The Harsha-Charita of Bana (Banabhatta (trans. E. B. Cowell & F. W. Thomas), 1897)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1897 Royal Asiatic Society (Oriental Translation Fund) edition (https://archive.org/details/harsacaritaofban00banaiala). First English translation of Bana's 7th-century historical romance of King Harsha.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE

HABSA-CARITA

•

OF

BANA.


FEINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY,
AT THE UNIVERSITY PEESS.


ORIENTAL TRANSLATION FUND.

NEW SERIES.

II.


THE

HABSA-CABITA

•

OF

BANA


TRANSLATED BY

E.  B. COWELL, M.A.

PROFESSOR  OF  SANSKRIT  AND FELLOW  OF  CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,

AND

F.  W. THOMAS, M.A.

FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.


PRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED UNDER THE  PATRONAGE OF  THE
ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY

AND  SOLD  AT

22, ALBEMARLE  STREET, LONDON

1897


TO

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
THE EARL OF NORTHBROOK, G.C.S.I.

this  work  is  dedicated  in  sincere  gratitude  for  the  kindly
sympathy  and  generous  help  which  he  has  given  to  the  New
Series  of  the  Oriental  Translation  Fund.  To  that  generosity  is
due  the  publication  of  this  translation  of  Bana's  old  historical
romance.


PREFACE.

THE  book  of  which  an  English  translation  is  now  for
the  first  time  presented  to  those  who  are  interested
in  Hindu  literature  and  antiquities,  appears  to  have  been
almost  forgotten  in  India.  One  writer  on  rhetoric  mentions
it  by  name  in  his  Sahityadarpana  as  an  example  of  the  kind
of  prose  composition  called  Akhyayika,  and  a  verse  passage
is  quoted  from  it  in  the  older  treatise  on  rhetoric,  the
Kavyaprakaga ;  yet  few  native  scholars  had  •  seen  it  for  many
years,  although  rare  copies  did  linger  unknown  in  some  native
libraries.  Professor  FitzEdward  Hall  first  introduced  it  to
the  knowledge  of  European  Orientalists  in  the  Introduction
to  his  edition  of  Subandhu's  Vasavadatta,  published  at  Cal-
cutta in  the  Bibliotheca  Indica  in  1859  ;  he  discovered  three
MSS.  more  or  less  complete.  An  edition  with  an  excellent
Commentary  was  published  at  Jatnmu  in  Kashmir  in  1879
(Samvat  1936),  and  this  was  reprinted  with  some  variations
in  Bombay  A.  D.  1892  (Qaka  1814),  and  an  independent
edition  of  the  text  appeared  in  Calcutta  in  1883,  prepared
by  Pandit  Vidyasagar.  Professor  Fiihrer  has  promised  a
new  edition  of  the  text  from  a  careful  collation  of  all  the
MSS.  available  in  India,  but  his  numerous  engagements  in
connection  with  the  Lucknow  Museum  have  hitherto  hindered
him  in  carrying  his  undertaking  to  completion.  We  have
had  to  do  our  best  with  the  imperfect  materials  at  our
command,  and  we  shall  mention  at  the  close  of  this  preface


Vlll  PREFACE.

the  additional  help  which  we  have  received  in  our  task  from
other  quarters.

The  great  merit  of  the  Harsa-carita  consists  in  the  fact
that  it  is  a  very  early  attempt  at  an  historical  romance.
Bana's  other  work,  the  Kadambarl 1,  and  Subandhu's  Vasa-
vadatta  deal  with  mythological  fiction,  and  everything  is
viewed  through  a  highly  poetical  atmosphere;  and  the
Dac,a-kumara-carita  is  equally  based  on  pure  imagination,
although  its  characters,  as  in  the  picaresco  literature  of
modern  Europe,  are  the  exaggerated  pictures  of  the  vulgar
rogues  and  ruffians  of  every  great  city.  But  the  author  of
the  Harsa-carita  has  taken  his  own  sovereign  as  his  hero
and  has  woven  the  story  out  of  the  actual  events  of  his  reign.
The  narrative  can  be  often  illustrated  by  contemporary
inscriptions, — in  fact  it  is  as  much  based  on  real  events  as
Scott's  Quentin  Durward  or  Waverley.  This  gives  to  it  a
peculiar  character  which  distinguishes  it  from  all  other  works
of  Sanskrit  literature.  In  studying  any  other  classical  San-
skrit writing  we  are  generally  obliged  to  infer  the  date  of
its  composition  by  a  careful  examination  of  the  accidental
allusions  or  the  peculiar  words  and  phrases  which  it  may
contain,  or  by  tracing  the  earliest  quotations  from  it  in
subsequent  authors ;  it  is  the  special  interest  of  the  Harsa-
carita  that  it  treats  of  a  period,  which  happens  to  be  almost
as  familiar  to  the  student  of  Indian  history  as  the  reign  of
any  of  the  early  Muhammadan  monarchs  of  Northern  India.

Qri-harsa,  who  gives  his  name  to  the  story,  was  the  ruler
at  whose  court  the  Chinese  Buddhist  traveller  Hiuen  Thsang
for  a  time  resided,  who  has  left  us  such  a  precious  description
of  India  as  he  actually  saw  it  in  the  early  part  of  the  seventh
century  (A.D.  630 — 644);  and,  fortunately  for  us,  Qri-harsa
was  a  king  who  well  deserved  to  have  this  strong  light  thrown
upon  his  reign.  He  was  the  Akbar  of  the  '  Hindu  period '  of

Indian  history ;  and  under  his  wise  toleration  the  adherents  of

<

1  Translated  by  Miss  Ridding  in  the  present  series.


PREFACE.  IX  •

the  contending  religions,  Brahmanism  and  Buddhism,  seemed
to  forget  their  rivalries  in  a  common  feeling  of  loyalty,  just
as  Rajputs  and  Muhammadans  served  Akbar  with  equal
devotion.  The  one  great  difference  is  that  Akbar's  reign  is
presented  to  us  in  broad  daylight  by  such  full  contemporary
narratives  as  those  of  Abu'l  Fazl  and  'Abd-ul-Kadir  Badaum,
which  give  us  a  detailed  account  of  every  great  event  and
biographical  notices  of  all  the  leading  personages  of  the
time ;  while  we  learn  the  events  of  Qrl-harsa's  reign  only
by  the  passing  allusions  of  the  Chinese  visitor  or  the  brief
records  of  some  inscription.  Now  here  our  romance  comes
in  to  supply  a  living  and  contemporary  picture,  wherein  we
can  see  something  of  the  India  of  that  time,  just  as  we  see
in  Arrian  and  Plutarch  something  of  the  India  of  Alexander's
time ;  but  we  long  in  vain  for  some  chronicler  who  would
have  filled  in  the  imperfect  sketch  with  a  thousand  details
now  for  ever  lost.

Bana's  style  resembles  the  estilo  culto  of  Spanish  litera-
ture ;  it  abounds  with  double  meanings  in  the  words  and
veiled  allusions  in  the  sentences,  so  that  the  reader  is  apt
to  be  bewildered  by  the  dazzling  coruscations  which  keep
flashing  across  his  path1.  Most  of  these  puns  and  under-
meanings  refer  to  mythological  stories,  or  well-known  poetical
superstitions  like  the  parted  ruddy-geese  on  the  opposite
banks  of  a  river,  or  the  cakora's  red  eyes  at  the  sight  of
poison;  but  some  of  them  undoubtedly  refer  also  to  the
events  of  his  time  and  can  only  be  unriddled  now  by  patient
research  and  critical  insight.  Thus  Hofrath  Prof.  Biihler
has  shewn  that  in  p.  76  the  words  at  first  sight  might
seem  to  mean  only  "  that  the  supreme  Lord  (Qiva)  took

1  We  have  tried  to  preserve  this  characteristic  feature  of  our
author's  style  by  continually  explaining  the  puns  in  our  notes ;  but
we  have  often  omitted  them  out  of  consideration  to  the  English  reader.
Many  of  these  will  be  found  in  the  '  Additional  Notes  and  Corrections '
in  Appendix  B.  Appendix  A.  also  contains  two  long  descriptions
omitted  from  the  text.


X  PREFACE.

the  hand  of  Durga  the  daughter  of  the  snowy  mountain";
but  under  this  mythological  allusion  is  concealed  a  reference
to  a  contemporary  conquest,  since  the  words  may  be  also
translated,  "in  our  monarch  a  supreme  lord  has  taken
tribute  from  an  inaccessible  land  of  snowy  mountains  " ;  and
there  are  several  similar  allusions  to  the  king's  exploits  in
the  same  passage.  Prof.  Biihler  remarks  that  the  inscriptions
of  Amc,uvarman  (three  of  which  are  dated  Samvat  34  and
39)  prove  that  the  Qrl-harsa  era  was  introduced  into  Nepal
during  the  lifetime  of  the  great  King  of  Thanesar  and  Kanoj,
who  held  the  whole  of  Northern  India  from  606  to  648  A.  D.
"  If  an  Indian  prince  adopts  a  new  foreign  era,  especially  one
founded  by  a  contemporary,  that  may  be  considered  as  almost
a  certain  proof  that  the  borrower  had  to  submit  to  the
Qaka-kartri  or  establisher.  of  the  era1."  Similarly  in  p.  57
where  we  have  a  description  of  Harsa's  reluctance  to  become
king,  till  the  Goddess  of  the  Royal  prosperity  herself  forced
him  to  mount  the  throne,  in  spite  of  his  previous  vow  of
austerity, — we  are  at  once  reminded  of  Hiuen  Thsang's  .
story  that  Harsa  at  the  advice  of  a  Bodhisattva,  refrained
from  mounting  the  simhasana.  So  too  in  p.  168  where  "  the
rising  clear-flecked  moon  (ga^diika)  shone  like  the  pointed
hump  of  (Diva's  tame  bull,  when  blotted  by  mud  scattered  by
his  broad  horn?,"  the 'commentator  himself  supplies  us  with
the  allusion,  as  he  tells  us  in  his  note  on  the  opening  verses
of  chap,  vi.,  that  Qa9anka  was  the  name  of  the  dishonoured
Gauda  king  against  whom  Harsa  was  marching.  Hiuen
Thsang  states  that  Rajyavardhana  was  treacherously  killed
by  Qasamka  (Che-chang-kia),  the  ruler  of  Karnasuvarna  in
Eastern  India.

But  beside  these  veiled  historical  allusions,  the  work  has
another  interest  from  the  vivid  picture  which  it  offers  of  the
condition  of  Indian  society  and  the  manners  and  customs  of
the  period.  Bana  is  not  a  mere  rhetorician ;  his  descriptions

1  Iiid.  Ant.  xix.  40.  «


PREFACE. .  XI

of  court  and  village  life  abound  with  masterly  touches  which
hold  up  the  mirror  to  the  time.  Not  even  the  Pali  Jatakas
introduce  us  more  directly  into  the  very  heart  of  the  period
or  give  us  a  more  life-like  picture.  The  court,  the  camp,  the
quiet  villages,  which  then,  as  now,  contained  the  great  mass
of  the  population,  and  the  still  more  quiet  monasteries  and
retreats,  whether  of  Brahmans  or  Buddhists,  are  all  painted
with  singular  power ;  and  his  narrative  illustrates  and  sup-
plements the  Chinese  traveller's  journal  at  every  turn.

The  first  chapter  gives  the  mythological  history  of  Bana's
family,  the  Brahmanical  Vatsyayanas,  until  we  come  to  his
own  birth  and  education,  and  his  spending  some  years  in
travel  partly  for  pleasure  and  partly  to  acquire  learning.
At  length  he  returns  to  his  home  Prltikuta  on  the  Sone,
where  after  a  while  he  receives  (ch.  2)  a  summons  from  King
Harsa's  half-brother,  that  he  should  repair  to  the  court  and
renew  an  intimacy  which  had  been  interrupted  by  some
former  acts  of  indiscretion.  He  obeys  the  request  and  repairs
to  the  royal  camp  near  the  Ajiravati  river  (on  which  Qravasti
stood,  though  it  is  not  alluded  to).  The  King  at  first  receives
him  coldly,  but  Bana  soon  makes  his  way  and  becomes  a
favourite.  After  a  while  (ch.  3)  he  revisits  his  home  at  the
beginning  of  autumn,  and  at  the  request  of  his  cousins  pro-
ceeds to  relate  the  history  of  the  King's  reign.  This  narrative
fills  the  remainder  of  the  book  (pp.  79 — 260),  and  is  left
unfinished  at  the  end  of  the  eighth  chapter.

Prabhakara-vardhana1,  the  king  of  Thanesar,  had,  by  his
queen  Yagovati,  two  sons  Rajyavardhana2  and  Harsa,  and  a
daughter  Rajyagri,  who  was  married  to  Grahavarman3,  the

1  Prabhakaravardhana  is  described  as  "  a  most  devout  worshipper
of  the  Sun  "  in  the  Sonpat  Inscription.

2  Rajyavardhana is  described  in the Madhuban  inscription as
"a  most  devout  worshipper  of  Sugata."

3  The  genealogy  would  seem  to  be  Grahavarman,  Avantivarman
(infr.  p.  122), Susthitavarman, Qarvavarman, Iganavarman,  Igvara-
variaan,  Adityavarman,  Harivarman  ;  cf.  the  inscriptions  Nos.  42,  46,


Xll  .  PREFACE.

son  of  the  Mukhara  king  of  Kanyakubja.  The  king  dies
while  his  elder  son  is  absent  on  an  expedition  against  the
Hunas,  but  the  prince  returns  at  his  brother's  earnest
summons ;  and  in  his  overwhelming  grief,  he  determines  to
become  an  ascetic  and  to  leave  the  throne  to  Harsa.  At
this  moment,  however,  tidings  arrive  that  Grahavarman  has
been  killed  by  the  king  of  Malwa1,  who  has  also  thrown
Rajya9ri  into  prison.  Rajyavardhana  at  once  determines
to  avenge  his  brother-in-law's  death  and  marches  with  his
cousin  Bhandi2  and  the  army,  leaving  Harsa  as  his  vicegerent.
After  a  time  news  is  brought  that  he  had  easily  conquered
the  Malwa  army  but  had  been  treacherously  assassinated  by
the  King  of  Gauda3.  Harsa  himself  now  marches  against
this  new  enemy;  on  his  way  he  accepts  offers  of  friendship
from  Bhaskaravarman4,  the  King  of  Pragjyotisa  (Assam).
Soon  afterwards  he  meets  Bhandi,  who  is  returning  loaded
with  spoil  and  bringing  the  Malwa  troops  prisoners ;  he
announces  that  Rajyacri  has  escaped  from  prison  and  fled
into  the  Vindhya  forest.  Harsa  sends  Bhandi  against  the
Gauda  king  and  hastens  himself  to  find  his  lost  sister.  By
the  help  of  a  Buddhist  mendicant  he  comes  upon  her,  just
as  she  is  preparing  to  mount  the  funeral  pile,  surrounded  by
her  female  attendants.  Harsa  rescues  her  from  the  pile  and
takes  her  with  him  to  the  camp,  after  making  a  vow  that  he
and  his  sister  will  assume  the  dress  of  Buddhist  mendicants
as  soon  as  he  has  conquered  the  Gauda  traitor  and  consoled
his  subjects  in  their  sorrow  for  his  deceased  father.

Harsa's  partiality  for  Buddhists  and  Buddhist  doctrines

47,  Corpus  Inscr.  Ind.  in.  Adityavarman  had  as  his  queen  Harsa-
gupta,  sister  to  Harsagupta,  of  the  same  Guptas  of  Magadha,  who  were
similarly  connected  with  Harsa's  family.

1  Professor  Biihler  suggests  that  this  is  the  Northern  Malwa  about
Fatehpur. He  would  identify  the  king  with  the  Devagupta  of  the
Madhuban  Inscription.

2  Poni  in  Hiuen  Thsang.

3  C£  Hiuen  Thsang,  (Julien),  n.  248.

4  Bhaskaravarma  Kumara,  in  Hiuen  Thsang.


PREFACE.  Xlll

is  frequently  brought  out  in  our  story,  as  the  foregoing
sketch  will  shew, — he  seems  indeed  to  be  more  than  half  a
Buddhist  at  heart;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  we  find  a
similar  view  of  his  character  in  Hiuen  Thsang's  account,
although  he  may  naturally  exaggerate  the  amount  of  favour
shewn.  His  language  might  indeed  imply  that  the  king
almost  professed  himself  a  Buddhist;  but  his  narrative
clearly  shews  that  he  was  equally  tolerant  to  both  the  great
religions  of  his  subjects.

Thus,  when  he  held  a  great  assembly  at  Kanyakubja,
twenty  kings  attended  it,  with  the  most  distinguished
Qramanas  and  Brahmans  in  their  districts.  An  immense
sangfiarama  was  erected  with  a  tower  and  a  golden  image
of  Buddha,  and  every  day  viands  were  presented  to  the
Qramanas  and  Brahmans ;  and,  in  the  disciples'  account  of
the  second  assembly  held  at  Prayaga,  we  find  that  on  the
first  day  they  installed  the  statue  of  Buddha,  on  the  second
that  of  the  Sun,  and  on  the  third  that  of  Mahe9vara.  Hiuen
Thsang  says  of  the  inhabitants  of  Kanyakubja,  "  une  moitie
suit  la  vraie  doctrine,  et  1'autre  s' attache  a  1'erreur";  and
our  narrative  similarly  shews  us  the  two  religions  existing
side  by  side  ;  and  in  the  elaborate  description  in  the  eighth
chapter  of  the  Vindhya  forest,  we  find  Buddhists  and
Brahmans  of  every  sect,  "  all  diligently  following  their  own
tenets,  pondering,  urging  objections,  raising  doubts  and
resolving  them."  When  we  read  these  accounts  of  India
in  the  seventh  century  they  lend  some  support  to  the  theory
that  later  Brahmanism  was  itself  a  renaissance,  and  was
separated  by  a  chasm  from  the  ancient  cult,  just  as  the
Sassanian  religion  was  a  later  revival  (after  the  long  Parthian
domination)  which  turned  a  longing  eye  to  the  past  glories
of  the  Zoroastrian  creed  under  the  Achsemenidse.

For  our  translation  we  have  chiefly  used  the  Bombay
text  (though  with  a  corrected  punctuation),  but  we  have
collated  it  with  the  Calcutta  and  Kashmir  editions.  Pandit


XIV  PREFACE.

Kailasacandra  Datta  Qastri1  had  published  the  text  and
translation  of  the  fifth  book  (Benares,  1883),  with  an
original  Sanskrit  commentary  of  his  own;  this  has  often
helped  us  in  obscure  passages  and  we  have  frequently
quoted  it.  Pandit  Ravaji  Ramacandra  Kale  has  also  pub-
lished (Bombay  1882)  a  very  useful  volume  of  English
notes  to  the  whole  work;  this  only  came  into  our  hands
when  our  translation  was  more  than  half  printed,  but
we  gladly  acknowledge  our  obligations  to  the  author  as  he
often  supplements  or  improves  upon  the  printed  commentary.
When  our  translation  was  partly  printed  we  obtained  the
help  of  the  valuable  MS.  (A)  which  Hofrath  Prof.  Btihler
has  presented  to  the  India  Office  Library,  and  he  also  lent
to  us  a  collection  of  the  various  readings  of  another  MS.  and
a  native  scholar's  notes  on  the  first  book.  The  MS.  A  has
been  of  great  assistance  to  us  and  we  have  frequently  quoted
it  in  the  later  part  of  our  translation  and  in  the  Notes  in
the  Appendix,  but  as  we  were  not  re -editing  the  text,  we
have  chiefly  consulted  it  where  the  native  editions  seemed
corrupt.

We  are  painfully  conscious  of  the  imperfections  of  our
translation ;  but  we  offer  it  to  Oriental  scholars  as  an  honest
attempt  to  help  the  student  in  reading  a  difficult  Sanskrit
work  which  will  well  repay  the  trouble  of  mastering  it.  The
book  is  full  of  Sanskrit  lore  of  every  kind ;  but  its  author
was  not  (as  Gibbon  says  of  Libanius)  "a  recluse  student
whose  mind,  regardless  of  his  contemporaries,  was  incessantly
fixed  on  the  Trojan  war  and  the  Athenian  commonwealth."
He  was  by  no  means  the  mere  lover  of  what  was  abstruse
and  difficult;  he  had  also  an  eye  for  the  picturesque  and  the
pathetic,  and  he  could  sympathise  with  the  men  and  women
of  his  own  time; — like  Apollonius  Rhodius,  he  was  a  poet
as  well  as  a  grammarian.

1  [He  was  an  old  pupil  in  the  Calcutta  Sanskrit  College.  E.  B.  C.]


THE HAKSA-CARITA.


INTRODUCTORY  VERSES1.

[1]  1.  Adoration  to  Cambhu,  who  is  the  main  pillar  in  the  building
of  the  city  of  the  three  worlds, —  beautiful  with  the  moon  hung  on  him
like  a  white  royal  chowrie 2,  as  it  kisses  his  lofty  brow.

[2]  2.  I  worship  Uma,  whose  eyes  are  closed  with  the  delight  of
grasping  Hara's  neck  as  if  she  were  fainting  at  the  touch  of  the
Kalakiita  poison  which  stains  it.

3.  Adoration  to  the  omniscient  Vyasa,  the  creator  among  poets,
who  made  the  Mahabharata  holy  by  his  speech  as  the  Bharata  continent
is  hallowed  by  the  river  Sarasvati.

4.  Most  commonly  the  poetasters  of  the  world  have  their  percep-
tions ruled  by  desire,  loquacious  and  wilful  like  red-eyed  kokilas  ;

[3]  5.  Countless  such  there  are  like  dogs,  following  their  own  vile
nature  from  house  to  house3, — not  many  are  there  like  Qarabhas,
possessing  creative  power4.

6. A  poet  is  not  reckoned  among  the  good5  and  is  detected  as  a

1  The  Kashmir  text  inserts  another  verse  at  the  beginning;  "  Hail  to  the
holy  Sarasvati,  hail !  that  goddess,  who,  having  her  power  manifested  as  the
enlightener  of  the  all,  through  the  gradually  evolving  faculties  commencing
with  '  desire,'  illuminates  the  nature  of  her  mansion,  the  lotus-hearts  of  the
sages, — her,  even  Sarasvati,  I  praise."

2  Chowries  and  flags  are  hung  on  triumphal  pillars ;  cf.  trailokyamahd-
grihastambha  (of  Visnu),  C.  I.  I.  iii.  159  and  160. Note  that  this  verse
occurs  entire  in  an  inscript.  Ind.  Ant.  xiii.  p.  92.

:!  Or  "  those  are  of  no  account  who  only  give  bald  descriptions  ( jati)  from
house  to  house."

4  There  is  a  pun  in  utpadaka,  which  is  also  a  synonym  for  the  fabulous
animal  called  the  qarabha  as  having  eight  legs,  four  of  which  are  said  to
grow  on  its  back  (Vdcaspatya  lex.).

5*0r  "  is  counted  as  no  man,"  a-na.


2  THE HARSA-CARITA.

thief'1  by  his  only  changing  the  words  of  fonnor  writers2  and  l>y  his
concealing  the  signs  of  different  styles3.

7.  In  the  North  plays  on  words  are  mainly  admired,  in  the  "West
it  is  only  the  sense  ;  in  the  South  it  is  poetical  fancy4 ;  in  Gauda  pomp
of  syllables.

8.  A  new  subject,  a  diction  not  too  homely,  unlaboured  double
meanings,  the  sentiment  easily  understood,  the  language  rich  in  sonorous
words— all  this  it  is  difficult  to  combine  in  one  composition.

[4]  9.  What  has  that  poet  to  do  with  poetry,  whose  language,  going
to  the  furthest  limits  of  metrical  skill5,  does  not  fill  the  three  worlds
like  the  Bharata  story  ?

10.  They  upon  whose  lips  abides  Sarasvatl,  unwearied  even  at  the
end  of  their  'fits,'6 — how  can  such  writers  of  romances7  escape  being
praised  as  the  princes  of  poets  ?

11.  The  pride  of  poets  verily  melted  away  through  Vasavadatta8
(when  it  came  to  their  ears),  as  the  pride  of  the  Brahman  seers9  through
the  (Indra-given)  spear  of  the  Pandavas  when  it  came  near  Karna10.

[5]  12.  The  prose-composition  of  the  revered  Haricandra  stands
pre-eminent  as  a  sovereign,  luminous  with  its  employment  of  words,
delightful11,  and  preserving  rigidly  the  traditional  rules  of  letters12.

13.  Satavahana13  made  an  immortal  refined  treasure  of  song,  adorned
with  fine  expressions  of  purest  character14  like  jewels.

1  Does  this  allude  to  the  Caura-pahcdqikd ;  or  only  to  plagiarists  gene-
rally ?  For  the  poet  Caura  see  Vdsavad.  Comm.  p.  33.

-  Or  "  by  his  changing  colour  through  fear,"  or  "by  trying  to  change  his
low  caste."

3  Or "by  his  concealing  the  marks  of  his  chains." For  bandha  cf.
Kdvydd.  i.  47.

4  Utpreksd, where  the  comparison is introduced by 'as  it  were'  or
'methought.'

5  Or  "  embracing  all  narratives."  For  the  literary  history  contained  in  the
following  lines  compare  Prof.  Peterson's  Introd.  to  Kadambari,  pp.  68 — 96.

6  Ucchvdsa  means  '  a  breathing  out '  and  also  '  a  division  of  a  narrative.'
The  sk.  contains  puns  in  vaktre  (also  the  name  of  a  metre),  and  kavi$i-ara  =
Brahma,  on  whose  lips  the  goddess  rests ;  cf.  Kdd.  Introd.  v.  11.

7  For  the  dkhydyikd  see  Sdh.  Darp.  §  568.

8  See  Dr  Castellieri's  paper  in  the  Vienna  Oriental  Journal,  vol.  i.,  where
he shews that  Bana wrote his work especially  to surpass Subandhu's
Vasavadatta  ; see  also  our  Appendix,  notes  to  pp.  67,  74,  233.

9  Drona,  &c.

10  Does  this  refer  to  Arjuna's  attack  on  Kama  with  the  Aindra  weapon,
Mahabh.,  vin.  4720?  n  Or  "not  stealing  from  others"  (aharl).

12  Or  as  applying  to  a  king,  "  glorious  by  the  rule  of  his  territory,  and
preserving  all  the  caste-regulations. "

13  Another  reading  is  £alivahana ;  both  Satavahana  and  Qalivahana  have
been  identified  with  Hala  the  author  of  the  Sapta<?ataka,  but  see  Weber,  iibtr
das  Sapta^atakam,  p.  3.  14  Or  "  of  pure  description."


INTRODUCTORY VERSES.  3

14.  The  fame  of  Pravarasena1,  bright  like  a  lotus2,  has  gone  to  the
other  shore  of  the  ocean  by  his  '  bridge,'  like  the  army  of  monkeys.

15.  Bhasa3  gained  as  much  splendour  by  his  plays  with  introduc-
tions spoken  by  the  manager,  full  of  various  characters,  and  furnished
with  startling  episodes,  as  he  would  have  done  by  the  erection  of
temples, created by  architects, adorned with  several stories, and
decorated  with  banners.

16.  By  whom  is  not  delight  felt  at  the  beautiful  expressions  uttered
by  Kalidasa  as  at  sprays  of  flowers  wet  with  honey-sweetness  ?

[6]  17.  To  whom  is  not  the  Vrihat-katha4  a  marvel  like  Hara's
sportive  exertions  of  power, — by  both  of  which  Love  is  kindled5,  and
glory  done  to  Gaurl  ?

18.  My  tongue  seems  checked  and  dra\vn  within  my  mouth  by
Adhyaraja's6  utsdhas,  even  when  they  are  only  remembered  as  abiding
in  my  heart7,  and  so  it  does  not  attain  to  a  poet's  success.

19.  Yet  still  through  my  loyalty  to  my  lord,  undismayed  and
eager  in  the  hope  of  gaining  my  end,  I  venture  audaciously  to  plunge
with  my  tongue  into  the  ocean  of  narrative.

[7]  20.  A  narrative,  like  a  bed,  which  is  to  wake  up  its  occupant
happily  refreshed,  is  set  off  by  its  well-chosen  words  like  feet,  luminous
with  the  clever  joinings  of  harmonious  letters8.

21.  Victorious  is  Harsa  who  guards  the  world  by  a  wall  of  fire  of
glorious  majesty, — a  mountain  of  good  fortune9  for  fulfilling  the  desires
of  all  his  friends.

1  He  seems  to  have  written  the  Prakrit  poem  the  Setubandha.

2  Kumuda  is  also  the  name  of  one  of  Kama's  monkeys.

3  See  Weber's  Indian  Literature,  p.  205.

4  The  Vrihat-katha  is  alluded  to  in  Kadambari  (Bombay  ed.  p.  40).

5  In  the  one  by  Kama's  being  consumed, — in  the  other  by  the  amatory
legends  of  the  poem  ;  or  it  may  mean  that  Kama  is  personified  in  the  latter,
as  Naravahana,  one  of  its  heroes.

0  An  unknown  poet,  unless  it  refers  to  Gunadhya,  the  author  of  the
Vrihat-katha.  Utsdha  seems  to  refer  to  a  pantomimic  recitation  as  well  as
to  general  energy.

7  I.e.  even  though  they  are  not  immediately  present  to  me ;  or  perhaps
"  which  though  mentioned  abide  in  my  heart." This  is  a  hard  cloka.

8  Or  "  with  the  fastenings  of  gold." For  cayyd  cf.  Kdd.  introd.  8.

9  Criparvata  is  also  the  name  of  a  range  of  mountains  in  Telingana.
Cf.  Hall,  Introd  to  Vdsavadattd,  p.  11.


1—2
I


CHAPTER I.

THUS  runs  the  tale : — In  former  days  the  Holy  One,  the
Most  High,  enthroned  in  his  own  sphere,  [8]  was  reclining
on  his  full-blown  lotus  couch  surrounded  by  Indra  and  the
other  gods ;  and  on  a  certain  occasion  he  was  holding  a
session,  framing  questions  on  the  lore  of  Brahma1  and
enjoying  other  blameless  discussions.  As  he  so  sate,  adored
of  the  three  worlds,  the  Prajapatis  headed  by  Manu,  Daksa,
and  Caksusa,  and  all  the  great  sages  with  the  seven  Risis
worshipped  him.  Some  in  chorus  chanted  the  Rik  hymns
apt  for  psalmody;  some  recited  the  Yajus  sentences  of
worship ;  some  sang  aloud  the  Saman  strains  of  praise.
Others  rehearsed  the  Mantras  that  reveal  the  ritual  of  the
sacrifice.  And  there,  arising  from  the  differences  of  their
studies,  quarrels  one  with  another  we  heard  among  them.

Now  there  was  a  certain  sage,  a  great  ascetic,  by  nature
excessively  choleric,  a  son  of  Atri  and  brother  of  the  moon,
by  name  Durvasas,  and  he,  while  brawling  with  a  second
sage  named  Mandapala,  [9]  being  blinded  by  passion  made  a
discord  in  singing  a  Saman.  At  this  silence  fell  on  all  the
other  sages  through  fear  of  a  curse,  while  Brahma  in  the
sport  of  another  conversation  heeded  not.  But  the  divine
Sarasvati,  a  maiden  of  tender  years,  now  doffing  her  girlhood
and  arrayed  in  youthful  beauty,  was  fanning  the  great
Father  with  a  fly-flap  held  by  her  arm's  waving  tendril.
Those  sprays,  her  feet,  glowed  with  a  natural  red  as  though
flushed  by  furious  stripes,  and  her  steps  were  musical  with  a

i  Cf.  Manu,  in.  231.


CHAPTER I.  5

pair  of  anklets  keeping  time  with  them  like  two  disciples
intoning  the  Veda  word  by  word.  Her  legs  produced  the
illusion  of  being  the  pillars  of  the  portal  to  the  city  of  Love1.
Her  left  hand,  like  a  bud,  was  laid  in  sport  on  the  chain  of
her  girdle,  which  tinkled  like  the  murmur  of  love-sick  kala-
hanisas.  Her  body  was  made  pure  by  a  Brahmanical  thread,
which,  hanging  from  the  shoulder,  seemed  like  a  coil  of
virtues  that  had  clung  to  her  through  dwelling  in  the
Manasa2  of  the  wise :  while  her  necklace,  studded  with  many
a  pearl  and  having  a  brilliant  central  gem,  suggested  the
path  of  renunciation,  leading  midway  the  sun  and  lined  by
many  liberated  souls3.  Her  quivering  lips  glowed  red  as
with  lac  from  the  feet  of  all  the  sciences,  which  had  entered
her  mouth.  In  her  cheek  was  reflected  an  image  of  Brahma's
black  deer-skin,  as  if  the  moon's  deer  were  come  down  to
hearken  to  her  honeyed  song.  [10]  One  eyebrow  like  a
creeper  was  raised  in  a  disdainful  curve,  and  a  stream  of
tears  flowing  from  the  outer  corner  of  her  eye  seemed  to  be
washing  one  ear  soiled  by  the  discord4;  while  the  other  ear,
revelling  in  a  white  full-blown  Sindhuvara  flower,  betokened
as  with  a  gleaming  smile  the  intoxication  of  knowledge5.  In
the  flowers  of  her  ear-ornament  tribes  of  devoted  bees
attended  upon  her  like  repeated  Oms  accompanying  the
Qruti.  Her  form  was  clad  in  a  silken  robe  fine  and  spotless

1  Cf.  Spenser,  Faery  Queen,  Bk.  n.  c.  iii.  27,  28,

'And  her  straight  legs  most  bravely  were  embay  led
In  gilden  buskins  of  costly  cordwayne...
Like  two  fair  marble  pillours  they  were  seen
Which  doe  the  temples  of  the  gods  support.'
Also  Vasavadattd,  p.  54  (Hall).

2  There  is  a  pun  on  mdnasa  =  (l)  mind,  (2)  lake  Manasa.

3  The  Sanskrit  here  has  puns  on  mukta  '  released '  and  '  pearl '  and
on  madhyandyaka  'central  gem'  and  'spiritual  guide through the
centre.' The  Comm.  quotes  a  passage  to  the  effect  that  '  the  ascetic
who  attains  yoga  and  the  warrior  slain  face  to  face  with  his  foe  pass
through  the  centre  of  the  sun ' :  cf.  the  last  note  to  this  chapter.

4  The  eyebrow  is  compared  to  a  spray  used  in  sprinkling  the  ear.

6  A  laugh  is  often  called  by  the  Hindus  '  white,'  cf.  Wilson,  '  Hindu
Theatre,'  n.  p.  197 :  and  SarasvatI  as  the  goddess  of  learning  is  naturally
spoke*n  of  as  intoxicated  therewith.


6  THE HARSA-CARITA.

as  the  fabric  of  thought.  In  this  guise,  shedding  on  all  sides
the  moonlight  of  her  teeth,  pure  as  if  of  the  substance  of
speech,  the  goddess  Sarasvati,  hearing  the  discord,  smiled.

Seeing  her  so  smiling,  '  Wretch ! '  cried  the  sage,  '  vain
in  the  conceit  of  a  grain  of  ill-got  knowledge,  dost  jeer
at  me  ? '  With  these  words,  shaking  his  head  so  that  his
matted  locks,  streaming1  from  the  broken  fillet,  seemed  by
their  outpouring  yellowness  to  flood  the  heavens  with  an
issuing  fire  of  passion ;  gathering  a  frown  that  darkened  the
chess-board2  of  his  forehead,  like  the  presence  of  the  god  of
death,  and  recalled  the  crocodile  embellishments  upon  the
faces  of  Yama's  wives  ;  with  a  red  eye  offering,  as  it  were,  an
oblation  of  his  blood  to  the  goddess  of  pitilessness;  imprison-
ing [11]  the  gleam  of  his  teeth,  as  if  it  were  his  voice  flying
in  terror  at  the  merciless  biting  of  his  lip ;  altering  the  tie
of  the  black  antelope  skin — a  scroll  of  cursing  as  it  were —
which  was  slipping  from  his  shoulder ;  clasped  in  every  limb
by  gods,  asuras,  and  sages,  who,  reflected  in  his  drops  of  sweat,
seemed  to  have  come  for  refuge  in  their  alarm  at  the  curse ;
with  a  hand  whose  fingers  shook  with  an  angry  tremor
spurning  his  rosary  as  though  it  were  a  string  of  syllables
clinging  with  supplications  to  him  ;  thus,  having  first  rinsed
his  mouth  from  his  earthen  pitcher,  he  took  the  water  of
cursing.

Meanwhile  the  great  goddess  Savitri  was  seated  in
corporeal  shape  near  to  the  Self-existent,  wearing  a  robe
of  the  silken  bark  of  the  tree  of  paradise  and  white  as  a
mass  of  ambrosia  foam.  A  shawl  of  lotus  filament  was
tied  in  a  svastika  knot  between  her  swelling  bosoms.
Three  sectarial  lines  of  ashes,  banners  of  triumph,  as  it  were,
over  the  three  worlds  vanquished  by  ascetic  force,  brightened
the  courtyard  of  her  forehead.  Her  Vaikaksyaka  scarf  con-
sisted of  a  hermit's  wrap  which  hung  from  her  shoulder,  white
as  ambrosia  foam,  like  a  Ganges  stream  bent  to  a  circle  by

1  Vifardru  apparently  = '  bursting.'

2  A§tapadam:  caturaiigaphalakam,  Comm. :  perhaps  so  called  from
its  furrowed  lines. Regarding  this  and  the  next  allusion  vide  further
note  in  the  appendix.


CHAPTER I.  7

ascetic  power.  Her  left  hand  held  a  crystal  water-vessel
like  the  lotus  calyx  whence  Brahma  arose ;  and  her  right,
encircled  with  a  rosary  and  studded  with  rings  of  shells,
was  raised  aloft,  the  finger  of  scorn  being  scornfully  waved
as  she  cried : — '  Fie  on  thee,  sinner,  prey  to  anger,  evil  of
heart,  reft  of  reason,  ignorant  of  self,  [12]  false  Brahman  and
pretended  sage,  outcast,  excommunicate,  how  comes  it  that,
bewildered  by  thine  own  offence,  thou  wouldst  curse  the
divine  Sarasvati,  mother  of  the  three  worlds,  fit  adoration  for
throngs  of  gods,  asuras,  sages,  and  mortal  men  ?'

So  she  spoke,  and  abandoning  her  ascetic's  pillow  arose,
and  with  her  the  four  incarnate  Vedas  left  their  cane  seats
in  wrath,  clad  in  bark  garments  and  holding  delicate  chowries
of  Ku$a  fibres,  bearing  their  hermit's  staves,  and  grasping
their  round  water- vessels  like  weapons.  Under  the  guise  of
sweat  soma  juice,  as  it  were,  oozed  from  them:  their  foreheads
gleamed  with  the  pure  ashes  of  the  Agnihotra  oblation :
their  voices  echoed  the  sacred  syllable :  the  quarters  of  the
heavens  were  oppressed  by  the  weight  of  their  angrily
agitated  matted-locks :  the  daylight  was  darkened  by  the
bulging  of  their  black  antelope  skins  flung  round  as  they
girt  up  their  loins :  and  the  world  of  Brahma  vibrated  with
the  coming  and  going  of  their  passionate  panting.

Whereat  in  vain  besought  to  mercy  by  the  gods,  '0
reverend  sir,  be  merciful,  she  is  no  victim  for  a  curse ' ;  in
vain  implored  by  suppliant  disciples,  '  Master,  forgive  one
fault';  in  vain  restrained  by  Atri,  'Balk  not,  my  son,  the
fruit  of  thine  asceticism ' ;  the  sage,  beside  himself  with
passion,  let  fall  the  water  of  that  curse,  crying: — 'Ill-
mannered  girl,  I  take  away  from  thee  this  state  of  pride
by  knowledge  won.  Begone  downward  to  the  world  of
mortal  men.'  But  when  Savitri  would  have  answered  curse
with  curse,  'twas  Sarasvati  that  hindered  her,  saying: —
'  Dear  friend,  restrain  thy  wrath  :  even  to  Brahmans  by  birth
merely,  uninitiated  in  heart,  respect  is  due.'  [13]

Thereupon,  seeing  Sarasvati  thus  cursed,  the  Lord  Brahma
uplifted  his  form,  which  wore  the  white  sacrificial  thread,  as
though  his  birth  from  the  lotus  had  left  a  fibre  clinging


8  THE HARSA-CARITA.

about  him.  With  his  right  hand,  which,  as  its  signet  ring
sent  up  a  spray  of  emerald  rays,  seemed  to  grasp  a  cluster  of
Ku$a  grass  for  staying  a  world-dissolution1,  he  allayed  the
tumult  of  the  curse ;  while  his  teeth  shot  out  pure  penetrating
rays  like  plummet  lines2  for  the  building  of  a  coming  aeon  of
bliss,  and  his  voice  echoed  through  the  spheres  like  a  drum
heralding  with  honour  the  departure  of  Sarasvati,  as  in  deep
tones  he  spake : — '  Brahman,  the  path  thou  hast  followed  is
one  not  frequented  by  the  good.  Its  final  goal  is  death.  The
dust  upraised  by  the  steeds  of  passion  in  their  unbridled
onrush  is  wont  to  cloud  the  vision  of  such  as  be  not  masters
of  the  senses3.  How  limited  indeed  the  scope  of  the  eye !
for  'tis  by  the  purified  intellect  that  the  perfected  behold  all
things  good  and  evil.  Nature  rejects  this  union  of  piety  and
wrath  as  of  water  and  fire.  How  dost  thou,  leaving  the  light,
sink  in  darkness !  for  the  root  of  all  asceticism  is  patience.
Skilled  in  discerning  the  faults  of  others,  thy  angry  mind,
like  an  eye  inflamed,  perceives  not  the  frailty  of  its  own
passion4.  How  can  censoriousness  consort  with  commerce  of
great  penances  ?  [14]  Blind  verily  is  that  seeing  man  who  is
over-wrathful.  Clouded  with  passion,  the  mind  distinguishes
not  what  should  and  what  should  not  be  done.  First  of  all
the  wisdom  of  the  angry  man  is  darkened ;  then  his  frowning
brow.  The  flush  of  passion  assaults  first  the  senses,  last  the
eyes.  In  the  beginning  the  store  of  merit  dissolves  away;
then  the  oozing  sweat.  The  flash  of  dishonour  flickers;
then  comes  the  trembling  of  the  lip.  How  ruinous  to  the
world  was  the  growth  of  thy  matted  locks  and  bark  dress,
shoots  and  bark  as  it  were  of  the  poison  tree  !  Like  a  pearl
necklace,  this  graceless5  impulse  of  thy  mind  is  out  of

1  The  origin  of  darblia  =  kuca  grass  from  a  world-convulsion  is  stated
Ath.  V.  19.  30.  5,  and  its  power  to  allay  passion,  id.  6.  43.  1-  .

2  Sutrapatam,  cf.  Kathas.  14.  30,  24.  93  :  this  passage  has  a  bearing
on  the  derivation  of  sutradhara.

3  There  is  a  pun  on  two  meanings  of  aksa  (1)  axle,  (2)  sense. Cf.
Kad.  p.  37, 1.  14.

4  Dosa  means  either  '  sin '  or '  inflammation  of  the  eye ' :  kupita  =  'in-
flamed '  in  both  senses.

6 Vrittamukta  has  also  per  paronomaxiam the  sense  of  '  having
round  pearls '  :  parivartulamauktika  Comm.


CHAPTER I.  9

harmony,  surely,  with  thy  sage's  dress.  With  a  heart  void
of  resignation  idly  like  an  actor  dost  thou  wear  the
counterfeited  semblance  of  an  ascetic.  Nought  free  from
taint  can  I  detect  in  thee.  Even  to  this  hour  thy
levity  floats  but  on  the  surface  of  the  sea  of  knowledge.
None  of  these  great  sages  are  deaf  and  dumb,  impotent  and
dull  of  wit.  Why  hast  thou  checked  the  sinless  Sarasvatl,
when  thine  own  heart,  the  haunt  of  angry  sin,  should  rather
have  been  checked  ?  These  are  the  follies  born  of  their
own  heedless  slips  whereby  the  undiscerning  fall  into
reproach.'

Then  to  Sarasvatl  he  spake  again : — '  Dear  child,  be  not
dejected.  Savitrl  here  shall  accompany  thee  and  solace  the
pain  of  severance  from  us.  And  the  curse  shall  end  when
thou  shalt  behold  the  lotus  face  of  thy  child.'

So  much  decreed,  Brahma,  having  dismissed  his  court  of
gods,  asuras,  sages  and  mortal  men,  laid  his  hand  upon  the
shoulder  of  Narada,  who  hastily  approached,  and  arose  for
the  performance  of  his  daily  rites.  [15]  Sarasvatl,  too,  a
little  discomfited  at  the  curse,  letting  fall  upon  her  bosom  a
mingled  glance  of  light  and  dark  like  a  streak  in  a  black
antelope  skin,  led  on  by  thronging  bees  caught,  like  the
incarnate  letters  of  the  curse,  in  the  incense  of  her  fragrant
sighs,  her  hands  nerveless  with  sorrow  at  the  curse,  went
with  Savitrl  to  her  mansion,  her  path  to  the  world  of  men
being  pointed  out  as  it  were  by  the  down-bent  rays  of  her
nails.  And  swarms  of  kalahamsas  of  the  palace,  convoked
by  the  prattle  of  her  anklets,  followed  after  her  like  the
hearts  of  the  dwellers  in  Brahma's  world.

Meanwhile,  as  though  to  bear  the  tidings  of  Sarasvatl's
descent,  the  light-coroneted  sun  went  down  to  the  middle
world.  Gradually  waned  the  day,  his  pools  all  saddened  by
the  calamity  of  the  closing  of  all  their  lotus  beds.  Quickly,
as  though  stung  by  the  angrily  bent  side-glances  of  wine-
flushed  beauties,  the  world's  sole  eye,  ruddy  as  a  young
monkey's  mouth,  lighted  upon  the  peaks  of  the  earth-propping
hills.  White  were  the  environs  of  the  heavenly  hermitages
with  milky  streams  flowing  from  herds  of  cows  with  dripping


10  THE HARSA-CARITA.

udders ;  as  though  washed  by  the  surge  of  the  milky  sea  in
uproar  at  the  near  rising  of  the  moon.  Let  out  for  his
evening  ramble,  the  chowrie-cro\vned  Airavata  was  dashing  his
tusks  at  will  against  the  banks  of  the  heavenly  stream,  while
the  sound  went  up  of  their  crashing  against  its  sides  of  gold.
The  sky  displayed  a  rosy  tint,  as  though  smeared  with  lac  from
the  feet  of  thousands  of  mistresses  of  the  Vidyadharas  gone
forth  to  their  trysts.  Like  the  sweat  of  Sandhya  in  her
delight  at  Qiva's  worship1,  the  evening  glow  streamed  forth
of  saffron  hue,  flushing  the  heavenly  spaces  and  filled  with
the  sunset  offerings  of  the  saints  on  their  journey  along  the
sky.  [16]  Resplendent  was  the  world  of  Brahma,  where
crowds  of  noble  worshipping  sages  clasped  a  forest  of  hands
in  evening  adoration  ;  as  though  all  the  lotus  beds  were  come
to  show  honour  to  that  lotus  whence  Brahma  sprang.  And
loudly  from  the  Brahmans2  uprose  the  chorus  of  the  third
libation  hymn.  In  the  temples  of  the  seven  sages  the
courts  were  all  tressed  with  the  flames  of  the  lighted
Vaitdna  fires ;  as  though  a  camp  lustration  had  commenced
in  an  army  devoted  to  Dharma.  Light  were  the  hermits
from  the  removal  of  the  poison  taint  of  sin  which  the
Aghamarsana  hymn3  had  stolen  away.  The  sand  isles  of
Mandakim's  stream  were  purified  by  rows  of  ascetics  seated
at  evening  prayer,  and  the  line  of  its  waves  was  broken  by
the  gleam4  of  Brahma's  floating  hamsas.  Fragrant  with
the  scent  of  their  own  honey,  the  night-lotus  beds,  to  the  joy
of  the  bees,  commenced  to  open,  like  umbrellas  of  the  water
nymphs,  seraglio  mansions  for  the  wives  of  the  feathered
tribes.  Satisfied  with  their  symposiums  on  the  sweet
honey  of  day-lotuses  now  languid  at  day's  close,  the  flamingo
swarms  sank  to  sleep,  arching  their  necks  to  be  scratched
by  the  soft  fibres,  and  fanning  the  blue  lotus  beds  with  rows
of  flapping  wings.  The  evening  breeze,  soft  as  the  sigh  of
night,  came  making  grey  the  river  with  the  pollen  of  flowers

1  Diva's  evening  worship  is  described  in  'the  Meghaduta  9!.  38.

2  Or  '  loud  in  Brahma's  praise '  or  '  loudly  from  Brahma.'

3  The  Aghamarsana  hymn  is  the  last  in  the  Rig- Veda.  c

4  Literally  '  betoothed  by  the  smile.'


CHAPTER I.  11

on  the  bank  and  bearing  perfume  from  the  jasmine1  in  the
curls  of  the  matrons  of  the  City  of  Saints.  [17]  Throngs  of
bees  reclined  in  huts  formed  by  the  cavities  of  lotuses  barred
by  the  tips  of  filaments  erect  and  stiff  as  they  closed.

Like  clustering  Kutaja  buds  in  the  forest  of  Qiva's  hair
when  it  tosses  in  the  dance,  the  star-swarms  filled  the  sky
with  their  clusters.  About  the  earth  the  new-born  darkness
closed,  coppery-hued  from  the  after-effects  of  the  twilight,
coloured  like  the  skin  of  a  ripe  date,  and  thick  as  the  cloud
of  doomsday2.  Sharply  piercing  the  mass  of  soft  dusk,  the
scattered  lamps  peeped  forth  like  clusters  of  Campak  buds
about  the  ear  of  the  goddess  of  night.  Paling  with  the
lovely  effulgence  of  the  crescent  moon's  rays,  the  eastern
quarter  began  to  narrow  the  dusk,  like  a  young  sandbank  by
Yamuna's  banks  when  the  dark  water  retreats  as  it  dries.
Perturbed,  like  the  spirit  of  a  proud  beauty,  by  the  moon's
fingers3  clutching  its  tresses,  the  darkness,  in  hue  like  a  jay's
wing,  a  very  cluster  of  curls  belonging  to  the  Gipsy4  of  night,
dissolved  and  abandoned  the  sky,  and  cast  its  gloom  upon
the  pools  of  blossoming  blue  lotuses.  The  form  of  the  Lord
of  White  Splendour,  now  uprisen,  assumed  the  glow  of  the
Udaya  mountain,  resembling  the  lip  of  the  nymph  of  night  ;
and  his  redness  was  as  though  he  were  covered  with  blood
oozing  from  his  own  deer,  now  slain  by  a  stroke  from  the
rending  paws  of  the  lion  that  dwells  in  the  caves  of  the
valleys  of  Udaya's  peaks.  The  gloom  had  waned,  as  if
washed  by  the  flow  of  the  moonstone's  ooze  from5  the
Eastern  hill.  Like  a  great  ivory  crocodile-mouthed  conduit
bearing  a  stream  of  milk  trickling  from  the  world  of  cows,
the  moon's  circle  had  commenced  to  fill  the  ocean.  [18]

At  that  clear  evening  time  Savitri  thus  addressed
Sarasvati,  who,  vacant  in  heart  as  it  were,  was  lost  in  tearful
thought  :  —  '  Friend,  my  tongue  is  ashamed  to  prate  to  thee,


,  =  bhupadl,  opens  at  night.
2  Or  'a  black  cloud.'  3  I.e.  'rays.'

4 Her  beauty  hangs  upon  the  cheek  of  Night

Like  a  rich  jewel  in  an  Ethiop's  ear. Romeo  and  Juliet.
"  lleud  acalacyuta  with  the  Calc.  and  Kashmir  texts.


12  THE HARSA-CAR1TA.

whose  wisdom  may  instruct  the  three  worlds.  Thou  knowest
already  what  arc  the  ill-mannered  ways  of  fate,  unstable,
heedless,  like  a  lowborn  person,  even  of  the  worthy,  incon-
stant, not  to  be  evaded,  in  no  wise  pleasurable1.  A  mere
grain  of  undeserved  humiliation,  coming  from  an  inferior,
makes  turbid  the  spirit2  even  of  the  wise.  Even  an  atom  of
misfortune,  when  watered  with  ceaseless  tears,  like  a  leafless
tree,  puts  forth  a  thousand  shoots.  An  over-delicate  soul,
like  a  Mdlati  blossom,  is  withered  by  the  particles  of  fiery
pain.  Like  the  elephant's  goad,  even  a  slight  prick  of
trouble,  assailing  the  great,  suffices  to  torment.  Moreover
our  native  home,  linked  to  us  like  a  kinsman  by  the  knotted
ties  of  natural  affection,  is  hard  to  abandon.  Separation
from  approved  friends,  dreadful  as  the  stroke  of  the  wood-
cleaving  saw,  leaves  a  fissure  in  the  heart.  But  thee  it
befits  not  to  be  thus  afflicted.  Thou  surely  art  not  the  soil
in  which  should  spring  up  the  shoots  of  the  poison  plant
of  pain.  Also,  seeing  that  before  and  behind  us  like  a  ruler
stand  our  past  deeds,  potent  whether  good  or  evil  in  pro-
ducing their  fruit.  [19]  wnat  occasion  have  the  wise  for
sorrowing?  Why,  pray,  do  these  inauspicious  tears  defile
a  face  which  is  the  single  lotus  of  auspiciousness  for  the
three  worlds  ?  Enough  now  of  this :  say  what  part  of  the
world  thou  wouldst  adorn.  On  what  blest  spot  is  thy  heart
fain  to  alight  ?  What  holy  bathing-places  dost  thou  desire
to  grace  ?  In  what  fortunate  forest  seclusions  wouldst  thou
live  the  ascetic's  life  ?  Here  am  I  ready  to  descend  to
earth,  a  loving  friend,  well-skilled  to  serve  thee,  tried  in
friendly  offices  when  we  played  together  in  the  dust.  Cast
thyself  henceforth  in  heart,  voice  and  deed,  seeking  no  other
refuge,  upon  the  author  of  all  knowledge,  the  bestower  of
paradise,  the  dust  of  whose  feet  makes  pure  both  gods  and
asuras,  whose  earring  is  formed  of  the  moon's  digits,  even  on
Qiva,  god  of  gods,  preceptor  of  the  three  worlds.  In  but  a
little  time  he  will  give  thee  release  from  the  woe  of  the  curse.'

1  The  ways  of  fate  are  here  punningly  compared  to  the  caprices  of
women,  cf.  vdmdh :  striyctfca  Comm.

2  There  is  a  pun  on  lake  Mfumsa  made  turbid  by  a  falling  particle.


CHAPTER I.  13

To  these  words  Sarasvati,  letting  fall  a  pearly  white  tear-
drop, replied : — '  Dear  friend,  if  I  go  with  thee,  neither
severance  from  Brahma's  world  nor  grief  at  the  curse  will
cause  me  any  distress :  'tis  only  that  the  happiness  of
serving  the  lotus-throned  fills  my  heart  with  soft  regret.
Furthermore  'tis  thou  who  knowest  the  abodes  where
Dharma  can  be  followed1  upon  earth,  the  means  of  mystic
meditation,  and  how  to  practise  the  postures  of  ascetic
rapture.'  So  much  said  she  ceased  to  speak  :  and  that  night
she  spent  with  unclosed  eyes,  sleepless  through  agitation.

Next  day  as,  heralded  by  the  dawn  [20]  rosy  as  an  old
cock's  comb,  the  adorable  sun,  the  world's  diadem,  Mount
Udaya's  crest  jewel,  arose  with  a  form  red  as  with  blood
scattered  from  the  mouths  of  his  own  steeds  cut  by  the
tossing  clanking  bit,  the  keeper  of  the  goose  tribes  that
draw  Brahma's  chariot2  sang  aloud  in  Aparavaktra  metre
as  he  strolled  along  not  far  away: —

'Wherefore  trembles  thine  anxious  glance,

'  0  nursling  of  pellucid  Manasa  as  thy  home  1

'  Descend,  O  kalahamsa,  to  the  pond  ;

'Again  shalt  thou  return  to  the  abode  of  lotuses.'

Hearing  this  Sarasvati  thought :  '  'Tis  I,  methinks,  to  whom
he  appeals.  So  be  it !  I  must  respect  the  sage's  sentence.'
So  she  arose  resolved  to  descend  to  the  earth,  and  having
left  her  attendants  prostrate  at  the  separation,  parted
from  her  kindred,  and  then,  like  one  cut  off  from  the  herd,
passed  thrice  round  the  four-faced  god.  At  last,  courteously
turning  back  crowds  of  pursuing  devotees,  she  set  forth
accompanied  by  Savitri  from  Brahma's  world.

Straight  she  came  to  the  steady-flowing3  loud-roaring
river  Mandakini  with  milky  udders  downward  streaming*
like  the  cow  of  Dharma,  a  very  Malatl  wreath  for  the  head

1  As  e.g.  Madhyade9a,  Manu  ii.  21.

2  The  Kashmir  and  Bombay  texts  insert  here  vivicya  : vicarya
'  having  reflected.'

3  Or  '  descended  from  Dhruva,'  i.e.  from  the  star  of  Dhruva  or  the
firmament  or  Visnu  ;  cf.  Comm.

4  The  Sanskrit  may  also  mean  '  with  down-raining  white  clouds.'


14  THE HARSA-CARITA.

of  Qiva1.  Thick  covered  were  its  banks  with  close-clinging
Balakhilyas2.  The  bark  of  its  trees  had  been  washed  by
Arundhati.  [21]  The  clear  stars  were  tremulous  as  they
crossed  its  high-leaping  waves.  Its  sand-isles  were  bristling
beds  of  floating  sesamum  seeds  and  water3  offered  by  ascetics.
All  white  were  its  banks  with  offerings  to  the  manes  let  fall
by  Brahma  when  purified  by  bathing.  Ku $a -grass  beds  of
the  seven  Kisis,  who  had  slept  hard  by,  gave  token  of  the
birth-fast  for  the  sun's  delivery  from  eclipse4.  Dappled  was
it  with  abundant  flowers  from  the  service,  let  fall  by  Qacl's
lord  when  purified  by  rinsing  his  mouth.  It  had  garlands
of  Mandara  blossoms,  dropped  as  the  remains  of  the  sacrifice
from  (Diva's  city.  Scornfully  had  it  cleft  the  rocks  of
Mandara's  caves.  Rippled  was  its  surface  with  the  cup-like
bosoms  of  unnumbered  beauties  of  Indra's  court5.  Its  waters
were  resonant  with  its  tumbling  over  myriad  stones  and
crocodiles.  Masses  of  the  moon's  ambrosial  dew  bestarred
its  banks,  flowing  down  from  the  sun's  Susumna  ray.  Grey
were  its  sands  with  smoke  from  the  fire  of  Dhisana6.  Vidya-
dharas  were  flying  in  terror  at  its  leaping  over  the  sand
lihgas  erected  by  the  saints.  Such  was  the  river,  the  cast
slough,  as  it  were,  of  the  sky  serpent,  the  sportive  forehead-
ornament  of  the  jester  of  Indra's  world7,  the  bazaar  street
of  the  wares  of  Dharma,  the  shot  bolt  of  the  gate  of  Hell's
city,  the  silken  turban  wrap  of  Sumeru's  king8,  the  cloth
banner  of  Kailasa's  elephant,  the  track  of  liberation,  the
wheel-rim  of  the  aeon9  of  goodness,  the  bride  of  the  lord
of  the  seven  oceans10.

Passing  along  its  banks  Sarasvati  descended  to  the  world
of  mortals ;  and  just  as  she  stood  on  the  edge  of  the  sky  she

1  The  heavenly  Ganges  falls  on  Diva's  head.

2  Liliputian  munis  concerning  whom  many  stories  are  told.

3  For  the  tilodaJcam  cf.  Manu  in.  210.

4  An  eclipse  involves  impurity  to  all  people,  and  so  necessitates  a  fast.

5  I.e.  Apsarases.

6  Brihaspati,  the  purohita  of  the  Gods,  and  the  planet  Jupiter.
T  Ganeca  ?  8  =  Civa.

9  Yuga=(l)  age  of  goodness,  (2)  chariot.  .

10  =The  Milk  Ocean  or  a  Mount  Candra  (Cornm.).


CtiAPTER I.  15

spied  a  great  river  brimming  with  water,  pure,  cool  and
sweet,  a  daughter  of  Brahma,  by  name  the  Stream  of  Gold,
but  by  men  called  Qona,  the  pearl  necklace,  as  it  were,  of
Varuna,  the  ambrosia  cataract  of  the  moon  mountain,  the
ooze  of  the  Vindhya's  moon-gem,  a  flood  of  camphor  sap  from
the  Dan  dak  a  forest,  the  streaming  loveliness  of  the  world,
the  crystal  couch  of  the  sky's  beauty1.  [22]  At  the  sight  her
heart  was  taken  captive  by  its  beauty,  and  there  upon  its  bank
she  resolved  to  dwell;  so  she  said  to  Savitrl: — 'Pleasant  to  me,
friend,  is  the  neighbourhood  of  this  great  river,  which  makes
dull  the  lustre  of  Mandakim.  Here  are  honeyed  voices  of
peacocks,  trees  having  stocks  besanded  with  heaps  of  pollen,
the  entrancing  hum  of  lute-like  clusters  of  scent-intoxicated
bees.  My  heart  prompts  me  to  abide  even  here.'  So  as  Savitrl
welcomed  her  words,  saying,  '  Thus  let  it  be,'  she  alighted
with  her  friend  upon  the  western  bank :  and  for  a  dwelling
she  fixed  her  mind  upon  a  certain  fair  creeper  arbour  by  the
shore  containing  a  slab  of  stone.  Then  after  resting  she
soon  arose,  and  having  with  Savitrl  gathered  flowers  for
worship,  bathed :  next,  having  in  Qiva's  honour  erected  sand
liiigas  on  the  sand-isles,  she  with  deep  devotion  performed
in  full  the  ritual  of  clasping  of  fingers  together  with  the
Dhruva  hymn  and  preceded  by  the  Pancabrahma  prayer2;
lastly  after  long  meditation  on  the  eight  incarnate  forms,
earth,  wind,  water,  sky,  fire,  sun,  moon,  sacrificer,  she
presented  the  eightfold3  offering  of  flowers,  and  refreshed
her  body  with  easily  gathered  roots  and  fruits  and  Qona
water,  cool  and  of  a  sweetness  surpassing  even  ambrosia.
That  day  passed,  she  made  a  couch  of  flowers  and  slept  on
the  stone  floor  of  the  creeper  arbour.  On  the  morrow  she
spent  night  and  day  in  the  same  routine.

[23]  Now  as  the  days  in  this  wise  sped  on  and  time  passed,
one  morning,  when  the  sun  was  risen  only  one  watch,  she  heard
in  the  northern  quarter  the  deep  clear  sound  of  horses'  neighs

1  I.e.  as  mirroring  the  sky. Qrl  often  reclines  on  a  slab.
,  2_A  prayer  addressed  to  Sadyojata,  Vamadeva,  Aghora,  Tatpurusa
and  Isana. Comm.  (We  have  divided  this  sentence  in  our  translation.)
3  As  symbolising  the  eight  forms.


16  THE HARSA-CARITA.

filling  the  thickets  of  the  woods  with  echoes.  Her  curiosity
aroused,  she  came  forth,  and  looking  abroad  from  the  bower
beheld  at  no  great  distance  and  speeding  towards  her  a  cloud
of  dust  grey  as  the  leaf  which  contains  the  blossoming  Ketaki
flower.  In  due  course,"  as  proximity  gave  birth  to  distinct-
ness, she  saw  a  troop  of  horse  floating  in  that  huge  mass  of
dust  grey  as  a  (Japhards  belly,  like  a  school  of  crocodiles  in
water.  Before  it  ran  an  army  of  foot  about  a  thousand  strong,
mostly  young  men,  with  clusters  of  crisp  hanging  hair  upon
their  foreheads,  and  cheeks  laughing  with  the  bright  gleam
of  their  ear-ornaments ;  girt  with  scented  jerkins  spotted  with
a  powder  of  black  aloe  wood  paste;  their  upper  garments
formed  into  turbans  ;  sparkling  golden  bracelets  on  their  left
forearms,  daggers  fastened  in  strong  knots  in  their  sashes  of
doubled  cloth ;  tirelessly  with  bodies  thin  and  hard  from  in-
cessant exercise  leaping  like  the  deer  of  the  winds  and  spurn-
ing smooth  and  rough  ground,  holes,  and  clumps  of  bushes ;
clubs  at  their  sides,  swords  in  their  hands  ;  laden  with  various
wild  flowers,  fruits,  roots,  and  leaves  for  worship  ;  and  making
a  ceaseless  hubbub  with  cries  of  '  On,  on,  make  speed,  make
speed,  away,  away,  make  way  in  front.'  In  the  midst  [24]  she
discerned  a  youth  in  age  about  eighteen  years,  shaded  by  a
sky-reaching  umbrella,  which  with  its  half-moon,  its  girdling
heaps  of  pearls,  its  inlay  of  pieces  of  various  precious  stones,
and  its  whiteness  as  of  shells,  milk  and  foam,  resembled  the
milky  ocean  voluntarily  come  to  present  Laksmi.  All  about
him  was  the  sparkling  light  of  his  ornaments,  as  if  the
horizon  of  the  heavens  were  keeping  close  out  of  passion  for
the  sight  of  him.  Down  to  his  loins  from  his  topknot  hung  a
wreath  of  Malcitl  flowers,  like  a  pennon  of  beauty  won  by  a
world  conquest.  The  red  rays  uprising  from  the  ruby  in  his
crest1  seemed  delicate  sprays  carried  by  an  invisible  goddess  to
cleanse  his  travel-soiled  form.  His  hair,  wreathed  in  clusters
of  crisp  curls  and  charmingly  adorned  with  a  coiled  coronet2

1  tykhandakhaiidika, :  cudabharanam. Comm.

2  Mundamala,  which  occurs  several  times  in  the  book,  seems  to
mean  originally  Durga's  wreath  of  sculls,  and  then  a  wreath  of  white
flowers. The  black  hair  in  contact  with  the  white  flowers  is  compared
to  the  darkness  swallowing  the  day.


CHAPTER I.  17

of  white  Vakula  buds,  appeared  to  be  swallowing  up  the  day's
contracted  blaze.  His  forehead,  all  yellow  as  with  arsenic
paste,  cast  the  glow  of  its  beauty  upon  the  heavens,  and
being  clasped  by  its  natural  loveliness,  seemed  composed  of  a
second l  portion  of  the  moon  which  forms  the  coronet  of  Qiva's
matted  locks.  His  wide  eyes,  whose  glances  bold  in  the
confidence  of  fresh  youth's  commencement  made  nought  of
the  whole  world,  appeared  to  create  an  autumn,  clothing  the
heavens  in  myriad  pools  of  opening  white,  blue  and  red
lotuses.  His  long  nose  was  like  a  river  of  beauty's  water,  flow-
ing from  beneath  the  moonstone  of  his  forehead,  and  bridged
across  the  stream  of  his  long  eyes.  His  mouth,  breathing
a  fragrance  of  mangos,  camphor,  Kakkola-fruits,  cloves,  and
coral  trees,  and  resounding  with  a  hubbub  of  intoxicated
bee-swarms,  seemed  to  emit  a  very  spring  together  with  a
Nandana  forest.  His  innocent  smiles,  bathing  the  heavens
with  the  light  of  his  teeth  as  he  uplifted  his  face  to  catch
the  jests  of  his  friends  around  him,  [25]  created  incessantly  a
kind  of  moonlight  roaming  about  the  sky.  A  dangling
three-pointed  ear-ornament — an  emerald  set  between  a  pair
of  pearls  big  as  Kadamba  buds — emitted  a  sheen  which
suggested  a  pendant  of  green  jasmine  leaves  with  their
flowers.  His  arms,  decorated  with  painted  lines  of  scented
civet  powder,  resembled  a  pair  of  Kama's  pennon  poles  with
rampant  crocodiles  girdling  their  tops.  His  body  was
divided  by  a  white  Brahmamcal  thread,  like  Mandara  en-
circled by  the  stream  of  Ganges  indignant  at  the  churning
of  the  ocean2.  His  breast,  a  broad  sandbank  with  two  shapely
swelling  bosoms  for  ruddy-geese,  and  with  a  coating  of
camphor  powder  in  handfuls  for  dust,  seemed  a  horizon
spread  out  before  him  and  kept  within  bounds  by  the  length
of  his  stout  arms.  His  slim  waist  was  marked  off  by  a  tight-

1  The  first  portion  having  been  used  for  Qiva,  the  second  remains  for
this  hero.  The  Sanskrit  words  for  'natural  loveliness'  may  also  be
translated  'connate  Laksmi,'  referring  to  the  birth  of  Laksml  along
with  the  moon  from  the  ocean.

,2  The  Ganges  is  imagined  as  seeking  to  stay  the  churning  by  cling-
ing fast  to  the  mountain.

C.  2


18  THE HARSA-CARITA.

drawn  lower  garment  of  Harltci*  green,  of  which  one  corner
was  gracefully  set  in  front  a  little  below  the  navel  and  the
hem  hung  over  the  girdle  behind,  and  which  on  both  sides
was  so  girt  up  as  to  display  a  third  of  his  thigh.  His  stout
thighs,  glistening  with  a  thick  smearing  of  bright  sandal,
seemed  to  scoff  at  the  length  of  Airavata's  trunk,  being
very  stone  pillars  for  supporting  the  granite  platform
of  his  great  chest;  while  his  knees  issued  from  huge
'crocodile  mouths2'  with  hard  flesh  accumulated  by  in-
cessant exercise.  His  shanks  were  somewhat  slim,  as  if
from  the  fatigue  of  supporting  the  weight  of  his  vast
thighs.  His  feet,  which  hung  on  either  side,  were  red  as
two  young  shoots  of  the  tree  of  paradise,  and  the  waving
light  of  their  nails  formed  as  it  were  a  row  of  chowrie
ornaments  for  his  horse.

[26]  He  was  mounted  on  a  great  steed,  swift  as  thought,  in
colour  like  a  dark  Sindhuvdra  flower,  and  with  a  coat  as  black
as  a  golangula  ape's  cheeks.  As  it  advanced  its  high  prancing
hoofs  seemed  to  rest  awhile  in  the  air  when  it  coiled  its  legs,
and  falling  to  tear  up  the  earth.  Every  moment  the  hard
bit  clanked  when  released  by  the  teeth.  Upon  its  forehead
dangled  rings  of  fine  gold  and  the  end  of  the  bit  rested  against
its  long  nose.  It  was  adorned  with  tinkling  trappings  of
gold.  Close  on  either  side  with  their  hands  grasping  the
saddle  cloth,  two  attendants  shook  white  chowries.  In  front
chanted  a  bard,  whose  eloquence  caused  the  hairs  on  the
young  man's  cheeks  to  bristle  with  delight,  as  though  tiny
stamen  filaments  from  his  ear-wreath  had  become  attached
to  them.  He  seemed  to  reveal  a  descent  of  a  Kama's  aeon,  to
produce  a  cosmos  of  moonlight,  to  beget  an  animate  creation
of  the  substance  of  smiles,  to  pave  his  path  with  devotion,  to
frame  a  day  all  of  love,  to  inaugurate  a  kingdom  of  affection.
He  was  to  the  eye,  as  it  were,  a  collyrium  of  allurement,  to
the  heart  an  attracting  spell,  to  the  senses  a  powder  able
to  affect  the  healthiest ;  for  desire  a  never-cloying  delight,  for

1  The  Harita  is  a  kind  of  pigeon.

2  Makaramukha  is  a  name  given  to  the  upper  part  of  the  knee;
makaramukham  :  janunor  uparibhagah. Comm.


CHAPTER I.  19

bliss  a  never-failing  charm ;  the  resurrection  day  of  Love1,
the  elixir  of  youth,  the  unshared  rule  of  loveliness,  [27]  the
triumphal  pillar  of  shapeliness,  the  capital  sum  of  grace,
the  fructuation  of  the  world's  good  deeds,  the  first  bud  of
beauty's  creeper,  the  fruit  of  Prajapati's  studies  in  creation,
the  glory  of  graciousness,  the  high-tide  of  sparkling  wit.

By  the  young  man's  side,  on  a  horse  not  close  to  any
other,  was  a  person  wearing  a  white2  jerkin  and  a  white
silken  turban  round  his  head.  Tall,  in  aspect  like  a  pillar
of  molten  gold,  with  a  frame  hardened  in  spite  of  advanced
years  by  exercise,  with  short  nails  beard  and  hair,  bald  as  a
shell,  somewhat  stout,  hairy-bosomed,  dressed  handsomely
but  with  little  display,  he  seemed  one  to  teach  even  old  age
to  be  decorous,  to  add  weight  even  to  great  qualities,  to
convert  magnanimity  itself  to  a  disciple,  to  provide  de-
portment itself  with  a  monitor.

When  the  young  man  heard  of  that  pair  of  divinely
shaped  maidens — for  the  footmen  in  the  van  took  it  all  in
at  a  glance  and  in  astonishment  made  their  report — his
curiosity  was  aroused,  and  putting  his  horse  to  a  gallop,  he
rode  up  to  the  bower,  eager  to  see  them.  While  still  at  a
distance,  he  alighted  from  his  horse,  and  staying  his  suite,
approached  respectfully  on  foot  attended  only  by  the  second
noble  personage.  [28]  Greetings  made,  Savitri  and  Sarasvati
duly  received  them  with  the  usual  hospitality  of  forest  life,
beginning  with  the  offer  of  a  seat  of  twigs  and  ending  with
presents  of  fruit  with  flowers.  They  being  seated,  Savitri
sate  down,  and  after  a  not  over-prolonged  silence  addressed
herself  to  the  second  of  the  two,  the  man  of  advanced  years  : —
'  Sir,  to  make  the  first  address  ill  becomes  women,  whose
innate  modesty  is  their  all,  more  especially  noble  girls,
innocent  as  woodland  fawns.  Yet  hearing,  greedy  to  learn
the  news  and  emulous  of  the  eye  which  has  been  gratified
with  seeing,  moves  me  thereto.  And  indeed  even  at  first
,  t  sight  the  good  proffer  confidence  like  a  gift.  Like  wine,  the

1  .Kama  was  killed  in  anger  by  Civa.

2  Read  valaksa  (for  dhavala)  with  Comm.  and  the  Kashmir  text.

2—2


20  THE HARSA-CARITA.

feeling  inspired  by  the  courtesy1  shown  by  a  superior  makes
even  the  timid  talkative.  In  the  very  meek  confidence  easily
reaches  its  highest  point,  like  a  string  passing  to  the  very
end  of  a  plaint  bow2.  Moreover,  even  in  the  profoundly
wise  the  previously  unknown  masterpieces  of  creation  visible
in  the  world  occasion  astonishment ;  for  the  beauty  of  this
high-souled  youth  is  beyond  anything  in  the  universe.  It  is
not  the  levity  natural  to  young  women  that  compels  me
to  speak,  but  the  exceeding  grace,  handmaid  of  high  birth,
that  appears  in  this  darling  of  heaven3.  Therefore  relate
what  hapless  region  has  through  your  coming  been  desolated
by  the  spreading  plague  of  separation.  What  is  your
destination?  Whose  son  is  this  young  man,  a  second
Kama  humbling  the  pride  of  Qiva's  roar?  How  named
the  sire,  rich  in  austerities,  whose  heart  this  youth  gladdens,
as  the  Kaustubha  jewel  gladdens  the  heart  of  Visnu,  with
an  ambrosial  shower  ?  [29]  Who  was  his  mother,  worthy  of
the  worship  of  the  three  worlds,  the  parent,  like  the  morning
twilight,  of  a  great  splendour  ?  What  fortunate  syllables
make  up  his  name  ?  To  inquire  concerning  your  honour  also
is  the  next  proceeding  of  a  heart  compliant  to  curiosity.'

She  having  so  spoken,  the  other  courteously  replied : —
'Lady,  kindly  speech  is  a  hereditary  art  among  the  noble.
Not  merely  your  face,  your  heart  also  is  moonlike,  bestowing
delight  by  words  cooling  like  ambrosia  dew.  Women  like
you  come  into  the  world  as  the  native  soil  of  nobility,  nay,
a  greater  glory,  as  the  fine  arts  for  forming  noble  characters4.
Not  to  mention  conversation,  even  interchange  of  glances
with  the  noble  is  a  great  exaltation.  Listen  then:  This  young
man,  Dadhica  by  name,  the  pride  of  the  Bhrigu  race,  is  the
externalized  life  of  the  sainted  Cyavana5, — that  forehead-

1  Or — of  the  wine — '  courteously  offered  by  a  superior.'

2  The  pun  here  turns  on  the  double  sense  of  atinamre=(l')  'flexible,'
(2)  '  very  submissive.'

3  The  term  used  here  (devandm  priyasya}  is  that  which  A9oka  uses
of  himself  in  his  inscriptions.

4  '  To  know  her  was  a  liberal  education,'  Steele.

5  For  the  story  of  this  mythical  sage  cf.  Wilson,  '  Hindu  Theatre '  I.
p.  263  n.  and  reff.


CHAPTER I.  21

mark  of  the  triad  Bhu  Bhuvas  and  Svar,  whose  invincible
might  paralyzed  the  pillar-like  arm  of  Indra,  whose  lotus  feet
tread  rudely  on  the  couch  formed  by  the  jewelled  crowns  of
gods  and  demons,  and  who  blasted  Puloman  by  the  outpouring
of  his  splendour.  His  mother  was  a  princess,  Sukanya  named,
a  gem  among  the  maidens  of  the  universe,  daughter  of  the
world-conquering  Qaryata,  whose  train  is  of  unnumbered
monarchs.  Observing  her  to  be  with  child,  her  father  took
her  in  the  birth-month  from  her  husband's  side  to  his  own
dwelling,  there  to  bear  her  child1.  The  son  borne  by  the
princess  was  this  young  man — long  life  be  his.  [30]  And  in
the  king's  house  he  in  good  time  grew  up,  lotus-eyed,  the
delight  of  his  kindred,  like  the  young  lord  of  stars2.  Even
when  his  daughter  returned  to  her  husband's  house,  the
grandfather  parted  not  from  this  cheery- faced3  grandson  of
his,  a  solace  to  the  heart.  There  accordingly  he  was  trained
in  all  the  sciences  and  the  circle  of  the  arts.

'In  time,  observing  him  to  have  attained  to  youth,  his
grandfather,  reflecting  that  his  father  too  should  have  the
delight  of  gazing  on  his  lotus  face,  has  now  prevailed  upon
himself  to  send  him  away  to  his  father's  presence.  But  me
let  your  highness  understand  to  be  one  named  Vikuksi,  the
least  of  servants,  minister  of  the  will  of  my  auspiciously-
named  lord  Qaryata.  My  master  appointed  me  his  attendant
on  the  way  to  his  father's  feet.  Our  royal  house  follows  the
rule  of  heredity,  and  length  of  service  produces  in  the  great
a  certain  kindly  feeling  even  towards  a  dependant4.  Un-
failing indeed  is  the  store  of  good  feeling  in  the  great.

'Some  two  leagues  hence  across  the  Qona  is  the  abode  of
the  sainted  Cyavana,  a  forest  rivalling  Caitraratha5  and  by
him  entitled  Cyavana,  an  appellation  derived  from  his  own

1  The  custom  should  be  noticed.

2  I.e.  the  moon.

3  l Na  jdyate  yatra  triptis  tad  asecanakam  viduh.' Comrn. 'that  of
which  we  are  never  satiated':  cf.  A.  K.  Vicesyanighnavarga,  53.

4  The  office  of  minister  was  frequently  hereditary  in  Hindu  times,
cf.  Wilson,  '  Hindu  Theatre '  n.  p.  208  n.

5  The  grove  of  the  god  Kuvera.


22  THE HARSA-CARITA.

name.  That  is  our  journey's  goal.  If  now  this  is  a  time  for
an  act  of  grace,  and  your  heart  is  void  of  contempt  towards  us,
if  such  as  we  are  fit  recipients  of  favours  and  worthy  to  hear,
let  not  this  our  first  solicitation  of  curiosity  meet  with  a
repulse.  We  also  are  fain  to  hear  your  highnesses'  story.
Your  aspect  in  no  way  falls  short  of  divinity :  but  our  hearts
are  eager  to  hear  your  lineage  and  names.  Say  therefore
what  stock  was  made  enviable  by  your  birth.  Who  is  this
lady  near  your  highness,  a  coinherence  as  it  were  of  mutually
exclusive  qualities?  Thus: — with  the  darkness  of  her  locks
close  by,  she  has  a  radiance  as  of  the  sun ;  [31]  with  the  face
of  a  lotus1  the  eye  of  a  fawn ;  wearing  the  brilliance  of  the
young  day,  she  has  yet  the  smile  of  a  night-lotus ;  the  voice
of  a  lovesick  kalahamsa,  yet  swelling  bosoms2:  hands  soft  as
day-lotuses,  yet  hips  broad  as  the  rocks  of  the  mountain  of
snow3 ;  thighs  like  a  young  elephant's  trunk,  yet  a  languid
gait ;  she  has  not  passed  the  season  of  girlhood,  yet  she  has
the  swimming  eyes  of  love4.'

Savitri  answered: — 'You  shall  hear,  my  lord,  in  good
time.  Our  hearts  are  fain  to  stay  here  many  days :  and  the
distance  is  slight.  Intimacy  will  make  all  clear.  Let  my
lord  not  forget  people  seen  only  by  chance.'  After  which
reply  she  became  silent.  But  Dadhica,  with  a  voice  which,
resembling  the  deep  mutter  of  clouds  laden  with  new  rain,
set  the  peacocks  dancing  in  the  creeper  arbours,  gravely
said: — 'My  lord,  her  highness  being  conciliated  will  be
gracious  to  us ;  now  let  us  visit  my  father.  Rise,  let  us
proceed.'  Then,  the  other  assenting,  he  slowly  arose,  and
with  a  bow  moved  away.  As  he  mounted  his  horse  and
departed,  Sarasvati  gazed  for  a  long  time  after  him  with  an
eye  with  straight  rigid  lashes  and  pupil  motionless  as  in  a

1  The  contradiction  turns  on  the  double  sense  ofpundarika  =  (1)  lotus,
(2)  lion.

2  Payodhardh  may  also  mean  'clouds'; the  kalahamsa  migrates
during  the  rainy  season.

3  Snow  kills  the  lotus  :  hence  the  contradiction.

4  The  words  may  also  mean  'not  faithless  to  Kumara  and  yet  loving
his  enemy  Taraka.'


CHAPTER I.  23

picture1.  Crossing  the  Qona,  Dadhica  quickly  reached  the
site  of  his  father's  seclusion.  But  when  he  disappeared
Sarasvati  stood  for  a  long  time  gazing  in  that  direction,
and  could  hardly  cease  looking  [32].

Then,  when  she  had  remained  quiet  one  short  moment
recalling  that  perfection  of  form,  her  heart  was  filled  more
and  more  with  astonishment.  Her  eye  longed  to  see  him
again ;  and  something  involuntarily  drew  her  glance  in  the
same  direction  as  before.  All  uncommissioned  her  heart
went  away  with  him.  Like  a  new  spray  upon  a  young
wood-creeper,  love  somehow2  sprang  up  in  her  heart.  She
passed  the  day  as  it  were  languid,  empty,  and  heavy  with
sleep.  But  when  with  westward  inclining  circle  the  sun's
radiant  form,  lover  of  the  lotus  beds,  sprung  from  the  three
Vedas,  was  nearing  the  west,  with  colour  golden  as  a  cluster
of  Lafigalikas,  and  brilliance  red  as  an  old  crane's  head,
while  the  gathering  dusk  sky-enveloping  was  befouling  the
firmament  with  a  blackness  like  the  bark  of  a  young  Tamala,
and  slowly  slowly  the  moon  was  creeping  up  the  heavens,
like  a  swan  of  Mandakim,  in  pursuit  of  the  tinkling  anklets
of  the  roaming  mistresses  of  the  saints, — at  that  hour,  the  very
outset  of  night,  Sarasvati,  her  twilight  worship  done,  fell  with
languid  limbs  on  her  couch  of  young  shoots  and  there
remained.  Savitrl  also,  having  performed  the  evening  ritual,
in  due  course  took  to  her  couch  of  leaves  at  the  usual  hour
of  rest,  and,  drowsiness  approaching,  slept  [33].

But  the  other,  though  she  closed  her  eyes,  enjoyed  no
sleep ;  her  couch  of  leaves  was  deranged  by  repeated  tossings
of  her  limbs,  and  this  was  her  thought: — 'Surely  the  world
of  mortals  is  above  all  worlds,  since  therein  are  born  such
gems,  the  three- worlds'  pride,  laden  with  the  company  of  all
fine  qualities3.  Thus: — the  moon  is  but  a  trickling  drop

1  This  simile  so  common  in  Sanskrit  poetry  may  be  paralleled  from
Shakespeare  '  Hamlet,'  Act  n.  sc.  ii.  465,  '  So,  as  a  painted  tyrant,
Pyrrhus  stood,'  and  also  Coleridge,  '  Ancient  Mariner,'
'As  idle  as  a  painted  ship

Upon  a  painted  ocean.'

.  2  Kuto* pi=(V)  '  somehow,' (2)  '  from  the  earth.'
3  Or  'heavy  even  for  all  necklaces.'


24  THE HAR§A-CARITA.

of  his  face's  flood  of  beauty:  his  glances  are  beds  of  ex-
panding lotuses,  white,  blue,  and  red :  the  sparklings  of  his
gem-like  lips  are  forest  avenues  of  open  Bandhukas.  To
that  body  only  the  disembodied  Kama  can  add  a  charm.
Happy  the  eyes,  hearts,  and  young  beauty  of  those  women
within  whose  vision  he  comes.  In  displaying  him  to  me
only  for  a  moment  my  ill-deeds  in  former  births  have
wrought  their  fruit.  What  resource  is  open  to  me  now?'
Amid  such  thoughts  as  these  drowsiness  coming  over  her,
she  at  length  lay  still  awhile,  and  falling  asleep  beheld  (in  a
vision)  that  very  youth  with  the  long  eyes.  Through  that
second  dream-meeting  the  lord  of  the  crocodile  banner,  draw-
ing his  bow  to  the  ear,  dealt  her  a  pitiless  stroke.  When  she
awoke  thus  smit  by  Kama's  bolt,  then  came  unrest  as  if  to  learn
her  condition1.  Thus  was  it  with  her : — from  that  hour,  [34]
even  though  unsmitten  by  the  pollen-whitened  wood-creepers,
she  felt  a  smart.  Though  her  eyes  might  not  be  hurt  by
flower-dust  wafted  by  gentle  breezes,  yet  she  would  let  fall  a
tear.  Though  not  bedewed  by  Qona  spray  scattered  by
myriad  fanning  hamsas  wings,  yet  a*  moisture  came  upon
her.  Though  not  borne  by  pairs  of  rocking  Kadambas*,
yet  was  she  agitated  by  the  tossing  waves  of  the  sylvan
lotus  pools.  Though  untouched  by  the  smoke  of  parting
sighs  let  fall  by  severed  pairs  of  ruddy-geese,  yet  she  wore
a  pallid  hue.  Though  unstung  by  the  honey-making  tribes,
all  grey  with  flower-dust,  yet  she  would  feverishly  start.

After  the  lapse  of  some  nights  Vikuksi  returning  by  the
same  route  arrived  at  that  place,  and,  having  checked  his
attendants  as  before,  approached  with  his  umbrella-holder.
Sarasvati,  who  had  observed  his  approach  from  afar,  sprang
joyfully  up,  and,  gazing  with  straining  neck  like  a  woodland
fawn,  seemed  to  bathe  the  way-worn  traveller  with  a  glance
that  whitened  the  ten  regions  of  space.  When  he  had  accepted
a  seat,  Savitrl  asked  him  aifectionately  '  My  lord,  is  the  young
prince  well  ? '  He  answered,  '  Quite  well,  your  highness,  and
he  bears  you  both  in  remembrance:  during  the  past  days,

1  I.e.  as  it  were,  to  make  a  call.

2  A  goose  with  dark-grey  wings.


CHAPTER I.  25

however,  he  is  somewhat  thin  in  figure,  and  experiences  as  it
were  an  inexplicable  and  causeless  void.  [35]  Also  there  will
arrive  later1  a  lady  named  Malati,  commissioned  from  him  to
inquire  of  you :  she  is  a  sigh  of  the  prince.'  Hearing  this,
Savitri  once  more  spoke : — '  A  magnanimous  prince  indeed
to  honour  with  his  acquaintance2  people  scarcely  known  to
him  and  seen  only  for  an  instant.  His  mind  was,  I  suppose,
accidentally  caught  by  us  for  a  moment  as  he  passed,  like
a  shawl  by  a  wayside  creeper.  In  your  lord's  son  true  nobi-
lity is  not  devoid  of  high  birth.  A  listless  world,  truly,  that
it  does  not  at  any  price  purchase  the  hearts  of  the  great  so
easily  won  to  friendship.  This  is  a  pinnacle  of  nobility  in
the  great,  unattainable  by  others,  whereby  they  win  the
whole  world  to  their  service.'  Having  spent  some  time
in  general3  conversation  Vikuksi  went  away  in  the  direc-
tion of  his  choice.

On  the  morrow  as  the  adorable  jewel  of  day  arose  with
his  thousand  rays,  illimitable  in  splendour,  invading  the
starlight,  veiling  the  darkness,  eager  to  expand  the  red
lotuses,  Malati  was  seen  to  have  crossed  the  Qona  and
to  be  approaching  with  a  small  retinue  of  attendants4.  [38]
While  still  far  away,  she  was  looted  as  it  were  by  Sarasvati's
wishes  in  her  love  for  Dadhica,  hurried  on  by  her  eagerness,
met  by  her  longings,  embraced  by  her  yearning,  welcomed
into  her  heart,  bathed  in  her  tears  of  joy,  anointed6  by  her
smile,  fanned  by  her  sighs,  arrayed  in  the  light  of  her  eyes,
worshipped  with  (the  flower  offering  of)  her  lotus  face,  made
a  friend  by  her  hopes.  So  she  drew  near,  and,  alighting  from
her  steed,  saluted  from  a  distance  with  bowed  head :  then
having  been  embraced  by  the  pair  she  modestly  sate  down.
Being  courteously  addressed  by  them,  she  congratulated
herself,  and  with  hands  humbly  laid  upon  her  head  an-

1  The  Comm.  explains  anvaksam=pratyaksam  =  'm  person': but
query  I

2  Or  '  inquiries.'

3  Uccdvacaik  :  prakritavastvasamspar^ibhih,  vicitrair  iti  vd. Comm.
•  4  The  long  description  of  Malati  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix.

5  Read  vilipta  with  the  Kashmir  text.


26  THE HARSA-CARITA.

nounced  the  respectful  greeting  wherewith  Dadhlca  had
charged  her ;  and  in  the  course  of  various  polite  conversation
she  won  the  hearts  of  Savitri  and  Sarasvati  by  her  urbanity
of  demeanour  and  courteous  address.

When  noon  had  passed  in  due  course,  and  Savitri  was
gone  down  to  the  Qona  to  bathe,  Malati  sent  away  her
attendants,  and  approaching  Sarasvati,  who  was  lying  on  a
couch  of  flowers,  [39]  said  meaningly  to  her : — '  Lady,  I  have
something  to  communicate  in  private  :  so  I  wish  you  to
bestow  on  me  the  favour  of  a  moment's  attention.'  Sarasvati,
suspecting  a  message  from  Dadhlca,  wondered  what  she  was
about  to  say.  So  concealing  with  a  portion  of  her  shawl  of
woven  bark  a  heart  which,  as  if  the  buds  of  curiosity  were
bursting  forth,  bristled  with  the  rays  from  the  nails  of  her
left  hand  laid  against  her  bosom ;  clinging  to  a  neighbouring
creeper  (her  hope  of  life,  it  seemed)  which  swayed  with  her
incessant  sighs,  while  her  dangling  ear-wreath  suggested  that
her  ear  was  running  forth  to  listen ;  her  blooming  moonlike
face  flooding  the  world  with  an  outpouring  of  beauty  like  a
stream  of  passion;  buoyed  up  by  swarms  of  dusky  bees
attracted  by  the  fragrance  of  her  flowery  couch,  like  embodied
yearnings  issuing  forth  blackened  by  the  fire  of  Kama's  flame ;
slowly,  slowly  in  the  fever  of  love's  dart  she  uprose  from
her  couch  of  flowers,  and  drawing  nigh  to  her  ear  the  Malati
reflected  in  her  cheek,  as  if  out  of  shame  she  would  say
'  Whisper  it  to  me,'  with  honeyed  voice  she  gravely  said  : —
'  Why  do  you  speak  thus  to  me,  friend  Malati  ?  Who  am
I  to  grant  attention  as  a  favour?  Even  without  asking1,
the  charming  and  lovely2  are  masters  of  our  bodies,  our
lives,  our  all.  There  is  nothing  that  you  are  not  to  me,
sister,  friend,  loved  one,  second  self.  Ordain  what  task,
small  or  great,  this  poor  body  may  perform.  This  com-
pliant heart  has  no  secrets  from  you.  Deal  as  you  please
with  your  slave.  Reveal,  lovely  lady,  your  meaning.'

'Lady,'  the  other  replied,  'you  do  not  need  to  be  told
the  delightfulness  of  mundane  things,  the  importunity  of  the

1  Aprdrthito  'without  a  request';  cf.  vidita  Kiratarj.  I.  2.

2  V.  1.  ativelam  (  =  atimdtram)  for  atipecalas  in  Kashm.  ed.


CHAPTER I.  27

army  of  the  senses,  the  intoxication  of  youthfulness,  the
restlessness  of  the  mind.  [40]  The  resistless  power  of  Kama  is
notorious.  Therefore  meet  me  not,  I  pray,  with  censure.
My  chatter  is  not  due  to  folly,  giddiness,  or  love  of  gossip.
There  is  nothing  which  great  devotion  to  a  master  does  not
make  people  attempt.  From  the  very  moment,  princess,
when  the  prince  beheld  you,  love  has  been  his  spiritual
guide1,  the  moon  his  lord  of  life2,  the  southern  breeze  his
familiar3,  anguish  has  been  in  his  secret  counsels,  pain  the
friend  of  his  bosom4,  wakefulness  his  kinsman,  yearnings  his
emissaries,  sighs  his  vanguard5,  death  his  squire,  disquiet  his
courier,  fancies  his  aged  advisers.  How  am  I  to  speak  ?
Should  I  say  '  he  is  a  match  for  your  highness,'  your  heart
will  tell  you  that;  'of  noble  character,'  that  is  beside  the
mark ;  '  a  man  of  sense,'  that  is  at  variance  with  his  state  of
mind  ;  '  blessed  by  fortune,'  that  depends  on  you ;  '  constant
in  affection,'  that  implies  experience ;  '  versed  in  rendering
homage,'  that  is  inappropriate  to  his  princely  rank;  'he  is
fain  to  be  your  slave  till  death,'  a  knave's  plea ;  '  you  shall
be  the  mistress  of  his  house,'  a  seductive  tale ;  '  happy
she  who  owns  such  a  lord,'  a  partisan's  story;  [41]  'you  are
his  death,'  an  unkind  saying;  'you  know  not  worth,'  a
reproach ;  '  you  have  often  shown  him  favours  in  dreams,'
unsupported  by  testimony ;  '  he  pleads  for  his  life,'  a  coward's
act ;  '  go  and  visit  him,'  a  command ;  '  though  forbidden,  he
is  coming  perforce,'  mere  overbearingness.  Therefore,  when
I  have  said  that  you  are  beyond  the  reach  of  words,  the
decision  rests  with  you.'

So  much  said,  she  became  silent.  But  Sarasvati  with
eyes  wide-open  with  love  replied : — '  I  am  unable  to  say
many  words.  Here  am  I,  lady  of  smiling  speech,  at  your

1  There  is  a  pun  on  guru  =  (I)  great,  (2)  teacher.

2  I.e.  as  allaying  his  pain  by  its  coolness. Jlviteca  may,  however,
mean  also  (1)  the  god  of  death,  as  the  moon  serves  to  kindle  his  passion,
and  (2)  purohit  or  spiritual  guide :  there  is  a  complicated  play  on  these
three  senses.

3  Or  '  a  cause  of  sighing.'

' 4  The  word  paramasuhrid  may  also  mean  '  preeminently  an  enemy.'
6  Or — punningly — '  sighs  go  before  his  body.'


28  THE HARSA-CARITA.

orders.  Take  charge  of  my  life.'  '  Your  commands  are  the
highest  of  favours,'  replied  Malati,  beside  herself  with  joy,
and  bowing  passed  on  her  galloping  steed  across  the  £ona,
and  proceeded  to  Cyavana's  hermitage  to  bring  Dadhica.
But  the  other  out  of  love  for  her  friend  made  Savitrl  also
acquainted  with  the  news.  Her  mind  panting  under  its  load
of  longing,  she  could  scarcely  pass  the  rest  of  the  day  which
seemed  an  aeon.  But  when  the  adorable  sun  had  sunk  with
all  his  radiance  in  the  west,  when  the  dusk  was  stilly
descending,  and  the  moon  was  issuing,  like  a  lion  from  his
cave,  from  the  eastern  quarter  now  gleaming  as  with  a
smile1,  then  SarasvatI  sate  herself  down  on  the  Qona  sands,
white,  delicate  as  China  silk,  rolling  in  waves,  like  a  silken-
soft  bed.  On  her  brow  was  a  jewel,  the  imaged  moonlight,
as  it  were,  of  Dadhlca's  toe-nails  as  in  her  dreams  she  fell  in
supplication  at  his  feet.  Reflected  in  the  mirror  of  her
cheek,  the  moon  thus  near  to  her  ear  seemed  to  be  com-
municating Kama's  charge,  '  Fair  smiling  one,  here  have  I
brought  thy  heart's  darling.'  As  her  hand  fanned  her  moist
cheek,  its  nails  scattered  a  horizon  of  rays,  like  a  bundle  of
moon-digits  converted  into  a  yak-tail  fan.  Above  her  heart,
sighing2  against  her  bosom,  she  had  just  strength  to  bear  a
young  lotus  stalk,  like  a  rod  let  fall3  in  sport  by  Kama  across
its  portal  to  say  '  Here  none  but  Dadhica  may  enter.'  [42]
Thus  did  she  expect  him,  and  this  was  the  thought  in  her
heart,  '  Since  I,  even  I,  SarasvatI,  have  been  enslaved,  like
a  low-caste  woman,  by  this  heart's  son  Kama,  what  is
to  be  expected  of  other  poor  excitable  maidens  ? '

With  Malati  Dadhica  came  bringing  sweet  perfumes
like  the  month  of  honey,  bearing  like  a  hariisa  cooling
lotus  fibres,  his  face  uplifted  in  deep  joy  like  a  peacock  at  a
cloud4,  causing  like  the  Malaya  breeze  a  tremour  upon  a


1  I.e.  an  arch  smile  at  the  meeting  of  the  lovers.

2  The  Kashmir  text,  however,  reads  stanayantl,  which  will  go  with
SarasvatI.

3  For  vetralata  cf.  Pancatantra  (Bomb,  ed.),  p.  16,  1.  1.

4  G/iana  =  (l)  great,  (2)  cloud.


CHAPTER I.  29

creeper-like  form1  all  white  with  moist  sandal :  drawn  on,  as
it  seemed,  by  the  lord  of  planets2  with  finger-like  rays  grasping
his  locks ;  wafted  by  the  southern  breeze  potent  in  kindling
love ;  borne  on  the  billowy  current  of  desire3.  A  throng  of
bees  crowding  towards  his  fragrance  arrayed  his  willowy
form  as  with  a  dark  garment :  the  moon's  image,  gleaming
within  like  the  ear-shell4  of  love's  raging  elephant,  whitened
the  convex  of  his  cheek  as  with  the  coy  aimless  smile  of  a
first  union.  Having  arrived  and  greeted  her  with  a  voice
which,  broken  like  a  hamsa's,  seemed  interrupted  by  a  tinkle
of  anklets  from  the  loved  one  taken  to  his  heart,  he  spent
that  fair  night  in  the  fashion  enjoined  by  Kama,  taught  by
youth,  [43]  dictated  by  passion,  and  revealed  by  insight.
Taking  confidence,  Sarasvati  made  herself  known  to  him,
and  with  her  he  spent  a  full  year  brief  as  a  single  day.

Then  by  ordinance  of  destiny  Sarasvati  conceived,  and
bare  in  good  time  a  son  graced  by  all  auspicious  signs.
Upon  him  at  the  very  hour  of  his  birth  she  laid  this  blessing,
'By  my  favour  all  the  Vedas  with  the  mystic  portions,  all
authoritative  books,  and  all  arts  shall  be  fully  and  spon-
taneously manifested  in  him.'  Then  bearing  Dadhica  in  her
heart  as  though  to  display  him  with  the  vaunt  of  an  ideal
spouse,  she  ascended  by  the  Great  Father's  will  with  Savitri
to  Brahma's  world.  She  having  departed,  Dadhica  also,
pierced  to  the  heart  as  by  a  lightning  flash,  went  away  sick
with  his  loss  to  the  woods  to  live  as  an  ascetic :  having
appointed  as  his  son's  foster-mother  a  hermit's  daughter
named  Aksamala,  wife  to  Bhratri,  a  Brahman  of  the  Bhrigu
race.  She  had  borne  a  son  at  the  very  hour  when  Sarasvati
gave  birth  to  hers.  So  the  two  children  gradually  grew  up
together,  fed  without  favour  at  the  same  breast.  The  one
was  named  Sarasvata  simply5,  the  other's  name  was  Vatsa.

1  I.e.  Sarasvati. The  words  may  also  mean  "  the  creepers  clinging
to  the  sandal  and  grislea  trees."

2  The  Moon.

3  Utkalikd  =  (l)  wave,  (2)  agitation.

4  Because  of  its  whiteness.

6  I.e.  '  Sarasvatfs  son' :  ukhyd  and  ndma  are  here  distinguished.


30  THE HARSA-CARITA.

And  between  the  two  there  existed  an  enviable  affection  like
that  of  brothers.

Now  Sarasvata,  who  through  his  mother's  power  was  at
the  very  outset  of  youth  gifted  with  the  full  treasure  of  the
sciences,  conveyed  it  undiminished  in  the  form  of  words  to
his  dear  confidant  and  loving  twin-brother  Vatsa.  When
Vatsa  took  a  wife,  he  made  for  him  in  that  same  nei^h-

'  O

bourhood  a  mansion  endearingly  named  The  Pinnacle  of
Delight1:  he  himself,  assuming  the  hermit's  staff,  black
antelope  skin,  bark  dress,  rosary,  girdle,  and  matted  locks,
went  to  join  his  father,  the  ascetic  [44].

From  Vatsa  there  proceeded  a  prolific  stock  like  Ganges
purifying,  noised  abroad*  through  the  growing  fame  of  the
school  established  by  its  founders,  upheld  on  the  Almighty's
head,  deep  in  the  lore  of  all  arts,  honoured  of  great  saints,
potent  to  shake  its  foes,  stretching  far  over  the  earth's
surface,  stumbling  not  in  its  going2.  Wherefrom  were  born
home-dwelling  sages  named  Vatsyayanas,  devoted  to  Qrauta
lore  yet  assuming  not  the  false  muttering  of  cranes,  vowed
to  the  '  Cock '  rules  of  fasting  yet  free  from  the  ways  of  cats,
averse  to  worldly  pretence,  bare  of  all  wily,  deceitful,  guileful
or  boastful  intent,  discarding  hypocrisy,  trampling  on  dis-
honesty, tranquil  in  nature,  free  from  sudden  change,  reluctant
in  heart  to  reprove  others,  cleansed  from  darkness  by  detach-
ment from  the  three  colours3,  shaken  clear  of  desire  by  deep
thought,  wavering  not  in  soul,  devoted  to  their  followers,  at
rest  from  all  the  doubts  of  different  schools,  openers  of  all  knotty
points  in  the  sense  of  books,  poets,  [45]  eloquent,  without
envy,  fond  of  charming  speech,  skilled  in  clever  wit,  versed
in  urbane  ways,  connoisseurs  of  dance,  song  and  music,  never
surfeited  with  tradition,  compassionate,  pure  through  truth,
honoured  of  the  good,  with  hearts  melting  with  a  dew  of

1  This  is  probably  the  name  of  Bana's  home.

2  The  adjectives  are  all  made  by  means  of  puns  to  apply  both  to  the
race  and  to  the  Ganges. This  paragraph  is  full  of  untranslateable  puns.

3  Varnatraya  'the  triad  of  colours,'  red,  white,  and  black,  is  a
synonym  for  the  material  world :  cf.  Cveta9v. Upanis.,  iv.  5. The  pun
is  on  varnatraya  =  three  castes  and  andhas  =  (\) darkness,  (2) food.
'  Their  food  pure  through  avoiding  the  three  castes.'


CHAPTER I.  31

tenderness  to  all  beings ;  likewise  endowed  with  all  qualities
yet  unconquered  by  the  quality  of  passion1,  possessed  of
patience,  cheering  their  dependents2,  not  cruel,  girt  with
knowledge3,  not  dull,  masters  of  arts4,  free  from  faults,
helpful5,  not  inflaming  others  yet  suns  of  brilliance,  without
heat  yet  sacrificers6,  without  crooked  ways,  happy7,  no  rigid
Stoics,  yet  abodes  of  good  deeds  rewarded8,  unfailing  in  the
performance  of  sacrifice,  dexterous9,  guileless,  superior  to
desire10,  preeminent  among  the  twice  born.

Now  as  this  stock  persisted  mid  the  flux  of  things,  the
passing  of  aeons,  the  descent  of  the  Kali  age,  the  going  of
the  years,  the  march  of  the  days,  and  the  lapse  of  time,  [46]
there  was  in  due  time  born  in  the  expansive  Vatsyayana
clan,  pressing  on  in  unbroken  succession,  a  certain  twice-born
man,  Kuvera  by  name,  devoted  as  the  son  of  Vinata  to  his
guru11.  He  begat  four  sons  Acyuta,  Icana,  Hara,  and  Pa9u-
pata,  propagating  their  race,  like  the  four  aeons,  through  the
power  of  Vedic  knowledge12,  like  Narayana's  columnar  arms
gladdening  the  circles  of  the  good13.  Among  them  Pac,upata
begat  a  single  high-souled  son,  by  name  Arthapati,  crest
jewel  of  all  the  Brahman  schools,  profound  as  the  four
oceans,  and  like  a  mountain  keeping  steadfast  the  law  of

1  Or — punningly — '  by  the  armies  of  kings.'

2  Or— punningly — 'inheritors  of  earth,  yet  gone  to  the  heavenly
Nandana.'

3  Or 'without  swords  yet  Vidyadharas.' The  Vidyadharas  are
always  armed  with  swords.

4  Or  '  without  coolness,  yet  moons.'

6  Or  '  teachers,'  taralcd:  dcdryd,  Comm. :  the  word  may  also  mean
'constellations,'  forming  a  punning  antithesis  to  adosdh,  which  may
mean  '  not  belonging  to  evening.'

6  Or  '  fires.'  r  Or  '  yet  serpents.'

8  Or  '  without  pillars,  yet  caravanserais  of  holiness.'

9  Or  'yet  Daksas.' Daksa's  mythological  sacrifice  had  been  inter-
rupted by  ^iva.

10  Or  '  without  serpents,  yet  Qivas.'

11  =(1)  parent,  (2)  teacher. The  son  of  Vinata  is  Garuda  who  stole
the  amrita  to  purchase  his  mother's  freedom.

12  Or — of  the  aeons — '  having  a  race  sprung  from  Brahma's  creative
power '  =  all  beings.

13  Or — of  Narayana's  arms — '  holding  the  discus  and  the  sword.'


32  THE HARSA-CARITA.

his  race1.  From  him  were  born  eleven  pure  sons,  like  the
Rudras,  with  faces  coated  with  a  dew  of  the  moon's  am-
brosia8; and  their  names  were  Bhrigu,  Hamsa,  Quci,  Kavi,
Mahidatta,  Dharma,  Jatavedas,  Citrabhanu,  Tryaksa,  Ahi-
datta,  and  Vic,varupa.  Of  whom  Citrabhanu  was  blessed
with  a  son  Bana  by  a  BrahmanI  woman  named  Rajadevi.
The  boy,  while  still  a  child,  was  deprived  of  his  mother,  who
was  taken  away  through  the  will  of  sovereign  destiny.
His  father,  however,  conceiving  a  deep  love  for  him  acted  a
mother's  part,  and  under  his  care  the  boy  grew  with  ever
increasing  vigour  in  his  own  home.

But  when,  being  now  about  fourteen  years  of  age,  he  had
passed  through  initiation  and  the  associated  rites,  and  had
returned  from  his  teacher's  house3,  his  father  also,  having
performed  in  full  the  sacred  duties  proper  to  the  twice-born
as  enjoined  in  Qruti  and  Smriti,  departed  ere  he  reached  the
allotted  span  to  his  rest4.  After  his  father's  decease  Bana  in
the  anguish  of  a  great  sorrow,  his  heart  all  aflame  by  day
and  night,  [47]  passed  some  days,  he  knew  not  how,  in  his
own  house.  When  his  sorrow  gradually  became  less  absorbing,
he  through  indulgence  in  sundry  youthful  follies,  due  either
to  misconduct  arising  from  independence,  to  the  impetuosity
prevalent  in  youth,  or  to  the  aversion  of  young  manhood  to
steadiness,  came  into  reproach5.  He  had  friends  and  com-
panions of  his  own  years,  and  among  them  two  brothers  of
low  birth6,  Candrasena  and  Matrisena,  a  dear  friend  the  ver-
nacular7 poet  Icjlna,  adherents  Rudra  and  Narayana,  precep-

1  Or — of  the  mountain — '  with  motionless  ranges.'

2  I.e.  they  were  moonfaced. There  may  also  be  an  allusion  to  the
Soma  juice.  3  As  a  stiataka.

4  Adacamistha,  literally  'not  in  his  tenth  decade,'  came  to  mean
'  not  having  attained  his  allotted  span,'  because  the  Hindus  regarded  a
hundred  years  as  the  natural  life  of  man. The  father  of  Bana  (who
was  14  years  old)  cannot  have  been  anywhere  near  this.

5  Itvaro  babhura  may  however  mean  '  was  wild.' The  Comm.  gives
gamanaala  as  the  equivalent  of  itvara ;  it  means  '  poor,  mean '  in  the
Divyavadana.

6  Pardcavdu  =  sons  of  a  Brahman  and  a  Sudra  woman.

7  Bhasakavi  is  explained  by  the  comm.  as  a  writer  of  songs  01;  a
vernacular  poet.


CHAPTER  I.  33

tors  Varavana  and  Vasavana,  a  descriptive  poet  Vembharata,
a  Prakrit  poet  the  young  noble  Vayuvikara,  two  panegyrists
Anangavana  and  Sucivana,  an  ascetic  widow1  Cakravakika,
a  snake-doctor  Mayuraka,  a  betel-bearer  Candaka,  a  young
physician  Mandaraka,  a  reader  Sudristi,  a  goldsmith  Camlkara,
a  supervisor  Sindhusena,  a  scribe  Govindaka,  a  painter  Vira-
varman,  a  modeller2  Kumaradatta,  a  drummer  Jimuta,  two
singers  Somila  and  Grahaditya,  a  maid  Kurangika,  two
pipers  Madhukara  and  Paravata,  a  music-teacher  Darduraka,
a  shampooer  Keralika,  a  dancer  Tandavika,  a  dicer  Akhandala,
a  gamester  Bhimaka,  a  young  actor  Qikhandaka,  a  dancing
girl  Harinika,  a  Para^ara  mendicant  Sumati,  a  Jain  monk
Viradeva,  a  story-teller  Jayasena,  a  Qaiva  devotee  Vakraghona,
a  magician  Karala,  a  treasure-seeker3  Lohitaksa,  an  assayer
Vihangama,  a  potter4  Damodara,  a  juggler  Cakoraksa,  a  Brah-
man mendicant  Tamracuda.  [48]  With  these  and  others  for
his  companions,  pliant  from  youthfulness,  smit  with  a  passion
for  seeing  other  lands,  despite  the  wealth  sufficient  for  a
Brahman  amassed  by  his  father  and  grandfather,  despite  his
hitherto  uninterrupted  pursuit  of  knowledge,  he  went  forth
from  his  home ;  and,  being  free  from  all  restraint  and  seem-
ing bewitched  by  early  youth  through  a  headstrong  will,  he
brought  himself  into  the  derision  of  the  great.

But  gradually  thereafter  by  observation  of  great  courts
charming  the  mind  with  their  noble  routine,  by  paying  his
respects  to  the  schools  of  the  wise  brilliant  with  blameless
knowledge,  by  attendance  at  the  assemblies  of  able  men  deep
in  priceless  discussions,  by  plunging  into  the  circles  of  clever
men  dowered  with  profound  natural  wisdom,  he  regained  the

1  Katydyanikd :  cf.

pa.tica$a.dvarsadeclyam  vlram  samsthitabhartrikam  \
vadanti  kdtyayanikam  dhritaka$ayavasasam.\\

Comna.  and  A.  K.  Manusyavarga  17.

2  Pustakrit : lepyakara  Coinm.  ; the  word  may  perhaps  mean  '  a
scribe.'

3  Asuravivaravyasanl :  patalabhila§l. Comm. Perhaps  it  means 'a
miner  or  metallurgist.'

,4  Dardurika,  explained  by  Tarauath  as  meaning  '  potter,'  is  quoted
by  Panim,  iv.  4.  34.

c.  3


34  THE HARSA-CARITA.

sage  attitude  of  mind  customary  among  his  race.  After  long
years  he  returned  once  more  to  his  own  native  soil,  resort  of
Bran  mans,  shelter  of  the  Vatsyayana  line.  There,  welcomed,
like  a  feast-day,  by  kinsmen  respectfully  announcing  their
relationship  and  renewing  after  long  absence  their  kindly
affection,  he  found  himself  in  the  midst  of  the  friends  of  his
youth  enjoying  almost  the  bliss  of  liberation1.

Here  ends  the  first  chapter,  termed  '  the  description  of  the  Vatsya-
yana race,'  of  the  Harsa-carita,  composed  by  Qri  Bana  Bhatta.

1  Bdlamitramandalasya  madhyagato  may  also,  with  reference  to  the
liberated  soul,  mean  '  in  the  centre  of  the  mild  sun's  disc,3  as  the  sun
loses  its  power  to  burn  in  his  presence.


CHAPTER II.


[49]  IT  is  with  a  king  of  profound  wisdom  for  those  who
have  no  means  of  access  to  him  as  it  is  with  a  well  for  those
who  have  no  way  of  descending  into  it, — virtuous  royal  in-
tercessors1 secure  the  desired  success;  the  day'2  plants  within
the  susceptible  lotus  the  beauty  given  by  the  sun ;  to  help
others,  without  regarding  their  virtues  or  faults,  is  the
passion  of  the  good.

There  Bana  roamed  about  happily  in  the  homes  of  his
kindred  seen  after  a  long  absence, — resonant  as  they  were
with  the  noise  of  continual  recitation, — filled  with  young
students  attracted  by  the  sacrifices,  running  about  like  so
many  fires  with  their  long  tawny  braids  of  hair3,  and  their
foreheads  white  with  sectarial  marks  made  of  ashes, —  with
the  terraces  in  front  of  the  doors  green  with  little  beds
of  soma  plants  all  fresh  from  recent  watering, — with  the
rice  and  panicum  for  the  sacrificial  cakes  laid  out  to
dry,  scattered  on  the  skins  of  the  black  antelope, — with
the  oblations  of  wild  rice  strewed  by  the  young  maidens,
—with  the  fuel,  leaves,  and  bundles  of  green  Ku$a  grass
brought  by  hundreds  of  pure  disciples, — filled  with  heaps
of  cow-dung  and  fuel — with  the  covered  terraces  in  their
courts  marked  by  the  round  hoofs  of  the  cows  as  they

1  The  words  will  also  mean  "  earthen  pots  furnished  with  a  string."

2  The  day,  as  distinguished  from  the  night,  is the '  intercessor '
between  the  lotus  and  the  sun,  as  Krisna,  the  king's  brother,  is  between
Banatind  Crl-Harsa.

3  Or,  if  taken  with  '  fires,'  "  betressed  with  stalks  of  tawny  flames."


Of.  Manu^ii.  219.


3—2


36  THE HARSA-CARITA.

came  in  for  the  daily  offerings,  dropping  the  milk  which
was  to  be  used  for  preparing  the  curds1,  [50] — with  troops  of
ascetics  busied  in  pounding  the  clay  for  making  pots, — with
the  sacred  limits  purified  by  heaps  of  udumbara  branches
brought  to  make  pegs2  to  mark  out  the  altars  for  the
three  sacrificial  fires, — with  the  ground  white  with  lines  of
offerings  to  the  Vi9ve  Devah, — with  the  sprays  of  the  trees
in  the  courts  grey  with  the  smoke  of  the  oblations, — with
the  wanton  calves  sporting  about,  caressed  by  the  young
cowherds, — with  the  succession  of  animal  sacrifices  clearly
suggested  by  the  young  spotted  goats  playing  about, — all
peaceful  through  the  cessation  of  the  labours  of  the  Brahman
teachers,  while  busy  repetitions  were  now  commenced  by  the
parrots  and  mainas, — like  so  many  hermitages  for  the
incarnate  Three  Vedas.

While  he  stayed  there,  Time  in  his  character  of  Summer,
with  his  smile  white  with  the  jasmines  in  full  flower,
yawned  and  swallowed  up  the  two  flowery  months3.  At
first  he  was  gentle  and  showed  compassion  to  the  thirsty
young  gardens,  as  if  they  were  the  young  children  left
behind  by  the  spring  when  it  was  conquered  and  had  passed
away  ;  and  at  its  first  rising  by  its  warmth  the  hot  season  [51]
unloosed4  all  the  imprisoned  blossoms  throughout  the  earth.
The  tresses  of  the  fair  [damp  after  bathing]  were  seized  by
the  god  of  love5  as  if  they  were  chowries  used  at  the
coronation  of  the  Spring,  the  King  of  Seasons  [and  so  still
wet  with  the  waters  of  installation] ;  and  the  Sun  made
his  expedition  against  the  North  as  if  in  wrath  for  the
lotus  beds  which  the  winter  frosts  had  burned.

As  the  forehead-burning  sun  grew  hot,  the  moons  of  the
women's  foreheads  undertook  vows  of  paying  homage  to  him,

1  Curds  composed  the  Vaigvadeva  oblation.

2  Used  in  measuring  the  altar,  see  Katyay.  Stit.  v.  3.  14.

3  Caitra  and  Vai9akha,  i.e.  from  the  middle  of  March  to  that  of
May. Grlsma  is  from  the  middle  of  May  to  that  of  July. Mahakala
also  contains  a  punning  reference  to  Qiva  in his  character  as  the
destroyer.

4  As  a  King  at  his  accession  sets  prisoners  free.

5  Ragh.  xvi.  50.


CHAPTER  II.  37

— being  decorated  with  sandal-lines  on  their  foreheads  as  sec-
tarial  marks,  and  wearing  their  curls  as  the  ragged  garments
of  ascetics,  and  bearing  rosaries  with  the  pearly  drops  of
perspiration  for  beads.  The  women  themselves  slept  away
the  day,  grey  with  sandal-wood  applications,  like  the  night-
lotuses  unable  to  bear  the  sight  of  the  sun ;  their  eyes,
heavy  with  sleep,  could  not  bear  the  light  of  their  jewels,
far  less  the  cruel  sunshine.  In  the  sultry  season  the  moon-
light nights  grew  less  and  less,  like  the  rivers,  which  cheered
by  the  diminishing  distance  the  parted  pairs  of  cakravakas.
on  their  banks  [52].  The  fierce  heat  of  the  sun  made  people
long  not  only  to  drink  water  perfumed  with  the  strong
scent  of  the  trumpet-flower,  but  even  to  drink  up  the  very
wind.

But  as  the  season's  childhood  passed  away  and  the  sun's
rays  became  hotter,  the  lakes  grew  dry,  the  streams  sank
lower,  the  waterfalls  ebbed  away,  the  din  of  the  crickets  in-
creased, every  thing  was  deafened  by  the  continued  cooing  of
the  distressed  doves.  Then  the  other  birds  grew  audacious,
the  wind  swept  away  the  refuse,  the  shrubs  grew  less  dense1,
the  hard  clusters  of  the  grislea  tomentosa  were  licked  by  the
young  lions  in  their  blind  thirst  for  blood,  the  sides  of  the
mountains  were  wet  with  the  water  spouted  from  the  fainting
elephant-herds,  and  the  bees  were  dumb,  as  they  lay  in  the
dark  patches  of  the  dried  ichor  of  the  heat-distressed
elephants.  The  season  appeared  with  its  borders  painted
red  with  the  blushing  Manddra  flowers,  while  the  splitting
crystal  rocks  were  marked  by  the  horns  of  the  buffaloes  as
they  were  bewildered  in  the  doubt  whether  what  they  saw
was  a  flowing  stream  of  water, — the  dry  creepers  rustled  in
the  sultry  heat,  the  scratching  wild  cocks  were  frightened  at
the  straw- conflagrations  in  the  heated  dust,  the  porcupines
took  shelter  in  their  holes,  [53]  while  the  pools  were  dried  down
to  their  muddy  bottoms  which  were  discoloured  by  the  fishes
as  they  lay  rolling  on  their  backs,  disturbed  *  by  the  troops  of
ospreys  hovering  in  the  arjuna  trees  on  the  banks ;  and  the

• l  From  the  falling  of  the  leaves.

2  Jvara. The  Schol.  takes  Kuta  as  the  bird's  cry.


38  THE HARSA-CARITA.

world  lighted  its  forest  conflagrations  like  a  solemn  lustration
ceremony,  and  the  nights  fell  into  a  consumption1  as  the
days  lengthened.

The  winds  raged  madly,  leaping  up  in  every  direction
in  the  waste  places  and  openly  carrying  off  masses  of  the
roofs  of  the  watering-sheds, — rubbing  against  the  rough
stony  places  as  if  they  were  itching  with  the  irritating
prickings  of  the  ripe  stinging  bushes  of  Mucuna  pruritus, —
gathering  a  material  outline  and  scattering  powder  as  they
.went,  and  bearing  the  sharp  shoots  of  the  mucukunda  as
their  teeth, — moistened  by  the  drops  in  the  mouths  of  the
noisy  flying  grasshoppers, — plunging  into  the  false  waters
of  the  mirage  as  it  trembled  as  with  waves  in  the  heat  of  the
young  sun, — hurrying  through  the  desolate  tracks  rustling
with  the  dry  ^ami-trees, — actors  in  the  wild  miracle-play2
with  its  passionate  circular  dances3  and  the  uproar  of  the
hurrying  hither  and  thither  of  the  dust  whirlwinds,  [54] —
blackened  with  the  ashes  of  the  sites  of  old  forest  con-
flagrations and  gathering  up  the  scattered  peacocks'  feathers
as  if  they  had  learned  the  ways  of  wandering  mendicants4,
— carrying  bunches  of  the  rattling  dry  seeds  of  old  karanja
trees  as  if  they  had  marching  drums, — bursting  out  with
the  panting  snorts  of  the  buffaloes  faint  with  the  heat, —
followed  as  by  their  children  by  the  long  lines  of  swift
deer  springing  up, — frowning  with  their  curls  of  smoke-
like  chaff,  rising  as  from  burning  threshing-floors, — spread-
ing the  waves  of  hell  by  their  hot  mists, — shaggy  as
with  hair  by  the  threads  of  the  bursting  silk-cotton  pods,
— covered  with  dry  leaves  as  with  a  cutaneous  eruption,  [55]
— bearing  the  long  lines  of  grass  like  a  sick  man's  exposed
veins, — shaking  the  points  of  the  barley-awns  as  if  they
were  a  beard, — taking  the  shed  quills  of  the  porcupines
for  their  teeth,  and  the  flames  of  fire  for  their  tongues, —
whirling  up  the  snakes'  cast-off  skins  as  their  crests, — practis-

1  Of.  Taitt.  Samhita  ii.  3.  5  ;  ii.  5.  6.

2  For  the  drabhatl  cf.  Sahitya  D.  420.  3  Read  rdserasa.

4  The  Digambara  Jamas  carry  peacocks'  tails  in  their  hards  to
sweep  insects  from  their  path. Sarva-Darc.  Sat}tgralui  transl.  p.  63.


CHAPTER II.  39

ing  on  the  hot  lotus-juices  as  a  preparation  for  the  future  task
of  swallowing  the  liquids  of  the  whole  world, — alarming  the
three  worlds  by  the  shrill  sound  of  rattling  the  dry  bamboo-
thickets  as  if  they  were  the  drums  to  proclaim  the  imminent
drying  up  of  the  entire  watery  element.  Their  path  was
variegated  with  the  scattered  feathers  of  the  darting  blue
jays, — they  seemed  coloured  by  the  live  coals  and  sparks  of
the  bursting  red  g unjd- berries,  as  if  they  had  caught  the
varied  hues  from  the  scorching  torch  of  the  sun's  rays ;  waking
up  as  they  wandered  the  wild  sounds  of  the  mountain  caves,
— skilled  in  preparing  a  magic  potion  to  reduce  the  world  to
dust, — propitiating  the  forest-fires  with  showers  of  the  coral-
tree's  flowers  as  with  offerings  of  blood, — with  their  course
bestarred  with  burning  sand,  and  bedewed  with  melted  bitu-
men from  the  heated  rocks ;  [50]  and  scented,  as  they  blew,
with  the  strong  smell  of  the  insects  in  the  hollows  of  the
trees,  which  were  baked1  in  the  fragments  of  the  sparrows'
eggs  which  had  exploded  as  they  grew  hot  in  the  forest-
conflagration.

Dreadful  forest-conflagrations  appeared  on  every  side, —
raging  as  if  fanned  to  fury  by  a  thousand  bellows,  like  exhala-
tions blowing  from  the  cavern-like  jaws  of  old  dragons, — some-
times like  deer2  quietly  eating  up  the  grass  at  their  will, —
sometimes  like  tawriy-coloured  ichneumons  creeping  in  the
holes  at  the  bottom  of  the  trees, — sometimes  like  followers
of  the  Muni  Kapila,  wearing  matted  locks, — sometimes  like
hawks  destroying  the  nests  of  the  birds, — sometimes  like
women's  lower  lips  red  with  melted  lac, — sometimes  like
arrows,  gaining  their  speed  by  the  wings  of  the  birds  which
they  have  overtaken, — sometimes  like  those  who  attain  nir-
vana, burning  up  all  the  causes  which  produced  them3, — some-
times like  lovers,  veiled  in  garments4  scented  with  flowers, —

1  This  refers  to  a  particular  method  of  pi'eparing  drugs,  the  various
substances  being  wrapped  up  m  leaves,  covered  with  clay,  and  roasted
in  the  fire.

2  The  word  for  '  deer '  (harinaK)  might  mean  '  yellow '  and  so  babhru
and  kapila  in  the  two  following  similes.

3  Or  '  the  causes  of  birth.'  4  Or  '  clouds.'


40  THE  HARSA-CARITA.

sometimes  as  if  languid  with  indigestion,  heavy  with
fumes,  [57] — sometimes  with  an  insatiable  craving  desiring
to  devour  the  whole  world, — sometimes  like  very  old  men,
leaning  on  the  top  of  a  bamboo,-1 — sometimes  like  a  con-
sumptive patient,  indulging  in  a  long  course  of  bitumen, —
sometimes  fat  as  feasting  on  every  kind  of  food — sometimes
burning  fragrant  gums  like  the  worshippers  of  Rudra, —
sometimes  standing  on  the  bare  stems,  with  the  thorny  madana
trees1  burned  entirely,  roots  and  branches  and  flowers, —
actors  in  the  wild  dance  with  their  quivering  flame-locks
outspread, — worshipping  the  Sun  with  their  opened  flame-
hands,  which  shower  down  the  dry  bursting  grains  of  parched
wild-rice  and  make  a  way  through  the  dried  tanks, — longing
without  disgust  for  the  smell  of  the  raw  flesh  of  the  fullgrown
tortoises  as  they  are  suddenly  offered  up  as  in  sacrifice,  and
consuming  even  their  own  smoke  lest  it  should  rise  up  and
become  clouds2 — with  quantities  of  massed  insects  crackling
in  the  dry  grass  like  oblations  of  mustard  seed, — with  the
white  shells  in  the  dried  lakes  breaking  into  pieces  through
the  heat  like  the  skins  of  leprous  patients, — raining  beeswax
in  the  woods  from  the  bee-hives  full  of  melting  honey,  as  if
they  were  covered  with  sweat, — with  their  curls  of  flames
now  all  dying  away  in  the  salt  wastes  as  if  they  were
bald,  [58] — and  again,  swallowing  apparently  mouthfuls  of
rocks  amidst  crags  which  seemed  built  up  of  the  fragments  of
the  blazing  sun-crystals.

One  day  during  that  terrible  hot  season  as  he  was  in  his
house,  after  having  eaten  the  afternoon  meal,  Candrasena,
his  half-brother  by  a  Qudra  mother,  entered,  saying, — "A
renowned  courier  is  waiting  at  the  door,  sent  to  you  by  Krisna,
the  brother  of  Qiiharsa,  the  king  of  kings,  the  lord  of  the
four  oceans,  whose  toenails  are  burnished  by  the  crest  gems
of  all  other  monarchs,  the  leader  of  all  emperors."  He  replied,
"  Introduce  him  without  delay."

Then he beheld the messenger entering as he was

1  This  can  also  mean  "  standing  like  Qiva,  with  Kama  bearing  his
flowery  arrows  consumed  by  his  blazing  eye."

2  Which  might  bring  rain  to  extinguish  them.


CHAPTER II.  41

brought  before  him, — his  legs  tired  and  heavy  with  the
long  journey,  with  his  tunic  girt  up  tightly  by  a  mud-
stained  strip  of  cloth,  the  knot  hanging  loose  and  fastened
up  by  a  ragged  clout  swinging  behind  him,  and  having  his
head  wrapped  with  a  bundle  of  letters,  which  had  a  deep
division  pressed  into  it  by  a  very  thick  thread  that  bound
it ;  and  he  said  to  him,  while  he  was  yet  some  way  off,  "  Is
all  well  with  my  honoured  friend  Krisna,  who  is  the
disinterested  friend  of  all  the  world?"  He  answered,  "All
is  well";  and  then  making  his  obeisance  he  sat  down  at
some  distance  and  said,  after  resting  awhile,  "  This  letter
has  been  sent  by  our  honoured  lord,"  and  he  unloosed  it  and
gave  it.  Bana  took  it  respectfully  and  read  it  to  himself.  [59]
'"When  they  have  once  learned  the- news  from  Mekhalaka,
the  wise  will  avoid  all  delay  as  hindering  success";  this  is
the  real  essence  of  the  writing, — all  else  is  mere  rhetorical
compliment1.'  Having  mastered  the  contents  of  the  letter
and  sent  away  his  attendants,  he  asked  for  the  message.
Mekhalaka  replied,  "My  lord  thus  addresses  thee  in  thy
wisdom,  '  Your  honour  knows  that  the  belonging  to  one
gotra,  or  to  one  caste,  or  the  being  brought  up  together
or  the  dwelling  in  one  place  or  the  constantly  seeing  each
other,  or  the  hearing  of  each  other's  mutual  affection,  or  the
conferring  of  benefits  when  absent,  or  a  similarity  of  dis-
position can  all  be  causes  of  affection ;  but  without  any  cause
my  heart  is  tenderly  affected  with  a  firm  love  towards  thee,
even  though  thou  art  not  seen  by  me  and  as  though  thou
wert  a  relation  near  at  hand  when  thou  art  really  afar  off,
just  as  the  moon  feels  towards  the  lotus-bed,  however
distant  it  may  be.  In  thy  absence  the  king  was  on  various
occasions  prejudiced  against  thee  by  the  malevolent ;  but  it
was  not  a  true  report.  There  are  none  so  situated,  but,  even  if
they  are  good,  they  will  have  friends,  neutrals,  and  enemies2.
Some  unworthy  remark  was  uttered  concerning  thee  by  some
envious  wretch  through  thy  mind  being  not  wholly  averse  to
the  levity  of  childhood,  and  others  caught  it  up  and  repeated
it..  The  minds  of  the  unreflecting  toss  about,  rolling  to  and
1  Cf.  the  Persian  phrase  Ziydda  ci  bar-tardzad.  2  Manu,  vii.  158.


42  THE HARSA-CARITA.

fro  like  water.  What  now  shall  the  lord  of  the  earth  do,
when  he  comes  to  a  settled  decision  after  hearing  many
different  suggestions  ?  Though  thou  wast  far  away,  yet  thou
wast  immediately  represented  by  us  who  sought  to  know  the
real  truth.  The  sovereign  has  been  reminded  with  regard  to
thee  that  '  every  one's  youth  in  the  opening  of  life  is  usually
guilty  of  some  levities,'  and  he  at  once  assented  to  the  ex-
cuse. Therefore  [60]  your  highness  must  repair  to  the  palace
without  delay.  I  cannot  approve  thy  habits,  living  as  thou
dost  thus  away  from  the  king  amidst  thine  own  friends  like  a
tree  without  fruit  away  from  the  sun's  beams.  Nor  shouldst
thou  shrink  from  the  toil  of  court-attendance  or  feel  any  fear
of  waiting  upon  him ;  for  although  it  may  be  true  enough,
1  Alas !  he  who  is  unskilled  in  waiting  upon  a  king  is  like
Kama, — he  cannot  speak  out  his  request,  although  the
opportunity  is  come  exactly  as  he  had  wished, — he  gives
pain  (to  his  patron)  by  hundreds  of  ill-timed  petitions  for
favours, — and  by  his  folly  he  throws  away  his  livelihood  in  a
moment1 ;' — yet  these  other  common  kings  are  one  thing,
and  our  ambrosial  lord  is  quite  another,  who  puts  to  shame
such  ancient  heroes  as  Nriga,  Nala,  Nisadha,  Nahusa,
Ambarisa,  Da9aratha,  Dilipa,  Nabhaga,  Bharata,  Bhagiratha,
and  Yayati.  His  eyes  are  not  stained  by  the  deadly  poison  of
pride ;  his  voice  is  not  choked  by  the  convulsive  effects  of  the
baneful  drug  of  conceit ;  his  postures  do  not  lose  their  natural
dignity  through  any  sudden  epileptic  fit  of  forgetfulness
caused  by  the  heat  of  arrogance ;  his  changes  of  feeling  are
not  exaggerated  by  the  fevered  outbursts  of  ungovernable
self-will ;  his  gait  is  not  agitated  by  the  unnatural  movements
of  an  access  of  self-conceit ;  his  voice  is  not  rendered  harsh
by  the  words  being  uttered  under  a  tetanus  of  hauteur  which
distorts  his  lips.  Thus  his  idea  of  jewels  attaches  to  men  of
pure  virtues,  [61]  not  to  bits  of  rock, — his  taste  delights  in

1  These  lines  must  be  read  with  a  series  of  puns,  when  taken  as
referring  to  Kama.  "  Although  his  realm  and  power  are  sprung  from
fancy,  Kama  cannot  be  called  'corporeal'  (dehl), — he  gives  pain  to
lovers  by  his  hundreds  of  arrows — and  by  his  folly  he  sacrifices  his
life  in  a  moment  consumed  by  Diva's  anger."  Samkalpaja  is  one  of  the
names  of  Kama.


CHAPTER II.  43

pearl-like  qualities,  not  in  heaps  of  ornaments, — his  judge-
ment as  to  proper  means  is  versed  in  deeds  of  bounty,  not
in  the  ichor-flowing  temples  of  poor  worms  of  elephants1, —
his  highest  love  is  for  preeminent  glory,  not  for  the  withering
stubble  of  this  life, — his  magnificence  is  devoted  to  adorning
the  different  quarters  of  the  earth  whose  tribute  he  seizes,
not  the  dolls  which  he  calls  his  wives, — his  notion  of  bosom
friendship  belongs  to  his  well-strung  bow,  not  to  the  cour-
tiers who  live  on  the  crumbs  of  his  board.  His  natural
instinct  is  to  help  his  friends,  sovereignty  means  to  him
helping  his  dependants,  learning  at  once  suggests  helping
the  learned  and  success  helping  his  kinsfolk,  power  means
helping  the  unfortunate  and  wealth  helping  the  brahmans ;
his  heart's  main  occupation  is  to  remember  benefits  and  his
life's  sole  employment  is  to  assist  virtue,  his  body's  one  use
is  to  carry  out  the  dictates  of  courage,  and  the  earth's  to  be
an  arena  for  his  sword,  attendant  kings  are  wanted  to  amuse
him,  and  enemies  to  help  his  majesty  to  shew  itself.  It
could  have  been  by  no  common  merits  in  former  births  that
he  attained  this  glorious  preeminence  so  that  the  shadow  of
his  feet  diffuses  an  all-excelling  ambrosia  of  happiness  round
him."

Having  heard  this,  he  said  to  Candrasena,  "Refresh
the  messenger  with  food  and  clothing,  and  then  let  him
rest"  [62].  When  he  was  gone  and  the  day  had  come  to  a
close,  and  the  afternoon  sunshine,  crimson  like  a  young  crow's
beak,  was  fading  away  as  if  drunk  up  by  the  cups  of  the
closely  joined  red  lotuses,  and  when  the  sun,  as  the  speed  of  his
horses  was  relaxed, — pale-pink  like  a  garland  of  China  roses,
— seemed  to  limp  as  if  he  stumbled  on  the  western  mountain,
as  though  his  feet  had  been  pierced  by  the  (fancied)  thorns
of  the  lotus-beds, — he  offered  his  evening  prayers  and  retired
to  his  couch,  as  the  early  night  was  hurrying  on  in  the  east,
her  long  locks  of  scattered  darkness  seeming  to  hang  dangling
in  the  air,  and  her  face  as  it  were  dark  with  sorrow  for  the
moon's  absence.  He  pondered  by  himself,  "  What  shall  I  do  ?

1  Elephants  are  one  of  the  component  parts  of  an  army  (sadhana) ;
of  course  there  is  also  a  pun  011  ddna.


44  THE HARSA-CARITA.

I  have  indeed  been  misunderstood  by  the  king,  and  this
advice  has  been  given  by  my  disinterested  kinsman  Krisna ;
but  all  service  is  hateful,  and  attendance  is  full  of  evils,  and
a  court  is  full  of  dangers.  My  ancestors  never  had  any  love
for  it,  I  have  no  hereditary  connection  with  it, — nor  is  mine
the  consideration  from  remembering  former  benefits,  nor  the
affection  caused  by  service  rendered  when  a  child,  nor  family
dignity,  nor  the  kindness  of  old  acquaintance,  nor  the  allure-
ment of  mutually  imparting  information,  nor  the  desire  of
more  knowledge,  nor  the  respect  paid  to  one's  fine  appear-
ance, nor  practice  in  all  the  turns  of  voice  fit  for  inferiors,
nor  the  cleverness  needed  in  the  circles  of  the  learned,  nor
the  skill  to  win  friends  by  the  expenditure  of  wealth,  nor
long  intercourse  with  royal  favourites.  Still  I  must  certainly
go.  Purarati,  the  venerable  guru  of  the  world,  will  do  every-
thing that  is  proper  when  I  am  away."  Thus  having  con-
sidered, he  made  up  his  mind  for  the  journey.

The  next  day,  having  risen  and  bathed  betimes,  and  put
on  a  dress  of  white  silk  and  seized  his  rosary  and  repeatedly
recited  the  hymns  and  sacred  texts  fit  for  one  starting  on  a
journey, — after  washing  the  image  with  milk1,  he  offered  wor-
ship to  Qiva,  with  lighted  lamps,  ointments,  oblations,  banners,
perfumes,  incense  and  sweet  flowers  [63].  Then,  having
offered  a  libation  with  profound  reverence  to  the  holy  fire2,
whose  right  flame  was  kindled  by  a  profuse  pouring  of  ghi,
and  whose  fiery  crest  was  noisily  crackling  with  the  splitting
husks  of  the  restless  mustard  seeds,  which  had  been  previously
offered,  he  distributed  wealth  according  to  his  means  to  the
brahmans,  and  walked  solemnly  round  a  sacred  cow  which
faced  the  east,  himself  decked  with  white  unguents,  and
wearing  white  garlands  and  white  garments,  and  having
his  ears  adorned  with  giri-karnika,  flowers,  fastened  with
the  ends  of  durva-grass,  and  covered  with  yellow  rocaria
paint, — and  having  white  mustard  put  on  his  topknot.
All  the  rites  necessary  at  starting  on  a  journey  were

1  Of.  Bk.  v. (Text,  p.  171.  2.)

2  The  rare  Vedic  word  acu$uk$ani  here  used  for  '  fire '  is  also  used  ill
the  old  Bengali  poem  Candl.


CHAPTER II.  45

performed  for  him  as  by  a  mother  by  his  father's  younger
sister  Malatl,  clad  in  white  garments  and  with  her  heart
overflowing  with  tenderness,  as  if  she  were  the  impersonate
goddess  Sarasvati1 ;  he  was  greeted  with  blessings  by  the
aged  women  of  the  family,  applauded  by  the  old  female
attendants,  dismissed  with  good  wishes  by  the  gurus  whose
feet  he  worshipped,  kissed  on  the  head  by  the  elders  whom
he  himself  saluted,  while  the  birds  by  their  omens  in-
creased his  eagerness  for  starting  and  the  astrologers  wished
their  utmost  to  secure  favourable  constellations.  So  in  a
favourable  moment, — looking  upon  a  full  water-jar  that  was
set  in  the  court-yard  which  was  daubed  with  brown  cow-
dung, — with  a  mango-spray  placed  on  its  mouth,  itself  white
with  five  finger-breadths  of  flour2,  and  with  its  neck  encircled
by  a  garland  of  white  flowers ; — having  paid  his  homage  to
the  family  deities  and  being  followed  by  his  own  brahmans
with  their  hands  holding  flowers  and  fruits  and  muttering
the  apratiratha  hymn3, — he  went  out  from  the  village  of
Pritikuta,  setting  his  right  foot  first.

On  the  first  day,  having  slowly  passed  through  a  grove
sacred  to  Candika  which  was  parched  and  waterless  from  the
hot  season,  and  ugly  with  leafless  trees, — with  figures  of  the
goddess  carved  on  the  trees  at  the  entrance,  which  received
the  homage  of  passing  travellers  [64], — though  dried  up,  yet
seeming  to  be  sprouting  with  the  thousands  of  red  tongues
which  hung  lolling  from  the  mouths  of  the  thirsty  wild
beasts, — all  astir  with  the  swarms  of  bees  flying  out  of  the
masses  of  honeycomb  as  they  were  licked  by  the  monkeys
and  bears, — and  bristling  with  the  hundreds  of  new  shoots  of
stout  asparagus  which  had  sprung  up  luxuriantly  from  the
burned  soil4, — he  arrived  at  last  at  the  village  Mallakuta.

1  Called  here  Mahacveta.

2  The  Coram.  seems  to  explain  pistapancdhgulam  (cf.  text,  p.  157.  7)
as  flour  daubed  on  with  the  five  fingers  moistened  with  goafs-milk
(iijakaktabhiK),  but  cf.  Morris'  note  on  pancangulika  in  the  Pali  Text
Soc.  Journ.  for  1884.

3  Rigv.  10.  103.

4  After  the  burning  of  forests  plants  often  spring  up  whose  seeds
had  been  lying  dormant. (Balfour's  Hot.)


46  THE HARSA-CAR1TA.

There  he  stayed  happily,  hospitably  received  by  his  brother
and  his  friend  Jagatpati  who  was  just  like  his  own  heart.  The
next  day,  having  crossed  the  holy  Bhagirathi,  he  passed  the
night  in  a  forest-village  named  Yastigrihaka1,  and  the  next
he  arrived  at  the  royal  camp,  which  was  pitched  near  Mani-
tara  along  the  Ajiravati  river;  and  he  stopped  near  the
royal  residence.

Having  bathed  and  eaten  his  meal  and  rested,  when
only  one  watch  of  three  hours  remained  of  the  day,  and
when  the  king  had  dined,  he  proceeded  leisurely  with
Mekhalaka  to  the  royal  gate,  one  by  one  observing  the  many
camps  of  the  renowned  subject  kings.  Here  the  royal
gate  was  all  dark  with  crowds  of  elephants, — some  brought
to  carry  turbans  of  honour,  others  to  bear  drums,  some  newly
bound,  others  acquired  as  tribute  or  as  presents,  some  sent
by  the  rangers  of  the  elephants'  district,  or  brought  in
the  excitement  of  a  first  visit  to  the  court  or  sent  at  the
time  of  an  embassy  or  presented  by  the  lord  of  a  wild
settlement  or  demanded  for  the  spectacle  of  a  mimic  battle,
or  given  or  taken  by  force,  or  let  loose,  or  set  ready  for  a
watch,  or  collected  to  conquer  all  continents  like  so  many
mountains  to  make  a  bridge  over  the  ocean, — all  gay  with
banners,  cloths,  kettledrums,  conchs,  chowries,  and  unguents,
like  so  many  ready-made  festival-days  for  the  royal  ceremo-
nies when  the  moon  enters  the  asterisrn  Pushya  [65].  The
place  seemed  all  in  waves  with  the  plunging  horses  as  they
leaped  up  to  the  sky  in  anger  against  the  horses  of  the  sun's
chariot,  with  their  chowries  and  ornaments  serving  as  wings,
and  challenged  Indra's  horse  to  a  contest  by  their  joyous
neigh,  and  mocked  the  whole  race  of  deer  as  too  laggard  of
foot,  with  the  foam  curling  round  the  corners  of  their
mouths  like  a  scornful  laugh,  and  set  the  Royal  Prosperity
herself  a-dancing  as  the  drum  of  the  ground  was  struck  by
their  ceaselessly  prancing  hoofs2.

In  another  part  it  was  tawny  with  troops  of  camels  sent

1  Bombay  ed.  Yashtigrahaka.

2  The  Schol.  would  also  take  it  as  meaning  "  striking  the  earth  with
their  hoofs."


CHAPTER II.  47

or  being  sent  as  presents  or  brought  back  in  return  for
others  which  had  been  sent,  tawny  like  monkeys'  cheeks, —
like  pieces  of  evening-glow  spangled  with  stars,  for  their
mouths  were  ornamented  with  lines  of  cowries  which  were
like  so  many  marks  left  in  counting  the  number  of  leagues
which  they  had  travelled, — or  like  red  rice-fields  covered
with  red  lotuses,  for  their  ears  were  gay  with  red  chow-
ries ;  or  like  old  karanja  forests  with  hundreds  of  dry
pods  cracking,  for  they  were  decked  with  strings  of  ever-
jingling  golden  ornaments ;  having  long  tufts  of  hair  and
variegated  threads  of  wool  of  five  colours  hanging  near  their
ears ;  all  tawny-red  as  monkeys'  cheeks.

In  another  part  it  was  all  white  with  its  masses
of  white  umbrellas,  like  autumnal  clouds  white  through
having  just  emptied  themselves  of  their  water-stores,  or
like  trees  of  paradise  whose  circles  of  shade  are  annihilated
by  the  splendour  of  their  masses  of  pearls,  or  like  the
lotuses  on  Narayana's  navel1  with  Garuda's  (jewelled)  wings
resting  close  to  them,  or  like  tracts  of  the  Milky  Ocean  with
huge  masses  of  coral  shining  in  them,  or  like  the  surface
of  the  serpent  Qesa's  hoods  with  large  rubies  sparkling
upon  it,  or  like  islands  in  the  White  Ganges  covered
with  flamingoes, — overpowering  the  summer-brilliance,  and
mocking  the  splendour  of  the  sun,  and  drinking  up  the
sunshine, — they  turned  the  earth  into  a  moon,  [66]  time  into
a  world  of  white  lotuses,  the  day  into  moonlight,  and  the  sky
into  a  mass  of  foam,  and  they  seemed  to  create  a  thousand
moonlights  out  of  due  time  and  to  laugh  to  scorn  all  the
pomp  of  Indra.

In  another  part  it  was  waving  with  thousands  of  stirring
chowries  bright  like  moonbeams,  which  seemed  to  spread  a
firmament  of  white  lotus-fibres,  and  to  make  an  autumn
in  every  direction  with  forests  of  kqpa  grass2  blossoming
everywhere,  and  to  abolish  the  rule  of  the  demon  of  ill-luck3,

1  Vi.smi  is  called  Padmanabha. Garudapaksa  may  also  be  a  kind  of
jewel ;  the  white  umbrellas  were  adorned  with  gems.

2  Saccharum  spontaneum,  see  Wilson's  Hindu  Dr.  ii.  p.  106,  note.
;i  Or  "  every  haunt  of  the  demon  of  the  iron  age."


48  THE  HARSA-CARITA.

dark  as  the  disgrace  of  a  coward  king,  and  to  turn  the  day
into  continual  vicissitudes  of  going  and  returning  by  their
uplifting  and  lowering,  and  seemed  to  steal  away  the  world
as  its  eight  regions  were  seen  for  a  moment  and  then  lost.

It  seemed  like  a  flock  of  white  geese  from  the  shell-
amulets  in  the  elephants'  ears,  or  a  forest  of  heavenly  trees
from  the  elephants'  banners,  or  a  grove  of  ruby  trees  from
the  umbrellas  of  peacocks'  feathers,  or  the  stream  of  the
heavenly  Ganges  from  the  muslin  dresses,  or  the  Milky
Ocean  from  the  linen  robes,  or  a  grove  of  plantains  from  the
flashing  emeralds ; — it  created  as  it  were  a  second  day  by
the  morning-rays  of  the  rubies,  and  made  a  new  sky  by  the
sapphires,  and  caused  an  unprecedented  night  by  the  dark-
violet  of  the  mahanlla  stones.  A  thousand  Yamunas  seemed
to  be  flowing  from  the  radiance  of  the  emeralds,  while  the
flashes  of  the  rubies  gleamed  like  charcoal.

[67]  The  camp  was  filled  on  every  side  with  conquered
hostile  vassal-chiefs, — some  who  could  not  find  admission
hung  down  their  heads  and  seemed  in  their  shame  to  sink
into  their  own  bodies  through  the  reflections  of  their
faces  which  fell  on  their  toe-nails, — others  seemed  to  present
chowries  in  obsequious  service  under  the  form  of  the  rays
issuing  from  their  nails,  which  were  thrown  back  from  the
ground  which  was  scratched  by  their  bare  fingers, — others
with  the  flashing  sapphires  hanging  on  their  breasts  seemed
to  be  carrying  sword-blades  suspended  from  their  necks
to  propitiate  their  lord's  anger, — others  with  their  faces
darkened  by  the  swarms  of  bees  which  flocked  attracted  by
their  perfumed  breath  were  as  if  they  wore  their  beards  long
as  in  mourning  for  their  lost  prosperity, — othe'rs  with  circles
of  bees  flying  up  round  their  crests  as  if  their  topknots  were
flying  away  afraid  of  the  coming  mortification  of  paying
homage, — honoured  even  in  being  conquered,  and  destitute
of  every  other  refuge, — continually  asking  the  servants  of
the  different  domestic  porters  who  at  intervals  made  their
exits  and  their  entrances,  and  whose  track  was  followed  by
thousands  of  various  suppliants, — "  Good  sir,  will  it  be
to-day  ?  will  the  great  lord  give  an  audience  in  the  hall


CHAPTER  II.  49

after  he  has  dined  ?  or  will  he  come  out  into  the  outer
court  ?"  and  thus  spending  the  day  in  the  hope  of  an
audience.

Other  kings  too  were  there,  come  from  the  desire  of
seeing  his  glory,  natives  of  various  countries,  who  were
waiting  for  the  time  when  he  would  be  visible.  There
were  also  seated  by  themselves  Jains,  Arhatas,  Pagupatas,
mendicants  of  the  school  of  Para^arya,  Brahman  students,
natives  of  every  land,  and  savages  from  every  forest  that
fringes  the  ocean-shore,  and  ambassadors  from  every  foreign
country.  It  seemed  like  a  creation-ground  where  the
Prajapatis  practised  their  skill,  or  a  fourth  world  made
out  of  the  choicest  parts  of  the  other  three ;  its  glory  could
not  be  described  in  hundreds  of  Mahabharatas, — it  must
have  been  put  together  in  a  thousand  golden  ages,  [68]  and
its  perfection  constructed  with  millions  of  svargas,  and  it
seemed  watched  over  by  crores  of  tutelary  royal  deities.

In  his  astonishment  he  thought  to  himself,  "  Surely  such
a  vast  multitude  of  living  beings  as  this  must  have  involved
to  the  creating  Principles  a  destruction  of  the  elements  or  a
lack  of  atoms  or  a  failure  of  time  or  a  cessation  of  vital  power
or  an  exhaustion  of  possible  forms !"  But  Mekhalaka,  being
recognised  from  afar  by  the  doorkeepers,  asked  him  to  wait
a  while,  and  himself  pressed  forward  unrepelled  and  entered.

Then  in  a  moment  he  came  out,  followed  by  a  tall  man
fair  like  a  karnikara  flower,  clothed  in  a  clean  jacket,  with  his
waist  tightly  bound  by  a  girdle  ornamented  with  a  quantity  of
flashing  rubies, — with  his  chest  broad  like  a  rock  of  Mount
Himalaya,  and  having  his  shoulder  rising  over  it  like  the
hump  of  Qiva's  bull, — and  carrying  on  his  breast  a  string
of  pearls  like  a  noose  to  tame  the  whole  restless  race  of
deer, — and  gleaming  with  two  jewelled  ear-rings  at  his  ear,
as  if  they  were  the  sun  and  moon  brought  to  be  asked
whether  even  a  king  of  the  solar  or  lunar  race  were  such  as
our  king  ? — while  the  sunbeams  seemed  to  give  place  to  him
through  respect  for  his  office,  as  though  they  were  rebuked
before  the  stream  of  beauty  which  flowed  from  his  face.  He
greeted  Bana  from  afar  with  his  long  eye  as  if  it  were  a
C.  •  4


50  THE HARSA-CARITA.

wreath  of  full-blossomed  lotuses  taken  up  as  an  offering1,
— set  in  the  very  centre  of  stern  discipline  and  yet,
with  his  topknot  bent  down  to  the  ground,  lifting  his
white  turban  as  a  token  of  respect,  [69]  and  grasping  in
his  left  hand  his  sword,  its  handle  rough  with  the  pearls
which  thickly  studded  it,  and  in  his  right  his  burnished
golden  staff  of  office  like  a  lightning-flash  suddenly  be-
come motionless.  Having  come  out,  Mekhalaka  said  to  him,
"  This  is  the  chief  of  all  the  doorkeepers,  the  king's  special
favourite  Pariyatra ;  let  him  who  pursues  success  treat  him
with  suitable  ceremony."  The  doorkeeper,  having  come  up
and  saluted  him,  addressed  him  respectfully  in  a  gentle
voice,  "Approach  and  enter,  his  highness  is  willing  to  see
you."  Then  Bana  entered,  as  he  directed,  saying,  "I  am
indeed  happy  that  he  thinks  me  worthy  of  this  honour."

He  next  beheld  a  stable  filled  with  the  king's  favourite
horses  from  Vanayu,  Aratta,  Kamboja,  Bharadvaja,  Sindh,  and
Persia, — red,  dark,  white,  bay,  chestnut,  dappled  like  part-
ridges, marked  with  the  five  auspicious  kinds  of  marks2,  with
eyes  spotted  with  white,  or  marked  with  light  yellow  spots
in  groups  like  the  Pleiads ;  with  long  thin  jaws  and  short
ears,  and  round  delicate  well-proportioned  throats,  [70]  with
long  upraised  curved  necks  like  sacrificial  posts,  with  their
shoulders  stout  and  robust  at  the  joints,  their  chests  full  and
projecting,  their  legs  thin  and  straight,  and  their  round  hoofs
hard  like  masses  of  iron ;  their  round  bellies  seemed  solid,
as  if  they  had  no  entrails  within  them,  lest  they  should
be  broken  by  their  excessive  swiftness,  and  their  broad  flanks
were  divided  by  a  long  depression3,  with  the  hairs  like  new
shoots  swaying  about  in  the  wind4.  They  were  with  diffi-
culty restrained  by  the  ropes  fixed  tightly  in  the  ground  on
both  sides,  and  they  seemed  to  grow  longer  as  they  struggled
with  one  foot  thrust  out  of  the  ropes'  confinement,  and  the
studs  on  their  necks  were  ornamented  with  cords  of  many

1  Cf.  p.  25, 1.  27.

2  Sc.  on  the  chest,  back,  face  and  flanks.

3  Drom  is  doubtful, — there  is  a  reading  udyacchrom.

4  Jagatl  seems  to  be  used  far  jagat  in  this  rare  sense.


CHAPTER II.  -51

strings, — their  eyes  were  closed,  and  they  kept  moving  their
mouths,  which  were  flecked  with  bits  of  foam  dark  with
the  juice  of  durva  grass,  while  the  skin  itched  and  twitched
about  and  was  bitten  for  a  moment  and  then  let  go  by  the
teeth.  Some  stood,  lazily  moving  their  tails,  with  one  side
of  their  loins  drooping  as  they  rested  on  one  hoof,  seeming
to  ponder  in  sleep,  and  slowly  uttering  interrupted  neighs,
while  the  ground  was  marked  by  their  hoofs,  whose  foreparts
rattled  with  the  noise  of  their  foot-rests  as  they  struck  upon
them ;  others  sought  for  food,  having  their  longing  excited
by  the  stray  morsels  of  fodder  scattered  about,  [71]  while  the
pupils  of  their  eyes  trembled  for  fear  at  the  yells  of  the
angry  Candalas  who  guarded  them.  They  seemed  to  have
a  lustration-fire  always  near  to  protect  them,  from  their
bodies  being  yellow  with  a  saffron  unguent  rubbed  on  them,
while  an  awning  was  spread  over  them  and  the  tutelary
deity  (Govinda)  was  worshipped  before  them.  As  he  looked,
his  mind  was  filled  with  curious  wonder,  and  he  entered  a
little  further  within,  and  saw  on  his  left  hand  an  elephant-
stable  indistinct  owing  to  the  distance,  but  regaling  the
nostrils  with  an  odour  as  of  groves  of  vakula  trees1  in  full
bloom  which  diffused  itself  far  and  wide,  while  the  stable
was  filled  with  streams  of  ichor  covered  with  bees,  and  its
outskirts  were  surrounded  by  a  grove  of  plantain-trees2,  and
its  height  seemed  to  crowd  the  very  sky.

He  asked  ''What  does  the  king  do  here?"  The  other
replied,  "This  is  his  majesty's  favourite  elephant,  his  external
heart,  his  very  self  in  another  birth3,  his  vital  airs  gone
outside  from  him,  his  friend  in  battle  and  in  sport,  rightly
named  Darpa^'ata4,  a  lord  of  elephants — this  is  his  special
pavilion."  He  replied,  "  O  my  friend,  if  he  is  called  Darpa-
<;ata  and  he  has  no  faults,  I  may  surely  see  this  lord  of
elephants, — will  you  take  me  to  him,  for  I  am  overcome
by  curiosity?"  "Be  it  so,"  he  answered,  "draw  near  by  all

1  From  the  mada  or  ichor  exuding  from  the  elephants'  temples.

2  Kadall  also  means  '  a  flag  carried  by  an  elephant.'

3  Or  '  veiled  by  a  new  nature.'

4  '  Keen  (or  perhaps  attenuated  and  so  lacking)  in  pride.'

4—2


52  THE HARSA-CAR1TA.

means,  what  harm  is  there  in  it  ?  have  a  good  look  at  the
lord  of  elephants."

[72]  So  he  went  fonvard  in  that  direction,  and  there  while
he  was  still  at  a  distance  he  saw  the  elephant  Darpagata  sur-
rounded by  the  troops  of  cataka  birds  uttering  their  loud  notes
in  the  sky  as  they  were  excited  by  the  deep  sound  issuing
from  his  throat  (which  suggested  clouds),  and  the  domestic
peacocks  which  made  the  ground  resound  with  their  cries,
— filling  the  surrounding  space  with  the  spirituous  scent  of  the
ichor  which  rivalled  the  full-blown  kadamba  flowers, — like  a
rainy  season  out  of  its  time  wearing  an  embodied  form, —
throwing  off  the  fourth  period  of  life  by  an  outburst  of  red
spots  on  his  skin  like  a  lake  covered  with  lotuses  brown  with
thick  drops  of  honey, — chanting  as  it  were  a  tune  for  his  auspi-
cious entrance  upon  the  fifth  period  with  his  shell-ornaments
as  they  mingled  with  the  deep  sound  of  his  flapping  ears, —
seeming  as  if  for  fear  of  bursting  the  earth  he  tried  to  lighten
his  weight  by  swinging  his  long  huge  body  with  sportive
oscillations  on  his  three  feet  as  they  kept  varying  in  constant
motion,  as  though  he  were  rubbing  his  body  against  the
walls  of  the  world, — challenging  the  world-bearing  elephants
of  the  various  regions  as  he  threw  up  his  trunk  in  defiance,
and  seeming  to  be  cleaving  the  pillar  of  the  world  with  a  saw
armed  with  thick  sharp  teeth.  It  was  as  though  the  world
could  not  contain  him  and  he  was  striving  to  force  a  passage
out,  while  his  drivers  tried  to  shew  him  every  service  which
could  alleviate  the  hot  season,  some1  like  clouds  with  long-
accumulated  stores,  hurrying  up  with  fresh  juicy  shoots  and
creepers,  others  like  lakes  whose  waters  are  variegated  with
heaps  of  Vallisneria  plants  and  lotus  fibres  scattered  on  them.
[73]  He  threatened  to  block  up  the  whole  world  with  all  its
mountain-ranges,  seas,  continents  and  forests,  with  his  huge  bar
of  a  trunk,  which  was  all  wavy  with  thin  lines  of  wrinkles
running,  round  it  as  if  they  were  marks  to 'reckon  up  the
number  of  past  victories  which  he  had  won  in  battle,  while
it  was  held  aloft  as  if  he  scented  the  ichor  of  some  rival

1  Read  lesakaih.


CHAPTER II.  53

elephant  approaching, — one  of  his  tusks  had  its  root  wet  with
spray  from  a  thick  piece  of  plaintain  covered  with  leaves
which  was  enclosed  in  the  trunk,  the  other  seemed  to  have
dropped  its  bough  and  was  as  it  were  all  horripilated  with
the  joy  of  battle  from  a  quantity  of  lotus  fibres  which  hung
from  it  in  play.  He  appeared  to  vomit  whole  beds  of
lotuses  which  he  had  eaten  in  his  gambols  in  the  lake,
through  the  bright  colour  of  the  two  tusks  together,  and
spread  his  own  glory  through  the  four  quarters  of  space ;
and  he  seemed  to  laugh  to  scorn  the  lions  who  vaunted  their
rough  play  with  some  poor  scarecrows  of  elephants  whom
they  had  worsted,  while  he  appropriated  for  himself  a  silken
veil  which  might  have  been  taken  direct  from  the  heavenly
tree.  When  he  lifted  up  in  play  his  huge  trunk,  he  seemed
to  drop  a  shower  of  red  lotuses  which  he  had  eaten,  or  to
vomit  a  quantity  of  fresh  shoots,  as  he  then  displayed  his
palate  which  was  soft  to  the  touch  like  red  silk.  His  bright
tawny  eyes  seemed  to  emit  a  stream  of  honey  which  he  had
drunk  up  with  the  mouthfuls  of  lotuses,  while  his  cheeks
poured  out  under  the  guise  of  ichor  a  rich  mixture  of  perfumes
as  if  he  had  been  eating  groves  of  the  pdrijdta  tree  of
heaven,  together  with  mangoes,  campakas,  lavalls,  cloves,
kakkolas,  cardamoms,  and  sahakaras,  and  perfumed  with
abundance  of  camphor.  He  seemed  to  be  busy,  night  and  day,
bestowing  all  the  woods  on  the  other  elephants  by  royal
inscriptions  of  donation,  made  vocal  with  the  swarms  of  bees
which  hummed  round  them  as  if  reading  them,  and  scratched
by  the  half-cut  branches  of  red  sugar-cane  as  by  a  graver,
and  which  seemed  by  a  mistake  to  stay  on  hand  instead  of
being  dispersed  abroad1 ;  [74]  he  was  constantly  cooled  by  a
trickling  garland  of  ornaments  cut  out  of  the  moongem*  in
the  shape  of  the  constellations,  and  he  carried  his  head  high
as  if  it  had  been  crowned  with  the  tiara  of  universal  empire

1  This  sentence  is  very  obscure  ;  hasta-sthiti  seems  to  imply  a  pun,
as  hasta  means  '  hand '  or  '  trunk ' ;  the  trunk  is  as  it  were  marked  all
over  with  lines  which  the  bees  seem  to  be  reading  aloud.  There  is  also
the  usual  pun  in  ddna  as  meaning  "  patches  of  ichor,"  and  in  vibhrama
as  '  mistake '  and  c  haste.'  2  Or  perhaps  '  ice.'


54  THE  HAR^A-CARITA.

over  all  his  compeers;  he  stood  as  though  he  were  loyally
fanning  the  Guardian  deity  of  the  royal  family  who  lay
pillowed  on  his  tusks,  with  his  huge  ears,  which,  as  they
flapped,  seemed  alternately  to  conceal  and  reveal  the
wide  world ;  while  his  tail  waved  like  some  flyflapper
marked  with  the  signs  of  elephant-empire  and  handed
down  through  a  long  succession  of  hereditary  rulers1.
He  seemed  to  pour  out  again  from  his  mouth  the
rivers  which  he  had  drunk  up  in  his  triumphal  progress  of
conquest,  in  the  form  of  the  clear  cold  water  which  he
spouted  forth  ;  and  he  displayed  his  sensitiveness  to  insult  by
loud  trumpetings  which  followed  various  movements  of  his
body  as  he  heard  the  drums  borne  by  other  elephants,  while
all  his  limbs  had  been  motionless  for  a  moment  as  he
listened  attentively.  He  seemed  to  pity  himself  for  not
being  in  the  thick  of  the  fray,  and  as  if  ashamed  of  the
humiliation  of  bearing  a  driver  he  poured  out  streams  of
ichor  and  scratched  the  ground  with  the  tip  of  his  trunk ;
his  eyes  were  a  third  closed  as  with  the  languor  of  intoxica-
tion, when  his  driver  shouted  angrily,  as  he  scornfully  took
up  and  dropped  the  mouthfuls  of  food,  and  finally  took  them
slowly  and  reluctantly,  [75]  while  the  juice  issued  from  his
mouth  discoloured,  like  a  stream  of  ichor,  by  the  dark  juice  of
the  tarriala  boughs  which  he  had  eaten.  He  moved  restlessly
with  pride,  he  snorted  with  repressed  energy,  he  swelled
with  intoxication,  he  staggered  with  youth,  he  flowed  freely
with  ichor,  he  leaped  about  with  conscious  strength,  he  was
drunk  with  arrogance,  he  seemed  to  be  ever  seeking  the
highest  place  with  ambition,  he  gasped  with  excitement,  he
affected  all  with  his  gracefulness,  he  rained  influence  on
every  side  by  his  beauty.

His  nails  were  smooth,  his  hair  was  rough, — he  was
reverend  in  face  but  a  gentle  disciple  in  deportment ;  soft
as  to  his  head,  but  firm  in  his  friendships ;  his  neck  was
short  but  his  life  was  long ;  he  was  stinted  in  his  belly  but
lavishly  bounteous  in  ichor ;  a  very  JBalarama  in  his  wild

1  Ayatavaifica  can  also  suggest  a  pun  as  meaning  '  the  backbone.'


CHAPTER  II.  55

exploits,  but  like  a  highborn  wife  in  his  devotedness ;  a  Jina
in  patience,  a  shower  of  fire  in  his  storms  of  anger ;  he  was
Garuda  in  his  power  to  lift  nagas1,  he  was  Narada  in  his
love  of  quarrels2,  a  thunderbolt  without  rain  in  his  sudden
attacks,  a  Makara  in  his  power  to  disturb  armies3,  a  serpent
in  the  might  of  his  teeth,  Varuna  in  the  noose  which  he  held
in  his  hand,  he  was  Yama's  net  in  entangling  his  enemies,
he  was  Time  in  his  buttings4,  Rahu  in  his  grip5,  Mars  in  his
crooked  movements,  a  circling  torch  in  his  rapid  rounds.
He  was  to  valour,  a  very  mountain  of  the  jewel  which
gives  all  desires;  to  chivalrous  feeling,  a  palace-home  with
his  tusks  for  two  pillars  of  pearl;  [76]  to  magnanimity,  a
heavenly  chariot,  moving  at  will,  and  gay  with  ornaments,
chowries,  and  bells ;  to  anger,  a  shower-bath  of  scented
water,  dark  with  a  constant  raincloud  of  ichor ;  to  ambition,
a  temple  with  a  golden  image6  within ;  to  pride,  a  pleasure-
hill  with  streams  running  down  its  sides ;  to  arrogance,  a
diamond  house  with  an  arch  of  ivory ;  to  royalty,  a  moving
hill-fort  with  its  high  frontal-globes  as  so  many  towers;  to
the  earth,  an  iron  wall  indented  with  thousands  of  arrows7;
to  the  king8,  a  tree  of  heaven,  resonant  with  hundreds  of
bees.  Thus  he  was  a  music-hall  for  the  dancing  of  his
flapping  ears,  a  drinking-saloon  for  the  swarms  of  bees,  a
gynseceum  for  the  display  of  paint  and  decorations9,  a
festival  of  Kama  for  the  sportive  gambols  of  intoxication,
a  faultless  evening  for  the  sight  of  all  the  constellations10;  a

1  i.e.  'elephants'  or  'snakes.'

2  Narada  is  expressly  called  kalahapriya  and  kalikdraka. Several
instances  of his mischief-making  propensities  occur  in  the  Visnu
Purana.

3  Vahinl  is  '  a  river '  as  well  as  '  an  army.'

4  Parinati  also  means  '  power  to  ripen.'
6  Or  '  in  his  seizure  of  the  sun.'

6  Pratima  also  means  '  the  part  of  an  elephant's  head  between  the
tusks.'

7  Or  '  with  loopholes  from  whence  to  discharge  arrows.'

8  Bhunandana  can  also  mean  "  the  heavenly  garden  of  the  earth."

9  (^ringdra  means  "love"  and  "the  marks  with  red  lead  on  an
elephant's  head  and  trunk."

10  Naksatra  has  been  used  before  as  an  elephant's  ornament.


56  THE HARSA-CARITA.


/


rainy  season  out  of  season,  for  the  overflowing  rivers  of
ichor ;  a  deceptive  autumn  for  the  perfume  of  the  saptaparna
trees1,  an  unprecedented  cold-season  for  the  showers  of  dew,
and  a  fictitious  cloud  for  the  trumpeting  thunders.

As  he  wondered,  thinking  to  himself,  "  Surely  in  his
creation  the  i.iountains  were  used  up  as  atoms,  how  else
could  this  astonishing  majesty  have  been  produced  ?  It  is
indeed  a  marvel, — a  Vindhya  with  tusks,  the  primeval  Boar
with  a  trunk  !" — the  doorkeeper  addressed  him  ;  "  See  !
when  his  enemies,  wandering  in  the  forests,  would  vainly
try2  by  a  hundred  wishes  to  paint  again  their  old  glory  gone
without  leaving  a  rack  behind,  and  when  their  minds  are
bewildered  with  devising  means  to  express  their  imagi-
nations,— [77]  this  lord  of  elephants,  if  he  comes  by  chance
into  their  recollection  as  they  listlessly  muse  in  despondency,
cannot  endure  as  rivals  even  the  world-supporting  elephants
in  the  Manasa  lake3. — But  come,  you  will  have  another
opportunity  of  seeing  him ;  you  shall  now  see  my  lord
himself!"

On  hearing  these  words  he  with  an  effort  drew  away  his
eyes  which  had  fallen  on  the  elephant's  ichor-bedewed  cheek
and  were  half  closed  as  if  intoxicated  with  the  sweet  odour ;
and,  following  the  path  indicated  by  the  doorkeeper,  he
passed  through  three  courts  crowded  with  subject-kings,  and
in  the  fourth  he  saw  King  Harsa,  in  an  open  space  in  front
of  a  pavilion  where  he  used  to  give  audience  after  eating,
surrounded  at  a  distance  by  his  attendants  in  a  line,  all
six  feet  in  height4,  fair  like  karnikara  flowers,  armed  and
of  old  families5,  like  so  many  golden  pillars, — with  his
special  favourites  seated  near  him.  He  was  sitting  on  a
throne  made  of  a  stone  clear  like  a  pearl,  washed  with  sandal-
wood  water,  and  bright  as  the  moon  with  its  feet6  of  ivory

1  Which  is  like  that  of  the  ichor.

2  The  Kashmir  edition  rightly  reads  alikhatam.

3  Or  '  even  the  elephants  of  hope  in  their  minds.'

4  Or  '  their  bodies  tall  through  exercise.'

5  Or  of  the  pillars,  '  shaped  by  tools  and  firmly  set.'

6  Or  'rays.'


CHAPTER II.  57

and  its  surface  cool  to  the  touch  like  snow-water, — he  rested
the  weight  of  his  body  on  his  arm  which  was  placed  on  the
end  of  the  seat,  and  he  seemed  to  be  sporting  with  his
subject-kings  under  the  far-shining  canopy  of  the  brightness
of  his  body  with  the  rays  of  his  jewels  diffused^ound,  as  if  it
were  in  a  lake  delightful  in  the  hot  season^,  the  water  of
which  was  tangled  with  clusters  of  the  long  soft  lotus-roots ;
and  he  seemed  made  as  it  were  out  of  the  pure  atoms  of  light.
[78]  He  was  embraced  by  the  goddess  of  the  Royal  Prosperity,
who  took  him  in  her  arms  and,  seizing  him  by  all  the  royal
marks  on  all  his  limbs,  forced  him,  however  reluctant,  to
mount  the  throne, — and  this  though  he  had  taken  a  vow  of
austerity  and  did  not  swerve  from  his  vow,  hard  like  grasping
the  edge  of  a  sword1 ;  clinging  closely  to  duty  through  fear
of  stumbling  in  the  uneven  path  of  kings,  and  attended  with
all  her  heart  by  Truth  who  had  been  abandoned  by  all  other
kings,  but  had  obtained  his  promise  of  protection, — and
waited  on  reverentially  by  the  reflected  images  of  a  fair
handmaid  standing  near,  which  fell  on  his  toe-nails,  as  if
they  were  the  ten  directions  of  space  impersonate2.  With
his  long  glances  which  penetrated  space  he  seemed  to
examine  what  the  Regents  of  the  different  quarters  had  done
or  left  undone,  while  the  sun  seemed  to  seek  his  permission  to
rise,  as  its  beams  rested  on  the  back  of  his  footstool  supported
by  jewelled  feet, — the  day  made  its  reverential  march  round
him,  while  a  clear  space  was  kept  in  the  centre,  marked  out
by  the  splendour  emitted  from  his  ornaments ;  he  burned  with
vexation  when  even  the  mountains  did  not  bow  before  him,
and  so  displayed  the  ocean  of  his  beauty  which  was  white  like
sandal- wood,  boiling  as  it  were  into  foam  through  the  heat  of
his  heroic  passion, — in  his  isolated  sovereignty  feeling  indignant
that  his  own  image  should  be  repeated  even  in  the  reflections
on  the  crest  jewels  of  the  prostrate  kings  round  his  feet,  and
keeping  his  Royal  Glory  continually  sighing  under  the  guise
of  the  wind  of  his  chowries  as  she  sat  fuming  with  vexed
pride ;  [79]  he  was  embraced  by  the  Goddess  Qri  who  came

1  Cf.  Eaghuv.  xiii.  67.  2  As  reflected  ill  the  ten  nails.


58  THE HAR$A-CARITA.

to  him  after  spoiling  all  the  four  oceans  of  their  beauty1;
though  he  gave  away  thousands  of  rainbows  from  the
coruscations  of  his  ornaments  and  sent  them  as  a  present  to
Indra,  yet  he  still  in  his  seeming  penury2  rained  ambrosia  in
his  interview?  with  other  monarchs ;  in  poetical  contests  he
poured  out  a  n'ectar  of  his  own  which  he  had  not  received
from  any  foreign  source ;  he  ever  shewed  his  heart  in  his
confidential  intercourse  even  when  it  was  not  sought ;  when
he  shewed  favour,  he  seemed  to  place  Glory,  though  herself  im-
moveable,  in  various  positions  by  his  patronage ;  in  the  parleys
of  heroes  he  seemed  listening  to  the  whispered  kindly  counsels
of  the  Goddess  of  battles  with  his  cheek  horripilated  in  joy ;
during  the  recital  of  the  past  conflicts  of  heroes,  he  ever
turned  his  eye  like  a  shower  of  soft  cleansing  oil  on  the
loved  sword  ;  in  easy  jests  flashing  from  his  bright  teeth  his
clear  meaning  to  the  circle  of  kings  standing  awed  by  his
majesty :  abiding  in  the  hearts  of  all  the  world  and  yet  never
leaving  his  own  proper  place  ;  in  his  greatness,  he  was  beyond
the  sphere  of  all  good  qualities,  out  of  the  range  of  ordinary
successes,  outside  of  common  benefactions,  beyond  the  possi-
bility of  blessing,  out  of  the  reach  of  desires,  far  removed
from  fortune,  not  within  the  scope  of  comparisons,  out  of  the
influence  of  fate,  and  beyond  the  past  experience  of  prosperity.
He  displayed  an  avatara  of  all  the  gods  united  in  one,  as  he
had  the  lost  delicate  feet  of  Aruna3,  the  slow-moving  thighs
of  Buddha,  the  brawny  forearm  of  the  Thunderer  (Indra),
the  shoulder  of  Justice4,  the  round  lip  of  the  sun,  the  mild
look  of  Avalokita5,  the  face  of  the  moon  and  the  hair  of
Krisna.  [80]  His  left  foot  was  playfully  placed  on  a  large
costly  footstool  made  of  sapphires,  girt  round  with  a  band  of

1  Qri  only  rose  from  one  ocean  when  she  became  Visnu's  queen.

2  Parityaktam  may  be  also  taken  as  neuter  with  madhu.

3  The  charioteer  of  the  Sun,  who  was  born  without  feet. Taking
the  proper  names  as  adjectives,  it  is  to  be  read,  "  he  has  delicately  pink
feet,  slow  gracefully-moving  thighs,  his  forearm  hard  as  the  thunder-
bolt, a  bull's  neck,  a  bright  round  lip,  a  mild  aspect,  a  moon-face  and
black  hair."

4  Represented  as  a  bull.

6  A  Bodhisattva  who  is  especially  worshipped  in  Northern  Buddhism.


•.


CHAPTER  II.  59


rubies, — as  if  it  were  the  (dark)  head  of  Kali  the  demon  of  the
iron  age, — while  the  surface  of  the  ground  was  dyed  by  the
rays  which  fell  on  it;  like  the  youthful  Krisna  when  he
planted  his  foot  on  the  circle  of  hoods  of  the  serpent  Kaliya,
he  dignified  the  earth  by  the  spreading  rays  Q£  his  toe-nails,
white  like  fine  linen,  as  with  the  tiara  of  His  chief  queen1.
His  feet  were  very  red  as  with  wrath  at  unsubmissive
kings,  and  they  shed  a  very  bright  ruby-light  on  the
crowded  crests  of  the  prostrate  monarchs,  and  caused  a
sunset  of  all  the  fierce  luminaries  of  war  and  poured  streams
of  honey  from  the  flowers  of  the  crest  garlands  of  the  local
kings,  and  were  never  even  for  one  moment  unattended,  as
by  the  heads  of  slain  enemies,  by  swarms  of  bees  which
fluttered  bewildered  at  the  sweet  odour  of  the  chaplets  on  the
heads  of  all  the  feudal  chiefs ;  and  they  formed  as  it  were
sylvan  summer-houses  of  full-blown  red  lotuses  for  the  Goddess
Qrl  to  shelter  in  as  she  acted  as  his  shampooer,  and  bore  signs
which  told  of  his  sovereignty  over  the  four  oceans  in  their
auspicious  marks,  such  as  the  lotus,  the  shell,  the  fish  and
the  makara.  His  two  thighs  were  like  two  ruby  pillars,  set
to  bear  the  weight  of  the  earth  which  rested  on  his  heart,
like  two  sandal-trees  with  their  roots  shining  with  the  rays
from  the  crest-jewels  of  the  serpents  clustered  round  them,
or  like  two  streams  from  the  ocean  of  beauty  overflowing
and  all  covered  with  foam,  or  like  two  huge  tusks  of  a
world-bearing  elephant,  bent  through  being  used  to  block  up
a  yawning  makara's  mouth2.  He  shone,  like  the  mountain
Mandara  with  Vasuki's  skin3  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean,
with  his  lower  garment  which  was  radiant  with  shot  silk-
threads,  washed  in  pure  water,  clinging  closely  to  his  loins,
ornamented  with  the  rays  of  the  jewels  of  his  girdle,  and
white  like  a  mass  of  ambrosial  foam, — while  he  appeared  girt
with  his  thin  upper  garment  spangled  with  worked  stars  like
the  round  world  with  its  surrounding  ether  cloudless  and  full

1  Of.  Bombay  ed.  p.  186,  8. 2  For  the  pun  see  note  supr.  p.  18.

3  Each  of  these  epithets  applies  to  Vasuki's  skin  as  well  as  to  the
king's  garment ;  and  so  too  in  the  next  sentence  they  similarly  apply
to  Kailasa  as  well  as  to  the  king's  chest.


60  THE  HAR^A-CARITA.

of  stars.  [81]  He  shone  with  his  broad  chest,  like  Kailasa  with
a  cliff  of  crystal, — able  to  bear  the  shock  of  various  armies,
too  sturdy  to  be  confined  within  the  limits  of  its  garment1,
and  made  smooth  in  spite  of  its  hardness  by  the  thousands
of  elephants'  tusks  which  had  collided  against  it.  His  neck
was  encircled  fry  a  necklace  of  pearls  like  the  serpent  Qesa,
now  sleeping  peacefully  in  the  sense  of  relief  at  depositing
the  burden  of  the  whole  earth  on  his  stalwart  arm,  or  like
the  dividing-line  which  draws  the  boundary  between  the  re-
spective empires  of  Qrl  and  Sarasvati  over  his  bosom  and  face.
His  breast  was  wrapped  in  a  fold  of  rays  from  the  pearls  in
his  necklace  as  if  it  were  a  strip  of  cloth  put  on  to  signify
the  solemn  conferring  as  a  special  gift  of  all  the  property
gained  during  one's  whole  life2;  he  was  like  a  jewel  mountain,
with  its  outstretched  wings  of  jewels,  spread  on  both  sides, —
with  the  red  rays  of  the  bracelets  as  if  they  were  the  paths
for  the  passage  of  the  glory  produced  by  his  arm  or  the
continued  streams  of  honey  from  the  lotuses  in  the  ears  of
Qri  as  she  lay  on  the  pillow  of  his  arm,  or  as  if  they  were
other  arms  newly  budding  forth  in  rivalry  of  Visnu's  four
arms.  He  at  once  destroyed  the  greatness  of  the  four
regions  of  space  and  their  rulers  by  his  two  long  arms,
which  were  as  the  bolts  to  blockade  the  path8  through  the
world-encircling  Lokaloka,  and  as  the  rock -walls  built  outside
the  moats  of  the  four  oceans,  and  as  a  cage  of  adamant  to
confine  all  illustrious  kings,  and  as  a  jewelled  triumphal  arch
for  the  festal  entrance  of  the  world's  goddess  of  Victory.
The  redness  of  his  lip  bedewed  all  the  regions  of  space  like
the  exudation  of  a  branch  of  the  heavenly  tree,  and  the  lip
itself  seemed  as  if  it  were  the  Kaustubha  gem,  taking  its
place  as  a  feature  of  his  face  in  its  desire  to  kiss  its  sister
Laksml4  wt^o  sat  enthroned  there.  He  displayed  at  intervals
a  sudden  flash  of  illumination  to  the  Goddess  of  Empire  who
was  somewhatx  dull  and  bewildered  by  nature,  through  the

1  Or  '  the  shock  ,of  rivers '  and  '  the  limits  of  the  sky '  (ambara).

2  The  Comm.  do^s  not  explain  the  ceremony  which  this  refers  to.

3  Cf.  Wilson's  Visnu  Pur.  vol.  ii.  p.  206.

4  Both  being  produced  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean.


CHAPTER II.  61

gleaming  flashes  of  his  teeth  as  he  laughed  at  the  sportive
sallies  of  his  companions ;  (when  he  smiled)  he  seemed  to  be
sending  away  the  lotuses  which  had  come  to  him  in  uncer-
tainty whether  it  was  his  face  or  the  moon — and  was  dismissing
the  autumnal  moonlight  which  had  entered  unc'-'flr  the  illusion
that  the  flash  of  his  line  of  bright  teeth  was  aoed  of  lotuses ;
[82]  and  he  made  a  new  anniversary  of  the  churning  the  ocean
by  the  odour  which  exhaled  from  his  mouth  perfumed  by
the  mingled  scent  of  wine,  ambrosia,  and  parijata  flowers,
which  filled  all  the  regions  of  space, — while  the  perfume  of
his  breath  was  continually  inhaled  by  his  overhanging  nose
which  rose  like  a  bud  on  his  expanded  lotus-face.  With  the
brightness  of  his  milk-white  eye  he  deluged  the  regions  of
space  as  with  a  full  tide  of  the  milky  ocean  at  the  rising
of  his  unparalleled  moon-face, — and  the  chowrie-woman,  as
reflected  in  his  stainless  cheeks,  seemed  to  be  Sarasvati  who
inhabited  his  mouth  taking  bodily  shape ;  while  his  broad
forehead  was  reddened  by  the  pink  hue  of  his  crest-ornament,
as  if  it  were  the  lac  dye  of  Laksmi's  feet  which  had  clung
to  it,  when  he  sought  by  prostration  to  appease  her  jealousy
at  the  preference  shewn  to  Sarasvati.  He  was  listening,  like
one  skilled  in  music  to  lute- players,  to  the  tribes  of  bees  in
his  ear-rings,  which  with  restless  feet  played  a  tiny  lyre
consisting  of  the  end  of  his  ear-ring  jewet  with  the  web  of
its  rosy  rays  for  strings ;  while  his  locks  were  encircled  by  a
wreath  of  white  jasmine  flowers  mimicking  Durga's  wreath  of
sculls,  and  serving  as  a  halo  round  his  moon-face,  like  a
circle  of  moonlight  from  the  nails  of  the  Goddess  of  Empire,
which  had  remained  behind  as  she  grasped  his  hair  in
amorous  play.  He  was  consecrated  by  the  light  of  the  pearls
in  his  top-knot  and  the  dark  rays  of  the  emeralds,  as  they
crossed  in  their  intermingling,  as  if  the  braid-like  streams
of  the  united  Yamuna  and  Ganges  had  come  of  their  own
accord  from  Prayaga.

His  imperial  splendour  was  however  eclipsed  by  the
women,  as  their  foreheads  became  blackened  by  the  darkness
produced  through  the  ornamental  tilaka  of  black  agallochum
being  melted  by  the  drops  of  perspiration,  as  if  it  were
a  dark  jnark  produced  by  their  repeated  prostrations  at  his


62  THE HARSA-CARITA.

feet  to  incline  him  to  grant  their  coaxing  requests, — [83]
propped  up1,  as  they  were,  by  their  flashing  pearl-necklaces
which  were  like  so  many  waves  rising  from  the  tossed
Manasa"  lake2, — seeming  in  jealousy  to  rebuke  Qri  herself
by  the  action  of  their  creeper-like  eyebrows,  tremulous  with
a  playful  motion, — dragging  him  captive  as  with  bonds
by  their  long  sweet-scented  sighs  which  seemed  made  of
the  Malaya  wind, — with  their  great  jar-like  bosoms,  encircled
with  bands  of  large  Vakula  flowers,  drawing  from  him  every
drop  of  contentment  with  his  own  proper  spouse, — violently
dragging  him  into  their  hearts,  by  the  attraction  of  the
rays  of  the  trembling  jewels  of  the  necklaces  which  were
set  in  motion  by  the  trembling  of  their  bosoms, — embracing
him,  as  with  many  outstretched  arms,  with  the  rays  of  their
far-flashing  ornaments, — keeping  their  minds  back,  as  it
were,  which  had  started  off  too  impetuously,  with  their  open
hands  which  served  as  a  covering  over  their  mouths  which
wore  an  additional  grace  from  a  languid  yawn, — skilfully
moving  their  eyes  which  were  half-closed  as  fainting  at  the
arrows  of  Kama  and  had  their  corners  contracted  on  account
of  the  pollen  of  the  flowers  in  their  ears,  shaken  by  the  bees
which  flew  about  blinded  by  intoxication, — striking  the
lotuses  in  their  own  ears  with  the  sidelong  glances  of  their
eyes  shot  from  under  the  play  of  their  frowns  through  their
mutual  jealousy, — carrying  the  king  reflected  in  their  soft
cheeks,  as  if  he  had  been  drunk  up  by  their  eyes  whose
lashes  were  motionless  with  the  flood  of  joy3  born  of  their
unblinking  gaze, — creating  for  love's  assistance  new  moon-
rises  by  their  involuntary  smiles  through  the  playfulness  of
desire, — and  seeming  as  in  anger  to  break  ever  so  many  of
Kama's  useless  bows  in  the  form  of  the  rays  of  the  curved
nails  as  the  joints  of  their  fingers  gave  a  loud  crack  when
their  twined  hands,  as  they  gesticulated,  came  into  close
contact  in  the  rapid  bendings  of  their  limbs.  He  lay
smiling,  while  he  languidly  struck  on  the  head  with  the  bow  of  4

1  Cf.  fvltam,  Pers.  i.  78.

2  Or  '  like  so  many  longing  regrets  rising  in  the  mind.'

3  The  Kashmir  ed.  reads  raci-.


CHAPTER II.  63

a  lute  the  shampooing  attendant,  as  his  lotus  feet  dropped
from  her  spray-like  hands  which  were  trembling  in  her  per-
spiring emotion ;  [84]  while  he  taught  the  Goddess  of  Empire
as  well  as  the  lute  (both  equally  dear)  while  each^had  its
kona1  firmly  grasped  in  his  hand.  Single  as  he^lay  there,  he
was  viewed  in  very  different  lights  by  different  spectators, —
riches  called  him  cold,  all  faults  turned  from  him  as
inaccessible,  the  senses  felt  awed  at  his  love  of  self-control,
the  genius  of  the  iron  age  said  '  he  is  beyond  my  reach,'  all
vices  pronounced  him  as  passionless,  dishonour  looked  on  him
as  timid ;  Love  said,  '  the  workings  of  his  mind  are  hard  to
be  understood';  Sarasvati  complained  that  'he  is  uxorious'2,
other  men's  wives  that  'he  is  impotent';  ascetics  said  that
'he  is  a  seer  of  the  highest  order,'  harlots  that  'he  is  a
deceiver';  his  friends  thought  that  'he  is  easily  led  by
others ' ;  Brahmans  that  '  he  is  our  ready  servant ' ;  and
his  enemies'  soldiers  that  'he  has  faithful  allies.'  More
truly  the  lord  of  Vahim3  than  Qantanu4,  more  illustrious  for
victory5  than  Bhisma,  more  delighting  in  the  bow6  than
Drona,  more  unerring  with  the  arrow7  than  A9vatthaman,
dearer  to  Mitra8  than  Karna,  more  forbearing9  than  Yudhi-
sthira,  possessing  the  might  of  more  elephants  than  Bhima,
more  worthy  of  figuring  in  the  war  of  the  Mahabharata  than
Arjuna.  He  was  as  it  were  the  cause  of  the  Golden  Age,
the  source  of  the  creation  of  the  Gods,  the  native  land  of
pride,  [85]  the  home  of  compassion,  the  close  neighbour  of
Purusottama10,  the  mine-mountain  of  valour,  the  assembly-


1  Kona  seems  to  mean  here  the 'bow  of  the  lute  and  also  'an  inter-
mediate direction  of  the  compass '  for  the  empire.

2  As  devoted  to  his  lawful  spouse,  Empire  ?

3  Vahinl  means  an  army  as  well  as  the  Ganges.

4  ^antanu  was the father of  Bhisma  by  the goddess Gaiiga,
Visnu  Pur.  iv.  20.

5  Bhisma  conquered  his  senses  when  he  resigned  the  kingdom  to  his
half-brother's  children.

6  Or  '  more  averse  to  desire.'

7  Or  '  more  certain  to  help  suppliants.'

8  His  friends  or  the  Sun  ;  Karna  was  the  son  of  the  Sun.

9  Or  'possessing  more  land.' 10  Krisna  or  'the  best  of  men.'


I

64  THE HARSA-CARITA.

room  for  all  sciences  to  Sarasvati,  an  anniversary  of  the
churning  of  the  Ocean  for  ambrosia  to  Laksmi,  an  exhibition
of  power  to  Dexterity,  a  common  meetingplace  of  the
proprieties,  a  valuation  of  her  treasures  to  Beauty,  final
perfection  to^.the  creation  of  the  atoms  of  form,  an  expiation
of  all  past  ev*J  deeds  to  Empire,  a  challenge  against  all
opposing  power  to  Kama,  a  means  for  displaying  Indra  to
all  men  as  'the  city-stormer,'  a  visible  return  of  ideal
justice,  the  seraglio  of  the  fine  arts  all  together,  the  ultimate
authority  for  defining  good  fortune,  the  final  bath  which
completes  the  rites  of  installation  to  all  monarchs, — the
grave  and  gracious,  the  awe-inspiring  and  affable,  at  the
same  moment  a  holiday  and  a  holy  day,  the  universal
Monarch.

Having  seen  him, — feeling,  as  it  were,  at  once  welcomed
and  checked,  full  of  desire  and  yet  satisfied,  with  his  face
horripilated  with  awe,  and  with  tears  of  joy  falling  from  his
eyes,  he  stood  at  a  distance  smiling  in  wonder  and  pondered,
"This  then  is  the  Emperor  Qri  Harsa,  that  union  of
separate  glories, — noble  in  birth  and  of  well-chosen  name, —
the  lord  of  the  field  bounded  by  the  four  oceans, — the
enjoyer  of  all  the  fruits  of  Brahma's  pillar,  the  world, — the
surpasser  of  all  the  victories  won  by  all  the  kings  of  ancient
times.  Through  him  the  earth  does  indeed  possess  a  tine
King!  His  youthful  exploits,  unlike  Krisna's,  transgress
not  right1;  [86]  his  freaks  of  power  cause  no  offence  to  the
man  of  refinement2  as  did  those  of  Qiva ;  his  boasts  lead  to  no
destruction  of  families  as  did  those  of  Indra  to  that  of  the
cowpens3;  unlike  Yama,  he  is  not  too  fond  of  wielding  the
rod  of  punishment;  unlike  Varuna,  his  treasure-houses  are
not  guarded  by  thousands  of  pitiless  sea-monsters4;  unlike
Kuvera,  seeking  an  interview  with  him  is  never  fruitless;
unlike  Jina,  the  sight  of  him  is  never  without  solid  result5;

1  Vrisa  may  also  mean  a  demon  slain  by  Krisua,  cf.  Visnu  P.,  V.  xiv.

2  Or  '  Daksa,'  Diva's  father-in-law.

3  Alluding  to  Indra's  name  gotrabhid.

4  Or  '  sword-bearers.'

6  Or  '  his  darcana  (system)  has  arthavdda.'  Should  we  read
arthdpatti,  as  the  Jainas  do  not  accept  this  as  a  pramana  ?


t  CHAPTER II.  65

unlike  the  Moon,  his  glories  do  not  wane.  Wonderful  is  his
royalty,  surpassing  the  gods !  His  liberality  cannot  find
range  enough  in  suppliants,  nor  his  knowledge  in  doctrines
to  be  learned;  his  poetical  skill  finds  words  fail^'as  his
valour  lacks  opportunities  to  exercise  it ;  his  p»ergy  wants
scope  and  his  fame  sighs  for  a  wider  horWn,  his  kindly
nature  seeks  in  vain  more  hearts  to  win,  his  virtues  exhaust
the  powers  of  number,  and  all  the  fine  arts1  are  too  narrow  a
field  for  his  genius.

Under  this  monarch  are  found  only  the  cloths  worn  by
devotees  in  meditation,  and  not  forged  documents2;  the
royal  figures  of  sculptors  and  not  the  vulgar  disputes  with
kings;  only  bees  quarrel  in  collecting  dews  (dues)3;  the  only
feet  ever  cut  off  are  those  in  metre ;  only  chessboards  teach
the  positions  of  the  four  '  members4,'  there  is  no  cutting  off
the  four  principal  limbs  of  condemned  criminals ;  only  snakes
hate  Garuda  the  king  of  birds  (dvija-gunt),  no  one  hates
Brahmans  or  gurus ;  and  the  followers  of  the  Mimamsa  alone
have  to  ponder  problems  in  administering  justice  (adhikarana),
while  they  examine  the  several  adhikaranas  or  'cases  for
discussion'  in  their  system."

[87]  So  approaching,  wearing  the  sacred  thread,  he
uttered  his  good  wishes.

Then  on  the  north  not  far  from  the  royal  palace  the
attendant  on  the  elephant  chanted  this  sweet  couplet  in  the
aparavaktra  metre;

"  O  young  elephant,  dismiss  thy  playful  restlessness,  follow
the  rules  of  good  behaviour,  with  bent  head ;  the  heavy  hook,
crooked  like  a  lion's  claws,  held  aloft,  does  not  spare  thee5."

But  when  the  king  heard  it  and  saw  him,  he  asked,
filling  the  sky  with  his  voice  deep  like  the  roar  of  a  lion  in  a

1  I.e.  the  64  kolas.

2  This  is  a  double-meaning  of  the  phrase  yoga-pattakah  ;  and  so  in
the  other  sentences.

3  Lit.  '  in  collecting  ichor '  or  '  in  giving  and  taking.'

4  Sc.  caturanga  'the  four  members  of  an  army,'  or  Chess. The
phrase  may  also  mean  the  cutting  off  of  the  four  principal  limbs.

r>  The  lines  can  be  also  taken  as  a  tacit  rebuke  to  the  luxurious
Bana.

C.  5


66  THE HARSA-CARITA.

mountain  cave,  "Is  that  Bana?"  The  doorkeeper  replied,
"  As  my  Lord  commands ;  it  is  he."  "  I  will  not  see  him
yet,  as  he  has  not  as  yet  offered  his  tribute  of  respect,"  so
sayin^Ve  turned  the  long  brilliance  of  his  eye,  whose  pupil
trembled  ae  it  inclined  to  the  corner  of  the  eye,  as  if  he  was
shaking  a  curium  variegated  across  with  white  and  dark  silk,
and  said  to  his  favourite,  the  son  of  the  king  of  Malwa,  who
was  sitting  behind, "  He  is  a  thorough  petit-maUre."  But  when
the  other  paused  for  a  moment  in  silence  at  this  unexplained
speech  of  the  king  and  the  courtiers  were  all  dumb,  Bana
replied,  "  Why,  my  lord,  do  you  thus  address  me,  as  if  you
did  not  know  my  character  and  did  not  believe  me,  as  if  you
depended  on  others  for  guidance  and  did  not  understand  the
ways  of  the  world  yourself?  The  nature  and  talk  of  people
will  always  be  wilful  and  various ;  but  the  great  ought  to  see
things  as  they  are.  You  surely  will  not  regard  me  with  pre-
judice as  if  I  had  no  special  claims.  I  am  a  Brahman  born
in  the  family  of  the  Soma-drinking  Vatsyayanas.  Every  cere-
mony was  duly  performed,  as  its  time  came,  beginning  with
the  investiture  with  the  sacred  cord ;  [88]  I  have  thoroughly
studied  the  Veda  with  its  six  angas,  and  as  far  as  I  was  able
I  have  heard  lectures  on  the  castras,  and  from  my  marriage
I  have  been  a  diligent  householder;  what  signs  have  I  of
being  a  petit-maitre1  ?  My  youth  indeed  was  not  without  those
follies  which  are  not  directly  inconsistent  with  either  world, —
so  far  I  will  not  deny;  and  my  heart  on  this  point  will
confess  a  feeling  of  repentance.  But  now-a-days,  when  your
highness, — calm  in  mind  like  Buddha  himself,  one  who
carries  out  all  the  rules  for  the  castes  and  orders  like  Manu,
and  bears  the  rod  of  punishment  as  visibly  as  Yama, —
governs  the  whole  earth  girdled  by  the  seven  oceans,  and
bearing  all  the  continents  as  its  garland, — who  would  venture
without  fear  even  to  act  in  his  own  mind  the  character  of
indecorum,  that  bosom-friend  of  open  profligacy  ?  I  will  not
dwell  on  human  beings, — in  consequence  of  your  power  even
the  bees  drink  honey2  in  fear,  even  the  ruddy-geese  are

1  Or  '  Kama  is  a  petit-maitre,  not  I.'

2  Madhu  means  '  wine '  as  well  as  '  honey.'


4  CHAPTER II.  67

ashamed  of  their  too  great  fondness, — the  very  monkeys  are
alarmed  when  they  play  their  wanton  tricks,  and  even  all  the
destructive  animals  eat  flesh  with  compassion.  Your  highness
will  in  time  know  me  thoroughly  by  yourself,  for  ji^is  the
nature  of  the  wise  that  their  minds  never  act  ^perversely."
Having  said  this,  he  was  silent.  &

The  king  also,  after  simply  saying,  "  So  we  have  heard,"
was  silent ;  but  he  did  not  welcome  him  with  any  signs  of
favour  such  as  friendly  conversation,  inviting  him  to  sit
down,  etc. ;  he  only  revealed  his  inward  pleasure  by  a  gracious
glance  which  seemed  to  bedew  him  with  a  shower  of  am-
brosia ;  and  as  the  setting  sun  was  verging  to  the  west,  [89]
he  dismissed  his  courtiers  and  entered  his  private  apartments.
Baiia  also  went  out  and  retired  to  his  place  of  abode.  The
day  was  now  calm  and  its  fierce  blaze  soft  like  polished  brass,
and  the  sun1,  the  diadem  of  the  western  mountain's  crest,  as
he  left  the  sky,  was  letting  fall  his  rays  like  the  sprays  of  the
Nicula  tree2;  the  deserted  cow-stations  in  the  forests  had
their  patches  of  tender  grass  covered  with  families  of  deer
lazily  ruminating ;  the  river-banks  resounded  plaintively  with
the  cooing  of  the  melancholy  female  ruddy-geese ;  in  the
pleasure-groves  near  the  house  all  the  waterpots  were  being
turned  over  to  fill  the  basins  near  the  trees,  while  the  troops  of
chattering  sparrows  were  sitting  on  the  boughs  which  formed
their  home ;  the  companies  of  hungry  calves  were  drinking
their  mothers'  flowing  udders,  after  they  had  returned  from
wandering  during  the  day;  the  sun's  round  goblet  for  drinking
the  evening  libation  of  the  western  ocean  was  sinking  covered
with  a  red  glow  as  if  it  were  plunged  into  a  stream  of
mineral  veins  in  the  western  mountain ;  the  religious  mendi-
cants were  intent  on  worshipping  the  shrines,  having  washed
their  feet  and  hands  in  the  outpour  of  their  water-pots ;  the
fire,  with  the  sacred  grass  spread  round  it,  was  blazing  up,-
with  its  hands  purified  by  the  sacrificial  vessels ;  the  devout
sacrificers  were  duly  offering  their  libations  ;  the  trees  of  the
groves  stood  with  their  monkeys  resting  from  all  their  tricks,

1  Read  in  the  Bombay  ed.  maricimati.

2  A  tree  with  scarlet  myrtle-like  flowers  in  long  pendent  racemes.

5—2


68  THE HARSA-CARITA.

and  with  the  nests  of  the  crows  crowded  with  their  inmates
fast  asleep1 ;  the  owls,  settled  in  their  huts  in  the  hollow  trunks
of  old  trees,  were  preparing  to  go  out  on  an  expedition;  a
thick&r-host  of  stars  was  indenting  the  expanse  of  the  sky,
like  a  quality  of  water-drops  scattered  at  the  time  of  the
evening  worship  by  the  thousand  hands  of  the  sages;  the
crest  of  night  floated  over  the  sky  like  a  mountaineer- woman's
topknot ;  the  young  avatar  of  evening,  dark  like  Qiva's  neck,
was  devouring  all  that  remained  of  the  daylight ;  the  lines
of  the  lamps  shone  out  as  if  they  were  the  ray-fingers  of
the  sun  which  had  entered  into  the  earthly  fire  at  night2
and  had  come  forth  to  point  in  scorn  at  the  darkness;  the
gates  seemed  to  announce  their  closure  by  the  creaking
of  the  folding  leaves;  [90]  the  children  were  beginning
to  long  to  go  to  sleep,  having  enjoyed  a  good  lying  in  bed
while  listening  to  the  long  stories  of  the  old  nurse ;  the
dreadful  mouth  of  early  night  was  beginning  to  yawn,
with  its  darkness  as  black  as  ink  or  an  old  buffalo,  and
waking  up  'the  good  people3.'  Kama  with  his  twanging
bow-string  was  raining  a  continual  succession  of  arrows  and
stealing  the  intellect  of  all  the  world,  the  ladies  had  their
loins  jingling  with  the  girdles  of  many  woven  threads  tied
by  their  tire-women,  while  romantic  heroines  started  on  their
wanderings  in  the  empty  roads,  following  the  guidance  of
love ;  the  pleasant  chatter  of  the  geese  in  the  ponds  became
rare,  as  it  was  dulled  by  the  tinkling  of  the  anklets  of  the
women,  and  the  notes  of  the  cranes,  as  these  grew  longer  as
they  became  deeper  asleep  4,  melted  the  hearts  of  separated
lovers;  and  a  number  of  lamps  were  scattered  about  like
the  seeds  beginning  to  shoot  of  the  coming  day.

He  reflected  to  himself,  "  King  Harsa  is  very  gracious,
since  he  is  still  fond  of  me,  though  he  is  vexed  at  the
rumours  which  have  naturally  spread  about  my  many  youth-

1  The  Comm.  explains  vidrdna  as  alasa,  cf.  p.  90, 1.  9,  230,  13,  and
235,  16.

2  Taitt.  Brahmana  ii.  1,  2,  9 ;  Raghuv.  iv.  1.

3  The  Yaksas or benevolent goblins  who attend Kuvera are
so  called.  4  Vidrana. *


4  CHAPTER II.  69

ful  follies;  if  I  had  been  really  under  his  displeasure,  he
would  not  have  honoured  me  with  an  audience.  He  wishes
me  to  be  virtuous;  for  lords  teach  proper  behaviour  to
their  dependents  even  without  words  by  granting  +l*&m  an
appropriate  reception.  Shame  on  me,  thus  brigaded  in  my
mind  by  my  own  faults,  and  crushed  by  neglect, — that  I
venture  to  indulge  in  various  fancies  concerning  this  most
excellent  monarch.  Verily  I  will  endeavour  so  to  act  that
he  may  recognise  me  in  time  in  my  real  character."

Having  made  this  resolve,  he  went  out  the  next  day  from
the  royal  camp  and  remained  for  a  while  in  the  houses  of
his  friends  and  relations,  until  the  king  of  himself  learned
his  true  character  and  became  favourably  inclined  to  him.
Then  he  reentered  again  to  visit  the  royal  abode ;  [91]  and
in  the  course  of  a  very  few  days  he  was  received  by  his  gra-
cious majesty  into  the  highest  degree  of  honour  springing
from  kindness,  of  affection,  and  of  confidence,  and  shared
with  him  in  his  wealth,  his  hours  of  unbending,  and  his
state  dignity.

Here  ends  the  second  chapter — entitled  The  Visit  to  the  King — of
the  Harsa-Carita  composed  by  Qri  Bana  Bhatta.


I


CHAPTER  III.


[92]  Raining  affection on  their  country1, thronged  by  many

devoted  people2,
Even  as  fine  seasons  are  kings  born  through  the  merits

of  their  subjects.
To  serve  the  good, to  behold  the  goddess of  glory, to

tread  the  heavens,
Whose  heart  is  not  eager  ? — aye  and  to  hear  the  fortunes

of  heroes.


ON  a  certain  occasion  Bana  left  the  king's  presence  and
went  to  that  Brahman  settlement  to  revisit  his  kin.  It  was
the  beginning  of  autumn,  when  the  clouds  are  thinned,  when
the  cataka  is  distressed,  when  the  kadamba  duck  gives
voice, — the  season  deadly  to  frogs,  robbing  the  peacock  of  its
pride.  Then  the  caravans  of  hamsas  are  welcomed  back3,
the  sky  is  like  a  whetted  sword,  the  sun  brilliant,  the  moon
at  her  clearest,  tender  the  array  of  stars.  The  rainbow  of
Indra  fades,  the  girdling  lightning  is  at  rest,  Visnu's  sleep  is
invaded4;  the  waters  run  hued  like  lapis  lazuli,  the  clouds
rolling  light  as  mists  leave  Indra  unemployed.  Then  closes
the  Nlpa,  the  Kutaja  has  no  flower ;  budless  is  the  plantain,

1  Or  of  the  seasons — 'bringing  moisture  by  their  rain.'

2  Or  '  with  people  rich  in  rice.'

3  The  wild  geese  fly  to  the  hills  when  the  inundations  cover  the
plains  at  the  beginning  of  the  rainy  season,  and  they  return  in  the
autumn.

4  Of.  Wilson,  '  Hindu  Theatre,'  n.  197.


CHAPTER III.  71

i

soft  the  red  lotus,  the  blue  lotus  exudes  honey ;  the  water-
lily  is  a  joy,  the  nights  are  cool  with  the  Cephalika,  the
jasmine  [93]  becomes  fragrant ;  the  ten  regions  are  all
ablaze  with  opening  night  lotuses,  grey  are  the  wir^is  with
Saptacchada  pollen,  lovely  clustering  Bandhujptls  form  an
unexpected  evening  glow.  The  horses  h^ve  undergone
lustration,  the  elephants  are  wild,  the  herds  of  oxen  in-
toxicated with  ferocity.  The  range  of  mud  diminishes,
young  sand  isles  bud  forth  by  the  river  banks.  The  wild
rice  is  parched  to  ripeness,  the  pollen  is  formed  in  the
Priyahgu  blossoms,  the  cucumber's  skin  is  hardened,  and
the  reed  grass1  smiles  with  flowers.

Gratified  beyond  measure  at  the  news  of  Bana's  favour
with  the  king,  his  kinsmen  came  forth  to  meet  him  with
congratulations.  In  due  course  he  experienced  the  great  joy
of  finding  himself  among  his  numerous  relatives,  greeting
some,  greeted  by  others,  kissed  by  some,  kissing  others,
embraced  by  some,  embracing  others,  welcomed  with  a
blessing  by  some,  blessing  others.  The  elders  being  seated,
he  took  a  seat  brought  by  his  excited  attendants.  At  the
receipt  of  the  flower  offering  and  other  hospitable  attentions
his  delight  was  still  further  increased,  and  it  was  with  a
joyous  heart  that  he  made  his  inquiries : — "  Have  you  been
happy  all  this  time  ?  Does  the  sacrifice  proceed  without
hindrance,  gratifying  the  Brahman  groups  by  its  faultless
performance  ?  Do  the  fires  devour  oblations  with  ritual  duly
and  without  flaw  performed  ?  Do  the  boys  pursue  their
studies  at  the  proper  time  ?  Is  there  the  same  unbroken
daily  application  to  the  Veda  ?  The  old  earnestness  in  the
practice  of  the  art  of  sacrifice  ?  Are  there  the  same  classes  in
grammar  exposition,  showing  respect  by  days  not  idly  spent
in  a  series  of  emulous  discussions  ?  Is  there  the  old  logic
society,  [94]  regardless  of  all  other  occupations  ?  The  same
excessive  delight  in  the  Mhnamsa,  dulling  all  pleasure  in
other  authoritative  books  ?  Are  there  the  same  poetic
addresses,  raining  down  an  ambrosia  of  ever-new  phrases  ?"

1  Cf.  Wilson,  « Hindu  Theatre,'  n.  196  n.


72  THE HARSA-CARITA.  f

They  replied: — "Son,  the  affairs  of  us  people  devoted
to  contentment,  whose  intellectual  pastimes  are  always  at
command,  and  whose  only  companion  is  the  sacrificial  fire,
are  of<Jittle  importance,  so  long  as  the  earth  is  happily
protectedSVy  our  monarch's  arm,  swaying  the  whole  world
and  long  as  the  body  of  the  king  of  serpents.  We  are  in
any  case  happy,  but  especially  now  that  you,  having  cast
aside  indolence,  occupy  a  cane  seat  beside  our  sovereign
lord.  All  the  ceremonies  proper  to  Brahmans  are  fully
carried  out  as  far  as  our  powers  and  means  permit  and  in
due  season."

Mid  such  conversations  as  these,  court  news,  remembrances
of  past  boyish  sports,  and  stories  of  the  men  of  old  he  amused
himself  with  them  for  some  time ;  at  length  rising  at  noon,
he  complied  with  the  usual  observances.  After  dinner  his
kinsmen  gathered  round  him.  Soon  the  reader  Sudristi  was
observed  approaching,  wearing  a  pair  of  silken  Paundra
cloths  pale  as  the  outer  corner  of  the  peacock's  eye :  his  sec-
tarial  lines  were  painted  in  gorocana  and  clay  from  a  sacred
pool  blessed  at  the  end  of  his  bath  ;  his  hair  was  made  sleek
with  oil  and  myrobolan,  a  thick  bunch  of  flowers,  kissing  his
short  topknot,  added  a  touch  of  spruceness,  the  glow  of  his
lips  had  been  heightened  by  several  applications  of  betel,
and  a  brilliance  imparted  to  his  eyes  by  the  use  of  a
stick  of  collyrium :  he  had  just  dined  [95]  and  his  dress  was
decorous  and  respectable.  He  seated  himself  on  a  chair  not
far  away,  and,  after  waiting  a  moment,  set  down  in  front  of
him  a  desk  made  of  reed  stalks,  and  laid  upon  it  a  manuscript
from  which  he  had  removed  the  tie,  but  which  still  seemed
encircled  by  the  rays  of  his  nails  like  soft  lotus  fibres.  Next
he  assigned  a  place  to  a  bee  and  a  dove,  which  he  set  down
close  behind  him.  Finally,  having  turned  over  the  inter-
vening leaves  marked  by  the  end  of  the  morning  chapter1,
he  took  a  small  light  block2  of  a  few  leaves,  and  read
with  a  chant  the  Purana  uttered  by  Vayu,  the  rays  of  his
teeth  seeming  to  cleanse  the  ink -stained  syllables,  and  to

1  Which  had  been  already  read.

2  Literally  '  small  door-panel,'  from  the  shape.


o

CHAPTER III.  73

•o

worship  the  volume  with  showers  of  white  flowers,  and  his
honeyed  intonations1,  like  the  anklets  of  a  Sarasvati  brought
near  his  mouth,  charming  the  hearts  of  his  hearers.

While  Sudristi  was  thus  reading  with  a  chant  deMghtful
to  the  ear,  the  minstrel  Sucivana,  who  was  r\$  far  from
him,  accompanied  the  modulation  of  the  charjt  by  reciting  in
a  voice  loud  and  sweet  this  arya,  couplet2: —

'  Itself  sung  by  sages,  itself  widespread3,  embracing  the  world,
cleansing  from  sin,

'Methinks  this  Purana  differs  not  from  the  achievements  of
Harsa !

'Following  the  law  of  heredity4,  free  from  discord,  noised  abroad
by  its  deeds5,  including  all  India  under  its  sway,

'  Issuing  from  a  Crlkantha6,  this  chant  resembles  the  sove-
reignty of  Harsa  !'

[96]  Hearing  this  Bana's  cousins,  who  had  previously  ar-
ranged together,  looked  meaningly  at  each  other,  while  a  smile's
ambrosia  whitened  the  convex  of  their  cheeks7.  There  were
four  of  them  brothers,  Ganapati,  Adhipati,  Tarapati,  and
Qyamala,  and  their  aspect  was,  like  Brahma's  four  faces,
made  pure  by  the  study  of  the  Veda8,  their  looks,  like  the
four  methods9,  endearing  from  the  employment  of  con-
ciliation; men  of  mild  manners,  and  culture,  holding  the

1  The  Comm.  explains  gamakah  as  '  points  of  transition  from  note
to  note ' ;  the  Vacaspatya  Diet,  says  svaro  yo  murchanam  eti  gamakah
sa  ihocyate  |  Kampitah  sphurito  lino  bhinnah  sthavira  eva  ca  \\  ahatan-
dolitau  ceti  gamakah  sapta  klrtitah.  |

2  The  couplet  is  replete  with  puns.

3  Or  '  surpassing  Prithu,'  the  primaeval  king.

4  Or  <  sound  of  the  flute.'

5  Or  'with  clear  rhythm.' Bharatamargabhajanaguru  contains  a
punning  ref.  to  (1)  Bharata,  the  divine  sage  of  music,  (2)  the  Bharata-
varsa,  '  India.'

6  I.e. '  an  honoured  throat ' ; Crlkantha  is  the  name  of  Harsa's
ancestral  kingdom.

7  This  paragraph  is  full  of  untranslateable  puns.

8  Each  Veda  being  promulgated  by  a  special  mouth,  see  Visnu
Pur.  i.  v.

9  For  the  four  Methods  of  Policy  cf.  Manu  7.  109  :  the  compound
may  also  mean  '  with  their  commencement  endearing  from  the  employ-
ment of  conciliation '  as  the  first  Method,  or  '  with  mouths  endearing
from  repeating  the  Sanaa- Veda.'


74  THE  HARSA-CARITA.

status  of  preceptors,  expounders  of  Nyaya,  deep  in  the  study
of  able  works,  receiving  only  good  words1  both  in  the  world
and  in  grammar,  versed  in  the  acts  of  all  monarchs  and  sages
of  old*~inspired  in  mind  by  the  Maha-Bharata,  acquainted
with  all  legends,  great  in  wisdom  and  poetry,  full  of  eagerness
to  know  stories^of  heroes,  thirsting 2  for  no  elixir  but  that  of
listening  to  well-turned  phrases,  foremost  in  years,  speech,
distinction,  asceticism,  the  conference,  the  festival,  in  person,
and  in  sacrifice.

At  a  signal  from  the  others  the  youngest  of  them  with
eyes  long  as  lotus  petals,  Qyamala  by  name,  much  loved  by
Bana  and  disposer  almost  of  his  soul,  respectfully  spoke,
[97]  bathing  the  heavens  with  the  light  of  his  teeth3: — "Friend
Bana,  the  king  of  the  twiceborn4  ravished  his  preceptor's
wife.  Pururavas  was  severed  from  his  beloved  Ayus  through
greed  for  a  Brahman's  gold.  Nahusa,  lusting  after  another's
wife,  became  a  great  snake5.  Yayati  took  upon  himself  to
win  a  Brahman!  woman's  hand  and  fell6.  Sudyumna  actually
became  a  woman7.  [98]  Somaka's  cruelty  in  murdering  Jantu8
is  notorious.  Through  infatuation  for  the  bow  Mandhatri  went
with  his  sons  and  grandsons  to  hell.  Even  while  an  ascetic,
Purukutsa  wrought  a  deed  of  shame  upon  the  daughter  of
Mekala9.  Kuvalayagva,  through  resorting  to  the  world  of
snakes,  avoided  not  the  Naga-girl  A9vatara10.  Prithu,  that  fine

1  I.e.  '  they  are  called  good,'  and  as  grammarians  '  they  receive  only
good  words.'

2  -avitrisiia  =  '  free  from  all  thirst  (= desire)  except  etc.'

3  In  this  speech  Bana  mentions  the  various  stains  on  the  honour  of
all  ancient  heroes, — only  Harsa  is  spotless. Some  of  the  accusations
however  rest  only  on  plays  of  words.

4  The  moon  carried  off  Tara  the  wife  of  Vrihaspati. In  the  next
sentence  Ayus  may  also  be  translated  '  life.'

5  Or  '  rake,'  cf.  Mah.  in.  clxxxi.  6  Mah.  i.  Ixxxi.-lxxxiv.

7  Or  '  follower  of  women,'  cf.  Visuu  Pur.  iv.  i.

8  He  offered  his  only  son  Jantu  in  sacrifice  to  obtain  a  hundred  sons,
Mah.  in.  cxxvii. The  vfordjantu  also  means  'living  creatures.'

9  Narmada. For  a  legend  of  some  connection  between  this  king  and
the  river  Narmada  see  Visnu  Pur.  iv.  iii.

10  This  refers  to  some  legend  of  this  king  having  been  drowned  while
bathing  after  hunting. Bhujahga,  ( snake '  and  '  rake,'  contains  a  pun.


0

CHAPTER III.  75

first  of  men,  did  violence  to  Prithivl.  In  Nriga's  becoming  a
chameleon1  a  confusion  of  castes  was  seen.  By  Saudasa  the
earth  was  not  protected,  but  confounded2.  Nala,  unable
to  control  his  passion  for  dicing3,  [99]  was  overcome  f.-y  Kali.
Samvarana  had  a  weakness  for  Mitra's  daughter4.,x'Da9aratha
came  by  his  death  through  overfondness  JOT  his  beloved
Rama5.  Kartavirya  was  slain6  for  persecuting  cows  and
Brahmans.  Marutta,  though  he  performed  the  Bahusuvarna
sacrifice,  involving  vast  expenditure,  was  not  highly  honoured
by  gods  and  Brahmans7.  Qantanu,  separated  through  in-
fatuation from  his  (loved)  river8,  wept  all  alone  in  the  forest.
[100]  Pandu  in  the  midst  of  the  woods  lost  his  life,  like  a  fish,
in  the  heat  of  passion9.  Yudhisthira,  downcast  through  fear  of
his  guru10,  diverged  from  truth  in  the  battle-front.  Thus  no
reign  has  been  stainless  except  that  of  this  Harsa,  king  of
kings,  sovereign  of  all  continents.  Concerning  him  indeed
many  marvels  are  reported : — In  him  we  see11  how  a  '  Subduer
of  Hosts '  has  set  at  rest  the  moving  partisan  kings 12.  In  him

1  Mah.  xin.  vi. ; there  is  a  pun  here,  as  it  may  also  mean  "  a
confusion  of  colours."

2  Mah.  i.  clxxviii. Naraksita  may  go  with  Saudasa  in  the  sense  of
'  murderer.'

3  Or  '  without  control  over  heart  and  senses.'

4  Mah.  I.  clxxi. By  a  pun  the  author  implies  '  a  weakness  for  his
friend's  daughter.'

5  Or  'for  beloved  women.'  6  By  Jamadagnya.

7  Marutta  wished  to  offer  a  great  sacrifice,  but  Vrihaspati,  the  priest
of  the  gods,  refused  to  officiate,  and  he  had  to  submit  to  many  indig-
nities before  he  could  secure  the  services  of  the  Brahman  Samvartaka
at  Benares,  see  Mah.  xiv.  vi.  vii.

8  For  the  legend  of  Qantanu's  love  for  the  goddess Gaiiga  see
Mah.  I.  xcvi.-xcix. Fa  Ami  beside 'river' may  also  mean 'army.'

9  Mah.  i.  cxxv.

10  Drona, see Mah. vii. cxci. The  truthful  Yudhisthira  is  once
persuaded  to  prevaricate,  when  in  order  to  stop  Drona  in  his  career  of
victory  he  tells  him  that  Asvatthaiuan  has  been  killed,  meaning  an
elephant  of  that  name  and  not  Drona's  sou. Drona  had  said  that  his
pupil  Yudhisthira  would  never  tell  a  lie  even  for  the  sovereignty  of  the
three  worlds.

11  He  proceeds  to  shew  by  a  series  of  plays  on  words  how  Harsa
fulfils  the  feats  of  mythological  heroes.

12  Or  'a  Balajit  (Indra)  has  fixed  fast  the  winged  in  ountains.'


76  THE HARSA-CARITA.  (

a  'Lord  of  People'  has  displayed  forbearance  towards  all
other  rulers1.  In  him  a  '  Best  of  Men '  has  won  fame  by
pounding  a  king  of  Sindh*.  In  him  a  '  Man  of  Might '  has
loosene&,a  king3  from  a  circling  trunk  and  abandoned  an
elephant  VNJn  him  a  'Lord'  has  anointed  a  young  prince5.
[101]  In  him  a  '  Blaster '  has  signalized  his  power  by  laying  low
his  enemy6  at  one  stroke.  In  him  a  '  Man-lion '  has  manifested
his  might  by  cutting  down  his  enemy  with  his  own  hand7.  In
him  a  '  Supreme  Lord '  has  taken  tribute  from  an  inaccessible
land  of  snowy  mountains8.  In  him  a  'World's  Lord'  has
stationed  the  world's  guardians  at  the  entrance  to  the
regions,  and  the  treasure  of  all  the  earth  has  been  distributed
among  the  first  of  the  people9.  These  and  the  like  great
undertakings  do  we  see,  resembling  those  of  the  first  age  of
gold.  Therefore  we  are  eager  to  hear  from  the  beginning
onwards  in  the  order  of  his  lineage  the  fortunes  of  this
auspiciously  named  hero,  rich  in  the  merit  won  by  noble
deeds.  It  is  long  since  we  first  desired  to  hear.  As  the
magnet  attracts  hard  and  sapless  iron,  so  do  the  qualities  of
the  great  even  the  hard  and  tasteless  minds  of  insignificant
people :  much  more  those  of  others  naturally  tasteful  and
susceptible.  Who  could  be  without  curiosity  regarding  his
story,  a  second  Maha-Bharata  ?  Pray  relate  it,  your  highness  !
Let  our  Bhrigu  race  become  even  more  pure  by  the  purificatory

1  Or  'a  Prajapati  has  set  the  earth  upon  the  hoods  of  the  serpent
£esa.'

2  Or 'a Purusottama has obtained Laksml by  churning the
ocean.'

3  The  king's  name  was  Qrikumara  or  Kumara  Gupta. Harsa  rescued
him  when  encircled  in  the  trunk  of  a  mad  elephant,  which  he  then
let  loose  in  the  woods. The  words  may  also  mean  '  a  Bali  has  set  free
the  encircled  mountain  and  loosened  a  great  serpent  (  =  Vasuki).'

4  The  great  elephant's  name  was  Darpacata.

5  Ref.  to  the  god  of  war,  Kumara,  and  to  Harsa's  young  son.

6  There  is  a  pun  on  Arati,  '  king  of  the  demons,'  slain  by  Kumara.

7  There  is  an  involved  ref.  to  the  story  of  the  Dwarf  Avatar  of  Visnu.

8  There  is  a  punning  ref.  to  Diva's  taking  Durga  to  wife.

9  I.e.  the  Brahmans. The  words  also  refer  to  Visnu  apportioning
the  earth  to  the  other  deities  as  its  regents  and  dividing  its  treasures
among  the  early  kings.


v  CHAPTER III.  77

hearing  of  the  deeds  of  the  royal  sage1."  So  much  said  he
became  silent.

"  Sir,"  replied  Bana  with  a  smile,  "  your  remarks  accord
not  with  fitness.  I  consider  the  demands  of  your,  Curiosity
impracticable.  People  absorbed  in  their  owr^objects  are
commonly  void  of  discrimination  between  ihe  possible  and
impossible.  Attracted  by  the  virtues  of  others  and  confused,
I  suppose,  by  passion  for  hearing  stories  of  friends,  the  minds
even  of  the  great  lose  their  discernment.  Consider,  sir !  On
the  one  hand  you  have  a  mere  student's  wit  of  an  atom's  capa-
city, on  the  other  his  majesty's  story  [102]  commensurate  with
the  whole  edifice  of  Brahma2 ;  on  the  one  hand  a  few  sounds
with  circumscribed  letters  and  the  five  modes  of  word-forma-
tion, on  the  other  virtues  beyond  calculation.  Beyond  the
comprehension  of  the  omniscient,  beyond  the  capacity  of  the
god  of  speech,  beyond  the  strength  of  the  goddess  of  eloquence,
how  much  more  is  he  beyond  such  as  I !  What  man  could
possibly  even  in  a  hundred  of  men's  lives  depict  his  story  in
full  ?  If,  however,  you  care  for  a  part,  I  am  ready.  In  what
way  may  a  feeble  tongue  possessed  of  a  few  grains  of  letters
be  of  service  ?  Your  highnesses  are  the  audience,  the
fortunes  of  Harsa  the  theme :  what  more  can  be  said  ?
The  day,  however,  is  near  its  close.  The  adorable  sun,  bright
with  matted  locks  of  ruddy  rays  trailing  behind,  is  sinking
in  the  mass  of  the  evening  glow,  like  the  Bhrigu  Rama  in
the  great  pool  of  all  Kuraksetra's3  blood.  To-morrow  I  will
narrate  the  story."  "  So  be  it,"  they  all  assented,  and
rising  soon  after,  he  proceeded  to  the  Qona  for  his  twilight
worship.

Then,  with  heat  soft  as  a  Malwa  woman's  wine-flushed
cheek,  the  day  folded  itself  up.  Red  exceedingly,  as  if
through  toying  with  the  lotus  beds,  the  sun  kissing  the  dusk
declined :  following  the  track  of  whose  chariot  horses,  the

1  Or — reading  rajarsivam$acaritapravanena — '  hearing  of  the  for-
tunes of  this  royal  sage's  house.'

2  I.e.  the  world.

3  Samantapancaka  = '  the  whole  land  of  the  five  lakes,' — alluding  to
Parana-  Rama's  slaughter  of  the  Ksatriyas.


78  THE HARSA-CARITA.  f

darkness  sped  like  Yarna's  buffalo  along  the  firmament.  In
due  course  the  bark  dresses  hanging  upon  the  hut-roofs
of  the  house  ascetics  were  gathered  in  along  with  their
patch e^of  red  blaze1.  The  heavens  were  gladdened  by  the
smoke  of  tie  Agnihotra  rite,  stealing  away  the  taint  of  the
Kali  age.  Th^  sacrificers  preserved  a  rigid  silence :  the
women  strolled  around  in  the  restlessness  of  recreation  time.
Bundles  of  green  panicum  and  rice  were  being  strewn  about
for  the  sacrificial  cows  after  milking ;  the  Vaitana  fires  were
being  lighted,  the  braided  ascetics,  hairy  with  black  antelope
skins,  were  seated  on  their  clean  mats,  [103]  the  students
mumbled  their  tasks,  the  meditating  yogis  squatted,  in  the
Brahma  posture,  innumerable  scholars  ran  about  with  sounds
of  clapping,  while,  by  leave  of  their  wearied  old  teacher,
a  concourse  of  dolts,  dandies,  and  boys  performed  their
twilight  task2  by  blunderingly  belching  out  the  disconnected
lines  of  their  books.

As  the  evening  was  now  established  in  the  sky  and  the
lamps  called  stars  were  peeping  forth,  Bana  proceeded  to  the
house,  and  sate  down  in  the  same  company  with  his  loved
kinsmen.  The  first  watch  having  been  so  spent,  he  betook
himself  to  a  bed  in  the  house  of  Ganapati.  With  all  the
others,  however,  who  in  spite  of  closed  eyes  obtained  no
sleep,  waiting  like  lotus  beds  for  the  sunrise,  curiosity  made
the  night  wear  but  heavily  away.

Awaking  at  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night,  the  same  bard
as  before  sang  a  couple  of  verses  : —

'Stretching  out  his  foot  behind,  elongating  his  body  upwards

to  full  length  by  bending  his  spine,
'With  bowed  neck  leaning  his  mouth  upon  his  breast,  tossing

his  dust-grey  mane,
'  His projecting  nostrils restlessly moving through desire for

fodder,  the  steed,
'  Now  risen  from  his  bed,  gently  whinnying  paws  the  earth  with

his  hoof.
'  With  bent  back  and  loins  brought  near  his  mouth,  curving  his

neck  sideways,
'His  curls  matted about  his  ears,  the  horse  with  his  hoof  rubs

the  corner  of  his  eye,

1  Cf.  Cakuntala  32.  2  Should  we  read  samdhyamsam  ?


CHAPTER  III.  79

'  Inflamed  by  irritation  in  sleep,  while  small  bits  of  chaff  cling

to  his  moving  eyelashes,

'  And  his  eye  is  uneasily  smitten  1  by  his  tossing  hoar-frost-scat-
tering forehead-tuft.'


[104]  Hearing  this,  Bana  dispelled  his  slumber^and  having
arisen,  washed  his  face,  worshipped  the  hol^  twilight,  took
his  betel  at  sunrise,  and  sought  the  same  place  as  before.
Meanwhile  all  his  kinsmen  collected  and  sat  down  in  a  circle
round  him.  Having  learnt  their  object  through  the  former
discussion,  he  began  to  relate  to  them  the  fortunes  of
Harsha : —

"Listen.  There  is  a  certain  region  named  Qrikantha,
peopled  by  the  good,  a  heaven  of  Indra,  as  it  were,  descended
upon  earth,  where  the  laws  of  caste  usage  are  for  ever  un-
confused  and  the  order  of  the  Krita  age  prevails.  Owing  to
the  number  of  its  land  lotuses  the  ploughs,  whose  shares
uproot  the  fibres  as  they  scar  the  acres,  excite  a  tumult  of
bees,  singing,  as  it  were,  the  excellencies  of  the  good  soil.
Unbroken  lines  of  Pundra  sugar-cane  enclosures  seem
besprinkled  by  the  clouds  that  drink  the  Milky  Sea2.  On
every  side  its  marches  are  packed  with  corn  heaps,  like  ex-
temporized mountains,  distributed  among  the  threshing  floors3.
Throughout  it  is  adorned  with  rice  crops  extending  beyond
their  fields,  where  the  ground  bristles  with  cumin  beds
watered  by  the  pots  of  the  Persian  wheel.  Upon  its  lordly
uplands  are  wheat  crops  variegated  with  Rajamasa  patches
ripe  to  bursting  and  yellow  with  the  split  bean  pods.
Attended  by  singing  herdsmen  mounted  on  buffalos,  pursued
by  sparrows  greedy  for  swarms  of  flies,  gay  with  the  tinkle  of
bells  bound  to  their  necks,  roaming  herds  of  cows  make
white  its  forests,  revelling  on  Vaspachedya*  grass  and  dropping
milk  as  if  the  Milky  Sea  had  been  drunk  by  the  bull  of  Qiva

1  Should  we  read  ahanyamanam  1

2  By  reason  of  their  sweetness,  Comm.

3  But  v.  Comm.  khaladJianadhamabhih  •Jchalapaldih  '  by  the  owners
of  the  threshing  floors.'

4  Lit. 'To  be  cut  with  tears': the  name  denotes  the  excessive
tenderness  of  the  grass  (cf.  Pan.  ii.  1.  33).


80  THE HARSA-CARITA.  {

and  then  divided  up  by  him  into  many  portions  through  fear
of  indigestion.  Like  eyes  let  fall  by  Indra1  when  blinded  by
the  smoke  of  its  divers  burnt  sacrifices,  thousands  of  spotted
antelopes  dot  the  districts.  [105]  Regions,  pale  with  the
dust  of  K&taki  beds  emitting  white  pollen,  gleam  like  the
approaches  of  Q;va's  City  when  made  grey  by  the  sprinklings
of  the  Pramathas.  Pot-herbs  and  plantains  blacken  the  soil
around  the  villages.  At  every  step  are  groups  of  young
camels.  The  exits  are  made  attractive  by  vine-arbours  and
pomegranate  orchards;  arbours,  ablaze  with  Pllu  sprays,
besmeared  with  the  juice  of  hand-pressed  citron  leaves,
having  flower  bunches  formed  of  spontaneously  gathered
saffron  filaments,  and  travellers  blissfully  sleeping  after
drinking  the  juice  of  fresh  fruit,  very  hostels,  as  it  were,  with
wood-nymphs  dispensing  ambrosia :  orchards,  where  the  fruit,
ripe  to  bursting,  seems  coloured  by  the  beaks  of  the  parrots
attacking  the  seeds,  and  the  flowers  are  tinged  by  the  cheeks
of  climbing  monkey  tribes.  There  are  lovely  groves  where
woodrangers  taste  the  cocoa-nut  juice,  where  travelling  folk
plunder  the  date-trees,  monkeys  lick  sweet-scented  date
juice,  and  partridges  tear  the  Aruka  to  pieces  with  their
beaks.  Not  barren  are  the  sylvan  hollows  of  forest  pools,
refuge  of  myriad  travellers,  encircled  with  avenues  of  tall
Arjuna  trees  and  turbid  at  the  edges  through  the  descent  of
herds  of  kine.  Troops  of  camels  and  flocks  of  sheep  form  in
hordes  under  the  guardianship  of  camel  boys.  Wandering
droves  of  mares,  besmeared  with  the  sap  of  crushed  saffron
beds,  where  they  roll  as  if  to  seduce  the  steeds  of  the  sun's
chariot,  visit  the  land,  roaming  like  the  deer  of  the  Maruts2
at  will,  with  snorting  nostrils  and  uplifted  heads  drinking  in
the  air,  as  it  were  to  beget  speed  in  the  young  lying  in  their
wombs.

Seen  like  wild  geese  amid  the  dusk  of  ever-smoking
sacrifices,  the  reeds  are  white  upon  the  earth.  The
land's  vast  resources  sound  through  the  animate  world  like
peacocks  wild  at  the  sound  of  drums  in  concert.  Good

1  The  god  of  the  Thousand  Eyes.

2  The  Maruts  are  borne  in  their  chariots  by  deer.


j  CHAPTER III.  81

men,  in  conduct1  spotless  as  the  moon's  rays,  adorn  it  like
pearls.  [106]  It  has  the  attraction  of  all-welcoming  hosts,
like  huge  trees 'whose  rich  fruit  is  plundered  by  hundreds
of  voyagers.  Great  men  are  its  bulwarks,  clad,  xUke  the
feet  of  the  Himalaya,  with  the  hair  of  deer  bearing  the
fragrance  of  civet.  Graced  is  it  with  ponote  like  Visnu's
navel,  where  fine  birds*  are  seated  upon  lotuses  with  tall
stalks.  Its  regions  are  filled  with  wide  ranches3,  which,  like
the  turmoil  of  the  churning  of  the  Milky  Ocean,  wash  the
lands  with  torrents  of  churned  milk.  Such  is  the  land  of
Qrikantha.

There  did  false  doctrines  fade  away,  as  if  washed  out  by
a  rain  of  tears  due  to  the  smoke  of  the  Triple  Fire.  Sinful
ways  vanished,  as  if  consumed  by  the  burning  of  the  bricks
for  altars.  Demerit  was  scotched,  as  if  cleft  by  the
axes  which  fashioned  sacrificial  posts.  Caste  confusion
ceased,  as  if  cleansed  by  a  rain  from  the  smoke  clouds  of
oblation  fires.  Sin  fled/ as  if  gored  by  the  horns  of  the
many  thousands  of  presented  oxen.  Disasters  were  cut  away,
as  if  excised  by  numerous  axes  chiselling  stone  for  temples.
Calamities  sped  afar,  as  if  routed  by  the  tumult  of
munificent  rites.  Disease  was  dissipated,  as  if  consumed
by  myriad  blazing  sacrificial  kitchens.  Sudden  death  came
not  near,  as  if  alarmed  by  the  sharp  beat  of  holy  drums
struck  at  bulls'  wedlocks4.  [107]  Plagues  departed,  as  if
deafened  by  the  never-ceasing  noise  of  hymns.  Overwhelmed,
as  it  were,  by  the  rule  of  law,  mishap  did  not  arise.

In  such  a  country  is  a  certain  district  called  Sthanviqvara,
blessed,  like  the  world's  first  youth,  with  sweet  fragrance  of
lovely  flowers  in  divers  pleasances ;  bedecked,  like  the  road


1  The  Sanskrit  has  a  play  on  the  double  sense  of  vrittam  =  (1)  conduct,
(2)  round  and  of  gunin  =  (\}  worthy,  (2)  strung  on  a  cord.

2  Dvijottama  =  (1)  best  of  birds,  (2)  Brahma,  (3)  Brahman,  there  being
an  allusion  to  the  story  that  Brahma  reclines  on  a  lotus  springing  from
Visnu's  navel.

3  Beside  '  wide  ranches '  mahaghosa  may  denote  '  mighty  rumblings.'

4  For  the  letting  loose  of  bulls  cf.  Wilson,  H.  D.  I.  p.  20  n.  and  reff.
ap.  B.  and  R.

c.  6


82  THE HARSA-CARITA.

to  Dharma's  gynseceum,  with  many  myriads  of  buffalos1
stained  from  rolling  in  saffron ;  whitened  at  its  borders,  like
a  part  of  the  celestial  realm,  with  yak-tail  flappers  shaken
by  the  winds;  blazing  to  all  the  ends  of  heaven,  like  the
ericampmelit  of  the  Krita  age,  with  thousands  of  flaming  sacri-
ficial fires ;  alk.-ying  all  inauspicious  signs,  like  the  Brahma-
world's  first  descent,  by  the  meditation  of  Brahmarsis  seated
in  the  posture  of  thought ;  thronged,  like  a  rival2  to  the
Northern  Kurus,  with  hundreds  of  great  rivers3  uproarious
with  tumult ;  surpassing  Tripura,  as  it  were,  in  having  all
its  people  unacquainted  with  the  devastating  might  of  Qiva's
arrow ;  bright,  like  a  replica  of  the  moon  world,  with  rows
of  white  houses  plastered  with  stucco4;  like  a  claimant  to
the  name  of  Kuvera's  City,  oppressing  the  world  with  clank-
ing ornaments  of  wine-flushed  beauties.

Sages  entitled  it  a  hermitage,  courtesans  a  lover's  retreat,
actors  a  concert  hall,  foes  the  city  of  death,  seekers  of  wealth
the  land  of  the  philosopher's  stone,  [108]  sons  of  the  sword  the
soil  of  heroes,  aspirants  to  knowledge  the  preceptor's  home,
singers  the  Gandharvas'  city,  scientists  the  Great  Artificer's
temple,  merchants  the  land  of  profit,  bards  the  gaming-
house, good  men  the  gathering  of  the  virtuous,  refugees
the  cage  of  adamant,  libertines  the  Rogue's  Meet,  wayfarers
the  reward  of  their  good  deeds,  treasure-seekers  the  mine,
quietists  the  Buddhist  monastery,  lovers  the  Apsaras'  City,
troubadours  the  festival  congress,  Brahmans  the  stream  of
wealth.

There  are  women  like  elephants  in  gait5,  yet  noble-
minded;  virgins,  yet  attached  to  worldly  pomp6;  dark,  yet
possessed  of  rubies7;  their  faces  are  brilliant  with  white
teeth,  yet  is  their  breath  perfumed  with  the  fragrance  of

1  There  is  a  pun  on  mahisl,  which  means  'a  crowned  queen'  as
well  as  '  a  buffalo.' The  paragraph  contains  many  other  puns.

2  The  Bombay  text  reads  vipaksa  'rival'  for  viksepa  ('threat'?).

3  Or — punningly — '  armies.'

4  Or — punningly — '  ambrosia.'

5  Or — punningly — '  visiting  vile  outcasts.'

6  Or — punningly — '  past  child  bearing.'

7  Or  '  dark  as  night  yet  bright  with  red  lotuses.'


j  CHAPTER III.  83

wine1;  their  bodies  are  like  crystal,  yet  their  limbs  are  soft
as  acacia  flowers ;  they  are  unattainable  by  paramours,  yet
robed  in  bodices2;  wide  are  their  beautiful  hips,  yet  are
they  possessed  of  thin  waists3;  lovely4  are  they,  yet  honeyed
in  speech ;  they  trip  not,  yet  have  a  bright  and  captivating
beauty5 ;  they  are  without  curiosity6,  yet  wed«ed.

[109]  Their  eyes  are  a  natural  mundamdla  wreath,  the
garlands  of  lotus  leaves  are  a  mere  burden.  The  images  of
their  curls  in  the  convex  of  their  cheeks  are  ear-pendants  that
give  no  trouble ;  Tanidla  shoots  are  a  superfluity.  The  talk
of  their  dear  ones  forms  happy  ear- ornaments ;  rings  and  the
like  are  but  affectation.  Their  cheeks  alone  give  a  perpetual
sunshine ;  for  pomp  only  have  they  jewelled  lamps  by  night.
Tribes  of  bees  attracted  by  their  breath  are  their  beauteous
veils,  the  duty  of  noble  women  their  hair-nets.  Their  voices
alone  are  their  sweet  lutes,  harp-playing  is  but  an  irrelevant
accomplishment.  Laughs  are  their  exceeding  fragrant  per-
fumes ;  needless  is  camphor  powder.  The  gleam  of  their  lips
is  a  more  brilliant  cosmetic ;  saffron  unguent  is  a  worthless
blot  upon  their  loveliness.  Their  arms  are  the  softest  of
playfully  smiting  wands ;  purposeless  are  lotus  stalks.  Drops
of  the  sweat  of  youthful  warmth  are  their  artful  bosom  orna-
ments, necklaces  but  a  burden.  Their  laps  are  broad  squares
of  crystal  slabs  for  their  lovers;  jewelled  couches  in  their
mansions  a  needless  means  of  repose.  Bees  clinging  in
greed  for  such  lotuses  are  their  resonant  foot-ornaments ;
useless  are  anklets  of  sapphire.  Domestic  kalahamsas,
summoned  by  the  tinkle  of  their  anklets,  are  the  unfailing
companions  of  their  walks ;  attendants  are  but  the  accidents
of  greatness.

In  that  country  there  arose  a  monarch  named  Puspabhuti,

1  Or  'with  faces  pure  as  Brahmans,  yet  &c.',  wine-drinking  being
forbidden  to  Brahmans.

2  Or — punningly — '  libidinous.'

3  Or— punningly — 'far-famed  as  wives  (Or  'having  brilliant  reti-
nues'),  yet  reckoned  among  the  poor.'

4  Or — punningly — '  tart  in  speech.'

5  Or— punningly — 'they  are  flushed  with  wine.'

6  Or — punningly — '  the  marriage  thread.'

6—2


84  THE HARSA-CARITA.  (

having,  like  Indra  incarnate,  a  bow  supporting  all  castes1,
Meru-like  in  the  attribute  of  a  golden  nature,  Mandara-like
in  attracting  glory",  ocean-like  in  observing  proper  bounds8,
ether-lijf.e  in  the  noising  abroad  of  his  fame4,  moon-like  in
his  receptivity  for  arts5,  Veda-like  in  truthful6  speech,  earth-
like  in  [110]  supporting  all  mankind,  wind-like  in  sweeping
away  the  bad  passions  of  all  kings7,  a  Guru  in  speech,  a
Prithu  in  breast,  a  Vigala8  in  intellect,  a  Janaka  in  asceticism,
a  Suyatra  in  splendour,  a  Sumantra  in  secret  council,  a  Budha
in  station,  an  Arjuna  in  brilliance,  a  Bhisma  with  the  bow,  a
Nisadha  in  frame,  a  Qatrughna  in  battle,  a  Qura  in  vanquish-
ing armies  of  heroes9,  a  Daksa  in  fecundity;  framed  in  fine  as
it  seemed  of  the  compounded  splendour  of  all  the  primaeval
kings.

This  king,  jealous  of  the  saying  "  this  earth  was  made
a  cow  by  Prithu,"  made  the  earth  his  queen10.  Now  the
minds  of  the  great  are  naturally  wilful  and  follow  their  own
lights.  Wherefore  from  boyhood  upwards  he,  untaught  by
any  man,  entertained  a  great,  almost  inborn,  devotion  towards
Qiva  the  adorable,  readily  won  by  faith,  upholder  of  the
universe,  creator  of  creatures,  annihilator  of  existence.  From
all  other  gods  he  turned  away.  Not  even  in  dreams  did
he  take  food  without  worshipping  him  whose  emblem  is  the
bull.  Devoted  to  the  Lord  of  Beings,  the  increate,  ageless,
guru  of  the  immortals,  the  foe  of  the  Demons'  City,  the  lord
of  countless  Hosts,  spouse  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountains,
him  before  whose  feet  all  worlds  bow,  he  thought  the  three
spheres  void  of  all  other  deities.  The  dispositions  of  his
subjects  also  were  conformable  to  their  monarch's  mind.

1  Or  '  of  all  colours.'

2  Or  '  Laksrni.'

3  Or  '  rectitude.'

4  Or  '  manifesting  sound,'  which  is  the  property  of  akapa.
6  Or  '  assemblage  of  digits.'

6  Or  '  increate.'

7  Or 'all  earthly  dust.'

8  The  name  of  a  Bodhisattva,  Comm.

9  Or  perhaps  '  in  conquering  Qurasena.'
10  Mahisl  may  also  mean  '  a  buffalo-cow.'


CHAPTER III.  85

Thu  s : — house  by  house  the  holy  lord  of  the  Cleaving  Axe  was
worshipped :  the  winds  blowing  in  those  pure  districts  were
fragrant  with  much  resin  melted  in  the  sacrificial  pits,  they
dropped  a  rain  of  dew  from  the  milk  used  for  bathing1,  they
whirled  along  petals  of  Bel  twig  chaplets.  [Ill]  K' was  with
gifts  and  presents  customary  in  Qiva's  worship  that  the  king
was  honoured  by  citizens,  dependants,  councillors,  and  neigh-
bouring sovereigns,  whom  his  arm's  might  had  conquered  and
made  tributary.  Thus  : — they  gratified  his  heart  with  huge
Qiva  bulls2  white  as  Kailasa's  peaks,  and  ringed  about  their
horn-tips  with  gold-leaf  creepers;  with  golden  ewers,  with
oblation  vessels,  censers,  flowered  cloths,  lamps  on  jewelled
stands,  Brahmanical  threads,  and  mukhakogas3  inlaid  with
bits  of  precious  gems.  His  queens  also  complied  with  his
desire,  voluntarily  undertaking  the  threshing  of  the  scattered
rice,  deepening  the  glow  of  their  hands  by  staining  the
temples  with  unguents,  occupying  all  their  attendants  in
stringing  flowers.  Now  this  monarch  so  devoted  to  Qiva
heard  men  speak  of  a  certain  great  Qaiva  saint  named  Bhaira-
vacarya, almost  a  second  overthrower  of  Daksa's  sacrifice4,
who  belonged  to  the  Deckan,  but  whose  powers,  made  famous
by  his  excellence  in  multifarious  sciences,  were,  like  his  many
thousands  of  disciples,  spread  abroad  over  the  whole  sphere
of  humanity.  Harmony  in  character  conciliates  good  will  even
towards  unknown  persons;  and  so,  immediately  on  hearing
of  this  saint  Bhairavacarya,  the  king  conceived  towards  him,
though  far  away,  a  deep  affection  as  towards  a  second  Qiva,
and  desired  even  with  longing  by  all  means  to  see  his  face.
One  day,  as  the  failing  light  was  kissing  the  western  hill,
the  portress  approached  the  king,  who  was  in  the  harem,
and  said :  '  Your  majesty,  a  recluse  stands  at  the  door  and
declares  that  he  has  come  by  order  of  Bhairavacarya.'

1  I.e.  bathing  the  god's  image.

2  I.e.  bulls  let  loose  in  honour  of  Qiva.

8  It  is  difficult  to  see  what  this  word  means  :  the  Comm.  says
mukhayuktah  kopd  mukhakofd  ye  lingopari  diyante.  Perhaps  it  is  a
covering  for  wrapping  the  image  of  the  linga.

4  The  real  overthrower  of  Daksa's  sacrifice  was  Qiva  himself.


86  THE HARSA-CARITA.

'  Where  is  he/  the  king  with  profound  respect  inquired,
'  conduct  him  here,  introduce  him.'  The  chamberlain  did  so,
and  soon  the  king  saw  the  ascetic  enter,  a  tall  fellow  [112]  with
arms  extending  to  his  knees,  emaciated  by  a  mendicant's  life
yet  from  *he  stoutness  of  the  bones  in  his  limbs  appearing
fat,  broad  in  £he  head,  his  forehead  undulating  with  deep
wrinkles,  fleshless  hollows  beneath  his  eyes,  which  were
round  and  ruddy  as  wine  drops,  his  nose  slightly  curved,
one  ear  very  pendulous,  the  rows  of  his  prominent  teeth
distinct  as  seeds  in  a  gourd,  his  lip  loose  as  a  horse's,  his  jaw
elongated  by  a  hanging  chin.  A  red  ascetic's  scarf
hanging  from  his  shoulder  formed  his  vaikaksaka  wrap ;
his  upper  robe,  consisting  of  a  tattered  rag  knotted  above  his
heart  and  stained  with  red  chalk,  seemed  to  betoken  the
knotted  passions  of  his  heart,  which  he  had  rent  in  pieces1.
In  one  hand  he  grasped  his  bamboo  stool.  His  left  held
a  yoke  pole  resting  on  his  shoulder,  where  its  motionless
point  of  support  was  tied  with  a  complicated  fastening  of
hair  rope;  to  this  were  attached  his  dirt-scraper  and  sieve
of  bamboo  bark,  his  loin  cloth  at  the  end,  his  alms  bowl
contained  in  its  receptacle,  namely  a  cavity  of  Khar  jura
wood,  his  waterpot  fixed  in  a  triangular  support  made  of
three  sticks,  his  slippers  disposed  outside,  and  a  bundle  of
manuscript  bound  by  a  string  of  stout  cord.

As  he  drew  near,  the  king  welcomed  him  with  the  usual
courtesies,  and  when  he  was  seated,  asked  where  Bhairavacarya
was.  Charmed  with  the  king's  gracious  speech,  the  mendicant
stated  that  he  was  staying  near  the  city  in  a  deserted  house
contiguous  with  the  woods  on  the  Sarasvatl's  banks ;  and  he
further  added  '  His  reverence  honours  your  sovereign  majesty
with  his  blessing.'  With  which  words  he  drew  from  his
pack  and  presented  five  jewelled  silver  lotuses  sent  by
Bhairavacarya,  which  overlaid  the  harem  with  a  glow  of  light.

[113]  The  king,  shrinking,  as  politeness  dictated,  from
slighting  a  friend's  gift,  but  also  unwilling  to  be  guilty  of  too
hasty  acceptance,  paused  a  moment  wavering,  but  at  length,

1  We  have  here  a  pun  on  raga — '  mortal  passion'  and  also  '  red
colour.'


CHAPTER III.  87

I

yielding  to  his  great  nobleness,  he  took  the  gifts  and  said : —
'Our  devotion  to  Qiva,  the  source  of  all  fruitful  results,
produces  fruits  inaccessible  indeed  to  desire,  seeing  that  we
find  such  favour  with  his  reverence,  the  guru  of  the  world.
To-morrow  I  will  see  his  reverence.'  With  these;  words  he
dismissed  the  ascetic,  profoundly  delighted  at  his  news.

The  next  day  he  rose  early,  mounted  his  horse,  and  with
his  white  umbrella  held  above  him,  and  a  pair  of  white
chowries  waving,  proceeded  accompanied  by  only  a  few
nobles  to  see  Bhairavacarya,  like  the  moon  visiting  the  sun.
Having  advanced  some  distance,  he  saw  one  of  Bhairavacarya's
own  disciples  approaching,  and  inquired  where  his  reverence
was  staying.  '  In  a  Bel-tree  plantation,'  the  man  replied,
'  north  of  yon  old  temple  to  the  Mothers.'  So  he  proceeded
to  the  place,  dismounted,  and  entered  the  plantation.

In  the  midst  of  a  great  throng  of  recluses  [116]  he  beheld
Bhairavacarya1,  who  on  seeing  him  at  a  distance  moved  like
the  ocean  seeing  the  moon,  and,  after  his  disciples  had  first
risen,  rose  and  went  forward  to  meet  the  king.  Having
presented  a  gift  of  Bel  fruit,  he  pronounced  a  benediction  in
tones  deep  as  the  roar  of  Ganges'  flood  when  it  was  vomited
forth  from  Jahnu's  ear.

The  king,  whose  eyes,  expanding  their  white  in  pleasure,
seemed  to  repay  the  lotuses  many-fold,  and  whose  brilliant
crest-jewel,  declining  upon  his  forehead,  seemed  to  put  forth
a  third  eye  as  a  manifestation  of  Qiva's  favour2,  repeated  his
salutation  by  a  bow  from  a  distance ;  while  from  his  ear-
wreath,  as  he  bent  down,  bees  flew  away  like  departing  sins
all  uprooted  by  Qiva  worship.  'Approach,  be  seated  here,'  said
the  teacher,  pointing  to  his  own  tiger-skin.  '  Your  reverence,'
the  king  respectfully  replied  in  a  voice  flowing  like  a  river  of
honey  and  rich  with  the  passionate  throbbing  utterance  of
lovesick  hamsas,  'you  ought  not  to  make  me  suffer  for  the
faults  of  other  princes.  It  is  surely  the  bad  manners  of  that
inglorious  glory  which  all  kings  regard,  or  else  the  mean
pride  of  wealth,  which  makes  the  teacher  deal  so  with  me.

1  For  the  description  of  Bhairavacarya  v.  Appendix.

2  Qiva  himself  has  a  third  eye  in  his  forehead.


88  THE HARSA-CAR1TA.

i

I  am  no  object  for  ceremoniousness.  Enough  of  formality:
however  far  removed,  in  will  I  am  your  reverence's  disciple.  A
teacher's  seat  should  be  like  himself  respected,  not  desecrated.
Let  your  highness  only  sit  here.'  So  much  said,  he  seated
himself  o*uxa  rug  brought  by  his  attendants.  Bhairavacarya
likewise,  complying  graciously  with  the  king's  not  to  be
resisted  words,  reoccupied  as  before  his  tiger  skin.  All  being
seated,  the  nobles  and  retinue  and  also  the  students,  he  made
the  customary  offering  of  flowers  and  the  like.  In  due  course
captivated  by  the  king's  charm  of  manner,  [117]  he  began  to
speak,  displaying  teeth  glittering  like  devotion  to  Qiva  made
visible,  and  stainless  as  a  piece  of  moonlight : — '  My  son,
your  exceeding  condescension  of  itself  proclaims  the  majesty
of  your  virtues.  You  are  a  vessel  for  universal  good-fortune.
Your  undertakings  harmonize  with  your  greatness.  I  from
birth  upwards  have  never  had  regard  to  riches.  This  poor
person  of  mine  therefore  is  not  sold  to  wealth,  that  fuel  to
the  fire  of  the  whole  round  of  vice.  My  life  is  sustained  by
alms.  A  few  hard-won  syllables  of  knowledge  are  mine.  I
have  some  small  store  of  merit  acquired  by  humble  service
of  the  holy  Master  Qiva.  Be  pleased  to  appropriate  whatever
of  this  deserves  to  be  of  service.  Like  flowers,  the  minds  of
the  good  can  be  bound  by  very  slight  ties1.  Moreover  good
men  approved  by  the  wise,  like  good  words,  at  the  first
hearing  produce  a  flash  even  in  profound  minds.  I  was  being
borne  away  on  the  foam-white  currents,  as  it  were,  of  a
curiosity  plunging  into  hidden  depths2,  when  your  nobility
drew  me  back  by  its  array  of  virtues3.'

'Your  reverence,'  replied  the  king,  'let  the  bodies  of
the  good  be  ever  so  devoted,  their  owners  alone  can  be  our
friends4.  The  mere  sight  of  you  has  done  me  infinite  good.
By  his  mere  coming  the  teacher  has  placed  me  in  an  enviable
position.'  After  some  time  spent  in  these  and  various
discourses  he  went  home.

1  Or  'virtues.'

•  2  I.e. '  of  knowledge ' : the  metaphor  is  from  a  river  vanishing
underground.

3  Or  '  cords.'

4  I.e.  I  do  not  need  your  services,  but  yourself.


CHAPTER III.  89

Another  day  Bhairavacarya  on  his  part  went  to  see  the
king,  who  placed  himself,  his  harem,  his  court,  and  his
treasury  at  the  ascetic's  disposal.  But  the  sage  with  a  smile
replied : — '  What  have  we  children  of  the  woods  to  do,  your
majesty,  with  power  ?  Wisdom  withers  sure  enough,  like  a
creeper,  under  the  blaze  of  wealth.  The  Brightness  which
shines  in  us  is  like  that  of  the  firefly  [118],  which  scorches  no
other  being.  Only  your  majesty's  peers  are  vessels  for
fortune.'  Then  after  staying  some  time  he  departed.

The  mendicant  as  before  presented  five  silver  lotuses  on
each  occasion.  One  day  however  he  entered  with  something
wrapt  in  white  rags,  and,  having  sat  down  as  before,  after  a
pause  spoke: — 'Most  fortunate  king,  his  reverence  informs  your
majesty  that  he  has  a  Brahman  disciple  named  Patalasvamin,
who  from  the  hand  of  a  Brahmaraksasa1  took  a  great  sword
called  Attahasa.  Pray  accept  of  this,  a  weapon  befitting  your
majesty's  arm.'  With  these  words  he  removed  the  cover-
ing of  rags,  and  drew  forth  from  the  sheath  a  sword,  like
the  autumn  sky  converted  to  a  scimitar,  Kalindl's  stream
solidified  to  rival  Visnu's  sword,  the  Kaliya  snake  in  its  anger
against  Krisna  become  a  weapon,  a  bit  of  the  black  cloud
of  doomsday  fallen  from  the  heaven  foreshadowing  a  rainfall2
to  dissolve  the  world ;  resembling  the  smile  of  Hate*  dis-
playing a  circle  of  great  teeth,  or  Hari's  stout  arm  with  the
fist4  tightly  clenched ;  formed  as  it  were  of  deadly  poison
capable  of  taking  the  lives  of  all  the  world ;  composed  of
steel  heated  by  the  fiery  wrath  of  fate;  in  its  exceeding
sharpness  humming  as  with  rage  at  the  mere  touch  of  the
air;  seeming,  as  its  image  fell  upon  the  jewelled  pavement  of
the  hall,  to  cleave  its  very  self  in  twain :  jagged  in  edge  with
rays,  like  hairs  left  upon  it  after  decapitating  foes ;  mincing
the  day,  whose  light  was  cut  in  pieces  by  an  inlay  of  radiance
flickering  like  the  lightning's  frequent  flash ;  a  side-glance,

1  Manu  xn.  60.

2  There  is  a  punning  reference  to  the  notion  of '  sword-edge  water.'

3  Himsa  wife  of  Adharma.

4  Musti  may  also  mean  '  hilt.' There  is  also  a  reference  to  a  demon
of  that  name.


90  THE HARSA-CARITA.

as  it  were,  of  the  night  of  doom,  death's  ear-lotus,  the  trium-
phal shout  [119]  of  pitilessness,  the  ornament  of  arrogance,
the  family  friend  of  wrath,  the  body  of  pride,  the  comrade  of
valour,  the  child  of  death,  the  path  of  approaching  glory,  the
road  of  departing  fame.

The  king  took  it  in  his  hand,  and  gazing  at  it  for  a
while,  seemed,  as  it  reflected  his  image,  to  be  giving  the
weapon  a  loving  embrace1.  At  length  he  gave  his  message  : —
'  Inform  his  reverence  that,  though  too  practised  in  the  art  of
scorning  the  acceptance  of  other  people's  property,  my  mind
is  unable  in  his  case  to  commit  the  impropriety  .of  going
counter  to  his  words.'  Pleased  at  the  acceptance,  the
mendicant  answered,  '  Fortune  attend  your  majesty :  I  now
take  leave  of  you,'  and  so  departed.  The  king,  naturally
of  a  warlike  humour,  felt  that  by  aid  of  that  sword  the
earth  lay  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.

The  days  passing,  Bhairavacarya  on  one  occasion  made  a
secret  petition  to  the  king  : — '  The  dispositions  of  the  great,
your  majesty,  are  careless  of  their  own  interests,  versed  in
serving  others.  To  such  as  your  majesty  seeing  petitioners
is  a  festival,  solicitation  is  to  confer  a  favour,  the  acceptance
of  gifts  by  others  a  boon.  You  are  the  centre  of  all  men's
wishes.  Wherefore  I  now  address  you  : — Listen ;  by  a  crore  of
muttered  prayers  have  I,  in  garlands,  clothes,  and  unguents
all  of  black  as  enjoined  in  the  Kalpa,  performed  in  the  great
cemetery  the  exordium  of  the  potent  rite  called  Mahakalahri-
daya.  Its  completion  ends  with  the  laying  of  a  goblin.  Without
companions  this  is  unattainable.  You  are  capable  of  achiev-
ing this.  Should  you  undertake  the  task,  there  will  be  three
other  assistants :  one  the  friend  of  my  boyhood,  Tltibha,  the
mendicant  who  visits  your  majesty;  the  second  Patalasvamin  ;
the  third  a  Dravidian  disciple  of  mine,  Karnatala  by  name.
If  you  approve,  let  this  arm  of  yours,  long  as  a  sky  elephant's
trunk,  take  Attahasa  and  for  one  night  become  the  bolt  of
one  quarter  of  the  heavens.'

To  this  speech  the  king,  delighted,  like  one  in  darkness

1  We  might,  however,  translate  "  embracing  it  with  his  hand  which
remained  motionless  as  if  painted."


CHAPTER III.  91

[120]  who  sees  a  light,  at  the  opportunity  of  conferring  a
favour,  replied : — '  I  am  highly  honoured,  your  reverence ;  I
consider  myself  favoured  by  a  charge  to  be  shared  with  your
disciples.'  Overjoyed  at  the  king's  words,  Bhairavacarya
proceeded  to  make  an  appointment ; — '  Your  honour,  armed
with  your  sword,  will  find  us  in  the  empt^  house  near  the
great  cemetery  here  at  this  hour  on  the  approaching  four-
teenth night  of  the  dark  fortnight.'

The  days  having  passed  and  the  fourteenth  having
arrived,  the  king  after  initiation  in  the  Qaiva  ritual  fasted.
The  sword  Attahasa  he  perfumed  and  honoured  with  scents,
frankincense,  and  wreaths.  The  day  came  to  a  close.  A
ruddy  hue  spread  over  the  heaven,  as  though  some  one  had
performed  a  Bali  ceremony  with  sprinkled  blood  to  ensure  the
success  of  the  rite.  The  sun's  rays  hung  down  like  vampires'
tongues  greedy  for  the  scattered  blood.  As  though  out  of
attachment  to  the  king  he  too  wished  to  become  a  warder
of  the  sky,  the  sun  had  occupied  the  western  quarter;
like  goblins  seemed  the  lengthening  shadows  of  the  trees.
The  encircling  darkness  started  up  like  hell-haunting  fiends
to  stay  the  rite.  In  the  firmament  the  starry  clusters
gathered  close,  as  if  to  look  upon  a  horrid  act.  Thus  at  the
dead  of  night,  in  the  soundless  stillness  of  a  sleeping  world,
the  king,  eluding  his  court  and  harem,  a  dagger  gleaming  in
his  left  hand,  Attahasa  drawn  in  his  right,  cloaked  from  head
to  foot  in  the  spreading  radiance  of  his  sword  like  a  dark
blue  silken  robe  assumed  to  escape  detection,  set  forth  alone
from  the  city,  and  reached  the  appointed  spot ;  royal  majesty
attending  unbidden,  [121]  and  success  dragged,  as  it  were,
by  the  hair  behind  in  the  shape  of  braids  of  bees  attracted
by  his  fragrance.

Then  the  three,  Titibha,  Karnatala,  and  Patalasvamin,
came  up  and  announced  themselves,  armed  like  Drona's
son,  Kripa,  and  Kritavarman  in  the  Night  Assault,  bathed,
garlanded,  and  strangely  attired.  About  their  topknots
of  flowers  ranged  murmuring  bees,  which  formed  as  it  were
a  magic  hair  tie.  On  their  heads  they  wore  turban  wraps
with  large  Svastika  knots  fastened  in  the  centre  of  their


92  THE HARSA-CAR1TA.

foreheads,  and  resembling  huge  mystic  seals.  Their  cheeks
were  lit  with  the  light  of  dazzling  earrings  pendant  from  the
cavity  of  one  ear,  while  their  mouths  were  as  it  were  drinking
up  the  gloom  of  night  in  the  wish  to  weaken  its  roaming
goblins.  Jewelled  rings  dangling  from  the  other  ear  anoint-
ed them  with  sparkling  lustre  like  a  spell-charmed  gorocana
pigment.  Brandishing  sharp  swords,  wherein  their  images
were  reflected,  they  seemed  offering  human  sacrifices  to
ensure  the  success  of  the  rite,  while  the  long-continued
flashes  of  the  steel  lined  the  darkness,  as  if  they  would
cleave  the  night  in  three  with  a  view  to  guarding  their
several  quarters  of  the  horizon.  Their  bucklers,  bearing
crescents  and  scintillating  starlike  groups  of  silver  globules,
might  be  compared  to  bits  of  darkness  sheared  by  the  hard
sword's  edge  and  forming  a  second  and  artificial  night.
They  wore  thick  new  cloths  girt  with  golden  chain-belts,
and  daggers  were  fastened  to  their  waists.

'Who  goes  there?'  demanded  the  king  of  the  three.
They  severally  announced  their  names,  and  with  them  at  his
heels  he  proceeded  [122]  to  the  silent,  deep,  and  awful  grave-
yard, where  all  was  in  readiness  and  pounded  resin,  flaming  in
magic  lamps,  filled  the  heavens  with  incense  and  smoke,  as  if
the  night  were  fleeing  away  with  its  gloom  half-burned  by  a
scattered  mustard  charm1.

In  the  centre  of  a  great  circle  of  ashes  white  as  lotus  pollen
Bhairavacarya  could  be  seen,  a  form  all  aglow  with  light,  like
the  autumn,  sun  enveloped  in  a  broad  halo  or  Mandara  in
the  whirlpool  of  the  churned  Ocean  of  Milk.  Seated  on  the
breast  of  a  corpse  which  lay  supine  anointed  with  red  sandal
and  arrayed  in  garlands,  clothes  and  ornaments  all  of  red,
himself  with  a  black  turban,  black  unguents,  black  amulet,
and  black  garments,  he  had  begun  a  fire  rite  in  the  corpse's
mouth,  where  a  flame  was  burning.  As  he  offered  some
black  sesamum  seeds,  it  seemed  as  though  in  eagerness  to
become  a  Vidyadhara  he  were  annihilating  the  atoms  of
defilement  which  caused  his  mortal  condition.  The  gleam  of

1  The  luminous  smoke  is  compared  to  the  half-burnt  night  fleeing
away  into  the  sky.


CHAPTER III.  93

his  nails  falling  on  the  oblation  appeared  to  cleanse  the
flames  of  the  pollution  due  to  contact  with  the  dead  man's
mouth,  while  his  smoke-inflamed  eye  flung  as  it  were  an
offering  of  blood  upon  the  devouring  blaze.  His  mouth,  show-
ing the  tips  of  white  teeth  as  he  slightly  opened  his  lips  in  his
muttering,  seemed  to  display  in  bodily  shajjg  the  lines  of  the
syllables  of  his  charms.  The  lamps  near  him  were  imaged
in  the  sweat  of  his  sacrificial  exertions,  as  if  he  were  burning
his  whole  body  to  ensure  success.  From  his  shoulder  hung
a  Brahmanical  thread  of  many  strands,  encircling  his  form, '
like  a  multiple  Vidyaraja  charm.

Having  approached,  the  king  saluted,  and  being  welcomed
set  about  his  own  task.  [123]  Patalasvamin  chose  Indra's
quarter,  Karnatala  that  of  Kuvera,  the  mendicant  that  of
Pracetas,  while  the  king  himself  adorned  that  marked  by
Tri9ariku's  light1.

The  warders  of  the  regions  having  taken  their  stations,
Bhairavacarya  confidently  entered  the  cage  composed  of
their  arms,  and  proceeded  with  his  awful  work.  The
opposing  fiends  having  after  fruitless  resistance  and  much
uproar  been  allayed,  suddenly  at  the  very  instant  of  midnight
the  earth  was  rent  open  to  the  north  and  not  far  from  the
magic  circle,  displaying  a  fissure  like  the  jaws  of  the  mighty
boar  of  doomsday.  Forthwith,  like  a  copper  post  torn  up  by
the  sky  elephants,  there  ascended  out  of  the  chasm  a  spirit
dark  as  a  blue  lotus,  with  shoulders  thick  and  square  as  the
Great  Boar's,  a  fiend,  as  it  were,  risen  from  the  womb  of  earth
or  the  demon  Bali  springing  up  from  the  cloven  hell.  The
gleam  of&Mdlati  wreath  amid  locks  of  crisp  curled  hair,  sleek,
dark  and  growing  thickly,  produced  the  effect  of  a  sapphire
temple  crowned  with  the  blaze  of  a  jewelled  lamp.  A
throbbing  voice  and  an  eye  naturally  red  suggested  one
drunk  with  the  vapours  of  youth.  A  necklace  tossed  about
his  throat.  Ever  and  anon  he  smeared  shoulders  comparable
to  the  sky  elephants'  frontal  globe  with  clay  crushed  in  his
clenched  hand.  Irregularly  bespotted  with  moist  sandal

1  Tri9anku  is  suspended  in  the  southern  heavens,  see  Ramay.  I.  60.


94  THE HARSA-CARITA. •  ,

paste,  he  resembled  a  tract  of  autumn  sky  speckled  with  bits
of  very  white  cloud.  Above  a  petticoat  white  as  the  Ketakl
petal  his  flank  was  drawn  tight  by  a  scarf,  the  long  white
cotton  fringe  of  which,  carelessly  left  loose,  hung  to  the
ground  just  as  if  it  were  the  serpent  Qesa  supporting  him
from  behind.  Hjs  stout  thick  thighs  [124]  planted  slow  paces
as  if  he  feared  to  break  through  the  earth :  yet  they  could
scarce  support  his  mountain-like  form  with  its  burden  of
overmastering  pride.  Again  and  again  he  doubled  his  left
arm  athwart  his  breast,  raised  the  right  cross- wise,  bent  his
leg,  and  furiously  slapped  his  arms1  with  such  a  noise  as
though  he  would  raise  a  storm  to  hinder  the  rite  and  maim
the  animate  world  of  one  sense.  '  Ho,  my  would-be  para-
mour of  Vidyadharis,'  he  sneeringly  shouted  in  tones  awful
as  the  echo  of  Narasimha's  roar,  '  whence  this  conceit  of
knowledge  or  blind  reliance  on  your  helpers,  that  without
making  an  oblation  to  me  you  aspire — fool  that  you  are — to
success  ?  What  madness  is  this  ?  Has  no  mention  come  to
your  ears  after  all  this  time  of  me,  the  Naga  Qrikantha,  after
whom  this  region,  whereof  I  am  lord,  is  named  ?  Against
my  will  what  power  have  the  very  planets  to  move  in  the
heavens  ?  What  a  miserable  unkingly  king  is  this,  who
accepts  favours  from  such  Qaiva  outcasts  as  you !  Receive
now  along  with  this  wretched  monarch  the  reward  of  your
misconduct.'  When  he  had  said  thus  much,  the  three,
Titibha  and  the  rest,  rushed  upon  him ;  but  with  furious
buffets  he  dashed  them,  armour,  swords  and  all,  to  the
ground.

Never  before  had  the  king  heard  himself  reviled.  His
limbs,  albeit  unwounded,  poured  forth  a  stream  of  furious
sweat,  water  of  the  sword-edge,  as  it  were,  drunk  in  many  a
battle.  His  hair  bristled  like  an  array  of  arrow  heads  shot
out  in  hundreds  to  lighten  him  for  the  fray.  Even  Attahasa,
mirroring  the  constellations,  seemed  to  proclaim  his  un-
bending spirit  by  a  contemptuous  smile  showing  clearly  a
row  of  white  teeth.  As  his  hands  moved  restlessly  in  the

1  An  Indian  challenge  to  combat.


CHAPTER III.  95

act  of  tightening  his  girdle,  their  horizon-like  gleam  of  nails
[1 25]  seemed  a  demon-quelling  charm  circle,  blocking  the  wide
heaven  to  guard  against  escape.  Scornfully  he  cried,  'Ho,
serpent,  crow,  are  you  not  ashamed  to  demand  an  oblation  in
the  presence  of  such  a  royal  flamingo  as  I  ?  But  what  avail
these  taunts  ?  Valour  dwells  in  the  arm,  £ot  in  the  voice.
Take  to  your  weapon.  Not  thus  are  you  my  match.  My
arm  is  untaught  to  smite  the  weaponless.'  With  still  greater
disdain  the  Naga  replied : — '  Approach,  what  care  I  for
swords  ?  With  my  two  arms  will  I  crush  your  pride,'  and  so
slapped  his  arms.  Ashamed  to  vanquish  a  weaponless  foe
with  weapons,  the  king,  flinging  away  sword  and  buckler,  girt
up  his  loins  outside  his  cloak  for  a  fight  with  fists.  So  they
fought  till  their  furious  slapping  had  bedewed  them  with  a  rain
of  blood  from  lacerated  arms,  which  falling  like  stone  pillars
almost  converted  the  whole  world  into  sound.  Soon  the  king
smote  the  serpent  to  the  earth,  and  having  seized  him  by  the
hair,  had  drawn  Attahasa  to  strike  off  his  head,  when  amid  the
wreath  on  his  shoulder  he  detected  the  sacred  thread.  For-
bearing his  weapon,  '  Villain,'  he  cried,  '  this  then  is  the  seed
of  your  career  of  ill-doing,  this  is  whence  you  proceed  without
fear  in  your  wicked  courses,'  and  so  let  him  go.  Straightway
as  in  a  moment  he  beheld  a  great  brightness ;  a  perfume  as
of  lotus  beds  opening  in  autumn  smote  upon  his  nostrils;
instantaneously  he  heard  a  tinkle  of  anklets,  and  guided  his
glance  in  pursuit  of  the  sound.

In  the  centre  of  the  sword  resting  in  his  hand,  like  a
lightning  flash  in  the  womb  of  a  black  cloud,  he  beheld  a
woman  whose  radiance  seemed  to  swallow  up  the  night.
Her  hands  were  like  red  lotuses.  Like  seaside  coral  beds
clinging  to  her  feet  trailed  the  web-like  rosy  glow  of  her  soft
toes.  [126]  Disguised  as  her  white  toe-nails  she  bore  along
the  splintered  moon-disk,  as  if  for  fear  her  lotus  hands  should
close1.  Clasped  anklets  lay  about  her  ankles,  as  though  in
her  coming  she  had  burst  from  a  prison  of  thick  linked
chains.  Out  of  a  dazzling  white  silken  robe,  embroidered

1  The  night-lotus  would  close  in  the  absence  of  the  moon.


06  THE HARSA-CARITA.

with  hundreds  of  divers  flowers  and  birds,  and  gently  rippled
by  the  motion  of  the  breeze,  her  form  rose  up  as  from  an
ocean's  waters.  The  tribali  clasped  her  waist  like  the  three-
fold Ganges  pleased  at  her  birth  from  the  deep1.  Her  round
bust  with  its  prominent  bosoms  was  like  the  sky  displaying
the  sky- elephants'  frontal  bones,  and  across  her  bosom,  like
the  dew  on  the  trunk  of  Airavata  in  his  time  of  rut,  lay  a
necklace  with  lustrous  pearls  like  stars  of  autumn.  Swayed
like  white  chowries  by  her  soft,  soft  breathing,  the  light  of
the  necklace  seemed  to  fan  her.  Her  hands  bore  a  naturally
rosy  tint,  as  if  they  had  caught  a  vermilion  tinge  from  slap-
ping the  forehead  of  a  rut-blinded  scent  elephant2.  Her
flashing  ear-ring  shone  like  the  second3  half  of  Hara's  crest
the  moon,  curved  to  a  circle.  Clinging  about  her  ear  was  an
ornament  of  Apoka  shoots  like  a  cluster  of  the  Kaustubha's
brightness.  Her  forehead  lacked  not  a  great  sectarial  line
dark  as  elephant's  ichor,  like  an  unseen  umbrella's  circular
shadow4.  Moon- white  sandal,  like  the  glory  of  the  kings
of  old,  brightened  her  form  from  hair-parting  to  feet.
Flowery  wreaths,  dangling  from  her  throat  and  kissing  the
ground,  flowed  over  her  like  rivers  finding  their  repose  in
ocean5.  Limbs  soft  as  lotus  fibres  voicelessly  proclaimed  her
lotus  birth.

'  Who  art  thou,  lady  ? '  cried  the  king  unappalled,  '  and
wherefore  hast  thou  come  within  my  sight  ? '  '  Hero,'  she  said,
almost  overpowering  him  with  an  unabashed  ness  at  variance
with  her  sex, '  know  me  to  be  that  deer  whose  pleasure  haunt
is  Narayana's  breast,  the  banner-pennon  of  Prithu,  Bharata,
Bhagiratha  and  the  other  kings  of  old,  [127]  the  gay  doll  upon
the  victory  columns  of  heroes'  arms,  the  flamingo  wantoning

1  Laksm!  rose  from  the  deep  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean.

2  Laksml's  elephant  is  referred  to. The  gandhadvipa  is  a  particularly
powerful  kind  of  elephant.

3  Civa  wears  a  crescent  moon  —this  was  the  second  or  absent  half.

4  The  umbrella  being  a  sign  of  sovereignty. Mada  is  described  as
dark  like  Tamala  shoots  in  Kadambar!  p.  243  I. ;  tamala-pallava-rasa-
fydmena  madajalena.

6  I.e.  as  if  they  were  the  rivers  which  had  flowed  into  the  ocean  from
which  she  had  risen  at  its  churning.


CHAPTER III.  97

with  yearning  to  sport  upon  the  waves  of  battle's  bloodshed
stream,  the  peacock  of  the  thickets  of  kings'  white  umbrellas,
even  Qri,  the  lioness  whose  caprice  is  to  roam  in  the  forest  of
sharp  scimitar  edges,  the  lotus  bed  of  the  pools  of  sword-edge
water.  I  am  ravished  by  this  thy  valorous  spirit.  Crave  of
me  a  boon  :  I  will  give  thee  thy  heart's  desirg,'

Heroes  are  unwearied  in  serving  others.  So  the  king
bowed  to  her,  and  heedless  of  his  own  advantage,  besought
the  success  of  Bhairavacarya.  Highly  gratified,  the  goddess,
anointing  the  king  with  her  wide-open  eyes  like  a  milk  ocean
thrown  over  him,  replied  '  So  be  it/  and  added,  '  Because  of
this  magnanimity  of  thine  and  because  of  thy  superlative
devotion  to  the  holy  Lord  Qiva  thou,  like  a  third  added  to
the  Sun  and  Moon,  shalt  be  the  founder  of  a  mighty  line  of
kings  persisting  unbroken  upon  earth,  daily  increasing  in
greatness,  full  of  matchless  heroes  elate  with  purity,  high-
fortune,  truth,  munificence,  and  fortitude.  Wherein  shall
arise  an  emperor  named  Harsa,  governor  like  Hari9candra
of  all  the  continents,  world-conquering  like  a  second  Man-
dhatri,  whose  chowrie  this  hand,  spontaneously  abandoning
the  lotus,  shall  grasp.'  So  saying  she  vanished.

The  heart  of  the  king  was  beyond  measure  gratified  to
hear  this.  Bhairavacarya  himself,  having  by  the  words  of
the  goddess  and  the  full  performance  of  the  rite  instantly
acquired  the  hair-lock,  diadem,  earring,  necklace,  armlet,
girdle,  hammer,  and  sword,  became  a  Vidyadhara.  Address-
ing the  king  he  said : — '  The  wishes,  O  king,  of  indolent
feeble-minded  people  embrace  not  remote  objects :  but  the
favours  of  the  good  are  of  their  very  nature  far-reaching.
[128]  To  bestow  this  boon,  unimagined  even  in  dreams,  who
except  your  majesty  had  power  ?  A  man  of  light  qualities  is
lifted  up  like  a  scale  by  the  acquisition  of  a  mere  particle  of
success.  Having  been  served  by  your  virtues  and  having  at-
tained my  purpose  through  none  other  than  you,  I  am  inspired
by  the  immodesty  of  an  infatuated  heart.  And  so  it  is  my
wish  to  win  remembrance  by  endeavouring  in  whatever  way
I  can  to  afford  you  some  grain  of  assistance.'  The  stout
hearts  of  the  wise,  however,  are  proof  against  reciprocation  of
C.  7


98  THE HARSA-CARITA.

favours,  and  the  king  therefore  refused,  saying,  '  By  your
reverence's  success  my  task  is  finished ;  let  your  reverence
proceed  to  a  station  according  with  your  wish.'

After  this  reply  from  the  king,  Bhairavacarya,  now  on
the  point  of  departure,  warmly  embraced  Titibha  and  the
others,  and  regarding  the  king  with  a  tearful  eye  like  a
blue  lotus-bed  streaming  with  frosty  dew,  "  Friend,"  he  re-
sumed, "  should  I  say  '  I  am  going,'  that  were  a  poor  token  of
affection1 ;  if  I  say  '  my  life  is  yours,'  'tis  superfluous  ;  '  make
this  poor  body  your  own'  would  imply  the  creation  of  an  un-
real distinction ;  '  you  have  purchased  me  bit  by  bit,'  the  bits
fall  short  of  your  kindnesses ;  '  you  are  my  kinsman '  would
place  a  distance  between  us ;  '  my  heart  remains  with  you '
would  want  evidence  ;  '  a  success  which  severs  us  is  torment '
would  not  find  credence;  'your  kindness  was  unmerited'  a
mere  reiteration ;  '  keep  me  in  remembrance '  a  command.
At  least  in  all  talk  of  ingrates  and  all  narrations  of  ignoble
people  let  me  be  remembered  as  one  remorselessly  bent  on
his  own  advantage."  So  speaking,  he  mounted  to  the  sky,
lashing  the  constellations  with  pearls  that  started  from  a
necklace  burst  in  his  speed,  and  passed  in  an  orbit  cleaving
the  planet  clusters  to  a  station  fitting  his  good-fortune.
Qrlkantha  also  spoke ;  '  Deign,  O  king,  whenever  necessary  to
favour  with  your  commands  one  bought  by  your  valour  and
taught  discretion,'  [129]  and  so  with  the  consent  of  the  king
entered  again  the  same  fissure  in  the  earth.

By  this  the  night  was  nearly  spent.  Fragrant  with  the
breath  of  opening  day-lotus  beds,  frosty  as  if  with  sweat  from
the  sport  of  ravishing  shawls  from  the  bosoms  of  forest
nymphs,  the  sylvan  breeze  had  begun  to  blow,  attracting  the
bees  by  its  perfume,  lulling  the  night-lotuses  to  sleep,  chilled

1  '?JT  and  fT  are  roots  of  ill-omen,  which  must  not  be  used  in
conversation.  When  Macaulay  talks  of  the  Lucknow  people  singing
songs  in  Hastings'  honour

'  Hdthl  par  hauda  ghore  par  zin
'  Jaldl  jdo  jaldl  jdo Warren  Ifusti/t.'
1  Howdah  on  elephant,  saddle  on  horse
'Ride  on  in  triumph  W.  H.'
they  meant  '•  Go  to  hell,  go  to  hell  quickly,  W.  H."


CHAPTER III.  99

by  the  night's  ending,  and  interspersed  with  rime.  Scorched
as  it  were  by  the  sighs  of  ruddy-geese  in  the  anguish
of  their  severance,  the  night  subsided  into  the  western
ocean.  The  lotus  beds  peeped  forth,  as  if  curious  to  view
the  bodily  presence  of  Laksmi.  As  the  birds  awoke,  the
forest,  quivering  in  all  its  creepers  beneath  £he  soft  breeze,
rained  down  showers  of  hoar-frost,  like  bunches  of  flowers.  With
their  noisy  imprisoned  bees  the  closing  night-lotuses  hummed
like  auspicious  horns  to  awake  the  beauty  of  the  day-lotuses.
The  stars,  buds  of  the  creepers  of  night,  clustered  together  in
the  western  sky,  as  if  wafted  on  by  the  panting  breath  of
the  rising  sun's  chariot-horses.  Occupying  Mandara's  peak,
the  Seven  Sages  became  grey,  as  if  coated  with  pollen  from
thickets  of  heavenly  creepers  rocked  by  the  gentle  breeze.
The  Starry  Deer  as  it  sank  seemed  like  a  fallen  goad1  of  the
gods'  elephant.

Taking  Titibha  and  the  others,  the  king,  whose  limbs
were  befouled  by  the  give  and  take  of  battle  with  the  demon,
bathed  in  the  pure  water  of  a  sylvan  pool.  He  then  entered
the  city,  and  next  day  gratified  all  three  with  unguents,  food,
and  clothing  immediately  after  his  own  person2.

After  the  lapse  of  a  few  days  the  mendicant,  despite  the
king's  remonstrances,  departed  to  the  woods.  Patalasvamin
[130]  and  Karnatala,  men  of  a  warlike  spirit,  remained  in  the
king's  service.  Elevated  to  a  fortune  beyond  their  wildest
dreams,  drawing  their  swords  in  the  midst  of  the  royal  guard,
occupying  the  front  rank  in  the  battle,  now  and  then  on  occa-
sion of  story-telling  appointed  to  narrate  various  actions  of
Bhairavacarya  and  incidents  of  their  own  childhood3,  they
arrived  at  old  age  by  the  king's  side.

Here  ends  the  third  Chapter — entitled  The  Exposition  of  The  King's
Ancestry — of  the  Harsa-Carita  composed  by  Cri  Bana  Bhatta.

1  A  reference  to  the  shape  of  the  constellation,  i.e.  Capricorn,  Comm.

2  According  to  the  Comm.  he  first  makes  the  ascetic's  friends  bathe
and  then  bathes  himself.

3  Caicaeavntttintah  seems  to  be  here  used  much  in  the  same  way  as
the  Welsh  Mabinogion,  which  originally  meant  '  amusements  of  youth '
but  came  to  be  the  name  for  the  collection  of  Welsh  heroic  legends.

7—2


CHAPTER  IV.

[131]  No  alliance1  wish  they  even  in  dreams,  they  make  no  joining

of  hands2;
By  the  sole  power  of  their  name  do  the  great  become  liege

lords  of  the  wedded  earth  !
Like  thetusk  set  at  a  wide  interval3  in  the  capacious  month

of  the  elephant-headed  god,  so  in  a  royal  house  though

populous
There  arises  but  one  like  to  Prithu,  causing  all  monarchs 4  to

shake  !

From5  this  Puspabhuti  there  issued  a  line  of  kings,  as
from  Visnu  a  lotus  whose  calix  the  best  of  the  twice-born
voluntarily  occupied6,  as  from  the  ocean  a  treasure  of  jewels
attended  by  Laksmi7,  as  from  the  orient  mount  a  troop  of
planets  including  Jupiter,  Mercury,  Venus,  the  Moon,  the  Sun,
and  Mars8,  as  from  the  might  of  Sagara  a  sea  capable  of
supporting  a  commerce  of  greatness,  as  from  Qura  a  Hari
race  boasting  a  Durjaya  and  a  Bala9.  In  which  line  were

1  Or — punningly — '  strategy.'

2  Or  '  grasping  of  taxes.'

3  There  is  a  pun  on  pratimd  =  (l)  likeness,  (2)  the  space  between
the  tusks  in  an  elephant's  mouth. Ganesa  has  only  one  tusk.

4  Or  'mountains.'

5  Only  a  smalL  '}art  of  the  puns  in  this  paragraph  is  susceptible  of
trapj^iojii. '  The  w>rds  for  Visnu  ('lotus-eyed'),  ocean  ('collection  of
'jewels'),  Orient  Mou\it  ('source  of  greatness'),  might  of  Sagara  ('one
mighty  as  Sagara'),  Uiira  ('hero')  may  all  apply  to  Puspabhuti,  the
others  similarly  to  the  race.

0  Or  '  whose  treasures  were  grasped  at  will  by  the  best  of  the  twice-
born  (  =  Brahmans).'  Brahma  is  the  best  of  the  twice-born.

7  Or  'attended  by  splendour.'

8  Or  '  including  teachers,  wise  men,  poets,  artists,  men  of  might,  and
kings.'

9  Or  '  boasting  invincible  might.' Durjaya  and  Bala  are  Visnu  and
Bala-Rama.


CHAPTER IV.  101

•

born  kings  free  from  the  stain  of  violating  Dharma,  [132]  as
living  beings  came  from  the  commencement  of  the  golden  age ;
dominating  the  world  by  their  splendour,  like  the  rays  from
the  source  of  light ;  thronging  the  regions  with  their  armies
in  array,  like  the  hills  sprung  from  Brahma ;  strong  to
support  the  world,  like  the  sky  elephants  borr^from  Brahma's
hand ;  rising  in  might  to  guard1  the  oceans,  like  clouds  from
the  season  of  rain ;  bestowing  the  fruits  of  desire,  like  trees
of  Paradise  from  the  Heavenly  Garden;  embracing  all  beings,
like  the  variations  of  existence  sprung  from  Visnu.

The  line  so  proceeding,  there  was  born  in  course  of  time
a  king  of  kings  named  Prabhakaravardhana2,  famed  far  and
wide  under  a  second  name  Pratapa9ila,  a  lion  to  the  Huna
deer,  a  burning  fever  to  the  king  of  the  Indus  land,  a  troubler
of  the  sleep  of  Gujarat,  a  bilious  plague  to  that  scent-elephant
the  lord  of  Gandhara,  a  looter  to  the  lawlessness  of  the  Lats,
an  axe  to  the  creeper  of  Malwa's  glory.  From  his  members
of  royalty  the  coronation  water  purged  no  foulness  but  filthy
lucre3.  Even  an  enemy's  life,  that  coward's  darling,  when
kept  like  a  straw  in  the  mouth  of  battle4,  filled  him  with
shame.  It  was  torture  to  him  to  be  accompanied  in  battle
even  by  his  image  in  the  sword-blade  which  his  hand  bore,
torture  that  even  his  bow  bent  to  the  foe  in  conflict.  A
proud  man,  he  was  vexed  by  his  proud  ambitions.  Steadfast
he  kept  his  royal  majesty,  as  if  pinned  by  the  implanted5
arrow-points  of  countless  foes.  [133]  Levelling  on  every  side
hills  and  hollows,  clumps  and  forests,  trees  and  grass,  thickets
and  anthills,  mountains  and  caves,  the  broad  paths  of  his
armies  seemed  to  portion  out  the  earth  for  the  support  of
his  dependants.  By  deterring  all  enemies  his  own  prowess

1  Or 'drink.'

2  Ou  the  Sonpat  seal  (Corpus  Inscr.  Ind. in.  pp. 231-2) Harsa
mentions  his  father  under  this  name.

3  Meaning  that  at  his  coronation  his  ministers  distributed  money.

4  To  carry  a  straw  in  the  mouth  was  a  sign  of  surrender :  cf.
»  Acworth's  '  Maratha  Ballads,'  p.  43  :

'  And  'twixt  the  teeth  a  straw  is  fit
For  curs  who  arm  but  to  submit.'
6  There  is  a  play  on  antaryata,  which,  taken  with  'foes,'  means  'dead.'


102  THE  HAR.<?A-CARITA.

annoyed  him  as  much  as  that  of  others,  leaving  his  passion
for  battle  ungratified.  In  the  seraglios  of  slain  rivals  his
valour  was,  as  it  were,  materialized  in  the  form  of  the  five
elements,  fire  in  the  women's  hearts,  water  in  the  hollows  of
their  eyes,  wind  in  their  sighs,  earth  upon  their  forms,  ether
in  the  vacant^  solitude1.  As  in  a  mirror,  his  glory  was
matched  in  those  gems  among  ministers  who  attended  him-.
Once  more : — his  greatness  was  made  to  glow  by  the  fire  of
his  valour,  his  success  was  digested  by  the  heat  of  his  courage,
the  growth  of  his  race  was  fostered  like  a  bamboo  by  the
water  of  the  sword's  edge,  his  valorous  deeds  were  proclaimed
by  the  mouths  of  the  wounds  which  his  steel  dealt,  his
grasping  of  tribute3  by  the  callosity  of  the  bow  string.  A
furious  onslaught  he  counted  a  present,  war  a  favour,  the
approach  of  battle  a  festival,  a  foe  the  discovery  of  a  treasure,  a
host  of  enemies  the  acme  of  prosperity,  a  challenge  to  conflict
a  boon,  a  sudden  onset  an  ovation,  the  fall  of  sword  strokes  a
shower  of  wealth.  Beneath  his  rule  the  golden  age  seemed
to  bud  forth  in  close  packed  lines  of  sacrificial  posts,  the  evil
time  to  flee  in  the  smoke  of  sacrifices  meandering  over  the
sky,  heaven  to  descend  in  stuccoed4  shrines,  Dharma  to
blossom  in  white  pennons  waving  over  temple  minarets,  the
villages  to  bring  forth  a  progeny  of  beautiful  arbours  erected
on  their  outskirts  for  meetings,  alms'  houses,  inns,  and  women's
marquees5,  [134]  Mount  Meru  to  crumble  in  a  wealth  of
utensils  all  of  gold,  a  very  cornucopia  to  bear  fruit  in  bowls
of  riches  lavished  upon  Brahmans.

This  king  had  a  queen,  YacovatI6  by  name,  noble  as
Qahkara's  Parvati,  but  remaining  SatI  in  another  incarnation7,
holding  the  heart  fast  like  Visnu's  LaksmI,  with  sparkling

1  Or  '  their  vacant  hearts.'

-  His  ministers  were  gems  reflecting  his  greatness.

3  Or — punningly — '  his  hand's  grasp.'

4  Sudhd  =  (l)  stucco,  (2)  ambrosia.

5  Pragvamcah—patiiicdh'i  is  a  hut  erected  on  the  sacrilicial  ground
for  the  sacrificer's  family.

6  The  Sonpat  seal  has  Yacowatl.

7  I.e.  she  was  sati  —  (l)  noble,  (2)  cobkunCt  '  blonde,' whereas  Parvatl's
other  incarnation  was  <;y<~i.m<~t  '  brunette.'


CHAPTER IV.  103

•

glancing  eyes1  like  the  moon's  Rohim,  mother  of  all  her
people  like  Prajapati's  Buddhi,  descended  from  towering
kings2  like  the  ocean's  Ganges,  deft  in  compliance  to  his
will3  like  the  hanisa-kings  Hamsi,  with  an  adoring  world
at  her  feet4  like  Dharma's  Triad,  never  abandoning  his  side
night  or  day  like  Vasistha's  Arundhatl.  She  was  endowed
with  the  gait  of  a  hcvnisa,  the  voice  of  a  cuckoo,  the
answering  love  of  a  ruddy-goose,  the  full  bosoms5  of  the  rainy
season,  the  laugh  of  wine,  the  manifold  worth  of  a  treasure,
the  rich  gifts  of  a  golden  shower,  the  enfolded  charms  of  a
lotus,  the  fruitfulness  of  a  flower,  the  adorableness  of  the
twilight,  the  moon's  freedom  from  heat,  a  mirror's  responsive-
ness to  all  creatures,  Samudra's6  intuition  of  character,  the
Supreme  Spirit's  universal  penetration,  the  scriptures'  stain-
less principles.  She  was  honey  in  converse,  ambrosia  to  those
who  sought  delight7,  rain  to  her  servants,  beatitude  to  her
friends,  bamboo-like  to  her  elders.  The  pride  was  she  of  the
family  of  smiles,  the  penance  purity  of  womanhood,  the
fulfilment  of  Kama's  ordinances,  [135]  the  Eureka8  of  loveli-
ness, the  ovation  of  passion,  the  fruition  of  beauty's  wishes,
the  special  providence  of  charm,  the  genesis  of  affection's
ancestry,  love's  boon-winning,  grace's  perfect  creation,  youth's
majesty,  intelligence's  cloudless  rain9,  glory's  lustration,  good-
ness' bloom  of  beauty,  Dharma's  heart's  delight,  Prajapati's
creation  of  the  atoms  of  bliss :  the  quietude  of  quiescence,
the  decorousness  of  decorum,  the  nobility  of  high  birth,  the
temperateness  of  temperance,  the  stand  of  steadfastness,  the
witchery  of  grace.  Such  was  the  queen,  the  centre  of  all

1  Or—  punningly — 'stars.'

2  Or  '  mountains.'

3  Or  '  visiting  Manasa.'

4  Or  '  schools ' :  the  Triad  is  the  three  Vedas.

5  Or  '  clouds.'

6  He  is  the  inventor  of  palmistry :  a  literal  rendering  would  be  '  in
knowledge  of  the  characters  of  others  she  was  the  essence  of  Samudra's
book.'

7  Or— reading  trisyatsu — '  to  the  thirsty.'

8  Vyuttkdnabuddhir  =  thQ  resultant  thought  of  a  yogin's  meditation.
0  '  Cloudless  rain '  is  a  synonym  for  '  a  marvel.' Comm.


104  THE HAKSA-CARITA.

I

creatures'  love,  confidence,  duty,  and  felicity,  who  upon  the
king's  bosom  shone  like  Laksmi  on  the  bosom  of  Hell's
Vanquisher.

The  king  was  by  natural  proclivity  a  devotee  of  the  sun1.
Day  by  day  at  sunrise  he  bathed,  arrayed  himself  in  white
silk,  wrapt  his  head  in  a  white  cloth,  and  kneeling  eastwards
upon  the  grourKI  in  a  circle  smeared  with  saffron  paste,
presented  for  an  offering  a  bunch  of  red  lotuses  set  in  a  pure
vessel  of  ruby  and  tinged,  like  his  own  heart,  with  the  sun's
hue2.  Solemnly  at  dawn,  at  midday,  and  at  eve  he  muttered
a  prayer  for  offspring,  humbly  with  earnest  heart  repeating
a  hymn  having  the  sun  as  its  centre3.

The  heavenly  will  can  be  won  to  favour  its  worshippers.
So  it  happened  that  on  the  occasion  of  one  hot  season  the
king  slept  on  his  palace  roof  white  with  stucco  spotless  as
the  moon-light ;  and  the  queen  lay  on  a  second  couch  at  his
side.  [136]  The  night  was  near  its  close,  and  the  lord  of  stars
was  declining  with  faded  radiance,  robbed  of  his  beauty  by
the  approach  of  dawn.  A  cool  frosty  dew  was  falling,  like  the
moon's  sweat  evoked  by  his  delight  as  his  finger  tips4  touched
the  lotus  beds.  Smit  by  the  breath  of  intoxicated  sleeping
beauties,  the  seraglio  lamps  staggered  as  if  drunk.  The
king  slept.  The  stars  mirrored  in  his  white  nails  seemed  to
be  stroking  his  feet.  His  limbs  were  carelessly  extended,  as
if  consigned  to  the  queens  of  the  quarters.  The  beauty  of  his
lips5  fanned  him  with  wine-perfumed  breath  like  the  wind  of
her  own  lotus-like  hand  acting  as  a  fan.  In  the  clear  surface
of  his  cheek  the  imaged  moon  shone  like  a  topknot  of  white
flowers  displaced  by  the  clutching  of  hair  in  amorous  dalliance.

Suddenly  with  a  cry  '  Help,  my  lord !  help '  the  queen
leapt  up,  a  tremour  swaying  her  willowy  form,  and  her
tinkling  anklets  seeming  to  call  out  to  her  attendants.

1  On  the  Sonpat  seal  Harsa  attaches  the  epithet  param&dityabhak-
tali  to  his  father,  brother,  and  other  members  of  the  family.

2  There  is  a  pun  on  anurakta  =  (I)  devoted,  (2)  reddened.

3  Of.  Weber  Ind.  Stud.  ix.  91.

4  I.e.  'rays.'

5  I.e.  the  personified  beauty  of  his  face.


CHAPTER IV.  105

•

Instantly,  scorched  as  it  were  in  both  ears  by  a  cry  for  help
such  as  never  in  all  the  world  he  had  heard,  much  less  in  his
queen's  mouth,  the  king  awoke  from  sleep.  With  a  right  hand
that  trembled  with  rage  he  drew  from  beside  his  head  a  sword
whose  glittering  edge  drew  a  line  like  a  prolongation  of  his
ear- wreath  across  the  night.  His  left  hand  swept  aside  his
robe  of  fine  muslin,  as  if  it  were  the  intervening  ether.
Loosened  by  his  hand's  furious  movement,  his  golden
bracelet  flashed  upon  the  heavens,  as  if  his  heart  were
roaming  in  search  of  the  cause  of  alarm.  He  brought  his
left  foot  furiously  down  with  a  stamp  that  shook  the  palace.
His  necklace,  which  had  fallen  in  front  of  him,  having  come
within  range  of  his  sword  edge,  shone  like  a  severed  portion
of  the  moonlight.  Inflamed  with  rage  and  sleep,  as  if
stained  with  betel  from  Laksnri's  kisses,  his  eyes  cast  a
glow  upon  the  whole  circle  of  the  heavens,  [137]  while  a
dark  trident-shaped  frown  seemed  to  bring  night  back
again,  as  he  leapt  up  hastily  crying,  '  Fear  not,  my  queen,
fear  not'.  When  however  on  casting  his  glance  in  every
direction  he  saw  nothing,  he  inquired  of  the  queen  the  cause
of  her  fright.

By  this  the  women  of  the  night  watch  had  run  up  like
family  goddesses,  and  the  servants  who  slept  near  were  all
awake.  So  now  that  the  alarm  which  had  made  her  heart
tremble  had  subsided,  the  queen  replied : — '  I  know  now,
my  lord.  I  saw  in  a  dream  two  shining  youths  issue
from  the  sun's  disk,  filling  the  heavens  as  with  radiance  of
morning,  and  turning  the  whole  world  as  it  were  into  light-
ning. They  wore  crowns,  earrings,  armlets,  and  cuirasses :
swords  were  in  their  hands:  they  were  bathed  in  blood
cochineal  red.  All  the  world  bowed  before  them  with  up-
turned faces  and  hands  joined  reverently  at  their  foreheads.
Accompanied  by  one  maid  like  a  moon  incarnate,  who
issued  from  the  ray  Susumna,  they  lighted  upon  the  earth,
and  while  I  screamed,  cut  open  my  womb  with  a  sword  and
essayed  to  enter.  My  heart  quaked,  and  I  awoke  with  a  cry
to  my  lord.'

At  that  juncture  the  morning  horn  rang  out  at  the  porch,
t


106  THE HARSA-CARITA.

<

like  the  first  utterance  of  the  king's  glory  proclaiming  the
vision's  fulfilment.  Briskly  sounded  the  tom-toms,  as  if  to
announce  a  coming  exaltation.  The  daybreak  drum  boomed,
as  if  pleased  to  be  struck  with  the  stick.  '  Victory  !  Victory  ! '
pealed  the  loud  voices  of  those  who  recited  well-omened  calls
from  sle'ep.  In  the  stable  yard  of  the  favourite  horses  the
slowly  rising  marshal  chanted  a  Vaktra  and  an  Aparavaktra
verse,  as  before  the  sweetly  neighing  steeds  he  scattered
emerald  grass  a-drip  with  frosty  water : —

[138] 'By  misshapen  trees  a  treasure,  by  flashing  light  a  tine

jewel,
'By  an omen the  approach of  luck  is clearly in the

world  revealed  !
'As  the  dawn,  his  harbinger,  announces  the  sun,  as  the

speeding  blast  the  rain's  approach,
'  Even  so  the  appearance  of  a  previous  vision  foretells

good,  yea  and  evil  hap  to  men  ! '

At  these  words  the  king's  heart  was  filled  with  delight.
'Queen,'  said  he,  'you  are  dejected  at  the  hour  of  joy.  Your
parents'  prayers  are  answered.  Our  wishes  are  fulfilled.  Our
family  goddesses  have  accepted  you.  In  his  graciousness
the  holy  god  of  the  radiant  crown1  will  grant  you  joy,  and
that  soon,  by  the  gift  of  three  noble  children.'  So  much  said,
he  descended  and  performed  the  customary  ceremonies.
Yasovati  also  was  cheered  by  her  husband's  words.

After  the  lapse  of  a  short  period  of  time  his  majesty
Rajyavardhana  came  first  of  three  to  being  in  the  queen's
womb.  Even  as  he  lay  in  the  womb  his  glory  shed  a  pallor
over  his  mother.  Oppressed  as  it  were  by  the  weight  of  his
virtues,  she  could  not  support  her  frame.  As  if  satisfied
with  the  ambrosia  of  his  outpouring  loveliness,  she  became
averse  to  food.  Languid  with  the  slowly  growing  burden  of
her  child,  she  yet  insisted  on  being  conveyed  with  the  sup-
port of  friendly  hands  to  salute  her  parents,  who  would  have
stayed  her.  In  her  lassitude  she  could  be  seen,  like  a  doll-
figure,  propped  against  the  nearest  walls  and  trunks  of  trees.
She  could  not  lift  her  feet,  which  seemed  checked  by  bees

1  I.e.  the  Sun.


CHAPTER IV.  107

•

greedily  settling  upon  such  lotuses.  Slow,  slow  was  her
gait,  as  if  she  were  conducted  by  domestic  hcntisas  clinging
in  greed  for  lotus  threads  to  the  rays  of  her  toe-nails.  Seek-
ing a  support,  she  would  put  forth  a  lotus  hand  even  towards
forms  reflected  in  jewelled  walls,  much  more  then  towards
her  women  friends.  She  longed  to  clasp^even  the  rays  of
gemmed  pillars,  much  more  the  house-creepers.  Her  house-
hold duties  she  had  scarce  strength  to  command,  not  to
speak  of  performing  them.  Needless  to  say  that  her  feet
were  wearied  by  the  burden  of  her  anklets, — even  her
imagination  failed  to  mount  the  palace.  She  could  not
support  even  her  limbs,  much  less  her  ornaments.  [139]
The  very  idea  of  climbing  play  hills  made  her  bosom
tremulously  heave.  When  she  should  have  risen  in  welcome,
her  child,  as  if  through  pride,  kept  her  motionless  with  slender
hands  in  vain  applied  to  the  points  of  her  knees.  All  day
long  her  downcast  glance  was  turned  in  joy  upon  her  zone,
her  lotus  face  brought  near  her  bosom  as  if  longing  to  see  her
child  had  drawn  it  inwards.  With  her  child  in  her  womb,
arid  her  husband  in  her  heart,  she  bore  as  it  were  a  double
majesty.  Resigning  her  form  to  her  friends'  bosoms,  she  set
her  feet  on  the  laps  of  her  handmaids,  on  the  heads  of  her
co-wives.  When  the  tenth  month  arrived,  she  brought  forth
my  lord  Rajyavardhana,  a  prince  composed  as  it  were  of
lightning  atoms  to  quell  the  cabals  of  all  kings1;  capable  of
supporting  the  whole  world's  weight,  as  if  endowed  with  the
mechanism  of  ^esa's  hood ;  heart-shaker  of  all  kings2,  as  if
constructed  with  the  limbs  of  sky  elephants.  His  birth  was
a  birth  of  joy  to  the  people,  who  became  as  it  were  dancing
incarnate.  For  one  month,  which  seemed  a  day,  the  king
held  a  great  festival,  innumerable  blown  horns  noisily
sounding,  hundreds  of  beaten  tom-toms  merrily  booming,
a  world  filled  to  overflowing  with  the  burden  of  deep-
rumbling  drums,  the  hearts  of  all  mankind  ravished  in  a
madness  of  delight.

1  Or — punuingly — '  to  clip  the  wings  of  all  mountains,'  referring  to
a  feat  of  Indra.

a  Or  '  mountains.'


108  THE HARSA-CARITA.

»

A  second  period  having  elapsed,  in  the  month1  of  plan-
tains, when  the  bud  is  on  the  Kadamba  tree,  the  barley
blades  grow  in  clusters,  the  red-lotus  stands  erect,  the  cdtaka's
heart  expands,  and  the  dwellers  in  Manasa  are  dumb,  in  that
month  Harsa  came  to  being  at  once  in  the  heart  and  womb
of  Ya9ovatl,  even  as  Krisna  in  Devaki.  Gradually  once  more
her  willowy  form,  arrayed  as  it  were  in  all  her  child's  pure
worth,  assumed  a  pallid  hue.  As  pregnancy  came  on,  her
cup-like  bosoms  grew  dark  in  their  tender  nipples,  as  if
stamped  for  an  emperor  to  drain.  Like  a  river  of  milk  let
into  her  face  for  her  bosom's  supply,  her  eye,  long,  moist2  and
white,  assumed  a  sweeter  expression.  Slow  grew  her  gait
beneath  the  load,  as  it  were,  of  a  frame  weighed  down  by  the
whole  array  of  auspicious  marks.  As  she  moved  tardily
about,  [140]  the  earth,  clasping  her  lotus  feet  mirrored  in
the  spotless  mosaic,  seemed  to  pay  her  a  prelude  of  worship.
All  day  long  as  she  lay  on  her  couch,  the  reflection  of  figures
embroidered  in  the  awning  rested  on  her  cheek's  clear  round8,
like  a  Laksmi  awaiting  the  child's  birth.  In  the  night  time,
when  she  had  mounted  the  roof,  the  moon's  disk  imaged  in
her  round  bosom,  when  bared  of  her  shawl  in  the  pangs  of
pregnancy,  appeared  like  a  white  umbrella  mysteriously  held
above  her  child.  Even  the  chowrie  women  on  the  painted
walls  waved  their  chowries  while  she  slept  in  her  apartment.
In  her  dreams  all  the  four  sky-elephants  seemed  to  con-
secrate her,  bearing  water  in  folded  lotus  leaves  held  by
their  trunks.  When  she  awoke,  the  puppet  servants  in  the
chamber  on  the  roof  raised  not  once  alone  the  cry  of
'  Victory  !  '  If  she  called  to  her  maids,  incorporeal  voices
went  forth,  crying  '  Say  your  commands.'  Even  in  play  she
would  suffer  no  violation  of  her  will4.  Moreover  a  wish  grew
upon  her  to  bathe  even  in  the  united  waters  of  the  four  great


he  month  Qravana,  i.e.  July  —  August. The  plantain
flowers  all  the  year,  but  especially  in  the  rains.

2  There  is  a  pun  in  snigdha  =  (l]  charming,  (2)  viscous.

3  Cf.  Da9akumaracarita  I.  p.  73  (Bomb.)  1.  12.

4  This  and  the  following  contain  allusions  to  the  superstition  that
the  mother's  mind  echoes  the  thoughts  of  her  child  :  hence  the  reference
to  the  four  oceans  —  the  limits  of  Harsa's  empire  &c.


CHAPTER IV.  109

«

oceans.  It  was  her  heart's  desire  to  roam  round  sand  isles
in  creeper  arbours  by  the  sea  shore.  Even  on  occasions  of
urgency  her  brow  would  capriciously  move.  Despite  the
jewelled  mirrors  close  to  her  hand  she  was  bent  on  seeing
her  face  in  a  drawn  sword's  blade.  Supplanting  the  lute,  the
bow's  twang,  ill-suiting  a  woman,  was  pleasing  in  her  ear.
Her  eye  was  gratified  by  lions  in  their  cages.  Even  in
saluting  her  parents  she  scarce  could  bend  her  apparently
stiffened  head.  Her  friends,  never  for  an  instant  leaving
her  side,  brightened  the  house,  as  in  anticipation  of  the
approaching  birth  festival,  with  eyes  wide-open  in  joy,  as
though  strewing  on  every  side  a  ceaseless  protective  charm
in  the  shape  of  a  rain  of  blooming  lotus  petals,  white,
red  and  blue.  Great  physicians  holding  various  herbs1  sat
in  their  proper  places,  supporting  her  as  the  mountains
support  the  earth.  In  the  knots  of  her  necklace-cord  were
fixed  fine  jewels,  [141]  like  the  hearts  of  the  oceans  come
with  Laksmi.

At  length  in  the  month  Jyaistha,  on  the  twelfth  day  of
the  dark  fortnight,  the  Pleiads  being  in  the  ascendant,  just
after  the  twilight  time,  when  the  young  night  had  begun  to
climb,  a  sudden  cry  of  women  arose  in  the  harem.  Hurriedly
issuing  forth,  Suyatra,  daughter  of  Yagovatl's  nurse  and  her-
self dearly  beloved,  fell  at  the  king's  feet,  crying  '  Good  news !
your  majesty,  you  are  blessed  with  the  birth  of  a  second  sou,'
and  carried  off  the  customary  festal  spoil2.

At  that  very  instant  approached  the  astrologer  Taraka,  a
man  very  highly  esteemed  by  the  king.  Hundreds  and  hun-
dreds of  times  he  had  shown  supernatural  insight  by  announc-
ing facts  beyond  the  ken  of  man,  a  calculator,  deeply  read  in

1  Vividhosadhidharas  applies  also  to  the  mountains. So  also  pra-
castaratnani  in  seqq.  has  a  twofold  application.

2  For  purnapatra  the  Comm.  quotes

anandado  hi  sauhardad  etya  vastrddikam  baldt  \
ajdnato  haraty  eva  purnapatram  tu  tat  smritam  \\
The  Vacaspatya  quotation  is  clearer,  if  we  read  eva  in  the  second  line.

harsdd  utsavakale  yad  alaiikdrdm^ukddikam  \
Ctkrisya  grihuate  purnapatram  p&rnakaqi  emt  tat  \\


110  THE HARSA-CARITA.

all  the  treatises  on  astronomy,  extolled  and  liked  among  all
astrologers,  endowed  with  knowledge  of  the  three  times,  and  a
Maga1.  '  Give  ear,  0  king!'  he  cried;  'it  was  on  a  day  like  this,
free  from  the  taint  of  all  evil  conjunctions  such  as  malignant
aspects  of  the  sun  and  moon,  at  a  moment  like  the  present,
when  all  the  planets  were  similarly  at  their  apexes,  that
Mandhatri  came  to  birth.  Since  then  in  all  the  intervening
time  no  second  has  in  the  whole  world  been  born  at  a  conjunc-
ture so  fit  for  an  universal  emperor's  birth.  [142]  The  son
now  born  to  your  majesty  shall  be  coryphaeus  of  the  Seven
Emperors2,  bearer  of  the  Seven  Imperial  Signs3  and  the
Great  Jewels4,  lord  of  the  Seven  Oceans,  performer  of  all
sacrifices  of  Seven  Forms5,  the  peer  of  him  of  the  Seven
Steeds6.'

Instantly  unblown  horns  rang  out  spontaneously  loud  and
sweet.  Unbeaten  boomed  the  consecration  drum  deep  as  the
roar  of  oceans  in  turmoil.  Unstruck  the  auspicious  tabors
pealed.  Like  a  timbrel  proclaiming  security  to  all  the  world,
the  tabor's  echo  thrilled  through  the  aerial  spaces.  Tossing
their  manes,  the  horses  neighed  with  joy,  while  their  muzzles
were  graced  by  wisps  of  green  Durvci  sprays  which  they
haughtily  took.  Sportively  uplifting  their  trunks  as  if
dancing,  the  elephants  trumpeted  in  sounds  grateful  to  the
ear.  Soon  a  heavenly  breeze,  fragrant  with  perfumes  of  wine,
blew  like  a  sigh  of  Laksmi  letting  fall  the  disc7.  In  the  courts
of  the  sacrificers  the  unfed  Vaitana  fires  blazed  up  with  flames
curving  to  the  right  to  foretell  the  coming  luck.  From  the
earth  uprose  great  treasures,  enclosed  in  cups  bedecked  with

1  For  the  Bhojakas  or  Magas  see  Wilson's  Visnu  P.  (Hall's  ed.),
vol.  v.  p.  382.

2  These  are  Bharata,  Arjuna,  Mandhatri,  Bhagiratha,  Yudhisthira,
Sagara,  Nahusa.

3  The  signs  are  peculiar  formations  in  hands,  feet,  &c.

4  The  six  great  jewels  are  enumerated  in  the  verse

manyacvakaricakrdni  vara  strl  parinayakah  \
sad  etdni  tu  ratnuni  1artita.nl  manlsibhih  \\

6  Rig.  V.  x.  124.  1  (Sayana),  and  Weber  Lul  Stud.  ix.  120.
8  =  the  Sun.

7  The  weapon  of  her  husband,  Visnu.  ,


CHAPTER IV.  Ill

•

chains  of  gold. In  the  shape  of  echoes  from  the  beaten  tabors
the  regents  of  the  sky  seemed  joyfully  to  give  forth  a  clamour
of  congratulation  to  the  heavens. At  that  moment  white-clad
Brahmans  approached  with  the  Veda  on  their  lips1,  like  the
Prajapatis  of  the  golden  age,  to  foster  the  new-born  life. Like
Dharma  incarnate  came  the  family  priest  jyith  lustral  water
and  fruits  ready  in  his  hand. Like  immemorial  customs  the
arriving  elders  of  the  family  could  be  seen. Away  ran  dis-
orderly crowds  of  freed  prisoners,  their  faces  hairy  with  long
matted  beards,  their  bodies  black  with  many  a  miry  smirch,
like  the  kindred  of  a  waning  Kali  age. Like  camp  lines  of  a
now  departed  wickedness  [143]  seemed  the  rows  of  shops,  given
up  to  general  pillage2. In  a  great  throng  of  boys  danced  the
old  nurses,  encircled,  like  the  young  mother's  tutelary  deities
incarnate,  in  a  troop  of  dwarfs  and  deaf  people  with  laughing
upturned  faces3. So  proceeded  the  great  birth  festival,  the
order  of  the  royal  household  gone,  the  pretence  of  chamber-
lains laid  low,  the  macebearers  robbed  of  their  maces,  entrance
to  the  harem  in  no  wise  criminal,  master  and  servants  reduced
to  a  level,  young  and  old  confounded,  learned  and .  unlearned
on  one  footing,  drunk  and  sober  not  to  be  distinguished,  noble
maidens  and  harlots  equally  merry,  the  whole  population  of
the  capital  set  a-dancing.

From  the  morrow  onwards  the  wives  of  the  neighbouring
kings  could  be  observed  in  thousands  approaching  the  palace
from  every  side.  Amazonian  nations  they  seemed,  pouring
onwards,  wide-opened  mines,  Krisna's  mistresses  on  the  march,
families  of  Apsarases  lighted  upon  the  earth.  After  them
followed  servants  bearing  garlands  in  wide  baskets,  with  bath
powder  sprinkled  upon  the  flowers ;  dishes  laden  with  bits  of
camphor,  clear  as  crystal  granules ;  jewelled  caskets  of  saffron
scents ;  ivory  boxes,  studded  with  rows  of  sandal-hued  Areca
nuts  and  tufted  with  slim  Khadira  fibres  dripping  mango  oil ;

1  Brahmamukhas  has  two  senses,  (1)  as  in  text,  (2)  'headed  by
Brahma.' There  are  other  puns  in  addition.

2  Cf.  Carlyle,  Frederic,  n.  195.

3  JatamatridevatdmarjarananCi  bahuputraparivdrasfttikagrihe  sthap-
yate. Comm.  '  the  tutelary  deity  of  a  new  mother,  with  a  cat's  face  and
surrounded  by  a  crowd.of  children,  is  set  up  in  the  lying-in  chamber.'


112  THE HAUSA-CARITA.

<

vermilion  and  powder  boxes  red  and  pink,  with  murmuring
bees  sipping  Parijata  perfumes ;  betel  trees  with  bundles  of
nuts1  hanging  from  the  young  slips.  As  they  danced,  the
quarters  of  the  heavens  rang  with  jewelled  anklets  clashing  as
their  feet  knocked  together2.

[144]  Thus  rthe  festal  jubilation  gradually  blossomed
forth.  Here  young  people,  of  ancient  noble  houses  and
unused  to  dancing,  showed  by  frolics  their  love  for  the
king.  There  drunken  slave  women  allured  the  favourites,
while  the  monarch  himself  looked  on  with  a  secret  smile.
In  one  place  respectable  old  feudatories  were,  much  to  his
amusement,  clasping  the  necks  of  the  intoxicated  bawds
of  the  capital  in  a  furious  dance.  In  another  place  naughty
slave  boys,  set  on  by  a  glance  from  the  sovereign,  betrayed
in  songs  the  secret  amours  of  the  ministers  of  state.  Else-
where wanton  water-girls  raised  a  laugh  by  embracing  aged
ascetics.  Elsewhere  again  in  the  eagerness  of  ardent  rivalry
throngs  of  slaves  carried  on  a  war  of  foul  language.  In
another  place  chamberlains  knowing  nothing  of  dancing
were,  to  the  entertainment  of  the  maids,  violently  forced
to  dance  by  the  king's  women.  The  festival  showed  moun-
tains of  flower  heaps,  rum -booths  like  shower-baths,  Nandana
forests  of  Parijata  scent,  a  hoar-frost  of  camphor  dust,  a
booming  of  drums  like  Qiva's  laugh3,  a  hubbub  like  the
ocean-churning,  vortexes  of  dancing  rings,  a  horripilation  of
rays  from  jewelled  ornaments,  a  very  tiara  of  sandal  forehead
marks,  a  never  ceasing  propagation  of  echoes,  an  endless
efflorescence  of  tokens  of  favour.

Young  men  frolicked  in  thousands,  prancing,  like  Kam-
boja  steeds,  with  garlands  of  Kecaras*  hanging  upon  their
shoulders,  leaping  with  dancing  eyes  like  spotted  antelopes5,


1  Read  -vltikuvltakdmcca. \7ltilca  is  explained  by  B.  and  R.  as  '  cut
areca  nuts  in  cube  form  covered  with  roots  and  folded  in  a  betel  leaf.'

2  Read  caranakuttana-  in  place  oicaraiian!  h/ftana-.

3  Literally 'possessing  a Qiva (Attalutsa "the  God  of  the  loud
laugh")  in  its  booming  drums.'

4  Or — punningly — '  manes.'

5  Their  eyes  are  compared  to  the  spots  of  the  antelope.


CHAPTER IV.  113

•

rending  the  earth  with  furious  stamps,  as  did  the  sons  of
Sagara  with  spades.  Scarce  could  the  earth  sustain  the  tramp
of  troubadours  dancing  to  time.  Smash  went  the  pearls
in  the  ornaments  of  the  young  princes  slapping  each  other
in  their  play.  [145]  Minium  dust  crimsoned  the  shell  of
Brahma's  egg1  in  every  part,  as  with  the  l^ood  of  a  repro-
duced Hiranya-Garbha  foetus.  The  heavens  gleamed  with
clouds  of  perfume  powder,  as  if  Mandakim  had  disclosed  a
thousand  sand  isles.  Yellowed  with  scattered  scent  dust,  the
daylight  glowed,  as  though  Brahma's  lotus,  ground  by  the
rocking  world,  had  stained  it  with  clouds  of  pollen  from  its
filaments.  Men  tripped  over  heaps  of  pearls  that  fell  from
necklaces  broken  in  collisions.

In  this  place  and  in  that  harlot-women  danced  to  the
accompaniment  of  instrumental  music.  Tambourines  were
slowly,  slowly  thumped ;  reeds  sweetly  piped,  cymbals  tinkled,
string  drums  were  belaboured,  the  low  gourd  lute  sang,  gently
boomed  the  kahalas  with  their  brazen  sounding  boxes,  while
all  the  time  a  subdued  clapping  proceeded.  Even  the  clank
of  jingling  anklets  kept  time  pace  by  pace,  as  if  intelligent,  with
the  clapping.  Whispering  softly,  like  cuckoos,  in  low  passion-
ate tones,  they  sang  the  words  of  vulgar  mimes,  ambrosia  to
their  lovers'  ears.  Wreaths  were  about  their  brows,  and
chaplets  round  their  ears,  upon  their  foreheads  sandal  marks.
With  upraised  creeper-like  arms,  vocal  with  rows  of  bracelets,
they  seemed  to  embrace  the  very  sun.  Like  Kashmir  colts,
they  leapt  all  aglow  with  saffron  stains*.  Great  garlands  of
amaranth  hung  down  upon  their  round  hips,  as  if  they  were
ablaze  with  passion's  flame.  Their  faces,  marked  with  rows  of
vermilion  spots,  seemed  to  wear  the  rubric  of  the  edict  plates
of  Love,  [146]  whose  ordinances  none  may  resist.  Dusty
were  they  with  camphor  and  perfumes  scattered  in  handfuls,
like  roads  frequented  by  the  desires3  of  youth.  Like  women
chamberlains  of  a  children's  festival,  they  lashed  the  young  folk

1  =the  world.

2  As  applied  to  the  colts  kunhmapramristi  means  '  rolling  in  saf-
fron.'

3  Lit.  '  mind-chariots.'

C.  }  8


114  THE HARSA-CAR1TA.

with  great  wreaths  of  flowers.  With  tossing  forehead  marks
and  earrings  they  swayed1  like  creepers  of  Love's  sandal  tree.
Like  waves  of  passion's  flood,  they  gleamed  all  resonant  with
the  cries  of  anklets2  adding  music  to  their  steps.  As  to  what
was  proper  to  be  said  or  not,  they  were  as  void  of  discrimination
as  the  childish  flay  of  happiness.  While  the  rapid  booming  of
the  drums3  thrilled  through  their  lithe  frames,  they  cast  off
flower  pollen,  like  Ketakls.  All  day  their  faces  were,  like  red
lotuses,  abloom ;  by  night  they  slept  no  more  than  night
lotuses.  As  if  possessed,  they  were  surrounded  by  throngs
of  princes4.  Like  endearments,  they  stole  away  the  heart ;
like  songs,  they  kindled  the  flame  of  desire;  like  the  symptoms
of  stoutness5,  they  gave  rise  to  joy.  Adding  passionateness
to  passion  itself,  a  glow  to  love,  a  joy  to  joy,  a  dancing  motion
to  dancing,  festivity  to  festival,  in  ogling  they  seemed  to
drink  with  the  white  (shells)  of  their  eyes,  in  scolding  to  im-
prison in  cages  of  rays  from  their  nails,  in  gestures  of  anger
to  lash  with  curling  eyebrows,  in  making  love  to  pour  a  rain
of  all  (sweet)  feelings,  in  deftly  moving  to  scatter  transfor-
mations.

In  other  places,  where  under  the  terror  of  chamberlains'
wands  the  people  had  made  room,  [147]  the  king's  wives
essayed  the  dance,  a  brilliant6  throng  with  a  forest  of  white
parasols  held  above  them,  as  if  they  were  wood  nymphs  roam-
ing beneath  trees  of  paradise.  Some,  wrapt  in  loose  shawls
hanging  from  both  shoulders,  swayed  as  if  mounted  on  play
swings.  Some,  with  wavy  robes  torn  by  the  edge  of  golden
armlets,  were  like  rivers  lined  by  crossing  ruddy-geese.
Others,  whose  bright  side  glances  were  bounded  by  earrings
entangled  in  tufts  of  white  waving  chowries,  were  like  pools

1  The  Bombay  text  has  lasantyo  '  flashing.' The  words  for  '  forehead
marks'  and  'earrings'  may  be  for  the  sake  of  the  simile  translated
'  bunches  of  leaves.'

2  Or — punningly — '  of  hamsas.'

3  Or — punningly  with  the  ketak'is — '  the  booming  of  clouds.'

4  Or  '  magicians.'

5  It  is  a  great  cause  of  congratulation  when  a  Hindu  grows  fat, —
they  hold  it  implies  a  virtuous  life  and  a  good  conscience.

6  The  Bombay  text  has  vilesur  for  virejur.


CHAPTER IV.  /  115

with  hamsas  plucking  at  forests  of  blue  lotuses1.  Others,  from
whose  tripping  feet2  trickled  a  dew  of  lac-reddened  sweat
that  besprinkled  the  palace  hanisas,  resembled  moonlight
nights  when  the  twilight  casts  a  glow  upon  the  moon's  disk.
Others,  with  brows  curved  in  derision  at  the  contortions  of
chamberlains  bending  beneath  golden  girdles  placed  about
their  necks,  seemed  love-nets  with  outstretched  arms  for
toils.

All  womankind  being  thus  set  dancing, the  earth,  crimsoned
by  trickling  lac  from  their  feet,  seemed  rosy  with  the  flush  of
love.  Their  round  gleaming  bosoms  made  the  festival  like  a
mass  of  auspicious  pitchers3.  Their  tossing  arms  caused  the
world  to  seem  nought  but  rings  of  lotus  roots.  Their  sparkling
playful  smiles  created  as  it  were  a  season  all  of  lightning
flashes.  The  days  seemed  dappled  by  the  light  of  dancing
eyes.  Brilliant  ear  chaplets  of  Cirlsa  flowers  cast  a  green
tint  upon  a  daylight  seemingly  of  parrots'  tails.  Dark
hanging  Tamala  sprays  of  braided  hair  shed  a  blackness  as  of
collyrium  on  the  prospect.  Uplifted  tendril-like  hands  made
all  creation  gleam  like  one  red  lotus-bed.  The  radiance  of
rainbow-tinted  gems  infused  a  colour  of  jays'  wings  into  the
sunlight.  Echoing  with  clusters  of  tinkling  ornaments,  the
heavens  seemed  nought  but  clanging  bells.  Even  old  ladies
shouted  like  maniacs.  [148]  Old  men  even  lost  all  shame,
as  though  bewitched.  The  wise  forgot  themselves,  as  if
intoxicated.  Even  hermits'  hearts  were  all  agog  for  a  dance.
The  king  gave  away  all  his  fortune.  Heaps  of  wealth,  like
Kuvera's  treasuries,  were  plundered  by  the  folk  on  every  side.

This  great  festival  ended,  another  period  of  time  passed
gradually  by.  Rajyavardhana  was  now  nearing  his  sixth  year,
while  his  majesty  Harsa  could  just  manage  five  or  six  paces
with  the  support  of  his  nurse's  finger.  His  majesty  wore  upon
his  head  a  mustard  amulet,  like  a  spark  of  his  valour's  fire  just
peeping  forth.  His  form  was  stained  yellow  with  gorocaria,

1  Their  eyes  are  the  blue  lotuses,  the  white  chowries  the  hamsas,  and
the  earrings  their  beaks.

2  Or — punningly — '  speeding  rays.'

"  A  pitcher  full  of  water  is  an  auspicious  onien.

8—2


116  THE HARSA-CARITA.

as  if  his  inborn  warrior's  prowess  were  coming  to  light.  His
neck  was  ornamented  with  a  row  of  great  tiger's  claws  linked
with  gold,  like  buds  of  pride  bursting  from  his  heart.  He
could  manage  a  child's  first  indistinct  cries,  the  prelude  as  it
were  of  truth.  His  innocent  smiles  won  his  kinsmen's  hearts,
as  flowers  do  beecs,.  Tiny  teeth,  growing  like  buds  of  happy
smiles  and  watered  with  the  dew  of  his  mother's  cuplike
breasts,  were  beginning  to  adorn  his  lotus  mouth.  The
womenfolk  in  the  harem  safeguarded  him  like  honour;  the
ministers  of  state  preserved  him  like  a  state  secret ;  the
young  nobles  held  fast  to  him  as  to  virtue  ;  his  kindred
cherished  him  like  the  family  prestige ;  the  swords  of  guards
caged  him  in  like  a  lion's  whelp.

It  was  at  this  time  that  queen  Ya9ovatl  became  pregnant
with  Rajya9ri,  even  as  Naray  ana's  form  with  the  earth.  And
when  the  time  of  her  delivery  was  come,  as  the  pool  gives
birth  to  the  lotus  bed  with  its  long  red  stalks  and  roots1,  as
the  rains  to  the  autumn  sweetly  vocal  with  wild  geese2,  as  the
spring  to  woodrows  with  their  limbs  all  fair  with3  flowers,  [149]
as  the  sky  to  the  shower  of  wealth  flashing  with  grains  of
gold,  as  the  tide  to  gems  with  a  flood  of  light,  as  the  new-
moon  time  to  the  crescent  which  delights  all  men's  eyes,  as
QacI  to  Jayanti  a  sight  for  a  thousand  eyes4,  as  Mena  to
Gauri  wooed  by  all  mountains5,  so  YaQovati  gave  birth  to  a
daughter,  who  added  to  the  two  sons  formed  a  further  orna-
ment, like  the  line  of  a  necklace  above  her  two  bosoms.

About  this  time  Ya^ovatl's  brother  presented  his  son
Bhandi,  a  boy  about  eight  years  of  age,  to  serve  the  young
princes.  Tufted  with  tossing  side-locks  of  curly  hair,  the
boy  was  like  a  reborn  Kama  with  his  head  encircled  by  the
smoke  line  of  the  flame  of  (Diva's  anger.  Darkened  on  one
side  of  his  body  by  an  earring  of  sapphire,  whitened  on  the
other  by  the  light  of  a  pearl  in  his  ear-ornament,  he  was  like

1  Or — punningly — '  with  long  lotus  eyes.'

2  Or  '  with  a  voice  sweet  as  a  wild-goose's.'

3  Or  '  tender  as  flowers.'

4  Sahasraksa  is  also  a  name  of  Indra,  '  for  the  God  of  the  Thousand
Eyes.'

5  Or 'kings.'


CHAPTER IV.  /  117

t

a  compound  Avatar  of  Visnu  and  (^iva.  A  diamond  bracelet
bound  about  his  stout  forearm  suggested  a  rejuvenated
Para9u-Rama,  betokened  by  the  cord  of  his  axe,  which  was
itself  all  worn  away  in  his  slaughter  of  the  Ksatriyas.
Curved  bits  of  coral  were  tied  to  his  neck  string,  as  if  he
were  a  reincarnate  Hiranyaka9ipu  wearing  bits  of  Narasimha's
claws  broken  against  his  adamantine  breast.  Though  still  a
child,  he  bore  himself  stiffly,  like  a  seed  of  the  tree  of  valour.

To  this  additional  son  the  king's  regard  was  equally
attached,  as  (Diva's  sight  to  his  third  eye.  [150]  The  princes
also,  the  heart's  joy  of  all  creatures,  derived  a  greater
splendour  from  the  company  of  this  naturally  courtly  child,
as  do  April  and  May  when  accompanied  by  the  southern
Malaya  breeze.  Growing  in  due  course  step  by  step  with  a
fourth  brother,  as  it  were,  namely  the  people's  joy1,  they
came  to  manhood.  With  stout  thighs  like  pillars,  forearms
broad  as  propylaea,  long  arms  like  bars,  wide  chests  like
panels,  stately  as  tall  ramparts2,  they  were  like  the  gateway
of  a  great  city  strong  to  afford  refuge  to  a  whole  world.

Charming3  were  they  and  not  to  be  gazed  upon,  like
sun  and  moon  overpowering  the  Avorld  by  the  flame  of  their
flashing  splendour  and  effulgence ;  manifested,  like  fire  and
wind,  in  radiance  and  power ;  adamantine  in  the  hardness  of
their  frames,  like  the  immovable  Himalaya  andVindhya  in  con-
junction ;  fit  to  bear  the  yoke  of  the  Krita  age,  like  two  great
bulls;  like  Aruna  and  Garuda,  borne  on  horses  and  well-propor-
tioned4; like  Indra  and  Visnu,  with  the  gait  of  elephants5;
like  Kama  and  Arjuna,  bedecked  with  ring  and  diadem;  like
the  eastern  and  western  heavens,  capable  of  procuring  the
uprising  and  setting  of  all  great  lights.  In  their  over-

1  For  the  simile  cf.  Raghu-  V.  x.  78.

2  Or  '  with  tall  Sal  trees.'

3  Few  of  the  puns  in  this  paragraph  can  be  represented  in  transla-
tion. The  word  abhirdmadurnirlksyau  may  also  be  taken  with  '  fire  and
wind.'

4  Referring  to  Aruna  and  Garuda  the  compound  harivdhanavibliak-
tacanrau  will  mean  '  having  their  bodies  divided  in  carrying,  the  one,
the  Sun,  the  other,  Visnu.'

6  Or  'mounted  on  lordly  ndgas,'  sc.  Indra's  elephant  and  Visnu's
serpent  Cesa.  •

;


118  THE HARSA-CARITA.

c

weening  pride  they  could  scarce  contain  themselves  in  the
hovel  of  earth  straitened  by  the  too  great  proximity  of  the
shore's  boundary1.  They  scorned  the  very  shadows  [151]
averted  from  the  light ;  they  blushed  that  even  their  reflec-
tions should  approach  men's  toe-nails ;  they  were  pained  at
the  coward  breaking  even  of  one  of  their  hairs;  they  felt  shame
at  the  second  umbrella  mirrored  in  their  crest-jewels.  The
name  of  master,  even  as  given  to  the  Six-faced  God2,  grated
upon  their  ears ;  a  counterpart,  even  as  seen  in  their  mirror,
caused  their  eyes  to  smart ;  to  clasp  hands  even  in  twi-
light adoration  seemed  to  plunge  a  spear  into  their  brows ;
the  very  bow  borne  by  the  clouds  distressed  their  hearts:
even  painted  kings  that  would  not  bow  appeared  to  burn  their
feet.  They  honoured  not  even  the  sun's  light,  content  with
a  bounded  sphere ;  they  scoffed  even  at  the  ocean,  whose
Glory  was  carried  away  by  a  mountain  (Mandara)3;  they
sneered  at  the  potent  wind  that  wore  no  warlike  shape4.  It
was  torture  to  them  that  even  Himalaya  should  be  fanned
by  Yaks'  tails,  agony  that  the  very  seas  should  have  their
conchs,  intolerable  that  even  Varuna  should  be  a  rival
overlord  of  the  four  oceans.  The  very  monarchs,  whose
parasols  they  seized  not,  they  left- void  of  splendour5.  Gracious
though  uncourted,  they  poured  honey  with  their  lips  even
upon  unassuming  people6.  The  stocks  of  evil  kings,  however
far  removed,  their  hot  anger  caused  to  wither.  Day  after
day  their  hands,  begrimed  with  the  marks  of  sword  play,
seemed  defiled  by  quenching  the  fire  of  all  other  monarchs'
prowess.  By  the  deep  twang  of  their  bows  at  recreation  time
they  seemed  conversing  after  recent  dalliance  with  the  queens
of  the  quarters.  Thus  were  the  names  Rajyavardhana  and

1  Comp.  Dryden,  'Cooped  up  he  seemed  in  earth  and  seas  confined.'
Jtfdna  may  mean  '  size,'  as  well  as  '  pride.'

2  Kartikeya.

3  At  the  churning  of  the  ocean  : otherwise '  whose glory  was
carried  off  by  kings.'

4  Or  '  made  no  war.'

5  A  pun  on  chdyd,  as  meaning  '  shadow '  and  '  splendour.'

6  Or — punningly — '  even  upon  the  temperate  their  lips,  though  they
were  not  addicted  to  wine,  rained  wine.'


CHAPTER IV.  /  119

<  /

Harsa  proclaimed  abroad  over  all  the  earth,  in  so  much  that
in  a  very  little  time  they  attained  to  fame  in  other  Continent
Isles  likewise.

[152]  One  day  their  father,  having  summoned  them,  retired
in  their  company  after  dinner  to  his  private  apartments  and
affectionately  addressed  them  : — '  My  dear  sons,  it  is  difficult
to  secure  good  servants,  the  first  essential  of  sovereignty.
In  general  mean  persons,  making  themselves  congenial,
like  atoms,  in  combination,  compose  the  substance  of
royalty1.  Fools,  setting  people  to  dance  in  the  intoxication
of  their  play,  make  peacocks  of  them2.  Knaves3,  working
their  way  in,  reproduce  as  in  a  mirror  their  own  image.
Like  dreams,  impostors  by  false  phantasies  beget  unsound
views.  By  songs,  dances,  and  jests  un watched  flatterers4,
like  neglected  diseases  of  the  humours,  bring  on  madness.
Like  thirsty  cdtakas,  low-born  persons5  cannot  be  held  fast.
Cheats,  like  fishermen6,  hook  the  purpose  at  its  first  rise  in
the  mind,  like  a  fish  in  Manasa.  Like  those  who  depict
infernos,  loud  singers  paint  unrealities  on  the  canvas  of  the
air7.  Suitors8,  more  keen  than  arrows,  plant  a  barb  in  the
heart.  [153]  For  these  reasons  I  have  appointed  to  wait
upon  your  highnesses  the  brothers  Kumaragupta  and
Madbavagupta,  sons  of  the  Malwa  king,  inseparable  as  my
arms  from  my  side ;  they  are  men  found  by  frequent  trials
untouched  by  any  taint  of  vice,  blameless,  discreet,  strong,
and  comely.  To  them  your  highnesses  also  will  show  a
consideration  not  enjoyed  by  the  rest  of  your  dependants.'

1  Pdrthiva  has  double  meaning,  (1)  royal,  (2)  earthen, '  the  substance
of  earth.' Similarly  samavdya  and  dravya.

2  Mayura  beside  'peacock'  means  also  'rogue's  jests.' Bdlicd/i,
(1)  children,  (2)  triflers,  alludes  to  the  play  of  children  making  the
peacocks  dance.

3  Pallavika  has  double  meaning  (1)  knave,  (2)  tendril.

4  Vdtikdh  =  (V)  knaves,  (2)  connected  with  the  humours. A  vitiated
state  of  the  wind  is  said  to  cause  madness.

6  Akullna  as  applied  to  cdtakas  means  'not  resting  on  the  earth.'
'  Thirsty '  goes  also  with  flatterers.

6  Jdlikdh  has  both  meanings.

7  Ambara=(l)  ether,  the  vehicle  of  sound,  (2)  canvas.

8  Atimdrga\idh  =  (\)  importunate  persons,  (2)  keen  arrows.


120  \  THE HAHSA-CAR1TA.

\  (

So  much  said,  he  ordered  the  chamberlain  to  summon  the

pair. After  a  brief  interval the  two  princes,  whose  eyes

were  fixed  upon  the  entrance,  saw  Kumaragupta,  the  elder

brother,  entering  with  the  chamberlain. He  was  a  young

man  neither  very  tall  nor  very  short,  in  age  about  eighteen

years. He  planted  weighty  steps,  as  if  to  steady  the  ground,

which  trembled  with  the  movements  of  numerous  kings. A

pair  of  rather  slim  shanks,  issuing  from  not  over-prominent

knee  joints,  sallied  as  it  were  from  thighs  showing  thick  hard

flesh  of  compact  growth  due  to  incessant  practice  in  leaping.

His  hollow  sides  tapered  at  the  waist,  as  if  his  middle,  like  that

of  Mandara,  had  been  rubbed  down  by  the  serpent  Vasuki  when

whirled  about  in  the  fury  of  gods  and  Asuras. A  chest  of  vast

breadth  offered  room  for  unbounded  feelings  of  respect  for  his

master. With  quiet  and  graceful  motions  his  pendulous  arms

appeared  to  be  carrying  him  across  the  not  easily  traversed

ocean  of  manhood. Upon  his  stout  forearm,  where  it  was

marked  by  the  bowstring's  scar,  shone  a  spray  of  light  from

the  jewelled  bracelet  of  his  left  wrist,  like  a  sprouting  bud  of

his  valour's  fiery  flame. From  the  jewel  of  his  ear-ornament

there  descended  upon  his  huge  shoulder  a  tawny  light,  like

an  antelope  skin  worn  in  sign  of  dedication  to  the  use  of

arms1. His  face,  whose  cheeks  reflected  the  decorated  figures

of  armlets  with  upstanding  points,  suggested  a  moon  with

Rohinl  set  in  its  heart. A  downcast  eye  with  pupil  fixed

and  still  seemed  to  give  a  lesson  in  decorum  to  the  lotuses,

whose face* are  uplifted  with  desire for Laksmi2. [154]

For  a  crest  he  bore  an  Amlataka  flower,  like  his  loyalty,

upon  his  head. He  displayed  a  graceful  flexibility  such  as

might  have  been  presented  by  a  nation  of  bows  affrighted  by

his  merciless  breaking  of  their  rings. He  derived  a  dignity

from  senses  conquered  even  in  boyhood  and,  like  conquered

foes,  kept  well  under  his  control. The  law  of  princely  nobility

was  the  trusted  mistress  whom  he  followed. Resplendent  as

he  was,  the  noble  nature  within  made  his  brilliance  soothing

as  a  sun  with  a  moon  inside  it. From  the  hardness  of  his

1  Of.  Manu  ii.  41.

2  Or  'glory.'  This  priuce,  thouy/idesirousof  glory, had  a  dowucast  look.

I

I


CHAPTER IV.  /  121

/

frame  he  seemed  to  wear  down  the  very  n^ountains.  His
happy  graciousness  was  as  if  he  were  selling  to  joy  the
people  whom  he  purchased  by  his  look.

Behind  him  came  his  younger  brother  Madhavagupta,
who  for  height  and  dignity1  resembled  a  moving  realgar
mountain.  In  the  guise  of  a  low  topknot  of  Mdlatl  flowers
great  glory  seemed  to  be  imprinting  upon  his  head  a  father's2
kiss  at  going  forth.  His  meeting  brows  seemed  to  bespeak
the  late  union  of  those  irreconcilables,  youth  and  decorum.
With  profound  gravity  he  kept  his  gaze  fixed,  like  his  loyal
devotion,  upon  his  heart.  Cooled  by  a  smearing  of  the
purest  sandal  paste  and  provided  with  a  pillow  in  the  shape
of  his  necklace,  his  breast  was  like  a  broad  slab  of  moonstone
for  glory  to  rest  upon  when  wearied  by  her  round  of  brief
visits  to  numberless  rival  kings.  He  had  the  eye  of  a
gazelle,  the  nose  of  a  boar,  the  broad  shoulders  of  a  buffalo,
the  forearm  of  a  tiger,  the  prowess  of  a  lion,  the  gait  of  an
elephant,  bribes,  as  it  were,  offered  by  the  frightened  crea-
tures after  losing  all  else  in  the  chase.

[155]  Entering,  they  bowed  from  afar  till  their  four  limbs3
and  heads  touched  the  ground,  then  assumed  a  suitable  posi-
tion indicated  by  a  kindly  glance  from  the  king.  After  a
momentary  pause  he  gave  them  instructions  from  that  day
forth  to  wait  upon  the  princes.  '  As  your  majesty  commands '
they  answered,  and  rising,  saluted  Rajyvardhana  and  Harsa
by  swaying  their  heads  again  and  again  to  the  earth.  They
on  their  part  saluted  their  father.  From  that  hour  the  two
were,  like  opening  and  shutting,  never  absent  from  the  range
of  the  princes'  eyes, — like  inspiration  and  exspiration,  night
and  day  before  their  mouths, — like  a  pair  of  arms,  ever
constant  at  their  side.

Meanwhile  Rajya9ri  gradually  grew  up  in  daily  increasing
familiarity  with  friends  expert  in  song,  dance  &c.  and  with
all  accomplishments.  In  a  comparatively  limited  period  she
came  to  maturity.  On  her  alone  fell  the  glances  of  all  kings,

1  Or — punningly — '  yellowness.'

2  Gurund  =  (1)  great,  (2)  father.

3  Sc.  thfir  knees  and  hands.


122  \  THE HARSA-CARITA.

«

like  arrows  on  the  targe,  and  sending  envoys,  monarchs
sought  her  hand.

One  day  the  king,  standing  on  the  roof  of  the  seraglio,
heard  a  man  in  the  outer  court  sing  an  arya  couplet  which
had  suggested  itself  to  him  : —

'At  the  time  of  the bosoms'1  swelling,  growing  with the

p&ssing  of  each  rainy  season,

'A  daughter  brings  low  her  father,  like  a  river  its  bank,
in  a  whirlpool  of  agitation.'

Hearing  this,  the  king  dismissed  the  servants,  and  said  to
the  queen  at  his  side: — 'Our  darling  Rajya9ri,  my  queen,  is
now  grown  a  young  woman.  The  thought  of  her,  like  her
noble  qualities,  never  for  a  moment  leaves  my  heart.  As
soon  as  ever  girls  near  maturity,  their  fathers  become  fuel  to
the  flame  of  pain.  The  swelling  of  her  bosoms1  darkens  my
heart,  as  clouds  the  day.  [156]  It  is  a  law  of  right,  by  whom-
soever framed  not  with  my  consent,  that  children  born  of
our  body,  dandled  at  our  breasts,  never  to  be  abandoned,  are
taken  from  us  by  the  unexpected  arrival  of  someone  unknown
to  us.  Truly,  these  indeed  are  the  brandmarks  of  this  tran-
sient life.  Herein  has  sorrow's  fire  more  than  in  aught  else
a  power  to  burn,  that  whereas  both  are  our  offspring  good
men  grieve  at  a  daughter's  birth.  Hence  is  it  that  to  their
daughters  noble  men  offer  water  even  at  birth"  in  their  tears.
For  this  fear  sages,  neglecting  marriage,  dispensing  with
domestic  life,  take  refuge  in  desolate  forests.  Who  indeed
can  bear  to  part  with  a  child?  The  more  that  suitors'
envoys  flock  in,  the  deeper  does  wretched  anxiety  retire,  as  if
abashed,  into  my  heart.  What  can  we  do  ?  In  spite  of  all,
householders  must  follow  the  ways  of  the  world.  In  general
too,  though  a  bridegroom  may  have  other  merits,  the  wise
especially  incline  towards  good  family.  Now  at  the  head  of
all  royal  houses  stand  the  Mukharas,  worshipped,  like  Qiva's
foot-print,  by  all  the  world.  Of  that  race's  pride,  Avanti-
varman,  the  eldest  son,  Grahavarman  by  name,  who  lacks
not  his  father's  virtues,  a  prince  like  the  lord  of  planets

1  Or — punningly — '  clouds.'

2  Water  is  offered  to  the  dead  at  a  funeral  (jalanjali):  see  Cole-
brooke's  Essays,  vol.  n.  p.  177.


CHAPTER IV.  /  123

/
descended  upon  earth,  seeks  our  daughter.  /  Upon  him,  it

your  majesty's  thoughts  are  likewise  favourable,  I  propose  to
bestow  her.'

To  these  her  husband's  words  the  queen  with  tearful
eyes  and  a  heart  alarmed  by  love  for  her  daughter  replied : —
'  Mothers,  your  majesty,  are  to  their  daughters  no  more
indeed  than  nurses,  useful  only  in  rearing  them.  In  their
bestowal  the  father  is  the  judge.  Love  for  a  daughter
however  far  far  exceeds  love  for  a  son,  pity  causing  the
difference.  My  lord  only  knows  how  all  our  lives  long  she  is
a  care  to  us.'

His  resolution  taken  in  the  matter  of  his  daughter's
bestowal,  the  king  sent  for  his  sons  and  acquainted  them  also
with  his  purpose.  Then  on  a  day  of  good  omen,  in  the
presence  of  the  whole  royal  household,  he  poured  the
betrothal  water  upon  the  hand  of  an  envoy  extraordinary,
who  had  arrived  previously  with  instructions  from  Graha-
varman  to  sue  for  the  princess.

[157]  He  having  gleefully  departed  with  his  mission
accomplished,  the  royal  household,  as  the  marriage  days
drew  near,  assumed  an  aspect  brilliant,  charming,  exciting,
and  auspicious.  All  the  world  bedecked  itself  with  betel,
perfumes,  and  flowers,  distributed  with  a  lavish  hand.
From  every  country  were  summoned  companies  of  skilled
artists.  Under  the  charge  of  royal  officers  came  whole
villages,  bringing  loads  of  serviceable  gifts.  Emissaries
conveyed  presents  from  many  a  king.  The  favourites  busied
themselves  in  the  disposal  of  troops  of  relatives,  come  in
answer  to  invitations.  Leather  workers,  wild  with  intoxi-
cation— having  been  treated  with  wine — flourished  in  their
hands  drumsticks,  with  which  they  sharply  struck  the  festal
drums,  till  they  boomed  again.  Mortars,  pestles,  stone  blocks
and  other  utensils  were  bedecked  with  pounded  perfumes1.
Successive  trains  of  troubadours,  appearing  on  every  side,
crowded  the  courts,  where  images  of  Indranl  were  being  set
up.  Carpenters,  presented  with  white  flowers,  unguents,

. l  For  pistapahcaiigula  cf.  supra  p.  45,  and  the  Jataka  (ed.  Fausboll)
II.  p.  256, 11/2-3.  f


124  \  THE HARSA-CARITA.

'

and  clothes,  jjv'imied  out  the  marriage  altar.  Workmen
mounted  on  ladders,  with  brushes  upheld  in  their  hands
and  plaster  pails  on  their  shoulders,  whitened  the  top
of  the  street  wall  of  the  palace.  Torrents  of  water  from
pounded  saffron  now  being  washed  stained  the  feet  of  the
nation.  The  courtyards  were  seas  of  elephants  and  horses,
suitable  for  bridal  gifts,  which  were  undergoing  inspection.
Throngs  of  astrologers,  set  calculating,  investigated  the
characteristics  of  different  moments.  Crocodile-mouthed
conduits,  conveying  scented  water,  filled  a  variety  of  pleasure
ponds.  The  outer  terraces  resounded  with  the  din  of  gold-
workers  engaged  in  hammering  gold.  Plasterers  were
beplastered  with  showers  of  sand  which  fell  over  them
from  freshly  erected  walls.  A  group  of  skilled  painters
painted  auspicious  scenes.  Multitudes  of  modellers  moulded
clay  figures  of  fishes,  tortoises,  crocodiles,  cocoanuts,  plan-
tains, and  betel  trees.  Even  kings  girt  up  their  loins,  and
busied  themselves  in  carrying  out  decorative  work  set  as
tasks  by  their  sovereign,  being  variously  engaged  in  polishing
mosaic  floors  of  red  lead,  or  erecting  the  posts  for  marriage
platforms,  which  they  strewed  with  handfuls  of  liquid  citar-
pana  pigment,  reddened  with  cochineal  disposed  about
them,  and  adorned  at  the  top  with  mango  and  Afoka  twigs.
[158]  From  the  furthest  orient  had  come  the  queens  of  all
the  feudatories,  noble,  high-bred,  shapely,  well-clad,  un-
widowed  dames  with  lines  of  vermilion  powder  glittering
on  their  foreheads.  Thronging  the  household,  they  sang
sweet  well-omened  songs  containing  allusions  to  the  bride
and  bridegroom's  families ;  or  with  fingers  steeped  in  divers
colours  dyed  neck-strings;  or  employed  their  skill  in  leaf  and
plant  painting  to  adorn  polished  cups  and  collections  of  un-
baked clay-ware;  or  stained  skeins  of  cotton  thread  for
bamboo  baskets  and  fabrics  of  wool  for  marriage  amulets ;
or  manufactured  cosmetics,  compounded  of  saffron  paste
clotted  by  bala^aim  essence,  and  face  unguents  adding  dis-
tinction to  beauty;  or  made  strings  of  cloves  mingled  with
Kakkola  fruit,  containing  also  nutmegs,  and  large  bright
lumps  of  crystalline  camphor  threaded  jn  the  intervals.


CHAPTER IV.  /  125

The  palace  was  arrayed  in  textures  flashing  on  every  side
like  thousands  of  rainbows,  textures  of  linen,  cotton,  bark
silk,  spider's  thread,  muslin,  and  shot  silk,  resembling  sloughs
of  snakes,  soft  as  the  unripe  plantain's  fruit,  swaying  at  a
breath,  imperceptible  except  to  the  touch.  Some  were  being
made  by  ancient  city  matrons,  cunning  in»  divers  ways  of
cutting  and  measuring;  some,  made  already,  were  being  dyed
by  washermen,  who  beamed  with  respect  for  the  courtly  old
ladies  of  the  harem ;  some,  after  dyeing,  had  been  shaken
by  servants  clinging  to  either  end,  and  were  drying  in  the
shade;  some,  now  dry,  were  having  all  the  charm  of  sprays
reproduced  in  their  twisted  shapes :  in  some  cases  the
spotting  with  saffron  paste  had  been  begun,  and  in  others
the  fragile  stuffs  were  torn,  while  grasped  by  servitors,
who  lifted  their  arms  to  clutch  them.  Couches,  whose  gay
coverlets  cast  the  hainsa  tribes  into  the  shade ;  bodices  over-
laid with  starlike  pearls;  countless  thousands  of  canvas
and  cloth  pieces,  divided  up  for  various  uses;  [159]  awnings
bright  with  soft,  freshly  dyed  bark  silk ;  marquees,  whose
roofs  were  covered  all  over  with  garments,  and  posts  swathed
in  strips  of  variegated  silk ;  all  these  gave  to  the  court  an
aspect  brilliant,  attractive,  exciting,  and  auspicious.

The  queen  Ya9ovatl,  though  only  one  person,  seemed  in
the  flurry  of  the  marriage  festival  multifariously  divided,  her
heart  being  with  her  husband,  her  curiosity  with  the  bride-
groom, her  love  with  her  daughter,  her  attentions  with  the
invited  ladies,  her  injunctions  with  the  servants,  her  body
accompanying  her  motions,  her  eyes  busy  in  looking  after
things  done  and  omitted,  her  joy  permeating  the  festival.
The  king  likewise  ever  and  anon  despatched  a  female  camel
to  his  gratified  son-in-law,  and  however  apt  the  servants,
intently  watching  his  face,  might  be  in  executing  his  orders,
yet  in  the  distraction  of  fatherly  affection  he  did  everything
in  person  along  with  his  two  sons.

Thus  the  royal  household  became  as  it  were  the  essence
of  freedom  from  widowhood;  a  world  seemed  born  full  of
auspiciousness;  the  prospect  seemsd  composed  of  troubadours,
the  sky  turned  into  dfums,  the  roaming  domestics  to  be  all


126  \  THE HARSA-CARITA.

\j ,

ornament,  creation  looked  nought  but  relatives,  time  appeared
composed  of  bliss,  the  splendid  festival  seemed  to  blossom  forth
with  all  Laksmi's  bloom.  It  was  as  if  there  were  a  treasure
trove  of  happiness,  a  realisation  of  life's  purpose,  a  ripening
of  good  deeds,  a  youth  of  felicity,  a  new  reign  of  delight,
a  fulfilment  tim/?-  of  desires.  Calculated  as  it  were  by  the
people's  fingers,  watched  for  by  the  banners  on  the  highways,
welcomed  by  reverberations  of  auspicious  music,  invoked
by  astrologers,  attracted  by  wishes,  embraced  by  the  hearts
of  the  bride's  women  friends,  the  marriage  day  arrived.
[160]  Instantly  at  dawn  all  strangers  were  expelled  by
the  chamberlains,  and  the  royal  family  was  drawn  apart.

Anon  the  groom-in-waiting,  having  entered,  introduced  a
young  man  of  fair  exterior,  saying,  '  A  betel-bearer,  your
majesty,  by  name  Parijataka,  arrived  from  the  bridegroom's
presence.'  With  a  graciousness  due  to  esteem  for  his
son-in-law  the  king  inquired  of  the  man  while  still  at  a
distance,  '  Young  sir,  is  Grahavarman  well  1 '  Hearing  the
king's  voice,  he  advanced  a  few  paces  at  a  run,  and  stretching
out  his  arms,  courtier  that  he  was,  bent  his  head  for  some  time
to  the  earth ;  then  rising  said,  '  He  is  well,  as  your  majesty
observes,  and  sends  respectful  greetings  to  your  majesty.'
Understanding  him  to  have  come  Avith  tidings  of  the  bride-
groom's arrival,  the  king  after  offering  hospitality  sent  him
back  with  this  charge,  '  At  the  first  watch  of  the  night  see
that  no  mishap  arise  owing  to  the  passing  of  the  marriage
hour.'

When  the  day  was  ended,  having  transferred  to  the
bride's  face  as  it  were  the  beauty  of  all  his  lotus  beds,  while
the  sun  glowed  like  the  foot  of  the  bridal  day's  loveliness ;
when  the  pairs  of  ruddy-geese  were  parting  in  shame,  as  it
were,  that  their  love  should  be  eclipsed  by  the  bride  and
bridegroom's  affection;  when,  flecked  like  a  pigeon's  throat1,
the  afterglow,  with  its  delicate  texture  of  red  silken  rays,

1  The  word  kapotakantliakarbure  is  best  taken  with  the  '  afterglow '
and  not  with  what  follows  :  karbura  may  mean  '  yellow '  or  '  golden.'
For  the  'yellow'  cf.  Psalm  68.  13  Sept.  :  Trrepuye?  Trfpiarfpas  irepiijp-


CHAPTER IV.  /  127

»  y

gleamed  like  the  banner  of  felicity  in  the  skyvwhenthe  dark,
like  the  dust  of  the  bridegroom's  approachh/g  train,  was  be-
smirching the  heavenly  spaces,  and,  as  if  all  ready  to  effect  the
favourable  conjunction,  the  starry  array  was  rising ;  while,
like  an  auspicious  marriage  bowl,  the  moon's  disk  was  shoot-
ing up  with  ever  growing1  halo  of  whiteness  from  the  Udaya
hill,  and,  as  the  lovely  radiance  of  the  bride's  face  swallowed
up  the  dusky  gloom,  the  night-lotus  beds  with  faces  supine
seemed  to  scoff  at  the  idly-risen  moon :  [161]  then  true  to  his
time  the  bridegroom  drew  nigh.  Before  him  with  red  gold-
studded  chowries  incessantly  flashing  ran  footmen,  like  desires
with  the  topmost  shoots  of  passion  standing  out.  The  horizon
was  filled  with  troops  of  horses,  which  were  welcomed,  as  it
seemed,  by  answering  neighs  from  the  prick-eared  steeds  of
the  capital.  Throngs  of  mighty  elephants  with  chowries
waving  at  their  ears,  arrayed  in  trappings  all  of  gold,
with  gay  housings  and  twanging  bells,  seemed  to  re-form
the  darkness  dissolved  by  the  rising  moon.  He  came
mounted  on  an  elephant  whose  muzzle  was  bedecked  with
a  zodiac  of  pearls2,  even  as  the  lord  of  night  rides  the  eastern
heaven.  All  about  him  was  a  hubbub  of  dancing  troubadours
shrilling  forth  the  notes  of  divers  birds,  as  when  the  new  spring
comes  with  his  groves3.  An  array  of  lamps,  incensed  with
dripping  perfumed  oil,  made  yellow  all  the  world  as  with  a
cloud  of  saffron  toilet  powder.  His  head,  with  its  flowery
topknot  set  amid  a  blooming  jasmine  wreath,  seemed  to  laugh
to  scorn  the  moonlit  evening  with  its  halo  and  its  moon.
He  had  formed  for  himself  a  mock  vaikaksaka  wrap  with  a
wreath  of  flowers,  like  a  flowery  bow  taken  from  Kama
vanquished  by  his  beauty.  Joyous  with  the  low  hum  of  bee
tribes  delirious  with  pride  in  the  fragrance  of  the  flowers,
he  resembled  a  Tree  of  Paradise  born  and  descended  again
with  Qrl  upon  the  earth.  His  heart  drawn  on  as  in  eagerness

1  Vardhamana  also  means  a  '  dish.'

2  Naksatramald  =  (1 ) '  the  moon's  asterisms,'  (2) '  a  string  of  27  pearls.'

3  Cf.  Kipling,  Beast  and  Man  in  India,  p.  225  :  '  In  Western  India
the  bridegroom  rides,  covered  with  tinsel  and  gay  clothing,  in  the  midst
of  a  moving  square  of  artificial  flowers  and  bushes,  counterfeiting  a
garden,  borne  on  long  platforms  on  the  heads  of  coolies.'


128  \  THE HARSA-CARITA.

y  i

to  behold  his  Yew  bride's  countenance,  he  appeared  almost  to
fall  forward  on  liis  face.

On  his  arrival  at  the  gate  the  king  and  his  sons,  accom-
panied by  their  royal  retinue,  went  forth  on  foot  to  meet  him.
Dismounting  he  bowed,  and  the  king  with  outstretched
arms  gave  him  a  hearty  embrace,  like  Spring  embracing
Kama.  Next  in  order  he  embraced  Rajyavardhana  and
Harsa,  and  the  king,  taking  him  by  the  hand,  led  him
within  doors,  where  he  honoured  him  with  a  seat  equal  to
his  own  and  with  other  attentions.

Soon  Gambhlra,  a  wise  Brahman  attached  to  the  king,
said  to  Grahavarman,  '  My  son,  by  obtaining  you  Rajya9rl
has  at  length  united  the  two  brilliant  lines  of  Puspabhuti  and
Mukhara,  whose  worth,  like  that  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  houses,
is  sung  by  all  the  world  to  the  gratification  of  wise  men's  ears1.
Previously  you  were  set  fast  by  your  merits2  on  the  king's
breast,  like  the  Kaustubha  jewel  on  Visnu's.  [162]  But
now  you  are  one  to  be  supported,  like  the  moon  by  Qiva,  °n
his  head.'

Even  while  he  spoke,  the  astrologers,  approaching  the  king,
said,  '  Your  majesty,  the  moment  approaches :  let  the  bride-
groom proceed  to  the  bridal  house.'  The  king  bidding  him
rise  and  go,  Grahavarman  entered  the  women's  apartments,
and,  disregarding  the  thousands  of  glances  that  like  opening
blue  lotuses  fell  upon  him  from  women  curious  to  see  the
bridegroom,  passed  on  to  the  door  of  the  bridal  house,  where
he  stayed  his  attendants  and  entered.

There  amid  a  company  of  relatives,  friends,  and  servants,
mostly  women,  he  espied  his  bride,  whose  face,  hidden,  like
the  morning  twilight,  by  its  roseate  veil8,  dulled  the  gleaming
lamps  by  its  radiance.  Not  too  tightly  embraced  by  woman-
hood, which  seemed  alarmed  by  her  excessive  delicacy,  she
appeared,  by  the  long  soft  sighs  which  her  bosom,  choked  with

1  Or  '  of  Budha,  the  regent  of  Mercury  and  son  of  the  moon,  and
Karna,  the  son  of  the  sun.'

2  Or '  cords.'

3  There  is  a  pun  in  aruna,  which  also  denotes  the  '  dawn.' The  dawn
also  dims  the  lamps.  t-


CHAPTER IV.  129

/

fright,  could  scarcely  utter,  to  bemoan  her  derating  maiden-
hood. Trembling  she  stood  motionless  with  bashful  ness,  as  if
fearing  to  fall,  gazing  with  a  quiver  of  terror  in  her  mind  at  that
lotus-red  hand  so  soon  to  be  grasped :  so  might  Rohinl  gaze  at
the  moon  when  near  eclipse1.  Her  body  was  white  with  sandal,
as  though  born  of  a  (white)  lotus  bed  whos$  amassed  loveli-
ness had  been  a  gift  from  the  moonlight.  A  fragrance  of
flowers  breathed  about  her,  as  if  she  had  come  forth  from  the
heart  of  spring.  The  perfume  of  her  breath  attracted  the  bee
tribes,  as  if  she  were  sprung  from  the  Malaya  breeze.  Love
followed  in  the  train  of  one  who  seemed  a  reborn  Rati.  Com-
pounded of  all  gem-like  natures,  brilliancy,  loveliness,  intoxi-
cation, fragrance  and  sweetness,  the  product  of  the  Kaustubha
jewel,  the  moon,  wine,  the  tree  of  paradise,  and  ambrosia,  she
seemed  a  second  Qrl  formed  by  the  ocean  in  his  rage  with
gods  and  asuras2.  [163]  The  soft  light  of  an  earring  produced
an  ear-pendant  of  pearly  rays  like  clusters  of  white  Sindhuvara
flowers.  Her  cheek's  surface,  a  glade  all  green  with  the
emerald  glow  of  her  ear-ornament,  formed  a  pleasance,  as  it
were,  for  the  fawnlike3  gleam  of  her  eye  ;  and  thus  she  seemed
to  chide  her  shamefaced  friends  and  heart,  which,  bewildered
by  the  interesting  spectacle  of  a  bridegroom4,  ever  and  anon
essayed  to  raise  a  glance.

No  sooner  had  that  thief  of  hearts  made  his  entrance
than  he  was  delivered  over  by  his  bride  into  the  clutches  of
love.  Most  deftly  he  performed  all  that  in  the  marriage  hall
the  bridegroom  is  made  to  do  by  women  with  faces  lit  by  a
mocking  smile.  Then,  his  bride  having  been  arrayed  in  the
dress  proper  for  the  ceremony,  he  took  her  by  the  hand,  and
going  forth,  came  to  an  altar  whitened  with  new  plaster  and
surrounded  by  invited  kings,  as  when  the  slopes  of  Himalaya
were  girt  by  mountains  gathered  to  the  wedding  of  Qiva  and

1  Rohinl  '  the  red  one '  gazes  at  the  white  moon  when  near  eclipse.
The  naksatras  are  the  moon's  wives.

2  The  first  Cri  or  Laksml  was  produced  by  the  ocean  (always  spoken
of  as  rich  in  jewels)  at  the  mythical  churning  along  with  the  objects
mentioned  in  this  sentence.

3  Or  « lovely.'

4  Or  perhaps  '  eager  tt»see  the  bridegroom  and  the  ceremony.'

c.  9


130  THE HARSA-CARITA.


Parvatl.  Gleaning  around  it  were  earthen  dolls,  whose
hands  bore  auspicious  fruits,  and  which  had  five-mouthed
cups  bristling  with  dew-besprent  blades  of  barley  and  enemies,
faces  painted  with  soft  colours1.  Brahman  witnesses  busied
themselves  in  kindling  the  flame,  which  smoked  under  logs
heaped  up  by  th~  teachers.  Close  to  the  fire  unsoiled  green
Kuca  grass  was  set,  and  hard  by  were  bundles  of  pounding
stones,  antelope  skins,  ghee,  garlands2,  and  fuel,  while  a
sparkle  of  parched  grain  was  mixed  with  dark  Qami  leaves
placed  in  new  baskets.  This  altar  the  bridegroom  ascended,
as  the  moon  with  his  beauty  mounts  the  heavens.  As  the
god  of  the  flowery  bow  came  with  Rati  to  the  red  Acoka,  so
he  drew  near  the  fire  with  its  tremulous  sprays  of  red  flame.
The  fire  being  fed,  [164]  he  marched  round  towards  the  right,
attended  by  the  very  flames,  which  as  if  curious  to  see  the
bride's  face  took  a  rightward  twist.  And  as  the  rice  oblation
was  let  fall,  the  blaze,  whitened  by  the  gleam  of  nails,  seemed
to  smile3  in  amazement  at  the  bride  and  bridegroom's  unpre-
cedented grace  of  form.

Anon  a  tempest  of  tear  drops,  clear  as  great  pearls,  showed
itself  in  the  bride's  face,  which  yet  displayed  no  discomposure,
and,  as  if  to  quench  the  fire's  image  in  her  cheeks'  clear  oval,
she  burst  into  weeping.  With  eyes  brimming  with  tears  the
women  of  the  family  raised  a  lugubrious  cry.  All  the  bridal
rites  being  fully  completed,  the  husband  bowed  with  his  wife
to  their  parents,  and  then  entered  their  chamber.  About  its
portals  were  figured  the  spirits  cf  Love  and  Joy.  Bees  going
before  like  friends  raised  a  hubbub.  The  charmed  lamps,
which  lighted  it,  swayed  in  the  wind  of  the  bees'  wings,  as
if  trembling  in  fear  of  a  blow  from  their  ear-lotuses.  At  the
foot  of  a  blossoming  red  Acoka  carved  on  one  side  stood  the
god  of  love  aiming  his  shaft,  the  arrow  drawn  to  the  string,
and  a  third  of  his  eye  sideways  closed.  A  fair  well-upholstered

1  So  the  Kashmir  and  Bombay  texts  and  the  commentator. The
Calcutta  text  has  amairamukhaih  '  goblet-mouths.'

2  The  Bombay  and  Kashmir  texts  read  -mut-,  'spoons,'  'ladles,
ajaovhich  seems  preferable.

3  The  nails  represent  the  teeth  shown  in  smiling.


CHAPTER  IV.  131

»  /

bed  with  pillows  was  guarded  on  the  one  p^ae  by  a  golden
rinsing  vessel,  on  the  other  by  a  golden  figure  holding  an
ivory  box,  like  LaksmI  incarnate  with  an  upright  lotus  stalk
in  her  hand.  At  the  bed's  head  stood  a  night  bowl  of  silver
bedecked  with  lotuses,  like  the  moon  come  to  join  company
with  the  flowery  god.  *

There,  while  the  bashful  young  bride  slept  with  her  face
averted,  the  bridegroom  spent  the  night  in  gazing  at  her  im-
ages in  the  mirrors  of  the  jewelled  walls,  like  family  goddesses
come  in  curiosity  to  hear  their  first  words  and  seen  through
jewelled  .loopholes.  Abiding  in  his  new  father's  house,  by  his
noble  nature  raining  ambrosia  as  it  were  upon  his  new
mother's  heart,  he  spent  ten  blissful  days,  ever  varying  with
continually  renewed  tokens  of  favour ;  and  then,  leaving  regret
like  a  palace  porter  behind,  [165]  and  taking  all  men's  hearts
with  him  like  provisions  named  in  the  dowry,  he  managed  to
secure  his  dismissal  from  the  king  and  set  out  with  his  bride
to  his  native  country.

Here  ends  the  fourth  chapter — entitled  The  Exposition  of  The
Emperor's  Birth — of  the  Harsa-Carita  composed  by  Crl  Bana  Bhatta.


9-2


CHAPTER V.

[166]  As  the  inconstant  lightning,  having  shown  a  splendpur,
lets  fall  the  thunderbolt,

Fate  after  ordaining  happiness  to  men  superadds  heart-
rending affliction.

As  Ananta,  moving  his  coils,  lays  the  mountains  in
ruins,  so  does  the  one  endless  time  by  its  revolu-
tions

Lay  great  souls  low  in  the  dust,  many  together,  re-
specting none.

Subsequently  the  king  one  day  summoned  Rajyavardhana,
whose  age  now  fitted  him  for  wearing  armour,  and,  as  a  lion
despatches  his  whelp  against  the  deer,  placed  him  at  the
head  of  an  immense  force  and  sent  him  attended  by  ancient
advisers  and  devoted  feudatories  towards  the  north  to  attack
the  Hunas1.

For  several  stages  my  lord  Harsa  followed  his  march  with
the  horse.  When  however  his  brother  had  entered  the  region
which  blazes  with  Kailasa's  lustre,  being  at  youth's  adven-
ture-loving age,  he  spent  several  days  away  from  camp  on  the
skirts  of  the  Himalaya,  where  lions,  c,arabhas,  tigers,  and
boars  are  plentiful,  a  fawn-eyed  hunter  with  his  bright  form
dappled  by  the  radiant  glances  of  love-smit2  wood-nymphs.
His  bow  drawn  to  the  ear,  he  emitted  a  rain  of  shining  shafts,
which  in  a  comparatively  few  days  left  the  forests  empty  of
wild  creatures.

One  day  however  at  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night8,  dawn

1  Cf.  Visnu  Pur.  vol.  n.  pp.  133,  134.

2  Or  perhaps  '  anxious  (for  their  proteges).'

3  This  is  a  sign  of  near  fulfilment.


CHAPTER  V.  133

'

being  almost  come,  he  saw  in  a  vision  a  lior/  burning  in  an
overpowering  forest  fire,  which  reddened  the  whole  sky  with
a  sea  of  flickering  flame.  [167]  Into  that  same  fire  he  saw  the
lioness,  leaving  her  cubs,  hurl  herself  with  a  plunge.  At  this
the  thought  arose  in  his  heart — 'Stronger  of  a  truth  than
steel  are  the  bonds  whose  tissue  is  love,  when  even  brutes  are
drawn  on  by  them  to  acts  like  this.'  On  awakening  his  left1
eye  incessantly  throbbed ;  a  mysterious  tremour  overspread
his  frame ;  his  heart  started  without  cause  from  its  internal
moorings ;  for  no  reason  at  all  a  profound  dejection  came
over  him.  What  could  it  mean?  Various  conjectures  wracked
his  mind,  until  losing  all  self-command  he  bowed  his  face  in
thought,  so  that  the  fixed  pupils  of  his  partridge  eyes  seemed
to  make  the  earth  for  an  instant  a  bed  of  sprouting  land-
lotuses.  A  void  as  it  were  was  in  his  heart  during  that  day's
sport,  and,  when  the  sun  had  ascended  to  mid-day,  he
returned  home,  where,  lying  on  a  bamboo  couch  stretched
on  the  ground  with  a  pillow  white  as  moonshine  and  cool
saftdal  unguent  covering  its  frame,  he  remained  with  small
hand-fans  softly  waving  on  either  side,  full  of  apprehension.

Anon  he  beheld  afar  off  a  certain  Kurangaka  approaching
with  a  billet  tied  in  a  forehead- wrap  of  rags  of  deep  indigo  hue2.
Weariness  and  heat  had  combined  to  give  him  such  a  black-
ness of  body,  that  he  seemed  turning  into  charcoal  through
some  inner  fire  of  grief.  Disguised  as  the  dust  excited  by
the  quick  trot  of  his  hurried  approach,  the  very  earth  appeared
to  pursue  him  out  of  curiosity  to  learn  news  of  its  king.
Flapped  by  the  opposing  breeze,  the  long  hem  of  his  robe
fanned  both  his  flanks,  just  as  if  his  rapid  advance  had  given
him  wings.  Impelled  from  behind  by  his  master's  charge,
drawn  on  from  the  front  by  prolonged  emissions  of  weary
breath,  the  sun's  image  shaped  in  his  oozing  forehead  seeming
to  snatch  at  the  writing  in  eagerness  to  learn  its  import,  his
body  empty  of  every  sense,  as  if  he  had  dropped  them  in  his
haste,  he  stumbled  vacantly  upon  an  even  enough  road,  as


1  The  right  would  have  foretold  good  news.
-  The  dark«colour  symbolizes  the  bad  news.


134  THE HARSA-CARITA.

V

though  overweighted  by  the  purport  committed  to  the  letter.
[168]  One  mightfbompare  him  to  a  fragment  of  a  black  cloud
soon  to  let  fall  a  thunderbolt  of  ill-news,  a  smoke  whorl  of  a
fire  of  sorrow  soon  to  blaze,  a  seed  of  a  paddy  of  sin  soon  to
bear  its  harvest  ;  a  very  courier  of  ill-omen.

At  that  sight  Harsa's  heart  was  cloven  by  a  terror
taking  shape  from  the  previous  succession  of  evil  omens.
Approaching  with  a  bow,  Kurarigaka  presented  first  the
despondency  seated  in  his  looks  and  then  the  writing,  which
the  prince  took  in  his  own  hand  and  read.  With  its  contents
affliction  penetrated  to  his  soul,  and,  looking  the  picture
of  desolation1,  he  inquired  what  was  his  father's  sickness.
With  eyes  dropping  tears  and  lips  the  faltering  accents  Kur-
angaka made  a  two-fold  answer  '  It  is,  my  lord,  a  violent
fever.'  At  this  news  Harsa's  heart  was  instantly  splintered
into  a  thousand  pieces.  Anxious  for  the  preservation  of  his
father's  life,  he  rinsed  his  mouth  and  conveyed  to  Brah-
mans  the  whole  of  his  regal  equipage,  jewels  and  gold  and
silver  to  a  vast  amount.  Then  without  taking  food  he  started
up  and  calling  to  a  youth  who  stood  in  his  presence  sword  to
forehead,  ordered  him  to  saddle  his  horse.  The  grooms  having
hastily  run  up  to  bring  it,  he  mounted  and  set  out  alone  with
a  tremour  at  his  heart.

Startled  by  the  conch's  sudden  call  to  horse,  the  cavalry
made  ready  in  haste;  and  came  galloping  in,  troop  after  troop,
from  every  side,  filling  the  abyss  of  heaven  with  the  loud
tramp  of  resonant  hoofs.  On  the  way  deer,  passing  from
right  to  left2,  foreshadowed  the  approaching  end  of  the  lion
king.  Facing  the  sun's  flaming  circle,  a  crow  on  a  burnt-out
tree  uttered  its  dreadful  cry,  as  if  to  cleave  the  prince's  heart.
Straight  against  him  came  a  naked  Jain,  bedecked  with  pea-
cock's tail-feathers3,  a  fellow  all  lampblack  as  it  seemed  with


apo.  Kaila§candra  Datta's  text  reads  Ciciy/Mt-fipo  'with
confusion  in  his  looks.'  For  the  idea  in  acagrahanipo  cf.  c.  vi.  p.  202,
11.  9-11  (text).

2  The  opposite  of  the  prackiksina  or  respectful  order. The  insolence
of  the  deer  betokens  the  lion's  death.

3  To  sweep  insects  out  of  his  path  for  fear  uf  taking  life.


CHAPTER V.  135

•

the  collected  filth  of  many  days  besmirching  h^  body.  [169]
This  inauspicious  celebration  of  his  departure  deepened  the
prince's  apprehensions.  His  heart  softening  with  filial  love,
surmising  now  this,  now  that;  his  eyes  immovably  fixed  upon
his  horse's  shoulder ;  followed  in  silence — for  all  amusing  talk
was  at  an  end — by  his  royal  escort;  he  in  a  single  day  accom-
plished a  distance  amounting  to  many  daysf  journey.  When
the  adorable  sun,  despondent  as  it  seemed  at  the  news  of  the
king's  sickness,  bent  downwards  with  waning  splendour,  he
refused,  despite  the  frequent  admonitions  of  Bhandi  and  the
other  affectionate  nobles,  to  take  food.  Footmen  being  sent
ahead  to  secure  a  relay  of  villagers  to  show  the  best  way,  he
passed  the  night  in  the  saddle.

On  the  morrow  at  noon  he  reached  the  capital,  but  its
sounds  of  triumph  were  departed,  sunk  the  booming  of  its
drums,  checked  its  minstrelsy,  its  festivity  expelled.  No
troubadours  sang,  no  merchandise  was  exposed  for  sale  in  the
shops.  Here  and  there  gleamed  the  smoke  whorls  of  the
Kotihoma  rite1,  which,  twisted  by  the  force  of  the  wind,  re-
sembled crumpled  horns  of  Yama's  buffalo  ploughing  up  the
place,  or  death's  net  lines  encircling  it.  Overhead  roamed
flocks  of  crows,  which,  cawing  harshly  in  the  day  time,  like
the  tinkle  of  iron  bells  adorning  Yama's  buffalo,  announced
the  approach  of  calamity.  Here  loving  kinsmen  were  keeping
a  fast  to  appease  Ahibradhna2,  lying  before  his  image.  There
young  nobles  were  burning  themselves  with  lamps  to  propi-
tiate the  Mothers.  In  one  place  a  Dravidian  was  ready  to
solicit  the  Vampire3  with  the  offering  of  a  skull.  In  another
an  Andhra  man  was  holding  up  his  arms  like  a  rampart4  to
conciliate  Candi.  Elsewhere  distressed  young  servants  were
pacifying  Mahakala  by  holding  melting  gum  on  their  heads.
In  another  place  a  group  of  relatives  was  intent  on  an  oblation
of  their  own  flesh,  which  they  severed  with  keen  knives.  Else-


1  An  oblation  to  propitiate  adverse  planets.

2  Qiva. The  Bombay  text  reads  Ahirbudhna.


3  Amarddako  •  VetCilo^  liaudradevatiiblieda  ity  anye. Comni.

4  Kailagcandra  Datta  reads  -dntra-  '  entrails  of  a  sacrificed  animal,'
for  -bdhuvapra-.


136  THE HARsA-CARlTA.

,

where  again  [170]  young  courtiers  were  openly  resorting  to
the  sale  of  hunfan  flesh.  Thus  the  capital  seemed  polluted
with  the  ashes  of  cemeteries,  encircled  by  ill-omens,  pillaged
by  fiends,  swallowed  up  by  the  Kali  age,  hid  beneath  mounds
of  sin,  sacked  by  the  raids  of  demerit,  victimized  by  the
taunts1  of  transience,  appropriated  by  the  mockeries  of  fate ;
vacant,  wrapped  la  slumber,  robbed,  abashed,  deluded,  fallen
in  a  swoon.

No  sooner  had  he  entered  than  in  the  bazaar  street  amid
a  great  crowd  of  inquisitive  children  he  observed  an  Inferno-
showman2,  in  whose  left  hand  was  a  painted  canvas  stretched
out  on  a  support  of  upright  rods  and  showing  the  lord  of  the
dead  mounted  on  his  dreadful  buffalo.  Wielding  a  reed-wand
in  his  other  hand,  he  was  expounding  the  features  of  the  next
world,  and  could  be  heard  to  chant  the  following  verse : —

Mothers  and  fathers  in  thousands,  in  hundreds  children

and  wives
Age  after  age  have  passed  away: whose  are  they,  and

whose  art  thou  ?

With  this  still  further  rending  his  heart  Harsa  arrived  in
due  course  at  the  palace  door,  now  shut  to  all  the  world.
Dismounting,  he  perceived  a  young  physician  named  Susena
coming  out  with  a  disquieted  mien,  like  one  reft  of  his  senses.
After  receiving  his  salute  the  prince  asked  whether  there  was
any  improvement  in  his  father's  condition  or  not.  'Not  at
present,'  was  the  reply,  '  but  there  may  be  when  he  sees  your

1  The  Kashmir  text,  however,  and  Kaila§c.  read  adhikaraih  ('rule')
for  dhikkaruih.

2  Yamapattaka  '  one  who  exhibits  pictures  of  Hades.' Of.  Kipling
'Beast  and  Man  in  India'  p.  123:  'One  of  the  most  popular  of  the
pictures  sold  at  fairs  is  a  composition  known  as  Dkarmraj,  a  name  of
Yama,  the  Hindu  Pluto,  and  also  broadly  for  Justice. The  Judge  is
enthroned  and  demon  executioners  bring  the  dead  to  receive  their  doom.
The  river  of  death  flows  on  one  side  of  the  picture  and  those  go  safely
across  who  hold  a  cow  by  the  tail,  while  others  are  torn  by  terrible
fishes. Chitragupt,  the  clerk  or  recording  angel  of  Yama,  considered  to
be  the  ancestor  of  the  kayastk  or  clerkly  caste,  sits  in  an  office  with
account  books  exactly  like  those  of  a  Hindu  tradesman,  and  according
to  the  record  of  each  soul,  punishments  or  rewards  are  given. ..Duts  or
executioners  torture  offenders,  while  the  blest  sail  upwards  in  air-borne
chariots.'


CHAPTER V.  137

»

highness.'  So  amid  the  salutations  of  the  chamberlains  he
slowly  entered  the  palace.  There  he  found  people  bestowing
all  their  goods  in  presents,  worshipping  the  family  gods,
engaged  in  cooking  the  ambrosial  posset1,  performing  the  Six
Oblation  sacrifice2,  offering  tremulous  Durva  leaves  besmeared
with  clotted  butter,  chanting  the  Maha-Mayurl  hymn3,  purify-
ing the  household,  completing  the  rites  fof  keeping  out  the
spirits  by  offerings.  Earnest  Brahmans  were  occupied  in
muttering  Vedic  texts;  [171]  (Diva's  temple  resounded  with
the  murmur  of  the  Hendecad4  to  Rudra ;  (^aivas  of  great  holi-
ness were  bathing  Virupaksa's  image  with  thousands  of  vessels
of  milk5.  Seated  in  the  courtyard  were  kings,  distressed  in
mind  at  failing  to  obtain  a  sight  of  their  sovereign :  bathing,
eating,  and  sleeping  had  become  mere  names  to  them,  and  their
clothes  were  foul  from  neglect  of  the  toilet,  while  they  passed
day  and  night  motionless  as  though  pictured,  awaiting
bulletins  from  the  king's  personal  attendants  who  came
bursting  in  from  the  inner  apartments.  On  the  terrace  was
a  woe-begone  group  of  less  intimate  servants,  discussing  the
king's  sad  plight  in  whispers :  here  was  one  imagining  errors
on  the  part  of  the  doctors,  there  one  reading  out  descriptions
of  incurable  diseases,  one  recounting  bad  dreams,  one  im-
parting stories  of  demons,  one  publishing  communications
from  astrologers,  one  droning  out  portents ;  one  again  reflect-
ing upon  the  transiency  of  things,  chiding  this  mutable
world,  censuring  the  mockeries  of  the  Kali  age,  and  accusing
fate ;  another  indignant  with  dharma  and  reproaching  the
gods  of  the  royal  household ;  a  third  commiserating  the  lot
of  the  afflicted  young  nobles.

Scanned  by  his  father's  servants  with  eyes  that  brimmed
with  fast  flowing  tears,  the  prince  passed  on  into  the  third

1  Of  milk,  ghee,  and  rice  offered  as  a  life-preservative  to  the  gods.

2  '  Prajdpate  svdlid'  iti  sanndm  devatdndm  nCima  grikltvd  sanndm
evdhutlndm  praksepah  saddhutihoma  ucyate. Comm.

3  Mahdmdyurl  •  Bduddhawdya. Comm. Cf.  Bendall,  Catal.  Nepal
MSS.  p.  49.

4  Itudrdikddafl '  Civamantrah. Comm.

5  Or  perhaps  '  washing  Diva's  thousand  milk  vessels.' Virupdksa=*
Qiva,  because  of  his  third^  eye.


138  THE HARSA-CARITA.

i

court,  where  he  now  detected  an  odour  of  boiling  oil,
butter  and  dec^tions  emitting  a  steam  scented  with  various
herb  draughts.

In  the  White  House  a  deep  silence  reigned.  Numerous
lackeys  thronged  the  vestibule  ;  a  triple  veil  hid  the  salon ;  the
inner  door  was  closed ;  the  panels  were  forbidden  to  creak ;
closed  windows  Kept  out  the  draughts1.  Anguished  attend-
ants, chamberlains  furious  at  a  tramp  of  footsteps  on
the  stairs,  all  orders  issued  in  noiseless  signs.  [172]  Not
quite  near  the  king  sat  a  man  in  armour ;  in  a  corner  stood
one  bearing  a  gargling  bowl,  flurried  by  frequent  summonses;
in  the  Moon  Chamber  crouched  the  silent  ministers  of  state ;
the  screened  balcony  was  occupied  by  women  of  the  family
distracted  by  profound  grief;  in  the  quadrangle  a  cluster  of
despondent  servants.  A  few  loving  friends  had  been  admitted.
The  physicians  were  in  terror  at  the  deep-seated  ravages  of  the
disease,  the  king's  advisers  sunk  in  dejection,  the  purohit  stupe-
fied; friends  despaired,  pandits  were  torpid2,  faithful  feudatories
in  agony ;  the  chowrie-bearer  had  lost  his  wits,  the  bodyguard
was  emaciated  with  grief.  The  favourites  saw  the  accomplish-
ment of  their  wishes  fade  away ;  beloved  princes,  having
out  of  loyal  affection  abandoned  sustenance,  fainted  with  loss
of  strength ;  young  nobles  were  prostrate  on  the  ground  from
night-long  watching.  Grief  lay  heavy  on  a  group  of  heirs  to
ancient  houses ;  the  chamberlains  were  shrivelled  up  with
sorrow  ;  the  court  poets  had  laid  aside  their  glee ;  confiden-
tial servants  uttered  despairing  sighs ;  from  the  pale  lips
of  the  king's  mistresses  the  betel  stain  had  fled.

The  head  cook  was  intent  on  the  preparation  of  the  diet
ordered  by  perplexed  physicians.  Attendants  were  drinking
streams  of  water  from  uplifted  cups3  in  order  to  distract  the
pain  of  the  king's  dry  mouth.  Gourmands  were  being  fed  to
relieve  his  craving.  All  the  dealers  were  busy  in  providing  a

1  Or  'small  apertures  had  been  formed  to  secure  ventilation,'  as
Kaila9candra  Datta,  which  seems  preferable.

2  Kaila9C.  reads  '  viprdna '  '  half-dead  '  for  nidrdna. The  Kashmir
text  has  vidruna,  which  is  probably  right,  cf.  text  p.  89  1.  12  and  note.

3  But  v.  corntn.  ucca$akam  •  apagatapdnablidjanam  '  empty  cups.'


CHAPTER V.  139

*

pharmacopoeia  of  drugs.  One  might  infer  the  sick  man's
fearful  thirst  from  the  incessant  calls  to  yhe  waterman.
Butter-milk  was  freezing  in  pails  packed  in  ice ;  a  collyrium-
stick  had  been  cooled  with  camphor  powder  placed  on  a  moist
white  cloth;  in  a  new  vessel  besmeared  with  wet  clay  was  whey
for  a  gargle.  Water  trickled  from  soft  bundles  of  fibres  covered
with  delicate  (red)  lotus  leaves;  on  the  ground  where  were
cups  of  drinking  water  lay  bunches  of  blue  lotuses  with  their
stalks.  Boiled  water  was  being  cooled  by  passing  in  a  stream
from  cup  to  cup ;  red  sugar  diffused  a  pungent  odour.  On  a
stand  stood  a  sand  jar  for  the  sick  man's  eyes1  to  rest  upon ;
fresh  water-plants  were  coiled  round  a  dripping  globe ;  [173]  a
crystal  platter  gleamed  with  parched  groats  and  barley-meal;  a
paste  of  flour  and  curds  was  held  in  a  yellow  emerald  cup2 ;  a
collection  of  crystal,  pearl,  and  shell  vessels  was  sprinkled  with
powders  and  infusions  of  cooling  herbs.  Piles  of  myrobalans,
citrons,  grapes,  and  pomegranates  were  at  hand.  Lustral
water  was  being  scattered  by  fee'd  Brahmans.  A  flat  stone
was  stained  with  forehead  unguents  which  a  maidservant  was
pounding.

There  he  saw  his  sire  preparing  by  a  camp-lustration,  as  it
were,  of  burning  fever  for  the  conquest  of  the  next  world.
On  a  couch  uneven3  from  his  restless  movements  he  tossed
like  venom -tortured  Qesa  on  the  Milky  Sea.  Like  the  drying
ocean  of  doomsday4,  he  was  white  with  a  dust  of  pearl  powder3 ;
but  black  death  was  uprooting  him,  as  the  black  demon"  up-
rooted Kailasa.  As  they  touched  him,  the  hands  of  the
attendants  engaged  in  ceaselessly  smearing  him  with  sandal
were  as  white  in  the  palm  as  if  turned  to  ashes  by  contact
with  his  burning  limbs:  while  in  the  guise  of  the  sandal

1  For  -iintaracaksusi  read  -iituracaksu$i  with  Kailacc.  In  the  next
compound  Kailacc.  reads  -galagolayantrake  '  coiled  round  tlie  neck  of
a  globe '  for  -galadgolayantrake.

a  Or,  if  we  omit  pita  with  Kaila§c.  and  take  ma3dra  =  nllamani,  'a
sapphire  cup.'

3  Literally  'wavy.'

*  Ksayahlle  =  (l)  at  doomsday,  (2)  at  his  death.

5  Or  'pearls,  sand,  and  dust.'

0  DofHnano .  vddkikRdifCuaca, Comm. The  demon  is  Ravaua.


140  THE HARSA-CARITA.

r

ointment  his  abiding1  glory  seemed  to  be  saying  farewell  on  his
departure  to  another  sphere.  Incessantly  applied  petals  of
red,  white,  and  blue  lotuses  seemed  to  blot  his  body  with  the
falling  glances  of  death.

On  his  head  a  thick2  silken  cloth  bound  round  his  hair
told  of  never-ceasing  shocks  of  pain,  and,  swollen  with  intoler-
able anguish,  a  \ietwork  of  dark  veins  stood  out  upon  his
forehead's  page,  a  dreadful  spectacle,  as  if  death's  finger  were
drawing  lines  to  show  the  number  of  days  ere  the  end.  As
if  in  horror  at  the  sight  of  death's  approach,  the  pupils  of  his
eyes  had  retreated  a  little  inwards.  A  stream  of  hot  breath,
rippled  by  waves  of  grey  rays  which  issued  from  a  line  of  dry
teeth,  suggested  a  river  seen  in  a  mirage.  A  tongue  darken-
ing, as  if  scorched  by  that  burning  breath,  bespoke  the  con-
vulsions of  an  appalling  complication.  On  his  breast  lay
gems,  pearl-necklaces,  sandal,  and  moonstones,  as  if  he  were
making  himself  meet  for  the  sight  of  death's  emissaries.
Tossing  his  arms  in  the  contortions  of  his  agony,  he  seemed
seeking  to  cool  the  feverish  heat  with  a  shower  bath  formed
of  rays  from  the  nails  of  his  vibrating  hands.  Even  his
images,  as  they  fell  on  the  neighbouring  liquids,  jewelled
floor,  and  concave  mirrors,  [174]  seemed  to  bespeak  the
extremity  of  the  heat8.  A  swoon,  whose  touch  brought
relief,  he  honoured  like  a  wife  in  whom  was  all  his  trust.
All  about  him,  noted  by  the  affrighted  physicians,  were
symptoms  of  death,  like  the  letters  of  Yama's  summons.
On  the  eve  of  the  Great  Journey,  he  was  leaving  to  his
kinsmen's  hearts  the  inheritance  of  his  pains,  while,  wedded
as  he  was  to  soul-weariness,  his  bodily  charm  was  as  if  in
jealousy  deserting  him.  Against  him  disease  had  concen-
trated its  powers;  emaciation  let  fly  all  her  darts.  Helpless-
ness had  taken  him  in  hand:  pain  had  made  him  its  province,
wasting  its  domain,  lassitude  its  lair.  Stung  was  he  by
dejection,  appropriated  by  self-abandonment,  enslaved  by


1  Sthamuna  '  abiding '  =  (1)  everlasting,  (2)  staying  behind  on  earth.

2  Kaila^c.  reads  nibaddha-  '  bound  about  him '  for  nivida-.

3  I.e.  by  retreating  into  these  cool  objects.  <


CHAPTER V.  141

i

sickness,  dandled  by  death,  the  target  of  the  south1 ;  quaffed
by  qualms,  devoured  by  sleeplessness,  swallowed  by  sallovvness,
gulped  down  by  spasms ;  a  captive  to  calamity,  a  prey  to
pains,  a  city  sacked  by  torments ;  fate  laid  hands  upon  him,
destiny  descried  him,  transience  sniffed  upon  him,  nothing-
ness overbore  him;  mortality  had  taken  his  measure2, affliction
seized  her  advantage,  distraction  made  him^ier  dwelling;  he
was  on  the  confines  of  doom,  on  the  verge  of  the  last  gasp,  at
the  outset  of  the  Great  Undertaking3,  at  the  portal  of  the
Long  Sleep,  on  the  tip  of  death's  tongue;  broken  in  utterance,
unhinged  in  mind,  tortured  in  body,  waning  in  life,  babbling
in  speech,  ceaseless  in  sighs;  vanquished  by  yawning,  swayed
by  suffering,  in  the  bondage  of  wracking  pains.

Seated  by  his  side  and  touching  him  on  head  and  breast
was  queen  Ya9ovati,  her  eyes  swollen  with  ceaseless  weeping,
her  body  grey  with  various  medicinal  powders,  fanning  him,
though  her  hand  grasped  a  chowrie,  only  with  her  sighs,  and
crying  again  and  again  '  My  lord,  are  you  asleep? '

At  this  spectacle  the  prince's  mind,  devastated  by  the
first  shock  of  grief,  became  apprehensive  of  destiny,  and  he
deemed  his  father  already  a  dweller  in  the  realm  of  death.
[175]  For  a  moment  he  was  as  it  were  divorced  from  con-
sciousness. Discarded  by  firmness,  tenanted  by  agitation,
left  empty  of  delight,  mastered  by  despondency,  he  seemed
to  have  a  heart  of  fire  within  him.  Stricken  as  it  were  by
deadly  poison,  his  swooning  senses  left  him  in  a  darkness
beyond  the  gloom  of  hell,  a  vacancy  exceeding  that  of  space,
and  he  was  at  a  loss  how  to  act.  He  brought  his  heart  into
contact  with  fear,  and  his  head  with  the  earth.

As  soon  as  the  king  perceived  his  darling  son  while  still
at  some  distance,  swayed  even  in  that  extremity  by  over-
powering affection,  he  ran  forward  in  spirit  to  meet  him,  and
putting  out  his  arms,  half  rose  from  the  couch,  calling  to  him
'  Come  to  me,  come  to  me.'  When  the  prince  hastily  drew

1  The  region  of  the  god  of  death.

J  Kail&9c.  reads  parikalpitam  for  parikalitam.  Not  so  the  Kashmir
text.

1  Kail^c.  reads praiftsasya  'journey'  for prayasasya.


9 \


\  .

142  THE HARSA-CARITA.

»

near  with  dutifully  downcast  looks,  he  raised  his  son's  head
by  force,  and,  tft'dng  him  to  his  bosom,  seemed  in  his  fondness
to  plunge  into  the  heart  of  the  moon's  disc,  to  dive  in  a  great
lake  of  nectar,  to  bathe  in  a  mighty  torrent  of  haricandana  sap,
to  be  sprinkled  by  the  waters  of  Himalaya1.  Limb  pressed
to  limb,  cheek  joined  to  cheek,  closing  eyes  which  flowed  with
incessant  drops  forming  on  their  lashes,  he  held  his  son  in  a
long  embrace,  forgetting  all  the  torment  of  the  fever.  At
length  reluctantly  released,  the  prince  drew  apart2  and  bowed
low ;  then,  having  greeted  his  mother,  returned  and  sat  down
near  the  couch,  where  his  father  gazed  upon  him  with  eyes
that  seemed  to  drink  him  in  with  their  fixed  unblinking  look.
Again  and  again  he  touched  him  with  trembling  palms,  and,
speaking  with  some  difficulty — for  his  throat  was  dry  through
sickness, — 'My  boy,' he  said, 'you  are  thin.'  Whereat  Bhancli  ex-
plained that  it  was  three  days  since  the  prince  had  taken  food.
At  this  the  king,  after  a  long  sigh,  found  strength  to  say
in  tear-choked  accents : — 'I  know,  my  boy,  your  filial  love  and
exceeding  tender  heart.  At  times  like  this3  overmastering,
all-afflicting  family  affection  distracts  even  a  sober  man's
mind.  For  this  reason  you  must  not  give  yourself  over  to
sorrow.  Consumed  as  I  am  by  the  fever's  fierce  heat,  I  am
still  more  so  by  your  distress.  Your  leanness  cuts  me  like  a
sharp  knife.  Upon  you  my  happiness,  my  sovereignty,  my
succession,  and  my  life  are  set,  and  as  mine,  so  those  of  all
my  people.  The  sorrows  of  such  as  you  are  a  sorrow  [176]  to
all  people  on  earth;  for  no  families  of  small  worth  are  adorned
by  your  like.  You  are  the  fruit4  of  stainless  deeds  stored  up
in  many  another  life.  You  bear  marks  declaring  the  sove-
reignty of  the  four  oceans,  one  and  all,  to  be  almost  in  your
grasp.  By  your  mere  birth  my  end  is  attained,  I  am  free
from  the  wish  to  live.  Only  deference  to  the  physicians
makes  me  drink  their  medicines.  Furthermore,  to  such  as

1  All  these  images  suggest  '  coolness '  or  relief  from  the  heat  of  the
fever.

2  Head  apasritya  with  Kail^c.

3  Kaila9c.  reads  '  Idricesu  vidhuresu '  '  in  such  afflictions  as  this.'

4  Kaila9C.  reads  phalam  asyuneka, — explaining  ast/a  as  =  «afr//i«.


CHAPTER  V.  143

I

you,  who  through  the  merits  of  a  whole  people  are  born  for
the  protection  of  all  the  earth,  fathers  are  j>mere  expedient
to  bring  you  into  being.  In  their  people,  not  in  their  kin,
are  kings  rich  in  relatives.  Rise  therefore,  and  once  more
attend  to  all  the  needs  of  life.  Not  till  you  have  eaten  will  I
myself1  take  my  diet.'

At  these  words  the  flame  of  sorrow  blazed  up  still  more
fiercely  in  the  prince's  heart,  as  if  to  consume  it.  One  short
moment  he  paused,  and  then  being  again2  charged  by
his  father  to  take  food,  he  descended  from  the  White  House
with  these  thoughts  in  his  mind : — '  This  great  crash3  has
come  without  warning,  like  a  bolt  from  a  cloudless  sky.
Even  a  common  grief  is  a  breathing  death,  a  disease  without
antidote,  a  plunge  into  fire  without  being  reduced  to  ashes,  a
living  abode  in  hell,  a  shower  of  coals  without  light,  a  sawing
in  twain  without  cleavage,  a  lancet's  stroke  that  leaves  no  scar.
What  then  of  deeper  afflictions  ?  What  shall  I  do  now  ?'

Escorted  by  one  of  the  king's  officers,  he  proceeded  to  his
own  apartments,  where  he  partook  of  a  few  mouthfuls,  mouth-
fuls  which,  as  if  of  smoke,  evoked  tears,  as  if  of  fire  awoke  a
burning  in  his  heart,  as  if  of  poison  brought  on  swoons,  as  if
of  mortal  sin  aroused  disgust,  as  if  of  alkali  inflicted  pain.
While  rinsing  his  mouth,  he  ordered  his  chowrie-bearer  to
fetch  tidings  of  his  father's  state.  Having  gone  and  returned,
the  man  reported  that  the  king  still  remained  as  before :
whereat  the  prince  in  distress  of  mind  rejected  the  betel,
and  when  the  sun  inclined  to  setting,  summoned  all  the
physicians  in  private,  and  with  a  despairing  heart  inquired
what  steps  under  such  circumstances  should  be  taken.  [177]
'Your  highness,'  they  answered,  'reassure  yourself:  in  a  very
few  days  your  father  will  be  reported  restored  to  his  proper
self  and  pristine  condition4.'

Among  their  number,  however,  was  a  young  doctor  of

1  Railage,  reads  for  svayam  sukham  '  with  an  easy  mind.'

2  Kaila9<5.  reads  punah  punar  '  again  and  again.'

3  Mahapralayo  om.  Kaila§c.

4  Prakriti,  as  the  comm.  observes,  is  an  ominous  word,  implying
'ante-natal  state.' «


144  THE HARSA-CARITA.

•

Punarvasu'a  race  named  Rasayana,  a  youth  of  about  eighteen
years  of  age,  holding  an  hereditary  position  in  the  royal  house-
hold, in  which  he  had  been  cherished  like  a  son  by  the  king.
He  had  mastered  the  Ayur  Veda  in  all  its  eight  divisions,
and,  being  naturally  of  an  acute  intellect,  was  perfectly
familiar  with  the  diagnosis  of  diseases.  He  now  stood  silent
and  tearful  with  \lowncast  looks.  Being  appealed  to  by  the
prince,  '  Friend  Rasayana,  tell  me  the  truth,  if  you  see  any-
thing at  all  unpromising,'  he  replied  '  To-morrow  at  dawn,
your  highness,  I  will  state  the  facts  of  the  case1.'

At  that  very  instant  the  keeper  of  the  palace  lotus  pools,
comforting  a  ruddy-goose,  chanted  aloud  an  Aparavaktra
couplet : —

'  Fortify,  0  bird,  thy  heart ; freely  abandon  grief ; pursue

the  path  of  discretion  :
'With  the  beauty  of  the  red-lotus  pools  the  sun  hies  himself

to  Sumeru's  peak.'

Versed  in  the  omens  of  words,  the  prince  on  overhearing
this  relaxed  his  hopes  for  his  father's  longer  life.  The
physicians  gone,  he  lost  all  fortitude,  and  at  nightfall  went
up  again  to  his  father's  presence,  where  in  anguish  of  heart
he  spent  a  sleepless  night  prolonged  by  grief,  listening  with-
out cessation  to  his  father's  cries  such  as,  'The  heat  is  terrible,
bring  pearl  necklaces.  Harini ! — place  jewelled  mirrors  on  my
body,  Vaidehl ! — anoint  my  brows,  Lilavati !,  with  bits  of  ice —
give  me  camphor  powder,  Dhavalaksi ! — apply  a  moonstone  to
my  eye,  Kantamati! — set  a  blue  lotus  on  my  cheek,  Kalavati!
— give  me  a  rubbing  with  sandal,  Carumata ! — [178]  make  a
brisk2  breeze  with  a  cloth,  Patalika ! — assuage  the  heat  with
lotuses,  Indumati ! — refresh  me  with  wet  clothes,  Madira-
vati !  —  bring  lotus  fibres,  Malati !  —  wave  a  palm  leaf,
Avantika  ! — bind  tight  my  whirling  head*,  BandhumatI ! —
support  my  neck,  Dharanika! — place  an  ice-cooled  hand  upon
my  bosom,  Kurangavati ! — shampoo  my  arms,  Valahika  ! —

1  Yathavasthitam  may  however  be  masculine  =  'the  king's  real
condition '  :  so  Kaila9c.  trans. ;  in  the  comm.  he  gives  prakritam.

1  Pataya  (Kaila9c.  pataya]. patum  kuru  'make  brisk.' Comm.

3  Lit.  'imprison  my  runaway  head.'  Kail^c.  notes  a  var.  lee.
badhamanam.


CHAPTER  V.  145

•

squeeze  my  feet,  PadtnavatI ! — clasp  tight  my  body,  Ananga-
sena! — what  hour?  Vilasavati ! — sleep  will^not  come,  tell
stories,  KumudvatI !'

At  dawn  the  prince  descended,  and,  though  a  horse  was
held  in  readiness  by  a  groom  advancing  to  the  palace  door,
went  on  foot  to  his  own  quarters.  There  in  hot  haste  he
despatched  express  couriers  and  swift  camet  riders  one  after
another  to  procure  his  brother's  coming.  After  washing  his
(tear-soiled)  face  he  rejected  the  toilet  appurtenances  brought
by  the  servants.  Hearing  from  distracted  young  princes  stand-
ing before  him  an  indistinct  murmur  '  Rasayana,  Rasayana,'  he
asked  '  Well,  friends,  what  of  Rasayana  ?,'  whereat  they  all  at
once  became  silent.  Being  further  pressed,  however,  they
with  sorrowful  reluctance  explained  '  Your  highness,  he  has
entered  fire.'  The  prince  became  (ashy)  pale,  as  if  scorched
by  an  inner  fire,  and  his  grief-blinded  heart,  torn  up  by  the
roots,  refused  to  be  steadied.  'A  noble  man,'  he  thought,
'  would  rather  not  be  than  like  an  ordinary  person  utter
unwelcome  and  distressing  words.  His  generous  nature,
maintained  in  trying  circumstances,  has  like  unadulterated
gold  acquired  a  greater  brilliance  by  entering  fire.'  Again
he  thought  'Rather  was  this  to  be  expected  of  his  love.  Was
not  my  father  his  father,  my  mother  his  mother,  we  his
brothers?  [179]  Even  when  other  masters  are  taken  away,
a  life  retained  is  a  cause  of  shame  in  the  world :  how  much
more  in  the  case  of  my  auspiciously-named  father,  who  was
to  his  dependants  ambrosia  itself,  a  veritable  kinsman,  un-
failing in  favours !  In  burning  himself  he  has  acted  as  the
time  demanded.  Nay,  what  does  fire  destroy  of  him  who
abides  in  glory  steadfast  to  the  world's  end  ?  He  has  but  fallen
in  the  flames ;  'tis  we  who  are  burnt.  Blessed  indeed  is  he,  a
chief  among  the  fortunate:  but  hapless  this  royal  house,
deprived  of  such  a  noble  youth.  As  for  me,  what  exacting
task,  what  relic  of  duty,  what  preoccupation  prevents  this  un-
feeling life  from  even  now  going  its  way1?  What  hindrance

1  The  Kashmir  text  reads  prasthanisthuraih,  perhaps  to  be  taken
as  one  word,  'bent  on  departing' :  Kaila$c.  has  prasthah  for  pranah.
The  Comm.  (prastha .  agwgaminah}  evidently  read  prasthdh.

c.  10


146  THE HARSA-CARITA.

is  there  that  my  heart  bursts  not  in  a  thousand  parts?'  Thus
sorrow-stricken,  he  went  not  to  the  royal  lodging,  but  disre-
garding every  duty,  threw  himself  upon  a  couch  and  remained
wrapped  in  his  shawl  from  head  to  foot.

Such  being  the  prince's  state  and  the  king's  condition
remaining  the  same,  the  hands  of  the  people  seemed  rivetted
to  their  cheeks,  Streams  of  tears  modelled  upon  their  eyes,
their  looks  fastened  on  the  ends  of  the  noses,  sounds  of  wailing
graven  in  their  ears,  lamentations  a  natural  growth  upon
their  tongues,  sighs  budding  on  their  mouths,  syllables  of
woe  painted  upon  their  lips,  sorrows  stored  up  in  their  hearts.
Frighted,  as  it  were,  by  the  fire  of  scalding  tears,  sleep  dwelt  not
in  the  hollows  of  their  eyes :  smiles  vanished,  as  if  dissipated
by  the  wind  of  sighs :  speech,  as  if  consumed  to  nothingness
by  hot  pain,  went  not  forward.  Even  in  tales  no  jests  were
heard :  none  knew  whither  musical  parties  had  gone.  Dances
were  as  much  forgotten  as  if  they  belonged  to  the  past  of
previous  births ;  even  in  dreams  no  finery  was  used.  There
was  not  even  a  rumour  of  pleasure :  the  very  name  of  food
was  unspoken.  Groups  in  taverns  were  like  flowers  in  the
sky1:  troubadours'  voices  seemed  conveyed  to  another  world  :
[180]  recreation  appeared  to  belong  to  a  different  cycle  of
existence.  Again,  it  seemed,  was  Kama  scorched  by  a  fire,
that  of  sorrow :  even  by  day  none  left  their  couches.  In  slow
succession  too  there  appeared  in  the  world  portents  many
and  great  together  on  every  side,  betokening  the  fall  of  a
lofty  spirit  and  filling  all  creatures  with  apprehension  of  the
king's  death.

Thus : — first  the  earth,  heaving  in  all  her  circle  of  great
hills2,  moved  as  though  she  would  go  with  her  lord.  Next
the  oceans,  as  though  remembering  Dhanvantari3,  rolled

1  I.e.  were  non-existent.

2  The  Kiddcala's  are  seven  in  number,  viz.  Mahendra  (the  Northern
parts  of  the  Ghats),  Malaya  (the  Western  Ghats),  Sahya  (Northern  parts
of  Western  Ghats),  (^uktimat  (doubtful),  Riksaparvata.  (Mts.  of  Gond-
wana),  Vindhya,  Pdriyatra  (Central  or  Western  Vindhya).

3  Or  'seeking  (another) Dhanvantari' to  heal  the king. Read
Dhanvantarer  with  Kailagc.,  who  also  has  ature  tasmin  for  antare
tasmin. Dhanvantari  was  produced  at  the  churning  of  the  Ocean.


CHAPTER  V.  147

•

with  waves  noisily  plashing  upon  each  other.  High  in  the
heavenly  spaces,  apprehensive  of  the  king's  rwnoval,  appeared
comets  like  braided  locks  with  awful  curls  of  far-extended
flame1.  Beneath  a  sky  thus  lowering  with  comets  the  world
seemed  grey,  as  with  the  smoke  of  a  Long  Life  sacrifice
commenced  by  the  sky  regents.  In  the  sun's  circle,  now
shorn  of  its  radiance  and  lurid  as  a  bowl  of  heated  iron,
some  power,  studious  of  the  king's  life,  had  presented  a  human
offering  in  the  guise  of  a  horrid  headless  trunk.  The  lord  of
white  effulgence,  gleaming  'mid  the  round  rim  of  his  flaming
halo,  seemed  to  have  raised  a  rampart  of  fire  in  alarm  at
Rahu's  greedily  opening  jaws.  The  quarters,  won  by  the
king's  valour,  glowed  red  as  though  they  had  in  anticipation
entered  fire2.  All  crimsoned  with  flowing  showers  of  bloody
dew,  the  earth,  his  spouse,  appeared  to  have  shrouded
herself  in  a  gown  of  red  cloth  to  die  with  him.  The  portals
of  the  heavens  were  blocked  with  untimely  masses  of  dark
cloud,  as  though  the  regents,  fearing  the  tumult  of  the
monarch's  death,  had  closed  their  iron  door-panels.  Loud
grew  the  awful,  heart-riving  bursts  of  thunder-storms,  crash-
ing like  the  patter  of  drums  that  are  beaten  at  the  out-goings
of  the  king  of  the  dead.  The  sun's  brilliance  was  dimmed
by  dust-showers  brown  as  camel-hair,  which  started  up,  as
it  were,  beneath  the  hoofs  of  Yama's  approaching  buffalo.
Rows  of  jackals  lifted  high  their  muzzles  in  a  discordant
howl,  like  firebrands  catching  fire  from  flames  that  fell  from
the  sky3.  In  the  royal  mansion  the  images  of  the  family
goddesses,  [181]  whose  braided  hair  at  its  parting  lines  gave
forth  smoke  in  token  of  their  distress4,  seemed  to  be  mani-

1  The  quarters  of  the  heavens  are  compared  to  wives  fearing  for
their  husband's  death. Widows  wear  braided  hair. VitatacikhikalCipa-
vikatakutiliih  may  punningly  mean  '  curly  and  long  as  a  peacock's  out-
spread tail.'

2  There  are  puns  in  -prastidhitah  (also  '  decked  in  the  king's  splen-
dour ')  and  anuraktdh  ('  red '  and  '  devoted ').

3  Cf.  the  name  ulkdmidha  =  t  jackal.' Kaila§c.  reads  jvCddbhih  for
jvalah.

4  Cf.  Vergil  Georg.  I.  480  '  Et  maestum  illacrimat  templis  ebur  awa-
que  sudant.'  •

10—2


148  THE HAR§A-CARITA.

festing  their  grief  by  dishevelled  locks1.  A  swarm  of  bees,
ranging  feverishly  about  the  Lion  Throne,  produced  the  illu-
sion of  Kalaratri's2  tossing  plaits  of  curling  hair.  Never  for
an  instant  ceased  the  croak  of  crows  hovering  above  the  women's
quarter.  From  the  centre  of  the  white  umbrella's  circle  an  old
vulture,  screaming  on  high,  tore  with  nimble  beak  a  bit  of  a  gem
— the  kingdom's  fife  as  it  were — red  as  a  piece  of  juicy  meat.
Distressed  by  these  mighty  signs,  the  prince  could  scarce
live  through  that  night.  On  the  morrow  a  woman  ap-
proached from  the  palace  with  such  a  tinkle  of  ornaments
breaking  in  her  hurried  advance  that  she  seemed  a  procla-
mation of  the  victory  of  dismay.  The  clash  of  her  anklets,
as  they  moved  on  her  hurrying  feet,  set  the  craning  hamsas  of
the  palace  cackling,  as  if  from  a  (respectful)  distance  they  were
asking  '  What  ?  What  ? ' ;  while  in  a  blindness  of  tears  she
seemed  to  learn  the  way  from  tame  cranes  screeching  in  answer
to  the  girdle,  which  as  she  stumbled  rang  upon  her  broad  hips.
Her  forehead  having  been  cut  in  collisions  with  unnoticed
doors,  a  mass  of  blood  like  a  red  shawl's  fringe  covered  her
weeping  face.  Her  cane,  which  she  was  casting  away,
looked  like  a  stream  from  her  golden  bracelet,  melted  ap-
parently by  the  heat  of  grief.  Her  fluttering  shawl,  waving  in
the  wind  of  her  breath,  suggested  a  snake  trailing  its  slough
behind.  Hanging  over  her  sloping  shoulders,  tossed  by  the
wind,  and  black  as  strips  of  Tamala  bark,  her  hair  covered  her
bosom  in  a  dangling  unbraided  mass  in  keeping  with  her  grief.
As  she  incessantly  waved  her  hand,  which  through  the  pain  of
beating  her  breasts  was  swollen  and  dark  almost  like  copper
in  the  palm,  one  might  have  thought  it  scorched  through
wiping  away  her  hot  tears.  The  people  near  her,  imaged  in
her  cheek,  she  seemed  to  bathe  in  her  eyes'  broken  cascade,
as  if  they  were  soon  to  enter  the  fire  of  sorrow.  Under  the
quivering  rays  that  issued  from  her  restless  eyes  the  very

1  In  times  of  misfortune  the  hair  of  the  family  goddesses  is  supposed
sometimes  to  smoke  ;  the  smoke  is  the  dishevelled  hair.

2  A  form  of  Durga  : the  name  (Kdlardtri= '  Night  of  Doom ')  is
used  here  by  reason of  its  appropriateness. The  black  strings  of
bees  represent  the  plaited  hair.


CHAPTER V.  149

»

day  grew  black,  as  if  burnt  by  her  grief.  It  was  Vela,
Ya9ovati's  head  attendant,  inquiring  of  eve^one1  where  the
prince  was.  [182]  Welcomed  by  the  people's  despairing
looks,  she  drew  near,  and  letting  both  hands  fall  upon  the
mosaic,  so  that  as  she  bent  her  head  the  rays  from  her  teeth
seemed  to  besprinkle  her  pallid  lips  in  a  falling  shower,
'  Help,  help,  my  lord,'  she  cried ;  '  though  her  husband  lives,
the  queen  has  taken  a  certain  resolution.'

At  the  news  of  this  further  grief  the  prince,  as  if  his
strength  of  mind  had  given  way,  as  if  melted  by  sorrow,  drained
by  thought,  carried  off  his  feet2  by  pain,  clasped  by  alarm  to  her
bosom,  lost  all  power  of  action.  With  returning  consciousness,
'  Callous  that  I  am,'  he  thought,  '  the  assault  of  grief,  oft  as  it
falls  upon  my  heart,  yet  like  a  hammer's  stroke  upon  hard
flint,  evokes  fire  indeed,  but  reduces  not  my  frame  to  ashes.'
Rising,  he  went  in  haste  to  the  women's  apartments,  where
while  still  at  a  distance  he  heard  cries  like  these  from  queens
resolved  to  die  : — '  Beloved  Mango,  take  thought  to  yourself,
your  mother  is  seeking  another  home — I  am  going,  darling
jasmine  cluster,  bid  me  farewell — Without  me,  sister  pome-
granate by  the  house,  you  are  now  to  be  defenceless —
Forgive,  red  Agoka,  my  kicks3  and  sins  in  plucking  your
sprays  for  ear-ornaments — I  see  you,  seraglio  Vakula,  wayward
child  as  you  are  become  through  those  mouthfuls  of  wine —
Clasp  me  tight,  dear  Priyangu  creeper ;  I  am  passing  beyond
your  reach — Friend  Mango  at  the  porch,  you  must  render  me
the  funeral  libation  of  water4,  since  you  are  my  child — See  you
forget  me  not,  brother  parrot  in  your  cage  !  What  say  you  ?  I
am  taken  away  from  you — May  we  meet  again,  $arika,  in
dreams — Mother,  to  whom  shall  I  entrust  the  tame  peacock
who  clings  in  my  path  ? — Nurse,  you  must  fondle  this  pair  of
hanisas  like  children — Ah  hapless  me !  not  to  have  enjoyed
the  marriage  festivities  of  this  couple  of  ruddy-geese — Go  back,

1  Read  pratipurusam  with  Kailagc.

2  Tulita  is  supported  by  the  alliteration  : Railage, has  akulita
' dumbfounded.'

3  '  Sanupuraravena  strlcaranenCibhitddanam  dohadam  yad  a$okasya
tatah  puspodgamo  bhaved '  ap.  Kailagc. Of.  Malavikagn.  in.

*  I.e.  the  jcdanjali  offered  at  a  funeral.


150  THE HARSA-CARITA.

fawn  deer,  mother's  darling — Chamberlain,  fetch  my  favuiirite
lute,  I  must  embrace  it — Take  a  good  look  at  me,  Candrasena
— VindumatI,  this  is  my  last  greeting — [183]  Let  go  my  feet,
girl — Venerable  old  widow  friend,  why  do  you  weep  ?  I  am  in
the  hand  of  fate — Chamberlain,  old  friend,  why  pass  respect-
fully round  an  unlucky  woman  like  me  ? — Control  yourself,
foster  sister,  why  do  you  fall  at  my  feet  ? — Clasp  me  by  the
neck,  sister,  for  the  last  time — Cruel,  I  have  not  seen  my
dear  friend  Malayavati — This  humble  greeting,  KurarigavatI,
is  for  goodbye — Sanumati,  this  is  my  last  obeisance —
This,  KuvalayavatI,  is  our  final  embrace — Pardon,  friends,
our  lovers'  quarrels.'

Entering  with  these  sounds  burning  in  his  ears,  he  saw
his  mother  just  issuing  forth,  after  giving  away  all  her  wealth
and  assuming  the  vestments  of  death,  with  the  purpose  of
entering  the  fire,  like  Sita,  before1  her  lord.  Still  wet  from
her  recent  bath,  she  resembled  the  holy  Qri  just  risen  from
the  ocean.  Like  the  sky  with  its  double  twilight  tints,  she
wore  two  saffron-brown  robes.  Enveloping  her  form,  like  a
silken  shawl,  she  wore  the  tokens  of  her  un widowed  death,
reddened  by  a  tissue  of  light  from  lips  stained  with  the  deep
dye  of  betel2.  Hanging  between  her  breasts  was  a  red  neck-
cord,  suggesting  a  stream  of  blood  pouring  from  a  broken  heart.
Her  necklace,  the  thread  of  which  was  drawn  aside  by  the
hooked  point  of  a  cross-bent  earring,  seemed  a  halter  of  white
silk  compressing  her  throat.  Her  limbs  being  all  aglow  with
moist  saffron  paste,  she  appeared  to  be  swallowed  in  the  pyre's
devouring  flames,  while  she  filled  the  bosom  of  her  robe  with
white  tears  like  flower  offerings  to  its  blaze.  At  every  step
she  scattered  in  dropping  bracelets  a  kind  of  farewell  present
to  the  family  goddesses.  From  her  neck  down  to  her  instep
hung  wreaths  of  strung  flowers,  as  if  she  were  mounted  on  a
death-swing  with  garlands  for  cords.

An  ear-lotus  resonant  with  bees  humming  within  seemed
to  be  saluting  her  lotus  eyes.  The  domestic  hai]isas,  lovers

1  With  reference  to  Sita  '  before  '  =  '  in  presence  of.'

2  Satis  are  burnt  in  all  their  ornaments. Kaila^c.  reads  avidkava
separately  '  though  no  widow,'  and  -patalam  ptitala/u.


CHAPTER  V.  151

.

of  her  jewelled  anklets,  moved  in  a  circle  round  her,  as  if
to  make  the  ceremonial  circuit1.  Her  hand  carried  a  picture
representing  her  husband,  which  she  held  as  steadfast  as  her
heart,  where  he  dwelt,  was  fixed  on  death.  Lovingly,  like
a  pennon  of  wifely  love,  she  clasped  her  lord's  spear-haft,
reverently  tied  with  waving  strings  of  white  flowers.
Before  the  king's  umbrella,  spotless  as  Aer  life,  she  shed
tears  as  to  a  kinsman.

She  was  giving  instructions  to  her  husband's  ministers,  who
grasped  them  with  difficulty,  their  eyes  being  stopped  by
torrents  of  tears  that  welled  up  as  they  fell  at  her  feet.
[184]  Her  ears  caught  the  sound  of  wailing  in  the  house,
where  a  group  of  old  kinsmen,  grieving  at  their  courteous
dismissal,  were  adding  to  the  clamour.  The  roars  of  the
caged  lions  took  her  heart  captive,  resembling,  as  they  did,
her  husband's  utterance.  Her  nurse  and  her  conjugal  love
had  combined  to  beautify  her :  an  old  woman  and  swooning,
familiar  both,  supported  her :  a  friend  and  agony,  comrades  in
adversity,  embraced  her :  servants  and  pain  were  about  her,
clasping  every  limb :  great  princes  and  sighs  attended  her2 :
behind  came  aged  chamberlains  and  heavy  griefs.  Even
upon  her  husband's  favourite  hounds  she  cast  a  tearful  eye :
she  fell  at  the  feet  even  of  rival  queens :  to  even  the  painted
figures  she  offered  greeting :  before  even  the  domestic  birds
she  clasped  her  hands :  to  the  very  brutes  she  said  farewell :
she  embraced  the  very  trees  about  the  palace.

'  Mother,'  cried  the  prince  while  still  afar,  his  eyes  filling
with  tears,  '  do  you  also  abandon  hapless  me  ?  Be  merciful
and  turn  back,'  and  so  in  the  act  of  speaking  fell  at  her  feet
till  his  crest  was  almost  lovingly  kissed  by  the  light  of  her
jewelled  anklets.  As  he  lay  there  with  his  head  touching
her  feet,  her  youngest  and  dearest  son  in  such  distraction  of
mind,  the  queen  Yacovati,  propped  up3  by  a  great  frenzy  of
grief  like  a  mountain,  carried  away  into  the  Tartarean
darkness  of  a  swoon,  overborne  by  the  full  tide  of  love

1  Read  pradaksimkriyamdnam  with  Kailagc.

a  Read  kidaputrair  ucchvasitaicca  with  Kailacc.

3  Cf.  Persius  Sat.  l.«!78,  '  Antiopa  aerumnis  cor  luctijicabtte  fulta.'


• -


152  THE HARSA-CAR1TA.

i

rising  in  might  like  an  outburst  of  accumulated  tears  long
pent  up,  could  not  in  spite  of  all  her  efforts  check  the
torrent  of  her  weeping.  Her  bosom  heaved  convulsively,
betraying  the  resistless  will  of  grief:  her  throat  was  choked
distressfully  with  sobs :  her  lip  quivered  with  exceeding
agony,  and  her  tightened  nostrils  repeated  the  tremor :  closing
her  eyes,  she  deltiged  her  clear  cheeks  with  flowing  rills  of
tears :  then  raising  her  face  a  little,  she  covered  it  with  the
hem  of  her  shawl,  wherein  her  shining  nails  showed  forth  in  a
row,  like  a  spring  of  lucid  tears  welling  up  through  the  thin
interstices.  [185]  Loud1  and  long  she  wept  like  some  mean
woman,  while  with  anguished  heart  and  dripping  breasts  she
recalled  to  mind  from  the  day  of  his  birth  all  the  childish
years  when  he  lay  in  her  bosom.  Then2,  as  her  thought
recurred  to  home  and  kin,  full  oft  she  moaned,  calling  aloud
upon  her  parents,  'Mother!  father!  look  not  upon  me  as  a
sinner  that  in  my  sore  affliction  I  have  set  out  for  the  other
world':  crying  to  her  dear  elder  son  far  away,  '  Alas  darling !
that  I,  all  ill-fated,  see  you  not ' :  lamenting  her  daughter,
now  settled  in  her  father-in-law's  house,  'Defenceless  are
you  now ' :  reproaching  fate,  '  Merciless  power,  how  have  I
offended?':  inveighing  in  various  ways  against  herself,  'No
woman  has  had  such  an  evil  portion  as  I ' :  suddenly  reviling
death,  '  Remorseless  one,  thou  hast  stolen  me  away  ! '

When  this  outburst  of  grief  had  died  away,  she  lovingly
raised  her  son,  and  with  her  hand  wiped  his  streaming  eyes,
which,  as  if  melting,  seemed  to  flow  only  the  more3  when  the
rays  from  her  nails  clustered  in  masses  on  his  lashes.  Her
own  eyes  also  she  wiped,  as,  again  and  again  refilling,  they
were  distressed  by  a  trickling  succession  of  tiny  drops,  while
their  whiteness,  swallowed  up  by  a  deep  red,  departed,
their  corners  were  swoln  with  scalding  tears,  and  their
lashes  bestarred  with  pearls4  of  lucid  dew.  Then  she  set
behind  her  ear  a  curl,  which,  loosened  by  her  distress,  clave

1  Muktakantham  '  uncontrollably.'

2  Insert  ca  with  Kaiha9c.

3  Or  simply  '  in  torrents.' The  rays  are  the  white  tears.

4  -tdra-  is  omitted  by  Kaila^c.  v


CHAPTER  V.  153

>

to  her  tear-moistened  cheek :  pushed  aside  a  mass  of  tresses
entangled  with  a  disordered  and  fallen  ear-ornament :  drew
back  with  her  hand  a  shawl  which,  being  wet  and  filled  with
a  torrent  of  tears,  had  somewhat  slipped :  bathed  her  lotus
face,  whose  beauty,  marked  with  thin  red  lines  impressed  by
the  shawl's  hem,  wore  a  rippled  appearance,  with  water
poured  from  a  silver  flamingo-mouthed  vessel  tilted  by  a
hunchbacked  girl1:  wiped  her  hands  on  a  white  cloth  held  by
mutes2:  stood  for  some  time  with  her  eyes  fixed  immoveably
upon  her  son's  face,  and  then  after  many  long  sighs  spoke.

'  It  is  not,  dear,  that  you  are  unloved,  without  noble
qualities,  or  deserving  to  be  abandoned.  With  my  very
bosom's  milk  you  drank  up  my  heart.  If  at  this  hour  my
regard  is  not  towards  you,  'tis  that  my  lord's  great  con-
descension comes  between  us3.  Furthermore,  dear  son,  [186]
I  am  not,  like  glory4  or  the  earth,  incompassionate,  a
requisite  of  sovereignty,  ever  craving  for  the  sight  of  another
lord.  I  am  the  lady  of  a  great  house,  born  of  a  stainless
ancestry,  one  whose  virtue  is  her  dower.  Have  you
forgotten  that  I  am  the  lioness  mate  of  a  great  spirit,  who
like  a  lion  had  his  delight  in  a  hundred  battles  ?  Daughter,
spouse,  mother  of  heroes,  how  otherwise  could  such  a  woman
as  I,  whose  price  was  valour,  act  ?  This  hand  has  been  clasped
by  even  such  a  hero,  thy  father,  a  chief  among  princes,  peer
of  Bharata,  Bhagiratha,  and  Nabhaga.  Upon  this  head
have  the  subservient  wives  of  countless  feudatories  poured
coronation  water  from  golden  ewers.  This  forehead,  in
winning  the  honourable  fillet  of  chief-queen,  has  enjoyed  a
thing  scarce  accessible  to  desire.  These  breasts  have  worn
robes  swayed  by  the  wind  of  chowries  waved  by  captive  wives
of  foes;  they  have  been  sucked  by  sons  like  you.  Upon

1  In  this  clause  read  with  Kailagc.  tarahgitam  iva  ca,  -Idoanyam,
and  kubjikd-  for  kunjikd- :  the  two  last  readings  are  in  the  Kashmir
text. By  a  series of  puns  the  queen's  face  is  compared  to  a  lotus,
tarahgitam  in  this  connection  meaning  'wave-tossed.'

2  Kaila^c.  has  kalamukakara-  not  loka-. He  also  inserts  dhttuta-
dhaeale  before  vdsahcakale  and  reads  pdnim  for  pdnl.

3  For  '  antaritcl '  Railage,  reads  '  antaritam.' The  sense  is  the  same.

4  Cf.  '  $urasamagam*ikavyasaninyd  lak?myd '  Kadambarl.


154  THE HARSA-CARITA.

<

the  heads  of  rival  wives  have  these  feet  been  set ;  they  have
been  adored  with  diamond-wreaths  of  diadems  by  the  bending
matrons  of  a  whole  capital.  Thus  every  limb  has  fulfilled  its
mission :  I  have  spent  my  store  of  good  works,  what  more
should  I  look  to  ?  I  would  die  while  still  unwidowed.  I
cannot  endure,  like  the  widowed  Rati1,  to  make  unavailing
lamentations  for* a  burnt  husband.  Going  before,  like  the
dust  of  your  father's  feet,  to  announce  his  coming  to  the
heavens,  I  shall  be  high  esteemed  of  the  hero-loving  spouses
of  the  gods.  Nay,  what  will  the  smoke-bannered  one2  burn
of  me,  who  am  already  on  fire  with  the  recent  sight  of  his
heart-rending  pains  ?  Not  to  die,  but  to  live  at  such  a  time
would  be  unfeeling.  Compared  with  the  flame  of  wifely
sorrow,  whose  fuel  is  imperishable  love,  fire  itself  is  chilly
cold.  How  suits  it  to  be  parsimonious  of  a  life  light  as  a
bit  of  rotten  straw,  when  that  life's  lord,  majestic  as  Kailasa,
is  passing  away  ?  Even  should  I  live,  yet  after  the  mortal
sin  of  slighting  the  king's  death  the  joys,  my  son,  of  my  son's
rule  will  touch  me  not.  In  those  that  are  consumed  by
grief  felicity3  is  ominous,  accursed,  and  unavailing.  Not  in
the  body,  dear  son,  but  in  the  glory  of  loyal  widows4  would
I  abide  on  earth.  [187]  Therefore  dishonour  me  no  more,
I  beseech  you,  beloved  son,  with  opposition  to  my  heart's
desire.'

So  saying  she  fell  at  his  feet.  But  the  prince  hastily
drew  them  away,  and  bending  down,  held  her  in  both  his
arms,  and  raised  her  prostrate  form.  Pondering  the  in-
evitableness  of  grief,  deeming  that  act  to  be  the  better  part
befitting  a  lady  of  rank,  recognizing  her  fixed  resolution,  he
stood  in  silence  with  downcast  looks.


1  Cambhund  tu  hate  kdme  tatpatnl  ratisaujititd
Mwnoha  purato  dristvd  patim  bhasmdvacesitam  \\
Jdtasanjnd  muhurttena  vilaldpa  ha  citradhd
Yadvildpdd  vane  vdpi  samaduhkham  abhiit  tadd  \  \ ,

Kaila§c.  from  Skanda  Purana.

2  I.e.  fire.

3  There  is  a  pun  in  bhutih,  which  may  also  denote  '  ashes.'

4  Vifvastdndm  •  vidhavdndm  Comrn.  cf.  A.K»


! ^


CHAPTER V.  155

True  is  it  that,  even  when  made  timorous  by  affection,  a
noble  nature  resigns  itself  to  what  accords  with  place  and  time.
Having  embraced  her  son  and  kissed  his  head,  the  queen
went  forth  on  foot  from  the  women's  quarter,  and,  though
the  heavens,  filled  with  the  citizens'  lamentations,  seemed  to
block  her  path,  proceeded  to  the  Sarasvati's  banks.  Then,
having  worshipped  the  fire  with  the  blooming  red  lotus
posies  of  a  woman's  timorous  glances,  she  plunged  into  it,  as
the  moon's  form  enters  the  adorable  sun.  The  other,  distracted
at  his  mother's  death,  departed  'mid  a  throng  of  kinsmen
to  his  father's  side,  and  found  him  with  his  vital  forces
nearly  spent,  revolving  his  eyeballs  as  the  declining  lord  of
stars  (the  Moon)  revolves  his  stars.  Overcome  with  excess  of
intolerable  grief,  robbed  by  affection  of  all  self-control,  he
clasped  those  lotus  feet  which  had  been  fondled  by  the
assembled  crests  of  all  proud  kings;  and  uttering  a  cry,
burst  like  a  common  man  into  a  long  fit  of  weeping,  rain-
ing from  clouded  eyes  a  most  pellucid  stream  of  tears.  It
seemed  as  if  an  inner  fire  were  melting  his  moonlike  face,  the
light-texture  of  his  teeth  turning  to  water,  the  loveliness  of
his  eyes  oozing  out,  the  ambrosia  of  his  countenance  trick-
ling away.

The  king,  whose  eyes  were  closing1,  recovering  conscious-
ness as  the  sound  of  the  prince's  ceaseless  weeping  fell  upon
his  ear,  uttered  in  faint  tones  these  words : — "You  should  not
be  so,  my  son.  Men  of  your  mould  are  not  infirm  of  heart.
Strength  of  soul  is  the  people's  mainstay,  and  second  to  it  is
royal  blood.  With  you,  the  vanguard  of  the  stout-hearted,
the  abode  of  all  preeminence,  what  has  weakness  to  do  ?
[188]  To  say  you  are  the  lamp  of  our  line  were  almost
depreciation  of  one  whose  brilliance  compares  with  the  god
of  day.  To  call  you  a  lion  among  heroes  is  like  a  reproach  to
one  whose  prowess  is  seconded  by  penetrating  insight2.  To

1  But  the  commentator  explains  uparudhyamanadristir  as  '  having
his  consciousness  impeded.' Kaila^c.  reads  uparirudhyamana-  'eyes
turned  up.'

2  If  we  keep  caurya  (which  Kaila^c.  omits),  it  will  be  '  heroism  and
penetrating  insight.' «


156  THE HARSA-CARITA.

•

declare  this  earth  yours  is  almost  a  vain  repetition,  when
your  bodily  marks  proclaim  an  universal  emperor's  dignity.  To
bid  you  take  to  yourself  glory  is  almost  contradictory,  when
glory  has  herself  adopted  you.  'Succeed  to  this  world'  is  a
command  too  mean  for  an  intending  conqueror  of  both  worlds.
'  Appropriate  my  treasury '  is  a  grant  of  little  service  to  one
whose  sole  craving  is  for  the  accumulation  of  fame  spotless  as
moonlight.  '  Make  prize  of  the  feudatory  kings '  is  almost
meaningless,  when  your  virtues  have  made  prize  of  all
beings.  'Support  the  burden  of  royalty'  is  an  injunction
misbecoming  one  accustomed  to  support  the  burden  of  the
three  worlds.  '  Protect  the  people '  is  but  reiteration,  when
the  sky  has  your  long  arm  for  its  bar.  '  Guard  well  your
dependants '  is  an  incidental  duty  to  a  peer  of  the  world's
Guardians.  '  Practise  yourself  in  arms/  to  one  whose  forearm
is  blackened  by  the  bow-string's  callous  brand  how  can  this
advice  be  given  ?  '  Check  levity '  is  an  utterance  without
excuse  towards  one  whose  senses  even  in  tender  years  were
held  in  check.  'Annihilate  your  foes'  is  a  suggestion  of
your  own  inborn  valour."  With  these  words  on  his  lips  the
lion  king  closed  his  eyes  never  to  open  them  more.

In  that  hour  the  sun  too  was  reft  of  the  brilliance  which
was  his  life.  Ashamed  as  it  were  of  his  own  sinfulness
involved  in  the  taking  of  the  king's  life,  he  now  bent  low  his
face.  As  if  scorched  within  by  a  fire  of  sorrow  for  the
monarch's  decease,  he  assumed  a  coppery  hue.  Slowly,
slowly  he  descended  from  the  heavens,  as  if  in  compliance
with  earthly  usage  to  pay  a  visit  of  condolence.  As
though  to  present  an  oblation  of  water  to  the  king,  he  drew
nigh  to  the  western  ocean.  As  soon  as  the  water  was
presented,  his  thousand  hands  became  red  as  if  burnt  in
sorrow's  flame.  [189]

With  radiance  thus  subdued,  as  if  the  mighty  emperor's
death  had  brought  on  a  deep  distaste  for  life  and  colour,  the
light-coroneted  god  entered  the  hollows  of  the  mountain
caves1.  Cool  grew  his  heat,  as  though  moistened  by  the

1  Like  an  ascetic. <


CHAPTER  V.  157

gathering  storm  of  the  people's  tears.  The  world  assumed  a
lurid  tinge,  as  if  from  the  colour  of  all  humanity's  tear-
flushed  eyes.  The  day  grew  black,  as  if  scorched  by  the  heat
of  countless  people's  burning  sighs.  From  the  day-lotuses
their  glory  departed,  as  though  it  had  started  to  follow  the
king.  As  the  shadows  passed  on,  the  earth  became
dark  as  with  grief  for  her  lord1.  Like  thfe  heirs  of  noble
houses,  anguished  cakravdkas,  abandoning  their  wives,
resorted  with  piteous  cries  to  the  outskirts  of  the  water2.
Alarmed  as  it  were  at  their  widowhood,  the  lotuses  hid
their  treasure  chambers3.  The  red  glow  oozed  away,  like  a
bloody  flow  from  the  sky-queens'  bursting  hearts.  In  due
course  the  lord  of  splendour  had  gone  to  the  other  world,
leaving  only  the  afterglow  behind4.  Like  a  banner  of  the
dead,  the  twilight  came  all  ruddy  with  a  lurid  expanse
spreading  far  and  wide  over  the  heavens.  Dusky  streaks,
like  the  lines  of  black  chowrie  ornaments  upon  a  bier,  were
seen  obstructing  the  view5.  A  night  black  in  all  its  quarters
was  mysteriously  built  up,  like  a  pyre  with  black  beams  of
aloe  wood6.  With  smiling  faces  the  beauteous  night  lotuses
adorned  themselves  in  ivory-petalled  buds  and  formed  for
themselves  white  garlands  of  wreathed  filaments,  like  wives
in  readiness  to  follow  their  lord  to  death7.  Like  the  tinkling


1  The  puns  here  turn  on  the  various  meanings  of  chayd  —  (V)  bright-
ness, (2)  shadow,  and  cyamd  =  (l)  black,  (2)  lady. The  puns  require
the  reading  parivritta-  for  parivrita- :  the  shadows  have  retraced  their
course  eastwards.

2  Or  '  vicinity  of  the  woods ' :  cf.  Comm.  vanam  •  toyam  vipinam  ca.
The  nobles  seek  the  woods,  the  birds  the  water.

3  The  lotuses  are  compared  to  queens,  who,  alarmed  by  the  breaking
of  the  royal  umbrella  (implying  the  king's  death),  hide  their  treasures
(ko$a  =  (\} buds, (2) treasures). Chattrabhahga also  refers  to the
umbrella-like  leaves  fading.

4  As  the  king  himself  had  gone,  leaving  only  affection  behind.

6  Dar^anapratikulasu  taken  with  the  chowries  will  mean  '  ominous
to  view.'

0  Or — with  the  night — '  black  in  its  quarters  as  aloe  wood.'

7  'Beauteous night lotuses' may also punningly mean 'night
lotuses  like  Satis ' : '  ivory-petalled  buds '  ( = '  buds  with  petals  white
as  ivory ')  also  means  '  ehrrings  of  ivory.'


158  THE HARSA-CARITA.

«

bells  of  the  gods'  descending  chariot  were  heard  the  voices  of
birds  settling  in  their  nests  in  the  tree  tops.  In  the  eastern
quarter  the  moon  appeared  in  sight,  like  the  umbrella  of
Indra  come  forth  to  welcome  the  king  on  his  journey  along
the  heavens.

At  that  hour  the  feudatories  and  townsmen  headed  by
the  family  priest,  taking  upon  proffered  shoulders  [190]
the  bier  of  this  Qivi-like1  king,  bore  him  to  the  river
Sarasvati,  and  there  upon  a  pyre  befitting  an  emperor
solemnly  consumed  all  but  his  glory  in  the  flames.  As
for  my  lord  Harsa,  through  all  that  night,  terrible  as
BhimarathP,  he  sat  with  the  princes  sleepless  on  the  un-
cushioned  ground,  surrounded  by  all  the  connections  of  the
royal  household  in  a  dumb  sorrowing  company  like  an
universal  assemblage  of  living  beings  ;  while  his  tears  rained
down  like  an  outpouring  of  the  flood  of  affection  which,
heated  by  sorrow's  fire,  flowed  only  within.  In  his  heart  he
thought : — '  Now  that  my  father  is  taken  away,  the  world  of
the  living  has  reached  its  goal :  a  chasm  sunders  the  progress
of  mankind ;  the  eldorados  of  desire  are  laid  desolate,  veiled
are  the  portals  of  joy.  Truthfulness  is  lulled  to  sleep,  the
people's  livelihood  is  made  a  spoil,  vanished  is  the  love  of
heroism,  sweet  speech  annihilated.  Banished  are  all  kinds
of  manly  sports,  ended  is  delight  in  battle,  pleasure  in  the
virtue  of  others  is  laid  low,  men  of  trust  are  an  exhausted
stock.  No  place  is  there  for  great  feats,  no  profit  in  the
Qastras,  no  prop  for  the  spirit  of  heroism,  discernment  is
passed  into  a  legend.  Let  men  offer  water3  to  might,  let  the
protection  of  the  people  go  a  begging,  let  chivalry  bind  her
widow's  braid,  let  sovereign  glory  flee  to  a  hermitage4,  let


1  Civi  gave  up  a  part  of  his  own  flesh  to  save  a  pigeon  from  a  hawk.

2  Bhimaratlil  =  <l  the  night  of  doomsday,'  or  '  that  night  in  a  man's  life
which  follows  upon  77  years,  months,  and  days,'  or,  according  to  the
commentator,  '  a  river  in  hell.'

3  Sc.  as  at  a  funeral.

4  The  words  samaprayatu  rdjyaprir  acramapadam  are,  as  Kaila^c.
observes,  ominous  of  Mdjyacrl's  fortunes,  since  they  may  also  mean  '  let
R.  flee  to  a  hermitage.'


CB AFTER  V.  159

the  earth  array  herself  in  two  white  robes1,  let  merriment  wear
a  pair  of  bark  dresses,  let  valour  mortify  herself  in  forest  seclu-
sions, let  heroism  put  on  rags.  Whither  now  must  gratitude  go
to  seek  him  ?  Where  again  will  the  creator  get  such  atoms  for
the  construction  of  great  spirits  ?  The  ten  regions  now  find
themselves  empty  of  virtue,  the  world  has  become  a  darkness
unlighted  by  duty,  fruitless  now  is  the  bL'th  of  those  who
live  by  the  sword.  Without  my  father  whence  are  to  come
those  gatherings  of  heroes  when  throughout  the  day  the
cheeks  of  warriors  bristle  as  stories  go  round  full  of  the
delight  of  famous  fights  ?  Would  that  even  in  a  dream  I
might  once  more  see  his  lotus  face  with  its  long  red  eyes2!
[191]  Even  in  another  birth  might  I  but  clasp  again  those  arms
more  massive  than  pillars  of  steel !  Even  in  another  world
might  I  but  hear  his  voice,  deep  as  the  roar  of  the  churned
Milk  Ocean,  calling  me  "  son  "  in  accents  like  a  torrent  of
ambrosia.'

While  the  prince  was  engaged  in  these  and  other  medi-
tations, the  night  drew  drearily  enough  to  a  close.  Anon
the  cocks  began  to  clamour  wildly,  as  if  in  grief.  The
courtyard  peacocks  precipitated  themselves  from  the  tops  of
the  trees  on  the  garden  mounts3.  The  birds,  forsaking  their
homes,  started  forth  for  the  forest.  The  gloom  suddenly
grew  thin  and  swooned  away.  The  lamps,  as  their  oil4
failed,  inclined  towards  extinction.  Robed  in  the  bright
red  bark  dress  of  the  dawn,  the  sky  seemed  to  have  betaken
itself  to  a  mendicant's  life.  Like  the  fragments  of  the
king's  bones,  the  stars,  all  grey  as  a  swallow's  neck,  were
being  gathered  up  by  the  appearance  of  morning5.  Droves  of
wild  elephants,  their  humps  covered  with  mountain  minerals6,
had  set  out  towards  divers  pools,  rivers,  and  fords.  Like  a

1  Sc.  like  a  widow.

2  Or— of  the  lotus—'  buds.'

3  Or — for  the  sake  of  the  implied  simile — 'houses,  hills  and  trees.'

4  Or — punningly — '  self-love.'

5  Read  samucclyamandsu  with  Kaila§c. Prabhatasamayena  may
also  be  translated  '  by  the  morning  ceremony  of  gathering  the  bones '
(asthicayana).

6  Or— punningly — 'paving  p0t,s  filled  with  the  king's  ashes.'


160  THE HARSA-CARITA.

*
funeral  j)inda  ball  of  pure  white  rice1,  the  moon  dropped

upon  the  verge  of  the  western  ocean's  sand  isle.  Gradually
his  light  paled,  as  if  through  the  smoke  which  spread  from
the  king's  flaming  pyre ;  in  his  heart  appeared  a  blackness
as  of  a  dark  scar  due  to  his  burning  sorrow  for  the  king:
chastened  in  mien  as  it  were  by  the  agony  depicted  in  the
moon-like2  faces  <s£  the  departed  monarch's  whole  harem,  and
distracted  with  yearning  for  his  already  vanished  Rohim,  he
drew  nigh  to  his  setting.  Like  my  lord  the  king3,  the  sun
had  mounted  the  heavens,  and  like  the  sovereignty,  the  course
of  night  had  changed.

Roused  by  the  appeals  of  groups  of  wise  kings,  like  the
lotus  beds  by  awaking  flamingos,  my  lord  Harsa  started  up,  and
passed  with  eyes  aflame  out  of  the  palace.  In  the  women's
apartments  only  a  few  sorrow-stricken  chamberlains  were
left,  and  the  domestic  hamsas  were  dumb  and  inert  now
that  the  tinkle  of  anklets  had  ceased.  In  the  court4
stood  his  father's  servants,  like  a  herd  of  wild  elephants
whose  leader  is  fallen.  Near  his  post  the  king's  sorrowing
elephant  lay  motionless  and  dull  with  his  rider  weeping  on
his  back.  [192]  The  royal  steed  occupied  the  stable  yard,  as
might  be  known5  from  the  lamentations  of  the  marshal.  In
the  empty  audience  chamber  the  clamorous  cry  of  '  Victory '
was  still.  Thus  the  prince  passed  on  to  the  Sarasvati's  bank,
and  having  bathed  in  the  river,  offered  water  to  his  father.
After  the  funeral  bath,  he  stayed  not  to  wring  his  hair,  but
having  put  on  a  pair  of  white  silk  robes,  proceeded  home  full
of  sighs,  umbrella-less,  with  none  to  clear  his  path,  and,  though
a  horse  was  led  up,  on  foot :  while  his  eyes,  flushed  like  a  red
lotus  and  rivetted  to  the  end  of  his  nose,  seemed  vomiting  forth
his  sorrow's  flame  for  fear  of  burning  his  father,  who  now

1  Or — with  the  moon — '  pale  as  a  ball  of  pure  white  wax.'  Kailafc.
inserts  parvctryam  '  at  night.'

3  ridrana,  as  before,  =  ' stupefied.'  Prosita  may  perhaps  go  with
purandhri,  if  on  pp.  149  sqq.  all  the  queens  enter  fire.

3  Read  rajamva  (for  rajatlva)  with  Kaila?c.

4  Kaksya  may  also  denote  the  elephant's  girth  cord :  so  Kailagc.

5  -kathite. Railage,  reads  -kvathite  'anguished'  and  mentions  -rya-
thite  'distressed'  as  an  alternative.


CHAPTER  V.  161

•

survived  only  in  his  heart,  and  his  lower  lip,  though  unstained
by  betel  and  now  for  a  long  time  washed  dean,  yet,  being
naturally  red  as  a  spray  of  the  tree  of  Paradise,  appeared  by
its  colour,  as  the  hot  sighs  came  forth,  to  emit  lumps  of  flesh
and  blood  from  a  cloven  heart.

On  the  same  day  the  king's  favourite  servants,  friends,  and
ministers,  whose  hearts  were  held  tight  by  fhe  bonds  of  his
many  virtues,  went  forth,  and  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances
of  tearful  friends,  abandoned  their  loved  wives  and  children.
Some  consigned  themselves1  to  precipices:  some  stationed
themselves  at  holy  fords  in  the  neighbourhood.  Some  in
agony  of  heart  spread  couches  of  grass,  and  quieted  their
great  sorrow  by  abstinence  from  food :  some,  beside  them-
selves with  passionate  grief,  plunged  like  moths  into  the
flame.  Some,  in  whose  hearts  burnt  a  fire  of  fierce  pain,
took  vows  of  silence  and  sought  refuge  on  the  mount  of
snows :  some  to  cool  their  heat  lay  on  couches  of  twigs
along  the  Vindhya  slopes,  where  wild  elephants  bedewed
their  bodies  with  a  shower  bath  from  their  trunks.  Some,
indisposed  for  a  courtier's  life,  abandoned  the  gratifications
within  their  reach,  and  lived  on  a  limited  diet2  in  vacant
forest  openings:  some  by  feeding  on  air  became  emaciated3
hermits,  rich  only  in  virtue.  Some  assumed  red  robes
and  studied  the  system  of  Kapila  in  the  mountains :  some,
tearing  off  their  crest  jewels,  bound  the  ascetic's  knot  upon
their  heads,  and  made  Qiva  their  refuge :  others  [193]  by
enveloping  themselves  in  trailing  pale-red  rags  displayed  the
bright  afterglow  of  their  love.  Others  again  reached  old  age
in  sylvan  hermitages,  where  the  deer  licked  their  forms  with
the  ends  of  their  tongues4:  others  finally  took  vows,  and
roamed  as  shaven  monks,  bearing  water  in  pots  and  in  the


1  For  babandhuh  Kaila9c. has  babhanjuh. For  the  custom  cf.
Dac.ak.  Purvapithikd  ucchvds.  4  sub  init.

2  Or as the commentator  (pindakdih'farirdih) suggests 'with
emaciated  frames.'

3  Lit.  '  with  prominent  veins.'

4  Kaila9c.  has  jihvatala  '  surface  of  their  tongues.'

C.  11


162  THE HARSA-CARITA.

hollows  of  their  eyes,  both  equally  red  in  colour  and  rubbed
by  their  hands.

My  lord  Harsa's  condition  underwent  no  change.  Wild
with  grief  for  his  father,  he  turned  away  from  all  the  avocations
of  life,  regarding  glory  as  a  curse,  the  earth  a  mortal  sin',  royalty
a  disease,  pleasures  serpents,  home  a  hell,  family  ties  a  bondage,
life  an  infamy,  tne  body  an  infliction,  health  a  blot,  vigour  a
result  of  sin,  food  a  poison,  poison  ambrosia,  sandal  a  flame,
love  a  saw,  heartbreak  a  felicity.  He  was  closely  attended
by  young  nobles  of  ancient  houses,  which  had  enjoyed  the
favour  of  the  court  for  generations,  venerable  trusted  advisers
wearing  an  inherited  dignity,  old  Brahmans  versed  in  £ruti,
Smriti  and  Itihasa2,  anointed  counsellors  of  royal  rank  en-
dowed with  learning,  birth  and  character,  approved  ascetics
well  trained  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Self,  sages3  indifferent  to
pain  and  pleasure,  Vedantists  skilled  in  expounding  the
nothingness  of  the  fleeting  world,  mythologists  expert  in
allaying  sorrow.  Under  their  influence  the  prince  was  never
allowed  even  in  thought  to  follow4  the  dictates  of  grief,  and
through  their  solicitations  he  gradually  lost  his  distaste  for
food  and  the  other  dues  of  life.  His  thoughts  recurring
to  his  brother,  thus  he  mused : — "  Pray  heaven  my  brother,
when  he  learns  of  our  father's  death,  a  type  of  the  world's
dissolution,  may  not  after  a  bath  of  tears  assume  two  robes  of
bark !  or  seek  [194]  a  hermitage  as  a  royal  sage !  or,  man-
lion  as  he  is,  enter  a  mountain  cave !  Though  his  lotus  eyes
brim  with  a  flood  of  tears,  may  he  yet  look  upon  the  lordless

1  Whence  the  contagion  of  governing  it  would  excite  disgust.

2  Kaila9c.  here  inserts  adhigatanikhilajinavacanaviditavipantabha-
vasthitayo  dharmadegandpatlydmsah  pdrd$arinah  'mendicants  skilled
in  inculcating  Dharma  and  acquainted  by  knowledge  of  Buddha's
teaching  in  full  with  the  contradictions  in  men's  notions  of  life.'

3  Here  Kailacc.  has  in  place  of  munayah  'samdpritdh  sandbhayah
cittajndpca  pradhdnasacivdh  niskdranabdndhavdcca  munayah '  '  sympa-
thising dependent  kinsmen,  great  ministers  expert  in  reading  people's
thoughts,  and  sages  who  acted  as  disinterested  kinsmen.' This  agrees
with  the  Comm.'s  sandbhayah '  sagotrdh,  which  has  no  reference  to  the
Gale,  or  Kashm.  text.

4  Kaila9c.  reads  pokdnupravanam  anucaritum  'to  act  in  pursuance
of  headlong  grief.' This  also  was  read  by  the  Comm.


CHAPTER V.  163

»

earth1!  Tormented  by  the  poisonous  pangs  of  a  first  loss,
may  the  best  of  men  yet  remember  himself2!  Never  may
indifference  due  to  the  transitoriness  of  things  lead  him  to
slight  the  advances  of  sovereign  glory !  All  aflame  with  the  fire
of  direful  pain,  may  he  have  recourse  to  the  coronation  bath !
Once  arrived  here  may  he  not,  when  pressed  by  the  kings,
display  a  contrary  mind  !  True,  my  noble  brother  was  deeply
devoted  to  his  sire.  He  was  for  ever  singing  to  me  our  father's
praises3,  '  Think  you,  Harsa,  that  any  man  ever  did  or  will
possess  such  a  stately  frame,  tall  as  a  golden  palm4,  such  a
great  lotus  of  a  face  with  its  upturned  looks  abloom  all
day  with  ove  for  the  sun's  rays5,  such  stave-like  arms,
bright  as  diamond  pillars,  such  smiles  mocking  the  grace  of
the  lazy  sot  Haladhara  ?  What  other  is  high-minded,  valiant,
and  generous  ? ' '  Amid  these  and  other  thoughts  he  could
scarce  pass  the  time,  waiting  with  longing  heart  for  his
brother's  advent.

Here  ends  the  fifth  chapter — entitled  The  Death  of  The  Great  King
— of  the  Harsa-Carita  composed  by  Qri  Bana  Bhatta.


1  Kailagc.  with  the  Comm.  understands  a  negative  here  and  trans-
lates '  may  he  not  consider  the  earth  helpless ' :  but  1

2  '  Remember  me '  Kailagc.  (trans.).

3  For  '-fldghaya  mam'  Kailagc.  reads  -claghayam. The  Kashmir
text  has  the  unintelligible  -$laghay&  mam.

4  Kaila§c.  reads punah  (sic)  vapuh  kancanatalatarupramgupramanam
for  punah  kancanatalatarupramgu  kayapramanam. The  Kashmir  text
agrees  with  Kaila§c.  except  that  it  omits  vapuh.

5  An  allusion  to  his  devotion  to  the  sun,  cf.  c.  iv. For  '  divasam
unmukhavikasitam  mukhamahakamalam '  Kailagc.  has  divasamunmu-
kham  vikasitam  mukhakamalam. The  Kashmir  text  agrees  with  those  of
Calcutta  and  Bombay.


11—2


CHAPTER  VI.


195]  Even  as  a  conqueror,  Death  gathers  his  troop  of  heroes,

Assembling  them  from  this  place  and  that  on  the  earth,

sending  forth  his  own  secret  emissaries  to  bring  them

in.

The  sin  of  smiting  the  confiding  rouses  the  anger  of

the  mighty  to  the  destruction  of  the  cruel  one,
As  the  twang  of  the  sapling  which  an  elephant  breaks
robs  the  lion  of  his  sleep.

The  Brahman  who  consumes  the  departed  spirit's  first
oblation  had  now  partaken  of  his  meal.  The  horror  of  the
days  of  impurity  had  passed.  The  various  appurtenances  of
the  royal  bier1,  beds,  chairs,  chowries,  umbrellas,  vessels,
carriages,  swords  and  the  like,  now  become  an  eyesore,  were
in  course  of  distribution  to  Brahmans.  The  bones,  in  shape
like  sorrow's  spearheads2,  had  been  carried  with  the  people's
hearts  to  sacred  fords.  A  monument  in  brick  had  been  set  up
on  the  sepulchral  pile.  The  royal  elephant,  victor  in  mighty
battles,  had  been  abandoned  to  the  woods.  Gradually  the
lamentations  subsided,  the  outcries  became  rarer,  the  tears
ceased  to  flow ;  the  sighs  were  less  vehement,  the  exclama-
tions of  despair  sank  to  a  murmur,  the  couches  of  despon-
dency began  to  disappear.  Ears  were  now  capable  of
listening  to  reason,  hearts  in  a  mood  to  be  heedful  of  kind
attentions,  the  king's  virtues  could  now  be  computed.  Grief

1  Read  nripatilcata-  with  the  Kashmir  text  for  nnpanikata-.

2  Bead  kalpitagokaqalyesu  with  the  Kashmir  text. The  fragments
of  bone  are  spearheads  in  the  people's  hearts.


CHAPTER VI.  165

•
was  becoming  a  moral  theme1,  the  poet's  pathos2  had  had  its

day.  Only  in  dreams  was  the  king  present  to  the  eye,  only  in
hearts  did  he  reside,  only  pictures  retained  His  outline  [196],
only  poetry  preserved  his  name.

At  this  season  my  lord  Harsa,  having  on  a  certain
occasion  laid  aside  his  occupations,  saw  himself  unexpectedly
surrounded  by  a  great  company  of  silent^downcast  nobles
headed  by  the  whole  assemblage  of  his  aged  kinsmen.  At
this  spectacle  he  reflected,  '  What  else  can  it  be  ?  This
sorrow-stricken  throng  of  people  announces  my  dear  lord's
arrival,'  and  so  with  a  tremour  at  his  heart  questioned  one  of
them,  a  man  of  distinguished  bearing,  as  he  entered, '  Come,
speak ;  is  my  noble  brother  arrived  ? '  'As  your  majesty
says,'  he  slowly  answered,  '  he  is  at  the  door ' :  whereat  the
prince,  whose  mind  was  softened  with  supreme  sorrow  added
to3  brotherly  affection,  all  but  poured  out  his  life  along  with
a  gushing  torrent  of  tears.

Anon,  heralded  by  lamentations,  which,  uttered4  by  the
chamberlain,  entered  like  servants  in  advance,  the  elder
brother  came  in  sight  amid  a  throng  of  servants  pale  and
worn  with  many  days'  neglect  of  bathing,  eating  and  sleep-
ing, and  reduced  in  numbers  by  their  long  and  rapid  march.
Only  one  or  two,  chiefly  domestics,  could  be  distinguished.
The  umbrella-bearer  was  wanting,  the  superintendent  of  the
wardrobe  lagged  behind,  the  pitcher-carrier  had  collapsed,
the  spittoon-bearer  was  prostrate,  the  betel-bearer  panted,  and
the  sword-bearer  limped.  The  prince's  form  was  grey  all  over
with  the  dust  of  the  roads,  as  though  his  helpless  heritage5,
the  earth,  had  made  him  her  refuge.  Long  white  bandages,
bound  about  arrow-wounds  received  in  battle  while  con-
quering the  Hunas,  dotted  his  form  like  side-glances  from  his
approaching  royal  glory.  Limbs  emaciated,  as  though  for

1  Pradecavrittitdm  dcrayati  '  declamatio  fiebat.'

2  Kaviruditesu  =  duhkhoddlpanakalesu  'occasions  for  kindling  grief
afresh.'

3  Nihita  lit.  '  placed  in ' :  there  is  probably  a  pun,  the  fire  of  sorrow
(manyu)  being  placed  in  the  oil  of  affection.

4  Or — punningly  with  reference  to  the  servants — '  admitted.'
6  Kramdgataya  cont^ns  a  pun  '  gathered  on  his  way.'


166  THE HARSA-CARITA.

•

the  preservation  of  the  king's  life  he  had  offered  their  flesh
in  sorrow's  fire,  told  of  the  heaviness1  of  his  grief.  Upon  his
crestless  head,  with  its  hair  miry  and  disordered  and  its
jewel  gone,  he  seemed  to  bear  grief  visibly  enthroned.  His
forehead,  lined  by  sweat  oozing  under  the  heat,  appeared  to
weep  with  yearning  to  fall  at  his  father's  feet.  With  a  broad
river  of  tears  he  Ceaselessly  bedewed  the  earth,  as  though  it
had  swooned  on  the  death  of  its  honoured  lord.  His  grief-
worn  cheeks  seemed  channelled 2  by  the  fall  of  that  incessant
stream  of  tears.  [197]  From  his  round  lips  the  betel  stain  had
faded  away,  as  if  they  were  melted  through  coming  in  the  way
of  his  burning  breath3.  Darkened  by  the  rays  of  his  sapphire
ornament,  of  which  only  the  amulet  was  left,  the  region  of  his
ear  seemed  burnt  by  a  great  flame  of  sorrow  at  the  recent
news  of  his  father's  death.  Though  his  beard  showed  but  a
faint  growth,  yet  his  face,  being  fringed  with  a  tassel  of  rays
from  the  dark  pupils  of  his  fixed  downcast  eyes,  looked  black
with  the  long  growth  of  mourning.  He  was  as  a  lion  distres-
sed and  left  without  a  refuge  by  the  fall  of  a  great  hill4,  like
the  day  turned  into  darkness  and  faded  in  splendour  by  the
setting  of  the  lord  of  light,  like  Nandana  robbed  of  its  shade
by  the  crash  of  its  tree  of  Paradise5,  like  a  quarter  of  the
heavens  vacant  through  the  exile  of  its  sky  elephant,  like
a  mountain  quivering  and  rent  by  a  crushing  thunder-
bolt6. Purchased  by  leanness,  made  a  bondsman  to
misery,  a  domestic  to  despair,  a  disciple  to  the  demands  of
grief,  appropriated  by  affliction,  dumb  with  taciturnity,
pressed  down  by  depression,  all  a  sweat  through  hot  pain,

1  There  is  an  oxymoron  in  the  antithesis  between  the  emaciation  of
the  limbs  and  the  heaviness  of  the  grief.

'And  many  a  furrow  on  my  grief -worn  cheek
Has  been  a  channel  for  a  flood  of  tears.'  Moss.

3  The  commentator,  who  explains  adharavimbenapi  as  instrumental
of  circumstance,  must  have  read  this  in  place  of  adkaravimbenopalak-
sitam,

*  Or  '  king.'

5  Kalpapadapo may  also mean 'king,'  and vickayam 'reft of
splendour.'

6  Or  '  by  the  fall  of  a  thunderbolt  upon  his^sire.'


CHAPTER  VI.  167

i

culled  by  melancholy,  looted  by  lamentation,  adopted1
by  apathy,  renounced  by  presence  of  mind,  disowned  by
discernment,  repudiated  by  resolution,  he  wa*s  absorbed  in  a
sorrow  beyond  the  appeals  of  the  counsels  of  age,  the  cure  of
good  men's  eloquence,  the  scope  of  sages'  voices,  the  power
of  holy  writ,  the  course  of  wisdom's  efforts,  the  range  of
friendly  offices,  the  sphere  of  sense  delight*,  the  province  of
gradual  repair*.

Uplifted,  as  it  were,  on  an  agitated  sea  of  stormy  surging
love3,  Harsa  rose  excitedly  to  meet  him.  But  his  majesty
Rajyavardhana,  on  seeing  him  at  a  distance,  felt  inclined  to  let
loose  his  long-stemmed  torrent  of  tears.  Extending  his  long
stout  arms,  as  if  he  would  make  an  armful  of  all  his  sorrows,  he
clasped  his  brother's  neck  in  abandonment  of  grief,  and  draw-
ing him  now  to  his  own  worn  unshawled  bosom,  [198]  now  to
his  neck,  now  to  his  shoulder,  now  to  his  cheek,  sobbed  with
such  violence  that  their  hearts  were  almost  uprooted  with
their  moorings.  The  king's  favourite  also,  as  his  sovereign
was  recalled  to  his  mind,  responded  like  an  echo  with  vehe-
ment sobs.  It  was  long  before  the  elder  brother's  tears  ceased
to  flow,  and,  like  the  rain-god  in  autumn,  he  very  gradually
calmed  himself.  Then  he  sat  down,  and,  water  being  brought
by  a  servant,  bathed  his  eyes,,  which  seemed  to  derive  the
foam  line  of  a  great  torrent  from  the  massed  light  of  the
man's  nails,  and,  often  as  they  were  wiped,  were  robbed
of  vision  by  drops  of  tears,  which,  forming  at  the  end  of
their  lashes,  impeded  their  opening.  Then  with  a  piece  of
moonlight  in  the  shape  of  a  towel4  presented  by  the  betel-
bearer  he  wiped  his  face,  which  the  hot  tears  had  scorched.
Having  spent  some  time  in  utter  silence,  he  rose  and
proceeded  to  the  bath  house.  After  a  stay  there  he  roughly
wrung  his  unadorned  locks  of  dishevelled  and  disordered
hair ;  and  with  a  lip  which,  as  the  remnant  of  its  quivering
emotion  struggled  as  it  were  for  existence,  seemed  to  wish  to

1  Read  vritam  '  chosen '  for  the  sake  of  the  alliteration.

2  Perhaps  we  should  read  kalakramapacayandm  '  gradual  decrease.'

3  For  the  pun  on  utkalika  '  agitation '  and  '  wave '  cf.  text  p.  42  1.  9.

4  Its  whiteness  and^oolness  are  compared  to  moonlight.


168  THE HARSA-CARITA.

i
kiss  even  itself  now  glorified  by  the  bath,  with  bathed  eyes

whose  whiteness  seemed  to  adore  the  sky  regents  with  a
dropping  flowei*  offering  of  white1  lotus  petals  opening  to
the  autumn  moon,  he  threw  himself  upon  a  couch  placed  on
the  courtyard  terrace  and  having  a  cushion  disposed  beneath
a  low  awning.  There  he  remained  without  uttering  a  word.

My  lord  Harsa  also  bathed  and  reclined  in  silence  by
his  side,  stretched  on  a  blanket  laid  upon  the  ground.
Glancing  ever  and  anon  upon  his  afflicted  elder  brother,  he
felt  his  heart  almost  split  into  a  thousand  parts.  For  the
sight  of  a  brother  is  a  rejuvenescence  of  sorrow.  To  the
people  that  day  was  terrible  even  beyond  the  day  of  their
king's  death.  Throughout  the  city  none  cooked,  none
bathed,  none  took  their  pleasure ;  in  every  quarter  there
was  no  man  but  wept.  Not  otherwise  did  the  day  pass  by2.
[199]  At  length,  hued  like  flesh  moistened  by  a  great  flow  of
blood — as  if  he  had  just  been  shaped  by  Twastri's  axe3 —
the  sun  sank,  red  as  madder,  in  the  waters  of  the  western
sea.  On  the  (red)  lotus  ponds  the  bee  tribes  buzzed  in
distress  at  the  closing  of  the  calixes.  Anguished  by  the
grief  of  their  spouses  at  their  approaching  separation,  a
horizon  of  ruddy-geese  fixed  a  tearful  gaze  upon  their
dear  friend,  the  sun's  orb4,  now  hued  like  a  blooming
Bandhuka.  Musical  with  bees,  graced  by  kalahartisa
beauties,  the  (night)  lotus  pools  gave  forth  a  sound  like  the
plaited  bells  upon  the  jewelled  girdle  of  the  roaming  Qri.
In  the  firmament  the  rising  clear-flecked  moon  shone  like
the  pointed  hump  of  Qiva's  tame  bull,  when  blotted  with
mud  scattered  by  his  broad  horns.

At  that  hour,  being  solicited  by  the  chief  feudatories,
who  approached  with  inoffensive5  admonitions,  Rajyavar-

1  Read  vicada  for  visada.

2  Owing  doubtless  to  the  recurrence  of  divasah  this  passage  from
'  Throughout '  to  '  pass  by '  is  omitted  by  the  Kashmir  text.

3  Twastri  was  the  artist  of  the  gods. For  the  story  cf.  Wilson's
Hindu  Drama,  vol.  i.  p.  363.

4  The  pairs  of  ruddy-geese  spend  the  night  on  different  sides  of  the
river  wailing  to  each  other.

6  Or  perhaps  'not  to  be  resisted.'


CHAPTER VI.  169

•

dhana  reluctantly  consented  to  take  food.  Dawn  having
appeared  and  all  the  kings  being  admitted,  he  addressed
himself  to  Harsa,  who  was  standing  near,  a*s  follows : — "  My
dear  brother,  your  situation  invites  instruction  from  your
elders.  Even  as  a  boy  you  held  fast  to  our  father's  habits  of
thought,  as  to  the  oriflamme  of  the  virtuous1.  Wherefore  to
one  so  tractable  my  heart,  softened  to  compliance  with  the
decrees  of  fate,  has  something  to  suggest.  Do  not  revert  to  the
gaucherie  so  easy  to  the  nature  of  the  young  and  so  much  at
variance  with  affection.  Do  not  like  a  dullard  make  opposition
to  my  wish.  You  are  surely  not  unacquainted  with  the  uni-
versal practice.  What  did  Purukutsa  when  Mandhatri,  the
three  worlds'  protector,  died  ?  What  Raghu  on  the  death  of
Dillpa,  whose  brow  governed  the  eighteen  continents  ?  What
Rama  on  the  death  of  Dasaratha,  who  in  the  great  Asura
battle  mounted  the  chariot  of  the  gods  ?  What  Bharata  on
the  death  of  Dusyanta,  to  whom  the  confines  of  the  four
oceans  were  but  a  cow's  puddle2  ?  Enough  of  these  :  [200]
did  not  our  father  himself  undertake  the  government  on  the
decease  of  his  auspiciously  named  sire,  who  by  the  pervading
smoke  of  more  than  a  hundred  sacrifices  turned  the  prime
of  Indra  grey8?  Moreover  the  man  whom  grief  subdues
the  learned  term  coward:  for  women  are  the  province
of  sorrows.  Still  what  am  I  to  do  ?  It  is  some  native
cowardice  or  womanishness  which  has  rendered  me  subject
to  the  flame  of  filial  grief.  My  mountain4  being  laid
low,  my  tears  are  all  set  flowing  like  torrents.  The  great
splendour  sunk,  the  lamp  of  wisdom  is  vanished  from  my
darkened  prospect.  My  heart  is  on  fire,  and  discernment,  as
if  apprehensive  of  being  itself  scorched,  visits  it  never  even
in  sleep.  All  my  manhood  is  melted  like  a  thing  of  lac  by
a  mighty  flame  of  pain.  At  every  word6  my  mind  faints  like

1  Or  punningly  '  a  pennon  with  a  cord.'

2  For  go$pada  cf.  Hesiod  '  Works  and  Days,'  489.

rrjfjMs  Z«i/s  vot  rpi'ro)  rjfjiaTi,  /^S*  aTroAifyot,

/iTjr'  ap vn(pj3d\\a>v  ftoos  onXfiv  P.IJT'  cmo\(in<av.

3  A  reference  to  the  myth  that  Indra  feared  to  be  displaced  by  any
one  who  should  perform  a  hundred  horse-sacrifices.

4  Or 'king.'  .  5  Or 'step.'


170  THE HARSA-CAKITA.

«

a  deer  smit  with  a  poisoned  shaft.  Like  a  misanthrope,  my
memory  roves  in  devious  wanderings.  My  firmness  has,
like  our  mother,  departed  with  our  sire.  Daily  my  sorrows
increase,  like  moneys  employed  by  an  usurer.  My  body,  as
if  laden  with  a  cloud  bora  of  the  smoke  of  sorrow's  flame,
rains  down  a  pouring  drizzle  of  tears.  'At  death  every  man1
is  dissolved  into  t/he  five  elements '  is  no  true  saying  of  the
childish  folk.  Our  father  is  become  fire  only,  since  he
bums  me  so.  The  o'ermastering  rebel,  grief,  having  penned
this  recreant  heart  of  mine,  burns  it  as  the  submarine  fire
the  ocean,  rends  it  as  the  thunderbolt  the  hill,  attenuates  it
as  waning  the  moon,  and  devours  it  as  Rahu  devours  the
sun.  My  heart  [201]  cannot  with  mere  tears  dismiss  the
fall  of  so  noble  a  spirit,  stately  as  Sumeru.  At  sovereignty
my  eye  grows  disordered,  like  the  partridge's  at  poison2.  My
mind  seeks  to  avoid  a  glory,  which,  as  if  belonging  to  out-
casts, is  of  no  noble  sort,  banner-borne,  crimson  of  hue3,
turbaned  with  many  shrouds  of  the  dead.  Like  the  house
sparrow,  I  cannot  endure  to  abide  even  a  moment  in  a  home
which  has  become  a  hell4.  I  desire  therefore  in  a  hermitage
to  purge  with  the  pure  waters  of  pellucid  streams  that  run
from  mountain  tops  this  fond  defilement  which  clings  to  my
mind  as  to  a  garment.  Therefore  do  you  receive  from  my
hands  the  cares  of  sovereignty,  a  gift  not  high  esteemed
indeed  and  reft  of  the  joy  of  youth,  like  old  age,  which  Puru
welcomed  at  his  father's  will5.  Dismissing  all  the  sports  of
youth,  deliver  your  bosom  like  Visnu  to  the  embraces  of
Glory6.  I  have  abandoned  the  sword."  So  speaking,  he  took

1  Pancajana  '  people  of  the  five  races,'  cf.  the  panca  janah  of  the
Rig-V.

2  The  partridge's  eye  is  said  to  '  grow  red'  (viraktam  also  'disgusted')
on  seeing  poison. See  Kulluka,  Manu,  vii.  217.

3  The  Sanskrit  words  may  here  mean  '  of  no  Aryan  lineage,  outcast
from  pure  birth,  polluting  assemblies ' ;  or  perhaps  '  destined  to  be  borne
on  the  poles  of  outcasts.'

4  Or  '  a  burnt  habitation.'

5  Yayati,  being  afflicted  by  Indra  with  the  curse  of  old  age,  pre-
vailed upon  his  son  Puru  to  take  the  affliction  upon  himself.

6  The  allusion  is  to  the  youthful  sports  of  Krisna  with  the  shep-
herdesses before  Laksm!  became  his  wife.


CHAPTER  VI.  171

•

his  scimitar  from  the  hand  of  his  sword-bearer  and  flung  it
on  the  earth.

At  this  speech  Harsa's  heart  was  cloven  as  with  the
stroke  of  a  sharp-pointed  spear,  and  he  reflected :  "  Can  my
lord  have  been  angered  when  away  from  me  by  a  hint
received  from  some  envious  wretch  ?  Or  is  he  seeking  in
this  way  to  try  me  ?  Or  is  this  a  mental  Aberration  born  of
grief?  Is  this  perchance  not  my  dear  brother,  or  has  he
possibly  said  one  thing  and  my  sorrow-vacant  sense  appre-
hended another?  Did  he  intend  one  thing  while  another
escaped  his  lips  ?  Is  this  a  stratagem  of  fate  for  the  downfall
and  ruin  of  our  whole  house,  [202]  an  intimation  of  the
failure  of  all  the  garnered  merit  of  my  deeds,  or  a  freak  of
a  whole  horizon  of  disastrous  stars  ?  Or  is  it  a  pleasantry  of
the  Kali  age,  heedless  of  my  sire's  death,  that  this  man  has,
like  the  vilest  of  mankind,  instigated  me,  as  one  ready  for
any  deed,  to  this  atrocious  act,  as  if  I  were  no  child  of
Puspabhuti's  line,  no  son  of  our  sire,  no  younger  brother  of
his  own,  void  of  affection  and  detected  in  fault  ?  Tis  like
bidding  a  divine  drink  wine,  a  faithful  servant  outrage  his
master,  a  good  man  have  dealings  with  the  low,  a  chaste
wife  forget  her  honour.  Thus  much  indeed  is  seemly,  that  on
the  death  of  so  noble  a  sire, — a  Maudara  for  churning  like  an
ocean  the  whole  ring  of  feudatories  drunk  with  the  intoxi-
cation of  valorous  frenzy, — a  man  should  seek  a  hermitage,
don  the  bark  dress,  and  practise  austerities.  But  as  for  this
charge  of  sovereignty,  it  is  like  a  rain  of  cinders  on  a
drought-parched  wilderness,  scorching  one  already  scorched.
This  is  unworthy  of  my  lord.  Again,  although  in  this  world
a  prince  without  pride,  a  Brahman  without  greed,  a  saint
without  anger,  an  ape  without  tricks,  a  poet  without
envy,  a  trader  without  knavery,  a  fond  husband  without
jealousy,  a  good  man  free  from  poverty,  a  rich  man  without
harshness,  a  poor  man  not  an  eyesore,  a  hunter  without  cruelty,
a  mendicant  with  a  Brahman's  learning1,  a  contented  servant,
a  grateful  dicer,  a  wandering  ascetic  without  gluttony,  a

1  Or  perhaps  '  an  orthodox  Brahman.'


172  THE HAR5A-CARITA.

•

misanthrope  with  a  soft  tongue1,  a  truthful  minister,  and  a
king's  son  without  vice  are  all  equally  hard  to  find,  yet  my
lord  himself  hasf  been  my  instructor.  Who,  I  wonder,  with
such  a  father,  a  very  scent-elephant  among  kings,  fallen,
with  such  a  royal  elder  brother  going  in  his  young  manhood
to  a  hermitage,  abandoning  his  throne,  and  rendering  sterile
his  great  pillar-like  thighs  and  arms,  could  desire  the  clod
called  earth,  defiled  by  the  tears  of  all  men's  eyes,  or,  even
were  he  an  outcast,  could  court  that  bawd  of  the  deeds  of
warrior  families  entitled  Glory,  whose  low  character  is  be-
trayed by  the  tokens  of  the  distorted  features  of  all  the  vile
parasites  who  hang  about  the  drunken  game  of  wealth  ?
How  did  such  a  deeply  degrading  thought  enter  my  lord's
imagination  ?  [203]  What  is  this  blemish  observed  in  me  ?
Has  Sumitra's  son2  faded  from  his  mind  ?  Have  Vrikodara
and  others  been  forgotten  ?  Not  thus  heedless  of  those  who
love  him,  thus  singly  fixed  upon  achieving  his  own  ends,  used
my  lord's  high  preeminence  to  be.  Again,  my  lord  being
gone  to  a  hermitage,  who  indeed  could  so  long  for  life  as  even
to  entertain  a  thought  of  the  earth  ?  The  lion  has  a  counte-
nance all  glorious  with  a  handsome  mane  clotted  with  the
ichor  from  the  heads  of  mad  elephants  which  his  paw,  terribly
arrayed  with  claws  sharp  as  the  points  of  a  thunderbolt,  has
felled :  but  when  he  has  gone  forth  to  take  his  pleasure  in
the  forest,  who  is  left  to  guard  his  dwelling  in  the  moun-
tain cave  ?  for  a  hero's  ally  is  his  prowess.  Why  is  my
lord  thus  considerate  to  the  jilt  glory  as  not  to  lead  her
disguised  as  old  age,  like  a  woodland  fawn,  to  that  same
hermitage,  with  rags  to  hide  her  bosom,  and  laden  with
bundles  of  Ku$a  grass,  flowers,  fuel,  and  leaves3  ?  But
what  avail  these  vain  and  manifold  reasonings  ?  in  silence


1  The  Comm.  gopyo-dasah  points  to  the  reading  of  the  Kashmir
text,  which  omits  parivrad  abvhhukmh  and  has  gopyah  in  place  of
nrifctmsah.

2  Alluding  to  the  far-famed  younger  brothers  of  the  Ramayana  and
Mahabharata,  Laksmana  and  Bhlma.

3  I.e.  'Why  not  wait  till  you  are  old?' It  was  not  unusual  for
Hindu  kings  to  retire  in  old  age  to  hermitages.,


CHAPTER VI.  173

•

will  I  follow  in  his  train.  And  the  sin  involved  in  trans-
gressing my  elder's  commands  austerity  in  fine  shall  dispel  in
a  hermitage."  So  reflecting,  he  stood  silent *and  downcast,  in
spirit  gone  first  to  the  hermitage.

By  this  the  weeping  Keeper  of  the  Robes  had  provided
bark  dresses,  as  previously  ordered.  The  women  of  the  royal
household  were  screaming,  as  if  their  hearts1  had  left  them
in  alarm  at  the  heavy  strokes  which  their  hands  dealt  (upon
their  breasts).  Brahmans  with  uplifted  arms  were  wailing
aloud  in  horror*.  With  doleful  cries  a  group  of  citizens  were
engaged  in  bending  before  the  princes'  feet.  Ancient
courtiers  ran  away  with  tumult  in  their  hearts.  Aged
kinsmen  leaning  on  servants  entered  with  trembling  forms,
disordered  apparel,  grief-choked  voices,  streaming  eyes,  and
hearts  bent  on  remonstrance.  Despondent  feudatories
sighed,  as  prostrate  they  marked  the  jewelled  mosaic  with
their  nails.  All  the  people  had  started  with  their  children
and  aged  to  forest  seclusions.

Suddenly  a  distinguished  servant  of  Rajya9ri,  [204]  Sam-
vadaka  by  name,  entered  with  flowing  tears  in  a  bewilder-
ment of  grief.  Uttering  a  cry,  he  precipitated  himself  into
the  audience.  Thunderstruck  at  this,  Rajyavardhana  and  his
brother  questioned  him  with  their  own  lips:  "Speak,  friend!
speak ;  what  stroke  more  unmanning  than,  the  present  is
fate,  triumphant  at  the  king's  death,  bringing  upon  us,  in
pursuance  of  her  resolve  to  increase  her  efforts  for  our  ruin?"
"  My  lord,"  the  man  with  an  effort  replied,  "  it  is  the  way  of
the  vile,  like  fiends,  to  strike  where  they  find  an  opening.
So,  on  the  very  day  on  which  the  king's  death  was  rumoured,
his  majesty  Grahavarman  was  by  the  wicked  lord  of  Malwa
cut  off  from  the  living  along  with  his  noble  deeds.  Rajya9ri
also,  the  princess,  has  been  confined  like  a  brigand's  wife
with  a  pair  of  iron  fetters  kissing  her  feet,  arid  cast  into
prison  at  Kanyakubja.  There  is  moreover  a  report  that  the
villain,  deeming  the  army  leaderless,  purposes  to  invade  and
seize  this  country  as  well.  Such  are  my  tidings :  the  matter
is  now  in  the  king's  hands."

1  I.e.  senses. ,  2  Abrahmanyam.


174  THE HARSA-CARITA.

«

Instantly  at  the  news  of  such  a  fresh,  sudden,  unex-
pected, unimagined  disaster  the  overwhelming  passion  of
sorrow,  rooted  as  it  was,  vanished  from  a  heart  previously
unacquainted  even  by  hearsay  with  humiliation,  naturally  im-
patient of  checks  from  outside,  filled  with  the  pride  of  early
manhood,  claiming  a  birth  from  a  heroic  line,  and  devoted  to
a  sister  now  suddenly  an  object  of  compassion.  An  awful
paroxysm  of  wrath  leapt  fiercely  into  the  recesses  of  Rajya-
vardhana's  heart,  like  a  lion  into  his  cavernous  abode.  On  his
broad  brow  a  deadly  frown  broke  forth,  darkening  like  Yama's
sister1  and  like  her  wavy  with  wrinkled  lines  that  writhed
like  Kaliya's  brood  in  their  fright  at  Klin's  destroyer2.  His
left  hand,  proudly  stroking  his  right  shoulder3,  huge  as  a  sky-
elephant's  frontal  hump,  rained  down  upon  it  a  torrent  of
rays  from  its  own  nails,  as  if  to  consecrate  it  for  the  enter-
prize  of  battle  toils.  [205]  His  right,  whose  palm  filled  with
oozing  sweat — just  as  though  he  had  seized  the  Malwa's
hair  to  tear  him  up  by  the  roots — and  which  trembled  as  if
with  yearning  to  grasp  wanton  glory's  tresses,  glided  once
more  toward  his  terrible  sword.  On  his  cheeks  appeared  an
angry  flush,  as  if  Sovereignty,  delighted  by  his  taking  up
arms,  were  celebrating  an  ovation  by  scattered  vermilion
powder4.  His  upturned  right  foot  climbed  his  left  thigh,  as
if,  all  kings  being  in  his  presence,  it  were  filled  with  the
pride  of  trampling  upon  their  array  of  diadems.  Imprinted
on  the  jewelled  mosaic,  his  left  foot  through  the  desperate
twitching  of  his  toes  spat  out  a  smoke,  as  though  he  would
spout  a  flame  to  leave  the  earth  widowed  of  men.  His  fresh
wounds,  bursting  in  his  fierceness,  spurted  a  bloody  dew,  as  if
to  awake  his  valour  sent  by  the  poison  of  sorrow  to  sleep.
Thus  he  addressed  his  younger  brother :  "  This  task,  my  noble
brother,  is  my  royal  house,  this  my  kin,  my  court,  my  land,  my


1  The  river  Yamuna.

2  I.e.  Krisna,  see  Visnu  Pur.  v.  16.

3  The  Comm.  takes  ko$a  as  an  oath  at  an  ordeal ;  but  it  seems  here
used  as  an  expletive,  cf.  bahudauda.

*  The  people  sprinkle  red  powder  on one  another  at  the  Holi
festival  and  at  other  rejoicings,  cf.  Kathas.  18.  122.


CHAPTER VI.  175

«

people  guarded  by  their  king's  club-like  arm :  this  day  I  go  to
lay  the  royal  house  of  Malwa  low  in  ruin.  The  repression  of
this  beyond  measure  unmannerly  foe — this*and  no  other  is
my  assumption  of  the  bark  dress,  my  austerities,  my  strata-
gem for  dispelling  sorrow.  Malwas  to  maltreat  the  race  of
Puspabhuti ! — this  is  the  hind  clutching  the  lion's  mane,  the
frog  slapping  the  cobra,  the  calf  taking  the«tiger  captive,  the
water-serpent  grasping  Garuda  by  the  throat,  the  log  bidding
burn  the  fire,  the  darkness  hiding  the  sun !  My  pain  has
vanished  before  a  more  vehement  passion.  Let  all  the  kings
and  elephants  stay  with  you.  Only  Bhandi  here  must  follow
me  with  some  ten  thousand  horse."  So  speaking,  he  ordered
the  marching  drum  instantly  to  sound.

Hearing  this  command,  my  lord  Harsa,  inflamed  as  he
was  with  a  fit  of  anger  at  the  tidings  of  his  sister's  and
brother-in-law's  fate,  felt  his  loving  agony  grow,  as  it  were,
to  a  greater  height  at  the  order  to  remain  behind.  [206]
Speaking  out,  "  What  harm,"  he  asked,  "  does  my  lord  see  in
my  attending  him  ?  If  I  am  regarded  as  a  boy,  then  I  should
all  the  more  not  be  abandoned :  if  as  needing  protection,  the
cage  of  your  arms  is  an  asylum  ;  if  incompetent,  where  have  I
been  tried  ?  if  in  want  of  fostering  care,  separation  makes  thin;
if  unequal  to  hardships,  I  am  classed  as  a  woman ;  if  you
would  have  me  happy,  happiness  marches  in  your  train ;  if
you  think  the  toil  of  the  journey  great,  absence  is  harder  to
support ;  if  you  would  have  me  watch  over  my  wife,  Glory
resides  in  your  steel ;  if  you  wish  me  to  guard  your  rear,
valour  is  your  rear-guard ;  if  you  argue  that  the  feudatories
are  uncontrolled,  they  are  secured  by  the  bonds  of  your
virtues ;  if  you  say  a  great  man  must  not  carry  a  companion
with  him,  then  you  count  me  as  distinct  from  yourself;  if
you  say  you  are  marching  with  a  very  light  train,  what
excessive  weight  is  there  in  the  dust  of  your  feet1?  if  you
think  it  inopportune  that  two  should  go,  gratify  me  with  the
commission;  if  you  say  brotherly  affection  is  timid,  the
fault  is  mutual.  Whence  this  your  arm's  excessive  greedi-

1  Sc.  such  as  I.


176  THE HARSA-CARITA.

«

ness  that  you  desire  alone  to  quaff  the  ambrosia  of  fame
as  white  as  a  mass  of  the  Milk  Ocean's  foam  ?  Never
before  have  I  Heen  stinted  in  your  favours.  Therefore  let
my  lord  be  gracious  and  take  me  also."

So  speaking,  he  sank  his  head  to  the  ground  and  fell  at
his  brother's  feet.  But  the  elder  upraised  him  and  said : —
"  Why  thus,  deartbrother,  by  putting  forth  too  great  an  effort
add  importance  to  a  foe  too  slight  for  our  power  ?  A  concourse
of  lions  in  the  matter  of  a  deer  is  too  degrading.  How
many  flames  gird  on  their  armour  against  a  sheaf  of  grass  ?
Moreover  for  the  province  of  your  prowess  you  have  already
the  earth  with  her  amulet  wreath  of  eighteen  continents.
The  winds  that  carry  off  ranges  of  great  hills  arm  not  against
a  trembling  cotton  yield.  The  sky  elephants,  audaciously
familiar  with  Sumeru's  flanks,  butt  not  upon  a  tiny  ant-hill.
For  a  world-wide  conquest  you,  like  Mandhatri,  shall  grasp,
in  the  shape  of  your  bow  with  its  curving  frame  adorned
with  bright  gold  leaf,  a  comet  portending  the  world's  end  of
all  earthly  kings.  [207]  Only,  in  the  unbearable  hunger
which  has  been  aroused  in  me  for  our  enemies'  death,  forgive
this  one  unshared  morsel  of  wrath.  Be  pleased  to  stay."
Such  was  his  answer,  and  on  the  same  day  he  set  out  to  seek
the  foe.

My  lord  Harsa's  brother  being  thus  occupied,  his  father
laid  to  rest,  his  brother-in-law  banished  from  life,  his  mother
dead  and  his  sister  a  prisoner,  he  could  scarcely  make  the
time-  pass,  alone  as  he  was  like  a  wild  elephant  strayed  from
the  herd.  Many  days  having  elapsed,  on  one  occasion  as  with
the  night  two-thirds  spent  he  lay  awake,  being  still  despon-
dent at  his  brother's  departure,  he  heard  the  watchman
chanting  an  Arya  couplet: —

'Though  his  virtues1  be  sung  by  continents,  though
rich  be  his  worth  like  a  treasure  of  jewels2,

'As  a  squall  a  ship,  so  does  fate  overwhelm  a  hero
without  warning.'

1  Or — of  the  ship — '  cables.'

2  Or — of  the  ship — '  though  it  have  amassed  the  prime  of  the  ocean's
treasures.'


CHAPTER VI.  177

•

At  this  his  heart  was  still  further  grieved  by  thoughts  of
the  instability  of  things ;  but  when  the  night  was  well-nigh
ended,  he  obtained  a  moment's  sleep,  and  in  a  vision  saw  a
heaven-kissing  pillar  of  iron  broken  in  pieces.  With  a
throbbing  heart  he  awoke  again,  and  reflected : — "  Why  do
these  evil  dreams  thus  incessantly  pursue  me  ?  Day  and
night  my  eye — and  not  the  right  one — flirobs  expert  in
prophecies  of  evil.  Dire  portents  again  never  for  a  moment
weary  of  announcing  the  death  of  no  mean  king.  Day  after
day  Rahu,  hard  by  the  sun's  disc  which  shows  a  headless
trunk,  is  seen  to  wear  a  bodily  form  no  longer  curtailed1.
The  Seven  Sages  vomit  eruptions  of  smoke,  swallowed
perhaps  in  their  time  of  austerity,  and  cover  all  the  planets
with  grey.  Every  day  dire  flames  are  seen  in  the  heavens,
and  the  star  groups  fall  from  the  firmament  like  motes  of
ash  from  the  burning.  The  dimmed  moon  seems  to  sorrow
for  the  downfall  of  the  stars.  Each  night,  as  the  meteors
flash  hither  and  thither,  the  heavens  with  tremulous  starry
eyes  gaze  as  it  were  upon  a  mighty  conflict  of  planets  in  the
abysm.  [208]  Whistling  with  bits  of  gravel  and  permeated
by  huge  flying  dust  clouds,  the  wind  seems  transporting  the
earth  somewhither  to  signify  the  transmission  of  sovereignty.
I  see  no  fair  auspice  in  the  hour.  Who  shall  waylay  this
fatality  in  our  stock,  which  wastes  its  tender  growth  as  an
elephant  a  bamboo  ?  Be  it  well,  in  any  case,  with  my  lord."
After  such  thoughts  as  these  he  found  a  difficulty  in  en-
couraging his  heart,  which  seemed  in  coward  flight2  from  an
outburst  of  brotherly  affection  in  its  midst.  Then  rising,
he  went  through  the  usual  round  of  duties.

When  in  the  audience  chamber,  he  saw  Kuntala,  a  chief
officer  of  cavalry  and  a  great  noble  high  in  Rajyavardhana's

1  The  trunk  seen  in  the  sun  seems  to  provide  Rahu,  an  eclipse
demon  who  is  all  head,  with  a  body. Varahamihira  (iii.)  says,  '  if  a
staff  is  seen  in  the  sun,  the  sovereign  will  die ;  if  something  in  the
shape  of  a  headless  trunk,  there  will  be  danger  from  sickness.'

2  '  Dravad '  may  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  melting,  '  his  heart  moist
with  an  oil  of  brotherly  affection  bxirsting  forth  within.' The  Kashmir
text  reads  antarbhinnam.  •

c.  12


178  THE HARSA-CARITA.

favour,  hastily  enter  with  a  dejected  company  entering  in
his  train.  His  form  was  wrapped  in  a  shawl  as  miry  as  if
unbeaiable  grief  had  reddened1  its  texture  with  a  smoke  of
hot  sighs.  His  looks  were  downcast,  as  if  through  shame  at
the  preservation  of  his  life,  his  glance  fixed  on  the  end  of  his
nose,  and  his  face,  hairy  with  the  long  growth  of  mourning,
mutely  with  uninterrupted  tears  bespoke  his  master's  fall.
This  sight  aroused  the  prince's  alarm,  but  when  the  time
came  to  hear  the  dreadful  calamity,  he  seemed  seized  in
every  limb  by  all  the  world  powers  at  once,  water  in  his
eyes,  sighs  in  his  moon-like  mouth,  fire  in  his  heart,  earth
upon  his  breast.  From  the  man  he  learnt  that  his  brother,
though  he  had  routed  the  Malwa  army  with  ridiculous  ease,
had  been  allured  to  confidence  by  false  civilities  on  the  part
of  the  King  of  Gauda,  and  then  weaponless,  confiding,  and
alone,  despatched  in  his  own  quarters.

Instantly  on  hearing  this  his  fiery  spirit  blazed  forth  in  a
storm  of  sorrow  augmented  by  flaming  flashes  of  furious
wrath.  His  aspect  became  terrific  in  the  extreme.  As  he
fiercely  shook  his  head,  the  loosened  jewels  from  his  crest
looked  like  live  coals  of  the  angry  fire  which  he  vomited
forth.  Quivering  without  cessation,  his  wrathful  curling  lip
seemed  to  drink  the  lives  of  all  kings.  [209]  His  reddening
eyes  with  their  rolling  gleam  put  forth  as  it  were  confla-
grations in  the  heavenly  spaces.  Even  the  fire  of  anger,  as
though  itself  burned  by  the  scorching  power  of  his  inborn
valour's  unbearable  heat,  spread  over  him2  a  rainy  shower  of
sweat.  His  very  limbs  trembled  as  if  in  affright  at  such
unexampled  fury.  Like  Qiva,  he  put  on  a  Shape  of  Terror :
like  Visnu,  he  displayed  a  Man-lion's  aspect :  like  the  sun-
crystal  hill,  he  fired  at  the  sight  of  another's  fierce  brilliance3:
like  doomsday,  his  form  overpowered  the  eye  by  the  brilliance
of  twelve  suns  uprisen :  like  a  world-alarming  hurricane,
he  brought  a  tremour  upon  all  monarchs4:  like  the  Vindhya,

1  Mud  is  often  described  as  '  red.'

2  Sc.  the  fire,  as  if  in  fear  of  a  hotter  fire,  scatters  water  around.

3  Or  'a  second  source  of  light.'

4  Or  '  mountains.'


CHAPTER VI.  .  179

•

he  grew  in  sublimity  of  form1:  like  a  great  serpent,  he  was
wroth  at  the  insult  of  a  vile  king2:  like  Janamejaya,  intent
upon  burning  all  sovereigns3:  like  Vrikodara,  athirst  for  his
enemy's  blood :  like  the  gods'  elephant,  in  full  career  to  repel
his  foes4.  He  represented  the  first  revelation  of  valour,  the
frenzy  of  insolence,  the  delirium  of  pride,  the  youthful  avatar
of  fury,  the  supreme  effort  of  hauteur,  the  rfew  age  of  man-
hood's fire,  the  regal  consecration  of  warlike  passion,  the  camp-
lustration  clay  of  resentment.

"  Except  the  Gauda  king,"  he  cried  "  what  man  would  by
such  a  murder,  abhorred  of  all  the  world,  lay  such  a  great  soul
low,  as  Agni's  progeny  did  Drona5,  in  the  very  moment  when,
having  by  his  arm's  undissembling  valour  subdued  all  princes,
he  had  laid  the  sword  aside  ?  [210]  Apart  from  that  ignoble
wretch,  in  whose  minds  would  my  lord's  heroic  qualities,
alighting  like  flamingoes  upon  the  lakes,  find  no  favour,  spot-
less both  as  a  mass  of  Ganges  foam,  and  recalling  the  memory
of  Para9u-Rama's  prowess6?  How  could  he,  furious  as  the
summer  sun,  which  dries  the  water  of  the  lotus  pools,  put
forth  his  hands,  regardless  of  friendly  advances7,  to  take
my  lord's  life  ?  What  shall  be  his  doom  ?  Into  what
creature's  womb  shall  he  pass  ?  Into  what  hell  shall  he
fall  ?  What  outcast  even  would  wreak  this  deed  ?  My
tongue  seems  soiled  with  a  smirch  of  sin  as  I  take  the
miscreant's  very  name  upon  my  lips.  With  what  design  did


1  Mbh.  til.  8781  (104). The  mountain  swelled  in  order  to  stop  the
path  of  the  Sun  and  Moon.

2  Or  '  conjurer.'  3  Or  '  snakes.'

4  Or  '  against  a  rival  elephant.'

5  Dhristadyumna  killed  Drona  unfairly,  when  the  latter  heard  the
news  that  his  son  was  dead. Dhristadyumna  is  called  the  progeny  of
fire  because  he  and  his  sister  Draupadl  were produced  out  of  the
sacrificial  fire. The  word  may  also  punningly  mean  '  the  author  of  evil
courses.'

fi  The  word  pak§apatam  may  punningly  mean  either  'favour'  or
'flight  by  wings':  for  the  story  of  Rama's  forming  a  path  over  Kailasa
for  the  wild-geese  cf.  Mahavlracarita  p.  26  (Trithen)  and  the  name
Krauncari.

7  Or — punningly — 'ray«,  regardless  of  their  (the  lotuses')  beauty.'

12—2


180  THE HARSA-CARITA.

c

this  mean  remorseless1  being  bring  my  lord  to  his  death,
working  his  way  like  a  worm  into  a  sandal  pillar  capable  of
delighting  a  whole  world  ?  Truly  now  the  fool,  when  in  greed
for  the  taste  of  sweet  savours  he  laid  hands  upon  my
lord's  life  as  honey,  saw  not  the  coming  onset  of  a  swarm  of
arrows2.  By  lighting  up  this  evil  path3  this  vilest  of  Gaud  as
has  collected  only  foul  shame,  like  lampblack,  to  the  soiling
of  his  own  house.  Though  the  sun,  crest  jewel  of  the  world,
may  be  sunk  in  the  west,  is  there  not  the  moon,  lion  lord  of
the  one  deer  that  roams4  the  planet  thickets,  ready  at  once
by  the  creator's  appointment  to  quell  the  darkling  foe  of  the
road  of  right  ?  Even  when  the  goad,  discipline's  lawgiver,  is
broken,  there  exists  for  a  wicked  elephant's  admonition  the
lion's  still  sharper  claw,  skilled  to  cleave  the  thick-boned
heads  of  all  mad  elephants.  Who  is  not  bound  to  punish
such  vile  jewellers,  as  it  were,  who  deface  the  most  brilliant
gems  ?  What  now  will  be  the  wretch's  fate  ? "

[211]  Even  as  he  thus  spoke,  the  senapati,  Simhanada,  a
friend  of  his  father  also,  was  seated  in  his  presence,  a  man
foremost  in  every  fight,  in  person  yellow  as  a  hill  of  orpi-
ment,  stately  as  a  great  full-grown  Sal  tree's  stem5,  and
tall  as  if  ripened  by  valour's  exceeding  heat.  He  was  far
advanced  in  years  :  and,  although  he  had  oft  risen  from  repose
upon  a  couch  of  arrows,  yet  in  point  of  vigorous  age  he
seemed  to  scoff  at  Bhisma.  So  stubborn  was  his  frame,  that
even  old  age  laid  but  a  trembling  hand,  timidly  as  it  were,
upon  his  stiff  hair.  He  seemed  while  still  alive  to  have
been  born  anew  into  a  lion's  nature,  compounded  of  guileless
valour  and  having  for  a  mane  his  straight  locks  white  as  a
bunch  of  moonlight.  His  eyes  were  veiled  by  brows  whose

1  With  reference  to  the  worm  vigataghrinena  will  mean  '  relieved
from  the  heat.'

2  Or  'bees.'

3  Or  punningly  '  lamp  at  a  loophole.'

4  Or  by  paronomasia  '  dims ' :  v.  vipesena  haranam  viharo  vichaylka-
ranam  gamanam  ca  Comm. The  moon  is  compared  to  a  lion,  and  the
deer  is  the  Hindu  counterpart  of  the  '  man  in  the  moon.'

5  The  Comm.  has  kandam  skandhah,  which  may  point  to  a  reading
-kanda-  for  praka-naa-.  t


CHAPTER VI.  181

•

wrinkled  skin  hung  loose,  as  if  he  shrank  from  the  mortal
sin  of  beholding  a  new  master's  face.  His  terrible  visage,
brightened  by  a  thick  white  moustache  which*  hid  his  cheeks,
seemed  to  pour  forth  an  untimely  war  time1  in  the  shape  of
a  commencing  autumn  white  with  blooming  Ka$a  groves.
A  beard  hanging  down  to  his  navel  played  the  part  of  a  white
chowrie,  fanning  his  master,  who  though  deajj  survived  in  his
heart.  In  spite  of  age  his  broad  chest  was  rough  with  great
gashes  of  wounds  opening  their  lips  as  if  athirst  to  drink  the
water  of  whetted  steel's  edge :  and  all  across  it  ran  in  lines
the  writings  of  many  great  scars  graven  by  the  axe  edge  of
sharp  swords,  as  though  he  were  making  a  calculation  of  the
hour  of  victory  in  every  battle;  whence  he  might  be  likened  to
an  eastern  range  of  hills  in  motion2.  In  the  charm  of  divers
martial  exploits  he  seemed  to  outstrip  the  very  Maha-Bharata ;
in  an  unbroken  career  of  slaughtering  foes  to  give  a  lesson  to
Para9u-Rama  himself:  in  ranging  oceans3  and  in  energy
devoted  to  winning  glory  perforce  to  throw  even  Mandara
into  the  shade:  [212]  in  adapting  himself  to  the  limitations  of
his  position4  to  surpass  the  very  sea :  in  steadfastness,  rigidity
and  elevation  to  shame  even  the  hills:  in  circumambient
effulgence  of  fierce  native  brilliance  to  set  the  sun  himself  at
nought :  in  the  wearing  toil5  of  supporting  his  lord's  weighty
concerns  to  laugh  even  (Diva's  bull  to  scorn.  Of  fury's  fire  he

1  There  is  perhaps  a  pun  here,  as  the  Sanskrit  might  mean  'an
untimely  Vikrama-era '  commencing  with  autumn  instead  of  the  spring-
month  Caitra.

2  He  is  compared  to  an  eastern  hill  because  of  the  long  line  of
ridges  across  his  breast  and  also  because  of  the  astronomical  reference
to  the  use  of  this  hill  in  calculating  ascensions. The  Sanskrit  helps  the
comparison  by  means  of  a  pun  in  parvata.

3  We  have  here  a  punning  reference  to  the  ocean-churning,  as  the
words  may  also  mean 'in  revolving  in the ocean  and attracting
Laksnil  &c.'

4  Vahinlnayaka  =  (\}  leader  of  armies,  (2)  lord  of  rivers  =  ocean. '  In
not  overpassing  his  bounds,'  and  'observing  the  principles  of  generalship.'

5  Ghristapristha  literally  =  '  having  an  abraded  back,'  an  idiomatic
turn  for  '  worn  out  by  many  labours,'  v.  Comrn.  karyesu  ksimtio  lokesu
qhriftupristha  ucyate. Tcvarabhara  will  punuingly  mean  '  the  weight  of
Ci'va.'


182  THE HARSA-CARITA.

«

was  the  rubbing  stick,  of  valour  the  lordliness,  of  arrogance
the  arrogant  quality,  of  pride  the  erysipelas,  of  violence  the
heart,  of  martial  ardour  the  life,  of  enterprise  the  panting
gasp :  to  the  infuriate  a  hook,  to  noxious  kings  an  elephant's
goad1,  the  colophon  of  chivalry,  the  family  priest  of  martial
companies,  the  scale-beam  of  the  brave,  the  boundary  over-
seer of  the  village  of  swords,  the  performer  of  proud
speeches,  the  sustainer  of  the  routed,  the  executor  of
pledges,  the  authority  on  openings  in  great  wars,  the  reveille
drum  of  battle's  devotees.  His  very  voice,  deep  as  the  boom-
ing of  a  drum,  inspired  the  warriors  with  lust  for  battle,
as  he  said :

'  My  lord,  knaves  in  themselves  most  foul  mark  not  how
they  are  themselves  deluded  by  the  foul  unresting  vixen
fortune,  as  crows  by  the  koil.  The  aberrations  of  success,  like
those  of  the  lotus,  include  the  closing  of  the  eyes  in  error2.
Hiding  the  sun  with  umbrella  shades,  the  sluggard  souls
become  unaware  of  the  fierce  heat  of  others.  What  indeed
is  a  wretch  to  do  whose  looks,  for  ever  turned  away  through
excess  of  timidity,  have  never  even  beheld  the  faces  of
angered  heroes3  when  the  fire  of  rage  puts  forth  its  bristles
upon  cheeks  tawny  with  the  swelling  of  unparalleled  excesses
of  passion?  [213]  Little  suspects  this  miserable  man  how
great  souls  dishonoured,  like  spells  wrought  by  Brahmans4,
in  a  moment  consummate  the  ruin  of  whole  houses.  Even
against  the  low  the  mighty  blaze  out  at  a  blow5.  Well
does  this  deed,  so  capable  of  hurling  irredeemably  to  hell,
befit  such  an  outcast  from  all  martial  gatherings.  To  right-
thinking  men,  who  bear  in  the  bow  a  treasure  precious  above
all  else  iu  battle,  and  whose  is  the  sword,  that  lotus  thicket
for  the  sport  of  glory's  hamsas,  even  ocean-churnings  and  the


1  Or  '  to  noxious  serpents  a  Garuda.'

2  Or — punningly — '  the  closing  of  buds  at  eve.'

3  The  words  for  '  timidity '  and  '  heroes :  may  also  mean  '  delicacy  '
and  'suns.'

4  There  is a  pun  in  ciprakritah,  which  means  (1)  'dishonoured,'
(2)  'wrought  by  Brahmans.'

5  Or  '  even  in  water  electric  flashes  blaze  out.'


CHAFFER VI.  183

•

like  appear  but  mean  expedients  to  bring  fame1  to  view :
what  then  of  such  expedients  as  his  ?  Those  for  whom,  as  if
themselves  incompetent  for  the  task,  the  very  hills  appointed
by  the  creator  to  support  the  earth  vomit  forth  iron  to  assist
the  stroke  of  clublike  arms  hard  as  the  thunderbolt, — how  can
such  stout-armed  myrmidons  of  spotless  fame  even  in  thought
dream  aught  impossible?  Before  warrior^'  hands,  glorious
in  power  to  quell  all  opposition2,  the  sun's  rays  (hands)  are
in  respect  of  occupying  the  realms  of  space  maimed.  Only  by
vulgar  report  is  Yama's  dwelling  in  the  southern  quarter,
essentially  it  is  in  the  frown  of  warriors,  where  are  terrible
spaces  curving  with  wavy  lines  like  the  Great  Buffalo's
horns3.  Strange  that  heroes  roaring  like  lions  in  battle4  do  not
suddenly  grow  manes  along  with  the  thorny  hair  that  bristles
under  the  joy  of  conflict !  The  mass  of  wealth5  born  from
the  four  oceans  has  two  dreadful  crucibles  whereby  foes  are
burnt,  the  subaqueous  fire  and  the  heart  of  a  great  hero6.
How  can  the  fire's  natural  heat  rest  before  it  has  em-
braced all  oceans7?  Idly  has  the  lord  of  serpents  expanded
his  vast  ponderous  hood,  when  by  his  coils8  he  supports
merely  a  clod  of  earth.  Only  the  arms  of  warriors,  adorned
with  forearms  heavy  as  a  sky  elephant's  trunk,  know  how
sweet  a  taste  does  the  earth  provide  in  the  enjoyment  of  a
supremacy  whose  edicts  are  never  set  at  nought,  Like  the
sun,  a  king  passes  his  days  at  his  ease  with  radiance  unim-
paired, while  with  upturned  face  the  goddess  of  lotuses9  clasps

1 =  Laksnil.

-  Or  '  in  overpowering  all  planets.'

3  This  compound  goes  with  both  daksiiiaca,  and  bhatabhrukutir :  in
the  former  case  we  must  translate  '  lines  of  the  Great  Buffalo's  horns,'
the  Great  Buffalo  being  that  of  Yama.

4  There  is  here  apparently  a  pun  on  the  speaker's  own  name  :  the
translation  would  be  '  letting  loose  Sitnhauada.'

5  Or — punningly — 'cinders.'

0  The  Kashmir  text  reads  mahapuru§diiam  hrdayam  dhdma.

7  Read payorafin saJiajasya (for payora^isahajasya) with the
Kashmir  text.

8  Or — punningly — '  by  his  government.' Bhogin  '  serpent '  may  also
mean  '  king.'

9  Padm^kara  =  (Y)  the  hands  of  PaclmS,  =  Qri,  (2)  lotus  bads.


184  THE HARSA-CARITA.

his  feet.  [214]  But  the  coward  is,  like  the  moon,  deer-hearted
and  pallid  of  hue1:  how  can  his  glory  abide  steady  for  even
a  pair  of  nights?.?  Expansive  is  the  heroic  spirit,  raining  a
spray  of  boundless  glory.  The  paths  of  prowess  are  levelled
by  the  pioneer  valour.  The  portals  of  pride  by  their  very
creak  dispel  its  foes.  The  open  realms  of  space  to  valour  are
lighted  by  the  sh^en  of  swords.  Glory,  like  the  earth,  derives
a  loving  flush  from  a  dewy  shower  of  the  enemies'  blood.
Like  a  row  of  toe-nails,  Royalty  also  glitters  more  brightly
through  rubbing  against  the  grindstone  edge  of  many  a  king's
diadem  jewels.  Enemies'  looks  as  well  as  a  man's  palms  are
darkened  by  ceaseless  practice  in  arms.  Hundreds  of  bandages
bound  about  manifold  wounds  make  fame  as  well  as  the  body
white.  Hard  strokes  of  swords,  falling  upon  the  cuirassed  panels
of  enemies'  breasts,  spit  forth  not  only  sparks  but  also  glory.
Whoso,  when  his  people  have  been  slain  by  the  foe,  announces
his  heart's  grief  like  a  wise  man  by  the  breast  beating  of  his
enemies'  wives,  whose  sighs  are  the  wind  caused  by  the
descent  of  hard  scimitars,  whose  tears  are  those  which  drip
and  fall  on  the  body  of  a  lifeless  foe,  who  offers  water  by
the  eyes  of  his  enemies'  mistresses2,  he  and  none  other
deserves  fame.  No  notion  of  kindred  do  the  enlightened  attach
to  bodies  evanescent  like  a  vision  come  and  gone  in  sleep :
with  heroes,  the  conception  of  body  belongs  to  imperishable
fame.  As  foul  lampblack  does  not  so  much  as  touch  the
diamond  mirror,  naturally  brilliant  with  a  radiance  of  ever
glittering  splendour,  so  sorrow  touches  not  the  illustrious.
Once  more,  you  are  the  vanguard  of  the  stout-hearted,  the
captain  of  the  wise,  the  foremost  of  the  mighty,  the  champion
of  the  noble,  the  forerunner  of  the  illustrious,  the  prime  of
the  dauntless.  Here  also  you  have  cool  retreats  for  the
abode  of  fortitude,  concealed  by  the  shadow  of  a  forest
of  strong  arms,  with  the  delight  of  sword-edge  water  within
reach,  and  the  fire  of  anger  ever  smoking  in  the  vicinity :
stout  are  those  walls  whose  panels  are  soldiers'  breasts.

1  Literally  'pale  of  back':  jjcuidurapristlia&ya~de$abhasaya  nirlaj-
jasya  'shameless,'  Comin.

2  Water  is  offered  to  the  dead.


CHAPTER VI.  185

•
Think  not  therefore  of  the  Gauda  king  alone :  so  deal  that

for  the  future  no  other  follow  his  example.  [215]  Wave
the  chowries  of  these  mock  conquerors,  Hhese  would-be1
lovers  of  the  whole  earth,  by  the  sighs  of  the  matrons
in  their  harems.  Excise  their  vicious  cravings  for  the
umbrella's  shade  by  awnings  of  flocking  kites  blinded  by
the  scent  of  carnage.  Dispel  with  exu/iations  of  tepid
blood  the  unhealthy  flush  of  eyes  diseased  by  the  side
glances  of  the  harlot,  ill-got  fame.  Assuage  by  the  lancing
of  sharp  arrows  the  tumours  of  preposterous  hardihood2.
By  panaceas  of  scars  from  encircling  bunches  of  iron
fetters  uproot  the  stinging  pains  of  feet  that  wanton  with
yearning  for  footstools.  By  the  letters  of  stern  command
in  caustic  showers  allay  the  itching  of  ears  alert  for  the  cry
of  'Victory.'  Remove  the  unhealthy  rigidity  of  stiff  un-
bending heads  by  forehead  applications  of  a  sandal  salve
consisting  of  the  gleam  of  toe-nails.  With  levies  of  tribute
for  nippers  extract  the  splinters  of  unmannerly  forwardness
inflamed  by  the  arrogance  of  wealth.  With  the  radiance  of
gemmed  footstools  for  lamps  pierce  the  darkness  of  soldiers
frowns  produced  by  windy  swelling.  Overcome  the  complica-
tions of  vain  pride  with  a  cure  removing  heaviness  of
head  by  the  lightness  of  kicks.  Soften  the  hardness  of
the  bow-string's  callosities  by  the  warmth  of  clasped  hands
folded  in  a  perpetual  obeisance.  Forsake  not  the  path
along  which  your  sire,  grandsire,  and  great  grandsire  have
marched  amid  the  envy  of  the  three  worlds.  Relinquishing
the  grief  proper  to  cowards,  appropriate,  as  the  lion  a
fawn,  the  royal  glory  which  is  your  heritage.  Now  that  the
king  has  assumed  his  godhead  and  Rajyavardhana  has  lost
his  life  by  the  sting  of  the  vile  Gauda  serpent,  you  are,
in  the  cataclysm  which  has  come  to  pass,  the  only  Qesa3
left  to  support  the  earth.  Comfort  your  unprotected  people.

1  (^raddliakamulca  occurs  iu  this  sense  in  c.  III.  p.  94. We  might
however  translate  '  these  seekers  after  the  reverence  of  the  whole  earth.'

2  The  Kashmir  text  has  vlrakarya  '  of  valorous  feats.'

3  A  pun  in  ce$a  ((1)  left,  (2)  the  serpent  (^esa)  refers  to  the  eartli-
supporting  serpent. .


186  THE HARSA-CARITA.

•

Like  the  autumn  sun,  set  your  forehead-burning  footsteps
upon  the  heads  of  kings1.  Let  your  enemies  with  nail-
scorching  clouds«of  smoke  from  sighs  all  hot  with  the  vexation
of  consecration  to  new  subservience  and  with  dawning  light
from  a  horizon  of  trembling  crest  gems  give  your  feet  a
dappled  hue.  Even  Para9u-Rama,  though  reared  as  a  solitary
ascetic  among  t^he  deer,  though  soft-hearted  with  the
tenderness  of  his  Brahmauical  nature,  did  yet,  when  his
father  was  slain,  frame  his  resolve  and  one  and  twenty  times
cut  down  and  eradicated  the  united  power  of  the  Ksatriya
stock,  which  with  the  fierce  echoing  twang  of  its  forest  of
bows'  notched  ends  [216]  could  rob  the  sky  elephants  of  their
madness,  and  could  inflame  the  world  with  fever  by  its  array
of  humming  bow-strings :  what  then  of  my  lord,  the  prince
of  the  magnanimous,  whose  spirit  wields  in  the  native  hard-
ness of  his  frame  a  thunderbolt  ?  Therefore  do  you  this  very
day  register  a  resolve,  and  for  the  wreck  of  this  meanest  of
Gaudas'  life  take  up  the  bow,  that  pennon  of  the  sudden
expedition  of  fate  busy  in  gathering  lives.  My  lord's  body,
baked  in  the  flame  of  humiliation,  cannot  without  the  cool
application  of  the  crimson  sandal-unguent  of  foes  be  relieved
of  this  dire  fever  of  pain.  Failing  the  means  of  allaying  the
pain  of  insult,  Bhlmasena  did  yet  without  the  device  of  any
Mandara2  quaff  the  ambrosia  of  foemen's  blood,  as  though  it
had  been  sweetened  by  Hidimba's  kisses.  And  Jamadagni's
son  bathed  in  pools  of  Ksatriya  gore,  whose  coolness  was  grate-
ful to  the  touch  by  assuaging  the  fever  of  anger's  fiery  flames.'
So  much  said  he  ended,  and  my  lord  Harsa  replied : —
'  The  advice  of  your  eminence  deserves  to  be  acted  upon.
As  it  is,  my  envious  arm  looks  with  a  claimant's  eye
upon  even  the  king  of  serpents  who  upholds  the  earth.
When  the  very  planet  groups  rise,  my  brow  longs  to  set
itself  in  motion  for  their  repression.  My  hand  yearns  to

1  The  words  for  '  footsteps '  and  '  kings '  may  denote  '  rays '  and
'  mountains.5

2  I.e.  to  churn  it  from  the  ocean. Bhlma  had  vowed  to  drink
Duh9asana's  blood  to  avenge  the  insult  offered  to  Draupadi. Hidimba
is  the  wife  of  Bhlma.


CHAPTER VI.  187

•
clutch  the  tresses  of  the  very  hills  that  will  not  bow. My

heart  would  force  chowries  upon  even  the  sun's  presumptu-
ously bright  hands1.  Enraged  at  the  title  of  king,  my  foot
itches  to  make  footstools  of  even  the  kings  of  beasts.  My  lip
quivers  to  command  the  escheatment  of  the  very  quarters
of  heaven  so  wilfully  occupied  by  their  headstrong  regents.
How  much  more  therefore  now  that  su^h  a  woeful  issue -
has  come  to  pass !  My  mind,  brimming  with  passion,  has
no  room  for  complying  with  the  observances  of  mourning.
Nay,  so  long  as  this  vile  outcast  of  a  Gauda  king,  this  world-
contemned  miscreant,  who  deserves  to  be  pounded,  survives,
like  a  cruel  thorn  in  my  heart,  I  am  ashamed  [217]  to  cry
out  helplessly  with  dry  lips  like  a  hermaphrodite3.  Until  I
evoke  a  storm  of  rain  from  the  tremulous  eyes  of  the  wives  of
hostile  hosts,  how  can  my  hands  present  the  oblation  of
water  ?  But  small  store  of  tears  have  these  eyes  till  they  have
seen  the  smoke  cloud  from  this  vilest  of  Gaudas'  pyre.  Listen
to  my  vow  :  '  By  the  dust  of  my  honoured  lord's  feet  I  swear
that,  unless  in  a  limited  number  of  days  I  clear  this  earth  of
Gaudas,  and  make  it  resound  with  fetters  on  the  feet  of  all
kings  who  are  excited  to  insolence  by  the  elasticity  of  their
bows,  then  will  I  hurl  my  sinful  self,  like  a  moth,  into  an  oil-
fed  flame.'  So  saying  he  gave  instructions  to  Avanti,  the
supreme  minister  of  war  and  peace,  who  was  standing  near :
'  Let  a  proclamation  be  engraved ' :  "As  far  as  the  orient
hill,  whose  summit  the  Gandharva  pairs  abandon  when  alarmed
by  the  hurtle  of  the  sun's  chariot  wheels, — as  far  as  Suvela4,
where  the  calamity  of  Rama's  devastation  of  Ceylon  was
graven  by  axes  hewing  down  the  capital  Trikuta, — as  far  as
the  western  mount,  the  hollows  of  whose  caves  resound  with
the  tinkling  anklets  of  Varuna's  intoxicated  and  tripping
mistresses, — as  far  as  Gandhamadana,  whose  cave-dwellings
are  perfumed  with  fragrant  sulphur  used  as  scent  by  the
Yaksa  matrons ;  let  all  kings  prepare  their  hands  to  give
tribute  or  grasp  swords,  to  seize  the  realms  of  space  or

1  Or  '  rays.'  '2  Durjate  •  vyasane. Comni.

3  The  Sanskrit  here  contains  an  untranslateable  pun.

4  A  mountain  in  Lanka,  Ceylon.


188  THE HAKSA-CARITA.

<

chowries,  let  them  bend  their  heads  or  their  bows,  grace  their
ears  with  either  my  commands  or  their  bowstrings,  crown  their
heads  with  the  duJit  of  my  feet  or  with  helmets,  join  suppliant
hands  or  troops  of  elephants,  let  go  their  lands  or  arrows,
grasp  mace-staves  or  lance-staves,  take  a  good  view  of  them-
selves in  the  nails  of  my  feet  or  the  mirrors  of  their  swords.
I  am  gone  abroad.  r  Like  a  cripple,  how  can  I  rest,  so  long  as
my  feet  are  not  besmeared  with  an  ointment  found  in  every
continent,  consisting  of  the  light  of  precious  stones  in  the
diadems  of  all  kings?"

Thus  resolved,  he  dismissed  the  assembly,  and  having  sent
away  the  feudatories,  left  the  hall  once  more  desirous  of  the
bath.  Having  risen,  he  performed  all  his  daily  duties  like  one
restored  to  himself.  And  from  the  face  of  the  three  worlds,
which  had  heard  the  vow,  the  day  with  heat  allayed  faded,
like  the  spirit  of  self-assertion,  away.  [218]  Later  on  when
even  the  adorable  sun,  reft  of  his  radiance,  had  disappeared,
as  if  afraid  of  the  loss  of  his  own  sovereignty;  when  even
the  red-lotus  beds,  apparently  through  fear,  were  closing  and
hiding  the  buzzing  of  their  bees1 ;  when  the  birds,  motionless
and  checking  as  if  in  fright  the  agitation  of  their  wings2,  were
becoming  invisible ;  when  in  honour  of  the  afterglow,  which,
like  the  king's  vow,  embraced  the  whole  world,  all  the
people  with  bowed  heads  joined  a  forest  of  adoring  hands ;
when,  as  if  the  sky  regents,  apprehensive  of  falling  from  their
station,  were  erecting  a  circle  of  sky-kissing  iron  bulwarks,
the  heavens  were  being  hidden  by  an  array  of  thick  mists ;
Harsa  did  not  stay  long  at  the  evening  levee.  The  very
lamps  around,  whose  flames  shook  in  the  wind  from  the
swaying  shawls  of  bending  kings,  seemed  to  salute  him,  as  he
dismissed  the  company,  and,  interdicting  the  servants  from
entering,  passed  into  the  bed-chamber.  There  he  lay
prostrate  and  stretched  upon  the  bed  his  languid  limbs.
As  soon  as  he  was  left  alone  with  his  lamp,  fraternal
affection,  finding  its  opportunity  like  a  brigand,  held  him  in
its  grasp.  Closing  his  eyes,  he  beheld  his  senior  living  as  it
were  in  his  heart.  Without  a  pause  his  sighs  issued  forth,  as
1  Or  '  arrows.'  2  Or  [  partisans.'


CHAPTER VL  189

•

if  in  quest  of  his  brother's  life.  Covering  his  face  with  a
flood  of  tears  in  place  of  a  white  shawl's  hem,  he  wept  long
and  silently ;  and  these  thoughts  were  in* his  heart :  '  How
could  such  a  form  as  his  possibly  deserve  an  end  like  this  ?
Our  sire  had  a  hard-knit  frame  like  a  broad  mass  of  rock :
but,  like  the  iron-stone  from  the  hills,  my  brother  was  harder
still.  How  after  losing  him  does  it  becom$  me,  heartless  that
I  am,  even  to  draw  one  breath  ?  This  is  my  love,  devotion,
attachment !  What  child  even  could  approve  of  my  surviving
his  death  ?  Whither  so  suddenly  has  that  noble  unity  gone  ?
Accursed  fate  has  parted  me  from  him  without  even  an
effort.  Unfeeling  that  I  am,  my  grief  has  been  all  this  time
obscured  by  rage — fie  upon  it ! — and  I  have  not  even
abandoned  myself  to  tears.  Frail  beyond  question  are  the
loves  of  mortals,  fragile  as  a  spider's  web.  Kinship  can  be
only  a  conventional  tie,  if  even  I  sit  here  apparently  self-
contained  like  a  stranger  when  my  lord  has  gone  to  heaven.
What  profit  has  dastard  destiny  reaped  by  parting  a  pair  of
happy  brothers  with  hearts  blessed  in  the  union  of  mutual
love  ?  [219]  My  lord's  virtues,  once  grateful  to  all  creatures
as  if  made  of  moonlight,  do  now  that  he  has  passed  to  another
world  verily  burn,  as  if  they  had  caught  fire  from  his  pyre.'
These  and  the  like  mournful  meditations  were  in  his  mind.
When  day  dawned,  he  gave  early  instructions  to  the  cham-
berlain that  he  desired  to  see  Skandagupta,  the  commandant
of  the  whole  elephant  troop.

Summoned  by  a  succession  of  numerous  people  running
all  together,  Skandagupta,  not  waiting  for  his  elephant,
hastened  on  foot  from  his  quarters  with  bustling  lictors
forcing  the  people  aside.  At  every  step  he  questioned
the  chief  elephant  doctors,  who  bowed  on  every  hand,  as
to  the  night's  news  concerning  the  favourite  elephants.  All
around  him  was  a  bustle  of  groups  of  people  belonging
to  the  camp.  In  front  ran  throngs  of  unemployed  persons1,
come  for  the  purpose  of  bursting  the  animals'  fastenings

1  The  comm.  however  explains  andyatta  •  hastiparcvaraksinah  '  ele-
phant attendants.'


190  THE HARSA-CARITA.

i

and  looking  like  Vindhya  forests  as  they  filled  the  expanse
of  heaven  with  thickets  of  bamboo  clumps  bedecked  with
uplifted  peacocks*1  tails.  With  them  were  riders  displaying
handfuls  of  emerald  green  fodder,  soliciting  fresh-caught
elephants,  or  bowing  from  a  distance  in  delight  at  getting
prime  wild  ones,  or  reporting  the  approach  of  rut  in  one
under  their  charge^  or  ordering  the  drums  to  be  mounted.
First  of  all  came  some  who,  having  been  deprived  of
their  elephants  for  careless  offences,  wore  their  beards
long  in  mourning,  while  ragged  new  comers  ran  up  in
hope  of  the  happiness  of  securing  one.  Troops  of  super-
intendents of  decoys,  finding  at  last  an  opportunity,  were
busy  with  hands  uplifted  enumerating  the  serviceable
females.  Rows  of  foresters  with  tossing  badges  of  twigs
strove  by  upraising  forests  of  tall  goads  to  announce  the
number  of  fresh  captured  elephants  which  they  had  secured.
Crowds  of  mahouts  displayed  leathern  figures  for  practising
manoeuvres1.  [220]  Emissaries  from  the  rangers  of  elephant
forests,  sent  to  convey  tidings  of  the  movements  of  fresh
herds  and  momentarily  expecting  supplies  of  fodder,  reported
the  commissariat  stores  at  villages,  towns,  and  marts.

Beneath  an  aspect  of  indifference  the  bearing  of  a  great
minister,  upheld  by  his  master's  favour,  and  a  natural  un-
bending rigidity  gave  to  Skandagupta  an  air  of  command.
He  seemed  to  enjoin  the  very  seas  to  provide  a  limitless
supply  of  shells  for  elephants'  ears,  to  pillage  the  very  hills  for
store  of  red-chalk  unguents  to  paint  their  heads,  to  deprive
Indra  of  his  Airavata's  charge  over  the  sky  elephants.  His
tread,  heavy  as  when  Kailasa  bent2  beneath  the  weight  of
Qiva's  step,  sought,  as  it  were,  to  quell  the  earth's  pride  in  her
power  to  support  great  weights.  His  swinging  arms,  which
reached  his  knees  and  dangled  as  he  moved,  appeared  to
plant  on  either  side  an  avenue  of  stone  pillars  for  elephant
posts.  A  somewhat  full  and  pendulous  lip,  sweet  as  ambrosia
and  soft  as  young  sprays,  suggested  a  bait  to  allure  the

1  These  were  figures  of  elephants  used  in  training  the  animals  for
battle.

2  Or  namita  '  was  bent '  (Kashmir).  „


CHAPTER VI.  191

•

elephant  of  (Jrl.  His  nose  was  as  long  as  his  sovereign's
pedigree.  A  pair  of  long  eyes,  exceedingly  soft,  sweet,  white,
and  large,  as  if  they  had  drunk  the  Milk  Oc«an,  gulped  down
the  expanse  of  heaven.  His  forehead  was  full  and  wide
beyond  even  Meru's  flank.  His  hair,  very  long,  naturally
curling  and  rejoicing  in  a  soft  dark  colour  as  if  from
growing  in  a  perpetual  umbrella  shade,  appeared,  as  its
tresses  tossed  and  quivered  like  young  tendrils,  to  cut  the
sun's  rays  and  despoil  them  of  their  light.  Though,  owing  to
the  fall  of  all  hostile  alliances,  he  had  abandoned  the  use  of
the  bow,  yet  all  the  ends  of  heaven  heard  the  echo  of  his
great  qualities1.  With  a  whole  army  of  raging  elephants  at
his  disposal,  he  was  yet  untouched  by  presumption2.  Great
in  station,  he  was  yet  full  of  sweetness3:  royal  yet  full  of
virtues4:  chief  of  the  generous3  as  of  elephants:  wearing
his  dependence  with  the  enviable  undaunted  dignity  of
sovereignty :  raised  to  a  position  in  the  king's  favour,  un-
approachable, like  a  noble  wife,  by  others  and  fast  fixed  by
love  to  one  lord  :  disinterested  kinsman  of  the  wise,  un-
salaried  servant  of  the  great,  unbought  slave  of  the  prudent.
[221]  Entering  the  palace,  he  saluted  from  a  distance,
leaning  his  lotus  hands  upon  the  earth  and  touching  it
with  his  head.  When  he  had  seated  himself  in  not  too
great  proximity,  Harsa  addressed  him:  'You  have  received
a  full  account  of  my  brother's  destruction  and  my  own
intentions.  You  must  therefore  hastily  call  in  the  elephant
herds  out  at  pasture.  The  hot  pain  of  my  brother's  defeat
forbids  even  the  briefest  delay  in  marching.'  Thus  addressed
Skandagupta  replied  with  an  obeisance :  '  Let  my  master
consider  his  orders  executed.  Loyal  devotion,  however,  re-
quires of  me  a  few  words.  Therefore  let  your  majesty  hear.


1  Or  '  bowstrings.'  2  Or  '  rut.'

3  Or  '  though  made  of  ashes,  yet  full  of  sap.'

4  Or  '  made  of  earth,  yet  consisting  of  threads.'  Cf.  Comm.  gunas  •
tantavo  'pi,  na  hi  ghatah  pato  bhavatlti  virodhah  in  allusion  to  the
favourite  illustration  in  Hindu  logic :  '  a  crock  is  not  a  cloth.'

5  The  pun  on  danam  (  =  (1)  a  gift,  (2)  rut)  has  occurred  before  in
Chapter  II.  .


192  THE HARSA-CARITA.

•

All  that  your  majesty  has  undertaken  is  worthy  of  the
nobility1  fostered  in  Puspabhuti's  line,  of  your  own  inborn
valour,  of  your  aiuis  long  as  a  sky-elephant's  trunk,  and  of  your
peerless  affection  for  your  brother.  When  even  the  wretched
worms  named  snakes  brook  no  insult,  how  should  such
mines  of  valour  as  yourself?  Yet  the  story  of  his  majesty
Rajyavardhana  hqs  given  you  some  inkling  into  the  despi-
cable characters  of  vile  men.  Thus  do  national  types  vary,
like  the  dress,  features,  food,  and  pursuits  of  countries,
village  by  village,  town  by  town,  district  by  district,  con-
tinent by  continent,  and  clime  by  clime.  Dismiss  therefore
this  universal  confidingness,  so  agreeable  to  the  habits  of  your
own  land  and  springing  from  innate  frankness  of  spirit.  Of
disasters  due  to  mistaken  carelessness  frequent  reports  come
daily  to  your  majesty's  hearing2.  In  Padmavati  there  was
the  fall  of  Nagasena3,  heir  to  the  Naga  house,  whose  policy
was  published  by  a  garika,  bird.  In  QravastI  faded  the  glory
of  Qrutavarman,  whose  secret  a  parrot  heard.  In  Mrittikavatl
a  disclosure  of  counsel  in  sleep  was  the  death  of  Suvarnacuda.
[222]  The  fate  of  a  Yavana  king  was  encompassed  by  the
holder  of  his  golden  chowrie,  who  read  the  letters  of  a
document  reflected  in  his  crest  jewel.  By  slashes  of  drawn
swords  Viduratha's  army  minced  the  avaricious  Mathura
king  Brihadratha  while  he  was  digging  treasure  at  dead  of
night.  Vatsapati,  who  was  wont  to  take  his  pleasure
in  elephant  forests,  was  imprisoned  by  Mahasena's  soldiers
issuing  from  the  belly  of  a  sham  elephant4.  Sumitra,  son  of
Agnimitra,  being  over  fond  of  the  drama,  was  attacked  by
Mitradeva  in  the  midst  of  actors,  and  with  a  scimitar  shorn,
like  a  lotus  stalk,  of  his  head.  Qarabha,  the  Acmaka  king,  being
attached  to  string  music,  his  enemy's  emissaries,  disguised  as

1  Read  abhijanasya  or  abhijdtyasya  for  ajdtyasya: the  Kashmir
text  has  abhijanasya  abhijatyasya.

2  This  speech refers  to  a curious mass  of unknown legendary
history.

3  Cf. Visnu  P.  Wilson's  tr.  (Hall's  eel.  vol.  iv.  p.  217)  Mann,  vii.
149.  150.

4  Cf.  Kathnsarit.  S.  ch.  12.


CHAPTER  VI.  193

students  of  music,  cut  off  his  head  with  sharp  knives  hidden
in  the  space  between  the  vino,  and  its  gourd.  A  base-born
general,  Puspamitra,  pounded  his  foolish  Maurya  master
Brihadratha,  having  displayed  his  whole  army  on  the  pretext
of  manifesting  his  power.  Kakavarna,  being  curious  of  mar-
vels, [223]  was  carried  away  no  one  knows  whither  on  an
artificial  aerial  car  made  by  a  Yavana  condemned  to  death1.
The  son  of  (^unaga  had  a  dagger  thrust  into  his  throat  in
the  vicinity  of  his  city.  In  a  frenzy  of  passion  the  over-
libidinous  Qunga2  was  at  the  instance  of  his  minister-Vasudeva
reft  of  his  life  by  a  daughter  of  Devabhiiti's  slave  woman
disguised  as  his  queen.  By  means  of  a  mine  in  Mount
Godhana,  joyous  with  the  tinkle  of  numerous  women's  jewel-
led anklets,  the  Magadha  king,  who  had  a  penchant  for  treasure
caves3,  was  carried  away  by  the  king  of  Mekala's  ministers  to
their  own  country.  Kumarasena,  the  Paunika  prince,  younger
brother  to  Pradyota,  having  an  infatuation  for  stories  about
selling  human  flesh,  was  slain  at  the  feast  of  Mahakala  by
the  vampire  Talajangha.  By  drugs  whose  virtues  had  been
celebrated  through  many  different  individuals  some  professed
physicians  brought  an  atrophy  upon  Ganapati,  son  of  the
king  of  Videha,  who  was  mad  for  the  elixir  of  life.  Confiding
in  women,  the  Kalinga  Bhadrasena  met  his  death  at  the
hands  of  his  brother  Virasena,  who  secretly  found  access  to
the  wall  of  the  chief  queen's  apartments.  Lying  on  a
mattress  in  his  mother's  bed,  a  son  of  Dadhra,  lord  of  the
Karusas,  encompassed  the  death  of  his  father,  who  purposed
to  anoint  another  son4.  Candraketu,  lord  of  the  Cakoras,
being  attached  to  his  chamberlain,  was  with  his  minister
deprived  of  life  by  an  emissary  of  Qudraka.  The  life  of  the

1  Of.  the  story  of  the  Enchanted  Horse  in  the  Arabian  Nights.

2  Vi§nu  Pur.  iv.  ch.  24.

3  Amravivaravyasaninam  'a  lover  of  snake  palaces'  or  'treasure
caverns ' :  cf.  the  Comm.'s  ahivivaram. This  king's  councillors  on  this
occasion  disguised  themselves  as  vdtikdh,  which  is  perhaps  for  vatigdh
'  workers  in  mines  or  metals.' Asuravivara  occurs  supra  text  p.  108
1.  5  and  p.  143  1.  9. In  the  former  passage  vdtikah  appears  and  is
explained  by  the  Comm.  as  asuravivaravyasanina  dcdrydh.

4  Kamandaki,  Nltisara,  vii.  51.

c.  '  13


194  THE HARSA-CARITA.

chase-loving  Puskara,  king  of  Camundi,  was  sipped,  while
he  was  extirpating  rhinoceroses,  by  the  lord  of  Campa's
soldiers  ensconced  in  a  grove  of  tall-stemmed  reeds.  Carried
away  by  fondness  for  troubadours,  the  Maukhari  fool  Ksatra-
varman  was  cut  down  by  bards,  his  enemy's  emissaries,  with
the  cry  of  '  Victory '  echoing  on  their  lips.  In  his  enemy's
city  the  king  of  the  Qakas,  while  courting  another's  wife,
was  butchered  by  Candragupta  concealed  in  his  mistress'
dress.  [224]  The  blunders  of  heedless  men  arising  from
women  have  been  brought  sufficiently  to  my  lord's  hear-
ing. Thus,  to  secure  her  son's  succession,  Suprabha  with
poisoned  groats  killed  Mahasena,  the  sweet-toothed  king  of
Kac.i1.  Ratnavati,  pretending  a  frenzy  of  love,  slew  the
victorious  Jarutha  of  Ayodhya  with  a  mirror  having  a  razor
edge2.  Devaki,  being  in  love  with  a  younger  brother,
employed  against  the  Sauhmya  Devasena  an  ear  lotus
whose  juice  was  touched  with  poisoned  powder.  A  jealous
queen  killed  Rantideva  of  Viranti  with  a  jewrelled  anklet
emitting  an  infection  of  magic  powder3 :  Vindumati  the
Vrisni  Viduratha  with  a  dagger  hidden  in  her  braided  hair4:
Hamsavati  the  Sauvira  king  Vlrasena5  with  a  girdle  orna-
ment having  a  drug-poisoned  centre :  Pauravi  the  Paurava
lord  Somaka  by  making  him  drink  a  mouthful  of  poisoned
wine,  her  own  mouth  being  smeared  with  an  invisible
antidote.'

So  much  said,  he  ended  and  went  forth  to  execute  his
master's  orders.  His  majesty  Harsa  complied  with  all
the  forms  of  royalty.  But  while  he,  according  to  his  vow,
was  commanding  his  march  for  a  world-wide  conquest,  in
the  abodes  of  the  doomed  neighbouring  kings  manifold  evil
portents  spread  abroad.  Thus : — herds  of  black  spotted  ante-
lopes roamed  restlessly  hither  and  thither,  like  imminent
glances  of  death's  emissaries6.  In  the  courts  resounded  the

1  Kamandaki,  Nltis.  vii.  52.  2  Ibid.  53.

3  Brihatsamhita  Ixxviii.  1,  Kamandaki  vii.  53. Read  visara.

4  Cf.  Varahamihira,  Brihat-Samhitd  Ixxviii.  1,  Kamandaki  vii.  54.

5  Kamandaki  vii.  53.

0  The  India  Office  MS.  has  aviprakristakaladristayah.


CHAPTER VI.  195

•

hum  of  swarms  of  honey  bees,  types  of  the  clatter  of  deserting
glory's  anklets.  With  streams  of  flame  issuing  from  cavities
of  hideous  open  mouths,  ill-omened  jackals  cfismally  even  in
the  day  time  howled  long  and  with  no  fair  presage.  Down
swooped  vultures,  red  as  young  monkeys'  faces  in  the  roots
of  their  wings,  as  if  full  well  acquainted  with  dead  men's
flesh.  All  at  once  the  trees  in  the  parks  piit  forth  untimely
flowers,  as  though  to  say  farewell.  Vehemently  wept  the
statues  in  the  halls,  beating  their  breasts  with  strokes
of  agitated  palms.  The  warriors,  as  though  their  heads
had  vanished  in  fear  of  the  near  clutching  of  their  hair,
beheld  themselves  headless  in  their  mirrors.  [225]  Upon
the  crest  gems  of  the  queens  appeared  footprints  marked
with  wheels,  conchs  and  lotuses1.  The  chowries  of  the
slave  women  slipped  suddenly  from  their  hands.  Even  in
lovers'  quarrels  the  soldiers,  averted  from  their  mistresses,
turned  their  backs  for  a  long  while  away.  On  the  elephants'
cheeks  were  parted  the  honey-symposia  of  the  bees.  As  if
sniffing  the  scent  of  Yama's  buffalo,  the  panting  steeds  refused
to  eat  the  green  young  grass,  ripe2  though  it  might  be.  In
the  courtyards  the  sluggish  peacocks  would  not  dance,  though
coaxed  by  girls  clapping  music  accompanied  by  the  sound  of
tossing  bracelets.  Near  the  gateways  night  after  night  troops
of  dogs  howled  shrilly  without  cause,  upturning  their  faqes
as  if  their  eyes  were  fixed  upon  the  moon's  deer.  Shaking
her  forefinger  as  if  to  count  the  dead,  a  naked  woman  wan-
dered all  day  long  in  the  parks.  Upon  the  inlaid  pavements
uprose  lines  of  grass  swaying  like  the  curved  hairs  upon  a
deer's  hoofs.  With  braided  locks  and  eyes  not  from  col-
lyrium3  lustrous,  appeared  in  the  wine  of  their  goblets  the
reflections  of  the  lotus  faces  of  warriors'  wives.  The  lands
shook  as  if  affrighted  at  their  approaching  seizure.  Upon  the

1  Natural  marks  on  an  emperor's  feet ;  cf.  Varahamihira,  Brihat  S.
Ixix.  17.

2  Literally  'clustering': stambakarim'baddhastambam  pakvam  va
Comm.

3  Widows  braid  their  hair  and  omit  the  use  of  colly rium. Bead
with  the  MS.  niranjanalofana-.

13—2


196  THE HARSA-CAR1TA.

<

bodies  of  the  soldiers  a  crimson  rain  might  be  seen  to  have
fallen,  in  hue  ruddy  as  blooming  Bandhuka  flowers,  and
suggesting  thfr-  clots  of  red  sandal  juice  wherewith  doomed
criminals  are  decked1.  As  if  to  lustrate  a  doomed  glory2,
blazing  meteors  ceased  not  to  fall  in  showers,  setting  the
star-clusters  afire  with  eruptions  of  incessantly  flashing
sparks.  At  the  very  first  a  furious  hurricane  swept  along,
from  every  house  bearing  away,  like  a  chamberlain,  chowries,
umbrellas  and  fans3.

Here  ends  the  sixth  Chapter — entitled  The  King's  Vow — of  the
Harsa-Carita  composed  by  Qrl  Bana  Bhatta.


1  Carudatta  in  the  Mricchakatika,  Act  x.,  describes  himself,  when
led  to  execution,  as  '  dragged  like  a  beast  to  sacrifice,  decked  with  the
marks of  red  sandal  on  his  limbs  and  besprinkled  with meal  and
pounded  incense.'

2  The  meteors  act  the  part  of  the  torch  which  was  carried  round  the
sacrificial  animal,  see  Ait.  Brdhm.  ii.  5.

3  We  may  here  note  a  few  small  variations  of  reading  by  the  Kash-
mir text  in  the  above  paragraph  : — (1)  for  aviprakristah  '  at  no  great
distance'  pravista — 'having  entered'  with  'emissaries,'  (2)  for  ajire  'in
the  courts '  dram  '  for  a  long  time,'  (3)  for  dram  advdrtham  '  long  and
with  no  fair  presage'  upadviram  gavartham  'near  the  camp  for  corpses,'
(4)  'in  the  halls'  omitted. There  are  also  unimportant  misreadings
prarudhaprasardh  for  -pranayah  'full  well  acquainted,'  pdnipallavdh  for
-pallavdt,  casana-  for  casaka-  '  goblets,'  atmapa(hara)  '  seizure,'  tarantl
for  apaharantl  'bearing  away.' The  MS.  has  no.  (3),  though  without
favdrtham,  and  also the  following  : — text  p.  225  1.  4  aghatanta for
vyaghatanta, 1. 10  katakesu  for  vdtakesu, 1. 11 niranjanalocanaruci
(?  runci),  1.  12  cetljandndm  for  bhatindm.


CHAPTER VII.

[226] To  the  vowed  hero  the  earth  is  a  courtyard  pediment,

the  ocean  a  dyke,

Hell  is  dry  land,  and  mount  Sumeru  an  ant-hill !
Strange  is  it  that the mountains bow  not  when the

stout-armed  wields  the  bow !
Of  what  account  at  all  are  the  wretched  crows  termed

enemies  ?

Some  days  having  passed,  on  a  day  with  care  calculated
and  approved  by  a  troop  of  astronomers  numbering  hundreds,
was  fixed  an  hour  of  marching  suitable  for  the  subjugation  of  all
the  four  quarters.  The  king  had  bathed  in  golden  and  silvern
vessels,  like  autumn  clouds  which  were  skilled1  in  pouring
water ;  had  with  deep  devotion  offered  worship  to  the  ador-
able Nilalohita2 ;  fed  the  up-flaming  fire,  whose  masses  of  blaze
formed  a  rightward  whorl ;  bestowed  upon  Brahmans  sesa-
mum  vessels  of  precious  stones,  silver,  and  gold  in  thousands,
myriads  also  of  cows  having  hoofs  and  horn  tips  adorned  with
creepers  of  gold-work3;  sat  upon  a  throne  with  a  coverlet  of
tiger  skin ;  duly  anointed  first  his  bow  and  then  his  body
down  to  the  feet  with  sandal  bright  as  his  own  fame ;  put  on
two  seemly  robes  of  bark  silk  marked  with  pairs  of  flamingos ;
formed  about  his  head  a  chaplet  of  white  flowers  to  be,  like
the  moon's  digit,  a  sign  of  the  supreme4 ;  [227]  drawn  to  the

1  Or  '  white,'  the  rainless  autumn  clouds  being  so.

2  =Rudra-Qiva.

3  This  clause  is  much  curtailed  in  the  Kashmir  text,  which  omits  all
mention  of  gifts  to  Brahmans,  and  by  a  zeugma  makes  the  king  sacrifice
the  cows.

4  Paramecvara  =  (l)  kitig,  (2)  Qiva.


198  THE HARSA-CARITA.

I

region  of  his  ear  a  fresh  gorocaiia-spoiied  Durva  spray  like
a  sprout  of  light  from  the  emerald  in  his  ear-ornament ;  and
wound  upon  Ms  forearm  together  with  the  seal-bracelet  an
amulet  to  prosper  his  going.  After  being  sprinkled  on  the
head  with  a  spray  of  lustral  water  scattered  by  the  hand  of
the  highly  honoured  and  delighted  Purohit,  he  had  sent  away
valuable  equipages,  and  divided  among  the  kings  ornaments
anointing  the  heavens  with  a  copious  light  of  jewels,  had
loosed  the  prisoners,  and  bestowed  suitable  gifts  of  favour  upon
distressed  pilgrims  and  nobles;  and  had  installed  his  right
arm,  which  by  a  reminding  throb  at  the  moment  brought  itself
as  it  were  to  notice,  in  the  office  of  subduing  the  eighteen
continents.  Finally  with  all  good  omens  pressing  forward
officiously,  like  devoted  servants,  in  the  van,  amid  a  clamour-
ous cry  of  '  Victory ! '  from  the  delighted  people,  he  issued
forth  from  his  house,  like  the  Golden  Foetus  from  Brahma's
egg,  to  set  on  foot  an  age  of  gold.

The  starting  place  was  fixed  at  a  large  temple  built  of
reeds  not  far  from  the  city  and  close  to  the  Sarasvati.  It
displayed  a  lofty  pillared  gateway,  an  altar  supporting  a
golden  cup  adorned  with  sprays,  affixed  chaplets  of  wild
flowers,  wreaths  of  white  banners,  strolling  white-robed
people,  and  muttering  Brahmans.  During  the  king's  stay
there  the  village  notary  appeared  with  his  whole  retinue
of  clerks1,  and  saying,  '  Let  his  majesty,  whose  edicts  are
never  void,  even  now  bestow  upon  us  his  commands  for
the  day,'  so  presented  a  new-made  golden  seal  with  a  bull
for  its  emblem.  The  king  took  it.  As  soon  however  as  a  ball
of  earth  was  produced,  the  seal  slipped  from  the  king's  hand
and  fell  face  downwards  upon  the  ground,  and  the  lines  of  the
letters  were  distinctly  marked  upon  the  nearly  dry  mud  and
soft  earth  of  the  Sarasvati's  bank.  Apprehensive  of  an  evil
omen,  the  courtiers  were  depressed,  but  the  king  thought  in
his  heart :  '  The  minds  of  the  dull  are  indeed  blind  to  reality.
The  omen  signifies  that  the  earth  shall  be  stamped  with  the
single  seal  of  my  sole  command :  [228]  but  the  rustics

1  Karani,  cf.  the  Hindi  Kinuit,  'a  clerk.'  The  Comm.  suggests  an
alternative  rendering  'requisites  for  writing.'.


CHAPTER VII.  199

•

interpret  otherwise.'  Having  thus  mentally  welcomed  the
omen,  he  bestowed  upon  the  Brahmans  a  hundred  villages
delimited  by  a  thousand  ploughs.  That  day«he  spent  in  the
same  place,  and  when  night  arrived,  complimented  all  the
kings  and  retired  to  rest.

At  the  close  of  the  third  watch,  when  all  creatures  slept
and  all  was  still,  the  marching  drum  was  beaten  with  a  boom
deep  as  the  gaping  roar  of  the  sky  elephants.  Then,  after
first  a  moment's  pause,  eight  sharp  strokes  were  distinctly
given  anew  upon  the  drum,  making  up  the  number  of  the
leagues  in  the  day's  march.

Straightway  the  drums  rattled,  the  ndndis1  rang  out
joyously,  the  trumpets  brayed,  the  kdhalas  hummed,  the
horns  blared ;  the  noise  of  the  camp  gradually  increased.
Officers  occupied  themselves  in  arousing  the  courtiers.  The
heavens  were  confounded  by  a  confused  noise  of  drumsticks
added  to  a  rapid  tapping  of  mallets2.  Commanders  mustered
crowds  of  barrack  superintendents 3.  Thousands  of  torches
lighted  by  the  people  made  inroads  upon  the  darkness  of
night  with  their  glare.  Loving  pairs  were  roused  from  sleep
by  the  tramp  of  the  women  of  the  watch4.  Shrill  words  of
command  from  the  marshals  dispelled  the  slumbers  of  blink  -
ing  riders.  Awakened  elephant  herds  vacated  their  sleeping
stalls.  There  was  a  shaking  of  manes  from  troops  of  horses
risen  from  sleep.  The  noisy  camp  resounded  with  mattocks
uprooting  ground  fastenings.  Elephant  hobbles  rattled  as
their  pins  were  extracted.  Rearing  horses  curved  their
hoofs  at  the  clear  low  noise  of  chain-keys  brought  towards
them.  [229]  A  clanking  sound  of  halter  fetters  filled  the
ten  regions  to  overflowing,  as  the  foragers  loosed  the  rutting
elephants.  Leathern  bags,  bursting  with  fullness,  were  ex-
tended upon  the  dusty  backs  of  elephants,  which  had  been

1  A  drum  which  is  beaten  for  a  good  omen. Gunja  or  Jcuhja  here
translated  '  trumpet '  is  explained  by  the  Comm.  as  a  horn  with  rings  of
lac  $ahkhabhedo  yatpristhe  jatu  parikalitam  bhavati.

2  For  this  characteristic  of  breaking  -camp  in  India  cf.  Twining
'  Travels  in  India,'  pp.  92  and  484.

3  The  Comm.  notes  a  var.  lect.  pathlpati  with  uncertain  meaning.

4  Cf.  yamakinyafa  c.^iv.  p.  137  1.  5  (text).


200  THE HARSA-CARITA.

<

rubbed  down  by  strokes  from  wisps  of  hay.  Servants  of
house-builders1  rolled  up  awnings  and  cloth  screens  belong-
ing to  tents  and  marquees.  Leathern  sacks  were  filled
to  roundness  with  bundles  of  pegs.  Store-room  stewards
collected  stores  of  platters.  Many  elephant  attendants2  were
pressed  to  convey  the  stores.  The  houses  of  the  neighbour-
hood were  blocked  with  clusters  of  cups  and  vessels,  which
were  lifted  upon  numerous  elephants,  while  the  riders  kept
the  animals  steady.  Wicked  elephants  were  loaded  with
a  cargo  of  utensils  hurriedly  tossed  upon  them  by  travel-
practised  domestics.  Amid  the  laughter  of  the  crowd  help-
less corpulent  bawds  lagged  as  they  were  with  difficulty
dragged  along  with  hands  and  legs  sprawling  sideways3.
Many  huge  and  savage  elephants  trumpeted  as  the  free  play
of  their  limbs  was  checked  by  the  tightening  of  the  girth-
bands  of  their  gaudy  housings.  A  jangling  of  bells  taking
place  in  the  elephant  troop  inflamed  all  ears  with  fever.
Camels,  as  sacks  were  set  on  their  backs,  bellowed  at
the  outrage.  The  carriages  of  the  high-born  nobles'  wives
were  thronged  with  roguish  emissaries  sent  by  princes  of  rank.
Elephant  riders,  deceived  as  to  the  time  of  starting,  searched
for  new  servants.  Highly  honoured  footmen  led  the  fine4
horses  of  the  king's  favourites.  An  array  of  gay  gallants
employed  thick  unguents  to  draw  circular  lines  of  camphor
on  their  persons5.  To  the  saddles  of  marshals  were  fas-
tened martingales  with  wooden  figures  of  deer6,  bells,  and
reeds  attached.  [230]  Apes  were  placed  among  troops  of
horses  whose  grooms  were  entangled  in  a  network  of  coiled

1  Grihacintaka  =  ? '  house-artists.'

2  Nallvahikah  .  karinam  vusa(ghasa  1)grahananiyukto  Jiastipako  me-
thakhyah. Comm.

3  Or  '  dragged  by  the  hands  of  sideways-bowing  servants '  ?

4  But  the  Kashmir  arid  Bombay  texts  read  varavajini  '  show  horses '
in  place  of  varavajini. We  might  translate  '  the  king's  favourite  show
horses.'

5  The  Comm.  explains  naslra  as  either  (1)  camphor,  as  in  the  text,
or  (2)  vanguard,  which  will  require  the  rendering  '  thick  unguents  fit
for  the  adornment  of  the  vanguard.'

6  Of. Comm. lavanakalayl (sic) 'mrigakritir  acedndm  ddrumayi
kriyate.  t


CHAPTER VII.  201

•

reins1.  Stablemen  dragged  along  half-eaten  shoots2  to  be
eaten  at  the  morning  manoeuvres.  Loud  grew  the  uproar  of
foragers  shouting  to  one  another.  Much  crashing  of  stables
resounded  as  the  young  rearing  horses  swerved  in  the  con-
fusion of  starting.  Women,  hastening  at  the  call  of  riders
whose  elephants  were  in  readiness,  presented  unguents  for
the  animals'  heads.  The  low  people  of  Ijie  neighbourhood,
running  up  as  the  elephants  and  horses  started,  looted  heaps
of  abandoned  grain.  Donkeys  ridden  by  throngs  of  boys3
accompanied  the  march.  Crowds  of  carts  with  creaking
wheels  occupied  the  trampled  roads.  Oxen  were  laden  with
utensils  momentarily  put  upon  them.  Stout  steers,  driven
on  in  advance,  lagged  out  of  greed  for  fodder  lying  near
them*.  In  front  were  carried  the  kitchen  appliances  of  the
great  feudatories.  First  ran  banner-bearers.  Hundreds  of
friends  were  spectators  of  the  men's  exits  from  the  interior  of
their  somewhat  contracted  huts.  Elephant  keepers,  assaulted
with  clods  by  people  starting  from  hovels  which  had  been
crushed  by  the  animals'  feet,  called  the  bystanders  to  witness
the  assaults.  Wretched  families  fled  from  grass  cabins  ruined
by  collisions.  Despairing5  merchants  saw  the  oxen  bearing
their  wealth  flee  before  the  onset  of  the  tumult.  A  troop  of
seraglio  elephants  advanced  where  the  press  of  people  gave
way  before  the  glare  of  their  runners'  torches.  Horsemen
shouted  to  dogs  tied  behind  them.  [231]  Old  people  sang
the  praises  of  tall  Tangana  horses  which  by  the  steady
motion  of  their  quick  footfalls  provided  a  comfortable  seat.
Deckhan  riders6  disconsolately  contended  with  fallen  mules.
The  whole  world  was  swallowed  up  in  dust.

1  Avaraksiny  '  aevabandhanarajjuh  Comm.

2  The  Coram.'s  prdudhiko  •  yogydzandrtham  prasevako  yo  bukkana
iti  prasiddhah seems  to point  to a reading  prdudhike 'bags' for
prdrohake  'shoots.'

3  Or,  taking  celam  as  =  vastram,  '  loaded  with  bundles  of  clothes.'

4  The Comm. however  says lambama.no '  gardabhaddso banijdni
karmakaro  vd,  which  would  require  the  translation  '  greedy  for  &c.  were
driven  on  by  donkey  boys.' Cf.  lamband  •  gardabhaddsdh  p.  236,1.  9
(text).

•' Vidrdiidh  •  sagokdh  Conini. Cf.  supra  p.  68  note.
0  '  There  are  no  mules  in  the  Deckan,'  Comm.


202  THE HARSA-CARITA.

At  the  hour  of  marching  the  front  of  the  king's  residence
became  full  of  chieftains  arriving  from  every  side,  mounted
on  female  elephants,  with  riders  holding  up  bows  striped
with  gold  leaf,  swords  grasped  by  confidential  servants  occupy-
ing the  inner  seats,  chowries  waved  by  betel  bearers,  sheafs  of
javelins  in  cases  under  the  charge  of  those  who  sat  at  the  back,
and  saddles  curving  with  scimitars  and  bristling  with  golden
arrows1.  Girths,  confining  on  either  side  the  ends  of  the
saddle,  kept  their  cloth  cushions  motionless  and  gave  a  firm
seat.  The  clash  of  their  swaying  foot-rests  augmented  the
sound  from  the  precious  stones  in  their  anklets2.  Their  shanks
were  covered  with  their  proper  covering3  of  delicate  tinted
silk.  Their  copper-coloured  legs  were  chequered  with
mud-stained  wraps,  and  a  heightened  white  was  produced  by
contrast  with  trousers  soft  and  dark  as  bees 4.  They  wore
tunics  darkened  by  black  diamonds  glistening  on  bright
forms5;  Chinese  cuirasses  thrown  over  them6,  coats  and
doublets  showing  clusters  of  bright  pearls,  bodices  speckled
with  a  mixture  of  various  colours,  and  shawls  of  the  shade
of  parrots'  tails.  Fine  waistbands7  were  wound  about  flanks
made  thin  by  exercise.  Servants  ran  up  to  loose  dangling  ear-
rings which  had  become  entangled  with  pearl  necklaces,  tossed
by  their  movements.  [232]  Their  ear-ornaments  clashed
as  they  struck  against  earrings  budding  with  gold  filagree
work.  The  stalks  of  their  ear-lotuses  were  fixed  in  their
turbans.  Their  heads  were  wrapt  in  shawls  of  a  soft  saffron


1  -nalaka- 1

2  Read pddabandha-  ('pddakataka,  'anklet')  with  Comm.

3  The  Kashmir  text  and  the  Comm.  read  -svasthdnasthagita-  for
svasthaganasthagita-.

4  The  sense  here  is  far  from  clear. The  Comm.  writes  pihgd  -jah-
ghikd,  anyejahghdlety  ahull  \  satuld  •  ardhajahghikd  ity,  anye  ardhajah-
ghdlety  ahull. The  Kashmir  text  reads  sitdhgaih  for  picahgapingaih.

5  Eead  mecakakancukaic.

0  The  Kashmir  text  and  the  Comm.  read  apacita  'parihitam  pujitam
vd.

1  (Jastam  •  pattikdthorah  katisutram  ity  arthah, Comm. : but the
Calcutta  and  Bombay  texts  read  castram  'fine  scimitars  fastened  to
&c.'


CHAPTER VII.  203

•

hue.  They  had  linen  turbans1  inlaid  with  bits  of  crest  gems.
Clouds  of  bees  formed  as  it  were  peacocks'  feathers  in  their
topknots.  Their  elephants'  housings  wei£  bedabbled  from
long  travel.  The  recesses  of  the  world  were  filled  with
proud  restless  warriors  who  bounded  along,  gay  with  round
Kardaranga  shields  of  various  colours  and  chowries  tossing
in  front  of  them.  The  abysses  of  the  .heavens  resounded
with  the  noise  of  the  tinkling  golden  ornaments  upon  hundreds
of  prancing  Kamboja  horses.  The  sharp  tapping  of  hundreds
of  fiercely  beaten  lamba  drums  deafened  the  cavities  of  men's
ears.  Their  names  were  proclaimed  aloud.  And  craning
footmen  awaited  their  commands.

When  the  adorable  sun  arose,  the  signal  conch  rang  out
repeatedly,  announcing  the  moment  of  the  king's  arraying
the  army.  After  a  brief  interval  he  came  forth,  riding
upon  a  female  elephant,  which  by  the  play  of  its  flapping
ears,  swaying  as  it  moved,  seemed  on  this  the  king's  first
expedition  to  be  producing  an  assemblage  of  earth-support-
ing elephants2  for  a  conquest  of  the  different  quarters.  An
auspicious  umbrella,  distinguished  by  a  turquoise  rod  and,
by  reason  of  the  bits  of  ruby  inlaid  at  its  top,  glowing  as  in
anger  at  the  sight  of  the  sunrise — this,  and  a  tunic  of  new
silk,  which  clung  about  him,  softer  than  the  plantain  fruit,  as
if  he  were  a  second  king  of  snakes,  recalled  the  day  of  the
ambrosia  churning  when  clouds  of  the  Milk  Ocean's  foam
whitened  the  skies3.  Raised  while  still  young,  like  the  tree
of  paradise,  to  the  station  of  an  Indra,  he  veneered  the  heavens
with  a  powder  for  placing  the  whole  world  at  his  disposal  in
the  shape  of  the  pollen  from  the  bunches  of  flowers  in  his
ear-wreath,  which  was  tossed  abroad  by  the  wind  of  the
flapping  chowries.  [233]  His  splendour  seemed  to  drink  up

1  The  Kashmir  text  and  the  Comm. read  for -colaih  -kholaih :
kholah '  cirastram,  '  helmets '  or  '  turbans.'

2  I.e.  by  reason  of  the  reverberations  of  the  sound.

3  Or  punningly  '  wearing  robes  white  as  the  Milk  Ocean's  foam.'  By
a  complicated  series  of  puns  the  king  is  compared  to  the  day  of  the
Ocean  churning. The  white  umbrella  is  the  white-clouded  sky  and  he
with  his  white  robes  is  the  serpent  (^esa  whirled  in  the  Milky  Ocean.
Read  lohittiyat(ay}(i  with  MS.  A.


204  THE HARSA-CARITA.

t

the  very  rising  sun,  whose  golden  image  appeared  in  his
fronting  crest-gem.  His  lip,  smeared  deep  with  betel  and
vermilion,  was  like^a  seal  assigning  away  the  various  island  con-
tinents in  fief  to  loyal  affection1:  while  in  the  guise  of  a  horizon
of  light  from  pearl  necklaces,  he  forced  chowries  upon  the
very  heavens.  With  his  brows  capriciously  raised  a  third
part  in  reviewing  |;he  royal  company,  he  seemed  to  enjoin
tribute  upon  even  the  three  worlds.  The  long  rampart  of
his  arms  appeared  to  embrace  the  seven  great  ocean  fosses
with  protecting  love.  Tightly  embraced  by  Glory,  having
with  her  all  the  sweetness  of  the  milky  ocean,  he  was,  as  if
made  of  ambrosia,  drunk  in  by  thousands  of  eyes  upraised
in  curiosity  by  the  people  of  the  camp.  The  weight  of  his
great  qualities  seemed  to  sink  him  deep  in  royal  hearts  all
moist  with  affection ;  the  flood  of  his  magnificence  to  anoint
the  very  marrow2  of  the  beholders.  Like  the  Lord  of  the
Immortals,  he  appeared  busy  in  wiping  away  the  stain  of
his  elder  brother's3  slaughter :  like  Prithu,  sweeping  away  all
the  gathered  kings4  with  intent  to  cleanse  the  earth:  like  the
sun,  preceded  by  thousands  of  ushers,  like  rays,  heralding  his
appearance5  and  clearing  the  way,  nimbly  moving  in  deft
performance  of  their  duty,  stern  in  enforcing  order,  effecting
as  it  were  the  seizure  of  the  very  regions  of  space,  which  were
hidden  by  the  press  of  frightened  fleeing  people,  teaching  the
very  wind  decorum  by  swallowing  up  his  goings  in  a  mass  of
waving  pennons,  expelling  the  very  sun's  rays,  which  were
repelled  by  a  cloud  of  dust  upraised  by  hurrying  feet,  keeping
aloof  the  very  day,  which  was  hurled  aside  by  the  light  from
a  foliage  of  golden  maces.

Then  as  the  company  of  kings  bowed,  with  bodies  duti-
fully bent  down,  hearts  thrilling  with  fear,  heads  all  agleam
with  the  light  of  golden  diadems  whose  gems  were  loosened

1  Anuruga  may  punningly  mean  '  redness.'

2  Majyanniva,  majjdmapi,  MS.

3  Indra  killed  Vi9varupa,  the  three-headed  son  of  Tvastri,  who  was
agraja  in  the  sense  of  being  a  Brahman.

4  Or  'hills,'  cf.  Visnu-P.  i.  13.  82.

5  Lit.  'causing  light,'  or  'crying  Ho!  people.' The  other  adjectives
have  a  punning  application  to  the  sun.


CHAPTER  VII.  205

•
by  their  motions, and crests emitting dust from  tossing

flowers,  [234]  the  rays  of  their  blazing  crest  jewels,  waving
downwards,  aslant,  and  upwards,  seemed  like  flocks  of  jays
engaged  in  producing  fair  omens1.  As  they  soared  like
courtyard  peacocks  to  the  sky,  now  dense  with  cloud-masses
of  dust,  it  was  as  if  the  sky-regents  were  fixing  at  their
doors  festoons  of  soft  sprays  from  the  tree  of  paradise2.
Thus  welcomed  with  bows,  the  hero  of  heroes,  purchasing
as  it  were  the  kings'  souls  in  the  shape  of  adoration,
distributed  among  them  tokens  of  his  favour,  such  as  quarter
glances,  side-glances,  full  glances,  raised  eyebrows,  half-smiles,
jests,  plays  upon  words,  inquiries  after  their  health,  return
greetings,  careless  movements  of  the  brow,  and  instructions,
according  to  their  several  deserts.

The  king  having  started,  the  echo  of  musical  instruments
spread  loudly  hither  and  thither  about  the  four  quarters  of
heaven,  like  the  snorting  of  sky  elephants  affrighted  at  the
tumult.  As,  angered  against  their  brethren  in  the  sky,
the  elephants  emitted  their  triple  flow,  the  tracks  of  the
ichor  torrent,  all  black  with  bees,  appeared  to  pour  thousands
of  Kalindi's  rills3.  The  sun's  radiance  being  crimsoned
with  masses  of  vermilion  powder,  the  birds4  feared  that  the
sunset  was  come.  The  booming  of  the  drums  was  lost  in  the
noise  of  elephants'  ear-flapping,  strengthened  by  the  uproar
of  bees.  A  host  of  waving  chowries  swallowed  up  the  whole
totality  of  things  moving  and  motionless.  The  sky  became
an  unbroken  white  with  clots  of  foam,  pure  as  Sindhuvara
chaplets,  tossed  by  the  breath  of  the  cavalcade.  Forests  of
umbrellas,  with  upright  golden  stocks  and  white  as  massed

1  Cf.  Malati  Madhava,  Wilson's  trans.  '  Hindu  Theatre,'  n.  p.  66—

'As  the  countless  jewels  shoot
Their  blaze  into  the  sky,  the  heavens  reflect
The  countless  hues,  as  if  the  peacock's  plumage,
Or  the  mixed  colours  of  the  painted  jay,
Played  through  the  air  &c.'

2  The  clouds  represent  the  doors,  the  colours  of  the  gems  the
leaves  of  the  tree  of  paradise. Read  vandanamdla.

3  The  waters  of  the  Kalindl  or  Yamuna  being  dark-blue  in  colour.

4  I.e.,  as  the  Comm.  explains,  '  the  ruddy-geese.'


206  THE HARSA-CARITA.

«

bunches  of  Tagaras,  drank  up  the  day,  and  the  eight  regions
were  lost  behind  their  close  array.  Blinded  by  a  night  of
dust,  the  day  blossomed  out  in  a  morning  light  from  lines  of
coronet  gems.  The  heavens  were  deafened  by  the  din  which
the  horses  made  with  their  clanging  golden  and  silvern  rows
of  chariot  ornaments.  As  if  to  quench  utterly  the  fire  of  foe-
men's  valour,  [235J1  the  elephants  bedewed  the  circle  of  the
quarters  with  a  hot  drizzle  of  ichor.  The  light  of  crest  gems,
flickering  like  lightning,  stole  from  all  eyes  the  power  to
open.  The  king  himself  was  surprised  at  his  forces,  and  casting
his  eyes  in  every  direction  beheld  an  army  starting  out  of  its
encampment,  in  appearance  like  the  animate  world  tumbling
at  an  aeon's  commencement  from  Visnu's  belly,  the  ocean
overflooding  the  world  in  a  stream  from  Agastya's  mouth,  the
Narmada's  flood  rolling  a  thousand  rills  after  being  dammed
and  let  loose  again  by  Arjuna's  thousand  arms.  Meanwhile  a
multitudinous  babble  was  going  on  as  follows: — 'March  on,
my  son  ! '  '  Good  sir,  why  do  you  lag  ?  Here  is  a  galloping
horse.'  '  Friend,  you  hobble  like  a  lame  man,  while  the
vanguard  here  is  coming  furiously  upon  us.'  '  Why  are  you
hurrying  the  camel  ?  Don't  you  see,  you  pitiless  brute1,
the  child  lying  there  ? '  '  Ramila,  darling,  take  care  not  to
get  lost  in  the  dust ! '  '  Don't  you  see  the  barley-meal  sack
leaks  ?  What's  the  hurry,  Go-ahead  ? '  '  Ox,  you  are  leaving
the  track  and  running  among  the  horses.'  '  Are  you  coming,
fishwife  ? '  '  You  female  elephant,  you  want  to  go  among
the  males.'  '  Hullo,  the  peasack  is  awry  and  dribbling :  you
don't  heed  my  bawling.'  'You're  going  astray  down  a
precipice :  quietly,  you  self-willed  brute.'  '  Porridge  man,
your  jar  is  broken.'  '  Laggard,  you  can  suck  the  sugar  cane
on  the  way.'  '  Quiet2  your  bull.'  '  How  long,  slave,  are  you
to  gather  jujube  fruit  ? '  '  We  have  a  long  way  to  go ;  why
do  you  linger,  Dronaka,  now  ?  this  long  expedition  is  at  a

1  Nihfuka  here  and  in  c.  viu.  p.  263  1.  10  and  276  last  line  (Bomb.
Ed.)  =  '  pitiless.' (^uka  in  the  sense  of  compassion  is  quoted  by  lexico-
graphers, cf.  B.  and  R.  s.v.

2  The  Kashmir  reading  prasaraya  is  perhaps  preferable  ;  '  drive  on
your  bull '  with  the  preceding  sentence.


CHAPTER  VII.  207

•
standstill  for  one rascal1.' 'The  road  in  front  is  .all ups

and  downs :  old  fellow,  see  you  don't  break  the  sugar
kettle.'  'The  load  of  grain  is  too  hea-«y,  Gandaka;  the
bullock  can't  carry  it.'  '  Quick,  slave,  with  a  knife  cut
a  mouthful  of  fodder  from  this  bean  field  :  [236]  who  can
tell  the  fate  of  his  crop  when  we  are  gone'2?'  'Keep
away  your  oxen,  fellow !  this  field  is  guarded  by  watchmen.'
'  The  wagon  is  stuck  fast :  harness  a  strong  pulling  steer  to
the  yoke.'  '  Madman3,  you  are  crushing  women :  are  your
eyes  burst  ? '  '  You  confounded  elephant  driver,  you  are
playing  with  my  elephant's  trunk.'  '  Trample  him,  you
savage  brute.'  '  Brother,  you  are  tripping  in  the  mire.'  '  O
friend  of  the  distressed,  raise  this  ox  from  the  mud.'  '  This
way,  boy  !  in  the  thick  of  the  dense  elephant  squad  there  is
no  getting  out.'

Here  groups  of  elephant  men,  bachelors,  knaves,  donkey
boys,  camp  followers,  thieves,  serving  men,  rogues,  and
grooms,  sated  with  an  easily  acquired  meal  of  plentiful  readily
pounded  remnants  of  grain,  expressed  their  approval  of  the
camp  in  bold4  boisterous  jubilation5.  There  poor6  unat-
tended nobles,  over- whelmed7  with  the  toil  and  worry  of
conveying  their  provisions  upon  fainting  oxen  provided  by
wretched  village  householders  and  obtained  with  difficulty,
themselves  grasped  their  domestic  appurtenances,  grumbling
as  follows : — '  Only  let  this  one  expedition  be  gone  and
done  with.'  '  Let  it  go  to  the  bottom  of  hell.'  '  An  end  to
this  world  of  thirst.'  '  Good  luck  to  this  servitude  of  ours.'
'  Goodbye  to  this  camp,  the  pinnacle  of  all  unpleasantness.'
Here  swiftly  running  in  a  line,  as  if  tied  together — as  it  were

1  Head  with  MS.  A  nistheyam.

2  Or  '  when  people  are  away.'

3  Yaksapalita,  may,  however,  be  a  proper  name.

4  Atidirdh  -pragalbhah,  'bold,'  Comm.  who  also  suggests  rdndlrah
'  harlots'  sons.'

5  Read  kelikaldih  (not  kekikaldih)  with  the  Kashmir  text  and  the
Comm.

6  The  Kashmir  text  and  the  Comm.  here  insert  -vriddha-,  '  old.'

7  Gatasamyogair  •  utpannacittaksobhair,  l  distracted,'  Comm. Read
-aydsdvegdgatasamyogair.


208  THE HARSA-CARITA.

on  board  a  ship  gliding  down  a  very  rapid  current — [237]  were
the  king's  hired  porters,  cany  ing  black  hard  clubs  as  heavy
as  trunks  of  trees?  bearing  golden  footstools,  waterpots1,  cups,
spittoons,  and  baths,  pushing  every  one  aside  in  irrepressible
pride  at  being  in  charge  of  their  sovereign's  property  with
himself  at  hand :  also  bearers  of  kitchen  appurtenances
with  goats  attached  to  thongs  of  pig-skin,  a  tangle  of  hanging
sparrows  and  forequarters  of  venison,  a  collection  of  young
rabbits,  potherbs,  and  bamboo  shoots,  buttermilk  pots  pro-
tected by  wet  seals  on  one  part  of  their  mouths  which  were
covered  with  white  cloths,  baskets  containing  a  chaos  of  fire-
trays,  ovens,  simmering  pans,  spits,  copper  saucepans,  and
frying-pans2.  Here,  with  cries  of  'The  labour  is  ours,  but
when  paytime  comes  some  other  rascals  will  appear,'  village
servants,  set  to  scare  on3  the  feeble  oxen  tripping  at  every
step,  were  indiscriminately  badgering  the  whole  body  of
nobles.  There  the  whole  country  side  had  come  in  eager
haste  from  both  directions  out  of  curiosity  to  see  the  king,
and  fools  of  grant-holders,  issuing  from  the  villages  on  the
route  and  headed  by  aged  elders  with  uplifted  waterpots,
pressed  furiously  near  in  crowds  with  presents  of  curds,
molasses,  candied  sugar,  and  flowers  in  baskets,  demanding
the  protection  of  the  crops4 :  flying  before  their  terror  of  irate
and  savage  chamberlains,  they  yet  in  spite  of  distance,  tripping,
and  falling,  kept  their  eyes  fixed  upon  the  king,  bringing  to
light  imaginary  wrongs  of  former  governors,  lauding  hundreds
of  past  officials,  [238]  reporting  ancient  misdeeds  of  knaves.
Others,  contented  with  the  appointed  overseers,  were  bawling
their  eulogies : — '  The  king  is  Dharma  incarnate ' ;  others,  de-


1  The  Kashmir  text  reads  paryanka  '  palanquins ',  and  the  Comm.
karakas  'tdmbuladhdrah,  'betel-box.'

2  The sense of the Sanskrit  words is here in several cases
doubtful.

3  For  khetane  the  Kashmir  text  and  the  Comm.  read  skhalane  •  pre-
rane,  which  we  translate. For  khetacetakaih  the  Kashmir  text has
khalacetakaih  '  rascally  servants.'

4  The  printed  texts  here  insert  some  words  which recur  below  ;
v.  note  on  next  page  and  Appendix,


CHAPTER  VII.  209

•

spondent  at  the  plunder  of  their  ripe  grain,  had  come  forth
wives  and  all  to  bemoan  their  estates,  and  to  the  imminent
risk  of  their  lives,  grief  dismissing  fear,*  had  begun  to
censure  their  sovereign,  crying  '  Where's  the  king?'  'What
right  has  he  to  be  king  ? '  '  What  a  king ! '  Hares1  ran
about  hither  and  thither,  pursued  by  furiously  running  crowds
armed  with  clubs,  and  struck  at  every  pac^  like  polo  balls2:
others  were  caught  by  throngs  coming  upon  them  all  at  once
and  torn  in  pieces,  while  others3  by  skill  in  plunging  between
the  legs  of  divers  animals  and  eluding  many  riders'  dogs  by
dodging,  managed  in  spite  of  showers  of  clods,  clubs,  sticks,
axes,  stakes,  spades,  hoes,  knives,  and  poles  to  effect  their
escape,  screaming  the  while  with  all  the  energy  left  them.
Elsewhere  a  cloud  of  dust  was  raised  by  bands  of  running
foragers  with  loins  a  mass  of  fodder  bundles  and  grey  with
chaff,  sickles  swinging  from  one  part  of  their  ancient  saddles,
loose  dirty  blankets  made  of  bits  of  old  wool,  and,  dangling  in
tatters,  torn  jerkins  presented  by  their  masters.  In  one
place  riders  were  intently  occupied  in  rehearsing  the  ap-
proaching Gauda  war4.  Here  all  the  people,  busy  with
orders  to  fill  up  muddy  places,  were  cutting  bundles  of
grass.  There  shrieking  quarrelsome  Brahmans,  mounted
on  the  tops  of  trees,  were  being  expelled  by  the  rods  of
chamberlains  standing  on  the  ground.  There  village  dogs,
entrapped  by  bits  of  food5,  were  being  tied  in  leashes.
Elsewhere  again  horses,  driven  by  princes  emulous  for
victory,  enlivened  the  scene  by  their  collisions.

Thus  the  camp,  exciting  interest  by  manifold  incidents,
[239]  was  like  the  doom's-day  ocean  gone  abroad  to  swallow
the  world  at  a  gulp,  hell  formed  to  embower  great  serpents6,
Kailasa  created  for  the  dwelling  of  the  supreme.  Like  the

1  Cf.  Hdt.  iv.  134.

2  Qirigudakaih :  cf.  B.  and  R.  giriguda,  'play -ball'  and  reff. The
Comm.  gives  the  meaning  '  clod.'

3  Insert  anyair  with  MS.  A.

4  The  Sanskrit  compound  here  is  almost  identical  with  that  omitted
above  :  v.  note  on  previous  page.

5  Read  grasdkrista  for  grdmakrista  with  the  Kashmir  text.

6  Or  '  kings.' '  0

C.  14


210  THE HARSA-CARITA.

storehouse  whence  the  Prajapatis  brought  forth  the  four
ages,  it  showed  a  succession  of  all  creatures :  like  austerities,
it  was  replete  *»vith  toil,  yet  like  them  bringing  the  noble
onwards  in  their  way.

With  such  a  spectacle  before  his  eyes  Harsa  arrived  at  the
encampment.  Reaching  his  quarters,  he  heard  the  stout-
armed  princes  abound  expressing  their  zeal  in  such  talk  as
this : — '  It  was  the  famous1  Mandhatri  who  opened  the  way  to
world-conquest.  With  the  irresistible  onset  of  his  chariot
Raghu  in  a  brief  time  set  the  world  at  peace.  Seconded  by
his  bow,  Pandu  imposed  tribute  on  the  array  of  kings
haughty  in  the  pride  of  inherited  prowess,  nobility,  and
wealth.  Having  crossed  the  realm  of  China,  the  Pandava
Arjuna,  in  order  to  complete  the  Rajasuya  sacrifice,  subdued
Mount  Hemakuta,  whose  caves  resounded  with  the  twang  of
the  bow-ends  of  the  angry  Gandharvas.  No  obstacle  save
resolution  do  the  conquests  of  heroes  know.  Though  shield-
ed by  Himalaya  with  all  its  snows,  the  impotent  Druma2,
fearing  a  trial  of  strength,  bore  like  a  servant  the  exactions
of  the  Kuru  king.  Not  too  ambitious,  surely,  of  conquest
were  the  ancients,  seeing  that  in  a  small  part  of  the  earth
there  were  numerous  monarchs  such  as  Bhagadatta;  Danta-
vakra.  Kratha,  Karna,  Kaurava,  (^upala,  Salva,  Jarasandha,
and  Sindhuraja.  King  Yudhisthira  was  easily  content  since
he  endured  quite  near  at  hand  the  kingdom  of  the  Kimpu-
rushas,  when  the  conquests  of  Dhananjaya  had  made  the
earth  to  shake.  A  faineant  was  Candako^a3,  who,  having
subdued  the  earth,  penetrated  not  into  the  Amazonian  realm.
How  insignificant  is  the  distance  between  the  Snowy  Range
and  Gandhamadana !  The  land  of  the  Turuskas  is  to  the
brave  but  a  cubit4.  Persia  is  only  a  span.  The  Qaka  realm
but  a  rabbit's  track.  In  the  Pariyatra  country,  incapable  of

1  Read  tatrabhavata (not  -am)  with  the  Kashmir  text  and  the
Comm.

2  Druma  was  the  king  of  the  Kinnaras.

3  There  is  an  oxymoron  in  the  expression  alasac  Candakogah,  since
caiida  means  '  violent.'

4  Read  tifhu  for  kisku — with  the  Kashmir  text.


CHAPTER  VII.  211

•

returning  a  blow,  a  gentle  march  alone  is  needed.
[240]  The  Deckhan  is  easily  won  at  the  price  of  valour.
Mount  Malaya  is  hard  by  the  Dardura  rotsk,  whose  cave
temples  are  pleasant  with  the  .fragrance  of  sandal  branches
tossed  by  the  wind  from  the  southern  ocean's  waves ;  and
Mahendra  joins  Malaya.'

At  the  door  of  his  lodgings  Harsa  graciously  dismissed
the  chiefs  on  either  side  by  motions  of  his  brows ;  then
entering,  he  dismounted  and  retired  to  a  seat  in  the  outer
audience  tent,  where,  after  dismissing  the  assembly,  he  re-
mained for  a  short  time.  Anon  the  chamberlain,  resting
both  his  hands  on  the  earth,  announced  that  Hamsavega,  a
confidential  messenger  sent  by  the  heir  apparent  of  Assam1,
waited  at  the  gate.  'Admit  him  at  once'  the  king  graci-
ously commanded.  Inspired  by  courtesy  and  respect  for  the
king,  the  chamberlain  went  forth  in  person;  and  soon
Hamsavega,  whose  very  exterior,  delighting  the  eye  with
graceful  flexions,  belied  the  weight  of  his  qualities,  entered
the  palace  in  courtly  style,  followed  by  a  long  train  of  men
carrying  munificent  presents.  While  still  at  some  distance
he  embraced  the  courtyard  with  his  five  limbs2  in  homage.
At  the  king's  gracious  summons  to  draw  near  he  approached
at  a  run  and  buried  his  forehead  in  the  footstool :  the  king
having  laid  a  hand  on  his  back,  he  approached  again3  and  once
more  bowed.  Finally  he  assumed  a  position  not  far  away,
indicated  by  a  kindly  glance  from  the  king,  who,  turning  his
body  a  little  aside,  sent  away  the  chowrie-bearer  standing
between,  and  face  to  face  inquired  familiarly,  '  Hamsavega,
is  the  noble  prince  well  ? '  '  At  this  moment,'  was  the  reply,
'  he  is  well,  since  your  majesty  so  respectfully  inquires  with
a  voice  bathed  in  affection  and  moist  with  a  flow  of  friend-
ship.' After  a  momentary  pause  he  went  on  in  courtly  terms :
[241]  '  Excepting  only  a  heart  replete  with  respect,  a  present
worthy  of  your  majesty,  who  is  a  vessel  for  the  grandeur  of

1  Pragjyotisa.  -  I.e.  hands,  feet,  and  head.

3  For  the  construction  nyastahastah  pristhe  pdrthivena  cf.  Raghu.
V.  vi.  20  nripdndm  crufavrittavamcu,  for  crutanripavrittavamca.

14—2


212  THE HARSA-CARITA.

governing  the  four  oceans,  is  with  difficulty  attainable  in  the
world.  Nevertheless  my  master,  in  his  endeavour  to  add
substance  to  rfis  message,  has  fulfilled  the  destiny  jof  this
umbrella  derived  from  Varuna,  a  family  heirloom — Abhoga
its  name — by  consigning  it  to  a  worthy  charge.  It  mani-
fests many  wonder-moving  miracles.  Every  day,  to  give
coolness  to  its  s^iade,  the  moon's  rays,  from  their  stored-
up  thousands,  penetrate  it  one  by  one.  This  having  en-
tered, pure  sweet  showers  of  moon-bright  water,  skilled  to
teach  the  lore  of  chattering  teeth,  drip  at  will  and  as  long  as
desired  from  its  jewelled  ribs.  Whoso,  like  Varuna,  is  or  is
to  be  sovereign  of  the  four  oceans,  him  and  no  other  does  it
honour  with  its  shade.  Fire  does  not  burn  it,  nor  wind  bear
it  away,  nor  water  wet  it,  nor  dust  defile  it,  nor  age  corrode
it.  Let  your  majesty  honour  it  with  a  glance.  My  com-
mission you  shall  hear1  in  confidence.'  So  speaking,  he
turned  round  and  commanded  one  of  his  own  men  to  rise
and  display  it.

The  words  were  scarcely  spoken  when  the  man  rose,  raised
it  aloft,  and  drew  it  from  its  wrapper  of  white  bark-silk.  Even
as  it  was  drawn  forth  in  its  exceedingly  white  splendour,  it
seemed  as  if  Qiva  had  burst  into  a  wild  laugh,  the  circle  of
Qesa's  flattened  hoods  had  leapt  gleaming  up  from  hell,  the
Milk  Ocean  had  stood  fixed  in  circular  shape  in  the  sky,  an
autumn  array  of  clouds  had  joined  company  in  the  firmament,
Pitamaha's  swan  equipage  had  rested  with  poised  wings  in
the  ether,  the  day  of  the  moon's  birth  from  Atri's  eye  had
appeared  to  the  people  with  all  the  charm  of  its  disc  of  white
effulgence,  the  instant  of  the  lotus'  uprising  from  Nara-
yana's  navel  had  been  revealed,  the  delight  of  gazing  to
satiety  upon  the  moonlit  twilight  had  been  granted  to
the  eye,  a  vast  round  sand-isle  of  the  heavenly  Ganges  had
emerged  in  the  bosom  of  the  sky,  and  the  day  been
exchanged  for  the  full-moon  night.  [242]  Distressed2  by
apprehension  of  a  moonrise,  the  pairs  of  ruddy-geese  in  the

1  Read  crosyasi  (for  frosyati)  with  the  Kashmir  text. So  the  MS.

2  Read  duyamdna  (for  huyamana)  with  the  Kashmir  text.


CHAPTER VII.  213

•

neighbouring  lotus  pools  slowly  and  softly  parted,  dropping
the  ends  of  lotus  fibres  from  their  busy  beaks.  Closing  their
voiceless  lips  in  fear  of  a  gathering  of  autiftnn  clouds,  the
groups  of  domestic  peacocks  turned  away  in  despondency.
In  a  mad  joy  at  the  moon,  opening  their  petals  with  a
broad  gleaming  smile,  the  white  lotus  beds  awoke.

With  wonderment  in  their  minds  the  kjjig  and  chiefs,  as
their  glance  mounted  up  in  the  line  of  the  handle,  gazed
with  awe  upon  that  great  world-marvel  of  an  umbrella,
which  might  be  compared  to  the  triple  world's  forehead
mark,  the  White  Island's  babyhood,  the  autumn  moon's
partial  incarnation,  Dharma's  heart,  the  moon- world's  palace,
Empire's  mouth  with  its  white  circle  of  teeth,  the  sky's
circular  hair-parting  showing  a  white  line  of  pearls  in
array1,  the  moon's  halo  with  its  white  centre  of  great  efful-
gence, Airavata's  round  ears  at  rest  in  all  the  loveliness  of
their  white  smiling  shells,  the  world-adored  track  of  Visnu
all  pale  with  Ganges'  white  eddies2.  Tied  around  its  rim  was
a  circle  of  small  chowries,  made  of  lotus  fibre  from  Manasa
and  resembling  the  flames  of  light  from  Varuna's  diadem.  To
its  point  was  attached  for  an  emblem  a  hamsa  with  pinions
poised  as  if  waiting  anxiously  to  hear  the  tinkle  of  imperial
glory's  anklets.  Its  charming  stock  was  a  smooth  miracu-
lously stiffened  lotus  root  from  Mandakim,  like  a  Vasuki  with
closed  hoods,  converted  to  a  rod.  Its  whiteness  seemed  to
cleanse  the  Zodiac,  its  outgoing  flood  of  radiance  to  veil
the  day,  its  height  to  depress  the  heavens.  It  was  like  an
ascent  of  all  fair  omens,  a  white  bower  for  Glory,  a  cluster
of  flowers  on  the  tree-trunk  of  Brahma3,  the  moonlight's  round
navel,  the  white  smile  of  Fame,  the  gathered  foam  of  the
water  of  all  swords'  edges,  the  nucleus  of  heroism's  splendou  r.

[243]  This  having  been  first  inspected  by  the  king,  the
servants  in  due  order  displayed  the  remaining  presents.
Among  them  were  famous  ornaments  inherited  from  Bhaga-


1  The  reference  is  to  the  galaxy.

a  The  Ganges  is  said  to  issue  forth  from  Visnu's  foot.

3  Sc.  the  world.  _


214  THE HARSA-CARITA.

(

datta  and  other  renowned  kings,  ornaments  which  crimsoned
the  heavenly  spaces  with  the  light  of  the  finest  gems :  the
prime  of  sheeny  crest  jewels :  pearl  necklaces  which  seemed
the  source  of  the  Milk  Ocean's  whiteness :  silken  towels,
pure  as  the  autumn  moon's  light,  rolled  up  in  baskets  of
variously  coloured  reeds :  quantities  of  pearl,  shell,  sapphire,
and  other  drinking  vessels,  embossed  by  skilful  artists :
loads  of  Kardaranga  leather  bucklers  with  charming  borders,
bright  gold-leaf  work  winding  about  them,  and  cases
to  preserve  their  colour :  soft  loin-cloths  smooth  as  birch
bark :  pillows  of  samuruka  leather1,  and  other  kinds  of
smooth  figured  textures :  cane  stools  with  the  bark
yellow  as  the  ear  of  millet :  volumes  of  fine  writing  with
leaves  made  from  aloe  bark  and  of  the  hue  of  the  ripe  pink
cucumber:  luscious  milky  betel  nut  fruit,  hanging  from  its
sprays  and  green  as  young  harlta  doves;  thick  bamboo
tubes  containing  mango  sap  and  black  aloes  oil,  and  fenced
round  with  sheaths  of  Kapotika  leaves,  tawny  as  an  angry
ape's  cheeks :  bundles  contained  in  sacks  of  woven  silk  and
consisting  of  black  aloe  dark  as  pounded  collyrium,  Go$lrsa
sandal  stealing  the  fiercest  inflammation  away,  camphor  cool,
pure,  and  white  as  bits  of  ice,  scent  bags  of  musk  oxen,
Kakkola  sprays,  clove  flower  bunches,  and  nutmeg  clusters,
all  bristling  with  masses  of  ripe  fruit:  cups  of  ullaka",
diffusing  a  fragrance  of  sweetest  wine :  [244]  heaps  of  black
and  white  chowries:  carved  boxes  of  panels  for  painting,
with  brushes  and  gourds3  attached:  curious  pairs  of  Kin-
naras*,  ourang-outangs,  jlvanjivaka  birds,  and  mermen,  with
necks  bound  in  golden  fetters :  musk  deer  scenting  the  space
all  round  them  with  their  perfume :  female  camara  deer>
used  to  running  about  the  house:  parrots,  garikas,  and

1  Samuruka  is  a  kind  of  deer.

2  The  Comru.  doubts  whether  this  is  the  juice  of  a  kind  of  fragrant
fruit  or  a  kind  of  decoction.

3  Sc.  to  hold  the  paints.

4  The  Kinnaras  are  described  as  mythical  beings  in  the  shape  of
men  with  horses'  heads,  perhaps  originally  a  kind  of  ape. Some  species
of  ape  may  be  meant  here.


CHAPTER VII.  215

t

other  birds  enclosed  in  gold-painted  bamboo  cages  and
chattering  copious  wit:  partridges  in  cages  of  coral:  and
rings  of  hippopotamus  ivory,  encrusted  with  rows  of  huge
pearls  from  the  brows  of  elephants1.

Delighted  at  the  sight  of  the  umbrella,  the  king  mentally
welcomed  it  as  a  fair  omen  on  his  first  march,  and  addressed
himself  in  friendly  terms  to  Hamsavega,  saying : — '  I  marvel
not,  fair  sir,  to  obtain  from  the  prince,  rich  in  every  precious
gift,  as  the  moon  was  got  from  the  ocean,  this  great  umbrella,
fit  to  be  held  above  the  head  of  the  Supreme.  The  first
lessons  of  the  great  are  in  conferring  favours.'  The  collection
of  presents  having  next  been  removed,  after  a  moment's  pause,
'  You  require  rest,  Hamsavega,'  he  said,  and  dismissed  him
to  the  chamberlain's  house.  Rising  himself,  he  bathed,  and
then,  seeking  fair  auspices,  entered  eastward  the  shade  of
Abhoga.

The  very  moment  he  entered,  such  a  coolness  arose
from  the  shade  that  the  moon  seemed  to  have  become  his
crest  jewel,  dew-dropping  moon-stones  seemed  to  kiss  his
forehead,  camphor  dust  to  melt  upon  his  eyes,  a  frost  from
drops  of  dissolving  snow  to  form  pearl  necklaces,  a  rain  of
Haricandana  juice  to  fall  without  a  pause  upon  his  breast,  his
heart  became  cool  as  if  made  of  night-lotuses,  an  invisible  melt-
ing ice  seemed  to  anoint  his  limbs.  Astonished  he  thought,
[245]  'What  but  an  undying  alliance  could  be  a  fit  return
for  this  present?'  At  the  hour  of  dining  he  sent  to  Ham-
savega the  remains  of  his  toilet  sandal  enclosed  in  a  polished
cocoanut  wrapped  in  a  white  cloth,  a  pair  of  robes  touched
by  his  person,  a  waistband  called  Pariveca  whereof  one  part 2
showed  clusters  of  clear  pearls  like  autumn  stars,  an  ear-
ornament  called  Tarangaka,  reddening  the  day  with  the
light  of  a  precious  ruby,  and  a  plentiful  repast.  In  this
and  other  proceedings  the  day  was  spent.

Anon  the  light-wreathed  sun,  his  form  dimmed  by
the  great  masses  of  dust  from  the  encamped  array,

1  These  pearls  are  often  alluded  to  in  Sanskrit  poetry,  e.g.  Kumara-
S.  i.  6.

2  Or  perhaps  '  with  the  name  '  Parivega '  formed  by  groups  of  &c.J


216  THE HARSA-CARITA.

i

dipped  in  the  western  ocean,  as  if  to  cleanse  his  polluted
frame.  As  though  to  announce  to  the  god  the  presentation
of  the  umbrella^  Abhoga,  he  departed  to  Varuiia's  quarter.
By  the  closing  of  all  the  day-lotus  beds  the  earth  with  all  her
isles  seemed  prematurely  to  clasp  hands  in  obeisance  before
her  lord.  Like  a  glow  of  affection  for  the  king,  the  twilight
flush,  akin  to  the  proffered  homage  of  the  whole  animate
creation,  took  the  world  in  its  embrace.  The  eastern  heaven
grew  dark,  as  if  alarmed  at  the  Gauda's  sin.  Beneath  the
gathering  gloom  the  earth  became  a  black  expanse,  as  though
the  fire  of  all  other  kings'  splendour  had  been  quenched.
The  heavens  strewed  thick  their  constellations  bright  as
opening  Tograra-blossoms,  like  flowers  for  the  twilight  levee
of  the  ruler  of  the  earth.  Dust-grey1  in  the  sky  shone  Aira-
vata's  track,  as  though  he  had  rushed  towards  the  fragrance
of  the  ichor  of  the  scent  elephants  in  the  camp.  Abandoning
Indra's  quarter,  as  if  infected  by  the  sniff  of  the  angered
tiger-king,  the  lover  of  Rohini2  mounted  the  firmament.
Over  the  ten  quarters  the  moon's  rays  sped,  thrilling,  like
rumoured  invasion,  the  hearts  of  proud  ladies.  Agitated
in  the  play  of  their  creatures*,  the  lords  of  rivers  shook
as  if  sick  with  terror  at  the  emperor's  new  march.  Leaving
all  the  realms  of  space,  the  weft  of  darkness  passed  into
the  cave  hollows,  like  anxiety  into  the  hearts  of  kings4.
[246]  From  the  night-lotus  beds,  as  from  the  eyes  of  hostile
neighbouring  chiefs,  sleep  waned  away.

At  that  hour  the  sovereign,  who  was  lying  beneath  an
extended  awning,  dismissed  his  servants  with  the  words
'  Begone  now,'  and  then  to  Hamsavega  said  '  Explain  your
errand.'  With  a  low  bow  the  other  began  his  narrative : —
'In  former  times,  your  majesty,  the  holy  earth,  having
through  union  with  the  Boar  become  pregnant,  gave  birth

1  The  dusty  colour  is  taken  as  due  to  the  dust  of  Airavata's  speed.

2  Rohiniramanas,  '  the  moon,'  may  also  mean  '  bull,'  which  is  sup-
posed to  be  frightened  by  the  tiger's  scent. The  tiger-king  is  Harsa.

3  Or — otherwise — '  the  lords  of  armies  in  all  the  functions  of  their
spirits.' The  '  lords  of  rivers '  are  the  oceans.

4  Or — with  the  usual  pun — '  mountains.'


CHAPTER VII.  217

in  hell  to  a  son  called  Naraka.  Before  this  hero's  feet,  while
he  was  still  in  his  boyhood,  the  crest-jewels  of  the  lords  of
nations  were  apt  to  bow.  Without  the  command  of  this  stout-
armed  ruler  of  the  world  the  sun  himself,  though  scanned
with  angrily  bent  side-glances  by  the  female  cakravakas  of
the  domestic  lotus  tanks,  went  not  to  his  setting,  and
Aruna  reversed  his  chariot  wheels  in  feaj.  It  was  he  who
won  this  umbrella,  this  external  heart  of  Varuna.  In  the
posterity  of  this  hero,  when  many  great  Meru-like  kings,
such  as  Bhagadatta.  Puspadatta,  and  Vajradatta,  had  passed
away,  there  was  born  a  Maharajadhiraja  named  Susthi-
ravarman,  a  splendid  hero  famous  in  the  world  as  Mriganka :
great-grandson  of  Maharaja  Bhutivarman,  grandson  of  Caii-
dramukhavarman,  and  son  of  Sthitivarman,  who  wore  the
unshaken  majesty  of  Kailasa.  This  king  was  born  with  a
pride  which  seemed  unborn.  Even  as  a  boy  he  dealt  out
presents  to  all  Brahmans  through  affection,  and  reverses1  to
all  enemies  through  hate.  In  him  was  seen  at  its  best  the
so  unattainable  sweetness  of  Glory,  that  child  of  the  salt
ocean.  For  he  took  away  the  conch-shells  of  the  lords  of
armies2,  not  their  jewels  ;  grasped  the  stability  of  the  earth,
not  its  tribute ;  seized  the  majesty  of  monarchs3,  not  their
hardness.  To  this  auspiciously  named  king  was  born  by  his
queen  QyamadevI  a  son  and  heir  Bhaskaradyuti,  otherwise
named  Bhaskaravarman,  as  Bhisma  was  born  to  Qantanu  by
Bhaglrathl.  Now  from  childhood  upwards  it  was  this  prince's
firm  resolution  never  to  do  homage  to  any  being  except  the
lotus  feet  of  Qiva.  Such  an  ambition,  so  difficult  of  attain-
ment in  the  three  worlds,  may  be  reached  by  one  of  three
means,  by  a  conquest  of  the  whole  earth,  [247]  by  death,  or  by
a  friend  like  your  majesty,  peerless  hero  of  the  world,  burning
the  heavens  with  a  blaze  of  impetuous  valour.  The  friend-
ship of  monarchs  again  commonly  has  regard  to  utility.

1  Pratigraha  is  used  in  a  double  sense,  (1)  =  presents  given  to  Brah-
mans, (2)  =  the  rear  of  an  army.

•  2  Or  'lords  of  rivers,' =  oceans. The  use  of  conchs  was  a  sign  of

independent  rule.

3  Or  '  mountains.'


218  THE HARSA-CARITA.

And  what  possible  contribution  of  utility  could  incline  your
majesty  to  friendship  ?  Wealth  is  but  a  remote  consideration
to  your  majesty,  whose  aim  is  to  amass  fame.  One  who
relies  upon  his  arm  alone  has  no  occasion  for  desiring  the
assistance  of  his  other  members,  much  less  of  a  stranger.
To  one  greedy  to  seize  the  four  combined  oceans  what
gratification  is  th^ere  even  in  the  proffered  gift  of  a  part  of
the  earth  ?  Even  the  alluring  present  of  a  beauteous  maiden
is  nothing  to  one  whose  eye  wantons  with  the  sight  of  glory's
lotus  face.  Seeing,  therefore,  that  ours  is  an  object  attainable
only  by  impossible  expedients,  let  your  majesty,  graciously
regarding  a  mere  petition,  hear.  The  sovereign  of  Assam
desires  with  your  majesty  an  imperishable  alliance,  like  that
of  Kuvera  with  the  foe  of  Kama1,  that  of  Dacaratha  with
Indra,  that  of  Dhananjaya  with  Krisna,  of  Vaikartana 2  with
Duryodhana,  of  the  Malaya  wind  with  the  month  Madhava.
If  your  majesty's  heart  too  is  inclined  to  friendship  and
can  comprehend  that  friends  enter  upon  a  slavery  disguised
under  a  synonym,  then  enough !  Commission  me  to  say
that  the  sovereign  of  Assam  may  enjoy  your  majesty's,  as
Mandara  Visnu's,  hearty  embrace,  so  that  the  crushed  bits  of
bracelet3  gems  may  grind  as  they  clash  against  the  jewelled
edges  of  great  arm  rings.  In  this  moonlike  face,  pouring  forth
a  ceaseless  ambrosial  flood  of  pure  beauty  and  magnificence,
let  the  glory  of  the  sovereign  of  Assam  at  length  indulge4  to
satiety  the  longing  of  her  eyes.  If  your  majesty  accepts  not
his  love,  command  me  what  to  report  to  my  master.'

When  he  ceased  speaking,  the  king,  who  from  previous
reports  of  the  prince's  great  qualities  had  conceived  a  very
high  respect  for  him  and  whose  affection  had  been  raised  to  a
climax  by  the  affair  of  the  umbrella  Abhoga,  replied  almost
bashfully  with  profound  respect : — '  How  could  the  mind  of
one  like  me  possibly  even  in  a  dream  show  aversion,
Hamsavega,  when  such  a  great  and  noble  spirit,  such  a

1  I.e.  Civa, Cf.  Megha-D.  76,  a.  2  Karna,  the  son  of  the  sun.

3  Kataka  by  a  pun  (  =  'the  slope  of  a  hill')  applies  also  to  Visim
and  the  mountain.

4  Or  with  the  Kashmir  reading  ksalayatu  '  bathe  her  eyes.'


CHAPTER VII.  219

•

treasure  of  virtue  and  captain  of  the  worthy,  bestows  his  love
as  an  absent  friend  upon  me  ?  Though  keen  to  scorch  the
whole  world,  the  rays  of  him  of  the  piercrhg  splendour  fall
cool  upon  the  lotus  bed  that  gladdens  the  eyes  of  the
universe.  [248]  Who  are  we,  bought  by  the  multitude  of
his  virtues,  to  be  called  friends  ?  the  ten  regions  are  the
unhired  servants  of  the  sweet  qualities  <jf  the  noble.  Who
needed  to  intercede  with  the  moon  on  behalf  of  the  night
lotus,  which  exhibits  its  likeness  in  a  nature  absolutely  bright
and  open x  ?  The  prince's  design  too  is  excellent.  Stout-
armed  himself,  with  me,  a  devotee  of  the  bow,  for  his  friend,  to
whom  save  Qiva  need  he  pay  homage  ?  This  resolve  of  his
increases  my  affection.  The  heart  respects  the  lion,  though
a  brute,  for  his  pride :  how  much  more  a  friend  !  Therefore
use  your  endeavours  that  my  yearning  to  see  the  prince  may
not  torment  me  long.'

Hamsavega  responded : — '  What  else  remains  ?  Even
your  majesty's  generous  words  give  a  pain  to  my  noble  master.
The  good  are  timid  of  dependence,  and  herein  especially  our
haughty  Vaisnava  line.  But  not  to  mention  my  master's
family,  let  your  majesty  consider : — WThen  towards  servitude
inclined  by  overwhelming  calamity,  like  a  wicked  mother,  old
in  years ;  spurred  on  by  greed  like  an  unsatisfied  wife ;  harass-
ed by  ill  imaginings  with  their  manifold  cravings,  begotten
of  youth,  like  bad  children;  beholding  circumstances  over-ripe,
like  an  elderly  daughter  in  his  house,  and  suggesting  recourse
to  another  man ;  urged  to  exertion  by  all  planets  of  distress,
like  poor  kinsmen ;  pursued  by  foul  deeds,  like  aged  servants,  of
long  standing  and  not  to  be  shaken  off:  when  thus,  cherishing
in  his  heart  in  vain  the  desire  of  grasping  the  whole  round  of
delights,  as  though  the  power  of  all  his  senses  were  blighted,  a
man  makes  up  his  mind  to  enter  a  palace,  as  a  malefactor2  a

1  The  argument  is  that  every  one,  however  exalted,  is  at  once  at-
tracted by  that  which  is  perfect  in  itself, — the  sun  by  the  day  lotus,
the  ten  regions  by  the  noble,  the  moon  by  the  night  lotus, — and  I  by
your  king.

2  The  notion  of  the  malefactor  and  the  causes  which  lead  him  to
crime  runs  through  the  whole  of  the  preceding.


220  THE HARSA-CARITA.

t

cowdung  fire,  to  the  burning  torment  of  all  his  frame, —
first  of  all,  withering  like  a  festoon  spray  at  the  very  portal,
he  has  the  distress  of  being  shut  out  by  lackeys.
Entering  at  the  door,  he  is  beaten  by  others  like  a  deer,
dashed  away  time  after  time,  like  the  dummy  in  elephants'
practice,  by  buffets  from  the  hands  of  a  group  of  lackeys1,
downbent  through^  greed  of  wealth,  like  a  tree  branch
over  a  treasure.  No  petitioner,  he  is  turned  away  and  shot
forth  [249]  by  the  mean2,  till  he  flies  into  desperation :  no
thorn,  he  is  plucked  away,  as  he  clings  to  the  feet,  and
hastily  hurled  aside :  no  Kama,  he  is  annihilated  by  the
scorching  glance  of  a  master3  angered  by  his  unseasonable
approach.  Like  an  ape,  he  changes  not  colour  when  angrily
reprimanded  :  like  a  Brahman-slayer,  he  performs  degrading
offices,  forbidden  to  touch,  his  shaven  poll  seared  by  daily
obeisances :  like  Ti^anku,  he  stands  day  and  night  with
downbent  head,  excluded  from  both  worlds4 :  like  a  horse,
he  submits  for  a  mouthful  of  food  to  be  driven  at  will5:
like  a  fasting  monk,  he  wastes  his  frame,  retaining6  the
desire  of  life  in  his  heart :  like  a  dog,  he  turns  away  from
his  proper  spouse  and  in  bondage  to  vile  habits  consumes
himself:  like  a  dead  man,  he  receives  his  ball  of  meal  in  grue-
some7 quarters :  like  a  crow,  he  lives  for  nought  a  wastrel8
life,  his  manly  vigour  subservient  to  a  greedy  tongue 9 :
like  a  ghoul  frequenting  graveyard  trees,  he  hovers
about  royal  favourites  made  rough  by  their  accursed

1  Pratihdramaiidalakara  may  also  mean  'trunks  surrounded by
'  gloves '.'

2  Amargaiiasya  may  also  mean  '  no  arrow '  and  udvegam  vrajatah,
'  speeds  on  its  flight.' '  No  arrow,  he  is  drawn  far  back,  turned  outwards,
and  driven  swiftly  away.'

3  Sc.  Qiva  or  a  king.  4  Ram.  I.  Ix.

5  Sukhavdhya  =  (V)  'easily  driven,'  (2)  'exiled  from  happiness.'

6  Or — as  applying  to  the  monk — '  with  death  (jiva-iiaca)  determined
in  his  heart.'

7  Anucita  may  be  divided  anu-cita  =  '  post  -burial,'  i.e.  'cemeteries.'

8  There  is  a  pun  in  vihitayuso,  which  might  be  divided  vi-hita-ayuso
=  '  having  a  life  fit  for  a  bird.'

9  Or — as  applying  to  the  crow — '  through  greed  of  tongue  devouring
human  ordure.'


CHAPTER VII.  221

•

success1 :  like  a  child,  he  is  innocently  duped  by  the  talk
of  parrot  kings,  conferring  delight  by  a  false  tongue  and
showing  affection2  only  on  their  lips:  like* a  vampire,  [250]
there  is  nothing  he  will  not  do  under  his  master's  spell :
like  a  painted  bow,  he  is  for  ever  bent  in  the  one  act  of
distending  a  string  of  imaginary  virtues3,  but  there  is  no  force
in  him* :  like  a  heap  of  dust  sweepings  gathered  by  a  broom,
he  carries  off  toilet-leavings5 :  like  a  phlegmatic  patient,  he  is
daily  worried  by  acrid  doorkeepers6:  like  a  Buddhist,  he  has
attained  to  life- weariness  through  learning  the  vanity  of
things7,  and  longs  for  the  yellow  robe  :  like  the  meal  offered  to
the  Divine  Mothers,  he  is  cast  out  into  space  even  at  night :
like  one  under  a  taint,  he  aggravates  a  wretched  existence
by  poor  lodging8:  like  a  pumping  machine,  he  has  left
all  weight  behind  him  and  bends  even  for  water :  degraded
below  the  worm,  he  worships  even  with  his  words  the  feet
of  those  uncontented  with  his  head  alone.  Abandoned  by
shame,  as  if  she  were  alarmed  by  hard  strokes  from  chamber-
lains' canes :  avoided  by  self-esteem,  as  if  stifled  in  a  heart
contracted  by  meanness:  parted  from  magnanimity,  as  if
angered  by  his  condescension  to  low  acts ;  through  devotion
to  riches  he  heaps  up  troubles,  increasing  his  contemptible-
ness  under  the  idea  of  magnifying  his  means.  Fool !  though
there  exists  a  wood9  fragrant  with  the  scent  of  myriad
flowers,  he  does  homage  to  a  mirage:  though  a  noble,  he
trembles  like  a  malefactor  as  he  draws  near :  though  of  good
presence,  his  being  is  fruitless  as  a  painted  flower:  though
learned,  his  speech  is  as  blundering  as  a  fool's:  though

1  Or  '  made  rough  by  the  ashes  of  the  burnt.'

2  Or  '  redness.'

3  AUJcagunadhyaropana  =  (\}  'ascribing  unreal  virtues,'  (2)  'stretch-
ing an  unreal  string.'

4  Or  '  but  he  has  no  force  of  an  arrow.'

6  There  is  a  pun  here,  as  nirmalya  might  mean  '  purity.'

6  Katuka  may  mean  either  (1)  'doorkeeper'  or  (2)  'hot  flavours.'

7  The  reference  is  to  the  nihilist  tenets  of  the  Buddhists. '  Through
vain  petitions '  or  '  through  nihilist  doctrines.'

8  Or  '  by  lodging  on  the  ground.'

9  Vane  may  also  mean  '  water '  in  reference  to  the  mirage. The  literal
sense  is  that  the  courier  might  have  recourse  to  a  life  in  the  woods.


222  THE HARSA-CARITA.

capable,  he  folds  his  hands  helplessly,  like  a  leper.  Roasted
without  fire  at  the  elevation  of  his  equals,  dying  without
expiring  [251]  atf'the  rise  of  his  inferiors,  tossed  like  a  straw
by  insults,  burned  without  respite  by  the  fire  of  pain,  though
partial  unportioned,  though  cold  to  pride  yet  scorching
his  kin,  though  of  humble  carriage1  yet  making  no  way,
though  his  weight^  is  fallen  from  him  yet  gravitating  down-
wards, though  void  of  spirit  yet  a  seller  of  human  flesh2,
though  free  from  intoxication  yet  not  master  of  his  actions,
though  no  hermit3  yet  giving  up  his  soul  to  pensiveness,  a
burnt-poll4  bowing  as  soon  as  he  gets  up,  a  domestic
fool  for  ever  dancing  to  amuse  the  wise,  a  household  fire-
brand burning  his  stock,  a  human  ox  bending  his  neck  to
get  even  a  wisp  of  grass,  a  mass  of  flesh  born  only  to
fill  his  belly,  a  sore  of  his  mother's  womb,  for  his  sins  a
servant, — for  him  what  atonement  is  there  ?  What  means
of  reformation  ?  Whither  shall  he  go  to  find  peace  ?
What  is  his  life  like  ?  What  manly  pride  is  his  ?  What
possible  pleasures  ?  What  dream  of  enjoyment  ?  This
dreadful  name  of  servant,  like  a  torrent  of  mud,  lays  every-
thing low.  '  Ah  me  ! '  he  sighs,  '  to  hell  with  such  wealth,
perdition  seize  such  advancement,  hail  to  such  worship-
fill  enjoyments,  my  service  to  such  grandeur,  away  with
such  glory,  joy  go  with  such  pomp,  for  the  sake  of  which  my
head  must  seek  the  earth.'  An  eunuch  whose  love  is  but
words,  a  worm  of  inodorous  carrion,  a  mannikin  of  no  account5,
a  walking  footstool  all  grey  atop  with  the  dust  of  feet,  [252]
in  coaxing  notes  a  human  cuckoo,  in  gratifying  cries  a
peacock,  in  bosom-rubbing  a  land  tortoise,  in  mean  fawnings
a  dog,  in  modulated  notes  a  pipe,  in  strainings  of  body  a
harlot's  person,  in  the  rice-fields6  of  manliness  a  straw,  in
jerkings  of  head  a  lizard,  in  curling  himself  up7  a  hedgehog,

1  Or  '  though  a  chariot,'  vimdna.

2  I.e.  his  own. Human  flesh  is  offered  to  goblins  or  spirits.

3  Or  'hapless.'

4  This  was  the  name  of  a  sect  of  ascetics.

5  Or  punningly  '  a  hell  of  dishonour.'

6  The  word  -pdlisu  is  ambiguous =(1)  'rice  field,'  (2)  'possessor  of.'

7  Of  the  servant  '  in  shrivelling  up  his  soul.'  ^


CHAPTER VII.  223

•

in  rubbing  of  feet  a  very  footstool1,  in  slappings  with
hands  a  ball2,  in  beatings  with  sticks  a  lute  board, — if  a
wretch  of  a  servant  belongs  to  the  worM  of  men,  then
a  rajila  snake  is  a  cobra,  and  a  withered  stalk  the  best  of
rice.  Better  for  a  manly  man  is  a  moment  of  manliness ;  at
the  price  of  bowing  the  wise  deem  not  even  the  joy  of  a
world-sovereignty  worth  a  bow.  Therefore,  let  your  majesty,
approving  of  our  love,  bethink  himself  that  the  king  of
Assam  died  only  a  few  days  ago.'

So  much  said,  he  became  silent,  and  shortly  after  bowed
and  took  his  leave.  The  king  spent  that  night  with  a  heart
held  captive  by  yearning  for  a  sight  of  the  prince :  for  over
the  great  self-devotion  works  as  a  charm  that  needs  no
simples.  On  the  morrow  he  sent  Hamsavega  away  with  a
load  of  answering  gifts  in  charge  of  eminent  envoys.  For3
himself  he  thenceforth  advanced  by  ceaseless  marches  against
the  foe.  One  day  he  heard  from  a  letter-carrier  that  Bhandi
had  arrived  with  the  Malwa  king's  whole  force,  conquered  by
the  might  of  Rajyavardhana's  arm,  and  was  encamped  quite
near.  At  this  news  the  fire  of  brotherly  grief  awoke  again ;
his  courage  gave  way,  and  he  retreated  into  the  darkness  as
it  were  of  a  swoon ;  laying  aside  all  his  occupations,  remaining
in  his  own  quarters  [253]  with  his  attendants  noiseless  and
still  through  the  chamberlains'  prohibitions,  he  waited  awhile
with  his  royal  retinue  for  Bhandi's  arrival.

Soon  with  a  single  horse  and  a  retinue  of  a  few
nobles,  he  came  in  sight.  His  soiled  garb,  his  breast  filled
with  the  points  of  enemies'  arrows,  like  an  array  of  iron  pins
implanted  to  restrain  his  heart  from  bursting,  his  beard
resting  like  reverence  for  his  master  in  his  bosom,  all
betokened  his  grief.  On  his  arm,  flabby  from  neglected
exercise,  dangled  for  an  ornament  a  remnant  of  his  charm
bracelet.  His  parched  lip,  faint  in  colour  from  careless
application  of  betel,  protruded  under  the  force  of  long  sighs,

1  There  is  some  obscure  pun  in pratipadaka  (  =  'leg  of  a  couch'  text
p.  7, 1.  2).

2  Read  kanduka  for  katuka  with  the  Kashmir  text.

3  Or  '  by  himself.'


224  THE HABSA-CARITA.

like  a  coal  from  a  heart  burning  with  sorrow's  flame,  and  with
a  stream  of  tears  for  a  shawl  he  hid  his  face,  as  though
abashed  by  the  '•crime  of  preserving  his  life  after  his  master's
removal.  With  limbs  enfeebled  he  appeared  to  shrink  through
shame  into  himself:  and  his  long  sighs  seemed  to  vomit
forth  the  now  purposeless  prowess  of  his  arm.  Like  a
sinner,  a  criminaj,  a  malignant  he  seemed,  like  a  man
plundered  and  deluded,  a  young  elephant  despondent  at  the
fall  of  the  monarch  of  the  herd,  a  lotus  bed  robbed  of  its
loveliness  by  the  sunset,  Drona's  son  distracted  by  Duryo-
dh ana's  death,  the  ocean  deprived  of  its  jewels.

In  this  guise  he  drew  near  the  king's  portals,  and,  dis-
mounting from  his  horse,  entered  the  residence  with  downcast
looks.  While  still  some  distance  away,  he  uttered  a  cry  and  fell
at  the  king's  feet.  But  he,  on  seeing  him,  rose,  and  advancing
with  tottering  steps,  uplifted  him,  and  clasping  his  neck  in
a  close  embrace,  wept  long  and  piteously.  The  fury  of  his
grief  relaxing,  he  turned  back  again  and  sat  as  before  upon
his  seat :  finally,  when  Bhandi  had  wiped  his  face,  he  wiped
his  own.  A  little  time  having  elapsed,  he  enquired  the
facts  of  his  brother's  death,  and  Bhandi  related  the  whole
story  in  full.  Next  the  king  asked  what  was  Rajya9ri's  plight.
'  Your  majesty,'  was  the  response,  '  I  learnt  from  common
talk  that  after  his  majesty  Rajyavardhana  was  taken  to
paradise  and  Kanyakubja  was  seized  by  the  man  named
Gupta,  queen  Rajya^ii  burst  from  her  confinement,  and  with
her  train  [254]  entered  the  Vindhya  forest.  But  not  to  this
day  have  the  numerous  searchers  sent  after  her  returned.'
'  What  care  I,'  the  king  answered,  '  for  other  seekers  ?
Where  she  has  gone,  I  myself,  abandoning  all  other  calls,  will
go.  Your  honour  also  must  take  the  army  and  advance  against
the  Gauda.'  So  saying,  he  rose  and  went  to  the  bath
chamber  ;  and  when  Bhandi  had  caused  his  mourning  beard
to  be  shaved,  had  bathed  in  the  chamberlain's  apartments,
and  had  received  signs  of  favour  in  the  shape  of  clothes,
flowers,  unguents,  and  ornaments  for  the  body,  the  king  ate
and  spent  the  day  alone  in  his  company.

On  the  next  day  Bhandi,  approaching  the  king,  said : —


CHAPTER VII.  225

•

'  Let  your  majesty  inspect  the  Malwa  king's  army  and  royal
equipage,  won  by  the  power  of  his  majesty  Rajyavardhana's
arm.'  The  king  consenting  to  this  being  dofie,  he  displayed
the  booty,  such  as  elephants  in  thousands,  great  as  moving
boulders,  with  muddy  cheeks  whose  temples  were  hairy
with  swarms  of  bees  clamouring  about  the  intoxicating  scent
of  incessantly  dripping  ichor,  elephants  booming  with  deep
roars  like  clouds  alighted  upon  the  earth,  and,  like  con-
centrated autumn  days,  emitting  the  fragrance  of  full-blown
Saptacchada  groves :  horses  swift  as  antelopes  and  gay  with
lines  of  gold-bedight  chowries :  ornaments  of  divers  kinds,
raining  floods  of  morning  radiance  and  by  their  light
covering  the  heavens  with  many  a  rainbow :  wondrous  pearl
necklaces  that  had  toyed  with  the  scent  of  the  bosoms  of
love-intoxicated  Malwa  women,  like  stars  and  yet  flooding
the  heavens  with  a  torrent  of  unborrowed  light :  yak-tail
chowries,  like  Harsa's  own  glories,  white  as  a  mass  of  moon-
light: a  white  umbrella  with  a  golden  stock,  like  the  lotus
dwelling  of  Qri:  beauteous  women,  like  Apsarases  come
down  out  of  fondness  for  valour  redolent  of  many  a  fight:
regal  paraphernalia  such  as  lion  thrones,  couches,  and  settees  :
all  the  Malwa  king's  adherents  with  their  feet  restrained  by
iron  fetters :  the  whole  of  his  treasure  chests,  heavy  laden
with  wreaths  of  ornaments  and  provided  with  written  records
of  their  contents.

The  inspection  over,  the  king  appointed  overseers  to  take
charge  of  the  booty  according  to  their  several  functions.
The  next  day  [255]  he  set  out  with  the  horse  in  search  of  his
sister,  and  in  a  comparatively  few  days'  march  reached  the
Vindhya  forest  referred  to.  Entering,  he  saw  while  still  at
some  distance  a  forest  settlement,  distinguished  by  woodland
districts  turned  grey  by  the  smoke  from  granaries  of  wild
grain  in  which  heaps  of  burning  Sastika1  chaff  sent  up  a
blaze.  Wherein  were  huge  banyans,  encircled  with  cowpens
formed  of  a  quantity  of  dry  branches;  tiger-traps,  con-
structed in  fury  at  the  slaughter  of  young  calves2;  zealous

1  A  kind  of  rice  ripening  in  sixty  days,  commonly  called  sathl.

2  \'atsarupaka  :  cf.  yatsarupa  p.  257  1.  3  from  end,  Bombay  ed.,  and
Comm.  svalpd  vatsd  •  vatsarupdh.

c.  .  15


226  THE HARSA-CARITA.

foresters  violently  seizing  the  axes  of  trespassing  wood-
cutters; and  Durga  arbours  built  of  tree  clumps  in  the
thickets.  The  Outskirts  being  for  the  most  part  forest,  many
parcels  of  rice-land,  threshing  ground,  and  tilth  were  being
apportioned  by  small  farmers,  and  that  with  no  little  vigour
of  language,  since  it  was  mainly  spade  culture  and  they  were
anxious  for  the  support  of  their  families.  No  great  amount
of  coming  and  going  tramped  the  earth  owing  to  the
difficulty  of  ploughing  the  sparsely  scattered  fields  covered
with  Kaga  grass1,  with  their  few  clear  spaces,  their  black  soil
stiff  as  black  iron,  the  branches  bursting  from  the  tree  trunks
set  up  here  and  there,  their  growths  of  impenetrable  gyamaka,
their  wealth  of  Alambusa,  and  their  Kokilaksa  bushes  not
yet  cleared  away.  Near  the  tillage  scaffolds  constructed
above  ground  suggested  incursions  of  wild  beasts.

In  every  direction  at  the  entrance  to  the  forests  were
drinking  arbours  made  of  wayside  trees,  which  by  their
coolness  seemed  to  dispel  the  summer  heat :  arbours,  where
the  shade  was  dappled  by  fresh  shoots  made  grey  by  the
dust  of  travellers'  stamping  feet,  where  were  Nagasphuta
bushes  planted  in  the  vicinity  of  freshly  dug  tanks  bedecked
with  bunches  of  Sal  flowers  easily  obtained  from  the  woods,
tiny  huts  formed  of  close-woven  wattles,  heaps  of  crocks
dotted  with  meal  and  encircled  by  twisted  braids  of  flies,
stones  of  rose  apples  which  travelling  folk  had  eaten  scat-
tered over  the  ground  about  them,  masses  of  Dhull-Kadamba
flowers  with  the  pollen  formed,  wooden  stands  surmounted
by  an  array  of  bristling2  water  jars  to  steal  away  thirst,
cool  porous  vessels  with  dripping  bases  for  allaying  weariness,
pitchers  black  with  moist  aquatic  plants  for  the  purpose
of  keeping  the  water  cold,  bits  of  pink  gravel  taken  from
ewers  to  cool  the  air,  cups  having  pink  flowers  tied  by
straw  whisps  about  their  necks,  tree  trunks  bristling  with
bunches  of  juicy  young  mango  fruit  forbidden  to  wither
by  bundles  of  dew-besprent  twigs,  and  successive  troops  of
resting  pilgrims  drinking  the  water.


1  The  Kashmir  text  and  A  read

2  Kantakita^' containing  grass  stalks'?  cf.  c.  v.  p.  139.


CHAPTER VII.  227

•

In  other  places  again  [256]  blacksmiths  Avere  almost
intensifying  the  heat  by  burning  heaps  of  wood  for  charcoal.
On  every  side  the  prospect  was  filled  with  tHk  inhabitants  of
the  district,  who  dwelt  in  the  surrounding  country,  entering
the  woods  to  collect  timber  and  enveloped  in  the  provisions
guarded  for  them  by  old  men  stationed  in  the  hamlet  houses
of  the  vicinity.  Their  bodies  they  had  anointed  to  prepare
themselves  for  their  hard  sylvan  toils.  On  their  shoulders
were  set  strong  axes,  and  about  their  necks  hung  their
breakfast  bundles.  They  wore  ragged  clothes  for  fear  of
thieves.  Their  water  they  bore  in  jars  having  mouths  covered
with  corks  of  leaves  and  attached  to  their  necks  which  were
encircled  by  triple  collars  of  black  cane.  Strong  oxen  marched
before  them  in  couples1.

Ranging  on  the  outskirts  were  hunters,  who  grasped  snares
with  intricate  loops  formed  of  animals'  sinews2,  and  bore  coiled
traps  and  netted  nooses  fastened  to  a  quantity  of  screens
used  in  shooting  wild  beasts.  Fowlers  roamed  hither  and
thither,  loaded  with  cages  for  falcons,  partridges,  kapinjalas,
and  the  like,  while  their  boys  loitered  about  with  aviaries
hanging  from  their  shoulders.  Troops  of  childish  trappers
wandered  in  eager  pursuit  of  female  sparrows  caught  with
twigs3  whereon  a  little  castaway  pulse  broth  was  smeared.
Young  hunters,  practising  bird-catching,  coaxed  on  a  tribe
of  dogs  frightened  at  partridges  hidden  in  clumps  of  grass.

There  were  people  moving  along  with  bundles  of  Cidhu
bark,  hued  like  an  old  ruddy-goose's  neck,  countless  sacks  of
recently  uprooted  Dhataki  flowers  of  the  colour  of  red  ore
and  of  cotton  plants,  plentiful  loads  of  flax  and  hemp  bundles*,
quantities  of  honey,  peacocks'  tail-feathers,  wreaths  of  com-
pressed5 wax,  barkless  Khadira  logs  frilled  with  hanging
Ldmajjaka  grass,  large  bundles  of  Kustha,  and  JRodhra  yellow
as  a  fullgrown  lion's  mane.  Village  wives  hastened  en  route
for  neighbouring  villages,  all  intent  on  thoughts  of  sale  and

1  Or  yuga  may  mean  'yoke': for  balad  read  balavad  with  the
Kashmir  text,  or  with  A  purahsaradballvarda*

2  Mrigatantu  1  3  The  MS.  A  reads  lagna  for  vadhii.

4  Read,  with  A,  atasl^anapfdakdndm.  •"'  Or  'easily  obtained'^

15—2


228  THE HARSA-CARITA.

i

bearing  on  their  heads  baskets  filled  with  various  gathered
forest  fruits.

Here  and  there  the  preparation  of  unsightly  fields  of
barren  soil  was  being  effected  by  numerous  lines  of  wagons,
bearing  heaps  of  manure  [257]  from  old  dust  heaps  and
yoked  to  strong  young  steers,  while  to  the  creaking  of  their
loose  and  noisy  ?vheels  were  added  the  angry  cries  of  the
dust-grey  ploughboys1  who  sitting  on  the  poles  urged  them
on.  The  surrounding  country  was  black  with  numerous  sugar
cane  enclosures,  showing  wide  carefully  tended  branches,
buffalo  skeletons  fixed  on  stakes  to  scare  with  their  sharp
points  the  rabbits  which  devastated  the  rising  buds,  and  high
bamboo  fences  which  the  antelopes  lightly  leapt  when  startled
by  ox-drivers'  sticks  which  the  watchers  hurled  at  them.

At  very  wide  intervals  were  the  dwellings  of  the  forest
householders,  girt  with  orchards  of  emerald-bright  Snuhd,
entangled  with  thickets  of  bamboo  suitable  for  bows,  and
difficult  of  access  owing  to  rows  of  thorny  Karanja.  They
had  garden  enclosures  with  clumps  of  Garmut,  Gavedhuka,
Granthiparna,  Qigru,  Surana,  Surasa,  Vahgaka,  Vaca,  and
the  castor  plant,  and  a  network  of  Kasthaluka  creepers,
reared  upon  tall  planted  uprights,  provided  a  shade.  Young
calves2  were  tied  to  Khadira  stakes  fixed  in  the  ground  in
circular  jujube  arbours,  and  crowing  cocks  more  or  less  indi-
cated the  positions  of  the  houses.  At  the  foot  of  Agasti3
trees  in  the  yards  tanks  and  drinking  vessels*  for  birds  had
been  constructed,  and  pink  masses  of  jujube  were  scattered
around.  The  walls  were  formed  of  partitions  made  of  [258]
slips  of  bamboo,  leaves,  stalks,  and  reeds,  while  for  ornament
gorocana  pigment  and  Kimguka  flowers  were  used5.  There
were  piles  of  charcoal  tied  with  Valvaja  grass,  numerous

1  Reading  sairika  (•hdlikah]  with  Comm.  and  A. The  texts  have
sairibkct,  ' ox.'

2  Vatsarupdh  svalpd  vatsdh  Comm. :  cf.  supra  note.

3  Read  angandgasti-  with  the  Comm.

4  Ksiprapupikd  1 The  Comm.  paksipupikd  'paksdndm  vetravaldni
bhdndabheddh  points  to  a  reading  paksipupikd. The  Kashmir  text  has
ksiprapaksipupiJcd. A  has  paksiprapikd.

5  Read  with  MS.  A  kimfukafforocandviracita/maiidanair  valvaja  — .


CHAPTER VII.  229

•

heaps  of  cotton  from  the  Seemul  tree  fruit,  stores  of  Nala
rice,  waterlily  roots,  candied  sugar,  white  lotus  seed,  bamboos,
and  threshed  rice  ready  at  hand ;  also  collections  of  Tamdla
seeds1,  mats  worn  from  being  used  to  pound  ashes  and
disposed  upon  heaps  of  Kagmarya^,  a  wealth  of  withered
Rdjddana  and  Madana  fruit,  abundance  of  Madhuka  fruit
decoctions,  pots  of  safflower  in  excellent  cupboards,  no  lack  of
Rajamasa,  cucumber,  Karkatika,  and  gourd  seeds,  and  col-
lections of  living  pets,  such  as  wild-cats,  maludhana  snakes,
ichneumons,  galijatakas 3,  and  the  like.

1  MS.  A  reads  tamalavyaih.

2  A  (?)  B  read  bhajmamalinamldnakdcmaryakutavydprita-,  'mats
used  for  heaps  of  Kdcmarya  and  so  worn  and  dusty '  ?

3  MS.  A  -pdlijatakadibhir,  cf.  p.  235,  infr.

Here  ends  the  seventh  chapter — entitled  The  Gift  of  the  Umbrella —
of  the  Harsa-Carita  composed  by  Crl  Bana  Bhatta.


e  CHAPTER  VIII.

[259]  As  it  produces  at  once  all  the  objects  which  desire  could
ask,

Even  Fate  seems  to  pay  beforehand1  its  homage  to  the
fortunate  ;

By  association  with  learned  men,  and  by  the  joy  of  be-
holding a  kinsman  who  has  been  loved  and  lost,

Who  would  not  be  made  happy  in  the  world2,  and  by
the  attainment  of  a  costly  jewel3?

Next  morning  the  king  rose  up  and  going  out  of  that
village  went  into  a  forest  of  the  Vindhya ;  and  there  he
roamed  hither  and  thither  for  many  days.  But  one  day  as
he  was  wandering,  the  son  of  Qarabhaketu,  a  tributary  chief
in  the  forest,  named  Vyaghraketu,  taking  with  him  a  young
mountaineer,  came  up  to  the  king.  Now  the  young  moun-
taineer had  his  hair  tied  into  a  crest  above  his  forehead  with,
a  band  of  the  Qyamalafa  creeper  dark  like  lampblack,  and
his  dark  forehead  was  like  a  night  that  always  accompanied
him  in  his  wild  exploits,  with  an  involuntary  frown  which
branched  in  three  lines ;  his  ear  had  an  ear-ring  of  glass-like
crystal  fastened  in  it,  and  it  assumed  a  green  hue  from  a
parrot's  wing  which  ornamented  it,  while  his  somewhat
bleared  eye,  with  its  scanty  lashes,  seemed  by  its  native
colouring  to  distil  hyena's  blood4  which  had  been  applied  as
a  medicine, — his  nose  was  flat,  his  lower  lip  thick,  his  chin
low,  his  jaws  full,  his  forehead  and  cheek-bones  projecting,
his  neck  a  little  bent  down  [260]  while  one  half  of  his

1  Cf.  Bombay  ed.  p.  140.  1.  2  Bhuvane,  MS.  A.

3  Qr!  Harsa  will  gain  all  these  blessings  in  the  course  of  the  eighth
book.

4  Pliny says that hyena's gall "illitum frontibus lippitudini
prodest,"  xxvin.  27.


CHAPTER VIII.  231

•

shoulders  stood  up1, — he  seemed  to  mock  the  broad  rocks
of  the  Vindhya's  side  with  his  brawny  chest,  which  was
broadened  by  exercise  and  hardened  by  incessantly  bending
his  bow,  while  his  arms,  which  were  more  solid  than  a
boa-constrictor,  made  light  of  the  tallest  faZa-trees  of  the
Himalaya ;  he  wore  a  tin  armlet,  decorated  with  white
godanta  beads2,  which  was  placed  on  his  fore-arm,  the  back
of  which  was  covered  with  a  bundle  o*f  the  rootlets  of
Ndgadamana3  fastened  together  by  the  bristles  of  boars  ;
he  had  a  thin  belly  but  a  prominent  navel ;  his  huge
broad  loins  were  rendered  formidable  by  a  sword, — the
end  of  which  was  anointed  with  quicksilver  and  its  handle
was  made  of  polished  horn, — it  was  wrapped  in  a  short  black
antelope  skin  as  in  a  woven  covering,  and  its  sheath  was
adorned4  with  the  spotted  skin  of  a  citraka  snake,  placed
between,  two  strips  of  the  skin  of  an  ahiram  snake.  His
brawny  thighs  were  covered  with  the  flesh  that  had  as  it  were
fallen  down  from  his  waist  which  had  grown  thin  and  spare  in
his  early  youth  ;  his  dark  body5  seemed  as  it  were  to  blossom
with  a  leathern  quiver  on  his  back,  made  of  a  bear's  skin,
wrapped  round  with  a  spotted  leopard's  skin,  its  woolly  hair
black  with  the  bees  that  clustered  on  it,  and  filled  with
arrows  bearing  mostly  crescent-shaped  heads ;  he  carried  a
hunter's  extemporised  box  of  colours  with  him  in  a  partridge
whose  red  palate  was  displayed  through  its  open  beak,  while
its  neck  was  strung  on  the  end  of  the  sharp  notched
extremity  of  the  bow,  and  a  hare  whose  soft  white  hair  on
its  breast  was  clearly  seen  by  reason  of  its  body  being
stretched  out  (as  it  hung  suspended),  while  its  nostrils  were
stained  with  a  line  of  blood  red  like  a  Bandhuka  flower  and
an  extempore  svastika  sign  was  produced  by  one  of  its  legs
which  was  caught  in  a  hole  cut  by  an  arrow  in  the  other

1  Skanna  may  mean  '  fallen,  drooping.'

-  Godanta  is  said  to  be  a  white  fossil  substance,  apparently  an
earthy  salt. The  Scholiast  calls  it  a  snake.

3  A  plant  used  as  an  antidote  against  poison.

4  MS.  A  reads  gankrita  for  tarakita.- This  passage  is  obscure.

5  AB  karsnyam.


232  THE HARSA-CARITA.

i

one, — it  hung  head-downwards  on  his  stout  bamboo-like
arm  which  bore  a  bow  resting  on  his  left  shoulder  and  which
was  adorned  with  a  profuse  pigment  of  peacock's  gall,  and
was  full  of  fierce  vigour  and  with  its  sinews  fashioned  of
Khadira  roots1,  while  the  top  of  the  arm2  was  gay  with
a  blue  jay's  tail  fastened  on  the  upper  part3.  His  right
hand  seemed  busily  engaged  with  a  vikarna*  arrow,  having
its  point  dipped  in  a  potent  poison,  and  looking  like  a
black  snake  which  had  been  stupefied  by  certain  roots5.  He
was  like  a  moving  dark  Tamala  tree  on  the  side  of  a  moun-
tain or  a  pillar  of  solid  stone  artificially  wrought6,  or  a  moving
mass  of  black  collyrium  [261]  or  a  melting  block  of  iron
from  the  Vindhya, — a  very  fever  to  the  elephants,  the  noose
of  death  to  the  deer,  a  comet  of  ill  omen  to  the  lions,  the
last  day  of  the  Durga-puja7  to  the  buffaloes,  the  personified
essence  of  destruction,  the  embodied  fruit  of  sin,  the  cause  of
the  Kali  age,  the  lover  of  doom's-night.

Having  made  him  stand  at  a  distance,  the  chief  addressed
the  king,  "  My  lord,  there  is  a  general  of  the  Qabaras  named
Bhukampa,  the  lord  of  all  this  Vindhya-range,  the  leader  of
all  the  village  chiefs, — this  is  his  sister's  son  Nirghata,  who
knows  every  leaf  in  this  Vindhya  forest,  and  still  more  its
localities;  let  your  majesty  ask  him, — he  is  able  to  carry  out
every  command."  Nirghata  laid  his  head  on  the  ground
and  made  his  obeisance  and  offered  the  partridge  and  hare
as  his  present.  The  king  respectfully  asked  him,  "  Sir,  you
are  acquainted  with  all  this  region,  you  love  wandering  at
this  season;  has  a  noble  lady  come  within  the  general's  sight
or  that  of  any  of  his  attendants  ?"

1  This  line  is  obscure ;  but  the  MSS.  AB  give  110  help,  having  the
same  reading.

2  Should  we  read  bahutikhara  which  means  'shoulder'  in  Bk.  vi.
(p.  204, 1.  1)  ?

3  Or  perhaps  "  three  parts  standing  out."

4  So  Kashm.  text.

s  Or 'held  by  the  tail.'

6  Or  perhaps  'torn  up  by  a  lever,'  cf.  Bombay  ed.,  pp.  104.  9,  123.
8-9,  169,  1.  12.

7  A  day  especially  celebrated  by  sacrifices  of  goats,  sheep,  and
buffaloes.


CHAPTER VIII.  233

•

Nirghata,  feeling  himself  honoured  by  being  thus  ad-
dressed by  the  king,  bowed  and  thus  respectfully  spoke,
"  Sire,  scarcely  the  deer  can  wander  he*e  unnoticed  by
the  general,  much  less  then  women,  or  such  a  distin-
guished lady.  Still  according  to  your  command  every  day
a  search  is  carried  on  by  diligent  messengers.  And  in
a  great  thicket  of  trees,  reverenced  by  munis,  which
grows  at  the  foot  of  some  mountains  a  league  from  this
place,  there  dwells  near  a  mountain  stream  a  wandering
mendicant  who  lives  on  alms,  named  Divakaramitra,  with
a  train  of  disciples, — haply  he  might  learn  some  tidings."
The  king  reflected,  "I  have  heard  that  a  follower  of  the
Maitrayani  9akha,  the  boy  friend  of  the  deceased  Grahavarman
of  auspicious  name,  having  abandoned  the  three  Vedas,  when
he  was  a  leading  Brahman  teacher,  though  still  young  in
years,  turned  his  studies  to  the  Buddhist  doctrine  and
assumed  the  red  dress.  [262]  Now  even  the  sight  of  a
friend  generally  gives  much  comfort  to  one's  heart,  and  the
good  qualities  of  every  one  are  worthy  of  a  visit,  and  who
would  not  shew  respect  to  a  muni?  And,  again,  religious
asceticism,  fit  mate  to  virtue,  causes  honour  to  be  paid  even
to  a  fool, — still  more  to  a  really  wise  man  who  wins  the
hearts  of  all  men.  Since  my  heart  has  been  continually
desirous  of  seeing  him,  this  is  a  lucky  chance  that  has  come
in  my  way, — we  will  visit  him  as  we  have  so  earnestly
sought  for  such  an  interview."  Aloud  he  said,  "  Shew  me,
Sir,  the  place  where  the  mendicant  dwells."  So  saying,  he
proceeded  in  the  direction  indicated.

As  he  went  on,  there  rose  in  his  view  all  sorts  of  trees,
some  full  of  fruit,  Karnikaras  in  blossom,  Campakas  in
abundance,  large  Phalegrahis,  Namerus  bowed  down  with
fruit,  palms  and  Naladas  with  dark  green  leaves,  Sarala  pines
and  the  yellow  Nagakesaras,  lines  of  Kuruvakas,  bristling
with  their  opening  buds ;  every  direction  was  painted  with
the  beauty  of  the  shoots  of  the  red  A$oka,  while  a  beautiful
grey  hue  was  thrown  over  them  by  the  pollen  of  the
blossoming  Kesaras ;  the  Tilakas  had  their  surface  covered
with  their  own  pollen  as  with  sand,  while  assafoetida


284  THE HARSA-CAR1TA.

i

spread  everywhere.  Betel  nuts  abounded  on  all  sides,  the
Priyahgus  were  brown  with  quantities  of  flowers, — every-
where was  heard  the  pleasant  murmur  of  the  bees  gathered
on  the  sprays  which  were  red  with  pollen,  [263]  while  the
undisturbed  rubbing  of  the  elephants'  cheeks  was  revealed
by  the  tell-tale  trunks  of  the  Mucukunda  trees,  which  were
stained  by  the  dark  ichor.  The  grassy  glades  were  all  bright
with  the  young  antelopes  skipping  about  without  fear,  while
the  Taniala  trees  darker  than  midnight  obscured  the
sunshine;  the  Deodars  were  spangled  with  their  clusters
of  flowers,  while  the  lines  of  rose-apples  and  Jambhlras
were  studded  with  patches  of  flickering  betel-vines ;  the
air  was  kissed  by  clumps  of  Dhulikadamba-trees  white  with
the  powder  of  their  flowers,  while  the  ground  was  moist
with  the  dropping  honey;  the  nostrils  were  refreshed  with
perfume;  the  hollow  trunks  of  the  Kutujas  were  tenanted
by  the  hens  with  their  new  broods,  while  the  young  sparrows
uttered  their  cries  as  they  were  tended  by  the  mother-birds,
and  the  beaks  of  the  cakora  birds  were  busy  in  feeding  their
mates,  and  the  bhurundas  were  fearlessly  eating  the  ripe
brown-red  fruit  of  the  Pilu  trees,  and  the  merciless  parrots
were  piercing  the  never-failing  fruit  of  the  Katphalas,  while
they  dropped  the  unripe  berries ;  the  young  hares  basked  on
the  smooth  rocks ;  lizards  rolled  about  securely  in  the  roots
of  the  Gephalika  water-plants  ;  the  antelopes  were  free  from
fear,  the  ichneumons  played  in  peace,  the  soft-voiced  kokilas
devoured  the  opening  buds,  the  deer  lay  ruminating  in  the
mango-groves,  troops  of  nllandajas1  rested  at  their  ease,  and
the  female  gayals  as  they  gave  milk  to  their  young  were
watched  by  the  motionless  wolves,  [264]  the  drum-like  flapping
of  the  elephants'  ears  grew  languid  in  the  pleasant  sleep  in-
duced by  the  lulling  sound  of  the  cataracts  falling  from  the
mountain  slopes  near  by  ;  the  ruru  deer  listened  well-pleased2
to  the  songs  of  the  neighbouring  kinnarls,  the  hyenas  were
delighted,  the  snouts  of  the  young  boars  were  stained  with


1  The  Schol.  explains  this  as  a  sort  of  deer  ;  the  name  would  seem
to  denote  some  kind  of  bird.  2  MS.  A  ramamdna.


CHAPTER VIII.  235

•

the  juice  of  the  Pitadru  trees  which  was  yellow  when  freshly
pierced,  polecats  were  making  a  low  noise  in  the  Gunjd
shrubs,  and  tribes  of  fdlijdtakas1  lay  asleep  in  the  nutmeg-
trees,  while  the  young  monkeys,  angry  at  being  bitten,  tore
in  pieces  the  nests  of  the  red  worms,  and  the  baboons,  eager
for  the  bread  fruit,  leaped  on  the  Laval i  shrubs ;  the  water-
basins  at  the  foot  of  the  trees  had  been  made  with  sand,  the
mountain-streams  were  checked  in  their  rush  by  the  zigzag
lines  of  waterpots,  while  pitchers  hung  on  the  thick  boughs
and  branches,  and  the  bowers  were  full  of  empty  begging-bowls
suspended  by  looped  strings ;  models  of  caityas  stamped  on
pink  clay  were  set  up  in  the  neighbouring  hermits'  huts ;  the
ground  was  stained  with  the  water  which  was  coloured  by
the  dye  of  the  brown  rags ;  the  peacocks  raised  their  storm
of  cries  as  if  the  thickets  were  so  many  clouds ;  the  branches
of  innumerable  trees  met  in  confusion  like  the  gcikhas2  of  the
Veda;  the  trees  assumed  dark  forms  as  if  made  of  rubies,
they  obscured  all  eyes  as  if  made  of  darkness,  they  seemed
to  lift  great  dark  lakes  of  verdure  into  the  air  like  so  many
Yamunas,  they  were  like  pleasure-hills  of  the  spring,  dark-
hued  as  with  emeralds,  or  like  flowering  mountains  of
collyrium — they  seemed  children  of  the  Vindhya  born  in  the
forest,  or  masses  of  hell's  darkness  which  had  burst  up  from
the  earth  or  close  neighbours  of  the  days  of  the  rainy  season
or  partial  avatars  of  the  nights  of  the  dark  fortnight,  or
palaces  of  the  wood-nymphs  constructed  of  sapphires.

The  king  reflected,  "The  venerable  mendicant  cannot  be
far  off."  [265]  Having  alighted,  and  washed  his  mouth  in  a
mountain  stream  and  having  made  his  troop  of  cavalry  halt
in  that  place  while  the  forest  glades  were  deafened  by  the
neighing  of  the  horses  as  they  welcomed  the  sudden  rest,
and  in  his  heart  having  assumed  a  deportment  suitable  for
a  visit  to  such  a  holy  man,  and  leaning  with  his  right  hand
on  Madhavagupta's  shoulder,  he  proceeded  on  foot  attended
by  a  few  tributary  kings.

Then  in  the  middle  of  the  trees,  while  he  was  yet  at

1  MS.  A  h&sjdtayah  for  valayah.

2  I.e.  texts  current  in  different  schools.


236  THE HARSA-CARITA.

t

a  distance,  the  holy  man's  presence  was  suddenly  announced
by  the  king's  seeing  various  Buddhists  from  various  provinces
seated  in  different  situations, — perched  on  pillars,  or  seated
on  the  rocks  or  dwelling  in  bowers  of  creepers  or  lying  in
thickets  or  in  the  shadow  of  the  branches  or  squatting  on
the  roots  of  trees, — devotees  dead  to  all  passion,  Jainas
in  white  robes1,  white  mendicants2,  followers  of  Krisna3,
religious  students,  ascetics  who  pulled  out  their  hair,  fol-
lowers of  Kapila,  Jainas,  Lokayatikas4,  followers  of  Kanada,
followers  of  the  Upanishads,  believers  in  God  as  a  Creator5,
assayers  of  metals,  students  of  the  legal  institutes,  students
of  the  Puranas,  adepts  in  sacrifices  requiring  seven  ministering
priests6,  adepts  in  grammar,  followers  of  the  Pancaratra  and
others  besides,  all  diligently  following  their  own  tenets,
pondering,  urging  objections,  raising  doubts,  resolving  them,
giving  etymologies,  disputing,  studying,  and  explaining,  and
all  gathered  here  as  his  disciples.  Even  some  monkeys  who
had  fled  to  the  'three  Refuges7'  were  gravely  busy  performing
the  ritual  of  the  caitya,  while  some  devout  parrots,  skilled  in
the  Qakya  castras,  were  explaining  the  Koca8,  [266]  and
some  mainas,  who  had  obtained  calm  by  expositions  of  the
duties  of  the  monastery  life9,  were  giving  lectures  on  the
law,  and  some  owls,  who  had  gained  insight10  by  listening
to  the  ceaseless  round  of  instruction,  were  muttering  the
various  births  of  the  Bodhisattva,  and  even  some  tigers
waited  in  attendance  who  had  given  up  eating  flesh  under
the  calming  influence  of  Buddhist  teaching,  while  the  fact
that  some  young  lions  sat  undisturbed  near  his  seat  shewed
at  once  what  a  great  sage  he  was,  as  he  thus  sat  as  it  were

1  The  Jaina  Qvetambaras.

2  Hindu  ascetics  in  white  robes,  who  had  abandoned  Buddhism.

3  Bhagavatdh.  4  An  atheistical  school.

5  Followers  of  the  Nyaya.

6  Or  containing  seven  leading  types,  see  Sayana,  R.V.  x.  124.  1.

7  I.e.  Buddha,  the  Law,  and  the  Assembly.

8  The  Buddhist  dictionary  by  Vasubandhu,  see  Burnouf  s  Introd.,
p.  563.

9  The  ten  cikshapadas  are  precepts  regulating  the  monastery  life.

10  The  Kashmir  text  reads  grihltdlokaih  for  grihltdllkaih. This  is
opposed  to  their  usual  blindness  by  day.


CHAPTER VIII.  237

•

on  a  natural  lion-throne.  His  feet  were  licked  by  some  deer
who  seemed  to  drink  in  ascetic  calmness;  he  propitiated
universal  charity  by  means  of  a  young  dove* which  sat  on  his
left  hand  like  a  lotus  dropped  from  his  ear  and  ate  wild  rice,
while  he  dazzled  the  spectators  by  the  rays  which  streamed
from  the  nails  of  his  other  hand,  as  he  poured  water  on  a
peacock,  which  stood  near  with  its  neck  uplifted,  like  an
emerald  water-jar,  or  strewed  grains  of  panic  and  rice  for  the
ants.  He  was  clad  in  a  very  soft  red  cloth,  as  if  he  were  the
Eastern  quarter  of  the  sky,  bathed  in  the  morning  sunshine,
teaching  the  other  quarters  to  assume  the  red  Buddhist
attire,  while  they  were  flushed  with  the  pure  red  glow  of  his
body  like  a  ruby  freshly  cut;  with  his  gently  bright  eye
bent  down  in  humility,  before  which  the  lotuses  in  the  lake
closed  their  buds,  he  seemed  to  rain  ambrosia  to  revive  the
little  insects  which  the  crowd  had  unwillingly  crushed, — he
was  the  Supreme  Buddhist1  Avalokite9vara,  compacted  of
all  the  letter-atoms  of  all  the  9astras, — absorbed  without
faultering  in  penances, — revealing  the  real  nature  of  all
things  to  the  student,  like  the  light, — one  whom  Buddha
himself  might  well  approach  with  reverence,  Duty  herself
might  vvorship,  Favour  itself  shew  favour  to,  Honour  itself
honour,  Reverence  itself  revere, — the  very  source  of  muttered
prayer'2,  the  circumference  of  the  wheel  of  religious  obser-
vance, the  essence  of  asceticism,  the  body  of  purity,  [267]  the
treasury  of  virtue,  the  home  of  trust,  the  standard  of  good
conduct,  the  entire  capital  of  omniscience,  the  acme  of
kindness,  the  extreme  limit  of  compassion,  the  very  finality
of  happiness, — Divakaramitra,  who  was  still  in  the  prime  of
life.  His  reverence  was  excited  by  his  calm  and  reverent
appearance,  and  he  devoutly  (sadaram)  saluted  him  while
still  at  a  distance,  with  head,  mind,  and  voice.

Divakaramitra,  being by  nature full of  kindness,  was
charmed  with his  visitor's  dignified  bearing,  which,  being

1  For  paramasaugat a  cf.  Fleet's  Gupta  Inscriptions,  p.  232.  _  There
may  also  be  a  pun,  "a  supreme  Buddhist  and  yet  recognising  an  l9vara."

2  The  Kashmir  text  and  A  have  japasi/a,  which  is  also  required  by
the  alliteration.


238  THE HARSA-CARITA.

i

such  as  he  had  never  seen  before,  surpassed  all  men  and
seemed  worthy  of  a  supernatural  world  and  shone  forth  in
the  fulness  of  his  magnanimity,  and  also  with  his  courtesy
which  at  once  revealed  noble  birth ;  and  without  hesitation  he
welcomed  him  with  his  eye  and  his  heart.  Heroic  in  mind
though  he  was,  he  sprang  up  hurriedly  from  his  seat  and
gathered  together  his  robe  which  was  somewhat  disordered  by
his  sudden  movement  as  it  hung  from  his  left  shoulder,  and,
being  skilled  in  courteous  compliments,  he  raised  his  right
hand  which  was  graced  with  all  the  lines  and  signs  of  a
great  man,  and  greeted  the  king  in  a  gentle  voice  and  with
hearty  welcome  and  every  good  wish;  and,  shewing  all  honour
to  him  as  to  a  guru,  he  invited  him  to  share  his  own  seat.

Then  he  said  to  a  disciple  by  his  side,  "  Bring  water  for
his  feet  in  an  ewer."  But  the  king  reflected,  "  The  kindness
of  the  noble  is  a  fast  bond,  though  it  is  not  made  of  iron ;
with  good  reason  my  old  friend  Grahavarman,  devoted
to  all  merit,  often  described  his  virtues  to  me."  He
then  said  aloud,  "This  favour  which  you  shew  me  seems
superfluous  after  the  blessing  which  the  very  sight  of  you
confers ;  after  you  have  proved  your  kindness  by  welcoming
me  as  your  own  with  your  testing  eye,  the  labour  of  offering
me  a  seat  seems  only  to  make  me  a  stranger.  The  very
ground1  in  your  presence  is  too  high  a  station;  and  when
my  whole  body  has  been  sprinkled  with  ambrosia  by  the
gracious  address  of  a  saint  like  yourself,  [268]  water  for  the
feet,  which  deals  only  with  a  part2,  is  needless, — let  your
highness  sit  down, — I  am  seated  well  enough,"  so  saying  he
sat  down  on  the  ground.

The  seer  said  to  himself  "  The  courtesy  of  the  great  is
the  true  adornment, — gems  and  the  like  are  mere  stones," —
so,  when  the  king,  however  much  pressed,  would  not  consent,
he  resumed  his  old  seat.  Having  paused  awhile  with  his  heart
bound  fast  in  the  fetters  of  his  eyes,  which  were  fixed  on  the
monarch's  lotus-face,  he  thus  addressed  him,  seeming  to  wash
away  the  sin  of  the  Kali  age  by  the  bright  gleams  of  his

1  Read  with  the  Kashmir  text  atibhiimir  bhumir  eva.

2  Read  with  the  Kashmir  text  pradecavritti.


CHAPTER VIII.  239

•

teeth,  and  exhaling  as  it  were,  when  he  opened  his  lips,  a
bower  of  spicy  plants,  bright  with  a  mass  of  blossoming
flowers,  which  had  sprung  from  his  life-long  Vegetable  diet, —
"  From  to-day  this  world  of  ours,  displaying  its  essential
goodness,  is  not  merely  not  to  be  blamed,  it  is  positively  to
be  praised.  What  marvel  is  not  seen  by  mankind,  when  this
form  of  thine  appears  unexpectedly  to  our  view?  Such
heart-delights  help  us  to  infer  what  our  good  deeds  iu
former  lives  must  have  been.  Our  penances  have  given  us
their  fruit  even  in  this  life,  when  they  let  us  look  on  a
favourite  of  the  gods  whose  sight  is  so  hard  to  be  attained.
Our  eyes  are  satiated  with  ambrosia, — our  minds  desire
not  even  the  happiness  of  nirvana;  it  can  only  have  been
by  great  previous  merit  that  our  eyes  can  rest  on  such
a  paragon.  Happy  was  the  day  of  thy  birth !  Fortunate
was  thy  mother  who  bore  thee  who  givest  life  to  all  living
creatures.  Blessed  indeed  are  those  merits,  of  which  thou
art  the  fulfilment.  Preeminently  meritorious  are  those
atoms  which  make  up  the  total  of  thy  limbs.  Fortunate  is
that  good  fortune  which  has  visited  thee, — blessed  is  the
human  nature  which  is  thine.  For  verily,  though  I  have
been  longing  for  liberation,  the  sight  of  thee  has  made  me
once  more  believe  in  human  birth, — without  my  own  will  I
have  seen  Kama  himself.  The  eyes  of  the  wood-nymphs  have
to-day  won  their  desire ;  these  forest-trees  have  attained  the
end  of  their  being,  since  thou  hast  come  within  their  range.
Thou  art  all  ambrosia — thy  words  must  be  only  sweet.
[269]  But  ponder  as  I  may,  I  cannot  imagine  what  earthly
being  could  have  instructed  thee  in  courtesy,  when  thou  art
still  such  a  boy.  The  range  of  virtues  was  void  till  thou  wast
born.  Happy  is  the  king  in  whose  family  thou  hast  arisen
like  a  precious  pearl.  My  mind  is  bewildered  when  I  think
how  we  can  gratify  such  a  worthy  visitor  come  so  un-
expectedly. What  are  we  indeed,  who  share  a  diet  of  roots
and  fruits  and  a  drink  of  the  mountain-stream  with  every
forester  ?  But  this  wretched  body  of  ours  is  only  for
another's  service, — all  we  have  is  left  for  the  welcome  of
our  friends.  Our  few  drops  of  learning  are  at  our  own


240  THE HARSA-CARITA.

disposal,  but  our  friendship  cannot  hesitate  how  to  make
use  of  them.  If  it  does  not  hinder  some  moment  of  action1,
and  if  the  secret  can  be  openly  uttered,  be  pleased  to  make
it  known;  my  heart  is  all  eager  to  hear.  Under  what  burden
of  anxiety  have  you  come  into  this  inhospitable  place,  and
how  long  will  you  go  on  wearying  yourself  with  wandering
about  this  empty  wood  ?  why  is  your  body  thus  worn,  unfit
to  bear  such  hardships  < "

The  king  respectfully  replied,  "  Reverend  Sir,  you  have
performed  everything  by  your  zealous  words  which  ceaselessly
rain  forth  ambrosia-like  honey  to  gladden  my  heart, — I  am
indeed  fortunate  that  a  venerable  saint  should  thus  consider
an  insignificant  person  like  me  worthy  of  respect.  Be  pleased
to  learn  what  is  the  cause  of  my  being  fatigued  with
wandering  in  the  forest.  For  I  have  only  one  young  sister
left,  who  is  the  sole  link  that  keeps  up  my  life,  now  that  I
have  lost  all  my  loved  kindred.  Now  she,  while  wandering
fearful  of  outrage  from  her  enemies  in  consequence  of  the
loss  of  her  husband,  entered  the  thickets  of  this  Vindhya
forest,  swarming  with  hordes  of  vile  foresters  and  unnumbered
troops  of  elephants,  and  terrible  beyond  measure  with  its
lions  and  9arabhas,  [270]  and  having  its  paths  infested  by
huge  buffaloes,  and  impassable  with  sharp  spear-grass,  and
full  of  pits  everywhere.  Night  after  night  we  have  been
ceaselessly  exploring  the  wood  in  search  of  her,  but  we  have
not  found  her.  Be  pleased  to  tell  me  if  any  tidings  of  her
have  reached  your  ears  from  some  forester."

The  holy  man  made  answer  with  some  agitation,  "  No
tidings  of  this  nature  have  come  to  me ;  we  are  not  worthy
to  bring  to  your  highness  such  welcome  narrations."  But
while  he  was  thus  speaking,  a  mendicant  of  tranquil  age  sud-
denly came  up  in  bewilderment,  and  folding  his  hands  before
the  ascetic  spoke  in  a  compassionate  tone  with  his  eyes  full  of
tears,  "  O  my  lord,  it  is  indeed  a  sad  occurrence.  A  young
woman  overpowered  by  heavy  misfortune,  though  apparently
highly  prosperous  in  former  days,  in  helpless  despair  is  even
now  mounting  the  funeral  pile.  Consider  that  she  is  not  yet
1  Read  with  the  Kashmir  and  Calcutta  texts  kancit.


CHAPTER VIII.  241

•

dead, — come  to  her  aid  with  suitable  topics  of  consolation ;
even  a  poor  worm  in  pain  which  found  no  rest  has  often  ere
now  experienced  the  sage's  compassion."

Fearful  for  his  sister,  melting  within  with  grief  from  his
fraternal  affection,  and  having  his  heart  greatly  agitated,
speaking  with  difficulty  in  broken  accents,  with  his  voice
choked  and  his  eyes  full  of  tears,  the  king^nade  inquiry,  "  O
Mendicant,  how  far  off  is  the  woman  whom  you  describe  and
can  she  be  still  alive  ?  If  you  asked  who  she  was  or  to  whom
she  belonged  or  from  whence  she  came  or  why  she  entered
this  wood  or  why  she  mounted  into  the  fire, — I  want  to  know
in  full  what  she  answered  to  each  question,  and  how  she
came  into  your  sight  and  what  manner  of  person  she  was."

The  Mendicant  replied,  "  Listen,  noble  Sir.  I  had  offered
my  worship  in  the  early  morning  to  the  sun  and  I  was  wander-
ing on  and  on  by  the  soft  sand  of  this  river-bank.  [271]  In
a  bower  of  creepers  near  the  mountain-stream  I  heard  a  mono-
tonous mournful  bewildering  sound  of  women's  weeping  like
the  murmur  of  lute-strings1  in  a  very  loud  note,  or  the  hum
of  bees  distressed  at  a  sudden  frost  cutting  their  lotus-beds.
With  a  sudden  feeling  of  pity  I  turned  to  the  spot;  and
there  I  saw  a  woman  surrounded  by  a  troop  of  other  women,
whose  eyes  were  closed  with  the  sharp  pain  of  the  spear-
points  of  the  Ctara-grass  which  had  pierced  their  heels,  and
whose  feet  were  swollen  beyond  the  power  of  moving  by  the
fatigue  of  a  long  journey,  while  their  toes  were  bleeding  with
the  wounds  from  the  jagged  stones ;  who  had  birch-bark  tied
on  their  ankles  which  were  aching  with  the  wounds  from  stakes,
while  their  legs  were  fevered  and  lame  with  blisters,  and  their
calves  were  white  with  dust,  and  their  knees  were  torn  by
the  matted  fibres  of  the  date-palms,  and  their  thighs  were
wounded  by  the  Catavarl  shrubs;  their  silk  skirts  were
torn  by  the  Ftdar-i-plants,  their  jackets  rent  by  the  sharp
ends  of  the  bambu  branches ;  their  soft  hands  were  pierced
by  the  thorny  .Bacfor^-creepers  as  they  pulled  them  down  in
their  wish  to  gather  the  fruit,  their  arms  were  wearied
by  the  quantities  of  bulbs,  roots  and  fruits  which  they  had
1  The  Kashmir  text  and  the  Comm.  read  varnatantrinam.

c.  16


242  THE HARSA-CARITA.

<

dug  up  with  the  horns  of  the  deer;  they  chewed  the  soft
myrobalans  to  relieve  the  dryness  of  their  mouths  without
their  favourite  betel,  while  they  used  red  arsenic  as  an  oint-
ment for  their  eyes  which  were  swollen  and  bleeding  with  the
blows  of  the  flowers  of  the  Ku$a  grass,  and  their  curls  were
torn  by  the  thorny  creepers ;  some  used  boughs  as  umbrellas
against  the  sun,  ethers  held  plaintain-leaves  as  fans,  others
carried  water  in  the  hollow  of  a  lotus-leaf,  others  took  the
fibrous  lotus-roots  as  their  provisions,  others  carried  pine  oil1
in  cocoa-nuts  balanced  on  loops  made  of  strips  of  China  silk
hanging  from  a  yoke ;  while  the  rest  of  the  crowd  were  be-
wildered eunuchs2,  humpbacks,  dwarfs,  deaf,  barbarians,  (and
all  the  other  mis-shapen  guards  of  the  gynaeceum).  [272]  The
centre  figure  which  lay  prostrate  in  the  wood,  though  in  deep
misery,  was  still  clothed  in  the  grace  and  dignity  of  high
birth, — her  body  dyed3  by  the  reflected  boughs  of  the  creepers
near  by,  as  if  it  were  covered  with  the  freshly  bleeding
wounds  of  her  desperate  grief, — her  feet  red,  as  with  the  cus-
tomary lac,  through  the  blood  pouring  from  the  wounds  made
by  the  hard  spikes  of  Darbha  grass,  her  face  pale  though
shaded  by  a  lotus-leaf  which  one  of  the  women  held  up  by
its  stalk, — seeming  to  be  more  empty  than  the  desolate
ether, — made  as  of  earth  in  her  insensibleness,  made  as  of
air  in  her  incessant  sighing,  made  as  of  fire  in  her  constant
fever,  made  as  of  water  in  her  streaming  outflow  of  tears, —
like  the  sky  in  her  want  of  all  support,  like  the  lightning  in
her  tremulousness,  like  sound  in  her  ceaseless  wailing,  like
the  kalpa  tree  of  paradise4,  dropping  off  her  silken  garments,
jewels,  flowers,  gold,  and  painted  decorations.  She  lay  on
the  ground  like  Ganges  after  her  descent,  while  her  limbs
still  shewed  their  insolent  power  ready  to  humble  imperial
heads  (as  Ganges  trampled  on  Qiva's  head  when  she  fell
upon  it) ;  her  feet5  were  grey  with  the  pollen  of  the  wood-

1  Saralatailena  Kashm.  and  MS.  A.

2  Read  -golcamkalaka.lamv.1ca-.

3  Read  -patallkriyamana-  (A  -pdtal'ikrita-}.

4  The  Kalpa  tree  dropped  everything  which  its  votary  desired. Cf.
p.  73,  1.  9. Note  puns  in  Comm.  in  mukta  and  vana.

6  With  a  pun  in  pada  which  also  means  '  rays.'


CHAPTER  VIII.  243

•

flowers,  and  she  herself  longing  for  another  world  like  the
paling  moon  of  early  morning, — her  long  bright  eyes  dimmed
with  the  outflow  of  tears,  and  she  herself  facfing  like  a  lotus-
bed  of  the  Mandakim, — passing  a  weary  time  like  a  bed  of
night  water-lilies  withering  beneath  the  fierce  rays  of  the  sun;
pale  and  thin  like  the  flame  of  a  lamp  at  morning,  deceived  by
its  exhausted  wick1;  like  a  female  elephanl^  plunged  in  a  lake
and  only  rescued  by  the  care  of  her  companions, — lost  in  the
forest  and  in  thought,  [273]  bent  upon  death  and  the  root  of
a  tree,  fallen  into  calamity  and  on  her  nurse's  bosom,  parted
from  her  husband  and  happiness,  exhausted  by  wandering
and  emptied  of  her  youth,  bewildered  in  her  dishevelled  locks
and  in  pondering  how  to  end  her  life,  pale  with  the  dust  of
the  road  and  the  pains  of  her  limbs,  burned  with  the  fierce
sunshine  and  the  woes  of  widowhood,  her  mouth  closed  with
silence  as  well  as  by  her  hand,  and  held  fast  by  her  com-
panions as  well  as  by  grief.  I  saw  her  with  her  kindred  and
her  graces  all  gone,  her  ears  and  her  soul  left  bare,  her
ornaments  and  her  aims  abandoned,  her  bracelets  and  her
hopes  broken,  her  companions  and  the  needle-like  grass-
spears  clinging  round  her  feet,  her  eye  and  her  beloved  fixed
within  her  bosom,  her  sighs  and  her  hair  long,  her  limbs  and
her  merits  exhausted,  her  aged  attendants  and  her  streaming
tears  falling  down  at  her  feet,  her  band  of  followers  and  her
life  reduced  to  a  scanty  remnant, — languid  in  opening  her
eyes,  ready  only  to  shed  tears,  continuous  in  anxieties,  broken
short  in  hopes,  wasted  in  her  body,  thick  in  her  sighs,  filled
with  misery,  emptied  of  courage,  dominated  by  fatigue,
deserted  by  her  heart,  immovable  in  her  purpose  but  shaken
from  her  self-command, — herself  the  home  of  calamities,  the
receptacle  of  cares,  the  abode  of  ever  varying  conditions,  the
fixed  site  of  want  of  fixity,  the  seat  of  fainting  fits,  the  centre
of  calamities,  the  goal  of  misfortunes,  the  very  dismay  of
dismays,  the  special  object  of  pity,  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  help-
lessness. As  I  saw  her,  I  reflected,  '  Strange  !  do  calamities
assail  even  such  a  form  as  this  ?'  But  even  in  that  destitute
condition  she  bowed  her  head  respectfully  as  I  came  up.  I

1  Daca,  also  means  '  state.'

16—2


244  THE HARSA-CARITA.

thought  to  myself,  as,  in  my  great  compassion  I  wished  to  •
speak  to  her,  '  How  shall  I  venture  to  address  such  a  noble
lady?  If  I  call  her  'my  child'  it  will  be  too  affectionate,
'mother'  will  be  too  flattering,  'sister'  will  be  giving  myself
too  much  honour,  'your  majesty'  would  be  the  address  of
her  attendant,  [274]  'princess'  will  be  too  general,  'lay
sister '  will  be  orn^v  my  hope,  '  mistress '  will  be  to  accept  the
position  of  her  slave,  'lady'  would  be  suitable  for  other
women,  'long-lived  one'  would  be  cruelty  in  the  circum-
stances, '  fortunate  one '  would  be  mockery  in  her  present
plight,  '  moonfaced '  would  be  an  improper  idea  for  a  muni,
'  girl '  would  be  disrespectful,  '  venerable '  would  too  much
imply  old  age,  '  holy '  would  not  be  borne  out  by  the  fortune
which  has  befallen  her1,  '  madam '  would  be  too  applicable  to
everybody.  Moreover,  '  who  art  thou  ?'  would  be  rude,  'why
dost  thou  weep  ?'  would  remind  her  of  the  cause  of  her  grief,
'  weep  not '  is  not  to  be  said  unless  one  can  remove  the  cause
of  her  tears,  'be  consoled'  has  no  foundation  to  rest  on,
'welcome'  is  flat  and  stale;  'are  you  well?'  is  false.

"While  I  was  thus  reflecting,  a  woman  of  venerable  aspect
but  overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  came  out  from  that  crowd  of
women,  and  laying  her  partially  grey  head  on  the  ground,
scalded  my  feet  with  her  tears  which  expressed  the  vehement
emotion  of  her  bosom,  and  my  heart  with  her  mournful
words.  '  Holy  father,  the  nature  of  a  religious  mendicant
is  always  compassionate  for  all  beings ;  and  the  Buddhists
are  skilled  in  the  self-devotion  of  relieving  every  sorrow,
and  the  doctrine  of  Qakyamum  is  the  family-home  of  pity,
and  the  Jaina  saintship  is  ever  ready  to  help  everybody,
and  the  religion  of  the  Munis  is  a  means  to  attain  the
next  world,  and  no  higher  kind  of  merit  is  known  in
this  world  than  saving  life.  Young  women  are  naturally
the  objects  of  compassion, — still  more  so  when  they  are
overwhelmed  in  misfortune ;  and  the  good  are  the  '  happy
land'  of  the  mourners.  This  our  mistress,  being  helpless
through  the  death  of  her  father,  the  loss  of  her  husband,
the  absence  of  her  brother,  and  the  disappearance  of  all
her  other  relatives,  in  her  excessive  tenderness  of  heart
1  Cf.  Acts  xxviii.  4.


CHAPTER  VIII.  245

•

and  childless  desolation,  naturally  wise  but  overwhelmed  by
the  cruel  insults  of  her  base  foes — her  delicate  nature
tortured  by  her  weary  wandering  in  the  forest  and  her  heart
bewildered  by  these  continually  fresh  calamities  inflicted  by
accursed  fortune,  [275] — unable  to  bear  her  dreadful  misery
any  longer, — rejecting  her  older  friends  as  they  tried  to
hinder  her,  whom  she  had  never  gone  contrary  to  before  even
in  her  dreams, — and  despising  the  friends  of  her  youth  who
tried  to  reason  with  her  and  whose  love  had  never  known  a
break  even  in  play, — and  spurning  away  her  attendants  who,
helplessly  weeping,  tried  to  dissuade  her  and  whose  words
she  had  never  before  scorned  even  in  thought, — she  is  now
entering  into  the  fire.  O  save  her!  Even  a  saint  like
thyself  may  employ  in  her  case  those  words  of  thine  skilled
in  such  counsels  as  can  remove  even  unendurable  sorrow.'
As  she  spoke  these  mournful  utterances,  I  raised  her  up  and
still  more  distressed  myself  gently  addressed  her, '  Madam,  it
is  as  you  say.  This  noble  lady's  grief  is  however  beyond  the
reach  of  my  words ;  but  your  request  will  not  be  in  vain,  if  we
can  save  her  but  for  a  moment.  My  own  teacher  is  near
at  hand,  who  is  like  another  holy  Buddha.  When  I  tell
him  this  occurrence,  he  will  certainly  come,  boundlessly  com-
passionate as  he  is.  He  will  guide  our  pious  sister  into  the
path  of  wisdom  by  the  good  words  of  Sugata  which  pierce
the  mists  of  sorrow,  and  by  his  own  wise  counsels,  illustrated
with  apt  examples  and  weighty  with  various  sacred  texts.'
When  she  heard  this,  she  fell  again  at  my  feet,  urging  me  to
make  haste.  So  I  have  come  in  haste,  announcing  to  my
teacher  this  startling  and  mournful  occurrence,  which
threatens  death  to  so  many  helpless  young  women."

The  king  at  once  understood  the  mendicant's  agitated
words,  which  were  interrupted  by  his  tears,  even  though  his
sister's  name  had  not  been  mentioned;  and  with  his  mind
oppressed  by  grief,  and  with  all  uncertainty  dissipated  by
the  reflection  that  her  condition  so  exactly  agreed  with  every
circumstance  told  about  her,  and  with  his  ears  burning  at
the  tidings,  said  to  the  chief  mendicant,  "  Holy  Sir,  this  is
indeed  my  poor  sister, — base,  hard-hearted,  cruel  and  un-


246  THE HA&5A-CAU1TA.

<

fortunate  as  I  am,  I  have  left  her  to  fall  into  this  condition
through  pitiless  undeserved  misfortunes, — my  torn  heart  only
too  surely  tells  rhe  so."  [276]  Then  he  turned  to  the  inferior
mendicant  and  said,  "  Rise  up,  holy  sir,  shew  me  where  she
is ;  make  haste1,  we  will  go  at  once  to  win  the  merit  of
saving  these  many  lives,  if  by  any  means  we  can  imagine  her

to  be  still  alive,"  and  as  he  uttered  the  words  he  himself

c
sprang  up.

Followed  by  the  holy  man  who  was  attended  by  all  his
disciples,  and  followed  by  all  his  tributary  kings  who  had
alighted  from  their  horses,  which  they  led  after  them,  the
king  made  the  Buddhist  disciple  go  in  front  to  shew  the  road,
and  went  on  foot  after  him,  seeming  to  devour  the  way  with
his  rapid  strides.  As  he  drew  near,  he  heard  from  between
the  trees  various  utterances  such  as  suited  the  emergency
from  that  crowd  of  women  all  anxious  to  die,  "  O  holy  Yama,
come  quickly, — where  art  thou,  O  goddess  of  our  family, — O
divine  Earth,  dost  thou  not  support2  thy  wretched  daughter  ?
— whither  is  Laksmi  gone,  the  matron  of  3Puspabhuti's
house  ?  O  lord  of  the  Mukhara  family4,  why  dost  thou  not
restore  to  consciousness  this  thy  widowed  wife,  distracted
with  her  various  griefs  ?  0  holy  Sugata,  thou  art  asleep  to
thy  distracted  worshippers.  O  Royal  Duty,  ever  fostering
the  house  of  Puspabhuti,  why  art  thou  become  so  indifferent  ?
I  raise  my  hands  in  fruitless  supplication  to  thee  also,  O
Vindhya,  thou  friend  in  calamity!  O  Mother  forest,  dost
thou  not  hear  the  cries  of  this  distressed  daughter  ?  O  Sun,
save  this  devoted  wife,  helpless  in  her  misery.  0  thou,
saved  with  difficulty,  ungrateful  Honour,  thou  utter  bar-
barian in  conduct,  dost  thou  not  save  the  princess  ?  what  have
her  royal  marks  secured  for  her  ?  O  queen  Ya9ovati,  devoted
to  thy  daughter,  thou  hast  been  carried  off  by  the  robber  fate  !
O  king  Pratapaclla,  dost  thou  not  fly  to  rescue  thy  daughter
from  the  flames  ?  thy  paternal  love  is  indeed  weak.  O  king
Rajyavardhana,  dost  thou  not  hasten  ?  thy  love  for  thy  sister

1  The  Kashmir  text  and  A  read  yatasva.  2  Dharayasi  A.

3  An  ancestor  of  Qri  Harsa,  see  ch.  iii.

4  Raja9ri's  slain  husband  was  Grahavarman  of  the  Mukhara  family.


CHAPTER  VIII.  247

•

is  indeed  cold,  the  world  of  the  dead  is  indeed  deaf  to  pity !
Away  O  fire,  art  thou  cruel  enough  to  kill  a  woman?  art
thou  not  ashamed  of  thy  blaze?  O  brother. wind,  I  am  thy
suppliant, — hasten  to  tell  the  king  Harsa  that  the  princess
is  burning,  he  is  the  consoler  of  all  who  are  in  trouble.  O
pitiless  barbarian,  Sorrow,  thou  hast  thy  desire !  [277]  O
demon  Separation,  thou  mayest  well  be  content!  In  this
lonely  wood,  whom  shall  I  call  ?  to  whom* shall  I  speak  ?  to
whom  fly  for  refuge  ?  to  which  direction  shall  I  turn  ?  what
shall  I  do  in  my  forlornness  ?  O  Gandhari1,  this  bundle  of
creepers  is  mine.  O  savage  Mocanika,  cease  that  quarrelling
over  the  gathering  of  boughs.  O  Kalahamsl,  why  do  you
still  smite  your  head  ?  O  Maiigalika,  why  do  you  still  weep
so  passionately?  O  Sundari,  your  companions  are  all  far
away.  O  Qabarika,  how  will  you  stay  in  this  horrible  camp
of  corpses  ?  O  Sutanu,  will  you  too  go  into  the  fire  ?  O
Malavatl  tender  as  a  lotus-fibre,  you  are  fainting.  O  mother,
Matangika,  have  you  too  accepted  death !  O  dear  Vatsika,
how  will  you  dwell  in  the  hated  city  of  the  dead  ?  O
Nagarika,  you  have  gained  glory  by  this  loyalty  to  your
mistress !  O  Virajika,  you  are  made  famous  by  your  resolu-
tion to  die  in  your  mistress'  calamity!  O  pitcher-bearer,
you  are  happy  in  knowing  how  to  face  the  fall  from  a
precipice !  O  Ketaki,  how  will  you  ever  find  again  such  a
mistress  even  in  dream  ?  O  Menaka,  may  the  God  Fire,
when  he  burns  your  body,  give  you  a  service  under  the
princess  in  every  successive  birth !  O  Vijaya,  fan  the  fire !
O  SanumatP,  Indivarika  bows  her  farewell,  longing  to  go
to  heaven !  O  KamadasI,  give  me  room  to  circumambulate
the  pile  !  O  Vicarika,  make  the  fire !  O  Kiratika,  strew  a
heap  of  flowers!  O  Kurarika,  cover  the  pile  with  Kuru-
vaka  buds !  O  chourie-bearer,  clasp  my  neck  for  the  last
time3 !  O  N  armada,  you  must  forgive  my  excessive
bursts  of  laughter  provoked  by  our  jests !  O  Subhadra,
may  your  journey  to  another  world  be  fortunate !  O

1  These  are  the  names  of  various  attendants  who  are  preparing  to
enter  the  funeral  pile  with  their  mistress.

2  Or '  on  the  mountain.' 3  The  MSS.  read  caramam  for  cdmaram.


248  THE HARSA-CARITA.

Grameyika,  who  lovest  the  virtues  of  the  noble,  may  you  rise
to  a  happy  birth  !  O  Vasantika,  make  room  !  0  queen,  thy
umbrella-bearer,  bids  thee  farewell, — give  me  a  last  look  !
Your  beloved  Vijayasena  abandons  life !  Muktika,  the
manager  of  your  dramas,  wails  aloud  near  you !  Patralata,
your  loved  betel-bearer,  O  princess,  falls  at  your  feet !  O
Kalingasena,  [278]  this  is  our  last  embrace,  press  me  tightly
to  your  bosom !  O  Vasantasena,  my  life  is  departing !  0
Manjulika,  how  often  do  you  wipe  these  eyes  dimmed  with
a  thousand  tears  of  intolerable  sorrow,  and  how  long  do  you
weep  while  you  embrace  me  ?  Created  existence  is  always
like  this,  O  Ya9odhana !  O  Madhavika,  why  do  you  still
hold  me  fast  ?  Is  this  a  situation  for  consolations  ?  The
time  is  past,  O  Kalindi,  for  reverential  salutations  to  your
companions  !  0  distracted  Mattapalika,  it  is  a  useless  waste
of  time  to  fall  humbly  at  the  feet  of  your  beloved  ones !  0
Cakoravati,  loosen  thy  hold  of  my  feet,  passionate  one !  O
Kamalinl,  why  these  repeated  reproaches  against  fate  ?  The
happiness  of  union  with  our  friends  is  over  only  too  soon !
Farewell,  O  revered  chamberlain  Tarangasena !  O  dear
Saudamini,  I  have  at  least  seen  you !  O  Kumudika,  bring
the  flowers  with  which  to  worship  the  fire  !  O  Rohim,  give
me  your  hand  to  support  me  as  I  climb  the  pyre !  O  mother
nurse,  be  firm ;  verily  such  is  the  retribution  of  those  who
have  sinned !  I  give  my  last  salutation  to  your  honoured
feet !  O  mother,  this  is  my  last  bow  of  farewell  as  I  depart
to  the  next  world ! — O  Laval  ika1,  at  the  time  of  death  why
is  there  this  joyful  shouting  in  my  heart !  with  what  fore-
boding do  my  limbs  bristle  and  thrill  with  delight  ?  O
Vamanika,  my  left  eye  throbs !  In  vain,  O  friendly  crow,  do
you  keep  alighting  on  a  milky  tree2  in  front  of  me  born  to
ill-fortune !  O  Harini,  I  hear  to  the  north  the  neighing  of
horses !  O  Prabhavatl,  whose  is  this  lofty  umbrella  which  I
see  between  the  trees  ?  O  Kurangika,  who  is  it  that  has

1  This  sudden  change  from  sorrow  to  joy  implies  Qri  Harsa's  ap-
proach.

2  This  seems  to  be  a  good  omen — a  crow  seen  on  one's  right  hand
is  a  good  omen  in  the  Bengal!  poem  '  Candi.'


CHAPTER  VIII.  249

•

uttered  ray  lord's  auspicious  name  ?  O  queen,  thou  art
indeed  happy  in  the  joy  of  the  coming  of  King  Harsa !"
As  he  heard  these  various  voices,  the  iing  hurried  up
and  saw  Rajyagii  fainting  as  she  prepared  to  enter  the
funeral  pile,  and  full  of  agitation,  he  pressed  her  forehead
with  his  hand  as  she  lay  with  her  eyes  closed  in  her  swoon.
[279]  At  that  reviving  touch  of  her  dear  brother's  hand  which
seemed  to  diffuse  a  life-restoring  power  alfe  if  healing  plants
were  fastened  to  his  arm,  and  to  drop  a  mysterious  influence
as  of  amulets  in  his  bracelets,  and  to  rain  ambrosia  from  the
moonbeams  of  his  nails,  and  to  bind  on  her  forehead  a  moon-
gem  crest  which  dropped  a  cool  dew  like  that  which  falls
when  the  moon  rises,  and  to  calm  her  fevered  heart  with  his
fingers  cold  like  lotus-fibres  and  to  bring  back  her  wandering
life,  Rajyagri  instantly  opened  her  eyes.  Clasping  the  neck
of  her  brother  thus  unexpectedly  restored  to  her  as  if  seen
in  a  dream,  and  pouring  forth  a  flood  of  tears  from  her  eyes
which  were  like  the  channels  of  two  rivers,  with  the  stored
reservoir  of  grief  overpowering  all  her  soul  and  bursting  out
violently  at  his  sudden  appearance, — she  cried  out,  "O  father,
O  mother,  0  friends."  Meanwhile  her  brother,  as  he  tried  to
comfort  her,  covered  her  mouth  with  his  hands,  and  kept
calling  out  in  a  loud  voice  through  the  agitation  caused  by  his
fraternal  affection,  "  O  my  child,  be  firm," — and  the  holy
teacher  exhorted  her  to  obey  the  words  of  her  elder  brother,
and  the  courtiers  implored  her,  "  Dost  thou  not  see,  O  queen,
the  condition  of  the  king?  cease  now  to  weep!"  Her
attendants  said  to  her,  "  0  Mistress,  have  pity  on  thy
brother,"  and  her  aged  relations  restrained  her, "  O  daughter,
cease  for  the  present  and  weep  again  at  some  future  time,"
and  her  young  friends  counselled  her,  "Dear  friend,  how
long  will  you  weep  ?  be  silent,  you  greatly  pain  the  king."
Though  surrounded  by  all  these  various  comforters,  the
princess  wept  violently  for  a  long  time  with  a  loud  out-
burst of  grief,  her  throat  choked  by  the  tears  which  broke
forth  to  shew  the  pressure  of  the  griefs  which  she  had  so
long  pondered  over,  and  her  soul  filled  with  the  weight  of
her  distress ;  but  when  the  first  vehemence  of  her  emotion


250  THE HARSA-CARITA.

was  spent  she  allowed  her  brother  to  lead  her  away  from
the  fire  and  sat  down  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  near  by.  [280.]

The  holy  teaoher,  having  slowly  recognised  that  it  was
Harsa  himself,  felt  a  still  deeper  feeling  of  reverence,  and,
after  a  short  pause,  made  a  secret  sign  to  his  disciple,  and,
the  latter  having  brought  some  water,  he  himself  presented
it  to  the  king  in  some  lotus  leaves  that  he  might  wash
his  face.  The  kiAg  also,  having  respectfully  accepted  it,
first  washed  his  sister's  eyes  which  were  flushed  from  her
continued  weeping  and  seemed  like  a  red  lotus  sprung1  from
her  long  flow  of  tears,  and  then  washed  his  own.  When
the  king  had  washed  his  face  all  the  spectators  stood  silent
as  if  painted,  and  then  he  turned  and  spoke  gently  to
his  sister,  "  My  child,  salute  this  holy  man.  He  was  your
husband's  second  heart  and  is  our  guru."  At  his  words  the
princess  made  her  obeisance,  while  tears  again  filled  her  eyes
at  the  sudden  shock  of  the  news  that  he  had  known  her
husband ;  and  the  holy  man,  who  felt  that  his  stoical
calmness  was  threatened  by  the  tears  which  gathered  in  his
own  eyes  and  could  only  be  kept  back  by  an  effort,  turned
away  his  eyes  for  a  while  and  heaved  a  long  sigh.  After
standing  still  for  a  time,  he  tenderly  spoke  in  a  gentle  voice,
"  O  virtuous  monarch,  you  have  wept  long  enough,  and
your  royal  attendants  have  not  even  yet  ceased  their  weep-
ing,— let  the  due  rites  of  ablution  be  performed, — when  all
have  bathed,  it  will  be  well  for  us  to  return  home."

Then  the  king,  in  compliance  with  right  custom  and  the
teacher's  words,  rose  and  bathed  in  the  mountain  stream,
and  proceeded  to  that  place  with  his  sister.  There  he
devotedly  waited  upon  her  in  her  sorrow  and  made  her  and
her  attendants  partake  of  the  food  prepared  for  the  funeral
offerings  in  honour  of  her  husband ;  and  then  afterwards  ate
of  them  himself.  Then  he  heard  from  the  attendants  the
full  story  of  his  sister's  misfortunes  from  her  imprisonment
onward, — how  she  was  sent  away  from  Kanyakubja,  from  her
confinement  there  during  the  Gauda  trouble*,  through  the

1  The  MSS.  readjatam  forjdlam.

2  A.  reads  Gaudasambhramaguptito,  B.  -sambhrame-.


CHAPTER  VIII.  251

•

action  of  a  noble  named  Gupta1, — how  she  heard  the  news
of  Rajyavardhana's  death,  and  refused  to  take  food,  and  then
how,  faint  for  want  of  food,  she  wandered  dmiserably  in  the
Vindhya  forests  and  at  last  in  her  despair  resolved  to  mount
the  funeral  pile.  [281]  Then  the  teacher  came  to  the  king,
as  he  was  sitting  quietly  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  with  his  sister
in  a  lonely  place  away  from  all  their  attendants, — at  first  he
sat  down  and  waited ;  and  then  little*  by  little  he  thus
addressed  him,  "  My  lord,  listen, — I  have  something  to  say  to
you.  Yonder  ear-ring  of  night,  the  inconstant  Moon,  in  his
pride  of  youth  despised  all  his  many  wives,  however  radiant
in  their  youthful  bloom,  and  carried  off  Tara  the  wife  of
Brihaspati  the  priest  of  Indra,  wishing  to  make  her  his  own
wife,  and  fled  from  heaven,  and  wandered  about  in  many
pleasant  places  with  her  whose  eyes  were  as  beautiful  as
those  of  the  timid  partridge  and  who  was  lovely  in  every
limb,  and  responded  to  his  love2.  But  at  last  through  respect
for  the  words  of  all  the  gods  he  restored  her  to  her  husband,
the  lord  of  speech, — still  in  his  heart  he  was  continually
burned,  though  without  fuel,  by  the  fire  of  absence  from  her.
"  One  day,  as  he  was  rising  from  the  Eastern  mountain,  he
beheld  his  own  reflection  in  the  pure  water  of  the  ocean,
and  as  he  gazed  he  fondly  remembered  Tara's  smiling
face,  and,  stirred  with  passion,  even  though  in  heaven,  he
dropped  big  tears  from  his  eyes,  which  were  as  bright  as
if  they  had  drunk  up  the  radiance  of  all  the  lotuses.  The
pearl-oysters  swallowed  all  these  tears  as  they  fell  into  the  sea.
When  they  had  become  pearls  in  the  bellies  of  the  oysters,
the  King  of  the  snakes,  Vasuki,  dwelling  in  hell,  somehpw
became  possessed  of  them ;  and  he  made  of  them  a  single
wreath  which  shone  even  in  hell  like  a  cluster  of  stars ;  and
he  called  it  Mandakini.  By  the  power  of  the  holy  Soma3,
the  lord  of  all  plants,  it  became  an  antidote  against  all
poisons,  and  in  consequence  of  its  having  been  produced
from  the  moon  which  is  the  ever- cool  fountain  of  ambrosia,
its  touch  relieves  the  pain  of  all  creatures.  Vasuki  therefore

1  See  supr.  pp.  178,  224.  2  Abhikamaya,  A.

3  The  Moon.


252  THE  HARSA-CARITA.

»

always  carried  it  about  with  him  to  soothe  the  burning  heat
of  poison  [282].

"As  time  passed  on,  one  day  a  mendicant  named  Nagarjuna
was  brought  to  hell  by  the  nagas;  he  begged  it  from  the  snake-
king  as  a  gift  and  received  it.  When  he  went  out  of  hell,  he
gave  it  to  a  king,  his  friend,  Satavahana,  the  lord  of  the  three
oceans1;  and  in  course  of  time  it  came  into  our  hands  by  the
regular  succession  bf  pupil-hood.  Although  to  offer  a  present
to  one  so  exalted  as  yourself  is  almost  an  insult,  still  I  pray
you  to  deign  to  accept  it  in  consideration  of  its  potency
against  poison,  since  you  know  the  virtues  of  medicines,  and,
as  you  are  ever  engaged  in  helping  all  living  beings,  your
life  well  deserves  to  be  guarded."  So  saying  he  uncovered
the  pearl-wreath  Mandakim,  which  was  wrapped  up  in  the
skirt  of  the  mendicant  who  was  standing  near  by.

When  the  pure  bright  mass  of  rays  suddenly  gleamed  forth
as  the  jewel  was  unveiled,  illumining  the  different  quarters
of  space,  it  was  as  if  the  trees  burst  out  from  their  very
roots  as  longing  for  their  twining  creepers  to  bud2, — as  if
troops  of  wild  geese  in  the  lakes  hurried  as  it  were  eager  for
new  lotus  roots,  making  the  sky  white  with  their  flapping
wings, — as  if  orchards  of  Ketakl-trees  blossomed,  white  with
the  pollen  as  the  clusters  burst  open  through  their  weight,
and  bright  with  the  needle-like  anthers3  made  visible  by  the
opening  of  the  calyx, — the  lotuses  seemed  to  awake,  rough
with  their  unfolding  leaves, — the  lions  moved  about,  seeming
as  if  they  filled  the  horizon  with  their  tossing  light-coloured
manes — the  wood-nymphs  smiled,  as  though  besprinkling
the  forest-glades  with  the  flashing  of  their  teeth, — thickets
of  Ka9a  grass  blossomed,  as  though  laughing  openly  with
their  filaments  bursting  out  of  their  buds, — herds  of
yaks  roamed  about,  looking  white  as  they  waved  their
bushy  tails, — the  mountain  streams  seemed  to  dash  along,
rolling  their  waves  which  swelled  and  foamed  and  danced —


1  He  therefore  ruled  Jambudvlpa,  Plaksadvlpa  and  Calmalidvlpa.

2  Lit.  'budding  creeper-brides'.

3  Or  is  it  '  the  sharp  long  leaves '  ?


CHAPTER VIII.  253

»

the  full  moon  seemed  to  rise  as  though  rejoicing  in  gaining
a  new  set  of  stars,  as  its  circle  of  spreading  rays  filled  the
different  quarters  of  the  sky, — the  day  setftned  to  be  made
clean  though  its  horizon  had  been  grey  with  the  ashes  of  the
forest-fires,  and  the  faces  of  the  women  soiled  with  tears
were  as  it  were  washed  once  more  [283].

The  king,  after  repeatedly  opening  and  closing  his  eyes
which  were  dazzled  by  the  mass  of  rays  in  front  of  him,  at
last  with  a  great  effort  beheld  the  wreath  filling  all  the
quarters  of  the  heavens  as  if  it  were  the  collected  spouting
of  all  the  elephants  of  the  sky,  or  the  cloudless1  autumn
moonlight  drawn  in  lines  there,  or  the  path  of  the  new
moon's  motion  with  its  steps  clearly  traced,  or  the  wreath
of  the  seven  rishis  dropped  motionless  from  their  hands2,
or  a  digit  of  the  moon  in  the  North-east  quarter,  eclipsing
the  splendour  of  all  the  ornaments  in  the  world3,  or  beauty
embodied  with  its  quality  of  whiteness  in  perfection,  risen
from  the  milky  ocean,  or  Ganges,  which  takes  away  all
misery,  come  down  to  the  successive  mountains  of  our  earth,
or  a  banner  of  silk  ceaselessly  fluttering  which  announces
the  coming  of  embodied  Imperial  power,  or  the  teeth  of
Qiva  seen  directly  in  front,  white  like  camphor,  or  Laksmi's
garland  which  she  gave  at  her  svayamvara,  fulfilling  her
bridegroom's  desires,  or  the  joyous  smile  of  the  goddess  of
Earth4  hardly  visible  beneath  her  concealing  hand,  or  the
rosary  of  personified  Royal  Duty,  intent  on  its  three  great
objects,  counsel,  treasure  and  an  army,  or  the  tablet  in-
scribed with  the  catalogue  of  Kuvera's  treasures,  ornamented
with  his  own  seal5.  As  he  gazed,  he  was  filled  for  a  long
time  with  astonishment.

Then  the  teacher,  taking  it  up,  bound  it  on  the  king's
noble  shoulder,  and  the  king,  shewing  his  pleasure,  thus

1  Or — punningly — 'having  great  pearls'.

2  Or — punningly — 'without  the  constellation  hasta\

3  Or — punningly — 'eclipsing  the  ashes  worn  by  Civa  the  ornament
of  the  whole  world '.

4  The  Kashmir  text  and  MS.  A  have  sudhaydh  for  vasudhdyah.
6  Samudra  may  punningly  refer  to  the  sea.


254  THE HARSA.-CARITA.

<

addressed  him,  "Reverend  Sir,  men  are  unworthy  of  such
gifts.  This  is  all  the  result  of  your  ascetic  observances  or
the  special  favoiVr  of  the  gods.  [284]  Who  are  we,  even  to
have  control  over  our  own  selves, — still  less  to  presume  to
accept  or  reject  your  gifts  ?  Ever  since  I  beheld  you  I  have
been  devoted  to  you,  with  my  heart  captivated  by  your
preeminent  virtues.  This  body  of  mine  is  placed  unreservedly
at  your  disposal  till  death.  You  are  now  absolutely  free  to
do  with  it  what  you  please."

After  a  while,  when  the  courtiers  had  discussed  the
beauty  of  the  wreath,  Rajya9ri,  having  gained  courage,
called  her  betel-bearer  Patralata  and  whispered  something
in  her  ear ;  and  the  latter  turned  respectfully  to  the  King
and  said,  "  Sire,  the  queen  bids  me  say  that  she  never
remembers  to  have  uttered  before  a  loud  remark  in  your
highness'  presence,  far  less  a  command ;  but  this  outrageous
tyranny  of  sorrows  makes  her  speak,  and  this  sad  plight
brought  about  by  evil  fate  makes  her  forget  her  due  respect1.
A  husband  or  a  son  is  a  woman's  true  support ;  but  to  those
who  are  deprived  of  both,  it  is  immodesty  even  to  continue  to
live,  as  mere  fuel  for  the  fire  of  misery.  Your  highness'
coming  stopped  my  resolution  to  die,  even  on  the  point  of
accomplishment;  let  me  therefore  in  my  misfortunes  be
allowed  to  assume  the  red  robe."  The  king  heard  her  and
remained  silent  for  a  time.

Then  the  teacher  spoke  gravely,  "0  lady,  verily  sorrow  is
a  synonym  for  '  demon/  another  form  of  epilepsy,  the  heyday
of  darkness,  a  peculiar  kind  of  poison,  an  undying2  King  of
the  city  of  the  dead ;  it  is  a  flame  which  has  no  nirvana,  a
consumption  which  never  ends ;  a  Janardana3  where  no
Laksmi  dwells,  a  mendicant4  who  has  nothing  to  do  with
holiness,  a  destroyer  of  sleep,  yet  without  wisdom8,  [285]  a

1  MSS.  A  and  B  read  iyam  hi  pucam  asahyatd  vyaharayati  hata-
daivadattd  ca  dafil  githilayati  vinayam,  which  we  adopt. But  we  might
read  -ddegdn  in  the  Bombay  text  as  governed  by  vyapdrayantl.

2  Or  "  other  than  Yama."

3  A  name  of  Krisna  as  '  agitating  mankind.' Every  epithet  in
this  speech  is  susceptible  of  two  or  more  meanings.

4  Or  "  a  destroyer."  6  Or  "  a  kind  of  sleep  with  no  waking."


CHAPTER  VIII.  255

•

very  crisis  of  fever  like  fire1,  a  Vinayaka2  who  is  no  attendant
of  Qiva,  a  host  of  evil  planets  with  no  Mercury  in  their  rear,
a  flame  with  nothing  auspicious  in  it3,  an  outburst  of  madness
from  love,  a  fire  rising  out  of  the  mind4,  a  fury  of  passion  out
of  a  tender  heart3,  parching  out  of  softness,  utter  gloom  out
of  affection6.  This  wound  of  the  heart  ever  running  with
tears7,  this  thief  of  life,  stealing  in  under  the  long  dark
night8,  this  cause  of  chaos,  overpowering  all  beings9,  this  lord
of  misrule  skilled  in  destroying  all  bodies,  this  lingering
sickness  ruthless  with  wasting,  sighing,  and  delirium,  this
evil  constellation,  foreboding  destruction  to  all  the  world,  this
thunderbolt  not  produced  from  the  clouds,  life-destroying
and  with  a  long-lasting  flash10, — even  all  the  hearts  of  the
wise  cannot  stand  against  it,  though  illumined  by  all  the
lightning-flashes  of  perfect  knowledge  and  profound  in
grasping  all  the  secret  meanings  hidden  in  deep  books,  [286]
ripe  with  the  lore  of  many  poems,  laden  with  the  weight  of
many  castras, — far  less  the  hearts  of  women  tender  like  the
flowers  of  the  new  jasmine,  and  weak  like  the  fibres  of  the
juicy  lotus  stalk.

"  Say  therefore,  O  faithful  to  thy  vow,  what  is  it  that  thou
art  doing,  who  is  reproached,  to  whom  art  thou  wailing  thus
loudly,  and  telling  thy  heart-consuming  sorrow?  We  mortals
must  bear  everything,  closing  our  eyes,  without  bewilderment.
O  holy  lady,  these  ancient  ordinances, — who  can  alter  them  ?
The  long  ropes  of  the  water-wheel, — birth,  old  age,  and  death,
— go  round  and  round,  night  and  day,  to  the  five  races  of
men ;  the  hard  all-sweeping  ordinances  of  Yama  are  cunning
to  trace  out  the  ways  of  all  the  minds  which  preside  over  the
five  different  families  of  the  five  kinds  of  great  beings11.  In

I  Or  "ever  active."  2  Gane§a  and  also  "an  obstacle."
3  Or  "  a  light  without  yoga."  4  Or  the  Manasa  lake.

5  Or  "  dust  out  of  moisture."  °  Or  "  colour  (riiga)."

7  Read  with  Kashmir  text  ajasrdsra-.

8  Or  'under  the  bewilderment  of  many  faults.'

9  Or  "all  the  elements.'  10  The  lightning  is  Ksanaprabha.

II  This  is  obscure. Perhaps  it  means  the  five  races  of  embodied
beings, — Gods,  men,  the  Manes,  cattle  and  birds. Or  perhaps  panca-
kula  means  '  the  assembly  (the  pancdyit)  of  the  elements.'


256  THE HARSA-CARITA.

i

every  home  the  hours  of  time,  never  waiting  even1  for  a
moment,  flow  on  and  on,  cunning  to  reckon  the  years2  of
life.  The  stern-  command  of  Yama  goes  forth  at  once
through  the  world,  offering  the  sacrifice  of  the  lives  of
all  beings.  The  drums  of  the  Lord  of  the  dead  keep
incessantly  clanging,  skilled  in  announcing  the  departure  of
all  living  beings.  The  messengers  of  fate  roam  in  companies
in  every  quarter  and  in  every  city,  with  eyes  red  like  hot
iron,  and  bodies  black  like  the  Kalakuta  poison  and  carrying
black  nooses  in  their  hands.  The  proclamations  of  the
dreadful  onset  for  the  destruction  of  all  living  beings  pass
from  house  to  house,  striking  terror  through  the  din  of  the
bells  of  Yama,  as  they  are  shaken  in  the  hands  of  the  awful
messengers.  In  every  direction  run  the  broad  highways  of
the  travellers  to  the  other  world,  with  the  young  jackals
which  haunt  the  cemeteries  howling  for  joy,  [287] — highways
crowded  with  the  biers  of  the  dead,  discoloured  with  the  hair
scattered  by  the  widows,  and  echoing  with  their  wailings  of
grief, — while  the  eyes  of  the  vultures  eagerly  watch  the
banners  of  the  King  of  the  dead,  as  they  flutter  grey  with
the  smoke  of  the  funeral  piles.  The  tongue  of  the  goddess
of  Doom's-night,  black  like  the  charcoal  of  the  funeral  piles
and  covered  with  blood,  licks  up  the  lives  of  living  beings,
like  a  cow  that  licks  her  calf's  shoulder, — eager  to  swallow
all  creation  as  a  mouthful.  The  hunger  of  the  god  of  death,
as  he  devours  all  beings,  never  learns  satiety.  The  stream
of  the  transitory  rushes  on  ever  speeding.  The  meetings
of  the  company  of  the  five  elements  last  only  for  a  moment.
The  sticks  that  compose  the  body's  machine3,  which  encages
the  soul,  are  apt  to  fly  asunder  in  the  night.  The  atoms
which  build  up  this  corporeal  frame,  are  ready  to  crumble,
helpless  against  the  onsets  of  good  or  evil  fortune.  The
threads  of  the  cords  that  bind  the  living  principle  break  at  a
touch.  Nothing  is  self-depending, — all  is  ending.

"  Considering  all  this,  O  wise  woman,  thou  surely  wilt

1  The  MS.  A  reads  Ksanam  apy  aksamamanah.

2  The  Kashmir  edition  and  A  read  ayuh-kald.

3  The  Kashmir  edition  and  A  read  gatrayantra.


CHAPTER  VIIT.  257

I

not  allow  darkness  utterly  to  overwhelm  thy  tender  mind.
A  single  moment  of  reflection  steadies  the  soul.  And  though
sorrow  has  made  a  wide  inroad,  is  not  thy  eldfer  brother  to  be
regarded  by  thee,  who  is  as  a  guru  and  as  a  father  ?  Were
it  not  for  him,  who  would  not  honour  thy  noble  resolve  to
assume  the  red  dress  ?  A  holy  mendicant  life  is  the  surest
consolation  for  every  sorrow ;  this  is  the  best  home  for  the
wise.  But  he  now  stops  thy  desire,  for  tliou  must  only  do
what  he  commands.  Whether  thou  regardest  him  as  a
brother,  as  an  elder,  as  one  beloved,  or  as  a  virtuous  man,  or
as  a  King, — thou  must  in  any  case  obey  his  decree."

When  he  ceased,  the  King  replied,  "Who  could  speak
thus  except  your  reverence  ?  You  and  your  fellows  are  the
pillars,  created  by  destiny,  of  its  own  will  and  unasked,  to
support  the  world  under  its  grievous  calamities.  [288]  You
are  the  lamps  of  religion,  softly  bright  with  kindness  and
powerful  to  dispel  the  darkness  of  delusion.  But  excessive
affection  like  mine,  when  emboldened  by  kindness  thus
lavishly  shewn  to  it,  learns  to  covet  what  is  properly  beyond
its  reach ;  and  to  receive  great  favours,  emboldens  even  a
cautious  man  to  venture,  urged  on  by  his  levity  of  heart,
and  self-love  teaches  even  a  retiring  man  to  thrust  himself
forward,  forgetful  of  all  considerations  of  what  is  proper
or  improper.  But  the  noble  will  always  on  their  part
recognise  the  constraining  influence  of  a  request,  as  the
ocean-tide  recognises  its  shore ;  and  your  highness  made
over  to  me  this  your  body,  unsolicited1, — primarily  to  shew
me  hospitality.  Therefore  I  would  prefer  a  petition  to
my  honoured  lord2.  My  sister,  so  young  and  so  tried  by
adversity,  must  be  cherished  by  me  for  a  while,  even  if  it
involves  the  neglect  of  all  my  royal  duties ;  but  I  also  made
a  vow  in  the  presence  of  all  the  world,  when  I  bound  myself
to  obey  my  right  arm  which  was  uplifted  to  destroy  the
insolent  enemies  who  had  slain  my  brother ;  and  unable  to
endure  the  insult  offered,  I  surrendered  my  whole  soul  to

1  Scil. when he  accompanied  Harsa  ; the  Kashmir  edition  (but
not  A.)  reads  abhyartkitena.

2  He  here  uses  the  Buddhist  term  '  bhadanta.'

C.  17


258  THE HAESA-CAR1TA.

righteous  vengeance.  Will  your  highness  therefore  deign  to
employ  himself  for  a  while  in  this  business  of  mine  ?  Grant
this  body  of  yours  to  me  your  guest1.  From  this  day  forth,
while  I  discharge  my  vow,  and  console  my  subjects  in  their
sorrow  for  my  father's  death,  I  desire  that  she  should  remain
at  my  side  and  be  comforted  with  your  righteous  discourses,
and  your  passionless  instruction  which  produces  salutary
knowledge,  and  yo'ur  advice  which  calms  the  disposition,  and
your  Buddhist  doctrines  which  drive  away  worldly  passions.
At  the  end,  when  I  have  accomplished  my  design,  she  and  I
will  assume  the  red2  garments  together. — What  will  not  the
magnanimous  grant  to  a  suppliant  ?  Dadhlca,  that  ocean  of
constancy,  made  the  lord  of  heaven  win  success  by  the  gift
of  his  bones3.  How  often  did  not  Buddha,  the  chief  of
Sages,  when  his  compassion  was  appealed  to,  disregard  his
own  life,  and  offer  himself  as  a  victim  to  carnivorous  animals  ?
You  well  know  other  instances  besides  these."  [289]  Having
uttered  these  words,  the  King  was  silent.

The  Buddhist  sage  replied,  "  The  fortunate  do  not  need
to  utter  their  wishes  twice;  at  once  by  means  of  the  thought
alone  you  make  your  virtues  receive  the  homage  of  the
offering  of  your  servants'  bodies4.  The  service  of  one  so
incapable  of  true  service  is  tied  to  your  command  whether
in  a  great  or  a  small  matter."  Pleased  at  the  way  in  which
the  other  so  warmly  accepted  his  friendship,  the  King,  after
staying  there  that  night,  the  next  morning  dismissed
Nirghata,  well  satisfied  with  gifts  of  garments  and  orna-
ments, took  his  sister  with  the  holy  man  and  went  back,
in  a  few  marches,  to  his  camp  stationed  along  the  bank  of
the  Ganges.

As  he  was  relating  there  to  his  friends  the  story  of  the
recovery  of  Rajyac.ri,  the  sun  completed  his  journey  through
the  heavens;  and  the  day,  dear  to  the  cakravaka  pairs,  folded

1  I.e.  become  in  turn  my  guest.

2  Kasuyani.

3  The  myth  of  Dadhyac  (later  Dadhlca)  occurs  in  the  Rig-veda  ;  the
bones  were  used  as  thunderbolts  against  Vritra.

4  The  MSS. A  and B read  gunus  tdvakah. Put  a  stop  after
janena.


CHAPTER VIII.  259

•

up  its  light  like  a  lotus-bed  tawny-coloured  with  thick  honey.
The  Sun  absorbed  again  in  his  body  the  web  of  his  sancti-
fying1 rays,  which  had  been  spread  far  and  wi«Se  to  the  ends  of
the  world,  red  like  freshly  spilt  blood,  just  as  the  preceptor
Qakalya  swallowed  back  the  Yajur-veda2  vomited  by  his
disobedient  disciple  Yajfiavalkya.  Then  in  gradual  succes-
sion, the  Sun,  bright  with  its  gathering  mass  of  deepening
colours,  seemed  to  be  like  the  congenital'crest-jewel3  which
Bhima  carried  off  from  A9vatthaman's  turban,  horribly  red
with  the  fresh  blood ; — or  like  the  begging  vessel  consisting
of  Brahma's4  skull,  filled  with  the  blood  from  the  veins  of  the
bald  heads,  which  Qiva  flung  down  in  his  furious  eagerness
to  present  a  Rudra-alms, — or  like  the  far-stretching  lake  of
blood5,  made  by  Rama  (Jamadagnya)  when  incensed  at  his
father's  murder,  [290]  and  filled  through  a  thousand  channels
from  the  throats  of  the  vile  Ksatriyas,  which  were  cut  by
the  axe  which  cleft  the  bull-like  shoulder  of  the  monstrous
Kartavlrya, — or  like  the  tortoise  Vibhavasu6  as  it  rolled  in
the  sky,  bereft  of  life  and  with  head,  paws  and  feet  contracted
through  fear  in  its  round  shell  and  covered  with  blood  from
the  attacks  of  Garuda's  cage-like  claws, — or  like  the  egg
which  contained  Aruna's  half-formed  embryo  body  when  its
mother  Vinata  broke  it7; — or  like  a  cliff  of  Meru,  rich  in
metallic  ore,  tossed  up  by  the  goddess  Kali,  vexed  at  the
long  delay  of  the  world's  destruction  beyond  its  appointed
time, — or  like  the  awful  cauldron  of  Brihaspati8,  bearing
signs  of  the  cooking  of  an  oblation  in  some  magic  rite  for  the
destruction  of  the  demons,  and  having  its  inside  red  with  the

1  Pdpamumsi.

2  One  or  two  words  have  been  supplied  here  from  the  Commentary.
For  the  legend  see  Visnu  Pur.  iii.  5.

3  Mahabh.  x.  ch.  14,  15.

4  This  seems  to  allude  to  the  legend  of  Brahma's  fifth  head  having
been  cut  off  by  Civa.

6  This  alludes  to  Paragurama's  slaughter  of  the  Ksatriyas,  when
he  cleared  them  from  the  earth  seven  times  and  filled  five  lakes  with
their  blood.

6  Mahabh.  i.  29.  7  Mahabh.  i.  16.

8  The  priest  of  the  gods.

17—2


260  THE HARSA-CARITA.

(

bloody  stew, — or  like  the  yawning  gulf  of  Mahftbhairava's1
mouth,  fearful  with  the  smeared  blood  of  the  demon  Gaja,
as  his  body  wasVapidly  swallowed.

Then  the  evening  appeared,  leaning  on  the  clouds  which
shone  with  the  sun's  many  forms  as  reflected  in  the  ocean, —
like  a  goblin  who  has  just  seized  his  fill  of  raw  flesh, — while
the  ocean  had  its  waves  dyed  in  the  evening  glow  as  if  it
were  once  more  crimson  with  the  blood  of  the  demons  Madhu
and  Kaitabha,  when  crushed  by  the  brawny  thighs  of  Visnu.
At  the  close  of  the  evening-tide,  the  moon  was  brought  to
the  King  as  a  respectful  offering  by  the  Night,  as  if  it  were
the  impersonated  Glory  of  his  Race  bringing  him  a  cup  from
the  pearl  Mountain,  to  slake  his  boundless  thirst  for  fame. —
or  the  impersonated  glory  of  the  Kingdom  bringing  him  the
stamp  of  the  primeval  King2  on  the  silver  patent  of  his
sovereignty,  to  encourage  him  in  his  resolve  to  bring  back
the  golden  Krita  age, — or  the  Goddess  of  the  Future3  con-
ducting a  messenger  from  the  White  Dvlpa  to  animate  him
to  the  conquest  of  all  the  seven  Dvipas4.

Here  ends  the  eighth  chapter  in  the  great  poem,  the  Harsa-Carita,
composed  by  Cri  Bana  Bhatta,  the  son  of  Citrabhcanu,  and  crest-jewel
of  the  company  of  great  poets.

1  A  name  of  Civa.  -  Manu  or  Prithu  Vainya.

3  Or  perhaps  '  Majesty '  (dyati).

4  This  concluding  description,  like  all  such  in  the  book,  is  at  least
semi-symbolical  ('the  pathetic  fallacy'). The  sunset  is  described  in
terms  suggesting  bloody  wars  and  the  fall  of  Harsa's  enemy,  followed
by  the  rising  of  the  moon  of  Harsa's  glory. — Bana's  narrative  abruptly
ends  here  which  was  begun  in  p.  79.


APPENDIX A.

I.

The  following  is  the  description  of  MalatI  omitted  p.  25 .

[35]  '  Under  the  semblance  of  her  form's  radiant  halo
•she  seemed  to  be  bringing  with  her  all  the  pure  water  of  the
river.  Like  Gaurl  on  her  tiger,  she  was  mounted  upon  a
great  maned  steed,  in  colour  resembling  a  bunch  of  opened
Atimuktaka  blossoms.  Sportively  inserted  in  the  girth  of
her  horse,  which  turned  prick-eared  to  listen  to  the  clear
tinkle  of  the  anklets,  her  feet,  glowing  with  clotted  lac  and
stained  with  saffron  on  the  upper  surface,  poured  out  on
either  side  bright  red  streams  of  light,  as  if  she  were
trailing  forests  of  sprouting  red  Acokas,  attracted  by  morbid
cravings  for  her  kicks1.  [36]  About  her  loins  a  girdle  rang
like  a  proclamation  devoting  to  murder  and  rapine  the
hearts  of  all  the  animate  world.  Hanging  down  to  her  toes,
a  gown  of  white  bleached  silk,  lighter  than  a  snake's  slough,
concealed  her  creeper-like  form.  Visible  through  the  robe's
thin  fabric,  her  limbs,  white  with  viscous  sandal,  sug-
gested a  lake  with  lotus  fibre-stalks  discernible  'mid  the
translucent  water.  Underneath  gleamed  a  petticoat  of
safflower  tint  and  variegated  with  spots  of  different  colours,
as  if  she  were  a  crystal  ground  enclosing  a  treasure  of  jewels.
Dotted  as  with  clusters  of  large  bright  planets  by  a  collar
of  pearls  round  as  Avnildkl  fruit,  she  recalled  the  autumn

1  A  reference  to  the  superstition  that  the  Acoka  cannot  blossom
until  kicked  by  a  woman,  cf.  p.  149  supra.


262  THE HARSA-CARITA.

sky,  overcast  with  a  mass  of  thin  white  cloud.  Above
bosoms  like  full  cups  she  wore  a  necklace  with  jewelled
pendants,  spraymg  forth  red  and  green  rays,  like  a  festoon
of  wild  flowers  signalizing  the  entrance  of  some  happy  man
into  her  heart.  Set  upon  her  forearms,  each  golden  bracelet,
having  an  emerald  crocodile-shaped  signet,  made  green  the
ends  of  heaven  with  a  texture  of  light  like  land  lotus-beds
accompanying  her  under  the  idea  that  she  was  Laksmi.
Her  joined  lips,  darkened  by  a  deep  black  stain  of  betel,
seemed  to  pour  forth,  mingled  with  the  afterglow,  a  dusk
swallowed  up  by  her  moonlike  face.  A  thick  swarm  of  bees,
settling  eagerly  upon  the  blooming  blue  lotuses  of  her  eyes,
covered  half  her  face  like  a  veil  of  dark  blue  silk.  Attached
to  her  left  ear,  a  peacock-blue  earring,  of  a  tint  borrowed
from  indigo,  resembled  a  patch  of  dark  cloud  amid  her
lightning  radiance.  [37]  From  a  pair  of  pendant  ear-orna-
ments, formed  of  three  pearls  comparable  to  Vakula  fruit,  she
poured  a  rain  of  light,  as  if  besprinkling  her  soft  creeper-
like  arms.  Her  right  ear  being  provided  with  a  pendant  in
the  shape  of  a  string  of  leaves  containing  Ketakl  flowers1,
it  seemed  as  if  the  moon's  tongue  were  through  greed  for
her  beauty  licking  her  cheek.  Her  face,  Love's  sum  of
riches,  bore,  as  it  were,  for  a  seal,  a  round  sectarial  mark,
black  as  Tawia^a-bark  and  dispensing  a  fragrance  of  civet.
Dancing  upon  her  forehead  and  kissing  her  hair-parting
was  a  frontal  jewel,  whose  upward-streaming  flickering
radiance  formed,  as  it  were,  a  shawl  of  red  muslin  about
her  head.  With  tresses  hanging  loose  from  careless  fastening
and  swaying  at  her  back,  as  if  wearing  a  streamer  of  dark
chowries,  she  resembled  the  pennon  of  Kama  with  her  crest-
jewel  for  its  crocodile2.  She  might  be  described  as  the
moon's  family  goddess,  the  simple  which  could  restore  to
life  the  God  of  the  flowery  bow,  the  shore  of  love's  ocean,  the
effulgence  of  youth's  moonrise,  the  great  river  of  passion's

1  The  Ketakl  flower  is  white, and therefore  compared to the
moonlight.

2  The  MS.  reads  -avaculinl  and  -pattikeva  ;  \\e  have  read  iva  in  both
places.


APPENDIX A.  263

I

ambrosia,  the  efflorescence  of  dalliance's  tree,  the  primer  of
archness,  the  moonlight  of  beauty,  the  strength  of  steadfast-
ness, the  sanctum  of  reverence,  the  nursery  garden  of
bienseance,  the  conference  of  excellencies,  the  wisdom  of
magnanimity,  the  satiety  of  youthfulness.

[38]  Behind  her,  mounted  on  a  tall  mule,  came  the
bearer  of  her  betel  casket,  a  girl  composed,  as  it  were,  of
flowers,  her  eyes  being  long  like  a  string  0f  blue  lotus  petals,
her  lips  rosy,  her  teeth  gleaming  like  jasmine  blossoms,  her
arms  soft  as  Cirlsa  chaplets,  her  hands  delicate  as  red
lotuses,  her  breath  fragrant  as  Vakula  buds,  and  her  aspect
bright  as  the  Campaka.'


II.

The  following  is  the  description  of  Bhairavacarya  omitted  p.  87.

[113]  'Soon  amid  a  great  throng  of  recluses  he  beheld
Bhairavacarya,  who  thus  early  had  bathed,  presented  the
eightfold  offering  of  flowers,  and  attended  to  the  sacrificial
fire.  Seated  on  a  tiger-skin,  which  was  stretched  on  ground
smeared  with  green  cow -dung,  and  whose  outline  was  marked
by  a  boundary  ridge  of  ashes,  he  was  wrapt  in  a  black  woollen
cloak,  as  though,  apprehending  an  entrance  into  an  Asura
cavern,  he  were  rehearsing  a  dwelling  in  the  darkness  of
hell.  Like  realgar  paste  purchased  by  the  sale  of  human
flesh1,  his  flashing  splendour,  lurid  as  lightning,  cast  a  glow
upon  his  disciples.  With  his  hair,  knotted  at  the  top  and
showing  the  round  shells  of  his  rosary  hanging  from  one
braided  part,  he  seemed  to  be  imprisoning  the  saints,  who,
presuming  upon  a  smattering  of  knowledge,  roamed  overhead.
[114]  His  time  of  life,  marked  by  a  few  white  hairs,  had  just
passed  five-and-fifty  years.  The  hair-line  on  his  skull  was
giving  way  to  baldness,  the  orifices  of  his  ears  were  covered

1  The  manahpild  or  realgar  stone  is  very  precious.


2G4  THE HAKSA-CA1UTA.

<

with  hair,  and  his  forehead  broad ;  while  a  slanting  forehead-
mark,  made  with  ashes,  produced  the  effect  of  a  white  line  of
skull  bone  burst*  by  the  heat  of  burnt  gum  repeatedly  held
over  half  his  head1. A  natural  frown,  contracting  the  interval
between  his  brows,  seemed  by  the  meeting  of  these  to  give
him  one  long  unbroken  line  of  brow  tawny  in  colour. His  very
long  eyes,  somewhat  yellow  as  with  gutta  serena  in  the  pupils,
sparkling  bright  in  the  centre,  and  from  their  red  comers
sending  out  a  film  of  rays,  appeared  to  trace  round  him  a
many-coloured  circle  like  a  rainbow,  and  to  shower  about  the
parts  of  space  an  oblation  to  Qiva  variegated  with  rows  of
white,  yellow,  and  red  symbolical  marks2. The  tip  of  his  nose
was  curved  like  the  end  of  Garuda's  beak,  his  cheeks  nan-owed
by  the  wide  gash  of  his  mouth,  and  the  outgoing  light  of  his
teeth,  somewhat  indented,  whitened  the  stretch  of  heaven  as
with  the  light  of  the  moon,  the  crest  of  that  Civa  who  was
ever  treasured  in  his  heart. As  if  overweighted  by  the  whole
Qaivite  canon  resting  on  the  tip  of  his  tongue,  his  lip  hung
a  little  downwards. A  pair  of  crystal  earrings,  dangling  from
his  pendulous  ears,  suggested  that  Venus  and  Jupiter  were
pursuing  him  in  the  confidence  of  acquiring a  knowledge
surpassing  gods  anoj  Asuras. Upon  one  forearm,  having  an
iron  bracelet  and  bound  with  the  line  of  a  charm-thread  of
various  herbs,  he  wore  a  bit  of  shell  like  one  of  Pusan's  teeth
broken  by  the  holy  (^iva  and  out  of  devotion  converted  into
an  ornament. His  right  hand  shook  a  rosary,  like  a  Persian
wheel  containing  the  buckets  for  raising  water  from  the  well
of  all  delightful  emotions. His  beard,  dangling  upon  his
breast  and  somewhat  tawny  at  the  end,  was  like  a  broom
sweeping  away  all  the  dust  of  passions  therein  contained.
Covered  with  a  circle  of  very  thick  black  hair,  his  bosom
seemed  scorched  by  the  illumination  won  through  meditation.
The  ring  of  a  rather  loose-hanging  wrinkle  ran  round  his
middle: [115]  the  flesh  upon  his  buttocks  swelled  out  in
bulk  :  his  girdling  loin-cloth  was  of  pure  white  linen :  while

1  For  this  custom  of.  p.  135  supra.

2  K.  R.  Kale  explains  this  of  a  rice  oblation  smeared  with  yellow
turmeric  and  reddish  saffron.


APPENDIX A.  265

»

circling  round  him  in  a  tight  paryaiika  band  was  an  ascetic's
wrap  in  hue  white  as  ambrosia  foam,  as  if  Vasuki,  manifested
by  the  power  of  many  unfailing  charms,  we/e  performing  the
circuit  of  honour  about  him.  His  feet,  whose  soles  were
tender  like  red  lotuses,  appeared  by  the  clear  woven  rays
which  fell  from  their  nails  to  be  crushing  hell  to  pieces  in
the  delight  of  carrying  away  its  great  treasures.  They
were  constantly  attended  by  a  pair  of*  pure  white  water-
washed  slippers,  like  a  pair  of  ha/nisas  become  intimate  with
him  during  his  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  fords  of  the  Ganges.
Constant  at  his  side  was  a  bamboo  staff  with  a  barb  of  iron
inserted  in  the  end,  which  might  be  compared  to  a  goad  for
driving  away  the  god  whose  function  it  was  to  remove
obstacles  to  the  full  attainment  of  knowledge1.  Rarely
speaking,  slowly  smiling  ;  every  man's  benefactor,  and  chaste
as  a  boy  ;  supreme  in  austerities,  surpassing  in  wisdom  ;
restrained  in  anger,  unrestrained  in  kindness;  graced,  like
a  great  city,  with  unfailing  native  nobility2  ;  delicately
tinted3,  like  Meru,  as  with  the  sprays  of  the  Tree  of
Paradise;  like  Kailasa,  having  his  head  purified  by  the
dust  of  Pa9upati's  feet:  like  (Diva's  heaven,  the  resort  of
Mahe9vara  throngs  ;  like  the  ocean,  «|eansed  by  many  a
male  and  female  stream  ;  like  the  Ganges  flood,  made  pure
by  visiting  many  a  sacred  bathing-place  :  dwelling  of  dliarma,
tlrtha  of  truth,  storehouse  of  sincerity,  burgh  of  purity,  hall
of  high  character,  domain  of  patience,  rice-plot  of  unassum-
ingness,  pedestal  of  constancy,  support  of  steadfastness,  mine
of  mercy,  home  of  happiness,  pleasance  of  pleasure,  palace  of
propitiousness,  [116]  mansion  of  venerableness,  congress  of
refinement,  genesis  of  good  feeling,  end  of  evil  :  such  was
the  holy  Bhairavacarya,  a  very  Qiva  incarnate.'


1  Scil.  Ganesa  was  himself  only  an  obstacle. But MS.  A  reads
anapanayana  f  the  not  driving  away.'

2  R.  R.  Kale  shews  that  these  words  contain  a  pun  when  applied  to
'  a  great  city,'  since  by  Pan.  6.  2.  89  the  word  nagara  does  not  lose  its
accent  when  compounded  (adlnaprakriti).

3  Chayti  contains  a  pun. Bhairavacarya  is  tinted  like,  Meru  shaded
with  the  sprays.


'  APPENDIX B.


ADDITIONAL NOTES AND CORRECTIONS.

(The  black  figure  refers  to  the  page,  the  plain  figure  to  the  line.}

6  8-10  For  pattrabhangamakarikd  cf.  Kdd.  p.  115,  1.  15,  and  for
makarika  Kad.  p.  211,  1.  14  (slmantamakarika)  and  below,
text,  p.  37, 11.  8-9  (cudamaniinakarika)  [Peterson's  2nd  ed.].
The  word  makarika  appears  to  denote  a  wia&ara-shaped
forehead  ornament,  perhaps  with  an  erotic  signification,  the
makara  being  Kama's  token.  Pattrabhahga  appears  to  be
regularly  used  of  personal  ornamentation,  probably  in  the
shape  of  leaves  (vide  text,  p.  146,  1.  3  with  the  pun  on  pattra
and  cf.  B.  and  R.) :  apdcrayapattrabhahgaputrikd  (text,  p.  140,
1.  2,  cf.  also  p.  153,  1.  18)  is  in  this  last  respect  exceptional.

The  reference  to  the  chess-board  in  this  passage  is  perhaps
due  to  the  fact  that  one  of  the  Indian  chess-men  was  a
makara  in  the  sense  of  being  an  elephant.  Kola  punningly
refers,  no  doubt,  to  the  black  army  on  the  chess-board.
Thus  kritakalasannidhdnam  has  three  senses,  (1)  'with  the
black  at  hand '  of  the  chess-board,  (2)  '  with  Yama  at  hand '
of  the  wives  of  Yama,  (3)  '  with  blackness  at  hand '  of  the
ascetic's  forehead.

13  20-3  The  verse  contains  puns  in  akalusamdnasa  ('pure  of  mind'  =
Brahma)  and  pahkajdlaya  (  =  abode  of  Brahma,  cf.  B.  and
R.).

17  1  Or  we  might  read  'drinking  in,'  as  a  flower  drinks  in  the
sunshine.

17 9 For 'heavens.' read 'world.'

17  14  For  'coral  trees'  read  'Pdrijata  scent,'  the  reference  to  the
Tree  of  Paradise  being  merely  a  pun.

17  28  sqq.  Read  '  for  the  two  ruddy -geese  of  a  loved  one's  breasts.'
For  the  comparison  cf.  Kad.  p.  83,  11.  14-15.  The  'sand-
bank' is  that  surrounding  the  ocean,  cf.  p.  160,  11.  1-2  infra.


t  APPENDIX B.  2G7

18  19-20. Read 'in the  air  and  falling  with the force of their

curvetting  to  tear  up  the  earth,'  valitavikatam  going  with
patadbhir.  •>

19  1 Sidd/iyayoga=f one  who  possesses  an infallible  charm': in

this  youth  happiness  possesses  just  such  a  charm.

19 7 Read  '  on  a  horse  with  no  person  in  attendance.'

19  18 '  Took  it  all  in ' :  we  have  translated  pratltya,  but  the  reading

of  MS.  A  (pratinivritya  '  having  retui^ied ')  is  better.

20  2-4 Read  arohati  (for  aropayati)  with  MS.  A. Atinamre  might

mean  '  towards  the  very  courteous.'

20  9--10  It  will  be  better  to  take  these  words  as  referring  to  Vikuksi
'that  appears  in  a  favourite  of  heaven  like  yourself.'
Devdnampriya  is  similarly  employed  below,  text,  p.  268, 1.  14.

22  12 Insert  '  with  a  lip '  before  '  wearing  etc.'

24  6-8 Read  '...my  misdemeanour,  as  if  committed  in  a  previous

birth,  has  wrought  its  fruit.'

25  9-10 Or  more  correctly  '...high  birth is  not  devoid  of  true

nobility,' or 'through your lord's nobleness high  birth
acquires  a  meaning.'

26  27-30 Read  'Who  am  I  to  grant  attention  as  a  favour,  or  to

command  body  or  life  ? Even  without  asking  the  charming
and  lovely  are  masters  of  our  all  (or  '  of  everyone ').'

27  6-12 Some  of  the  puns  in  this  passage  are  omitted.

27  13-14  For  'your  heart  will  tell  you  that'  read  'that  is  honouring
oneself,'  and  cf.  Kad.  p.  199, 11.  17-18.

27  17  'That  implies  experience'  is  probably  wrong  for  nipunopaksepah,
but  the  correct  rendering  is  not  clear.  Comparing  Kad.  p.
180,  1.  10,  we  may  suggest  that  it  means  'a  polite  in-
sinuation '  or  '  threat ' ;  for  the  use  of  nipuna  cf.  also  Kad.
p.  220,  1.  8.

29  11-12  'Spent  that  fair  night':  literally  'wooed  that  lovely
woman.'

29  28 Bhratri  is  probably  a  proper  name,  as  Dadhica  has  no  brother,

and it  would be unnecessary  to describe his brother  or
cousin  as  a  Brahman. It  might  mean  'foster-brother.'

30  8-9  and  n.  1 As -kuta was a common termination in place

names,  it  will  be  better  to  keep  the  Sanskrit  name  Prltikuta.
That  this  was  the  name  of  Bana's  home  appears  below,  p.  45.

30  19  For  the  reference  to  herons  and  cats  cf.  Mann  iv.  9  1.  30.  The
'Cock'  rules  required  the  eating  of  food  of  only  the  size  of
an  egg.


268  THE HAUSA-CAiUTA.

«

30  n.  2 We may  here note  some  of the  puns in this passage  :

pravardhamdna  =  (\}  as  in  text,  (2)  'giving  forth  a  roar  as  it
rises  fronj  the  footprint  of  the  patriarch  Visnu ' ;  sabilaka-
ldgama  =  (l)  as  in  text,  (2)  'deep  and  singing  as  it  goes';
mahdmuni=(l)  'great  saints,'  (2)  'Jahuu';  vipaksaksobhak-
sama  =  (l)  as  in  text,  (2)  'potent  to  shake  the  hills';
ksititalalabdhdyati=(\)  'renowned  over  all  the  earth,'  (2)  as
in  text;  crauta  =  (l)  as  in  text,  (2)  ' cant ' ;  janapaktayah  =
(1)  as  in  texf,  (2)  'the  cooking  of  the  people';  agrihltagah-
cardh  =  (\)  as  in  text,  (2)  'not  retreating  to  holes'  like
snakes.  The  punning  expression  bhdglrathlpravdha  iva
vipaksakxobhaksamah  recurs  on  the  inscription  hid.  Ant.
xni.  p.  78,  1.  15.

31  22 For 'a  mountain' read 'the  weight of  the  earth.' Catur-

udadkigambh:ira  =  ideeY>  with  four  oceans.'
33 6 A verse in the Comm. defines  hairika as 'a goldsmith's

supervisor.'

33  n.  3  On  asuraoivara  v.  n.  p.  193,  n.  3  and  also  Kad.  p.  227,  1.  2.
In  the  note,  p.  193,  vtitika  is  probably  interpreted  wrongly,
as  the  sense  '  madmen '  ('  inspired ')  will  suffice.  The  word
occurs  Kad.  p.  287,  11.  11-12  bhujahgavrittayo  mahdvdtikdh
and  below,  p.  152,  1.  7.

37  8-9  'Moonlight':  sodupdh  punningly  means  also  'possessing
rafts.'

37  21 Eead  'the  ripe  (red)  clusters  of  the  grislea  tomentosa.'

38  2-3 Read  '  as  the  summer  grew  more  mature.'

39  16-18 Read 'Insects  baked...,  which  were  studded  with  etc.'

39  26 'Wearing  matted  locks':  or  punuingly  'resting  on  rootlets':

the  pun  injatd  occurs  above,  text,  p.  14,  1.  5  and  passim.

40  31 For  '  brother '  read  '  cousin '  or  '  half-brother.'

45  u.  2 On  pancdngula  cf.  Fleet,  C.  I.  I.  in.  p.  146. It  recurs  Kad.

p.  41,  1.  13.

46  1 It  is  not  clear  who  this  brother  was:  perhaps  bhrdtari  here

means  'cousin'  or  ' fosterbrother ' ;  cf.  note  on  p.  29,  1.  28
supra.

48  29 Cf.  Colebrooke's  Essays,  I.  190.

49  8 Read  Pardcara.

50  5-6 Read  'with  the  huge  pearls  which  studded  it.'

50  10  Or  'let  your  worship  treat  him  etc.'  Kalydndbhinivecin  is
used,  Kad.  p.  104,  1.  7,  p.  136,  1.  6,  as  a  synonym  for
kalyanin,  which  itself  occurs,  text,  p.  117,  1.  11  below,  and
Kad.  p.  102,  1.  1.


APPENDIX B.  269

I

50  32-3  Or  read  'grow  longer  owing  to  one  hoof  being  extended
behind  by  means  of  a  footrope':  for  this  method  of
hobbling,  the  object  of  which  was  to  give^the  horse  a  certain
carriage  of  body,  cf.  J.  L.  Kipling,  Beast  and  Man  in  India,
p.  170.

53  30-2 Read  'his  head,  which  was  constantly  cooled...,  he  carried

high  etc.'

54  24-5 Dalantam,  the  Kashmir  reading  (which  is  supported  by  the

alliteration)  would  require  the  rendering  'he  seemed  to
burst  with  pride.'

57  9  sqq. In  this  sentence  we  have  probably  a  reference  to  the  facts

underlying  Iliuen  Tsang's  story  (Beal,  Si-Yu-Ki,  I.  p.  213)
that  Harsa  at  the  advice  of  a  Bodhisattva  refrained  from
mounting  the  simhasana  or  '  lion-throne.'  For  the  laksanani
clasping  his  members  cf.  Kdd.  p.  186, 11.  17-18.

58  2-5 Or  perhaps  'he  gave  away  to  the  Kings  from  the  coruscations

of  his  ornaments  thousands  of  rainbows,  which  had  been
sent  to  him  by  Indra  as  presents  ;  in  his  conversations  he
rained  wine  (sc.  sweetness)  which  he  himself  had  abandoned '
(cf.  note  2).

59  26-7 For  makaramukha-  the  Kashmir  text  has  mukha-,  which

gives  a  better  sense.

61  30 Omit 'self.'

62  27-8 For this conceit cf. Kdd. p. 192, 11. 5-6. We read

-darfanusukharasarasardfimanthantapaksmand :  cf.  the
Kashmir  text.

64  10-11 Read  '  to  the  creators  the  day  of  their  final  bath  etc.'

65  12 Omit  'royal.'

65  26 Read  aparavaktm.

66  9-11 Read  'the  other  by  his  silence  seemed  not  to  comprehend

the  speech — Bana  having  paused  a  moment  in  silence  etc.'

67  1 MS.  A  has  atyanuvritti,  which  is  doubtless  right.
67 5 Or  '  that  they  unfailingly  grasp  people's  characters.'

67  35  to  end  of  the  paragraph  A  great  portion  of  this  passage  recurs
nearly  verbatim  in  the  Vasavadatta  (Hall),  p.  168,  1.  6-
p.  171,  1.  3.

72  1-6  It  would  be  perhaps  better  to  take  sukhitayil  with  kiyan-
mdtram  nah  krityam  'We  have  but  little  concern  with
happiness  so  long  as  etc.'


270  THE HARSA-CARITA.

t

73  19-74  2 The epithets  have  different  senses  according  as  they

apply  to  the  lives  and  to  the  studies  of  Bana's  cousins.  In
their  live^  they  are  '  men  of  mild  (or  '  pure ')  ways,  believed
when  they  speak,  holders  of  the  status  of  preceptors  (or  '  a
high  status'),  conscientious  in  speech,  weighty  owing  to
their  application  to  virtue,  and  renowned  for  goodness.'  In
their  studies  they  are  'expounders  of  texts,  devoted  to
exegesis,  engaged  upon  difficult  words,  logicians,  deep  in  the
study  of  able,  works,  and  averse  to  all  infelicitous  language.'
For  similar  passages  cf.  C.  I.  I.  in.  p.  175,  J.  R.  A.  S.
(Bomb.),  x.  p.  78,  11.  32-3,  Epigr.  Lid.  I.  p.  87,  11.  22  sqq.

74  12 For  '  respectfully '  read  '  affectionately.'

74  14-75  15 Most  of  this  passage  recurs  verbatim  Vasavadatta  (Hall),
p.  273,  1.  1-p.  276,  1.  4.

74  20 The  punning  sense  of  marganavyasana  is  'addiction  to  pillaging

expeditions.'

75  1-10 In  a  few  cases  we  have  in  this  paragraph  placed  the  wrong

alternative  in  the  text ;  the  whole  should  run : — In  Nriga's
becoming  a  chameleon  a  confusion  of  colours  was  seen.  By
Sandasa,  the  murderer,  the  earth  was  confounded.  Nala,
inadequately  skilled  in  dicing,  was  overcome  by  Kali....
Kartavlrya  was  slain  for  persecuting  a  Brahman  by  reason
of  his  cows.  Marutta...was  not  highly  honoured  by  the
Brahman  of  the  gods.'  The  alternatives  should  go  in 'the
notes.

75  12 Vaiie  punningly  means  'in  the  water'  and  madanarasdwsto

'drunk  with  Madana  juice.'

76  8-10 This  passage  refers,  as  Biihler  has  shown  (Ind.  Ant.  xix.

p.  40),  to  Harsa's  conquest  of  Nepal.

78  10 Read  '  being  fed  with  oblations.'

78  15-16 MS.  A  has  sandhydm  avadhlrayati  'dishonouring  the  twi-
light.'

80  10 For  praspkotita  'bursting  out'  (nlrdjanlkrita)  v.  note  on  p.  226,

1.  20  infra.
80  17 For  'tinged  by'  read  'indistinguishable  from.'

80  34 The  reeds  were  used  for  the  sacrificial  fire,  cf. Katyayana

Cr.-S.  22.  10.  25: or  should  we  read  varnairl

81  4 We  may  take  mahattara  in  the  sense  of  a  'village  head,'  cf.

C.  I.  1.  in.  p.  169,  n.  7. It  is  'a  title'  Epigr.  Ind.  I.  p.  275.
81  10 According  to  the  Comm.  mathitapayah  may  punningly  mean

'  buttermilk  and  milk.'
81  12 Kudristayah  punningly  =  '  weak  eyes.'


APPENDIX B.  271

t

81  c.  1 Read  gunin  (sic).

82  11-12 Read  'might  of  king's  raids,'  the  reference  to  Diva's  arrow

being  merely  a  pun.  I

82  16 For 'lover's  retreat' read 'home  of  Kama.'
82  24 On  asuravivaravysanin  and  vatika  v.  note  on  p.  33 bove.

82  n.  2  If  viksepa  (which  appears  in  MS.  A)  is  to  be  kept  it
doubtless  means  'camp,'  regarding  which  sense  v.  Ind.  Ant.
vii.  pp.  62  and  252,  XL  p.  161  n.  etc.

82  n.  6 Read  '  Or — punningly — "  Gaurls  yet  not  attached  to  ^iva  ".'

83  15 Read  '  their  hair-nets  but  the  fashion  of  young  ladies.'

83  last  line Biihler  suggests  (Epigr.  Ind. I.  p. 70)  that  the name

should  be  read as  Pusyabhuti,  as  many  proper  names  in
-bhnti  have  the  name  of  a  constellation  for  their  first  member.

84  9-10 Read  'a  Budha  in  the  assembly.' It  is  to  be  noted  that  these

proper  names  are  significant,  Prithu  meaning  '  broad,'  etc.

86  19 Or  '  bamboo  sieve  for  straining  earth.'

88  15 Or  pratipattayah  may  mean  '  manner  of  address.'

88  29-30  and  n.  4 But MS. A has  anuktesu,  which  requires  the

rendering  'friends  are  masters  of  our  bodies  even if  un-
mentioned.'

89  1 Or  '  on  the  following  day.'

89  24 Or  '  a  hilt  of  ivory.'

90  9-10 Or  'which  is  but  little  skilled  in  the  contempt  gained  by

accepting  the  property  of  others.'

90  26-7 Mahakalahridaya  =  l  having Mahakala (sc. Qiva) for its

centre,'  cf.  p.  104,  n.  3.

91  7 Or  '  at  such  and  such  an  hour.'

91  35-7 The  murmur  of  the  bees  corresponds  to  the  muttering  of  the

charms ;  their  clusters  to  braids  of  hair.

92  1 Read  '  mystic  hand-clasps.'

92  21-2 Or  'and  the  incense  and  smoke  of  resin,  transfused  (literally

'broken  up')  with  the  light  of magic lamps,  filled the
heavens  etc.'

93  29-31 With  reference  to  the  temple  the  long  compound  means

'  having  its  top  adorned  with  thick  crisp  curls  of  sleek,  dark
cloud.'

93  35 Read  '  globes.'

94  10-11 For  'raised... leg'  read  'raised  the  right  leg  crosswise  in  a

bent  shape,'  cf.  below,  p.  174, 1.  23.


272  THE HARSA-CARITA.

I

94  22-3 Read  '  who  is  made  an  instrument  by  such  ^aiva  outcasts  as

you.' For  the  use  of  upakaranlkar  cf.  text,  p.  35, 1.  9.

95  30 For  '  coral«beds '  read  '  coral-tree  sprays.'

95  35 Or  '  from  the  prison  of  a  close  encampment.'

96  last  line An  instance  of  such  'victory  columns'  (jayastambhCilf]  is

the  Mandasor  stone  pillar  with  Yacodharman's  inscription,
C.  I.  1.  m.  pp.  142  sqq.

97  33 Read 'having been  enslaved  by  your  virtues and  having

attained  m*y  true  self.'

98  14 We read with Kashmir edition  iiah. MS. A  here  reads

tvadvirakakaraiiam  karanlyam  na  siddhir.

101  2  sqq. The  Kashmir  text  reads  -pravarut  and  MS.  A  -prasarat  for

-prabhavdt.  We  may  here  note  the  puns  in  this  paragraph
which  we  have  left  unmentioned:  Kritamukhat  —  (\}  'be-
ginning of  golden  age,'  (2)  'clever';  tejonidheh  =  (\}  'source
of  light,'  sc.  the  sun,  (2)  '  treasure  of  splendour  or  valour ' ;
mgraha-(\]  'forms'  (of  the  hills),  (2)  'armies';  brah-
maJcardt=(V)  'Brahma's  hand,'  (2)  'prayer-maker';  ghaml-
gamdt=(Y}  'approach  of  clouds,'  (2)  'possessed  of  profound
learning';  nandandt  =  (l)  'heavenly  garden,'  (2)  'giver  of
delight';  crldhardt=(\}  'Visnu,'  (2)  'sovereign.'

102  last  line Laksmi  clasps  Visnu's  breast  (parahridaya  'the  supreme

(spirit's)  breast '  or  '  the  greatest  (king's)  heart ').

102  n.  6 MS.  A,  eight  of  the  best  other  MSS.,  and  the  Madhuban

Inscr.  have  Yacomati,  cf.  Biihler,  Epigr.  Ind.  I.  p.  70.

103  22 Better  '  loveliness'  boon-winning.'

103  last  line-104  1 Read  'the  centre  of  the  king's  existence,  love  etc.'

104  12 The  Adityahridaya  is  still  a  common  stotra,  cf.  Biihler,  Epigr.

Ind.  I.  p.  70.

105  30-1 The  Comm.  here  suggests  a  rendering  '  red  as  a  firefly '  for

indragopakarucd,
109  10 Read  dhavalantyo  with  MS.  A  and  the  Kashmir  text.

109  n.  2 In  the  first  quotation  read  sauhdrddd,  and  in  the  second

alahkardmcukddikam  and  purnakam.

110  25  and  n.  7 Read  '  leaving  her  husband,  the  disc-wielder.'

111  8 Or  '  old  ladies  of  the  family  could  be  seen.'

111  14 Or  'the  Mothers  incarnate.'

112  27 The  echoes  repeat  the  festival.

112  n.  1 MS.  A  has  vikatavlkdmcca:  cf.  tdmbulavltikd  Kdd.  p.  183,

1.  11,  p.  191,1.  23  etc.
112  n.  2 MS.  A  has  caranavikuttana,  doubtless  the  right  reading,

confirming  our  conjecture: cf.  Kdd.  p.  73,  1.  19


,  APPENDIX B.  273

113  18 Or  perhaps  'the  soft  ring  of  the  brazeu  gong  was  clearly

heard.'

114  15 We  read  itfsavayantyo  with  MS.  A.

117  12 Daksina  'courtly'  also  means  by  a  pun  'southern.'
117  18 For  'gateway'  read  'structure.'

117  25 The  word  kritayiigayogyau  has  two  senses,  (1)  'fit  for  the
Krita  age,'  (2)  '  taking  exercise  together.'

119  14 '  Unwatched ' :  or  '  considerately  treated.'
119  23 Or  '  Malwa  nobles,'  but  cf.  p.  66,  1.  7.

119  n.  1 Ksudrdh  also  has  two  senses,  (1)  '  mean  persons,'  (2)  'small.'

120  28 The  red  Amldtaka  flower  is  punningly  compared  to  loyalty ;

anuraga  =  (\)  'redness,'  (2)  'loyalty.'

121  5  and  n.  1 For  '  dignity '  read  '  fairness.'

121  6-8 This  noble's  glory  is  'going  forth'  in  the  sense  of  'spreading

abroad,'  cf.  p.  90, 11.  4-5  supra.

122  13 Gunavatta  might  be translated 'the possession of attri-

butes ' :  the  Kashmir  text  has  an  easier  reading  gunavrittci
'as  if  become  an  attribute,'  with  doubtless  puns  in  guna
and  vritta.  Cinta,  would  be  better  rendered  by  '  anxiety.'

122  33 DharanldharCindm-(V)  'royal  houses,'  (2)  (with  reference  to

Diva's  footprint)  'hills.'  The  word  mahecvara  doubtless
implies  that  the  Mukharas  were,  like  Harsa  himself,
Civaites.

123  10-11 The  reading  of  MS.  A  (yathd  neyam)  gives  better  sense

'  that  all  our  lives  she  may  incur  no  trouble,  'tis  for  my  lord
to  provide.'  A.  reads  acitam  (?),  the  Calc.  ed.  nddhitam,
and,  in  a  note,  arttitam.

124  21 Sarasdtarpanahasta  means  '  hand-marks  of  liquid  pigment,'  if

the  Comm.  rightly  explains  dtarpana  as  pistapaticdhgula,
for  which  cf.  p.  123  n.,  and  compare  nihitaraktacandanahasta
Kdd.  p.  224,  11.  16-17,  and  dtarpaiiapancdngulayah,  Vdsa-
vadattd  p.  183, 1.  3.

124  35 The  reference  is  to  the  vicesaka  or  '  beauty-spot.'

125  6 Bhakti  we  have  translated  'cutting'  in  accordance  with  the

Comm.,  who  explains  it  by  mcchitti:  we  might  translate
1  adorning,'  a  sense  which  both  bhakti  and  vicchitti  will
bear.

c.  18


274  THE HARSA-CARITA.  4

125  15 The  sense  is  not  quite  clear ;  with  our  transl.  cf.  Ind.  Ant.  xui.

p.  77,  1.  7  of  inscr. ;  we  might  compare  Raghu  V.  xvn.  25
hamsa&hnadukiilavdn  with  S.  P.  Pandit's  note :  MS.  A  has
-hamsatulaicca  (?  = '  beds  of  goose  down ').

126  5 Tauvarajye  exactly  =  an  installation  of  the  heir  to  the  throne,

a  time  of  great  jubilation.
126  29 Sc.  red  lotuses.
128 2 For  muk/ieny  patati  in  this  sense  cf.  Kdd.  p.  35,  1.  6  (with

Peterson's  'note)  and  p.  38, 1.  2.

128  24 Langhayan  means — punningly — 'leaping  over'  (of  the  lotus

beds).

129  11 Bead  Rati  (sic).

129  20-21  The  reading  of  MS.  A  adhomukhim  gives  better  sense
'  while  with  downcast  face  she  seemed  to  chide  her  friends
and  heart  etc.';  cf.  p.  120, 1L  25-6.

129  SOsqq. We  have  puns  in  sudhd  =  (l]  'plaster,'  (2)  'ambrosia,'  and

bhubhrid=(V)  'mountain,'  (2)  'king.'

130  1-4  and  n.  1 Read  'enemies'  faces'  (sic). We  should  perhaps

translate  'enemies'  faces  with  coloured  masks.'  Also
sekasukumdra  may  mean  'oil-besprent,'  and  the  words
'  which  had '  ought  perhaps  to  be  omitted.  We  have  taken
the  instrumentals  as  connected  with  anjalikdrikdbhih.

131  4 The  'night  bowl'  nidrdkalaca  is  no  doubt  employed  as  a

charm  at  the  bed's  head;  cf.  Kdd.  p.  68,  1.  7,  p.  178,  1.  14.

133  13 The  red  eyes  of  the  cakora  are  referred  to  below,  p.  170,  n.  2

and  also  Kdd.  p.  140,  1.  6,  Raghu-  V.  vn.  22.

134  21 Read  'to  have  his  horse  (or  'the  horses')  saddled.'

135  30 Or  '  young  devotees '  or  '  squires,'  '  apprentices ' : the  word

navasevaka  appears  to  have  a  semi-technical  sense,  cf.
p.  200,  1.  22  and  Kdd.  76,  1.  20,  p.  207,  1.  6,  p.  331,  1.  16.

138  30-33 It  would  be  possible  here  to  read  '  their  dry  mouths '  and

'  their  cravings.'

139  3-4 ^aldkd  is  explained  by  Kailas  c.  as  '  collyrium  stick ' :  the

Comm.  says  pdsdiiakanikdh  '  bits  of  stone.'
139  11 Read  'porous  jar.'

142  18-21 The  Sanskrit  sentences  may  here  be  differently  divided  : —

'  I  know,  my  boy,  your  filial  affection.  At  times  like  this
an  over  tender  heart  distracts  even  a  sober  man's  mind.
Hard  to  resist  is  family  affection,  all-confounding.'

143  2 For 'fathers 'read 'parents.'
149 6 For  '  pallid '  read  '  parched.'


,  APPENDIX B.  275

151  n.  2 MS.  A  has  kulaputraih  pvasitaifca.
154  21 Read  'glory,  of  (sic).

154  n.  1 Query  vanam  vdpi  1

155  n.  1 Read  uparirudhyamdna  (sic).

158  19-21 Place  comma  after  manorathdndm  and  read  'the  paths  of

men's  desires  are  sundered,  their  Eldorados  are  laid
desolate  etc.'  Of.  Kdd.  p.  312,  1.  23  bhagnd  panthdno
gundndm,  and  the  whole  passage.  *

159  30 For  '  humps '  read  '  frontal  globes.'

159  n.  5 MS.  A  has  prabhdtasamaye  and  samucclyamdndsu. Read

samuceiyamdndsu  (sic)  in  note.

160  14 'With  eyes  aflame'; sc.  the  prince  could  not  bear  to  look

upon  the  objects  which  met  his  view.

160  n.  1 (gdva  =  (\]  grey,  (2)  belonging  to  a  corpse.

161  27-8 Or  better  '  made  bright  the  afterglow  of  their  love.'
161  n.  1 MS.  A  has  babhanjuh.

163  12 Read  'love.'

164  6-9 Rather  '  As  the  twang  of  the  broken  sapling,  by  robbing  the

lion  of  his  sleep,  redounds  to  the  elephant's  own  destruction,
So,  by  awaking  a  hero's  wrath,  to  the  villain's  own  ruin
turns  the  foul  blow  dealt  upon  the  confiding.'

167  7  and  n.  2  Kdlakramopacaydndm  is  probably  right  after  all,  cf.
Kdd.  176,  1.  20;  the  impossibility  of  gradual  increase
implies  the  sudden  intensity  of  the  sorrow.

167  31  sqq. The  Sanskrit  has  here  a  complicated  simile ;  the  prince's

washed  face  and  throbbing  lip  are  compared  to  the  autumn
sky  at  the  close  of  the  rains,  when  the  lightning  has  almost
ceased,  his  white  eye  to  the  opening  lotuses.  MS.  A  has
jijayisateva.

168  26 Qri,  the  goddess  of  sovereignty,  is  roaming,  sc.  not  yet  settled

with  a  new  king.  The  paragraph  contains  several  significant
allusions  ('  the  pathetic  fallacy ').  The  red  sunset  is  a  sign
of  bloody  wars;  the  separation  of  the  ruddy-geese  of  the
separation  of  the  brothers;  the  buzzing  bees  of  arrows;
the  rise  of  the  blotted  moon  of  the  rising  power  of  the
Gauda  king.  The  last  is  important  as  the  word  used  for
the  moon  ((Japdnka)  confirms  the  Comm.'s  statement  in
p.  195  (text)  that  this  was  the  Gauda  king's  name  (Hiuen
Thsang's  Che-chang-kia).  One  MS.  of  the  Harsa-Carita
names  him  Narendra-Gupta,  v.  Biihler  Epigr.  Ind.  I.  p.  70.


276  THE HARSA-CARITA.  t

169  7-8 'Softened  etc.'; this  however  may  go with 'you,' after

'  tractable.'

170  15-18 MS.  A  reads  corruptly  -kritapatdvagunthanljanadruman-

gandm  ivat  and  nirdkartum  for  tyaktum.  The  reading
janahgamanganam  is  probably  the  right  one,  as  the  con-
ception of  Qri  as  a  Candala  woman  runs  through  this  speech
and  its  reply.

170  n.  5 Guror  contains  a  second  sense  '  an  elder's  will.'

171  14-15 Read  'freed  from  fear  by  my  sire's  death.' Sc.  Puspabhuti

had  held  it  in  check.

172  n.  3 The  meaning  might  be  '  Why  not  take  the  sovereignty —

worn  out  as  it  is — with  you  ?'  But  Rajyavardhana  had
himself  compared  Crl  to  old  age.

173  30 The  Malwa  king  is  identified  by  Buhler  with  the  Devagupta

of  the  Madhubau  Inscr.  (Epigr.  Ind.  i.  p.  72),  and
Kanyakubja  he  regards  as  Grahavarman's  capital.  Malwa
may,  he  says,  be  the  Malwa  in  the  Punjab  near  Thanesar.

174  12 Or  perhaps  the  river  writhes  with  Kaliya's  brood.

174  16-20  The  hand  is  here  compared  to  a  spray  (pallava)  used  for
sprinkling  water.  The  'sweat'  in  the  next  sentence  is  a
common  Hindu  erotic  idea.

176  1 For  '  you  desire '  read  '  it  desires.'

177  n.  2 MS. A here  agrees  with the Kashmir rendering,  which

should  be  adopted  'which,  breached  within  and  timid
through  brotherly  affection,  seemed  as  it  were  in  flight.'
The  reading  is  confirmed  by  antarbhinnahridayatvat,  Kad.
p.  273,  1.  18.

180  24  The  senapati  had  really  risen  from  a  bed  of  reeds  (para).  Cf.
Vasavadatta,  p.  297,  1.  9.

183 2 For 'his 'read 'this.'

183 7 Rather  '  dream  of  aught  dishonourable.'

183  19  The  serpent  Cesa  supports  merely  the  earth  (not  the  oceans)
and  does  not  enjoy  the  earth  (v.  next  sentence).

185  8 Caksuraga  appears  to  be  a  technical  word  with  an  amatory

sense,  as  it  occurs  in  similar  passages  below,  p.  283,  1.  11
(text)  and  Kad.  p.  41,  1.  1.

186  22-25  and  n.  2 The  notion  in  this  sentence  is  that  Bhima  is

pleased  with  the  taste  of  carnage,  since  it  is  sweetened  by
the  kisses  of  his  demon  wife.


APPENDIX 1$.  277

The  title  sandhivigrahadhikrita  besides  vyapritasandhivigraha
and  sandhivigrahika  is  found  also  on  inscriptions,  e.g.  C.  1. 1.
in.  pp.  10,  35,  104,  108,  128,  167 ;  Incf.  Ant.  xm.  pp.  84,
118;  J.  R.  A.  S.  (Bomb.)  x.  p.  27 ;  Epigr.  Ind.  I.  p.  88,  1.  50.

188  7 The  Kashmir  text  inserts  iti  after  pardgato'ham,  perhaps  to

mark  the  end  of  the  quotation.  We  ought  apparently  to
translate  paragato' ham  by  '  I  am  arrived,'  cf.  Kad.  p.  262,
1.  13,  p.  264, 1.  11,  and  our  text,  p.  243, 1.  3.

189  12-14 We  may  better  take  suciram  with  ruditam  'I  have  not

abandoned  myself  for  long  even  to  tears.'

189  25 Skandagupta  is  probably  the  same  person  whom  Harsa  names

on  the  Madhuban  Inscr.,  Epigr.  Ind.  I.  p.  73.

190  3 Take 'uplifted' with 'thickets.' With reference to the

Vinclhya  this  compound  means  '  with  bamboos,  creepers,
woods,  and  thickets  adorned  with  peacocks'  tails.'

190  n.  2 Omit  the  note.

192  28-9  It  would  be  possible  with  Dr  Bhau  Dhaji  to  render
^ailusamadhyam  adhyasya  by  '  having  joined  a  company  of
actors.'

192  n.  1 Kead  dbhijdtyasya.

193  5-7 We have  here  omitted Candlpatih (which might mean

'lord  of  Candi,'  so  Hall)  with  the  Kashmir  text  and  read
Caicunagih  with  MS.  A.  Kanthacca  is  read  by  MS.  A  and
the  Kashmir  text.  MS.  A  reads  ak&ry&kutuhall  'curious
where  he  should  not  be.'

193  13 MSS.  AB  have  '  Mount  Govardhana.'
193  15 Mekala  is  part  of  the  Vindhya  Mountains.
193  16 Eead  'the  Paunaki  prince'  (MS.  A  has  Paunika).
193  26 The  Kashmir  text  and  the  Comm.  read  Dadhna.

193  n.  3 Concerning  asuravivara  and  vatika  cf.  note  on  p.  33  supra.

194  3 We  might  translate  'ensconced  in a  reed  grove  with  an

uplifted  thicket  of  reeds  in  their  hands.'

194  12  For  'sweet-toothed'  read  'drunken.'  Dr  Bhau  Dhaji's  MS.
apparently  read  madhumoditamadhuraka-  in  one  word.
For  madhuraka  MS.  A  has  madhurasa.

194  14  Probably  MS.  A  is  here  right  in  reading  Jaruthyam  'in
JdruthV

194  n.  6 Read  -kaladutadristayah.


278  THE HARSA-CARITA.  4

198  7-10  We  have  here  read  samvibhajya  klistakdrpatikakidaputra-
lokam  ucitaih  prasddaddnair,  vimucya  bandhandni.

198  24 The  word1  dksapatalika 'one  in charge of aksapatala  i.e.

documents '  occurs  frequently  on  inscriptions,  cf.  C.  I.  I.  in.
p.  180,  1.  76  and  p.  190,  n.  2.  We  have  a  'notary-in-chief'
(mahdksapatalika)  id.  p.  177,  1.  46,  and  a  'village  notary'
(gramaksapatalddhikrita}  id.  p.  257,  1.  15.  Mahdksapata-
Iddhikaranddhikrita  occurs  on  Harsa's  Inscr.,  Epigr.  Ind.
i.  p.  73.  t

199  17 For  balddhikrita  cf.  C.  1. 1.  in.  pp.  109  n.,  210  n. ;  Kdd.  p.  331,

I.  14.

199  22 Bead  katukakatuka-. For  katuka  —  ' officer'  cf.  text,  p.  250,

1.4.

200  22 On  navasevaka  v.  note  on  p.  135,  1.  30  supra.

200  27-8  The  apes  are  carried  for  superstitious  reasons  (raksdrthatn\
Comm.

200  n.  3  The  sense  of  jdghanika  is  uncertain :  possibly  it  means
'  debauchee,'  cf.  jaghanya.  We  translate  jdghanlkara.

200  n.  4  The  translation  suggested  in  the  notes  is  supported  by
Kad.  p.  88,  11.  4-5,  p.  97,  1.  21,  p.  191,  11.  2-3,  p.  212,  1.  17
etc.,  and  supra  p.  106,  1.  6.

200  n.  5 Ndslra  means  '  vanguard,'  Kad.  p.  331,  1.  14,  which  confirms

the  meaning  '  vanguard '  here.

201  28 MS.  A  reads  trastavesara-  ' frightened  mules '

202  5 Antardsana 'the  inner  seat' occurs in  a  similar  passage,

Kad.  p.  112,  1.  5. Perhaps  the  sense  is  'a  near  seat.'

202  u.  1 MS.  A  has  tilaka.

203  21 Read  'inlaid  ruby'  for  'ruby  inlaid  at  its  top,'  as  upari  goes

with  dhriyamdiiena.

204  n.  2 We  have  followed  MS.  A: otherwise  it  would  have  been

necessary  to  read  drastrln  for  drastrindm.

205  5 Read  'palace  peacocks,' and  for  the  idea  cf.  Kad.  p. 183,

II.  6-7.

205  16 'Spread':  for  tastdra  intransitive  cf.  Kad.  p.  76, 1.  21,  p.  368,

1.  11. MS.  A  has  tatdra.

206  4-6 We  have  read  haritakritdh  for  haritlkritdh : MS.  A  has

harmdm  kritdh.

207  2 For  '  old  fellow '  read  '  standstill.'

208  16 '  The  whole  body  of  nobles ' :  or  asamvibhakta  might  mean  'the

not  specially  provided  nobles.'


,  APPENDIX B.  279

208  19  'Fools  of  grant-holders':  dgrahdrika  occurs  on  inscriptions
in  the  sense  of  '  an  officer  in  special  charge  of  an  agrahara,'
C.  I.  I.  m.  p.  52,  n.  2,  p.  257,  1.  12.  »

208  27 Ayuktaka  is  a  regular  word  for  '  official '  on  inscriptions,  e.g.

0.  I.  I.  in.  p.  166,  1.  20:  we  have  dyuktapurusa,  id.  p.  8.
Cctta  'knaves'  is  the  word  which  Fleet  renders  (C.  I.  I.  ill.
p.  98  n.)  by  '  irregular  soldiers.' MS.  A  has  ceta.

208  n.  4 Here  (Bombay  ed.  p.  238, 1)  the  texts  read  uddhuyamdnadhuli-

patalam  kvacid  ekdntapravrittdcvavaracakracarvyamdndgd-
migauda  vimrigyamdnasasyasamraksanam,  which  as  far  as
gauda  recurs  below,  continuing  with  -vigraham.  It  is  clear
that  in  the  first  passage  only  mrigyamdnasasyasamraksanam
is  needed.  The  repetition  must  be  due  to  some  homoeote-
leuton  (perhaps  abhidadhdnair  and  dhdvamdnair).  The  MS.
A  is  here  right  and  reads  -carcyamdnd-.

209  1 '  Ripe ' :  we  read  nispanna  with  Comm.  and  the  Kashmir  text.

209  27  '  Collisions ' :  or  samghatta,  may  mean  '  races,'  as  supra  text,
p.  65,  1.  3.

211  23-4 For  this  custom  of  touching  on  the  back  cf.  Kdd.  p.  230,

1.  19,  p.  335,  11.  9-10  and  Hiuen  Thsang,  Si-  Yu-Ki  (Beal),  i.
p.  85  ;  (Julien)  I.  86.

213  13 There  is  doubtless  a  pun  in  danta,  implying  that  the  umbrella

has  circles  of  ivory.  For  mandalaka  MS.  A  has  manda-
ladyuti.

214  14-15 'And  of  the  hue  etc.':  the  Sanskrit  adjective  may  here  go

with  the  next  clause.  The  Kashmir  text  in  this  line  reads
the  adjective  dgurava-.

216  15  '  Rushed  towards' :  or  perhaps  'fled  from,'  as  the  gandhadvipa
is  a  terror  to  all  other  elephants.  The  Moon  in  1.  18  refers
to  Qagaiika,  the  Gauda  king  (cf.  sup.  note  on  p.  168).

216  20  The  'ladies'  are  the  wives  of  Harsa's  enemies,  whose  lands
are  soon  to  be  seized.

216  22-3 Vimuktasarvdcd  may  punningly  mean  'abandoning  all  hope.'

217  25 Hiuen  Thsang  visits  Bhaskaravarinan,  king  of  Kamarupa.

218  n.  4 MS.  A  also  has  ksdlayatu,  which  is  to  be  preferred.

219  17-18 Or  perhaps  'What  any  more  can  torment  my  noble  master,

thus  addressed  by  your  majesty?'

219  26 After  '  daughter '  insert  a  comma.

221  16-17  We  might  here  translate  'he  worships  men's  feet  even
with  his  words,  uncontented  with  his  head  alone.'


280  THE HARSA-CARITA,

222  last  line '  A  hedgehog ' :  or  '  polecat.'

222  n.  5 Or  '  an  uncounted  hell.'

223  9 We  have  translated  pardgatah  by  '  died '  (cf.  pareta)  because

the  ambassador  comes  from  the  Kumara. But  v.  note  on

p.  1 88,  1.  7  supra. We  might  translate  '  the  king  of  Assam

will  arrive  in  a  few  days '  or  '  has  come  home  only  a  few

days '  or  '  for  a  few  days.'
223  32-3 Read  'dangled  as  his  sole  remaining  ornament  his  charrn

bracelet,'  comparing  S.  P.  Pandit's  note  to Vikramorvact,

p.  84.
223  n.  3 For  the  instrumental  atmand  =  fon  his  own  part'  cf.  Kdd.

p.  25,  1.  16,  p.  163,  1.  15,  p.  340,  1.  2  etc.

225  last  line 'Zealous' is our translation of  yantrita; but the

Kashmir  text  has  ayantrita,  which  probably  means  'furi-
ous,' literally  '  unrestrained ' ;  cf.  B.  and  R.  MS.  A  reads
dvistagopdlakalpita.

226  20 '  Dust  of  travellers'  stamping  feet' :  for  this  use  of  prasphotita

(the  dust  flying  out]  in  almost  the  same  word  cf.  Kdd.

p.  223,  1. 15  kdrpatikaprasphotitacaranadhfdidhnsarakisa-

layaldnchitopakanthaih.
22811 Or  '  white  skeletons.'
229  10 We  have  accidentally  omitted  the  concluding  sentence  '  There

the  king  stayed,'  or  with  MS.  A  '  There  the  king  passed  the

day.'
233  13 According  to  Dr  Bhau  Dhaji  (J.  R.  A.  S.  Bomb.  x.  p.  40)  the

Maitrayaniya  Brahmans  are  still  found  at  Bhadgaon  and  in

neighbouring  villages  near  the  Satpuda  Mts.
233  29-235  5 Part  of  this  passage  recurs  nearly  verbatim,  Vdsava-

dattd  (Hall),  p.  263,  1.  4-p.  266,  1.  3.
236 8 The  keqaluncana  ascetics  appear  to  be  mentioned  Si-Tu-Ki

(Beal)  i.  p.  76 ;  (Julien)  i.  69.
250  31 The  Kashmir  text  has  patitapinda,  and  MS.  A  pratipinda,

which  would  support  the  rendering  'taking  food  with  an

effort  shown  at  every  mouthful.'

255  n.  11 Cf.  pancamandall  C.  I.  I.  in.  p.  31, 1.  6. Pancakula  is  the

title  of  an  office,  Epigr.  Ind.  I.  pp.  160,  170;  cf.  Ind.  Ant.
xi.  p.  221,  1.  21,  p.  242,  1.  9.

256  30 '  In  the  night ' :  but  MS.  A  has  a  better  reading  gdtrisu  '  in

those  who  have  bodies,'  to  be  taken  with  maMbhutagrdma-
gosthyah.


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES,  ETC.


I.


Acyuta,  a  relative  of  Bana,  31
Adhipati,  cousin  of  Bana,  73
Adhyaraja,  a  poet?,  3  9!.  18  and  n.  3
Agnimitra,  a  king,  192
Ahidatta,  uncle  of  Bana,  32
Arthapati,  grandfather  of  Bana,  31
Avalokita,  58,  237
Avanti,  187
Avantivarman,  122

Bana,  32 — 79  passim
Bhadrasena,  a  king,  193
Bhairavacfirya, an ascetic, c. in.

85— ,  263
Bhandi,  cousin  and  friend  of  Harsa,

llli,  135,  142,  175,  223—4
Bhasa,  a  poet,  2  <,•!•  15
Bhaskaradyuti, Kuinfira of  Assam,

217^

Bhaskaravarman  =  foreg. ,  217
Bhrigu,  uncle  of  Bana,  32
Bhukampa,  a  £abara  king,  232
Bhutivarmau,  a  king  of  Assam,  217
Brihadratha,  (1)  a  king,  192  ; (2)  a

king,  193
Buddha,  58,  66,  245,  258


Candragupta,  the  famous,  194
Candraketu,  a  king,  193
Candramukhavarman, a king

Assam,  217
Caura,  a  poet  ?,  1  cl.  6
Citrabhanu,  Bana's  father,  32


of


Dadhra,  a  king,  193

Dadhna,  var.  lect.  for  preceding,  193

Devabhuti,  a  king,  193

Devaki,  a  queen,  194

Devasena,  a  king,  194

Dharma,  uncle  of  Bana,  32

Divakaramitra,  a  recluse,  233  sqq.

Gambhlra,  a  Brahman,  128
Ganapati,  (1)  cousin  of  Bana,  73,  78 ;

(2)  a  king,  193
Grahavarman, brother-in-law of

Harsa,  122,  123,  128,  173,  233,  238
Gunadhya, author of the Vrihat-

katha,  3  n.  3
Gupta,  a  noble,  224,  251

Hala,  author  of  the  Saptagntaka.  ~1

11.  10

Hamsa,  uncle  of  Bana,  32
Hamsavati,  a  queen,  194
Hamsavega,  envoy  from  Assam,  211.

223

Hara,  relative  of  Bana,  31
Haricandra,  an  author,  2  cl.  12
Harsa,  cc.  2,  4 — Qpasniin
Harsa's  son,  76  n.  5

Iciina,  relative  of  Bana,  31

Jagatpati,  friend  of  Bana,  46
Jarutha,  a  king?  (v.  note  in  appen-
dix), 194

19


282


THE HAR§A-CARITA.


Jatavedas,  uncle  of  Bana,  32

Kakavarna,  a  king,  193

Kalidasa,  3  (,-1.  16

Kapila,  161,  236

Karnatala,  an  ascetic,  c.  in.  90 —

Kavi,  uncle  of  Bana,  32

Krisna,  brother  of  Harsa,  40,  44

Ksatravarinan,  a  king,  194

Kumaragupta, a Malav^, noble  or

prince,  76  n.  3,  119,  120
Kumarasena,  a  king,  193
Kuntala,  officer  of  Rajyavardhana,

177

Kurangaka,  a  courier,  133 — 4
Kuvera,  ancestor  of  Bana,  31

Madhavagupta,  a Malava  noble  or

prince, 119,  121,  235
Mahasena,  (1)  a king, 192; (2)  a

king,  194

Mahldatta,  uncle  of  Bana,  32
Malatl,  aunt  of  Bana,  45
Malava  king's  sons, 66  (but  cf.  n.

app.)  119  ;  king,  119
Mekhalaka,  messenger  from  Krisna,

41—50

Mitradeva,  a  king,  192
Mriganka, liruda  for Susthiravar-

man,  217

Nagasena,  a  king,  192
Narendra-Gupta, Appendix n. on

168,  26
Nirghata,  sister's  son  of  Bhukampa,

232,  258

Pariyatra,  Harsa's  chief  door-keeper,

50

Pa^upata,  ancestor  of  Bana,  31
Patalasvamin,  c.  in.  89 —
Patralata,  servant  of  Rajyacri,  254
Pauravi,  194
Prabhakaravardhana,  Harsa's  father,

cc.  iv.  v.  101 —
Pradyota,  a  king,  193
Pratapacila  =  Prabhakaravardhana,

101,  246


Pravarasena,  an  author?,  2  el.  14
Purarati,  Bana's  guru,  44
Puskara,  a  king,  194
Puspabhuti, ancestor of  Harsa, c.

ui.2)assim,  128,  192,  246
Puspamitra,  a  king,  193
Pusyabhuti  =  Puspabhuti,  83  (n.app.)

RajadevI,  Bana's  mother,  32
Eajyacrl,  Harsa's  sister,  116,  121—,

128, 158  n.  4, 173,  224, c.  vm.

j)assim
Bajyavardhana, brother of Harsa,

cc.  rv.  v.  vi.  passim,  223 — 225,  246,

251

Bantideva,  a  king,  194
Rasayana,  a  young  doctor,  144 — 5
Ratnavati,  a  queen,  194

Qalivahana,  an  author,  2  n.  10

Qarabba,  a  king,  192

Qarabhaketu,  a  forest  chief,  230

Qacanka,  the  Gauda  king,  168  and
note  in  appendix

Qigunaga,  a  king,  193

Qrikumara,  a  Malava  prince,  76  n.  3

Qrutavarman,  a  king,  192

£uci,  uncle  of  Bana,  32

^udraka,  a  king,  193

Qunga,  a  king,  193

QyarnadevI,  a  queen  of  Assam,  217

Qyamala,  cousin  of  Bana,  73,  74

Samudra,writer  on  physiognomy,  103

Satavahana,  an  author,  2  cl.  13

Simhanada,  senapati  under  Harsa,
180

Skandagupta,  commandant  of  ele-
phants under  Harsa,  189 — 191

Somaka,  a  king,  194

Sthitivarman,  a  king  of  Assam,  217

Subandhu,  author  of  the  Vasava-
datta,  2  n.  5

Sucivana,  singer,  33,  73

Sudristi,  reader,  33,  73

Sugata  =  Buddha,  246

Sumitra,  a  king,  192

Supatra,  var.  lect.  for  Suyatra

Suprabha,  a  queen,  194


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, ETC.


283


Susena,  a  physician,  13(i
Susthiravarman,a  king  of  Assam,  217
Suvarnacuda,  a  king,  192
Suyatra,  attendant upon  Yacovati,
109

Tfiraka,  an  astrologer,  109
Tarapati,  cousin  of  Bana,  73
Tltibha,  an  ascetic,  c.  in.  90 —
Tryaksa,  uncle  of  Bana,  32

Vasudeva,  a  minister,  193
Vatsapati,  a  king,  192


Vela,  attendant  of  Ya9ovati,  149
Vidiiratha,  (1)  a king, 192  ; (2)  a

king,  194 ?
Vindumati,  a  queen,  194
Vlrasena,  (1)  a  king,  193  ;  (2)  a  king,

194

Vicala,  a  Bodhisattva,  84
Vicvariipa,  uncle  of  Bana,  32
Vyaghraketu,  a  forest  chief,  230

J
Yacomati,  Harsa's  mother,  cc.  iv.,

v.,  246
Ya<?ovati  =  foreg.


II.


Aicvarakaranika  ascetics,  236

AjiravatI,  river,  46

Andhras,  135

Aratta  horses,  50

Arhatas,  49

Acmakas,  192

Assam (Pragjyotisa),  211,  223

Aupanisada  ascetics,  236

Ayodhya,  194

Bhagavata  ascetics,  236
Bharadvaja  horses,  50
Bhojakas,  110
Bhrigu  fjotru,  20,  76
Bodhisattvas,  84,  236
Buddhists,  236,  242,  244

Cakoras,  193
Canipa,  194
Camundi,  194
Canclika,  grove  of,  45
Ceylon,  187
'  Cock '  rules,  30

Dandaka  forest,  15
Dardura  rock,  211
Darpa9ata,  Harsa's  elephant,  51,  52,
76  n.  4


Deckhan,  201,  211
Dhruva  hymn,  15
Dravidas,  135

Gandhamadana,  187,  210

Gandharas,  101

Gaudas,  2, 178—180,  185—7, 209,

216,  224,  250

Godhana  or  Govardhana  Mt.,  193
Gujarat,  101

Hunas,  101,  132,  165

Jainas,  49,  134,  236,  244
JFiriithl,  194,  v.  note  in  appendix

Kalingas,  193

Kamboja  horses,  50,  112,  203
Kanada  ascetics,  236
Kanyakubja,  173,  224,  250
Kapila  ascetics,  161,  236
Kardaranga  leather,  203,  214
Karusas,  193
'


Kashmir  horses,  113
Kecaluiicana  ascetics,  236
Krisna,  followers  of,  236
Kuruksetra,  77


284


THE HARSA-CARITA.


Lanka,  187
Latas,  101
Lokayatika  ascetics,  336

Magas,  110

Magadhas,  193

Mahendra  Mt.,  211

Mahecvaras,  122  (v.  note  in  appen-
dix), 265

Maitrayamyas,  233 f.

Malavas,  77,  101,  119,  175,  178,  223,
225

Malaya  Mt.,  211

Mallakutar,  village,  45

Manitara,  town,  46

Mathuras,  192

Maukharis  =  Mukharas,  194

Mauryas,  193

Mekala,  193

Mrittikavati,  192

Mukharas,  122,  128,  246

Nagas,  192

Nepal,  76  (v.  note  in  app.)

Padmavati,  192
Pancabrahina  prayer,  15
Paiicaratra  ascetics,  236
Pandurin  ascetics,  236  1.  7
ParaQarins,  33,  49,  162  n.  2,  171  1.  35
Pariyatra  country,  210
Pacupata  ascetics,  49
Paunakis,  193  :
Paunarvasavas,  144
Paurauika  ascetics,  236
Pauravas,  194
Persia,  50,  210


Prayfxga,  61

Prltikuta,  Sana's  home,  30,  45

Pundra,  72,  79


s,  232
(^'aivas,  91,  137
£akas,  194,  210
^'oria  river,  15,  23,  24,  28
^ravastl,  192
gnkantha,  73,  79,  81,  94
Qriparvata,  3  n.  6
(^vetambara  Jains,  236
Saptatantava  ascetics,  236
Sarasvati  river,  158,  160,  198
Sauhmyas,  194
Saimras,  194
Sindh,  50,  76,  101
Sthanvicvara,  81
Suvela,  187

Taiigana  horses,  201
Trikuta,  187
Turuskas,  210

Vaisnavas,  219
Vanayu  horses,  50
Vatsyayanas,  30,  34,  66
Vayu  Purnna,  72
Videha,  193

Vindhya,  161,  224,  225,  240
Yiranti,  194

Vrihatkatha,  the,  3  (,•!.  17
Vrisnis,  194

Yastigrihaka or Yastigrahaka, vil-

lage, 46
Yavanas,  192—3


CAMBRIDGE:  PRINTED  BY  j.  &  c.  F.  CLAY,  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS.


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.


KOV  0  '
QUARTER  LOAN
