FVL LYING.


DICVLOVS DISCOVRS, OP $, ni BARS}
NET, ENTITYLED: ADISCOVERIE OF


THE FRAVYDVLENT PRACTISES _ /-
* IOHN DARRELL, |


A = $ *4


FAFHEREIN 1S et AND 1PÞ.4 | axis


=IÞ
SHEWED IN THE ETES OF THE {WO} Ee es Y.


-_ Paldh Ma gTrlt 4 ids |
A |
C - |
ie
b:.-4
4
|. «4
*
b--:0
By
Li4
/ e
| Þ


——_—— 4


| ſmmplicitie he haldeth it lawful to lye,copge and f aint


- Whatisthe matter ſaith another? Anſwere is made
 togeathcr with ſuch others, whom they with theire crooked eonuey»


en V
| fabing after a good dinner perbaps, then ener any 'of the
full aſcaſon. And this in effect notonely the ſtreetes and Tavernes'


TO THE CHRISTIAN AND VVELL AFFECTED REA.
DER, 10/1N DARAELL MINIS UER OF THE VYORD,
WISHETH ALL GNACE ANO HAPPINES. WIIH
a1udgnent ro dilcerne betwixt thinges that ditfer,
berwene twat which 1s true and taile,
good and evil,

1 the dayes of Henrie the lecoffJ of Frawnice, father to Charles, the
| 2reat maſtacrer and murderer of CGiodes Sayntes, when the Sunnee
1ne of the Golpell beganne to breake forth in that kingdome, and
tae name of Hugnt as a by«word vt reproch was given 9 the proteſ
{ors thereof: mn the yery entrie as 1t were of thoſe troubles and burlie
burleyes tor reiigion, it is recorded of the Italian weomen,and credu+
lvas popularttie of that countrie, that hearing ot rhe great {turre that
was then riſen aboutthoſe Hwgonorcs, they would needes knowe of
their golUlye fathers ad holy inquiiitunge Fryers, what thole French
Hug onotes were: yvnto whom that deuoute and Pop»holy generation
(nor vnlike themſe|ues) made this wholeſome any catholike aghwerer
That they were nat men torſooth, but vglyc and monſts | "_

| fs


ly multituJe,ncuer requyringe nor
l traight ro a kinde of hi & clapping 4
ter out cries and hatfull exclamations agaialt them, | +2; 508
wretches,fie on them wretches. Now even thus good reader(and ns
better then thus) tareth it with me at this inſtant. The name & ſound ©.»
of Darrell, of his impriſonunent,and the cauſe therot,hathan amanty* >
ncr poſſeſſed & oyeripread the whole land, why,what is he faith one? . |
preſently and rev»
dilye by our two Engliſh Inquiſiters. Samwell Hartſnet and hismalter,


> n


anccs haue be witched, that Darrell is foriooth «4 wh 4 conſent, :
4 Iugler, an Exorciſt, a counterfeite, 4 demull-fling er, 4 deus -drincr, aSee 7
ducer, 4 deceiuer, an Impoſtor, and I know not what: that of an imp# ,
ſo ut be toa god end,
(45 his faworits tearme it,) to the glory of God, in which regard be bath tak,
pon him to be deeplye ſeene un the myſterie of demils, and hath playd bis
the prize in this ing linge ſcience, caſting out more deanls by as 5 py |


ane renge off, bur (46 have beno ermo BY ry benches and.


—— | 4 : F *
SETS - , "FX ;
o 7 "


LE
#3
bu


dd


THE FPISTLE


Seates of Tuſtice have ſounded with the noyſe of this Darrell,the dewsl
elri«er, and of the count feite trickes that he ſhould teach, V \ herem
notwithſtandinge 1 thanke God, when they haue thundered out the
vrrermoſt they can againſt me,I may truly ſay(and that with the tefti
monie of mine owne hart and conſcience) that I am inſt ſo guilrie of
the thinge they charge me with, as the fore-recited French Hwugonotes
were of all that rablement wherewith they were (o belmeared and de
Rured by that Italian munckiſh fraternitie. For if it be true that the
fad heades like dragons, faces like dog ges, cares like /wine,(noutes like
ſerpentes, and that they would eate vp their moth:75,05c. 1 hen is it allo
true I confefle,that Darrell is ſuch a mounftrous vile fellow as is heere
layd forth and deſcribed. But alas good reader this is no new thinge:
looke backe to ages paſt and thou ſhalt find it to be an old inueterate
ouerworne praiſe of ſathan, newly furbiſhed and ſet abroach againe


by his inſtrumentes, to paint out the profeſſors of the goſpellin the ,


moſt ougly deformed ſhape they.can deviſe: (as we ſec by our Saui-

our Chit and his Apoſtles and ſo conſequently by his miniſters ſpe-

cially:) not that they be ſuch indeede as they are deſpitfully featured

out, but to this end, to make them more odiouſly envied and maliti-

oy hated of the world,which is the ſpeciall marke the enimy ſhoot-
at.

Now the principall thinge that is charged ypon me, (and which I
have all this a bile denied,and fil deny o) 8, kom 10 counter ferte,
But what is this,that Darrel! ſhould thus trach to counterfeitefwhy no -
thinge els forſooth, but a rrall entrance and poſſeſſion of the demill of and
into the bodies of men, to be diſprſſſſed and remooued thence by fafting and
prayer, and all to pract and make good the hipocriticall ſafting and exerciſe
of the pu ugans, which otherwiſe (without ſome ſuch fetches and demiſes)wow
Id prooue erke nauzhr. This then we lee is the finne, if it be true. And
ſuerly allow it to be true and to be ſuch indeede as they have layde it
forth to be with all his cireumſtances,1 my ſelfe will ſubſcribe & ioyne
with them im the condemnation of it to the bottome of hell, and the
{ner to the very depth of the grave, as wherin(if it be rightly exam!
edand —_—_ is doflye ſhut vp and included not onely the diſho-
nor of God and diſgrace of his workes, but a foule and deteſtable a=
buſe of Godes church and a mocking of Gods people, with a ſcorne-
tull and ſhameles contempt both of magiſtracy and miniſterie. And
can not the wiſd ome and maieſtie of the ſtare of Fnp/and fine out a-
due puniſhment and correRion for ſo wretched and greivous an enor
mitie as this? no queſtion but it can,may,and ought,if the partie were
once orderlye _ ;


Romances in auntient time for fauor to deliver any mito death m"_
the


by law convicted. But as it was not the manner of


'


.


——


"ms os &A @w owt. ww ot


0


$


: thepartie accuſed had his acculers before him,H& leave to defend .”
* ſelfe: (oisit not the manner of the Honorable Courtes of Laſtice in WY


; } from my ſoule renounce them,as heerctofore Ihaue often done with


_ $—_  - o » a PO


YOTHE READER,


him


England, to proceed to ſentence before convition,or to puniſhment
betore apparant proofe. And this is it that hath and doth make me
more contident m defenſe of myne owne innocencie, and the equitie
of my caule,cven the reuerent opinion and eſtimation that I have of
the ordinarie courtes of luſtice in this land, before whom whenloe -
ver I ſhalbe called, I know it 1s not a hundred of ſuch lying and libel


ling diſcourſes as this of Samwell Har/netes, that ſhall any way ſwaye |
them, either to ſentence or cenſure the meaneſt of her Maicſties ſub |
iectes without euidence and proofe.
But my fault they willneedes kaue to be double: one an error in my il


Iudgment, the other « plaine knacke of knawcry (for I can call it no bet
ter) in my prattiſe. For the firlt my ſimple Tudgment (as I hauc alrea
dy both by word & writting made knowne)is this: 7hat 4s the bodkes
of men may really be poſje, ed of Sathan in this ave 4s well as in former
rimes: ſo the ordin.oic way and meanes of their diſprſſeſſion and deliner=
ance is prayer, or prayer and fa?mge. This is (in effect) all thatI hold,
and contend for, wherin | willinglye referre and ſubmict my lelfe to
the godly learned of our Church, I challeng no power to worke mi-
racles,nor guift aboue others to caſt out deuils. I have not vſed any
adiuration: all which are fathered vpon me, but I condemned the
ſame 1n others, And now before the Lord and men I doe vtterly &


my tongue & pen: what groſſe and dangerous eyor then doe I main- |
taine? For the other that is my knacke or packer of knawery in teachmge '
80 counterſeitr, and fayning a diſpoſſeſ]1on by prayer, when their were na |


ſuch things performed: 1 cannot be periwaded (for all this impudent &
ſhameles diſcourſe of S Harſnetes, ſo bedecked anJ adorned with my
L. of Londms flowers) that they themſelues in their conſciences doe be
leene this knacke of knauerre againſt me in that ſort as they haue ſert
it downe. The reafons that induce me o to thinke be theſe.

Firſt,becauſe they would not ſuffer S-mrrs or rather the devill in
him to doe histrickes,though they were ſundrie times deſired pub-
liklye and priuatly that he might doe them for the better endinge of
the controuerſie, and that he offered to doe the ſame.

Secondly, their manner of proceeding againſt me conrrarie to
the ordimarie courſe of iuſtice and equitie: yea ſuch as heathens an1 y
infidels would blaſh and be aſhamed to vſe: as appeareth 'by the par-
ticolars in thetreatife following. Now what neede the» ro have vie]
any fuch exrraordinarie and vnlawfull proceedings, If they were per-
lwaded of the truth of that which they pretended againlt me, or ov


blaſphemer,and forſworne wretch?


” ſt


THE EPISTLE


they had any iuſt matter or (ound an cleare euidence to convince


me by: nay it they weare nor in themleiues pertwaydcd, that Darrell
would cleare wrmitelte of teaching to conntcyfente, it he 1huuwid be admutt
ed to a proceeding according to the lawes,of the iealme 1n 1uch caics
prouiieg? "ir 8 |

1 turdly, their very writtinge againſt me in this caſe m that man
ner as they haue done,ts lutficicnt uw the 1ygment of the Wile tO Ulle
cry and ilcouer the guiltines of their contcieaces this way, For what
aieit were it ro puniia treafon or rebellion by Booke-wrucng? 1 will-
inglye contetic the {inne they charge me with (it 1t be true} ro be as
bad as rebellion, and to delerue more then the piilorie, yea a ſhame-
full and a reprochtall death to the terror ot others, Andit they can
proue the thinges publiithed again(t me m that printed Libell of S,
Har(netes, they ;thall neede no 4urte to pate ypou me, neither will I
craue any tauour but iultice with leyeritie, Seeinge then the punithe
not nor neuer went about to punith thus {uppoled otfence according
to the weight and deſert thereof: nay haue bene fo tarr trum that, as
within 14.dayes atter the publiftunge ot the booke made againit me,
they offered me libertie ypon condiuon I would promile nut to pre
ach of poſſe{ſio nor dilpotteſſion: nor in my publice preactung 1witi=
tic the poſſeſſion and diſpoſleſſinge of the perions controverted' nor
deale any more in the diipoſſetſinge of any: and yet have publiclye
made it ns tor ſo haynous and notorious acrime, what doth


this argue but that inwardly in theire owne ſoulcs, they doe not be» *


letue their owne lible*

Fourthly,their often and ordinarie bringinge in the teſtimonie
of Somers againſt me in theire (aide booke, (abie to make a horle to
ſpue) whentoever they are at a ſtand and can by no meanes writhe
nor wrelt in that which they would taine make good (being vtterlye
voyd of all honeſt courle of detence) then torlvoth comes in M. Som
ers dropping out of M Herſnets budget as an authenticall witnes. And
what doth more argue the guiltines ot ther conſcieces,the deſpratces
of their cauſe, & the ſhamleines ot their defence then this? That they
'are not abaſhed to ſuppreſle the examinations of ſundry honeſt men,
wiſe men and gentlemen of good place, taken by Comiſſion from,
the .2rch.B, o/ Torke as thinges of no account: and inſtead of them ts
tell vs a tale of Kobin-hood, or rather if you will , of Robin the dewill,
alias, William Somrvs” why alas, are they do {imple or (ortiſh to ima=
grime, that any man that is well in his wittes, will beleeue this or that
be-auſe Somers (aith it,that infamous and notorious lyer,counterfeit,


Fiftly, theire winkinge at theire 7, Lancaſhire counterfeirs, and


—_#— 4 4a H.-. <<, ea 8g


TOTHE READER,


{moth paſſing by them nut punutunge them, albcit 6.of them were
| I trac latnetalllly, NLT ally Of thoike 4, whom they have deait with,
and lay Vpun their examuiiation have cunteiled that they haue coun


gs tertereuzuy not yomr's new principall luppoley counterteite: but ta»
nan. | Woured , uitettained, countehaunced, cerilhed and made much of
Gila hun though molt vile and mntamous, and tuch as they mult needes
vhat | K0w to naue icarce ally match 1m lewunes and iniquitie:as if comnmere


vill. | fertung and bla/pheming were a prayie or but a {pirt of youth in himy
and trachins to counter force onely odious in me, Now whence come


IN meth thus ttealing by the 7, and,impunitie of all, but trom te conict
can ence of man,teluiny hum that tHcy 47 no 1counterferts, and. thertore it
5. ts belt co 1et chem alone,and not re panuth all thele innocentes; Lett
ul they in their innocencie denyiag conttaatlye to haue counterteited,


(he any exclaning againit them,ihould bring them to great [hame.

ing dixily an laitly the ung tnat mult monueth me thus to be per»
lwaled t5:their winking at, aad not aalvering at all to the wpoſſib5e

3 | buczot or concermang /0&/ling, Katherine Wright, Mary Cooper, and

the 7, in Lanc4bre,whici are tae onely ghinges we alicadge ag

tie their counterfeiting, why they neither are ngr can pollible be counters
feites:a.a4 che liuy thifres(to blere the e1es of men) they have deuied


ws anJ rorged out of cietr owne braines tor anſwere to the wnpoſſibu/atres
th Þ! elle ad t Sam'rs COM uUV[FeOurang, & aainely to the depo.utions of
G |} ©e 17. proving the np 1/16 ities by oath, Heerevnro | may add the
@2l 47d, luttti lh, c.cies,and more cen ridiculous prootes of my treach=
$12 +. 3: cet (24 e'teites, For 114104427 tolbdun valeuc, the fooe pro. 14.15,
Ut Lylo peaple, winch w 4 a:leuue + very thin?” (nat Coret was & vlucton, fc
© thac ve 144d 4 4'will, ipeciallye wacn they have the pharitees telling
oy themn,that 5: c4tcth farch dous throwh Brilgroul: that he is abigſphte
ye 2), (p:Cially Wien the 1g previt laith he hath bla/phemed, yee heare


m // his bla;phemue: ) vill vpoa the producinge of theletiily ſhiftes and ab
1d ſurd proo'es,by a Prelate (pecially and his Chaple:ne, hand ouer head, -
&S an 1 of taeir word, rather then vpn any diligent examination of the
matter receiuc the(e for covnterteites, and me for their initruZor:
Ws (w'uch the B of Landon and $,Huſn't knew tall well,eis they woulde
n hays ſaued thac labour: )yer the Prelat? and his Ch4p/4:ne cannot poſ
o ſiblie ( beleeus aad be perſwaded in rew conſciences, which haue
b, forge them to thisſaide cad an1 parpole, and 12ue deliheratly and
4 aduriedly wayed all things taroughly concerning tis matter:except
N


you will cleane put out the eyes of their vaJerſtan ingl,and deprive te 4 { |


them of their rea(on, 3 make them of reaſonable, ynreaſonable crea
tures, Though the poogls of the leves throuzh that tilly ſhit of the


His Preilts aud the Elders did beleus, that Cinytcs dycypics come by


©


,
pi \
|
4.74

{>
*/ ,
-. «at
=


wk


THE FPISTLE


night and ſtole him away, whiles the ſoutiers ſlept, yet the hie prieſtes
and Elders who deuiled this (hi't for the imotheringe of Chriſts re-
ſurre..tion, knewe and were perſwaded in their colciences 1t was not
ſo, but far otherwiſe. Even (© in this our cale, though many of the
471-3 of England doe in their ſimplicitig and raſh creculitie verclie
eleiue that Somers > the reſt hane counterfeited, ep 1 inſiructed them,be
caule ofthe filly reaſons printed & publiſhed to that end by the B.of
London and S.Ha-ſnct:yert the B.& Harſnet which haue invented & de
uiledthoſe ſottiſh reaſons, and framed a whole booke for the (mother
inpge of the worke of God wrought vpon theſe perſons, can not but
know and be in their conſciences perſwaded,that they haue not coun
terfeired,nor I tqught them,
Theſe then(good reader}with ſundrie others are the ſpeciall rea
ſons that moue me to thinke, that they themſe!ues(what face ſocuer
they ſett on it)doe not yet in their owne coniciences betwixt god &


them, conſtantly beleiue all that they haue thus publiſhed or rather,


libelled againſt me,beinge a'thinge vnpoſliblie they ſhould, And ifit
fare ſo with the bitin F; aud bitrereſt aduerſaries, I may the bolder I
thinke (even by the law and ru/e of equitie) be an earneſt ſuter vn-
to thee whoſoever thou art to ſuſpend thy judgment, and not haſti«
ly to paſſe any ſentence againſt me: & intreat thy patience chriſtian
reader and fauourable cenſure of me thus farr fourth, as to cauſe thee
to ſtope thine eares to all vniuſt ſurmizes and odious exclamations
apain(t me, till proofe and triall haue discovered my guiltines or in-
nocencie. And this the rather I truſt you will doe, if you remember
and forgett not that ſaying of the holy ghoſt: hr chat 1s firſt in hrs owne
Canſe 15 ml} then cometh his neighbour ,and maketh inquirie of him, And
that other in theſame place:he that anſwereth amattcr before be heave it
it 8 follie and ſbame wnto him. He that anſwereth, that is, taketh vpon
him to iudg or determine of a matter incontrouerſie,before he heave it,
meaning,what can be ſaid of both ſides,it i follic and ſhame vnto him,
that is,a poynt of follie comming from the lake of wiſdome, and ſuck
as whereof one ought to be aſhamed.

And the rather I am to intreat this fauour at thy handes, in that
I have not bene dealt with accordinge to the ordinarie courſe of Tu -
ſtice of this land,butfaltogether againſt the haire and in the vnreaſon
ableſt manner of proceeding that might be, as if it were no matter at
all what violence % i ndignitie they offer to a man of my condition,
or to ſo ba'e a fellowe as Drvel! is. Neither by their patience doe
ehinke, that they can for their lives give me an inſtance or ſhewe me
the like preſident of their irregular & diſorderly proceeding avainſt
mein any of the honorable cull courr:s. of the Realme,which is wor


A 4» AST c- a 2-7


___
"af —c__ cc. a Gat aan ack. am


TO THF READER,
thy the notinge, yea to be recorded and navled on the poſtes of the
ltreetes to the veiw of poſteritie, One would thinke that the reue-
rent tathers ot the Church, ſhould in their courtes an.| tudiciall pru-
ceedinges giue their children (as they would haue them counte)
the reverent lyges of the land,and fathers of the common wealth,
an example and pa/terne of luſtice and equrie:and not uch an exam
ple as they would abhorr and be a ſhamed to foilowe, I haue heard
that amonge other the excellent graces of Cod vpon her \aieſtie,
this is one that doth exceedingly grace both her perlon & her gover-
ment,namely, that in the makinge and ordaininge of her Iudges,ſhe
doth among other things emzoyne the this ({peciall charge: That what

ſocurr in equitie may be produced on the brhalfe of the ſubuc(te,may be p.t
tiently heard and fauorably admitted without exception or partialutie' and
that they ſbould not 0 themſelues to ſrtte otherwiſe m Indomont (or
ber ſelfe, then for her |ubieFFe.which kind of equall and chriſtian proced
inge if it had bene held with me,I needed not now to haue ſpent my
time in refuting this ſhameles and malitious inve:tiue. what proceed
inge hath bene vied againſt me will plainly appeare by this diſcourſe
followinge, and namely in my anſweare to the ſecond chapter of the
firſt booke, by the quarres or demaundes to the Diſcowerey (I meane
the B, of Lond and S.' Harſnet) iuſtifiynge the ſame, and affirminge
that this cauſe bath bene.ex mined, acrrydinge to the vſnal conrſe by the
lawes of the Rralme in ſuch caſes provided, And yer ſhall not the Diſco»
ry be ever able to name in what one thing after ny appearice be«
fore the high commiſſion, I was dealt with according to lawe, Truly
for my owne parte I cannot. If he can, let him doe it. For theſe rea-
ſons I hope good reader,that [ayinge aſide all partiallitie an1 preiu-
dice, youw!ll reſerue the one eare, to heare what Dawell hath to ſay

for the Lord and himſelfe, and againſt counterferting ,and teachinoe $9-
mers, Darling Crc.to counterfeite:and that-you will beware how you re
ceiue a falſe report _—_ your neighbour,ſpecially againſt the Lord
himſelfe and his workes,

If any thinke that the charge of count eyf-it ing, and of wy teachinge

89 cornter{..ite (the ſumme of the booke anſweared by me, )is ſo lying,

Naunderous, abhorring eo common ſence, palpable falſe,and vnpoſſi

ble to be true, that it was altogether vnworthy the an{wearinge and

convincing,or at leaſt of ſo large an anſweare an4 convition as heere
followeth: ſuch may remember that the Apoſtles being charged wich


pag 14 ofthe
"uy (ATIE,


draggkennes and to be /ull of newe wine,Peter for them all anſweare { 20-12-13 14.
'* & conuinced that vile Naunder. In like ſort did ouy Sauiour Chriſt 4b 13+


d-ins, charged more vily to be a coniurer, and to caft out drmils through


; Eclzabub, the prince of denils, which thinges are written for cur learn»


—


THE EPISTLE


ing,even to teach vs what to doe whs any iuch thing falleth out, Now
Lac 44 zer 1 aaue beae tor thele two realons. Firit,l thougit ut tice ©)
alweare ty ail that is contained in tne Dycouery, whit wceemeth £0
make mure vr ictic againlt tne caule vr ny telte:leatt patiing by tome
of this king, it mia be thoagit | thertore did it ana purpoily, bee
cautcl were not avic to aalweie, Againe, 1 coitdered that many haug
already given an care to countrrfet age, and verily beieiue our Dema
niakes to be cmnrerjcrts; tor their takes taertore,os that Lought draw
thete preiudicace; perſons trom their error tothe unbracinge of the
truti,it was requiite tO aalwere all that 1 tae tace made tor counter
tertinge, which could nat be pertormed in tzwe wordes, yeconuly, [
knewe che credit of the adueriarie was great, my owne little, beinge
a bale & contemptible perſon u1 the eyes of the world. i hat my leite
then and that whici 1 contend tor might be beletwed, even of thig
dotinge and blind generation, It was neceilaric 1 ihould not onel
cracke or diauah the credite of the aduerlarie, evea with his
trendes,which might haue bene done 1n atew wordes:but take ail cre=
dit trom him,by dete-tinge all his filthines: tor wa .nakinge bis namg
to rotte and ihiake, and the councerteit caule ne i1aca in 141d, their ig
hope that mea will giue ſome eare vary ine,and that | itrive for, be [
never ſy meane, Now this would be belt peccor.ne4d in tae larger pur
ſace an4 ikirringe Jeepely in che talih24s,lyes, and ablurduties of the
Diſconerer, which coulde nat be Jonne withu ut tae naitiplyiage of
wordes. For the more 04s ltirrech ia char waich 18 (tiaciage and fil »
thy, the more itinking ſauor it (eadeth focth, And is thall we find it
to bein the a-nple ripping vp of c:us foule Liſcr0cry to the De
tefhion wherof we will now proceed, God alliltinge ys, If '
the fal/h»0d of lame be dere ted,and thou find our «+
the truch by this our Detef#on: then open
thy mouth in the defence of that truth,


and afliſt me with thy prayers,


Thine in the Lar
bobs Darrell, 2


LYING. DISCOVERY.


8 inall ages there haue bene ſome which have gainſaid the holy
doctrins of god revealed in his word, fo likewite there haue not
wanted luch as haue reſiſted the works which he hath wrought befor
the children of men, Againſt the wondertull works wrought in Egipe
by Moſes did thole lorcerers [annes and [ambres rile vp,and let them. Exo4-7: rt;
ſciues with all their diuelith arte and power. V Vhen the holy ghoſte
fell vpon the Apoſtles in the torme ot chouen tongues like fuc, cuen
ot thole which were eye & care witnelles thereot, there were ſome
that mocked them, ſaying that they were full of newe wyne, The A- a&.1.14, , 17
poltle Paule having calt the ciuell out of the 2ytbomfſe, her mailters |
were offended therewith: caught him ex Sylas his atlociate,and drew
them before the maieſirates:who vpon theire incenſinge, commaznded
them to priſon, and to be beaten with rods; whereypon they were beaten 5 5.8,
ſore, cajt into an inward priſon ar dungeon: and thewe ſecte made faſt in
the (tockes. V V hen there was brought to Chriſt Teſus one poſſeſſed with 8
diucl, blind, and dumbe, and that he had healed hun , ſo that bee which
ws blind and dumb, both [pake and awe: all the prople (it is (aid ) were
amaſcd,, andjaid, is nat this that ſonue of Damid;; And vpon the lame
worke wrought vpon an other at.an, other timeggbe multuud marucile.
ed [aying, The like was neuer [ene 4n Iſrael, But the Phariſes reliſted as
other workes of his, ſo both theſe and laid: be caſteth out dauels, thro <
web Beekzebub the prince of diels, In a word, the mockinges and ſcour 9. #
gings, the banilhments, the bonds ang impriſonments, the puttinge
to death of Chriſt leſus, the, Prophets, and his Apoltles doe tellity,
how the word and workes'of gou have bene from time to time. c&li-
ſted. Euen ſo it is now: God hauing wrought divers rare andgreate
workes, there have bene {omg tound to withſtand, then: and to beax
the world in hand that all is but conmterteyting and notorious coles
nage, Among thele the.cheit are.D, Zanarofe L. of Landon and Sam
«ll tJarſnet thug chaplaine and Examwmngz whole labour day andnight
it hath bene for the [vace almoſt ot two yeares/and igabar tirne naus
they applyedand abule.| theire wit and autaprity,.to perſwade this
to the world, and to this end have they publilhed a-booke, called 2-
Diſcow'ie, But as Paule ſaith of [annes and Iancs that withſiend dig 301
ſes,and of certaine men in kis time of-carrupe mug s'(pr 1641 concertre
we the faith,which did then rg1/i the t/utb;even lo'8 the lame lay] of
thele men: 7hey [ball prounile no longer, for theit macines;ball be exigent
Into all mn, as theirs alſo was, |
Herevnto ferueth as the former treatiſe, wherein the truth is de
clared, and thele workes publiſhed and made knowne to the world,
(for the declaration of the truth, 45a, eonvi;tjon of the falſhood') fo
the treatiſe following: wherein the DISCOVERY is fully 1 truſt an-
A1. lwered


mat. 1 2.24


|


pA? 10.1 4+


marks: 2.
3.UM.5$.2 4
ynlie 25,


--


|


|
$1014.19,


ad 24 (1


| 2&.17.6,


4 ADETECTION OF $8, HARSNET


{wered :nd the euill name rayſed vp, and giucen our "—_— thede
workes, viz. of counterfeyting, and my teaching(the fome or woe
parts of that bocke)taken away. &nd when the lord ſhall yer further
purſue the manifeſtation of theſe workes, diſcloſing that which is
now couered, and making that knowne which now 1s hyd, which I
doubt not but in due time he will: Then will their filthines and madnes
beenident indede, And for our further aſſurance + crein, we may remem-=
ber, it is written Thou(Lorde) behouldeſt miſcheiſ and wrong,that thou
maiſt take it into thine handes. And againe: 7 here is nothing hyd that ſhal
24 be op eneds+ neyther is there a ſecret but that it ſhall cove to light. And
apaine to this purpoſe it is ſaid by the Apoſtle: Some mens ſwmes are
before hand, and goc bifire vnto indgment: but ſame mens followe
after, Likewiſe,alſo the g50d warkes are manifeſt befare hand,e they that
are otherwiſe c.ounot be hyd. wherby it is playne that howloener the ſi-
nnes of ſome men are tor a time in this world ynknowne, as hauinge
bene committed in ſecret and inthe darkneſſe, yet the Lorde in his
time will bring them to light, and manifeſt them to the world; and
on the other {i.e, though the good workes of ſome be not for a time
thro the ſlarnders of ſome manifef and knowne to the world ro
be ſuch, yet it ſhall not alwaies be oe, they ſhallnot alwayes be hyd,
but m an other (ime god will reveale them, to be that incede they are,
It is in the ſecond place to be obſerned, that as ſathan hath ever
vied by his inſtruments to reſiſt the doftrines & workegof godgthat
thereby he might kepe god from his glory and prayle, and man from
deleuing end profitits by them: fo rhe: principal) meanes wherby he
hath preuayted in all times, hath bene the omar iv) 'p- thoſe hom
the Lord hath therein vſed as inſtruments: for the old ferpent know
eth ſullwell, that t!:e credit & good name ofmen being taken away
be rhe dotines they tack never (otrue and wholſome, & the work
wherein they were vitd neverfo profitable and to be admired, they
will nor be recerned, Neither is he ignorant hereof th-t let the (lands
er be neuet ſo manifeſtly or palpably talfe, yer the world will beleve
it and run! e away with it as currant, if once it be rayſed vp & ſpread
abroad: for he knowerh that there is not one wiſe man of a thowſand,
who vſeth to conſider of a thing and heare what can be faide of both
fydes, before he imbrace it as 2 trarh: and that zh foo{b/h will belewe es
wery thinge Henee it i«that in thrſe cares it is bis ſurft and cheife labour to
r.1ije vp and ſpread abroad flanders,By this meanes he prevailed aganſt
Paule ſirring vp ſome to affirme that he was a prſ'lent fellowe, 4 mo
wer of [edition that he ſubnerted the fate of the world: and was an enemy
to the xte(as we fpake now of ſerre} a travtor, ding aganrſ} the decree
of Ceſar, Yea of Chriſt himſelfe the divell by his inſtruments gave it
; out


Cy AWE PF T 9 Yy


_—_—_— an. AM ws ww Ss


out, thathe wzs a Dece aver, and wor!e then fo 4 Coninrer; calinge ont
dizels through the prince of diucls, By the ſame meanes that auncient
ſlaunderer, and acculer of the bretherca day and night, both to god


and men, who thereby deceaweth all che world, hatlt hitherto mighte Revi.cag,


ly prevayled againſt the workes of god wee [peake of: ſpreadinge a-
broace that 21aifter More and 1, eſpecially my ſelfe; are Deccanors,
Impoſters, cogoning marchants, that I have taught ſome (I knowe not
yet howe many) to counterteyt, But as S, Pawle notwithſtandynre
the aforelaide accuſations, was nither ſeditious nor traytor, but cne
that pratliſed and taught the contrary: and Chriſt wasno Deceauer
but one 1n whoſe tongue was ſound u9 guile, neither caſte our Cevilles
by the prince of divels, but came to defiroy the works of the dixell, ens
ſo wein lik miner notwithſtanding that we are thus accuſed to be de
ceivers & coſoners, and Iknowe not what,and my ſelf to have taughr
Somers and others to counterfeyr: yet it ſhall by gods grace appeare
by the {equel!, that we are no ſuch men indeede, and that my ſelfe is
not (I thanke god) guilty of any ſuch abomynation, as mine aduer-
ſaryes moſt yniuſtly lay vpon me. where by the way we may learne
thus much; that it is not inough for one to be accuſed, for then inno-
cency it ſelfe (Chriſt Ieſus I meane) ſhould not goe vnconcemned,
Therefore as in allother accuſations and cuill reportes of cur neigh
bours brought vnto our eares, ſo in this —_— Somers and mee,
if we deſire ro auoyde the taſtifying of the wicked, and condemning
of the iult, both which are an abomination wnts the Lord: we muſt exa-
mine whither the things alleadged to that end by the Diſconerer doe
throughly prone the ſame or no: otherwiſe they be but empry words
diſconering the mallice of the- Dyſconerer, To the furtherance wherof
this may [crue that heere followeth, whereynto we will now by gods
grace proceede,
EG OF THE FPISTLE,

This cafting ont of elinels 1«(ſaith he) nw diſcourred to be but 4 pure play,
conteyning two principal! parts of a vyce and a dinell, inc ſhift druyſed t9
to belpe this 1.yce of the tage, that he might not be hiſſed at of all the wld
is:that to caſt out a dinel, is no ſuch great marter, as men make acconnt of
beinge but mirandum et won miraculum, in thenatwre of a winder ,and
nt of a mit ale,

Thinkeſt thou (Chriſtian Reader) that this Miſconcyer (or rather
Maſter comminge thus to play his part on the ſtage) meaneth good
ſooth,that behaueth himſ{*Iffo ridiculouſly in the very entrance of (©
warghty a matter: or that his intent is to bleare thy eyes cf rncerſtid
ing,with tris colours of rhetorike,fyne quipps,8 multitud of wordes
& depoſitions: leaſt you _ ſe theſe works of ; od to his glory &

3 our


Avgilt liter ty,
de 1111 a,

D 1neus vpul,
39 4-1-Co


pag 4-


br ny apo! g't


6 ADETECTION OF+:S. HARSNETS

your comfort, fur to come to the point: S,H, is very 1gnorant if he
canot ice a ditterence berwene 1 ancium & miracrulum tor by mirand
wm 1s Ment Only athing afmnratione dionum wot ihy adn ation,o\ to be
am, ot which nun-ber who knoweth not ther be many works wh
ich be not miraculous, 1her was final cauſe then why ke ſhould ſport
him(elſe therewith and callit hcere «/b1ift, 4 miſerable jbift, and a little
atrer « /{y /illy ſhift, leinge Auguſtine, and after him Daneus aman of
great learning, put an apparant difference betwene minrum S& mii acu-
[1,4 Wond1';c5 4 mitacie, According to whole ndgnents Imay well
terme that election of fpirits we ſpeake of, mum a wonder and deny
Itto be mila:uluwm 4 myracle, Now it it lo tall out that the Dyceurrers
procedings be anſwerable to his begining; lus booke to his epillle,8&
his dealing conceryng the matter of la..t, to this in matter of doct=
rine: then may his buoke be r1gl.tly called 4 LUrſcorc.ye,not of & pwre
play, but of tis owne inward an lectet COITUP LCN (alw £11 Maile as
wnorance, Which no doubt he yreatly velneeh uculce be curred,
but let vs iieare what be ſaith iurthet aparli this wy /bys of mane,

IW ha: duil conceutes (lanh i e), bad the rulei's of the 1-wesg thai they
eould nt ſee this fly ſilly ſhift, to apt ae the, mit ac (es of our Sawiou Cliye
Wt, and to till the progle there was no tt care whey jules beleewe , that
nr Sanur wa: the jount of God: mm ayang j1cl) 11ghty maracles among
them: the cheif one whereof was caſting ont of diwels: Ly1:4/0n that action
was but mirandum, et non nuracuium, « {ir enge 4byag for ſilly people
tv wonder at, and not a my acle, to infoict them to belene.

1he Di(concrcy might .have remernbred that] doe not afirme

that the caſting out of duels performed by Chrilt, was by _ &
prayer,and ſo mi anda, ot non miraculs: but the contrary ( euen there,
where I treate hereof) to both theſe. To caf aut deweli(fay 1) by awards
{> 4s one #9 ſooner commanndeth the (pirit to goe out, but frthwith be dew.
partiih as Chriſt and his Apoltles aha, 15 not only a mv acle, but F theme
the greatejre. but by the meanes of pr ayer and faſiing to di,ywue out Sathany
#' Yather to nreal Chr {t (to whome all power FA, £18en n beanen 411d m
e&'th)to caſt Sathan forth,is mar andum, non miraculum.

Had theſe words of mine bene ſpoken to the T-havies could thoſe
alu!l conceyted Rulers of the Tewes haue thence taken occaſion to haug
depraxed our Saviour lus caſting out of divels* Sure one wold thinke
they ſerued rather tothe-magnifying thereof, Now if the Di/comrrer
could proue, that Chriſt cid caſt forth wicked (pirits by faſtinge anJ
prayer, or yet his Apoſtles, then indeede for as much as 1 houlde all
eiection performed by them to be miraculous and yet hovlde that it
sno myracle, when Sathan is expelled by prayer and faſting,he ſho


ulde conuince mee otherwiſe he doth but tryfle and abuſc his 21
er


yy wy Y o$ =.


2» X -”'_ wwe x oe w+Z£ a ww EE 27 wm.


TE TA


wo 6 Be


a 1


2 13 +» ZE I 2.9 0”


LYING DISCOVERY, 7
der in cauſing him to ſpend his houres in ſuch vayne yole and vnpro
firable diſcoufſe as concerneth cothinge the matter in queſtion ney=
ther toucheth his aduerſary any thing at al). |

Hee procedeth.7here is & place laith hee in the la? of S. Mark,
wherem they mightely pleaſe themſeines, and taking it as a vod of deferice
to mayntayne their cauſe, it proues in handling a {erpent that denonyeth
them vp, the wordes are theſe: Theſe ſignes ſhall followe them that belru?
in my name they ſhall caft out dyuclls, and jball ſprake with newe tou
ng es EXC.

This is ameere {launder for it isas farre from mee and ener
was from alleadging this {cripture in my defence, as it 1s from rak-
inge vpon me to worke myracles, and I will as ſoone doe the one,as
the other, Howe this ſcripture is to be vnder{tood of ſvch as bad the
myraculous faith, I haue ſhewed before againſt 7hyrews and the pa-
piſts peruerting it to their diſpotieſſinge of divels: and that it can-
not be vnderſtood of all belewers as he expoundeth it,

But to procede. In ſteede of the author his name, wee haue in
the end'of the Epiſtle theſe twoo letters $.H.ſo that men may onely
gelſe who hath made the d:ſcowerie, V Vere the truth on the d1ſcoue-
rers ſide,he woulde ſure in playne and full letters haueſert to his nam
withont ſtaggeringe,and thereby intimated thus much, Looke what
I haue ayd of counterfeytinge, and by Darrell or any other, I ſuch a
one:am ready to iuſtifie the fame but the dſcowerer beinge privie to
his owne fall and corrupt dealinge.and fearinge leaſt that wovlde
be deſcryed and come one day to Fohe, thought it wiſdome to con-
ceale his name: who can tell alſo how the chriſtian magiſtrat will take
this, when ke ſhall perceive how greatly God is diſhonored hereby
and ſee the intollerable iniurie that is done firſt and cheitely to the
Lord himſelſe.who hath wrought theſe greate workes,and to whom
eate glory and __ is due (or the ſame:ſecondly to thoſe whom
od( amonge others)hath vſed herein,and thoſe vpon whom theſe
workes were wrought, takinge away the 2006 name both of all thoſe
and of others that ure name,as mnch as in him lyeth beſt 'esthe

reuious and cauſeleſſe moleſtation of many ſubiets in the land. an4
the wrong doune to them b>th in their tubſtance and good name, In
this reſpect allo there is cauſe why the Diſcouerer ſhoulde ſert Jowne
ewo letters, rather then his name: for it is good pollicy to prevent a
miſcheif, and caſt for the wort,

There is no doubt but that S.H. ſtand for Sumn!l Farſnt chap
line to the Fiſhop of London, but whither he alone, ork is lord & hee
Faue diſconered this counterfeyting and <oſunage there is the quelt=
ton,Some thinke the booke 9 be the Biſhops 01 ne doinge and mas
we


ke


pas. 14, *


$ A DETECTION OF $. HARSNT'S
ny thinke it to be the ioynt worke of chem both, Qt Herſnet I think
men duubt not coniideringe the two firlt letters of his name be (ub-
ſcrived. As touchinge his Lord and mailter its probable, iceing the
booke 1s commonly called the Biſhop of Londons booke, & that all
or part of it was made by an high Commr{toncr ſuch as the Bilhop is,
as appeareth by theſe words: 7 be 4utiar of th: breif nat ation to drawe
V > prraducnture jrom dealing with M1. Darrell: nowe other Commiſſte
97 11. no reaſon can it potſibly be .For the Bilhop of Londos it is that
hath depoſed and examyned 1 know not how many, and that is ac=
quainted with euery quirk and corner of this cauſe, that hath mana=
ved this matter, that hath periwaJe4 not only the relt of the bigh Co
14;/,oners, bat the whole land allo as much as in him lyeth, that all is
but counterfeyting and knauery: but how truly he and his chapline
lay (0, and what reward they both delerue at the hands of god, and
men, forall the greate paines they haue taken in this benatte, dooth
partly appeare by the premiſles, and will (I truſt)more tully be made
wautett by that which followerh.
THE FIRST BOOKE,
THE 1, CHAPTER,
The nomber of ſuch perſons as are {asd to haue bene diſpoſſeſſed,
by M. Darrels meanes,
M. Darrell exowing into ſome ſnl credit with the ſumpler ſort: became ve
ry peat Gr proud, Somthing to thas purpoſe be conſeſſeth'ſome thought that
I aid glory ſomwhat tomu«ch in the ation of caſimy forth diuels, And a lit
tle after | here are adeled in the end of the hiſtory of the boy of Burton theſ
words #izſbortly you ſball bane the true ſtory come forth of thiſe 7.31 Lan
cajhire that were pailefſed with wncleane ſpiruts, and all [eaun deliutred
45 one time by this man, meaning M. Darrell as be himſelf confeſſeth.
Hereby the Deſcouerer laboreth to perſwade the worlde that I
gid glory in the caſting out of diuels as1s playne by theſe words: whet
M. Darrell tookg wppon him after thes bus ſecond exployt, it may be ſurmy
ſed by elo'ying mn the firſt,
1o the firſt of theſe I anſwere that I hane not altogither ſo de-
poo , as appeareth by page 2.77, of the Diſconcry,But admit it were
0, and that ſome have lo thowght of me es is layde, yet it followeth
not theirvpon, that I gloryed 8&c.for many haue miſe conceaued the
{beaches & ations of men, when Eliab Dawmids eldeſt brother, heard
the words of Dawid concernninge the killnge of Golzah he theirvpon
thought,and ſaid vnto him, that he was com downe to ſe the battle of pri
oe and the malice of his hearte:and yet it was nothinge ſo. How oft did
lolephs brethren conceaue amiſſe of his peaches and a Lions*To the
ſeccnd I anſwer,that beinge exgmined by the B,of L.ypon my oath,
whe-


:
1
|
|
|
|


LYING DISCOVERY, [
v hither I theught that by rheſe wordes this man, with the reſt were
mer my teite: 4 anſwered affirmatively, And it being playne that he
£14 meane me,(tor who els had to doe with Darling/& the7 in .Lance
/£41c)how could 1anſwer otherwil without periury*1 heſe words allo
we mult remember are not mine but the printers,as I tould the Byſbep
at my examynation, & at the lame time condemed them greatly (both
which the Deſconcrer 1 warrant you concealeth) how then doe they or
ray an{wer ynto them argue my glorying in the 4ctis of ce 50 de
wcisFLet the Diſconcrer tram hus et & it may be be wil be aſham
ed of it, Moreouer were it that 7 did elayſomwhat toomuch herem the
lame maketh not againſt the cauſe, but argueth only my corruption,


Darrell being ſent fur into Lancaſbire by one M. Starchy <ſpoſſeſſed in the pag. x,
jad M. Sen/oef houſe ſme prjs at one clap: vi3:1obn Starchye, pag.3 33;


Margaret Hardman: Eliancr Hardman: Ellen Holland: Ma garet Byrom
4nd Lane Aſbton. And in the end of the diſcowery the Dy/comerer hath
theie wor1es: wnto theje notable exployts of Darrells, concerning Mary
Cowper, Katheryn Wright the boy of Burtow: and William Somcy: ſome»
thing might be added of bis pretended diſpoſſeſſmng, the ſeauen (ſo often men
toned) 1 Lancaſbie, out of one M, Mares examynation and confeſſyon
$ouching ibat matter: his ſayd eXamPynarun 1s im the Regifter 5 off eo
ber Mazeftses Coniifſt oners, And if any will take the paynes to pervje the
ſpall finde that 11, Darrels, and 21, Mores courſe beld with thoſe 1n Lan»
Caſhir CO, WA 45 Payne relic logs 46 with any of the other .

VVe':eare of M, Moves dealing and mine, about the (preten-
ded) <ſp:ſjrfjwrg of 7, Lancaſbirg and m general] termes of the courſe
weheld v ith them therem, but Cock thele firlt words vnto theſe laſt
we heare not what they for theit parts did, ſaue what is intimated b
thee aforeſaid words: lo as the reader knoweth not well what to m
or thinke of them, of whom notwithſtandinge there is oft mention
made, and whither he ſhould account them counterteyts, yea or no,
I deſire therefore to knowe of the Biſhop of London & H.mſnet what
their: indgmentsof theſe ſeauen whither they counterfeyted a poſ-
ſallion or were ingdeede poſſeſſed: for one of theſe ſure they did, be-
c2:/e they were handled ſo like to thoſe that are poſſeſſed, both in 8
during the me of their trouble (or ſo fayned) andat the time and
inſtant of their deliverance(or diflembled deliverance) euery one of
them crying aloud, beir.s rent ſore, and lyinge as dead, or ſceminge
loto be, tichan the ſignes of diſpoſſeſſion: Yea #fter -Ilo as wee
hauc heard inthe ſtory, either the vnclehne ſpirits being 50ne out,re


turned ypon them all, ſeeking to reenter into thera 2g3inc, accord=


ing to the Scriptures, or ſome ſach thing they fayned, Theſe thinges
guly ccalidered, it cannot be denyed but


thateith were polls
ddr]


math 19.4 4-


ÞaS 4+


leſſe would they


10 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


elſed, or diſembled a poſſeſlion, YE pofſeſſed-ir is tobe hoped that
they are now difpolſciled, confideritg rhe ſignes of diſpofletſion men
rivned m the golpell were heard and teene at the rime and inſtant of
their amendment, and that ſince that yery time, (being three yeares
palt)they haue continued free from being vexed by Sathan,as before
they were, one excepted that is repoſſeſſed. The retume alſo of the
ſpirits doth confirme their eie&iori. YF thus it poe 8 haue gon with
the 7, in Lancaſhire: then we ſee men may be-poſſeſſed in theſe dayes
and diſpoſſeſſed, yea that the greateſt part of the perſons controuer-
ted were ſo mdeede, and did not faipne {o to be as ts pretended.

If they counterfeyted, why was not 21, Starchy and ſome other
about them, being ſo many, fetched to London by Purſeuants or war
rants, as well as ſundry from N ortingham about Somers,& divers out
of St eff ordſbire about Thomas D arline? And why was there no com=
miſſion direted to ſome in Lancaſhire, for the better Roo into
this counterfeyting, and ſifting of thoſe counterfeyts(if ſuch they be)
being 7, as well as oneinto D arbyſbire, an other into Lecefterſbure, 8
3.0r 4, (I take it ) to Nottingham, for the finding out of the counter
teyring of thoſe foure theres Yf theſe haue counterfeyted with Somcrs
and Darling, why were not they or ſome of them fetched vp andre-
ceyued into the Biſhop of Lonaons houſe, and by his Lordſbip and S,
Harſnet Speed and exarrined about their counterfeyting, as well as
Somers and Darling their fellowe counterfeyrs were? for marke what
the Di/courrer himſelf faith in the end of this chapter: touching al/ theſe
([aming thoſe in Lancaſhire) examynatiss hane bene taken,8 4s well by the
confeſſrons of the parties, as by diners other circuonflances, it doth playnlye
dppeare, that all which was done betwixt M., D arrell and them was meer
ly counterfeyted, I dernaund now why theſe [.ancaſvire perſons were 0-
mitted? why their examinations were not taken, and they tried what
confeſſions they would have made, as well as Somers, Narlins. Kath:
#ieht, and M, Conper. if theſe likewiſe merely counterſeyted. Surely
methinketh that if theſe 7, were counterfeits, the Biſhop and Harſnet

doe hereby greatly preiudice the cauſe they haue in hand, and them
ſclues. for admit one or two of then were obſtinate, and would not
confeſle a co unterfeytinge, yet it may be ſome of them would. There
are ſundry of them, = they are not all ſure made of one moulde,
Some of them allo very yong, and itis likely they wold tel the truth
moreouer it cannot be that the Biſhop and Havſnet taking \uch great
and long paynes about two veares, day and night, to find out 4.co-
unterſeyts, [onkon paſſed by ſach a number of cornterfevtes, o


greate a Pray as this was, if o be they were counterſeyts, And much
ſought out one ſingle counterſeyt Kath, Y'7 4 he
Y


en


that
men
nt of


eares
efore
f rhe
with


. LYING DISCOVERY, 4 ——
by name, have depoled and examyned her (with ſundrye others )
tor counterteyting 14, yearespalt; arid let ali theſe alone with theire
counzerteyting about three y Fo , if rhele were counterfeyts as
well as ſhe (is pretended to be) Apaine if thoſe 7,have counterteited
ſo that we haue not 4, but 1 1, coynterfeyts, conſidering 1 dealt with
theſe 7. as well as the other 4, es ©-4e-- no mention made (not ſo
much as in generalty) of my fr practiſes and procedings concern
ine the pretended pojſe|j1on and d<(p»ſſcſſion ot theſe 7, nor any word vied
tending therevnto, as well as of #1, Somers Thomas Daiins & the
reſt eucn in particuler and by name? Surely the D:ſcounrer did great-
ly forget humſeit to mention my (pretended) diſpolleſſing of 4. only
in the tytle of his booke, and in the firſt chapter of the booke where-
1n he treaterh of the number of ſuch perſons a5 are ſa1d to haue bene di(p»
ſeſſed by my meanes to name 1 1. Beſides if thoſehane tounterfeyred
leing then they are the greateſt part of the counterfeyts, and have
not at all bene dealt with tor their counterteyrting,it is playne that the
Biſbop and Haſnct have bur ſlightly ſhuffoled and flubbered over tlie
matter of counterfeyting wherewtth th ey hane bene wholy raken yp
a long tine, and lett their worke ynperfeRt: euch fe ro an vnwile
builder who nor firſt ſitting downe and caftihg with tiimſelf Ghar his
houſe will coſt him, falleth of building: bur perceiuing after he hath
builded a while, that he is not able to fyniſh that he began, is conſtr-
ayned to giue ouer his building, wherypon all that behold it begin to
mock him: or that foohiſh man whith vpawares bujlderh highouſe v- |
pon the ſands, bur afterwards perceining the fame to be rio ſure fou-
ndation, ceaſerh to build any further: for this cauſe I adviſe them ei
ther to confefle the truth & giue glory to god,or els for ſhame to pro
ceede on in finding oue more counterfeyts, and add to the 4. they
haue already thoſe 7, for all eleutn were hatdled alike: and their con
dition the ſame, yea ſomuch'is in effeR acknowledged by the P:ſhype
and Ha ſn inthis whole firſt Chapter of theirs, and in very manye
Places of ther booke: otherwiſe all that heare therof will laugh at the,
and their doting partiallity, that would be ſo hot and (weat ſomuch |
about 4. and let 7, ofthe lame counterfeyt condition paſſe & eſcape
yatouched. Furthermore, if theſe 7. haue likewiſe counterfeyred, 1
delire to knowe of the Difcowcrrr who'taughtthem fo to doe, & that
he make him knowne to the world,as he hath'done the teacherof the
other fore, for why ſhould we not think that they likewiſe had an in
ſtruſor, ſpecially ſeing 5, of the 7.were very 1's, and their fevts as |
fpqirable & hardtob Wink as thoſe of the 4f my ſelf{(we heare)ſch-
oled Syners, Darlin ij, : W41{hr ard Mary Corprr, and ſeinge the
7, were handles alike to thele 4, rags he and that I dealt wa
eds tne


.


y* .


vi. A


”—_— A DETECTION OF S. HARSNTS


the 7, as well as the other 4. and that 3, of the 4. were helpedby the
ſame meanes, viz. by prayer and faſting, or diſſembled the ſame with
theſe, it is in all _—_ likely, that if I :aſtructed the 4. to counterfeit
then I have done the like to the 7, in Lancaſbire allo: but conſidering
1 am not accuſed thereof, and if I were I truſt they » ould cleare me
them(elues: it is to be thought that this notwithRancinge, I an free
from teaching lobn Starchy Anne Starchy, and the other 5, who he ig
then that inſtruted them, it would be knowne. [ohn and Anne Star
chy with the reſt would be depoſed and examined by the L. B/bop of
London, and made to tel] whoit was, what his name is, that beinge
knowne the world might be betterſatiſhed as touching their counter
feyting, and he whoſoeuer he is, might partake with me m puniſh-
ment, ſeing he hath committed the like or the ſame fault. Laſtly if Is,
and Anne Starchy: Margaret Hardman Elianw Hardmanexc, be cou
nterfeytes, why are they not puniſhed for counterfeyting, conſider-
ing it is a fault deſeruing very ſeuere puniſhment, and not to be tolle
rated or borne with in any, much leſſe whe ſo many conſpire & ioyn
togither in tting this ſaide abomination. Thus you ſee (Chriſt
ian Reader) in what ſtraits the Bybop and his Chepline have brought
R— - _ ay ſoever they turne mo LET to the
eht or ] 7. in Lancaſhire were poſſeſſed, then wee
heare what followeth therypor: if they affirme they counterfeyred a
wer ked_ They woe they ve ile conoing hon hereby the on
ce 1s 10) we lee are little or nothing ho y: the onlye
| ry things The is that o 4 An not be i. to returne any anſwer
wichout a bran» herevnto at all: mug haue —_—_——— my wordes, and enlarged
c_—_— and th wold proucke them therevnto.
y penne, =— | | |
Lane Aſhton is ſince {allen into the bandes of certaine Seminary pre=
ifs, and bath bene carryed by them vp and downe that country to ſs
recuſunts bouſes(4s certame yale men were wont to carry puppets) and
©4f-3. cunning counterfeiting of certame fits & ſlaying of birſelf by the ſecret dire
cticns of the ſaid preifls, ſbe hath gotten god knoweth what: they by ſuch lew
waned, th Maher hae in the meane
ſhame) Y
Thus it is Jane .4/bton being with ſix other diſpoſſeſſed as wee
haue heard, was after _— the popiſh religion) repoſſeſſed, 8
thereypon fell into the hands of certaine preilts, who haue carryed
her vp and downe the country, exorciling and adiuring the divell in
mow fauorts} her after their manner. Now I of the Biſbop of London why
preiſt thenco, . theſe Seminarie preiſts haue not benein all this time commirted to
goed priſon and puniſhed as well as 21. More and my ſelfe, for beſides that


they are preilty, it is acknowledged (andit is moſt true) that thereby


w tt — -— a” DS ol —+ I-33 3-2


”—_ Ws Fx ==


LYING DISCOVERY. ry
hir maicfties ſubircts hane bene ſhameſully abuſed, and further it is ſaid
that ſhee fiayeth herſelf pon their ſecret dwections, whereby it ſhoulde
ſeme(if one may beleue the Dsſconerer)that theſe preiſts have taughte
her to coiterfyt, at leaſt in part, why alſo isnot this notorious couter
feyt puniſhed, that hath had a principall hand in this ab» 11g of bu' ms
iefc [ubiefhs? but it may be ſhe is no counterfeit, for it is ſaide that
through the aweftions of the [aid preifis ſbee hath gotten god knowes what:
Imagine that it is the doing of ſome tricks, or as is [a1


aide heere the cow


merſeyting of certaine fits whether ſhe will or not as Mey Couper is
brought forth depoſing, that cerraine ſpeaches of mine (principally)
and of certaine women, togither with her experience of che ({1gnes of
poſſeſſion in her brother, made her to doe that which ſþce newer thowght
to hauc done, and this whether ſhe would or no, ſo as ſhe could not re-


frayne: no maruaile then though ſhe have not bene puniſhed for cou pag-z.2&


nterfeyring, and this is the very reaſon why of 11 , counterfeyts (as
ſome call them)none have bene puniſhed for counterfeyting:no not
Somers: who if it were ſo was an horrible blaſphemer, and otherwils


moſt abominable,
OF THF 2, CHAPTER,
The occaſuon a” > . Darrells dealing with Somers wes
b; Ub c __ me —_— PU

. Dar. veriue of efties Commiſſuon for cauſes eceie= pag
ſrfticall _ ſent - appeared before the L. gy. of Canterbury
and others at : 7-0 whence he was committed to priſon,by reſon
of his abſurd and wntrue(but yet very confident) aſſertions: grumng therby
uſt occaſ13 to ſuſpet?, that he was but 4 conterfeyt:c7 order 1045 taken for
the further examination of that cauſe, according to the vſuall rourſe by the
lawcs of the Realme, in ſuch caſes prouided, T he iſſue whereof was , that
pon the hearing of M, Darrell, and the depoſntions againſt him in opers
court, before the L. Archbiſbop of Canterbury, the L, Biſhop of London,
Cc. he the ſaid M, Darrell was by the full agreement of the whole court,
condemned for a counterfeyt* and together with M, More (his companyon)
who tooke pon him to wuftefly the ſad Darrell, had otherwiſe greatly myſ=
behaned himſelf )they were both of th:m depoſed from the miniſtery, and co
muted to cloſe priſon, there to remayne wntill order were taken for theire
frarther pumſhment.

All T affirmed at my commitment was, that Somers had not coun-
terfited: Let men nowe iudge, whether that be 4b/ard &x falce 2. whe
ther ſo __—_ be heriſy:tor I was commited to priſon for hereſy, 8
other hereſy (1 then vttered not) not for teaching Som. to counter
feit:which fat was not th& in queſtis,nonot vntila month after I had


bene in priſon: yea by the d;conrrers owne words, (Which be that I was


B 3 Come


to


14 A DETECTION OFP S. HARSNETS -

commited to priſon by reaſon of(or for)my abſind and wntr ue aſſertions;
it ITE I was ” ſent to priſon; tor the ſame caule I have
bene to long deteyned in prilon vez. teaching to counterfeyte, 3 Let
men iudge, whither for this confident afcrtzon I delerued to be com+
mitted to priſon, what order was taken ana agreed vpon by ſome in ſe-
cret,& whuther the lelfe ſame that after was put in executis I knowe
not: but that in the examination of this caule there was a proceding
«ccording to the vſuall comrſe of this Realme un (uch caſes promded how.
locuer the Dy/comcrer in generall termes affirmeth it, yet he makerh
not the ſame to appeare un the particulers. Sir Dy/cowerer you affirm
inJeedethat I was 1aaicially proceeded againſt by due courſe of lawe
and ordinary practiſe of the high commillion court, according to the
lawes in that behalf prouided. 1 pray you therefore an{wer mee,

Firſt whether doe you knowe, that it is the viuall courſe-and or
dinary practiſe of that court to deny the coppy of articles,or aniwers
to men convented into that court, whenas vpon their oathes they
haue fully & directly anſwered vato all ſuch interrogatoryes,as haue
bene objeted gail them? And if this be the due courſe & ardinae
ry practiſe of that court: whether doe you knowe the lame,to be ac-
cording to the lawes in that behalf prouided?

Item whether doe you knowe, that it is the vſuall courſe, and
ordinary praiſe of that court, touching the examination of any wit
neſſes againſt a Defendant, to ſend forth commiſſioners into the co
untry, and to authoriſe any other perſons to be commiſſioners, then
ſuch only, as hir Maieſty by her letters patents vnder the Great ſcale
of England, h ath appoynted high commiſſioners*And if this be the
due courle & orcinary pradtile of that court, whether do you know
the ſame to be according to the laws in that behalte ——_

Item whither doe you know, thar it is the vuall courſe and ordi
nary prattiſe of that court, that the Commiſſioners, or other depu-
ted by them, ſhould menace witneſſes called before them(as you your
ſelfe Sir Diſcoerer did)with impriſonment, bringing vp to London,
burning of their feete, or with ſome other kinde of vyolences in cae
they depoſe not to their humour and contentment: And if it be foe
whether doe you know the ſame to be according to the laws in that
behalf provided”

Item whither doe you knowe, that it is the vſuall courſe & ordi
nary pratiſe of that court, to examine witneſſes againſt the defends
ant, without giuing him notice of the time and place of their produe
tion, and (© to haue them (worne in abſentia partie rex? And it this be
the vſuall courſe and ordinary practiſe of that court, whether do you

knowe the ſameto be according to the lawes in that bechalte pro


uiced?


>


Poe DPEDQ3D


— ©. © rex. XI”


oe X %.


a- ow A we,


—_—_— _


the ame to be according to the laws in that behal? provicedF


LYING DISCOVERY. "5


Item whether doe you knowe, that it is the vſuall courle & ordi
nary prattiſe in that court, for ſuch to examine witneſſes againſt the
defendant, as haue no authority to take depolitions as you Sir D:/c»
werer did at London) And ifit be ſo then whether doe you knowe the
ſame to be according to the lawes in that behalf erouided-

Item whether doe you knowe, that it is the viuall courle & ordi
nary practiſe of that court, not to ſuffer the defendant to miniſter In-
terrogatoryes againſt the witneſſes produced againſt him: And if it
be ſo, then whether doe you knowe the ſame tobe according tothe
lawes in that behalf prouided?

Item whither doe you knowe &c.that the defendant, whether
he be an adulterer, an inceſtuous perſon, or periured perſon&c, for
the clearing of his innocency gray ym, the cryme obietted, benot
ſuffered to produce witneſſes, and to haue them examyned on his
behalfe? And if this be the ordinary practiſe of that court, whether
doe you knowe the ſameto be accordinge to the lawes in that be-
halfe provided?

Item whether doe you know, that it is etc. To denye ſuch as are
accuſed of negro any ee ,etc.to haue theyre profors &
Aduocates to pleade and defende their cauſe* And if it be ſo,then
whether doe you knowe that the ſame is accordinge to the lawes in
that behalfe prouided*

Item whether doe you know,that it is etc.to condemne any per
ſon as puiltie of any offence,obieQted againſt him , vnder the mouth
of two witneſſes at the leaſt, and them allo to be ſuch againſt whom
by the eccleſiaſtical lawes no exception maye be taken?And if this be
the courſe of that court, whether doe you know the lame to be accor
dinge to the lawes in that behalfe prouided”

tem whether doe you know,that it is ect.that ſocius criminis,be
admitted for a witneſſe againſt him, whom none but himlfe can ac-
cuſe?And if it be the ordinary prattiſe of that court, then alſo whether
his teſtimony of neceſſitie muſt be inflar durum reftrmoniorum 011
exceptione maiorum? And whether this be according to the eccleſiaſli
call lawes in that behalfe prouided?

Item whether doe you know,that it is etc.to deny vnto the deſen
dant the ſight of the depoſitions of ſuch witneſles,as are produced &
examined againſt himzAnd if it be, whether is the ſam+ accordinge
to the lawes in that behalfe prouided, |

Item whether &c.to commit a miniſter of the goſpe!l. cr any « -
ther man to priſon without bayle or mampriſe, only for cb/w0d v4
wntruc, though confident aſſertions? and if it be,whether do veu kncw


Io


$)


14


Tf


61 A DETECTION OF $, HARSNET

Item whether doe you knowe, that it is the vſuall courſe & or
dinary practiſe of that court, to proccede againtt ottenaurs w caules
temporall? And if it be, whether doe you knowe Lie lame to be acer
ding to the lawes in that behalt prouided” £0:

Item, whether &c. to proceede to the condemnation of anye
offendor, by any other prootes, then ſuch only as are warranted by
the eccleſialticall lawes of her Maieſties kingdome* And ut ut be,whe-
ther doe you knowe the lame to be accoruung to the lawes in that ve
half prouided?

whether doe you knowe, that it is the ne courle, & ;-
dinary praQiſe of that court, to pronounce any entence, or de
finitive tudgment of condemnation tor any ottence to be c0.11tted
by the defendant: otherwiſe then by publique reading ot the lane {©
rence in writing by one of the Comnullicners themiclues, the ter
his aſſociats by their conſents approuing the ſame: 4nd il it be oe:
whether doe you knowe the ſame to bee accordinge to tac 1aves
that behalfe prouided? |
» And wherethe Dyſcomerer addeth, that the iſſue theres was,th ot
pon the bearinge of me,and the depo[ations ag aint me mn open courts L
was by the full agrement of the open court condemned for 4 counterſoytter
end together with M.More depoſed from the mimiſtery, and commuted to
oof Pr yſon,there to remaine vnuull order Cy far owr fur ther punn=
ment:
, I demaund of him who was preſent at this hearing: firſte whe«
ther I vſedany continued {; en, ſaue one: and whether in the
ſame I was not cut of. 2. whether being charged to teach Somers and
M. Cooper hisilter, Kath: Wright and Tho, Daring, I ſpake any thing
in my owne defence concerning the 3, laſt, one word or two excep=
ted, concerning Kath: Wright, which rayſed vp collor in this Diſcowe
yer, 3. whether 7h: Daring being in the court by the Biſbop of L.com
maundement, was heard to tay any thing touching my teachinge of
« hirn, or his own counterfeyting, or not counterteyting: yea whether
euer he or any otheraffirmed that I taught him to counterfeyte.4.
whereas the depoſitions againſt mee were heard then to ſpeak their
their fill, ſo the depoſitions(of the 17, taken by the 12, Comuſioners)
Which are for mee, were heard to ſpeake at all, either then or at any
other time before, though I have oft and inſtantly deſired the ſame.
5. whether ever any one of my witneſſes,(who cr hundredes to
.. Cleare me) were heard to ſpe e either in court, Or Countre before
commil1toners, 6, whether if -it be as / ſeme to intimate by theſe my
demaunds, this being he {peaketh of was likewiſe accordinge to the


Wall come by the lewes of the Realme in ſuch caſts promidedyea or not


AA es LYING DISCOVERY; - -
7, where he ſaith we arercſawued for further puniſhment, Talke of him
whether this be according to the lawes of the Rralme, that we the acceſ
aries {if there were any counterteyting) ſhall thus haue puniſhment
ypon punuhment, and the counterteyrs (it ſuch they were) nor any
ot them, be puniſhed at all: as if all the iniquity were in teachinge to
counterteyt, and none in leaming and practiling the ſame: otherwiſe
ſure) they ſhould bepuniſhed as well as we, and not all the ſtrypes
laid vpon M. Mores back and myne, And where it is ſaide, that / was
by th: (ll agreement of the open cort condemned for 4 connterfeyt, it is
OT- yatrue, Neither was that or any other detinitiue ſentence gruen of
me, 1n the end we being commaunded to ſtand alide(as the manner
is) were torthwith after in the open court ſuſpended, and commaun
is ded co cloſe prion there to remayne till we ſhould beare further from the
And lo haue we done((aue that we haue not bene all this while cloſe


171

Ce: priſoners) waytng when we thali be hears according to the Queens

n lawes, and be either acquited or condemned, Moure then this was

not done, nor wor laide,

ne They that ymagine Somers was not poſſeſſed, but did connterſe yt;
[ ([aith the preface) doe by ronſequence deny the the ſoncr aignty of 007 Sat
's ou #14 that action, «And one of the written pamphicts: to dengs the work of
9 the dzuels and God m the diſpsſ}cſſion of So: may jecme to be aficy a forte
. to deny them in the gojpell. 1 henfolloweth his contutation, Indeeae if


' M, Darells credit were as good mm ſaying, that $9: was poſſeſſed, 3 that
' by bis and bus fellowes meanes he was d:ſpsſſeſ}ed: as the knangel;fls and
Apo/Hes ought to be, when they rell vs of arners that were poſſeſſed in Chr
ts time, then therr [aid collections were pertinent. Otherwile manye falſe
ancs from time to time, hauing deluded the people with hipocriſy, and
pretence of ca{ling forth dels, ut 15 a (ug geſtion of Sathan for any mo coletF
that thereby the | aid afFions of our Samont: and his Apoſtles, are in any
ſort blemiſhed. but let them rayle on,


If Somers were poſſeſſed and diſpoſſeſſed(as I truſt is made mani- /


feſt) then are theſe their collections very pertinent though Darrel: cre
dit nor his fellowes, be any way to be compared with the To
and Apoſiles: neither are the ſard atHions of 0197 Sauiour and his Apoſtles
 1n any ſort blemiſhed by theſe wordes, as this man ſuggeſteth, no man
ſo colleftimg: but a man would thinke rather that they be blewyſhed,


which will not receaue the poſſeſſiou and diſpoſſeſſion contended for -


notwithſtanding it hath ſo great confirmation from the goipell Bur
let them(faith he)rayle on. Is not heere very perylous rayling? well. If
there be not heere, yet eliwhere there is, whereby they ſhew of what
ſpirit they are, And this he doth by ſetting downe many rayling ſen-


 tences(ſo termed by him) hich on ſcattered here and ther.through
' I our


29.1%,


1.9 A DETECTION OF $. HARSNETS


out the N.oation and Preface tomy Apollogye: Some of which
will repeate, but of the ſhortelt for breuity ſake,
$ag-31. M. Darrell hitherto could nat obtcyne ſomuch 4s patient audience
| or any iudicyall coſe of proceeding. Agayne, thrir proceedings haue bene
| maarect, cont/ary to the ro yall conmmaundement of ber Mas TY her lawes
and lawfull liburues of hor yall ſubie&s,and agayne his mdges became


S ! now _ iſoncd for giuing teſtimony to the truth. agayne let men brware
i 1m crediting falle rumours ag ainſt thoſe holy men of god, who doe nowe ot
hall hereafter ſuffer in this holy cauſe, Agayne I would adniſe them that


hecde, leaſt they be found euen fighters againſt god.

| Thus we ſee what rayling the frends of this cauſe doe ve: let
vs now conlider, what rayling and ſcoffing(to let others goe)this ma
an aduerſary to the caule, and great frend to counterfeiting doth ve:
that ſo comparing the rayling togither,we may the better diſcerne of
it, and of theſe raylers. ;


| - v__— ” Thes caſting out of dinels is diſcouered to be but a pure play, contayninge
dis Lord, and £99 principall patts of a vyce and a dinell, let them with all their inglyngs
dlalters lobnery ariue our 4 melancholike ſpirit, out of any poore ſoule in Bedlam , T hus
much for a taſte of dinel driuers legerdemayne: open the curtaine and ſee the
puppets play. M. Darrell is thought by ſome to be ſuch a one that if hee met
with the dell, he was able to curb him. 1M. Darrell will be aright Ex
arciſt aft er the curr ant faſhion among the Ieſuits: if hr want the faith of lo
FRE ing my acles, he may caft his capp at them meaning diuels. when Somers
was ſpoſſiſſed, the dewill was ſhroudly dreſſed, he was forſooth ſo extream
ly tormenicd by the fafting, prayers, and preaching of M. Davrell andthe
reſt, as he hadſno leaſure to [ay what he muſt doc, or what he would do, but
rude(y without taking any leane of them departed. The dinell was tricks
with their conceaucd prayers. One d:uell would hane bene mad at the name
of Preſbyter, an other at the ſ1oht of « miniſter that will not ſubſcribe, an
ether to hauc ſcene men [it or lend at the communion. And! whoe knoweth
whether in time, the naming of a preſbitery would not hauc ha! the vertue
of a popiſh relique, as well to caft out a dinell, as to diſcloſe him If their (ch
1 | allers be of the new cut: they cry, they wallowe, they foame, and ſhew the
T7 6 x eye* ſremes mentioned in the Scriptures, There E.xorciſts for want of worke are
| geraudletthy arinen to their ſpiſts, and like Tinkers watke vp and down from place ta
Rr be place, ſcekins to be Jenplayed. T'wo points ſerned hs twne inſtead of neg ling
ako yh i B flicks, beereis faſt and looſe as the Fe Ypt4n lifteth, If the reſemblances of


Darvells praFtiſes to Pedlers be not fit: then as you remember Some's and
Dell colluding together, thinke vpon the pretty feates botwixt Bankes


and his horſe, So ſkulfmll a catt is D arrell in hunting D arlings menſe.here
voto _


* parties, pleaders, and accuſcrs. agayne M. Darrell and M. Mare are


Wlannder this worke, and perſecute the ſeruants of god without cauſe to tak


N


LYING DISCOVERY, 19
ynto add that hecalleth vs awe! ſlingers, Impoſters, tmglerr, abſurde
mates coſoning marchants, ſalſe knaues, crc.

A preat deale more there is of this ſtampe: yea the whole boke
from the tirlt leafe to the laſt, is written in ſuch ſcoffing and raylinge
characters, that it might leme rather to haue bene compiled by Nath
Palquil, or ſome Interlude-maker, then any other oflobriety & iud
ment, Burt the ſtile is ſutable to the matter. And fo to returne vnto


hath bitter enuying and ſtrife in his harte for the falſhood ( whereof
S, Iames ſpeaketh, as the wordes following doe ſhewe: for contentis
for the truth is lawfull and commendable) as appeareth by his to

and pen, and is 4 [yar againſt the truth; It muſt of neceſſitye Las 6
be, euen by the teſtimony of the ſpirit of god, that this Diſcoverer and
luch as he,are the children of this earthly, ſenſwall, and diuclſb wiſtlome:
gut of his owne mouth then let this man be mdged,


OF CHAP, 3 *
| How M. Davvells frendes hawe ſet out the pretended
diſnoſſr ene of W.$0,

The D1ſc.telleth vs of certaine counnterfeyts,as of a maid of Cheſley
of one Mildred the baſe dane hfter of Alice Norrinston: of a Dvtch man
with ſome others, Ergo concludeth he, Som's is a counterfeyt,8 that
ſuperexcellent wonder which M. D avrels fawourers, euen thoſe of the our =
ages Conſiftaryan faction magnifye ſomnch is 4 counterſeyt and lewde
practiſe, |


— ER. rD


Narratio u in
the anſwer! to


o A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS
Conſideringe this very obicttion is aniwered,and the abſaurditie
thereot ihewed un the narration, this man who takerh vpon him to
con:ute that {aide treacile, thoulde rather: haue ſhewed the weaknes
of the n&74tors anlwer to thus iayd obiection 1t lo he could: then have
taken vp that ſtale obiection agayne, 1 he narrator hath here tofore
anlwered this argument thus:th4s followeth not yor we may with as good
reaſon jaye many banc not cuuntert enced, therfore Somers dad not connte's


the 1.0bieftion, £18 2 £/2CVe COMd MENT Ay man counterfeit ſuch thinges as Som in truth


hath danc, Hereunto 1 add,that Somers counterteninge folioweth not
here upon,except theſe rhinges withall be true, tirit that this maide of
Cheſter Muldred the Dutchman ct.counterteited.Secondly that Som.8&
they carried thein(elues alyke:for if Sommers.were handled atter a dif
terent manner trom them,what letteth,that he might be no counter=
teire.although they had counterteyted”Betore then this argumente
be ot any torce,the /2;/c,mult ſhewe:that thole Englyb and Dutch tol
kes hc mentionethzhad a variable {wellinge runninge all alonge their
boudyes.and (o of the reſt of the rare accidentes whereof concerninge
Som,we haue hearde:neither of which he hath perfourned: And then
ailo it followerh only probably, Againe,it this be a good realun,then
15 this alſo*1,N, publythed a booke ſtufted tullot vntruthes.wherevp
on it was called a legend of lyes:thertore, S, H, the publyſher of thus
booke, hath ſo done.

Moreouer it is certaine that all thoſe the Di/c.here ſetteth down
for counterfeits, did not counterteit,yea 1 thinke none of them the
mayd of Kent excepted, For the m4yd of Cheſter it is well knowen and
to many, that ſhee counterfeited not. And howe doth he proue the
Duchman, (concerninge whole poſſeſſion and diſpolleſſion there is a
booke printed, )to have diſſembled*forlooth Samwel! 1a ſnet ſayth (o
a ſubſtantiall proofe,and worthy argument ſure. He himlclfe conteſſ=
eth that the Mazor of maydlone(a towne in Kent) Nicaſins V anderſch=
ewe (the miniſter of the duch church there(and Iobn Stukelbowe, with dy=
wer's others dic! ſubſcyibe to that pampbelet as he pleaſeth ro cal the boke
g'oreſaide. The queſtion and doubt nawe is whether we ſhall beleue
this ſmgle man,and ſuch alſo as we ſhal heare, or theſe other which I
know e not how many more. After this manner he proueth the reſt he
nametli to kauc;counterfeited. Although theſe had counterfeited it
maketh nothing againſt vs,as hath bene ſhewed: yer who that is wile
willbeleue this mans report (for other proofe haue we none,) that
they counterfeited,ſeeing he doth intimateno leſſe by M1. T byockme
ortons children, whoſe vexation by Satan was ſo maniteſt anc notori-
us?for marke what 1s{ oops 9 3,moreon:y he had hearde and read (


meaninge $9» who ſyerly ſulicd the arte of counterfeitinge ) ſome
- -


' LYING DISCOVERY. rt
parte of a vey ridicuius books concermmy one M.Throgmortons childyen(ſut


pp4jca ro bauc bene bewitthed by a woman of W arbyye (wherby be ſay


44k be Warned | me pore ant was not 1,novant 45 j is occaſton [eruecdgte
4/ aux woat be uſt ty witches, And this agatne the Dyc teLiet Vs zathe
peilon ON DUmnr's,

Ii us twuc attirmed that Som. learned ſome points from M. Throg=
morrons children, they theretore 1t is to be thought 1d counterteit,tor
from whome are counterteyt trickes to be learned but trom counter
teyts, and luch as have war [kill in thole worthy teyts, as they can


act Lhcm themiciuesf And mn particuicr Its laid, that trom them hee Pag-9:7.


learned to ajcrube what bee ujt to witches: v13, as they had donne betore
hum. gay ne tur 444; venyeth that they were bewitched: for it they
were but /nppoſed to oc bewutcbeds then were they not bewitched in-
deeve, «law yet 1t1S nanutelt by niany of their ipeaches and actions
(menuoney in the printed bobke concerning the witches ofWarboyſ”
{pecialy by thelr c:ywg out ypon Alle Samueld the witch, they leeme-
ed 10 to be.anu thettore it they were nut bewatched & Vexec by the
Deull they counterteited, In a worde looke into the printed booke
and you ihalltynde, that it they were not vexed with vncleane ſpi-
irs, they were molt notorious counterfeyrs, and ſuch as betore them
neuer were, but laith the Dyſc. they were not bewitched or torment»
ed with euull{puits: confederating with ſome wicked manor woman
there abuts 720 conclude 1 counterfeyts,and ſo indecde the Diſe
couerer meaneth; yet he mougen it beſt and moſt for his lafety becauſ
they were the children of an Eſquier, not to (ay {o in playne tearmes:
as he doth likewile by M, Pr At children in Lancqbire, He nowe
that would tayne baue the world deeme theſe for counterfeyts,(tho-
ugh for thame he dare not (ay (o) —_ whoſe children they
were, the nomber 5, the tyme they were afthcted, aboue 100%
their age being lome of them about 9, or 10, yeares ould, the ſun-
dry impollible thinges to be counterfeyted donne in appearance by
then, as the 1re lupernaturall ſwelling in their bodyes, &c. their ſup-
ernaturali ſtren ; ons ledge, whereby it came to palle (ro let Os
ther things g.0e) that one of the (M, Iaane by name) foretould that


there ſbowld be rwclue of thim which ſhould be bewitched m that houſe in ye prineel


one ſort or other and named them all, bring all weomen kind, and ſeruants
in the howſe, berſel( and ber ſiſters being (ywe of the numer, all which pro

wed afterwards very true, for they had all pag Wn ercifs, anc! mol of
them aff licted m the ſame ſort and manner 4s theſe f1ue f; ers were: & far-
thern.ore that thoſe ſeywants that cane in thei places, for the met parte
of tum were of licted m the luke ſort as the other, for the ſpace of two years
rogeather: and that beſides wo of them. M, loaxe and M.lave a, 4

I


elobts


12 A DETECTION OF $S. HARSNTS


ron were at the Aſliſes at Huntington ſeene of the Iudge and Iftices in
civers fits, and M, lane in her fit ſet.in the court; both of them befory
{uch witneſles grenouſly tormented, moſt pittifuully to bebould: And laſtly
Alice S.eueli(rogether with her huſband and daughter) was not on
ly found guilty by the lury of bewitching them, but belides did her
4A at her execution confeſſe that ſbee had bewitched them, and ſente
ber ſpwit to torment them: Conſidering (1 ay) theſe thinges, and that
the/«(with other) proofes, preſumprions, circumſtances, and reajont 0»
uing their bewitching and vexation by the Divell wereat largedeli-p
wered befare the Indge, and therefore vpon oath: any after publiſhed
to the world, and knowne (as it appeareth) to the D1ſconerer, what
a ſhamefullrhinge is it, and intollerable injury donne to thoſe get»
tlewomen, and their parents yea to the Iurorsand Juſtices that con
demned the witches, to affirme(in _ and proclayme to all men,
that they counterfeyted? And me thinketh one ſhould not deale
thus, and that aduiſedly, except he thought that there were no witc+
| hes, nor diuels, or at leaſt that the diuels haue no power to torment
| men in their bodyes, But he that will not haue theſe 5, to be bewitch-
| ed, but counterfeyts, (from whoſe \ nmpave 70, Dp learned ſome
of his tricks, and (o not all of them from me) let himtell me in
| earneſt in his reply (if he be not aſhamed to make any reply )what he
| : thinketh of the Leylor his man of Huntington, for ſeeing he was in all
j reſpe&s handled as the fize children were, it is, to be thought that if
| they were not bewitched nor vexed by the diuell, but did counterfeit,
it was ſo likewiſe with him, T hat he was handled alike to them, and
therfore their condition alike, appeareth by the euidence of the ſayd
Leylor(vpon his oath) gaue, which isſet downe in the booke entitu-
led, 1he Arraienment and execution of the witches of Warbayſe: in theſ
wordes followinge .7hen the T.ryloy of Huntineton gaue this euidence:that
4 man of his finding mother 5 amuell very vnruly m_ was priſoner,at
4 time chayned her to a bed-poaft: wherefare not long aſter his man fel ſickg
| and in all reſpef#s wes handled as the forenemed children were, with hea»
ning vp and downe of his body, ſhakins his armes, leoos and head, haning
more ſtrength in hm mm his fits, then any two men had, crying out of mather
| Samnuell, ſayins that ſhe didl bewitch him: 1nd thus remaynins in this extr


«kb praxted bok.


M. Throemortons children(as Som. did in part) I th-inke all that heare
| of it will lavgh at his folly, And heere we may obſerve bow the Df.

| to proone Som. a counterfeyt, beareth vs in hand, firſt, that 7ho.Dar
| bns, Kath. Wright, M, Couper, and the 7. in unary +99 were counter-
feyts, Secondly the maid of Chefer, Mildred cc. In a worde, that all

V


aor dinary courſe of ſcknes, about x. or 6. dayes after dyed. It it fall out fo,


that he ſay that this man counterfeyted too, and learned ſo to do of


>» a a, —” 6 © — > »> 23


_ ew ctw Ot _ oo fie a nn on oaamti


Kenmnitins (8 the Dy. with him)cuerthroweth hion ſeife in his owne


LYING DISCOVERY, | 23


vexed indeede bythe diuell, on this ſide and beyond the ſeas, among
vs and the papiſts were counterfeyts, e720 (faith he) Somers connerſcy
ted. And this is, his mayne and penerall argument, The ntecedent
or firlt parte whereof I deny, and doe deſire the Biſhop and S. H. to
proue that, and then I will give them the concluſion, and all they
contend for,


For-aſmuch as M, Darrells frends doe (+ oft alleadge Tertullian; s 97


Cypryen. S, Ambroſe. S, Auſten, S, ror! Wi with Proſper Exc. it 85
nt amiſſe to heare what Kemnitins (writing againſt the counſell of Trem)


ſaith of this point, Exorciſtas ct. T hey hane tranſformed their Exoreiſts m


to magical Inchamters, In times paſt it was a peculiar guiſt to caſt out i=
wells out of mens bodtyes by the woyce of man, and power of god, And the
ſame gift continued in the church in the times of $ Cypryan, $. Ambroſe
S. Auguſtine, $, Chnſiſtame, and of Proſper: Obſeſſi in templum addu-
cebantur, et ſepe communibus eccleſiz precibus liberabantur: T he po

he


ſeſſed were brought into the chnrch, and were often=times deliuered by t


common pr ayers of the church: w_ ilud demum &c, Put aſterward;


(ſaith he)that gwift ceaſed, If M. Darrell haue ag aine obteywed it, let bim
make much of it,
The Diſ, perceyuing that beſides the holy ſcriptures, the aunc


ent fathers are not only for poſſeſſion in theſe dayes, I meane 'ſynce
myracles ceaſed, but alſo for diſpoſſeſſion by earneſt prayer: thought
od to make ſhewe of this, that the teſtimonyes we m— out of
the auntient writers are peruerced, & make nor for vs at all:8& why?
Kemmitins faith ſo, |
I anſwere,Peter Marter as greate a divine ashe,(to let others poe)af-
firmeth the contrary,as before we have hearde, where is now this ar-
ente,yf | ſhoulde ſaye no morecbut for our better ſatiſfaction,


et vs conſider what Kemmitins ayth,and how trulye. The ſame guifte math. 19,0,
ſayth he (meaning that power ouer vncleane ſpirits,giuen by Chriſts [3-3


to his Apoſtles Jcontined m the church in che times of Tertull1an Ciprian
Ambroſe. Auſtin,ct, Howe can this be ſo,ſeinge to caſt out duels as
the Apoſtles did8&c.by a worde is a miracle. 8& that miracles were cea
ſed be fore there tymes?we may remember that when and to whom
this peculiar gift» caſt dimels out of the bodtyes of men was given, then
and to the ſame perſons was'there withal] giuen,to heale every ſick-
neſſe and every diſcaſe.for almuch then as Tertrllian Cyprian, Ambroſ
Auguſtine, Chriſoftom,Proſpiy,had not the guyft to heale ſycknelles
and diſeaſes,to give ſight to the blyndect. It can not therfore be that
theſe fathers had this Apoſolica/l guift, as Krnmitins aFirmeth,& the
Djſ. woulde bave ir.yea the thine it ſelfe ſheweth the contrary,and


24 A DETECTION OF S, _:ategrak a
wordes'7he poſſeſſed ({a3th he) were brought into t chin 5

thoſe f+ She pfifengs ten tunes delemered by the common prayers of ihe

vie cory my £#19/<be.1Did the Apoltles calt out Satan thusror rather havinge alle

mls 2 thoritie over the diuils,commauned them m the name of 1etus £0 g9

forth,and immediatly they departedf yt thele tathers had tte jame

guiſte wyth the Apoſtles,as 18 here affirmed,why 1d taey Dot learn

the ſame manner,and with like luccelle that they did, 4 nicane zihe

preſent and ſpedy dellyuerance ot the partie polielie7 but calt o&-

than out after another miner,with more longer velay,yreater helps

then ever the Apoſtles did or had: For howewweuer tee 48 ROT men

tion made un the (criptnres,of all thoſe the Apolucs dulpvliclice by

farr, yet by infallible reaſons taken out of them,it 1s care, tat the

Apoltls didnot deliver any that were polleit ty the common jr 47s of

the churche as it is here ſaid of theſe aunciet tathers, 1 hey 11a & Wvre

readie and ealie way to drive out the yncleane 1pirit of what kinde 10

Iuk.g.1., eueritwas.ct.by a worde, yeaſome times leile lutticed, which as it

«Qcs,1618, Jid more (et forth their authoritic and power ouer wicked lp.rits, [0

aAes.19.12, it commended allo their doQrine and miniſtrie, aboue this cieQcung


Je us very lbkly of ſatan by praier,eſpetially beinge alliſted therin by others. lt can nut


frag therefore be that the Apoſtles did at any time dulpoliciie iathan by the


3 perer,deuilles publique pr giers of the church as is here atfirmed,and that truly,ot thule
went out, as, {thers: Nowe what doth theſe thing


F-15-i6,


es argue but this, that howeloe «


ver the ſame expullis of Diuels out of mens body es continued in the
churche,and was in the times of 7er:«llien Ciprian Ambroſe Chrijoſiom
&c.yetthe Apoſtolicall power ouer Diuels,was betore tho.e tunes
ne,and no man then guifted with that power:lt in thele delaner ane
ces by the publick pr aiers of the church whereof Kenmitins ipeaketh 1 er
tullian Ciprian ct, had any pecular guilt as it is here (ayde: 1 demaund
of the Dy/.(for Kemnitixs 18 dead, and he is of his judgment otherwiſ
.he would not haue alleadged him) firlt, what this guitt was, for the
the ſame that the Apoſtles hac( notwithſtanding they both ſay it) it
Is cleare it was not, 2, why rather one of theſe ſhould haue a guitt in
caſting out diuels, then the people or any of them that ioyned with
them un ſuch expulſyon, ſeeing the meanes whereby Sathan was caſt
out was prayer, and that the people preſent, prayed & intreted god
in this behalfe, as well as theſe their leaders, and their prayers were
not in Vayne, but as well prevailed with god, as the ſupplycations b&
interceſſions of their miniſters; for what though ney + e prayers
of theſe holye men were more ferent, and by conſequent auayled
more with god, then the requeſts made by any private chriſhan: ſhall
ve therfore aſcnbe ſuch expulli6 of the diuell to one perticular man,
and therewithal I knowe not what ſpeciall guift therein? what is this


LYING DISCOVERY, 27


in effee but to make the praiers of the reſt of pods people preſence
as ſpeaches ſpoken in the ayeroend beatinge oo fuck G m—
deth not?, 3.ſeinge by the Diſ,owne ſecret confeſſion, men werepol-
ſeiled in Tertullian Ciprian,cyct.there dayes, why not now?4:Seenge
in the dayes of theſe auncient fathers,men were diſpoſſeſled and Sa-
tan calt ovt by the prayers of the faithful, why maye not men be dif<
polleiled nowe ypon the viinge of the (ame meanes? were the prays
crs of gods people then mightie with god to the expelli Sath
an and are they of no force nowe7or rather is it impoſſible they ſhou
Ide preuayle lo nowe,and in theſe our dayes,as the Di, becaule Kem
nts. ſaith lo, will needes have itf In a worde, what letteth it that
men may not nowe in this our time be diſpoſſeſſed by prayer,or pra
er and faſtinge as we ll as when Tertullian. Ciprian, .Ambrole Chriſeft
om» Ang uſtne and Proſper lived, 2 ſeinge that in their dayes miracles
were cealed,and an end pnt to them as well as nowe: and that theſe
fathers had no more a guifte to worke miracles, then M* More & my
ſelfe, whome God hath pleaſed (amonge others) to vie in the lyke
work. Theie queſtions I deſire the Dyſc.to anſwer, and Iwill expete
it at his hanJes if eer he replie:excepte he be contente in plaine &
expreſle termes to yelde to this truthe, And thus we ſee that rather
then the Diſc,will haue nothinge to ſaie againſt diſpoſſeſſion in theſe
daies,he will bring vs yet the error at leaſt of one man: & that he ſaith
ſo it is inoughe (orſooth, becauſe he was otherwiſe greatly learned
But howe proueth the Dyſc,this out of the holy icriptures*which ſe-
inge he doth not,nor Itrult can not, it is becauſe there is no light in
him,yer wyſely muſt we obſerue here what Kemmitixs error is, leaſt
we ſhoulde doe iniurye euen to the deade. Herein he faid then very
truly that the guift is ceaſed: and very titly allo againſt the gh. 19.9

ainlt okccichs writ )yhole exorcifts chalenge ſuch a guift,where vp
on as did the Apoſtles,ſo doe they adivre or charge the ſpirits ro goe
out,only herein he ſpakeas a man and miſtooke the matter: firſt in
that he tooke this exiſt to continue in the church vntill and in the a-
foreſaid fathers times, 2 in that he thought (as it ſeemeth )that there
is no caſtinge out of Divels now,becaus that guift 15 ceaſed for beſides
that extrordinarie and miraculus kinde of eieRtion of ſathan,which

inge temporarie,continued only in the churche whiles other mira-
cles faſted, ind together with them had an end, which was longe be-
fore ſome of theſe fathers dayes: There is an other ordinarie and per
petnall. viz,by prayer,or praierand faſtinge.By this meanes and af-
ter this manner the aboue named fathers m ther times caſt our diue!s
and not by any peculyar and miraculus guift beſtowed vpon ther,
continuinge in the church yntill theire dayes, And thus are or may be


If,8.20,


26 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


euil ſpirits caſt forth at this daye.and whereas he ſcornefully addeth ”
It M Darrell hane avame obtainedit, meaning that peculiar gift to calt
out 1iucl;which the Apoſtles had: let him make much of ut ;1 in good h
earneſt anſwere,that as I haue no ſuch guſt nor yet any (petiall gwift ”
herein aboue the leaſt of my brethren or priuate chriſtian: ſo neither b
euer 4id 1 trom the firſt time that 1 dealt in the diſpoſſellinge of my t
arrogat any peculiar guift to my ſelfe.but have from time to time c
the lame as tarr from me as [could both with my tongue and pen. 2
by the carriage of my ſelfe in this action Ihaue thewed no lefle, and l
herein may all men be confirmed as by my whole treatiſe before con
cerninge diſpoſſeſſion:ſo by that is here aforelaide: Greatly then are
they to blame,which charge me with challenging 1 knowe not what
puift in caſting out Devils:
-—-oney - <A OF THE 4. CHAPTER,
25 made a fite M. Darrell did of his owne accord (after he was ſent for by M.
—_— ih Dee, & M. Starchy) acquaint one M, More with the mat=
cout diules, | : .
then many 6- ter, and obteyncd him to be his compannyon in
Qher, that athion, (463
Hauing ſhewed the ſeuerall occaſions of that chriſtian dutye 1
performed to Kath, right and Th, Darling, but corruptly. he proce-
deth in the ſame vaine to the reſt: & in the third place tclieth vs how
It came to paſſe that 14, More, and my ſelfe went to thoſe in Lanca-
fore. V Vhere he ſaith, that I went pon the ſencime fr by M1. Lee and
M, Starchy, he is deceaued. For a meſſenger comming vnto me iro
theſe, I refuſed to goe, & returned that for anſwer. About ſome 1 0o.
weekes after( I thinking to have heard no more of it ) came an other
meſl enger with a letter from M, Srarchy, wherein he was ymportu-
nate with me, beleeching me even for gods love to ſee bis diltreſled
children, and an other from M, Iames Aſpton a luſtice of peace there
by, declaring the manner of their handling, & requeſtmg my paynes
to come vnto them. T he next day { being the exerciſe day at«4ſLby
de la zouch where I then dwelt) I made this knowne to ſundry prea-
chers, in number about 16, T heir reſolution was, that Iſhould doe
well to poe, and withall they thought itfit (vpon the motion of one
of them,not of myne nor it M.Mores)that one of :he company ſhould
goe with me, to this end principally, that if it ſhould pleaſe G od to
proſper vsin that we went about, the ſame vpon cur returne, and re
porte might ſtand and be confirmed in the mouth of two witneſſes,
And heereof there be many witneſſes. And then I wentrot vpon M.
Dee his letter, ſo neither did I of my owne accord aconaint M. Move (10
pernculiar) with the matty as the Dile. pretencer./ nd therefore he
miſtaketh or rather (I feare) wittingly miTeporteth this whole mat-
eter


Y = ww, ww. A oo, - wy A x2 £3. & @-==-


we uh A » > 6 I.


-—,


—


Ws *  *wc  __.


LYING DISCOVERY, 27


ter, But he proceedeth on, to the occaſion ot my going to Somers.

By the tame that $1, hail bis fits M., Davrell was of ome name: and
beſides hauing a ſiſter in lawe in Nottingham, one Miſtres Wallis, ſbe was
nut rongue-tycd, what 4 man her brother was: and thereypon being wrged
by certaine weomen, ſhe writt ro M, Darrell a letter importing ſaith M/,
tres Gray) that the Lady Zouch, ſhe herſelf, and diners other gentlwomens»


requeſted him to come oncy to jee the jard Somei's. Page2 3s


Next to the name I had, the title tattle (torſooth) of my ſifer in
lawe, and her letter importing as is heere ſpecitied, occalioned my go
ing to Somers, But the truth is this, After So, had bene about a mons«
eth very ſtrangely and greuoully afflited, and that in ſuch extraor-
dinary manner, as therevpon he was ſuſpected to haue an euill(pirit
within him cauſing it, Mibve Gray hauing read the prynted booke
concerning Th,Darhne, and of the aduice there ſpecifyed that 1 gaue,
made relation thereof to one Miſires Bereſſord, who tould her that I
had aliſter in lawe dwellinge in Nottimgham. Heere-vpon ſhee was
ſent for, requeſted to write ynto me, for my ſpeedy repaire to Sow,
She refuſed, ſaying that I would not come ypon her writing, but ſaid
ſhe if you will write a better vnto him, Lwill ioyne therein, ana ſub-
ſcribe my name vnto it. Vpon this a letter was framed by one Syr E-
Kan-(as they call bim) and ſublcribed by my liſter in lawe, the tennor
whereof was this,

" Brother Darrell aſtey moſt harty manner exc, T hbeſe are not only of
my [elf to requſt you, but alſo all the whale towve of Nott,willah you;&
alſo M. Strillry 16 take ſomuch paynes as to come 2 nto vs to 4 yonge man
for as by the letter beveincloſed, we thimk he 1s paſſ/ fd of ſome call (pirit:
which they hearing; of that good gwaft that the = h exen you and wro -
we bt mightcly by you, we gency ally.crawe your preſence and aſſiſtance with
vs, which we will do tothe wterm-ſt of ow' powers, Theſe arc therfore to re-
queſt y- to take the paynes to came with as much expedition as paſſ bly yes
may, and thus the lord be with you aſſiſt and keept yau now and! currmare.
This (ccond of Nonember 1 (97, we 5

Vnder this letter were {i bſcribed theſe fewe lynes following,which
they ment by the former wordes, the l:ttry here inclyſed, cc nteyninge
oe {peciall thinges which induced them to thinke that hee was pol-
eſled, |

His mannn of taking is thus: ſometimes it ts in ene places ſometime
in an ther: and when we 'harge it inthe name of the ſathir to anyyde. it
tormenteth hm, and be ſkricketh and aryeth, and after he is able to ſprake,
be [arth be did not (krike. And be ſaith he ſecth dirs hkenr ſes, ſomtime's
a mouſe, (1metimes a d'ger, and it perfwaderh him to ſpoyle himſelle, and
them that pray for hum,and with = bike perſwaſ1es to gre Lim a bage of

—_


\


|
28 A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS


money, and jyne cloathes, aud to make him richer then any of the townt, .


1f he wil! bit one foremght tet bum alone,

V V aththis letter came another to the effeRt aforeſaile from 2,
Alaridge the boyes pattor: when peruſing this ſubſcription, 1 founde
d;ucts ugnes of poltetiion, whereof ſome are mentionedin the gol-
peli, vthers 1 had obleruedin experience: and queltioning with the
meliinger, heard belides ot his foming, ca{ting into the fyer, extraor
dinary 1treny Sc 1 returned in aniwer that thole thinges being true
that they mn rnear letter, and their meſſenger more at large related vn
to me, tne boy was vndoubredly potlelled with the dwell: and withal
1 aduiled them to vie the meanes of faſting and prayer for his dely=
ucrance trom Sathan: but therein I ſaid they were to ſpare me, for di
uers realons 1 rendred them, and to craue & alliſtance of others of
greater guiftes and neerer them then 1 was, Heerevpon they did wri
ghr preiently to 2M, lobn Iveton, and M. Iobn Prowne: the one beinge
then trom home, the other in his anſwer aduiſed them to ſend for me
becaule of the experience 1 had aboue others. (belides he M, Ircton I
meane wrote to me to the ſame end) ypon this M. Maivry his letter
was procured and fenr to me, vpon the receipt whereof I went. For
thus truly Lthought, that foraſmuch as ſundrye of the inhabitants of
Notumgham and among them his maiſter, his paſtor, rogeather with
the magittrate who were intereſſed in the boy, called and deſired my
povorc aduice and a(liftance, itwas my part and duty to goe, and to
yealde them my belt affiſtance, contrary to that I had purpoled and
written before, as being called of god to that worke: and hereabout
I cenlulted alſo with two godly & learned men then in Aſbby: who
were eut lo ailo perlwaded,and whoſe allowance I had in that I did,
I went not then to So, vpon my ſiftes in [awes bare letter, neither doth
the lame ymport as the Diſc, vnder the name of an other reporteth
but being mltant!y requeſted by ſuch as you heare: and if S.#7 ſtand

' for Smell Harſnet as all men ſuppoſe and wherof there is no- doubt
then knoweth he themoſt of theſe thinges as well as I: yea almoſte
30 man better: fot beſides that he hath heard(vndoubredly) of theſe
ſeucrall lerrers (7. Ireton his excepted) many times: he may remem-
ber, thathe being a commiſſioner, 'among other intergatoryes,they
had one concerning the occaſion of my comminge to Not. and that
Miltres Gray and M. William Lang ford among others bein- depoſed
an interrogated thereabours, anſwered thar M. Maioy that then was
(viz. M. beter Clarke ) did write vnto me to that end, and that ther-
vpon I came: bending their ſpeach to the ſaid M, Clarke who was pre
ſent, as b*ing a commiſſioner, Indeede this yy of their depoſitions


was not ſer downe among the reſt as I yas ſhortly after credivly in-


iibink


S** SQL PEARE T T7 7 T & CT OPT Y YET EI EEE


——


LYING DISCOVERY. 28
formed. And now let others iudg of M.Harſnets dealing herein,
{t 1s by the way to urea. that the Dy/ .humleite (aithoughin
his icotting vaine(contelleth that / ran not ot my lelte tro Som.nor any
of the rett ox have bene ſought vnto; trom whence a probable arguma=
ent may be arawne, that 1 uid not teach hum to counterteyt nor any
ot the vther, For it 7 had {o done tor gayning glory to my elf in a tet
ned Uulpolletiing of him: (wely (after io much paynes taken tor fun-
dry yeares together) { would in all likelihood have winded my cite
by lome odd practice and deuile or other into that action, otherwiſe
what had hts counterteyting bene to me, or would haue adv
mee more then an other: true laith the Ly/, and theretore very cun-
rungly you dia ſo, For Som, hath depolcd that thele wordes you ſaid
vntv hum im Aſbby parke: He alſo (meaning my lelte ) could me, lairh


Som. that bc bewng, «ſiſter im lawe us Notting ham, one M. Wallys, I co» p*gt.6.


wid no jooner name hum when 1 [bowld be thought to be poſſeſſed, but rhat
preſently aud the rather by his iſter's meanes, beſhowld be jent for to come
wiz me, | CTA TI nr oY 97 is hereafter ouerthrowne
and therby itis maniteſt tharno ſuch {peach was there vrtered by me.
But it is {trengrined by Edhnond Garland's depolition: Before M.Davr
OE _ hee) 1 hawe bene preſent twiſe or thviſe at ſeucrall ti-
mes, when vom. hath in his fits vjed theſe words: Darrell, Darrel


| Danell, Itthe meane of the firſt ſending for me, that be de ?*6-30


poleths talſe: it of the latter / yeald vo it: but howſocuer he mean
anci others take it, it mattereth nor, becauſe it is playne by the premi
les that I went not to Sow, vpon his naming me, but ypon other oc=
cation, whereby the falſhood of Som. depolition dorh further appeare
and Garland; allo it we reſpeRt the end wherevnto it ſerueth, more=
ouer had there bene any ſuch compaRt berwene Sow. and me, why
went /not at the firſt ſending for, being eſpecially ſo ſolemnly ſente
for by a meſſenger of , bringing withhim a horſe for mee to
ryde on (to make ſure / ſhould come, as ſome percaſe thought) ſuch
a letter as we heare, and an other beſides from M1. Aldridget But not
withſtanding: this I fate ſtill, and not only ſo,but returned beſyds fuch
ananſver as wherevpon they write to two others as is aforſaid either
of whoſe afliſtance had they of Notr ,obteyned, we had neverheard
any thing of my teaching to counterfeyt.who can now in reaſon yma
pine that there was any ſuch compact? could / be ſure that I ſhoulde

the ſecond time intreated, hauing alſo denyed in twoe ſeuerall let-
ters to deale in that ation” Indeede it ſo fol! our by rhe prouidence
of goc'( who had therevrito appointed me) bat in refpe&t of men |
chance. For thus it was, One of the Earte of Huntington's rmeny Mai,
Howlr by name, bei gat Notting hem, the Maia toulde him of a pur-

i |


Pg. 2 4»


30 A DETECTION OF $S. HARSNETS


poſe he had to write by him-to his Zoya, to be a meanetome ,to com '| 0
vatd themto a boy:greatly diltrefſed, M. Hoult anſwered, that he the ca
ought thatneede not, for that his owne Jetter to me woulde ſuffyce 4


and prevaile (o farr with me, his place conſidered, And herevpon the
Sgid [etrer was made, and lent by him, who was preſently to come to
Aſiby to bis Lord, remayning there, where my (elite alſo dwelt at the


deltery whereot he made this knowne vnto me, And thusmuch row” WA
ching the occalion of my going to Sam, wherein through the vnrea- 4
ſonableneſle and wreſting of my acuerſary, I haue bene inforced 'to ul,
be longer then 1 delvred. re


Hamwinge brewun the finate of the law be percened therein ſuch greate te
caryupirons be gaue bimſelfe to the fludic of dirainine :that fo be mighte ©
ſerue god and krpr a grod concience, |

The vie of rhis 1sto alienate the affeRtions of thoſe which be of
this calling from me,and there withall fromthe caul it ſelfe.But God pl
is my witneſſe that I never affirmed any ſuch thinge, neither did the ;


lame everenter into my thought, The commo1awes | hold and ever th
did ſince I ſtudied them,to be grounded: vpon the lawe of god and. |} ®'
reaſon,& to be of neceſſaric and (i ule in the common wealth *
{o farr-am I and ever was from inge the ſtudie of them,farr' | *?
therefore was that from me,the Dyſc, here ſuggeſteth. this is it
true,that when the Lorde (who had betore time. | {©


ploye me otherwiſe, andin the ſtudye of an other aw,)did draw-1we | | 3
another waye,by layinge his hande vpon me,in cauſingea & | *
extraordinary {luggiſhnes to fall ypon me, being a ſtudent of the co |
mmon lawes ) euen then when I was moſt free and far from the fam - |
I thus thought with my ſelfe, and it may be I have ſome times ved th
wordes to this effet,that without all contradigion it were much be de
tter for me,ro ſpende my dayes and ſtrength in the tudie of the de ' |
uine then humane lawe,and to be occupied and labour or worke vp ' tal
on the ſoules of men, endeuouringe theire eternall ſaluation:then a- afr
bout the landes and goods of men and rightinge of the , don
vnto them therein which only concerneth this momentary bs ,and
reacheth not to the bodies of men ,much leſle to there foules: The | 7:
welfare and ſaluation of which next to the glory of godis only wor- Is
thy to be ſought and laboured for:all other thinges beinge mere tryf» || *?
les in companſon thereof. Beſides conſidringe ſeriouſly of the afore | +
ſayd hande of God,vpon me,and of the continuance of my very rare
ſlv-g1(hnes (the lyke whereto I chinke. hath bene ſeldome founde in


any, notwithſtandi earneſt {trjui inſt the ſame; Tbegan hz
to feare leaſt I did ainſt rhe cho a 7 ar that the lord pi
ſure woulde viemy ener adghs nei v hs,


LYING DISCOVERY. .. 1


And this Lſpeake thenrath in Obriſt nelyenct )
e amy minde, and tranſlate. myiſtudye; wo the
of God,& not any corraption in the ſame that


other ſand?
cauſed me 20
law of man to the
I perceaued, |
Has frend forgetteth himſelf in aff irmins that M. Darrclls life hath
bene [o ſearched ute, for true nt 13 that diligent care was had ang commau-


wndement gruen according [y, that touching bus conuer/ation, otherwiſe the ©*8*5


apperteymed directly to bus pretended come of cafting out d1uells there ſb1-
uld not any one point be inquired mio: neuther was there, as by the alts 1n
ne it may appeare, and 4: it is ſuppoſed.M. Darrell will bimſelfe con
C/0
 Noverily, I am fo ſarr from confeſſmng this, that I am fully aſus.
red of the contrary. I hate bene very credibly mformedof a ſerching
after the lite 1 led at Cambridge, and by page 9x. it appeareth that vp
n ſome inquiry, mformation hath bene given, How I behaved my
elfe at .4/bby and at Nottingham the Dy. himſelfe may remember,
that he and an other Compmuſlianer and examyned one Web
his wife of Notringham( at whoſe hou'e at my firſt comming I made
my abode for a ſewe dayes) wherevpon and what moued her to inter
tayne me, what ſpeaches in ſecret paſſed betwene her and me, what
words I vtteged in the prayers I vied while I was there, or to this ct-
{e}, and not concerning my caſting ont dixclls ox Som, counterfeiting
or not counterſeyring, concernmg which ſhe could ſay theleaſt of a
thouſand: And for-almuch as thiz/e of the D3ſ, was contrary to the
cmmanngament given him, and that herein he and his fellowe com-
miſſioneas went beyond the boundes of their commiſſion, and that
ET oy CODES
er of it, {peci ole thathe in authority. Rac what hath the Ds/.
in all his arching found oury, Laſke 55 apa oxe os »fe I have
taken,or to whom I haue done wrong” if he cantell lethim heere-
after declare yt. m_
But one thing is reported of M, Darrell, which paſſcth the reſt, aud |, .,
maketh it probable (you may not debt ) that Gad hath gwen him an ef=* ©
frciall grace abowe all other Exorciſts, now  deyes to expel drutly, F pa. 5


ſey that after « ſort, he hath far{aken houſe, lends, and «ll for Chriftsſaker


which bring an Apoflolicall reſolution, why ſhould not he haue that guifte
taunted ynts bim? Indeede one is as true as the other, | |

The reaſon why it hath bene faid as is heere repored is, becauſe,
for a preaching miniſtery ſake, andſo for Chriſt and his goſpellfake,l
changed ky + OA and when I dwelt in my owne houſe, & vp0.
my om in my natiu country, among my kinſtolkes and acqu=-
#ynance, to my full contentment and hartes delight for the Boges

| EPs 0


mak g.21.


marke. 8. 14.
macke.$. 1 4,


Iuke-14.26,"


g2 A DETECTION OF $, HARSNETS
at this lite 1 { through the grace of god) left all thele ts my loſſe, &
puchedmyctent | Hs and hereot | am not aſhamed. And
why might not he who knew this to be true, ſay as is atoreſaider this
the Dy. icorncth, being one of theſe that will neither enter into the
kingdome ot heauen, nor {utter thoſe that would, He ſeemeth by hus
ſcorntull ipeaches tollowing, to thinke that there 1s no for/akang of bs
uſe, land, and all to followe C briſt, but where one lelteth huwle, tande,
and all he polictletn and giveth the mony to the poore, according to
the (peach, ot Chrilt to the yong man in the golpeulz y you wall be per
fect, fell that thou haſt, and gzue ut to the poore. DUt tet this error gue,
what meaneth the Dy/. to call this an A; o{/olicall reſoiazzont, It ihouuld
ſeme the antwer giue by Peeter concerning humlelt,oc tellowe Apoltiy,
Bebould we baue tnſaken all &3 followed thee, Bur the Oyſc. mult knowe
that all this reſolution to for/ake all and follywe Chnift 1s not proper and
peculyar to the Apoſiles, but common to them with ali chrittians, yea
this reſolution is 10 generall, as he that is not relolued to toriak huuſe
land, yea and his owne life alſo, and all ro followe Cinit and his gol
pell, Gs) 1s not worthy of Chriſt; ane! cannos be his diſcipte. 1 bras taith
our Sauiour, (#) whyſoener will followe mee, let hum jor|ake humſelf, that
1s,reſolue with himielte,or be willing and ready to wie or lay yvowne
bis life for my [ake whenſoeuer I ſhall call him there-vnto, which hee
malt dayly expect: much more houſe and land and all things belids:
and againe, if any man come to mee, and hate not bus father, and mother,
en nap.”
e cannot be my d1/ciple, And here-ypon ymed: ,
reth him that is x." reſolute and ready to forlake life and 7 yy gu
endure whatloeuer perſecutions can befall him for Chrilt's lake, and
yet profeſle himſeſfe to be Chriſt's, to a raſh and foolyb men, that be-
nneth, to builde, but is not able ro make an end, and to an vnadui
ed king, going to warre againſt an other, who will neither ſender
ſage and deſire prace, neither yet is able to meete him that comme
nſt him: and then concludeth the ſame thus: /o utes =
be be of you, that forſakerh not all that he hath, he cannot be my diſciple,
Yea obſerue Ibelecch you heere, how by the next wordes following
theſe of Peter(wherepon it muſt needs bethe Diſ.gathererh thisreſs-
lution of forſaking all, to be Apoſtolicall) this is manifeſtly convinced,
For when Chriſt had vpon occaſi6 of Ferter's words, tould him & the
other of his diſciples, what reward they which had thus forſaken all &
followed him ſhould have, that they ſbould ſt twelue thrones ox
excloe the rwelue tribes of Thracll: there he ſhewerh that neither this for .
_ of all,nor rev ard,is proper to them his Apoſtles, but common
others, laying: And whoſoruer ſhall forſake bouſes,or brethren, orſifter,,


me to haue or to


hcall exift, meaning, the ſame guiftto calt out diuells and O= By chis worthy
ox yr rea, had. And marke what be ad- req :


deth, Indeede one is £8 truc 4s the other, Bur I ſay who ſhoulde knowe x:


berter then he, the one is more true then the other, and that the lag. & thoſe worthy
ter is asfalſe, as the other is true, But to leave my (elf, what ſaith the 2 529
D/. to many thouſand («) martyrs in former ages, who had not on- necds have the
ly this reſolution, but did indeede forſeke howſe, land and all yea theire {recall oh
owne lives for Chrifts [cke: were they all Apoſiles,and indewed with devills, becauſe
that Apoftolicell gmift, by a worde to caſt out divels, and by conſequ- they forfake all
ent to worke other miracles: Thus we (ee that whiles the D;ſ. in moc Shell aka _
kage blundereth out Apoſtolic all reſolution, and Apoſiotiicall graſt, he
dehwereth do&trines rather Apoſtaricall then Apoſtolicall, I meane,
ſuch as canin no forte be drawne from: nor agreeing with their ho-


ly — |
Will you knowe how he hath forſaken all to followe Chrifl? Hawinge


two or three houſes, and « litle lord m and elſwhere, left hun

by his father, he ſolde the ſame, and ſince bath lined vpon the monneye,

(bring 4s one of his frends ſzith ) fine or ſixe hundred poundes, If then to Pag. 16.
ſell land and lrue pon the monney, be to leane all, and followe Chriſt, and

«fit noate of one that can caft out dinels, wee ſhall nat wante men of that

trade: many viurers in England will / > art good Exerciſts,

Ir is cleare thathowſocuer he doth nor in plaine tearmes call me
vſurer, yet he doth intimate ſomuch, and would have tyen {ſo to acc-
ounte of me, Bur I deſire all men ſeinge it isnot ſo, to be better per-
lwaded of me,and not togiue eare to this his falſe reporte. True it is
that after certaine ſhorte leaſes which my father left me were expi-
red, ( which were worth yeacely three times more to me then my i
I ould that little lande I had,as beinge not able of the annuall rene
there-of ( {petially in thoſe deare yeares ) to mayntaine my ſelfe and
familie, hauinge x. children, Bur it is as true, that preſently with the
ſame moneye I tooke a farme in Aſbbie-delcouch,and bought ſome
ſtore of ſheepe,kine,horſes,oxen,with other thmges appertayninge


to hulbandry,for the mayntenanc of my houſhon]d,which both reli-
gion and nature taught me - prouide for, An] theſe thinges = well
G1 owne


knowne to many. lt is plaine then that I neither ſoulde my land to
thatend the Di{c.pretendeth,neuher being i ould did lie ypon the m9
n:cy,that is, let it torth to vſune as viurers doe. I am ſory thus to trou
ble the world.with the readinge of my privuat aftaircs,but that the
vnreſonablenelle of the aduerlaric and his ſclanderous tongue doeth
there-vnto entorce mezin the iuſt defence of mine owne innocence.
Bur hath not the Dj{c,here faithfully kepte his promiſe, in thatbe
| {aide he would not meddle with my life'or 1s he not. taken tardie,, 1
that he laied he had not ſearched there-into,
OF.CHAPTER F.
| Hw M. Darrell knewe Sow, and the veſt,


to be prſſeſed.


M. Dad! afmetb that Chrift did nat wdeyne any meanes ts now

P27 who was poſſeſſed m the «poſils tame: but leſt that to be d:ſcerned by the ma

| ncy of thenre fits, and ſofr aming his 1ndement according/y, be ſaith: that

| the only meanes whereby now men ave deſcerncato be poſſeſſed, are: the ſ1g
cs which are mentioned wn the ſcriptures,

1 neither doe nor did fay that the Apoſtles did by no other way
or meancs diſcerne who were polleſled, Th by the marner of their
vexation by ſathan, which he calleth heere the manner of their fits for Þ} ,,

cle 6 it may be that ſome times they knewe ſomuch by ſome preſent and to
Me extraordinary guift, and (o it is likely that arle knew the js war _
to be poſſelled, and therefore 1 ide that the-only meanes wher
NOW men ave di(cerned ily 6 this is it I (ay, that Chriſt <d nat o7'= +
drync any ſuch meancs, for then we ſhoulde have it in the Scriptures, Þ} 1
and ſuch ordinancc there I dare be bould to fay we haue none. Belids }} .,
what neede Chriſt to haue ordeyned any other meanesfor the dilce
erning of the poſſeſſed, ſeeing by their manner of handling.in theyre || .,
fits it was ſo n\anifeſt, and a diſeaſe ſo caſy to be knowne, that the co- d
|


mon' people, yea cuen the ſimple w omen. could difcemne therecl, as

vers .10. hath before bene ſhewed? yea bur ſaith the Diſ; there is ſuch an orci JN

nance: for in the 1, to the Cor, Chap, 12, among other guifts, there Þ}

is mention of one, called d:/cretro | , the diſcerning of (pirites: ÞÞ v1

| which faith the ID; was amea/wme of rods (ſpirit to dijcerne betwixt comne 1};
| matlt*.1s, teorſeyts, and ſuch as ware indecde pref ut we muſt knowe that the |

| jne2+ 24% holy ghoſt meanerh hereby an aber manner of puift. (4) Bevare (12 NN a

ith Chriſt) of falſe prophets, u bich came t» you m fcepes claathms butm- |

oO 200113» wargly @erauening wolues, Andagaine * tho ſball ariſe falle Chriſiers 4

_ and falſe prophets, and ſhall jbew greate ſignes and wonders, ſorhat vf 't I &

| wel'© poſſible they ſbonld arcrane 1he va y el:i(/, And $, Pani ſpeaketh iit

of (») falſe Apt lex which, mere degcry tall rwowkgiios tan[Jormug. fi, be

= CLAHES


rou
the
eth
CIC.
the
1


elts


(clues 1nto the Apyſiles of Chriſt: and of Sathan bis miniſters, trar(ſorm-
ng themſcluts as though they were the muniſters of raghteonſnes. And $,
ohn ſaith thus: Dearly belowed, belewe not enery ſpirit, but try the ſpirits
whether they are of god: for many falſe prophets ave gone ont into thiggyo ld.
All theſe bear* the world im hand that they haue the ſpirit of god, and
teach the truth, or true and only way to taluation, whereby they de-


ceane many, and yet it 1snot {o, He now that is in-abled ot god to di 110hn. 4.6.


{cerne the falſe prophets, and falſe Chriſts, from the true, and pur dif
ference betwene (Þ) the ſpirnt of truth, and * the ſpirit of er-01: he I ſay
and all they have this gwitt, called the arjcerning of ſpirits: which is com
man to all the elect. But he that herein hath an excellency andſharp..
nes to diſcerne the {ame aboue others, may titly be ſaid, and 1 thinke
moſt properly, to haue this guitr, In this guift Petey ( as it is proba-
ble ) excelled Fhnlrp in diſceming of Symon Mags, This guitt they
alſo may be ſaid to have, which can beſt diſcerne betwene thoſe who


though rhey preach the truth, yet they mingle the ſame with vayne » 1im.1, 4. & 4.


and vnprofitable doctrines(which Pawle calleth fables,prophanc 8 onld 7


12 [eper ate owr ſelnes from ſuch teachers: ) and thoſe which be good and
profitable wnto men, the wholeſome words of owr, Lord Ieſus Chriſt, &> the
doCtrines which be according to godlynes. T his is it that the ſpirit ot god
meaneth by the diſcerning of jpurats, and not a guitt or megſmre of gort's
ſpurt, whereby to ds rs, 9.4 enmterſeyts, and ſuch as were rnderde
poſſeſſed, which neuer any dreatned of before the, 1/corerer. | Ando
marumle, For there 1s no ſuch difficulty to diſcerne betwene count-
erfeyts and the poſſeſſed indeede, V Vholceuer looketh into the gol
pell and confadereth of the manner of their vexation by Sathan, who
are there faide to hane bene pollefſed may ealily knowe whenone &
Tefſed, No-phiſitian canſo calily and ſurely gdiſcernethe difeale of
Li patiemby pulſe, vryne, and other lignes: as a chriſtian man-of vn
derſtanding, may by the ſignes of Sathan his poſleliing one, diſcerne
of poſſeſſion, And reaſon will teach men to dilcerne of counterfey-
ting viz, whether thoſe thinges they behould can poſſibly come -ey-


%


ther frominature, or arte,” UN
It is alſo to be obſerued that the Dyſ, {peaketh of the thone-paſt,
and not of the time preſent: 1 wwld be knowne (fanth ue) what that
rvift WAS, hedoth not ſay,whatthat guitt is, and-againe, 4 211ft to
di/cerne betwixt connterſextt, and ſuch xs WFRE poſſeſſed, he fauh not
ſuch as are potſeſled; whereby it is playnethat in 1» opvnion this gy
it whereoflie (peaketh 1s gone, {othat none is now able to drſeeine
betwene acounterieyt, and one poſſeſſed; Howe is itthen thatthe
Diſc,


tjim.2,14.,16,


WY CS ables, prophane C3 vame bablmes,foliſb On vulcarned queſttons >, 2 4.rtus. 3-6
bidding vs to ay ſuch do&rines, toput away ſuch, to anoya ſuch, and 111.9 344),


{taketh it ypon him 00 judge that Somers and the reſt be «c
. V Vhat fooles doth the Di. moke of men? and what a di
culr is it forſooth to iudge in this caſe? Surely he thinketh t
tne ped, end chan nocmercte his
withered, for to ſay (men at this day being polleſſed) that none c
deſcerne, whither they counterfeyte or no, Ut is r00 abſurd to ſpe


of,
OF CHATTER 6.
' Of M. Darrell's knowledge, who ſent the dinell
into Somers and the reſt.

All the diuels that M. Darrell hath betherto encountred, wer
by witches (as ut ſermeth ) into bus patiens. Whether witches Sins
wels into men ar weomen ( 45 many doc pretend) 15 4 queſtion, among theſ
that write of ſuch matters: EC henanand Gendy far dhe det


© 0 3, OMe bi bimſcife, and with T hyrens |


Ir is the Lorde( (Gan Hacke progarhs ) thatſendeth divels ir
men, Shall we rect awe ud at the handerof God ((aith Iob ) and not n
ceane emlly DT Teen
Shal ter be ei in cry te Ld bath nt doe Thazthen I
and aſſirme is this: that Sathan bein, ſent of god and ſo pe
oo enceringo cone, as ſometimes he wag ingo arling ak &e.t
divell being thus ſent, ſtirreth vp the corrupt affections of ſome,wit
whome ( as [ may ſay ) he hath famil.arity, and laboreth to bri
tem w heath erode cre ei cut
ed manner, by him or his miniſtery to ay ar
CE Rd rkavandel mens the perſon,
_—_— yer aketh he ofe thiscourle, that thereby he may drew men

hn ee Ceci

his it ſhould ſeeme) to ſhame
by bhp afflited es he others alſo, as one Mayen
whoſe bem wit $


red the matter, as that the party or pur
Rirved vp to ioyne with hicain then

and made knowne to the worlde: and C—— well thinke hee
doth to this ſecond end, becauſe it is his manner to bring one firſt to


ſynne, and the ſynne perfeRed, to chaſten them to ſhame and
gyyey Aran


of them, he diſcovered


iſhment, as neither is it to any purpoſe to obie&
erwahes arovery bx dropy wayne Findages {ex or ns


poſſeſſion: hr that they dire& not the ſpirit therevnto, but Ton


” oY p< Þp2ODy2 TO PoOY thre 9m.N.SPDMEASPEBISESECSDPCESFTYS


AE LYING DISCOVERY. '.. >
ii enly to their ſpirit or familiar, of tormenting the party whome they
date ( 48 ppeneth by their confellions) thonicell of hg 06M0 te
cord enermg into the parion to be polletied, vnto which faR and fer
uice the lord humlelt hath indeede appoynted him. And where the
orange” IL me 0 19 ne 4
ſend deucls mio men, it he vaderitand not by that he calleth /;
5 atorelaide, he (aith nothing againlt me, nor to the matter: buctiſs
as / ymagine he doth, then 1 demaund of him, who I know conlent-
_ ya theſe' reae leamed men: ee Ay war hor their fa
pirits may not al togither in as in ge
ck compre uyomurni_agtr). PD may Es or ſtrange] y vexeth them
A by tome extemall operation agrees ar 6s ey wi os: ſeei ==
meerely a tormenting Sathan, the
regen bene mugs andy ber lefe to the will ad ie
(cretion of the diuell: as this latter we all knowe is confirmed: by the
confeſſions of thouſands of witches and that in all ages from time to
rime, ſo is this ogher allo by the confeſſion of ſome. Yea
f Dy: to obie& the confeſſion of the witchag is to no purpoſe
already anſwere1 by the former learned men. His words
co yve. vr ar rn witches lues: that me ybefie
| ar to ſuch le ned men 4: haut written Wficienty of ex-30,
RET nn ei Bees
20ns of the witches t clues, bat
are no witches as Wierws wh pres Gr wit rn ſuc learned men
he here ſpeaketh of, fortheſe men that
ter beno winches muſinerdy wr 1 ani the witches
= =
men w it is
frye Bur he thought it wiſdome not tq
MhTup x phony. the reverent
nag insfor ta ay he made them guilty


""kevtiobs = in and
w_ De ng ne Rar ne art


diſpoſſeſled ,y ninafes 0 KERe Sa0Re 30

he dot faye that none 00 ape, Takg

abwnuarey dandy}

grantinge ( 1 warrant you ) in volume

pe err yu) ee ogra

piltes alſo counterfeits, as Lorors: ;vhoon

coiecure any other, but that he ko!derh.chat none can be at this day

polled 7lalike-forte Lay beidotb hereby witches, noe plainly de-
I i


A ON Ee OF S. HARSNETS


as much to the reader
ſion of diaels,2,
© pan x ny yur to the hurt of others

he procede bur one [tc er,it wil be covertly to the denial of
divels,V Vell this 1 dare be boulde to ſay of the _ whoſoeuer he
be: that howſoeuer he profelle that he and that there
are divells, yet. by this very worke of his '( this Diſcomnie I meane(he


denyeth both,
"E OF.CHAP. 7.


OF THE CAVSES PRETENDED, WHY MEN
© AREFOSSESSED.
Alyce Goodrig of St


jp pr obiulmis called

Minnye in Ge tee tie colored,red rt a ſende

mo 2 i met. effec be cb ney yarns ry
: a

Re Dake ap | — the ret; for hemee-
rine-ther Cnr m cp let an efc ry tearmeth tt


as) dnury > her contempt, v{ed theſe with.
ry E nab a Ile rea rt gw.
Honor the


ſe. derideth this d inthe booke of /
= Dalings, and no e heis that there areno
I witches: yet there is in reaſon ( how ſtrange, and incredible ſo euer '
ik Sb yr was ap el ogra gr ſelle
LI! r firſt we have er

| and that ſungrie times 2, the circumſtances mentioned in her confeſ


|
Tis ſion are true, ſuch a day ſayd ſhe,] met Darlinge,in ſuch a
| er vote ypc mech bx aw


-/an_ pla op hog doth de any Co


boy leting an ae ow
the boy fer one Shery «ts boy, w
ptr theſe wordes:Gyp wary


i C&rc.and there with-all prof mga array Fo is
er returninge vnto © P
Xisv wyiruatinerns | tobe wo odhery that this þ
named, that e thenand
hd tel worker dogs and laſtly Ny =
, V
tobe dhe and fo concinned work and vorle, hich
| as euident as the deylighr at noone, that he was tormented the


|
| uell- who ( Cr Jenna e things, can.in reaſon


$1} vl iaking
|


o__


On ons


| thinke, but that rruly eoncerning her ſending of her M1
ro torment D , As then it is certaine, yea me Det


big bande dune deryed, that jo ens comet [dll


or


[F2©””———— Fr zi M7733 3-4


796
LYING DISCOVERY, 39

CT WII . Moreover in that we reade the
like of others we are thereby confirmed herein, Alice Samwell
a witch of arr yh >< ( as is ſer downe in the printed booke ) The! Araignata
that ſhee ſent her ſpirit called P/wck, to M1, Throgmortons childven, and 5, wecurnn of.
willed bim to goe and torment them, ind that they were tormented by wabcy ie.
the divell, cuen , of his daughters, it is notoriouſly knowne, aud
gen maxed ar gre: as the Dil. 0 peg _ Soap oor

ugh fa would, as is atthem. jf this
now a that Alice en finh 3 perf nib ſhoulde nor
the like confeſſed by Alice Goodrige of herlelf, be OR tran? Ao yf


the one of thele ſtrength vows, I, ma ſundry circumſtances -
neo gn. why we not credite the other alſo, confir

nc
ws « ir thr offender the and maketh the con-
f a eg incredible, yea ridiculous vnto him? doth
this offend him ſent her Coker ir to goe and torment


himeor this, he be eeale milieeandareell yon fo ſmall occali
on? or this, that her ſpirit as in che forme of a6 or this, that


ber Ni had a name feb me y _
them* or thit, thattho
or rmber $6


vnto her like alittle TITS
man or woman ſhould & entercou os:
and thus moe ary Lek theſe


yore - th
Diſc Hedintes Verde ther =


Firſt, that#his laſt, which
——— be enpres eg inet a jv


the generall, though not.in the particuler, eiymaicn from the ho-

ly ſcriptures, for nnd pur Axis oy the ſonns

gen. {opener hr we meh ae ful _

ve com em about

adheres rad. Samnell: w

Seule repayred vnto, is ſaid to haue «foniliar (ps

Gull Rack appoates vnto Sevle in the ofie rye) and
ro Emtine when prot EEE

yet ſomtimes, and v paw hrs in

this of ar Eyme and

rad fr hors, Np

ad they confederate

this

gerdthem that w:rke


x phone winm ianage


A Levit.19,;h


£ — SHOE OSSTEDEER


2:


eee OST
Z :
« #


Pagy b,


40 A DETECTION OF $, HA&SNETS ;
Alic $ amucll but thouſands other haue confelled the like, as firangy
and incredible as theſe of Alice Goodryge, and the truth of the lauue
haue bene contirmed by many cizcunutances, wherevpon tele kund
of people, ( witches 1 meane ) haue receaued the punutunent due iQ
ſuch maletactors, Neither dia this Ace Goodrge eicape vapuuhed;
but was for this very fact and no other conumiuced to Lvy gayie by
« luſtice of peace, tound guilty thereot by the 1ury, and by my 49d
Anderſon aduadged to ymprilorument, where lunce lie dyed, NOT yet
Edmond Hartley who atter he was tound guilty by the 1ury, Was ade
iudged by the ludge ro death,and accordingly execured, Now U ug
concerning Alice Goodrige and Dar{yng which was the very evidence
giuen at Derby againſt her,be a mecre eſt & ridiculous matter as the
Dy/.maketh it, and thatindeed there was no ſuch thinge,(this Dare
kng being as 1, Hwrſnet would haue it a very counterteyr boyjandun f Ct:
that allo the caſe notbing ſo in truth) who teeth noty that to f fi
make the belt we can, he doth thereby condemne, Iuage, luttce, 8& f "et
Jury of ſimplicity: and he is the only man ( torſooth ) that hath bad f Pe:
ane Leia Dna at wprcirh| :
mn to di quely impeacied the þ
DD Eee in
| mg, ſpecially beinge given heetein, Ide.
roam gorrd Common Golf England ( who
can beſt iudge heereot, and whome'it cheifly concerneth deliberately teſt
to conlider, And if it fall out ſo that he be nor in caſe of Premwauzre yer
fure it is ſuch, and ſo notorious an abuſe, as they I ruftin tlieire wile
in this whole firſt books of hem to mah vs together, as maj
for wel he'knoweth that in'other doctrines, I difſent a litle more


uld ſorbroughly and J;
diſpofleſſion,as viually the maſter and ſcholler doe.neithet can he be
ipnorante here-of,who,is ſo well tudied in T hrrews, that Thirexs his
creafe from whichl flould leame foridorh all my ſill, came 2 light
$1/95 Ta Ghedſod rh, diſpoſſeſſed, and ſ:.
the ſai te otro be din Eog &, vntill after I was in in the.

Garehouſe (that Iknowe of) and therfore it can not be that Team,

ed any thinge for my hicherto frot him. I wente be.


LYING DISCOVERY. ar
uell where this firſt booke of the five had bene,if Thireus booke had
not come to the Dz/c,handes,betore this Dyſcowerie came from them:
fot whoſoeuer hath read T brrews,may calily ſee,how that as wind fil-
leth a bladder, and ſo makerh it bigg, which init ſelfe is lutle: ſo hath
Thyvens treatile of Demonuakes made the firſt booke of the Diſcouerers


(well greatly.
ML oF CHAP. 8.


tures, and that we reade not of the firſt ——_ of any ſuch mea» math. 12.37,
nes: why may we not well thinke,that as god in mercy left and ordey **%"9'"3»
ned meanes in nature, for the curing of the naturall dileales and in=

firmityes of mens bodyes, euen from the time mans body was ſub-

iect vrito them: ſohe did this ſupernaturall meanes, for the |

healing of this fuperna arall Aiaſe;Footn the time it allo was [ubiect
thervnto, which 15 the fall of Aden, Bur ſaith the Dyſ,, Herein Darrell

bath no great certainty, for he confeſſeth that there is no mention in the olde

teſtament, of the inſtitution ” that meanes, Andſo of likelihood men were

poſed from time to'time during the ſpace almoſt of 4000. yeares, God .

bm{elf hauing ordeyneel no wayes to cure thei, Out of my own mouth

and confeſſton;he pretendeth to convince me. But marke how vnſkil

fully he doth it. Darrell himſelf confeſſeth, that there is no mention in the P*6'4%
olde teſtament of this mitants, which he ſaith hath bene in the church ſynce

the fale of Adam: by his ſayms then i ts RD. that men being poſſeſſed

about 4000. yeares, ebd ileyned no withts nit them, He ſhould baue þ..


inferred of my laid eonfeſſſon; ng theftfore being poſlciſed aboar

4000, yeares god in writinge [ettno ſpecyallor peculiar meancs all

that time for the curinge of them, but in{tead therof he concludeth

as we heare, Bur let vs take the argument as he himſelfe hath framed

It: In the olde teſtament rh:re is no mentioh' of this meanes or meducyne t9

BN war the poſſeſſed, Therefore from Addhz Yo C at ther's was no ſuch means

A" mecdeme ovdeyned of got to heale them. Tar wer, thetthe argument

Ffollowerh not, as may appeate by that which followerh. In the olde

\{tcftament there is no mention of ſpecial] means or medicinesto cure

{Ifeuers, or other diſeaſes, therefore Gpd hath ordeyngd no meanes

$07 medicines toheale met) vm or Andheere Light progeede | -
to a thouſandanſiances; The ve - wm wyahis vonſquice isnot good

3+ [ n


0 OGG. BOTS OO OI os 6 _ -


—


bib.1,r,


wme'h,i9 ce,
Luke 10,16”


heb. 1,3.


as Sam. 28.6.


P37-43+


Thyreus par, z,
$4p.4i+


4: JETECTON-OF S.HARSYETSs&— ©
is, becauſe many yea almoſt infiny1e thinges are decreed in tle '
cret and #ternall ccunſell of god, and krowne foto be of man, whi
ere Nut fer doV ne in l:is revealed will: ſo that although there ve no or,
dinance as touching t).e healurg of the poſletſed by prayer, or talting
and prayer mentioned in the ould teſtament, yer rotv it;ſtandynee
the tame might well be a meanes orCeynicd of god ſor the coringe of
fuch, Yeconcly, we n.ay aſſure our ſeives that god revealed many of IF 4
his ordinances to them which lived voder the lave, which were not "
ſer downe in the ſcripture of the alde 'reſlament: becauſe howſoever © ,
now to vs vnder the goſpe!l, and in the laſk.Cayes * god /pcakcth on
by bis ſome, bidding vs * brave him in his word * and miniſtery, ta
as atthis Cay for cur information in the Lorces will and pleaſur with
man, we are to goe to the holy ſcriptures only, anc the miniſters of.
Chriſt Celiueringe that which from them they haue receiugd: yet,
al ſuniry timts and'in dintrs manne;s god [pake wn the olde tines to our:
fathers, beſides by the ſcripture of the old teſtament,as by his prophs,
ets, by dreames and,viſions,and by vrim: welltherefore might pray
er and faſting be, not only the ordinance of god for the caltinge of
Sathan out of the bodyes of men, but alſo revealed and made known,
tobe ſuch to the Church of god then, albeit the ſame were not mene,
tioned in the old teſtament, From this argument the Diſ, procedeth,
to a ſecond, wherein alſo there is as little art: taken from the teſtimos
ny of Thyreus, and that he doth in theſe wordes

Put in ſayin? that the ſame meanes doe continue n»we in the chureh,.
txt were 11 vfe before the commine of Chriſt: that his maifters the pop
exoreifoc, will condenme as an error in him. For one of thc ſaith, that the
w4yes of caſting out dinells in the olde Tefiament, iam veruſtate, 1non
alia Ce cauſa antiquarz ſunt, et, abolitz, «s brrng grown? 18 ddtag', art
norze ab hſbed for their age.

Behold his conſutation, Surely this man was barrayne of argu-.
ments, otherwiſe he would never haue run to 7hyrexs for ſo abſurd «
one 2s this is, to conuince me with, If he had produced the teſtimoe.
ny of an antient father or late writer he had ſaid ſomething: an! yet
it had bene argumentum in-artificiale, an & gurnent wherein were m1: art
a: all, efoecially in a matter of religion, which is to be decide? by the |
holy ſcriptores' anJ not by the writings and opynions;of men. Pne
for the convincing ofme a miniſter of the goſpell, to produce the ſay
ing of Thyeur a Tefuite and ſoch as hath neither ſap nor ſavcur init,
15 to beate the ayre, & not to Ciſpute, Thus he may as well connince
me in not ſo fewe as #n hvndred ſeuerall points of dofrine, as then:
ber of ſacraments, the preſence of Chrift inthe bread and wyne, &c.,
wheren rhelefuire dilenteth Tom that which 1 with the Se

(0)


Kit


od dce hould and maynteyne,
p M. Darell boldeth that inthe Apoſtles i15me, there were two [ates
or k,yndes of caſting out aruels, the one ordinary, which was in th: church
before the comming of Chrift : vi7, fafting endprayr, and the other extr a+
grdmary, 11%. com ing of >&than to depart im the name of Chrift,
Of this latter kince of ejection of Sathan there is no queſtion,
the doubt is whether the tirſt was in the church in the Apoſtles tme
and that reſteth to be diſcuſſed, Seeinge wee reade of acaſtinge out
o! diuells by faſtinge amd prayer, even then when Chriſt himlſelfe
was vpon earth: ( for Chriſt ſaith not, 1þss kinde ſball not goe forth as


ſpeaking of the time ſuture, or that which afterwardces ſhould be,but mat.e9.19.,
this kemde gorth n:t out, as meaning of the tin.e preſent, & that which ©4k449-2+


then was done or in vie: )and that after this manner the Apoliles di4
not Ciſpcſlelie the divells as is mace cuident (I truſt ) where I rreat
ood foiptatt it muſt neeces be that this kince of eietion of vn-
cane [pirits, vix by prayer or prayer and falling, was in the church
n te Apcſtjes ime. And this is confirmed by theſe wordes of our
Sanjouur: 1/ 1 rhbrough Beekgebub caſt ont d1uels, by whome doe yoru chile


dren caft them onrs therefore they ſb alibe your indges, By whome ( ſaith


Chriſt j cor your children Ft them out? as if Le hed ſaid, Gong Beel- pros wr


zebub or by the fpirit of pod? by which interrogaticn is inlinuated,
de they itnor by the ſprrit of god* for you {ay not of them nenther
vil aye, that that they dce, 1 done by the divell; rherefore thatis,
becauſe you fay that your children caſt out divels by the ſpirit of god
v herein indeede you ſay truly: and in the meane ſeaſon affirme that
I caſt them cut by Beelzebub: and ſo of the like aftions, done by the
ſane finger, giue acontrary indgment, which is a moſt vynrighteous
thing, they ſha/be your mdees: that is in the day of iudgment thall teſ-
tify againſt vou: according to which teſtimony, god ſhall indge you,
Itis now to be conſidered, by whome and by what manner this was
dcne, whether by the Apcſtles, or ſome oder whichhadfro Chrift
wer with them ouer vndeane ſpirits, and ſo by
commaunding Sathan to depart in his name, or by ram other kynd
of men; and after an other manner: Firſt then we are to knowe that
by thoſe which are heere called your children, meaning Jewes which
m Chriſt's time caſt out dives, cannot be eedeiftocd coniurers, be-
cau'e they cannot well be ſaid to caſt out divells as is heere ſaide of
theſe: for how can Sathan drive out Sathan? but ſpecially, for that Ch
riſt approueth of this eieRion, and ſecretly confeſſeth it to be done


receaued the ſame


d: | by the ſpirit of god, Neither hereby may we ( although many doe )
+} vnderſtan the Apoſtles cr Diſciples, nor yer any who expeied e-
thele


vill ſpirits by cor.maunding them in the name of Teſus Ch


1 ; » 7 v 7 - = v 4 EC 4 p y- D * -
- SORE
ud


pag-49-


x


neacke. 3.3 f


mark. 10.2 4,


Tohn 11, 48, &


I2,10s%


Jehn 33, 14,


lohan. 153.19;


Luk 16,1”,


math 15.21,
maiko p, 2 9.


| Calvin; a: 7.0


4 © ADETECTION OF S, HARSNETS
theſe their children the Phariſes confeſſed to calt diuells forth by the;
Power of gad, but this as they denyedto Chrilt, ſo it cannot be bur
that To would deny the lane allo to all of his houſhould,& to wh6'
focuer that (hould playnely and directly in his name, and by any po-
wer receaued from him catt forth Sathan: for the di/ciple 35 not 4boue
his maſter, nr the ſerwant ab11e bis Lord. It is enough for the diſciple to
be 45 his majjſter is, and the ſernant as the tord, If they called the _ 0
the houſe Beelzebub, how much more them of his bowjbolde! And as the ph
ariſes becaulc of theire extreame mallice againit Chriſt, which muſt
needes extend it ſelfe to his dilciples, could 'not but be farr from the
approuing and commending of any greate worke done in the name
ot Chrilt, to allo for that they could not indure that the people ſhold
beleege in bim, but when any-myrade was done that might caule or"
helpe forward.that ſame, 'they were readye to burſt for anger, That"
this generation af vypers then, who excommunicated the blind ma”
tor bearing witneſle to the work that Chriſt had wrought ypon him,”
and ordeyned that if any man did confeſſ that he was Chriſt, be [houlde be '
excomunicate owt of the Synagogne: who conſulted togither to put Lazys
rus to death, brcawſe far his fake many of the lewes went away, and beles"\
wed an leſas. would acknowledge that worke to be done. by a deuyne |
power, ( and (o al lowe and commend it) which was done in the nie *
and power of Ieſus Chriſt, and was very etfectuall to bring the lewes *
to beleuc in Chriſt, as they d19 heere of this eiection of diuells per« '
formed by their children, as -a thing even impoſſible. For thele two"
reaſons it. cannot be, that they who are ſaide heore to c4ft owt dywelles, '
were cither of the Apoſtles or 70, diſciples-of Chiiſt, or any other
that by power communicated from Chrilt did in the extraordinarye ”
manner calt forth wicked ſpirits, If therfore euill ſpirits were caſt out *
of ſome inthe Apokles time, and not by the Apoltles nor by any 0« '
thers after that extraordinary manner the Apotttles did, viz. by come *
maunding of Sathan to depart in the name of Chriſt Ieſus, as by the
Scripture is manite(t; rauſt it not needes be, thatthen there was an ?
other manner of ciection beſides that extraordinary vied by tae Ae
poltles and diſciples of Chriſt” and why may we not ſay, that it was '
by prayer, or prayer and faſting, conſidering thoſe wordes of our Sa- '
niour, T bis kinde can by no other yneanes come forth, but by prayer and "
fats? The former ot thele Caluine writinge 'vpon this very place, +
dozh pot only affirme, bur alſo confirme and proue out of theicrip-" '
tures, and cothelatter he doth very muchinclyne, although he Coe *
not ully auouch the lame;


F, tivs CHIN guid FW, ACCEpINAICTC\ their chilare ſac take f Ir the children of £8 /
that whole ni ad [ome thinke that che Apoties were ſa called. Oh 9


refer


KR KB» &<T :


= 2B gB oY =» a QA BETH So


LYING DISCOVERY, : 45
rxferr thews to the olde Prophets, Bus I doubt not but that he vndertant.
ch the Exorciſts of mak gy there were many among the lewes, as
pearetb by the 19, chapter of the Acts. for it us likely that they did i
u1 better of the diſciples of Chriſt, then of the maijter, And preſently af=
ter (peaking of the origunall oftheſe Exwroaſts he ſaith this: {ts fiers po
tet} vt inu4cato Dei namine, damones fugarent cxc. ſo ut may be, that &
calling vpn the name of god ( that is by prayer ) thry did caſt out diwells
and the prople hauang hed experience of juch power of god, did raſbly ordeyn
wo themſelues an ordinaty funttruon.

But the Dyſc, laborech to coatute, firſt by producing M. More his
contrary iadgmente,I anlwere,that M, More and my ſeifc are fellowe
gunailters,and that the ſame is no more a conuiction of my opinion-
then mine of his. And what although we dilſent not only here in,bur-.
in {ome other points allo co the doctrine controuerted,whi'
> the Dyc.l warrant you leteth out and purſueth to the vtrermolt
ere we not men and fubie:t vneo error as well as others? And isit ſuch
a rare matter to ſee two differ aboute the interpretation of the lame .
aqater " jenr bes of ſuch vie; as the ame (torſooth ) mult needs.

publiſhed co the worldefſurely nothinge leile, Bur this vie wee
may make of it,that the ſame con.idered,it isnot likely there was a
ny luch deuiſe or confederacie as the Diſc.affirmeth in the 1 5,page of
his Di[courrre, His wordes be thel. Of theſe premeſes it wonlde peradune
me anger them, if ny ſbonld collect,that iv wll likel:boode ſermge neuher
by l-araingb ur [uRicient a gumentes, they crulde heretofore preuaile, for
the [ettinge wp of t ateriall conceits, they thought to ſupply: there
wants thereby this d:wiſe of caſtinge out diuels, In preiſinge the Jiffe-
retice in opinions betwixt vs,theDi/c.onerthroweth the \rebr9d he
here ſpeaketh of,more then he was aware, Secondly, he goeth about -
to conuince me, by two arguments of his owne: the tivlt where of is'
(ett downe in thele wordes.70 bould with M:D arrell,that there was an
wdinarie meane't) ce} out dinels in Chriſts time,d th derrogat much from pag. 44,
the h1nar of ns mir acles in caſting out ſatan. anſ'vere,no:no more,then
to hould that there was then an ordinarie meanes to heale other diſ-
eaſes and infirmities of mans body,doth derrogat from the honw of bi
miracles, i healinge pertons fo diſeaſed or affe:ted, but bere of he gi +
zeth a reaſon: for the infidels might haus ſurmiſed, that Chriſt haddone
it by the ordinarie me ances tinge ved the ſam: ſecretly maith aut there
kr:wledee, The vnbeleuing lewes coulde no more ſurmile thus,then
in hiscuringe of naturall diſcaſes,that he di4 the ſame by natural
meanes,or medicines ſecretly applied vnto them before, Ani neither
of theſe coulde they in any reaſon {1 much as ſurmi'e, con{1deringe


{the infinitnumbor he heale. land that immediatly;, 1v ſo2ne a3 hefar-


IK 1 view -


z4 7 0


46 A DETECTION OT'S. HARSNETS


them, yea often times before.vpon the touching ofthe hem ofhis grb
ment. His ſeconde argument tolloweth ,mmoreourr,ut maye argue the exe
tr aordenaric meancs to be ſuperfluous: there bemge then an ordmarie, mes


nes,and that of ſuch facillure,as will after appeare.no, for the expuilion
of ſatan by the extraordinarie meanes.ct.by a worde,ſo as Chriſt ng/


ſooner ſpake.or the Apoſtles in his name, bur the euil ſpirit went out*
did ws manefeltly and palpablie ( as I may faye )ſett _—_—_
liſh and preache to al men, the dietic of Chrilt Ieſus:which the ording
rie by callinge vpon the name of God,did not.2, The extraordinary
and miraculus eection by a worde, ag ſome times by the very ſha-
dowe of one,ſo gaifted,or kercheiefs or handkercheifs carried from
duch, argued a far greater power-and authoritie ouer vncleane ſpirits
and ſo did more commende and dignifie fuch perſons and there mi
niſtrie,then the eieQtion by the ordinarie meanes, The extraordinary
therefore, was not p_ bur of ſinguler vie, notwithſtandi
there was then an ordinarie meanes. Neither is the ordinarie,of
facillitie as the Dijc.imaginerh. Is itſo ealie a thinge to pray,or to be
ſo atfeted with the mulerie of an other,as to ſende vp bohes or
nes to the Lord in their bebalfeIndede to babble or to vie the

of our lippes for our ſelues or othersis an ealie matter,comms to the
prophaneſt that {iue:bur to labour inwardly in our ſpirits,or to offer
vp a ſpirituall ſeruice acceptable to God in Chriſt, cr as the Prophet
-oaws —_— Na on barts to _ fi amt rang forour

clues or others,they beinge to and natorally

ven to looke thyther,is a verie a hard and difficult el inge:and
far more vnrealie to continue and holde out any time therem:& hard


lieſt of all can wee be contented, and that'for the $20d of an-other,


to waine our ſelues for a daye from meate .and drinke,and all other
comfortes of this life: Our profits and pleaſures,a#iiftinge & humb-
linge our ſoules together ther with. That this is not a matter of ſuch
facillitie as the Diſc.affirmeth, lamentable and davly experience doth
ſhewe.But if we will ſpeake of a /acill:tie, in caſtinge out denils, then
muſt we goe to Chriſt & his Apoſtles, who no ſooner ſpake the word
but it was donne,yea ſom times with more ſac:/litie then a worde ,as
is layed downe before.

M. Darrell confeſſmg the neceſſity of ſayth in the [aid ordinary mes
nes, ſaith: that neither the faith of doing myr acles, nov the whifyine farth
is therein ncrf}ary; but that the temprary, or hiftoricell fatth may ſuffice.
Jt bene brre obtefed, that an biftoricall faith ſufticins,l as is before expre
fed ) and that the prayry and faſtms in ſuch as hane but that faith canme
pleale god: it will Fre that the 'dinary meanes which Chrift hath left
1a bis church fr cafling out of dinels as receſſory, is ſuch & mcarces as 1m


accept


Om LO SOCOGESSIESSTISEI CSS SS


able to MM, Darvell anſweoeth, that the cquence
a pn} 0 dk -_

and ſo he antwereth againe, and againe will, if the Diſc. ſholde
ympleade him a thouſand times, Surely one wolde thinke this argu-
n.cnt tolloweth not. The prayer and faſting of ſuch a5 hane only the tone>
por all or buſtoricall faith, cannot pleaſe god m Chriſt, to. the obteyninge of 6
ny | pq bling: therefore not to the caſing ont of [athan, or obreringe
of 1bir cor porali benefit: and ſo by conſequence, wee hane 4 meanes to Caft
out 71: es, uf thus be one, which 1s not acceptable ur pleaſing wnto god, Y'E
the Dyſc, reply that he doth;not ſo vnderſtand the Antecedent, or firſt
part of this argument, as ſet it downe, then I ment not to deny the
g ument, — | _ but the Antecedent, which mo te this

e prayer and faſt CC, cannot pleaſe rod to the obtryninge

any tl ng, ( xt neue le ped; En he a


0
deth nothing, Now this is falſe. For the prayers and humiliation of


the wicked,may auayle with god to the obteyning of a corporal| bee
nefit, and remouing of a temporall judgment from himlſelte or an 0+
ther, and ſuch is pelleſſion, and deliverance therefrom: ajbeit the (Ge
1s not effeQuall to procure a {pirituall bleſling, as the remiſſion of ſins
and ſuch like. Aba faſting and — mlelfe, though it were
but outwardly and not in ſouncnetle and {yncerity of hart, did there-
by eſcape not only himſelfe, but his ſonn alſo that puniſhment which
—_— had —_ _ them both, The _ not( mw the
Moſes 11180'y 00 4 ear, neither oppreſſe him. yee ſhall not

xa eatart Tay nor fathe ol ſe hilde: if rick trowble juch, &
fo he call and cry-vnto me, I will ſurely heere ns cry, And a little after: if
thow take thy neighbours rayment to pledge, thow ſhalt riſtore it pnto him
befare the ſanne goe downe: for that 15 bis comering only, and this is his gar
ment fr his ſk1n: wherein ſhall be ſleepe? therefore when he yet -onto me
I will beare him: for 1 am DP 0 \hallwe thinke now that god hea-
reth not the prayers or cryes that the ſtranger, widdowe, father/e(le,
&c, lend forth to the ver je of the anguiſh of their ſoules, and pre
uouſnes of their oppreſſion, except they be ſuch as be incewed with
a iuſtifying faith; god forbid, For howſoener it is certaine that in-thes
and in ſuch like caſes the eares of the lord are open to ſuch, & theire
rayers moſt availablewith god: yet are they not ſhut agairt ſinners
ut pod heareth them thus my as to deliver them from the oppreſ}i«
on they are in, and to take vengeance,of their oppreſſors, Anc it is to
be obſerued that we have no ſuch limitation here. Is it not thus (aide
by the lorde? If the ſtranger, widdowe, fatherleſſe childe that fearerh


my name, call an! cry unto me, I v ill heare: but more pencrallys,yf


any widd we or ſathirl: je cbilde whatſoever, being iniuried, or,oppre "
% lle


LYING DISCOVERY. FR


itknges 21-30
29.29, I *


exodus 22. 21+
vers 23+
VEels 26.27»


ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS

decl, c43 and cry wato mee | will ſurely beeve. Thus then it is, Cod doth
heare tne lighings and ayes &c. that wicked men un their mileryes,on
unmineat daunger thereot doe lend forih vato him, and deliuereth


luis 445-9 them, as the creator ready to thew mercy to bus creature, which al
"AF" though as a linner tie abnvrceth, Witt 1s prayers and all tus lacrificey,
7 yet 45 ULs CIe4zure he loucth, and hath compailion of, ipecially in mi«
Luc: ; }6 tecy, as appeareth by the piaces of icripcure aboue written: wherg


math, c.4;, Chis (er duwne for arcalon, way he wull lurely heare the oppreile4
Pals i+5-46 ltranger, widdowe, tatherieile & for [ an mcrcijuell: allo by that lays


4+ +++ . Mmgot Dawd: The lord 45 grade all, And terein we \ballbe turther con

firmed, if we call to munde, how the iorve 1a reipect ot our creation
na,  Calleth himlelt our* j&ther, and ys thelaine reipect tus /onucs and
ues 13.41, Ganz hiers: Welltnergtores may gu grarels gaudren bycroation, in
£444.43. + a imatter percayninge to this lite, ſeeing allo in che chunges of this life


y EY WT *


Lov.j, 15.46, & Re is lo aboundantly gratious vato them: Bur 'conceraunge the lifs


$2.26, that is to come, or {piricuall bleilings in heauenly things, ic 15 Ag mar
ws i-',._  aaile though he heare rnem nocat ally but only bus luancs by adops
x tion, conluering he wilt bettowe no luch * treaſures vpoR them, &
6 pers: 3-5 that lelus Chrilt makethno** interceil;on- for then: ia whoime onl
and tor whole mediation, ſuch requelts are accepred ot god, 6
093-46: Eu: an oth: point may not be left aſleepe, Darrell | «ith : hat m the aid


place of Math. 17. 20, that the faith there mentioned, 1s to be y
41 bt the faith of d1;ns miracles: That the Apuſtles were reproued for theire]
Weaknes that faith: And that if the ſame bad bme ſtronge enowg h, they
muy bt bawt call wt the wicked ſpirit mentioned un that Chapter, verſe 21,
with preyer ar faſtins: whereby it followeth( for ought that dull men c3
diſcerne) that M, Darrel! houlding (as #s before mnnoned) that place of
ſcripture to be a ſreret & dinance for the gontinuance of fa'tin pee ay,
«5 the meancs.t0 cat out diutlls, and that therein by faith 1s wnder(tood the
faith of dung mar cies: ( whnah if it had bene irons enowgh mn the Apoſtles
pray and j aſting had brne \uperſiuous) it will followe ut is thausht, that
tht butoricall faith will not ſerus bis twins, but that ut muſt be the faith of
dns muractes: which muſt be wnderftoadl ſor the ſaith that is required of ne
c:ſjury, when there 1; necat to calt out dhuclls. Ys a5 if he want that, hrmay
( 64 hrs one nCh 1m) cult bis capp at them.

Marke (13004 Reader) his noate of attention, or preface before
my a'lerton” $1: ax 8:her prynt may nat be left aft»epe! an'1 after his co=
le .tion there-vpon, the cine of 4 cavp, ymagine his own2 into the
are, aad you (hall lee the man marucylouſly eryunphing: ſo that ci
ther now {ure he hath the vitory, $& that he hath gt alſo out of my
awne wordes, or els he willneuer have it. The pryn | a firmed was,
Cat ic f6/th nerationer! Math, 19, 20.4, ta be wniderlord of the mirg- «-


is/


bn; fe


downe
place 9)
prayer |
and v4
17, 2:
know!
yerſe 7
j4bmg
us, Þ
be me
aniwe
are he
wreq!


=> CTESS


©OZEADST


MLST


WASHES RTOSDK SAS


— 1 V - 0


_ - LYING DISCOVERY,  , gp

bus faith and heereof I gaue'two reaſons, which are heere likewiſeſet

downe, There-vpen laith the Diſc, is followeth,. that Dar, beldinge ths

place of (cripture to be 4 jecret ordinance for the continuance of f aftug aud
prayer 4s the meanes oc | aniwer, that all thathe inferteth was rue,

and very titly collected, if I held the place he {peakerh of viz, Mah,

17, 20, to contayne in it the ordinance wee ipeake of: Bur all men

knowe that it is not Math, 17, verſe 20. which were molt abſurd: but

verſe 21, vi3, theſe wordes: This kymde goeth net owt, but by prayer and

jaitmg. Yea the Diſc. himlelfconfelleth rhe ſame, but the leate before

tus, page 43, Thus in a word we ſee his collection and boaſtinge to

be meercly in vayne, Yet for our better vnderſtanding and further

anſwer, we mult remember: that two kindes of expullion of lathan

are heere {poken of: one extraordinary, wherein the miraculous taith
required, verſe 20. and an other by an ordinary meanes, viz.praier

or prayer and falting, verſe 21, and here howlocuer the zultityinge
farh is to be wiſhed, and is beſt: yet the faith temporall, or hiſtorical

may ſuffice, for the expelling of lathan after this manner, or by the

ordinary meanes, which ſtanderth not fomuch in the fb of the per+

ſon thetein vſed, as in the mercye of god obteyned, man vſinge the

meanes which to that end he hath ordeyned. And as this faith. may

luffice, ſoit ſhould ſeeme that it hath or ſhall: for we reade that in

the day of the lorde, ſome workers of iniquity ſhall ſay for themſclus

lord hauc we not in thy name caft ou: dixels? why ſhould we vnderſtand math,y.23
this of Iudes only and ſuch as he, who by a word caſt our givells,ſeing
that manner of eietion continued ſo ſmall atime in the church: And
not as well ofthe ſonnes of Sceus? (and ſuch as they ) who it is pro=
bable caſt out diuells by the ordinary meanes, where-with they had
mixed ſome a4iurations, ( where-ypon they were called Exarciftes )
added thereto in that and former time when all things almoſte were
corrupted, and as it is very likely ypon ſome imitation of the proph«
ets, who had (no doubt) caſt out divels by adiuring or commaund-
ng the ſpirits to goe out inthe name of the lorde: as the papilts doe
no\ve in the ymitation of Chriſt and his Apoſtles: both of them for-
getung thar they had not receaued any ſuch power ouer yncleane !pt
rits, and therefore ſhould haue refrayned from commaunung or ad-
wring them. True it is that they were far from caſting the ewill ſpirit
out of the man mentioned Acts 19, the reaſon I thinke was becauſe
they entred ypon that where-ynto they were not at all called of god:
for not contented with that manner of cieftion. they had formerlye |
ved, becauſe ir ſhewed noſuch authority ouer diuells, as.that perfor
ned by the Apoſtles, arid by conſequent did commend them nothig
&much to the people, which wes the only thing they deſued: they at

| on tempt


ads,19.13» -


Fag-30,


@pb.C. :0,


gant. 4.


a.Pr.5-9.


yo ADFTFCTION OP S. HARSNETS


tempted to caſt cull (prits owt of ſundry in the name of the lord Ieſme11g
maruaile therefore though they had no better ſucceſle therein, albeit
they percaſe aftcr an other manner, I meane the ordinarye meanes
both before & after that diſpoſleſled divers. Ar d why doth this teme
ſo ſtrange and incredible to ſome, as I known it doth? why maynor
a wicked man be as well an inſtrument to calt out diue!ls after the or-
dinary, as the extraordinary manner: and out of the body, as well ag
the loule of man?ſeig eſpecially this latter is a far more worthy work,
If we obieR as ( | thin! e ) we can obiect nothing elle, thar god hea-
reth not the prayers of ſuch,nor regardeth their humiliations: that is
anſwered already.

1 hew powerſull preaching is annexed for a meanes to pray and faſt.
meg. Wherevnto may L added rhe word of God (as the ory (auth) which
the dine lls (forſoath) could not indure to be are, but would be gone. And lo
You ſee them fall into the ſaid popyh follics, makinge the ſgnes of poſſe ſſton,
tbe mcanes and cauſes of diſpoſſeſſion.

V Vee doe nor, neither euer did affirme, that theſe are the me-
anes ordeyned of god for the caſtinge of ſathan out ofthe bodyes of
men, for we doubt not but that without the vſinge of either of theſe
he may be expelled, as it was in the dilpoſſeſſjon ki Kath, Wright and
Da'ling.Yet notwithſtanding we thinke that in this aid wgrke theris
good and holy vſe thereof. Firſt, becauſe in this caſe, men wreſile n:t
&2 ainſt flijh and blud, but ag ainft principallityes and poweve, and agamſt
the worldly gouernours,, the princes of the darknes of this world, againſt (pt
rituall wichedneſjer which ave in the high places: It Randeth them there+
fore vpon, to take vnto them the whol: armour of god that they may
be able to reſiſt ſo ſtrong an enemy, and hauing finiſbed «ll rhings lid
faſt. Now part, yea a principall part of this amowr, is the ward of god,
euen the ſword of the ſoivie And herein we haue our bleſſed Sauioure
for an example to imitate, who when the deuill in an extraordinarve
and viſible manner appeared vnto him, ſpeaking alſo vnto him, here
liſted and overcame him by the word of god, Secondly, becauſe the
reading, interpreting, & applying of the holy (criprures ſerue to ſtre

then our taith, whereof ger isneede: for reſif ( ſaith ©. Peter ) the
dinell edfaft in the faith. 3. to ſtirr vp whatſoever guift of praver 15m
vs, or feruency therein, and to worke the true humbling of vs vnder
the mighty hand of god. But admit we hould readin» & expoundis
of the word of god were meanes of diſpoſſeſſion. yet that followeth
not there vpon which the Dzſc, from thence colleerh vn;. that wee
make the [1gnes of po}? ſion, the moancs &> cauſes of dilpoſſ, ſor, Did we
ever houl{thereading and vreaching of the word, ro beſignes of v3
& on? furely no: for theſe ſi2nes are nothing elie but rhe wh
£70.55


LYING DISCOVERY.
#Fefs and operations which ſathan beinge within the body of man
ſendeth forth: in which nomber to place the worde of od og preg
ciing thereof, 1s a molt ſortiſh and unpious thinge: and ſimple men
though webe, yet} truſt wee were never (o abſurd: which beinge ſo,
the Þ1ſc. collection is not worth a ſtrawe,

Eur faith he, it :s moſt apparant by M, Mores conceite, who thinketh


prayer more nec ſary, then the j1gnes of poſſe un mrntoned 1m the ſorip- pag-J0.,


inves, fur the truc diſcerning of thoſe who are pſi ſſed.

It appeareth that M. More doth not tay altogither fo, as is here
mentioned. Eut be it graunted: doth he ther!ore make prayer a ligne
of puſſellion? 2g lo one & the ſame thing, « ſrene of p/ſſe{jron,e meancs
or cauſe of d1ſp1ſſ-fſron? Behould how the Diſc. argueth, By prayer 4
man may dr(cerne of thoſe that are p1ſſeſjed: ergo, prayer is « ſ19ne of poſ=

ſion. 11 thus be a good argument then are thele allo: By the guifte
called the diſcerning of ſpirits, the Apoſtles trulye diſcerned of thoſe
that vere poſſeſled, as the D1ſc, affirmeth pag. 28. go, that guitt is
a ſigne of poſſeſſion, By the knowledge of the ſignes of ſathan poſſeſl
ſing one, mentioned in the goſpel, wee may trulye diſcerre of thoſe
that are poſſeſſed: erg 0, that knowledge is a (igne of poſſeſſion. And
ſo the Apoſtles were poſſeſſed, & all indued with this ſaid knowledg
for where the yu__e ſgne of a thing is, there is alſo for certainty the
thing ſignify ed thereby. Agame, by good ſkill in phiſick, one may tra
lye diſcerne of a fever: therefore Qllm hiſick is a ſigne of a fever.
Thus to reaſon, doth very ill beeſeme a batcheller of artes, mach more
« batcheller ——— of «;inity. But this much worſe: profeſſed de-
vines to charge falſly ( and that in print ) a preacher of the goſpell, to
hould, that prayer is « ſiene of poſſeſſron, where-vpon followeth, that al
which pray are poſleſled.

OF CHAP, 9.
Of the ſromes wherebry M. Darrell e others doe <> ſcerne (as they
[ay ) when [athan is expelled,

M. Darells ionot ance makgth him (as ie ſermerk ) in this point confident.


He is prremptory, that becauſe it 1 [aide m the ſcriptures: that the ſpirits of F”


the lunatike, when he was caft out of him did cry and rent him ſore, &r that
bs lay as one dead. that therefore theſe three are infallable ſ1enes appointed
of God t1 knowe wh-n one 1: di[poſſeſſed, Nay rath-r then fayle hee will be
content with one of them, as un bus dealing with Thomas Darlmge heereaf<
ter will apprare.

V Vhere-vpon I houlde theſe three for /iemer whereby to knowe
when on* is de/p+ſſ.ſſed, as (ignifying the egreſſe of the (pirite, I hae
before declared: it remayneth therefore only that I anſ'ver to thoſe
obicctions the Diſc, makeib againſt them, The firſt wherof is this:
Son


Fo


marke 1.26.


A DETECTION ON $. HARSNETS


BE he may eeſuly counterfeyt theſe ſugnes: ergo ape. anſiver,


that Rane can co 1s, doe the lice to any one of
much leſle can any them all. For the holy ghoſt {
not of a natural cy, ſent forth by mans yoyce or power, the like wh
erevnto £2 other man may iter and {o counterfeyt: But. of a ſuper-
natural loud ery, lens forth by « ſapernaturall power, I means, the di
uells: for it is ſaid, the yncleane ſpirite cryed with 4 loud vryce and cam:
ot of bums: 11 like ſorte it is (aid, the wncle ane ſpiris tare bm: nowe one
would thinke that both the hand and tongue of man were too ſhort
to performe that is done by the diuell. It 1s beſides aid of the polleſ<
led chulde mentioned Mark. 9. that when the ſpirit was gone out of him,
be w4s 44 one dead, in ſomuch that many ſaid be ts dead, meaninge that
howſoeuer he was not indeede deade, but had life remayning in him,
yet he was in ai] things like to a deade body, without any appearance
ot lite, ſtarke and ſtitt, the pulſes not beating, nor taking breath &c.
hke to a man in aſwound. in whome although there be life, yer no
fuch thing appeareth to be, Euen fo it was with the dilpoſleſſed child,
where-ypon the peSple which thronged about him tookehim to be
decade. Nowe this lewd knewe cannot cally nor yet potlibly coumerfeyt
Howloeuer then, were our 10, diſpolleiſcd perſons counterteites, as
the Dyc. will haue them, there crymg, renting, and fayning to lye as
dead, an other as lewde might eaſily counterfeyr: yet to tay that one
may counterfeyrt che crying, renting ſore, and lyms 2 deade, mentioed
ig the goſpel, and cauled by the dtuel!, is both aviurd & impious,
His ſecond obieRion is ſer downs in thele wordes .M .Darrell confeſe
ſing, that in the Apoſtles times, ſome ſpirits were ca? ou: mye eaſily then
others, might in reaſon haut thausht, that thoſe that we3t ont ſo r:41ly, {id
wor ſo grewuſly torment the parties at their ca(tin? out, as th: reſt aid,

True, not ſo grewouſly torment at there #uIN7 Out, 4i ft beret ard,
therefore not grew-uſly torment at all, and {o of the other i1ignes. This
followeth nor, as euery childe may ſe, Two maleta:tors are whippe4
(ymagine) for one and the ſame falt, by two ſeuerall tormentors: the
one being beaten by the more cruell man, hath 40. {tripes: the other
by him that is leſſe cruell hath but 20, By this reaſon nov of the Djſ
this ;atter was not beaten at all, for he was not beaten ſo grew29/ly as
the other was.

His third obiection followeth: And ſomewhat it is that a!thourh
there ave diuers mentioned in the ſcriptures, to haue bene diſpeſſ'ſſecl by 16r
Sau Chrift and by his Apoſtles: yet it is (aid of none but of the lunatick,
Mark. 9. that when Sath an departed, the ſpirit either cryed, or rente him
ſore, or that thy lay as dead. To make thrrefore ſuch particularities in ont,
4 gener «/l rule te all, argueth greatly the weaknes of his indgmeent.


T ke


MUC i | SI. "=, MR”
JFISUCQCIVY ty : \


The Diſc. is greatly deceaued,for ot an other Marky 1.( a mann and
Bot a childe, as the (matike was Mark, 9. ) itis ſaid, that when he was
cilpoliciied, the vncleanc ſpirit tare bm, and that he tare or reng him ate 75
ſrc appeareth by Zxke 4. where the lame {tory 18 let down. Secondly voor y-
iT 18 W11ten, that be oy:d with 4 loude viyce, and came out of him,
And in the 8, of the Acts, that the wucicane ſpurs crying with alnede
Wye, (4/ne ont of mary that were poſjeſJed, Ana in that thus is not laide
keere of a particuler perlon, as .\14/4 1, C7 9. but of marry, it is ther
by playne, tat it was an vivall thing with the {pirits, to lend torch ar
cauie loude ci'yrs, wixn they went ont of thoſe they poſ];[[*d. 1hushaththe
Di/c. in laying that none bit the lunatick Mark 9, cube crycd, or mas
rent ſore, vitered yn- awares a maniteſt yntruth, and therein (hewed
no great learning or tadgment, who vpbraydeth othery with 1gne=
M41. WARES, and want of 14gment, V Ve reade not inveede in cues
ry place where mention is made of caſting out diulls, of theſe 3, ett
6:15, that they cryrd, were vent ſore, and lay a5 d:ale, but only in the 9,
ot Mark: nor in any place bel1des, that they in that cale were for a lea
{0 «5 dead, and had the D:/c. aid either of theie, he had {aid rruiye:
yet notwithttanding it is very probable that thus it went with the dif
poiletled generally: tor in the 17, of Math, and 9. of Luke where the ,
ciſpollethion of the [x#.4tick childe is ſet downe, there is no mention
nether of c:ying * nor renting, nor lying 45 d-a:{yyer by the 9. of Mark vers. 8.
t 1s cleare that when the diuel went out of him be &:y:d, was rente fore, 15 43
&11ay as deade, Inthe 4, of Luke we reade of the diipollet];on of one tat ute.there is
0! Caprnaum, whome Chriſt met in the ſynagogue, but we heareno mop are"! 15 gy
ting of any-{ude cry: that then was ſent fn yet bythe 1, of Mu o® hat is cakes
reric 20, where the {ame myracle is recorded itis playns there was due of
luch a cry: for it is ſaid, the vrcleane ſpirit a:yed with 4 tid wager. In Ben es
that taere isthen no more inention 1a the golpe!l of theſe I call /rgnes not atier that le
0 arſpoſſe}ſion, it :5 not becauſe they which were d:potſeiles, ud net pkg yon 7
&y, neither were /ore rent, nor lay for aleaſon «a dad, 4t 177 going out marnded him
ef 15: ſpy's, but only the luna:the Marke 9. whereof fewe wil doubt, togee
a c Laces colupared and con{y Jered with that of the ACTS: But tor Arab of bis
Cat tag noly Fuanzeli; iabouring a'rer breuity doc ( viuall,) "ejI1k egicie.
only the ſaid preate workes with ſome fewe circumRances, as out ct
whome the divell was cat, where an Ypecially by whome 8 in what
mannerit was done viz: by the word or commauncenment of Chriſt:
without deſcribing at large the manner of ſathans vexing the fayde
party, either while ke held his moſſe!Tion, or when he went forth, the
9: of Markeonly excepted, where both rhieſe are per forme: & there
fore it is that where we reade not of all the 3, iencs, anc! not be-
ulc other difpoſieiled periors did not oz8%e: whentke {yirit went

M 3 «ut


vets.z5*


14 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNE TS
out, but only he. And where the Diſc: ſaith that rather then fayle 1
will be content with any one of them: 1 anſwer that howſoeuer I thinks
theſe 3: ſignes were vſually heard and ſeene in the cgreſle of the (pi.

_ rirs,y*t it may be not alwayes, but ſometimes two or poo one did
ſuffice to ſignify the ſame, and yet are not the other therefore in vaie
becauſe the more ſignes the more we are confirmed in the diſpollef.
ſion of one: for why may not this as well be true of the [ignes of dif.

olſellion as of poſſeſſion? where all the ſ1gnes arenot required, but
ou of many may ſufice, as hath bene ſtewed before: yea what &
if we ſhould ſee one b-wed t224ther, ſo as he could nor lift vp himſelf,
foritis very 2s the * poſſeſſed woman was Lyke 13, might we not well thence
l:ikelye ſhee was ther ( eſpecially if we perceived that it was not naturall) that he had

75008 a ſpirit caning the infirmity of body, and that he was ſo bound by ſa

than? And yet this is but one effet or operation of ſathan: & ſo but
one ſigne of poſſeſſion. And why one {1gne may not ſuffice to ſignify
the ſpirits going out of a man, as well as this being in the body of mi
I for my part doe not ſee neither doe I think that the Diſc, can ſhew
any reaſon. And although be it one, or more, there is ſinguler vie of
the ſigne or ſignes, to lignifye the egreſſe, as I haue ſhewed before,
treating thereof: Yet are the ſignes of diſpoſſeſſion of noſuch abſolut
neceſſity, as the ſignes of poſſeſſion are, as might eaſilye be ſhewed,
And therefore I will not deny but that one may be diſpoſſeſſed, and
none of theſe ſignes appeare, which is more: the health and eaſe of
the party from ali former vexation by the diuell, declaring his delive
rance from the diuell, as it is in naturall diſeaſes: yet I think it falleth
out thus very ſeldome if ever, for the reaſons formerly giuen by me,
| de Damon.cap. Vnderſtand me of the eieftion of (athan by the finger of God,% noe
| gaietzo of hisvoluntary egreſſe asis in the papacy, which may well alter the
| caſe. And fois Thyrcus fully anſwered ſaying, nm rar fit vt [priitus de

i feendart, mulls 5 [1a dil, ceſſu ) poſt le datis ſnome. It is often ſcene that ſathan

F departcth, leauing no ſienes of bis going: which the Diſc. in the ende of
this Chapter obieReth out of him againſt me.

From theſe ſignes he proceedeth to certayne other, which my
ſelfe haue obſerued in experience, whereof we haue heard before, 8&
faith that it may not be omitted of whome | hane learned thrm, even of
Thyreus forſooth. But how can this poſſibly be true* ſeing Thyrens tre
tile de damoniacis, from which by my handes theſe counterfeyrs ſho!d
have receanel their dire&tions concerninge the ſignes, came not to

. Fnmelandvmill the yeare 1 (98. thev ſuffring or doin2e the ſame, the
Tmennethe one of them I meane Darling 1 c9 5. and the other vi>. the 7. in Lan-
—_ caſhwe 1 $96.7 How greatly alſo in this reſpeR ci 1 the Diſc, f rpetk
himſciſe to make (almoſt) a whole * booke to this end, to peieg

tne


 _ cc wy og Gy PD '= BK - 3%. - 2, - -428 -- 259


LYING DISCOVERY, i
the world, that I haze learned all my ſkile (forſooth) concerning poſſ=
eilion, of Thyrcns the Teſnite, and inthe ſame booke euery where al-
leaige him to confute me: whereby appeareth that 'Thyreus and I dil
ſent in racgment as much almoſt as two can diſſent about the doQrie
in queſtion: 8& therefore it is very vnlikely that 7 bane learned T know
not what from him, He procedeth to obieR againſt the Henes heard
an] ene at the diſpoſſellion of the parties controverted as followeth,


T he cheif aſſurance, that M. Dar. and M, More bad, that ſathan\0*8-51-


þad left Lan Aſhton, was her owne wordes, viz, when riſing ſrom her ſit,

be {ard he is gone, he 1s gone, | am well, I thank god. And having wept
in the ſaid fit, ſbee alſo ſaide, that then Sathan d:parted fr m her. So as
herre we hane a newe jiene of Sathans going ont Wa one: vir. the wepinge
of the party,

1 hat M. More hath faid no ſuch thing, as the truth is, ſo it is pro
bable heereby, for that the Diſc. in the margent hath notnored the
article and page, as his v'vall manner is in other places, which if he
could haue done, he woulde never have omitted, And truly for my
owne part ( god is my witneſle ) I neuer ſaid fo, yea it was farr from
me, much [eſſe did I depoſe fo, as the Diſc. affirmeth, yea what need
it, ſeeing beſides her moſt extreame tormentes at that time, I ( with
many _ ſawe her lye as Cead for a ſeaſon: which had I forgotten
as it is not like!y, yet thereof the ſtory of the 7. in Lancaſhire written
by M. Drickons ( one of the coppies whereof I had ) would have put
me in minde: 1, heereofalſo I was never depoſed nor examyned, no
nor yet concerning the 7, in Lancaſhire, ſave the firſt time I was befor
the Biſhope a worde ar two, concerning them all in generaall, as whe
ther I had not ſeene them before M, Starchy writ ynto me, and whe-
ther M, More had not bene there before he went with me, VVherby
appeareth the corrupt dealing of the Diſcouerer, who in the margene
hath Darrell ad .ort. 17 pag. 144. And whereas in the Lancaſhire ſtory
penned by M, Dickons, from whence (and not from M, More nor
me } the Diſc. hath both this and a great deale more in this ſaid cha
pter, and elſwhere ſcattered heere and there, there is mention of her
increaſe of torment (which as I conceaue is ment by thoſe words Mar.
9. rent ſire) where-vpon theſe wordes are vſed: Now in this trme they
were all eveencd to ſer how pittifully ſhe was twrmented: & togither with
that he heere mentioneth this, viz. ſhe was caſt into 4 traunce, and lay
at one dleade for a while: he hath of purpo'e omitted both theſe: that
ſve he might weaken that itis ſaide by me concerninge the ſipnes of
diſpoſſeſſion, and withall bring the reader ignorant hereof, ro ſuſpeRN

h r diſpoſſeſſion, and rogither with hers all the reſt. To which pur-
pole he proceedeth to rhe di poſſeſſion of Marg ared Byrom, w_ the
12nes


— —


dh N bf | ARSH


I mzanc elpecially 1 in that he tellemh 12 tac arg nent trom wiicice be


bijtary of the 7. 31 Lanca/wire.

TIT? Murgaret Byrom (aide that 6s bot Yeuerringes «ſte; ſure bed lyrn a
d:at half 41 01477; /b feuce vhe jpa'ss £9/m” pp from ber belly towards bat
bre(t, thence t1 er threat Cc. as tolloweth the hultory before. 1s {;/i bra
hind it [a5d jlpre 4 [147t throat, and & (rib [1tids £9.46 4 WERG 4 5Y ep
molt ws; vn/aurry. Here wit han? the leſuaes ſtrnche. And v:j14:5 ihe
rk inf « able mae ammns t M.D4:chree (12ues of dſp 1] {fs mw. [y:ns
for dad i; perre eonſmeec, ſor this party _ ed 4. Ale 97 are 34:48
WA; g£91e,

Ibis obietion ariſeth onlye of the milplacinge of one words
Which the writer ot this {tory 34. hens 411 vi avates: winic being
piace in his right place the ovbiection 1s ey an. VCred? ivr Waceras

This word +has 1t 15 thu (et downe, M. Lyr1mn ſad (2) 147 8 9 NO TNC, fer ſors

7; vg lotto, bai ly as dead 0a!je a1 198% /u27 [ell ue j; VI 00” 3p &c. 1t ihoulde
haue bene thus: Mares ut Byron, 4y1a DOC VEIN? 4 :2r jb? bs: {lyf
ai dead ha te A WEN 114 [ie | 'elt £16 | p YIE Co\87 Pj) C *C, Neltner Cal £18
firſte in any ſence or reaion be a(cr,ocd to ML, oo « 5y/0n, as they

malt nee.les it we taxe tae wordes as they are y oe 1) repore=
ed: for ſhe kne'y not how long the lay dead, n> more then a ceade
body: But very titly taey bel 1 20 the Writer of tie [hLory, as Appea
reth by the right placing of the word tt, From Mar; ares Lym he
procecdet! h to the ot! er! Ixe, and out of the Lamica/bire "{tory, letteth
downe at large the ſeuerall! hapes that t the cuill {pits ( as 1tſhoulde
leeme ) cauled prel lent ly vpon their eprelic from tem, aid prelen=
ted them'elues mto cr Ginde, es, aSit they hal gone torch of them ine
dued with uch bodves: and there- ypon pla, ch vppon Dar(ynves
wiw/e, Ant allthis to make their dips! ſellun odious or ridiculous if
he could, whereas ind-ede it confirmeth the fame, But he ſaith neuer
a word of their moſt extrame torments, tor renting [ re, their 0y0nge
bone: the ir Iyms at 5: « if they had bene ſtarke drede, which in the
lat1s (tory are | tKewife let Jowne with thetr {euerall circamſtaunces;
I 6.2 thinges he rough t 220d to omitt:
gant. fg. inally, aga! _ the by es of Cifpolle! Tion, and therein the dif
_ a3 C £ 1 of 614 p mmM:;4cKs, confirmed by the {t pnes thereof, hee
meeth in 7 ywan;, aying: Srort; pro" pulunt!7 ws £06. A wickd|ps
Wits mn oO 42 (4 ploalnre omit theſr Gewe ', fn they may ſb-we chem, and


A i yr 1097 wit en: ng eope their poſſſſ 1, | ack. er Jy” *#r and fgraunte
\e 9.4 that endertanding ds of th e tones which [piritus ab Exar Cl coats
Kat, the (piri6s camped oy the ExIroftt 0147, 65 the P1b1187 01 of 4 Can

die


nes thereof: > $9 he Jealerh more playnlie aad leilc correptly,


ha1the fame: not from M. More depoilugus X gune, but irom we .


#
c
,
f |
t


LYING DISCOVERY, yu
ae, the brealing of « quarry m the glafe-windowe, and ſuch like ridicu-
lous ligng2, IT 1s Molt true. the lignes allo which ot the owne accord
Uicy $1UC, as The lenlible and Viiuic ( as | may lay ) going outin(uck
IOIC az WC LICATE, Pamurmg CFC 1 Juubt nat bur they mAy at then'e lms
[eel pleaſe omits; but tat ey may [pew tm ana Keepe Lo Pp {ſeſj10ns
el)ecially the ugnes mentoned nh we gOIpELL, as tie {0 WIC WL HAUE
It, all LHAt allu alter the 1ieancs 1s vic ariglit, Winch gSUU | ath Ore
aeyned tor the calling our uf diuclls 1 deny. WWF 10 CANNUL DE TIT gud
wil} utter the fpirices thus to delude & mock his people, which inal
be Leereabuuts occupied 1n taith and obedience to his owne ordine
ance: wherein as the wicked lpirits would delight exceecingly, thus
(1 meanc ) to dillemble an egretle, in handiing che periuns poticlied
1 luch mance as lome times they did when they wente out of men,
a1 elpectally at the time we ipeake of, ſo woulde they vie the lame
tuil otten; yea 1 trult it it were 10, & lett to 1hiur pleaſrre, and that the
Celis were not 1 this cale ouer ruled & brydled by that ouer & all-
ruliy had oi god,all £rgland ihoid haue heard ot it betore this. A gaine
we: Cit thus tat the {pits might give thele {1gns & tarrie in men, or
that the [pirits might ome alltne 11gnCcs m<nocd in the (cripture whe
they goe ro1th of men,we could not know that the polletled were dif
policiied as hath bene thewed,but mult needes {tan 11 doubt therof
at ical{t tor a tine, & that time wherin we are attected with the works
of god,it euer: whereby it wowd come to palle, that when this won=-
certull workeot god tholde at any time be wrought, the lord ſhould
neither be hattely prayſed, tor the ſame, and recraue that glory that
otherwiſe wouta be giuen him,nor man receaue lound protic therby,
And it 1s a wonderiulithing to conliver how ready the papilts are to
aftirme that their Fxorgjls can & doe compell the (pirits to giue fuck
lines as they plcalcot their Ceparturezatid never once thinke of gods
compellinge them to giue the l1gnes mentioned in his word at their
egrelie, tor the aliurat.ce ot his people, that they are gone out, who
without tue lame cannot pollibie {;nowe iGmuch,nor of his reltrayn-
mg them tothe ec the laid lignes whe yet Uiey remaine within them,
OF CHAP. 10,
Of M. Dar, and M, ves conceit: that *athan being ca} ont
of ne, d1th preſently aſter ſecke to rep ſe ſje hum.
MT. Darrell like a knde fronde, had ntun te arais with the di{poſ}*ſſe


on of ary; but foi his Care therein be may be thmebs to bane dcſerncd great Prg.55


eommentd ation, Fir bis ps /waltons t3]uch Hl han benegthat they ſhoutd

»/e a'l drlizence and circwntpi tion, that /athan did nat a7 ame reenter us

to them, 1 brs his pet ſwatzon hath ener bene lr awne ſrom 4 poſition, which

be j!i/ly bowldetb; that Sathan beinve expelled ous of man, doth (eehe pri
JS J 0h < Sa. / us of , Pp


pg ;6


mith1:4}-


Exodus 1 or7,


Deut. ; 2 y.


ExodusS,1 9.4.


Zech,:.s.
Romans 3,2.
Komais y, 4,


--


FF ADFTECTION Of $. HARSNETS


ently after to reentey into bim ag aine: and that it is conmmrily a very hard
matliy to withſtand him, by r(aſon of his (ubtilty't, allwing them by proe
#n1es, and terrifying of them by threatnmgs, 4nd a littie atter: ſts [x 7
pn of Sathansjocking to reenter, vily:th vpou 4 mA INCA jdt bl
the ſereptures,
6" 011 the wncirane (prrit ( Cainh Chriſt ) is 4ope ont of a m1, ewalk
ah ron bout dl y Places, ſeefing veſt, and fynduah none. 1h nbejaith, 1
BL YOUYHC TRIED 14119 hc, fr 1m when 1 came: and when ht 17 com , be
fſinauh it empty, (wept, ard rarn ſhed. 1 hen he exeth, & tak th wats bom
ee'n other (runs wore then bunſelf,, and they emer mm, aud dwell theres
and the end of that man ts ww{t then the bt inine , Enen [0 jhall tt be with
8b1s 9n614tzon, | his place of ſcripture is indeede metephiricall as aps
peareth by the'e wordes, een {6 it all be with thee wicked gencratin
aud is vied by our Yaniour, to illuſtrate and playnly (et forth the mi
ſerable ( fature ) eſtate of the lewes, if they continued in their finns,
1he metaphoye is this, As it is with a man which hath an vncleane ſpi=
rit caſt out of him, if notwithſtancinge that great mercy of god recey
vec, he continue in, or returne to 1s former [innes, whereby it c6e
to paſle that the divell returning and ſeeking to enter into him again,
doe indeede enter in, which he certainly will, if he finde his old gueſt
ſuch, and that with ſeauen other ſpirits worle then himſelſe, the end
of that man ſhal] be worſe then his begining, miſerable therefore and
fearefull, even ſo ſhall it be with this people 6f the Tewes, who being
in their bloud and filthvnes, pod waſhed and clenſed and made them
his peculiar people, and * chrif treaſure aboue all prople, ſo as they were
the lords pion and Tacob the lot of his inherit ance, and hath * carrycd
them pon carles winzes, being ſo tender ouer them, that * he that tru.
cheth them, tourh:th the apple of hn eyr, and * hath committed to them hi
oral , lo as ® ro th "Mm apprrtryneth the arlption , and the glory, and the
Conrmants, andthe gining of the lawe, and the ſiruice of god, and the proms
fes: if this people now hauing bene made partaker of theſe and many
other vnſ»eakable mercies of god, ſhall returne to their former filthis
neſle for their intollerable ynthankfulnes their laſt eſtate ſhall be very
miſerable, and worſe then their firſt: which ſcripture as our fathers be
fore v8, ſo we atthis day ſee fulfilled before our eyes, in that as it was
ſaid to Cain;they are caſt out fr6 their owne land, which flowed with
mylke and honney, and are vavabonds and runagates in the earth, &
fo their eſtate farr worſe, even ſcauen folde worſe, then ener before.
From this (cripture 1 colleR theſe things. Firſt and cheifly, that the
divell beinge caſt out of men, ſeeketh to enter ayavne into them. 2,
That he deficerh the recouery of that pray he hath loſt, (that is the


pollefling againe of the aid party ) above many other prayes. 3. that


—_ A aw A wa


(\


LYING DISCOVERY. ſ9


he doth recover {nd repoſſelle ſuch as give themſelves to the ſeruice
ct ſinre, and otherwiſe cari not, 4. 1 har in this cale the vncleane ſpirit
en reth not in alone, but vwath more and worſe, f, that the end cor laſt
eflate of ſuch |} all be worſe then their firſt, N'owe what thourh this
(crijpture be vied by the Lord as 4 metaphor or f1milituce to iluſtrate
an cther thmg: way we not therefore gather theſe things from hence?
or is there no truth ( trow we ) in the metaphors them ſclues vſed by
our Sauiour? Tf the {at (ſaith Chrilt ) hane loft his ſan, it is vood for


nothing: my doe not light 4 candle and {mt it wudty 4 buſl «ll, but on 4 (4.


alctuck, and it ercth light wnto all that are in the houſe, * T he kingdome pron 6,


of braun 15 like wnto leanim, which a woman takith and Iydcth m three
peels of meale, till all be leanened, In like manner, S. Panle * A line *
lraumn launch the whole __ ®* Coe to the prſmire O [ure ard, ( fayth
Sal,mm ) brbould ber wayes, [7 pr py ho meate inthe (immer, C3 £4
thoreth bur ſooge in the harmſt, He that goeth vpon coal's, his ſeeteſhall be
bunt,
1Theſe are m/t.e/hors and yet in them and athouſand more in ho-
ly ſcripture, there 1s a certaine and vndoubred truth, That is ſayde
heere of going vp n coalce, of the Piſmire, leauen, and the reſt with in«
finite more of the like kinde, is very true, notwithſtanding the lame
is mctaphorically | panel yea let the Diſc, ſhew but one metaphor in all
the (criptures, where there is not a certaine and vndoubted truth:
how can it then pollibly be that this ſpoken of rhe vncleane ſpirit going
out of 4 man, ſhould be vntrue, becauſe it is metapha icalls That this
is ſpoken metaphorically, hindreth not at all the truth therof, And wher
as the Dz{c. pretendeth as though I did only rely vpon the mctaphoe
ricall place, and had ng other proofe, for that I ſo contidently aftirme
as touching the retwne of the dinell, and ſecking to enter ag aine into him
ont of whome he 7: gon, he is Ceceaued: for amoſte pregnante proofe
hereof there is( as hath bene already ſhewed) in the 9, of Mark where
Chriſt Ieſus being about to caſt the Ciuell out of one, and knowinge
the a/orefaid metaphore to be moſt true, and that rhe wncleane ſpirit be
ing gone ont of man will returne, and ſeeks to enter into the ſame man 4-
game, forbiddeth him ſo to doe, I meane, the reentring or repoſſeſſig
of the ſaid party, it may be the rather becauſe he was a child: 7 charge


thee ( faith he to the ſpirite ) come out of him, and enter no more into b7. vers 13.


Albeit then one teſtimony of the Lord Tefus might aboundantly ſuf-
fice, yet behould a double teſtimony of his for the further confirmig
ef vs in this truth: why then doth this ſeeme ſome ſtrange or newe
dotrine, or 04: concerre, not onlye to the Diſc, but ro manye other
that abhorre the counterſeyting ke contenceth for, ſeeinge it hath


fach warrant, and ig ſo playnlie ſer downe in the ſcriptures 7 me think


math. 1 194


ww.


69 A DETECTION OF 8, HARSVE TS
et ily" ides ve loved into the nature of the dinell and how heſtid
&laite:te{ bath rovardes god and man, this invule Not 1ecime ls
Itra! Ze ATUNS, AMINI WIcke4 Men 20 Tat V (1uitiy pI! (lelletti an Os
ther inans houte, 15 it [0 Yall ou: that he 100! e rhe pultctiion ticreot,
Yer Will 2e n9C pre.ent uly g1yc OuUECr ali Cl 47/116 tncreto, and iccKe nor
motcater the eioyIn; » of it; bu: it by.ltrong hand, briberv: or any
other violent or decetprrull meas, nc can cumnpalle tle polletuon ge
2ane, lie wiltarely doe 1t: it he obte yne 18 nor, yer UT is Cieare he will
UVC ils belt eur, As TN 18 ge rally rae, 10 lpectally 1t 17 be &
lumptuons houle, and (uct | a5 v Te erein the V tur; 'er taKeth great pleas
lurc ro dwel: mn, an: | he allo one of great a4eaurity, ans hating dead
lv, tie rene owner thereot, t,uen lo and much more wicked nd 118
Iiynant lpurits ( Which are princt; alliryes and powers ) being as viure
pers cal t OUt Of the budyes Of met 1, the glorious temples tor the holy
: 10itto du ell un: doe {eke by all polltbie mcanes to enter unto them
anc, Al: re 00le! le then. V\ cul | knowe ans contelle, that lathi
bake 2 CALL OU! of the ſoule of man, which he polle:leth lo long as We
cont ings the culdren of dii»bedtence, he doth more egerly et ett It,
and lecke the rep: fletling of it, then euer ie d11 betore: and this be-
lides tat the holy (cr ru; re teacheth vs, cuery conuert know eth to
be true 1n 11s owne experi: CE. Nowe why {hould nor the ſame [pt-
rit take t IC lar ne courle prele thy » after his election our of that other
part ©: ma", his body I m eane: leing not only the [criptures, butthe
parties [t):ewile {o oth 1lefed out of their owne experience {ipnifye
the iaine Vato vs? ths con dered there was 1ult caulec | thinke to per
J ware the perlons [moflefled as I did, and is ſet downe before. And
{mail Caule 15 aca bt the D:/c. to condemne the reaſon ( at Mong 0s
Thers ) Oi tte exligence an crcum 'p! 's 7, M requt! reg ot rt em: V BE be-
caule of the w1/, Cahable ſugull Y mo eu aler/ ay te arr WHICH thee
wetl it iclie, both i'r his decerr{aall and allw: 118 pr om!/ , and rerrifying
threats; to p who knowerh not that by how muc 1 more tute the ences
mY 1s, Al d we | imple, by lo much the more <©« lent an cs cumſpees
we hay neede to be, lealt otherwiſe by bis curing arici ur neghgece
he circumuent Vs; Nene! 's ny well-jnitruite 1 Chritti an 1norant
heercot that the diull ordinary, it not alwa aves, pre! laviect ana O-


Verco er vs, el r by © rot wiaagpha ertore it {halbe our
WiIdome o& che mea canceoflaf; to have a V 'P1an feveroeyiier of
gence, 1 has may the 1:/c. le ho WD al! ably he erret) ;, who (as it may
ſexe ) with his papyb or Hefintice!l Fxorafs ( whome in the ſeconde
piace he produceth againſt vs ) _ th 1 at thoſe puites which &v?
##c* ca on 0/ mn, fecundo eoſdem invredi, et vexare non P ſvn:


(491190 Omer the | ccond time in's hottie acl, and vx lem, And yet


-


LYING DISCOVERY. 6r
bchoulde how he boalteth as if the truth were firmly & vndoubtedly
of his ſide, and as it he had aniwered all thattnen have to lay in two


wordes, Viz. that the (cripture wee relye vppanzts 4 metaphorical place. pag. ;8.


| Bui M, Darrell ('iaith he ) and bu frendes will peraduenture be better


prouded in this pyynt heercafier, How Dar. ts promded he nowe leeth:
And by that time $, H. is prouided tor obiections, I truſt Dar. will
be (u/ficiently proutded tor anlwers vnto them, And thus much for
anlwer to the obiections made againit my opinions, which lomtimes
L delivered to the B, ot London, uttle thinking that the lame ſhoulde
haue bene publiſhed ro the worlde. It remayneth that I proceede to
the matter of fact charged againlt mee: in which two poynts the dy-
evu7ry conlilteth.
OF CHAP, 11.
Ho w thoſe that tooke vpon them to cat out diucls dve vet them-
ſeturs work, and of their dewſes to comer thew lewdnes

The t£xarcaſts of bath kindes for wante of worke are drmen to theyre
fhiſtes: and like tikers walks vp and downe from place to place ſeeking ts
be imployed,

Obſerue heere not lomuch the Dyſc. rayling, as his contrariety b&
thwarting of himſelte: for vape 22, he himſclte ſaith and conteſleth,
that when Kath. Wrieht was firſt troubled, ſbe was by one M. Bereſfardes
aduice fem to M Dat, at Manſjeild, and to one M Beckingham to be cons
farted, or cwed of her infirmity, And concerning the occalton of my de
aling with 7þ. Darlng thus: The certamty bereof 25, that M. Walkeden
( the boyes grandfather ) hearmg how M. Dar. had helped K. Wright, pro
cured hum to come to Burton, to he!pe Darling: from him he peoceedeth
to thoſe in Lancaſbire: When the 7, in Lancaſbire were woubled M.Star
ky, and M, Dee reſolued vpon him, and writ their ſeucral letters wnto him


pag.0Qg


fat his repayre into Lancaſbire: And laltly as touching the occaſion of pag, z.


my going to Somer's, he {aith: that * / hawinge aliſter in lawe at Nott:
ene Miſtres Wallys, ſhe writ wnto me, requeſting me to come owner to ſee the
aid Somers: Herevpon he addeth and colle:teth ( and that trimlye )
thus: Hetherto it may apprare, how M, Dar. hath beuc ſoneht vnto,

YF this his colle:t1on with the premiſes be true, ( otherwiſe he is
greatly to blame to publiſh them to the world, and that for certayne
truthes ) how can this allo be true, that [ike « tinker I walked wpp and
«wne e736, It is one thing to be ſought wnto, and an other t2 ſecke for
wke, and to be ymployed. And thus is the Drſcourrer conuyneed by
his D:/corrry: and let this ſatfice for anſwer and refutation of his tin=
&orlike ſluffe, '

It rs a matter of (ame difficulty to diſcrmry their ſhits and ſleightes t6
Moat pw'p5ſe, they baue [7 man): and by their experience doe manage thrm

O 1 -


-


pag 6c


.


peg 79 & 8,


p#1;-v 2. $4,


pag 63>


32g-65-


Sag.65.
£28166.


Pap 03,


62 A DETECTION OF $S. HARSNETS


ſo cr aſtely. Diners of them are herre ſet doywne, and the viſt may be ſupph


ed peraduenture by ſome heereafter, Sometimes they make chyee of ſome
ſuch boyes or wenches, as they thinke ave fitt ſor ther” pw poſe, whome they
procure by many promiſes and allurements, to herpe their cormſell, and ts
be ( as thry tearme it ) aclmiſed by them.

The Deſc. and $0, heereafter tell vs, how for his counterfeitinge
I * promiſed him he bowled newer wart whilelt I lined, 2, * that fo do»
ing I dbted not to procure him a releaſe from his maiſter: that beſides
I allured him by giuinge him firſt x11. pence, and after rhat an other
xij, pence, but we heare nothing of the promites I made either Kath,
Wright, or Th. Darlins, or My Cooper: nor vet how theſe, or thoſe
an Lancaſhire were allured to counterfeyte, Bur] conceaue how it is,
Theſe were not fit /chollers to diſſemble and collude with me a5 Som. was
and others of that kinde, but counterfevts of an other kinde, ſuch ag
] did not confederate or couenant with, as I did with Somers: but &
my commins to their fayned difpoſſeſſion, fownc ll xt caſe, rroubled ys
ther in their flomark with holler or fleame, or 11 thery belly Wi 'h erypinges
or collick, or in their heade or 10ynts with aches or numn*ſſe: and vppon
certaine {peaches vied by me a reformed Exorciſt began to ſuſprf? them
ſelues to Le eſefed and others alio with them: wherevpon eve pore
foules ) vnawares acted they knew not how the fignes of poſſeſſyon
and diſpoſſefſion, Did ever one reade any thing more abſurde then
this? It may be we ſhall heereafter heare that which is as abſurd of S*«
mers: but otherwiſe we ſeldome or neuer reade the like ſortiſh and ri-
diculous ſtuff, as the Dc, hath for 8, leaves togither, from page 61.
_— the ende of his firſt booke. But he procedceth in his childe-iſh
tale

And theſe ave commonly of the poorer ſort, either the children or [vuate,
of ſuch perſime, as the Exorciſts doe well know, to be of their owne ſlampr,
and well aff efted towards them,

Heerethe Dilc, greatly forgate himſelſe* for albeir ſome of our
Demmmacks were pore, yet was not Th, Darl7e of the paver ſort, much
leſle M. Srarkies cli 'ren, whoſe ſonne is to inherite land worth ( as 1
take it ) ſome hundreds of pounds by the yeare, Put he worſe forpat
himſelfe in that which followeth: for how could we know the parents
# maſters of ſuch to be well affefled toward: ve, whome weenever
knew or ſawe in the face, before we dealt in the difpoſſeMon of the
perſons poſſeſle !: as they are really to teſtify, and one in reaſon may
well imagine of M, Star: yand Mar, Pyrome mother, ſeing we dwelt
abovt co myles a\under, He addetl that we knewe thewn t1 be of onre
own” /{ampe: what he meaneth hereby ( becauſe theſe wordes are ſom
what obCcure ) we may perceave by that keere following, ſet downe


pag.69:


Pg


any e
(uch as hawe on the other ſude pretended ſome $eate, for they know not whas


1-{urmation. Heerein alſo the Diſc, was greatlye deceaved, tor it 3s
well known that the parents and maiſley of the perſons poſſeſſed, were
not Reenſants, and ſor grale after reſa'mation they were (o farr from


that, as vndoubredly they know not what that reſormation he
keth of meant, no not any of them, Darings frences excepted,


LYING DISCOVERY. © "Fx
e 69, you ſball obſerue 4 little wonder: It will hardly be fhewed, that
of thus {orte han bene ſound,but either in the bouſes of Recul arts,or of


ue =
kus


you heare of what amp they were, whoſe children or feruants coun=
rerfeyted, as the 1c, tearmeth theire yexation by ſathan: whereby
it is manifeſt of what {amp we are, that dealt in the diſpoſſefſinge of
theſe counterfeytes: which allo in the ſame place he declareth more at


larg


e: Beſades it falleth out amone fi vs: that thry who hane taken vipon
them, to hawe caſt out dinells, hawe ftill beme men of that bumonr, as bem pag 69,


farſooth moye pure then the reſt of their brethren where by the way firſt
we may learng, who is more pure then the ve} of brs brethren that is in


pln ne termes  prritane: not he as allmen imagine, who challengeth


ome purity to himſelfe aboue other men, but he who ts of the bymokr
of reformation: more playnlie: he that hath ſome zeale for reſormation, Yf
the cauſe be thus, as it iscleare it is, there is no cauſe why theſe provie
tancs (as they callthem ) ſhould be hated, deſpiſed, abhorred, and ſo


ſhameſully intreated, as th


were rather dogpes, then men. It is a


good thing ( and deſerving loue atd reverence ) to defire the refor-
»4tion of that which i samulle in church, or perſon: a better & more
pleaſing to god, ro ſeeke and labour after it, ſo it be done aright and
in due order: and belt of all and highly accepted before god to be ear
neſt and $ea/ous therein. But admit that theſe men ſeeke after the re-
f.rmation of thoſe thmgs which be not amiſſe, and neede not there-


fore to be reformed: in particvler, admit that it was
to reepe carnall things, of thoſe congr
ſpirituall thinges: to eate of the milke ©


arions where th


heflock, though they feede


1] for men
e 'not


not the flock: for theſe kind of * ſouldicrs to have wages, albeit they
goe not a warfare, and that it were notthe Lords ordinance that
they only which preach the poſpell, ſhould leue of the voſpell: and that neceſ< |
ſity lyrth not vpon every miniſter to preach the goſpell, but that the rea |
ding thereof ſufficeth, and that men may live of the goſpel, although
they be not able to preach the goſpell, or if they he able, preach little
or not at all, or not to the people from whome for their ſaid preachip
fake they receaue their maintenance” alſo that weorren mav bayreiſe,
in the cae of danger or neceſſity as they call it, &c, Admit this I fay,
vet notwithſtanding foraſmvch as thoſe whom men call ; wit-me,doe


Geke the reſormation cf thele things, and others of the ame kinde m


A


,
cor, 6.14, 16,


| vers i,


* _— — —_—  — ———


Fers 1,


64 ADETECTION OF $. HARSNETS
a zeale of 291, as is hereby manitelt, in that for this caule they doe .&
arc ready toforlake father and mother, wite and children, houſe and
land, liberty wich all the comforts ot this lite, yea lite it lelte it god cal
them therevnto: and are contented 1n ang during this lite to be of all
men the molt miſerable: there is {mall cauie why the Dr/concrer and
the world with him, ſhould hate, ſcorne, & ſo contemptibly vie them
as it they were the otfeowring of the world, and refule ot the people,
$, Fawle in the 9. to the Ryma. calleth God to watneſje to bs conſcaence,
that he hal great he aum*(}* and continuall ſorrowe m his heart, and that
hc wind wijh brmſelfe to be ſeperated from god, for his brethren that were
his lyn/men according to the fiſh, and.in the begining ofthe Chapter
follwing, he yſeth theſe wordes: Brethren my harts deſire and prayer to
go for Wracll as,that thry might be [aurd;his realo therof followeth, Far

b:ave them record, that they bay the geale of Ciod but not accot dinge te
kn»wledee, If Pale were thus aftected towards the lewes,who were ſo
exceedingly violent and outragious in whatlocuer they went about
in their blynde zeale, as at large appeareth by the ſtory of the Adtes
ot the Apoſi/:s. becaule they had 1n them # zeal: of god; woulde hee,
were he now living among vs, be ſo aftected as the molt are, towards
the puritancs as they are tearmed, in whome it is manitelt there is n
_ of g3d, be it that it were not according to knowledg * ſeing they

oenothing in their ſaid zeae ina tumultuous, but all peaceable man
ner: as by prayer to god, and humble petition to her Maieſtye the


heade, and the body of this Realme met and toyned togither in Par |


lianent? either would $, Paulc (trowe wee ) call theſe men in ſcorne
as the Dz/c. doth: * men of the onerworne conſ1forian fattion, men of the
hummus of reformation, men more pure then the reſt of their brethren, that
$5, puritazes: or with others preciſr.ens phanta!hicall men: cc. yea of Sa-
than Srhemuſts as my (elf haue heard them called: becauſe of theyre
Zeale, admit it were a blinde zea e: who for the blinde zeale that the
lewes had, called them ſo lowngly brethren It is not pollible:

As from ſome thinges which {might be oblerued, ſo from theſe two
Places, and ſome other, elpecially that, page Ie. (where ypon cer-
taine worthy premiſes he colleteth, that n all kkelrb22d, ſemg neither
by learning nr ſufficient areuments, they of the over- w11ne Confatorian
faction could beeretofore preuyle, for the ſetting vp of their preſbyteryall
conceyts, they thauzht to ſupply their wants therem, by this demiſe of caſte
owt djxcells:) It may very probably be gathered,that the thinge which
hath vexed the Diſc. and made him [weate ſomuch about counter -
fevting, ts not the counter(evting, and teaching to counterfeyt a poſ
ſeſſion: nor his hatred and abomination to (inne, and in particulerto
this deteſNable couſenage: but his hatred againit the a
wal


entres


hich


"%
VA


LYING DISCOVERY, T;


which god vſediin theſe great workes of his: whome, together with
ali o{ ihe lame ſtop, as trom his loule he hath of long hatcu, fo here«
by was the lame nughtely increaled, un that theie Kinde of men /bowld
b« thowz bt to haue ſuch intereſt in Chriſt leſ1us, 4s that 4 their ({allly ter=
med ) verball prayers, and bypocriticalt taftangs, he ſhould as ut were wiſe
bly dejcende from beau, and tread downe d4than vnder thew' feete,

] hislaid the Na74tor betore the Diſc, came torth, cannui be indued.
whereby we may le he coniectured aright, And mark what he there«
ypon out of the Apoltle addeth: But god bath choſen the ſ1olyh thinges
of the world to confound the wiſe, and the weaky thinges of the warlde to
ef und the rmughty, As it he had laid: in that the Lord hath vied wm
thele rare and great workes ot his, ſuch weake and contemprible m&,
we {hould rather conl1dering the lordes manner of dealing, be contic
med thereby un thele workes, & further alſured that they are of god
then kept trom beleuing and embracing the lame.

T beſe are not dealt with but there muſt be @ great aſſemb'y gathered
pv ither wn one corner or other: all of them ſuch perſons, 4s they knowe to be
thew frendes, or at the leaſt as their ſard frends doe bring with them, and
we thought fit to be permerted.

The talſhood of this is heereby manifeſt, in that M. More and P
knewe not thoſe perſons in Lanc4bire who boyd with vs 10 prayer
to pod for the calting out of Sathan of the perlons polleſſed, as they
ea" witneſle: nor yet any one of them being meere {trangers to thena
aliand they to vs: andat Note, allo they were generally vnknowne


to me neither wastheir any choyce made by ſome of owr frendes, and At the Spell
ou of tie pf .n


: / Lancaſh:re therg
who werenota few ) as the Diſc. ſuggelteth: Belides this partly are were preſents.
bout 49. & ©
$e.8 Nee.13%


procuring of men to come, (asis well knowne to them that did come


ueth, that ( were there a counterfeytinge indeede ) thye owr /ayde
> ws were confederates therein, which I think hardly any will (a-
vour, It is maruaile that the Di/c, affirmed notlikewile that all thoſe
which haue ſeene Somncrs, Dwlins, and the 7,in Lenca/hire intheir( pre
tended) fitts, were not my fre ( lo ſhould Ihaue ſome Roare of
trends: Yor atlealt that my frendes heſpeaketh of 4d bring them, or
procure them to come, knowing them to be luch as were like to be per
werted, for this he might as truly haue affirmed as the other: & this
had bene to ſome purpoſe in.leede, whereas the other is to'none, le
ts [trange therefore that he ſtrayned not himlelte a little further: bur
though he doe itnot heere, yer he faith ſomething el-where bendig
this way: for ſpeaking of the 12, Commiſſioners, he hath thes words
* that they are nor to be impeach *d, (ornuch [or their want of wildom, 43
for ther blynding the eye thereo!,, by tnrar prepoſtexans aff ectzons, they b [1
wih M, Darrel, Vt now the principaleye witnelles of Som, (itts for
0 wildoing


peg,.6$


rag. 208;


os ADETECTION OF $. HARSNETS
wiſdome, learning, and authority were thus affeed towardes


well may it be that the reſt alſo were: And it by my frends I could pp |


cure theſe perſonsto ſee Sv, in his firts, who albeit for theire wiſdomg
they were not ealily to be deceyued, yet becauſe of their Yprepoſterogy
ff eftions were fitt to be peruerted, mach more by the (aide frends of
myne might I procure meaner perſons to ſee him, morefit to be pers
uerted then they. And this is to be ſuppoſed of the reſt of our Dems.


racks, viz. that the principalland other witnees of their
vexation were likewiſe blynded all, and every
of them with prepo/tcrous affection,
which no man((ure)will bee-
leue, the Dyſc, excepted,


The end of the Firſt Books.


THE SECOND BOOKE


OF CHAP. 1,


Diſcomerer.
O/ M. Dar. mmtercort ſe with So, by ſtats at Aſbby, from about
theyeare 1 592 wntill 1 597. for his inſtruction how to diſ=
ſembte himſelf to be poſſeſſed.
arre

This my away guiltynes is prooued two wayes, firſt by Srmers

acculing me to haue taught him: Secondly, by circumſtances arguing

the ſame: depoſed by diuers witneſſes, In the accuſation we are to ob

ſerue firſt, the accuſer: ſecondly the accuſation it ſelfe, laſtly the cir-

pag va confirming the ſame ( asis pretended ) depoſed by 0-
thers.

The accuſer is William Somers, a yong man about the age of 22,

yewes: who firſt is knowne to be a notorious and infamous lyar: for

4c


LYING DISC - \T, | &7
4. times hath he varyed with that double and falſe rongue of I is: ſom


| times alfirm.ing, at other times denying all counterfeyting: and eue-


ty of theſe times openly, and to an infinitenomber of men, 2, By tis
Une confellion ke hath counterfeyted a poſleilion: and it that were
{o, prophaned the holy exercile of prayer and faſting: an1 is therfore
molt vile and abominable, 3. Yt he haue counterfeyted, he is a moſt
horrible blaſphemer: hauing ſometimes ſaid there 5s 19 god; and ſome- bb yarn
tines vied theſe wordes, I am * god: I am Chriſt, as is depoſed, 4 He Blaſpheamous
«2 forſvorne wretch: for he hath ſivorne both wayes, that hee hath Hackenywere,
counterfeyted, and that he hath not counterfeyted: yea with an exe- 1y coudemned;
cation, betaken himſelfe to the divell if ever he counterfeyted: he 6 ———
mult needes therefore be forſworne, In regard heereof I anſwer that themies & in
foraſmuch as ther is only one witneſſinge againſt me, I ought not diguies as this
therevpon without further proofe, neither by the © Jawe of god, nor range tharthi
by the ciuill lawe, be held and adiudged as guilty, 2. I haue to all the tewde pernned
rticles framed againſt me out of his accuſation, aniwered negatiuely boy owns
and me thinketh were I a private man, in regarde of my educatAcn, and much made
yeares, and life, I ſhou!d be creditedrather then Somers: much more o—_ HOY
being a miniſter of Chriſt Ieſus and preacher of his goſpell. 3. Belides ates £2
my owne oath and proteſtation againſt this lingle acculer, * learned Anſ.
and grave Jets bhp offered tro be my compurgators: which by ,p,,, ig.15.
the ctuill lawe { according to which I am to be iudged ) doth abonn- 1chn,8,17-
cantly ſuffice for my purgation: _ my owne without theires is AE 4
ſufficient. 4.1 take exception "_—_ is teſtimony in regard of his , cim, 5.19,
vnworthynes, which appeareth by the premiſes. And becaule of this LI
I a®Firme, that there is no body teſtifying againſt me the crime' layde 4 1,hn Browne
to my charge: for there is none but Somers ( as by that which follow- M.Robert Evin-
eth is made cuident,) and by Fo all lawe is n#llns teſtis: no witneſle, $77 2 utes
} COU er ag 2 4 4+

The Diſc. ſaith of him, that be hath dealt ſince his examynation at hy

Limon much more ſinceerly in this matter then I,
Darrell,

Admit then S-1y, were not ſuch and fo vile ag we heare, but as
the Diſc. it may be will haue it, a yong man of good reporte* admitt
likewiſe that not only he but others alſo ioyned togither with him in
the accuſation, yet notwithſtanding for-aſmuch as the accuſation it
ſelf is moſt falſe, as we ſhall heare, all will make nothinge to proove
ry euiltynes, And ſo from the acculer let vs proceede to the accula-


tion, and examyne it,


Dilconerer, | .
About a quarter of a yeave br{ove my departure ( [aith $9.) from.
Tha, Grayes, ( with whome 1 thea «welt at Lanolry Abby in Ley oy


ſhire


6& A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS
fire) 1 was ſent one day to Aſbby ae {a Zouch ( being 4. ## 5 , myles dif


rent ) vpn june vccdj un of bu{ynes, At W241 5hine 1 ave pr "Does,
wh che's boy- £9511g anto an (a) alchauſe, found there M. Darrcil, wb _ lute WE
Ent a pipe mee en 129 mit) pet

be knows atfs Darrell d: parted out of the bouſc, 4nd jt4y*4d 48 FE are Vu: Fg6
wad: Alchoule. And then be torke me apart, ajked 1ns ny 114m", wire 1 wes vorne, with
ea) About 299. whim: [ dwelt, Als ( qunh [2 Jr eneY ) 2M als 4 pre 'Y 0IYs and my
af the cheife of COMMIT eymAn: 1 knewe thy father, 414 41n ſorr Ve to |echuce 410 NEARER
_ ans cc: for l was ſumply apparrelled, eucn 4s meaty dinyt 45 could ve, lee
ed, hace” att. £f6 promiſec to brins me out of the towne, and 60 CCL TAC ſHNCEDLIL 3s PINT
readie(in effect ) 313 if 1 world be ruled b ;y bin, I [bould nas bt druen to gu jo 04/C 4s 4 did
Lied _ but bs able to mainteyne my ſelfe as long 4s 1 lined, W71cu hdd ds, patched
to Altbaſer, as my barynes, Ivetorned homeward, and found M, Darrelinv j 4 jrom the
_ —_— place where I left hum, talfang with (c) two 9 three jira 1,015, avoHs one
goipell. Katheryne Wright whom! h: ſaid bs bad diſp2jſejjed of 4n vnctean? ſpy,
(b)boyes vuat- Aﬀrer be had ened bis communication with them, hb! wont with me along
leplayein the #4 8hc ſtrerte in my way h1ymeward: and as we wire 914ng toguher, 1 has
er ltreres ging our beard ſom: of his ſpraches with the Jatde jti ang ers, 4/ked hym
-_ neche, What they mont: be au[wered ms with a lng [peach cmccrmng te prſſe{]eh
namuzsuvr ſur- of K, (Fright, and tonld m? the manner of 1 fits CC. as ere fouuwe
- angs hayrmarny eth: where is ſet downe at large our tirlt (preteaded mecung) or ace
Batnumaruel Quaintance with the occaſion thereof, the allurements 1 vied to per
CEIES {wade him to counterfeyte, and the acting of certayne trickes by my

lolte for his better inltruction,
Darrell.

I anſwer before the Lord, and as 1 ſhall anſwer it at the dreade-
full day of iu lement, that I never ( ro my knowledge ) lawe Wilham
Somers before tne 5. of Nouember 97. which was but two dayes be
tore his dilpolleſlion, an 1 that was allo vpon carneit intreaty mauve
by the Mir ( then) of Nttini/ham and by ſundry others; much
lee then had 1 for certaine yeares before 97. divers and tecret me-
tings with him, and confederated with him, as he accuſerh me.

Secon ly, I an{.ver, that foraſmuch as S-crs was gone trom M,
Crayes before the tine he aFirmerh our tirlt meeting or acquainrace
bezan' it cannot therefore pothibly be, that this his laid accu/ation is
trus. Abour Midlommer 1 598, ! being by the 1, of Lon depoled
and examynel, it was articulated again{t me, that about 4. yeares
( then ) vat, as I was talking with two or three {tranvers in Afbby cd
cernmy K, #97, WS», cane to vs, and that leauing them, 1 went
with 11m onthe wav homewards, perſwadinge hin to counterfe\t &

| polletion as 8, rich; had done. The ame was read an | charced a-
gatall mem Michelmas tearme followinge at Lambrib beture my


F


LYING DISCOVERY, -69


Eard ch:if Iufice and ſome other of her Maieſtyes moſte honorable
priuy counlell, And this was done in the pretence of aboue an hun-
dread. Then or at that time ( as we lee ) our t:rit acquaintance began
Arno 1 594, now ſixe yeares pat: but So, acculation being ſynce by
the D/c. retyned, and caſt into a newe mould, becaule of an Apolozre
of mine wood 1 after this, he is now laid to haue bene acquainted with
1c from abut the yeare 1 592, whereby the Diſc. hath gayned two
yeares, which ſtandeth him in ſinguler tteade. tor take the acculation
as it was at the firſt, and is in the article, and continued long charged
agairilt me, as in equity we ought, the Dy/c. and Som, are manuteitly
conuinced by the diſcowery it lelte, tor by pages 94. and 9, it appea
reth, that it isnow about eight yeares lince 50, went trom Mayer
Graycs, and the acculations being. m his tirſt trame, it is little more
thea {xe yeares {ince Somers and | were firlt acquainted, as he attir-
meth: lo that Som. ſhould haue bene gone from M. Grayes, about 2,
(0) yeares after the Diſc, accompt, betore ke and I were acquainted,
an./ theretore the accuſation falſe, Blame not then the Dy/c, tor this
alceration of the time, for had he let it goe as it was framed at the firſt,
eitzer he muſt haue Jet that point of my Apol{o2ie alone, or els haue
cleanie ouerthrowne himſelfe and all: now whether of them ſocuer he
had Jone, 1t had bene againſt himlelfe, and the latter ſhamed him tor
euer, It was wiſdome then (I trow ) with a dalh of his pen to preuet


(0)op orree
mendaicem efF


Weg em


al, wich was by writing the figure of2, in{tead of the tigure ot 4, &


chaunging 94. into 92, But let vs take the time of our firtt acquain=
tance to be, not as So, hath affirmed, but as the Diſc. now reporteth
It: ( tor [ice no remedy ) yet by the d//comrry it (ele it will appeare,
that the accuation is falſe herein: for by page 94. it is playn ( as forth
wit we ſhall heare ) that So, went from M, Grays aboue 7, yeares
before the </c:uery came forth, and the Diſc, himlelfe contefleth.that
It was then but 7. yeares {ynce wee were acquaynted, for from! 92,
(which is ſaid to be the firſt rime of our acquaintance, if we were ac-
nx ng lo ſoone ) vntill 99. are but 7, yeares: and belides Somers
aith that we met togither abut 4 quarter of a yeare & pag &o. twilue


0” thirteene weekes before he went from M. Grayes. By the Gſcourry nt


lelfe therefore it is manifeſt, that he could not come to meat bby
from M. Thomas Grayes at Langley abby 4 qu1 ter of a yrare before
hi, departure thence, as both here and vage 82. is by Soms7's in his accu
ation aFirmed. whereby it is cuident that the Diſc. in his diſcourry
hath plavnly diſconered my inocency, tog-ather with So. & his own
falſhood an corruption. And this is the ſecond time the Diſc uerer
£ convinced by his diſconery. And if heereby my innocency and the
&\00d of S2.acculation appeare: How would it ſhine and be cleare


os if


t 3g v4,


__ A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


if ypon a commiſſion graunted I ſhould maice proofe that it isabone
10. yeares {ince his departure trom Langlcy abby, whereot I an ves
Ty ſure, and how or which way it will torthwith appcere

It will not hc ine him to lay that he doth not dyre-tlye affirme
that we became acquaynted 92. but about 92. tor this worde about
mult haue relation to the time atter 92 _vn.93. and notro the time
betore, becanſe he ſaith in the next wordes tollowmpe, that 1 brc.ume
acguainted with v0. at Aſs by about 5.0 6, yeares pa/t, meaninre trom
98, which 1s all one as 1t he had faid from 92. or 93, whereas others
wilc he ſhould haue laid, abort 6. or 7. yeare, paſt.

Diſcouver,

Againſt this the Diſc. obiecteth as followeth: Where M. Darrell
faith ( viz. inmy Apllogy ) that it 18 9,yewves or thereabouts ſme Som,
went from M, Graves, if that were true, he had ſaid ſomewhat, for the cla
rins therefore of this: reſt M, Gray and Niſiroffe Ciray being interro7a
zed 2.4, Otlob. 1598, how long it was ſmce So. left their ſernice: the one

ſaith: more then 51x: yeares pd(t: and the othw about [1xe yoares as they re«
member. But there is ſome brtter certamty to bolt out the truth herein, $4,
was bound prentiſe ( as M. Dar. confeſſeth ) with Thomas Porter, about 4
monneth or fine weekes after he was diſchareed of M, Brackenburyes (er-
mice: and $0. ſatth that he remayned little above a quarter of a yeare ( if ſo
done ) with M. Brackenbury: and it will be confeſſed, that he went from


*M, Grayes to dwell with M. Brackenbury: (o as if we can fynde when


Som. was bound prentice, it will appcare how long it is ſince he owelte at
M. Grayes, Now the Indenture 1t ſelfe whereby he was bun, bearcth
«ate the ſeauenth of May m the 3 e.yeare of her Maieſty: wherby it is mans
#eſt the premiſes bemso true, that it 1s not yet [cauen yeares (ince Som. wel
with M, Cray, which coutr:wlerh M. Dar. nyne weaves,

Darrell.

The premi's being true, that he laith is not therhy maniſef:for if we
ad to the date of the Indenture, the monneth or 5, werker and quar*
ar of a year he fpeaketh of, itis likely to be full 7, yeares, and ag well
more as leſie., yeathe premiſſes b-17 tur, it is manifeſt that his not


Jet 7. yoaves (12. at the time the dhſr overy came forth ) is fal'e: for if


wy

it were »ore then 6, yoares im October 1 598, lince $», departure from
M. Grape: mult it not needes be more then 7, yeares in Novernber

92. % ch was the time Wherein the diſconrry firlt fawe the lioke?
find this 1s the third time the Dyiſconcory is convinced bv his owne
iſe: 9%. ne ther of To thr promiſes hrime nn, romtingle my 9. yo.
tor thy Gone tran, MP Cray notwwithRlanding depred rroly: and fo
dd fſ- Cirs', her memory ſay;inoe h r for the preſent. They
touch: as 6 mK; {cen.c, tat they would male ſure to {weare truly,
l and

-


LYING DISCOVERY. N


and to keepe them within their boundes, and no marugile feins nor-
withltanding that (as I was credibly informed ) the B: of Lowabre
ſaid to NM. Cray when he thus depoſed, that he had forfworne hims
(clic: offermg to lay him a hundred pounds that it wasnot G. yeares
ſince $9. lett h1s leraice, albert M., Cray being ready to lay with lms
he a'iter retuied: and not oniy this, but threatned him and Miſtreſje
Gray likewile to lend them to priton, what would he hane done, or
at ica{tTaid, it they had gone as tar as truly they might? Had they de
poled that it was nt 7. yearcs, or that it was not eight, or not 9, years
palt, their depoſitions bcing true, that I faid of 9. yeares mult needes
haue bene falle, but we ſee they have depeled otherwiſe: and I rruſt
it they ſhould now be depoſed thereof, atter they haue better conit-
dered of the matter their depoſitions woulde not controwle but con
lirme Darrells 9. yeares, But admit it were but 7. yearcs.( vea lome-
what lele ) from the time of So», departure from M. Crayes, vntill
the time 1 writ my apollygy, which was in October 98. tt had bene all
one and as much for theclearinge of mee, as it it tad be! e 9, or 19,
yeares from the time he went thence, becauſe thereby it had bene e-
uident he was gone from Langley Abbey betore our pretenced mee-
ting ſhould begin: which is ſufticient for me, yea although wee take
the time of our firſt acquaintance to begin in the yeare 92, 08 as the
D:/c. after aftirmeth, about 5. or 6. yeares pſi from y8. much more it
we take it as it was at the firſt layd out in writing againſt me: for if
So, were gone from 24, Grayes 7. yeares before the yeare 98. which
was.Amno 91, then wasnot he there 92. vherebv we way lee had the
Diſc. controuled my 9.ycares:it would not auayle him for the prooving
of my gviltineſſe. And if the Dzſc. will heerein ſaye any thing to the
purpoſe, ( otherwiſe he may in this poynt be tereafter ſylent ) h-e
muſt leane my 9. yeares, and proue that So, was at M. Cirayes at Lane
ly .Abby in the yeare 92. as he and Simers affirme: which I thinke
he Gall tinde as ympoſlible for him to foe, as to proove So. a count» r
feyt. And when he hath performed this ( if it proue poſlible ) yet 18
he never a whit the nearer my teaching cf him, |
And vhere in this account of the Diſc. be faith Sn, wirs bound:
prentice as ( M: Darrell conſeſſeth ) with Thomas Porter, about a moneth
oy (ye wrekrs after he was drſcharoed of NN. Brackenburyss [ryuice ob +
ſerne I beſeech vou his cunning: for he pretendeth 'to the rea ''er o8
thouch that were graunted by me for a truth: whereas that which Þ
con{r(f 19 this, that Somers was boynd prentile t1 Thimas Fort, and the
very placing ofmy conſeTron in the middeft of t] ele wordes doth
Vn! \ fs much, a' nt . a” he 1 46 b VO; 4 1} wh PI iff STTAS fyre


- # o# 1? 4 / TY T J | _ | CakC .
ww: ek te TY; Dr C077” Ao 7} Sa Z, TIS "0 » , \y.! S » 5 tbo. Y, {© 4 © 166d ec ”
IV'ir


732  ADETECTION OF 8. HARSNETS


But to let that goe: the Diſc, and Sum27's in thele and the words fals
loawiag betore mentioned have vetered 3. vatruthes, cuen as many
a there be leucrall paints deuuered: For tirit beludes that Som. was
a>out 6, weekes with Porter betore he was bouaa, as i79ar:cy and his
witc are rcaly to witnellc, he was ( as | otter ailo co proue ) atter he
came from M. Brackenbwy at his iotiers nuule Wa iNortengham tirlk
lick tor certaine weexcs, atter in ncalta bctore he went to i orter, In
the whole as | conte<ture by that which tuluweln, about laalfa years
betore he was bound prentle, 2 2. ( as ihurluly we ihau neare ) beinge
21 B' ackenbu'y: p) DOY he re! may ned at Ll liauintanac 0 VuUrity ot Wy
g9Yns tro the tcalt or Fenticoſt an the yeare Y 1. vViu Uic 'cait ut Nitchacl
the archangel & trom thence he weat to {us aalite:s avule at Holme
not far trom Newa/k vppon /rent: where ally lic ieaayned tor alca
{on, belides the tune « was M, Brac R108) YI LOOY UELITE IE CANE Th
Bell hall, which as I thinkxe was abuui a yeare, 1 tis 50/44. Caiictli battle
abiucd Fnarter , and becaule he bad nuclyed neere eluvuga, the np.
addetn of long. 3 -D0Mmer s being taught by v1. C17 4y*) hooked
an1not aoic aSilit {hould i1CEnc to MIUUIeC TIE COTIE.UUN wv.ucn was
due vnto him, ran away trom M. Grayes avine to 1N1114n9/14/n, wher
likewitc he continucd a icaton, betore ne » cit to M1 & 40h 2087 Yesg
but haw long L know not. It will not the b: co 4/ 1/4, 046 JEN , Cql, OTE
cept it be by Somers and the Dyjcuucrer( who ipa' c 4-3; £9 Jeiruer an
tinge for truth be 1t never to talle ) that be w 4. ( #1711 a itraygare
toore ) jr Mailer Gr ayes to awcil wth NM. Diacknowy. we naue
_ before, that the Dyſc. his premiſſes beyng tra, yet that keinter=
et vpon them is falle, viz. that it 1s not yer 7. yearcs lince omers
dwelt with M. Gray: how much more then the premuiles being | talle?
lo that both conclul 100 and premilles be talle aad decentull, uke rg
tac authors anc! inuentors of them.
Diſcanrer.
4nd where the D:ſconerer vpon occaſion of theſe wordes of
myne 1n my A3o9.ye; Somers wa! gone j from M Crays 5. yeares before
orgy pretends d m: 119, hath thele wordes: 1} M, Darrell meane they
{ lt mreting at Abby, it is palpable wneruth, to (ay, that Nomers Was
efron NI. Gh 4's LL * yedves belyre that tims: rf be wnd:rtand thire
[ut ner22n9 mn the parke, he was eane indeed; from M, Grays ab1u7 three
ye ares beſc,ve that time, but nat fyue:
Darrell,
He muſt re emember, that I vied thoſe wordes for the conuyn=
Cl 17 Ol the acculation t); et) la\ de C ur 1n lundry articles avainit me,
u leremn nur firllt in TEL 22 WAS (a! IQ C mw be al avout 6, veares now palt,
292 that ! truſt would | prous no Vat uh, if I fhovuld be put to my eri


LYING DISCOYERY. * 74
all: and not of the accuſation now in prynt, wherein our arquaintice
is {tretched about two yeares turther, which 1s as muchthe Dyſc. as
Sn. acculation, and a milerable compound, as I may lay- 2, Admit
I had bene n:1l-informed, it had bene a tault in them trom whomel
receaued that information, and an other in me to ſpread it abroade,
( although with no purpole of printing it ) yet nottung auayleabie to
proue me guilty of reaching So, to counterteyr,

Aid whereas Somers taith in his accuſation, that d'wellnge at M,
Grayes at Langley abbey, he came from thence to me 48 Ajhby de la ouch
( being foure or fyue myles diſtant ) ypon ſome occaſyon, where I taught
him to counterteyt, and that ſundry times as appeareth by page $:.
wherevpon it is to be intended that I dwelt then at Aſbby, as | have
for diuers yeares: this alſo ( it is euident) is falle, in that he was gone
from M. Gray:s before 1 came to dwell at Abby: tor trom thence he
went about 10. yeares paſt, and it was but 7, yeares vpon the feaſte
day of $, Mychaell the archaungell laſt ( I meane Anno 99. )ſynce I
went toAſbby: ſo he was gone about 3, yearcs before | came thither
or indeede ever ſawe Ajbby. This vrged by me heeretofore in my
Apollog y, the Diſc. ſemeth to conuince urthele words following,

Diſcomerer.

Somers affmmeth | [aith Daell) that when he repayred to me t2 be
ta92ht, he came from one M. Grayes of Langlcy, with whome he ſauh be PET
then dwelt, to Aſbhy where I then dwelt, as he aff wmeth: and in a parks
there we met. In which wordes there are foure wnerutbes. Fuſt, Som. doth
nit (ay that ever he repayred wnto him to be taught, but that beinge with
bun hc was taught by him. - b

Darrell,
| VVhether Somers as is pretended came to me at Ajbby with mn
intent to be r4u9ht and to that ende, or no, it mattereth not, for the
queſtion is, whither cuer we met at Aſhby, S& whither he was taught
by me or no. Now and againſt this mecting and teaching at «4/Þby,
both in my Apologye & here I bend my felfe,and thus 1 realon:He
was pone from M. Gr.zyes before I came to 7/\by, & whiles 1 dwelt
at bby heremayned not at M. Gray's: It cannut thertore be that
Som. dwelling with M. Gray came to me dwel.ing ſome foure or tyue
myles diſtant at Aſbby as he aNrmeth. /\nd where the Diſco. trifieth
22-ut the ende Symrrs ſet before him(effe in comming vnto me, ſure-
l» if there were any ſuch meeting at 4/Lby, and teaching there to cou
Nterieyt, as S-mers and the Diſcourrer pretend, conftdering it is fayde,
tat af try our ACGHAINIANCY beran and agreement about counterfey- fag bo,
ting, he met me three or foure times in Aſhby: one woulde thinke that
he came to receaue ſomenewe inſtruction from me, or to have the


2 ould


pag fo.
paa 82,


F*g)33,


rig t 4.


bs $0


y+ ADETECTION OP 9. HARSNETS


ould renewed: for wherefore elſe came he vnto me? It is not ſaide g
ny where that I went to him, or ſought him out at Langley abbye or


el{-where, or yetin f/bby, but that he * forme me in an alchouſem »


Aſbby, and (a)met me three or ſoure times in Abby. And againe (b) I
were to Abby, and enquiring for M. Darrell, ſoundbimmn ab ſe by the
choole neeve the Chun [= Ya) d. lang mit with him, be walked with me
m9 the felldeser, And againe (c) | tocke fſbbym my way of purpoſe ta
ſee M. Darrell whame I found thor: Is itnow credible that he ſhoulde
come thus of prp2/c to me at Aſhby, being come 1nquare an] lecke at-
terme, when he hath ſound me and we met, I preſently fall of reache
ing him, and be of learning, and yet he come to no {uch ende? It he
had ſayde thus of our firſt meeting it had bene another matter, but
£0 aftirme that he nou ropayred vrito me to be taught, had there bene
any fuch re payring and teaching, muſt needes bein the 11 /pment of
all men very vatrue, Yea it is contrary to pag. $4. with 85. Thus is
the Diſcoucrcy conuince4 the fourth tyme by his owne d;/toncry: and
pretending to ſhew my vntruthes is himſelfe fallen into an vntrut
were there any truth in my teaching Somers to counterfeyt, which he
contendcth tor. But let ys procceCeto his ſecond vntruth,
Diſconrrer.

Secondly the tymes of $9. repayring to M. Darrell were not whileſt he
dwelt with 21, Gray: but afterwardes when he was run away from hu
maiſtey Thomas Porter of N tt, for Somey's only layeth t1M. Darr. charge
that on « time when he dwelt at M. Gray he met him the ſaid Darrell by
chance at Aſhby, & ws then firſt tſiruted by bim,

Darrell,

Contrary to this are theſe wordes page 82, Alſo the [aide Somers
af rymeth that after bis former arquarntance begun with N. Davell and
whileft he ſill remayned with NI, Gray be met M, Darveil thee or foure
mes 1 Aſhby And continuing his (peach concerning oor meetinge
at Aſby, whiles Somrrs remayned with M. Grayat Laneley abbry, he
addeth this furtke:: at other times allo the ard M. Darrell did kindly

Sainte mi: and ſo proceedeth the Diſcourrer (as there appeareth) tome»
tion Somers departure from M, Grayes to M. Prackenburyre, & how
ſhortly aſter he was with him, he fell a counterfeyting and praiſing
theſe feyts of ativity, whichofme he had learned at .4ſ:by, whiles
he was at M, Grays. V Vhereby it is plavne if the Diſconrrry fay try
Iy page $2. that we met more then one time at Aſhby whileſt S1men
dwelt at NT, Gray, which iscontrary to that is heere affirmed.
Thus thefift time the Diſ-rucrer is confuted by his owne d1/courrwel
and ifhe ſpeake the truth page 82. ( otherwiſe he is to blame to pub-
liſh a lye for a truth ) he ſpeaketh beere vnrruly; and ſo in conuyſ»


cing


LYING DISCOVERY. Is


ging me of an yntruth, he himſel'e is found with an other vntrath.

1 hirdly Som:rrs doth not aff ir1me that M. Darrell dwelt then at \ſb-
by, when he dw) at M.Cirayes and mett him in Aſbby they might mecte
there toguther thauch M. Darrell <d not dwell there,

Beit that inthe article layde out in writing avainſt ne, it is not
exprelly (aide, that I welt then at Ajhby, yet contidering it is fayde
that he came ſundry times to me'at Aſbhy before he went from M.
Gr.ycs, we haue heard in realon 1t isto be ſo intended, and the ſame
was to be vnJerſtood, which is all one as it it had bene expreſſed, for
howſocuer Somers might meete me by chance at Aſhby the tirſt time
he was { as they fay ) inſtructed by me, ( and yet this is very incredi
ble that we ſhould not only ſtumble one vpon an other in an alchouſe
but agree ſo quickly of our match, and fall ſo roundly to our worke
euen at the firſt daſh ) yet that by chance thus he ſhould meete me af»
ger at Aſbby three or ſow'e times and at other times atſo before he wente
from M. Grayes, as is aboucſaide, I not dwelling at Aſhby but 20.
myles of and aboue, he allo dwelling foure or fyue myles of, and in
ſubieRion to an other,is ( almoſt ) as vnlikely, as that a blynCle man
ſhoulde catch an hare with a taber, as it is in the prouetbe: for it is
not ſayd either by Som, or the Diſc, that I appoynted him to meete
me at Aſbby, we dwellinge both of vs el[where: for that bad bene
as abſurd, conſidering the places of our aboades, as preſently will ap
peare, V Ve may therefore allure our ſelues that the reaſon why it 18
mentioned fo carefully and purpoſely, firſt in So, accuſation, then in
the circumſtances confirming the ſame, that Lanelry abbry and Aſhe
by were funre or fyue myles dla is becauſe men might there-vppon
coniecture that I dwelling jm Aſbby, and he no further of, might well
in ſme probabillity and likelihood meete in Aſhby, and that divers
times, and in the patke which ſtandeth betwene them both: whereas
hal it bene confeſſed that I {welt not there but twenty myles from
the place, had I ſay the accuſation bene ſo framed, an the place of my
dwelling al:o named, it had bene made thereby m all indifferent mes
iudgments not only very vnlikely to be true, but alſo incre-dible, as
may appeare by that which heere followerh,

I am able to proue by a multitude of witneſſes that from the
tine Ilefe the Vniuerſity of Combridoe which is about eightene years
pat, yntill I went to Aſbby, I dwelt either at Mau/ſirld in Sheorwond,
or Bu/we{l a village three myles diſtant from Vote, ſaue that I was at
Ln: a ſtudent of the common lawes of this land, almoſte a veare,
which was about fiſteene veares paſt, now Laneley abbry with theſe
two townes are north-wardes from \ſbby and the groundes belong-


inz to the Abbry, M, Grayes demeanes lye very rearethe tigh way


from


PAR IIs


pag $0, by,


pag 56.


pag F1


75 ADZIECTION OF $, HARSNETS


f.ormboth the ſayd townes to A(bby,the wayes meeting thirteene df
tourrcene myles betore you come at Abby, lo tuar lrom with of
taele places loeuer of my aboade I went, ( as from the one of them [
mull, i 1 dwelt not at Abby) Lmult neeves palle by M, Grays houſ
where yo, dvelling was, when | was ({hort of A[bby 4. or 5, myles
which conlidere.\, who can be fo grotle as once to ymagine that We
would appoint and that (onury 14182, {vby to be the place wherein
to con/uit and doe our tricks: a man would thinke, that had $9, and I
met as he aftirmeth, loms parte of thc grounds belonging to Langley
abb:y (there being eſpecially trees & bulhes, as well as in A(bby park)
had beae {ater an1 more for our ca'e: for lo much laboure beltowed
in vayne might Lat lealt haue ſaved. Conſidering allo it 1s laide that
we metin Abby towne, and (oin the uiev of oxhers and that often,
wherein mvK needes be great daunger lealt one day it (hould make
tothe deſcrying of vs and * bring vs 01th din 0f banving: Aſhby
was the molt yumeete place of a thouſand we mighthaue agreed vp&
and mad? choyce of. It is moſt true the Dy/c. ſaith, that 1 dwelt not
at Abby, ( butindede at Mz oſſrilil) when S9, dwolts at MN. Orayess
neither will ay man deny, but that we night b.460 32210 there togither
thou: h 1 d:d nat then dw2'l there: bat that the accu ation was thus fra=
med againit me at tie (irlt ( accorQing to which I [ramed my Apology
is as falle,as this is true,whart fault then was committed by me herein
in my Apo/121c7 yetif we will oeleae the Di c.when he [peaketh vn tru
ly,by his laying it may be gathered that L did dwol 2 Abby whe S1ms
dwelt at M.Grayes:tor re reckoning page 94, & 95, how 10Ng It Was
trom the time that Som. went from M.CGrayes:hath theſe words: Itis
not yet 7.yeareslince Som. dwelt with M, Gray: & reckoning on the ©
therlid inthe pag following, how long I dwelt at A (bbyhe vieth theſe
words: which ycares being layd tozither,ce amount t1 abou? cieht yeares
nd 4 ale. it thoſerwo ſpeaches or accounts of his be trne, (which
vnder colour of truth he publilketh to the worl*)oy the d:/, his owne
teſtimony when Somers dar lt at MN: Orayes, I dwelt at Abby, and
therfore he might well hane ler this third vnruth of mine alone. And
Mis helix: tine the D {ono is convinced by his hſconcry. Hows
(ever itbe whether l then dwelt tlure or not there as it oreatly mat
erect not) the iſe, is taken in an other vntruth aid contraditions

ame leafe, as by his d;/cort,y 45 further diſcouered


yea in tlie verye |
Sum: talhood and his owne,
Diſco. |
Fourthly,whorcas M, Daw [aitl (:\ he meane plaintie,) that $9. affirm
eth theo meeting in the pav ke to have bene whil/le he dwelt at M, Grays.


he 45 therin oreatly decerneed, For there [arde mectin'g thare was litile abont
: 4


LYING DISCOVERY,
9 are before vis pretencled diſp:ſſe ron at Nortinghan, |


1 | Larrell,
of ©: Iris laidpage 80. that when we were firſt acqueynted and agree
1 edt ts waateny winch is luppoled to be Cluers yeares betore the lat
af ter mee here ipoken of, 1 acted his tricks ynto him, Now this wee
$; 641; | eacr togKe tg be ment in Abby perky, Bur leceing we mett not
'2 enece clien, as the truth ts: and the Dy/c, hunlelte contelleth, and yer
n nvtwichitaading met then lomewhere, as the Dye, and So, attirmg,

q L avi re enem both to bethinke them and agree ot the place, where 1
y taught and he learned at our fiſt acquniance,and to diicouer that in
J' tlic Next ij cv260).y, FOr the berter {krengrhening of their wreecthed &
qd mulcrable acculation: tor in Aſbby parte we heare it was not, and na
t other place of our meeting hath hitheft» bene named, the Alchayſe
l an Abby (treetes excepted, in neither ot which places it is cleare
't by thaz116 awne wordes page 8. that | ated not his tricks vnto him,
y V Vhere [ aifirme in my «polagye,that it « but 6, yeares ſmace 1
6 went to. Ajbbit, whe Diſc, indeuoreth to perlvade the world that when
't he pablithed bis aſconcrie it was about 10, yeares: and this is an_Q=
» thet ant/3cþ ( torloorh ) of mine; His words be tliels; |
r Diſcouerer.
fl If the inform.ction giuen be truc, be doth therein forgert bimſelſe. For P*% rept

b it 45 Yeported that be dw I in one Perrincs houſe in Ajbby about one yeare (far he)yous
1 1 b:n tn ans Labn Hollander 464t 6, yeares and Lyhly wn William Swine Veto gen de.
4 ſons about 4'yeare ant 4 halfe: which beuns layd tagtthry, dar amount t there were A
T wbvue eight yeares and « halfe. wherevnts ( if M, Darrell die nx jtill con- ch) » ranting
” tinue bus faraily there, but hath dwelt ſince 4 yea/ ar tw) 46 Nottingham) T7 3m =
is that tune alſo [ance be departed thence, may al/1 be adied, conſcience, it

: Dore that nc tn
ſe It is yepoytedd ( ſaith ho Y'hat I 4wolt 56 Paton whome Sir Diſce* tollowewn,
T werer is ehis reported, or is it ſimply your owne forged deuile® That
h the report and inform 0190 of my Toellin ” eeht years 34 halfe Ajb
1e by ( there wereany ſuch ) is veterly iaile,yea in the Dyſcomcrers awn
4 conicience, it may appeare by that whigh heere tollowerh,

d - '\Iwenttodwelt at, #}b5y ( as I can calily and (utticienty prove)

= ypon rhe tealt day of Sat Mychae!l rnarchangell 92, and my Apatin

t 8 1 madeſince my departure rom \/bby abour che lame time of the

ls yeare 99. How is it then poſtjvle, that I ould dell there 8, yeares

d mi abalfe and that herein I ſaid truly in my Apology the Dycounrer


hinſe fe cannor be ignotant: for page £4. he mal eth mention of @
teſtimoniall from NyJrtine how (he ſhould haye alied allo from Mar
feildrand Baulwell For the inhabitants of theſe three townes toyned ro
gether in one and the (elſe ſaine teſtimonyal! ) ang} of an otter tron
$1 Aftoy


(a)by hs (le
auihcrnty, when
_—y diuci , Com-
W11lloners ſhoid
haue iwovncd
WG ALD TA 1a


" A DETECTION OP 8. HARSNETS


Aſbby , having ſome 200. names of the cheif of theſe towrees ſabſcrys *


bed, for the witneiling of my good beliauivur duiing the ſpace of my
aboade with them, which was about 16, veares, Which wath lundry
other writings the 3, of London * iiurioutly tooke avay from me,
being priſoner in the Gatehouſe, And inthe A(bby teltimonyall he
k novweth are theſe wordes: Wee the Inhabitants of Ajbby de la gonrh
Cc. ortify that ſor the ſpace almoſt of ſuxe yeares together, duringe which
time be hath dwelt heeve in Aſbbygbe bath lined among vs im very govd re
porte, behawin? bimſelfcenery way as became hrs proſeſjumm, and the goſ [
of Chrift. And this they offer ( being aboue 3o, in nomber ) totelti
fy further, if it ſhall pleaſe authority to call them therevnto. Nowe if
my dwelling in Abby (as the Diſc. vpon a falie report inſinuateth }
had bene eight yeares and a halfe, is it credible, that ſo many honeſt
inhabitants, purpoſing to giue atrue teſtimonyall of my behanioure
during all the time of myne aboade with them, would haue diminiſh
ed more then two yeares and a halfe of my continuance at Aſhby?
ſeing eſpecially they voluntarily offer to iy that they have ſub-
ſcribed ynto, vpon their corporall oathes: and that the thing deſired
( as I can proue ) was not a teſtimonyall concerning my behauioure,
but as touching the time of my aboade with them. 1s not this Dyſco-
werer then ( his owne conſcience witneſſing the ſame ) a Diſcoverer, a
reporter, or an informer ofa ſhameleſſe yntruth? for is itnot a ſham
eſſe thing that he ſhould publiſhand make ſhewe to the world, that
I dwelt at Aſbby at leaſt 8. yeares and a haife,” himſelfe knowinge the
ſame to befalſe? Is the information ( trow we ) where-vpon he affr-
meth this, to be compared for nomber and credit, with the aforeſaide
infermation to the contrary? But I deſire to know of the Diſc. from
whore he had his 1wſormation. Surely from none mn Aſbby, for the
inhabitants ney of that trowne know that I neither dwelte ſixe
yeares nor {1xe dayes #1 4 houſe of Tobn Holl.mmds: vea that he had-no
houſe (then ) to let and ſpare me, and that I 4id not dwell hale fixe
yeares in any one houſe of any one particuler mansin Aſþbby, But it
may be he had his informatton from William Smers, who bath infor-
med him in many other worthy things, and whoſe teſtimony with
him is of greate credit,ſuch as he receaueth before the othes of aboue
thirty. of x ſhould he not then beleiue him herein(ifhe be the infor-
mer )beforc the report of aboue 30, others? But let vs heare Somers
ſpeake ih his owne perſon, and proceedein his accuſation.
Diſomoo.

Within 12, or 13, weekes ( as 1 thinke) after my firſt acquaint ence

with M. Darrell, M.Cray placed mi with one M1, Anthony Brackenburw


68 keepe cert zine ſulury hazyed conneyes, with whome aſter Ihadreme\ned
bout


a anal To ES, 4A A aa = »


—


* LYING DISCOVERT, © 29
fmt 8, or 7, weekes, ( a3 far as I remember) I began to putt in tHal7ile

wdiy of theſe inſivuEtions that M. Darrell pom oy flaws -
#lle to be ſacke: 1 foamed at the mouth: I did ſometimes lie ſpeachl:ſjo as
thaurh I had bene dumbe: and ſo by the ſpace almofle of a monneth I did
cunterſcyt 43 well 48 T conld, ſuch fits xs M, Darrell had tould me that
Katheryne Wright did praiſe, How be it I was not ( as it (cemeth) at
that time my aſte[maiſter.,For M, Brackenburie and M. Randoll Bartow
bis brother, being verily perſwaded that I was but a connter ext, Ex that
I had d:fembled all that I had done, 1 was turned owt of ſcruice, © wente
home to Nottingham to my mother: with whome aſtcy I had remayned 4»
bout 4 moneth, I was bound prentiſe for ſeauen yeares, to one Thamas


Porter 4 muſitian in that towne.


Darrell.

Before he hath tould vs how and what I taught him proves
ypon our firſt greeting, and now he telleth how and where he pure in
pratiſe ſundry of theſe inſIruFrons, with the ill ſucceſle which followed
vypon that his forwardnes, in that he would be doing before he was
his :4fts maiſter: which made him I warrant you take time enough
before he did his feyts the ſecond time, That this is falſe and come
out of the ſame ſhop with the former, and from the ſame author, the
divell I meane, the father of lyes, 1s hereby manifeſt, in that he was
gone from M. Cy ayes in Leycefter ſhire, and ſeruant with M, Bracken

ein Worceſterſhire, before the time that he and I are ſaide by the
D:ſconerer himmſelfe to haue bene acquainted togither, For we have
heard before out of page 78. that we became acquanted ab te the
yare 1592, and out of page 79. about ſine or ſixe yeares pal before
98, Now I can by oath prove that from the feaſt of Penticoaſt 1 $91
Willam Somers then M..4nthory Brackenbwuryes boy, remayned at the
mannour houſe of Belhall in the county of Wigrn, vnrillthe feaſte
of $. Mychaell tharchangell,and from thence went to his ſaid maiſter
his houſe at a towne called Ho/me, How long before thistime he had
bene NT, Byackenburies boy I yet know not, but that he ran away fr6
M. Grays home to Nottingham and there continued a time before he.
went to M, Brackenbary is certaine. Yt then So was gonne from M,
Gray 91,yeal rake itin the yeare 90. if not before, which is 9, or
10, yeares paſt, how coulde he poſſibly be M. Graves boy, and re-
maynins with him in his ſeruice at Langley abbey, come to mee from
thence to 4/bby for 12.0r 13, weekes 92, and 7. or 8, yeeres »aſt,
except he had retorned to M, Grayes ſernice againe after he hai] bene
with M; Brackenbury, which is maniſeſt he did not by page 83. 84.
and neither So. nor the Diſtourrer ener affirmed that, And where he


laith he foamed, I think it paſſeth his ſkill, and that he comerſeyted er


WAY


pag #1.


pag 34 by.


ing {tran zely handled, vexed indeee by ſathan, and as { verily think


_


© DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS ©
was theyeſwe eurned ont of ſence, and went hams, the trati is, that ba. fſ -- þs


then poltelled, an! thereby a conrinuall trouble to M. Br ackenbur
he was from thence ſcat home to his mother on horſback, and iha
with two or three for his more aaferye, and with moaney allo from
Mybrefſs Brackenbury te his ſaid mother, and this was the counte
ting he vied, and the manner of his :waing out of ſeruice, Thus m
for an'wer to the firlt part of Sys acculation, conteyninge ure
firſt a:quayntance and agreement about counterfeyting: wherein a
ther be diuers other abſur.l things( hich for breuity ſa«c & partlitor
that they are vnworthy the anſwering I omyt ) v thus 15 one, that mi
tioning my teaching of him, and a.tiag of certaine cricks for his bet
ter inſtruction, we tieare not of any place where this [hould be Pere
formed: for the Diſcoucrer telleth vs that our meetinge in Ajbby
arke was not ti! aboue 3. yeares after this, and other place is neither
CE nor elſwhere named. This dealing is much like to his, that ac-
culing one before the iulgment leat of robbery,na neth not any plac
where he !houlJ be robbeq, Bur let vs proceede to our third pretens
ded meeting, for the ſecond meeting which is [aide to be yppon by
for? running from his maiſter an4 in his wav going to Eſſex, conteineth
only atew wordes berwixt vs concerning counterfeyting, without as
ny teaching and acting on my part, and learning on his, and there.
fore L will omytit, V Vhere fir{tI will ſet downe the Diſcourrer his
wordes [eraing to male a way therevnto, & then So. his oOwne,
Diſtoue' er.

Vp mm bis [econdrummneo fron bis mailer, and after hs 141remays
ned in .ſj*x 4 2021 pat of a yeare, till he wai w'ary hr rec ning humnee
ward" 42 4int tywards Notting ham with better hope then before, t1 buy out
his yeares , thrug"t 1t conuenient in hi; i1nty homewards to rake Aſuby
his wy, of pu1p3'e tr ce M. Davell, whons be ſound there as by [aith
had dralins with him as (ollyweth,

Vp Mm My 0010 at thet time tn 2M. Davvoll, hs ahed me where l
hat bene: whither I was goings, and wither 1 had attrronpted tn pY4cH
any of his inrutins, To whome I an{wered acrordine tr his quclons:
that [had no Con nont tim", thor wile then wh I w.s PITT to dot any
of thoſe thing s,: then br tonld mee many thine of the b ry of Payton. WY
wp 1 ſh ping my (Olfe to han a deſire to 106 and (oe him, MI. 1D. [44
Iſh al{ de well in (6 doins, becan's that ſoeins of hims in bie fitte, 1 nicht
the bitter learne tn de them 11y Glee ator war {it brine thac ine anede
w*'1f ty Burton, where 1 /awe The, Daviline: but veverynine that & 1004
mumnbor people came likewiſe ts oo bam, and Faring that Fome of tht®
my Int Fnowe me, I returned to þ ſbby not ſaying to ſee Darlimno in &'y of

| "4 ba


LYING DISCOVERY. "=


- - bus fits. At my commine back ae aine to M. Darrell be demannded of mes


wither 1 bac jeene the voy many of his fits: & 1 anſwered that I bad nes


. for ebcTeaſon laſt mentioned: which M. Darrell not well approwing, ſaid


that 1 mug bt well inouoh haue ſtaid 80 bare ſeene ſome of thum, becauſe w
4; 19 key that any there cowld hawue knowne me: | hen vpon ſome fua'=
ther «ccaſion of [peaches betwixt vs, M. Darrell delzuered wnto me in wri
ane, the particuler fitts, which the ſaid 1 homes D ering lately had, and
#14 al the moſt of them himſelſc before me, we two being in the parke roge
ther alone, by Ajbby, At that time alſo M. Darrell delzwered ynto mee us
writing, certaine ſrones and geſtures, which were to be vſed, be jaid, to ſg «
miſy /ondyy kyndes of ſmmes: which geſtures be dad likewiſe 467 himſelfe us
the place before mentioned. | hen tolloweth the acting of ce
teates on his part: and after that he thus procedeth, 1 heſe things thus
wijbed 1 tould M. Darrell that 1 ment to returne to ſee rf 1 comlde gett my
ſeife releaſed from my mailjer, and he approwng my purpoſe therin, ſayde
that when the time [erued I might well put all the former things mn practiſe
there with good effett: and that im fo domg he dowbted not, to procure mee
# relea/ from my maifter. He alſo tould me,that be hauing 4 ſiſter in law m
Not. on Miftris Wallys 1 could no ſoner name her wh? | ſhould be thought
to be poſſeſſed, but that preſerly, c the rather by hs / oters meacs be ſbould
be ſent for to come vnto me.cr {0 we departed. And thus far $0.{quoth the
Liſ)for the profe of all the former particulers wherwith Darr, u charged
Darrell,

As in the two former (pretended ) meetings, ſo in this thirde,
neither Sow, nor the Di(c..doe tell vs in what yeare of the Lorde, or
of the Queene we met, which I deſire'the Reader to oblerue, Th
knew not belike what yeare to name, leaſt thereby they ſhould diſ<
acuantage themſelues. Before we heard of no place where I ſhoulde
give thele worthy inſtructions: neither then, nor now doe we heare
of the certaine timE wherin this ſhould be done: which dealing is like
to his that accuſing one to haue robbed him, can neither nanie placs
Where he robbed him, nor the time when: which acculation if it ho.
Kd be receaued, as it is far from any Iudge, ſo it woulde peraJuens
ture trouble one were he neuer {o innocent, to cleare himſelfe there-
of, But as before out of the Di/c. and S9 wordes, vttered ellwhere
and to an other ende, I haue, will they nill they, founde ont aboute
what time ourfirſt pretended mecting and acquaintance ſoulde be=
gin, thovgh not the iuſt time, and thereby cleared my ſelfe, & ſhews
6d the falſhood of his accufation, even ſo 1 truſt ro doe heere, In the
page before,viz. $3. itis aide that the ſceomd time Somers ram from

is maiftey, was about a yrare and a halfe before he fell to bis praftiſes at *
Nettmrg ham: and heere it is aide, that vpg1 this bis ſecond ryning and
Si aſi


pag-265.


ſemble cert ame ericks: wherein continning till the weeke


Te ADFTECTION OY $. HARSNETS


aficr be had vemayned in Fſſ'x « gm part of a yeare, we met in Aſbby-


paike in his returuc from Ejjex to Nottingham. Now to his laid praciſes


be fell at Natt. in October .Anm 97. (o that by So. and the Diſc, ſaye +


ing, this our meeting in the parke was inthe yeare 24. nd this the
I ):/c. page 94. ( though to an other ende ) contetleth, ſaying: There
meeting in the par ke wats Uittle abane a yeave before bis pretended dijpoſſeſa
fron at Nottingham: but this bis diſpsſj'ſſron pretended ( as he tearmeth
ut ) was vpon the 7, of Nouember 97. therefore this our meetinge
mult be ( ifthere were any ſuch ) by the Diſcowerers owne confeſlyon
1n or about October 96, which pollibly cannot be (o: for that at this
laide meeting So, laith that I rowld him many things of the boy of Burtos
and aduiſed hum to 90 and / ee him, wherevp on he went to Burton, and
fſawe Thomas Darling 8c, as/is aforeſaide: then 1 delrmurred wnto him un
writing the particuley fits which the [aide Darline lately had exc. nowe
thele things cannot poſlibly be true, ( and ſo the accuſation is notori
ouſly falle ) becauſe Darling was not at that time poſſeſſed, but diſpoſ
ſeſſed, and delivered from ſathan and his vexation, aboute half _
yeare beforethis time, and a yeare and a halfe before Somers dilpoſle
elſion as in the begining of his fift booke is made manifeſt,


On(( faith he)Thomss Darling dwelling at Burton;vpon Trent, be
gimme to be ſack m February IS9y. aid afterward; take _ him to diſe
efo


[ re Whitſon-
tyde {ollowing, be was deemod by MD arrell to be poſſi ſſed, and the next


Eaty after ( as it if pretended) was diſpoſſeſſed. From which time he contt=


nued well, by the ſpace of about eight dayes, and then being at the ſchoole
be fell ag aine to certamne tricks and perſenered in them by ſtarts two dayes
whileſi tt was pretended that ſathan ſought to rep»ſſeſſe him. But ſynce he
hath left thaſe practiſes, This appeareth allo by the firſt and ſecond pe*
ges of tus booke.


Tf Darling were recovered and well, "fo continuing ( or leſte hit


practi ” at the time the Diſc, mentioneth, as the truth is, and Sow.


Cipoſſeſled vpon the 7. of Nowembey 97, how can that which is heere
reported be true? So that the Niſc.hath againe in his Diſconery diſco
u:red my innocency, and the falſhood of himſelfe and So accuſation.
And this is the ſcauenth tyme the D;ſcourrey is conuynced by his
owne Diſc onery. .
Moreouer where the Diſc. and Som. afFirme, that in his y-twne
80 Nortineham, after his ſerond rummins from bis mailer, cx 4 latte abt
« yavre before his pretended diſpsſſ,T-o-m, wee ment in Aſhby parke and
that there I taught him: I am able and offer to prooue by ſundrve
witneſſcy


4


LYING DISCOVERY. t7_
witneſſes, that Ss, after his ſecond vagary or running away from his
maiſter, was returned againe to Nozz, to his ſayd maiſter and there
continued with him aboue two yeares and a quarter before his Cilpol
ſeſſion. How can the premitles then or accuſation potitbly be trae.

x Andwheras he Lich, that I deliwered to hum mn writing the pave
ticuler fitts which Darling ( then ) had, and againe, that I de{nrred vnto
him in writing certaine ſrgnes and gcltures, I demaund whatis become
of this writing,and why myne own hand isnot brought torth againit
me. It may be that Som. tare it in peeces after firlt he had written the
lame in a Scntentie Puerides, as he did by the writing he had at our pag #3,
firſt meeting, and hath loſte this booke allo with the other, O that
theſe wn, acmodum puerilia, and mult needes imell (& be laugh
ed at ) in the tudgment of the wile, yea it was well for ſome they wer


no worle,
The Diſc. addeth: And thus far Som, for the provfe of all the ſormer


particulars, wherewith M, Darrell is charged, Aworthy proot ſure but


furable to the reſt, I maruaile that the Diſc, is not aſhamed, to acco-
unt So, teſtimony « proofe, and much more to produce his teſtimony
ſo oft, I thinke (4) 40. times at the leaſt, and for the prouinge of fo
many ſeveral! things as he doth: he being a notorious lyar, a periured
perſon, 1n a word as infamous and vile a youth as liueth I thinke this
Cayce vpon the face of the earth , Notwithſtandinge ſah the Drſco-
werer. (u) the confeſſion of Som. 15 of greate moment. And is it ſo indeed? 9857+

V Vhy $0. hath {aid there rs wo (r) god, 8& vied thele wordes, I am god what then? yer
and (a) Chriſt, as is depoſed: Bluſh then and be aſhamed ( O thou a yoni ie
man ) of thoſe ſpeaches, Beſides, Som. hath ſaid and forne that be ts admited a-
did not counterteyt. It his wordes be of ſuch credit with the Diſc, & guult Varre,
ſome fewvrthers(tor with few or none that are wile and godly I hope

they be not ) why ſhould not his wordes ſealed at other tymes with

oathes and execrations be of like vallew? And why doth the D/{co,

or any other rather beleeue So. affirming he counterteyted, then c-

nying the ſame? ſcing eſpecially he hath as oft denyed, as atiirmed

that he counterfeyted, a) that he hath alſo varyed ſomuch with that

double and falſe as 5% of his, even 4. times, and therefore is not to

be beleeued in any thing he faith, nor his teſtimory to be admitted pag to, |

in any court of record. Yea bur faith the Diſc, S-m. c-1{rſſjon 75 nt [6

bare as M, Darrell pretendeth, but is ſirmmothened with many colt an-

cs ( dpoſed by many ) 4s dye aron' the ſame in all likelyhod to be true;

yet m aiy of them togither with the byyes oath, are very prognart proofes

treot, page 106, And thuſmuch concerning the accuſation, now we

vii! proceede tothe circunttances contyrminge ( as is pretended )

the lame. | L


This aroverh +=
defperat C44is


-—


CE eee eee ED —OO CO CCCCCTS


px-ty:
e fi'ſt circurn


Fance allead
@( : COn:irme
$5. dC al nn


Biic 2. C1! CUIN-


KK; Ic. C
p3x-37.


She 3.Ccircum-


i '11+E.
P*s; $7,


the 4 X. $.cur-


CU1t<is4


pag 55:


A DETECTION Or 8, HARSNETS


Diſconrrer.


I: it em{ifj*d by M, Gi ay and Miſireſſe Gray, and by M.Ds


b4


8- bim/elfc, that So. awelt with M. Ciray at Langley, within 4. or 5 . miles


of &jvby de la ouch: and did run In crands as Mary Houlden ſaith,
2. M. Darrell bcaring So. deſcribe the ſcituation of Aſhby, did thereby
w:{l perceauc, that be had bene at Ajbhy, So 4s there 1s no impediment
that riſpect why be might not meete M. Darreel there as us depoſed.

3. 1: z5 alſo confeſjed to he true, that So. gomg to dwcll wth M. Brack,
enbui'y (oft certame bykes at M. Orayes.

Likewiſe that Som. was bound a prentiſe with T bom Porter and
that be raunc wiſe from him 1s acknowledged to be true by M. Dar. bime
ſelfe. and ſa the [aid $0, had ſwfficient opportunity to goe to Aſbby, and vs
pailke with M. Dar. at ſuch trnts, 4s vpon bus oath be bath delywred,

Daarell,

By theſe and ſuch like circumſtances, had Somers charged any
other with teaching him, the {ame perſon might as well ( and indeed
as truly) be proved guilty thereof as I, For inſtance: Admit So. had
acculed S, Haſnet initeade of I. Dar. and that the accuſation were
thus: About eight yeares palt I dwelling at Langley Abbey with M,
The. Gray: and going on errandsnow to Aſbby a market town there
by, now to Lowghorrow an other , mett ona time one M. Harſner at
Aſbby, and there the ſaid M. 1zarſnet perſwaded me to counterfeyte
to be polſelled with the diaell, which he ſaid I mig; 'ealtly learne, &
he would teach me: promiſing me that if therein [would be ruled by
tim he would take me into his owne ſeruice, ar ' .aintain me while
L lived. herevpon we went into A/bby parke , and! ting there M, He
7/net the better to teach me did a&t diuers tricks, for gnaſhinge with
bis teeth, he knocked his'own teeth togither diuers times, for __
he rolled his tongue in his mouth, and then put out ſome little ſpittls
betwixr his lippes, and faid that I might ſoone learne to doe it better,
by rolling a (tone in my mouth, but ſpecially if I coulde gett a little
loape to vie at ſuch times: ( &c, as followeth page 81.) and becauſe
we were to depart farr one from another for my better remembrance
he gaue me dire3tions in writing, charginge me to make away the
writing, which I did after I had writ the ſame in a Sententie F-reriles,
which booke left at M: Gyayes. Now about 12, or 15. weekes( as
I thinke ) after my firſt acquaintance with M, Haſner: M, Gray oy:
ced me with one M. Anthony Brackenbury to keepe certaine ſyluer
hayred connyes: with whom after T had remayned abour ſix or ſeaus
weekes, I began to put in prattiſe ſundry of thoſe inſtructions that
M. Ha/nct had given me, $&c. as before we have heard out of page


$3. Heereypon being turned out of (eruice I went home to Norte
han


LYLYG DISCOVERY, T


bom % was bound preatice ttt ro 1 bo, Porter of Nett.and after with &


LALICTIN £4 T2012 21d in London; where beinge | repayred ro M,
114/71 al ls Canber in tie £, of Londens houic, & made knowne
to um my ylilucceile; who tould me that he mult further inſtruct
re, and tiiac hemight the more lately and conueniently doe it, hee
laid ze would procure his Lord to agree with my matiter tor my yea
res, a1dto receauc ine ity his hoale. aand atter I ſhould be his many
as |.c avi before proauied me, aid then he woulde teach mee in tis
6/41 Ler: and accordingly he did io,

Now ty, Harſnes thall deny this, and fay that here is nothinge
but 5s, bare acculaiion; I will out of his mouth returne againlt hung
that obo 441197 75 not [0 bare as he pretendeth, but 1 jirengthened with
wth carcumſl unces as dit argue the | ame in all ikelhood to be iu: yee
tay-le togigher with ſame 04:1 that might be added, are pregnant provfes
thereof: tor firlt it is manifeſt that Sv, dwelt with M, Gray, & did rum
on errands as Mary Holden faith, 2. Som. hath bene at &jbby: So as
tliereis no ympediment in tlus re{pect why he nigat not mcete 56.
Harſnes there, as he chargeth him, 3. So, dwelt with XJ. Erackenbury
4. Som, going to dwell with 21, Brackenbary left certaine bookes at
M. Grayes. 5. $9. being at M, Brackenbwryes did counterteyt, & was
r- refore turned out ot ſeruice, as 18 [atd page 81, 6. $9. was bounde
prentite with 7þ-,Rarter,and did goe after to Lendon,7.beinghhere he
was bound prentice with a barber in Eaſt-Smyrhſcild, 8, He was from
thence receaued by; the B.of London into his houle,agreeing with his
mailter for his yea,zs, and it may well be this was by $. H. procure-
ment. 9, being in tne B, houſe So, was often in S, 1441/net his chamo
ber, and they two alone. 10. So, was S. Har/nets man, and had main=
tenance from him. Theſixe firſt of theſe circumſtances the Dy/c. tel-
leth vs is true, and the foure laſt he knoweth to be true: and yet the
accution I truſt he will ſay is falſe, The circumſtances then of an ac-
ea(ation ( vayne and tryfling ones I meane as bethe:c ) may be true,

nd the acculation very falſe, Notwithſtanding then the truth o: the
Diſc, circumſtances precedent and ſubſequent, yet the acculation of
®#y trachins of $ ths 11 ounterfoyt, may be ( and indeede is ) moſt no
wrioufly tale, And heereby is Jilcouered the vanitye and lightuelle
#f the Diſi ourrers lilly & ſottiſh coronftancer, which may af» ell lerue
for the appeaching of himſelfe or any other, as of nie againſt whome


they are brought. So that I ſhall nar neede to ſend any more UME pep FL.


m. rcfuting that which refuteth it ſe!fin the iuJgment of the wile.
Di'conrrer,

6. Somers pr aftiled at M. Crackenburyes ſime [1b Fitts, as hebal af

wid at Nottingham, wheorevpm M. Prackenbisy dtd diſcharge him

Y [ 0 Nb


ers
UK 'C# CCUM
F$87'Y


1 ADFETECTION OF S. HARSNE TS


from his ſe ermice, 4s Som. hath affirmed.
Darrel.

This is anſwered before, 2.5, titts at Nore, were not counter«
ſeyted but done by the diuell- ergo $2. counterteyted not at M, Brgs
ch-nburies, bat was then poilelied, tor it 1s laide, that his fitts as thy
tmo places were alike.

Diſconerer.

7, $1. m his fitts at Nett. and before 21. Dav. commine thuther, dif

anc bum the ſad Dar. duce tm"sS,
Darrell,

I deny not but that he named me, before I was the ſecond time
fert ſor by the M1.nrors letter: but the [:{c, muſt prouethat he named
me before the tir{t ſending for me, when to one ofthe letters for my
repayre to So. iſh ſe Wallys my ſiſter in lawe ſubſcribed her name,
end that the {aid naming of me, was the occaticn of my {ending for,
etherwiſe this namine me firengtheneth not So, accuſation as is plain
by page £6. mentioned before m the very laſt wor 1s of $9. acculatis
And this as hitherto the Diſc. hath not done, ſo neither ſhall he be
able ro performe: as may appeare by that I heretofore have reported
concerning the true cccalton of my poing to Som, which I can ealilye
prove.

But amit it were otherwiſe then I aſtirme, yet ſeing it was not

Som. but the Ciueliby his tongue that nance me, it argueth rather

the ſubtlety of the digell at that time laying the foundation of that bu

ilding he {ance hath erecied, then my teaching him to counter{ey t.
ID:/comrrer,

8, MD ev2!! ronld Robert Cooper the boyes father in Lows that if be
word cariſuly lo:ke tn Synree, he ſbould not looſe & priny by him: which
ſovteth with that depo/ed ty Smers: How if be wink be anted by NI. Dar.
he bald ro! want: And ihe ſannw 1s tmoraled bythat which MN. Dank
himſelf: conf fſſoth. wit. that Lo was a means with {ime others t+ haut 4
coll:(3on nec for the route of the ſa:d Cyo, or. but maeae thire were


i297.
, —E
# re FP
Poirther Corey hang thine devoſed, for we heare not what hee
bath denoſed. enly the Dile. oaith O, Be it allo graunted that T han


#.* © ' | TR 1? |
eon'el!-d z£ is hrere aide. thogh 1:1 be otherwiſe: why mgebr I not


Lane viel works ro thicefe t to Coy, and what balltherein favd
1 beleemins mee” Contidering tte X verty of C: WO and the Sreate
carce, an! ont agrance Swmmwrcvne tobim and his famil:e
Cay and night for ome veces, beeides the great trouble and di-
ELetnes ne pat itt andlus vat, It icuicthere were two collett-

d CL


LYING DISCOVERY. '


ens, but neither of them in the name aſSomers but of the poore: The
fif{t of them was at the priuate faſt helde at S-n diſpoflellion: The
ſecondar a publique faſt kept at Note, Thele colle.tions all me I truſt
will allow of. But was the monney at theſe times colleted gyuen to
$:mrrs? or not a penny: or yet was all or moſt of it giuen for his re-

lJeite ro Cooper his father in lawe* nothing leſle. 'The monney recea-
ued at the tir{t colle-tion vas part of it giuen tothe poore of Norringe
hin, and part to Thomas Porter $1, mailter, becauſe of the loſle he had

ſuffered, and the charge he ha 1 bene at through Somers alt!i.tion,for
the {pace of aboue a moneth before, as M. Allred 21. Willham Lang
fard with ſame others can witneTe. That which was giuen at the fe-

cond and publique faſt was diſtributed by the Mair, whereof fore

he YAauye t9 the pPoore of that town, and ſome to Cooper, party becauſe
of the charge and trouble he had bene at whites S/mers remay ned with
him, partly tor the cloathing of him, who ſcarſly had any to couer his
nakednes. And how doth Tis confirme his accuſation, & prove that
I taught him to counterfeyt as the Diſc, affirmeth? The lying boy


1p fs.


faith in his accuſation that I promiſed him if be wind be rnled by mee, aa bu,


b. {/ ul be alle fo Manna lim/ Ife aA. lone A, hi lea” and avaln that
be (bould nener want whilſt be tieed' It this vere the principal! ende of
his counterfeyting as is pretended, why ( when he had counterfeited
and done his feates ) did ney ther he demavnce, nor] pive lim any
thing? But let the Diſc. and Som. ſay what they pleaſe, tor there ten»
fues are their owne, and.they lordes oner them: the Ceede ſheweth
thathe hath lived nd bere farr better mayrrevned, {irce be faice be
counterſevred. then whiles ke 1d counteriert, as the Die. trearmerh


mis poſeflion, ſo as the divell may feeme to have hep prowife with pay $9.% 166+
him hitherto al'uring him thus: then had brtt'y fry tl on was dt comers © OO.
feyt, and line bke a man, thin to lane mthiner: {71 thin [alt {ay then awe:


wit nt a conterſeyt, anc! go nts the dearg yes 41d thett f! #4 aut rae
W718.
Dilcourrer.


9.1 brnobt wet the yoares of hs af pre u ip. f yore!


.
I 0-


-


/ i pe "-
LY PV COTM CO- 'a the « cn ith


ff 1, which is this: To auenry wort to Somcys bis math that be flould ens ta


j # - , Ny 4 /
Fant. fillings 4.pmceto v1. 4c him of L1s appieniiyptp, v hich ati
wats 1 did pirſorme.
Iarrell

Fare theſe th inne are to be rene bred rs that Tome my word
ge is Leere and, if So, farker mlave 21 not Conan bio be ſocha ay
vhichhenct performing as T hone: very te ven! | wasmret te
Corice | | lf blo rranile:se 1. 1i3cohi
: erice hound ro par, b cnt of mw prove, id .xihig


 . 1 &. 4 FP Ip. > Ma & on Phe
'ire2 that So,m:211 bitcl 4/0 of lis. Yea!es,. PECANS / 52,


IJ, 1,
* + w%k


GAL + y
£ 'Y LI Coin ts


p19 ys.
ch 10, c1rcum-
Saws,
18.50.
po "P.- £
C7? ! I


' F ADETECTION OF S, RARSNETS


mailter was a idler, which trade of life we all know 1s much abuſed,
3. Porter being belides a weauer, had kept lnm {till in hls leruice,
that he would aaac yinployed lum only to the trade of WEauLNg, 4,
all its was knowiae to diuers, and to what ende it was done: whence
it came that 1 paying the atorclaide I 3.8. 4d, the Mar icnt mee at
the next collection tor the poore 6.s. 8d. of it, deliring me to take
that vatul the next collction following, and that then i thould haue
the other moyiic. And when that came I had ot M1. Wiluwnn Lange
ford cnough not all, yer 3.5. 4.9. the. other 3.s. 4.4 I went without,
tor chat trouble about Somers grew then vpon nee, 4n4 this 1s all the
buying | vicd, his allo is {aid to be the other ea of his countertey»
ting: [2 bs releaſed ( quota So. from my mater accrrduus as M, Davel
had prom:ſcd une, 1 did began the courſe that M. Dar. had wiſhed me ta
v4 tie. Alkely thing that he who knew lo ready a way, & of thy
two mach better, I meane to rwane away from bis mailter, woulde to
that (aid ad counterteyt to be potlelt- with the diuell, 2. Iris to be
conlidered, what 1 did for hiaa in this behalie, when henad performs
e | {1c condit:on 0A tus part: eaen that is beecre alorelaide, which &
Wil noting, ;
Dt; cormmrer,
1 0. Milreſjs Willys according to 24. Darrills former wardes, did


fend for N., DD as. ts core vnto bim,


Darrell.

This is anſwered before; where we mutt obſerue that this circans
Face with the +, next? precedent, haue bcne purpolly inſerted in the
Ac alation,becau e beiag either 11 part tra2, of lemning {o to be to the
vow1e G& 1ncon'iderat, the acculationitlelte might therby leeme to
b- truc, and from them receaue {oine confirmation; whereas were al
of them molt trac, and tae whole as they arenot, yet notwithiti-
ding the acculation ( as touching the lite of it, 1 meane my reachinge
kim to connterfeyt ) mic ht be molt falſe, as in deede it 1s: which bur
for brevity fake I would herehaue made very playn, And thus muck
for anl.ver to the crow nances ailcadged by the Dc. for rhe ſireng.-

| f 1 41191; now tollowe other. circumſtances gener aily


ric . M£( 56, Al?
a ® !1;7; F p iff.
eve Dilcrmy,
There are heerewnhall belides let downe by the Dye. certayne


» circumitances generally woums ſuch 4 compact: as hiſt that I with ſom


other of my adocrentes di &-0une or Taucne mirteyned him with good
CICAYC.
Darrell,
Being atſupper with Ciaers preachers atthe ſigne of the caftle,
Sas.


S1mers came in, and one of the company, not my ſelfe, willed him to
it downe and to take part with vs, which accordingly he did, As be=-
fore the 11ſc, would have thereacer imagine that 1 was an alchoule
Launter, fo here a haunter of tauernes, but he hath two certificats co
c1ning my life and conuerſation,with about 200, handes Lbſcribed ,
thar teileth him it is otkerwile, whereby his linne herein is made the
orcater.
Diſconerer.

2, when $9, was accuſed to hawe bewitched one, M. Dar. dealt with
the Mator of Nott, that he mizht be bayled,

| Darrell,

It ſhall be heereafter ſhewed, that this is falſe: But why might I
not well haue done fo, had I bene then at Note, as I was ablent” icing
it 15 manifeſt ( as in his place will apeare ) he was innocent of the mur
ther for which he was impriloned, and ſo hardlve intreated through
themallice of lome7And,how doth that conclud the compat# of coun-
rerfeyting berwixt vs two? or what lodgick call you this?

Diſcoucrer,
3. while M. Darrell was at Nottingham he hadſecrett conference
with So, diwcr's times,
Darrell.
I never had (peach with luim in private vntill about 9, weekes af-
terbis 1iſpoſſeſſion, neither is there any thing depoſed to the contra
ry, (no not by So, himſelfe ) and that was to my remembrance only
once,as I haue depoſed,the occaſion wherofT can ſhew, & vp6 his fa
ther in lawe Robert Coopers requeſt I did ir, But be it,dmers trmes, why
might I not lawfully ſpeake with him apart? I thinke in ſome reſpect
better then others both in regard of his former affli&tion, and the dan
ger he was in aboue others, and that he was one ouer whoſe foule I
was by my calling to watch. Yf this be a good circumſtaunce avainſt
me, vill ikewite be of ſome ſtrength againſt ſome others in Note,
whome I could name, who talked with him apartas well as I,and of-
ter r00, eſpecially meeting with the other circumſtances: as,that they
knew him, dwelt in the fame towne with him, ſo as they might bane


ſufficient opportunity t9 meete to-rther, were o't with bim, with many cir-


cutnltances more as ſtrong 2s theſe obieted again!t me, ButI will
ſew wherein this circumſtance is defe&iue, whereby the weaknes of
it may yet better appeare, Ytrhey which haue depoſed to owr ſecret 7
din; conferences had gone a little further, and ſaid that they harknin
h&rd me commend him for doing ſuch a trick'well, and ſuch a feate
excellently well. ſo 25 mv (elſe could not hane bettered it, or to ſome
ſuch purpoſe; then {14d there binea circumſtaunce' indeede, euen 4
4 Pro-


LYING DISCOVERY. © %


pag 8 9.


the 2 general
Cu cunt} abc &


2p.90,


the 3 penerel


eucumfas


C6 © PALLET,


p170.99 the 4
g* (18! al CCUM -
Ka4g.e


114 enidente
Eg ne that the
Dil. 19077 18
gleutfull 10 248
g/-vis


anath, 11.6 p


gag 90,
hs $ circud-


Qance


- * !
TA A . 5% * . *-y' %
0: Pre umpuon, were!


mk ins a [ $4 54 8
; DAD CONCIUGCE. LI:Al |


oy ADFETFECTION OP 8. HARSNETS


# % . .


. , , ' « » R ]
n I. 11 ; iT oy #-% ($44 ” CI1C [ IC tl: St 3 a Pro.


'

| a” $ * 2 ' . \ i =— L

4A (3 FAUONTE 111 y +\ t, * 1 of 1. 434i \J Li ne nos
£ }


—


. $—_—


| ! 1 ' , ,
thin, but thathe might hauc learned and acted, Put tate the circuhy
[tance as Its, of my Lare tailing with him, ana 1 1s 0.0 Valalty &


all,
Dilcoucy, Ni
A. When T1, wa Allen at iarr with NN, Dar. he writ with him thus: N:
all thmos that I did were connterſeyt, 7 1 pray you tet it paſj+, for the more Th
y2u mciiile mit, the more {credit it wil Ge for yourrruch doth 41eucth (ef
wes [ame pack, berweone them, its
Darrell, he
The ia was this, He ſaid that he had counterfevted: I denyed {in
en] oain{aide the iame, Now 1n this letter Sathan by his inſtrument ter
did gocabout to perlivade me to ceaſe to contend againſt counter= ”
feyting, thatis, for the Lorde and his worke: and thus the truth is, Ft
that I haue counterfeyted, and it ts to your diſcredit that yore hane bene des NY (el
ceaued by mee, but much move diſcredit will it be for yu, i,you medal "4
further in it: oinc our therefyre your contending aodinſt my counterfeiting, F tr
But ſuppoſe that So. ment as the Diſc. pretendeth, that there had bem i} po
ſome pachins betwixt v5 concerning counterfeyting, and that hehaJex N -y
preſled his meaninge in playne wordes: the, ſame had not made mee «ll


ouilty of reaching him, except Somer} bare accuſation did ſuffice ther | re.
to, and then had the matter bene long ſince ont of controuerſy, and | #1
the Diſc. might well haue ſaued a great deale of labour, And heereby | ſev
the way note the wiſdo®e of the Diſc, that will ſtrengthen $9. accu» | »þ
ſation, by Somers letter, that is (a) Somers by Somers, *. Let vs heere ff «6
obſcrue, how that nowithſtandinge the extreame folly hee ſheweth
heerein and in the reſt of his circumſtances, yea generally jn all that he
ſaith throughout all the diſcouery, yet alas many by his lyesand very
fables, bauc bene drawne from belecuing the workes of god, to grue | 21
eare to lus ſlaunders and foolery, and to iuſtifye the wicked, and | to
condemne the iuſt, which are haynous ſynnes beefore the Lord, po
VVell it muſt needes be that offenſes come, but wo be to that man ( ſayth tat
Chriſt ) by whome the offence commcth, it were better ſor him that 4 mill- wh
flone were hanged about his neck, and that hs were drowned in the depth | (v
of the (ia,

The falſhood and vanity of his fift circumPtance of rwning my ef | 1
py 45 touch? the witch, pretended by me to hane lent her ſpirit into Sm. | ON:
relying only vppon the Diſc. bare report, I for breuity omit, referr- || M's
ing the Reader for his' ſatiſiattion therein to the beginning of the bo | ut!


ry concemung Somers, s
OF CHAP.:. & g. :


aft


LYING DISCOVERY, 9:


"9s Diſcou
no. ON M.D arrells prinate dnetions to $0. whilte he was at Not. with
cung bin, how ht efhanld fr um time t» time be haue himelfe in hrs contre}: mime” p3p.99-


y Ut Diſco.
In this 2 .Chapter $9. chars! 1eth me that comming to Not v pon
the c. of 'Nouember,the two next morninges beinge ob and 7. of


has: Nouember,I came vnto him and had certaine ſpeaches with him pri=
me uathy ©,Aas rouchinge the ating of his fitts ypon the day of his dilpoſ«
the ſcion, the laid 7 day of November :and allo what he ſhoulde doe in


his remoual!(& vpon the very motion therot)from the houſe where
he was,to the place wherethe faſt appoynted was held for his di!poſ- pag.108,


wed img, which laſt part of his accebaingd is {ett downe m theſe wordes at-
1ent ter many other. And even [ojaid M. Day.(the ſecond morning bemo the
tere 7 of N onember)the lil; 'O 0 de is ſhatl be taken with ther this mornmmnso. An me
h is, ane ſhall be (ent to ſee 1f thou be readie: at what time thou ſhalt [hewe thy
* ate NY ſelfe to be - much ty ed in thy fitts:vpon ſuemfication wheroſ,(1xe or ſenen
dl ſpall come to bringe thee wpon there olders, whom thou maiſte oreathye
ins, rmble in their carriao of thee, by flruoling with them, as other: that wrre
bem | prfefjed did: and as thounh the diuell had compelled thee ſo to doe, bermo wee


lex ry loth to come to ſo godly an exerciſe. Shortly aftet M. Darvels departure,
mee | all thinzes were done accordinely. One Lanoford was ſent to ſee if [ were
ther | rearlic- at whoſe comming I did make ſhewe of my oreateſt fits in an wnqur=
and tt manner, Ther vp the (aide Lano favede retwrnmg to M. Darr. by and by
eby ſenen cams to carrie mewhom (1 winke) I chd very much trouble: & wher
ccu» | w/111 it was 9inen out, that I was ſo heavie immy fitts,as ſeucn was [carſe
cere | obleto carrie me.
veth Darrell,
t he If this accuſation were indeede true, who ſecth not,how eaſie n-
ery | matter it were by found /and infallible teſtimonies to manifeſt the
give F truth thereof. For as certaine nights and dayes, before my comminge
and | to Nvre. this pretended counterfeyte had divers perſons of honeſt re
port abicinge with him, partly by reaſon of his grenous and lamen-
wth | table affliction, and yartly to preſerue him from deſtroving himſelfe,
ill= | which by as manve wayes as he could, hee attempted to haue done,
eth | (which argueth alſo that he was no counterfcit,but indeed really poſſ
elſed, for what counterteite, did euer (ecke willingly by all meanes to
yep | murther himſelfe) ſo after my comming to Note. vntill his diſpoſſeſſ1-
om. | On, he had much more company with him then before, both day & ow
night, ſo that heneuer beinve by himſelfe alone after my comminge,
Risnot poſlible that I hould haue ſuch, and fo 1c noe ryuate conferre
with him as is here pretended And if I conld not be with him,& 6-n-
ferr with him iQ an inuiſible manner, how commerh it to paſle that ſo
many


93 A DETECTION OF $. HARSNETS


many eye wirnelles being preſent, ther is not one prodace1 to prous
this cn; ence? or did 1 at my comminge put all torth of there place
where he remained, and where we had conterence:why thea are not
ome ot tnem prodaced, (worne and examined to depole this theire
thrultynge our? [ythence by the rules and maximes ot the ecciclialtio
call iawe, by which I ought to haue bene ludged,onss probands mcum
bit ag ent ſeit? accuſanti,and that a(tore jiue accu} atoi'e non probant 6, ab
folnendus eft res: Lappeale to all the doctors of the Ciuiil lawe, whee
ther the teltimonye of $2,being as him(elfe contetlcth a counterteyt,
beinge {OCLHS CYImLINGS obiects, being a VAgarant rullagate from his M.
ſhould in this cale be a good teſtunonye to proue ttus privat confere
yea orno. But to let theire opinion palle rouchinge tius poynt:; I am
readie, and able by lundy credible and honeſt perlons in whoſe com»
panye allrogether I remayned thole ewWO INOrningees, to make good
proote;that I was neither of theſe morninges with $9 at all, neither
$1.at time ex + | =
i, alone,nor yet with others (a) It then Somers was neither of thele two


«ePicd wine!


one che later 0: Orgs priaatly by himiclte alone: If allo as wel by ſuch perſons as


ere my (elt* were at that time with him beinge not a few, as by ſuch perions with
weravcmled whom I remained in aplace far diſtant from Som. lodging,l be able to
togither 199122 Drauemy (eltenot ro have bene preſent,but all to gether ablent, fro


HLDOIAVE 'S Id


wo: tors de. the partie with whom this pretended primate conference ſhould be:Let
Lucrmcetrow the reader Iudge whether theſe two falle witnelles Som. I meane &
- oa the D1ſc.the one principall the other acce{lary as graund contederats

and con\pirators againſt the good narne of an Innocent, be not wote


ticly of all good men to be exploded and hilledat.


| Di, cor ; |
: Yea but quoth the ſc. M.D ar:himfelfe conſeſeth ſomwhat which
PT ten:leth to the confirmation of this his ſecond conference with Somers: For


beinge depoſed he acknowledged,that he ſent William Langford that
mornng t) take order for the preſ ot bringing of $0.0 Smules hbouſe,co that
MM. Lan? forde brought him word, that as ſoone as be ſpeakr of the boyes
remoninge, be was preſe ntly caſt into aſore fit. And agdines m his haſtoree
ie hath thele words: The boy was browzhi Ly & or 7 ſirong men,who had
all of them envueh to cloe, to bringe him t» the next connentent and / cemlye
ve9700, I's thi place of bus aboade.
Darrell:
My confeſſion tendeth nothing to the eonſirmation of any ſuch pre
tended conference; For what though I lent”. Lane ford, that I. Lang
f ord did bring me word et: and that be was browght by 6 or 7 doth this
praue that vw the 6 and 7 of Noamembay in the mornine,l had ſpeach
"  priuatlye with $125? marke the Deſc:argnment.


D.orclldothe confeſle that theſe and thele thinges were done by
Lane


LYING DISCOVE! ay, 94
Lens Frd,et. therefore Darrell hal priaate conference with Son's a=
bout counerteiting which argument it it be good, why then not this
follow nn: gc ako:

u- L417 f3rd confeſleth theſe thinges to be true :

therefore W, Laps fd had priuat t conference with Somers the 6
and 7 of Nouember abuut counterteyting,
Nov it this argument hold n: \t avainit W.Lan-ſrd why ſhould, is
halde a2arn{t mer ldgenye not chat it fell out as is here ſaide with So.
v,2N tne motion £07: hium,and in the remoning ot him, but that
| vpon the 7 of Nouember 97, ( or yet at any other time) directed
2r aduiſed him ſo to doe I deny, which fa: t beinge thus denyed the
Dil confi meth or proueth thus: $5, did thus and thus, (as appeareth
by L.ercls owne depotition,and his hittorie)-1g2 D&,inftructed him
{o ro doe. If this be a good argumente, itisa verie ealie matter £0
proue that I haue taught S».to \ countertey te:and ha1 So, acculed the
{/' as he hath done me, an1he but ſent M.{Lansford or ſome other
2 ' that he was remouz4, leſt that ſhould be to doe when the people
were alſembled:I could with great facilitie; ;proue hm guiltie of teach
ing him to counterfeite, And here wemay lee what the diſc, prouerh
or contirmeth by this his worthy corfirmation:and how herein(as ot-
en elle where) he buitieth himſelfe ro- prone that whieh is or w!llbe
graanted,and omiteth that which is by me denyed:2.we mult heere
vnJerſtand,that the 4c. knowing res things to be true, hath inſert
ec them among $9. lyes,therby bopine to dazeltheeyes of men,and
deceiae the ſimple, or over haſtie and vnaduiſed reader: who ſceing
theſe thinges, being agreat part of his accuſation to be true,may ther-
vpon imagine that the reſt is likewiſe true. And this 1s the maine fallz
cie = deceit he v(eth in ſerting downe $-,8ccufation,

For the preſer uinge of ſome from beinge thus be euiled by this
deceauour. we mult knowe, that when one is acr1:(ed of a matter cap!
tall or criminall, to proue the accule4 gw ltie, it isn t it} ticient that
certaine circumſtances or perticalers comavned in the accyſation be
true: for it ww cate matter for him that careth nog withthe co,
how fooliſh ani ri iculous, beſides fale,the accu ation be, to frame
ſuch an aconſation,Mmir of high reaſon) as 1 halbe true in 19.cir: 279
ſtances or ſenerall pointes of the accu'atton, an | v 2 V fallen the 20,
being the trea! "nable at or intent it ſelfe,as may ca" ly be conic 'tur-

el by the in! ance © 4 IN? bet OTe CONCErn: noe J, Ha in't. 'y v en (>1 It is

In $7, w hi Je accuſation, a1 this prre therof, wherin notwithſtan 1-
ny (undrie circa ances (not mater:all) are true," r that wherot [

811 accu ed, VN Ot 2119 of þ;, 4a t) Cormti(erto, 15 | alvatyuec falle e,and Na"

thinge proued nor yet produce | that probablie rm! In confi-me the

Ys | {au


the 1.circum


ſtance.
Pg 1097s


arns9.
P13 16


x) e2 Cxcum
(tance
pg 100,


95
fame, And thus haue I anſweared the accretion of Som. or principal


A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


uats therof,concerning my teaching him to counterterte* and truſt
the fallhood of it 1s made cuidente to all men. Let vs t-ow proceedto
the circumſtances, that is, cer: aine ſpeaches of myne, whereby allo the
diſc. will proue that I haue ſcholed Somers.where by the way,we mult
&b{erve, that the accuſation beinge talle, (wherot I thinkehardly any
chrilti3 that hath read the premules doth once doubt)noircumſtices
can ever make it true. In this reſpect it is a thinge needles to vie any
more wordes about them. Yet that my innocencie may be the more
manifeſt,and leſt in not antwering them, ſome ſhould 1magine thatl
werenot able to anſwere, I will ſay ſomthing to them, but with what
breuitie I can, Leauing S9.who hath {o accuſtomed his tongue to is
ing,that he ſcarſlye vitereth a true worde in all that followeth, to
</c.to beleive his lyes: who calleth falſhood truth,/ar d truth falſhod,

The firſt circumſtance prouing(as is pretended)my inſtrudting
him, is [et downe in theſe wordes.
Diſconerer,

M.Dar hauing neuer ſcene Som. (as he pretendeth) did affirme, that he
wat certainlye poſſeſſed by a wicked ſpirite,vpon the rude report of a ſumple
man,one Hug hWWrilſon, and vpon 4 letter receaued by wilſon from his jy
inlaw miſtvis Wallis. This M.Dar,confeſſeth in theſe wordes. Being cert
ed in myſiſters letter and by the + 07; gr vena fheaches, of the manner
of $0. fits: I did ſend them worde, that thoſe thinges being true he was poſſe
eſſed,and this I did before I ſawe Somers,

Darrell,

VVee muſt knowe that other proofe the Di/c. hath not of this his
circumſtance,then this my confeſſion:and it is apparant that my con
ſeſſion proueth it not:for in the circumſtance it 1,that I /aide S0.iu
certainly pofſeſſed,and I write vncertainly and vndoubtedly therof, as
appeareth by my wordes. And conſideringe that in the'letter (which
is ſett downe before )there are diuers ſignes of poſſeſſion mentioned,
and that Hugh Wilſon tolde me further of So.foaming,of his extraor-
divary ſtrength, caſtinge into the fire, with other ſignes of ſathan his
poſſeſſinge man, mentioned in the goſpell, as I can proue: and that
where the proper ſigner lignes of a thing is,there is the thing ſigni-
fyed thereby: why might I not well write as I acknowledge owe!
did*and what did I therin ill beſeeming me? And how abſurdly doth
this conclude my inſtruQinge of So, to counterfeite? Let the reader
frame here the argument, and he will eaſilie grope and finde out the
abſurditie.

Diſcourrey


Darrell ſaide,that be purpoced to bane a faft for Som diſpeſſeſun'®
'l


LYING DISCOVERY. od
that he donbred nat of good ſweeſſe,by that meanes to procure the byes de -
Ieruft Y her arnmce, Heerevpon the diſc. collecteth as followeth; 7his Ml Dar,
edto Wl confident braogmg that he doubted not of good ſucerſſe,as it argneth brs t#
Lo the norance:/o the ſame being t1yned to hrs raſh credulitiegdoth make it proba -
muſt | ble that eyther be had Leyde his plotte with the baye before, or cls that be
yany  knowe very wil, b1w by bis cunninge to drawe one the boy for the ſerumge
flices Y of bis trorne as he himfelfe hiſt,
le any | D arrell, |
more V Vhat and how 'great my confidence in this caſe is, and wherevp-
thal Y on the lame is grounded, appeareth els where, where 1 treate of the
what | meanes of diſpoſſe{ſion. But marke how the Dy-ergoeſh thervpon:
to } Darell doubted not of good ſucceſſe, ergo it is probable that be had plot=
t ted befure with the boy about coumerſerting, or elſe kyiewe very well ct,
ſhod, © By this reaſon had 1, [reton or M, Browne, who were writ vnto, and
icing there counſel and paines deſiered about Fo. as well as mine, hoped of
good ſuccifſe a faſt being vſed for his diſpeſſeſſion, and ſo affirmed: they
had eyther plotted with him about counterfeiting, or cle ct. Apaine if this
hath | be a good circumſtance,8 that out of itone may probablie conclude
ſomple ® as you heare,then can I tell and proue to the Diſc. who taught the 7.
sf in L ancaſbire,for I am ſure he will haue them counterfeites too, Sure
ertifie BY Iy M.More, For when he went and came into Lancaſhire, he was ve=
anna | ry confident of good ſucceſſe,a (aft being vſed for there aiſpoſſeſſron,and his
5 poſſe | ienorance and raſh creaulitie concerninge there deliverance equal to
mine as touching $0. this alſo he did affirme to others,as I knowe he
will confeſle: therefore he either had layde his plotte with tham before, or
us his Y elſc he knewe very well how by his cunning to arawe them on for the ſeru-
y con | ing of his tune, as he himſelfe hiſt, The abſurditie of the Diſc.firſt colle&ti
0.484 F on mp my plotting with Somers to counterfeite, becauſe vypon
of, as | iuſt occaſion I writ that he was poſſeſſed, with ſuch a caution as you
yhich  hauc heard, every child may eſpie: and furelie his ſecond colleFion is
ned, # nolefl abſurd. for how could 1 knowe & that very well that he woulde
aor- i be 4 awne on by me to counterfeite, before I had ſpeach with him or
n his | yet did ſee him? It might be for any thinge Iknewe to the contrary,
| that  hauing then neuer ſeene him,that if the boy was not poſſeſſed, yet he
igni- | was otherwiſe greuiouſlve aflited (wherypon the letters & meſſen-
erel | gercame vnto me ) and ſo would have {male liſt to ſexe my twrne a+
doth | gaine, were it not ſo, yet percaſe he was nor apt to doe ſuch rare feits
ader | asin that caſe arerequiſite, Moreover, admittinge both theſe to fall
the } out patte as he would haue it, yet how could I knowe before I ſerr
eve of $9. that he would be willing to counterfeite a polieſſion with
the diuil,and that he was a/together graceles,for otherwiſc he neither
would nor dyrſt commit ſuch an abomination.


ff
b, 9.


pig 192,


pag 39.

pai? ;0 6,

Pig 293,

This is the eight
' gMmMc tac [)13/coie


Yr 1+ COMMICE {
: 3
9) tvs Res 6/40 Fe


Pg 16.


my 12:2,
eaulkg 2s,
mar; y» F-


97 ADETECTION OF S, HARSNETS
Diſconerey,
The chrifeſt meanes whereby M. Dar.did ſeduce the 1rople, and cuns
inelye injruct $1, with [uſpition in any that b:leined himywere theſe
tw falſe ro undes,(wherof m the firſt borke) v3. that thoſe who are paſſe ſſ
ed,hau. in there ſitts no y/ e of there en/es or {aculties of there minds, and
that whatſocurr they either dy2 of VA at ſuch times, it 1s u9t they but $4«
than that dath bth [ay and doe it.
Darrell
Howſoeuer the Di(c. doth not onely here but(I knowe not how
oft) els where as vag. 30,69,111, 289, 305, prattle and floriſh with
emptie words as though theſe were the two priacipall and f ale grounds
wherby I an (aid to haue bewitched all the beholders: wee mult firſt
knowe that ke proueth notthe former of thele{ whereto 1 will firlt
an'\vere) no not ſo much as by a falſe witnes, For his 4 witneſles here
tollowing,and two pag 111.doe only depo'e that I aide $2. was ſenc
lefle in lus fits,anJ thoſe two paz. 395, that I ſaide the ſame by Ka,
Wright: which ioyned together prone not that I faid rþ1ſe who at
fff r(jed ave ſenceleſſe, or as he ſaith elſe where and meaneth heere (4)
wha! 1:4er 1s poſſe ffedtsts im bis fitts altogether ſencleſſe 2. T have vpon my
oath denyeJ,that I ſaid glys of $9. v3. at the times articulated again
me: at another tyme I deny, that I affirmed K.th, Wright was ſencles,
and a thrid time being here about depoſed, 1 anſiveared thus: (4) 1
b:lrinc that Tho, D.&linge bad not bys fences or menoric in his fits:but I(t)
think: that Oo [4m mi J t [1 weler the mation z4s5 that hr en had 2r mobi
han had his ſences in his ſaid fits. And (urelye I muſt needs thinkelo,
except I were {o groſſe as toimagine, that ſathan being entered ins
to man,is bound (as I may ſay) hand and fote to depriue euery ſuch
perſon of ther ſences,and cannot otherwiſe doe:and ſecondly ſhould
much forget my {elfe, who haue in experience ſeene the contrary in
M.oroara Byrom, lane AſÞtonand alſo in. S»ne's, as I haue ſhewed
bctore, where treate of the ſignes of poſſeſſion. For this reaſon con
firmed by ſome experience,I am as far as any other from ſaying that
the D4/r.{o oft inculcateth and fathereth upon me, vy. tht whoſorutt
& preſſed is elrovethor {cncles in all there fits, yet notwithſtandingel
houl4 that the pwleT-d or.linarily are ences in theire firts,not on»
Iv becauſe my lel/e an! others ane obſerued this in experirence, but
ſpecially b*cauſe the ame maybe probablie colle ted ont of the (crip
tures, For di4 not the denill deprive them(at leaſt) of ſome of there
ſences,, whom he male bath blind an1 1-afe? wherevpon the ſpirite
was cal'e-{ by Chrift Teſus()) Jerfe 1r112and may we nor well thinke
that ther Were without feeling, why Ronke the nſelues with ones?
eng {coiure the f.vm: in: wire depruced of the faculties of there mi þ
a,


LYING DISCOVERY,


89


both of their yndertancing and mennry ( tor it is playne by the context


tharthey were (4) oxt of their Yight mynde ) haue wee not then
caue to indge that they were degrywed of all their fences internall & ex _ , _
ternall? And thatthus it went not alwayes with them, but in theyre tuk


ty ers, that is inthe time of their vexation by Sathan, may be gathered |
out of the 8, Marke, where it is ſaid of one of them, inſteade of both
that b:1112 often bound with fetters and chaynes he brake them: and then it
was, that na man could tame him, and made his aboade ( naked ) in the
monntaynes and or aucs, and ſlroke hunſelfe with (tones, lo as there were
other times viz. when they were out of their fitts, when he lived and
conuerſed among men, cloathed & in his right mynd. And that not
only theſe, but generally the poſſeſſed in Chriſts time were ordinari-


ly for the time of their fitts without their ſences, we may
thinke, becaulc it is euident that they had not their vnder


Fong


otherwile they would neuer haue cryed out (m) what bane wre to doe
with thee, O Ieſus of Nazareth? art thou come to deſiroy vs? and that not
only theſe but many poſleſſed with diuells yſed thee kynd of ipeach
es, appeareth by Marke 1. 34, Thus we ſee that one of theſe which
the Duſc, calleth my falſe grounds wherewith he chargeth me to haue
le flicks wherevppon my Legerdemayne
ly ſcriptures. Bees
of ſome, who it ſhoulde
c pag 39+
tions of Margaret Heriſon of Burnham Vlpe in Norfolke, and the ſpeach the
ſpirit had with M Robinſon miniſter at the ſame place, it is ſaide that ſhe
was of all ences both internall and external, to the 1ndgment of thoſe that


ſeduced the people, and (a) 1#
as he calleth it ) did conſs
des, this hath bene ob
leeme were volleſled. In an hiſtory printed 86. concerning the


. is warranted
dryer yen.


e,ſhee commun


were preſent, viterly depryed, and in an other plac
printed of the bewit


widerſtanding cryed ec, And in the booke


to her
inge of


M. Robert Throckmortons 5. daughters, who as I take it were poſlelled,
it is reported that they were depryued of all yſe of ther ſences duringe
their fitts, and that they could neither ſee, heare, nar fecle any body: and to
this effe& there are ſcattered very many ſpeaches throughout the aid
booke: yea it is playne there that two of theſe gentleweomen, Miſtris
Iranc and Miſtres Iane had not theire ſences in theire fitts before the


Iudge and Iuſtices.


ſe wordes: The


And where the Diſc. by way of prenention hath the
hmatick un the ſcriptures was mt his ſits dombe, but it cannoe be ſbewe::
that hs wanted the reſt of his ſences:


He ſeeth now more may be ſhewed by other perſons then poſſel-
ſed: and truly it 1s an eaſye matter to ſhewe, that the /nnarrck v anted


in healing the lamatick ſayd: T dombe and deafe ſpirit I charg
-


one of the externall ſences he ſpeaketh not of, viz, hearing: for Chril marke 92.


e thee
came


.(m>)mak r.:4,


/ Pg* 36»


-y FRY FF, vx - P * $ +7 wh. 3 ds a
95 ADETECTION OT.5. HARSNETS
- ” & 7 % I y
conm out if ham now the fk: Kit Was itn callvyu of tiieenT:t AU u'ele
Ih. Th rn C LHETATH : (7: 2Mit} FL £4 £4 sf [ ! * 1 / 6# © i d - ho . G ! tle
ye | ; 2 ks
EXTtceimnal: lences, aSricei/ , P: 11] CC EV MLIHNAUELN, 10 23S Them
arenvts butd., cvicrn i {ONCEes, 411 nc {tay tiiat the POLiENred am
Or were 11 C:riits (NEC ACDT MEU MN FN CIU ITS Gi Air ENCIT ICNICES: TON BB
IS C}E37E AL WETE N07 POICHET WILT GONDE LP2TITS AS Us 51146ICR Was
C+11G C115 CONCCITI 2 Ul & Tir it Gt T; C ih v 8 JI4 1: « es
'Þ
- Li/k
I, (os ' #7 8 * ] | . J, ' ; [ 0.
I\1\ ICCON:] AIPPIOEN FAV P OT ORE CIC 18S, IHE W117 OPM? te poſſeſſed
? ad , : | LCL
GC 0 AY AT FAC » VI7. 10 ter HEE, 27 35 2291 thy, OH 0 MODAN T4;


"Il th botb ut) Hild du th
Darrell
That the divcil vierh the re nove of thoſe he poſſetieth, & lpeak
eth by them it is maruleſt by theſe criprures among e others(u) what »
thy name! Leon: (our wo at Wany. (; | ) ind thi damcll b:(ot ueht lum\lay
in”. If th HA } Vs Offt, (ut) ot VvyY 10 P00 /NHC th <y ae ol /Ww an (p) H: wud
thy peat Ace and com 1O Ot 0) { bins. (h ) Flo cull Wt ances. nel! Ii, AB« d jufſ ove


, Mot th dim {ls ty lay tha 7 thry Rue w him. (1) « Ant dmells came ont vj ide


my, ©& y'1/9, at d ſaying, thou art that Chry t that {onne of God, Heerey Put
Auonlmeatiirmeth, Diabolum ciwcs |, NYHA VH, 1H CHIMS COPIES THEY AHHHE:
that the cnell wſcth bis tongye, mio whoſe bodye be is entred* yea inthe
manitold ſpeaches of the poſſeſſed mentioned in the golpel,. we readt
not of any one which wos not vrtcred by the dinell. Ie 15 cleare ther
that frm ifnot alwaves in the fitts of the Pc Neſled, Sathan fpeaket!
and not they. And as the vncleane (piritts vie the tongues of ic in Il
whomethey are, and | peake what they will by ther, fo doe t! vaio
vie the other parts or members of their bodyes to pertorme a ac*
tons: as their leere to goe with th eir hands, to {mite with,&c. (o the
dmells went w ththeleere of the men poſle!ied with the legvon, anc
CAaTTVEec. [el COM mtrot eh e NOCUNfavrnes and Pranes, WwcOnr v ith the lame
feere (0) vi of the evans vory (circe, and with the mens hands offered
Vyolence no doubt to Hiners, /» that my man miebt goe by that way: (1,
{ ſnckrd the chawne alumder, and brake the fettrys in poecer, V [7 erw 1th they
Vere i, nna: \ and Tr ho i] "1m with tl: 'E1T OV Ine L an” ec 79; 't/ {7 27OS And
; ((irits [awe It*


ip


generally 1t 15 faide of others, that 7s) when the yrclearr
[ne thr) fell dew boſore bem. Peſides, t! er arties poſſeſied werreat '
have confidently armed rom tit) 1? Eto time their litts bene ended,
that they newe not any thing they durme thoſe tyres fpake or did,
and vet dio) manta tons, and for the mcſt part never ceaſed proving:
yea: 19 + ot tl fe 11 Las "Dn. nnNme | I Once A! 2, nio4rs and
C19 tho w Jovres they were arcaltome'] vnto as well and a« readilens
euzr, {pae as freely as at other times, an! yet knew not.ung? More

Cl


[Or It
WV adg


peak
hat Py
W,i4\
11's
il
| Ide
Pon
ATT:
n th
eade
ther
aketh.
nM
a6
Cr ac"
O tic
and


tered
1» (1
| thes
And
ve [0-
eat *f
aded,
r did,

and
[yes


ON
JT: is v


Cl


F 5


= - |


LYING DISCOVERY, ot


done all that time, nor of any thinre


fc of tharth


ey had laidor


C' 'T 6+ % *%

t in | ene (poken or done tothem. And of M. T hroct _ 1s 14

dren in Jie {rt alleted, it 1s WrItte! 1 the: Wl ea 1t p raled 0 a1) delie The Arr3iene
Te a Wo thei fitt; » try ment |. "C1 kat wb, t t/ " hz ' { 4177 / neyt/ "s 2 mc! 1d cxecy
7; { }i'l thy hat bt MP A t 7 1th. 4 240 heerea! - "Ws bh lei reve py fret, a wade +


rely, \s nd as This is reported of the 5 daughters generally and par-

+1, to the ſame is faid of 7. [writes m the hou tHHicted mall-of
, ho fame fie A177 Tim. INCY IN thee Worcs: and ww! , t/ v 19.70 of
Yor {itts, ther know m0 more then 1 the children what 01 they bd won


I 316 ; nc t nov Joſef ſreaches way ys 110nNsS, Vca ws at loener In


UI I :

thei [1% s rh C' 'C lard e and 41d come! rom the d1nell, ! whon 6 thev
Welo a et - lame (1: ne oy —_ ile Ver ed, and not GY th: Cl 'CINE®* or
| wenct uſt caule to beleue them thus affirming, when we ce 1t


nant! "ake 1t {orne things are vitered by them, v hich patleth 1h;eire
no bi ih , and reach, and done which at reimpoſſtble to be done by
hen? And ſeeing it is evident that whatſoever theſ e perſons poſte(T-
ed lat. and c1;) mn 1th \cir tittes, the ſame was Ipoken an done not by
* m but by the diue!l, and that ſomuch is manifeſt by thger! pores
1 part, tho ugh not IN th; e whcle; why may not I fc ; rv owne parte
tinke or be of opynicn, th at what[- = Yr the; "ſ0:, Ned d7 oy Hay ( cr lina
( the tame of their [itts, ut 15n0t t/ CY, L1e Sat) _ cloth bath lay
x5 En chargeth me ( bur faifly ) perem pr: rily to af
rne: 4nd yer thel ie. P roverh not thus mvch asnov 'eV oluntar! 'V
0h but onely ow I haue (aid tO this efiect in particu/ar, concern's
& and Kathoayne Wrirht. And thus much as t re in ge myleo ne
ecrormnd, ' and! "iugling ſlickwherevpon my (co crdemayne ad


weles \
6lY /


(ULL )DC (ed tai C<


| 1
Now ler vs conſider v hat the Diſc. eatheret h or concdud eth of


theſe tw! yp) (uppoled Jaije} -rozndes of ryne. | rſt, flat ther Gy I de
CU ls pre /c,and draw them to thinke aricl ay; tat the | erſons con


1 .
rrouerred were poſſe Ted. Alas poore filly foules, whic!


by the! e.ew wordes of myne le 'uce & bly 'Nc.. ed. V\ hy but all were

not hereby ſecined. and drawne to thinks ard give our'im tpea Kh that

t e'e were po: Teſl ted, for ſundry v -eckes letore 16, IT theſewcr ice,

(aimitt] cid (; P ealke them ) or ve! eoer (awe $9 Pu line, | ef] UL

Wricht, many tho vue! tand!atd ( a: I can pro''e | tat! the: were pol-
1


I Were lr '" ar


]


ſeiied, wherevpen there was arameur th ereof in thole quarters; wh.2
now, cr what focach ein; d thoſe prope?

Vecondly, tho by T ommn”® , in Prwfed' So. without (il; rtiom 17: 71
that briincd in u T eb in trated theſk conmerents, it won nil
* cOmnnino % lecret ! 7 Wo wn 576 vn) as my laid chollers? ad neds
w hang bene railer growne men, then boyes a 1!ittle Cam(eils, But


1 168 ac


The 3.eircum
{tance
Py O08 .


The 4 circum
{\ mice
PB I. I,


It HI. Es
Pay ilo,


Tie 6.circum-
Itance

Pp 8 til,

bg 7.circum-
{tauce.
pag 113+

the 8 circum.
{tznce.
D .
S 4s L i;


The 5.circum-


4


©,


g2 A DZTECTIOVN OF $S. HARSNETS


how can this be, ſeing all the counterfeytes, had their leſſons at theirg
tyngers endes, ſome about a moneth, {ome a quarter of a yeare,lome
two yeares before? and againlt this the Dc. laith not any thing (aus «
about 59. Beſides if this be a good reaſon to proue my inttracting of
So. why doth he not vic the {ame to prouc thereby my teachinge of
ene 7. 1n Lancaſhire? which howloeuer he would haue the worlde tg þ
thinke is true, yet for ſhame he dare not publiſh it ro the world. Laſt«
ly, this being a g00C argument ot one his teaching ro counterfeyte, M
the Dy/c. (hail doe well to inquire after him who ſaid as much here«
totore of M, 1 brockmortons children( and of others) as I concernynge
So. Darlms and Kath Wrizht yea the very ſame with me, that being
found out he might be puniſhed for luch inſtruction as well as I. For
albeit it be ſome yeares lince luch inſtructmy,and counterfeyting way,
1 meane of M. T brackanrons children yer it 1s little more fon half ſo
long as it is lince Kath, #7rihts connterfeyting and my teachinge of
her, and therefore may mvch better be inquired into, then this other
tat done {un dry yeares before, And thus the [:/c. hauinge made a 7


way to that which followeth, and layd this as his foundation, wheres nn
vpon his whole: D:ſcouery reſteth, as whoſocuer hath read & obſer. "h
ued that worthy worke cannot bur ſee, he proceedeth to build there» &


vpon, proportionably to the rotten and worle then ſandy yea ridicu» fil
lous toundation, to r 6 ouerthrowing and caſting downe whereof I

alſo will procede, and ſo come to the reſt of the D:/conerers circumſt ans
ces, whereby he procedeth to proue my teaching of Somers to coun- }f . 7%
rerleyt,


Dilconerer. ſa

Van the aforeſaid bare relation of Hugh Wilſon and before he had thi $ ©

ſeene $0. Dar, ſent word by him to Nott, that Somers was in his fits (ence _
leſje. It is vntrue.

M . Darrell at his commins to So, to Nott. ſaid he was poſſeſſed befare '


he had ſeene him m any fit, eſpecially ſuch afytt as might nat caſilye be "a
cornntcyſeyted, talle. ol
M. Dar. vm his firſt comming vnt» Som, affirmed, that it was J
not ” . that ſpake in hus ſitts, but the d:uell by bim. I graant, what follo he
Wer:
M. Dav. the firſt night of bis comming wnto the b1y affirmed in the bi
preſence of the ſ:n1d bry, that he was in his fitts ſenceleſſe. talie. 9
M. Dar. Jpecifyed the fame might mn the preſence of So. co diner 1+
there, the manner of ſuch fitts as the poſſeſſed had m the ſcriptures, and of the
thaoſr which were [eeme( a8 he ſaid) mm Kath. ; Wright, the boy of Burton,
nd tho ſtauen in Lancaſhire. what of this”
M. Das. then ſaid to the perſons preſent in the heareing of Sam . that


LYING DISCOVERY, 93


be the [aid So. would doe the like, falle,
M,Dar. tonld them un So. bearing, that be the ſaid So.was not fo nnch
troubled for his owne ſ1mmes,as for the ſynncs of the people, or of the inbabt= The gs exrcuy
banis of Notrt. falle, ſtance
M. Dar. affirmed in the preſcnce of the bay, that ſathan did vſe to P*8 *'4
ſhew by geſtures m thoſe that were paſjeſjed, the particuler [unnes that {46g= The 10 aromy
wed in vhoſe places where they dwe(r, taile, _ =
M.Da”, affirmed in the bcarms of $0, and preſence of many, that he ve- D_YW
rily thought the deucll would doe the like in $9. and declare by jrgnes & geſ 29 1.curcungd
ewes the ſinnes of N _ and of others, _ VER 7 NO
$0. acting thoſe geliures, M.D ar. did expound them very learncdlye, |
toſremſy hn 6. junne that raigned mn Nos. talle. ou an
Thc next day (being Sonday ) M. Da. comming to So. vſed the lik pag 116.
ſpea ches then m the preſence of others that be had done ouernight: viy, that wh 4 circume
$9. was m his futts [encel:ſſe xc. talle. pag 120.
M. Dar. did take vpon hum to foretell many things that woulde hap- the 14 circutts
pen the dy appoyntedfor the faſt: as that they norte


/ of veryftr thing”, Pag 1
that Sathan would wonderfully tor ment-the boy, and that Le deed not IF


but that they ſboule perceauc by the ſ1gncs of poſſeſſion and dsſpoſſeſſum,that
- boy was poj* y, and that then be ibould be deliuered from Sathan.
.


M, Dor te day the firmed is ſemncabt they ond 6 tel,
widently perceaue by the ſignes of poſſeſſion, that So. was poſſeſſed, and by rs: **4+


the ſ1gnes of daſpoſſ7ſjion that So. jbowid. be di(poſſeſed, if god woulde: and


comming to 1mreate of the particu'ar ſtones of po{je ſjuan, and ſo of diſpoſſeſ=
ſion, be of ctjuch _ Cs = that wi = ut on to att A rye
«; he named them, T he latter part of this circumſtance is falſe: Itis pro
ued by So, depolition only. |

Inthe declaring of theſe {peaches depoſed by many, conteyninge
in them ſo many carcumſt ances, conſilteth my m/tructing of So, by [pea
king io others in his bearme, thoſe things which I ment that be (bowled! prac- r
t1je: wherein 1 dealt ſo cunning ly a5 that albeit I bad neur ſeene hum at
Aſbhy, nor dealt with bim priuatly «t Nott, yet thus [aide comſe which 1
beld with him there, and with thoſe that cameo ſee lum ibis ſits, was lo
contryued as might eaſily inſorme $9. what be bad to doe, and did indceae
blyncle and miſlcade many of the people.

Darrell.

I anſwer generally to theſe and all the former circumſlances: firſt ,,, neſt penerall
that all theſe circumſtances with the reſt of the depolitions in the Dyſis an'wenes 0 the
«cy. were taken by Commiſſioners choſen and appointed by them © mrs
v hich are againſt me, I not being ſuffered to ioyne with them there-
tn; neither 4a I tad ner poſſibly could gett any coppy of them, or


ag 196,


mv 2.apſwere


My 3. an{weare.


my 4. aniy7care,


94 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


Commiſſion graunted for me, tore-examyne theſe witneſſes. Now
theſe proceedings are contrary to the Queenes lawes, and the orgi-
nary pratile of the high Commiſlion court: and for that cauſe ( had
I nothing elle to lay ) theie crrcumances ( with the other depolitions
in the D/c-yery ) are of no force, neither prouing any ttitng, nor yet
proued avainſt me,

2, 1 heſe Commiſſioners were and are my mortall enemyes, &
therefore very partiall, one of them:{clues alſo 21, B”7h.cn Greemwyby
name, being their ctarke or notary, And as it cannot ( almoſt) other
wile be, fo Ei able to proue, tharthey hane carr: c.| them(eſues ve.
ry corruptly in the.execution of theire {euerall Commiſſions: And
therefore in all equity and indifferency, the things heere and through
out the Diſcourry depoſed are to be more then Bleted, euen s,
reicted,

3.1 affirme that many of theſe cir-umſeances are falſe, and offerto
bring at leaſt an hundred witnefles ( if ſo many were needefull 3 to de
poſe otherwile forthe fallifying of chem.

4. Admit that I had ioynetl in theſe Commiſſions, and that all
were true which is depoſed: I affirme that theſe crcamftances are to
-veake and inſufficient to proue that [taught him ro counterfeyt ſuppo-
ſing he were a counterfeyr: for it we will prove a thing in controuerly
or matter criminall by carcumſ{ ances, as ' muſt be divers, ſo they
;nuſt be ſtrong, every one probably concluding that whervnro they
ſerue, bearing rhe name and nature of a preſumption, 5 we very well
call it: the etimolopy of which worde teacheth, that the preſumprien
being true, it is thence to be preſumed,and in all likelihood thought,
that thaf'is true whereof it is a preſumption And thus diners preſump
tions meeting togither, being lo many probable arguments, (ſpecially
hauing reſpec? to the other preſumprions ) they make among them a
{ound and ſubſtantia'l proofe, and neceſſarily conclude that v hereof
they are preſumprions, As for example, and for rhe better vnderſtan-
ding thereof: Let vs vmagine that in Grayes Inne FeildesI S. a gentle
man of Grayes Inne is ſlayne, no body being eve witneſſe thereof, ſo
that 7. S being deade,and none preſent ar the mvrther, the arches
rer is to be founde out by ciroumPances, or not at all If avainſt 7. N,
being apprehended vyon ſuſpition,it ſhonld be obieBed, thar he was
of Graves Inne as wellas I S. that he knew him well, and was ar quan
ted with him, and the place alſo where 7. S. was ſlavne. that hee vas
ſeene walking with him the dar before m the city, that he was Lnawn
to be of preate vallour, and therefore able to performe {6-1-2 @F, &
that aewas his owne, and to goe wher he would at his + 'eafare. 97
0 bad /reſſ 1: acnt opportumi


2 yoe and fight with him and ſlay kim: thel


Now
ordi-
( had


tions


T1 yet


LYING DISCOVERY. 95


cineuml ances (Iay) and an hundred more ſuch, are not auaileable ro
proue /. N, guilty of the laid murther: for notwithſtanding.thele cir=
cumſ}.ances were moſt true, and many more of this kinde, 1. N., m ighe
be as innocent and free from the murther as the babe 1n the wembe:
yea by ſuch like crcran/lances a thouſand ſeverall perſons might be as
well condemned as [, N,And if m this cale ypon the aforeſaide cr no
ſtronger arcumſtances, a Tuſtice of peace ſhould cemmit 7. N. to pri-


{on, the Iury f:nde him guiky — I. $. the Indge pronoun


ce lentence of him, and he therevpon be


) executed, woulde not


all men that ſhould heare thereof wonder at it and lay with one con
ſent: Surely the gentleman was innocent for any thivge that appea-
red to the contrary, Burt if againſt 7. N.it ſhould be given in euicence,


that the ſame morning 7. $S. was ſlayne, they two talling cut, challen-


ed one the other, namirg time and place, where and v hen, after I $,


vas killed, that ſhortly
comming frem the faide place ſprinkled with blovo, that his iworce


ter the murther cor mitted, he was ſeere


was bloudy, and his dagger found where this murther was done: by
theſe and ſuch like orcyumſlances or preſumptions, it was as manifeſt
he ſlew him as if there Lac bene\ſcme preient at the runher, And


marke I pray, how every of theſe circumſtances and (uch I;ke which
we very aptly call pre/urpticns, do probably cencluce 7- N. to Fave
done this murther, yea the leaſt and weakeſt of them the ther pre-


ſum; tions conſidered therewith: which theformer cron fancies oe
not at all. Even ſo it is in the matter of tracing to cormorfe ye, where-
of _ accuſed, the I iſc. v cvld prove me guilty by cr.c:mPances:


but the


-


erg all of the ſme k:nde with the firfi of the afcrefaid ar-


un ances alleacged apairſt 1, N. that is frivoſovs, vayne,and ricvicu-
lous, not one of them deſerving the rare of a prefer pricey, doe ror
prove me puilty of ſuch irftra&ien,no wore then tHe firſt aboue na»
mec crc mſt ances prooue I. N, guilty of morttenrg I. S.

1 Eat theſe are ſuch frinolovs aromſtances will appeare to him
that ſanding in doubt therecf ſhall marke how hand ml: they ccn-
clude my in) wetinec of So. to comnterſr yt, wherevrto they ſerve 28 117.
«nl ances, and otherwiſe doe their maiſter the Diſconrer vo ervice


at ij]. Asthrs fer example: Davell before I law Simeve ſaid Jewas pol


ſj d, if the fremes of jv (ſen were ſo ene im bm as be' was interned tt 1s
fi babie thnifore that Dar. taught him to crnntirfent a peſtrf} on. An arre,
Da, Firm d that it was not So, that ſpake m his fits, but the dincllly
bim, it 6: therefore probable that Dar. infirutted So. to mnrheyt, Dor,


aff :1med 19 the 11eſir:cs of So. that be was tn Fir fitts ſeneele lis, it 16 19 he
" * , = . n Fa
Preſumrd therffare that be tanebt him tn. Gunter feyt. Dar ſaid ( for for


the £//c, and his faile witnedles teil ys) that $9, was not ſornch crows -


Th 1$1% my Cale.
7:16 tu 113 HUG. 11


, (.au"we irs,


'
e


1 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS
ded {ir bi; orc ſunnts, 4s for the ſinnes of the people: ergo he tan2ht him


ro co0terfey:, If thus we ſhould goe through the ID:ſe, ciroumbances
an 4 weigh them in the ballance of reaſon, we ſhall tynde them as light
or lighter then vanity it ſelfe Traly I thinke ſince the worlde was
male, there were never more vaiae, ydle, and ſottilh corcum|tamuncey
oale:t:d azain't any manliaing.

My 5. an4latt anſwer is, that if there were a poſſibility of coun
terfeyting, as there is n2t, an4 thele circum tances were a little (tron
ger 11 appearance then they are: yet in this caſe of reaching So. I caq
not beproued gailty by circamitaances, for how can it pallibly bee
made true by any ccum}4nces that I haue taught $9. to counterteyr,
ſo long as he cannot tell wherenor in what place I raught him, not
when? can any ation be done, but there is a place and time wherein
and when the ſane is done?Euen (0 it is in this my /choolins of Somers,
Haue I taught $2,to counterfeyt? Idelire ro know where and when,
In .4by parke ( for other place as yet there 1snot any named )1
haue thewed it cannot be, and it is ascleare as the day light at noone,
where then” It would be knowne: So, heereof cannot be ignorant
if there were any {uch thing performed. Let him then tell the place
where, the weekes, monethes, or yeares wherein the ſane was doing
with other circumſtances therevnto apperteyning,. It rhis So. cannot

doe ( as hitherto he 'hathnot truly anq men may well thinke he cate
not, tor if he could he had done it before this ) we may be moſt a(ſge
red it 1s becaul there was nener any ſuch inſtruRing of him, Ir isnot
in this our cafe as it is in murther an4 ſuch like olfeces, Son. isnot
deade, but aliue, he is not abſent and to ſeeke, but at han1, neyther
can he but know that which I deſire he ſhould make knowne, it 'any
ſuch thing be. An vntill this be done by Sz, the aforeſeid circunlan
ces and a thouſanJ ſuch more are mt ſufficient, or any whit at all auai
leable'to prooue me guilty of teachinge him to counterteyr. yea to
whar purpoſ- are my circumſtances in this caſe of ours, except thisl
{peake of be firſt performed” truly to none at all: except it be to da-
zell mens eyes, and {o to keepe them from ſeeing that which other-
wiſe they could not bnt ſee moſt clearly. If S»m. had once done this
I ſpeake of, and ſo asI were not able to conuince him, then indeede
there would be ſome vſe of cirrumnlences to ſtrengthen his accuſation,
They had neede allo to be very ſtrong ones, conſidering the ynwar
thynes of the accuſer, and the rare and wondetfull feyts I ſhol4 teach
him.But that being not done, I maruaile how any man of reaſon and
iudgment, ſhould hould me gwilty vpon thoſe aforeaid poore and


emprty 7 i cumPlances,


For where the D:ſ., ſaith that I ard (o curmingly inſtru? Som, by


LYING DISCOVERY.

thine to others in his hearing thoſe things that I meant he ſboulde pratt-
uſe, : that albeit L had nencr jeene Hay nor dealt with Au pri= Bag 10G
ua:ly at Nott. yet the corrſe that I bad beld wth him there was ſo contry= mere of the Fog
weed 4; 1 1:2 ht caſuly forme $9. what he had to doc it is moſt ablurde, pts,
For who ca be lo voyde of reaſon asto thinke, that I could no ſo0- |
ner lpcake of the {1gnes of poſſetlion mentioned in the golpell, as to-
ming, caſting into the fyer,excraordinary (trength ect, and ot othere
very adntirable teyts, as of a greate ſwelling in the body,and of a lit»
tle iwelling to run along the body berwene the fleth and the [kyn, of
making the armes and legges heauy as yron, ot retorting the tongue
to the throat, lo as no part of it could be icene in the mouth, of un-
during the pricking with pynnes,and keeping in the bloud ſo as none
not a drop thould ſue at the places pricked, with many more luch
kke: but that So. preſently could and did thereypon doe the fame?
was there euer ſo cumb!e a boy and ſo apta ſcholler heard of beefore
ſince the world began? It is no maruaile then though the Dſc. terme
him an apt ſcholler, $9. faith he bring an apt ſcholler for M. Darrell to
practiſe ypan, bearing by M. Dar. ſpeaches what was to be done at his han pag 11G
des 1d exc, wherewuh all that were preſent were much amazed.

But admit this were poſlible, as me thinketh none ſhould lay ſo
belides the Dyſc. yet out of queſtion it is impolſlible, that the [peach
6s] ied to others at Norte. in So hearing vpon the fift of Nouember 8&
after, before which time my voyce was not hearde in the preſence of
51, :hould inſtruR So, in thole things he practiſed for the {pace of 4.
(i) weekes at the leaſt before that time. which being ſo, and withall ma
niteſt and notoriouſly knowne, confirmed alſo by the depoſitions of (2) how can the
the 17, That So. or x & divell did the very ſame things before the g, 2i/;avoy ce hs
of November and my comming to him at Note. which he did after, ye.
wherevppon I was ſent for and requeſted to come: it cannot be that
$1, was inſtructed of me by ſpeaking to others in his hearine, thoſe thinges
that I ment he ſhould praZtiſe. Becſides, it is againſte common ſence
that I ſhould inſtratt him after this manner, if that were true that
the Diſc, and So. affirme to be true, I meane that I had bene ſcholing
of him beefore at Aſbby, and prynatly allo inſirufFed him at Nott, For
he hauing bene ( as they {ay ) foure or fyus yeares learning his tricks
md hauing ha4 them allo in writing from me, he coulde not ( lure )
de to learne them when he ſhoulde a:t them, Againe it had bene ex-
treame folly or rather madnes in vs both, that hauing ſo long tune Se
epportunity to teach and learne in, could finde out none, but deterr
tn] the very inſtant they were to be prattiſed.
Thus the D;/cor. him(elfe may ſee, that his crcumPtomces albeit
ev be many, are too weake and inſufficient to proue my teaci:inge
C2


" The ;.chap.coi
ener parte of,
the to! mer CIs

e:mſtaunce and


41 1% a! ere
wilweaicd,


-
pig 127+


pog 136,


page-93-


98 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


of his counterſeyt, and therefore $1, accuſaticn muſt doe the deede,
or elle 1t wall not be:which (as appeareth by the premiſtes )is palpable
falle, hauing newer face nor pothbi/lity of truth in it. T he beſt way
then for the Di/conwer, I meane the B {b. of London and .Samnucll He
net is, to confetle the truth and publiſh ir, and ſo giue glory to god:
ſeeing the failhood of this Dijcuury is nowe made mianiteſt in the
cyecs of the Sunne,
OF CHAP, 4.
Diſconcrer.

Of M. Dat. cunning inſiructine Somers, by ſpraking to ethers in his
Praring e of Sathans ſeckmg to repoſſeſſe him: and of the ating of certayne
tricks under a com let.

Inthe former parte of this chapter the Diſc. telleth vs of a ſec»
ond or ntw c/enage, viz. $9. counterfeytinge of a repoſſeſſion: and after
what manner I inſtructed him we heare inthe title of the chapter,
This coſenage the Diſc. pretendeth to proue by two ſpeaches of mine
the one isthat I ſhould af nmeto my Auditory in the hraring of Som,
that for a certainty Sathan wonld ſecke rorepaſſeſje the {ard So. and jit-
rayle ag amſt him except he were mightcly withſtood by faith The other
that I affarmed the meht he was dſp: ſſ1jjed 1m the hearinz of So, &r chuers
etha's, that ſathan returned the ſame nt he was ciſpeſſeſſea out of cert-
«ne 11 Lancyhireand that ſo returning he appeared vnto them in cert ant


ſumlitudes.


Darrell.

Vhen the Diſc, hath proued me euilry of the firſt coſenaor, |
my ſelfe will yeald the ſecond: & vntill he haue performed that which
yet he hath not, none that is wiſe, will regard what he ſaith, concer-
ning this new coſonave, ashe termeth So. repoſſeſſion. 2, All or moſt
of that I have given before in anſwer to the aforc ſaid circomſ) ances
ſcrueth alſo for anſwer vnto this, x Seeing betwene $59. difpoſſeſon
and repoſic}ion ( which was about thirteene weekes ) he and I had


ſecret conference togither chucrs times, as the Die. telleth vs, and that for


the inftiu*ting of him to diſſeemble a repoſſeMon, it had bene ſuffid
Cnt,to kane m a orde Or two at one of tk ee Cur ſecret cre yencet tO
have b d him fall 2gaine ro his former tricks, and fay withall that the
divell 6id ſeele to enter into him: fo that this ir Aru& inve of himby
(pea img t9 oths in his hearivee nel not, £nd one woulde think, that
were there any ſuch no co/ingee, T wonkd rather have given him his
Cire10N CC rcerning the ſame apart, then before divers others. 4+ dy,
was then repoſſeſle.), asnow at this vr fert bei.
Thereatons that move me to thinke.that $19, fs inde de ve”

ſeled are tlicle. 1, becaueabout 12. or 1 2. v celes after his div C
C {bl


J |


LYING DISCOVERY. © —"


eede, || {cfion, I (among divers others) ſawe in him the ſignes ofpoſſeſſion,

pable eucn all the ſame I did before, and beheld him handled after the very
t way & ſame manner he was the tune of his firſt trouble: and therefore if the .
oy pollclled, he is lo now, and if ener he was poſleſled, then and for the mwk.9.25.
god: | {ane caule he is againe poſleiied, 2. Theſcripturetelleth vs, that the mail 2+4 Je

n the | wncicane [pirite being gon out of 4 man, doth not only returne and [che

2 enter 119 his laid houſe againe, but indeede entcy and polleſte the ſaid
party, if returning be favde him empty, (wept, and garniſhed, that is rea-

dy and prepared to interteyne his oulde guealt the divell, which is

in his | when the party 1s vncleane and hueth in ſinne, for an $ncleane perioun

tayne | is a fitt receptacle for the foule {pirit; but So. out of whome the divell

was caſt, is and hath bene ſuch, as is manifeſt by his abominable lying


a ſecs | in denying the worke of God wrought vpon him, his falle accuſinge ;
after | of the innocent, ioyned with greate obſtinacye and ympudencie, his

Ir, periury, and other greuous and open fy nnes of his: It muſt needes

mine © therefore be that $9. is repoſſeſſed, 3, There is ſomethinge in reaſon 58


"Som, to confirme vs herein: in that frem time to time $9. hath bene doing P'*'
d pee | 11 ſecrett, and offered lometimes openlye to doe his tricks, as ſom e
other | call them. After he had ſaid the fecend time that he had counterſey-
tewers Y ted, and was asfree from being vexed by ſathan, an«! as tarr trom: all
" cert» | appearance of pers as now he is, he, (as is notoriouſly knowne,
tan | and the Diſc. himſelfe confeſſeth,)/bewed his rricks before my L. ns
drſon, and diners others, m ſome extraordmary ſort. At one of my exa-
minations before the B, of Lond,n M. Barker regiſter to the high co
ae, l Y million, and another gentleman being preſent, $9. yppon occa'1on of
which Y ſome wordes vttered by me, would have bene Conge his tricks, and
neer- | Had vndoubredly but that the Poop rebuked Lim for it, and preent
moſt Y 1» for feare thereof ſent him away, It ſhould ſeeme that the Pſp) ad
whe,  feene him doe his tricks before that time, yea perca'e often, otherv if
eſMon | he would have bene as glad for the further ſatilfyinge of kim{el'e to
[ had} have feene his feyts, as ſome there preſent. Ar Lombok vppen v bit=
arforf} ſon-eue, in open court Fo. offered to dee histricks, ard had net 1! e
faffia 2. of Lindon laid, it was to ro purpoſe, becauſe NM, WorrandTwole
ee, fav, it was not Fe, but the divel) that did them, be bad withour que'-
e the tion fallen to his worke. Nerther conwe in rea'en thinke, tlatth ce
mb vVerc bare offers or worces, henct beirge alle to perform © any {ch


-,thafl nhing, conſidering ( to cmyt ofherpimies ) Fe or the Civell Gd i Ver d?

m bs fomeof is rrickes becfore my I Undo, nd theactoreadecre tf
4. fl them both carran ! isready ro deenbem, when £1, vill, accents
to the conenanrt paſſe? betwene them, Conſrferivg then ©. (or 19: en

_—_ the c12e/1) is Come now and then as vehbeare, ar ilthat itch (er 1o7 as
jv © the © e-v irnefles tlie ek cunielie none Deities hum can donthe lite,
(300 and


Ihke1t.22,


loo A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS


andthe cheife of them, thatif the boy did not ſay he counterfeyted,
and ceale to doe the tricks when he 1s biaden, he ſhould yerily thiak
that he did them by the diuell: may not this well atcer the premiſes
contirine vs in his palletſion? whether So, was packt beyond the leag
by ſome that knew he was poiletTed, and teared leatt that woulde one
day appeare,or went of his owne accord about ſome great bulynes of
his owne,let other men iudge: as alſo why it will not ve graunted that
the meanes may be yſe4 which the (u) worde ot god dire-teth vs vn=
to for the dilcouery of Sathan, waome we are buulde to aificme lure


keth in him.


And where ſome men can hardly with any patience indure to
heareof this repolleiſion, becauſe no fuci thing appeareth: they muſk
know that Sathan doth an4 hath long lab-ured to obſcure the worke
of god wrought vppon $9.8& to anniiulate it, if it were poſlible,that ſo
god might goe without the glory and prayſe which would be gyuen
him in the acknowledgment thereof,and man loſe the protit he wolde
make of ſuch a rare worke of god. To this end and for the detrer brin
ging of this to paile, the diue(hauing recouered So. an4 entred into
his hua(e, the body of So, agayne ) indeuored by himlelfe and hisin
ſtruments threatninz and promiſing, to drawehim to deny the work
of Cod, and affirme that he counterteted, and therewithall couenan-
ted with So to helpe bim to dve any thing that be would take in hand,mea
ning thoſe thinges that he had in the tune of his poſſet)ion done. The
caſe being thus, and this betng the worke that the diuell, hath in hid,
it is not to be ymagined that Sathan beings in So. ſhoulde torment
him, and ſo make it appeare that he is there: for thus he ſhoulde be
againſt himſelfe, and ouerturne all he had done and hath in hande.
Yt the diuell hauing drawne So. ( after that he was againe entredin-
to him) to ſay he counterfeyted {houlde vexe him, and ſent forth the
ſame etfets he did before he thus affirmed, cauſing a verye greate
ſwelling in his belly, an other and much lelle to run along his bodye
berwene the fleſh and the ſkyn, depryuing him of all ſence, ſo as be-
ing prickt deepe with pynnes, he woulde nor ſtyrr, nor bloud iſſue,
zetorting his tongue into his throate, cauſing him to foame exceſſiu-
ly, to be ( in appearance ) of ſupernaturall ſtrength, and knowledge,
caſting him into the fre without being burnt &c. and that daylie:
what would it aduantage the diuell for $9, to ſay and ſweare he coun-
terteyted, when the deede euery houre done by_ himlelfe ſhewed the
contrary? and where had bene my teaching to counterfeyr? and the
impriſoning the innocent? how would allo the children of men haue
bene generally kept from beeleeuing the worke of god and magnify-
ince him for it, and not only ſo, but inſteade thereof brought to re-


ceaue


LYING DISCOVERY, 161


ceauc a falle and. viie report againit his ſeruant, and that which is far
wor.c agauilt the worke 1t tee, Howlocner then the diuell is natural
ly cairic< to Vexe and torment them in whole bodyes he is, and to
(ene torth luch eftects as we heare, and ordinarilye doth fo: yet we
may be atlared gnat when ho (eeth it 1s more tor t15 aduantage to re=
trayne, ( aSit is in this our cale to draw thouſands to {ynne, then to
rorment one lole body ) he being in man willnot ſhewe himſelfe and
make that knowae, but lurke and lye cloale ( as I may ſay!) like a fub
tle lerpent, and oulde foxe as he is.

V/ Ve haue hearde before 1n the ſtory, that for the ſpace of a fort.
night or chereabouts ſathan did withdrawe himlelte trom vexing lobrs
St.urk,y,and Anne Starky tor certaine dayes,inlomuch as their parents
with others did verilye thinke at the tirtt when M., More and I came
to Cleworth, that they had bene well, and no wicked fpirites withia
them: yea we haue had experience thereof even in Somers: who after
he had giuen it forth that he counterteyted, and therewith continued
as well and tree from all appearance of poſſeſſion, as at this preſent he.
doth, forthe {pace of 4, or 5, weekes, was fearofully tormented by
the diuell, before the CommilTtoners, and many other witnelles, and
ſo continued about 1 2, dayes,( in the vew of all that came vnto him)
yntill the aduerſaries hauing gathered hart to themſelues, did riſe vp
again for counterfeyting, and tooko him the ſecond time into their
cuſtody,in whole hads he wasno ſooner, but pre{ctly he was(as they
thought) well,and no diuell ( forſooth ) in him: and fo hath remay-
ned as they thinke yntill this day, which ſuddayne amendment, if I
may lo call it, with the cauſe or occaſion thereof, might helpe vs to (pi
ont the reaſon of Sathans not vexing of So. albeit he be in him ſtyll if
we were wie. Now I deſire to know, why the diuell may not aſwell
by the ſpace of ſome yeares abſtaynefrom tormenting the man he pol
ſelſeth, as for the ſpace of ſome weekes, Thus we ſee that So. not be-=
ing vexed by fathan, doth nor let but that he may be poſleſled, VV e
ſee alſo thereafon why the diuell thus withdraweth himſelfe, which
well conſidered we may perceaue that it is not poſſible it ſhonl4 haue
bene or yet be ( ſo longe as all things continue as they are) that the
yncleane ſpirit entred into So. with ſeauen worſe then himelte, ſhold
vex him at all, otherwiſe then in corners, before ſuch, and in ſuch ma«
ner, as he thinketh good, and (eeth it to make tor the vphouldine 3&
mainteyning of that euill name of counterfeyting, which he for the ob
ſcaring of the greate worke of god, hath rayſed vp, and ſpread far 8&
neare, for what ſaith the ſcripture when the ſtronge man armed keepeth
the bauſe, the thinss that ho poſſeſſeth are in prace* This is firlt to be vnd+
crſtyod of corporal! poſlethion, as is playne by the occaſion thereof,

D 2 Now


mah. 12 +9.,
Luk i4-24,


mth 12.45.
Luk 11.26,


Now did ever the {iron
then he doth So. þi« bouſc or body? v hen no
er, when So, lunfcife and fome tuch as are rulers in the church & co.
mon wealth, yea and too many ethers, ate tor this vriult poſleflor,
for COMMIT FOWTIRZY', an! fea hy YOUlg water ey: anu NO man almcoſt in a
zeale of god and his giury riſeth vp againithim, As then the repoſſe{
to that v Inch 1s toretoulde vs by the holy ſcrip
xrking otlathan, ad veimg aut prace with Somers,
we lce the {cripture likev ile tuihlled. Neither doe 1 doubr, but that if
any zealous tor the Lorde of hoalts, ſhall procure ſuch order to bet;
ken, that the meanes may be vied for the diſpoſieſſinge of this viur-
xr, and ſo Chrilt leſus the ffromger come vppon this frons man, he ſhal
be ſpoyled of his houle, the armoure wherein he truſted taken from
him, and his ſpoyles demided: and we therein allo fee the {cripture ful
filled beefore our eyes, we delire that a tryall heercof may be made,
that ſo happely if no other way an end may be put to this controuer-
ſie, To deny this were very bard, and inturious to the manifeſtation
of the worke, and peace of thoſe which contend abut it. If 1 had only
poſleiled, and not to hauc bene beclides diſpoſleſled, [
ſhould have bene lefle confident in this preſent poſlefiion, for whyl
ſhould haue doubted lealt Sathan peraduenture had leave from god,
to poſleſſe him only for a ſeaſon, which time be
remayne there no longer, albeit no mear
and againſt this I fynde nothing in holy ſcripture. But of ther
ſion of one,I am otherwiſe perlwaded: becauſe it 1s ſaid &that of both
the Fuangcliſts which {rake of the conditis of the repoſſeſſed,that the
eentred in with ſeauen worſe then himſelfe, will dwell
1ere, and take vp his habitation, as hauivge ſome right and intereſt
in the houſe. In which reſpect it may be 1t is {aid that the [aff fat of that
man is worſe then the firſt: meaning that the condition of the man repo
ſeſſed, is worſe then it was when he was firſt poſſeſſed. For firſt Chrilt
'ealerh in both the Fuangel!ſis in the preſent tenſe, not in the future,
ie laſt tate of that man rs wor. e, not ſhalbe worſe, 2. The antitheſis
or oppolition betwene fuſt andlaft eater, confirmerh this expoſition,
for by ſir rlare we are to vnderſtande the condition of the polleſle:
from the time ſathan eritreth into man, vntill the time of his exection,
and by /aft of ate,] thinke his hke conditio of being poſſeſſed, but after
eietion: wherby it may welbe diſtiguiſhed fr6 the former, & righth
be called laſt eftat hauing reſpect to the other and like efat going be-
fore. And this [i condition of one pol
ſeMon. is aide to be the w re: firſt, becauſe into ach the ame (pit
v hich was there before is entred. with ſcaren wile then Lm(clfe. 2. be
cave they vill dv el] there: that is, though thev be caſt our, rerzonng


lion of So, 1s accorun;
tures, cuentio 1m rr 1s


knowne Som.


vTite hauin


A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


armed man poſieſle a houle more quietlye,
man reli{teth that viurps


W.


£8 WasSVie


Ted, which is thar we call repo


expired he might
d for his expulſion


the,
ar p-
- CVs
lor,
tina
wel
Ict1p
mere,
hat if
be ta
viur-
e ſhal
from
re ful
nade,
OuCr*
ation
1 only
Ned,
why
1 £0,
might
_
polle!
oth
at the
dwell
tereſt
of that
1 reps
(hilt
uture,
itheſis
ſition,
{[eſle!
» 100,
it a'ter
ighth
ng be»
1] repo
e (rot
2. be


T0114


LYING DIRCOVERY. ſ-}
their poſſeſſion, And troly no warraite though tlie ellate of the repo
ictled be fuch as we hcare, and lar worſe then the Hate ct thole per-
longs poſletled out of whome the VICeane (pirit Was neuer calt: cont
ccring theire great vnthanktulines, for !o linguler and lencible mer
cy of go01 beltyuwesi vopon them, an1 that notwithitanding the [ord
kauing corrected them lor their !innes by the divell. and after Jeliue=
red them out of his handes, yet they returne to theire {innes agayne:
without which one cannotbe repoſleſled. 1 his I fay conlidered it is
in with god, to deliver them vpp to the fyll poſletiion of the diuell,
or diae!ls, or at lcalt to ume further poſſeſſion and intereſt in them
then beetore

As for the B, of London obieftion, that Sv. hanins vemaynrd
1ar0 in bis houſe, hath gone to the Chuch all that time, and there carryed
bm}. il as 61 deoly 5 AMP KY of Jas family, and lik, wile wm m—_
at home as M, Harſna ( quoth he ) can witneſſ+: it 1s calilye an{wered,
for we reade inthe 1. of 2/arke, that at Capurranm there was in the Sys
nagorue 4 14N 17, whom: thire was 41 Tuclant ſpit: and how oft the
fame man had bene there u ho can tell” and quietly ( no doubt) hee
carried himſelfe there, otherwi'e that had beneno place forhim. In-
deede he cryed out .when he {awe Jetus, butthis allrhat were pcfel -
{ed did whereſceuer they met him, lo that faid excl-wation was not
becauſe of his being in the Synagogar, but becauſe of Chriſt his being
there,

V'Vhere I fay that So. is now poſſeſed, I doe not rreave that
the dinel] is for certavnty at the very inſtent when Io fpeake in the
body of Srncrs for as.he may be there, ſoat that preſent may hee be
without him, as I ſuppoſe: but I mean that Sathan hath lrane from god
ty enter mto that body of hrs, and torment it, which he is denyed to dee
by others, which letteth nor but that he may or doth goe forth ſcre-


times, 2rd come 1n againe at his pleaſure, Anc this I cenceave genre math. 4 +4 and


rally of the poſſeſſed, and Sathan bis being within them, for 1t is Jike -
ly that the divell doth with thoſe he entreth into as the father of rhe
Luvatick faith, concerringe his dealinge with his chylde,(a) .And' he
( quath Þr ) a pirat taketh him, and (ud len!y be crycth and be trareth him
tat hefyamoth, and hardly departeth frim him, when he hath bruled him
The'e are (aide in the Ccriptures to be (b) paſgefjed w:th the dive'l, mea
mg touching their bodyes, which in this caſe is cailed his 46+ for
concerning their \ ules they areno more nor otherwi'e poſſeſſe:! the
others, now a man is poſſeſſed of his houſe, althovgh he remavne ne t
al\avecin it, Fren ſo it is (I thinke) hetweene athan and his honle,

that is the body he pofſeeth, Indeede ke is ſaid to be profeſſed, in

Tame there t5 an pncleaneſpuritt; but folloverh nat thereypon that


the


what it is to be


mark x 23


pag: 13+:


pag 239.


Darrell


.
Ny1ri4toa
acp.2+


104 A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS


the lirit is alyayes i2 the man, 8 neuer out of him, Yga except iow
one {pirit, 112 an otacr ſhoulde goe into the body of the pollelleq,
after rae dig2ll raketh once pollettion of the bady of man, wivehis
valicely: it mult needes be that the (piric goeth vat ſometimes: tar
otervietisnot pollible, that the ſpirit thoulde verer thele thinges
he 1s by experience leene oft to doe by the tongue of the party poll.
elle, as tne {peaches and ations {poken and done elle where, at or a
bur the lame inttant they are {poken and done. And thus much con
cerning Som. repaſſeſjzan,
Dilcourrer.

Aſter this $2, dewiſed nrw tricks vader a comeriett, vpn this occaſum,
Lyins vppon his bed with a conrriet cal ourr him, h:2 moucd by chance be
kuew 141t how, ſome parte of his bzdy, wh:n h: w-65 [upped to be in afu,
an-l therefare ſencel:jſe, whirevpn he the ſaid M Dax', 2.417 it out, that it
w.4i the dincll, that made that mvtio. wnd:er the concylett: which was [uch
an in/lru{tion to Sym as he ceaſed n1t to feede that error: Likewiſe ( ſayth
$2, } lying in my b:d, 1 did ſometimss knack, ani fillip with my finsers &
rot's, againſt th: b:d(id:s and feete: and this 4/0 wa; aſcribed to M. Da,
4; 79 bans bent done by the dinell.

[hat which $2. heere depoſeth is confirmed by the depoſitions
of divers, 7þ: very wackin? at that tim? 1 was thrre,((aith M. Hallam)
w.45 0n of 1s toes, flipping dywnefrom the other: when the vayce of 4. ot 5.
kncks wire beard trguther in manner of 4 chyme, quoth M. Crayen, |
ford: one of them to be his finoer thruſt vnder his thigh, as be lay uppon his
bach, reorge Richardion tis, Touching the likeneſſes of kuthnges mu
wing in $9, bed, I haue hearde much wander thereof, at one time when |
was there, it was the byyes forte, Edmund Garland thus. Catching ons
tame at that which I [awe mou the cloathes, I oott buulde of it and offering
to caſt wp the cloathes, to ſer what T hat in my hand, it flippea from mr, &
1 brelecur it was the bayyes priny members. A gaine I harms a knockin? 8
the beds feete, carched the boy by the toes, which 1 prrceaurd to bane made
the former knockin. M. Aldred thus. therappins in M, Hall.ons opinimt
w45 uh el/c, but the tappin? of one of his na ples vpn 41 other, M.Va
The tappmg wes the fillippins of his Fyngers or (o:ns m1tion with his tacs.
V Ve heare what $». and his witne!lgs lay, let vsnow hear what
was depoſed before the 12, CommiſNconers.

NM, Aldridge, This oxamin#t {xtth that be Pandins in the hall heard: 4
groate knocks 11 the parlour where th: boy ley, an! ſud.lenly he rufhed i
whore be found the bry almne in his bed, [yins with hs face vpward i 411 bus
fitt, with bis m eh drawn awry nbc eyes. Navin 4; though they would
kan fartod ont of bic brad, And hneln» downe 11 pray he h ard the kno

(2119 45 arme vnder bis knees &s be thouo hr: and in th: b-d vnde the cout


LYING DISCOVERY,


the urew of the eye. And againe this examinate ſawe the bedeloathes at the
F feere t9/04ke, une, and leape, as the lraurs of an aſpen tree, ſhaken with


Ihe wy nude.


97
let, he ſawe the forme, and ſhape «5 it were of fyne kitlings in quantity to


lone Pye ſaith that diners times ſbee had heard « clappins in his bed, dep.6,
4s thigh ut had bene the clappins of 3 . hand:s, and that (bec hath ſcene «


m 114914 18 the bed, 4s though 1t had vene the creepms of 3. kitlmgs, which
[hte and diners others haue madenred to take houlde of, but neuer could, for
when they attempted the | ame, it hath vaniſhed, his handes and fecte newer
fturrmg to their 1ghts and that at other times, ſhee hath hcard at his bedds


feere a knocking, 4s though it were vnder the bed to thew wnderſtanding.
E'rqabveth Milw ard [aith, that ſhee hearde a thumpins, or knacking tn dept 46


his bed, and jhee putting her hand mto his bed, felt the ſaid knoc


inge ( 48
ſbee chought ) at 4 bollow place aboue the cheſt of brs body: a vey cf
ſhee heard as (hee went d1wne the ſlayres being ſo fearful a5 ſhee durſt not


fiay aboue with him,


M. Pave ſayth, that he hearde 4 thumping, or knocking im the boyes ;


bed in three ſenerall places at once, and he puttung his bande into the bed felt


it ſenſibly knoek wnder bis hand.


Thomas Gray Eſquire ſaith, that be ſavy 4 moning wnder the -
molt couerins of the bed (not far diſtant from the ſmall of the ſaid Filuen


Somers leg, ) which lay in a round lum


pantinge,which this Examynate


priceaume, p;ynted at, and ſaid ta the anders\by, what might this be: wh
ervpon one of them (aid, it ts his feet: then it was anſwered by thoſe that [at
von the bed; feete, thus: we haus his feete hreve, and dre h1lde them, Then
this Deponemt for the better wnder(tanding thereof lay1 his hand vppon the
[aid lump, and felt it moue, and claſpins his hand togither, h: felt that it
yealded, as ayre, or wynd, and opening his hand agame it filled the ſame
m very full manner, And this Examynat takin? away his hand, ſaw the
claathes ſettle very ſoftly downe, like 4s a bladder brins blown ful of winde
falleth tog1ther after it is pricked: and ymediatly the like monins was on the
ether ſyde of the ſaid W, alien Somers, and this depanent ſecing 1t ſaid (lay
In; bis hand yppon the place, where before it was ) beere it was euen now,
and at that very inſtant this deponent ( without moning of mis hands ) (en-
ſibly felt ſomething wnafer the clothes # very faft in the palm of his hand


like the forte of a kutling, or ſuch like thing.
Darretl,


The Djſc, telleth vs, what his owne deponents, ( of his owne
culling, an of his own ſifting and examynation, and ſome of them of


| >


his owne ſtampe and a%e?ion, whoſe Jepoſitions alſo are produced
dy liis 0.1m (elfe, depoſinge more or lefle as he pleaſerh ) doe aye:
but ia his whole Di{conery, we hearenot of thele other depolitiones,


ep-19 ;


deP.1g.


166 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


depoſed and examyned by other manner of perſons then himlelfe,
and fellowe Commiſſioners. 1 he Diſconcrer belike thinketh thus to


blynde the eyes of the worlde, but the muſt knowe that the produ»


cing of theſe abſurd and ridiculous depoſitions of I know not whom,
raken as it were behinde a cloath by ſuch as are partyes, and no indif-
terent Commiſſioners, area ſlender conuiction of the depoſitions of
thele other fyue heere ſpecityed, ſo grauely, iuditially and orderlye
done, let the Dz{c, heereafter then conuince that which they haue de
poled: for vntil} that be done, and theſe 5. proued periured: It can-
not poſliblie be ( as cuery childe may lee ) that that or thole thinges
which moued vndey the conerlett, ſeene and looked vppon as they mo
ue or crept yp and downe the bed from place to place, ſtirringe and
mouing vnder the handes of many, as if C had bene whelpes, kyt
lings. ratts, or ſuch like lyuing creatures, ſamerimes allo vaniſhinge
vnder mens handes, when feeling them they beegan to claſpe theyre
handes &c. as before, hearde likewiſe ro make a —_—— knock-
ing, ſhould be So. feete, or his toes, or fingers, or pryuic members: or this
knocking be cauſed by his fynger thruſt vwnder his thigh, or by the fillipe
ang of his fyngers, or by one of his tors, /lyppinse downe from the other, or
by the fullipping of one toe with an other vppon the bed, or yer by the tap»
png of one of bus nayles vpon an other, For ( to omyr that which contey«
ned in theſe fyue laſt depoſitions offereth it ſelfe to rhe conſideration
of euery one, it is notoriouſly knowne to the inhabitants of Norting
bam that his moning ex knocking wnder the couerlett, continued tenne
dayes and nights, by times or rather more, and that So. was vſuallye
helde by ſome, armes & legs, his armes alſo ( he being in his cloaths )
on the day time aboue the coueringe, and ſeldome or never vnder it.
And this is( in part ) confirmed by M. Gy ayes depoſition. I /aw({aith
be Js 0 lying 0p0n 4 bed,being belde by ſondry perſons at his feete, and /o
. &t his beade cx. Agayne as before wee haue hts feete heere and doe holde
zbem. How could then this motion and knocking be made by his handes
or free! 2. Som. on the day time was alwayes in his cloathes: it came
not then( ſurely )from the tapping of one of his two nayles one vpon an 0
they. 3. Neyther in the night when So. was in his naked bed could the
knocking . or rapping come either from the ſlipping downe ofhis roes
from the other, or his finger thruſt vnder his thigh, or the fillippinge
of his toes or fingers, or tapping of one of his toe navles upon an 0+
ther, becaule of the loudnes thereof: for ſaith F/izcb-th Milwarde, I
beard the knocking as I went down the tayrs, brine ſo fearefull, as 1 df
not ſt ay aboue with him. And M. Aldridg,( ſpeaking of an other time,
and when he was in an other houſe ) anding m the haule ] heard a git


«te knocking in the pe low wher the boy lay, And this which M. +


LYING DISCOVERY, Io7


cepoſerh, there are a great number of witneſſes ready to depoſe.

4.It is to be obſerued that M. Hallams depoſition beginneth thus
Hauing hearde of many wonders, of certain LEO s im So, bedd, I was
pei'y dejirous 70, And George Richardſon atter th
the likencſjes of kiulmgs moning in So, bedd, I hane hearde much wonder
thereaf, and at one tyme C5 c. whereby it is playne that either there was
ſome very rare accident, or ſeeming ſo to be, which we may be aſſu-
red did arawe many to behould hun: And beelides at this time M,
Hallam and M Freeman ( becauic his kinlwoman was now appeached
to be a witch, for this accident, and the Diſconery of certaine perſons
tor witches, began, continued and ended togither )gave it out that
So, was a counterfeyt, V Vhich two things conlidered, and that by rea
fon of the latter the moſt that came vnto him had an eſpeciall eye to
counterfeyting, how ſimple, and what filly ſoules mdde needes
be, that were thus deluded by the tipping and tapping. ſlippmeg, cx fil
lpping of a boyes toes and fingers? Bur as 1n other things ſo in this par
ticular, the Diſc, will not only put out their eyes who behelde Somers
troubles, and depriue.them as their ſences I meane their feeling, and
hearinge, but alſo of theire reaſon and vnderſtanding, as if they had
bene iooles or naturals,or more like vnto bruite beaſts then men, And
this I deſire the Reader to conſider of,

OF CHAP, x.
OfM, Dar cunning inſtrut?my of Somers, by ſpeakins to others
in bus hearing ſuch things, as be ment he (bould practiſe
im the detefiing oftwitches,
After M. Dar. brought him on to an other matter concerning the dle-


teching of witehes, af} tymmg to druers m the preſence of Sumers, that 1t was Pag-1 37


wdmary with thoſe that were lately diſpoſſeſſed to dere? witches, and that
So, would doe the like. T beſe pg 5M. _s denyeth.
arre


As before the D;ſc. hath tould vs thatI inſtrufted So. in his prac


tiles from the 5, of Nouember vnuill the 7. 2. to difſemble arepoſſeſ


lion. 3, certayne tricks vnder a couerlett, by ſpraking to others in Sum.
bearins : ſo hEre he ſaith the ſame concerning the d41+fmg of witches:


that ] inſtru&ted him therein, by ſpcakmy to others in his hrarmg. Hence


it commeth that both in theſe ſeveral! inſtrudiors ard coſerapes me-
tioned by the Dyſceerer, and the depoſitions proving the re, and
namely this touching witches, we have ordirarily ſore ct thcle dau


is manner: Touching


les, im the preſence of Somcrs, Mm the byes preſeaice, 'he bry emo preſent, fee forar ſt her


Somers being preſent, in the preſence of the boy, M. Dar. offivmwc tr theſe ©
that were with the boy, in the bearing of S1mers, b:fove Semorigne., f nd
| theſe with ſuch like clauſes are moſt materyall, and ſuch as m1ghtrot


be


k 2 il Jo


|
|
|
|
|
|
|


tos A DETECTION OF $S, HARSNETS


be omitted, for then my cunning inſtructing, and depy litions concers
ning the lane doe tall to the rounde, D14 euer any ice the worldg
was made pubvliih to the world tor truth any in good carnete,lo ablurd
and ridtcuious itutk, as this-is of my wjtructing 39, by \Prakwiy to uthers
in 15 h:4/142, what I would -haue him to docf 1 be 24. 1,caketh ofs
rea 07 wonders, he may well let this go among one of thei, for I an
fare it is a matrer to be wondred at were it true, v1y. that Darrell and
$,mers ihould agree togither abour counterteyring « poilethion, dips
{ellion &c, which are not very caly to be countericyted, 'meece toge
ther thercabour for the {pace of 4. or 5. yeares, haue inſtru:uyasm
writing pale betwene chem, atter comming to dwell ar the lane tye
wn e ineete often in Day, chamber alone, ana cuea ten waea tele
counterteyt tricks were doing, an. yer notwithita 14ing eter au thee
nſtra:ting and learning vatill the very time ca2*th 1,50, avail do
lus teytes before others, Qne woulds thinke tac .nca woulle rainer
hulle atthele things then belecue them: buc by la.u$ucaole experience
we lee it is otherwile: wherein the folly ot ina.1, aud now eailly hee is
milled and {educep, doth cuidentiy appeare.
Cieage Richardſon depoleth thus, One Mitrig* Wallis andothers

did talks in the roms where So, lay, of ſuch fer ons 45 were (u{ pected ts be
witches, before bethe [aid Somers did name them.

By tis depolition of the Dyjc, owne witnelie as I may iay,.(&

therforenot by him not to be denye4 for lure teitumony )this latt ups
poledinttru:tion of myn: is very mach weakene4, tor it is verye vn»
itkely that 1 did inftru:t him to dete-t witches, leeing [ did not dys
rect him what perſons he ſhoulde name for witches, as appeareth by
this depolition, which ymplyeth that he had ſuch direction only trom
this ſpeach of Mi/treſſe Wallys and others, But what it Myſtreſſe Walls
and the reſt had not come in the nick, as I may ſayfor comauage had
notnamed thele perſons ſuſpeited to be mutches{or at they had: named
them, yet hadnot ſo done 1» the roame where Somers lay, that is not i
his hearing? /fall theſe things had not fallen out thus hand pat as the
lay, where had then bene this derec7ting of witches (ror zt mult needs
be that eyther this coſenage had neuer bene, or Son. hal at icalt nas
med other perſons, But it may be that Miftreſſe #allys at leattit not
the nthers had confederated with me;about my teachinge $9. to coune
terteyt, and there are theſe circumſtances to {trengthen it, 1. Slee is
my wifes {iſter, 2. when it was ſhe was nt tingwr-tyra what 4 man ber
brother was.3. Shee writ a letter vato me- to come ouer anc. lee 50m,
4. we heare waat wordes ſhee vttered (if ve may becicue Cieorge Kio
chard/on (weaging) an that in $9. þ+.019, Contidering theſe circuits
ances furelyThe Dj/c. did greatly torgert himſelf, for clic vadoubt-


LYING DISCOVERY. 109


edly when it was, he woulde haue depoſed and examyned Myfriſſe
#llys about this matter.


Dyſcou. pag 149»
blurd M. Dr. ( ſaith Robert Cooper ) deſared the Nuaioy to make inquirye
others Nl ehr1n2h the rowne, if any perſon could charge any of the pretended wuches.
th ofs | The Matar did ſo accordingly, & nothing being ſayd to diuers of their chs
1 am rees p they were all / (tt at liberty ypon bonds, l aning iwo,
{land Darrell,
dups I aid that the ſaid deteRng of certayne perſons for witches was
: roge || done by Sathan,and as he might therein tpeake truth to an ewillend,
vas1n © ſo being the father of lyes, there was more cauſe to ſuipett him of ly-
ie to» |} ing: and therefore whoſoever ſhould there-ypon hold & report them
t:cle © (or any of them ) to be witches without tome proote had therof from
| nee & men, ſlould iniure them in their good name, & {in againſt god. For
14 do |} whereas So. was very ſtrangely and greuouſly bandled at the bringing
a:ner @ and carrying away of the deteted perſons, and (o oft as that was don
ience ©] where-vpon percale ſome ſulpeted them to be witches; we mult re-
ee is member that this alſo was done by the diuell (as by the manner of ir
i did appeare ) therefore not to be regarded, who were they, or ſom
hers || ofthe, molt tree from witchcraft, yer might haue done ſo, thereby
to be © tohauedrawne the innocent to puniſhment, and man to condemne
& ſlaunder the righteous  Heere-vpon I affirmed, that if any could
teſtify any thing againſt them concerning witchcraft, it were wel th
didit. And.I hearde that witneſled againſt them yea almoſt all of the,
before they were had to the magiltrate, that for my own part I did &
ſtill doe ſuſpe&t them generally to be ſuch as worke with ſpirits, and
that Alice Freeman, Widdow Hig git, Widdow Boote, Groues, Millycent
Hurſlsy, and So, aunt ( whoſe name I know not } are ſuch I haue no
doubt, and 7 thinke I could make proofe of thoſe facts of theires, as
would make it manifeſt to others. And heereby it is playne that it is
yntrue the D:ſe. ſaith, that the parties brought wnto Somers. were there=
by reputed for witches: for thus it was: Prelently vppon the detection, Sf: Jug
matters of fat cameto light, firſt priuatly, then openly in the towne
hall, which lay hid yntill then, and there-vpon were they reputed for
t na» ©} Pi!ch:s. yea it is well knowne to the inhabitants of Note that when
F not |} theſe of the rowne of Note, were openly before the magiſtrates of the
oune | faid towne for ſuſpition of witchcraft, there was not a word v{ed con-
ces | cErning the detetion: widdow H1p git was! ted a witch, for divers
en ber | fa 's wherein it muſt needes be that the diuell and ſhe did conſpire to
Jom, | gether, and eſpecially for murthering the childe of one Bingham of
Nutt. whereof he openly accuſed hey in the towne hall. So Alice Fre
an yas reputcd a witch for mn of fait, ſpecially a little aſter p
Z 4


--v


pag 142.
Pag $43"


are ADPTECTION OF S. HARSNETS
dere2ion,vpon {uſpirion of murthering the clulde of Mary Cope ce.


ter vnto Scmers, wherevpon ſhe was condemned by (a) two Iurye
of wilifull murtker, and 1t is {trange that any Jury 1}:ould be founde
to acquite her there of. 1 hus might I proceede to the reſt, taue tha
none of them were charged with taking away the life of any. Yealer
all men iudge of Millicent H orſlaycs owne confellion: who beinge by
M. Perkyns luftice of peace examyned, and denyinge that ever lite
hurt any body, acknowledged that ſhe had helped divers, butitws
(forſooth) by good prayers, whereof ſhe then Gd one,
Dijcaucrer.
Put this deniſe of Dar. concerning the deteFing of witches is almolt
Laide aſleepe. and againe This deceipt of Dax. is ſo daſbt, as it is ſuppded
wee ſhall heare no more of it,
Darrell.
It is a praiſe of Sathan and no deniſe of myne to diſcloſe the ac-
quaintance he hath with ſome of his familiars. T his hath bene ſcene
beeſides in Tho. Darlng and the 7. in Lancaſhire, in Margaret Hery |


 ſon,( of whome beefore ) M, Throckmortons children, & many other, |


And where the Diſc. ſuppoſethwe [ball hcare uo more of this, ſarely we
had not if he had not giuen cauſe thereof: and before I ende, Init Y +
once apaine tell him and all men, that it was not So. but the divell by
his e, that detected the witches, For firſt it 1snot likely that he Y +
coulde haue diſcloſed ſo many, 2. As Sathan was during this Dyſcae |
1y ſenſibly about So, body vnder the coueringto our ſight, hearing |
and feeling, (as is aforeſaid) ſo was he alſo ſenſibly vexing him mu

bocy, as was manifeſt to the great multitude that duringe that tyme |
beheld him: In probabillity therefore might not the 4ivel viehiston BY
gue and other inſtruments of ſpeach, although that be very rareand Y\ 1
extraordinary, as well as perform other things as rare, yea more rare
about him. and alſo moleſt him in his body, & ſome other parts her |
of? 3. He knew nothing more or leſle of the infinite ſpeaches he then
vttered, and namely of his caliing for and naming certaine perſonsto | /
be witches, as himſelfe then affirmed, when there was ſome beleuing | *
of him, and in reaſon to leade others to beleeue him, as wil appeare | |
by the reaſon following. 4. whiles he was diſcovering theſe perſon, | /
he vttere] thoſe thinges which paſſ:d his knowledge and vnder- |
ſtanding: For now it was that he expounded the Creed by the ſpace | «
of an howre: when Alice Freeman and widdowe Hiegit were ſearched -
by diuers weomen, a good way from his fathers hou'e, he tould ther | «
of even as they were ſearching, and that Aire Freeman ha ! a mark of
ſuch a ſhouller, and the other none found of ker, which was even ©,
Y Vken Millicent Horſlay was ha before the aboucnameJ 21, Periynt
F


dh 1 # SE 4


= q- ; ; > IE
LYING DISCOVERY. - ©


77:
4, or f. myles diſtant from Nott. he tould the very time ſhe was ex-
amyned, the words ſhe then vſcd for herlelfe, and of the ſri &


ſearching of her. In like ſort he tould of the ſpeaches and attxons of
e tha her ſiſter a myle of Nor. even when the ſame fell out. Apgd were it
ealenf} not to auoyde tedyouſnes, much more of chis kinde migh./ heere be


ſaid. Seeing thenir is care, that theſe ſpeaches were vttered by the
r (lite diuel]: why ſhould we not thinke that the other ſpeaches, which con
Litws cerned and accompanyed ahe ſame, & were vttered asit were with

the lame breath, came fromthe ſame ſpiru? |


OF CHAP,S6.
«lmoft OfM. Dax. comrſe, from about the fea of. December wntill
uppoſed the fourteenth of Tanuary, whileſt Somers reſuſed to diſ=
yl emble any longer. |


Diſcos. Pag 145 }

M. Dar. bent his cheife force to perſwade his auditorye,that ſathan
would lurke ſometimes about one (ont of whome he had bene caſt) ſuffering
the party to be well for a 200d ſpace, but that he was verily perſwaded, that
Sathan would not ge him ower, wntill in the end be had vepoſſiſſed him.

About 8.weeckes after the time the Dy/coucrer. heere ſpeakethof, Danelt,
and after Somers had given it forth that ke counterteyted,I did open
lye affirme, that Sumys had not counterſeyted,and 2, that hewas
repoffſeſſed, and that it came from the ſubtlety of fathan then lurk ing
in him, that he vexed him not, but I woulde hane bene aſhamed, to
haue ſaide, that Sathan would luke ſumetimes about one. or that Sathan
would not gine So. one vntil be had repoſſeſſed him, as the Niſc. chargeth
me to haue done: but proueth none of them not ſo much as by a alle
witnes, no not by So.owne teſtimony,who ſticeth Þim in great ſtead
at other times for the proofe of many worthy things. Put that which
the Di(c. ſaith keere, he thwarteth and overthroweth elſe-w here. for
heere from the 7. of December wntill the 1 4. of Tanuary, he will have me
pratling to my auditory that Sathan lurketh ſometimes about ome, & that
ſathan wold not giue oner wntill m the end h» had rep-ſſeſſed Srmers, in the
whole Chapter following alſo affirming, that he began to be repoſſeſ=
fed about the 14. of January: and i page 127. he telleth vs that ©,
ſuppoſed rep1ſſeſſuin was about the 21 . of Nonember. If Theld and gaue
It out abort the 2.1, of N:membr, that So, was repoſſeſſed. it is net cre
dib'e that I ſhould from the 7. of December till the 1.4. of Linwers iavg'e
as the Diſc. a%irmeth, And thisis the 9, tyme that the Diſcowcrer is
conuinced by his owne Diſconcry
Diſcrn, pg 549
The author of the Narration writeth thus vbon So. diſpoſe MI,
Da. was retayned preacher in Natt, that popmlozes towat, haning b id ”
el


pp : 3s,


pg 145,


»


112


A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


ſetled preacher there before this time, ſince the begining of et maieſiyes ral


gne. tyther M, Aldridg or his companion are in danger of an hard impu-
ration: except it may be thus bolpen” M. Aldridg t vicar of $ Maty:s in
Note. whecras thes fellow peraduenture accounteth neyther perſons nor vicars
nr ary that bear ſuch popijh names, for preachers: the DoCtor to be choſen


by the parriſh, as M, Dar. ws, ts the preacher ( forſoath ) that muſt beare


the bell.
Darrell.

The Narrator denyeth nor, that they haue had a preacher, bur
no ſetled preacher, or S— myniſterie, for that M, 4ldride hath
flocks or congregations beelades to attend yppon as well as that, whe
ereby it hath come to paſle, that his people of Nozz. haue bearde his
voyce oft times but once in a monneth, ſometimes {ildome: which
many beſides the Narrator account no fetled miniſter y,

. OF CHAP. 7.
How So. about the 14. of Lanuary fell again to the ating of cere

tayn fitt:, wherein he continued at times, till about the 2.4,

of Febanaiy, 3 bow M, Da. pretended that he was
poſſeſſed,
Diſcoucrr.
M. D.wr. ſpent about 4. or 5. weekes ( next come befave the 14. of las
nuary) mm preaching, and reutling thoje that belde So. for a counterfeyt.
Darrell.

Had I carryed my ſelfe in the pulpitt and worke of the minilte
ry, as the Diſc. beareth the world in hand, I had bene more fyrt and
worthy to haue (itt at the plow tayle, and guided it, then in the chair
of Chriſt Teſus, and to haue bene a guide to his people. I publiſhed
the worke of god, preſently after the diſpoſſelſ1un of Somers 8& then
41d ( as in duty 1 ought ) make mention openly of Ss, and at other
times I deny that euer I mentivned him, ſaue that ahout a quarter of
a yeare after his diſpolleſlivn, and after he ſayd he counterfeyred, I
ſake againſt that curſed confetlion of his, and againſt them that wo.
uld hane him to be a counterfeyt, And this I did twiſe, once vppon
the Lordes Jay to my owne people, & an other time notlong after
to them and others corae out of the coaſts thereahQurs met togither
at ataſt. At this latrer time alſo I remember, I vſed a few wordescon
cerniuge h:sre; offcHion And whereas the Diſc, ſaith in the chapter
be tore that Lp? CA hed As Nott. about that fimne, vi, from about the 7.
of Dre: mbrr to the 1.4. of January 6. or 7. ſermons, vpn the 43. 44+
4 ©. ver wopan the 12. of Nath wtmcernmg [athans returne to renter
he {eith vnrruly: for they were preached in Nonember, two of then
o'wic?, ani! 9. ayes of this moncth, and ſ{ on forwardes on re
| lordes


LYIVG DISCOVERY. *".
Lordes dayes vntili 1 had tinuthed that icripture, He bringeth mee in
ucpuiilly Ubay buL {48 LAU viten ) he bach currapted my uepolityony
Lic £41 44444 FADE Us Uhalie being vi nis owne inlerwig. BDecldes when
4 pi Cdes Uicic 3ermouns mute then 6, of the 7. lermons were ot ip1-
FLuasl PUICULOU, and Uhatin buin thele 1 ipake as the truth is, the mp
[Laviiatils Of .vprs. can witneile, R


1 he Dc, taith turther-that with this A gument of chuels I /o ronb- Pag 145+


hd ny adit Y, Ht WI) HOW VEL WER of ths 644 juin leaned wc for
WIWMY ACE, <> | ; 'Y

1 ruiy it is very valikely, ſeing whiles I was preachinge of, this
(cripture, they generally maye choyce of ane tor tnewr teacher, It is
tuc 1ndecde that lome two vr three ot the cheit treades to-counterigy
tg, nawwall men, not {auoringot thefſpirit, thewed ſome dillike ro
4uy Picacill.g, abit adutiedimens preach of loue. abd charny; layinge
ta Uiey were cacr incharity betore | came there: but this was abbyt
a quarter ot & yeare atter theie 7. ſermons, wherin{ had preached the
law ( that lo they wight be drawne to huager and thirlt atter the gol


pell, and.made txt-tv receaue ut) whuch.was not ed yinpLance pu
rruo them? and thexevppon they kicked wath the heels wie
\precuruuig co inſtruct wlieu teacher, ad to direct their guide liketo


tre ichokier, that ſhould take vppon hin to teach tus ichoolemailter)
wich 15 Nu new nor (trange thing, "ou
conerer.


My father as low ( (aith 6 receaucd &t two collefFions made by


M. Dar. mcancs the fonie of twenty nobles, or thercabomgs, in reſpect of bys pag 148,


rouble and chevy te, when 1 was in my pretended fats,
Darrell.


VVhat a ſhameleſſe boy is this, ſeeing the contrary is notory
ouſly knowne to the ith of NG I have ſhewed be-
fore tharat rhe firſt collection made at hus vi(poſſeiſion, his Yacher in
aw had neuer a penny, and at the {econd bur-pare thereof, as | gelle |
about 20, s, or 4, nobles, whereot part was to apparrell Somers.
4nd theſe collections were not by my meanes, otherwiſe then by ſpa
king to the people at the diſſolumg of the congregation to be mind-
full ot the poore, it ſo 1 did. Neyther doe I doubt but that the Diſcos.
knoweth this to be very falſe, yea few berter,& yer behold he publiſh
eth it for truth to the world. For who can thinke but that he hath ex-
anyned the boy his father in law thereabours: tr{t in hope to have 1t
confirmed by his depoſition, if any ſuch thing happely bad bene: 2.
though it ſhould prove otherwiſe, vet hoping either by threats or by
fattering ſpeaches ro draw him therevnto: for if Rob. Coojt the box $


tather m: 1awe haue depoſed as the Diſc. affirmeth, be hath ſundrye
QO 2


£1.u0s


=


vrg ADE OF S.F TS

rtimesin other things &s falſly as So, himlelfe hath heerein,

Beelidesir1s very likely that the Diſc. hath had ſome (peach hereoh,
eyther with the Mawy, or M, Freeman, or M. William Gregory, from
whome he might learnethe certayntye heerein. For the M aver give
Sv father in law that which he had of the colleQtion, and if it were 20
nobles, from him he receaued it, who can witneſle that I never ſpake
word to him concerning the ſame* fo that were that true which is fall
and that So. father in lowe bad 20, wbles, yet it made not againſt me,
Seeing now we heare nothinge of this 20. nobles from none of thele
but only from Somers, not a Y polition among the tmultitude of depo
ſfitions confirminge this, we may be ſure that it isnot onlye falſe, but
4ultly (uſpeſt the Dc, himſelfe to know the falſhood of it,


' (2 #FfCOMrrer

It is to be obſermed: Flo of M. Dar. cheif frends hane left bin
after @ ſort in two of the eheifeſ} poynts of this whole aFtion, One of them
ne vimen his opinion, that So. did mot eoſſemble thoſe fits which he aft
ed before the Commiſſuoners, depured from the 1 ord Archbiſbop of Yorke
but that it was the elwell m him, thit played thoſe prankes in his body, ©
wid ( it [eemeth ) be content to aekmowlede , that be was but ate
vime of this ex on, he would not aff me that the ſaid So. had bem &
any tome ; although (ſaith be) I bane heard by depoſitions and
ther reports, that might induce me very probably to thinke that he was ds-
ſefſed. T he other being a very vaſb and headftronge yonge man, one,
Brinſtey a minifter: he at the time of bis exanmnation dowbteth aftmmch if
Sow repoſſeſhom as the former aitl of his di/poſſeſſron. 1 amfully perſwatd
({aith be ) that William $0, was puſſeſſed with an exill ſpirit, and that
was diſpoſſeſſed: but concerning his repoſſeſſion 1 am not therein ſo fully i
Frated: : althyugh 1 bane many reeſons to mance we ſo to thmke.


At the time of hu examination ( meaning M. John Browne one of

the 12, Commiſſioners, a very reverend and learned man ) he woull
not effirme, that is, vpon his oath ( for the booke was preſently called
for {o ſoone as any appeared before the B. of Londm ) that So. ward
ojd. Did M. Browne leaue me, or yet the cauſe and worke of
which he regardeth a little more then me. becauſe he would nor ſwet!
- that $9. was difpoſſeſſed. Truly it had bene very if he ſhoulde
have ſo ian y One woulde thmke that he hath ſhewed himſele 1
frend to the cauſe, whatſoeuer he is to me, 1m ſaying that he didnt
ſemble. 2. inaffirminge that he was poſſoſſed, an! that it was the dah
m him Hoppe thoſe prancks in his pol! as the Diſc rermerh then,
3 that he dd thinkthat be was diſtoſſ ſſed,or to this effe Rt. And for N
Brmſlcy a preacher of the goſpell, it appeareth by his depoſition, t


p2g-156 |,


Sw Oo wap 6a ws HD aA rH gn aA oe eG ua 6c Tr mr E EE roo -% Do


 WWTINNE JISCOVERTS, "IS;
he hath not left me nor yet the ca. |. For he hath depoſed that be «s
fully perſwaded that $9. was prſ"(ſed, 2. that be is fully perſwaded be was
ap d. 3. that though be be not ſo fully perſwaded of bis repoſſeſſims,
tt be doth think ſo, meaning of the time preſent, becaule for any thing
he knew,lathan after his repolleſſing of So,might percaſe be departed,
Surely the Di/c, was not wiſe in producing thoſe depoſitions Which e
very childe may ſee maketh not for him, but againſt him, And as vn»
wiſc was he to tell vs that M Ireton his credit wrought ſoms mcomyem=
ence, through his facility in beleumng thoſe things which were tould him: al
bent hus ſpeaches ſtill did rely vpon this ſuppoſition, that if thoſe thing « which
be yank were true, then thus and thus, For M, Ireton 1s known as to be
of ſinguler learning, (o of great wiſdome, and therefore ( as it is ſaid
of ſych in the prouerbes) will conſuder before he belene* as the things re


ported, {o the credit of the reporter, with other circumſtaunces: and prov-14-15+
none of thoſe fooliſh ones whi planar ang thee 2, M. Ireton was prou.14.19e !


not only :owldand heard of the ſtrange and fearefull operations of ſa-
than, in and vppon the body of Somers, but was alſo an eve witneſſe
ereoh, the daye of the commiſſion, he beinge one of the Commis
ners, ſq that this ſilly evaſion of the Djſc. will not (rue his turn,

And hereby, as partly alſo in that M, Ireton being by the B. of London
depoſed, concerning $0. counterfeyting, poſſeſlton, diſpoſſeſſion, &

ſeſſion, as well as the two former, ({ for he came not (ſure) to
London, dwelling an hundred myles of for nothinge, neither beime
come was he kept by the Biſbop ſundry dayes, depoſed, and often ex-
amyned, about nothinge, but in all likelihood the very ſame that M.
Browne & M. Brinſley were,)$% that of the ſaid depoſitions or anſwers
of his to the ſame articles, we heare nothing in this volume of depo-
ſitions, it isa very ny for men to conie*ture, what M. Ireton
thinketh of Som, For had there bene but a lyne for the Diſc. ſe,
all the world ſhould haue heard of it, The ſame may be ſayd by M. F
winoton a great ſcholler likewiſe & Commiſſioner, who togither with
M. Browne and M, Brinſlcy was depoſed and examyned: of « hoſe an
fvers alſo and what he an eye witneſſe hath ſaid to So, counterfeiting
or not, his poſſeſſion, diſpoſſeſſion, and repoſſeſſion we heare not a
worde. The ſecret teſtimony of theſe 4, ſo reuerent devines, and 0-
pen allo by theire ſpeaches from time to time, the wite and diſcreetr
will regarde more then all the depoſitions the Diſenre to the con-
trary producerh.


Diſcom.

Ppon M. Dar. rebort & preach ms that So. was vepoſſ ſed, three was
then greater reſort wat» him then before. M. Dar. Bll wa''ing eu't'y on
that came ( 45 (a) So. ſaith) that be the ſaid So, was repoſſ” [ſd: cx that be

ſte


_— I ———


| — OT  ——_ =


P3Sg S4.C


p--!mr 1.1,


v16


S)}\) *}: þ \IS \


A DETEC
remayned in all bts fits yterly ſenceleſſe.
bairell,


Thists a manifeſt vatruth, tur the next day afterl frſt ſaide he


was rep.Lliciled, and betore | preacacd iv, L weil to Ajboy, where
my ta.uiiy renayned ,and betore | returned { being tl:E iatcrday tois
lowing ) ag was ha lty S. {v4/5, and laid he cComuciieyted, WHRELNer
al.o 1 neither did no! mig repayre Vato aun Oar Oily cane EXCCpe
xed when the Mai was preieat. And atter the Dy/coucty of latnan ve
tore the 1 2. Commithoners, 1 was wit him oaly te act Mmov1nnge
wich digers ininitte rs at Edmund Ga lands houle, veparting prelently
home co Abby, trom whote houl: he was departed, & wan the dog
rarned to tus vomyt, I meanc his tormer cunte!liun ot counterteyre
ing, which he had dulclayme4 tor a ſeaſon, betore | returacy to Now,
and both theſe 1 can dyrectly prouc. But how got te ſc. provus
r1at be affirmeth; why thus So. /4ich #: and then the eader may be
jucitisalye.
Diſcomerer.

I: mipht greatly be maruaylcd what eftimation &x credis M.D ar. gat
by thos new ſo'gery of $2. pretended repoſſeſſi 12. Howbent many of the wiſt
Jort, that were not poſſ. Jed ,with the giddy humonre of nouet! yes ( coucred
forſoath with rate & [1g hings ) did lauob this to [corneas they dad the reſt,

Darrell.

The wiſer ſort the Diſc. calleth thoſe which did laugh to ſcorne the
worke of god . Of ſuch /corners'the world was neuer withoat ſome:
when a far greater worke then this we treate ot,and more wonderfull
was wrought, and that ymedatly by the Lorde hunlelte, whereotwe
reade inthe 2, of the AF, it is Lid ſome mocked. T here is a genera»
Lion an.{ ever will be, that ſitteth un the ſeat of the ſcornfull. Bur wha


' are thoſe wyc mon he {peaketh of? foriooch M,, W, alton Arch-deacon


of Darbyſbire, and M, Sales officaall: both nonreſydents, and the lat-
tera man of no learning, and as little wiſdome and government: He
wouice neuerel'e ( as 1 haue credibly hearde ) haue bene the rynge
leaer in the ſetting vp of a may-pole the laſt lommer, with pypinge,
and Cancing, and that vppon the Lordes day. Out of the miniſtery
are of theſe wiſe men, M. Peter Clarke Matar then of Nort, M.Freman
and the other Note, Commiſſioners. For beeſtdes theſe there were
ſcarſlye any( ſome papilts only excepte-!) which were knowne to wag
t!:e tongue againſt the worke of god, the multirude not only ackno-
v ging it: but reioycinge in it, and magnifyinge the name ot god,
And m the miniſtery none were knowne to be for counterfeyting,&
a;ainlt the poſſeſſion and di/poſſe Tion of Somers but the two former:
vpon occa:yon that M. #”altan did rice vp and that openly agaiolt the


nianifeſt


LYING DISCOVERY, rr7


manifeſt worke ot god, atter one publique meeting about Som, there
was an other at the lame time agreed von, V V hen the appoynted
Gay Was cvine, there were mett togither many mumtters atv learned
men,ail wich were tor polletlio,& ao mi heard to ipeake a word tor
counerteyiing, this arch- deacon and officiall excepted, Now all thel
the Dc, accpunteth to be men po{/c{jed though not with divells, yett
with the grdd ly humnows of noucltycs. V Vell my brethren, it 1s tarr better
to be one of the foo!yb of ths world, and tor that folly to be laughed at
and icorned, then ot the wile,&** princes of this world, 8 for the lame
to be laughed at by bun that dwelleth m heaucn, and of the lord to be had , .,,..
mn deri[yon, But 1 delire to know of the Diſc, ( who can ſo well diſcern « cvr.2.6.
ot ipirits ) with what ſpirit M, Walton was polleſſed, when beefore P'**++
the Commiflioners after all this contention, he renounced counter-
teyting, and confeſled it to be the finger of god, as both M. Emngton &
M. 1lobn Strelley with others can witneile: and whether at that time he
allo were not poſſiſſed with the gidely humor of noucltyes, conered with
xale an:iſighmes,
this bs ſaid — he had contmued ther

So, 2rew weat'y of this brs ſaid relapſe,after conts een 4® |
buct (ixe weekes, Ao to 9a Ces he ſbould be quyet if be might $I»
«:t oc: of MN, Darrel! finger s,and be at S$.loanes. And againe inthe next
late: Cooper ſremfied to ſome of the Aldermen, what So. had ſaid wnts
bim tenchmg bis defire that be might remayne with him, that ſo at the
lmeth be might be mn quyet,

Darrell.


In theſe wordes the Dy/c. telleth vs how So. by the meanes of
lon CoMper, got himſelfe from his jfather in lawes houſe to S, Ioanes.
1he reaton mouiug him there-vato was, that being weary of coun-
terfeyting thraugh his long continuance therein, viz. for 6. weekes
tgither, he could not tell how to gine ouer his diſſembling, becauſe
of me, To helpe himielte therefore in this ſtraight, he bethoughthi
of this courſe we heare of. For anſwer hereynto: firſt the Dyſc, doth
not proue that $9. was the caule of his going to S, Ioanes, no not by
51, depoſition, but onlye ſaith ſo him lelfe. 2, By the depoſition of ©
lobn Cooper page 177. the contrary doth appeare, as we ſhall preſent-
ly beare. 3. we may herzby coniecture how falſe this is, in that S. Ioce
nes is a hovle in Note. whether vagrant and ydle perſons are ſent and
kept very ſtraight to worke, beinge ſeverely corrected if they fayle
therein, Now who can thinke that $9. who had runn away, firſt from
M. Grayec, and after twiſe from 7h1. Porter,,was a yong fydler & ſing |

ms boy, had allo playd the counterfeit boy as the Diſc, ſaith, firſt at
YM. 5 ackenb ur yes, then at Nore. ſhould offer yoluntarily hisneck to


87.


Py 144-
Fg ILS.


pul. i,


118 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


the yoake, (1 meane of tov'elome kbour ) and his back to the rod of
correction, And wherefore ſhoulce he oe this? Lecaule ( forſooth)
otherwiſe he conlee wor be qryet, > vtt himſclſe out of m;y frrigers, but
mult naeces will he nill te cenmnue his counterfeyting, whereof alas
he erew wimy, A noft rdrontons thing, all anon figrces v ell conly-
Cered, which Teauerotle Feacer ro beth ir ke him of, Yea bur the
Diſc. is of an other m1nce: for marke vat be telleth vs, anc that ye
ry ſolerrnly in en other place.

If any ſauh be doc ſrrmiſe theſe prattiſcs to be tmprobable, a» brings
»uch ſubiett ro daneir in that the ſard patties that are ſo cunning ly drawn
on 1n thoſe courſes, may vpon many occaſions dete(? them: they muſt kay
that theſe fellywes are well enoneh furmſbed m that behalfe. For foftl ams
oneft the P apiftes, it were ſup 1cient t binge « ſuſpition of Hiyelſyye, that


ſpoule but doubt that one were mot pf ſc, if their preifts af) mmed the cu


trary. And we fee among} or ſelnes bow baifly it ts mdured,, that on
pretended E xorcifts are called tmto queſtion, but be 1t that the waſt ſhould

fall out: yet they hane ſuch rules, as it you will allow them, they ave Jaft
enough. For if ary doe once fall mto there k anidles, or yealde the mſclncs wnte
#hei pedtiſes, they can nener be ridd fron tham by ary meanes, fo lore
&5 they arc plraſed to woke pon them,

Conlidering theſe wordes of the Dz/c. and that He faith that con
Dterfeytes can nee? be vid by amy means from ther trachers ſo lovge as
abey are pleaſed to wake jon them: it is vo ramatle thevgh Som. were

lad to get himlelie even to $, Toaues ( theworlt place for his caſe of
a thculand ) that ſo he might 1iqbimieſte of re: tur rather a rervell
that he ccuid ſo berid of me. lecing the Diſc, faith that fuch {choſlers
can rey be rid of their maiſters, no not by at.y meancs. It ri.is be tre
S. H. how came it to paſſe that So. viel hin:ſelſc out of ry handes ence
before vhen he was wemny of comtericytime, as now Fe 18 (aicle to be?
So. ( quorh*the Diſc. ) beginning to be werre of connterfeyting , for onght
that M1. Dar. could doe, altegithes veſuſte! to contirme his diſ[embling con
any longer: and ſo made no ſhew of any of his pranks for the ſpace of 5. wet
kes, And apayne: So. grown weary of brs d:ſſjn:nlation, contraty to Da
relis perſwaſ1ons g awe ower all by tricks eg prattiſes, And this he preveth
ſubſtantially by So. teſtimony. Hereof ( faith Fe So. im thes (rt, About
the begrming of December, 1 did grow very weary of all my former jreftts
ſes, and thereypon did molly leane them, contro1y to N. Tar. eood liking
who endewored to frer/wad me ſlill to continme in then be't be eenld mit pres
wayle with me [0 fary, Bere by the vay ve ſee thor tl © Tony is ce
trary to himſelfe, fnd this is the 16. time 1þ ot t] © 1 emer 15 ene
pinced by his owne Diſcounry, Por ] vcvidlnen (1 fy ) ofthe Diſe
why So, couldnotas vellgent ani licyl is latter tin « a7 of wry {ref


LYING DISCOVERY. 119


without the conueying of him{elie to F, vanes, as well as beiure, O -

thers will thinke though the Dyfc. be of a1 ather_minde, that were it

ſo that I had taught $\, to counterfeyt, as he will haue it, and he had

but m lecret tould me, that bring weary of counterieyting, be wolde
counterfeyt no more, and rather then ſo he would diicoucr all, I wo-
ulde haue bene willing enough to haue17d my lelte of him,c7 if nedes
I muſt buſy my ſelfe m this worthy art, auc rather {Cught out aney ec
ſcholler, then kaue t1oublec ny ſelfe with one fo lazy, fo wayv arce,
vaucring, and peruerie, wherein allo vas fuch darger. For bowſces
uer amorgft the papiſts there 1s no Canger to the precſ; reachir ge one to
counterteyt, though the counterfeyt bewray ail, lo lung as the preeft
«ff r mes the contrary, if v e way belceve the Diſconrrer: yet [trult he
vill not ſay the ſame of the mmiſters of Chrilt Jeſus amcnge vs, and
yet he doth ſay jomthirg bending that way, Moreover, it $:m, laide
thus to Coopry and went by his cvne procurement to this ſaid end to
S. loanes: why when he was ccmie thiuker dic Cooper threaten ro whip
him, it he would not lecue Fig tricks, os Corper |.imfelie conteſlec vp=
pon his oath to the 1 2, Commilſicners? but more for the ccnuincivg
of this followeth forthwith. And where the Diſc. pretenceth that Ss,

grew wear of hes relapſe weaning counterfeyting to be repoſteſiec!, be
cauſe be kad contin.ned there abut ſrxe makes benstheran rectly de
craued, for it was but two cel es, So. Legan to be repolieſſed at or
about the time of his yr-priſcrnent, as appeareth by the beginnirge
of tis chapte1 "age 49. but that was rot abcur tle 14, of Jatvary,
gs the ws Git in the argurrent of this chapter anc! So, alſo alittle af
ter, turtle 14, of February 2s] can preve by weny witneſſe. & the
24,0t Jcbriuvary he went tos, lung, as is cnidfied, where bee vas
pre cuiet. ard ccniefied lis difiin.viaticon. By 1h 18 tFat bath

ere ſaid we may partly ſee, that So. removed not Fimlelle for the cas


ble heere allecged, to $. loans, but they inceed couled ti isremenicll


whcweSathen vied as his inſti ments to get fiem t] 6 boy that cur»
led confeſſion of counterfeyting which ſoone aſter he vas there Lee
made, the meanes fir{t being vied, which ſerued there- vnto: vrz, pro
mites and threats, as heerea'ter v il] appear. And thoſe were our Note
tngham Commiſſioners, whe cauſed him to be carried thither
greztly again? the boyes and his parents will, vnder coul-
lour to fynde out fore counterfeytinge, where it
was as manifeſt as the dave-light at noon,
that there was no poſl1billity of
coi nterieytinoe,


T he cud of the [ecorid Broke.


pag 177,


= A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


THE THIRDE BOOKE..


OF CHAP. 1,


How Somers confeſſed bis dſſimulation «t $, Toancs in Notting=
ham 4s ſoone as be was out of M, Dar. dijpoſut10n,
Diſconercr.
Concert ning the occaſion of $0, remouing from his ſatber mn lawes hm
0 $, loancs in Nott. ( « place where the prore are ſect to worke ) Ibn Coos
per the keeper there depoſeth thus. Being oft, ntimes with So, in b1s firs, &
dilligently bebwlding the cou8ſe of brs carriage in them: 1 grew very | ſe
pions that be did but diſſemblegand there yppm w.1s well content, to haut
the tuition of him, to make tr yall of the matter: the rather, ſo that the
bayes keprr's and frende, that were abt him, were willing to pleaſe hum in


all bis bnmars.
Darrell.


The true occaſion or rather cauſe of Somers remouing, was ney-
ther the former, whereof I haue ſpoken, nor yet this latter here men
tioned, bur firſt and cheifly the mallice of M. Freeman Aldermanybe
eaule his kinſwoman Allice Freeman was by So. dete-ted for a witch
which could not ſtay it ſelfein acculing $9. yniuſtſly of witchcraft, &
mpriſoning him, & after vppon bayle byndinge him ouer to anſiver
it at the Aſſiſes,but proceeded & never gaue ouer vntill So.confeſied
that he had counterfeyted,he hoping therby as it ſhould ſemeto re+
couer the goodname of his kinſwoman,and pactly to diſgrace and (o
conſequently to be reuenged of me, whome in regarde of that dilco
uery and the counterfeyting he then ſtrove for and I gaynſaid, he ha
red extreamely, ſo as at the length he couldnot indure to come to
the >hurch, when I exerciſed my miniſtery 2. the mallice of M. Cre+
#my the towne clarke( a popiſh mare ) againſt the work of god, that
is the diſpoſſeſſion of Somers and this becaule of his religion, being 10
hart a papiſt, as is playn, in that for the ſpace of eleuen yeares betore
he had not receaued the lordes ſupper. Now the papiſts & their adhe
rents( albeit the learneder (forte of then due acknowiedpe a reall pol-
{ef}ion and diſpoſſeſſion of Sathan in and out of the botreh of men)
cannot yet in patience indure that any ſuch worke ſhould be wrought
in our church and by our miniſtery by faſting and prayer performed
br vs, This forſooth the» will haue peculiar to their own { negogus
te their own portuſſe,to their owne Te rogamns,mibled prayers, pro


ceſſicns,coniurings, & ceremonyes,as ele-her hath bene manifeſtly
| | z


LYING DISCOVERY,


21k
ſhewed.To theſe came M, Morey an Alderman one allo reputed to be


yniound and popith thele three did draw with them M1, Hart Alder
nn and M. Clarke then Mair a man very ealy becaule of his fimphk
city ty be aulled; which o, atlembled in the rowne hall, ſent tor mo,
hgaityimg vato me; that they purpoled to take So. and comit him to
tlic caltody ot two honnelt inen, becauſe they ſuſpected hum to coun
terfeyt, which aceordingly they did 3 dayes after: {auc that the men
t! ey prouided to be So. Keepers namely lobn Cooper & Nich. Shepherd
were icariely honnelt and ot good name as we [hall heare hereatter,
Diyſcoucrer,
The day after that So. came to o loenes, he did counterfeyt himſelfe
( /aith Nicholas Shepherd) to be m fit, becauſe ( 5 1 think) certain wes
men were come thuher vnto him to ſee him, who did greatly bemoaue him:
wherevppon I remoning the ſaid weomen from hum, tould hum whileft hee
Was 11 b15 tricks won lohn Coopers preſence: that if he grins __
riſe vp, 1 wonld ſet ſuch 4 payre of HAPS him 4s b#
Oar ther ym $0: een fe entift bad ky 8d
no mare fits, whileſt he continued there, bemng the ſpace almoſt of 4 monneth,
The next day | fallmg into ſome better acquaantance with bim, ( bt vpport
my promiſe that I would be his frend, and procice him fawour from MM
wr & hes brethren) did confefſe vnto me, that all he had done in the conrſe
of bns former tricks, were but counterſeyted, and ſaid, that when | .
I [ould ſee all his ſaid tricks, and how he did them, T be ſame day I towld
lobn Cooper, what So. had confeſſed vnto me, and willed him that when
they were in bed toguther, he ſbould talke with him thereof, ſayinge, that L
vr1ly thoug ht, he would confeſſe all vnto him at large. And accordingly it
fell out, For as lobn Cooper hath depoſed, So. tould him, that «ll the tricks
he had dane in his ſazd poſſeſſion and repoſſeſſion were all of them counter =


feyted,
Darrell. Had
It'is yery true that is faid here of afit that So, had before cr =
taine weamen, and is as true that the ſame day or day before he had
an other in the garden before M. Freeman and ſome other: vpon the
l:ght whereof, becauſe of his greuous beating of himſelf, with his face
Avex. and tongue thruſt into the moulds, wallowing, & foming,
ethelaid M. Freeman atfirmed, that he had the falling &, aud
this was preſently bruited throughout Nottingham, If So. were weary
4 br rel.a;ſe or pretending to be repoſſſſed, that is of counterfeyting, 8&


aid vnto Coops r, that his dejire wits to be at S, Toanes, and that ſo_at.the pag 1 $3.8177%


lenzth he mi: ht be pier an giue ouer his counterfeyting, as is ſaid in
this very Page, ang in the leafe before why did he fall to the doinge
of his tricks again after he pot S. Ioancs? It is abſurd to lay that

py


—


Pag 19),


4


fps


122 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


he did thus, becauſe the weromen did bemone b1m for the weomen be ng
remoued or as Cooper depoſerh page 193, put 9m of the bore, and {o de
paired, he was fl:{l at hrs tricks: It cannot therefore be that he cid at
this time his tricks becauſe of the v eomen: neitl.er becaul he thought
men tooke ſome pleaſure to behold him,ane tor that cauſe himſelt in
the attwge of them. Nether can it be that Shephcad and Cooper did
threa& bim, that the weome or any other might lee, thar they could
n:ake him leaue his tricks, and all his knauery: ſeeirge the weomen
were gone hore, and they two alone with Som, in his fit, when they
did threaten him. Moreonor, it is confeſſed that So. at S.m [oanes na
| fit, being threarned by Coiper to be whipped, and by Shepheard to be pin
pag-'94- thed with a paire of kmpknaps,did therevpon elently leaue hrs tricks, and
See thengoo? had no mare fits, whileſt be was at S. loanes: It cannot therefore be that
Diſcs crolieth & So, left his counterfcyring, becauſe he grew (2) weary thereof, and Cid
0 ape <n- of himſelte goe to S. [canes to be (a) quyer, and that he confelled ſo.
ferpoſed coun- 19h to Cooper before he came to S. Joanes,as the Dijc, affirmeth page
raifeyt. cd prue 1 #2, and 1.78, And thisis the 11. time the Diſconcrer is copuinced
©Guec! his TrICKes: , |
_f1rthreates or by his Diſcouery. N
feare, how then " VVearebelides to obſerve heere, firft that this confeſſion of
_ = _—_— counterleyting was got, by cne Neb. Shepheard, and John Cooper two
4d voluntar.ty VETy difſolute and infamous men. I remember in a certificate made
roeare humllt by one of Nozr. ro the Arcb-biſhop of York, wherevnto many of the
© quits cheif of Nort. ſubſcribed, there were theſe wordes vied concerninge
: theſe honeſt men, that they were two (0) 1.akſhames, the better of thim
morn DS hawing bene twiſt (0) ar aiencd. 2. that theſe were fit inſtrvmentes for
ugh aguatt Sathan to worke by, 3, that Sem. conſeſſicn of counterfeytirge vs
Dauiell, not voluntary, but extorted & by threats compaſled.
Drſconerer
The 26. of Frbruary beme Sonday, $0. was deſrrous to goe to the
church, and 1 tould hum that if be ſbould (o dot, &T then fall agame to one of
Pag-193- his ould tricks, the prople would be much troubled. W hereypon (quoth So
you know what 1 haue conſeſſed nt» 1010, and 1 will grue you my bande
and doe promiſe you "airhfully that 1 will wt then fall mto any fit A nd [0
I wont tothe church with him, both in the ſorcnoone and in the afternoon)
Nic. Sheppeards © be kept bis promiſe with me, |
Pay 29 7 Darrell
By this depoſition of Shr/ brarcd;s, it is rlavne that vorwinhand-
Ing Som. con'elfion and ſhew of ceonrerſer tinge get 1) © Cepenent


cid not haſtily beleve bim, bot made fore cer br © Prpgeringe M1


leait at his counterteyting: or ele n hy ſhould Ve vie thee cr fuch like
, - I , * } , p
v ords: ity n ſhould Call AC A'P to "1 fv vy 14: "WL. [ . | iv


be much troubled &c, hence atto it Was, that both £/ 4 beard, $$ 1


v1.


LYING DISCOVERY, 123


al the time he was at $. I-anes, were euer both or one of them at his
ebow , giuing their diligent attendance vppon this counterteyt where
{euer he was in church or elſe-where, as is well knowne to the inha«
icants of Note. In that likewiſe the Mazor with the £/dermen afore-
(aid, and Greeory hired this couple of hanneſt men, and gaue them
their wages, to wayt ataninch y 7pon Somers and thet not only vnrill
he had confelled he counterfeyted, bur after allo for the of amo
neth, all one as if he had denyed that he diſſembled, and ſtood to the
truth & preſent poſſeſſion, in which ſtate whoſoeuer is,it is verye re-
ſite he haue a keeper cF keepers, becaule of the danger he isin ro
deſtroyed by the diuel: it argueth that they alſo doubxed he was
vo counterfeyt, notwithſtanding his conteſſop luſpeRinge the truth


thereof.
OF CHAP. 2,
How M: Darrell dealt with So. for the reuocation of his ſaide
confeſj1on that be.had diſſumbled.


Diſcoucrer, |


M, Dar. was charged by ber M arſtzes Commiſſioners to hane ſo


v.17 wayes to hawe withdrawn So. from bis ſaid confeſſ1un, & haue wek F*8


mi it that by was poſſeſſed. And againe, when M. Dar. perccaned that
$1, by no prywate meancs that be could we would be drawne &c.
Darrell,

Here is a whole chapter ccnſumed, and many words vſed, about
ivft nothing. I otice and cnlv cnce vied a few worces to So, why les
he remay ned at S, Jones, and that in the preſence of the Mavor & bod
others; reprouing him of the haynous w Le had cemmitted, and
tre great ſcandall ke had njres affirming that he counterfeired, his
ovn conſcience acculirg Þim thereof: 5 is any more cepoſed a
gainſt me, And v hat herein did Lill beeſeeming me, or that 1 ought
not, and in duty was bound to doe?

I confeſſed being examyned that So, in ſayine He had in the whole
rurſe of bis former firs diſt mbled, [yed therein grewonſiy a0 ai f bis owne
cmſcience, to the donor of god, ard Int of tis cl re Therevpen faith


the Diſcowerer, Conſider the gentle $eale of benefiting the chureh, by b1s f
tlty and (hill m caſting out diu'lls, He _


My me-ning as that the people of god beleeuing and medita-


img of the worke of god wrought vpon Fumerr, woulde no doubt re-
ceaue therebv great profit, wherof many thovgh not all, through this
le of his, an curſed confeſſion of counterfevting are deprived an4
not 1nly fo, but thereby drawne to receaue a falſe report and euil nie
2painſt the worke of god, and by conſequent” againſt the Lorde him=-
lelfe, and to iuſtify the wicked, which is an abomynation before the


ht pag it 5,


146.


pag 186,


pg i879,


math,121.43»


pag 138,


* myncd diucr times about this matter he found himſelfe ſo perplexed, as th


124 A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS
lord. And this tendeth to the diſhonowr of god, and hurt of bis chuveh n


pevple
OF CHAP. 3.
Hiw M, Dar. deuiſed two 0 or three ſhifts, to haut au)yded Sq.
conf*jjion, that he had d:j:mbled,
Diſcomerer.,
Being examyned Iconfeſled, that I had ſaid at ſometimes, tha
$9. aff irmuny that be counter feyted, was « confirmation that he was repoſſe


eſſed,
Darrell.

My reaſon is, becauſe the ſam: inioyned with his obſtinacy is
certaine argument that he js empry ſep and ;arniſbed, and therefore | ,.
if he were poſleiled and diſpotletled, he is repoilelled,

Diic ouerer
M. Dar. breathed out his ſecond oracle (which is my ſecond ſbift t
awnyd So. confeſſion ) ſaying that it was no maruaile thigh be coulde die
his fits conſudermg that he had more demalls in him then before, tlereof M,
Dar hath not bene examyned, becauſe tt was one of the interogator yes whe
rynto he refuſed to an{ wer. For true it is that after that he hac! bene 'ex4*


he refuſed to be any further exanryned, ſaymsg that bus conſctence was trow
bled, m that hc had anſwered ſomuch already. wherein be is u1t preathyt
to be be blamed. For althourh a lyar muſt haue a good memory, yet by ma
ny rofſe queſtrons, hegnay be taken ſbort, as it hath happened to ham mu


ny pareiculcrs,


- B © 8 © 3 =, bv


| aw!


Darrell

Heerein appeareth manifeſtly the mallice,craft and peruerſe wrelt
inge otthis Diſcowerer:, For as I knewe not what the 1mtcrrog atoryes
were I refuſed ts anſwer vnto,ſo did I not therefore refuſe becau( I was
:aken (bort as he would haue it, orfor that I was not able ſutficiently
to anſwer them, neither Ithanke god was I therefore in my ſclf pop'®
el, or my con[tience troubled, bar for that hautag yealdec ro ſomuch be
tore as men with any modeſty or conſcience could require at my ht»
nds, yea to more, and hauing anſwered already to no lefſe I thinke
then to 190. or 200, mmterr20atoryes, I perceaued evidently by lamen

table experience, tha! my ſaid anſwering albeit it were by oath, di
not atal! heipe to purge or cleare me as an innocent, and to put al
ende to the controuer(y, wherevnto the LorJ hath ſanctifyved anoth
and which was rhe thing I expeSted, and hoped for: vea that this ws
notthe ſcope and drift of this my examynation and multirue of In-
terrogarorves ( howſoeuer the B. of London did ſo pretend ) but to
entra” me cunningly, if happely they could, & to make me my 0wn®
aps


Land


A A A —" OOH wy wo ws =, oo» tr = r= =


LYING DISCOVERY. 1:7


appeacher and accyſer, when they were wholly dectitute of other me

ances to prove that Which they did lo eagerly and carneſtly ſtryue to

boult out againlt me,namely this counterteiting as now 15 manifett to

all men,a thing that neither by the law of god nor man 1 was bound

ynto, it | had bene guilty, as heauen and earth is my witnelle 1 was

not, Seconvly I retuled to depole any further, hecaule manye of the
interrogatoryes were molt yayne childiſh and ridiculous, as may ap
peare vy the L1/cowery it (elfe, elpecially if we conſider, that fromthe
my gwlryneſle was in part to be gathered, For this caule allo 1 con«
tetle 1 was gretued($ as | tak itiultly greived) in my louleto anlwer

any turther ypo my*oth,& to call to wicnefle the gloryous & teartull

name of the Lorde, ( whereat egery Chriſtian ought in reaerence to
tremble ) ro ſuch bale, tryflinge, and ridiculous things as were then

propounded ynto me without end or lymutation, {which I perceiued
by tormer experience)as being not worthy to be cotirmed by the tel=
timony of pods molt glorious name, But alas I knew not what the ar
ticles were yntill I was (worne: and at the firſt time I was beefore the

Biſhip to be examyned, I yealded to an{wer to thole thinges which
ſhoull concerne my dealing with: $9. or any of the perſons whome I

had affirmed were poſſeſſed: which I did for the further confirmation
of my innocency, and for auoydinge of that ſuſpition which I feared
would haue 1iſen vpon my denyall to haue anſwered. And at the tim
of this refuſall to anſwer, I ſpake to this effect to the Bybop as partly
appeareth by the wordes heere mentioned. Now where the D1/c. pre
tendeth that I am contrary to my ſelfe in many perticulers, I demaund
of him, why he hath not noted and recorded thoſe my particulers con

rarietyes, or at leaſt giuen ſome taſt thereof. It may be he hath refer

red them to his next volume or malitious inuectiue againſt Darrell,

becauſe peraduenture there is ſuch aheape of them that they cannot

well be contayned in this Diſconzry of his without tediouſneſle to the
Reader; Indeede as the Diſc. orderth the matter there be many con-
traditions betwixt his deponents and me: Burt the queſtion & doubt
Is firſt, whither he hath produced both their depoſnions and mine tru ©
ly or no: Secondly, if he hane done ſo, then whether 1 haue Jepoſed
truly, or they whoſe depoſitions haue bene obteyne'} and compailed
for the moſt part by threates or a lurements as I offer and am able to
proone to thoſe that are in authority if 1 may be therevnto admitted:
notwithſtanding finde it not mentioned thronghout his whole Dyſ
enery, in what one particrler thing 1 am contrary to my fetfe, wher-
of to the wiſe and vnpartiail Reader T leave the conſideration, as allo
of the manifould cantrarietyes or particuler things wherein the [);/-
couerer 1s contrary to noe his Di ow1y: in nomber 15, which
d 2 1n


pag 5b,


pag 191+


pig L 9 Js


Pg 193»


pag't93.
pag 191,
pag 195.


8 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


in their _ places I haue noted, and to iudge him of his owng
mouth: deſiring the Diſconererin his next treatiſe, ro reconcile thoſe
places in his Drſconery: and to ſhew how I haue either ignorantly miſe & re
taken him, or malitiouſly peruerred his words: or elſe hold his peace | »
alrogither, and by his lylence proclaime to all men the falſhood he W
hath hitherto maynteyned: for that he will confeſſe the truth, & ſhie || ©
himſelfe to giue glory to god, ( which for him were a happy thinge ) W:


thereof there is little or no hope, til
OF CHAP. 4. d

How M. Dar. and his frendes to diſcredit So, confeſſion did ſi

falſly report, that he was induced thereynto by pronuſes bl
—_— and inchantments at

iſcoucrer ar


Amommeſt many wayes whereby men ave corrupted, and induced © | V
Jprakefally, allurements by f.ryre promiſes, and threatmmges haue not th NY "1
cyſt force: which being very well knowne to M. Dar. and his good frendes,
they thought it might carry ſome good probabillity, and ſerue fo 4 ſbift,n | #'
giuc it out: that So. was ſo wrought and drawne to affirme, that he had dif *
embled, Byt how wntruly they haue charged him herein, the depoſutions fol | ®
ng will declare f
So. ( as the Diſc. ſaith ) depoſeth, that he was not induced by any pro» Þ ”
miſes ſo to confeſſe, but did it willinely. And M. Hart, M. Tackſon, M. [,
Freeman, & M, Gregory teſtify, that he did of his own free will withus |
compulſion an y ways. T he men that were cheifly ſwſpe&cd to hane delt with ©
So, as heere ut 25 Jupp!ſea, were Iobn Cooper and Nicholas Shepheard:whoſe
drp1ſitions follow. T nener knew ( ſaith Shepheard ) of any promiſes made ts | ©
the boy, to confeſſe that he had counterſeyred: but 1 remember that M.lack, | P*
ſon promiſed, that if he would declave the truth, he would be good vnto him NB ®
and helpe him to a ſeruice in London. Indeed 1 confeſſe, that in one of the | ©
boyes fits at $. Toanes 1 threatned to hane a payre of pincers to pinch him by le
the toes, if he ſed theſe ericks, And Tobn Cooper thus: I doe not know any ir
that perſwaded So. to confeſſe himſelſe to be a <;ſſembler. Againe $0, (aſter I (f
his comming to $ Toanes) did! pretend himſelfe within a day or two to hawt th
certayne fits, wherevpon the ſaid Cooper, putting at one time ſundry wyues i ©
out of the houſe, ( at whoſe commins he the ſaid So. did fall into one of the la
ſaid fits ) and then giuing him ſome wordes of correFion, vr;. threatninee | P'*
to whip bim, he the ſaidl $0. preſently roſe vp. By neither of theis depoſitions [| ©!
can it be colleFFed, that they threatned the bey to ſay be had ;diſſembled,or |
that thereby he was mdnced ſo to aff irme.
Darrell.
And heere is all the Diſc. proofe of that he faith, and diſprole
of that I have affirmed, If $, teſtimony be true ( elſe ſure the ons
vw


LYING DISCOVERY. 125


woulde not rely ſomuch ypon him, nor produce him as he doth eueri
hand while, for the proofe in a manner of euery particular thing, whe
rewith it pleaſeth him thus falſly and inuriouſly to charge me ) that
which he hath teſtityed concerninge 'this poynte is to be regarded,
which heere followeth. After So. had for the {pace of a wunlins euen
curing that time he remayned at, /oanes, ſaid he counterfeyted, he
was brought before the 12. Commiſſioners,] affirming the ſame, yn-
till being calt into ſundry fits, and vexed anew by ſathan ( wherin the
deede it ſelfe ſhewed the contrary) he tad to the Commil=
ſioners, that he did not diſſemble, Thus ſaying ( viz. that he diſſem-
bled not ) and bei |
at one Ed.Garlands houſe, in which time he was aſked by Garland
and others then preſent why he had counterfeyred, ſeing it was other
wiſe He anſwered, and after ſet it downe with his owne hande wri-


auſ.u,


tormented by the diuecll, he continued 10.days '


ting, ( which is yet to be ſeene ) thus: Beinge at S. loanes theve came


mito me 4 thing like wnto a dog, and ſaia vntome Exc. And Nicholas be
pheard ſaid, and if 1 were in a - a2aine, he woulde fetch a paire of knype
knaps and a rope, and he c me confeſſe, ( meaning that he was
a counterfeyt ) or elſe hang me, And lohn Cooper and Shepherd ſaid, and
if I wowle (ay, that I was a counterfeyt, that M. Maior and the Aldermen
would e140 me ten pound, and 1 ſet vp any trade that I woula, and
| had better to ſay that I was a counterfeyt &r liue like  man,then to haue
mthing. For f 1 ſhould ſay that I was not a counterfeyt, and goe into the
degrees hands 1 ſbould hae nothing
Ifrhis anſwer and hand writing be true'( and it is greatly confirm
ed by Shephcards G——_— and macle maniteſtro be true in part)this
poynt is cleared and it thereby evident that So. was mduced by promiſes
and rhreatning« to (ay he counterteyred. 2, This appearerh by the a-
foreſaid depoſitions,for howſoever the former deporents being y0d-
leſſe men, not fearing an oath, deny the promiſe, which doubtles they
from the Major and ſome of the 4/dermen made knowne vnto h1m
(for as I remember M. Lick /on Alderman acknowledged as wuch in
the town hall in theJhearing of many, but ſaid they $3 it in pollic: e,
to drawe the boy on ) leaſt they ſhould _ ſome diſprace vpon the
laid Maior and Aldermen, yet Shepheard we lee maketh menticn of a
promiſe, if he would declare the truth, that is, confeſſe that he had coun +
terfeyted: for he had not vnrill that day affirmed that he did not con
nterſevt, which if they had accounted for ruth, that he had declared
ito them alreadye, A promiſe then viz, to br rood yrto bim &c- vas
made to $9. if he would conf-Ne a counterfeyring, called heere the
truth. And page 179. Shephrard depoſeth thus: So. ypon my promnle
that I would be bis frend, andprocure him fawour from M, _— we
(4


anſ\s,


pag 178.


128 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


brethren cs conſe ſſe vnuto me,that all be had done in the courſe of bis former
ericky wei'e bus counterſeyted, whether now there was any promiſe made
tO 59. by Shepbcard and he induced thereby to jay be countorſeyted. Let
tie Qucreete Reader tudge, as allo whether this deponent of the Diſe,
aud tor counterteyting, be not tortworne, ! 0
Bur that by threarnmes be was mduced to ſay be d;ſſembled it is by their
depoutons euident. For 50. being 1n one of his tits, the one ot them
conieileth that he rhreamedto whip him,the other to pinch þim with 4 p-
wie of pancer's, if be wſed any mare of thoſe trycks that 18 counterteit tricks;
the leauing of which and neucr vſing them aſter wards as it is conteſled he
did vpoa theie threats, carrieth with it in realon a fecret or ſtill con-
tellion of counterfeyringe. which 1 ſay was ſought and aymed at in
theic threats. This turtheir appeareth by Shepheardes depolition men»
tioned alittle before: The day aſtcr ((aith he) that So" came to S, loans
be did counterſeyt himſelfe to be m 4 fit, wherevpan 1 tould him whleſt be
Ws in bus tricks that if be would n2: leaue and riſe vp 1 would ſett ſuchs
payre of knipknaps vpn him , 45 (bauld make bm to rue it: and ther
So. der! preſently riſe and left his [aid tricks, and had no mare fits, whiletbe
continu: there, being the [pace almo(} of 4 moneth Heere we (ee that $h-
epheardweareth that So, counterfeyted, and that beinge fo perſwaded
he threatned him it be would not leant bis counterfeyting , now let cuery
one tudge, whether it is not likely that with the forlakinge of hisco+
wnter/cyrmy he (ought not for a confeſſion of counterfeyting: wee are to
obſerue heere that Shepheardrhreamned So. with « paye of kmpknap if
be were in a fit 424ine according to So. anſwer & writinge, which may
well induce vs to beleeue $9. in the reſt he bath vtrered with thee
breath, and namely that Shepheard (aid he would make bum confeſſe, that
he counterfeyted or elſe hang him, with the roape that he threatned to
fetch with his paire of knipknaps. 3. Speaking of this his threatning it
ſaid, that thereypon $9. left his tricks, and had no more fits. The tie when
So. made this confeſſion is to be marked. It was preſentlye after thi
threatning and promiſing, and not before, The'e things conſidered it a
nnotbe denyed but that Sv, by promiſes c3 threats w.ts induced to aff in
that be had djembled: at the leaſt, that in my Apo!log yl did norfa)h
report hereof as the Dc, in the argument of this Chapter affirmeth
but according to the truth: My wordes are theſe: For the obteyang ]
this conſeſſun, Cooper and Shrpheard( two molt lewd andencll diſpoſed pt
ſons ) threarned him the one t1 whip him, the other to pinch him with 4 þ4y
of pincers, 4s appeareth both by So. confeſſton, and ther owne vpp nt they
oathes before the 12, Commriſſimers: vpon occaſion of theſe wordes


for the diſprouing whereot this chapter was compiled by the Diſco
Fer.
ale


LYING DISCOVERY, B--
Diſconerer,

But by Ml, Day. owne rule, m that 50, being in 4 fit heard their ſayd
threamnung ſpraches, and riſing vp bad no mvve fits, whileſt be was at $ loa
nick #6 [Cemctn bo be apparant that he was 4 diſſembler.

Darreil

My rule lettetn not but that 30. being un 4 fie might beare: for I
hould ti.at howlocuer thole 12 whome are vncleane {pirits, be in their
tics ordumaily depriged ot racir leaces, yet not alwayes, nor at all ties
but 1s tnen and to ott ocherwile, as the {pirit ſhall ſce tt make tor his
aduaiage, which [ aitiime ot cas fit, and eucry other that Se. hath
hau ( ipecially) luxce ghat time, and hath ſtill 1 doubt not in ſecret bo-
to1c LV, it 11 be lo that 1n thele tits he doth heare. Bur how doth the
bc, pruoue that ds. did heare their threatning ſpeaches in the tut hee
MEunctaF Luicly not At ai. lt is to no purpole to ay that he lemed
to þcare by that which he did prelently vpon their ehreatnings tor they
that be polletied iceme to others to lee, whea they (ee nothing, to go
wita tne1r teece, to itrike with their handes, and to (peake, when nor
they bur the dugell pertormetn thel thigs,as hath already bene ſhewe1
our of tac icriptures: euen lo they ſeeme to heare,when they heare not
And tor the rying vp, that is the giuing over his tricks, /40mg #o more
fizs tor a moneth: we mult ynderitang,that he which did thele trickes
(as the 2c, prophanly calleth the ny could as ealily put an ende vnta
the.n, and would readily doe 1t, when he lawe it make for his aduan=
tage, tuat IS, the F—_ of the world, that So, had counterfeited
waazend how greatly the diuell gayneth by this cunning erick of his
aboue the reſt ae hath done in $9. body, every one may now ſee, and
we that haue bene thus long priſoners doe feele,

1 hat which the Diſc, adderh concerning ſorcery charming and anoyn
t:ing,of $9. is talſe tabulous 8& (launderous: neither my (elfe nor any of
my freads ever dreamed, that through theſe or any of thele Som, was


25


| Ever mduced or compelled ro ſay that he had diſſembled, as the Diſc. affir


Pag 191-


meth, but proueth not nor neuer wilbe able iu(tly ro proue: only this pag 154


it was: Some in Note. ſuſpected leaſt whiles S9. remayned atS* [oanes
there were that ſought the caſting of the Jruell our of $9. that coun=-
teriey ted, not by prayer and faſting, but ſometimes by conuration,at
other time by an oyntment wherewith M; Gregory a reputed papiſt ca
uſed him to be annoynted, It is ſaid by the DD1ſe- and cCepoſed by bis
wWitnetle Shy pbeard and Cooper that by M. Ciregor yes apporntment, this
Dyriument wes gin bink'to mak bim more nimble toſþew hn tricks:yea but
t ihould ſcene that it had an other odd quallity in it, for when Shep-
beard gave ſome of this oyatment to Mary Cyopey, ( Sam. feſter ) to n+
po ynt L finger as by his depoſition appeareth, he {aid that ſhe Ton
Ly 2 ave


4


I;6 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


haue no morefits, what this oy1tment was, and where it was had, whe
ther of M. Gregory himlelfe, or by his appoyntmient of the Apotheca
ry, doth not appeare in the depoſitions, in which poynt is to be no=
ted the couert & cloſe carriage ofboth the deponents,
OF CHAP. x,

we Diſconerer

AI0y ,  OfM. Dar. ridiculous pretence, that So. was inducedby the dinellin
forme of a black doggi and an aſſe, to ſay he had iſſembled,

4 Darrell,

But heereof we ſhall notneede to doubt, how ridiculous ſhener it
ſeeme to the Dyſc. if we can perſwade our ſelues of the truth of gomer;
former an{wer.and hand-writing wherevpon it relyeth, and is groun«
ded, His wordes be theſe.

(1) vf Somrys be Being at $, loans, thete came wnto me 4 thing like vnto a (0) dog, &
@ man of mt ſaid vnto me: And if 1 would conſent wnto him and [ay that | was 4 couns
| rg un trfext, be would grue me 4 bage of gould, and iſ 1 wonld nt, he wold mak
ticail with M. me be hanged, orelſe he wold teare me in peeces, And if I woulde I ſhoulde
oy —_— doc any thing that I wowld rake m hand and he would come to mee lyke

wrell, mouſe, and would helpe me. And there came to me a thing like an (a) dſſ


Drrel!, why are
hey not as kiud ond ſaid of I won'd mot (ay that I was @ counterſeyt, be would caſt me into


creto belecue


tim in this poy- the well,and ſo went 4Wway. ;
ſhewben he og VVe ſhall be the better perſwaded of the truth heereof, if wee
Finoe of D.rre1s firſt remember that which by experience hath bene found true, that it
yea the caule it i$ Sathans yſuall manner to appeare tn viſible ſhapes to them he pol-
vene 2150, 107.5, ſeſſeth, and that So, wasnow poſſeſſed, 2, that Sv. in this ſitrs beefore
re, the Commiſſioners ſaid ( as it were in the throate) « black dogs 4 dv
; 4 dogg a dogg, iterating the ſame very oft and ſpeaking at that time no
Thyreus chape. hinge elſe in his firts, 3. that three of the Commiſſioners ſaw a black
6.5.c: cap.7. 6, dogg ( in appearance ) about the boy in a fitt or fitrs, buſy abouthis
face, and none other. Now it could not be but had it bere a dopg it
deede, ſome others alſo ſhould haue ſeene him, there beinge ſo many
thronging about him, yea ſurely one or other would have dryuen him
away, either for the ſafetye of the boy, or that they w__ the better
haue ſeene, whereof every one was ſo deſirous: and wold never have
indured him to haue chopt at his face, as a water-dogge at a duck,ws
it was ſaid by ſome of good credit he did, 4. where this thinee likes
blacke dogoe that is the dinell, promiſed to hr{pe Som. in any thinge If
would take in hand, mening, to doe thoſe things he formerly had done
- in hint, becauſe So. {aving he counterfevted ( vpon which conditi"
he made him this promiſe) might the rather be beleene& ro counter
feyt, it is manifeſt that therein this writing is true, for that ever (ime


he made that confetljon vnill this day, So. when he wil doth his ric


|
[
|


LYING DISCOVERY. 141,
ſuch as none can doe, and therefore we may be aſſured this thing like
4 mouſe doth helpe him, and when he will, he leaveth & puntcth.an end
vnto them, as though Ss, had done all, and not this morſe. 5, 1 hat
the ſecond or latter part of this writing allo is true, as is before ſhews
ed, Now theſe fyue things being true, as indeede they are, I ee not
why any ſhould doubt of the truth of this writing: which beinge true
it is manifeſt that So», was induced by the dewell in is of ablack dogge
and an aſſe, to ſay he had diſjembled: and then is not this Darrells ride


culows pretence?
OF CHAP, 6.
How M.Dar. hath falſly aff irmed,that So. was induced to ſay he had
<ſſembled, far feare of banging: whereas be falling mto his fitts bes
fore the commſſtoners at Nott. (pon a former compadt ) the
feare of hang mg was one of the cheifeſt cauſes, that hee
then affwmed, that he had not <ſJemblcd,
Diſconetey,


T here is added a ſixt inducement, vt. the ſeare of hanging: he being


ſlandered to have bewitched one Stirland to death, For the clearing therfare pag 192+


of this wntruth: $0, before hath dcpoſed, that one cauſe why about the 1 4.
day of January 1 597. he fell againe to thoſe fits, ( wherevpon M . Darrell
affirmed that he was repel is ) was this: vir, 1 be ſeare of (urh daunger,
as he otherwiſe might hauc fallen into, by reaſon of the ſaid accuſation,
crrmmg his bewitching of Strland to death, 1
Darrell.

Ts not this wieruth like to be well cleared by So. depoſition? Bur
to let that goe, and to deliver heerein the truth. So. beinge charged
with felony and for the {ame impriſoned, as is confeſſed page 149. we
all know that at the afſiſes he was to be arraigned and therefore in dan
ger of banging. 1 ceſire now to know how $0, could be freed fr6 this
danger, by falling into his former fitts. The Dyſc. telleth ys for that thy
by he ſhould _ to be dcfended & wpheld by M. Dar. & hi: frends
ſo far forth as they were able thrmſuluer, or by any other meanes that they
could procure on his behalf, hy but Dar.& hrs frends had they bene wil
ling & delirous,were not able to Celiver him: ir6 the Canger he was in,
and keepe him from his tryall, (pecially the matter being in the hands
of Dar. and $0. greate aduerſaryes: neither yet did I or anve of my
frends attewpt anye ſuch thinge. as the Major with the 4/dormen and
town clarke know tull well: vw hereby it is playne that as we were vna-
ble, ſo we deſired not to keepe him from his trvall: T his therefore can
be no reaſon of $9. returning to 15 old byas of <[[anulation. Yea I deſire
the Diſc, heereafter ro ſhew, how poſſible $9. falling a6am mto his for
mer ſits could any way helpe to deliver him!e!fefrom theſuſpition of
Witch-


132 A DETECTION OF'S. HARSNETS
wichc. 4 7 being the thing that brought him witiun the d54g77 of hangs
ang. 1 am very ture it was the oniye way to bring hum 59 De condeine
ned tor a witch, and iv to the gallowes: and ereiore Wee May be lure
tt was not Somzrs, bat the diuell 12 50, that beiag returacd and ente«
ring into his houle azaine, tell ro bis olde yas: or mus it was: The
adueriaryes eſpecially M. Freeman aad CI/Cg07 ys haulug contends
ed tor counterteyting about 1 1, weekes, but nor prevayling, it lo fell
out, th. one Sterland of Snenton neere Nott. bauneg bene one ay mm the
market; at Nort. fell there ſick, whereof be dyeel, bus before ws ns juckneſſe
ſari (as his wiſe and others ajferined) that So, b44 trode,vpm his bees, wht
he was leſt at the [aid market, and b41 certainly bew:tcned bun, as appea
reeth by page 149. tlerevppon It was braited throughout Not me-
bamthat S/, was a witch, and nat polleiſed, and lo all that he had bes
tore done, or ſuffered, came irom nmlelte, and his tamulyar ipurit.
Thisrumour ſpreading ir lelte, the matter was inquired 1ato, S& toud
out that he dyed (as the philitian lauh) of « baſtard pluriſy, in his ra
ning laying as 1s atore/aid, which 1s conteiled page 149. tus wite allo
atfiraung, tat ſhe would a2t for any thing lay tnat $9, had bewitche
ed her huidand, Heereyppon the atoreſaid ramor luddenly vanuhed
and came to naught. But M. Freman and M. Cregory commny trom
* London abont ten dayes after, reatued the ſane, and of 14.t nothi
made a haynous matter, and woald accdes nauec So.to be a witcn. M,
Freeman got to his owne how!e Sterland; wiie, and foine of her neigh
bours, and fo wrought them that the p3ore wite & her neighboures
laid forthwith after openly in the rowne hall ſomuch, as wherevppon
for the bewitchmg Sterlendher huſband to death, Sv. was unpruuned
and they bound to giue euidence againit him at tne nexc aililes, And
heereot Sy, was not ignorant, being a matter notortoutly knowne .t9
the inhabitants of Note. Thus wee lee how $5. came to be in frare of
danger of hanginz, and by whoſe meanes or procurement. what was
now to be done by Somers or what was the {ateſt courie tor himro
take, whereby to free himſelfe from the daunger he was i, 8 to laue
his life? Surely to fay and ſtand to itthat be counterteyred in all that
he ha1 done before; for who would then accuſe him of witchcraft, of
ple care to {uch accuſation? If he would atfirme that he humſelte did
all by art4in dilſe nulation, no body would belecae that he had enter
diuell or {pirit, or any thing to doe with (pirit or taimiliar, this ( I lay)
wataa ealy and ſure way to ſaue his life, an {fo it proved. Agayne,
Sn, avght thus thinke with hinſclte*: M. Freeman and M. Ciregoy
who would fazne hwme me to b+ a counterteyt: are they whoe haue
cauſed me to be accu's! of wirchrr ef, an {they are able to take that or


der with M. 25x, and the other Alierm:n they ſpecially _—_
w


LY Sa. <_# - A__—— Wm +


ng wh, tn > Gf @ty., fi tw es .,c


—_—
-


"us


LYING DISCOVERY


i , La EEDE - ' p ' | ? L 'C
wil 1 elem I[iC CTCIL 47ſly C Calliils th.C ITE fiiat F..15S Matter (hall To.


Cilts 5
luce CECUT (ty TUTTINET, 10 AS LINdi UgT UEATIUIPTIC Al C alliics, Nui lys
nte- NIuUCI do VI us TY SF, ill, 01), aa L W1:l thcs<ciure BY L C AUIRCTES) teu, NS
1he l0 PICGIC TEK ab, CTIA WL RH LOTE ITT 00, by AN mng tt HC Ulls
nds LE[UULLCA VELY WEL JIEE NNNNUCE TTOLLL LLC & anger ie W2$SIMN, did Jaye
0 tell ils HC, YEA AN LNUSIT FER OUT, MOT re WINEUINS UKs £0 ls COPEL Sy

4 the tC LO INE NIAZT And 11MIN UY 4 (OTTCH 1 [{OTLUL UI) } that Þ: Hcl i 144
ef (l114 UL WO jpirit,and [1341 411 DU Da INC 174 THY 0 CULSIE 1s Former 01: K: ſy
whe Wc Out Comititſcytia, jAys 4 4 (1).4t WC IDCY Wii, 1 (Y {- and je At 11S
pPpca od ULTICRS ABA DYW BY Wd (01% &N Lat for WHICDCS C3 DPHTC ICY. bc bad
gs GICLUMKT CAL 4.0 mm yndec to yy Ree: 73; ncuer licard more of ht! > DEW Itehny 'c
4 Ce v/ 40 14944 TO ACAT(, UNE NIATHY AN ZERO IBCR WARN TAE TOW Cl ik limnvu=
it. CCS All, !O ad Li1E 171, Ic hEeucl heard th ereut, Nor £0. iECenee on [0
toud ITN.) WACHNIN (eDarfe ailivl Io other tellons.\_n the cthel lide h ad 09.
1s 14. {tvod to LiEetratn, and ha. acuer acknowledged any counterie, ting,
e allo tor any CUNS 11149 CUULU ICC, he had bene as certayniye arraigned of
1tche WiHCDCAj( a> IE WAS ASCRICU and yMpI toned tor the lame, L1H lands
ihed wite and herneighbuurs had graen cutdence againit tum, aillluch a
trom lury (1 trait) called our to haue gunc on hun, as it may be wold haue
) Found BUN SUUTY , as ell as one Act ie 1ame atllilcs, that tvuand Alc
Yr þ Freeman not guiity of inarthering or bewitcing to death the chile of 200
weigh Of ,\.4/Y Coyper iter to 50's, Y V hether $9 now were d&/awne to ſay. ;
wares be 144 aye eanbled, jor feare 0! hanging ,as | altirme, or the / care of hang is .
ppon cared 1» mio /ail ta [1:5 oil: COMT[C 9) djſumulat MW, as te Die, atfirmeth
zned Iettne Neaucgriudye. Zut the Dc, proceedetna yet alittle twrther in
An] tic proote of that ac ailirmeth.
1e 10 Diſc ancrery.
we  Beefidrs aftty that So. yas that occd/1m, and ſome others ', fell to hrs
© was ole 1 icks, Ie continued mm them about ſix weeks, and dd 11 t mat: * bt <iſ» ; pag 199%
1M 10 Jt ation fs O(1Gu ly knmwne, (or all that tunt, an til his Oo mmm ts
o laue J * ALS, 9 ASH ISA Parant, that So. for jearc J / 412m, fell A. ANC 2
| that V1 fora Oy 4s of arr nualon,
i, of Darre!! *
fe did S0. COMIN 4 on'y avout ten © ayes repoſteiſed, which is! 'eere ter
erect me, af 4UNgT toh1s 61 id rick , and not ©, weekes. 6 trreD inad his dl
| lay) jan at 10N owns. It 1s true that he ard not lay thathe « ff abicd, nll
22a yNe Ns « m_—_ fo 5, A J4Hes, and 5 as n  maruayle, 1ecinNg 16 was craine
reg Ny Dy Other meanes Le eftc CS _ IS OL PICO ITE MECVCDUCTS TO 2 at C n Cline
e haue UN Ot 18, VIF by throats and promiſes, \ (ed ' artly by lathen, pa! th , by


hat or bis in trumen ts, and ail « rice im after his comming 12 5 I 4NCS "Bur
1 4 b w ao thu Is Prue MUcL 1 letle "0 ie! 1. W A} {s, © ' PLOOUE :hat
with | Which the Diſc, interreth there vpon, viz that So. for feare of bariginge


Pg 195+


þ ag 200.


pig 198.& 202,


145 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS
fell againe to bis diſſimulation?


Diſlcarrer,

Aſjuredly ( quoth the Diſc. ) this ſullow through his acquam! ance
with ſathan ( as it (hould ſeeme ) 15 growne to extrardinar'ye © preſump
trons biuldn ſje: not ſhaming to ſay any thing that may ſorue his turne

Darrel]
V Vhether this latter parte may be truly ſaid of himſelfe, and he
be indged out of his owne mouth, let him chat hath hearde vs both
ſpeake iudge,


D:ſconerer,
$9. fell mts his fits b: fore the Commiſſroners at Nott, wppon @ forme
compa@?, and for fear »f hanging ( chufty ) then aff med, that he had nat
di fombbd. This 1s by acerees made manifeſt wnto yors.
Darrell

But how” by $9, depoſitions, v hich are ſtrengthener by the de
poſitions of others. theſe latter I will for a ſeaſon ſpare, and wee vl
heare wh at So faith the principall deponent heere, as alſo throughout
the 2. 3. and 4. bookes of the Di/courry,

IDiſcomrrer.

Concerning the firſt So. depoſeth thus. It beins knowne, that T wasts
appeare before the Commifſuners, Nich Shepheard, and others moucd me,
that when 1 ſb1uld come before them, I ſhould jhew ſome of my tricks m ſuch
manner and forme as I had before done them, & nat riſe ac ame wntill M.
Mais ſhwild call me, that thereby ((ay thry ) it may plamly appeave to the
Commiſſioners, that whatſoeuer thou haſt done before was done of thine own
accord, 7 meevely counterſeyted,. This counſell bemg agrecable to M, Ms
wr's deſire ( as I was mjormed) 1 dad willinoly yeald wnto it.

Now for the ſecond poynt, lett $0. proceede,vpon the [aid aorrement, 1 ap
praring (ſaith $0: before the Commiſſioners, and after ſome ſpraches had
with me (by ſome of them ) fell downe and playd diners of my ticks: as
was aconſtomrd t) d ve m my pretended fitts. T here I continued tumbling &
acting my tricks for a long time, fill expetmg when M Many wonlde call
mV. whileſt T was thus tumb ang, two did prick me with pynnes: one m the
band, anc! an other in the leg 7, which although I felt moſt {encibly, yet 1
duved it beeanſe T fill wayted, that NM. Matior ſhould call ne, but he fore
getting [0 to dar G7 1 bring no lmger able to contimve.m that fart, T did ri
1 m3 jclſe, 4s 1 was wont to doe, m the end of other my dliſſmbled fits.)

\ Darrell.

VVhether there was any compact? berwene the Aair and Som
it mattereth not, If there were ror, their {in is at the dore & will one
day finde them out that have © denoſed. If there were. it came doub
tlelle irom the ſubtlety of the Giucil, who Faving for ſuncry weekss


mance


© 1p


ue


ne he
s both


LYING DISCOVERY. 136


beefore lurked in Somer, (that ſo he might the better rayſe vp the e.
vill name of counterteyting of the greate worke of god ) ana beinge
by the appoyntment or commaungement of god ( as is to be tuppo=
le. ) at this time to manitelt hinlelte, thought t: ercby to helpe lame
ſeltc, and periwace the world (till notwithitancing this his diicouery,
that So, was a counterteyr. It any demauna why 1nould the | ord com
maun d the {pirit to diſcuuer himlelief 1 aniwer, th at 15 @ lecret & an-
ly knowne to the lorde: yet it may be,becanſe the I,ord haumge fore
appointed a mighty and wondeitull oppetiton againſt }1s n;anifeſt
worke, he would have lolemne witnelies tir{t thereot, for the turther
ſtrengthening vf thote who ſhoulo beeleve his worke, and makinge
thule the more, yea out of miealure mexcufable, who ſhould reſ1ſt &
fight againſt it, percale alſo and partiye ro {trengthen and incourage
lis [eruants whome he would eſpecially vie not only in bearinge vwite
nelie:to the poſſeſſion and dilpoſſefſion, but allo ro the repoſſeſhon
of Somcys, which laſt the worlde would not indure to heare of: anc to
put them in hope (tor their turther incouraging therein ) that as then
after iathan had withdravne and hid himleitetor a gime, wherevpon
there was greate contention, whether the boy were poſſeſſed or coun
terfey ted, the Lord did diſcouer the ſpirit to the manifeſtation of the
truth, and that beefore ſolemne witneſſes, ſo one day after an other
manner of contention, I meane farr greater, ard before more lolewn
witneſſes, of greater authority, god would vncale that ſub till (pirit &
deceauer of the world, ro the full manifeſtation of the truth, and his
ov ne glory, whether then 1 ſay there v as any ſuch compaC/ 25 is heere
mentione« or no, it matrereth not, neither whether S were af aye
of har-emig + but the mattcy indeece to be eonſ1dered by vs is, whether
$0.cid thoſe ſlrarge things v hereof the Commiſhoners were ey wit
neſles, as So. and ihe Diſc. af irme, or the divel! as we affirme.
1he Commiſſioners with fundry others of account and good
credit doe know, that beefore them; Som. wallowed to and fro cn the
char;.ber floar, or ſv.iftly rowled » ith his body ſtretched ovr tothe
full length, in very lrang and acmirab'e ( veal ma: truly ay ) in ſu-
ernaturall manner, 2. T hat he lay before them vith his body (wel
pgreatly. 3, His intralls were ſhot vp and downe alcng in his body,
much like to the ſhooting ofa v eavers ſhittle 4. greate violence was
offered vnto kjm thereb+ to make t11 all if he Fac any feelinge, and
namely he was prick ed with prrns in band and lepg, v hereathe ſtir-
red no morethen a ſtock. 5. being vricked and that Ceepe, net © drop
of bloud iPued cut T his prickirg with pynn s, and the mcuringe
thereof So. bimfellewe fee confelerth, fo it may be he did, the not if-


ſuirg of bloud , and the Diſc. thought good to keepe that back: but


Py -


137 A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS


x
hu lucuetl ; 2eake tins by come:ture only, yet this 1 am (ure of;thar
0, W»Obs, 40 Ci II 144) DIECC at all. t1lis I1QG11M WAs5 new oh beeture


-
LiiG 44h AHLLLOUCTS, THE Lace red where he hal bene Pricxed, buT ting
TF," 5 # v 143 F by ) kt > oth J.l.- , T1 % VS 7 }CL | Too I1}C4y 'T$; & Tacre gatnere, &


I Ca ) b\) } CRIT INs IUT) v Co IICILLICT SITY [1 JI CO, | WwCL 2ule £1 Toy Lyn W235


.


WIilwUIt. aL yok JENUULY Vi, L914 SUE) oy name, nit only pricked
HI UCP, atuvicnalic animeh deepe, ( as NM. Un woe Small ( who
LiCiil rl OUT LUC DOY CPC, HNHICE £9 FG 13, ot London, as ally
Liide iv wunildd IUCN }) DUC LELUHIES ITiire BIIENE | downe, of purpole
Co) 434448 {111 Lf An. biwwll.lilat, but netic Won be. rt now Jon,
( VI ail, UNTICIWLI2S OT ATM) CAN 27 ATTIO OTUCT £42 MALLET, that
41 CALL INGUTE Lo DY& pricked Wt pynnes, a 4 ncuer itirr thereat, nor
DO LL, WALLUW, Tad 1111 Oct NILS INTTALS, LNen | acny n not but
CAL OY), KNIT GAUE SUICNDIICE | beetore the Commilioners! otnerwile
IT ILQT UCC UTI DC, Wide WICK NINGS CAME from tac diacll, and tv he
UI HOC COUNENEyYE. CEXCPT EMC vy C. Will pur 0 out the ey Cs, Nut only
Qi IE wWomin.lhoners, hb 0! MANY Otiers alto,

IVIUTEINE; , 11 3), dB 4 LOU: erieyt {1.1 een [hew his own t/ ickes,
an tac ea.l tercot,and of the comp 4. with the Main w wi that therby
It 11 0t pi yn'v aypceere ro the Crmmiſſumers that whatſoeucr he had dme
b/c, wa dio 0; bn owne 4:cor te, 33 mverty counterteyted, or as M Fre
H44/1 INAKIL A&D) ed, [0 [4/1 'Yy the company }f bis canner yem?, and the
1.4/3), t1,4::\y 4.10 ), ValY Vvaenne 1a1 bw” 4 th: n and "was aſked
by tag commitlthners wHorrefare bs fell d1winn, dil he anlwer that a
ql 117 wm 017 bis Eynakarddima worde to as by his anlwers It was
cuileit tat ether he could not, or woul1 not tell ot any thing that
C'CIET INC 11 af Pearactlc © ) 1a. | done, or wa q ropy vnto hum by others
For TilS WAS NT Lhe wav (yu jt! ſ! the com 14NY [Ms — rfeytim?, wha
KiilS fat ieto bethe ead why he then did [11S pY ancl KV, but to induce
MeCN tt D2IECUE Ti1eE CONTTAry, 50. is produc ed dy CE [D//c, anlwerange
E14S UODICSION U1TICIE WOTTES,

[2 One,
: I had thus ened thel! Pratt b:. the Comm'/Trmmws 4d! bes a mot


F J
Wer yo I” M62 { with any fit ff, TvF o] can into that _—
f jv f } lM, Y 3.4 / 4 #4 1 IV mn " Tin y 1 » ; FY T 41 { 9 14 , of to) Fits
m1 vom 9% foeachoe that I bad mt A (jombled A! To 370 hu '-


man df quoth the DV ,) why br (oo an/winnd, by (a th ths
IH / / 1et R | þ f © fo 'N f 7 Y / 'Y 1 ly AV, tht
f A "% 1/2 8 l "PP wffn » "Y bh 4%, wW 1 } 4


«, tha | wi; but a lil nhl, Brlcds 1 brod
101i wierd tred, winw. truly por was
292 1ther a}: bled; or elſe that he


4 #


f,that
'elure


at thy
1, &
| Wa
cked
who
S ally
pole
JIN,
that
; Nor
t but
wile
2 he
only


LYING DISCOVERY, 138


durſ} not ſpeake his myude therem, © call me , ſeme the veſt of the commiſe
ſroners and many others ſo confident mdeed, that 1 wa; repoſ}:ſſed. bur=
thermore 1 alſo then feared laſt MI. Markbams. and one lagues wot des,
with/undy other», would prouc true: who the ſame morning © oncynight
bad towld me, that if 1 were found to be a dijjembler, | muſt e hang ed: whe
TL qwth laques, if ut &hen appr arc that thow «rt not a d:ſJembler,thei (48
n2 lawe nor ludge hurt thee, lu theſe rejpetts I thowsht it the [aſſt way for
my /elfe, to yeald for that time t» then hnunors, and to anſwer 4s before
expreſſed, that 1 bad nat dijjembled.
Darrell,

For our better vnderſtandiag ot the iagling and deceipt heere
vied, we mutt know that euen as 50, was tacing it out to the Commi
{lvners, that he had counterteyted, and yet retuling to counterfeit {a
againe, he was Vyolently calt downe, the ipirit then erifling exceding -
ly:10 traming hus countenance,& toyz:ng with his armes and legps as a
man in carnall rea.on would haue verily thought that he counterfey-
ted: nothing being done but that might ealily be done by any, Our
helpe was £1us, Liar being puiled by the cares and hayre of the heade/
as1i they thovid haue naue bene plucked of, and therewithall his head


beacen ſo to the floar, at a mercituil man would (carlly doeto a dogg |


yet he ttir1ed not not at all therat, nor at the pricing of him with pin
nes, neyther did any bloud itJue at the places prickev.,

1 his tirt ended, he beinge alked by the Commiſlioners what
hee had done alſo what others had done to him, hee coulde teil of
notiunge, one of the commulioners alkinge him, whether he were
not pricked of one of tus handes with a pynne,he anlwered yes hou:d
nge torth the wronge hand: whereby rhole that were pre-ent per-
ccaued, that he wouid gladly baue vrrered thoſe thungs that had in
that titt betallen hum, 1t pothibly he could, that fo {till hee might have
perlwa.ted men that he had tormerly diflembled. Laltly beinge de+
maunded whether he had counterteted,he antu ered with a braien tace
as betore the (aid tit that he had counterteyte4 Forthwith he v as car»
ryed away by his keepers and preſently atter elle-where 1n the touwne
fearetully tor mented by the diuell, whereof when tydings was brou-
ghtto the Commillioners, viz. that now So, was very teartuliy hand
led, ſome commaunded that he ſhould be brought back againe,v hich
being done accordingly, he no ſooner appeared bectore them, but he
was 1 a *1tt, and'lo proceeded from fitt to fitt, till he had had lundry,
the ſpicit in theſe vexing him indeede, and ſhewing his rage & malice
agamit man, and not mn {ubtilty as he did at the f(t, |

V Vhere now the Diſc, affirmeth, that So. liinge in the fitt,he had


Mas


at the tirlt, when be was pricked with pynnes, aud out of which the eh


'
Je r11ti GG ob! fhic


{; An +4 q Q& Ci!
cd (e141mvny,


] T11le thi buſh
not at the verve ; | :
» bled: Somers depoleth it: and there 1s not ſomuch as a ſalle witnefle


131


159 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


Mais ſhould have called him, 6id vpcn good deliberaticn(forſocth)
change his mynce, and accordinge thereto the titt beinge ended,
lay to the Cummillioners that he had! not d&rſ}n;blect: it 18 vritrue, for
then he affirmed the contrary, that hc had 1ſjcn:bled, as the Commile
toners with fur;dry others can teſtify: And 1t *o, did lay to the Coms
m1lizoners, that be had not d,ſſemblia which I doe nor remember, it
v 2$ aſter he was (ent for the lecond time, and vpon the fearefull vex«
ation hethen incured thick and threefoulde by Sathan which helpeth
not the Diſc. at all: for noru irh{tancimg that were ſo, yet this that So,
and the Diſc. doe tell vs, is falſe,

Secondly it is :© be obſerued how the Drſcoucrer proueth that
Somers thus changed his mynde lyinge in his fit. w hySomers (0) faith
lo,neither can this be otherwiſe prooved: Alſo how he veoougth that
Somers atthe end of this ſaice fit, (0) affirmed that he had not diſſeme


ſtrengthening it, ſo that the truth hereof reſteth cnly and barely vp6
So. cre.it, which Ithinke ts long agoe ſhametuily crackt, and ſhivered
both with wile men and with fooles. 3. were So, credit better then; it
is, yet the tale which is tould vs, is ſo vnſavery or rather ſo abſurd, &
ſenceleſſe, that me thinketh it 1smore then frm that ary man of
—_ and iudgment ſheuld ever harken vnto it, or embrace 1t as
a truth.

For marke I pray you: heere is a paltry boy bronght in dely-
berating and conſulting, as if he were a graue man of greate delibera
tion , aduiſement. And when I pray you and at what inſtant muſt
this graue deliberation of his be, forſooth even then, when he was do
ing of h1s rare fayts, and others ving their pleaſure towards him: one
violently beating his heade to the floar, anc phacking him bv the hat
and cares full ſoundly, an other pricking him in the hand with a pvn,a
third inthe leg: & he in danger to be ſo further cealt with,& to have
the like hard meaſure offered him: he knew not by how many, mee
thinketh that by meanes heereof his thoughts ſhould have bere dra-
wne an other way, partly to the tricks he had in hand, partly to his
pa\ne and partly taken vp about the pre'ent denger an likelihood he
vas in of induring yet more payne, and by reaſon hereof ſo perplexd
and mterupted, as that he could hardly have fallen into ſo grave a con
fulration with hinſelfe: and ſo orderlye alſo have proceeded therem
from one poynt to an other, from the firſt & weakeſt reaſon that mo»
ved him, to the ſecond & ſtronger, and from thence to the third and
moſt forcable of all, ky

Of all ſeaſons this fore muſt needes be the moſt wnfir and vn*


ſca'onable ſcaſun for Semcrs to debate deliberate and conſult in: =
| &


oth)
ded,
, for
mite
,om«
r, it
Vex=
peth
it 50,


LYING DISCOVERY, 140


ther dce Ithirkettar this plot and device of Som. and the Diſcaniig


Had £8) ſapp or watt 1n it at all, to make this conſultation Cetern'1 nas


ticn and reloiution to be i i enmaceſt or,cuncy the tire ©! 45 pre
enced tits, there wauld be ro favor mths. Yathooint benea [He
n:01E probable 1t they Fad layd, ] hefit berg enced 2nc paſt, or whi-
Ii 1c fico0 Leefore the cm naſiicners, bethinking h:10is lte v hat an
ler to make: but take the tale as it 1s Celwvered vs, viz, while bhewas
1 13 ft, and 1 thinke he is (carſly well in his witts tÞ at vill beleve it,
4. 1he third and m:ayn realcn leacirg him therevnto v as (for
ſcoth} rhe ſave of hanging, anting of this ty cach, that if be wrre find to
be a iſ} embler he nayſi Le hanged Pe itthat thelewordes were ſpoken
muſt $0, therefore neecesbe in ſuch agreate per plexity and ſcare of
Larging, as if the very naming therect were lufficient tomake him qu
alc tor fearef
Alas pcore {itple boye, belike be thought that euverve worde
was a blowe. But wherefore doe ] call him Omple, who deliberatinge
and diſcuſſinge of matters betore he reſolued what to doe thev eth
10 n:uch wittf where now was all his ingenye and Ceepe conſultation,
that ſcared hanging becaule of his difimbloge doth not cuerye childe
Erow that for couſenzpe a man can not by our lawes be hanged, but P*8 *©3
is ot erw iſe to be puniſhed?
And it herein he were ignorante, and that ncne of his frendes
of themſelues woulde have roulde him ſo mnch, yethe might eaGily
by enquiry haue learned ſomuch: But how proueth the Diſconcrey that
theſe very wordes of threatning were vicae By the tefſiumony of So-
mers, and Nich. Shepheat d & lobn Cooper his keepers, three moſt vyle
and wicked men.
Secondlye. te may obſerue how the teſtimonye of theſe two
witneſſes ( for the third is an accuser anda j arty )doe prove the ſame,
I/ :r be promed (quoth M. V arkham) that thaw att a conntericyt, thew de
ſerurft to be hanged: T hus Cepoſeth Shephear d anc Cooper thus M, Mar
kham ſaid to So, that rf be were found to be a d:ſjembler he muſt be hanged, *** ©
Againe Sheph-ard thus: Onclagues ſaid to So. im the hearing of me, and
of Ibn C cooper, that 1f be werr proned to be a comm ſeyt be muſt beFaroed
&nd Cooper Cepoſerth after this manner, One Jaques tould the boy, that
if be <1d connterfeyt be won'd be hanged: Concerning M. Markham tis
peach, the one depoſeth 1{:w deſtrmf}, the other thow mul be hanord
anc the one ſweareth lagu: laid be wwff the other he wonld be hanoed:
Heereby it appeareth that thele are fale.wimneſles being (o variable 8
diſlonant one from an other: Finally, take Shephrards wordes toncer-
ning M. Dlarkþamn, and Coopers concerning leagues and there vas wall
cau'e


_—_— ---


Was oc -—— dd


—_— — — — ———


141 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


caa.e why $1, ſhoau'4 be afrayd of hanginge: an ie!ſe why the Diſcon,
[tal breate tori into mage wordes: 4 115 WAS treatnns CT terrify
17 1adecde, 431: to han baton ths omtancy? of 4 ſtronger man; whereir
tic 1c, hath relation tov the other fra'e that 50, had of hanging, whi
revt he ipeacwn in the begininge vt tis chapter, as though torſoott
F'i1S TeAare rar lurpaiied that. l}ut cucry chiude may lee the contrary,%
the Lc. vayne baiting: tor deedes tarr paile wordes; And l am ve

lure, that nad a itronger inan then 30. bene acculed of felony, b& for
the lane bene unpruloncd, as 59. Was, as the D1c. himſelfe conteſſeth
Wtuch cauied the feare of 442 m2 in 39, mentioned betore: though ne
uer io 1naocenc, yet lo:mumes he woulde have teared the lotle of his
hte: and lo would no man or ynderltandinge 1n this cale, though he
were guilty of counterteyring, as 59. was not, And thus much for ate


{wer to thus calummation.
OF CHAP. 7,


png ! 49-


Di/comrrer,
How $0- w.es prrſwa-le { by threatmngs and promiſes, to haut confie
mucd bs aiſunuaiim,; after be bad bene befave the Compmiſſtuncrs at Nott,
va tall M. 1 ar, might azame iſp Wl hum.
LoaiTteEll.

V Vhy mightnot ſome perlwade So. hauing confeſſeJ the truth
why is thisro therein to contunae, and to take heede of (a) returning with the dog
tic periwading Ho OA | . T
ofum wo Jcont;s 30 Us VONyte, And what did they therein ill beleeming theme The
nue tus dutuau- L4/c, mult reme:nver that he hath not yet prooucd So. d{] mulation,
Luzon. As tor tne threatninss and promiſes the Di/c. prateth of, he that will
vouch ate them the reading, caaa2t but lee, that tey delerue rather
to be laugne4 at, then to haue any an{wer at all,

Diſcomerer.
The lulges comminge to Note. be the (aid So, beins ſent for beefore the
L. Ander(oa confeyj.d a: large, hiw he had diſ]embled, and there ſhewmee
bus tricks before h1s Lwdjbip 3 diners or hers, mn ſome extrarrdenary ſortts
to thiſe that had nat ſeen! hm borfore, he preſently ſtarted vp, vpn his Los
bidling bum to arrije, and b-w:d hunſelfe to be 5 well as be was beſare.
Darrell.

I doe in all reverence counſel| & adueiſe my Lord Anderſon and
whoſocuer heereto fore haue [ecne, or heereatter ſhall ſee So. doe hs
tricks, or rather the diuell tis tricks in him, to turne away theyre cyt
tram $9, failing downe, and arrilinge at a call, to the things ated be*
fore them, Lhe which albeit they be eaſy to be counterfeyred in com»
pari{on of the rare effe-ts the (pirit ſometimes lent forth in Somers yet


Pag :04


rag 2907


ee ein
114% &
JS 4
T-x1
Hen!
111.4 4
[Vi »
WIG
Webs
lidbit
Wray
49 [FF
Agal
Niel
$0118;
CO
hee:


rh


LYING DISCOVERY, 142
er taem be we.l examyned, and they willbe found to be ſuch, as can-
Diſcon[1:.1. oc avae , aay humane or natarall ttrength and agillity, & ther-
rerrifygp's. c (114. ucedes COME (rom &@ lapernaturail power, which is the diuel,
vherein.+> {07 50, {aulag downe aad riling at the beck of man, that commeth
w%, Whetryn wc iuuly of me iwpirit theredy blyndeing the eyes of men, and
orſoothſ 11. Acitig tc: 60 UNKE, tat 1t 15nd he, but 59. that doth the teyts,
TAary,X io Cc dit remcmoer that by rae holy icripture rt 1s playne, that a
m veriſwic.cu lpuic policing one, as he doth now Somers, hath the owerru-
| & for iy; vi the boay aal partes thereot, at his plealure, as the ſpirit of mi
elleth ha wiico weretore the diveil will, ( and he will when he teeth it to
ugh ne] inace 501 tus aduaniage ) he can alwell and doth as readily caſt down
e of his the 09dy of 5077s ana raylert vp againe, as any of vs can doe by ours
agh he Again< ae caat doth thule things { meane the ſupernaturell accidents
for Abe nictt 0164.1 1 5007's Lying 0N the ground, can as calily throw downe
y-mz75 and raile him vp, or put an ende to his fitts, vpon the word or
commaaad of a man, tnatſo Somers may rayle vp himlelte: V Ve may

heere auo remember, how ſome of thole in Lencaſbrre, continued 3,

| {ayes and mignts 1n atit, in which timeit is certaine they did manye
cont f thunges ar che (peaches ot others, and yet it was not they but the dy-

Noll, F vel un them,

The D:ſcoucrer (aith, that Somers ſbewed his tricks in ſome extraor

dnary ſort, It 1s very trac: for the ſpirit tryfled and toyed exceing-

truth Fj, wnich excraordinarilye he had done before, ſpecially exceeded
ug fnnch therein as then he did. 2, It was extrawdinay in that none
" The Þ oftne ſonnes of Adam caa doe the like. But the Di/conerer ſhold haue
{4tion, } done well, and to the better [ati(fyinge of the Reader, ifhe had tould
at Will Þ v;the paruculer tricks he at that time did, as of the (wellinge he had


rather then in his body, though nothunge ſo bigge as in former times, of notemab > -
tie exceeding waight ot his legg & arme like (a) iron, faſhiou of all the


cer


wn | Since which time ( [ayth Somers ) I hane bene very well, It bank god pag 39S


D:ſcouerer


ſorte, ntwith(i ending M. Darrell did then &3 bath ſunce dimers times aff yrined,
's £9s Þ that lremagneſtiilrepoſſeſſed,


4 Darrell.
"op He is not, nor ſince hath bene better, then he was for ſunJry we-
* Iesbeefore, after which it appeared that he was not ver.ye well, but
* ©YT. If racindeede poſſeſſed with the diuell. And {o I doubt not notwith-
andinge this ſuppoſed well, and very well being of his, but that he
8 ſo (ill, and that in due time, god will make it manyfeſt to all


men,
O 2 OF


— —


— —— ——


—— —” -—- « -


144 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


OF CHAP, 8. /P x

Of the depoſutiones taken on M. Dar. beehalfe at Nott. and how n
wpon the examynation of his owne witneſſ*s, it fallcth out:that | n
the bodily ations of So. in bus fits, were not ext! aorde n,

2.41 y, £5 they haue bene miſreporoed 0!

Diſcamerey. ne


| Thecommiſſ:0n was procured, C3 expedited the 2.0. of March 1 597, NC

by theſe Commnſjuoners, ( iſ the pred Narration (aid traly ) lobn Sher. Bm:

wood E (quiet, high Sheriff, Sw Iohn Byron Knight, lohn Stanhop, Roben Þ} 14

pag 208. Markham, Richard Perkins Fjquires, Peter Clarke Mayor of Notemgham, || S-

Myles Leigh Official, lobn Ireton, Iohn Browne, Robert Fuington, and NÞ 1!

Thomas Boulton, mnuſters &5 preachers, men for their ſufficiency, it is trus || fi

Very mecte to haue dealt m a ſary greater matter. The grntlemen ave verye

to) o what na- Well hnrowne to be fit gourrnonrs, and arc 4 greate ſtay in thoſe partes of the

ewe, that nether country where they dwell. If the exanryation of a matter of highe treaſon
reverent mutt” 2 bene committed vnto them, or any »ther of a lower degree, concer

ers of great lear- - my 1 4 tower » COMCOT TRE

ning, 10: woor- the good and peace of their country, they had! bene within the comnas of thei

thy peneier owne element, and would no doubt with all fufficiency bawe diſcharged th? | * {


45 —Y ſelues therein, But the hipecriticall ſleights of falſe ſeducers, in matters tha | ©:


of tliem, coulde , 1 X wh
onct reach vnto CORE religion, they are of ang ther (c) narnure, h
©r were ablc to Darrell. Mm! 4
Judge ob The Diſc. knowing that the depoſitions taken at this time, dos || ***«


vtterly ouerthrow $0, counterfeyting, and prove it as impoſſible for
So. by art to haue done thoſe things he muſt haue done, it he be a dif ther
ſembler, as it is for him to walke vpon the ſea, or ro goe to Rome on ff O'
a day, and that the ſaid depoſitions doe receave ſorre credit from the | #nc
ſufficiency and worthyneſle of the Commiſſioners them'elues by who |} pall
they were taken, thought it good pollicy firſt and afore all thines, to

calt a myſt as it were betore the eyes of his Reader, and to pur ſome

ſcruple and doubt ip his mynde whether theſe were the vere Commil & for t}
fioners inc/eece, as I and my frends doe beare the world in hand, and hiy
yer he knoweth full well ( and no man betrer then he ) that they were | P1//
the very ſame: only M* John Walton Avchdracon of Darbyſhire is wat U7
ting in this rolle, and maketh them vp 12, in nomber. Secondlye, a $.# 14
low theſe to be the men, then forſooth he excepteth againſt them, as | #hat :
well in regard of theire pa trallity: branded as before in theſe wordes
By their prepoſterous aff c(tons th: y eld with Mi, Darr:1l, as in regard of
the inſuf} iciency of the gentlemen, cloſely implved & marked in th
wordes: T hey held not themſclues within compas of their exone elemente.
Concerning the firſt we muſt know that theſe are only but the word
and floriſhes of the Di{c. 2nd that indeede and in truth ther is no ſud
matter, all the cheif of them ( one only excepted ) being meere ſtran-
gers


 ſtran- Wat they depoſed in this manner cs they Cid: v hat & thrg 's __


LYING DISCOVERY.


ers vnto me, and two of the other my great aduerſaryes, nay 1may


crab; ſay, that 1 did not know any living that Cid n ore deadlye hate
me then M , Walton, As touching their {vfficiency, albeit in other thi=


nysthe Diſc, we lee doth ſurely acknowledg it, yet in this preſent caſe


of counterteyting he hath a me and wype at them, as it they did


not well know what they did: for why alas poore gentlemen they did


not ({vrfooth) keepe themielues within the compaſle of rherr owne cle


ment, Narke heere good Reader: Perer Clarke, Richard Hurt, Anchor
lak/on, Richard Morey, and William Freeman, Aldermen of Nottimch.7,


T44


$.omnell Maſon gent. William Gregory Towneeclarke, and Samnel! Harſ


net the Dyſcomcer: wherot the moſt are tradeſ-men, and ſome verye
ſimple men, d1d not exceede their bounds, went not beyoni'e theyre
gompaſle, but helde themſelues within theire element in the execution
of their ſeverall comiſſions: Bur the aforeſaid gent/emen that had this
matter in examination before ( notwithſtandinge the gentlemen be
of greate wildome and ſufficiency ) did by the cenſure ot the Diſc, o=
uerſhoote themſelves and went beyond their element,
A ſtrange thing: But it may be that S. Harſnrr, if none of hisfellowe
Commiſſiovers, hath that ſpecial) exiſt whereof he ſpeaketh page 28,
which in his learning he calleth the prrft of a6[corming ſprites: which is a
mea/wre of gods ſpirit, to diſcerne betwixt counterfiyts, and ſuch as were tn
geede poſſeſſed; which none of the other bath: yt he have fo, yett mee
thinketh theſe other commiſſicners ſhould at leaſt be ableto tell whe»
ther So. being prickt with pynnes before their eves, ſtirred thereat or
no' and whether any bloud iſſued out: whether his body ſv elled &c.
and this (with ſuch like) in this caſe ſufficed, and is ſure within the c6.
paſle of their clement.
Diſcouerer.
And conſcerning alſo the witneſſes themſelues, much might be [aide


fir their excuſe. T hey having conceaucd well of M. Darrell, coulde not ea- 80


fly ſulpe&? any trechery mm bim, And to ſay the truth theſe grounds preſup»
poſeel to be true ( which M. Dar. had tans ht thm ) viz, that whatſocury


Cc


that 15 as ench
to lay, that they


IVnot for ſwes-


br did or (pake un bis fits it was not So but the d:;well that <1d ex ſpeak it: re themiſetues


ft may vather be maruayled, that they depoſed no (a) more, then blamed


that they depoſed ſo much. ;
7 Darrell.


Varkel pray you the vnconcienable proceeding of this Diſconce

Per: Firſt in his preamble to the depoſitions, ſomthing be faith r- exte-
mate the ewerſ;eht of the commiſſioners, ther for the excuſe of the wit-
*»ſes he telleth vs thor the witneſles alſo comcranced well of mr, or were
V iſe prepoſi-rowſlye aff effed towardes mee: and thence al'o it came


mere,it $9978
caunte ferred a8
the Df. 6. will


haus 1t,


i145 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS |


aunvult all men ſhouid thus ate:t and loue me: whom others lomuck
actelt aud abliur/ Tac Commilioners they through their prepoſcerou
4jjctions to me had tnetur oye of w!/ dame blynaed: lu as they liKe VN
nien as they were, hcid with Lyarrell, beleuing that Som, had not dil-
{cubied whercas the wycr ſort belemed Somers, The witnelles (beings
n (clic then 17, ) conceaued (o well of meas tor the affection they bore
me (tt the L1/c, lay true ) tiiey purpolely forlweare theiniclues: for it
ty thole things wich ypon their oathes they did avow, they did de-
pule nut tor taat they law and teic any iuch rare and impollibic things
un $0. as they depoſed: but vpon toine partiall and corrupt affectius w
wWarucs me: then can 1tnoc be denyed but tnatl they did Hatly pecriui C
themiclues: which it it were {o tac 224/c, being a rninilter of the go
pell, might haue bene better occupyed a great deale to haue vilpiay«
ec tel corruption and agrauated their iynne, then thus to haue plea
dedin their detence and excule. An other thinge whereby tne witnel=
(es were drouento depole as they did, was { lain the Dyſc.) a falle &
deceipttull ground they had reccaucd from M. Dareli viz. that it was
n9t Soiners, but the diucll that did <3 ſpake all i his fits: 1 o thus anſwer
that notwithitanding any ipeach they heard trom me they ttxcanlelues
could well enough tell what they heard telt or law in Somers: my lpte
ach could not (lure) put out their eyes or deprive them of theire lets
ces and teclng, whituer the things were |poken or done by So, or by
the diuell, that was nothing to them. Moreouer, almoſt ail the wits
nelics depuicd to thoſe things which thev partly telt, and partly ſave,
bectore they heard my yoyce at Note. as appeareih by tize depoſitions
n© {peach tnen of aune could either (o bleare anc dazell their eyes or
bewitd, anu benumne their Icnces to make them quite voyd of lence
Wein cnuuliun the 1yc, dow heerevpon tellvs that it mayrabY
be marua yicd they depojed no more, then they blamed that they depoſed þo
much. what a ienceielie {peach 1s this, and how ill beieming any
protellcth humleite to be achriftian much more a nunilter of the gol
pell. From hence the D1/c, to the end of this Chaprer ſettech downe
the retra6f4tions of lundry ot the deponents: yea ie beareth the world
in hand, that they haue all of them rerrac#c: ail that before theſe com
muiſlioners they had tormeriy depoſed: Mow it is a ſynne and ſhams
for any to reta't char which he hach beetore abſolutely aduisedly and
vpu good ground afhrmed vpon his oath. But a greater ſyune and
ſhame 115 tv iultif» ne11m (o doing, Secondly among theſe retrattis
ens there be ſome, ( as forthwith will appeare ) which haue diretlye
periwore.: theraleines, it the D/c. report their depolitions truely.
Now waatar abomvnartion 1s this, that a Byb  & his Chaylayne who
taic ypon then to be c2nurers an. reprouers of mens taults haue no
repro


> LYING DISCOVERY,


140
reproefe for the pertured, nay be to tart trom dealing fo with often
guls Of Mallie.uUic at they Vat mnaruAdyie nat 64Cy AIC NO MUIC
periurcad,


| Di/coucrer
But one thing concernmg our wines in hand, 1s worthy of 4 con/te
Ee a4tt4n; IÞal Tb. 119j1 Ji txjc SAL WCYC CAAIHYRCA we © Ot (ympic pA-


Jorg CT j16cl) Ads 1344 119; vent paſi [Wijc OV TIACC HPLC GIY , TH UL LITE £4119 PAS 1inp


of 14 [1601DK. dot ( bans nec) care ready) WUKHIH (3416 p! #16 ce if
win jje2 iT , 161 Peradiveret we 17 Weld targht 700d poiae J 10 iy 100 One
thn vpn ncjunper (org,

Darrell,

A thirde and pringipall excepuon againſt our witneſſes is, that
they were jumple mew. 1 _ lome of them were genticiucn of wor
lt1p, others genticmen by office, 4. preachers. ln a word none of the
are accounteu by iuch ag beit knowe thein, to be more ſunple then 0.
ther men; yea 4 dare be bould to lay not any ot the 17, deponents be
to umpie as lome that 1 could name of the latter Commutlwners, whe
Kh 1s a ihame toriome, and dilgrace of theu commillion, .l he 4. ex»
ception is, 7bey had not bene pajs twiſe or thrice with the boy. It 1s molt
yatruc, tor tundry of them had bene oft with him in his tits, lome ale
molt dayly wath hum tor the {pace of a monneth bectore, ang one was
continually im the lame houle with him day and nught. And where he |
obiecteth that 1 hawing 60. ready, it had bene fit 1 ſhould firſt haue pro”
auced my cheif wienelics: we mutt vnderitand that the commulioners
lttig two dayes togither and calling for lomero prooue nowe this,
bo that, une whule this ympoſhibie thinge to be counterteyred, an 0-
ther while ſuch other marter as in their wiſdomes they thought good
| was conſtrayned to ſend jn ſuch as were then at hand. But how kno
weth the D1/c, that thele are not my cheif witnetſes? He that aduiled
ly cuniadereth of their depoſitions, will tinde that.they haue depoled
materially againſt counterfeyting, and ſo much as the worlde is not a*
ble to atuiwer, much lefſe the Dz/c. with all the heipe he hath trom his
nulcrabie ſhittings, wreaſtings & reexamynetions, Againe if ther were
any omyttea, which eould,depole more materially and fa!ly againlt
Us :uppoled countertey ting, then doth this cauſe and worke of God
ulteyue the more lolle, and 18to the Diſc more aduantage: he might
veiitheretore have heldebis peace and contented himieite with that”
Wu is ready depoled. Bur in all likelihood he would heere-vpor
petivade tus reader, that the things depoſed are of ao moment at all,
but cally auoyGed and wyped away with 2 wett finger. But alas this
1s harder tor tum then he ymagineth: It is beyond the compaſle of all
tus icar rung and wit, as may appeare by that which he hath done alrea

F 2 |


147 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


dy: for hauing heerein labored what he can by fach countenance and
authority as he could pulſibly procure, yea and preſſed euery thinge
to the vrrermoſt, yet in the ende after all his (weating, caruaiingand
acl», hath he proued uſt nothing in the accovnt of any man of wiſe
done and wigment: as I truſt will ymediarh, e appeare vvpon the
\1ew 5 the excamnynatic ns themſclues, Had he not better then 3aue lit
(il, and winked at the'e depoſztions, or lmoothly'paſſed by ther, as he
doth by divers other thines, as it he had not ſeene them, then thus to
haue [trvgle! and ſtrinen like a birde in the lyme, to the vtter diigre
ace and guerthrowe of hin:cife and the pretendea countertry tinge
he {0 earreftly ſtryueth for. And thus mach for anſwer to his cogmg
a” d 2aucring preface: Now to proceed to the examininge of the Dil
re-examynatiins. T hat this may be done the more throughly 8 exatte
ly, I will firſt ſet downe the firſt depoſitions of thoſe whome the Diſc. | 7
hath re-examyned, ( where he either hath not donne it at all, or elſe / ;
but in part ) and ſo comparing theire former and latter depoſitions or br
re-examyn4tions togither, wee ſhall playnlye ſee what thoſe witneſſes fo
haue retratted or qualyfied, and how worthely and ſubſtanrially this


SS a@f to > es ww.


=


Diſc. conuinceth the depoſitions of rhe 17, taken by the aboue named ”
12, Commiſlioners, y
Robart Aldridee clarke viccar of $. Maryes in Nott, ſworne Cf ex ' | :


Narraton dep 2 77 yned, ſaith: that ff he coming t» W. Somers vp thurſe aay being the

3. of Nowember (as he thmketh) he found him lymg wpon 4 bra, no bedd- c
cloathes lying vpm him, but only his hoſe: and ſawe a thing runnmge Wy *
bus right legs tothe quantity of a muſe, and he calling wnto god by prayn W
gmediatlic ut remourd out of the right legg into the left, &x laying hrs hand ff} 8:

therevpon, imediatly it remoucd mto hrs belly, where it did [1 well to a veryt

greate quantity, twiſe ſo byy 4s his body as hethinketh, and from thence in f
to bis breſt, c> thee it was the bignes of his fiſt, © from thence into hrs nel ©
& from thence wnder his care, where it remayned m the byenes of a frend = ©;
walnut, not chanving his former cullor, and ſo remayned there for the ſpace

of 4 quarter of an honre,

And thu exanynate further ſaith: that he heard in a ſtrange bollow-
#þ woyce, that be was hrs, and this examynat anſwering (aid that br lyre,
he was gods: & that be had made a promiſe wnto goin baptiſme to be bt
then the vayce anſwered, that he was god Chriſt © a king, & that be md
de baptiſme, and that he made hum his by a new conrnant. ”
Thus ex.amynate allo further ſaith, that the ſaid W.. $1, had ſuc þ fr why
ensth, as ſine men ha much ado to keepe him d1wne, durmge which time "or
he exceeded in ſwelling, [kriking roaring ies yelling very feave!t wlly, gnaſbit ,
of his teeth, 37 foaminge at his mth, And alſo [4ith that ſlandimoe mn te als
hall be beard a great knocking in the parlor whore the b1y lay, & ff __ :


| LYING DISCOVERY, 148
he ruled in, where he ſound the bry alon» m his bed, lyins with his face vp=


_ wards in his fit, with his mouth drawne awry. c> his eyes Marmg, as thoe
nd Id, they would hauc flartcd out of hrs head. And kneeling dy wne 0 pr.aues
wil ht d thi ku cm? anayne wn his knees as hr thous bt «And in the bedd
the wilcr the conerlet he [ Awe the forme <7 ſhape, as 1t were of fine kythmges 1m
IC (it qt MIR» $0 1he'v) w of h1s (YE. And anayne this rxamm atr ſ[awo the bride

oh dl14thr at the fecte to ſhake, maone, © leapeas the leaues of an Aſpen tree

—_ LE the wynde. | |

ifgrs Now tolloweth the Diſc. re-examynation of this deponent,

inve Diſconerer,


gin M. Aldridge bring aſked, why how etofore he bad affirmed, that he pe
Vi ceamed, whileſt $1 was ating his tricks, the formes as ut wore of htlnes,
; wider the cowerlet that lay vpn him , the ſaid conerlett being bitwixte his


xats x

Dil eyes 3 them, rather then the farmes of whelpes, of conneyes, of Yatts 7c. 41
rele [991th I chi: ke my ſo affirming aid proceede of this 7c. becauſe I haue
us of | 044 97(97e, that certayn witches had ſpirits in formes of kuthings, & thoſe


neſles form 'S then Came ro my minde. And A474yne I ae not very well know, that


v this © ſences my b: deceaued. Beſides I was then wry greatlye afi ayde,
med | » #6 15. great meanes to deceauc 4 mans ſences: being 4 mig by paſſyony

thit w:l/ procure many ynaomarons, cauſe 4man to thinke that which
1 but Intle 19 b» greate, that which tandeth, to moe: c3 that to be, which


eo te NP Whereby 1 confeſſe (my great fear conſidered ) that I might be de-

pedds NY £414, in affirming many things, concerning the particu! avities of the ſaid
So. htts: and | verily thinke it may be true, that $2. aff rmeth, of making

43411 FP

ayer, Nl ©7741e motions with his fingers wnder the ſaid conrylett, © of bis knocking
e2 ainft the bedtock, whil:ft I was jraying by his bedſide,

_ Darrell,

M. Aldrilze being re-examyned denyeth not, that he ſawe the
farmes or ſhapes 4s it were of 5. kitlings in quantity vnder the coucrlet wher
$0. lay: but only ſhewerh, why he rather tearmed or compared the (a
ide formes to kithngs, then to other ſuch like liumg creatures, as whelps
conneys, ratts Cc. occalyoned therevnto by the interrogatory propo-
unded vnto him, except we gather the fame out of the laſt wordes of
his depoſition, But be it for F
myner he was drawne ynawares to retrat that he had before concer-
ning this poynt depoſed: was there therefore no ſuch ſupernaturall ac
cident vnder the couerlet, as the Diſc. woulle have men heerevppon
to colle? why beſides this deponent, there haue 4. others depoſed
to this rare accident, as hath bene declared beefore, whereof twoe at
the leaſt viz M. Th, Gray and Ioane Pye haue bene likewiſe re-exa-
mvned thereabouts, but we heare neither of retra tion, nor yet of 98
«cation thereof, whereof we may reſt aſſured that they iteraced and


are, or through the cunning of his exa= |


atirmed


pag 319,


1p 21123
Tho.Hayes


: kiggs: 6 11


I +7 AD=EIECIIIN OF S. HARSNETS
attirmed the ſame agaie vpon their Ie-cxamynauln, Shail nowe the
TEN DE periurey, ( A> 4ICCUC>S UT) [11QLIE Li all C WETIE LD LV GH «UAUTIY)
bCECauic UI Luc $OP ic) Ot ONE, LC ULUITIMIVIE, UUTN UTIL pruvuc LAAL 1vas
AV bdye NAT YEA TEG OT GJ1A47J3CA BU WAL TIC UEPUIT a at -LNE MUILT A f
cnc 1i;c. WOOL taynce LEcTEY ppon NnUale, & Lanc The WUTIOE Les
IKCuc, wild Ice 6, Aut iv be OLLETWIIES 1 Ca TOTGUMUCA 43 UL LICAION UT
CalinuL be but Uiat he was turther re-Cxalnynedy and IDat WE Neare ot
110 (OLE (reAlrſic aki Nt 5gIt 15 NETEDY CUIENT That te 1d NUT LOMUCH as
QUALITY Lludl BE Bad FOLmerly Jepuled, Concerning L1G V1U7G00g , PA ye }
wit | We Wang, && thus LU pernartura.! {trengln, 1 nerelvie ole two W3pv-


L1DUTY Es TEMAYNE 11144 PTOUCU and Varetractcd by M. Audriag Oall,
al 10 CULLEQUENtly Vaalulwered & VDauo yuce by the Dijcomres n
D1jcourrer. ,
I bercas Tho. Hayes depoſett vejore the L, Arch-Biſbopp of Yorks Co ,
mſſtuncrs at Nott, tus be | awe fore thing runn out of # v0. iegs mio the -
viitr, CF Fence ſarthwuh mig bt» belly, / wellwg the ſainc; an ouch that ,
pt ſame was much bowned VPWAI GS: CF when wwe [ame aeparied thencegbe Y
[aw ut playnly an bs throate, i [iS congue, and m hs cheeke, neere to bn; l


64 e=1 vote, to the quantity of the yolk oj an tgg, worth be taking, betwene
Ins funger's, founa tbe [ame to be un ſoſenes tike the yolk of an eg ge. Bom ve= ,
exam ynecd, he auth tons. 1 awe «| welling m bus cheeke, to the guanin.ye of i
tb yoik of an ee 9, C3 an bus throate of the jane quanuy. fwriner then by
thioat CF his face, 1 could not nor dad ſee us. So, tyang mn his cloathes, But !
{ame a jturring run downe his breſt, eg mto ns leg ors, without any rijenge L
gnaniity, that 1 could dlſcerne, (aug ms betty, the boy as that tume te
ng on bys back ſomwhat bended,
1 his ſwelling and running of ſomthinge in So. body, 1s one of the cheife
ſupruais all ations or paſſions, ( for the Apoilogy ut ſeemeth knewe nat F.
whrher to cal; them )thas M. Dar. & the Narrator dat snfift won , for the
Proofe that So, was poſſeſſed, Put if they were no other, then M. Hayes vpou
113 EXam ynaton bath agpoſed: there was uo greate firangencs in them, 1 u =
Juppsjed that M, Dar, will be very angry , to hawe theje wall rus tn
ungs ſo extenuated: But he muſt be content, fo! it ts very azreeable to bly


former ſucceſſe, " fey

Darrell, ar

See you how this man tryumpheth beefore the yitory, yea be» | ;,

fore his ad uer{ary once meete him in the feilds, I may yery well lay to mr

hum, as Ahab layd to Benhadad: Let not bim that grrdeth bis hare, pl.
boaſt bimſelfe 4 be that put-eth it of, T'o proue that 0. hath not coun-

terteyted, among ſundry other aRtions or pallions ro the nomber of | y-


20 at the leaſt, euery of which is /upernature!l, that is ſuch as neither
an ce from nature, nor att compalle, I account hx rwmwing *
r1ab


LYING DISCOVERY, Fo


riable [welline which So. had, to be one 8f the chefeſt: $9. (lay I ) bal
a/wellng berweene his fleth & ikynne of a variabic bignetic, in lome


WL Vas

"Wy part of tus body ot the bignetle ot an egge, in lome other bigger, lome
YE: letle, lwittly rawning vp and downe along his body, ſomerumes mak=
OW it mga tay tor a quaiter of an howre ana fometimes lefle, in this or
Ic of that part of the vody. It was leene and teit ( to let other parts goe) 1a
CH as his toote, and to remoue trom toe toe, and 1n his torchead, & other
_ artes of his face: his eare rootes. yea in his very tongue, and which


1p0- 15 mote of all, to thruſt our his eyes extraordinanly brgge a blacknelle

; being ſundry tunes vpon them tor the pretent, Belides, beinge in the
one arme it would be forthwith in the other, and ſo of his legges, and
when 1t made any itay in legg or arme, as oft it did, then and guringe
that time the ſame member was as heauy and inflexible as if it had ben


bow iron, 1 hat ſuch a ſwelling there was 1 proue by the depoſitions of 11,
tha Two we haue hearde already, namelye M. Aldridge, and 01, Hyyes


ce.be both preachers: the reſt followe.

Sp" W, Hynds ſworn cr examyned ſaith, that t his comming wnto the nanaion dep y
[aid So. he dd ſee a ſwelling in his neck t9 the 6 of a" great wallnutt,
and from thence it remoued into the bone of h1s cheek, and there was to the

Yeof bizneſj of a great haſell nut: and from thence ut removed into his eye &x the

"Y [kyn of his ey waxed black, and becauſe this examynat had heard before

ay that he the ſayd $9. did counterfey!, be did lay his hand ypon the ſaid ſwel-
lng vpn the cheek, bone, which [willing thd tremble like an aſpen leafe mm

Jul 4 calm winde, Cr was viry ſoft, but m that place did nat charge his natu-

K rall cullor,

beife Tho. Weltfeyld ſworne and examyned (aith, that vpon ſunday at ni.

gl being the 6.of Nowember, be ſaw $0: hauing a.oreat ſwellins wnder his


narration dep. 4


| po eſt eare,, to the bieneſſe of a wallnutt, and from thence it remowed into the

þ eye, where it ſemed not [ſo greate, but cauſed 4 great blacknes in his eye and
pow wpon that this examynat layd his hand and felt 4 certain moning. and his
we ey canced into his natur all cullor ymediatly: and ſo changed 8. tmes bz +
'r40 twone 3. and 6, a clockin the marmns .

9 bY Ivane Py [worn and exanyned ſaith, that $1. being m his fits, ſbe hath


ſent a wells un his feet, which remaned ft ”m toc to toc, and ſo t1 bis legs, narration dep. 6
end from thence in his body to to the bygnes of a 3. penny whnte loaf” ani ſ
to bis throat to the bignes of a r.att , and wider his eat to the biencſſe of 4 wal
mt, and in his eyr brees bike 4 blacke clocke, and (0 remon'd from place to
place, which this examinate and others hawe ſenſible ſcene, ard felt,
Williem I m1 {rd ſworne ahd examined [ajth, that ypon the 7 of No
vembry the [aid $0: bring extreanly tormented,nd toyicd, and his butt ns
therewith opened, he [awr 4 ri{:noe or [7 welling, in the bottume of 1s bellies
which to ys knowleds + mowe3d the clothes: and his bref! and tomary bringe


F Qz | lare


nartatiih df


Kart, Gepe (| }.


par.deP.15.


na, der.16,


6a dep. 19,


te2 A DETECTION OF $. HARSNETS


bare be ſaw wiſiblic the ſame riling, or ſwelling in bieneſ} of agooſe ege, ow


4 haipeny wine loaſc, aſ}nd vp to his breft, and ſo to ns throate,

[ Sterlley (worne and exammed ſaith, that be [rw 4 (uttle thinge ta
mov? in diners parts of his bady, ſwelling the brdye,and rymnge mto ſeucrel
partes of the face,to the vines of 4 crab or wa!lnut

Kichard Mee ſworne and examined [arth, that on ſunday at might bte
ins the 6 of Nomwember,be came to the [ar1 So. to watch with him about
of the clo.ke at mebt,and found with him M. Weſifcld,and others, and be
tw'ne 3.and 6 aclcke in the mwninge hear a voice ſaying that he would
hauc hz; right eye: and then he would han his le't eye, the vyce bring 4: he
thinketh contrary to his natwall voyce. And this examinate further ſaith,
that a day or two before, and ſundrie other times this examinate td ſee 4
ſwelling m his armes and legs, they being naked to the bienes of 4 wallnut,
and Yem owing from place to place into bis bady, and that be felt it 3#t his bel
ly to che bienes of a 6.browne l:afe, and that u was ſo herd that he could
mt preſſe u downe with his hand: which this examinate aſſayed to doegby
putting bis hand vnatr the bed clothes.

I Þ are sworne and examined {aitb,that he [awe W. Som, lie groueling
vp his face vpen the bed, and a cert aine ſwelling or riſmg wnder his clots
bes to the bienes »f a nwwſe: which remooued from place to place, to dint
partcs of his body.

I Clarke ſmorne and examined [aith,that the clothes bring taken off W
Som, be ſawe in his og being un bis ſhirt, a(welling or riſmge to the big-
nes of a ratte, which this cxammate tooke hold of: and found it as ſoft to his
feeling as a downe jillywe,and he thinking to hold ut faſt,st preſently eveyd
ed,and then the boy [aid it was gone downe into his legg, And this exami
nat? ſaith, that be [awe him at ſundric gimes when diners of his members,
as his leg gs, armes, and others were inflexible, and exscedins beam, how
Mature, at yon.

W. Hung ſworne and examined ſaith,that be did ſee « thing in W.S,
fitt t» the bignes of a wallnut running in the fl:ſþe of the ſaid So. about his
facr,farbead, and cyer,and ſo run about bis face to his exe.

Thar So.then had ſuch a variableſwelling as I affirme,ſuch as area
ſonable man will thinke #.Ss could not counterfeite, or commaund
to rune alonge in his body at his pleaſure, every on may ſee that will
not willfu'} - be blyndfold himſelfe:neither can it be otherwiſe,except
theſe 11 ,wimmeſſes be periured,and with them ſome others, who have
ſince dep»ſed the (ame. Now the Dzſc. thinketh to wipe a!l this aw ave
ans to bind the eves of the world, with producinge the examination
of on of the 1 1, deponents,and boaſteth as though he had anſwered
throughlie an4 paid me home as touching this /welline,to my ſhame,


au] proucth yea «s be ſupp:ſerh that 1 will be vory angrie, to haut 6d
Lt a


70, a


nee ts
(OY a!


ht bes


out 3


md be
would


4 be
ſaith,
[ec 4»


linut,


1s bel


could
by


eling
(lots
guers


LYING DISCOVERY. rex


ſupernaturall ſwellings ſo extenuated. The Diſc. ſure taketh me to be a


verye impatient man, or els this thought woulde neuer have entred
into his hart, yet he ſhall ſee that I wil aniwere him without any great
chotler. And firſt I affirme that 21, 7ho. Hyyes being reexammecd, hath
not retreated that which before he depoled, nor yet qualified the
lane,except the [D;/c, counteth this a qualification, as | (uppole he


doth,that F.$1,did then lye in his clothes,which in truth is a very lor- *


rie one,or rather non at all-ſeeing in his depoſition betore he had ſaid
that he aw was v/:01 «ll [aints day: and it is well knowne that Som,had
kisclothes on the day time: And this for another, that the boy d1d at
that time Lye on his backe, ſomwhat bended.which wordes if they be 21,
Hayes his. I thinke he was contented to be {towe them on the Dyſco:
and his fellow commiſſioners,ſo to be ridd of them:yert notwithſtand
ing he depoſeth vpon his reexamination, that he had a /wellinge #n his
belly,but in other words. Indeede 1 confeſle theire is. ſome ditierence
in words betwene his firſt and laſt examination,and no maruel/ there
paſſing a yeare betwene them and more, and that the commuſſioners
at this latter examination thirſted after ſome ditference, contrarietie,
retratation,or qualification,framing their interrogatories according-
lie, they are the ſame in ſubſtance-ſauing that in the firlt this ſwelling
is vrged alittle further, he depoſſinge that it was in his chreke nere the
eare root ,and in his tongue: and in the latter care roote, and tongue are 0-
mitted:which was through M, Hayes his forgetfulnes,or els the Diſco.
hath purpoſly omitterh or conceiled them,as not leruing his purpole,
2, Let vs take this examination at the huckſters hand, and as the D'/.
hath produced it,and we ſhall find theiris {male cauſe why he ſhoulde
{o boaſtingly lay,that ther was no great ſir anones in the ſweling, Is it not
very ſtrange to ſee no at his owne will and pleaſure, make « ſwellmg
in his throat to the quantitie of the yelke of an egge,which Tho, Hayes being
reex.amined depoſeth? 3-But admit M.Hayes had vpon hisrcexamma-
tin denyed all that he had before depoſed, ſhal that preiudice the de
ww of the other 1c* or were they theffore periured heerein,
ecauſe he was f erivred? It is manifeſt by the D:ſcowrrie thatDl, Al-
why Rich. Mee, Toane Pye,and W Hunt, who have likewiſe depoſed


to this (ypernatwall ſwelling, were alſo reexamined,but we heare not, 6.1.4


a word what theſe ſaid vpon their(a) reexamyratiuns to this /wellmg: 1 war rams pow þ
1. folo g* a5 th
, mk not Aga
Darrell.


one may therby imagine that they have neither retratted,nor qualit
ed the ſame. The conſtancie now cf theſe 4 witneſſes, doe much more
confirme this /xwell2ng to haue bene in So. body, then the retraflation
of one ſole witneſſe, doth weal:en the ſame, if it had bene (o that be
had allrogeather retra ted t! at, which he had before depoſed, as be
bath not, The Di/c, addeth the depoſition of 21.Cravcn. 1 q_—

v liat


anCl. 2,


an(. 3+


p1g.213-


pag 2c8,


pag 207.


154 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


Wat his fail Cepotition doth in this chapter of reexaminations: and
wity he 15 tett ainonge the 1 e2x.4mmatey leeing he was none ot the 17,
tirit Jeponentes, nor eaer examined betore. lt ſhould ſeeme by this
an loine,other luch like depolitions of his,that he was on* readie tg
helpe the Diſc. at a pinch, when he ſtood in neede of a depolition tot
his parpoie. And here we may note the cunning dealing of the Duc,
why to make Darrell, ſeeme the more odious and to helpe out this
pretended counterfeiting, (which cannot ſtand without [uch ſlye and
tichy thitts) amonge his reexammants foiſteth in this examinante of
his owne culling. 2,1 anſweare, that his ſaid depofition is both verys
taile and ridiculous, ſeruing the Dy/c. not ſo much to convince or ex+
gcunat theſe \ſupornaturall runnings, (which he doth fortooth wonder«
full ioundly betore)but to make way to a pretty ieſt of his,wherwith
he deſired beiike ro delight his reader. M. Darrell (quoth he)doe not
here ſay, that the dewill ſkipped out of the boyes thigh imo bis Ps and
turncd womſelſe ! into a pare of glowes: the dill may rather be thought to
h.une rune vp and downe mn his owne coſenine patethen m the boyes bodye.
In lice torte and to the end atoreſaid,he bringeth in [obn Wig gen,who
was neuer {worne and examined before, yet;the Dc. placeth himin
the ranke of the reexammants, Finally,he alledgeth So.authentical te-
{tmony,which neer taileth him: and therevpon inſerteth thele wor
des of his owne,
Diſcouerer
Beſides he (meaning So.) Likwiſeſetteth d1wne how he did make the
ſaid montons that ſemeth to rune in hrs bady, in theſe words:1 did mane forſ
the calfe of my leg 8,then my knebone,which motton of the knee, will likwiſe
make 4 motion or r1/ing mn the thich. Alſo by drawing and (topping of my
wind, my belly would lin andſbew a kind of ſwellmg. The bunch as they
rearmed it about my cheſt, was by the thruſting out of my breaſt. Likewiſe
my ſecret ſwelling did make the end of my windpipe t» mooue, and to ſbrw
greater then vſ * it is, Agam my moons of my lawes one bunch was


early mad: in the ſide of my chike neare my care.And about the middle of


of my cheke, with the end of my tonge thru(t ag ainſt it, theſe mations by pr

fiſe I would make 4 very ſalt ont after another, ſo as there might eaſilye

ſeeme to be a running m my badly of ſome thing, from place toplace,
[Darrell.

I deſire every on to conſider whethrr any of the children ofmen,ad-

mitt ther had bene no other /wellins or motions then this beaſt con-


telſeth,can mak theſe m1tiong here ſpecified,who can mone the calfe of


brs lege, without mouing or ſhaking his whole legge? and ſo I might

proceed on to ſome other motions,2. wher pretence is made that tom

Jweilmgs were made by So, hzs tanoue ſpecially in his face; —_—
af


©
n
|
'
t
|
?
c
c
>
|
|
\
l
l
|


ING DISCOVERY. res
that his con#2we could not make that ſwe!lmg wider his exre root, much
keiſe chat which was in his forhead, and leait of all thurſt out tus eyes.
and caule, ablacknes of them, But I demaund how he made that ſew!l
mg wn bus fete, rem2 yum from toe, to toe. it was not with his tonge ſure
ke did that.

Diſcomerer.

The Dsſc.
re(tly backward, not moning bis body, and that his eyes were as great 4s
beaſts eyes,and that his tongue would be thiaſt out of bus brad, to the biones
of 4 Catyes tongue,

But let vs ſee what the ſaid Mee hath depoſed, vpon his reexamination.
Wheras I hawe bene conceined, to ſay and [ware, as u before expreſſed, my
MeAnmng was CT 4s (ſaith be) that be the ſaid So turned his face agood way
towards bis ſbowlder,c3 nototherwiſ:ey lkwil my meaning wes,14,that hrs
eyes were ſomwhat goglins out,but otherwiſe ns more then ordinary. And
thirdly my meaning wes, and is, that by reaſon it was candle light when 1
ſaw bis tongue thurjt out, and by reaſon of my conceit of the ſtr angnes of So.
groubles, before I ſaw him: bs tongue being thrult out, it ſeemed [omwh
big ger,then if So. had bene well, Iſhould _ thugs bt it to bane bene,

Darre

Rich. Mee dil depoſe to about 11 ſeuerall things, non of which
can polliblic be done by art, as appeareth by his depoſition in print:
now being reexanied $& I trult of them all,he hath only minſed that
he ſaid ot the bignes of So, cyes cr tongue be twning of his face directly
backward: which we regard not at all,as beig of no ſuch momet: doth
the D1{co, thinke by this trifling ofhis, that he hath anlweared all that
Rich. Mee hath depoſed concerning So, ? he hath done nothiog lefle,
Mee his reexamination ſheeweth {ome little frailtie, but overthrow-
eth not his firſt depoſition. Yea his relenting no more, (all circumſtan
ces con{idered)doth rather wei, {00 his former depoſitio,then his
qualification weaken it. And this I ay of Rich.Mee,isto be yuderfiod
likwiſe of [oave Pye: whoſe depoſition _——_s it 14. impollible


procedeth. Furtbermore,one Rich, Wee did depoſe before the —_
ſad Commu|ſtoners,that be had [ene W. Somers fland,and ture bis face di- Richard Mas


216.


dep.1 .


things to be done by $9.0r any ſonne of Adam. the Dyſc,anſweareth, 1+2n< Py,


with telling vs ſhe was reexamined, and of her qualifiyng vpon herre


examinatio one{azſole impoſſibility of the 1 4, But he mult know(as pag 2:6


is aforaide)that beſides theſe haue not retra;ted theire firlt Jdepolitt-
ons, ſundrie others alſo togeather with them haue depoſe the lame
thinges: which their retra:tation, much lee thete ory qualifications
of theirs can not conuince or dilproue. And here we may againe ob-
ſerve the deceite of the Diſc. who mentioning ſcarclye the 10.part af
Rich. Mee and 20,0f [pane Pics pgs prctendeth to the ignora
WM. nee


Henry Nulter,
Rich. New on
VV am thu
pay 214 & 21

=

Pag 211,

{10} 111 the fore
1! jo Wal GoOme 0
kenc tgremclote


a'i:d noe maru I
tronohT Candid


L "” 1112 C - wap
Tiicmn, as 4 1 "os


' I
1 '! ld ad IUTC


wld,


pay 11s,


0):
w


ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


nte reader,as though he had ſer downe all that they at the firſt time
depoled* with therr tull anſwears at their reexaminations, Beſides the
tormers, the D1{c. produceth Hem y Nuſſey Rich. Newton and Wl,
Hint: who having betore depoſed, the two firſt to Som. ſpeakine with


15h


-. 11 mth wide open, the third with hrs mouth ſhut cloſe: being reexami


ned, Henry \ufſey hath qualified,the other two retracted or denied,
that the had before depoled, if the Dyſc.haue ſer downe their reexa.
minartions truly: T his periurie of theirs,the Diſc. calleth the qwalifuns
of thei former dep Watt MSC MCT pr tations of their Amp. Bur if men
may be aclnntre« {o to expound theire owne wordes, we (hall never
taue anv periured,norpuniſhed for perturie to the end of the world:
notwithſtanding I an{weare:Secing the Commiſſioners that examin
ed,di(as 1 am informed and doe verilie beletue)threaten their exam
znats ſometimes with hauing them before the 7. of L-nd m,ſomtimes
with imprilonment, & before their eyes commaunded Henry Zutler
by name to priſon. it is no marueli though amonge many, ſome fraile
men were found, that would rather relent either in part or in whole,
from that which in their conſciencs they knew to be true, then hazard
and im danger themlclues they knewe not to what puniſhment and
trouble. Stronger men then they haue done as much in the like cale:
we all know how ſhamtully chat notable Apoſtle of our faviour Peter
another manner of man then any of our examinats, for feare den;/ed
that he knew the Lord, and that with an oath, or execration. It isno
ſtrange thinge then for our reexaminats (weake and infirme men as
they were) to haue ſhruncke and relenred, had it bene farther then
this.2.1.et the very enimyes ſudge whether voluntarie oathes, whet
n2 profite or feare of evill in the world was like to come vnto the de-
ponents theirby, or oathes compaſed partlie with flaterie and othet
cuninge dealinge, partlye with terrors and threats ( as is notoriou-
five knowne) be more like to be true. 3. Thoſe which haue relented
are but few, and can not therfore in any reaſon prejudice that which
the reſt being many haue depoſe4{ which is abundandlye ſufficient to
cleare the cuuſe from counterfeting:and that we diſire may be anſwer
ed:oftering to make vp the number of theſe few pety reuolrers(2 0?


- 3,excepted, )with 2 ſupplie and advantage if we may be ſuffered 4 ll


1s to be ſuppoſed that if the reexaminations were (0) ſeene,it would
appeare that more is confirmed,then extenuated.
Dl. anevey
Theſe were the cherfe pont r, which ſocmed mol Nrans in the ſaid deps
ſrt ims, taken at Nott whery/on it was thous ht road to hant the ard wit-
neſ}'s examined, And hw they qualific their former wards, you ſee it ap»
fa ant.


"LYING DISCOVERY. 2M
Theſe (faith he) were the cheif poynrs. v7... the runing ſwelling, ſpeaks


ing with h:s month wide open,at other times loſe ſhut, the turmng of hes


fac dareFtly backward, hrs cyes being as great 45 beaſt cyes, and 19 nee of


the bignes of a C alues tongueyhrs boy doubled, his bead berwene hrs leggs:
for not on more then thele hath the Diſc. named.1I anſwere,that ther
are fundrie other p1ynts bef1des,and amonpe thoſe ſome not inferiogr
to them, which the Dy/co. doth not once name or rouch in this his
Chapter of reexaminations,much loſe returne an anſwer vnto them:
In che ſaid depoſ1tions taken at Nottingham,it was alſo depoſed.

1. That (omrimes his legges, fomtimes his armes,were heavie and
inflexible like yron. depoted by Ibn Strelley, artic. 12, Ioanc Tye
&tc, 6,

2.1 hat, $o.had fach extraordinarie ſtrength; that ſomtimes 3.
4.5.6 or more were ſcarfe able ro rule him.depoſed by Rob. Aldride
artic,2, Toane Pye, ait. 6, John Wood, art. 11, Ibn Strelley,qt.12.,
Richt,d Mee art. 15, William Langford. artic.9.

3. when 4 or 5, fturgled with him, (ſometimes for an hower toge
thet)ſo as they were throughlie wearied, he did nor ſweate,pante, or
change colour. depoſed by Wil, Langford art. 9. Richard Mee arti.
13, IlobnWodavtic. 11,

4 He wallowed, gnaſhed with his teeth and foamed at his mouth
exceſliulie depoſed by Robert Alavide artic. 2. Wil, Aliredanrt.y.
hn Strelley art 12 Rich, Mer art,13, Will. Lan»fird arti. 9.

5. His face and month tearefully diſtorted,one lippe towardes one
gare,another towards arother: depoſed by V/ilkam Aldred arti.y,
loane Pye arti.6. Richard Mee artic. 13.

6. His body plucked roonnd vpon an heape like a browne loafe: &
ſo rowlec,he was caft vp like a ball from the bed 3 or 4 times to gei
ther, halte a yard hie. depoſed by Ioaye Pye, artic,6,

7: Being caſt mto the fire(where he laye with his hand in the fire
not burned) ſomtimes-againft the walls & iron barrs of the chimney,
with great violence,he receiued no apperance of hurt at all. depoſed
by Inane Pyr art. 6, Tobn Strelley art. 12 Rich Mee art.17.

8 He told of divers things done in his abſence, without notice gi-
ven by any perſon, depoſedd by Elgabrth Milward art. 14, Toane
Pye, artic, 6*

9, Inhis fits ſtrange ſmelles were in the place where he lav, ſome
times like brumſtone,lomtimes very ſweete. depoſed by Izane Dye
atic.6 Richard Mec,artic. 10.

10.A ſtrange knocking perciued ab-ut his bed, in his firts: both
his feete & hands being held ynmoneable. depoſed by Rb Alared
are, ban Peat. 5, Eliza Nilward art. 14, Toby Part art.ly.

oF ®


1 1. He did crie hideouſhy, ſomtimes likea Bull,beare, ſwine,and


T7


in a\male yoyce ynpollible ro be countertcited:depoied by Wills
Langford arts.9. Robert Aldrdg arts.2, Rich.Mee arts, 3* vi
1 2, His legge would be crooked with his talies, and coulde nothy 3
Rrightened, vepoſed by Rich, Mer &rt.13, The hiates arti.l. = th
13. In his titeshis pulſes and temples did not beate. depoledby F 3+
FVVilkam Lang ford, 4 Cbirurgian 411.9. th


14.His eycs was blacke and chaunged colour in his fites, depoled | 7”

by /Vilkam Hinde arts. 3. Tho, VVejtfeild arti 4. Rich. Mee ars.1;, | *

1 5. He lay tor an hower as one dead:cold as Ice, his faceandba f **

des blacke,no breath being perceiued to come trom hun, depoled by & ©

deane Pye art.6, Elie Milwarde arnicle.1 4,

Theſe poymes, are contained m the aforeſaid depoſitions,nd ſremed | "*

wooſt ſlang ,as wel! as the former mentioned by the Dyſcomerer,and we  ”*

uer either the Bybop or his Chaplaine doe pleade for the diuill againe,

the mult needs returne ys anſwere ynto thele or els theydoe bur title

lay nothing.Secondly,he ſhall doe wellto make known to the world,

what M..4/dridge,M. Hayes, Rich.Mee,loane Pye, and the other recx

aminats did lay beinge reexamined to the other poynes they hadbe-

tore depoſed, In the meane {eaſon every child may lce,thar the Dy,

hath ngt performed that he profeſſerh to doe in the title of this chap

ter. vz, to make it playne, that vpon the reexammation of my owne wite

meſſes (as he calleth them) i: falleth out, that the bodaly «Cons of So. m

bus fitts, were mot extr aordinarie, ſeeing he hath not ſo much as named

(c) neither was (c) 1 5. of them, and if I ſhould graunt hira that thoſe bodily 4:2
x witome® (or palliones)of So.which he mentioneth,were not cxeraordenary(fas
noe hey mult Which he ſaith very little, and proueth full ſilily) yer ther is enought
needs haue mar- belides to make it manitelt us, apparant to the world that it was un


d the taſty:
of all the ſuppot PALIÞle for Somers to haue counterteited,


ed countertei= And whereas it pleaſeth him ro you ſo indefinitly, and to (aye
ng that The [aide witneſſes were examined,clolly and cuningly theirby ime
poo as ifthey hal bene all examined, & (o it ſcemeth would taine

uc his reader conceiue and be periwaded, wherevpon allo; (doubt-

les) it cometh to paſſe, that he neuer mentionerh neither the pum-

ber of the firſt deponents, nor of the reexaminats: we are to ynder-

ſtand, that vpon the 20. of March 97. before the 12. Commilſlioners

mentioned m the begining of this chapter, there were 17, witnelles

examined, whoſe names are confuſedly ſert downe before: with the

principal! thinges they depoſed. Synce which time there hawe bene

lundric of che faid deponents by the Diſ. and other of kis collegesre

exanined: but how many I knowe not, and he himſelte mentioneth

pLcly but (eauen with their qualifications:thinkinge by this n_—_

V


LYING DISCOVERY, _


vizard of a reexa nination, though he bring in but a few, and of the
meanett of the thinges depoſed, tupprethiag and {ilencing the reſt of
the rare accidents depoſed, together with many deponents,to carric
away the cauic as it were inacloud,and to dazel mens eyes and make
them belceue, that all the depolitions (wherin 1 and my fellowes doe ſo
preatlie trihumyh)are tally antwered,contuted,and overthrowne, But
we muſt not torgett, that of the 17. tenne of them haue either not
bene recxamined at all,or els being reexamined haue reliſted all their
tem prationes,threats,and allurements,and doe through gods mercy
concinae ſtedtaſt and vnmouable: vpon the teſtimonie of which wit-
neiles(with many more)(a)this truth, I meaine,the wnp?ſſibiluce of S9-
m5 counterfeiting doth reiye and ſtand lo lure, that the world is not
able ro remoue tt. Forif in the mouth of 2:or 3.witneſles a truth b;
the ordinance of gods ro ſtand, and everie controuerſie to be decid
ed: how much more then is this truth ta ſtand ſteadfaſt, and con
trouerlie to be ended,even by the Lords owne ordinance,
18 the mouth of ten times 3.witnelles or theire
abours


FINIS,


THE FOVRTH BOOKE


T ae impoſlibilitic of Som. counterfeizing beinge manifeſt enough


5y the laſt chapter, in the eyes of any vnpartiall and indifferent


luloe, were ther n >thiag els laid, nor to be (aid, then theiris allready
fad. I thinke it (hallbe widome to vie few words more concerninge


the lame. Beſiles, Iam afrayd the reader is weurye in turninge over
luch patched and ridiculous ſtuffe as this,when my (elfe am not alitle
gretued to lee my time (which onght to be more pretious to me the
the gold of ophir) thus vainly and idlie conſamed, in turnninge and
rakinge vp ſuch filthy and vnſaurie dunge, and were it not thatI am
ou ledthar the Lord hath called me heerevato, both for the de-

ce of minc owne innocency,and ſpeciallye rhe ſerring forth of that
wondertull worke of his, which wretched & vngodly men doe ſecke
by all.nzanes to deface, I wou'4 in that regard haae burye4 all in (i.


Sz


(a)for beſides
theie 17. 'theire
have bene hac?
by che Bi/hope &
his commuill 1o-
ners about i}, |
more d epolcd,
which haue wit-
nelſed by Somers
many thinges
vnp«Atble ro be
counterfeite,


24-2375.


pap 93+!


169 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


lence mage agoe.For thele cauſes (moſt chriſtian reader)albeit I pur: bi
poſe(by thy patience 8& gods aſliſtance)to make the caie more clears af
and playne vnto thee in that which remaineth to be an{wered of the
obiecticns 8& ſurmitles of the Dyſconcrer: yet will I theirin be as brefe
as po{lible I can,and as the!vnreaſonablenes of the aduerſarie wil giue Y


me leaue: the rather in that whatſoeuer he coineth and breatheth out
avainſt the cauie rather then me heereafrer, cometh out of the very ap
ſame forge and ſhope with the former, wherof I am content to make 03
thy Clfe Judge in the pervſall, a,
OF CHAP.rn,
Diſcouer er. ru


How M.D ar. laboured from time to time,to make thoſe thinges that 6, | |,
did,ex were but very teyes,to be _—_ both flrang cx extrasrdmary. jor
arrell,
V Vhether the thinges depoſed to be done by Som.(done indede a
by the Divell) were very toycs and nothing ſtrange and cxt!4 wamary "2
in them: and further whether the things done by So. were ſuch as he '
did or could doe of himſelfe. and fo argue a counterfeitinge, or whe- b
ther the did paſſe his reach, (kill, and power and ſo argue a {upernatu i
rall power,namly the power of the diuell within him, let the clariſtian


reader hirnſelfe Iudge by my anſwere to the laſt chapter. m4
OF CHAP.2. ed

Diſcoucrer tho

How M. Dar. would not ſuffer as mire as be could any to deale with | __
Sv.m has fatts,to try whether he were ſenſelcſſe or diſſembled. bs
Darrell. =


The graundof this chapter isthis gſertion fathered vpponme: } _,
v2. that S-.0r whoſoever 1s poſſeſſed is ſenſeleſle in all theire fites:
wherevnto I haue ſufficiently anſwered 10 my an{were to the 3. chap kin
ter of the =.booke.


OF CHAP 2. 68


How M.D#'. indeuoured to excuſc So. when he was taken ſbot, and _
did ſuch tayei,as did argue. him ſufficiently to be a cmmier(eit.
Diſcomcrer. V


It is obiected that his foaming came from a prece of Blacke lead \f
he had in his mouth T put ( ſaith Somers ) & peere of blacke lead intomy
mouth that therby I miobt ſoame im mare abundant manner,

Darrell. ha

It is true that one a time he had a litle blacks lead in his month, but

(as I verily rake it)he did not then foame,as partly app<arerh by Fd-
mmnd Garlands dep? {ttion, (following) who was then preſent. But be


u that he did, his foams came not, nor was becauſe of the ſaid black


mo


LYING DISCOVERY. 16r
kad:for then another am, ear lead into his mouth, ſhall theuby


be made able to foame allo which I thinke non of vnderſtancinge will
affirme:an4 triall therof may ſoone be made: 3 we {peake of a fimmg
in the time of his firſt potſefſion,now foaming. and then foaming, {pe
cially in great abundance the Cay of his lifpolleſſion: and this blacke
lead trom whence his foaming ſhould come,he had onely once in his
mouth,when he was at Gar{ands houle,as is plaine by the depoſitions
concerning the ſame,which was almoſt 20. weekes after the foaming
wee ſpeake off. Now although blacke {cad may peradventure haue
ſuch an odd myſticall qualitie as is pretended, yet it could not (lure)
cauſe him to foame,fo long and ſo many weekes before he had it. For
theiris no body that depoſeh to any blacke lead: then and if he had
had any we ſhould no doubt haue heard of it:nay So, himſelte Jepoſ
eth no ſuch thinge: but by this depoſition we may rather coniecture,
that if the diuell cauſed not his ſoaming, bat himſelfe, then it came by
rolling @ lone or (oape in his mouth, for fo ſaith he I taught him to doe,
that he might the bettcy foame, But how doth the Dzſconercy proue
that Somers foaming came of blacke leadi beſides Somers teſtimonie,
by the depoſitions of two witneſſes. In one firte T ſaw William Somers
(iaith Edmond Garland) froath at the moyth very much, ſo 4s the foame


raped downe mto bis necke: and at on time I found a peece of blacke lead pag 2 39.


In Jo mouth, He doth not ſay, and at the ſame time, vz.that he foam-
ed, found a peece et:but,and at one time I found et: meaninge, another
time, So that by this depoſition it ſhould ſeeme, that Somers framed
not when the blacke lead was im his mouth. From hence then we can
no more conclude that So. foaming came from thr: prece of blacks lead
his mouth, then from the morſels of bread, and gobberes of fleſhe,

which he likwiſe hath had in his mouth. But George Richardſon depoſ


eth more fully:In  fitt he foamed (ſaith he) excedimely, and I heremg a= 03-237


kind of gr atins of ſome what betwixt bis teeth, tould Garland the boyer kee
pr: wherypon Garland taking him by the heawe of the bead, and I by bis
mouth, we ſhooke aut of b1s mouth a prece of blacke lead,

Larrell,

I will not ſtand heare to ſhew the falſhod of mans depoſition, but
onely I aſke,what and if So.inſtead of the black /-adhad in his mouth
aſtone,or pine: had the ſame cauſed his ſhaming borh at rhat time, &
longe before?For I doubt not but that either cf th eſe hath as v cl) that
vertue and workinge quallitie in it as blacke [rad bath: I am truive a-
ſhamed to vie ſo manv wordes a bout that which deſcruerh rather to
be laughed ar, then anſwered: but the folly of theſe who beleetuimee
ths haue in good earneſt obie Fed it againſt me, as a mattcr of niv-
ment, hath thus farr conſtrained me,


- o


P18 23-6


pag 338.


pag 142,


1-2 A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS


OF CtiaF.4.
L14j comer

H1w contrary to M: Darr: ajjerizon, Somer, had his ſenſes and vndcte
flandrig m bs jitts,

[arrell:

In my anſwere to the 8 chap: ot iny 2 booke,l haue ſhewed,that
howiocuer vathan doth (av duubrt)oi dinarilie deprive tnvie ho pole
leilerh an cher tites, of crew internall and external ientes, yer not all
Waye$,but can an4 doth by his {lyghcs io order the matter;as that the
puliciled haue many tunes taeir icntes 8& vynderitanding in as good
mealure as thole taat are not potlellgy, a thinge that I have allwayes
held, and never lence | came to any 1wdgment attirmed the contrarie,
V'nieile thertore the 12yc, had proucd that So: #1 all his fits bad hus per
fecte ences and vnder (tanding ,( which he neither doth nor by any pol.
{ibilitie can due) he laith notiung at all agaialt my ailertion, but hight
eth with his 0wneihadow, & coarateti a torgerie of his 0wne,whuch
he tallye caargeth vpoa me,

OF CHAP. x:
Diſcomercr:
Of the notions and knockangs which were heard and ſene about Som
in his fuuts,that they were done and made by hinſelfe, and were not 4s N;
Darr, hath reparted;extraardindrie or ſupernatural.
Darrell

This is anſwered before in my anlweare to the 4 chap: of theſe-
cond buoke:and may in a word be an{weared againe: that all that is
their and here obie:ted is falle,abiurde,and ridiculous, as hath allreas


dye bene ſhewcd.
OF CHAP:6


How Somers caſting himſelfe into the fire, was voluntary, and no exti4+

ordinary matier,as M. Darrell hath pretended.
D1iſcouerer

B*cauſe the ward of caſting into the fire (quath So.) doth ſeme to umpot
muth:Firt lſay,chat the fires im my Miſtris [ouſt and then afterward; mn
my ſather in laws, were but very ſinale,made of [lat coales,and [0 compa(ſe
ed at the en:ls and foreparte with barrs of won, that except I [bald has?
thruſt my ſelfe betwixt th: ſayd barrer, and the wall, or had thrut my
pavers berw'xt the bars, T ernld nt in any wiſe hane ca} my ſelfe into 'he
fire: But I confefſ that M: Dar. hawins told me out of $. Marke,aud UN
w:/e haums (traightlie warned \uch as krept mt in my [uppoſtd fits, that
th:y 'bruld br viry carfull th looks vato mel did caſt my le wow (F thes


Into the Chimmncy,9r von the yrons or grates.


Darrell,


con«


LYING DISCOVERY, 163


Conceraing this poynt Io4ve Pre hath depoſed thus On Allhalow
ep12 48 nvJne- or thew abouts I with ſundry others, being with VVilliam
Suncr 5,08 45 (ating 1 4 chaire abt awo yards from the fire ſide,and ſud
dnly was cat tow, d; the firc, h:s bead lights vpon the iron that keept
vp the fare, and ane of bus hands m the fn e; and they bem? 3 9 4 taking
hun vp 9 ] aA16c hun from burning [they could ua / him in the chaie 47.411:
ju br leggs were ſo bowed «3 they all could not ftrerght them, and he ſo
heavic,as they conld jcarce itt hum, and that neithtr his hcad,haire, nv 4
uy part of bis body w-4s hurt or burned by the fire.

And M. ub Strelley atter this manner : He was on a ſudden caſt in *%P-'7
to the fare m the preſence of all; andſudgdenly taken ont without any hurt to
hum by the fire, bemg of waight 4s a ſoreſaide.

And Rich. Mee thus: And ie {aid Som. would be violently caſt into the 4ep-13
the fare, ſtanding from the fare a yarde and halfe off ,and none of h1s clothes
burnt ar beave ſmeed,
Let now the reader chuſe,whether he will beleiue this beaſt of Env
{und,or theſe 3,vpon their oathes,and many other affirming,and rea
dic to depole the lame, and more then this, And where he ſaith, that I
firatehtly warned ſuch as keept him that they ſhould be carſull to looke vn
12 bun: how can this poſible be true, ſecinge he was cal into the fire, eng F
before (a) I came to Nottingham as appeareth by the depoſition of {;, Game vw
lone Pye which allo Hugh Wilſon made knowne vnto me at Aſbbye, that plead tir
when he came to me their for my repiare to So. at Note. as he and ſom **
of my owne familie can witnes, And where he confeſſeth, that he ca?
hmſelfe vpon the yrons or gr ats:it ſhould ſeeme that as the fires were ve
ry [mall (tor ſooth)and made of ſlate coales, fo the yrons or erates by me
anes therof werenot hoat neither,els the woull ſure haue burnt him ;
| Diſcouerer \
Ouer and beſides So.depolition the Diſc, produceth two others:
wherof one depoſeth that on a time he clapt his buttockes vpon the five, 14 pars
the other,that he fell downe with his ſhoulders on the fyre.
But he was oft caſt into the fire,ſo that hus being caſt at two ſeuera]] 1494 Alwood
times as is ſaide,if that were (o, letteth not but. that at other times he
might be ſo caſt, as that ſome bare part of his body laye in the fire: yea
it is directly depoſed by [oamc Pye of one time, and before the Biſh1p
of Lindon (as 1 take it) by Edm, Garland of another time and place,
that his bare hand laye in the fire, and for ſome little ſpace as appeat-
eth by the circumſtances, and yet was not burned. An ther are ſun-
drie ready to depoſe;that at another time and place in the preſence of
many,he was throwne on his face into the middeſ of a hoat & great
fyre, his face bareinge downe the hoat coales'that lyinge thus with a
nine cap on his head 2.ary C y_—_ his ſiſter ſnatched at him, plucke
: away


narration d: :


164 ADETECTION OF S, HARSNETS


away the cap,and left face and barehead in the fyre: And yet behould
no face burned,nor hearre ſinged thereby,
Ot CHAF,7,
| Dilcomcrer
Of $2 pretended firenoth and weight in his fitt that contrary to Mar.
ana. his frends reports, they was nothing extraordumarit mn them,
0g 244 Darrell
So. ſay I had ſuch extraordinarie and ſupernatural] ſtrength, that 3
ſomtimes 4, 5. 6, or moe, were ſcarce able to rale him, though they
had him at great advantag: as lying flatt vpon the ground,or _ .
bed, (yeaa lowe trundle bed) or tyed faſt to a chaire 3. men for an
houre or their abouts ſtrjuing with him, though they ſwet and were
in a manner breathles,and theirby forced to giue place to others: yet
did henot ſo-much as chang his colowr,or pant, nay he was ſcarcely per
(c) anſwere this ceiued to draw his winde,as is depoſed ergo, S9.1sno (c) counterfete.
wgumen; or © For no man can adde to his ſtrength by counterfeiting.
ycald ro |
uu, [ Wiſcomerer
The Dyſc. now telleth vs that his ſfreneth was not extramdinary,
And he proueth it firſt by $0, ridiculous depoſition,then bythe depo
ſitions of 7, others,
Somtimes ſaith Ed.Garland a man that hath had great triall of Som,


ſupematuar!| ſtrength) Somers ftreneth was but ordinarie And againe,l
found him often of 5-25 work p ty
atrel]


VVhy this leteth not but that at ſome other times fn ſome of his
fits, he was of extraordinarie fireueth: And this I doubt not but that
Garland did at the ſame time depoſe, though we here nothing of it,
Yea his very words inſinuat no leſſe. The other ſixe depoſe that they
p gig proume his flrength, found it to be but ordinaric. I doe not fay nei
ther ever did, that So, in all his fitts was of extraordinarie ſtrength, for
then indeede Garland and the other ſixe had depoſed materially: but
of ſuch ſtrength in ſome of them he was without all queſtion and cd
trad:tion. He foamed we ſave, he wallowed we ſay, he was caſt into
the fyrewe lay,etc Yea wee ſay not that he foamed, or waowed, he
was caſt into the fire in all and every of his fittes, but that in ſome of
them and at {undrie times he was evidently ſeene to be thus ſtrangly
and extraordinarily viſited. And preſuppoſe that vpon the apprehen-
tion of alewde petſon for ſome felloniovs ate, 3 or 4. honeſt ſubſtan
tia/j men ſhould bring in euidence,that fuch a Cay and time they ſaw
the p:rtie breakinge vp his neighbaurs houſe and takinge awav FS
goods werenot this euidence ſufficient in law and reaſon to convince
the tell:n, becauſe that at ſome other time or times, cther bares
161


pag 245


LYING DISCOVERY. 165


frendes did ſee him fitting in his chaire and realing ofa booke? For
this is truly the 1)4/c. manner cf reaſoninge in this caſe,to bleare the
e\ es of the world with, and to proue this counterfeiting if þ « c. vide,
$-1n:imes (forſfouth) Somers flrensth was but ordinarie:and Somtimes or
often ((aith another) I ſuwyd him but of caſe flrength: ergo Som. ſhength
was not extr cordinarie,as Darrell affirmeth, In like manner he argueth
before: one a time ſaith on, Som.clapt his buttocks on the fire another, he
fell d-wne with his ſhoulders on the fire,ergo So.was neu caſt unto the ſwes
his face,ar bave hands being in the fire,and he not burned.
OF CHAP.S,
Diſconerer
$0. knowledee in his fits was not extr aordinarie as M.Dav. and his frenes
haue (alſlye pretended: neither could he ſpeake Grecke, Hebrew, or Latines
other wiſe then he had learned.
Darrell

That his knowledoe was extr arrdinarie,l truſt it is elswhere in the his
ſtorie made manifeſt, Againſt it nothing is obiected worthy the anſwe
ring. But alas poore Somers himſelfe) who never fayleth the D1ſe.at a
pine”) he good ſoule like an honeſt youth is ageuery hand whyle {o

e brought vpon the ſtage to patch out this m_— cauſe, and to
depoſe at Jarge: now wheras to this end I haue _ that he (a
boy ſcarcely vnderſtanding one article of the Creeddid expound the
Creed by the ſpace of an houre togeither or their abours,(athing ac»
knowledged by two of the Disconerers owne witneſſes) this is hand=-
ſomly ſhad owed,glozed vpon and daubed ouer in theſe words: tht
he was in ſome ſort enabled ſo to dee, by reaſon that almoſt curry miniſter,
that came wnto himhad interpreted the Articles of the Creed diners times
wr him. It had bene good and a moſt equall and indifferent courſe
(feeing $9. is knowne to be an impudent lying wretch) for the ſtreng
thening of this glozing depoſition, ſo vnlikly to be true,to have had
theſe miniſters knowne, and ther names, that did thus enable and in-
ſtrat Som. mmthe articles of the Creede: or at leaſt the depoſitions of
ſom e of thoſe who were then preſent would then haue bene talen. It
had bene no heard matter for the Commiſſioners to have ſifted our
this vpon the taking of the depoſitiens, if it had pleaſed them ſeeing
it is depoſed(you ſee)that thel Miniſters hane interpreted wot | bum the
articles of the Creed diners times and that in the time of this his troukle
he was ſe-Jome or never alone, But admitt that ſuch a cour'e v ere ta-
ken by I know not how many mmilters Vintinoe him in þ1s (cknes,(a
thing that I ſuppoſe no man of vnderſtanding will eaſily beleiue) ver
t 18a queſtion whether $9. were of himſelfe able to lay vp ſo much,
ts ſomtimes he delivered,

OF


Acc. _— Roo <> os PING


pag 356


A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS ©
OF CAAP.9.


166


Thrive was nv mpoſſubility in $9. ſites 43 M. Dar.and his frendes haue


fauily pr teuded,
Diſcourrer
[his th: D/ſ, prouerh by no letie then 10,depoſitions. Now I
cond with 1are (auch tKobert Coauper )what thmges the boy did in
hs its: 4 thu 4iy 01087 of 4s minbicncs aud CApPACHIC AY doc rhe like,


Darrell
Robert Coopry being preſent at 30. diſpoſſeſſion,with teares confeſſ
ed his lunnes betv. e vs all,being lome 1 50. It ac that time he though
$0. counterteited,then thole teares ot his and conteilion were hipocri
ticall, | he truth is that oppreſſed with ſ-arc, vpon theftearetull tight
he then beheld,he thed thole teares and made that contellion: as the


men ot £/he/us d1d vpon the report only of the like worke of Satan:


* bur being now without that tearcy as himfelte contelleth, his mind or


wdgment as it ſhoulde {eeme 1scleane altered, as by this and other
wretched depolitions of hisappeareth,
Diſconerer

I waroft (quoth George Richardſon) with the bay in his fittes, and

could neuer (ec any thing Toe by him, but I could doe the like.
Darrell

George Richardſon pag, 2:33 depoterh that he ſaw $0. in afitte,wher
in he ſo.amed exceedingly Now I thinke he can not do the like,though
he pur a peace of blacke lead into his mouth to helpe him,as he ſah-
So. then did. And where he (aith he was oft with him, I ſpppoſe his oft
times, were not aboue 2 or 3 times.

Diſcomerer.

Secing $9. m bis fitts(aith M, Aldred)the faft of Nouember ,heauinge
wp his belly, drawing his mouth towards his eaves: mg ,er, 1 departed
away poſwaled that he was a{counterfeute, and that he did nothing, but
that a boy naughtely diſpoſed mig ht doe as well as he,

arrell

ButI would faine know what M, Aldred did thinke vpon the 7
of Noue mber, vpon which day he preached at So. diſpoſſeſſion, and
1m his prayer confeſſed his ſinnes with teares, on which morningallo
he laid to ſome, that the ſaid night his ſleepe departed from him, vp-
on 11at he bebeld the euening before in Som. as alſo what he thought
of Som, when he was firlt depoſed before the 12, Commilſioners. It
may betheir are many thouſands in this kingdome which ſomtimes
thought $9,t0 be aconmerfeiter who now ſee & confelle thatit is vnpo=
Nible it ſhould be (0: this therfore is nothing to the purpoſe nor at all
againſt


LYING DISCOVERY. 167

gaia't me that 21, Lldred hath depoled, For albeit the 5 of Novem»
per ae (peaneci of a might Lmagiae thoſe tew actions of the boy to
be cvgaterieite, yet this lecteth nuc but that at other times both atter
and before vpon the light of other nore ttrange and te aretull acci-
Gcns,00 inignt be of a1 other mind, And thus(bar lor breuicies lake)
cod 1 parxcalerly a2tweare aa ayvoyde all thele depoſitions ot tas

Dy CaMerer,


Diſcouerer. 25%

I newer did ſec any thing that $9, d14,to make me to thinks that it was Alon that all
ſupernaturall:laith Nich. Shepheard. and M. Craven, I did not ſee him 52s & 4 duzen
dic any thing which anarber boy might nt eaſulat hawe perform: 4, And M. vs. thacthey ae«
Folter,l [aw nothing but it mug ht be counterfeiced.and M Pare: I could 47 awe &c- no
BI percenue any ext! aordinary thing to be done by the bay, but what 41y 0 ugr lhon Hoke
ther might well baue done: And M Y Vallis, I could not percemee any ſuch they are all wee


ftr angnes 1a the thunges | {aw the boy doc,and lames Alwood: wpon the 5


ax any thung,but that —T Mow mig bus eaſulie doc, fouud chem alh
ar


Becaule theſe men were enher blind,or ſceing would not ſee,ſhall ®**
wee thertore put out the eyes of others, of the 17 depoled firit, and
of luagrie others depoled unce: as alſo of hundreds belides readie to
depole the ſame, it rney were therynto called by authoritie? All men
are not like to Peter and lobn who [aid vato the taces of the hie priſts 384.20
and (ders, chat they could not but ſpedkg the things which they had ſcent
& berd.2. wher almolt al theſ 10 witneſes which ſaw So,in many fits
depole, that they rhemſelaes could dothe likg, others, that any body might
Srile fan yenogis hore ARC ILINY be perrured if they
haue ſo depoſed indeede? for their be almoſt 3o which haue depoſed
to about: thinges impollile to ho Gong by any nevarater |
wer.Belids,by the depoſitions of $0.8 0 & examined
the B: and the Diſc, and alledged in this booke to proue counter-
feiting, and ſo by the Diſcourric it ſelfe, it is manifeſt, that it is not ſo
ry calie a matter for one, much leſſe for any body naughiily diſpoſed,
to doe the [ame So.did, Srven came ts carrie me ([aith Somers) whom, as I
om apply angry reap 123 ity ap that I was ſo
beavie in my ont «. le to carie me. By this reporte it
ſhould ſeeme that 7 could hardly carry him,not becauſe of his ftrug
ling, and yet euery bo e can not ſo ſtruggle, bur for the exceedinge pag.ado.& 1834
great we be of his body(which is by ſome depoſed) whervpon this
teport did re It isalfo confeſle and depoſed, that he made hv» belly
% fuel nnd did ide is tongue v2: fo 8 00 purcdll of is could be -—
: uh


pag 23-5
pag 215»
Pg 204.
pag 233»
"ITY ivy,


Pa, 2334s


Pag 257»


pap 29


__ Porter
0b.C oper
Ed.Garland


Myunud


168 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


with a candle, for not longe before and in the preſence of the Main
with ſome © others, his mouth was by 12 perlons or their aboures
looked into with a candle, but no tongue nor parcel| therof was their
to be ſeenc, ſave the roote in his throate: Againe,Som: thruſt his tonge
backwards into his ome om. with his mouth wyde open, pricked with
prunes, endured it, foamed exceedingly, that the foame ran dawne on

the ſides of is month,und about his chinne,C7 roaped downe into bis necks:
Thele unges (confeſſed by the D/co, himlelfe and the frendes of } reſi


amo rms - depoſed by his owne deponents,) cap not any bs. | def
dy naus htely diſpoſed eaſily doe:yea hereby it is euider that no vody can
by art doe the lie, and theirfore So: hath not counterfeited. Let the


owng
his


D;/c.then and frendes of Re judged out of there
monthes, And this is the 12.time the Diſcowerer is convinced
D;/conery, Before wehaue hearde that the Diſc.in his Diſcomerie
diſcouered my innocencye: & heere we playnly ſee that he hath done
as much for the caule it ſelfe. Yfnow hereby the impoſſibilitie of Ss,
counerfeitiug doe :how much more,when herevnto we ſhall
add the rare and ſupernaturall accidents mentioned in my anſweare
to the laſt chapter of the third booke,
Diſcourer

Whether theſe depoſitions will [atiſſie M, Dar. and his frends, it may
br doubted, but to a) reaſonable men they will be ſufficient, to ſbew the
vanitic of the foreſaid pretended PT.

Darr


The Diſc. may now be out of doubt, that theſe his depoſitions doe
not ſatiſfie me, us alſo why: neither doe they or can they ſatiſkie 1rruſt
any reaſonable men, but muſt needes appeare vnto them to be as ge
rally vaine & frivolous. ſo moſt of them manifeſtly falſe, & the depo
nets plainly periured,if they hane ſo depoſed, Farr therfore are they

"mg any venitic in the aforeſaid impoſtbilities , vineRe\y2
cloud of witneſſes. And thus is this ſup fed vanitie of the afc
impoſ161lties quite ouerthrowne, & pm; tr lighter then vanitie it

OF CHAP. 19r |

How contrarie to M. Dar, end his frend. <ſſertions.W $0. was accout-

ed by meny in Nottinehamyfor « 94 the time that he beg ame
bss practiſes there,vntill be coufeſſed the ſame himſelfe,


comerer

This he proverh by ſundrie jk ſitions, One depoſeth,] told M.

Da .it was reported, that the boy 2d eanofore Another, 1 did verilie

thinke that be did but diſſemble. A third, many full bold opimon, that the

boy did diſſemle* A fourth,1 thinke that So. diſſembled; and thus doe 3:

moe depoſe, $i
Darrell


— ——


—eGnwyeagy yr 939qQ QC IE SSBMESCYIZEYY


#2


23 FRAES8EAST


The people of the Iewes faid of Chriſt, that þ» was 42 lutron and 4
#mker of wine, and that be had « dial: yea the phariſes ſaid of him,


that he was aconiurer, caſting out dewils, through Belzcbub the Frince of


denils, And yer behold there was never wy thinge more faile.N!any,
yea generally all the 'people of the [ewes did thinke and report, that
the diſciples tid fteale leſns away by nieht, whiles the ſouldays fleept: and I
warrant you, had the bie presfts, (Who rayſed vp this Naunder of the
reſurrection of Chriſt) ſent forth Commiſſioners, enow would have
depoſed the ſame. and yet loe exceeding falle:yea not only ſo,but ab+
borring to common ſenſe, For what more abſurd and ſenleles rhinge
a be NE errAk ore rhny' my _ affirmed oh at wo they
, bus diſc Im away v as gone while the ſoulders
3. ng was raverall belecued, 4 monge [i lewes
ow knewe the ſouldiers thar the diſciples ſtole him away? and whe -
ther be raiſed vp himſelfe, and went away yea or no, as his diſciples
firmed? Thus we ſee theris nothing o falſe and abfurd,ſpecially if it
be againſt the glory of god, and the good of his church, but if Sathan
once gerte any to d giue our in yn many will beleive it, and re-
= tt, Even ſo albeit it be Papa falſe, abhorring from reaſon and
ſe and vnterly impoſſible to betrue,that Som. did counterfeit, yet
not withſtanding 1t may be belc.ued, reported, and depoſed by ma-
. So inconfiderate und fooliſh is tan to beltrue eutry thing) This the
ſerpent harh in long experience knowne to be true, & that therby


by nothing more he hath im all ages ms eatly againſt the
Lord and his ſervants; Otherwiſe ws never ipread abroade (0
manifeſt ſlaunders as vnceſſantly he doth. And as

caſes he doth thus without faile,8 ener will:ſo hat
perticuler workes of god, whereof my {elſe haue bene a witnes. Kath.
Fright wasno ſooner diſpoſſeſſed, but preſently the denill raiſad vp
one Becks anold man in the miniſtrie,and a kinde of preacher,
to ſay that ſhe had the falling ſicknes: and yet the man never ſaw her
vntill her diſpoſſeſion: Dale being difpoſſeſſed, Sathan ſtirred vp
one Ethwierd Baker'to ſay that he counterfeited,and others to report
that he waghelpetlby awitch of Sraphenbil. when rhe 7.in Lancaſhire
were delivered from Sarhan, the*papaſts pave it out and ſpread ic a-
broad that I was a Coniurer, in ſo mych as M. Dickons writtinge vn-
to me thereof,aluiſed me to come to Mancheſter, ard onenly m the
pulpit to cleare my ſelfe of that Naunder. Neither doe I doubt but
thar the ſame is voyſed among them vnrill this day, For ſince my im
priſormment/ vnderſtand by writing, that they report their, thar I Cid
put the dewll into them all the very ſame words alſo have { ndry of
them ſaid to my face in priſon, And they papiſtes at they CLrk- open
ly «nd a loud have called my beloued brotha 24, More, who toned


pererally in other |
he done in theſe” /


math.11.19.
lohn 7, 2:0
wath, 9. z 4.aud
12 24+


math.z8 13.15


Prou. 14-16,


wack.a1.3i8,


but alas theſe
mcn/ were out
their owne cie-
menc,


pag 152-8151. fo falle,that one may not(in appearance or {o true that he can
not diſproue by this kad of wgamcns may chmke and prattle of


Pag 258.


170 A DETECTION OF $. HARSN!


with m2 in the ſame worke, (and in regard theirof hath bene my fel
low in bonds) Conawer.{a like forte whea the deaill was calt our of So
mTs,he had lome at hand to lay that he counterfeited:yea cealed nof -
vntul by hunſcite and his initrumencs, he had not onely drawne til.
boy (vpon whom we worke was wrought; to ſay that he countertet
ed:but that the ſame might be aore probable and the rather beleiue
ed, to atfirme beſides that 1 taught hun to.co doe; yea lert v8 allure
our ſelues that it Sacan thould be driven out of thowlands hereaiter,
againlt cuery ſuch worke of god, tor the obicuring of it,he would
raiie vp & [pread abroad one {launder or ocher;otherwiie god ſhowd
goc with the g'oric due to him, aud man make his bett profit therof,
without any reliltance by dathan,which is not pollible,except un lom
ſpeciall caſe, and tor a cartaine time it pleaſe the lord to chaine him
vp. Be itthen as the Dyſc. ſaith, (though in this chapter of his there
be much vntrath)that So wes 6c by many iu Nott, for « dſſem»
bler:it doth no more proue Sa.to be 4 &;/)cmbler, then the account and
report of the people of the I-wes proveth that Lon the baprilt bad'e
dewill,yea that Chrilt was a 2 lwtton and drmcker of wme,that he ceft ous,
aexils by the prince of dewils and that he had & dewall: In a matter of re-
ligion or concerning god or his ſeruants, vox populi,is nor(as we com
monly laye) vox deybut often, if not for the molt parte, wx diab'li,
Yet indeede the people ar multitude,ſaid noc from time to rime,nor ,
yetat any time, that Ss. counterfeited, as the D/e. affirmerh,bur the
contrary, But let vs frame and therby a litle better oblcrue the Dye.
argument, therby to ſee how ſubſtantiallie he th Som. to have
counterfeired, It was faith one: I chinke


, I verily thinke (lay 0
thers we So. did counterfeit,ergo So.counterfeited, Behold the Dyſc. de»

jon, If this be aged this alſo:many reports
that So. did not counterteit, and lome of better judgment aud credite
then theſe haue ſo depoſed: as namely M. Ireton, M- Browne


M. Evington, M., Brin/ley, preachers of the obek: ergo So, did not
counterfeite Thus alſo I can proue that Ss, was lefled, for they a-
forefaid preachers hae depoled that they thinks ſo, Yea what is thei


the fyre of pu ago CtC, he lIeweawho arenot afew thinks,
and verily thinke,and ſay to this day,that the Meſſias is noe yet come,
ergo. The D:ſco. may be aſhamed thus to diſpute. But this ſhamles
kinde o! arguing, doth wel ſat with the cauſe he hath in hand. Neuer-
theleſſe Tanſvere particularly to the cheilelt of chele depoſitions,


Ds/conerer
I ded abwayer(faich MAIre i) bubs wayberha beddbur df Sh.


AS


—


PRO ERP SRGET


SPaSFafineat a5


thejard broly read over, before ut went tothe preſſe: and yet acknowledesth
| | X 2 py


* LYING DISCOVERY, UW
F Dariell-
ha. we hauc heard before how greatly 24. Aldred was foRed with
Wat he veheid ud So. the 0, of tNuuember & night,and the day of his
Ccupuiie:ion, wither 105 brewucs lake | reterr the reader:io 85 it can
nuC puliible be ue that is heere gepoled, And if M, Aldred heue
&1L4C (ilh V pn bus Oath, his depolutien is rot to be regarded,

comcrer


When I percetoed (qub 2 Log) that the dincl $het was pag 16>
» be 18 SoincT5;C0mtd | peaks ne language bus Englyb, i rooky the boye for @
wwuTfeuc, and (0 awayes m dad repwie ln,
arrell
I anſweare 24, Leigh,that this is a fory argument and fily concluſi
as ton. moo pontt nr» Fn. nr CG
decauic be cond |peare 10 lang wage bus engleb. For ther be (0@


Gvubi) in Exngiand Which be 1omwhat (irag'y handled, that can ipeak
Bo 940” ihingndg c O16 englyls, be yer are no counterteits. Nether doth
Kt ENCE LUO wha he nad no dewill xn bum. except M can proue
this,taat wholocur 1s polietied and hath a deuul 18 hu dis
vers Languages: then indede be faith lomethinge. 1 hear 15 no doubt 4
but Laat Tue weull can {ku of all : INS ;


ypon tat beige 1n man, he theirfore will {}
#7 1vme ot 6464, at the becke alſo and pleaiure of this or that man.

He can doe many that he will aot doe. No queſt:

but che deuul un So,(god permitting) could have done a

Wowany tninges whereby it ſhould haue bene as mwnteſt

he had bene in Somers, as by ſpeaking larin,or greeke,
whereof he did n6t one: and yet it followe
ern not theirypon that he was not
their,


THE FIFTH BOOKE


OF CHAP, r.

How M1 Darrells crede,touchinge his dealing with the bry »f Burton,
&1h relye upon a falſe and fooliſh booke that was publybed of the ſaid boys
pretended pſſ” | 1ow,and diſpoſſeſſon.

Diſconerer


pag 263, ,
And M.Dar. bonſ+lſe conſeſſ*th that he read, or at the lea? did heave


192 ADETECTION OF $, HARSNETS


ng pon duers occaſions, as hereafter ſþall apprare, that. ſundrie peyne* "i

toy Han hire vntruc: which bringe conſidered rogerher with the [ana maya .

- Dije ad nener bethought,that M1. Darr. writteth ſalſly, when he telleth vs that « great
Fo reafone:h fo Any world dpeſ the ſaide booke to be (c) war, if they might be called

oy ns as if cpcurwmto by autboritic,

— > <qumyte Darrell


uhe Wee & ons __ hauinge vſed many wordes -- _ purpoſe and not
jor ye worthy the anlwearing,to proue the printe _ Dare
= — {ing to be « ſale and fall booke, cormeth in the third and laft placy
to that which he thinketh to be moſt materiall, namely, my ovne
confeilion, in that I acknowledee ſandic pryntes in it t- be wntrue: and
theſe he ſheweth in the chapter tollowinge to be three-But weruuſt
ynderſtand they are matters of circumſtance, and that I doe nor mſhi
foe the booke in every cr cunmſtence, but the hiſtoric t» be erur-in ſubſlance,
asa by pag. 266, Now marke good reader how the Dyſc.ar-
: T he booke concerning Darling 5s vntrue mm Jome pryntes, ther
ove in all,or ergo the whole booke rs falſe, Hath he his ſerices thinke you,
that gropeth not che groſſnes of this arzument? Now, wheres it
ſceme that I was in fault in thet I did not correve the booke in
(aide poymees that were « mille, leeing I read it ower before it went tithe
preſe, the very truth is, that in a writinge which Irerurned
with the booke to M: Iobs Deniſon the publiſher theirof, I did ent
downe the ſumme of that I ſpeake to Dorling & bis frends,defiering
that that beinge the truth might be publiſhed, & thar the other lines
which were (and now printed) wherein theſe ſaid vnrruthes
are contayned, might be left out. Am I now in fault, becauſe theſe
things were not — reformed? Touchinge the other poynt,
to witt my affirminge, that many 1ore readie to depoſe the ſaid Loke
be true, though I my ſelfe (forſooth) acknowledg it to be Falſe: marke
I praye thee (good reader) the deceitfull dealinge of the Diſcowerer:
how he furpoſly leaveth out the ſpeciall wordes that ſhould cleare
the ca'e,v7,for the ſubſtance of it. ſavd in my Apologie,thr booke prints
ed for the ſubſtance of 1t, hath bene offered to be confirmed by the oaths
of 4 gredt many: aprincipall part whereof we ſee he ominterh:w the
out which omiſtion he could never haue made (agenery cd may
ſee) this goodly flowriſh, and: theirfore it muſt needes be that the
ſame was wittingly and aduiſedly done by him, which 2pgravaterh
his fault theirin: whereas 1 meant then and doe meane till, that the
ſubſtantiall povntes theirof that make againſt counterfeiting, are true
and juſtifiable For confirmation wherof we muſt know that M. D-m
ſon wh# he came to the B. of Londen to be examined ab-ut the ſame
mater, brought in writinge the names of a great many (1 ny a-
ut


4YING DISCOVERY. mw
bout 40. ) who offered to tothe ſame effedte, yfthey might
kaue beneadmirted: neither deubt I but that he made his lnodns


to the Bybyp.
OF CHAP. 2.

Of M. Davells raſbnes in aff irminge Thomas Dowling to be paſeſjed,
and of his cunning inſh ting bim, how to brhane humſelfe ypon the day
of bis pretended Sib ton,

Diſcouerer,

This mutttar of Darlings was 'ſo accrprable wnto M. Darrell buninge
Gene owt of worke from the pretend ed d; ſton of Katherine wright, v7 pag 2:70,
for about 9, or tem yeares, ns _ - mſelfe nt2 tr ſomwhet groſly.

This he proveth by the depoſition of Robert Tomme,who depoſeth
that he tated other preachers and my *k the manner of the bryes
fttts.1 anfwered,that my optnion was the bry was poſſeſſed. Darrell ſaid he
was of opinion'erc. ergo. a worthy argument ſure. In the 22 page the


D:ſc. bath theſe words: The certaine hrereof is that M., W alkeden the
boyes ranfuther hereing how M.D arvell had helped Kath. Wright,procur
ed hom to come#40 Burton belpe Darling, 1 fnow the Diſc.ſpeake true
ly as indeed he doth (though he ſeldome fault that war) then every


one may ſee that D.avell cr not thruſt or intrud himfelfe ento thit «(74
n,muchles ſomewhat groſlye as the Diſe. affirmeth, being theirevnto

dan by the boyes grandfather MW «lkeden. And
thus is the Do/comrrer convinced the 1 3* time by his owne D;ſconery,

And where he ſaith that the afore aid preachers vpon mv perſwa pag'271
tion,reſolued tre rther with we & diners other miniſters of « ſaft to be hal
« Burton for Darlins« diſþ»ſjeſjion, and indevoreth to proue the ſame
by Ieſſe Bees depoſition:I anſweare that had we done ſo,we had done
nothinge whereof we neede to be aſhamed, bur the truth is we had
not a word about that,as M. Milderſbhem and M. Myre with the reſt of
the miniſters can witnes.
Diſcomerer


Bring earneflye imreated (ſaith M. Darrell) for my oreſence at the faſt 1 8 7

derzed the ſame,avd that for theſe two reaſone: v7. for avoydine the nite of

Pame glorie, and that the people through myne abſence might be kept from

aſcribinge any ſpeeiall eniſt ts me in cafting out deuils. In which h:s ſecond

reaſon 1t may be obſcrurd: firft hit conceite, that the draill the next days

would be caft out: then it appeareth that he had wſe evear vauntrs » the

aiſpofi" rom of Kath Wrieht,or otherwi(r, why ſhould be bane (ul. -d 4

ny ſuch thing by tht people? Ag.rine if this were nt a ſhifting realm, hip

Cane it to paſſe,that he was preſent at the diſpoſ} ſinge of the 7, in Lance 4»

ſoire:but eſpeciallie of Wil. So, when his name was alms/t at the war's 1
ar


pag 377.


An'wearst


174 A DETECTION OF $, HARSNETS
Durell RE TIE
V Vhat my canceice(as the Dzjc. tearmerh it)beerein is,and where
vpon grounded, appeareth by that I have {ma wm my N@T408treat
ing ot Wie meanes vt dupoiiciiion. For anlweae to the ſecond thinge
hecere obiected agaiatt me, Ionaly put the chnituan reader wm mince,
that the people ut the Lewes would have made Chrilt a kung, and the
peopie of Lilira with thewe pref would bac [ecrificed vnte the Apoſtles,
b4 nabas and Pani, as godes come downe vnto them wn the likenes of men:
and yet it1s certaine Wat Chrilt and theic bus Apoſtls were tarr from
ſeckinge or deliring any fuch thing, 1 © the thard 1 anſweare, that bee
ge pune £0 the great good Liouetime had receiued an can
eyc witnes of this autable worke ot god, and grived an this reipecte
tor my ablence heere ipoken ot,elpeciallye attcr the boyes Uipolielli
on:1 theirvpon thought aud determuned with my leite, at ike occalie
on atterwaca ſhould be ottered of my preicace,not to with wraw my
ſclte as | aid any more, theueby to lovic the benehte of that good
which the Lurd an mercy mught attoord me by being preſent and an
ey e witnes at the'e & luch like deuWerances: aibeit in we two tormey
relpecics, or tor the two realons atoreiaid, I atter my leile delired &
cuuld rather have wilhed to have bene abient wen preient. And that
hcereia I ſpeake the truth,and lyenotgod 1s my Wines,
Di/comerer,

Howbeit, if he had bene fo careyuil to haue avoyded the note of vaine
gihoric as be pretenderh.he would newer hawe jwſt ered the wordes o. fore men
traned of the diuell touching bus praying 14s fait 43 they dad, that were wr't
D arlmg eta bane peſ}ed bu handes:fot then by be ſeemeth ſo grecdy of joue
cOMmmende 16 ts Vater then o_— Webs Conmtentcd t0 receae ul from jabwth

arrell,

Had I bene the publiſher of that booke the Dy/c, might then with
{me better coulour haue tramed this maiicivus collection aganſt
me 2,thyie words are not lo much lett downe tor the matter ot the,
as for the inner of their deliuerie, v2. ith hs mouth wide open:which
thing impollible to be counterteced, wil the louner be beleiged,whe
it is not onely declared that the boy [pake with his mouth wyde opens
but allo (pecified what wards he {o vitered;and in this reſpecte their
v as go0d and ruſt caule of publiſhinge them. 3* | herre is tmall cauſe
wh; any ſhould commend m2, or conceiue well of me in regard
this peach, ſeeing it was ſpokea by the father of lyes, and therefore
g-catlye to be lulpe-ted of falihode, excepte my felfe had publiſhed
the booke: tor my peryſmge of it was knowne onely to lome 3,07 4.
3% 7, S,


OF CHAP.4,


DM" > + —= £5 6 =.


yy w.7Hz i. + 4 AX as © wc a


a OD 6H &


- >.


LYING DISCOVERY. 175


Of M. Darrell: fra ther prattiſe with Darling to pretendgthat Sathan
bt to renter vuto himy and of ſome other bis wntrue aſſertions concern
mg the bayes fires, and of his cunnung dealunge likewi(e with bun, thas be
(bald neuer conſe(ſe bis d:ſſimulation,
Darrell.
From page,* 85.vntill 2 30.the Diſcs. purſueth his owne ſhadow,
hbouring with many wordes to convince me of that | never affirm-
ed. vz. 1 bat Darling in all bis fittes was altogether ſenceles; this I haue
ſhewed before in my an{weare to this penerall charge, wherevnto to
avoyde tediouſnes andidle repetitions of the ſame thinge,I referre
the reader tor fyll anſweare to —, am heere he obieReth againit me, -
iſcouerer
_. Another thing that the Diſc. troubleth himſelfe much with, and
where aboutcs he beſtowerh many lines,even from the page 283.cAl Ps **9:
page 293. is, that I ſhould affirme, that it ws Sathen onely (a5 [dsd
thinkg) that vſed the words m thoſe dialogues mentioned in the ſaid vooks
be the | aid Satan tr an[farwing bimſelfe into an angell of rg ſuch times


me when he [remea fo (peake Z And this he contuterh full ſoundly (I
I & warrant you) firlt by producinge the boy The 1 OO rang tot
hat be dath nas Gelerue ſo. TNe6 by WC Se of [eſſe Bee a ladler, who
fat; by woe «ffirmeth [0, ud ke ſo fuming wng. There reaſon
is, becaule of the godly ſpeeches be vſed mentioned in the dialog wes, 1 hen


une and in 'the third an lalt place the Diſc, himſelfe telleth ys, that for

ml the ſame, reaſon he chinkerh that it can not be that the faide di«logwes

wb came fron the deyill; his gan net be theſe: If any man will take the
ne peynes to peruſe thafe ſpeeches, which Iefſe Bet bath fathered'vpon the bay ,

ah un the ſaid dialoges: be ſpall finde them to be ſuch as will baraly be found 3


424iNe itt any ({o ie that Ouer was veer ” e aſcribed to Sathan,


nſt .  Ifnow I can ſhew. out of a hiſtory of good credite againſt which
he, theire can, no exception be taken, as holy wordes and as vnlikely co
ich come from Sathan, as thole mentioned in the di«/ozves, to bane yet


/he nevertheles bene vetered by Sathan,then I hope the Dy. will yeeld,
ens that the kolines of thoſe ſpeaches doth not lete, but that the ſame not
eur withſtandinge they might proceede from the diuell. V Veread then |, _ _ ,
ule n the divine orje,that the Tempror (aide ynto Chriſt,is i written, al au k 1.24
of leadging ſcripture for his e, (all the wordes whereofbe holy.)
"re An. aften-thus; Ieſus the ſonne of the moſt high god. And againe,I know
ied thee what thou art, even the boly one of god. V hat wordes I praye you
4. be more holy 'then theſe”) and what wordes more vnlikely to come
from Sathan then ſuch as theſe” Sure if the Dc. had bene livinge in
that age,and preſent at theſe holy ri [peaches, he w tas
2


peg 3.93,


tzS ADETECTION OF'S. HARSNETS
kave thought they came from Sathan, Even ſo likewite I muze what
the B. and S. H&ſnct wou!d have ſayd,if they had bene by," hen that


teſtimonie and commendation was giuen by the «!iuell of Paw! & Sy.


las, whereof we read in the ates 7heſe men (ſaith he) are the ſervancres
of the moſi heb £od, which fa

wordes almoſt could be delivered more vnlikely to proceede from
the diuill, that aduerſarie of mankinde, then theſe? for being true, a
man at the ſirſt bluſh might imagine, that if the were the ſpeaches of
the euilt ſpirit, then ſure be was not vnwilling that men ſhould be fa
ed:wherasthe old ſerpent ment theirby to hinder, and did mightelye
Kinder the faluation of men, I meane the inhabitantes of Philspps:

by oft c:yinge oxt in that manner as he did, he moued and occaſion
ed S.Paul to caſt him forth of her whom he poſſeſſed, and others vp-
on that fate of the Apoſtle, to caſt him and Silas a prophet into pri-
fon, & ſo ordered the matter that ypon their inlargment they depart
ed the citie:which no queſtion wasithe RR aymedatinthe.
commenidation he gaue of P.»/and S1/as. iSo that by rheſe and ſuch
like esof the holy ſcripture we may ſaflye condude, tharthe
wicked fpiritheere ſpoken of, did ayme ſure at ſome evill pratiſe &
inrent,wher! be ved thoſe holy words mentioned in the ſayde dis-
byu-howſoeuer the Dsſe. happely iudge otherwiſe, and his deponent
Iefſt Bee ,becauſe of the godly ſpeaches contained in the <hafogwer.


comerer

M. Dorvell being charged, that ſmce the tim? of the wx

” of Darling,ht cheribedemtertained & lodged boy at bu houſe:
and that ledft bis owne packing and diſſumulation might happen to be de-
refF-d s well as the bayes: be did vſe 3 fo fo th! ecTe.
vto him: v3. that be ſbould c ontin ue conſt ant, uffer himſel/e by
any allurment to be dr awen t1 (ay, that he had diſſembled in bis former
frtes,and that he was newer p1ſſeſjed with any wicked [pirit And his an-


[ware i thus: one night I entertained the [aid Darlinge m ny houſe at


Aſbby: and the reſt be denieth: but Darling bimſelfe depoſerh it. 1 haut
bene with M. Darrell ([aith he)diners times, ſometimes at Putton,once at
Apleby,once at Packinvton,at ſeuer all exerciſes: from whence I went how
with M.D.ovell to Ajbby, and ſupped that night with M, Rilderſhem,M.
Dax. two other miniſters,and Miftris Iretm,at M, Hilderſhames houſe,
dd ye that night at M. Davell. Allo 1 confeſſe that M. Darrell hath
had ſome communication with me,and hath willed me «t [metimes that [
ſhould be conſt ant, and ſticke to the truth, meaning, that I ſbon!d wot (
my ſelſe to be dr awen to aff ime that 1 was not poſſeſſed: but that 1


wored my from the poſſeſſion of Sathen,


w wnto you the way of [alvation, V har:


M,
ſembled in all my [ayd fittes, and ſo conſequent(ye, that God bad net delio


Dur.


S BOY YES MAY


—F-.--- 3-2]


th


4


*
The
art
he
ach
the
 &
hes
ent


SIT STARRERSPENS


Darrell
Heere is greatadoe and much prattle about


packing, diſſimulation,


LYING DISCOVERY. bo


and I knowe not what, and of the feare forſooth that was on my os
call


halfe lealt the {ame ſhould be deteRed: but if the Iudge ſhou!

for the evidence to prooue this,then come in nothing but 2, poore &
ſilye circumltances or preſumprions: either of which if the be of force
to proue any thing,mult needes probablie conclude this ſaid packing .
The firſt 6 vey and argument of his is this. Since the preteu ded


d/ſpoſſc}1on of Davap Davell hath cheri{bed, entertained, and loaded


Dathng:it js theirfore that Durell raught Darling to coun
terfrite apoſſe(ſion;and that at ſuch time or times ther was ſome pack
ing betwenethem about the (mothering of the ſaid diſſumslation. The
antecedent or former parte of his realon the Dſco. pretendet) to
proue both by my awne depoſition and D.av/inges, but he doth not
pode fully; for jp x he (poaketh pals {bing of Dealing, as if

had bene my darling indeede, or as if I had bene ſome folter fa-
ther ynto him.bat proueth no ſuch thinge, but onely the bare lodg-
inge of him one nzght onely: and truely I doe not remember that e-
ver he dideate one crumme of bread in,my houſe in his life, Bur ad
mirte he had ſupped with,mag as well as. lodged with me, and ſtayed
Yall a ada ths arty obo rarfas js let how
of all that? admittinge the to as it is falle)yet how
doth the ent and ithange to by M. Heſnetes logike?
many haue eaten and lodged with me, whom I never packed
nor conſulred with about dſſemblinge « poſſeſſion.) The ſecond cir»
cuwſtance is, Darrell willed Darling to be.canſtant. and fticke to the
muth,end not [uffer himſelfe to be dy awne to effrme tht be bad d:ſſemled
I woldbe loth to blot paper or ſtand long in anſwering and refuting
ſuch ware as this: And therfore I only deſire the reader to open his
eyes and to behold the yanitie of it, and withall the ſhifting ;pacherie
of this diſcouerer who pretendeth farſooth and would faine hane the
worldeto thinke rhat theſe worges of mine were vſed to darlinge at
mine owne howſe at Aſbbie and that darling hath ſo depoſed, & ther
fore I depolinge the flat contrarie,muſt needes be forlworne, Now
this cunninge insinuation of his.is cloſely $& darkely but yet maliti-
oully ſhut vp in theſe wordes of his:the reſi derrel denicth: implyinge
therein as if I ſimplye and abſolutely denyed all che reſl which(to make
the caſe plaine and znt vmto the good reader) I doe nor. I doe
not d+xry» that ever I vſed any ſuch ſpeaches to Darlinge at all, But
that I vſed any ſuch ſpeaches to him in my houſe at Aſbbre the niphe
I lodged him there,or {pake any words vnto him to that eFe, T his
6:hat which)I denyed vpon my oath,and deny agayne:nay | have vp-


the 1.circumy
{tauce


178 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS


on my oath tothe Boi London confelſed, that 1 ſaid to Dar linge as
ws here by him depoſed, But where & whenfin the Gatbouje atter tis
LD lmge had bene in the &ybops houle for ſundry weekes together,
and lundry meanes vied,yea and by your leaue none of the belt(c)
to haue drawen hun with Sommers( tor the it ot Som +


mr conteilion of counterteuumge)to laye and cuntelle 'tnat he had
countertented:as threatning,and unpriſonment in the Byſbops houle,


torging and deliueringe ot letters to Darlinze as come trom me,and


thecypon requiringe ,and obtaining anſweres from him to the lane
le crers, athinge not denied by the 8, of him lelte in open
Court.ln like iorte Darlinge depoled that 1 ſaid thus to him (as here
is {pecitied at the Garehow/e after his departure from the Zyſbop,and
nut at Aſbby:the contrary where vnto he is redy to depole. Now
where the Diſe, by his wreſting and writhing, alteringe and keeping
backe parte ot our depoſitions intimateth,that one ot vs mult nedes
be perwred,8 that in his chriſtian and charitable intendement mult
nedes be Darrell, The truth is(and fo it will jehat in our de
politions at large we depoſed one and the (ame thinge in effect, our
vep olitions ſtrengthenmg and contirmingione another and nor diff
enting or croſſing oneanother And jy mar kind of ileights any (lips
perie dealing:the Diſc.maketh often s of periurie and contrari-
eties where none is, If you willhaue any more circumſtances, they
are (et downe a lyttle before in the Diſcowerye and doe here followe,
z. cir-umftance =DDovell no ſooner (aw the byye in a fitt, but preſently be affirmed bim
pag 273. ro bepoſſsſed. | :
X Darrell told* them in Dar linger hearmg of Katherin wris ht, who
pag 372 hauing bene poſſeſed was troubled'in ſuch fort as Dar lyng was. ;
X I ar.Yepeated m the boyes heareing what were the {gm both of poſſeſs &
Pag 27 3s etiſpoſſrſjuon mentioned in the ſcr1pt ures, wherby Darlinge might tearne,
what hr was to att Cr prafiis the next dey when be was to be diſpoſeſſed.
6 [) arrell move the boyer fremdes to haue a faft for his pretended diſ-
Paſuon roll them that that kende of ſpirit was not caſt owt but by pray-
and caſt me. __—y
, Darrell hauing appoynted the ſaydf aft, foretolde to thoſe that were
pag 274 preſent 1n Darlings hearing,that they ſhould [ee*the denill caſt bim into ve-
ry (fravre firts,and that they ſbould heave the denill fprake in bim, wherby


the [are brye myvhr lr ane whate be war to ae that daye. )


; D avvell affirmed that Darling wits ſenceles in al bis frets,
pag, 23 5- Darrell af wmed that whatſocury D arlinge ſcemed to doe or ſpeake itt
"3h -F his fits st was nothe, but Sathan.
T b:ſe cerenmP ances art all of them in a manner {al ſlennderows


ani! nalirions ſoedhly prouee ani! ſ» [o11ifoly and abj wrdly 45.4
man


>=2 x2 SS >-#


SPOEPSTtCY pay


ac, —


LYING DISCOVERY. ©. « 179
man of wiſlome & conlcience .nult nedeseyther (mile or bluſh ar


then:tor ablwere Wcriore yato them in oreite and to ihew how ab=
lurdly they prouc my teaching of Dar tnge to connierfeyte | reter the
reader vaco my tormer autwere 00 tne lane cironumntauces allcaged &
gaialt wwe in 39ucrs his cale to prou that 1 taught him to countere
teit/ For tae )//c.being(as it ſhould iceme Jbarraiac and deititute of
p:9ates,is torced you lee to tlye to his former munition and to bore
rowe the laine wepuns wacrwith he did io laye about him in Sow his
cale , why then ihould not 1 give him the repulie and drive him
back with the very laine rampeure ot detence 1 vied betore, where in
his lucceiſe | hope will be ao better thea it was, But I would faine
knowe and I demaund ot the Dyc.it Darling or ay other creature
did cuer atfirme that 1 taughte hun the {aid Dr ling to counterteyte
lurely no :For then we {hould have hearde of it in this Ds
V Vherethen the we army fo mT s of M
c
arrell;eyrher theſe cv


/c.owne word, and thenl am ſure
you are more credulus, then wiſe.


OF CHAP. x*
How D «ling confeſſeth bis owne diſſumulation,


Howbeu true ut is that within « fortmg ht after be was ſett at liberrie,


and bad conferred wuh M. Darrell mn the g athow+,and with ſome others,


br wrizte 4 letter to the B, of London affirmunge that he had bene drawen
0n by ſubtileies to make the [aid confeſſion: and addeth theſe wordes: what
x «ll this to the purpoſe if 1 of frailtie {bould [ay,that all was d<ſemblinge,
was it therfore ſo? 1 ſay that this paper is blacke,1s it ſo therfore? Thoſe a
ticles which I was (worne wnts before, 1 will land wnto them and inftifit
them. but concerninge the other 1 will neuer conſent wnto them.
The maine and in a manner ſole thing, the [24ſc. alleadgeth for
pu of D arlinves counterfeiting ,is his owne confeſion: le rt downe be
rein this chapter. Ianſweare negatiuely U.r{ng never made any
fuch confeſſion, Thus it was, S, He ſnet examininge Darling on a time
to 3 or 4 articles, he hauing anſweared them, vnaduiledly and like a-
boy as he was, beinge then alſo his ſcholer forſooth, put his hand as
Farſnet his tutor did bid him at the lower end of the leafe, theire be«
inge a greet (pace betwene his anſweares,and the placc where he ſub-
ſcribed his name. In this ſpace H.oſnet did inſert that abſurd and ridi-
culvs confeſſion mentioned in this er, which was of He ſnets
foiſting & taigning,but never confeſſed by Do lmg, as Darling after
depuſed,and roſtife d the ſame _ the L. Archbi
s


Harſneres
VX


pagn96.,


ances P38 T5
and ſcholang,or els It you be pug 4596


Diſcoure


Durel


186 ADETECTION OP $, HARSNETS


face 2.But admite he had made ſuch a confeſfinn: ſeeing it is evident
it had bene done of trailtie and humane infirmite (which yer god be
prayſed he d id not) what is thi: (as the bay himſel/e ſaith) ro the pu
poſe? 1/1 of frauttre ſhould [ay xc. ere it mult not be forgotten how
Darling a yoiig (tripling of thoſe t6der & vnſertled yeares was dealt
with and enſnared, He was for the ſpace of a moneth in the oy pr
houſe: duringe which time the Bſb1p and his Chapline with all theire
ferchesand deaiſes weare dayly and clarrce in hand with the boy to
wringe this confeſſion from him* which they beinge not able by any
meanes to obtaine, and diſpairing theirof as it ſhould 'eeme, Ha!) nt
his ſcholemaſter vndertooke to doe this feait, when they two were
in his chamber together, and did effe te it accordinglye, but in ſuch
manner and by luch a worthy deuiſe as we hewe: and then preſently


perceiuinge him not to be for there p__ as —_ ae. -
e dores. But before and to the ,


tayning Somers, turned him out of t
end aforeſaide, I meane the gerttinge of a confeſſion of counterſertinge,
(which notwithſtanding they went without)he was kept'ſo ſtraight,
that none of his frendes, no not his mother, might haue any acceſſe
vnto him.ſometimes he wasnot alittle fawned vpon:ſomtimes migh
ily threatened. S.Harſnet they two being in his chamber alone,offer-
ed to thrattle him,and threatened to whyp him, if he would not con«
feſle Dovells prattiles, ſheewinge oſhim two roddes, diuers other
threatnings I omite. He was impriſoned in the Biſbps houſe: ſundrie
letters allo (as is before ay were framed and delivered to
him as ſent from me,from whom an{weares to them were obtayned,
nu wn ran to haue entangled the boy and to haue gotte ſome
thing from him if poſſibly the could. Admit now that Darling a boy
of 1 x. yeares of age, beinge thus ſore layde at for a confeſſion, had at
of frayltie, and in a deſire to be at libertie and ridde out of
theire handes, yeelded them that ſorie confeſſion that is thus father-
ed vpon him: had the thinge confefled by him,bene theirfore true?
Men ſometimes of greater yeares and riper judgment, have in ſuch
cale ben too eaſily | nts m the truth to affirme that which is fall
and erronious, How eaſily then might ſuch a weake boy be -
ed and ſeduced? 3. Suppoſe that he had voluntarily and of his owne
accord confeſſed that in all thinges he diſſembled, yer the ſame ſuffie
ednot to proue him a counterfeit, ſeeinge it is evident ſome thinges
were done or ſuffered by him which _ no poſſibilitie be counter
feited: whence may be drawne an unavoydable argument to craze
the credite of him and Somrr: and of the reſt of the ſuppoſed coun-
terfeires: or no man confeſſinge or reportinge an impoſſibilitie of
hiclclie ought to be credited; But Somers, Dealing, Katheriwe yo
& i


EASY” YL” YT DTTC


—_


n
Ld
b
be
be
be


[


LYING DISCOVERY. if
and Mary Cooper, confeſſe & report impoſſibilities of chemſelues, in
laying they counterfeited,if ſo be they have lo laie,

Ergo they ought not to be credited,

Now concerning this Drline(to paſe by ſundrie other ſtrange
ations or rather paſſions of his, Yhe oft times in aday in his littes,bad
a great ſwelling in his body, by reaſon whereot divers times the bur-
tons of his dublert did bruſt off, and his aglet holces breake, albeit
they were purpoſly made and (ett on the (tronger. 2, He beinge but
of 1 3.yeares of age was of tiat ſtrength that two ſtrong men coulde
not hold hi downe or rule h1m,a thing impoſlibleto be couterteited :
for no man can add to his ſtrength by counterteiting, 3. In his traces
he vrrerec ſundrie continued (peaches with his mouth wyde open,as
appeareth by the booke that is printed of him, 4. his armes & thoul-

er bones were in many of his fites thruſt out of ioynt,'eene & lelt
lundrie times by diuers, Now beſide the paine and anguiih of the
toyntes & ſenowes in this caſe, I would faine knowe for my learning,

how it is poſſible for a man to put his bones out of ioynte and in a
gaine at his pleaſure, and then immediatly uſe and occupy his armes
in as go6d plight as if no ſuch thinge had happened vnto him. YEM,
Drſcomrrer Ni his ſweet lewell #”, Somers can with all their nimble-
nes. packinge, and dexteritie, but deuiſe to counterfeite ſuch prettie
trickes as thele, then indeede the ſay lomethinge to Darrell, and for
Dwiings counterfeiting,

Furthermore Alice Goodridge the witch ſundrie times confeſſed,
that ſhe miſtaking 7ho. Darling tor one Sher 14t 4 boy, ſent her ſamil:ar

& ſpirit in the liknes of a dog (partie coloured redede and white,called Min
my) to torment him in his body, and that ſhe had cauſed his vexarion
by the divel. And further at her ſendinge of him,ſhe ſtrained all her
bodye,and vomited,bidding her minnyto goe and doe the ike to the

7e, who returning ſaid,that he had done ſo, Now the truth is, that
beſides the childe was molt fearefully tormented,in and through all
the partes of his bodye,he was much troubled with yonring & with
often prouccations therevnto, as yf he had ſtriuen and ſtrained to
vomit and could not. It is alſo to be remembred, that ſhee named
the time when , the place where, the occation wherevpon, and the
wordes ſhe vſed when ſhe ſente the deuill ro torment him, as appea-
reth in the 2 6.page of the printed booke, Herevpon Alyce Gooarr'g
was committed to I) arbye gaole ,inditec and arraigned,and founde
puiltie thereof, and by my Lord. Andeſon ſentence given vpon her to

.mprisonmente, where ſince ſhe died. Theſe thin: es conſidered,
to ſaie and publiſh thus confidently that Darling cxmter(ey'e, what


ks it cls,but preſumtyolly ro condenine both Iury and ludge c ther


EY


es. DA ee.


18: A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS
of :niuſtice ar limplicitie, or both, And theſe thinges are ſo notori
ul.y knowca to ali the Cuntrye, that an hundred ſuch ſhameletie iſ
C087 Ys 4s U ils,are nut able once to bringe then(l meane the umpoli4
C1lites atore-larde) into doubte or queition thete, For the tw1ther
contirmatiun where of, we are reauy to Pruue and auerie the lane
by the oathe of many lutticent wineiles,and there-by make molt
euident and playne to the worid, that # 15 1mpſible that Darbnge
ſhowlde be 4 cuter fert ln the meane ticalon we inay,rememver that
two /n/liccs of peace and quorum and aboue fortye of the inhabitantes
of Burton ney ghbours there-ynto,v hich were eye wyiciles of Dar
lnges vexations*haue vnder theire handes in twoo leuerallteſtimo-
nia.s witnelled, that bis furts,torments,or beraknges,were ſuch and jo ju,
prrnaturall, asthey avc fully perſwaded no man ts poſſ1b be; able to cone
zer/enteand tor this and foine other reaſons we prrſwaded and dve ve »
rily thinke that Darhnge did not diſſemble: as appeareth by the tenure
of then /etters reſtimoniall here tollowinge. 1 he former wher- of the
P:jþ p hath, and a coppie of the latter,as 1 take it,
T: » all thoſe to whom ut doth or may appert aint, wee whoſe names are
vnder written, Iu{tices of peace, and quorom within the countes of
Staff 11/,and Darby, amongelt others ſend greeting . whereas we bane bine
r:.qur/led and d\ired to ce je our knowledges, concerninge the ſtraunge
bandling or b:takeing of one Thomas D arlinge. of late grenouſly handled
and ty mented, and that m ſuch ftrans manner 4s was to be=
boul, (whereof we weare eye witneſſes) we therſore for the better Jarejung
of «ll thoſe that are deſwous to know the truth in that bebalfe,haue thoug
gm to [19nifie,that we ave perſwaded,and doe verily thinke,that the ſarde
Thoinas [ Jarkre, ad nw 1ſemble,or counterſert in any thoſe his fittes, or
flange betakinges, and the cauſes or reaſons which mou vs ſo to thinke ,t6?
Fn''t for that the manner of thoſe his fittes,torments, or bet akringes z weare


Juch, and ſo ſnprrnaturall as we are fully perſwaded, no man 1s p1ſſi ble


@ble to corner ferte the like, And allo for that their was one Alice Goode
criclgr, thr wiſe of onr Oliuer Goodderidee, of Staprnhill, within the coun
11 of Darby, who lons before that time, had brne ſuſp:(trd for a witche,
ad bring for that cauſe brow hr before vs, did wan bet examimation
fore wi,conſeſſt that ſbe? did miſtake the ſaid Th), Darling; and thmezhtit
h ad bine one Sherratte a boy who had dome her ſom wrong” (43 ſbe ques
and mnreouer we baue bine informed by ſome of 995d ex- dart mn vs
knywnethat the faid Alice Grodderidee chd conteſſe that ſhe didl call hy
£14.ng ( for lo ſhe tearmod it which wa («1 ſhe (aid) in liknes of 4 kttle dog
and cailed it Minnie, and bad it goe after the ſaid [)arline ( think LL it
bai bin Sh r att) and twinonts him in all the partes of his 61fy, wc»
ſaid the dog ce returned to ber 474me, aud tou!d ber be haa done - hes
4


LYING DISCOVERY.
ba te him, an further bee did conſcſ}e that after that time,ſbe newer [awe
tbc ſaid little drgge, bus once, that u came to her m ihe Gayole at Darby,
wh-uher bee was commuted for the ſaid facte, andjbe bring in the ſayde
Gaole, w.ts broght before the Iutuces of Ajjije and Gaole deliuerie, ani
their dejuered the jaud Inſtices 10 be good to ber and forgiue ber ,c3 [be wonld
neuer dye ſ1 any mare.tn teſtunonee wher of we herevnto ſeverally [ett our
bandes and ſcales, dated the Furſt daye of Ofdaber. 1 598, |
Hiwnjerye Ferrers, Thomas Greſley.


2 4/l thoſe to whom it d1th or may appertaint, we whoſe names are wi
T der writ tex, 4[well reflantes po 71) rome o towne of Buy
tou vpon Trent in the coun:se of Stafford, 4s ochers greetinge. whereas wee
banc bene requeſted, and dejired to certafie our knowledzes, concernninge the
ftraiig baudung or be taking of one Tho. Darling of late griewouſly ha:dled
aud S dag 414 that in |uch \trange manner 45 was wwmider fully to be
bauld, (wi:reoj w* were eye witneſſes) we therefore for the benter [at ifſi
3n: of all thaſe, that are dejierons to know the truth in that bene
thruzht g1: ta /azn'fie, that we art per wided,and dre verily thinks, that
the | 414: C2. Darling did nat difſemble, or counterfeite in any of thoſe his
fuer, ar tra 1ge betakringes, And the canſes or reaſons which mont viſo to
th.nke be n4a1y, worcof for av,yding of over tedious matter, we will onely
bercun Alledze ſom: few (43 namely) farſt for that we bane knowne _—_
Th1.4) 4rling from b: childb20d to be of an hondft and grations diſpoſutzon.
an4b 1h bimſelfe an1bis frea.ls in whoſe keepinge be was duringe __
fittes ra be ſuch 45 we are well aſſured, wwuld haue no hand i t of
lew.l: prathiſes,and alſo the menuner of thoſe his fittes,"tormentes or betake »
ings were ſuch, and |o ſupernatwall «1 we are fully perſwaded that no
m4 25 p2ſſubile able to counterfeit the bkz.And alſo (or that their was one
Alice Graddridge <5.c. To the effetF in tbe fore (aid Teſtimonial, And
their wpon this Alice, Gaadaridge being brought before the Inflices of «ſiſe
and Gaole delinery was by dewe cor of lawe then convicted of the [ame
ſa7,in teſlun1ny wherof w: hauc herewnto ſeverally ſubſcribed our names,
datrd at Burton aforeſaid the fifte deye of Ofober. 1 598,
Peter Eckerlall miniſter at Burton. L[. Grainger, VV. Caldwall
VV. Hawes, I, Hawes H.Blackwall R. Turner VV,woadcocke
I Fichit I, Finney E,wrightman V.Palmer K.Moore R.Hyde
I Debanke I.Bridgett E.Hudſonne T,Dutton R.watſon T,
Horbyne R,Baker H.Clarke E.Goodcole R. Taylor 1.Simplon
T. Haſten the elder,conſtables of Burton, T,Haſten the younger R,
Hayes w, Harreſen I. Taylor. R. Sheaten, H: wackfeild. R.Tomſon
T. Saunders, I. Alſoppe. R.Tealz. w.Clarke. T.Stanly. R.Henlye
LHenworthe 1,Butler R.Bradlye Raphe Teate. 4s
A3 Thas


_ =


Fd 4 293,


a. 4.4 fn


1834 A DETECTION OP $S. HARSNETYS
Thus we (ce that howſoeuer dolinges vexation by Sathan is nog
@onfirmed by the oathes ofmen as Somers is: Yet by the teſtemonig
of many witneſſes of good credit, who render 3. forcible reaſonsa
gaynit counterfeirynge, Henowe that is {0 filthye as to beleive this
iſcourrer vpon his bare reporte without any proofe or reaſon of
Do linges counterfeiting before the teſtimonye of ſo manye alleagi
ſuch effeuall reaſons againſt counterfeyringe:let him be Fldbye
and yet more filthye. The matter contained in theſe teſtimoni.
als makinge againſt Darling: coounteſertinge,l haue ſufficiently preſe
ſed and vrged before in my Apologie wherevnto the Di(e. returneth
no manner of anſwere at all,and yet beareth the world in hand, that
he hath diſpatched and wiped away all, Theſe thinges which make
lo {trongly agoiel counterfeiting. are likewiſe, ſett downe in the prin«
ted booke of Do ling, and are the. principalthinges +in'it to be ob
ſerued to his vexation by Sathen : againſt theſe c and
the reſt of this kynde,theDsc.ſhoulde: have bente his force in that
courſe he hath taken,wherevnto he ſaith not a worde:and not haue
ed by theſe omen gy wm Gon —_
(ce trifli nges'that maye eaſely be praiſed, or make &
ſhewe of bets ok a counterfeited. as ,the ſpeches ve
gered by the tongue of Dxrlinge dialogue wiſe and his apparitiones
ofa Cat, 4 Dragon, 4 Brave Lightnings, Thundring,s Lanve, 6D,
etc, which though I am aſſured that Doling did not counterfeit, yet
it iseuident that it is no harde matter to connterfeite and diſſemble
the ſame and more,ifone were (o lewdly giuen:and the world will ex
ſilie be drawen to beleiue a praRtice in ſuch ſmall and ſlighte marters
as theſe :when it neither jwill nor can beleue theſe [rhinges here mb-
tioned to be counterfeited. And thus is laid open and di the
craftie and fraudulent Ne, of the Diſconcter.
iſcomerey - |
Lahly it is to be obJerned,than D arimge after he had continued a while in
bis fuſt pretended fits, many Juppeſed and gauc it out,that he was ages.


ſembler,as it maye appeare by the depoſations following viylefſe Bees
Edw Bakers, |
Darrell
This is his other ent to proue Darling counterfeit. The v6


rye lame he vſed before to proue Sommers a counterfeite. A worthy
one it is fure and in effeR the ſame with this: many ſuppoſed and gavt
it out, that Paull was « Grd :therfore he is a God. Thus we ſee whate
blaſphemous concluion would followe vpon ſuch an Antecedent,if
it were true.when the Diſc. hath pur this argament of bis(denyed by
meginto moode and figure, and proved the propolition,v3 whaſe:


;


HSE


LYING DISCOVERY. nr
we mary ſuppoſe and gine out in ſpeech is true, will then yelde him the
couduſion,and reſigne him er los ey phrgnrs. both Som «
mers and Darlinge to be counterfeites, And this maye luffice for


an{were to the Dſconerie concerning Darlinges counterſeytinee, nd my
teaching of bi
OF CHAP.s6,


Ab herin bt —_ bay
reuſe of Katherin rig bts confeſ}wn towchinge the beoinnine of
w1ſ] imulation, and of the mw that oy her (s to doe. Se G
T he generall cauſe it ſelfe touching the Lute attempts of caſtinge out the al
will,ss of great importance: otherwiſe ut is not vſuall,that matters (o long paf
»;..bout 13.07, 14,yeares _— be roy into.
arre


There is a cvſe then wee (ee of our attemtimge, he meaneth pro»
tendinge to ca} out Dexils, but what this caſe ſhould be,that is a ſe-
cret foriooth, we ſhall heare more of that another time, for the pre-
ſente we muſt contente our ſelues with a generall notize of a gewrall
cane, and that ( faith he)of « greate importance.It is to be thought ther
fore and preſumed that he meaneth the ſame cauſe which he ſpe ak-
eth of ,Pag.14.1 5,that is,the ſetting vp of the Preſbuceriall concerts, or
diſcipline ſo long contended-for by
of he meane ſ0)as Nehemiah ſometime did to Senballat the enemie of

e Iewas;1t is not done according to theſe wordes thas thou [ateſt: for thew


ſome. V Vhere- vnto we anſwer er achemiah. 6.8


becauſe in ſo atfurn.inge ſhee regorteth thoſe thinges to bave ow


faineſt them of thine owne harte.
Diſconerer.
Katherin


e010 ſe of her pretended poſſeſſion and diſpoſſeſ}ion, nd of her fytts both b,=
fore and fanado wipe did wk be extraordmarie, it was
ol diſjembled,
To get thiscfeſſiw-Homth lmple maide (which

© get this confe{/101- is poore & e maide (which is
all that the De tg proue Lahia W rights & mulation ) wee
muſt know, that the Commiſſioners(who were ſent downe by the B.
of London for the ſame ſe the preſident or principal whereof for
footh was S. Harſnet.this Diſc. )kept ber with the two balfe dayes and
anighte,and in the ſaid time threatned to burne her ſcte,if ſhee would
Rot confeſle that ſhe had diſſembled: as ſhee affirmed forthwith after
ſhee came from the commiſſioners, bewaylinge her ſaide perivrie,
And herein S* Haſnet « commiſſioner was a principall agent. Bur
deit granted that t his hcr confeſſion was voluntarie, ——_ extore
ted,as the contrarye js manifeſt. Yet therein is ſhe not to be beleiued


wn


right being examined ,coufeſſeth vpon hcroath,that in «ll the Pg-27A.,


atchough aſpirir done by her (elte which ſhe polliblye coulde not doe. For K.\ rights
cauncc betelir 1N tier ty rs Lg twell cxcedinglic in ner body & necke,whence it cang
a" ws fey wr LV paile nat ilie wente daylyc with her PEUTCOAC llacke laced to hg
wy vp « down iengch 07 one nande: lomethinge allo was lenciblye telt to (ir Vp &
Mo bet 5 du+0cin her bodyC,,as\t it had bene lome quicke thinge. lhce was
is <2 com Neil of ExLTAurumarie and lupernaturall itrength,anuet luch exce
———— Cliige waigac athat 5, ttronge men by realon ot her waighte (ihe not
M. 0 [ord de. HTIULIg OC LU agangeat al) could Icarcelye carrycher a little Waye,
4 ol. ag $45,5. Aibelt LIE WELE Ten but uf Lume, 16.07 17,yeares of age. lo thelle]
1,4 Mayead tlus one pretie toye of the dewil,which I doe not lee how
nu 41chitand- 1t could pullibly be coanterteuce, dhe being at one M.Edwerde Bryeſ
a 3 noon * fordes houe,delirous to drinke,but could take none:M. Bereſford bum


mane neeft feite came and called tor drincke, but as they held it to her mouthe,
6; (is Wepolit- beriglle the dIMCke Tor ted VP out ol tbe peice to the roote of the


Wil, ou TTY PESEC


W.1 4.4 ys parlvaur,

It, 144 V4! i hana , Diſcoverer

Mus uote yo And this courſe jbe conſeſſu1 (be hah belde from the time ſhe began it,

Tacingyi y uu wil WALKS LIE Lame al-nojl of br CXAMmimarnm. V3abomut I 3.07 I 44Y*4res*frariee

_ v1 4648 {yp bccarſe jhie was by that occaſuan much made of , and /or that ſh: feared,

F vetrs oy 4, That of ſlo bad ſbewed ber ſelfe ro hawe bene perfectly well far any lng ſes

01 4.0440% = ſonghtr jacher wilawe would bu _ to bus for mer bard vjaze of ber,

ig.2 vp, arre

* YFK.\#"right haue counterteiced,ſhe hath theirin ſpent the prime
of her lite, [rom the age ot 17, vnuill about3o. theirby dep:iveing her
ſeite of many,it not ot all tne comforts of this lite, as locietie, marriage
7c. who can now in any reaſon thinke, that a younge damlſellto my
remembrance of a come!y feature and _ de.irous enough(if
not to much)of the plealures of this lite, would wittingly,and willing
ly depriae her (elfe of them all, and that for ſo many yeares rogether,
and to ſuch an end as heere is pretended. I deny not that K. Wri2 bt
bath depoled that this was the reaſon of her counterfeitinge, Bucl
tiult S. Harſnet did therynto by bis ſlyghtes and deuiles draw her &
entice her. Neuerthcles who of vnderitandinge will beleive eyther
hi or her,ſecing there were more caſlie and honelt wayes to haue as
voyded the hard v/4ge of ber (ather in lawr,(to admit ſuch vſagez then
this of taining to be polleſſed with the deuil? as either by going to ſer
Vicc,or coupling her ie!ferolome in honet mariage, And truly I can
nut Out mara'le,that (hz hath not bene all this while wearie and dou
ble wearie of counterfeiting and had her fill theirof,ſeeinge ſhee hath
conciaued {o | ng in the pra tile ofit. It is omethinge allo that in all
this time her counterfeiting hath nat bene eſpied nor found our, till

the D/ſfo.zre” cane with his fell» # cn niTioners. But this ſarpall*


186 A DETECTION OF $S. RARSNETS = ©


NYT LJIINCTTS A


et! al the reſt, that after fo longs coumterfeitinge about 14. yeare
eoncingailkce. is 1s not yer puantihed at all tor her ſaide counterfers


Big,nor M. y999rs neiter,nor atty of the relt, Oh laith the Diſce
conver Concemnge KsWright, worn jb: was ex anined (b: profeſ*d,
tht ih2c2jorth br: wn'!d b:icom: 4 nem? wwnan,and leauc al bir frm
«://inu4tiis, 1histhen belike 1: (atilta:tion lutficiente for all her
coancerteiung, As good a (atiitattion are the like wordes vttered by


a notorious tnette,nurtherer,or any other maletaRors:& yerneuer
theles they are punithed by the chrittianmagiltrat, 8 fo ought to be


CHAP.7.


Of 14 Darrells procedinges with Katheria Wright f or her pretended


ap u-tt 121.

but there was another engine vſed,ss Ks, Wrighte,hath depoſed in
theſe word's, One fabimn of M. Davell in my pretended diſp1ſſeiſion at
Man'ſcrlde,wss ts lye yy1n my bellye, ſaying that he would: by ſo lyinve
pr'{ſe the Luvell out of me. When this ſtran Jrae was objeFted t> M,
Darriili fn J19tl hbe,1 looked for thit,ean framed his an[were wato
* m :015, or4e.4 'baningeread im the ſcriptures how Elias and. Saint Paul
4 frorc) rien eluet alone an ſam? that wear d:1, in theit Pecauty ts,


bje ,44:4b.18:0 4 yn126 frodent in dAittiniti, ti pt foue of 2 e. yevves,
/ - ' -Y 5+ . . , - % | : .
p/ 42c,1 did mn « blend: $eale(45 I thinke)be vpon the [aid Ka, Wrizht as


x :5 obiet:d After w des this ns ſaied anſwere beinge repeated as the
muarr u,he td rbas anondit viz.l did lie vpn the ſaied Ka. Wriehte,
but 44 v314 ef b{ilizy4i. Ll belewe. | bis pudilification biting owed of, be
d:jir6) abit three diyet after aſtconde review: and then far the diſcharge
of h1s coliftrenct 45 be[aied in deliutring the truth, be ſet down his minde un
this forte: Wheras being examined vpon the ſuden of a fatt.dine rwelue
yeares paft,t haue ſaied that I did theſwomt as there it is expreſſed m « blid
Zeale m;afting « foolib and indiſerett imita21n of the , Prophet and A,
pole T dt 09m proteſt that haninge called my ſelfe better to minde by cont
fermge with niy wiſe who Wi 16 preſent, and by better del:berr ation
»pon the ſame,that 1 verily b:leiut I did mat the [4id fatto the endt there
ſpetified: for that l newer Atamed at that time of warking any miracle,
weither. did looke for her deliuer ance from Sathan,but ſbe being at that time
vere vihuelic 1 dud it to kepe bev downegthere being allo at that ne -
ther ypon ſum part of her, and vpon me that we mightthe rathor er
d:wue And thus at the len: th, you baue his per{ete anſwere wherein
1 is to be feared that he bath made boulde with his 04th. For where 8s «t
the thirde time he ſaith be ws taken vpn the ſud1cn, when'bt made
bis furfl 4nſwere,that ſem2th not to be true, for that hit ſaide lying ypon
was 19 ſooner mentioned vt» him, but he aff ire that þe booked far
K,a7d bad rwo examples ” for bis excuſe the/eing.
qe bu


pag: ob,


pag 39%


if9 AD FTIICTICN CF E. FAFEMETS
I deſire thee(good reader) with, patience to heare & with wildometo
conſider of tizat which is here thus cunningite & malitiouſly pubiilh
ed againſt me. I] am charged thou icelt, with countericiting, and have
bene thus long impriſoned, toſſed and turmvile |, examined and reex
amined for teaching to counterteit:but the provte of this tayling,and
S.Harſnet and his Maſter both commung thort oi this their purpoie &
intent, to their greite:and not being able tor their lives wich ail there
wreaſting,packing,and milerabie (iutrs,to convince me of this linne,
then they flye to another ſhitre(a luctiſh one) chinkinge theirby ve-
terly ro ſhame me,and diſgrace me foreuer vz. To make the world be
leiue that Iam avitious and vncleane perſon, their withall cloſly ime
plyinge and prvocings men yt they could:chat Darrell who makes
no conicience of ſo foule a ſinne as that of wucleaunes,will neuer make
bones at fo {male amiatter as for glorie to teach men to counterfeit: 8&
heereinlyeth the ſtrength and torce of all this foule batterie againſt
me, in that one ſinne.1s apre enough to drawe on another. But if I
were (uch a one indeede as they woulZ ſo faine have me ſeeme tobe,
z.cither a drunckard or alchouſe haunter with Somers,as before is in
vated:or an vncleane perſon of vnchalt behauior with K. Wright as
here is inſinuated, and more playnly by that marginall note, pag. 37.
arrels [uft:T doubt not, but they would haue bene able after all rheir
earching and __—_ into my former life,to haue made ſome better
proofe theireof then they have,

Now. before I enter into the anſwere of ſuch particulars as are here
thus vniuſUlye charged vpon my head, to wype away all ieloufie and
ſulpition which may happely enter into the conceipte of too a
oft me: I doe here vnſeinedly proteſt in the preſence of God and
is Angels, that in allthis my dealinge with Kat, Wright, Thad nor (1
thanke God)ſo much as an vneleane thought:neither did] le on her
in ſuch manner as Elias & Paw/ſomimes did in the reſtoringe of two
to life, nor yet;in imitation of them: all which I direUly depoſed be-
fore the Biſbop. And that theire was no vncleannes in ate, euery one
may be aſſured hereby, in that this ſaid lyaing were their preſ
eye witneſſes theirof,my owne wyfe with other weomen,and for that
another man allo, Edward Loades by name lay together with me vp*
onher: all or moſt of which witneſſes be yet liveynge, and readie to
beare witnes herevnto, if they v* be admitted: with one of which

ſ!


at the leaſt, the wife of Henry Cr:ſſe of Manſfeild, S. Harſnet had (pe*
ach at Manſf-ild, as he with his fellow commiſſioners returned from
examininge K.ight, but what ſhee witneſſed we heare not, onely
my (elſe heard that he received ſuch anſweare from her, and found


her {p backwarde from affirminge that he would hauc had ber gab
| catt


'a


ad
a
er
'0
bo
10
1d
at
z-
0
h
n
Y
d
e
q4


threatn*d ro haue her before the B, of Loandon,and with impriſonmet
their, This being ſo,and my conſcience being cleere even coram trib ue
nal, I may the bolder go04 reader craue thy patience to heare my
further anſweare to the particulars as followeth.
Being by the Byſbop of London examined concerning thisLyinse
I fayd that I did not wel:remember wherefore | did it ,and no mar-
Ju» wap. lo long [ince it was done,about 14 yeares,and a thing not
worthy the remembring”notwithitanding the ws wil pretſing meto
an immediat an{were,would needes haue me ſay lumething V \'here
ypon to fariſfie his importunacy,l tould him that tor the preſent !
1d thmke or imagin that I did it in ſome childiſh, too hſh,and vail.
crete imitaion of the Prophet and Apoſtle:For quoth I vnto him [
was then young and had [tulied divinitie bvt a while,and therefore
It may be did fall into ſuch an error and childiſh parte. But after my
departure entring into a more ſerious conlideraton of the matter 8&
hauing my memorie alſo holpen and releiued by other meanes. I re-
turned with al the conuenient ſpeed I could not 3. dayes aftry as the
D;{e.faith,but ſooner, and craued that my ſayd anſwere_might be
corrected ,for that I had much miſtaken the matter . V Vhere-ypon
being depoſed againe, I afirmed' as the truth was,that I did not lye
on her in imitation of the prophet & Apoſtle, wherof I rencred 3 re
ſons. Two of them are mentioned bv the Diſc .himſelfe,but the third
& principal he hath after his vſual manner craftcly omitred,lealt the
reader ſhould happely lyght on that might ren 1 to my clearing, The
reaſon was this It I had / ſo as Ehas and the Apiſledid, Then no
doubt 1 e laied my mouth vpon her mouth my eyes vpn
her eyes & my handes vpon her hands. &c.wheras there was no tuch
thing don neither can be imagined to be:for the I wolJ have layen on
herin one ofher trances,)ſceing ſhee had many Yand not in a fytr &
ſuch a fitt wherein aboue all other ſhe was worlt to be ruled-nay it
can not in any reaſon be conceiued that I intended any ſuch thinge
conſidering Edwarde Loades (a man yet lyuing ) ioyned with me in
that Z-ying. This I did ſay vpou my oath ,and can preue parte of it
by witneſſes. notwithſtau ing all this my firſt anſwere was not cor»
reted,wherein(as I am informed) I am dealt with contrary to Lawe
equitie and Iuſtice, but yet not contrary to the vſuall dealing of the
Erſhop and his Chapline, Albe it then I freely confeſſe thar in the fa Te
done ſo longe ſince I was very vndiſcreete, and in my anſweare ypon
my examination no lefſe raſh, and vnaduiſeo: yet the cale be-nge no
otherwiſe then we heare, their was {male cauſe why cirher it ſhoulde
be obieted ayainſt me before the judgment ſeate, or that 7079” Pare
ly ſhould have it vp as it were ypon aſtage, in Combrive ar the come
mencement, or the Dif in this triumphant ſort to publiſh and pro


LYING DISCOVERY. _


191 A DETE CL . HARS TT


elaime ic to the world,therby to make Darrell an odious & infamoug
perion: as 2t he ſhould lye vpon a woman in bealtly manner, or els
zw0Uihiy & preſanpracally doe 1t in imitatio of Elas or Pawl:Which
as I have p: oteited is moit talie, But ſuppole this latter Were true;
yer (eeing it was done ſo many yeares liace, when I was little berter
ten a Cid wn yaderitandinge,and that now beinge ot riper yeares [
am as tarr trom approuing tncirof, or practilinge the like as aly man
whatſocacr,it muit needes be Irake it,and cannot be exculed to be in
the tughelt degree oi mallice, and the hardelt mea:ure of regenge, in
tliis Uelpightiai & opprobrious manner to obiect it againlt me, Aud
yet when they bauc ail done & {trained aud racke\ thus folly or vae
diicrete parte of taine to the vttermolt, it will be tognd to weake to
proue or convince me of that which they wokuld lo tayne (yea rather
thea their lives):ind me guiltie off.vz.7 his teaching the &'t of notorious
connterf elrmg. winat doth my luppoled lyingeion rerths. £3 (it it were
truc,as 1t is talle)helpe and furttier them 1n chis their Fica and accula


tun againſt mes (urely not one tote at all,but onely to cale their Go«
mokes,and wreake their mallice And this makes me remember a re.
port of the old Earle of Swurrie, who being araigned and ca:led before
the Commutlioners tor Hihg Treaſon, it was among other thinges al-
leadged againſt him by lome then in authoritie,that he had very gif


orderly bivken the glaſle windowes in Cheapſide, whervato the Erie
made an{weare:wha'?doe you call me hither far High treaſmm and doe you
#leadge vnts me ihe folles of my youth” Even thus(good reader) areth
it with me at this in{tant. I have bene called hither by the High, Come
miſjion, and have endure thus long trouble and impriſonment, not
for any trifle or triflinge matter ifit ſhould be true,bur for ſuch avile
an thamfull practiſe,as deſerueth rather the ſeuere {courge or rigaur
of ju'tice, and my lelfe to be madea fearetull example an i pe Kils
20 polteritie, then to haue any booke or any ſuch baulinge diſcourle
gs che Diſc, hath wrirten and publiſhed againſt me, And yet we les
wizenthey come to proue this hainous matter againſt me, then they
fa!l co tell me {15 theſe men did by the Exrlr) of my breakinee of glaje
w-n:lowes I meane of my/yins on K, Wright: which tat as | my Pull
co not approue of but codemne as very vndiſcretly done, ſo they for
their partes may mate much of it, but it will little avavle them to
prone me guiltie ot reaching K. Wright to counterfeit a pale ſion and dif
pf fron of the dewall,. |
{hat which pleaſeth the D:ſconvrrey to tearme my qualificatim,is
nothing lcfſe, but onely an anſweare to certayne ek of the article
which at the firſt readmge of the B. (ifhe read them) I marked not
well, containing in it a playne and dire 2 anſweare to that which was
not anſwered before. wherein yet the Dyc. after lus wonte1 n_
| | _


LYING DISCOVERY, 298
bath left out parte and the belt parte on D.ovel; behalfe, yz. theſe wor
des:1 did ye vpan ber jideyſbe {yung on ber (ide,and this(as my anlwere to
thus articie will witnes)l depoted at the lame time when 1 layd my (y- This perad vet ©
wg was 11 1m1t4120n of rhe prophtt,ues I dui( vx. far the preſent )thinkg.whet rake rd |
ot as 1 was not then very lure, 10 had I aduuledly coalidered thereof, ,,, much.aad
ad better remembered my ſelfe,l had preſeatly and jn the lace mo» theirtvre no
ment corre-ted that falle immagiation of mine, wherein I fo much fn hrdrt
wronged my lelte. Now as the lc. hath oautted part of my depo» down,
lition, lo(tne better ro peice Vp his patcheric,) hath he added ſomee
thinge ot nis 0wac,vz.45 Þ belexue: and againe, I verily beleine, which
wor as b:caule the argue a dabting,the D1i/c.hath inſerted, as though
I ha4 ttoode in 445 of thole thinges, wherof I am and-was very lure
and out of all 4:ybt. Neither would I haue proteſted fo confidentlye
as 15 1ere colutciled, and thea come in after wards with I belerwe. I verily
belezue,
Y Yhen I (ayd Aa I ked for this, 1 did not meane (ach a fylehy
1d ridicais depolicion as isnere mentioacd,ar fuch an article as
then was read vaco me much worle tacn the depolition;buc being ex
aniacd concerinage Ke. Wright, Hooked to heare of myſaid (ying and
to be examined thereof,and that the worl1 [hould be borne in
that it was in a vacleane delice, and thervato inJed inclined the arti»
cle, i'tc realan wheceat was becauſe { knew; Sathan would eo
hgh a24.ipread abroade, this raſh and yndilcret ate of mine ,it god
did permut hun, and chat the ſame through the greate folly of man
a14 proaes to beleve any thing reported thovgh neuer (o falſe, elpe-
taily agaialt a preacher and muniſter of the word, would tead to my
reproach, and not reſt there,bur thorough the falle perſwation there=
ot,ceepe many (rom beleuing the workes of God wherein the Lord
bad viedme as aninſtrument others This greiuving me inwar
dy inmy ioule, andin that my greite thele wordes forth,
the Diſc.wold faine here vpon interr, that I mad: b)lde with my oath,
becaule I yd that I was cx4 mined vpn the ſod4ine.To this I an{vere
a4 iTis cruegthat I was 32 the ſodaine examin'd If this fatt:,and yet lo-
kd /orthe [ame,after that the Biſbyp began to examin me as touching
K1 1g ht:far oefore he came to this article,therewere diuers other
articles propoſed vnto me concerning this [ail Ketherin, about the
which the Bybp was a 9204 ſpace in examining me.ln which interim
I looke 4 to heare of that which n>v the world you (ee (through the
©2aritie of this chaplaine and his gaod Maiſter)chus infamoully hea»
reth, As touching this depalition of K4 Y/7ights, he 1s verie ſin
that knoweth not who taught or perſyade4 her io to depaſe and
it came 110t of her (elfs,if {o be ſhee haue ſo depoled,


*4


nog
Diſcourrer
WVeſee that Ka V7 richt wa: di(p
mes (of prayer and; jaſtin« Jthat Chriſt appaymted:and ſo Darrel muſt b&dri
wen #0 conſeſſe that be wrought 4 mirecle,
Darrell
I haue ſhewed els where thatDenils are or may be caſt our by
prayer,or bv praver amd faſting, according to the kind ot ſpiritwher
with the partie is potſe/ſed: and that this is the ordinance of Chriſt, K
Vrright then being by prayerdiſpoſſeſſed, was healed by the ordinary
meanes, as wel as thoſe which be deliuered from Sathan by falt inge
and praicr; and thereforenot by miracle.
"  Difcomerer F
I: being obieFFed to M .D #ell by bry maieſtics Commiſſuners that
be knowing the ſaied Katherin VVright to diſſemble in her pretended frees
at Manſſeild, bad privat conference with her, and taught her how to order
ber ſelfe in the manner of her counterſeiting, wherby he encouraged ber in
that her lewd courſe, be doth deny it, but hereofKa VVright depoſeth
thus: M. D arvell after his commy to me at* Manffeild, didl t tcach
me «lone, bow to uſe _ m) ſelfe inmyfes.


arre
 rhenewert® KaY/right ſaied this for feare leaſt her feete ſhould have bene
der,;ro be belped burned. 2, K.)/Yright came to Man(Jeild bvr two dayes before her
A pres on difpoſſeſſion,before which'rtime ſhe had bene for many weekes 'hand-
—”" _ means”, vow mariner,even after the ſame manner
as ſhee was at Manſſeild and after at /Vbiteington vpon her repolleſſi-
on,as is euident by pag. 305.where-vpon ſhee was firſt had to one Af
when fure theire rþgr a conturer,to be holpen yf it mightbe, and after by the appoyne
> tmghiners ment of the now Ledie Bowes, then Miftres Fovliem to Cheſterfeild n
apollefion be- market towne thereby, whether by her meanes alſo repared
fore. _ \..;, Meighbourminiſters, which ſeing herin divers fits, ſaſpefted her to
fal&,neither is be poſſeſſed ,wh the ſame was bruted in thoſe ; ,and
| #heſame depol- this was before ſhe came to Manſſeilde as the aforeſaid Ladie with ma
weſlcs, but one. Ny Others can witnes. It can not be then(were K. Y/right a counterfrt
| Ly chis,ther /Þ»*t that I did teach ber at Manſſeild ſeing whether ſhe couerfeited,or was
Se :/:ie Poſſeſed, it was ſo with herlong befote ſhe was [Et byM Pereffarde to
fe wat  enll 15 Manſſeild, beiore which time God he knowerh ,I never ſaw her,neith
Sj, hind"? er doth Ka V/Pright nor yer the Diſe.ſay any rhing'to the contrarie. 3.
manner aecwng T was faith Ka ,V Vriebt when T parted from MD avril in the very; ame
wh forme ſa! exfe that I came to Manſſeild, And forthe ſtrigrheni g*hereof are pro
maſt be fot Cnced the depoſitons of three:wherevpori the Diſc: (rag 305
cauſe he ws deth thus: By which conference Of the time it appeaverh deveFHy that Rae


letied, | | | |
ey 290, Wrieht was not at all in ary ſortereleiued by M Darrel]. And in _


3
. Pag- $05s


A DETECTION OF $8. HARSNETS |


fed, but not by the ordimarie meg


aw Ay ©


Wwmre-aAIZ_S


TYSSEESSSEAESSSTSETEEFLEASS.


LYING DISCOVERY, TY
place thus. Hwdthis comrſe ſber conſeſſerbyſbe bath beld fromthe time ſhe,
began it , wntil| the tame almoſt of thi: het examination, vZ. about 1 3,0 14
cares, 1 his conſydered 1 delire to know ot the Di/couerer,wl-erciore Þ
did reach Ka. Fright to counterfeit, If to glorye in the difpolieſſion of
her, asis to be intende4, for the gayne of one peny is not layed to my
charge-how cometh it to palſe,that Ka Bright faynec nor her fcite r9
be c1ipoſſeſſed;& ſo contirmed well ever atter that | with others vicd
prayer in her behalfe, bur not withſtanding the prayers vic) to rhe
end to make ſhew that ſhe was therby diſpoileiſed, and a lecret a gree
ment theirol berwene vs/f the [Dfſc. ſay truly, yet contirved the very
ſame, counterfeiting a pcſſeſhon after in like manner as betoref | h1g
tended to the ſhame of me her maſter, and not to my prayie: all the
£lorie had bene m the fained difpoſſeſſion,whervnto the diſſembimge
of a poſſeſſion onely ſerued, (if their had bene any ſuch iniquitie) and
theirefore would in no caſe haue bene omitted. who can be ſo groſle as
ence to imagine that I did teach K Wright to counterteit a poſſeſſion,
and give her no inſtruQion concerning the diſſemblirg of a diſpoſſeſ
ſions ipeciallie ſeeinge I did affirme and beare the world in hand that
ſhee was diſpaſſeſſed ypon the prayers vſed by my lelte & others?
what in common ſence would K. rights fayninge to be yore ad
vartag mefHad K, YYright diſembled to have had the Cevill caſt our
of ber by me,and then muſt ſhe have remained well, vfterIprerended
to diſpoſleſſe her,in carnall reaſon ther was ſomthing to have induced
me theirvnto, but their wasnothing in reaſon to leade me to perſwad
and teach ber to-counterfeite onely to bepoſſeſſed with the devill.and

the ſam for many yeares to diſſerr ble. As this could not procure mem
particular the prayſe ofmen, and tobe reputed to haue ſome rare and
odd pifte in cehing ont dewils,but rather the contrary,all thipgs well con


fidered: ſo neither in generall could it further che ſetting vp of the Pre F815:


(oyteriall conccites: ſeemg heerewas no dewill caſt cut by a PreſLitir1all
mn,to commend him,8& his conceies to the world, And this is the 14,
time the Diſconerer is convinced and ſhamed by his owne L)sſconrry,


4.Ir is to be remembred, that K. wright ſetting downe the canſe of 2nſ-46


ber d:ſſimwlation forſooth, doth not mention any profite or benifite
ſhee (hould receive from me, or that I did beare ber ſo in hand, but
mentioneth che hard ſage of her father in lawe lobn Nekin,in beating ©
bruſmng her yery ſore:to deliver her ſelfe from which ſhe fel of counter-
mg: wherevnto the


4 -


much made of by ber p arentes” If theſe were the reaſons or cauſes of KP


Wrig bes of: fſſpmwlation, as K.VVriebe andthe Dr/c.tell vs:then ſhe did
nor'<ſſemble for Darrels ſake, not for any profite or benefite ſhe wag
to receiue from him. And this is the 1 5. time that the Diſcowerer isccn..


yinced


Diſc. addeth, «deſre to hue at ſome eaſe, and to be pa 197 1258


 $ag3ngs-X gas


95 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS ©


viaced by his Diſcourry: except you will lay theſe were not the onely:

$446) C> OL ACT COULLETIGILIAS, WiC WE CAN ALT IR aNy realgn Urake,ice

Wzc nether bh. Y Vrighs aor Dyco.(who betwene them 1 crait haue

ORUGEd Luc) haue named any other care.

tlawage aa wearcd that witch is taid co prone K, V Vright 4 coun

ger cate, anmu uy icite 50 bat 144ght ber the reit in thus chapter beinge of

lee muinecac 4 Viutzas nat worthy the aniwearinge, and lo will pro»
Cee L9 ay Cooper the tourth commerfeue.
OF CHAP.S,

OF AL Dorels proceedings with M. Coopergtbe ſifter of william Somers
Dyſcomerer.

Faſt M.Cooper ſth thus: many tumes M, Darrell would call me waee
bum 4 lone, | veins 4n my fatbers bouſe, and tell me that be doubted, that |
W164i pr ou 31 £42 to be poſſ;jjed, end theirfore bad me looks vnio it. His
pAriKiia) pea bes wun ber were nothing elſe, but 4 cunnimee protect
put Mary Cooper us mud, that je mught countefeite ſuch 4 matter ,and (6
yoce raakest, H:rewnto 44/0 that apacriauncib, which jbe depaſeth thus: 1 ofren
mc ixard vl, Darreil| ay bjore my precended exilnes,thas it was the den
was cuitome, worn be bad pajjeſſed one un 4 famulee, to ſeeks to p/ſſeſſe more
of the ſaimc jamie ikow ye. d 211 (45 47g nenge too plainly bus cunniay packs
m2) M, Darrell denyeth; bus u« ſom: what ſtrengthened by Somers depo <
futon w ups bevalte: beforetume (ſaith br) that | fell az ane mnco thi enarſe,
C. Furtbermaore whiles the (ade; Mw'y Cooper was mcduatng 48 it ſeen
ec vpn il. Darrels former ſpraches gt fell out that 4 child of bars died «lit
ue b:jore Clrotmas. which joe torke ſo beavilie,as is made ber aa ſbee ſaith
6ndced 4ud eruly enill at e4/c,and| mwhat widht: whereyp mn errtaint' w's
m1 44 others wn the towne, comming vnto me;tould me ((aich ſoee) that
wa; 1991/ey then L knewe my [elfe to be: and that [ be 4: evill army
brother william was. Thoſe wardes added to MN. Darrells former ſpraches*
that he doubted (bt wml d prone to be prſſeſſtd, and that Sathau wa; mit
content with one in 4 ſamiit, together with her experience of the ſugnes 4
P[ſejſion, which [be bad ſcene in her brother,and often beard of M.D
mad: ber (3 ſhe: [aith) to dot that which ſbe nener thowght to hawe dine:
that 15, (4: (be add:ih)to tomble and tft, to taike idely, and to laugh,

Darrell


[n this laſt chapter of the D1ſcomery, the Dc. telleth vs of the coun
tertcitinge of one Mary Cooper of Nottingham, - wife of Robert Comer
the younger,and liter co Full:am Somers, and of my teachinge of het,
or cunnins: mud fradulent pratiſes vicd to the ſaid enl. And rhis be
proacth by her depoſition, treagtheneJ by Somers depoſition, other
provic hath henons. She counterfeiced a poſſeſſion. An4ro the end
the aught be deemed by the world to be poilaiſed, ſhee did tumble F

PIE


SOWwg ous «4 oo


ry l , _ n b #44 my [ "1 | bo p
- » Ld
- » , 3 , T
- LYING DIS RY, © "x96
*


poſſe, talke 1dely, an4 laugh. mpg hte
Ker neca ihce ns hagednyheipeto teach ner raem,ork ehhauryſ:s
Bly SIcal C4012 erin, batot acricite without megſhe was alle
T9 44 120d XC. And werent they wile peopie winch
vpva tae doinge ot thale;toyes would deeme her to be vollededcee
mait Ka9we-cen( and may 19 realon ' atlure our ſelucs; that were
May c voper a councerieute, tomake thew tneirot The did tomething
Euic dcudes ramble and tojſe talke rdely and laugh: yea by the words of
ea L3yc, lomuch ma, oe comectgred, um that he ſaith Mary Coopers
EXPCT1cnee of the jrgnes of pj p2(ſ7{ſion, whrchjbe had ſrenc in ber brother, and
ofica vcard of mc, made ber (3-5. wence 1x18 to b gathered, that theito
be .avugat to be policies with the deal as weil agher brother was,
c14ca34a.crtece ume (ac lealt) of chejngwes of poſſyſon,,as WV. Sonters
her orucher aad to the laid end dons hninedl - Let vschen (1 iay)
cva 14er wiaat countertett rrickes the did, and whether hey be luch
as 4 cvaidreach, and the learne and pra:tile, |

'4 3ac
= wita ttrange ughts


manacr dtatnd rs coarie or dd her brother Sowner s,
far ue no looner ended his nes, but preſenchy in the rwinkling ofan
&Y© the begans terg,and when ſhy ended, iminediatybeganohe! &
thus they did chough they werein ſeveral roomes;**
3.1n theie wekelnkes ery much,wherof ſhe knewe nothing
aſter, and that ps gre i eight be mad very probable by diver
' circumitances adſo. |
Faw me otneopay ſhe was aftht ren that 4. 7 y,coude
\. The wasof fa tural! rllinge of diners thinges
_ way ot her, and chat at the {ame inſtant they were done.
her fires he was in the fudgment of men wi out feelinge.
Fla ule mopby on ys wes was done to
make triatl theirof, which ahi wo ar, dly will tuffice
theirvnto, And that was this: hee little th Ga ts ere withall
the force of a man inward, ſo as preſently after it fwelled much, and
great payne had ſhe thei .F many dayes after:yertherrat ſtirred ſhe
not at all,no more did Somers
7. wag; twig the miceſt as it were deuided; and rayſed vp of
either {1de,
8.Qut of her belly was _ heard a kinde of vhupping, alld a
3 noyie


24897 ' ADETECTION or $HARSNETS |


of hebetyr ant oak lege | 17 rm. wi in ED ofthe


4a rec ſomewhat more then haife gone with chujd: and
: little or not at all bigger, about a quarter of a-


— 2, Ih his (welling would ſuddenly begone, & after a little while
- be ther againe: 3. \/pon and.duringe thas fu elljng ſhe. felt: ſormthin


| (as it werequicke)ſtirr within her, whervpon ſhe thought eſpecia
artbe firſt,that ſhe was with child, and now & then Ks. er


great ſimplicitie ſhe ſo hoped a great while after: & yer alwayes from

the beginmge ſhe (aid, that that Nirving was nothing like to that ſhe

felt her. when before ſhe was with child. after ſhe had thus c6

tinued about 1 3.0714. weekes,the tell a traveling, (o as midwite af=
ter midwife and weomen were called in and ſent for, wher

 in(asI was credibly informed)it went thus with her. Atthe begining
, of her trauile, her belly was about the bi areas va and ſo =

next day very bigg, but ſoft: not ery bigg,and hard.ac if

- ſhe had bene indeede with child, poor ——


PT gms wo” ug wo = wits &4© cs  .... -


- ſometimesallo the npgmatietige rigs


1s. Moreaover,a was ſometirr es


| ſeeneand felt in very ſtrange ed detatocutaeetodiinotied 0
bene ſome quicke Sie ciaandite -
| felrandthiswas in partes of ber body,as about her ſtomake, |}
' aboue her breſtes,and in herarme or ſhoulder. And this rare rune I
: together with alteration in her beIly,from little to th
— teo di ſoft to harde,& from harde ro om Y
| ment time ofher cravell, which was for 2.0r 3. daves, as I re- b)
She had the paynes ofa woman in trauill: and in danger of d1

eath,as many women in trauel|:in ſo much as they which were with { . *

Fwy xhardgrwer ger the bell to be .toled far hex. In 2- o_
word I Wn PUP IAN ane ms» = _ H
. heetein (om others,in that they bring forth ſomerhinge, ei fat
nes recnab run. (meme bikcbx he ook wh
at all, Neither then nor after: travell after cravell, and noch -nge bur ſhe
. fraucimge, andonewould have thought for a childe, for therrwere | 22
all the Genes and forrunners of a child, and ver behold node was | V"
brought forth,noryer any thing elſe. That iſſued from hey. 5+ ne he
uer was knowne or heard of to come from any woman, bur «ore 2 wa
child was either brought or their to be into the ---'</: and _
yet loe no child. Beſides theſe things which ſhe had in common with int
qther wedmen, which weomen carite'l it is impoſſible ro counterfeit, c a
2nd a ſhame for men to ſay ſo: ſhe had this in ſpeciall and proper to Da


ber .clic,that lumpes of fleſh came from her, and that which beinge


LCREMA TEE ELECLSS ES


' totheB


n 4 by . ? 1 %s ge : , 4 P _ EY © (a of 6 \ 4 h p p p
y G F 7 os LN. Pot Kong WOT 7 ; 2 SL & RS
y : x p- ha! bl
”" - 2 4 -
- hg ny Gs
G


_ carried to the Philiuonghe ſaid that it it came from nature,it was not


polbble for her to liue. Hecre was a bloudie counterfeitinge, if you
e all, as the weomen which were at this travell can tell better
then I, V Vhiles thele thinges, and preſently after theſe thinges were
done, the nutwighltanding did riſe out of her bed,& go yp & downe
the houſe, into the chauiber, and neither keept bed nor houſe for all
her traucling: which had colt her it may be her life if this her trauel-
inge had bene naturall, and not extraordinarie and ſupernatural), In
ker breits allo ſhe had ſometimes water, and ſometimes nulke. It was
a prittie peece of canning to conyaye now milke now water,into her
breſtes,and (luch as tewe weomen can doe the like: and yet this we (e
1s but the lealt of a many, of her laytes, Is not this aſtrange kinde of
traueling,and [trange childe ſure that this woman went wuthfIt may
be it will proue ſo in the end when this woman ſhall come to be deli-
ucred of this childe. After all this trauelige I haue ſeene this woman
with her belly of a bignes ſomewhat more then ordinarie, and within


| halfe agyarter of an hovre and leſle, lo bigg to my Iudgment and.o-


thers,as $ amo great with child and readie to be delivered.
As rhe ſumme of this being examined by the 2. of London\con-


cerning Mary Cooper, I ſett downe in wrighting, (whereof I readpart

— to heare the relt) aftirminge vpon my oath
ſome of the ſame to be true of my owne knowledg, and that the reſt
I was crediblie infor med and did beleiue to be true:{o I offer now to


thoſe that be in authoritic ro make profe heereof by many witneſſes. pag $ 19+


Yea the Diſc. himſelfe confellerh ſbe had 6.5 ſwelfnge in ber body wher»
by ſbe verily thought het ſelfe to be with child. And a little after he pro-
duceth 21.Cooper depoſiing thus:whe Myftres Gray and the rel] of ber c#


| pany(2%, the other weomen deſired to come to her travell)came about


me ſaying and reporting that I ſbowld be delmered of ſome monſtrous thing,
Heereby it _ not onely that Mary C per trawiled, as is afore
{ai”, but alſo that in the fame it went with her very extraordinarilie:
wherevpon the weomentheir preſent, looked not that the ſayd Mary
ſhould have bene delivered of a childe, but of ſome monſter: and trulye
no maruel! the premiſſes conſidered,

VVe heare what M1. Cooper hath counterfeited,& what I haue taught
her,if a counterfeite the be. But how did I reach her”For ſooth 1 (aid
vnto her I doubted ſbe would prone to be prſſs ſſed: and that Sathan was
not content with one in a {amilie, This latter ſpeach faith the Dyſconcrer,
(v hich no wiſe man will belaiue)rguerh too playuly his cuning packing .


Did ever man reade ſuch ridiculo! s ſtuffe as this? Doth it not de
ſerue rather to be hiſſed at,then anſ ered? Frame the argument S. H,


Darrell ſayd to Mary Cooper (be doubted or thought ſbe was puſeſſed Ge.


thaſare


pag 318,


pag 33


pag z16


399
T heirfore he tawiobt Mary Cooper to counterfeite « poſſ ſſo. By the ſame


' TeALLN Certaifle women and others un Notrenghan which gocinge tg


fle ering ſome world thinks to


| A DETECTION OF $. HARSNETS


hus'y Cooper layd, ſbe would be as could 48 her vrother was, taught br i
counte; jeu. bor heereby mey ment jbe wowld be poſjeſt as Somers was,
which 15 more then that 1 affirmed. tieerevpon tae Die, alcribeth
her counterteiunge parcly to them and this teach of theirs: bnt how
locti.luy he dotia it, and how ablurdly he realoaeth here agamit them
an inezlert every cluid wdge,a boy may lec tnat were we deceived,
aid Mary Cooper not polleit,this laid ipeach argueth our timpliciticy
bur nv tluch imquiae as the Dyc.preteadeth: iv leike groie ts this,
that Mary Cooper and | d velling 1a the lane towne,and | deliring in
my lelte that 1iary Cooper thouid coumertente, and the wilimge on
her part to pertorie the lame, as the ſc. pretenderh, yet dwellinge


' in che ſame towne anJ hauing luadrie times ipeach together,neither


I nor ſhe euer had word ot counterceiting, but onely vied luch ipea-
ches as you heare: which were 4 cuning prozect (forſooth) to put het' in
muncl of counterfeiting. Heere was an apt icholler { trow, that need na
turther inftru-tion i ſo difficult a matter, chen co hane a few torye
wordes(tach as you heare)calt forth, which might put ber 3n mmae on
lye ot that ſhee ſhould doe, Her brother was good at learminge his
tettes, if you will beleige the Diſcowcrer, farr ſurpaflera hun,
But Mary Cooper withe depoiition proceedeth, | |
Diſcowrrer
Which lauzhins, I wml ſomrrumes haut reftrayned, but could nt,
by reaſon of the proples ſooliſh 00g that were prejent.7 his laughing and
e but « [male matter:but con/ider what M,
Harrell gathercth of it. 1 aff med ſaith be in Mary Conpers bearmg, that
by [augbing and flreringe countenance was ſuch 4: 1 bad ſeencin others
pſ4. Againe 1 bane [ayd that ber laughter in ber fits did proceed from
the dewill,
Da


Concerning this /au2hing, anJ the wordes I ſpake as touchinge
the ſame, this we malt vaderſtand: that for certaine weekes when
Mary Coapry was about her aforeſaid traurllins, and Sathan moſt bu-
fie about her,ſhe was giuen (o to /c42þins, that ſhee no ſooner look»
ed uf any body bat ſhee would [au or ſmile, neither could ſhe ab-


Raine as ſhe ſai4,and no daubt truly: Now 1 ſeeing this cotirenance |


in ner ſomecimes.and hearing of it by others,and perceiuing evidet-
ly at the ſame time the worke of Sathan vpon her, & calling to mind
the fleeringe countenance and /auzbmy not onely of K. Wright, but
a:lo of 3.ot the 7. in Lencdhis, and withall con'idering that (uch an
exc te might well proceed from the deaill,who by his nature is gia®

£9


ml
tr
£
| 41
A


4 6


—-


GW Gw4 90% «moe wg A = ©» = ce Ho ©


 watcn «ep ner tron protitinge by that affliction: and indeuouringe


vato | rather inclined, yea ina manner wholly: or being without by
ſome external operation of his, And this I therfore did,rhat I migpe


LYING DISCOVERY. . ©
wall vanitie,and theurfore might well caale ſuch a vaine & light coil |
genance: did teil her, tar that her l4ughng of (mulnge came no dowbe
from the dewl!, And ttus Liaide theirby to have drawae her to haue
rurned her eye to god, correcting her tor her tinne, by the aurulteris
et Jatnan,


:


Dyſcomerer.,
Ag 4ine the ſaid Mary Cooper beung thus deemed to be troubled with pag g19%
S444, tt jel out thai bejades ber jayd greaſe and weaknes [be hed alſo
ſome | wellnge m by body, whreby jbe verily thoug bt ber ſelfe to be with
child. And ocherwy e whatjoeucr (bt pretended us outward bewybe necher
bad | uifercd nor feit 48 be bath depoſed any thing wn the world, Againſt
ber opu43.4 of berg wth child, M.Darrell oppoſed bimjelfe 45 much 4; we
could, \L. Darrell (j auth (bt) labawred to broug me from my porſwann of
beiag wich could, vy often |aymng, that u was n2 child, bus juchb 4 ciuld 48
£94 0: jc every good body from.
I __ looking &
perceiuing this {imple woman to be ever looking to nature,
are ang = nature, /<yung | wi with child: (be
tr 41:4,4 44 (be paped jor allthis jbe was with child; 1 lecinge her to doe «4.4
$44s, 4515 WE wnaaner of vs al alnolt to looke and gaze onely vpon
Lc 4:ancs, af 1econd cave of our troubles,and to goe No turtner,
a4 actag malt ture ailo tnar heerein (he was greatly deceiuel:labor
eds iraye ner troin that fond, fooliſh, and aolurd conceit of hers


thus, a.fared her that the was not with child, and that thele thinges
caine not tromnarure,but from a ſupernaturall power, & fomthing a
boac axtare,which was the deuil:eicher inwardly polleiling her, wihge


theirby tne berrer drawe her to looke from earch to heaven:to gol [
mean the aathour of her a'fliction, and his extraordinarit hand vp-
0a her, atfu:tinge her in her body by the minilterye of Sathan, as [
tould her: that ſo the might bethe more throughly aFe cd, hu n- Y
bled vader that ladgmenc;and the Lord ſo iudgiage her. Yt the had 4
proued with childe and brought forth one avt loag after,thea it ha4
the ved ſome limplicitie in me, but not argued my £cachinge of ber to
counterfente,tf (ach the were,an1 then if tho:e wordes hal beae caſt in __
my teeth, 1 couidleiſe haue blaned them. But behold more theft a
eare & halfe after the te!tiom 2eung {tice wichia ner, 3 thougi1t ihe
1bene quick with child,as weome callit,ſhe braughe n xthig forchs
nether liumg creature,nor yet vntimaly birch. V Vas I not then(trow
ye)to blame to {ay as 1 4rd?thar he was not with child,it 16104 ma»
E 3 Micity


-


px 3.


io,


t99 ADETECTION OP S. HARSNETS
nifeſt, theirin then I ſaid truly, and for that one would thinke I de-
ſerued not to be blamed. Yer yow ſee I am;which pureth me in mind
of the pronerbe we have: truth may be blamed, bur it ſhall never be
ſhamed. Ani what if 1 ſhould ve the other ſpeach againe: God b/efſe
every port! woman from ſuch a thildes 1 thinke cheir 1s never a
woman in Eneland, but if I ſhone ſay fo in her hearenge,would lay
mn her hart, Amen to ir-vnderſtand me you mnſt concitionally . Bug
this that followeth I defire the reader carefully to obſerue.

The Diſc.confeſſerh that M ary Cooper had greife and weakenes,al-
ſos ſwelling im her body,and alirtle before it is ſaid, that at her coun«
terfeite travuell ſbe was inderde and truly enill at eaſe, and. (omewhat
weake, wherevpon cert ame weomen comming wnto hery; 10 her traucl:exe
Of Somers(in effect) he eonfeſleth, that he had « dh/raſe m bus bocy by
wating: Of Da line that he felt indeed at the firff ſome prickings m his
legges,and that be werntrd, and was ſomewhat evill at caſe and of Kath,
Wruy ht, that (he growinge t» ſome wrakencs, brean 10 be troubled with &
Kinde of ſwelling in her body, occaſioned (as fince ſhe hath learned)by ſome
mee of s,not vnknowne to diners wromen. Heereby 1 appear
eth that all theſe counterfeites, did nor all theire feaires Hut that ſom
of them came from nature'ſo that nature & cra't mav ſeeme to haug
conſpired and traveled together to bringe forth theſe counterſeires:
yea every of them without exception. V Vhat, were they all /chr and
'emill &t eaſe, $, H.9 Sure they had not otherwiſe bene fitte perſans'to
have made counterfeits off:and belike the better ro make lemblance
of counterfeiting, they were to have ſome helpe from nature, » hich
they could not have from arte. But what might that be which was
hnaturall,and which they conld not doe by arte? « ſwelling 1m the bv
why, but William Somers did counterfeit this /wrlling, ns
by pag. 1$7.and2 1 3.wherehetelleth vs alſo ful abſurdly how he did
the ſame. The orher counterfeits then ned not to hane run to nature
for the doinge of this tricke. But if they were all of them 1m{eed and
thuly vill at eaſe,as the Diſc. and they themſelues fay,and that truly:
it is franpe that they ſhould have any harte to counterfeite: alſo that
being /icke ani weake they were able to ſhew forth ſuch ſtrength, and
ſuch admirable and manifold fayres, as is manifeſt they or the devi!l
did. And this is the ſixtenerh time the Dy/cowcrer is convinced by his


owne Diſconery. _
iſ comrrer


When Miſtris Craye ſaith Mary Cooper and the reſt of her companyt
tame about m*, ſeyinve and repyriinge that I ſpould br delmered of ſome
monſtrous thing, 1 lLaughrd hartely at thrir folly: and this my Lau bing?
they termed my fitr, and 'wowld cy out” now Lard biyfſe her, ſbe ii wy

ee


g
7
C
7
ſ
t
n
k
l
im
ſt
Bt
be
e4
ln


oy V Bw OY we 7,


CO ILL EE TE qi FF OA. A TRSEzmMGSCCXazET., aA.


” » ' * wa


be ener have affirmed, much leſſe publ
'Corper &id at her traweile whereof we have hatde nuthirge bur /avg?
'Pur as the Di), doth here extenvate or rather make wilt nor inge of


fitt.The which theire forliſh wonderinge mare me {ansh more and more:
and tho more I laughed they mare they cry: Lord hane met cy vpon ber,
fie ts in a fravg, fit, beſides when I had laughed tull myharte was j-10 at
thim,becan(c thy fIrength was ſpent with langh.ng, then would the whe
company of women, namely Mifiris Gr ay, and the ret cy ont tad bi fe
ber lord bi. fe her, Lad [: 7 _ mevey vpon ho now ſbe 1411 & [Yame.
arre
» VVehaveberrdbeforeof May Corper bring mth child,and that
#frer ſbe had cominued io many weekes m apperancetle teiloi 4 ancl
ing, v herevpen cmers neighbour weon:en(& a mung them fires
Cr«5) being firſt requeſtes (accordirpe to te cuſtc ne) came 4G ber
ſaid awel, and how it went with her their very catraorumatyy, in
lo much as they weomen preſent theirat conceiuec /be wana hawe
bene delutt cd of ſome monſſrows thing, as 18 bere contet'es. i he Liſe,
how telleth vs in the per:cn and depolitien of Mary Corf(v hich I
know He would have men beleve to be true)rhat the did nuttngbur
langh, and this lavybing they termed bir fitt: were not thele vile v co.
men,which ſeeing. a women onely /avgh,} cid theirvpon thinkethat
ſhe was in travel,and not onely ſo, but marina that jhe wonle, be arte:
mered of ſome monſler;and theirvpen ord vrto the 11G 10 hane merty on
ber? Apaine It 1s ſay de, that Mary Cooper was m:arcd ard truly ew! at
eaſe: It rs incredible then that beinge ſeke, ſhe ſhould thus excee en
lawghing Surely if Caſphwrnivs werealive of whem the Foet lanh, pee
1o ridet Calphurmins ore; and ſhould reace this riciculeus cepol.von,
he wcvuld not cnely /avgh with open month therrat,but as it 1s laychere
of Mary Cooper, lawgh till bs bavte were ſore, Had net the [2/ſc. folde
himſelte to al! impudencie and ſherr.eles paynlaying the truth,» ovid
hed to the world, that N' oy


the rare and greuovs effeftes,v hich Sathan wroupht vpen the t ody
of Mary Corper, at the time of her ſuppoſed mrawcric, ic hath he dore
the hke befcre(to his vtermcſ) ——_ his Diſcomrry'by other
as ſtrarge and preivovs effetes,which the evil ſprites 10 Sor e154, Dar
tine, anc K atherin (Wright ſent forth: and this is ebcvue all tþ1mpes ro
be obſerced by the reader, for heerein principally lyeth his Ceceite.
Secondly,as heere he Coth this beſides mipicuſly,very eb(vrely and
m ridiculous marner,ſo viſually before. For mſtance: Sornrs (ay I cid


foame excefſiuely:it is true \ per the Diſc ard is Ceporertes,but it ,,,,.,


Vas uv hen ke had blatke rad in bir month exc.
Difcomerer oi
Yom heave m t,js de ofetion ſm, enention of the Indges, wi ery on it 1»


ſte


LYING DISCO WERY. r*g |


E $2c $577


_ pagi:


'2OO
to remntuber wnto you w)4t 4 very (brange and maiitions pr atiſe was vide
der taken, to bane procured the death of 4p w3inds one Alice Frema'ty'


-—-


*  "ADETECTION OF $ HARSNE:


won prerence that jbt was 4 witch. Tins <Aice Freeman was one of thoſe


Wh Son's bad nam:d for witchts,end ts alicd to M. Freeman an Ale


derman and Infice of peace #8 Notungham. Ut 15 ſaid (but wnuruly) by


 fomt of M.Darrels frendes $48 befare the deteCbing, of Ale Freeman jor


4 witch\u was notreparied in Nottmobams that Som?!'s was 4 dijembler,
therby inferring that the offence tafen by tor deretbionywas the canſe that
rayſed vp 4/launde far ſooth of S1m-rs digfunulation, Tor practiſe wasgta
charge the j4yd prore wwnen Alice Froeman, to haut bewitched to death
tbe could of Mary Cooper: and thatjb:s likewiſe was the cauſe of the |4yde
Maries trouble 4d v-x atron, 4s haucing b: witched her i like manner,
which conceite bemg thruſt into Mary Coopers beadybe was arraigned; M,
Darrell was ane 4monz tt diners that game wn evidence 42am} the W1141s
grounding hunſclte much vpon Somers detecting of ber jor witch: C3 mat
ger's were (0 proſecuted 4x41] her, 4s had aut the ludzes m thew wiſdune
/corned| ommbat ut verily thaus b:gtbe pore womn(# emp found guil
ue by the gr cat enquet) 14d bene cmdemned to death, |
Darrell. |

Seeing the Diſc. will iuſtitic Alice Freeman,and together with her
kinlman M. Freem.n haue her to be a very innocent, & to haue bene
without caule' through the mailice (tor{oth) ot lane accuied of witch
crefte,let vs therfore 1ee'what may b>layd concerning her: nat that [
will charg her with witchcraft,but that we may lee, the is nogaltoge=-
ther {o tree trom all ſu{pition of witchcratt as the,Dſco, atd her kin
man pretend: and that there was iut caule of the proceedinges vſed
again{t her. In the beginning of December 9 Js hr - after the dil
covcrie of this Alice Freeman among other perlons for a witch,by Ss
m5 or ratuer.by the Jeuul viinge his tongue, ſhe the ſaid Alice com
ming into the houle of Kybere Cooper, father in law to Somers and 20
M.o'y Coyper his fitter, ſome angrie wordes the layd Mary gaue her,
callinge her 4 witch The night tollowing (but how it came to palle[
know not) Mary Cooper telt a ſtiring witiun her belly, as if their were
ſome quicke thinge, her belly (welling (which was (eaſible ta others)
an] the other greuous vexations wherot we haue heard before grow


ing vpon her by little an licrle. ['o this tire M. Aldridee hath de | f


led: aterw.nd; ſhe pruc to beindifferently well, «nd ſo doth contiunr:
ently ſhe complayacth, that (be hath a kind of ſtirring im ber b:lly, Bati
Alce Freeman together with her familiar {pirit cauſed Mary Coopers
ſtrange and fearetull vexations, then it was thougnt that her malljce
did not ſtaye it ſelfe there, but reached to her onely child,that ſo ſhee
might beturcherrevenged of her: and hereypon this ſaſpition ci! a-


f | inthe


other


purſue
but we
2que


fomth
loſt.


RIS ww. OW > ar”


18!


MTS


n7per's
allice
» ſhee
j1a-


k o
: A
"x ro .


LYING DISCOVERY, 207
riſe. About 10 dayes after the former iarre in a faire mone ſhineeus
ainge,4lice Freeman went from her owne houſe to Robert Cooper his '
houle. ae leeiage her: and maruelinge to ſee her trudg(o fait,thar
could {ll (beinge avery ougly, old, lame woman, doe it, followed
whate toote atter ner,and dogged her. V Yhen ſhe was come to the a
torelaid houle, the did not tortawith knocke at the dore,as the man. |
ner ot well meaning people is: bur peepes firlt at the chinckes of the
doore,then weat ihe to the window,and thus the continued playing
at bo-peepe a good while,and yet the is no chil1 but a well aged wo-
man. At ienguu the eſpied the honeſt man which had followed after
her,and thea ihe full mannerlye and hene{hlie fell a nge. Into
the houle ſhe comneth. Moy Cooper had then a litle childe (tanding
at her knee in health and playinge, Alice Freman deſired to light a=
candle, bur Robers Cooper denyed her, and aſked her why ſhe camet9
that houſe,wnich of all other was by the Maior forbidden her. Away
goeth the withour lighting her candle,and as ſhe went ouer the thre
ihold, the child which even now was ſo well and merry,begane to bo
ſicke,and tell a (crighinge and (ckreaminge, and ſo continued for twa
dayes and then dyed. Cons

Some queſtions might be heere aſked, which if Gorwem
anlveced, would remoue lome ſcruple which remaynerh (Ul in many
as, wheretore [he went (o ſo haſtilic thether, and being come peeped
in afrec that manner; wherefore to light a candle at that houle, ra
then another? It being the onely houſe which was by the magilrate
forbiddea her: there beinge beſides ſo many houſes, I know nat how
maay berwixt her houſe and Coopers: Coopers houſe allo ſtandinge out
ot the itreete,a good ſpace into the churchyarde, Moreover, to what
end [he weat,to light a candle, how that contradiction of hers may
be lalved” To fone the ſayd,ſhe went with a candle from home,only
to light it,anJ ſo to returns! home: and this her anſlweare was approu
ed by the magiltrates of Nttinghem,and yet can not be true the pre
miles co(idered,belids that which folioweth oucrthroweth the lame,
To others that ſhe had loſt pinnes in the churchyard,8 would haue
lighted her candle at Coppers houte (tiding in the churchyard eo have
found ſome of them,for it is oddes ſhe had not found then all,to loe
other this q u2tion bing aſke 1 her, ſho anſweared (hz hal loſt 29.
in the churchyard, and that ſhe deſired to find. But it may be he that
purſued her, found that which ſh2 loſt.he would be examined therof:
but we malt firſt/know, what ſhe loſt; whether mony, or panes [e is
a queſtion alſo, whether ſhewent of purpoſe and made haſteto loſe
lomthing, that after ſhe might be occupied in lecking that ſhe neacr
lo. It would be demaunded allo, why being denied to light her can _


fally


"4
. "wy .


ot —ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS =
dle there, ſhe went not to another houſe to light it,that ſo ſhe mighy


haue gone a bout the ſeekinge of that whatſoeuer it was ſhe deſired .


ſo much to finde. Surely either ſhe had loſt nothing, or elſe ſhe grew
careles of that ſhe had cared ſo much for newly before: for ſhe went
preſently to another houſe,and a little v kile after home, without res
turning tothe churchyarde,
I might add here another ſuſpitious matter againſt her,concerning
tne George Spence” by v hoſe 'meanes m al probabillitie as] conlde
ſhew,but that I haſte to an end. he was ſo greiuouſly aPFlicted,that ve
ry many were quicklie gathered about hinz,and longe after continu«
ed troubled in his hs after a ſtraunge anJ vnnaturall manner,
I can tell alſo of a pretie pranck ſhe playd after both tele ſhe cam on
a time into the houſe of a man in Nottingham whoſe name I haue
forgotten*who carrieth Aquanitz vp and down the cuntrie:his wife
weld her with ſome ſhreud wordes: for there be few in Notting
which love not her roome better then ber company, ſhee claſped her
huſband about the neck or backe,and departed,a ſtrange kinde of (a*
tution. The fame Gaye the man went forth with his bottles on his
backe* when he was gore forwarde about a mile or two in a ſayre
euen grene ſwerde waye,backwarde fell he and brake his bottles, 8&
there laye all the mans .Aquayiiz. Back he comes for new bottles* &
more 41u4vitz:when he came at the very ſame place again,it fel out
with him iuſt as before, If this was long of Alice, Fremans imbracinge
him,the poore man I dare ſaye had as live ſhe had ſo kindly imbraced
another as him, for the louing (alutation if I ſay it came from thence,
ſcathed him 4.nobles. Home he cometh the ſecond time. & after they
two were made freindes he and his bottles eſcaped well. I haue hee
ard of more ſuch like ſtories of Alice Fremen, as of one which falling
out with her as ſhe was at meate ,had lyke to haue bene choaked,8&
continued handled in that ſtrange manner in her throate,as I never
hearde of the like before,and that for the ſpace of 5. howres or there
abouts.euen vntill Alice and ſhee were made cater-couſins,and then
toe ſhe was as wel as might be and this was as itis iaide'and ſome 0
ther of this kinde, before Somcrsſaide ſhe had a catt. |
Theſe things moued ſome to ſuſpeRt Ahcr Freman of witch:yaft,
and though not all yet parte of this was 9:3ven inenidence ag arn(t her: 88
not Somers deteFlins of her for awitch,whereof there was no ſpeach be-
fore the Tudge and beivg done by the lying ſpirit was theirfore to be
held or falſe & Navnderous,or at leſt to be ſuſpetted,except evicet
prove thereof might be had from men. And heereof had M Freman
her kinſman well conſidered he would neue: bane Jaboured ſo much


by himſelfe and his frendes, I meene his fellowe Cont to
| "RAY ave


:


LYING DISCOVERY. to


by | bave proued Somers a counterfeite,therby to recouer(as he thought}
4 | the good name of his kinſwoman; Seeing the (uſpition of her witch»
w crafte relyed not at all of Somers detcEHing her fr « witch,but of mat-
nt ters of fact to be proued againſt her: and that were Somers a counter-
Bs feire, which he hath thirſted ſo; much after, the ſame woulde not

free her from the (aid ſuſpition. 1he Dy/c.parentheſisvz but witrus
ng ly, is vntrue my frendes laid very true, if we vnderltand them of the
de time after Somers diſpolletTion, as they (no doubt) meant, It is well
ve knowne to the inhabitantes of Nott, that before the derritmy of Alue
a. | Freman for a witch, Soma was not reported m Not. to be @ diſj-mbler:ne
ef, cher produceth the o_ any as, to the contrary:onely himſelfe
on ſaith the contrary: whole teſtimonie I thinke no man will regard. Bug
ue to returne againe vnto Mary;Cooper,the Dyſc proceedeth etc.
iſe Diſcomerer.


M. Aldridge depoſeth thus. Afterwardes ſhe grew to be indifferently Shs |
er well, and ſo doth continuc:onely ſbe _—_— that ſhe hath a kimde of

ſas | firing mher belly: (wherevnto the' Diſco. addeth) and ts not otherwiſe

his | #onbled,then it bappencth owt vpon accaſun with other weomen,


're Darrelt
'& It is firſt to be obſerned, that po of M. Aldridge depoſition is
& | wantinge: afterwardes ſhe grew well: thele wordes muſt nee.Jes haue


ue | relation to lome before, wherein ſomething wasſaid concerning her
ge evilnes, and for the confirmation of that I haue to that end before de
od livered: bur the Nz/c, thought good to [mother all that, as makeinge
ce, | notfor him, bur againſt him:and this is vſuall with him, 2. Jt is depol-
_ ed that ſhe hath « /lirring in her belly,(according to that I haue before
es | afirmed)andconfeſſed.that ſhe is troubled as other women are _ os
ng calion: then ſure there v as ſomethinge beſides her /aughing, which lo
'& | affeRtedthe women met at her aforeſaidetrauaile. pag 3:8.
aef Diſcomercr,
ore The authour of the Breife Narration writeth in this forte: what goodly
en | [uffe thry((meaninge the Niſcowerer and his fellow Commiſſioners }
*o | Farucreturned,time and mallice will make knowne wnto 14, 1 be ſtuffe ſuch

4s it 15 (vile indeed his Maifterſhippe may be pleaſed now to pervſe: and
ft, tbeirby reape ſome profite, if he read'it wid ns greater mallice then it
*& WAS WYIERGNG, "
*4L Darrell. =
be The N.a7 ator(I dare ſaye)was neither Prophet nor the ſonne of F-
iz | aPropher,and yet herein he did foretel that which after cam to palTe
141 The fluff that .S. Haſn't and his fellowe commilſioners haue retro
ned lim 'elfe confeTerh is wile ind-de and ſure (o it is,vea as ric Tam
perſwaded,as cuer was re1wncd lunce England was a nation, for what
T7


hd
VS 0
- 2 © L I


<a


= ©


264 A DETECTION OF $. HARSNETS |
is that ſtuffebut an heape of faile, fooliſh, ridiculus,and ablurde thinges
witnetled ypon the oathes ot Men, 10.uc tew dEpLUTIONS EXCEPTE Q,
Bur 1s this all that doth inake ttus /inu;fc vilcfay hereby Ut is made


more vle, in that thus wile (tuffe was compalled by the cunnung per 'Y +
twa{ions, and threates of the commuliigners, men tur the preieng


and this a:tc in aut1oriue,and 1uch as ihold rather haue done their _
; undeuours to haueprelerued then drawen the deponents to periurye. :
Burt ishere all:no the ftuffe retwrned and publyined to the worlde is Y
made more vile by the L),/cowerer, us aduuuouns, detractions, and al 4%
rerations:being therby made tarr worie then at the firlt ix was dely ,
uered. But is thus all that maketh this ({wjfe velccno no: all this ſtuffe CG,
hath bene compalled and produced noc againtt man,but agaialt the 2
Lordehimſelte:not (indeede)to nnde ou any connterferting and tea- -
chinge to counterſeite whereot there 1s nu more queltion or doubr.to -3
be made,then whether it be daye light at noone 1n the tayrelt tun 3%


thine daye in ſomer:put to oblcure tne workes of god, and to keepe "
bus people trom beleuing them to be luch:becauie tncy were broughg
to palle by ſuch as the Dſconrrer delpitera and hatera ,and woulde


taine haue al men to hate and delpile, And this is it cnat maKket b this T
K - | . . Till
ſiuffe out of mealure vile, execrable, and abonunable ia the light of D;
god,and therefore ought (o co ve repated ot all his people. Yea ut we oy:
the jnhabicantes of En2(and be the lords people or 1aheritance as we 5
profeſle:we cannot bur {o account hereot, & will thertore by al good fl
meanes accordinge to our places further thire pani.hnzar: and our n


vice Crodes,which are here on earth in CTads {teade, will rake ven- pe
gance of theſe traitors $ revels agaialt G4, for this vaſpeakable dif


| | Vagbra cy W:
honor done to him,an { this trealon or revellion of cheires,in takinge
parte with (athan his enemie, (the God and prince of this "aa, je
| _ whonn lome extraordinary manner is rilen vp againſt theie workes "A
w__® of Cod )againſt the Lorde himlelte. Yt it be laid by ſome in authori o,
tie,that it ur may be made to appeare that thele thinges are true,they *


willnot endure them, bur ſeuerely pvnnilh theſe commillioners:I in


| Ldne not (iy of All hu nillitic offer ro make prote ot theie tlunges, and generally of F/
every verticnla: whatlocuer | hauc let dowas in this my A pollogie or dctence of the


 — ubgpan workes of (Fa1,and of my lelie:and if herein 1 fayle I refuſe no pun« w
es will fivie :o Miſh nent. In the meane (ealon it is to be remembred, whareof theſe el


= tha thei worthy com nilſtoners exaninedluc' as were by them depoled -ſure
ROW 0 ve (TUO ly f th & Fla- , Th” * .

& have former- 1y for the molt parte of (ach 112%; as might ſeruc to proue theire r
ly confeed, foolithabiuri and ridicuigs crc n}22co5:a0 to this a ors they oy
devaiel the n concerning the (pzaches that I ſhaull verer in the be4+
rins(to al 99th) «xr preſence of $1 n, An1how long before ſhould I have
(pkza thee tainges? a5) ace a yeare: yea ſon: of them avaut 14.


yeares then pat, were not here god in;maries chat could remem-*


A,


| LYING DISCOVERY. | "oo


þ2r the yery wordes they heacde to long befor, (peciallie the ſame
ticric or nourung CONCErmg rhem,anu be $12 got worthy teremens


bs bring; yea le 19:h Une waen toy were ipoken and that id pertoR tn the maſſe 0
wy ly as they nede nat to Vit 1115 Clauie [9 fas 45 thty remrmaer or other rye,

ae ro this effect, Une would thimke it had Bene fcrer mea thoud hauc ly have (ix times
air dene examined CoOMcermng, we acmons of 39 tnen ot my lpeaches, this worde ofa |
'e. and 0; the itrange and extraorcmnare thmges they hadicenc an him © "16 otteRs
I if nappely they nad tenc ay,aSthe lt, tirtl counmniutioners did: tor

al cierevy only it would be made manttclt and out of controgerlie by

| te oathes of Men, Wheraer yom, hay CO; -2r>eytcd or ng. [titbe ob

$4 te-ted rnathere 0! they ad depole tuch as were examined by the 12

" C4.n Rilhoners: I anlwere and confelie that tney did io indeed by di

a vers of them :but the D/C hath kept back and buried all that lome


a of tem attirmed the ſeconde eume vpon their oathes,and wa man-
' ger all cat ene ret ren depulcd, as is mnage manitelt bY my aniwere
« to tine 8.chapicr of the 3.booke. to rhat the caute 1s not bettered there
t b, z Only nc Dilc 15 made ene more lntu!ll,

G Concerrunge the depolttionspablithed to the worlde vnder my
. nanke, tins ts it we malt Knowe: that howloeuct tor rhe lubitance of
f ici they be mime, yet many of then as hey be produced by tne
D1{c. are uot inner lone he hath fathered vpon me,1 hauug depoled whe 1 depoſed
b D441 tinge, Avr yet neaer beac examined thereot:others ne nath douttully with ;
; corrapted, omunes adding, tomtimes omitting or ceeptag back that ie $4455 ©5'2)
x which 15 Very .aateriail: and oy this his corrapt dealinge with my de- nender.or othes


politions on the one lyde and the like with the depulitions of hig ©9115 attect,
( wt.:ch vivallyT


” owne depaac:ns on the other ſyde, he maketh oreate ſhewe to the 41d, the Os/cunte*
Wort of periartc wIere anne is, Now this pertury he MCeanetn t@ 7 wicr neples

: | uf m ] ſeth producetly

| me .tor why | a.n bat o71e,a2drat Dit produceth ordinarily 3.074. nedatinn Je

. or more Jdepoling che contrary. And are nor diveito be beleved be ctuniy. & waere

; fore one?l an{'ver,,ngt alwvayes and in all ca'es, Againlt Paul Anans: d grey by + .
the hizh preift with the Eliers and [ermniles, and I know not hows ac v.ng

4 many lewes belides wirneffcd before the igdzmeat teate,an1 would oy" top

F no 4oubthayve Jenole l, that he was a prtzlent ſedow, 414 4 1mauer of ſe Y pores}
q:ition,the cotrary only Paula pore pritoner attirme1:8&'yet the rrura =

p was with this ole man. Eaen.o it may be (and 1 would be forrie it 43 244. 9

\ were n2t)in this our preſent cale, AnJ here it isnotto be forgotten) x

ttar may leite being firſt depolcd 'S Haſnetwent down with hy com S.

| milan after; his iacergatories being traned according to the things 14


L had formeclie depoſe:andihere endeu dured by rareacs any other
wile to drawe many of thoſe which came before him'and his fellows
commllionersto depole the contrary to that Iha1 formerly dep6ſ=
ed, (tint lo height make me harfullto the world, becaulci was(for


G3 a loth


” * A CINee OF eh wg O_ FOG
© Notorious a red perlon)to reat greite(alas)of

ou foules and ng "a" theire Gs + Wa. the Soft (506 not

much depoſinge willingly that which they knew to be true,as what

the Diſc.againſt their willes would have them to depole,& perſwad-

| ed to be true, ſaying, I truſt, Dove! hinſcife hath confeſſed it vpon bus

#d4th exc. when I had depoſed otherwiſe, and that the lame wore falſe,

”- as my lelfe doe aſſuredly knowe, and am able and offer to make di-

| re<t profe theiro? by lome of there depoſitions,and of many of them

could W the power of reaſon ſhew the ſame, and would but for bre

uitic lake,


The Dz/c. telleth vs, that the reader ſhall reape ſome profit by his
Diſcouerer,if heread ut with no greater mal/ce then u was written,
The profit is in ſtead of gloritiyng God for the preate workes be
hath wrought,and making that right and holy vie of his works wher
of at large we have heard ellwhere, to receiue an evill name & falle
and vile report of the ſame:and to iuſtifie the wicked,and condemne
the righteous, which is an abumination before the Lord. And looke
what reward is due to him that ſendeth forth ſuch curſed fruite, that
may the Di{couerer expette and m iuſtice is to receive at the handes
of the chriſtian Magiſtrate, for all the paynes he hath taken. For
doth not nature it (elfe teach vs that the labourer is worthy of his
hirefand reaſon this, that the hire or reward ſhould be proportiona-
ble to the labour or paynes man taketh? V'Vhether this corrupt and
worle then rotten ſiuffe, and whether S. H. Diſcourry cetefted now
(1 rruſt)to be avery ſinful, fhamfull, launderous, and lying treati'e, [a
came from charitie as the Di/conerer pret&deth,or from mallice which o!
he denieth,as it belongeth to god the ſearcher of the kartes to iudge, of
ſo it is no hard thinge for man to conieAure. For as our of theabun- ne
dance of the hart the mouth ſpeaketh,ſo the han writerh. fe
Howbeit per aduenture, when he hath better conſedered the comtentes m
=" IGM of this treatiſe, he wil mt be ſo peremtorie.Otherwiſo be bath bere matter
ju 1s. fuftciemtoſbewhic ſkill mfor on. EI— of w.
arre
As in theſe wordes the Diſcourrer very vali antly challengeth the
N arr ater,lo pag 58.doth he challeng me likwiſe,ſaying after his ſcoff
inge manner, that 1 will prradventwre be better prowded hereafter: and
that it weve convent#t alſo that 1 furmiſbed my ſelfe with ſome better proff,
T his chalenge con(i4ered there is [male cauſe why any ſhoul be of-
ſended with me for aniwering the Diſcaurric, and producing the beſt
es I hane, for the prouinge that William Scmert, the 7. im Lance-
ſbire, Thomas Davling ,and Katherine Wrie bt were indeed paſſe with de
wuls, and dxſpoſſeſſed of themgand d;a not counterfent the [meas 1s x


=  wmmpppe On GY Y AGY,.,ncmQEAac mo ao we. cc


by effirmed by the Diſcoucrer,8 ſome others, And if it be ſo that here


_ m1 have delivered the trurch,as I rruſt it is manifeſt by this and my 0


ther treatiſe, me thinketh no chriſtian ſhould be diſpleaſed therwith,
bur rather reioyce in this publiſhing & manifeſtation of thete workes
of god, and remouing of the blocke thar lyeth un the way, hindering
the Lordes people from magnifiyng of him for them, and profirmge
by them.Can the child of God be offended with that which renceth
wo the prayſc and glorie of God his father? or the lover of the truth,
with the contendinge tor the truth, and convittion of the falſhood?
Haue I committed any thinge herein bat that which in dewrtie I did
owe vnto God,and could not without ſinne have left vnperformed?
T he Prophet leremiah
0 cor age for the truth. Had not I bene guiltie of this fmne, and tad
not this reprofe reached it ſelfe to me, it baſe and vile man publiklye
defacing the truth and workes of God, I ſhould not as pubiikly have
maintayned the ſame,and ſhewed ſome courage for the truth, beinge a
principall witnes of theſe workes,and called allo to ſuffer for them*lf
S.H.had publiſhed a ſlaunderous and reprochfull booke againlt me,
meerly concerning my owne perſon, andnot agamſt the | ord-alio,as


this 1s. Dyſcovery concerning my — to counterfeit is, 1 could have P93 %"*


bene contented in ſilence to haue by it: and yet a good rame
is a pretious thinge, aboxe ſlur and gould, and ſuch as one would be
loth to loſe, or ſuffer ro be taken from him: but to ſee S. H. Naunder
and bringe vp #n evil] name of the workes of God, and {pread the
ſame farr and neare:and for feare of puniſh ent, or deſire of ibertie,
or other carnall reſpe&,not to gaynlay S*H. and to wftifie the works
of God againſthim'and all gaiplayers,was a poynrt of great cowardli-
nes, and ill beſeeminge the; ſouldier of lefas
feare man,more then God.Such fearefull ones ſball hae then
the take which burneth with fire and brinflon ,which t& the ſecond death.
The ſcope and drift of all that hath bene ſaide mpe both
the cauſe and my ſelfe is,that the movthes of all men being th ,
and the worke of God beinge :cknowledged: The Lord may have
his glorie and prayſe, and man receive his profite theirby. Secondly,
that mine owne innocency and fellow priſorners appearinge,ve may
not only (being reſtored ro our miniſterie and people, )obrayne |iber
tie for our body es, but alſo ſor cur revgves: & they v hich Have cauſe
ed all this fturr in eur church,and vniuf! molefeticryymo vs,and m
vs, beinge minifters ro the congregations ve belcrpe, andrayſed vp
this vile Nanncer of the great 21d rrre worke of God,znd \ree fe eat


ed to vphold and maimmaine it beinge cn frot, 2nd t].enrm forght a-


gainſt God and bis glorie,and the good ufbispecylernay be oo


p 04S Od
"FP 4 © T2 ,
We " "ih
-
Ln Li p
. oy T


yneth that the people in his time bed ler-y.3.


Chriſt: and indeed to 2» Tim. 4.
enmn Ren.z 14.


209 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS
inquired after; and beitig tound out delt with as che entmies of God
ai 18 COUTCA. and recerae there wut [ECO[NPEICC OT TEWRATUE, ihe
444ancs of the caule, the ntulicrable tnuric June to vs tne leruants
any nLaiiactors ot tae Lord of noites, cry a jou ang thiri varo
caclonnes of inen, 4.meanc the tonorable ad in mph place aid au-
MUrIe ter a lpeaclc execution theirut, 4 ne lawes aiic of our land
Aſi. [16 authoring Which trom ner mvit excclicnt Matic itie 18 deriy-
C4 TOLUCA,CAaLTOT NO IE: ie, HAUT eratt tnceirigre and not nuinoic ups
DUICATLON £0 OUT MOCtaill CIOS 28; that they Would tender ths cauic
O: UC KNATLAL L294, 1 £4 be now 2ealuus 1t eutr, ye Princes & lud
25 Of Te eartn,and iuter aot Gods caule £v be tnus dlihunared 4
ruuven VNUCT 5c tecte of men.tic nemoer and turget not [hits laying
ONE Lord i Detect yOu, 0901 tat Dan 1r me { wik hn, J* iy hat
a me me [t24; {07 4 p1jed. kN hen yOu Our AYAIES G14 honuraate pers
bODLLAY ; det! re 10 JE T{gHUt NUNOTAbIC indeed, ve you caretull ro hanor
fe iordein caxnge j 47te bo nayntauung this cane x worke of us,
And tus hauuuge cated My ipeacn ty inan, 1 convert ny peach
torhee Loni way ane and bolt ragwelk all caings, 4a mo thy by
lo:ne as iny belt yea in y onely beltoucad Vinate ny name, ald poure
OUT,MY COMPLALN day any! gat, BY | be guitie of Nat watcn 18 ia /d
tomy charge:lt tnaus eonfederared with $1: Ti, DO a'lin7, K4therine
Wriolt,or M4"y Cooper: ever ay etc eye N nem co my No vic | ge,
Yr any of che:n 52t Tre they werepyle led,as 1 cvaceiae uf £211 Cale:
enenict asnatoanciy os nates las 7 111g ttackezany oy '-ward vace
at! men, as of lare | haue bene'yace mays ©, anichis a te of nias
regiitred tomy perpatuall wia nte: buc rate thou Lord my name ale
{5 our of the booxe-o) life, and gras me my portion with Nip ICILES,
Burt ut be otherwiſe and accor Jt! 12 to that | nave lay 1,tnea let the
HyNreauit es of theiu'lt 4C:1:107 Aim, 4Ccar ling Y6 to tny DOTS, Artle
& Lord,mayntame thy owne caule,cleare the - Tre thou hate done
by thy awne ter. Awake alſo and and vp L beleech thee tar ny
detence. 1 now hafte called me our ani lem me on this warke, 4 2nd
ns TJeirin nou nalts ,20cd e126 6ys


$! Aati>Uily dire ted and att, (+-.
of my enderitanding t tO lee 1c0 this rut Lan 11a FE 125t farlakea me:
Poea(09 (tiith praye cnec with ms ny Lord tld (134, an1 n2 act
lrau' le 2147uIte DV! ud V Owne war. ce .40. 1o{Cnce Of VS ery (Cr aNctcs
Vatull thc eru'h C iMa'll elk, 0 hai! the congregation of the
PU! leon NI "IF thee ab ut: tor their (akes ther? ore and that
Fe 102 An 1 tang, oy W: wy 25001 d,rebuke chow 52
than,and cavis the -» Min »i(b"ate5 rg revake tne (ganes
0! men.


Ths


- Fhrhinnns eerie et, —*


d

e he fiu;nber of lach perions avare

T by M.aJarrels qeanes, Chap, be. ... " Oe At

'O « vecaiion why M. Darrets v come wer.


1- tron ag L,amberh, » 14 146491285
4 »w Mk Dartets fret ima Foote ,
E ot V V 1lham Somers woo  » 11247 pa 49,
_ T7 fo ghputreny deatisateh


'C tag | ap.+ 1949.71
ny 2 Nerv Vidhan gomenand


; 6 194 mh an es.


d the refit c6be


- tis 2 $il owls m6 #h-
G hopIſs ertowigeioh ſent the =
, »14.9../ thin albans*

J ne ctendeg, men are paſſeſed, Chaps:

r Pike canes _ by M.Dartell and others, w


ed,Ch J\ iy hat | Are Nama) APE. om
gs 4 hens 15) 24; 51042d crit pat oa,
oth. cons ate, oe ome x 147,


ir EATS a9 DEETA
orhiacdfraction avs 2s


th Somers


Y

4

7 he - Sathans mime ro allele , and of

' obs tngs = =


vecaber youll «boar theetiofthe rae. Ghap 4.) '1!. vnpgg9®,


DEM.D els cunning inſtru Ring of Somers,by
4 wile de-! =


in his. hearing {ach Soma heads bi


tecking of witches, from about the xXi. of f Nou:anber, yl about

theyu.ot Decernber. Chap. 5. 22411100012 ty —_— 257,

: Pfil.Darrelge nd md zind
ff Lanuarie, whulclt So, ns - diſſemble any eas rm 111,


SAWY


{np


Nog


t as hevas cur of M.I 'erre's GiſpeFtith CH

—— Sf hf
at he had cil\embled Chap. 2/*  * 1

Hom dM Durtellvetiſeirwo or three ſhifts to be Ic


AST —_ nr
- nn wy


a


Shona, I :


had t
adi)
ns prene' P1100 SINDI.) Dal dipe


11 blvortt on v YO


'r0 fry The Comtentes of the Fourth Pocke- J


pear pp ——_ toyes) ot ens bol


How: Darrelw/ould not ploemeyas

Chapis io ns iT niiool 2NL, 4 "<pap-16:

nn
toyesas argue to

Fnultogkene Chap, 3 :

How eontrary Thy Bude affection, Somervhad kis Mah + For +
deritanding 5 MEG! 913 37 Oh O17 16 Y
Ofthe motions and knockinges which were heard TY he Fs |

Sort achis feage)( that they were once ance by tore,


14. 2a
CR TE hh | -


were 109 a5 i arr Lath reporte.,cxtraorainary or ſupernte: 7


k | pag 162! |
's whng ) imfcife into the fre: was valuntarie. «nd rio
"y matret.as NM Dartelilhath pretenced Ca, 6.) ayl G2,
*15 pretended ſiren, th& un e1ght n h1s &:s, that centrans to
-i> and) his i1cnucs repvits,theil was noibing extianrunvary
11 1617; CLap.7: jag 164,
S©:1.crs knowledge in his fits was not extraordinary as M Iarieil &
his !rends have taiſly prerendeJ.nei.}er cou'd be {4 eake Cireekegiie
brw or I atine, otherwiſe then be had learned Chap. $: ay 1l*s,
1 heir was no impoſſibilitie m Somers fits,as M Lartell & his ti erids
taue faiſly pretended Chap.g. pag 166:
How contrary to M Zarrels & his frends aſſertions, w. Son-c18 was
accounted by many mm Nott. for a diſſemb.er,from the time that he
begane his praQtiſes their, yntil he confeſſed the lame hinife fe (a.1 0
ag 168
The contentes of the Fiſt Pooke Anſmweared, oh
How M Darrels credite touching his dealinge with the boy of Bur«
ton, doth relie vpon a falſe & fooliſh booke that was pvbliſhed of
the ſaid boyes pretended poſſeſſicn & diſpoſſion Chap 1. pag 1 71,
OfM Darrels raſtnes in affirming Thomas Larlng to be polleſlec,
& of his cunning inſtruing him, him how to behave himielte vpon
the day of his pretended 1 poſhon Chap, 2; pag 173,
OfM Darrels further practiſes with Dalng to pretend that Sathan
ſought to reenter into him, & of ſome other his yntrue aſſertions,
concerning the boy es fites, and of his cunning dealing likwite with
tim, that be ſhould never confeſſe his diſſimulation Ca 4:pag 17 x:
How Darling confeſſed his owne diſſimulation'Chap.g. pag $79.
A breife of K. Wrights confeſſion, touching the beginnmg of her dill
mulation.& of the reaſons that moued her ſo to doe Ca 6.pag 18,
Of M.Darrels procedinges with Katherine Wright,fot her pretend-
Fed diſpoſſeſhon. Chap. 7. pag.1 87,
OfM. Darrels —a——_ with Mary Cooper, the fiifter of \ Vlli-
am Somers, Chap.9, pag. 19g.
F auites eſcaped
pag 8. (beaches ſor fpeaches,p,14 high cwiſiiovers for comiſſicoers, pa. 19to be fe 2,
to be p 20.Mbſcy:be for ſubſcribe. 1b wh (1 know for with I knowe p.2 z demunr lot
denum ib.d:d etc, by for was:by,p,26 and then for as then,p+ 36.chafien tor after » 45
but the for but thus the,p 47.15 it tor it 15 p 54.Ceſcendant tor diicedant; p 7, 35 nwie
for as we!l more p 97 yeare 9. foryeare y8, p gs, wow 6 tur dor-brtully, p, 7+
done at }.4s harges tor done & cx, ebtcd at bis hardes pe 27 het not vet for had war),
p 128 indeed for mndiced, p 442; had dome tor kad not done, p. 14g: She Wor d ta tho-
1old P.146.could rwre fer could mn ihienoe pg 1gh, ili ler tift i, pray cime
iavtorinttiifle & oy ab Gt mansfc1o! thi: yu an: p16: &£ Date nay pic,y.s
mY yet weyp, 467, Cex 0!6d 1 Gee {01 6 ohid tail y, tio Leuny [ge 10 ep cicd


rail iay f


7 & |


F ins .


