The Life of Paracelsus
========================================
Franz Hartmann (1887) — Hartmann's Paracelsus biography — the book that revived Paracelsus for English occultists. Source: https://archive.org/details/lifeofphilippust1896hart. Public domain.

THE   LIFE   OF 
PHILIPPUS  THEOPHRASTUS  BOMBAST 

OF  HOHENHEIM 

KNOWN   BY  THE  NAME  OF 

PARACELSUS 

THE  SUBSTANCE  OF  HIS  TEACHINGS 

CONCERNING   COSMOLOGY,  ANTHROPOLOGY,   PNEUMATOLOGY,   MAGIC 

AND   SORCERY,    MEDICINE,    ALCHEMY   AND   ASTROLOGY, 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY 

EXTRACTED  AND  TRANSLATED  FROM  HIS  RARE  AND  EXTENSIVE  WORKS 
AND  FROM  SOME  UNPUBLISHED  MANUSCRIPTS 

BY 

FRANZ  HARTMANN,  M.D. 

AUTHOR   OF    "  MAGIC,"   ETC. 

SECOND  EDITION,  REVISED  AND  ENLARGED 
(Second  Impression) 

,{ The  beginning  of  wisdom  is  the  beginning  of  supernatural  power" 

Paracelsus 

LONDON 
KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER  &  CO.  L^ 

BROADWAY    HOUSE,    68-74    CARTER    LANE,    E.C. 

1^  l^T.p^l 

The  rights  of  translation  and  of  reproduction  are  reserved. 

BfsHZfS^ 

Printed  by  Ballantyne,  Hanson  &»  Co. 
at  the  BaMantyne  Press,  Edinburgh 

PREFACE 

Eecent  researches  in  the  ethereal  realms  of  Mysticism, 
Metaphysics,  and  transcendental  Anthropology  have  proved 
beyond  a  doubt  the  existence  of  a  great  number  of  appa- 
rently mysterious  and  occult  facts,  whose  causes  cannot 
be  explained  by  a  science  whose  means  for  investigation 
are  limited  by  the  imperfections  of  sensual  perception, 
and  whose  researches  must  necessarily  come  to  a  stop 
where  physical  instruments  cease  to  be  of  any  service. 
Invisible  things  cannot  be  seen,  neither  can  that  which  is 
imponderable  be  weighed  with  scales;  but  invisible  and 
imponderable  things,  such  as  the  cosmic  ether,  the  light- 
producing  power  of  the  sun,  the  vital  power  of  plants  and 
animals,  thought,  memory,  imagination,  will,  psychological 
influences  affecting  the  state  of  the  mind  or  producing  a 
sudden  change  of  feeling,  and  other  things  too  numerous 
to  mention,  are  nevertheless  facts,  and  exist  in  spite  of 
the  incapacity  of  teachers  of  anatomy  or  chemistry  to 
explain  them.  If  a  reasonable  sceptic  says  that  such 
things  do  not  exist,  he  can  only  mean  to  say  that  they 
do  not  exist  relatively  to  his  knowledge  ;  because,  to  deny 
the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  anything  of  which  we 
know  nothing  would  imply  that  we  imagined  ourselves 
to  be  in  possession  of  all  the  knowledge  that  exists  in  the 
world,  and  believed  that  nothing  could  exist  of  which  we 
did  not  know.     A  person  who  peremptorily  denies  the 

vi  PREFACE 

existence  of  anything  which  is  beyond  the  horizon  of  his 
understanding  because  he  cannot  make  it  harmonise  with 
his  accepted  opinions  is  as  credulous  as  he  who  believes 
everything  without  any  discrimination.  Either  of  these 
persons  is  not  a  freethinker,  but  a  slave  to  the  opinions 
which  he  has  accepted  from  others,  or  which  he  may  have 
formed  in  the  course  of  his  education,  and  by  his  special 
experiences  in  his  (naturally  limited)  intercourse  with  the 
world.  If  such  persons  meet  with  any  extraordinary  fact 
that  is  beyond  their  own  experience,  they  often  either 
regard  it  with  awe  and  wonder,  and  are  ready  to  accept 
any  wild  and  improbable  theory  that  may  be  offered  to 
them  in  regard  to  such  facts,  or  they  sometimes  reject 
the  testimony  of  credible  witnesses,  and  frequently  even 
that  of  their  own  senses.  They  often  do  not  hesitate  to 
impute  the  basest  motives  and  the  most  silly  puerilities  to 
honourable  persons,  and  are  credulous  enough  to  believe 
that  serious  and  wise  people  had  taken  the  trouble  to 
play  upon  them  "practical  jokes,"  and  they  are  often 
willing  to  admit  the  most  absurd  theories  rather  than  to 
use  their  own  common  sense. 

It  seems  almost  superfluous  to  make  these  remarks,  as 
perhaps  none  of  our  readers  will  be  willing  to  be  classified 
into  either  of  these  two  categories ;  but  nevertheless  the 
people  to  whom  they  may  be  applied  are  exceedingly 
numerous,  and  by  no  means  to  be  found  only  among  the 
ignorant  and  uneducated.  On  the  contrary,  it  seems 
that  now,  as  at  the  time  of  the  great  Paracelsus,  the  three 
(dis)graces  of  dogmatic  science — self-conceit,  credulity, 
and  scepticism — go  still  hand  in  hand,  and  that  their 
favourite  places  of  residence  are  public  auditories  and 
the  private  visiting-rooms  of  the  learned. 

It  is  difficult  for  the  light  of  truth  to  penetrate  into  a 

PREFACE  vii 

mind  that  is  crammed  full  of  opinions  to  which  it  tena- 
ciously clings,  and  only  those  who  accept  the  opinions  of 
others,  not  as  their  guides,  but  only  as  their  assistants, 
and  are  able  to  rise  on  the  wings  of  their  own  unfettered 
genius  into  the  region  of  independent  thought,  may  receive 
the  truth.  Our  modern  age  is  not  without  such  minds. 
The  world  is  moving  in  spirals,  and  our  greatest  modern 
philosophers  are  nearing  a  place  in  their  mental  orbit 
where  they  come  again  into  conjunction  with  minds  like 
Pythagoras  and  Plato.  Only  the  ignorant  schoolboy  be- 
lieves that  he  knows  a  great  deal  more  than  Socrates 
and  Aristotle  because  he  may  have  learned  some  modern 
opinions  in  regard  to  a  few  superficial  things,  or  some 
modern  inventions,  with  which  the  philosophers  of  old  may 
not  have  been  acquainted;  but  if  our  modern  scientists 
know  more  about  steam-engines  and  telegraphs  than  the 
ancients  did,  the  latter  knew  more  about  the  powers  that 
move  the  world,  and  about  the  communication  of  thought 
at  a  distance  without  the  employment  of  visible  means. 
If  the  anatomist  of  to-day  knows  more  about  the  details 
of  the  anatomy  of  the  physical  body  than  the  ancients, 
the  ancients  knew  more  about  the  attributes  and  the 
constitution  of  that  power  which  organises  the  physical 
body,  and  of  which  the  latter  is  nothing  more  than  the 
objective  and  visible  representative.  Modern  science  may 
be  successful  in  producing  external  appearances  or  mani- 
festations with  which  the  ancients  were  not  acquainted ; 
the  initiates  into  ancient  sciences  could  create  internal 
causes  of  which  modern  science  knows  nothing  whatever, 
and  which  the  latter  will  have  to  learn  if  it  desires  to 
progress  much  further.  There  is  no  resting-place  in  the 
evolution  of  the  world.  There  is  only  progression  and 
retrogression,  rising  or  falling.     If  we  falter  at  the  door 

viii  PREFACE 

to  the  realm  of  the  invisible,  and  dare  not  enter  the 
temple  where  the  mysterious  workshop  of  Nature  exists, 
we  will  sink  still  more  into  the  mire  of  illusion,  and  lose 
still  more  of  the  faculties  necessary  to  perceive  the  things 
of  the  soul.  A  member  which  is  not  used  atrophies ;  a 
faculty  that  is  not  actively  employed  is  lost.  If  our  whole 
time  and  attention  is  taken  up  by  the  illusions  of  sense, 
we  will  lose  the  power  to  perceive  that  which  is  super- 
sensual;  the  more  we  look  at  the  surface,  the  less  will 
we  know  of  the  kernel;  the  more  we  sink  into  matter, 
the  more  will  we  become  unconscious  of  the  spirit  which 
is  the  life  of  all  things. 

But,  fortunately  for  humanity,  each  evil  carries  its  own 
remedy  in  its  bosom,  each  action  is  followed  by  a  reaction, 
and  the  progression  of  the  world  resembles  the  move- 
ments of  a  pendulum  that  swings  from  one  side  to  the 
other,  while  it  at  the  same  time  moves  forward.  Ages  of 
bigotry  are  followed  by  periods  of  thought  that  may  end 
in  ages  of  scepticism ;  centuries  of  scientific  or  religious 
ignorance,  intolerance,  and  superstition  lead  to  revolutions 
of  thought  that  may,  again,  end  in  atheism  and  crime ;  but 
each  swing  of  the  pendulum  raises  humanity  a  step  higher 
on  the  ladder  of  progression.  When  it  reaches  the  point 
of  gravity,  it  would  stop  unless  pushed  on  by  the  impulse 
coming  from  one  or  the  other  extreme. 

It  seems  that  our  age  is  nearing  that  neutral  point 
again.  Blind  "Materialism"  has  expended  its  powers;  it 
may  still  have  many  pretended  followers,  but  very  few 
that  believe  in  it  in  their  hearts.  If  there  were  any 
persons  who  sincerely  believed  in  it,  and  followed  its 
teachings  to  its  last  logical  consequences,  they  would 
necessarily  end  their  days  in  jail  or  be  driven  to  suicide ; 
but  the  great  majority  of  the  advocates  of  Materialism 

PREFACE  ix 

like  the  bigots  of  old  theology,  feel  and  think  differently 
from  what  they  say :  they  deal  out  their  theories  to 
others,  but  do  not  desire  to  use  them  themselves.  Doubt, 
the  great  enemy  of  true  faith,  is  also  the  enemy  of  dog- 
matic ignorance ;  it  destroys  all  self  -  confidence,  and 
therefore  impedes  not  only  the  power  to  do  good  in  those 
that  are  good,  but  it  also  weakens  the  poison  of  those 
that  do  evil.  The  eyes  of  a  world  that  stepped  out  from 
a  night  of  bigotry  into  the  light  of  day  were  dazzled  and 
blinded  for  a  while  by  the  vain  glitter  of  a  pile  of  rubbish 
and  broken  pots  that  had  been  collected  by  the  advocates 
of  material  science,  who  palmed  it  off  for  diamonds  and 
precious  stones;  but  the  world  has  recovered  from  the 
effect  of  the  glare,  and  realised  the  worthlessness  of  the 
rubbish,  and  it  again  seeks  for  the  less  dazzling  but 
priceless  light  of  the  truth.  Treasures  that  have  long 
been  buried  and  hidden  away  from  the  sight  of  those 
that  were  neither  able  to  realise  nor  to  appreciate  their 
value  are  now  brought  to  light ;  pearls  of  ancient  wisdom 
are  brought  from  the  East ;  fountains  of  knowledge  that 
have  been  for  centuries  closed  up  are  again  opened,  and  a 
flood  of  light  is  thrown  over  things  that  appeared  impos- 
sible, mysterious,  and  occult. 

As  we  dive  into  the  ancient  mysteries  a  new  world 
opens  before  us.  The  more  we  begin  to  understand  the 
language  of  the  Adepts,  the  more  grows  our  respect  for 
their  wisdom.  The  more  we  become  able  to  grasp  their 
ideas,  the  more  grows  our  conception  of  man.  The  ana- 
tomy, physiology,  and  psychology  which  they  teach  make 
of  man  something  immeasurably  greater  than  the  puny 
and  impotent  being  known  to  modern  science  as  a  com- 
pound of  bones,  muscles,  and  nerves.  Modern  science 
attempts  to  prove  that  man  is  an  animal ;  the  teachings 

x  PREFACE 

of  the  Adepts  show  that  he  may  be  a  god.  Modern 
science  invests  him  with  the  power  to  lift  his  own 
weight;  ancient  science  invests  him  with  the  power  to 
control  the  destiny  of  the  world.  Modern  science  allows 
him  to  live  for  a  very  limited  number  of  years ;  ancient 
science  teaches  that  he  has  always  existed,  and  will  never 
cease  to  exist  if  he  desires  to  live.  Modern  science  deals 
with  the  instrument  that  the  real  man  uses  as  long  and 
as  often  as  he  comes  into  relationship  with  the  world  of 
phenomena,  and  she  mistakes  that  instrument  for  the 
man ;  the  Adepts  show  us  the  true  nature  of  the  essential 
man,  to  whom  one  earthly  existence  is  nothing  more  than 
one  of  the  many  incidents  of  his  eternal  career. 

There  is  an  invisible  universe  within  the  visible  one,  a 
world  of  causes  within  the  world  of  effects.  There  is  force 
within  matter,  and  the  two  are  one,  and  are  dependent 
for  their  existence  on  a  third,  which  is  the  mysterious 
cause  of  their  existence.  There  is  a  world  of  soul  within 
a  world  of  matter,  and  the  two  are  one,  and  caused  by 
the  world  of  spirit.  And  within  these  worlds  are  other 
worlds,  visible  and  invisible  ones.  Some  are  known  to 
modern  science ;  of  others  she  does  not  even  know  that 
they  exist ;  for,  as  the  material  worlds  of  suns  and  planets 
and  stars,  the  worlds  of  animate  and  inanimate  beings, 
from  man,  the  lord  of  creation,  down  to  the  microscopic 
world  with  its  countless  inhabitants,  can  only  be  seen  by 
him  who  is  in  the  possession  of  the  powers  necessary  for 
their  perception,  likewise  the  world  of  the  soul  and  the 
realms  of  the  spirit  can  only  be  known  to  him  whose 
inner  senses  are  awakened  to  life.  The  things  of  the 
body  are  seen  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  body, 
but  the  things  of  the  soul  require  the  power  of  spiritual 
perception. 

PREFACE  xi 

It  is  very  natural  that  those  who  have  not  developed 
the  power  of  spiritual  perception  will  not  believe  in  its 
existence,  because  for  them  this  faculty  does  not  exist. 
Therefore  the  outward  reasoner  is  like  a  man  who  keeps 
his  eyes  closed,  and  calls  for  proofs  of  the  existence  of 
that  which  he  cannot  see ;  while  he  who  is  able  to  see 
with  the  eye  of  the  soul  or  the  intellect  requires  no  other 
proof  that  the  things  which  he  sees  exist,  and  he  is  right- 
fully entitled  to  speak  authoritatively  of  his  experience 
in  regard  to  that  which  is  invisible  to  the  majority,  just 
as  a  man  who  has  returned  from  a  previously  unexplored 
country  is  entitled  to  speak  authoritatively  about  the 
things  which  he  has  seen,  and  to  describle  his  experi- 
ences ;  while,  as  a  matter  of  course,  every  listener  has 
the  right  to  accept  that  which  appears  to  him  reasonable, 
and  to  reject  whatever  goes  beyond  his  capacity  to  under- 
stand ;  but  to  deny  the  power  of  spiritual  perception 
because  one  does  not  possess  it  himself  is  as  foolish  and 
arrogant  as  if  a  blind  man  were  to  deny  to  others  the 
power  to  see. 

This  power  of  spiritual  perception,  potentially  con- 
tained in  every  man,  but  developed  in  few,  is  almost 
unknown  to  the  guardians  of  science  in  our  modern 
civilisation,  because  learning  is  often  separated  from 
wisdom,  and  the  calculating  intellect  seeking  for  worms 
in  the  dark  caverns  of  the  earth  cannot  see  the  genius 
that  floats  towards  the  light,  and  it  cannot  realise  his 
existence.  And  yet  this  ancient  science,  which  the 
moderns  ignore,  is  perhaps  as  old  as  the  world.  It  was 
known  to  the  ancient  prophets,  to  the  Arhats  and  Eishis 
of  the  East,  to  initiated  Brahmins,  Egyptians,  and  Greeks. 
Its  fundamental  doctrines  are  found  in  the  Vedas  as  well 
as  in  the  Bible.     Upon  these  doctrines  rest  the  funda- 

xii  PREFACE 

ments  of  the  religions  of  the  world.  They  formed  the 
essence  of  the  secrets  that  were  revealed  only  to  the 
initiated  in  the  inner  temple  where  the  ancient  mysteries 
were  taught,  and  whose  disclosure  to  the  vulgar  was  for- 
bidden under  the  penalty  of  torture  and  death.  They 
were  the  secrets  known  to  the  ancient  sages,  and  to  the 
Adepts  and  Kosicrucians  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  upon  a 
partial  understanding  of  their  truths  rests  the  system  of 
modern  Freemasonry. 

But  it  is  a  great  error  to  suppose  that  the  secrets  of 
the  Alchemists  can  all  be  communicated  by  words  or 
signs,  or  be  explained  to  any  one  who  may  be  trusted 
with  them.  The  rendering  of  an  explanation  requires 
the  capacity  to  understand  on  the  part  of  the  receiver, 
and  where  that  power  is  absent  all  explanations,  be  they 
ever  so  clear,  will  be  in  vain.  It  would  be  of  little  use 
to  explain  the  nature  of  a  palm-tree  to  an  Eskimo,  who 
living  among  icebergs,  never  saw  a  plant,  or  to  describe 
the  construction  of  a  dynamo-machine  to  an  Australian 
savage.  A  man  entirely  ignorant  of  all  spiritual  compre- 
hension, however  well  his  intellectuality  be  developed, 
will  be  in  the  same  condition  regarding  the  understand- 
ing of  spiritual  things  as  the  savage  in  regard  to  that 
which  belongs  to  modern  civilisation.  In  the  spiritual 
as  well  as  in  the  sensual  kingdom  the  perception  is  first, 
and  then  comes  the  understanding.  The  greatest  mys- 
teries are  within  our  own  self.  He  who  knows  himself 
thoroughly  knows  God  and  all  the  mysteries  of  His 
nature.  The  doctrines  resulting  from  true  contemplation 
are  not  to  be  confounded  with  speculative  philosophy,  that 
reasons  from  the  known  to  that  which  it  cannot  know, 
trying  by  the  nickering  light  of  logic  to  grope  its  way 
into  the  darkness,  and  to  feel  the  objects  which  it  cannot 

PREFACE  xiii 

see.  These  doctrines  were  taught  by  the  children  of  light, 
who  possessed  the  power  to  see.  Such  men  were  the 
great  religious  reformers  of  all  ages,  from  Confucius  and 
Zoroaster  down  to  Jacob  Boehme  and  Eckartshausen, 
and  their  teachings  have  been  verified  by  every  one 
whose  purity  of  mind  and  whose  power  of  intellect  have 
enabled  him  to  see  and  to  understand  the  things  of  the 
spirit. 

Some  of  their  doctrines  refer  to  morals  and  ethics, 
others  are  of  a  purely  scientific  character;  but  both 
aspects  of  their  teachings  are  intimately  connected  to- 
gether, because  beauty  cannot  be  separated  from  truth. 
They  both  form  the  two  pages  of  a  leaf  in  the  book  of 
universal  Nature,  whose  understanding  confers  upon  the 
reader  not  merely  opinions  but  knowledge,  and  renders 
him  not  only  learned  but  illuminated  with  wisdom. 

Among  those  who  have  taught  the  moral  aspect  of  the 
secret  doctrine,  there  are  none  greater  than  Buddha, 
Plato,  and  Jesus  of  Nazareth ;  of  those  who  have  taught 
its  scientific  aspect,  there  have  been  none  more  profound 
than  Hermes  Trismegistus,  Sankaracharya,  Pythagoras, 
and  Paracelsus.  They  obtained  their  knowledge  not 
merely  from  following  the  prescribed  methods  of  learning, 
or  by  accepting  the  opinions  of  the  "  recognised  autho- 
rities" of  their  times,  but  they  studied  Nature  by  her 
own  light,  and  becoming  illuminated  by  the  light  of 
Divine  Nature,  they  became  lights  themselves,  whose 
rays  illuminate  the  world  of  mind.  What  they  taught 
has  been  to  a  certain  extent  verified  and  amplified  by 
the  teachings  of  Eastern  Adepts,  but  many  things  about 
which  the  latter  have  to  this  day  kept  a  well-guarded 
silence  were  revealed  by  Paracelsus  three  hundred  years 
ago.     Paracelsus  threw  pearls  before  the  swine,  and  was 

xiv  PREFACE 

scoffed  at  by  the  ignorant,  his  reputation  was  torn  by  the 
dogs  of  envy  and  hate,  and  he  was  treacherously  killed  by 
his  enemies.  But  although  his  physical  body  returned 
to  the  elements  out  of  which  it  was  formed,  his  genius 
still  lives ;  and  as  the  eyes  of  the  world  become  better 
opened  to  an  understanding  of  spiritual  truths,  he  appears 
like  a  star  on  the  mental  horizon,  whose  light  is  destined 
to  illuminate  the  world  of  occult  science,  and  to  penetrate 
deep  into  the  hearts  of  the  coming  generation,  to  warm 
the  soil  out  of  which  the  science  of  the  coming  century 
will  grow. 

CONTENTS 

i.  the  life  of  paracelsus 
ii.  explanations  of  terms 
iii.  cosmology    . 
iv»  anthropology 
v.  pneumatology 
vi.  magic  and  sorcery 
vii.  medicine 
viii.  alchemy  and  astrology 
ix.  philosophy  and  theosophy 

Appendix 
Index  . 

PAGE 
I 

20 

44 

63 
103 
128 

165 
238 
266 

287 
3°5 

PARACELSUS 

I.    THE    LIFE    OF    PARACELSUS 

TnE  dawn  of  the  sixteenth  century  called  into  existence 
a  new  era  of  thought,  and  was  the  beginning  of  the  most 
stupendous  and  important  accomplishments  of  those 
times  —  the  reformation  of  the  Church.  The  world 
awoke  again  from  its  long  sleep  in  mental  torpitude 
during  the  Middle  Ages,  and  shaking  off  the  incubus  of 
Papal  suppression,  it  breathed  freely  once  more.  As  the 
shadows  of  night  fly  at  the  approach  of  the  day,  so  clerical 
fanaticism,  superstition,  and  bigotry  began  to  fade  away, 
because  Luther,  in  the  name  of  the  Supreme  Power  of 
the  Universe,  spoke  again  the  Divine  command :  "  Let 
there  be  light !  "  The  sun  of  truth  began  again  to  rise 
in  the  East,  and  although  his  light  may  afterwards  have 
been  obscured  by  the  mists  and  vapours  rising  from  fields 
on  which  dogmas  and  superstitions  were  undergoing  the 
process  of  putrefaction,  nevertheless  it  was  penetrating 
enough  to  extend  its  beneficial  influence  over  the  subse- 
quent hours  of  that  day.  It  shone  through  the  murky 
atmosphere  of  sectarian  bigotry,  and  sent  its  rays  into 
doubting  minds.  Free  thought  and  free  investigation, 
having  shaken  off  the  chains  with  which  they  were  bound 
down  for  centuries  by  the  enemies  of  religious  liberty, 
broke  the  door  of  their  dungeon,  and  rose  again  to 
heaven  to  drink  from  the  fountain  of  truth.  Free  in- 
quiry took  the  place  of  blind  credulity ;  reason  rose  vic- 
torious out  of  its  struggle  with  blind  belief  in  clerical 

A 

2  PARACELSUS 

authority.  Spirits  that  had  been  bound  to  cold  and 
dead  forms  were  set  free,  and  began  to  expand  and  take 
their  natural  shapes ;  and  truths  that  had  been  monopo- 
lised and  held  captive  for  centuries  by  an  exclusive  caste 
of  priests,  became  the  common  property  of  all  that  were 
able  to  grasp  them. 

Such  a  great  struggle  for  liberty  on  the  battlefield  of 
religious  thought  could  not  take  place  without  causing 
a  commotion  in  other  departments  where  mind  was  at 
work.  In  the  department  of  science  there  could  be  seen 
a  general  struggle  of  the  new  against  the  old,  of  reason 
against  sophistry,  and  of  young  truths  against  errors 
that  had  become  venerable  through  age.  Logic  battled 
against  belief  in  antiquated  authorities ;  and  new  con- 
stellations, composed  of  stars  of  the  first  magnitude, 
began  to  rise,  sending  their  rays  into  the  deepest  recesses 
of  thought.  Luther  overthrew  the  barrier  of  ecclesi- 
astical hierarchy ;  Melanchthon  and  Erasmus  liberated 
speech ;  Cardanus  lifted  the  veil  off  the  goddess  of 
Nature ;  and  Copernicus,  like  Joshua  of  old,  bade  the 
sun  to  stand  still,  and,  obedient  to  his  command,  the  sun 
stood  still,  and  the  planetery  system  was  seen  to  move 
in  the  grooves  in  which  it  was  ordained  by  the  wisdom 
of  the  Supreme. 

One  of  the  greatest  and  illuminated  minds  of  that 
age  was  Philippus  Aureolus  Theophrastus  Bombast,  of 
Hohenheim.  He  was  born  November  26  in  the  year 
1493,  in  the  vicinity  of  a  place  called  Maria-Einsiedeln,1 
being  a  village  about  two  hours'  walk  from  the  city  of 
Zurich,  in  Switzerland.  His  father,  William  Bombast,  of 
Hohenheim,  was  one  of  the  descendants  of  the  old  and 
celebrated  family  Bombast,  and  they  were  called  of 
Hohenheim  after  their  ancient  residence  known  as 
Hohenheim,  a  castle  near  the  village  of  Plinniugen,  in 
the  vicinity  of  Stuttgart,  in  "Wurtemberg.  He  was  a 
relative  of  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Order  of  the  Knights 

1  At  present  a  place  of  pilgrimage. 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  3 

of  St.  John  of  these  times,  whose  name  was  George 
Bombast  of  Hohenheim.  He  established  himself,  in  his 
capacity  of  a  physician,  near  Maria-Einsiedeln  ;  and  in 
the  year  1492  he  married  the  matron  of  the  hospital 
belonging  to  the  abbey  of  that  place,  and  the  result  of 
their  marriage  was  Theophrastus,  their  only  child.  It 
may  be  mentioned  that  Paracelsus,  in  consideration  of 
the  place  of  his  birth,  has  also  been  called  Helvetius 
Eremita,  and  furthermore  we  sometimes  find  him  called 
Germanus,  Suevus,  and  Arpinus.  His  portrait,  in  life- 
size,  can  still  be  seen  at  Salzburg,  painted  on  the  wall 
of  his  residence  (Linzer  Street,  No.  365,  opposite  the 
church  of  St.  Andrew).  Other  poi'traits  of  Paracelsus 
are  to  be  found  in  Huser's  edition  of  his  works,  and  in 
the  first  volume  of  Hauber's  "  Bibliotheca  Magica."  The 
head  of  Paracelsus,  painted  by  Kaulbach  in  his  celebrated 
picture,  at  the  Museum  at  Berlin,  called  "  The  Age  of 
Reformation,"  is  idealised,  and  bears  little  resemblance  to 
the  original. 

In  his  early  youth  Paracelsus  obtained  instructions  in 
science  from  his  father,  who  taught  to  him  the  rudiments 
of  alchemy,  surgery,  and  medicine.  He  always  honoured 
the  memory  of  his  father,  and  always  spoke  in  the  kindest 
terms  of  him,  who  was  not  only  his  father,  but  also  his 
friend  and  instructor.  He  afterwards  continued  his 
studies  under  the  tuition  of  the  monks  of  the  convent  of 
St.  Andrew — situated  in  the  valley  of  Savon — under  the 
guidance  of  the  learned  bishops,  Eberhardt  Baumgartner, 
Mathias  Scheydt  of  Rottgach,  and  Mathias  Schacht  of 
Freisingen.  Having  attained  his  sixteenth  year,  he  was 
sent  to  study  at  the  University  of  Basel.  He  was  after- 
wards instructed  by  the  celebrated  Johann  Trithemius  of 
Spanheim,  abbot  of  St.  Jacob  at  Wurzburg  (1461  — I  5  1 6), 
one  of  the  greatest  adepts  of  magic,  alchemy,  and  astro- 
logy, and  it  was  under  this  teacher  that  his  talents  for 
the  study  of  occultism  were  especially  cultivated  and 
brought    into   practical   use.       His   love  for   the   occult 

4  PARACELSUS 

sciences  led  him  to  enter  the  laboratory  of  the  rich 
Sigismund  Fugger,  at  Schwatz,  in  Tyrol,  who,  like  the 
abbot,  was  a  celebrated  alchemist,  and  able  to  teach  to 
his  disciple   many  a  valuable  secret. 

Later  on,  Paracelsus  travelled  a  great  deal.  He 
visited  Germany,  Italy,  France,  the  Netherlands,  Den- 
mark, Sweden,  and  Russia,  and  it  is  said  that  he  even 
went  to  India,  because  he  was  taken  prisoner  by  the 
Tartars  and  brought  to  the  Khan,  whose  son  he  after- 
wards accompanied  to  Constantinople.  Every  reader  of 
the  works  of  Paracelsus  who  is  also  accquainted  with  the 
recent  revelations  made  by  the  Eastern  Adepts,  cannot 
fail  to  notice  the  similarity  of  the  two  systems,  which  in 
many  respects  are  almost  identical,  and  it  is  therefore 
quite  probable  that  Paracelsus  during  his  captivity  in 
Tartary  was  instructed  in  the  secret  doctrine  by  the 
teachers  of  occultism  in  the  East.  The  information 
given  by  Paracelsus  in  regard  to  the  sevenfold  principles 
of  man,  the  qualities  of  the  astral  body,  the  earth-bound 
elementaries,  &c,  was  then  entirely  unknown  in  the 
West;  but  this  information  is  almost  the  same  as  the 
one  given  in  "  Isis  Unveiled,"  "  Esoteric  Buddhism,"  and 
other  books  recently  published,  and  declared  to  have  been 
given  by  some  Eastern  Adepts.  Paracelsus,  moreover, 
wrote  a  great  deal  about  the  Elementals,  or  spirits  of 
Nature,  but  in  his  description  of  them  he  substituted  for 
the  Eastern  terms  such  as  were  more  in  harmony  with 
the  German  mythological  conceptions  of  the  same,  for  the 
purpose  of  bringing  these  subjects  more  to  the  under- 
standing of  his  countrymen,  who  were  used  to  the 
Western  method  of  thought.  It  is  probable  that  Para- 
celsus stayed  among  the  Tartars  between  1 5 1 3  and 
I  5  2 1 ,  because,  according  to  Van  Helmont's  account,  he 
came  to  Constantinople  during  the  latter  year,1  and 
received  there  the  Philosopher's  Stone. 

The  Adept  from  whom  Paracelsus  received  this  stone 

1  Van  Helmont,  "Tarlaii  Historia,"  §  3. 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  5 

was,  according  to  a  certain  aureum  vcllns  (printed  at 
Rorschach,  1598),  a  certain  Solomon  Trismosinus  (or 
Pfeiffer),  a  countryman  of  Pai-acelsus.  It  is  said  that 
this  Trismosinus  was  also  in  possession  of  the  Universal 
Panacea ;  and  it  is  asserted  that  he  had  been  seen,  still 
alive,  by  a  French  traveller,  at  the  end  of  the  seven- 
teenth century. 

Paracelsus  travelled  through  the  countries  along  the 
Danube,  and  came  to  Italy,  where  he  served  as  an  army 
surgeon  in  the  Imperial  army,  and  participated  in  many 
of  the  warlike  expeditions  of  these  times.  On  these 
occasions  he  collected  a  great  deal  of  useful  information, 
not  only  from  physicians,  surgeons,  and  alchemists,  but 
also  by  his  intercourse  with  executioners,  barbers,  shep- 
herds, Jews,  gipsies,  midwives,  and  fortune-tellers.  He 
collected  useful  information  from  the  high  and  the  low, 
from  the  learned  and  from  the  vulgar,  and  it  was  nothing 
unusual  to  see  him  in  the  company  of  teamsters  and 
vagabonds,  on  the  highways  and  at  public  inns — a  circum- 
stance on  account  of  which  his  narrow-minded  enemies 
heaped  upon  him  bitter  reproach  and  vilifications.  Hav- 
ing travelled  for  ten  years  —  sometimes  exercising  his 
art  as  a  physician,  at  other  times  teaching  or  studying 
alchemy  and  magic,1  according  to  the  custom  of  those 
days — he  returned  at  the  age  of  thirty-two  again  to 
Germany,  where  he  soon  became  very  celebrated  on 
account  of  the  many  and  wonderful  cures  which  he 
performed. 

In  the  year  1525  Paracelsus  went  to  Basel ;  and  in 
1527,  on  the  recommendation  of  Oxcolampadius,  he 
was  appointed  by  the  City  Council  a  professor  of  physic, 
medicine,  and  surgery,  receiving  a  considerable  salary. 
His  lectures  were  not — like  those  of  his  colleagues — 
mere  repetitions  of  the  opinions  of  Galen,  Hippocrates, 
and  Avicenna,  the  exposition  of  which  formed  the  sole 
occupation  of  the  professors  of  medicine  of  those  times. 

1  Conrad  Gesner,  "  Epist.  Medic,"  lib.  i.  fol.  1. 

6  PARACELSUS 

His  doctrines  were  essentially  doctrines  of  his  own,  and 
be  taught  them  independently  of  the  opinions  of  others, 
gaining  thereby  the  applause  of  his  students,  and  horri- 
fying his  orthodox  colleagues  by  his  contravention  of 
their  established  custom  of  teaching  nothing  but  what 
could  be  well  supported  by  old  and  accepted  authorities, 
irrespective  of  whether  or  not  it  was  compatible  with 
reason  and  truth. 

He  held  at  the  same  time  the  office  of  city  physician, 
and  in  that  capacity  he  offered  a  resolution  to  the  City 
Council  of  Basel  to  the  effect  that  the  apothecaries  of  that 
city  should  be  subjected  to  his  supervision,  and  that  he 
should  be  permitted  to  examine  whether  or  not  the  com- 
pounders of  medicines  understood  their  business,  and  to 
ascertain  whether  they  had  a  sufficient  quantity  of  pure 
and  genuine  drugs  on  hand,  so  that  he  might  prevent 
them  from  asking  exorbitant  prices  for  their  goods. 

The  consequence  of  this  measure  was,  as  might  have 
been  expected,  that  he  drew  upon  himself  the  concen- 
trated hatred  of  all  the  druggists  and  apothecaries ;  and 
the  other  physicians  and  professors,  jealous  of  his  success 
in  teaching  medicine  and  curing  diseases,  joined  in  the 
persecution,  under  the  pretext  that  his  appointmeut  as  a 
professor  at  the  university  had  been  made  without  their 
consent,  and  that  Paracelsus  was  a  stranger,  of  whom 
"  nobody  knew  where  he  came  from,"  and  furthermore 
that  they  did  not  know  whether  or  not  he  was  "  a  real 
doctor."  But  perhaps  all  these  annoyances  and  vilifi- 
cations would  have  had  no  serious  consequences  if  he. 
had  not  made  the  members  of  the  City  Council  his 
enemies  by  writing  a  severe  publication  against  a 
decision  which  he  considered  very  unjust,  and  which  was 
rendered  in  favour  of  a  certain  Canonicus  Cornelius  of 
Lichtenfels,  whom  he  had  saved  from  death  after  the 
latter  had  been  given  up  to  die  by  the  other  physicians, 
and  who  had  acted  very  ungratefully  towards  him.  The 
consequence  of  his  hasty  action  was,  that  he  had  to  leave 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  7 

Basel  secretly  and  hurriedly  in  July  1528,  to  avoid 
unpleasant  complications. 

After  this  event  Paracelsus  resumed  his  strolling  life, 
roaming — as  he  did  in  his  youth — over  the  country, 
living  in  village  taverns  and  inns,  and  travelling  from 
place  to  place.  Numerous  disciples  followed  him,  attracted 
either  by  a  desire  for  knowledge  or  by  a  wish  to  acquire 
his  art  and  to  use  it  for  their  own  purposes.  The  most 
renowned  of  his  followers  was  Johannes  Oporinus,  who 
for  three  years  served  as  a  secretary  and  famulus  to  him, 
and  who  afterwards  became  a  professor  of  the  Greek 
language,  and  a  well-known  publisher,  bookseller,  and 
printer '  at  Basel.  Paracelsus  was  exceedingly  reticent 
in  regard  to  his  secrets,  and  Oporinus  afterwards  spoke 
very  bitterly  against  him  on  that  account,  and  thereby 
served  his  enemies.  But  after  the  death  of  Paracelsus 
he  regretted  his  own  indiscretion,  and  expressed  great 
veneration  for  him. 

Paracelsus  went  to  Colmar  in  1528,  and  came  to 
Esslingen  and  Nuremberg  in  the  years  1529  and  1530. 
The  "  regular  physicians  "  of  Nuremberg  denounced  him  a 
quack,  charlatan,  and  impostor.  To  refute  their  accusa- 
tions he  requested  the  City  Council  to  put  some  patients 
that  had  been  declared  incurable  under  his  care.  They 
sent  him  some  cases  of  elephantiasis,  which  he  cured  in  a 
short  time  and  without  asking  any  fee.  Testimonials  to 
that  effect  may  be  found  in  the  archives  of  the  city  of 
Nuremberg. 

But  this  success  did  not  change  the  fortune  of 
Paracelsus,  who  seemed  to  be  doomed  to  a  life  of 
continual  wanderings.  In  1530  we  find  him  at  Noerd- 
lingen,  Munich,  Eegensburg,  Amberg,  and  Meran ;  in 
1  5  3  1  in  St.  Gall,  and  in  1  5  3  5  at  Zlirich.  He  then  went 
to  Maehren,  Kaernthen,  Krain,  and  Hongary,  and  finally 
landed  in  Salzburg,  to  which  place  he  was  invited  by  the 
Prince  Palatine,  Duke  Ernst  of  Bavaria,  who  was  a  great 
1  Urtstisius,  "Baseler  Chronik.,"  bk.  vii.  chap.  xix.  p.  1527. 

8  PARACELSUS 

lover  of  the  secret  arts.  In  that  place  Paracelsus  obtained 
at  last  the  fruits  of  his  long  labours  and  of  a  widespread 
fame. 

But  he  was  not  destined  to  enjoy  a  long  time  the  rest 
he  so  richly  deserved,  because  already,  on  the  24th  of 
September  1  5  4 1 ,  he  died,  after  a  short  sickness  (at  the 
age  of  forty-eight  years  and  three  days),  in  a  small  room  of 
the  inn  called  the  "  White  Horse,"  near  the  quay,  and  his 
body  was  buried  in  the  graveyard  of  St.  Sebastian.  There 
is  still  a  mystery  in  regard  to  his  death,  but  the  most 
recent  investigations  go  to  confirm  the  statement  made  by 
his  contemporaries,  that  Paracelsus  during  a  banquet  had 
been  treacherously  attacked  by  the  hirelings  of  certain 
physicians  who  were  his  enemies,  and  that  in  consequence 
of  a  fall  upon  a  rock,  a  fracture  was  produced  on  his 
skull,  that  after  a  few  days  caused  his  death.  A  German 
physician,  S.  Th.  von  Soemmering,  examined  the  skull  of 
Paracelsus,  which  on  account  of  its  peculiar  formation 
could  not  easily  be  mistaken,  and  noticed  a  fracture  going 
through  the  temporal  bone,  which,  by  reason  of  the  age 
and  frequent  handling  of  the  skull,  had  become  enlarged 
in  size  so  as  to  'be  easily  seen,  and  he  believes  that  such 
a  fracture  could  only  have  been  produced  during  the  life- 
time of  Paracelsus,  because  the  bones  of  a  solid  but  old 
and  desiccated  skull  would  not  be  likely  to  separate  in 
that  manner. 

Certain  it  is  that  Paracelsus  was  not  killed  on  the 
spot,  but  that  at  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  in  posses- 
sion of  his  mental  faculties  and  reasoning  powers,  as  is 
shown  by  the  documents  containing  his  last  will  and  testa- 
ment, which  were  written  down  on  the  20th  of  September 
1 541,  at  noon,  in  the  presence  of  Melchior  Spaech, 
city-judge  of  Hallein ;  Hans  Kalbssor,  notary-public  of 
Salzburg  ;   and  several  other  persons  of  prominence. 

The  bones  of  Paracelsus  were  exhumed  in  the  year 
1572,  at  a  time  when  the  church  was  repaired,  and 
reinterred  near  the  back  side  of  the  wall  that   encloses 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  9 

the  space  in  front  of  the  chapel  of  St.  Philippi  Neri, 
an  extension  of  the  church  of  St.  Sebastian,  where  his 
monument  may  be  seen  at  the  present  time.  The  midst 
of  a  broken  pyramid  of  white  marble  shows  a  cavity 
which  contains  his  picture,  and  above  it  is  a  Latin 
inscription,  saying : 

Philippi  Tlieoplirasti  Paracelsi  qui  tantam  orbis 
famam  ex  auro  chymico  adeptus  est  effigies  et  ossa 
donee  rursus  circumdabitur  pelle  sua.— Jon.  cap.  xix. 

Below  the  portrait  are  the  following  words : 

Sub  reparatioue  ecclesiae  mdcclxxii.  ex  sepulchrali 
tabe  eruta  heic  locata  sunt. 

The  base  of  the  monument  contains  the  following 
inscription : 

Conditur  hie  Philippus  Theophrastus  insignis  Medi- 
cinae  Doctor  qui  dira  ilia  vulnera  Lepram  Podagram 
Hydropsin  aliaque  insauabilia  corporis  contagia 
mirifica  arte  sustulit  et  bona  sua  in  pauperes  dis- 
tribuenda  locandaque  honoravit.  Anno  mdxxxxi. 
Die  xxiv.  Septembris  vitam  cum  morte  mutavit. 

Below  this  inscription  may  be  seen  the  coat-of-arms  of 
Paracelsus,  representing  a  beam  of  silver,  upon  which  are 
ranged  three  black  balls,  and  below  are  the  words : 

Pax  vivis  requies  aeterna  sepultis. 

A  translation  of  the  above  inscription  into  German  may 
be  seen  on  a  black  board  on  the  left  side  of  the  monu- 
ment. The  two  latter  inscriptions  have  evidently  been 
taken  from  the  original  monument,  but  the  one  around 
the  portrait  was  added  in  I  572. 

Thus  were  the  earthly  remnants  of  Paracelsus  disposed 
of ;  but  an  old  tradition  says — and  those  who  are  sup- 
posed to  know  confirm  the  tale — that  his  astral  body 
having  already  during  physical  existence  become  self- 
conscious  and  independent  of  the  physical  form,  he  is  now 

io  PARACELSUS 

a  living  Adept,  residing  with  other  Adepts  of  the  same 
Order  in  a  certain  place  in  Asia,  from  whence  he  still — 
invisibly,  but  nevertheless  effectually  —  influences  the 
minds  of  his  followers,  appearing  to  them  occasionally 
even  in  visible  and  tangible  shape. 

Paracelsus  left  very  few  worldly  goods  at  the  time  of 
his  death,  but  the  inheritance  which  he  left  in  the  shape 
of  his  writings  is  rich  and  imperishable.  This  extra- 
ordinary man — one  of  the  most  remarkable  ones  of  all 
times  and  all  peoples — found  many  enthusiastic  followers  ; 
but  the  number  of  those  who  envied,  and  therefore  hated, 
him  was  still  greater.  He  had  many  enemies,  because 
he  overthrew  the  customary  old-fogeyism  of  the  orthodox 
physicians  and  speculative  philosophers  of  his  age ;  he 
proclaimed  new,  and  therefore  unwelcome,  ideas ;  and  he 
defended  his  mode  of  thinking  in  a  manner  that  was 
rather  forcible  than  polite. 

One-sided  culture  could  see  in  Parcelsus  nothing  else 
but  an  enthusiast,  a  fanatic,  and  noise-maker ;  his  enthu- 
siastic followers,  on  the  other  hand,  looked  upon  him  as 
a  god  and  a  monarch  of  all  mysteries  and  king  of  the 
spirits.  It  was  his  destiny  to  be  misjudged  by  his 
friends  as  well  as  by  his  enemies,  and  each  side  exagge- 
rated his  qualities — the  one  his  virtues,  the  other  his 
faults.  He  was  denounced  and  vilified  by  one  set  of 
ignoramuses,  and  his  qualities  extolled  by  another,  and 
the  two  camps  roused  each  other  into  a  frenzy  by  their 
inordinate  praises  and  vile  denunciations,  whose  exaggera- 
tions were  evident  to  every  one  but  themselves.  Those 
historians  who  have  criticised  the  character  of  Paracelsus 
severely,  forgot  to  take  into  consideration  the  customs 
and  fashions  of  the  time  in  which  he  lived,  the  character 
of  his  surroundings,  and  his  restless  wanderings.  Now, 
as  the  battle  of  contending  opinions  has  ceased  to  rage, 
we  may  take  a  dispassionate  view  of  the  past,  and  after 
studying  his  works  and  the  writings  of  his  critics  and 
biographers,  we  will  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  he  was 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  n 

one  of  the  greatest  and  most  sublime  characters  of  all 
times.  His  works  contain  inexhaustible  mines  of  know- 
ledge and  an  extraordinary  amount  of  germs  out  of  which 
great  truths  may  grow  if  they  are  attended  to  by  com- 
petent cultivators,  and  a  great  deal  that  is  at  present 
misunderstood  and  rejected  will  by  future  inquirers  be 
drawn  to  the  light,  and  be  cut  into  some  of  the  noblest 
blocks  in  the  spiritual  Temple  of  Wisdom. 

The  writings  of  Paracelsus  are  especially  distinguished 
by  the  short  and  concise  manner  in  which  his  thoughts 
are  expressed.  In  this  regard  they  may  be  compared  to 
some  ot  the  writings  of  Thales,  Heraclitus,  Pythagoras, 
Anaxagoras,  and  Hippocrates.  There  is  no  ambiguity 
in  his  expressions,  and  if  we  follow  the  roads  which  he 
indicated,  progressing  at  the  same  time  along  the  path 
of  physical  science,  we  shall  find  the  richest  of  treasures 
buried  at  the  places  that  he  pointed  out  with  his  magic 
wand. 

Paracelsus  was  a  Christian  in  the  true  meaning  of 
that  word,  and  he  always  attempted  to  support  the  doc- 
trines he  taught  by  citations  from  the  Bible.  He  asks : 
"  What  is  a  philosophy  that  is  not  supported  by  spiri- 
tual (internal)  revelation  ?  Moses  did  not  attempt  to 
teach  physics  ;  he  wrote  in  a  theological  sense  calcu- 
lated to  impress  the  feelings  and  awaken  the  faith  of  the 
simple-minded,  and  perhaps  he  may  not  have  understood 
physics  himself.  The  scientist,  unlike  the  theologian, 
does  not  put  any  trust  in  his  feelings,  but  believes  only 
in  his  experiments,  because  physical  science  deals  with 
phenomena  and  not  with  faith.  The  Hebrews,  moreover, 
did  not  know  much  about  natural  science,  and  as  a 
people  they  have  always  been  more  ignorant  than  others 
in  that  respect." 

"  Faith  is  a  luminous  star  that  leads  the  honest  seeker 
into  the  mysteries  of  Nature.  You  must  seek  your  point 
of  gravity  in  God,  and  put  your  trust  into  an  honest, 
divine,  sincere,  pure,  and    strong   faith,  and   cling  to  it 

12  PARACELSUS 

with  your  whole  heart,  soul,  sense,  and  thought — full 
of  love  and  confidence.  If  you  possess  such  a  faith, 
God  (Wisdom)  will  not  withhold  His  truth  from  you, 
but  He  will  reveal  His  works  to  you  credibly,  visibly, 
and  consolingly." 

"  Everything  that  happens  takes  place  through  the 
will  of  the  Supreme.  Conscience  is  the  state  which  we 
have  received  from  God,  in  which  we  should  see  our  own 
image,  and  according  to  the  dictates  of  which  we  should 
act,  without  attempting  to  discover  reasons  in  the  guid- 
ance of  our  life  in  regard  to  morals  and  virtues.  We 
should  do  that  which  our  conscience  teaches,  for  no  other 
reason  but  because  our  conscience  teaches  it.  He  who 
does  not  burn  himself  will  not  be  burned  by  God,  and 
God  provided  him  with  a  conscience  into  which  he  may 
put  his  implicit  trust.  To  learn  from  others,  to  accept 
the  opinion  of  others,  to  act  in  a  certain  manner  because 
others  are  acting  in  that  way,  is  temptation.  Therefore 
faith  in  the  things  of  the  earth  should  be  based  upon 
the  holy  Scripture  and  upon  the  teachings  of  Christ,  and 
it  will  then  stand  upon  a  firm  basis.  Therefore  we  shall 
put  the  foundation  and  the  corner-stone  of  our  wisdom 
upon  three  principal  points,  which  are  :  first,  Prayer,  or 
a  strong  desire  and  aspiration  for  that  which  is  good. 
It  is  necessary  that  we  should  seek  and  knock,  and 
thereby  ask  the  Omnipotent  Power  within  ourselves,  and 
remind  it  of  its  promises  and  keep  it  awake ;  and  if  we 
do  this  in  the  proper  form  and  with  a  pure  and  sincere 
heart,  we  shall  receive  that  for  which  we  ask,  and  find  that 
which  we  seek,  and  the  doors  of  the  Eternal  that  have 
been  closed  before  us  will  be  opened,  and  what  was  hidden 
before  our  sight  will  come  to  light.  The  next  point  is 
Faith  :  not  a  mere  belief  into  something  that  mayor  may 
not  be  true,  but  a  faith  that  is  based  upon  soul-know- 
ledge, an  unwavering  confidence,  a  faith  that  may  move 
mountains  and  throw  them  into  the  ocean,  and  to  which 
everything  is  possible,  as  Christ   has  Himself  testified. 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  13 

The  third  point  is  Imagination.  If  this  power  is  properly 
kindled  in  our  soul,  we  will  have  no  difficulty  to  make  it 
harmonise  with  our  faith.  A  person  who  is  sunk  into 
deep  thought,  and,  so  to  say,  drowned  in  his  own  soul,  is 
like  one  who  has  lost  his  senses,  and  the  world  looks  upon 
him  as  a  fool.  But  in  the  consciousness  of  the  Supreme 
he  is  wise,  and  he  is,  so  to  say,  the  confidential  friend  of 
God,  knowing  a  great  deal  more  of  God's  mysteries  than 
all  those  that  receive  their  superficial  learning  through 
the  avenues  of  the  senses ;  because  he  can  reach  God 
through  his  soul,  Christ  through  faith,  and  attract  the 
Holy  Ghost  through  an  exalted  imagination.  In  this 
way  we  may  grow  to  be  like  the  apostles,  and  to  fear 
neither  death  nor  prison,  neither  suffering  nor  torture, 
neither  fatigue  nor  hunger,  nor  anything  else." 

But  with  all  his  piety  Paracelsus  was  no  bigot.  He 
was  an  enemy  of  hypocrisy,  ceremonial  service,  and  pious 
ostentation.  He  says  :  "  If  you  pray  publicly,  to  what 
purpose  will  it  serve  ?  It  will  only  be  the  beginning  and 
the  cause  of  idolatry,  and  therefore  it  has  been  prohibited 
by  Christ." 

He  did  not  teach  that  we  should  ignore  or  treat  with 
contempt  all  external  forms  of  religion,  and  imagine  our- 
selves superior  to  them ;  but  he  taught  that  we  should 
try  to  outgrow  and  rise  above  all  externalism,  and  become 
members  of  the  true  inner  Church  of  Christ.  Therefore 
he  says :  "  Let  us  depart  from  all  ceremonies,  conjura- 
tions, consecrations,  &c,  and  all  similar  delusions,  and 
put  our  heart,  will,  and  confidence  solely  upon  the  true 
rock.  We  must  continually  knock  and  remind  God  in 
us  to  fulfil  His  promises.  If  this  is  done  sincerely, 
without  hypocrisy,  with  a  true  and  pious  heart,  we  will 
then  obtain  that  for  which  we  seek.  If  we  abandon 
selfishness,  the  door  (of  our  higher  consciousness)  will 
be  opened  for  us,  and  that  which  is  mysterious  will  be 
revealed  "  (Philosophia  Occulta). 

"  Salvation  is  not  attained  by  fasting,  neither  by  wear- 

14  PARACELSUS 

ing  a  particular  kind  of  clothing,  nor  by  beating  one's 
self.  Such  things  are  all  superstition  and  hypocrisy. 
God,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  has  created  all 
things  holy  and  pure,  and  they  need  not  be  consecrated 
by  man.  God  Himself  is  holy,  and  all  that  He  made  out 
of  His  own  holy  will  is  also  holy.  It  is  for  us,  by  becom- 
ing holy,  to  recognise  the  holiness  of  God  in  all  things  " 
(Philosophia  Occulta). 

During  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  when  the  mental 
atmosphere  was  in  a  state  of  great  commotion,  when 
everybody  contended  either  for  Luther  or  for  the  Pope, 
Paracelsus  stood  above  the  quarrelling  parties,  and  rejected 
all  sectarianism,  for  he  said :  "  Among  all  sects  there  is 
none  which  possesses  intellectually  the  true  religion.  We 
must  read  the  Bible  more  with  our  heart  than  with  our 
brains,  until  at  some  future  time  the  true  religion  will 
come  into  the  world."  His  sympathies,  however,  went 
with  the  liberal  Protestants,  and  he  expressed  himself  in 
regard  to  the  action  of  Luther  as  follows  :  "  The  enemies 
of  Luther  are  to  a  great  extent  composed  of  fanatics, 
knaves,  bigots,  and  rogues.  Why  do  you  call  me  a 
•  Medical  Luther  '  ?  You  do  not  intend  to  honour  me  by 
giving  me  that  name,  because  you  despise  Luther.  But  I 
know  of  no  other  enemies  of  Luther  but  those  whose 
kitchen  prospects  are  interfered  with  by  his  reforms. 
Those  whom  he  causes  to  suffer  in  their  pockets  are  his 
enemies.  I  leave  it  to  Luther  to  defend  what  he  says, 
and  I  shall  be  responsible  for  what  I  may  say.  Whoever 
is  Luther's  enemy  will  deserve  my  contempt.  That  which 
you  wish  to  Luther  you  wish  also  to  me ;  you  wish  us 
both  to  the  fire." 

Such  were  the  true  characteristics  of  this  great  man. 
The  accusations  brought  against  him  by  his  opponents 
show  that  his  faults  have  been  so  grossly  exaggerated  that 
the  very  absurdity  of  the  charges  brought  against  him 
renders  such  statements  incredible  and  harmless.  He  has 
been  represented  as  a  drunkard,  and  this  accusation  has 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  15 

been  based  upon  a  passage  occurring  in  a  letter  which  he 
wrote  to  some  students  of  the  University  of  Zurich,  and  in 
which  he  addresses  them  as  Combibones  ojptimi.  It  seems, 
however,  more  probable  that  the  partnership  in  drinking 
alluded  to  in  this  expression  was  meant  to  refer  to  the 
"  wine "  of  wisdom  rather  than  to  any  more  material 
liquid  ;  moreover,  the  contents  of  that  letter  are  very 
serious  and  pathetic,  and  show  no  indication  of  frivolity 
or  a  love  for  debauch.  It  has  also  been  ascertained  that 
Paracelsus  up  to  his  twentieth  year  never  drank  any 
intoxicating  drinks,  and  even  if  it  should  be  found  that 
he  afterwards  drank  wine,  such  a  fact  could  easily  be 
explained  by  the  general  custom  of  those  times,  according 
to  which  even  the  most  honourable  and  respected  persons 
(Luther  included)  were  in  the  habit  of  "  drinking  each 
other's  health."  If  we,  moreover,  take  into  consideration 
the  quantity  and  quality  of  his  works,  which  were  all 
written  within  a  period  of  time  covering  fifteen  years,  we 
may  be  permitted  to  conclude  that  he  could  not  have 
accomplished  such  a  work  in  a  state  of  that  continual 
intoxication  in  which,  according  to  the  statement  of  his 
enemies,  he  must  have  remained.  "  Therefore,"  says 
Arnold  in  his  "  History  of  Churches  and  Heretics  "  (vol. 
ii.  cap.  xxii.),  "  the  report  is  disproved  by  the  fact  that 
a  man  who  is  a  glutton  and  drunkard  could  not  have 
been  in  possession  of  such  divine  gifts." 

Paracelsus  has  been  accused  of  vanity  and  boasting, 
and  the  fact  is,  that  he  was  proud  of  the  attributes  or  ac- 
complishments manifested  in  him  ;  but  he  did  not  glorify 
his  own  person,  only  the  spirit  that  exalted  his  soul. 
Seeing  himself  surrounded  by  ignorance,  misjudged  and 
misrepresented,  but  conscious  of  his  own  strength,  he 
asserted  his  rights.  He  maintained  that  the  value  of  the 
truths  he  taught  would  be  appreciated  in  due  time,  and  his 
prophecy  has  proved  to  be  true.  It  was  this  consciousness 
of  his  superior  power  that  inspired  him  to  exclaim  :  "  I 
know  that  the  monarchy  (of  mind)  will  belong  to  me,  that 

16  PARACELSUS 

mine  will  be  the  honour.  I  do  not  praise  myself,  but 
Nature  praises  me,  for  I  am  born  of  Nature  and  follow 
her.      She  knows  me  and  I  know  her."1 

His  language  is  not  that  of  a  boaster,  but  rather  that 
of  a  general  who  knows  that  he  will  be  victorious,  when 
he  writes :  "  After  me,  ye,  Avicenna,  Galenus,  Rhases, 
Montagnana,  and  others  !  You  after  me,  not  I  after  you, 
ye  of  Paris,  Montpelier,  Suevia,  Meissen,  and  Cologne  ;  ye 
of  Vienna,  and  all  that  come  from  the  countries  along 
the  Danube  and  Rhine,  and  from  the  islands  of  the  ocean  ; 
you  Italy,  you  Dalmatia,  you  Sarmatia,  Athens,  Greece, 
Arabia,  and  Israelita !  Follow  me !  It  is  not  for  me 
to  follow  you,  because  mine  is  the  monarchy.  Come 
out  of  the  night  of  ignorance !  The  time  will  come 
when  none  of  you  shall  remain  in  his  dark  corner  who 
will  not  be  an  object  of  contempt  to  the  world,  because  I 
shall  be  the  monarch,  and  the  monarchy  will  be  mine."2 

This  is  not  the  language  of  vanity  and  self-conceit ; 
it  is  rather  the  language  either  of  wisdom  or  of  folly, 
because  extremes  resemble  each  other.  Paracelsus  was 
proud  of  the  spirit  that  spoke  through  him  ;  but  per- 
sonally he  was  modest  and  self-sacrificing,  and  he  well 
knew  that  a  man  would  be  a  useless  thing  if  he  were  not 
overshadowed  by  the  spirit  of  the  Supreme.  He  says : 
"  Remember  that  God  has  put  a  mark  upon  us,  consisting 
in  our  shortcomings  and  diseases,  to  show  to  us  that  we 
have  nothing  to  pride  ourselves  about,  and  that  nothing 
comes  within  the  reach  of  our  full  and  perfect  under- 
standing ;  that  we  are  far  from  knowing  absolute  truth, 
and  that  our  own  knowledge  and  power  amount  to  very 
little  indeed." 

Personal  vanity  and  ostentation  were  not  the  elements 
to  be  found  in  the  character  of  Paracelsus — they  were 
the  customs  of  the  physicians  of  that  age  ;  but  it  is  a 
daily  occurring  fact,  that  he  who  exposes  and  denounces 
the  faults  of  others  appears  to  the  superficial  observer  as 
1  "Libr.  Paramirum,"  Preface.  2  "Libr.  Paragranum,"  Preface. 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  17 

boasting  of  his  own  superiority,  although  no  such  motive 
may  prompt  him.  And  as  Paracelsus  was  not  slow  to 
criticise  the  ignorance  of  the  "  learned,"  it  was  necessarily 
supposed  by  the  vulgar  that  he  looked  upon  himself  as 
more  learned  than  all  others,  and  they  had  not  the 
capacity  to  know  whether  or  not  he  was  justified  in  such 
an  estimate  of  himself.  He  was,  however,  far  superior 
in  medical  skill  to  all  his  colleagues,  and  performed 
apparently  miraculous  cures  among  many  patients  that 
had  been  pronounced  incurable  by  the  leading  doctors — 
a  fact  that  has  been  proved  by  Erasmus  of  Rotterdam,  a 
most  careful  and  scientific  observer.  Among  such  patients 
were  not  less  than  eighteen  princes,  on  whom  the  best 
physicians  had  tried  their  arts  and  failed.  In  his  thirty- 
third  year  he  was  already  an  object  of  admiration  for 
the  laity,  and  an  object  of  professional  jealousy  for  the 
physicians.  He  also  incurred  the  wrath  of  the  latter  by 
treating  many  of  the  poorer  classes  without  pay,  while 
the  other  physicians  unrelentingly  claimed  their  fees. 
The  most  common  reward  for  his  labour  was  ingratitude, 
and  this  he  earned  everywhere,  not  only  in  the  houses  of 
the  moderately  wealthy,  but  also  among  the  rich ;  for 
instance,  in  the  house  of  the  Count  Philippus  of  Baden, 
whose  case  had  been  given  up  as  hopeless  by  his  physicians. 
Paracelsus  cured  the  count  in  a  short  time,  who  in  return 
showed  great  penuriousness  towards  him.  Moreover,  the 
ingratitude  of  that  prince  caused  great  joy  to  the  enemies 
of  Paracelsus,  and  gave  them  a  welcome  opportunity  to 
ridicule  and  slander  him  more  than  ever. 

Accusations  of  a  different  order  are  brought  against 
him,  referring  to  the  bluntness  of  his  style  of  writing, 
which  was  not  always  refined  or  polite.  It  should,  how- 
ever, be  remembered  that  such  a  style  of  speaking  and 
writing  was  universally  used  in  those  times,  and  objec- 
tionable expressions  were  adopted  by  all,  not  excluding 
Luther,  the  great  Reformer,  who,  in  spite  of  his  genius, 
was  a  mortal  man.     Paracelsus  was  a  great  admirer  of 

B 

1 8  PARACELSUS 

Luther,  and  even  surpassed  him  in  enthusiasm  for  re- 
ligious and  intellectual  freedom.  Luther  seemed  to  him 
to  be  still  too  conservative.  He  believed  that  such  a 
gigantic  revolution  in  the  world  of  mind  could  not  be 
accomplished  with  meekness  and  condescension,  but  that 
it  required  firmness,  tenacity,  and  an  unbending  will. 
He  says  of  himself:  "  I  know  that  I  am  a  man  who  does 
not  speak  to  every  one  only  that  which  might  please  him, 
and  I  am  not  used  to  give  submissive  answers  to  arro- 
gant questions.  I  know  my  ways,  and  I  do  not  iwish  to 
change  them  ;  neither  could  I  change  my  nature.  I  am  a 
rough  man,  born  in  a  rough  country  ;  I  have  been  brought 
up  in  pine-woods,  and  I  may  have  inherited  some  knots. 
That  which  seems  to  me  polite  and  amiable  may  appear 
unpolished  to  another,  and  what  seems  silk  in  my  eyes 
may  be  but  homespun  to  you." 

Great  abuse  has  been  heaped  upon  Paracelsus  by  his 
enemies  on  account  of  his  restless  and  roaming  way  of 
living.  He  acquired  his  knowledge,  not  in  the  comfort- 
able manner  in  which  the  great  majority  of  scientists 
acquire  theirs,  but  he  travelled  all  over  the  country  on 
foot,  and  went  wherever  he  expected  to  find  something 
that  might  be  useful  to  know.  He  writes :  "  I  went  in 
search  of  my  art,  often  incurring  danger  of  life.  I  have 
not  been  ashamed  to  learn  that  which  seemed  useful  to 
me  even  from  vagabonds,  executioners,  and  barbers.  We 
know  that  a  lover  will  go  a  long  way  to  meet  the  woman 
he  adores :  how  much  more  will  the  lover  of  wisdom 
be  tempted  to  go  in  search  of  his  divine  mistress !  " 
{Paragranum :  Preface). 

He  says  :  "  The  knowledge  to  which  we  are  entitled  is 
not  confined  within  the  limits  of  our  own  country,  and 
does  not  run  after  us,  but  waits  until  we  go  in  search  of 
it.  No  one  becomes  a  master  of  practical  experience  in 
his  own  house,  neither  will  he  find  a  teacher  of  the 
secrets  of  Nature  in  the  corners  of  his  room.  We  must 
seek  for  knowledge  where  we  may  expect  to  find  it,  and 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  19 

why  should  the  mau  be  despised  who  goes  in  search  of 
it  ?  Those  who  remain  at  home  may  live  more  com- 
fortably, and  grow  richer  than  those  who  wander  about ; 
but  I  neither  desire  to  live  comfortably,  nor  do  I  wish  to 
become  rich.  Happiness  is  better  than  riches,  and  happy 
is  he  who  wanders  about,  possessing  nothing  that  requires 
his  care.  He  who  wants  to  study  the  book  of  Nature 
must  wander  with  his  feet  over  its  leaves.  Books  are 
studied  by  looking  at  the  letters  which  they  contain ; 
Nature  is  studied  by  examining  the  contents  of  her 
treasure-vaults  in  every  country.  Every  part  of  the 
world  represents  a  page  in  the  book  of  Nature,  and  all 
the  pages  together  form  the  book  that  contains  her  great 
revelations." 

So  little  has  Paracelsus  been  understood  by  the  profane, 
that  even  to  this  day  he  is  supposed  to  have  advocated 
the  very  superstitions  which  he  tried  to  destroy.  For 
instance,  far  from  encouraging  the  superstitious  practices 
of  the  star-gazers,  he  says :  "  The  planets  and  stars  on 
the  sky  neither  build  up  a  man's  body,  nor  do  they 
endow  him  with  virtues  and  vices,  or  any  other  qualities 
whatsoever.  The  course  of  Saturn  lengthens  or  shortens 
nobody's  life ;  and  although  Nero  was  of  a  martial 
temperament,  he  was  not  the  child  of  Mars,  nor  Helena 
the  daughter  of  Venus.  If  there  had  never  been  any 
Moon  on  the  sky,  there  would  be  nevertheless  people 
inclined  to  lunacy.  The  stars  force  us  to  nothing,  they 
incline  us  to  nothing ;  they  are  free  for  themselves,  and 
we  are  free  for  ourselves.  It  is  said  that  a  wise  man 
rules  over  the  stars ;  but  this  does  not  mean  that  he 
rules  over  the  stars  in  the  sky,  but  over  the  powers  that 
are  active  in  his  own  mental  constitution,  and  which  are 
symbolised  by  the  visible  stars  in  the  sky  "  (Philosophia 
Occulta). 

Paracelsus  did  not  read  or  write  much.  He  says  that 
for  ten  years  he  never  read  a  book,  and  his  disciples 
testify  that  he  dictated  his  works  to  them  without  using 

20  PARACELSUS 

any  memoranda  or  manuscripts.  On  taking  an  in- 
ventory of  bis  goods  after  his  death,  a  Bible,  a  Biblical 
Concordance,  a  Commentary  to  the  Bible,  and  a  written 
book  on  Medicine  were  all  the  books  that  could  be  found 
in  his  possession.  Even  earlier  than  Luther  he  had 
publicly  burned  a  Papal  bull,  and  with  it  the  writings 
of  Galen  and  Avicenna.  He  says  :  "  Reading  never  made 
a  physician.  Medicine  is  an  art,  and  requires  practice. 
If  it  were  sufficient  to  learn  to  talk  Latin,  Greek,  and 
Hebrew  to  become  a  good  physician,  it  would  also  be 
sufficient  for  one  to  read  Livius  to  become  a  great  com- 
mander-in-chief. I  began  to  study  my  art  by  imagining 
that  there  was  not  a  single  teacher  in  the  world  capable 
to  teach  it  to  me,  but  that  I  had  to  acquire  it  myself. 
It  was  the  book  of  Nature,  written  by  the  finger  of  God, 
which  I  studied — not  those  of  the  scribblers,  for  each 
scribbler  writes  down  the  rubbish  that  may  be  found  in 
his  head  ;  and  who  can  sift  the  true  from  the  false  ?  My 
accusers  complain  that  I  have  not  entered  the  temple  of 
knowledge  through  the  '  legitimate  door.'  But  which 
one  is  the  truly  legitimate  door  ?  Galenus  and  Avicenna 
or  Nature  ?  I  have  entered  through  the  door  of  Nature  : 
her  light,  and  not  the  lamp  of  an  apothecary's  shop,  has 
illuminated  my  way." 

Great  stress  was  laid  by  his  accusers  upon  the  fact 
that  he  wrote  the  greater  part  of  his  books  and  taught 
his  doctrines  in  the  German  language,  and  not,  as  was 
then  customary,  in  Latin.  But  this  was  one  of  his  most 
important  acts ;  because  in  so  doing  he  produced  a  refor- 
mation in  science  similar  to  the  one  that  Luther  produced 
in  the  Church.  He  rejected  the  time-honoured  use  of  the 
Latin  language,  because  he  believed  that  the  truth  could 
as  well  be  expressed  in  the  language  of  the  country  in 
which  he  lived.  This  daring  act  was  the  beginning  of 
free  thought  in  science,  and  the  old  belief  in  authorities 
began  to  weaken.  It  is  probable  that  Paracelsus  would 
never  have  attained  his  knowledge  if  he  had  permitted 

THE  LIFE  OF  PARACELSUS  21 

his  mind  to  be  fettered  and  imprisoned  by  the  idle  for- 
malities that  were  connected  with  a  scientific  education 
at  that  time. 

Here  it  may  not  be  improper  to  add  a  few  opinions  con- 
cerning Theophrastus  Paracelsus  from  persons  of  repute  : — 

Jordanus  Brunus  says :  "  The  highest  merit  of  Para- 
celsus is,  that  he  was  the  first  to  treat  medicine  as  a 
philosophy,  and  that  he  used  magical  remedies  (hypnotism, 
suggestion,  &c.)  in  cases  where  the  physical  substances 
were  not  sufficient." 

J.  B.  van  Helmont :  "  Paracelsus  was  a  forerunner  of 
the  true  medicine.  He  was  sent  by  God,  and  endowed 
with  divine  knowledge.  He  was  an  ornament  for  his 
country,  and  all  that  has  been  said  against  him  is  not 
worthy  to  be  listened  to." 

Opposed  to  this  there  are  the  opinions  of  certain 
"  authorities,"  whose  memory  does  not  longer  exist,  but 
who  may  be  quoted  as  specimens  of  learned  ignorance  : — 

Libanius :  "  Opera  Paracelsi  sunt  cloaca,  monstrosa, 
jactantia  rudiate,  temeritate  conflata." 

K.  G.  Neumann :  "  No  one  can  take  up  a  book  of 
Theophrastus  without  becoming  convinced  that  the  man 
was  insane." 

Very  recently  one  medical  authority,  while  acknow- 
ledging publicly  the  high  merits  of  Paracelsus,  said  that 
the  consequence  of  the  promulgation  of  his  doctrines  was 
the  growth  of  a  sickly  mysticism.  This  may  be  true, 
but  Paracelsus  cannot  be  blamed  for  the  inability  of 
those  who  do  not  understand  him  ;  we  may  just  as  well 
make  Jesus  Christ  responsible  for  the  introduction  of  the 
Inquisition  and  other  follies  that  arose  from  a  misinter- 
pretation of  what  He  taught. 

It  is  true  that  it  is  very  difficult,  if  not  altogether 
impossible,  to  understand  the  writings  of  Paracelsus 
without  possessing  a  certain  amount  of  spiritual  insight 
and  intuition.  The  writings  of  Paracelsus  deal  especially 
with  metaphysical  and  not  with  corporeal  things.      Thus, 

22  PARACELSUS 

for  instance,  when  he  speaks  of  "  Sulphur,"  he,  like  other 
Alchemists  of  his  times,  refers  to  a  certain  active  energy 
or  form  of  the  will,  for  which  even  modern  science  has 
not  yet  invented  a  name,  and  for  which  the  term 
"  Sulphur  "  is  a  symbol,  in  the  same  sense  as  "  Mercury  " 
is  a  symbol  for  intelligence,  "  Salt "  for  substance, 
"  Venus  "  for  love,  and  so  forth.  One  would  therefore 
vainly  inquire  at  the  chemist's  shop  for  the  "  sulphur " 
of  Paracelsus,  for  he  says :  "  If  any  one  wanted  to 
thoroughly  describe  the  sulphur,  and  if  it  were  proper 
to  do  so,  which  it  is  not,  paper  alone  would  not  be 
sufficient  for  that  purpose.  To  the  sulphur  belongs  a 
good  worker  and  artist,  well  experienced  and  capable  to 
think  profoundly ;  not  a  mere  talker  and  theorist,  who 
is  only  great  in  preaching  but  does  not  act.  He  who 
knows  how  to  use  the  sulphur  (his  own  power)  will  be 
able  to  produce  more  miracles  than  I  can  describe.  He 
who  does  not  know  the  sulphur  knows  nothing,  and  can 
accomplish  nothing,  neither  of  medicine  nor  of  philosopher , 
nor  about  any  of  the  secrets  of  Nature  "  ( Vom  Schwefel, 
vol.  vii.  p.  182). 

This  is  merely  to  show  that  the  language  of  Paracelsus 
has  to  be  taken  in  an  allegorical  and  mystical  sense, 
which  was  well  understood  by  the  Alchemists  of  his 
time,  but  for  which  modern  erudition  has  no  comprehen- 
sion ;  because  with  the  knowledge  of  spiritual  mysteries 
and  secret  powers  of  Nature,  the  meaning  of  the  symbols 
representing  those  things  has  also  been  lost.  It  is 
therefore  not  surprising  to  see  that  Paracelsus  is  very 
little  understood  even  by  his  admirers,  and  that  the 
majority  of  his  researchers  seem  to  be  far  more  concerned 
about  his  person  than  about  his  philosophy. 

Moreover,  Paracelsus  uses  a  terminology  of  his  own. 
He  deals  in  his  writings  with  many  subjects,  for  which 
his  language  had  no  appropriate  terms.1      He  therefore 

1  Appropriate  terms  for  the  subjects  referred  to  are  only  found  in  Eastern 
languages,  especially  in  Sanscrit. 

WRITINGS  OF  PARACELSUS  23 

invented  a  great  many  words  of  his  own  to  express  his 
meaning,  and  only  few  of  his  words  have  obtained  the 
right  of  citizenship  in  our  language.  To  facilitate  the 
study  of  the  works  of  Paracelsus,  his  disciples,  Gerhard 
Dorn,  Bernhard  Thurneyssen,  and  Martin  Ruland,  com- 
posed dictionaries  to  explain  the  meaning  of  such  curious 
terms.  The  one  compiled  by  Ruland,  entitled  "  Lexicon 
Alchemicum"  (Prague,  1 6 1 2),  is  the  most  complete.  Guil- 
helmus  Johnson  published  the  same  under  his  own  name 
at  London  in  1660,  and  it  has  been  incorporated  into  the 
greatest  collection  of  alchemical  writings,  the  "Bibliotheca 
Ohymica  Ouriosa,"  by  J.  T.  Mangets  (Geneva,  1702). 
Another  "  Dictionarium  Paracelsicum "  was  written  by 
a  certain  Bailiff,  and  added  to  the  Geneva  publication. 
But  as  all  these  books  have  become  very  rare,  and  can 
only  be  obtained  with  difficulty  and  at  a  great  expense, 
we  therefore  add  below  a  complete  list  of  his  favourite 
terms,  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  may  wish  to  read  his 
complete  works. 

THE  WRITINGS  OF  PARACELSUS. 

Paracelsus  wrote  personally  not  a  great  deal.  He 
usually  dictated  that  which  he  desired  to  be  put  into 
writing  to  his  disciples.  The  greatest  part  of  his  works 
is  therefore  in  the  handwriting  of  his  disciples.  Few  of 
the  works  of  Paracelsus  were  printed  during  his  lifetime. 
Those  that  were  printed  consist  of  his  seven  books,  "  De 
Gradibus  et  Compositionibus  Receptorum  et  Naturalium," 
Basel,  1526;  and  of  his  "  Chirurgia  Magna,"  printed  at 
Ulm,  1536.  The  rest  of  his  writings  did  not  become 
known  publicly  until  after  his  death,  and  it  is  to  be 
regretted  that  his  disciples  and  followers — such  as  Adam 
von  Bodenstein,  Alexander  von  Suchten,  Gerhard  Dorn, 
Leonhard  Thurneyssen,  Peter  Severinus,  Oswald  Crall, 
Melchior  Schennemann,  and  others — delivered  them  in 
such  a  state  of  confusion  to  the  printer,  that  frequently 

24  PARACELSUS 

entire  pages  were  missing,  and  it  was  very  difficult  to 
put  those  that  were  to  be  had  into  some  order. 

Separate  editions  of  the  works  of  Paracelsus  were 
published  by  Hieronymus  Feierabend  in  Frankfurt,  by 
Arnold  Byrkmann  in  Cologne,  and  by  Peter  Barna  in 
Basel.  Simultaneously  a  great  many  spurious  prints  and 
writings,  falsely  attributed  to  Paracelsus,  were  put  into 
circulation,  as  appears  from  a  note  by  Antiprassus 
Siloranus,  who  says  that  Paracelsus  wrote  35  books  on 
Medicine,  235  on  Philosophy,  12  on  Politics,  7  on 
Mathematics,  and  66  on  Necromancy.  If  we  remember 
that  Paracelsus  was  engaged  in  literary  labours  for  only 
fifteen  years,  it  appears  self-evident  that  Siloranus  referred 
in  his  note  to  all  the  books  and  papers  that  were  put  into 
circulation,  and  attributed  to  Paracelsus  by  the  public. 

John  Huser,  doctor  of  medicine  at  G-rossglogau,  under- 
took a  critical  examination  of  such  works,  on  the  request 
of  the  Archbishop  Prince  Ernst  of  Cologne.  He  collected 
with  great  labour  all  the  autographs  of  Paracelsus  and 
the  original  manuscripts  of  his  disciples,  such  as  could  be 
found  ;  he  put  them  into  order,  and  revised  and  published 
them  at  Cologne  in  a  general  edition  during  the  years 
1589  and  1590.  That  collection  contains  the  following 
works : — 

I.   WOEKS  ON  MEDICINE. 

1.  Paramirum  de  Quinque  Entibus  Omnium  Morborum.    (Auto- 

graph of  Paracelsus.) 

2.  Opus  Paramirum  Secundum.     (Autograph.) 

3.  Liber  de  Generatione  Hominis. 

4.  Liber  Paragranum.     (Autograph.) 

5.  Liber  Paragranum  Secundum.     (Autograph.) 

6.  Chronica  des  Landes  Kaernthen. 

7.  Defensiones  und  Verantwortung  wegen  etlicher  Verunglimp- 

fung  seiner  Misgoenner. 

1  Paramirum  of  the  Five  Causes  of  Disease.  2  Second  Book,  Parami- 
rum. 3  Book  of  the  Generation  of  Man.  4  Paragranum.  5  Paragranum, 
Second  Book.  6  History  of  the  Country  of  Kaernthen.  7  Defence  and 
Answer  respecting  some  Misrepresentations  made  by  his  Enemies. 

WRITINGS  OF  PARACELSUS 

25 

8.  Labyrinthitis  medicorum  errantium. 

9.  Das  Buch  vom  Tartaro,  das  ist  vom  Ursprung  des  Sands  und 

Steins. 

10.  Epistel  der  Landschaft  Kaernthen  an  Theoplirastum. 

11.  De  viribus  membrorum. 

1 2.  De  primis  tribns  essentiis. 

13.  Vom  Ursprung  und  Heilung  der  natuer- 

licben  Pestilenz. 

14.  Ein   Buechlein  von  der   Pestilenz  an  die 

Stadt  Sterzingen'. 

15.  Zwei  Buecher  vom  Ursprung  und  Ursach 

der  Pest. 

16.  Drei  andere  Bueclier  von  der  Pestilenz. 

17.  Elticlie  Collectanea  de  Peste.     (Autograph.)^ 

18.  De  Morbis  ex  Tartaro  oriundis. 

19.  Theophrasti  Epistola  ad  Erasmum  Rotter- 

damum. 

20.  Erasmi  Rotterdami  Responsio. 

21.  Liber  de  Teteriis. 

22.  Liber  quatuordecim  paragraphorum. 

23.  Von  den  tartarischen  Krankheiten. 

24.  Von  den  Krankheiten  die  den  Menschen 

derVernunft  herauben. 

25.  Von  Krummen  und  lalimen  Gliedern. 

26.  Von  den  astralischen  Krankheiten. 

27.  Vom  Padagra. 

28.  Andere  zwei  Buecher  vom  Podagra.    (Print.) 

29.  Vom  Ursprung,  Ursach  und  Heilung  des  Morbi  Caduci  und 

Epilepsy.     (MS.) 

30.  De  Caduco  matricis.     (MS.) 

31.  Von  den  Bergkrankheiten.     (MS.) 

32.  Theorica  Schemata  seu  Typi.     (Autograph.) 

From  the  original 
MS.  of  Dr.  J  oh. 
Montanus,  of 
Hirschfcld. 

MS.  of  Montanus. 

Autographs  of 
Paracelsus. 

8  The  Lab3rrinth  of  the  Wandering  Physician.  9  The  Book  of  Tartarus 
— i.e.,  of  the  Origin  of  Stones  in  the  Bladder.  10  Letter  of  the  Country  of 
Kaernthen  to  Theophrast.  n  Of  Organic  Powers.  12  Of  the  Three  First 
Elements.  33  Of  the  Cause  and  Cure  of  the  Ordinary  Pest.  14  Letter  about 
the  Pest  to  the  Town  of  Sterzingen.  15  Two  Books  on  the  Cause  and 
Origin  of  the  Pest.  16  Three  more  Books  on  the  Pest.  17  Collections  of 
Notes  on  the  Pest.  18  On  Diseases  coming  from  the  Tartarus.  19  Theo- 
phrastus'  Letter  to  Erasmus  of  Rotterdam.  20  His  Answer.  21  Book  on 
Jaundice.  22  Book  of  Fourteen  Paragraphs.  ffl  On  Tartaric  Diseases. 
24  On  Diseases  causing  Insanity.  25  On  Contracted  and  Paralysed  Mem- 
bers. 26  Diseases  caused  by  Astral  Influences.  27  On  Gout.  w  Two  more 
Books  on  Gout.  M  On  the  Cause,  Origin,  and  Cure  of  Nervous  Diseases 
and  Epilepsy,  30  On  Displacements  of  the  Uterus.  31  Diseases  in  Moun- 
tainous Regions.     32  On  Types  of  Diseases. 

26  PARACELSUS 

33.     Practicae  particularis  seu  Curationis  morborum  Tartareorum 

(Fragment.) 
Etliche  Consilia  Medica.     (MS.) 
Etliche  Fragmenta  Medica.     (MS.) 
De  Sanitate  et  Aegritudine. 
De  Stercore  et  Aegritudinibus  en  hoc  ore- 

undis.  }-  Autographs. 

De  anatomia  oculorum  et  eoruin  affectioni- 

bus. 
Auslegung  primae  sectionis  Aphorisrnorunf 

Hippocrates. 
De  modo  phlebotomandi. 
De  urinis  et  pulsibus. 
De  modo  pbarmacandi. 
Archidoxorum  Libri  X.      "| 
De  Renovatione.  [Autographs. 

De  Vita  longa.     (German.)  ' 
De  Vita  longa.     (Latin.) 
Some  fragments  in  German. 

40. 

4i 
42 

43 
44 
45 
46, 

47 
48 

49 
50, 

Sources 
not  mentioned. 

1 

De  praeparationibus  libri  duo.  ^Manuscripts. 

Process  den  Spirit""  ? 

De  natura  rerum. 

Process  den  Spiritum  Vitrioli  zu  machen.    [ 

II.  ALCHEMY. 

De  Tinctura  Physica.  ^ 

Liber  Vexationum.  YMamiscripts. 

Thesaurus  Alchemistarum.  J 

De  Cementis.  \  Autographs. 

Cementum  super  Venerem  et  Marte./ 
Das  Manuale  de  Lapide  Philosophorum.     (MS.) 
Ratio  extrahendi  ex  omnibus  metallis  Mercurium,  Sulphur,  et 
Crocum.     (MS.) 

33  Cure  of  Tartaric  Diseases.  3i  Some  Written  Consultations.  S3  Medical 
Fragments.  3G  Health  and  Disease.  37  Excrementive  Substances  and 
Diseases  caused  by  them.  38  The  Eye :  its  Anatomy  and  Diseases. 
33  Explanation  of  the  First  Sections  of  Hippocrates'  Aphorisms.  40  How 
to  Let  Blood.  41  Diagnostics  from  Urine  and  Pulse.  43  Pharmaceutics. 
43  The  Book  of  Archidoxes.  41  Renewal.  43  Long  Life.  46  Ditto. 
47  Various  Fragments.  a  Preparations  of  the  Second  Book.  49  How 
to  make  Spirit  of  Vitriol.  50  The  Essential  Nature  of  Things.  B1  "  Cura- 
tive Tincture."  s2  Vexations.  53  Alchemical  Treasures.  54  Cements. 
55  A  Cement  for  Venus  and  Mars.  5G  Manual  of  the  Philosopher's  Stone. 
67  How  to  Extract  of  all  Metals  their  Mercury,  Sulphur,  and  Crocus. 

WRITINGS  OF  PARACELSUS  27 

III.  VARIOUS  WRITINGS. 

58.  Intimatio  Theophrasti.  "i  ,_„     ..   . 

;  T»  j-v  .       t         }MS.  of  Aporinus. 

59.  De  gradibus  rerum  naturauum.  J  J     1 

60.  Herbarius.  \a   t  h 

61.  Yon  den  fuenf  natuerlicben  Dingen.  / 

62.  Zwei  Tractate  vom  Terpenthin  und  Honig."l 

63.  Vom  Ebenholz,  von  Bruechen  und  Prae-  tMS.  of  Montanus. 

paration  der  Mumie.  J 

64.  De  virtutibus  herbarum.     (MS.  of  Aporinus.) 

65.  Liber  Principiorum.     (MS.  of  Montanus.) 

66.  De  Thermis.     (MS.  of  Oporinus.) 

67.  Vom  Bade  Pfeffers.  ^ 

68.  De  gradibus  et  compositionibus.  VMS.  of  Montanus. 

69.  Scholia  in  libros  de  gradibus.     > 

70.  Fragmenta.  \  a    t 

71.  Fragmenta  aliquod  de  re  Herbaria./ Aut°9™phs. 

IV.  NATURAL  HISTORY  AND  PHILOSOPHY. 

72.  Philosophia  ad  Athenienses.     (Print.) 

73.  Opus  anatomicum.     (Autograph.) 

74.  Philosophia    degenerationibus  et  fructibus  quatuor  elemen- 

tarum.     (Print.) 

75.  Philosophia  de  generatione  hominis.     (Print.) 

76.  De  meteoris.     (Autograph.) 

77.  Aliud  opusculum  de  meteoris.     (Autograph.) 

78.  Liber  meteorum  tertius.     (MS.  of  Montanus.) 

79.  De  generatio  metallorum.     (Ditto.) 

80.  Von  den  natuerlichen  Waessern. 

53  Advice  of  Theophrastus.  59  Of  the  Various  Grades  of  Things.  60  Ou 
Plants.  61  On  the  Five  Natural  Things.  62  Two  Tracts  on  Turpentine 
and  Honey.  63  Ebony-Wood,  Ruptures,  Preparation  of  the  Mumia. 
64  The  Virtues  of  Plants.  65  The  Books  of  Beginnings.  6G  Mineral 
Springs.  67  The  Baths  of  Pfeffers.  68  Gradations  and  Compositions. 
09  Remarks  about  Gradations.  70  Fragments.  71  Fragments  treating  of 
Plants.  72  Letters  to  the  Athenians.  73  Anatomy.  74  Doctrine  of  the 
Products  and  Fruits  of  the  Four  Elements.  75  On  the  Generation  of 
Man.  7G  Meteors.  77  More  about  Meteors.  78  Third  Book  on  Meteors. 
79  The  Generation  of  Metals.     t0  Natural  (Thermal)  Springs. 

28  PARACELSUS 

V.  MAGIC. 

*  Autographs. 

Other 
Manuscripts. 

8r.  De  divinibus  operibus  et  secretis  naturae." 

82.  De  sagis  earumque  operibus. 

83.  De  Daemonicis  et  Obsessis. 

84.  De  somniis. 

85.  De  sanguine  ultra  mortem. 

86.  De  animalium   hominum  post  mortem 

apparentibus. 

87.  De  virtute  imaginativa. 

88.  De  cbaracteribus. 

89.  De  Homunculis  et  Monstris. 

90.  De  Philosophia  occulta.  >    M&  of  Montanus. 

91.  De  Imaginationibus.       ) 

92.  Philosophia  Paracelsi. 

93.  Vom   Fundamente   und   Ursprung  der 

Weisheit  und  Kuenste. 

94.  Fragmenta. 

95.  Philosophia  sagax. 

96.  Erklaerung  der  ganzen  Astronomie.     (MS.  of  Montanus.) 

97.  Practica  in  Scientiam  Divinationis.  "J 

98.  Erldaerung  der  natuerlichen  Astronomie.  >    Autographs. 

99.  Fragmenta.  ) 

100.  DasBuchAzothseudelignoVitae.    |    Ma„;  fo> 

10 1.  Archidoxes  Magicae  (seven  books).      > 

102.  Auslegung  von  30  magischen  Figuren.     (Autograph.) 

103.  Prognostication    zukuenf tiger    Geschichten    auf     24    Jahre. 

(Print.) 

104.  Vaticinium  Theophrasti  }    MS,  0f  Montanus. 

105.  Verbesserte  Auslegung  Iheophrasti.    ) 

106.  Fasciculus  Prognosticationum  Astrologicarum. 

81  The  Divine  Works  and  Secrets  of  Nature.  82  Sorcerers  and  Witches 
and  their  Arts.  83  Devils  and  Obsessions.  84  Dreams.  85  The  State  of 
the  Blood  after  Death.  86  Souls  of  Men  appearing  after  Death.  88  Char- 
acters. 89  Homunculi  and  Monsters.  90  Occult  Philosophy.  91  Ima- 
ginations. 92  The  Philosophy  of  Paracelsus.  93  The  Foundation  and 
Origin  of  Wisdom  and  Arts.  94  Fragments.  95  Critical  Philosophy. 
96  Explanation  of  Astronomy.  97  Instructions  in  the  Science  of  Divina- 
tion. 9B  Natural  Astronomy.  D9  Fragments.  10°  The  Book  Azoth,  or  the 
Tree  of  Life.  101  Fundamental  Doctrines  of  Magic.  102  Explanation  of 
Thirty  Magic  Figures.  103  Prophecies  for  Twenty-four  Years.  104  The 
Predictions  of  Theophrast.    1Uo  Explanations.    106  Astrological  Predictions. 

II.  EXPLANATIONS  OF  TERMS  USED  BY 
PARACELSUS. 

Including  some  other  Terms  frequently  used  by   Writers  on 
Occultism. 

"Since  the  days  of  the  unlucky  mediaeval  philosophers,  the  last  to  write 
upon  these  secret  doctrines  of  which  they  were  the  depositaries,  few 
men  have  dared  to  brave  persecution  and  prejudice  by  placing  their 
knowledge  upon  record.  And  these  few  have  never  as  a  rule  written 
for  the  public,  but  only  for  those  of  their  own  and  succeeding  times 
who  possessed  the  key  to  their  jargon.  The  multitude,  not  under- 
standing them  or  their  doctrines,  have  been  accustomed  to  look  upon 
them  as  either  charlatans  or  dreamers." — H.  P.  BlaVatsky  :  Isis 
Unveiled,  vol.  i. 

Abessi,  or  Reeis.— Kef  use ;  dead  matter ;  excrementitious  sub- 
stances. 

Adech. — The  inner  (spiritual)  man ;  the  lord  of  thought  and 
imagination,  forming  subjectively  all  things  in  his  mind,  which 
the  exterior  (material)  man  may  objectively  reproduce.  Either 
of  the  two  acts  according  to  his  nature,  the  invisible  in  an 
invisible,  and  the  visible  one  in  a  visible  manner,  but  both  act 
correspondingly.  The  outer  man  may  act  what  the  inner  man 
thinks,  but  thinking  is  acting  in  the  sphere  of  thought,  and 
the  products  of  thought  are  transcendentally  substantial,  even 
if  they  are  not  thrown  into  objectivity  on  the  material  plane. 
The  inner  man  is  and  does  what  he  desires  and  thinks.  Whether 
or  not  his  good  or  evil  thoughts  and  intentions  find  expression 
on  the  material  plane  is  of  less  importance  to  his  own  spiritual 
development  than  to  others  who  may  be  affected  by  his  acts,  but 
less  by  his  thoughts. 

Admisural. — Earth  (literally  and  allegorically). 

Adrop,  Azane,  or  Azar. — "  The  Philosopher's  Stone."  This  is  not 
a  stone  in  the  usual  sense  of  that  term,  but  an  allegorical 
expression,  meaning  the  principle  of  wisdom  on  which  the 
philosopher  who  has  obtained  it  by  practical  experience  (not 

30  PARACELSUS 

the  one  who  is  merely  speculating  about  it)  may  fully  rely, 
as  he  would  rely  on  the  value  of  a  precious  stone,  or  as  he  would 
trust  to  a  solid  rock  upon  which  to  build  the  foundation  of  his 
(spiritual)  house. 

Acthna. — An  invisible,  subterrestrial  fire,  being  the  matrix  from 
which  bituminous  substances  take  their  origin,  and  sometimes 
producing  volcanic  eruptions.  It  is  a  certain  state  of  the  "  soul " 
of  the  earth,  a  mixture  of  astral  and  material  elements,  perhaps 
of  an  electric  or  magnetic  character.1 

Acthnici. — Elemental  spirits  of  fire  ;  spirits  of  Nature.  They  may 
appear  in  various  shapes,  as  fiery  tongues,  balls  of  fire,  &c. 
They  are  sometimes  seen  in  "  spiritual  seances."  2 

A'kasa. — An  Eastern  term.  Living  primordial  substance,  cor- 
responding to  the  conception  of  some  form  of  cosmic  ether 
pervading  the  solar  system.  Everything  visible  is,  so  to  say, 
condensed  A'kasa,  having  become  visible  by  changing  its  supra- 
ethereal  state  into  a  concentrated  and  tangible  form,  and  every- 
thing in  nature  may  be  resolved  again  into  A'kasa,  and  be  made 
invisible,  by  changing  the  attractive  power  that  held  its  atoms 
together  into  repulsion ;  but  there  is  a  tendency  in  the  atoms 
that  have  once  constituted  a  form,  to  rush  together  again  in  the 
previous  order,  and  reproduce  the  same  form  ;  and  a  form  may 
therefore,  by  making  use  of  this  law,  be  apparently  destroyed 
and  then  reproduced.  This  tendency  rests  in  the  character  of 
the  form  preserved  in  the  Astral  Light. 

Alcahest. — An  element  which  dissolves  all  metals,  and  by  which 
all  terrestrial  bodies  may  be  reduced  into  their  Ens  primum,  or 
the  original  matter  (A'kasa)  of  which  they  are  formed.  It  is  a 
power  which  acts  upon  the  Astral  forms  (or  souls)  of  all  things, 
capable  of  changing  the  polarity  of  their  molecules,  and  thereby 
to  dissolve  them.  The  power  of  Will  is  the  highest  aspect  of 
the  true  Alcahest.  In  its  lowest  aspect  it  is  a  visible  fluid  able 
to  dissolve  all  things,  not  yet  known  to  modern  chemistry. 

Alchemy. — A  science  by  which  things  may  not  only  be  decomposed 
and  recomposed  (as  is  done  in  chemistry),  but  by  which  their 
essential  nature  may  be  changed  and  raised  higher,  or  be  trans- 
muted into  each  other.  Chemistry  deals  with  dead  matter 
alone,  but  Alchemy  uses  life  as  a  factor.  Everything  is  of  a 
threefold  nature,  of  which  its  material  and  objective  form  is 
its  lowest  manifestation.  There  is,  for  instance,  immaterial 
spiritual  gold,  ethereal  fluid  and  invisible  astral  gold,  and  the 

1  It  is  an  element  in  the  life  of  the  "great  snake  "  Vasuki,  that  accord- 
ing to  Hindu  mythology  encircles  the  world,  and  by  whose  movements 
earthquakes  may  be  produced. — H.  P.  B. 

2  They  are  the  Devas  of  fire  in  India,  and  bulla  were  sometimes  sacri- 
ficed to  them.— H.  P.  B. 

EXPLANATIONS  OF  TERMS  31 

solid  visible,  material  and  earthly  gold.  The  two  former  are,  so 
to  say,  the  spirit  and  soul  of  the  latter,  and  by  employing  the 
spiritual  powers  of  the  soul  we  may  induce  changes  in  them 
that  may  become  visible  in  the  objective  state.  Certain  external 
manipulations  may  assist  the  powers  of  the  soul  in  their  work  ; 
but  without  the  possession  of  the  latter  the  former  will  be 
perfectly  useless.  Alchemical  processes  can  therefore  only  be 
successfully  undertaken  by  one  who  is  an  Alchemist  by  birth  or 
by  education.  Everything  being  of  a  threefold  nature,  there  is 
a  threefold  aspect  of  Alchemy.  In  its  higher  aspect  it  teaches 
the  regeneration  of  the  spiritual  man,  the  purification  of  the 
mind,  thought,  and  will,  the  ennobling  of  all  the  faculties  of  the 
soul.  In  its  lowest  aspect  it  deals  with  physical  substances,  and 
as  it  leaves  the  realm  of  the  living  soul,  and  steps  down  to 
hard  matter,  it  ends  in  the  science  of  modern  chemistry  of  the 
present  day. 

Alcol. — The  substance  of  a  body  free  from  all  earthly  matter  ;  its 
ethereal  or  astral  form. 

Aluech. — The  pure  spiritual  body  (the  Atma). 

Anatomy. — The  knowledge  of  the  parts  of  which  a  thing  is  com- 
posed ;  not  merely  of  its  physical  organs  and  limbs,  but  of  its 
elements  and  principles.  Thus  the  knowledge  of  the  sevenfold  con- 
stitution of  the  universe  embraces  the  anatomy  of  the  Macrocosm. 

Aniadus. — The  spiritual  activity  of  things. 

Aniadum. — The  spiritual  (re-born)  man ;  the  activity  of  man's 
spirit  in  his  mortal  body  ;  the  Seat  of  Spiritual  Consciousness. 

Aniada. — The  activities  that  are  caused  by  astral  influences,  celes- 
tial powers  ;  the  activity  of  imagination  and  phantasy. 

Anyodei. — The  spiritual  life  ;  the  subjective  state  into  which  the 
higher  essence  of  the  soul  enters  after  death,  and  after  having 
lost  its  grosser  parts  in  Kama-loca.  It  corresponds  to  the  con- 
ception of  Devachan. 

Aquastor. — A  being  created  by  the  power  of  the  imagination — i.e., 
by  a  concentration  of  thought  upon  the  A'kasa  by  which  an 
ethereal  form  may  be  created  (Elementals,  Succubi  and  Incubi, 
Vampires,  &c).  Such  imaginary  but  nevertheless  real  forms 
may  obtain  life  from  the  person  by  whose  imagination  they  are 
created,  and  under  certain  circumstances  they  may  even  become 
visible  and  tangible. 

Archates,  or  Archalles. — The  element  of  the  mineral  kingdom. 

Archaeus. — The  formative  power  of  Nature,  which  divides  the 
elements  and  forms  them  into  organic  parts.  It  is  the  principle 
of  life  ;  the  power  which  contains  the  essence  of  life  and  charac- 
ter of  everything. 

Ares. — The  spiritual  principle  ;  the  cause  of  the  specific  character 
of  each  thing. 

32  PARACELSUS 

Astra. — States  of  mind,  either  in  the  mind  of  man  or  in  the  uni- 
versal mind.  Each  mental  state  in  the  mind  of  man  corresponds 
to  a  similar  condition  in  the  mental  atmosphere  of  the  world,  and 
as  the  mind  of  man  acts  upon  the  universal  mind,  so  that  mental 
atmosphere  reacts  upon  him. 

Astral  Body. — The  invisible  ethereal  body  of  man  or  of  any  other 
thing ;  the  physical  form  being  merely  the  material  expression 
of  the  astral  body,  which  builds  up  the  external  form. 

Astral  Light. — The  same  as  the  Archaeus.  A  universal  and 
living  ethereal  element,  still  more  ethereal  and  highly  organised 
than  the  A'kasa.  The  former  is  universal,  the  latter  only  cosmic 
— viz.,  pertaining  to  our  solar  system.  It  is  at  the  same  time 
an  element  and  a  power,  containing  the  character  of  all  things. 
It  is  the  storehouse  of  memory  for  the  great  world  (the  Macro- 
cosm), whose  contents  may  become  re-embodied  and  reincarnated 
in  objective  forms  ;  it  is  the  storehouse  of  memory  of  the  little 
world,  the  Microcosm  of  man,  from  which  he  may  recollect 
past  events.  It  exists  uniformly  throughout  the  interplanetary 
spaces,  yet  it  is  more  dense  and  more  active  around  certain 
objects  on  account  of  their  molecular  activity,  especially  around 
the  brain  and  spinal  cord  of  human  beings,  which  are  surrounded 
by  it  as  by  an  aura  of  light.  It  is  this  aura  around  the  nerve- 
cells  and  nerve-tubes  by  which  a  man  is  enabled  to  catch  impres- 
sions made  upon  the  astral  aura  of  the  cosmos,  and  thereby  to 
"  read  in  the  Astral  Light."  It  forms  the  medium  for  the  trans- 
mission of  thought,  and  without  such  a  medium  no  thought 
could  be  transferred  to  a  distance.  It  may  be  seen  by  the 
clairvoyant,  and  as  each  person  has  an  astral  aura  of  his  own, 
a  person's  character  may  be  read  in  his  Astral  Light  by  those 
who  are  able  to  see  it.  In  the  case  of  a  child  who  has  not  yet 
generated  any  special  characteristics,  that  emanating  aura  is 
milk-white  ;  but  in  the  adult  there  is  always  upon  this  funda- 
mental colour  another  one,  such  as  blue,  green,  yellow,  red, 
dark-red,  and  even  black.  Every  living  nerve  has  its  astral 
aura,  every  mineral,  every  plant  or  animal,  and  everything  of 
life,  and  the  glorified  body  of  the  spirit  is  made  to  shine  by  its 
light. 
A  strology. — The  science  of  the  "  stars  ; "  i.e.,  of  the  mental  states 
in  the  mind.  It  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  modern  physical 
astronomy. 
A  strum. — This  term  is  frequently  used  by  Paracelsus,  and  means 
the  same  as  Astral  Light,  or  the  special  sphere  of  mind  belong- 
ing to  each  individual,  giving  to  each  thing  its  own  specific 
qualities,  constituting,  so  to  say,  its  world. 
Avitchi. — An  Eastern  term.  A  state  of  ideal  spiritual  wickedness  ; 
a  subjective  condition  ;  the  antitype  of  Devachan  or  Anyodei. 

EXPLANATIONS  OF  TERMS  33 

Azoth. — The  creative  principle  in  Nature  ;  the  universal  panacea 
or  spiritual  life-giving  air.  It  represents  the  Astral  Light  in 
its  aspect  as  the  vehicle  of  the  universal  essence  of  life  ;  in 
its  lowest  aspect  the  electrifying  power  of  the  atmosphere — 
Ozone,  Oxygen,  &c. 

B 

Beryllus. — A  magic  mirror  or  crystal  in  whose  Astral  aura  appa- 
ritions may  be  seen  by  the  clairvoyant.  Berillistica  ars:  the 
art  of  divining  by  means  of  seeing  in  crystals,  magic  mirror, 
flowing  water,  looking  into  cups,  into  stones,  &c,  all  of  which 
methods  are  calculated  to  render  the  mind  passive,  and  thereby 
to  enable  it  to  receive  the  impressions  that  the  Astral  light  may 
make  upon  the  mental  sphere  of  the  individual ;  by  detracting 
the  attention  from  external  and  sensual  things,  the  inner  man 
is  made  conscious  and  receptive  for  its  subjective  impressions. 

Bruta. — Astral  force  manifested  in  animals ;  second  sight  in 
animals ;  power  of  animals  to  discover  instinctively  poisonous 
or  curative  medicines,  &c. 

c 

Caballi,  Cabales,  Lemures. — The  astral  bodies  of  men  who  died 
a  premature  death — that  is  to  say,  who  were  killed  or  killed 
themselves  before  their  natural  term  of  life  was  over.  They 
may  be  more  or  less  self-conscious  and  intelligent,  according  to 
the  circumstances  in  which  they  lived  and  died.  They  are  the 
earth-bound  suffering  souls  of  the  dead,  wandering  in  the  sphere 
of  the  earth's  attraction  (Kama-loca)  until  the  time  arrives 
when  they  would  have  died  according  to  natural  law,  when  the 
separation  of  their  higher  principles  from  the  lower  ones  takes 
place.  They  imagine  to  perform  bodily  actions,  while  in  fact 
they  have  no  physical  bodies,  but  act  in  their  thoughts  ;  but 
their  bodies  appear  to  them  as  real  as  ours  appear  to  us.  They 
may  under  certain  necessary  conditions  communicate  with  man 
through  "  mediums,"  or  directly  through  a  man's  own  medium- 
istic  organisation. 

Chaomantia. — Divination  by  aerial  visions  ;  clairvoyance  ;  second 
sight. 

Cherio. — "  Quint-essence."  The  essence  or  fifth  principle  cf  a 
thing ;  that  which  constitutes  its  essential  qualities,  freed  of 
all  impurities  and  non-essentials. 

Clissus. — The  hidden  specific  power  contained  in  all  things ;  the 
life-force  which  in  vegetables  mounts  from  the  roots  into  the 
trunk,  leaves,  flowers,  and  seeds,  causing  the  latter  to  produce  a 
new  organism. 

C 

34  PARACELSUS 

Corpus  invisibile. — The  invisible  body;  the  animal  soul  (Kama- 
rupa)  ;  the  medium  between  material  forms  and  the  spiritual 
principle  ;  a  substantial,  ethereal,  but  under  ordinary  circum- 
stances invisible  thing  ;  the  lower  astral  form. 

Corpora  supercoelestia.- — Forms  that  can  only  be  seen  by  the 
highest  spiritual  perception  ;  they  are  not  ordinary  astral  forms, 
but  the  refined  and  intelligent  elements  of  the  same. 

D 

Derses. — An  occult  exhalation  of  the  earth,  by  means  of  which 

plants  are  enabled  to  grow.     Carbonic  acid  gases,  &c,  are  its 

vehicles. 
Devachan. — An  Eastern  term.     A  subjective  state  of  happiness  of 

the  higher  principles  of  the  soul  after  the  death  of  the  body. 

(See  Anyodei.)     It  corresponds  to  the  idea  of  Heaven,  where 

each  individual  monad  lives  in  a  world  which  it  has  created  by 

its  own  thoughts,  and  where  the  products  of  its  own  spiritual 

ideation  appear  substantial  and  objective  to  it. 
Divinatio. — The  act  of  foreseeing  future  events  by  means  of  the 

soul's  own  light ;  prophecy. 
Divertellum. — The  matrix  of  the  elements,  from  which  the  latter 

generated. 1 
Durdales. — Substantial  but  invisible    beings,   residing  in  trees 

(Dryades)  ;  elemental  spirits  of  nature. 

E 

Edelphus. — One  who  divines  from  the  elements  of  the  air,  earth, 
water,  or  fire. 

Electrum  magicom. — A  composition  of  seven  metals,  compounded 
according  to  certain  rules  and  planetary  influences ;  a  prepara- 
tion of  great  magic  power,  of  which  magic  rings,  mirrors,  and 
many  other  things  may  be  made. 

Elementals. — Spirits  of  Nature.  Substantial  but  (for  us)  invisible 
beings  of  an  ethereal  nature,  living  in  the  elements  of  air,  water, 
earth,  or  fire.  They  have  no  immortal  spirits,  but  they  are  made 
of  the  substance  of  the  soul,  and  are  of  various  grades  of  intelli- 

1  For  instance,  each  metal  has  its  elementary  matrix  in  which  it  grows. 
Mines  of  gold,  silver,  &C,  become  exhausted,  and  after  centuries  (or 
millenniums)  they  may  be  found  to  yield  again  a  rich  supply  ;  in  the 
same  way  the  soil  of  a  country,  having  become  infertile  from  exhaustion, 
will  after  a  time  of  rest  become  fertile  again.  In  both  cases  a  decom- 
position and  a  development  of  lower  elements  into  higher  ones  takes 
place. 

EXPLANATIONS  OF  TERMS  35 

gence.  Their  characters  differ  widely.  They  represent  in  their 
natures  all  states  of  feeling.  Some  are  of  a  beneficial  and  others 
of  a  malicious  nature. 

Elementaries. — The  astral  corpses  of  the  dead,  from  which  the 
spiritual  part  has  departed,  but  in  which,  nevertheless,  intel- 
lectual activity  may  have  remained  ;  the  ethereal  counterpart 
of  the  once  living  person,  which  will  sooner  or  later  be  decom- 
posed into  its  astral  elements,  as  the  physical  body  is  dissolved 
into  the  elements  to  which  it  belongs.  These  elementaries  have 
under  normal  conditions  no  consciousness  of  their  own  ;  but  they 
may  receive  vitality  from  a  mediumistic  person,  and  thereby  for 
a  few  minutes  be,  so  to  say,  galvanised  back  into  life  and  (arti- 
ficial) consciousness,  when  they  may  speak  and  act  and  appa- 
rently remember  things  as  they  did  during  life.  They  very 
often  take  possession  of  Elementals,  and  use  them  as  masks  to 
represent  deceased  persons  and  to  mislead  the  credulous.  The 
Elementaries  of  good  people  have  little  cohesion  and  evaporate 
soon  ;  those  of  wicked  persons  may  exist  a  long  time  ;  those  of 
suicides,  &c,  have  a  life  and  consciousness  of  their  own  as  long 
as  the  division  of  principles  has  not  taken  place.1  These  are  the 
most  dangerous. 

Elementum. — The  invisible  element  or  basic  principle  of  all  sub- 
stances that  may  be  either  in  a  solid  (earthly),  liquid  (watery), 
gaseous  (airy),  or  ethereal  (fiery)  state.  It  does  not  refer  to  the 
so-called  simple  bodies  or  "  elements  "  in  chemistry,  but  to  the 
invisible  basic  substance  out  of  which  they  are  formed. 

Evestrum. — The  Thought  body  of  Man ;  his  conscious  ethereal 
counterpart,  that  may  watch  over  him  and  warn  him  of  the 
approach  of  death  or  of  some  other  danger.  The  more  the 
physical  body  is  active  and  conscious  of  external  things,  the 
more  is  the  Thought  body  stupefied  ;  the  sleep  of  the  body  is 
the  awakening  of  the  Evestrum.  During  that  state  it  may  com- 
municate with  the  Evestra  of  other  persons  or  with  those  of  the 
dead.  It  may  go  to  certain  distances  from  the  physical  body 
for  a  short  time  ;  but  if  its  connection  with  that  body  is  broken, 
the  latter  dies. 

Erodimum. — A  pictorial  or  allegorical  representation  of  some  future 
events ;  visions  and  symbolic  dreams  that  may  be  produced  in 
various  ways.  There  are  three  classes  of  dreams  from  which 
may  arise  four  more  mixed  states  of  dreams.  The  three  pure 
classes  are  :  1.  Dreams  that  result  from  physiological  conditions  ; 
2.  Dreams  that  result  from  psychological  conditions  aud  astral 

1  This  division  takes  place  in  consequence  of  the  opposite  attraction  of 
matter  and  spirit.  After  it  is  accomplished,  the  astral  body  will  be  dis- 
solved into  its  elements,  and  the  spirit  enter  into  the  spiritual  state. — See 
A.  P.  SlNNETT  :  Esoteric  Buddhism. 

36  PARACELSUS 

influences  ;  3.  Dreams  that  are  caused  l>y  spiritual  agency.  Only 
the  latter  are  worthy  of  great  consideration,  although  the  former 
may  occasionally  indicate  important  changes  in  the  planes  to 
which  they  belong  ;  for  instance,  a  dream  of  a  nail  being  driven 
into  the  head  may  predict  apoplexy,  &c. 

F 

Firmament. — The  soul — sphere  of  the  Macrocosmos,  respectively 

that  of  the  Microcosmos. 
Flagae. — Spirits  knowing  the  secrets  of  man  ;  familiar  spirits  ; 

spirits  that  may  be  seen  in  mirrors  and  reveal  secret  things. 

G 

Gamathei,  or  Gamahetj. — Stones  with  magic  characters  and  pic- 
tures, possessing  powers  received  from  astral  influences.  They 
may  be  made  by  art  or  in  a  natural  manner.     Amulets,  charms. 

Gigantes. — Elementals  having  the  human  form,  but  of  superhuman 
size.  They  live  like  men,  and  are  mortal,  though  invisible 
under  ordinary  circumstances. 

Gnomi,  Pygmaei,  Cubitali. — Little  Elementals  having  the  human 
form  and  the  power  to  extend  their  form.  They  live  in  the 
element  of  the  earth,  in  the  interior  of  the  earth's  surface,  in 
houses  and  dwellings  constructed  by  themselves. 

H 

Homunculi. — Artificially  made  human  beings,  generated  from  the 
sperm  withoit  the  assistance  of  the  female  organism  (Black 
magic") 

Homunculi  imagunculae. — Images  made  of  wax,  clay,  wood,  &c, 
that  are  used  in  the  practice  of  black  magic,  witchcraft,  and 
sorcery,  to  stimulate  the  imagination  and  to  injure  an  enemy,  or 
to  affect  an  absent  person  in  an  occult  manner  at  a  distance. 

Ilech  prtmum,  Ileias,  Ileadus. — The  first  beginning  ;  primordial 

power  ;  causation. 
Ilech  supernaturale. — The  union  of  the  superior  and  inferior 

astral  influences. 
Ilech  magnum. — The  specific  healing  power  of  medicine. 

EXPLANATIONS  OF  TERMS  37 

Ilech  crudum. — Tlie  combination  of  a  body  out  of  its  three  con- 
stituent principles,  represented  by  salt,  sulphur,  and  mercury, 
or  body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  respectively  the  elements  of  earth, 
water,  and  fire. 

Ileiades. — The  element  of  the  air  ;  the  vital  principle. 

Iliaster. — The  hidden  power  in  Nature,  by  means  of  which  all 
things  grow  and  multiply  ;  primordial  matter  ;  materia  prima  ; 
A'kasa.  Iliaster  primus :  life  ;  the  balsam  of  Nature.  II.  secun- 
dus :  the  power  of  life  inherent  in  matter.  II.  tertius :  the  astral 
power  of  man.  II.  quartus :  perfection  ;  the  power  obtained  by 
the  mystic  process  of  squaring  the  circle. 

Imaginatio. — The  plastic  power  of  the  soul,  produced  by  active 
consciousness,  desire,  and  will. 

Impressiones. — Effects  of  a  passive  imagination,  which  may  give 
rise  to  various  bodily  affections,  diseases,  malformations,  stig- 
mata, monsters  (hare-lips,  acephali,  &c),  moles,  marks,  &c. 

Incubus  and  Succubus. — Male  and  female  parasites  growing  out  of 
the  astral  elements  of  man  or  woman  in  consequence  of  a  lewd 
imagination.  2.  Astral  forms  of  dead  persons  (Elementaries), 
being  consciously  or  instinctively  attracted  to  such  persons, 
manifesting  their  presence  in  tangible  if  not  visible  forms, 
and  having  carnal  intercourse  with  their  victims.  3.  The 
astral  bodies  of  sorcerers  and  witches  visiting  men  or  women 
for  immoral  purposes.  The  Incubus  is  male,  and  the  Succubus 
female. 

K 

Kama-Loca. — An  Eastern  term.  Region  of  Desire.  The  soul- 
sphere  (third  and  fourth  principle)  of  the  earth — not  neces- 
sarily on  the  earth's  surface  —where  the  astral  remnants  of  the 
deceased  putrefy  and  are  decomposed.  In  this  region  the  souls 
of  the  deceased  that  are  not  pure  live  (either  consciously  or  in 
a  state  of  torpor)  until  their  Kama-rupas  (bodies  of  desire)  are 
laid  off  by  a  second  death,  and  they  themselves  having  been 
disintegrated,  the  division  of  the  higher  principles  takes  place. 
The  lower  principles  being  disposed  of,  the  spirit,  with  his 
purified  affections  and  the  powers  he  may  have  acquired  during 
his  earthly  existence,  enters  again  into  the  state  of  Devachan. 
Kama-Loca  corresponds  to  the  Hades  of  the  Greeks,  and  to 
the  purgatory  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church— the  Limb  us. 
(See  Elementaries.) 

38  PARACELSUS 

L~~ta?. — Astral  bodies  of  plants.     They  may  be  rendered  visible 
ont  of  the  ashes  of  plants  after  the  latter  have  been  burned. 
• . !  Pausgenesis,  in  the  Appendix.) 
Lemcres. — Elementals  of  the  air  ;  Eleinentaries  of  the  deceased  ; 
•rapping  and  tipping  spirits,"  producing  physical  manifesta- 
tions. 
Limbcs  (Magnus). — The  world  as  a  whole  ;  the  spiritual  matrix  of 
the  universe  ;  Chaos,  in  which  is  contained  that  out  of  which 
the  world  is  made. 

M 

Magic. — Wisdom ;  the  science  and  art  of  consciously  employing 
invisible  (spiritual)  powers  to  produce  visible  effects.  TVill, 
love,  and  imagination  are  magic  powers  that  every  one  pos- 
Sr?jes,  and  he  who  knows  how  to  develop  them  and  to  use 
them  consciously  and  effectually  is  a  magician.  He  who  uses 
them  for  good  purposes  practises  white  magic.  He  who  uses 
them  for  selfish  or  evil  purposes  is  a  black  magician.1  Para- 
celsus uses  the  term  Magic  to  signify  the  highest  power  of  the 
human  spirit  to  control  all  lower  influences  for  the  purpose 
of  good.  The  act  of  employing  invisible  powers  for  evil  pur- 
poses he  calls  Necromancy,  because  the  Elementaries  of  the 
dead  are  often  used  as  mediums  to  convey  evil  influences. 
Sorcery  is  not  Magic,  but  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Magic 
as  darkness  to  light.  Sorcery  deals  with  the  forces  of  the 
human  and  animal  soul,  but  Magic  with  the  supreme  power 
of  the  spirit. 

Magisteredii. — The  medicinal  virtue  of  medicinal  substances,  pre- 
served in  a  vehicle. 

Masgoxaeia. — A  magic  power  by  which  heavy  bodies  may  be  lifted 
without  any  great  physical  effort ;  magical  suspension ;  levitation. 
It  is  usually  accomplished  by  changing  their  polarity  in  regard 
to  the  attraction  (gravity)  of  the  earth. 

Matrices. — The  vehicles  of  things  ;  elementary  bases. 

Melosesae.  —  Elemental  spirits  of  water,  usually  appearing  in 
female  forms,  but  which  may  also  take  the  forms  of  fishes  or 
snakes.  They  have  souls,  but  no  spiritual  principle  ;  but  they 
may  obtain  the  latter  by  entering  into  a  union  with  man.  (The 
fourth  principle  uniting  with  the  fifth.)  The  human  shape  is 
their  true  form  ;  their  animal  forms  are  assumed.  They  are  also 
called  Undines. 

1  S-.e  '-'Magic,  White  and  Black  ;  or,  The  Science  of  Finite  and  In- 
finite Life."  by  Dr.  F.  Hartmann. 

EXPLANATIONS  OF  TERMS  39 

Metaphysics. — The  science  of  that  which  is  "  supersensual "  but 
not  purely  spiritual ;  consequently  the  knowledge  of  the  astral 
plane,  the  ethereal  elements  in  the  organism  of  man  and  of 
Nature,  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  "  inner  man,"  the 
correlation  of  spiritual  energies,  &c.  &c. 

Macrocosjios.  —  The  Universe;  the  great  world,  including  all 
visible  and  invisible  things. 

Microcosmos. — The  little  world.  Usually  applied  to  Man.  A 
smaller  world  is  a  Microcosmos  if  compared  with  a  larger  one. 
Our  Solar  System  is  a  Microcosm  in  comparison  with  the  Uni- 
verse, and  a  Macrocosm  if  compared  with  the  Earth.  Man  is  a 
Microcosm  in  comparison  with  the  Earth,  and  a  Macrocosm  if 
compared  with  an  atom  of  matter.  An  atom  of  matter  is  a 
Microcosm,  because  in  it  are  all  the  potentialities  out  of  which 
a  Macrocosm  may  grow  if  the  conditions  are  favourable.  Every- 
thing contained  in  a  Microcosm  in  a  state  of  development  is 
contained  in  the  Microcosm  in  germ. 

Moxstra. — Unnatural — usually  invisible — beings,  that  may  spring 
from  corruption  or  from  unnatural  sexual  connection,  from  the 
(astral)  putrefaction  of  sperma,  or  from  the  effects  of  a  morbid 
imagination.  All  such  and  similar  things  may  pass  from  the 
merely  subjective  into  the  objective  state;  because  "objective" 
and  "subjective"  are  relative  terms,  and  refer  rather  to  our 
capacity  to  perceive  them,  than  to  any  essential  qualities  of 
their  own.  "What  may  be  merely  subjective  to  a  person  in 
one  state  of  existence  may  be  fully  objective  to  one  in  another 
state  :  for  instance,  in  delirium  tremens  and  insanity,  subjective 
hallucinations  appear  objective  to  the  patient. 

Mttuta. — The  essence  of  hie  contained  in  some  vehicle.  (Prana, 
Vitality ;  cringing  to  some  material  substance.)  Parts  of  the 
human,  animal,  or  vegetable  bodies,  if  separated  from  the  organ- 
ism, retain  their  vital  power  and  their  specific  action  for  a  while, 
as  is  proved  by  the  transplantation  of  skin,  by  vaccination, 
poisoning  by  infection  from  corpses,  dissection  wounds,  infec- 
tion from  ulcers,  &c.  (Bacteria  are  such  vehicles  of  life.)  Blood, 
excrements,  &c,  may  contain  vitality  for  a  while  after  having  been 
removed  from  the  organism,  and  there  may  still  exist  some  sym- 
pathy between  such  substances  and  the  vitality  of  the  organism  ; 
and  by  acting  upon  the  former,  the  latter  may  be  affected.1 

1  A  case  is  cited  in  which  a  plastic  operation  was  performed  on  a  man's 
nose  by  transplanting  on  it  a  piece  of  skin  taken  from  another  person. 
The  artificial  nose  answered  its  purpose  for  a  long  time,  until  the  person 
from  whom  the  piece  of  skin  was  taken  died,  when  the  nose  is  said  to 
have  rotted.  Cases  are  also  known  in  which  persons  have  felt  a  pain 
caused  by  the  pressure  of  a  stone  upon  a  recently  amputated  leg  that, 

40  PARACELSUS 

Mysterium  magnum. — Original  matter ;  the  matter  of  all  things ; 
the  ultimate  essence  ;  essentiality  of  the  inner  nature  ;  specific 
quality  of  the  semi-material  part  of  things.  All  forms  come 
originally  from  the  Mysterium  magnum,  and  all  return  to  it  in 
the  end  ;  the  Parabrahman  of  the  Yedantins. 

Mysticism  and  Mystic  knowledge. — Mystical  is  that  which  is 
mysterious  and  occult,  and  therefore  not  generally  known. 
Mysticism  generally  refers  to  a  morbid  craving  for  gratifying 
a  curiosity  to  know  all  about  spooks,  witchcraft,  black  magic, 
&c. ;  true  mystic  knowledge  is  soul -knowledge,  and  is  based 
upon  the  development  of  the  power  of  the  soul  to  distinguish 
between  that  which  is  real,  eternal  and  permanent,  and  that 
which  is  illusive,  temporal,  and  subject  to  change. 

N 

Necrocomica. — Visions  of  future  events  in  the  air.    . 

Necromantia. — Sorcery ;  witchcraft ;  the  art  of  employing  the  un- 
conscious Elementaries  of  the  dead  by  infusing  life  into  them, 
and  employing  them  for  evil  purposes. 

Nectromantia. — The  perception  of  the  interior  (the  soul)  of  things ; 
psychometry ;  clairvoyance. 

Nenufareni. — Elementals  of  the  air.     Sylphs. 

Nymphae. — Elementals  of  water-plants. 

o 

Occultism. — The  science  that  deals  with  things  that  transcend 
sensual  perception  and  are  generally  little  known.  It  deals 
especially  with  effects  that  cannot  be  explained  by  the  uni- 
versally known  laws  of  Nature,  but  whose  causes  are  still  a 
mystery  to  those  who  have  not  penetrated  deep  enough  into  the 
secrets  of  Nature  to  understand  them  correctly.  What  may  be 
occult  to  one  person  may  be  fully  comprehensible  to  another. 
The  more  the  spirituality  and  intelligence  of  man  grows,  and 
the  more  it  becomes  free  of  the  attractions  of  sense,  the  more 
will  his  perceptive  power  grow  and  expand,  and  the  less  will  the 
processes  of  Nature  appear  occult  to  him. 

without  their  knowledge,  had  been  buried,  and  the  pain  instantly  ceased 
when  the  stone  was  removed.  This  sympathy  existing  between  man's 
consciousness  and  his  body  is  the  cause  that  the  astral  form  of  a  dead 
person  may  keenly  feel  any  injury  inflicted  upon  his  corpse.  The  "  spirit " 
of  a  suicide  may  feel  the  effects  of  a  post-mortem  examination  as  severely 
as  if  he  had  been  cut  up  while  alive. 

EXPLANATIONS  OF  TERMS  41 

Paragranum  (from  para  =  over,  and  granum  =  kernel). — The  science 
that  deals  with  the  very  heart  of  things,  taking  into  account 
their  mysterious  origin. 

Paramirum  (from  para  —  over,  and  mirare  —  admire). — The  science 
which  deals  with  that  which  is  spiritual,  wonderful,  elevating, 
holy,  and  admirable  in  Nature. 

Penates  or  Pennates,  Lares,  Hercii,  Etesii,  Meilichti. — Spirits 
of  the  elements  of  fire,  as  well  as  imps,  hobgoblins,  &c,  attached 
to  particular  places,  haunted  houses,  &c.  They  may  produce 
noises,  "  physical  manifestations,"  stone-throwing,  &c. 

Pentacula. — Plates  of  metal  with  magic  symbols  written  or  en- 
graved upon  them.  They  are  used  as  charms,  amulets,  &c, 
against  diseases  caused  by  evil  astral  influences. 

Phantasmata. — Creations  of  thought ;  "  spirits  "  living  in  solitary 
places  (they  may  be  produced  by  the  imagination  of  man,  and 
be  able  to  communicate  with  him) ;  hallucinations. 

Praesagium. — Omen  ;  signs  of  future  events. 

Pygmaei. — Spirits  of  the  Element  of  the  Earth ;  being  the  products 
of  a  process  of  organic  activity  going  on  in  that  element,  by 
which  such  forms  may  be  generated.  They  are  dwarfs  and 
quite  microscopical  beings,  ever  at  war  with  the  Gnomes. 

E 

Rota. — An  Eastern  term.  Form.  Kama-rupa,  form  caused  by 
desire ;  Mayavi-rupa,  illusive  form  caused  by  the  will  and 
imagination  of  a  person  who  consciously  projects  his  own  astral 
reflection  as  that  of  any  other  form. 

s 

Sagani. — Elementals  or  spirits  of  Nature. 

Salamandri. — Salamanders  ;  spirits  living  in  the  element  of  fire. 

Salt,  Sulehur,  and  Mercury. — The  three  constituent  states  or 

principles  of  the  cosmos,  corresponding  to  Substance,  Energy, 

and  Consciousness. 
Scaiolae. — Spiritual  powers,  qualities,  virtues,  depending  on  the 

quality  and  quantity  of  the  elements  that  produce  them.     Such 

powers  are  thought,  love,  hate,  imagination,  hope,  fear,  &c. 
Sidereal  body. — The  same  as  the  astral  soul  or  the  body  formed 

by  thought. 
Somnia. — 1.  Dreams.     2.  The  invisible  astral  influences  that  one 

42  PARACELSUS 

person  may  exercise  over  another  in  his  dream.  A  person  may 
thus  make  another  person  dream  what  he  desires  him  to  per- 
ceive ;  or  the  astral  body  of  one  sleeping  person  may  converse 
with  that  of  another ;  or  such  astral  bodies  of  living  persons 
may  be  impressed  or  be  made  to  promise  to  do  certain  things 
after  awakening,  and  they  will  then  keep  such  promises  when 
they  awake. 

Spirit. — This  term  is  used  very  indiscriminately,  a  fact  that  may 
cause  great  confusion.  In  its  true  meaning  spirit  is  a  unity,  a 
one  living  universal  power,  the  source  of  all  life  ;  but  the  word 
spirit  and  spirits  is  also  used  very  often  to  signify  invisible,  but 
nevertheless  substantial  things  —  forms,  shapes,  and  essences, 
elementals  and  elementaries,  shade?,  ghosts,  apparitions,  angels, 
and  devils. 

Spiritism. — The  dealing  with  spooks,  ghosts,  elementals,  &c,  and 
believing  them  to  be  the  immortal  spirits  of  departed  human 
beings. 

Spiritualism. — The  science  of  that  which  is  spiritual,  the  contrary 
of  "  materialism  ; "  the  understanding  of  religious  truths,  based 
upon  spirituality. 

Spiritus  vitae. — The  vital  force  ;  a  principle  taken  from  the  ele- 
ments of  whatever  serves  as  a  nutriment,  or  which  may  be 
imparted  by  "  magnetism." 

Spiritus  animalis. — Astral  power,  by  which  the  will  of  the  inner 
principles  in  man  is  executed  on  the  sensual  and  material  plane  ; 
instincts. 

Sylphes. — Elementals  residing  in  mountainous  regions  (not  in  the 
air). 

Sylvestres. — Elementals  residing  in  forests  ;  the  Dusii  of  St. 
Augustine ;  fauns. 

Syrenes. — Singing  elementals.  Melusinae,  attracted  to  and  often 
keeping  in  the  waters  ;  half  women,  half  fishes. 

T 

Thkosophia. — -Supreme  wisdom,  acquired  by  practical  experience, 
by  which  it  is  eminently  distinguished  from  merely  speculative 
philosophy.  Theosophy,  or  divine  self-knowledge,  is  therefore 
not  to  be  confounded  with  theosophical  doctrines  that  are  the 
result  of  theosophical  knowledge  ;  to  say  nothing  about  the  idle 
dreams  and  vagaries  which  are  often  dealt  out  under  the  name 
of  "  theosophy,"  and  which  have  brought  this  term  into  general 
disrepute. 

Trarames. — An  invisible  power  that  may  communicate  with  man 
through  sounds,  voices,  ringings  of  bells,  noises,  &c. 

EXPLANATIONS  OF  TERMS  43 

u 

Umbratiles. — Shadows ;  astral  appearances  becoming  visible  and 
sometimes  tangible  (modern  spiritistic  form  manifestations) ; l 
the  Scin-lecca,  or  wraith,  or  the  German  Doppelgaenger  of  a 
person.  They  may  become  visible  by  attracting  ethereal  material 
elements  from  the  body  of  a  medium,  or  any  other  person  in 
whom  there  is  little  cohesion  of  his  lower  elements  in  conse- 
quence of  some  disease,  or  on  account  of  inherited  peculiarities 
of  his  organisation  ;  or  they  may  attract  them  from  the  surround- 
ing atmosphere.  Their  life  is  borrowed  from  the  medium,  and 
if  it  were  prevented  to  return  to  the  medium,  the  latter  would 
be  paralysed  or  die.     (See  Evestrum.) 

Vampires. — Astral  forms  living  at  the  expense  of  persons  from 
whom  they  draw  vitality  and  strength.  They  may  be  either 
the  astral  bodies  of  living  persons,  or  of  such  that  have  died, 
but  which  still  cling  to  their  physical  bodies  buried  in  the  grave, 
attempting  to  supply  them  with  nutriment  drawn  from  the 
living,  and  thereby  to  prolong  their  own  existence.  Such  cases 
are  especially  well  known  in  the  south-east  of  Europe — Moldavia, 
Servia,  Russia,  &c.  (Vourdalak).2 

Xeni  nephidei. — Elemental  spiriie  that  give  men  occult  powers 
over  visible  matter,  and  then  feed  on  their  brains,  often  causing 
thereby  insanity.3  A  great  number  of  physical  mediums  have 
become  insane  from  this  cause. 

Yliaster. — Primordial  matter  out  of  which  the  universe  has  been 
formed  in  the  beginning  of  time. 

1  Ruland  says  about  them  :  "  Umbratilia  transmutata  sunt  in  hominem 
conspectum  ab  astris  efc  suis  ascendibus  occultis  oblata,  quae  non  sicus 
lemures  apparent  oculis,  idque  per  magiam  efficaciani." — Lexic.  Alchemic, 
p.  466. 

2  Well-authenticated  cases  of  vampires  may  be  found  in  Maximilian 
Perty's  works  and  in  H.  P.  Blavatsky's  "  Isis  Unveiled." 

3  They  assist  "  physical  mediums  "  to  lift  material  objects  without  any 
visible  means. 

III.  COSMOLOGY 

The  power  that  waB  active  in  the  formation  of  the  world 
was  God ;  the  Supreme  Cause  and  Essence  of  all  things, 
being  not  only  the  Father  of  the  Son,  but  of  all  created 
things  that  ever  were,  that  are,  or  will  be;  the  Yliaster,1 
the  primordial  and  original  Cause  of  all  existence.  This 
Power  is,  was,  and  will  be  the  eternal  Constructor  of  the 
world,  the  "  Carpenter  "  of  the  universe,  the  Sculptor  of 
forms.  Creation  took  place  through  the  inherent  Will  of 
that  Creative  Power  being  expressed  in  the  "  Word  "  2  or 
Fiat  (active  and  efficient  thought),  in  the  same  manner 
as  if  a  house  would  come  into  existence  by  a  breath.3 
The  cause  of  the  beginning  of  creation  was  in  the  eternal 
inherent  activity  of  the  immaterial  Essence,  and  all  things 
were  invisibly  or  potentially  contained  in  the  First  Cause, 
or  God. 

When  creation  took  place  the  Yliaster  divided  itself; 
it,  so  to  say,  melted  and  dissolved,  and  developed  out  of 
itself  the  Ideos  or  Chaos  (Mysterium  magnum,  Iliados, 
Limbus  major,  or  Primordial  Matter).  This  Primordial 
Essence  is  of  a  monistic  nature,  and  manifests  itself  not 
only  as  vital  activity,  a  spiritual  force,  an  invisible,  in- 
comprehensible, and  indescribable  power ;  but  also  as 
vital  matter,  of  which  the  substance  of  living  beings 
consists.4      In  the  Limbus  or  Ideos  of  primordial  matter, 

1  From  8\ri,  forest,  and  astra,  stars  or  worlds. 

2  The  X0705. 

3  By  the  breath  (out-breathing)  of  Brahma. 

4  This  means  that  Life  is  the  cause  of  matter  and  force.  Force  and 
matter  are  originally  identical ;  they  are  only  two  different  modes  of  one 
and  the  same  cause  or  substance  which  is  called  Life,  and  which  is  itself 
an  attribute  or  function  of  the  supreme  cause  of  all  existence.     Modern 

44 

COSMOLOGY  45 

invested  with  the  original  power  of  life,  without  form, 
and  without  any  conceivable  qualities — in  this,  the  only 
matrix  of  all  created  things,  the  substance  of  all  things 
is  contained.  It  is  described  by  the  ancients  as  the 
Chaos,  and  has  been  compared  to  a  receptacle  of  germs, 
out  of  which  the  Macrocosmos,  and  afterwards  by  division 
and  evolution  in  Mysteria  specialia,1  each  separate  being 
came  into  existence.  All  things  and  all  elementary 
substances  were  contained  in  it,  in  potentia,2  but  not  in 
actu,  in  the  same  sense  as  in  a  piece  of  wood  a  figure  is 
contained,  which  may  be  cut  out  by  an  artist,  or  as  heat 
is  contained  in  a  pebble,  that  may  manifest  its  essence  as 
a  spark  if  struck  with  a  piece  of  steel.3 

The  Magnus  Limbus  is  the  nursery  out  of  which  all 
creatures  have  grown,  in  the  same  sense  as  a  tree  may 
grow  out  of  a  small  seed ;  with  the  difference,  however, 
that  the  great  Limbus  takes  its  origin  from  the  Word  of 
God,  while  the  Limbus  minor  (the  terrestrial  seed  or 
sperm)  takes  it  from  the  earth.  The  great  Limbus  is 
the  seed  out  of  which  all  beings  have  come,  and  the 
little  Limbus  is  each  ultimate  being  that  reproduces  its 
form,  and  that  has  itself  been  produced  by  the  great. 

discoveries  go  to  prove  the  unity  or  identity  of  matter  and  energy.  Recent 
researches  in  chemistry,  and  comparisons  made  between  the  chemical, 
musical,  and  colour  scales  seem  to  indicate  that  the  cause  of  the  difference 
between  the  heterogeneous  single  bodies  is  not  caused  by  an  essential 
difference  of  the  substances  of  which  they  are  composed,  but  only  a  differ- 
ence in  the  number  of  their  atomic  vibrations. 

1  "Mysterium"  is  everything  out  of  which  something  may  be  developed, 
which  is  only  germinally  contained  in  it.  A  seed  is  the  "  mysterium  "  of  a 
plant,  an  egg  the  mysterium  of  a  living  bird,  &c.  If  Eastern  mythology 
says  that  the  universe  came  out  of  an  egg  put  into  the  water  by  Brahma 
(Neuter)  or  Ideation,  it  implies  the  same  meaning  as  the  Mysterium  magnum 
of  Paracelsus ;  because  the  egg  represents  the  mysterium,  the  water  the  life, 
and  the  spirit  hatches  out  of  it  the  Creative  God,  Brahma  (Masculine). 

2  It  seems  that  Paracelsus  anticipated  the  modern  discovery  of  the 
"potency  of  matter  "  three  hundred  years  ago. 

3  The  Yliaster  of  Paracelsus  corresponds  to  the"Ev  of  Pythagoras  and 
Empedocles,  and  it  was  Aristotle  who  spoke  first  of  the  form  in  potentia 
before  it  could  appear  in  actu — the  former  being  called  by  him  "the 
privation  of  matter."     (Note  by  H.  P.  Blavatsky.) 

46  PARACELSUS 

The  little  Limbus  has  all  the  qualifications  of  the  great 
one,  in  the  same  sense  as  a  son  has  an  organisation 
similar  to  that  of  his  father.  "  As  it  is  above,  so  it  is 
below." 

As  creation  took  place  and  the  Yliaster  dissolved, 
Ares,  the  dividing,  differentiating,  and  individualising 
power  of  the  Supreme  Cause,  began  to  act.  All  pro- 
duction took  place  in  consequence  of  separation.  There 
were  produced  out  of  the  Ideos  the  elements  of  Fire, 
Water,  Air,  and  Earth,  whose  birth,  however,  did  not 
take  place  in  a  material  mode  or  by  simple  separation, 
but  spiritually  and  dynamically,  just  as  fire  may  come 
out  of  a  pebble  or  a  tree  come  out  of  a  seed,  although 
there  is  originally  no  fire  in  the  pebble  nor  a  tree  in  the 
seed.  "  Spirit  is  living  and  Life  is  Spirit,  and  Life  and 
Spirit  produce  all  things,  but  they  are  essentially  one 
and  not  two.  The  tongue  talks,  and  yet  it  does  not  talk, 
for  it  is  the  Spirit  that  talks  by  means  of  the  tongue,  and 
without  the  Spirit  the  tongue  would  be  silent,  because 
the  flesh  alone  cannot  talk."  The  elements,  too,  have 
each  one  its  own  Yliaster,  because  all  the  activity  of 
matter  in  every  form  is  only  an  effluvium  ot  the  same 
fountain.  But  as  from  the  seed  grow  the  roots  with 
their  fibres,  afterwards  the  stalk  with  its  branches  and 
leaves,  and  lastly  the  flowers  and  seeds ;  likewise  all 
beings  were  born  from  the  elements,  and  consist  of 
elementary  substances  out  of  which  other  forms  may 
come  into  existence,  bearing  the  characteristics  of  their 
parents.1  The  elements,  as  the  mothers  of  all  creatures, 
are  of  an  invisible  spiritual  nature,  and  have  souls.2 
They  all  spring  from  the  Mysterium  magnum,  which  is 
eternal  life,  and  therefore  the  spiritual  elements,  and  all 

1  This  doctrine,  preached  300  years  ago,  is  identical  with  the  one  that 
has  revolutionised  modern  thought  after  having  been  put  into  a  new  shape 
and  elaborated  by  Darwin  ;  and  is  still  more  elaborated  by  the  Indian 
Kapila,  in  the  Sankhya  philosophy.     (Note  by  H.  P.  Blavatsky.) 

2  Everything,  whether  it  may  manifest  itself  as  matter  or  as  force,  is 
essentially  a  trinity. 

COSMOLOGY  47 

the  beings  that  have  been  formed  of  such  elements,  must 
be  eternal ;  just  as  a  flower  consists  of  elements  similar 
to  those  of  the  plant  on  which  it  grows. 

"  Nature  being  the  Universe,  is  one,  and  its  origin  can 
only  be  one  eternal  Unity.  It  is  an  organism  in  which 
all  natural  things  harmonise  and  sympathise  with  each 
other.  It  is  the  Macrocosm.  Everything  is  the  product 
of  one  universal  creative  effort ;  the  Macrocosm  and  man 
(the  Microcosm)  are  one.  They  are  one  constellation, 
one  influence,  one  breath,  one  harmony,  one  time,  one 
metal,  one  fruit"1  (Philosophia  ad  Athenienses). 

There  is  nothing  dead  in  Nature.  Everything  is 
organic  and  living,  and  consequently  the  whole  world 
appears  to  be  a  living  organism.  "  There  is  nothing 
corporeal  which  does  not  possess  a  soul  hidden  in  it. 
There  exists  nothing  in  which  is  not  a  hidden  principle 
of  life.  Not  only  the  things  that  move,  such  as  men 
and  animals,  the  worms  of  the  earth,  and  the  birds  of  the 
air  and  the  fishes  in  the  water,  but  all  corporeal  and 
essential  things  have  life." 

There  is  no  death  in  Nature,  and  the  dying  of  the 
beings  consists  in  their  return  into  the  body  of  their 
mother ;  that  is  to  say,  in  an  extinction  and  suppression 
of  one  form  of  existence  and  activity,  and  in  a  re-birth  of 
the  same  thing  into  another  and  more  interior  world,  in 
a  new  form,  possessed  of  new  faculties  that  are  adapted 

1  This  description  of  the  sympathy  existing  between  Man  and  Eternal 
Nature  recalls  to  memory  the  old  evToirav  and  the  <rv/j.irvoia  fjua,  avppia 
fxia,  crv/j.Tra8eia  iravra  of  Hippocrates,  and  it  especially  reminds  us  of  the 
"  Timseus  "  of  Plato  and  the  "Emerides"  of  Plotin,  in  which  works  the 
whole  of  Nature  is  represented  as  a  living  and  rational  being  (£Qov), 
having  come  into  existence  by  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Cause.  The  head 
of  man  is  there  pictured  as  being  an  imitation  of  the  peripheric  con- 
stitution of  the  world.  The  basis  of  the  natural  philosophy  of  Paracelsus 
is  the  evidently  existing  correspondence,  correlation,  and  harmony  be- 
tween the  human  constitution  and  the  constitution  of  the  starry  world, 
including  all  terrestrial  things,  and  this  philosophy  is  almost  identical 
with  that  of  Plato,  which  speaks  of  the  formation  of  all  things  in  the 
inner  world  according  to  eternal  patterns  existing  in  the  realm  of  the  pure 
Ideal. 

48  PARACELSUS 

to  its  new  surroundings.  "  Two  factors  are  discernible 
in  each  thing — its  body  (form)  and  its  Activity  (qualities). 
The  latter  is  nothing  else  but  an  effluence  of  the  Supreme 
Cause  because  everything  exists  from  the  beginning  in 
God,  into  whose  unmanifested  state  all  things  will  return 
in  the  end,  and  from  whose  power  they  all  receive  their 
qualities,  or  whatever  they  deserve  on  account  of  their 
capacity  to  receive  or  attract  it. 

Life  is  an  universal  omnipresent  principle,  and  nothing 
is  without  life.  "  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  air  gives 
life  to  all  corporeal  things,  such  as  grow  from  the  earth 
and  are  born  of  it ;  but  the  special  life  of  each  thing  is  a 
spiritual  being,  an  invisible  and  intangible  spirit.  There 
is  nothing  corporeal  which  has  not  within  itself  a  spiri- 
tual essence,  and  there  is  nothing  which  does  not  contain 
a  life  hidden  within.  Life  is  something  spiritual.  Life  is 
not  only  in  that  which  moves,  such  as  men  and  animals, 
but  in  all  things ;  for  what  would  be  a  corporeal  form 
without  a  spirit  ?  The  form  may  be  destroyed ;  but 
the  spirit  remains  and  is  living,  for  it  is  the  subjec- 
tive life.  There  are  as  many  spirits  and  lives  as  there 
are  bodily  forms.  Therefore  there  are  celestial,  infernal, 
and  terrestrial  spirits,  spirits  of  human  beings,  of  metals, 
stones,  plants,  &c.  The  spirit  is  the  life  and  the  balsam 
within  all  corporeal  things "  ( Vita  Berum,  iv.).  In 
some  forms  life  acts  slowly — for  instance,  in  stones;  in 
hers  (organised  beings)  it  acts  quickly.  Each  element 
has  its  own  peculiar  living  existences,  belonging  to  it 
exclusively.1  Such  existences  or  beings,  living  in  the 
invisible  elements,  are  the  elemental  spirits  of  Nature. 
They  are  beings  of  the  Mysteria  specialia,  soul-forms, 
which  will  return  into  their  chaos,  and  who  are  not 
capable  of  manifesting  any  higher  spiritual  activity  because 
they  do  not  possess  the  necessary  kind  of  constitution  in 
which  an  activity  of  a  spiritual  character   can  manifest 

1  For  instance,    fishes   in   the   water,    blood-corpuscles  in  the  blood, 
animalcule  in  putrid  fluids,  bacteria  in  impure  air,  &c.  &o. 

COSMOLOGY  49 

itself.  Otherwise  they  live  like  animals,  or  even  like 
human  beings,  and  they  propagate  their  species.  By  the 
knowledge  of  ether  (A'kasa)  we  may  come  into  contact 
with  such  beings,  and  there  are  some  of  them  that  know 
all  the  mysteries  of  the  elements.1 

"  Matter  is,  so  to  say,  coagulated  smoke,  and  is  con- 
nected with  spirit  by  an  intermediate  principle  which  it 
receives  from  the  Spirit.  This  intermediate  link  between 
matter  and  spirit  belongs  to  all  three  kingdoms  of  Nature. 
In  the  mineral  kingdom  it  is  called  Stannar  or  Trughat,2 
in  the  vegetable  kingdom  Leffas ; 3  and  it  forms,  in  con- 
nection with  the  vital  force  of  the  vegetable  kingdom, 
the  Primum  Ens,  which  possesses  the  highest  medicinal 
properties.4  This  invisible  ethereal  body  may  be  resur- 
rected and  made  visible  from  the  ashes  of  plants  and 
animals  by  alchemical  manipulations.  The  form  of  the 
original  body  may  thus  be  made  to  appear  and  disappear.5 
In  the  animal  kingdom  this  semi-material  body  is  called 
Evestrum,  and  in  human  beings  it  is  called  the  Sidereal 
Man.  Each  living  being  is  connected  with  the  Macro- 
cosmos  and  Microcosmos  by  means  of  this  intermediate 
element  or  Soul,  belonging  to  the  Mysterium  magnum, 
from  whence  it  has  been  received,  and  whose  form  and 
qualities  are  determined  by  the  quality  and  quantity  of 
the  spiritual  and  material  elements." 

As  all  things  come  from  the  same  source,  containing 
the  primordial  substance  of  all  things,  they  are  all  inti- 
mately related  to  each  other  and  connected  with  each 
other,  and  are  essentially  and  fundamentally  a  unity. 
Any  difference  existing  between  two  dissimilar  things 
arises  only  from  a  difference  in  the  forms  in  which  the 

1  Each  Elemental  may  know  the  mysteries  of  that  element  to  which  it 
belongs. 

2  The  Astral  body  (Linga-sharira)  of  minerals,  plants,  and  animals. 

3  Astral  protoplasm. 

4  Perhaps  this  may  serve  as  a  clue  to  explain  the  action  of  homoeopathic 
medicines. 

6  See  Appendix  :  "  Palangenesis  of  Plants. " 

D 

5o  PARACELSUS 

primordial  essence  manifests  its  activity.  Such  a  differ- 
ence is  caused  by  the  different  grades  through  which 
such  forms  have  passed  in  the  progress  of  their  evolution 
and  development. 

[Note. — If  we  compare  the  teachings  of  the  Eastern  sages  with 
the  cosmology  taught  by  Paracelsus,  and  substitute  the  Sanscrit  or 
the  Tibetan  terms  used  by  the  former  for  those  invented  by  the 
latter,  we  find  the  two  systems  almost,  if  not  wholly,  identical. 
According  to  the  Eastern  sages,  there  is  a  ceaseless  activity  going 
on  during  the  state  of  Pralaya  (the  night  of  Brahm),  in  that  incom- 
prehensible eternal  First  Cause  that  may  be  looked  upon  in  one 
of  its  many  aspects  as  being  Matter,  Motion,  and  Space,  in  an 
absolute  sense,  which  is  beyond  the  grasp  of  our  relative  concep- 
tion. Its  motion  is  the  unconscious  latent  life  inherent  in  it. 
This  is  the  Yliaster  of  Paracelsus,  the  "root  of  Matter,"  or 
Mulaprakriti  of  the  Vedantins,  out  of  which  Prakriti  (Matter) 
and  Purusha  (Space)  become  manifest  as  body  and  form.  In  this, 
The  Absolute,  Infinite,  and  Unconditioned,  being  the  endless  aggre- 
gation of  everything  conditioned  and  finite,  the  germs  or  poten- 
tialities of  all  things  are  contained.  It  is  the  Limbus  Chaos  of 
Paracelsus,  and  the  germs  contained  in  it  are  developed  by  the  action 
of  the  Universal  Mind,  Dyan-Chohans,  and  the  power  of  Wisdom, 
Fo-hat — to  use  the  Tibetan  words.  Thus  the  Universe  may  be  said 
to  be  a  product  of  Cosmic  Ideation  and  Cosmic  Energy,  acting,  not  at 
random  or  in  an  arbitrary  manner,  but  according  to  a  certain  order 
produced  by  previous  causes,  which  are  themselves  the  effects  of 
other  causes,  and  which  constitute  the  Law.  The  existence  of  this 
inevitable  and  unchangeable  law  is  frequently  alluded  to  by  Para- 
celsus. He  says,  for  instance,  in  his  book,  "  De  Origine  Morborum 
Invisibilium "  :  "  Does  not  holy  writ  say  that  God  spoke  :  Am  I 
not  the  God  who  made  the  dumb  and  the  deaf,  the  blind  and  the 
seeing  ?  What  else  does  this  mean,  but  that  he  is  the  creator  of  all 
things,  of  good  and  of  evil  ? "  The  writings  of  the  Buddhists  teach 
the  same  doctrine,  saying  that  there  is  only  One  Power,  Swabhdvat. 
It  cannot  act  otherwise  than  according  to  the  law  of  cause  and  effect, 
and  that  makes  a  useful  tree  grow  as  well  as  a  useless  stone  in  the 
bladder,  according  to  the  causes  that  have  been  produced  by  pre- 
vious effects.  Each  act  and  each  thought  has  a  cause,  and  the 
cause  of  the  cause  is  the  Law.] 

Man,  as  such,  is  the  highest  being  in  existence,  because 
in  him  Nature  has  reached  the  culmination  of  her 
evolutionary  efforts.      In  him  are  contained  all  the  powers 

COSMOLOGY  51 

and  all  the  substances  that  exist  in  the  world,  and  he 
constitutes  a  world  of  his  own.  In  him  wisdom  may- 
become  manifest,  and  the  powers  of  his  soul — good  as 
well  as  evil  —  may  be  developed  to  an  extent  little 
dreamed  of  by  our  speculative  philosophers.  "  In  him  are 
contained  all  the  Coelestia,  Terrestria,  Undosa,  and  Aeria  " 
— that  is  to  say,  all  the  forces  and  beings  and  forms  that 
may  be  found  in  the  four  elements  out  of  which  the 
Universe  is  constructed.  Man  is  the  Microcosm  containing 
in  himself  the  types  of  all  the  creatures  that  exist  in  the 
world,  "  and  it  is  a  great  truth,  which  you  should  seriously 
consider,  that  there  is  nothing  in  heaven  or  upon  the 
earth  which  does  not  also  exist  in  Man,  and  God  who  is 
in  heaven  exists  also  in  man,  and  the  two  are  but  One." 
Each  man  in  his  capacity  as  a  member  of  the  great 
organism  of  the  world  can  be  truly  known  only  if  looked 
upon  in  his  connection  with  universal  Nature,  and  not  as 
a  separate  being  isolated  from  Nature.  Man  is  dependent 
for  his  existence  on  Nature,  and  the  state  of  Nature 
depends  on  the  condition  of  mankind  as  a  whole.  If  we 
know  Nature  we  know  Man,  and  if  we  know  Man  we 
know  Nature.  "  Whoever  desires  to  be  a  practical 
philosopher  ought  to  be  able  to  indicate  heaven  and  hell 
in  the  Microcosm,  and  to  find  everything  in  Man  that 
exists  in  heaven  or  upon  the  earth ;  so  that  the  corre- 
sponding things  of  the  one  and  the  other  appear  to  him 
as  one,  separated  by  nothing  else  but  the  form.  He  must 
be  able  to  turn  the  exterior  into  the  interior,  but  this  is 
an  art  which  he  can  only  acquire  by  experience  and  by 
the  light  of  Nature,  which  is  shining  before  the  eyes  of 
every  man,1  but  which  is  seen  by  few  mortals." 

1  Thus  a  man  in  whom  Supreme  Wisdom  or  God  has  become  fully 
manifest  is  a  god  to  the  extent  of  his  wisdom,  and  the  power  which  he  can 
exercise  will  extend  as  far  as  the  power  manifested  through  him  will  reach. 
A  man  will  become  an  incarnation  of  good  or  evil  according  to  the  degree 
in  which  the  good  or  evil  existing  in  the  Universe  becomes  manifested 
through  him.  But  as  no  one  can  become  a  Christ  by  merely  speculating 
upon  the  doctrines  of  Christ  without  practising  them,  so  nobody  can  come 

52  PARACELSUS 

The  science  which  deals  with  the  comparison  of  the 
Microcosm  and  Macrocosm  for  the  purpose  of  elucidating 
the  nature  of  the  two  (which  are  in  reality  one),  and  to 
bring  to  an  understanding  the  rational  principle  governing 
their  activity,  is  called  by  Paracelsus,  Astronomia,  and  this 
term  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  modern  physical 
Astronomy,  or  the  science  of  the  revolutions  of  the  suns 
and  planets  in  cosmic  space,  neither  does  it  refer  to  the 
mathematical  astrological  science  of  the  sixteenth  century. 
The  Astronomy  of  Paracelsus  means  wisdom,  or  a  direct 
recognition  of  the  truth,  caused  by  a  just  appreciation 
and  comprehension  of  the  relationship  existing  between 
the  Macrocosmos  and  the  Microcosmos,  "  whereby  the 
nature  of  man  becomes  known  through  an  understanding 
of  the  upper  sphere  of  the  great  world,  as  well  as  by 
investigating  the  lower  sphere  of  his  little  world,  as  if 
they  were  apparently  (what  they  are  essentially)  one 
Firmament,1  one  Star,  one  Being,  although  appearing 
temporarily  in   a  divided  form  and  shape." 2 

The  sphere  of  the  Universal  Mind  is  the  upper  firma- 
ment and  the  sphere  of  the  individual  mind  the  lower 
firmament,  but  the  two  are  intimately  connected  together 
and  are  essentially  one.  "  It  is  the  knowledge  of  the 
upper  (outer)  firmament  that  enables  us  to  know  the 
lower  (inner)  firmament  in  Man,  and  which  teaches  in 
what  manner  the  former  continually  acts  upon  and  inter- 
relates with  the  latter."  Upon  this  knowledge  the  true 
science  of  Astrology  is  based. 

Each,  however — the  Microcosmos  as  well  as  the  Macro- 
cosmos — are  to  be  looked  upon  as  having  each  a  separate 
and   independent  existence,  and  as  being  independent  of 

into  possession  of  practical  knowledge  by  merely  accepting  a  creed  or  a 
belief  in  the  scientific  opinions  of  others  without  any  experience  of  his  own. 

1  One  mind. 

2  "Liber  Paramirum,"  cap.  2.  This  is  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  the 
teachings  of  Paracelsus.  The  Macrocosm  and  the  Microcosm  may  not 
only  be  "compared  together,"  but  they  are  one  in  reality,  divided  only  by 
form,  which  is  an  essentially  vedantic  doctrine. 

COSMOLOGY  53 

each  other,  each  one  by  reason  of  the  individuality  of 
its  own  inherent  power,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that 
both  have  the  same  origin  and  the  same  life ;  for  the 
one  primordial  power  has  become  differentiated  in  each 
separate  form,  and  its  originally  homogeneous  action  has 
become  modified  by  the  special  qualities  that  have  been 
acquired  by  the  forms  in  which  it  manifests  itself.  "  As 
the  sky  with  its  stars  and  constellations  is  nothing 
separate  from  the  All  but  includes  the  All,  so  is  the 
'firmament'  of  Man  not  separate  from  Man;  and  as 
the  Universal  Mind  is  not  ruled  by  any  external  being, 
likewise  the  firmament  in  Man  (his  individual  sphere  of 
mind)  is  not  subject  to  the  rule  of  any  creature,  but  is  an 
independent  and  powerful  whole."1 

The  practical  application  of  Astronomia  (mental 
science)  is  called  Magic,  a  science  which  by  investigat- 
ing the  parts  of  the  whole  leads  to  a  comparison  of 
their  ideal  relations  and  connections,  and  consequently 
to  a  recognition  of  their  inner  nature.  "  Hidden  things 
(of  the  soul)  which  cannot  be  perceived  by  the  physical 
senses,  may  be  found  through  the  sidereal  body,  through 
whose  organism  we  may  look  into  Nature  in  the  same 
way  as  the  sun  shines  through  a  glass.  The  inner  nature 
of  everything  may  therefore  be  known  through  Magic  in 
general,  and  through  the  powers  of  the  inner  (or  second) 
sight.2     These  are   the   powers   by  which   all  secrets  of 

1  This  fundamental  truth  of  occultism  is  allegorically  represented  in 
the  interlaced  double  triangles.  He  who  has  succeeded  in  bringing  his 
individual  mind  in  exect  harmony  with  the  Universal  Mind  has  succeeded 
in  reuniting  the  inner  sphere  with  the  outer  one,  from  which  he  has  only 
become  separated  by  mistaking  illusions  for  truths.  He  who  has  succeeded 
in  carrying  out  practically  the  meaning  of  this  symbol  has  become  one 
with  the  father ;  he  is  virtually  an  adept,  because  he  has  succeeded  in 
squaring  the  circle  and  circling  the  square.  All  of  this  proves  that  Para- 
celsus has  brought  the  root  of  his  occult  ideas  from  the  East. 

2  If  the  individual  mind  is  one  with  the  Universal  Mind,  and  if  the 
possessor  of  the  individual  mind  wishes  to  find  out  some  secret  of  Nature, 
he  does  not  require  to  seek  for  it  outside  of  the  sphere  of  his  mind,  but  he 
looks  for  it  in  himself,  because  everything  that  exists  in  Nature  (which  ia 
a  manifestation  of  the  Universal  Mind)  exists  in  and  is  reflected  by  him- 

54  PARACELSUS 

Nature  may  be  discovered,  and  it  is  necessary  that  a 
physician  should  be  instructed  and  become  well  versed  in 
this  art,  and  that  he  should  be  able  to  find  out  a  gveat 
deal  more  about  the  patient's  disease  by  his  own  inner 
perception  than  by  questioning  the  patient.  For  this 
inner  sight  is  the  Astronomy  of  Medicine,  and  as  physi- 
cal Anatomy  shows  all  the  inner  parts  of  the  body, 
such  as  cannot  be  seen  through  the  skin,  so  this  magic 
perception  shows  not  only  all  the  causes  of  disease,  but 
it  furthermore  discovers  the  elements  in  medicinal  sub- 
stances in  which  the  healing  powers  reside.1  That  which 
gives  healing  power  to  a  medicine  is  its  '  Spiritus '  (an 
ethereal  essence  or  principle),  and  it  is  only  perceptible 
by  the  senses  of  the  sidereal  man.  It  therefore  follows 
that  Magic  is  a  teacher  of  medicine  far  preferable  to  all 
written  books.  Magic  power  alone  (that  can  neither  be 
conferred  by  the  universities  nor  created  by  the  award- 
ing of  diplomas,  but  which  comes  from  God)  is  the  true 
teacher,  preceptor,  and  pedagogue,  to  teach  the  art  of 
curing  the  sick.  As  the  physical  forms  and  colours  of 
objects,  or  as  the  letters  of  a  book,  can  be  seen  with  the 
physical  eye,  thus  the  essence  and  the  character  of  all 
things  may  be  recognised  and  become  known  by  the  inner 
sense  of  the  soul."  2 

self,  and  the  idea  of  there  being  two  minds  is  only  an  illusion  ;  the  two 
are  one. 

1  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  many  practitioners  of  medicine  possessed 
of  genuine  powers  of  true  spiritual  perception  ;  but  it  is  a  universally  re- 
cognised fact  that  a  physician  without  intuition  (common  sense)  will  not 
be  very  successful,  even  if  he  knew  all  medical  books  by  heart.  We  should 
be  guided  by  wisdom  but  not  by  opinions.  The  opinions  of  others  may 
perve  us,  but  we  should  not  be  subservient  to  them. 

2  Von  Eckartshausen  describes  this  inner  sense  as  follows :  "It  is  the 
centre  of  all  senses,  or  the  inner  faculty  of  man,  whereby  he  is  able  to  feel 
the  impressions  produced  by  the  exterior  senses.  It  is  the  formative 
imagination  of  man,  whereby  the  various  impressions  that  have  been  re- 
ceived through  the  outer  senses  are  identified,  and  brought  into  the  inner 
field  of  consciousness.  It  is  the  faculty  through  which  the  spirit  interprets 
the  language  of  Nature  to  the  soul.  It  changes  bodily  sensations  into 
spiritual  perceptions,  and  passing  impressions  into  lasting  images.  All  the 
senses  of  man  originate  in  one  sense,  which  is  sensation." 

COSMOLOGY  55 

■  I  have  reflected  a  great  deal  upon  the  magical 
powers  of  the  soul  of  man,  and  I  have  discovered  a 
great  many  secrets  in  Nature,  and  I  will  tell  you  that 
he  only  can  be  a  true  physician  who  has  acquired  this 
power.  If  our  physicians  did  possess  it,  their  books 
might  be  burnt  and  their  medicines  be  thrown  into  the 
ocean,  and  the  world  would  be  all  the  more  benefited  by 
it.  Magic  inventrix  finds  everywhere  what  is  needed, 
and  more  than  will  be  required.  The  soul  does  not 
perceive  the  external  or  internal  physical  construction  of 
herbs  and  roots,  but  it  intuitively  perceives  their  powers 
and  virtues,  and  recognises  at  once  their  signatum. 

"  This  signatum  (or  signature)  is  a  certain  organic 
vital  activity,  giving  to  each  natural  object  (in  contra- 
distinction to  artificially  made  objects)  a  certain  simi- 
larity with  a  certain  condition  produced  by  disease,  and 
through  which  health  may  be  restored  in  specific  diseases 
in  the  diseased  part.  This  signatum  is  often  expressed 
even  in  the  exterior  form  of  things,  and  by  observing 
that  form  we  may  learn  something  in  regard  to  their 
interior  qualities,  even  without  using  our  interior  sight. 
We  see  that  the  internal  character  of  a  man  is  often 
expressed  in  his  exterior  appearance,  even  in  the  manner 
of  his  walking  and  in  the  sound  of  his  voice.  Likewise 
the  hidden  character  of  things  is  to  a  certain  extent 
expressed  in  their  outward  forms.  As  long  as  man  re- 
mained in  a  natural  state,  he  recognised  the  signatures 
of  things  and  knew  their  true  character ;  but  the  more 
he  diverged  from  the  path  of  Nature,  and  the  more  his 
mind  became  captivated  by  illusive  external  appearances, 
the  more  this  power  became  lost. 

"  A  man  who  wholly  belongs  to  himself  cannot  belong 
to  anything  else.  Man  has  the  power  of  self-control, 
and  no  external  influences  can  control  him  if  he  exercises 
this  power.  The  influences  of  the  Macrocosm  cannot  so 
easily  impress  their  action  upon  a  rational,  wise,  and 
passionless  man  as  they  do  upon  animals,  vegetables,  and 

56  PARACELSUS 

minerals,  which  they  impregnate  to  such  an  extent  that 
their  characters  may  be  seen  in  the  forms,  colours,  and 
shapes,  and  be  perceived  by  the  odour  and  taste  of  such 
objects.  Some  of  these  external  signs  are  universally 
known ;  for  instance,  the  age  of  an  elk  is  indicated  by 
the  number  of  the  ends  and  the  shape  of  its  horns ; 
other  symbols  may  require  a  special  study  for  their -true 
interpretation  "  1  (De  Natura  Rerum). 

This  science,  resulting  from  a  comparison  of  the  ex- 
ternal appearance  of  a  thing  and  its  true  character,  is 
called  by  Paracelsus  their  Anatomy.  There  are  even  to 
this  day  a  great  many  vegetable  medicines  used  in  the 
prevailing  system  of  Medicine  whose  mode  of  action  is 
not  known,  and  for  whose  employment  no  other  reason 
has  been  given  but  that  the  exterior  shapes  of  such 
plants  correspond  to  a  certain  extent  to  the  form  of 
the  organs  upon  which  they  are  supposed  to  be  acting 
beneficially,  and  because  experience  has  supported  such 
a  belief. 

"  Each  plant  is  in  a  sympathetic  relation  with  the 
Macrocosm,  and  consequently  also  with  the  Microcosm, 
or,  in  other  words,  with  Constellation  and  Organism  (for 
the  activity  of  the  organism  of  man  is  the  result  of  the 
actions  of  the  interior  constellation  of  stars  existing  in 
his  interior  world),  and  each  plant  may  be  considered  to 
be  a  terrestrial  star.  Each  star  in  the  great  firmament, 
and  in  the  firmament  of  man,  has  its  specific  influence, 
and  each  plant  likewise,  and  the  two  correspond  together. 
If  we  knew  exactly  the  relations  between  plants  and 
stars,  we  might  say :  This  star  is  '  Stella  Rorismarini,' 
that  plant  is  '  Stella  Absynthii,'  and  so  forth.      In  this 

1  In  Babbitt's  "Principles  of  Light  and  Colour,"  it  is  demonstrated  that 
each  ray  of  colour  has  a  certain  therapeutic  influence  on  the  human  system  ; 
Blue  acting  soothingly  on  the  circulation  of  the  blood  ;  Red  stimulating ; 
Yellow  acting  as  a  purgative,  &c.  He  gives  some  interesting  examples 
of  correspondences  between  the  colours  and  medicinal  qualities  of  certain 
flowers,  plants,  drugs,  &c,  with  the  action  of  the  above-named  colour- 
rays. 

COSMOLOGY  57 

way  a  herbarium  spirituale  sidereum  might  be  collected, 
such  as  every  intelligent  physician,  who  understands  the 
relationship  existing  between  matter  and  mind,  should 
possess,1  because  no  man  can  rationally  employ  remedies 
without  knowing  their  qualities,  and  he  cannot  know 
the  qualities  of  plants  without  being  able  to  read  their 
signatures.  It  is  useless  for  a  physician  to  read  the  books 
of  Dioscorides  and  Macar,  and  to  learn  from  hearsay  the 
opinion  of  others  who  may  be  his  inferiors  in  wisdom. 
He  ought  to  look  with  his  own  eyes  into  the  book  of 
Nature  and  become  able  to  understand  it;  but  to  do 
this  requires  more  than  mere  speculation  and  to  ran- 
sack one's  brain ;  and  yet  without  that  art  nothing  useful 
can  be  accomplished." 

Perhaps  this  might  be  made  clearer  by  expressing  the 
same  idea  in  modern  language,  and  saying :  Each  thing 
is  a  state  of  mind,  because  the  whole  world  is  mind. 
Each  thing  is  a  materialised  thought  (a  "  star "),  and 
represents  the  character  of  the  thought  expressed  in  it ; 
and  as  one  thought  acts  upon  another,  so  the  mental 
state  represented  by  a  certain  plant  may  act  favourably 
upon  a  certain  state  of  the  patient's  mind,  and  thus  react 
upon  the  body.  The  peculiar  qualities  of  a  plant  are 
those  which  are  symbolised  by  its  form  ;  all  that  is  re- 
quired to  know  it,  is  the  faculty  of  recognising  its  char- 
acter. As  there  is  a  state  and  influence  which  is  called 
"  love,"  "  hate,"  &c,  so  there  are  states  of  mind  repre- 
sented in  outward  forms  of  plants,  such  as  Rypericon 
perforatum,  Sambucus,  Juniperus,  &c.  &c.  Each  form 
is  only  the  materialised  part  and  external  expression  of 
the  character  of  the  "  spirit "  or  the  "  aura "  which  it 
represents,  in  the  same  way  as  each  star  in  the  sky  is 
only  the  visible  part  or  the  materialised  kernel  of  the 
"  spirit  "  which  it  represents,  and  whose  sphere  extends 

1  Eckartshausen  has  made  such  a  herbarium :  he  gives  the  names  of 
medical  plants  and  the  names  of  the  planets  with  which  they  are  sympa- 
thetically connected. 

58  PARACELSUS 

as  far  as  its  influence,  just  as  the  sphere  of  a  rose  extends 
as  far  as  its  odour.  The  character  builds  the  form,  and 
the  form  expresses  the  character. 

But  this  harmony  existing  between  the  form  and  the 
character  is  furthermore  remarkable  in  certain  other 
conditions  and  qualities,  which  are  often  of  more  import- 
ance to  a  physician  than  the  external  shapes.  "  If  the 
physician  understands  the  anatomy  of  medicines  and 
the  anatomy  of  diseases,  he  will  find  that  a  concordance 
exists  between  the  two.  There  is  not  only  a  general 
relationship  existing  between  the  Macrocosm  and  the 
Microcosm,  but  a  separate  and  intimate  interrelation 
and  interaction  exist  between  their  separate  parts,  each 
part  of  the  great  organism  acting  upon  the  corresponding 
part  of  the  small  organism  in  the  same  sense  as  the 
various  organs  of  the  human  body  are  intimately  con- 
nected and  influencing  each  other,  and  manifesting  a 
sympathy  with  each  other  that  may  continue  to  exist 
even  after  such  organs  have  been  separated  from  the 
trunk."  There  is  a  great  sympathy  existing  between 
the  stomach  and  the  brain,  between  the  mammae  and 
the  uterus,  between  the  lungs  and  the  heart.1  There 
is,  furthermore,  a  great  sympathy  existing  between  the 
mind  and  the  thoughts  and  the  organs  of  the  human 
body.  Such  a  sympathy  exists  between  the  thoughts 
and  the  plants,  between  stars  and  stars,  between  plants 
and  plants,  and  between  the  plants  and  the  organs  of 
the  human  body,  in  consequence  of  which  relationship 
each  body  can  produce  certain  changes  in  the  activity 
of  life  in  another  body  that  is  in  sympathy  with  the 
former.  Thus  may  the  action  of  certain  specific  medi- 
cines in  certain  diseases  be  explained.  As  a  bar  of 
magnetised  iron  induces  magnetism  in  another  bar  of 
iron,  but  leaves  copper  and  brass  unaffected,  likewise  a 

1  Dr.  J.  R.  Buchanan,  in  his  "Therapeutic  Sarcognomy, "  makes  prac- 
tical use  <>f  this  sympathetic  relationship  existing  between  the  various 
parts  of  the  human  body. 

COSMOLOGY  59 

certain  plant,  possessing  certain  powers,  will  induce 
certain  similar  vital  ethers  to  become  active  in  certain 
organs  if  the  plant  and  the  organ  are  related  to  the  same 
"  star."  Certain  plants,  therefore,  act  as  antidotes  in 
certain  diseases,  in  the  same  manner  as  fire  will  destroy 
all  things  that  have  not  the  power  to  resist  it.  The 
neutralisation,  destruction,  or  removal  of  any  specific 
elements  producing  disease,  the  change  of  an  unhealthy 
and  abnormal  action  of  the  vital  currents  into  a  normal 
and  healthy  state,  constitutes  the  basis  of  the  therapeutic 
system  of  Paracelsus.  His  object  was  to  re-establish  in 
the  diseased  organism  the  necessary  equilibrium,  and  to 
restore  the  lost  vitality,  by  attracting  the  vital  principles 
from  living  objects  and  powers.  Remedies  containing 
the  required  quality  of  that  principle  in  the  greatest 
quantity  were  most  apt  to  replace  such  lost  powers  and 
to  restore  health.1 

The  organisms — that  is  to  say,  the  material  forms 
of  invisible  principles — take  their  origin  from  the  soul 
of  the  world,  symbolised  as  "  water." 2  This  doctrine  of 
Paracelsus  is  therefore  the  same  as  the  ancient  doctrine 
of  Thales,  and  as  the  old  Brahminical  doctrine  according 
to  which  the  world  came  into  existence  from  an  egg 
(allegorically  speaking)  laid  in  water  (the  soul)  by  Brahm 
(Wisdom).  He  says  that  by  the  decomposition  of  that 
essence  a  "  mucilage  "  is  formed,  containing  the  germs  of 
life,  out  of  which,  by  generatio  aequivoca,  first  the  lower 
and  afterwards  the  higher  organisms  are  formed. 

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  doctrine  of  Paracelsus  bears 
a  great  resemblance  to  the  one  advocated  by  the  greatest 
modern  philosophers,  such  as  Haeckel  and  Darwin ;  with 
this  difference,  however,  that  Paracelsus  looks  upon  the 
continually  evoluting  forms  as  necessary  vehicles  of  a 
continually  progressing  living  spiritual  principle,  seeking 

1  Thus  Paracelsus  employed  not  only  the  vital  magnetism  (mesmerism) 
of  human  beings,  but  also  that  of  animals  and  plants,  for  the  cure  of  disease. 

2  "  The  Spiiit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters  "  (Gen.  i.  2). 

60  PARACELSUS 

higher  modes  for  its  manifestation,  while  many  of  our 
modern  speculative  philosophers  look  upon  the  intelligent 
principle  of  life  as  non-existing,  and  upon  life  as  being 
merely  a  manifestation  of  chemical  and  physical  activity 
of  dead  matter  in  an  incomprehensible  and  causeless  state 
of  development.1      They  see  only  one  half  of  the  truth. 

No  animal  ever  grew  to  be  a  man,  but  the  divine 
man,  becoming  incarnated  in  human-like  animal  forms, 
caused  these  forms  to  become  the  human  beings,  such 
as  we  know  them  at  present  upon  our  earth. 

"  According  to  the  biblical  account,  God  created  the 
animals  before  He  created  man.  The  animal  elements, 
instincts,  and  desires  existed  before  the  Divine  Spirit 
illuminated  them  and  made  them  into  man.  The  animal 
soul  of  man  is  derived  from  the  cosmic  animal  elements, 
and  the  animal  kingdom  is  therefore  the  father  of  the 
animal  man.  If  man  is  like  his  animal  father,  he  re- 
sembles an  animal ;  if  he  is  like  the  Divine  Spirit  that 
lives  within  his  animal  elements,  he  is  like  a  god.  If 
his  reason  is  absorbed  by  his  animal  instincts,  it  becomes 
animal  reason ;  if  it  rises  above  his  animal  desires,  it 
becomes  angelic.  If  a  man  eats  the  flesh  of  an  animal, 
the  animal  flesh  becomes  human  flesh ;  if  an  animal  eats 
human  flesh,  the  latter  becomes  animal  flesh.  A  man 
whose  human  reason  is  absorbed  by  his  animal  desires 
is  an  animal,  and  if  his  animal  reason  becomes  enlightened 
by  wisdom  he  becomes  an  angel." 

"  Animal  man  is  the  son  of  the  animal  elements  out  of 

1  The  true  doctrine  has  also  been  taught  by  Jacob  Boehme,  an  unedu- 
cated shoemaker  but  illuminated  seer,  from  whom  all  of  our  great  philo- 
sophers have  borrowed  ideas.  He  says  :  "  The  constellation  is  the  outspoken 
Word.  It  is  the  instrument  through  which  the  holy,  eternally  speaking 
Word  speaks  and  produces  objective  forms.  It  is  like  a  great  harmony 
of  many  voices  and  musical  instruments.  They  are  interacting  powers, 
wherein  the  essence  of  sound  (Akasha)  is  the  substance,  and  this  is  taken 
up  by  the  Fiat  and  causes  corporeity.  This  substance  is  the  astral  spirit. 
In  it  the  elements  become  coagulated  (corporified),  and  thus  forms  are 
born,  comparable  to  the  hatching  of  an  egg  brooded  over  by  a  hen " 
(Myslcr.  Magn.,  xi.  26). 

COSMOLOGY  61 

which  his  soul  was  born,  and  animals  are  the  mirrors  of 
man.  Whatever  animal  elements  exist  in  the  world 
exist  in  the  soul  of  man,  and  therefore  the  character 
of  one  man  may  resemble  that  of  a  fox,  a  dog,  a 
snake,  a  parrot,  &c.  Man  need  not,  therefore,  be  surprised 
that  animals  have  animal  instincts  that  are  so  much  like 
his  own ;  it  might  rather  be  surprising  for  the  animals 
to  see  that  their  son  (animal  man)  resembles  them  so 
closely.  Animals  follow  their  animal  instincts,  and  in 
doing  so  they  act  as  nobly  and  stand  as  high  in  Nature 
as  their  position  in  it  permits  them,  and  they  do  not 
sink  thereby  below  that  position ;  it  is  only  animal  man 
who  sinks  below  the  brute.  Animals  love  and  hate 
each  other  according  to  the  attraction  or  repulsion  of 
their  animal  elements :  the  dog  loves  the  dog  and  hates 
the  cat,  and  men  and  women  are  attracted  to  each 
other  by  their  animal  instincts,  and  love  their  young 
ones  for  the  same  reason  as  the  animals  love  theirs ;  but 
such  a  love  is  animal  love — it  has  its  purposes  and 
its  rewards,  but  it  dies  when  the  animal  elements  die. 
Man  is  derived  from  the  dog,  and  not  the  dog  from  the 
man.  Therefore  a  man  may  act  like  a  dog,  but  a  dog  can- 
not act  like  a  man.  Man  may  learn  from  the  animals,  for 
they  are  his  parents ;  but  the  animals  can  learn  nothing 
useful  to  them  from  man.  The  spider  makes  a  better 
web  than  man,  and  the  bee  builds  a  more  artistic  house. 
He  may  learn  how  to  run,  from  the  horse  ;  to  swim,  from 
the  fish  ;  and  to  fly,  from  the  eagle.  The  animal  world 
is  taught  by  Nature,  and  it  is  divided  into  many  classes 
and  species,  so  that  it  may  learn  all  the  natural  arts. 
Each  species  has  forms  that  differ  from  those  of  another 
species,  so  that  it  may  learn  that  art  for  which  it  is 
adapted  by  Nature ;  but  man,  as  a  whole,  has  only  one 
kind  of  form,  and  is  not  divided,  and  therefore  the 
animal  soul  of  man  is  not  divided,  but  all  the  animal 
elements  are  combined  in  it,  the  reason  of  man  selecting 
what  it  likes. 

62  PARACELSUS 

"  A  man  who  loves  to  lead  an  animal  life  is  an  animal 
ruled  by  his  interior  animal  heaven.1  The  same  stars 
(qualities)  that  cause  a  wolf  to  murder,  a  dog  to  steal,  a  cat 
to  kill,  a  bird  to  sing,  &c,  make  a  man  a  singer,  an  eater, 
a  talker,  a  lover,  a  murderer,  a  robber,  or  a  thief.  These 
are  animal  attributes,  and  they  die  with  the  animal 
elements  to  which  they  belong ;  but  the  divine  principle 
in  man,  which  constitutes  him  a  human  being,  and  by 
which  he  is  eminently  distinguished  from  the  animals,  is 
not  a  product  of  the  earth,  nor  is  it  generated  by  the 
animal  kingdom,  but  it  comes  from  God;  it  is  God,  and  is 
immortal,  because,  coming  from  a  divine  source,  it  cannot 
be  otherwise  than  divine.  Man  should  therefore  live  in 
harmony  with  his  divine  parent,  and  not  in  the  animal 
elements  of  his  soul.  Man  has  an  Eternal  Father  who 
sent  him  to  reside  and  gain  experience  within  the  animal 
elements,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of  being  absorbed  by 
them,  because  in  the  latter  case  man  would  become  an 
animal,  while  the  animal  principle  would  have  nothing  to 
gain,"  and  would  thus  be  led  individually  to  speedy  anni- 
hilation (De  Fundamento  Sapientice). 

What,  then,  can  be  the  true  object  of  human  life,  except 
to  attain  the  consciousness  of  one's  own  true  and  divine 
state,  and  to  realise  that  one  is  not  an  animal,  but  a  god- 
like being  inhabiting  a  human  animal  form.  All  the 
divine  powers  are  latent  in  man's  divine  nature.  If  he 
once  realises  what  he  actually  is,  he  will  be  able  to  use 
them  and  be  himself  a  creator  of  forms. 

1  "  Heaven  " — the  interior  kingdom,  the  mind. 

TV.    ANTHROPOLOGY 

THE   GENERATION    OF   MAN 

"  All  that  Aristoteles  and  his  followers  have  written 
about  the  generation  of  man,  is  not  based  upon  observa- 
tion or  reading  within  the  light  of  nature ;  but  consists 
merely  of  theories  which  they  have  invented  and  elabo- 
rated with  a  great  deal  of  cunning  and  trouble.  It  is 
merely  phantastry  and  devoid  of  truth ;  for  although  the 
light  of  nature  has  not  refused  them  anything,  it  has  also 
given  them  nothing.  What  we  teach  is  not  the  result 
of  opinion  and  speculation,  but  of  actual  experience. 
Our  philosophy  has  not  originated  in  the  realm  of  the 
imagination,  but  is  copied  from  the  book  of  nature  itself. 
We  believe  that  for  the  terrestrial  man  there  is  no  nobler 
enjoyment  than  to  know  the  laws  of  nature ;  but  we 
reject  that  kind  of  smartness  and  cunning  which  invents 
systems  of  so-called  philosophy,  based  upon  arguments 
which  have  no  foundation  in  truth.  All  that  these 
writers  can  talk  about  is  the  sensual  world,  such  as  they 
perceive  with  their  senses ;  but  we  claim  that  this  world 
of  external  appearances  is  only  the  fourth  part  of  the 
actual  world  ;  not  that  the  world  were  still  three  times 
bigger  than  it  appears  to  us,  but  that  there  are  still 
three-fourths  of  it  of  which  we  are  unconscious.  We 
say  that  there  is  a  world  within  the  (element  of)  water, 
and  that  it  has  its  own  inhabitants  ;  and  another  world 
within  the  (element  of)  the  earth  ;  and  there  are  volcanic 
people,  who  live  in  the   fourth   part  of   the  world,  in  the 

element  of  the  fire  "  (De  Generatio  Hominis). 

63 

64  PARACELSUS 

"There  are  creatures  having  within  themselves  the 
seed  for  their  propagation,  such  as  minerals  and  plants, 
and  all  that  has  no  self-consciousness ;  and  there  are 
others  endowed  with  consciousness  and  life,  without  any 
seed  in  them,  namely,  animals  and  human  beings."1 

Man  is  made  out  of  three  substances,  or  seeds,  or 
"  mothers."  His  spiritual  seed  is  from  God,  and  God 
is  his  mother;  his  astral  elements  are  developed  under 
the  influences  of  the  constellation  (the  astral  plane),  and 
his  mother  is,  therefore,  the  soul  of  the  world ;  his 
visible  body  is  formed  and  born  out  of  the  elements  of 
the  visible  world,  and  thus  the  terrestrial  world  is  its 
mother. 

"  If  the  whole  man  were  made  only  out  of  the  seed 
of  his  parents,  he  would  resemble  his  parents  in  every 
respect.  A  chestnut-tree  bears  chestnuts,  and  from  each 
of  its  fruits  can  grow  nothing  else  but  a  chestnut-tree; 
but  the  mixture  of  seeds  is  the  cause  that  a  son  may  be 
very  unlike  his  father.  The  seed  {tincture)  from  the 
brain  of  the  father  and  that  from  the  brain  of  the 
mother  make  only  one  brain  in  the  child,  but  that 
tincture  among  the  two  which  is  the  strongest  will  pre- 
dominate and  characterise  the  child." 

Man  receives  his  spirit  and  body  not  from  his  father 
and  mother,  but  from  God  and  from  nature,  acting 
through  the  instrumentality  of  his  parents.  His  soul 
and  body  are  formed  in  his  mother,  but  do  not  originate 
in  her.  The  three  substances  or  elements  which  go  to 
make  up  the  constitution  of  man  are  universal ;  man  is 
merely  a  centre  or  focus  through  which  they  act. 

There  are  beings  who  live  exclusively  in  only  one  of 
these  elements,  while  man  exists  in  all  three.  Bach  of 
these   elements   is   visible    and    tangible    to   the   beings 

1  It  is  taught  that  primordial  man  also  had  within  himself  the  power 
to  propagate  his  own  species,  while  he  was  in  an  ethereal  state ;  but  when 
he  became  more  material  the  female  element  became  partly  separated  from 
him  and  woman  came  into  existence. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  65 

living  therein,  and  its  qualities  may  be  known  to  its 
inhabitants.  Thus  the  Gnomes  may  see  all  that  is  going 
on  in  the  interior  of  the  earthly  shell  surrounding  our 
planet,  this  shell  being  as  air  for  them ;  the  Undines 
thrive  and  breathe  in  their  watery  world;  the  Sylphs 
live  in  the  air  like  a  fish  in  the  water,  and  the  Sala- 
manders are  happy  in  the  element  of  the  fire.  A  person 
in  whose  organisation  the  element  of  earth  preponderates 
will  have  great  talents  for  agriculture  and  mining ;  a 
soul  sympathising  especially  with  the  watery  element 
will  endow  the  person  with  a  taste  for  a  seafaring 
life,  &c. 

Spirit  is  perceptible  to  spiritual  existences,  and  the 
thoughts  of  mortals  consequently  appear  visible  and 
material  to  spirits ;  the  Soul  essence,  with  its  currents 
and  forms,  may  be  seen  and  felt  by  the  Elementals  and 
beings  that  live  in  the  realm  of  the  soul ;  and  they  are, 
also,  capable  of  reading  such  thoughts  as  are  not  of  a 
too  refined  and  spiritual  character  to  be  discerned  by 
them,  and  to  perceive  the  states  of  feelings  of  men  by 
the  colours  and  impressions  produced  in  the  auras  of  the 
latter ;  but  they  cannot  perceive  divine  and  spiritual 
things.  Matter,  in  the  state  in  which  it  is  known  to 
us,  is  seen  and  felt  by  means  of  the  physical  senses; 
but  to  beings  who  are  not  provided  with  such  senses, 
material  things  are  as  invisible  and  intangible  as  spiritual 
things  are  to  those  who  have  not  developed  the  power  of 
spiritual  perception. 

The  Spiritual  Essence  of  Man  comes  from  the  highest 
emanation  of  God.  It  is  gifted  with  divine  wisdom  and 
with  divine  power ;  and  if  the  higher  elements  constitut- 
ing the  normal  man  become  conscious  of  the  possession 
of  divine  gifts,  and  learn  to  realise  their  powers  and  how 
to  employ  them,  they  will  be,  so  to  say,  superhuman, 
and  may  rightly  be  called  Divine  Beings,  or  Sons  of 
the  Almighty.  Whenever  a  child  is  conceived,  a  word 
proceeds,  like  a  ray  from  God,  which  provides  the  future 

E 

66  PARACELSUS 

man  with  a  Spirit.1  This  Spirit,  however,  is  not  absorbed 
immediately  by  the  new-born  child,  but  becomes  incarnate 
gradually,  as  the  man  grows  and  attains  reason  and  in- 
telligence.2 Manjr  men  and  women  live,  and  marry,  and 
die  without  ever  coming  into  full  possession  of  (or  without 
entering  into  a  firm  connection  with)  that  divine  ray  of 
wisdom  that  can  alone  transform  them  into  immortal 
human  beings ;  because,  although  the  powers  and  essences 
that  go  to  make  up  their  astral  souls  may  be  much  more 
enduring  in  their  form  than  their  physical  bodies,  still 
these  powers  will  become  exhausted  and  these  essences 
be  decomposed  into  their  elements  in  due  time,  and  there 
is  nothing  that  endures  to  the  end  except  the  Spirit  of 
God,  that  may  become  manifest  in  man  by  assimilating 
the  more  refined  essences  of  the  soul.  If  no  such  assi- 
milation takes  place — in  other  words,  if  the  individual 
during  his  life  does  not  become  wise  and  good  and 
spiritually  enlightened — the  divine  ray  will,  at  the  death 
of  the  person,  return  again  to  the  source  from  whence  it 
came  ;  but  that  individual's  personality  3  will  only  remain 
as  an  impression  in  the  astral  light.  There  are  two 
kinds  of  intelligence  in  man — the  higher  and  the  lower 
intelligence.  It  is  only  the  human  (superhuman)  intelli- 
gence that  can  combine  and  unite  itself  with  the  spirit. 
The  lower  or  animal  intellect,  however  clever  it  may  be, 
and  however  much  learning  it  may  possess,  will  be  lost, 
because  it  is  not  spiritual.      It  is  the  spirit  or  life  alone 

1  This  Spirit  is  the  same  spiritual  ray  that  has  overshadowed  man  in 
his  previous  incarnation  and  afterwards  become  withdrawn  into  the  divine 
essence,  from  which  it  issues  again.  It  is,  therefore,  not  a  new  Spirit,  but 
the  same  that  incarnated  before. 

2  This  is  not  to  be  understood  as  if  some  astral  form  in  the  human 
shape  were  waiting  to  crawl  into  the  body  of  the  child,  but  that  the  spiritual 
element  gradually  develops  and  becomes  active  in  the  child,  in  proportion 
as  the  human  instrument  through  which  it  desires  to  act  enables  it  to 
manifest  that  activity.  An  incarnation  generally  becomes  complete  only 
when  the  child  has  attained  its  seventh  year. 

3  There  is  a  difference  between  individuality  and  personality  ;  person- 
ality being  a  changeable  mask  which  the  individual  ray  produces. 

ANTHROPOLOG  Y  67 

that  can  hold  forms  together  and  prevent  their  dissolu- 
tion and  their  return  into  chaos.  Pure  spirit  has  no 
personality,  but  exists  impersonal  in  and  as  God.  Every 
birth  produces  a  new  person,  but  not  a  new  spiritual  ray. 
The  spirit  survives,  but  the  personality  of  man,  as  such, 
will  be  lost.  Only  those  elements  belonging  to  his  per- 
sonality that  will  be  absorbed  by  the  spirit  will  survive 
with  the  latter.  The  cement  that  unites  the  soul  with 
the  spirit  is  love,  and  the  love  of  God  is,  therefore,  the 
highest  good  attainable  by  mortal  man. 

"  The  animal  kingdom  is  not  without  reason  and 
intellect,  and  in  many  of  its  arts,  such  as  swimming, 
flying,  &c,  even  superior  to  man ;  but  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  far  superior  to  the  reasoning  intellect,  and  by  means 
of  this  spirituality  man  may  rise  above  the  animal  plane. 
Therefore  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  exter- 
nal and  the  internal  man ;  for  the  intellectuality  of  the 
former  perishes,  while  the  wisdom  of  the  latter  remains" 
(Be  Fundamento  Sapientice). 

The  astral  Soul-essence  of  Man  is  formed  by  the 
ethereal  or  astral  influences  coming  from  the  souls  of  the 
world  and  of  the  planets  and  stars,  especially  from  the 
soul  (or  astral  body)  of  the  planet  whereon  he  lives.  As 
the  soul  of  each  man  and  of  each  animal  has  its  peculiar 
qualities  that  distinguish  it  from  others,  so  the  soul  of 
each  planet,  each  sun,  each  world,  has  its  peculiar  charac- 
teristics, and  sends  out  its  beneficial  or  its  destructive 
influences,  pervading  cosmic  space,  acting  upon  the 
Microcosm  of  man,  and  producing  finally  visible  results.1 
These  astral  elements  are  the  organisers  of  the  soul  of 
man.  They  are  the  builders  of  the  temple  in  which  the 
spirit  resides,  and  being  energised  by  them,  the  soul  of 
man  attracts  by  physiological  processes  the  elements  of 

1  This  is  not  to  be  understood  as  if  the  astral  influences  were  creating 
the  divine  soul  of  man.  Man's  spirit  is  from  God  ;  his  astral  qualities  are 
developed  by  the  astral  influences,  and  his  elementary  (physical)  body  grows 
out  of  the  elements  by  which  it  is  surrounded. 

68  PARACELSUS 

the  earth,  and  forms  tissues,  muscles,  and  bones,  and  be- 
comes visible  and  tangible  to  other  similarly  constituted 
beings  as  the  material  or  animal  body  of  man.1 

Man  may  therefore  be  looked  upon  as  a  twofold  being 
— a  visible  and  an  invisible  man  (or  as  having  a  material 
and  a  spiritual  aspect),  linked  together  by  an  astral  soul. 
"  The  form  of  a  corporeal  thing  is  one  thing,  and  that 
which  produces  the  form  is  another  thing  ;  the  form  of 
a  thing  arises  from  the  form  of  the  mystery  (character). 
If  a  builder  wants  to  build  a  house,  the  form  of  the 
house  exists  in  his  mind  before  he  executes  the  building, 
even  if  it  is  seen  by  no  one  except  by  the  builder  him- 
self" (De  Podagris,  II.).  The  visible  man  consists  of 
such  originally  invisible  elements  as  have  become  visible 
in  his  body ;  the  invisible  man  consists  of  feelings  and 
thoughts  whose  origin  is  in  the  Macrocosm,  and  their 
light  is  reflected  and  impresses  itself  upon  matter.  Man 
is  therefore  the  quintessence  of  all  the  elements,  and  a 
son  of  the  universe,  or  a  copy  in  miniature  of  its  Soul, 
and  everything  that  exists  or  takes  place  in  the  universe, 
exists  and  can  take  place  in  the  constitution  of  man. 
The  congeries  of  forces  and  essences  making  up  the  con- 
stitution of  what  we  call  man,  is  the  same  as  the  con- 
geries of  forces  and  powers  that  on  an  infinitely  larger 
scale  is  called  the  Universe.  Everything  in  the  Universe 
reflects  itself  in  man,  and  may  come  to  his  consciousness  ; 
and  this  circumstance  enables  man,  when  he  knows  him- 
self, to  know  the  Universe,  and  to  perceive  not  only  that 
which  exists  invisibly  in  the  Universe,  but  to  foresee  and 
prophesy  future  events.  On  this  intimate  relationship 
between  the  Universe  and  Man  depends  the  harmony  by 
which  the  Infinite  becomes  intimately  connected  with  the 

1  Those  anatomists,  physiologists,  and  other  scientists  who  claim  to 
know  all  about  the  constitution  of  man,  because  they  have  studied  the 
organisation  of  his  physical  body,  and  deny  the  existence  of  a  soul  and 
spirit,  know  only  a  part — and  in  fact  the  most  unimportant  part — of  the 
constitution  of  man. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  69 

Finite,  the  immeasurably  great  with  the  small.      It  is  the 
golden  chain  of  Homer,  or  the  Platonic  ring.1 

The  object  of  man's  existence  is  to  he  a  real  Man,  including 
all  that  this  term  implies  ;  i.e.,  to  re-establish  the  harmony 
which  originally  existed  between  him  and  the  divine  state 
before  the  separation  took  place  which  disturbed  the  equili- 
brium, and  which  caused  the  first  emanation  of  the  divine 
essence  to  be  absorbed  by  the  third  material  emanation  and 
to  sink  into  matter.  To  re-establish  this  harmony,  Man 
may  bring  the  will  of  God  to  perfect  expression  in  his 
nature,  by  learning  to  know  within  himself  the  will  of 
God  and  being  obedient  to  it,  and  thereby  his  own  nature, 
and  finally  even  the  whole  of  the  Macrocosm,  will  become 
spiritualised  and  be  rendered  paradisaical.  The  individual 
qualities  and  temperaments  of  men  will  be  developed  to 
a  certain  extent,  independently  of  their  surroundings,  by 
the  power  of  the  Ens  seminis,  a  formative  power  (potency) 
of  matter.  Adam  and  Eve  (the  spiritual  dual  male  and 
female  essence)  have  received  their  body  through  the 
"  creatures  "  (elemental  or  astral  essences),  and  through  the 
Ens  seminis,  and  through  this  never-ceasing  supply  men 
and  women  will  come  into  existence  until  the  end  of  the 
world.2     If  there  were  no  planets  and  stars,  and  if  there 

1  This  doctrine  of  Paracelsus  is  identical  with  the  one  taught  by  the 
ancient  Brahmins  and  Yogis  of  the  East ;  but  it  may  not  necessarily  be 
derived  from  the  latter,  for  an  eternal  truth  may  as  well  be  recognised  by 
one  seer  as  by  another,  in  the  East  as  well  as  in  the  West,  and  two  or 
more  spiritually  enlightened  persons  may  perceive  the  same  truth  inde- 
pendently of  each  other,  and  describe  it — each  one  in  his  own  manner 
The  terms  Microcosm  and  Macrocosm  are  identical  in  their  meaning 
with  the  Microprosopos  and  Macroprosopos,  or  the  "Short-face"  and 
"  Long-face,"  of  the  Kabala.     (Note  made  by  H.  P.  Blavatsky.) 

2  This  "end  of  the  world,"  i.e.,  of  external  bisexual  generation,  will  be 
when  man  has  again  found  the  woman  within  himself  from  whom  he  has 
become  separated  by  his  descending  from  his  spiritual  state  and  becoming 
gross  and  material.  "  The  Lord  is  not  without  the  woman  ;  "  that  means 
to  say  that  the  paradisaical  Man  (the  Karana  sharira)  is  still  male  and 
female  in  one  ;  but  man,  having  ceased  to  be  "the  Lord,"  and  become  a 
servant  to  the  animal  kingdom  in  him,  has  ceased  to  recognise  the  true 
woman  in  him,  his  heavenly  bride,  and  Beeks  for  the  woman  in  that  which 
is  external  to  him.     Therefore  man  cannot  enter  into  his  original  state  of 

70  PARACELSUS 

never  had  been  any  in  existence,  nevertheless  the  children 
of  Adam  and  Eve  would  be  born  and  have  their  particular 
temperaments.  One  may  be  melancholy,  another  choleric, 
a  third  sanguine  or  bilious,  &c.  Such  qualities  of  men 
come  from  the  Ens  proprietatis,  and  not  from  any  astral 
influences,  for  the  temperaments,  tastes,  inclinations,  and 
talents  form  no  part  of  the  body ;  that  is  to  say,  they 
give  no  complexion,  colour,  or  form  to  it — they  are  the 
attributes  of  the  Ens  proprietatis.1 

Although,  speaking  in  a  general  sense,  the  Microcosm 
and  the  Macrocosm  bear  to  each  other  a  similar  relation- 
ship as  the  chicken  in  the  egg  bears  to  its  surrounding 
albumen,  nevertheless  the  action  of  the  Macrocosm  upon 
the  Microcosm  is  only  an  external  condition  of  life,  called 
by  Paracelsus,  Digest.  No  man  or  any  mortal  being  can 
exist  without  the  influence  of  the  Astra,  but  they  do  not 
come  into  existence  through  them.  A  seed  thrown  into 
the  soil  may  grow,  and  produce  a  plant,  but  it  could  not 
accomplish  this  if  it  were  not  acted  upon  by  the  sun, 
nor  could  the  soil  itself  produce  a  seed,  no  matter  how 
long  the  sun  would  shine  upon  it.  Paracelsus  explains 
the  origin  of  the  qualities  of  the  external  conditions  of 
life  as  being  produced  by  the  mutual  attractions  and 
interactions  existing  between  the  Macrocosmos  and  the 
Microcosmos,  and  by  the  harmony  of  both  spheres  (the 
upper  and  lower  mind),  of  which  either  is  formed  in 
accordance  with  the  other.  The  common  basis  of  both — 
which  is,  so  to  say,  their  common  receptacle  of  germs 
— is  called  Limbics.  "  Man  being  formed  out  of  the 
Limbus,  and  the  Limbus  being  universal,  and  therefore 
the    mother    of    all   things,    it    follows   that    all    things, 

unity  and  purity  except  by  means  of  the  celestial  marriage  (within  his 
soul)  such  as  takes  place  during  the  process  of  spiritual  regeneration. 
(See  Jacob  Boehme.) 

1  What  else  can  this  "Ens  proprietatis  "  mean  but  the  human  monad 
reincarnating  itself,  and  being  in  possession  of  all  the  tastes,  inclinations, 
talents,  and  temperament  acquired  during  its  former  existences  as  an 
individual  being  ? 

ANTHROPOLOGY  71 

including  man,  have  the  same  origin,  and  each  thing  is 
attracted  to  its  own  original  by  reason  of  this  mutual 
relationship.1 

"  If  man  were  not  formed  in  such  a  manner  and  out 
of  the  whole  ring  and  of  all  its  parts,  but  if  each  man 
were  made  out  of  a  separate  piece  of  the  world  essentially- 
distinct  from  others,  he  would  not  be  capable  to  receive 
the  influences  residing  in  the  whole.  But  the  soul  of 
the  great  world  has  the  same  divisions,  proportions,  and 
parts  as  the  soul  of  man,  and  the  material  body  of  man 
receives  the  material  body  of  Nature  in  the  same  sense 
as  the  son  receives  '  the  blood '  of  his  father." 

A  relationship  similar  to  the  one  existing  between  the 
Macrocosm  and  the  Microcosm  exists  between  man  and 
woman,  and  between  woman  and  the  uterus,  and  between 
the  uterus  and  the  foetus. 

"  The  whole  of  the  Microcosm  is  potentially  contained 
in  the  Liquor  Vitce  (Prana),  a  nerve-fluid  comparable  to 
the  fluidic  brain-substance,  and  in  which  is  contained 
the  nature,  quality,  character,  and  essence  of  beings,  and 
which  ethereal  life-fluid  in  man  may  be  looked  upon  as  an 
invisible  or  hidden  man — so  to  say,  his  ethereal  counter- 
part or  reflection  "  (JDe  Generatio  Hominis). 

"  From  this  nerve-aura  or  liquor  vitse,  in  the  process 
of  the  generation  of  man,  the  semen  separates  itself  in 
a  manner  comparable  to  the  separation  of  the  foam  or 
froth  from  a  fermenting  liquid,  or  as  the  quintessence 
(the  fifth  principle)  of  all  things  separates  itself  from 

1  Aboriginal  spiritual  Man  (male  and  female  in  one)  has  been  created 
by  the  will  of  God  being  active  within  divine  wisdom  ;  but  the  woman 
was  made  out  of  a  "  rib  "  (a  poiver)  of  man.  Therefore  man  and  woman 
are  not  equals,  except  as  far  as  their  animal  constitution  goes.  "The 
matrix  from  which  man  originated  was  the  whole  world  (the  limlus) ;  but 
woman  came  out  of  the  matrix  of  man.  Thus  man  made  unto  himself  a 
matrix,  the  woman,  who  is  now  to  him  as  much  as  a  whole  world,  and  the 
spirit  of  the  Lord  is  within  her,  informing  and  fructifying  her.  No  one 
has  seen  it ;  but  nevertheless  it  is  in  the  matrix  of  woman.  Therefore 
they  ought  not  be  used  for  whoredom ;  for  the  spirit  is  in  them,  coming 
from  the  Lord  and  returning  to  Him"  {Paramirum,  iv.). 

72  PARACELSUS 

the  lower  elements.  This  semen,  however,  is  not  the 
sperma  or  the  visible  seminal  fluid  of  man,  but  rather  a 
semi-material  principle  contained  in  the  sperma,  or  the 
aura  seminalis,  to  which  the  sperma  serves  as  a  vehicle.1 
The  physical  sperma  is  a  secretion  of  the  physical  organs, 
but  the  aura  seminalis  is  a  product  (or  emanation)  of 
the  liquor  vitas.  It  is  developed  by  the  latter  in  the 
same  sense  as  fire  is  produced  out  of  wood,  in  which 
there  is  actually  no  fire,  but  out  of  which  heat  and  fire 
may  proceed.  This  emanation  or  separation  takes  place 
by  a  kind  of  digestion,  and  by  means  of  an  interior  heat, 
which  during  the  time  of  virility  becomes  produced  in 
man  by  the  proximity  of  woman,  by  his  thoughts  of  her, 
or  by  his  contact  with  her,  in  the  same  manner  as  a 
piece  of  wood  exposed  to  the  concentrated  rays  of  the 
sun  can  be  made  to  burn.  All  the  organs  of  the  human 
system,  and  all  their  powers  and  activities,  contribute 
alike  to  the  formation  of  semen ;  and  the  essences  of  all 
are  contained  in  the  liquor  vitas,  whose  quintessence  is 
the  aura  seminalis,  and  these  organs  and  physiological 
activities  are  reproduced  in  the  foetus  out  of  this  liquor. 
They  are,  therefore,  germinally  contained  in  the  seminal 
fluid  that  is  necessary  for  the  reproduction  of  the  human 
organism.  The  spiritual  semen  is,  so  to  say,  the  essence 
of  the  human  body,  containing  all  the  organs  of  the 
latter  in  an  ideal  form."  Furthermore,  Paracelsus  makes 
a  distinction  between  Sperma  cagastricum  and  Sperma 
iliastricum,  of  which  the  former  is  the  product  of  the 
imagination  (thought),  and  the  latter  is  attracted  directly 
from  the  Mysterium  magnum!1 

1  That  which  Paracelsus  calls  the  semen,  or  seed  of  man,  is  not  that 
which  is  known  as  semen  to  modern  physiologists,  but  a  semi-spiritual 
principle  to  which  the  sperma  merely  serves  as  a  vehicle  and  instrument 
for  propagation ;  or,  to  express  it  in  other  words,  the  fructifying  principle 
does  not  exist  in  the  sperma,  but  in  the  spirit  (the  will  and  imagination) 
of  man,  or  what  is  also  called  "  the  tincture."  The  sperma  merely  serves 
as  a  vehicle,  in  the  same  sense  as  the  body  of  a  man  is  a  vehicle  for  the 
manifestation  of  his  interior  spirit.     (See  De  Qener.  Horn.) 

2  The  universal  matrix,  into  which  the  spiritual  monad,  having  passed 

ANTHROPOLOGY  73 

"  Woman,  however,  being  nearer  to  Nature,  furnishes 
the  soil  in  which  the  seed  of  man  finds  the  conditions 
required  for  its  development.  She  nourishes,  develops, 
and  matures  the  seed  without  furnishing  any  seed  her- 
self. Man,  although  born  of  woman,  is  never  derived 
from  woman,  but  always  from  man.  The  cause  of  the 
mutual  interaction  of  the  two  sexes  is  their  mutual 
attraction.  The  tendencies  of  man  cause  him  to  think 
and  to  speculate ;  his  speculation  creates  desire,  his 
desire  grows  into  passion,  his  passion  acts  upon  his 
imagination,  and  his  imagination  creates  semen.  There- 
fore God  has  put  semen  into  the  imagination  of  man, 
and  planted  into  women  the  desire  to  be  attractive  to 
man.  The  matrix  contains  a  strong  attractive  power, 
to  attract  the  semen,  similar  to  that  of  the  loadstone  to 
attract  iron." 1 

"  The  relationship  existing  between  the  Macrocosm  and 
Microcosm  finds  its  analogy  in  the  relationship  existing 
between  the  female  body  and  the  uterus.  The  latter 
may  be  regarded  as  a  Microcosm  in  a  Microcosm.  As 
the  semen  of  man  contains  potentially  all  the  organs 
of  the  parent  body,  so  there  are  contained  potentially 
in  the  uterus  all  the  attributes  of  the  female  body,  the 
whole  of  man's  body  is  potentially  contained  in  the  semen, 
and  the  whole  of  the  body  of  the  mother  is,  so  to  say, 
the  soil  in  which  the  future  man  is  made  to  ripen,  because 
all  the  essences  and  forces  of  her  body  centre  in  the 
uterus,  and  there  the  power  of  her  imagination  is  especi- 
ally active.  Thus  is  Man  the  product  of  a  secondary 
fluid,  while  the  Macrocosmos  is  the  product  of  a  primor- 

through  the  Devachanic  state,  finally  enters,  and  from  which  it  is  again 
attracted  into  new  incarnations. 

1  "  Thus  the  matrix  attracts  the  seed  of  both  persons,  mixed  with  the 
sperm ;  and  afterwards  it  expels  the  sperm,  but  retains  the  seed.  Thus 
the  seed  comes  into  the  matrix"  (Gebaerung). 

"The  matrix,"  however,  does  not  mean  merely  the  womb  of  a  woman  ; 
the  whole  body  of  the  woman  is  a  mother,  a  "matrix"  (De  Morbor. 
Matric). 

74  PARACELSUS 

dial  fluid,  and  as  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  beginning  of 
creation  moved  upon  the  surface  of  the  waters  (the  soul) 
likewise  the  human  spirit,  being  diffused  through  the 
whole  of  man's  organism,  moves  upon  the  (seminal)  fluid, 
out  of  which  the  human  form  is  developed.  That  Spirit 
of  God  is  the  vivifying  and  spiritualising  element  in  the 
process  of  procreation.  But  the  human  foetus  passes  in 
the  uterus  through  an  animal-like  existence,  receiving  the 
true  spirit  at  a  later  period.  It  is  then  like  a  fish  in  the 
water,  and  brings  an  animal  nature  into  the  world." 

The  fact  of  the  semen  being  formed  of  all  parts  of 
the  body  in  equal  proportion  explains  why  persons  are 
born  in  whom  certain  organs  may  be  missing.  If  for 
some  cause  one  part  or  another  of  the  human  organism 
does  not  participate  in  the  formation  of  semen,  its  essence 
will  be  missing  in  the  constitution  of  the  seminal  fluid, 
and  cannot  reproduce  the  corresponding  part  in  the 
matrix.1  If  for  some  cause  a  part  of  the  father's 
organism  produces  a  double  quantity  of  semen,  a  child 
will  be  born  having  supernumerary  members. 

"  Whatever  the  mother  imagines  and  obtains,  the  seed 
(spirit)  of  that  thing  is  attracted  to  the  matrix,  and  thereof 
grows  the  child ;  but  the  assertions  of  those  astronomers 
who  claim  that  the  stars  make  a  man  are  erroneous,  and 
we  will  look  upon  such  claims  as  a  fable  and  joke  to 
which  one  may  listen  during  an  idle  hour.  There  are 
many  fools  in  the  world,  and  each  one  has  his  own 
hobby  "  (G-ebaei'ung  des  Menschen). 

As  the  imagination  of  man  is  productive  of  semen, 
likewise  the  imagination  of  the  mother  exerts  a  great 

1  It  might  be  objected,  that  if  this  were  true,  a  man  having  lost  a  leg 
could  beget  only  one-legged  children  ;  but  such  a  superficial  reasoning 
would  be  caused  by  a  misunderstanding  of  the  true  nature  of  man.  The 
invisible  man  is  the  essential  man,  the  physical  body  only  the  outward 
expression.  If  the  physical  body  loses  a  limb,  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
soul-body  loses  it  likewise  ;  but  if  there  is  a  congenital  malformation,  such 
as  supernumerary  fingers  or  toes,  they  may  be  reproduced  in  the  child  ; 
because  nature  has  a  tendency  to  acquire  habits  and  to  repeat  them. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  75 

constructive  influence  upon  the  development  of  the  foetus, 
and  upon  this  fact  is  based  the  similarity  existing  between 
children  and  parents.1  Twins  and  other  multiple  births 
are  caused  if  the  uterus  attracts  the  semen  with  more 
than  one  single  draught.  The  power  of  attraction  which 
the  uterus  exercises  upon  the  seminal  aura  is  so  great 
that  by  coming  into  contact  with  the  spermatic  fluid  of 
animals  it  may  absorb  it  and  bring  forth  monstrosities.2 

It  may  therefore  be  said  that  the  imagination  of  the 
father  sets  into  activity  the  creative  power  necessary  to 
generate  a  human  being,  and  the  imagination  of  the 
mother  furnishes  the  material  for  its  formation  and 
development ; 3  but  neither  the  father  nor  the  mother  is 
the  parent  of  the  essential  spiritual  man,  but  the  germ 
of  the  latter  comes  from  the  Mysterium  magnum,  and 
God  is  its  father.  Parents  do  not  endow  their  children 
with  reason,  although  they  may  furnish  the  child  with 
a  body,  in  which  the  principle  of  reason  may  or  may  not 
be  able  to  act.4  Eeason  is  the  natural  birthright  of 
every  human  being ;  it  is  eternal  and  perfect,  and  need 

1  This  creative  and  formative  power  of  the  imagination  may  be  used  to 
advantage  for  the  purpose  of  producing  male  or  female  offspring  at  will, 
as  has  also  been  proved  by  experiments  made  in  cattle-breeding.  If  the 
desire  or  passion,  and  consequently  the  imagination,  of  the  female  is 
stronger  than  that  of  the  male  during  coition,  male  children  will  be 
produced.  If  on  such  an  occasion  the  imagination  of  the  male  is  stronger 
than  that  of  the  female,  the  child  will  be  of  the  female  sex.  If  the  imagi- 
nation of  both  parties  is  equally  strong,  a  "hermaphrodite"  may  possibly 
be  the  result. 

2  It  will  perhaps  be  difficult  to  state  an  example  to  prove  this  assertion  ; 
neither  has  it  been  disproved. 

3  The  effects  of  the  mother's  imagination  on  the  development  of  the 
fcetus  are  well  known  to  the  people.  Hare-lip,  acephali,  moles,  &c,  may 
be  caused  by  the  effects  of  a  morbid  imagination. 

4  If  a  child,  as  is  often  the  case,  manifests  the  same  tastes,  talents,  and 
inclinations  as  those  of  his  father  or  as  other  members  of  the  same  family, 
it  does  by  no  means  necessarily  follow  that  these  tastes,  &c.,  have  been 
inherited  by  it  from  his  parents,  and  the  contrary  often  takes  place.  A 
similarity  of  tastes,  &c,  between  the  child  and  his  parents  would  rather 
go  to  show  that  the  monad,  having  developed  its  tendencies  in  a  previous 
incarnation,  was  attracted  to  a  particular  family  on  account  of  an  already 
existing  similarity  of  his  own  tastes  with  those  of  its  future  parents. 

76  PARACELSUS 

not  be  educated  in  the  child,  but  it  may  be  overpowered 
and  driven  out  by  dogmatism  and  error.  Intellectual 
acquisitions  are  perishable ;  memory  is  often  lost  much 
quicker  in  old  age  or  on  account  of  cerebral  diseases 
than  it  is  developed  in  youth.1  Children  may  inherit 
from  their  parents  the  powers  to  employ  their  reason, 
but  they  do  not  inherit  reason  itself,  because  reason  is 
an  attribute  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Man  cannot  lose  his 
reason,  but  he  can  become  lost  to  it,  because  reason  is 
an  universal  principle,  and  cannot  be  owned  by  any  indi- 
vidual man,  even  if  it  is  manifested  in  him. 

"  A  man  carrying  seed  in  him  (having  a  lewd  imagi- 
nation) uses  no  reason  ;  he  lives  only  within  his  lusts  and 
morbid  fancies.  God  has  created  man  that  he  may  live 
as  a  free  being  within  the  light  of  nature;  therefore  the 
philosopher  should  remain  free  in  that  light  and  not  live 
in  the  seed  of  nature,  which  is  called  Allara.  God  has 
put  the  seed  into  the  imagination ;  but  He  has  given 
to  man  a  free  will,  so  that  he  may  either  allow  himself 
to  be  carried  away  by  his  fancies,  or  rise  superior  to 
what  nature  desires  in  him  "  {G-ebaerung.) 

Woman  and  Marriage. 

Woman,  in  so  far  as  she  is  a  human  being,  contains, 
like  man,  the  germs  of  all  that  exists  in  the  Macrocosm, 
and  can  manifest  the  same  mental  characteristics  as  man. 
Moreover,  there  are  males  with  preponderating  female 
soul-qualities,  and  females  in  whom  the  male  elements 
are  preponderating  ;  but  woman,  as  such,  represents  the 
will  (including  love  and  desire),  and  man,  as  such, 
represents  intellect  (including  the  imagination) ;  only 
in  the  Lord,  within  either  of  them,  i.e.,  in  their  own 

1  Numerous  cases  are  known  in  which  persons  of  great  learning  have 
become  simpletons  in  their  old  age ;  others,  where  such  persons,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  short  sickness,  lost  all  their  memory,  and  had  to  learn  to  read 
again,  beginning  with  the  ABC. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  77 

God,  exists  true  wisdom.  Therefore  woman,  as  such,  is 
more  given  to  willing,  and  is  led  by  her  desires ;  while 
man,  as  such,  is  more  given  to  arguing  and  calculating 
causes  and  effects.  Woman  represents  the  substance ; 
man  represents  spirit.  Man  imagines,  woman  executes. 
Man  creates  images ;  the  woman  renders  these  images 
substantial.  Man  without  woman  is  like  a  wandering 
spirit — a  shadow  without  substance,  seeking  to  embody 
itself  in  a  corporeal  form ;  woman  is  like  a  flower,  a  bud 
opening  in  the  light  of  the  sun,  but  sinking  into  dark- 
ness when  man,  her  light,  departs.  The  divine  man  (the 
angel)  is  male  and  female  in  one,  such  as  Adam  was 
before  the  woman  became  separated  from  him.  He  is 
like  the  sun,  and  his  power  may  be  reflected  in  men  and 
women  alike ;  but  woman,  as  such,  resembles  the  moon, 
receiving  her  light  from  the  sun,  and  man  without  the 
woman  (in  him)  is  a  consuming  fire  in  want  of  fuel. 

Originally,  man  and  woman  were  one,  and  conse- 
quently their  union  could  not  have  been  more  intimate 
than  it  actually  was ;  but  man,  having  become  separated 
from  the  woman  in  him,  lost  his  true  substance.  He 
now  seeks  for  the  woman  outside  of  his  true  self,  and 
wanders  about  among  shadows,  being  misled  by  the 
illusions.  Being  fascinated  by  the  charms  of  the  terres- 
trial woman,  he  drinks  of  the  cup  of  desires  which  she 
presents  to  him,  and  sinks  into  a  still  deeper  sleep  and 
forgetfulness  of  the  true  celestial  Eve,  the  immaculate 
virgin,  who  once  existed  within  himself.  In  this  way 
woman  is  the  enemy  of  man,  and  revenges  herself  for 
having  been  divorced  from  him  and  cast  out  from  her 
true  home  within  his  heart ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
she  is  man's  best  friend  and  redeemer ;  for  man,  having 
lost  the  paradise  in  his  soul,  and  having  become  uncon- 
scious of  the  true  light  which  existed  in  him  before  he 
went  to  sleep  in  the  spirit  and  awoke  in  the  flesh,  would 
sink  into  still  lower  degradation  and  descend  to  still 
lower  hells,  if  woman  did  not  stand  upon  the  threshold 

78  PARACELSUS 

to  stop  him,  and  for  the  true  heaven  which  he  lost  offer 
him  a  terrestrial  paradise,  illuminated  by  the  light  of  her 
love,  whose  origin  is  in  heaven. 

The  Lord  is  the  same  in  woman  as  He  is  in  man ; 
but  males  and  females  are  not  equals.  They  are  con- 
stituted very  differently  from  each  other,  not  only 
according  to  their  mental  characteristics,  but  also  in 
regard  to  the  whole  of  their  bodily  substance.  Male 
and  female  animals  are  made  out  of  the  same  stuff; 
but  woman  was  not  originally  created;  she  was  formed 
out  of  a  "  rib "  (a  spiritual  substance)  of  man,  and  is 
therefore  of  a  nobler  and  more  refined  kind  of  matter, 
such  as  he  possessed  before  the  woman  was  formed  from 
him.  Woman  is  made  of  the  best  and  substantial  part 
of  man,  and  is  therefore  the  crown  of  creation. 

"  A  common  boor  thinks  that  the  blood  of  a  woman 
is  the  same  as  that  of  a  man ;  but  a  physician,  unless 
he  has  been  baptized  with  the  blood  of  a  boor,  will  see 
the  difference  between  the  two  "  {De  Morb.  Matric). 

Man  represents  the  dark,  fiery  will,  woman  the  light 
love-will ;  man  the  fire,  woman  the  water.  It  is  not 
the  divine  man  who  is  attracted  by  any  woman,  but 
the  tincture  (nature)  in  him.  The  fiery  element  in  man 
seeks  for  the  watery  element  in  woman,  and  carries  the 
man  along.  Thus  it  is  neither  man  nor  woman  who 
longs  for  sexual  intercourse,  but  nature  in  them. 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  doctrine  which  has  done  more 
mischief  than  the  misconstrued  teaching  about  affini- 
ties and  soul-marriages ;  because  such  a  doctrine  is 
willingly  accepted  by  the  carnal  mind.  God  did  not 
create  souls  in  halves,  nor  can  Adam  find  his  Eve  again 
unless  she  grows  within  his  heart.  Man  will  never 
find  his  celestial  bride  unless  he  looks  for  her  within 
his  internal  heaven,  within  "  the  Lord."  Sexual  cohabi- 
tation, whether  authorised  or  unauthorised  by  Church  or 
State,  is  merely  an  animal  function.  There  is  neither 
absolute  good  nor  absolute  evil  in  marriage.      It  relates 

ANTHROPOLOGY  79 

to  the  parties  entering  the  contract,  and  is  therefore 
relative.  It  may  serve  for  their  edification  in  one  case, 
and  for  their  degradation  in  another.  To  the  semi- 
animal  man  it  may  be  a  school  of  education ;  but  the 
regenerated  man  requires  no  sexual  relationship.  The 
procreation  of  children  is  an  animal  function,  and  he 
who  is  unable  or  unwilling  to  exercise  it  has  no 
business  to  marry.  If  he,  nevertheless,  enters  the  con- 
nubial bonds,  he  commits  a  piece  of  stupidity,  if  not 
a  fraud.1 

It  is  also  useless  for  a  man  to  resist  the  claims  of 
nature  in  him,  if  he  cannot  rise  superior  to  that  nature ; 
and  the  power  for  that  superiority  does  not  depend  on 
his  human  will,  but  comes  from  his  higher  and  spiritual 
nature,  in  which  he  should  seek  his  refuge. 

"  As  long  as  the  root  is  not,  with  all  of  its  fibres,  torn 
out  of  the  earth  (i.e.,  as  long  as  man  has  not  become 
regenerated,  and  thereby  free  from  sexual  attractions), 
he  will  be  blind  and  feeble ;  the  spirit  quick ;  the  fancy 
strong ;  and  the  temptations  so  great  that  he  cannot 
resist,  unless  he  has  been  chosen  for  that  purpose ;  for 
all  things  are  ordained  by  God.  If  He  wants  you  to 
be  married,  and  to  have  children  from  you,  then  all 
your  pledging  yourself  to  chastity  and  your  virginity 
will  amount  to  nothing.  If,  in  such  a  case,  you  refuse 
to  marry,  you  will  then  fall  into  whoredom,  or  something 
still  worse.     Thus  will  God   punish   your   disobedience, 

1  "  As  there  is  a  love  between  animals  so  that  they  long  to  dwell  and 
cohabit  together  a3  males  and  females,  so  there  is  such  an  animal  love 
among  men  and  women,  which  they  have  inherited  from  the  animals. 
It  is  a  deadly  love,  which  cannot  be  carried  higher,  and  belongs  merely 
to  the  animal  nature  of  man.  It  springs  from  animal  reason,  and  as 
animals  love- and  hate  each  other,  so  does  animal  man.  Dogs  envy  and 
bite  each  other,  and  in  so  far  as  men  envy  and  fight  each  other  they 
are  the  descendants  of  dogs.  Thus  one  man  is  a  fox,  another  a  wolf, 
another  a  bear,  &c.  Each  one  has  certain  animal  elements  in  him  ;  and 
if  he  allows  them  to  grow  in  him,  and  identifies  himself  with  them, 
he  is  then  fully  that  with  which  he  is  identified "  (De  Fundamcnto 
Sapientke). 

80  PARACELSUS 

and   your  resistance  to  the  will   of   God  will   be  your 
eternal  death  "  (Be  Homunculis). 

In  regard  to  the  marriage  obligations,  Paracelsus  says : 
"  If  a  woman  leaves  her  husband,  she  is  then  not  free 
from  him  nor  he  from  her ;  for  a  marriage  union  having 
once  been  formed,  it  remains  a  union  for  all  eternity." 
This  means  that  by  entering  wilfully  into  sexual  relation- 
ship with  another  being,  we  become  attached  to  it  in 
our  will,  and  a  partaker  of  its  future  Karma.  A  woman 
to  whom  a  man  is  bound  by  promise  and  sexual  inter- 
course becomes,  as  it  were,  a  part  of  the  man,  and  cannot 
be  divorced  from  him  by  any  ceremony  or  external 
separation.  They  constitute,  so  to  say,  one  mind,  and 
the  component  parts  of  the  mind,  which  represent  the 
carnal  man,  are  not  separated  until  the  time  of  the 
second  death.1 

Sexual  intercourse  without  love  is  merely  a  kind  of 
onanism  with  a  corporeal  form  substituted  for  the  merely 
mental  image ;  but  if  sanctioned  (not  "  sanctified ")  by 
love,  it  is  then  a  union,  not  merely  of  body,  but  also  of 
soul ;  not  of  the  spiritual  soul,  which  needs  no  such 
union,  it  being  already  one  with  all  other  such  souls 
in  the  substance  of  Christ,  but  a  union  of  that  which 
constitutes  the  lower  mind  of  man.2 

1  This  goes  to  account  for  cases  of  vampirism,  when  the  elementary  of 
a  dead  person  is  still  attracted  to  the  object  of  its  affections  and  obsesses 
him  or  her  (Incubi  and  Succubi :  "Spirit-husbands  and  "  Spirit-brides  "). 

2  It  is  not  the  flesh  and  bones  of  a  man  which  form  attachments  and 
make  and  break  promises,  but  the  internal,  carnally  minded  man  ;  and 
this  man  will  be  bound  by  his  attachments  and  promises  long  after  the 
house  in  which  he  has  lived  (his  body)  will  have  ceased  to  exist.  In 
regard  to  this  subject,  Paracelsus  regards  it  as  dangerous  to  give  further 
details. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  81 

The  Constitution  of  Man. 

According  to  Paracelsus,  the  constitution  of  man  con- 
sists of  seven  principles,  or,  to  express  it  more  correctly,  of 
seven  modifications  of  one  primordial  essence,  which  are 
as  follows,  and  to  which  we  add  their  Eastern  terms1 : — 

i.  The  Elementary  Body.    (The  Physical  Body)— Sthula  Sharira. 

2.  The  Archaeus.     (Vital  force) — Prana. 

3.  The  Sidereal  Body.     (The  Astral  hody) — Linga  Sharira. 

4.  Mumia.     (The  Animal  Soul) — Kama  rupa. 

5.  The  Bational  Soul.  (The Human  Soul) — Flesh  of  Adam.    Manas. 

6.  The  Spiritual  Soul.     (The  Spiritual  Soul)— Flesh  of  Christ. 

Buddhi. 

7.  The  Man  of  the  new  Olympus.     Atma  Buddhi  Manas. 

In  his  "  Philosophia  Sagax  "  and  his  "  Explanations  of 
Astronomia,"  Paracelsus  deals  extensively  with  a  descrip- 
tion and  explanation  of  these  seven  qualities.  The  most 
important  points  referring  to  the  higher  principles  are  as 
follows : — t(  The  life  of  man  is  an  astral  effluvium  or  a 
balsamic  impression,  a  heavenly  and  invisible  fire,  an 
enclosed  essence  or  spirit.  We  have  no  better  terms  to 
describe  it.  The  death  of  a  man  is  nothing  else  but  the 
end  of  his  daily  labour,  or  taking  away  the  ether  of  life, 
a  disappearance  of  the  vital  balsam,  an  extinction  of  the 
natural  light,  a  re-entering  into  the  matrix  of  the  mother. 
The  natural  man  possesses  the  elements  of  the  Earth, 
and  the  Earth  is  his  mother,  and  he  re-enters  into  her 
and  loses  his  natural  flesh ;  but  the  real  man  will  be 
re-born  at  the  day  of  the  resurrection  in  another  spiritual 
and  glorified  body  "  (JDe  Natura  fierum).  % 

1  See  A.  P.  Sinnett's  "Esoteric  Buddhism." 

2  Speaking  of  the  day  of  the  resurrection,  Paracelsus  refers  to  a  great 
mystery,  alluded  to  in  St.  John's  Revelation,  and  more  plainly  spoken  of 
by  the  Eastern  Adepts,  when  at  the  end  of  the  Seventh  Round  all  the 
higher  recollections  of  the  various  personalities  with  which  the  spiritual 
monad  has  been  connected  during  its  many  objective  existences,  and  which 
have  not  become  exhausted  in  Kama-loca,  but  have  been  preserved  in 
the  Astral  Light,  will  re-enter  the  field  of  consciousness  of  the  spiritual 
(divine)  man. 

F 

82  PARACELSUS 

In  the  study  of  anthropology  the  consideration  of 
the  divine  part  of  man  is  of  supreme  importance  ;  for  the 
animal  part  of  man  is  not  the  true  man  ;  neither  is 
the  elementary  body  the  man ;  for  that  body  without 
the  true  man  within  is  merely  a  corpse.  "  Man  has  two 
spirits,  a  divine  and  a  terrestrial  spirit.  The  former  is 
from  the  breath  of  God  ;  the  latter  from  the  elements  of 
the  air  and  the  fire.  He  ought  to  live  according  to  the 
life  of  the  divine  spirit  and  not  according  to  that  of  the 
animal "  (De,  Zunaticos). 

But  the  divine,  immortal,  and  invisible  man  cannot  be 
a  subject  for  the  investigation  of  any  science,  such  as 
deals  merely  with  external  and  visible  things.  He  can 
be  known  to  no  one  except  to  his  own  self;  for  the  low 
cannot  comprehend  the  high,  and  the  finite  mind  cannot 
contain  the  infinite.  The  study  of  the  divine  man  is  the 
object  of  self-knowledge.  "  Physical  science  deals  with 
the  physical,  and  metaphysical  science  with  the  astral 
man ;  but  these  sciences  are  misleading  and  incomplete, 
if  we  lose  out  of  our  sight  the  existence  of  the  divine 
and  eternal  man  "  (De  Fundamento  Sapientice). 

"  Neither  the  external  nor  the  astral  man  is  the  real 
man,  but  the  real  man  is  the  spiritual  soul  in  connection 
with  the  Divine  Spirit.  The  astral  soul  is  the  shadow 
(ethereal  counterpart)  of  the  body,  illumined  by  the 
spirit,  and  it  therefore  resembles  man.  It  is  neither 
material  nor  immaterial,  but  partakes  of  the  nature  of 
each.  The  inner  (sidereal)  man  is  formed  out  of  the 
same  Limbus  as  the  Macrocosm,  and  he  is  therefore  able 
to  participate  in  all  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  existing 
in  the  latter.  He  may  obtain  knowledge  of  all  creatures, 
angels,  and  spirits,  and  learn  to  understand  their  attri- 
butes. He  may  learn  from  the  Macrocosm  the  meaning 
of  the  symbols  (the  forms)  by  which  he  is  surrounded,  in 
the  same  manner  as  he  acquires  the  language  of  his 
parents ;  because  his  own  soul  is  the  quintessence  of 
everything  in  creation,  and  is  connected  sympathetically 

ANTHROPOLOGY  83 

with  the  whole  of  Nature ;  and  therefore  every  change 
that  takes  place  in  the  Macrocosm  can  be  sensed  by  the 
ethereal  essence  surrounding  his  spirit,  and  it  may  come 
to  the  consciousness  and  comprehension  of  man."  l 

Mortal  man  is  a  spirit,  and  has  two  bodies  that  are 
intimately  connected  together,  an  elementary  and  a 
sidereal  body.  These  two  bodies  go  to  form  one  man. 
When  a  man  dies,  his  elementary  body  returns  to  the 
elements  of  the  Earth ;  the  Earth  absorbs  the  whole  of 
his  three  lower  principles,  and  nothing  remains  of  the 
form  of  the  body.  The  more  material  parts  of  the 
sidereal  body  undergo  a  similar  decomposition.  This 
body  is  formed  of  the  astral  elements,  and  is  not 
dependent  on  physical  substances.  It  is  subject  to 
planetary  influences,  and  as  the  elementary  body  is  dis- 
solved into  the  elements  from  which  it  has  been  taken, 
likewise  the  astral  form  will  in  due  time  dissolve  into 
the  sidereal  elements  to  which  its  substance  belongs. 
The  sidereal  body  remains  near  the  decaying  physical 
body  until  it  is  itself  decomposed  by  the  action  of  the 
astral  influences.  The  two  bodies  were  partners  during 
life,  and  are  only  separated  by  death.  Therefore  they 
naturally  remain  near  each  other  for  a  while  after  death, 
until  they  are  consumed  by  their  elements,  the  one  in 
the  grave,  the  other  one  in  the  air.2  The  decomposition 
of  the  elementary  body  requires  a  certain  length  of  time 
according  to  its  qualities  and   the  qualities  of  its  sur- 

1  It  ought  to  be  kept  in  mind  that  whenever  Paracelsus  speaks  of  the 
terrestrial  or  "earthly"  man,  he  does  not  refer  to  the  elementary  (physi- 
cal) body,  but  to  the  carnal  part  of  the  mind  (the  lower  manas).  There- 
fore, he  say,  "the  body  thinks,  but  the  spirit  wills."  The  elementary 
body  does  not  think;  it  is  merely  a  corpse,  without  the  "inner  man," 
and  the  shadow  of  the  latter.  It  is  as  such  of  so  little  importance  that  it 
may  not  be  at  all  missed,  if  we  leave  it  either  during  a  trance  or  after  its 
death. 

2  If  clairvoyance  were  at  present  a  normal  faculty  of  mankind,  and  if 
men  could  see  the  astral  forms  of  the  dead  hovering  over  the  graves  and 
decomposing  in  the  air,  graveyards  would  soon  be  abolished,  and  cremation 
take  the  place  of  burial. 

84  PARACELSUS 

roundings,  and  likewise  the  sidereal  body  may  be  decom- 
posed slow  or  quick,  according  to  the  coherence  of  its 
particles,  and  according  to  the  quality  and  strength  of 
the  astral  influences  acting  upon  it. 

The  elementary  body  is  corporeal,  but  the  sidereal 
body  is  ethereal.  The  elementary  body  is  visible  and 
tangible ;  the  sidereal  body  is  invisible  and  intangible  for 
us,  but  visible  and  tangible  for  those  beings  that  are 
of  a  nature  similar  to  its  own.  The  elementary  body 
cannot  move  on  its  own  account  from  the  place  where  it 
has  been  deposited  after  death  ;  but  the  sidereal  body 
(Kama  rupa)  goes  to  that  place  to  which  it  is  mostly 
attracted  by  its  own  desires.  If  there  are  no  particular 
places  to  attract  it,  it  will  remain  near  the  elementary 
body ; *  but  if  it  is  attracted  to  other  places  it  will  visit 
them,  and  it  is  therefore  especially  liable  to  haunt  the 
residence  which  the  person  occupied  during  his  life, 
being  attracted  there  by  its  acquired  habits  and  instincts. 
Being  devoid  of  reason  and  judgment,  it  has  no  choice 
in  such  matters,  but  follows  blindly  its  attractions.  The 
sidereal  body  will  under  certain  (mediumistic)  condi- 
tions become  visible,  and  it  therefore  can  be  seen  at 
places  to  which  the  reflex  of  its  former  passions,  such 
as  envy,  avarice,  repentance,  revenge,  selfishness,  lust, 
&c,  will  attract  it,  and  it  may  remain  in  such  places 
until  it  is  dissolved  and  decomposed.  If  a  sensitive 
person  asserts  to  have  seen  the  spirit  of  a  deceased 
person,  we  may  believe  that  he  has  seen  the  sidereal 
body  of  such  a  person,  but  it  is  wrong  to  believe  that 
such  a  ghost  or  apparition  is  the  real  man,  because  it 
is  nothing  else  but  the  sidereal  corpse  that  appears  on 
such  occasions.  Such  astral  corpses  may  be  seen  like 
the  reflection  of  a  man  in  a  mirror  until  they  dis- 
appear, and  the  form  of  one  may  last  longer  than  that 
of  another.2 

1  Thus  there  seems  to  be  a  scientific  reason  for  offering  sacrifices  upon 
the  graves  of  the  dead,  as  is  the  custom  in  China. 

2  The  last  thoughts  and  desires  of  a  dying  person,  and  their  intensity, 

ANTHROPOLOGY  85 

"  The  art  called  Nigromantia  (Necromancy)  teaches 
how  to  deal  with  such  forms.  It  teaches  their  habits 
and  instincts,  their  attributes  and  qualities,  and  how 
we  may  find  out  through  them  the  secrets  of  the  persons 
to  whom  those  shadows  belonged.  As  the  image  of  a 
man  in  a  large  mirror  shows  the  whole  of  his  person 
and  imitates  all  his  movements  and  actions,  so  by  observ- 
ing the  sidereal  body  of  a  deceased  person,  we  can 
obtain  information  in  regard  to  the  former  appearance 
and  the  acts  and  ways  of  that  person,  and  find  out 
who  he  was  and  where  he  lived "  *  (Philosophia  Sagax, 
lib.  i.  :  Probatio  in  Scientiam  Nigromanticam). 

Paracelsus  ridicules  the  exorcists,  and  those  who  say 
prayers  and  read  masses  for  the  dead,  "  because,"  he  says, 
"the  former  attempt  to  force  a  sidereal  corpse  to  talk, 
while,  in  fact,  no  corpse  can  talk,  and  they  can  get  from 
it  at  best  a  reflection  of  their  own  thoughts,  and  the 
latter  attempt  to  fetch  an  inanimate  body  into  a  living 
heaven  by  their  pious  interposition." 

In  regard  to  the  conjurers,  he  says  : — "  They  attempt 
to  conjure  sidereal  bodies,  and  do  not  know  that  they  are 
attempting  an  impossibility,  because  such  bodies  have  no 
sense  and  cannot  be  conjured.  The  consequence  is,  that 
the  devils  (certain  elementals)  take  possession  of  such 
sidereal  bodies  and  play  their  pranks  with  the  conjurers. 
Such  devils  will  take  possession  of  a  living  man,  and 
make  a  weak  man  act  as  they  please,  and  cause  him 
to  commit  all  sorts  of  foolishness  and  crimes.  But  if 
they  can  do  this  with  a  living  soul,  how  much  easier 
then  will  it  be  for  them  to  take  possession  of  a  dead 

will,  to  a  great  extent,  determine  the  locality  to  which  such  a  sidereal 
body  may  be  attracted.  Some  places  have  been  known  to  be  haunted  for 
a  great  number  of  years. 

1  It  appears  from  this  sentence  that  the  phenomena  of  "Modern 
Spiritualism"  are  not  a  new  revelation,  but  were  known  and  explained 
three  hundred  years  ago.  "  Oh,  the  soul  of  poor  Galen  !  If  he  had 
remained  faithful  to  truth,  his  Manes  would  not  now  be  buried  in  the 
abyss  of  hell,  from  whence  he  wrote  me  a  letter.  Such  is  the  fate  of  all 
quacks  !  "  {Parayranurn,  Preface). 

86  PARACELSUS 

soul  which  has  no  spiritual  power  to  resist !  Therefore, 
such  conjurers  do  not  deal  with  the  spirits  of  the  dead, 
but  with  the  powers  of  evil  and  the  fathers  of  lies." 1 

The  Elementals  are  also  the  beings  which  may  pro- 
duce so-called  "  physical  manifestations,"  cause  the  ap- 
pearance and  disappearance  of  objects,  throw  stones,  &c. 
In  a  fragment  entitled  "  De  Sagis  et  Earum  Operibus " 
(On  Witches  and  their  Arts),  cap.  3,  he  says:  "In 
regard  to  such  things,  you  ought  to  know  that  they  are 
natural,  and  that  no  one  can  justly  say  otherwise  but 
that  Nature  produces  them,  because,  if,  for  instance,  a 
blooming  rose  is  brought  in  the  midst  of  winter  into  a 
country  where  there  are  no  roses,  an  ordinary  man  will 
think  that  such  a  thing  took  place  in  contravention  to 
Nature's  laws ;  but  the  Magus  (the  wise),  who  knows  by 
what  process  such  phenomena  are  produced,  knows  that 
they  are  produced  according  to  the  law  of  Nature,  because 
such  a  flower  is  brought  from  a  country  where  it  has 
grown  in  a  natural  manner,  and  where  there  is  no  winter 
at  that  time.  Thus,  ice  or  snow  may  be  brought  with 
the  same  facility  into  a  warm  country  in  the  midst  of 
summer  from  another  country  in  which  it  is  winter. 
Ignorant  persons  should  be  informed  that  the  Magus 
creates  neither  roses  nor  snow,  but  that  he  can  receive 
them  from  places  where  they  already  exist."  2 

1  This  sentence  may  seem  to  throw  discredit  upon  the  practices  of 
modern  spiritualists,  but  not  all  the  practices  of  spiritualists  consist  in 
dealing  with  the  sidereal  bodies  of  the  dead.  Such  practices  do  not 
deserve  the  name  Spiritualism,  but  ought  to  be  looked  upon  as  Spiritism, 
and  when  the  laws  upon  which  our  modern  Spiritualism  and  Spiritism  are 
based  are  known,  it  will  be  easy  enough  to  make  a  distinction.  Spirit- 
ualism means  a  dealing  with  spiritual  intelligences  ;  Spiritism,  a  dealing 
with  unintelligent  or  semi-intelligent  invisible  forms.  A  spiritualist 
enters  into  the  sphere  of  a  spirit ;  that  is  to  say,  he  enters  en  rapport 
with  a  certain  mind,  and  writes  or  speaks  in  the  spirit  of  the  latter, 
making  himself  a  medium  through  which  the  intelligence  of  the  latter 
can  act,  and  by  which  means  he  may  obtain  great  truths.  The  spiritist 
permits  an  invisible  entity  to  enter  bodily  into  his  own  physical  form  and 
submits  his  body  to  the  will  of  the  invisible  stranger. 

2  The  fact  that  such    material    objects    are   occasionally  brought  by 

ANTHROPOLOGY  87 

Intimately  connected  with  the  sidereal  body  is  the 
Evestrum  and  the  Trarames.  In  regard  to  these, 
Paracelsus  says  in  his  "  Philosophia  ad  Athenienses " : 
"  To  speak  of  the  Evestrum  in  its  mortal  and  immortal 
aspects,  we  may  say  that  everything  has  an  Evestrum, 
and  that  it  is  like  a  shadow  seen  upon  a  wall.  The 
Evestrum  comes  into  existence,  and  grows  with  the 
body,  and  remains  with  it  as  long  as  a  particle  of 
the  matter  composing  the  latter  exists.  The  Evestrum 
originates  contemporaneously  with  the  first  birth  of  each 
form,  and  everything,  whether  it  be  visible  or  invisible, 
whether  it  belongs  to  the  realm  of  matter  or  to  the 
realm  of  the  soul,1  has  its  Evestrum ;  but  Trarames 
means  an  invisible  power  that  begins  to  be  able  to 
manifest  itself  at  a  time  when  the  senses  of  the  inner 
perception  become  developed.  The  Evestrum  indicates 
future  events  by  causing  visions  and  apparitions,  but 
Trarames  causes  an  exaltation  of  the  senses.  Only  those 
who  are  gifted  with  great  wisdom  may  understand  the 
true  nature  of  Evestrum  and  Trarames.  The  Evestrum 
influences  the  sense  of  sight ;  Trarames  the  sense  of 
hearing.  The  Evestrum  causes  dreams  foreshadowing 
future  events ;  Trarames  communicates  with  man  by 
causing  voices  to  speak,  music  to  sound  that  may  be 
heard  by  the  internal  ear,  invisible  bells  to  ring,  &c.2 
Whenever  a  child  is  born,  there  is  born  with  him  an 
Evestrum,  which  is  so  constituted  as  to  be  able  to 
indicate  in  advance  all  the  future  acts  and  the  events 
in  the   life  of   the  individual  to  whom  it  belongs.      If 

invisible  powers  is  known  to  all  who  have  examined  the  phenomena  of 
Modern  Spiritism ;  but  no  scientific  researcher  will  ever  discover  how 
this  is  done  as  long  as  he  does  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  Elementals, 
in  regard  to  which  little  is  publicly  known. 

1  According  to  the  teachings  of  the  Eastern  Adepts,  each  of  the  seven 
principles  of  man  may  again  be  subdivided  into  seven,  and  each  soul  has 
therefore  a  sevenfold  constitution.  In  other  words,  each  of  the  seven 
qualities  contains  also  the  other  six.     (See  Jacob  Boehme.) 

2  So-called  Astral.  Bells,  known  to  all  practical  occultists. 

88  PARACELSUS 

that  individual  is  about  to  die,  his  Evestrum  may  indi- 
cate the  approach  of  his  death  by  raps  or  knocks,  audible 
to  all,  or  by  some  other  unusual  noise,  by  the  movement 
of  furniture,  the  stopping  of  clocks,  the  breaking  of  a 
picture,  the  fall  of  a  mirror,  or  any  other  omen ;  but  fre- 
quently such  omens  are  neither  recognised  nor  noticed,  and 
not  understood.  The  Trarames  produces  manifestations 
of  a  more  subjective  character,  and  may  speak  to  a  person 
in  a  way  that  is  audible  to  him  but  inaudible  to  others." 

"  The  Evestrum  of  man  is  born  with  him,  and  after 
the  death  of  the  latter  it  remains  in  the  earth-sphere, 
and  there  is  still  some  sympathetic  connection  between 
the  Evestrum  and  the  eternal  and  immortal  part  of  man, 
and  it  will  indicate  the  state  of  happiness  or  misery  in 
which  the  soul  of  the  person  to  whom  it  belongs  exists. 
Such  Evestra  are  not  the  souls  of  the  dead  walking 
upon  the  earth,  but  they  are  the  ethereal  duplicates  of 
the  persons  to  whom  they  belonged,  remaining  until  the 
last  particle  of  the  matter  composing  the  physical  bodies 
of  the  latter  has  been  consumed." 

"  All  Evestra  originate  in  the  Turba  magna,  the  col- 

1  The  Evestrum  appears  to  be  identical  with  the  Linga  shariram,  or 
Astral  body  of  the  Eastern  occultists.  The  Trarames  is  the  power  which 
acts  on  the  open  sense  of  hearing  of  the  astral  man. 

2  They  have  often  been  seen  and  described  as  the  spirits  of  the  dead 
by  mediums  and  clairvoyants.  The  "  Evestra "  are  merely  states  of 
mind,  or  thoughts,  having  become  endowed  with  a  certain  amount  of  will, 
so  as  to  render  them  more  or  less  self-conscious,  and,  as  it  were,  inde- 
pendent of  the  person  from  whom  they  originate,  as  is  shown  in  cases 
where  a  man  would  be  glad  to  get  rid  of  some  idea  by  which  he  is  pos- 
sessed, but  cannot  drive  it  away  from  his  mind.  Such  thoughts  will 
remain  impressed  on  the  astral  light  of  a  room  which  that  person  in- 
habited, and  such  an  image  may  even  become  visible  and  objective.  A 
case  is  known  where  a  man  became  insane  and  was  sent  to  an  insane 
asylum,  where  he  was  kept  for  over  a  year.  He  suddenly  became  well 
and  went  home  ;  but  afterward  he  heard  that  his  "  ghost "  was  still  haunt- 
ing the  cell  which  he  had  occupied  in  the  asylum,  and  that  it  was  there 
raving,  overthrowing  the  furniture,  &c.  He  became  curious  to  see  his 
own  "  ghost,"  and  in  spite  of  all  the  warnings  of  his  friends,  he  went  back 
to  that  cell,  saw  his  "ghost,"  and  was  again  observed  by  it,  so  that  he 
died  insane. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  89 

lective  activity  of  the  universe.1  The  Evestra  prophetica 
proceed  directly  from  the  Turba  magna,  the  Evestra 
obumbrata  come  into  existence  at  the  time  when  the 
forms  to  which  they  belong  appear.  The  Evestra  pro- 
phetica 2  are  the  harbingers  of  great  events  that  may 
concern  the  well-being  of  the  world.  If  some  such 
important  event  is  to  take  place,  they  will  be  the  fore- 
runners to  announce  it  to  the  world,  so  that  the  latter 
may  be  prepared  for  it,  and  a  person  who  understands 
the  true  Inature  of  such  an  Evestrum  is  a  seer  and  pro- 
phet. Even  the  highest  God  has  his  Evestrum  mijsteriah 
by  which  his  existence  and  his  attributes  may  be  re- 
cognised,3 by  which  everything  good  may  be  known,  and 
which  may  illuminate  every  mind.  All  the  powers  of 
evil,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  have  their  Evestra 
mysteriales,  which  may  predict  future  evil,  and  which 
shed  their  bad  influence  over  the  world." 

"  Necromantia  gives  its  signs  through  the  Astra, 
which  we  also  call  '  Evestra.'  They  mark  the  bodies  of 
the  sick  and  the  dying  with  spots,  showing  that  he  will 
die  on  the  third  day ;  they  mark  the  hands  and  fingers 
of  men  with  yellow  spots,  foreshowing  fortunate  events. 
Through  them  the  dead  perform  signs  and  wonders, 
such  as  the  bleeding  of  a  corpse  in  the  presence  of  the 
murderer,  and  through  their  power  voices  are  sometimes 
heard  from  out  of  the  tombs.  Noises  and  hauntings 
may  thus  take  place  in  charnel  -  houses,  and  the  dead 
appear  in  the  clothing  which  they  used  to  wear  while 
living,  and  various  visions  be  seen  in  mirrors,  stones, 
water,  &c.  A  great  deal  might  be  said  about  such 
things,  but  it  would  create  fears  and  superstitions  and 
other  evils.  This  we  wish  to  avoid,  and  we  will  there- 
fore say  no  more  about  such  things,  which  ought  not  to 
be  publicly  known  "  (Signat.  Rer.,  ix.). 

1  The  Soul  of  the  Universe.      According  to  Jacob  Boehme,  it  is  the 
awakened  life  of  the  inner  world,  perturbing  Nature. 

2  Direct  emanations  of  the  Universal  Mind  ;  Thought  bodies. 

3  The  transcendental  bodies  of  the  Dhyan-Chohans  collectively. 

go  PARACELSUS 

"  There  are  Evestra  in  all  things,1  and  they  are  all 
prophesying  spirits,  whether  the  bodies  to  which  they 
belong  are  rational  or  irrational,  sensitive  or  without 
sensation.  These  Evestra  teach  Astronomia  (natural 
science)  to  him  who  can  understand  what  they  say. 
The  character  of  each  thing  may  be  known  through 
its  Evestrum,  not  by  making  astrological  charts,  calcu- 
lating nativities,  and  composing  prognostics,  but  by 
looking  at  it  with  the  understanding,  in  the  same 
manner  as  we  may  look  at  the  image  of  an  object  in  a 
mirror  or  at  the  shadow  of  a  body  on  the  surface  of  the 
water,  or  upon  the  earth.  The  Ens  (the  eternal  cause 
and  character  of  a  thing)  is  reflected  in  its  Evestrum. 
The  form  of  the  latter  perishes,  but  the  spirit  remains. 
The  number  and  variety  of  Evestra  are  as  incalculable 
as  that  of  the  visible  and  invisible  forms  to  which  they 
belong.  The  Evestra  of  human  beings  know  the  thoughts 
of  men,  guide  their  instincts,  watch  over  them  in  their 
sleep,  warn  them  of  dangers,  and  prophesy  future  events. 
The  Sibyls  of  the  past  have  read  the  future  in  the  Evestra, 
and  the  Evestra  have  caused  the  ancient  prophets  to 
speak  as  it  were  in  a  dream  "  (Philos.  ad  Athenienses). 

"  The  world  of  the  Evestra  is  a  world 2  of  its  own, 
although  intimately  interlaced  and  connected  with  ours. 
It  has  its  own  peculiar  states  of  matter  and  objects 
that  may  be  visible  or  invisible  to  its  inhabitants,  and 
yet  corresponding  to  a  certain  extent  to  ours.  Still,  it 
is  a  world  constituted  differently  from  ours,  and  its 
inhabitants  can  know  as  little  about  our  existence  as 
we  about  theirs.  The  firmament  of  the  universe  3  is 
fourfold  in  its  essence,  and  divided  into  four  planes.  One 
belongs  to  Matter  (Earth),  one  to  Water,  one  to  Air, 
and  one  to  Fire,  but  the  firmament  in  which  rests  the 

1  See  Professor  Denton's  "The  Souls  of  Things."  Every  atom  and 
molecule,  every  ephemeron,  must  have  its  Evestrum,  whether  the  com- 
pounds are  regarded  as  organic  or  inorganic. 

2  The  Astral  Plane. 

3  The  sphere  of  the  Universal  Mind. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  91 

Evestrum  is  dispersed.  The  latter  is  not  the  firmament 
containing  our  visible  stars,  but  the  sphere  in  which  the 
Nymphse,  Undines,  Salamanders,  Flagee,  &c,  live.  These 
beings  are  not  dependent  on  our  sphere  of  existence,  but 
they  have  a  firmament  of  their  own  ;  they  have  their 
own  peculiar  conditions,  places  of  dwelling,  localities, 
stars  and  planets.  As  there  is  in  our  world  water  and 
fire,  harmonies  and  contrasts,  visible  bodies  and  invisible 
essences,  likewise  these  beings  are  varied  in  their  con- 
stitution and  have  their  own  peculiarities,  for  which 
human  beings  have  no  comprehension.  But  the  two 
words  intermingle  and  throw  their  shadows  upon  each 
other,  and  this  circumstance  causes  delusive  visions, 
apparitions,  omens,  and  signs,  mixing  strangely  with  the 
two  impressions  coming  from  the  Evestra  prophetica, 
and  only  an  intelligence  illuminated  by  wisdom  can  dis- 
tinguish the  true  from  the  false.1 

"  The  first  thing,  however,  which  we  ought  to  do  is, 
as  Christ  says,  to  seek  for  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  His 
justice.  If  we  do  this  we  will  require  no  prophecies, 
because  all  that  we  need  will  be  given  to  us " 2  (De 
Arte  Praesaga). 

Thus,  the  astral  life  is  most  active  in  man  when  his 
physical  body  is  asleep.  The  sidereal  man  is  then 
awake,  and  acts  through  the  Evestrum,  causing  occa- 
sionally prophetic  dreams,  which  the  person  after  awaken- 
ing to  physical  consciousness  will  remember,  and  to 
which  he  may  pay  attention.  Such  dreams  may  also 
be  caused  by  other  influences,  and  be  delusive ;  and 
man  ought  therefore  neither  to  reject  nor  to  accept  all 

1  The  writings  of  Paracelsus,  such  as  have  been  preserved,  in  regard  to 
the  description  of  the  Astral  world,  are  exceedingly  mixed  up,  and  written 
in  a  style  which  renders  their  meaning  almost  incomprehensible. 

2  This  means  that  it  is  not  advisable  to  try  to  develop  astral  sight  or 
to  deal  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  astral  plane  as  long  as  we  have  not 
the  power  to  rise  above  that  plane.  When  our  true  spiritual  powers 
become  active  in  us,  we  shall  also  be  able  to  see  all  that  is  below  that 
state  of  existence,  and  incur  no  danger  from  it. 

92  PARACELSUS 

dreams  without  discrimination,  but  always  use  his  reason 
to  distinguish  the  true  from  the  false.  "  But,  on  the 
whole,  there  may  be  more  reliance  put  into  dreams  than 
in  the  revelations  received  by  the  art  of  Necromancy ; 
because  the  latter  are  usually  false  and  deceptive,  and 
although  the  Elementals,  using  the  astral  bodies  of  the 
dead  on  such  occasions  as  masks,  will  give  correct 
answers  to  questions,  and  often  confirm  their  assertions 
with  oaths,  nevertheless  no  implicit  confidence  or  reliance 
can  be  put  into  what  they  may  say,  because  they  do  not 
wish  to  speak  the  truth,  nor  are  they  able  to  speak  it." 

"  The  patriarchs,  prophets,  and  saints  preferred,  there- 
fore, visions  and  dreams  to  any  other  mode  of  divination. 
Balaam  was  so  well  versed  in  the  art  of  calling  forth 
prophetic  dreams  that  he  could  have  them  whenever  he 
wanted.  He  was  therefore  falsely  accused  of  being  a 
sorcerer ;  for  the  Scriptures  do  not  use  any  discrimina- 
tion in  such  matters,  but  call  every  one  a  sorcerer  who 
has  such  powers,  and  uses  them  to  obtain  information 
without  being  himself  a  saint.  God  wills  that  we  shall 
be  like  the  apostles  in  purity  and  simplicity  of  mind, 
and  that  we  shall  not  speculate  in  hidden  and  secret 
things,  such  as  are  called  supernatural l  and  which  may 
be  misused  for  the  purpose  of  injuring  one's  neigh- 
bour in  body  and  soul.  The  difference  between  a  magus 
and  a  sorcerer  is,  that  the  former  does  not  misuse  his 
art.  If  magic  (the  power  of  the  spiritual  will)  is  mis- 
used, it  is  then  sorcery  "  (Philosophia  Occulta). 

"  There  are  two  kinds  of  dreams — natural  ones  and 
such  as  come  from  the  spirit.  It  is  unnecessary  to  say 
much  about  the  former,  because  they  are  known  to  all. 
They  may  be  caused  by  joy  or  sadness,  by  impurities  of 
the  blood,  by  external  or  internal  causes.      A  gambler 

1  Those  are  in  error  who  claim  that  there  is  nothing  supernatural ;  for 
although  all  things  exist  in  Nature,  Nature  itself  is  not  God.  God  is  not 
outside,  but  above  and  beyond  Nature  ;  not  in  regard  to  locality,  but  in 
regard  to  His  superiority. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  93 

may  dream  of  cards,  a  soldier  of  battles,  a  drunkard  of 
wine,  a  robber  of  theft.  All  such  dreams  are  caused  by  the 
lower  principles  of  such  persons,  which  play  with  their 
imagination,  heat  their  blood,  and  stimulate  their  phantasy." 

"  But  there  are  supernatural  dreams,  and  they  are 
the  messengers  from  God,  that  are  sent  to  us  at  the 
approach  of  some  great  danger.  Ananias,  Cornelius, 
and  many  others  had  similar  visions,  and  such  super- 
natural dreams  take  place  sometimes  even  among  the 
present  generation  ;  but  only  the  wise  pay  attention  to 
them.  Others  treat  them  with  contempt,  although  such 
dreams  are  true,  and  do  not  deceive." 

"  The  dream  in  the  Gabal  plays  with  that  which  is 
in  man,  and  that  which  the  dream  shows  is  the  shadow 
of  such  wisdom  as  exists  in  the  man,  even  if  during 
his  waking  state  he  may  know  nothing  about  it ;  for 
we  ought  to  know  that  God  has  given  us  all  wisdom  and 
knowledge,  reason,  and  the  power  to  perceive  the  past 
and  the  future ;  but  we  do  not  know  it,  because  we 
are  fooling  away  our  time  with  outward  and  perishing 
things,  and  are  asleep  in  regard  to  that  which  is  real 
within  ourself .  If  one  appears  to  have  more  talent  than 
another  man,  it  is  not  because  he  has  been  especially 
favoured  by  God,  but  because  he  has  more  than  the 
other  sought  of  that  which  God  has  given  to  each " 
(Fragmenta  Medico). 

"  There  are  some  persons  whose  nature  is  so  spiritual, 
and  their  souls  so  exalted,  that  they  can  approach  the 
highest  spiritual  sphere  at  a  time  when  their  bodies  are 
asleep.  Such  persons  have  seen  the  glory  of  God,  the 
happiness  of  the  redeemed,  and  the  torture  of  the  wicked  ; 
and  they  did  not  forget  their  dreams  on  awakening,  but 
remembered  what  they  had  seen  unto  the  end  of  their 
days.  Such  things  are  possible,  and  the  greatest  mys- 
teries are  thus  laid  open  to  the  perception  of  the  spirit ; 
and  if  we  earnestly  desire  such  gifts,  and  pray  with  an 
unrelenting  faith  to  the  power  of  the  Supreme,  that  rests 

94  PARACELSUS 

in  ourselves,  to  grant  them  to  us,  we  may  be  enabled  to 
see  the  Hysteria  Dei,  and  to  understand  them  as  well  as 
Moses,  Jesaiah,  and  John." 

"It  sometimes  happens  that  the  Evestra  of  persons  who 
have  died  perhaps  fifty  or  a  hundred  years  ago  appear  to 
us  in  a  dream,  and  if  such  an  Evestrum  comes  to  us  in 
our  dream  and  speaks  with  us,  we  should  pay  especial 
attention  to  what  it  says ;  for  such  a  vision  is  not  a  hal- 
lucination or  delusion,  and  it  is  possible  that  a  man  is  as 
much  able  to  use  his  reason  during  the  sleep  of  his  body 
as  when  the  latter  is  awake,  and  if  in  such  a  case  such 
an  Evestrum  appears  to  him,  and  he  asks  questions,  he 
will  then  hear  that  which  is  true.  A  great  deal  could 
be  said  about  such  Evestra,  but  it  is  not  proper  to  say 
more  about  them." x 

"  Through  the  Evestra  we  may  obtain  a  great  deal  of 
knowledge  in  regard  to  good  or  to  evil  things,  if  we  ask 
them  to  reveal  them  to  us.  Many  persons  have  had  such 
prayers  granted  to  them.  Some  people  that  were  sick 
have  been  informed  during  their  sleep  what  remedies 
they  should  use,  and  after  using  such  remedies  they  be- 
came cured.  And  such  things  have  happened  not  only 
to  Christians,  but  also  to  the  heathens,  to  Jews,  Sara- 
cenes,  Mamelukes,  Persians,  and  ./Egyptians;  to  good 
and  to  bad  persons ;  and  I  cannot,  therefore,  believe  that 
such  revelations  come  directly  from  the  Deity,  because, 
there  being  only  one  God,  all  those  peoples  cannot  have 
separate  gods  ;  but  I  believe  that  the  universal  light  of 
Nature  illuminated  such  disciples,  and  as  that  light  has 
no  organs  of  speech,  it  causes  Evestra  in  the  astral  spheres 
of  men  during  their  sleep  "  {Be  Gaducis). 

"  When  men  are  asleep  their  bodies  are  like  those  of 
animals  or  plants,  for  animals  and  plants  have  also  their 
elementary  and  their  sidereal  bodies ;  but  the  divine 
spirit  can  only  become  active  in  man.      During  sleep  the 

1  The  thoughts  of  great  minds  remain  for  ages  like  stars  on  the  mental 
horizon  of  the  world. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  95 

sidereal  body,  by  which  man  is  connected  with  the  inner 
nature  of  the  Macrocosm,  becomes  free  in  its  movements, 
and  it  can  then  rise  up  to  the  sphere  of  his  ancestors, 
and  converse  with  the  stars  (thoughts)  ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  processes  taking  place  in  the  intellectual  sphere  of 
the  Macrocosm  will  throw  their  reflections  into  his  soul 
and  come  to  his  inner  perception.  Dreams,  visions,  and 
omens  are  gifts  given  to  the  sidereal  man,  and  not  to  the 
elementary  body." 

"  The  day  of  the  corpora  is  the  night  for  the  spiritus. 
When  the  bodies  cease  their  labour,  the  spirits  (in  man) 
begin  their  work.  When  the  body  of  man  rests,  his 
spirit  begins  to  become  active  ;  and  when  the  spirit  rests, 
the  body  resumes  its  work.  Therefore  is  the  waking  of 
the  body  the  sleep  of  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit's  sleep 
a  waking  for  the  body.  They  will  not  sleep  or  operate  to- 
gether ;  one  acts,  while  the  other  reposes  "  (Philosoph.,  v.). 

"  But  dreams  will  be  pure  or  impure,  wise  or  foolish, 
rational  or  irrational,  according  to  the  position  which 
man  occupies  in  his  relation  to  the  light  of  Nature. 
Prophetic  sights  are  caused  by  the  circumstance  that 
man  has  a  sidereal  body,  related  to  the  substance  of  the 
Universal  Mind,  and  the  former  confabulates  with  the 
latter  whenever  the  attention  of  the  sidereal  body  is  not 
needed  by  the  requirements  of  the  physical  body.  That 
is  to  say,  all  that  takes  place  in  the  outer  world  is  mir- 
rored forth  in  the  inner  world,  and  appears  as  a  dream. 
The  elementary  body  has  no  spiritual  gifts,  but  the  side- 
real body  possesses  them  all.  Whenever  the  elementary 
body  is  at  rest,  asleep  or  unconscious,  the  sidereal  body 
is  awake  and  active,  because  the  latter  needs  neither 
rest  nor  sleep ;  but  whenever  the  elementary  body  is 
fully  awake  and  active,  the  activity  of  the  sidereal  body 
will  then  be  restrained,  and  its  free  movements  be 
impeded  or  prevented,  like  those  of  a  man  who  is 
buried  alive   in  a  tomb."1 

1  "The  spirit  educates  the  body  (the  internal  the  external  man),  and 
may  seduce  it  to  commit  sins,  for   which  the   body   has   to  suffer ;    but 

96  PARACELSUS 

"  The  quality  of  the  dreams  will  depend  on  the  har- 
mony that  exists  between  the  soul  and  the  Astrum 
(Universal  Mind).  To  those  who  are  self-conceited  and 
vain  of  their  imaginary  knowledge  of  exterior  things, 
having  no  real  wisdom,  nothing  can  be  shown  to  them, 
because  the  perverted  action  of  their  own  minds  opposes 
the  harmonious  action  of  the  Universal  Mind  and  re- 
pulses it.  The  spheres  of  their  souls  become  narrow  and 
contracted,  and  cannot  expand  towards  the  whole.  They 
rest  self-satisfied,  buried  in  the  shadow  of  their  own 
ignorance,  and  are  inaccessible  to  the  light  of  Nature. 
Their  attention  is  fully  absorbed  by  the  smoke  of  the 
candle-wick  of  their  material  reason,  and  they  are  blind 
to  the  light  of  the  spiritual  sun.  The  activity  of  the 
Universal  Mind  can  only  come  to  the  consciousness  of 
those  whose  spheres  of  mind  are  capable  of  receiving 
its  impressions.  Those  who  make  room  for  such  im- 
pressions will  receive  them.  Such  impressions  are  pass- 
ing in  and  out  of  the  sphere  of  the  individual  mind, 
and  they  cause  visions  and  dreams,  having  an  important 
meaning,  and  whose  interpretation  is  an  art  that  is 
known  to  the  wise "  {Phil.  Sagax). 

"  Thus  one  spirit  may  teach  another  during  the  sleep 
of  the  body ;  for  spirits  deal  with  each  other  and  teach 
each  other  their  art.  A  foreign  spirit  cannot  enter  into 
a  body  which  does  not  belong  to  him  ;  it  is  bound  to 
its  own  body.  Therefore,  the  body  of  man  must  learn 
from  its  own  spirit,  and  not  from  a  foreign  one ;  but  his 
spirit  must  learn  from  other  spirits,  for  it  cannot  always 
have  everything  out  of  its  own  self  "  (Philos.,  v.). 

the  body  can  neither  instruct  nor  seduce  the  spirit.  The  body  eats  and 
drinks,  but  the  nourishment  of  the  spirit  is  faith.  The  body  perishes, 
the  spirit  is  eternal.  The  body  is  subdued  by  the  spirit,  but  not  the 
spirit  by  the  body.  The  body  is  dark,  the  spirit  light  and  transparent. 
The  body  is  subject  to  disease  ;  the  spirit  remains  well.  Material  things 
are  dark  to  the  body,  but  the  spirit  sees  through  everything.  The  body 
(mind)  speculates  ;  the  spirit  (the  will)  acts.  The  body  is  Mumia,  the 
spirit  is  balsam.  The  body  belongs  to  death,  the  spirit  to  life.  The  body 
is  of  the  earth  ;  the  spirit  from  heaven  and  God"  {Phil.  Tract.,  iv.). 

ANTHROPOLOGY  97 

Death 

The  word  "Death"  implies  two  meanings:  I.  Cessa- 
tion of  the  activity  of  Life;  2.  Annihilation  of  Form. 
Form  is  an  illusion,  and  has  no  existence  independent  of 
Life ;  it  is  only  an  expression  of  life,  and  not  productive 
of  it.  The  form  cannot  cease  to  live,  because  it  never 
lived  before,  and  the  death  of  a  form  is  only  the  cessation 
of  the  eternal  power  of  life  in  one  form  of  manifestation 
of  its  activity  preceding  its  manifestation  in  some  other 
form.  But  Life  itself  cannot  die  or  be  annihilated, 
because  it  is  not  born  of  a  form.  It  is  an  eternal  power, 
that  has  always  existed  and  always  will  exist.  The 
annihilation  of  a  particle  of  life  would  be  a  loss  to  the 
Universe  that  could  not  be  replaced.  Life  is  a  function 
of  God,1  and  will  always  exist  as  long  as  God  is. 

Before  we  can  expect  to  die,  we  must  first  come  to 
life.  Life  cannot  cease  to  be  active  in  a  form  as  long  as 
it  has  not  become  active  therein.  There  are  two  kinds 
of  life  in  man — the  spiritual  and  the  natural  life.  If  the 
natural  life  ceases  to  be  active  in  a  man,  the  man  dies,  and 
he  will  then  be  conscious  only  of  the  life  of  his  spirit ; 
but  if  that  life  has  not  become  active  in  him  during 
his  natural  life,  it  will  not  become  so  by  means  of  his 
death.  No  mortal  man  can  become  immortal  by  dying ; 
he  must  have  gained  (become  conscious  of)  eternal  life 
during  his  terrestrial  existence  before  he  can  expect  to 
retain  that  life  after  the  death  of  his  body.  "  What  is 
death  ?  It  is  that  which  takes  the  life  away  from  us. 
It  is  the  separation  of  the  immortal  from  the  mortal  part. 
It  is  also  that  which  awakens  us  and  returns  to  us  that 
which  it  has  taken  away  "  (Paramirum,  ii.). 

"  Each  form  is  an  embodiment  of  certain  principles  or 
qualities.  If  there  were,  for  instance,  no  heat,  nothing 
could  become  hot.      If  there  were  no  wisdom,  no  man 

1  The  seventh  principle. 

G 

98  PARACELSUS 

could  become  wise ;  if  there  were  no  art,  there  would 
be  no  artists.  If  the  principles  from  which  men  and 
animals  derive  their  qualities  did  not  exist,  there  could 
be  no  men  or  animals  in  whom  such  qualities  are  made 
manifest.  These  principles  (forms  of  will)  remain, 
although  the  forms  in  which  they  have  been  manifested 
for  the  time  being  decay.  If  a  wise  man  dies,  his 
wisdom  still  continues  to  be,  and  may  be  communicated 
to  another  person  "  (De  Fund.  Sap.). 

If  a  mill  suddenly  comes  to  a  stop,  it  may  be  from  two 
causes ;  either  the  miller  who  manipulated  it  has  gone 
away,  or  there  has  been  something  wrong  with  the 
works,  so  that  they  could  not  operate  any  longer.  In 
the  same  way  the  death  of  the  body  will  occur,  if  for 
some  reason  the  body  is  no  longer  capable  to  accomplish 
its  work  for  the  spirit  by  which  it  is  inhabited,  or  it 
may  be  that  the  inhabitant  (the  soul)  for  some  reason 
has  left  the  house.  The  latter  circumstance  accounts  for 
many  cases  of  sudden  death  "  from  unknown  causes," 
and  therefore  an  apparently  dead  body  should  never  be 
buried  before  the  only  certain  sign,  which  shows  that  it 
is  no  longer  inhabitable — namely,  putrefaction — appears ; 
for  otherwise  we  are  not  sure  that  the  inhabitant  may 
only  be  temporarily  absent,  and  find  his  house  destroyed 
when  he  returns. 

All  forms  are  subject  to  annihilation ;  they  are  only 
illusions,  and  as  such  they  will  cease  to  exist  when  the 
cause  that  produced  them  ceases  to  act.  The  body  of  a 
king  or  a  sage  is  as  useless  as  that  of  an  animal  after  the 
life  whose  product  it  was  has  ceased  to  act.  A  form  can 
only  maintain  its  existence  as  long  as  the  action  of  life 
upon  the  substance  of  the  form  continues.  But  life  is  an 
eternal  and  perfect  power;  it  can  be  brought  into  con- 
tact, but  it  cannot  be  united  with  physical  matter.  It 
can  only  be  attracted  to  physical  matter  by  the  power  of 
the  spirit,  and  if  the  spirit  ceases  to  attract  it,  life  will 
depart  from  matter,  and  the  form  will  be  dissolved  into 

ANTHROPOLOGY  99 

its  elements.  Nothing  can  become  united  with  eternal 
and  perfect  life  except  that  which  is  eternal  and  perfect. 
That  which  is  good  and  perfect  can  continue  to  live ; 
that  which  is  evil  and  imperfect  will  be  transformed.  If 
all  the  elements  constituting  a  man  were  good,  if  his 
whole  emotional  and  intellectual  constitution  were  per- 
fect, such  a  man  would  be  wholly  immortal.  If  there  is 
nothing  good  in  him,  he  will  have  to  die  and  to  be  wholly 
transformed.  If  a  part  of  him  is  good  and  another  part 
evil,  the  good  portion  will  live  and  the  evil  one  will 
perish.  "  Omne  bonum  perfectum  a  Deo ;  imperfectum  a 
diablo." 

"  The  divine  man  does  not  die ;  but  the  animals  in 
him  are  subject  to  dissolution.  Man  will  have  to  render 
account  for  his  acts ;  not  so  the  animals.  An  animal  is 
only  an  animal  and  not  a  man ;  but  the  true  man  is  an 
image  of  God.  Animal  man  is  that  which  the  animal  in 
him  makes  of  bim,  and  if  a  man  is  not  really  a  man  in 
regard  to  his  wisdom,  he  is  not  a  man  but  an  animal " 
(De  Fund.  Sap.). 

"  The  spirit  of  man  comes  from  God,  and  when  the 
body  dies  the  spirit  returns  to  God.  The  astral  soul 
comes  from  the  astral  plane  and  returns  to  it.  The  body 
comes  from  Nature  and  returns  to  it.  Thus  everything 
returns  to  its  own  prima  materia.  If  God  is  not  con- 
scious in  us,  how  can  we  expect  to  be  conscious  in  God  ? 
Who  can  see  by  a  light  which  does  not  shine  ? "  {De 
Morb.  Invis.,  iv.). 

"No  man  becomes  raised  in  the  flesh  of  Adam  and 
Eve  (the  lower  Manas),  but  in  the  flesh  of  Christ  (the 
Atma-Buddhi  Manas  ;  therefore  that  which  is  not  in  the 
flesh  of  Christ  cannot  be  redeemed "  (De  Fund.  Sap., 
fragm.). 

Everything  that  exists  is  a  manifestation  of  life. 
Stones  and  metals  have  a  life  as  well  as  plants,  animals, 
or  men  ;  only  the  mode  of  the  manifestation  differs  on 
account  of  the  organic  structure  of  the  particles  of  which 

ioo  PARACELSUS 

they  are  composed.  A  fly,  for  instance,  has  the  same 
life  as  a  stone,  because  there  is  only  One  Life,  but  in  a 
fly  it  manifests  itself  otherwise  than  in  a  stone,  and  while 
the  shape  of  the  stone  may  exist  for  thousands  of  years, 
the  fly  lives  only  a  few  days. 

The  elements,  which  are  used  by  the  power  of  life  for 
the  purpose  of  manifesting  itself,  are  as  indestructible 
as  life  itself,  but  they  continually  change  their  states, 
they  are  continually  undergoing  transformations,  they  are 
continually  calcinated,  sublimated,  dissolved,  decomposed, 
distilled,  coagulated,  and  tinctured  in  the  alchemistical 
laboratory  of  Nature. 

Each  form  has  a  certain  period  during  which  it  may 
exist  as  a  form,  and  the  length  of  this  period  is  predeter- 
mined by  the  number  which  is  a  constituent  factor  in 
the  organisation  of  form,  and  which  springs  from  life 
itself,  because  life  is  a  conscious  power,  and  does  nothing 
at  random,  but  everything  according  to  its  own  inherent 
law;  and  if  the  form  should  be  prematurely  destroyed, 
life  will  nevertheless  be  active  in  the  astral  soul  of  the 
form,  which  cannot  be  destroyed  until  the  time  for  its 
natural  dissolution  has  arrived.1  The  outer  form  is  only 
caused  by  the  action  of  life  upon  the  astral  form,  and  if 
the  exterior  form  is  broken,  the  inner  form  still  continues 
to  exist,  and  can  under  certain  conditions  be  brought 
again  into  contact  with  the  remnants  of  the  broken  form, 
and  thereby  that  form  may  be  revived.  If  a  thing  dies 
a  natural  death,  such  a  revival  is  impossible ;  but  if  the 
death  has  been  premature,  such  a  revival  may  take  place, 
if  the  vital  organs  of  the  person  or  animal  have  not  been 
irrevocably  destroyed.2 

But  even  in  that  case  there  still  exists  a  very  close 
sympathetic   relationship  between  the   remnants  of  the 

1  Premature  death*  from  crime,  suicide,  and  accidents  cause  their 
victims  to  become  earth-bound  spirits,  until  the  time  of  their  natural 
dissolution  arrives. 

2  Sec  F.  Hartmann,  "Premature  Burial,"  London,  1896. 

ANTHROPOLOGY  101 

body  and  the  living  astral  form,  and  this  relationship 
continues  to  exist  until  the  period  of  the  natural  life  of 
the  individual  has  expired,  or  until  the  substances  com- 
posing his  body  have  been  entirely  dissolved  into  their 
elements.1  The  remnants  of  such  bodies,  the  corpses  of 
persons  that  have  committed  suicide  or  died  by  the  hands 
of  an  executioner,  have  therefore  great  occult  powers. 
They  do  not  contain  life,  but  the  balsam  of  life,2  and  it 
is  very  fortunate  that  this  fact  is  not  publicly  known, 
because  if  evil-disposed  persons  knew  these  things  and 
the  use  that  can  be  made  of  the  corpses,  they  might  use 
them  for  sorceries  and  evil  purposes,  and  inflict  much 
suffering  upon  others.3 

If  we  would  burn  a  tree,  and  enclose  the  ashes  and 
the  smoke  and  the  vapour,  and  all  the  elements  that 
made  up  the  tree,  into  a  great  bottle,  and  plant  a  living 
seed  of  that  tree  into  the  ashes,  we  might  resurrect  the 
same  kind  of  a  tree  again  out  of  its  ashes,  because  there 
would  be  a  centre  of  life,  to  which  all  the  elements  that 
were  before  necessary  to  form  that  tree  could  be  again 
attracted  to  form  another  tree  of  the  same  kind,  having 
all  the  characteristics  of  the  former ;  but  if  there  were 
no  seed,  there  would  be  no  tree,  because  the  character  of 
the  tree  is  neither  in  the  ashes  nor  in  the  vapour  nor  in 
the  smoke,  but  in  the  Myslerium  magnum,  the  eternal 
storehouse  of  life,  from  which  it  will  be  attracted  again 
by  the  seed,  and  be  made  to  live  in  a  new  form  endowed 

1  Spirit-communications  from  suicides  go  to  confirm  this  fact. 

2  The  vehicle  of  life  (the  astral  body). 

3  The  Eastern  esoteric  doctrine  teaches  the  same  :  The  astral  form,  or 
Cahalli,  of  suicides,  or  of  one  who  died  an  unnatural  premature  death, 
cannot  immediately  be  dissolved,  but  will  linger  and  wander  in  the 
earth's  atmosphere  (Kama-loca)  for  the  period  that  was  allotted  to  its 
body's  life  by  natural  law.  The  astral  bodies  (spirits,  so  called)  of  suicides 
are  those  who  appear  nine  times  out  of  ten  in  spiritual  seances,  when  they 
will  assume  any  celebrated  name,  or  even  the  appearance  of  certain  well- 
known  persons,  whose  images  are  well  impressed  in  the  aura  around  those 
present.  They  are  the  most  dangerous  of  all  the  Elementaries.  See 
"  Key  to  Theosophy." 

io2  PARACELSUS 

with  greater  virtues  and  powers  than  the  ones^it  pos- 
sessed before. 

All  this  goes  to  show  not  only  the  indestructibility  of 
"  matter,"  but  also  that  of  "  mind."  The  will-spirit  of 
a  person  retains  its  own  qualities  after  the  death  of  the 
person  ;  but  this  will-spirit  is  not  the  person  itself.  The 
person's  personality  consists  of  that  combination  of  per- 
sonal qualities  which  are  represented  in  his  form,  and  if 
that  form,  be  it  on  the  physical  or  on  the  astral  plane,  is 
dissolved,  there  is  then  an  end  of  that  personality,  and 
only  the  will-spirit  remains.  But  the  divine  spirit  of 
man,  having  attained  self-consciousness  in  God  and  sub- 
stance in  the  body  of  Christ,  or,  to  express  it  in  other 
words,  that  part  of  the  Manas  which  has  become  illu- 
mined by  the  light  of  the  Atma-Buddhi,  will  continue  as 
a  self-conscious  and  self-luminous  entity  in  the  life  of 
eternity.1 

Thus  there  is  something  incorruptible  and  eternal,  and 
something  corruptible  and  temporal,  in  man,  and  he  may 
use  his  free  will  to  identify  himself  either  with  the  one 
or  the  other.  If  he  identifies  himself  with  Nature,  he 
will  have  to  be  transformed  by  her.  If  he  identifies 
himself  with  the  divine  spirit,  he  will  remain  that 
which  he  is.  "  There  is  no  death  to  be  feared  except 
that  which  results  from  becoming  unconscious  of  the 
presence  of  God." 

1  Jacob  Boehme  says :  "  Death  is  a  breaking  up  of  the  three  king- 
doms in  man.  It  is  the  only  means  by  which  the  spirit  is  enabled  to 
enter  into  another  state  and  to  become  manifest  in  another  form.  When 
the  spirit  dies  relatively  to  its  selfhood  (personality)  and  its  self-will 
becomes  broken  in  death,  then  out  of  that  death  grows  another  will, 
not  according  to  that  temporal  will,  but  according  to  the  eternal  will " 
(Signal.,  xvi.  51). 

V.  PNEUMATOLOGY 

The  orthodoxy  of  the  Middle  Ages  looked  upon  angels 
and  devils  and  departed  human  spirits  as  being  personal 
invisible  entities.  They  personified  the  powers  of  good 
and  of  evil,  and  made  of  them  caricatures  and  monsters 
that  flitted  from  place  to  place,  attempting  to  subjugate 
the  souls  of  men  or  to  bring  them  within  their  power. 
The  governmental  institutions  during  those  times  were 
those  of  oligarchy,  and  the  poor  were  dependent  on  the 
favours  of  the  rich.  The  power  of  the  Church  was 
supreme,  and  the  dictates  of  the  clergy  suffered  no  dis- 
obedience. Servility  and  the  craving  for  personal  favours 
were  the  order  of  the  day,  and  this  state  of  mind  neces- 
sarily influenced  and  modified  the  religious  conceptions 
of  the  people.  The  Supreme  Spirit  of  the  Universe 
became  degraded  in  their  eyes  to  a  personal  tyrant,  into 
whose  favour  they  attempted  to  wheedle  themselves  by 
penitences,  supplications,  and  by  means  of  the  interces- 
sions of  priests,  who  were  supposed  to  be  his  favourites. 
Everything  that  could  not  be  reconciled  with  existing 
prejudices  and  opinions  was  attributed  to  the  devil ;  and 
the  horrors  of  the  inquisitions,  religious  persecutions,  and 
witch-trials  are  too  well  known  to  require  to  be  recalled 
to  the  memory  of  the  reader. 

"  Pneuma"  or  "  soul,"  means  a  semi-material  spirit, 
an  essence  or  form  which  is  neither  "  material,"  in  the 
common  acceptation  of  this  term,  nor  pure  spirit.  It  is 
(like  everything  else  in  the  universe)  a  form  of  will,  and 
may  be  with  or  without  any  intelligence.  Usually  it 
means  the  connecting  link  between  spirit  and  body ;  but 
there  are  beings  who  belong  entirely  to  the  realm  of  the 

104  PARACELSUS 

soul  and  have  no   such  bodies  as  are  commonly  called 
"  material." 

It  may  be  said  that  the  soul  is  a  certain  state  of 
activity  of  the  will,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the 
physical  body ;  for  if  we  look  at  the  universe  as  being 
a  manifestation  of  will  in  motion,  then  all  forms  and 
objects  that  we  know  of,  or  which  we  can  imagine, 
are  certain  vibrations  of  will.  Thus  we  may  look  upon 
physical  nature  as  being  constituted  of  a  low  order  of 
vibrations ;  upon  the  soul  as  a,  higher  octave  of  the  same, 
and  of  spirit  as  one  higher  still.  If  the  physical  body 
dies,  the  lower  octave  ceases  to  sound ;  but  the  higher 
one  continues  and  will  continue  to  vibrate  as  long  as  it 
is  in  contact  with  the  highest ;  but  if  the  spirit  has 
become  separated  from  it,  it  will  sooner  or  later  cease  its 
activity-  Thus  if  man  dies  the  soul  remains,  and  its 
higher  essences  go  to  form  the  substance  of  the  body  of 
the  paradisaical  man,  "  the  man  of  the  new  Olymp,"  and 
the  lower  essences  of  the  soul,  from  which  the  spirit  has 
departed,  dissolve  in  the  astral  elements  to  which  they 
belong,  as  the  earthly  body  dissolves  in  the  elements  of 
the  earth. 

This  dissolution,  however,  does  not  take  place  imme- 
diately at  the  time  of  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  the 
body,  but  may  require  a  long  time.  That  which  consti- 
tuted the  mind  of  a  man  will  still  continue  to  exist 
after  the  death  of  the  body,  although  it  is  not  the  man 
itself.  "  If  a  man  has  been  true  during  his  life,  his  spirit 
will  be  true  after  the  man's  death.  If  he  has  been  a 
great  astronomer,  a  magician,  or  alchemist,  his  spirit  will 
still  be  the  same,  and  we  may  learn  a  great  many  things 
from  such  spirits ;  they  being  the  substance  of  the  mind 
which  once  constituted  the  terrestrial  man"  (Philos., 
Tract  v.). 

There  are  two  deaths  or  two  separations — the  sepa- 
ration of  the  spirit  and  soul  from  the  body  and  the 
separation    of   the    spirit    from   the   astral    soul,   or,  to 

PNEUMATOLOGY  105 

express  it  more  correctly,  of  the  spiritual  soul  from  the 
merely  intellectual  and  animal  soul.  If  a  person  dies  a 
natural  death  {i.e.,  from  old  age),  his  passions  having 
died  out  during  his  life,  his  selfish  will  having  become 
weak  and  his  mind  like  that  of  a  child,  putting  its  con- 
fidence in  his  father,  his  spirit  and  soul  will,  at  the  time 
of  his  death,  become  free  from  material  bonds  and  be 
attracted  to  the  body  of  Christ.1 

"Such  a  soul  is  herself  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ,  and 
Christ  is  her  Master.  She  does  not  enter  into  communi- 
cation with  mortals,  because  she  has  no  desire  for  anything 
earthly.  She  does  not  '  think '  or  speculate  about  terres- 
trial things,  or  worry  herself  about  her  relatives  or  friends. 
She  lives  in  a  state  of  pure  feeling,  bliss,  and  enjoyment."  2 

Such  is  the  fate  of  those  who  die  a  natural  death  in 
God;  but  the  conditions  of  those  who  die  prematurely 
without  being  regenerated,  either  by  their  own  hands  or 
in  consequence  of  some  accident,  differ  greatly ;  because, 
although  their  souls  have  become  forcibly  separated  from 
their  bodies,  the  spirit  does  not  therefore  necessarily  leave 
the  soul,  but  remains  with  it  until  another  separation 
takes  place.  They  remain  in  such  cases  human  beings 
like  any  others ;  only  with  this  difference,  that  they  do 
not  possess  a  physical  body,  and  they  remain  in  such  a 
state  until  the  time  arrives  when,  according  to  the  law  of 
Nature  and  their  own  predestination  (Karma),  their  phy- 
sical death  should  have  taken  place.      At  that  time  the 

1  Boehme  says :  "  When  the  soul  has  passed  through  death,  it  is  then 
in  the  essence  of  God.  It  remains  with  the  works  which  it  has  produced 
here,  and  in  this  state  it  will  behold  the  majesty  of  God  and  see  the  angels 
face  to  face.  In  the  unfathomable  world  where  the  soul  is,  there  is  no  end 
or  object  which  that  soul  would  have  to  attain.  Where  the  carrion  is, 
there  will  the  eagles  assemble."  (All  that  the  soul  desires  will  come  to  it.) 
— Forty  Questions,  xxi.  3. 

2  Boehme  says  :  "  The  majority  of  souls  depart  from  their  terrestrial 
forms  without  the  body  of  Christ  (divine  love),  but  being  connected  there- 
with only  by  a  small  thread."  Such  souls,  having  but  little  spirituality, 
will  not  exist  in  such  glorious  bliss  as  those  whose  spirituality  has  been 
unfolded  upon  the  earth  and  who  loved  God  above  all. 

106  PARACELSUS 

separation  of  their  higher  and  lower  principles  takes 
place.  Up  to  that  time  they  possess  their  astral  bodies. 
Such  bodies  are  invisible  to  us,  but  they  are  visible  to 
them,  and  have  sensation  and  perceptive  faculties,1  and 
they  perform  in  their  thoughts  that  which  they  have 
been  in  the  habit  of  performing  during  life,  and  believe 
that  they  are  performing  it  physically.  They  still  remain 
in  the  earth  sphere,  and  Paracelsus  calls  them  Cdballi, 
Lemures,  &c.  They  are  still  in  full  possession  of  their 
earthly  desires  and  passions :  they  attempt  to  satisfy 
them,  and  are  instinctively  attracted  to  persons  in  whom 
they  find  corresponding  desires  and  passions,  and  to  such 
places  where  they  may  hope  to  satisfy  them,  by  entering 
into  sympathy  with  such  persons  (mediums),  and  they  are 
therefore  often  inclined  to  instigate  such  mediumistic 
persons  to  the  commission  of  crimes  and  immoralities ; 
neither  can  they  avoid  doing  so,  because,  by  losing  their 
physical  bodies,  they  have  lost  the  necessary  amount  of 
energy  and  will-power  to  exercise  self-control  and  to 
employ  their  reasoning  faculties.  They  often  haunt  the 
places  where  they  used  to  spend  their  time  during  life,2 
thus  attempting  to  find  relief  from  their  burning  thirst 
after  the  gratification  of  their  desires.  "Wherever  their 
thoughts  attract  them,  there  they  will  go.  If  they  have 
committed  some  crime,  they  will  be  bound  by  repentance 
to  that  place  where  it  was  perpetrated ;  if  they  have  a 
treasure  buried,  care  for  their  money  will  hold  them 
there ;   hatred,  or  desire  for  revenge,   will  tie  them  to 

1  Seusation  is  an  attribute  of  life.  If  life  resides  in  the  astral  body,  he 
astral  body  will  have  sensation,  and  as  long  as  that  body  is  connected 
sympathetically  with  the  dead  physical  body,  it  may  even  feel  any  injury 
inflicted  upon  the  latter.  The  physical  body,  if  it  is  inanimate,  has  no 
sensation  ;  the  latter  belongs  to  the  inner  man.  Wherever  the  centre  of 
consciousness  is  established,  there  is  sensation. 

2  Books  might  be  filled  with  reliable  accounts  of  obsessions,  of  haunted 
houses,  and  instances  in  which  such  ghosts  have  been  seen  are  exceedingly 
numerous.  Some  persons,  that  may  not  be  able  to  see  them,  may  feel 
them  instinctively,  or  even  physical^,  like  a  cold  wind,  or  like  a  current 
of  electricity  passing  through  the  body  (see  "  Borderland  "). 

PNEUMATOLOGY  107 

their  enemies ;  *  passion  turns  them  into  vampires,  and 
connects  them  with  the  object  of  their  passion,  provided 
that  there  are  some  elements  in  these  objects  which  will 
attract  them  ;  because  the  astral  body  of  an  evil  person 
cannot  influence  the  mind  of  a  pure  person,  neither  during 
life  nor  after  death,  unless  they  are  mutually  connected 
by  some  similarity  in  their  psychic  organisations.2 

"  Under  certain  circumstances,  such  human  entities 
will  become  visible  or  manifest  their  presence  in  some 
manner.  They  may  appear  in  bodily  shape,  or  remain 
invisible  and  produce  sounds  and  noises — such  as  knocks, 
laughing,  whistling,  sneezing,  howling,  groaning,  sigh- 
ing, walking,  trampling,  throwing  stones,  and  moving 
articles  of  furniture  or  other  objects,  and  all  this  may 
be  done  by  them  for  the  purpose  of  calling  the  attention 
of  the  living,  so  that  they  will  obtain  an  opportunity  to 
enter  into  communication  with  them."3 

But  not  all  the  appearances  of  supermundane  or  sub- 
mundane  visitors  are  caused  by  the  apparitions  of  the 
ghosts  or  astral  bodies  of  suicides  or  victims  of  accidents, 
nor  by  the  astral  corpses  and  the  Evestra  of  the  dead ; 
but  there  are  other  invisible  entities  sometimes  haunting 

1  Chinamen  and  Hindus  have  been  known  to  kill  themselves  for  the 
purpose  of  revenge,  so  that  their  souls  may  cling  to  their  enemies  and 
trouble  their  minds  or  drive  them  to  suicide.  It  is  also  well  proven  that  wars 
are  often  followed  by  numerous  suicides  occurring  in  the  victorious  army. 

2  Such  a  case  of  vampirism  is  personally  known  to  me.  A  young  man 
killed  himself  on  account  of  his  passion  for  a  married  lady.  The  latter 
loved  him,  but  did  not  encourage  his  advances  on  account  of  her  matri- 
monial obligations.  After  his  death  his  astral  form  became  attracted  to 
her,  and  as  she  was  of  a  mediumistic  temperament,  he  found  the  necessary 
conditions  to  become  partly  materialised  and  trouble  her  every  night.  It 
required  a  long-continued  effort  until  she  finally  became  rid  of  the  In- 
cubus. If  our  practitioners  of  medicine  were  better  acquainted  with 
occult  laws,  many  "mysterious"  cases  that  come  under  their  observation 
might  become  clear  to  them,  and  they  would  obtain  a  deeper  insight  into 
some  causes  of  mania,  hysteria,  hallucination,  &c. 

3  Fragment,  "  De  Animabus  Mortuorum."  A  great  part  of  this  frag- 
ment has  been  lost.  All  such  spirits  are  the  products  of  imagination  and 
will.  If  a  person  has  an  evil  imagination  he  creates  a  corresponding 
form  in  his  mind,  and  if  he  infuses  that  form  with  his  will  he  has  then 
created  a  "  spirit,"  which  will  attract  similar  influences. 

108  PARACELSUS 

the  houses  of  mortals,  and  becoming  occasionally  visible 
and  tangible  to  the  physical  senses,  if  the  conditions 
necessary  for  such  a  purpose  exist. 

"  One  of  these  classes  is  made  up  of  beings  called 
'  phantasmata.'  These  ghost-like  beings  are  '  nocturnal 
spirits,'  having  reasoning  capacities  similar  to  those  of 
man.  They  seek  to  attach  themselves  to  men,  especially 
to  such  as  have  very  little  power  of  self-control,  and 
over  whom  they  can  gain  power.  There  are  a  great 
many  kinds  of  such  spirits,  good  as  well  as  evil  ones, 
and  they  love  to  be  near  man.  In  this  they  are  com- 
parable to  dogs,  who  are  also  fond  of  the  company  of 
men.  But  man  can  profit  nothing  from  their  company. 
They  are  empty  shadows  (shells),  and  are  only  an  encum- 
brance to  him.  They  are  afraid  of  red  corals,  as  dogs 
are  afraid  of  a  whip  ;  but  the  brown  corals  attract  them  "  x 
(Hcrbarius  Theophrasti :  Be,  Corallis). 

"  Some  people  believe  that  such  spirits  can  be  driven 
away  with  holy  water  and  by  the  burning  of  incense ; 
but  a  genuine  holy  water  cannot  be  had  so  long  as  no 
man  is  found  who  is  holy  enough  to  be  able  to  invest 
water  with  an  occult  holy  power,  and  the  odour  of  in- 
cense may  sooner  attract  evil  spirits  than  drive  them 
away ;  because  evil  spirits  are  attracted  by  things  that 
are  attractive  to  the  senses,  and  if  we  wish  to  drive  them 
away  it  would  be  more  reasonable  to  employ  disagreeable 
odours  for  such  a  purpose.  The  true  and  effective  power 
against  all  evil  spirits  is  the  spiritual  will.     If  we  love 

1  Paracelsus  recommends  the  wearing  of  red  corals  as  a  remedy  against 
melancholy.  They  are  said  to  be  ruled  by  the  influence  of  the  sun,  while 
those  of  brown  colour  are  under  the  influence  of  the  moon.  The  red  ones 
are  disagreeable  not  only  to  Phantasmata,  but  also  to  Monsters,  Incubi, 
Succubi,  and  other  evil  spirits  ;  but  the  brown  corals  are  agreeable  to  and 
attract  them.  I  know  of  some  cases  of  melancholy,  depression  of  mind, 
hypochondria,  &c.;  that  have  been  successfully  treated  by  the  wearing  of 
red  corals,  while  other  articles  employed  for  the  same  purpose  had  no 
effect,  and  the  cure  could  therefore  not  be  attributed  merely  to  the  belief 
of  the  patient.  The  ignorant  will  find  it  easier  to  ridicule  such  things 
than  to  explain  them. 

PNEUMA  TOLOG  Y  109 

the  source  of  all  good  with  all  our  heart,  mind,  and 
desire,  we  may  be  sure  never  to  fall  into  the  power  of 
evil ;  but  priestly  ceremonies — the  sprinkling  of  water, 
the  burning  of  incense,  and  the  singing  of  incantations — 
are  the  inventions  of  clerical  vanity,  and  they  therefore 
take  their  origin  from  the  source  of  all  evil.  Ceremonies 
have  been  instituted  originally  to  give  an  external  form 
to  an  internal  act ;  but  where  the  internal  power  to 
perform  such  acts  does  not  exist,  a  ceremony  will  be  of 
no  avail  except  to  attract  such  spirits  as  may  love  to 
mock  at  our  foolishness  "  (Philosophia  Occulta). 

Another  class  consists  of  the  Incubi  and  Succubi,  of 
which  rabbinical  traditions  speak  in  an  allegorical  manner 
as  having  been  created  by  the  spilling  of  the  seed  of 
Adam  (the  animal  man)  while  engaged  with  Lilith,  his 
first  wife  (meaning  a  morbid  imagination).  Paracelsus 
says  in  his  book,  "  De  Origine  Morborum  Invisibilium," 
lib.  iii. :  "  Imagination  x  is  the  cause  of  Incubi  and  Suc- 
cubi and  fluidic  Larvae.  The  Incubi  are  male  and  the 
Succubi  female  beings.  They  are  the  outgrowths  of  an 
intense  and  lewd  imagination  of  men  or  women,  and  after 
they  take  form  they  are  carried  away.  They  are  formed  of 
the  sperma  found  in  the  imagination  of  those  who  commit 
the  unnatural  sin  of  Onan  in  thought  and  desire.  Coming 
as  it  does  from  the  imagination  alone,  it  is  no  true 
sperma,  but  only  a  corrupted  salt  (essence).  Only  a 
seed  that  enters  the  organs  which  Nature  provided  for 
its  development  can  grow  into  a  body.2     If  seed  is  not 

1  The  word  "  imagination  "  ought  not  to  be  mistaken  for  empty  fancy  ; 
it  means  the  power  of  the  mind  to  form  into  a  substantial  image  the  in- 
fluences which  are  actually  present. 

2  It  is  here  not  the  question  of  merely  visible  and  tangible  things,  but 
of  the  products  of  the  mind,  which  are  also  substantial,  and  which  may 
become  visible  and  tangible  under  certain  conditions. 

"The  invisible  body  as  well  as  the  terrestrial  body  act  each  in  its  own 
way.  That  which  the  visible  body  performs  is  done  with  its  hands  ;  the 
inner  man  works  by  means  of  his  imagination  and  will.  The  works  of 
the  former  appear  to  us  real ;  those  of  the  latter  like  shadows  "  {Morb. 
Jnvisib.,  iii.). 

no  PARACELSUS 

planted  into  the  proper  soil  it  will  rot.  If  spenna  does 
not  come  into  the  proper  matrix  it  will  not  produce  any- 
thing good,  but  something  useless.  Therefore  the  Incubi 
and  Succubi  grown  out  of  corrupted  seed,  without  the 
natural  order  of  things,  are  evil  and  useless ;  and  Thomas 
of  Aquinas  has  made  an  error  by  mistaking  such  a  use- 
less thing  for  a  complete  one." 

"  This  sperma,  coming  from  the  imagination,  is  born 
in  Amor  Hereos.  This  means  a  kind  of  love  in  which 
a  man  may  imagine  a  woman,  or  a  woman  a  man,  to 
perform  the  connubial  act  with  the  image  created  in  the 
sphere  of  the  mind.  From  this  act  results  the  expulsion 
of  an  ethereal  fluid,  impotent  to  generate  a  child,  but 
capable  of  bringing  Larvae  into  existence.  Such  an 
imagination  is  the  mother  of  a  luxurious  unchastity, 
which,  if  continued,  renders  man  impotent  and  woman 
sterile,  because  much  of  the  true  creative  and  forma- 
tive power  is  lost  by  the  frequent  exercise  of  such 
a  morbid  imagination.  This  is  frequently  the  cause 
of  moles,  abortions,  miscarriages,  and  malformations. 
Such  corrupted  sperma  may  be  taken  away  by  spirits 
that  wander  about  at  night,  and  who  will  carry  it  to  a 
place  where  they  may  hatch  it  out.  There  are  spirits 
that  will  perform  an  '  act '  with  it,  as  may  also  be  done 
by  witches,  and,  in  consequence  of  that  act,  many  curious 
monsters  of  horrible  shapes  come  into  existence"  (De 
Orig.  Morb.  Invis.). 

"  If  such  monsters  are  born  from  a  powerful,  conscious 
imagination,  consciousness  will  also  be  created  in  them. 
The  spirits  of  night  can  use  all  that  is  born  from  such 
sperma  according  to  their  pleasure,  but  they  can  use 
nothing  of  a  human  character  or  possessing  true  spirit." 
"  Amor  hereos  is  a  state  of  the  invisible  body,  and  is 
caused  by  an  overheated  imagination,  stimulated  to  such 
an  extent  as  to  eject  sperma,  out  of  which  Incubi  and 
Succubi  grow.  In  ordinary  pollutionibus  nocturnalis,  the 
body  loses  sperma  without  any  effort  of  the  imagination, 

PNEUMA  TO  LOGY  1 1 1 

and  the  spirits  of  night  can  therefore  not  use  it  for  their 
purposes." 

"If  women  have  passed  beyond  the  age  of  fertility 
and  are  unchaste  and  of  a  vivid  imagination,  they  often 
call  such  things  into  existence.  If  persons  of  either 
sex  have  lewd  desires  and  an  active  imagination,  or  if 
they  are  passionately  in  love  with  another  person  of  the 
opposite  sex,  and  unable  to  obtain  the  object  of  their 
desire  and  fancy,  then  an  Incubus  or  Succubus  may  take 
the  place  of  the  absent  object,  and  in  this  way  sorcerers 
call  Succubi,  and  witches  Incubi,  into  existence."  *  "  To 
prevent  such  unfortunate  occurrences,  it  is  necessary 
to  be  chaste,  honest,  and  pure,  in  thought  and  desire, 
and  whoever  is  unable  to  remain  so  should  not  remain 
single.2  Imagination  is  a  great  power,  and  if  the  world 
knew  what  strange  things  can  be  produced  by  the  power 
of  the  imagination,  the  public  authorities  would  cause  all 
idle  persons  to  go  to  work  and  to  employ  their  time  in 
some  useful  manner,  and  they  would  take  care  of  those 
who  are  unable  to  control  their  own  imagination,  in  order 
that  such  evil  results  should  be  avoided  "  (Morb.  Invis,  iv.). 

1  Mediaeval  occult  literature  and  that  of  Modern  Spiritualism  contain 
many  examples  of  Incubi  and  Succubi,  some  having  appeared  visibly  and 
tangibly  ;  others,  though  unseen,  were  touched  and  felt.  Such  cases  are 
at  the  present  day  much  more  numerous  than  is  commonly  believed,  but 
they  can  only  "materialise"  if  the  necessary  conditions  are  given.  They 
are  therefore  only  felt  during  a  state  of  sickness,  and  after  the  recovery  of 
the  patient  they  disappear,  because  they  cannot  draw  the  elements  neces- 
sary for  materialisation  out  of  a  healthy  constitution.  Such  Incubi  and 
Succubi  are  the  products  of  a  physically  and  morally  diseased  state.  The 
morbid  imagination  creates  an  image,  the  will  of  the  person  objectifies  it, 
and  the  nerve  aura  can  render  it  substantial  to  sight  and  touch.  More- 
over, having  once  been  created,  they  attract  to  themselves  corresponding 
influences  from  the  astral  soul  of  the  world. 

2  Animal  instincts  cannot  be  suppressed,  and  the  "  flesh"  cannot  be 
"mortified,"  except  by  awakening  a  higher  psychical  activity  in  the  place 
of  the  lower  ones,  or  by  an  exaltation  of  the  spiritual  nature  over  the 
animal  principle  in  man.  Abstinence  in  acts  is  useless  for  spiritual 
development,  unless  it  is  followed  by  abstinence  in  thought.  Enforced 
celibacy  does  not  make  a  priest ;  a  true  priest  is  a  saint,  and  saints  are 
persons  who  have  outgrown  their  carnal  desires. 

H2  PARACELSUS 

"  The  so-called  '  Dragon  '  is  an  invisible  being,  which 
may  become  visible  and  appear  in  a  human  form  and 
cohabit  with  witches.  This  is  accomplished  by  means 
of  the  sperma  which  is  lost  by  masturbators,  fornicators, 
and  prostitutes  in  acte  venereo,1  arid  which  such  spirits 
use  as  a  corpus  to  obtain  for  themselves  a  human  form, 
because  the  whole  of  the  human  form  is  typified  in  the 
sperma,  and  if  such  spirits  use  the  sperma  of  a  certain 
person,  it  is  as  if  one  man  puts  on  the  coat  of  another 
man ;  and  then  they  have  the  form  of  that  person 
and  resemble  him  in  all  his  parts  and  details " 2  (De 
Fertilitate,  Tract,  ii.). 

"  Another  such  hideous  monster  is  the  Basilisc,  created 
by  Sodomy,  and  also  the  Aspis  and  Leo.  There  are 
innumerable  bastard  forms,  half  man,  half  spiders  or 
toads,  &c,  inhabiting  the  astral  plane,  belonging  to  the 
'  serpent  which  is  to  have  his  head  crushed  by  the  heel 
of  Christ'"3  (Fragm.). 

"  If  such  forms  are  sufficiently  dense  to  become  visible, 
they  appear  like  a  coloured  shadow  or  mist,  or  black 
shadows.  They  have  no  life  of  their  own,  but  they 
borrow  it  from  the  person  who  called  them  into  exist- 
ence, just  as  a  shadow  is  cast  by  a  body ;  and  where 
there  is  no  body,  there  can  be  no  shadow.  They  are 
often  generated  by  idiots,  immoral,  depraved,  or  diseased 
persons,  who  lead  irregular  and  solitary  lives,  and  who  are 
addicted  to  bad  habits.  The  coherence  of  the  particles 
composing  the  bodies  of  such  beings  is  not  very  strong, 
and  they  are  afraid  of  draughts  of  air,  light,  fire,  sticks, 
and  weapons.      They  are  a  sort  of  airy  appendix  to  the 

1  This  is  the  kind  of  "  spirit "  created  by  the  followers  of  P.  B.  Randolph, 
according  to  the  instructions  given  in  his  book  called  "Eulis." 

2  They  cannot,  however,  become  visible,  unless  they  can  draw  some  of 
the  astral  essence  from  the  person  or  persons  in  whose  presence  they  desire 
to  appear ;  in  other  words,  persons  must  be  mediumistic  to  produce  such 
manifestations  of  form. 

3  John  Schemer  says  :  "  If  you  could  see  the  horrible  monsters  by 
which  you  are  surrounded  you  would  be  sick  from  disgust." 

PNE  UMA  TOL  OCY  113 

body  of  their  creator,  and  there  is  sometimes  such  an 
intimate  connection  between  them  and  the  body  of  their 
progenitors,  that  if  an  injury  is  inflicted  upon  the  former, 
it  will  be  transmitted  to  the  latter.  They  are  parasites 
drawing  vitality  out  of  the  persons  to  whom  they  are 
attracted,  and  they  exhaust  their  vitality  very  soon,  if 
such  persons  are  not  very  strong."  x 

"  Some  such  beings  influence  men  according  to  their 
qualities ;  they  watch  them,  increase  and  deepen  their 
faults,  find  excuses  for  their  mistakes,  cause  them  to 
wish  for  the  success  of  evil  actions,  and  gradually  absorb 
their  vitality.  They  fortify  and  support  the  imagination 
in  the  operations  of  sorcery ;  they  sometimes  utter  false 
prophecies  and  give  out  misleading  oracles.  If  a  man 
has  a  strong  and  evil  imagination,  and  wishes  to  injure 
another,  such  beings  are  always  ready  to  lend  a  helping 
hand  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose."  Such 
beings  render  their  victims  insane,  if  the  latter  are  too 
weak  to  resist  their  influence.  "A  healthy  and  pure 
person  cannot  become  obsessed  by  them,  because  such 
Larvas  can  only  act  upon  men  if  they  make  room  for 
them  in  their  minds.  A  healthy  mind  is  a  castle  that 
cannot  be  invaded  without  the  will  of  its  master ;  but 
if  lusts  are  allowed  to  enter,  they  excite  the  passions 
of  men  and  women,  they  create  cravings  in  them,  they 
produce  bad  thoughts  which  act  injuriously  upon  the 
brain ;  they  sharpen  the  animal  intellect  and  suffocate 
the  moral  sense.  Evil  spirits  obsess  only  those  human 
beings  in  whom  the  animal  nature  is  preponderating. 
Minds  that  are  illumined  by  the  spirit  of  truth  cannot 

1  Paracelsus  gives  here  a  very  good- description  of  some  of  the  modern 
spirit-materialisation.  The  "  airy  appendix  "  (astral  form)  usually  comes 
out  of  the  left  side  of  the  medium,  in  the  region  of  the  spleen.  Mediums 
need  not  necessarily  be  depraved  persons,  but  there  must  be  some  fault  in 
their  organisation,  else  the  combination  of  their  principles  would  be  too 
strong  to  part  with  some  of  their  astral  substance.  Materialising  mediums 
may  be  very  good  people,  but  solitary  lives  and  vicious  habits  lead  to  the 
development  of  such  mediumship,  which  proves  to  be  very  injurious  in 
the  end. 

H 

U4  PARACELSUS 

be  possessed ;  only  those  who  are  habitually  guided  by 
their  own  lower  impulses  will  become  subjected  to  their 
influence.  Exorcisms  and  ceremonies  are  useless  in 
such  cases.  Praying1  and  abstinence  from  all  thoughts 
that  stimulate  the  imagination  or  excite  the  brain  are 
the  ouly  true  remedies  "  (De  JEnte  Spirituali).  "  The  cure 
of  obsession  is  a  purely  psychical  and  moral  act.  The 
obsessed  person  should  use  true  prayer  and  abstinence, 
and  after  that  a  strong-willed  person  should  will  such 
spirits  to  depart "  (Philosophia  Occulta).2 

The  reason  why  we  cannot  see  such  astral  entities 
is  because  they  are  transparent  as  air.  We  cannot 
see  the  air  unless  we  produce  a  smoke  in  it,  and  even 
in  that  case  we  do  not  see  the  air  itself,  but  the  smoke 
that  is  carried  by  the  air.  But  we  can  feel  the  air 
when  it  moves,  and  we  may  also  occasionally  feel  the 
presence  of  such  entities,  if  they  are  dense  enough  to 
be  felt.  Moreover,  the  purpose  of  our  senses  is  to 
perceive  the  objects  that  exist  on  the  plane  for  which 
those  senses  are  adapted,  and  therefore  the  physical 
senses  exist  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  physical  things, 
and  the  senses  of  the  inner  man  are  made  to  see  the 
things  of  the  soul.  When  the  outer  senses  are  in- 
active, the  inner  senses  awaken  to  life,  and  we  may  see 
the  objects  on  the  astral  plane  as  we  see  things  in  a 
dream.  There  are  also  some  poisons  by  which  the 
organic    activity  of   the  body  can   be  suppressed  for  a 

1  By  "  praying  "  is  meant  the  exercise  of  the  spiritual  will. 

"  Oh,  you  stupid  and  foolish  priest,  who  know  absolutely  nothing  ;  be- 
cause you  imagine  to  be  able  to  drive  away  evil  spirits  with  sweet-smell- 
ing incense,  such  as  is  enjoyed  by  good  and  evil  spirits  alike.  If  instead 
of  your  incense  you  were  to  take  asafcetida,  then  might  you  succeed  in 
driving  away  the  evil  spirits  and  the  good  ones  besides  "  (Philos.  Occulta). 

2  It  often  happens  that  bodily  diseases  are  the  cause  of  morbid  desires. 
A  disease  of  the  skin  (pruritus  vaginae  or  scroti)  causes  erotic  desires ;  a 
displacement  of  the  womb,  an  erosion,  ulcer,  or  inflammation  of  the  os 
uteri,  cause  mental  depression  and  hysteria ;  piles  cause  melancholy,  &c, 
&c,  ;  but  all  such  causels  are,  in  their  turn,  the  effects  of  previous  causes 
having  a  psychical  origin,  and  they  establish  the  conditions  by  which 
elementary  influences  act. 

PNE  UMA  TO  LOG  Y  115 

time,  and  the  consciousness  of  the  inner  man  be  rendered 
more  active,  and  which  will  therefore  enable  us  to  see 
the  things  on  the  astral  plane.  But  such  poisons  are 
destructive  of  reason  and  very  injurious  to  the  health. 
In  fevers,  deliriums,  &c,  such  things  may  also  be  seen. 
Some  of  them  are  the  creations  of  the  mind  of  the 
patient ;  others  may  have  been  created  by  the  morbid 
imagination  of  another  person,  as  described  above.1 

But  if  such  entities  are  invisible  under  normal  con- 
ditions to  a  human  being,  they  will  be  well  enough 
perceived  by  a  human  Elementary  consciously  existing 
on  their  plane,  and,  what  is  still  more,  depraved  human 
characters  after  death  take  themselves  the  forms  of 
animals  and  monsters,  whom  they  were  brought  to 
resemble  by  their  own  evil  thoughts.  Form  is  nothing 
but  an  appearance  representing  a  character,  and  the 
character  shapes  the  form.  If  the  character  of  a  person 
is  thoroughly  evil,  it  will  cause  the  astral  form  to  assume 
a  hideous  form.  Therefore  the  souls  of  the  depraved 
appear  in  animal  shapes.2 

Pure  spirit  has  no  form :  it  is  formless,  like  the 
sunshine.  But  as  the  sunshine  causes  the  elements 
of    matter    to    grow   into    plants,    soul  -  substances    are 

1  Experiments  that  have  been  made  in  London,  with  the  inhalation  of 
various  ethers,  chloroform,  nitrous  oxide  gas,  and  hydrocarbonates,  have 
had  the  effect  of  producing  such  "  hallucinations."  Before  these  gases 
were  known,  fumigations  of  poisonous  substances  were  used  for  such 
purposes.  The  receipts  for  the  materials  used  for  such  fumigations  were 
kept  very  secret,  on  account  of  the  abuse  that  might  have  been  made 
of  such  a  knowledge,  and  in  consequence  of  which  a  person  may  be 
even  made  insane.  One  of  the  most  effective  fumigations  for  the  purpose 
of  causing  apparitions  were,  according  to  Eckartshausen,  made  of  the 
following  substances  : — Hemlock,  Henbane,  Saffron,  Aloe,  Opium,  Man- 
drake, Solanum,  Poppy-seed,  Asafoetida,  and  Parsley.  The  fumigations 
to  drive  away  evil  spirits  were  made  of  Sulphur,  Asafoetida,  Castoreum, 
and  more  especially  of  Hypericum  and  Vinegar.  Carbolic  Acid  was  not 
known  at  that  time. 

2  This  is  confirmed  by  Swedenborg  in  his  description  of  "  Hell,"  and 
also  by  Jacob  Boehme.  The  animal  soul  of  the  departed  takes  the 
form  and  shape  of  that  animal  whose  character  predominated  in  his 
constitution. 

n6  PARACELSUS 

formed  into  beings  having  shapes,  through  the  action 
of  the  spiritual  rays.  There  are  good  spirits  and 
spirits  of  evil ;  planetary  spirits  and  angels.  There 
are  the  spirits  of  the  four  elements,  and  there  are  many 
thousand  different  kinds.1 

"  Each  child  receives  at  the  time  of  its  birth  a  familiar 
spirit  or  genius,  and  such  spirits  sometimes  instruct 
their  pupils  even  while  the  latter  are  in  their  earliest 
youth.  They  often  teach  them  to  do  very  extraordinary 
things.  There  is  an  incalculable  number  of  such  genii 
in  the  universe,  and  we  may  learn  through  them  all 
the  mysteries  of  the  Chaos  in  consequence  of  their  con- 
nection with  the  Mysterium  magnum.  Such  familiar 
spirits  are  called  Flagce."  2 

"  There  are  several  kinds  of  Flagse,  and  there  are  two 
ways  by  which  we  may  obtain  knowledge  through  them. 
One  way  is  by  their  becoming  visible  and  able  to  talk 

1  There  is  a  never-ending  chain  of  births  and  transformations  taking 
place  in  the  world  of  causes  (spirits),  as  in  the  world  of  effects  (forms). 
The  lives  of  some  such  entities  extend  over  enormous  periods  of  time ; 
others  have  only  a  short  individual  existence.  According  to  the  Erah- 
minical  teachings  there  are  seven  main  classes  of  spirits,  some  of  them 
having  innumerable  subdivisions: — I.  Arupa  Devas  (formless  spirits), 
planetary  spirits — the  intelligent  sixth  principle  of  the  planet  whose 
product  they  are.  2.  Rupa  Devas  (having  forms).  High  planetary 
spirits.  Dhyan-Chohans.  3.  Pisachas  and  Mohinis — male  and  female 
Elementaries  consisting  of  the  astral  forms  of  the  dead,  that  may  be 
obsessed  by  Elementals,  and  cause  Incubi  and  Succubi.  4.  Mara  rupas  : 
forms  of  desire  or  passion.  Souls  doomed  to  destruction.  5.  Asuras : 
Elementals  (Gnomes,  Sylphs,  Undines,  Salamanders,  &c).  They  will 
develop  into  human  beings  in  the  next  Manvantara  (cycle  of  evolution). 
6.  Beasts.  Elementals  having  animal  forms,  monstrosities.  7.  Rakshasas 
or  demons,  Souls  of  sorcerers  and  of  men  with  great  intelligence,  but 
with  evil  tendencies.  Criminals  for  the  advancement  of  science,  dog- 
matists, sophists,  vivisectionists,  &c.,  furnish  material  for  the  develop- 
ment of  such  "devils."  The  Asuras  are  often  called  Devas,  and  are 
worshipped  in  many  places  of  India.  They  are  the  guardian  spirits  of 
certain  places,  gardens,  houses,  &c,  and  have  temples  of  their  own. 
There  are  many  thousand  varieties.     (Sec  "  Isis  Unveiled.") 

2  They  are  evidently  a  different  class  of  "  familiar  spirits "  than  the 
"invisible  guides"  mentioned  above.  The  spirit  which  each  child  re- 
ceives at  its  birth,  and  who  attends  to  the  person  during  his  terrestrial 
life,  is  his  own  spiritual  self,  the  "  Karana  sharira." 

PNE  UMA  TO  LOG  Y  117 

with  us ;  the  other  way  is  by  their  exercising  an  in- 
visible influence  upon  our  intuition.  The  art  of  Nectro- 
mancy  1  enables  man  to  perceive  interior  things,  and 
there  is  no  mystery  concerning  any  human  being  that 
may  not  be  found  out  by  that  art,  and  the  Flagse  can 
be  made  to  reveal  it  either  by  persuasion  or  by  the 
strength  of  one's  will,  for  the  Flagse  obey  the  will  of  man 
for  the  same  reason  that  a  soldier  obeys  the  will  of  the 
commander,  or  an  inferior  obeys  that  of  his  superior, 
although  the  latter  may  be  physically  stronger  than  the 
former.  The  Flagse  can  be  made  to  appear  visibly  in  a 
mirror  of  Beryl,  in  a  piece  of  coal  or  a  crystal,  &c.  ;  and 
not  only  the  Flagse  themselves,  but  the  persons  to  whom 
they  belong,  may  be  seen,  and  all  their  secrets  be  known. 
And  if  it  is  not  practicable  to  cause  them  to  become 
visible,  such  secrets  can  be  found  out  by  a  communica- 
tion of  thought,  or  by  signs,  allegorical  visions,  &c.  By 
the  assistance  of  these  Flagse  hidden  treasures  may  be 
found  and  closed  letters  be  read,  and  everything  secret 
be  seen,  no  matter  how  much  it  is  hidden  from  outward 
sight,  for  the  opening  of  the  interior  sight  removes  the 
veil  of  matter.  Things  that  have  been  buried  will  thus 
be  found,  stolen  goods  recovered,  &c.2  The  Flagse  reveal 
their  secrets  to  us  in  our  dreams,  the  good  as  well  as 
the  evil.  He  who  obtains  knowledge  from  the  spirit 
obtains  it  from  his  father ;  he  who  knows  the  Ele- 
mental knows  himself ;  he  who  understands  the  nature 
of  the  elements  understands  how  the  Microcosm  is  con- 
structed. The  Flagse  are  the  spirits  that  instructed 
mankind  in  arts  and  sciences  in  ancient  times,  and 
without  them  there  would  be  no  science  or  philosophy  in 
the  world."  3 

1  Nectromancy  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  Necromancy. 

2  The  Count  Saint  Germain  could  read  sealed  letters,  and  the  same  was 
repeatedly  done  by  H.  P.  Blavatsky  in  the  presence  of  the  author. 

3  The  whole  of  the  universe  is  an  expression  of  consciousness,  and  there 
are,  therefore,  innumerable  states  of  conscious  and  intelligent  will  in  the 
world  ;   some  in  visible  and  others  in  invisible  form  ;  some  shapeless,  like 

u8  PARACELSUS 

"In  the  practice  of  divination  by  sortilegium,  &c,  the 
Flaga3  guide  the  liand.  Such  arts  are  neither  from  God 
nor  from  the  devil,  but  they  are  from  the  Flagse.  The 
ceremonies  that  are  customarily  used  on  such  occasions 
are  mere  superstition,  and  have  been  invented  to  give  to 
such  occasions  an  air  of  solemnity.  Those  who  do  prac- 
tise that  art  are  often  themselves  ignorant  of  the  laws 
that  control  it,  and  they  perhaps  attribute  the  results 
obtained  to  the  ceremonies,  and  mistake  tomfooleries  for 
the  essential  thing." 1 

In  regard  to  the  reliance  to  be  put  on  the  revela- 
tions of  invisible  beings,  Paracelsus  says :  "  Evil  spirits 
love  to  lead  men  into  error,  and  therefore  their  pro- 
phecies are  usually  unreliable  and  their  predictions 
based  upon  trickery.  God  made  spirits  mute,  so  that 
they  may  not  tell  everything  so  plainly  to  man  that 
man  does  not  need  to  use  his  reason  to  avoid  making 
mistakes.  The  spirits  should  not  instruct  man ;  but 
they  do  not  always  obey  that  command.  Therefore  they 
are  often  silent  when  their  speech  is  mostly  needed,  and 
they  frequently  speak  false  when  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  know  the  truth."  This  is  the  cause  that 
so  many  things  that  have  been  told  by  spirits  have  been 
proved  lies  and  illusions,  and  some  spirits  lie  a  great  deal 
more  than  others.  But  it  may  happen  that  perhaps  out 
of  a  dozen  predictions  made  by  such  spirits  one  accident- 
ally comes  out  true,  and  ignorant  people  will  in  such 
cases  pay  no  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  other  eleven 
predictions  were  false,  but  they  will  be  ready  to  believe 

currents  of  air  ;  others  undefined,  like  mists  or  clouds ;  others  solid,  as 
rocks  ;  some  impermanent ;  others  permanent,  like  the  stars. 

1  The  rationale  on  which  divination,  geomancy,  the  practice  of  the 
divining-rod,  &c,  is  based,  is  that  by  means  of  such  practices  a  knowledge 
in  regard  to  certain  things,  such  as  already  exists  in  the  spirit  of  man, 
may  come  to  the  understanding  of  the  intellect  of  his  own  personality. 
The  inner  man  cannot,  under  all  circumstances,  communicate  his  know- 
ledge to  the  external  man,  because  the  consciousness  of  the  two  is  not 
identical ;  but  the  spirit  may  influence  the  nerve  aura  of  the  person  and 
control  the  muscles  of  his  body,  and  thus  guide  his  hands. 

PNEUMA  TOLOG  Y  tl$ 

everything  that  such  spirits  say.  Such  spirits  often 
teach  those  persons  who  deal  with  them  to  perform  cer- 
tain ceremonies,  to  speak  certain  words  and  names  in 
which  there  is  no  meaning,  and  they  do  all  such  things 
for  their  own  amusement,  and  to  have  some  sport  at  the 
expense  of  credulous  persons.  They  are  seldom  what 
they  pretend  to  be;  they  accept  names,  and  one  will  use 
the  name  of  another,  or  they  will  assume  the  mask  and  the 
ways  of  acting  of  another.  If  a  person  has  such  a  spirit, 
belonging  to  a  better  class,  he  may  make  a  good  fortune- 
teller ;  but  one  who  has  a  lying  spirit  will  hear  nothing 
bat  lies ;  and,  on  the  whole,  all  these  spirits  surpass  each 
other  in  deception  and  lies"  (Philosojphia  Sagax).1 

"  Man  is  an  instrument  through  which  all  the  three 
worlds — the  spiritual,  the  astral,  and  the  elementary 
world — are  acting.  In  him  are  beings  from  all  these 
worlds,  reasonable  and  unreasonable,  intelligent  and  unin- 
telligent creatures.  A  person  without  any  self-knowledge 
and  self-control  is  made  to  act  according  to  the  will  of  these 
creatures;  but  the  true  philosopher  acts  according  to  the 
will  of  the  Supreme,  the  Creator,  in  him.  If  the  masters 
whom  man  obeys  are  foolish,  their  servants  will  also  act 
foolishly.  It  is  true  that  every  one  thinks  that  he  is  the 
master,  and  that  he  does  what  he  pleases ;  but  he  does 
not  see  the  fool  within  him,  who  is  his  master,  and  by 
whom  he  becomes  a  fool  himself "  (De  Meteoris  "). 

There  is  another  class  of  spirits,  the  Sagange  or  Ele- 
mental Spirits  of  Nature.  Paracelsus  says  about  their 
bodies :  "  There  are  two  kinds  of  flesh — one  that  comes 
from  Adam  and  another  that  does  not  come  from  Adam. 
The  former  is  gross  material,  visible  and  tangible  for  us  ; 
the  other  one  is  not  tangible  and  not  made  from  earth. 
If  a  man  who  is  a  descendant  from  Adam  wants  to  pass 

1  Those  who  have  some  experience  in  modern  spiritualism  will  recog- 
nise the  truth  of  this  description.  Spiritualists  should  not  act  upon 
the  advices  of  spirits,  if  such  advices  are  against  their  own  reason,  and 
scientists  should  not  rely  on  the  opinions  of  others,  if  such  opinions  are 
acrainst  common  sense. 

120  PARACELSUS 

through  a  wall,  he  will  have  first  to  make  a  hole  through 
it ;  but  a  being  who  is  not  descended  from  Adam  needs 
no  hole  or  door,  but  may  pass  through  matter  that  ap- 
pears solid  to  us,  without  causing  any  damage  to  it. 
The  beings  not  descended  from  Adam,  as  well  as  those 
descended  from  him,  are  organised  and  have  sub- 
stantial bodies  ;  but  there  is  as  much  difference  between 
the  substance  composing  their  bodies  as  there  is  be- 
tween Matter  and  Spirit.  Yet  the  Elementals  are 
not  spirits,  because  they  have  flesh,  blood,  and  bones; 
they  live  and  propagate  offspring;  they  eat  and  talk,  act 
and  sleep,  &c,  and  consequently  they  cannot  be  properly 
called  "  spirits."  They  are  beings  occupying  a  place 
between  men  and  spirits,  resembling  men  and  women  in 
their  organisation  and  form,  and  resembling  spirits  in 
the  rapidity  of  their  locomotion.  They  are  intermediary 
compound  beings,  formed  out  of  two  parts  joined  into 
one ;  just  as  two  colours  mixed  together  will  appear  as 
one  colour,  resembling  neither  one  nor  the  other  of  the 
two  original  ones.  The  Elementals  have  no  higher  prin- 
ciples ;  they  are  therefore  not  immortal,  and  when  they 
die  they  perish  like  animals.  Neither  water  nor  fire 
can  injure  them,  and  they  cannot  be  locked  up  in  our 
material  prisons.  They  are,  however,  subject  to  diseases. 
Their  costumes,  actions,  forms,  ways  of  speaking,  &c,  are 
not  very  unlike  those  of  human  beings  ;  but  there  are  a 
great  many  varieties.  They  have  only  animal  intel- 
lects, and  are  incapable  of  spiritual  development "  {Lib. 
Philos.,  ii.). 

"  These  spirits  of  Nature  are  not  animals ;  they  have 
a  reason  and  language  like  man;  they  have  minds,  but 
noM  spiritual  soul.  This  may  appear  strange  and  in- 
credible ;  but  the  possibilities  of  nature  are  not  limited 
by  man's  knowledge  of  them,  and  the  wisdom  of  God  is 
unfathomable.  They  have  children,  and  these  children 
are  like  themselves.  Man  is  made  after  the  image  of 
God,  and  they  may  be  said   to  be  made  after  the  image 

PNE  UMA  TO  LOG  Y  121 

of  man ;  but  man  is  not  God,  and  the  elemental  spirits 
of  Nature  are  not  human  beings,  although  they  somewhat 
resemble  man.  They  are  liable  to  sickness,  and  they  die 
like  animals.  Their  habits  resemble  those  of  men  ;  they 
work  and  sleep ;  they  eat  and  drink  and  make  their 
clothing ;  and  as  man  is  nearest  to  God,  so  are  they 
nearest  to  man  "  x  {Lib.  Philos.,  i.). 

"  They  live  in  the  four  elements :  the  Nymphge  in  the 
element  of  water,  the  Sylphs  in  that  of  the  air,  the 
Pigmies  in  the  earth,  and  the  Salamanders  in  the  fire. 
They  are  also  called  Undinge,  Sylvestres,  Gnomi,  Vuleani, 
&c.  Each  species  moves  only  in  the  element  to  which  it 
belongs,  and  neither  of  them  can  go  out  of  its  appropriate 
element,  which  is  to  them  as  the  air  is  to  us,  or  the 
water  to  fishes ;  and  none  of  them  can  live  in  the  element 
belonging  to  another  class.  To  each  elemental  being  the 
element  in  which  it  lives  is  transparent,  invisible,  and 
respirable,  as  the  atmosphere  is  to  ourselves." 

"  The  four  classes  of  Nature- spirits  do  not  mix  with 
each  other ;  the  Gnomes  have  no  intercourse  with  the 
Undines  or  Salamanders,  nor  the  Sylvestres  with  either 
of  these.  As  a  fish  lives  in  the  water,  it  being  its 
element,  so  each  being  lives  in  its  own  element.  For 
instance,  the  element  wherein  man  breathes  and  lives  is 
the  air ;  but  to  the  Undines  the  water  is  what  the  air  is 
to  us,  and  if  we  are  surprised  that  they  are  in  the  water, 
they  may  also  be  surprised  because  we  are  in  the  air. 
Thus  the  element  of  the  Gnomes  is  the  earth,  and  they 
pass  through  rocks  and  walls  and  stones  like  a  thought ; 
for  such  things  are  to  them  no  greater  obstacles  than  the 
air  is  to  us.  In  the  same  sense  the  fire  is  the  air  wherein 
the  Salamanders  live ;  but  the  Sylvestres  are  the  nearest 
related   to  us,  for  they  live   in   the   air   like  ourselves ; 

1  Man  in  his  aspect  as  a  terrestrial  being,  and  if  we  leave  the  divine 
principle  out  of  our  consideration,  is  himself  an  elemental  spirit  of  Nature, 
composed  of  all  the  four  elements  ;  but  as  he  lives  and  breathes  in  the  air, 
he  may  be  called  an  elemental  of  the  air  walking  upon  the  earth. 

122  PARACELSUS 

they  would  be  drowned  if  they  were  under  water,  and 
they  would  suffocate  in  the  earth  and  be  burned  in  the 
fire;  for  each  being  belongs  to  its  own  Chaos  and  dies  if 
transported  into  another.  If  that  Chaos  is  gross,  the 
beings  living  in  it  are  subtle  ;  and  if  the  Chaos  is  subtle, 
the  beings  are  gross.  Therefore  we  have  gross  bodies, 
so  that  we  can  pass  through  the  air  without  being  blown 
down,  and  the  Gnomes  have  subtle  forms,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  pass  through  the  rocks.  Men  have  their  leaders  and 
authorities ;  bees  and  ants  their  queens ;  geese  and  other 
animals' have  their  leaders;  and  so  also  have  the  spirits 
of  Nature  their  kings  and  queens.  The  animals  receive 
their  clothing  from  Nature  ;  but  the  spirits  of  Nature 
prepare  it  themselves.  The  omnipotence  of  God  is  not 
limited  to  His  taking  care  only  of  man,  but  is  abun- 
dantly able  to  take  care  also  of  the  spirits  of  Nature, 
and  of  many  other  things  of  which  men  know  nothing. 
They  see  the  sun  and  the  sky  the  same  as  we,  because 
each  element  is  transparent  to  those  who  live  therein. 
Thus  the  sun  shines  through  the  rocks  for  the  Gnomes, 
and  the  water  does  not  hinder  the  Undines  to  see  the  sun 
and  the  stars ;  they  have  their  summers  and  winters,  and 
their  '  earth '  bears  them  fruits ;  for  each  being  lives  on 
that  element  whereof  it  has  grown"  (Lib.  Philos.,  ii.). 

"  As  far  as  the  personalities  of  the  Elementals  are 
concerned,  it  may  be  said  that  those  belonging  to  the 
element  of  water  resemble  human  beings  of  either  sex ; 
those  of  the  air  are  greater  and  stronger ;  the  Sala- 
manders are  long,  lean,  and  dry;  the  Pigmies  are  of  the 
length  of  about  two  spans,  but  they  can  extend  or  elon- 
gate their  forms  until  they  appear  like  giants.  The 
Elementals  of  air  and  water,  the  Sylphs  and  Nymphs, 
are  kindly  disposed  towards  man ;  the  Salamanders  can- 
not associate  with  him  on  account  of  the  fiery  nature 
of  the  element  wherein  they  live,  and  the  Pigmies  are 
usually  of  a  malicious  nature.  The  Pigmies  are  build- 
ing houses,  vaults,  and  strange-looking  edifices  of  some 

PNEUMA  TO  LOG  Y  1 23 

certain  semi-material  substances  unknown  to  us.  They 
have  some  kind  of  alabaster,  marble,  cement,  &c. ;  but 
these  substances  are  as  different  from  ours  as  the  web 
of  a  spider  is  different  from  our  linen.  Nymphs  have 
their  resideuces  and  palaces  in  the  element  of  water; 
Sylphs  and  Salamanders  have  no  fixed  dwellings.  On 
the  whole,  the  Elementals  have  an  aversion  against  self- 
conceited  and  opinionated  persons,  such  as  dogmatists, 
inquisitive  sceptics,  drunkards,  and  gluttons,  and  against 
vulgar  and  quarrelsome  people  of  all  kinds  ;  but  they  love 
natural  men,  who  are  simple-minded  and  child-like,  inno- 
cent and  sincere,  and  the  less  there  is  vanity  and  hypoc- 
risy in  a  man,  the  easier  will  it  be  for  him  to  approach 
them  ;   but  otherwise  they  are  as  shy  as  wild  animals."  1 

"  Man  lives  in  the  exterior  elements,  and  the  Ele- 
mentals live  in  the  interior  elements.2  They  have  dwell- 
ings and  clothing,  manners  and  customs,  languages 
and  governments,  of  their  own,  in  the  same  sense  as 
the  bees  have  their  queens  and  herds  of  animals  their 
leader.  They  are  sometimes  seen  in  various  shapes. 
Salamanders  have  been  seen  in  the  shapes  of  fiery  balls, 
or  tongues  of  fire  running  over  the  fields  or  appearing 
in  houses.  Nymphs  have  been  known  to  adopt  the 
human  shape,  clothing,  and  manner,  and  to  enter  into 
a  union  with  man.  There  are  certain  localities  where 
large  numbers  of  Elementals  live  together,  and  it  has 
occurred  that  a  man  has  been  admitted  into  their  com- 
munities and  lived  with  them  for  a  while,  and  that  they 
have  become  visible  and  tangible  to  him."  8 

1  There  is  nothing  very  strange  in  the  belief  that  such  "  spirits  "  exist, 
if  we  only  keep  in  mind  that  the  best  part  of  ourselves  is  an  invisible 
spirit  of  unknown  dimensions,  occupying  and  overshadowing  a  limited 
material  form. 

2  The  "soul"  of  the  elements  ;  i.e.,  their  ethereal  aspects. 

8  It  is  not  credible  that  a  person  has  entered  with  his  physical  body 
into  the  Venus  mountain  or  Untersberg,  or  any  other  such  renowned 
places  of  which  popular  tradition  speaks.  Neither  have  the  witches 
and  sorcerers  of  the  Middle  Ages  been  at  the  witch-sabbath  in  their 
physical  budies,   and  it  seems  equally  improbable  that  a  person   should 

124  PARACELSUS 

"  The  angels  are  invisible  to  us ;  but  nevertheless  an 
angel  may  appear  to  our  spiritual  sight,  and  likewise 
man  is  invisible  to  the  spirits  of  nature,  and  what  the 
Undines  know  of  us  is  to  them  merely  what  fairy  tales 
are  to  us.  The  Undines  appear  to  man,  but  not  man 
to  them.  Man  is  gross  in  the  body  and  subtle  in  the 
Chaos ;  therefore  they  may  enter  his  Chaos  (the  physical 
plane),  and  appear  to  him  and  remain  with  him,  marry 
and  have  children  with  him.  Thus  an  Undine  may 
marry  a  man  and  keep  house  with  him,  and  her  children 
will  be  human  beings  and  not  Undines,  because  they 
receive  a  human  soul  from  the  man ;  and,  moreover,  the 
Undine  herself  thereby  receives  the  germ  of  immortality. 
Man  is  bound  to  God  by  means  of  his  spiritual  soul, 
and  if  an  Undine  becomes  united  to  man,  she  will 
thereby  become  bound  to  God.  As  an  Undine  without 
her  union  with  man  dies  like  an  animal,  likewise  man 
is  like  an  animal  if  he  severs  his  union  with  God." 

"  Therefore  the  Nymphs  are  anxious  to  become  united 
with  man;  they  seek  to  become  immortal  through  him. 
They  have  a  mind  and  intellect  like  man,  but  not  the 
immortal  soul,  such  as  we  have  obtained  through  the 
death  of  Christ.  But  the  spirits  of  the  earth,  the  air, 
and  fire  seldom  marry  a  human  being.  They  may, 
however,  become  attached  to  him  and  enter  his  service. 
It  must  not  be  supposed  that  they  are  airy  nothings 
or  merely  ghosts  or  appearances ;  they  are  of  flesh  and 
blood,  only  subtler  than  man  (i.e.,  of  the  substance  of 
mind)." 

"  The  Nymphs  sometimes  come  out  of  the  water  and 
may  be  seen  sitting  on  the  shore  near  their  dwelling, 

ever  have  entered  physically  the  abodes  of  disembodied  adepts.  But  the 
physical  body  of  a  man  is  not  the  man  ;  it  is  only  his  external  shadow, 
and  wherever  man's  consciousness  is,  there  will  he  be  present  himself. 
But  while  he  is  there,  he  does  not  miss  his  exterior  body,  of  which  he  has 
no  more  use  than  of  a  part  of  his  clothing  purposely  laid  away,  and  on 
reawakening  to  physical  consciousness  he  may  well  believe  that  he  had 
been  to  such  a  place  in  his  physical  form. 

PNEUMATOLOGY  125 

and  they  as  well  as  the  Gnomes  have  a  language  like 
man ;  but  the  spirits  of  the  woods  are  more  rough 
and  speak  nothing,  although  they  are  able  to  speak  and 
are  clever.  The  Nymphs  appear  in  human  form  and 
clothing ;  but  the  spirits  of  fire  are  of  a  fiery  shape. 
They  are  usually  not  to  be  found  in  the  company  of 
men ;  but  they  come  to  cohabit  with  old  women,  such 
as  are  witches,  and  they  are  sometimes  obsessed  by 
the  devil.  If  any  man  has  a  Nymph  for  a  wife,  let 
him  take  care  not  to  offend  her  while  she  is  near  the 
water,  as  in  such  a  case  she  might  return  to  her  own 
element ; 1  and  if  any  one  has  a  Gnome  for  a  servant, 
let  him  be  faithful  to  him,  for  each  has  to  be  dutiful 
to  the  other ;  if  you  do  your  duty  to  him,  he  will  do 
his  duty  to  you.  All  this  is  in  the  divine  order  of 
things  and  will  become  manifest  in  due  time ;  so  that 
we  will  then  be  able  to  see  that  which  seems  now  almost 
incredible  "  (Lib.  Philos.,  ii.). 

In  the  legends  of  the  saints  the  Elemental  spirits  of 
Nature  are  often  alluded  to  as  "  devils,"  a  name  which 
they  do  not  deserve,  because  there  are  good  as  well 
as  bad  Elementals ;  but,  although  some  may  be  very 
selfish,  they  have  not  developed  any  love  for  absolute 
evil,  because  they  have  only  mortal  souls,  but  no 
spiritual  essence  to  make  them  immortal.. 

Besides  the  astral  spirits  in  man  and  the  Elemental 
spirits  of  Nature,  there  are  many  other  spirits  born 
within  the  soul  (the  will  and  imagination  of  Nature) ; 
and  as  the  mind  of  man  may  create  monsters,  and  man 
paint  their  images  on  canvas,  or  sculpture  them  in 
stone  or  wood,  so  the  universal  power  of  Nature's  mind 
creates  monsters  in  the  astral  light,  and  they  will 
throw  their  shadows  forth  in  the  physical  world  of 
appearances,  by  becoming  objective  in  corporeal   bodies 

1  "If  any  one  marries  a  water-nymph,  and  she  deserts  him,  he  ought 
not  to  take  another  wife,  for  the  marriage  has  not  been  dissolved.  If  he 
marries  another  woman  he  will  shortly  die  "  (De  Nymph.). 

126  PARACELSUS 

upon  the  earth.  Some  of  them  are  short-lived,  and 
others  will  live  unto  the  day  of  the  dissolution  of  all 
things.  "  We  all  know  that  a  man  may  change  his 
character  in  the  course  of  his  life,  so  that  he  ultimately 
becomes  a  very  different  person  from  what  he  was 
before  ;  and  thus  every  creature  having  a  will  can  change 
and  become  supernatural  or  unnatural ;  i.e.,  different  from 
that  which  normally  belongs  to  its  nature.  Many  of  the 
head-lights  of  the  Church,  who  now  strut  about  with 
jewels  and  diamonds,  will  be  dragons  and  worms  when 
the  human  body  in  which  they  are  now  masquerading 
will  have  disappeared  at  the  time  of  their  death  "  (Lib. 
Philos.,  iv.). 

"  There  are  the  Sirens}  but  they  are  merely  a  kind 
of  monstrous  fishes  ;  but  there  are  also  two  more  kinds 
of  spirits,  related  to  the  Nymphs  and  Pigmies,  namely, 
the  Gigantes  (giants)  and  the  Dwarfs.  This  may  not 
be  believed;  but  it  ought  to  be  remembered  that  the 
beginning  of  true  knowledge  is  that  the  light  of  Nature 
illumines  man,  and  that  in  this  light  he  knows  all  things 
in  Nature  by  means  of  the  light  of  the  inner  man.  The 
Giants  and  Dwarfs  are  monsters,  being  related  to  the 
Sylvestres  and  Gnomes  in  the  same  sense  as  the  Sirens 
are  related  to  the  Undines.  They  have  no  (spiritual) 
souls,  and  are  rather  to  be  compared  to  monkeys  than 
to  human  beings.  Such  spirits  are  often  the  guardians 
of  hidden  treasures." 

"  Such  things  will  be  denied  and  ridiculed  by  the 
worldly  wise  ;  but  at  the  end  of  the  world,  when  all  things 
will  be  revealed,  then  will  also  come  forward  the  so- 
called  '  doctors '  and  '  professors,'  who  were  great  in  their 
ignorance ;  then  will  it  be  seen  who  were  those  that 
were  learned  in  the  foundation  of  Nature,  and  the  others 
learned  in  empty  talk.  Then  we  will  know  those  who 
have  written  according  to  truth  and  those  who  taught 
according  to  their  own  fancy ;   and  each  one  will  receive 

1  Jtalicore  Catacca  (Mermaid). 

PNE  UMA  TOLOG  Y  1 27 

what  he  deserves.  There  will  then  be  no  doctors  and 
no  magisters,  and  those  who  are  now  making  a  great 
deal  of  parade  and  noise  will  then  be  very  silent ;  but 
those  who  have  received  the  true  understanding  will 
be  happy.  Therefore  I  recommend  my  writings  to  be 
judged  at  that  time  when  all  things  will  become  mani- 
fest, and  when  each  one  will  see  the  light  as  it  was 
revealed  to  him." 

"  The  evil  spirits  are,  so  to  say,  the  bailiffs  and  execu- 
tioners of  God  (Karma).  They  have  been  called  into 
existence  by  the  influences  of  evil,  and  they  work  out 
their  destiny.  But  the  vulgar  have  a  too  high  estimate 
of  their  powers,  especially  of  the  power  of  the  devil. 
The  devil  has  not  enough  power  to  mend  a  broken  pot, 
much  less  to  enrich  a  man.  He — or  it — is  the  poorest 
thing  that  can  be  thought  of,  and  poorer  than  any  being 
that  can  be  found  in  the  four  elements.1  There  are  a 
great  many  inventions,  sciences,  and  arts  that  are  ascribed 
to  the  agency  of  the  (personal)  devil ;  but  before  the 
world  grows  much  older  it  will  be  found  that  the  devil 
has  nothing  to  do  with  such  things,  that  the  devil  is 
nothing  and  knows  nothing,  and  that  such  things  are 
the  results  of  natural  causes.  True  science  can  accom- 
plish a  great  deal ;  the  Eternal  Wisdom  of  the  existence 
of  all  things  is  without  a  time,  without  a  beginning,  and 
without  an  end.  Things  that  are  considered  now  to  be 
impossible  will  be  accomplished  ;  that  which  is  unex- 
pected will  in  future  prove  to  be  true,  and  that  which  is 
looked  upon  as  superstition  in  one  century  will  be  the 
basis  for  the  approved  science  of  the  next"  (Philosophia 
Occulta). 

1  The  "devil "  is  evil  spiritual  will.  The  devil  has  no  power  over  man ; 
but  if  man  allows  a  devil  within  himself  to  grow,  then  will  the  great  Devil 
aid  the  little  devil  to  grow  and  nourish  him  with  his  own  substance.  (See 
"  The  Doctrines  of  Jacob  Boehme.") 

VI.  MAGIC  AND  SORCERY 

In  proportion  as  an  art  or  science  is  lost  or  forgotten, 
the  very  name  by  which  it  was  called  becomes  misunder- 
stood, misapplied,  and  finally  forgotten.  In  proportion 
as  men  become  unspiritual  and  material,  they  will  grow 
incapable  of  comprehending  the  power  of  spirit.  There 
are  many  persons  even  to-day  who  deny  the  existence 
of  spirit,  or  of  anything  that  transcends  the  power  of 
perception  of  their  physical  senses.  One  example  of  the 
degradation  of  terms  is  the  meaning  which  is  at  present 
commonly  attributed  to  the  word  magic.  The  true  signi- 
ficance of  that  term  is  the  application  of  spiritual  know- 
ledge, or  Wisdom,  in  contradistinction  to  that  science 
which  sees  only  the  material  aspect  of  Nature.  But  the 
vulgar  have  come  to  believe  "  magic "  to  mean  only 
sleight-of-hand  performances,  or  perhaps  conjuring  or 
dealings  with  the  devil,  or  with  the  spirits  of  the  dead. 
True  magic  is  the  greatest  of  all  natural  sciences,  because 
it  includes  a  true  knowledge  of  visible  and  invisible 
Nature.  It  is  not  only  a  science,  but  also  an  art,  because 
it  cannot  be  learned  out  of  books,  but  must  be  acquired 
by  practical  experience.  To  acquire  that  spiritual  ex- 
perience is  to  become  spiritual ;  it  is  to  perceive  and 
know  the  true  nature  of  the  visible  and  invisible  elements 
that  compose  the  Macrocosm  and  the  Microcosm,  and  to 
possess  the  art  to  direct  and  employ  the  invisible  powers 
of  Nature.1      Divine  knowledge  and   divine   powers  do 

i  "  Magic  is  the  knowledge  of  how  to  employ  spiritual  powers  ;  but  it  is 
self-evident  that  nobody  can  employ  any  spiritual  powers  unless  he  has 
come  into  tlieir  possession  by  the  awakening  of  his  own  spirituality  ;  nor 
can  any  one  become  spiritual  by  merely  imagining  himself  to  be  so.     It  is 

MA  G1C  A ND  SORCER  Y  1 29 

not  belong  to  the  personal  self.  Therefore  he  who  desires 
to  know  and  to  use  the  powers  of  magic  must  rise  above 
the  delusion  of  self,  and  become  impersonal  in  the  spirit. 
He  must  learn  to  distinguish  between  that  which  is  divine 
and  eternal  and  that  which  is  animal  and  selfish  in  him. 
But  there  is  also  another  art,  called  "  black  magic "  or 
sorcery,  which  consists,  not  in  acting  in  and  through  the 
power  of  God,  which  commands  the  elemental  forces  of 
Nature,  but  by  propitiating  the  evil  elementals,  and  in 
asking  favours  of  them,  becoming  their  slave.  Paracelsus 
says : — 

"  Magic  and  sorcery  are  two  entirely  different  things, 
and  there  is  as  much  difference  between  them  as  there  is 
between  light  and  darkness,  and  between  white  and  black. 
Magic  is  the  greatest  wisdom  and  the  knowledge  of  super- 
natural powers.1  A  knowledge  of  spiritual  things  cannot 
be  obtained  by  merely  reasoning  logically  from  external 
appearances  existing  on  the  physical  plane,  but  it  will 
be  acquired  by  obtaining  more  spirituality,  and  making 
one's  self  capable  to  feel  and  to  see  the  things  of  the 
spirit.  It  would  be  well  if  our  clergymen,  who  are 
called  spiritual  guides,  would  know  more  of  spiritual 
things  than  what  they  have  read  in  their  books,  and  if 
they  had  some  practical  experience  in  divine  wisdom, 
instead  of  merely  repeating  the  opinions  of  the  other 
people  believed  to  have  been  divine." 

therefore  not  surprising  that  in  an  age  in  which  the  very  meaning  of  the 
term  '  spiritual '  became  incomprehensible  to  the  learned,  the  meaning  of 
'  magic '  has  become  also  a  mystery." 

1  The  word  "supernatural,"  as  employed  by  Paracelsus,  does  not  imply 
anything  beyond  Nature  as  a  whole,  because  nothing  exists  beyond  the 
All,  but  it  means  that  which  transcends  Nature  in  her  lower  aspect,  or  5 
a  higher  or  spiritual  aspect  of  Nature  than  the  merely  mechanical  and 
physiological  part  of  her  work.  If,  for  instance,  we  follow  our  instincts, 
we  act  naturally — that  is  to  say,  according  to  the  demands  of  our  animal 
nature  ;  but  if  we  resist  natural  impulses  by  the  power  of  will  and  reason,  * 
we  employ  powers  belonging  to  a  higher  order  of  Nature.  If  we  avoid  to 
do  evil  on  account  of  the  evil  consequences  which  it  would  cause  to  our- 
selves, we  act  naturally  ;  but  if  we  avoid  it  on  account  of  an  inherent  love 
of  principle,  we  act  in  the  wisdom  of  God. 

I 

130  PARACELSUS 

"  The  wisdom  which  man  ought  to  have  does  not  come 
from  the  earth,  nor  from  the  astral  spirit,  but  from  the 
fifth  essence — the  Spirit  of  Wisdom.  Therefore  man  is 
superior  to  the  stars  and  the  constellation,  provided  he 
lives  in  the  power  of  that  superior  wisdom.  Such  a 
person,  being  the  master  over  heaven  and  earth,  by  means 
of  his  freewill,1  is  called  a  Magus,  and  therefore  Magic 
is  not  sorcery,  but  supreme  wisdom  "  {De  Peste). 

"  Christ  and  the  prophets  and  the  apostles  had  magical 
powers,  acquired  less  by  their  learning  than  by  their  holi- 
ness. They  were  able  to  heal  the  sick  by  the  laying  on 
of  their  hands,  and  to  perform  many  other  wonderful  but 
natural  things.  Our  clergymen  talk  a  great  deal  about 
such  things ;  but  where  is  the  priest  of  to-day  who  can 
do  like  Him  ?  It  has  been  said  by  Christ  that  His  true 
followers  would  do  the  same  things  and  still  greater  ones  ; 
but  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  at  present  one  Christian 
minister  who  can  do  anything  as  Christ  did.  But  if  any 
one  who  is  not  a  man-made  minister  comes  and  cures  the 
sick  by  the  power  of  Christ  acting  through  him,  they  call 
him  a  sorcerer  and  a  child  of  the  devil,  and  are  willing  to 
burn  him  upon  a  stake." 

The  first  requirement  for  the  study  of  Magic  is  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  Nature.  But  there  is  a  false 
and  a  true  natural  science.  A  science  may  be  perfectly 
logical  in  all  its  deductions,  but  nevertheless  false,  if  its 
fundamental  doctrines  are  based  upon  a  misunderstand- 
ing of  spiritual  truths,  which  a  cold,  unspiritual  intellect 
is  unable  to  grasp.2  The  true  science  of  Nature  draws 
its  logical  conclusions  from  fundamental  truths,  which  it 
knows  to  be  true,  because  it  perceives  them  by  the  power 
of  the  mind  illuminated  by  wisdom.  False  science  bases 
its  conclusions  in  regard  to  spiritual  things  upon  external 
appearances  caused  by  the  illusion  of  the  senses ;  true 

1  The  will  is  only  free  when  it  is  free  from  the  delusion  of  self  and  its 
desires. 

2  All  sciences  are  false  if  they  are  godless  ;  that  is,  if  they  seek  for  the 
first  origin  of  anything  anywhere  else  but  in  divine  truth. 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  131 

science  rests  in  the  faculty  of  the  higher  regions  of  the 
human  soul  to  grasp  spiritual  truths  which  are  beyond 
the  power  of  perception  of  the  semi-animal  intellect. 

Magic  is  a  power  which  teaches  the  true  nature  of 
the  inner  man,  as  well  as  the  organisation  of  his  outward 
body.  The  superficial  reasoner  can  comprehend  nothing 
but  what  he  can  perceive  by  his  external  senses ;  but 
the  inner  man  has  perceptive  faculties  transcending  those 
of  his  body.  The  spirit  of  man  is  not  bound  to  any 
locality  ;  it  is  as  free  as  the  wind  which  blows  over  the 
sea.  If  spiritual  consciousness  has  once  been  attained, 
spiritual  perception  follows.  During  sleep  the  spirit  is 
capable  to  move  more  freely,  and  to  visit  distant  places. 
"  You  should  know  that  man  has  the  capability  (latent 
or  active)  to  foresee  future  events,  and  to  read  the  future 
from  the  books  of  the  past  and  from  those  of  the  present. 
Man  also  possesses  a  power  by  which  he  may  see  his 
friends  and  the  circumstances  by  which  they  are  sur- 
rounded, although  such  persons  may  be  a  thousand  miles 
away  from  him  at  that  time.  This  art  is  taught  by 
Gdbalis  (the  spiritual  perception  of  man).  It  is  a  power 
which  may  become  especially  active  in  dreams,  and  that 
which  is  seen  in  such  dreams  is  the  reflection  of  the  light 
of  wisdom  and  prophecy  in  man.  If  a  man  in  his  waking 
state  knows  nothing  of  such  things,  the  cause  of  his  igno- 
rance is,  that  he  does  not  understand  how  to  search  in 
himself  for  the  powers  that  are  given  to  him  by  God,  and 
by  which  he  can  arrive  at  all  the  Wisdom,  Reason,  and 
Knowledge  concerning  everything  that  exists,  whether 
it  be  near  him  or  far  away." 

He  who  seeks  the  truth  for  his  own  purposes,  or  to 
adorn  and  glorify  himself  with  it,  will  never  find  it.  We 
should  not  seek  to  possess  the  truth,  but  to  let  it  become 
manifested  in  us. 

"  There  are  those  who  imagine  that  man  obtains  his 
knowledge  from  his  own  self  and  from  the  stars,  so  that  if 
one  is  born  under  a  favourable  star  he  will  know  every- 

132  PARACELSUS 

thing.  But  if  man  is  to  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God, 
how,  then,  can  he  be  a  child  of  the  constellation,  which  is 
doomed  to  perish  ?  Where,  then,  shall  we  seek  for  true 
wisdom,  except  in  that  which  is  higher  than  all  the  stars, 
namely,  God  ?  "  l  (Be  Inventione  Artium). 

Ignorance  is  the  cause  of  imperfection.  "  Men  do  not 
know  themselves,  and  therefore  they  do  not  understand 
the  things  of  their  inner  world.  Each  man  has  the 
essence  of  God,  and  all  the  wisdom  and  power  of  the 
world  (germinally)  in  himself;  he  possesses  one  kind  of 
knowledge  as  much  as  another,  and  he  who  does  not 
find  that  which  is  in  him  cannot  truly  say  that  he  does 
not  possess  it,  but  only  that  he  was  not  capable  of  suc- 
cessfully seeking  for  it." 

The  exercise  of  inner  sight  requires  tranquillity  and 
peacefulness  of  the  mind.  "  Sleeping  is  waking  in 
regard  to  such  arts,  because  it  is  the  inner  light  of 
Nature  that  acts  during  sleep  on  the  invisible  man,  who, 
notwithstanding  his  invisibility,  is  existing  as  truly  as 
the  visible  one.  The  inner  man  is  the  natural  man,  and 
knows  more  than  the  one  formed  of  flesh."  2 

"  How  can  any  one  instruct  others  in  regard  to  the 
works  of  God  if  he  does  not  keep  His  laws  ?  How  can 
any  one  teach  Christ  if  he  does  not  know  Him  ?  How 
can  that  which  is  not  eternal  know  the  eternal  ?  How 
can  a  fool  teach  divine  wisdom  ?  Verily,  the  nearer  we 
approach  the  judgment-day  the  more  will  there  be  wise- 
acres and  pretended  instructors ;  but  on  that  day  those 
who  were  the  first  will  be  the  last,  and  the  last  ones  the 
first.  Our  sciences  are  worthless  if  they  do  not  spring 
from  the  foundation  of  the  true  faith  "  (Lib.  Philos.). 

"  Nature  is  the  universal  teacher.      Whatever  we  can- 

1  All  phenomenal  science  springs  from  a  knowledge  of  phenomena,  and 
is  therefore  only  relative  and  subject  to  change. 

2  During  sleep  the  soul,  so  to  say,  separates  itself  to  a  certain  extent  from 
the  body,  and  lives  in  its  own  sphere.  If  a  man  does  not  remember  his 
soul  experiences  after  his  body  awakens,  it  is  because  the  union  of  his 
personal  mind  with  his  spiritual  understanding  has  not  yet  taken  place. 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  133 

not  learn  from  the  external  appearance  of  Nature  we 
can  learn  from  her  spirit.  Both  are  one.  Everything 
is  taught  by  Nature  to  her  disciple,  if  he  asks  for  infor- 
mation in  an  appropriate  manner.  Nature  is  a  light, 
and  by  looking  at  Nature  in  her  own  light  we  will  under- 
stand her.  Visible  Nature  can  be  seen  in  her  visible 
light ;  invisible  Nature  will  become  visible  if  we  acquire 
the  power  to  perceive  her  inner  light."  a  "  The  hidden 
things  are  there  like  a  pillar  of  rock  before  a  blind 
person.  He  can  see  it  if  he  is  able  to  open  his  eyes. 
The  moon  shines,  but  does  not  show  things  in  their  true 
colours  ;  but  if  the  sun  arises,  then  will  the  true  colours 
be  seen.  Thus  the  external  light  in  Nature  is  like  the 
moon,  beyond  which  shines  the  internal  light,  and  in  this 
light  that  which  has  been  invisible  will  appear  visibly  and 
comprehensibly  "  (Morb.  Invis.).  "  There  is  a  light  in 
the  spirit  of  man  illuminating  everything,  and  by  which 
he  may  even  perceive  supernatural  things.  Those  who 
seek  in  the  light  of  external  Nature  know  the  things  of 
Nature ;  those  who  seek  knowledge  in  the  light  of  man 
know  the  things  above  Nature,  which  belong  to  the 
kingdom  of  God.  Man  is  an  animal,  a  spirit,  and  an 
angel,  for  he  has  all  three  qualities.  As  long  as  he 
remains  in  Nature  he  serves  Nature ;  if  he  moves  in  the 
spirit,  he  serves  the  spirit  (in  him)  ;  if  he  lives  in  the 
angel,  he  serves  as  an  angel.  The  first  quality  belongs 
to  the  body,  the  two  others  to  the  soul,  and  they  are  its 
jewels.  The  body  of  man  remains  on  the  earth,  but 
man,  having  a  soul  and  the  two  additional  qualities,  is 
enabled  to  rise  above  Nature,  and  to  know  that  which 
does  not  belong  to  Nature.      He  has  the  power  to  learn 

1  There  is  nothing  to  prevent  any  person  from  seeing  by  this  inner  light 
of  Nature,  except  the  errors,  prejudices,  and  misconceptions  which  are 
caused  by  the  illusions  of  the  senses,  and  which  are  intensified  by  an 
education  in  a  system  of  philosophy  which  mistakes  these  errors  for  funda- 
mental truths.  The  truth  can  only  be  found  where  it  is.  A  knowledge 
of  the  supreme  power  of  the  universe  cannot  be  obtained  by  denying  its 
existence.     Life  cannot  be  found  in  an  empty  form. 

i34  PARACELSUS 

all  that  belongs  to  heaven  and  hell,  to  know  God  and 
His  kingdom,  the  angels  and  spirits,  and  the  origin  of 
evil.  If  a  man  is  to  go  to  a  certain  place,  it  will  be 
useful  to  him  to  know  all  about  that  place  before  he 
goes  there ;  he  will  then  after  his  arrival  be  enabled  to 
move  about  freely,  and  to  go  wherever  he  pleases.  The 
quality  of  each  thing  created  by  God,  whether  it  be 
visible  or  invisible  to  the  senses,  may  be  perceived  and 
known.  If  man  knows  the  essence  of  things,  their  attri- 
butes, their  attractions,  and  the  elements  of  which  they 
consist,  he  will  be  a  master  of  Nature,  of  the  elements, 
and  of  the  spirits"1  (Philosophia  Sagax). 

"  The  truth  does  not  grow  from  your  speculation  and 
phantastry ;  but  he  who  understands  his  own  nature  in 
the  light  of  Nature  possesses  true  knowledge.  It  is  not 
sufficient  that  we  should  have  a  theory  of  the  truth,  but 
we  should  know  the  truth  in  ourselves  "  {Be  Peste.). 

"  There  are  two  kinds  of  intelligence,  that  of  the 
carnal  man  and  that  of  the  spirit;  the  former  argues, 
the  latter  knows.  Animals  also  have  reasoning  qualities  ; 
but  their  understanding  is  not  from  the  (direct)  light  of 
the  spirit "  (Be  Generat.  Homin.). 

"  The  light  of  Nature  teaches  us  that  each  form, 
reasonable  and  unreasonable,  conscious  ones  and  such 
as  are  without  consciousness,  has  its  natural  spirit.  The 
Nectromanticus  (seer)  must  know  these  spirits,  for  with- 
out that  knowledge  he  will  not  find  their  true  character. 
By  his  art  he  can  sense  them,  and  having  perceived 
them  with  his  inner  sense  he  will  find  their  forms. 
Such  spirits  may  be  perceived  in  crystals  ;  they  guide 
the  divining-rod  and  attract  it  as  a  magnet  attracts 
iron ;  they  turn  the   sieve  and  the  key,2  and  draw  the 

1  Here  Paracelsus  does  not  refer  merely  to  the  faculty  of  ordinary 
clairvoyance,  but  to  the  true  inner  comprehension,  to  the  "spirit  of 
Nature "  which  reveals  all  things  in  its  own  light.  It  is,  in  other 
words,  the  Holy  Ghost  or  the  true  spiritual  understanding  within  the 
higher  region  of  the  mind,  above  the  "  constellation." 

a  Such  modes  of  divination  are  well  known  to  modern  spiritualists. 

MA GIC  AND  SORCER  V  135 

flame  of  a  light  away  from  the  wick.  By  the  art  of 
Nectroroancy  we  may  look  into  the  interior  of  rocks, 
closed  letters  may  be  read  without  being  opened,1  hidden 
things  be  found,  and  all  the  secrets  of  men  be  brought 
to  light.  Some  people  believe  that  such  arts  can  best 
be  practised  by  virgins  and  innocent  children,  because 
their  minds  are  not  clouded  by  false  opinions  nor 
darkened  by  memories  of  evil  deeds ;  but  any  one  can 
practise  this  art  if  he  has  the  necessary  qualifications" 
(PhilosopMa  Sagax). 

He  who  understands  letters  can  read  words,  and  he 
who  knows  words  can  read  books.  If  we  know  that 
a  certain  cause  may  produce  a  certain  effect,  and  if 
such  an  effect  takes  place,  we  will  easily  recognise 
the  cause  that  produced  it.  "  If  the  crowing  of  cocks 
announces  a  change  of  weather,  and  if  we  hear  the 
cocks  crow  in  an  unusual  manner,  we  may  predict  that 
the  weather  will  change.  Certain  animals  have  in- 
herited instincts  that  cause  them  to  act  in  a  certain 
manner,  which  will  indicate  other  future  events  than 
a  change  in  the  weather.  The  peculiar  cry  of  a  pea- 
cock or  the  unusual  howling  of  a  dog  indicates  the 
approach  of  a  death  in  the  house  to  which  they  are 
attached ;  for  every  being  is  a  product  of  the  universal 
principle  of  life,  and  each  contains  the  light  of  Nature. 
Animals  possess  that  light,  and  men  bring  it  with  them 
into  the  world."  2 

The  power  of  clairvoyance  and  prevision  is  especially 
active  in  dreams,  when  the  activity  of  the  physical  body 
is  subdued,  and  the  disturbing  influences  coming  through 
the  avenues  of  the  physical  senses  are  excluded.  "Artists 
and  students  have  often    received   instructions   in  their 

1  The  astral  duplicate  of  the  writing  is  seen  by  the  astral  sense. 

2  Man  possesses  that  power  from  birth,  but  the  majority  lose  it  after- 
wards by  neglecting  to  use  it,  and  in  consequence  of  concentrating  all 
their  attention  upon  the  illusions  of  the  material  plane.  Moreover,  the 
organs  for  the  finer  perceptions  become  paralysed  and  atrophied  by  the 
use  of  alcoholic  drinks. 

136  PARACELSUS 

dreams  in  regard  to  things  which  they  desired  to  know. 
Their  imagination  was  then  free,  and  began  to  work  its 
wonders.  It  attracted  to  it  the  Evestra  of  some  philo- 
sophers, and  they  communicated  to  them  their  knowledge. 
Such  things  happen  frequently,  but  it  very  often  occurs 
that  on  awakening  to  consciousness  in  the  outer  world 
all  or  a  part  of  what  has  been  learned  during  the  dream 
is  forgotten.  If  this  happens  and  we  wish  to  remember 
such  dreams,  we  should  not  leave  the  room  after  rising, 
and  speak  to  nobody,  but  remain  alone  and  undisturbed, 
and  eat  nothing  until  after  a  while  we  remember  that 
dream."  l 

"  It  is  often  the  case  that  dreams  have  an  important 
meaning,  but  many  dreams  that  are  pleasant  may  signify 
sorrow,  and  disagreeable  dreams  often  signify  joy ;  and 
we  should,  therefore,  not  put  too  much  confidence  in 
dreams." 2 

Men's  astral  bodies  may  more  easily  be  influenced 
during  sleep  than  during  the  waking  state.  The  power 
to  influence  persons  during  their  sleep  is  sometimes  used 
for  evil  purposes :  "  Some  persons,  being  in  love  with 
others,  and  finding  their  love  unrequited,  have  sometimes 
used  this  circumstance  to  influence  those  whose  love  they 
desired  by  appearing  to  them  in  their  dreams.  They 
wrote  with  their  own  blood  their  names  upon  pieces  of 
new  paper,  and  put  the  slips  under  their  pillows  or  beds, 
so  that  these  persons  should  see  the  intended  lovers  in 
their  dreams  and  fall  in  love  with  them.  Girls  used  to 
put  their  belts,  ribbons,  locks  of  hair,  &c,  under  the 
pillows  of  young  men  for  whose  love  they  craved ;  but 
very  seldom  they  found  the  desired  result  in  this  manner, 

1  Dreams  or  visions  of  a  true  spiritual  origin  make  usually  a  very 
strong  impression,  and  are  then  not  easily  forgotten. 

2  Thus,  for  instance,  we  may  dream  of  a  death  and  burial,  and  the  cause 
of  that  dream  may  be  that  one  of  the  animal  elementals  in  our  own 
constitution  has  died,  or,  in  other  words,  that  we  have  become  free 
from  some  degrading  idea  or  element,  an  event  which  is  surely  a  cause 
for  joy. 

MA  GIC  A ND  SORCER  Y  137 

because   they    forgot   that    faith    is   necessary    to  obtain 
success."1 

A  strong  faith  and  a  powerful  imagination  are  the 
two  pillars  supporting  the  door  to  the  temple  of  magic, 
and  without  which  nothing  can  be  accomplished.  Ima- 
gination is  the  formative  power  of  man  ;  it  often  acts 
instinctively  and  without  any  conscious  effort  of  the 
will.  "  Man  has  a  visible  and  an  invisible  workshop. 
The  visible  one  is  his  body,  the  invisible  one  his  ima- 
gination (mind).  The  sun  gives  light,  and  this  light 
is  not  tangible,  but  its  heat  may  be  felt,  and  if  the 
rays  are  concentrated  it  may  set  a  house  on  fire.  The 
imagination  is  a  sun  in  the  soul  of  man,  acting  in  its 
own  sphere  as  the  sun  of  the  earth  acts  in  that  of  the 
earth.  Wherever  the  sun  shines,  germs  planted  in  the 
soil  grow  and  vegetation  springs  up,  and  the  sun  of 
the  soul  acts  in  a  similar  manner,  and  calls  the  forms 
of  the  soul  into  existence.  Visible  and  tangible  forms 
grow  into  existence  from  invisible  elements  by  the  power 
of  the  sunshine.  Invisible  vapours  are  attracted  and 
collected  together  into  visible  mists  by  the  power  of 
the  sun  of  the  outer  world,  and  the  inner  sun  of  man 
performs  similar  wonders.  The  great  world  is  only  a 
product  of  the  imagination  of  the  universal  mind,  and 
man  is  a  little  world  of  its  own  that  imagines  and 
creates  by  the  power  of  imagination.  If  man's  ima- 
gination is  strong  enough  to  penetrate  into  every  corner 
of  his  interior  world,  it  will  be  able  to  create  things 
in  those  corners,  and  whatever  man  thinks  will  take 
form  in  his  soul.  But  the  imagination  of  Nature  is  like 
a  monkey  aping  the  actions  of  man.  That  which  man 
does  is  imitated  by  the  monkey,  and  the  pictures  formed 

1  All  such  practices  have  a  certain  scientific  reason.  The  experiments 
of  Reichenbach  with  the  magnetic  or  odic  emanations  of  persons  and 
objects  have  shown  the  great  effect  they  have  upon  sensitive  organisms ; 
but  to  try  such  experiments  upon  hardened  sceptics  and  habitual  deniers 
is  like  testing  the  powers  of  a  magnet  upon  a  piece  of  wood. 

138  PARACELSUS 

in  the  imagination  of  man  create  corresponding  images 
in  the  mirror  of  Nature." 

"  Imagination  is  like  the  sun.  The  sun  has  a  light 
which  is  not  tangible,  but  which,  nevertheless,  can  set  a 
house  on  fire;  thus  the  imagination  is  like  a  sun  in  man 
acting  in  that  place  to  which  its  light  is  directed." 

"  Man  is  mind ;  he  is  what  he  thinks.  If  he  thinks 
fire,  he  is  on  fire ;  if  he  thinks  war,  then  will  he  cause 
war ;  it  all  depends  merely  on  that  the  whole  of  his 
imagination  becomes  an  entire  sun ;  i.e.,  that  he  wholly 
imagines  that  which  he  wills  "  (De  Virtute  Imaginativa). 

"  The  sun  acts  upon  the  visible  soil  of  the  earth,  and 
upon  invisible  matter  in  the  air ;  imagination  acts  upon 
the  invisible  substance  of  the  soul,  but  the  visible  earth 
is  formed  from  the  invisible  elements  of  the  earth,  and 
man's  physical  body  is  formed  of  his  invisible  astral 
soul.  The  soul  of  man  is  as  intimately  related  to  the 
soul  of  the  earth  as  the  physical  body  of  the  man  is 
related  to  the  physical  body  of  the  man,  and  they  con- 
tinually act  upon  each  other,  and  without  the  soul  the 
vehicle  could  not  exist.  Visible  matter  becomes  in- 
visible, and  is  acted  on  by  the  soul,  and  invisible  matter 
becomes  organised  and  is  made  visible  again  through 
the  influence  of  the  soul.  If  a  pregnant  woman  ima- 
gines something  strongly,  the  effects  of  her  imagination 
will  become  manifest  in  the  child.1  Imagination  springs 
from  desire,  and  as  man  may  have  good  or  evil  desires, 
likewise  he  may  have  a  good  or  an  evil  imagination. 
A  strong  desire  of  either  kind  will  give  rise  to  a 
strong  imagination.  Curses  as  well  as  blessings  will 
be  effective  if  they  come  from  the  heart  "  (Be  Virtute 
Imaginativa).2 

1  For  this  reason  pregnant  women  should  during  the  time  of  their 
pregnancy  have  beautiful  surroundings  and  think  noble  and  beautiful 
thoughts. 

3  If  we  do  not  think  that  which  we  speak,  our  words  will  be  empty 
talk.  He  who  thinks  many  things  disperses  his  power  in  many  directions  ; 
he  who  thinks  and  wills  only  one  thing  is  powerful. 

MA  GIC  A  ND  SORCER  Y  1 39 

"  Nothing  can  come  out  of  the  sphere  of  the  mind 
except  what  is  drawn  into  it,  and  that  which  is  drawn 
into  it  can  come  out.  If  a  pregnant  woman  craves  for 
strawberries,  the  image  of  strawberries  will  be  drawn 
into  her  mind,  and  her  imagination  may  impress  a  mark 
resembling  a  strawberry  upon  the  child.  Frogs  do  not 
grow  in  the  sky,  and  if  (as  has  happened)  a  multitude 
of  frogs  come  down  from  it  during  a  rain,  these  frogs 
must  have  been  drawn  up  somewhere  before  they  came 
down." 

"  The  imagination  of  women  is  usually  stronger  than 
that  of  men.  They  are  more  passionate,  stronger  in 
love  and  stronger  in  hate,  and  their  imagination  may 
carry  them  during  their  sleep  (in  their  astral  forms) 
to  other  places,  where  they  may  be  seen  by  others  who 
are  in  the  same  state.  They  are  then  really  at  those 
places,  and  will  remember  what  they  have  seen,  although 
they  were  there  without  their  physical  bodies ;  for  their 
minds  were  active  at  such  places,  and  the  mind  is  the 
real  person,  not  the  body  that  is  asleep."  * 

If  a  pregnant  woman  forms  an  image  in  her  mind 
and  projects  it  by  her  desire,  it  will  impress  itself  on 
the  body  of  the  child.  "  If,  for  instance,  a  woman  in 
her  imagination  strongly  conceives  of  a  snail,  and  then 
puts  her  hand  upon  her  knee,  then  will  the  image  of 
the  snail  appear  upon  the  knee  of  the  child.  Her  will 
(although  unconsciously)  acts  in  this  way  like  a  master, 
bidding  a  painter  to  pnint  him  a  snail.  Wherever  the 
touch  of  the  hand  goes,  there  will  be  the  image  "  (Be 
Virtute  Imaginativa). 

"If  a  person  dies,  and  seriously  desires  that  another 
person  should  die  with  him,  his  imagination  creates  a 
force  that  will  draw  a  vehicle  from  his  dead  body  and 

1  This  passage  refers  to  the  excursions  of  witches  on  the  Hartz  Moun- 
tains and  other  places,  often  spoken  of  in  the  witch  trials.  Many  supposed 
witches  were  burnt  to  death  for  having  confessed  that  they  had  attended 
at  such  meetings. 

140  PARACELSUS 

give  it  shape,  and  this  can  be  projected  by  the  impulse 
given  to  it  by  the  thought  of  the  dyiug  person  towards 
that  person,  and  cause  him  to  die.  Such  is  especially 
the  case  if  a  woman  dies  of  puerperal  fever,1  and  if 
such  a  woman  wishes  that  the  whole  world  should  die 
with  her,  an  epidemic  may  be  the  consequence  of  her 
poisoned  imagination." 

"  Fear,  terror,  passion,  desire,  joy,  and  envy  are  six 
states  of  the  mind  which  especially  rule  the  imagination, 
and  consequently  the  world  of  man ;  and  as  the  mind 
of  man  is  the  microcosmic  counterpart  of  the  universal 
mind,  the  antitypes  of  these  states  are  also  active  in 
the  imagination  of  the  world,  and  the  thoughts  of  man 
act  upon  the  latter  as  the  latter  acts  upon  him.  It  is 
therefore  desirable  that  we  should  govern  our  imagina- 
tion and  not  allow  it  to  run  wild.  We  should  attempt 
to  grasp  the  spirit  by  the  power  of  the  spirit,  and  not 
by  speculative  fancy  "  2  (De  Virtute  Imaginativa). 

"  Man  is  a  twofold  being,  having  a  divine  and  an 
animal  nature.  If  he  feels,  and  thinks,  and  acts  as 
divine  beings  should  act,  he  is  a  true  man ;  if  he  feels 
and  acts  like  an  animal,  he  is  then  an  animal,  and  the 
equal  of  those  animals  whose  mental  characteristics  are 
manifested  in  him.  An  exalted  imagination  caused  by 
a  desire  for  the  good  raises  him  up ;  a  low  imagination 
caused  by  a  desire  for  that  which  is  low  and  vulgar 
drags  him  down  and  degrades  him." 

"The  spirit  is  the  master,  imagination  the  tool,  and 
the  body  the  plastic  material.  Imagination  is  the  power 
by  which  the  will  forms  sidereal  entities  out  of  thoughts. 

1  It  is  well  known  that  the  corpses  of  women  having  died  of  puerperal 
fever  are  very  infectious,  and  dissecting  wounds  received  in  such  cases 
are  especially  dangerous.  The  passage  implies  that  the  invisible  astral 
substance  may  draw  contagion  from  the  poisonous  body,  and  spread  it 
by  the  power  of  an  evil  will. 

2  This  means  that  we  should  be  able  to  feel  the  truth  with  our  souls, 
without  reasoning  about  it  from  an  objective  standpoint.  We  should 
realise  the  truth  by  being  one  with  it,  and  not  examine  it  as  if  it  were 
something  strange  and  separate  from  ourselves. 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  141 

Imagination  is  not  fancy,  which  latter  is  the  corner- 
stone of  superstition  and  foolishness.  The  imagination 
of  man  becomes  pregnant  through  desire,  and  gives  birth 
to  deeds.  Every  one  may  regulate  and  educate  his 
imagination  so  as  to  come  thereby  into  contact  with 
spirits,  and  be  taught  by  them.  Spirits  desiring  to  act 
upon  man  act  upon  his  imagination,1  and  they  therefore 
make  often  use  of  his  dreams  for  the  purpose  of  acting 
upon  him.  During  sleep  the  sidereal  man  may  by  the 
power  of  the  imagination  be  sent  out  of  the  physical 
form,  at  a  distance  to  act  for  some  purpose.  No  place 
is  too  far  for  the  imagination  to  go,  and  the  imagination 
of  one  man  can  impress  that  of  another,  wherever  it 
reaches  "  (Philosophia  Sag  ax). 

"  Imagination  is  the  beginning  of  the  growth  of  a  form, 
and  it  guides  the  process  of  its  growth.  The  Will  is  a 
dissolving  power,  which  enables  the  body  to  become 
impregnated  by  the  '  tincture '  of  the  imagination.  He 
who  wants  to  know  how  a  man  can  unite  his  power 
of  imagination  with  the  power  of  the  imagination  of 
Heaven,  must  know  by  what  process  this  may  be  done. 
A  man  comes  into  possession  of  creative  power  by  uniting 
his  own  mind  with  the  Universal  Mind,  and  he  who 
succeeds  in  doing  so  will  be  in  possession  of  the  highest 
possible  wisdom ;  the  lower  realm  of  Nature  will  be 
subject  to  him,  and  the  powers  of  »Heaven  will  aid  him, 
because  Heaven  is  the  servant  of  wisdom."2 

"  Before  man  is  born,  and  afterwards,  his  soul  is  not 
perfect,  but  it  may  be  perfected  through  the  power  of  a 
holy  Will.  Spirits  are  essential,  visible,  tangible,  and 
sensitive  in  relation  to  other  spirits.3     They  stand  in  a 

1  Even  physical  sight  depends  on  the  imagination.  If  we  behold  an 
object,  it  is  not  scientific  to  say,  "  I  see  ;  "  but  we  ought  to  say,  "  I  imagine 
to  see." 

2  This,  however,  no  man  can  do  by  exercising  his  own  self-will ;  but 
it  is  accomplished  by  the  divine  will  in  him,  into  which  he  must  enter 
himself,  it  being  that  of  his  higher  self. 

5  The  term  "  spirits  "  refers  here  to  intelligent  souls, 

142  PARACELSUS 

similar  relation  to  each  other,  as  physical  bodies  to  other 
physical  bodies.  Spirits  speak  with  each  other  through 
spirit,  but  not  by  means  of  audible  speech.  While  the 
body  is  asleep,  the  soul  may  go  to  a  distant  place,  and  act 
intelligently  at  such  place.1  If  it  meets  another  spirit, 
whether  it  be  an  incarnated  or  a  disincarnated  one,  they 
will  act  in  regard  to  each  other  as  two  human  beings 
act,  if  they  meet.  One  man  communicates  his  thoughts 
to  another  with  whom  he  is  in  sympathy,  at  any  distance, 
however  great  it  may  be,2  or  he  may  act  upon  the  spirit 
of  another  person  in  such  a  manner  as  to  influence  his 
actions  after  the  body  of  the  latter  awakens  from  his 
sleep.3  In  this  way  he  can  even  injure  the  health  of 
that  person,  and  upon  this  law  of  Nature  is  based  the 
possibility  of  witchcraft  and  sorcery." 

"  The  exercise  of  true  magic  does  not  require  any 
ceremonies  or  conjurations;  or  the  making  of  circles  or 
signs ;  it  requires  neither  benedictions  nor  maledictions 
in  words,  neither  verbal  blessings  nor  curses ;  it  only 
requires  a  strong  faith  in  the  omnipotent  power  of  all 
good,  that  can  accomplish  everything  if  it  acts  through  a 

1  It  may  happen  that  the  spirit  of  a  person  will  go  to  a  distant  place 
while  the  body  is  asleep,  and  act  intelligently  there,  and  that  the  man, 
after  awakening  from  his  sleep,  remembers  nothing  about  it.  But  an 
adept,  in  whom  spiritual  consciousness  is  his  normal  state,  can  do  so 
knowingly  and  consciously,  and  remember  all  about  it  after  his  spirit 
(Majavi-Rupa)  returns  to  his  body. 

2  Any  one  may  make  successful  scientific  experiments  with  thought- 
transference.  Similar  scientific  experiments  for  long  distances  will  be 
more  difficult,  on  account  of  the  differences  of  time,  place,  and  conditions, 
and  because  spiritually  enlightened  persons,  possessing  great  power  of 
impressing  their  thoughts  at  great  distances,  are  at  present  not  easily 
found. 

3  It  has  been  proved  by  many  experiments  that  a  person  thrown  into 
a  mesmeric  sleep  by  a  mesmeriser  may  be  requested  to  do  certain  things 
after  he  awakens  from  his  sleep,  and  that  after  he  awakens  he  will  per- 
form such  actions,  although  he  will  not  remember  what  has  taken  place 
during  his  sleep.  It  is  therefore  very  fortunate  that,  in  the  present  state 
of  morality  of  our  modern  civilisation,  such  powers  are  not  generally 
known,  and  that  they  are  not  often  in  the  possession  of  those  who  wish 
to  abuse  them. 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  143 

human  mind  being  in  harmony  with  it,  and  without  which 
nothing  useful  can  be  accomplished.  True  magic  power 
consists  in  true  faith,  but  true  faith  rests  in  spiritual 
knowledge,  and  without  that  kind  of  knowledge  there 
can  be  no  faith.  If  I  know  that  divine  wisdom  can 
accomplish  a  certain  thing  through  me,  I  have  the  true 
holy  faith ;  but  if  I  merely  fancy  or  suppose  that  a 
thing  might  be  possible,  or  if  I  attempt  to  persuade 
myself  that  I  believe  in  its  possibility,  such  a  belief  is 
no  knowledge,  and  confers  no  faith.  No  one  can  have 
a  true  faith  in  a  thing  which  is  not  true,  because  such 
a  '  faith '  would  be  merely  a  belief  or  opinion  based 
upon  ignorance  of  the  truth." 

Nothing  can  be  accomplished  without  the  power  of 
faith.  If  a  loaf  of  bread  were  laid  on  a  table  before 
a  hungry  man,  and  the  man  did  not  believe  that  he 
could  break  a  piece  of  it,  he  would  starve  to  death  in 
spite  of  the  loaf.  "It  is  the  faith  which  gives  us  power, 
and  through  the  power  of  faith  we  become  spirits  our- 
selves, and  able  to  use  spiritual  power.  Faith  renders 
the  spirit  strong ;  doubt  is  the  destroyer.  All  that  is 
accomplished  over  and  beyond  our  terrestrial  nature  is 
accomplished  by  us  through  the  power  of  faith.  That 
in  which  we  have  faith  requires  no  proofs.  He  who 
asks  for  proofs  departs  from  the  faith.  If  God  speaks 
in  us,  we  require  no  proofs  of  the  truth  of  what  He 
says ;  for  we  recognise  it  in  the  power  of  truth.  This 
power  is  taken  from  nobody,  unless  he  throws  it  him- 
self away.  The  good  as  well  as  the  evil-disposed  ones 
can  only  be  strong  through  faith.  There  is  only  one 
power  of  faith,  but  its  application  may  be  for  good  or 
for  evil "  (Morb.  Invis.).1 

1  Faith  is  not  based  upon  any  intellectual  comprehension,  but  it  is  the 
true  spiritual  understanding.  It  is  not  a  belief  in  some  external  aid, 
but  the  inner  consciousness  of  the  possession  of  power.  If  Joshua  David- 
son broke  his  leg  by  jumping  from  a  two-story  window  for  the  purpose 
of  proving  his  faith  to  himself,  it  was  because  he  superstitiously  believed 
that  some  external  power  would  protect  him  in  his  fall,  and  he  knew 

M4  PARACELSUS 

"  How  can  there  be  any  true  faith  in  a  man  who  has 
not  in  himself  the  power  of  God  ?  The  godless  do  not 
believe  in  faith  because  they  have  none  of  it,  even  if  they 
continually  talk  about  it.  They  cannot  know  what 
'  faith '  is.  Where  can  we  find  a  theologian  who  drove 
out  an  evil  spirit,  or  made  a  spirit  come,  or  who  healed 
the  sick  by  the  power  of  God's  will ;  not  to  mention  the 
fact  that  no  clergyman  ever  removed  a  mountain  by 
means  of  his  faith,  or  threw  it  into  the  ocean  ?  But  if 
some  one  produces  a  sign,  be  it  good  or  evil,  they  denounce 
him  and  call  him  a  sorcerer  ;  for  they  are  not  capable  to 
distinguish  between  magic  and  sorcery  "(Philos.  Occult.,  ii.). 

"  Faith  is  the  cause  of  witchcraft  and  sorceries,  by 
which  means  one  person  may  injure  another  without 
running  much  risk  of  discovery;  because  he  may  kill  or 
injure  his  enemy  without  going  near  him,  and  the  latter 
cannot  defend  himself  as  he  might  if  he  were  attacked  by 
a  visible  foe.  Great  care  should  be  taken  that  the  powers 
of  the  faith  are  not  misused,  because  in  such  a  case  it 
will  be  witchcraft.  The  witches  *  are  the  most  dangerous 
persons  in  the  world,  if  they  use  their  evil  will  against 
anybody." 

"  It  would  be  very  easy  to  give  instructions  so  that 
every  one  might  convince  himself  of  the  truth  of  these 
statements,  but  such  instructions  might  be  misused  by 
wicked  persons  who  might  employ  such  knowledge  for 
evil  purposes ;  and  it  is,  moreover,  not  to  be  regretted  if 
methods  by  which  one  man  may  injure  another  should 
not  be  publicly  known.2      But  there  are  certain  things 

nothing  of  the  power  of  the  god,  his  own  self.  His  faith  was  an  artificial 
and  not  a  natural  one.  He  knew  nothing  about  God ;  that  is  to  say,  he 
had  no  divine  will ;  he  placed  his  confidence  in  the  say  so  of  the  theo- 
logians, but  not  in  his  own  perception  of  truth. 

1  They  are  now  called  "  hypnotisers." 

2  It  may  be  remarked  that  the  processes  given  below  would  not  be 
effective  if  employed  by  any  one  who  is  not  in  possession  of  power  to 
make  them  effective,  and  we  see,  therefore,  no  cause  why  they  should 
not  be  published.  Those  who  possess  such  evil  powers  know  these  things 
already. 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  145 

that  ought  to  be  known  to  physicians,  so  that  they 
may  learn  the  cause  of  certain  mysterious  diseases,  and 
know  the  means  how  to  cure  them,  and  to  counteract 
evil  influences  by  the  power  of  good.  There  are,  for  in- 
stance, some  sorcerers  who  make  an  image  representing 
the  person  whom  they  desire  to  injure,  and  they  drive  a 
nail  into  the  foot  of  that  image,  and  evil  will  and  mali- 
cious thought  cause  the  person  whom  the  image  repre- 
sents to  experience  a  great  pain  in  his  foot,  and  to  be 
unable  to  walk  until  the  nail  from  the  image  is  removed. 
Now,  if  a  physician  meets  with  such  a  case,  and  he 
does  not  know  the  cause  of  the  pain  in  the  foot  of 
his  patient,  he  will  not  be  able  to  cure  it ;  but  if  he 
knows  the  cause,  he  can  employ  the  power  of  imagina- 
tion to  counteract  the  evil  that  has  been  caused  by  a 
similar   power."  x 

"  Thus,  it  has  happened  that  nails  and  hair,  needles, 
bristles,  pieces  of  glass,  and  many  other  things  have  been 
cut  or  been  pulled  out  of  the  bodies  of  certain  patients,  and 
were  followed  by  other  things  of  a  similar  character,  and 
that  such  a  state  of  affairs  continued  for  many  weeks  or 
months,  and  the  physicians  stood  there  helpless,  and  did 
not  know  what  to  do.  But  if  they  had  better  understood 
their  business,  they  would  have  known  that  these  things 
had  been  brought  into  the  body  of  a  patient  by  the  power 
of  the  evil  imagination  of  a  sorcerer,  and  they  might 
have  put  one  of  the  extracted  articles  into  an  elder  or 
oak  tree,  on  the  side  directed  towards  the  rising  sun, 
and  that  article  would  have  acted  like  a  magnet  to 
attract  the  evil  influence,  and  it  would  have  cured  the 
patient." 

"  A  strong  will  subdues  a  weaker  one,  and  therefore 

1  If  the  representatives  of  modern  erudition  would  take  some  trouble  to 
inquire  in  an  unsophisticated  manner  among  the  country  populations  of 
Europe,  they  would  be  surprised  at  the  great  amount  of  evil  that  is  still 
caused  by  soicery,  either  consciously  or  unconsciously  employed.  Such 
things  are  all  caused  by  natural  means,  but  with  whose  character  our 
modern  sceptics  are  not  acquainted. 

K 

146  PARACELSUS 

the  first  necessary  condition  for  the  purpose  of  producing 
magic  effects  is  the  development  of  the  will.  The  power  of 
the  will  acts  more  readily  upon  animals  than  upon  man, 
because  the  soul  of  man,  being  supported  by  the  divine 
spirit,  has  more  power  to  defend  itself  against  the  in- 
fluence of  a  foreign  will  than  the  sidereal  body  of  animals. 
The  will  of  a  waking  man  will  act  upon  another  person, 
who  may  be  awake  or  asleep  ;  but  it  can  also  happen 
that  one  man  acts  spiritually  upon  another  while  both 
are  asleep ;  the  astral  form  of  a  sleeping  person 
can  visit  another  person  in  his  dream,  and  influence 
the  latter  to  love  him ;  or  it  may  injure  that  person,  or 
perhaps  cause  him  to  perform  something  which  he  would 
not  perform  if  left  to  himself." 

In  regard  to  the  action  of  the  will  at  a  distance,  Para- 
celsus says :  "  As  to  images  of  wax  (which  are  made  for 
the  purpose  of  assisting  the  imagination  and  concentrating 
the  will),  I  will  tell  you  that,  if  a  person  desires  to  injure 
an  enemy,  he  may  do  so  through  some  medium;  i.e.,  a 
vehicle.  In  this  way  it  is  possible  that  my  spirit,  with- 
out the  assistance  of  my  body  and  without  a  sword,  can 
kill  or  wound  another  person  simply  by  the  action  of  my 
will.  It  is  furthermore  possible  that  I  may  bring  the 
spirit  of  my  enemy  into  an  image,  and  afterwards  injure 
or  lame  him  in  the  image  according  to  my  will,  and  that 
the  body  of  that  enemy  will  be  correspondingly  injured 
or  lamed  thereby.  The  power  of  the  will  is  the  main 
point  in  medicine.  A  man  who  wishes  every  one  well 
will  produce  good  effects.  One  who  begrudges  everybody 
everything  good,  and  is  full  of  hate,  will  experience 
on  his  own  person  the  effects  of  his  evil  thoughts. 
Images  may  be  cursed,  and  diseases — such  as  fevers, 
epilepsy,  apoplexy,  &c. — thereby  be  caused  to  the  per- 
sons whom  those  images  are  made  to  represent.  I  am 
speaking  seriously.  Our  physicians  know  only  a  very 
small  part  of  the  power  of  the  will.  The  will  creates 
spirits  (forces)  that  have    nothing  to    do  with    reason- 

MA  GIC  AND  SORCER  Y  1 47 

ing  but  obey  blindly " x  (Par amir um,  tract,  iv.  cap. 
viii.). 

"  Faith  stimulates  and  elevates  the  power  of  the  spirit. 
A  person  who  has  a  strong  faith  feels  as  if  he  were  lifted 
up,  and  were  living  independent  of  the  body.  By  the 
power  of  faith  the  apostles  and  patriarchs  accomplished 
great  things  that  were  above  the  ordinary  run  of  Nature, 
and  the  saints  performed  their  miracles2  by  the  power 
of  faith.  Such  miracles  as  were  performed  by  them 
during  their  lifetime  were  performed  by  their  own  faith ; 
other  miracles  that  took  place  through  their  relics  or 
near  their  tombs  were  caused  by  the  power  of  faith  of 
those  who  asked  their  help.  All  the  wonders  of  Magic 
are  performed  by  Imagination  and  Faith." 

In  producing  magical  cures,  it  is  the  power  of  faith  in 
the  patient  himself,  and  not  the  dead  saint  or  the  relic, 
that  cures  the  disease. 

"  A  dead  saint  cannot  cure  anybody.  A  living  saint 
may  cure  the  sick  by  virtue  of  the  divine  power  that 
acts  through  him.  This  divine  power  does  not  die 
with  the  body  of  the  saint,  and  therefore  true  saints 
are  still  living,  although  their  mortal  bodies  have  died. 
The  power  which  enabled  the  saints  to  work  miracles 
is  still  alive,  and  accessible  to  all.     It  is  the  power  of 

1  We  would  not  advise  any  reader  to  make  any  such  experiment, 
because,  apart  from  the  immorality  of  such  a  practice,  it  is  known  to  every 
occultist  that  if  such  an  evil  power  is  once  propelled,  and  is  not  of  sufficient 
strength  to  penetrate  the  soul-sphere  of  his  object,  and  to  accomplish  its 
purpose,  it  rebounds  with  a  destructive  effect  to  the  source  from  whence 
it  was  projected. 

2  The  term  "  miracles "  means  natural  feats  produced  by  spiritual 
power.  ■  If  a  person  acts  against  his  own  natural  instincts — if  he,  for 
instance,  performs  an  act  of  unselfishness  without  any  hope  of  reward — 
such  an  act  may  be  called  a  supernatural  act.  The  natural  law  for  self 
is  selfishness,  and  if  a  man  causes  his  selfish  nature  to  act  in  a  manner 
that  goes  against  the  interests  of  that  nature,  he  acts  in  the  strength 
of  a  power  that  is  beyond  his  selfish  nature  and  supernatural  to  it, 
although  that  power  is  not  outside  of  him.  Spirit  may  manifest  itself 
in  Nature,  but  it  is  not  produced  by  Nature.  God  is  the  original  cause 
of  all  things ;  Nature  is  an  effect.  God  is  the  will ;  Nature  its  mani- 
festation. 

148  PARACELSUS 

the  Holy  Ghost,  and  if  you  live  in  God  He  will  over- 
shadow you  with  that  power,  and  it  will  teach  you 
the  laws  of  God,  and  you  will  be  guided  like  other 
saints,  even  as  the  apostles  Peter  or  Paul  "  (De  Sanc- 
torum Beneficiis  Vindictis). 

"  Faith  has  a  great  deal  more  power  than  the  physical 
body.  Yon  are  visible  and  corporeal,  but  there  is 
still  an  invisible  man  in  you,  and  that  invisible  man 
is  yourself  too.  Each  act  performed  by  your  body  is 
performed  by  the  invisible  man.  The  one  acts  in  a 
visible,  the  other  in  an  invisible,  manner.  If  an  in- 
jury is  inflicted  upon  the  invisible  man,  that  injury  will 
be  reproduced  on  his  visible  body.1  Such  things  can 
be  done,  but  it  is  very  wrong  to  attempt  them.  Who- 
ever attempts  them  is  tempting  God,  and  he  who 
succeeds  will  seriously  injure  his  own  soul.  There  have 
been  people  who  have  made  images  of  wax  representing 
certain  persons  of  the  opposite  sex,  and  they  melted 
such  forms  by  the  heat  of  a  light,  to  assist  their  own 
evil  imagination,  and  by  using  their  faith  they  have 
succeeded  in  enticing  those  persons  into  an  unlawful 
love.  The  Ohaldaeans  and  Egyptians  used  to  make 
images  according  to  the  constellations  of  the  stars,  and 
these  images  moved  and  talked,  but  they  did  not  know 
the  powers  that  acted  in  them.  Such  things  are  done 
by  faith,  but  it  is  not  the  true  faith  in  God,  but  a 
devilish  faith,  supported  by  the  desire  for  evil ;  because 
a  faith  that  kills  and  injures  men  is  not  good ;  a  true 
faith    can  only  come    from    the    source   of  all   good,  in 

1  What  a  great  field  would  be  opened  to  the  delight  of  our  "physio- 
logical institutes  "  and  vivisectors  for  the  gratification  of  their  morbid 
scientific  curiosity  if  this  art  were  taught,  or  if  they  believed  in  its 
possibility  !  Fortunately  the  scepticism  of  the  fool  is  his  own  best  pro- 
tection against  the  evils  that  would  arise  from  premature  knowledge, 
and  also  the  best  protection  for  mankind  against  the  injury  he  would 
otherwise  inflict.  But  that  such  things  can  be  done  will  be  clear  to 
every  intelligent  student  of  mediaeval  witchcraft,  and  they  are  still  done 
this  very  day,  several  such  cases  having  recently  come  within  the  per- 
sonal knowledge  of  the  author, 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  149 

which  there  can  be  no  evil,  and  that  which  is  not  good 
is  not  true.  Evil  belongs  to  the  world,  because  without 
evil  good  could  not  be  known  or  appreciated  ;  but  in 
the   source  of  good  there  can  be  no  evil."  * 

"  True  faith  has  wonderful  powers,  and  this  fact 
proves  that  we  are  spirits,  and  not  merely  visible 
bodies.  Faith  accomplishes  that  which  the  body  would 
accomplish  if  it  had  the  power.  Man  is  created  with 
great  powers ;  he  is  greater  than  heaven  and  greater 
than  the  earth.  He  possesses  faith,  and  when  his  faith 
has  become  a  conscious  power  in  him  it  will  be  a 
light  more  powerful  and  superior  to  natural  light,  and 
stronger  than  all  mortal  creatures.  All  magic  processes 
are  based  upon  that  faith.  By  faith  and  imagination 
we  can  accomplish  whatever  we  desire.  The  true  power 
of  faith  overcomes  all  the  spirits  of  Nature,  because  it 
is  a  spiritual  power,  and  spirit  is  higher  than  Nature. 
Whatever  is  grown  in  the  realm  of  Nature  may  be 
changed  by  the  power  of  faith.  Whatever  we  accom- 
plish that  surpasses  Nature  is  accomplished  by  the  power 
of  faith,  and  by  faith  diseases  may  be  cured"2  {Philo- 
sophia  Sagax). 

"  The  sidereal  man  is  of  a  magnetic  nature,  and  for 
that  reason  he  can  attract  the  powers  and  effluvia  of  the 
astral-world.  If,  therefore,  any  inimical  astral  influences 
are  circulating  in  the  All  of  Nature,  the  man  becomes 
sick,  and  if  these  currents  change  he  will  become  well 
again.      The  same  thing  happens  if  a  good  or  an  evil 

1  Absolute  good  cannot  be  evil,  but  requires  the  presence  of  relative 
evil  to  become  manifest. 

2  However  much  this  may  be  disputed  in  theory  by  superficial  reasoners, 
it  is  nevertheless  accepted  in  practice  even  by  the  most  sceptical  prac- 
titioners of  medicine.  A  physician  who  has  no  confidence  or  faith  in 
his  own  ability  will  not  accomplish  much.  Moreover,  physicians  often 
have  each  one  his  own  favourite  remedy,  which  will  act  successfully,  if 
employed  by  one,  and  fail  in  the  hands  of  another,  and  this  can  be  ex- 
plained by  the  fact  that  one  physician  has  more  faith  in  his  own  favourite 
remedy  than  in  that  of  another. 

150  PARACELSUS 

thought,  supported  by  a  strong  faith,  changes  or  creates 
currents  that  act  upon  the  sidereal  man." 1 

The  astral  currents  created  by  the  imagination  of  the 
Macrocosmos  act  upon  the  Microcosmos,  and  produce 
certain  states  in  the  latter,  and  thus  also  the  astral 
currents  produced  by  the  imagination  and  will  of  man 
produce  certain  states  in  external  Nature,  and  these 
currents  reach  very  far,  because  the  power  of  the  imagi- 
nation reaches  as  far  as  thought  can  go.  The  physio- 
logical processes  taking  place  in  the  body  of  living 
beings  are  caused  by  their  life  currents,  and  the  physio- 
logical and  meteorological  processes  taking  place  in  the 
great  organism  of  Nature  are  caused  by  the  life  currents 
of  Nature  as  a  whole.  The  astral  currents  of  either  act 
upon  the  other,  either  consciously  or  unconsciously,  and 
if  this  fact  is  properly  understood  it  will  cease  to  appear 
incredible  that  the  mind  of  man  can  produce  changes  in 
the  universal  mind,  which  will  cause  changes  in  the 
atmosphere,  winds  and  rains,  storms,  hail,  and  light- 
ning, or  that  evil  may  be  changed  into  good  by  the 
power  of  faith.  "  Heaven  (the  mind)  is  a  field  into 
which  the  imagination  of  man  throws  the  seeds.  Nature 
is  an  artist  that  develops  the  seeds,  and  what  is  caused 
by  Nature  may  be  imitated  by  Art "  (De  Sagis  et  eorum 
Operibus). 

"  To  conjure  the  spirit  of  a  thing  means  to  seek  after 
the  truth  which  that  thing  represents.  To  see  the  spirit 
of  a  thing  means  to  recognise  the  character  of  that 
thing,  with  all  its  qualities  and  attributes.2  To  make 
the  spirit  of  a  thing  subservient  to  one's  power  is  to 
know  how  to  use  the  powers  that  are  hidden  in  such 
a  thing  for  our  own  purposes.     If  I  know  the  attributes 

1  "The  whole  world  is  like  a  man  and  a  woman,  and  has  also  its 
anima  and  its  spiritus  imaginationis ;  only  much  stronger  and  more 
powerfully  than  man."  The  spirit  orders,  the  will  (matter)  obeys ; 
thought  (imagination)  directs,  the  soul  (the  body)  executes  and  produces, 
be  it  intellectually  or  without  intelligence. 

2  The  "  spirit  "  of  a  thing  is  represented  by  the  sum  of  its  qualities. 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  151 

of  a  thing,  I  know  its  spirit.  If  I  can  make  use  of 
the  qualities  of  a  thing,  its  spirit  will  be  my  servant. 
Nothing  can  be  known  of  a  thing  unless  we  succeed  in 
making  its  character  appear  plain  to  our  understanding." 
"  The  vehicle  through  which  the  will  acts  for  effectu- 
ating good  or  evil  is  the  living  Mumia.  Mumia1  is  a 
vehicle  that  contains  the  essence  of  life.  If  we  eat  the 
flesh  of  animals,  it  is  not  their  flesh  itself  that  forms 
again  blood  and  bones  in  our  bodies,  but  the  invisible 
vehicle  of  life  derived  from  the  flesh  of  these  animals 
is  taken  up  into  our  bodies,  and  forms  new  tissues 
and  organs.  If  an  animal  dies  in  consequence  of  some 
internal  disease,  we  do  not  eat  its  flesh,  because  its  Mumia 
has  been  poisoned  by  its  disease ;  neither  do  we  eat  the 
flesh  of  animals  that  died  of  old  age,  nor  the  flesh  of  a 
rotten  carcass,  because  its  healthy  Mumia  has  departed 
on  account  of  the  decomposition,  and  what  is  left  of  the 
Mumia  has  been  poisoned  by  the  process  of  putrefaction. 
The  Mumia  of  a  living  being  partakes  of  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  being  from  which  it  is  taken.  For  this 
reason  we  do  not  eat  the  flesh  of  ferocious  animals,  such 
as  tigers,  lions,  wild -cats,  &c.  They  contain  a  fiery 
Mumia  which  stimulates  the  astral  essences  of  man,  and 
causes  in  him  such  tendencies  as  were  the  characteristics 
of  the  animals  from  which  they  are  taken.2  We  eat  the 
flesh  of  domestic  animals,  because  their  character  is  more 
gentle  and  their  Mumia  less  exciting,  such  as  the  stupid 
ox,  the  gentle  sheep,  &c;  but  the  healthiest  animal  food 
is  the  flesh  of  birds,  because  they  live  in  the  air,  and  the 
air  is  the  noblest  of  the  four  elements." 

1  The  odic  or  "  magnetic  "  body,  containing  the  life -principle. 

2  One  reason  why  any  one  who  desires  to  develop  his  spirituality  should, 
if  his  condition  otherwise  permits  it,  adopt  a  vegetarian  diet,  is  that  the 
flesh  of  animals  exercises  a  stimulating  effect  upon  the  lower  and  animal 
instincts,  which  ought  to  be  overcome  instead  of  being  aroused.  The 
scientific  explanation  of  this  action  of  flesh  is,  that  eaoh  material  thing  is 
an  expression  of  its  soul,  and  that  it  contains  some  of  the  qualities  of  that 
soul  or  life  (Kama),  and  communicates  them  to  a  certain  extent  to  those 
in  whom  it  is  taken  up. 

152  PARACELSUS 

The  "  Mumia  "  of  a  thing  is  its  life- principle.  "  From 
the  use  of  the  Mumia  have  resulted  the  greatest  and 
mysterious  magnetic  cures;  for  some  persons  who  have 
learned  to  know  and  understand  the  action  and  power 
of  their  own  Mumia,  and  that  even  a  small  dose  of  it 
attracts  uuto  itself  the  powers  of  the  whole  body,  like 
the  magnet  attracts  iron,  have  in  this  way  cured  them- 
selves of  many  ills  "  (PMlosoph.,  tract  iii.). 

"  The  Mumia  of  the  dead  body  is  useless,  and  the 
Mumia  that  is  prepared  by  embalming  a  corpse  is  good 
for  nothing  but  to  serve  as  food  for  worms.  The  most 
efficacious  Mumia  is  that  of  a  person  who  died  in  an 
unnatural  manner  while  his  body  was  in  good  health ; 
such  a  one,  for  instance,  as  has  been  hung  or  decapi- 
tated, or  whose  body  has  been  broken  on  the  wheel. 
A  person  who  dies  a  slow  death  in  consequence  of  some 
disease  loses  his  powers  before  he  dies,  and  putrefaction 
begins  often  in  such  cases  even  while  the  patient  is  still 
alive.  His  Mumia  will  then  be  worthless.  But  if  our 
physicians  knew  the  occult  powers  of  the  Mumia  of  per- 
sons that  have  died  sudden  deaths,  they  would  not  permit 
the  body  of  an  executed  criminal  to  hang  at  the  gallows 
for  over  three  days,  but  they  would  take  it  away  and  use 
it  for  medical  purposes.  Such  a  Mumia  is  very  powerful, 
especially  after  it  has  been  exposed  to  the  influence  of 
the  air,  the  sun,  and  the  moon." 

"  The  Mumia  of  a  being  who  dies  a  violent  death  in 
the  air  returns  to  the  air ;  the  Mumia  of  a  body  is  taken 
up  by  that  element  in  which  the  body  is  decomposed. 
If  a  person  is  drowned,  his  Mumia  will  go  to  the  element 
of  water ;  if  he  is  burnt,  it  will  go  to  that  of  the  fire  " x 
(Philosoph.,  tract  iii.). 

1  Those  who  are  to  a  certain  extent  acquainted  with  modern  spiritualism 
will  know  that  usually  at  the  beginning  of  a  strong  "  physical  manifesta- 
tion "  a  cold  draught  of  air  is  felt,  and  sometimes  even  a  corpsedike  odour 
pervades  the  air  of  the  room  where  the  seance  is  held.  This  is  caused  by 
the  presence  of  the  astral  body  of  the  dead,  bringing  with  it  the  elements 
of  its  surroundings,  such  as  are  connected  with  its  Mumia,  from  the  grave. 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  153 

"  These  three  kinds  of  Muraia  have  very  wonderful 
occult  powers,  and  many  strange  feats  may  be  performed 
through  their  use  by  those  who  know  how  to  employ 
them,  especially  by  such  as  have  taken  the  Mumia  them- 
selves from  the  persons  for  whose  life  it  served  as  a 
vehicle.  Such  people  are  executioners,  hangmen,  and 
murderers,  and  the  latter  sometimes  kill  a  man  for 
the  mere  purpose  of  obtaining  his  Mumia  to  perform 
wicked  things.  But  for  such  people  it  would  have  been 
better  if  a  millstone  had  been  hung  about  their  necks 
and  they  had  been  thrown  into  the  sea,  because  they 
will  themselves  end  in  a  pitiful  manner,  and  their  souls 
will  experience  the  evil  which  they  themselves  have 
created." 1 

On  account  of  the  great  occult  power  contained  in  the 
Mumia,  it  is  used  in  witchcraft  and  sorcery.  "Witches 
and  sorcerers  may  make  a  bargain  with  evil  spirits,  and 
cause  them  to  carry  the  Mumia  to  certain  places  where 
it  will  come  in  contact  with  other  people,  without  the 
knowledge  of  the  latter,  and  cause  them  harm.  They 
take  earth  from  the  graves  of  people  who  have  died 
of  the  plague,  and  infect  other  people  with  it.  They 
also  infect  the  cattle,  spoil  the  milk,2  and  cause  a  great 

If  it  is  the  "spirit"  of  a  drowned  person,  the  air  in  the  room  will  appear 
to  become  damp  and  musty,  or  perhaps  a  sprinkling  of  spray  may  take 
place.  Moreover,  if  the  "  spirit "  of  a  person  who  was  a  great  drunkard 
manifests  itself,  the  air  may  become  pervaded  with  the  odour  of  alcohol. 

1  The  final  fate  of  sorcerers  and  black  magicians  has  often  been  alluded 
to  in  writings  on  occultism.  The  organisation  of  spiritual  forces  which 
they  create,  and  in  which  their  consciousness  and  sensation  rests,  is 
very  strong ;  but  as  it  does  not  receive  its  life  from  the  Supreme  Spirit, 
it  is  not  immortal,  and  its  dissolution  will  therefore  be  painful  and  slow, 
but  certain. 

2  Note. — I  have  taken  especial  pains  to  investigate  this  subject,  and  I 
have  come  to  the  conclusion  that,  if  such  persons  make  a  bargain  with 
evil  spirits,  they  usually  do  this  effectually,  not  by  any  talk  or  cere- 
monies, but  by  entering  into  a  state  of  harmony  of  feeling  (coming  en 
rapport)  with  such  evil  entities,  and  they  may  do  this  unconsciously  or 
unknowingly  in  their  normal  state,  or  it  may  be  that  only  the  sidereal 
man  knows  that  such  a  compact  exists.  Such  '.'  sorcerers "  are  often 
evil-disposed  but  ignorant  persons,  who  perhaps  do  not  even  know  that 

154  PARACELSUS 

deal  of  damage,  and  the  injured  people  do  not  know 
the  cause  of  the  evils  that  afflict  them.  A  great  deal 
might  be  said  in  regard  to  this  subject,  but  we  will  not 
write   it   down,   because  .  we  do   not   desire  to  give  in- 

they  possess  such  powers,  and  they  "bewitch"  persons  simply  by  the 
power  of  their  ill-will,  guided  by  some  unseen  intelligence,  and  without 
being  themselves  conscious  of  their  success  ;  but  in  other  instances  they 
know  it.  The  fact  that  such  sorceries  do  occur  will  not  be  doubted 
by  any  one  who  has  investigated  the  subject.  They  occur  to  a  great 
extent  among  the  country  people  in  Europe,  and  especially  in  Roman 
Catholic  countries.  In  Bavaria  and  Tyrol  the  country  people  are  always 
suspicious  of  strangers,  whom  they  believe  capable  of  bewitching  their 
cattle.  They  will  not  permit  such  strangers  to  enter  their  stables  if  the 
latter  do  not  pronounce  a  blessing  on  entering  it ;  and  if  they  are  afraid 
of  the  evil  power  of  some  neighbour,  they  will,  under  no  circumstance, 
lend  any  article  to  him  or  accept  anything  from  him. 

Several  cases  of  "  bewitched  cattle"  and  "blue  milk  "  are  known  to 
me  personally,  of  which  I  will  mention  the  following  as  an  example  : — 

At  a  farm-house  not  far  from  Munich  the  milk  became  one  day  "  blue  "  ; 
after  having  been  deposited  in  the  usual  place  it  began  to  darken,  became 
lightly  blue,  and  that  colour  after  a  while  deepened  into  an  almost  inky 
darkness,  while  the  layer  of  cream  exhibited  zigzag  lines,  and  soon  the 
whole  mass  began  to  putrefy  and  to  emit  a  horrible  odour.  This  occurred 
again  and  again  every  day,  and  the  farmer  was  in  despair.  Everything 
was  attempted  to  find  out  the  cause  of  the  trouble  ;  the  stable  was 
thoroughly  cleaned,  the  place  where  the  milk  was  kept  was  changed,  a 
different  food  was  given  to  the  cattle,  and  samples  of  the  milk  were  sent  to 
Munich  to  be  examined  by  chemists  ;  the  old  milk-pots  were  replaced  by 
new  ones,  &c,  but  nothing  produced  a  change  in  the  existing  state  of 
affairs. 

At  last  my  sister,  the  Countess  S ,  who  resided  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, hearing  of  these  things,  went  to  that  farm-house  to  investigate  the 
matter.  She  took  with  her  a  clean,  new  bottle,  and  filled  it  with  the 
milk  as  it  came  from  the  bewitched  cows.  This  milk  she  took  home  with 
her  and  deposited  it  in  her  own  pantry,  and  from  that  day  the  trouble  in 
the  house  of  her  neighbour  ceased,  and  all  the  milk  in  her  own  house 
became  blue. 

Here  again  everything  was  tried  to  find  out  the  cause,  but  without  any 
success,  until,  about  three  months  afterwards,  some  old  lad)- — living  about 
300  miles  distant — effected  another  spell  by  her  own  occult  powers,  using 
some  slips  of  paper,  on  which  she  wrote  something,  and  in  consequence  of 
which  the  trouble  ceased.  Before  it  ceased,  however,  something  strange 
happened.  Before  daybreak,  as  the  milkmaid  was  about  to  enter  the 
stable,  some  black  thing  like  an  animal  rushed  out  of  the  half-opened 
door,  knocked  the  milk-pail  and  the  lantern  out  of  her  hands,  and  dis- 
appeared.    After  this  all  went  well  again. 

On  another  occasion,  in  a  similar  case  which  took  place  in  the  same 

MA  GIC  A ND  SORCER  V  155 

structions  in  sorcery,  or  enable  the  wicked  to  use  the 
knowledge  obtained  for  the  purpose  of  injuring  others" 
{De  Peslilitate). 

"It  is  very  desirable  that  some  good  and  wise  men, 
well  versed  in  the  secret  arts,  should  be  appointed  by 
the  authorities  to  counteract  and  prevent  the  evils  pro- 
duced by  the  wicked  who  practise  witchcraft  and  sorcery, 
and  they  should  pay  particular  attention  to  convents, 
monastei-ies,  and  houses  of  prostitution,  because  in  such 
places  a  lascivious  and  evil  imagination  is  especially  culti- 
vated, and  great  quantities  of  sperma  are  there  collected 
by  evil  spirits,  and  that  sperma  contains  a  powerful 
Mumia,  which  can  be  extracted,  and  transformed  into 
evil  things  ;  or  it  may  decompose  and  become  a  strong 
poison,  furnishing  life  to  innumerable  invisible  (micro- 
scopic) existences,  by  which  epidemics  and  plagues  will 
be  caused.  One  witch  may  poison  another  by  such 
means,  and  the  familiar  spirits  of  witches  often  steal 
sperma  from  persons  who  are  addicted  to  bad  habits  and 
use  it  for  evil  purposes." 

"  An  especially  powerful  poison  that  may  be  used  in 
sorcery  is  the  menstrual  blood. 

"  If  a  woman  exposes  a  cloth  impregnated  with  the 
menstrual  blood  to  the  rays  of  the  new  moon  at  night, 
and  to  the  rays  of  the  sun  during  the  day,  a  powerful 
basilisk  is  created,  because  it  attracts  the  ' magnes  sails' 
This  invisible  poison  can  give  rise  to  many  and  various 
diseases,  because  the  moon  is  the  '  menstruum  mundi,' 
and  exercises  a  very  evil  influence.  Gold  attracts  mer- 
cury   and    amalgamates    with    it,   and    likewise   the    sun 

neighbourhood,  the  owner  of  the  bewitched  cattle  was  advised  to  take 
a  sample  of  the  milk  from  each  cow,  to  mix  them  in  a  pan,  to  boil  it  over 
a  slow  fire,  and  to  whip  it  with  a  rod  while  it  was  boiling  down,  and  to 
throw  the  rest  away.  This  advice  he  followed,  and  on  the  next  day  a 
person  of  ill  repute  was  met,  having  his  face  covered  with  bloody  streaks, 
as  if  they  had  been  inflicted  with  a  rod.  This  man  could  give  no  satis- 
factory account  of  the  origin  of  his  marks,  and  it  is  supposed  that  he  was 
the  punished  sorcerer.  The  trouble  then  ceased.  These  examples  go  to 
corroborate  what  Paracelsus  says  about  the  Mumia 

156  PARACELSUS 

attracts  the  '  mercurmm  menstrui  mulierum.'  The  moon 
exerts  a  certain  evil  influence  periodically  every  month, 
and  the  '  menstruum  mulierum '  is  renewed  periodically 
every  month,  and  during  such  periods  there  is  an  especi- 
ally strong  sympathy  between  them." 

"  Women  should  know  such  things  and  pay  attention 
to  them,  else  they  may  run  great  danger.  It  is  a  known 
fact  that  during  the  time  of  a  plague  many  more  women 
die  than  men.  It  is  also  known  that  women  who,  on 
account  of  their  age,  have  lost  the  power  to  menstruate, 
are  more  powerful  than  others  to  effect  evil  spells  and 
sorceries,  and  to  injure  men  and  animals.1 

"  If  you  take  turpentine  and  distil  it,  the  spirit  of 
turpentine  will  go  away  and  the  rosin  remain ;  and  if 
you  mix  the  rosin  again  with  the  spirit,  you  will  have 
your  turpentine  again  as  it  was  before.  In  a  similar 
way  the  human  blood  contains  an  airy,  fiery  spirit,  and 
this  spirit  has  its  centre  in  the  heart,  where  it  is  most 
condensed,  and  from  which  it  radiates,  and  the  radiating 
rays  return  to  the  heart.  Thus  the  world  has  its  fiery 
spirit  prevading  the  atmosphere,  and  its  centre  is  called 
the  sun,  and  the  influences  radiating  from  the  sun  return 
to  that  centre.  The  sun  radiates  heat  and  attracts  the 
vapours  of  the  earth,  and  likewise  the  heart  of  man 
attracts  the  '  humidum  menstrui,'  which  is  a  poisonous 
planetary  exhalation  of  the  Microcosm  of  woman.  The 
'  spiritus  vitce  cerebri '  of  an  insane  person  is  attracted  to- 
wards the  moon  in  the  same  manner  as  the  needle  of  the 
compass  is  attracted  towards  the  Pole,  and  such  a  person 
will  therefore — especially  at  the  time  of  the  new  moon, 

1  This  was  a  common  belief  during  the  Middle  Ages,  and  many  a  poor 
old  woman  has  been  burned  to  death  for  having  been  suspected  of  being 
a  witch.  This,  however,  does  not  invalidate  the  statements  of  Paracelsus. 
In  women,  on  the  whole,  the  will  is  more  active  than  in  men,  and  they 
are  less  liable  to  exercise  self-control.  A  woman  having  become  disap- 
pointed in  love  and  embittered  with  the  world  becomes  a  suitable  instru- 
ment for  the  powers  of  evil  to  act  through  her  organism.  Woman  is 
more  powerful  for  good  and  for  evil  than  males,  because  she  represents 
will  and  substance,  and  man  only  the  imagination. 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  157 

when  that  attraction  is  the  strongest — grow  worse,  and 
begin  to  rave  ;  and  likewise  the  sensitive  spirit  (aura) 
of  a  man  who  is  weak  and  offers  no  resistance  will  be 
attracted  towards  the  moon  and  be  poisoned  by  its  evil 
influence." 

"The  witches  and  evil  spirits,  moreover,  use  certain 
invisible  and  poisonous  elements,  taken  from  spiders, 
toads,  and  other  villainous  creatures,  and  use  them  in 
combination  with  the  menstrual  blood  for  evil  purposes  ; 
but  it  is  not  advisable  to  publish  the  secret  how  this  is 
done.  We  will,  however,  say  that  sometimes  they  make 
an  image  of  a  person  in  wax,  and  tie  a  rag,  soiled  with 
the  menstrual  blood,  around  it,  and  add  the  Mumia  of 
the  carcass  of  some  animal — preferring  one  of  an  animal 
that  has  died  of  an  ulcer — and  by  using  their  evil 
imagination  they  throw  the  evil  spell  upon  the  person 
whom  the  image  represents,  and  in  this  manner  they 
poison  his  blood  and  cause  him  to  die."  x 

"  They  sometimes  take  a  mirror  set  in  a  wooden 
frame,  and  put  it  into  a  tub  of  water,  so  that  it  will 
swim  on  the  top  with  its  face  directed  towards  the  sky. 
On  the  top  of  the  mirror,  and  encircling  the  glass,  they 
lay  a  wreath  of  Sinechrusmontes  Behdem,  and  thus  they 
expose,  it  to  the  influence  of  the  new  moon;  and  this 
evil  influence  is  thrown  towards  the  moon,  and,  radiating 
again  from  the  moon,  it  will  bring  evil  to  those  who  love 
to  look  at  the  moon.  The  rays  of  the  moon,  passing 
through  that  ring  upon  the  mirror,  become  poisoned, 
and  poison  the  mirror ;  and  the  mirror  throws  back  the 
poisoned  ether  into  the  atmosphere,  and  the  moon  and 
the  mirror  poison  each  other  in  the  same  manner  as  two 
malicious  persons,  by  looking  at  each  other,  poison  each 
other's  souls  with  their  eyes.  If  a  mirror  is  strongly 
poisoned  in  this  manner,  the  witch  takes  good  care  of 
it ;    and    if  she   desires  to   injure    some   one,   she  takes 

1  Poisonous  and  malicious  animals  are  forms  of  life  in  which  an  evil 
quality  of  the  poisoned  will  in  Nature  has  become  manifest. 

158  PARACELSUS 

a  waxen  image  made  in  his  name,  she  surrounds  it 
with  a  cloth  spotted  with  the  menstrual  blood,  and 
throws  the  reflex  of  the  mirror  through  the  opening 
in  the  middle  of  the  head  of  the  figure,  or  upon 
some  other  part  of  his  body,  using  at  the  same  time 
her  evil  imagination  and  curses;  and  the  man  whom 
the  image  represents  will  then  have  his  vitality  dried 
up  and  his  blood  poisoned  by  that  evil  influence,  and 
become  diseased,  and  his  body  covered  with  boils. 
Such  is  the  '  pestis  particularism  which  may  be  known 
if  it  affects  a  man  who  has  not  been  near  any  other 
persons  or  places  from  which  he  might  have  caught  the 
disease." 

"  But  if  a  witch  desires  to  poison  a  man  with  her  eyes, 
she  will  go  to  a  place  where  she  expects  to  meet  him. 
When  he  approaches  she  will  look  into  the  poisoned 
mirror,  and  then,  after  hiding  the  mirror,  look  into  his 
eyes,  and  the  influence  of  the  poison  passes  from  the 
mirror  into  her  eyes,  and  from  her  eyes  into  the  eyes 
of  that  person ;  but  the  witch  cures  her  own  eyes  by 
making  a  fire  and  staring  into  it,  and  then  taking  the 
menstrual  cloth,  and,  after  tying  it  around  a  stone, 
throwing  it  into  the  fire.  After  the  cloth  is  burned 
she  extinguishes  the  fire  with  her  urine,  and  her  eyes 
will  be  cured ;  but  her  enemy  will  become  blind " 
(De  Pestilitate). 

"  There  are,  furthermore,  certain  substances  used  by 
witches  and  sorcerers  which  they  give  to  other  persons 
in  their  food  or  drink,  and  by  which  they  render  those 
persons  insane,  and  such  an  insanity  manifests  itself  in 
various  ways.  Sometimes  it  renders  men  or  women 
amorous,  or  it  makes  them  quarrelsome  ;  it  causes  them 
to  be  very  courageous  and  daring,  or  turns  them  into 
cowards.  Some  will  fall  deeply  in  love  with  the  person  who 
administered  to  them  such  philtres ;  and  it  has  happened 
that  in  this  way  masters  and  mistresses  have  fallen  deeply 
in  love  with  the  servants  who  administered  to  them  such 

MA  GIC  A  ND  SORCER  Y  159 

things,  and  thus  they  became  themselves  the  servants  of 
their  own  servants.  Even  horses,  dogs,  and  other  animals 
have  thus  been  brought  under  the  influence  of  such  spells. 
If  women  administer  such  things  to  men,  the  latter  may- 
fall  so  deeply  in  love  with  the  former  as  to  be  unable  to 
think  of  anything  else  but  of  them ;  and  if  men  ad- 
minister such  things  to  women,  they  will  continually  think 
of  them  "  (De  Morbis  Ammtium). 

"  But  the  things  which  such  persons  use  for  such 
purposes  are  nothing  else  but  substances  that  have  long 
been  in  contact  with  their  own  bodies,  and  which  con- 
tain a  part  of  their  own  vitality.  Women  are  more 
successful  in  such  experiments,  because  they  are  more 
impulsive,  more  implacable  in  their  revenge,  and  more  in- 
clined to  envy  and  hate.  If  they  are  fully  absorbed  by 
their  own  imagination,  they  call  into  existence  an  active 
spirit  that  moves  their  imagination  wherever  they  may 
desire  it  to  go.  A  wood-carver  takes  a  piece  of  wood 
and  carves  out  of  it  whatever  he  has  in  his  mind,  and 
likewise  the  imagination  can  create  something  out  of 
the  essence  of  life.  The  Mumia  is  the  vehicle  of  which 
the  imagination  makes  use  for  the  purpose  of  taking 
some  form.1  It  is  lifted  up  and  expanded  by  the  power 
of  faith,  and  it  contracts  and  penetrates  the  mind  by 
being  impressed  by  the  will.  Women  have  a  greater 
power  of  imagination  during  their  dreams  and  when  they 
are  alone ;  and  they  ought,  therefore,  not  to  be  left  alone 
a  great  deal,  but  ought  to  be  amused,  because  if  they  are 
ill-disposed  and  harbouring  evil  thoughts,  they  may,  by 
the  power  of  their  imagination,  poison  the  food  which 
they  cook,  or  make  it  impure,  without  being  themselves 
aware  of  it.  Women  who  are  occupied  a  great  deal  with 
an  evil  imagination,  and  who  are  unable  to  control  it, 

1  The  more  the  physical  body  is  active,  the  more  will  it  need  material 
food.  The  more  the  astral  body  is  active,  the  more  will  it  attract  nutri- 
ment from  the  astral  plane.  The  more  divine  love  is  active  in  man,  the 
more  will  his  soul  receive  of  the  substance  of  Christ.  Each  of  these  three 
states  has  its  own  functions  and  qualities. 

160  PARACELSUS 

should  not  be  permitted  to  nurse  and  educate  infants, 
because  the  impressions  which  their  imagination  creates 
unconsciously  impresses  itself  and  acts  injuriously  upon 
the  minds  of  the  children.  The  imagination  is  the 
cause  that  beings  have  been  created  out  of  the  'Mumia 
spiritiialis,'  which  possesses  great  powers  "  1  (Fragment : 
De  Virtute  Imaginationce). 

"  By  the  power  of  the  imagination  foreign  bodies  are 
transferred  invisibly  into  the  bodies  of  human  beings,  in 
the  same  manner  as  if  I  take  a  stone  in  my  hand  and 
put  it  into  a  tub  of  water,  and,  withdrawing  my  hand, 
I  leave  the  stone  in  the  water.  Menstruating  witches 
especially  may  dissolve  (dematerialise)  bodies  by  the 
power  of  their  imagination.  They  make  a  figure  of 
wax  representing  the  person  whom  they  wish  to  injure, 
and  they  tie  a  cloth  spotted  with  menstrual  blood  around 
the  neck  of  that  figure,  and  attach  it  there  by  means  of 
a  string  drawn  through  the  pulpy  mass  of  a  crushed 
spider.  They  then  take  a  bow  and  an  arrow  made  of  a 
certain  kind  of  wood ;  they  tie  pieces  of  glass,  or  nails, 
or  bristles,  or  anything  else,  to  that  arrow,  and  shoot  it 
into  the  waxen  image ;  and  in  this  way  the  articles  dis- 
solved by  their  imagination  are  by  the  power  of  the 
Mumia  transmitted  into  the  body  of  the  sensitive  person, 
and  there  they  will  be  found  in  a  corporeal  form "  (De 
Sagis). 

"  The  power  of  the  imagination  is  a  great  factor  in 
medicine.     It  produces  diseases  in  man  and  in  animals, 

i  According  to  Paracelsus,  the  characteristic  signs  by  which  witches 
can  be  known,  or  which  justify  the  suspicion  of  a  person  being  a  witch, 
are  as  follows  : — 

1.  They  avoid  the  company  of  men  and  lead  solitary  lives. 

2.  They  especially  venerate  certain  days,  such  as  Thursday,  Friday,  and 

Saturday. 

3.  They  avoid  sexual  intercourse. 

4.  They  often  have   special   marks,  such   as  certain   deformities   and 

physiognomical  characteristics. 

5.  They  practise  certain  ceremonies,  and  seek  to  associate  with  those 

who  practise  such  arts. 

MAGIC  AND  SORCERY  161 

and  it  cures  them.  But  this  is  not  done  by  the  powers 
of  symbols  or  characters  made  in  wax  or  being  written 
on  paper,  but  by  an  imagination  which  perfects  the  will. 
All  the  imagination  of  man  comes  from  the  heart.  The 
heart  is  the  '  seed '  of  the  Microcosm,  and  from  that  seed 
the  imagination  proceeds  into  the  Macrocosm.  Thus  the 
imagination  of  man  is  a  seed  that  becomes  materialised 
or  corporeal.  A  thought  is  an  act  having  an  object  in 
view.  I  need  not  turn  my  eye  with  my  hand  in  the 
direction  in  which  I  desire  to  see,  but  my  imagination 
turns  it  wherever  I  want  it.  An  imagination  coming 
from  a  pure  and  intense  desire  of  the  heart  acts  instinc- 
tively and  without  any  conscious  effort.  The  power  of  a 
strong  imagination  directed  upon  another  can  kill  or  cure 
him  according  to  the  nature  of  the  desire  that  impels 
the  force,  and  which  may  be  good  or  evil.  Therefore 
a  curse  will  become  productive  of  evil,  and  a  blessing 
productive  of  good,  if  it  comes  from  the  heart."  -1 

"The  curse  of  the  oppressed  poor  is  nothing  but 
an  imagination  ;  but  that  imagination  is  firm,  and  not 
a  wavering  and  uncertain  thing.  It  is  penetrated  by 
and  followed  with  an  earnest  desire  that  the  object  of 
their  wish  shall  be  accomplished,  and  that  which  men 
desire  in  cursing  enters  into  their  imagination,  and  from 
the  imagination  results  the  act.  The  evil  elements 
in  the  soul  of  him  who  acted  evil  attract  unto  them- 
selves the  evil  will  set  free  by  the  curse  of  him  who 
has  been  injured ;  for  the  soul  is  like  a  magnet,  attract- 
ing unconsciously  that  which  corresponds  to  its  nature  " 
(Fragm.). 

"  Magic  is  great  hidden  wisdom,  just  as  that  which 
is  commonly  called  human  wisdom  is  great  folly.  To 
use   wisdom,    no   external   ceremonies   and   conjurations 

1  The  weak-minded  people  of  our  present  civilisation  know  nothing 
about  an  imagination  that  comes  from  the  heart.  They  live  entirely  in 
their  brains,  in  moonshine  and  fancy.  What  Paracelsus  calls  the  imagina- 
tion of  the  heart,  and  H.  P.  Blavatsky  the  "doctrine  of  the  heart,"  is  the 
self-conscious  will  enlightened  by  intelligence. 

L 

1 62  PARACELSUS 

are  required.  The  making  of  circles  and  the  burning 
of  incense  are  all  tomfoolery  and  temptation,  by  which 
only  evil  spirits  are  attracted.  The  human  heart  is  a 
great  thing,  so  great  that  no  one  can  fully  express  its 
greatness.  It  is  imperishable  and  eternal,  like  God. 
If  we  only  knew  all  the  powers  of  the  human  heart, 
nothing  would  be  impossible  for  us.  The  imagination 
is  fortified  and  perfected  through  faith,  and  each  doubt 
destroys  the  effect  of  its  labour.  Faith  must  confirm 
the  imagination,  because  it  perfects  the  will.  The  reason 
why  men  have  not  a  perfect  imagination  is  because  they 
are  still  uncertain  about  their  power,  but  they  might 
be  perfectly  certain  if  they  only  possessed  true  know- 
ledge." 

"  If  the  imagination  of  a  man  acting  upon  another 
cannot  always  accomplish  what  he  desires,  it  is  because 
it  is  too  weak  to  penetrate  the  armour  of  the  soul  of 
that  other  person,  and  a  weak  imagination  has  no  effect 
upon  another  person,  if  the  latter  is  protected  by  a 
strong  and  resisting  faith  ;  and  each  one  may  strengthen 
bis  own  faith  and  make  his  soul  invulnerable  by  believ- 
ing in  the  supreme  power  of  Good  " x  {Be,  Peste.,  lib.  i.). 

"  Those  who  are  strong  in  their  faith,  and  full  of 
confidence  that  the  divine  power  in  man  can  protect 
him  against  all  evil  influences,  whether  they  come  from 
an  incarnated  or  a  disincarnated  entity,  cannot  be  harmed 
by  either.  But  if  a  weak  person  is  obsessed  by  such 
an  evil  influence  and  is  unable  to  drive  it  out,  then 
it  is  necessary  that  some  other  person  who  possesses 
that  spiritual  power  should  drive  it  out  in  his  place. 

1  Fear  makes  a  person  negative  and  liable  to  be  infected.  During  the 
time  of  epidemic  diseases,  those  who  are  not  afraid  of  being  infected  are 
the  least  liable  to  become  their  victims.  He  who  is  confident  that  he 
cannot  be  affected  by  sorceries  is  not  liable  to  become  their  victim. 

"  He  who  fears  thinks  of  nothing  but  evil.  He  has  no  confidence  in 
God  (in  himself)  ;  he  only  imagines  diseases  and  death,  and  thus  he  creates 
diseases  in  his  imagination,  and  ultimately  makes  himself  sick "  (De 
Pestilitate,  ii.). 

MA  GIC  A  ND  SORCER  Y  163 

A  worm  may  grow  in  a  hazel-nut  although  the  shell  of 
the  nut  is  whole,  and  there  is  no  place  where  the  worm 
could  have  entered.  Thus  an  evil  spirit  enters  into  the 
body  of  a  man  and  produces  some  disease  without  making 
a  hole  into  him.  If  the  mind  is  weak  and  the  soul  not 
protected  by  faith  and  confidence,  it  will  enter ;  and 
therefore  the  best  remedy  is  a  strong  mind,  illuminated 
by  the  interior  light  of  wisdom  coming  from  God." 

"  Ills  of  the  body  may  be  cured  by  physical  remedies 
or  by  the  power  of  the  spirit  acting  through  the  soul. 
Ills  of  the  soul  are  cured  by  the  power  of  the  spirit, 
but  to  do  this  requires  more  than  mere  lip  prayer  and 
gibberish  and  idle  ceremonies  ;  it  needs  the  consciousness 
of  the  spirit  that  it  can  accomplish  that  which  it  desires 
to  do.  A  paternoster  is  useless  if  the  lips  speak  it 
while  the  heart  desires  evil.  He  who  is  dressed  up 
like  a  clergyman  is  therefore  not  necessarily  a  spiritual 
person,  although  he  may  have  been  ordained  by  the 
Church.  To  be  ordained  by  man  does  not  imply  the 
possession  of  spiritual  power,  because  such  a  power 
can  only  be  given  by  the  spirit ;  he  who  possesses  the 
power  to  cure  diseases  and  to  drive  out  evil  influences 
by  the  power  of  the  spirit  is  ordained  by  God.  The 
others  are  quacks  and  maleficants,  in  spite  of  their  super- 
stitious beliefs,  their  illusory  science,  diplomas,  and  man- 
made  authority  "  (JDe  Sanctorum,  Beneficiis). 

"  God  looks  at  the  heart  and  not  at  the  ceremony. 
All  fasting  and  praying  done  by  hypocrites  for  the 
purpose  of  showing  off  their  piety  is  the  work  of  the 
devil  in  them.  All  blessings  and  benedictions  with 
'holy  water,'  &c,  are  things  which  the  devil  has  in- 
vented to  make  men  believe  that  they  could  dispense 
with  God  and  find  their  salvation  in  ceremonies.  St. 
Peter  is  not  superior  to  God,  neither  can  the  spirits 
in  man  do  anything  but  what  the  Lord  in  him  permits 
them  to  do.  All  good  things  should  be  sought  for 
in   God,   and    not    in   the    spirits  or  saints ;    neither   in 

164  PARACELSUS 

angels  nor  devils.  If  we  give  the  true  faith  out  of 
our  hand  we  will  be  without  it ;  if  God  departs  from 
the  soul,  then  will  the  evil  spirits  therein  have  free 
play"  (Morb.  Invis.), 

If  the  followers  of  the  Christian  Church  or  the 
modern  "  theosophists  "  were  to  realise  these  truths,  they 
would  cease  to  kneel  before  external  Christs  or  run 
after  strange  "  Mahatmas,"  and  every  one  would  try  to 
know  the  Christ  or  "  Mahatma  "  within  himself. 

VII.  MEDICINE 

"  Those  who  imagine  that  the  medicine  of  Paracelsus  is  a  system  of 
superstitions  which  we  have  fortunately  outgrown,  will,  if  they  once 
learn  to  know  its  principles,  be  surprised  to  find  that  it  is  based  on  a 
superior  kind  of  knowledge  which  we  have  not  yet  attained,  but  into 
which  we  may  hope  to  grow." — Lessing,  Paracelsus. 

The  practice  of  medicine  is  the  art  of  restoring  the  sick 
to  health.  Modern  medicine  is,  to  a  great  extent,  looked 
upon  and  employed  as  if  it  were  a  system  by  which  man 
by  his  cunning  and  cleverness  may  cheat  Nature  out  of 
her  dues  and  act  against  the  laws  of  God  with  impunity, 
while,  to  many  persons  calling  themselves  physicians,  it 
is  merely  a  method  of  making  money  and  gratifying 
their  vanity.1  Instead  of  seeking  to  know  the  divine 
laws  in  Nature,  and  to  help  to  restore  the  divine  order 
of  things,  the  highest  aim  of  medical  science  is  at  present 
to  find  means  to  so  poison  the  body  of  man  and  make 
it  pestiferous  by  inoculation  as  to  render  it  "  immune," 
which  means,  to  make  it  incapable  of  reacting  upon  the 
introduction  of  a  similar  poison.  This  system  corre- 
sponds in  religion  to  that  which  succeeds  in  quieting 
the  voice  of  conscience  by  never  paying  any  attention  to  it. 

Four  hundred  years  ago  Paracelsus  spoke  the  follow- 
ing words  to  the  physicians  of  his  times,  and  we  leave 
it  to  the  reader  to  judge  whether  or  not  his  words  may 
find  just  application  to-day.      He  says  : — 

"  You   have  entirely  deserted   the  path  indicated    by 

1  Is  not  even  now  the  scientific  world  continually  engaged  in  seeking 
for  means  by  which  man  may  lead  an  intemperate  and  immoral  life  without 
becoming  subject  to  the  natural  consequences  thereof  ?  Are  not  even 
now  many  of  our  "  doctors  "  poisoning  the  imagination  of  their  patients 
by  frightening  them  instead  of  seeking  to  instil  hope  and  confidence  into 
their  minds  ? 

i6S 

166  PARACELSUS 

Nature,  and  built  up  an  artificial  system,  which  is  fit 
for  nothing  but  to  swindle  the  public  and  to  prey  upon 
the  pockets  of  the  sick.  Your  safety  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  your  gibberish  is  unintelligible  to  the  public,  who 
fancy  that  it  must  have  a  meaning,  and  the  consequence 
is  that  no  one  can  come  near  you  without  being  cheated. 
Your  art  does  not  consist  in  curing  the  sick,  but  in 
worming  yourself  into  the  favour  of  the  rich,  in  swindling 
the  poor,  and  in  gaining  admittance  to  the  kitchens  of 
the  noblemen  of  the  country.  You  live  upon  imposture, 
and  the  aid  and  abetment  of  the  legal  profession  enables 
you  to  carry  on  your  impostures,  and  to  evade  punish- 
ment by  the  law.  You  poison  the  people  and  ruin  their 
health ;  you  are  sworn  to  use  diligence  in  your  art ;  but 
how  could  you  do  so,  as  you  possess  no  art,  and  all  your 
boasted  science  is  nothing  but  an  invention  to  cheat  and 
deceive  ?  You  denounce  me  because  I  do  not  follow 
your  schools ;  but  your  schools  can  teach  me  nothing 
which  would  be  worth  knowing.  You  belong  to  the 
tribe  of  snakes,  and  I  expect  nothing  but  poison  from 
you.  You  do  not  spare  the  sick :  how  could  I  expect 
that  you  would  respect  me,  while  I  am  cutting  down 
your  income  by  exposing  your  pretensions  and  ignorance 
to  the  public  ?  " 

This  is  not  applicable  to  the  medical  profession  of 
our  day  as  a  whole ;  not  because  that  profession  has  of 
itself  risen  to  a  higher  standard,  but  because  physicians 
are  human  beings,  and  humanity  as  a  whole  has  been 
somewhat  improving  in  morals.  There  are,  however, 
numerous  well-intentioned  fools  in  the  medical  pro- 
fession, knowing  nothing  whatever  about  the  real  nature 
of  man,  and  their  mistakes  are  not  less  injurious  if 
committed  in  ignorance  than  if  they  were  intentional. 
Moreover,  their  folly  is  the  more  dangerous  as  it  is 
protected  by  the  authorities  of  the  State.1 

1  Those  who  study  the  effects  of  vaccination  without  prejudice  will 
easily  find  that  nothing  is  done   in  that  practice  except  substituting  a 

MEDICINE  167 

There  are  three  kingdoms  acting  in  the  constitution 
of  man,  an  outer,  an  inner,  and  an  innermost  principle ; 
namely,  the  external  physical  body,  the  inner  (astral) 
man,  and  the  innermost  centre  or  soul.  Ordinary 
(regular)  physicians  know  hardly  anything  about  the 
external  body,  nothing  about  the  inner  man,  the  cause 
of  the  emotions,  and  less  than  nothing  about  the  soul. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  the  divine  spark  in  the  soul  which 
created  and  supports  the  inner  man,  and  the  outer  form 
is  the  vehicle  in  which  the  inner  man  is  outwardly 
manifesting  himself.  Man's  natural  body  is  produced 
by  Nature ;  but  the  power  in  Nature  is  God,  and  God 
is  superior  to  Nature.  Man's  divine  spirit  is  therefore 
able  to  change  his  nature,  and  to  restore  the  health  of  his 
physical  form  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  soul. 

The  medicine  of  Paracelsus  deals  not  merely  with  the 
external  body  of  man,  which  belongs  to  the  world  of 
effects,  but  more  especially  with  the  inner  man  and  with 
the  world  of  causes,  never  leaving  out  of  sight  the 
universal  presence  of  the  divine  cause  of  all  things. 
His  medicine  is  therefore  a  holy  science,  and  its  practice 
a  sacred  mission,  such  as  cannot  be  understood  by  those 
who  are  godless ;  neither  can  divine  power  be  conferred 
by  diplomas  and  academical  degrees.  A  physician  who 
has  no  faith,  and  consequently  no  spiritual  power  in  him, 
can  be  nothing  else  but  an  ignoramus  and  quack,  even 
if  he  had  graduated  in  all  the  medical  colleges  in  the 
world  and  knew  the  contents  of  all  the  medical  books 
that  were  ever  written  by  man. 

slowly  developing  and  far  more  dangerous  disease  for  a  more  acute  and 
less  dangerous  one.  The  reason  why  this  is  not  generally  known  is 
because  the  diseases  inoculated  by  vaccination  often  appear  only  a  long 
time  after  its  performance,  and  their  cause  is  therefore  not  recognised. 
Thus  a  lifelong  suffering  from  eczema  is  often  the  consequence  of 
vaccination. 

As  to  the  celebrated  Pasteur  cures,  it  is  said  that,  of  all  his  patients, 
ninety-six  per  cent,  have  died,  while  the  remaining  four  were  probably  not 
infected,  and  would  have  remained  well  anyhow. 

1 68  PARACELSUS 

The  Virtues  of  a  Physician 

The  object  of  medical  instruction  should  be  to  educate 
the  natural  talents  of  those  who  are  born  physicians,  so 
that  they  may  make  use  of  the  experiences  gained  by 
their  elders.  It  is  useless  and  dangerous  to  make  a 
medical  practitioner  out  of  a  person  who  is  not  a  physi- 
cian at  heart. 

"  The  greatest  and  highest  of  all  qualifications  which 
a  physician  should  possess  is  Sapientia — i.e.,  Wisdom — 
and  without  this  qualification  all  his  learning  will  amount 
to  little  or  nothing  as  far  as  any  benefit  or  usefulness 
to  humanity  is  concerned.  He  alone  is  in  possession  of 
wisdom  who  is  in  possession  of  reason  and  knows  how 
to  use  it  without  error  or  doubt.  The  book  of  wisdom 
is  the  recognition  of  the  truth,  and  the  truth  is  God ;  for 
He  who  has  caused  all  things  to  come  into  existence, 
and  who  is  Himself  the  eternal  fountain  of  all  things, 
is  also  the  source  of  all  wisdom  and  the  book  in  which 
the  truth  is  to  be  found  without  any  interpolation  or 
error.  In  and  through  Him  alone  shall  we  be  able  to 
find  wisdom  and  to  act  wisely,  and  without  Him  all  our 
learning  will  be  mere  foolishness.  As  the  sun  shines 
upon  us  from  above  and  causes  plants  to  grow,  so  the 
talents  necessary  for  the  exercise  of  this  art,  whose  germs 
exist  in  the  human  heart,  must  be  developed  in  the  rays 
of  the  sun  of  divine  wisdom.  We  cannot  find  wisdom 
in  books,  nor  in  any  external  thing ;  we  can  only  find  it 
within  ourselves.  Man  cannot  create  day,  nor  can  he 
create  night ;  and  he  cannot  create  wisdom,  but  it  must 
come  to  him  from  above.  He  who  seeks  wisdom  in  the. 
fountain  of  wisdom  is  the  true  disciple,  but  he  who  seeks 
it  whei'e  it  does  not  exist  will  seek  for  it  in  vain." 

Wisdom  is  not  created,  manufactured,  or  "  developed  " 
by  man,  but  it  becomes  manifest  in  him  by  its  own  power, 
whenever   the   conditions   are   favourable.       Intellectual 

MEDICINE  169 

learning  is  an  artificial  thing,  and  may  be  accumulated 
by  man's  selfish  efforts  to  learn  and  possess  knowledge  ; 
but  wisdom  is  the  realisation  of  truth  within  the  soul, 
that  comes  from  an  awakening  to  its  realisation. 

"  It  is  said  that  we  should  seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  which  is  within  us,  and  that  everything  else 
would  be  added  ;  it  has  also  been  said  that  if  we  only 
knock  strongly  enough  the  door  will  be  opened,  and 
we  will  never  ask  in  vain,  provided  we  ask  with  a  sincere 
heart  and  not  with  an  adulterous  object  in  view.  A 
physician  must  seek  for  his  knowledge  and  power  within 
the  divine  spirit ;  if  he  seeks  it  in  external  things  he 
will  be  a  pseudo-medicus  and  an  ignoramus.  God  is 
the  Great  First  Cause  in  and  from  which  all  things 
came  into  existence,  and  all  our  knowledge  should  there- 
fore come  from  God  and  not  from  man-made  authorities  " 
(Zahyrinthus  Medicorum). 

"  A  physician  should  exercise  his '  art,  not  for  his 
own  benefit,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  patient.  If  he 
practises  merely  for  his  own  benefit,  such  a  physician 
resembles  a  wolf,  and  is  even  worse  than  an  ordinary 
murderer ;  for,  while  a  man  may  defend  himself  against 
a  murderous  attack  made  upon  him  on  the  high-road, 
he  has  no  means  of  defence  against  the  murderer  who, 
under  the  guise  of  a  benefactor  and  protected  by  law, 
comes  to  steal  his  goods  and  destroy  his  life." 

"  A  physician  should  be  above  all  honest  and  true. 
Let  his  speech  be  '  yes '  and  '  no,'  and  let  him  avoid 
using  subterfuges  and  prevarications;  God  acts  through 
him  who  is  upright,  honest,  and  pure,  but  not  through 
him  who  is  wicked  and  false.  God  is  absolute  Truth, 
and  His  power  does  not  become  manifest  in  those  who 
are.  not  true.  The  power  of  the  physician  should  be 
resting  in  the  truth ;  if  it  rests  upon  lies,  it  will  be  use- 
less and  belongs  to  the  devil." 

If  man  were  made  only  out  of  one  kingdom,  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  then  would  it  be  sufficient  for  him  to 

ifo  PARACELSUS 

lead  a  holy  life,  to  enable  him  to  cure  all  diseases  in 
himself  and  in  others ;  but  as  he  is  made  of  three  worlds, 
it  is  necessary  that  the  physician  should  also  have  a 
knowledge  of  the  conditions  existing  in  the  two  other 
worlds,  the  world  of  mind  and  external  Nature.1 

"  He  should  also  be  well  experienced ;  for  there  are 
many  kinds  of  disease,  and  they  cannot  be  known  with- 
out experience  and  learning.  No  one  ever  knows  so 
much  that  he  could  not  learn  more.  Every  art  requires 
experience.  You  cannot  become  a  good  painter,  sculptor, 
or  shoemaker  by  the  mere  reading  of  books,  much  less 
can  you  be  a  good  physician  without  being  experienced. 
He  should  know  the  laws  of  Nature,  but  above  all  the 
constitution  of  man,  the  invisible  no  less  than  the  visible 
one.  His  knowledge  will  strengthen  his  faith,  and  his 
faith  will  endow  him  with  power,  so  that  he  will  be  like 
an  apostle,  healing  the  sick,  the  blind,  and  the  halt." 

The  medicine  of  Paracelsus  therefore  rests  upon  four 
pillars,  which  are:  I.  Philosophy,  i.e.,  a  knowledge  of 
physical  nature;  2.  Astronomy,  i.e.,  a  knowledge  of  the 
powers  of  the  mind ;  3.  Alchemy,  i.e.,  a  knowledge  of 
the  divine  powers  in  man ;  and  4.  The  personal  virtue 
(holiness)  of  the  physician. 

The  Four  Pillars  of  Medicine 

1.  A  physician  should  be  a  philosopher  ;  i.e.,  acquainted 
with  the  laws  of  external  Nature. 

"  The  knowledge  of  Nature  is  the  foundation  of  the 
science  of  medicine,  and  it  is  taught  by  the  four  great 
departments  of  science :  Philosophy,  Astronomy,  Alchemy, 
and  Physical  Science.  These  four  sciences  cover  a  large 
field,  and  require  a  great  deal  of  study.  A  common 
proverb  says,  '  Life  is  short,  art  is  long.'  Ever  since 
the  beginning  of   the   world   men  have  sought   for   the 

1  Here  comes  in  the  advantage  of  intellectual  education,  but  an  educated 
intellect  without  any  self-perception  of  truth  belongs  to  the  devil. 

MEDICINE  171 

art  to  destroy  disease,  and  they  have  not  found  it  yet ; 
but  to  the  patient  it  appears  that  the  medical  art  is 
very  short  and  the  acquisition  of  science  very  slow, 
while  his  disease  is  quick,  and  does  not  wait  until  the 
doctor  has  found  his  art.  If  a  physician  is  in  possession 
of  true  knowledge,  then  will  his  art  make  short  work 
with  the  disease,  and  the  life  of  the  patient  will  be  com- 
paratively long.  Art  is  short,  for  it  requires  little  time 
to  apply  it  when  it  is  once  in  our  possession ;  but  error 
is  long,  and  many  die  before  finding  the  art "  (Commen- 
taria  in  Aphorismas  Hippocratis). 

"A  physician  must  be  a  Philosopher;  that  is  to  say, 
he  must  dare  to  use  his  own  reason  and  not  cling  to 
opinions  and  book-authorities,  be  they  old  or  new.  He 
must  above  all  be  in  possession  of  that  faculty  which  is 
called  Intuition,  and  which  cannot  be  acquired  by  blindly 
following  the  footsteps  of  another;  he  must  be  able  to 
see  his  own  way.  There  are  natural  philosophers  and 
there  are  artificial  philosophers.  The  former  have  a 
knowledge  of  their  own ;  the  latter  have  borrowed  know- 
ledge from  their  books.  If  you  wish  to  be  a  true 
physician,  you  must  be  able  to  do  your  own  thinking, 
and  not  merely  employ  the  thoughts  of  others.  What 
others  may  teach  you  may  be  good  enough  to  assist  you 
in  your  search  for  knowledge,  but  you  should  be  able 
to  think  for  yourself,  and  not  cling  to  the  coat-tail  of 
any  authority,  no  matter  how  big-sounding  the  title  of 
the  latter  may  be  "  (Be  Modo  Pharmacandi). 

"  The  wisdom  of  our  sophists  and  medicasters  does 
not  consist  in  a  knowledge  of  Nature,  but  in  a  knowledge 
of  what  Aristoteles,  Galen,  Avicenna,  and  other  accepted 
authorities  have  supposed  Nature  to  be ;  they  only  know 
the  dead  body  of  man,  but  not  the  living  image  pre- 
sented by  Nature ;  they  have  become  untruthful  and 
unnatural,  and  therefore  their  art  is  based  upon  their 
own  fancies  and  speculations,  which  they  imagine  to  be 
science.     The  true  physician  is  a  product  of  Nature,  not 

172  PARACELSUS 

a  product  of  speculation  and  imagination.  If  you  are 
not  able  to  see  a  thing,  it  will  be  useless  to  try  to 
imagine  how  it  may  look ;  perception  enables  you  to 
see,  but  speculation  is  blind.  Wisdom  is  not  given  by 
Nature,  nor  does  man  inherit  it  from  the  latter ;  it  is 
planted  in  him  by  his  eternal  parent,  and  grows  and 
increases  in  him  by  practice." 

It  is  not  true,  as  has  been  asserted  by  certain  modern 
writers,  that  Paracelsus  has  objected  to  the  dissecting 
of  dead  bodies  and  called  it  useless ;  what  he  said  is, 
that  such  a  practice  was  unnecessary  for  those  who  had 
developed  the  true  inner  sight ;  just  as  it  is  useless  for 
a  man  to  walk  on  crutches  when  he  is  in  perfect  health. 
He  says : — 

"  The  anatomy  of  man  is  twofold.  One  aspect  of  it 
may  be  known  by  dissecting  the  body,  so  as  to  find  out 
the  position  of  its  bones,  muscles,  and  veins,  &c. ;  but 
this  is  the  least  important.  The  other  is  more  important, 
and  means  to  introduce  a  new  life  into  the  organism,  to 
see  the  transmutations  taking  place  therein,  to  know 
what  the  blood  is,  and  what  kind  of  sulphur,  salt, 
and  mercury  (energy,  substance,  and  mind)  it  contains  " 
(Paramir.,  i.  cap.  c). 

"  By  the  power  of  wisdom  man  is  enabled  to  recognise 
the  unity  of  the  All,  and  to  perceive  that  the  microcosm 
of  man  is  the  counterpart  of  the  macrocosm  of  Nature. 
There  is  nothing  in  heaven  or  upon  the  earth  which  may 
not  be  found  in  man,  and  there  is  nothing  in  man  but 
what  exists  in  the  macrocosm  of  Nature.  The  two  are 
the  same,  and  differ  from  each  other  in  nothing  but  their 
forms.  This  is  a  truth  which  will  be  perceived  by  every 
true  philosopher,  but  a  merely  animal  intellect  will  not  be 
able  to  see  it,  nor  would  man's  fancy  enable  him  to  under- 
stand it.  That  philosophy  which  is  based  upon  wisdom — 
i.e.,  upon  the  recognition  of  the  truth  of  a  thing — 
is  true  philosophy  ;  but  that  which  is  based  upon  fancy 
and  the  idle  speculation  is  uncertain.      The  former  is  the 

MEDICINE  173 

true  gold ;  the  latter  is  merely  an  imitation  which  if  put 
into  the  fire  will  leave  nothing  but  sulphur  and  ashes." 

"  He  who  wants  to  know  man  must  look  upon  him 
as  a  whole  and  not  as  a  patched-up  piece  of  work.  If 
he  finds  a  part  of  the  human  body  diseased,  he  must  look 
for  the  causes  which  produce  the  disease,  and  not  merely 
treat  the  external  effects.  Philosophy  —  i.e.,  the  true 
perception  and  understanding  of  cause  and  effect — is 
the  mother  of  the  physician,  and  explains  the  origin  of 
all  his  diseases.  In  this  understanding  rests  the  indica- 
tion of  the  true  remedy,  and  he  who  is  not  able  to 
understand  will  accomplish  nothing;  he  will  go  on  in 
the  future  laming,  crippling,  and  killing  his  patients  in 
Nomine  Domini  as  he  did  in  the  past." 

"  A  physician  who  knows  nothing  more  about  his 
patient  than  what  the  latter  will  tell  him  knows  very 
little  indeed.  He  must  be  able  to  judge  from  the  exter- 
nal appearance  of  the  patient  about  his  internal  condition. 
He  must  be  able  to  see  the  internal  in  the  external  man  ; 
for  if  he  wanted  to  experiment  merely  according  to  his 
own  fancy,  the  world  could  not  furnish  him  enough 
patients  to  arrive  at  the  end  of  his  experiments.  He 
must  have  the  normal  constitution  of  man  present  before 
his  mind  and  know  its  abnormal  conditions ;  he  must 
know  the  relations  existing  between  the  microcosm  of 
man  and  the  macrocosm  of  Nature,  and  know  the  little 
by  the  power  of  his  knowledge  of  the  great.  "We  should 
rise  up  to  a  true  realisation  of  the  nature  of  man  and 
his  position  in  the  universe,  and  then  apply  our  know- 
ledge according  to  the  teaching  of  wisdom,  and  this 
kind  of  study  will  injure  no  man ;  but  those  who 
experiment  with  their  patients,  without  knowing  the 
real  constitution  of  man,  are  murderers,  and  may  God 
protect  the  sick  from  them !  " 

u  Nature  —  not  man  —  is  the  physician.  Man  has 
lost  the  true  light  of  reason,  and  the  animal  intellect 
with    its    speculations    and    theories    has    usurped    the 

174  PARACELSUS 

place.  Try  to  enable  yourself  to  follow  Nature  again, 
and  she  will  be  your  instructor.  Learn  to  know  the 
storehouse  of  Nature  and  the  boxes  in  which  her  vir- 
tues are  stored  up.  The  ways  of  Nature  are  simple,  and 
she  does  not  require  any  complicated  prescriptions." 

2.  A  physician  should  be  an  Astronomer;  this  means 
that  he  should  know  the  heaven  (the  mental  sphere) 
wherein  man  lives,  with  all  its  stars  (ideas)  and  con- 
stellations. 

A  physician  must  be  an  Astronomer,  for  he  ought  to 
know  the  influences  of  the  seasons,  of  heat  and  cold, 
of  dryness  and  moisture,  of  light  and  darkness,  &c, 
upon  the  organism  of  man.  There  is  a  time  for  every- 
thing, and  what  may  be  good  at  one  time  may  be  evil 
at  another.  There  is  a  time  for  rain  and  a  time  when 
the  roses  are  blooming,  and  it  is  not  sufficient  that  a 
physician  should  be  able  to  judge  about  to-day,  he  should 
also  know  what  to-morrow  will  bring.  Time  is  man's 
master,  and  plays  with  him  as  the  cat  with  a  mouse, 
and  no  one  knows  the  future  but  God.  A  physician 
should,  therefore,  not  depend  too  much  on  the  accom- 
plishments of  the  animal  intellect  in  his  brain,  but  he 
should  listen  to  the  divine  voice  which  speaks  in  his  heart, 
and  learn  to  understand  it.  He  should  have  that  know- 
ledge which  cannot  be  acquired  by  reading  in  books,  but 
which  is  a  gift  of  divine  wisdom.  He  should  be  married 
to  his  art  as  a  man  is  married  to  his  wife,  and  he  should 
love  her  with  all  his  heart  and  mind  for  her  own  sake, 
and  not  for  the  purpose  of  making  money  or  to  satisfy 
his  ambition.  If  he  loves  his  art,  his  art  will  be  true  to 
him  ;  but  if  he  sticks  to  it  only  for  mercenary  purposes, 
or  if  he  merely  imitates  the  art  of  another,  it  will  be  an 
adulterous  alliance,  and  no  good  will  be  the  result.  True 
marriage  is  not  a  mere  binding  together  of  two  forms,  but 
it  is  an  union  of  the  soul.  Tho  physician  who  is  not 
married  to  his  art  with  his  soul  is  a  quack,  an  adulterer, 
and  an  impostor  "  (Comm.  in  Aphor.  Hijypocr^). 

MEDICINE  175 

Man's  body  is  itself  a  product  of  mind,  and  its  condi- 
tion depends  to  a  great  extent  on  the  state  of  his  mind. 
All  his  diseases,  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  directly  due  to 
external  mechanical  causes,  are  due  to  mental  conditions. 

"  Philosophy  (anatomy)  deals  with  the  visible  material 
part  of  man's  constitution ;  but  there  is  a  vastly  greater 
part  of  man  which  is  ethereal  and  invisible.  As  the 
terrestrial  body  of  man  is  intimately  related  to  his  terres- 
trial surroundings,  likewise  his  astral  body  is  in  relation 
with  all  the  influences  of  the  astral  world ;  and  that  part 
of  philosophy  dealing  with  these  astral  influences  is  called 
astronomy.' 

"  Astronomy  is  the  upper  part  of  philosophy  by  which 
the  whole  of  the  microcosm  may  become  known.  Philo- 
sophy deals  with  the  elements  of  earth  and  water,  belong- 
ing to  man's  constitution.  Astronomy  deals  with  his  air 
and  fire  (the  mind).  There  is  a  heaven  and  earth  in  man 
as  there  is  in  the  macrocosm,  and  in  that  heaven  there 
are  all  the  celestial  influences,  whose  visible  represen- 
tations we  see  in  the  sky,  such  as  the  planets  and  stars, 
the  Milky  Way,  the  Zodiac,  &c,  neither  more  nor  less ;  for 
the  microcosm  is  an  exact  counterpart  of  the  macrocosm 
in  every  respect  except  its  external  form." 

"  The  terrestrial  part  of  man  is  a  child  of  the  earth, 
and  the  astral  man  is  a  child  of  the  astral  world,  and  as 
the  two  worlds  are  intimately  connected  with  each  other, 
the  physician  should  be  acquainted  with  the  influences  of 
the  astral  as  well  as  with  those  of  the  terrestrial  world. 
Man's  diseases  do  not  originate  in  himself ;  they  originate 
from  the  influences  which  act  upon  him  and  enter  his 
constitution.  The  astral  influences  are  invisible,  but 
they  act  upon  man,  unless  he  knows  how  to  protect  him- 
self against  them.  Heat  and  light  are  intangible  and 
incorporeal ;  nevertheless,  they  act  upon  man,  and  the 
same  takes  place  with  other  invisible  influences.  If  the 
air  becomes  vitiated,  it  will  poison  man's  body ;  if  the 
astral  influences  are  in  a  state  of  corruption,  they  will  do 

176  PARACELSUS 

likewise.  The  elements  themselves  are  invisible ;  that 
which  is  visible  belongs  merely  to  the  external  form. 
The  Arcanum  of  Man — i.e.,  the  real  inner  man — is  in- 
visible ;  that  which  we  see  of  him  is  not  an  essential  part  of 
his  constitution,  but  merely  his  external  corporeal  form."  1 

"  The  things  which  we  see  are  not  the  active  prin- 
ciples, but  merely  the  corpus  containing  them  ;  the  visible 
forms  are  merely  external  expressions  of  invisible  prin- 
ciples. Forms  are,  so  to  say,  the  vehicles  of  powers,  and 
they  may  be  visible  or  invisible.  The  invisible  air  and 
the  ether  of  space,  or  a  perfectly  clear  and,  therefore, 
invisible  crystal,  are  just  as  much  corporeal  as  the  solid 
earth,  a  piece  of  wood,  or  a  rock.  Each  of  these  cor- 
poreal things  has  its  own  particular  life  and  inhabitants 
(micro-organisms) ;  we  walk  about  in  the  air,  although 
the  air  is  corporeal ;  fishes  swim  about  in  the  water,  and 
the  yolk  of  an  egg  rests  in  the  albumen  without  sinking 
to  the  bottom  of  the  shell.  The  yolk  represents  the 
Earth,  and  the  white  represents  the  invisible  surround- 
ings of  the  Earth,  and  the  invisible  part  acts  upon  the 
visible  one,  but  only  the  philosopher  perceives  the  way  in 
which  that  action  takes  place." 

"  All  the  influences  of  the  terrestrial  and  the  astral 
world  converge  upon  man,  but  how  can  a  physician 
recognise  the  manner  in  which  they  act  and  prevent  or 
cure  the  diseases  which  are  caused  by  that  action,  if 
he  is  not  acquainted  with  the  influences  existing  in 
the  astral  plane  ?  The  star-gazer  knows  only  the  ex- 
ternal visible  heaven ;  but  the  true  astronomer  knows 
two  heavens,  the  external  visible  and  the  internal  in- 
visible one.      There  is  not  a  single  invisible  power   in 

1  Recent  experiments  go  to  prove  that  sensation  may  be  externalised. 
Thus,  for  instance,  a  man  may  surround  himself  with  an  invisible  shell  or 
aura  by  projecting  his  own  odic  emanations  to  a  certain  distance  from  his 
body ;  so  that,  while  his  body  becomes  insensible  to  pain,  the  pain  will  be 
felt  when  the  aura  around  him  is  touched.  This  goes  to  show  that  sensa- 
tion exists  in  the  odic  aura  (Prana),  and  not  in  the  physical  form.  (Com- 
pare E.  Du  Prel,  Die  sympathetlsclic  Kurmcthode.) 

MEDICINE  177 

heaven  which  does  not  find  its  corresponding  principle 
in  the  inner  heaven  of  man ;  the  above  acts  upon  the 
bolow,  and  the  latter  reacts  upon  the  former." 

3 .  The  physician  ought  to  be  an  Alchemist ;  that 
is  to  say,  he  ought  to  be  regenerated  in  the  spirit  of 
Jesus  Christ  and  know  his  own   divine  powers. 

"He  should  be  an  Alchemist;  that  is  to  say,  he 
should  understand  the  Chemistry  of  Life.  Medicine  is 
not  merely  a  science,  but  an  art ;  it  does  not  consist 
merely  in  compounding  pills  and  plasters  and  drugs  of 
all  kinds,  but  it  deals  with  the  processes  of  life,  which 
must  be  understood  before  they  can  be  guided.  All 
art,  all  wisdom,  all  power,  acts  from  one  centre  to- 
wards the  periphery  of  the  circle,  and  whatever  is  en- 
closed within  that  circle  may  be  regarded  as  medicine. 
A  powerful  will  can  cure  where  doubt  will  end  in 
failure.  The  character  of  the  physician  acts  more  power- 
fully upon  the  patient  than  all  the  drugs  employed. 
A  carpenter  or  a  mason  will  fail  to  make  perfect  work 
without  compass  and  square,  and  a  physician  without 
religion  and  firmness  will  be  a  failure.  Alchemy — i.e., 
the  employment  of  a  strong  will,  benevolence,  charity, 
patience,  &c. — is,  therefore,  the  principal  corner-stone  in 
the  practice  of  medicine." 

"  The  psychical  surroundings  of  the  patient  have  a 
great  influence  upon  the  course  of  his  disease.  If  he 
is  waited  upon  by  persons  who  are  in  sympathy  with 
him,  it  will  be  far  better  for  him  than  if  his  wife  or 
his  attendants  wish  for  his  death.  In  a  case  of  sickness, 
the  patient,  the  physician,  and  the  attendants  should  be, 
so  to  say,  all  one  heart  and  one  soul,  and  they  should 
always  keep  in  mind  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  which 
says :  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself " x 
(Comm.  in  A  ph.  Hippoer.). 

1  We  should  sympathise  with  the  patient,  but  not  with  his  disease. 
We  should  not  confirm  him  in  his  morbid  fancies,  or  encourage  him 
in  believing  himself  sick.     The  majority  of  sick  people  lack  the  energy 

M 

178  PARACELSUS 

"  The  physician  should  bo  well  versed  in  physical 
science.  He  should  know  the  action  of  medicines,  and 
learn  by  his  own  experience  and  by  the  experience  of 
others.  He  should  know  how  to  regulate  the  diet  of 
the  patient,  and  neither  overfeed  nor  starve  him.  He 
should  know  the  ordinary  course  of  disease,  and  the 
premonitory  symptoms;  for  a  disease  is  like  a  plant, 
which  may  grow  to  a  big  tree  if  it  is  not  rooted  out 
while  it  is  young.  A  child  can  cut  down  an  old  oak 
when  it  first  comes  out  of  an  acorn,  but  in  time  it  will 
require  a  strong  man  and  an  axe  to  cut  it  down. 

"  A  physician  should  be  learned,  and  profit  by  the 
experience  of  others,  but  blessed  is  he  who  knows  the 
living  medicine  and  how  to  obtain  it.  He  knows  that 
there  are  innumerable  remedies  in  Nature,  which  are 
the  Magnolia  Dei — i.e.,  the  mysteries  of  God,  hidden 
from  the  eyes  of  the  vulgar,  but  opened  to  the  spiritual 
perception  of  the  wise  " 1  (Comm.). 

4.  The  physician  must  have  a  natural  aualijiealion  for 
his  occupation. 

"  He  who  can  cure  disease  is  a  physician.  To  cure 
diseases  is  an  art  which  cannot  be  acquired  by  the  mere 
reading  of  books,  but  which  must  be  learned  by  ex- 
perience. Neither  emperors  nor  popes,  neither  colleges 
nor  high  schools,  can  create  physicians.  They  can  confer 
privileges  and  cause  a  person  who  is  not  a  physician 
to  appear  as  if  he  were  one,  but  they  cannot  cause 
him  to  be  what  he  is  not ;  they  can  give  him  per- 
mission to  kill,  but  they  cannot  enable  him  to  cure 
the  sick,  if  he  has  not  already  been  ordained  by  God. 
Theory  should  precede  practice ;  but  if  it  consists  in 
mere  suppositions  and  assumptions,  and  is  not  confirmed 
by  practical  works,  such  a  theory  is  worthless  and  ought 

necessary   to  cure  themselves.      In   such   cases   we   should   show   them 
energy  instead  of  a  helpless  commiseration. 

1  Modern  medicine,  with  its  "hypnotism,"  and  "suggestion,"  seems 
to  be  about  to  learn  the  first  letters  of  the  alphabet  of  the  system  of 
Paracelsus. 

MEDICINE  179 

to  be  abandoned.  The  pseudo-physician  bases  his  art 
on  his  books — i.e.,  on  that  which  he  believes  the  authors 
of  those  books  to  have  known ;  the  art  of  the  true  physi- 
cian is  based  on  his  own  knowledge  and  ability,  and  is 
supported  by  the  four  pillars  of  medicine — Philosophy, 
Astronomy,  Alchemy,  and  Virtue  "  (Paragranum). 

"  A  physician  who  is  true  to  his  own  higher  self  will 
also  have  faith  in  himself,  and  he  who  has  that  faith 
will  easily  command  the  faith  of  the  people.  A  preacher 
who  utters  moral  sermons,  but  does  not  observe  his  own 
doctrines,  will  not  command  respect ;  he  will  rightly  be 
despised  and  bring  his  doctrines — even  if  they  are  true — 
into  discredit ;  likewise  a  physician  who  is  seen  to  be 
untruthful,  wavering,  and  ignorant  will  lose  the  con- 
fidence of  the  public.  The  art  of  medicine  should  be 
based  on  truth ;  it  is  a  divine  art  which  should  not  be 
prostituted  for  base  purposes.  A  physician  who  deserves 
the  confidence  of  the  people  will  be  trusted  by  God, 
for  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  that  guides  the  hearts  of 
mankind." 

"  I  praise  the  spagyric  physicians  (the  alchemists),  for 
they  do  not  go  about  idling  and  putting  on  airs,  being 
dressed  in  velvets  and  silks,  having  golden  rings  on 
their  fingers  and  their  hands  in  white  gloves ;  but  they 
are  daily  and  nightly  patiently  engaged  in  their  work 
with  the  fire  and  seeking  their  pastime  within  their  own 
laboratory  (the  mind).  They  do  not  talk  much  or  praise 
their  medicines;  for  they  know  that  the  work  must 
praise  the  master,  and  not  the  master  the  work "  (De 
S&parat.  Rer.). 

All  arts  originate  in  divine  wisdom,  and  no  man  ever 
invented  anything  through  his  own  power.  Man  cannot 
accomplish  even  the  most  trifling  thing  without  the 
power  of  the  Will;  but  the  will  of  man  is  not  his 
product  and  does  not  belong  to  him  ;  it  belongs  to  God, 
and  has  merely  been  lent  to  man  ;  he  is  permitted  to 
use  it,  and  abuses  it  on  account  of  his  ignorance.      All 

180  PARACELSUS 

things  come  from  God,  the  good  as  well  as  the  evil 
ones ;  but  while  the  former  are  His  direct  products, 
and  in  harmony  with  the  Law,  the  latter  are,  so  to 
say,  His  grandchildren  which  have  become  degenerated ; 
for  evil  is  good  perverted.  Those  who  put  their  trust  in 
God — that  is  to  say,  in  the  power  of  Goodness,  Wisdom, 
Justice,  and  Truth — will  surely  succeed ;  but  those  who, 
while  they  pretend  to  serve  God,  serve  merely  them- 
selves, are  the  children  of  evil,  and  will  perish  with  it." 

"  One  of  the  most  necessary  requirements  for  a  phy- 
sician is  perfect  purity  and  singleness  of  purpose.  He 
should  be  free  of  ambition,  vanity,  envy,  unchastity, 
pomposity,  and  self-conceit,  because  these  vices  are  the 
outcome  of  ignorance  and  incompatible  with  the  light  of 
divine  wisdom  which  should  illumine  the  mind  of  the 
true  physician ;  but  our  practitioners  of  medicine  will 
not  believe  me  when  I  say  that  it  is  necessary  that  a 
physician  to  be  successful  should  be  virtuous ;  because 
they  imagine  that  success  is  due  only  to  learning,  and 
they  cannot  realise  that  all  true  wisdom  and  power  is 
derived  from  God." 

"  There  is  a  knowledge  which  is  derived  from  man, 
and  another  one  which  is  derived  from  God  through 
the  light  of  Nature.  There  are  artificially  made  phy- 
sicians and  there  are  born  physicians.  The  latter  possess 
their  talent  from  birth,  and  it  may  be  unfolded  and  grow 
like  a  tree  if  it  is  properly  nursed.  He  who  has  no 
natural  talent  to  be  a  physician  will  never  succeed.  He 
who  is  not  a  physician  in  the  spring  of  his  life  will  not 
be  one  in  the  fall." 

"  A  physician  should  be  faithful  and  charitable ;  he 
should  have  full  and  perfect  faith,  a  faith  which  is  not 
divided.  Faith  and  Charity  are  essentially  identical ; 
they  both  spring  from  God,  and  God  is  one  and  cannot 
be  divided.  The  faith  of  a  physician  is  not  manifested 
by  making  many  visits  to  his  patient,  but  by  his  ability 
to  recognise  and  treat  the  disease.     He  should  give  to 

MEDICINE  181 

his  patient  his  utmost  attention,  he  should  identify  him- 
self heart  and  soul  with  him,  and  this  cannot  be  done 
without  charity  and  benevolence.  He  who  loves  only 
himself  and  his  -  own  profit  will  be  of  little  benefit  to 
the  sick,  for  he  will  neglect  the  patient.  To  recognise 
the  disease  of  the  latter  and  to  be  able  to  benefit  him, 
entire  harmony  should  exist  between  the  physician  and 
the  patient;  a  physician  who  loves  his  art  for  its  own 
sake  will  also  be  charitable  towards  the  sick "  {Origin 
of  Diseases). 

The  Arcileus 

All  organic  functions  are  caused  by  the  activity  of 
one  universal  principle  of  Life.  This  principle  acts  in 
all  the  members  of  the  body,  either  slow  or  quick,  per- 
ceptible or  imperceptible,  consciously  or  unconsciously, 
normal  or  abnormal,  according  to  the  constitution  of  the 
organs  in  which  it  is  active.  As  long  as  the  character 
(the  spirit)  of  an  entity  is  preserved,  it  acts  in  that 
entity  as  a  whole ;  if  the  form  is  broken  up  and  loses 
its  character,  it  manifests  itself  in  other  forms ;  the  life 
which  is  active  in  a  man  during  his  lifetime  in  causing 
the  organic  functions  of  his  body,  will  manifest  its  activity 
in  creating  worms  in  his  body  after  the  spirit  has  left 
the  form.  The  spirit  is  the  centre  which  attracts  the 
principle  of  life ;  if  the  spirit  has  left  the  form,  life  will 
be  attracted  to  other  centres. 

If  the  activity  of  the  life-principle  takes  place  in  a 
form  in  an  harmonious  and  regular  manner,  unimpeded  by 
any  obstacles,  such  a  state  is  called  health.  If  its  activity 
is  impeded  by  some  cause,  and  if  it  acts  abnormally  or 
irregularly,  such  a  state  is  called  "disease." 

This  principle  of  life  is  called  by  Paracelsus,  Archaeus. 
It  is  not  a  material  substance,  in  the  usual  acceptation 
of  that  term,  but  a  spiritual  essence,  everywhere  present 
and  invisible.      It  causes  or  cures  disease  according  to 

1 82  PARACELSUS 

the  conditions  under  which  it  acts,  as  it  may  be  pure 
or  impure,  healthy  or  poisoned,  by  other  influences. 
The  animal  organism  attracts  it  from  its  surroundings 
and  from  the  nutriments  which  enter  into  its  form ; 
it  assimilates  it,  and  loses  it  again.  "  The  Archeeus, 
or  Liquor  Vita?,  constitutes  the  invisible  man.  The 
invisible  man  is  hidden  in  the  visible  one,  and  is  formed 
in  the  shape  of  the  outer  one  as  long  as  it  remains 
in  that  outer  one.  The  inner  man  is,  so  to  say,  the 
shadow  or  the  counterpart  of  the  material  body.  It  is 
ethereal  in  its  nature,  still  it  is  substance ;  it  directs  the 
growth  and  the  formation  and  dissolution  of  the  form  in 
which  it  is  contained ;  it  is  the  noblest  part  in  physical 
man.  As  a  man's  picture  is  reflected  in  a  mirror,  so 
the  form  of  the  physical  man  is  reflected  in  the  invisible 
body "  1  (De  Generatione  LTominis). 

"  The  Archasus  is  an  essence  that  is  equally  distri- 
buted in  all  parts  of  the  human  body,  if  the  latter  is 
in  a  healthy  condition  ;  it  is  the  invisible  nutriment 
from  which  the  visible  body  draws  its  strength,  and  the 
qualities  ot  each  of  its  parts  correspond  to  the  nature 
of  the  physical  parts  that  contain  it.  The  Spiritus 
Vitas  takes  its  origin  from  the  Spiritus  Mundi.  Being 
an  emanation  of  the  latter,  it  contains  the  elements  of 
all  cosmic  influences,  and  is  therefore  the  cause  by 
which  the  action  of  the  stars  (cosmic  forces)  upon  the 
invisible  body  of  man  may  be  explained "  (De  Viribus 
Membrorum). 

"  The  Archeeus  is  of  a  magnetic  nature,  and  attracts 
or  repels  other  sympathetic  or  antipathetic  forces  be- 
longing to  the  same  plane.  The  less  power  of  resistance 
for  astral  influences  a  person  possesses,  the  more  will 
he  be  subject  to  such  influences.  The  vital  force  is 
not  enclosed  in  man,  but  radiates  around  him  like  a 
luminous  sphere,  and  it  can  be  made  to  act  at  a  dis- 
tance.     In  those  semi-material  rays  the  imagination  of 

1  It  is  the  Pranamaya  of  Sankaracharya. 

MEDICINE  183 

man  produces  healthy  or  morbid  effects.  It  will  poison 
the  essence  of  life  and  cause  diseases,  or  strengthen  and 
purify  it  after  it  has  been  made  impure,  and  restore  the 
health." 

"  All  diseases,  except  such  as  come  from  mechanical 
causes,  have  an  invisible  origin,  and  of  such  sources 
popular  medicine  knows  very  little.  Men  who  are 
devoid  of  the  power  of  spiritual  perception  are  unable 
to  recognise  the  existence  of  anything  that  cannot  be 
seen  externally.  Popular  medicine  knows,  therefore,  next 
to  nothing  about  any  diseases  that  are  not  caused  by 
mechanical  means,1  and  the  science  of  curing  internal 
diseases  consists  almost  entirely  in  the  removal  of  causes 
that  have  produced  some  mechanical  obstruction.  But 
the  number  of  diseases  that  originate  from  some  un- 
known causes  is  far  greater  than  those  that  come  from 
mechanical  causes,  and  for  such  diseases  our  physicians 
kuow  no  cure,  because,  not  knowing  such  causes,  they 
cannot  remove  them.  All  they  can  prudently  do  is  to 
observe  the  patient  and  make  their  guesses  about  his 
condition ;  and  the  patient  may  rest  satisfied  if  the 
medicines  administered  to  him  do  him  no  serious  harm, 
and  do  not  prevent  his  recovery.  The  best  of  our 
popular  physicians  are  the  ones  that  do  the  least  harm. 
But,  unfortunately,  some  poison  their  patients  with 
mercury ;  others  purge  them  or  bleed  them  to  death. 
There  are  some  who  have  learned  so  much  that  their 
learning  has  driven  out  all  their  common  sense,  and 
there  are  others  who  care  a  great  deal  more  for  their 
own  profit  than  for  the  health  of  their  patients.  A 
disease  does  not  change  its  state  to  accommodate  itself 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  physician,  but  the  physician 
should  understand  the  causes  of  the  disease.  A  phy- 
sician should  be  a  servant  of  Nature,  and  not  her  enemy; 
he  should  be  able  to  guide  and  direct  her  in  her  struggle 

1  Such  as  are  caused  by  overloading  the  stomach  with  food,  constipa- 
tion of  the  bowels,  obstructions,  &c. 

1 84  PARACELSUS 

for  life,  and  not  throw,  by  his  unreasonable  inter- 
ference, fresh  obstacles  in  the  way  of  recovery "  (Para- 
granum). 

"  Medicine  is  much  more  an  art  than  a  science ;  to 
know  the  experience  of  others  may  be  useful  to  a  phy- 
sician, but  all  the  learning  in  the  world  could  not  make 
a  man  a  physician,  unless  he  has  the  necessary  talents, 
and  is  destined  by  Nature  to  be  a  physician.  If  we 
want  to  learn  to  know  the  inner  man  by  studying  only 
the  appearance  of  the  exterior  man,  we  will  never  come 
to  an  end,  because  each  man's  constitution  differs  in 
some  respect  from  that  of  another.  If  a  physician 
knows  nothing  more  about  his  patient  than  what  the 
latter  tells  him,  he  knows  very  little  indeed,  because 
the  patient  usually  knows  only  that  he  suffers  pain. 
Nature  causes  and  cures  disease,  and  it  is  therefore 
necessary  that  the  physician  should  know  the  processes 
of  Nature,  the  invisible  as  well  as  the  visible  man.  He 
will  then  be  able  to  recognise  the  cause  and  the  course 
of  a  disease,  and  he  will  know  much  more  by  using  his 
own  reason  than  by  all  that  the  looks  or  the  patient 
may  tell  him.  Medical  science  may  be  acquired  by 
learning,  but  medical  wisdom  is  given  by  God  "  :  (Para- 
granwni). 

"  Natural  man  has  no  wisdom,  but  the  wisdom  of 
God  may  act  through  him  as  an  instrument.  God  is 
greater  than  Nature,  for  Nature  is  His  product ;  and 
the  beginning  of  wisdom  in  man  is  therefore  the  be- 
ginning of  his  supernatural  power.  The  kind  of  know- 
ledge that  man  ought  to  possess  is  not  derived  from 
the  earth,  nor  does  it  come  from  the  stars;  but  it  is 
derived  from  the  Highest,  and  therefore  the  man  who 
possesses  the  Highest  may  rule  over  the  things  of  the 
earth,  and  over  the  stars.  There  is  a  great  difference 
between  the  power  that  removes  the  invisible  causes  of 

1  This  mode  of  reasoning  is  as  applicable  to  the  state  of  medical  science 
to-day  as  it  was  at  the  time  of  Paracelsus. 

MEDICINE  185 

disease,  and  which  is  Magic,  and  that  which  causes 
merely  external  effects  to  disappear,  and  which  is  Physic, 
Sorcery,  and  Quackery."* 

The  Mumia 

The  Archasus  is  the  essence  of  life,  but  the  principle 
in  which  this  essence  is  contained,  and  which  serves  as 
its  vehicle,  is  called  Mumia.  "  In  the  Mumia  is  great 
power,  and  the  cures  that  have  been  performed  by  the 
use  of  the  Mumia  are  natural,  although  they  are  very 
little  understood  by  the  vulgar,  because  they  are  the 
results  of  the  action  of  invisible  things,  and  that  which 
is  invisible  does  not  exist  for  the  comprehension  of  the 
ignorant.  They  therefore  look  upon  such  cures  as  having 
been  produced  by  the  '  black  art,'  or  by  the  help  of  the 
devil,  while  in  fact  they  are  but  natural,  and  have  a 
natural  cause ;  and  even  if  the  devil  had  caused  them, 
the  devil  can  have  no  power  except  that  which  is  given 
to  him  by  God,  and  so  it  would  be  the  power  of  God 
after  all."  2 

"  There  is  a  twofold  power  active  in  man — an  invisibly 
acting  or  vital  power,  and  a  visibly  acting  mechanical 
force.  The  visible  body  has  its  natural  forces,  and  the 
invisible  body  has  its  natural  forces,  and  the  remedy  of 
all  diseases  or  injuries  that  may  affect  the  visible  form 
are  contained  in  the  invisible  body,  because  the  latter  is 

1  It  would  be  interesting  to  find  out  how  many  chronic  diseases  and 
lifelong  evils  are  caused  by  vaccination.  If  the  organism  contains  some 
poisonous  elements,  Nature  attempts  to  remove  it  by  an  expulsive  effort 
caused  by  the  action  of  the  spirit  from  the  centre  toward  the  periphery, 
and  producing  cutaneous  diseases.  If  by  vaccination  a  new  herd  is  estab- 
lished to  attract  the  diseased  elements  (Mumia),  the  manifestation  of 
the  poison  on  the  surface  of  the  body  may  disappear,  but  the  poisonous 
elements  will  remain  in  the  body,  and  some  other  more  serious  disease  will 
manifest  itself  sooner  or  later. 

2  This  invisible  Mumia,  that  may  be  transferred  from  one  living  being  to 
another,  is  nothing  else  but  the  vehicle  of  life,  or  "  animal  magnetism.' 

186  PARACELSUS 

the  seat  of  the  power  that  infuses  life  into  the  former, 
and  without  which  the  former  would  be  dead  and  decay- 
ing. If  we  separate  the  vital  force  from  the  physical 
form,  the  body  dies  and  putrefies ;  and  by  impregnating 
a  dying  body  with  vitality  it  can  be  made  to  live  again. 
The  invisible  forces  acting  in  the  visible  body  are  often 
very  powerful,  and  may  be  guided  by  the  imagination 
and  be  propelled  by  the  will.  As  the  odour  of  a  lily 
passes  from  the  flower  into  the  surrounding  air,  so  the 
vital  force  contained  in  the  invisible  body  passes  into 
the  visible  form  and  beyond  it.  The  physical  body  has 
the  capacity  to  produce  visible  organs — such  as  the  eyes 
and  the  ears,  the  tongue  and  the  nose — but  they  all  take 
their  origin  from  the  invisible  body,  of  which  the  external 
visible  form  is  only  the  outward  representation." 

"  But  if  the  germs  and  the  essences  of  all  the  organs 
of  the  physical  body  are  contained  in  the  invisible  vehicle 
of  life,  it  follows  that  this  invisible  microcosmic  body 
contains  certain  definite  qualities,  which,  if  they  are 
properly  understood,  may  be  used  for  some  purpose ; 
and  the  cures  that  have  been  performed  by  the  use  of 
this  Mumia  prove  that  this  assertion  is  true.  The  pinks 
are  beautiful  flowers  so  long  as  they  are  not  separated 
from  the  plant  upon  which  they  grow,  and  the  cheli- 
donium  grows  as  long  as  it  can  draw  its  nutriment  from 
the  earth  ;  but  if  the  pinks  are  separated  from  the  parent 
stem,  and  if  the  roots  of  the  chelidonium  are  dead,  these 
plants,  being  separated  from  the  source  out  of  which  they 
drew  their  vitality,  will  decay.  The  life  that  made  them 
live  is  not  dead,  but  it  is  departed  from  the  dead  form  ; 
and  if  it  could  be  restituted,  the  form  could  be  made  to 
live  again.  The  Mumia,  or  vehicle  of  life,  is  invisible, 
and  no  one  sees  it  depart ;  but  nevertheless  it  is  a 
spiritual  substance  containing  the  essence  of  life,  and  it 
can  be  brought  again  by  art  into  contact  with  dying 
forms,  and  revive  them,  if  the  vital  organs  of  the  body 
are  not  destroyed.      That  which  constitutes  life  is  con- 

MEDICINE  187 

tamed  in  the  Mumia,  and  by  imparting  the  Mumia  we 
impart  life.  The  visible  body  seems  to  see  and  to  talk, 
and  yet  wo  do  not  see  the  powers  that  see  and  talk 
through  it.  Likewise  the  action  of  the  Mumia  upon 
the  visible  body  cannot  be  perceived  by  the  senses — 
only  its  effects  can  be  seen.  A  visible  form  without 
vitality  has  no  other  power  but  its  own  weight ;  but  if 
it  contains  the  Mumia,  it  may  perform  a  great  deal. 
The  Mumia  is  the  arcanum,  the  '  flower  of  man/  and 
the  true  elixir  of  life.  The  Mumia  acts  from  one  living 
being  directly  upon  another,  or  it  may  be  connected  with 
some  material  and  visible  vehicle,  and  be  employed  in 
that  shape  " l  {Be,  Origine  Morbor.  Invisibilmm). 

Sympathetic  Cures 

"  Man  possesses  a  magnetic  power  by  which  he  can 
attract  certain  effluvia  of  a  good  or  evil  quality  in  the 
same  manner  as  a  magnet  will  attract  particles  of  iron. 
A  magnet  may  be  prepared  from  iron  that  will  attract 
iron,  and  a  magnet  may  be  prepared  out  of  some  vital 
substance  that  will  attract  vitality.  Such  a  magnet  is 
called  the  ' magnes  microcosmi'  and  it  is  prepared  out  of 
substances  that  have  remained  for  a  time  in  the  human 
body,  and  are  penetrated  by  its  vitality.  Such  substances 
are  the  hair,  the  excrements,  urine,  blood,  &c.  If  it  is 
desirable  to  use  the  excrements,  they  are  to  be  dried  in 
a  shadowy,  dry,  and  moderately  warm  place  until  they 
have  lost  their  humidity  and  odour.  By  this  process  all 
the  Mumia  has  gone  out  of  them,  and  they  are,  so  to  say, 
hungry  to  attract  vitality  again.  If  such  a  magnet  is 
applied  to  a  part  of  the  patient's  body,  it  attracts  and 
absorbs  vitality  from  that  part  in  the  same  manner  as  a 
sponge  absorbs  water,  and  it   will  thereby  allay  the  in- 

1  Paracelsus,  not  Mesmer,  is  the  original  discoverer  of  so-called  Mes- 
merism. 

1 88  PARACELSUS 

flammation  existing  in  such  a  part,  because  it  attracts  the 
superabundance  of  magnetism  carried  to  that  place  by 
the  rush  of  the  blood.  The  Mumia  coming  from  the 
body  of  a  person  continues  to  remain  for  a  while  in  sym- 
pathetic relationship  (magnetic  rapport)  with  the  Mumia 
contained  in  such  a  person,  and  they  act  magnetically 
upon  each  other.  If,  therefore,  the  Mumia  is  extracted 
from  a  diseased  part  of  a  person  by  a  microcosmic  magnet, 
and  the  magnet  mixed  with  earth,  and  an  herb  is  planted 
into  it,  the  Mumia  in  the  magnet  will  be  extracted  by 
that  plant,  and  lose  its  diseased  matter,  and  react  in  a 
beneficial  manner  upon  the  Mumia  contained  in  the  body 
of  the  patient ;  but  it  is  necessary  that  the  selected  plant 
should  be  one  which  bears  the  signature  of  the  disease 
with  which  the  patient  is  affected,  so  that  it  will  attract 
the  specific  influence  from  the  stars.  In  this  way 
diseased  elements  may  be  magnetically  extracted  out 
of  a  person  and  inoculated  into  a  plant.  This  is  called 
the  transplantation  of  diseases ;  and  diseases  may,  in  a 
similar  manner,  be  transplanted  into  animals  that  are 
healthy  and  strong,  or  the  virus  be  transferred  upon 
other  persons ;  and  many  practices  of  sorcery  are  based 
upon  that  fact.1     In  this  way  diseases  can  be  cured  in 

1  It  is  nothing  uncommon,  especially  in  Mohammedan  countries,  to 
see  packages  lying  in  the  road  tied  together  with  a  string.  On  opening 
them,  hair,  bloody  rags,  excrements,  &c,  will  be  found.  Such  packages 
are  laid  there  by  some  sick  persons  or  their  friends  ;  they  contain  the 
Mumia  of  the  sick,  and  it  is  intended  that  he  who  opens  the  package 
should  get  the  disease  of  the  patient,  and  the  latter  get  well.  Occasion- 
ally such  a  "magnet"  is  buried  under  the  doorstep  of  an  enemy,  so  as 
to  cause  him  to  walk  over  it  and  become  sick.  It  is  dangerous  for  sensitive 
persons  to  handle  such  things. 

The  mode  of  curing  diseases  by  transplanting  the  virus  into  trees  has 
been  used  by  the  successors  of  Paracelsus,  Tentzel,  Helmont,  Flood, 
Maxwell ;  and  others  practised  them  to  a  great  extent,  and  acquired 
great  reputations.     They  give  some  of  the  following  instructions  : — 

"  Many  diseases  may  be  cured  by  way  of  sympathy,  by  employing  the 
warm  blood  of  the  patient  as  a  magnet  for  the  Mumia.  The  blood  may 
be  extracted  by  venesection  or  cupping,  and  made  to  run  into  lukewarm 
water  or  milk,  and  this  is  given  to  a  hungry  dog  to  eat.  The  process  can 
be  repeated  several  times,  until  the  patient  recovers. 

MEDICINE  189 

one  person  and  caused  to  appear  in  another ;  love  between 
two  persons  of  the  opposite  sex  may  thus  be  created,  and 
magnetic  links  be  established  between  persons  living  at 
distant  places,  because  there  is  only  one  universal  prin- 
ciple of  life,  and  by  it  all  beings  are  sympathetically 
connected  together." 

The  plants  used  for  the  transplantation  of  diseases 
bear  the  signatures  of  the  diseases  whose  names  are 
added.  In  cases  of  ulcers  and  wounds  the  Mumia  may 
be  planted  with  Polygonum  pzrsicaria,  Symphytum  offici- 
nal, Botanus  europeus,  &c.  The  plant  is  to  be  brought 
for  a  while  in  contact  with  the  ulcer,  and  then  to 
be  buried  in  manure.  As  it  rots,  the  ulcer  heals.  In 
toothache  the  gums  should  be  rubbed  with  the  root  of 
Senecio  vulgaris  until  they  bleed,  and  the  root  is  then 
to  be  replaced  into  the  earth ;  or  a  splinter  may  be  cut 
out  of  a  blackthorn  or  willow  after  the  bark  has  been 
lifted  up.  Pick  the  gums  with  that  splinter  until  they 
bleed,  and  replace  the  splinter  into  the  tree  and  tie  the 
cut  in  the  bark  up  so  that  it  will  heal.  In  menorrhagia 
uterina  the  Mumia  should  be  taken  from  the  groins  and 
planted  with  Polygonum  persicaria.  In  menorrhcea  cliffi- 
cilis,  Mentha  pulcgium  is  used.  In  phthisis  pulmonalis 
the  Mumia  may  be  planted  with  an  orchis  in  the  vicinity 
of  an  oak  or  cherry  tree,  or  the  Mumia  be  planted 
directly  into  such  trees.  The  (fresh)  urine  of  a  patient 
should  be  heated  in  a  new  pot  over  a  fire,  and  an  egg 
boiled  in  it.  "When  the  egg  is  hard  boiled,  some  holes 
should  be  made  into  the  egg,  and  the  urine  boiled  down 
until  the  pot  is  dry.      The  egg  is  then  to  be  put  into  an 

"  The  excrements  of  the  patient  may  be  dried  as  described  above,  and 
pulverised ;  they  are  tied  up  in  a  cloth  and  applied  as  a  poultice,  until 
they  are  penetrated  with  sweat  from  the  patient,  and  the  powder  is  then 
mixed  with  earth  and  inserted  into  a  flower-pot,  and  a  plant  bearing  the 
signature  of  the  patient's  disease  is  planted  into  it.  After  the  plant  has 
grown  a  while  it  is  thrown  into  running  water  in  cases  of  fevers  and  in- 
flammations, but  in  cases  of  a  humid  character  or  in  lymphatic  affections 
it  should  be  hung  into  smoke." 

190  PARACELSUS 

ant-hill ;  the  ants  will  eat  it,  and  the  patient  recovers. 
In  atrophy  of  the  limbs  the  Murnia  is  taken  from  the 
upper  and  lower  joints  of  the  diseased  limb,  and  planted 
with  an  oak  or  cherry  tree.  Diseases  can  also  be  cured 
by  transplantation,  if  the  diseased  part  is  covered  for  a 
while  with  a  piece  of  fresh  beef,  until  the  sweat  enters 
into  it,  and  the  beef  is  then  given  to  a  cat  to  eat.1 

Occult  Properties  of  Plants 

An  especially  favourite  remedy  of  Paracelsus  is  the 
Hypericum  perforatum,  which  is  used  especially  against 
elementals,  spirits,  and  larvae  inimical  to  man.  "  The 
veins  upon  its  leaves  are  a  signatum,  and  being  per- 
forated, they  signify  that  this  plant  drives  away  all  phan- 
tasm ata  existing  in  the  sphere  of  man.  The  phantasmata 
produce  spectra,  in  consequence  of  which  a  man  will  see 
and  hear  ghosts  and  spooks,  and  from  these  are  induced 
diseases  by  which  men  are  induced  to  kill  themselves,  or 
to  fall  into  epilepsy,  madness,  insanity,  &c.  The  hyperi- 
cum  is  almost  an  universal  medicine  " 2  {Be  Naturalibus). 

Another  plant  of  great  occult  power  is  the  Eosemary 
{Rosmarinus  officinalis),  which  also  has  the  quality  of  keep- 
ing away  evil  influences,  and  is  therefore  a  protection 
against  witchcraft,  obsession,  vampirism,  and  the  influ- 
ence of  evil  thoughts. 

The  "  Herbarium "  of  Paracelsus  describes  the  occult 
properties  of  thirty-six  plants,  and  also  of  minerals  and 
precious  stones ;  but  it  would  make  this  book  too  volumi- 
nous to  enter  into  details. 

1  An  intelligent  physician  will  neither  accept  nor  reject  the  sympathetic 
cures  to  which  the  directions  given  above  refer,  although  they  may  seem 
to  be  absurd  and  based  upon  superstition.  The  term  "  superstition  "  signi- 
fies a  belief  in  something  of  which  we  have  no  knowledge,  but  if  we  under- 
stand the  rationale  of  a  thing  the  superstition  ends. 

2  Have  those  who  ridicule  this  statement  ever  employed  the  hypericum 
in  cases  of  hallucination '{ 

MEDICINE  191 

The  Magnet 

Paracelsus  was  better  acquainted  than  our  modern 
physicians  with  the  therapeutic  powers  of  the  magnet, 
and  used  it  in  various  diseases.  He  knew  the  powers 
of  mineral,  human,  and  astral  magnetism,  and  his  doc- 
trines in  regard  to  human  magnetism  have  been  con- 
firmed to  a  great  extent  since  the  time  of  his  death. 
More  than  a  hundred  years  ago  Mesmer  created  a  sen- 
sation in  the  medical  world  by  his  discovery  of  animal 
magnetism  and  by  his  magnetic  cures.  His  discovery 
was  then  believed  to  refer  to  something  new  and  un- 
heard of,  but  Lessing  proved  already  in  1769  that  the 
real  discoverer  of  animal  magnetism  was  Paracelsus. 

In  regard  to  the  powers  of  the  magnetism  Paracelsus 
says : — 

"  That  which  constitutes  a  magnet  is  an  attractive 
power,  which  is  beyond  our  understanding,  but  which, 
nevertheless,  causes  the  attraction  of  iron  and  other 
things.  Our  physicians  have  always  had  magnets  at 
their  disposal,  but  they  did  not  pay  much  attention  to 
them,  because  they  did  not  know  that  they  may  be  used 
for  any  other  thing  than  to  attract  nails.  Our  doctors 
have  ceased  to  learn  anything  from  experience,  and  they 
make  use  of  idle  talk ;  and  it  is  a  pity  and  a  shame  that 
the  representatives  of  our  science  should  know  so  little. 
They  have  every  day  occasion  to  see  magnets  publicly 
and  privately,  and  yet  they  continue  to  act  as  if  no 
magnets  were  in  existence." l 

"  They  complain  of  me  because  I  do  not  follow  the 
methods  prescribed  by  the  ancients;  but  why  should  I 
follow  the  ancients  in  things  in  which  I  know  they  were 
wrong  ?      They  could  not  know  things  of  which  they  had 

1  The  knowledge  of  the  therapeutic  use  of  the  magnet  has  not  advanced 
much  since  the  days  of  Paracelsus.  Baron  Reichenbach  investigated  the 
subject  in  a  scientific  manner,  but  the  result  of  his  experiments  is  still 
ignored  by  the  medical  profession  as  a  whole. 

192  PARACELSUS 

no  experience,  and  it  would  be  foolish  to  follow  them  in 
things  in  which  they  were  mistaken.  Whatever  I  know 
I  have  learned  by  my  experience,  and  I  therefore  depend 
upon  my  own  knowledge,  and  not  upon  the  ignorance  of 
another." 

"  Our  doctors  say  that  the  magnet  attracts  iron,  and 
verily  it  does  not  require  a  great  deal  of  learning  to  be 
able  to  perceive  a  fact  that  may  be  seen  by  every  igno- 
rant boor ;  but  there  are  qualities  in  a  magnet  not  known 
to  every  ignoramus,  and  one  of  these  qualities  is  that  the 
magnet  also  attracts  all  martial  humours  that  are  in  the 
human  system." 

"  Martial  diseases  are  such  as  are  caused  by  auras 
coming  and  expanding  from  a  centre  outwards,  and  at 
the  same  time  holding  on  to  their  centres ;  in  other 
words,  such  as  originate  from  a  certain  place,  and  extend 
their  influence  without  leaving  the  place  from  where 
they  originate.  In  such  cases  the  magnet  should  be  laid 
upon  the  centre,  and  it  will  then  attract  the  diseased 
aura  towards  the  centre,  and  circumscribe  and  localise  the 
disease,  until  the  latter  disease  becomes  reabsorbed  into 
its  centre.1  It  is  useless  to  try  to  suppress  the  external 
symptoms  that  are  caused  by  a  disease,  if  we  at  the  same 
time  allow  the  disease  to  spread.  A  poisonous  tree  can- 
not be  kept  from  growing  if  we  simply  cut  off  some  of 
its  branches  or  leaves ;  but  if  we  could  cause  the  vital 
essence  which  it  draws  by  its  roots  from  the  earth  to 
descend  again  into  the  roots  and  re-enter  the  earth,  the 
poisonous  tree  would  die  on  its  own  account.  By  the 
attractive  power  of  a  magnet  acting  upon  the  diseased 
aura  of  the  blood  in  an  affected  part,  that  aura  may 
be  made  to  return  into  the  centre  from  which  it  origi- 
nated, and  be  absorbed  therein ;  and  thereby  we  destroy 
the  herd  of  the  virus  and  cure  the  patient,  and  we 
need  not  wait  idly  to  see  what  Nature  will  do.     The 

1  If  we  remember  that  the  blood  corpuscles,  and  consequently  also  the 
nerve  auras,  contain  iron,  this  statement  appears  very  rational. 

MEDICINE 

193 

magnet  is  therefore  especially  useful  in  all  inflamma- 
tions, in  fluxes  and  ulcerations,  in  diseases  of  the  bowels 
and  uterus,  in  internal  as  well  as  in  external  disease." 

"  The  magnet  has  a  front  (north  pole)  and  a  back 
(south  pole);  the  former  attracts  and  the  latter  repulses. 
In  a  case  of  hysteria  the  attracting  part  of  the  magnet 
is  applied  above  the  uterus,  and  the  repulsing  part  of 
another  magnet  below.  In  this  way  the  nervous  force 
controlling  the  movements  of  the  uterus  will  be  pro- 
pelled towards  its  proper  place.  In  cases  of  epilepsy, 
where  there  is  a  great  determination  of  nervous  fluid 
towards  the  brain,  the  repulsing  (negative)  pole  of  a 
magnet  is  applied  to  the  spine  and  to  the  head,  and 
the  attracting  (positive)  pole  of  other  magnets  upon 
the  abdominal  region.  There  are  a  great  many  other 
diseases  that  may  be  cured  by  the  proper  use  of  the 
magnet,  but  for  those  who  are  able  to  understand  such 
things  the  hints  already  given  will  be  sufficient,  while 
those  who  have  little  understanding  would  not  com- 
prehend this  system  even  if  we  were  to  write  a  book 
about  it.  It  should,  however,  be  remembered  that  the 
manner  of  employing  a  magnet  changes  according  as  to 
whether  we  wish  to  draw  the  diseased  aura  out  of  the 
body,  or  to  cause  it  to  be  reabsorbed  into  its  centre." 

The  forces  composing  the  Microcosm  of  man  are 
identical  with  the  forces  composing  the  Macrocosm  of 
the  world.  In  the  organism  of  man  these  forces  may 
act  in  an  abnormal  manner,  and  diseases  will  be  thereby 
created ;  in  the  great  organism  of  the  Cosmos  they 
may  act  in  an  abnormal  manner,  and  thereby  abnormal 
conditions,  or  "  diseases "  in  the  earth  and  atmosphere, 
in  the  water  and  in  the  elements  of  fire  (electricity), 
may  be  created.  Man  may  be  affected  with  spasms, 
or  dropsy,  or  colic,  or  fevers,  &c,  and  the  Macrocosm 
of  the  earth  may  be  affected  with  earthquakes,  rain- 
spouts,  storms,  and  lightnings.  The  elements  that  con- 
stitute the  life  of  the  heart  of  man  constitute  the  life 

N 

194  PARACELSUS 

of  the  sun ;  the  quality  of  life  found  in  the  elements 
constituting  his  blood  corresponds  to  the  quality  of  the 
invisible  influences  radiatiug  from  Mars ;  if  the  soul- 
essences  that  characterise  the  influences  of  Venus  did 
not  exist,  the  instincts  which,  cause  men  and  animals 
to  propagate  their  species  would  not  exist,  and  thus 
every  planet  and  every  star  contains  certain  magnetic 
elements  that  correspond  with  the  identical  magnetic 
elements  existing  in  the  constitution  of  Man.  A 
physician  who  wishes  to  be  rational  must  know  the 
constitution  of  the  universe  as  well  as  the  constitution 
of  man ;  he  must  be  an  anatomist,  a  physiologist,  and  an 
astronomist ;  and  it  will  avail  him  little  to  learn  these 
sciences  from  the  books,  but  he  should  have  an  under- 
standing of  them  by  the  power  of  interior  perception, 
which  cannot  be  taught  in  books,  but  must  be  acquired 
by  practice. 

Anatomy 

Paracelsus  regarded  man  as  being  not  merely  a  com- 
pound of  muscles  and  bones,  tissues  and  nerves,  but  as 
representing  on  a  smaller  scale  all  that  is  contained  in 
the  great  world.  Therefore  his  soul  and  mind  are  as 
much  parts  of  his  true  constitution  as  are  the  earthly 
elements  of  which  his  elementary  body  is  made  up. 
Thus  the  anatomy  of  Paracelsus  takes  in  all  the  parts 
of  man's  constitution,  which  has  already  been  described 
in  a  previous  chapter. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  Anatomy  of  the  Microcosm, 
one  teaching  the  constitution  of  the  external  form  of 
man,  the  other  one  that  of  the  internal  living  man.  To 
seek  for  the  internal  man  by  dissecting  the  external 
form  is  useless,  for  in  doing  so  we  do  not  find  life,  but 
we  destroy  the  form  in  which  it  manifested  itself. 

The  Anatomy  of  the  Microcosm  is  twofold :  ( I )  The 
local  anatomy,  which  teaches  the  constitution  of  the 
physical    body,    its    bones,   muscles,    blood-vessels,   &c. ; 

MEDICINE  195 

and  (2)  The  more  important  essential  anatomy — i.e.,  the 
anatomy  of  the  living  inner  man.  The  latter  is  the 
kind  of  anatomy  which  it  is  most  important  for  the 
physician  to  know,  but  it  will  be  difficult  to  bring  it 
to  the  understanding  of  those  who  merely  judge  by 
external  appearances  and  refuse  to  follow  the  way  of 
the  truth.  If  we  know  the  anatomy  of  the  inner  man, 
we  know  the  Prima  materia,  and  may  see  the  nature 
of  the  disease  as  well  as  the  remedy.  That  which  we 
see  with  our  external  eyes  is  the  Ultima  materia.  By 
dividing  and  dissecting  the  external  body,  we  can  learn 
nothing  about  the  inner  (astral)  man ;  we  merely  destroy 
the  unity  of  the  whole  "  (Paramir.,  i.  6). 

The  life  of  a  thing,  being  latent  in  the  form,  is  set 
free  when  the  form  is  destroyed;  its  entering  into  a 
new  form  is  regeneration. 

"  The  rose  is  beautiful  and  has  a  sweet  odour  as  long 
as  it  remains  in  the  form ;  but  to  manifest  its  medicinal 
qualities  in  the  constitution  of  man,  its  form  must  be 
destroyed  and  its  spirit  enter  the  body  of  man.  Only 
that  which  enters  into  regeneration  is  useful ;  the  rest 
is  useless.  In  this  regeneration  enters  the  true  Sulphur, 
Mercury,  and  Salt"  (the  ethereal  essences  contained 
within  the  gross  particles). 

Physiology 

"  As  each  of  the  component  parts  has  its  own  life, 
so  it  has  its  own  death  ;  there  is  a  continual  process 
of  death  and  regeneration  going  on  in  man.  As  a 
tree  or  a  plant  grows  out  of  its  seed,  so  the  new  life 
grows  out  of  the  old  one,  and  that  which  was  hereto- 
fore invisible  becomes  visible.  The  physician  should 
be  able  to  see  that  which  is  not  visible  to  everybody. 
He  should  see  it  in  the  light  of  Nature,  and  if  this 
light  is  to  be  called  a  light,  it  must  be  visible  and 
not  dark." 

196  PARACELSUS 

"  The  physical  body  of  man  is  grown  from  a  physical 
germ,  and  requires  physical  nutriment  for  its  support. 
There  is  something  like  a  fire  (energy)  within  ourselves 
which  continually  consumes  our  form,  and  if  we  were 
to  add  nothing  to  our  body  to  supply  the  waste  caused 
by  that  combustion,  our  form  would  soon  die.  We  con- 
tinually eat  our  own  selves;  we  eat  our  fingers,  our  heart, 
our  brain,  &c.  ;  but  in  each  morsel  of  food  which  we  eat, 
there  is  contained  the  material  required  to  replace  that 
which  has  been  consumed  by  that  internal  fire.  Each 
part  of  our  organism  selects  what  it  needs,  and  that 
which  is  superfluous  or  useless  is  rejected.  The  Master 
in  man,  who  superintends  the  building  up  of  the  or- 
ganism, supplies  every  organ  with  that  which  it  needs. 
We  need  not  eat  bones  to  cause  our  bones  to  grow,  nor 
veins,  ligaments,  and  brain,  to  have  those  things  formed 
within  us.  Bread  will  produce  blood,  although  there  is 
no  blood  in  the  bread  "  (Paramir.,  i.  7). 

"  Besides  the  visible  body,  man  has  an  invisible  one. 
The  former  comes  from  the  Limbus,  the  latter  is  made 
from  the  breath  of  God.  As  a  breath  is  like  nothing 
in  our  estimation,  likewise  this  spiritual  body  is  like 
nothing  to  our  external  senses.  This  invisible  body  is 
the  one  which  is  spoken  of  as  constituting  our  corporeal 
form  on  the  day  of  the  resurrection"  (Paramir.,  i.  8). 

"  Heaven  and  Earth,  air  and  water,  are  scientifically 
considered  a  Man,  and  man  is  a  world  containing  a 
heaven  and  an  earth,  air  and  water,  and  all  the  various 
principles  which  constitute  the  mineral,  vegetable,  and 
animal  kingdoms,  and  the  higher  acts  upon  the  lower. 
Thus  the  principle  constituting  Saturn  in  the  Macrocosm 
acts  upon  the  Saturn  in  man ;  the  Melissa  of  the  Macro- 
cosm acts  upon  the  Melissa  in  the  Microcosm,  &c.  There 
are  innumerable  principles  in  the  Macrocosm  and  in  the 
Microcosm ;  they  are  not  differing  from  each  other  in 
the  number  of  things  of  which  they  are  composed,  but 
in  the  way  they  are  composed  ;   for  they  all  consist  only 

MEDICINE  197 

of  three  things — i.e.,  Sulphur,  Mercury,  and  Salt.  As  a 
million  of  figures  are  (potentially)  contained  in  a  rough 
piece  of  wood  from  which  a  woodcutter  may  cut  one 
or  many  images  or  forms ;  so  many  hundred  different 
diseases  may  be  produced  from  the  Corpus  of  man,  and 
yet  it  is  but  a  single  Corpus;  and  as  all  the  wooden 
images  may  be  consumed  by  one  fire,  so  there  is  one 
Fire  in  the  universal  storehouse  of  Nature  which  con- 
sumes that  which  is  impure  and  separates  it  from  that 
which  is  pure." 

"  A  painter  paints  a  picture  upon  a  piece  of  wood, 
and  you  will  then  see  the  picture,  but  not  the  wood ; 
but  a  wet  rag  may  wipe  out  all  that  the  painter  has 
made.  Thus  we  have  been  cut  out  by  the  hand  of  God, 
and  He  formed  us  in  the  three  Substances  and  painted 
us  all  over  with  Life,  but  death  wipes  out  the  picture. 
Therefore  we  should  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  seduced 
by  the  temptations  of  life,  seeing  that  they  are  nothing 
but  illusions,  resembling  colours  which  in  themselves 
are  neither  red,  nor  yellow,  nor  green,  but  merely 
appear  to  be  so  to  the  eye.  Death  too  has  its  colours, 
and  if  the  colour  of  death  takes  the  place  of  the  colour 
of  life,  death  gets  the  mastery  over  life ;  these  two 
colours  the  physician  should  know,  but  they  do  not 
explain  the  disease ;  they  are  merely  outward  signs,  and 
as  such  they  are  illusive"  (Faramir.,  i.  5). 

"  It  is  erroneous  to  speak  of  Fever  as  if  this  were 
disease.  The  name  '  fever '  refers  to  the  heat  of  the 
disease,  and  this  heat  is  merely  a  symptom ;  it  is  neither 
the  cause  nor  the  substance  of  the  disease ;  it  would 
be  more  appropriate  to  call  it  Morons  Nitri  or  Morbus 
Sulphuris  incensi.  '  Apoplexy '  is  a  misnomer  ;  because 
it  is  caused  by  a  sublimation  of  Mercury,  and  ought  to 
be  more  properly  called  Mereurius  CacMnialis  Subli- 
matus}      The  same  may  be  said  in  regard  to  many  other 

1  This  might  perhaps  be  translated  as  "  a  congestion  of  blood  to  the 
brain  caused  by  overworking  the  brain,  or  overloading  it  with  a  bad 
nervous  aura." 

198  PARACELSUS 

diseases  and  their  misnomers.  Names  ought  to  indicate 
the  true  nature  and  not  merely  the  external  effects  of 
the  diseases.  If  a  physician  cannot  see  deeper  than  a 
boor,  then  he  is  a  boor  and  not  a  physician.  What  is 
there  in  the  ocean,  in  the  earth,  in  the  air,  or  in  the 
firmament — i.e.,  the  '  fire  ' — which  should  not  be  known 
to  a  physician  ?  Why  is  professional  ignorance  so  great 
and  success  so  little,  but  because  the  practitioners  study 
only  external  effects  and  the  anatomy  of  the  external 
form,  and  are  not  able  to  look  with  the  eye  of  the  spirit 
into  the  mysterious  part  of  Nature  ?  We  cannot  see  the 
life  in  things  that  are  dead ;  the  eyes  of  the  soul  must 
open,  and  we  must  become  able  to  see  not  only  the 
house  of  life,  but  its  living  inhabitant." 

Therapeutics 

"  If  we  wish  to  restore  health,  we  should  be  able 
to  use  the  virtues  contained  in  all  the  four  elements  of 
the  celestial  and  terrestrial  realm.  Man's  organism  is 
composed  of  many  parts ;  if  one  part  is  diseased,  all  the 
other  parts  suffer,  and  one  disease  may  be  the  death 
of  the  whole.  Man  has  in  him  the  whole  firmament, 
the  upper  and  lower  spheres ;  if  his  organism  is  sick  it 
calls  for  help  to  heaven  and  to  the  earth.  As  the  soul 
must  fight  against  the  devil  with  all  her  strength,  and 
call  God  to  her  aid  with  her  whole  heart,  her  whole  mind, 
and  all  her  powers ;  so  the  diseased  physical  organism 
calls  to  its  aid  all  the  celestial  and  terrestrial  powers 
with  which  it  has  been  invested  by  God  to  resist  the 
cruel  and  bitter  death  "  (Paramir.,  i.  2). 

Paramirum ;   or,    The  Book  of  the   Causes  and  the 
Beginning  of  Diseases — The  Five  Causes. 

"  There  is  only  one  eternal  and  universal  Cause  of 
everything,  which  is  God,  and  if  we  were  to  write  in 
a  true   Christian  spirit,  we    should  not  make  any   divi- 

MEDICINE  199 

sions ;  but  for  the  sake  of  helping  our  finite  under- 
standing, which  is  not  able  to  grasp  the  power  of  the 
Infinite,  we  are  forced  to  accept  the  theory  of  a  variety 
of  causes,  hoping  thereby  to  sharpen  our  intellect  for 
the  comprehension  of  finite  things,  until  by  the  illumi- 
nation of  Divine  Wisdom  we  shall  become  able  to  behold 
with  the  eye  of  Faith  the  eternal  Unity  of  the  All." 

"  We  have  therefore  divided  the  cause  of  all  diseases 
into  five  classes,  which  are  as  follows : — Ens  Astrale, 
Ens  Venenale,  Ens  Naturcde,  Ens  Spirituale,  and  Ens 
Deale ; 1  but  the  latter  is  the  fundamental  cause  of 
everything  that  exists." 

"  As  there  are  five  causes  of  disease,  there  are  also  five 
different  methods  of  treating  diseases,  and  five  classes 
of  faculties  or  sects  of  physicians  which  follow  these 
methods.  Each  method  is  alone  sufficient  to  treat  all 
the  five  classes  of  diseases,  and  each  physician  should 
be  well  experienced  in  the  methods  of  the  sect  to  which 
he  belongs,  and  he  should  not  change  from  one  system  to 
another,  but  confine  himself  to  the  one  he  has  chosen  to 
adopt.2  He  should  not  be  wavering  and  uncertain,  but 
he  should  be  firm  and  full  of  faith,  and  be  able  to  know 
more  by  his  own  internal  power  of  recognition  than  by 
external  observation  or  by  what  the  patient  may  tell 
him  ;  for  the  patient,  being  only  conscious  of  suffering, 
is  not  in  a  condition  to  judge  his  own  case  correctly,  and 
the  physician  must  be  able  to  see  things  which  are  not 
seen  by  every  one." 

But  the  origin  of  some  particular  disease  may  be  not 
in  only  one  of  these  causes,  but  in  two  or  more  of  them, 
and  unless  a  person  is  able  to  recognise  all  the  causes 
of  such  a  disease  he  will  be  unable  to  prognosticate  the 
time  of  its  duration.  An  astrologer  may  calculate  your 
horoscope  correctly,  and   tell   you  by  what  diseases  you 

1  This  means :  astral  causes  or  origins,  causes  from  poisons  or  im- 
purities, causes  that  spring  from  morbid  conditions  in  the  body,  spiritual 
causes,  and  such  as  come  through  the  action  of  the  moral  law  {Karma). 

-  Those  who  are  Jacks  of  all  systems  are  usually  masters  of  none. 

200  PARACELSUS 

are  threatened  and  when  they  will  end ;  but  he  takes 
only  one  of  the  five  causes  into  consideration,  and  the 
chances  are  four  to  one  that  his  predictions  will  prove  to 
be  wrong,  and  that  he  will  be  laughed  at  by  those  who 
have  only  a  superficial  knowledge,  and  who  do  not  know 
the  cause  of  his  failure. 

I.  Diseases  caused  by  Astral  Causes. 

"  The  world  is  the  Macrocosm  and  man  the  Microcosm, 
and  the  elements  of  all  that  exists  in  the  former  exist  in 
the  latter.  All  the  influences  that  come  from  the  sun, 
the  planets,  and  stars  act,  therefore,  invisibly  upon  man, 
and  if  these  influences  are  evil  they  will  produce  evil 
effects.  No  vegetables  would  grow  without  the  influence 
of  the  sun,  but  if  that  influence  is  too  strong  they  will 
wither  and  perish.  The  world  is  surrounded  by  a 
vaporous  sphere,  like  an  egg  surrounded  by  a  shell. 
Through  that  shell  the  cosmic  influences  pass  towards 
the  centre,  and  on  that  occasion  they  may  become 
poisoned  by  the  miasmas  in  the  air,  and  create  epidemic 
diseases.  An  evil  astral  influence  does  not  poison  the 
whole  world,  but  only  those  places  where  causes  for 
infection  exist.  If  no  germs  of  disease  exist  in  our 
atmosphere,  the  astral  influences  coming  from  the  out- 
side will  cause  no  harm.  If  evil  elements  exist  in  the 
sphere  of  our  soul,  they  attract  such  astral  influences  as 
may  develop  diseases.  If  the  water  in  a  lake  freezes  to 
the  bottom  the  fish  will  die,  and  they  will  likewise  die 
if  the  water  gets  too  warm  ;  and  if  certain  evil  elements 
exist  in  the  water  which  attract  certain  correspondingly 
evil  planetary  influences,1  a  great  many  fish  may  die,  and 
no  one  may  know  the  cause  "  (Paramirum). 

"The  astral   influences  are  the  servants  of  man  and 

1  Such  influences  consist  in  certain  states  of  electricity,  magnetism, 
miasmas,  and  other  "  forces,"  for  which  modern  science  has  no  names  and 
modern  languages  no  words,  but  which  we  may  call  "modifications  of 
Prana." 

MEDICINE  201 

not  his  ruler.  A  seed  which  is  planted  in  the  ground 
contains  in  itself  all  that  is  necessary  for  developing  into 
a  tree,  if  the  conditions  necessary  for  such  a  develop- 
ment are  furnished.  It  has  the  Ens  Seminis  in  itself; 
but  if  the  sun  did  not  exist,  it  would  never  grow.  The 
seed  needs  a  Digest,  and  this  is  furnished  by  the  soil,  but 
the  soil  would  be  useless  without  being  warmed  by  the 
sunshine.  A  child  in  the  womb  of  its  mother  contains 
in  its  Ens  Seminis  the  power  to  grow,  its  Digest  is  the 
womb  in  which  it  lives,  it  requires  neither  planets  nor 
stars ;  its  planet  and  star  is  its  mother.  A  child  may 
be  conceived  or  born  during  the  best  constellation  of 
planets,  and  nevertheless  have  very  bad  qualities.  In 
such  a  case  the  planets  are  not  to  blame ;  it  is  the  Ens 
Seminis,  which  it  has  inherited  in  its  blood." 

"  Man  lives  within  the  invisible  world  comparable  to 
the  yolk  in  an  egg.  The  chicken  grows  from  the  white 
of  the  egg,  which  constitutes  its  chaos,  and  man  is 
nourished  by  his  chaos.  Within  man  are  the  sun  and 
moon,  the  planets  and  all  the  rest  of  the  stars,  and  also 
the  chaos"  (Paragran.,  ii.). 

The  outward  influence  of  the  stars  on  the  sky  avails 
nothing,  if  there  is  not  a  corresponding  power  in  the 
organism  of  man  upon  which  it  can  act ;  but  if  the  germ 
of  disease  is  present,  the  corresponding  influence  of  the 
stars  acts  upon  it.  For  instance,  a  man  in  whom  £  or 
$  are  the  ruling  powers  may  be  rendered  very  passionate 
during  a  conjunction  of  Venice  and  Mars.  Another  born 
under  the  influence  of  ^  may  be  troubled  with  rheu- 
matic pains  whenever  Neptune  stands  prominent  on  the 
sky.  An  observation  of  the  contents  of  the  astronomical 
almanac  might  often  aid  our  physicians  in  making  a 
correct  prognosis. 

"The  moon  exercises  a  very  bad  influence,  especially 
at  the  time  of  the  new  moon,  which,  may  be  very  inju- 
rious for  persons  whose  sidereal  bodies  possess  magnetic 
elements  that  will   attract  that   influence,  and   the   con- 

202  PARACELSUS 

junction  of  the  moon  with  certain  other  planets  will 
make  her  influence  still  more  injurious.1  For  instance, 
a  conjunction  of  the  moon,  Venus,  and  Mars  may  give 
rise  to  the  plague ;  a  conjunction  with  Saturn  to  certain 
acute  diseases,  &c. ;  but  no  evil  influence  can  develop  a 
disease  where  the  germ  of  that  disease  does  not  already 
exist.  The  seat  of  the  sun  in  the  Microcosm  is  in  the 
heart,  that  of  the  moon  is  in  the  brain.  The  moon's 
influence  is  cold ;  and  insane  people  have  been  called 
'  lunatics '  because  they  are  often  injuriously  affected  by 
the  moon,  whose  influence  acts  upon  the  brain  and  stimu- 
lates the  sexual  passions,  and  causes  inj  urious  dreams  and 
hallucinations."  2 

"  There  are  certain  stars  whose  influence  corresponds 
to  the  medical  qualities  of  certain  metals,  and  others  that 
correspond  to  those  of  certain  plants,  and  they  will  act  for 
good  or  for  evil  if  they  are  attracted  by  corresponding  ele- 
ments in  the  sidereal  body  of  man.  A  physician  should 
know  the  physiology  and  anatomy  of  heaven  as  well  as 
that  of  man  to  understand  the  cause  and  cure  of  astralic 
diseases,  because  he  will  vainly  try  his  remedies  as  long 
as  his  patient  is  under  the  ascending  influence  of  an  evil 
star ;  but  after  that  evil  influence  ceases,  the  disease  will 
also  be  changed  or  disappear.  Every  metal  and  every 
plant  possesses  certain  qualities  that  can  attract  corre- 
sponding planetary  influences,  and  if  we  know  the 
influence  of  the  star,  the  conjunctions  of  the  planets, 
and  the  qualities  of  our  drugs,  we  will  know  what 
remedy  to  give  to  attract  such  influences  as  will  act 
beneficially  upon  the  patient."3 

1  It  is  not  the  physical  body  of  the  planet  that  acts  upon  the  physical 
body  of  man,  but  the  astral  influence  of  the  planet  acting  upon  the  astral 
form. 

2  What  the  noxious  influence  of  the  moonlight  is  in  the  external  world, 
the  same  is  the  influence  of  a  morbid  imagination  in  man. 

3  Diseases  often  appear  without  any  assignable  cause.  In  acute  diseases 
the  patient  often  grows  suddenly  worse,  or  he  may  grow  suddenly  better, 
and  no  cause  can  be  assigned  to  it.  Such  changes  are  usually  attributed  to 
"catching  cold  "  where  no  cold  has  been  caught,  to  mistakes  in  the  diet 

MEDICINE  203 

*  If,  for  instance,  a  woman  is  deficient  in  the  element 
of  Mars,  and  consequently  suffers  from  poverty  of  the 
blood  and  want  of  nervous  strength  (anaemia),  we  may 
give  her  iron,  because  the  astral  elements  of  iron  corre- 
spond to  the  astral  elements  represented  by  Mars,  and 
will  attract  them  as  a  magnet  attracts  iron.  But  we 
should  choose  a  plant  which  contains  iron  in  an  ethere- 
alised  state,  which  is  preferable  to  that  of  metallic  iron.1 
In  a  case  of  dropsy  it  would  be  exceedingly  injurious  to 
give  any  remedy  that  would  help  to  attract  the  evil  in- 
fluence of  the  moon ;  but  the  sun  is  opposed  to  the  moon, 
and  those  remedies  which  attract  the  astral  essences  of 
the  sun  will  counteract  those  of  the  moon,  and  thereby 
the  cause  of  dropsy  can  be  removed.  The  same  mode  of 
reasoning  may  be  applied  in  all  other  astralic  diseases." 

2.  Diseases  caused  by  Poisonous  Substances  and 
Impurities. 

"  Everything  is  perfect  in  itself  and  nothing  is  im- 
pure if  it  is  what  it  ought  to  be ;  but  if  two  things 
come  together,  then  one  may  be  a  poison  to  the  other  " 
{Be  Ente  Veneni). 

"  Impurities  and  injurious  elements  enter  the  human 
organism  in  various  ways.  They  may  be  taken  in  the 
food  or  drink,  inhaled  with  the  air,  or  be  absorbed  by 
the  skin.  There  are  visible  and  invisible  poisonous 
substances,  that  are  not  injurious  if  they  enter  the 
organism  alone,  but  will  become  poisonous  if  they  come 
into  contact  with  others.  There  are  poisons  and  im- 
purities of  various  kinds,  and  what  is  healthy  food  for 
one  organism  may  be  injurious  if  taken  into  another, 
and   each    thing   contains    hidden    virtues   that   will    be 

where  no  such  mistakes  have  been  made,  or  they  are  attributed  to  "meteo- 
rological changes,"  of  whose  action  upon  the  human  system  therapeutic 
science  knows  less  to-day  than  at  the  time  of  Paracelsus,  because  it  is 
fashionable  among  certain  people  to  reject  ever}  thing  which  they  cannot 
see,  as  being  "unworthy  of  their  consideration." 
1  For  instance,  elder-berries  (Samhucus). 

204  PARACELSUS 

useful  for  some  beings  while  they  are  evil  for  others. 
The  salamander  eats  fire,  the  ox  eats  grass,  the  peacock 
can  swallow  snakes  and  the  ostrich  stones ;  but  man 
requires   a  different  kind  of  food." 

Philosophy  informs  us  that  the  world  is  made  out  of 
the  will  of  God.  If,  then,  all  things  are  made  out  of 
will,  it  logically  follows  that  the  causes  of  all  internal 
diseases  are  also  originating  within  the  will.  All 
diseases,  such  as  are  not  caused  by  any  action  coming 
from  the  outside,  are  due  to  a  perverted  action  of 
the  will  in  man,  such  as  is  not  in  harmony  with  the 
laws  of  Nature  or  God.  If  his  will  begins  to  move 
in  disharmony  with  these  laws,  then  will  a  state  of 
disharmony  be  created,  which  ultimately  finds  its  ex- 
pression on  the  external  visible  plane,  and  it  is  not 
necessary  that  the  diseased  person  should  be  intellec- 
tually aware  of  the  cause  of  such  an  inharmonious  action, 
for  the  will  in  man  produces  the  harmonious  and  in- 
harmonious performances  of  his  internal  organs  without 
man  being  aware  of  it  and  without  the  consent  of  his 
intellect.  A  mere  thought,  an  idea,  a  mental  impres- 
sion, may  produce  such  an  inharmonious  action  of  will, 
and  as  the  name  "  Tartarus "  expresses  that  which  is 
perverted,  impure,  or  opposed  to  good,  diseases  of  such 
an  origin  are  called  by  Paracelsus  "  Tartaric  Diseases." 

"First  of  all  should  the  physician  know  that  there 
are  three  invisible  substances  which  by  their  coagulation 
form  the  physical  body  of  man,  and  which  are  sym- 
bolised as  'sulphur,  mercury,  and  salt.'  The  'sulphur' 
represents  the  auras  and  energies,  the  '  mercury '  the 
fluids,  and  the  '  salt '  the  material  and  substantial  parts 
of  the  body ;  and  in  each  organ  these  three  substances 
are  combined  in  certain  proportions,  differing  from  each 
other.  These  three  substances  are  contained  in  all 
things,  and  the  digestive  power  is  the  great  solvent  for 
these  substances,  of  which  each  part  of  the  body  assi- 
milates whatever   it   will   require.     Dew  falls  from   the 

MEDICINE  205 

invisible  air,  corals  grow  in  the  water,  and  seeds  draw 
their  nutriment  out  of  the  soil ;  the  earth  is  a  great 
stomach,  in  which  everything  is  dissolved,  digested,  and 
transformed,  and  each  being  draws  its  nutriment  from 
the  earth  ;  and  each  living  being  is  a  stomach  that  serves 
as  a  tomb  for  other  forms,  and  from  which  new  forms 
spring  into  existence  "  (Paramir.,  i.). 

Each  organism  requires  that  kind  of  food  which  is 
adapted  to  its  own  nature.  The  body  cannot  be  nourished 
with  theories,  nor  the  mind  with  potatoes.  The  body 
requires  material  food,  the  mind  mental  knowledge ;  but 
the  soul  needs  the  nutriment  that  comes  from  the  holy 
spirit  of  truth. 

"  Every  living  being  requires  that  particular  kind  of 
food  which  is  adapted  to  its  species  and  to  its  individual 
organism,  and  Life,  the  great  alchemist,  transforms  the 
food  taken.  In  the  alembic  of  the  animal  organism  it 
extracts  from  it  those  substances  which  the  various  organs 
need.  The  lower  class  of  animals  are  even  better  alche- 
mists than  man,  because  they  can  extract  the  essence 
of  life  out  of  things  which  he  is  forced  to  reject.  Man 
extracts  the  more  refined  essences  from  food ;  but  a  hog, 
for  instance,  will  extract  nutriment  out  of  substances 
that  would  act  as  poisons  in  the  organism  of  man,  but 
there  is  no  animal  known  that  will  eat  the  excrements 
of  a  hog.  Animals  refuse  to  eat  or  drink  things  which 
are  injurious  to  them,  and  they  select  by  their  natural 
instincts  those  things  which  they  require ;  it  is  only 
given  to  intellectual  man  to  disobey  his  natural  in- 
stincts, and  to  eat  or  drink  things  which  are  injurious 
to  him,  but  which  may  gratify  some  artificially  acquired 
taste.  Man  is  much  more  subject  to  diseases  than 
animals  in  a  state  of  liberty,  because  animals  live  in 
accordance  with  the  laws  of  their  nature,  and  man  acts 
continually  against  the  laws  of  his  nature,  especially 
in  regard  to  his  eating  and  drinking.  As  long  as  his 
body  is  strong  it  can   expel  or  overcome  the  injurious 

206  PARACELSUS 

influences  which  are  continually  caused  in  it  by  in- 
temperance, gluttony,  and  morbid  tastes ;  but  such  a 
continuous  effort  at  resistance  will  imply  a  serious  loss 
of  vitality,  and  a  time  will  come  when  disease  will  be 
the  result,  because  the  organism  requires  a  period  of 
rest  and  a  renewal  of  strength  to  expel  the  accumulated 
poisonous  elements.  If  the  physician  attempts  to  pre- 
vent such  an  expulsion  of  poisonous  elements,  he  at- 
tempts a  crime  against  Nature,  and  may  cause  the  death 
of  his  patient.  If  he  weakens  in  such  cases  the  strength 
of  his  patient  by  abstracting  blood,  he  will  become  his 
murderer.  Rheumatism  and  gout,  dropsy,  and  many 
other  diseases  are  often  caused  by  such  accumulations 
of  impure  or  superfluous  elements,  and  Nature  cannot 
recover  until  such  elements  are  expelled  and  the  vital 
power  of  the  organs  restored.  While  the  organism  is 
weakened  and  its  vitality  on  the  wane,  the  germs  of 
other  diseases  may  become  developed  by  attracting  in- 
jurious astral  influences,  because  its  power  of  resistance 
is  enfeebled,  and  thus  one  kind  of  a  disease  grows  out  of 
another  "  (De  Ente  Veneni). 

3.  Ens  Natures, — Diseases  arising  from  the  Condition  of 
Man's  Nature  ;  i.e.,  from  Psychological  Causes. 

The  world  of  corporeal  forms  is  an  external  expression 
of  the  world  of  mind.  Each  thing  represents  an  idea  ; 
each  star  in  the  sky  is  a  visible  symbol  of  a  universal 
power  or  principle.  A  diseased  state  of  the  body  is 
often  caused  by  a  diseased  state  of  the  mind.  The 
majority  of  diseases  are  due  to  moral  causes,  and  the 
treatment  ought  to  be  of  a  moral  kind,  and  consist  in 
giving  instruction  and  in  applying  such  remedies  as 
correspond  to  those  states  of  mind  which  we  wish  to 
induce  in  the  patient. 

Modern  science  knows  almost  nothing  about  the  cause 
of  the  action  of  medicines,  and  for  this  reason  the  use 

MEDICINE  207 

of  herbs  and  roots  has  been  almost  entirely  abandoned. 
She  has  her  purgatives,  her  suporifica,  diaphoretica ;  she 
says  that  Aloes  increases  the  peristaltic  movements  of  the 
bowels,  and  that  strychnine  paralyses  the  nerves,  &c. ; 
but  why  these  remedies  act  thus  and  not  otherwise,  this 
she  does  not  explain. 

Modern  medicine  requires,  so  to  say,  a  sledge-hammer 
for  killing  a  fly ;  but  the  finer  natural  remedies,  such  as 
have  not  a  merely  mechanical,  gross,  immediate,  and  de- 
structive action,  have  almost  entirely  disappeared  from  the 
pharmacopoeia,  and,  as  harmless  and  useless,  been  remitted 
to  the  care  of  old  women.  Their  action  is  not  under- 
stood ;  because  it  is  not  so  violent  as  that  of  the  poisons 
used  by  the  orthodox  "  regular  "  physician,  and  therefore 
the  effects  produced  are  not  at  once  apparent  to  the  eye ; 
but  while  the  finer  forces  of  Nature  silently  and  noise- 
lessly act  upon  the  body  of  the  patient,  the  violent 
drugs  administered  by  the  modern  practitioner  usually 
serve  only  to  drive  away  effects  by  shifting  the  seat  of  the 
disease  to  a  still  more  interior  and  more  dangerous  place. 

The  doctrines  of  Paracelsus  go  to  show  that  the  same 
power  which  exists  in  the  mind  of  the  universe,  and 
which  produced  a  star  on  the  sky,  is  also  capable  to 
become  manifest  as  a  plant ;  that  the  whole  world  con- 
sists of  various  states  of  spirit,  having  become  embodied 
or  corporified  in  forms  in  Nature,  in  which  the  qualities 
of  the  will,  which  produced  them,  is  represented  and 
made  manifest ;  and  that,  all  things  originating  primarily 
out  of  one  will-spirit,  they  are  all  related  together  and 
may  be  made  to  act  upon  each  other  by  the  law  of  induc- 
tion. Each  thing,  from  the  sun  down  to  a  tumour  in  the 
body  of  an  animal,  constitutes  a  certain  state  of  vibra- 
tion of  the  one  original  essence,  and  by  applying  a 
remedy  which  is  in  a  near  relation  to  a  diseased  organ 
(according  to  the  quality  of  its  spirit)  we  can  induce  a 
healthy  action  in  that  organ,  and  thus  restore  its  normal 
condition. 

208  PARACELSUS 

"  Many  diseases  are  caused  especially  by  the  abuse  of 
physiological  powers,  in  consequence  of  which  the  organs 
lose  their  strength  and  vitality.  Thus  the  stomach  may 
be  overloaded  with  food  and  irritated  by  stimulating 
drinks,  which  force  it  to  perform  more  than  its  natural 
and  legitimate  amount  of  work ;  the  kidneys  may  be 
inflamed  by  stimulating  and  poisonous  drinks,  and  be- 
become  weak,  or  enlarged,  on  account  of  their  overwork ; 
the  same  may  be  said  of  the  liver ;  the  sexual  powers 
may  become  prematurely  exhausted  by  excesses,  and  the 
health  of  women  be  destroyed  by  the  unnatural  frequency 
by  which  connubial  acts  are  performed.  Animals  live 
according  to  their  nature,  and  it  is  only  given  to  reason- 
ing man  to  act  against  his  instincts,  to  neglect  to  listen 
to  the  warning  voice  of  his  nature,  and  to  misuse  the 
organism  with  which  he  has  been  entrusted  by  the 
creative  power  of  God.  In  many  cases  of  lost  vitality 
the  weakened  organs  will  recover  their  strength  after  a 
time  of  rest  and  cessation  of  abuse.  Nature  is  a  patient 
mother  that  often  forgives  the  sins  committed  against 
her,  although  she  cannot  forget  them.  "We  may  there- 
fore often  trust  to  her  recuperative  powers,  and  Nature 
will  be  able  to  restore  that  which  has  not  been  irre- 
vocably lost ;  for  Nature  is  a  great  physician,  and  the 
dabblers  in  medicine  and  apothecaries  are  her  enemies, 
and  while  the  latter  fill  the  graveyards  of  the  country 
with  corpses,  Nature  distributes  the  balsam  of  life." 

"  Every  organ  in  the  human  body  is  formed  by  the 
action  of  certain  principles  that  exist  in  the  universe, 
and  the  former  attract  the  corresponding  activity  in  the 
latter.  Thus  the  heart  is  in  sympathy  with  the  elements 
of  the  sun,  the  brain  with  the  moon,  the  gall-bladder 
with  Mars,  the  kidneys  with  Venus,  the  lungs  with 
Mercury,  the  liver  with  Jupiter,  the  spleen  with  Saturn, 
&c.  There  are  many  stars  in  the  great  firmament  of 
the  universe,  and  there  are  many  germs  hidden  in  the 
little  world  of  man,  and  the  high  influences  the  low ; 

MEDICINE  209 

and  in  the  Microcosm  and  Macrocosm  all  things  stand  in 
intimate  sympathetic  relationship  with  each  other,  for  all 
are  the  children  of  one  universal  father."  l 

Not  only  is  Man  a  compendium  of  invisible  forces, 
having  grown  into  corporeal  shape ;  every  animal,  plant, 
and  mineral  is  a  corporified  principle,  a  materialised 
power,  or  a  combination  of  such ;  and  the  Astronomy  of 
Paracelsus  includes,  therefore,  not  merely  a  knowledge 
of  the  "  stars,"  but  also  a  knowledge  of  Zoology,  Botany, 
and  Mineralogy.  "  What  is  Mars  but  the  principle  of 
Iron,  which  is  found  universally  distributed  in  Nature 
and  in  the  constitution  of  man  ?  What  is  Venus  but 
the  power  which  excites  the  Vasa  Sjoermatica  in  men  and 
in  animals  ?  What  is  Melissa  but  a  power  which  exists 
in  the  astral  light  and  finds  its  material  expression  in  the 
herb  Melissa,  which  grows  in  our  gardens  ?  What  are  the 
animals  but  the  personifications  of  those  characters  which 
they  represent  ?  Everything  is  an  expression  of  the 
principle  of  life  in  a  material  form,  and  the  life  is  the 
real  thing ;  the  external  form  is  merely  the  house  or 
Corpus  in  which  it  resides  "  (Be  Pestilitate). 

Signatures 

"  All  natural  forms  bear  their  signatures,  which  indicate 
their  true  nature.  Minerals,  vegetables,  and  animals  re- 
main true  to  their  nature,  and  their  forms  indicate  their 
character.  Man,  who  has  become  unnatural,  is  the  only 
being  whose  character  often  belies  his  form,  because, 
while  his  character  may  have  changed  into  that  of  an 
animal,  his  form  has  retained  the  human  shape.  If 
such  men  could  re-enter  the  Limbus  of  Nature  and 
be  born  again  in  forms  which  correspond  to  their  true 

1  We  ought  not  to  forget  that  each  planet  corresponds  to  a  certain 
state  of  the  mind.  Thus  \  represents  a  melancholy,  3  a  fiery  temper, 
d  a  dreamy  disposition,  7/  ambition  and  pride,  §  intelligence,  ?  love 
and  desire,  ©  wisdom. 

0 

210  PARACELSUS 

nature  ;  and  if  this  should  take  place,  many  of  our  Phari- 
sees, strutting  about  in  scarlet  coats  and  pretending 
to  be  benefactors  of  mankind,  while  they  in  reality  care 
for  nothing  but  for  the  gratification  of  their  ambition 
and  lusts,  would  be  born  in  the  shape  of  monkeys,  camels, 
and  buffaloes  "  {Be,  Philosophia). 

"  He  is  not  a  physician  who  can  see  only  that  which 
is  visible  to  every  boor.  The  experienced  gardener  can 
tell  by  looking  at  a  seed  what  kind  of  a  plant  will  grow 
from  it,  and  likewise  the  physician  should  be  able  to 
perceive  how  a  disease  originates,  and  in  what  way  it 
will  develop.  He  who  knows  how  the  rain  originates 
will  also  know  the  origin  of  dysentery ;  he  who  knows 
the  origin  of  the  winds  knows  how  colic  originates ;  he 
who  knows  the  periodical  changes  of  the  seasons  may 
know  the  origin  of  intermittent  fevers ;  he  who  knows 
the  ebbs  and  tides  in  the  Macrocosm  will  know  the  cause 
of  menorrhagias  of  the  Microcosm,  &c.  The  quack  studies 
diseases  in  the  affected  organs,  where  he  finds  nothing 
else  but  effects  which  have  already  taken  place,  and  he 
will  never  arrive  at  an  end ;  for  if  he  were  to  kill  a 
thousand  people  for  the  purpose  of  studying  those  effects, 
he  would  still  be  ignorant  in  regard  to  the  causes.  The 
true  physician  studies  the  causes  of  diseases  by  study- 
ing man  as  a  whole.  In  him  exist  all  the  diseases  that 
did  exist  in  the  past  or  will  exist  in  the  future.  The 
destroyer  is  not  a  physician,  but  an  executioner  and 
murderer.  Let  the  honest  man  ask  his  own  conscience 
whether  God  meant  that  we  should  acquire  wisdom  by 
murder  "  l  (Paragran.,  i.). 

"  As  the  sunshine  penetrates  through  a  glass  window 
into  a  room,  so  the  influences  of  the  astral  light  enter 
into  the  body  of  man,  and  as  the  rain  is  absorbed  by  the 
soil,  while  stones  and  rocks  are  impenetrable  to  it,  so 
there  are  certain  elements  in  man's  organisation  which 
absorb  these  influences,  while  other  elements  resist  their 
1  Let  the  vivisectionists  consider  that  question. 

MEDICINE  211 

action.  To  obtain  a  correct  idea  of  the  construction  of 
the  Microcosm,  we  should  know  how  the  Macrocosm  is 
constructed ;  we  must  look  upon  man  as  an  integral 
part  of  universal  Nature,  and  not  as  something  separate 
or  different  from  the  latter.  The  earth  nourishes  the 
physical  body,  and  the  astral  body  is  nourished  by  the 
astral  light,  and  as  the  former  hungers  and  thirsts  for 
the  elements  of  the  earth,  so  the  latter  longs  for  the 
influences  which  come  from  the  astral  plane.  There  are 
many  thousands  of  '  magnets  '  in  the  constitution  of  man  ; 
good  attracts  good,  evil  attracts  evil ;  good  improves  the 
good,  and  causes  it  to  be  better ;  evil  attracts  evil,  and  is 
rendered  worse  thereby.  Innumerable  are  the  Egos  in 
man ;  in  him  are  angels  and  devils,  heaven  and  hell, 
the  whole  of  the  animal  creation,  the  vegetable  and 
mineral  kingdom  ;  and  as  the  individual  little  man  may 
be  diseased,  so  the  great  universal  man  has  his  diseases, 
which  manifest  themselves  as  the  ills  that  affect  humanity 
as  a  whole.  Upon  this  fact  is  based  the  prediction  of 
future  events  "  (Paragran.). 

"Those  who  merely  study  and  treat  the  effects  of 
disease  are  like  persons  who  imagine  that  they  can  drive 
the  winter  away  by  brushing  the  snow  from  the  door. 
It  is  not  the  snow  which  causes  the  winter,  but  the 
winter  is  the  cause  of  the  snow.  Those  people  have 
departed  from  the  light  of  reason  and  lost  themselves 
in  idle  vagaries,  to  the  great  detriment  of  the  welfare  of 
humanity.  Consider  how  great  and  how  noble  man  is, 
and  that  his  visible  form  is  merely  the  outgrowth  of  in- 
visible powers.  As  it  is  outside  of  man,  so  is  it  inside, 
and  vice  versd,  for  the  outside  and  inside  are  essentially 
one  thing,  one  constellation,  one  influence.  It  is  the 
Limbus  in  which  the  whole  of  creation  is  hidden.  He  who 
knows  only  the  external  form  of  man,  and  not  the  power 
by  which  it  is  produced,  knows  nothing  but  an  illusion ; 
his  science  is  illusive,  only  fit  to  impose  upon  the 
ignorant"  (Be  Astronomia). 

212  PARACELSUS 

"  Good  or  evil  influence  comes  down  from  the  sun, 
the  moon,  or  the  stars ;  the  action  of  the  macrocosmic 
influences  stimulates  the  corresponding  elements  (the 
Corpora  Microcosmi  Astralia)  existing  in  man  into  action. 
The  same  element  which  produces  Mars,  Venus,  or 
Jupiter  in  the  sky  exists  also  in  the  body  of  man ; 
because  the  latter  is  the  son  of  the  astral  body  of  the 
Macrocosm  in  the  same  sense  as  the  physical  body  of  man 
is  a  son  of  the  earth.  To  be  a  physician,  it  is  not  suffi- 
cient to  know  the  anatomy  of  the  physical  body ;  you 
should  also  know  that  of  the  astral  body ;  you  should 
know  not  merely  a  part,  but  the  whole  constitution  of 
the  Macrocosm  and  the  Microcosm  of  man.  Adam  is  not 
the  father  of  man,  nor  is  Eve  his  mother ;  they  were  both 
human  beings  themselves.  The  first  man  was  a  product 
of  creation,  and  all  created  things  constitute  together  the 
Limbus  (Nature).  Man  is  born  from  the  Zimbus,  and 
still  remains  in  it ;  the  two,  i.e.,  Man  and  Nature,  are 
one,  and  he  who  knows  the  anatomy  of  Nature  knows 
also  the  constitution  of  man.  If  a  man  gets  sick,  it  is 
not  the  eternal  part  in  him  which  suffers,  but  it  is  his 
Zimbus,  which  is  composed  of  many  hundreds  of  different 
elements,  which  are  all  related  to  their  corresponding 
elements  in  the  great  Zimbus  of  Nature." 

"  Nature  (Heaven)  is  Man,  and  Man  is  Nature  ;  all 
men  are  one  universal  Heaven,  and  Heaven  is  only  one 
universal  Man.  Individual  man  is  the  individualised 
universal  Man,  and  has  his  own  individual  heaven,  which 
is  a  part  of  the  universal  Heaven.  If  all  children  were 
born  at  once  and  upon  one  point,  they  would  all  be  con- 
stituted alike,  and  be  sick  or  well  at  the  same  time ;  but 
at  the  time  of  conception  a  differentiation  takes  place, 
and  each  child  receives  his  own  individual  nature,  which, 
however,  still  remains  an  integral  part  of  the  universal 
nature  of  mankind.  Thus,  there  are  many  points  in  a 
circle,  and  each  point  constitutes  a  circle  of  its  own,  and 
yet  they  all  belong  to  the  great  circle,  and  as  each  little 

MEDICINE  213 

circle  may  expand  so  as  to  encompass  the  whole,  so  the 
heaven  in  man  may  grow  so  as  to  expand  towards  the 
whole,  or  contract  into  his  own  centre  and  disappear." 

"  Why  does  man  want  to  eat,  to  drink,  and  to  breathe 
but  because  he  is  related  to  the  elements  of  earth,  water, 
and  air,  and  must  attract  these  things  to  his  constitution  ? 
Why  does  he  need  warmth  but  because  he  is  related  to 
the  element  of  the  fire  and  cannot  do  without  it  ?  And  all 
these  elements  may  produce  diseases.  There  is  no  disease 
in  the  elements,  but  the  disease  starts  from  the  centres. 
The  origin  of  diseases  is  in  man,  and  not  outside  of  man ; 
but  outside  influences  act  upon  the  inside  and  cause 
diseases  to  grow.  Man  is  himself  a  cosmos.  A  physi- 
cian who  knows  nothing  about  Cosmology  will  know  little 
about  disease.  He  should  know  what  exists  in  heaven 
and  upon  the  earth,  what  lives  in  the  four  elements  and 
how  they  act  upon  man ;  in  short,  he  should  know  what 
man  is,  his  origin  and  his  constitution ;  he  should  know 
the  whole  man,  and  not  merely  his  external  body.  If 
man  were  in  possession  of  a  perfect  knowledge  of  self  he 
would  not  need  to  be  sick  at  all." 

"  Diseases  serve  to  teach  man  that  he  is  made  out  of 
the  universal  Zimbus,  and  that  he  is  like  the  animals 
and  by  no  means  better  than  they.  He  should  study 
himself  and  the  rest  of  creation,  so  that  he  may  attain 
self-knowledge ;  and  this  self-knowledge  should  be  above 
all  obtained  by  the  physician.  Man  is  the  highest  of  all 
animals,  and  the  whole  of  the  animal  creation  is  contained 
in  him,  and,  moreover,  he  has  the  power  to  attain  self- 
knowledge,  a  faculty  which  the  animals  do  not  possess." 

"  Every  star  (faculty)  in  the  nature  of  man  is  of  a 
double  nature,  and  he  who  knows  the  stars  also  knows 
the  nature  of  the  disease ;  but  the  Arcana  of  Nature  are 
single.1  If  the  two  opposites  in  the  constitution  of  man 
(heat  and  cold,  love  and   hatred,  &c.)  are   at   war  with 

1  That  which  is  divine  in  man  is  only  one,  and  has  only  one,  aspect ;  all 
other  things  have  two  aspects,  a  material  and  an  ethereal  one. 

2i4  PARACELSUS 

each  other,  each  of  them  asks  for  help  from  their  common 
mother  (Nature),  and  the  physician  should,  therefore, 
be  well  acquainted  with  the  astronomy  of  the  inner 
heaven  of  man,  so  as  to  know  how  to  assist  Nature  in 
her  work." 

True  love  and  true  knowledge  are  inseparable. 

"  To  understand  the  laws  of  Nature  we  must  love 
Nature.  He  who  does  not  know  Maria,  does  not  love 
her  ;  he  who  does  not  know  God  does  not  love  Him  ;  his 
belly  (his  greed)  is  his  god.  He  who  does  not  under- 
stand the  poor  does  not  love  them.  The  more  know- 
ledge we  obtain,  the  stronger  will  be  our  love  and  the 
greater  our  power.  He  who  knows  God  has  faith  in 
God ;  he  who  does  not  know  Him  can  have  no  true 
faith.  He  who  knows  Nature  will  love  her,  and  obtain 
the  power  to  employ  her  forces.  No  one  can  be  made 
into  an  artist  or  inventor  if  he  has  not  the  natural  love 
and  capacity  for  it ;  no  one  can  be  a  good  physician  unless 
he  is  born  to  be  one.  The  art  to  invent  is  a  species 
of  Magic,  which  cannot  be  taught,  but  which  must  be 
acquired.  All  Wisdom  comes  from  the  East ;  from  the 
West  we  can  expect  nothing  good ;  therefore,  you  who 
desire  to  be  useful  physicians,  act  according  to  the  sun 
of  true  Wisdom,  and  not  for  the  aggrandisement  of  the 
moonshine  of  self  "  (Labyrinthws  Medicorum). 

"  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  a  certain  material 
element  coming  from  the  planets  enters  the  organism 
of  man  and  adds  something  to  it  which  it  does  not 
already  possess.  The  light  of  the  sun  does  not  contri- 
bute any  corporeal  substance  to  the  organisms  existing 
upon  the  earth,  and  a  man  does  not  become  heavier  if 
he  stands  in  the  sun ;  but  the  natural  forces  acting  in 
the  various  organs  are  intimately  related  to  similar  forces 
acting  in  the  organism  of  the  world,  and  as  the  liver,  the 
spleen,  the  heart,  &c,  are  the  bodily  representatives  of 
certain  organic  activities,  likewise  the  sun  and  the  moon, 
Venus,  Mars,   &c,  are  the  visible  representatives  of  the 

MEDICINE  215 

corresponding  activities  of  the  Cosmos.  If  a  man  gets 
angry,  it  is  not  because  he  has  too  much  bile,  but  because 
the  '  Mars,'  the  combative  element  in  his  body  (the  in- 
visible power  that  guides  the  production  of  bile),  is  in  a 
state  of  exaltation.  If  a  man  is  amorous,  it  is  not  because 
his  spermatic  vessels  are  overloaded,  but  because  the 
'  Venus '  (the  amorous  element)  in  his  body  is  in  a  state 
of  exaltation.  If  in  such  cases  a  conjunction  of  the 
combative  and  amorous  elements  takes  place  in  his  body, 
an  ebullition  of  jealousy  will  follow  ;  and  if  such  an 
internal  conjunction  should  take  place  at  a  time  when 
conjunction  of  the  planets  Mars  and  Venus  takes  place  in 
the  sky,  the  sympathetic  relationship  existing  between 
the  elements  representing  these  planets  in  the  Microcosm 
and  the  elements  represented  by  those  of  the  Macrocosm 
may  lead  to  serious  consequences  unless  counteracted  by 
the  superior  power  of  reason  and  will." 

There  are  a  great  many  stars  in  the  universe ;  there 
are  a  great  many  forces  active  in  the  organism  of  man. 
There  are  a  great  many  plants  which  are  the  earthly  repre- 
sentations of  astral  influences  corresponding  to  the  quali- 
ties of  the  stars,  and  which  will  attract  the  influences  of 
the  stars  to  which  they  are  sympathetically  related.  By 
using  such  plants  as  medicine  we  attract  the  planetary 
life-influences  needed  to  restore  the  vitality  in  diseased 
parts. 

We  give  below  a  list  of  some  principally  useful  herbs, 
the  names  of  the  planets  to  which  they  are  sympatheti- 
cally related,  and  the  names  of  the  principal  diseases  in 
which  they  may  be  used  with  advantage.  It  will,  how- 
ever, appear  reasonable  that  it  makes  a  vast  difference 
whether  such  plants  are  fresh  or  whether  they  have 
been  dried,  and  their  occult  properties  are,  moreover,  to 

1  It  would  be  interesting  to  collect  statistics  of  crimes,  showing  exactly 
the  time  when  they  have  taken  place,  comparing  the  latter  with  the  time 
of  the  conjunctions  of  the  planets  existing  at  the  same  longitude  and 
latitude,  and  also  compare  them  with  the  constellations  that  ruled  at  the 
time  of  birth. 

216  PARACELSUS 

a  great  extent  modified  by  the  time  of  the  day  or  night, 
and  under  what  planetary  conjunctions  they  have  been 
gathered,  and  at  what  time  they  are  used.  Each  plant 
should  be  gathered  at  a  time  when  the  planet  to  which 
it  is  related  rules  the  hour,  and  its  essence  should  be 
extracted  as  long  as  it  is  fresh.1 

Sun. — Rosmarinus  officinalis,  Lavandula  officinalis,  Salvia  offici- 
nalis, Satureja  officinalis,  Melissa  officinalis.  (Acute  inflam- 
mations, diseases  of  the  heart,  rheumatism,  &c.) 

Moon. — Thymus  majorana,  Helleborus  niger,  Ruta  graveolens. 
(To  be  used  in  insanity,  hysteria,  nervous  diseases,  &c.) 

Mercury. — Pulmonaria  off.,  Althsea  off.,  Plantago  laureola.  (Pneu- 
monia, catarrh,  phthisis  pulmonalis,  inflammations  of  mucous 
membranes.) 

Venus. — Ononis  spinosa,  Verbascum  thapsus,  Apium  petroselinum. 
(Dropsical  swellings,  diseases  of  kidneys  or  bladder,  &c.) 

Mars. — Carduus  benedictus,  Urticaria  diocia,  Erythrsea  centau- 
rium.  (Fevers,  diseases  of  an  acvite  and  violent  character  ; 
eruptive  fevers,  &c.) 

Jupiter. — Ruta  graveolens,  Hepatica  nobilis,  Adianthum  veneris 
Chelidonium  magus,  Linum  usitatissimum,  Cannabis  sativa. 
(Jaundice,  liver  diseases.) 

Saturn. — Chrysosplenium  alternifolium,  Scrophula  nodosa,  Teu- 
crium  Chamaedrys.    (Hypochondria,  piles,  melancholia,  &c.)2 

There  are  a  great  many  other  plants  whose  essences 
correspond  to  the  ethers  radiating  from  other  planets 
and  stars,  and  if  we  knew  all  the  qualities  of  the  stars, 
we  would  find  that  the  quality  of  each  of  them  is  re- 
presented on  the  earth  by  some  plant.  By  the  judicious 
use  of  plants  beneficial  astral  activities  may  be  attracted 
and  evil  influences  neutralised ;  but  to  know  what  plants 
are  required  in  each  case  it  is  necessary  to  know  not 
only  the  anatomy  of  the  human  body  and  the  functions 
of   its    organs,  but    also    the   constitution    of  the   starry 

1  Useless  to  say  that  our  druggists  know  nothing  about  such  things,  and 
do  not  observe  them. 

2  The  physician  of  the  nineteenth  century  will  hardly  fail  to  recognise 
among  these  remedies  many  that  are  habitually  used  in  modern  medicine, 
although  there  is  hardly  any  other  reason  for  their  employment  known  but 
that  experience  has  taught  that  they  are  useful. 

MEDICINE  217 

heavens,  the  qualities  of  the  stars,  and  the  time  of  the 
appearance  and  conjunctions  of  planets.  The  impossi- 
bility to  grasp  at  once  all  these  things  intellectually 
shows  that  the  power  of  spiritual  perception  is  a  most 
necessary  qualification  for  the  true  physician. 

It  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this  work  to  enter  into 
a  detailed  account  of  the  treatment  of  special  diseases 
adopted  by  Paracelsus.  It  may  suffice  to  say  that  the 
difference  between  the  system  of  medicine  of  the  present 
day  and  that  of  Paracelsus  is  a  difference  growing  out 
of  an  entirely  different  apprehension  of  fundamental 
truths.  Modern  science  looks  upon  the  universe  as 
being  a  conglomeration  of  dead  matter,  out  of  which,  by 
some  unexplainable  process,  life  may  become  evolved  in 
forms.  The  science  of  Paracelsus  looks  upon  the  whole 
of  the  universe  as  the  manifestation  of  a  universal 
principle  of  life,  acting  through  the  instrumentality  of 
forms.  Modern  science  seems  to  regard  the  forms  as 
the  sources  of  life ;  the  science  of  Paracelsus  looks  upon 
the  forms  as  being  the  products  of  life.  Forms  are, 
so  to  say,  condensed  forces  or  crystallised  space ;  but 
space  itself  is  an  aspect  of  the  one  life,  and  there  is  no 
dead  matter  in  the  universe,  for  that  which  dies  returns 
again  into  the  matrix  of  Nature,  to  be  reborn  into  other 
forms,  and  to  serve  again  as  an  instrument  for  the  mani- 
festation of  life. 

In  the  universe  of  Paracelsus  there  is  life  everywhere, 
and  all  beings  are  connected  together  by  a  common  link. 
Some  forms  are  in  a  close  mutual  sympathy,  while  be- 
tween others  an  antipathy  is  prevailing.  Some  attract 
and  others  repel  each  other.  During  the  ascendency  of 
a  planet1  its  essence  will  be  especially  attracted  by 
plants  and  by  animal  organs  that  are  in  harmony  with 
it ;  but  what  else  is  this  radiating  planetary  essence  but 
the  elixir  of  life,,  the  invisible  vehicle  of  a  quality  peculiar 
to  that  power?     And  therefore  a  patient  may  grow  better 

1  The  "  ascendency  of  a  star  "  means  the  increase  of  a  power. 

218  PARACELSUS 

or  worse  without  any  visible  cause.  A  medicine  that 
will  do  good  at  one  time  will  be  useless  at  another,  and  a 
system  of  medicine  without  understanding  and  without 
true  knowledge  of  natural  laws  will  remain  a  system 
of  mere  suppositions  and  superstitions,  of  passive  obser- 
vation and  inactivity,  and  if  it  attempts  to  interfere  with 
the  cause  of  a  disease,  the  probability  is  that  it  will  do 
serious  harm.  Paracelsus  says :  "  Our  physicians  pay 
no  attention  to  the  position  of  the  planets,1  and  there- 
fore they  kill  more  patients  than  they  cure,  because  a 
medicine  that  may  do  good  at  one  time  may  be  injurious 
at  another,  according  to  the  prevailing  influence.  That 
which  is  active  in  medicines  is  their  astral  elements  acting 
upon  the  astral  man,  and  they  are  produced  by  astral 
influences,  and  it  makes  the  greatest  difference  whether 
a  medicine  is  pervaded  by  one  influence  or  by  another  " 
(De  Caducis). 

It  should  always  be  remembered  that  astral  influences 
do  not  act  directly  upon  the  physical  bodies  of  men  and 
animals,  but  upon  their  vital  essence,  in  which  all  ele- 
ments are  contained.  Love  for  a  certain  person  may 
be  created  by  a  word  or  a  touch,  by  a  breath  or  a  kiss, 
but  only  if  the  person  who  is  touched  or  breathed  upon 
has  in  his  soul  the  elements  that  are  capable  to  manifest 
that  particular  kind  of  love.  The  vehicle  of  life  that 
contains  the  life-essence  in  the  body  of  man  (the  Mumia) 
is  the  same  as  that  which  contains  the  universal  life  and 
forms  the  astral  body  of  the  world  ;  but  each  energy 
may  exist  in  various  states  and  modifications,  differing 
from  each  other.  "  Even  the  ignorant  knows  that  man 
has  a  heart  and  lungs,  a  brain  and  a  liver  and  stomach  ; 
but  he  thinks  that  these  organs  are  independent  things, 
that  have  nothing  to  do  with  each  other  ;  and  even  our 
most  learned  doctors  are  not  aware  of  the  fact  that 
these  organs  are  only  the  material  and  bodily  repre- 
sentatives of  invisible  energies  that  pervade  and  circulate 

1  The  quality  of  the  influences  acting  upon  the  patient. 

MEDICINE  219 

in  the  whole  system ;  so  that,  for  instance,  the  real 
'  liver '  is  to  be  found  in  all  parts  of  the  body,  and 
has  its  herd  in  that  organ  which  we  call  the  liver.  All 
the  members  of  the  body  are  potentially  contained  in 
the  centre  of  the  vital  fluid,  which  has  its  seat  in 
the  brain,  while  the  activity  which  propels  it  comes 
from  the  heart  " l  {De  Viribus  Membrorum). 

Mind  is  not  created  by  the  brain,  neither  is  love  nor 
hate  created  by  the  heart ;  but  mind  acts  through  the 
brain,  and  love  and  hate  have  their  origin  in  the  heart. 
"  A  man  who  is  angry  is  not  only  angry  in  his  head 
or  in  his  fist,  but  all  over ;  a  person  who  loves  does 
not  only  love  with  his  eye,  but  with  his  whole  being ; 
in  short,  all  the  organs  of  the  body,  and  the  body  itself, 
are  only  form-manifestations  of  previously  and  universally 
existing  mental  states." 

"  The  body  of  a  man  is  his  house ;  the  architect  who 
builds  it  is  the  astral  world.  The  carpenters  are  at  one 
time  Jupiter,  at  another  Venus  ;  at  one  time  Taurus, 
at  another  Orion.  Man  is  a  sun  and  a  moon  and  a 
heaven  filled  with  stars ;  the  world  is  a  man,  and  the 
light  of  the  sun  and  the  stars  is  his  body ;  the  ethereal 
body  cannot  be  grasped,  and  yet  it  is  substantial,  because 
substance  (from  sub,  under,  and  sto,  standing)  means  exist- 
ence, and  without  substance  nothing  exists.  If  the  life 
of  the  sun  did  not  act  in  the  world,  nothing  would  grow. 
The    human   body   is  vapour    materialised   by    sunshine 

1  This  doctrine  is  corroborated  by  modern  discoveries.  Amputations 
of  limbs  are  followed  by  a  state  of  atrophy  of  certain  parts  of  brain- 
substance,  which  seems  to  indicate  that  the  force  which  shapes  the 
limbs  has  its  centre  in  the  brain.  If  certain  parts  of  the  brain  were 
destroyed,  the  limbs  would  begin  to  atrophy.  If  we  apply  this  mode  of 
reasoning  to  the  Macrocosm,  we  find  that  all  the  essences  and  ethers  that 
go  to  make  up  the  organs  of  the  Macrocosm  are  also  contained  in  its 
centre,  the  sun ;  and  if  a  certain  element  were  taken  away  from  the  sun, 
the  planets  could  not  continue  to  exist  in  their  present  condition.  If  a 
certain  element  that  goes  to  form  the  legs  of  men  were  suddenly  taken 
away  from  the  universal  storehouse  of  the  Macrocosm  (the  Limbus), 
human  beings  would  be  born  without  legs  :  if  no  principle  of  reason 
existed,  there  would  be  no  use  for  brains,  &c. 

220  PARACELSUS 

mixed  with  the  life  of  the  stars.  Four  elements  are  in 
the  world,  and  man  consists  out  of  four,  and  that  which 
exists  visibly  in  man  exists  invisibly  in  the  ether  per- 
vading the  world.  Where  is  the  workman  that  cuts 
out  the  forms  of  lilies  and  roses  that  grow  in  the  field  ? 
and  where  is  his  workshop  and  tools  ?  The  characters 
of  the  lilies  and  roses  exist  in  the  astral  light,  and  in 
the  workshop  of  Nature  they  are  made  into  forms.  A 
blooming  flower  cannot  be  made  out  of  mud,  nor  a 
man  out  of  material  clay ;  and  he  who  denies  the  for- 
mative power  of  Nature,  and  believes  that  ready-made 
forms  grow  out  of  the  earth,  believes  that  something  can 
be  taken  out  of  a  body  in  which  it  does  not  exist "  (Be 
Caducis). 

The  power  of  sight  does  not  come  from  the  eye,  the 
power  to  hear  does  not  come  from  the  ear,  nor  the 
power  to  feel  from  the  nerves ;  it  is  the  spirit  of  man 
that  sees  through  the  eye,  and  hears  with  the  ear,  and 
feels  by  means  of  the  nerves.  Wisdom  and  reason  and 
thought  are  not  contained  in  the  brain,  but  they  belong 
to  the  invisible  spirit  which  feels  through  the  heart  and 
thinks  by  means  of  the  brain.  All  these  powers  are 
contained  in  the  invisible  universe,  and  become  manifest 
through  material  organs,  and  the  material  organs  are 
their  representatives,  and  determine  their  mode  of  mani- 
festation according  to  their  material  construction,  because 
a  perfect  manifestation  of  power  can  only  take  place  in 
a  perfectly  constructed  organism,  and  if  the  organism  is 
faulty  the  manifestation  will  be  imperfect,  but  not  the 
original  power  defective  "  (I)e  Viribus  Memhrorum).    ■ 

The  animal  intellect  differs  from  the  human  intellect 
especially  in  that  the  animal  can  see  only  the  vehicle, 
but  the  human  intellect  discovers  the  principle  mani- 
fested therein.  For  this  reason  those  of  our  would-be 
scientists  who  only  see  external  effects,  and  cannot  see 
the  principles  therein,  have  only  an  animal  intellect, 
however  well  trained  it  may  be. 

MEDICINE  221 

4.  Diseases  originating  from  Spiritual  Causes.1 

This  class  of  diseases  includes  all  evils  that  are  caused 
by  an  evil  will,  resulting  from  passions,  evil  desires, 
disordered  thoughts,  and  a  morbid  imagination.  Such 
psychological  states  produce  physiological  changes  in 
the  physical  body.  Shame  produces  a  blush  in  the  face, 
and  terror  produces  a  paleness.  Fear  causes  diarrhoea ; 
melancholy,  obstructions ;  anger  or  envy  gives  rise  to 
jaundice.  Gaiety  may  cure,  and  grief  may  kill.  Violent 
emotions  produce  miscarriages,  apoplexy,  spasms,  hysterics, 
and  cause  malformations  of  the  foetus,  &c,  &c.  Such 
things  are  known  to  all  who  have  investigated  such 
matters ;  but  it  is  less  generally  known  that  the  evil 
imagination  of  one  person  can  affect  the  mind  of  another, 
poison  his  vitality,  and  injure  or  kill  his  body. 

The  reason  why  this  is  not  generally  known  is,  that 
the  imagination  of  the  majority  of  men  and  women  in 
our  present  state  of  civilisation  is  too  weak,  their  will 
too  feeble,  and  their  faith  too  much  pervaded  by  doubt 
to  produce  the  desired  effects ;  and  it  is  fortunate  that 
their  imagination,  however  evil  it  may  be,  has  not  much 
power  as  long  as  the  state  of  morality  is  not  higher 
advanced  than  it  is  at  present.2  Nevertheless,  there  have 
been  persons  whose  evil  will  was  so  strong  as  to  project 
the  products  of  their  imagination  instinctively  or  con- 
sciously upon  a  person  whom  they  desired  to  injure,  and 
such  persons  are  still  in  existence,  although  they  may 
not  deem  it  prudent  to  boast  of  their  gifts  or  to  exhibit 
their  powers  in  public.  Envy  and  hate  produce  an  evil 
imagination,  and  create  forces  that  are  more  active 
during  sleep  than  during  waking.      The  evil  thoughts  of 

1  That  which  is  born  from  our  thoughts  is  a  spirit"  (Paramir.,  i.). 

2  To  think  is  to  act  on  the  plane  of  thought,  and  if  the  thought  is 
intense  enough,  it  can  produce  an  effect  on  the  physical  plane.  It  is  very 
fortunate  that  few  persons  possess  the  power  to  make  it  act  directly  on 
the  physical  plane,  because  there  are  few  persons  who  never  have  any  evil 
thoughts  entering  into  their  mind. 

222  PARACELSUS 

a  malicious  person  can  affect  another  (sensitive)  person, 
not  only  while  the  former  is  awake,  but  also  during  his 
sleep ;  because  when  the  physical  body  is  asleep,  the 
sidereal  body  is  free  to  go  wherever  it  pleases  or  wher- 
ever it  may  be  attracted. 

"  The  life  that  is  active  in  the  organs  is  the  anima 
vegetiva  (the  animal  soul).  It  is  an  invisible  fire  (sulphitr), 
that  can  easily  be  blown  into  a  flame  by  the  power  of 
the  imagination.  Imagination  creates  hunger  and  thirst, 
produces  abnormal  secretions,  and  causes  diseases ;  but  a 
person  who  has  no  evil  desires  will  have  no  evil  imagina- 
tion, and  no  diseases  will  spring  from  his  thoughts." 

"  A  person  who  has  evil  desires  will  have  an  evil 
imagination,  and  the  forces  created  in  the  sphere  of  his 
mind  can  be  projected  by  powerful  will  into  the  mental 
sphere  of  another.  Thoughts  are  not  empty  nothings, 
but  they  are  formed  out  of  the  substance  that  forms  the 
element  of  the  mind,  in  the  same  sense  as  a  piece  of  ice 
is  made  out  of  the  substance  of  water.  The  will  is  the 
power  that  concentrates  the  image  formed  in  the  mind, 
in  the  same  way  as  the  power  of  cold  will  cause  a  body 
of  water  to  freeze  into  solid  ice;  and  as  an  icicle  may 
be  thrown  from  one  place  to  another,  likewise  an  evil 
thought,  formed  into  substantial  shape  by  an  intense 
will,  may  be  hurled  into  the  mental  sphere  of  another, 
and  enter  his  soul  if  it  be  not  sufficiently  protected." 

"  Imagination  is  the  cause  of  many  diseases ;  faith  is 
the  cure  for  all.  If  we  cannot  cure  a  disease  by  faith, 
it  is  because  our  faith  is  too  weak ;  but  our  faith  is 
weak  on  account  of  our  want  of  knowledge ;  if  we  were 
conscious  of  the  power  of  God  in  ourselves,  we  could  never 
fail.  The  power  of  amulets  does  not  rest  so  much  in  the 
material  of  which  they  are  made  as  in  the  faith  with  which 
they  are  worn  ;  the  curative  power  of  medicines  often  con- 
sists, not  so  much  in  the  spirit  that  is  hidden  in  them,  as 
in  the  spirit  in  which  they  are  taken.  Faith  will  make 
them  efficacious;  doubt  will  destroy  their  virtues." 

MEDICINE  223 

The  Ens  Spirituale  is  the  Will.  The  power  of  the 
true  spiritual  Will  is  known  very  little,  because  it  is 
attained  by  very  few.  In  our  present  civilisation,  men 
of  strong,  determined,  and  enlightened  Will  are  few  and 
far  between ;  men  and  women  are  ruled  to  a  great  extent 
by  their  instincts  and  desires,  and  have  not  sufficient  will- 
power to  rise  above  and  control  them. 

"  The  Ens  Spiriltiale  is  a  power  which  may  affect  the 
whole  body  and  produce  or  cure  all  kinds  of  diseases ;  it 
is  neither  an  angel  nor  a  devil,  but  it  is  a  spiritual  power 
which  in  the  living  body  is  born  from  our  thoughts." 

"  There  are  two  principles  active  in  man ;  one  is 
the  principle  of  Matter,  which  constitutes  the  corporeal 
visible  body ;  the  other  one  is  the  Spirit,  intangible  and 
invisible,  and  the  spiritual  principle  may  be  vitiated 
and  diseased  as  well  as  the  body,  and  transmit  its 
diseases  to  the  body.  The  Ens  astrale,  veneni,  and 
naturale  act  upon  the  body,  but  the  Ens  spirituale 
and  deale  belong  to  the  spirit ;  if  the  body  suffers,  the 
spirit  need  not  suffer;  but  if  the  spirit  suffers  the 
body  suffers ;  the  body  cannot  live  without  the  spirit, 
but  the  spirit  is  not  confined  by  the  body,  and  there- 
fore is  independent  of  it.  The  spirit  in  man  sustains 
the  body  as  the  air  supplies  him  with  life ;  it  is  sub- 
stantial, visible,  tangible,  and  perceptible  to  other 
spiritual  entities,  and  spiritual  beings  stand  to  each 
other  in  the  same  relationship  as  one  corporeal  being 
to  another.  I  have  a  spirit  and  you  have  one,  and 
our  spirits  communicate  with  each  other  in  the  same 
sense  as  our  bodies ;  but  while  we  need  language  to 
understand  each  other,  our  spirits  understand  each 
other  without  using  words.  If  one  spirit  is  angry  at 
another  it  may  injure  him,  and  the  injury  received 
be  transmitted  upon  his  body.  Spirits  harmonise  and 
associate  with  each  other,  or  they  repel  or  injure  one 
another.  Spirits  are  not  born  from  the  intellect,  but 
from   the   soul,  for   the  soul  is    the   substance   of   life. 

224  PARACELSUS 

Thought  alone  produces  no  spirit,  but  it  determines  the 
qualities  of  the  will." 

"  There  is  no  spiritual  power  in  children,  because  they 
have  no  perfect  will-power ;  he  whose  will  is  perfected 
gives  birth  to  a  spirit,  as  a  pebble  produces  a  spark, 
and  this  spiritual  power  partakes  of  the  nature  of  his 
will.  He  who  lives  in  the  will,  possesses  the  spirit 
— i.e.,  the  Ens  spiriiuale.  There  is  a  corporeal  world 
and  a  spiritual  world,  and  the  two  are  one,  and  the 
spiritual  beings  live  in  their  own  spiritual  world  as 
we  live  in  ours.  They  have  their  likes  and  dislikes, 
their  sympathies  and  antipathies,  like  ourselves,  and 
they  do  not  always  correspond  to  the  likes  and  dislikes 
of  the  bodily  forms.  Men  may  quarrel  and  fight  with 
each  other  and  their  spirits  nevertheless  be  in  harmony, 
but  if  a  spirit  injures  another  spirit,  the  material  body 
of  the  latter  will  becomes  also  affected." 

"  The  spirits  of  a  man  may  act  upon  another  with- 
out the  other  man's  consent  or  intention,  unconsciously 
and  involuntarily  to  him ;  but  if  man's  will  is  in 
unity  with  his  thought  and  desire,  a  spirit  (force)  will 
be  produced  which  can  be  employed  for  good  or  for  evil. 
If  two  such  spiritual  forces  battle  with  each  other,  the 
weaker  one,  or  the  one  which  does  not  defend  itself 
sufficiently,  will  be  overcome,  and  bodily  diseases  may  be 
the  result.  An  evil-disposed  person  may  throw  the  force 
of  his  will  upon  another  person  and  injure  him,  even  if 
the  latter  is  stronger  than  the  former,  because  the  latter 
does  not  expect  and  is  not  prepared  for  the  attack ;  but 
if  the  other  is  stronger  and  resists  successfully,  then  a 
force  will  be  kindled  in  him  which  will  overcome  his 
enemy  and  which  may  destroy  him  " x  (Bepercussio). 

1  Here  is  the  whole  philosophy  of  what  is  now  called  "hypnotic  sug- 
gestion" outlined.  Men's  thoughts  constantly  act  upon  each  other,  be 
it  knowingly  or  without  their  knowledge,  and  the  stronger  overcomes 
and  overawes  the  weaker  ;  but  the  strength  of  the  thought  depends  upon 
the  force  of  the  will  by  which  it  is  endowed,  and  the  strength  of  will 
depends  upon  the  amount  of  its  consciousness." 

MEDICINE  225 

"  Waxen  images,  figures,  &c,  may  be  used  to  assist 
the  imagination  and  to  strengthen  the  will.  Thus  a 
necromancer  will  make  a  waxen  image  of  a  person 
and  bury  it,  covering  it  with  heavy  stones,  and  if  his 
will  and  imagination  are  powerful  enough,  the  person 
whom  it  represents  feels  very  miserable  until  that 
weight  is  removed.  Likewise,  if  he  breaks  a  limb  of 
that  figure,  a  limb  will  be  broken  in  the  person  whom 
the  figure  represents,  or  he  thus  inflicts  cuts,  stabs,  or 
other  injuries  upon  an  enemy.  It  is  all  done  through 
the  spirit  acting  upon  the  spirit.  No  necromancer 
can  by  his  will  act  directly  upon  the  body  of  a  person, 
but  he  can  act  upon  his  astral  spirit,  and  the  spirit  of 
the  injured  person  reproduces  the  injury  upon  his  own 
body.  Thus  a  necromancer  plants  a  tree,  and  he  who 
cuts  the  tree  cuts  himself ;  that  is  to  say,  he  does  not 
cut  his  body,  but  the  spirit,  which  has  the  same  limbs 
as  the  body,  and  the  cuts  made  upon  the  spirit  are 
reproduced  upon  the  body." 

"  Thus  the  spirit  of  a  person  may,  without  the  assist- 
ance of  his  body  and  without  a  knife  or  sword,  cut  or 
stab  or  injure  another  person  by  the  mere  force  of  the 
imagination  and  will,  and  images  can  be  cursed  effectu- 
ally, and  fever,  apoplexy,  epilepsy,  &c,  be  caused  thereby  ; 
but  our  scientists  have  no  conception  of  what  a  power 
the  will  is,  because  they  have  no  strong  will,  and  they  do 
not  believe  in  such  things,  because  they  are  beyond  their 
comprehension.  The  will  produces  such  spirits,  and  they 
can  also  act  upon  animals,  and  it  is  even  easier  to  affect 
animals  than  to  affect  men,  because  the  spirit  of  man  is 
better  able  to  defend  itself  than  that  of  an  animal."  l 

"  Not  only  may  a  necromancer  thus  consciously  injure 
another  person   by  his   evil   will   and   imagination,  but 

1  Here  again  is  a  glorious  new  field  of  activity  for  the  enterprising 
vivisectionist ;  but  unfortunately  he  in  whom  such  evil  forms  of  will- 
power (elementals  or  devils)  have  come  into  existence  will  not  get  rid 
of  them  easily,  and  he  will  be  himself  the  greatest  sufferer  in  the  end. 

P 

226  PARACELSUS 

the  spirit  of  envious,  jealous,  revengeful,  and  wicked 
persons  can,  even  if  they  are  ignorant  of  the  practices 
of  sorcery,  injure  those  who  are  the  objects  of  their 
evil  will  while  the  body  is  asleep ;  for  dreams  which 
come  from  the  spirit  are  actually  enacted,  but  dreams 
which  do  not  come  from  the  spirit  are  only  plays  of 
fancy." 

"  One  poison  will  render  another  poison  harmless, 
and  thus  the  effect  of  the  imagination  of  one  person 
neutralises  the  effects  of  the  imagination  of  another. 
If  any  one  can  make  an  image  of  wax  to  injure  my 
body,  I  may  make  another  image  to  attract  the  evil 
spell.  His  image  obtains  its  power  by  the  force  of 
his  faith,  and  my  image  obtains  its  virtue  by  the 
power  of  my  faith ;  and  the  injuries  inflicted  by  my 
enemy  upon  the  image  will  leave  me  unharmed,  and 
the  curses  that  he  heaps  upon  me  will  return  to  him 
and  leave  me  unhurt." 

"  If  a  person  is  gloomy  and  despondent,  he  ought 
not  to  be  left  alone,  but  he  ought  to  have  some  one 
to  cheer  him  up  and  to  explain  to  him  that  he  must 
free  himself  of  his  own  morbid  thoughts.  There  are 
some  who  believe  that  it  is  possible  for  witches  to 
pass  through  doors  and  to  vampirise  people;  but  no 
witch  can  bodily  (physically)  pass  through  a  closed  door 
in  the  way  in  which  this  is  done  by  sylphs  and  pigmies ; 
they  do  such  things  in  their  astral  forms." 

"  O  you  doubtful  man,  you  Peter  of  little  faith,  who 
are  moved  by  each  wind  and  sink  easily !  You  are  your- 
self the  cause  of  all  such  diseases,  because  your  faith 
is  so  little  and  feeble,  and  your  own  evil  thoughts  are 
your  enemies.  Moreover,  you  have  hidden  within  your- 
self a  magnet  which  attracts  those  influences  which  cor- 
respond to  your  will,  and  this  celestial  magnet  is  of  such 
power  that  for  more  than  a  hundred  or  even  thousands 
of  miles,  it  attracts  that  which  your  spirit  desires  out  of 
the  four  elements  "  (Philos.  Occulta). 

MEDICINE  227 

5 .  Diseases  originating  from  the  Divine  Cause  {Karma)? 

All  diseases  are  the  effects  of  previously  existing 
causes.  Some  originate  from  natural  and  others  from 
spiritual  causes.  Spiritual  causes  may  have  been  created 
by  a  man  during  a  former  existence.  For  such  cases 
there  is  no  remedy  but  to  wait  patiently  until  the  evil 
force  is  exhausted  and  the  law  of  universal  justice  satis- 
fied ;  for  even  if  the  just  retribution  for  our  sins  can  be 
evaded  at  one  time,  it  will  only  be  postponed,  and  the  evil 
returns  at  another  time  with  an  accumulation  of  interest 
and  with  increased  force. 

"  All  diseases  originating  from  the  above-mentioned 
four  causes  may  be  cured  by  the  power  of  the  true  Faith. 
All  health  and  all  disease  come  from  God,  and  in  God 
is  the  cure.  Some  diseases,  however,  do  not  directly 
come  from  God,  but  are  natural  (although  they,  too, 
come  from  God  indirectly,  because  Nature  is  a  manifesta- 
tion of  the  power  of  God),  but  other  diseases  are  directly 
sent  by  God  as  a  punishment  for  our  sins.  Each  disease 
is  a  purgatory,  and  no  physician  can  know  exactly  when 
or  how  it  will  end  ;  the  physician  is  only  a  servant  of 
God,  who  works  to  accomplish  His  will.  If  it  is  the 
will  of  Providence  {Karma)  that  the  patient  should  still 
remain  in  his  purgatory,  then  will  the  physician  not  be 
able  to  help  him  out  of  it ;  but  if  his  time  for  redemp- 
tion has  come,  then  will  the  patient  find  the  physician 
through  whom  God  will  send  him  relief.  The  physician 
may  cure  the  sick  by  using  remedies,  but  it  is  God  who 
makes  the  physician  and  the  remedy.  God  does  not 
perform  miracles  without  man ;  He  acts  through  the 
instrumentality  of  man,  and  restores  the  sick  to  health 
through  the  instrumentality  of  the  physician,  and  there- 
fore the  physician  should  be  in  possession  of  faith  (in 
harmony  with  God),  so  as  to  be  a  perfect  instrument 
through  which  the  will  of  God  can  be  accomplished." 
1  "The  will  of  God." 

228  PARACELSUS 

"  He  who  expects  help  from  medicine  or  from  a  phy- 
sician is  not  a  Christian,  but  he  is  a  Christian  who  hopes 
to  receive  aid  from  God  through  the  instrumentality  of 
man.  God  is  the  first  and  most  potent  physician  ;  human 
physicians  are  only  His  deputies.  Call  not  for  help  to 
the  personal  self  of  any  man,  but  ask  it  from  God  acting 
through  man,  and  He  will  cause  you  to  find  the  physician, 
if  it  is  well  for  you  that  you  should  receive  aid ;  or  He 
may  aid  you  through  the  power  within  yourself,  provided 
you  are  holy  or  a  physician  yourself." 

"Two  kinds  of  punishment  (Karma)  are  waiting  for 
the  sinner.  One  takes  place  during  his  life,  the  other 
one  after  his  death.  Those  sins  which  are  not  expiated 
after  death  will  produce  certain  effects  in  our  next  life. 
God  is  the  master  of  Nature,  and  the  physician  is  her 
servant,  and  let  no  physician  fancy  that  he  can  be  a 
master  of  Nature  unless  he  is  a  servant  of  God." 

"  There  are  two  ways  of  practising  the  medical  art : 
the  first  is  to  employ  art ;  the  second  is  to  employ  lancy. 
The  former  means  the  employment  of  observation,  reason, 
knowledge,  experience,  and  wisdom  ;  the  latter  is  the  pro- 
duct of  speculation,  self-conceit,  preconceived  opinions, 
and  ignorance.  Those  who  are  wise  will  know  which  way 
to  choose  "  (De  JEnte  Dei). 

"  No  physician  should  presume  to  know  the  hour  of 
recovery  in  such  cases,  because  it  is  not  given  to  man  to 
judge  of  the  offence  of  another,  and  the  inner  temple 
contains  mysteries  in  which  no  uninitiated  stranger  is 
permitted  to  pry.  If  the  trial  is  over,  God  will  send  the 
physician.  If  a  patient  recovers  by  following  the  advice 
of  a  physician,  it  is  a  sign  that  the  physician  has  been 
sent  by  God  ;  but  if  no  recovery  takes  place,  God  did  not 
send  the  physician.  Nothing  in  the  world  happens  with- 
out a  cause.  The  ignorant  physicians  are  the  servants  of 
hell,  sent  by  the  devil  to  torment  the  sick ;  but  the  true 
physician  is  God.  God  does  nothing  in  an  unnatural 
manner,  and  if  He  produces  wonders,  He  produces  them 

MEDICINE  229 

through  human  agencies.  God  does  not  go  about  prac- 
tising medicine  or  come  to  see  a  patient ;  if  He  comes  to 
him,  He  comes  in  the  shape  of  a  man.  If  a  town  pos- 
sesses a  good  physician,  people  may  look  upon  him  as  a 
blessing  from  God ;  but  the  presence  of  an  ignorant  or 
greedy  doctor  is  a  public  calamity  and  a  curse  to  all. 
But  all  bodily  diseases  will  be  cured  at  the  legitimate 
hour,  when  the  battle  of  life  is  ended  and  the  angel  of 
death  opens  the  portal  to  the  eternal1  kingdom  of  rest."  2 

The  Practice  of  Medicine 

As  there  are  five  causes  of  diseases,  so  there  are  five 
different  ways  of  removing  them,  and  therefore  five  classes 
of  physicians: — 

"  1 .  Naturales — i.e.,  those  who  treat  diseased  conditions 
with  opposite  remedies ;  for  instance,  cold  by  warmth, 
dryness  by  moisture,  &c,  according  to  the  principle, 
Contraria  contrariis  curantur.  To  this  class  belonged 
Avicenna,  Galen,  &c."  (Allopathy,  Hydr  other  apie,  &c.). 

"  2.  Sjpecifici. — Such  as  employ  specific  remedies,  of 
which  it  is  known  that  they  have  certain  affinities  for 
certain  morbid  conditions.  To  this  class  belong  the 
Empirics  "  (Homoeopathy). 

1  The  word  eternal  does  not  signify  a  time  without  end,  but  a  state  in 
which  time  is  not  measured,  and  in  which  it  therefore  does  not  exist. 

2  A  misunderstanding  of  the  doctrine  of  Karma  may  give  rise  to  an 
erroneous  belief,  which  may  be  productive  of  serious  harm.  There  are 
great  numbers  of  religious  fanatics  in  the  East,  and  some  in  the  West, 
who  would  not  make  an  attempt  to  pull  a  person  out  of  a  burning  house, 
even  if  they  could  easily  do  so,  because  they  believe  that  if  it  is  "the 
will  of  God,"  or  his  Karma,  that  he  should  perish  in  the  fire,  it  would  be 
wrong  to  interfere  with  that  law,  and  to  frustrate  the  purpose  of  God. 
They  should  remember  that  if  it  was  the  will  of  God  which  caused  such 
a  person  to  fall  into  danger,  it  must  also  have  been  the  will  of  God  which 
sent  them  near,  and  enabled  them  to  save ;  and  if  they  neglect  to  do 
their  duty  and  suffer  him  to  perish,  they  are  arrogating  to  themselves  the 
prerogatives  of  gods.  They  then  act  against  the  law,  and  will  become 
responsible  for  their  act.  God  acts  through  man,  and  a  man  who  does 
not  respond  to  His  call,  and  refuses  to  obey  the  Divine  command,  spoken 
within  his  heart,  is  a  useless  instrument,  and  will  be  rejected. 

230  PARACELSUS 

"  3.  Character  ales. — The  physicians  of  this  class  have 
the  power  to  cure  diseases  by  employing  their  will- 
power "  {Magnetism,  Suggestion,  Mind-Cure). 

"  4.  Spirituales. — The  followers  of  this  system  have 
the  power  to  employ  spiritual  forces,  in  the  same  sense 
as  a  judge  has  power  over  a  prisoner  in  the  stocks,  because 
he  is  in  possession  of  the  keys.  Such  a  physician  was 
Hippocrates"  (Hypnotism,  &c). 

"  5.  Fideles — i.e.,  those  who  cure  by  the  power  of  Faith, 
such  as  Christ  and  the  apostles  "  (Magic). 

"  Among  these  five  classes,  the  first  one  is  usually  the 
most  orthodox  and  narrow-minded,  and  rejects  the  other 
four  for  not  being  able  to  understand  them." 

"  From  each  of  the  five  causes  of  diseases  all  kinds  of 
diseases  may  spring,  and  each  kind  of  disease  can  there- 
fore be  divided  into  five  classes,  according  to  its  cause. 
There  are  consequently  five  kinds  of  plague  and  five 
kinds  of  cholera,  five  kinds  of  dropsy  or  cancer,  &c.  If, 
for  instance,  a  plague  appears,  the  Naturales  will  say  it 
is  caused  by  a  disorganisation  of  the  bodily  structures, 
while  the  Astrologer  will  say  it  is  caused  by  a  certain 
constellation  of  planetary  influences ;  but  there  may  be 
three  more  causes  which  produced  that  epidemic,  and 
which  will  determine  its  character.  Moreover,  each 
disease  may  manifest  itself  in  two  ways,  one  of  which 
belongs  to  the  department  of  Medicine,  the  other  one 
to  the  department  of  Surgery.  That  which  radiates  from 
the  centre  (constitutional  diseases)  belongs  to  Medicine ; 
that  which  is  localised — i.e.,  circumscribed  or  confined 
to  a  certain  locality — belongs  to  Surgery.1 

"  Bach  physician,  no  matter  to  which  sect  he  belongs, 
should  know  the  five  causes  of  diseases  and  the  five 
methods  of  treatment ;  but  each  method  is  in  itself 
sufficient  to  cure  all  diseases,  no  matter  from  what  cause 
they  originate  "  (De  Entihus  Moroosom). 

1  The  word  "  surgery "  is  here  applied  in  a  sense  somewhat  different 
from  its  modern  acceptation. 

MEDICINE  231 

"  No  knowledge  is  perfect  unless  it  includes  an  under- 
standing of  the  origin — i.e.,  the  beginning;  and  as  all 
of  man's  diseases  originate  in  his  constitution,  it  is  neces- 
sary that  his  constitution  should  be  known,  if  we  wish 
to  know  his  diseases." 

The  Three  Substances 

"  The  Bible  tells  us  that  Man  is  made  out  of  nothing ; 
that  is  to  say,  his  spirit,  the  real  man,  is  from  God,  who 
is  not  a  thing,  but  the  eternal  reality ;  but  he  is  made 
into  three  somethings  or  '  substances,'  and  these  three 
constitute  the  whole  of  Man :  they  are  himself,  and  he 
is  they,  and  from  them  he  receives  all  that  is  good  or 
evil  for  him.  Every  state  in  which  man  can  possibly 
enter  is  determined  by  number,  measure,  and  weight." 
The  "  Three  Substances "  are  the  three  forms  or  modes 
of  action  in  which  the  universal  primordial  Will  is 
manifesting  itself  throughout  Nature,  for  all  things  are 
a  Trinity  in  a  Unity.  The  "  Salt "  represents  the  prin- 
ciple of  corporification,  the  astringent  or  contractive  and 
solidifying  quality,  or,  in  other  words,  the  body ;  the 
"  Sulphur  "  represents  the  expansive  power — the  centri- 
fugal force,  in  contradistinction  to  the  centripetal  motion 
of  the  first  quality — it  is  that  which  "  burns,"  i.e.,  the 
soul  or  light  in  all  things  ;  and  the  "  Mercury "  is  the 
Life,  i.e.,  that  principle  or  form  of  will  which  manifests 
itself  as  life,  or  consciousness  and  sensation.  Each  of 
these  forms  of  will  is  an  individual  power ; l  nevertheless 
they  are  substantial,  for  "  matter  "  and  "  force  "  are  one, 
and  originate  from  the  same  cause.  The  three  sub- 
stances, held  together  in  harmonious  proportions,  consti- 
tute health ;  their  disharmony  constitutes  disease,  and 
their  disruption  death. 

"  These  three  substances  should  be  practically  known 

1  So  are  light,  heat,  electricity,  &c.     Each  of  them  is  an  individual,  and 
nevertheless  universally  existing,  energy. 

232  PARACELSUS 

to  the  physician,  for  his  usefulness  does  not  consist  in 
merely  possessing  theoretical  knowledge,  but  in  his  ability 
to  restore  health.  He  must  learn  to  know  these  sub- 
stances by  studying  the  light  of  Nature,  not  by  seeking 
them  in  his  own  imagination ;  he  should  become  able 
to  see  Nature  as  she  is,  and  not  as  he  or  others  may 
imagine  her  to  be.  His  art  should  be  baptized  in  the 
fire ;  he  must  have  himself  been  born  from  the  fire,  and 
tested  in  it  seven  times  and  more.  No  one  is  born  a 
physician  out  of  himself,  but  out  of  the  light  of  Nature, 
and  this  light  is  the  great  world.  He  should  pass  through 
thd  examination  of  Nature  and  know  her  laws.  He 
should  not  sesk  for  wisdom  in  his  own  fancy,  but  in 
the  light  of  Nature,  and  from  the  ability  to  recognise 
this  light  springs  the  true  science.  Not  in  the  books, 
but  in  the  light  of  Nature  is  to  be  found  true  wisdom 
and  art,  theory  and  practice ;  but  those  who  cannot  find 
wisdom  in  that  light,  and  seek  for  it  in  their  own  fancy, 
will  continually  err." * 

"  There  is  nothing  in  man  which  would  naturally  cause 
him  to  be  a  physician.  He  has  the  capacity  to  collect 
ideas  intellectually,  but  this  alone  does  not  constitute 
art.  This  faculty  is  like  an  empty  box,  useful  only  to 
store  up  useful  things.  Let  us  look  at  two  examples : 
the  glass-maker  and  the  carpenter.  The  glass-maker 
did  not  learn  his  art  from  himself,  he  found  it  in  the 
light  of  Nature,  for  Nature  showed  him  how  to  melt  the 
materials  by  means  of  the  fire,  and  discovered  the  glass 
for  him ;  but  a  carpenter  who  builds  a  house  constructs 
it  according  to  his  own  ideas,  provided  he  has  the  neces- 
sary materials.  A  physician  may  have  the  necessary 
materials — i.e.,  the  patient  and  the  remedies — but  he  is 
not  a  true  physician  as  long  as  he   has  not  the  true 

1  Sankaracharya  says :  "  The  first  necessary  requisite  for  the  attain- 
ment of  real  knowledge  is  the  possession  of  the  power  to  distinguish  the 
enduring  (spirit)  from  the  non-enduring  (matter)."  That  which  hinders 
man  to  see  the  truth  is  the  delusion  of  "  self." 

MEDICINE  233 

knowledge  as  to  how  and  when  and  why  they  must  be 
applied.  The  glass-maker  is  taught  by  Nature,  the 
carpenter  follows  his  own  fancy ;  the  former  is  taught 
by  the  fire,  and  the  true  physician  receives  from  the  fire 
of  Nature  his  wisdom  and  his  art — i.e.,  his  experience. 
This  is  his  true  approbation."  1 

"  The  ignorant  refuse  to  follow  Nature,  and  they  fol- 
low their  own  fancies.  Understanding  is  twofold.  One 
understanding  comes  from  experience,  the  other  from 
aptitude ;  the  former,  again,  is  twofold,  and  is  based 
either  upon  the  understanding  of  the  law  or  merely 
upon  haphazard  experiment.  The  former  is  the  one 
upon  which  true  medicine  rests,  and  implies  the  know- 
ledge of  the  three  substances;  the  other  is  merely  suppo- 
sition and  error,  for  a  haphazard  experiment  may  succeed 
once  and  fail  at  another  time." 

"  We  should  not  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  persons,  but 
in  the  footsteps  of  Nature ;  we  should  not  act  on  account 
of  hearsay,  but  on  account  of  our  own  understanding. 
The  first  man  who  learned  anything  useful  was  taught 
by  Nature ;  let  Nature  teach  us  as  she  taught  him.  If 
my  art  is  to  be  based  upon  a  firm  foundation,  it  must 
be  based  upon  my  own  understanding,  not  upon  that  of 
another  man.  A  physician  should  have  God  before  his 
eyes,  visibly  and  tangible ;  he  should  see  the  truth,  not 
shadowy  or  as  in  a  dream,  but  tangible  and  without  any 
doubt.  Our  science  should  be  based  upon  our  own 
perception  of  truth,  not  upon  mere  belief  or  opinion. 
Information  received  from  men  can  only  assist  us  in 
forming  opinions,  but  it  constitutes  no  knowledge.  True 
knowledge  consists  in  a  direct  recognition  of  the  real, 
and  is  taught  by  Nature  herself." 

1  The  true  physician  acts  in  harmony  with  natural  laws  ;  the  quack 
tries  to  oppose  Nature  by  means  of  his  own  inventions.  The  true  physi- 
cian will  aid  Nature  to  throw  off  the  germs  of  disease  ;  the  quack  will  try 
to  force  Nature  to  retain  the  poison  and  to  prevent  its  outward  manifes- 
tation. (Compare  William  Tebb,  "  Leprosy  and  Vaccination."  London, 
I893-) 

234  PARACELSUS 

"  As  far  as  the  patient  is  concerned,  there  are  three 
things  required  of  him  to  effect  a  cure :  his  disease 
should  be  a  natural  one,1  he  should  have  a  certain 
amount  of  will,  and  a  certain  amount  of  vital  energy. 
If  these  conditions  are  not  present,  no  cure  can  be 
effected ;  for  even  Christ  could  not  benefit  those  who 
were  not  receptive  of  His  power.  This  power  is  Faith, 
and  it  should  be  present  in  the  patient  as  well  as  in  the 
physician.  Christ  did  not  say  to  the  sick,  '  I  cured  thee,' 
but  He  said,  '  Thy  faith  made  thee  whole.'  It  is  not  the 
physician  who  heals  the  sick,  but  it  is  God  who  heals 
him  through  Nature,  and  the  physician  is  merely  the 
instrument  through  which  God  acts  upon  the  nature  of 
the  patient.  The  patient  should  therefore  have  faith  in 
God  and  confidence  in  his  physician.  God  acts  accord- 
ing to  universal  law,  and  makes  no  exceptions  in  special 
cases  ;  but  all  power  comes  from  God,  and  may  be  guided 
properly  or  its  action  impeded  by  the  physician.  God 
kills  no  one ;  it  is  Nature  which  causes  people  to  die. 
God  is  Life,  and  the  physician  in  whom  the  power  of 
God  is  manifest  will  be  a  fountain  of  life  and  health  to 
the  sick.  To  God  belongs  the  praise,  and  to  man  the 
blame.  Those  who  attempt  to  cure  diseases  by  their 
own  power,  without  recognising  the  eternal  source  of  all 
power,  will  never  know  the  deeper  mysteries  of  Nature. 
They  deal  with  lies,  and  do  not  perform  the  will  of  God ; 
and  if  they  murder  their  patients,  it  is  they  themselves 
who  are  responsible  for  it." 

"  Those  who  attempt  to  cure  the  sick  by  means  of  what 
they  learn  in  books,  and  without  using  their  own  judg- 
ment, are  like  the  foolish  virgins  mentioned  in  the  Bible, 
who  wasted  the  oil  from  their  lamps,  and  tried  to  borrow 
light  from  others.  Those  whose  minds  are  open  for  the 
reception  of  the  truth,  who  are  charitable  to  all,  who  love 
their  art  for  its  own  sake,  and  seek  to  do  the  will  of  God, 
without  any  thought  of  self,  they  belong  to  my  school, 

1  Not  due  to  unexhausted  Karma. 

MEDICINE  235 

and  are  ray  disciples.  They  will  be  taught  by  the  light 
of  wisdom,  and  God  will  perform  His  miracles  through 
their  instrumentality  "  (De  Virtute  Medici). 

Arcana  (Mysteries) 

Why  is  the  practice  of  medicine  of  Theophrastus  Para- 
celsus almost  incomprehensible  to  the  modern  prac- 
titioner? It  is  because  the  latter  seeks  to  treat  the 
diseased  organs  themselves,  which  are  as  such  merely 
the  external  effects  of  internal  causes,  and  he  knows  of 
no  other  way  to  act  upon  them  except  by  mechanical 
or  chemical  means  ;  while  the  method  of  treatment  of 
Paracelsus,  by  means  of  which  he  made  the  most  wonder- 
ful cures,  is  to  change  the  interior  spiritual  causes  from 
which  the  outward  effects  grow  ;  to  treat  the  very  essences 
out  of  which  corporeal  organs  become  crystallised,  and 
to  supply  them  with  the  power  of  vitality  of  the  quality 
which  they  require.  To  accomplish  this,  deep  insight 
into  the  causes  of  disease,  spiritual  perception,  spiritual 
knowledge,  and  spiritual  power  are  needed,  and  these 
qualities  belong  not  to  that  which  is  human  in  man,  but 
to  the  light  of  the  spirit  which  shines  into  him.  For  this 
reason  the  Arcana  of  Paracelsus  have  been  universally 
misunderstood,  and  it  is  believed  even  to  this  day  that 
his  '  secret  remedies '  were  certain  compounds  which  he 
concocted,  and  which  might  be  prepared  by  any  apothe- 
cary, if  he  were  put  in  possession  of  the  prescriptions  for 
them.  This  is,  however,  not  the  case.  A  prescription 
that  might  be  learned  from  books  is  not  an  Arcanum ; 1 
a  secret  that  might  be  communicated  intellectually  from 
one  person  to  another  is  not  a  divine  or  spiritual  mystery. 
A  cow  can  give  birth  to  nothing  else  but  a  calf,  a  monkey 

1  An  Arcanum  is  incorporeal  and  indestructible  of  eternal  life,  super- 
human and  beyond  Nature.  In  us  is  the  Arcanum  Dei  and  the  Arcanum 
Nature?.;  the  Arcanum  is  the  virtue  of  a  thing  in  its  highest  potency  ;  the 
Arcanum  Hominis  is  that  power  of  man  which  is  eternal  in  him  "  (Archi- 
doxes,  De  Arcanis). 

236  PARACELSUS 

cannot  produce  a  man ;  neither  can  he  who  has  not  him- 
self been  reborn  in  the  spirit  produce  or  endow  things 
with  spiritual  power.  Man  must  himself  be  that  which 
he  desires  to  produce. 

We  do  not  blame  those  who,  not  being  spiritual,  are 
unable  to  grasp  spiritual  truths ;  we  only  reject  the  con- 
ceit of  those  who,  not  being  capable  to  see  the  true  light, 
dogmatically  deny  its  existence. 

Even  of  the  direct  disciples  of  Paracelsus,  few  only 
were  able  to  see  the  truth  clearly.  He  says :  "  Twenty- 
one  of  my  servants  have  become  victims  of  the  execu- 
tioner (the  illusions  of  this  world,  false  reasoning).  May 
God  help  them !  Only  a  few  have  remained  with  me  " 
(Denfensio,  vi.). 

"The  first  Arcanum  is  the  Mercurius  vivus ;  the 
second,  the  Prima  Materia;  the  third  is  the  Lapis 
Philosophorum ;  and  the  fourth,  the  Tinctura.  These 
remedies  are  rather  of  an  angelic  than  of  a  human 
character"  (Archidoxes,  iv.). 

If  the  will  of  God  acting  within  Nature  could  create 
a  world,  surely  the  same  divine  will,  acting  within  man, 
can  cure  all  diseases ;  but  only  that  will  which  is  active 
in  man,  not  that  which  is  outside  of  him,  can  act  within 
his  organisation ;  and  before  a  man  becomes  able  to 
send  his  soul  within  the  soul  of  another  person,  his  own 
will  must  become  godlike  and  free.  A  "  hypnotiser " 
merely  paralyses  the  will  of  a  weak-minded  person  and 
induces  a  kind  of  dream ;  but  the  magic  power  of  the 
true  Adept  is  the  power  of  God  acting  through  him. 
Such  powers  do  not  belong  to  that  which  is  mortal  in 
man,  but  to  that  which  is  divine,  and  therefore  those 
who  wish  to  graduate  in  the  school  of  Paracelsus  and 
follow  his  example  will  have  to  outgrow  their  self- 
conceit  and  become  regenerated  in  the  spirit  of  divine 
wisdom,  which  is  the  realisation  of  truth. 

"  We  are  not  intent  upon  showing  our  feelings  and 
thoughts,   mind   and   heart,  to  idiots  and  fools,  and  we 

MEDICINE  237 

protect  ourselves,  therefore,  by  a  good  wall,  to  whose  door 
only  the  wise  ones  possess  the  key.  If  you  have  the 
proper  understanding,  you  will  comprehend  it  and  act 
accordingly ;  but  if  you  are  deficient  in  your  knowledge 
or  in  its  practical  application,  you  will  also  be  without 
all  the  planets,  stars,  and  signs  "  (Caelum  Philos.). 

Note. — The  above-named  Arcana  may,  although  imperfectly,  be 
described  as  follows  : — 

Mercurius  vivus. — Spiritual  Intelligence,  Divine  Self-conscious- 
ness, Wisdom. 

Prima  Materia. — The  Logos  in  its  aspect  as  the  substance  and 
essence  of  all  things,  the  "Word"  (Ahasha). 

Lapis  Philosophorum. — The  spiritual  man  himself,  having  attained 
self-knowledge. 

Tinctura. — The  power  of  divine  love,  it  being  identical  with 
divine  wisdom. 

VIII.  ALCHEMY  AND  ASTEOLOGY 

Alchemy  and  Astrology  are  sciences  which  are  at  the 
present  time  very  little  understood,  because  they  deal 
with  spiritual  things,  which  cannot  be  known  to  persons 
who  are  not  in  the  possession  of  spirituality.  Chemistry 
deals  with  physical  matter ;  alchemy  deals  with  their 
astral  principles.  Astronomy  deals  with  the  physical 
aspect  of  the  bodies  of  planets  and  stars ;  astrology  deals 
with  the  omnipresent  psychic  influences  which  their 
souls  exert  upon  each  other,  and  upon  the  Microcosm 
of  man. 

Chemistry  is  a  science  that  may  be  learned  by  any 
one  who  has  ordinary  intellectual  capacities,  and  a 
certain  amount  of  skill  required  for  its  practical  appli- 
cation. Astronomy  may  be  studied  by  any  one  who  is 
able  to  comprehend  mathematics  and  possesses  logic 
and  physical  sight.  Alchemy  is  an  art  which  cannot 
be  understood  without  spiritual  or  soul  knowledge.  As- 
trology is  incomprehensible  to  those  who  cannot  realise 
the  true  character  of  the  stars.  The  books  treating  of 
alchemy  and  astrology  will  easily  be  understood  by 
persons  who  know  the  things  of  which  they  treat,  but 
to  those  who  are  not  in  possession  of  such  knowledge 
they  will  be  incomprehensible. 

Everything  in  Nature   has  a  threefold  aspect.     The 

highest   aspect  of  alchemy  is  the   regeneration  of  man 

in  the  spirit  of  God  out  of  the  material  elements  of  his 

physical  body.     The  physical  body  itself  is  the  greatest 

of  mysteries,  because  in  it  are  contained  in  a  condensed, 

solidified,  and  corporeal  state  the  very  essences  which  go 

to  make  up  the  substance  of  the  spiritual  man,  and  this 

238 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  239 

is  the  secret  of  the  "  Philosophers  Stone."  The  sign  in 
which  the  true  alchemist  works  is  the  Cross,  because 
man  roots  with  his  material  elements  in  the  earth,  pene- 
trates with  his  soul  through  the  animal  forces  of  Nature, 
while  his  higher  nature  reaches  above  the  animal  creation 
into  the  realm  of  immortality. 

The  next  aspect  of  alchemy  is  the  knowledge  of  the 
nature  of  the  invisible  elements,  constituting  the  astral 
bodies  of  things.  Each  thing  is  a  trinity  having  a  body 
and  a  spirit  held  together  by  the  soul,1  which  is  the  cause 
and  the  law.  Physical  bodies  are  acted  upon  by  physical 
matter ;  the  elements  of  the  soul  are  acted  upon  by  the 
soul,  and  the  conscious  spirit  of  the  enlightened  guides 
and  controls  the  action  of  matter  and  soul.  By  the 
power  of  the  spirit  material  elements  may  be  sublimated 
into  invisible  elements,  or  invisible  substances  be  coagu- 
lated and  become  visible.  Instances  of  this  may  be 
occasionally  seen  in  "  spiritualistic  seances,"  although  in 
such  cases  the  alchemist  who  produces  them  is  invisible. 

The  lowest  aspect  of  alchemy  is  the  preparation,  puri- 
fication, and  combination  of  physical  substances,  and 
from  this  science  has  grown  the  science  of  modern 
chemistry,  which  in  its  present  state  is  a  great  advance- 
ment over  the  lower  aspect  of  old  chemistry,  but  which 
has  lost  sight  entirely  of  the  higher  aspects  of  Nature. 
A  higher  advancement  of  the  science  of  chemistry  will 
bring  it  again  into  contact  with  alchemy.  Chemistry 
decomposes  and  recombines  material  substances  in  certain 
proportions ;  it  purifies  simple  substances  of  all  foreign 
elements,  and  leaves  the  primitive  elements  unchanged ; 
but  alchemy  changes  the  character  of  things,  and  raises 
them  up  into  higher  states  of  existence.  To  exercise 
this  power,  not  mere  mechanical  labour,  but  artistic  skill 
is  required.  "  A  person  who  composes  a  chemical  pre- 
paration by  manual  labour  and  according  to  certain  rules 

1  "Hermes  said  that  the  soul  alone  is  the  medium  by  means  of  which 
spirit  and  body  are  united"  {General.  Rerum.,  i.). 

240  PARACELSUS 

is  a  chemist ;  the  weaver  who  manufactures  a  cloth,  and 
the  tailor  who  makes  a  coat,  may  be  called  alchemists, 
because  neither  clothes  nor  coats  are  grown  by  Nature. 
The  chemist  imitates  Nature,  the  artist  surpasses  her; 
the  labourer  lends  his  hands  to  Nature,  so  that  she  may 
accomplish  something  through  him.  The  artist  makes 
use  of  the  material  with  which  Nature  provides  him, 
and  develops  something  that  exists  germinally  in  Nature. 
The  painter  who  daubs  a  wall  is  a  chemist;  his  work 
requires  skill,  but  no  genius.  The  artist  who  composes 
a  picture  is  an  alchemist,  because  he  embodies  an  idea, 
and  puts  his  own  character  into  his  work."  To  under- 
stand correctly  the  meaning  of  the  words  alchemy  and 
astrology,  it  is  necessary  to  understand  the  intimate 
relationship  and  the  identity  of  the  Microcosm  and  Mac- 
rocosm, and  their  mutual  interaction.  All  the  powers  of 
the  universe  are  potentially  contained  in  man,  and  man's 
physical  body  and  all  his  organs  are  nothing  else  but 
products  and  representatives  of  the  powers  of  Nature. 
The  Microcosm  and  Macrocosm  may  not  only  "  be  com- 
pared together,"  but  they  are  really  and  actually  essen- 
tially one  in  their  power,  and  one  in  the  constitution  of 
their  elements.1  "  If  I  have  '  manna '  in  my  constitution, 
I  can  attract  '  manna '  from  heaven.  '  Melissa '  is  not 
only  in  the  garden,  but  also  in  the  air  and  in  heaven. 
'  Saturn '  is  not  only  in  the  sky,  but  also  deep  in  the 
earth  and  in  the  ocean.  What  is  '  Venus '  but  the 
'  Artemisia'  that  grows  in  your  garden  ?  What  is  '  iron ' 
but  '  Mars '  ?  That  is  to  say,  Venus  and  Artemisia  are 
both  the  products  of  the  same  essence,  and  Mars  and 
iron  are  both  the  manifestations  of  the  same  cause. 
What  is  the  human  body  but  a  constellation  of  the  same 
powers  that  formed  the  stars  in  the  sky  ?  He  who 
knows  what  iron  is,  knows  the  attributes  of  Mars.  He 
who  knows  Mars,  knows  the  qualities  of   iron.      What 

1  "  Man,  being  the  son  of  the  Microcosm,  has  in  him  also  all  the  mineral 
elements  "  (De  Peste). 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  241 

would  become  of  your  heart  if  there  were  no  sun  in  the 
universe  ?  What  would  be  the  use  of  your  '  vasa  sperma- 
tica '  if  there  were  no  Venus  ?  To  grasp  the  invisible 
elements ;  to  attract  them  by  their  material  correspond- 
ences ;  to  control,  purify,  and  transform  them  by  the 
living  power  of  the  Spirit  —  this  is  true  alchemy " 
(Para gran.  i.). 

The  Seven  Planets 

The  "  Seven  Planets  "  are  the  Seven  Principles  which 
constitute  the  universe,  and  which  are  at  least  "  poten- 
tially "  contained  in  everything.  Paracelsus  speaks  of 
them  in  a  very  mystical  language,  as  follows : — 

"  There  are  seven  elementary  powers  or  principles — 
four  lower  ones  belonging  to  mortal  and  changeable 
things  (Sthula  sharira,  Linga  sharira,  Prana,  and  Kama), 
and  a  trinity  of  celestial  power  (Atma  Buddhi  Manas), 
which  is  also  called  the  quintet  essentia.  The  four 
elements  (lower  principles)  can  in  no  way  interfere 
with  the  quintet  essentia.  The  heavenly  and  the  hellish 
power  is  not  obedient  to  the  four  elementary  powers, 
but  each  section  stands  for  itself"  (De  Mercurio,  vol.  vi. 

P-  378). 

This  goes  to  show  that  to  the  spiritual  kingdom  be- 
longs a  state  of  consciousness  different  from  the  lower 
states  of  consciousness,  and  having  nothing  in  common 
with  them.  Spirituality  is,  therefore,  not  to  be  con- 
sidered as  a  state  of  high  intellectual  development,  but 
it  is  an  awakening  to  an  entirely  different  and  higher 
state  of  consciousness,  which  may  take  place  in  persons 
of  high  intellectual  development,  but  far  oftener  in  those 
who  are  unsophisticated  and  of  a  simple  mind. 

The  "  Seven  Planets "  are  equally  mysteriously  de- 
scribed in  his  "  Ccelum  Philosophorum  "  : — 

1.  ¥•  Mercury.  Wisdom;  -i.e.,  the  knowledge  of  the 
soul  that  realises  the  truth,  and  which  has  nothing  to  do 

Q 

242  PARACELSUS 

with  the  action  of  the  intellect,  that  consists  in  collecting 
and  comparing  ideas.  "  All  things  are  hidden  within 
all  things.  One  of  them  is  their  concealer,  and  at  the 
same  time  their  body  and  vehicle,  external,  visible,  and 
movable.  All  things  are  revealed  within  this  vehicle, 
for  it  is  a  corporified  spirit ;  but  the  spirit  thereof  has 
no  name."  Translated  into  modern  language  this  means  : 
"  Mercury  represents  divine  wisdom.  The  whole  of 
Nature  is  a  vehicle  and  visible  manifestation  of  the  wisdom 
of  God ;  but  God  Himself  cannot  be  described.  He  is 
the  universal  life,  the  root  of  all  consciousness  and  know- 
ledge, and  the  will  of  divine  wisdom." 

2.  %  Jupiter.  Universal  primordial  substance  and 
power.  "  Within  the  body  of  Jupiter  are  contained  all 
the  other  six  metals  in  a  spiritual  state,  each  always 
still  deeper  hidden  and  more  remote  than  the  one  that 
precedes."  This  means  that,  of  all  the  seven  principles, 
each  contains  the  other  six  either  actively  or  potentially. 
Thus,  even  within  a  stone  or  an  oyster  there  is  a  hidden 
spark  of  divinity,  such  as  may  become  conscious  and  mani- 
fest in  the  constitution  of  man. 

3 .  £  Mars.  Universal  energy.  The  will.  "  Mars,  owing 
to  its  combative  energy,  is  enabled  to  gain  glory  and  to 
assume  the  place  of  the  king.  Care  will  have  to  be  taken 
that  he  does  not  become  captured.  We  must  see  how 
we  can  raise  him  up  and  combine  0  and  (£  with  *2  in  the 
place  of  Mars."  This  indicates  that  we  should  seek  to 
attain  a  powerful  will,  but  avoid  letting  that  will  become 
subservient  to  matter  ( ^  ).  This  is  done  by  combining 
our  imagination  ((J)  with  wisdom  (G). 

4.  $  Venus.  Love,  identical  with  Knowledge  ;  because 
true  love  is  the  spiritual  recognition  of  the  true  self. 
"  The  six  other  metals  have  formed  a  corruptible  external 
body  with  the  quality  of  Venus  ;  but  all  combustible  things 
can  be  changed  by  the  power  of  fire."  This  is  to  say 
that  human  love  is  at  present  bound  up  with  many  im- 
purities, but  when  the  true  fire  of  love  awakens,  these 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  243 

impurities  will  burn  away  and  leave  us  in  possession  of 
unadulterated  wisdom. 

5.  h  Saturn.  The  Life-principle.  Saturn  says:  "My 
six  brothers  have  relegated  me  and  expelled  me  from 
the  spiritual  kingdom.  They  have  forced  me  to  live  in 
a  corruptible  form.  I  have  to  submit  to  be  that  which 
they  refuse  to  be.  My  body  is  attracted  to  the  earth,  so 
that  everything  I  embrace  becomes  earthly ;  but  it  would 
not  be  well  for  the  world  to  know  all  the  virtue  hidden  in 
me  and  all  that  I  may  accomplish."  This  means  that  the 
human  mind  (Manas)  is  the  connecting-link  between  spirit 
and  matter.  If  the  inquisitive  scientist  were  to  know 
the  divine  life  within  his  own  constitution,  and  could 
develop  it  before  he  has  attained  innocence  and  virtue, 
he  would  become  an  incarnate  devil  instead  of  a  god. 

6.  C  Luna — Moon.  Imagination.  "The  principal 
thing  to  know  in  regard  to  Luna  is  its  origin.  It  is  the 
seventh  metal,  containing  the  six  others  in  a  spiritual 
state,  and  it  is  externally  corporeal  and  material."  This 
goes  to  show  that  Luna,  in  its  external  aspect,  means 
matter  with  its  phenomena,  which  are  always  illusive  as 
long  as  we  do  not  know  their  true  origin.  If  we  wish 
to  gain  absolute  knowledge  of  all  things  in  Nature,  we 
must  attain  the  knowledge  of  God. 

7.  0  Sol — Sun.  The  Life,  or  Wisdom.  "  It  is  pure 
fire,  and  has  within  itself  all  the  other  six  metals  (prin- 
ciples)." Everything  that  exists  is  a  manifestation  and 
product  of  the  one  life  in  the  universe,  from  which  all 
things  receive  their  vitality  and  powers ;  "  for  that  which 
is  visible  is  merely  the  vehicle,  but  the  element  therein  is  a 
spirit,  and  lives  in  all  things  as  the  soul  lives  in  the  body. 
This  is  the  prima  materia  of  the  elements,  invisible  and  in- 
comprehensible, but  nevertheless  present  in  all ;  for  prima 
materia  is  nothing  else  than  the  life  itself  in  all  creatures. 
That  which  is  without  life  is  no  longer  an  element,  but 
within  the  ultima  materia,  wherein  is  contained  neither 
virtue  nor  energy  "  (Philosophia  ad  Athenienses,  vol.  viii.). 

244  PARACELSUS 

The  above  extracts  will  be  quite  sufficient  to  show 
that  the  modern  method  of  thinking  scientifically,  which 
deals  only  with  external  phenomena,  and  with  comparing 
opinions  referring  to  them,  is  quite  insufficient  for  our 
initiation  into  the  mysteries  of  alchemy,  and  that  this 
study  requires  a  mind  capable  to  look  upon  the  world 
not  as  being  made  up  of  many  separate  pieces,  but  as 
one  great  and  indivisible  organism,  pervaded  by  co-exist- 
ing spiritual  powers,  whose  outward  manifestation  is  the 
realm  of  phenomena.  Alchemy  studies  not  merely  phe- 
nomena, but  it  is  the  science  of  the  soul  of  all  things. 

What  does  material  science  know  about  things  of 
the  soul  ?  Chemistry  is  a  science  which  deals  with  the 
chemical  combination,  separation,  and  recombination  of 
physical  substances.  Alchemy  deals  with  the  purifi- 
cation and  combination  of  astral  elements,  and  with 
the  development  of  lower  forms  and  lower  states  into 
higher  ones.  By  chemistry  we  may  purify  physical 
substances  from  all  foreign  elements,  and  divest  them 
of  physical  impurities,  but  their  own  element  will  not 
be  changed.  By  alchemy  we  raise  a  principle  into  a 
higher  and  purer  state  of  development.  The  processes 
in  Nature  by  which  combinations  and  decompositions 
of  matter  take  place,  such  as  putrefaction,  caused  by  the 
contact  of  a  substance  with  air,  and  the  chemical  com- 
binations of  two  or  more  substances  coming  into  contact 
with  each  other,  are  chemical  processes.  The  growth  of 
a  tree  out  of  a  seed,  the  evolution  of  worlds,  the  develop- 
ment of  precious  metals  out  of  an  apparently  worthless 
matrix,  the  growth  of  a  foetus,  the  development  of  an 
animal  or  a  human  being,  &c,  are  alchemical  processes, 
because  life  itself  enters  into  these  processes,  as  a  factor, 
and  they  would  not  take  place  without  the  action  of 
life.1 

1  Johannes  Tritheim,  Abbot  of  Spanheim,  one  of  the  greatest  alchemists, 
theologians,  and  astrologers,  a  learned  and  highly  esteemed  man,  makes 
some  remarks  in  his  book  (printed  at  Passau,   1506)  that  may  help  to 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  245 

Planets  are  states  of  mind,  and  as  the  mind  has  a 
higher  and  a  lower  aspect,  consequently  each  planet  has 
its  two  aspects  correspondingly. 

Mercury  in  its  higher  aspect  is  the  srnybol  of  wisdom, 
in  its  lower  aspect  that  of  the  intellect. 

Jupiter  in  its  higher  aspect  represents  majesty,  in  its 
lower  aspect  energy. 

throw  some  light  on  the  perplexing  subject  of  alchemy.  He  says  :  "The 
art  of  divine  magic  consists  in  the  ability  to  perceive  the  essence  of  things 
in  the  light  of  Nature,  and  by  using  the  soul-powers  of  the  spirit  to 
produce  material  things  from  the  unseen  universe  (A'kasa),  and  in  such 
operations  the  Above  (the  Macrocosm)  and  the  Below  (the  Microcosm) 
must  be  brought  together  and  made  to  act  harmoniously.  The  spirit 
of  Nature  is  a  unit}',  creating  and  forming  everything,  and  by  acting 
through  the  instrumentality  of  man  it  may  produce  wonderful  things. 
Such  processes  take  place  according  to  law.  You  will  learn  the  law  by 
which  these  things  are  accomplished,  if  you  learn  to  know  yourself.  You 
will  know  it  by  the  power  of  the  spirit  that  is  in  yourself,  and  accomplish 
it  by  mixing  your  spirit  with  the  essence  that  comes  out  of  yourself.  If 
you  wish  to  succeed  in  such  a  work  you  must  know  how  to  separate  spirit 
and  life  in  Nature,  and,  moreover,  to  separate  the  astral  soul  in  yourself 
and  to  make  it  tangible,  and  then  the  substance  of  the  soul  will  appear 
visibly  and  tangibly,  rendered  objective  by  the  power  of  the  spirit.  Christ 
speaks  of  the  salt,  and  the  salt  is  of  a  threefold  nature.  Gold  is  of  a 
threefold  nature,  and  there  is  an  ethereal,  a  fluid,  and  a  material  gold. 
It  is  the  same  gold,  only  in  three  different  states  ;  and  gold  in  one  state 
may  be  made  into  gold  in  another  state.  But  such  mysteries  should  not 
be  divulged,  because  the  fool  and  scoffer  will  laugh  at  it,  and  to  him  who  is 
covetous  they  will  be  a  temptation." 

[Notice. — I  wish,  to  warn  the  reader,  who  might  be  inclined  to 
try  any  of  the  alchemical  prescriptions  contained  in  this  book, 
not  to  do  so  unless  he  is  an  alchemist,  because,  although  I  know 
from  personal  observation  that  these  prescriptions  are  not  only 
allegorically  but  literally  true,  and  will  prove  successful  in  the 
hands  of  an  alchemist,  they  would  only  cause  a  waste  of  time 
and  money  in  the  hands  of  one  who  has  not  the  necessary  quali- 
fications. A  person  who  wants  to  be  an  alchemist  must  have  in 
himself  the  "  magnesia,"  which  means  the  magnetic  power  to 
attract  and  "coagulate"  invisible  astral  elements.  This  power  is 
only  possessed  by  those  who  are  "  Initiates."  Those  who  do  not 
know  what  this  expression  means  are  not  "reborn"  (or  initiated), 
and  it  cannot  be  explained  to  them.  But  he  who  is  initiated  will 
know  it,  and  needs  no  instruction  from  books,  because  he  will  know 
his  instructor.] 

246  PARACELSUS 

Mars  represents  spiritual  power,  but  also  in  its  lower 
aspect  strength  of  passion,  &c. 

Venus  in  its  higher  aspect  is  divine  love,  identical 
with  self-knowledge ;  in  its  lower  aspect,  desire. 

Saturn  is  the  life  in  the  universe,  and  in  another 
aspect  it  represents  matter. 

The  Sun  is  the  fountain  of  all  life.  The  spiritual 
sun  is  the  symbol  of  spiritual  life  and  immortality,  the 
physical  sun  the  source  of  vitality. 

The  Moon  in  its  higher  aspect  represents  spiritual 
substance,  the  glorified  soul ;  in  its  lower  aspect  it  is 
the  symbol  of  imagination  and  fancy. 

"  Separation  is  the  cause  of  existence,  the  birth  of 
things  from  the  Mysterium  magnum.  It  is  the  greatest 
wonder  known  to  practical  philosophy  ;  it  is  a  divine 
art.  He  who  can  attract  things  out  of  the  Mysterium 
magnum  (A'kasa)  is  a  true  alchemist."  This  power  is 
possessed  only  by  those  who  are  spiritually  developed.1 
Nature  continually  exercises  that  art  through  the  organis- 
ing power  of  the  invisible  astral  body.  "  As  the  fowl 
produces  a  chicken  with  wings  and  legs  out  of  the 
small  microcosm  contained  in  the  shell  of  an  egg,  so 
the  arcana  of  Nature  are  ripened  by  the  processes  of 
alchemy.  Natural  alchemy  causes  the  pear  to  ripen,  and 
produces  grapes  on  a  vine.  Natural  alchemy  separates 
the  useful  elements  from  the  food  that  is  put  into  the 
stomach,  transforms  it  into  chyle  and  blood,  into  muscles 
and  bones,  and  rejects  that  which  is  useless.  A  physician 
who  knows  nothing  of  alchemy  can  only  be  a  servant  of 
Nature,  however  well  he  may  be  versed  in  the  science 
of  external  things ;  but  the  alchemist  is  her  lord.  If 
the  physician  cannot  infuse  vitality  into  decaying  parts, 
he  cannot  effect  a  cure,  but  must  wait  until  Nature 
accomplishes  the  task ;  but  he  who  can  guide  the  power 
of  life  can  guide  and  command  Nature." 

Spiritual  development  is  not  dependent  on  intellectual  acquirements, 
and  there  are  sometimes  persons  that  are  ignorant  in  worldly  things,  but 
who  nevertheless  possess  great  spiritual  powers. 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  247 

Alchemy  is  described  by  Paracelsus  as  an  art  in 
which  Vulcan  (the  fire  of  Nature)  is  the  active  artist. 
By  this  art  the  pure  is  separated  from  the  impure,  and 
things  are  made  to  grow  out  of  primordial  matter 
(A'kasa).  Alchemy  renders  perfect  what  Nature  has 
left  imperfect,  and  purifies  all  things  by  the  power  of 
the  spirit  that  is  contained  in  them. 

Salt,  Sulphur,  and  Mercury 

"  All  things  (man  included)  are  composed  out  of  three 
substances,  and  all  things  have  their  number,  their 
weight,  and  their  measure.  Health  exists  when  the 
three  substances  constituting  a  thing  preserve  their 
normal  proportion  of  quantity  and  quality ;  disease  re- 
sults if  this  proportion  becomes  abnormal.  These  three 
substances  are  called  Sulphur,  Mercury,  and  Salt.1  These 
three  substances  are  not  seen  with  the  physical  eye,  but 
a  true  physician  should  see  them  nevertheless,  and  be 
able  to  separate  them  from  each  other.  That  which  is 
perceptible  to  the  senses  may  be  seen  by  everybody 
who  is  not  a  physician;  but  a  physician  should  be  able 
to  see  things  that  not  everybody  can  see.  There  are 
natural  physicians,  and  there  are  artificially  made  physi- 
cians. The  former  see  things  which  the  latter  cannot 
see,  and  the  others  dispute  the  existence  of  such  things 
because  they  cannot  perceive  them.  They  see  the 
exterior  of  things,  but  the  true  physicians  see  the  in- 
terior. The  inner  man  is  the  substantial  reality,  while 
the  outer  one  is  only  an  apparition,  and  therefore  the 
true  physician  sees  the  real  man,  and  the  quack  sees  only 
an  illusion." 

"  The   three    substances    are   held   together   in   forms 

1  This  does  not,  of  course,  refer  to  the  chemical  substances  known  to  us 
by  these  names.  "  No  one  can  express  or  sufficiently  describe  the  virtues 
contained  in  the  three  substances ;  therefore  every  alchemist  and  true 
physician  ought  to  seek  in  them  all  his  life  unto  his  death  ;  then  would 
his  labour  surely  find  its  just  reward"  (De  Morte  Serum). 

248  PARACELSUS 

by  the  power  of  life.1  If  you  take  the  three  invisible 
substances  and  add  to  them  the  power  of  life,  you  will 
have  three  invisible  substances  in  a  visible  form.  The 
three  constitute  the  form,  and  become  separated  only 
after  the  power  of  life  deserts  them.  They  are  hidden 
by  life,  and  joined  together  by  life.  Their  combined 
qualities  constitute  the  qualities  of  the  form,  and  only 
when  life  departs  their  separate  qualities  become  mani- 
fest. If  the  three  are  united  in  due  proportions,  health 
exists  in  the  form  ;  but  if  they  become  separated,  the 
one  will  putrefy  and  the  other  will  burn.  Man  does  not 
see  the  action  of  these  three  substances  as  long  as  they 
are  held  together  by  life,  but  he  may  perceive  their 
qualities  at  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  their  form. 
The  invisible  fire  is  in  the  sulphur,  the  soluble  element 
in  the  salt,  and  the  volatile  element  in  the  mercury. 
The  fire  burns,  the  mercury  produces  smoke,  and  the  salt 
remains  in  the  ashes;  but  as  long  as  the  form  is  alive 
there  is  neither  fire,  nor  ashes,  nor  smoke."  2 

1  "  The  sophist  says  that  nothing  living  can  come  out  of  dead  sub 
stances,  but  no  substance  is  dead,  and  they  know  nothing  about  the 
alchemical  labour.  The  death  of  a  man  is  surely  nothing  but  the 
separation  of  the  three  substances  of  which  his  body  is  composed,  and 
the  death  of  a  metal  is  the  taking  away  of  its  corporeal  form  "  (De  Morte 
Rerwm). 

2  "The  three  Substances  are  three  forms  or  aspects  of  the  one  uni- 
versal will-substance  out  of  which  everything  was  created ;  for  the  un- 
manifested  Absolute  in  manifesting  itself  reveals  itself  as  a  trinity  of 
cause,  action,  and  effect ;  father,  son,  and  the  holy  ghost ;  body,  soul, 
and  spirit. 

"It  is  therefore,  above  all,  necessary  that  we  should  realise  the 
nature  of  the  three  Substances  as  they  exist  in  the  Macrocosm  and 
recognise  their  qualities,  and  we  shall  then  also  know  their  nature  and 
attributes  in  the  Microcosm  of  man.  That  which  burns  and  appears 
fiery  to  the  eye  is  the  Sulphur,  it  is  of  a  volatile  (spiritual)  nature ; 
that  which  is  of  a  material  nature  is  the  Salt ;  and  the  Mercury  is  that 
which  may  be  sublimated  by  the  action  of  the  fire.  It  is  invisible  in 
its  condition  of  Prima  materia,  but  in  its  ultimate  state  it  may  be  seen  ; 
and  as  the  whole  constitution  of  man  consists  of  these  three  Substances, 
consequently  there  are  three  modes  in  which  diseases  may  originate, 
namely,  in  the  Sulphur,  in  the  Mercury,  or  in  the  Salt.  As  long  as 
these  three  Substances  are  full  of  life  they  are  in  health,  but  when  they 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  249 

"  There  are  hundreds  of  different  kinds  of  salt, 
sulphur,  and  mercury  in  the  universe  and  in  the 
human  system,  and  the  greatest  arcana  (potencies) 
are  contained  in  them.  All  things  are  hidden  in 
them  in  the  same  sense  as  a  pear  is  hidden  in  a  pear- 
tree  and  grapes  in  a  vine.  The  superficial  observer 
sees  only  that  which  exists  for  his  senses,  but  the 
interior  sight  discovers  the  things  of  the  future.  A 
gardener  knows  that  a  vine  will  produce  no  pears, 
and  a  pear-tree  no  grapes.  The  ignorant  speak  of 
heat  and  cold,  of  dryness  and  moisture,  of  sweetness 
and  acidity,  of  bitterness  and  astringency,  without 
knowing  the  cause  that  produces  such  qualities ;  but 
the  wise  recognise  in  them  the  qualities  of  the  stars" 
(Paragranum) . 

"  Let  no  one  be  so  foolish  as  to  imagine  that  Alchemy 
can  easily  be  understood  and  be  made  common  property. 
If  you  want  to  make  the  sphere  of  Saturn  run  in 
harmony  with  earthly  life,  you  may  put  all  the  planets 
therein.  Of  Luna,  however,  you  must  not  take  too 
much  ;  only  a  little.  Let  it  all  run  until  the  heaven 
of  Saturn  entirely  disappears ;  then  will  the  planets 
remain.  They  will  have  died  in  their  corruptible  bodies 
and  taken  an  incorruptible  perfect  body.  This  is  the 
life  and  spirit  of  heaven  which  causes  the  planets  to 
live  again  and  become  corporified  as  before "  (Caelum 
Philosophorum) . 

The  remedy  by  which,  according  to  Paracelsus,  rejuve- 
nation (regeneration)  could  be  accomplished  is  something 

become  separated  disease  will  be  the  result.  Where  such  a  separation 
begins  there  is  the  origin  of  disease  and  the  beginning  of  death.  There 
are  many  kinds  of  Sulphur,  of  Mercury,  and  of  Salt ;  that  which  belongs 
to  Sulphur  should  be  made  into  Sulphur,  so  that  it  may  burn ;  what 
belongs  to  Mercury  should  be  made  to  sublimate  and  ascend  ;  what 
belongs  to  Salt  should  be  resolved  into  Salt." 

"To  explain  the  qualities  of  the  three  Substances  it  would  be  neces- 
sary to  explain  the  qualities  of  the  Prima  materia  ;  but  as  the  Prima 
materia  mundi  was  the  Fiat  {Logos),  who  would  dare  to  attempt  to 
explain  it  ? " 

250  PARACELSUS 

entirely  different  from  what  it  has  been  supposed  to 
be  by  his  critics.  It  is  not  a  compound  of  chemical 
substances,  but  an  Arcanum,  "  an  invisible  fire,  which 
destroys  all  diseases"  (Tinct.  Phys.,  vii.).  "The  Materia 
T  nc  urce  is  the  greatest  treasure  in  the  world."  * 

Paracelsus  was  an  enemy  of  endless  prescriptions,  and 
of  all  the  daubing  and  greasing,  quackery  and  nasti- 
ness,  connected  with  the  apothecaryship  of  his  time. 
He  says :  "  What  shall  I  say  to  you  about  all  your 
alchemical  prescriptions ;  about  all  your  retorts  and 
bottles,  crucibles,  mortars,  and  glasses ;  of  all  your 
complicated  processes  of  distilling,  melting,  cohibiting, 
coagulating,  sublimating,  precipitating,  and  filtering;  of 
all  the  tomfoolery  for  which  you  throw  away  your  time 
and  your  money  ?  All  such  things  are  useless,  and  the 
labour  for  it  is  lost.  They  are  rather  an  impediment 
than  a  help  to  arrive  at  the  truth."  But  he  was  a 
practical  alchemist.  In  the  preface  to  his  work  entitled 
"  Tinctura  Physica  "  he  says  :  "  I  have  a  treasure  buried 
at  the  hospital  at  Weiden  (Friaul),  which  is  a  jewel  of 
such  a  value  that  neither  Pope  Leo  nor   the  Emperor 

1  The  "  tinctura  physicorum  "  is  a  great  alchemical  mystery.  Hermes 
Trismegistus  of  Egypt,  Orus  of  Greece,  Hali,  an  Arab,  and  Albertus 
Magnus  of  Germany  were  acquainted  with  it.  It  is  also  called  the  Red 
Lion,  and  is  mentioned  in  many  alchemical  works,  but  was  actually 
known  to  few.  Its  preparation  is  extremely  difficult,  as  there  is  the 
presence  of  two  perfectly  harmonious  people,  equally  skilful,  necessary 
for  that  purpose.  It  is  said  to  be  a  red  ethereal  fluid,  capable  of  trans- 
muting all  inferior  metals  into  gold,  and  having  other  wonderful  virtues. 
There  is  an  old  church  in  the  vicinity  of  Kenysten,  a  town  in  the  south 
of  Bavaria,  where  this  tincture  is  said  to  be  still  buried  in  the  ground. 
In  the  year  1698  some  of  it  penetrated  through  the  soil,  and  the  pheno- 
menon was  witnessed  by  many  people,  who  believed  it  to  be  a  miracle. 
A  church  was  therefore  erected  at  that  place,  and  it  is  still  a  well-known 
place  of  pilgrimage.  In  regard  to  the  material  (if  it  may  be  so  called) 
used  for  the  preparation  of  this  great  medicine,  Paracelsus  says:  "Be 
careful  not  to  take  anything  from  the  lion  but  the  rose-coloured  blood, 
and  from  the  white  eagle  only  the  white  gluten.  Coagulate  (corporify) 
it  according  to  the  directions  given  by  the  ancients,  and  you  will  have  the 
tinctura  physicorum.  But  if  this  is  incomprehensible  to  you,  remember 
that  only  he  who  desires  with  his  whole  heart  will  find,  and  to  him  only 
who  knocks  strong  enough  the  door  shall  be  opened." 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  251 

Carolus  could  buy  it  with  all  their  wealth,  and  those 
who  are  acquainted  with  the  spagyric  art  (alchemy)  will 
confirm  what  I  say." x 

"  True  Alchemy  which  teaches  how  to  make  (D  or 
0  out  of  the  five  imperfect  metals,  requires  no  other 
materials,  but  only  the  metals.  The  perfect  metals 
are  made  out  of  the  imperfect  metals,  through  them 
and  with  them  alone ;  for  with  other  things  is  Luna 
(phantasy),  but  in  the  metals  is  Sol  (wisdom)." 

Chaems 

The  power  of  certain  substances  to  absorb  and  to 
retain  certain  planetary  influences  is  used  for  the  purpose 
of  investing  them  with  occult  qualities.  Pure  metals 
may  be  used  by  the  alchemist  for  that  purpose,  and  in 
this  way  amulets,  "  magic  mirrors,"  and  other  things 
that  will  produce  magic  effects  are  prepared.  Para- 
celsus says : — 

"  The  compositions  of  the  astra  of  metals  produce 
wonderful  effects.  If  we  make  a  composition  of  seven 
metals  in  the  proper  order  and  at  the  proper  time,  we 
will  obtain  a  metal  which  contains  all  the  virtues  of  the 
seven.  Such  a  composition  is  called  '  electrum.'  It 
possesses  the  virtues  of  the  seven  metals  that  enter 
into  its  composition,  and  the  electrum  is  one  of  the 
most  valuable  preparations  known  to  secret  science. 
The  ordinary  metals  cannot  be  compared  with  it  on 
account  of  its  magic  power.  A  vessel  made  of  the 
electrum  will  immediately  indicate  it,  if  any  poisonous 
substance  has  been  surreptitiously  put  into  it,  because 
it  will  begin  to  sweat  on  its  outside." 

"  Many  wonderful  things  can  be  made  of  this  elec- 
trum, such  as  amulets,  charms,  magic  finger-rings,  arm- 
rings,   seals,   figures,  mirrors,    bells,    medals,    and    many 

1  If   we  remember  that  the  wise  ones  will  lay  up  their  treasures  in 
heaven,  the  above  passage  becomes  easily  comprehensible. 

252  PARACELSUS 

other  things  possessing  great  magic  powers,  of  which 
very  little  is  publicly  known,  because  our  art  has  been 
neglected,  and  the  majority  of  men  do  not  even  know 
that  it  exists." 

"  It  would  not  be  proper  to  explain  all  the  virtues  and 
powers  of  the  electrum,  because  the  sophist  would  begin 
to  blaspheme,  and  the  ignorant  would  become  angry ; 
the  idiot  would  ridicule  and  the  wicked  misuse  it ;  and 
we  are  therefore  forced  to  be  silent  in  regard  to  some  of 
its  principal  virtues.  But  there  are  a  few  wonderful 
qualities  which  it  possesses,  and  of  which  we  will  speak. 
We  have  observed  them  personally,  and  we  know  that 
we  are  speaking  the  truth.  We  have  seen  finger-rings 
made  of  the  electrum  that  cured  their  wearers  of  spasms 
and  paralytic  affections,  of  epilepsy  and  apoplexy;  and 
the  application  of  such  a  ring,  even  during  the  most 
violent  paroxysm  of  an  epileptic  attack,  was  always  fol- 
lowed by  immediate  relief.  We  have  seen  such  a  ring 
begin  to  sweat  at  the  beginning  of  a  hidden  disease." 

"  The  electrum  is  antipathetic  to  all  evil  influences, 
because  there  is  hidden  in  it  a  heavenly  power  and 
the  influence  of  all  the  seven  planets.  Therefore  the 
Egyptians  and  Chaldeans  and  the  Magi  of  Persia  used 
it  against  evil  spirits,  and  made  great  discoveries  by  its 
use.  If  I  were  to  tell  all  I  know  about  the  virtues  of 
the  electrum,  the  sophists  would  denounce  me  for  being 
the  greatest  sorcerer  in  the  world." 

"  I  will,  however,  say  that  I  have  known  a  person  in 
Spain  who  possessed  a  bell  made  out  of  the  electrum, 
and  weighing  about  two  pounds,  and  by  ringing  that 
bell  he  could  cause  various  kinds  of  spectres  and  ap- 
paritions to  appear,  and  they  would  obey  his  commands. 
Before  using  the  bell  he  always  wrote  some  words  or 
characters  on  its  inside.  He  then  rang  the  bell,  and 
immediately  the  spirits  appeared  in  such  a  shape  as  he 
ordered  them  to  take.  He  was  even  able  to  attract  by 
the  sound  of  that  bell  the  spectres  of  men  or  animals, 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  253 

or  to  drive  them  away  when  they  were  not  wanted ; 
and  whenever  he  wanted  another  spirit  to  appear  he 
wrote  some  other  characters  on  the  inside  of*  that  bell. 
He  refused  to  tell  me  the  secret  of  these  words  and 
characters,  but  I  meditated  about  it,  and  found  it  out 
myself." 

"  You  need  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  such  things 
are  possible,  because  everything  is  possible,  if  it  is  con- 
sistent with  natural  laws.  One  man  may  call  another 
man  by  his  name,  and  order  him  to  do  certain  things, 
and  if  the  latter  respects  the  former,  or  is  awed  by  his 
superiority,  he  will  obey  his  order  without  being  forced 
to  do  so  with  a  weapon  or  stick.  On  invisible  beings 
the  will  of  man  has  still  more  effect,  and  an  inferior 
being  can  be  made  to  obey  the  will  of  a  superior  one 
by  the  force  of  the  mere  thought  of  a  word,  because  the 
lower  is  subject  to  the  higher,  and  the  inferior  to  the 
superior,  and  what  else  is  the  will  but  a  power  hidden 
in  the  thought  (mind)  of  man,  and  becoming  active 
through  his  imagination.1  But  the  thought  of  man  is 
as  potent  to  impress  a  spirit  as  the  spoken  word  is  to 
impress  the  mind  of  a  man,  for  spirits  have  no  physical 
ears  to  hear  physical  sounds,  and  the  voice  is  only  needed 
for  those  who  cannot  hear  in  the  spirit."  2 

"  If  the  astral  element  in  man  can  be  sent  into  another 
man  by  the  power  of  his  Olympic  spirit,  such  an  astral 
element  may  also  be  embedded  in  metals  and  leave  its 
influence  in  them,  and  thereby  the  metal  can  be  raised 
into  a  higher  state  than  the  one  into  which  it  was  put 
by  Nature." 3 

1  The  power  that  man  may  silently  exercise  over  animals  is  well  known. 

2  It  does  not  require  the  sound  of  our  voice  to  bring  the  image  of  some 
object  before  our  imagination,  and  if  we  see  the  image  of  a  thing  in  our 
mind,  and  realise  its  presence,  it  actually  exists  for  us,  and  thus  a  spirit 
may  be  brought  into  a  form  by  the  power  of  imagination. 

3  This  remark  throws  some  light  on  alchemical  processes,  and  goes  to 
show  that  it  is  not  the  "  magnetism "  of  the  planets  alone,  but  also  the 
soul-essence  of  the  operator,  that  is  to  be  bound,  and  the  two  connected 
together  in  the  metal  by  the  process  described  below. 

254  PARACELSUS 

The  Electrum  Magicum 

The  electrum  magicum,  is  prepared  as  follows : — 
"  Take  ten  parts  of  pure  gold,  ten  of  silver,  five  of 
copper,  two  of  tin,  two  of  lead,  one  part  of  powdered 
iron,  and  five  of  mercury.  All  these  metals  must  be 
pure.  Now  wait  for  the  hour  when  the  planets  Saturn 
and  Mercury  come  into  conjunction,  and  have  all  your 
preparations  ready  for  that  occasion ;  have  the  fire,  the 
crucible,  the  mercury,  and  the  lead  ready,  so  that  there 
will  be  no  delay  when  the  time  of  the  conjunction  arrives, 
for  the  work  must  be  done  during  the  moments  of  the 
conjunction.  As  soon  as  this  takes  place  melt  the  lead 
and  add  the  mercury,  and  let  it  cool.  After  this  has 
been  done,  wait  for  a  conjunction  of  Jupiter  with  Saturn 
and  Mercury,  melt  the  compound  of  lead  and  mercury 
in  a  crucible,  and  in  another  crucible  the  tin,  and  pour 
the  two  metals  together  at  the  moment  of  such  con- 
junction. You  must  now  wait  until  a  conjunction  of 
the  sun  with  either  one  or  both  of  the  above-named 
planets  takes  place,  and  then  add  the  gold  to  the  com- 
pound after  melting  it  previously.  At  a  time  of  a 
conjunction  of  the  moon  with  the  sun,  Saturn,  or  Mer- 
cury, the  silver  is  added  likewise,  and  at  a  time  of  a 
conjunction  of  Venus  with  one  of  the  above-named 
planets  the  copper  is  added.  Finally,  at  a  time  of  such 
a  conjunction  with  Mars,  the  whole  is  completed  by  the 
addition  of  the  powdered  iron.  Stir  the  fluid  mass  with 
a  dry  rod  of  witch-hazel,  and  let  it  cool."  x 

"  Of  this  electrum  magicum  you  may  make  a  mirror 
in  which  you  will  see  the  events  of  the  past  and  the  pre- 
sent, absent  friends  or  enemies,  and  what  they  are  doing. 
You  will  see  in  it  any  object  you  may  desire  to  see,  and 
all  the  doings  of  men  in  daytime  or  at  night.      You  will 

1  All  the  above-mentioned  conjunctions  take  place  in  our  solar  system 
in  the  course  of  thirteen  successive  months,  but  the  directions  refer  to 
conjunctions  of  principles  contained  in  the  Microcosm  of  man. 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  255 

Bee  in  it  anything  that  has  ever  been  written  down,  said, 
or  spoken  in  the  past,  and  also  see  the  person  who  said 
it,  and  the  causes  that  made  him  say  what  he  did,  and 
anything,  however  secret  it  may  have  been  kept."  1 

"  Such  mirrors  are  made  of  the  electmm  magicum;  they 
are  made  of  the  diameter  of  about  two  inches.  They  are 
to  be  founded  at  a  time  when  a  conjunction  of  Jupiter 
and  Venus  takes  place,  and  moulds  made  of  fine  sand  are 
used  for  that  purpose.  Grind  the  mirrors  smooth  with 
a  grindstone,  and  polish  them  with  tripoli,  and  with  a 
piece  of  wood  from  a  linden-tree.  All  the  operations 
made  with  the  mirror,  the  grinding,  polishing,  &c,  should 
take  place  under  favourable  planetary  aspects,  and  by 
selecting  the  proper  hours  three  different  mirrors  may 
be  prepared.  At  a  time  of  a  conjunction  of  two  good 
planets,  when  at  the  same  time  the  sun  or  the  moon 
stands  on  the  '  house  of  the  lord  of  the  hour  of  your 
birth,'  the  three  mirrors  are  to  be  laid  together  into  pure 
well-water,  and  left  to  remain  there  for  an  hour.  They 
must  then  be  removed  from  the  water,  enveloped  in  a 
linen  cloth,  and  be  preserved  for  use."2 

Palingenesis 

Nothing  in  Nature  is  dead,  and  alchemy  does  not 
deal  with  inanimate  things.  The  old  alchemists  were 
believers  in  the  possibility  of  spontaneous  generation,  and 
by  the  action  of  psychical  powers  they  created  forms  in 
which  life  became  manifest.  They  could  generate  living 
beings  in  closed  bottles,  or  by  the  Palingenesis  3  of  plants 
or  animals,  cause  the  astral  form  of  a  plant  or  an  animal 

1  That  is  to  say,  you  may  come  en  rapport  with  the  astral  light,  which 
is  the  sensorium  of  the  world,  and  in  which  the  "  memory"  or  impression 
of  everything  is  preserved. 

2  It  would  be  useless  to  give  detailed  descriptions  of  processes  that  can- 
not be  followed  out  by  any  one  who  does  not  possess  the  necessary  magic 
(magnetic)  power,  and  those  who  possess  the  power  will  hardly  require 
such  descriptions,  in  which  allegories  are  strangely  mixed  with  truths. 

3  See  Appendix. 

256  PARACELSUS 

to  become  visible  again,  and  to  resurrect  from  its  ashes. 
One  of  the  greatest  secrets,  however,  is  the  generation  of 
beings  like  men  or  women,  that  were  generated  without 
the  assistance  of  a  female  organism,  and  which  were  called 
Homunculi.     Paracelsus  speaks  about  them  as  follows  : — 

Homunculi 

"  Human  beings  may  come  into  existence  without 
natural  parents.  That  is  to  say,  such  beings  grow 
without  being  developed  and  born  by  a  female  organism ; 
by  the  art  of  an  experienced  spagyricus  (alchemist)." 
— Be  Naturci  Rerum,  vol.  i. 

"  The  generatio  homunculi  has  until  now  been  kept 
very  secret,  and  so  little  was  publicly  known  about  it 
that  the  old  philosophers  have  doubted  its  possibility. 
But  I  know  that  such  things  may  be  accomplished  by 
spagyric  art  assisted  by  natural  processes.  If  the  sperma, 
enclosed  in  a  hermetically  sealed  glass,  is  buried  in  horse 
manure  for  about  forty  days,  and  properly  '  magnetised,' 
it  begins  to  live  and  to  move.  After  such  a  time  it  bears 
the  form  and  resemblance  of  a  human  being,  but  it  will 
be  transparent  and  without  a  corpus.  If  it  is  now  arti- 
ficially fed  with  the  arcanum  sanguinis  hominis x  until  it 
is  about  forty  weeks  old,  and  if  allowed  to  remain  during 
that  time  in  the  horse-manure  in  a  continually  equal 
temperature,  it  will  grow  into  a  human  child,  with  all 
its  members  developed  like  any  other  child,  such  as  could 
have  been  born  by  a  woman  ;  only  it  will  be  much  smaller. 
We  call  such  a  being  a  homunculus,  and  it  may  be  raised 
and  educated  like  any  other  child,  until  it  grows  older 
and  obtains  reason  and  intellect,  and  is  able  to  take  care 
of  itself.  This  is  one  of  the  greatest  secrets,  and  it  ought 
to  remain  a  secret  until  the  days  approach  when  all  secrets 
will  be  known." 2 

1  Without  this  arcanum  the  experiment  would  not  succeed,  nor  the 
form  become  visible. 

2  Paracelsus  has  been  reproached  for  his  belief  in  the  possibility  of 
generating  homunculi  ;  but  a  deeper  insight  into  the  processes  of  Nature 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  257 

It  seems  to  be  useless  to  quote  any  more  alchemistical 
prescriptions  of  Paracelsus,  or  of  any  other  alchemist. 
To  the  uninitiated  they  are  unintelligible ;  while  the 
initiated,  having  the  light  of  the  spirit  for  his  teacher, 

will  show  that  such  a  thing  is  not  necessarily  impossible.  Modern  autho- 
rities believe  it  to  be  not  impossible.  Moleschott  thinks  that  we  may 
perhaps  yet  succeed  in  establishing  conditions  by  which  organic  forms 
can  be  generated  ;  Liebig  is  of  the  opinion  that  chemistry  will  yet 
succeed  in  making  organic  substances  by  artificial  means.  Goethe  says  in 
his  "Faust":— 

"And  such  a  brain,  that  has  the  power  to  think, 
Will  in  the  future  be  produced  by  a  thinker." 
Where  no  germ  is  present  such  a  generation  would  certainly  be  impos- 
sible ;  but  chickens  can  be  artificially  hatched  out,  and  perhaps  homunculi 
may  be  developed.     There  seem  to  be  some  historic  evidences  that  such 
things  have  been  accomplished,  as  the  following  account  will  show  : — 

In  a  book  called  "The  Sphinx,"  edited  by  Dr.  Emil  Besetzny,  and  pub- 
lished at  Vienna  in  1 873  by  L.  Rosner  (Tuchlauben,  No.  22),  we  find  some 
interesting  accounts  in  regard  to  a  number  of  "spirits"  generated  by  a 
Joh.  Ferd,  Count  of  Kueffstein,  in  Tyrol,  in  the  year  1775.  The  sources 
from  which  these  accounts  are  taken  consist  in  masonic  manuscripts  and 
prints,  but  more  especially  in  a  diary  kept  by  a  certain  Jas.  Kammerer, 
who  acted  in  the  capacity  of  butler  and  famulus  to  the  said  Count.  There 
were  ten  homunculi — or,  as  he  calls  them,  "prophesying  spirits" — pre- 
served in  strong  bottles,  such  as  are  used  to  preserve  fruit,  and  which  were 
filled  with  water  ;  and  these  "spirits  "  were  the  product  of  the  labour  of 
the  Count  J.  F.  of  Kueffstein  (Kuf stein),  and  of  an  Italian  Mystic  and 
Rosicrucian,  Abbe  Geloni.  They  were  made  in  the  course  of  five  weeks, 
and  consisted  of  a  king,  a  queen,  a  knight,  a  monk,  a  nun,  an  architect,  a 
miner,  a  seraph,  and  finally  of  a  blue  and  a  red  spirit.  "  The  bottles  were 
closed  with  ox-bladders,  and  with  a  great  magic  seal  (Solomon's  seal  ?). 
The  spirits  swam  about  in  those  bottles,  and  were  about  one  span  long, 
and  the  Count  was  very  anxious  that  they  should  grow.  They  were 
therefore  buried  under  two  cart-loads  of  horse-manure,  and  the  pile  daily 
sprinkled  with  a  certain  liquor,  prepared  with  great  trouble  by  the  two 
adepts,  and  made  out  of  some  '  very  disgusting  materials.'  The  pile  of 
manure  began  after  such  sprinklings  to  ferment  and  to  steam  as  if  heated 
by  a  subterranean  fire,  and  at  least  once  every  three  days,  when  every- 
thing was  quiet,  at  the  approach  of  the  night,  the  two  gentlemen  would 
leave  the  convent  and  go  to  pray  and  to  fumigate  at  that  pile  of  manure. 
After  the  bottles  were  removed  the  '  spirits '  had  grown  to  be  each  one 
about  one  and  a  half  span  long,  so  that  the  bottles  were  almost  too 
small  to  contain  them,  and  the  male  homunculi  had  come  into  possession 
of  heavy  beards,  and  the  nails  of  their  fingers  and  toes  had  grown  a  great 
deal.  By  some  means  the  Abbe  Schiloni  provided  them  with  appropriate 
clothing,  each  one  according  to  his  rank  and  dignity.  In  the  bottle  of  the 
red  and  in  that  of  the  blue  spirit,  however,  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen 

K 

258  PARACELSUS 

will  not  require  them.  But  those  who  condemn  the 
ancient  occultists  for  their  supposed  ignorance  and  super- 
stition would  do  well  to  remember  that  it  requires  a 
vastly  greater  amount  of  credulity  to  believe  that  great 
reformers  in  science  and  men  possessed  of  wisdom,  such 

but  '  clear  water '  ;  but  whenever  the  Abbe"  knocked  three  times  at  the  seal 
upon  the  mouth  of  the  bottles,  speaking  at  the  same  time  some  Hebrew 
words,  the  water  in  the  bottles  began  to  turn  blue  (respectively  red),  and 
the  blue  and  the  red  spirits  would  show  their  faces,  first  very  small,  but 
growing  in  proportions  until  they  attained  the  size  of  an  ordinary  human 
face.  The  face  of  the  blue  spirit  was  beautiful,  like  an  angel,  but  that  of 
the  red  one  bore  a  horrible  expression. 

"  These  beings  were  fed  by  the  Count  about  once  every  three  or  four 
days  with  some  rose-coloured  substance  which  he  kept  in  a  silver  box,  and 
of  which  he  gave  to  each  spirit  a  pill  of  about  the  size  of  a  pea.  Once 
every  week  the  water  had  to  be  removed,  and  the  bottles  filled  again  with 
pure  rain-water.  This  change  had  to  be  accomplished  very  rapidly,  be- 
cause during  the  few  moments  that  the  spirits  were  exposed  to  the  air 
they  closed  their  eyes,  and  seemed  to  become  weak  and  unconscious,  as  if 
they  were  about  to  die.  But  the  blue  spirit  was  never  fed,  nor  was  the 
water  changed ;  while  the  red  one  received  once  a  week  a  thimbleful  of 
fresh  blood  of  some  animal  (chicken),  and  this  blood  disappeared  in  the 
water  as  soon  as  it  was  poured  into  it,  without  colouring  or  troubling  it. 
The  water  containing  the  red  spirit  had  to  be  changed  once  every  two  or 
three  days.  As  soon  as  the  bottle  was  opened  it  became  dark  and  cloudy, 
and  emitted  an  odour  of  rotten  eggs. 

"In  the  course  of  time  these  spirits  grew  to  be  about  two  spans  long, 
and  their  bottles  were  now  almost  too  small  for  them  to  stand  erect ; 
the  Count  therefore  provided  them  with  appropriate  seats.  These  bottles 
were  carried  to  the  place  where  the  Masonic  Lodge  of  which  the  Count  was 
the  presiding  Master  met,  and  after  each  meeting  the}'  were  carried  back 
again.  During  the  meetings  the  spirits  gave  prophecies  about  future 
events  that  usually  proved  to  be  correct.  They  knew  the  most  secret 
things,  but  each  of  them  was  only  acquainted  with  such  things  as  be- 
longed to  his  station  :  for  instance,  the  king  could  talk  politics,  the  monk 
about  religion,  the  miner  about  minerals,  &c.  ;  but  the  blue  and  the  red 
spirits  seemed  to  know  everything.  (Some  facts  proving  their  clairvoyant 
powers  are  given  in  the  original.) 

"  By  some  accident  the  glass  containing  the  monk  fell  one  day  upon  the 
floor,  and  was  broken.  The  poor  monk  died  after  a  few  painful  respira- 
tions, in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  the  Count  to  save  his  life,  and  his  body 
was  buried  in  the  garden.  An  attempt  to  generate  another  one,  made  by 
the  Count  without  the  assistance  of  the  Abbe",  who  had  left,  resulted  in 
failure,  as  it  produced  only  a  small  thing  like  a  leech,  which  had  very 
little  vitality,  and  soon  died. 

"One  day  the  king  escaped  from  his  bottle,  which  had  not  been  pro- 
perly sealed,  and  was  found  by  Kammerer  sitting  on  the  top  of  the  bottle 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  259 

as  Paracelsus,  Johannes  Tritheirn,  Van  Helmont,  and 
others,  should  have  consented  to  write  whole  volumes 
of  such  intolerable  rubbish  as  such  writings  would  cer- 
tainly be  if  they  were  to  be  taken  in  a  literal  meaning, 
than  to  believe — as  is  actually  the  case — that  great 
spiritual  truths  were  thus  hidden  behind  allegories  that 
were  intended  to  be  understood  only  by  those  who  pos- 
sessed the  key  in  their  own  hearts. 

Although  Paracelsus  asserts  that  it  is  possible  to  make 
gold  and  silver  by  chemical  means,  and  that  some  persons 
have   succeeded  in  making   it,1   still   he  condemns  such 

containing  the  queen,  attempting  to  scratch  with  his  nails  the  seal  away, 
and  to  liberate  her.  In  answer  to  the  servant's  call  for  help,  the  Count 
rushed  in,  and  after  a  prolonged  chase  caught  the  king,  who,  from  his 
long  exposure  to  the  air  and  the  want  of  his  appropriate  element,  had 
become  faint,  and  was  replaced  into  his  bottle — not,  however,  without 
succeeding  to  scratch  the  nose  of  the  Count." 

It  seems  that  the  Count  of  Kufstein  in  later  years  became  anxious  for 
the  salvation  of  his  soul,  and  considered  it  incompatible  with  the  re- 
quirements of  his  conscience  to  keep  those  spirits  longer  in  his  possession, 
and  that  he  got  rid  of  them  in  some  manner  not  mentioned  by  the  scribe. 
We  will  not  make  an  attempt  at  comment,  but  would  advise  those  who 
are  curious  about  this  matter  to  read  the  book  from  which  the  above 
account  is  an  extract.  There  can  be  hardly  any  doubt  as  to  its  veracity, 
because  some  historically  well-known  persons,  such  as  Count  Max  Lam- 
berg,  Count  Franz  Josef  v.  Thun,  and  others,  saw  them,  and  they  pos- 
sessed undoubtedly  visible  and  tangible  bodies  ;  and  it  seems  that  they 
were  either  elemental  spirits,  or,  what  appears  to  be  more  probable, 
homunculi. 

1  The  following  is  a  prescription  how  to  make  artificial  gold,  taken  from 
an  old  alchemistical  MS.,  and  a  marginal  note  says  that  an  experiment 
tried  with  it  proved  successful : — Take  equal  parts  of  powdered  iron,  sub- 
limated sulphur,  and  crude  antimony.  Melt  it  in  a  crucible,  and  keep  it 
in  red  heat  for  eight  hours.  Powder  it,  and  calcinate  it  until  the  sulphur 
is  evaporated.  Mix  two  parts  of  this  powder  with  one  part  of  calcinated 
borax,  and  melt  it  again.  Powder  and  dissolve  it  in  common  muriatic 
acid,  and  let  it  stand  in  a  moderate  heat  for  one  month.  The  fluid  is 
then  to  be  put  into  a  retort  and  distilled,  and  the  fluid  that  collects  in 
the  recipient  (the  muriatic  acid)  is  returned  into  the  retort  and  again  dis- 
tilled, and  this  is  repeated  three  times  ;  the  third  time  a  red  powder  will 
be  left  in  the  retort  (probably  a  mixture  of  muriate  of  iron  with  antimo- 
nium  oxide).  This  powder  is  to  be  dissolved  in  the  menstruum  philoso- 
phicum  (made  by  pouring  chloride  of  antimony  into  water,  filtering,  and 
evaporating  the  fluid  to  a  certain  extent,  to  make  it  stronger).     The  solu- 

260  PARACELSUS 

external  experiments  as  useless  in  the  end,  and  it  seems 
to  be  more  than  probable  that,  even  in  such  chemical 
experiments  as  may  have  succeeded,  something  more 
than  merely  chemical  manipulations  was  required  to  make 
them  successful.1 

"  The  heavenly  fire  which  comes  to  us  from  the  sun, 
or  acts  within  the  earth,  is  not  such  a  fire  as  is  in 
heaven,  neither  like  our  fire  upon  the  earth ;  but  the 
celestial  fire  is  with  us  a  cold,  stiff,  frozen  fire,  and  this 
is  the  body  of  gold.  Therefore  nothing  can  be  gained 
from  gold  by  means  of  our  fire,  except  to  render  it  fluid 
in  the  same  sense  as  the  sun  renders  fluid  the  snow  and 
turns  it  into  water"  {Caelum  Philos.).2 

Astrology  is  intimately  connected  with  medicine,  magic, 

tion  is  to  be  evaporated  again,  and  the  remaining  powder  mixed  with  its 
own  weight  of  corrosive  sublimate  of  mercury.  This  powder  is  to  be 
dissolved  again  in  the  menstruum  philosophicwn  (diluted  muriatic  acid), 
and  distilled  until  a  red  oily  substance  passes  into  the  receiver.  If  you 
obtain  this  oil,  you  may  take  some  newly  prepared  chloride  of  silver,  satu- 
rate it  gradually  with  the  oil,  and  dry  it.  Put  one  part  of  this  powder 
into  five  parts  of  molten  lead,  separate  the  lead  again  from  the  silver 
(by  cupellation),  and  you  will  find  that  one-third  of  the  silver  has  been 
transformed  into  gold. 

1  There  is  a  considerable  amount  of  historical  evidence  of  a  trustworthy 
character  that  goes  to  prove  that  pure  gold  has  been  artificially  made,  but 
it  is,  to  say  the  least,  doubtful  if  this  was  done  in  a  way  that  could  be 
successfully  imitated  by  one  who  is  not  an  alchemist.  According  to  a 
trustworthy  report,  coming  from  a  source  whose  veracity  is  not  doubtful, 
a  certain  alchemist  was  kept  imprisoned  by  the  Prince-Elect  of  Saxony 
at  a  fortress  at  Dresden  in  the  year  1748,  because  the  Prince  wanted  to 
obtain  through  him  artificial  gold.  This  adept  produced  four  hundred 
pounds  of  gold  by  alchemical  means,  and  finally  escaped  from  the  prison 
in  some  unexplained  manner.  Flamel  is  said  to  have  made  artificial  gold 
on  April  25,  1382. 

2  Tiffereau  has  repeatedly  succeeded  in  transmuting  inferior  metals 
into  gold,  by  exposing  for  a  long  time  solutious  of  chemically  pure  silver 
or  copper  to  the  sunshine  in  tropical  countries,  and  he  presented  a  con- 
siderable quantity  of  such  gold  to  the  Academy  of  Science  in  Paris.  The 
gold  thus  obtained  differed  in  some  respects  from  the  natural  gold 
(Tiffereau,  "L'Or,"  Paris).  One  of  the  best  modern  treatises  on  Alchemy 
in  its  physical  aspects  is  August  Strindberg's  "Sylva  Sylvarum  "  (Paris, 
1896),  which  goes  to  show  that  all  chemical  substances  are  only  modes 
of  vibration  of  one  primordial  substance,  and  can  be  changed  one  into 
another  by  changing  the  state  of  etheric  vibration. 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  261 

and  alchemy.  If  we  desire  to  make  use  of  the  influences 
of  the  planets  for  any  purpose  whatever,  it  is  necessary 
to  know  what  qualities  these  influences  possess — how 
they  act,  and  at  what  time  certain  planetary  influences 
will  be  on  the  increase  or  on  the  wane.  The  quality  of 
the  planetary  influences  will  be  known  to  a  man  who 
knows  his  own  constitution,  because  he  will  then  be  able 
to  recognise  in  himself  the  planetary  influences  corre- 
sponding to  those  that  rule  in  the  sky  ;  the  action  of 
such  influences  will  be  known  if  we  know  the  qualities 
of  the  bodies  upon  which  they  act,  because  each  body 
attracts  those  influences  that  are  in  harmony  with  it, 
and  repels  the  others ;  the  time  when  certain  planetary 
influences  rule  may  be  found  out  by  astronomical  calcu- 
lations, or  by  tables  that  have  been  prepared  from  such 
for  that  purpose;  but  the  spiritually  developed  seer  will 
require  no  books  and  no  tables,  but  will  recognise  the 
conditions  of  the  interior  world  by  the  states  existing 
in  his  own  mind. 

Paracelsus  was  not — what  is  called  to-day — a  profes- 
fessional  astrologer.  He  did  not  calculate  nativities  or 
make  horoscopes,  but  he  knew  the  higher  aspect  of 
astrology,  by  which  the  mutual  relations  of  the  Macro- 
cosm and  the  Microcosm  are  known.  He  rejected  the 
errors  of  popular  astrology  as  he  did  those  of  other 
popular  religions  or  scientific  superstitions ;  and  his 
system  of  astrology,  if  rightly  understood,  appears  of  a 
sublime  character  and  full  of  the  grandest  conceptions. 
He  says :  "  No  one  needs  to  care  for  the  course  of 
Saturn ;  it  neither  shortens  nor  lengthens  the  life  of 
anybody.  If  Mars  is  ferocious,  it  does  not  follow  that 
Nero  was  his  child ;  and  although  Mars  and  Nero  may 
both  have  had  the  same  qualities,  they  did  not  take  them 
from  each  other.  It  is  an  old  saying  that  '  a  wise  man 
may  rule  the  stars,'  and  I  believe  in  that  saying — not 
in  the  sense  in  which  you  take  it,  but  in  my  own.  The 
stars  force  nothing  into  us  that  we  are  not  willing  to 

262  PARACELSUS 

take ;  they  incline  us  to  nothing  which  we  do  not  desire.1 
They  are  free  for  themselves,  and  we  are  free  for  our- 
selves. You  believe  that  one  man  is  more  successful  in 
the  acquirement  of  knowledge,  another  one  in  the  acqui- 
sition of  power ;  one  obtains  riches  more  easily,  and 
another  one  fame.  And  you  think  that  this  is  caused 
by  the  stars ;  but  I  believe  the  cause  to  be  that  one 
man  is  more  apt  than  another  to  acquire  and  to  hold 
certain  things,  and  that  this  aptitude  comes  from  the 
spirit.2  It  is  absurd  to  believe  that  the  stars  can  make 
a  man.  Whatever  the  stars  can  do  we  can  do  ourselves, 
because  the  wisdom  which  we  obtain  from  God  over- 
powers the  heaven  and  rules  over  the  stars." 

He  objected  strongly  to  the  use  of  ceremonies  that 
were  made  for  the  purpose  of  attracting  spirits  by  means 
of  planetary  influences.  He  says  :  "  Whatever  comes 
from  the  astral  '  spirits '  is  sorcery.  Such  spirits  are 
false,  and  we  do  not  believe  in  them  ;  but  we  believe  in 
the  power  of  that  wisdom  which  rules  heaven,  and  by 
which  all  the  mysteries  of  Nature  may  be  known.  Sor- 
cery has  been  called  magic;  but  magic  is  wisdom,  and 
there  is  no  wisdom  in  sorcery.  True  science  knows 
everything.  The  eternity  of  all  things  is  without  time, 
without  beginning,  and  without  an  end.  It  is  sub- 
stantially present  everywhere,  and  acts  where  it  is  not 
expected.  That  which  seems  to  be  incredible,  impro- 
bable, and  impossible  will  become  wonderfully  true  in 
eternity." 

"Man's  mind  is  made  up  of  the  same  elements  as 
the  stars ;  but  as  the  wisdom  of  the  Supreme  guides  the 
motions  of  the  stars,  so  the  reason  of  man  rules  the  in- 
fluences which  rotate  and  circulate  in  his  mind.  The 
essence  of  man's  sidereal  body,  which  he  attracts  from 

1  It  is  not  divine  man,  but  the  elements  in  the  body  of  man,  which  attract 
corresponding  influences  from  the  powers  of  marocosniic  Nature. 

2  If  they  come  from  the  spirit,  t.ht^  spirit  must  have  pre-existed,  and 
have  acquired  them  in  a  previous  incarnation. 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  263 

the  stars,  is  of  a  substantial  nature ;  still,  we  consider  it 
as  being  something  spiritual  on  account  of  the  ethereality 
of  its  substance,  and  on  account  of  the  great  dimensions 
of  its  invisible  body.  The  essences  in  man's  sidereal 
body  are  intimately  related  to  the  sidereal  essences  of  the 
stars,  and  the  former  attract  the  powers  of  the  latter ; 
but  if  a  man  is  the  master  over  his  own  mind,  he  can 
permit  those  attractions  to  take  place  in  an  irregular 
manner,  or  control  his  passions  and  repel  influences 
which  he   does  not  desire. 

"  There  is  an  attractive  power  in  the  soul  of  man, 
which  attracts  physical,  mental,  and  moral  diseases  from 
the  Chaos.  The  planetary  influences  extend  through 
all  Nature,  and  man  attracts  poisonous  qualities  from 
the  moon,  from  the  stars,  and  from  other  things ;  but 
the  moon,  and  the  stars,  and  other  things  also  attract 
evil  influences  from  man,  and  distribute  them  again  by 
their  rays,  because  Nature  is  an  undivided  whole,  whose 
parts  are  intimately  connected." 

"  The  sun  and  the  stars  attract  something  from  us,  and 
we  attract  something  from  them,  because  our  astral  bodies 
are  in  sympathy  with  the  stars,  and  the  stars  are  in  sym- 
pathy with  our  astral  bodies ;  but  the  same  is  the  case  with 
the  astral  bodies  of  all  other  objects.  They  all  attract 
astral  influences  from  the  stars.  Each  body  attracts  cer- 
tain particular  influences  from  them  ;  some  attract  more 
and  others  less ;  and  on  this  truth  is  based  the  power 
of  amulets  and  talismans,  and  the  influence  which 
they  may  exercise  over  the  astral  form  of  the  bearer. 
Talismans  are  like  boxes,  in  which  sidereal  influences 
may  be  preserved." 

"  Three  spirits,  united  in  one,  live  and  act  in  man  ; 
three  worlds,  united  into  one,  throw  their  rays  upon  him ; 
but  all  three  are  only  the  reflection,  image,  or  echo  of  one 
primordial  creation.  The  first  is  the  essence  of  the  ele- 
ments ;  the  second,  the  soul  of  the  stars  (the  mind) ;  the 
third,  the  spirit — the  life.     The  lower  instincts  of  man 

264  PARACELSUS 

are  caused  by  the  life  of  the  elements,  but  there  is  only 
one  life,  and  the  life  that  causes  the  instincts  of  man  is 
contained  in  all  elements — in  the  stars  as  well  as  in 
vegetable  and  animal  forms.  The  activity  of  the  life- 
essence  is  modified  in  vegetable,  animal,  and  human 
forms ;  it  becomes  the  life  of  the  earth,  and  the  life  of 
the  earth  is  radiated  back  to  the  stars.  Stars  attract 
and  repel  each  other ;  they  have  their  sympathies  and 
antipathies ;  and  these  living  antipathies  and  sympathies, 
attractions  and  repulsions,  could  not  exist  if  no  vehicle  of 
life  existed  between  them." 

"  Primordial  matter,  forming  the  basis  of  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  human  body,  has  absorbed  influences  from  the 
stars,  and  they  nourish  the  elementary  (physical)  body, 
and  by  means  of  these  influences  man's  soul  is  connected 
with  and  united  to  the  souls  of  the  stars.  Having  three 
worlds  in  him  and  living  in  three  worlds,  man  should 
learn  to  know  the  lower  elements,  understand  the 
sidereal,  and  know  the   eternal." 

"  The  body  comes  from  the  elements,  the  soul  from  the 
stars,  and  the  spirit  from  God.  All  that  the  intellect  can 
conceive  of  comes  from  the  stars."  1 

"  All  knowledge  comes  from  the  stars  (the  Universal 
Mind).  Men  do  not  invent  or  create  ideas  ;  the  ideas 
exist,  and  men  are  able  to  grasp  them.  If  all  professors 
of  music  in  the  world  would  die  in  one  day,  heaven,  being 
the  original  teacher  of  music,  would  not  die,  and  it  would 
teach  other  persons  this  art. 

"  Many  ideas  exist  which  men  have  not  yet  grasped ; 
many  stars  are  still  too  far  away  to  form  a  connection  with 
the  earth.  The  realm  of  stars  and  ideas  is  infinite,  and 
therefore  the  source  of  inventions  and  discoveries  is  not 
yet  exhausted." 

"  New  stars  appear  and  others  disappear  on  the  sky. 

1  By  "  stars"  (astro)  Paracelsus  does  not  refer  to  the  physical  bodies  of 
the  planets,  but  to  mental  states  existing  in  the  Cosmos,  and  which  are 
represented  by  the  stars. 

ALCHEMY  AND  ASTROLOGY  265 

New  ideas  appear  on  the  mental  horizon,  and  old  ideas 
are  lost.  If  a  new  comet  appears  on  the  sky,  it  fills  the 
hearts  of  the  ignorant  with  terror  ;  if  a  new  and  grand 
idea  appears  on  the  mental  horizon,  it  creates  fear  in  the 
camp  of  those  that  cling  to  old  systems  and  accepted 
forms." 

"  Physical  man  takes  his  nutriment  from  the  earth  ; 
the  sidereal  man  receives  the  states  of  his  feelings  and 
thoughts  from  the  stars  ;  but  the  spirit  has  his  wisdom 
from  God.  The  heat  of  a  fire  passes  through  an  iron 
stove,  and  the  astral  influences,  with  all  their  qualities, 
pass  through  man.  They  penetrate  him  as  rain  pene- 
trates the  soil,  and  as  the  soil  is  made  fruitful  by  the 
rain.  Likewise  man's  soul  is  made  fruitful  by  them  ; 
but  the  principle  of  the  supreme  wisdom  of  the  uni- 
verse penetrates  into  the  centre,  illuminates  it,  and  rules 
over  all." 

"  Hail  may  destroy  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  evil  plane- 
tary influences  be  attracted  by  the  soul  of  the  earth 
and  cause  epidemic  diseases,  and  the  spiritual  centre  in 
man  be  devoid  of  wisdom,  and  darkness  rule  in  its 
place.  The  earth,  the  animal  kingdom,  and  physical 
man  are  subject  to  the  government  of  the  stars  ;  but  the 
spiritual  man  rules  over  the  stars  and  over  the  elements, 
and  conquers  the  worlds  without  and  the  world  within 
by  the  wisdom  that  comes  from  God.  Stones,  plants, 
and  animals  obey  the  government  of  the  mind,  and 
man  should  obey  the  will  and  wisdom  of  God.  The 
individual  terrestrial  life  should  correspond  to  the  laws 
governing  the  universe  ;  man's  spiritual  aspirations 
should  be  directed  to  harmonise  with  the  will  and 
wisdom  of  God.  If  this  is  attained,  the  inner  con- 
sciousness will  awaken  to  an  understanding  of  the  influ- 
ences of  the  stars,  and  the  mysteries  of  Nature  will  be 
revealed  to  his  spiritual  perception." 

IX.  PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY 

Modern  philosophy  is  a  system  of  theoretical  specula- 
tion, based  upon  reasoning  from  that  which  is  believed 
to  be  true  to  the  unknown,  drawing  logical  deductions 
from  accepted  opinions  and  establishing  new  theories ; 
but  theosophy  is  the  possession  of  spiritual  knowledge 
obtained  by  practical  experience.  To  be  a  philosopher 
it  is  necessary  to  have  acute  reasoning  powers,  and  to 
calculate  possibilities  and  probabilities;  to  be  a  true 
theosophist  it  is  necessary  to  have  the  power  of  spiritual 
perception  and  to  know  the  things  perceived,  irrespective 
of  any  possibilities,  probabilities,  or  accepted  opinions. 
A  speculative  philosopher  occupies  an  objective  stand- 
point in  regard  to  the  thing  which  he  examines ;  the 
theosophist  finds  the  character  of  that  thing  in  himself. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  Macrocosm  of  Nature  that  is  not 
contained  in  man,  because  man  and  Nature  are  essen- 
tially one,  and  a  man  who  is  conscious  of  being  one  with 
Nature  will  know  everything  in  Nature  if  he  knows  only 
himself.  A  philosopher  having  no  knowledge  of  his 
own  spirit  can  only  speculate  about  things  which  he 
does  not  see ;  a  practical  theosophist,  knowing  his  own 
spiritual  state,  does  not  need  to  speculate,  because  he  sees 
the  spirit  of  things  and  knows  what  he  sees.  Philosophy 
is  the  love  of  wisdom  and  the  speculation  thereon ;  theo- 
sophy is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  clear  under- 
standing itself. 

"  There  is  a  true  and  a  false  philosophy.  As  the 
froth  in  new-made  wine  swims  upon  the  top  and  hides 
the  true  wine  below,  likewise  there  is  a  froth  of  sophistry 
and    pseudo-philosophy   swimming   at    the    top    of   true 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY  267 

philosophy  ;  it  looks  like  knowledge,  but  it  is  the  out- 
come of  ignorance,  gilded  and  varnished  to  deceive  the 
vulgar.  It  is  like  a  parasite  growing  upon  the  tree  of 
knowledge,  drawing  the  sap  out  of  the  true  tree  and 
converting  it  into  poison.  The  intellectual  working  of 
the  brain  alone  is  not  sufficient  to  give  birth  to  a  physi- 
cian ;  the  true  physician  is  not  he  who  has  merely  heard 
of  the  truth,  but  he  who  feels  the  truth,  who  sees  it 
before  him  as  clearly  as  the  light  of  the  sun,  who  hears 
it  as  he  would  hear  the  noise  of  the  cataract  of  the 
Rhine  or  the  whistling  of  the  storm  upon  the  ocean, 
who  smells  it  and  tastes  it,  it  being  sweet  to  him  as 
honey  or  bitter  as  gall.  Nature  produces  diseases  and 
effects  their  cures,  and  where,  then,  could  be  found  a 
better  teacher  than  Nature  herself  ?  That  alone  which 
we  see  and  feel  and  perceive  constitutes  true  knowledge, 
not  that  of  which  we  are  merely  informed  in  books  and 
which  is  not  confirmed  by  experience." 

"  The  knowledge  of  Nature  as  it  is — not  as  we 
imagine  it  to  be — constitutes  true  philosophy.  He 
who  merely  sees  the  external  appearance  of  things 
is  not  a  philosopher ;  the  true  philosopher  sees  the 
reality,  not  merely  the  outward  appearance.  He  who 
knows  the  sun  and  the  moon  has  a  sun  and  a  moon  in 
him,  and  he  can  tell  how  they  look,  even  if  his  eyes 
are  shut.  Thus  the  true  physician  sees  in  himself  the 
whole  constitution  of  the  Microcosm  of  man,  with  all  its 
parts.  He  sees  the  constitution  of  his  patient  as  if  the 
latter  were  a  clear  crystal,  in  which  not  even  a  single 
hair  could  escape  detection.  He  sees  him  as  he  would 
the  stones  and  pebbles  at  the  bottom  of  a  clear  well. 
This  is  the  philosophy  upon  which  the  true  art  of 
medicine  is  based.  Not  that  your  physical  eyes  are 
able  to  show  you  these  things,  but  it  is  Nature  herself 
who  teaches  it  to  you.  Nature  is  the  universal  mother 
of  all,  and  if  you  are  in  harmony  with  her — if  the  mirror 
of  your  mind  has  not  been  made  blind  by  the  cobwebs 

268  PARACELSUS 

of  speculations,  misconceptions,  and  erroneous  theories — 
she  will  hold  up  before  you  a  mirror  in  which  you  will 
see  the  truth.  But  he  who  is  not  true  himself  will  not 
see  the  truth  as  it  is  taught  by  Nature,  and  it  is  far 
easier  to  study  a  number  of  books  and  to  learn  by  heart 
a  number  of  scientific  theories  than  to  ennoble  one's 
own  chai-acter  to  such  an  extent  as  to  enter  into  perfect 
harmony  with  Nature  and  to  be  able  to  see  the  truth." 

If  "  theosophy "  means  the  clear  perception  and 
understanding  of  truth,  there  can  be  no  true  philo- 
sophy, religion,  or  science  without  theosophy,  the  under- 
standing of  truth  being  the  only  basis  upon  which  all 
true  knowledge  rests. 

No  one  can,  therefore,  be  truly  called  a  theosophist 
who  does  not  possess  the  knowledge  of  his  own  divine 
self,  which  enables  his  person  to  know  all  things  as 
only  God  knows  them.  This  power  is  in  possession  of 
no  mortal  man,  but  belongs  to  the  god  in  man.  Only 
when  man  has  found  the  god  in  him  can  he  partake  of 
divine  wisdom. 

Man  is  a  mixed  being ;  he  is  a  centre  or  focus  in 
which  the  three  kingdoms — i.e.,  the  three  forms  of  mani- 
festation of  the  primordial  Will,  the  world  of  darkness 
or  fire,  the  world  of  spiritual  light,  and  that  of  external 
nature — are  active,  and  in  which  the  powers  of  either  of 
these  three  kingdoms  may  become  conscious  and  mani- 
fest. If  he  is  a  temple  of  the  holy  spirit,  God  will 
reveal  His  wisdom  in  him ;  if  he  is  a  dwelling  of  evil 
will,  the  devil  will  become  personified  in  him ;  if  the 
world  of  mind,  intellect,  emotion,  &c. — i.e.,  the  "  heaven  " 
of  the  external  world — is  reflected  within  his  soul,  and 
his  mind  becomes  absorbed  by  it,  he  will  be  a  child 
of  the  world. 

It  is  most  true  and  certain  that  if  there  were  no 
natural  world,  Nature  could  not  become  manifested  in 
man,  and  it  is  equally  true  that  if  there  were  no  God 
and  no  devil — i.e.,  no  supreme  power  for  good   and  no 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY  269 

power  for  evil  in  the  universe — neither  a  god  nor  a 
devil  could  become  revealed  or  personified  in  a  man. 
Evil  exists  for  the  purpose  of  being  conquered  by  good. 
Only  in  this  way  can  knowledge  be  obtained. 

There  is  no  seed  having  the  power  to  create  itself  the 
sunlight  which  it  requires  to  enable  it  to  grow,  and  in 
the  same  sense  there  is  no  man  having  himself  the 
power  to  create  a  god  by  his  own  will  and  pleasure ;  but 
like  acts  upon  like.  The  natural  (physical  or  astral) 
principles  in  man  are  acted  upon  by  the  corresponding 
powers  in  Nature ;  the  growth  of  plants  is  due  to  the 
power  of  the  sun  being  active  in  them,  and  the  spiritual 
unfoldment  of  the  soul  of  man  is  also  due  to  the  power 
(the  grace)  of  the  God  of  the  universe  descending  upon 
him. 

The  knowledge  of  a  man  in  regard  to  a  truth,  however 
learned  and  intellectual  he  may  be,  can  be  nothing  else 
but  a  dream  to  one  who  does  not  recognise  his  own  real 
existence  in  God.  If  we  believe  or  accept  the  doctrine 
of  another  man  who  perceives  the  truth,  it  does  not 
follow  that  we  possess  that  truth  as  our  own ;  it  simply 
means  that  we  consider  his  opinion  worthy  of  our  belief. 
A  knowledge  of  the  opinions  of  others  may  guide  us  in 
our  researches  as  long  as  we  cannot  find  the  truth  in 
ourselves,  but  such  a  knowledge  is  as  liable  to  mislead  us 
as  to  lead  us  right ;  the  only  key  to  arrive  at  the  recog- 
nition and  understanding  of  the  truth  is  the  perception 
and  understanding  itself.  Opinions  change,  and  creeds 
and  beliefs  change  accordingly,  but  the  knowledge  which 
we  find  in  our  own  experience  stands  as  firm  as  a  rock. 

There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  theoretical  theosophy, 
because  divine  wisdom  is  not  a  matter  of  theory, 
but  the   divine   knowledge   of  self.      To   know   a  thing 

1  God  is  the  supreme  will  of  the  universe,  or,  as  Boehme  calls  it,  the 
will  of  divine  wisdom.  It  is  therefore  a  divine  will,  and  it  could  not 
be  divine  if  it  were  not  free  and  subject  to  nothing.  This  does  not 
imply  that  God  is  something  external  to  Nature,  but  that  He  is  supe- 
rior to  it. 

270  PARACELSUS 

we  must  see  it  and  feel  it  and  be  identified  with  it 
ourselves.  Things  that  transcend  the  physical  power 
of  sight  can  only  be  known  if  they  are  experienced 
and  seen  by  the  soul.  Love  or  hate,  reason  and  con- 
science., are  unknown  things  to  those  who  do  not 
realise  their  existence.  The  attributes  of  the  spirit 
are  not  only  beyond  the  power  of  sensual  perception, 
but  they  are  beyond  the  power  of  intellectual  com- 
prehension ;  they  can  only  be  known  to  the  spirit 
itself,  and  they  are  called  occult  because  they  cannot 
be  understood  without  the  possession  of  the  light  of 
the  spirit.  This  spiritual  light  is  an  attribute  of  the 
spirit  and  beyond  the  reach  of  the  merely  intellectual 
but  unspiritual  mind. 

"  Man  has  two  kinds  of  reason,  augelic  and  animal 
reason.  The  former  is  eternal  and  of  God,  and  remains 
with  God  ;  the  latter  is  also,  but  indirectly,  originating 
from  God,  and  not  eternal ;  for  the  body  dies  and  its 
animal  reason  with  it.  No  animal  product  can  be  vic- 
torious over  death.  Death  kills  that  which  is  animal, 
but  not  that  which  is  eternal.  A  man  who  is  not 
a  man  as  far  as  wisdom  in  him  is  concerned,  is  not  a 
man  but  an  animal  in  human  shape "  (Be  Fundamento 
Scvpientice). 

To  be  able  to  understand  good,  it  is  necessary  that 
man  should  experience  evil,  for  without  the  know- 
ledge of  darkness  the  true  nature  of  light  could  not 
be  known;  but  no  amount  of  evil  experience  will 
enable  a  man  to  know  that  which  is  good  and  divine 
if  he  is  not  in  possession  of  the  true  understanding, 
which  endows  him  with  the  power  to  profit  by  his 
experience,  and  which  is  not  of  his  own  making,  but 
given  to  him  as  a  gift  by  wisdom  itself. 

"  The  wise  rules  the  stars  in  him,  but  animal  man 
is  ruled  by  his  stars,  which  force  him  to  do  as  he  is 
directed  by  his  animal  nature.  He  who  has  escaped 
the  gallows  once  will  repeat  his  crimes ;   for  he  thinks 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY  271 

that,  having  escaped  his  punishment  once,  he  will  escape 
it  again.  Such  a  person  is  blown  about  like  a  reed, 
and  cannot  resist  the  forces  which  are  acting  upon  him, 
and  the  reason  of  this  is,  that  he  has  no  real  self-know- 
ledge, and  does  not  know  that  there  is  in  him  a  power 
superior  to  that  of  the  stars  (the  lower  mind).  Wisdom 
in  man  is  nobody's  servant  and  has  not  lost  its  own 
freedom,  and  through  wisdom  man  attains  power  over 
the  stars  " 1  (De  Fundamento  Sapientice). 

Knowledge 

Intellectual  reasoning  may  arrive  at  the  door  of  the 
spiritual  temple,  but  man  cannot  enter  without  perceiv- 
ing that  the  temple  exists  and  that  he  has  the  power 
to  enter.  This  knowledge  is  called  faith ;  but  faith 
does  not  come  to  those  who  do  not  desire  it,  and  a 
desire  for  divine  wisdom  is  not  created  by  man.  Man's 
desires  depend  on  the  presence  of  an  exciting  cause, 
and  that  which  attracts  him  strongest  is  the  thing  for 
which  he  has  the  greatest  desire.  It  is  not  within  the 
power  of  the  animal  or  intellectual  nature  of  man  to 
desire  or  to  love  that  which  he  does  not  know.  He 
may  have  a  curiosity  to  see  the  unknown  God,  but  he 
can  truly  love  only  that  which  he  feels,  and  of  which 
he  knows  that  it  exists.  He  must  realise  the  presence 
of  the  highest  in  his  own  heart  before  he  can  know 
it.  The  spiritual  temple  is  locked  with  many  keys, 
and  those  who  are  vain  enough  to  believe  that  they  can 
invade  it  by  their  own  power,  and  without  being  shown 
the  way  by  the  light  of  wisdom,  will  storm  against  it 
in  vain.  Wisdom  is  not  created  by  man  ;  it  must 
come   to   him,  and   cannot   be   purchased   for   money  nor 

1  Everybody  knows  that  the  thinking  faculty  is  not  our  own  self,  bnt 
that  there  is  something  in  us  which  has  the  power  to  think  or  to  let  think- 
ing alone.  This  something  is  higher  than  the  intellectual  realm,  and 
therefore  higher  than  all  of  its  "stars." 

272  PARACELSUS 

coaxed  with  promises,  but  it  comes  to  those  whose 
minds  are  pure  and  whose  hearts  are  open  to  receive 
it.  It  is  said  that  those  who  wish  to  become  wise 
must  be  like  children,  but  there  are  few  amongst  the 
learned  who  would  be  willing  to  undertake  such  a  feat. 
There  are  few  who  would  be  able  to  realise  the  fact, 
even  if  they  were  willing  to  do  so,  that  they  them- 
selves are  without  life,  without  knowledge,  and  without 
power,  and  that  all  life  and  consciousness,  knowledge 
and  power,  come  from  the  universal  fountain  of  all, 
of  which  they  are  merely  imperfect  instruments  for 
its  manifestation.  There  are  few  amongst  the  learned 
capable  of  giving  up  their  pet  theories,  their  accepted 
opinions,  their  dogmatic  reasoning  and  speculations  about 
possibilities  and  probabilities,  and  sinking  their  own  per- 
sonal will  entirely  into  the  wisdom  of  God.  Humanity 
resembles  a  field  of  wheat,  in  which  each  individual 
represents  a  plant,  attempting  to  grow  higher  than  the 
others  and  to  bear  more  abundant  fruit ;  but  there 
are  few  who  desire  to  be  nothing  themselves,  so  that 
God  may  take  full  possession  of  them  and  be  all  in  and 
through  them. 

"  The  great  majority  of  the  '  investigators  of  theo- 
sophy '  do  not  love  wisdom,  they  only  desire  it ;  they 
desire  to  possess  it  for  the  purpose  of  adorning  them- 
selves with  it ;  but  wisdom  is  no  man's  servant — it 
comes  only  to  those  who,  abandoning  self,  sacrifice  them- 
selves in  the  spirit  of  wisdom.  Those  who  seek  the 
truth  for  their  own  benefit  and  gratification  will  never 
find  it,  but  the  truth  finds  those  in  whom  the  delirium 
of  'self  disappears,  and  it  becomes  manifested  in  them." 

The  object  of  existence  is  to  become  perfectly  happy, 
and  the  shortest  way  to  become  so  is  to  be  perfect  and 
happy  now,  and  not  wait  for  a  possibility  to  become  so 
in  a  future  state  of  existence.  All  may  be  happy,  but 
only  the  highest  happiness  is  enduring,  and  permanent 
happiness  can  be  obtained  only  by  attaining  permanent 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY  273 

good.  The  highest  a  man  can  feel  and  think  is  his 
highest  ideal,  and  the  higher  we  rise  in  the  scale  of 
existence  and  the  more  our  knowledge  expands,  the 
higher  will  be  our  ideal.  As  long  as  we  cling  to  our 
highest  ideal  we  will  be  happy,  in  spite  of  the  sufferings 
and  vicissitudes  of  life.  The  highest  ideal  confers  the 
highest  and  most  enduring  happiness,  and  the  whole  of 
Theosophy  consists  in  the  recognition  and  realisation 
of  the  highest  ideal  within  one's  self.  This  is  to  be 
accomplished  only  by  the  overcoming  of  the  illusion  of 
separate  existence  and  the  awakening  of  the  soul  to  the 
essential  unity  of  all  things.  It  is  a  state  of  divine 
wisdom  which  can  be  attained  in  no  other  way  than  by 
the  light  of  that  wisdom  becoming  manifested  in  man.1 

Spiritual  Eegeneration 

As  long  as  any  one  fancies  his  highest  ideal  to  exist 
only  outside  of  him,  somewhere  above  the  clouds  or  in  the 
history  of  the  past,  he  will  go  outside  of  himself  to  seek 

1  God  is  the  greatest  power  in  the  universe,  because  He  is  the  source 
and  sum  of  all  powers  in  their  highest  mode  of  manifestation.  God  is 
therefore  absolute  consciousness,  absolute  love,  and  absolute  wisdom. 
If  we  wish  to  accomplish  anything  great,  the  first  requirement  is  the 
presence  of  God,  because  He  is  man's  understanding  and  power,  and 
resides  in  man.  But  God  cannot  be  approached  by  an  intellect  that  is 
without  love.  God  is  love,  and  is  only  attracted  by  love.  We  cannot 
know  the  principle  of  love  unless  we  love  it  with  our  heart,  and  the 
more  we  desire  it,  the  more  will  we  be  able  to  comprehend  with  the 
heart  what  this  principle  is.  The  love  of  God  is  therefore  a  power 
transcending  the  lower  nature  of  man  ;  it  cannot  develop  itself  out  of 
the  animal  elements  of  man,  but  it  is  a  gift  from  the  universal  fountain 
of  love,  in  the  same  sense  as  sunshine  cannot  grow  out  of  the  earth,  but 
comes  from  above.  Gods  lives  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  if  we  desire  to 
love  Him,  we  must  love  all  that  is  good  in  humanity.  The  love  of 
humanity  is  the  beginning  of  the  knowledge  of  God.  The  intellect  is 
the  greatest  possession  of  mortal  man,  and  an  intellect  that  rises  to  the 
source  of  all  knowledge  by  the  power  of  love  may  know  God  and  all 
the  mysteries  of  Nature,  and  become  godlike  itself ;  but  an  intellect 
without  love  leads  into  error,  grovels  in  darkness,  and  goes  to  perdition. 
An  intellect  combined  with  love  for  the  supreme  good  leads  to  wisdom  ; 
an  intellect  without  love  leads  to  the  powers  of  evil. 

274  PARACELSUS 

for  it  in  dreamland  or  in  the  pages  or  history.  This  is 
not  theosophy,  but  merely  dreaming ;  for  not  that  wisdom 
which  exists  outside  of  man  but  that  which  has  taken 
root  in  him  renders  him  wise.  A  child  is  not  born  from 
outside  of  its  mother's  womb,  but  from  within,  and  the 
spiritual  regeneration  of  the  soul  must  be  accomplished  by 
that  power  which  is  existing  within  the  soul  itself. 

The  spiritual  regeneration  of  man  requires  the  opening 
of  his  inner  senses,  and  this,  again,  involves  the  develop- 
ment of  the  internal  organs  of  the  spiritual  body,  while 
the  latter  is  intimately  connected  with  the  physical  form. 
Thus  this  regeneration  is  not  an  entirely  spiritual  pro- 
cess, but  productive  also  of  great  changes  in  the  physical 
body.  He  who  rejects,  neglects,  or  despises  his  physical 
body,  as  long  as  he  has  not  outgrown  the  necessity  of 
having  such  a  corporeal  form,  may  be  compared  to  the 
yolk  in  an  egg  wanting  to  be  free  from  the  white  of  the 
egg  and  the  shell,  without  having  grown  into  a  bird. 

"  Philosophy "  means  love  of  wisdom,  but  not  those 
who  love  wisdom  for  their  own  aggrandisement  are  its 
true  lovers.  Such  people  love  only  themselves,  and 
desire  wisdom  as  a  means  for  parading  with  it ;  they 
desire  to  know  the  secrets  of  Nature  and  the  mysteries 
of  God,  for  the  gratification  of  their  scientific  curiosity. 
"  Theosophy  "  means  the  wisdom  of  God  ;  in  other  words, 
the  self-knowledge  of  God  in  man.  It  is  not  "  man," 
but  the  god  in  man  who  knows  his  own  divine  self,  and 
it  therefore  does  not  rest  with  the  will  and  pleasure  of 
man  to  become  a  theosophist,  but  this  depends  on  the 
awakening  of  the  divine  spirit  in  him.  Philosophy 
argues  and  deducts,  speculates,  makes  additions  and 
multiplications,  and  by  logical  reasonings  seeks  to  prove 
that  for  such  or  such  reasons  this  or  that  cannot  be 
otherwise  than  so  or  so ;  but  divine  wisdom  requires  no 
arguments,  no  logic  or  reasoning,  because  it  is  already 
the  self-knowledge  of  the  One  from  whom  all  other 
things  are  deriving  their  origin.      It  is  the  highest  and 

PHILOSOPHY  AND   THEOSOPHY  275 

most  exalted  kind  of  rationality,  for  there  can  be  nothing 
more  rational  than  to  know  the  divine  fountain  of  All, 
by  entering  into  its  own  understanding. 

"  All  numbers  are  multiples  of  one,  all  sciences  con- 
verge to  a  common  point,  all  wisdom  comes  out  of  one 
centre,  and  the  number  of  wisdom  is  one.  The  light  of 
wisdom  radiates  into  the  world,  and  manifests  itself  in 
various  ways  according  to  the  substance  in  which  it 
manifests  itself.  Therefore  man  can  exhibit  reason  in 
a  threefold  manner :  as  instinct,  as  animal  reason,  and 
spiritual  intelligence.  The  knowledge  which  our  soul 
derives  from  the  physical  and  animal  elements  is  tem- 
poral ;  that  which  it  derives  from  the  spirit  is  eternal. 
God  is  the  Father  of  wisdom,  and  all  wisdom  is  derived 
from  Him.  We  mav  grow  into  knowledge,  but  we 
cannot  grow  or  manufacture  knowledge  ourselves,  be- 
cause in  ourselves  is  nothing  but  what  has  been  deposited 
there  by  God.  Those  who  believe  that  they  can  learn 
anything  real  and  true  without  the  assistance  of  God, 
who  is  Himself  the  truth  and  the  reality,  will  fall  into 
idolatry,  superstition,  and  error.  But  those  who  love 
the  luminous  centre  will  be  attracted  to  it,  and  their 
knowledge  comes  from  God.  God  is  the  Father  of 
wisdom,  and  man  is  the  son.  If  we  wish  for  know- 
ledge we  must  apply  for  it  to  the  Father  and  not  to 
the  son.  And  if  the  son  desires  to  teach  wisdom,  he 
must  teach  that  wisdom  which  he  derived  from  the 
Father.  The  knowledge  which  our  clergymen  possess 
is  not  obtained  by  them  from  the  Father,  but  they  learn 
it  from  each  other.  They  are  not  certain  of  the  truth 
of  what  they  teach,  and  therefore  they  use  argumen- 
tation, circumvention,  and  prevarication ;  they  fall  into 
error  and  vanity,  and  mistake  their  own  opinions  for 
the  wisdom  of  God.  Hypocrisy  is  not  holiness ;  conceit 
is  not  power;  slyness  is  not  wisdom.  The  art  of  de- 
ceiving and  disputing,  sophisticating,  perverting,  and 
misrepresenting  truths,  may  be  learned  in  schools ;   but 

276  PARACELSUS 

the  power  to  recognise  and  to  follow  the  truth  cannot 
be  conferred  by  academical  degrees ;  it  comes  only  from 
God.  He  who  desires  to  know  the  truth  must  be  able 
to  see  it,  and  not  be  satisfied  with  descriptions  of  it 
received  from  others,  but  be  true  himself.  The  highest 
power  of  the  intellect,  if  it  is  not  illumined  by  love, 
is  only  a  high  grade  of  animal  intellect,  and  will  perish 
in  time  ;  but  the  intellect  animated  by  the  love  of  the 
Supreme  is  the  intellect  of  the  angels,  and  will  live  in 
eternity  "  (Be  Fundamento  Sapientice). 

"  All  things  are  vehicles  of  virtues,  everything  in 
Nature  is  a  house  wherein  dwell  certain  powers  and 
virtues  such  as  God  has  infused  throughout  Nature  and 
which  inhabit  all  things  in  the  same  sense  as  the  soul 
is  in  man ;  but  the  soul  is  a  creature  originating  of  God 
and  returns  again  to  God.  Natural  (terrestrial)  man  is 
a  son  of  Nature,  and  ought  to  know  Nature,  his  mother ; 
but  the  soul,  being  a  son  of  God,  ought  to  know  the 
Father,  the  Creator  of  all "  (  Vera  Influentia  Rerum). 

Faith 

In  regard  to  the  true  and  the  false  faith  Paracelsus 
says  : — "  It  is  not  a  faith  in  the  existence  of  a  historical 
Jesus  Christ  that  has  the  power  to  save  mankind  from 
evil,  but  a  faith  in  the  Supreme  Power  (God),  through 
which  the  man  Jesus  was  enabled  to  act,  and  through 
which  we  also  may  act  when  it  becomes  manifested  in 
us.  The  former  '  faith '  is  merely  a  belief  and  a  result 
of  education ;  the  latter  is  a  power  belonging  to  the 
higher  constitution  of  man.  Christ  does  not  say  that 
if  we  believe  in  His  personal  power  to  accomplish 
wonderful  things  we  will  be  enabled  to  throw  moun- 
tains into  the  ocean ;  but  He  spoke  of  our  own  faith, 
meaning  the  divine  power  of  Gcd  in  man,  that  will  act 
through  ourselves  as  much  as  it  acted  through  Christ, 
if  we  become  like   Him.      This  power  comes  from  God 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY  277 

and  returns  to  Him  ;  and  if  one  man  cures  another  in 
the  name  of  Christ,  he  cures  him  by  the  power  of  God, 
and  by  his  own  faith.  That  power  becomes  active  in 
and  through  him  by  his  faith,  and  not  out  of  God's  grati- 
tude for  his  professed  belief,  or  the  belief  of  the  patient 
that  Christ  once  existed  upon  the  earth." 

"  The  power  of  the  true  faith  extends  as  far  as  the 
power  of  God  in  the  universe.  Man  can  accomplish 
nothing  by  his  own  power,  but  everything  can  be 
accomplished  through  man  by  the  power  of  faith.  If 
we  did  not  have  faith  in  our  ability  to  walk,  we  would 
not  be  able  to  walk.  If  we  accomplish  anything  what- 
ever, faith  accomplishes  it  in  and  through  us." 

"  Faith  does  not  come  from  man,  and  no  man  can 
create  faith  or  make  himself  faithful  without  faith ; 
but  faith  is  a  power  coming  from  God.  Its  germ  is 
laid  within  man,  and  may  be  cultivated  or  neglected  by 
him ;  it  can  be  used  by  him  for  good  or  for  evil,  but 
it  only  acts  effectively  when  it  is  strong  and  pure — not 
weakened  by  doubt,  and  not  dispersed  by  secondary  con- 
siderations. He  who  wants  to  employ  it  must  have  only 
one  object  in  view.  Diseases  are  caused  and  cured  by 
faith,  and  if  men  knew  the  power  of  faith  they  would 
have  more  faith  and  less  superstition.  We  have  no 
right  to  call  any  disease  incurable ;  we  have  only  the 
right  to  say  that  we  cannot  cure  it.  A  physician  who 
trusts  only  in  his  own  science  will  accomplish  little,  but 
he  who  has  faith  in  the  power  of  God  acting  through 
him,  and  who  employs  that  power  intelligently,  will 
accomplish  much." 

"  If  any  one  thinks  that  he  can  cure  a  disease,  or 
accomplish  anything  else,  without  the  power  derived 
from  God,  he  believes  in  a  superstition ;  but  if  he 
believes  that  he  can  perform  such  a  thing  because  he 
is  conscious  of  having  obtained  the  power  to  do  so,  he 
will  then  be  able  to  accomplish  it  by  the  power  of  the 
true  faith.      Such  a  faith  is  knowledge  and  power.     True 

278  PARACELSUS 

faith  is  spiritual  consciousness,  but  a  belief  based  upon 
mere  opinions  and  creeds  is  the  product  of  ignorance, 
and  a  superstition."  x 

Reincaknation 

"  The  body  which  we  receive  from  our  parents,  and 
which  is  built  up  from  the  nutriments  it  draws  directly 
and  indirectly  from  the  earth,  has  no  spiritual  powers, 
for  wisdom  and  virtue,  faith,  hope,  and  charity,  do  not 
grow  from  the  earth.  These  powers  are  not  the  pro- 
ducts of  man's  physical  organisation,  but  the  attributes 
of  another  invisible  and  glorified  body,  whose  germs  are 
laid  within  man.2  The  physical  body  changes  and  dies, 
the  glorified  body  is  eternal.  This  eternal  man  is  the 
real  man,  and  is  not  generated  by  his  earthly  parents. 
He  does  not  draw  nutriment  from  the  earth,  but  from 
the  eternal  invisible  source  from  which  he  originated. 
Nevertheless  the  two  bodies  are  one,  and  man  may  be 
compared  to  a  tree,  drawing  his  nutriment  from  the 
earth,  and  from  the  surrounding  air.  The  roots  extend 
into  the  earth,  and  seek  their  nutriment  in  the  dark,  but 

1  This  is  the  curse  of  all  dabblers  in  the  divine  mysteries,  that  when 
they  begin  to  believe  that  there  is  something  superior  to  the  merely  animal 
man,  this  belief  opens  the  door  for  superstition  and  idolatry  ;  for,  having 
no  knowledge  of  the  power  of  the  divine  will  within  their  own  self,  they 
are  devoid  of  the  true  faith,  which  is  divine  self-confidence.  They  there- 
fore put  their  trust,  not  in  the  one  true  God,  but  in  the  gods  which  they 
have  created  within  their  own  imagination.  They  seek  in  outward  things 
for  that  which  they  cannot  find  within  their  own  empty  shells.  They 
neglect  their  duties  as  men  and  revel  in  dreams  wherein  there  is  nothing 
real.  Some  put  their  faith  in  doctors  and  priests,  others  in  herbs  and  roots, 
still  others  in  magic  spells  and  incantations ;  but  the  wise  know  that  the 
first  step  on  the  road  to  spiritual  unfoldment  is  the  fulfilment  of  one's 
duties  as  a  man  ;  for  no  god  can  grow  out  of  a  man  unless  the  man  has 
become  truly  that  which  he  ought  to  be.  In  this  fulfilment  of  one's  duty 
and  becoming  true  to  one's  nature  as  man  rests  the  germ  of  true  happi- 
ness, and  from  this  germ  is  evolved  the  regenerated  man  in  whom  heavt-n 
exists  and  who  lives  through  eternity. 

2  Where  should  that  germ  come  from,  if  it  had  not  existed  before,  and 
how  did  it  attain  its  divine  qualities '! 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY  279 

the  leaves  receive  their  nutriment  from  the  air.  The 
temporal  body  is  the  house  of  the  eternal,  and  we  should 
therefore  take  care  of  it,  because  he  who  destroys  the 
temporal  body  destroys  the  house  of  the  eternal,  and 
although  the  eternal  man  is  invisible,  he  exists  never- 
theless, and  will  become  visible  in  time,  just  as  a  child 
in  its  mother's  womb  is  invisible  before  it  is  born,  but 
after  its  birth  it  may  be  seen  by  all  but  those  who  are 
blind ;  and  as  everything  returns  after  a  while  to  the 
source  from  whence  it  came,  so  the  body  returns  to 
the  earth  and  the  spirit  to  heaven  or  hell.  Some 
children  are  born  from  heaven,  and  others  are  born 
from  hell,  because  each  human  being  has  his  inherent 
tendencies,  and  these  tendencies  belong  to  his  spirit, 
and  indicate  the  state  in  which  he  existed  before  he 
was  born.  Witches  and  sorcerers  are  not  made  at  once ; 
they  are  born  with  powers  for  evil.1  The  body  is  only 
an  instrument ;  if  you  seek  for  man  in  his  dead  body, 
you  are  seeking  for  him  in  vain." 

"  The  Philosopher's  Stone  " 

But  this  physical  body,  which  is  believed  to  be  of  so 
little  importance  by  those  who  love  to  dream  about  the 
mysteries  of  the  spirit,  is  the  most  secret  and  valuable 
thiug.  It  is  the  true  "  stone  which  the  builders  rejected," 
but  which  must  become  the  corner-stone  of  the  temple. 
It  is  the  "  stone  "  which  is  considered  worthless  by  those 
who  seek  for  a  God  above  the  clouds  and  reject  Him 
when  He  enters  their  house.  This  physical  body  is  not 
merely  an  instrument  for  divine  power,  but  it  is  also 
the  soil  from  which  that  which  is  immortal  in  man 
receives   its   strength.       A   seed    requires   the    power   of 

1  They  are  born  with  the  tendencies  which  they  acquired  in  forraei 
lives  upon  the  earth,  or  upon  some  other  planet.  The  personified  devils 
we  meet  in  the  world  are  the  "  materialised "  forms  of  devilish  powers 
existing  upon  the  astral  plane. 

280  PARACELSUS 

the  sunshine  to  enable  it  to  take  from  the  earth  the 
elements  necessary  for  its  growth,  and  in  the  same  sense 
the  spiritual  body  of  man,  receiving  its  nutriment  from 
the  spirit,  could  not  unfold  and  develop  if  it  were 
not  for  the  presence  of  the  physical  body  of  man, 
with  its  elementary  and  elemental  forces ;  for  the 
physical  body  is  comparable  to  the  wood  from  which 
is  produced  the  fire  which  gives  light ;  there  would  be 
no  light  if  there  were  nothing  to  burn.  "The  more 
there  is  wood  to  burn,  the  greater  will  be  the  com- 
bustion, and  thus  it  is  wHh  the  Lapis  Philosophorum 
or  Balsamo  perpetuo  in  corpore  humano." 1  "  But  it  is 
not  proper  to  say  a  great  deal  about  the  Lapis  Philoso- 
phorum or  to  boast  about  its  possession ;  the  ancients 
have  sufficiently  indicated  the  way  for  its  preparation 
to  those  who  are  not  devoid  of  the  true  understanding ; 
but  they  have  spoken  in  parables,  so  that  unworthy 
persons  may  not  know  the  secret  and  misuse  it.  Look 
at  a  man ;  he  is  not  a  perfect  being,  but  only  a  half  a 
man  as  long  as  he  has  not  been  made  into  one  with  the 
woman.2  After  having  become  one  with  the  woman 
(in  him),  then  will  he  be  not  a  half,  but  a  whole  "  (De 
Lap  id.  Philosophy. 

The  Chuech 

The  rock  upon  which  the  true  (spiritual)  church  is 
founded  is  not  to  be  found  in  Rome  nor  in  Protestantism, 
nor  in  the  realm  of  fancy,  but  in  the  power  of  faith. 
"  It  is  the  Word  of  Wisdom  from  which  you  should 
learn,  and  in  that  Word  you  will  find  neither  statuary 
nor  paintings,  but  only  the  universal  spirit.  If  faith 
is  preached  to  you,  it  is  done  for  the  purpose  of  im- 
planting it  into  your  heart,  where  it  may  take  root  and 

1  The  balsam  of  life  (a  man  without  sexual  power  is  unfit  for  initiation). 

2  Man  and  woman  are  both  one  in  the  Lord.     The  "  man  "  is  the  spirit 
and  "  woman  "  the  soul. 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY  281 

grow  and  become  manifest  to  you  ;  but  if  your  faith  is 
not  in  your  heart,  but  in  forms  and  ceremonies,  and  if 
you  cling  to  these  forms  you  may  know  that  your  heart 
is  evil ;  because,  although  the  forms  and  the  ceremonies 
cause  you  to  weep  and  to  sigh,  this  sighing  and  weeping 
is  worthless,  because  your  sentiment  comes  from  those 
images,  and  to  those  images  will  it  return.  All  things 
return  finally  to  the  place  from  whence  they  took  their 
origin,  and  as  these  things  are  perishable,  the  sentiments 
which  they  excite  will  perish  with  them.  God  only  de- 
sires the  heart  and  not  the  ceremonies.  If  you  do  not 
require  the  ceremonies,  they  will  be  useless  in  matters 
of  faith  as  well  as  in  the  art  of  magic." 

It  is  foolish  to  refuse  to  be  guided  by  the  church  as 
long  as  one  is  not  able  to  find  one's  own  way ;  but  to  be 
thus  guided  is  not  the  object  of  existence ;  we  should 
strive  to  learn  how  to  govern  ourselves,  instead  of 
being  continually  dependent  upon  the  help  of  another. 

"  I  do  not  say  that  images  should  not  be  made,  and 
that  the  suffering  of  Christ  should  not  be  represented  in 
pictures.  Such  things  are  good  to  move  the  mind  of 
man  to  the  practice  of  piety,  virtue,  and  veneration,  and 
to  those  who  are  unable  to  read  they  are  very  useful  and 
better  than  many  a  sermon.  I  am  not  speaking  against 
the  use  of  a  thing,  but  against  its  misuses.  Such  things 
are  useful  if  we  know  their  true  meaning  and  under- 
stand their  effects  "  (De  Imaginibus,  iii.). 1 

"  The  saints  are  in  heaven,  and  not  in  the  wood  out 
of  which  an  image  is  carved.  Each  man  is  himself 
nearest  to  his  own  god.  I  contradict  your  old  fathers 
because  they  wrote  for  the  body  and  not  for  the  soul ; 
they  wrote  poetry,  but  not  theosophy ;  they  spoke  flat- 
teries instead  of  telling  the  truth.  They  were  teachers 
of  fashions  and  usages,  not  teachers  of  eternal  life.      The 

1  Thus  it  would  also  be  better  for  our  modern  would-be  theosophists  if, 
instead  of  running  after  external  "  Mahatmas"  and  seeking  salvation  from 
them,  each  one  were  to  strive  after  knowing  the  real  Mahatma  existing 
Within  his  own  soul. 

282  PARACELSUS 

mere  imitation  of  the  personal  usages  of  the  saints  leads 
to  nothing  but  damnation.  The  wearing  of  a  black 
coat,  or  the  possession  of  a  piece  of  paper  signed  by- 
some  human  authority,  does  not  make  a  man  a  divine. 
Those  are  divine  who  act  wisely,  because  wisdom  is  God. 
A  clergyman  should  be  a  spiritual  guide  for  others ;  but 
how  can  a  man  be  a  spiritual  guide  if  he  merely  talks 
about  spiritual  things  and  knows  himself  nothing  about 
them  ?  It  may  be  said  that  the  personal  behaviour  of  a 
clergyman  does  not  affect  the  truth  of  what  he  teaches ; 
but  a  clergyman  who  does  not  act  rightly  does  not  pos- 
sess the  truth,  and  therefore  cannot  teach  it.  He  can 
only,  parrot-like,  repeat  words  and  sentences,  and  their 
meaning  will  be  incomprehensible  to  his  hearers,  because 
he  knows  nothing  about  that  meaning  himself." 

"Belief  in  opinions  is  no  faith.  He  who  foolishly 
believes  is  foolish.  A  fool  who  believes  unreasonable 
things  is  dead  in  faith,  because  he  has  no  real  know- 
ledge, and  without  knowledge  there  can  be  no  faith. 
He  who  wants  to  obtain  true  faith  must  know,  because 
faith  grows  out  of  spiritual  knowledge.  The  faith  that 
comes  from  that  knowledge  is  rooted  in  the  heart.  He 
who  ignorantly  believes  has  no  knowledge,  and  possesses 
no  faith  and  no  power.1  God  does  not  desire  that  we 
should  remain  in  darkness  and  ignorance  ;  on  the  con- 
trary, our  knowledge  should  be  of  God.  We  should  be 
the  recipients  of  divine  wisdom.  God  does  not  rejoice 
to  see  fools,  blockheads,  and  simpletons,  who  are  ready 
to  believe  anything,  no  matter  how  absurd  it  may  be ; 
neither  does  He  desire  that  only  one  wise  and  learned 
man  should  be  in  each  country,  and  that  the  other  people 
should  follow  him  blindly,  as  the  sheep  follow  a  ram ; 
but  we  should  all  have  our  knowledge  in  God,  and  take 
it  out  of  the  universal  fountain  of  wisdom.      "We  should 

i  There  is  a  false  faith  that  comes  from  ignorance  (Tamas),  and  a  false 
faith  that  originates  from  selfish  desire  (Rajas)  ;  but  the  true  faith  springs 
from  wisdom  (Sattwa),  and  is  itself  the  way  for  its  attainment. 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY  283 

know  who  and  what  God  is,  but  we  can  learn  to  know 
God  only  by  becoming  wise,  and  we  become  wise  when 
the  wisdom  of  God  becomes  manifested  in  us.  The  works 
of  God  will  become  manifest  to  us  through  wisdom, 
and  God  will  be  most  pleased  if  we  become  His  image. 
To  become  like  God  we  must  become  attracted  to  God, 
who  is  the  universal  fountain  of  all,  and  the  power  that 
attracts  us  is  divine  love.  The  love  of  God  will  be 
kindled  in  our  hearts  by  an  ardent  love  for  humanity, 
and  a  love  for  humanity  will  be  caused  by  a  love  of  God. 
Thus  the  God  of  the  Macrocosm  and  the  God  of  the 
Microcosm  act  upon  each  other,  and  both  are  one,  for 
there  is  only  one  God,  and  one  law,  and  one  Nature, 
through  which  wisdom  becomes  manifest "  (Be  Funda- 
mento  Sapientice). 

"There  is  an  earthly  sun,  which  is  the  cause  of  all 
heat,  and  all  who  are  able  to  see  may  see  the  sun,  and 
those  who  are  blind  and  cannot  see  him  may  feel  his 
heat.  There  is  an  eternal  sun,  which  is  the  source 
of  all  wisdom,  and  those  whose  spiritual  senses  have 
awakened  to  life  will  see  that  sun,  and  be  conscious  of  his 
existence  ;  but  those  who  have  not  attained  full  spiritual 
consciousness  may  nevertheless  perceive  his  power  by  an 
inner  faculty,  which  is  called  Intuition.  Animal  reason 
is  active  in  the  animal  soul,  and  angelic  wisdom  in  the 
spiritual  soul.  The  former  sees  by  the  light  of  Nature, 
which  is  produced  by  a  reflection  of  the  rays  of  the  divine 
light  acting  in  Nature ;  but  the  light  of  the  spirit  is  not 
a  product  of  Nature,  but  the  supreme  cause  of  all  which 
in  Nature  becomes  manifest.  Nature  does  not  produce 
a  sage ;  she  merely  furnishes  a  natural  vehicle  for  a  sage. 
Nature  is  not  perfect,  but  produces  cripples  and  diseases, 
abnormalities  and  monstrosities,  the  blind  and  the  lame ; 
but  that  which  comes  from  God  is  perfect.  It  is  a  germ 
which  is  planted  in  the  soul  of  man,  and  man  is  the 
gardener  and  cultivator,  whose  business  it  is  to  surround 
it  with   the  elements  necessary  for  its  growth,   so  that 

284  PARACELSUS 

when  the  earthly  tabernacle  is  broken,  the  spirit,  attracted 
by  His  love,  His  eternal  home,  may  return  to  it,  having 
grown  in  knowledge,  being  clothed  in  purity  and  illu- 
mined by  divine  wisdom." 

"  The  wisdom  of  God  is  not  made  up  of  pieces,  but  is 
only  one.  While  we  are  on  this  earth  we  ought  to  keep 
our  mirror  in  God,  so  as  to  be  in  every  respect  as  a  child 
is  like  its  father.  Thus  we  ought  to  be  made  out  of  the 
whole  cloth,  and  not  be  patched  up.  The  wise  man  in 
God  has  his  wisdom  in  God,  and  he  will  teach  in  a  way 
that  nobody  can  contradict  or  resist  him,  and  his  teaching 
will  harm  no  one,  but  bring  joy  and  gladness  and  glory 
to  all  who  will  receive  it "  (De  Fundamento  Sapientice). 

Spirit  passes  into  the  body,  and  out  of  it,  like  a  breath 
of  air  passing  through  the  strings  of  an  .ZEolian  harp. 
If  we  succeed  in  binding  it  there,  we  will  create  a  source 
of  undying  harmony  and  create  an  immortal  being.  But 
to  bind  spirit  we  must  be  able  to  bind  thought.  Man 
is  a  materialised  thought ;  he  is  what  he  wills.  To 
change  his  nature  from  the  mortal  to  the  immortal  state 
he  must  change  his  material  mode  of  thinking,  and  even 
rise  above  the  sphere  of  thought.  He  must  cease  to 
hold  fast  in  his  thoughts  to  that  which  is  illusory  and 
perishing,  and  hold  on  to  that  which  is  eternal.  The 
visible  universe  is  a  thought  of  the  eternal  mind  thrown 
into  objectivity  by  its  will,  and  crystallised  into  matter 
by  its  power.  Look  at  the  everlasting  stars  ;  look  at  the 
indestructible  mountain-peaks.  They  are  the  thoughts 
of  the  universal  mind,  and  they  will  remain  as  long  as 
the  thoughts  of  that  mind  do  not  change.  If  we  could 
hold  on  to  a  thought  we  would  be  able  to  create.  But 
who  but  the  enlightened,  who  live  above  the  region  of 
mentality  in  the  kingdom  of  spirit,  can  hold  on  to  a 
thought  ?  Are  not  the  illusions  of  the  senses  continually 
destroying  that  which  we  attempt  to  create  ?  Men  do 
not  think  what  they  choose,  but  that  which  comes  into 
their  mind.      If  they  could  control  the  action  of  their 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOSOPHY  285 

mind  by  rising  above  it,  they  would  be  able  to  control 
their  own  nature  and  the  nature  by  which  their  forms 
are  surrounded. 

But  mortal  man  has  no  power  to  control  the  powers 
of  Nature  in  him,  unless  that  power  becomes  manifested 
in  him.  "  We  mortals  are  not  from  heaven,  but  from 
the  earth  ;  we  did  not  drop  down  from  heaven,  but  grew 
from  the  earth.  Terrestrial  powers  are  moving  in  us ; 
but  if  we  are  reborn  in  the  spirit,  then  will  we  move  in 
celestial  power.  What  is  this  aid,  these  powers  of  which 
I  am  writing,  but  celestial  powers  ?  Who  gives  and 
distributes  them  but  God  alone  ? "  (Morb.  Invisib.,  v.). 
He  who  trusts  in  his  own  power  will  fail,  and  become  a 
victim  of  his  own  vanity ;  he  who  expects  salvation  from 
others  will  be  disappointed.  There  is  no  god,  no  saint, 
and  no  power  in  which  we  can  put  any  confidence,  faith, 
or  trust  for  the  purpose  of  our  salvation,  except  the 
power  of  divine  wisdom  acting  within  ourselves.  Only 
when  man  realises  the  presence  of  God  within  himself 
will  he  begin  his  infinite  life,  and  step  from  the  realm 
of  evanescent  illusions  into  that  of  permanent  truth. 

The  realisation  of  eternal  truth  is  caused  by  the 
''  Holy  Ghost,"  this  being  the  light  of  self-knowledge, 
the  spirit  of  truth.  No  man  can  create  within  himself 
that  light,  nor  drag  the  spirit  of  truth  down  to  his  level, 
nor  push  himself  by  his  own  will  into  that  light ;  he  can 
only  wait  in  peace  until  that  spirit  descends  and  becomes 
manifest  in  his  soul.  Thus  the  acquisition  of  wisdom 
consists  in  passively  receiving  the  light  from  above,  and 
in  actively  resisting  the  influences  from  below  which 
hinder  its  manifestation. 

Unselfishness 

"  Theosophy "  is  the  wisdom  of  God  in  man,  and 
therefore  cannot  be  appropriated  by  any  person.  It  cannot 
become  manifested  in  man  as  long  as  there  exists  in  him 

286  PARACELSUS 

the  delusion  of  "self,"  because  that  "self"  is  a  limited 
thing,  which  cannot  grasp  the  infinite  indivisible  reality. 
For  this  reason  "  love  " — that  is  to  say,  the  abandonment 
of  "self" — is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  This  doctrine, 
however,  is  generally  misunderstood.  It  does  not  teach 
that  /  should  merely  desire  nothing  for  myself;  but  it 
teaches  that  there  should  be  no  conception  of  "I"  in  my 
mind  that  loves  or  desires  anything.  Only  when  that 
illusion  of  "  self "  has  disappeared  from  my  heart  and 
mind,  and  my  consciousness  arisen  to  that  state  in  which 
there  will  be  no  "  I,"  then  will  not  /  be  the  doer  of  works, 
but  the  spirit  of  wisdom  will  perform  its  wonders  through 
my  instrumentality  (Philosophia  Occulta). 

In  this  also  exists  the  difference  between  divine  love 
and  "  altruism."  Altruistically  inclined  persons  are 
usually  not  selfish,  but  possessed  by  the  idea  of  "self." 
Not  from  God,  but  from  their  own  illusion  of  selfhood, 
are  their  works  emanating.  They  are  themselves  the 
doers  of  their  works,  and  are  proud  of  their  own  goodness 
and  wisdom ;  but  their  good  works,  being  the  product  of 
an  illusion,  are  illusive,  and  therefore  impermanent.  The 
altruistic  humanitarian  sees  in  other  human  beings  his 
brothers  and  sisters ;  but  God,  dwelling  in  the  soul  of 
the  wise,  sees  in  every  vehicle  of  life  and  in  every 
creature  His  own  divine  self. 

APPENDIX 

Adepts 

There  are  Adepts  of  various  grades.  There  are  such  as 
live  like  normal  men  in  their  physical  bodies,  and  who 
are  able  to  send  their  astral  spirit  out  of  their  bodies 
during  their  sleep  to  any  place  they  choose,  and  on 
awakening,  their  astral  spirit  returns  again  into  the 
body  to  which  it  belongs;  and  there  are  others  who 
have  no  physical  bodies,  because  they  have  arrived  at  a 
state  of  perfection  in  which  such  bodies  are  no  longer 
required  for  their  purposes.1  "  There  are  persons  who 
have  been  exalted  (verzueckt)  to  God,  and  who  have  re- 
mained in  that  state  of  exaltation,  and  they  have  not 
died.  Their  physical  bodies  have  lost  their  lives,  but 
without  being  conscious  of  it,  without  sensation,  without 
any  disease,  and  without  suffering,  and  their  bodies 
became  transformed,  and  disappeared  in  such  a  manner 
that  nobody  knew  what  became  of  them,  and  yet  they 
remained  on  the  earth.  But  their  spirits  and  heavenly 
bodies,  having  neither  corporeal  form,  shape,  nor  colour, 
were  exalted  to  heaven,  like  Enoch  and  Elias  of  old  " 2 
(Philosoph.,  v.). 

1  See  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  "The  Voice  of  the  Silence"  [Nirmanahaya's). 

2  C.  von  Eckartshausen  speaks  in  his  "Disclosures  of  Magic"  (1790) 
about  the  Adepts  as  follows  :  "  These  sages,  whose  number  is  small,  are 
children  of  light,  and  are  opposed  to  darkness.  They  dislike  mystifica- 
tion and  secrecy;  they  are  open  and  frank,  having  nothing  to  do  with 
secret  societies  and  with  external  ceremonies.  They  possess  a  spiritual 
temple,  in  which  God  is  presiding. 

"They  live  in  various  parts  of  the  earth,  and  do  not  meddle  with  poli- 
tics; their  business  is  to  do  as  much  good  to  humanity  as  is  in  their  power, 

287 

288  APPENDIX 

"  There  is  a  great  difference  between  the  physical  and 
the  ethereal  body.  The  former  is  visible  and  tangible, 
but  the  latter  is  invisible  and  intangible.  The  body  eats 
and  drinks  ;  the  spirit  lives  in  faith.  The  body  is  evanes- 
cent and  destructible ;  the  spirit  eternal.  The  body 
dies  ;  the  spirit  lives.  The  body  is  conquered  by  the 
spirit ;  the  spirit  is  victor.  The  body  is  opaque,  clouded  ; 
the  spirit  transparent  and  clear.  The  body  is  often  sick ; 
the  spirit  knows  no  disease.  The  body  is  dark,  but  the 
spirit  is  light,  and  sees  into  the  hearts  of  the  moun- 
tains and  the  interior  of  the  earth.  The  body  executes 
acts  which  the  spirit  orders.  The  body  is  the  mumia ; 
the  substance  of  the  spirit  is  the  balsam  of  life.  The 
former  comes  from  the  earth,  but  the  spirit  from 
heaven  "  1  (Philosoph.,  iv.). 

and  to  drink  wisdom  from  the  eternal  fountain  of  truth.  They  never 
quarrel  about  opinions,  because  they  know  the  truth.  Their  number  is 
small.  Some  live  in  Europe,  others  in  Africa,  but  they  are  bound  together 
by  the  harmony  of  their  souls,  and  they  are  therefore  as  one.  They  are 
joined  together,  although  they  may  be  thousands  of  miles  apart  from  each 
other.  They  understand  each  other,  although  they  speak  in  different 
tongues,  because  the  language  of  the  sages  is  spiritual  perception. 

"No  evil-disposed  person  could  possibly  live  among  them,  because  he 
would  be  recognised  immediately,  for  he  would  be  incapable  of  being  illu- 
minated by  wisdom,  and  as  a  mirror  covered  with  mire  cannot  reflect  the 
light,  likewise  sxich  a  soul  cannot  reflect  the  truth.  But  the  more  the  soul  of 
man  grows  perfect,  the  nearer  does  it  approach  to  God,  and  the  more  will 
its  understanding  grow  and  its  love  be  exalted.  Thus  may  man  enter 
into  sanctification ;  he  may  communicate  with  perfect  beings  in  the 
spiritual  kingdom,  and  be  instructed  and  guided  by  them.  He  will  be  a 
true  child  of  God.  All  Nature  will  be  subject  to  him,  because  he  will  be 
an  instrument  to  carry  out  the  will  of  the  Creator  of  Nature.  He  knows 
the  future,  the  thoughts  and  the  instincts  of  men,  because  the  mysteries 
of  eternity  are  open  before  him. 

"  But  the  plans  of  the  worldly-wise  will  come  to  nought.  That  which 
took  the  followers  of  false  science  centuries  to  accomplish  will  be  wiped 
out  by  a  single  stroke  of  the  finger  of  God,  and  a  nobler  generation  will 
come,  which  will  worship  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 

1  There  are  three  kinds  of  knowledge  : — I.  External  knowledge,  or 
scientific  opinions  in  regard  to  external  things  (Gal.  vi.  3).  This  know- 
ledge leads  to  error,  because  it  concentrates  all  the  attention  upon  the 
illusory  exterior  of  things,  and  keeps  the  mind  in  ignorance  in  regard  to 
interior  truths.     2.  Knowledge   received  by  entering  into  the  mysteries 

APPENDIX  289 

Creation 

The  unmanifested  Absolute  cannot  be  conceived  other- 
wise than  as  a  mathematical  point,  without  any  magnitude, 
and  such  a  point  in  becoming  manifest  in  all  directions 
would  necessarily  become  a  sphere.  If  we  imagine  such 
a  mathematical  point  as  being  self-conscious,  thinking, 
and  capable  to  act,  and  desirous  to  manifest  itself,  the 
only  thinkable  mode  in  which  it  could  possibly  accom- 
plish this  would  be  by  radiating  its  own  substance  and 
consciousness  from  the  centre  towards  the  periphery. 
The  centre  is  the  Father,  the  eternal  source  of  all 
(John  i.  4) ;  the  radius  is  the  Son  (the  Logos),  who  was 
contained  in  the  Father  from  eternity  (John  i.  1) ;  the 
power  of  the  father  revealed  in  the  light  of  the  son  from 
the  incomprehensible  centre  to  the  unlimited  periphery  is 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  spirit  of  truth,  which  is  manifested 
externally  and  revealed  in  visible  Nature  (John  xv.  26). 
We  cannot  conceive  of  a  body  without  length,  breadth, 
and  thickness ;  a  circle  or  a  sphere  always  consists  of  a 
centre,  radius,  and  periphery.  They  are  three,  yet  they 
are  one,  and  neither  of  them  can  exist  without  the  other 
two.1     God  sends  out  His  thought  by  the  power  of  His 

of  Nature  ;  comprehension  of  truths  independent  of  the  opinions  of  others. 
It  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  (Sirach  i.  16).  3.  Wisdom,  or  the  knowledge 
of  the  Supreme  Cause  of  all  effects  obtained  by  knowledge  of  self  (Book  of 
Wisdom,  vii.  17-27).     This  is  the  wisdom  of  Solomon. 

There  are  three  kinds  of  knowers  : — I.  The  theorists,  who  deal  with 
opinions  and  with  illusory  appearances  ;  the  opinionated  and  dogmatists> 
sceptics,  materialists,  &c,  who  continually  quarrel  about  their  different 
opinions.  2.  Those  who  are  able  to  recognise  interior  truths  objectively 
by  the  power  of  their  interior  perception.  3.  The  Adepts,  who  are  united 
with  God,  and  know  everything  because  they  know  themselves,  by  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  being  manifest  in  themselves  (Prov.  ix.  7). 

1  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  found  in  all  the  principal  religious 
systems :  in  the  Christian  religion  as  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit ;  among 
the  Hindus  as  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva ;  the  Buddhists  call  it  Atma, 
Buddhi,  and  Manas ;  the  Persians  teach  that  Ormuzd  produced  light  out 
of  himself  by  the  power  of  his  word.  The  Egyptians  called  the  First  Cause 
Ammon,  out  of  which  all  things  were  created  by  the  power  of  its  own  will. 
In  Chinese,  Kwan-shai-gin  is  the  universally  manifested  Word,  coming 

T 

290  APPENDIX 

will  (the  Iliaster  divides  itself).  He  holds  fast  to  the 
thought,  and  expresses  it  in  the  Word,  in  which  is  con- 
tained the  creative  and  conservative  power,  and  His 
thought  becomes  corporified,  bringing  into  existence 
worlds  and  beings,  which  form,  so  to  say,  the  visible 
body  of  the  invisible  God.  Thus  were  the  worlds  formed 
in  the  beginning  by  the  thought  of  God  acting  in  the 
Macrocosm  (the  Universal  Mind),  and  in  the  same 
manner  are  forms  created  in  the  individual  sphere  of 
the  mind  of  man.  If  we  hold  on  to  a  thought  we  create 
a  form  in  our  inner  world,  and  we  might  render  it  objec- 
tive and  material  if  we  knew  our  own  creative  power. 
A  good  thought  produces  a  good,  and  an  evil  thought 
an  evil  form,  and  they  grow  as  they  are  nourished  by 
thought  or  "  imagination." 

Generation 

All  beings  are  the  product  of  the  creative  power  of  the 
imagination.1  This  imagination  may  proceed  (i)  from 
Nature,  (2)  from  man,  (3)  from  God. 

There  are  consequently  three  modes  in  which  men  may 
come  into  existence : — 

1.  Natural  men,  the  result  of  sexual  intercourse 
between  men  and  women.  The  imagination  of  the 
parents  creates  the  sperm ;  the  matrix  furnishes  the 
conditions  for  its  development.  "  They  are  born  of 
flesh,  and  their  destiny  is  to  serve  as  vehicles  for  the 
Spirit "  (St.  John  iii.  6).2 

from  the  unmanifested  Absolute  by  the  power  of  its  own  will,  and  being 
identical  with  the  former.  The  Greeks  called  it  Zeus  (Power),  Minerva 
(Wisdom),  and  Apollo  (Beauty)  ;  the  Germans,  Wodan  (the  Supreme 
Cause),  Thor  (Power),  and  Freia  (Beauty).  Jehovah  and  Allah  are  trini- 
ties of  Will,  Knowledge,  and  Power ;  and  even  the  Materialist  believes 
in  Causation,  Matter,  and  Energy. 

1  There  are  three  kinds   of  imagination  :    passive  imagination,  active 
thought,  creative  thought. 

2  There  are  three  kinds  of  birth  :  the  birth  of  the  flesh,  of  the  soul,  and 
of  the  spirit ;  and  each  birth  has  three  stages  :  generation,  germination, 

APPENDIX  291 

2.  God-men,  the  products  of  the  imagination  and  will 
of  the  divine  Logos,  the  incarnating  spiritual  entities 
(St.  Matt.  i.  23  ;  St.  Luke  i.  35).  "They  are  already 
born  of  the  Spirit "  (St.  John  i.  1 4).1 

3.  Primordial  men,  without  fathers  or  mothers  and 
without  sex,  produced  by  the  thought  of  God  in  the 
matrix  of  Nature  (Hebrews  vii.  3).  "  They  are  the  true 
images  of  the  Creator,  the  children  of  God,  without 
sin  and  without  knowledge"  (Luke  iii.  38).  Being 
attracted  to  matter,  and  desiring  to  enjoy  material 
pleasures,  they  gradually  sink  into  matter  and  learn  to 
know  good  and  evil.2 

Initiation 

"  Initiation,"  or  "  baptism,"  is  the  growth  of  the  spiri- 
tual principle,  which  is  germinally  contained  in  every 
man,  into  consciousness.  "  Two  germs  grow  into  one 
man.  One  comes  from  the  Spirit,  the  other  germ  comes 
from  Nature ;  but  the  two  are  one.  One  becomes  con- 
scious of  Nature,  the  other  one  may  become  conscious 
of  the  Spirit.  One  is  the  child  of  Adam,  the  other  the 
son  of  Christ.  There  are  a  few  whose  spiritual  conscious- 
ness is  awakened  to  life,  who  have  died  in  Adam  and 
are    reborn    of    Christ ; 3    those   who   are    reborn    know 

and  fructification.  The  first  birth  is  the  natural  birth  of  man  ;  the  second 
is  the  awakening  of  the  soul,  and  the  attainment  of  its  power  (Ephes. 
iv.  13)  to  control  the  desires  and  passions ;  it  is,  so  to  say,  an  invisible  fire, 
penetrating  the  whole  of  the  body.  The  third  birth  is  the  regeneration 
of  the  spirit,  its  awakening  to  spiritual  consciousness.  The  last  stage  is 
attained  by  very  few  (i  Cor.  xv.  47  ;  St.  John  iii.  6). 

1  Krishna,  Buddha,  Christ. 

2  "Adam."     The  failures  of  the  Dhyan-Chohans. 

3  The  "flesh  of  Adam"  forms  the  animal  elements  of  the  soul,  but'the 
flesh  of  Christ  is  the  spirit  (the  sixth  principle).  All  the  animal  principles 
existing  in  Nature  exist  germinally  in  the  soul-essence  of  man,  and  may 
grow  there  and  develop  into  entities.  The  whole  of  the  animal  creation 
is  thus  represented  in  the  soul  of  man,  because  the  growth  of  an 
animal  passion  means  the  growth  of  an  animal  principle  in  the  soul.  If 
such  passions  are  conquered  by  the  power  of  the  spirit,  these  animal 
"creatures"  will  die  and  be  expelled  from  the  organism  of  the  soul,  in 

292  APPENDIX 

themselves,  and  are  thus  initiated  into  the  kingdom  of 
the  Spirit. 

"  Initiation  is  therefore  a  matter  of  growth,  and  cannot 
be  obtained  by  favour.  Ceremonies  are  only  external 
forms.  The  true  baptism  is  the  baptism  of  fire,  the 
growth  into  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  the  victory  of  the  spirit 
over  the  animal  nature  of  man."  x 

We  know  that  nobody  can  enjoy  the  possession  of  any 
external  sense,  such  as  sight,  hearing,  &c,  unless  he  has 
organs  adapted  for  that  purpose.  The  same  is  true  in 
regard  to  the  inner  senses  of  man,  which  also  require  the 
organisation  of  a  spiritual  but  nevertheless  substantial 
body ;  and  as  the  physical  body  generates  its  organs  in 
the  womb  of  its  mother,  so  the  spiritual  body  becomes 
generated  in  the  astral  body  of  man. 

"The  form  of  man  must  be  adapted  to  his  plane  of 
existence.  A  horseshoe  of  iron  has  a  form  adapted  to 
its  purpose,  and  so  has  a  goblet  of  silver.  Nature  has 
many  strange  children,  and  man  must  have  his  shape, 
and  also  that  wherein  he  is  made.  Therefore  Christ 
says,  '  He  who  is  with  Me  denies  himself.'  This  means 
that  he  must  rise  superior  to  that  which  belongs  to 
Nature  in  him.  He  must  take  his  cross  upon  his 
shoulders,  namely,  the  cross  which  Nature  has  put  upon 
him.  Take  Nature  upon  your  shoulders  and  carry  her, 
but  do  not  identify  yourself  with  her.  Love  your  neigh- 
bour, and  free  yourself  of  that  carnal  reason  which  forces 
you  to  be  a  servant  of  self "  {Be  Arte  Presaga). 

the  same  way  as  a  decayed  part  of  the  physical  body  becomes  separated 
from  the  physical  organism  ;  and  as  snch  processes  going  on  in  the  physical 
form  may  be  observed  during  the  waking  state,  likewise  the  corresponding  pro- 
cesses going  on  in  the  organism  of  the  soul  may  be  observed  during  a  dream. 
1  There  are  three  kinds  of  baptism,  by  which  three  different  names  are 
received.  The  first  baptism  is  only  an  external  form,  and  the  name  is 
optional  ;  the  second  is  the  baptism  with  the  "  water  of  truth,"  or  the 
awakening  of  the  soul  to  a  recognition  of  the  truth,  by  which  a  new  name 
is  received,  expressing  the  quality  and  destination  of  the  individual  (i 
Moses  xvii.  5) ;  the  third  is  the  baptism  with  the  "fire  of  the  spirit,"  and 
the  name  which  it  confers  expresses  the  power  of  the  perfect  and  immortal 
divine  man  (St.  John's  Revelation  ii.  17). 

APPENDIX  293 

Mediumship 

"  Nature  can  teach  everything  belonging  to  Nature ; 
she  derives  her  knowledge  from  the  Spirit.  But  Spirit 
and  Nature  are  one,  for  Nature  is  a  light  that  comes  from 
the  Spirit.  If  Nature  learns  from  the  Spirit,  the  one 
becomes  divided  into  two :  the  disciple  asks  questions, 
and  answers  them  himself.  In  a  dream  the  dreamer  and 
the  person  he  dreams  of  are  one ;  and  in  temptation  the 
tempter  and  the  tempted  are  one." 

"  The  light  of  Nature  is  the  light  that  comes  from  the 
Spirit.  It  is  in  man — is  born  with  him,  and  grows  up 
with  him.  There  are  some  persons  who  live  in  this 
interior  light,  but  the  life  of  others  is  centred  in  their 
animal  instincts,  and  they  grope  in  darkness  and  error. 
There  are  some  who  write  wiser  than  they  know,  but  it 
is  wisdom  that  writes  through  them,  for  man  has  no 
wisdom  of  his  own ;  he  can  only  come  into  contact  with 
wisdom  through  the  light  of  Nature  that  is  in  himself." 

"  Those  who  live  in  their  animal  instincts  are  not  wise, 
and  that  which  they  write  is  inspired  by  their  animal 
reason.  Some  animals  are  murderous  and  others  are 
greedy ;  some  are  thievish  and  others  are  lewd  ;  but  all 
the  elements  of  the  animal  kingdom  are  in  the  soul  of 
man,  and  whenever  such  elements  become  alive  in  him 
they  dominate  over  his  reason,  and  man  becomes  like  a 
reasoning  animal,  and  writes  as  dictated  by  his  animal 
reason." 

"  That  which  a  man  writes  is  not  created  by  him, 
but  it  existed  before  him,  and  will  exist  after  him ;  he 
only  gives  it  a  form.  Therefore  that  which  he  writes  is 
not  his  but  another's ;  he  is  only  the  instrument  through 
which  truth  or  error  expresses  itself.  There  are  those 
who  write  mechanically,  and  such  writing  may  come  from 
three  causes ;  intellectual  writing  may  come  from  over 
fifty-seven  causes,  and  the  writing  of  the  Word  of  God 
may  come  from  ten  causes.     A  person  who  writes  should 

294  APPENDIX 

know  the  cause  from  whence  his  ideas  come,  for  only  he 
who  knows  wisdom  can  write  wisely  " x  (De  Fundamento 
Sapientice). 

Occult  Phenomena 

Action  at  a  Distance. — The  (spiritual)  breath  of  man 
reaches  very  far ;  for  the  breath  is  his  spirit,  and  he  may 
send  his  spirit  many  hundred  miles  away,  so  that  it  will 
accomplish  all  that  the  man  himself  could  have  accom- 
plished. Such  a  breath  travels  as  fast  as  the  wind,  or 
as  a  ball  shot  out  of  a  gun,  and  delivers  its  message " 
(Philosoph.  Tract.,  iii.). 

Disappearance  of  Objects. — "  Visible  bodies  may  be  made 
invisible,  or  covered,  in  the  same  way  as  night  covers  a 
man  and  makes  him  invisible,  or  as  he  would  become 
invisible  if  he  were  put  behind  a  wall ;  and  as  Nature 
can  render  something  visible  or  invisible  by  such 
means,  likewise  a  visible  substance  may  be  covered 
with  an  invisible  substance,  and  be  made  invisible  by 
art"2  (Philosoph.  Sag.,  i.). 

Palingenesis. — "  If  a  thing  loses  its  material  substance, 
the  invisible  form  still  remains  in  the  light  of  Nature 
(the  astral  light) ;  and  if  we  can  reclothe  that  form  with 
visible  matter,  we  can  make  that  form  visible  again.  All 
matter  is  composed  of  three  elements — sulphur,  mercury, 
and  salt.  By  alchemical  means  we  may  create  a  mag- 
netic attraction  in  the  astral  form,  so  that  it  will  attract 
from  the  elements  (the  A'kasa)  those  principles  which  it 

1  There  are  three  distinct  classes  of  mediumship  :  mechanical  medium- 
ship,  in  which  the  physical  forces  of  the  medium  are  used  by  extraneous 
influences  (obsession,  physical  manifestations,  &c.)  ;  emotional  medium- 
ship,  by  which  the  energies  of  the  soul  of  the  medium  are  stimulated 
and  his  feelings  and  his  thoughts  aroused  (trance  speaking  and  writing) ; 
spiritual  mediumship,  in  which  wisdom  manifests  itself  through  transcen- 
dentally  conscious  man  (ecstasy,  illumination). 

2  It  is  said  that  "  darkness  is  absence  of  light."  We  may  say  with  equal 
truth  that  "  light  is  absence  of  darkness  ; "  light  and  darkness  are  cer- 
tain states  of  the  cosmic  ether  (A'kasa).  Light  is  "spirit,"  darkness  is 
"  matter."     Both  have  positive  qualities  (Gen.  i.  4). 

APPENDIX  295 

possessed  before  its  mortification,  and  incorporate  them 
and  become  visible  again  " *  (Be  Rcsuscitationibus). 

Occult  Letters. — "  If  the  elementary  body  can  write  a 
letter,  and  send  it  by  a  messenger  to  somebody  in  a 
month,  why  should  not  the  ethereal  body  of  an  Adept  be 
able  to  write  a  letter  and  to  send  it  to  its  destination 
(by  an  element  spirit)  in  an  hour  ?  " 2  (Philosoph.  Sag.,  i. 
cap.  6). 

Transformations. — "  There  is  a  species  of  magic  by 
which  living  bodies  can  be  formed  and  one  body  be 
transformed  into  another,  as  was  done  by  Moses " 3 
(Philosoph.  Sag.). 

Transmutations. — "  An  instance  of  transmutation  may 
be  seen  in  wood  which  has  become  petrified.  The  form 
of  the  wood  remains  unchanged ;  nevertheless  it  is  no 
longer  wood,  but  a  stone  "  (De  Transmutationihus). 

Passage  of  Matter  through  Matter. — "  Things  that  are 
done  by  visible  means  in  the  ordinary  manner  may  be 
done  by  invisible  means  in  an  extraordinary  way.  For 
instance,  a  lock  can  be  opened  with  a  key ;  a  cut  be 
made  with  a  sword ;  the  body  be  protected  by  a  coat- 
of-mail.  All  this  may  be  done  by  visible  means.  You 
may  grasp  a  man  with  your  hand  without  making  a 
hole  in  him,  and  take  a  fish  out  of  water  without 
leaving  a  hole  in  the  water ;  or  you  may  put  some- 
thing into  water,  and  if  you  withdraw  your  hand  no 
hole  will  be  left  in  the  water.  By  the  necromantic  art 
something  can  be  put  through  a  body  or  into  a  body, 

1  Plato,  Seneca,  Erastus,  Avicenna,  Averroes,  Albertus  Magnus,  Cas- 
palin,  Cardanus,  Cornelius  Agrippa,  Eckartshausen,  and  many  others 
wrote  about  the  palingenesis  of  plants  and  animals.  Kircher  resurrected 
a  rose  from  its  ashes  in  the  presence  of  Queen  Christina  of  Sweden,  1687. 
The  astral  body  of  an  individual  form  remains  with  the  remnants  of  the 
latter  until  these  remnants  have  been  fully  decomposed,  and  by  certain 
methods  known  to  the  alchemist  it  can  be  reclothed  with  matter  and 
become  visible  again. 

2  The  value  of  a  letter  should  be  determined  by  the  quality  of  its  con- 
tents, and  not  by  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been  received. 

3  Exod.  vii.  10. 

296  APPENDIX 

and  no  hole  will  be  left  in  the  latter  " 1  (Philosoph.  Sag., 
i.  4). 

Thought-Transfer 

"  By  the  magic  power  of  the  will  a  person  on  this 
side  of  the  ocean  may  make  a  person  on  the  other  side 
hear  what  is  said  on  this  side,  and  a  person  in  the  East 
thus  converse  with  another  person  in  the  West.  The 
physical  man  may  hear  and  understand  the  voice  of 
another  man  at  a  distance  of  a  hundred  steps,  and  the 
ethereal  body  of  a  man  know  what  another  man  thinks 
at  a  distance  of  a  hundred  miles  and  more.  "What  can 
be  accomplished  by  ordinary  means  in  a  month  (such  as 
the  sending  of  messages)  can  be  done  by  this  art  in  one 
day.  If  you  have  a  tube  a  mile  long,  and  you  speak 
through  it  at  one  end,  a  person  at  the  other  end  will 
hear  what  you  say.  If  the  elementary  body  can  do  this, 
how  much  easier  will  it  be  for  the  ethereal  body,  which 
is  much  more  powerful  (in  relation  to  other  ethereal 
bodies)  than  the  former !  "  2  (Philosoph.  Sag.,  i.  cap.  60). 

Spirits  of  the  Departed 

"  If  a  person  dies,  it  is  only  his  body  that  dies ;  the 
human  soul  does  not  die,3  neither  can  it  be  buried,  but 
it  remains  alive,  and  knows  whatever  it  knew  before  it 

1  Such  manifestations  of  occult  power  may  be  witnessed  frequently  in 
spiritualistic  stances.  The  reason  why  they  seem  incomprehensible  to  us 
is  because  we  habitually  look  upon  form  as  something  real  instead  of  seeing 
in  it  an  illusion,  and  because  our  accepted  opinions  in  regard  to  the  con- 
stitution of  matter  are  fundamentally  wrong. 

2  The  earthly  atmosphere  may  be,  so  to  say,  perforated  by  a  tube 
or  wire,  carrying  an  electric  current,  and  the  ether  (A'kasa)  be  "  per- 
forated "  likewise  by  a  current  of  spiritual  force.  An  electric  current 
passes  unimpeded  through  the  earth  ;  a  thought  current  passes  unimpeded 
through  the  A'kasa. 

3  The  human  soul  is  threefold  :  the  animal,  intellectual,  and  spiritual 
soul.  The  imperfect  elements  of  the  soul  die  ;  that  which  is  perfect  remains 
alive.  Life  is  threefold :  the  organic  life,  the  life  of  the  soul,  and  that  of 
the  spirit. 

APPENDIX  297 

became  separated  from  the  body.  It  remains  the  same  as 
it  was  before  death  :  if  a  man  has  been  a  liar  in  his  life, 
he  will  be  one  after  death ;  and  if  he  has  been  well  ex- 
perienced in  a  certain  science  or  art,  he  will  know  that 
science  or  art ;  but  a  human  soul  that  knew  nothing 
about  a  certain  thing  during  its  life  will  not  be  able  to 
learn  much  about  it  after  death." 

"  If  we  desire  to  enter  into  communication  with  the 
spirit  of  a  deceased  person,  we  may  make  a  picture  repre- 
senting that  person,  and  write  his  name  and  the  questions 
we  wish  to  ask  him  upon  it,  and  put  that  picture  under 
our  head  after  retiring  to  rest ;  and  during  our  sleep  the 
deceased  appears  to  us  in  our  dreams  and  answers  our 
questions.  But  the  experiment  must  be  made  in  a  spirit 
of  unfaltering  faith,  full  of  confidence  that  it  will  succeed, 
else  it  will  fail,  because  it  is  not  the  picture  that  brings 
the  spirit,  but  our  faith  that  brings  us  into  communi- 
cation with  it ;  and  the  picture  is  only  made  for  the 
purpose  of  assisting  the  imagination,  and  to  make  it  more 
powerful  "  x  {Philosophy  v.). 

"  Men  have  two  spirits — an  animal  spirit  and  a  human 
spirit — in  them.2  A  man  who  lives  in  his  animal  spirit 
is  like  an  animal  during  life,  and  will  be  an  animal  after 
death;  but  a  man  who  lives  in  his  human  spirit  will 
remain  human.  Animals  have  consciousness  and  reason, 
but  they  have  no  spiritual  intelligence.  It  is  the  pre- 
sence of  the  latter  that  raises  man  above  the  animal,  and 
its  absence  that  makes  an  animal  of  what  once  appeared 
to  be  a  man.  A  man  in  whom  the  animal  reason  alone 
is  active  is  a  lunatic,  and  his  character  resembles  that  of 
some  animal.  One  man  acts  like  a  wolf,  another  like  a 
dog,  another  like  a  hog,  a  snake,  or  a  fox,  &c.  It  is 
their  animal  principle  that  makes  them  act  as  they  do, 
and  their  animal  principle  will  perish  like  the  animals 
themselves.      But  the  human  reason  is  not  of  an  animal 

1  There  are  three  sources  of  faith  :  opinion,  belief,  and  knowledge. 

2  The  human  spirit  has  a  twofold  aspect,  a  human  and  a  divine  one. 

298  APPENDIX 

nature,  but  comes  from  God,  and  being  a  part  of  God,  it 
is  necessarily  immortal "  (De  Lunaticis). 

The  Elixik  of  Life1 

Paracelsus,  as  well  as  his  predecessors,  such  as  Galen, 
Arnold,  De  Villanova,  Eaimund  Luilius,  &c,  laboured 
studiously  to  discover  a  remedy  for  the  prolongation  of 
life.  He  did  not  believe  in  the  possibility  of  rendering 
the  physical  body  immortal,  but  he  considered  it  the 
duty  of  every  physician  to  attempt  to  prolong  human 
life  as  long  as  it  could  be  prolonged,  because  it  is  only 
during  life  upon  the  earth  that  man  can  acquire  know- 
ledge and  improve  his  character ;  after  death  he  acquires 
nothing  new,  but  enjoys  his  possessions.  Paracelsus, 
like  Eoger  Bacon,  Verulam,  and  others,  maintained  that 
the  human  body  could  be  rejuvenated  to  a  certain  extent 
by  a  fresh  supply  of  vitality,  and  it  was  his  aim  to  find 
means  by  which  such  a  supply  could  be  obtained.  He 
says : — 

"  If  we  could  extract  the  fire  of  life  from  the  heart 
without  destroying  the  heart,  and  draw  the  quintessence 
out  of  inanimate  things,  and  use  it  for  our  purpose,  we 
might  live  for  ever  in  the  enjoyment  of  health,  and  with- 
out experiencing  any  disease.  But  this  is  not  possible 
in  our  present  condition.  We  cannot  reverse  the  laws 
of  Nature,  and  whatever  dies  a  natural  death  cannot  be 
resuscitated  by  man.  But  man  may  mend  that  which 
he  himself  has  broken,  and  break  that  which  he  himself 
has  made.  All  things  have  a  certain  time  during  which 
they  exist  upon  the  earth.  The  saints  have  a  certain 
time  during  which  they  exist,  and  also  the  wicked.  If 
a  man's  time  to  stay  is  over,  he  will  have  to  leave.     But 

1  The  writings  attributed  to  Paracelsus  in  regard  to  this  subject  that 
are  known  at  present  are  partly  spurious,  partly  fragmentary,  and  the 
translations  incorrect.  The  extracts  given  below  of  his  writings  on  the 
Elixir  of  Life  are  taken  from  an  original  MS.  in  private  possession. 

APPENDIX  299 

many  die  before  their  time  is  over,  not  by  a  visitation  of 
Providence,  but  because  they  are  ignorant  of  the  laws 
controlling  their  nature." 

"  Metals  may  be  preserved  from  rust,  and  wood  be 
protected  against  the  rot.  Blood  may  be  preserved  a 
long  time  if  the  air  is  excluded.  Egyptian  mummies 
have  kept  their  forms  for  centuries  without  undergoing 
putrefaction.  Animals  awaken  from  their  winter  sleep, 
and  flies,  having  become  torpid  from  cold,  become  nimble 
again  when  they  are  warmed.  A  tree  will  sometimes 
bear  no  fruit  for  twenty  years,  and  then  begin  again  to 
bloom  and  bear  fruit  as  it  did  when  it  was  young ;  and 
if  inanimate  objects  can  be  kept  from  destruction,  why 
should  there  be  no  possibility  to  preserve  the  life-essence 
of  animate  forms  ?  " 

"  Life  itself  comes  from  heaven.  It  is  an  emanation 
of  the  Supreme  Power  of  the  universe,  and  it  is  therefore 
eternal  and  unchangeable ;  but  it  requires  a  substantial 
vehicle  for  its  manifestation.  Material  forms  are  earthly, 
and,  like  all  earthly  substances,  they  are  subject  to  disso- 
lution and  change.  To  prolong  the  process  of  life,  we 
must  try  to  protect  the  material  form  in  which  life  is 
active  against  all  injurious  influences  that  may  act  upon 
it.  We  must  therefore  attempt  to  eradicate  all  physical 
and  psychical  diseases,  and  to  prevent  all  evils  that  are 
caused  by  age,  occupation,  or  accidents.  We  should 
protect  man  against  all  evil  influences  acting  upon  him 
during  the  foetal  state,  in  infancy,  youth,  manhood,  and 
old  age ;  we  should  defend  him  against  injurious  in- 
fluences coming  from  the  astral  plane ;  cause  him  to 
avoid  immoderate  eating  and  drinking,  fatigue  of  body 
or  mind,  excessive  joy  or  grief,  or  mental  excitement  of 
any  kind.  We  must  protect  him  against  infectious  or 
epidemic  diseases,  whether  they  are  of  a  physical  or  moral 
character,  and  employ  such  remedies  as  have  been  pro- 
vided by  Nature  for  such  purposes." 

"  Such  a  remedy  is  the  Primum  Ens,  the  source  of  all 

300  APPENDIX 

life.  As  the  fabulous  halcyon  becomes  rejuvenated  and 
its  own  substance  renewed  by  drawing  its  nutriment  from 
the  Primum  Ens,  so  may  man  rejuvenate  his  constitution 
by  purifying  it  so  that  it  will  be  able  to  receive  without 
any  interruption  the  life-giving  influence  of  the  divine 
spirit.1 

"  But  the  vehicle  that  forms  the  medium  through 
which  life  acts  consists  of  elementary  substances  that  are 
found  in  Nature,  and  which  form  the  quintessence  of  all 
things.  There  are  some  substances  in  which  this  quint- 
essence is  contained  in  greater  quantities  than  in  others, 
and  from  which  it  can  more  easily  be  extracted.  Such 
substances  are  especially  the  herb  called  melissa  and  the 
human  blood. 

The  Primum  Ens 

The  "Primum  Ens"  of  a  thing  is  its  first  beginning, 
its  Prima  Materia,  an  invisible  and  intangible  spiritual 
substance,  which  can  be  incorporated  in  some  material 
vehicle.  "  He  who  wants  to  separate  the  Primum  Ens 
from  its  Corpus  (vehicle)  must  have  a  great  deal  of 
experience  in  the  spagyric  art.  If  he  is  not  a  good 
alchemist  his  labour  will  be  in  vain  "  {Be  Separat.  Per.). 

"  The  Primum  Ens  Melissa?  is  prepared  in  the  follow- 
ing manner : — Take  half  a  pound  of  pure  carbonate  of 
potash  and  expose  it  to  the  air  until  it  is  dissolved  (by 
attracting  water  from  the  atmosphere).  Filter  the  fluid, 
and  put  as  many  fresh  leaves  of  the  plant  melissa  into  it 
as  it  will  hold,  so  that  the  fluid  will  cover  the  leaves. 
Let  it  stand  in  a  well-closed  glass,  and  in  a  moderately 
warm  place,  for  twenty-four  hours.  The  fluid  may  then 
be  removed  from  the  leaves,  and  the  latter  thrown  away. 
On  the  top  of  this  fluid  absolute  alcohol  is  poured,  so 
that  it  will  cover  the  former  to  the  height  of  one  or  two 
inches,  and  it  is  left  to  remain  for  one  or  two  days,  or 

1  Compare  "  Five  Years  of  Theosophy  :  "  The  Elixir  of  Life. 

APPENDIX  301 

until  the  alcohol  becomes  of  an  intensely  green  colour. 
This  alcohol  is  then  to  be  taken  away  and  preserved, 
and  fresh  alcohol  is  put  upon  the  alkaline  fluid,  and  the 
operation  is  repeated  until  all  the  colouring  matter  is 
absorbed  by  the  alcohol.  This  alcoholic  fluid  is  now  to 
be  distilled,  and  the  alcohol  evaporated  until  it  becomes 
of  the  thickness  of  a  syrup,  which  is  the  Primum  Ens 
Melissa; ;  but  the  alcohol  that  has  been  distilled  away 
and  the  liquid  potash  may  be  used  again.  The  liquid 
potash  must  be  of  great  concentration  and  the  alcohol  of 
great  strength,  else  they  would  become  mixed,  and  the 
experiment  would  not  succeed."  * 

1  Lesebure,  a  physician  of  Louis  XIV.  of  France,  gives,  in  his  "  Guide 
to  Chemistry"  ("Chemischer  Handleiter,"  Nuremberg,  1685,  p.  276), 
an  account  of  some  experiments,  witnessed  by  himself,  with  the  Primum 
Ens  Melissa  as  follows  : — "  One  of  my  most  intimate  friends  prepared  the 
Primum  Ens  Melissce,  and  his  curiosity  would  not  allow  him  to  rest  until 
he  had  seen  with  his  own  eyes  the  effect  of  this  arcanum,  so  that  he  might 
be  certain  whether  or  not  the  accounts  given  of  its  virtues  were  true.  He 
therefore  made  the  experiment,  first  upon  himself,  then  upon  an  old 
female  servant,  aged  seventy  years,  and  afterwards  upon  an  old  hen  that 
was  kept  at  his  house.  First  he  took,  every  morning  at  sunrise,  a  glass 
of  white  wine  that  was  tinctured  with  this  remedy,  and  after  using  it  for 
fourteen  day3  his  finger  and  toe  nails  began  to  fall  out,  without,  however, 
causing  any  pain.  He  was  not  courageous  enough  to  continue  the  experi- 
ment, but  gave  the  same  remedy  to  the  old  female  servant.  She  took 
it  every  morning  for  about  ten  days,  when  she  began  to  menstruate 
again,  as  in  former  days.  At  this  she  was  very  much  surprised, 
because  she  did  not  know  that  she  had  been  taking  a  medicine.  She 
became  frightened,  and  refused  to  continue  the  experiment.  My  friend 
took,  therefore,  some  grain,  soaked  it  in  that  wine,  and  gave  it  to  the  old 
hen  to  eat,  and  on  the  sixth  day  that  bird  began  to  lose  its  feathers,  and 
kept  on  losing  them  until  it  was  perfectly  nude ;  but  before  two  weeks 
had  passed  away  new  feathers  grew,  which  were  much  more  beautifully 
coloured ;  her  comb  stood  up  again,  and  she  began  again  to  lay  eggs." 

In  the  "  Life  of  Cagliostro  "  some  such  rejuvenating  medicine  is  men- 
tioned, and  the  names  of  some  persons  who  succeeded  in  the  experiment 
are  given.  These  and  similar  facts  have  neither  been  proved  nor  dis- 
proved by  science,  but  are  waiting  for  an  investigation.  The  judges  at 
the  trial  of  Cagliostro,  before  the  tribunal  of  the  Inquisition  at  Rome, 
were  only  intent  to  convict  him  ;  but  he  who  can  read  their  report  "  be- 
tween the  lines  "  will  find  a  great  deal  that  speaks  in  favour  of  Cagliostro, 
and  much  that  has  not  been  explained. 

302  APPENDIX 

Peimum  Ens  Sanguinis 

To  make  the  Primum  Ens  Sanguinis,  take  blood  from 
the  median  vein  of  a  healthy  young  person,  and  let  it 
run  into  a  warm  bottle  that  has  been  weighed  upon 
scales,  so  that  the  exact  quantity  of  the  blood  used  will 
be  known.  Add  to  this  blood  twice  its  quantity  of 
alcahest,  close  the  bottle,  and  permit  it  to  remain  in  a 
moderately  warm  place  for  about  fourteen  days,  after 
which  the  red  fluid  is  to  be  separated  from  the  sedi- 
ment, filtered,  and  preserved.  This  is  the  Primum  Ens 
Sanguinis,  and  it  is  used  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
Primum  Ens  Melissce. 

The  Alcahest 

The  celebrated  Alcahest  is  an  universal  medicine 
whose  preparation  was  also  known  to  Helmont  and  to 
some  Eosicrucians.  It  was  considered  by  them  as  one 
of  the  greatest  mysteries.     It  is  prepared  as  follows : — 

"  Take  freshly  prepared  caustic  lime,  if  possible  still 
warm ;  powder  it  quickly  in  a  dry  place,  and  put  it  into 
a  retort.  Add  as  much  absolute  alcohol  as  the  powder 
will  absorb,  and  distil  the  alcohol  at  a  moderate  heat, 
until  the  powder  in  the  retort  is  left  perfectly  dry.  The 
distilled  alcohol  is  now  to  be  poured  again  upon  the 
lime,  and  distilled,  and  this  operation  repeated  ten  times. 
Mix  the  powder  with  the  fifth  part  of  its  own  weight 
of  pure  carbonate  of  potash.  This  must  be  done  very 
quickly  and  in  a  dry  atmosphere,  so  that  it  will  not 
attract  any  moisture.  Insert  the  mixture  of  the  two 
powders  into  a  retort  and  heat  it  gradually,  after  putting 
about  two  ounces  of  absolute  alcohol  into  the  recipient. 
White  vapours  arise  from  the  powder,  and  are  attracted 
by  the  alcohol,  and  the  heating  is  to  be  continued  as 
long  as  this  takes  place.  Pour  the  alcohol  from  the 
recipient  into  a  dish,  and  set  it  on  fire.      The  alcohol 

APPENDIX  303 

burns  away,  and  the  alcahest  remains  in  the  dish.  It 
is  an  excellent  medicine,  and  is  used  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  Primuni  Ens  Mclisscc."  l  On  account  of  the  great 
powers  contained  in  the  limestone,  Paracelsus  says  that 
"many  a  man  kicks  away  with  his  foot  a  stone  that 
would  be  more  valuable  to  him  than  his  best  cow,  if  he 
only  knew  what  great  mysteries  were  put  into  it  by  God 
by  means  of  the  spirit  of  Nature."  2 

Zenexton 

One  of  the  greatest  sympathetic  remedies  of  Para- 
celsus, for  the  possession  of  which  he  was  envied  a  great 
deal,  and  the  preparation  of  which  he  kept  very  secret, 
was  his  Zenexton.  His  disciple,  Oswald  Sroll,  in  his 
"Basilica  Chemica,"  pp.  210-213,  describes  its  prepara- 
tion as  follows : — 

"  Make  an  instrument  of  good  steel,  by  which  you 
may  cut  some  small  tablets  of  the  size  of  a  penny,  and 
whose  composition  will  be  given  below.  The  instru- 
ment consists  of  two  discs,  which  can  be  connected 
together  by  a  middle  piece  in  the  shape  of  a  ring,  form- 
ing a  hollow  space  between  the  two  discs,  and  the  latter 
are  provided  with  handles.  Upon  the  inner  side  of  one 
disc  is  engraved  a  snake,  and  the  inner  side  of  the  other 
represents  a  scorpion,  so  that  the  substance  which  is  to 

1  We  give  these  and  the  following  prescriptions  as  curiosities,  for  what 
they  are  worth.  They  contain  great  truths,  but  only  those  who  know 
will  be  able  to  understand  and  to  prepare  them.  Those  who  go  to  the 
apothecary's  shop  to  get  these  remedies  prepared  will  be  disappointed. 

2  The  alchemistical  writings  of  Paracelsus  are  as  obscure  for  the  un- 
initiated as  those  of  any  other  alchemist,  but  to  the  initiated  they  are 
plain  enough.  He  gives,  however,  many  plain  directions  in  regard  to 
the  treatment  of  special  diseases,  and  which  can  easily  be  followed  out. 
The  reason  why  the  doctrines  of  Paracelsus  are  not  more  extensively 
followed  out  by  modern  physicians  is,  that  his  system  is,  unfortunately, 
little  known,  and  still  less  understood.  The  time  will  come  when  the 
resurrected  doctrines  of  Paracelsus  will  create  again  a  revolution  in  medical 
science,  as  the  man  Paracelsus  did  three  hundred  years  ago. 

304  APPENDIX 

be  put  into  the  hollow  space  between  the  two  discs  will 
receive  the  impression  of  the  snake  on  one  side  and  of 
the  scorpion  on  the  other.  The  instrument  is  to  be 
made  at  a  time  when  sun  and  moon  are  together  in  the 
sign  of  Scorpion.1  By  this  process  the  upper  bodies  will 
be  joined  to  the  lower  ones  in  an  inseparable  sympa- 
thetic union." 

"  The  substance  of  which  the  tablets  are  made  is 
prepared  as  follows : — Take  about  eighteen  live  toads, 
dry  them  by  exposing  them  to  the  sun  and  the  air,  and 
powder  them.  They  must  be  dried  very  quickly,  else 
they  will  rot.  Take  a  number  of  menstrual  cloths  from 
young  girls ;  white  arsenic,  auro-pigment,  half  an  ounce 
of  each ;  roots  of  Diptamus  albus  and  Tormentilla  ereda, 
of  each  three  drachms ;  one  drachm  of  small  pearls ; 
red  corals,  pieces  of  hyacinths  and  smaragds,  half  a 
drachm  of  each ;  oriental  saffron,  forty  grains ;  and  a 
few  grains  of  musk  and  amber.  Powder  all  fine,  mix 
it  all  together,  and  make  a  paste  out  of  it  with  rose- 
water  and  gum-tragacanth.  Make  a  paste  out  of  it  at 
the  time  when  the  moon  is  in  the  sign  of  Scorpion,  cut 
into  tablets,  and  seal  them  with  the  instrument.  Dry 
the  tablets,  cover  them  with  red  silk,  and  wear  them  by 
a  string  around  your  neck,  but  they  ought  not  to  touch 
the  bare  skin.  Such  an  amulet  protects  the  wearer 
against  the  plague,  sorcery,  poison,  and  evil  astral  in- 
fluences ;  it  draws  poisons  out  of  the  body,  and  absorbs 
them  entirely." 

1  This  takes  place  in  the  Macrocosm  during  the  time  of  the  new 
moon,  occurring  each  year  between  October  23  and  November  23. 

INDEX 

INCLUDING   ALL   THE   TERMS    PECULIAR    TO    PARACELSUS 

Abessi,  or  Rebis,  29 

Abortion,  no 

Abuse  of  powers,  208 

Actlina,  30 

Acting  at  a  distance,  141,  142, 

146,  224 
Adam  and  Eve,  69,  78,  99,  212 
Adecb,  29 
Adept,  287 
Admisural,  29 
Adrop,  Azane,  or  Azor,  29 
Air,  175 
A'kasa,  30 
Alcabest,  30,  202 
Alchemical    prescriptions,    254, 

259,  301,  303 

processes,  249,  25 1 

Alchemist,  177,  179 

Alchemy,  30,  100,  177  238,  249 

of  nature,  100,  137 

Alcol,  31 
Allara,  76 
Aluech,  31 
Amor  hereos,  1 10 
Amulets.  36,  222,  303 
Anatomy,  56,  172,  194 
Angels,  124,  133,  134 
Aniadum,  31 
Animal  instinct,  60,  205 

man,  61 

reason,  173,  205,  208,  220, 

269 

soul,  222 

Animals,  60,  115,  205,  225 
Anthropology,  63 
Anyodei,  31 

1  Apothecaries,  208,  250 

J  Apparitions,  84,  87,  91,  107 

Aquastor,  31 

Arcana,  176,  213,  235 

Archseus,  31,  81,  181 

Archates,  or  Archalles,  31 

Ares,  31,  46 

Astra,  264 

Aspis,  112 

Astral  bells,  87 

bodies,    32,    84,    106,    113, 

123,  136,  142 

cause  of  disease,  185,  200 

currents,  149,  150,  239 

entities,  107,  113,  124,  262 

essence,  67 

- forms,  123 

influences,    113,    175,    210, 

212,  215,  218,  263 

life,  91 

light,  32,  85,  88,  125,  210 

world,  90 

Astrology,  32,  216,  238 

Astronomy,  90,  174 

Astrum,  32,  96 

Atmosphere,  150 

Attraction,  200,  246,  263 

Aura,  57 

seminalis,  7 1 

Authority,   163,    167,    171,   192 
276,  281 

Azoth,  33 

Balsam  of  life,  48,  81,  ior,  280 
Baptism,  292 
!  Bargain  with  devils,  153 

3°5  u 

3°6 

INDEX 

Basilisc,  112 
Beasts,  no,  125 
Belief,  269,  232 
Beryl,  33,  117 
Birth,  290 

of  elements,  46 

Black  magic,  221,  224 
Blessings,  138 
Blood,  194 
Blue  milk,  153 
Bodies,  astral,  68 

invisible,  81,  185,  196 

seven,  81 

sidereal,  81,  95 

Body,  the  elementary,  81,  83,  95, 

197,  219,  223,  238,  264,274, 

279,  288 

dissecting  of,  172,  185 

spiritual,  105,  288 

Brain,  208 

Buried  treasures,  106,  117 

Caballi,  33,  101,  106 
Cagliostro,  Count,  301 
Carpenter  of  the  universe,  44, 

219 
Causes  of  disease,  198 
Celibacy,  67,  78 
Ceremonies,  109,  114,  161,  182 
Chaomantia,  23 
Chaos,  44,  116,  122,  262 
Charms,  251 
Character,  115,  177 
Charity,  100 
Chastity,  79 
Chemistry,  238,  244 

of  life,  177 

Cherio,  33 

Children,  66,  75,  87,   160,  212, 

224 
Christ,  234,  276 

in  man,  78 

magical  power  of,  130 

Christians,  228 

Church,  103,  280 

Circle,  212 

Clairvoyance,  115,  117,  135 

Clergymen,  129,  162,  275,  282 

Clissus,  33 

Colic,  210 

Colours,  56 

Conception,  65,  73 

Confidence,  149,  162,  179 
Conjunction  of  planets,  202,  215 
Conjuring  spirits,  84,  1 50 
Consciousness,  68,  131,  265 
Constitution  of  man,  81 

of  Macrocosm,  215 

Corals,  108 

Cosmology,  44,  213 

Cosmos,  44,  213 

Creation,  44,  46,  50,  60,  288 

Credulity,  258 

Crystals,  117,  267 

Cures  by  saints,  147 

sympathetic,  187 

Curses,  138,  161,  235 

Darkness,  294 
Darwin,  59 

Death,  47,  81,  83,  97,  104,  185, 
195,  197,  229,  269 

apparent,  98 

Decomposition,  83 

Derses,  34 

Desires,  evil,  222 

Devas,  116 

Devils,  85,  124,  127,  153,  185 

Digest,  70 

Disciples,  236 

Disease,  181,  193 

Diseases,  causes  of,  193,  198 

causes  of  astral,  200 

causes  of  spiritual,  221 

cured  by  faith,  230 

cured  by  magic,  230 

names  of,  197 

treatment  of,  211 

Dissecting  corpses,  172 

Divertellum,  34 

Divination,  34,  118 

Divine  beings,  65 

Divorce,  80 

Dragons,  112 

Dreams,  91,  no,  131,  135 

remembering,  136 

Dropsy,  203 
Durdales,  34 
Dwarfs,  126 
Dysentery,  210 

Earth,  81 
Earthquakes,  193 
Eckartshausen  (C.  von),  54,  287 

INDEX 

3°7 

Edelphus,  34 

Egos,  2 1 1 

Electrum  magi  cum,  34,  251,  254 

Elemental  spirits,  65,  85 

spirits  of  nature,  63,  119 

Elementals,  34,  63,  86,  120 
Elementaries,  35,  115 
Elementary    body,    81,    83,    95, 
123,  196,  219,  238,264,  274, 
279,  288 
Elements,   35,  46,  64,  90,   120, 

123,  176,  213,  220 
Elixir  of  life,  217,  298 
Emanations,  221 
Ens,  199 

astrale,  200 

deale,  227 

natural,  206 

seminis,  69,  201 

spiritual e,  221 

veneni,  203 

Epilepsy,  225 
Erodinium,  35 
Essence  of  life,  151,  218 
Eternity,  229 
Evestra,  35,  87 
Evil  desires,  162 

eye,  158  _ 

imagination,  155 

spirits,  113,  118,  127,  153, 

157,  162 
Excrements,  187 
Exorcism,  85,  105 

Faith,  ii,   137,   142,   147,   162, 
167,  179,  226,  227,  276,  282 
Familiar  spirits,  116 
Fancy,  141 
Father,  62,  289 
Fever,  197 

Fifth  essence,  82,  241 
Fire,  46,  81,  138,  196 
Firmament,  90 
Flagae,  36,  116,  135 
Flesh,  121,  151 
Food,  159,  196,  203,  205 
Foreseeing    future    events,    37, 

135 
Forms,  93,  115,  217,  268 
Fortune- telling,  118 
Freedom,  271 
Fumigation,  115 

Gabal,  93 
Gamathei,  36 

Generation  of  man,  63,  75,  290 
Geomancy,  118 
Ghosts,  83,  107,  108,  H2 
Giants,  36,  125 
Gnomes,  36,  65,  121 
God,  44,  50,  163,  169,  180,  184, 
227,  234,  269,  273,  282,  285 
Gold,  245 

artificially  made,  259 

transmutation  of,  260 

Graveyards,  83 
Growth,  283 
Guardian  spirits,  116 

Haeckel,  59 
Hallucination,  115 
Happiness,  272 
Harmony,  68,  265 
Haunted  houses,  89,  106 
Health,  181,  207 
Heart,  161,  163,  208 
Heaven,  169,  196,  212 
Hell,  279 

Herbarium  spirituale,  57 
Herbs,  56,  190,  215 
Hidden  treasures,  117,  250 
Holy  Ghost,  289 

water,  108 

Homunculi,  36,  256 
Hypericum  perforatum,  190 
Hypocrisy,  275 
Hypnotism,  142,  236 

Ideal,  273 

Ignorance,  126,  132,  282 

Ilech,  36,  37 

Iliaster,  37 

Illusions,  197,  284 

Images,  145,  148,  158,  160,  225 

Imagination,  73,  109,  111,  125, 

137,  147,  159,  162,  221,  226 

of  women,  74,  no,  138,  159 

Immortality,  97 

Impressions,  37 

Impurities,  203 

Incarnation,  60 

Incense,  108 

Incubus  and  Succubus,  37,  109, 

in 
Inner  sense,  55,  114,  274 

3o8 

INDEX 

Insanity,  113 
Instincts,  135 
Instruction  received  during  sleep, 

132 
Intelligence,  134 
Intuition,  194,  283 
Invisible  man,  82,  131,  253,  278, 

279 
Invisibility,  114,  294 

Jupiter,  242 

Karma,  127,  227,  228 
Knowledge,  117,  129,  131,   134, 

180,  214,  233,  269,  271,  275, 

282,  289 

artificial,  1 80,  274 

of  good  and  evil,  144,  211, 

279 

of  nature,  130,  173 

of  self,  132,  214,  271 

spiritual,  184,  268 

Lapis  Pliilosopliorum,  236,  279 

Larva?,  109,  no,  113 

Leffas,  38 

Lemures,  38,  106 

Leo,  112 

Letters,  occult,  117,  295 

closed,  read,  117 

Life,  46,  48,  98,  181,  209,  264, 
298 

chemistry  of,  177 

elixir  of,  217,  298 

essence,  151,  218 

forms  or  vehicles,  181 

universal,  2 1 7 

Light  of  nature,  180,  195,  282, 

293 

of  spirit,  282 

Limbus,  38,  44,  70,  209,  21 1 

Liquor  vita?,  70,  156,  182 

Logos,  44,  60,  289 

Lord,  78 

Love,  67,  214,  242,  272 

charms,  136,  158 

of  self,  274 

Lying  spirits,  262 

Macrocosm  and  microcosm,  39, 
47,  73,  *73,  193,  208,  219, 
248 

Magic,  38,  54,  86,  128,  150  161, 

224 

bells,  252 

black,   139,   144,   153,  185, 

221,  224 

circles,  162 

crystals,  1 1 7 

images,  148 

mirrors,  158,  251,  254 

rings,  252 

Magicians,  131,  153 
Magisterium,  38 
Magnetic  cures,  188,  193 
Magnets,  156,  161,  182,  188,  191, 

211,  226 
Man,  51,  7y,  81,  119,  167,  196, 

211,  280 

constitution  of,  81 

divine,  60,  81,  278 

elementary  body,  95,  175 

magical  power  in,  132 

object  of  existence,  60,  69, 

272 

origin,  60,  63,  64 

sidereal,    66,    82,   91,    148, 

175,  247 

soul-essence  of,  66 

spiritual,  67,  278 

anganoria,  38 
Maria  (Maya),  214 
Marks,  89 
Marriage,  67,  78 
with  nymphs  and  sylphs, 

125 
Mars,  209,  240,  242 
Martial  diseases,  192,  202 
Masses  for  the  dead,  85 
Materia  prima,  195,  236,  264 
Matrix,  38 
Matter,  48,  102,  223 

primordial,  195,  236,  264 

Medical  science,  170,  199 

wisdom,  184,  235 

Medicine,  54,  165,  183 

practice  of,  165,  229 

qualification    for    practice, 

54,  232 

systems  of,  199 

Medicines,  56,  59,  206,  208 
Mediums,  106 
Mediumship,  293 
Melissa,  196,  209,  240 

INDEX 

309 

Melosinso,  38 

Menstrual  blood,  155 

Mercurius  vivus,  236 

Mercury,  204,  231,  241 

Metals,  34,  99,  202,  25 1 

Metaphysics,  39 

Microcosm,  39,  47,  51,  175,  I93> 

208,  212,  248 
Mind,  57,  102,  219 

universal,  50,  125,  264 

Miracles,  147,  228 
Mirrors,  157,  254 
Modern  medicine,  207 

science,  206 

Modesty,  234 
Mules,  no 

Monsters,  39,  no,  125 
Moon,  157,  240 

evil  influence  of,  201 

Mothers,  139 

Mumia,   39,   81,   101,   151,   185, 

187,  213 

of  the  dead,  152 

Mysteries,  48,  237 

Mysterium  magnum,  40,  44,  101 

Mysticism,  40 

Nativities,  calculating  of,  261 

Natural  man,  184 

physician,  54,  178,  180,214, 

247 
Nature,  47,  51,    132,    173,   212, 

233,  267,  283 

light  of,  133,  180,  233 

love  of,  214 

Necrocomica,  40 
Necromancy,  40,  89,  225 
Nectromancy,  40 
Nenufareni,  40 
Nerve  aura,  71 
Numbers,  275 
Nutriment,  265 
Nymphs,  91,  121 

Object  of  existence,  60,  69,  272 
Obsession,  106,  113,  162 

cure  of,  113 

Occult  phenomena,  86,  89,  106, 

160,  246,  253,  294 
Odic  force,  151 
Omens,  88,  91,  135 
Onanism,  80 

Opinions,  233,  269,  282 
Organs,  208,  220 
Origin  of  disease,  183,  193,  198, 
204,  208 

Palingenesis,  100,  255,  294 
Paracelsus,  life,  1 

tomb,  9 

writings,  33 

Paragranum,  41 
Paramirum,  41,  198 
Parasites,  113 
Passions,  105,  226 
Patients,  177,  181,  234 
Penates,  41 

Penetrability,  265,  295 
Pentacula,  41 

Perception,  210,  233,  247,  267 
Phantasmata,  41,  108 
Philosopher's  stone,  4,  279 
Philosophy,  63,  170,  266,  274 
Physicians,  55, 165, 168, 178, 183, 

199,  200,  214,  227,  232 
Physiology,  195 
Pillars  of  medicine,  170 
Plague,  156 

Planets,  209,  214,  217,  241 
Plants,  56,  189,  202 
planetary  correspondences, 

56,  216 

properties,  occult,  190 

rules  for  gathering,  216 

Plato,  47 

Pneumatology,  103 

Poisons,  114,  157,  175,  203,  206, 

236 
Pollutions,  no 
Power,  277,  285 
Practice  of  medicine,  165,  198, 

228,  229 
Prsesagium,  41,  118,  135 
Praying,  163,  281 
Predictions,  118 
Prevision,  135 
Prescriptions,  250,  303 
Primordial  essence,  49,  99,  236, 

300 
Primum  ens,  49,  299 

ens  melissBe,  301 

ens  sanguinis,  302 

Principles,  208,  220 
seveD,  81 

3i° 

INDEX 

Prophecy,  90,  131 
Prophets,  92 
Punishment,  228 
Purification,  206 
Pygmaei,  41 

Quackery,  163,  165,  174,   183, 

185,  210,  233,  250 
Qualification    of    a    physician, 

178 
Quintessence,  82,  241 

Reason,  211,  269 
Reasoning,  211,  274 
Regeneration,  273 
Reincarnation,  278 
Rejuvenation,  249 
Relics  of  saints,  147 
Remedies,  207 

against  obsession,  190 

against  witchcraft,  162,  224, 

226 
Repercussio,  224 
Resistance,  162,  224 
Resurrection,  49,  295 

Sag  an  1,  41 

Saints,  125,  163,  281 

working  miracles,  147 

Salamanders,  41,  91,  121 

Salt,  41,  204,  231 

Salt,  Sulphur,  and  Mercury,  41, 

197,  231,  247,  249 
Sapientia,  169 
Saturn,  243 
Scaiolse,  41 
Science,  63,  127,  132,  178,  207, 

233,  244,  276 
Second  sight,  132 
Self-control,  55,  284 
Self-possession,  99 
Self- thinking,  171 
Semen,  71,  no 
Separation,  246 
Seven  metals,  251 

planets,  241,  245 

principles,  241 

Sex,  73 

Sexual  intercourse,  80 
Sexuality,  71,  79 
Sidereal  body,  41,  140 
Signatures,  55,  189,  209 

Sins  against  nature,  208 

Sirens,  126 

Sleep,  91,  93,96,  132,  221 

Sodomy,  112 

Sorcerers,  92,  153 

Sorcery,  113,  128,  144,  185,  225, 

262 
Sortilegium,  119 
Soul,  49,  67,  71,  103,   123,  163, 

244,  283 

of  things,  71 

Speculation,  63,  171,  272 

Sperma,  72,  109 

Spirit,  42, 46,  59, 65,  95,  115,131, 

223,  284 
Spirits,  116,  141,  163,  223,  262 
of  the  departed,  85,  92, 101, 

296 

earth-bound,  100,  106 

of  many  kinds,  116,  125 

of  nature,  63,  119 

red  and  blue,  257 

Spiritism,  42,  85,  ioi,  106,  117, 

119,  262 
Spiritual  essence,  65,  81 

cause  of  disease,  1 1 3 

consciousness,  67,  131 

knowledge,  129,  268 

— —  perception,  65,  135 
Spiritualism,  42,  85,  297 
Spiritualistic  phenomena,  85,  89, 

92,  117,  135,  152,  239 
Spirituality,  151,  163,  236,  241 
Spiritus  animalis,  42 

vitae,  42 

Stars,  56,  201,  212,  217,  265 
and  plants,  56,  215,   241, 

246,  262,  269 
Substance,  49,  219,  233,  247 
Succubi,  37,  109,  1 1 1 
Suicides,  100,  105 
Sulphur,  204,  231 
Sun,  156,  194,  214,  242 
Supernatural,  129 
Superstition,  127,  190,  277 
Sylvestres,  121 

Sympathetic  remedies,  187,  189 
Sympathy,  47,  58,  ioo,  177 
Systems  of  medicine,  229 

Talisman,  263 
Tartaric  diseases,  204 

INDEX 

3ii 

Tartarus,  204 

Teaching  during-  sleep,  96 

Temperaments,  71 

Theosophists,  268,  272 

Theosophy,  42,  266,  273 

Therapeutics,  198,  207 

Thought,  221 

naturalised,    57,    65,    140, 

239 

transfer,  142,  296 

Three  substances,  64,   197,   204, 

231,  233,  247,  249 

worlds,  263 

Tiffereau,  260 

Tinctura  physica,  236,  250 

Transformation,  245,  295 

Transmutation,  247,  295 

Transplantation  of  disease,  188 

Trarames,  42,  87 

Treatment  of  disease,   189,  193, 

199,211,  217. 
Trinity,  248,  289 
Tritheim,  Abbot,  244 
Truth,  172,  233 

seeking  of,  131 

Turba,  89 

Umbratiles,  43 

Undines,  91,  121 

Union  with  God,  273 

Unity,  47,  172 

Universal     mind,     141,    207, 

264 
Universe,  47,  172 

Vaccination,  166,  185 
Vampires,  43,  107,  226 
Vegetarianism,  1 5 1 
Vehicles,  59,  98,  1 86,  276,  283 
Venus,  208,  241,  242 
Vibrations,  104,  207 
Virtue  of  a  physician,  168 
Visions,  87,  91,  92,  94 

Warning  to  dabblers  in  alchemy, 

147,  245,  278 
Wax  figures  in  magic,  140,  158, 

160 
Weather-making,  150 
Wisdom,  127,  130,  168,  179,  188, 

214,  262,  269,  271,  274,  282, 

284 
Witchcraft,  in,  144,  148,  153 
Witches,  no,  112,  157,  226 

signs  of,  160 

Will,  204,  222,  225 

acting  at  a  distance,  140 

Will-power,  108,  141,  177,  179, 

225 
Will-spirit,  123,  161 
Woman,  7^  76,  156,  203 
Word,  60,  290 
Worlds,  invisible,  63,  263 

Xeni  nephidei,  43 

Yliaster,  43,  44,  46 

Zenexton,  303 

THE   END 

Printed  by  Ballantyne,  Hanson  &*  Co. 
at  Paul's  Work,  Edinburgh 

f 

R  147.  P*l 

n 

■ 

$888 

8KB8 

8388 

rag 

m
