Magic, White and Black
========================================
Franz Hartmann (1890) — Hartmann's occult primer — the English-language magical textbook of the theosophical era. Source: https://archive.org/details/magicwhiteandbl00unkngoog. Public domain.

Magic, White and Black

The Science of Finite and Infinite Life

CONTAINING

PRACTICAL HINTS FOR STUDENTS OF OCCULTISM

BY ^
FRANZ HARTMANN, M. D.

"For in our searchings are fulfilled all our desires, and vft
obtain the victory over all worlds."— iCAomi, Upanishad,

EIGHTH AMERICAN EDITION REVISED

PHILADELPHIA

DAVID McKAY COMPANY

WASHINGTON SQUARE

Digitized by

Google

OoFTBioiir, 1800^

BT

JOHN W. LOVELL,

OOPTBIOBT. 1901, THB MBTAFHT8I0AL PCBUBUINa CO.

OOPTBIGHT, 1901,

THEOSOPHIGAL SOOIBTT,

Printed in the United States of America

Digitized by

Google

DESCRIPTION OF THE FRONTISPIECE.

At the foot of the picture is a sleeping Sphinx^ whose
upper part (representing the higher principles) is human ;
while the lower parts (symbolizing the lower principles)
are of an animal nature. She is dreaming of the solution
of the great problem of the construction of the Universe
and of the nature and destiny of Man, and her dream takes
the shape of the figure above her, representing the Macro-
cosm and the Microcosm and their mutual interaction.

Above, around, and within all, without beginning and
without an end, penetrating and pervading all, from the
endless and unimaginable periphery to the invisible and
mcomprehensible centre, the *' Father " of All, the supreme
source of every power that ever manifested or may in the
future manifest itself, and by whose activity the world was
thrown into existence, being projected by the power of
His own will and assuming form in His imagination.

The Omega (and the Alpha in the centre) represent the
** Son,'* the Absolute having become manifest as the
Universal Logos or The Christ, the cause of the beginning
and the end of every created thing. It is One with the
" Father i* being manifested as a Trinity in a Unity, the
cause of what we call Space, Motion^ and Substance.
The " regenerated " spiritual man, whose matrix is his
own physical body, draws his nutriment from this univer-
sal spiritual principle as the physical foetus is nourished by
means of the womb of the mother, his soul being formed
from the astral influences or the soul of the world.

Out of the Universal Logos proceeds the ^*^ invisible
Light ''of the Spirit, the Truth, the Law, and the Life^
embracing and penetrating the Cosmos, while the visible
light of Nature is only its most material aspect or mode of
manifestation, in the same sense as the visible sun is the
reflex of its divine prototype, the invisible centre of power
or the great spiritual Sun*

Digitized by

Google

6 DESCRIPTION OF THE FRONTISPIECE.

The circle with the twelve signs of the Zodiac, enclosing
the space in which the planets belonging to our solar sys-
tem are represented, symbolizes the Cosmos, filled with
the planetary influences pervading the Astral Light.
Here is the store-house of Life, the Iliaster of Paracelsus,
in which the Mysterium magnum (the Spirit) is active.

The activity in the Cosmos is represented by the inter-
laced triangle. The two outer ones represent the great
powers of creation, preservation, and destruction, or Bra-
hamay Vishnu^ and Siva^ acting upon the elements of
Fire, Water, and Earth — that is to say, upon the original
principles out of which ethereal, fluid and solid material
substances and forms are produced.

The two inner interlaced triangles refer more especially
to the development of Man. By C, and D represent
Knowledge^ the Knowery and the Knowtiy which trinity
constitutes Mind or Consciousness, E, F, and G represent
the Physical Man (Stoola-Sharira), the Ethereal or Inner
Man (Sukshma-Sharira), sidereal body of Paracelsus, astral
body, Kama rupa, etc., and the Spiritual Man (Karana-
Sharira, the divine Archaeus, the spiritual Soul). The
centre represents the divine Atma^ the personal Christy
being identical with the Universal Logos. It is, like the
latter, a Trinity in a Unity,* receiving its light from the
Baram-Atma and radiating it again from the centre. It
is the spiritual seed implanted in the soul of man, through
whose growth immortal life is attained. Its light is the
Jiose of the Cross that is formed by Wisdom and Power y
being joined together into one and sending its influence
through the world. But below all is the realm of Jllusiony
of the most gross and heavy materialized thoughts, sinking
into Darkness and Death {the Eighth Sphere or Chaos)y
where they decompose and putrefy, and are resolved again
into the elements out of which the Universe came into
existence.

It will be noticed that the three A's form a five-pointed
star in the centre of the double interlaced triangle repre-
senting the six-pointed star. The five is continually seek-
ing to expand and to come in perfect harmony with the
six, while the latter is forever striving to enter the five and
to become manifest therein. In other words, the dark and

* Of the three interlaced A's only one is distinctly drawn in tht
igure.

Digitized by VjOOQIC


DESCRIPTION^ OF THE FRONTISPIECE. |

corporified centre seeks for eternal freedom and light j
while the unlimited light seeks for corporification and form.
One has a centripetal and the other a centrifugal action,
and as neither can conquer the other, there results per-
petual motion ; the pulsation of the eternal heart of Divi-
nity; the law of evolution and involution. If the five-
pointed star were to become a six-pointed one — ^if the
Rosicrucian Rose had six leaves instead of five — this
turning of the wheel would have an end \ there would be
A/r«ra«a,— eternal rest.

Digitized by

Google

Digitized by

Google

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

The favor with which " Magic '* has been received by those
who are interested in the study of the hidden mysteries ol
Nature, made it expedient to publish a third edition of this
book. From an insignificant pamphlet, written originally
for the purpose of demonstrating to a few inexperienced
inquirers, that the study of the occult side of nature was
not identical with the vile practices of sorcery, " Magic "
grew into a book of respectable dimensions, and now this
new edition is to be still more enlarged, and I hope will
also become still more useful.

The most serious objection which has been made against
this book has been on account of its title ; but the causes
which induced me to select such a title were suggested by
the purpose for which the book was intended ; nor would
I at present be able to find one more appropriate for it,
for " Magic" means that divine art of exercise of spiritual
power by which the awakened spirit in man may con-
trol the living elements.

But if we desire to master any forces whatever, either
within or beyond our own sphere, it is above all necessary
to know what these forces are, and we have no better
means to study the qualities of any internal forces than
by observing those which are active within ourselves, the
perception of the processes. The art Magic is the exercise
of spiritual power, which may be obtained by practising
self-control, and this power cannot be acquired in any other
way. The constitutions of all men are fundamentally the
same, and in each human being are magical powers germi-
nally or in a latent condition ; but they cannot be said to
exist before they become active and manifest themselves,
first interiorly, and afterwards in an outward direction.

It was not my object, in composing this book, to write
merely a code of ethics^ and thereby to increase the already
existing enormous mountain of unread moral precepts, but
to assist the student of Occultism in studying the elements

Digitized by

Google

lo PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

of which his own soul is composed, and to learn to know
his own psychical organism. I want to give an impulse to
the study of a science, which may be called the " anatomy
and physiology ofthesouly* which investigates the elements
of which the soul is composed, and the source from which
man's desires and emotions spring.

To arrive at this end the merely intellectual reading of
books on Occultism is entirely insufficient. The divine
mysteries of nature are above and beyond the power of
conception of the semi-animal intellect. They must be
intuitively grasped by the power of the spirit, which enters
into the substance of which the world is formed. If we
cannot perceive a spiritual truth with the eyes of the spirit,
intellectual reasoning and book learning will not enable us
to perceive it clearly. Books, dealing with such subjects,
should not be masters to us to whom we must blindly fol-
low ; they should merely be our assistants. They are
merely useful to describe the details of things which we
already — although perhaps indistinctly — see with our
spiritual perception ; they are merely servants to hold up
before our eyes magnifying mirrors, wherein we see the
truths, whose presence we feel in our own soul.

Jacob BoehmCy the great theosophist, says in regard to
the study of Occultism : " If you desire to investigate the
divine mysteries of nature, investigate first your own mind,
and ask yourself about the purity of your purpose. Do
you desire to put the good teachings which you may
receive into practice for the benefit of humanity? Are
you ready to renounce all selfish desires, which cloud your
mind and hinder you to see the clear light of eternal truth?
Are you willing to become an instrument for the manifest-
ation of Divine Wisdom ? Do you know what it means to
become united with your own higher Self, to get rid of
your lower Self, to become one with the living universal
power of Good, and to die to your own insignificant terres-
trial personality ? Or do you merely desire to obtain great
knowledge, so that your curiosity may be gratified, and
that you may be proud of your science, and believe your-
self to be superior to the rest of mankind ? Consider, that
the depths of Divinity can only be searched by the divine
spirit itself, which is active within you. Meal knowledge
must come from our own interior, not merely from extern
nals ; and they who seek for the essence of things merely ia

Digitized by

Google

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. ii

externals, may find the artificial color of a thing, but not
the true thing itself."

Let therefore those who wish to acquire " Magic,** i.^.,
spiritual or divine power, follow this advice ; let them rise
mentally into the highest regions of thought and remain
therein as its permanent residents. Let them cultivate
their physical bodies and their mental constitutions in such
a manner that the matter of which they are composed will
become less gross and more movable and penetrable to the
divine light of the spirit. Then will the veils that separate
them from the invisible world become thinner.

The following pages arc an attempt to show the way
how Man may become a co-operator of the Divine Power
whose product is Nature ; they constitute a book which
may properly bear the title of " Magic," for if the readers
succeed in practically following its teachings, they wTll be
able to perform the greatest of all magical feats, the spi«
»iiual regeneration of Msui.

Digitized by

Google

Digitized by

Google

PREFACE.

Our age is the age of opinions. The majority of our
educated people live, so to say, in their heads, and the
claims of the heart are neglected. Scepticism is king, and
wisdom is only permitted to speak when it does not come
into conflict with selfish considerations. The guardians of
science attempt to bring the infinite truth within the grasp
of their finite understanding, and whatever they fail to
comprehend is supposed by them to have no existence.
Our speculative philosophers refuse to recognize the
incomprehensible power of universal love whose light is
reflected in the human soul ; they wish to examine eternal
truths by the flickering candle-light of their minds' reason*
ing from the basis of sensual observations; they forget
that Humanity is a Unity ^ and that one individual cannot
encompass the All. They ask for scientific reasons why
man should be faithful and true, and why he should not
consider his own personal interests above those of the rest
of mankind.

It is universally admitted that man's final destiny cannot
depend on the theories which he may have formed in his
mind regarding Cosmology, Pneumatology, plans of salva-
tion, etc., and as long as he possesses no real knowledge,
one set oif beliefs or opinions may perhaps be as good as
another j but it cannot be denied, that the sooner man
frees himself of erroneous opinions and recognizes the real
truth, the less will he be impeded by the obstacles which
are in the way of his higher evolution, and the sooner
will he reach the summit of his final perfection.

The most important questions seem, therefore, to be :
" Is it possible that a man should actually know anything
transcending his sensual perception, unless it is told to
him by some supposed authority ? Can the power of intui-
tion be developed to such an extent as to become actual
knowledge wifiiout any possibility of error, or shall we
always be doomed to depend on hearsay and opinions ?
Can any individual man possess powers transcendmg those

Digitized by

Google

14 FREFACB.

which are admitted to exist bj modem science, and how
can such transcendental powers be acquired ? "

The following pages were written for the purpose of
attempting to answer such questions, by calling the atten*
tion of those who desire to know the truth to a consider-
ation of the true nature of Man and of his position in the
Universe. Those who believe that they already know it of
course will not need the instructions which Uiese pages
contain, but to those who desire to know they may be of
some use, and to the latter we recommend the advice given
by Gautama Buddha to his disciples : " Believe nothing
which is unreasonable, and reject nothing as unreasonable
without proper examination."

This book was not written for the purpose of convinc-
ing sceptics of the fact that phenomena of an occult char^
acter have taken place in the past and are occurring at
present ; though an attempt has been made to prove the
possibility of mystic occurrences, by offering some explan-
ation in regard to the laws by which they may be pro-
duced. No space has been devoted to lengthy illustrative
examples of phenomena. Those who recjuire them will
find such ex'idence in the books whose titles have been
given at the foot of the pages.

Digitized by

Google

PREFACE TO THE SIXTH EDITION.

It is the usual fate of books that are written to suit the
spirit of the times, that even if they create a sensation at
their first appearance, the interest for them soon dies out ;
either because they are superseded by others, giving ex-
pression to more advanced thought, or because their con-
tents were suited only to a limited circle of readers. This
has not been the case with ** MagiCy White and Blacky"
which was bom in India in the year 1884, and the num-
ber of whose readers has increased year by year, so that
now after sixteen years a new edition is again called for.
Moreover, the book has been translated into different
European languages, all of which goes to show that it is
considered by many as a standard work on theosophy,
metaphysics and occult science, and there is no doubt
that it will hold its position as such ; because the truths
which it contains are eternal and will never grow old, and
the form in which they are represented is generally re-
garded to be comprehensible and clear.

Magic is that knowledge of the spiritual powers hidden
within the constitution of man, which enables him to em-
ploy them consciously and intelligently. If he employs
them for the purpose of attaining perfection through the
realization within himself of the highest ideal, common
to all mankind, it is called "white magic"; and he may
use these powers for beneficent purposes and in harmony
with the universal law of love and justice ; if he employs
them for low or selfish purposes, or in opposition to
divine law, he makes the high subservient to the low, he
degrades the spirit, and with it himself. This misuse of
divine powers is called "black magic," and it was not my
object to teach this art, but to warn the readers against it

Within the last twenty years the desire to know more
about that which belongs to the higher or spiritual life of
man has grown and spread all over the world ; but the

Digitized by

Google

i6 PREFACE TO THE SIXTH EDITION.

methods of investigation differ. Among the scientific cir-
cles of the West there is observable a general striving for
materializing the spirit ; that is to say, to drag down spirit-
ual truth to the lower material level and make it com-
prehensible to the semi-animal intellect, without taking
the trouble to try to raise oneself spiritually to those
heights, where alone the light of truth can be perceived
in its own purity. This kind of research will never pro-
duce anj^hing higher than opinions and theories, based
upon external observations and inferences; because the
speculative intellect cannot rise above itself and spiritual
truth can be grasped only spiritually. This is what St.
Paul teaches when he says (I. Corinth., II., 6): "We
speak wisdom among them that are perfect ; yet not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the great ones of this world,
that comes to naught, but we speak the wisdom of God
in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained
before the world to our glory.

The other way of investigation, which is the only true
one and more generally followed in the East, is to spiritu-
alize the body; to render ourselves more spiritual, so as
to be able to receive, feel and grasp spiritual truth. The
power to do this is within ourselves, as is taught not only
by the sages of the East, but also by the Christian bible,
for it is written : '* Know ye not that ye are the temple of
God and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you ?" (I. Cor-
inth., III., 1 6.) In this Spirit of God in man rest all of
man's divine and magical powers. To call the attention
of the readers to the divine powers existing within them-
selves, thus to lead them to a knowledge of their own higher
nature, to aid them in entering a higher life and finally to
state what the greatest mystics of the East and West have
taught in regard to the nature and the development of
these powers, has been the aim of I^e Author.

Florence (Italy), May 9, 1900.

Digitized by

Google

PREFACE TO THE SEVENTH EDITION.

The constantly increasing demand for this well known
work, during the past years, is the cause for the appear-
ance of the present edition.

'* Magic. White and Black " has done much to awaken
interest in the mysterious powers latent in man. It has
stimulated many to attempt the developing of the moral,
mental, and spiritual sides of their nature.

The success of the book was assured from the begin-
ning, not only from its elevating teachings, but from the
easy and popular style in which these teachings were
presented.

Previous editions have been circulated in all parts of
the world. Each reader has acknowledged the helpful-
ness of the book and has created in others the desire to
possess it

The Publishers.

Digitized by

Google

Digitized by

Google

I

I

MAGIC.

INTRODUCTION.

** There is no religion bigher than the recognition of the truth.*

Whatever misinterpretation ancient or modem ignorance
may have given to the word Magic, its only true signifi<
cance is T^e Highest Science, or Wisdom based upon
knowledge and practical experience.

If you doubt whether there is any such thing as Magic,
and if you desire any practical illustration about it, open
your eyes and look around you. See the world, the ani-
mals, and the trees, and ask yourself whether they could
have come into existence by any other power than by the
magic power of nature. Magical power is not a supernatural
power, if by the term " supematiu-al " you mean a power
which is outside, beyond, or external to nature. To sup-
pose the existence of such a power is an absurdity and a
superstition, opposed to all our experience ; for we see that
all organisms, vegetable and animal ones, grow by the
action of internal forces acting outwardly, and not by hav-
ing something added to their substance from the outside.
A seed does not become a tree, nor a child 'a man, hf
having substance added to its organism by some outside
workman, or like a house which is built by putting stones
on the top of each other j but living things grow by the
action of an internal force, acting from a centre within the
form. To this centre flow the influences coming from the
universal storehouse of matter and motion, and from there
they radiate again towards the periphery, and perform that
labor which builds up the living organism.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

20 LIFE.

But what else can such a power be, except spiritual
power, and as such it is supernatural, although acting
in nature ; for nature is neither Spirit nor God, but a
product of the Divine Spirit, an image formed in the
universal Mind by the power of the Divine Will. God is
All ; but All is not God, and the magical powers of Justice,
Wisdom and Love, etc., are not products of nature, but
attributes of the spirit. As such they are higher than
nature, although not outside of it. It penetrates to the
very centre of material things. It cannot be a mere
mechanical force; for we know that a mechanical force
ceases as soon as the impulse which originated it ceases to
act. It cannot be a chemical force, for chemical action
ceases when the chemical combination of the substances
which were to combine has taken place. It must there-
fore be a living power, and as life cannot be a product of a
dead form, it can be nothing else but the power of Life,
acting within the life-centres of the forms.

This Life or ^/// in nature is a magician, and every plant,
animal, and man is a magician, who uses this power uncon-
sciously and instinctively to build up his own organism ;
or, in other words, every living being is an organism in
which the magic power of life acts ; and if a man should
attain the knowledge how to control this power of life, and
to employ it consciously, instead of merely submitting
unconsciously to its influence, then he would be a magician,
and could control the processes of life in his own organism.

Now the question is : Can any man obtain such a power
as to control the processes of life ? The answer to this
question depends on what you mean by the term " man.'*
If you mean by " man " an intellectual animal, such as we
meet every day in the streets, then the answer is ; No !
for the majority of the men and women of our present
generation, including our greatest scientific lumens, know
absolutely nothing about that universal thing or no-thing,
which produces what we call " Life," and which we may call
the " Will ; " because we know that no action ever takes place
without an effort of what we call "Will," exercised with or
without relative consciousness. Some of them have not
even made up their minds whether or not they will believe
in its existence. They can neither see it nor feel it, and
therefore they do not know what to make of it.

But if you mean by " man " that intelligent principle,

Digitized by

Google

tVILL. tl

which is active within the organism of man, and which
constitutes him a human being, and by whose action he
becomes a being very distinct from and above the animals
in human or animal form, then the answer is : Yes I for the
divine power which acts within the organism of animal
man is the same and identical power which acts within the
centre of nature. It is an internal power of man, and
belongs to man, and if man once knows all the powers
which belong to his essential constitution, and knows
how to use them, then he may enter from the passive into
the active state, and employ these powers himself.

Absurd as it may seem, it is nevertheless a logical con-
sequence drawn from the fundamental truths about tiie
constitution of man, that if a man could control the univer-
sal power of life acting within himself, he might prolong
the life of his organism as long as it pleased to him ; if he
could control it, and knew all the laws of matter, he might
render it dense or vaporous, concentrate it to a small point,
or expand it, so as to occupy a great deal of space.
Verily, truth is stranger than fiction, and we might see it,
if we could only rise above the narrow conceptions and
prejudices which we have inherited and acquired by educa-
tion and sensual observation.

The most strange things happen continually in nature,
and hardly attract our attention. They do not seem
strange to us, although we do not understand them;
merely because we are accustomed to see them every day.
Who would be so " foolish " as to believe that a tree could
grow out of a seed — as there is evidently no tree in the
seed — if his experience had not told him that trees grow
out of seeds in spite of all arguments to the contrary ?
Who would believe that a flower would grow out of a plant,
if he had not seen it, for observation and reason show
that there is no flower in the stalk ? Nevertheless, flowers
grow, and cannot be disputed away.

Everywhere in nature the action of an universal law is
manifest, but we cannot see the law itself. Everywhere
we see the manifestations of a will ; but those who seek
for the origin of Will within their own brains will seek for
it in vain.

The art of magic is the art of employing invisible or so-
called spiritual agencies to obtain certain visible results.
Such agencies are not flitting about in space, ready to come

Digitized by

Google

M MAGIC.

at the command of anyone who has learned certain incan-
tations and ceremonies; but they consist principally in
the imseen but nevertheless powerful influences of the
Emotions and the Will, of desires and passions, thought
and imagination, love and hate, fear and hope, faith and
doubt, etc., ertc. They are the powers of what is called
the soul ; they are employed everywhere and by everybody
every day, consciously or unconsciously, willingly or unwil-
lingly, and while those that cannot control or resist such
influences, but are controlled by them, are passive instru-
ments, ^^ Mediums ^^ through which such unseen powers
act, and often their unwilhng slaves ; those who are able
to guide and control such influences by gaining control
over themselves, are, in proportion to their controlling
capacity, active, and powerful, and true Magicians. We
see, therefore, that with the exception of irresponsible
persons, every one who has any will power is, in so far as
he exercises that power, an active Magician ; a white
magician if he employs them for good, a black magician if
he uses them for the purposes of evil.

We all cannot honestly say " we have life; " for life
does not belong to us, and we cannot control or mono-
polize it. All we can say without arrogance and presumption
is that we are instruments through which an universal
principle that produces what we call"Z/yif" manifests
itself in the form of a human being. We are all Mediums^
through which an universal Will which causes Life acts.
He who thinks that he has any power whatever of his own,
thinks foolish ; for all the powers he has are lent him by
nature, or — ^more correctly speaking — ^by that etemsd
spiritual power, which acts in and from the centre of
nature, and which men have called " God," because they
have found it to be the source of all good.

No one will deny that Man, besides having physical
powers, is also temporally endowed with mental and
spiritual energies. We love, respect or obey a person,
not on account of his superior bodily strength, but on ac-
count of his intellectual and moral worth, or while we are
nnder the spell of some real or imaginary authority that
we may believe him to possess. A king or a bishop has,
as a person, not necessarily any more power than his
lackey or butler, and must make himself known before he
will be obeyed ; a captain may be the weakest man in his

Digitized by

Google

THB MACROCOSM AND MICROCOSM. 23

company and still his soldiers obey him. We love beauty,
harmony, and sublimity, not on account of their usefulness
for material purposes, but because they satisfy an inner
sense, which does not belong to the physical plane.

What would be a world without the magic power of
love of beauty and harmony ? How would a world look
if made after a pattern furnished by the modem '' rational-
istic philosopher " ? A world in which beauty and the power
of good were not recognized could be nothing else but a
world of maniacs. In such a world art and poetry could
not exist, justice would become a convenience, honesty be
equivalent with imbecility, to be truthful would be to be
foolish, and Self-interest the only god worthy of any con-
sideration.

Magic is that science which deals with the mental powers
of man, and shows what control he may exercise over him-
self and others. In order to ^udy the powers of man it is
necessary to investigate what Man is, and what relation he
bears to the universe, and such an investigation, if properly
conducted, will show that the elements which compose the
essential man are identical with those we find in the imi«
verse ; that is to say, that the universe is the Macrocosm^
and man — its true copy — the Microcosm.

Microcosmic man and the Macrocosm of nature are one.
How couici it be possible that the Macrocosm should con-
tain anything not contained within the Microcosm, or that
Man should have something within his organism which
cannot be found within the grand organism of nature ? Is
not man the child of nature, and can there be anything
within his constitution which does not come from his eter-
nal father and mother ? If man's organization contained
something uomatural, he would be a monster, and nature
would spew him out. £ver3rthing contained in nature can
be found within the organism of man, and exists therein
either in a germinal or developed state ; either latent or
active, and may be perceived by him who possesses the
power of self-knowledge.

We are born into a world in which we find ourselves
surrounded by physical objects. There seems to be still
another — a subjective — ^world within us, capable of receiv-
ing and retaining impressions from Uie outside world.
Each one is a world of its own, with a relation to space
different from that of the other. Each has its days of sun*

Digitized by

Google

94 RELIGIOIT AND SCIENCE.

shine and its nights of darkness, which are not regulated
by the days and nights of the other ; each has its clouds
and its storms, and shapes and forms of its own.

If we ask of science to teach us the true nature of these
worlds and the laws that govern them — but physical science
deals only with extem^d forms — she gives only a partial
solution of the problems of the objective world, and leaves
us in regard to the subjective world entirely in the dark.
Modern science classifies phenomena and describes events,
but to describe how an event takes place is not sufficient
to explain why it takes place. To discover causes, which
are in themselves the effects of unknown primal causes,
is only to evade one difficulty by substituting another.
Science describes some of the attributes of things, but the
first causes which brought these attributes into existence
are unknown to her, and will remain so, until her powers
of perception will penetrate in the unseen.

Besides scientific observation there claims to be still
another way to obtain knowledge of the mysterious side of
nature. The religious teachers of the world claim to have
sounded the depths which the scientists cannot reach.
Their doctrines are supposed by many to have been
received through certain divine or angelic revelations, pro-
ceeding from a supreme, infinite, omnipresent, and yet
personal — and therefore limited — Being — the existence of
which has never been proved. Where is the proof that
such revelations are either true or divine? Surely, a
blind belief in the contents of a book cannot be real know-
ledge ; nor can it be reasonably supposed that the theo-
logians themselves have any actual knowledge of what
they teach. We dare say that there are but few clerg3rmen
who are personally acquainted with God. Nevertheless
thousands are engaged in teaching others that which they
themselves do not know, and in spite of a very great
number of religious systems there is comparatively little
religion at present upon the Earth.

The term Religion is derived from the Latin word re-
ligere, which may be properly translated *^ to bind back,"
or to " relate." Religion, in the true sense of the term,
implies that science which examines the link which exists
between man and the cause from which he originated, or
in other words, which deals with the relation which exists
between man and the world of causes. True religion is

Digitized by

Google

MYSTIC. 95

therefore a science far higher than a science based upon
mere sensual perception, but it cannot be in conflict with
what is true in science. Only what is false in science must
necessarily be in conflict with what is true in religion, and
what is false in religion is in conflict with what is true in
science. True religion and true science are ultimately one
and the same thing ; a religion that clings to illusions, and
an illusory science, are equally false, and the greater the
obstinacy with which they cling to their illusions the more
pernicious is their effect.

There should a distinction be made between " religion "
and " religionism ; " between " science " and ** scieniism ',*^
between " mystic" and " " mysticism.**

The highest aspect of Religion is practically the union of
man with the Supreme First Cause, from which his essence
emanated in the beginning.

Its second aspect teaches tne relations existing between
that Great First Cause and Man ; in other words, the re-
lations existing between the Macrocosm and Microcosm.

In its lowest aspect religionism consists of the adulation
of dead forms, of the worshipping of fetiches, of fruitless
attempts to wheedle oneself into the favor of some imagin-
ary deity, to persuade " God " to change his mind, and to
try to obtain some favors which are not in accordance with
justice.

Science m her highest aspect is the self-knowledge of the
fundamental laws of Nature, and is therefore a spiiitual
science, based upon the knowledge of the spirit within our
own selves.

In her lower aspect it is a knowledge of external phe-
nomena, and the secondary or superficial causes which
produce the latter^ and which our scientism mistakes for
the final cause.

In its lowest aspect scientism is a system of observation
and classification of external phenomena, of the causes of
which we know nothing.

Religionism and Scientism are continually subject to
changes. They have been created by illusions, and die
when the illusions are over. True Science and true
Religion are one, and if joined to Practice, they form the
three-lateral pyramid, whose foimdations are upon the
earth, and whose point reaches to heaven.

Mystic in its true meaning is spiritual knowledge;

Digitized by

Google

10 MYSTICISHr.

that is to sajv the knowledge of spiritual and " super-
sensual" things, perceived by the spiritual powers of per-
ception. These powers are germinally contained in every
human organization, but only few have developed them
sufficiently to be of any practical use.

Mysticism is a hankering after illusions, a desire to pry
into mysteries which we cannot comprehend, a craving to
satisfy our curiosity in regard to what we ought not to know,
as long as we have not the power to understand it. It is the
realm of fancies, of dreams, the paradise of ghost-seers,
and of spiritistic tomfooleries of all kinds.

But which is the true religion and the true science?
There is no doubt that a definite relationship exists
between Man and the cause that called humanity into ex-
istence, and a true religion and a true science must be the
one which teaches the true terms of that relation. If we
take a superficial view of the various religious systems of
the world, we find them all apparently contradicting each
other. We find a great mass of apparent superstitions and
absurdities heaped upon a grain of something that may be
true. We admire the ethics and moral doctrines of our
favorite religious system, and we take its theological
rubbish in our bargain, forgetting that the ethics of nearly
all religions are essentially the same, and that the rubbish
which surrounds them is not real religion. It is evidently
an absurdity to believe that any system could be true, un-
less it contained the truth. But it is equally evident that
a thing cannot be true and false at the same time. The
truth can only be one. The truth never changes ; but we
ourselves change, and as we change so changes our aspect of
the truth. The various religious systems of the world can-
not be unnatural or supernatural products. They are all
the natural outgrowth of man's evolution upon this globe,
and they differ only in so fiar as the <!:onditions under which
they came into existence differed at the time when they
began to exist ; but true religion is supernatural ; for it is
that clinging of the soul of man to that which is higher
than his semi-animal and impermanent nature. Each in-
tellectual human being, except one blinded by prejudice,
recognizes the fact that each of the great religious systems
of the world contains certain truths, which we intuitively
know to be true ; and as there can be only one fundamen-
tal truth, so all these religions are branches of the same

Digitized by

Google

TRUTH. rt

tree, even if the forms in which the truth manifests itself
are not alike. The sunshine is everywhere the same, only
its intensity differs in different localities. In one place it
induces the growth of palms, in another of mushrooms ;
but there is only one Sun in our system. The processes
going on on the physical plane have their analogies in the
spiritual realm, for there is only one Nature, one Law,

If one person quarrels with another about religion, he
cannot have the true religion, nor can he have any true
knowledge. The only true religion is the religion of Love,
and love does not quarrel. Love is an element of Wisdom,
and there can be no wisdom without love. Each species
of birds in the woods sings a different tune ; but the prin*
ciple which causes them to sing is the same in each. They
do not quarrel with each other, because one can sing
better than the rest. Moreover, religious disputations,
with their resulting animosities, are the most useless things
in the world ; for no one can combat the darkness by
fighting it with a stick ; the only way to remove darkness
is to kindle a light, the only way to dispel spiritual igno*
ranee is to let the light of knowledge that comes from the
centre of love shine into the heart.

All religions are based upon internal truth, all have an
outside ornamentation which varies in character in the
different systems, but all have the same foundation of
truth, and if we compare the various systems with one
another, looking below the surface of exterior forms, we
find that this truth is in all religious systems one and the
same. In all this truth has been hidden beneath a more or
less allegorical language, impersonal and invisible powers
have been personified and represented in images carved in
stones or wood, and the formless and real has been pictured
in illusive forms. These forms in letters, and pictures, and
images are the means by which truths may be brought to
the attention of the imripe Mind. They are to the grown-
up children of all nations what picture-books are to small
children who are not yet able to read, and it would be as
unreasonable to deprive grown-up children of their images
before they are able to read in their own hearts, as it
would be to take away the picture-books from little children
and to ask them to read printed books, which they cannot
f et understand.

Vexy stupid indeed and insignificant would be the stories

Digitized by

Google

tS FICTION

contained in the Bihle^ and in othw relij^Cus books, if the
personal events described therein were referring merely to
certain occurrences having happened in the lives of certain
individuals who lived some thousands of years ago, and
whose biography can seriously interest no one to-day.
What do we care now about the family affairs of a man
called Adam or Abraham ? Why should we want to be
interested in knowing how many legitimate or illegitimate
children the Patriarchs had, and what became of them?
What is it to us whether or not a man by the name of
Jonah was thrown into the water and swallowed by a
whale ? What happens to-day in the various countries of
Europe is more interesting and important for us to know
than what happened at the court of Zerubabel or Nabu-
chodonoser.

But fortunately for the Bible and — if we only knew
how to read it — ^fortunately for us, the stories contained
therein are by no means merely histories of persons who
lived in ancient times, but they are allegories and myths
having very often a very deep meaning, of which our ex-
pounders of the Bible, as well as its critics, usually know
very little. Fictions are necessary to represent truths ;
but they should not be mistaken for the truth itself. The
truth is eternal, and cannot be grasped by that which is
neither eternal nor true. We need fictions to bring it
within our grasp as long as we have ourselves merely a
fictitious existence.

The men and the women of the old and new " testa-
ment " are much more than mere persons supposed to
have existed at that time. They are personifications of
eternally active spiritual forces, of which physical science
does not even know that they exist ; and their histories
give an account of their action, their interrelations within
the Macrocosm and its counterpart the Microcosm ; they
teach the history of the evolution of mankind in its
spiritual aspect

If our natural philosophers would study the Bible in its
esoteric and spiritual aspects, they might learn a great
many things which they desire to know. They might
learn to find out what are the true powers of the " living
faith," and which are required to produce occult pheno*
mena at will ; they might find instruction how to trans-
mute lead or iron into pure gold, and to transform
animals into gods.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

INTUmolT. ag

But it is a truth, based upon natural laws, that man can
see nothing except that which exists in his ipind. If his
mind is filled with illusions, he will see nothing but illu-
sions, and the deepest of symbols will be pictures without
meaning to him.

If our children — the big ones as well as the little ones
— are only looking at the pictures without learning the
text, they are apt to grow to believe the pictorial repre-
sentations to be the very things they are intended to
represent ; they become accustomed to forget that forms
are only illusions, and that formless realities cannot be
seen. It is so much easier to believe than to think.
Children should not linger over their picture-books so long
as to neglect their higher education. Humanity has out-
grown the infancy of its present cycle, and asks for more
intellectual food ; the age of superstition is passing away,
and the demand is not for opinions but for knowledge, and
knowledge cannot be obtained without an effort. The
expressed opinion of one person can only give rise to
knowledge in another, if corroborated by the same or a
similar experience of the latter. A person can only truly
believe that which he knows, and he can only actually
know that which he has perceived.

There is a difference between perceiving and under-
standing the truth. We may perceive the truth with our
heart, and we understand it with our brain. In other
words ; We may feel the truth intuitively, and examine it
intellectually. If our present generation would cultivate
the faculty of feeling the truth with their hearts, and after-
wards examine that which they feel by means of their in-
tellect, we would soon have a far better and happier state
of society everywhere. But the great curse of our age is
that the intellectual faculties are strained to their utmost
power *of resistance, to examine the external form of things
intellectually without perceiving their spiritual character
by the power of intuition.

Men, instead of living in the sanctuary of the temples
which they inhabit, are continually absent from there,
and reside in the garret under the roof, looking out through
the windows of the garret after the illusions of life. Day
and night they stand there and watch, careful that none of
the passing illusions may escape their observation, and
while their attention is absorbed by these idle shows, the

Digitized by

Google

30 OPINION.

thieves enter the house and the sanctuary without being
seen, and steal away the treasures. Then at the time
when the house is destroyed, and death appears, the soul
returns to the heart and finds it empty and desolate, and
all the illusions that occupied the brain during life fly away,
and man is left poor indeed, because he has not perceived
the truth in his heart.

The real object of a religious system should therefore be
to teach a way by which a person may develop the power
to perceive the truth. To ask a man to believe in the
opinion expressed by another, and to remain satisfied with
such a belief, is to ask him to remain ignorant, and to
trust to another person more than to himseE A person
without knowledge can have no conviction — no faith, and
his adoption of one particular system depends on the cir-
ciunstances under which he is bom, or brought up, or sur-
rounded. He is most liable to adopt that system which
his parents or neighbors have inherited or adopted, and if
he changes from one system to another, he, generally
speaking, does so from mere sentimentality, or on account
of some selfish consideration, expecting to obtain some
benefit to himself by that change. From a spiritual stand-
point he will gain nothing under such circumstances;
because, to approach the truth, he must love the truth for
its own sake, and not on account of the personal advantage
that it may bring ; from an intellectual standpoint he will
gain little or nothing by exchanging one superstition for
another. The only way by which Man can hope to arrive
at the truth is to love the truth on account of its being the
truth, and to free his mind from all prejudices and predi-
lections, so that its light may penetrate into the mind.

What is the religionism of to-day, but a religion of fear?
Men do not wish to avoid vice, but they wish to avoid the
punishment for having indulged in vice. Their experience
teaches them that the laws of nature are unchangeable, but
nevertheless they continue to act against the universal
law. They claim to believe in a God who is unchangeable,
and yet they implore His assistance if they desire to Dreax
His own law. When will they rise up to the true con-
ception that the only possible God is that universal power
which acts through the law, which is itself the Law, and
cannot be changed ? To break the law is identical with
breaking the God within ourselves, and the only way to

Digitized by

Google

SELF-KNOW LEDGB. 3I

obtain forgiveness afler He is broken is to restore the laWi
and to create a new God within ourselves.

It may be well to study the opinions of others, and to
store them up in the book of our memory, but we should
not accept them on any merely external evidence, nor
reject them without investigation, but weigh them in the
scales of reason and justice. Even the teachings of the
world's greatest Adepts, unimpeachable as they may be,
t:an only instruct us, but give us no real knowledge. They
can show the way, but we must take ourselves the steps on
the ladder. Were we to recognise their dictum as the final
aim, to be accepted without any further investigation, we
should again fall back into a system of belief for the sake
of authority. Knowledge gives strength, doubt paralyzes
the will. A man who does not believe that he is able to
walk will not be able to walk as long as he does not
believe; a man who knows by experience that he can
command himself will be able to do so. He who can com-
mand himself can command that which is below him,
because the low is controlled by the high, and there is
nothing higher than Man having obtained a perfect know-
ledge of Self.

The knowledge of Self is identical with Self-knowledge,
because the true self of Man is God ; it is unlimited, and
knowing its own self it knows everything by its own power.
It is knowledge independent of any opinions, dogmas or
doctrines, no matter from what authority tliey may pro-
ceed If we study the teachings of any supposed authority
external to our own selves, we at best know what the
opinion of such an authority is in regard to the truth, but
we do not necessarily arrive thereby at a self-knowledge of
the truth. If we, for instance, learn what Christ taught
about God, we are only informed of what he knew or
believed to know, but we cannot know God for all that,
imless we awaken to a realization of his presence within
our own heart. The knowledge of even fiie wisest of all
men, if communicated to us, will be to us nothing more
than an opinion, as long as it is not experienced within our
own selves. As long as we cannot penetrate within the
soul of Man, we can know little more about him but his
corporeal form ; but how could we penetrate within the
soul of another as long as we have not the capacity to enter
cur own? Therefore the beginning of all real knowledge
is the knowledge of Self.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

JJ SPECULATIONS.

Does "rationalistic" speculation confer any true know-
ledge of Man ? The range of her power of observation is
limited by the perceptive power of her physical senses,
assisted by physical instruments ; she has no means to
investigate that which transcends physical sense, she can-
not enter the temple of the unseen, she only knows the
external form in which the reality dwells. She only knows
the illusive form of man, she knows nothing whatever of
the essential and real man. In vain shall we look to her
for the solution of the problem, which thousands of years
ago the Egyptian Sphinx propounded.

Do the popular religious systems confer any true know-
ledge of Man ? The conception which the average theolo-
gian has of the mysterious being called man is as little as
liiat of the professor of modem science. He looks upon
man as a personal being, isolated from other personal
beings around whose infinite little personality centres the
interests of the infinitely great. He forgets that the
founders upon the principal religious systems taught that
the original and essential man (Adam) was an impersonal
power, that the real man (the Christ) is a whole and cannot
be divided, and that the personal man is only the tempor-
ary temple in which the universal spirit resides.*

The misconceptions arising from ignorance of the true
nature of Man are the cause that the popular religious
opinions held by the average theologians in Christian and
Pagan countries are based upon selfishness, contrary to the
spirit of that which true religion teaches. Christians and
" Heathens " clamor for some personal benefit to be con-
ferred by some imaginary person upon their insignificant
personal self, either here or in the problematical hereafter.
Each one of such short-sighted persons wants to be saved
himself above all, the salvation of the rest is a matter of
second consideration. They expect to obtain some benefit
which they do not deserve, to wheedle themselves into the
favor of some personal deity, to cheat the " devil " of his
just dues, and to smuggle their imperfections into the
kingdom of Heaven.

The only reasonable object which any external religiDus
system can possibly have, is to elevate man from a V wet

* Bible : Corinth, ili. lOu

Digitized by LjOOQiC

SELFISfflTESS. 33

State to a higher one, in which he can form a better con«
ception of his true dignity as a member of the human
family. If there is any possibility of imparting to a man a
knowledge of self, the churches are the places where such
a knowledge should be imparted ; but to accomplish this
the claims of the spirit should predominate over those of
the form,l the interests of religion and the interests of the
" Church *' would have to cease to be amalgamated, and
the Church should again be founded upon the rock of the
living faith instead of the craving to obtain some selfish
personal benefit in this world or in the hereafter.

He who is led by selfish considerations cannot enter a
heaven where personal considerations do not exist. He
who does not care for Heaven but is contented where he
is, is already in Heaven, while the discontented will in
vain clamor for it. To be without personal desires is to
be free and happy, and " Heaven " can mean nothing else
but a state in which freedom and happiness exist. The
man who performs beneficial acts induced by a hope of
reward is not happy unless the reward is obtained.

A man who performs a good act with the hope of reward
is not free. He is the servant of Self, and works for the
benefit of Self and not for absolute Good. It is, therefore,
not the power of Good which will reward him, he can only
expect that reward from his own personal Self.

The man who performs evil acts, induced by a selfish
motive, is not free. He who desires evil and is restrained
by fear is not his own master. He who recognizes the
supreme power of the universe in his own heart has become
free. He whose will is swayed by his lower personal self
is the slave of his person, but he who has conquered that
lower self enters the higher life.

The science of Life consists in subduing the low and
elevating the high. Its first lesson is how to free oneself
from the love of self, the first angel of evil.

This " Self" is composed of a great many selves or ys,
of which each one has his peculiar claims, and whose
demands grow in proportion as we attempt to satisfy them.
They are the semi-intellectual forces of the soul that would
rend the soul to pieces if they were allowed to grow, and
which must be subdued by the power of the red Master,
the superior " I " — ^the Spirit.

These " Ts " are the Elementals^ of which has been said

Digitized by

Google

34 Boas.

so much in occult literature. They are not imaginary
things, but living forces, and they may be perceived by him
who has acquired the power to look within his own souL
Each of these forces corresponds to some desire, and if it
is permitted to grow is symbolized by the form of the ani-
mal which corresponds to its nature. At first they are
thin and shadowy, but as the desire which corresponds to
them is indulged in, they become more and more dense,
and gain great strength as our desires grow into a passion.
The lesser Elementals are swallowed by the bigger ones,
the httle desires are absorbed by the stronger ones,
until perhaps at last one Master Passion, one powerful
Elemental remains. They are described as having the
form of snakes and tigers, hogs, insatiable wolves, etc., but
as they are often the result of a mixture of human and
animal elements, they do not merely exhibit purely animal
forms ; but frequently they look like animals with human
heads, or like men with animal members ; they appear
under endless varieties of shapes, because there is an end-
less variety of correlations and mixtures of lust, avarice,
greed, sensual love, ambition, cowardice, fear, terror, hate,
pride, vanity, self-conceit, stupidity, voluptuousness, self*
ishness, jealousy, envy, arrogance, hypocrisy, cunning,
sophistry, imbecility, superstition, etc., etc.

They constitute the false " I's " or '* Egos " in man ; for
even if man in his self-conceit may imagine that he knows
his true self, and that this self is only one, a deeper thought
will convince him that he is not self-existent, but an ever,
changing product of nature. He will then see that, as long
as God has not awakened in his soul, he is not truly self-
conscious ; but that it is Nature, having become self-con-
scious in his organism; creating therein these various
states of self-consciousness, each of which he mistakes for
his own true self.

These Elementals live in the soul-realm of man as long
as he lives, and grow strong and fat, for they live on his
life-principle, and are fed by the substance of his thoughts.
They may even become objective to him, if during a
paroxysm of fear or in consequence of some disease they
are enabled to step out of their sphere. They cannot be
killed by pious ceremonies, nor be driven away by the ex-
hortations of a clergyman ; they are only destroyed by the
power of the spiritual Will of man, which annihilates

Digitized by

Google

INTELLECTUAL GERMS. 3J

them as the light annihilates darkness, or as a stroke of
lightning rends the clouds.

Only those who have awakened to spiritual conscious-
ness can have that spiritual will, of which the non-regene-
rated know nothing. But those who are not yet so far
advanced may cause those elementals to die slowly, by
withdrawing from them the food which they require, that
is to say, by avoiding all desires and thoughts which cor-
respond to their character. They will then begin to wane,
to get sick, die and putrefy like a member of the body which
has become mortified. A line of demarkation will be
formed in the soul-body of man, there may be " inflamma-
tion " and suffering. A process, similar to that which takes
place if a gangrenous part of the physical body is thrown
off, takes place ; and at last the putrid carcass of the Ele-
mental drops off and dissolves.

These descriptions are neither fancies nor allegories.
Theophrastus Paracelsus^ Jacob Boehmey and many other
writers on Occultism write about them, and a due appre-
ciation of their doctrines will go far to explain many
occurrences mentioned in the history of witchcraft, and in
the legends of the lives of the saints.

But there are not merely animal germs within the realm
of the soul of man. In each human constitution there are
also the germs which go to make up a Shakespeare, a
Washington, Goethe, Voltaire, a Buddha, or Christ. There
are likewise the germs which may grow to make a Nero,
Messalina or Torquemada ; and each germ may develop
and take a form, and ultimately find its expression and re-
flection in the outward form, as much as the density of the
material atoms, which are slow to transform, will permit ;
for each character corresponds to a form, and each form to
a character.

Man's microcosm is a garden in which all kinds of living
plants grow. Some are poisonous, some are wholesome
plants. It rests with man to decide which germs he wants
to develop into a living tree, and that tree will be himself.
There are within him the germs of matter and soul and
of spiritual activity ; in him are the seeds from which
spring intellectual and emotional functions, and the deepest
of all is the hidden will at the centre ; the spirit, which is
to become the immortal man ; the true Self.

To accomplish this task it is not necessary to become a

Digitized by

Google

36 RENUNCTATION.

misteithrope and retire into a jungle to feed on the pro
ducts of one's own morbid imagination; tne struggle
caused by the petty annoyances of everyday life is the best
school to exercise the will power for those that have not
yet gained the mastery over Self. "To renounce the
vanities of the world " does not mean to look with con-
tempt upon the progress of the world, to remain ignorant
of mathematics and logic, to take no interest in the welfare
of humanity, to avoid the duties of life or neglect one's
family. Such a proceeding would accomplish the very re-
Verse of what is intended ; it would increase the love of
self, it would concentrate the soul to a small focus instead
of expanding it over the world. " To renounce one's
self" means to conquer the sense of personality and to free
one's self of the love of things which that personality
desires. It means " to live in the world, but not cling to
the world," to substitute universal love for personal love,
and to consider the interests of the whole of superior im-
portance than personal claims. The renunciation of self
is necessarily followed by spiritual growth. As we forget
our personal self, we attach less importance to personali-
ties, personal things, and personal feelings. We begin to
look upon ourselves not as being permanent, unchanging
and unchangeable entities, standing isolated among other
isolated entities, and being separated from them by im-
penetrable shells, but as parts of an infinite power, which
embraces the universe, and whose powers are concentrated
and brought to a focus in the bodies which we temporarily
inhabit, into which bodies continually flow and from which
are incessantly radiating the rays of an infinite sphere of
light, whose circumference is endless and whose centre is
everywhere.

Upon the recognition and realization of this truth rests
the only true religion, the Religion of the Universal Love
of all Beings, As long as man takes only his own little
self into consideration in his thoughts and acts, the sphere
of his mind becomes necessarily narrow. All our popular
religious sects are based upon selfish considerations.
Each of our religious sectarians speculates to obtain some
spiritual, if not material, benefit for himself Each one
wants to be saved by somebody ; first he, and then per-
haps the others ; but, above all, he himself. The true
religion of universal Love knows of no " self."

Digitized by

Google

SACRIFICE. 37

Even the desire to go to heaven or enter the state of
Nirvana^ is, after all, but a selfish desire, and as long as
man has any selfish desires whatever, his mind perceives
only his own self. Only when he ceases to have a limited
illusive " self" will his real self become unlimited and be
omnipresent. He who desires unlimited knowledge must
rise above limitation.

Looked at from that height, the personality appears
exceedingly small and insignificant, and of little import-
ance. Man appears as the centralization of an idea, per-
sons and peoples like living grains of sand on the shore of
an infinite ocean. Fortune, fame, love, luxury, etc.,
assume in his conception the importance of soap-bubbles,
and he has no hesitation in relinquishing them as the idle
playthings of children. Neither can such a renunciation
be called a sacrifice, for grown-up boys and girls do not
** sacrifice *' their popguns and dolls, they simply do not
want them any longer. In proportion as their minds
expand, do they reach out for something more useful, and
as a man's spirit expands, his surroundings, and even the
planet on which he lives, appear to him small as a land-
scape seen from a great distance, or from a high mountain,
while at the same time his conception of the infinite grows
larger and assumes a gigantic form. This expansion of
our existence " robs us of a country and a home " * by
making us citizens of the grand universe ; it separates us
from our mortal parents and friends to unite us with them
for ever as our immortal brothers and sisters ; it lifts us up
from the narrow confines of the illusory form to the unlim-
ited realm of the Ideal, and releasing man from the prison-
house of insignificant clay, it leads him to the sublime
splendor of Eternal and Universal Life.

Every form of life, the human form not excepted, is
nothing more than a focus in which the energies of the
universal principle of life are concentrated, and the more
they are concentrated and cling to that centre, the less are
they able to manifest their activity, to grow and expand.
Self-satisfied man, who employs his capacities only for his
own selfish purpose, contracts them into himself, and as he
contracts he becomes more and more insignificant, and as
he loses sight of the whole, the whole loses sight of him.

% Bulwer-Lytton : •* Zanoni."

Digitized by LjOOQIC

38 EXPERIENCE.

If, on the other hand, a person who is not in possession of
sufficient energy attempts to send his forces into the region
of the unknown, scattering them through space, without
having strengthened them by the development of the
intellect, they will wander like shadows through the realm
of the infinite and become lost. Harmonious growth
requires expansion along with a corresponding accumula-
tion of energy.

Some persons are possessed of great intellectual power,
but of little spirituality ; some have spiritual power, but a
weak intellect ; those in which the spiritual energies are
well supported by a strong intellect are the elect To
become practical, we must first learn to understand the
thing we want to practise, by observation and receiving
instruction. Understanding is a result of assimilation and
growth, not a result of cramming. It is an awakening to a
state of consciousness of the nature of the thing that comes
within the range of our cognition. A person coming to a
strange country in the evening will, when after a night's
rest he wakes in the morning, hardly realize where he is.
He has, perhaps, been dreaming of his home and those
that are left there, and only after he opens his eyes and
awakens to a full sense of consciousness of his new and
strange surroundings, will the old impressions fade away,
and he will begin to realize where he is. In the same
manner old errors must disappear before new truths can
be realized. Man only begins to exist as a spiritual being
when his spirit comes to life.

To become perfect, physical health, intellectual growth,
and spiritual perception and activity should go hand in
hand. Intuition should be supported by an unselfish
intellect, a pure mind by a healthy form. How to accom-
plish this can neither be taught by a science which deals
only with illusory effects, nor by a religious belief based
upon illusions ; but it is taught by the Wisdom Religion^
the knowledge of self, whose foundation is truth, and
whose practical application is the highest object of human
existence.

This Wisdom Religion has been, and is even to-day, the
inheritance of the saints, prophets, and seers and of every
one who is wise, no matter to what external system of reli-
gion they may have given their adherence. It was known
to the ancient Brahmins, Egyptians, and Jews, Gautama

Digitized by

Google

WISDOM. 39

Buddha advised his people to strive for it. It formed the
basis of the Eleusinian andBachic mysteries of the Greeks,
and the true religion of Christ is resting upon it. It is the
true religion of Humanity, that has nothing to do with con-
fessions and forms. Now^ as in times of old, its truths
are misunderstood and misrepresented by men who pro-
fess to be teachers of men. The Pharisees and Sadducees
of the New Testament were the prototypes of modem
churchmen and scientists existing to-day. Now, as then,
the truth is daily crucified between superstition and selfish-
ness and laid in the tomb of ignorance, from whence it will
rise again. Now, as then, the spirit has fled from the form^
being driven away by those that worship the form and
hate the spirit. Wisdom will for ever remain a secret
science to Uie idolators adoring the form, even if it were
proclaimed from the housetops and preached at a market-
place. The dealer in pounds and pennies, absorbed by
his material interests, may be surrounded by the greatest
beauties of nature and not comprehend them, the intel-
lectual reasoner will ask for a sign and not see the signs by
which he is continually surrounded. The tomb from which
the Saviour will arise is the heart of men and women ; if
the good in them awakens to self-consciousness, then will
it appear to them as a sun, shedding its light upon a better
and happier generation.

The existence of the magic power of good will proba-
bly be denied by few ; but if the existence of good, or
White Magic, is admitted, that of evil, or Black Magic^ is
not any more improbable.

It is not man who exercises good or evil magic powers,
but it is the God in him who works good or evil through
the organism of man. God is good or evil according to
the conditions under which he acts ; for if God did not
include evil as well as good, he would not be universal,
God performs good or evil deeds according to the mode
in which he must act ; in the same way as the sun is good
in spring-time when he melts the snow and assists the
grass and flowers to crawl out of the dark earth, and evil,
if he parches the skin of the wanderer in tropical Africa
and kills persons by sun-stroke. God causes the healthy
growth of a limb and the unhealthy growth of a cancer by
the magic power of his unconscious will, which acts accord-
ing to law and not according to whims. Only when the
Divinity in Man has awakened to consciousness and know-
Digitized by LjOOQIC

40 BLACK MAGIC.

ledge, will man be able to control his own magic (spiritual)
power and employ it for Good or for Evil.

A person having created (or called into consciousness)
in himself an impersonal power may employ it for good or
for evil, but if he employs it for his own personal gain, he
loses that power, because in such a case the sense of his
personality becomes more permanent and his personal
Self has no power. Every day we may read of persons
who have used high intellectual powers for vile purposes.
We see persons making use of the vanity, greediness, self-
ishness, or ambition of others to render them subservient
to their own purpose. We see them commit murder and
instigate wars for the benefit of their own purposes or to
attain some object of their ambition. But such events
belong more or less to the struggle for existence. They
do not necessarily belong to the sphere of black magic,
because they are usually not caused by a love for evil, but
by a desire of a personal benefit of some kind. The real
black magicians are those that are doing evil for the sake
of doing evil, who injure others without expecting or
receiving any benefit for themselves. To that class belong
the backbiter and the slanderer, the traducer and seducer,
those who create enmity in the bosom of families, who
oppose progress and encourage ignorance, and they have
been rightly called the Powers of Darkness^ while those
who do good for the sole purpose of doing good are the
Children of Light.

The struggle between Light and Darkness is as old as
the world ; there can be no light become manifest without
darkness, and no evil without good. Good and evil are
the light and shadow of the one eternal principle of life,
and each is necessary if the other is to become manifest.
Absolute good must exist, but we cannot know it without
knowing the presence of evil. Absolute evil cannot exist,
because it is held together by a spark of good. A soul in
which there were no good whatever would rage against
itself, the forces constituting such a soul would combat
each other and rend it to pieces. Man's Redeemer is his
power for good. This power attracts him to that which
is good, and at the end, when the supreme source of all
power, from which life emanated in the beginning, with-
draws that activity into itself, the powers of darkness will
suffer, but the Children of Light will be united with the
source of all Good.

Digitized by

Google

o

CHAPTER L

THE IDEAL.

** God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship bam im
•|Mrit and in truth."— John iv. 24.

The highest desire any reasonable man can cherish, and
the highest right he may possibly claim, is to become per-
fect. To know everything, to love all and be known and
beloved by all, to possess and command everything that
exists, such is a condition of being that, to a certain
extent, may be felt intuitively, but whose possibility can-
not be grasped by the intellect of mortal man. A foretaste
of such a blissful condition may be experienced by a per-
son who — even for a short period of time — is perfectly
happy. He who is not oppressed by sorrow, not excited
by selfish desires, and who is conscious of his own streng^^h
and liberty, feels as if he were the master of worlds and
the king of creation ; and, in fact, during such moments
he is their ruler, as far as he himself is concerned, although
his subjects may not seem to be aware of his existence.

But when he awakes from his dream and looks through
the windows of his senses into the exterior world, and
begins to reason about his surroundings, his vision fades
away ; he beholds himself a child of the Earth, a mortal
form, bound "with many chains to a speck of dust in the
Universe, on a ball of matter called a planet that floats in
the infinity of space. The ideal world, that perhaps
a moment before appeared to him as a glorious reality,
may now seem to him the baseless fabric of a dream, in
which there is nothing real, and physical existence, with
all its imperfections, is now to him the only unquestion-
able reality, and its most perfect illusions the only things
worthy of his attention. He sees himself surrounded by

Digitized by

Google

4a THE TRUE IDEAL.

material forms, and he seeks to discover among these forms
that which corresponds to his highest ideal.

The highest desire of any mortal is to attain that which
exists in himself as his highest ideal. A person without
an ideal is unthinkable. To be conscious is to realize the
existence of some ideal, to relinquish the ideal world would
be death. A person without .any desire would be useless
in the economy of nature, a person having all his desires
satisfied needs to live no longer, for life can be of no farther
use to him. Each one is bound to his own ideal; he
whose ideal is mortal must die when his ideal dies, he
whose ideal is immortal must become immortal himself to
attain it.

£ach man's true ideal should be his own higher spiritual
self. His Christ, or God. Man's semi-animal self is not
the whole of man. Man may be regarded as an invisible
power or ray extending in a line from the (spiritual) Sun to
the Earth. Only the lower end of that line is visible,
because it has evolved an organized material body ; by
means of which the invisible ray draws strength from the
earth below. If all the life and thought-force evolved by
the contact of the lower end of that line with matter are
spent within the material plane, the higher spiritual self
will gain nothing by it, and when death breaks the com-
munication between the higher and lower self, the lower
self will perish, and the higher one will remain what it was^
before it evolved a mortal inhabitant of the material world.

Man lives in two worlds, in his interior and in the
exterior world. Each of these worlds exists under con-
ditions peculiar to itself, and that world in which he lives
is for the time being the most real to him. When he fully
enters his interior world during deep sleep or in moments
of perfect abstraction, the forms perceived in the exterior
world fade away ; but when he awakes into the exterior
world the forms seen in his interior state are forgotten, or
leave only their uncertain shadows on the sky. To live
simultaneously in both worlds is only possible to him
who succeeds in harmoniously blending his internal and
external worlds into one.

The so-called Real seldom corresponds with the Ideal,
and often it happens that man, after many unsuccessful
attempts to realize his ideals in the exterior world, returns
to his interior world with disappointment, and resolves to

Digitized by

Google

HAPPINESS. 43

give up his search ; but if he succeeds in the realization o{
his ideal, then arises for him a moment of happiness,
during which time, as we know it, exists for him no more,
the exterior world is then blended with his interior world,
his consciousness is absorbed in the enjoyment of both,
and yet he remains a man.

Artists and poets may be familiar with such states. An
inventor who sees his invention accepted, a soldier coming
victorious out of the stru^le for victory, a lover united
with the object of his desire, forgets his own personality
and is lost in the contemplation of his ideal. The extatic
worshipper, seeing the Redeemer before him, floats in an
ocean of rapture, and his consciousness is centred in the
ideal that he himself has created out of his own mind, but
which is as real to him as if it were a living form of flesh.
Shakespeare's Juliet finds her mortal ideal realized in
Romeo's youthful form. United with him, she forgets the
rush of time, night disappears, and she is not conscious of
it ; the lark heralds the dawn, and she mistakes its song for
the singing of the nightingale. Happiness measures no
time and knows no danger. But Juliet's ideal is mortal
and dies, and having lost her ideal Juliet must die, and the
immortal ideals of both become again united as they enter
the immortal realm through the door of physical death.

But as the sun rose too early for Juliet, so in all engage-
ments of evanescent ideals that have been realized in the
external world, happiness vanishes soon. An ideal that
has been realized ceases to be an ideal ; the ethereal forms
of the interior world, if grasped by the rude hand of mor-
tals and embodied in matter, must die. To grasp an
immortal ideal, man's mortal nature must die before he can
grasp it.

Low ideals may be killed, but their death calls similar
ones into existence. From the blood of a vampire that has
been slain a swarm of vampires arises. A selfish desire
fulfilled makes room for similar desires, a gratified passion
is chased away by other similar passions, a sensual craving
that has been stilled gives rise to new cravings. Earthly
happiness is short-lived and often dies in disgust ; the love
of the immortal alone is immortal. Material acquisitions
perish, because forms are evanescent and die. Intellectual
accomplishments vanish, for the intellectual forces are
subject to change. Desires and opinions change and

Digitized by

Google

44 ILLUSIONS.

memories fade away. He who clings to old memories,
clings to that which is dead. A child becomes a man, a
man an old man, an old man a child ; the playthings of
childhood give way to intellectual playthings, but when the
latter have served their purpose, they appear as useless as
did the former, only spiritual realities are everlasting and
true. In the ever-revolving kaleidoscope of nature the
aspect of illusions continually changes its form. What is
laughed at as a superstition by one century is often
accepted as the basis of science for the next, and what
appears as wisdom to-day may be looked upon as an
absurdity in the great to-morrow. Nothing is permanent
but the real ideal, the truth.

But where can man find the truth ? If he seeks deep
enough in himself he will find it revealed, each man may
know his own heart. He may send a ray of his intelli-
gence into the depths of his soul and search its bottom,
he may find it to be as infinitely deep as the sky above his
head. He may find corals and pearls, or watch the mon-
sters of the deep. If his thought is steady and unwavering,
he may entei the innermost sanctuary of his own temple
and see the goddess unveiled. Not everyone can penetrate
into such depths, because the thought is easily led astray ;
but the strong and persistent searcher will penetrate veil
nfter veil, until at the innermost centre he discovers the
germ of truth, which, awakened to consciousness, will grow
mto a sun that illuminates the whole of the interior world,
wherein everything is contained.

Such an interior meditation and concentration of thought
upon the germ of divinity, which rests in the innermost
centre of the soul, is the only Umq prayer. The adulation
of an external form, whether living or dead, whether ex-
isting objectively or merely subjectively in the imagina-
tion, is useless, and serves only to deceive ourselves. It
is very easy to attend to external forms of external "so-
called worship," but the true worship of the living God
within requires a great effort of will and a power of will,
which few people ar© able to exercise, but which can be
acquired by practice. It consists in continually guarding
of the door of the sacred lodge, so that no illegitimate
thoughts may enter the mind to disturb the holy assembly
whose deliberations are presided over by the spirit of
wisdom.

Digitized by

Google

MEDITATION. 45

How shall we know trie truth ? Truth, having awakened
to consciousness, knows that it is ; it is the god-principle
in man, which is infallible and cannot be misled by
illusions. If the surface of the soul is not lashed by the
storms of passions, if no selfish desires exist to disturb its
tranquillity, if its waters are not darkened by reflections of
the past, we will see the image of eternal truth mirrored in
the deep. To know the truth in its fulness is to become
alive and immortal, to lose the power of recognizing the
truth is to perish in death. The voice of truth in a person
that has not yet awakened to spiritual life, is the '^ still
small voice " that may be felt in the heart, listened to by
the imperfect, as a half-conscious dreamer may listen to
the ringing of bells in the distance ; but in those that have
become conscious of life, that have passed through the
first resurrection of the spirit in their own heart, and re-
ceived the baptism of the first initiation administered by
themselves, the voice of the riew-bom ego has no uncertain
sound, but becomes the powerful Word of the Master.
The awakened principle of truth is self-conscious and self-
sufficient, it is the great spiritual sun that knows that it
exists. It stands higher than the intellect and higher than
science, it does not need to be corroborated by " recog*
, nized authorities,*' it cares not for the opinion of others,
and its decisions suffer no appeal. It knows neither doubt
nor fear, but reposes in the tranquillity of its own supreme
majesty. It can neither be altered nor changed, it always
was and ever remains the same, whether mortal man may
perceive it or not. It may be compared to the light of the
earthly sun, that cannot be excluded from the world, but
from which man may exclude himself. We may blind our-
selves to the perception of the truth, but the truth itself is
not thereby changed. It illuminates the minds of those
who have awakened to immortal life. A small room re-
quires a little flame, a large room a great light for its
illumination, but in either room the light shines equally
clear in each ; in the same manner the light of truth shines
into the hearts of the illuminated with equal clearness, but
with a power differing according to their individual
capacity.

It will always be perfectly useless to attempt to describe
self-knowledge to another man. Only that wliich exists
relatively to ourselves has a real existence for us, that of

Digitized by

Google

46 THE TRUE LIGHT.

which we know nothing does not exist for us. No proof
of the existence of light can be furnished to the blind, no
proof of transcendenul knowledge can be given to those
whose capacity to know does not transcend the realm of
external phenomena.

There is nothing higher than truth, and the acquisition
of truth is therefore man's highest ideal. The highest
ideal in the Universe must be a universal ideal. The
constitution of all men is built according to one universal
law, and the highest ideal must be the same ideal to all and
attainable to all, and in its attainment all individuals
become reunited into one. As long as a man does not re-
cognize the highest ideal in the Universe, the highest one
which he is able to recognize will be the highest to him ;
but as long as there still exists a higher one than the one
he perceives, the higher will unconsciously attract him,
unless he persistingly repulses its attraction. Only the
attainment of the highest ideal in the Universe can give
permanent happiness, for having attained the highest there
is nothing left that could be possibly desired. As long as
there is still a higher ideal for man, he will have aspira-
tions to reach it, but having reached the highest its
attraction ceases, he becomes one with it and can desire
nothing more. There must be a state of perfection which
all may reach, and beyond which none can advance, until
the Universe as a whole advances beyond it. All men
have the same right to reach the highest, but not all have
the same power developed, some may reach it soon, others
may lag on the road, and perhaps the majority may fall
and have to begin again at the foot of the ladder. Each
ripe acorn that falls from an oak has the inherent capacity
to develop into an oak ; but not each finds the same con-
ditions for development. Some may grow, a few may
develop into trees, but the majority will enter into decom-
position to furnish new material out of which new forms
may be developed.

The highest truth in its fulness is not known to a man
in the mortal form. Those that have attained to a state of
perfect consciousness of absolute truth require no form to
hold it, they belong to a formless tribe ; they could not be
one with an universal principle if they were tied by the
chains of personality ; a mind expanded, so that the prison-
house of flesh can hold it no more, will require that prison-

Digitized by

Google

ILLUMINATION. 47

liouse no longer. Form is only required to shelter the
spirit in the infancy of his development, as long as he has
not attained full power. Having attained the knowledge
of evil and the power to control it, and having by the rea-
lization of the truth " eaten from the tree of life and
attained immortality," * he can protect himself by his own
power, and requires his clothes of flesh no longer.

Imperfectly developed man, unless he has become very
much degraded, feels intuitively that which is true. The
scientist who reasons from the plane of sensual perceptions
is farthest from a recognition of the truth, because he mis-
takes the illusions produced by his senses for the reality,
and repulses the revelations of his own intuition. The
philosopher, unable to see the truth, attempts to grasp it
with his intellect, and may approach it to a certain extent ;
but he, in whom the truth has attained the state of self-
consciousness, knows the truth by direct perception, he is
one with it, and cannot err. Such a state is incompre-
hensible to the majority of men, to scientists and philoso-
phers as well as to the ignorant, and yet men have existed,
and exist to-day, who have attained that state. They are
the true TheosophisiSy but not every one is a Theosophist
who goes by that name, nor is everyone a Christ who is
called a Christian. But a true Theosophist and a true
Christian or Mahaima are one and the same, because both
are human forms in which the universal spiritual soul has
attained a state of self-consciousness.

The terms " Christian " or " Theosophist," like so many
other terms of a similar kind, have almost entirely lost
their true meaning. A " Christian " now-a-days means a
person whose name is inscribed in the register of some so-
called Christian Church, and performs the ceremonies
prescribed by that social organization.

But a real Christian is something entirely different from
a merely external one. The first Christians were a secret
organization, a school of Occultists, who adopted certain
symbols and signs, in which to represent the truths they
knew, and thus to communicate them to each other, while
hiding them from the eyes of the ignorant.

A real Theosophist is not a dreamer, but a most practical
person. By purity of life he receives the power to per-
ceive higher truths than averap^e man is able to see.

• Bible \ Genesis iii. %%,

Digitized by LjOOQiC

4S PROPHETS.

As the truth is only one, men in all countries, in whoin
the truth has become self-conscious, have the same percep-
tion. This explains why the revelations of all prophets
are identical with each other, provided they have attained
the same power. The truths revealed by a Jackob
Boehme, or Paracelsus in Germany, are essentially the
same as those revealed by the Thibetan Mahatmas, they
only differ in extent and in mode of expression. An
ecstatic Christian saint in England or France would tell
the same tale as an ecstatic Brahmin in India or an
ecstatic red Indian in America ; because all three, being
in the same state, would exactly see the same thing.
The truth is there, visible to all who are able to per-
ceive it, but each will describe what he sees according
to his mode of thinking and in his own fashion. If —
as the ignorant believe — all the visions of saints and
lamas, sany3,ssi, and dervishes^ were only the result of
hallucinations and fancies, not two of them, having never
heard of each other, would have the same vision. A tree
will be a tree to all who are able to see it, and if their
sight is clear no preconceived opinions will change it into
something else ; a truth will be seen as a truth by all who
are able to see it, and no preconceived opinions will alter
it or change it into a lie. To know the whole truth is to
know everything that exists ; to love the truth above all is
to become united with the consciousness of all ; to be able
to express the truth in its fulness is to possess universal
power ; but to be one with immortal truth is to be for
ever immortal.

The perception of the tnith rests in the equilibrium
of the intellect and the emotions. As long as the mind
has not awakened to a state of direct recognition of the
truth, it will only see the shadow of its presence and hear
the indistinct whispering of its voice. The sound of that
voice may be drowned in the turmoil of the intellectual
workshop, its light may be obscured by the storms of the
emotions. To understand that voice and to behold that
light distinctly and without any foreign admixture, heart
and head should act harmoniously together. To perceive
the truth, purity of heart and strength of mind should
go hand in hand, and it is therefore taught that men must
become like children before they can enter the sphere of
truth. Head and heart, if supported by reason, are as Ona

Digitized by

Google

SINGLENESS AND COMPLEXEDNESS. 49

but if they act against each other they form the absurd 7bf0
that produces illusions. The emotional maniac is only
guided by his heart, the intellectual fool only listens to the
dictates of his head, he lives — ^so to say — in his head and
neglects the heart. But neither the revelry of the emotions
nor intellectual fanaticism discloses the truth ; only in the
" stillness that follows the storm," * when the harmony of
both is restored, will the truth be discovered. A man who
only follows the dictates of his emotions, resembles one
who in ascending a mountain peak becomes dizzy, and
losing nis power to control himself, falls over a precipice ;
a man who is only guided by his sensual perceptions influ*
encing his intellect is easily lost in the whirlpool of multi-
farious illusions. He is like a person on an island in the
ocean examining a drop of water taken from the ocean,
and being blind to the existence of the ocean from which
that drop has been taken. But if heart and head are
attuned to the divine harmonies of the invisible realm of
nature, then will the truth reveal itself to man, and in him
will the highest ideal see its own image reflected.

We sometimes hear some people boast that they are
controlled by their intellect ; but no one boasts that he is
controlled by his emotions. The former are as much in
error as the latter ; for a free man is not controlled by
either of the two ; he is his own master. By the power of
his will and reason he controls the intellectual workings of
his brain no less than the emotions of his heart, and only
such a person is wise. Heart and brain are not ourselves.
They are instruments which have been lent to us by nature.
They should not govern us ; but we should govern them,
and use them according to the dictates of the universal
law, whose words we can only hear, when we are free from
the bonds of the animal self.

Material man, entombed in his chrysalis of clay, can
only feel, but not see, the rays that radiate from the sphere
of infinite truth ; but if he bids his emotions be still 1 and
commands his intellect be not deluded 1 he may stretch his
feelers into the realm of the spirit and perceive the light of
truth. His heart should be used as a touchstone to examine
the conclusions arrived at by the brain, and the brain
should be employed like scales to weigh the decisions of the

« « Light on the Path," by M. C

Digitized by LjOOQIC

50 SPIRITUAL PERCEPTION.

heart; but when his self-knowledge has been awakened,
there will be no more difference of opinion between the
head and the heart, the perceptions of the one will be in
harmony with the aspirations of the latter, the one will see
and the other will feel the truth. Then will the lower
ideals vanish before the light of truth, for truth is a jealous
goddess and suffers no other gods beside her.

Man is usually guided only by his intellect, woman is
often guided only by her emotions. To reason from
external appearances has become a necessity to men in
consequence of their material organization, which like
a shell surrounds the soul of men or women, in which
alone rests the power of sensation and perception ; but
if the innermost man, the true spirit, sleeping in every
mortal, awakens to life, he emits a light that penetrates
through the veil of matter and illuminates the soul. If
the germ of divinity, hidden in the centre of the soul, is
permitted to awaken, it emits a spiritual light, which
reaches from man to the stars and to the utmost limits of
space, and by the help of that divine light he may perceive
and penetrate into the deepest mysteries of the Universe.
Those who are able to know the truth by direct perception
do not need to be informed of it by the reading of books,
the whole of the visible and invisible realm lies open before
them, like a book in whose pages they may read the whole
history of the world. They know all the forms of life,
because they are one with the source of life from which all
forms were bom, they need not study letters, because the
IVord itself is living in them. They may be the instru-
ments through whom eternal wisdom reveals itself to those
who are entombed in matter ; but in that case it is not the
teacher revealing the truth, but the truth itself revealing
itself through him. These are the only Jlluminates and
Tkeosophists that have any real existence ; not those who
merely imagine to be what they not really are.

How pitiful must appear to the enlightened the war of
opinions raging among those whom humanity believes to
be the lights of knowledge and wisdom; how insignifi-
cantly small appear those lights before the sun of truth.
What appears as a light to the ignorant, appears to the
illuminated seer as a source of darkness and smoke, and the
wisdom of the world becomes foolishness * before theeyet

* I Cor. ill. 19.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

SUPERSTITIONS. 51

of the truth. The oyster in its shell may believe to be at
the pinnacle of perfection, and that there is no higher
existence than that which it enjoys in the ocean-bed ; the
scientist, proud of the discoveries of his department of
science, is frequently found to be swelled with vanity,
knowing little how little he knows. Many of the repre-
sentatives of modern science forget that the greatest inven-
tions have been made — ^not by the professed guardians of
science, but by men upon whom they looked with con-
tempt, and that many useful inventions were introduced,
not with the assistance, but in spite of the opposition of
the learned. It may be disagreeable to call up unpleasant
memories, but we cannot close our eyes to the fact that
the inventors of railroads, steamships, and telegraphs have
been ridiculed by professors of science, that men of science
have laughed at the belief in the rotundity of the earth,
that some of the legitimate keepers of the truth have often
betrayed their trust, and that especially the followers of
the medical profession, as a class, have often been
prominent on account of their misunderstanding of the
laws of nature, and of their opposition to truth, whenever
it conflicted with their preconceived opinions.

Many useful discoveries have been made through the
power of intuition ; assisted by a strong intellect, some
seem to have been made by the aid of that intuition which
comes from the devil, and their results are still a curse to
mankind. For centuries the learned professions have
been thriving on human suffering, and many of their
followers, mistaking the low for the high, have dethroned
the god of humanity and worshipped the fetish of Self in
its place. The fear of an illusory devil external to man
has served to swell the money-bags of Brahmins and
priests, while the real internal devils, residing in the
animal nature of man, were allowed to grow. For cen-
turies many of the appointed servants of the Supreme have
only served the golden calf, residing in their animal nature,
feeding their followers with false hopes of immortality, and
speculating on the selfish propensities of men to obtain
material profits for their own selves. Those to whom
humanity looks for protection against bodily ills, and who
therefore — mort than anybody else — should understand
the real constitution of man, usually experiment with the

Digitized by

Google

5a DELUSIONS.

physical form to seek the cause of disease, being ignorant
of the fact that the form is the expression of life, the product
of the soul, and that external effects cannot be efifectually
changed without changing the internal causes. Many of
them refusing to believe in Soul^ seek the cause of diseases,
in its external expression, where it does not exist. Diseases
are the necessary results of disobedience to the laws of
nature, they are the consequences of " sins " that cannot
be forgiven, but must be atoned for by acting again in
accordance with natural laws. In vain will the ignorant
ask the guardians of health for their assistance to cheat the
law of nature out of its dues. Physicians may restore
health by restoring the supremacy of the law, but as long
as they know only an infinitesimal part of the law they can
only cure aq infinitesimal part of the diseases afflicting
mankind ; they can often only suppress the manifestation
of one disease by calling another and more serious one into
existence.* In vain will such investigators seek for the
cause for epidemic diseases in places where such causes
may be propagated, but where they are not created. The
soul of the Earth in which such causes reside cannot be
seen with microscopes, it can only be recognized by a man
whose spiritual perceptions have been awakened by the
awakening into consciousness of his interior self.

A true conception of the nature of man will lead to the
comprehension of the fact that man, being as a microcosm
the true image, reflection and representative of the ma-
crocosm of nature ; Nature has the same organization as
Man, although not the same external form. Having the
same organs and functions, and being ruled by the same
laws, the organism of Nature is liable to experience
diseases, similar to those experienced by the organism of
man. Nature has her dropsical swellings, her nervous
tremblings, her paralytic affections by which civilized
countries turn into deserts, her inflammatory affections, her
rheumatic contractions, spells of heat and cold, eruptions
and earthquakes. If our physicians knew the nature of
man, they would also know the organization of Nature as
a whole, and understand more about the origin of epidemic
diseases, of which they now know merely the external
effects.

• See C. L. Hunt i " VaccinaUon.*

Digitized by LjOOQIC

MEDICAL SCIENCE. 53

What does modern medical science know of the con-
stitution of man, whose life and safety is made to depend
on that knowledge ? It knows the form of the body, the
arrangement of muscles, and bones, and organs, and it calls
these constituent parts by names which it invented for the
purpose of distinction. Having no supersensual percep-
tions it does not know the soul of man, but believes that
his body is the essential man. If its eyes were open it
would see that this visible body is only the material kernel
of the '' immaterial," but nevertheless substantial real man,
whose soul-essence radiates far into space, and whose
spirit is without limits. They would know that in the life-
principle, in whose existence they do not believe, resides
sensation, perception, consciousness, and all the causes
that produce the growth of the form. Laboring under
their fatal mistake they attempt to cure that which is not
sick, while the real patient is unknown to them. Under
such circumstances it is not surprising that the most
enlightened physicians of our time have expressed the
opinion that our present system of medicine is rather a
curse than a blessing to mankind, and that our drugs and
medicines do vastly more harm than good, because they
are continually misapplied. This is an assertion which has
often been made by their own most prominent leaders.

The ideal physician of the future is he who knows the
true constitution of man, and who is not led by illusive
external appearances, but has developed his interior
powers of perception to enable him to examine into the
hidden causes of all external effects. To him the acquisi-
tions of material science are not the guides but only the
assistants, his guide will be his knowledge and not his
" belief,*' and his knowledge will endow him with faith^
which is a power acting upon that part of man that cannot
be reached by the administration of drugs.

If our medical students were to apply a part of the time
which they employ for the study of certain external sciences
which are practically useless to them for the development
of their interior perception, they would become able to see
certain processes within the organism of man, which are
at present to them a mere matter of speculation, and which
are not discoverable by any physical means.

But even the modem physician acts wiser than he knows.
He may say that he does not believe in faith, and yet it

Digitized by

Google

54 FAITH.

is only faith that upholds him and by which he exists,
because if men had no faith in him they would not employ
him, and if his patients did not believe that he could
benefit them they would not follow his directions. A
physician without intuition, having no faith in himself, and
in whom no one else has any faith, is perfectly useless as a
physician, no matter how much he may have learned in
schools.

There is nothing whatever that can be accomplished
without the power of Faith, and there is no faith possible
without knowledge. We can only accomplish that of
which we are confident that we can accomplish it, and we
can only be truly confident if we know by experience that
we have the power to do it.

What does popular science know about Mind ? Accord*
ing to the usual definition. Mind is *' the intellectual
power in man," and as by man she means a visible form,
this definition makes of mind something confined within
that visible form. But if this conception were true, there
could be no transmission of thought to a distance. If no
mind-substance did exist outside the visible form, there
could be no transmission of thought from one such form to
another. No sound can be heard in a space from which
the air has been exhausted, and no thought can travel
from one individual to another without a corresponding
material existing between them to act as a conductor ; but
the possibility of thought-transference is now an almost
universally admitted fact; its truth has been perceived
long ago by children who make practical use of it in some
of their games. Moreover, any one who doubts its possi-
bility has it in his power to convince himself by either
impressing his thoughts silently upon others, or — if he is
of a receptive nature — ^by letting others impress their
thought upon him. It must, therefore, be obvious even to
the superficial observer, that popular science in regard to
this fundamental doctrine has not yet arrived at the truth.
Her logical deductions cannot be true as long as the
premises from which she reasons are false, and her opinions
in regard to the powers possessed by man cannot be
perfect as long as she does not know the essential nature
of Man.

How infinitely more grand and how much more reason-
able is the conception of ancient science, according to

Digitized by

Google

MIND. 55

whose doctrines everything that exists Is an expression of
the thoughts of the Universal Mind, pervading the infinity
of space 1 This conception makes Mind a power in the
realm of infinity, acting through Uving and intelligent
instruments, and of Matiy an intellectual power, an expres-
sion of the Universal Mind, able to receive, reflect, and
modify the thoughts of the latter, like a diamond that
becomes self-lummous through the influence of the Sun.

There is no reason why we should believe that an
intelligent mind can exist only in a form which is visible
and tangible to the external senses of man. There ma^
be, for all we know, untold millions of intelligent or semi-
intelligent beings in the universe, whose forms are consti-
tuted difierently from ours, who live on another plane of
existence than ours, and who are therefore invisible to our
physical senses, but who nevertheless have a mind, and
may be perceived by the superior power of perception of
the awakened spirit. Nor is their existence a matter of
mere speculation, for they may be perceived by those who
have the power of interior perception whenever they enter
the sphere of their mind.

All we know of external objects is the images which they
produce in the sphere of our mind. Astral or spiritual
beings produce no reflection upon the retina, but their
presence may be felt when they enter the mental sphere of
the observer, and they may be perceived with the eye of
the soul.

The ideal scientist of the future having attained the
power of spiritual perception, will reco^ize this truth.
But when this time arrives scientific opinions will cease to
be mere beliefs, and knowledge will take their place.

The common utilitarianism of our age is the result of a
general misconception of the true nature of man, and of
that which is really useful and worthy of his attention.

If we believe that the object of life is simply to render
our material Self satisfied and to keep it in comfort, and
that material comfort confers the highest state of possible
happiness, we mistake the low for the high and an illusion
for the truth. Our material mode of life is a consequence of
the material constitution of our bodies. We are " worms
of earth " because we cling with all our aspirations to earth.
If we can enter upon a path of evolution, by which we
become less material and more ethereal, a very different

Digitized by

Google

fi NECESSITIES.

order of civilization would be established. Things which
now appear indispensable and necessary would cease to be
useful; if we could transfer our consciousness with the
velocity of thought from one part of the globe to another,
the present mode of communication and transportation
would be no longer required. The deeper we sink into
matter, the more material means for comfort will be
needed; the essential and powerful god in man is not
material — in the usual acceptation of this term — and
independent of the restrictions laid upon matter.

What are the real necessities of life? The answer to
this question depends entirely on what we imagine to be
necessary. Railways, steamers, electric lights, &c., are
now a necessity to us, and yet millions of people have
lived long and happy knowing nothing about them. To
one man a dozen of palaces may appear to be an indispen-
sable necessity, to another a carriage, another a pipe, or a
bottle of whisky. But all such necessities are only such as
man himself has created. They make the state in which
man now is agreeable to him, and tempt him to remain in
that state and to desire for nothing higher. They may
even hinder his development instead of advancing it. If
we would rise into a higher state, in which we would no
longer require such things, they would cease to be a
necessity, and even become undesirable and useless ; but
it is the craving and the wasting of thought for the augmen-
tation of the pleasures of the lower life which prevent man
to enter the higher one.

To raise the evanescent man to a state of perfection
enjoyed by the permanent ideal man is the great object of
life ; the Arcanum, that cannot be learned in books. It is
the great secret, that may be understood by a child, but will
for ever be incomprehensible to him who, living entirely in
the realm of sensual perceptions, has no power to grasp it.
The attainment of that which is the highest is the Magnum
opus, the great work, of which the Alchemists said that
thousands of years may be required to perform it, but that
it may also be accomplished in a moment, even by a
woman while engaged in spinning. They looked upon the
human mind as being a great alembic, in which the con-
tending forces of the emotions may be purified by the heat
of holy aspirations and by a supreme love of truth. They
gave instructions how the soul of mortal man may be subll^

Digitized by

Google

THE ELIXIR OF LIFE. 5;

fiated and purified from earthly attractions, and its
immortal parts be made living and free. The purified
elements were made to ascend to the supreme source of
law, and descended again in showers of snowy whiteness^
visible to all, because they rendered every act of life holy
and pure. They taught how the base metals — ^meaning
the animal energies in man — could be transformed into the
pure gold of true spirituality, and how by attaining spiritual
life — allegorically represented under the ^^ Elixir of Life*'
— souls could have their youth and innocence restored and
be rendered immortal.

Their truths shared the fate of other truths ; they were
misunderstood and rejected by the ignorant, who con-
tinually clamor for truth and reject it when it is offered,
because, being blind, they are unable to see it; their
science is known only to those who are able to grasp
it. Theology and Masonry have— each in its own manner
— continued the teachings of the Alchemists, and fortunate
is the Mason or the priest who understands that which he
teaches. But of such true disciple6 there are only few.
The systems in which the old truths have been embodied
are still in existence, but the cold hands of Sensualism and
Materialism have been laid upon the outward forms, and
from the interior the spirit has fled. Doctors and priests
see only the outward form, and few can see the hidden
mystery that called these forms into existence. The key
to the inner sanctuary has been lost by those that were
entrusted with its keeping, and the true password has not
been rediscovered by the followers of Hiram Abiff. The
riddle of the Egyptian Sphinx still waits for a solution, and
will be revealed to none imless he becomes strong enough
to discover it himself.

But the truth still lives. It resides on the top of a
" mountain " called Faith into the eternal Law of Good.
It shines deep into the interior world of man, and sends its
divine influence down into the valleys, and wherever the
doors and windows are open to receive it, there will it
dispel the darkness, rendering men and women conscious
of their own godlike attributes and guiding them on the
road to perfection, until, when all their struggles have
ceased and the law has been restored, they will find
permanent happiness in the realization of the highest
universal ideal.

Digitized by

Google

Y

CHAPTER II.

THE REAL AND THE UNREAL.

« Allah I Bi'-smiMlal^ 1— God is Ow.^'^^cran.

Everywhere in the broad expanse of the universe we see
an almost infinite variety of forms, belonging to different
kingdoms and species, and exhibiting an endless variety of
appearances. The substance of which those forms are
composed may, for aught we know, consist essentially of
the same primordial material, forming the basis of their
constitution, although the qualities of the various bodies
may differ from each other, and it is far more reasonable to
suppose that this one primordial eternal essence exists and
appears in the course of evolution in various forms, than to
believe that a number of different original substances have
come into existence either by being created out of nothing
or otherwise. What this primordial essence — this imma-
terial substance* — may be we do not know, we only know
of its manifestation in forms which we call things. What-
ever may find expression in one form or another may be
called a thing, and a thing may change its substance and
yet the form remain the same, or its form may change and
the substance remain. Water may be frozen into solid ice,
or be transformed by heat into invisible vapor; and
vapor may be chemically decomposed into hydrogen and
oxygen; yet, if the necessary conditions are given, the
energies which previously formed water will form water
again ; the forms and attributes change, but the elements
remain the same and may combine again in certain stipu*
lated proportions, regulated by the law of attraction.

* The A*Aasa of the Brahmins or the Iliasier of Paracelsus, die
Universal Proteus*

Digitized by

Google

UTILITY OF PRINCITLE. 59

As this hypothetical primordial substance or principle
has no attributes which we can perceive with our senses,
we cannot see it or feel it, and we therefore do not know
the real substance of a thing; we only distinguish the
peculiarities of the attributes of its form, and for the pur-
pose of distinction and classification we give it a name.
We may gradually deprive a thing of some of its attributes
or substance and change its form, and yet it remains that
thing as long as its character remains, and even after we
destroy its form and dissolve its substance the character of
the thing still remains as an idea in the subjective world,
where we cannot destroy it, and we may clothe the old
idea with new attributes and produce it under a new form
on the objective plane. A thing exists as long as its char-
acter exists, only when it changes its character it ceases to
be. A material thing is only the symbol or the represen-
tation of an idea ; we may give it a name, but the thing
itself remains forever hidden behind the veil. If we could
on the physical plane separate a single substance from its
attributes, and endow it with others at will, then one body
could be transformed into another, as, for instance, base
metals be transformed into gold ; but unless we change the
character of a thing, a mere change of its form will only
affect its external appearance.

By way of illustration, let us look at a stick. It is made
of wood, but this is not essential ; it might be made of
something else and still be a stick. We do not perceive
the stick itself, we only see its attributes, its extension and
color and density ; we feel its weight, and we hear its sound
if we strike it. Each of these attributes or all of them
may be changed, and it may remain a stick for all that, as
long as its character is not lost, because that which essen-
tially constitutes it a stick is its character or an idea which
has not necessarily a definite form. Let us endow that
formless idea with new attributes that will change its char-
acter, and we shall have transformed our ideal stick into
anything we choose to make of it.

We cannot change copper into gold on the physical
plane, we cannot change a man into a physical child, but
we may daily transform our desires, our aspirations and
tastes by the omnipotent power of the will. In doing this
we change our character, and make of man — even on the
physical plane — a different being.

Digitized by

Google

6o CHARACTER.

Nobody ever saw a real man, we only perceive the
qualities which he possesses. Man cannot see himself.
He speaks of his body, his soul, his ^irit ; it is only the
combination of the three which constitutes what we con-
sider a man^ the Ego in which his character rests is some-
thing for which we have no conception. As an idea and
yet an individual unit he enters the world of matter, evo-
lutes a new personality, obtains new experience and
knowledge, passes through the pleasures and vicissitudes
of life and through the valley of death, and enters again
into that realm where in the course of ages his form will
cease to exist, to appear again in a form upon the scene
when the hour for his reappearance strikes. His form and
personality change, his real Ego remains the same and yet
not the same, because during life it acquires new attributes
and changes its characteristics.*

We see that a plant ceases to grow when its roots are
torn from the soil, and when they are replaced into the
soil the growth may continue. Likewise the human spirit^
man's higher self, takes root in the physical organism of
man, and develops a soul through the latter, but when
death tears out the roots, the soul rests and ceases to
grow, until it finds again a physical organism to acquire
new conditions for continued growth, and to improve its
own real self

What can this real ego be, which lives through death and
changes during life, unless it is The Will itself, obtaining
relative consciousness by coming in contact with matter ?
Is any man certain of his own existence ? All the proof
we have of our existence is in our consciousness, in the
feeling of the / amy in which is the realization of our exist*

* A true appreciation of the essential nature of man will show that
the repeated reincarnation of the human monad in successive personali-
ties is a scientific necessity. How could it be possible for a man to
develop into a state of perfection, if the time of his spiritual growth
were restricted to the period of one short existence upon this globe ?
If he could go on and develop without having a physical body, then
why should it have been necessary for him to take a physical body at
all ? It is unreasonable to suppose that the spiritual germ of a man
begins its existence at the time of the birth of the physical body, or that
the physical parents of the child could be the generators of the spiritual
monad. If the' spiritual monad existed before the body was born, and
could develop without it» what would be the use of its entering any body
at all?

Digitized by

Google

CHANGE OF ATTRIBUTES. 6l

cnce. Every other state of consciousness is subject to
change. The consciousness of one moment differs from
that of another, according to the changes which take place
in the conditions which surround us, and according to the
variety of our impressions. We are craving for change
and death ; to remain always the same would be torture.
Old impressions die and are replaced with new ones, and
we rejoice to see the old ones die, so that the new ones
may step into their places. We do not make our impres-
sions ourselves, but we receive them from the outside
world. If it were possible that two or more persons could
be born and educated under exactly the same conditions,
having the same character and receiving always the same
impressions, they would always have the same thoughts,
the same feelings and desires, their consciousness would be
identical, and they might be considered as forming collec-
tively only one person. A person, having forgotten all
the mental impressions he ever received, and receiving no
new ones, might exist for ages, living in eternal imbecility,
with no consciousness whatever except the consciousness
of the / Atiiy and that consciousness could not cease to
exist as long as there is in him that Will which enables him
to be.^

* This is the only possible condition in which a person, who has during
his earthly life acquired no spiritual possessions, can possibly exist after
death. A person whose whole attention is given to sensual pleasures,
or to merely intellectual pursuits on the material plane, carries nothing
with him into the subjective existence after the death of the body which
can exist permanently. Nor could it be otherwise ; for it is not he who
dies ; it is the &lse egos dying in him. A man who does not know his
own true self cannot die, because he has not yet come to life ; it is only
nature^ living and d3ring in him.

His sensations leave him at death, and the images caused in his mind
by the recollection of the superficial knowledge which he has acquired
during life will gradually fade away ; the intellectual forces, which have
been set into motion by his scientific pursuits, will be exhausted, and
after that time the spirit of such a person, even if he has been during life
the greatest scientist^ speculator, and logician, will be nothing but an
imb^ile being, having merely the feeling that he exists, living in dark-
ness, and being drawn irresistibly towards reincarnation ; seeking to
reimbody itself again under any circumstances whatever, to escape from
nothingness into existence.

But he who acquires spiritual self-consciousness will be self-luminous
and live in the eternal light. He brings a light with him into the dark-
ness, and that light will not be distinguished, for it is eternal ; while
the light of this world is like darkness to him.

Digitized by

Google

62 RELATIVE LIFE.

Under whatever form life may exist, it is only relative.
A stone, a plant, an animal, a man or God, each has an
existence of its own, and each one exists only for the
others, as long as the others are conscious of his existence.
Man looks upon the existences below him as incomplete,
and the incomplete beings below him know little about
him. Man knows little about any superior beings, and yet
there may be such, looking upon him with pity as they
would look upon an inferior animal that has not yet awak-
ened to a realization of its real existence.

Those who are supposed to know, inform us that there
is no being in the universe superior to the spiritual regener-
ated man ; but that there are innumerable invisible beings
who are either far superior or inferior to mortal man as
we know him. In other words, the highest beings in the
universe are such as have once been men ; but the men
and women of our present civilization may have to progress
through millions of ages before they attain that state of
perfection which such beings possess.

We are accustomed to look upon that which we perceive
with our senses as real, and upon everything else as unreal,
and yet our daily experience teaches us that our senses
cannot be trusted if we wish to distinguish between the
true and the false. We see the sun rise in the East, see
him travel along the sky during the day and dis-
appear again in the West; but every child now-a-days
knows that this apparent movement is only an illusion,
caused by the turning of the earth. At night we see the
"fixed" stars above our heads, they look insignificant
compared with the wide expanse of the earth and the ocean,
and yet we believe that they are blazing suns, in compari-
son with which our mother Earth is only a speck of dust.
Nothing seems to us more quiet and tranquil than the
solid rocks under our feet, and yet the earth whereon we
live whirls with tremendous velocity through space ; the
mountains seem to be everlasting, but continents sink
beneath the waters of the ocean and rise again above its
surface. Below our feet moves, with ebbs and tides, the
swelling bosom of our apparently solid mother the earth,
above our head seems to be nothing tangible, and yet we
live on the very bottom of the airy ocean above us, and do
not know the things that may perhaps live in its currents
or upon its surface. A stream of light seems to descend

Digitized by

Google

RELATIVE CONSCIOUSNESS. 63

from the sun to our planet, and yet darkness is said to
exist between the atmosphere of the Earth and the sun,
where no meteoric matter exists to cause a reflection ;
while again we are surrounded by an ocean of light of a
higher order, which appears to us to be darkness, because
the nerves of our bodies have not yet been sufficiently
developed to react under the influence of the Astral Light.
The image reflected in the mirror seems a reality to the
unreasoning mind ; the voice of an echo may be mistaken
for the voice of a man ; the elemental forces of nature may
be loaded with the products of our own thoughts, and we
may listen to their echo, believing it to be the voices of
spirits of the departed. We often dream when awake, and
while believing to be awake we may be asleep.

It is not scientific to say " we are asleep ; " as long as
we do not know who " we** are. We can only truly say
that such and such functions of a physical or psychical
organism, which we call our own, are asleep or inactive
while others are active and awake. We may be fully
awake relatively to one thing and asleep relatively to
another. A somnambul^s body may be in a state resem-
bling death, while his higher consciousness is fully alive,
and has even far superior powers of perception than it
could employ if all the activity of his life-principle were
engaged in performing the functions of his lower organism.

Solid matter looked at with the physical eye appears as
a dense mass of unchangeable something, but examined
with the eye of the intellect it appears as an aggregation
of centers of energy easily penetrable to thought. A solid
mass is therefore in reality a concentration of force, and
what we behold in the form of matter of any kind is only
the symbol of stored-up energy, a visible expression of the
invisible force residing in matter. Seen with the eyes of
the spirit, matter and force are known to be only one^ the
twofold activity of one eternal reality, the twofold mani-
festation of eternal power.

Matter is an external visible manifestation of force,
having become latent; Spirit is an internal invisible
active power. Both are the two diflerent modes of mani-
festation of one primal cause.

If we turn from the consideration of form to that of
space, and examine what relation extension and duration
bear to the consciousness of forms, we find that their

Digitized by

Google

64 MATTER.

qualities change according to our standard of measure-
ment and according to our mode of perception. To an
animalculae in a drop of water that drop may appear as an
ocean, and to an insect living on a leaf that leaf may con-
stitute a world. If during our sleep the whole of the visible
world were to shrink to the size of a walnut or expand to
a thousandfold its present dimensions, on awakening we
should perceive no change, provided that change had
equally affected everything, including ourselves. A child
has no conception of its true relation to space, and may try
to grasp the moon with its hands, and a person who has
been born blind and is afterwards made to see, cannot judge
of distances correctly. Our thoughts know of no intervening
space when they travel from one part of the globe to
another in an almost imperceptible space of time. Our
conceptions of our relation to space are based upon
experience and memory acquired in our present condition.
If we were moving among entirely different conditions, our
experiences, and consequently our conceptions, would be
entirely different. Our idea of relative space is a mode of
perception of distance, and there appear to be as many
dimensions of space as there are modes of perception or
consciousness. Space relatively to form can only have
three dimensions, because all forms are composed of three
dimensions — length, thickness and height. A conscious-
ness existing in a mathematical point could have no con-
ception of form, because such a point has no form. A
consciousness existing in a line or in a plane without
thickness could have no conception of form, because the
former having only one, and the latter only two extensions,
cannot exist as forms, but only as mathematical abstrac-
tions. Consciousness in the absolute sense is without
form, but entering into relation to form, its relation to
space will be threefold, because three is the number of
form.

It is evidently an absurdity to talk dhovX forms existing
in a fourth dimension of space; because three is the
number of form, and no form whatever, whether visible or
invisible, can possibly exist without possessing the three
factors, which are necessary to constitute it a form, namely,
lengthy breadth and thickness. There may be innumer-
able invisible powers in space; but whenever any such
power manifests itself in a form, it always belongs to three

Digitized by

Google

SPACE. 6s

dimensions of space. Absolute Space like Matter and Mo-
tion is fundamentally one^ and has no dimensions for any
body. It only manifests dimensions, when it becomes
relative to forms, and forms are necessarily always three
dimensional.

Space in the absolute is independent of form, but forms
cannot exist independent of space. We may imagine our-
selves to be in the midst of a solid rock, and we will be
there in space, although there will be no room in which we
could move. Everyone knows that there exists a difference
between good and evil, between love and hate, between
knowledge and ignorance ; but if two things or ideas differ
from each other there is the idea of a distance of some kind
between them, and distance means space, but a space that
has in such cases no relation to form, and of which we can
form no conception.

As our conception of space is only relative, so is our
conception of time. It is not time itself, but its measure-
ment, of which we are conscious, and time is nothing to us
unless in connection with our association of ideas. The
human mind can only receive a small number of impressions
per second ; if we were to receive only one impression per
hour, our life would seem exceedingly short, and if we
were able to receive, for instance, the impression of each
single undulation of a yellow ray of light, whose vibrations
number 509 billions per second, a single day in our life
would appear to be an eternity without end.* To a
prisoner in a dungeon, who has no occupation, time may
seem extremely long, while for him who is actively engaged
it passes quickly. During sleep we have no conception of
time, but a sleepless night passed in suffering seems very
long. During a few seconds of time we may, in a dream,
pass through experiences which would require a number of
years in the regular course of events, while in the uncon-
scious state time has no existence for us.

In books on mystical subjects we find often accounts of
a person having dreamed in a short moment of time, things
which we should suppose that it would take hours to dream
them 'y for instance the following : ** A traveler arrived late
at night at a station. He was very fatigued, and as the
conductor opened the door of the car, he entered, and im-

* Carl dtt Px^ : << Die Plamimbewohiurr

Digitized by LjOOQIC

66 TIME.

mediately fell asleep. He dreamed that he was at home,
and living with his family ; that he fell in love with a girl
and married her ; that he lived happy until he meddled
with political affairs, and was arrested on a charge of having
entered into a conspiracy against the government. He
was tried, and condemned to be shot, and led out to be
executed. Arrived at the place of execution, the command
was given, and the soldiers fired at him, and he awoke at
the noise caused by the shutting of the door of the car,
which the conductor had shut behind him when our friend
entered. It seems probable that the noise produced by
shutting that door caused the whole dream."

In this state, when the experiences of the internal state
mingles with the sensations of the external consciousness,
the most erroneous impressions may be produced ; because
the intellect labors, logic and reflection exist ; but reason
does not act sufficiently powerful to discriminate between
the true and the false.

But what is the difference between objective and subjec-
tive states of existence ? Our bodies do not cease to live
while we are asleep, but we have a different kind of per-
ceptions in either state. The popular idea is that objec-
tive perceptions are real and subjective ones only the
products of our imagination. But a little reflection will
show that all perceptions, the objective as well as the sub-
jective ones, are results of our " imagination." If we look
at a tree, the tree does not come into our eye, but its
picture appears in our mind ; if we look at a form we per-
ceive an impression made in our mind by the image of an
object existing beyond the limits of our body ; if we look
at a subjective image or a thought, whether it be of our
own creation or caused by the influence of another being,
we perceive the impression which it produces on our mind.
In either case the pictures exist in our mind, and we per-
ceive nothing but the impressions made on the mind, and
the only difference between the two is, that in the former
case the impression is caused by something visible, and in
the latter by something invisible to our physical sight, but
the internal impressions may be as real as the external
ones. If we close our eyes the latter vanish and the former
appear more distinct. If our eyes are open, the former
may become mixed with the latter, or be entirely superseded
by them on account of their superior strength.

Digitized by

Google

PROJECTED MENTAL IMAGES. 67

The fact is, that everything appears either objective or
subjective according to the state of consciousness of the
perceiver, and what may appear to him entirely subjective
m one state may appear to him objectively in another.
The highest truths have to him who can realize them an
objective existence, the grossest material forms have no
existence to him who cannot perceive them.

The basis upon which all exhibition of magical power
rests is a knowledge of the relations that exist between
object and subject. If we conceive in our mind of the
picture of a thing we have seen before, an objective form
of that thing comes into existence within our own mind,
and is composed of the substance of our own mind. If
by continual practice we gain sufficient power to hold on
to that image and to prevent it from being driven away and
dispersed by other thoughts, it will become comparatively
dense, and be projected upon the mental sphere of others,
so that the latter may actually believe to see objectively
that which exists merely as an image within our own mind ;
but he who cannot hold on to a thought and control it at
will cannot produce its reflections upon the minds of
others, and therefore such psychological experiments often
fail, not on account of any absolute impossibility to per-
form them, but on account of the weakness of those who
desire to experiment, but have not the power to control
their own thoughts, and to render them solid enough for
transmission.

Everything is either a reality or a delusion, according to
the standpoint from which we view it. The words " real "
and " unreal " are only relative terms, and what may seem
real in one state of existence appears unreal in another.
Money, luxury, fame, adulation, etc., appear very real
to those who need them; seen from the point of view
of a god who has no use for them they appear to be
only illusions. That which we realize is real to us,
however unreal it may appear to another, and the appear-
ance of reality changes as our consciousness changes.
If my imagination is powerful enough to make me firmly
believe in the presence of an angel, that angel will be
there, alive and real, my own creation, no matter how
invisible and unreal he may be to another. If your
mind can create for you a paradise in a wilderness,
that paradise will have /or you an objective existence.

Digitized by

Google

M OBJECTIVE EXISTENCE.

Everything that exists, exists in the universal Mind
If the individual mind becomes conscious of his relation
to a thing, it begins to perceive it. No man can cor-
rectly conceive of a thing that does not exist, he cannot
know anything with which he stands in no relation. To
perceive, three facts are necessary : The perception, the
perceiver, and the thing that is the object of perception.
If they exist on entirely different planes, and cannot enter
into relationship, no perception will be possible between
them, and they will not know each other ; if they are one,
there will be no perception, because the three being one,
there can be no relation between them. If I wish to look
at my face, and am not able to step out of myself, I must
use a mirror to establish a relation between myself and the
object of my perception. The mirror has no sensation,
and I cannot see myself in the mirror, I can only see my-
self in my mind. The reflection of the mirror produces a
reflection which is objective to my individual mind, and
which comes to my subjective perception. Looked at
from the standpoint of individual perception, I and the
image produced in my mind, as well as the mirror, have
each a separate existence ; but looked at from the stand-
point of The Absolute., myself, the image and the mirror
are only One ; the diflerence between us is merely one of
appearance.

Reflection upon these facts will give us a key to an
understanding of man's nature, and some of his mysteries.
We cannot objectively see the light or the truth, as long as
we are within the centre of the one or the other. Only
when we enter beyond the centre of the light, can we see
the source of the latter ; only when we fall into error, will
we learn to appreciate the truth. As long as primordial
man was one with the centre of universal power from
which he emanated as a spiritual ray or entity in the
beginning, he could not know the divine source from which
he came. The will and imagination of the Universal Mind
were his own will and imagination. Only when he began
to " step out of himself" could he begin to imagine that he
existed as a separate " Self ; " only when he began to act
against the law, did he begin to realize that there was
another law than his own. When man, as a spiritual
entity, having attained perfection, enters again into the
centre, his sense of self and separateness will be lost, but

Digitized by

Google

CREATION. 69

he will be in possession of knowledge. To see a thing, it
must become objective. To know a thing, we must be
separated from it. When we fully comprehend a thing,
we become one with it, and know it by knowing ourselves.

This example is intended to illustrate the fundamental
law of creation. The first great cause — ^so to say —
stepping out of itself, becomes its own mirror, and thereby
establishes a relation with itself. ** God " sees His face
reflected in eternal Nature ; the Universal Mind sees itself
reflected in the individual mind of man. The Father comes
to relative consciousness in the Son, but when He again
retires into Himself the relation will cease; the Father
will then be again absolutely one with the Son. He will
again become one with Himself, there will be no more
relative consciousness, and " Brahm will go to sleep " until
the night of creation has ceased. But God knows that he
exists even after all his relation with external things has
ceased, and does not need to look continually into a mirror
to be reminded of that fact. Likewise the absolute con-
sciousness of the great I am is independent of the objective
existence of Nature, and He will still " sit on the great white
throne after the earth and the heaven fled away from His
face."*

If the world is a manifestation of the Universal Mind,
everything that exists must exist in that mind ; there can
be nothing beyond the Universal Mind, because it is
necessarily infinite ; it can be only One, and there can be
no beyond. We exist in that Mind, and all we perceive of
external objects is the impressions which they produce
upon our individual minds through the medium of the
senses or by a superior mode of perception.

The superior powers of perceptions are those possessed
by the inner man, and they become developed after the
inner man awakens to self-consciousness. They correspond
to the senses of the external man, such as seeing, hearing,

• St. John : Revelations xx. 2. If the old maxim is true that ** it
is above as it is below/* it then follows that God never sleeps. Man^s
spirit is not unconscious when his physical body is asleep. On the
contrary, it is more fully awake when centered in its own self-
consciousness. Likewise the " sleep of Brahm " during Malaya
can only refer to his external creative activity, but not to his celestial
existence in his own self-conscious light.

Digitized by

Google

70 INNER SENSES.

feeling, tasting, smelling, and other modes of perceptioUi
which are not yet developed in the physical man.

External sensual perceptions are necessary to see sensu4
things ; the internal sensual perceptions are necessary to
see internal things. Physical matter is as invisible to the
spiritual sight as astral bodies are to the physical eyes ;
but as every object in nature has its astral counterpart
within the physical form, it may see, hear, feel, taste, and
smell with its astral senses those astral objects, and there-
by know the attributes of the physical objects as well or
still better than the physical man mi^ht have been able to
do with his physical senses ; but neither the physical nor
the astral senses will be able to perceive, unless they are
permeated by the light of the spirit which endows them
with life.

If everything that exists is Mind, and if we ourselves are
that Mind, all the forms of the subjective as well as the
objective words can be nothing else but states of our
Mind. Thought is the creative power in the universe.
Thought-germs grow in the mind as the seeds of plants
grow in the soil of the earth. The latter are quickened
into life by the light of the sun, the former by the light of
intelligence. At the beginning of a day of creation, Brahm,
begins to create, his thoughts call worlds into existence.
Things are materialized thoughts, or states of mind having
been rendered objective. Few persons have the power to
think spontaneously and independently, although all may
believe to have that power ; if they were able to manipulate
thought they would be able to create. The majority of
men only occupy themselves with the thoughts that come
into their mind without their bidding; they are instru-
ments or " mediums " through which the universal principle
of mind thinks, but they are unable to originate a thought,
much less to project it into objectivity through the power
of the will. He who has gained the power to hold on to a
thought may project it upon another, and the process will
be facilitated if the " receiver " is in a passive state of sleep,
hypnotism, or somnambulism. The expression "sugges-
tion" is in such cases entirely inappropriate to describe what
takes place; "Induction" would be more appropriate;
for the passive person not merely acts upon the suggestion
of his " magnetizer," but his will becomes a helpless instru-
ment through which the thoughts of the former are induced
fo a/^t iinnn the subjective or objective plane.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

INDUCTION. 71

We usually look upon a thing as real if it is seen alike by
several persons, while if only one person professes to see it,
it being invisible to others, we may call it illusive ; but all
impressions produce a certain state of the mind, and a
person must be in a condition — or state of mind — to enter
into a relation with that state which the impression
produces. All persons being in the same state of mind,
and receiving the same impression, will perceive the same
thing, but if their states differ, their perceptions will differ,
although the impression coming to their consciousness will
be the same. A horse or a lion may be seen alike by
everyone ' ho has his normal senses developed ; because
all men having normal human senses, may be in the same
mental state, but if one is excited by fear, or has his
attention otherwise absorbed, his mental state will change
and his perception will differ from that of others. A
drunkard in a state of delirium tremens may believe to see
worms and snakes crawling over his body. His experience
tells him that they have no external existence. Neverthe-
less they are horrible realities to him, and he seeks to rid
himself of their presence. They really exist for him as the
products of his own mental condition, but they do not
exist for others who do not share that condition. But if
others were to enter the same state they would see the
same things, and he who sees them can make others see
them, provided he is able to communicate to them his own
consciousness — ^that is to say, his own mental state.

Our perceptions therefore differ — not only in propor-
tion as the impressions coming from the objects of our
perception differ — but also according to our capacity to
receive such impressions, or according to our own mental
states. If we could develop a new sense we would believe
to be in a new world, and if our capacity to receive im-
pressions were restricted to only one sense, we would only
be able to conceive of that which could become manifest
to us through that sense and the world which we could
perceive would be very limited. Let us suppose the
existence of a being whose mode of perception were
entirely different from our own, and who could enter into
only one state of consciousness ; for instance, that of hate.
Having all his consciousness concentrated into his guid-
ing passion, he could become aware of nothing else but of
hate. Such a " god of hate," incapable of entering into

Digitized by

Google

7a MENTAL STATES.

any other mental state, could perceive no other states but
those corresponding with his own. To such a being the
whole world would be dark and void, our oceans and
mountains, our forests and rivers, would have no existence
for him ; but wherever a man or an animal would burn with
hate, there would be perhaps a lurid glow perceivable by
him through the darkness, which would attract his atten-
tion and attract him, and on his approach that glow may
burst into a flame in which the individual from whom it
proceeded may be consumed. Any other mental state or
passion may serve for a similar illustration. Hate
attracts hate, and Love attracts love, and a person full of
hate is as incapable to love as a being full of love is inca-
pable to hate ; both are mental states, which, after a person
has fully entered them, cannot be changed at will.

Man is that what he really wills. His whole being is
nothing else but the ultimate product of a will acting in
him ; not of his imaginary will, but of the real will, which is
one and divine.

The Bhagawad Gita says : " Those that are bom under
an evil destiny " (having acquired evil tendencies by their
conduct in former lives) " know not what it is to proceed
in virtue or to recede from vice ; nor is purity, veracity,
or the practice of morality to be found in them. They
say the world is without beginning and without end, and
without an Ishwar, that all things are conceived in the
junction of the senses, and that attraction is the only
cause." *

Those who believe that everything exists in conse-
quence of the attraction of two principles, forget that there
could be no attraction if there were not some cause that
produces that attraction, and that the attraction would
cease as soon as the cause that produced it would cease to
exist. They are the deluded followers of a doctrine
which they themselves cannot seriously believe. They
agree that out of nothing nothing can come, and
yet they believe that the power of attraction was
caused by nothing, and that it continues to exist without a
cause. They are the followers of the absurd Two which
has no real existence, because the eternal One divided into
two parts would not become two Ones but the two halves

* Bhagawad Gita, L. zvi.

Digitized by LjOOQiC

THE WILL. 73

of a divided One. One is the number of Unity, and Two
is Division ; the One divided into two ceases to exist as a
One, and nothing new is thereby produced. If the plan
for the construction of the world had been made according
to the ideas of the followers of Dualism, nothing could
have come into existence that did not already exist at a
time when nothing existed, because action and reaction, if
any existed, would have been of equal power, and there
could be no progressing of anything existing at present
If Ormuzd (the principle of good) were of equal power
with Ahriman (the principle of evil) there would be an
end to all progression, and the state of the world from
all eternity would have been the same ; but behind Ormuzd
and Ahriman is the nameless and invisible fire ^ the law of
evolution^ and Ormuzd continually conquers Ahriman by
the inherent power of good. If the Parsi worships the fire,
he worships the invisible power of Good. The visible fire
and the visible sun are the symbols which represent to
him the invisible power and spiritual sun, and it would be
difficult to find any symbols in nature more fit to represent
the infinite power of good and light, by which the dark
power of evil will be fully conquered in the end.

Whatever this power of good may be, it is beyond the
capacity of finite man to give it an appropriate name, or to
describe it, because it is beyond the comprehension of
mortal man. It has been called " God^' and as such it
has ** many faces," because its aspect differs according to
the standpoint from which we behold it. It is ^^ Supreme
cause, from which everything comes into existence ; it must
be absolute consciousness, wisdom and power y love, intelli"
gence and life, because these attributes exist in its mani-
festations, and could not have come into existence without
it It has been called Space, because everything exists in
space, but space itself is incomprehensible to us, although
we exist in it and are surrounded by it Space is a term
which has no meaning, unless it means extension, and ex-
tension is an attribute oi Matter, but matter cannot exist
without Motion, and the motion of matter is caused by the
Law. Space, Matter and Motion in the absolute are in-
comprehensible to us, because man being a relative beinij
can only comprehend that to which he stands in relation*
Being bound to a form he can only know that which ^xiAl9
relatively to fonn.

Digitized by

Google

74 GOD.

The Absolute s independent of relations and conditions, ia
the original cause of all manifestations of power. An
attempt to describe it would be equivalent with an attempt
to describe something which has no attributes, or of whose
attributes we can form no conception. When Gautama
Buddha was asked to describe the supreme source of all
beings, he remained silent, because those who have reached
a state in which they can realize what it is, have no words
to describe it,* and those who cannot realize it would not
be able to comprehend the description. To describe
the absolute we must invest it with comprehensible
attributes, and it then ceases to be The Absolute and
becomes relative. Therefore all theological discussions
about the nature of "God " are useless, because "God " has
no natural attributes, but Nature is His manifestation.
If we use the word " God " in its legitimate meaning, as
" Good^^ then to deny the existence of God is an absurdity^
equivalent to denying one's own existence, because all
existence can be nothing else but a manifestation of life, as
" Good." To declare to possess an intellectual knowledge
of God is equally absurd, because we cannot know any-
thing of which we cannot conceive. He can only be
spiritually known, but not scientifically described, and the
fight between so-called Deists and Atheists is a mere
quarrel about words which have no definite meaning.
£very man is himself a manifestation of God, and as each
man's character differs from that of every other, so each
man's idea of God differs from that of the rest, and each
one has a God (an ideal) of liis own ; only when they all
attain the same, the highest ideal, will they all have the
same God.

To him who does not believe in the power of Good, the
power of Good does not exist, and its existence cannot be
demonstrated to him. To him who feels the presence of
Good, Good exists, and to him its existence cannot be
disputed away. The ignorant cannot be made to realize
the existence of knowledge unless he becomes knowing ;
those who know cannot have their knowledge reasoned
away unless they forget what they know. The caricatures
of gods set up by the various churches as representations
of the only true God are merely attempts to describe that
which cannot be described. As every man has a highest

2 Corinth, xii. 4.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

ABSOLUTE GOOD. 75

ideal (a god) of his own, which is a symbol of his aspir-
ations, so every church has its peculiar god, who is an out-
growth or a product of evolution of the ideal necessities of
that collective body called a church. They are all true
gods to thent^ because they answer their needs, and as the
requirements of the church change, so change their gods ;
old gods are discarded and new ones put into their places.
The god of the Christian differs from that of the Jews, and
the Christian god of the nineteenth century is very different
from the one that lived at the time of Torquemada and
Peter Arbues, and was pleased with torture and Autos-da-
Fi, As long as men are imperfect their gods will be im-
perfect j as they become more perfect their gods will grow
in perfection, and when all men are equally perfect they
will all have the same perfect " God," the same highest
spiritual ideal and the same universal reality, recognized
alike by science and by religion ; because there can be
only one supreme ideal, one absolute Truth, whose reali-
zation is Wisdom, whose manifestation is power expressed
in Nature, and who^? most perfect production is ideal
Man.

There are seven steps on the ladder, representing the
religious development of mankind : On the first stage man
resembles an animal, conscious only of his instincts and
bodily desires, without any conception of the divine ele-
ment. On the second he begins to have a presentiment
of the existence of something higher. On the third he
begins to seek for that higher element, but his lower ele-
ments are still preponderating over the higher aspirations.
On the fourth his lower and higher desires are counter-
balancing each other. At times he seeks for the higher,
at other times he is again attracted to the lower. On the
fifth he anxiously seeks for the divine, but seeking it in
the external he cannot find it. He then begins to seek for
it within himself. On the sixth he finds the divine element
within himself and develops spiritual self-consciousness,
which on the seventh grows into self-knowledge. Having
arrived at the sixth, his spiritual senses begin to become
alive and active, and he will then be able to recognize the
presence of other spiritual entities, existing on the same
plane. His will then becomes free from every selfish
desire, his thoughts become obedient to his will, his word
becomes an act, and he may then rightfully be called an
Adept.

Digitized by

Google

A

CHAPTER IIL

FORM.

«« The Universe is a thought of GoAJ^-^Paracelsus.

According to Plato the primordial essence is an emanation
of the Demiurgic Mind, which contains from eternity the
idea of the natural world within itself, and which idea Hi
produces out of Himself by the power of His will. This
doctrine seems to be almost as old as the existence of
reasoning man on this globe. It contains essentially the
same truth which has been taught by the ancient Rishis^
and has been expressed — although, perhaps, in other terms
— ^by the deepest thinkers of all ages, apparently from the
first planetary spirit j that made his appearance on this
earth, down to the modern philosophers who teach that the
world is a product of ideation and will,* although the lat-
ter seem to forget that will and ideation cannot exist
independently of something that wills and thinks, but are
the functions of some unknown principle or Cause.

This One unknown cause comes into knowable existence
when the unmanifested Absolute manifesting itself assumes
a threefold aspect. Upon this truth is based the doctrine
of the Trinity^ which we find represented in the most
ancient religious systems of the East as well as in Christian
S3rmbolism, and without which even so-called "rational-
istic science " becomes irrational ; because if the ** mate-
rialist" (correctly) states that there can be no matter
without motion and no motion without matter, he must —
to remain logical — add that the existence of matter and
the activity of motion must have some cause. He may not
know that cause, but the cause nevertheless is there, even
if we know nothing at all about it, except that it is. The

* Schopenhauer : ** Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellang."

Digitized by LjOOQiC

7RINI7Y. 77

trinity of rational science is therefore Action^ Reaction^ and
Causation^ or, in other words, Matter y Motion^ and Cause
(Potency).

The great Christian Mystic, Jacob Boehme^ describes the
Great First Cause as a trinity of will, thought, and action.
His doctrine corresponds to that which is taught in the
East, regarding the three emanations of Brahm, and of
which that German shoemaker could at that time have
hardly known anything, if he had not been an Illuminate.
He says, in his book on " The Three Principles^' that by
the activity of the Will-Fire at the Centre \hR eternal con-
sciousness of the latter was reflected in Space as in a niirror,
and from this activity Light and Life were born. He then
describes, how by the action radiating from the incompre-
hensible centre, radiating into the element of Matter, and
the subsequent reaction from the periphery toward the
centre, rotation, mixture of the essential substances and
complexedness were caused, and how at last the Ether ^ the
world of forms, came into existence, and grew into material
density. Thus the will of the Father (Cave) sent out the
Son (Life), and through that action the power of the Father
in the Son (Light), or the *' Holy Ghost " became manifest,
and its manifestation is the visible and invisible universe
in one, with all its suns, stars, planets, their forms and
inhabitants, with all the angels and demons, devas, ele-
mentals, men and animals, or in other words, with all the
energies and powers and forms of the visible and invisible
side of nature.

This trinity manifests itself on three different //tf«^j or
modes of action, that have been termed Matter ^ Souly and
Spirity or, according to the S)rmbolism of ancient occult
science, Earth , Water , and Fire. The One becomes
manifest in the Three, but the Three is a whole and does
not consist of three parts, of which one comes into suc-
cession after another, it springs into existence at once.
Reaction cannot exist without Action, and both are due to
a co-existing Cause, The Father does not become a
Father before the arrival of the Son, and that which pro-
duces the Son is the power resting in the Father, his Will
manifesting itself as the Spirit pervading all nature. There
is no motion without matter or without cause ; no cause
without an effect and without something upon which an
effect is produced. There can be no extension and dur-

Digitized by

Google

78 OBJECTIFIED SPACE,

ation or *' Space " without matter or motion, and no form
without space. Absolute space is invisible, and we cannot
conceive of its form. We cannot imagine it to be without
any limits, nor can we conceive of any limits to it with no
space beyond it ; relative space is limited and exists as a
form. TTiere can be no empty space, because "space"
means extension, and we cannot conceive of " nothing,*'
nor can " nothing " have an extension. Forms are — so to
say — space which has been rendered objective, crystalized
Into some shape which may or may not be perceptible to
our senses, and no form can exist but in space.

These forms come into existence by the action of the
three elements, Fire^ Water and Earthy neither one of
which exists without the other two ; because they are not
three different things per se^ but only three aspects of the
eternal One.

Spirit or " Fire " is an immaterial, formless, and
universal element. It is the matrix in which everything
was contained before it was thrown into objectivity by the
awakening of its Will. It is the Will itself; the source of
all power and the substance of which all is made. " God
is a fire, to which none can approach except through the
Son." The dark fire cannot be known to man except
through the light which emanates from it Life would never
be known, unless it becomes manifest, and to become
manifest, a form is required. No magical process has ever
been accomplished without the magic fire, and to learn to
know the true nature of that fire is the great desideratum
of every occultist.

Soul or " Water " or " Light " is a semi-material element.
It is the organizing element of corporeal forms. The soul
of microcosmic man corresponds to the soul of the macro-
cosm. It is the playground of the elemental forces of nature,
existing in the astr^d plane. It penetrates and surrounds
the planets as it surrounds and penetrates the bodies of
men and animals and all other bodies and forms, and all
material forms are — so to say — only " materialized souls^*
that will perish after the light has been extracted from
them. The light is the redeemer from darkness on every
plane of existence. It comes from the fire \ but it is not
itself the fire. It is a principle in itself, and its attributes
are different from those of the fire. It is itself the life of
everything.

Digitized by

Google

ELEMENTS. 79

Matter or "Earth" is an invisible material element
pervading all space. Condensed by the organizing power
of the soul, it clothes the forms of the latter and renders
them visible on the physical plane. But not all forms are
visible to the physical sense of sight, the material forms
which we see are not the only forms in existence. The
invisible world, hidden in the visible one, could be dis-
covered by man if he were able to draw the veil from matter,
because within the material form resides the invisible
element of which the visible form is only the external
expression.

From the interaction of the three primordial elements,
Spirit, Soul and Matter, four compound principles be-
come manifest, and these four added to the three former
represent seven principles. This sevenfold division in the
constitution of Uie Macrocosmos and Microcosmos was
known to the ancient sages of the .East as well as to
Western Adepts, such as Paracelsus and others, and has
recently been brought prominently to the notice of the
public by the teachings of the Eastern Adepts.

As a matter of course, however, all such divisions are
arbitrary, for man is an undivided whole, and we may divide
his constitution in as many parts as we please for the
purpose of facilitating this study. We may look upon him
as a unity or in a dual aspect as a manifestation of Spirit
acting in Matter, or as a trinity of Spirit, Body and Soul,
or in his fourfold aspect as a representation of four states
of consciousness ; as a full accord of five harmonious
powers, as a compound of four elements joined to the
fifth, the quintessence of all things, as a revelation of six
visible powers emanating from a seventh but invisible
centre, etc. The sevenfold classification recommends
itself on account of its simplicity, and because it can be
easily seen to harmonize with the customary threefold
classification.

Jacob Boehme teaches that of these seven principles or
natural qualities, the first and the seventh are one, and
refer to Ae Father ; the second and sixth as one refer to
the Son, and likewise the third and fifth to the Holy
Spirit.

It has been stated as follows :

I. A — ^The element of Matter A^kdsa^ represented
by " Earth:'

Digitized by

Google

8o SE VEN PRINCIPLES.

2. AB. — ^A combination of Matter and Soul, known

as the Astral Body, a mixture of " Earth and
Water."

3. B — ^The Souit known as the Perisprit^ or the

animal principle in man, represented bj " Water."

4. ABC. — ^The Essence of Life^ a combination of

Matter, Soul, and Spirit, "Earth, Water, and
Fire."

5. AC. — ^The Mindy a combination of Matter and

Spirit, or *' Earth and Fire" (the principle of
Intellectuality).

6. BC. — ^The Spiritual Soul, a combination of Soul

and pure Spirit, or " Water and Fire " (the
principle of Spiritual Intelligence).

7. C. — Pure Spirit or " Fire," the incomprehensible

First Great Cause.*

The division adopted by Paracelsus and in " Esoteric
Buddhism " is identical with the above, with the exception
that tht/iva or Vitality is counted as the second, and the
Astral body as the third principle ; as follows : — i. The
physical body (Stoolasariram). 2. Vitality (Mumia). 3.
Astral Body (Sidereal body). 4. Animal Soul. 5. Intel-
lectual Soul. 6. Spiritual Soul. 7. Spirit.

It is said that this division was also known to the
ancient Jews, and that the Hebrew Alphabet, consisting of
22 letters, was made with reference to it; because the
three in seven states produces twelve symbols, and 3+7
+ 12 = 22.

Jacob Boehme describes the action of these seven
principles in his own way. He says :

" When the light was bom at the Centre, the (spiritual)
Sun, and reacted upon the central fire, a terrible battle
ensued, causing an igneous eruption, and from the sun
proceeded a flash of storm and fire, an element, called
Mars. Taken captive by the light, it assumed a place
and continues to agitate all nature. The light, having
been enchained by Mars, proceeded further in the rigidity

* The Sanicrit terms for the seven principles are : i, Pracriti ;
2, Lingasariram ; 3, Kamarupa ; 4, Jiva \ 5, Manas ; 6, Bnddhi ;
7» Atma (Param-Atma, firahmam, Parabrahm). — See <' Five years of
Theosophy," ?• 153.

Digitized by

Google

PLANETARY POWERS. 8l

of the element of matter (Saturn)^ and became corporeal
in forms.

"Above the element c3\\q^ Ju^iter^ in the adstringent
anguish of the whole body of this solar system, the Sun
was not powerful enough to mitigate the horror, and there
arose Saturn^ the element, opposite to meekness, produ-
cing rigidity. The Sun is the heart of Nature, the Centre
of Life ; Saturn represents corporeal nature or Matter.
Without the action of the Life coming from the Sun upon
Mattery there would be no production of forms. Venus
is the daughter of the Sun, She rises out of the water of
the universe, penetrates the hard element of matter and
enkindles Love. Mercury (like the others, an invisible
clement) represents the principle of sound, or the Word,
by whose activity the sleeping germs of everything are
awakened to life. Mercury is continually impregnated by
the substance of the Sun. In it is found the knowledge of
that which existed before the light had penetrated into the
solar centre. The Moon was produced directly from the
Sun at the time of his becoming material. The Moon is
the spouse of the Sun. She is the Eve, who was made out
of a part of Adam, while the latter was asleep."

In this classification The Sun represents Wisdom, the
Moon^ Imagination, Mercury , the Mind substance, VenuSy
the Astral Body, Mars, the principle of Life, y^/z/^r, the
element of Power, Saturn, primordial Matter ; but the
significations of these planets differ according to the aspects
we take of them.

All forms are the expression of either one or more of
these elementary principles, and exist as long as their
respective principles are active in them. They are not
necessarily visible, because their visibility depends on
their power to reflect light. Invisible gases may be solidi-
fied by pressure and cold, and rendered visible and tangible,
and the most solid substances may be made invisible and
intangible by the application of heat. The products of
^osmic thought are not all sufficiently materialized to be
visible to the physical eye, and in reality we see only a
very small part of their sum. No one doubts that there is
an immense amount of invisible matter in the universe,
whether cometary or otherwise, and every improvement in
(he manufacture of optic instruments brings new realms of
forms and life to our perception.

Digitized by

Google

82 INVISIBILITY.

Each transformation of activity gives rise to changes d
forms, and may bring new forms into existence. Solid ice
may be transformed into invisible vapor, and condensed
again into a tangible form. The more matter expands and
the more its motion is made active, the more will it escape
the perception of the physical senses, but its expansion
does not necessarily render it less powerful to act. Steam
is more powerful than water, and overheated to a certain
degree it evolves electricity, and may become very des-
tructive. The more the element of matter is condensed,
the more inert does it appear ; the more it expands, the
farther will its sphere of activity reach.

All bodies have their invisible spheres. Their visible
spheres are limited by the periphery of their visible forms ;
their invisible spheres extend farther into space. Their
spheres cannot be always detected by physical instruments,
but they nevertheless exist, and under certain conditions
their existence can be proved to the senses. The sphere
of an odoriferous body can be perceived by the organ of
smell, the sphere of a magnet by the approach of iron, the
sphere of a man or an animal by that most delicate of all
instruments, the abnormally sensitive brain.

These spheres are the magnetic, coloric, odic, or lumi-
nous auras and emanations belonging to every object in
space. Such an emanation may sometimes be seen as the
Aurora Borealis in the polar regions of our planet, or as
the photosphere of the siin during an eclipse. The
'^ glory " around the head of a saint is no poetical fiction,
no more than the sphere of light radiating from a precious
stone. As each sun has its system of planets revolving
around it, so each body is surrounded by smaller
centres of energy evolving from the common centre, and
partaking of the attributes of that centre. Copper, Carbon,
and Arsenic, for instance, send out auras of red ; Lead
and Sulphur emit blue colors ; Gold, Silver and Antimony,
green ; and Iron emits all the colors of the rainbow. Plants,
animals, and men emit similar colors according to their
characteristics ; persons of a high and spiritual character
have beautiful auras of white and blue, gold and green, in
various tints ; while low natures emit principally dark red
emanations, which in brutal and vulgar or villainous persons
darken almost to black, and the collective auras of bodies
of men or plants or animals^ of cities and countries, cor«

Digitized by

Google

SPHERES AND EM ANA TIONS. 83

respond to their predominant characteristics, so that a
person whose sense of perception is sufficiently developed
may see the state of the intellectual and moral development
of a place or a country by observing the sphere of its
emanations.

These spheres expand from the centre, and their periphery
grows in proportion to the intensity of the energy acting
within the centre. Who can measure the extent of the
sphere of thought and the depth of the regions to which it
may penetrate, who can determine the distance to which
the power of Will and Love and spiritual Perception will
act ? We know the sphere of a rose by the odor that
proceeds from the latter if we have the power to smell, we
know the character of the mind of a man if we enter the
sphere of his thoughts, provided that our inner senses are
sufficiently developed to become conscious of the state of
his mind.

The quality of psychic emanations depends on the state
of activity of the centre from which they originate, for
each thing and each being is tinctured with that particular
principle which exists at the invisible centre, and from this
centre receives the form of its own character or attributes.
They are symbols of the states of the soul of each form,
they indicate the state of the emotions. Each emotion
corresponds to a certain color : Love corresponds to blue.
Desire to red, Benevolence to green, and these colours
may induce corresponding emotions in other souls,
especially if the emotional element is guided by reason.
Blue has ,a soothing effect, and may tranquilize a maniac
or subdue a fever ; Red excites to passion, a steer may be
furious at the sight of a red cloth, and ah unreasoning mob
become infuriated at the sight of blood. This chemistry
of the soul is not any more wonderful than the facts known
in physical chemistry, and these processes take place
according to the same law which causes Chloride of Silver
to turn from white into black if exposed to blue or white
light, while ruby red or yellow light leaves it unchanged.

The thoughts of the Universal Mind expressed in matter
on any plane, comprise all the forms of the mineral,
vegetable, and animal kingdoms on Earth, including the
bodies and souls of all beings. Their physical forms are
the expressions of three principles, and each material form
contains within itself its ethereal counterpart, which may,

Digitized by

Google

34 THE CENTRE.

under certain conditions, separate itself from the more
material part, or be extracted therefrom by the hands of an
Adept. These astral parts may be corporified and be
rendered visible. Actually all bodies, even the most solid
rocks, are nothing else but corporified astral appearances,
whose innermost substance is the fire whose light is their
life. Every individual being is a flame in creation whose
light differs from others according to its own particular
attributes.

Astral forms continue to exist for a while after the
visible bodies to which they belong have had their fire
extinguished. The astral corpses of the dead may be seen by
the clairvoyant hovering over the graves, bearing the
resemblance of the once living man. They may be arti-
fically infused with life and with a borrowed consciousness,
and made use of in the practices of Necromancy and
Black Magicy or be attracted to ** spiritual seances'* to
represent the spirits of the dead.

There are persons in whom this principle — either in
consequence of constitutional peculiarities or in conse-
quence of disease — ^is not very firmly united with the
physical body, and may become separated from it for a
short period.* Such persons are suitable " mediums " for
so-called spirit-materializations^ their ethereal counter-
parts may appear separated from their bodies and assume
the visible form of some person either living or dead. It
receives its new mask by the unconscious or conscious
thoughts of the persons present, by the reflections thrown
out from their memories and minds, or it may be made to
represent other characters by influences invisible to the
physical eye.

As the brain is the central organ for the circulation of
nerve-fluid, and as the heart is the organ for the circula-
tion of the blood, so the spleen is the organ from which
the astral elements draw their vitality, and in certain
diseases, where the action of the spleen is impeded, this
** double " of a person may involuntarily separate itself
from the body. It is nothing very unusual that a sick

* Tliis intimate relation of the astral form and the physical body is
often illustrated at so-called exposures of ** spiritual mediums." If a
materialized form is soiled by ink or soot, the coloring matter will
afterwards be found on the corresponding part of the medium's body,
because, when the astral form re-enters that body, it will leave the
soiling matter on the corresponding parts of the latter.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

ASTRAL FORMS. 85

person feels ** as if he were not himself" or as if another
person was lying in the same bed with him, and that he
himself were that other. Such cases of ^' Doppelgaengers/'
Wraiths, Apparitions, Ghosts, etc., caused by the separa-
tion of the Lingasariram from the physical form, can be
found in many works treating of mystic phenomena
occurring in nature.*

Usually these astral forms are without consciousness
and without any life of their own ; but they may be made
to be the seat of life and consciousness, by withdrawing
the life from the material form and concentrating it into
the astral body. A person who has succeeded in doing
this may step out of his physical form and live independent
of the latter, and an Adept may even entirely remain out«
side his physical body and continue to live in his ethereal
and invisible form.t

The forms in the realm of Soul, in which the fourth
principle is the essential element, are still more ethereal and
more independent of a definite form. This will not seem
incomprehensible, if we remember that they too are forms
of thought, and that a thought or an idea may take a
defined shape or may remain shapeless and undefined. If
we, for instance, hear the word " animal," we conceive of
a living being of some shape or other, but give our con-
ception no definite form ; but if the animal is described as
one with whose form we are acquainted, the picture of that
form will come to the consciousness of the mind. Con-
centration of thought gives shape to ideas and condenses
the formless into forms. Purely spiritual or abstract ideas,
such as love, faith, hope, charity, etc., have no shapes and
cannot be conceived as forms, they can at best be symbol*
ized by forms which are made to guide our thoughts
towards the formless ideas whose attributes they are
intended to bring before our imagination.

• Adolphe D'Assier i " L'humMiit6 posthume.'*

f The stories of fakirs who have been buried alive for months and
resurrected afterwards might here be used as illu<;tration. They are too
well known to need repetition in this place. Moreover, phenomena,
however well attested they may be, can never stand in the place of
knowledge; they furnish no explanation of the mysterious laws of
nature. The occurrence of phenomena proves notlung but that they
occur. Real knowledge is never attained by the observation of external
phenomena, it can only be attained by the knowledge of sel&

Digitized by

Google

86 SPIHITS.

Among the ancients it was customary to make such
personifications of impersonal powers, and to describe
their functions in symbols and allegories. The first
Christians adopted that system. Modem religionism
believes those allegories to represent dead persons and
peoples, and knows nothing about the living principles
which they represent.

As there are three elements represented in the three
kingdoms of the physical plane, so there are three king-
doms of Elementals existing on the astral plane, corres-
ponding to the elements of fire, water, and earth. Indivi-
dual forms on that plane may often make their presence
felt to men or animals, but under ordinary circumstances
they cannot be seen. They may, however, be seen by the
clairvoyant, and, under certain conditions, even assume
visible and tangible shapes. Their bodies are of an elastic
semi-material essence, ethereal enough so as not to be
detected by the physical sight, and they may change their
forms according to certain laws. Bulwer Lytton says:
" Life is one all-pervading principle, and even the thing
that seems to die and putrefy but engenders new life and
changes to new forms of matter. Reasoning then by
analogy — if not a leaf, if not a drop of water, but is no less
than yonder star — a habitable and breathing world —
common sense would suffice to teach that the circumfluent
Infinite, which you call space — the boundless Impalpable
which divides the earth from the moon and stars — ^is filled
also with its correspondent and appropriate life."

And further on he says : ** In the drop of water you see
animalculse vary ; how vast and terrible are some of these
monster-mites as compared with others. Equally so with
the inhabitants of the atmosphere. Some of surpassing
wisdom, some of horrible malignity, some hostile as fiends
to man, others gentle as messengers between Earth and
Heaven." *

Our sceptical age is accustomed to admire in such
descriptions the "fancy" of the writer, never suspecting
that they were intended to convey a truth ; but there are
many witnesses to testify — ^if it were necessary — ^that such
invisible but substantial and variously shaped beings exist,
and that they, by the educated will of man, can be made

• Bulwer Lytton : <• Zanoni."

Digitized by LjOOQiC

ELEMENTAL SPIRITS OF NATURE. 87

conscious, intelligent, visible, and even useful to man.
This assertion is supported by the testimony found in the
writings of Rosicrucians, Cabbalists, Alchemists, and
Adepts, as well as in the ancient books of wisdom of the
East and in the Bible of the Christians.

Such existences are, however, not necessarily personal
beings. They may be impersonal forces, acquiring form,
and life, and consciousness by their contact with man.
The Gnomes and Sylphes^ the Undines and Salamanders^
do not entirely belong to the realm of fable, although they
may be something very different of what the ignorant
believe them to be. How insignificant and little appears
individual man in die infinity of the universe ! and yet
there is only a comparatively insignificant part of the
universe revealed to him by the senses. Could he see the
worlds within worlds above, beneath, and everywhere,
swarming with beings whose existence he does not suspect,
while they, perhaps, know nothing of his existence, he
would be overwhelmed with terror and seek for a god to
protect him ; and yet there are none of these beings higher
or as powerful as the spiritual man who has learned to
know his powers, and in whom his own god has awakened
to consciousness and strength.*

The beings of the spiritual plane are such as have once
been men, their constitution is beyond the comprehension
of those that are not their equals, and their ethereal forms
in a state of perfection we cannot conceive. Having out-
grown the necessity of residing in a form they enter the
state of the formless, approaching evermore the Universal
Mind, from which the power called Man emanated at the
beginning. We may look upon a personal man as a single
note in the great orchestra composing the world, and upon
a Dhyan Chohan f as a full accord or a compound of
notes in the symphony of the gods. There may be unhar-
monious compositions of notes in music, and there are evil
spiritualities as there is darkness in contradistinction to
light, because a high grade of intelligence may be used for
vile purposes ; but the good spirituality cannot be con-

* Paracelsus gives detailed descriptions of these beings*
t Son of Wisdom (Angel).

Digitized by

Google

88 SOUL INDUCTION.

quered by evil, because it is protected by wisdom, which
is essentially good, and of which evil is but the reverse.

There are good and evil spiritual beings, and either class
may possess a great deal of knowledge and power ; but
only the good — that is to say, kind and benevolent powers,
can be considered wise — because wisdom means a union
of knowledge and love, from which the highest powers
spring. To be wise, is to be good and beautiful and true.
Evil spiritualities may be very strong, but they cannot
overcome the good ones, because they lack wisdom, and
wisdom is itself the divine will of God.

What is a spirit ? Nothing else but a thought rendered
alive by the will ; a ray of light, receiving its impulse by the
fire hidden therein. A thought without will is unsubstantial,
like an image in a mirror ; made active by the will, it
assumes life, substance and form. We all are spirits as
long as we have the will ; but when the will leaves a man,
his life goes with it, and his body, the shadow, fades
away.

The realm of the Soul is the realm of the emotions.
Emotions are not merely the results of physiological
processes depending on causes coming from the physical
plane, but they belong to a form of life on the astral plane,
they often come and go without any apparent cause. The
state of the weather, or circumstances over which we have
no control^ may cause certain emotions independently of
our state of physical health. A person entering a room
where every one is laughing is liable to participate in the
common emotion without knowing the cause of the hilarity ;
a whole crowd may be swayed by the intense emotion of a
speaker, although they may not fully understand what he
says ; one hysterical woman in a hospital ward may create
an epidemic of hysteria among the other women, and a
whole congregation may become excited by the harangue
of an emotional exhorter, no matter whether his language
is foolish or wise. A sudden accumulation of emotion or
energy on the astral plane may kill a person as quickly as
a sudden explosion of powder. We hear of persons who
were " transfixed by terror " or " paralyzed by fear." In
such cases the astral consciousness having become abnor-
mally active at the expense of the consciousness on the
physical plane, the activity of life on the physical plane
may cease, and the affected person may faint, or perhaps
die.

Digitized by

Google

FORMATIOJSr. 89

All forms come into existence according to certain laws.
The solar microscope shows how, in a solution of salt, a
centre of matter is formed, and how to that centre its
kindred forces are attracted, crystalizing around it, and
becoming solid and firm. Each kind of salt produces the
peculiar crystals that belong to its class and no other, how-
ever often the process may be repeated. In the vegetable
kingdom we see that the seed of one plant will attract to
itself those forces which it requires to produce a plant
resembling its parent; the seed of an apple-tree can
produce nothing else but an apple-tree, and an acorn can
grow into nothing else but an oak. The principal charac*
teristics of an animal will be those that belong to its
parents, and the external appearance of a man will cor*
respond more or less to that of the race and family in
which he was bom.

As every mathematical point in space may develop into
a living and conscious and visible being, after once a
certain centre of energy (a germ) has been formed, so in
the invisible realm of the soul astral forms may come into
existence wherever the necessary conditions for their
growth exist. In the same manner as an active motion on
the physical plane may attract the universally diffused
matter around a common centre, likewise an active emotion
on the astral plane may crystalize around a thought into
an invisible but nevertheless substantial entity, which may
have an existence of long or short duration according to
the intensity with which the forces composing it are concen-
trated upon its centre. As the forms on the physical
plane correspond to the characters of the forces prevailing
upon that plane, so the forms on the astral plane are ex-
pressions of the characteristics of the prevailing emotions
on that plane. They may manifest themselves either in
beautiful or in horrible shapes, because every form is onljr
the symbol or the expression of the character which it
represents.

The forms in the mineral kingdom are expressive of
forces acting in straight and angular lines, those of the
vegetable kingdom represent radiating and curved lines ;
the animal forms are expressions of forces acting on the
astral plane, and the inhabitants of the astral plane may
resemble visible animal or human forms. In those forms
which belong exclusively to the astral plane the higher

Digitized by

Google

90 PHANTOMS.

spiritual energies are not active. They may have a con-
sciousness of their own and realize their existence, but
under ordinary circumstances they have no more intelli-
gence than animals, and cannot act intelligently and in
accordance with reason. They follow their blind attraction,
as iron is attracted to a magnet, and wherever they find an
excessive amount of emotion evolved by a human being
they are attracted thither as to a common centre, and their
accumulation increases the activity of that centre and
increases the size of its sphere. We therefore often see
that if one emotion is not controlled in the beginning it
may grow and become uncontrollable. Some people have
died of grief and some others of joy.

But if these unintelligent forms are infused with the
principle of intelligence proceeding from man, they become
intelligent and act in accordance with the dictates of the
master from which they receive their will and intelligence,
and who may employ them for good or for evil. Every
emotion that arises in man may combine with the astral
forces of nature and create a being, which may be per-
ceived by persons possessing abnormal faculties of per-
ception as an active and living entity. Every sentiment
which finds expression in word or action may call into
existence a livmg entity on the astral plane. Some of
these forms maybe very enduring according to the intensity
and duration of the thought that created them, while others
are the creations of one moment and vanish in the next.

There are numerous cases on record in which some
person or other having committed some crime is described
as having been persecuted for years by some avenging
demon, who would appear objectively and disappear again.
Such demons may be, and perhaps can be nothing else but
the products of the involuntary action of the imagination
of their victims ; but they are nevertheless real to the lat-
ter. They may be called into existence by memory and
remorse, and their images, existing in the mind, may
become objective by fear, because fear is a repulsive
function ; it instinctively repulses the object of which a
man is afraid, and by repelling the image from the centre
towards the periphery of the sphere of mind, that image
may be rendered objective.

Instances are known in which persons have been driven
to suicide, hoping thereby to escape these persecuting

Digitized by

Google

DOUBLES. 91

demons. Such demons are said to have in some cases
taken even a tangible form. But whether tangible or in-
tangible, the substance of which they are formed is merely
a projection of substance of the person to whom they thus
appear. They are, so to say, that person himself, and if
the latter could injure or kill such a "ghost," he would
merely thereby injure or kill his own body.*
An Adept in a letter to Mr. Sinnett says :
"Every thought of man upon being evolved passes into
another world and becomes an active entity by associating
itself — coalescing we might term it — ^with an Elemental —
that is to say, with one of the semi-intelligent forces of
the kingdoms. It survives as an active intelligence — a
creature of the mind's begetting — ^for a longer or shorter
period, proportionate with the original intensity of the
cerebral action which generated it. Thus, a good thought
is perpetuated as an active, benelScent power, an evil one
as a maleficent demon. And so man is continually
peopling his current in space with the offspring of his fan-
cies, desires, impulses, and passions ; a current which
reacts upon any sensitive or nervous organization, which
comes in contact with it, in proportion to its dynamic inten-
sity The Adept evolves these shapes consciously,

other men throw them oflf unconsciously." *

* In the " lives of the Saints," and in the history of witcbcrait, we
often find instances of the appearance of '* doubles " in visible and even
tangible forms. Sach phenomena may take place in mediumistic per-
sons, if by contrary emotions the Will becomes divided, acting in two
diiTerent directions, and projecting thereby two forms; for it is the
spiritual Will of man that creates subjective forms, consciously or un«
consciously, and under certain conditions they may become objective
and visible.

As an illustration of this law we may cite from the Ada Sanctorum
an episfxle in the life of Saint Dominic. He was once called to the
bedside of a sick person, who told him that Christ had appeared to him.
The saint answered that this was impossible, and that the apparition
had been produced by the devil, because only holy persons could have
an apparition of Christ. As hie said so, a doubt as to whether the
apparition seen may not have been a true one after all entered hia
mind, and immediately a division of consciousness was produced, which
caused the double of Dominic to appear at the other side of the patient's
bed. The two Dominies were seen by the patient, and heard to dis-
pute with each other, and while one Dominic asserted that the apparition
had been the work of the devil, the other one maintained that it was the
true Christ The two Dominies were so exacdy identical, that the

Digitized by

Google

92 THOUGHT SHAPES.

This testimony is corroborated by one coming from
another source, and proving that to create subjective forms
it is not necessary to give a distinct shape to our thoughts
by the power of imagination, but that each state of feeling
or sentiment may find expression in subjective forms,
whether or not we may be conscious of their existence. A
form is a state of mind, and a sentiment is a state of mind ;
a sentiment expressed will be represented by a correspond-
ing form.

Mr. Whitworth, a clairvoyant, describes how in his youth,
while seeing a German professor perform on an organ, he
noticed a host of appearances moving about the keyboard
— ^veritable Lilliputian sprites, fairies, and gnomes, astonish-
ingly minute in size, yet as perfect in form and features as
any of the larger people in the room. He described them
as being divided into sexes and clothed in a most fantastic
manner ; in form, appearance and movement they were in
perfect accord with the theme.

" In the quick measures, how madly they danced, waving
their plumed hats and fans in very ecstasy, and darting to
and fro in inconceivable rapidity, with feet beating time in
rain-like patter of accord I Quick as a flash, when the
music changed to the solemn cadence of a march for the
dead, the airy things vanished, and in their place came
black-robed gnomes, dressed like cowled monks, sour-
faced Puritans, or mutes in the black garb of a funeral
procession ! Strangest of all, on every tiny face was
expressed the sentiment of the music, so that I could
instantly understand the thought and feeling that was
intended to be conveyed. In a wild burst of sounding grief
came a rush of mothers, tear-eyed and with dishevelled
hair, beating their breasts and wailing pious lamentations
over their dead loved ones. These would be followed by

patient did not know which of them was the true saint, and which one
his image, and he could not make up his mind what to believe ; until
at last the saint called upon God to assist him, — ^that is to sav, he con*
centrated his will-power again within himself ; his consciousness became
again a unity, and the ** double " disappeared from view.

Absurd as such stories may appear to our " enlightened age," their
absurdity ceases when the occult laws of nature, and the feet of the poasi*
Inlities of a double consciousness are understood*'

• A. P. Sinnett i « The Occult World."

Digitized by

Google

SPIRITS OF MUSIC. f3

plumed knights with shield and spear, and host of fiery
troops, mounted or foot, red-handed in the fiery strife ol
bloody battle, as the clang of martial music came leaping
from the keyboard, and ever, as each change brought its
new set of sprites, the old ones would vanish into the air
as suddenly as they had come. Whenever a discord was
struck, the tiny sprite that appeared was some mis-
shapen creature, with limbs and dress awry, usually a
humpbacked dwarf, whose voice was guttural and rasping,
and his every movement ungainly and disagreeable/'

He then describes how in his riper age he saw such fairy-
like beings coming from the lips of persons talking, and
which seemed in every action the very counterpart of the
feeling conveyed in the uttered speech. If the words were
inspired by good sentimeills, these figures were transcen^
dentally beautiful ; bad sentiments produced horrid-looking
creatures j hate was expressed by hissing snakes and dark,
fiery devils j treacherous words produced figures beautiful
in front and disgusting and horrid behind; while love
produced forms silvery, white, and full of beauty and
harmony.

" On one never-to-be-forgotten occasion I was a pained
witness to a scene of living faithfulness on one side and a
double-faced, treacherous duplicity on the other. A fair
young girl and her departing lover had met to exchange
greetings ere he went on a distant journey. Each word
of hers gave forth beautiful, radiant fairies ; but while the
front half of each that was turned to the girl was equally
fair to look upon, and smiled with all the radiant seeming
of undying affection, the rear half of each was black and
devilish, with fiery snakes and red-forked tongues pro-
truding from their cruel lips, as gleams of wicked cunning
danced in sneaking, sidelong glances from the comers of
the half-closed eyes. These dark backgrounds of the little
figures were horrible to look at, ever shifting, dodging, and
seeming to shut up within themselves, as they sought to
keep only bright and honest toward the trusting girl, and
hold the black deception out of sight. And it was notice-
able that while a halo of cloudless radiance surrounded
the good outside seeming, a pall of thick vapor hung like
a canopy of unbroken gloom above the other." *

* Religio-Philoiophical JounuiL

Digitized by LjOOQIC

94 APPARITIONS.

It would be absurd to suppose that these forms had any
objective existence outside of the mind of the man who
observed them. They were the creations of the involun-
tary action of his mind, and represented the various mental
states which were produced in quick succession by the
impressions his mind received ; but they furnish a good
illustration to the theory, that each form expresses a
certain character, and that each mental state corresponds
to a certain form, in which it may find its expression.

The above description coincides with what has been
described by others, and proves that thoughts and senti-
ments are something substantial residing in the imagination
of man, and which may affect his inner world for good or
for evil, and that the necessity of controlling thoughts and
desires is not a matter of little importance, but has a
practical use. But those who reject such testimony and
consider such forms as illusive may remember that not
only such forms, but all forms, are only apparitions, and
that they all represent invisible truths. Before the pure
light of reason all illusions will disappear in the end and
the truth appear — ^not hidden in forms, but in the sublime
splendor of its purity — ^before the wondering gaze of
spiritually-awakened Man. y^

But alUiough subjective forms are manifestation^f life
they have no appropriate active will of their own. They
are the creations of the thought of man acting upon the
A'kasa. They are only kept alive by the life-power that
radiates into them from the life-centre in man. They are
like shadows, vanishing when the fountain of light from
which they drink is exhausted. When the psychical action
of man^ that gave them life, ceases to act, or acts in another
direction, they will disappear sooner or later. However,
as the corpse of a man does not dissolve immediately as
soon as the principle of life has departed, but decays
slowly or rapidly according to their molecular density and
cohesion, likewise the astral forms created by the desires
of man may require a considerable time for their dissolution
according to the amount of will-fire made active in them.
They continue to exist as long as man infuses life and
consciousness into them by his thought and his will, and if
they have once gained a certain amount of power, they may
still cling to him, although he may not desire their com-
panionship. They depend on him for their life, and the

Digitized by

Google

DEVILS. 95

struggle for existence forces them to remain with the
source from which they draw their vitality. If they depart
from that fountain they die ; they are therefore forced to
remain, and, like the phantom created by " Frankenstein,"
they persecute their creators with their unwelcome pre-
sence. To rid oneself of such a presence, he who is
persecuted should direct the full power of his aspirations
and thoughts into another and higher direction, and there-
by starve them to death. In this way the spiritual principle
of every man becomes his special Redeemer^ who by the
transformation of character saves him from the effects of
his sin, and before whose pure light the illusions created by
the lower attractions will melt like the snow under the
influence of the sun.

Elemental forms being the servants of their creator — ^in
fact, his own self — ^may be used by him for good or for evil
purposes. Loves and hates may create subjective forms
of beautiful or of horrid shapes, and, being infused with
consciousness, obtain life, and may be sent on some errand
for good or for evil. Through them the magician may
blend his own life and consciousness with the person he
desires to affect. A lock of hair, a piece of clothing, or
some object that has been worn by the person he desires
to affect, may form a connecting link between himself and
the latter. The same object may be attained if that person
is put into possession of an article belonging to the
magician, because wherever a portion of anything with
which the magician was connected exists, there will a part
of his own elements exist, which will form a magnetic ]ink
between him and the person whom he wishes to affect. If
he has developed his astral senses, distance will not pre-
vent him to observe the person with which he is connected ;
if he can project his astral form at a distance, his form may
be present with his victim, although the latter may not be
able to see it.

The astral image of a person may be projected con-
sciously or unconsciously to a distance. If he intensely
thinks of a certain place, his thought will be there, and
consequently he will be there, for the thought of a man is
the most important part of himself. Wherever a man's
consciousness is, there is the man himself, no matter
whether his physical body is there or not.

The histoiy of spiritualism and somnambuLsm furnishes

Digitized by

Google

#C ASTRAL PROJECTION.

abundant evidence that a person may be consciously and
knowingly in one place, while his physical body lies dor-
mant in another. Franciscus Xaver was thus seen in two
different places at one and the same time. Likewise
ApoUonius of Tyana, and innumerable others mentioned
in ancient and modem history.

The Elemental sent by a magician is an essential part of
the magician himself, and if the victim is vulnerable by
being mediumistic — with other words, by not having his
own principles held together by the power of his reason
and will, the latter may be injured by the former. But the
former, too, if his astral form be materialized to a certain
extent, even if not sufficiently to be visible to the eye, may
be injured by physical force, and as the astral form re-
enters the physical body, the latter will partake of the
injuries inflicted upon the former.*

The magician, who by the power of his will has obtained
control over the semi-intelligent forces of Nature, can make
use of these forces for the purposes of good or evil. The
helpless medium, through whom manifestations of occult
power take place, can neither cause nor control such mani-
festations. He cannot control the elementals, but is
controlled by them. The elements of his body serve as
instruments through which these astral existences act, after
the Medium has surrendered his will and given up the
supreme command over his soul. He sits passively and
waits for what these elementals may be pleased to do ; he
unconsciously furnishes them with his Hfe and power to
think, and his thoughts and the thoughts of those that are
present may become reflected in these astral forms, or may
enable them to manifest an intelligence of their own.

A medium for spirit-manifestations is merely an instru-
ment for the manifestation of invisible forces over which
he has no control, and the more mediumistic a person is,
the less will he be liable to exercise a will of his own.
The best of such medituns have been very unjustly blamed
for ^'cheatingy^ for a medium which would not "cheat" is as
unthinkable as a mirror that would not reflect the objects
before it The thoughts of the persons visiting a Mediiun,
and who are trying to find out his " impostures," are taken
up by the Medium and reflected by him. It is therefore

* Des Moosseaox: << Moeondesddmons,'* Eimemoserx <' Magie."

Digitized by LjOOQiC

SPIRITUALISM. 97

not the Medium's person that cheats, but his visitors
cheating themselves through his instrumentality. A
mirror that would not reflect all the objects that are
brought before it, would be a very unnatural and deceptive
thing ; a Medium who would only reflect such thoughts as
he chose to reflect would be an impostor, for being able to
exercise his own will he would not be in that passive
condition which constitutes his mediumship.

The Adept in Magic is not the slave of these forces, but
controls them by the power of his will. He may con-
sciously infuse life and consciousness and intelligence
into them and make them act as he pleases ; they obey
his commands because they are a part of himself. The
spiritualists do this unconsciously; they frequently sing
at their seances to produce harmony, and they know that
the more the conditions are harmonious the better will be
the manifestations. The reason for this is, that the more
harmony eacists in a circle, the less will there be any
exercise of individual will, the less concentration of self,
and the easier will it be for these influences to use the
will and the vitality of the sitters.

These animal astral existences belong to the kama rupa
form of existence, and their forms are therefore too ethereal
to act directly upon gross matter. They, therefore, need
the assistance of an intermediary principle, which is
furnished by the second principle in man, the combination
of soul and matter, called Lingasariram, This may be
furnished by the astral elements of the living, or by the
astral renmants of those whose bodies are dead.

The astral elements used by the Elementals in spiritual
seances for the purpose of producing physical phenomena,
are not only taken from the medium^ but from all present,
whose constitution is not strong, and who may therefore
furnish such elements. In seances for materializations ^
they are also taken from the clothing of those present, and
furnish material for the drapery of the " spirits," and it
has been observed, that the clothing worn by people who
frequently attend to such seances wears out sooner than
usual.

To bring fresh-spilled blood into such " spiritual
seances," would probably increase the strength of the
" materializations " very much, and a knowledge of such
facts has given rise to the abominable practices of ^/^x^A

4

Digitized by

Google

^8 GHOSTS.

magic^ which are still going on in many parts of the world.
Although secretly and unknown to the police. This
knowledge has also undoubtedly given rise to the sacrifice
of animals in the performance of religious ceremonies. A
certain executioner was unfortunately gifted with clair-
voyance, and after having decapitated a person he could
see the ** spirits " of dead people — sometimes even his
friends and relatives— pounce upon the fresh-spilled blood
of the criminal, and feed on its emanation and aura. He
became so disgusted that he had to resign his position.
It is also a fact that, at a time when the blood-<lrinking
mania in Europe was started by medical ignorance, many
people who practised it became insane, and others became
demoralized by it.

The astral remnant of man is without judgment and
reason, it goes wherever his instincts may attract it, or
wherever any unsatisfied craving may impel it to go. If
you wish to be haunted by the " ghost " of a man, attract
him by the power of love or hate which you felt for the
man. Leave some promise unfulfilled which you might
have fulfilled, and instinctively the astral form of the
deceased will be attracted to you to seek its fulfilment,
drawn to you by its own unsatisfied desire.

Such an astral form is not necessarily in any way con-
sciously connected with the real spirit of that person, as
will be clear to those who have studied the doctrines of the
constitution of man. It may be merely that combination of
his lower principle, or his astral corpse, which made up the
animal man. But if the man was very brutish, having all
or nearly all his consciousness concentrated into his
animal elements, such a remnant may constitute all, or
nearly all, there ever existed of that person, except his
higher reason, which may have fled even before his death.
There are endless varieties of combinations of circumstances
existing on the astral as ye41 as on the physical plane ; there
is no pattern by which all cases can be explained alike.
Their study belongs to the d^^BiXtmeiitoi Necromancy.

It is not his fault if you do not perceive his presence and
hear his voice, it is because your astral senses are asleep
and unconscious ; you may feel his presence and it may
cause a feeling of depression in your mind; he speaks to you
but in a language thatyou have notyet learned to understand.
In those elementary remnants remains that which con«

Digitized by

Google

NECROMANCY.

99

stituted the lower nature of man, and if they are tempor-
arily infused with life, they will manifest the lower charac-
teristics of the deceased, such as have not been sufficiently
refined to join his immortal part. If a music-box is set to
play a certain melody and made to start, it will produce that
same melody and no other, although it has no consciousness
of its own. The remnant of emotional and intellectual
powers in the astral remnant of man will, if this remnant
is made to speak, become manifest in the same kind of
language which the man during his life used to speak.

The fresh corpse of a person who has suddenly been
killed, may be galvanized into a semblance of life by the
application of a galvanic battery. Likewise the astral
corpse of a person may be brought back into an artificial
life by being infused with a part of the life-principle of the
medium. If that corpse is one of a very intellectual
person, it may talk very intellectually ; and if it was that
of a fool, it will talk like a fool. The intellectual action
resembles mechanical motion in so far that if it is once
set into action it will continue without any continual effort
of the will, until it is exhausted or comes to a stop. We
often see this in daily life. There are old and young
people frequently seen who are in the habit of telling
some favorite story, which they have already told many
times, and which they repeat on every ocassion. It may
be noticed, that when such an one begins to tell his story,
it is of no use to tell him that one knows it already. He
has to finish the story in spite of himself.

An orator or a preacher does not need to think and
reason about each word he utters separately. When the
stream of ideas once flows, it flows without any effort of
the will. If ideas flow into the astral brain of a deceased
person, infused with life by the medium, that brain will
elaborate those ideas in the same way it was accustomed
to do during life.

We also reason while we dream ; we draw logical con-
clusions during our sleep ; but reason is absent, and
although, while we dream, our logic seems to be reason-
able, nevertheless we often see that it was foolish when
we awake and when our reason returns, or becomes active
again.

The mental organism of man resembles a clockwork,
which if it is once set into operation will continue to nm

Digitized by

Google

100 EVIL ASSOCIATIONS.

until its force is exhausted ; but there is no clockworl
which winds itself up without extraneous assistance, and
there is no mental organism able to think without a powel
that causes it to begin the process of intellectuation.

In a departed soul the attraction of good and evil still
continues to act, until the final separation of the higher
and the lower takes place. It may follow the attraction of
the higher principles in nature and be attracted to spirit,
or it may again come into contact with matter through the
instrumentality of mediumship, take again part in the
whirling dance of life, although by vicarious organs ; follow
once more the seduction of the senses, and lose entirely
sight of the immortal self.

It is therefore not merely dangerous to a person to hold
intercourse with the ** spirits of the departed ; " but it is
especially injurious to the latter, — as long as the final
separation of their lower principles from the higher ones
has not yet taken place. Necromancy is a vile art, and so
has therefore always been abhorred. It may disturb the
blissful dreams of the sleeping soul, which aspires to a
higher state of existence. It is like roughly attacking a
samt during his hours of meditation, and to force him to
take an interest in affairs of the lower life, which can be of
no use to him in his efforts to rise into a superior state. It
is a step towards degradation ; and as every impulse has
a tendency to repeat itself, the most terrible consequences
may follow after what seemed to be at first merely some
innocent amusement.

These astral remnants may be used by the black magi-
cian and by the elemental forces in nature for the purpose
of evil. If they are unconscious, they will only serve as
the instruments of the latter ; if they are conscious they
may enter into an alliance and co-operate with them.

Such alliance, either consciously or unconsciously on the
part of him who enters into such an unspiritual inter-
course, may take place between an evil-disposed person
and a very evil inhabitant of the astral plane, whose whole
consciousness has been concentrated within his lower
principles. We are convinced that many people who are
in actual possession of powers to work black magic work
evil unconsciously j that is to say, that if they hate a
person, they are often unconscious of the efiects which
their hate produces upon the latter, and of the mode in

Digitized by

Google

SORCERY. loi

which it acts. The spiritual force created by their hate
may enter the organism of the object of their hate and
cause some bodily sickness, and the person from whom
the evil power proceeds may be entirely ignorant of the
fact that it was his own hate which produced the sickness.
Such black magicians merely furnish the elements of evil,
by which invisible powers act. The animal elements,
existing in the soul of man, may, after having attained a
certain degree of vitality, be projected by hate towards
another person and enter his soul, even unknown to him,
from whom they originate. But they are still a part of the
life-principle of the person from whom they originated, and
if they cannot take hold of the soul of him, against whom
they are directed, they return again to the source from
which they originated, and may kill him, from whom they
emanated. It is therefore said, that if the will of the black
magician is not strong enough to effect his evil purpose,
the force will return and kill the magician.

This is imdoubtedly true, and the grossest illustration of
it is, if a person by a fit of rage or jealousy is induced to
kill himself. It is the reaction following an unfulfilled
desire, which induces the rash act ; the act is merely a
result of his previous mental state.

The surest protection against all the practices of black
magic, whether they are caused consciously or uncon-
sciously, is to acquire strength of character, — in other
words, faith in the divine principle within one's own
soul.

As man becomes ennobled, the lower elements in his
constitution are thrown off and replaced by higher ones,
and in a similar manner a transformation may take place
in the opposite way if he degrades himself by his thoughts
and acts. Sensual man attracts from the A'kasa those
elements that his sensuality requires, for gross pleasures
can only be felt by gross matter. A man with brutal
instincts growing and mcreasing may degrade himself into
a brute in character, if not in external form. But as the
form is only an expression of character, even that form
may again approach an animal in resemblance.

The proof of this assertion is seen every day, for we
meet every day in the streets brutish men, whose animal
instincts are only too well expressed in their external
forms. We meet with human snakes, hogs, wolves, and

Digitized by

Google

loa ^ DEGRADATION.

those upon whom alcohol has stampeds it seal, and it does
not need the instructions given in books on physiognomy
to enable almost anybody to read the character of certain
persons more or less correctly expressed in their exterior
forms.

In the physical plane the inertia of matter is greater
than in the astral plane, and consequently its changes are
slow. Astral matter is more active, and may change its
form more rapidly. The astral body of a man whose
character resembles an animal may therefore appear to
the seer as an animal in its outward expression.*

The astral form of an evil person may appear in an
animal shape if it is so filled with brutish instincts as to
become identified in his imagination with the animal
which is the expression of such instincts. It may even
enter the form of an animal and obsess it, and it sometimes
happens that it enters such forms for its own protection
against immediate decomposition and death.

It would be useless to give anecdotes, illustrating
instances, in which such things took place. The principal
object of the reader should be to learn to know the essen-
tial constitutions of man, by observing the conditions of
his own being and the law which regulates all forms of
matter and functions. If he once understands the modes
in which the law may act, it will be a matter of little im-
portance to know in what particular cases it may have
manifested itself in such modes. Accounts of phenomena
can never supply the place of the understanding of the
law.

Popular traditions speak of human beings having
assumed the form of animals, roaming about and injuring
men and cattle. Modem culture is prone to pronounce
impossible everything that she cannot explain \ but the
existence of such forms is theoretically not impossible,
because a person may project his astral elements at a
distance and make them appear in a material form, and
that form is not necessarily human, because man is what
he thinks^ and his exterior shape may adapt itself to the
true character by the power of his imagination.

E. Swedenborg : <« Heaven and Hell."

Digitized by

Google

CHAPTER IV.

LIFE.

« I neTer was not, nor shall I hereafter cease to he}^

Bhagwat GUa.

The universe of forms may be compared to a kaleidoscope
in which the various forms of the original energy manifest
themselves in an endless variety, appearing, disappearing,
and re-appearing again. As in a kaleidoscope the pieces
of variously-colored glass do not change their substance,
but only change their positions, and, through the delusive
reflections of mirrors at each turn of the instrument, are
made to appear in new constellations and figures, so the
One Life manifesting itself appears in an infinite number
of forms and colors, acting as " matter " or " force,"
unconscious or conscious, blind or intelligent, voluntary or
involuntary, from the atom, whose auras and others rush
through a common vortex,* invisibly but nevertheless
substantial, up to the blazing suns whose photospheres
extend over millions of miles, and from the microscopic
Amoeba, whose protoplasm manifests only the rudiments
of instinct, up to perfect Man, whose intelligence conquers
the gods.

Forms are isolated and materialized thoughts. If you
can hold on to a thought and isolate it from others, yot
call into existence a form. If you can impart to that
form your consciousness, you may make it conscious ; if
you can invest it with the element of matter, you may
make it visible and tangible ; but few persons are able to
hold on to one single thought even for one single minute of
time, because their minds are wavering and flickering;
few can transfer their consciousness, because they cannot

* Babbitt : ** Principles 3f Light and Color."

Digitized by LjOOQiC

104 UNITY OF EXPRESSION.

voluntarily forget their own selves ; few can control the
element of earth, because it is their master, and they aze
attracted by it The prototypes of all forms exist in tke
Astral Light,, which is the Universal Soul in which
resides the Universal Mind; the A^k&sa or Universal
Matter being its more material substance. If a form
comes into existence on the physical plane, its growth is
simply a process by which something that already exists
becomes visible and material, or, to speak more correctly,
a lower state of vibration of the same element. This some-
thing is the idea or character of the form, and as each
character is a unity, such a character will be distinctly
expressed in all parts of the form. A human being — ^for
instance — ^will not have the body of a man and the head of
an animal, but its human character will be expressed in all
its parts, and as the character constituting humanity is
expressed in all human individuals, so is the character of
an individual expressed in all its parts. This is a truth
upon which the doctrines of Astrology, Phrenology,
Chiromancy, Physiognomy, etc., are based, which — if
rightly understood — ^are not only possibly true, but must be
necessarily and unavoidably true, because Nature is a
Unity, The nature of an animal, a plant, or a man, is a
unity, and is therefore expressed in all the parts of each
respective form. It can be scientifically demonstrated that
each component part of an organism is a microcosm, in
which are represented the principles composing that
organism. We may by examining a part of a leaf know
that it comes from a plant, and by looking at an animal
substance see that it came from an animal, or by testing
even the most minute part of a mineral or metal know that
it belongs to the mineral kingdom. Likewise we may read
a man's character in his hands or face or feet or in any
other part of his body, if we have acquired the art how to
read it correctly.

These things are known to physical science. But if the
power of interior perception is once attained, a still greater
world of wonders is opened before the astonished sight of
the seer; he will then perceive that every part of an
organism bears the correct impression of the form of the
whole, and upon each particle is '^ photographed " by the
Astral Light the picture of the body to which it belongs.

The suns and planets in space as well as all terrestrial

Digitized by

Google

SIGNATURES. 10$

objects have their souls, else they could have no bodies ;
because their bodies are only the external expressions of
the soul, and their character rests in their souls. Their
souls act upon each other and are acted upon by all, and
as the characters of these souls change, so change the
physical forms. These astral influences, constituting the
soul of the Universe, build up all forms, they modify the
character and the growth of minerals, plants, and animals,
they are the cause of endemic and epidemic diseases, they
evolve in the course of ages variously-shaped animals, they
predetermine to a certain extent the destiny of men,'^ and
furnish the energies whose character impresses itself upon
everything. Their signatures may be seen in the book of
life belonging to every form, in the size and shape of
features and limbs, in Uie lines of the hands, in the color
of eyes and hair.f They are the forces by which the
Universal Mind puts his mark upon everything, and those
who are able to read may find the true history of every-
thing written upon the leaves of its soul. J Likewise every
individual mind prints his character upon every one of
his thoughts, words, and -acts, and upon the soul of
everything which comes within his sphere.

Upon this law is based the science of Psychometry. By
this science we may obtain a true history of past events.
By psychometrically examining a stone taken from a
house we may obtain correct information in regard to the
former or present inhabitants of a house, or a fossil may give
a true description of antediluvian scenery and of the mode
of life of prehistoric animals or men. By the psy chome trical
examination of a letter we may obtain information about
the person who wrote the letter and also of the place in

* This is to be taken in the same sense as heat and cold, rain and
sunshine ; miasmas and earthquakes may change the fortune and destiny
of men who do not take due care to protect themselves against their
effects ; but as man by the power of his intellect has become able to
guard himself against the inimical influence arising in the external
plane ; likewise by the exercise of his will and intelligence he may
overcome the dangers threatening him from the astral plane.

t DebaroUes : ** Mystfcres dc la main."

X Prof. W. Denton : " Soul of Things." J. R. Buchanan ; ** Manual
of Psychometry.

Digitized by

Google

lo6 PSYCffOMETRY.

which the ktter was written. If this art were universally
known and practised, criminals could be detected hj
examining psychometrically a piece of the wall, the floor,
or the furniture of the room in which a murder or robbery
was committed; it would make an end to convicting of
innocent persons on circumstantial evidence, or to letting
the guilty escape for want of proof ; for the psychoroeter
would, by the superior powers of his perception with the
spiritual eye, see the murderer or robber or counterfeiter
as plain as if he had seen them with his external eyes vsrhile
the deed was committed.

Each form is the external expression of a certain
character which it represents, and as such it has certain
peculiar attributes, which distinguish it from other forms.
A change of its character is followed by a gradual change
of the form. An individual who becomes degraded in
morals will, in the course of time, show his degradation in
his external appearance ; persons of a different appearance
and diiTerent characters may, in the course of time, as their
characters harmonize, resemble each other to a certain
extent in appearance. Forms of life, belonging to the
same class and species, resemble each other, and each
nationality has certain characteristics expressed in the
individuals belonging to it. A full-blooded Irishman will
not easily be mistaken for a full-blooded Spaniard, although
the two may be dressed alike, but if they both emigrate to
America their children or grandchildren will in time lose
the national characteristics which their ancestors pos-
sessed. Change of character changes the form ; but a
change of external form does not necessarily change the
character. A man may lose a leg and become a cripple,
and still his character may remain the same as before ; a
child may grow into a man, and still his character remain
that of a child unless modified by education.

These facts are incontrovertible proofs that the character
of a being is more essential than his external form ; that
the form is illusive, and that the reality is a principle which
is independent of form. If the character of an individual
were to depend on his inherited form, children born of the
same parents and educated under the same circumstances
would always manifest the same mental characteristic, but
it is well known that the characters of such children often
differ widely from each other, and they may posses?
characteristics which their parents do not possess.

Digitized by VjOOQIC

CHARACTER. 107

If, as it frequently happens, children show the same or
similar talents and intellectual capacities as their parents,
such a fact is by no means a proof that the parents of the
child's physical body are also the parents or producers of
its intellectual germ ; but it may be taken as an additional
evidence of the truth of the doctrine of reincarnatioHy
because the spiritual monad of the child would be natur-
ally attracted, in its efforts to reincarnate, to the bodies of
parents, whose mental and intellectual constitution would
correspond nearest to its own talents and inclinations,
developed during a previous earthly life.

Characters may exist independent of external conditions ;
the latter can only modify, but not create, the former.
The best soil will not produce an oak tree unless an acorn
is present, and a Cholera Baccillus will not produce
cholera where the " predisposition " to that disease does
not already exist. Forms may facilitate the development
of character, but they do not create it, and persons that
appear in every respect alike may be of a very different
character.

How can we account for such moral and intellectual
discrepancies in forms that are merely alike, as long as we
shut our eyes to the truth, that that which is essential in a
being, whether rational or irrational, is its character, and
that its form is only the external expression of that internal
and invisible character, which may survive after the form
has ceased to exist, and after the dissolution of the form
finds its expression again in another form ! Forms die,
but their character remains unchanged after their death,
preserved in the Astral Lights like the thoughts of man
stored up in his memory, after the events that called them
into existence have passed away. A character does neither
die nor change after it has left the form, but, after a time
of rest in the subjective state, it will reimbody itself again
in a new-born objective form, to grow and change its
nature during the life of the form. Seen from this stand-
point, " death " is life, because, during the time that death
lasts, that which is essential in a form does not change ;
life is death, because only during life in the form the char-
acter is changed, and old tendencies and inclinations die
and are replaced by others.

Each form is an incarnation of a certain character. Our
passions and vices may die while we live \ if they survive
us they will be bom again.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

loS REINCARNATI017.

The character of an oak exists before the acom begins
to grow, but the growing germ attracts from earth and air
such elements as it needs to produce an oak \ the character
of a child exists as such before the physical form of the
child is bom into the world, and attracts from the spiritual
atmosphere the elements to which its aspirations and
tendencies are attracted. Each seed will grow best in the
soil that is best adapted to its constitution, each human
monad existing in the subjective state will be attracted at
the time of its incarnation to parents, whose qualities may
furnish the best soil for its own tendencies and inclinations,
and whose moral and mental attributes may correspond to
its own. The physical parents cannot be the progenitors
of the spiritual germ of the child, that germ is the product
of a previous spiritual evolution, through which it has
passed in connection with former objective lives. In the
present existence of a being the character of the being that
will be its successor is prepared.

Therefore, every man may be truly said to be his own
father ; for he is the incarnated result of the personality
which he evolved in his last life upon the planet, and the
next personality which he will represent in his next visit
upon this globe is evolved by him during his present life.

The development of a plant reaches its climax in the
development of the seed ; the development of the animal
body reaches its climax in the capacity to reproduce its
form, but the intellectual and spiritual development of a
man may go on long after he has acquired the power of
reproduction, and it may not have reached its climax when
the physical form is on the downward path, and ceases to
live. The condition of the physical body may undoubtedly
furnish facilities for the development of character in the
same sense as a good soil will furnish facilities for the
growth of a tree ; but the best soil cannot transform a
thistle into a rose-bush, and the son of a good and intel-
lectual man may be a villain or a dunce.

As a primordial essence proceeds to manifest itself in
forms, it descends from the universal condition to general,
special, and finally individual slates. As it ascends again
to the formless, the scale is reversed, and the individual
units expand, to mingle again with the whole. Life on the
lowest planes manifests itself in an undifferentiated con-
dition ; air has no strictly defined shape ; one drop of

Digitized by

Google

DIFFERENTTA TXON OF FORM. 109

water in the ocean shares an existence common to all
other drops ; one piece of clay is essentially the same as
another. In the vegetable and animal kingdom the
imiversal principle of life manifests itself in individual
form; still there is little difference between individual
plants, trees, animals, and men belonging to the same
species, and the peculiar attributes which distinguish one
individual form from another cease to exist when the form
disappears. That which essentially distinguishes one
individual from another is independent of form, and exists
after the form has ceased to live. Distinctions of form are
perishable, but distinctions of character remain; those
attributes which raise their possessors eminently above
the common level begin at a state when external appear-
ances cease to be of great consequence. Socrates was
deformed and yet a great genius ; the size of Napoleon's
body was not at all in proportion with the greatness of his
intellect. Honor and fame rise above the grave of the
form, and the influence of great minds often grows stronger
after the bodies that served them have turned to dust
Strong minds expand far beyond their physical form while
they live. They do not die when the form disappears.
Their characters continue to exist and may reappear upon
the earth.

All characters may become reincarnated or reimbodied
after they have left the form, but if an individual has no
specific character of its own, the common character belong-
ing to its species or class will be all that, after leaving the
old body, can enter the new. If an individual has devel-
oped a specific character of its own, that distinguishes it
from its fellows, that individual character will individually
survive the dissolution of its form, because the law that
applies to the whole, or to the class, will also apply to the
part. A drop of water mixed in a body of water will
become dispersed in the mass, it may be evaporated and
condensed again, but it will never again be the same drop ;
but if a drop of some ethereal oil is mixed with the water,
and the whole is evaporated in a retort, it will, after being
condensed, form again the same individual drop in the
mass. A high character may lose its individuality during
life and sink to the common level, but if it has established
a distinction from others, its individuality will survive the
death of the form. To accomplish a change of character

Digitized by

Google

no INDIVIDUALITY.

an individual form is required, to build up an individual
form a character must exist.

If we wish to produce a form we must first decide upon
its character. A sculptor who would aimlessly cut a stone,
without making up his mind as to what form he desired to
produce, would not accomplish anything great. The form
is a temple of learning for the character, in which the
latter gains experience by passfng through the struggles of
life. The harder the struggle the faster may the character
of the individual become developed ; an easy life may
increase the size of the form, but will leave the character
weak ; a hard struggle may weaken the form, but will
strengthen the spirit. Forms grow at the expense of other
forms, the growth of character induces other characters to
grow. Forms grow weak when they impart their own sub-
stance to others, characters grow stronger while they
impart to others their strength. Individuals vampyrize
each other as long as they require material forms, but a
character that has once been formed finds the source of
its strength within itself. In the lowest plane, where the
physical life-impulse acts very slow, an isolated form may
exist for a considerable time ; a stone or a diamond may
last for ages, because the consuming fire of life is not very
active in them ; but in forms in which life is very active,
permanent isolation is not compatible with the existence
of form. The higher we rise in the scale of life on the
physical plane, the smaller grows the possibility of endur-
ing isolation. An isolated scrub pine may live surrounded
by snow and ice on an almost bare rock, where no highly-
organized life can exist, and an animal life may live a
comparatively isolated existence in a forest, where a man
would soon starve to death. Life in forms requires other
forms to feed upon, characters are self-existing, they
require the contact with other characters only to try their
own strength, and as they grow and use their power they
increase their own fortitude.

The attributes which constitute character are formless ;
they may be expressed in a form, but after the form is
dissolved they return to the formless again. Abstract
ideas, such as "good, evil, wisdom, power, love, hope,
faith and charity," etc., have no forms, but they may
characterize a living being and render it good or bad, wise
and powerful,'* etc. Still such qualities do exist, even if

Digitized by

Google

SELFISHNESS. Ill

they are not manifest in fonns ; forms cannot create their
own attributes, but they are the expressions of principles
which exist, and which may or may not become manifested
in forms.

The " spirit," or character, is the originator of form, the
astral forces of nature are the architects, and the physical
plane of nature furnishes the material to render the form
substantial, and to enable it to come into contact with the
physical plane. Thought is the great power by which
forms are called into existence. The thoughts of a person
during life determine the tendencies of his soul while in
the subjective state, and these tendencies attract other in-
fluences and bring him again into contact with form. An
entity, attracted by the illusion of self, may fancy itself to
be something distinct and isolated from the universal life,
and look upon all other existences as being distinct from
the whole. From this illusion arise innumerable other
illusions. From the sense of self arises the love of self, the
desire for the continuance of personality, giving rise to
greed, avarice, envy, jealousy, fear, doubt and sorrow,
pain and death, and to the whole range of emotions and
suflferings, which frequently render life miserable, and
afford no permanent happiness. If a person is miserable
and can find no happiness in himself, the surest and
quickest way for him to be contented is to forget his own
personality, and to live in others, by blending his own
consciousness with that of some others, or all. By feeling
with others he will forget his own self, and for the time
being cease to experience the sufferings produced by the
illusion of self. A person who lives in a state of isolation
on the emotional plane will care for nothing else but for
his own personality. He concentrates all his energies
into himself, and becomes more and more insignificant
and spiritually small. Gradually he will sink to lower
planes of thought, becoming — so to say — more and more
heavy as his soul becomes dense ; and if once the down-
ward impulse is "given, and not arrested, he will sink lower
and lower, until his personality, at the death of the form,
disappears in the vortex and he ceases to exist as a man in
human form, having already during life ceased to exist as
a man in a human character. When his physical body is
decayed and the " magnetic body " dispersed, the remnant
of his soul elements may still continue to exist Its move-

Digitized by

Google

Iia EMOTIONS.

ments will be guided by its controlling emotions^ it wiU
not go whither it chooses, for having no inteligence it can
make no choice ; but it will go whither it is attracted by its
instincts, until its energies are exhausted and it ceases to
exist as a form.

Thus the animal elements of a man who was during his
life a great drunkard, may after his death be attracted to
another living drunkard and be drawn to a grog-shop;
those of a lewd person seek comfort in a brothel, those of
an avaricious person stand guard over his buried treasures,
etc., etc. ; and all such remnants may have a certain
amount of consciousness and memory left, and may be
|;alvanized back temporarily into a living state by coming
in contact with a medium. Thus endless varieties of
spooks^ ghosts^ vampires^ incubiy succubij etc., may come
into existence, and there are innumerable accounts given
in books on magic, occultism and spiritualism, to illustrate
such facts.

As on the physical plane, so on the astral plane, isolation
produces starvation. An emotion to be kept alive must
be fed by corresponding emotions, else it will devour its
possessor. A person who loves another person or object
intensely, and cannot gain the object of his desire, must
transfer his love upon some other object, or he may perish
in the attempt to suppress it. If the love is transferred to
a higher ideal it will render man happy ; if it is transferred
to a lower one dissatisfaction may be the result. Stored-
up anger will find some object upon which to spend its
fury, else it may produce an explosion destructive to its
possessor; tranquility follows a storm. The "black
magician " who attempts to kill or injure another person
by the intensity of his hatred, projected towards that per-
son, may be killed or injured by the intensity of the force
he has created, and which— if it is not sufficiently strong
to effect his object— will react upon himself Accumulated
energy cannot be annihilated, it must be transferred to
other forms, or be transformed into other modes of motion ;
It cannot remain forever inactive and yet continue to
exist. It is useless to attempt to resist a passion which
we cannot control. If its accumulating energy is not led
into other channels it will grow until it becomes stronger
than will and stronger than reason. To control it, it
should be led into another and higher channel. Thus a

Digitized by

Google

LUNATICS. 113

love for something vulgar may be changed by turning it
into a love for something high, and vice may be turned
into virtue by changing its aim. Passion is bhnd, it goes
where it is led to, and reason is a safer guide for it than
the instinct. Love for a form disappears with the death of
the form, or soon after ; love of character remains even
after the form in which that character was embodied
ceased to exist.

The ancients said that Nature suffers no vacuum. We
cannot destroy or annihilate a passion. If it is driven
away another elemental influence will take its place. We
should therefore not attempt to destroy the low without
putting something in its place ; but we should displace
the low by the high ; vice by virtue, and superstition by
knowledge.

There are some persons who live in perfect isolation on
the intellectual plane. They are such whose thoughts are
entirely absorbed by intellectual labors, having no time
or inclination to attend to the claims of their spirit.
They are — so to say — ^living continually in the cupola of
their temples, the head, while their hearts are made to
starve and become petrified. They concentrate all their
intellectual forces into their brains, and may become very
learned in regard to the small details of life on this planet,
but while they concentrate their attention upon the small,
they often lose their capacity to enter into harmony with
the whole. Seen from the standpoint of eternal truth,
they are lunatics, living in the moonshine of their own
ima^nation, dawdling away their life among the realm of
illusions and perishing form and neglecting that which alone
is lasting and permanent. They constitute to a great extent,
the " materialists," " sceptics,'* and *' rationalists " of our
age. They throw away their birthright to immortality by
arguing themselves into a belief in its impossibility, they
may become criminals " for the sake of science," disregard-
ing the laws of humanity ; their astral corpses will
continue to exist for a while after the death of their physical
forms, until the intellectual power active therein is exhaust-
ed, but their spiritual aspirations having already deserted
them during their life, there will be nothing left of them in
the end to survive the dissolution of the soul.

All forms that nature produces are the products of
universal life expressing itself in forms. They are manifes-

Digitized by

Google

114 LIFE TRANSFER.

tations of the One in Tkree^ but as such they do not
possess any life of their own. There still remains theun-
manifested One^ which must become active in the form if
the form is to live. The Three rendered alive through the
One, produces the Four, and /^^»r is therefore the number
of perfection. It represents the square^ by means of
which the Universe is constructed, and which finds its
symbolic expression in the life-giving influences meeting
from the four cardinal points, Nordi, South, East and
West.

Life is universally present in nature, it is contained in
eveiy particle of matter, and only when the last particle of
• life is departed from a form the form ceases to exist It
may remain for centuries inactive in a form, but when it
begins to manifest itself, motion appears in the form, and
the higher the form is developed the higher may be the
activity of its life. Life in a stone does not appear to exist,
and yet without life there would be no cohesion of its
atoms. If the life-principle were extracted from a mineral
its form would be annihilated. A seed taken from the
tomb of an Egyptian mummy began to germinate and
grow after it was planted in the earth, having kept its life-
principle during a sleep of many centuries. If the
activity of animal life could be correspondingly arrested,
an animal or a man might prolong individual existence to
an indefinite period. Stones may live from the beginning
of a Manvantara unto its end ; some forms reach a very
old age, but if the life impulse is once given it is difiicult —
if not impossible — to arrest it.

Life may be transferred from one form upon another,
and the power by which it may be transferred is the power
of Love, because Love, Will and Life are essentially the same
power, or different aspects of one, in the same sense as heat
and light are modifications of motion. The power of hate
may kill and the power of love has been known to call the
apparently dead back to life. Love is a restoration of
life and health, more powerful than all the drugs of the
Pharmacopojia, and it is the universal panacea which the
true physician applies.

Thus the sun is continually transferring his life, his will
and his love to this globe without losing anything thereby.
There is no actual loss ; but merely a setting in motion of
vibrations of life and light in the body of our planet by

Digitized by

Google

THE WILL-CURE. 11$

the central wiU-fire at the centre of our system, the sun.
There are thousands of people sick, because the sun in
them is grown cold ; they cannot make up their minds to
be well ; they cannot form that firm resolution, which is
neceesary to set the will at their own centre into motion,
so that its vibrations would induce life and health in all
parts of their system. Their disease is Infidelity. They
are full of doubt, uncertain whether they ought to live or
to die, and while we bemoan their miserable condition,
they have neither the courage nor the will to be well, and
instead of curing themselves, they hire a doctor to amuse
them and to enable them to remain sick.

Every disease, without any exception, is in the first
instance caused, directly or indirectly, by a weak or
perverted will or a disordered imagination ; nor could it
be otherwise, because man himself and the world wherein
he lives is a product of will and imagination, and there is
nothing else but these two factors to act upon. The more
external the disease or the accident is, the more remote is
it from these original causes ; but even an external
accident is due to a disharmony existing between the will
of subject and object, either consciously or unconsciously
expressed. The origin of the majority of internal diseases
can be traced to some emotion of the will or to some in-
harmonious thought, to some irregular desire or some state
of the mind, conceived either by the patient himself, or
impressed upon him by another.

All things and all states are expressions of will and
thought. People get sick, because they unconsciously
will to be sick and this unconscious action of the will is
induced by the imagination. If being sick were looked
upon as a disgrace and punished by the law, there would be
far less sick people in the world. The more the comforts
for the sick are increased the more will there be people
who need them. Many a man who hires a physician for
his family thereby introduces the plague into his house.
With the issuing of each diploma that creates a new doctor,
a new herd pf infection for the community is created,
because the very sight of a doctor makes one think of
disease and may cause disease, while there are thousands
of sick persons that would be well to-day if they had never
found it to be convenient to be sick.

What then is the use of our modem system of quackery

Digitized by

Google

Ii6 TRAVELS OF THE LIFE PRINCIPLE.

and dosing with medicine, be it legally or illegally done,
if the cause of disease is not in the body, but in the will
and the thought of the patient ? When will humanity arrive
at an understanding of the eternal truth, that he who looks
for redemption in external things is doomed to disappoint-
ment, while man's only true friend and redeemer is the
God whom he carries within himself, nor can any man give
to another the life, the truth or the Christ, but it is the life,
the light and the truth itself giving itself to a man
through the instrumentality of those that have been
regenerated in the life and light of the spirit of truth. A
physician or a preacher, having no faith in the power of
good, and no self-consciousness of the presence of God
within themselves, but are full of conceit in regard to their
own learning and intellectual accomplishment, can cure
neither the ills of the body nor those of the souls, they
can only create illusions and act upon the imagination of
the patient, but not infuse life into his will. They are not
physicians, but clowns and reciters of stories which they
themselves do not believe.

The true life-giving power rests in the source of all
Good. " In him is life, and the life is the light of men.'* *
Through its influence the elements composing lower forms
of existence are gradually raised into higher states. It is
everywhere present, and manifests itself wherever a form
is capable to respond to its vibrations. It cannot be
found by vivisection nor by chemical analysis, and modem
scientific books say nothing about it ; yet it is an element
in which and through which we all live, and if it were
withdrawn from us for a single moment we would be
immediately annihilated.

To be blind to the existence of the universal source of
all good, is to be blind to the fact that is apparent every-
where, that grasses and trees, animals and men, live and
grow. Without the power of life nothing living could
come into existence. Truly the children speak a great
truth when they say that " God made the grass grow ; "
but the learned, who cannot conceive of anything that
transcends their sensual perception, cannot rise to the
sublime conception of a universal, supreme, and therefore
divine power. Our Materialistic philosophers desire to

* St. John i. 4

Digitized by LjOOQiC

GROWTH. 117

abolish their '^ God ; ** and it is to be hoped that they will
succeed, for the god of which they conceive is impotent.
The supreme power of life in the universe is beyond con-
ception, this they cannot abolish ; an attempt to destroy
it would have to begin with their own annihilation.

Life is a manifestation of power, a function of the un*
imaginable cause of all existence. It must be a substan-
tial principle, else it could not exist, because no activity
can take place without substance. It has no forms, but is
manifested in forms ; it continually advances from lower
to higher forms, and as it advances the character of forms
advances with it. The building of the ** Temple of
Solomon" goes on unceasingly. Invisibly act the elements
of nature, the master builders of the universe. Life
inhabits a form, and when the form is decayed it gathers
the elements and builds itself a new house. A rock,
exposed to the action of wind and rain, begins to decay
on its surface, the elements gather again and appear in a
new form. Minute plants and mosses grow on ^e surface,
living and dying and being reborn, until the soil accumu*
lates and higher forms come into existence. Centuries
may pass away before this part of the work is completed ;
but finally grasses will grow, and the life that was formally
dormant in a rock now manifests itself in forms capable to
enter the animal kingdom. A worm may eat a plant, and
the life of the plant becomes active and conscious in a
worm ; a bird may eat the worm, and the life that was
chained to a form crawling in darkness and filth now
partakes of the joys of an inhabitant of the air. At each
step on the ladder of progression life acquires new names
to manifest its activity, and the death of its previous form
enables it to step into a higher one. The principle of life
is not changed thereby, nor is the sun changed when he
sends his rays upon the earth. A piece of black iron is
rendered luminous, if exposed to heat, but remains iron
for all that. Not the iron produces the light nor the form
the life, but the former manifest themselves according to
the qualites of the latter.

Forms are nothing but symbols of life, and the higher
the life expresses itself the higher will be the form. An
acorn is an insignificant thing compared with the oak, but
it has a character, and through the magic action of l^e it
may develop into an oak The germ of its individual life

Digitized by

Google

Ii8 ELTXIR OF LIFE.

is incarnated in the acorn, and forms the point of attrac*
tion for the universal principle of life. Its character ia
already formed, and if it grows it can become nothing else
but an oak. Buried in the earth it may grow and develop
from a low into a higher state through the influence of the
highest, because the principle of life is contained in it.
But however great its potency for growth may be, still it
cannot germinate without the life-giving influence of the
universal fountain of life reaching it through the power of
the sun, and the sun could not make it grow unless the
principle of life were contained in the germ.

The rays of the sun penetrate from their airy regions to
the earth ; their light cannot enter the solid earth,which pro-
tects the tender seed or a plant from the fiery rays, whose
activity might destroy its inherent vitality. But the seed
is touched by the heat that radiates into the earth, and a
special mode of life manifests itself in the seed. This
life is not a new creation, but it is The Absolute becoming
manifest in a form. The seed begins to sprout, and the
germ struggles towards the source of the life-giving
influence, and strives towards the light. The roots have
no desire for light, they only crave for nutriment, which
they find in the dark caverns of matter. They penetrate
deeper into the earth, and may even absorb the activity of
the higher parts of the plant. But if the latter belong to
a species whose character it is to grow towards the light^
its nobler portions will enter its sphere, and may ultimate-
ly bear flowers and fruits.

The soul of man bein^ buried in matter, perceives
instinctively the life-giving influence of the supreme spirit-
ual sun, while at the same time it is attracted by matter.
If man's whole attention Is attracted to the claims of his
body, if all his aspirations and desires are directed to
satisfy the desire of his material form, he will himself remain
a thing of earth, incapable to become conscious of the
existence of Light. But if he strives for Light, and opens
his soul to its divine influence, he will enter its sphere and
become conscious of its existence. A time will arrive
when matter will lose its attractions for him, and as the
odor of the flower can exist after the flower and the roots
from which the latter drew its nutriment have ceased to live,
so will the character of that man, even after his physical
body has continued to exist, consciously survive, and

Digitized by

Google

ELIXIR OF LIFE. ti^

having followed the attraction of the immortal law, become
himself one with the law, and be rendered immortal.

The true Elixir of life can only be found at the eternal
fountain of life. It springs from the seventh principle,
manifesting itself as spiritual power in the sixth and shed*
ding its light down in the fifth, illuminating the mind. In
the fifth it is manifest as the intellectual power in man,
radiating down into the fourth and controlling by the
power of Reason the turbulent elements of the latter. In
the fourth it creates desires, calling forth life and instincts
in the lower triad, and thereby enabling the forms to draw
the elements which they need from the storehouse of
nature. It forever calls men to life by the voice of truth,
whose echo is the power of intuition crying in the wilder-
ness of our hearts, baptizing the souls with the water of
hope, and pointing out to them the true spirit which,
coming to consciousness in their heart, may baptize them
with fire and knowledge, and initiate them into the eternal
life.

Digitized by

Google

CHAPTER V.

HARMONY.

** Let no one enter here who is not well versed in mAthematics and
mvsic." — Pythagorcu,

'<To listen to the music of the spheres ** is a poetical
expression, but it expresses a great truth; because the
Universe is filled with harmony, and a soul who is in
full harmony with the soul of the universe may listen to
that music and undesriand it. The world as well as man
resemble musical instruments, in which every string should
be in perfect order, so that no discordant notes may be
sounded. We may look upon matter on the physical
plane as a state of low vibration and upon spirit as the
highest vibration of life, and between the two poles are
the intermediary principles constituting the grand octave
called Man.

A more exact study of the laws of harmony will undoubt-
edly give us a deeper insight into the laws which govern
the functions of the principles of which Nature and man
are composed. Woman is the image of Man, representing
Man's beauty and will, while the male part of humanity
is to represent reason and strength, but neither can
continue to exist without the other, and neither a male nor
a female being is perfect. Only that being is perfect in
which the male and female elements are united.

That which saves the male portions of mankind from
becoming brutes is the remnants of the female principle,
still left in Adam when Eve was created out of ** one of

Digitized by

Google

THE ETERNAL VIRGIN. »I

his ribs." That which constitutes the true woman is the
eternal divine female principle, the eternal virgin, in her.
That which brings woman near to the semi-animal male and
which makes her discernible to him, is the male elements con-
tained in her human organization. A man without any female
elements in him would be a devil, a woman without any
male elements would be an angel, but could not live upon
a gross material planet such as the earth.

The Moll accord is the harmonious counterpart of the
Dur accord ; but it has been proved that the existence of
a family of moll-accordsy existing independently of dur-
accords, and running in parallel lines with the latter, is an
impossibility. The most beautiful sound is not a single
sound, but an accord oi three. Such an accord is like a
mental conception, which — ^for the purpose of realizing its
existence as a unity — ^has to pass through three phases of
consciousness ; viz : i. that of being one with itself ; 2.
that of being different from itself ; and 3. that of con-
ceiving that these two states are only one.

Nature is the product of a cause, and everything in
nature is ruled by the law of cause and effect. There can
be no arbitrary ruler in the universe, and even if there
were such a ruler, his decisions would be the effects of the
action of his mind, and the actions of his mind would be
determined by pre-existing causes, and he would therefore
be subject to law. A bemg that is not subject to law is
an imimaginable monster that cannot exists because all
beings come into existence through the law of cause and
effect, and nothing can be without having come into
existence ; only the eternal law itself, which is no-thing,
self-existent, and absolute.

Here it might be objected, that the law could not exist,
if there was not a cause of the law, in other words, a law-
giver ; and such would be the case, if we had to deal with
arbitrary laws ; but the eternal law of cause and effect
requires no law-giver; because it is eternal and therefore
self-existent. Each being is subject to that law, because
each is a product of it The law of cause and effect calls all
beings into existence ; but the law itself is not SLbeing,aLnd
if man enters the state of Nirvana, he ceases to be subject
to the law ; because as he is then one with the law, he is
the law, and cannot be subject to any other law but hiDQh
self, and has ceased to be a ** being."

Digitized by

Google

122 KARMA.

Man 18 a being and exists in the world, having come
into existence according to the law of cause and effect
The form and quality of his body depend on the physical
conditions under which he was bom ; the state of his soul
depends on the astral influences that concentrated their
power upon him in consequence of his aflinity; his
character depends on the causes created during his
previous existence, and these causes constitute his Karma*
of which he himself is the creator. Man is himself a
product of the law of cause and effect, and in all depart^
ments of nature the effects produced are always in exact
proportion to the causes that produced them. If we knew
the causes weU, we could easily calculate their effects.
Each thought, each word, each act creates a cause, which
acts directly on the plane to which it belongs, creating
there new causes, which react again upon the other planes.*
A thought is a mental state that may be expressed in a
word, and the word may be made effective by an act. An
act is the expression (the word^ of a thought. Every form
in nature has a threefold constitution, every sjrmbol a three-
fold meaning, every perfect act is a trinity. To perform
an action three factors are necessary : the actor, the act,
and the object acted on. To constitute a complete act
three factors again are required : the motive, the will, and
the performance. A motive or thought which finds no
expression in an act will have no direct result on the phy-
sical plane, but it may cause great emotion in the sphere of
mind, and these may again react on the physical plane.
The best intention will produce no visible effect unless it
is put into execution ; but intentions produce certain men-
tal states, that may be productive of actions at some time
in the future. The performance of an act will have an
effect, no matter whether it was premeditated or not, but
an act without a motive will not directly affect the planes
of thought. Such an act is the result of insanity, and
imposes no moral responsibility upon the performer, but it
will, nevertheless, have its effects on the physical plane
that may react upon the mind.

* Paracelsus explains how the morbid imagination of man may create
states in the mental atmosphere which poison the imagination of nature,
and how by a reaction of the UniTCrsal Soul upon the soul of man,
epidemic disuses come into existence.

Digitized by

Google

mCROCOSMOS AND MACROCOSMOS. laj

'^rom the causes created on the physical, astral, and
^iritual planes innumerable combinations of effects come
into existence, creating new causes, that are a^ain followed
by effects, and every force that is put into action on either
plane continues to act until it is exhausted by transforma-
tions into other modes of action, when its vibrations will
be changed ; to others, and the previous effects will cease
to exist.

It is highly interesting to study the actions of the law of
cause and effect on the various planes of existence. By
the threefold action of that law, as thought^ will^ and
performance^ on the physical, emotional, intellectual, and
spiritual planes, a great many varieties ensue which giv^
nse to endless modifications and varieties, and again
produce innumerable secondary causes, which again pro-
duce effects. For instance, a good act performed on the
physical plane with an evil thought, or an evil act performed
with a good motive, or a good act with a good motive, or
an evil act with an evil thought, produces certain effects
upon one plane, while the motive affects another plane, and
they both react upon higher planes, and there results are
produced which react again upon the lower planes, and at
last the actions of the law of Karma will become so com-
plicated, that it is impossible to follow it into its details.
Nor is it necessary that we should do so ; for we should
not do good as a matter of speculation and for the purpose
of acquiring good Karma; but we should do good,
because we love good on account of its goodness.

Man is not a being whose existence is separated from
nature, but an integral part thereof. Heat and cold,
sunshine and storms on the physical plane, affect his
body, the elemental forces of nature act upon his soul, and
the influence of the universal spirit radiates to his centre.
Likewise man reacts upon the whole. By his physical
labor he changes the face of the Earth, acting sometimes
AS a creator and at other times as a destroyer of forms ;
his emotions produce currents in the soul of the world that
give rise to new causes in the invisible realm, which again
react upon the physical plane. His imagination may
create thought-germs, that may in the course of time find
expression in physical forms, his passions may give rise to
epidemic diseases,* his collective and accumulative

* Paracdsai : ^ De Orieixie Morboniin InTisibilimn."

Digitized by LjOOQIC

124 DISHAFMONIES.

energies lead to convulsions in nature, and if harmony
is restored in the universal Man, nature will be restored to
harmony.

The discords in nature are produced by imperfect man.
Having tasted of the tree of knowledge, he has learned to
oppose his individual will to the order existing in nature,
and he will continue to suffer the consequences of his sins
until he recognizes the superiority of the All to that of the
individual, and uniting his will with that of the whole, ends
the conflict of separate interests, and thereby restores the
unity and harmony of the whole.

Originally eternal nature was an harmonious whole, in
which discords were created by a separation of interests
among its constituents and an opposition of their individual
wills to the will of the whole. In the beginning the
universal will, radiating from the centre, became — so to
say — reversed in the action of its surface rays, and there-
by the sphere of illusions came into existence at the
periphery sphere representing the visible world. But at
the centre there still exists the immeasurable power of the
uniform law, where light penetrates through the clouds that
surround the spiritual sun. These clouds constitute the
world of illusions, and the action of this law can be per-
ceived in every form of activity in all departments of
nature.

Plato wrote over the door of his acaderhy : " Let no
one enter here unless he is well versed in mathematics ; "
and Pythagoras demanded the additional knowledge of
music. They meant to say that he who wishes to investi-
gate the hidden mysteries of nature must be able to draw
logical conclusions from his observations and attune his
soul to the divine harmonies of the universe.

Nature is still a Unity, and every part of it stands in a
certain definite relation to the whole; nothing is left to
chance. Everything has its number, measure, and weight,
and there is nothing in nature which is not ruled by
mathematical laws. Suns and stars have their periodical
revolutions. The molecules of bodies combine in certain
proportions, known to chemistry, and in all events on the
physical plane as well as in the realm of the emotions a
certain regularity and periodicity has been observed.
There are regular hours for the appearance of day and
night, fixed intervals for sprirg and summer, autumn and

Digitized by

Google

MA GIC NUMBERS. 135

winter, for ebbs and tides in the ocean and in the waters
constituting the soul. The physiological and anatomical
changes in animal forms occur at fixed periods, and even
the events of life take place according to certain occult
laws ; because, although man's actions seem to be free, yet
his actions are caused by his will, and his will is influenced
by his mental states, which are again the effects of still
deeper causes that find their origin in the supreme law.

The followers of Pythagoras knew every process in
nature to be regulated by certain numbers, which are as
follows :

3

9

IS

*5

4

16

1*

136

S

25

6S

325

6

36

III

666

7

49

175

1225

8

64

360

3080

9 81 369 3321

This table represents a succession of numbers, which are
obtained by the construction of Tetragrams or magic
squares^ and it was believed that by the use of these
numbers every effect could be calculated if the original
number referring to the cause were known. If everything
has a certain number of vibrations, and if these vibrations
increase or diminish at a certain ratio and in regular
periods, a knowledge of these numbers will enable us to
predict a future event.

Every person has a certain number that expresses his
character, and if we know that number, we may, by the
use of the magic squares, calculate certain periodical
changes in his mental and emotional states, which may
induce him to make certain changes in his outward con-
ditions, and in this way we may, perhaps, calculate
approximately the time when some important changes may
take place in his career. But as the numbers of men are
known only to the enlightened, who do not require such
calculations, these magic squares are at present of little
practical value, and of none whatever for the purpose of
" fortime-telling,*' or to satisfy idle curiosity in regard to
future events.

This law of periodicity is, however, an universal law,
and an attention to it may lead to some important dis-

Digitized by

Google

1j6 SEVEHr.

coveries. Its actions have long ago been known to exist
in the vibrations producing light and sound, and it has
recently been recognized in chemistry* by experiments
tending to prove that all so-called simple elements are only
various states of vibrations of one primordial element,
manifesting itself in seven principal modes of action, each
of which may be sub-divided into seven again. The differ-
ence which exists between so-called single substances
appears, therefore, to be no difference of substance or
matter, but only a difference of the function of matter or
in the ratio of its atomic vibration.

The occultists of all ages have looked upon the Seven
as being a sacred number. The religious books of the
East speak of seven emanations of Parabrahm ; and there
is a sufficient number of passages in the Apocalypse and in
other parts of the Bible to make it appear that the relation
which this mysterious number bears to the construction of
the universe has not escaped the attention of the Christian
Fathers.

The ancient philosophers believed that there were seven
planets in our solar system, and modem scientists base
their claims of their superiority over the ancient astrono-
mers upon the fact that they have discovered more planets
and asteroids than were known in ancient times.

Eternal truths which are cognizable to the spiritual per-
ception of the illuminated of to-day must be the same that
were seen by seers thousands of years ago, because such
truths do not change, neither can a true spiritual perception
make any mistakes. It is, therefore, probable that if the
exoteric doctrines of the ancients spoke of seven planets,
the esoteric meaning was that there existed six planetary
spheres, which, including the central sphere, produce seven.
According to the prevailing opinion in regard to the nebular
theory, our planetary system has been evolved from the
original substance (fire-mist) that constituted the body of
the sun, forming an immense sphere, extending beyond the
orbit of Neptune. If we imagine in a sphere a centrifugal
force radiating from the centre towards the periphery, and
a centripetal force acting towards the centre, there will be
a point between the centre and the periphery where the

* L. B. Hellenbach : '* Die Magie dcr Zahlenu"

Digitized by LjOOQIC

7HE PLANETS. I37

two opposing forces meet. At that point their straight
motions will either counteract each other and there will be
a stand-still, or — ^what is more probable — ^the radial force
will be broken and transformed into a revolving motion
around a new centre formed at the place of contact. In
such a case there would be not less than six bodies to
enclose the seventh on all sides.

But as to the number of corporeal planetary bodies,
visible on the sky, this is a matter belonging to the
investigation of mundane astronomy. Occult science
deals with principles ; the ultimate outcome of the expres-
sions of these principles in corporeal forms is a matter of
secondary importance.

The number Seven represents the scale ofnaiurCi it is
represented in all departments of natuie, from the radiant
sun, whose light is broken by a dewdrop into the seven
colors of the rainbow, down to the snowflake crystalizing
in six-pointed stars around the invisible centre. The law
of seven has been found to rule in the development and
growth of vegetable and animal organisms, in the consti-
tution of the Universe, and in the constitution of Man.
Seven is the rule by which the totality of existence is
measured, but Five is the number of Harmony, If the
fifth note in the musical scale is in accord with the first
and the third, harmony will be the result. There are
other accords which are harmonious, but the most perfect
accord is caused by the harmony of the first, the third, and
the fifth. The sounds may be harmonious, but to attain a
perfect accord a third one is required. The same law
rules in the constitution of Man. If his body (his first
principle) is in accord with his instincts ^the third), he
may experience pleasant sensations, but full harmony and
happiness is only attained when his fifth principle (his
intelligence) fully assents in the union of the first and the
third. Other parallels may be drawn between the musical
scale and the scale of principles in man, and it will be
found that both have their accords in moll and in dur that
correspond to each other. Each man's life is a symphony,
in which either harmonious or discordant tunes may pre-
vail

The power by which harmony is produced is the power
of Love. Love produces harmony, hate causes discord.
Love is the tendency of the disunited parts of one

Digitized by

Google

laS LOVE.

principle to unite again into one. This tendency pre-
supposes the power of mutual recognition, recognition b
a manifestation of consciousness, consciousness is a mani-
festation of life. Life, Love, Consciousness, Harmony, are
essentially one, the opposite of which is discord and death.
Why do some notes, if sounded together, produce harmony,
if not on account of the similarity of the elements that
compose them coming to the consciousness of our own
mind ? Mutual recognition among friends causes joy, and
joy means harmony, happiness, and content.

If two or more notes of exactly the same kind are
sounded together, they produce neither harmony nor dis-
cord, they simply increase their own strength. They are
already one, and no relation exists between them ; but if
different notes are struck, each containing an element con-
tained in the other, each sees its own counterpart repre-
sented in the mirror held by the other, and this recognition
is joy. If we listen to beautiful music the air seems filled
with life. If the principle of harmony exists within our-
selves we may recognize it in the music, and it becomes
alive in our soul. A discordant being may listen to the
most beautiful music and be left cold, because there is no
harmony within his own soul.

If a principle becomes conscious of its own existence
in another form, and recognizes its beauty in that form in
its purity, and unalloyed by any adulteration, perfect har-
mony is the result. If two or more things contain the
same element, these elements are justly adapted to each
other, and seek to unite, because they are constituted alike ;
they vibrate together as one. This tendency to unite
creates Love^ which manifests itself on all planes of exist-
ence. The planets are attracted to the sun and to each
other, because they all contain the same elements, seeking
to reunite, and the power of gravitation is nothing else
but the power of love. Man is attracted to woman and
woman to man, because they perceive in each other the
elements of their own highest ideal, and the more their
common ideal becomes manifest in each, the more will
they love each other and be fully contented. Man and
woman can only truly love each other if they are both
either consciously or unconsciously attracted by the same
ideal. This ideal may be high or low, but the higher it is
the more permanent will it be, and the greater will be their
mutual happiness.

Digitized by

Google

UNITY OF PRINCIPLE, 139

In each human being exist certain elements which are
identical with those existing in all other human beings, and
therefore one with the latter. Consequently, individual
man only appears to he a separate being ; while in fact the
whole of humanity is a unity and one; it is merely the
outward expression of the Universal Man^ which is mani-
fest in many separate human forms. The dirtiest beggar
in the street, the most vicious criminal, as well as the
greatest king or queen in the world, is myself and yourself,
for there is no distinction between one human being and
another in the fundamental principle which constitutes a
human being, and which is the Universal Man^ the ter-
restrial Adam and the celestial Christ.

In other words : Mankind is only one, but it appears
in many millions of various masks, and sometimes with
very inhuman habits, because the mask which the forms
wear hinders their free evolutions. This mask is the
personality of each man, the instrument through which
Adam acts, and which is full of imperfections. He, in
whom the terrestrial Adam has become the celestial Adam,
the Christ, sees in every man and woman not only his
brother or sister, but his own self. A person who injures
another, injures himself, for each man constitutes a power
which acts upon humanity, and the good or evil he does
will return to himself.

A man who attempts to fall in love with himself, or,
with other words, to find in his person his own highest
ideal, will never succeed in being contented and harmon-
ious. A man who seeks to recognize himself as his own
highest ideal becomes self-centred and vain. His love,
instead of expanding to the periphery of his sphere, will
act from its periphery to the centre, and he will l)ecome
spiritually smaller every day. But the man or the woman
who seeks the realization of their pwn ideal in the object
of their love, will, if they find it, recognize it as their own
self which they always possessed, although they were not
aware of its possession until they found it in another form.
He who possesses the truth recognizes it wherever he
finds it in others, but he who does not possess it cannot
recognize it. Our modem age often rejects the highest
truths unless they bear the stamp of man-created authority :
but the wise recognize the truth by its own light

Light is darkness unless it is reflected by matter. Light

Digitized by

Google

130 ATTRACTIOH.

cannot illuminate itself, but it illuminates the darkness, and
consequently the existence of light depends on the exist-
ence of matter. Love without an object cannot exist
relatively. A person in love with himself loves nothing.
Love, attached to nothing, exists in the Absolute, A love
being attached to a high object is high, and if it is attached
to a low object it is low, as life in a low form is low, and
in a high form high ; because love, and life, and harmony
are the functions and attributes of one and the same
principle in nature, they are only different aspects of one
universal power. Where love exists there is life, and no
life can endure without love, and the more the love expands
over all, the more will the living spiritual power of man
extend. The more love is concentrated upon a single
object, the stronger will it be in that direction and infuse
love and life in that object, and the more it is divided
among different objects, the more will its power be dis-
persed.

Love, to be strong, must be pure and unalloyed with
selfish considerations. If we love a thing on account of
the use we can make of it, we do not in reality love that
thing, but ourselves. Pure love has only the well-being of
its object in view, it does not calculate profits, and is not
afraid of disadvantages that may grow out of its love. The
intellect calculates, but love follows the law of attraction.

Impure love is no love at all, it is merely attraction. It
is weak, and does not enter into its object ; it may cause a
ruffle on the soul of another, but does not penetrate to the
centre. Pure love penetrates and cannot be resisted,
unless it is opposed by another love of equal strength, but
streaming in another direction. The most potent love
potion a person can give to another is to love that person
without any selfish object in view. Such pure love will
infuse itself into the soul of the beloved and call forth
corresponding vibrations of love, because one mode of
activity gives rise to similar modes, according to the uni-
versal law of induction.

This is undoubtedly true, provided that the love-germs
in the soul of the beloved correspond in quality to those
of the lover and are reached by the latter. The strongest
sunshine cannot cause any plants to grow in a soil in
which the seeds of the latter are too deeply imbedded to
be reached by the heat of the sun, or too much obstructed

Digitized by

Google

LOVE CHARMS. 131

by weeds to grow. Likewise the heart is the soil where
psychic germs of all kinds are imbedded, ready to unfold,
if accessible, to the magic power of love.

If you wish to progress on the road to perfection, take
lessons in love. Learn to love the highest, and you will
be attracted by it. Seek in every man those qualities
which appear to be high, and cover his mistakes by charity
and love. If you speak ill of another you speak ill of
yourself, because he who prominently notices the faults
of another must have the elements of those faults in him«
self. A vain person is repulsed by the vanity of another,
a liar expects from others the truth, a thief does not wish
to have his own property taken away. Virtues attract
each other, producing harmony, but vices repulse each
other, and discord is the result.

Each man is a mirror in which every other man may
see his own image reflected, either as he is or as he may
become in the future, for in every human soul exist the
same elements, although in different states of development,
and their development often depends on external conditions
over which man has but little control.

An emotion suppressed and forced back on itself may
become diseased and its direction perverted. A love
which is neither transformed nor fulfilled, but harbored in
the heart, creates phantoms and hallucinations just as
stagnant water develops animal life. A love for a high
ideal, which, instead of reaching up to the sphere of that
ideal, seeks for it in lower spheres, will languish and starve
or be attracted to lower ideals ; but, if love meets its cor-
responding love, harmony will be the result.

Love is the most necessary element for the continuance
of life ; there is no life without love, and if man were to
cease to love life he would cease to live. A love for a
higher life will lead men to a higher condition, a love for a
lower state will drag them down to a low. It often happens
that if a person's love for a high ideal does not meet the
object which it desires, it transfers its love upon something
that is low. Old females without any offspring often trans-
fer their parental affection upon some favorite cat or
dog, and there are men who buy the semblance of love
when no genuine love can be had.

Whenever a lower vibration is not entirely out of harmony
with a higher one, the higher vibration may accelerate the

Digitized by

Google

13a INDUCTION.

action of the lower one and bring it up to its own level, in
the same manner as a bar of iron, surrounded by an
insulated electric wire, may have electricity induced in it,
and through a long-continued and powerful action of the
higher vibrations upon the lower ones even the involuntary
actions of the body, such as the movements of the heart,
may become subject to individual will. Two strings of a
musical instrument which sound not entirely out of har-
mony, may, by being sounded together for a certain length
of time, at last become harmonious \ a man living in more
refined society, which is not too far above his moral or
intellectual level, will become more refined, servants will
ape their masters, and animals take some of the lower
characteristics of those that attend to them, and friends
or married couples being continually in each other's com-
pany may finally resemble each other to a certain extent

If the respective rates of the vibrations of two substances
are entirely out of harmony, they may repel each other,
and abnormal activity or excitement follows. The animal
body, for instance, can be exposed without danger to a
comparatively high degree of heat, if the temperature is
gradually raised ; while an even lower degree of heat may
be very injurious if applied suddenly. It is not for fancied
reasons that the occultist abstains from Alcohol and from
animal food. The elements of such substances are in a high
state of activity, and by coming into contact with the
elements of the blood, they stimulate them and throw them
into an abnormal state of vibration, giving rise to emotions
on the astral plane, which may in their turn affect the
higher principles in man in an undesirable manner. The
same is the case with other substances, whose odic emana-
tions are red, while those emitting blue auras are of a
different character ; but even the highest elements draw
their nourishment indirectly from the lowest ones, and the
old saying that '^ a sound mind needs a sound body to
develop in '* is not a mere fiction ; because, although a
sound brain (the instrument of the Mind) may exist in an
invalid body, still robust health is nevertheless useful and
desirable, and it is important, for the development of occult
powers, to select proper food and follow such laws of
Hygiene as the individual may require.

'* What may be one man's food, will be another man's
poison ; " in the sphere of matter as well as in the sphere

Digitized by

Google

ANIMAL FOOD. 133

of the emotions. Strong constitutions can bear strong
food, weak minds will get frightened at unwelcome truths.
Intemperance in food and drink is as bad as intemperance
in emotion ; and self-restraint is equally necessary on both
planes.

No man has ever become an Adept merely because he
lived on vegetables ; a vegetable diet is, however, much
preferable to meat-eating for various reasons. Apart from
the self-evident fact that it is entirely untheosophical and
opposed to the divine law of justice that he who strives
after the attainment of a higher state of existence should
destroy animal life, or cause others to destroy it for the
purpose of gratifying his animal appetite, it will be plain to
every one who investigates the laws of the higher life, that
the loading of the human organism with animal substances
will not facilitate its penetration by the light of the divine
spirit.

Those who desire to become more spiritual and refined
should avoid supplying their bodies with that which is
gross ; those who desire to master their passions should
not feed themselves with substances in which the elements
of such passions reside ; those who wish to come into pos-
session of more ethereal forms act unwisely if they supply
the latter with substances which must necessarily render
them more gross, and material and dense, and thus hinder
the free movements of the spirit within. Instances may be
known, where a person has attained a considerable degree of
spiritual development in spite of living on the corpses of
animals ; but such instances are very rare, and it may be
said without hesitation that one of the first steps to the
acquisition of spiritual refinement is the abandonment of
animal food,

A great variety of different kinds of food produces dis-
orders of the digestive organs and impurities of the blood ;
a struggle for life ensues between the different auras, and
excitement, fever, and disease is the result. The same
law explains the origin of venereal and cutaneous diseases,
and in the astral plane, a great variety of emotions, called
into existence within a short space of time, may render a
person insane.

Numerous cases of severe chronic diseases are known
to have been cured by fasting — either voluntary or en-
forced. Man actually needs but little food. Gluttony is
a habit, not a necessity.

Digitized by

Google

134 INFECTIONS.

Wherever two forces of an entirely opposite charactei
meet, disharmony will be the result, and as everybody has
his own peculiar emanations and auras and transmits them
to others, so everyone receives the magnetic auras of oihers
or of the locality by which he is surrounded, and these
emanations may be either wholesome or pestiferous ; men
and women may either cure or poison each other by them,
and it may therefore be well to follow the advice which
Gautama Buddha gave to his disciples, and eat and sleep
alone.

Many people are very careful to have their food weB
prepared, so that no unhealthy food enters the body;
while at the same time they are very careless as to what
emotions enter their mind ; because they fail to realize
that purity of the emotions is as necessary as purity of the
body.

A strong force overcomes a weak force, and a stronger
emotion may render a weaker one inactive. If the strong
emotion is high, it elevates the lower, if the lower one is
the strongest, degradation is the result. Cautiousness
may keep combativeness in check or make man a coward ;
but without cautiousness combativeness will fly off at a
tangent, and rashness and disaster may be the result.

Tlie higher emotions evolute from the lower ones, and
by the control of reason vices grow into virtues. Intense
love of self may expand into love of wife and friends, or
widen still more into a love of country or a love of human-
ity. The more it expands the more it becomes refined.

Nothing in the universe can be annihilated, (Hily the
form can be changed. An emotion cannot be killed, but
it can be educated up to a higher level.

Purely sexual instinct may be transformed into a pure
love of an elevated character by associating with a person
of the other sex, who is of a highly moral and intellectual
nature ; brutal combativeness may be purified by leading
it into an intellectual channel^ where the pen will take the
place of a cudgel : acquisitiveness may be elevated into a
craving for knowledge, and destructiveness into a desire
for the destruction of error.

It has been said that our vices are the ladder on which
we may climb up to heaven, and this is undoubtedly true,
because the only effective virtue which man can possess is
energy^ and if we employ our energies for good mstead of

Digitized by

Google

USE OF THE PASSIONS. 135

evil, we turn our vice into virtue ; but he who possesses no
energy is equally useless for good as he is for evil.

There can be nothing absolutely wrong in employinp^
the natural instincts and emotions in a natural and legiti-
mate manner ; the question is only whether such an em-
ployment will be useful for the purpose we have in view.
If we have a sum of money at our disposal, we have a right
to spend it for pleasure, or to buy something useful, or to
throw it away. In the same manner we may spend our
physical forces, our vital energies, or our emotions, for the
pursuit of useful pleasures or for the purpose of our higher
evolution ; but as we cannot expend the same sum of
money again after it is once spent, so the sum of energies
expended for a low purpose will be lost for the higher
object in view. If a person has no higher object in view
than to eat and drink, sleep and propagate his species, he
may be thereby rendered perfectly happy, and if he fol-
lows the dictates of his nature, there can be nothing wrong;
but he who desires to assist the slow process of nature in
developing himself into an immortal bein^, must take care
not to waste his strength on lower attractions ; and in the
course of time the energies which produced the lower
emotions will develop into not less strong but higher
emotions ; the whole of the lower activity will be trans-
formed into a higher one.

Only that which is pure can be harmonious.

Singleness of purpose renders a motive pure, but a variety
of purposes causes impurity. If a person devotes himself
to a certain mode of life, because all his desires are directed
towards that end, his motive will be pure ; but if he has
besides other objects in view, his motive will be impure,
and may defeat his aim.

The word '' asceticism " is continually misapplied. A
man who lives in a convent, or as an hermit in the wilder-
ness, is not an '^ ascetic," if he has no desire for a life in
the world ; for it is no act of self-denial to avoid that which
we do not want. ^'Asceticism" means discipline^ and a
person who is disgusted with the ways of the world under-
goes a much more severe discipline, if he remains in the
world, than if he runs away, and goes where he may enjoy
his peace. The real ascetic is therefore he who lives in the
midst of the society whose manners displease him, and
whose tastes are not his own, and who, in spite of all the
temptations by which he may be surrounded, still maintains

Digitized by VjOOQIC

136 ASCETICISM.

his integrity of character. Strength only grows by resist-
ance, and our enemies are therefore our friends, if we know
how to use them. A hermit living in the woods, where he
has no one to contradict and resist him, can gain no
strength. Such a life is only suitable for one who has
already gained full strength, and who wants to enjoy that
which he already possesses. Tranquillity is only suitable
for the Adept; the Neophite must go through the ordeal
of life.

Metals are purified by fire, and the emotions by suffer-
ing. The lower desires must starve to nourish the higher ;
the animal passions must be crucified and die ; but the
angel of Will removes the stone from the sepulchre, and
liberates the higher energies from the sphere of selfishness
and darkness ; and then the resurrected virtues will begin
to live and become active in a new world of enduring light
and harmony.

To obtain a clear view of the process of purification of
man, imagine yourself immersed in a mist of matter, sur-
rounded by inimical influences from the emotions of the
astral plane that gradually lead to your dissolution.
Deep in yourself, in the cloudless centre of your soul, and
yet seemingly far above you, is your internal god, your
ethereal prototype, your real self, the immortal Adonai,
like a mirage, waiting to attract your more refined elements
towards himself. The more you concentrate your thoughts
and desires upon your lower self, and cling to the sphere
of desires, the more will the serene image grow dim and
shadowy; but if your aspirations and thoughts, made
effective by your Will and your acts, rise above the sphere
of self and cling to the pure ideal, then your higher energies
will flow towards it, making it grow more and more dis-
tinct and substantial, until your innermost self .and your
consciousness is united with it, and free from all earthly
attractions, looks down upon that which remains below,
and beholds in it only the shadow of its own immortal
reality. Desire results from attraction, attraction results
from the separation of two substances, analogous in their
essences and properties. We cannot desire a thing of
which we know nothing, and if we are attracted to a thing,
there must necessarily be in us a portion of it desirous to
reunite itself with the portion from which it is separated.
A human being possessed of a divine spark of the univer-
sal spirit knows intuitively the source from which it came

Digitized by VjOOQIC

PUHIFICATIOir. 137

and with which it desires to become reunited, without
needing any scientific demonstration to convince him intel-
lectually of this truth.

To recognize the purity of the divine spark within is
true adoration, to attempt to realize it is true meditation ;
to exert the will to bring one's self in perfect harmony
with it, is aspiration or prayer. To express that prayer in
acts, is to make it effective. True prayer is always
efficacious on the plane whereon it is made to act. Prayer
on the physical plane consists in physical works, on the
astral plane it purifies the emotions through the action of
the will ; in the realm of the intellect study is prayer and
leads to knowledge, and the highest spiritual aspirations
lift man out of the turmoil of matter and bring him nearer
to his own god.

There is not a single instance known in history in which
true prayer has not been efficacious. If any man has not
obtained that which he asked, it only proves that he did
not know how to pray. True prayer means self-sacrifice ;
a giving up of the low upon the altar of the high. True
prayer does not consist in words, but in actions, and the
gods help him who helps himself ; but he who expects that
tiie gods should do for him that which he ought to accom-
plish himself, does not know how to pray, and will be
disappointed. Prayer means a rising up in our thoughts
and aspirations to our highest ideal, but if we do not our-
selves rise up to it, we do not pray. If we expect our
highest ideal to come down to us, we expect an absurdity
and impossibility.

To attain the highest the spirit should be the master,
the passions, the servants. A helpless cripple is the slave
of his servant ; a man who depends on ignorant servants
to do work which he can do himself has, to a certain
extent, to submit to their whims and imperfections, and if
he changes his servants, that does not change his position.
A person who has vulgar desires and tastes becomes the
servant of these tastes ; they dictate to him, and he has to
exert himsrff to obtain the means to gratify their claims ;
but he who has no ignoble desires to serve, is independent
and free and his own master. He has conquered matter,
his strife with the astral elements ceases. For him discord
can then no longer exist, and his purified elements will
find their responsive vibrations in the eternal life of the
universal spirit of Love.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

t

CHAPTER VI.

ILLUSION.

''Reason dissipates the illusions and visionary intexpfetations of
dungs, in which the imagination runs riot." — Dr, Caird.

The first power that meets us at the threshold of soul's
dominion is the power of imagination ; it is the plastic and
creative power of the mind. Man is conscious of being
able to receive ideas and to put them into forms. He
lives not entirely in the objective world, but possesses an
interior world of his own. It is in his power to be the
sole autocrat in that world, the master of its creations and
lord over all it contains. He may govern there by the
supreme power of his will, and if ideas intrude, which
have no legitimate right to exist in it, it is in his power
either to drive them away or suffer them to remain and to
grow. His reason is the supreme ruler in that world, its
ministers are the emotions. If man's reason, misled by
the treacherous advice of the emotions, suffers evil ideas
to grow, they may become powerful and dethrone reason,
imless it employs the Will to suppress them.

This interior world, like the outer world, is a world of
its own. It is sometimes dark, sometimes illuminated ;
its space and the things it contains are as real to its
inhabitants as the physical world is real to the physical
senses; its horizon may be either narrow or expanded,
limited in some and without limits in others ; it has its
beautiful scenery and its dismal localities, its sunshine
and storms, its forms of beauty and horrible shapes. It is
the privilege of intellectual man to retire to that world
whenever he chooses ; physical enemies do not persecute
him there; bodily pain cannot enter. The vexations of

Digitized by

Google

THE INNER KINGDOM. 139

material life remain behind, but the emotions enter with
him.

This interior realm of the soul is the Temple of Man
wherein we should shut ourselves and lock the door
against the intrusion of sensual impressions, if we desire
to "pray.'* On the entrance of that temple are the
Dwellers of the Threshold^ our desires and passions,
which are our own creations, and which must be con-
quered before we can enter. Within that temple exists a
world, as big and as illimitable as the external unbounded
universe, the forms of which we see with our physical eyes.
This inner world is filled with the products of man's own
creation ; some of them inactive, but others have become
active and living entities, which may assume dominion and,
by growing into power, dethrone the real king, Reason.
In this inner realm each man is — or ought to be — the God
whose spirit floats over the waters of the deep, and whose
fiat calls into existence only that which is useful and
good. The more this inner individual god will be in har-
mony with the God of the universe, the more will the two
become one, and the greater will be the perfection of the
inner world over the happiness of the individual. Only
when man has found himself in that inner world, will he
begin a life which must necessarily be immortal because it
is free from change, and having become his own master,
he can belong to nobody but himself— not to his lower— r
but to his highest self, which is one with the eternal Christ
or the Maha-atma of the universe.

In that interior world is the battle-ground of the gods.
There the gods of love and hate, the daemons of lust and
pride, and anger, the devils of malice, cruelty, and re-
venge, vanity, envy, and jealousy, may hold high carnival,
they may stir up the emotions, and, unless subdued by
Reason, they may grow strong enough to dethrone it.

Reason rests upon Truth. Wherever truth is disre-
garded illusions appear. If we lose sight of the highest,
Uie lower will appear to be the highest, and an illusion
will be created. One is the number of Truth, Six is the
number of illusion, because the Six have no existence
without the Seventh, they are the visible products of the
one, manifesting itself as six around an invisible centre.
Wherever they are six, there must be the seventh, although
the presence of the latter may not be manifest One is

Digitized by

Google

I40 ANIMAL FORMS.

the number of life, and six the number of shadows from
which life has departed.

Forms without life are illusive, and he who mistakes
the form for the life or principle of which it is an expres-
sion is haunted by an illusion. Forms perish, but the
principle that causes their existence remains. The object
of forms is to represent principles, and as long as a form
is known to be a true representation of a principle the
principle gives it life ; but if a form is made to serve
another principle than the one which called it into exist-
ence, degradation and death will be the final result.

The irrational forms produced by nature are perfect ex-
pressions of the principles they are intended to represent ;
rational beings only are the dissemblers. Each animal is
a true expression of the character represented by its form,
only at the point where intellectuality begins deception
commences. Each animal form is a symbol of the mental
state which characterizes its soul, because it is not itself
the arbitrary originator of its form, but rational man has
it in his power to create, and if he prostitutes one prin-
ciple in a form for another, the form will gradually adopt
that shape which characterizes the prostituted principle,
of which, in the course of time, it becomes a true expres-
sion.

Therefore we find that a man of noble appearance, by
becoming a miser, gradually adopts the sneaking look and
the stealthy gait of an animal going in search of its prey ;
the lascivious may acquire the habits, and perhaps the
appearance of a monkey or goat, the sly one the features
of a fox, and the conceited the looks of a donkey.

If our bodies were formed of a more ethereal and plastic
material than of muscles and bones, each change of our
character would produce quickly a corresponding change
of our form ; but gross matter is inert, and follows only
slowly the impressions made upon the soul. For this
reason the deduction of Phrenology, Physiognomy, etc.,
however much truth they may contain, cannot convey
absolute truth. The material of which astral forms and
souls are made are more plastic, and the soul of a villain-
ous person may actually resemble a pool filled with vipers
and scorpions, the true symbol of his moral characteristics,
mirrored in his mind. A generation of saints would, in
the course of time, produce a nation of ApoUos and

Digitized by

Google

PURITY. MI

Dianas, a generation of villains would grow into monsters
and dwarfs. To keep the form in its original beauty the
principle must be kept pure and without any adulteration.

One fundamental color of the solar spectrum, if unmixed,
is as pure as another ; one element, if free from another, is
pure. Unmixed copper is as pure as unalloyed gold,
and emotions are pure if free from extraneous mixing.
Forms are pure if they represent their principles in their
purity ; a vUlain who shows himself what he is is pure and
true, a saint who dissembles is impure and false. Fash-
ions are the external expressions of the mental states of a
country, and if men and women degenerate in their char-
acter their fashions will become absurd.

The want of power to discriminate between the true and
the illusive, between the form and the principle, and the
consequent error of apprehending the low for the high, is
the cause of suffering. Man's material interests are
frequently considered to be of supreme importance, and
the interests of the highest elements in his constitution are
forgotten. The power that should be expended to feed
the high is eaten up by the low. Instead of the low
serving the high, the high is made to serve the low, and
instead of the form being used as an instrument of action
for the principle, the principle is made to wait until the
claims of the form are attended to ; in other words, a low
principle is substituted for a higher one.

Such a prostitution of principle in favor of form is found
in all spheres of social life. We find it among the rich and
the poor, the educated and the ignorant, in the forum, the
press, and the pulpit, no less than in the halls of the mer-
chant and in the daily transactions of life. The prostitu-
tion of principle is worse than the prostitution of the body,
and he who uses his intellectual powers for selfish and
villainous purposes is more to be pitied than she who car-
ries on a trade with her bodily charms to gain the means
by which she may keep that body alive. The prostitution
of universal human rights for the benefit of a few individ-
uals is the most dangerous form of prostitution on Earth.

The difference between vulgar prostitution of the body
and the more refined prostitution of the intellectual
faculties for the purpose of accomplishing selfish ends, is
merely that in the first class merely the grossest parts of
the human organization are misused, while in the other

Digitized by

Google

I4S PROSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT.

class the higher and more permanent parts are misused
The consequences of the latter kind must therefore be
much more lasting than those of the former. There are
few women in the world who have become degraded from
an inclination to be so ; in the great majority of cases they
are the victims of circumstances which they had not the
power to resist \ but intellectual villains usually belong to
the higher classes, where want and poverty are unknown.

To employ the intellectual powers for the mere purpose
of '^ makmg money " is the beginning of intellectual pros-
titution. Blessed are they who are able to gain their bread
by the honest work of their hands, for an employment
which requires little intellectual attention will leave them
free to employ their mental powers for the purpose of
spiritual meditation and unfoldment ; while those who
spend all their mental energy upon the lower planes are
selling their immortal birthright for a worthless mess of
potage which may nourish the body while it starves the
soul.

The greatest of all illusions is the illusion of " SelfJ^
Material man looks upon himself as something existing
apart from every other existence. The shape of his form
creates the illusion of being an independent substantial
whole, and the changes in that form take place so slow and
imperceptible, that the error is not perceived. Still, there
is not a single element in his body, in the constitution of
his soul, or in the mechanism of his intellect, that is not
continually departing, and is replaced by others from the
universal fountain of life. What belongs to him to-day
belonged yesterday to another, and may belong to another
to-morrow. In his physical form there is a continual
change. In the bodies of organized beings tissues disap-
pear slowly or quickly, according to the nature of their
affinities, icnd new ones take their places, to be replaced in
turn by others. The human body changes in size, shape,
and density as age advances, presenting successively the
symbols df the buoyant health of youth, the vigorous con-
stitution of manhood, or the grace and beauty of woman-
hood, up to the attributes indicating old age, the forerunner
of decay and cessation of activity in that individual form.

No less is the change in the soul. Sensation and desires
change, consciousness changes, memories grow dim. No
man has the same opinions he had when he was a child;

Digitized by

Google

PERSONALITY. I43

knowledge increases, intellect grows weak, and on the
mental as well as on the physical plane the special activity
ceases when the accumulated energy is exhausted by trans-
formation into other modes of action or is transferred in
other forms.

The lower material elements in the constitution of man
change rapidly, the higher ones change slowly, but only
the highest elements are enduring. Nothing can be said
to belong essentially to man but the character of his sixth
principle in its union with the seventh. He who cares a
great deal for his lower principles, cares for things that are
not his own, but which he has only borrowed from nature.
While he enjoys their possession an illusion is created,
making them appear to be an essential part of himself, and
his imagination revels in their fancied possession. They
are, however, not more an essential part of himself than
the clothes which a man wears, a constituent part of the
man. His only true self is his character, and he who
loses the strength of his character loses all his possessions.

One of the kings of illusions is Money ^ the king of the
world. Money represents the principle of equity, and it
should be employed to enable every one to obtain the just
equivalent for his labor. If we desire more money than
we can rightfully claim, we wish for something that does
not belong to us but to another, and we repulse the divine
principle of truth. If we obtain labor without paying for
It its proper equivalent, we deprive others of justice, and
therefore deprive ourselves of the principle of truth, which
is a more serious loss to ourselves than the loss of money
to the defrauded.

Money as such is an illusion, only the principle of
justice, which it represents, has a real existence. Never-
theless we see the world lie at the feet of the form. The
poor clamor for it, and the rich crave for more, and the
general desire is to obtain the greatest amount of reward
by giving the least possible equivalent. There are priests
who save souls, and doctors who cure bodies for money ;
law is sold to him who is able and willing to pay, fame and
reputation and the semblance of love can be obtained for
money, and the worth of a man is expressed in the sum of
shillings or pounds which he may call his own. Starvation
threatens the poor, and the consequence of superabundance
the rich, and some of the rich take advantage of the distress

Digitized by

Google

144 MONEY.

of the poor to enrich themselves more. Science exerts her
powers to increase the amount of the material comforts of
man. It vanquishes the impediments presented by time
and space, and turns night into day. New engines are
invented, and the work whose performance in former
times required the use of a thousand arms, may now be
accomplished by a child. An immense amount of personal
suffering and labor is thereby saved. But as the means
to satisfy the craving for comfort increase, a craving arises
for more. Things that formerly were considered luxuries
now become indispensable needs. Illusions create illusions,
and desires give rise to desires. The sight of the principle
is lost, and the golden calf is put into its place. Produc-
tion is followed by over production, the supply exceeds
the demand, the price of labor comes down to starvation
rates, and on the rotten soil the mushrooms of monopoly
grow. The more the facilities increase to sustain the battle of
life, the more increases its fury. The noblest power of man,
his intellect, whose destiny it is to form a solid basis for
the highest spiritual aspirations of man, is forced to labor
for the satisfaction of the animal instincts of man ; the
body flourishes, and the spirit starves and becomes a
beggar in the kingdom of truth.

From the love of self arises the love of possession. It is
the hydra-headed monster whose cravings can never be
stilled. Nearest to the illusion of self stands the illusion
oiLove. True love is not an illusion, it is the power that
unites the world and an attribute of the spirit ; but the
illusion of love is not love, but only love's shadow. True
love seeks only for the happiness of the object it loves,
but animal love cares for itself, and seeks only enjoyment.
True love exists, even if the form is dissolved ; false love
dies, when the form to which it was attached decays.

Ideal woman is the crown of creation, and has a right to
be loved by man. A male being, who does not love the
character of a woman, bears only the semblance of a man,
and man is not a complete being unless he possesses
woman's love. A man who does not love beauty has no
element of beauty in him. But the man who only fancies
woman's attractions, and not the woman herself, is repulsed
by her. If only his instincts attract him to her she sees
his weakness and is repulsed by it. She may be rendered
vain enough by the possession of such charms as to enjoy

Digitized by

Google

FANCY. HS

the victory gained by them over a fool, but an intelligent
woman looks upon such a victim as an object of pity and
commiseration, and not as a source of strength.

Man loves beauty and woman loves strength. A man
who is the slave of his desires is weak, and cannot com-
mand the respect of a woman he professes to love. If she
sees him squirm under the lash of his animal instincts she
will not be able to look upon him as her protector and
god.

Man represents Reason, and woman represents Will. If
the will is in harmony with reason it will be as om. If
they act against each other illusions come into existence.

Another illusion is the craving for physical life, and well
may he crave for it who has no character of his own,
because, having lost his character, if he loses his life, he
loses his all. Men and women cling to the illusion of life
because they do not know what life is. They will submit
to indignity, dishonor, and suffering rather than die.
Life is a means to an end, and as such it is valuable ; but
why should life be so desirable as to sacrifice character for
it ? One life is only one temporary condition among a
thousand similar ones through which the character of a
man passes in its travels on the road to perfection, and
whether he remains a longer or a shorter interval at one
station, cannot be of any very serious importance to him.
Man can make no better use of his life than to sacrifice it,
if necessary, for the welfare of others ; because this act
will strengthen his own character, in which rests the source
of his life, and the power by which he is enabled to
reappear in a new form.

On the other hand, he who sneaks away from the
battle of life for selfish purposes, or because he is afraid to
continue its struggles, will not escape. He may wish to
step out of life and destroy his body, but the law cannot
be cheated. Life will remain with him until his natural
days would have ended. He cannot destroy it, he can
only deprive himself of the instrument through which he
can act. He resembles a man who has to perform some
work and throws away the instrument which would have
enabled him to perform it. Vain will be his regrets.

But if, in the cases of sane suicides, the illusion called
life continues after the death of the physical body, and
consciousness remains with the astral form, then a serious
question arises in regard to the disposal of the bodies of

Digitized by

Google

146 CRAVING FOR ANIMAL LIFE.

such unfortunate persons ; for wherever consciousness
exists, there must be sensation, and as in such instances a
magnetic connection is said to continue to exist between
the astral man and his corpse, it appears not impossible
that the post mortem communications of suicides are true,
and that injuries inflicted upon the body may under certain
conditions be felt very acutely by the disembodied man.

Another illusion is a great deal of what is called
" science." True knowledge makes a man free, but false
science renders him a slave to the opinions of others.
Many men waste their lives to learn that which is foolish
and neglect that which is true, mistaking that which is
evanescent and perishing for the eternal. Nor is their
desire for learning usually caused by a desire to learn the
truth, else they would not reject the truth when they see it.
In the majority of cases learning is not the aim but the
means to the aim of the student, while his real objects are
the attainment of wealth, position, and fame, or the grati-
fication of curiosity. The true wealth of a nation or a man
does not rest in intellectual acquirements, but in spiritual
possessions, which alone will remain permanent.

There is nothing more productive of a tendency to the
development of an extreme degree of selfishness than the
development of a high degree of intellectuality, without
any accompanying growth of spirituality. Whoever doubts
this assertion let him observe the petty jealousies every-
where prevailing among the learned professions. More-
over, a high degree of intellectuality enables a person to
take personal advantages over others who are less learned,
and unless he possesses great moral powers he may not be
able to resist the temptations that are put in his way. The
greatest villains and criminals have been persons of great
mtellectual qualifications. A development of the intellect
is necessary to understand spiritual truths after they are
once perceived, but they cannot be perceived by the
intellect without spirituality ; they can only be perceived
by the power of the spirit. The development of spiritual
powers of perception is, therefore, of supreme importance;
that of the intellect comes next. " Blessed is he whom
the truth teaches, not by perishable emblems and words,
but by its own inherent power ; not what it appears to be,
but as // «." *

* Thomas de Kempis*

Digitized by LjOOQiC

AMBITION. 147

The love of power and fame are other illusions. True
power is an attribute of the spirit If I am obeyed because
I am rich, it is not myself who commands obedience, but
my riches. If I am called powerful because I enjoy
authority, it is not myself who is powerful, but it is the
authority vested in me. Riches and authority are halos
thrown around men, which often vanish as quickly as they
have been acquired. Fame is often enjoyed by him who
does not deserve it, and the most honored man is he who
has cause to respect himself on account of his acts.

Place of birth and condition of life are circumstances
which are usually not matters of choice, and no one has a
right to despise another on account of his nationality, reli-
gious belief, color of skin, or the act he may play on this
planet. Conditions are illusions, caused by the conse-
quences of other illusions; they do not belong to the
essential character of man. Whether an actor plays the
part of a king or a servant, the actor is, therefore, not
despised, provided he plays his part well.

There are other illusions which come without being
asked, and remain, although their stay is not wanted.
They are the unwelcome visitors — Fear^ Doubts and
RemorsCy and they, like all other illusions, are caused by
ignorance of the true nature of man and the extent of his
powers. Men sometimes live in fear of a revengeful power
which has no existence, and may die from fear of an evil
that does not exist. They are often afraid of the effects of
causes which they, nevertheless, continue to create \ they
may doubt whether they will succeed in cheating the law,
not knowing that the real man is himself the law and
cannot be cheated. Every acts creates a cause, and the
cause is followed by an effect which reacts on him who
created the cause, whether he may experience that effect
in this life or in another. To escape the effect of the
cause which has been created, he who created the cause
must try to transform himself into another man. If his
lower principles have led him into mistakes they will suffer,
but if he succeeds in assimilating his nature with his higher
principles, and thereby changes himself into a being of ^
different character, their suffering will not be of the greatest
importance to him. Such is the only rational philosophy
of the " forgiveness of sins," and priests could forgive sins

Digitized by

Google

148 FEAR, DOUBT AND REMORSE.

if they were able to change the sinner into a saint. This
can, however, only be done by the individual exertions of
the " sinner," who may be instructed by one who is wise.
To become sufficiently wise to instruct another about the
laws or his nature it is of the utmost importance that the
instructor should know these laws, and be acquainted with
the true constitution of man.

Reason is the savior of man, ignorance is his death and
unreason his suffering. Reason is the power of the mind
to recognize the truth, and in the light of truth the shadows
of doubt and fear and remorse cannot exist.

Illusions are dispersed by Reason through the power of
Will. When the will is held in abeyance the imagination
is rendered passive, and the mind takes in the reflections of
pictures stored up in the Astral Light without choice or
discrimination. When reason does not guide the imagin-
ation the mind creates disorderly fancies and hallucina-
tions. The passive seer dreams while awake, and may
mistake his dreams for realities, but his dreams may be his
own creations, or they may be impressions caused by
floating ideas taking possession of the unresisting mind^
and, according to the source from which such impressions
come, they may be either true or false. Various means
have been adopted to suspend the discriminating power of
will and render the imagination abnormally passive, and
all such practices are injurious, in proportion as they are
efficacious. The ancient Pythoness attempted to heighten
her already abnormal receptivity by the inhalation of
noxious vapors ; savage and semi-civilized people some-
times use poisons, or whirl in a dance until the action of
reason is temporarily suspended ; others use opium, Indian
hemp, and other narcotics, which not only suspend their
will and render their mind a blank, but which also excite
the brain, and induce morbid fancies and illusions.*

* The fumigations which were used at former times for the purpose
of rendering reason inactive, and allowing the products of a passive
imagination to appear in an objective state, were usually narcotic
substances. Blood was only used for the purpose of furnishing substance
to Klementals and Elementaries, by the aid of which they might render
their bfxlies more dense and visible.

Cornelius Agrippa gives the following prescription : Make a powder
of spermaceti, aloe W(wd, musk, saffron, and thyme, sprinkle it with the
blood of a hoopop. If this powder is bnmt npan the graves of the

Digitized by

Google

ASTRAL PERCEPTIONS. 149

Fortune-tellers and clairvoyants employ various means to
fix their attention, to suspend thought and render their
minds passive, and the images which they receive may be
true or false ; others stare at mirrors or crystals, water or
ink,* but the Adept, while not forsaking the use of his
reason, renders his imagination passive by maintaining,
under all circumstances, a serene tranquillity of the mind.
The surface of a lake whose water is in motion reflects only
distorted reproductions of images projected upon it, and if
the elements in the interior world are in a state of con-
fusion, if emotion fights with emotion and the uproar of the
passions troubles the mind, if the heaven of the soul is
clouded by prejudices, darkened by ignorance, hallucinated
by insane desires, the true images of things seen will be
equally distorted. The divine principle in man remains in
itself unaltered and undisturbed, like the image of a star

dead, the ethereal forms of the latter will approach, and may become
visible.

Eckartshcusen made successful experiments with the following pre*
scription : Mix powdered frankincense and flour with an egg, add milk,
honey, and rosewater, make a paste, and throw some of it upon burning
coals.

Another prescription given by the same author consists of hemlock,
saffron, aloes, opium, mandragora, henbane, poppy-flowers, and some
other poisonous plants. After undergoing a certain preparation, which
he describes, he attempted the experiment, and saw the ghost of the
person which he desired to see; but he came very near poisoning
himself. Dr, fforst repeated the experiment with the same result, and
for years afterwards, whenever he looked upon a dark object, he saw the
apparition again.

Chemistry has advanced since that time, and those who desire to make
such experiments at the risk of their health, may now accomplish this in
a more comfortable and easy manner by inhaling some of the stupefying
gases known to chemical science.

* There are numerous prescriptions for the preparation of magic
mirrors ; but the best magic mirror will be useless to him who is not
able to see clairvoyantly ; while the natural clairvoyant may call that
faculty into action by concentrating his mind on any particular spot, a
glass of water, ink, a crystal, or anything else ; for it is not in the mirror
where such things are seen, but in the mind ; the mirror merely serves
to assist in the entering of that mental state which is necessary to pro-
duce clairvoyant sight. The best of all magic mirrors is the soul of
man, and it should always be kept pure, and be protected against dust
and dampness and rust, so that it may not become tarnished, and remain
perfectly clear, and able to reflect the light of the divine spirit in its
original parity.

Digitized by

Google

I50 CLAIRVOYANCE.

reflected in water j but unless its dwelling is rendered cleai
and transparent) it cannot send its rays through the sur-
rounding walls. The more the emotions rage, the more
will the mind become disturbed and the spirit be forced to
retreat into its interior prison ; or if it loses entirely its
hold over the mind, it may be driven away by the forces
which it cannot control, burst the door of its dungeon,
return to the source from whence it came, and leave man
behind as a living corpse, a maniac, * in which the spiritual
principle is entirely inactive.

If a person suffers his reason to give up the control over
his imagination he surrenders one of the greatest prero-
gatives of man, and exposes himself to danger. In the
normal condition reason guides the imagination to a certain
extent ; in abnormal conditions the will of another may
take its place, or it may roam without being guided,
influenced only by previously-existing conditions. A person
who dreams does not control the actions which he performs
in his dream, although he may dream that he is exercising
his will. The things seen in his dream are to him realities,
and he does not doubt their substantiality, while external
physical objects have no existence for him, and not even
the possibility of their existence comes to his consciousness.
He may see before him a ditch and dream that he wills to
jump over it, but he does not actually exert his will, he
only follows the impulses created during his waking con-
dition. A person in a trance may be so much under the
influence of a " magnetizer " as to have no active will of
his own, and be only led by the imagination of the operator.
The avenues of his external senses are closed, and he lives
entirely in the subjective world, in which material objects
can find no place, and in which such objects could by no
means be introduced. Still what he sees is real to him,
and if the operator creates a precipice in his imagination,
perhaps represented by a chalk mark on the floor (to assist
the imagination of the operator), the " subject *' will, on
approaching it, experience and manifest the same terror as
he would in his normal state if a precipice were yawning
under his feet ; and if the operator should have the cruelty
to will the entranced to jump over its edge, the most
serious consequences to the individual might follow. A

• See H. P. Blaratsky : <• Isis Unveiled."

Digitized by LjOOQiC

MEDIUMSHIP. 151

glass of water transformed into imaginary wine by the will
of the '^ mesmerizer " may make the subject intoxicated^
and if that water has been transformed into imaginary
poison it may injure or kill the sensitive. A powerful
** mesmerizer " ca- form either a beautiful or a horrible
picture in his mind, and by transferring it by his will U'.on
the mental sphere of a sensitive, he may cause him — even
if the latter is in his normal condition — either pleasure or
suffering, while the mental images so created in the mind
of the sensitive may again react upon others and be per-
ceived by them.

If a person is en rapport with a magnetized subject,
the image or even a thought existing in the mind of the
former is immediately accepted as a reality by the latter.

Such states may be induced, not merely during the
magnetic sleep, but also during the normal condition, and
without any active desire on the part of a magnetizer. If
the audience sheds tears during the performance of a
tragedy, although they all know that it is merely a play,
they are in a state of partial magnetization. Hundreds of
similar occurrences take place every day, and there is
sufficient material everywhere in every-day life for the stu-
dent of psychology to investigate and explain, without
seeking for cases of an abnormal character.

If a " Medium " submits the control over his imagina-
tion to another being he becomes his servant. This other
being may be another person, or it may be an idea, an
emotion, a passion, and the effect on the passive Medium
will be proportionate to the intensity of the action mani-
fested by them. It may be an elemental, an astral corpse,
or a malicious influence, and the Medium may become an
epileptic, a maniac, or a criminal. A person who surren-
ders the control over his imagination, indiscriminately, to
every unknown power, is not less insane than he who
would entrust his money and valuables to the first un-
known stranger or vagabond that would ask him for it.

Mediumship is nothing else but a process of transfer of
thought, and differs from an ordinary magnetic experi-
ment only in so far as in the latter the operator is a visible
person, while in the former the influence proceeds from
an invisible source, and is the more dangerous because
being invisible it is not known from whence it proceeds.
If a magnetizer commands his subject to commit a mur»

Digitized by

Google

ISa MENTAL IMAGERY.

der, the latter may commit it, even after he has awakened
from his sleep. In such a case the operator is the mur-
derer, and the subject merely the instrument.

How many murders and crimes are committed every
year through sensitive persons, who have been influenced
or " mesmerized " by visible persons or invisible thoughts
to commit them, and who had not sufficient will power to
resist, it is impossible to determine. In such cases we
hang or punish the instrument, but the real culprit
escapes. Such a " justice " is equivalent to punishing a
stick with which a murder has been committed, and to let
the man who used the stick go free. Verily the coming
generations will have as much cause to laugh at the ignor-
ance of their ancestors as we now laugh at the ignorance
of those who preceded us.

The state of the imagination is a great factor in the
observation and appreciation of things. The savage may
see in the sculptured Minerva only a curious piece of
rock, and a beautiful painting may be to him only a piece
of cloth daubed over with colors. The f^reedy miser, on
looking at the beauties of nature, think? o^ ly of the
money-value they represent, while for the poet the forest
swarms with fairies and the water with spri' ?s. The artist
finds beautiful forms in the wandering cloucls aiid in che
projecting rocks of the mountains, and to hi' . wh-^e nind
is poetic every symbol in nature becomes a poem c :d S' o.
gests to him new ideas ; but the coward wanders i rough
life with a scowl upon his face ; he sees in every .omer
an enemy, and for him the world has nothing attractive
except his own little self. The man who cannot be trusted
is ever mistrustful, the thief fears to be robbed, and the
backbiter is extremely sensitive to the gossip of others.

The cause of this is evidently that each man perceives
only those elements which exist in his own mind, and if
any foreign element enters, it is immediately tinctured
and colored by the former. The world is a mirror where-
in every man may see his own face. To him whose soul
is beautiful, the world will look beautiful ; to him whose
soul is deformed, everything will seem to be evil.

The impressions made on the mind by the effects of the
imagination may be powerful and lasting upon the person.
TTiey may change or distort the features, they may render
the hair white in a single hour ; they may mark, kill, dis-

Digitized by

Google

IMAGINATION. I53

figure, or break the bones of the unborn child, and make the
effects of injuries received by one person visible upon the
body of another with whom that person is in sympathy.
They may act more powerfully than drugs ; they cause and
cure diseases, induce visions and hallucinations, and may
produce stigmata in so-called saints. Imagination performs
its miracles, either consciously or unconsciously, in all
departments of nature. By altering the surroundings of
animals at such times their color can be changed at will.
The tiger's stripes are said to correspond with the long
jungle grass, and the leopard's spots resemble the speckled
light falling through the leaves.* The forces of nature,
influenced by the imagination of man, act on the imagina-
tion of nature, and create tendencies on the astral plane,
which, in the course of evolution, find expression through
material forms. In this way man's vices or virtues be-
come objective realities, and as man's mind becomes puri-
fied, the earth becomes more beautiful and refined, while
his vices find their expression in poisonous reptiles and
noxious plants.

The soul of the world has its animal elementary exist-
ences, corresponding to those existing in the animal soul
of man. Either are the products of thought-evolution.
The Elementals in the soul of man are the products of the
action of the thought in the individual mind of man ; the
elemental forms in the soul of the world are the products
of the collective thoughts of all beings. Animal elemen-
tary powers are attracted to the germs of animals, and
grow into objective visible animal form, and modify the
characters and also the outward appearance of the animals
of our globe. We therefore see that as the imagination of
the Universal Mind changes during the course of ages^
old forms disappear and new ones come into existence.
Perhaps if there were no snakes in human forms, the
snakes of the animal kingdom would cease to exist.

But the impressions made on the mind do not end with
the life of the individual on the physical plane. A cause
which produces a sudden terror, or otherwise acts strongly
on the imagination, may produce an impression that not
only lasts through life but beyond it. A person, for
instance, who during his life has strongly believed in the

*Sir John Labbodct <* Proceedmgs of the British AssodatioiL*

Digitized by LjOOQiC

154 OBJECTIFIED THOUGHTS.

existence of eternal damnation and hell-fire, may, at his
entrance into the subjective state after death, actually
behold all the terrors of hell which his imagination during
life has conjured up. There may have been no premature
burial, the physical body may have been actually dead ;
but the terrified soul, seeing before it ail the horrors of its
own vivid imagination, rushes back again into the deserted
body and clings to it in despair, seeking protection.
Personal consciousness returns, and it finds itself alive in
the grave, where it may pass a second time through the
pangs of death, or, by sending out its astral form in search
of sustenance from the living, it may become a vampire,
and prolong for a while its horrible existence.* Such
misfortunes are by no means rare, and the best remedy
for it is knowledge or the cremation of the body soon after
death.

In the state after death the imagination neither creates
new and original forms nor is it capable of receiving new
impressions ; but it — so to say — lives on the sum of the
impressions accumulated during life, which may evolute
innumerable variations of mental estates, symbolized in
their corresponding subjective forms, and lasting a longer-
or shorter period until their forces are exhausted. These
mental states may be called illusive in the same sense as
the forms and events of the physical life may be called
illusive, and life in " heaven " or " hell " may be called a
dream, in the same sense as life on the earth is called a
dream. The dream of life only differs from the dream
after death, that, during the former, we are able to make
use of our will to guide and control our imagination and
acts, while during the latter that guidance is wanting, and
we earn that which we have sown, whether it is pleasant or
not. No effort, whether for good or for evil, is ever lost.
Those who have reached out in their imagination towards
a high ideal on earth will find it in heaven ; those whose
desires have dragged them down will sink to the level of
their desires.

It is said that the most material and sensual thoughts
create forms in the subjective condition which will appear
to him who created them, after he enters that sphere, even

^Maximilian Perty : ^' Die mystischen Erscheinungen in der Natnr."

Digitized by LjOOQIC

HAPPINESS. 155

more gross, dense and material, than the material forms
of the terrestrial world ; nor does this seem incomprehen-
sible, if we remember that everything is composed of
thought-substance, and that the terms " density," " mate-
riality," etc., are merely relative terms. What appear to us
dense and material now, may appear ethereal or vaporous,
if we are in another state, and things which are invisible to
us now may appear grossly material then. A due
consideration of the relations existing between conscious-
ness and what we call *^ matter " will make it appear that
there may be worlds more dense and material to its
inhabitants than our physical world is to us; for it
is the light of the spirit that enlivens matter, and
the more matter is attracted by sensuality and con-
centrated by selfishness, the less penetrable to the
spirit will it become, and the more dense and hard will it
grow, although it may for all that not be perceptible to our
physical senses ; the latter being adapted merely to our
present state of existence.

We should enter the higher life now, instead of waiting
for it to come to us in the hereafter. The term " heaven "
means a state of spiritual consciousness and enjoyment
of spiritual truths ; but how can he who has evolved no
such consciousness and no spiritual power of perception
enjoy the perception of things which he has not the power
to perceive ? A man without that faculty entering heaven
would be like a man blind and deaf and without the power
to feel. Man can only enjoy that which he is able to
realize, that which he cannot perceive does not exist for
him.

The surest way to be happy is to rise above all selfish
considerations. People crave for amusement and pas-
times ; but to forget one's time is to forget one's self, and
by forgetting themselves they are rendered glad. People
are rendered temporarily happy by illusions, because while
they enjoy an illusion, they forget their own personal
selves. The charm of music consists in the temporary
absorption it causes to the personality in the harmony of
sound. If we witness a theatrical performance and enter
into the sprit of the play, we forget our personal sorrows
and live — so to say — in the personality of the actor. The
ictor who understands how to absorb our attention,
absorbs our personal consciousness and becomes inspired

Digitized by

Google

156 WORSHIP.

by our own enthusiasm ; an actor from whom the sympathy
of the audience is withheld, will find it difficult to play his
part well. An orator who is in full accord with his
audience becomes inspired with the sentiments of his
audience ; it is his audience that gives expressions of his
feelings through him ; while he speaks he may forget the
part he has intended to speak and give expression to that
which his audience feels. Without being aware of it, we
actually live and feel and think within each other.

If we enter a cathedral or a temple, whose architecture
inspires sublimity and solemnity, expanding the soul;
where the language of music speaks to the heart, drawing
it away from the attachment to the earth ; if the beauty
and odor of flowers lull the senses into a forgetfulness of
self, such illusions may render us temporarily happy to an
extent proportionate to the degree in which they succeed
in destro3ring our consciousness of personality and self,
and as such they are immeasurably better than other
illusions that appeal to the lower personal self; but if we
seek for the truth in the outward expression of a form,
instead of looking for it in the principle which the ferm is
to represent, we will be led into darkness instead of being
led into light. For this reason the belief in external gods
strengthens the illusions of self; they induce men to
become cowards, to ask for favors which they do not
deserve, in preference to other men that deserve them ;
they help to establish the autocracy of priests, and to put
the false priest upon a throne from which the true god has
been excluded. Such misconceptions destroy the dignity
of mankind, and a religious system based upon such prac-
tices degrades men instead of elevating their character.
He who has grown to live above the illusion of form and
recognizes the existence of the true god in his heart, needs
no illusions to guide his attention. He carries the temple
of the eternal God in his own soul, and worships it without
ceremonies and rites, by perpetual adoration.

Digitized by

Google

CHAPTER VIL

CONSCIOUSNESS.
« I am that I 9m^'^Bible.

Everything in the universe* is a manifestation of mind;
for the universe itself is an expression of eternal wisdom.
Everything therefore is mind ; possessing consciousness in
the absolute, and being capable of manifesting relative con-
sciousness. Consciousness in the Absolute means uncon-
sciousness in relation to things. Absolute self-consciousness
means the full realization of one's own existence^a godlike
state of self-existence, independent of any external object ; a
state of eternal life within one's own light. Self-conscious-
ness means the realization of one's own existence indepen-
dent of other things ; while relative consciousness means
the realization of one's own existence with reference to
the objects of one's perception. Unconsciousness in the
absolute is non-existence, a term without meaning ; while
relative unconsciousness means ignorance in regard to that
of which one does not know that it exists. Consciousness
means knowledge and life ; unconsciousness is ignorance
and death. An imperfect knowledge is a state of imperfect
consciousness in relation to the object of knowledge ; the
highest possible state of consciousness is the full realization
of the truth. Consciousness means existence. Non-con-
sciousness is non-existence, — ^nothing. Self-consciousness

IS7

Digitized by

Google

I5S RELATIVE CONSCIOUSNESS,

is self-existent, independent of any object. Relative exist-
ence is the consciousness of the relation between subject
and object.

A thing has no existence relatively to ourselves before
we become conscious of its existence. A person who does
not realize his own existence is unconscious, and for
the time being, to all practical purposes, as far as he him-
self is concerned, dead. A state of existence is incompre-
hensible unless it is experienced and realized, and it begins
to be from the moment that it is realized. If a person
were the legal possessor of millions of money and did not
know it, he would have no means to dispose of it or enjoy
it. A man may be present at the delivery of the most
eloquent speech, and, unless he hears what is said, that
speech will have no existence for him. Every man is
endowed with reason and conscience, but if he never listens
to its voice, the relation between him and his conscience
will cease to exist, and it will die for him in proportion as
he loses the power to hear it. Symbols have a meaning
to him who understands their meaning, but for the ignorant
nothing but the forms which he sees and feels exist ; theii
meaning has no existence for him.

A man may be alive and conscious in relation to one
thing, and dead and unconscious rein lively to another.
One set of his faculties may be active and conscious, while
another set may be unconscious and its activity suspended.
A person who listens attentively to music may be conscious
of nothing but sound ; one who is wrapt in the admiration
of form is only conscious of seeing ; another, who suffers
from pain, may be conscious of nothing but the relation
that exists between him and the sensation of pain. A man
absorbed in thought may believe himself alone in the midst
of a crowd. He may be threatened by destruction and be
unconscious of the danger. He may have the strength of
a lion, and it will avail him nothing unless he becomes
conscious of it; he cannot be immortal unless he becomes
conscious of immortal life. The more a person learns to
realize the true state of his existence, the more will he
become conscious of his existence. If he does not
realize his true position, illusions will be the result. If he
fully knows himself and his surroundings, he will be con-
scious of his own powers, he will know how to exercise
them and become strong.

Digitized by

Google

PERCEPTION. 159

To become conscious of the existence of a thing is to
perceive it To perceive it means to enter into relation
with it, and to feel the existence of that relation. Life itself
is a manifestation of consciousness ; motion is a manifest-
ation of life. A thing without consciousness of any kind
is unthinkable and could not exist. Even the most immov-
able mountains are states of mind, corporified eternal
thoughts, and as such they are expressions of consciousness*
They feel the power of gravitation, and speak through the
mouth of the echo. The body of our mother earth, although
devoid of self-consciousness and intellectual reasoning, is
nevertheless conscious of the presence of the sun, turning
with incredible velocity around its axis ; each of its parts
strives to receive the full influence of his light, and after
receiving his blessing gives way to another part to be
blessed likewise. Stars and planets, worlds and moleculesj
are attracted toward each other, all by the action of eternal
love, which could produce no reaction on absolute uncon«
sciousness if such a thing could exist.

Absolute self-consciousness belongs only to God. He
alone is self-existent and independent of any outside con-
ditions. He is self-sufficient, and needs nothing to excite
consciousness or knowledge in Him. Man's self-conscious-
ness, in so far as the realization of a divine presence has
not awakened within him, is as much an illusion on his
imaginary self-existence, because it is then not his true
real " I," but nature that has become self-conscious in
him ; producing that ever changing and impermanent sense
of the ego^ which appears from hour to hour and from day
to day chameleon-like under different attributes. This
artificially produced ego is a mere nothing, and one proof
of it is that the great majority of people continually re-
quire some stimulus to enable them to know that they
exist. If they are alone and without ** pastime" they
are miserable. If they are only in company with them-
selves, they are then in company with nothing. Without
an amusement of some kind they would become insane or
die.

But he, in whom the divine consciousness of his true
inner self has awakened, will require no external stimulus
to let him know that he lives. He may be shut up in a
prison or in a tomb, he carries his own light with him ; he
cares little for the company of men, if he is in company
T-ith his God

Digitized by

Google

l6o SLEEP.

Man is an organism, in which either God or nature, or
the antithesis of God, the devil, may become self-conscious.
If only nature is self-conscious in him, he has then no real
life or consciousness of his own. It is absurd of him to
speak of dying, because he has never yet come to life. If
God has become self-conscious in him, he will be one with
God, whose temple he is, If the self-consciousness of the
devil resides in his house, then is he a personal devil for
all practical purposes and intents.

From the moment that man becomes relatively conscious
of the existence of a spiritual power within his soul, he
enters into relationship to that power, he attains spiritual
consciousness ; but it may still be a long time until that
power becomes fully alive and self-conscious in him.

The vulgar have only the consciousness of the animal
within themselves. It is the hog in one that is given to
gluttony j the goat in another that is given to lewdness ;
tiie tiger in one that kills ; the snake in another that stings
by the power of calunmy ; the fox in another from which
he receives his cunning. They are houses which the master
has never inhabited, or which he has deserted, and which
are filled with animals. It is the animals that are living
and acting in them, the persons themselves have no life.

As everything that exists is of a threefold nature, so
there are three modes of perception : the physical percep-
tion, the perception of the soul, and the spiritual perception.
The former reaches the surface of things, the second the
soul, and the third reaches into their innermost centres.
To see is to think with the organ of sight. A thought sent
to the surface of the object of perception will see only the
surface ; a thought becoming conscious in the centre will
see that which exists at the centre.

Everything that exists, exists within the Universal Mind,
and nothing can exist beyond it, because the Universal
Mind includes all, and there is no " beyond." Percep-
tion is a faculty by which mind learns to know what is
going on within itself. Man can know nothing but what
exists within his own mind. Even the most ardent lover
has never seen his beloved one, he merely sees the image
which the form of the latter produces in his or her mind.

If we pass through the streets of a city the images of
men and women pass review in our mind while their bodies
meet our own ; but for the images which they produce

Digitized by

Google

INNER SENSES. l6l

within our consciousness, we would know nothing about
their existence. The images produced in the mind come to
the consciousness whose seat is the brain ; if man's con-
sciousness were centered in some other part of his body,
he would become conscious in that part of the sensations
which he receives. He might, for mstance, see with his
stomach or hear with his fingers, as has been actually the
case in some somnambulic states.

From the relations existing between object and subject,
physical senses came into existence. There could be no
perception without resistance. If our bodies were per-
fectly transparent to light we could not perceive the light,
because light cannot illuminate itself. The Astral Light
penetrates our bodies, but we are not able to see it with
our physical eyes, because the physical body offers no
resistance to it; but when the physical body begins to
sleep, and life retires from the outer into the inner man,
the astral man may become conscious of the existence of
that higher light, and see it like beautiful stars, or sheets of
light, resembling the electric light falling through a crystal
globe.

At the time when we fall asleep, consciousness gradually
leaves its seat in the brain and merges into the conscious-
ness of the '' inner manJ^ It may then begin to realize
another state of existence ; and if a part of die conscious-
ness still remain with the brain, the perception of the inner
consciousness may come to the cognizance of the lower
personal self. We may, therefore, in that half-conscious
state, between sleeping and waking, when our conscious-
ness is — so to say — oscillating between two states of exist-
ence, receive important revelations from the higher state
and retain them in the memory of the external self. The
more our consciousness merges in that higher state, the
better will we realize the higher existence, but the impres-
sions upon our personal self will become dim and perhaps
not be remembered ; but as long as the greatest part of
our consciousness is active within the material brain, the
perceptions of the higher state will only be dim and mixed
up with memories and sensations of the lower state of
existence ; the images will be confused.

When the turmoil of external life ceases and the external
senses come to rest, then is the time for the inner senses
to become more active, and then the neophyte may enjoy

6

Digitized by LjOOQiC

162 HAUNTED HOUSES.

communion with his master, the divine Adonai. Then
may he receive lessons from the world of the spirit, and
problems that were too difficult for him to be solved while
his external senses were fully alive may now become clear
to him in his " sleep," and even be remembered when he
'' awakens " again to external life.

The tranquillity of the outer senses facilitates the action
of the inner senses. It is said of Socrates, that he once
stood for eighteen hours immovable and absorbed in
thought ; but in the fully illuminated seer, the external and
internal consciousness are as one. Jacob Boehme was in
a state of divine illumination for three weeks, and followed
during that time his occupation as a shoemaker.

Life, sensation, perception and consciousness may be
withdrawn from the physical body and become active in
the astral body of man. The astral man may then become
conscious of his own existence independent of the physical
body, and develop his faculties of sense. He may then see
sights which have no existence for the physical eye, he
may hear sounds that the physical ear cannot hear, he may
feel, taste, and smell things whose existence the physical
senses cannot realize, and which consequently have no
existence to them.

What an astonishing sight would meet the eyes of a
mortal, if the veil that mercifully hides the astral world
from his sight were to be suddenly removed ! He would
see the space which he inhabits occupied by a different
world full of inhabitants, of whose existence he knew
nothing. What before appeared to him dense and solid
would now seem to be shadowy, and what seemed to him
like air space he would find peopled with life.

All houses are " haunted," but not all persons are equally
able to see the ghosts that haunt them, because to perceive
things on the astral plane requires the development of a
sense adapted to such perceptions. Thoughts are " ghosts,"
and only those that can see thoughts can see " ghosts,"
unless the latter are sufficiently materialized to refract the
light and to become visible to the eye.

Nor is it necessary that the person whose "ghost"
haunts a house should have died. There are many living
persons whose spirits haunt the houses which they formerly
inhabited. Each thought, expressed with a certain intensity
of will ; each curse and each blessing that comes from the

Digitized by

Google

SEEING IS FEELING. 163

heart, gives birth to a spirit that may haunt a place and
even produce external and visible effects under certain
conditions.

We may feel the presence of an astral form without
being able to see it, and be just as certain of its presence
as if we did behold it with our eyes ; for the sense of feel-
ing is not less reliable than the sense of sight. The pre-
sence of a holy, high, and exalted idea that enters the
mind fills it with a feeling of happiness, with an exhila-
rating influence whose vibrations may be perceived long
after that thought has gone.

Each human being may be looked upon as an unlimited
sphere of consciousness with a visible centre. Each
resembles a living nebula^ of which only the solid kernel
is visible. Visible man is not all there is of man ; but
surrounded by an invisible mental atmosphere, comparable
to the pulp surrounding the seed in a fruit ; but this light,
or atmosphere, or pulp, is the mind of man, an organized
ocean of spiritual substance, wherein all things exist. If
man were conscious of his own greatness, he would know
that within himself exists the sun and the moon and the
starry sky and every object in space, because his true self
is God and God is without limits.

To see a thing is identical with feeling it with the mind.
The mind of man extends through space ; it is therefore not
merely the images of things we see but the things them-
selves that exist within the periphery of our mind, however
distant from the centre of our consciousness they may be ;
and if we were able to shift that centre from one place to
another within the sphere of the mind, we might in a
moment of time approach to the object of our perception.

If you throw a handful of sand into a quiet lake, does
not every grain form a centre of motion upon the surface,
from whence proceed concentric waves in all directions ?
Can you tell where the realm of one such motion is limited,
and do they not all move in the same lake? Likewise each
individual being constitutes a centre of consciousness in
the sea of eternity, whose ripples of thought extend into
the depths of the infinite mind.

As it is, the centre of consciousness of normally con-
stituted man is located in the brain, and, if the mind feels
an object, the impressions have to travel all the way to the
brain. If we look at a distant star our mind is actually

Digitized by

Google

164 tRANSFER OF CONSCIOUSITESS.

there and in contact with it, and if we could transfer our
consciousness to that place of contact, we would be our-
selves upon that star and perceive the objects thereon as
if we were standing personally upon its surface.

If we were not able to feel with the mind, we would not
be able to become conscious of the character of the things
we see and whose qualities are invisible to us ; but the
individual spheres of beings enter and pervade each other
and exchange their sensations like the circular rings pro-
duced if a handful of pebbles is thrown into a lake.

Perception \s passive imagination, because if we perceive
an object, the relation which it bears to us comes to our
consciousness without any active exertion on our part
But there is an active perception or imagination hy which
we may enter into a relation with a distant object m space
by a transfer of consciousness. By this power we may act
upon a distant object if we succeed in forming a true image
of it in our own consciousness. By concentrating our
consciousness upon such an object we become conscious
in that place of the sphere of mind where that object exists.
Instead of perceiving an already existing relation we
establish consciously a relation between such an object and
ourselves. If I can form in my mind a true image of an
absent person, and clin^ to it with my will, I am then
identified in my mind with that person, and am actually
with him or her. My real " I " is everywhere, and wherever
I locate my consciousness, there am I consciously myself,
all except the physical form. How could I be nearer to a
friend than to be in perfect harmony with his soul, and
identified with him in his own consciousness?

Consciousness is existence, and there are as many states
of consciousness as there are states of existence. Every
living being has a consciousness of its own, the result of its
sensations, and the state of its consciousness changes every
moment of time, as fast as the impressions which it receives
change ; because its consciousness is the perception of the
relation it bears to things, and as this relation changes,
consciousness changes its character.

If our whole attention is taken up by animal pleasure, we
exist in an animal state of consciousness ; if we are aware
of the presence of spiritual principles, such as hope, faith,
charity, justice, truth, etc., in their highest aspects, we live
in our spiritual consciousness, and between the two

Digitized by

Google

SELF CONSCIOUSJ^ESS. i6$

extremes there are a great variety of gradations. Con-
sciousness itself does not change, it only moves up and
down on the scale of existence.

There is only one kind of consciousness which never
changes its form, because its relation to things never
changes, it being in relation with nothing except with
itself. It is the divine consciousness of existence per se,
the realization of the / am. It cannot change, because
existence /^r se never changes; its change would involve
non-existence or the annihilation of all.

When the Absolute One Life becomes relative in a form
the degree of its manifestation depends on the state of the
activity of life expressed in the organization of its form.
In a low organized form there may be sensation, but there
is no intelligence. An oyster has sensation and con-
sciousness, but no intelligence and no power of discrimin-
ation. A man may have a great deal of intellect and no
consciousness of the existence of spirituality, sublimity,
justice, beauty, or truth. If these divine principles have
become fully alive and self-conscious in him ; then, and
only then, is he in possession of Divine Wisdom,

The lowest existences follow implicidy the laws of nature
or of Universal Wisdom; they have no wisdom of their
own. The highest spiritual beings follow their own wisdom ;
but their wisdom is identical with the universal law. The
difference between the lowest beings and the highest ones
is, therefore, that the lowest ones perform the will of God
unconsciously and unknowingly \ while the highest ones
do the same thing knowingly and consciously. It is only
the intermediary beings between the lowest and highest
who imagine that they are their own law-givers, and may
do what they please.

The muscular system exercises its habitual movements
in the act of walking, eating, etc., without being especially
guided by a superintending intellect, like a clockwork
that, after being once set in motion, continues to run ; and
a man who is in the habit of doing that which is right and
just, will act in accordance with the law of justice instinct-
ively, and without any consideration or doubt.

Each state or existence has its own mode of perception,
sensation, instinct, consciousness and memory, and the
activity of one may overpower and suppress that of the
other. A person being only conscious of the sensations

Digitized by

Google

|66 WISDOM.

created by some physical act, is at that time unconscious
of spiritual attractions. One who is under the influence of
chloroform may lose all his external sensation of pain, and
yet be conscious of his surroundings. One in a state of
trance may be fully awake on a higher plane of existence,
and entirely unconscious of what happens on the physical
plane. The muscular system may be semi-conscious and
overpower the inteUect, or the conscious and intelligent
brain may control the muscular system.

A person may dimb up to the most dizzy heights of a
tower or a mountain peak, and if there is a rail or a stair-
case to afford him even an imaginary protection, he will
not be very liable to become overpowered by the sense of
danger. His intellect may be aware of danger, but reason
teaches the unreasoning animal man, filling the muscular
system with the sensation of security, and he will not be
very liable to fall. But if you remove the protection, the
sensation of danger presenting itself before the mind
impresses the unreasoning animal instincts with the over*
powering illusion of fear, and danger may become immi*
nent. The body becomes conscious of the attraction of
the chasm, the intellect too weak to guide the will to resist
the tendency of the excited body to follow that attraction,
and the person may fall

The unintelligent muscular system is conscious of
nothing else but the attraction of Earth. In it the element
of Earth predominates, and unless it is upheld by the
intellect and will, it seeks to act according to the impulse
created in it by that attraction. The astral body /^r se is
unintelligent, and unless infused with the intelligence
coming from the higher principles, it follows the attrac-
tions of the astral plane. These attractions are the
emotions created by desires. As the physical body, if
unguided by reason, may fall and jjerish by the fall, so the
astral body, following the attractions of love and hate»
may refuse to obey the intelligent principle of man, and
seek its own destruction. The animal consciousness of
man is that unreasoning brute instinct which impels him
to seek for the gratification of his natural desires.

Correctly speaking, there is no such thing as animal
reason, animal intellect, animal consciousness, etc Con-
sciousness, reason, intelligence, etc, in the absolute, have
no qualifications ; they are universal principles, that is to

Digitized by

Google

ATTRACTION. 167

say, functions of the Universal One Life, manifesting
themselves on various planes in mineral, vegetable, animal,
human, astral and transcendental forms.

The condition of a person whose consciousness is no
more illuminated by reason, is seen in cases of emotional
mania, and sometimes in cases of actual obsession. In
such cases the person will act entirely according to the
impulses acting upon his lower consciousness, and when
he recovers his reason, be entirely unconscious of his
actions during that state. Such states manifest themselves
in only one person, or they may simultaneously affect
several persons, and even whole countries, becoming ej)!-
demic by the law of induction, as has been experienced in
some wholesale " obsessions *' occurring during the Middle
Ages.* They are often observed in cases of hysteria, may
be witnessed at religious meetings, during theatrical per-
formances, during the attack upon an enemy, or at any
other occasion, where the passions of the multitude are
excited, inducing them to acts of folly or bravery, and
enabling people to perform acts which they would be
neither willing nor able to perform if they were guided
only by the calculations of their intellect.

Merely imaginary self-consciousness exist ; when thought
and will are divided. We then live in our imagi-
nation ; but the will is dormant and inactive. Only when
will and thought become united and act as one then will
true self-consciousness become manifest. The self-con-
scious will, receiving its light from thought, is a god or a
devil according to its tincture. In its full development it
is a power beyond the comprehension of normal man. It
enables its possessor to blend his own consciousness with
that of any other person, to enter into communication with
any other person in any part of the world, although that
other person may not become aware of his presence,
unless he has developed his own power of spiritual per-
ception to a certain extent. If we steadily concentrate
our thought upon a person or a place, the highest thought-
energies, residing in the fifth principle of man, will actually
visit that place, because thought is not bound by the laws
of gross matter regarding time and space, and we are able
to think of a far-off place as quick as of one that is near.

* ** Histoire des diables de Loudin."

Digitized by LjOOQiC

168 WILL AND THOUGH!.

Our thoughts go to the desired locality, for that locality,
however far it may be, is still within the sphere of mind!
If we have been there before, or if there is something to
attract us, it will not be difficult to find it. But under
ordinary circumstances our consciousness remains with
the body. We may even realize our presence at the place
which we visit, but on returning to our normal state we
cannot remember it, because the semi-material principles
of our soul, in which resides memory, have not been there
to collect impressions and transfer them to the physical
brain. But if our will has become one with our thought
so as to accompany the latter, then our consciousness may
go with them, being projected there by the power of the
will, and illuminated by thought We shall then visit the
chosen place consciously and know what we are doing, and
our astral elements may carry our memory back and im<
press them upon our physical brain. The reason why such
things sometimes take place at the time of death, and the
conscious appearance of the dying person occurs at a
distant place, to visit a friend, is because at the time of
dying the will becomes again free and unites with the
thought of the person, thus forming a veritable spirit, a
union of will and thought.

It sometimes happens that the '' double " of a sleeping
person is attracted to a distant place ; acting, however,
like an automaton, without intelligence. This simply shows
that the will of the person was not set free. His thought
was there, but not his conscious will ; nor could the will
leave the sleeping body of a person that has not become
sufficiently spiritual, because the will is the life^ and if it
were to leave the form the body would die.

There are a great number of cases on record where,
in consequence of a sudden and intense emotion, for
instance, the desire to see a certain person, the will has
become prominently active, and projecting itself from the
physical body has rendered the thought of the person con-
scious and visible at a distance. In cases of home-sickness
we find some approach to an instance of this. The person
separated from home and friends, having an intense yearn-
ing to see his native place again, projects his thoughts and
his unconscious will to that place. He lives — so to say —
spiritually in that place, while his physical body vegetates
in another. The lUe-elements pass more and more to these

Digitized by

Google

iNTOXrCATTOJ^. 169

astral elements at the expense of the life-elements necessary
to supply the wants of Uie physical body. There seem to
be nothing particularly important the matter with the
patient, he has a little fever, becomes weaker, and finally
dies — that is to say, he goes where he desires to go,
although his gradual going is imperceptible and unrecogniz-
able to physical senses.

Sometimes in cases of sickness a similar process takes
place. When, from whatever cause, the union between the
physical form and the astral body becomes weakened, the
astral form may separate itself for a while or permanently
from the physical form and follow a stronger attraction, and
in such cases it may be seen by persons gifted with second
sight.

The s3rmptoms of such a beginning of separation may
often be observed in cases of severe sickness, when the
patient has the sensation as if another person were lying in
the same bed with him, and as if that person were in some
way connected with him, and he would have to take care
of the latter. As recovery takes place, the principles
whose cohesion has been loosened become reunited, and
that sensation disappears.

A higher state of consciousness than that of the normal
state is often observed in cases of trance and somnambu-
lism ; a lower state than the normal one is witnessed in
cases of drunkenness or intoxication of some kind.

A case is cited in Dr. Hammond's book on insanity, in
which a servant, while in a state of intoxication, carried a
package with which he had been entrusted to the wrong
house. Having become sober, he could not remember the
place, and the package was supposed to be lost ; but after
he got drunk again he remembered the place, he went
there and recovered the package. This goes to show that
when he was drunk he was another person than when he
was sober ; man's individuality continually changes accord-
ins to the conditions in which he exists, and as his con-
sciousness changes he becomes another individual, although
he still retains the same outward form. Instead of getting
drunk a man may become full of the wine of the spirit In
that case he may, while in that state, write down very high
and exalted ideas, which he may not fully remember after
his return to his normal state, and perhaps he may then not
even understand his own writings.

Digitized by

Google

I70 TRANCE.

If a person is in the hypnotic state, subject to the wiH
'' magnetizer," it is the consciousness of the latter
which takes possession of the former, and uses his mental
organism as if it were his own. If a hypnotizer causes his
subject to commit a crime, it is he who commits it through
the instrumentality of the hypnotized ; if a medium lies, it
is the lying thoughts of him who consults the medium that
are echoed back through the latter, nor could he be a
genuine medium if he did not reflect lies as well as the
truth.

All men are mirrors, in which the world is reflected ; all
men are mirrors reflecting each other's thoughts and
acting them out. Experience shows, that there is not a
day in the year that not some hypnotizer consciously or un-
consciously commits a crime through another person ; and
while the real culprit goes scot free, the weak-minded
instrument is punished. Thousands of marriages are the
outcome of '^ hypnotization.'' Man exists as an individual
only as long as he is in possession of divine reason, and
this reason is not an attribute of the human form, but a
function of the divine Spirit which illuminates it.

In the state of trance the consciousness is entirely con-
centrated on the higher planes, and the mind may even
forget the existence of the physical body. In the state of
intoxication the person may only be conscious of his animal
existence and entirely unconscious of his higher self. A
somnambule in the lucid condition looks upon her body as
a being distinct from her own self, who is, to a certain ex-
tent, under her care. She speaks of that being in the third
person, prescribes sometimes for it as a physician prescribes
for his patient, and often shows tastes, inclinations and
opinions entirely opposed to those which she possesses in
her normal condition. Somnambules often give promises
which they fulfil when they return to their normal condi-
tion, although, when they awake, they do not remember of
ever having made any promise at all.

If man's consciousness changes from one state to another,
his tastes and inclinations change accordingly. While his
thoughts revel in animal pleasures, the realm of the spirit
will be closed to him, nor will he desire to enter it ; if he
has once attained the power to perceive the things of the
spirit, animal pleasures and the knowledge of which terres-
trial science is proud will appear absolutely worthless to

Digitized by

Google

THE HIGHEST STA TE. 171

him. Persons while in a trance may love another person
intensely, because they are then capable to perceive his
interior qualities, and they may detest him when they are in
their normal condition, because they then merely behold
his external attributes.*

This higher self, which often seems to care so little for
the earthly troubles that vex and perplex the lower self, is
the real man, who continues to live when the body of the
person with which he is connected during life no longer
exists. It is the individual which, through a long chain of
reincarnations, has become connected with many person-
alities, extracting from each the elements which are worthy
to be preserved, and assimilating them with his own. Only
few persons mentioned in history have succeeded in uniting
their personality with their own divine and impersonal
Atma. Such that have succeeded are the truly enlightened,
and require no more incarnations.

The highest state of spiritual consciousness is the full
and complete realization of divine truth. Even while
physical consciousness is active the consciousness of the
higher principles may be so exalted as to render the body
little conscious of pain. History speaks of men and
women whose souls rejoiced while their earthly tabernacles
were undergoing the tortures of the rack, or were devoured
by flames at the stake.

Man leads essentially two lives, one while he is fully
awake, another while he is fully asleep. Each has its own
perceptions, consciousness and experiences, but the ex-
periences of that state, called "deep sleep," are not
remembered when we are fully " awake." At the border-
land between sleep and waking, where the impressions of
each state meet and mingle, is the realm of confused
dreams, which are usually remembered, and seldom con-
tain any truth.

This state is, however, favorable to receive impressions
from the higher self, or to see the pictures existing in the
astral light. In the former case the higher self may use
symbolical forms and allegorical images to convey ideas
to the lower self, and to give it admonitions, forebodings,
and warnings in regard to future events ; in the latter case
faces and forms of persons that previously occupied the

H. Zschokke : << Verklaerungen " (Transfigurations).

Digitized by LjOOQiC

ITS DREAMS.

room of the sleeper may be seen, or his mind may wandti
to scenes to which he is unconsciously attracted.

There are, however, various kinds of dreams, and it
would be wrong to deny that some of them may not be
useful. The higher self may make use of the impressi«
bility of the lower self during the time of half-conscious
slumber to impress it with useful visions and warn it of
danger, and to teach it lessons which the lower self wouki
not be able to understand while his physical senses are fully
active and the voice of intuition drowned in the noise of
die struggle produced by the contending emotions. Many
a difficult problem has been solved during sleep, and the
terrestrial world is not always without any reflex of the
light from above. The mind of the sleeper during the
sleep of the body may come into contact with other minds,
and pass through experiences which he does not remember
when he awakes. Man, in his waking condition, often
has experiences which he afterwards does not remember,
but which he, nevertheless, enjoyed at the time when they
occurred, and which at that time were real to him.*

* Man bfls not only a doable conscioasness, bat he leads two Utbs
which are separate and yet one. Each of these lives has its own
experiences, and if while in one state we do not remember the
experiences of the other state, this does not disprove the trath of oar
assertion. A man may live and UDdergo certain experiences in a certain
place, while his body is asleep, or unconscious, or half-conscious in
another place ; and if the physical body returns to its normal state, it
may or may not remember what happened to him while he was in the
other state. But there are some exceptional cases, in which the con-
sciousness of both states may become blended, and then the person may
remember where he had been and what he had been doing while in that
other case. One of such extraordinary cases is mentioned in A. P,
Sifmetfs *^ Incidents in the Life of Madame Blavatsky." Speaking of
her sickness in T$/lii» Madame Blavatsky says, that she had the sensation
as if she were two difierent persons* one being the Madame Blavatsky
whose body was lying sick in bed, the other person an entirely different
and superior being. '< When I was in my lower state,** she says, ** I
knew who that other person was and what she (or he) had been doing ;
but when I was that other being myself, I did not know nor care who
was that Madame Blavatsky." It is therefore very well possible that
Madame Blavatsky's ** transcendental £gv," with all its consciousness,
Acuities, and powers of perception, in fact, her reai se/f, was consciously
and really undergoing certain mysterious experiences in Tibet, while
the physical instrument, which we call *< Madame Blavatsky," was sidt
at llflis ; but such an explanation will be mcomprehensible to those
persons who imagine the physical body of a person to be the whole cl

Digitized by

Google

DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS. 173

A mixture of the various states of sensations and per-
ceptions produces the normal consciousness of man. Man
feels in himself at least two sets of attractions that come
to his consciousness, the " earthly " and the " fiery " ele-
ments. One set drags him down to earth and makes him
cling with a firm grasp to material necessities and enjoy-
ments, the other set, lifting him up into the region of the
unknown, makes him forget the allurements of matter, and
by bringing him nearer to the realm of abstract ideas ol
the good, the true, and the beautiful, gives him satisfaction
and happiness. The greatest poets and philosophers have
recognized this fact of double consciousness, or the two
poles of one, and between those two poles ebbs and floods
the normal consciousness of the average human being.

Goethe expresses this in his '' Faust" in about the fot
lowing terms : —

'< Two sonls, alas I are conscious in my breaatt
Each from the other tries to separate.
One clings to earth, attracted by desirei
The other rises upward," etc*

One attraction arises from Spirit, another from matter.
By the power of Reason Man is enabled to choose which
way he will follow, and by the power of his Will he is
enabled to follow his choice. He may concentrate his
consciousness entirely on the lower plane, and sinking into
sensuality, become entirely unconscious of the existence of
higher aspirations, or he may live entirely in the higher
planes of thought and feeling, grow to realize fully the
beauties, realities, and truths of the spirit, and become dead
to the attractions of matter. A self-centered and narrow-

his person, and his physical form to be his own real self. Only whea
the relations existing between the higher and lower self will be (blly
understood by our would-be philosophers will their eyes become
opened to a realization of the truth that man's phenomenal terrestrial
self is nothing else but a temporary illusion, a bundle of ever-changing
powers and principles held together by the power of the divine Spirit,
and endowed by the latter with the faculty to perceive, to think, to will
and to remember ; a fleeting cloud of living matter, illuminated for the
time being by the light of the spirit^ a mere instrument through which
impersonal forces act ; while the real self of man exists in another region
of thought, and is known only to those who are passing through the
process of spiritual regeneration.

Digitized by

Google

174 REASON.

minded man may have his consciousness narrowed down
to a small sphere ; a great and liberal mind may expand it
without any limits, until the whole of space will appear to
him to be filled with his own consciousness, and his power
of perception will enable him to penetrate ail the mysteries
in Nature. Few may be able to reach such a state^ and
few will be able to comprehend its possibility ; but there
have been men who, on the threshold of Nirwana, were
able to concentrate the powers of their minds in centres
beyond the attraction of earth, and while their physical
bodies continued to live on this planet, the divine self,
leaving its human form, could consciously roam through
the interplanetary spaces and see the wonders of the
material and spiritual worlds. This is the highest form of
Adeptship attainable on earth, and to him who accomplishes
it the mysteries of the Universe will be like an open
book.

Every man and woman, however, can feel within their
souls the presence of the divine Spirit, even if they cannot
yet see its light. This is the beginning of that true spirit-
ual consciousness, to which we should cling at all times and
which finds its expression in the adoration of the highest
good. Still such states are yet far from spiritual self-
consciousness, which is a full realization of individual
existence within the spiritual realm, and as such is known
only to few. Even the most devout worshipper, as long
as the divine Spirit has not awakened within his soul, will
merely feel the beauties of the spiritual realm in the same
sense as a blind man may enjoy the warm rays of the
sunshine without being able to see the light \ only when
the process of spiritual regeneration has fairly begun will
he be able to see the sun of glory within his own soul, and
the illusive self-consciousness of his former state which
caused him to believe that he was a permanent being, will
be transformed into that real self-conscious state in which
he becomes self-luminous in the light of the Truth, a state
in which man actually knows that he exists as an eternal,
self-existent and immortal power in God.

Digitized by

Google

rt

CHAPTER VIII.

DEATH.

^< Omne bonmn a Deo^ imperfectum a I>isLheL]oJ'^^Paracelsus.

Consciousness is knowledge and life ; unconsciousness is
ignorance and death. If we are conscious of the existence
of a thing, a relation exists between ourselves and that
thing. If we are unconscious of its existence, neither we
nor that object ceases to exist, but there is no relation
between us. As soon as we begin to realize that relation,
the character of the object perceived in the sphere of our
mind becomes a part of our mental constitution, and we
begin to /iv^ in relation to it. We then possess it in our
consciousness. If we lose its possession, we may regain it
by the power of recollection and memory. To know an
object is to live relatively to it, to forget it is to die in
relation to it.

Unconsciousness, ignorance and death are, therefore,
synonymous terms, and every one is dead in proportion as
he is ignorant. If he is ignorant of a fact, he is dead
relatively to it, although he may be fully alive in many
other respects. We cannot be conscious of everything at
once, and, therefore, as our impressions and thoughts
change, our consciousness and relation to certain things
change, and we continually die relatively to some things
and begin to live relatively to others. Relative death and
unconsciousness occurs every moment, and we are not
aware of its occurrence. We meet hundreds of corpses in
the streets, which are entirely dead and unconscious in
regard to certain things of which we are conscious, and
relatively to which we are alive ; and we may be dead in

Digitized by

Google

lyd PROLONGING LIFE.

regard to many things to which others are alive and conr
saoos. Only simultaneously occurring omniscience m
regard to everything that exists would be absolute life
without an^ admixture of death.

Each prmciple in man has a certain sphere of conscious-
ness, and its perceptions can only extend to the limits of
that sphere. £ach is dead to such modes of activity as
are in no relation with it. Minerals are unconscious of
the action of intelligence, but not of the attraction of Earth;
spirit is dead to earthly attraction, but not to spiritual
principles. If we can change the mode of activity in a
form, we call into existence a new state of consciousness,
because we establish new relations of a different order ;
the old activity then dies and a new one begins to live.

If the energy which we are now using for the purpose
of digesting food, for performing intellectual labor and
for enjoying sensual pleasures, were used for the purpose
of developing spirituality, we would be in a comparatively
short time rewarded for our labor by becoming superior
beings, of a state so far above our present condition, that
we can at present not even conceive of it.

In the constitution of average man life is especially active
in the animal body, and he clings to the life of that body
as if it were the only possible mode of existence. He
knows of no other mode of life, and is afraid to die. A
person whose centre of life and consciousness is in his
astral body will be conscious of another existence, and his
physical body will be only so far of value to him, as by its
instrumentality he may act on the physical plane.
Physical death is a continuation of the activity of life in
higher principles. If we, by some occult process, could
concentrate all our life into our higher principles before
our body ceases to live, we might step in advance of death
and live independent of our physical body.

Such a transfer of life and consciousness is not beyond
possibility. It has been accomplished by some, and will
be accomplished by others. The material elements of the
physical body are continually subject to elimination and
renewal. By restricting the renewal of these elements
within the limits of the utmost necessity, and at the same
time withdrawing our consciousness from the exterior and
concentrating it upon the interior plane, we may, in course
of time, change the compound parts of the physical body

Digitized by

Google

SEPARA TION OF PRINCIPLES. 177

into more ethereal ones, until its physical molecules become
entirely replaced by finer elements belonging to the astral
plane, when its organization will require no more food
from the physical plane, and become invisible to the
physical eye.* It would, however, be absurd to suppose
that immortality could be obtained by means of gymnastic
exercises and semi-starvation and without an awakening of
tiie inner life. If the divine life awakens in man, the
grossly animal elements in his constitution will die and
disappear without any external aid.

No one would be willing to look upon such a change
as deaihy and yet it would be nothing else but a mode of
dying slow as far as the physical body is concerned, while
at the same time it is a resurrection of the real man into a
superior form of existence. Death — ^whether slow or

Slick — is nothing but a process of purification, by which
e imperfect is eliminated and rendered unconscious.
Nothing perishes but that which is not able to live.
Principles cannot die, only their forms disappear.

Only that which is perfect can remain without being
changed. Truth, wisdom, justice, beauty, goodness, etc.,
cannot be changed ; it is merely the forms in which they
become manifest that can be destroyed. If all the wise
men in the world were to die in one moment, the principle
of Wisdom would nevertheless exist, and manifest itself
in due time in other receptive forms ; if Love were to leave
the hearts of all human beings, it would thereby not be
annihilated, it would merely cease to exist relatively
to men, and men would cease to live while love would
continue to be. Eternal principles are self-existent, and
therefore independent of forms, and not subject to change ;
but forms are changeable, and cannot continue without
the presence of the principles whose instruments for
manifestation they represent.

The human body is an instrument for the manifestation
of life, the soul is an instrument for the manifestation of
spirit. If the life leaves the body, the latter begins to
disintegrate ; if the spirit leaves the soul, the latter begins
to dissolve. A person in whom the spiritual principle has
become entirely inactive is spiritually dead, although his
body may be full of life and his soul full of animal desires.

• Thi ThMS9pkut: <<£ludr oflife."

Digitized by LjOOQIC

178 GOD IS IMMORTAL.

Such spiritless living corpses are often seen in fashionable
society as well as in the crowds where the vulgar assemble.
A person in whom the principle of reason has become
inactive is intellectually dead, although his body may be
full of animal life ; lunatics are dead people, in whom only
the non-intellectual or semi-intellectual principles con-
tinue to live. If the soul leaves the body, the latter dies
but the soul lives. If the soul dies, God continues to
be.

The soul, like the body, is a compound organism, com-
posed of various elements. Some of these elements may
be fit to receive the Light of the spirit, others are not fit
to do so. If, therefore, a person, during his earthly life
has not purified his soul sufficiently so as to enter the
spiritual state immediately after the death of the physical
body, a separation of the pure and impure elements from
the still impure remains must take place in the state after
death. When the final separation is accomplished, the
spiritual elements enter the spiritual state (which, in fact,
they have never left) ; and the lower elements, which may
or may not possess a certain remnant of consciousness of
their own, remain in the lower plane, where they gradually
disintegrate.

If the organization of the physical body becomes im*.
paired to such an extent that the principle of life cannot
employ it any longer to serve as an instrument for its
activity, it ceases to act. Death may begin at the head,
the heart, or the lungs, but life lingers longest in the head,
and it may still be active there to a certain extent after
the body, to all exterior appearances, has become uncon-
scious and ceased to live. The power of thought may
continue for a time to work in its habitual manner, although
sensation has ceased to exist in the nerves. This activity
may even grow in intensity as the principles become
disunited ; and if the thought of the dying is instensely
directed upon an absent friend, it may impress itself upon
the consciousness of that fi iend, and perhaps cause him to
see the apparition of the dyiiig. At last vitality leaves the
brain, and the higher prmciples depart, carrying with them
their proper activity, life and consciousness, leaving
behind an empty form, a mask, an illusion. There need
not necessarily be any loss of consciousness in regard to
the persons and things by which we may be surrounded '

Digitized by

Google

PROCESS OF DYING. 179

the only consciousness which necessarily ceases is that
which refers to his personality, of physical sensation, pain,
weight, heat and cold, hunger and thirst, which may have
affected the physical form. As his life departs from the
brain, another state of consciousness may come into
existence, because he enters in relation to a different order
of things. "The principle, carrying memory, emerges
from the brain, and every event of the life which is ebbing
away is reviewed by the mind. Picture after picture
presents itself with living vividness before his consciousness
and he lives in a few minutes his whole life again.
Persons in a state of drowning have experienced that state
and regained their life. That impression which has been
the strongest, survives all the rest ; the other impressions
disappear to reappear again in the d^vachanic state. No
man dies unconscious, whatever external appearances may
seem to indicate to the contrary ; even a madman will
have a moment, at the time of his death, when his intellect
will be restored. Those who are present at such solemn
moments should take care not to disturb, by outbursts of
grief or otherwise, that process by which the soul beholds
die effects of the past and lays the plan for its future
existence."*

The process of the parting of the perisprit from the
physical remains is described by a clairvoyant as follows :
— " At first I saw a beautiful light of a pale blue color, in
which appeared a small egg-shaped substance about three
feet above the head. It was not stationary, but wavered
to and fro like a balloon in the air. Gradually it elongated
to the length of the body, the whole enveloped in a mist or
smoke. I perceived a face corresponding in features to
that which was so soon to be soulless, only brighter, more
smooth, more beautiful, yet unfinished, with the same want
of expression that we observe in a new-bom infant. With
every breath from the dying body the ethereal form was
added to and became more perfect. Presently the feet
became defined, not side by side, as the dying man had
placed himself, but one hanging below the other, and one
knee bent, as new-born infants would be in an accidental
position. The body appeared to be enshrouded in a
cloudlike mist A countless host of other presences

* Extracted firom the ktter of an Adept

Digitized by LjOOQiC

189 7 HE PERISPRIT.

seemed to be near. When the whole was completei aB
slowly passed out of si^ht." *

This ethereal body is the soul-body ox perisprit of the
person that died. It is not the spirit itself, but it may
still be made luminous by the spirit, as it was during life.
It may still contain the good and evil tendencies which it
acquired during life. If man's spirit rises above the
attractions of his lower self, his lower self would be uncon-
scious and desintegrate ; but if he clings to his animal nature
with a great intensity of desire, a centre of consciousness
will become established therein, and its sense of personality
may continue to exist for a while in his animal soul even
after the physical body is dead.

The time during which an astral corpse may remain in
this state before it is entirely dissolved depends on the
density and strength of its elements. It may differ from a
few hours or days to a great many years. Man is made
up of a great many living elements or principles, of which
each one exists in its own individual state while they all
receive their life from the spirit. When the spirit with-
draws they become separate, while each one may retain
for a while its own particular life and consciousness in the
same sense as a wheel which is once set into motion will
continue to run until after the force is exhausted, even if
the original motive power is withdrawn.

The astral remnant of a man is, therefore, not the man,
but a part of his psychic organism, which may or may not
be conscious that it exists, and which may or may not be
connected with the spiritual monad whose instrument it
was during life.

This Kama loca state is the " land of the shadows," the
Hades of the ancient Greeks, and the " purgatory " of the
Koman Catholic Church. Its inhabitants mayor may not
possess consciousness and intelligence, but the astral souls
of average honest men and women possess no intelligence
of their own ; they can, however, be made to act intelli-
gently by the power of the Elementals. Paracelsus
says: — "Men and women die every day, whose souls
during their lives have been subject to the influence and
guidance of Elementals. How much easier will it be for
such Elementals to influence the sidereal bodies of such

A. J. Davis describes a similar scene.

' Digitized by LjOOQiC

PURGATORY. l8t

persons and to make them act as they please, after their
souls have lost the protection which their physical bodies
afforded I They may use these soul-bodies to move phy-
sical objects from place to place, to carry such objects
from distant countries, and to perform other feats of a
similar kind that may appear miraculous to the unin-
itiated."

The state of consciousness of the animal soul after the
physical form has become unconscious and lifeless may,
therefore, differ widely in different persons, according to
the conditions that have been established during its con-
nection with the body. The soul of an average person in
Kama loca with only moderate selfish desires is not con-
scious and intelligent enough to know that its physical
body has died, and that it is itself imdergoing the process
of disintegration ; but the soul of a person whose whole
consciousness was intensely centred in self may be con-
scious and intelligent enough to remember its past life and
to feel its impending fate. Seeking to prolong its existence
it may cling for protection to the organism of some living
being, and thereby cause an obsession. Not only weak-
minded human beings but also animals may be subject to
such an obsession.

To a body without sensation or consciousness it can
make no difference under what conditions it may continue
to exist or perish, because it cannot realize its existence ;
but to a soul in which the spark of divine intelligence
has kindled consciousness and sensation, its surrounding
conditions will be of importance, because it can realize
them more or less fully according to the degree of its con-
sciousness. Such surroundings, in the state after death,
each man creates for himself during life by his thoughts,
his words, and his acts. Man is creating all his life the
condition wherein he will live in the hereafter.

Thought is material and solid to those that live on the
plane of thought. Even on the physical plane every form
that exists is materialized thought, grown or made into a
form; the world of the souls is a world in which thought itself
appears material and solid to those who exist in that world.
Man is a centre from which continually thought is evolved,
and crystallizes into forms in that world. His thoughts
are things that have life and form and tenacity; real
entities, solid and more enduring than the forms of the

Digitized by

Google

i»a HELLS.

physical plane. Good thoughts are light and rise above
us, but evil thoughts are heavy and sink. The world
below us to which they sink is the sphere of the grossest,
most diseased, and sensual thoughts evolved by evil-dis*
posed and ignorant men. It is a world still more material
and solid to its inhabitants than ours is to us ; it is the
habitation of man-created personal deities, devils, and
monstrosities invented by the morbid imagination of
man.

They are only the products of thought, but, nevertheless,
they are real and substantial to those who live among them
and realize their existence. The myths of hell and purga-
tory are based on ill-understood facts. '* Hells '' exist, but
man is himself their creator. Brutal man creates monsters
by the working of his diseased imagination during life ;
disembodied man will be attracted to his creations. There
are few persons who are not subject to evil thoughts ; such
thoughts are the reflex of the lurid light from the region of
evil, but they cannot take form unless we give them form
by dwelling on them and feeding them with the substance
taken from our own mind. Love is the life of the good,
malice the life of the evil. An evil thought, evolved
unconsciously, is an illusion without life ; an evil thought,
brought into existence with malice, becomes malicious and
living. If it is embodied in an act, a new devil will be
born into the world. The horrors of hell exist only for
those who have been conscious, voluntary, and malicious
colaborers in peopling it with the products of their fancy ;
the beaudes of heaven are only realized by him who has
created a heaven within himself during his life.

Pain is only caused if a being exists under abnormal
conditions. Devils do not suffer in hell, because they are
there in their own natural element ; they would suffer if
they had to enter in heaven. They belong to the darkness
and suffer in the presence of light. A man suffers if his
head is kept under water ; a fish suffers if he is taken out
of the water. A cruel and vicious person may enjoy sights
which will horrify others ; but if he still has some good
elements within his organization, they will suffer until they
have become separated from evil. If there are spiritual
powers for good, there must be spiritual powers for evil ;
for Evil is merely perverted Good. If man is a temple of
God, he may likewise be a residence for the DeviL If

Digitized by

Google

DEVILS. 1S3

man has a spirit^ that spirit can enter into relations with
either of the two states ; but for a spiritless man, an animal,
neither God nor the Devil has any use ; nor can the highest
Dhyan Chahan of evil exert any power over a man unless
that man has already a devil in him.

We can only be conscious of the existence of things, if
a relation exists between ourselves and the things. A
person who has created nothing during life that could
have established a relationship with his immortal self will
have nothing immortal with which to enter into relationship
with after death. If his whole attention is taken up by his
physical wants, the sphere of his consciousness during life
will be confined to those material wants. When he leaves
his material habitation material wants will no longer exist
for him, and his consciousness of them ceases. Having
created nothing in his soul that can enter into relation with
spirit, his soul will neither lose that which it never possessed
nor gain that which it never desired, but remain a blank.
If we hire a priest or a professor to do our thinking for us,
we create no spiritual aspirations or living thoughts for
ourselves. If we are contented to believe the opinions of
others, we have no knowledge of our own. The artificial
knowledge which has thus been created by the reflection
of the thought of others on the mirror of the individual
mind has no power of penetration. Those minds which
have been fed on illusions will have no substance after the
illusions have passed away. The only knowledge which
can remain with the spirit is that which it knows itself.

Every cause is followed by an effect. Illusions that
have been created in the mind are forces that must become
exhausted before they can die. They will continue to act
in the subjective state and produce other illusions by the
law of harmony that governs the association of ideas, and
all illusions will end in the sphere to which they belong.
Selfish desires will end in the sphere of self, unselfish
aspirations and thoughts will bring their own rewards if
they were good, and their own punishment if they were
evil. Life is a continual death or exchange of conditions
under which we exist Our desires for things change as
the conditions under which we exist assume a different
character. Before we are bom our state of life depends
on the state of the mother's womb ; but having been bom
into the world, we care nothing more for the placenta and

Digitized by

Google

184 EXHAUSTION OF ENERGIES.

membranes that furnished us with nutriment and life during
our foetal existence. Being infants, our interests are
centred upon the breasts of the mother, but these breasts
are forgotten after we need them no more. Things which
absorbed the whole of our consciousness during our youth
are discarded as we grow older. If we throw off the phy-
sical body, the desire for that which was attractive to it
and important for its existence is thrown off with it, or
perishes soon afterwards.

But if the soul again approaches the material plane, and
through the influences of mediumship again enters into
relationship with it, the old consciousness and the old
desires, that had gone to sleep, reawaken, and its physical
sensations return. If the influence of the medium is with-
drawn, it relapses in its state of stupor or unconsciousness.

There are innumerable varieties of conditions and pos-
sibilities in the world of spirit and on the astral plane, as
there are upon the physical plane. If the mind begins to
investigate these things separately, and without undel^
standing the fundamental laws of nature upon which
such phenomena are based, it may as well despair of ever
being able to form a correct conception of them. If a
botanist were to examine separately each one of the thou-
sands of leaves of a large tree, for the purpose of finding
out the true nature of the latter, he would never arrive at
an end ; but if he once knows the tree as a whole, the color
and shape of the individual leaves will be easily known.
Likewise, if we once arrive at a correct conception of the
spiritual nature of man, it will be easy to follow the various
ramifications of the one universal law.

There is no death for that which is perfect, but the imr
perfect must perish sooner or later. So-called death is
simply a process of elimination of that which is useless. In
this sense we all are continually dying every day, and even
wishing to die, because every reasonable person desires
to get rid of his imperfections and their consequences and
the sufferings which they cause. No one is afraid to lose
that which he does not want, and if he clings to that which
is useless, it is because he is unconscious and ignorant of
that which is useful. In such a case he is already partly
dead to that which is good, and must come to life and learn
to realize that which is useful, by dying to that which is
usefulness. This is the so-called mystic deaths by which

Digitized by

Google

THE MYSTIC DEATH. 185

the enlightened come to life, which involves the uncon-
sciousness of worthless and earthly desires and passions,
and establishes a consciousness of that which is immortal
and true. The reason why men and women are sometimes
afraid to die is because they mistake the low for the high,
and prefer material illusions to spiritual truths. There is
no death for the perfect, and he who is imperfect must
throw away his imperfectness, so that that which is per-
fect in him may become conscious and live. This mystic
death is recommended by the wise as being the supreme
remedy against real death. This mystic death is identical
with a spiritual regeneration.*

Hermes Trismegistus says : " Happy is he whose vices
die before him ; " and the great teacher Thomas de Kempis
writes : " Learn to die now to the world " (to the attractions
of matter), " so that you may begin to live with Christ "

A person whose vices have died during his earthly life
does not need to die s^ain during his life as a soul. His
sidereal body will dissolve like a silver cloud, being
unconscious of any desires for that which is low, and his
spirit will be fully conscious of that which is beautiful,
harmonious, and true ; but he, whose conscience is centred
in the passions that have raged in his soul during life,
can realize nothing higher than that which was the highest
to him during his life, and cannot gain any other conscious-
ness by the process of death. Physical death is no gain,
it cannot give us that which we do not already possess.
Unconsciousness cannot confer consciousness, ignorance
cannot give knowledge. By the mystic death we arrive at
life and consciousness, knowledge and happiness, because
the awaking of the higher elements to life implies the death
of that which is useless and low. ** Neither circumcision
nor uncircumcision availeth, but a new creature." f

There are Esprit s sou/rants^ our suffering souls. They
are the " revenants '* or " restants," the astral bodies of
victims of premature death, whose physical forms have
perished before their spirits became ripe enough to separate
from the soul. They remain within the attraction of the
Earth until the time arrives that should have been the

•Johniii. 3,
tGola. vi. 15.

Digitized by

Google

i86 SUICIDES.

termination of their physical lives according to the law of
their Karma. They are under normal conditions, not
fully conscious of the conditions in which they exist ; but
they may be temporarily stimulated into life by the influence
of mediumship. Then will their half-forgotten desires and
memories return and cause them to suffer. To rouse such
existences from their stupor into a realization of pain for
the purpose of gratifying idle curiosity is cruel, and may
be very injurious to such souls, as it may reawaken their
thirst for liife and for the gratification of earthly desires.

The soul of the sane suicide, however, or that of a mali*
clous person,may be fully conscious and realize the situation
in which it is placed. Such existences may wander about
earth, clinging to material life, and vainly trying to escape
the dissolution by which they are threatened. Partly
bereft of reason, and following their animal instincts, they
may become Incubi and Succubi^ Vampires stealing life
from the living to prolong their own existence, regardless
of the fate of their victims. The soul-bodies of the dead
may be either unconsciously or consciously attracted to
mediums for the purpose of communicating with the living.
By using the astral emanations of the medium they may
become materialized, and be rendered visible and tangible,
and appear like the deceased person himself. But if a
deceased person was in possession of high aspirations and
virtues, his soul-corpse will not actually be the actual entity
which it represents, although it may act in every respect
as the person whose mask it wears. If we blow into a
trumpet it will give the sound of a tnunpet and no other.
The soul-corpse of a good person, if infused artificially
with life, will produce the thoughts it used to produce
during life ; but there will be no more of the identity of
that person in the corpse than there is the identity of a
friend in the wire of a telephone, if we recognize his voice
and manner of expression through such a wire.

The revelations made by such " spirits " are only the
echoes of their former thourjhts, or of thoughts impressed
upon them by the living, as a mirror reflects the faces of
those that stand before it. They do not give us a true
description of the spirit's condition in the world of souls,
because he is himself ignorant of that condition. At the
time when Plato was living, such souls returned, giving
descriptions of Hades and of the deities that were believed

Digitized by

Google

SPIRIT MANIFEST A TIONS. 187

to exist in that place. At the present day the souls of
Roman Catholics will return and ask for masses to be
relieved from purgatory, while the Protestants refuse to be
benefited by the ceremonies of the Catholic Church. The
souls of dead Hindus ask sometimes for the performance
of sacrifices to their gods, and every " spirit " appears to
be domineered by those ideas in which he believed during
his life. The discrepancy in their reports prove that their
tales are usually only the products of the imagination of
the irrational soul.

If man has a *' spirit," that spirit must be immortal.
Having become conscious in man, it cannot become un-
conscious again, because it is self-existent and independent
of all conditions but those which it creates itself. The self-
consciouness of the I Am is indestructible, because it exists
in the absolute eternal One. The more the lower elements
cling to that principle in which absolute consciousness
rests, the more will they partake of its state and be rendered
conscious and immortal. The object of man's life is to
become conscious that He is — ^not an illusive personal
form — but an impersonal, immortal reality. The object of
his existence is to render the unconscious spirit conscious
and the mortal soul immortal ; the object of death is to
release that which is conscious from that which is uncon-
scious, and to free the inmiortal from the bonds of ignorance
and of matter.

The tree of life grows and produces a seed, and this seed
may have to be planted again, to grow into a tree and pro-
duce another seed, and this process may have to be
repeated over and over again, until at last the spiritual
consciousness slumbering in the seed awakens to immortal
life. Again and again may the soul be forced by the law
of evolution to incarnate into flesh. Unconscious of anv
relation to personalities, it will be attracted to such condi-
tions as may be best suited for its further development, as
its Karma decides. It will be attracted to overshadow a
man whose moral and intellectual tendencies and qualities
correspond to its own, careless whether it enters the
world as a new-bom babe through the door of the hut of
a beggar, or through the palace of a king. It does not
care for personal conditions, because it is unconscious of
its own state.

Thus a man that reigned as a king in a former incanuir

Digitized by

Google

XS8 REINCARNATIOir.

tion may be reborn as a beggar, if his character was that
of a beggar, and a liberal beggar may create as his future
successor a king or a being of noble birth. Both act with-
out freedom of choice at the time of their visit to the £arthy
following unconsciously their Karma. But the Adept,
whose spiritual consciousness is awake, will be his own
master. He has grown above the sense of personality, and
thereby gained immortal consciousness during his earthly
life. He has thrown away his lower self, and death cannot
rob him of that which he no longer possesses and to which
he attaches no value. Being conscious of his existence
and of the conditions under which he exists, he may follow
his own choice in the selection of a body, if he chooses to
reincarnate, either for the benefit of humanity or for his own
progression. Having entirely overcome the attractions of
Earth, he is truly free. He is dead and unconscious to
all earthly temptations, but conscious of the highest happi-
ness attainable by man. The delusion of the senses can
fashion for him no other tabernacle to imprison his soul,
and before him lies open the road to eternal rest in Nirvana.
If a person has once attained a certain amount of spiritual
knowledge, he will — ^if it is necessary for him to reincarnate
again — ^not need to follow the blind law of attraction ; but
he will be able to choose the body and the conditions most
suitable to him. He may then reincarnate himself in the
body of a child, or in the body of a grown person, whose
soul has been separated by disease or accident from the
body, and the latter may thus be brought to life again, if
no vital organ is too seriously injured to carry on the
functions of life again. Cases are known in which a certain
person apparently died, and finally came to life again,
when from that time he appeared to be an entirely different
man ; so, for instance, he may have died as a ruffian and
after his recovery become suddenly like a saint, so that
such a sudden change appeared inexplicable on any other
theory than that an entirely different character had taken
possession of his body. Such people may, after their
recovery takes place, speak a language they never learned ;
talk familiarly of things they never saw ; call people by
their names, of which they never heard ; know all about
places, where their physical bodies never have been, etc.,
etc. If phenomena could prove anything, such occurrences
might go to prove the theorv of the reincarnation of living
adepts.

Digitized by

Google

DEGRADATION. I89

To die — in the real meaning of the term — ^is to become
unconscious in relation to certain things. If we become
unconscious of a lower state, and thereby become con-
scious of a higher existence, such a change cannot properly
be called death. If we become unconscious of a higher
condition, and thereby enter a lower one, such a change
is followed by degradation, and therefore degradation is the
only possible death, because death in the absolute does not
exist. Degradation takes place if a human faculty is em-
ployed for a lower purpose than that for which it was by
nature intended. Degradation of the most vulgar, the low-
est material type takes place, if the organs of the physical
body are used for villainous purposes, and disease, atrophy
and death are the common result. A higher and still more
detrimental and lasting degradation takes place, if the
intellectual faculties are habitually used for selfish and
degrading purposes. In such cases the intellect, that
ought to serve as a basis for spiritual aspirations, becomes
merged with matter, his spiritual consciousness ceases to
exist, — in other words, his consciousness is entirely bound
down to the plane of personality and selfishness, and
becomes inactive in the region of impersonality and life.
The lowest and most enduring degradation takes place if
man, having reached a state m which his personality has,
to a certain extent, been absorbed by his impersonal /,
degrades his spiritual self by employing the powers which
such an amalgamation confers for villainous purposes of a
low character. Such are the practices of black magic.
A person who for want of any better understanding em-
ploys his intellectual faculties for his own selfish purposes,
regardless of the principle of justice, is not necessarily a
villain, but simply ignorant of his own interests. Such
persons cannot die spiritually, because they have not yet
come spiritually to life. The murderer may commit a
murder to save himself from being discovered of some
crime, and not for the purpose of robbing another
person of life. A thief may steal a purse for the
purpose of enriching himself, and not for the purpose of
rendering another man poor. Such acts are the result of
ignorance, and ignorance has no permanent life ; persons
usually act evil for selfish purposes and not for the pure
love of evil. Such acts are the result of personal feeling,
and personal feelings cease to exist when the personally

Digitized by

Google

190 BROTHERS OF THE SffADOf^.

to which they belong ceases to exbt. Such a personal
existence ceases when his life on the physical plane or in
Kama loca ceases to act. The higher, immortal and
impersonal / of the man is neither a gainer nor loser on
such an occasion, it remains the same as it was before the
compound of forces representing the late personality was
bom.

The real villain, however, is he who performs evil for the
love of evil without personal considerations. A person who
is no more influenced by his sense of personality, and has
thereby gained spiritual life and powers, is a magician.
Those who employ such powers for the purposes of evil
have been called black magicians or Brothers of the
ShadoWy in the same sense as those who employ their
spiritual powers for good purposes have been called Bro-
thers of Light. The white magician is a spiritual power
for good ; the real black magician is a living power of evil
attached to a personality that performs evil instinctively
and for the love of evil itself This power of evil may kill
the man or the animal that never offended it, and by whose
death it has nothing to gain, destroys for the love of de-
struction, causes suffering without expecting any benefit for
itself, robs to throw away the spoils, revels in torture and
death. Such a person calls to life an impersonal evil
power, which is a part of himself, and which continues to
exist after his personality ceases to exist on the physical
plane. Many incarnations may be needed before such a
power will come into existence and become strong, but
when it once lives it will perish as slow as it grew.
" Angels," as well as '* devils," are bom into the world, and
children with villainous propensities and malicious
characters are not very rare. They may be the product
of such forces as in former incarnations have developed a
tendency for evil, without becoming fixed in evil by
developing any spiritual consciousness in the direction of
evil.

Every power which may be employed for a good purpose,
may also be used for an evil purpose. If we can by magne-
tism decrease the rapidity of the pulse of a fever*patient, we
may also decrease it to such an extent, that the subject
ceases to live. If we can force a person by our will to
perform a good act^ we may also force him to commit a
crime.

Digitized by

Google

SORCERY. »9«

It appears to be unnecessary to enter into details in re-
gard to the practices of Black Magic and Sorcery. It is more
noble and useful to study how we can benefit mankind,
than to satisfy our curiosity in regard to the powers for
evil. To show to what aberrations of mind a craving
for the power of working black magic may lead, it may be
mentioned that the would-be black magician, Gi/es de
Rays^ marechal of France, and better known as " Blue
Beard," who was executed for his crimes at Nantes, killed
and tortured to death during a few years not less than one
hundred and sixty women and children for the purpose of
practising Necromancy and Black Magic.

The white magician delights in doing good, the servant
of the black art revels in cruelty and crime. The former
co-operates with the Divine Spirit of Wisdom, the latter
co-operates with the animal and semi-intellectual forces of
nature ; the former will be exalted in God and united with
Him ; the latter will ultimately be absorbed by the devils
with which he has associated and which he called to his
aid.

To raise our consciousness into the spiritual plane is to
live ; to let it sink to a lower level is to die. The natural
order of the universe is that the high should elevate the
low ; but if the high is made to serve the low, the high
will be degraded. Everywhere in the workshop of nature
the high acts upon the low by the power of the highest.
The highest itself cannot be degraded. Truth itself cannot
be turned into falsehood, it can only be rejected and
denied. Reason itself cannot be rendered foolish, it can
only be refused obedience. The universal and impersonal
cannot itself become limited, it can only come into
contact with such personalities as are able to approach it.
The highest does not suffer by breaking its connection
with the low, the low alone suffers and dies.

The impersonal and real is everywhere, and manifests
itself in the consciousness of man. Man's consciousness
rotates between the two poles of good and evil, of spirit
and matter ; the attraction from below may be equal to
the attraction from above. The omnipresent influence of
the great spiritual Sun renders him strong to overcome the
attraction of matter, and assists him to come victorious
out of the struggle with evil. Man is not entirely free as
long as he is not in possession of perfect knowledge, which

Digitized by

Google

19* RELATIVB FREEDOM.

means, of a perfect consciousness of the truth ; but he is
free to allow himself to be attracted by a love for the tnidi
or to repiilse it His spiritual aspirations may be in co-
operation with nature or act against it. He may become
united with the principle of truth, or he may sever his
connection with it and sell his inherited rights to immor-
tality, like the biblical Esau, for a comparatively worthless
mess of pottage. The Centaur in his nature, whose lowei
principles are animal, while the upper parts are possessed
of intellect, may carry away his spiritual aspirations and
lull them into unconsciousness by the music of its illu-
sions.

Bodies ma^ be comparatively long-lived, and some souls,
compared with others, may be very enduring ; but there
is nothing permanent but the consciousness of love and
the consciousness of hate. Love is light, and hate is
darkness, and in the end love will conquer hate because
darkness cannot destroy light, and wherever light pene-
trates into darkness, there inll love conqueri and hate and
dadmess will disappear.

Digitized by

Google

CHAPTER IX.

TRANSFORMATIONS.

** Be ye transfonned by the renewing of yoar mind***— Robu zH. t*

The Universe is a manifestation of thought, and thought is
an action of Mind. The mind whose thought can bring
an universe into existence must be an Universal Mind,
embracing in its totality all the individual minds that ever
existed, and containing the germs of everything that will
ever come into existence.

Mind is a motion of will. Without the will acting either
consciously or instinctively (mechanically) within the mind,
there would be no production of thought ; nor could the
will produce any orderly thought on the mind if there were
no Wisdom, and it will therefore be safer to say: The
Universe is a product of thought, will and wisdom ; nor
could either of these three ever produce anything, if they
were seeking to act independently of each other ; they
must necessarily be one, and that one^ representing itself in
three different aspects, as Creative Thought, Universal
Will and Divine JVisdom, is commonly called God. It
will therefore be best to say : The Universe is a manifest'
ation of God,

I am well aware that the use of such an expression
always gives rise to innumerable misunderstandings in the
minds of theists, atheists and pantheists ; because each of
these classes has its own conception of " God ; ^ forgetting

193

Digitized by LjOOQIC

194 OOD.

that the finite mind cannot conceive of the infinite, an0
that the universal God is beyond the understanding of any
thing less than its own divine selC

A man's life does not reside outside, but within his own
body, and likewise God does not live outside of His own
creation ; but His power acts inside of Nature. God is
everything in Nature, and also in that which is not pro-
duced by nature, and therefore supernatural and eternal,
such as Justice and Trutn. Nevertheless Nature is not
God , everything is not divine ; but everything is a state
of being wherein, under certain conditions, the power of
God can become manifest. Likewise a stone or a tree is
not nature ; but in each stone and in every tree certain
qualities of natural laws are revealed.

If God is all and one, then there can be only one
original power and one original substance ; and power and
substance themselves can only be two modes of manifesta*
lion of the eternal One. There can be neither " matter '*
nor ** motion "//r sc; these two terms signify merely two
aspects of that which is beyond our conception. If oui
mmds were independent of the conceptions of time and
space, we might perceive how it was that the One ever came
to manifest itself as a Three and to create a world ; but as we
are ourselves His creatures, we cannot encompass our
Creator, we cannot penetrate with our curiosity into the
sanctuary of the mystery of mysteries; we can merely rise
up in our thought to the throne of the Eternal, and seek to
fee/ the power of God within our own heart, and then we
wiU know more about Him than if we study the whole
library of the Vatican, or learn by heart the Encyclopadia
theologica.

Jacob Boehme, a man who was capable to open his
eyes and to see the truth, and who was therefore not
under the necessity of depending on mere belief in what
he might have imagined to be true in consequence of draw-
ing logical inferences from external observations, says:
** The eternal foundation, the will of God, became desirous
of conceiving of something, and as there was nothing but
its own self, this universal consciousness conceived of its
own self; * it looked within itself,' or, to express it in other
woids, ' God beholds Himself in the mirror of His own
sternal Wisdom.*''

Human language is not well adapted tr> tb^ discussion

Digitized by

Google

umrr. mil

of eternal truths which are beyond finite comprehenrios,
and which can never be understood unless we call to our
aid that very light of whose existence we desire to obtain
proof. Therefore, the external reasoner and doubter, he
who relies solely on his own intellectual reasoning, will
never arrive at eternal truth, because he rejects the light
of the spirit, and extinguishes— not the light — but his own
capacity of understanding.

If there is only one God in the universe; there can be
only one power. This power is called the Wiii, and it is
^ndamentally the same, whether it manifests itself in the
spiritual plane, as divine love, wisdom, life, light, justice
and truth ; on astral plane, as attraction, repulsion, emotion,
passion, desire ; in the physical plane, as motion, light, beat,
magnetism, electricity, cohesion, chemical afGnity or any-
tiiing else. All these powers and forces and energies are
and can be nothing else but manifestations of Will acting
on the higher planes with and on the lower ones without
self-consciousness. God never changes, and the Will never
changes. Nothing ever changes except the mode of the
manifestation. All these assertions require no other i>roof
but one's own observation. If you doubt them, look within
yourself, and ask yourself whether or not they are true.

If there is only one God in the Universe, there can be
only one Substance. This substance can fundamentally
likewise be nothing else but the Will, but for the sake of
distinction we may call it the Mind^ because it is by means
of a mental imagery that the Will creates thoughts within
itself. We might also call it " Imagination " or " Ideation ' ;
but whatever words we may use, there is each and every one
of them liable to be misunderstood, because words are
merely symbols, and to the understanding of any symbol a
key is necessary. This key is the understanding itself,
which can be given by no man because it is a self-existent
principle that is not of man's making, but will come to him
by its own grace, if he makes himself ready for its reception.

This one Substance is fundamentally the same in all
departments of nature. It constitutes the body of God,
and therefore of the highest angels. It forms the vehicle
of Spirit and Light and Thought ; it is everything ; from
the Astral Light that pervades the world, down to the
most grossly material objects. The highest mountains no
less than the most minute atoms are corporified Mind;

Digitized by

Google

196

thoiq^ lettdered wcBd and material hf the inactiTfty of
their inherent WilL If the will of God were to begin to
■love within the foundations of the earth, the world which
we now occupy would be dissolved in the twinkling of
an qre.

AU is one» and the one is in eternal rest. Nevertheless
we find no absolute rest anywhere ; but wherever we look
we find a continual change of form and activity, a trans-
formation of the images existing in the infinite mind. If
the mode of activity of the will is changed within a form,
tiie form changes its attributes ; but form itself is nothing.
It is merely an external appearance. There is consequently
no change of anything except of the appearance and mode
of manifestation of that which eternally is.

Forms are shapes of the Will, tinctured by the Imagina*
lion, or, we may also say, they are shapes of mind, whose
qualities are determined by the action of the will residing
in them. They are all certain states of Mind and Will, and
as such they are enduring or not according to the quality
and intensity of the vibrations of the divine light that
causes them to exist as an appearance on the screen of
creation. They are all manifestations of their own inner
si>iritu2d light, rendered objective and corporeal. If the
will and thought constituting a form are divine, the form
will be perfect ; if the will is impure, or the thought inhar-
nsonious, there will be disharmony in the form which is
their external expression.

The perfection and duration of a form depends on the
quality of the character expressed therein. A thought
which is a perfect expression of the truth is everlasting and
beautiful; it will require no circumstantial evidence to prove
that it is true ; its truth will be self-evident to every one who
is capable to perceive it Every one who possesses truth
himself is an authorized expert in knowing the truth, while
the sceptic and liar cannot see the truth, however learned
he may otherwise be.

A thought once formed exists as an image in the mirror
of eternity. To remember a thought, is to look for it in
the Astral Light and to behold it there. The Astral Light
is the book of nature, where every thought becomes
engraved and every event recorded. The stars on the sky
exist and every one may see them. Likewise ideas exist
like stars on the inner sky of the Universal Mind» shedding

Digitized by

Google

IHB SOUL OF THINGS. 197

their rajrs into the minds of men, and he who is able to
open his eyes sufficiently can behold them there. No one
can monopolize an idea, they are accessible to all who can
grasp them, and they are sometimes grasped simultaneously
by receptive minds. No one can create a body out of
nothing, no one can create an idea ; all that men can do is
to take the already existing materials and to put them into
new shapes. A man who thus evolves a new and grand
idea kindles a new star in the heavens, whose light may be
seen by every one.

Not only do the thoughts of men impress themselves
into the Astral Light, but the Universal Mind takes cog-
nizance of everything that exists, and every event that takes
place on the physical plane is recorded in the memory of
nature. Every stone, every plant, every animal as well as
every man, has a sphere in which is recorded every event
of its existence. £ach is like a light of which we can see
only the grossly material wick ; but neither the flame nor
its luminous sphere of living light. In the Astral Light of
each is stored up every event of its past history and of the
history of its surroundings ; so that every thing — ^no matter
how insignificant it may be — can give an account of its
daily life, from the beginning of its existence as a form up
to the present, to him who is able to read. A piece of
lava from Pompeii may give to the Psychometer a true
description of the volcanic eruption that devastated that
town and buried it under its ashes, where it remained hid-
den for nearly two thousand years; a floating timber
carried by the Gulf Stream to the fer North may give to
the inhabitants of the North a true picture of tropical life ;
and a piece of bone of a Mastodon may teach the vegetable
and animal life of antediluvian periods.^

The pictures impressed in the Astral Light react upon
the mental spheres of individual minds and may create in
them emotional disturbances, even if these pictures do not
come to the full consciousness of their minds. Deeds com-
mitted with a great concentration of thought call living
pictures in the Astral Light into existence, that may cause
mipressible persons to commit similar acts.

If the true nature of the constitution of man were pro*
perly understood, capital punishmeni would soon be aoan*

• Fkof. Wnu Dentons << Soul of Thiivi.*

Digitized by LjOOQiC

I9S CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.

doned as perfectly useless, unjust and contrary to the law
of nature. That which commits a murder or any other
crime is a conscious and invisible power, which cannot be
killed, and which does not improve in character by being
separated from its external form. The body is innocent, it
is merely an instrument in the hands of the invisible culprit,
the inner man. The face of even a criminal bears an
expression of peace when the soul has departed. By
severing the bonds between this intellectual and vicious
power and the physical form, we do not change its ten-
dency to act evil ; but while during the life of the body the
action of that power was restricted to only one form, having
been liberated, it may now incite numerous other weak-
minded people to perform the same crime for which the
body was executed. Thus by capital J^unishment evil is
not abolished, but its sphere of action mcreased. As far
as the theory of influencing other would-be criminals with
fear, by making an example of one, thus to prevent others
from committing crimes, is concerned ; it is well known
that criminals do not look upon any punishment as being
something which they have deserved for their deeds, but
as being a consequence of having been so careless as to
allow themselves to be caught, and they usually make up
their minds, that if they were permitted to escape, they
would be more careful — ^not to be caught again.

The destruction of a form is entirely useless for the pur-
pose of annihilating the principle which it represents, be-
cause the form is not the character, nor can the destruction
of the form in any way improve or ameliorate that character.
He who steals away the life of any being, whether legally
or illegally, merely destroys the conditions under which a
Spark of the Divinity was striving to unfold its light and
to obtain consciousness, and he thereby commits a crime
against God ; while the punishment of the culprit exists
nowhere except in his imagination, because if he is not
afraid to die, death will be no punishment to him. All
that killing can possibly accomplish is to produce a change
of external effects, creating thereby internal causes which
are far more injurious even if they are less evident We
are against killing for the sake of convenience ; but on the
other hand we would not subscribe to that sentimental
policy that never wards off" a blow and submits to be
killed. He who permits himself to be killed by another,
is committing murder through him. From a misunder^

Digitized by

Google

REFORMS. 199

Standing of the relations existing between a principle and
the form in which it finds its expression result the most
ludicrous eflFects ; not the least of which are the vagaries
of those who attempt to improve the condition of the world
by doctoring the external effects of internal causes, where-
by invariably worse evils come into existence. If we wish
to prevent the growth of an evil tree, it is of little use to
lop off the leaves and the twigs, or even to hide the tree
behind a screen. The living force in the roots and in the
trunk will act with renewed strength, producing new
branches and leaves, which the screen cannot cover from
sight.

All forms are nothing but s3rmbols by which internal
principles find their expression ; to successfully change a
form it must be endowed with a new principle. We may
melt iron a thousand times, we cannot transform it inta
gold, nor could we transform a sinner into a saint if we
were to baptize him with all the water that runs into the
sea, but we only make a piece of iron magnetic by endow-
ing it with magnetism, and a villain may become honest if
the light of the true understanding enters his heart.

Each being in nature represents a mental state in a cer-
tain condition of vibration. Each represents a melody in
the great symphony of the music of the spheres ; and as one
sound of an instrument may cause a similar vibration in a
corresponding instrument, likewise the principle expressed
in one form may call a similar principle in another form
into action.

If mankind as a whole were so far awakened from their
slumber as to be able to recognize the existence of eternal
principles, instead of merely beholding the perishing form,
then would the golden era begin and the paradise be again
established upon the earth. Then would they cease to
run after illusions and shadows, or to put their faith into
worthless objects. Then would they behold the Holy
Spirit in everything and the Redeemer within themselves.
Then would the world be transformed by the magic power
of love, and the darkness of ignorance be changed into the
light of knowledge by the influence of the rays of divine
wisdom.

But what else can an eternal principle be, except a state
of living will tinctured by divine thought ? Even the highest
spiritual beings and planetary spirits can be nothing else but
self-conscious thoughts of God, vehicles for the divine will

Digitized by LjOOQIC

an. SYMPATHIES.

and instruments for its manifestation ; all being obedient
to divine law, order and harmony^ withoat which they
coald not be divinr or eternal.

God does not ^eed the world to enable him to be what
He is, but Nature requires God to enable her to exist
The principle of life requires no form, but forms need the
principle of life to enable it to live. Likewise eternal love
and justice and truth are self-existent, self-sufficient and
independent of any object or form; but they cannot
manifest themselves without appropriate forms, and the
forms that require them to enable them to love, to be just
and true. In other words : God is independent of His
creation ; but creation is dependent on Him.*

Thus the sun could exist without our earth, but the earth
not without the sun; a man can be without truth, bat
eternal truth nevertheless remains what it is, even if there
were no one to recognize it.

Thus we see that nothing will ever change or be trans-
formed, except by the influence of another principle. A
natural product grows by the influence of natural pnnciples,
and that which is divine in man by the influence of the
Divine ; while that which is devilish in man will grow by
the aid of the Devil.

All things are made of will and thought, and therefore
thought and will can act even upon corporeal substances.
AnySiing a person touches receives a part of his own spirit.

A lock of hair, a piece of clothing, the handwriting di%
person or any article he may have touched, handled, or
worn, may indicate to an intuitive individual that person's
state of health, his physical, emotional, intellectual, and
moral attributes and qualifications. The picture of a
murderer may be impressed on the retina of his victim,
and in some instances be reproduced by means of photo*
graphy ; but it is surely impressed on all the surroundings
of the place where the deed occurred, and can there be
detected by the psychometer, who may thus come en raf'
pert with the criminal, and even follow the events of his
life after he has left that locality, and hunt him down just
as the bloodhoimd traces the steps of a fugitive slave.f

* See Jacob Boehme, ** Aurora " 23.

t Emma Hardinge BriUen : << Ghost Land.** The case dted fai this
book, in which a clairvoyant followed the tracks of a murderer through
several towns and caught him at last, it quoted in several Geiauui
jpnblications of the last century.

Digitized by

Google

PRECIOUS STONES. ftti

This tendency of the Astral Light to inhere in material
bodies gives amulets their power and invests keepsakes
and relics with certain occult properties. A ring, a lock
of hair, or a letter from a friend, may not only conjure up
that friend's cture in a person's memory, but bring him
en rapport w.wh a peculiar mental state of which that per-
son was or is a representation. Why do people put so
much value upon die keepsakes received from a friend
that they often dawdle away their time in playing with
them ? Is it that their memory is so weak as to require
such a stimulus ; or is there somethingof that friend about
them which the soul feels and perceives, but which cannot
be recognized externally ? If you wish to forget a person,
or free yourself from his magnetic attraction, part from
everything that reminds you of him. Articles belonging
to a person may bring us in sympathy with that person,
although the fact may not come to our consciousness, and
this circumstance is sometimes used for purposes of black
magic.

TTie existence of a power, by which a disease may be
transferred upon a healthy person, even in " non-conta-
gious " cases, by means of some article belonging to the
sick person, is generally believed in by the people in
eastern countries. It must, however, be remembered that
in making such experiments the success depends on the
amount of faith which the magician can employ. Without
faith, nothing can be acco&iplished, but "faith" means
" wiU without any doubt," such as is attained by experience.

As every form is the representation of a certain mental
state, every substance has ics sympathies and its antipa-
thies ; the loadstone attracts iron, and iron attracts the
oxygen of the air ; hygroscopi . bodies attract water; some
substances change their color: under certain colored rays,
others remain unaffected, etc.

The ancients attributed certain virtues to certain pre-
cious stones, and imagined that the Garnet was conducive
to joy, the Chalcedony to courage, the Topaz promoting
chastity, the Amethyst assisting reason, and the Sapphire
intuition. A spiritual force to be effective requires a sen-
sitive object to act upon. But every spiritual or any
other force can only come to the cognizance of him who is
receptive for it. If a person cannot feel the occult
influences of nature, it does not necessarily follow that

Digitized by

Google

sot DRUGS.

thej do not exist, and that there may not be others who
may be able to perceive them because their impressional
capacities are greater.

Only the ignorant man believes that he knows every-
thing. What is really known is only like a grain of sand
on the shore of the ocean in comparison to what is still
unknown. Physiologists know that certain plants and
chemicals have certain powers, and to a certain extent
they explain their secondary effects. They know that
Digitalis decreases the quickness of the pulse by para-
lyzing the heart j that Belladonna dilates the pupil by para-
lyzing the muscular fibres of the Iris ; that Opium in small
doses produces sleep by causing anaemia of the brain,
while large doses produce coma by causing congestion;
but why these substances have such effects, or why a chem-
ical compound of Nitrogen, Oxygen, Carbon, and Hidro-
gen may be exceedingly poisonous in one chemical com-
bination, while the same substances if combined in a
different stcechiometrical proportion may be used as food,
neither chemistry nor physiology can tell us at present.
If we, however, look upon all forms as symbols of mental
states, it will not be more difficult to imagine why strych-
nine is poisonous, than why hate can kill, or fear paralyze
the heart.

If all things are made of imagination and will, then
surely drugs are the same, and by giving drug a to a patient,
we merely induce a corresponding activity in his will, and
act upon the imagination of his nature. The fact that the
patient is not himself conscious of it, does not change the
matter. There are many processes going on in his system
of which he has no knowledge. We, therefore, see that
even the most rabid anti-mind curer and drug-doctor acts
after all himself upon the mind of the patient.

The power to receive, transform and evolve thoughts
is the power of Imagination. If an idea enters into the
mind, the mind seeks to clothe it into a form, and this
power may be exercised independently of any active
application of the will.

Imagination is, therefore, an active power, and it forms
the basis of all artistic and magical operations. Art and
magic are closely related together; both give objective
form to subjective ideas. The artist exercises this power
when he mentally projects the picture formed in his mind

Digitized by

Google

IMAGINATION. 903

upon the canvas and chains it there by the use of his pencil
or brush ; the sculptor shapes the picture of a form on his
mind and embodies it in ^e marble. He then employs
mechanical force to free the ideal from all irregularities,
and resurrects it from the tomb, out of which it may rise
as a materialization of thought. The magician forms an
image on his mind and makes it perceptible to others by
projecting it into their mental spheres.

By this law many of the feats performed by Indian
fakirs may be explained. They may cause tigers and
elephants or anything else appear before a multitude, by
merely forming the images of such things in the sphere of
their mind, and as that sphere extends through space, they
may locate these images wherever they chose. What the
spectators see on such occasions is nothing else but the
thoughts of the conjuror, rendered objective and visible by
his will.

In the case of an artist mechanical labor executes the
work, and the artist will finish his work the sooner the
more he works to that end. In the case of a magician,
concentr'^tion of thought executes his work, and he will
succeed the better the more his thought is concentrated
upon the work he desires to perform ; but the greatest
amount of labor will not enable a person who is not an
artist to produce a real work of art, and the greatest con-
centration of thought will not enable a person whose will
is not free to perform a true magical feat.

As long as the world exists no man has ever changed an
opinion or an idea, except by the influx of another idea ;
nor has any Alchemist ever changed any inferior metal
into gold except by the influence of that principle which
constitutes gold ; nor has evil ever been transfcirmed into
good, except through the action of the superior power of
good.

The processes of nature are alchemical processes and
not merely chemical ones ; because, without the principle
of life acting upon the chemical substances of the earth, no
growth would result. If the force of attraction and repul-
sion were entirely equal, everything would be at a standstiU.
If growth and decay would go hand in hand, nothing
could grow, because a cell would begin to decay as soon as
it would begin to form. The chemist may take earth, and
water, and air, and separate them into their constituent

Digitized by

Google

J04 SPIRITVS MUNDI.

elements, and recombine them again, and at the end of hit
work he will be with his work where he began. But the
Alchemy of nature takes water, and earth, and air, and
infuses mto them the fire of life, forming them into trees
and producing flowers and fruits. Nature could not give
her life-imparting influence to her children if she did not
possess it; the chemist who has no life-principle at his
command cannot perform the wonders of Alchemy.

Johannes Tritheim says : " The Spiritus Mundi resem-
bles a breath, appearing at first like a fog and afterwards
condensing like water. This ' water ' (A'k&sa) was in the
beginning pervaded by the principle of life, and light was
awakened m it by the^a/ of the eternal spirit This spirit
of lights called die soul of the world (the Astral Light), is
a spiritual substance, which can be made visible and tan-
^ble by art ; it is a substance, but, being invisible, we call
It spirit. This * soul ' or corpus is hidden in the centre of
everything, and can be extracted by means of the spiritual
fire in man, which is identical with the universal spiritual
fire (the Astral Light^, constituting the essence of nature
and containing the images and ficmres of the Universal
Mind."

" This Light (Astral Light) resides in the Water (Ak&sa)
and is hidden as a Seed in all things. Everything that
originated from the spirit of light is sustained by it, and
therefore this spirit is omnipresent ; the whole of nature
would perish and disappear if it were removed from it ; it
is the principiuM of all things."

There were true Alchemists during the Middle Ages who
knew how to extract that Seed from the soul-essence of the
world, and there are some who have the power to perform
that process to-day. " It is an eternal truth, that without
our secret magical fire nothing can be accomplished in our
art. The ignorant will not believe in our art because they
do not possess that fire ; and without that fire all their
labor is useless. Without that fire spirits cannot be bound,
much less can they be acted upon with material fire." *

The most important alchemical work is the generation
of man; it requires not only the chemical combination ot
physical substances, but involves a chemistry of the soul
and an influence of the spirit, and all must harmoniously

* J. lYitheim x ** Miraculosa," Chap. ziv.

Digitized by LjOOQiC

CHEMISTR Y OF LIFE. 90$

act together^ ii a human being and not a human monster
and mental homunculus is to be the result. If the rules of
Alchemy were better understood and adhered to, scrofula,
cancers, syphilis, tuberculosis, and other inherited diseases
would disappear^ and a strong and healthy generation of
men and women would be the result.

The true alchemical laboratory is the body of man, the
alembic is the soul, the magic fire the will, having become
free. Ignorance is like lead, but by the addition of mercury,
representing knowledge, it becomes transformed into the
pure gold of wisdom. Nothing will ever be accomplished
without a mortification of the earthly residua, and it is for
that purpose necessary to practise a continual sublimation
of thought by sending the aspirations of the soul up to the
highest good, and to coagulate the wisdom received, so
that it may be incorporated into the soul and even the
body become luminous in the light of the spirit.*

All this can be accomplished only in proportion as the
will becomes free and ceases to be the slave of that com-
pound of elementals and animals which constitutes the
illusive ego of man. Not only should the will be free of all
lower desires, but free likewise from the dominion of the
imagination. The will is the sun, the imagination the
moon. The moon must obey the sun, not the sun to the
moon. Thought must become obedient to the will and the

* To answer the question whether or not any one ever succeeded in
making gold grow in this manner, we will say that there is a German book
in existence entitled, << Collection of historical accounts regarding some
remarkable occurrences in the life of some still living Adepts." It was
printed in 1780; and among many most interesting anecdotes about
successful attempts of making gold grow, there are copies of the legal
documents and decisions of the court at Leipzig in regard to a case
where, during the absence of the Count ofErback, in the year 171 5, an
Adept visited the countess in the castle of Tankersteifty and out of grati-
tude for an important service which had been rendered to him by the
countess, he transformed all the silver she had into gold. When the
count returned, who, as it seems, kept his own property separate from
that of his wife, he claimed that gold for himself, appealing to a certain
statute of the law, according to which treasures discovered upon or be-
low the surface of a certain piece of land belong to the proprietor of
that tenitory ; but the court decided that as the material (the silver) out
of which the gold had been made belonged legally to the countess, con-
sequently this gold could not be classified as a hidden treasure, and did
not come within the reach of that statute. The count thereupon loil
bis case, and his wife was permitted to keep the gold.

Digitized by

Google

•06 NATURAL LAW.

wQl must be in harmonj with wisdom, while wisdom is
acquired in no other way but by obedience to the law.

He who obeys the laws of nature and acts as her servant,
becomes the master of nature and renders her obedient to
him. He who obeys the divine laws of God and is a true
servant of God, will be in possession of divine power, and
God will fulfil his desires.

The will becomes free tnrough knowledge. Not by
means of what is usually called *' knowledge," and which
consists in opinions formed by intellectual speculation and
drawing inferences, but by means of the knowledge of the
soul ; such as is the result of the soul's own perception and
experience.

Only when the will has become free, will it be able to act
at a distance and to perform the wonders of Magic and
Alchemy, which are regarded as miracles by the ignorant
and denied by the foolish, because no man can be found
who is able to perform them ; they all being the slaves of
worldly desires.

The will of God is free and identical with the law. It is
not influenced by any selfish desire nor by exhortations and
prayers. It never deprives any creature, however low it
may be in the scale of evolution, of any of its rights, or gives
Ihem to another ; it is deaf to persuasions, unaffected by
bombast and bragging, and can neither be bribed with
money nor be deluded with shows.

If the actions of the Universal Mind were not subject to
the eternal law of cause and effect, but g^uided by the
arbitrary whims and notions of some invisible power or
god contained therein, the most extraordinary results were
liable to follow, and the age of actual miracles would begin.
The earth would perhaps stand still for a day or a year
and begin to revolve again the next ; sometimes it might
turn fast and at other times slow, and there is no end to
the absurdities which might take place ; especially if this
imaginary power could be induced to follow the advices of
its worshippers.

To the superficial observer the processes of nature seem
to be the results of chance. The sun shines and the rain
falls upon the land of the pious as well as upon that of the
wicked ; storms and fires rage, careless whether they
destroy the life and property of the learned or that of the
ignorant, because they are the necessary results of the

Digitized by

Google

DIVINE WISDOM. aojf

law of cause and effect The interest of individuals cannot
control the welfare of the whole. While tiie welfare of
the human body seems to be, to a certain extent, under
the control of the will of the individual, the processes of
nature^ as a whole, appear to be unguided by the reason
of the Universal Mind.

Man's reason can prevent an outburst of his emotions ;
but where is the personal god to control the emotions of
the soul of the world ? God does not prevent the growth of
warts, or cancers, or tumors, God being the law cannot act in
contradiction with Himself. His blessings are accompanied
by curses. Man's foot crushes the insect, because man^s
perception and intelligence does not pervade his feet ; God
does not prevent the growth of a stone in the bladder,
because the high cannot manifest itself in the low, wisdom
cannot be active in an unconscious form ; the means must be
adapted to the end. The music that can be made with a
harp cannot be made with a stick. The intelligence of
the Universal Mind can only manifest itself through
instruments adapted for intellectual maniiestation.

Wisdom is not a product of the organization of man.
It is eternal and universal. It finds its expression in the
fundamental laws upon which the universe with all its forms
is constructed. It is expressed in the shape of a leaf, in
the body of an animal, in the organism of man. Its action
can be found everywhere in nature, as long as the beings
in nature live according to nature. There are no diseases
in nature which have not been originally created by
powers which acted contrary to the laws of nature and
became therefore unnatural. Outward appearances seem
to contradict this assertion ; because we find animals
affected with diseases, and epidemic diseases are even of
frequent occurrence in the vegetable kingdom. But a
deeper investigation into the occult laws of nature may
show that all the forms of nature, minerals, vegetables, and
animals, are merely states or expressions of the states of the
Universal Mind — in other words — products of the imagin-
ation of Nature ; and as the imagination of Nature is acted
on, influenced and modified by the imagination of man, a
morbid imagination of man is followed by a morbid state of
the Universal Mind, and morbid results follow again on the
physical plane. This law explains why periods of great
moral depravity, sensuality, superstition, and materialism

Digitized by

Google

JOS SPIRITUAL PROGRESS.

may be followed by plagues, epidemics, famine, wars, etc,
and it would be worth the while to collect statistics to
show that such has invariably been the case.

The elementary forces of nature are blind and obey the
law thai controls them. If hailstones were wise, they
would not indiscriminately destroy the crops ; if the sun
were a vehicle for intellectual labor, he might perhaps be
persuaded sometimes to change the directions of his rays.
Stones have no intelligence, because they have no organi-
zation through which intelligence can act, but if an
intelligent power sets them into motion, they obey the law
by which their movement is guided. As the organisms
rise in the scale of evolution and development, their con-
sciousness becomes more manifest. Consciousness be-
comes manifest as instinct in the animal creation. It
teaches the bird to fly, the fish to swim, the ants to build
their houses, the swallows to make their nests. Act-
ing through the nerve centres and the spinal cord it
induces the actions of the heart and lungs and other
organic and involuntary actions of the body.

The brain is the most highly developed instrument for
the manifestation of mind. It performs the intellectual
labor of the organism, acting as a centre of attraction for
the collection of ideas, as a workshop for their transforma-
tion, and as a focus from which they are reflected again
mto the Astral Light But with the power of performing
intellectual labor the highest manifestation of God in man
is not yet obtained. If we wish to know the wisdom and
majesty of God, we must prepare ourselves to become fit
receptacles for His love.

To accomplish this, we need not seek to acquire any-
thing by our own power. All selfish efforts are useless for
that purpose. All we need is to throw away the obstacles
in our possession that hinder us from seeing the light of
the trudi, and which consist of our own selfish thoughts
and desires. If man accomplishes this herculean task,
then will the door to the mystery be open before him ; his
mind will become illuminated with wisdom, and in his own
soul he will behold the glory of his Creator.

Digitized by

Google

CHAPTER X.*

CREATION.
«*ABd God said: Let us make Man."— ^i»i^.

Fhe most important question that was ever asked, and is
still asked with anxiety and often with fear, is the same
that was propounded thousands of years ago by the Egyp-
tian Sphinx, who killed him that attempted to solve the
riddle and did not succeed : What is man ? Ages have
passed away since the question was first asked, nations
have slain each other in cruel religious warfare, making
vain efforts to impose upon each other such solution of
the great problem as they believed they had found, but from
the tombs of the past only re-echoes the same question —
What is Man? And yet the answer seems simple.
Common sense^ if divested of religious or scientific
prejudices, tells us that man, like every other form in the
universe, is a collective centre of energy, a solitary ray of
the universally present Divine Light which is the common
source of everything that exists ; he is a true child of the
great Spiritual Sun. As the rays of our sun only become

* The term Creation is frequently misunderstood. Neither the Bible
nor any other reasonable book says that anything had ever been created
out of nothing. Such a superstition belongs entirely to modem material-
istic Science, which believes that life and consciousness could grow
out of dead and unconscious things. The word *' Creation '' means the
production of /hrms ; form in the absolute is not a thing, it is nothing
Dut an illusion, and, therefore, if a form is produced^ nothii^ but «&
illiuion has been cr«Ued.

909

Digitized by LjOOQIC

3IO THE MICROCOSM.

visibly active in contact with dust, so the divine ray is
absorbed and reflected by matter. It mingles for a while
with matter, and draws up towards the sun such elements
as are sufiiciently refined to escape the attraction of
Earth.

The sun-ray plays with the waves of the ocean : the heat
created by the contact of water with light from above
extracts from below the refined material, and the vapors
rise to the sky, where, like the ghosts of the seas, they
wander in clouds of manifold shapes traveling freely through
the air, playing with the winds, until the time arrives when
the energies which keep them suspended become exhausted
and they once more descend to earth. In a similar
manner the divine ray of the spiritual sun mingles with
matter while dwelling on £arth, absorbing and assimilating
whatever he chooses or what corresponds to his needs.
As the butterfly flits from flower to flower, tasting the
sweets of each, so the human monad passes from life to
life, from planet to planet, gathering experience, knowledge,
and strength, but when the day of life is over, night
follows, and with it follows sleep bringing dreams of vivid
reality. The grossest elements remain to mingle again
with earth, the more refined elements — the astral elements
— ^which are still within the attraction of the planet float
about, driven hither and thither by their inherent
tendencies, until the energy which holds them together is
exhausted, and they dissolve again in the plane to which
they belong; but the highest spiritual energies of man, held
together by love freed from the attraction of Earth, ascend
to their source like a white-robed spirit, bringing with it
the products of its experience beyond the limits of matter.
Man's love and aspiration do not belong to Earth. They
create energies which are active beyond the confines of
the grave and the funeral-pyre ; their activity may last for
ages, until it becomes exhausted, and the purified ray,
endowed with the tendencies impressed upon it by its last
visit to the planet, again seeks association with matter,
builds again its prison-house of animated clay, and appears
an old actor in a new part upon the ever-changing stage
of life.

Some of the greatest philosophers have arrived at a
recognition of this truth by speculation and logical reason-
ing, while others whose minds were illuminated by wisdom,

Digitized by

Google

EXPERIENCE. an

have perceived it as a self-evident fact by the power of
intuition.

To build the new house the impressions gathered by its
previous visits furnish the material. The slothful rich man
of the past may become the beggar of the future, and the
industrious worker in the present life may develop tenden-
cies which will lay the foundation of greatness in the next.
Suffering in one life may produce patience and fortitude
that will be useful in another ; hardships will produce en-
durance; self-denial will strengthen the will; tastes engen-
dered in one life may be our guides in another ; and accu-
mulated energies will become active whenever circum-
stances require it during an existence on the material
plane either in one life or another, according to the eternal
law of cause and effect.

A child may burn its fingers by touching the flame, and
the adult may not remember all the circumstances under
which the accident occurred ; still the fact that fire will
bum and must not be touched will remain impressed upon
the mind. In the same manner the experiences gained in
one life may not be remembered in their details in the
next, but the impressions which they produce will remain.
Again and again man passes through the wheel of trans-
formation, changing his lower energies into higher ones,
until he has attained knowledge by experience, and he
becomes — ^what he is destined to be — a god.

There is a certain stage in the spiritual evolution of man^
when he will become self-conscious in the spirit. He will
then remember the events of his previous life; but to
remember them in his present state of imperfection would
be merely a hindrance in his progress. It has been said,
that by not remembering the errors of our past lives and
their evil consequences, man is liable to commit his pre-
vious errors again ; but we ought not to do good merely
as a matter of speculation and to avoid evil consequences
resulting therefrom, but from an inherent desire to do good,
regardless of what the resulting consequences may be.

Man, like the majority of organized beings, is an atom
in the immensity of the universe ; he cannot be divided
and still remain a man ; but unlike other and lower organ-
ized beings, whose realization of existence is confined to
the physical or astral plane, that which constitutes him a
Man and distinguishes him from an animal is an integral

Digitized by

Google

Sta EVOLUTION.

and conscious part of the highest spiritual energy of the
universe, which is everywhere present; and his spiritual
consciousness is, therefore, not limited to a certain locality
in the physical world.

Who made Man? — Man makes himself during every day
of his life. He is his own creator. The clay — the mate*
rial body — that clings to the ray of the manifested Absolute^
is taken from Earth ; the energies, called the soul^ are the
products of the astral plane ; the highest energies, called
the spirit^ belong to ** heaven.'' Animal man, like the
lower orders of nature, is a product of the blind law of
necessity, and may even be produced artificially.* As such,
his mother is Nature, the ever immaculate virgin, who
presents time-born man to his father, the infinite spiritual
principle, to be transformed into a god. The physical
attributes of the child and its mental qualifications are
the result of inheritance or previously existing conditions.
Like the tree that can send its roots into the neighboring
soil and gather the nutriment by which it is surrounded,
but cannot roam about in search of food at distant places,
so physical roan has only a limited choice in the selection
of such means of development as he may require; he grows,
because he cannot resist the law of necessity, and the im-
pulses given by nature. But as reason begins to enlighten
him, the work of creation begins. The intelligence
within says to the will : " Let us make man." She urges
the will, and the will sullenly leaves its favorite occupation
of serving the passions and begins to mould animal man
in accordance with the divine image held up before him by
wisdom.

Let us make Man means : Let us make a divine man
out of an animal man ; let us surround the divine ray
within us with the purest of essences gathered from the
lower planes ; let us throw off everything which is sensual
and grossly material, and which hinders our progress ; let
us transform the emotions into virtues in which the spirit-
ual ray may clothe itself when it reascends to its throne.

Let us make man 1 It depends entirely on our efforts
what kind of a man we shall make. To make an average
man or even a superior one in the common acceptation of
the term is not a very difficult matter. Follow the rules

* See Para€iisus. ** HomuncuU."

Digitized by LjOOQiC

SELF-MADE MEN. «$

of health and the laws of diet, provide above all for your-
self and never give anything away, unless by doing so you
are sure to get more in return. You will then make a
respectable animal, a *' self-made " man, prominent, inde-
pendent and rich — one who lives and dies on the plane
of selfishness, an object of envy for many ; respected
perhaps by many, but not by himself.

But such is the influence of the higher nature in man,
that even on that plane an apparent unselfishness will often
bring material reward, and while the inexorable miser is
despised by all, he who occasionally confers little favors
makes friends, and may get his favors returned with
interest.

There is another class of self-made men; those who
appear prominently on the intellectual plane. They stand
before the world as the world's benefactors, as philoso-
phers, teachers, statesmen, inventors, or artists. They
have what is called genius^ and instead of being mere imi-
tators, they possess originality. They benefit themselves
by benefiting the world. Intellectual researches that
benefit no one are unproductive ; they resemble physical
exercise with dumb-bells, by which muscular strength may
be gained, but no labor accomplished. An intellectual pur-
suit may be followed for merely selfish purposes ; but unless
there is a love for the object of that study, little progress
will be made, and instead of a sage, a bookworm will be
the result. The majority of the learned live in their own
darkness, seeking only for the fruits that others have
gathered; but true genius is a magician who creates a
world for himself and for others, and his light expands as
he grows in perfection.

Intellectual labor alone cannot be the true object of life ;
infinite truth cannot be grasped by the material brain. He
who attempts to arrive at the truth merely by the intellectual
labors, without consulting the heart, will find it a difficult
work. The heart is the seat of Wisdom, the brain the seat
of the reasoning intellect, and receives its life from the
heart. The heart and the head should work together in
harmony, to kill the dragon of ignorance, dwelling upon
the threshold of the temple.

In the allegorical books of the Alchemist the Sun repre-
sents Love ; he is the " heart " of our solar system ; the
Moon represents the Intellect or the "brain;" Earth

Digitized by

Google

314 THE TEMPLE.

represents the physical Body, If the male Sun cohabits
with the female Moon in the water of Truths they will pro-
duce a son whose name is Wisdom. The intellect is the
material man whose bride is Intuition, the divine woman ;
no man or woman is perfect as long as the celestial mar-
riage has not taken place through the power of Love.*

Man is not merely an intellectual workshop ; but a tem-
ple wherein resides the spirit of God. The materials of
which Man is constructed are the seven principles that
flow into him from the store-house of universal nature,
the builder is the will, reason the superintendent, and wis-
dom the supreme architect. The building goes on without
noise, and no sound of the hammer is heard, because the
materials are already prepared by nature; they only
require to be put into their proper places. The highest is
the Spirit, and Spirit alone is immortal. Such of the lower
elements as may harmonize with it amalgamate with the
spirit, and are rendered immortal. Pure spirit can only
find its corresponding vibrations in the highest spiritual
elements, such as are furnished by the higher principles,
and consist of the purest thoughts, aspirations, and mem-
ories produced by the fifth, in which resides the intel-^
lectual power of man. Pure intelligence is Spirituality,
but intellectual power laboring only in the lower planes of
thought can bring to light no spiritual treasures, unless it
is penetrated by the light of Wisdom, which enables it to
distinguish the pure metal from the material dross. A
very intellectual and learned person may be very unhappy
and unharmonious, if his tendencies are towards evil, and
his mind incapable to be illuminated by the light of truth.
Wisdom is the perfect recognition of the truth ; it resides
in the spiritual principle of man, and sends its light down
into his fifth principle, where it may be seen by the power
of intuition, shining through the clouds of matter like the
sunlight penetrating a fog.

The fifth principle receives its stimulus from the fourth,
the rational nature of man. We cannot build a house
without solid material, and we may just as well attempt to
run a steam-engine without fuel or water as to make a
genius out of a being without any emotions or intellect
The stronger the emotions are, the more enduring will

* <• The Perfect Way, or the Finding of Christ.**

Digitized by LjOOQIC

THE BUILDERS. 21]

be the spiritual temple, if they can be made to fit into the
walls and pillars. A person without any emotions is with«
out virtues, he is without energy, a shadow, neither cold
nor warm, and necessarily useless. The passionate man is
nearer to the spirit, if he can guide his passions in the right
direction towards Uie source of all good, than the man who
has nothing to guide and nothing to conquer.

To produce a perfect building, or a perfect man, the
proportions must be harmonious. Wisdom guides the work
and love furnishes the cement. An emotion is either a
virtue or a vice according to the manner in which it is
applied. Misapplied virtues become vices, and well«
directed vices are virtues. A man who acts according to
the dictates of prudence alone is a coward; one who
indiscriminately exercises his generosity is a spendthrift ;
courage without caution is rashness ; veneration without
knowledge produces superstition ; charity without judgment
makes a beggar, and even one-sided justice, if too stem
and unbending and imtempered by mercy, produces a
miserly, cruel, and despicable tyrant.

The irrational soul, impelled only by its desires and un-
guided by wisdom, resembles a drunken man who has lost
his physical balance ; it totters from side to side, falls from
one extreme into another, and cannot guide its steps.
Only an equilibrium of forces can produce harmony, beauty
and perfection. The irrational soul, swayed by uncontrol-
lable emotions, forms an unfit habitation for the divine ray^
that loves peace and tranquillity.

The control of the emotions is the difficult struggle, that
is allegorically represented by the twelve labors of Hercules,
which the oracle of Zeus commanded him to perform.
Every man who desires to progress is his own Hercules
and works for the benefit of the king (his Atma), whose
orders he receives through the divine oracle of his own
intuition. He is constantly engaged in battle, because the
lower principles fight for their lives and will neither be
conquered. They are the products of matter and they cling
to their source.

Whence do the emotions come ?

The cosmologies of the ancients express under various
allegories the same fundamental truth ; that " in the begin-
ning" the Great First Cause evolved out of itself, by the
power of its own will, certain powers, whose action and

Digitized by

Google

3l6 MYTHOLOGY.

reaction brought the elementary forces that constituted the
world into existence. These elementary forces are the
Devas of the East, the Elohims of the Bible, the Afrites of
the Persians, the Titans of the Romans, the Eggregores of
the book of Enoch. They are the active agents of the
cosmos, beneficial or detrimental according to the condi-
tions under which they act, intelligent or unintelligent
according to the nature of the instrument through which
they act. They are not self-conscious rational entities, but
may manifest themselves through self-conscious organisms
endowed with reason ; they are not individuals, but may
become individualized by finding expression in individusd
forms. Love and hate, envy and benevolence, lust and
greed are not persons, but their shadows may become per-
sonified in human or animal forms. An extremely malicious
person is the embodiment of malice, and if he sees the
demon in an objective form, he beholds the reflection of
his own soul in the mirror of his mind. Ideas exist every-
where, but we cannot perceive a thought unless it first
enters the sphere of our soul. The spirit that enters our
soul obtains his life from ourselves, and if we do not expel
it from our soul he may grow strong by vampirizing our
life. Like a parasite growing on a tree and feeding on its
substance, it may fasten its feelers around the tree of our
life, and grow strong while our own spirit grows weak. A
thought, once taking root in the soul, will grow, unless it
is expelled by force, until it will become expressed in an
act, when obtaining a life of its own by that act, it will
leave its place to a successor. Those elementary forces
of nature are ever)rwhere, and always ready to enter the
soul if its doors are not defended. To call up a wicked
spirit we need not go in search of him, we need only allow
him to come. To call up a devil means to give way to an
evil thought, to vanquish him means to resist successfully
a temptation to evil.

The elementary powers of nature are innumerable, and
their classification gave rise to the pantheons of the Greeks
and to the mythologies of the East. The greatest power
is Zeus^ the father of the gods, or the source from which all
other powers take their origin. Minerva, the goddess of
wisdom, springs from his head, her origin is the noblest of
all, but Venus, the daughter of the Sun, arising from the
ocean of the imiversal Soul, conquers all by her beauty.

Digitized by

Google

PANTHEON. Siy

She holds together the worlds in space by the power of her
attraction, binds souls to souls, chains the good to good,
and binds the evil to evil. She is the mother of the minor
gods that combat each other, because love of self, love of
possession, love of fame, love of power, etc., are all only
children of the universal power of love. They fight among
themselves like children, because action gives rise to reac-
tion, love is opposed by hate, hope by fear, faith by doubt,
etc. To control them the god of Power (Mars) must be
united with the goddess of Love — in other words, the
passions must be held in obedience by the Will.

Each power exists and is held in its elementary matrix
or vehicle, the Alcisa, the Universal Proteus^ the generator
of form, which finds its outward expression in Matter.
They are all brought into life by desire for existence.
This ever-turning wheel of desire is the eternal circle of
evolution and involution, or the snake^ " whose head shall
be crushed by the heel of the woman," meaning Wisdom,
the eternal virgin, whose "daughters" zxt faith^ hope
and charity.

The snake of evil cannot enter the soul, if the latter is
defended by wisdom. If an evil thought enters the soul
and we do not immediately reject it, we harbor a devil in
our heart, whose claims we take into consideration, we
give him a promise and induce him to remain, and like an
unwelcome creditor he will continually argue his claims
until they are fulfilled.

The lower triads of principles in the constitution of man
receive their nutriment from the inferior kingdoms of nature.
If the body is overfed or stimulated by drink, the emotional
element will become excessively active and the intellect
will become weak. Too stimulating food or drink is
injurious for higher development, because life will in such
cases withdraw its activity from the higher principles and
be made to work in the lower principles of man. Large
quantities of otherwise healthy food will be injurious for the
same reason. The principle of life which transforms the
lower energies into higher ones is the same principle which
causes the digestion of food. If it is squandered in the
lower organs, the higher organs will suffer. Some men are
habituated to meat-eating, and they require ?.t ; others are
used to alcohol, and if they would suddenly discontinue its
nse they will suffer; but meat and alcohol are, under nor-

Digitized by

Google

fli8 NUTRIMENT.

mal conditioiis, unnecessary for the human system, and
often they act positively injurious.

A ^ure person requires pure food, but to the impure
impurities become at first a luxury, and afterwards a nece9*
sity. *' God said : Behold, I have given you every herb^
bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and
every tree, in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed, to
you it shall be for meat." *

The principal argument of the lovers of animal food is
that it " gives bodily strength, and is necessary for those
who have to perform manual labor." This argiunent is
based upon an erroneous opinion, because animal food
does not give as much strength as a vegetable diet ; f it
only stimulates the organism, and induces it to use up the
strength which it already possesses in a short period of
time instead of saving it up for the future. The cons:;*
quences of an exclusive animal diet are gluttony, extreme
sensuality, combativeness, cruelty ; and stupidity, indo^
lence, physical and psychical apathy, are the necessary con*
sequences of over-stimulation.

Darwin says that " the hardest-working people he ever
met are the persons that work in the mines of Chili, and
that they are living on an exclusively vegetable diet"
The country people in Ireland live almost without meat*
eating, and yet they are strong and enduring. The conunon
Russian eats very little meat and enjoys good health. The
strongest people that can perhaps be foimd anywhere are
the country people in the South of Bavaria, and they eat
meat only on exceptional occasions and holy-days.
Horses, bulls, elephants are the strongest animals, and
live on vegetable food, while the prominent traits of
character of the flesh-eating animals are cowardice, irrita-
bility and cunning. A bear kept at the Anatomical
Museum at Giessen showed a quiet, gentle nature as long
as he was fed on bread, but a few days* feeding on meat
made him, not stronger, but vicious and dangerous.

Each animal form is an expression of that animal's
character, and he who takes it up in his system receives a

* Genesis i. 29.

t According to the calculations made by Prof. J. v. liebig, the
same amount of albuminous substances for which^ if in the form of animal
food, is paid lood., can be bought in the shape of peas for 9d., and in
that of wheat for 4d.

Digitized by

Google

ALCOHOL. at9

part of that character in his own constitution^' If men
were to live on the meats of tigers and cats, wolves and
hyenas and birds.ofprey^ the effect would soon be ^een.
in a state of greater demoralization.

Let those who desire to know the truth in regard to
meat eating seek the answers to -their questions not with
the intellect, of the head, but through the voice of wi^om
speaking in the interior of their heart, and they will not be
mistaken.*

Ano^er question arises m regard to the eating of flesh;
it is the question whether or not man has a right to Idll
animals for his food. (To the professed Christians who
claim to believe in- the Bible there, seems to be no cause
for any dbubt, because the command b plain : '' Thou shaU
not kiUJ* And yet this command is disregarded daily by:
millions of professed .^* Christians/' who base their illusoiy
right to Jdll animals upon a misunderstood verse of their ,
Bible. If it is said.tiiat God permitted man^to ''have'
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowls of
the air, and over the cattle, and over every living thing
that moveth upon the earth," f we should know that by
the terms "fish," and "fowl," and "cattle," etc, are
meant the elementary forces in him, which find their
objective represenutions in the animal kingdom, and that
it is nowhere said that man is pennitted to take away a
life which he is not able to give. Man's prerogative is to
appease suffering, not to cause it; not to interrupt the
work of evolution, but to assist it Christianity and
Murder are incompatible terms.

Meat is stimulating, and stimulating food creates a desire
for stimulating drink. The best cure for the desire for
alcoholic drink is to avoid the eating; of meat It is
doubtful whether there is any passion m the world more
devilish and more detrimental to the true interests of
humanity and of individual happiness than the love of
Alcohol. As meat-eating endows man with illusory
strength, that soon fades away, leaving its possessor
weaker than he was before ; likewise stimulating drinks
lull him into an illusory happiness, which soon disappears,
and is followed by lasting and real misery, causing suffering
to himself and to others. . It causes a long list of diseases

• See Dr. A. Ktiigifbrd< The Perfect Way in Diet**
t Genesis i. 26.

Digitized by

Google

tao RELATIVE UTILITY.

€l the internal organs, and leads to premature death ; it is
the cause of b^ far the great majority of all crimes
committed in civilized countries. To those who look
upon man as a rational being, it seems incomprehensible
why civilized nations will suffer an evil in their midst that
fills their jails, hospitals, lunatic asylums, and graveyards,
and why men will ** put an enemy in their mouths " that
destroys their health, their reason, and their life; but
those who look deeper see that the dawn of reason has
only begun, and that the spiritual faculties of the majority
of men still sleep in the icy embrace of ignorance and
illusion. Reforms are necessary, but they cannot be
inaugurated by force. *

The body politic resembles the individual body. It is
of no use to destroy the means to gratify a desire as long
as the desire itself is suffered to exist The evils that
affect mankind are the outcome of their desires for such
evils. Means to gratify evil desires will exist as long as
they are patronized, and if they are abolished other means
will be found. Weeds are not destroyed by cutting their
leaves, if the roots are allowed to remain.

To eat and drink and sleep for the purpose of living, and
not to live for the purpose of eating, drinking, and sleeping
is a maxim which is often heard, but which is not fre-
quently carried out A great deal of nutriment daily
taken by men serves no other purpose than to comply
with habit, and to gratify an artificially created desire.
The more a man is gross and material, the greater is the
quantity of food he desires ; and the more food he takes,
the more gross and material will he become. Noble and
refined natures require little nutriment ; ethereal beings
and ** Spiritual " entities require no material food.

The means should always be adapted to the end in view.
If the end is low and vulgar, low and vulgar means will
be needed ; if it is noble and high, equally high and noble
means are required. A prizefighter, whose main object is
to develop muscle^ will require a different training from
that of one who desires to develop the faculty to perceive
spiritual truths. Conditions that may be suitable for the
development of one person may be impraticable for
another. One man may develop faster through poverQTf

* See Dr. A. Kinasfoidi <* The Alcoholic Controveny,

Digitized by LjOOQiC

PRACTICAL OCCULTISM. 221

another through wealth ; one man may need as his initial
psychic stimulus the gentle and exalting influences of
married life, while another one's aspirations may rise
higher if independent of earthly ties. Each man who
exercises his will for the purpose of his higher develop-
ment is, to the extent he exercises it, a practical occultist.
Every one grows necessarily in one direction or in another ;
none remain stationary. Those who desire to outstrip
others in growth must act.

One of the Tibetan Mahatmas says in a letter :

'^ Man is made up of ideas, and ideas guide his life.
The world of subjectivity is the only reality to him even
on this physical plane. To the occultist it grows more
real as it goes further and further from illusory earthly
objectivity, and its ultimate reality is Parahrahtn, Hence
an aspirant for occult knowledge should begin to con*
centrate all his desires on the highest ideal, that of
absolute self-sacrifice, philanthropy, divine kindness, as of
all the highest virtues obtainable on this Earth, and work
up to it incessantly. The more strenuous his efforts to
rise up to that ideal, the oftener is his will-power exercised
and the stronger it becomes. When it is thus strengthened,
it sets up a tendency, in the gross shell of Stula-sharira^
to do such acts as are compatible with the highest ideal
he has to work up to, and his acts intensify his will-power
doubly, owing to the operation of the well-known law of
action and reaction. Hence in occultism great stress is
laid on practical results.

Now the question is : What are these practical results,
and how are they to be produced ? It is a well-known
fact derived from observation and experience that progress
is the law of nature. The acceptance of this truth suggests
the idea that humanity is in its lower stages of develop-
ment, and is progressing towards the state of perfection.
It will approach the final goal when it develops new
sensibilities and a clear relation with nature. From this
it is obvious that a final state of perception will be arrived
at when the energy that animates man co-operates with
tiie One Life operating in the Cosmos in achieving this
mighty object; and knowledge is the most powerful
means to that end.

Thus it will be clear that the ultimate object of nature
is to make man perfect through the union of the human

Digitized by

Google

aaa FAITH AND DOUBT.

spirit with the One Life. Having this final goal before
our mind, an intellectual brotherhood should be formed by
uniting all together, and this is the only stepping-stone
towards the final goal To produce this practical result,
untOHy we must hold up the highest ideal, which forms the
real matiy and induce others to look up to it. To lead
our neighbors and fellow-creatures to this right path, the
best means should be pursued with self-sacrificing habits.
When our energy as a collective whole is thus expended,
in working up to the highest ideal, it becomes potent, and
the grandest results are produced on the spiritual plane.
As ^is is the most important work in which every occul-
tist should be engaged, an aspirant for higher knowledge
should spare no efforts to bring about this end. With the
progressive tide of evolution of the body as a whole, the
mental and the spiritual faculties of humanity expand. To
help this tide on, a knowledge of philosophical truths
should be spread. 7%is is what is expected from an
aspirantfor occult knowledge^ and what he should do*^

The will is developed through action and strengthened
by faith. The movements of the body, such as walking,
are only successfiilly performed by a person because he
has a full and unwavering faith in his power to perform
them. Fear and Doubt paralyze the will and produce im-
potency; but hope and faith produce marvelous results.
The lawyer or physician who has no faith in his own ability
will make blunders, and if his clients or patients share his
doubts, his usefulness will be seriously impaired ; whereas
even the ignorant fanatic or quack may succeed, if he has
faith in himself.

Bulwer Lytton says : " The victims of the ghostly one
are those that would aspire and can only fear." Fear and
Doubt are the hell-bom daughters of ignorance that drag
man down to perdition ; while Faith is the white-robed
angel that lends him her wings and endows him with
power. '^ Samsayatma Vinasyati " (the doubter perishes),
said Krishna to Arjuna, his favorite disciple.

Even blind faith without knowledge may be more use-
ful than imperfect knowledge without faith, and conse-
quently without action. Strong faith, even if resting upon
an erroneous conception, may act powerfully in producing
results ; faith produces an exalted state of the imagination,
which strengthens the will, banishes pain, cures disease,
leads to heroism, and^ansforms hell into heaven.

Digitized by LjOOQIC

DEVELOPMENT OF WILL POWER. 8^

The only way to develop will-power is to act. Each act
creates a new impulse, which, added to the already exist-
ing energy, increases its strength. Good acts increase the
power for good ; evil acts, the power for evil ; but those
whose actions are neither good nor evil acquire no power
for either. A person who acts only from impulse mani-
fests no will, and if he obeys his lower impulses he pas-
sively develops into a criminal or a maniac. The most
horrible crimes are often committed without any propor-
tionate provocation, because the perpetrators had not the
power to resist the impulses that prompted them to such
acts. Such persons are not wicked ; they are weak and
almost irresponsible beings ; they are the servants of the
impulses that control them, and they can be made the
helpless instruments and victims of those who know how
to call forth their emotions : they are like the soldiers of
two opposing armies, who are not necessarily personal
enemies ; but are made to hate and kill each other by
appeals to their passions. The oftener such persons give
way to impulses, the more is their power of resistance
diminished, and their own impotency is their ruin. It is
of little use to be merely passively good, if abstinence from
wrong-doing may be so called. A person who does neither
good nor evil accomplishes nothing. A stone, an animal,
an imbecile, may be considered good, because they do no
active evil ; a person may live a hundred years, and at the
end of his life he may not have been more useful than a
stone.*

There is nothing in nature which has not a threefold
aspect and a threefold activity. The Will-power forms
no exception to this rule. In its lowest aspect the Will is
that power which induces the voluntary and involuntary
functions of the physical organism; its centre of activity is
the spinal cord. In its higher aspect it is the power which
induces psychic activity ; it is diffused through the blood
which comes from the heart and returns to it, and its
actions are governed, or can be governed, by intellect
acting in the brain by means of the impulses, influences,
and auras radiating from there. In its highest aspect the
Will is a living and conscious power having its centre in

* '< He who is neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm, will be spited oak
by xaXxa^y^Bible.

Digitized by

Google

SS4 OBEDIENCE.

the heart ; but this kind of Will is kBown only to those
who are illuminated by divine Wisdom.

The will, to become powerful, must be free, which means
that it must be obedient to universal law, to become free
of the bonds of self. If we desire an object, we do not
necessarily attract that object, but the object attracts us.
Eliphas Levi says : " The will accomplishes everything
which it does not desire ; " and the truth of this paradox
is seen in everyday life. Those who crave for fame or
riches or love are frequently disappointed ; the rich miser
is poorer than the beggar in the street, and happiness is a
shadow that flies before him who seeks it in material
pleasures. The surest way to become rich is by being con-
tented with what we have ; the safest way to obtain power
is to sacrifice ourselves for others; and if we desire
love, we must distribute the love we possess to others, and
then the love of others will descend upon us like the rain
descends upon the earth.

The development of the Will is a process of growth, and
the only true way to develop the Will is by being obedient
to the universal Law. Then will we become masters of
our Will, and our Will will become a serviceable instru-
ment in our hands ; but as long as the Will is governed by
personal desire, it is not we who control our will, but it is
our desire. As long as we do the will of the lower
animal I, we cannot be gods ; only when we perform the
will of the Divinity, within ourselves, we will become free
of the bondage of the animal elements, and be our own
masters.

Man in his youth longs for the material pleasures of
earth, for the gratification of his physical. body. As he
advances, he throws away the playthings of his childhood
and reaches out for something higher. He enters perhaps
into merely intellectual pursuits, and after years of labor he
may find that he has been wasting his time by running
after a shadow. Perhaps love steps in and he may think
himself the most fortunate of mortals, only to find out,
sooner or later, that ideals can only be found in the ideal
world. He may become convinced of the emptiness of
the shadows he has been pursuing, and, like the winged
butterfly emerging from the chrysalis, he stretches out his
feelers into the realm of infinite spirit, and is astonished
to find a radiant sun where he only expected to find dark-

Digitized by

Google

SPECCULATING GODS. 12$

ness and death. Some arrive at this light sooner ; others
arrive later, and many are lured away by some illusive light
and perish, and, like insects that mistake the flame of a
candle for the light of the sun, scorch their wings in its
fire.

Life is a continual battle between error and truth;
between man's spiritual aspirations and the demands of his
animal instincts. There are two gigantic obstacles in the
way of progress : his misconception of God and his mis-
conception of Man. As long as man believes in a whim-
sical reasoning God who distributes favors to some and
punishes others at pleasure, a God that can be reasoned
with, persuaded and pacified by ignorant man, he will keep
himself within the narrow confines of his ignorance, and
his mind cannot sufficiently expand. To think of some
place of personal enjoyment or heaven, does not assist
man's progression. If such a person desists from doing a
wicked act, or denies himself a material pleasure, he does
not do so from any innate love of good ; but either because
he expects a reward from God for his " sacrifice," or
because his fear of God makes him a coward. We must
do good, not on account of any personal consideration,
but because to do good is best. To be good is to be wise ;
the fool expects undeserved rewards; the wise expects
nothing but justice. The wise knows that by benefiting
the world he benefits himself, and that by injuring others
he becomes his own executioner.

What are the powers of Man, by which he may benefit
the world? Man as a created being has no powers
belonging to him. Even the substance of which his
organization is made up, does not belong but is only lent
to him by Nature, and he must soon return it to her. He
cannot make any use of it, except through that universal
power, which is active within his organization, which is
called the Will^ and which itself is a function of the uni-
versal principle, the Spirit*

Man is merely a manifestation of this universal principle
in an individual form, and all the spiritual powers he
seems to possess belong to the Spirit. Like all other
forms in nature he receives life, light and energy from the
universal fountain of Life, and enjoys their possession fee
a short span of time ; he has no powers whatever which he
may properly call his own.

8

Digitized by

Google

sa6 UNITY.

Thus the suDshine and rain, the air and earth, does not
belong to a plant They are universal elements belonging
to nature. They come and help to build up a plant, they
assist in the growth of the rosebush as well as the thistle ;
their business is to develop the seed, and when their work
is done, the organism in which they were active returns
again to its mother, the Earth. There is then nothing
which properly belongs to the plant but the seed, for it
alone can continue to exist without the parental organism
after having attained maturity, and in it is contained the
character of the species to which it belongs.

Life, sensation and consciousness are not the property
of man ; he does not produce them. They are functions
of the universal Spirit and belong to that universal power,
which has been called God. This Spirit, the One Life^
furnishes the principles which go to build up the organism
called Matty the forms of the good as well as those of the
wicked. They help to develop the germ of Intelligence
in man, and when their work is done, those elements
return a^ain to the universal fountain of Life. The germ
of Divinity is all there is of the real man, and all that is
able to continue to exist as an individual, and it is not a
man, but a Spirit, one and identical with the Universal
Spirit, and one of His children. How many persons
exist in whom this divine germ reaches maturity during
their earthly life? How many die before it becomes
mature ? How many do not even know that such a germ
exists ? Who can answer these questions ?

To this Universal Principle belong the functions which
we call Will and Life and Light ; its foundation is Love,
a Fire to which nothing that can perish will ever approach.
To this Universal Principle belong all the fundamental
powers which produced Uie universe and man, and only
when man has become one and identical with that Spirit
can he claim to have any powers of his own.

But the Will of this Universal Spirit is identical with
the LaWy and man who acts against the Law acts against
the Will of the Spirit, and as the Spirit is man's only real
Self, he who acts against that Law destroys himself.

llie first and most important object of man's existence
is, therefore, that he should learn the law, so that he may
obey it and thereby become one with the law and God.
A man who knows the Law knows himself, and a man
who knows his divine Self knows God.

Digitized by

Google

The only power which man may rightfully claim his own
is his Knowledge; it belongs to him because he has
acquired it by the help of the powers lent to him by
nature and the Spirit which is active therein. Not the
"knowledge *' of the illusions of life, for such 'knowledge is
illusive, and will end with those illusions ; not mere intel*
lectual learning, for that intellect will be exhausted in
time; but the spiritual knowledge of the heart, which
means the power to grasp the truth by feeling and under-
standing, to feel it intuitively, and to see that which we
feel by the light of the spiritual intelligence of the mind.

What has been said about the Will is equally applicable
to the Imagination. If man lets his own thoughts rest,
and rises up to the sphere of the highest ideal, his mind
becomes a mirror wherein the thoughts of God will be
reflected, and in which he may see the past, the present
and future ; but if he begins to speculate within the realm
of illusions, he will see the truth distorted and behold his
own hallucinations.

The knowledge of God and the knowledge of Man are
ultimately identical, and he who knows himself knows
God. If we understand the nature of the divine attributes
within us, we will know the Law. It will then not be diffi-
cult to unite our Will with the supreme Will or the cosmos ;
and we shall be no longer subject to the influences of the
astral plane, but be their masters. Then will the Titans
be conquered by the ^ods ; the serpent will have its head
crushed by Divine Wisdom (Sophia) ; the " devil " will be
conquered, and instead of being ruled by demons, we shall
become rulers and gods.

It is sometimes said that it does not make any difler-
ence what a man believes so long as he acts rightly ; but
a person cannot be certain to act rightly, unless he knows
what is right, and we, therefore, see the most horrible acts
of injustice committed in the name of justice, errors pro-
claimed as truths, and forms mistaken for principles. The
belief of the majority is not always the correct belief, and
the voice of reason is often drowned in the clamor of a
superstition based upon an erroneous theological doctrine.
An erroneous belief is detrimental to progress in propor-
tion as it is universal ; such belief rests on illusion ;
knowledge is based on truth. The greatest of all religious

Digitized by

Google

St8 RVLBS OF LIFE.

teachers therefore recommended Right Belief za being the
first step on the Noble Eightfold Path.*

Perhaps it will be useful to keep in mind the following
rules:

I. Do not believe that there b anything higher in the
universe than the immortal principle of good obtaining
self-consciousness in man, and that man is exactly what he
makes himself-— not what he pretends to be — and nothing
else. The true religion is the recognition of truth ; idols
are playthings for children.

3. Learn that the All is one and that everything is tfay«
self; man is a component and integral part of universal
humanity, and that what affects one acts and reacts on aU.

3. Realize that man is an embodiment of ideas, and his
physical body an instrument which enables him to come
mto contact with matter and control it; and that this
instrument should not be used for unworthy purposes. It
should neither be worshipped nor neglected.

4. Let nothing that affects your physical body, its com-
fort, or the circumstances in which you are placed, disturb
the equilibrium of your mind. Crave for nothing on the
material plane, live above it without losing control over it.

5. Never expect any favors from anybody, but be
always ready to assist others to the extent of your ability,
and according to the requirements of justice. Never fear
anything but to offend the moral law and you will not
suffer. Never hope for any reward and you will not be
disappointed. Never ask for love, sympathy, or gratitude
from anybody, but be always ready to bestow them on
others. Such things come only when they are not desired.

6. Learn to distinguish and to discriminate between the

* The eight stages on the noble eightfold Path to find the truth are^
aoQording to the doctrine of Gautama Buddha, the following 1

1. Right Belief.

2. Right Thought.

3. Right Speech.

4. Right Doctrine.

5. Right Means of Livelihood.

6. Right Endeavor.

7. Right Memory.

8. Right Meditation.

The man who keeps these augas in mind and follows them will be
free from sorrow, and may become safe from fritnre rebirths with thdr
ocmsequent miseries.

Digitized by

Google

RULES OF UFB. 239

true and the false, and act up to your highest ideal of
virtue.

7. Learn to appreciate everything (yourself included) at
its true value in all the various planes. A person who
attempts to look down upon one who is his superior is a
fooly and a person who looks up to one who is inferior is
mentally blind. It is not sufficient to know of the worth
of a thing, its worth must be realized, else it resembles a
treasure hidden in the vaults of a miser.

Louis Claude de Saint Martin (the Unknown Philo-
sopher) says :

'^ This is what should pass in a man who is restored to
his divine proportions through the process of regenera«
tion:

'* Not a desire, but in obedience to the law.

'^ Not an idea, which is not a sacred communication
with Good.

'^ Not a word, which is not a sovereign decree.

" Not an act, which is not a development and extension
of the vivifying rule of the word.

'^ Instead of this, our desires are false, because they come
from ourselves.

'^ Our thoughts are vague and corrupt, because they form
adulterous alliances.

*' Our words are without efficacy, because we allow them
to be blunted every day by the heterogeneous substances to
which we continually apply them.

'< Our acts are insignificant and barren, because the** can
but be the results of our words."

Such and similar instructions are nothing new ; they have
been pronounced in various forms by the philosophers of
all ages, and have been collected in books, and men have
read them without getting any better for it, because they
could not intellectually see the necessity for following such
advice. These doctrines have been taught by the ancient
Rishis and Munis, by Buddha and Christ, Confucius, Zoro-
aster and Mahomed, Plato, Luther and Shakespeare, and
every reformer. TTiey have been preached in sermons,
and are written in poems and prose , in works of philosophy,
literature, fiction, and art. They have been heard by all,
understood by some, and practiced by a few. To learn
them is easy, to realize them is difficult, to adopt them in
practical life is divine. The highest spiritual truths cannot

Digitized by

Google

S30 THEORY AND PRACTICE.

be^ intellectiully grasped, the reasoning powers of half*
animal man cannot hold them until they become accustomed
to them ; average man can only look up to those ideals which
are perceptible to his spiritual vision in moments of aspira-
tion, and onl^ gradualljr can he grow up into that plane
when, becoming less animal and more intuitive, he will be
able to realize Uie fact that moral growth is not necessary
to please a god whose favor must be obtained, but that
man himself becomes a god by that growth, and that he
can stimulate it only by making his energies act on a higher
plane. The highest energies are latent in the lower ones ;
they are the attributes of the spiritual soul, which in the
majority of men is still in a state of infancy, but whirh in
future generations will be more universally developed, when
humanity as a whole, having progressed higher, will look
back upon our present era as the age of ignorance and
misery, while they themselves will enjoy the fruits of the
higher evolution of Man.

Digitized by

Google

CHAPTER XL

LIGHT.

« Lei tbere be Ughu'^-^BiUe,

FOftic, personality and sensuality are the death of spirit;
the dissolution of form, loss of personality and unconscious-
ness of sensuous perceptions, render spirit free and restore
it to life. The elementary forces of nature, bound to forms,
become the prisoners of the forms. Being entombed in
matter they lose their liberty of action and move only in
obedience to external impulses ; the more they cling to
form, the more dense, compact, heavy and dull will they
become, and the less will be self-acting and free. Sunlight
and heat are comparatively free; their elements travel
from planet to planet, until they are absorbed by earthly
forms. Crystallized into matter they sleep in trees and
forests and fields of coal, until they are liberated by the slow
decomposition of form, or forcibly set free by the god of
fire. The waves of ocean and lake play joyfully with the
shore. Full of mirth they throw their spray upon the lazy
rocks. The laughing waters of the wandering brook glide
restlessly through forest and field, dancing and whirling
and playing with the flowers that grow by the side of their
road. They rush without fear over precipices, falling in
cascades over the mountain sides, uniting, dividing, and
uniting again, mingling with rivers and resting at last for a
while m the sea. But when winter arrives and King Frost
puts his icy hand upon their faces, they crystallize into

Digitized by VjOOQIC

SjS EARTH.BOVND SPIRITS.

indi^dual foims, they are then robbed of their freedom, And
like the damsels and knights of the enchanted castle, they
are doomed to sleep until the warm breath of youthful
Spring breaks the spell of the sorcerer and kisses them back
into life.

The fundamental laws of Nature are the same in all
her departments, and man forms no exception to the
general rule. He is a centre around which some of the
mtelligent as well as some of the unintelligent forces have
crystallized into a form. Bound by the laws of the Kanna
which that centre created, they are doomed to dwell
in a form, and to partake of the accidents to which
forms are exposed ; imprisoned in a personality, they par-
take of the sufferings which the tendencies of that person-
ality have called into existence. They may be exposed to
desires whose thirst increases in proportion as they are
furnished with drink, to passions whose fire bums hotter in
proportion as their demand for fuel is granted ; they are
tempted to run afler shadows that ever fly, to grasp at hopes
that ever beckon and vanish as soon as they are approached,
to sorrows that enter the house although the doors may be
closed against them, to fears whose forms have no substance,
to illusions that disappear only with the life of the form.
Like Prometheus bound to a rock, the impersonal spirit
is chained to a personality, until the consciousness of his
herculean power awakes in him, an4 bursting his chains he
becomes again free.

Not all the elements that go to make up a complete man
are enclosed in his material form. The far greater part of
them is beyond the limits of his physical body ; the latter
is merely a centre in which those invisible elements meet.
The elements that exist beyond stand in intimate relation
with those that are within, although the elements within
the form may not seem to be conscious of the existence of
those beyond. Still they act and react upon each other.

The character of man is far more important than his
physical form. Thought can create a form, but no form
can produce a thought ; and yet the substance of thought
is invisible as long as it has not clothed itself in a form.
Air exists within and beyond the physical body ; it is in-
visible, and yet it is an important element of the body, a
man who could not breathe would be very incomplete.
The ocean of mind in which man exists is as necessary to

Digitized by

Google

7 HE TRUE SELF. 333

his soul-life as the air is to his body, he cannot breathe if
deprived of air ; he cannot think if deprived of mind. The
outer acts upon the inner, the inner upon the outer, the
above upon the below, and the little upon the great. A
man who could live independent of his surroundings would
be self-existent, he would be a god.

The spirit is not confined by the form, it only over-
shadows the form ; the form does not contain the spirit, it
is only its outward expression ; it is the instrument upon
which the spirit plays, and which reacts upon its touch,
while the spirit responds to its vibrations. An ancient
proverb says : " Everything that exists upon the Earth has
Its ethereal counterpart above the Earth, and thejre is
nothing, however insignificant it may appear in the world,
which IS not depending on something higher ; so that, if
the lower part acts, its preceding higher part reacts upon
it"*

The greatest philosophers in ancient times taught that
the voyLi that alone recognized noumena, alwa3rs remained
outside the physical body of man ; that it overshadowed
his head, and that only the ignorant believed it existed
within themselves. Modem philosophers have arrived at
similar conclusions. Fichte writes : " The real spirit which
comes to itself in human consciousness is to be regarded
as an impersonal pneuma — universal reason — and the good
of man's whole development therefore can be no other than
to substitute the universal for the individual consciousness."

The greatest of all teachers, Gautama Buddha, says :
'^The permanent never mingles with the impermanent,
although the two are one. Only when all outward appear-
ances are gone, is that one principle of life left, which exists
independently of all external phenomena. It ts the fire
that bums within the extemal light when the fuel is
expended and the flame is extinguished, for that fire is
neither in the flame nor in the fuel, nor yet inside either of
the two, but above, beneath, and everywhere."

This real and permanent Self is an impersonal principle.
Hermes Trismegistus says : '' His father is the Sun, his
mother the stars, and his body the generations of men."
It is not attracted into the physical body of man, but the
soul of man may unite itself with that principle. It is the

• Sohar Wajecae.

Digitized by LjOOQiC

SM THE MASTER.

real Ego of every person, and the person who succeeds to
merge his personality into that £^o is thereby rendered
immortal. It is the true and livmg Christ of the real
Christians, not the dead *' Jesus ** but ue living Saviour who
remains with His followers unto the end of the world \ and
every one who unites his own self with that Christ — nfy
matter what his creed or confession may be — will become
as true and veritable a Christ as ever lived upon the Earth.
It is the "kfiytiii of the ancients, the Adam Kadmon of the
Hebrews, the Osiris of the Egyptians, the Iswar of the
Hindus, the way, the light, and the truth, the divine Self of
every man and the Redeemer for all.

The whole of a man is not enclosed within the small
circle that circumscribes his terrestrial life. He who has
found the Master within himself knows the true insigni-
ficance of his own personal self. The life of the latter is
made up of a comparatively small number of years passed
among the illusions of the terrestrial plane ; the life of the
former is made up of the essence of a great many of such
lives, he has retained of them only that which is useful and
grand while the worthless parts have been rejected. He
who has once realized the presence of his God laughs at
the idea of having ever imagined himself to be something
more than a bundle of semi-conscious elements from which
the Higher Self may draw nutriment if it finds anything
therein compatible with its own nature. What is all the
power and glory of earthly kings compared with the divine
Man, the King in the realm of the soul ? What is all the
science of this earth but nonsense, if compared with the
self-knowledge of the regenerated man ? Well may he who
has welcomed the Lord in his soul be willing to renounce
money, power and fame, terrestrial loves and all the illu-
sions of life, if it can be called " renunciation " to refuse to
touch things upon which one looks with indifierence, if
not with contempt. How can he who has never seen the
image of the true Saviour in his heart love Him, and how
can he who has once beheld it cease to love and adore
Him with his whole mind and with all the faculties of the
soul ? Such things are too sacred to be divulged by the
spirit of God to him who is not worthy to receive God in
his soul ; they will not be understood by those who cannot
yet rise above limitation ; let those who know the things
of which we have attempted to write rejoice and worship
in silence.

Digitized by

Google

THE LORD. %ii

He who has succeeded in merging the elements consti-
tuting his soul with that divine and ethereal higher self will
feel its power in his own heart. This principle baptizes
his soul with fire, and he who receives this baptism of fire
is ordained a priest and a king. He who is full of its
influence is the true " vicegerent of God," because the
supreme power of the universe acts through its instrument*
ality. This principle fills his person with a peace " which
passeth understanding," attracts the hearts of men to him,
and sheds blessings upon every one who approaches his
presence. It forgives the sins of men, by transforming
them into other men who have not sinned and need not to
be forgiven ; it does not require to hear confession to give
advice, because it can read the innermost thoughts of every
man, and its admonishing voice is heard in the heart that
has learned to understand its language. The development
of the power to perceive it confirms men's faith by enabling
them to recognize that to be true which they heretofore
only believed to be so, and being taught by the truth itself,
they can make no mistake ; it communicates with man—
not by being absorbed by man, but by absorbing the soul
of man into itself ; it brings the dying to life, because,
bein^ immortal, he who is united with it partakes of its
own immortality; the marriages it celebrates can never be
dissolved, because in this principle all humanity is bound
together to one indissoluble whole ; to separate from it
would be death to the part that separates itself from the
whole. The sphere in which this principle still lives is the
sphere of eternal life ; it is the only true and infallible
«« church/' and its power cannot be taken away. This
church is truly ''catholic/' that is to say, universal ; noth-
ing can live without its jurisdiction, because nothing can
continue to exist without the authority of life. Still it has
no particular name, requires no fee for initiation, no oefe-
monies or rites. Heathens and infidels may enter it with*
out chan^ng their creed ; opinions cease to exist where
the truth is revealed.

But this true principle of Christ is not the Christ of
popular Christianity; it has long ago been driven away
from the modem Christian temples, and an illusion has
remained in its place. The money-changers and tradesmen
have again taken possession of the temple of mind, sacri-
ficing the life-blood of the poor at the altars of wooden

Digitized by

Google

336 IHE CHRIST.

gods, closing their eyes to the truth and worshipping
tinsel, squandering the wealth of nations for the glorifica-
tion of self. The true '^ Son of Man " is still scoffed at by
His nominal followers, traduced by His pretended friends,
crucified by men who do not recognize in Him the only
source of their life. Killed by men in their own hearts,
ignorantly and foolishly, because they do not know what
they are doing, and that their own life-substance departs
at the time when He departs from their life.

Modem civilization adores the religion of selfishness,
and rejects the gospel of love ; she debases her own
dignity by crouching at the feet of idols, where she should
stand up in her own dignity and purity as the queen of the
whole creation. Humanity is still dreaming and has not
jret fully awakened to life. She searches for a god in her
imagination, and cannot realize that he can only be found
in the truth. Men and women clamor for the coming of a
god, and yet this god is ever ready to come to them as
soon as he is admitted into the heart, by submitting to
him their will.

This unknown god is attainable to all. He is ever
ready to be bom in every heart where the conditions for
his birth are prepared. He always begins to come to life
in a *' manger " between the elemental and animal forces in
man. He can only be bom in a lowly place, because
pride and superstition are his enemies, and in a heart
filled with vanity he would soon suffocate. The news of
his birth sends a thrill of pleasure through the physical
body, and the morning stars sing together for joy, herald-
ing the dawn of the day for the resurrection of the spirit.
The three magicians from the East, Love^ Wisdom and
Power ^ appear at the manger and offer their gifts to the
new-bora babe. If Herodes^ the king of pride and ambi-
tion, does not succeed in driving it out of the country, it
begins to grow, and as it grows its divinity becomes mani-
fest. It argues with the intellectual powers in the temple
of the mind, and silences them by its superior knowledge.
It penetrates into mysteries, which intellectuality, born of
sensual perceptions, cannot explain. Grey-headed ma-
terial science, sophistry hoary with age, old logic based
upon misconceptions of fundamental truths, give way, and
are forced to acknowledge the wisdom of the half-grown
god.

Living in the wilderness of material desires, it is vainly

Digitized by

Google

THE REDEEMER. 237

tempted by the devil of selfishness. It cannot be misled
by personal considerations, because being impersonal it
has no personal claims. The " devil " can give to it noth^
ing that it does not already possess, because being the high*
est it rules over all that is low.

This principle is the first emanation of The Absolute.
It is the " only-begotten " son of its father, and it is as old
as the father, because the manifested Absolute could only
become a ** father " at the time when the ** son " was born.*
It is the living Wordy and every man is a Christy in whom
the " Son of God" becomes manifest. It is the divine self
of every man, his own original ethereal counterpart without
any infirmities, because the latter only belong to the form.
It is not a personality, but it may become individualized
in man and yet remain in its essence impersonal, a living
principle, ubiquitous, incorruptible and immortal. This
is the great mystery before which the intellect, reasoning
from particulars to universals, stands hopelessly still, but
which the soul, whose inner spiritual perceptions are alive,
beholds with astonishment and wonder. The spirit is
formless and cognizes the formless ; the intellect is con-
nected with form, and can only behold the formless in the
light of the spirit. The intellect deals with the finite, and
can only grasp the infinite, if illuminated by that very
principle whose existence is doubted before the illumination
took place.

As long as the wavering intellect doubts the existence of
spirit, it cannot become conscious of its existence, because
only the steady light of unclouded reason can penetrate
into the depths where the spirit resides. Mere " belief" is
a confession of ignorance ; true faith is based upon convic-
tion. But we cannot be convinced of the existence of
something we do not know and of which we are uncon-
scious, except by becoming conscious of its existence.
Consciousness, knowledge and realization of the existence
of something can only begin at the moment when that
something begins to become conscious within ourselves.
We may search for the god within us, but we cannot
artificially bring him to life. We can prepare the condi-
tions under which he may awake to consciousness within
ourselves, by divesting the mind from all emotional and

* Bible : St. John u I ; Hebrews i« 3.

Digitized by LjOOQiC

JS8 GRACE.

intellectual predilections and prejudices, and wken the
divine principle has awakened within us, then has arrived
the moment of '' grace." Such a grace is not a favor con-
ferred by a partial, whimsical, and personal god, it is the
effect of a strong desire, which has the power to grant its
own prayers, and if that desire does not exist, it is useless
to'* pray." As well may an acorn enclosed in a stone beg
to be developed into an oak as a man whose heart is filled
with desires for the low ask to become conscious of the
hi^h. To put implicit belief in the statement of bonze or
pnest is weakness, to enable ourselves to recognize the
truth is strength, to arrive at conviction through knowledge
confers the only true faith.

Tennyson speaks of the beginning of true faith when he
says —

*< We have but fiuth, we cannot know,
A beam in darkness, let it grow."

We cannot intellectually know ; but when the beam has
grown, it constitutes spiritual knowledge^ which is identical
with the living faith.

When the divine and impersonal principle begins to
become conscious in the personal man, it acts upon him
from the five points of attraction, represented by the five-
pointed star, and in Christian symbology by the cross.
The body begins to feel new sensations, the pulse begins to
throb with more vigor, the animal forces stirred up in their
"hells " by the arrival of ** Christ " become more active,
pains may be experienced in the head, the palms of the
hands, and the soles of the feet, and in other parts of his
body, and the candidate for immortality — whether he be a
Christian, a Turk, a Brahmin, a Jew, or an Infidel — ^may
thus physically experience the process represented in the
martyrdom of Christ.* The interblending of the immortal
with the mortal will necessarily cause suffering to the latter
until the lower elements are entirely subjected and rendered
unconscious.

There is no salvation except through suffering ; pains
accompany man's entrance into the world, pains accom-

* The above remark does not refer to stigmata^ which are a resalt of
a state of exalted imagination, while the pains referred to are the result
of the penetrating power of the spirit, infusing a new life into the physical
fonn.

Digitized by

Google

THE NEW LIFE. 239

pany his spiritual regeneration. The low must die so that
the high may live, and as the low is gifted with conscious-
ness and sensation, it suffers acutely during its transfor-
mation. Only he who has tasted the bitterness of evil can
fully realize the sweetness of good, only he who has suffered
the heat of the day can fully appreciate the cool of the
evening breeze. He who has lived for ages in darkness
will know the true value of light when he enters its realm ;
he who has been buried in illusions will rejoice when he
rises up into real knowledge.

What is true in regard to individual man is equally true
in regard to humanity as a whole. Christ, the divine prin-
ciple in the kingdom of Spirit, impelled by the infinite love
that radiates from the centre of the All, eternally descends
into the hearts of mankind, to partake of their suffering and
to show them the way to perfection. Compared wiUi the
** ram " of the intellect whose power resides in his horns,
He is the " lamb " of wisdom, having no will of His own,
but doing the will of the Father. He takes upon His
shoulders the sins of the world, for He Himself is without
sin. He can gain no personal benefit by His descent into
matter; being perfect Himself, He needs no further perfec-
tion ; it is the sins of men and women that induce Him to
shed His love and light and life into humanity. Being one
with humanity, He suffers with all mankind. He suffers with
them on account of their sins ; and as men and women
become conscious of His divine presence, they become
aware not merely of their own individual evils, but of the
sufferings of humanity as a whole ; they begin to suffer
with and for each other, they recognize in the Christ prin-
ciple the universal link that binds them all together into
one harmonious whole by the power of infinite Love.

Realizing their true nature as sons of the eternal God,
they die to all that is animal and low, and the more they
die to the latter the more will they become alive in the
spirit, wherein exists the only true, real, and immortal life.
The motto of the ancient Rosicrucian fraternity was : In
Deo nascimur, in/esu morimur^ reviviscimus fer Spiritum
Sanctum : that is to say, their souls, like those of all other
men, were born from the universal fountain of all Good ;
they died to their semi-animal natures by entering into the
spiritual body — *'the spiritual church" — of Christ, and
becoming one with the Christ spirit, they gained eternal

Digitized by

Google

940 AT^ONEMENT.

life by being penetrated, illuminated, and glorified by its
divine light. Their " church " had nothing whatever to do
with any external church organization ; the temple wherein
their spirits met and held holy communion of thought, was
the universal temple of the Holy Ghost ^ representing Love,
Wisdom and Sanctity, and they S3rmbolized it by a circle,
representing the sphere of thought, wherein Mercury
(Intelligence) and Venus (Love) were joined together.

This conjunction of the principle of Love and Intelligence
within the soul of man constitutes the true " Rosicrucian "
and Adept. It is not to be obtained by any external cere-
monies and rites ; but by the entire sacrifice of the self-will
of semi-animal man to the eternal will of God ; whereby the
lower self is rendered inactive and helpless, as if it were
nailed upon a cross ; while the divine self of man becomes
revealed in its own light.

Of these real Rosicrucians no " history " can be written ;
because they have nothing to do with external things ; but
live in eternity.

^ Of late the most grotesque and fabulous stories about the '^ Rosicm-
dans " have been put into circulation, and some enterprising publishers
have brought out books about their ** ceremonies " and ** rites." All
such speculations are based upon the mistaken idea that the Rosicrucians
were a certain sect or organization going by that name, and being bound
together by some creed or belief, and using external ceremonies and signs.
There is no doubt that some such ** secret societies " existed, calling
themselves " Rosicrucians," and some such are still in existence. They
have, however, nothing in common with the true Rosicrucian principle |

Digitized by

Google

SYMBOLISM. 241

These ideas are not new, they have not come into
existence with the advent of Modem Christianity; they
are eternal truths, as old as the world, and they have been
represented in various fables and allegories among the
nations of this globe. In the " Old Testament " we find
the doctrine of salvation represented in the story of Noah's
ark. Noah represents the spiritual man, and the ark
the spiritual church. Only those elements of the psychic
organism of man which enter the spiritual realm are saved,
while those who remain in a lower state are doomed to
destruction. Upon the waters of thought floats the ship
containing many compartments ; the window of knowledge
is open to enable the divine Man to look out upon the
watery waste. The intellectual raven is sent out to dis-
cover dry land, but it can find no place to rest, and returns
to the ark ; the dove of spiritual intelligence alone can find
solid ground in the realm of the spirit ; she returns with
the emblem of peace, the doubts recede, and the ark is
turned into a temple resting upon the top of the mountain
of knowledge.

Blessed is he whose ark during his terrestrial life is
guided upon this Ar-ar-at of Faith; it will enable him
I>atiently and with indifference to bear the ills of terrestrial
life until the soul is released from her bonds, and returns to
her home in the eternal kingdom, having become separated
from all the attractions of matter.

After this separation, Isis^ the goddess of nature, the
mother of his body, an ever-immaculate virgin, Mary,f will
take care of her son. The life-principle which was active

no more than the Christ spirit has anything to do with the organization
of some so-called ** Christian " sect. He in whom the Christ lives is a
real Christian, not he who merely professes a belief in Him with hii
mouth. Likewise he who lives in the light that shines from the centre
of the Cross is a Rosicrucian, and not he who merely belongs to a sect
by that name. A true Christian can only be known by his acts, and
likewise there is no need for the true Rosicrucian to use passwords and
signs for the purpose of making himself known. The only sign by which
the brothers recognize each other is the light of the Thith*

t Maja f Illusion).

Digitized by

Google

a^a CEREMONIES.

in him during his earthly existence will be laid in a new
sepulchre, '' wherein was man never yet laid," it will be
transferred and embodied in new vegetable or animal
forms.* Entering again into the wheel of transformation
and evolution, it may help to produce grain, and assist in
tfie growth of the grape ; hidden in bread and wine, it may
again enter the human form ; but the soul, having partaken
of the immortal life of the spirit, will have become self-
exbtent in God, and suffer no further migrations. He who
partakes of material food enters into communion with
the life-principle of nature, while he who assimilates his
nature with the spiritual principle, becomes one with the
spirit that constitutes his higher self, communicates with
the real Christ

In the ancient mysteries the ceremony called the trans-
figuration and communion was performed in a similar
manner as it is now taking place in the Christian churches.
The initiator presented bread and wine to the candidates
before the final revelation was made. This ceremony
represents the descent of the spirit into matter, by which
the soul is at once nourished with the " bread of life," and
stimulated into a higher kind of spiritual activity by the
" wine of divine love," and its efficacy will be propor-
tionate to the receptivity of the mind of the candidate.

The great Christian mystic, Jacob Boehme, says : *' What
we eat or drink affects merely the physical body, but does
not affect the spirit. That which the ceremony symbolizes
exteriorly must take place interiorly, else the ceremony
will be of no use. Those who wish to commune with the
spirit must rise up to it in their thoughts ; the high will
not come down to mingle with that which is low."

Thus it seems that the original Christian allegory was
intended to describe an occult process, which must have
been known long before the establishment of the external
Christian church. It is based upon an universal law of
nature, and as such it must have existed as long as
humanity existed. The Indian Yogii who, by the practice
of Yog,f unites his lower self with his higher self; the
Brahmin, who by meditation and study merges his Atma
with the universal Parabrahm ; the Buddhist who attempts

* A. P. Smnetts "^Esoteric Buddhism,'' chap, ii*
t«* To bind."

Digitized by

Google

TRUTH. 143

to annihilate his lower self that his formless self may be
absorbed in Nirvana, all follow the same process ; but the
ignorant, whether they may call themselves Brahmins,
Buddhists, Christians, or any thing else, and who look upon
the allegorical representations of natural and ''supernatural"
forces described in pictures, and books, as being the
images of existing personal deities, are idolators.

How much more grand and sublime is practical Chris*
tianity than the mere theoretical christianism of our times !
Jesus of Nazareth, whether he ever existed or not, re-
presents the ideal man whose example we ought to follow.
Without being a true follower of the ideal Christ, a belief
in a person can be of no value. How superior is know-
ledge to mere opinion and belief, how infinitely greater
the living spirit of Christ to a mere belief in the historical
person whose memory is worshipped by those who cling to
external symbols and cannot rise up to a realization of
spiritual facts ! Why do men close their eyes and grope
in darkness while they are surrounded by light, why do
they cling to death when the door of inmiortal life is open
before them?

Those who cling to external symbols without knowing
the meaning of the latter, cling to illusion. To convert an
ignorant person by substituting one form of illusion for
another is useless, and the money and labor expended for
such '' conversions " is wasted. Ignorance exchanged for
ignorance remains ignorance still; a change of opinion
cannot establish conviction, and a pretence to knowledge
does not make a man wise.

If a man knows the truth, it matters little by what name
he may call it, or under what form he may attempt to
express that which cannot be made into form. The
Buddhist, who looks upon the image of Buddha as a
figurative representation of a living principle, and who, in
memory of a once living person in whom that principle
found its fullest expression, and whose example he wishes
to follow, offers flowers and fruits at his shrine, is as near
the truth as the Christian who sees in the picture of Jesus
of Nazareth the representation of his highest ideal.

There had been a great deal of time and labor spent to
prove or disprove that the founder of Christianity was a
person living in Palestine at the beginning of the Chris-
tian era. To know whether or not such a person by the

Digitized by

Google

244 JESUS OF NAZARETH.

name of Jesus^ or perhaps Jehoshuay ever existed, and
whether he existed at the time indicated by theologians,
may be a matter of great historical interest, but it cannot
be of supreme importance for the salvation of Man;
because persons are only forms, and as such they are limited
and parts of the whole, and the whole cannot be subor-
dinate to the part. If the Man described as Jesus in the
New Testament lived, he was undoubtedly an Adept, and
as such he was a true " Son of God," because every one in
whom the spirit of God awakens to consciousness is a
Son of God * and an incarnation of the Word. For all we
know, he may have been the most perfect incarnation of
the spirit of truth that ever existed, but the truth existed
before the person was born, and it is not the belief in the
person that can save mankind from evil, but the recogni-
tion of the truth, of which the outward form can be noth-
ing else but the external expression. Those who believe
in the still living eternal spirit of Christ, whether they
believe in His person or not, are the true worshippers, but
those who do not follow His words, but believe in His
person, worship only a form without life — an illusion.

The doctrines of the Jesus of the Gospel grow in sub-
limity in proportion as their secret meaning is understood ;
the tales of the Bible in regard to His deeds and the miracles
which He performed, and which to the superficial observer
appear incredible and absurd, represent eternal truths and
psychological processes which are not merely things of the
past, but which occur even now within the realm of the
soul of man, and in proportion as man ceases to be a
" Christian," and comes nearer to Christ, veil after veil
drops from his eyes, and a new life awakens in him, and a
new and infinite vista of thought rises up before his
astonished eyes.

The theory of the redemption of man does not date from
the time when the historical Christ is supposed to have
been bom. The history of Christ finds its prototype in
the history of Krishma. The Greeks taught the redemption
of the soul under the allegory of Amor and Psyche. Psyche
(the human soul) enjoys the embraces of her divine lover
Amor (the sixth principle) every night. She feels his
divine presence and hears the voice of intuition in her

* Reyelations xx. 7,

Digitized by LjOOQIC

9LD TRUTHS WITH NEW NAMES. 245

heart, but she is not permitted to see the source from
which that voice proceeds. At a time when the God is
sleeping (when the voice of her intuition is silent) her
curiosity awakes and she wishes to see the god. She lights
the lamp of the intellect and proceeds to examine critically
the source of her happiness ; but at that moment the
god disappears, because the clouds and illusions created by
her lower intellectual powers hide the higher spiritual
truths from view. Despairingly she wanders through the
lower regions of her emotions and through the sphere of
sensual perceptions. She cannot find her god by the
power of reasoning from the material plane. Ready to
die, she is saved by the power of her love for her redeemer ;
that attracts her to him. She follows that attraction and
becomes united with him, no more unconsciously but
conscious and knowing his attributes, which are now her
own.

Modem Christianity has not destroyed the Olympian
gods. They were allegorical representations of truths, and
truths cannot be killed. The laws of nature are the
same to-day as they were at the time of Tiberius;
Christianism has only changed with symbols and called old
things by new names, and the dead heathen gods have
been resurrected in the form of Roman Catholic saints.

Modem writers have represented the same old truths in
other forms, in prose and in verse. Goethe — ^for instance
—represents it beautifully in his ** Faust." Dr. Faust^
the man of great intellect and celebrated for his learning,
in spite of all his scientific accomplishments, is unable to
find the tmth.

<* The imknown is the usefiil thing to know

That which we know is useless for our purpose*"

Despairing at the impotency and insufficiency of
Intellectual research, he enters into a pact with the prin-
ciple of evil. By its assistance he attains wealth, love
and power, he enjoys all that the senses are capable to
enjoy, still feeling intuitively that selfish enjoyment cannot
confer tme happiness. Neither the splendor of the
imperial court, nor the beauty of Helen of Troy, who
retums from the land of shadows at his request, nor the
orgies of the Blockshtrg^ where all human passions are let

Digitized by

Google

846 FAUST.

loose without restraint, can satisfy his craving for more.
Lord of the Earth, he sees only a single hut which is not
yet his own, and he takes even that, regardless of the fate
of its inhabitants. Still he is not satisfied until, aftei
having recovered a part of land from the ocean by his
labors, he contemplates the happiness which others may
enjoy by reaping the benefit of his work. This is the first
unselfish thought that takes root in his mind. It fills him
with extreme happiness, and in the contemplation of the
happiness of others his personality dies and his higher self
becomes glorified and immortal.

Truth knows that it f>, but it cannot intellectually and
critically examine itself unless it steps out of itself, and,
stepping out of itself, it ceases to be one. The eye cannot
see itself without the aid of a mirror ; good becomes only
known to us after we have experienced evil ; to become
wise we must first become foolish and eat the forbidden
fruit An impersonal power not having been embodied in
a form, would know that it exists, but would know nothing
more. To learn the conditions of existence it becomes
embodied in form and acquires knowledge ; having gained
that knowledge, form is no longer required.

The desire for personal existence imprisons the spirit
of man into a mortal form; he who during his life on
Earth conquers all desire for personal existence becomes
free. The divine Buddha, resting under the Boddhi-tree
of wisdom, and having his mind fixed on the chain of
causation, said : *' Ignorance is the source of all eviL
From ignorance spring the Sankharas (tendencies) of
threefold nature-productions of body, of speech and thought
(during the previous life) ; from the Sankharas springs
(relative) consciousness, from consciousness spring name
and form, from this the six regions (the six senses) ; from
this springs desire, from desire attachment, from
attachment existence, birth, old age, death, grief,
lamentation, suffering, dejection and despair. By the
destruction of ignorance the Sankharas are destroyed, and
their consciousness, name and form, the six regions, con-
tact, sensation, desire, attachment, existence, and its
consequent evils. From ignorance spring all evils, from
knowledge come cessation of this mass of misery. The
truly enlightened one stands, dispelling the hosts of ilhi*
lions like the sun that illuminates the sky."

Digitized by

Google

IMPERSONALITY. 247

The power which di£fuses the sense of personality is the
same which caused the existence of man ; it is the power
of love, and the more the love of a person expands over
all others the more will the consciousness of personality
be diffused. We esteem a person according to the degree
in which he prefers common interests to the interests of
his own personality. We admire generosity, and unselfish-
ness, and benevolence, and yet such qualities are absurd
and useless, if we believe that the highest object of man's
existence is his own personal happmess on the physioU
plane ; because the highest happiness in that plane consists
m the greatest amoimt of possessions pertaining to that
plane. To give is to experience a personal loss. But if
the man strives for impersonal power, to give away per-
sonal possessions will be his gain, because the less he is
attracted to personal possessions the more he will expand
his personality. To give with the view of expecting some
benefit in return is useless for such a purpose, l^cause
a person having such an object in view simply gives up
one personal possession for another. He is a tradesman
that clings to his goods, and is only willing to part with
something good provided he can get something better in
exchange.

Neither the white nor the black magician has any such
personal considerations. The inveterate villain does not
obey his selfish emotions, but controls them and creates
emotions in others which they cannot resist, and in this
way he makes others accomplish his purpose. He hates
whom he chooses to hate, and his will, if directed against
the person he hates, is freighted with evil. His touch
may bring disease, and his evil eye may be poison to per-
sons who, having very little will power of their own, are
unwilling to resist its influence. The emotions which he
calls forSi attract to themselves corresponding elements ;
he enters into co-operation with the evil forces of the astral
plane, whom he either commands or propitiates, or he
makes a compact with them by gratifying their evil desires
and invoking their aid. Instead of expanding his powers
he concentrates them into a focus. His will is rather
forcible than powerful, and is sometimes rendered so by
certain practices, such as the careless endurance of physical
pain, and by such ceremonies as may assist his imagination.
The energies which he accumulates in his astral body

Digitized by

Google

a4S PRACTICE OF MAGIC.

may continue to exist long after the death of his physical
body, until they are exhausted by suffering and disin-
tegrated in the astral plane. He opposes his individual
w& to the cosmic will, and the result is isolation and
death.

The white magician strengthens and expands his will-
power by bringing it into harmony with the universal will.
Not to counteract, but to assist the process of evolution, is
his object, and as the progress of the evolution in nature
is towards unity, the first manifestation of his will is a
universal love for humanity, and each act by which he
expresses this love strengthens his will. To unite one's
will with the universal will does not mean a merely passive
contemplation and perception of spiritual truths, but an
active penetration into the process of evolution, and a real
co-operation with the beneficent powers, the master-
builders of the sidereal universe.

Such a union is not produced by an inactive acqui-
escence with the decrees of an inexorable fate, and patient
indifference to whatever may happen ; much less by a
submission of one's will to the dictates of another person
who claims to be furnished with divine authority, but by
a strong determination to accomplish whatever is in our
power for the good of humanity, and by expressing that
determination through action.

A man may surrender his will to the will of another
man, if he believes the latter to be more wise than himself,
and by doing so he may become strong in mastering his
own self; but he should never surrender his reason and
never act contrary to the dictates of his conscience. The
convent discipline of the Middle Ages may have been
conducive to strengthen the will-power of those that were
subjected to it, but it was destructive to reason, and
instead of gods imbeciles were created.

According to the unselfishness and the spiritual power
of a person his individual influence may extend over a
family, a village, a town, a country, or over the whole
Earth. Every one desires influence, and seeks to obtain
power by obtaining wealth and position. But the influence
gained by such possessions is not individual power. A
fool may be a pope, a king, or a millionary, and people may
bow in obedience before him on account of his position
and wealth. They may despise his person and adore his

Digitized by

Google

PERSONALITY. 349

possessions, which he himself adores, and to which his
person is as subject as the lowest one of his slaves. Such
a person is not a commander ; it is his wealth that com-
mands him and the others. His wealth in such a case is
the reality, and he himself an illusion. When his wealth
is squandered his own personality disappears, and those
who used to crouch at his feet may spurn him away from
their table. The spiritual power of a person is indepen-
dent of such artificial aids ; a virtuous person is esteemed
in proportion as his qualities become known, and the
spiritually strong exerts a powerful influence over all his
surroundings.

To this class belong all those who have risen above the
crowd by the power of their own will and intelligence, and
not in consequence of merely external circumstances, such
as are conveyed by birth, money or favoritism. It is the
internal qualities of a man, and not merely his external
possessions, that are constituting his virtue.

Opposed to love is hate. Hate is love reversed ; it is
the opposite pole of the same power that in its manifest-
ation for good is called love, and in its manifestation for
evil is named hate. Hate, like love, is an impersonal
power, and the being whose consciousness of personality
is merged into hate becomes himself an impersonal power
for evil and as such he may cause evil. His impersonal
self may be, to a certain extent, as powerful for evil as the
impersonal self of him who employs his faculties for good,
but at the end, when the tension between the two poles
will have reached its natural limits, the law of justice will
prevail with the good.

The reason why love must prevail over hate is because
love being associated with wisdom is stronger than hate.
Love unites and attracts all ; it even converts hate into
love by the power of truth. Hate disunites and repulses.
Love is related to wisdom, and hate is based on ignorance.
Both are enduring and independent of form, but only that
which is good and wise is immortal. Wisdom is therefore
the true redeemer of good, and at the same time the de-
stroyer of evil. Love, acting from the centre to the peri-
phery destroys the consciousness of personality and elevates
the soul over the attraction of the Earth, expanding the
limits of its activity as it increases in power. Tending
downwards from the periphery to the centre it prod

Digitized by*

9S9 I-OVE AND HA TE.

form* personal!^, selfishness, unconsciousness and deatti.
Awakening again in the form it expands and grows again,
and attracting the most refined and spiritual elements ol
the form withm itself it saves them from the tomb of mat-
ter and resurrects them from the form.

Man may be compared with a planet revolving around
its own centre ; above the orbit in which he turns is light,
below it darkness, but his own personality is crystallized
in the centre. The light above and the darkness below
attract him, and both are filled with life and strong
power ; only in the centre is the material form, held to-
gether by the cohesion of selfish attractions, rendered
unconscious and immovable by its density, chilled by its
remoteness from the spiritual sun. The farther he travels
from that centre, the more will he approach the light or
the shadow, and having reached a certain point at which
the attraction of his personal self ceases, he will either
rise up to the source of light or sink into the shadow,
according to his tendencies which lead him to permaaent
good or to permanent evil. A change from darkness to
li^ht, from evil to good, is only possible as long as man, in
his revolutions around the centre of his own self, has not
transcended the orbit where the attraction of self ceases,
and where the attraction of light and shadows counteract
each other. Having transcended that orbit, no return is
possible, he has then committed the unpardonable sin
which only the impersonal man can commit ; because per-
sonal man, being bound to a form, and under the influence
of love for self, is not free to act as he pleases. As long
as he clings to self he acts ignorantly and under the pres-
sure of selfish considerations. Mistaking the low for the
high, he clings to the low and perishes with it. Only he
who has attained the knowledge of self will be able to
choose free, because he will know the nature of that which
he chooses ; the blind have no freedom of choice. Only at
the end, when all will have attained knowledge and freedom,
will be the final resurrection of humanity, as a whole, the
parting of light and shadow, and the restoration of good.
Then will be the day of Judgment referred to in the Reve-
lation of St. John, when after the ending of the seventh
round of the life-wave around the planetary chain, the
"bottomless pit" will be opened and the good and evil
will part. But no personal judge may be Uiere, nor any
persons that could be judged, but only the power of gooC

Digitized by LjOOQIC

THE BALANCE. ^$1

and evil, of which former personalities constitute an inte-
gral part, and the power of the law. *

The unpardonable sin is to knowingly and willfully reject
spiritual truth. In a certain sense all sins are "unpardon-
able/' because they all cause effects which have to become
exhausted before they can cease ; but if a person kntmh
ingly and wUlfully^ without any selfish considerations,
rejects the truth, it proves that he has a determinate prefer-
ence for evil, that he loves evil better than good, and that
he is therefore amalgamated with evil. He who is ignorant
is not responsible for his acts, but he who knows the truth
and rejects it will suffer its loss. Only the good will sur-
vive, and he who chooses evil will perish in evil. It is
therefore dangerous for men to acquire occult knowledge,
before they have becon*^ sufficiently wise .Vo delect only
that which is good.

Man passes through several resurrections. His life-
principle resurrects in the plants growing on his grave and
in the worms feeding upon his body, his astral soul resur-
rects from the body, his true self from the elementary
forces connected with the activity of his soul. Besides
these resurrections there are continually resurrections
taking place within the soul of man ; there is the resurrec-
tion from selfishness to a true realization of truth, the
resurrection from ignorance to knowledge, and his libera-
tion from the attraction of evil. Good and evil will finally
resurrect from the form, the good a blessing and the evil
a curse ; but the ignorant that know neither good nor evil
will have no resurrection, because they have no spiritual
life. They will remain chained to the form and sleep crys-
tallized in space and "live not again until the thousand
years f are finished,"!}! when they may again begin their
labor of developments at the commencement of a world.

But He that is will still "sit upon the great white
throne " after the earth and the heaven have fled away
from His face,§ and the powers of good, the sons of wis-
dom, "over which the second death has no power," will
be with Him §§ as priests and kings, when, after the Pralaya
is ended. He stretches forth His hands and commands
again : Let there he Light.

* St John: Rereladoiis xz. i.

t The Pralaya. | St John: ReveUtioiis zx. 5.

% Rereladoos xx. s. )$ Ibid., xx. 6.

Digitized by

Google

CHAPTER XII.

CONCLUSION.
** He to whom time b like eternity, and eternity like time, is free."— »

To picture the eternal and incomprehensible informs, and
to describe the unimaginable in words, is a task whose
difficulty has been experienced by all who ever attempted it.
The formless cannot be described in forms, it can only be
represented by allegories which can only be understood by
those whose minds are open to the illumination of truth.
The misunderstanding of allegorical expressions in the
sacred books has led to religious wars, to the torturing,
burning and killing of thousands of innocent victims ; it
has caused the living wives of dead Hindus to be burned
with the corpses of their husbands, it has caused ignorant
men and women to throw themselves before the wheels of
the car of the Juggernath^ it causes the endless quarrels
between some 200 Christian sects, and while the truth
unites all humanity into one hii.rmonious whole, the mis-
understanding of it produces innumerable discords and
diseases.

The Bible says : " The secret things belong unto the
Lord;" and the Bhagwat Gita repeats the same truth in
the following words : " Those whose minds are attracted
to my invisible nature have a great labor to encounter,
because an invisible path is difficult to be found by cor-
poreal beings." The greatest poets of the world have
had occasion to regret the poverty of human language,
which rendered it impossible to express the language of their
hearts in words \ and those whose minds have been fully
opened to the knowledge of spiritual truths, the wisest of
all men, such as Buddha, have left no written records of
their doctrines ; perhaps their conceptions wero too grand
to be expressed in words, and can be understood only by
those who feel as the^y felt, and whose hearts are open to
the sunlight of divine illumination.

25a

Digitized by LjOOQiC

THE SUN OF WISDOM. 153

Let U8 attempt to put the impressions intuitively
received, regarding the Divine Source of all Being, into
language, although we well know that language is inadequate
to describe it, and an attempt to put that which cannot be
grasped by the intellect into words, will give rise to mis-
conceptions in those who are unable to think with their
hearts.

Far, in the unfathomable abyss of space, far beyond the
reach of the imagination of man, unapproachable even by
the highest and purest angel or thought, self-existent,
eternal, resplendent in its own glory is the Shining One^
whose palpitating Centre is invisible Fire, whose rays are
Light and Life, pervading the Universe to its utmost
limits, penetrating every form and causing it to live and
to grow. Their harmonious vibrations are undulating
through space, filling all animate and inanimate beings
with the substance of Love. Meeting primordial matter
in space, they form it into revolving globes, and chain
them together by Love, manifesting itself as attraction and
guiding them on in their restless revolutions. Penetrating
into the hearts of animals and men, they create sensation
and relative consciousness, cause the form to feel, to per-
ceive and to know its surroundings, call into life the
emotions of love and its reaction hate with all their attend-
ing virtues and vices. Penetrating deep into the hearts of
men, they kindle there the divine fire in whose light man
may see the image of the Shining One, and know it to be
himself.

But it is beyond the power of man to describe in
language that which cannot be described, to combine
words, so that the reader may form an intellectual con-
ception of something for which no intellectual conception
exists ; for in the presence of the highest, the unthinkable
ideal, intellectual labor ceases, and spiritual adoration
begins. Intellectual labor is a function which man shares
with the animals ; but the divine prerogative of spiritual
man and his highest destiny is to live in eternal perception
and adoration of the highest Good, of which the intellect
cannot conceive, and for which we can find no name.

In this eternal universal principle is the source of all
Power. In it alone is magic power contained, even to the
extent of creating new worlds and to call a new universe
of forms into existence. It is the only Philosopher's Stone

Digitized by

Google

•S4 INTELLECTUAL ANIMALS.

and the or^f Elixir of Life or Universal Panacea^ wxA
can be had everywhere and at any time without expense,
by every one who knows how to seek for it It can attain
self-consciousness and self-knowledge only in the organism
of man, because the lower animals are not yet &r enough
advanced to be used as its vehicles and inctrument ; but
the man in whom it has awakened to life shares its attri-
butes and obtains magic power ; for he is a iving temple
of God. The man in whom God has not awaken ^ is, as
long as he remains in that condition, merely an intellectual
animal, and having no Spirit active withm his heart, he
can possess no spiritual or magical powers. Some modem
** Philosophers," who say that man has no magical powers,
are right from their own pomt of view ; for the " mar "
known to external science iw merely an intellectual animal,
having no spiritual and therefore no magical power ; the
real man only begins to exist when he is reborn in the
Spirit. True philosophers have recognized this fact
Schopenhauer says: ''In consequence of the action of
'grace,' the entire being ci man becomes remodelled, so
that he desires no longer anything of that for which he was
craving heretofore, and becomes so to say a new man." *

Everything in nature has a threefold nature, and like-
wise the allegories of the sacr^'d books of the £as. as well
as those of the West have a ihrecibld meaning — an exoteric,
an esoteric, and a secret signification. The vulgar- the
learned as well as the unearned — can see only the
exoteric side, which, in the majority of cases, is so absurd,
that its very absurdity should serve as a warning to people
endowed with common sense not to accept these fabies in
their literal meaning; there is, however, nothing too
absurd to attract the attention of the ignorant, and we see
them, therefore, split into three classes, namely — first, into
those who impUcitly believe their literal meaning;
secondly, into those who reject them on account of their
supposed absurdity, never suspecting a deeper meaning ;
and, thirdly, into those who are irritated at their absurdity,
and valiantly fight the man of straw which they have them-
selves set up in their minds.

Those who are willing to learn can be instructed, but
they that believe that they already know, refuse to be

• " Welt als Wille tmd Vontellnog.'* L, 625.

Digitized by LjOOQiC

THE PATH. %%%

taught. For this reason the legitimate guardians of the
truth, the teachers of science and religion, like those who
have no intellectual power, are often the last ones to re-
cognize the truth. Those who are not able to think cannot
be taught, and those who live entirely within the region of
intellectual speculation reject the light of their own intui-
tion. The esoteric meaning of s3nnbols may be understood
by those whose intellect is open to intuition, and may be
explained to all who do not reject the truth ; but the secret
meaning of the sacred symbols cannot be explained in
words, It can be understood only by those who have
entered the practical way.

How can we enter the path f — Only in practical experi-
ence is life. Petrified speculative science, mouldy spec-
ulative philosophy, and dried-up speculative theology
groan in the embrace of death. Humanity awakes from
her slumber and asks them for the bread of wisdom, but
receives only a stone. She turns to science, but science is
silent, wraps herself up in her vanity and turns away ; she
turns to philosophy, and old philosophy answers, but her
talk is an incomprehensible jargon, and confuses matters
still more. She turns to theology, but theology threatens
the obnoxious questioner with hell, and bids her to remain
ignorant. But the people, on the whole, are no longer
satisfied with such answers ; they are no longer contented
with the assertion that the truth is known to a few, and
that they themselves must remain ignorant, they want to
enjoy it too.

If we wish to enter the path to infinite life, the first
requirement is

TO KNOW.

Knowledge is the perception and understanding of truth.
We can only know that which we perceive. AH know-
ledge arrived at by logic, however exact, is only negative
knowledge, but not positive ; for truth is spiritual and can
be recognized only by spirit By intellectual reasoning
and mathematics we can find out what a thing is not ; but
never what it actually is. We say that one and two added
together make three ; meaning that they can make nothing
else but three ; but what the three actually is, still remains
a mystery. We say that if we chemically combine Sulphuf

Digitized by

Google

9S^ KNOWLBDOE.

and Carbon, the result can be nothing else but a com-
pound of Sulphur and Carbon ; but for all that we do not
Know what that combination is, as long as we have not
perceived its attributes. There are two principal modes
of perception, namely, seeing and feeling. Each of these
modes, if unaccompanied by the other, is unreliable ; only
if we simultaneously see and feel a thing do we know that
it exist

Thousands of years have passed away since mankind
first saw the sun and stars, and modem telescopes have
brought them nearer to us. Nevertheless our knowledge
of these cosmic bodies, and the conditions of life existing
upon them, consists merely of speculation and opinions,
which may be overthrown at any time, when our means
for observation are supplanted by better ones. We give
names to the substances discovered by the spectroscope,
but we will not know the true nature of the stars as long
as we are not able to partake of their consciousness and
feel the qualities of the life and characters embodied in
their forms.

For thousands of years mankind has intuitively felt the
presence of the Unknown. Those who felt the presence
of the universal Spirit, know that it exists. Generations
after generations have disappeared from earth after spend-
ing their lives in vain efforts to know not God whose
power they felt but whom they could not see with their
eyes, and even our greatest theologians seem to be very
far from a true knowledge of God. Only when the mind
of the regenerated man has become illuminated by divine
wisdom will he be able to know the true God, for he will
see His image within his own soul.

If we are able to see and feel the external attributes of
a thing, we may begin to understand what these qualities
are, but we will, for all that, still be ignorant of its interior
qualities and its true character. To know the latter it will
be necessary to enter into its spirit, and this can only be
done by the spirit of man, not by his external senses. The
spiritual principle in man, if once awakened to self-con-
sciousness, has attributes and functions far superior to
those of the external man ; it has the power to perceive,
to see and to feel the internal qualities of things which are
imperceptible to the external senses ; it can identify itself
with the object of its observation and partake^of its con-

Digitized by LjOOQIC

SELF-KNOWLEDGE. 157

sciousness, it becomes for the time being as one with that
object and shares its feelings, it sees that object objection-
ally and partakes of its subjective sensations.

Thus does a lover partake of the joys and sorrows of
the object he loves, and feel as if he were one with it in
spirit although separated from it in the form \ for love is
the power by which such a divine state is attained, it
penetrates all things, and coming from the centre of all
it goes to the centre.

What is it that prevents us to love and to know all
things but our own prejudices and predilections ? We do
not see things as they are but as we imagine them to be.
He who desires to know all things should not look upon
them with his own eyes, but with the eyes of God ; he
should not think the thoughts suggested by external
appearances, but he should let the Divine Spirit do its
thinking within his mind.

To obtain true knowledge we must render ourselves
able to receive it ; we must free our minds from all the
intellectual rubbish that has accumulated there through
the perverted methods of education of modern civilization.
The more false doctrines we have learned the more diffi-
cult will be the labor to make room for the truth, and it
may take years to unlearn that which we have learned at
the expense of a great deal of labor, money, and time.
The Bible says that "we must become like little children
before we can enter the kingdom of truth." The princi-
pal thing to know is to know ourselves; if we know our-
selves, we will know that we are to be the kings of the
universe. The essential Man is a Son of God^ he is some-
thing far greater, far more sublime and far more powerful
than the insignificant animal described as a man in our
scientific works on anthropology.

Well may Man who knows his true nature be proud of
his nobility and power; well may the man known to
external science be ashamed of his weakness. Well may
the former consider himself superior to the gods, and the
latter, a worm of the earth, crawl into a comer and ask for
the protection of a real man who is a god. The true Man
is a divine being, whose power extends as far as his
thoughts can reach ; the irrational man is a compound of
semi-animal forces, subject to their caprices and whims,
with a spark of divine fire in him to enable him to control

9

Digitized by

Google

9^ DTGNTTY OF MAIT.

Ifaem, but which spark, in the great majoriqr of cam, if
left to smoulder and vanish. The former is immortal, the
latter lives a few years among the illusions of life. The
former knows that he lives for ever in the All, the latter
expects to die, or perhaps to obtain a lease on his personal
existence by the favor of some personal god who may
permit him to carry his initjuities into a sphere, in whidi
only the pure can exist.*

There are three kinds of knowledge, the useful, the
useless, and the harmful. The most useful knowledge is
the one which relates to the essential nature of man, to his
destiny, and to his possibilities. There is no higher
knowledge than the practical knowledge of religion ; that
is to say, the knowledge of all that relates to the spiritual,
emotional, and physical nature of man. He who has thic
knowledge is necessarily the true physician for the soul as
well as for the body, and he heals by the power of his
spirit An attempt to separate religion from science and
the practice of morality from the practice of medicine
leads to illusions of the most dangerous kind.

The useless knowledge is the knowledge of, or rather
the adherence to, illusions and falsehoods ; it is no real
knowledge, although it embraces a ^eat deal of what is
considered of great importance in civilized countries that
men should know.

The harmful knowledge consists in scientific attam-
ments without any corresponding perception of the moral
aspect of truth. It is only partial knowledge, because it
recognizes only a part of the truth. A high intellectual
development without any corresponding growth of moraiitj
is a curse to mankind. Knowledge to be good must be
illuminated by Wisdom; knowledge without wisdom is
dangerous to possess. Misunderstanding and misapplica-
tion of truths are the source of suffering.

The attainment of power is often not accompanied with
any proper understanding how to apply that power wisely.
The invention of the fulminates of mercury, of gunpowder
and nitro-glycerine, has caused much suffering to a large
part of humanity. Not that the substances applied, or
the forces which are liberated, are intrinsically evil, but

* Rerelations xzi s?«

Digitized by

Google

DANGEROUS KNOWLEDGE. 159

their misapplication leads to evil results. If all men were
intelligent enough to understand the laws which govern
them, and wise enough to employ them for good purposes
only, no evil results would follow.

ii we proceed a step further and imagine intellectual
but wicked and selfish people possessed not only of the
power to employ explosives, poisonous drugs, and medi-
cines to injure others, but able to send their own invisible
poisonous will to a distance, to leave at will the prison-
house of the physical body and go in their astral forms
to kill or injure others, the most disastrous results would
follow. Such forbidden knowledge has been and is some*
times possessed by people with criminal tendencies, a fact
which is universally known in the East, and upon the pos-
sibility and actuality of such, facts havs been established
on many occasions, and among others by many of the
witch trials of the Middle Ages. Modem scientists ma^
now laugh at these facts, but the doctors of law, of medi-
cine, and of theology of their times, were as sure of their
knowledge then as their modern representatives are of
their own opinions to-day, and the former had as many
intellectual capacities as the latter. The only difference is
that the former knew these facts, but gave a wrong explan-
ation ; the latter refuse to examine them, and give no
explanation at all.

Man is continually surrounded by unseen influences, and
the astral plane is swarming with entities and forces,
which are acting upon him for good or for evil, according
to his good or evil inclinations. At the present stavo of
evolution man has a physical body, which is admirably
adapted to modify the mfluence from the astral plane, and
to shelter him against the " monsters 0/ the deep.''

If the physical body is in good health, it acts as an
armor, and, moreover, man has the power, by a judicious
exercise of his will, to so concentrate the odic aura by which
he is surrounded, as to render his armor impenetrable j but
if by bad health, by a careless expenditure of vitality, or by
the practice of mediumship, he disperses through space
the odic emanations belonging to his sphere, his physical
armor will become weakened and unable to protect him ;
he becomes the victim of elementaries and elemental forces,
his mental faculties will lose their balance, and sooner or
later he will, like the symbolical Adam and Eve^ know

Digitized by

Google

36o DANGERS OF THE ASTRAL PLANE.

that he is naked, and exposed to influences which he can*
not repel. Such is the result for which those ignorantly
crave who wish to obtain knowledge without correspond-
ing morality. To supply the ignorant or weak with
powers of destruction would be like providing children
with gunpowder and matches for play.

Only an intelligent and well-balanced mind can discrim-
inate properly and dive into the hidden mysteries of Nature.
'*Only the pure in heart can see God." He who has
reached that stage need not search for an Adept to instruct
him ; the higher intelligences will be attracted to him, and
become his instructor, in the same manner as he may be
attracted by the beauty of an animal or of a flower.

A harp does not invent sound but obeys the hand of a
master, and the more perfect the instrument, the sweeter
may be the music. A diamond does not originate light,
but reflects it, and the purer the diamond the purer will
be its lustre. Man does not invent original thought, will,
and intelligence. He is a mirror in which the thought of
God and the imagery of nature is reflected, an instrument
through which the eternal will or the animal will expresses
itself ; a pearl filled with a drop of water from the uni-
versal ocean of intelligence.

* ' If you eat from the tree of true knowledge you will
surely die. *' Your personality will be swallowed up by a
realization of the fact that personal isolation is only an
illusion, and that you are one with the all. But as your
personality dies, a greater truth opens before you, and
you become not only God-like, but God.

He who ascends to the top of a high mountain need not
inquire for somebody to bring him pure air. Pure air sur-
rounds him there on all sides. The realm of wisdom is
not limited, and he whose mind is receptive will not
suffer from want of divine influx to feed his aspiration.

The school in which the occultist graduates has many
classes, each class representing a life. The days of vaca-
tion may arrive before the lesson is learned, and what has
been learned may be forgotten during the time of vacation ;
but still the impression remains, and a thing once learned
is easily learned again. This accounts for the different
talents with which men are endowed, and for their propen-
sities for good or for evil. No effort is lost, every cause
creates a corresDon diner effect, no favors are granted, ^o

THE SCHOOL OF THE OCCULTIST. 261

injustice takes place. Blind to bribes and deaf to appeals
is the law of justice, dealing out to every one according to
his merits or demerits ; but he who has no selfish desire
for reward, and no cowardly fear of punishment, but who
dares to act rightly because he cannot do wrong, identifies
himself with the law, and in the equilibrium of the law will
he find his Power.
The second requirement is

TO WILL.

If we do not want to receive the truth we will not obtain it,
because it rests in the spirit, and the spirit is a power that
exercises the universal law of attraction ; it attracts the
mind that corresponds to its vibrations, and is repulsed by
discords.

Men believe that they love the truth, but there are few
that desire it. They love only welcome truths ; those that
are unwelcome are usually rejected. Opinions which flatter
the vanity and are in harmony with accustomed modes of
thought are accepted ; strange truths are often regarded
with astonishment and driven away from the door. Men
are often afraid of that which they do not know, and, not
knowing the truth, they are afraid to receive it. They ask
new truths for their passports, and if they do not bear the
stamp of some fashionable authority they are looked upon
as illegitimate children, and are not permitted to §row.

How shall we learn to love the truth f By bemg obe-
dient to the law. How can we become convinced of its good*
ness f By doing our duty. Irrational man asks for external
proofs, but true man requires no other certificate for
the truth but its own appearance. There can be no differ-
ence between speculative and practical knowledge; an
opinion based upon mere speculation is no knowledge.
Knowledge can only be attained by speculation, if the
speculation is accompanied by experience. Those who
want to know the truth must practise it ; those who cannot
practise it will not know it ; speculations without practice
can only lead to doubtful opinions.

Man can have no actual desire for a thing which he does
neither feel nor see, and which he therefore not knows.
How can we love a thing of which we know not whether it

Digitized by

Google

$m WILL.

ii good or erOy whether it will benefit or injure us, if wt
approach it Many followers of the church profess to love
God, and have not the remotest c ception of what God
18. Many profess to love Christ, and despise and reject
Him if they meet Him in man. Such a '^ love of God and
Christ " is a pretence and an illusion, it exists only in the
brain and not in the heart We can only love that of which
we know that it is good, because we feel it to be so : and
where else could we feel the presence of God except within
our own heart ? To learn to desire God means therefore
to enter a mental state in which we can feel the presence
of the Divine principle within our own heart ; to learn to
know God means to learn to know our own Divine Self.

To enter a state in which universal truth may come to
our direct perception, no intellectual labor but spiritual
development is required. We must become master of our
own thoughts and desires, and be able to sink our thoughts
into the invisible centre of AIL

We do not have far to go in search of that CentrCy it
exists within the heart of each human being ; for the soul
of each human being is an exact image of the soul of the
miiverse, and as the great Spiritual Sun exists in the centre
of the Universe, likewise the image of that sun exists withm
the heart of each human being. If we only permit this
divine light to shine within our own soul, we will know the
truth, for the truth is only one, and the one existing within
our own heart is identical with the one existing within the
centre of the universe.

If we desire to see the pure light of the terrestrial sun,
the atmosphere must not be obscured by clouds and fogs ;
if we desire to see the eternal light of the spiritual Sun
existing within the heart, the realm of the soul must not be
clouded by material desires. We must by the power of
our will dispel the fogs and mists created by the vapors
coming from the material plane. We must become our own
masters in our own house. To do this requires effort and
perseverance, and the average investigator, finding it easier
to accept ready-made creeds, than to educate his spiritual
faculties, usually remains satisfied with his own supersti*
tions, or argues himself into a belief that spiritual causes
cannot be known*

Men do not seriously desire the truth, because they
cannot estimate what they do hot know and they do not

Digitized by

Google

THE CENTRE. ,63

know it because they cannot reach what they do not
seriously desire. Mere curiosity, or a wish to learn to
know the truth at our leisure without neglecting the claims
of the elementary kingdom composing our soul, cannot
attract the spirit. Man is chained to the kingdom of the
Elementals with a thousand chains. The inhabitants of his
soul appear before him in their most seductive forms. If
the^ are driven away they change their masks and renew
their petitions in some other form. But the chains by
which man is bound are forged by his own desire. His
vices do not clin^ to him against his will. He clings to
them, and they will desert him as soon as he rises up in
the strength and dignity of his manhood and shakes them
off. There is a method, by which we may, without any
active effort, obtain that which we desire, and this is that
we should desire nothing except what the divine spirit
desires within our own heart.
The third requirement is, therefore,

TO DARE.

We must dare to act and throw off our desires, instead of
waiting patiently until they desert us. We must dare to
tear ourselves loose from accustomed habits, irrational
thoughts, and selfish considerations, and from everything
that is an impediment to our recognition of the truth. We
must dare to conquer ourselves and to conquer the world ;
dare to face the ridicule of the ignorant, the vilifications of
bigots, the haughtiness of the vain, the contempt of the
learned, and the envy of the small ; dare to proclaim the
truth if it is useful to do so, and dare to be silent if taunted
by the fool.* We must dare to face poverty, suffering, and
isolation, and dare to act under all circumstances according
to our highest conception of truth.

All this might be easily accomplished, if the will of man
were free ; if man were his own master and not bound with
the chains of the soul ; but man is a relative being, and as
such his will can only be free to a certain extent ; it can
only enjoy a relative liberty as long as it is a slave to
desire. Man may perform certain acts and leave others

* Piov* zsvu 4*

Digitized by LjOOQIC

j64 DARING.

undone if he chooses ; but his internal desire determines
his choice, and man acts in obedience to it A man who
is free of external desires has the power to will that which
his nature does not desire, and not to will that to which the
desires of that nature attract him.

To make the will free, action is required, and each action
strengthens the will, and each unselfish deed increases its
power. In unity is power. To render our will powerful
we may unite it with the will of others, and if the desires of
the others are different from ours, our will thereby becomes
free from our own desires. In action is strength. If we
oppose our will to the will of others, by acting against the
desires of others, we increase its strength, but we become
thereby isolated from others.

There is only one universal' power of will, because
divinity is a whole. It may act in the direction for good
and in the direction for evil ; but its action for good is the
strongest, because it emanates from the eternal source of
i^\ good. This will-power being the collective sum of all
will-power in the universe, is the power that moves the
worlds. It is necessarily immeasurably stronger than any
individual will-power can possibly be, because the whole is
larger than the part, and the infinite greater than the
finite. He who unites his own will with the universal will
becomes powerful ; he who exercises his will by opposing
it may become strong, but while the former attains eternal
life with the whole, the latter causes his own destruction,
as he will finally be crushed by the opposing force, which
is immeasurably stronger than he. I>are to obey the Law^
and you will become your own Master^ and the Lord over
all.

Philosophical courage is a quality for which men are
respected everywhere. The Red Indian prides himself at
his indifference to physical pain, the Fakir undergoes
tortures to strengthen his will-power, the civilized soldier
is eager to prove his contempt for danger, and to measure
his strength with the strength of the enemy. But there are
deeds to perform that require a courage of a superior kind.
It requires only momentary outbursts of power or tempor-
ary efforts of will to perform a darinsr deed on the physical
plane, and after it is accomplished It is followed by satis-
faction and rest ; but in the realm of the soul there is
ao rest for those who have not succeeded in eradicating

Digitized by

Google

SILENCE. JiS

that which is eviL A continual and unremitted strain is
needed to keep the emotions subjected, and this strain is
rendered still more fatiguing by the circumstance that it
depends entirely on your own will whether or not we will
endure it, anddiatifwe relax the bridle and allow our
emotions to run free and disorderly, sensual gratification
is the result. It requires a courage of the highest order to
act under all circumstances in obedience to the law. Long
may the batde last, but each victory strengthens the will ;
each act of submission renders it more powerful, until at
last the combat is ended, and over the battlefield where
the remnants of the slain desires are exposed to the
decomposing action of the elements hovers the spiritual
eagle, rising towards the sun and enjoying the serene
tranquility of the ethereal realm. The only true way to
obtain courage is to rise above/ear.

Metals are purified by fire and the spirit is purified by
suffering. Only when the molten mass has cooled can we
judge of the progress of the purification ; only when a
victory over the emotions is gained, and peace follows after
the struggle, can the spirit rest to contemplate and realize
the beauty of eternal truth. In vain will men attempt to
listen to the voice of truth during the clash of contending
desires and opinions, only in the silence that follows the
storm can the voice of truth be heard.*

The fourth requirement to the recognition of the t;ruth is
therefore

TO BE SILENT.

This means that we must not allow any desire to speak in
our heart, but only the voice of the truth ; because the truth
is a jealous goddess and suffers no rivals. He who selects
wisdom for the bride of his soul must woo her with his
whole heart and dismiss the concubines from the bridal
chamber of his soul. He must clothe her in the purity of
his affection and ornament her with the gold of his love,
for wisdom is modest, she does not adorn herself but waits
until she is adorned by her lover. She cannot be bought
with money nor with promises, her love is only gained by
acts of devotion. Science is only the handmaid of wisdom,

•«* Light on the Path," by M. C

Digitized by LjOOQIC

J66 MEDITATION.

and he who makes love to the servant will be rejected by
the mistress ; but he who sacrifices his whole being to
wisdom will be united with her.

The Bhagwat Gita, says : '' He who thinketh constant^
of me, his mind undiverted by any other object, will fiod
me. I will at all times be easily found by a constant
devotion to me."

The Christian Mystic, Jacob Boehme, an illuminated
seer, expressed the same truth, in the form of a dialogue
between the master and his disciple, as follows :

The disciple said to the master : '^ How can I succeed
in arriving at that supersensual life, in which I may see
and hear the Supreme ? ^

The master answered : '^ If you can only for a moment
enter in thought into the formless, where no creature
resides, you will hear the voice of the Supreme."

The disciple said : '' Is this far or near ? ''

The master answered : '' It is in yourself, and if you can
command only for one hour the silence of your desires,
you will hear the inexpressible words of the Supreme. If
your own will and self are silent in you, the perception of
the eternal will be manifest through you ; God will hear,
and see, and talk through you ; your own hearing, desiring
and seeing prevents you to see and hear the Supreme." ^

These directions are identical with those prescribed by
the practice of Raja-Yog^ by which the holy men of the
East unite their minds with the formless and infinite.
Religious services are calculated to elevate the mind into
the region of the formless, and, in fact, all religious systems
can have no other legitimate object than to teach methods
how to attain such states. Churches are not worthy
the name of church, which means 2, spiritual union^ unless
they serve as schools in which the science of uniting one-
self with the eternal fountain of life is practically taught.
But it is easier to allow one's mind to revel among the
multifarious forms and attractions of the material plane,
and to listen to the Syren song of the Elementals inhabit-
ing the soul, than to enter the apparendy dark caves of the
formless, where at first no sound is heard in the eternal
stillness of night but the echo of our voice, but where alone
true power resides. It is easier to let our minds be <

* Jacob Boehme : '^ Theofophical Writings,'' book vi.

Digitized by LjOOQiC

7 HE AWAKENING. 26f

trolled by thoughts that come and go without our bidding
than to hold fast to a thought and command it to remain^
and to close the doors of the soul to all thoughts that haire
not the seal of truth impressed upon their forms ; and this
is the reason why the majority of men and women prefer
the illusions of finite life to the eternal realities of the
infinite — ^why they prefer sufferings to happiness, and
ignorance to a knowledge of truth.

To be silent means to let no other language be heard
within the heart but the language of God, to listen to the
voice of Divine Wisdom speaking within the heart ; but
this state will be arrived at only after the storm of the
passions, the battle of desires, and the conflict of the
mtellectual forces is over.

He who has learned to know, to will, to dare, and to be
silent, is upon the true path that leads to immortal life, and
will know how to practise interior meditation or yog; but
by those who move merely in the sensud plane, or whose
minds are concentrated upon external things of the physical
or intellectual plane, even the meaning of these words will
not be understood.

Various instructions are given in the books of the East
in regard to the practice of this interior meditation, but
they all teach the same thing, namely, a concentration of
man's higher consciousness to a single point within his own
centre.

In the Oupnekhata the following directions are
given : —

" Breathe deep and slow, and concentrate your unwaver-
ing attention into the midst of your body, into the region
of the heart. The lamp in your body will then be protect-
ed against wind and motion, and your whole body will
become illuminated. You must withdraw all your senses
within yourself like a turtle, which withdraws its members
within the shell Enter your own heart and guard it, and
Brahma will enter it like a fire or a stroke of lightning. In
Uie midst of a big fire in your heart will be a small flamet
and in the centre of it will be Atma.*^

Herocarcas^ an abbot of a convent upon the mount
Athos^ gives to his monks the following directions to
acquire the power of true clairvoyance : '* Sit alone in your
room, after having the door locked against intrusion, con"
centrate your mind upon the region <n the navel and try to

Digitized by

Google

att SOUND.

•ce with that Try to find the seat of your heart (sink
jrour consciousness into your heart), where the centre of

Eower resides. At first you will find nothing but darkness ;
ut if you continue for da3rs and nights without fatiguei
you will see light, and experience inexpressible things.
when the spint once recognizes his own centre in the
heart, he will know what he never knew before, and there
will be nothing hidden before his sight, whether in heaven
nor upon the earth."

Let us compare with these statements one received from
an unlearned person, who possesses the power to see
interior truths. He says : '* Sink your thoughts downward
into the centre of your being, and you will find there a
germ which, if continually nourished by pure and holy
thoughts, will grow into a power that will extend and ramify
through all parts of your body. Your hands and feet and
your mterior organs will becomt alive ; a sun will appear
within your heart and illuminate your whole being. In this
light you will see the the present, the past, and the future,
and by its aid you will attain the true knowledge of self.** *
Man is himself a thought, pervading the ocean of Mind.
If his soul is in perfect accord with the truth, the truth will
unite itself with his soul. A talented musician will not
need a scientific calculation of the vibrations of sound to
know whether a melody which he hears is melodious or
not ; a person who is one with the truth will recognize
himself in everything that is true.

What is sound ? If everything is fundamentally will,
sound can be nothing else but a manifestation of wilL
Will may act either relatively, unconsciously, or consciously,
or even in a self-conscious state. Sound manifests the
same attributes. The noise made by the knock of a hammer
carries with itself no emotions or intelligence ; it can
awaken them only by means of association of ideas. But
a piece of music or a song carries with it the qualities
with which it has been endowed by the musician or the
singer. Music is a language that speaks to the heart
without any previous agreement as to what sounds are
meant to signify certain words, as is done by telegraphing.
Music produces in every receptive soul the sentiments

•J. Kerning, ^'Key.^'^

Digitized by LjOOQiC

KEELEY MOTOR. 169

that its melodies are intended to represent ; and the more
the music is a true representation of these sentiments, the
more will this be the case. Likewise there is sound carrying
intelligence. The words spoken by a person awaken
corresponding thoughts in the mind of an intelligent person,
and they will be impressive in proportion as they are true.
If he who tells a lie does not at least for the time being
imagine it to be true, his words will act at best upon the
imagination, but not upon the will. A good actor knows
that he must imagine himself to be the person whose part
he plays, if he wants to produce the desired effect. Intelli-
gent speech carries with it the power to induce intelligent
Uioughts in an intelligent being, as the sunshine carries
with it life to the seeds in the soil. There is a still higher
form of sound ; it is not known to everybody. It is the
self-conscious divine word, that speaks within the heart of
the awakened.

The spirit is like a breath. To the eloquent speaker,
being inspired by the truth of what he says, words will
come without consideration ; they form themselves in his
soul and not in his brain. In him who is conscious of
speaking the truth, it is not so much the man that speaks,
as rather the truth speaking through him, and he may
inspire his hearers with his own sentiments, even if they do
not understand his language, because the will emanating
from him is endowed with his own emotional attributes.

Every sound is vitalized, if it comes from a living source ;
but it can have no higher vitality than the source from
which it originates. A sound produced by the striking of
a fiddle bow upon a tuning fork can manifest no higher
consciousness than that of the tuning fork, no matter how
it is treated mechanically. A merely mechanical noise
cannot produce living effects, no more than a piece of dead
wood cause a tree to grow in the soil. It cannot be the
carrier of life, unless it comes from a living being.

The attempts that have been made to " vitalize " sound
by merely mechanical means, and to cause it to act with
life and intelligence, have failed on account of a misunder-
standing of that fundamental law of nature, according to
which forms do not produce principles, but are merely
vehicles or instruments for their manifestation. If I want to
vitalize anything, I can only vitalize it with my own vitality,
having no other vitality at my command, nor can I cause
the universal principle of life to vitalize anvthing accord

Digitized by LjOOQIC

tfo LANGUAGE OF NATURE.

ing to my win* unless I have obtained command orer kkf
booming divine. Everybody is continually " vitalizing"
himself and the words which he speaks ; but only a setf-
oonscious divine spirit could spiritualize inanimate things.

The word of God, being God itself, can vitalize sound.
It is the creative Power in the universe. He in whom the
divinity has not become self-conscious cannot command
that power. There is, therefore, no danger that the world
would be exploded, if " the Adepts were to let the secret
out as to how the trick is done." Such a revelation would
be as useless to mankind as to tell a beggar how he could
inv<;st his money, if he had an^ to invest.

The will of a person may ** vitalize " apparently inanimate
objects, as is often done at spiritistic seances ; but in that
case it is accomplished by its action upon living invisible
beings, and without any conscious action of the mediuoL
Therefore, the wonders of the mechanical application of
living sound, if any such have ever been performed, can be
due only to mediumship.

To act consciously and intelligently upon the elemental
powers of nature requires the possession of an intelligent
and self-conscious power, the magic power of the (spiritual)
will of an Adept. Merely mechanical combinations can
produce nothing but merely mechanical results.

Natural forces are subject to natural law, and, therefore,
intellectual man, acting in accordance with natural law,
can make them subservient to his purposes, by establish-
ing the conditions under which they will act ; but the divine
Word of God is above nature, and above any conditions
that man can establish. Man can govern it in no other

* It is an absolute impossibility to transform matter into motion or
sound, or sound into life or spirit ; because the seven forms of eternal
nature are eternal and unchangeable. All that can be changed is their
mode of action. Darkness cannot be chanfred into light, although it
maybe penetrated by its neither does a red-hot iron change into lights
although light becomes manifest therein by means of the heat. •< Each
of the original forms of eternal nature retains forever its own centre."
i^* Jacob Boehme:' « Threefold Life.")

It is true that each of the seven principles contains potentially the
other six, and that the higher may be awalcened or <* liberated " in the
lower ; btit this can only be done by the action of the higher inducing
the corresponding latent higher principle to become active within the
lower. Merely mechanical motion cannot call life or consciousness into
action in a form, without the action of a living and consdons power te
act upon the life and consciousness latent tberdiu

Digitized by

Google

UNIVERSAL LANGUAGE. vi\

way, than by becoming one with divine Law ; but then he
ceases to be a man, and becomes a God, governing his own
self and all the laws of his nature.

Every form in nature is a symbol of an idea and repre-
sents a si^ or a letter. A succession of such symbols
forms a language, and the totality of all forms in nature is
the language of nature. He who is a true child of nature,
that means to say, he whose will is pure and whose mind
free of error, will understand the language of nature and
know the character of everything. His mind will be like
a clear mirror, wherein the attributes of natural things are
reflected and enter the field of his consciousness.

Such a language means a radiation of the essence of
things into the cent^^ of the human mind, and a radiation
from that centre into the universal ocean of mind. Man
in a state of purity, being an image and an external expres-
sion of the highest principle, is able to reflect and repro-
duce the highest truth in its original purity, and man's
expressions ought, therefore, to be a perfect reproduction or
echo of the impressions which he receives ; but average
man being immersed in matter, as a result of a combination
of principles on a lower scale of evolution, receives the
pure original rays only in a state of refraction, and can
therefore reproduce them only in an imperfect condition.
He has wandered away from the sun of truth, and behold-
ing it from a distance it appears to him only as a small star,
that may perhaps vanish from sight. Everything in Nature
has its name, and he who has the power to call a thing by
its proper name can make it subservient to his will. But
the proper name of a thing is not the arbitrary name given
to it by man, but the expression of the totality of its
powers and attributes, because the powers and attributes
of each being are intimately connected with its means
of expression, and between both exists the most exact
proportion in regard to measure, time and condition.

There is only one genuine and interior language for man,
the symbols of which are natural and must be intelligible
to all, and this language is a direct communication of
thought This interior language is the parent of the
exterior one, and being caused by the radiation of the first
cause which is unity, and with whom all men are one, it
follows that if the original irradiation of the supreme ray
were existing in all men in its original purity, all men
would understand the same interior kmguage, and also the

Digitized by VjOOQIC

«7S UNIVERSAL LANGVaXmB.

same exterior one, because the latter is the external expres-
sion of the former. In fact this original language still
exists, but few understand it, and none can learn it except
by the process of interior evolution. The interior Ian-
^[uage, breathes — ^so to say — ^spirit ; while the exterior one
IS only a succession of sounds.

Each word in that interior language is the character of
the thing itself, a si^ and symbol which men cultivate
unknowL^ly ; each is the centre of each being, and who-
ever reaches that centre b in possession of the word and
the siga . These symbols are the essential characteristics
which distinguish one individual or group of individuals
from others ; by these symbols are harmonious souls
attracted, and by them one artist recoenizes another artist
in beholding his works without seeing nis person.

Men have ever been desiring an universal language.
Such an universal language cannot be arbitrarily con-
structed, or, if so constructed, would be more difficult to
learn than any other. True language must express the
harmony of the soul with the nature of things, and as long
as there is distinction of character and disharmony there
can be no universal, harmonious language.

But if there is an universal language of nature, there is
also a universal language of God, and this divine language
is the Word of God that speaks within the heart of the
awakened. It is the voice of the Truth itself that speaks
the Word, and if you cannot hear that voice, you are not
called to teach, because it would then not be the truth
speakuig through yoiu: mouth, but the devil of your own
conceited self. He who lives in the spirit of this world and
in his sins, cannot truly teach any one. He who does not
live in the spirit, can have no spiritual life and cannot
impart it to others. He may repeat like a parrot what he
has heard, or tell what he has read in books. He may say
what he fancies to be true, but he is not an instrument for
the manifestation of truth.

The only true teacher is the Truths the Word^ the Christ.
He says : " I am the light of the world, and he who follows
Me will have life eternal." He does not say : " Go to this
parson or that professor and get from him a description of
what he thinks how the light is supposed to look," but He
advises us to follow Him and find the true understanding
ourselves. Only when all the book-makers on theosophical
subjects will be in possession of the living truth and of

Digitized by

Google

LYING. 273

self knowledge in regard to what they are writing about,
will we have a true divine science ; only when all the miii-
isters of the church will become ministers and servants of
God, so that God may speak through them, will we have
the true religion taught

There is a threefold expression of the divine principle ;
a physical, and intellectual, and a divine word. The first
is the language of nature, the second the language of art,
the third one is poWer. Each thought is represented by a
certain allegorical sign ; each being is a characteristic
symbol and living exterior image of its interior state.
Each body is the symbol of an invisible and corresponding
power, and Man, in whom the highest powers are contained,
is the most noble symbol of nature, the first and most
beautiful letter in the alphabet of earth. For every thought
there is an outward expression, and if we have a thought
which we cannot express by symbols, it does not follow
that such symbols do not exists but that we are unac-
^ainted wiUi them. A word or a language is the expres-
sion of thought, and to be perfect it must give perfect
expression to the thought it is intended to convey. By
^ving a false expression to thought the power of language
IS lost. In our present state of civilization words are often
used more for the purpose of concealing than revealing
thought. Lying is therefore disgraceful, and involves a
loss of power and subsequent degradation. To ^ve pure
and perfect expression to thought is White Magic ; to act
upon the imagination so as to create false imi)ressions is
witchcraft, deception and falsehood. Such witchcraft is
practised every day and almost in every station of life,
from the priest in the pulpit who wheedles his audience
into a belief that he or his church possesses the keys of
heaven, down to the merchant who cheats with his goods,
and to the old maid who secures a husband by the means
of artificial teeth and false hair ; down to the physician
who makes a living by exciting a morbid imagination in
his patients and persuading them that they are ^' really
sick." Such practices are publicly denounced and silently
followed ; they will lead to a universal disappearance of
faith and trust, they will necessarily lead to active evil and
bring destruction upon the nation that allows them to
grow; because, as the powerof good increases by practice,
in the same manner increases the po^.erofevil.

Man's mission is to do good ; that means to do that

Digitized by

Google

374 ^W:^ SECRET OF BEAUTY AND YOUTH.

which is most useful for his development. By doin^ goodf
sensual matter is eliminated ; his material constitution will
become more and more refined, and his interior illuminated
by die light of wisdom, until even his physical body may
assume die attributes of the astral form, and man himseU
be a living soul. Therein alone lies the secret of eternal
beauty and youth, the true Elixir of Life. By doing evil
he attracts to himself the unintelligent and material prin-
ciples of Nature, the elements of evil ; his higher principles
become more and more material and heavy until, dragged
into the mire of matter by his own weight, he is unable
to rise to the light, he becomes metaphysically petrified,
and his power of intuition lost

Man's actions are his writings. By putting his thoughts
into action, he expresses them and records them in the
book of life. He writes them all over his body and upon
his face ; they will appear in the lustre of his eyes and in
the grace of his movements. An angelic soul cannot fail
to impress its beauty upon the form.

Evil acts are followed by a de^adation of character,
producing an increased corporification of sensual elements
and an incrustation of the soul. Selfish desires bleach the
hair before their time, bend^ the back, wrinkle the face,
and are the cause of endless ills ; for all of which there is
no other remedy but goodness of will.

Good actions dissolve existing incrustations produced
by evil deeds, and re-establish the soul in its former con*
dition. Repentance, unless followed by action, is useless.
It is like the inflammation caused by a thorn in the flesh i
it causes pain by gathering to its assistance the vital forces
of the body; but unless the thorn is removed by the
active intervention of the individual, an abscess and putre-
faction will be the result. Man's acts are his creations,
they give form to his thoughts. The motive endows them
with character, the will furnishes them with life.

An intention is useless as long as it is not put into action.
A sign, a letter, or a word is useles unless it conveys a meanr
ing whidi is realized by him who employs it ; a symbo^
represents an idea, but no symbol can be efficacious unless
it IS intellectually applied. The most potent magical sigiii
are useless to him who cannot realize what they mean,
while to him who is well versed in occult science, a single
point, a line, or any geometrical figure, may convey a vast
lieanin^.

Digitized by

Google

THE PENTAGRAM. 275

Let US in conclusion attempt to explain exoterically
and esoterically a few of the most important magical signs.
We may succeed to a certain extent in giving these explan*
ations in words ; but their secret spiritual meaning cannot
be expressed in language ; language can merely attempt to
guide the reader into a region of thought in which he may
be able to perceive the secret meaning with the eyes of
the spirit :

The Pentagram or the Five-pointed Star.

In its external appearance it is merely a geometrical
figure, found everywhere as a trade mark or ornament.
Superstitious and credulous people once believed, that if
it were drawn upon the doors of their houses it would
protect them against the intrusions of the sorcerer and the
witch.

In its esoteric signification the four lower triangles
represent the four elementary forces of nature, and as the
lines of each triangle are intimately connected or iden-
tical with those forming the other lines, the sum of these
lines forming only one broken line without any interruption,
likewise the four lower elements are intimately connected
and identical with the fifth element, the quintessence of aU
things, situated at thie top of the figure ; representing the
head, the seat of intelligence in man.

The spiritual knowledge of the Five-pointed Star is
identical with its practical application. Let us beware y

Digitized by VjOOQIC

376

THE SIX-POINTED STAR.

that the figure is always well drawn, leaving no open
space, through which the enemy can enter and disturb the
harmony existing in the Pentagon in the centre. Let us
keep the fieure always upright, with the topmost triangle
pointing tolieaven, for it is the seat of reason and Wisdom,
and if the figure is reversed i^orance and evil will be the
result. Let the lines be straight, so that all the triangles
will be harmonious and of equal size, so that the symbol
will grow without any abnormal development of one prin-
ciple -^t the cost of another. Then the lower triangles
will send their quintessence to the top, the seat of
intelligence, and the top will supply the lower triangles
with power and stimulate them to grow. Then when the
time of probation and development is over, the triangles
will be absorbed by the Pentagon in the centre and form
into a sauare within the invisible circle connecting the
apices ot the triangles, and our destiny will be fulfilled.
There is no higher duty for man to perform, than to keep
the Five-pointed Spiritual Star intact ; it will be his
protection during life and his salvation in the hereafter.

7^ Double Triangle or Six-painted Star.

This is one of the most important magical signs, and
spiritually applied it invests man with power. Its exoteric

Digitized by

Google

meaning is merely two triangles joined together, so that
they partially cover each other, while the apex of one
points upwards and the apex of the other downward. It
16 sometimes surrounded by a circle or by a snake biti»g
its tail, and sometimes with a tau in the middle.

Its esoteric meaning is very extensive. It represents
among other things the descent of spirit into matter, and
the ascension of matter to spirit, which is continually
taking place within the circle of eternity, represented by
the snake, the symbol of wisdom. Six points are seen in
the star, but the seventh cannot be seen ; nevertheless the
seventh point must exist, although it h^ not become
manifest ; because without a centre there could be no six-
pointed star, nor any other figure existing.

But who can describe in words the secret or spiritual
signification of the six-pointed star and its invisible centre ?
Who can intellectually grasp and describe the beauties
and truths which it represents ? Only he who can prac-
tically apply this sign will grasp its full meaning. Knowing
that sign practically means to realize the nature of " God*^
and the laws of eternal nature, it means to know the
process of evolution and involution going on within the
microcosm of man and corresponding to those of the
macrocosm of nature. It means to possess the power to
enter within one's own interior soul and to behold the
majesty of God in His light It means to forget one's
own self and the world of illusions and to be absorbed in
the depths of eternity, where thought ceases and only
adoration exists. To him who cannot realize within his
heart the divine mysteries of nature, the blinding light
shining from the centre of the figure has no existence ; but
the enlightened sees in that invisible centre the great
Spiritual Sun, the heart of the Cosmos, from which Love
and Light and Life are radiating for ever. He sees the
seven primordial rays of that light shining into invisible
matter and forming visible worlds upon which men and
animals live and die, and are happy or discontented
according to their conditions. He sees how by the breath
of that invisible centre sims and stars, planets and
satellites are evolved, and how, if the day of creation of
for<ms is over, it reabsorbs them into its bosom. Verily
the six-pointed star is a most potent magical sign, ana
it requires the wisdom of God to understand it^ the

Digitized by

Google

378

THE CROSS.

omnipotent power of the One Life to apply it to its
fiiUest extent.

In its external signification the Christian Cross is a
symbol of torture and death. The sight of a Cross calls
up in the mind of the pious the memory of a historical
event said to have taken place in Palestine some two thou-
sand years ago» when a noble, good and just man was
executed as a criminal upon a cross. If the element of
hate is predominating in the soul organization of the
Christian beholding the Cross, its sight may call into
action very '* unchristian" feelings about the wickedness
of the Jews.

D»

'Is.

mi.

The Cross.
The internal impression caused by the sight of the

* Compare/. R. Skinner, " Key to Hebrew-Egyptian Mystery.*'

Digitized by LjOOQiC

THE CROSS. 279

Cross will differ according to the standpoint from which we
behold it.

The esoteric meaning of the Cross is very ancient, and
the Cross has existed as a secret symbol probably thousands
of years ago before the Christian era. The philosophical
Cross represents, among other thines, the principle of
matter and that of spirit intersecting each other, forming the
quaternary which, when it is inscribed in the square, forms
the basis of knowledge for the Occultist. The horizontal
line represents the animal principle, for the heads of animals
are bowed to the earth. Man is the only being upon the
globe who stands erect; the divine principle within him
keeps him upright, and, therefore, the perpendicular line
is the symbol of his divinity. The cross represents Man,
who has acted against the law, and thereby transformed
himself into an instrument for his own torture. From the
beginning of his existence, as a ray of the divine spiritual
Sun, he represented a perpendicular line, cutting in the
direction of the Universal Will of the source from which
he emanated in the beginning. As the distance from that
source increased, and as the ray entered into matter, it
deviated from the originally straight line and became
broken, creating thereby a division in its own essence and
making two parts out of the ori^nal Unity, thus establish-
ing in matter a separate will, acting not in accordance with
univeral Law, but even in opposition to it If man follows
again the dictates of the Law, he will then be taken from
the Cross and resume his former position. ** To take up
one's Cross," means to sacrifice one's own desires to the
rule of divine Law. By doing so the evil and animal
desires remain crucified and die, but the divine element will
be resurrected and enter the Light.

Who can know the practical spiritual signification of the
Cross except he who has been nailed thereon and suffered
the pangs of crucifixion of thou]g;ht and desire and of the
mystic death ? The external Christian sees only the wooden
Cross, but he whose spiritual perception is open sees the
living Crossin its glory. Sublimely stands that Cross upon
the mountain of the living Faith ; magnificent is its aspect.
Far into space shines the light radiatingfrom its centre and
illuminating the darkness with its beneficent rays, which
give life to all who behold it. Rise, oh man, up to your

Digitized by

Google

a8o THE CROSS,

divine dignity, so that you may see the true Cross, the true
Light. Not the dead wooden Cross, the emblem of igno-
rance and suffering, nor the flittering cross made of brass,
the emblem of vanity, sectarianism and superstition ; but
the Living Golden Cross, the emblem of Wisdom which
each true Brother of the Golden and Rosv^ Cross carries
deeply buried withm his own heart This cross is the
full-grownTree of Life and of Knowledge, bearingthefruits
of salvation and immortality, the dispenser of Life, the pro-
tector against eviL He who knows practically the true
mystery of the Cross isacquainted with the highest wisdom ;
he who is adorned with the true Cross is safe from all
danger. Infinite power of the Cross ! In thee is Wisdom
revved. Buried deep, deep in the realm of Matter is thy
foot, teaching us Patience ; high, high into heaven reaches
thy crown, teaching us Faith, Lifted by Hope and ex-
tended by Charity are thy arms, Light and Sunshine
surround thee. Link upon link the chain of creation
encircles the Cross ; worlds within worlds, forms within
forms, illusions upon illusions surrouhd it like clouds and
nebulous mists ; but in the Centre is the Reality in which
is hidden the jewel of priceless value, the Truth. Let the
dew of heaven which comes from the true Cross descend
into your hearts and penetrate into your soul and body, so
that it may ci^stallize into form. Then will the darkness
within your mmd disappear, the veil of matter will be rent,
and before your spiritual vision will stand revealed the
angel of truth.

The present material age is ever ready to reject without
examination the symbob of the past whose meaning it
cannot realize because it knows them not. Encaged in
the pursuit of material pleasure, it loses sight of its true
interest, and exchanges spiritual wealth for worthless
bawbles. Losing sight of nis destiny, man runs after a
shadow, while others embitter their lives for the purpose of
propitiating an angry God, and to buy from him happiness
m a life of which they know nothing. Ruled by fear,
many bow before the Moloch of superstition and ignorance,
while others wilfully shut their eyes to the light of divine
reason and madly rush into the arms of a dead and cold
material science to perish in her stony embrace ; but the
wise,whosefar-seeineperception reaches beyond thenarrow
circle of his material surroundings, and beyond the short

Digitized by

Google

THE CROSS. 281

span of time which embraces his life on earth, knows that
it is in his own power to control his future destiny. He
raises the magic wand of his will and quiets the tempest
raging in the astral plane. The emotions which were
rushingto his destruction obey him and execute his orders,
and he walks safely upon the waters under whose calm
surface is hidden the abyss of death, while above his head
shines the bright constellation formed of Truth, Know-
ledge and Power, whose centre is Wisdom and whose
germs can be found in the spiritual self-consciousness of
every human being.

THE END.

Digitized by

Google

Digitized by

Google

INDEX.

Absolute, 40, 65, 68, 74, 118, 129, 157, 165, 220, 2^.

Accord, 121.

Adam, 32, 81, 120, 129.

Adept, 75, 85, 91, 149, 174, 188-

Adonai, 136, 162.

Adoration, 137, 156, 174, 253.

After-life, 61, 94, 112, 145, 178, 181.

Agrippa, 14a

Aldiemy, 56, 203, 213.

Alcohol, 132, 218.

Allegories, 27, 86, 171, 215, 241, 452.

Ambition, 148.

Animal food, 132, 218.

Animal forms, 102, 140.

Animals, 160, 218, 254.

Apparitions, 169, 178.

Aspirations, 100.

Asceticism, 36, 135.

Associations, 100.

Astral body, 80, 98, 151, 162, 166, i86»

Astral forms, 84, 90, 94, 98, 180, 259.

Astral light, 63, 104, 160 171, 196, 201.

Atheism, 74.

Atma, 233, 242, 267.

At-onement, 221, 240.

Attraction, 72, 100, 129, 144, 167, 191, 201, 250*

Aura, 82, 132.

Awakening, 267, 271.

Beauty, 274.

Belief, 227, 237.

Bhagavad Gita, 72. 252, 266.

283

Digitized by

Google

a«4 INDEX.

Bible, 98, 936, 244, 253.

Black Magic, 39, 84, 112, 190, 264.

Blavatsky, 172.

Blessing, 162.

Blood, 98, 132.

Boehme, Jacob, 12, 35, 77. ^ x^-». ^^ ^42, 252, 266.

Brain, 208, 213.

Builders, 215.

Brahm, 69. *

Bulwer Lytton, 86, 222.

Capital Punishment, 152, 19S.

Cause, 61.

Centre, 84, 253, 262, 280.

Ceremonies, 242.

Change, 61, 142, 183.

Chaos, 6.

Character, 59, 104, 218, 232.

Charms, 131.

Chemistry, 83, 204.

Christ, 33, 42, "6, 129, 139, 234, 236.

Creation, 55, 69, 207.

Christianity, 47, 235, 243.

Church, 33, 75, 235. 240, 266.

Clairvoyance, 84. 86, 149, 267.

Colors, 83, 132.

Communion, 221, 235, 242.

Conscience, 45.

Consciousness, 61, 63, 95. 128, 155, I57» I7^» 179-

Conversion, 243.

Crime, 152, 198.

Cross, 238, 278.

Crucifixion, 238.

Crystallization, 231.

Curses, 162.

Daring, 263.

Darkness, 40.

Death, 47, 61, 88, 160, 175, 178, 184, 189.

Degradation, 100, 102, 189.

Deism, ,^.

Digitized by

Google

INDEX. 285

Delirium, 71.

Delusions, 52, 67, 71.

Demons, 90, 100.

Desire, 37, 136, 22a

Devil, 95, 100, 160, 182, 200,

Differentiation, 109.

Dignity, 258.

Diseases, 52, 115, 207.

Disharmony, 124.

Double, 85, 91, 169.

Double consciousness, 92, 169, 173.

Double triangle, 276.

Doubt, 116, 222, 237.

Dreams, 66, 148, 171.

Drugs, 202.

Dualism, 72.

Dying, 116.

Earth, 79, 166, 214.

Ego, 34, 60, 159, 232.

Elementals, 33, 86, 91, 96, 151, 180, 259.

Elements, 78, 86, 232.

Elixir of life, 57, 118, 177, 254.

Emotions, 49, 83, 88, 112, 134, 215.

Emanations, 83.

Energy, 135, 176, 184.

Epidemics, 122, 167.

Evil, 251.

Evolution, 212.

Existence, 46, 62, 66, 157, 164, 166.

Experience, 211, 261.

Faith, 53, loi, 116, 201, 222, 237.

Fame, 147.

Fakirs, 85, 203.

Fall of Man, 90, 246.

Father, 77, 237.

"Faust," 173. 245.

Fear, 90, 147.

Fichte, 233.

Fiction, 28.

Digitized by

Google

286 INDEX.

Fire, 78, 253-

Five pointed star, 258, 275.

Food, 217.

Forgiveness, 31, 251.

Form. 37, 47, 58, 63. 76. 81, 94, 103, 140, 190, 231, ^^

Freedom. 33, 49* I92» «^5, 223, 231, 250.

Fumigation, 148.

Gautama Buddha, 74, i43, 228, 233, 246, 252.

Generation, 204.

Germs, 35, ^o*

Ghosts, 85. 91. 98, 162. ^ ^ ^r

God, 22, 30, 39. 69, 73, "6, 139, 159, 174, 194, 207. 226. 236, 266.

Gods, 74, 156, 225.

Good, 249, 251.

Goodness. 223.

Grace, 238. 254.

Gravitation, 128, 166.

Growth, 38, 75, 89, "7, 220, 224, 230.

Hades, 180, 186.

Happiness. 41, 43, 4^, I35, ^SS, 247-

Harmony, 87, 120, 215.

Hate, 72, 240.

Haunted houses, 162.

Heart, 213.

Heaven, 154-

Hell, 154, 182.

Hermes. 185, 233.

Herocarcas, 267.

Holy Ghost, 77, 239-

Hypnotism, 70, 150, i70-

Hysteria, 88, 167.

Ideal, 41, 75, 129.

Ideas, 59-

Idols, 156. 243-

Ignorance, 246, 259.

Illumination, 47, 50-

Illusion, 6, 44, 71, 131, 183, 224-

Images. 65.

Digitized by

Google

INDEX. 287

Iniftgiiiatioii,66^94f I23> >3<t >M >53t i^* i^> ^>i S>7»

Immortality, 61, 65, 15a.
Impresnon, 61^ 65^ 15a.
Incubos, 186.
Indiflerencey 248.
Induction, 70^ 133.
Infectkon, 13.
In6delity, 115.
Imier man, 69, 161, 198.
Inner senses, 161.
Inner world, 42, 139,

In»nity> "3» 'S'» '^T*

Inspiration, 169.

Instinct, 208,

Intellect, 15, 29, 49, 99, 147, ao8. 9IJ, JQRi

Intelligence, 208.
Intemperance, 133,220.
Intuition, 15, 29, 49, 51.
InvisibUity, 62, 70, 81, 155.
Isolation, no.

Jesus of Nazareth, 234, 243.

Kamaloca, 180.

Kamampa, i8o.

Karma, 122, 187, 239.

Keeley motor, 270.

Kempis, 185.

Knowledge, 15, 69, 183, 122, 227, 246, %^

Krishna, 222, 244.

Language, 252, 270.

Law, 30, 121, 206, 226.

Lifc> ao. 33» 55. 62, 103, 145. 176* a^S* «39-

life principle, 80, 116, 242.

life transfer, 99, 10 1, 114, 176, i8i.

Light,4o, 78, 129,231.

Logos* 5. 237'
Lord, 235.

Loire, 43> i^> I44f ^39* ^5> ^7f M9i

Digitized by

Google

INDEX.

IfHlb^ii, 90, 39» 84» i»> 190» ^5> ^7i SS4«

Ifagic fire, ao4«

Ifagic minon, 13I9 149, 170.

lltgic immben, 135.

Magic iqiiAre% \2^

lUgnetiimf 150.

MM>t ao, 13, 3a, 4^ s*» ^ ^» ^7. "a. «3^» «4a. i^a, 170, 309, asr

•3«> «5o> aS7.
Marriage, lyi, 314.

MaaoiM7,S7.
Matter, i6a, 334.

'•59i«3»73t77»7f-
53-

Meditation, 45, 366.
Mediamiliip, 33, 84, 96, li^o, i7o» 114.
Memor7,44,l96, 311.
MM, 54>69,8o, 149, 157, 163, 193.
Mind cure, 115,303.
Money, 143.
Motion, 73, 77.
Motive, 123.

Maicalar conadoameis, 165.
Mnsic, 369.
Myiteries, 39, 343.
Mysticism, 36.
Mystic death, 185.
Mythology, 86, 316, 345.

Nature, 52, 134, 3o6.
Necessities of life, 56.
Necromancy, 84, 98, 100, 18&
Nirvana, 37, I3i, 174, 188. 341*

Obedience, 2331 348.
Ob)ectiTityy66,9U
Object of life, 55, 330.
Obsessions, I03, 167, iSl.
Occultism, 330) 351, 36a

One, 73, 77, 114, 139-
Opinions, 30, 183.
Oupnekhata, 376.

Digitized by

Google

mDMUt^ 283

Mn, iSs.

Pantheon, 217.

PMBoelsns, 35, \2%y l8»

Parentage, 60.

Passion, 112, 135,215.

Path, 255.

Penetration, 44.

Pentagram, 275.

Peiception, 48, 55» ^» 7o, I5«» >5f.

Padection, 38, 41.

Personality, 37, 4a» ^^ 1^9, 14a, I55* ^V^ «37» MUx

Periodicttj, 152.

Perispirit, ICO.

Phantoms, 9a

Philosopher's stonc^ 254.

Physicians, 52, 115.

Planetary spirits, 8y«

Planets, 81, 126.

Plato, 76, 124.

Power, 248.

Practioe, 220, 261.

Pralaya, 69.

Prayer, 44, 137, 238.

Predons stones, 20i.

Primordial matter, 59.

Principles, 59, 140, 17^ 199, 214, 226.

Progress, 208.

Prophets, 48.

Prostitution, 141.

Psyche, 244.

Psychometry, 106, 196U

Purgatory, 154, 180.

Purification, 136, 178.

Purity, 135, 141.

Pythagoras, 125.

Quackery, 115.

Rationalism, 74.
Reality, 58, 62, dy.

a» 66, 139, 148, 167, 174, SOf •

Digitized by

Google

290 INDBX'

Reasoning:, 50, 99. 255.
Redeemer, 40, 95, 234. 237.
Reforms, 199.

R^eneration, 173, 185, 236.
Re-incarnation, 107, 187, 210.
Relativity, 40, 64.
Religion, 24, 32, 236, 258.
Renundati«)n, 36.
Resurrection, 250.
Rose, 6, 280.

Rosicrudan, 239, 240, 28a
Rules of life, 228.

Sacrifice, 37.

Saint Dominic, 91.

Saint Martin, 266.

Salvation, 235, 238.

Schopenhauer, 254.

Sdence, 24, 52, 146.

Self, 37, 233, 237.

Self-consdousness, 34, 69, 157, 165, 174, 21T

Self-control, 49, 224, 265.

Self-existence, 175.

Selfishness, 33. m-

Self-knowledge, 31, 183, 206, 257.

Sensation, 166.

Senses, 69.

Separation, 177.

Seven, 126, 139.

Seven Principles, 79, 119^

Sex, 120, 143,

Signature, 105.

Sight, 163.

Silence, 265.

Sin, 124, 147, 250.

Six, 139.

Six-pointed Star, 276.

Sleep, 66, 160, 171.

Snake, 217.

Socrates, 162, 170.

Somnambulism, 63, 170.

Digitized by

Google

INDEX. 291

Son, 77, 237, 244.

Sorcery, 95, loi, 191, 295.

Soul, 52, 60, 78, 80, 118, 142, 152, 177, 196, 244, 262.

Soul death, 177.

Sound, 267.

Space, 63, 73, i%

Speculation, 33.

Sphinx, 5, 57.

Spheres, 83.

Spirit, 60, 63, 70, 88, 174, 187. 233.

Spirits of music, 92.

Spirits of nature, 87, 232.

Spiritualism, 84, 95, 100, 150, 185.

Spiritus Mundi, 204.

Spleen, 84.

Subjectivity, 66, 138

Substance, 59, 195.

Succubus, 186.

Suffering, 238.

Suggestion, 70.

Suicide, loi, 145, i8b

Sun. 115, 213, 253, 262.

Superstition, 44, 51.

Symbols, 86, 158, 171, 202, 240, 255.

Sympathy, 200.

Temperance, 217.

Temple, 117, 139, 214. 240.

Theosophy, 42, 50, 165, 227, 262.

Thought, 70, 163, 168. i8i.

Thought-transfer, 54, 67, 95, 151, 164, 167, 232.

Three, 63, 77, 114. 121, 254.

Time, 65.

Tincture, 167.

Trance, 170.

Transformation, 58, 82, 140, 147, 193.

Tree of life, 187.

Tree of knowledge, 360.

Trinity, 76.

Tritheim, 204.

Truth, 27, 44, 48, 171, 235, 243, 261.

Two, 72.

Digitized by

Google

i^x

INDEX.

Unconicioauaess, 157^ 175*
Unity, 69, 73, 77, 104, 129, 135, 9%^.
Unselfishness, 213, 248.
UtiUty,ss,59,22o.

Vampires, 145, l86.

Vanity, 148.

Vibration, 131, 214, 855*

Vice, 131, 152.

Viigin, 121,212.

Virtne, 131, 152, 215, 249^

Visions, 148.

Water, 78.

WiU, 20, 60, 72, 78, 124, 145, 165, 167, ao6, J

Will cnre, z 15.

Wisdom, 39, 207, 214, 258,265.

Witchcraft, 95, 295.

Woman, 120, Z44«

Word, 237, 244* «fia-

Worlds^ 42, 13&

Worship, 44, I55» 174-

Y<^ pracdce, 921, 235, 242,
eodlac,6.

Digitized by

Google

Digitized by

Google

Digitized by

Google

COUNtWAY UBRARV

HC 2TSX Z

t ii«i

3 2044 046 347 456

4

tized by

Google

Magtc, wtiitt tnd Mack. t904

Countway Library

3 2044 046 347 456

BFR1668
