Philosophy of the Unconscious, Vol. 3
Eduard von Hartmann (W. C. Coupland, trans.) (1884)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Hartmann's Philosophy of the Unconscious, Vol. 3: the unconscious and the problems of religion and history. Coupland's 1884 translation.

========================================================================

VOL.  TIL


the
ENGLISH  AND FOREIGN

philosophical  library.


VOLUME  XXVII.


PHILOSOPHY


THE UNCONSCIOUS.


EDUAED  VOX  HAETMAXX.


SPECULATIVE  RESULTS  ACCORDING  TO  THE  INDUCTIVE
METHOD OF  PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.


2utf)ori0eti  translation

BY

WILLIAM  CHATTERTON  COUPLAXD,  M.A.  B.Sc.

IN  THREE VOLUMES.
VOL.  III.


L  0  X  D  0  X  :
TEUBNER & CO., LUDGATE HILL.

1 884.

[All  rl'jlits  reserved.']


'Baflanrgne  ■press

BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND  CO.
EDINBURGH AND LONDON


r-


--


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA
SANTA  BARBARA  L ., . . :  E ;  LIBRARY


3 H7


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS— (continue!).

chap.  ]

XIII. THE IRRATIONALITY  OP  VOLITION  AND  THE  MISERY  OF
EXISTENCE .......

NATURE  OF  THE PROBLEM .....

First  Stage  of  the  illusion  : happiness  is  con-
sidered AS  HAVING  BEEN  ACTUALLY  ATTAINED  AT
THE PRESENT STAGE OF THE "WORLD'S DEVELOP-
MENT, ACCORDINGLY ATTAINABLE BY THE INDI-
VIDUAL OF  TO-DAY  IN  HIS  EARTHLY  LIFE  (ANCIENT
WORLD — CHILDHOOD) .....

(I.) CRITICISM OF SCHOPENHAUER'S THEORY OF THE

NEGATIVE  CHARACTER  OF  PLEASURE .
(2.) HEALTH, YOUTH, FREEDOM, AND A  COMPETENCE
AS  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  ZERO-POINT  OF  FEELING
AND  CONTENTMENT  ....

(3.) HUNGER  AND LOVE .....

(4.) COMPASSION,  FRIENDSHIP,  AND  DOMESTIC  FELICITY

(5.) VANITY, SENSE OF HONOUR, AMBITION, LUST OF

FAME AND POWER  ....

(6.) RELIGIOUS EDIFICATION  ....

(7.) IMMORALITY ......

(8.) SCIENTIFIC  AND ART-ENJOYMENT .

(9.) SLEEP AND DREAMS .....

(IO.) THE ACQUISITIVE INSTINCT  AND  COMFORT

(II.) ENVY, CHAGRIN, REPENTANCE, ETC.

(12.) DOTE .......

(13.)  RESUME"


23
27

41
49

57
59
60
66
68
7i
7i
73


Vlll
CHAP.


CONTENTS.

PAGE

Second  Stage  of  the  illusion  :  happiness  is  con-
ceived ATTAINABLE  BY  THE  INDIVIDUAL  IN  A
TRANSCENDENT  LIFE  AFTER  DEATH  (MIDDLE  AGE
—YOUTH)  ......  79

Third  Stage  of  the  illusion  : happiness rele-
gated TO  THE FUTURE OF  THE  WORLD (MODERN
TIMES— MANHOOD). CONCLUSION (OLD  AGE)  .  94

THE GOAL OF EVOLUTION AND THE SIGNIFICANCE  OF
CONSCIOUSNESS (TRANSITION TO PRACTICAL PHILO-
SOPHY) .  .  .  .  .  .  .120

THE  ULTIMATE  PRINCIPLES  .  .  .  .  .143

(I.) RETROSPECT OF  EARLIER  PHILOSOPHIES .  . 147

(2.)  THE  WILL  .  .  .  .  .  -159

(3.) THE PRESENTATION  OR IDEA  .  .  -173

(4.)  THE  IDENTICAL  SUBSTANCE  OF  BOTH ATTRIBUTES 1S7
(5.)  THE  POSSIBILITY  OF  METAPHYSICAL  KNOWLEDGE 1 97


APPENDIX.

THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE NERVE-CENTRES

(I.) INTRODUCTION  ....

(2.) NERVE-FIBRE  AND  GANGLION-CELL  .

(3.) THE  SPINAL  COED ....

(4.) THE INNER PSYCHICAL ASPECT OF THE REFLEX

PROCESS  .....

(5.)  TEE TELEOLOGICAL CHARACTER  OF THE REFLEX

FUNCTION .....
(6.) THE  FOUR  CHIEF  GRADES  OF  NERVE-CENTRES
(7.) THE  MORPHOLOGICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  PARTS

OF THE BRAIN  ....

(8.) THE CENTRES OF  THE SPACE-SENSES
(9.) THE CEREBELLUM  ....

(10.) THE FORE-BRAIN  ....

(II.)  THE CO-OPERATION  AND  SUBORDINATION OF THE

NERVE-CENTRES  ....

(12.) ORGANISM  AND  SOUL.
ADDENDA  ......


205
207
211
2l8


245

257
260

265

26S

274
2S5
2S9


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS—
Continued.


XIII.

THE IRRATIONALITY  OF  VOLITION AND THE MISERY
OF EXISTENCE.

NATURE  OF  THE PROBLEM.

The  object  of  this  chapter  is  to  inquire  whether  the  being
or  the  non-being  of  this  present  world  deserves  the  pre-
ference. And  here,  more  than  at  any  other  stage  of  our
inquiry,  must  we  crave  the  reader's  indulgence,  since  a
tolerably  exhaustive  treatment  of  the  subject  would  re-
quire a  book  to  itself.  In  this  place  our  exposition  must
be  rather  of  the  nature  of  an  episode,  both  on  external
grounds  and  more  particularly  because  the  result  of  this
inquiry,  although  important  for  the  clearing  up  of  the
ultimate  principles  of  Philosophy,  has  no  direct  bear-
ing on  the  main  theme  of  the  work  as  proclaimed  in  its
title,  "  The  Unconscious."  Nevertheless,  in  a  short  exa-
mination, presenting  many  new  points  of  view,  I  hope  to
afford  suggestions  even  to  the  opponents  of  the  opinions
here  advanced,  which  may  to  a  certain  extent  compensate
them  for  the  perusal  of  this  digression.

If  we  glance  at  the  judgments  of  the  greatest  minds  of
VOL.  III.  A


2  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

all  ages,  we  find  those,  who  have  at  all  found  occasion  to
express  their  opinion  on  the  subject,  pronouncing  the  con-
demnation of  life  in  very  decided  terms.

Plato  says  in  the  "  Apology  "  :  "  Now,  if  death  is  with-
out all  sensation,  a  dreamless  sleep,  as  it  were,  it  would
be  indeed  a  wonderful  gain.  For  I  think  if  any  one
selected  a  night  in  which  he  had  slept  so  soundly  as  to
have  had  no  dream,  and  then  compared  this  night  with
the  other  nights  and  days  of  his  life,  and  after  serious
consideration  declared  how  many  days  and  nights  he  had
spent  better  and  more  pleasantly  than  this  one,  that  not
merely  an  ordinary  mortal,  but  the  great  king  of  Persia
himself,  would  find  these  but  few  in  number  as  compared
with  all  his  other  days  and  nights."  More  clearly  and
picturesquely  it  would  hardly  be  possible  to  state  the  advan-
tage which,  on  the  average,  non-being  possesses  over  being.

Kant  says  (Werke,  vii.  p.  381) :  "  One  must  indeed  make
an  ill  reckoning  of  the  worth  of  the  journey  (of  life)  if
one  can  still  wish  that  it  should  last  longer  than  it  actually
does,  for  that  would  only  be  a  prolongation  of  a  perpetual
contest  with  sheer  hardships."  Page  393,  he  calls  life  "  a  trial-
time,  wherein  most  succumb,  and  in  which  even  the  best
does  not  rejoice  in  his  life."

Fichte  declares  the  natural  world  to  be  the  very  worst
that  can  be,  and  is  himself  only  consoled  by  the  belief  in
the  possibility  of  a  preferment  to  the  blessedness  of  a
supersensible  world  through  the  medium  of  pure  thought.
He  says  (Werke,  v.  pp.  408-409) :  "  Courageously  men
betake  themselves  to  the  chase  after  felicity,  heartily
appropriating  and  fondly  devoting  themselves  to  the  first
best  object  that  pleases  them  and  that  promises  to  repay
their  efforts.  But  as  soon  as  they  withdraw  into  them-
selves and  ask  themselves,  'Am  I  now  happy  ?'  the  reply
comes  distinctly  from  the  depth  of  their  soul,  '  Oh,  no;  thou
art  still  just  as  empty  and  destitute  as  before  !'  Convinced
that  this  is  a  true  deliverance,  they  imagine  that  they  have
failed  only  in  the  choice  of  their  object,  and  throw  them-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  3

selves  upon  another.  This,  too,  will  just  as  little  content
them  as  the  first ;  no  object  beneath  the  sun  and  moon  tcill
satisfy  them.  .  .  .  Thus  they  pine  and  fret  their  life  through;
in  every  situation  in  which  they  find  themselves,  thinking
if  it  were  only  different  how  much  better  their  lot  would  be,
and  yet,  after  it  has  changed,  finding  themselves  no  better
off  than  before ;  at  every  spot  at  which  they  stand,  sup-
posing if  they  could  only  reach  yon  height  their  uneasi-
ness would  cease,  yet  finding  again,  even  on  the  height,
their  old  woe.  .  .  .  Perhaps  they  even  resign  the  hope  of
satisfaction  in  this  earthly  life,  but  accept  in  compensa-
tion a  certain  traditional  doctrine  concerning  a  blessedness
beyond  the  grave.  In  what  a  deplorable  illusion  are  they
caught !  Quite  certainly,  indeed,  lies  blessedness  also
beyond  the  grave  for  him  for  whom  it  has  already  begun
on  this  side ;  through  the  mere  interment,  however,  one
does  not  enter  into  blessedness;  and  they  will  in  the
future  life,  and  in  the  infinite  series  of  all  future  lives,
just  as  vainly  seek  blessedness  as  they  have  sought  it  in
the  present  life,  if  they  seek  it  in  anything  else  than  in
that  which  already  encircles  them  so  closely  here  that  it
can  never  be  brought  nearer  to  them  in  endless  time,  in
the  Eternal. — Thus,  then,  errs  the  poor  offspring  of  eter-
nity, thrust  out  of  his  paternal  abode,  always  surrounded
by  his  celestial  heritage,  which  his  timid  hand  fears  only
to  touch,  inconstant,  and  roaming  in  the  waste,  endeavour-
ing in  vain  to  settle ;  fortunately,  through  the  speedy  ruin
of  all  his  habitations,  reminded  that  he  will  nowhere  find
rest  but  in  his  father's  house."

Schelling  says  (Werke,  i.  7,  p.  399) :  "  Hence  the  veil  of
sadness  that  is  spread  over  all  Nature,  the  deep  indestruc-
tible melancholy  of  all  life."  He  has,  moreover  (Werke,
i.  10,  pp.  266-268),  a  very  beautiful  passage  which  should
be  read  in  its  entirety ;  here  I  can  only  quote  a  few  frag-
ments :  "  Certainly  it  is  a  painful  way  the  Being  which
lives  in  Nature  traverses  in  his  passage  through  it;  to
that  the  line  of  sorrow,  traced  on  the  countenance  of  all


4  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Nature,  on  the  face  of  the  animal  world  testifies.  .  .  .  But
this  misfortune  of  existence  is  hereby  annulled  that  it  is
accepted  and  felt  as  non-existence,  in  that  man  seeks  to  bear
up  in  the  greatest  possible  freedom  from  it.  .  .  .  Who  will
trouble  himself  about  the  common  and  ordinary  mischances
of  a  transitory  life  that  has  apprehended  the  pain  of  uni-
versal existence  and  the  great  fate  of  the  whole  ?"  "Anguish
is  the  fundamental  feeling  of  every  living  creature  "  (i.  8,
322).  "  Pain  is  something  universal  and  necessary  in  all
life.  .  .  .  All  pain  only  comes  from  being"  (i.  8,  335).
"  The  unrest  of  unceasing  willing  and  desiring,  by  which
every  creature  is  goaded,  is  in  itself  unblessedness  "  (ii.  1,
473;  comp.  also  i.  8,  235-236;  ii.  1,  556,  557,  560).

I  shall  content  myself  with  these  citations ;  a  few  more
will  be  found  in  Schopenhauer's  "World  as  Will  and
Idea,"  ii.  chap.  46.

But  what  do  such  subjective  expressions  of  opinion
without  annexed  reasons  prove  ?  Must  we  not  rather
mistrust  them  because  they  proceed  from  eminent  intelli-
gences, affected  by  that  melancholy  sadness  which  is  the
inheritance  of  almost  all  genius,  because  they  do  not  feel
at  home  in  the  world  of  their  inferiors  ?  (Comp.  Aristotle,
Prob.  30,  1.)  Certainly  the  worth  of  the  world  must  be
measured  by  its  own  standard,  not  by  that  of  the  genius.
Let  us  look,  therefore,  further.

Imagine  some  one  who  is  no  genius,  but  a  man  with
the  best  general  culture  of  his  time,  endowed  with  all  the
other  good  things  of  an  enviable  lot,  in  the  most  vigorous
years  of  manhood,  who  is  fully  conscious  of  the  advantage
which  he  enjoys  over  the  lower  orders  in  the  uncivilised
nations  and  over  his  fellows  of  ruder  ages,  and  who  by  no
means  envies  those  above  him,  who  are  tormented  by  all
sorts  of  discomforts  spared  to  himself — a  man  who  is  neither
exhausted  and  rendered  blase'  by  immoderate  pleasure,  nor
has  ever  been  crushed  by  exceptional  strokes  of  fate.

Let  us  imagine  Death  to  draw  nigh  this  man  and  say,
"  Thy life-period is  run out,  and  at  this  hour  thou  art


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  5

on  the  brink  of  annihilation  ;  but  it  depends  on  thy  pre-
sent voluntary  decision,  once  again,  precisely  in  the  same
way,  to  go  through  thy  now  closed  life  with  complete
oblivion  of  all  that  has  passed. Now  choose  !  "

I  question  whether  the  man  would  prefer  the  repetition
of  the  past  performance  to  non-existence,  if  his  mind  be
free  from  fear,  and  calm,  and  if  he  has  not  altogether  lived
so  thoughtlessly,  without  all  self-reflection,  that,  in  his
inability  to  offer  a  summary  criticism  of  the  experiences
of  his  life,  he  does  but  give  expression  in  his  answer
merely  to  the  instinct  of  the  desire  of  living  at  all  cost,
or  allows  his  judgment  to  be  thereby  too  much  biassed.
How  much  more,  however,  now  must  this  man  prefer  non-
being  to  a  re-entrance  into  life,  which  offers  him  not  the
favourable  conditions  his  past  life  offered,  but,  on  the  con-
trary, leaves  it  perfectly  to  chance  into  what  new  life-
conditions  he  enters,  which  thus  offers  him,  with  a  possi-
bility bordering  on  certainty,  worse  conditions  than  those
which  he  first  disdained !

In  the  situation  of  this  man,  however,  the  Unconscious
would  find  itself  at  every  moment  of  a  new  birth,  if  it
really  possessed  an  option.

]5ut  in  this  example,  likewise,  the  reproach  attached
to  the  opinions  of  genius  is  not  to  be  avoided,  that  we
have  interrogated  an  intelligence  far  above  the  average,
but  that,  as  each  single  phenomenon  must  be  judged  by
its  own  standard,  the  world  as  a  whole  can  only  be  judged
with  approximate  correctness  if  the  judgment  is  passed
according  to  the  average  standard  of  all  the  several  pheno-
mena. The  above  example,  however,  if  it  is  correct  in
itself,  proves  that  this  stage  of  intelligence  already  con-
demns the  phenomenon  by  which  it  is  supported,  of
which  it  is  indisputably  the  sole  competent  tribunal,
whilst,  on  the  contrary,  the  error  only  consists  in  this,
that  it  regards  itself  as  competent  to  condemn  also  what
is  hrlow  it,  whilst  this  likewise  must  be  measured  by  its
own  standard.


6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

This  error  is,  however,  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  it  also
quite  universally  occurs  where  the  intelligence  does  not
stand  so  high  as  to  condemn  the  appearance  by  which  it
is  supported.  Let  any  one,  e.g.,  ask  a  woodcutter,  or  a
Hottentot,  or  an  orang-outang  whether  he  would  prefer
annihilation  or  new  birth  in  a  rhinoceros  or  a  louse.
They  would  probably  all  prefer  annihilation,  but,  never-
theless, prefer  the  repetition  of  their  own  life  to  anni-
hilation, precisely  as  the  rhinoceros  and  the  louse  would
prefer  a  repetition  of  their  life  to  annihilation.

This  error  arises,  however,  from  this,  that  the  inter-
rogated at  the  moment  of  decision  projects  himself  with  his
present  intelligence  into  the  life  of  the  lower  phase,  when
lie  of  course  must  find  it  unendurable,  and  forgets  that
then  at  the  lower  stage  also  only  the  intelligence  of  this
lower  stage  would  be  at  his  command  for  judging.

There  remains,  then,  in  fact,  nothing  for  it  but  to
judge  every  phenomenal  stage  of  the  Unconscious  by  its
own  standard,  and  then  to  draw  from  all  these  special
judgments  the  algebraic  sum,  which  then  at  the  same  time
represents  a  real  unconscious  unity,  namely,  the  totality  of
all  the  subjective  determinations  of  feeling  posited  in  the
All-one  Being.  Every  judgment  from  an  alien  standpoint
yields  unavailable  results  ;  for  every  being  is  just  as  happy
as  it  feels  itself  to  be,  not  as  i"  should  feel  in  its  place  with
my  intelligence,  since  this  is  an  unreal  supposition.

Pain  and  pleasure  are  only  so  far  as  they  are  felt ;
they  have  thus  no  reality  at  all  except  in  the  sentient
subject;  consequently  an  objective  reality  does  not  directly
appertain  to  them,  but  only  in  virtue  of  the  objective
reality  of  the  subject  in  which  they  exist,  i.e.,  their  reality
is  immediately  a  subjective  one,  and  only  so  far  as  they
have  a  subjective  reality  have  they  indirectly  also  an
objective  one.  It  follows  from  this  that  there  is  no
other  direct  measure  of  the  reality  of  sensation  than  the
subjective,  and  accordingly  that  an  illusion  or  untruth  of
feeling  as  such  is  impossible.


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  7

But  undoubtedly  feeling  may  be  untrue  so  far  as  the
ideas  are  untrue  by  which  it  is  aroused,  but  then  the
delusion  indeed  always  lies  in  the  idea  of  the  object,  but
the  feeling  itself,  no  matter  whether  it  rests  on  a  real
basis  or  on  an  illusion,  is  always  equally  true  and  equally
entitled  to  be  taken  account  of  in  the  sum  total.

If,  now,  the  difference  in  the  sentence  which  the  intel-
ligence of  the  louse  would  pass  on  its  life  and  that  which
my  intelligence  passes  on  my  life  depends  solely  on  this,
that  the  louse  is  entangled  in  illusions  which  I  do  not
share,  and  that  these  illusions  afford  it  an  excess  of  felt,
thus  real  felicity,  which  causes  it  to  prefer  its  life  to
non-existence,  manifestly  the  louse  would  be  right  and  I
wrong.  The  decision,  however,  is  not  so  simple  ;  for  beside
this  source  of  error  on  my  side  there  remain  further  sources
of  error  in  the  answer  of  the  louse,  which  corrupt  its
judgment,  as  the  former  mine  —  to  wit,  although  un-
doubtedly the  life-value  of  every  being  can  only  be  con-
sidered according  to  its  own  subjective  standard — and  here
illusion  is  as  good  as  truth — yet  it  is  by  no  means  asserted
that  every  being  draws  the  correct  algebraic  sum  from  alL
the  affections  of  its  life,  or,  in  other  words,  that  its  collective
judgment  on  its  own  life  is  a  correct  one  in  respect  of  its
subjective  experience.  Quite  apart  from  the  degree  of
intelligence  necessary  for  the  pronunciation  of  such  a
summary  judgment,  there  remains,  in  the  first  place,  the
possibility  of  errors  of  memory  and  combination ;  and
secondly,  of  a  bias  of  the  judgment  by  the  ivill  and  uncon-
scious feeling.

If  we  may  assume  that  the  former  errors  might  be  got
rid  of  in  the  judgment  of  a  large  number  of  individuals,
the  latter  source  of  error,  on  the  contrary,  weighs  so  much
the  heavier.  Whoever  knows  how  powerful  is  the  un-
conscious bias  of  thought  and  judgment  by  the  will,  by
instincts  and  feelings,  will  immediately  allow  the  great
importance  of  the  errors  thereby  rendered  possible.
Bet  any  one  reflect how easily  unpleasant impressions


8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

are  blotted  out  of  the  mind  and  how  pleasant  ones  re-
main, so  that  even  an  event  or  adventure  disagreeable
enough  in  reality  appears  in  memory  in  the  most  charming
light  {jwvat  meminisse  malorum) ;  in  consequence  of  this
the  recapitulating  memory  must  attain  to  a  far  more
favourable  summing  up  of  the  pleasure-content  of  personal
life  than  a  review  of  the  pleasure  and  pain  actually  felt
in  the  course  of  life  undistorted  by  the  glasses  of  memory
would  yield.  What  memory  is  unable  to  accomplish  in
the  way  of  hushing  up  really  felt  pain,  the  instinct  of
hope  most  certainly  accomplishes  for  future  feeling
(comp.  below  No.  12),  and  the  balance  of  the  past  will
be  involuntarily  falsified  by  all  younger  persons  by  the
introduction  of  the  idea  of  a  future  which  is  purged  by
hope  of  the  main  causes  of  past  pain  without  the  causes
of  pain  hereafter  to  be  added  being  taken  into  account.
Thus  it  is  not  the  true  life  as  it  actually  was  and  will  be,
but  as  it  is  exhibited  to  the  uncritical  eye  in  the  embel-
lishing mirror  of  memory  and  in  the  deceptive  roseate
hue  of  hope  that  is  used  for  drawing  the  balance  between
the  sum  of  pleasure  and  the  sum  of  pain ;  and  hence  it  is
no  wonder  if  a  result  appears  to  be  yielded  which  little
enough  agrees  with  reality.

Let  one  consider,  further,  that  the  foolish  vanity  of  man
goes  so  far  as  to  prefer  to  seem  rather  than  to  be  not
merely  well  but  also  happy,  so  that  every  one  carefully
hides  where  the  shoe  pinches,  and  tries  to  make  a  show  of
opulence,  contentment,  and  happiness  which  he  does  not
at  all  possess.  This  source  of  error  falsifies  the  sentence
that  one  passes  on  others  according  to  what  they  express
and  reveal  of  the  balance  of  pleasure  and  pain  of  their  life,
just  as  the  two  just-named  sources  of  error  the  judgment
on  their  own  part.  If  one,  however,  judges  according  to
what  other  people  are  wont  to  declare  concerning  the  sum
of  happiness  of  their  whole  life,  it  is  clear  that  we  have
here  to  deal  with  the  product  of  the  two  mentioned
errors. One  already  sees  from  this  with  what  caution


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  9

we  must  accept  the  judgment  of  mankind  on  their  own
felicity.

Lastly,  when  we  consider,  as  is  a  priori  to  be  expected,
that  the  same  unconscious  will  which  has  created  beings
with  these  instincts  and  passions  will  also  through  these
instincts  and  passions  influence  conscious  thinking  in  the
direction  of  the  same  life-impulse,  we  should  rather  only
wonder  how  the  instinctive  love  of  life  should  come  to
be  able  in  consciousness  to  condemn  this  same  life ;  for
the  same  Unconscious  which  wills  life,  and,  moreover,  for
its  quite  special  ends  wills  just  this  life  in  spite  of  its
wretchedness,  will  certainly  not  omit  to  fit  out  the  crea-
tures of  life  with  just  as  many  illusions  as  they  need,  in
order  not  merely  to  make  life  supportable,  but  also  to
leave  over  enough  love  of  life,  elasticity,  and  freshness  for
the  life-tasks  to  be  accomplished  by  them  and  claiming
all  their  energy,  and  thus  to  cozen  them  concerning  the
misery  of  their  existence.

In  this  sense  Jean  Paul  well  says :  "  We  do  not  love
life  because  it  is  beautiful,  but  because  we  must  love  it ;
and  hence  it  happens  that  we  often  draw  the  inverted
conclusion  :  since  we  love  life,  it  must  be  beautiful."
What  is  here  called  love  to  life  is  nothing  else  but  the
instinctive  impulse  of  self-preservation,  the  conditio  sine
qua  lion  of  individuation,  the  negative  expression  of  which
is  the  avoidance  and  warding  off  of  disturbances,  and  in
the  highest  degree  the  fear  of  death,  of  which  mention  has
been  made  at  the  beginning  of  Sect.  13.  Chap.  i.  Death
in  itself  is  no  evil  at  all,  for  the  pain  connected  with  it
falls  indeed  still  into  life,  and  would  not  be  more  feared
than  the  same  pain  in  sickness,  if  the  cessation  of  indi-
vidual existence  were  not  bound  up  with  it,  which  is  not
felt,  thus  cannot  be  any  evil  at  all.  As  little  then  as  the
fear  of  death  can  be  understood  otherwise  than  from  the
blind  instinct  of  self-preservation,  so  little  the  love  of  life.
As  is  the  case  in  general  with  the  fear  of  death  and  the
love  of  life,  so  in  particular  in  many  phases  of  life,  which


io  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

instinctive  impulse  spurs  us  to  retain  and  eagerly  to
experience,  in  consequence  of  which  our  judgment  on  the
algebraic  sum  of  the  enjoyments  and  pains  special  to  this
phase  is  corrupted  and  the  impression  of  the  experience
just  made  glossed  over  by  the  new  deceitful  hope.  This  is
the  case  with  all  the  properly  impelling  passions,  hunger,
love,  honour,  avarice,  &c.

It  must  now  be  inquired  here,  in  respect  of  the  different
impulses  and  aims  of  life,  how  far  instinct  and  passion
themselves  cause  a  corruption  of  the  judgment  with  regard
to  the  total  enjoyment  or  pain  endured  through  the  par-
ticular aim ;  but  this  would  be  a  very  difficult  problem,
because  the  assent  of  every  reader  would  depend  on  this,
that  in  judging  of  his  previous  judgment  he  perfectly
emancipate  himself  in  each  of  these  directions  from  the
corrupting  influence  of  impulse  and  passion,  which  is
hardly  to  be  expected ;  for  a  conscientious  life-long  self-
observation  is  scarcely  able  to  effect  that.  Apart  from  the
small  prospect  of  success  which  this  effort  by  its  very
nature  would  offer,  there  would  be  also  an  external  incon-
venience connected  with  it.  This  consideration,  namely,
would  by  no  means  dispense  us  from  the  task  of  after-
wards subjecting  all  those  feelings  to  a  criticism  which,
iu  spite  of  their  complete  reality,  rest  on  illusions,  and
which  therefore  are  destroyed  along  with  the  destruction  of
these  illusions  with  advancing  conscious  intelligence.

This  inquiry  we  cannot  be  spared,  because  all  progress
has  in  view  the  increase  of  conscious  intelligence.

The  lower  animals  and  plants,  since  the  commencement
of  organic  life,  have  been  more  and  more  displaced  by
higher  ones — the  higher  animals  by  man, — and  humanity
will  in  time  attain,  on  the  average,  a  pitch  of  intelligence
and  cosmic  intuition  which  at  present  only  a  cultured  few
have  reached.

The  question  how  far  the  feelings  rest  on  illusions  is  thus
of  the  highest  importance  for  the  decision  of  our  problem,
since  what  will  become  of  the  world,  whither  it  is  tending,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  1 1

is  manifestly  of  far  greater  importance  for  the  estima-
tion of  its  value  than  the  provisional  stage  of  development
at  which  it  may  accidentally  happen  to  be.

We  should  thus,  then,  have  to  consider  the  same  im-
pulses and  phases  of  life  once  more  under  this  second
point  of  view,  and  it  is  evident  that  here  many  repetitions
must  occur,  partly  not  to  disturb  the  understanding,  partly
because  iii  the  concrete  case  the  two  points  of  view  are  so
intimately  connected  that  it  often  appears  hardly  possible
strictly  to  separate  them.  I  therefore  prefer  to  pursue  the
consideration  from  both  points  of  view  simultaneously.

In  many  cases  where  the  reader  might  be  disinclined  to
admit  that  the  ordinary  theoretical  assumption  of  a  prepon-
derating enjoyment  rests  on  an  error,  i.e.,  on  a  corruption
of  the  judgment  by  impulse  or  by  other  sources  of  error,
he  would  hardly  refuse  to  allow  that  the  preponderating
enjoyment  itself  supposed  by  him,  if  it  really  exists,  still  de-
pends on  an  illusion,  and  is  accordingly  rendered  question-
able by  the  thorough  destruction  of  the  illusion.  Both,
however,  come,  for  the  object  of  our  inquiry,  almost  to
the  same  thing ;  for  if  it  is  true  that  with  the  progressive
intelligence  of  the  world  the  illusions  of  existence  also
must  be  more  and  more  undermined,  until  finally  all  is
recognised  as  "  vanity  of  vanities,"  the  condition  of  the
world  would  become  ever  more  unhappy  the  more  it  ap-
proaches the  goal  of  its  evolution,  whence  we  should  con-
clude that  it  would  have  been  more  rational  to  prevent  the
development  of  the  world  the  earlier  the  better,  best  of  all
to  suppress  its  arising  at  the  moment  of  its  origin.

Before  all  tilings,  however,  I  beg  the  reader,  in  the
following  inquiries,  to  keep  continually  in  view  that  the
above-stated  sources  of  error  (pp.  7-9)  in  the  estimate
of  life  constantly  tend  to  preoccupy  and  mislead  his
judgment  in  favour  of  an  over-estimate  of  pleasure
and  under-estimate  of  displeasure,  and  that  the  views
and  opinions  on  life  which  he  brings  with  him  to  this
philosophical  inquiry  are  already  themselves  results  that


12  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

are  thoroughly  saturated  by  the  influence  of  the  sources
of  error  named,  and  thus,  as  imported  prejudices,  oppose
the  unprejudiced  consideration  of  the  actual  facts.

First  Stage  of  the  Illusion.

Happiness  is  considered  as  having  been  actually  attained
at  the  present  stage  of  the  world's  development,  accordingly
attainable  by  the  individual  of  to-day  in  his  earthly  life.

i.  Criticism  of  Schopenhauer's  Theory  of  the  Negative  Char-
acter of  Pleasure. — I  must  in  this  inquiry  presuppose  an  ac-
quaintance with  the  so-called  Pessimism  of  Schopenhauer
(see  "World  as  Will  and  Idea,"  vol.  i.  §§  56-59,  vol.  ii.
chap,  xlvi.;  "Parerga,"  2d  ed.,  vol.  i.  pp.  430-439,  and  vol.  ii.
chaps,  xi.  and  xii.),  and  entreat  the  perusal  of  the  sections
indicated  in  the  above  order, — a  request  for  which  the
reader  hitherto  unacquainted  with  Schopenhauer's  piquant
style  will  certainly  be  obliged  to  me.  How  far  I  differ
from  the  views  there  expounded  will  be  sufficiently  evident
from  what  has  been  previously  said.  The  attempted
proof  ("  Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,"  3  Aufl.  Bd.  ii.
S.  667-688)  that  this  world  is  the  worst  of  all  possible
ones  is  a  manifest  sophism ;  everywhere  else  Schopenhauer
himself  tries  to  maintain  and  prove  nothing  further  than
that  the  existence  of  this  world  is  worse  than  its  non-
existence, and  this  assertion  I  hold  to  be  correct.  The  word
Pessimism  is  thus  an  inappropriate  imitation  of  the  word
Optimism. — Further,  futile  as  I  must  regard  the  attempts
of  Leibniz  to  demonstrate  out  of  existence  the  misery  of
the  world  in  order  to  save  the  Supreme  Wisdom  and  the
best  of  all  possible  worlds,  as  little  can  I  approve  that
Schopenhauer  overlooks  so  much  the  wisdom  of  the  world's
arrangements  in  dwelling  on  its  misery,  and,  although  he
cannot  quite  deny  it,  that  he  leaves  it  as  far  as  possible
unnoticed  and  makes  light  of  it. — Then  I  keep  clear  of
the  notion  of  guilt  which  Schopenhauer  imports  into  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  13

creation.  I  have  frequently  expressed  myself  against  a
transcendent  use  of  ethical  conceptions,  because  these
have  a  meaning  only  for  conscious  individuals  in  their
intercourse  with  one  another.  Only  this  can  I  conclude
with  Schopenhauer  from  the  misery  of  existence,  that  the
creation  owes  its  first  origin  to  an  irrational  act,  i.e.,  to
such  an  one  in  which  reason  has  had  no  part,  therefore  to
the  mere  groundless  will. — Lastly,  however,  I  have  still
to  signalise  Schopenhauer's  wrong  use  of  the  concept  of
Negation.  As  Leibniz  endeavours  to  attribute  to  pain
an  exclusively  negative  character,  so  Schopenhauer  to
pleasure ;  not,  indeed,  altogether  in  the  privative  sense  of
Leibniz,  but  in  such  a  way  that  pain  alone  is  said  to
arise  directly,  but  pleasure  only  to  become  possible  in-
directly, through  abolition  or  diminution  of  pain.  Now  I
do  not  in  the  least  intend  to  dispute  that  every  removal
or  diminution  of  a  pain  is  a  pleasure,  but  not  every
pleasure  is  a  removal  or  diminution  of  pain,  and,  con-
versely, it  just  as  much  holds  good  that  the  removal  or
diminution  of  pleasure  is  a  displeasure.

Undoubtedly  a  reservation  must  be  made  which  tells  in
favour  of  pain — to  wit,  both  pleasure  and  pain  attack  the
nervous  system,  and  thereby  produce  a  kind  of  fatigue,
which,  with  the  highest  degree  of  pleasure,  may  become
fatal  atony.  Hence  results  a  need  increasing  with  the
duration  and  the  degree  of  feeling,  i.e.,  a  conscious  or
unconscious  will,  to  cause  the  cessation  or  remission  of
feeling  to  occur.  With  displeasure  this  need,  springing
from  the  attack  on  the  nerves,  co-operates  with  the  direct
aversion  to  the  endurance  of  a  pain  ;  with  pleasure,  on  the
contrary,  it  opposes  the  direct  desire  for  the  retention  of
pleasure,  and  always  diminishes  the  same;  nay,  it  can  finally
overcome  it.  (Think  of  exhaustion  in  sexual  gratification.)
Pain  is  (apart  from  complete  blunting  of  the  nerves  by
great  pain)  the  more  painful,  pleasure  the  more  indifferent
and  cloying,  the  longer  it  lasts.

Here  lurks  already  the  first  reason  why,  with  a  perfectly


14  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

fair  balance  for  the  measurement  of  direct  pleasure  and
displeasure  in  the  world,  the  scale  would  turn  in  favour
of  pain  through  the  additional  nervous  affection.  But
further,  while  through  this  additional  need  of  remission
in  respect  of  every  enduring  feeling,  the  indirect  plea-
sure, i.e.,  that  arising  through  cessation  of  a  pleasure,
relatively  diminishes,  it  appears  even  a  priori  that  a  pro-
portionately much  larger  part  of  pleasure  than  of  pain
in  the  world  points  to  an  indirect  origin  from  the  remission
of  its  contrary.  But  now,  since,  as  will  appear  from  this
whole  inquiry,  it  is  true  that,  on  the  whole,  there  is  far
more  pain  than  pleasure  in  the  world,  it  is  no  wonder  that,
in  point  of  fact,  through  the  remission  of  this  pain,  by  far
the  largest  part  of  all  the  pleasure  which  one  meets  with
in  the  world  finds  it  sufficient  explanation,  and  but  little
pleasure  remains  whose  origin  is  immediate.

Accordingly  for  practical  purposes  it  comes  pretty  much
to  what  Schopenhauer  asserts,  namely,  that  pleasure  has  an
indirect  origin,  and  pain  a  direct.  This  can,  however,  not
affect  the  principle  of  the  matter,  for  it  is  and  remains  in-
disputable that  there  is  also  pleasure  which  does  not  arise
through  remission  of  a  pain,  but  is  positively  raised  above
the  indifference-point  of  sensation.  Let  any  one  think  of
the  enjoyments  of  agreeable  taste  and  of  those  of  art  and
science,  which  latter,  since  they  did  not  fit  into  his  theory
of  the  negative  character  of  pleasure,  Schopenhauer  pru-
dently rejected  and  treated  as  painless  delight  of  the  in-
tellect liberated  from  the  will,  as  if  the  intellect  liberated
from  the  will  could  still  enjoy,  or  as  if  there  could  be  a
pleasurable  sensation  without  a  will  in  whose  satisfaction
it  consists  !  If  we  cannot  avoid  claiming  relish,  the  sexual
pleasures  taken  as  purely  physical  and  apart  from  their
metaphysical  relations,  and  the  enjoyments  of  art  and
science  as  pleasurable  sensations;  if  we  must  grant  that  these,
without  a  previous  pain,  without  previously  sinking  below
the  indifference-point  or  zero-point  of  sensation,  could  posi-
tively rise  above  it ;  lastly,  if  we  keep  firm  hold  of  our


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  15

principle  that  pleasure  only  consists  in  the  satisfaction
of  a  desire,  Schopenhauer's  assertion  must  necessarily  be
false  that  pleasure  is  only  a  remission  or  cessation  of  pain.
But  now  he  says,  in  proof  of  his  theory,  the  will  is,  as
lonjz  as  it  exists,  unsatisfied,  for  otherwise  it  would  exist
no  longer;  the  unsatisfied  will,  however,  is  want,  need,
displeasure.  If  now  it  is  satisfied,  this  displeasure  is  abo-
lished, and  therein  consists  the  satisfaction  or  pleasure ;
another  there  is  not.  This  argument  appears  irrefutable,
and  yet  its  consequence  is,  as  shown,  in  contradiction  with
experience.  The  conciliation  easily  results  when  one  more
closely  regards  the  enjoyment  of  agreeable  taste  or  an  art-
pleasure,  and  asks  oneself  where  then  the  will  lurks  that,  as
long  as  it  is  unsatisfied,  is  displeasure.  There  is  neither  a
displeasure  nor  an  unsatisfied  existing  will  to  be  found.
There  remains  nothing  for  it  then  but  to  assume  that  the
will  is  only  evoked  at  the  same  moment  at  which  it  is  also
satisfied,  so  that  there  exists  no  time  for  its  unsatisfied
existence.  It  is  in  accordance  with  this  that  it  is  indeed
one  and  the  same  thing  what  influences  (excites)  the  will
and  what  satisfies  it,  as  one  may  directly  convince  oneself
when  one  comes  upon  a  disagreeable  morsel  among  pleasant
tastes,  or  when  faulty  dissonances  occur  in  a  piece  of  music  ;
then,  namely,  the  will  is  indeed  set  in  motion  (stimulated),
but  it  is  not  satisfied,  and  now  at  once  the  displeasure  is
there.  Here,  in  the  case  of  the  will,  which,  on  arising,
immediately  meets  with  the  satisfaction  again  annihilating
it,  it  is  clear  that  the  pleasure  of  satisfaction  is  certainly
something  positive,  not  issuing  directly  and  alone  from  the
lessening  of  pain,  that  rather  even  the  indirect  pleasure,
presenting  itself  on  the  diminution  of  the  pain,  must  be
understood  as  direct  satisfaction  of  the  will  to  get  rid  of  the
pain.  Had  Schopenhauer  not  brought  with  him  to  this
inquiry  the  preconceived  opinion  of  the  enjoyment  of  the
intellect  independently  of  will,  he  would  doubtless  have
perceived  these  relations,  and  would  not  have  stopped  at
his  conception  of  the  negative  character  of  pleasure.


1 6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

All  that,  however,  would  perhaps  not  have  sufficed  to
establish  this  conviction  in  him,  if  there  had  not  been  one
thing  more  in  his  excuse.  We  have  seen  (Sect.  C.  Chap,
iii.  vol.  ii.  pp.  94-96)  that  the  non-satisfaction  of  the  will
must  indeed  by  its  nature  always  be  conscious  ;  satisfaction,
however,  by  no  means  directly,  but  only  then,  when  the
conscious  understanding  attains  consciousness  by  the  com-
parison of  opposite  experiences  ;  that  satisfaction  also  is  de-
pendent on  external  circumstances,  and  is  anything  but  a
direct  and  infallible  consequence  of  the  will.  I  beg  that
the  examples  there  quoted  may  be  read  through  once  more
in  order  to  save  repetition  at  this  place.

It  deserves  particular  notice  that  in  the  whole  vegetable
kingdom  and  the  lower  stages  of  the  animal  kingdom  we
cannot  suppose  the  degree  of  consciousness  requisite  for
the  comparison  of  experiences  and  recognition  of  their
dependence  on  external  causes,  that  accordingly  we  must
not  deem  these  organisms  capable  of  any  apperception  of
will-satisfaction,  thus  of  any  sensation  of  pleasure,  whilst
pain  and  displeasure  thrust  themselves  even  on  the  dullest
consciousness  with  pitiless  necessity.  But  even  higher
animals  must  in  general  be  capable  of  far  fewer  satisfac-
tions of  will  than  one  is  usually  inclined  to  assume
according  to  the  analogy  of  man.  As  concerns  man  him-
self, even  in  him,  since  of  course  not  every  man  at  every
moment  of  a  petty  satisfaction  of  will  is  compelled  to
draw  comparisons  with  opposite  experiences,  in  general
only  such  satisfactions  of  will  become  conscious,  i.e.,  felt
as  pleasure,  whose  accompanying  circumstances  direct  the
man,  without  his  assistance,  to  the  contrast  of  opposite
experiences,  e.g.,  unusual,  rare  satisfactions,  either  in  kind
or  degree,  or  such  as,  through  the  association  of  ideas,
recall  opposite  experiences,  whether  of  others  or  of  one's
self.

All  satisfactions  of  will  that  have  become  habit  and
rule  become  ever  less  .felt  as  such,  i.e.,  as  pleasure,  the
less  they  permit  the  memory  of  opposite  experiences  to


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  17

arise. It  is  clear  that  by  far  the  larger  part  (not  in-
tensively but  numerically)  of  the  satisfactions  of  the  will  is
thereby  lost  to  consciousness,  whilst  the  non-satisfactions
are  felt  uncurtailed. Wherefore  Schopenhauer  says,  quite
correctly ("Welt als Wille unci  Vorstellung," 3  Aufl.
Bd.  ii.  S.  657) :  "We  feel  the  wish  as  we  feel  hunger  and
thirst ;  as  soon,  however,  as  it  is  fulfilled,  it  is  with  it  as
with  the  enjoyed  morsel,  that  ceases  to  be  for  our  feeling
at  the  moment  that  it  is  swallowed. Pleasures  and  joys
we  miss  painfully  as  soon  as  they  cease ;  but  pains,  even
when  they  disappear  after  long  presence,  are  not  imme-
diately missed,  but  their  absence  has  to  be  brought  home
to  us  by  means  of  reflection. In  the  degree in  which
enjoyments  increase,  the  receptivity  for  them  diminishes ;
the  accustomed  is  no  longer  felt  as  enjoyment. ¥or  that
reason,  however,  the  receptivity  for  suffering  increases ;  for
the  omission  of  the  customary  is  painfully  felt." — (Parerga,
2  Aufl.  Bd.  ii.  S.  312) :  "As  we  clo  not  feel  the  health  of
our  whole  body,  but  only  the  little  part  where  the  shoe
pinches  us,  so  also  we  do  not  think  of  all  our  perfectly
satisfactory  affairs,  but  of  some  insignificant  trifle that
vexes  us." Untrue,  however,  is  it  when  he  adds :  "  On
this  depends  the  negative  character,  often  emphasised  by
me,  of  well-being  and  happiness,  in  contrast  to  the  posi-
tive character  of  pain." Undoubtedly  there  exists  in  the
apperception  of  pleasure  and  pain  a  certain  justification  of
these  conceptions,  so  far  as  pain  becomes  conscious  by
itself  alone,  but  pleasure  only  in  contrast  to  the  idea  of
pain. Undoubtedly  the  effects  are  frequently  the  same
as  ?/ the  theory  of  Schopenhauer  of  the  negative  character
of  pleasure  were  correct,  but  yet  there  is  between  both  a
world-wide difference, and the principle remains un-
touched  that  pleasure and pain are  in  general distin-
guished as  the mathematical  positive  and  negative,  i.e.,
that  it  is  indifferent  which  sign  one  gives  to the one,
which  to  the  other.

It  lias,  again,  been  very  clearly  shown  how  infinitely

VOL.  III.  Ii


1 8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

more  fruitful  than  mere  criticism  is  reflection  on  the
reasons  by  which  great  men  have  been  led  to  frame  false
hypotheses.  While,  namely,  we  found  the  hypothesis  of
the  negative  character  of  pleasure  just  as  incorrect  as  that
of  Leibniz  on  the  negativity  of  evil,  we  have  at  the  same
time  apprehended  three  moments,  each  of  which  falls  into
one  scale  in  favour  of  pain,  and  which  in  combination
practically  yield  almost  the  same  result  as  the  theory
of  Schopenhauer.  They  are — (i.)  the  stimulation  and
fatigue  of  the  nerves,  and  the  need  thence  arising  of
the  cessation  of  enjoyment,  as  of  pain ;  (2.)  the  necessity
of  regarding  all  pleasure  as  indirect  which  only  arises
through  cessation  or  remission  of  a  displeasure,  but  not
through  instantaneous  satisfaction  of  a  will  at  the  moment
of  the  excitation  of  the  same ;  (3.)  the  difficulties  which
oppose  the  apperception  of  the  satisfaction  of  will,  whilst
displeasure  co  ipso  produces  consciousness ; — we  may  add  :
(4)  the  brief  duration  of  the  satisfaction,  which  is  little
more  than  a  passing  moment,  whilst  the  non-satisfaction
lasts  as  long  as  the  actual  will,  thus,  as  there  is  hardly
an  instant  when  an  actual  will  was  not  present,  is,  so  to
speak,  eternal,  and  only  always  limited  by  the  satisfaction
which  hope  affords.

The  first  point  depends  on  the  nature  of  organic  life,  in
particular  of  the  nervous  functions,  as  foundation  of  con-
sciousness ;  the  last  three  points  follow  immediately  from
the  nature  of  the  will  itself.  The  latter  undoubtedly  hold
good,  therefore,  not  merely  for  our  world,  but  for  every
world  that  is  at  all  possible  as  objective  form  of  the  will.
But  the  first  point  will  also  hold  good  wherever  there  is
question  of  a  balance  between  pleasure  and  displeasure ;
for  since  pleasure  can  only  be  obtained  through  the  con-
trast with  displeasure  in  a  consciousness  already  highly
developed,  but  a  consciousness  again  presupposes  indivi-
duation with  the  help  of  matter  or  its  analogue,  so  also  in
every  other  world  conceivable  as  objectified  will  the  law
of  fatigue  and  the hebetation  of  pleasure  thence  arising


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  19

"will  hold  good  in  this  analogue  of  matter.  We  may
accordingly  regard  all  four  points  as  necessary  conse-
quences of  the  nature  of  the  will  in  respect  to  pleasure
and  pain,  and  have  to  see  in  them  the  eternal  barriers
which  the  Unconscious  must  encounter  in  every  attempt
at  creation,  and  which  render  it  a  'priori  impossible  to
fashion  a  world  in  which  pain  should  be  outweighed  by
pleasure.  But  these  four  points  have  also  the  further
value  of  being  able  to  serve  in  the  progress  of  our  a
posteriori  inquiries  in  every  special  subject  of  considera-
tion as  an  objective  corrective  of  instinctive  prejudice,
just  as  the  former  statement  of  the  most  important  sub-
jective sources  of  error  (pp.  7-8)  serves  as  a  subjective
corrective.  I  beg  the  reader,  therefore,  to  keep  the  one
as  the  other  constantly  in  view.

We  must  still  pay  some  attention  to  the  second  of  the
four  points.  If  we  look  for  examples  of  such  pleasure-
sensations  as  only  consist  in  a  cessation  or  remission  of
pain,  we  must  carefully  beware  lest  we  do  not  introduce
at  the  same  time  cases  in  which  pleasure  is  enhanced  by
an  additional  satisfaction  of  will,  as,  e.g.,  the  relish  of  food
and  the  cooling  refreshment  of  drink  add  to  the  satisfac-
tion of  hunger  and  thirst,  the  physical  sexual  enjoyment
to  the  stilling  of  the  longings  of  love.  Pure  examples  in
the  sensuous  sphere  are  a  subsiding  toothache  ;  in  the  intel-
lectual, the  recovery  of  a  friend  from  a  dangerous  illness.
When  we  consider  such  pure  examples,  no  one  will  any
longer  doubt  that  the  pleasure  arising  through  cessation
of  pain  is  very  much  less  than  was  that  pain,  just  as  con-
versely pain  arising  through  the  cessation  of  a  pleasure  is
far  less  than  that  pleasure.

This  phenomenon  might  at  the  first  blush  surprise  us,
since  we  regard  the  intensity  of  feeling  as  dependent  only
on  the  degree  of  change,  but  not  on  the  relation  of  th  s
beginning  or  end  of  the  change  to  the  indifference-point
of  the  sensation.  However,  in  my  opinion,  it  is  explained
in  the  ca.se  of  the  ceasing  displeasure  by  the  subsequent


20  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

vexation,  detracting  from  the  pleasure,  that  one  has  had  so
long  to  endure  the  pain  ;  one  feels  less  bound  to  return
thanks,  as  it  were,  to  one's  fate  for  the  liberation  from  the
pain  than  entitled  to  grumble  and  demand  satisfaction  for
the  infliction  of  the  pain,  because  the  whole  movement
took  place  below  the  point  of  indifference,  whereas  in  the
ceasing  pleasure  the  blunting  effect  of  fatigue,  renders
more  indifferent  to  the  termination  of  the  enjoyment.
According  to  this  explanation,  that  lessening  of  the  plea-
sure in  proportion  to  the  pain,  in  whose  cessation  it  con-
sists, only  occurs  if  the  circumstance  that  the  whole
movement  has  taken  place  below  the  zero  of  sensation
also  actually  falls  into  consciousness.  The  less  the  con-
sciousness of  the  interested  person  places  the  movement
below  the  zero-point  of  sensation,  the  more  as  a  matter  of
fact  does  the  pleasure  become  equal  in  degree  to  the  dis-
pleasure in  the  cessation  of  which  it  consists.  This  is
least  possible  with  sensuous  pain;  hence  nobody  would
consent  to  be  stretched  on  the  rack  in  order  to  enjoy  the
pleasure  of  the  cessation  of  the  pain.  In  the  intellectual
sphere,  however,  the  contest  with  distress  and  the  rejoicing
over  every  attained  victory  securing  the  immediate  future
is  the  proof  of  it.  As  soon  as  mankind  makes  clear  to  itself
that  this  delight  is  similarly  related  to  the  preceding  un-
easiness as  the  remission  of  pains  to  the  tortures  of  the
rack,  and  that  this  movement,  equally  with  that,  falls
wholly  below  the  zero-point  of  sensation,  so  soon  will  it
too  enjoy  those  victories  over  want  as  little  as  the  racked
enjoy  the  relaxation  of  the  cords.

What  now-a-days  is  called  the  spectre  of  the  poverty  of
the  masses  is  nothing  but  this  dawning  consciousness  that
the  struggle  with  want,  care  and  its  alleviation  lies  entirely
on  the  negative  (pain)  side  of  the  zero-point  of  sensation,
whilst  formerly,  when  the  poverty  of  the  masses  was  ten
times  greater,  this  consciousness  was  wanting,  and  the
people  endured  their  poverty  as  sent  from  God.  Another
proof  how  progressive  intelligence  makes  man  unhappy.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  21

This  contest  of  man  with  want  is,  however,  only  one
example ;  if  we  look  round  at  the  possible  joys  of  the
world,  we  shall  very  soon  become  aware  that,  with  the
exception  of  the  physically  sensuous,  the  aesthetic  and
the  scientific  enjoyments,  there  is  hardly  a  happiness  to  be
perceived  which  did  not  depend  on  the  liberation  from  a
preceding  displeasure.  Quite  specially,  however,  does  this
hold  for  great  and  vivid  joys.  Aroltaire  says,  "  II  n'est  de
vrais  plaisirs  qu'avec  de  vrais  besoins."

Closely  connected  with  this  is  the  interesting  question
whether  in  general  pleasure  can  be  a  countervailing  equi-
valent for  pain,  and  what  coefficient  or  exponent  must  be
assigned  to  a  degree  of  pleasure  to  counterbalance  for
consciousness  an  equal  degree  of  pain.  Schopenhauer,
citing  the  verse  of  Petrarch,  "  Mille  piacer'  non  vagliono
tin  tormento  (a  thousand  pleasures  are  not  worth  one
pain),"  makes  the  eccentric  assertion  that  altogether  a
pain  can  never  be  balanced  by  any  degree  of  pleasure;
that  therefore  a  world  in  which  pain  can  occur  at  all  is,
under  all  circumstances,  with  ever  so  much  preponderat-
ing happiness,  worse  than  none.  This  view  could  hardly
be  supported  ;  whether,  however,  there  do  not  lie  in  it  a
cure  of  truth  so  far  as  the  co-efficient  necessary  for
equivalence  does  not  at  all  need  to  be  =  1,  as  is  usually
assumed,  that  were  well  worthy  of  consideration.

If  I  have  the  choice  either  of  not  at  all  hearing,  or
of  hearing  first  for  live  minutes  discords  and  then  for  live
minutes  a  fine  piece  of  music;  if  I  have  the  choice  either
not  to  smell  at  all,  or  to  smell  first  a  stench  and  then  a
perfume;  if  I  have  the  choice  either  not  to  taste,  or  to
taste  first  something  disagreeable  and  then  something  agree-
able, I  shall  in  all  the  cases  decide  for  the  non-hearing,
non-smelling,  and  non-tasting,  even  if  the  successive
homogeneous  painful  and  pleasurable  sensations  appear  to
me  to  be  equal  in  degree,  although  it  would  certainly  be
very  difficult  to  ascertain  the  equality  of  the  degree.

Hence  I  conclude  that  the  pleasure  must  be  perceptibly


22  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

greater  in  degree  than  a  pain  of  like  kind,  if  they  are  to  be
equivalent  in  consciousness,  so  that  one  determines  their
combination  as  equal  to  the  zero  of  sensation  and  prefers
it  to  the  latter  on  a  small  enhancement  of  the  pleasure
or  lowering  of  the  pain.  For  the  rest,  this  coefficient
probably  fluctuates  with  different  individuals  within  cer-
tain limits,  and  only  its  mean  amount  should  be  greater
than  i.

On  the  causes  underlying  this  remarkable  phenomenon
I  venture  to  make  no  supposition.  This  much  is  cer-
tain, that,  if  the  fact  is  correct,  this  circumstance  also
tells  against  a  preponderance  of  happiness  in  the  world,
for  suppose  the  case  that  even  the  sum  of  pleasure  and
pain  objectively  taken  were  equal,  yet  their  combination
subjectively  would  stand  below  the  zero-point,  as  the
combination  of  a  stench  and  a  fragrance  is  below  zero.
The  world  accordingly  resembles  a  money-lottery :  the
appointed  pains  one  must  pay  in  in  full,  but  the  gains
one  receives  only  with  a  deduction,  which  answers  to  the
difference  between  the  constant  coefficient  of  the  plea-
sure-and-pain  equation  and  I.  Were  this  remarkable
inequality  in  value  of  pleasure  and  pain,  which  seems  to
me  highly  probable,  confirmed  on  other  sides,  it  should  be
added  to  the  above  four  points  as  a  fifth.  In  this  sense
►Schopenhauer  says  (Parerga,  ii.  313):  "It  is  in  harmony
with  this  that  we  commonly  find  joys  far  below,  pains
far  above  our  expectation."  (P.  321) :  "  Deserving  of  envy
is  no  one,  of  commiseration  numberless."  (W.  a.  W.  u.  V.,
ii.  658):  "Before  one  declares  with  such  confidence  that
life  is  a  desirable  or  thankworthy  good,  let  any  one  calmly
compare  the  sum  of  possible  delight  which  a  human  being
may  enjoy  in  his  life  with  the  sum  of  possible  suffering
which  may  afflict  him  in  his  life.  I  believe  the  balance
will  not  be  difficult  to  strike."

It  is  now  our  task  to  inquire  whether  in  the  life  of
the  individual  the  sum  of  pleasure  or  pain  preponder-
ates, and  whether  in  the  individual  as  such  the  conditions


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  23

are  given  for  attaining,  under  the  most  favourable  circum-
stances conceivable  in  one's  life,  an  excess  of  pleasure  over
pain.  As  the  field  to  be  viewed  is  too  vast  for  a  simulta-
neous survey,  a  solution  will  be  facilitated  by  considering
separately  the  sum  of  pleasure  and  pain  according  to  the
main  directions  of  life.  But  during  the  future  considera-
tions the  reader  must  always  keep  in  mind  these  premised
general  observations,  since  the  circumstances  mentioned
are  continually  acting  as  essentially  limiting  co-efficients
of  pleasure,  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  they  either  leave
the  pain  unaffected  or  even  increase  it.

2.  Health,  Youth,  Freedom,  and  a  Competence  as  Condi-
tions of  the  Zero-point  of  Feeling,  and  Contentment. — The
states  mentioned  are  mostly  claimed  as  the  highest  goods
of  life,  and  not  without  reason  ;  nevertheless  they  fail  to
afford  positive  pleasure,  save  when  they  have  just  arisen
by  transition  from  the  opposite  states  of  pain.  During
their  undisturbed  continuance,  however,  they  represent
only  the  zero-mark  of  sensation,  and  by  no  means  a  posi-
tive elevation  above  it ;  the  building-ground  on  which  the
expected  enjoyments  of  life  are  to  be  erected.  It  is  in
accordance  with  this  that  the  persistence  of  the  states
awakes  as  little  a  feeling  of  pleasure  as  of  pain,  since  at
the  zero-point  in  general  there  is  nothing  to  be  felt,  but
that  every  fall  from  this  level  into  sickness,  old  age,
bondage,  and  distress  is  painfully  felt.  These  goods  have
thus,  in  fact,  the  purely  privative  character  that  Leibniz
would  ascribe  to  evil ;  they  are  the  privation  of  age,  sick-
ness, servitude,  and  distress,  and  are  intrinsically  incapable
of  being  raised  above  the  zero-point  of  sensation  on  the
side  of  pleasure,  thus  incapable  of  producing  a  pleasure,
unless  by  remission  of  an  antecedent  pain,  even  if  it
consist  only  of  an  imaginary  fear  or  care.

In  health  all  this  is  quite  self-evident;  nobody  feels  a
limb  except  when  he  is  ill  ;  only  the  nervous  feels  that  he
has  nerves ;  only  he  who  has  diseased  eyes  that  he  has  those


24  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

organs :  the  healthy,  however,  perceives  only  by  sight  and
touch  that  he  has  a  body.  With  freedom  it  is  just  the
same.  Nobody  feels-  if  he  himself  determines  his  actions,
for  this  is  the  self-evident  natural  condition,  but  un-
doubtedly he  feels  painfully  all  external  constraint,  every
invasion  of  his  self-determination,  as  it  were,  as  an  injury
of  the  first  and  most  original  law  of  Nature,  that  he  shares
with  every  animal,  with  every  atomic  force.

Youth  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  time  of  life  in  which
alone  perfect  health  and  an  unimpeded  use  of  the  body  and
mind  is  found,  whilst  with  age  its  infirmities  also  make  their
appearance,  which  are  felt  painfully  enough.  But,  in  the
second  place,  youth  alone,  a  direct  consequence  of  the
unimpeded  use  of  the  body  and  mind,  possesses  the  full
capacity  of  enjoyment,  whilst  in  age  undoubtedly  all  the
burdens,  inconveniences,  vexation,  disagreeables,  and  tor-
ments make  themselves  doubly  sensible,  but  the  faculty
for  enjoyment  diminishes  more  and  more.  This  capacity
for  enjoyment  has,  however,  still  only  the  value  of  the
level ;  it  is  only  capacity,  i.e.,  possibility  (not  reality)  of
enjoyment.  What  is  the  good,  however,  of  the  best  teeth,
if  one  has  nothing  to  bite  with  them  ?

Finally,  also,  the  competency  or  assurance  against  want
and  privation  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  positive  gain  or
enjoyment,  but  only  as  the  conditio  sine  qua  non  of  bare
life,  which  has  to  wait  for  its  enjoyable  fulfilment.  To
endure  hunger,  thirst,  frost,  heat,  or  damp  is  painful ;
protection  from  these  evils  by  needful  dwelling,  clothing,
and  food  cannot  be  called  positive  good  (enjoyment  in
eating  does  not  belong  to  this  category).  Were,  namely,
the  bare  life  assured  in  its  conditions  of  existence  already
a  positive  good,  mere  existence  in  itself  must  fill  and
satisfy  us.  The  contrary  is  the  case  :  the  assured  existence
is  a  torment,  unless  a  filling  up  of  the  same  is  added.
This  torment,  which  is  expressed  in  ennui,  may  be  so
insupportable  that  even  pains  and  ills  are  welcome  to
escape  it.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  25

The  most  usual  filling  of  life  is  work.  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  work  for  him  who  must  work  is  an  evil,  be  it
in  its  consequences  for  himself,  as  for  humanity  and  the
advancing  evolution,  ever  so  rich  in  blessing ;  for  nobody
works  who  is  not  compelled,  i.e.,  who  does  not  take  work
upon  himself  as  the  less  of  two  evils — whether  the  greater
evil  be  want,  the  torment  of  ambition,  or  even  mere  ennui
— or  who  had  not  the  intention  through  undertaking  this
evil  to  purchase  for  himself  greater  positive  good  (e.g.,  the
satisfaction  in  rendering  life  more  pleasant  for  himself  and
those  dear  to  him,  or  for  the  value  of  the  performances
produced  laj  means  o/work).  All  that  can  be  said  on  the
value  of  work  reduces  itself  either  to  economical  advan-
tages (with  which  we  shall  deal  later  on),  or  to  the  avoid-
ance of  greater  evils  (idleness  is  the  beginning  of  all  vices) ;
and  the  utmost  that  man  can  attain  to  is,  "that  he  should
rejoice  in  his  own  works,  for  that  is  his  portion,"  i.e.,  that
he  should  become  habituateel  to  bear  the  inevitable  as  well
as  possible,  as  the  cart-horse  at  last  draws  the  cart  with
tolerable  good-humour.  At  work  man  consoles  himself
with  the  prospect  of  leisure,  and  in  leisure  we  have  to
console  ourselves  with  the  thought  of  work.  Thus  the
alternate  play  of  leisure  and  work  comes  to  this,  that
the  sick  turns  himself  in  his  bed  to  get  out  of  his  uncom-
fortable position,  but  soon  finds  the  new  position  just  as
uncomfortable,  and  so  turns  back  again.

As  a  rule,  work  is  the  price  for  a  secure  existence.  It
is  not  enough,  therefore,  that  the  assured  existence  repre-
sent in  itself  no  positive  good,  but  only  the  zero-point  of
sensation  ;  this  purely  privative  good  must  still  he  pur-
chased hy  pain,  in  contrast  to  health  and  youth,  which  one
only  obtains  as  gifts.  And  how  great  is  often  the  pain
which  is  inflicted  on  the  poor  by  work  !  I  am  not  think-
ing of  the  labour  of  slaves,  but  of  the  labour  of  the  opera-
tives of  our  large  towns.  "At  the  age  of  five  to  enter  a
cotton-mill  or  other  factory,  and  from  that  time  onward  to
be  fixed  there  and  perform  the  same  mechanical  work  for


26  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ten,  twelve,  and  finally  fourteen  hours,  is  to  purchase  dearly
the  pleasure  of  breathing"  (W.  a.  W.  u.  V.,  ii.  66 1).

jSTo  less  considerable  sacrifices  than  the  earning  of  a
maintenance  does  the  conquest  of  a  relative  freedom
demand,  for  complete,  freedom  is  never  obtained.  On  the
other  side,  the  assurance  of  existence  and  the  attainable
degree  of  freedom  have  the  advantage  that  one  can  in
general  conquer  them  by  one's  own  energy,  whereas  we
are  altogether  passively  receptive  with  regard  to  youth
and  health.

If  now  one  actually  possesses  these  four  privative
goods,  the  external  conditions  of  contentment  are  given ;
if  then  the  requisite  internal  condition,  resignation,  ac-
quiescence in  the  inevitable,  be  added,  contentment  will
dwell  in  the  mind  so  long  as  no  considerable  misfortunes
and  pains  afflict  it.  Contentment  craves  no  positive  happi-
ness ;  it  is  just  the  foregoing  ef  such.  It  only  desires
freedom  from  considerable  evils  and  pains,  thus  about
the  zero-point  of  feeling.  Positive  goods  and  positive
happiness  can  add  nothing  to  contentment,  but  undoubt-
edly they  can  endanger  it;  for  the  greater  the  positive
goods  and  good  fortune,  the  greater  is  the  probability  of
suffering  by  their  loss  great  pains,  which  temporarily
destroy  contentment.  Contentment  can  thus  be  so  little
regarded  as  a  sign  of  positive  happiness,  that  rather  the
poorest  and  those  with  fewest  wants  can  most  easily  obtain
permanent  possession  of  it.  If,  nevertheless,  contentment
is  so  frequently  lauded  as  a  happy  state,  nay,  as  the  supreme
attainable  felicity  (Aristot.,  Eth.  Eud.,  vii.  2 :  rj  evSai/xovia
twv  avTcipKcov  iari,  Happiness  is  the  possession  of  the  self-
sufficient ;  Spinoza,  Eth.,  part.  4,  Prop.  52,  Obs. :  Self-
contentment  is  truly  the  utmost  that  we  can  hope),  this
can  only  be  true  if  the  state  of  painlessness  and  voluntary
resignation  of  all  positive  felicity  deserves  the  preference
before  the  essentially  transient  possession  of  positive
happiness.  Altogether,  if,  as  I  believe,  it  is  justifiable
to  call  health,  youth,  liberty,  and  an  easy  existence  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  27

highest  goods,  and  contentment  the  supreme  happiness,
it  follows  at  once  from  that  how  doubtful  must  the  case
stand  with  all  positive  goods  and  positive  happiness  that
one  can  justly  place  before  them  the  privative  goods,  those
consisting  in  mere  freedom  from  pain,  lint  what,  then,  does
freedom  from  pain  offer  ?  Truly  nothing  more  than  non-
existence !  If,  then,  a  "  but "  is  still  connected  with  posi-
tive goods  and  happiness,  which  places  them,  on  the  whole,
still  below  contentment,  i.e.,  still  below  the  zero-point  of
sensation,  at  which  non-existence  permanently  stands,
it  is  thereby  declared  that  they  also  rank  below  non-
existence. Equal  in  value  to  non-existence  would  only
rank  the  absolutely  contented  life,  if  there  were  such  :
there  is  none,  however,  for  even  the  most  contented  is  not
always  perfectly  and  in  all  respects  contented,  conse-
quently all  life  ranks  in  value  below  the  absolutely  con-
tented, consequently  below  non-existence.

3.  Hunger  ami  Love.

"  Until  this  paragon  of  spheres
By  philosophic  thought  coheres,
The  vast  machine  will  he  controlled
By  love  and  hunger,  as  of  old,"

says  Schiller  very  rightly.  They  are  both,  not  only  for
progress  and  development  in  the  animal  kingdom,  but
also  for  the  commencing  development  of  humanity  and
the  ruder  states  which  characterise  the  same,  almost  the
sole  springs  of  action.  If  the  value  of  these  two  factors
for  the  individual  must  be  pronounced  to  be  small,  there
is  little  prospect  of  showing  the  value  of  individual  life
for  its  own  sake  in  other  ways.

hunger  is  painful  in  the  extreme,  which  certainly  he
alone  knows  who  has  felt  it;  its  satisfaction,  the  gratifi-
cation of  satiety,  is  for  the  brain  the  mere  removal  of
pain,  whilst  for  the  subordinate  centres  it  undoubtedly
may  entail  a  positive  elevation  above  the  zero-point of


28  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sensation  in  the  comfortable  feeling  of  digestion.  This
will,  however,  for  the  common  feeling  or  total  well-being
of  the  individual,  have  less  weight  the  more  the  subordi-
nate centres  recede  relatively  to  the  brain,  which  receives
only  feeble  traces  of  the  comfortable  feeling  of  digestion,
but  feels  so  much  the  more  depressed  in  its  mental  tone
and  working  power  through  the  satiation.  Whoever  finds
himself  in  the  fortunate  situation  of  being  able,  whenever
the  commencement  of  hunger  is  announced,  instantly  to
satisfy  the  same,  and  whoever  is  not  inconvenienced  by
the  lowering  of  the  power  of  the  brain  through  satiety,  may
certainly  receive  through  hunger  a  certain  excess  of  plea-
sure by  the  pleasure  of  digestion ;  but  how  few  are  in
this  doubly  enviable  position!  Most  of  the  1300  mil-
lions of  the  earth's  inhabitants  have  either  a  scanty
nourishment,  unsatisfying  and  prolonging  life  with  diffi-
culty, or  they  live  for  a  time  in  superfluity,  from  which
they  derive  no  preponderating  enjoyment,  and  must  for
another  period  actually  starve  and  suffer  wTant,  when  they
must  accordingly  endure  the  pains  of  hunger  for  long
periods,  whilst  the  pleasure  of  satiety,  with  perfect  stilling
of  hunger,  only  occupies  a  few  hours  of  the  day.  But  now
let  any  one  compare  the  dull  delight  of  satiety  and  digestion
with  the  distinct  gnawing  of  hunger  or  the  hell-torments
of  thirst  to  which  animals  in  deserts,  steppes,  and  such
regions,  that  in  the  hot  season  are  perfectly  dry,  are  not
seldom  exposed.  How  much  more,  however,  must  among
many  species  of  animals  the  pain  of  hunger  exceed  the
pleasure  of  satiety  in  the  course  of  life,  which  at  certain
seasons  die  of  hunger  from  want  of  food,  often  in  con-
siderable numbers,  or  for  weeks  and  months  just  on  the
brink  of  starvation,  prolong  their  existence  in  slightly
more  favourable  conditions  of  life  !  This  happens  both
with  graminivorous  birds  and  birds  in  the  winter  of  the
polar  and  temperate  zones  and  in  the  arid  tropics,  as  also
with  camivora  and  beasts  of  prey,  which  often  for  weeks
wander  about  vainly  in  search  of  booty  until  they  perish


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  29

of  inanition.  It  is  not  so  long  since  in  Europe  one  calcu-
lated on  a  famine  every  seven  years,  and  if  this  has  been
changed  by  our  present  means  of  communication  into
mere  dearth,  i.e.,  into  famine  merely  for  the  poorest  classes,
this  or  a  similar  state  of  things  certainly  continues  to
exist  in  by  far  the  largest  part  of  the  earth.

But  even  in  our  large  towns  we  read  ever  and  anon  of
cases  of  literal  dying  of  hunger.  Can  the  gluttony  of  a
thousand  gourmands  outweigh  the  torments  of  one  starv-
ing human  being  ?

And  yet  extreme  starvation  is  with  us  the  rarer  and
lesser  evil  produced  by  hunger;  far  more  fearful  is  the
bodily  and  mental  wasting  away  of  the  race,  the  dying  off  of
children,  and  the  peculiar  diseases  engendered  by  it.  One
has  only  to  read  the  accounts  of  the  weaving  districts
of  Silesia  or  of  the  dens  of  misery  of  London.  The  less,
however,  a  check  is  given  to  the  progressive  increase  of
humanity  by  devastating  wars,  the  more  the  hosts  of
epidemics  disappear  by  increasing  cleanliness  and  their
spread  is  hindered  by  precautionary  measures,  the  more
must  the  ability  to  procure  sustenance  prove  the  sole
natural  limit  to  increase,  since  the  proportion  of  births
remains  tolerably  the  same;  and  the  hypothesis  of  Carey
that  hereafter  the  ability  of  the  human  race  to  procreate
and  increase  will  diminish  is  altogether  arbitrary,  and
justified  by  no  historical  analogies.

However  great  may  be  the  progress  of  agriculture  and
chemistry,  still  at  last  a  point  must  be  reached  beyond
which  the  production  of  the  means  of  subsistence  cannot
go.  The  increase  of  the  number  of  human  beings  by  gene-
ration has,  however,  no  limit  save  that  which  is  assigned
by  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  subsistence;  this  has
always  formed  the  main  source  of  restriction,  and  will
become  so  more  exclusively.  This  limit,  however,  is  not
abrupt  and  well  defined,  but  it  passes  from  a  sufficiency
to  impossibility  of  existence  through  infinitely  numerous
life-stages,  of  which  each  succeeding  one  is  more  hungry


3o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  wretched.  To  deceive  instinct  the  stomach  is  often
filled  with  substances  that  are  neither  agreeable  in  taste
nor  nutritious ;  thus  in  China,  e.g.,  the  poorest  class,  that
cannot  purchase  rice,  eat  a  kind  of  sea-tangle,  which  con-
tains scarcely  any  nutritive  matter.  If  one  thinks  of  the
masses  which  live  on  tasteless  or  insipid  aliment  (rice,
potatoes),  one  will  no  longer  be  able  to  assert  that,  for  the
great  excess  of  pain  which  hunger  produces  in  the  world,
the  relish  connected  with  eating  could  offer  a  certain
makeweight.

The  result  in  respect  of  hunger  is  then  this,  that  the
individual,  by  the  simple  stilling  of  his  hunger,  never
experiences  a  positive  rise  above  the  zero-point  of  sensa-
tion ;  that  under  specially  favourable  circumstances  he  can
certainly  gain  a  positive  excess  of  pleasure  by  the  relish
and  pleasure  of  digestion  connected  with  hunger ;  but  that
in  the  animal  kingdom  and  human  kingdom,  on  the
whole,  the  torment  and  pain  produced  by  hunger  and  its
consequences  far  outweigh,  and  always  will  outweigh,  the
pleasure  connected  with  its  satisfaction.  Considered  in
itself,  therefore,  the  need  of  food  is  an  evil;  only  the  pro-
gress of  development,  to  which  it  acts  as  a  spring  through
the  struggle  for  food,  not  its  own  value,  can  teleologically
justify  this  evil.

I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting  here  the  words  of  Scho-
penhauer (Parerga,  ii.  313):  "  Whoever  wishes  to  put  to  a
brief  trial  the  assertion  that  in  the  world  enjoyment  out-
weighs pain,  or  at  least  is  in  equipoise  with  it,  should
compare  the  sensation  of  the  animal  which  devours  another
with  that  of  this  other."

As  for  the  other  spring  of  Nature,  Lore,  I  must  in
regard  to  its  theory  refer  to  Chap.  ii.  B.  In  the  animal
kingdom  one  can  hardly  speak  of  an  active  sexual  selec-
tion on  the  part  of  the  male,  even  among  the  highest
birds  and  mammals;  of  a  passive  selection  through  the
struggle  of  the  males  in  which  the  strongest  remains
victor,  only  among  a  small  part  of  the  higher  animals.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  31

For  the  rest,  the"  sexual  impulse  is  not  individual,  but
is  purely  general.  But  now  in  the  infinitely  larger  part
of  the  animal  kingdom  there  do  not  exist  organs  of
sexual  pleasure  acting  as  stimulants  to  coition ;  without
such  accordingly  coition  is  an  office  indifferent  to  the
egoism  of  the  individual  which  is  carried  on  by  the
impelling  constraint  of  instinct,  as  the  spinning  of  the  web
of  the  spider  or  the  building  of  the  bird's  nest  for  the
eggs  hereafter  to  be  laid.  To  the  absence  of  enjoyment
in  the  office  of  fecundation  in  the  case  of  most  animals
also  the  frequently  indirect  form  of  this  function  devi-
ating from  direct  copulation  points.  When  in  the  ver-
tebrates a  personal  physical  enjoyment  appears  to  occur,  it
is  at  first  certainly  as  flat  and  insignificant  as  possible  ;
but  soon  there  is  also  added  the  contest  of  the  males  for
the  female,  which  in  many  species  of  animals  is  waged
with  the  greatest  bitterness,  and  has  for  its  consequence
often  painful  injuries,  not  seldom  also  the  killing  of  one
of  the  rivals.  Add  to  that,  among  those  animals  which  at
the  time  of  rut  form  herds  led  by  the  victorious  male,
the  involuntary  continence  of  the  younger  members,
whether  they  separate  into  smaller  detachments  or  remain
with  the  main  herd,  when  an  invasion  of  the  rights  of  the
head  of  the  family  is  punished  in  the  cruellest  fashion.
This  involuntary  continence  of  the  largest  part  of  the
males,  and  the  pains  and  vexation  caused  the  defeated  by
the  contests,  seem  to  me  a  hundredfold  to  exceed  the
pleasures  accruing  to  the  prosperous  males  from  the  sexual
pleasure.  As  for  the  females,  in  the  first  place,  among  must
animals  they  far  more  rarely  couple  than  the.  privileged
males  ;  and,  secondly,  the  pains  of  child-bearing  in  their
case  fur  outweigh  the  pleasure  derived  from  copulation.

With  man,  especially  the  cultivated,  birth  is  more  pain-
ful and  more  difficult  than  for  any  other  animal,  and
mostly  entails  even  a  longer  sick-bed.  1  need  not  hesitate,
therefore,  to  declare  the  total  sufferings  of  child-bearing
for  the  woman  greater  than  the  total  physical  pleasures


32  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  coition.  "We  should  not  be  misled  by  the  circumstance
that  impulse  causes  the  woman  to  pronounce  the  contrary
decision,  practically,  and  perhaps  also  theoretically.  Here
Ave  have  a  glaring  case  where  impulse  blinds  the  judgment.
One  has  only  to  think  of  that  "woman  who  could  not  be
cleterred  from  sexual  intercourse  by  the  repetition  of  the
Cesarean  operation,  and  one  will  estimate  the  value  of
such  judgment  more  truly.  The  man  seems  to  be  better
off  in  this  respect ;  but  he  only  seems  so.

Kant  says  in  his  "  Anthropology  "  (Werke,  vii.  Abth.  2,
S.  266) :  "  In  the  former  (the  epoch  of  natural  develop-
ment), in  the  state  of  nature,  at  any  rate,  he  is  in  his
fifteenth  year  impelled  by  the  sexual  instinct  and  capable
of  reproducing  and  maintaining  his  kind.  In  the  second
(the  epoch  of  civic  development)  he  can  (on  the  average)
hardly  venture  it  before  the  twentieth  year.  For  although
the  youth  has  early  enough  the  power  to  satisfy  his  own
and  his  wife's  inclination  as  citizen  of  the  world,  he  is  far
from  possessing  the  power  to  maintain  his  wife  and  child
as  subject  of  a  state. — He  must  learn  a  trade,  obtain
customers,  before  commencing  housekeeping  with  his
wife,  when,  in  the  more  polished  classes,  the  five-and-
twentieth  year  may  well  pass  before  he  is  ripe  for  his
destination.  How  now  does  he  fill  up  the  interval  of  a
compelled  and  unnatural  continence  ?  Hardly  otherwise
than  with  vices."

These  vices,  however,  soil  the  aesthetic  sense,  blunt  the
delicacy  of  the  mind,  and  not  seldom  lead  to  immoral
actions.  Lastly,  through  their  inherent  immoderation,  and
for  other  reasons,  they  unsettle  the  health,  and  only  too
often  sow  the  seeds  of  ruin  for  the  following  generation.

But  whoever  actually  and  exceptionally  keeps  free  from
all  the  vices  filling  up  the  provisional  period,  and  by  an
effort  of  reason  overcomes  the  torments  of  aroused  sensi-
bility in  ever-renewed  struggle,  has  in  the  interval  be-
tween puberty  and  marriage,  the  interval,  if  not  of  most
endurance,  yet  of  the  most  flaming  sensibility,  to  endure


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  33

such  an  amount  of  pain,  that  the  subsequent  total  of
sexual  pleasure  can  never  make  amends  for  it.  The
age  of  marriage  for  men  is,  however,  constantly  rising  with
advancing  civilisation ;  the  provisional  period  thus  becomes
continually  longer,  and  is  longest  precisely  in  the  classes
where  the  nervous  sensibility  and  irritability,  thus  also  the
torment  of  privation,  is  greatest.

But  now  in  Man  the  purely  physical  side  of  sexual  love
is  subordinate,  far  more  important  is  the  individualised
sexual  instinct,  which  promises  an  extravagant  felicity  of
never-ending  duration  from  the  possession  of  a  particular
individual.

Let  us  first  consider  the  consequences  of  love  in  general.
One  side  generally  loves  more  ardently  than  the  other;
the  less  loving  is  usually  the  first  to  draw  back,  and  the
other  feels  faithlessly  abandoned  and  betrayed.  Whoever
could  see  and  weigh  the  pain  of  deceived  hearts  on  account
of  broken  vows,  as  much  of  it  as  is  in  the  world  at
any  moment,  would  find  that  it  alone  exceeds  all  the
happiness  derived  from  love  existing  at  the  same  time  in
the  world,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  pain  of  disillusion
and  the  bitterness  of  betrayal  lasts  much  longer  than  the
blissful  illusion.  Still  more  cruel  becomes  the  pain  for
the  woman  who  has  sacrificed  everything  for  her  lover
from  genuine  deep  love,  only  to  live  in  close  contact  with
him  as  a  clinging  plant.  If  such  an  one  be  torn  from  her
stay  and  cast  adrift,  she  stands  truly  fallen,  i.e.,  M'ithout
support  in  the  world ;  deprived  of  her  strength,  robbed  of
the  protection  of  love,  she  must,  a  detached  flower,  wither
and  hide, — or  shamelessly  plunge  into  the  current  of  base
life  in  order  to  attain  forgetfulness.

How  much  married  and  domestic  peace  is  not  de-
stroyed by  clandestine  love  !  "What  colossal  sacrifices  of
paternal  happiness  and  well-being  in  other  respects  does
not  the  unblessed  sexual  impulse  demand !  Father's
curse  and  expulsion  from  the  family  circle,  even  from  the
social  circle  in  which  one  has  become  rooted;  such  is  the

vol.  in.  <J


34  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

price  paid  by  man  or  maiden  in  order  merely  to  be  united
to  the  beloved  one.  The  poor  seamstress  or  servant-girl
who  consumes  her  joyless  existence  in  the  sweat  of  her
brow,  she,  too,  falls  one  evening  a  prey  to  the  irresistible
impulse;  for  the  sake  of  rare  brief  joys  she  becomes  a
mother,  and  has  the  choice  either  of  committing  infanti-
cide or  of  spending  the  largest  part  of  her  earnings,  scarcely
sufficient  even  for  herself,  on  the  maintenance  of  the  child.
Thus  for  long  years  she  must  bear  care  and  want  with
threefold  severity,  if  she  will  not  throw  herself  into  the
arms  of  a  life  of  vice,  which  secures  her  for  the  years  of
youth  a  less  toilsome  livelihood,  only  to  be  followed  by
an  age  of  the  more  frightful  misery;  and  all  this  for
the  little  bit  of  love  !

It  is  a  pity  that  there  are  no  tables  of  statistics  showing
what  percentage  of  all  love-affairs  in  every  rank  of  life  lead
to  marriage.  One  would  be  horrified  at  the  small  per-
centage. Leaving  out  of  sight  old  bachelors  and  maids,
even  among  married  couples  one  will  find  the  number  by
no  means  large  of  those  who  have  not  behind  them  a  little
broken-off  affair ;  many,  however,  who  could  tell  of  several.
Of  the  concluded  marriages,  again,  only  a  very  small  part
are  concluded  from  love,  the  rest  from  other  considerations :
one  may  gather  from  that  how  small  a  part  of  all  love-
affairs  terminate  in  the  haven  of  marriage.  Of  this  small
part,  however,  again,  very  few  attain  a  so-called  happy
marriage,  for  happy  marriages  are  altogether  much  rarer
than  one  might  think,  in  consequence  of  the  make-believe
in  order  to  keep  up  the  appearance  of  happiness  ;  but,  in
fact,  the  happy  marriages  are  least  of  all  to  be  found  among
those  concluded  from  love,  so  that  of  the  small  part  of
the  amours  terminating  in  the  haven  of  marriage,  the
majority  again  comes  worse  off  than  if  they  had  ended  in
marriage.  Those  few,  lastly,  which  lead  to  the  happy
marriage  attain  this  not  through  love  itself,  but  only  by
this,  that  the  characters  and  persons  happen  so  to  fit  that
conflicts are avoided  and love passes into friendship.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  35

Those  rare  cases  in  which  the  happiness  of  love  gently
and  imperceptibly  glides  into  that  of  friendship,  and  all
bitter  disillusion  is  spared  it,  are  so  rare  that  they  are  even
balanced  by  those  bad  marriages,  which  are  concluded
from  love.  Of  all  love-affairs  not  terminating  in  marriage,
however,  the  larger  part  does  not  attain  its  goal  at  all,  and
the  smaller  part,  which  does  attain  it,  makes  the  people,
at  least  the  female  part,  still  more  unhappy  than  if  they
had  not  attained  it.

After  these  general  considerations  we  cannot  be  doubt-
ful that  love  prepares  for  the  individuals  concerned  far
more  pain  than  pleasure.  Hardly  anywhere  will  instinct
so  much  oppose  this  result  as  here,  and  perhaps  few  will
grant  it  but  those  in  whom  instinct  has  lost  its  power
through  age.

Let  us,  however,  consider  the  process  in  satisfied  love
in  detail,  in  order  to  see  that  even  here  pleasure  rests
substantially  on  illusion.  Undoubtedly,  in  general,  the
quantity  of  the  pleasure  is  proportional  to  the  strength
of  the  satisfied  will,  provided  that  the  satisfaction  falls  in
its  full  extent  into  consciousness, — a  supposition  which,  in
perfect  strictness,  is  so  much  the  less  admissible  the  more
obscure  is  the  will  and  the  more  its  contents  extend  from
the  region  of  unconsciousness  into  that  of  consciousness.

But  let  us  leave  this  on  one  side,  and  grant  that  a
very  strong  will,  no  matter  how  arisen,  to  possess  the
beloved  object  is  consciously  present;  then  undoubtedly
must  the  satisfaction  of  this  will  be  felt  as  intense  plea-
sure, and  that  the  more  the  more  clearly  the  person  con-
cerned becomes  conscious  of  the  fulfilment  of  his  wish  a.s
of  ii  fact  dependent  on  external  circumstances  ;  the  greater
therefore  is  the  contrast  of  the  fulfilment  with  a  preceding
recognition  of  difficulties  and  obstacles.  A  caliph,  on  the
other  hand,  who  is  conscious  that  he  has  only  to  issue  his
commands  in  order  to  possess  any  woman  that  pleases  him,
will  hardly  be  at  all  conscious  of  the  satisfaction  of
his  will,  however  strong  it  may  be  in  any  particular  case.


36  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Hence  it  follows,  however,  that  the  pleasure  of  satisfac-
tion is  only  purchased  by  preceding  pain  at  the  supposed
impossibility  of  attaining  possession ;  for  difficulties  whose
conquest  one  foresees  as  certain  are  already  no  longer
difficulties.

But,  according  to  our  previous  general  considerations,
the  preceding  pain  through  the  certainty  or  probability  of
non-success  will  be  greater  than  the  corresponding  plea-
sure in  fulfilment.  But  now,  as  certainly  as  the  final  enjoy-
ment on  fulfilment  is  a  real  one  because  it  depends  on  the
satisfaction  of  an  actually  existing  will,  so  certainly  is  the
idea  on  which  the  enjoyment  depends  an  illusion.  Con-
sciousness, namely,  finds  in  itself  a  violent  longing  for
the  possession  of  the  beloved  object,  which  surpasses  in
intensity  and  passionateness  every  phenomenon  of  will
else  known  to  it.  Since,  however,  at  the  same  time,  it
does  not  suspect  the  unconscious  goal  of  this  will  (which
lies  in  the  nature  of  the  child  to  be  created),  it  supposes
a  prospective  extravagant  enjoyment  to  be  the  goal  of  that
extravagant  longing;  and  instinct  supports  this  illusion,
since  the  man,  if  he  should  mark  that  there  is  a  cheating  of
his  egoism  for  the  sake  of  alien  ends,  would  soon  seek
to  suppress  the  instinct  of  passionate  love.  Thus  comes
to  pass  the  illusion  with  which  the  lover  proceeds  to  the
sexual  act,  and  which  may  be  experimentally  proved  to
be  such  by  this,  that  the  satisfaction  of  the  will  on  the
possession  of  the  loved  one  remains  just  the  same  if  a
counterfeit,  from  whom  his  will  would  recoil  with  disdain
and  abhorrence,  be  successfully  imposed  on  the  lover  with-
out his  knowledge.

Nevertheless  the  pleasure  in  the  satisfaction  of  the
accomplished  will  is  quite  real, — but  this  pleasure  was
indeed  not  in  the  mind  of  the  lover,  but  rather  that
extravagant  bliss  lij  which  he  thinks  the  violent  will  for
possession  set  in  motion  !

Of  such  a  bliss  or  pleasure  there  exists,  however,
nothing  at  all,  since  the  enjoyment  is  purely  compounded


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  yj

of  the  satisfaction  of  that  violent  will  for  possession  to  be
first  set  in  motion,  and  of  the  common  physical  sexual
enjoyment.  When  the  violence  of  the  impulse  allows  con-
sciousness to  a  certain  extent  to  breathe  again  and  to  attain
some  clearness,  it  becomes  aware  of  the  disillusion  of  its
expectation.  Every  disillusion  as  regards  an  expected  en-
joyment is,  however,  a  pain,  and  indeed  a  so  much  greater
pain  the  greater  was  the  expected  enjoyment,  and  the
more  certainly  it  was  expected.  Here,  then,  when  an
extravagant  bliss,  expected  with  absolute  certainty,  turns
out  to  be  pure  illusion  (for  the  two  real  moments  of  the
enjoyment  were  indeed  as  a  matter  of  course  expected
besides  this  blessedness),  the  pain  of  disenchantment
must  reach  a  high  degree ;  so  high  a  degree  that  it  per-
fectly counterbalances,  when  it  does  not  outweigh,  the
really  existing  enjoyment.  Certainly  the  impulse,  not
annihilated  at  a  stroke,  but  continually  renewed  for  some
time,  although  with  generally  decreasing  strength,  prevents
this  disillusion  from  being  apprehended  immediately  and
in  full  extent  by  consciousness ;  the  renewed  pining  after
satisfaction  perverts  the  judgment,  and  obstinately  keeps
up  the  illusion  of  the  contrary  experience  for  the  future.

But  this  duping  of  the  conscious  judgment  by  impulse
does  not  last  for  ever.  The  attained  possession  soon
becomes  customary  property.  The  idea  of  the  contrast
with  the  difficulties  of  the  attainment  disappears  more  and
more  ;  the  will  for  possession  becomes  latent,  as  no  dis-
turbance of  possession  is  threatened,  and  the  satisfaction
of  this  will  becomes  ever  less  felt  as  pleasure.  Xow  the
disenchantment  finds  for  itself  a  way  more  and  more  into
consciousness.

But  this  disillusion  is  not  the  only  one  that  attains  to
consciousness,  but  there  are  many  others.  The  lover
had  fancied  he  was  entering  on  a  new  era,  to  be  trans-
ported by  possession,  as  it  were,  from  earth  to  heaven,
and  he  finds  in  his  new  state  all  the  old  surroundings
and  daily drudgeries, lie  had thought to gain in  tiie


38  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

beloved  one  an  angel,  and  finds  now,  when  the  impulse
no  longer  distorts  his  judgment,  a  human  being  with  all
the  human  faults  and  weaknesses.  He  had  imagined
that  the  state  of  extravagant  felicity  would  be  eternal,  and
he  now  begins  to  doubt  whether  he  has  not  been  very
much  deceived  as  regards  the  expected  bliss  of  possession.
In  short,  he  finds  that  everything  is  as  before,  but  that  he
was  a  great  fool  in  his  expectations.  The  only  real  enjoy-
ment in  the  first  time  after  acquiring  possession,  the  satis-
faction of  the  accomplished  will,  has  disappeared,  but  on
the  ecstasy  supposed  to  be  eternal  has  supervened  sorry
disenchantment  yielding  a  lasting  pain,  which  is  only  very
slowly  extinguished  by  the  accustomed  devotion  to  the
common  daily  round.

Undoubtedly  very  rarely  on  the  conclusion  of  a  mar-
riage, at  least  on  one  side,  are  there  not  sacrifices  made,
were  it  only  of  liberty  ;  these  sacrifices  now  emerge  into  con-
sciousness, and  increase  the  displeasure  at  the  disillusion.
If  elsewhere  only  vanity  succeeds  in  hiding  pain  and  mis-
fortune and  vaunts  a  non-existing  happiness  and  plea-
sure, here  also  shame  co-operates  to  the  same  end,  since
one  would  hardly  ascribe  the  disenchantment  to  one's  own
stupidity.  The  erewhile  lovers  seek  to  hide  the  pain  of
disenchantment  not  only  from  the  world  and  one  another,
but  if  possible  also  from  themselves,  which  again  contri-
butes to  enhance  the  discomfort  of  the  situation.

Thus  then  the  real  enjoyment  in  the  union  of  lovers
must  not  only  be  paid  for  in  advance  by  fears,  anxiety,
and  doubt,  nay,  often  temporary  despair,  but  subsequently
again  with  the  pain  of  disenchantment — that  enjoyment,
the  perception  of  whose  illusory  character  at  the  moment
of  enjoyment  itself  can  only  be  averted  by  the  violence  of
the  impulse  suspending,  or  indeed  corrupting,  the  judgment.

But  now  we  have  so  far  paid  little  attention  to  the  state
before  the  union  of  the  lovers,  and  yet  it  is  just  here  where
the  tenderest,  most  blissful  sensations  are  found,  as,  in
particular,  those  in  the  first  flush  of  the  dawn  of  the  newly


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  39

opened  heaven.  On  what  does  that  unquestionably  real
pleasure  depend  ?  On  hope,  on  nothing  but  hope,  which
only  anticipates  a  future  good,  and  only  imagines  that  that
will  be  ecstatic  bliss  ;  on  a  hope  which  is  hardly  conscious
of  itself  as  hope,  but  with  every  moment  is  revealed  in  a
truer  light.  The  greatest  difficulties  opposing  union  can-
not destroy  this  hope  and  its  felicity ;  but  that  it  is  really
nothing  but  hope  is  proved  by  this,  that  the  lovers  de-
spair, and  even  destroy  themselves,  when  the  impossibility
of  their  union  has  become  certainty.  If,  now,  this  love-
happiness  preceding  union  is  only  hope  of  the  happiness
to  be  expected  after  union,  it  becomes  illusory  when  that
is  seen  to  be  illusory.

This  is  the  reason  why  only  first  love  can  be  true  love;
in  the  second  and  after  loves  the  impulse  meets  with  too
great  resistance  from  the  consciousness,  which  now  more
or  less  clearly  perceives  the  illusory  nature  of  the  first
love.  Thus  Goethe  says  in  "  Truth  and  Fiction,"  speaking
of  "  Werther "  :  "  Nothing,  however,  gives  more  occasion
to  this  weariness  (this  loathing  of  life)  than  a  return  of
love.  .  .  .  The  thought  of  the  Eternal  and  the  Infinite,
which  peculiarly  elevates  and  supports  it,  has  vanished ;
it  appears  transient,  like  all  that  recurs."

"Whoever  has  once  understood  the  illusory  nature  of
successful  love  after  union,  and  therewith  also  of  that
before  union,  whoever  has  come  to  see  the  pain  outweigh-
ing the  pleasure  in  all  love,  for  that  man  the  phenomenon
of  love  has  no  more  health,  because  his  consciousness
oilers  resistance  to  the  imposition  of  means  to  ends  that
are  not  his  ends;  the  pleasure  of  love  has  been  for  him
undermined  and  corroded,  only  its  smart  remains  to  him
unrelieved.  Ihit  although  such  an  one  will  not  be  able
entirely  to  resist  the  impulse,  this  will  yet  be  the
endeavour  of  his  reason,  and  he  will  be,  at  any  rate,  suc-
cessful in  any  particular  case  in  moderating  the  fervour
of  love  into  which  he  fell  as  ingenuous  youth,  and  in
reducing accordingly also the degree of pain  and the


40  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

excess  of  pain  over  pleasure  which  would  otherwise  have
fallen  to  his  lot.  He  will,  however,  at  the  same  time  be
conscious  that  he  is  entangled  against  his  will  in  a  passion
that  causes  him  more  pain  than  pleasure,  and  with  this
perception  from  the  standpoint  of  individualism  the  doom
of  love  has  been  pronounced  (comp.  i.  231-233).

These  last  reflections  refer  only  to  that  love  which  is  so
fortunate  as  to  attain  its  end ;  but  if  we  include  all  cases,
this  account  of  the  worth  of  love  wears  a  very  unfavour-
able aspect.  Illusory  pleasure  and  predominant  pain,
even  in  the  most  successful  case ;  generally  thwarting  of
the  will  without  attaining  of  the  goal,  accompanied  by
grief  and  despair ;  annihilation  of  the  future  of  so  many
women  by  loss  of  chastity,  their  sole  social  support, — these
are  the  results  we  have  found.

It  could  not  admit  of  doubt  that  reason  would  counsel
entire  continence,  were  it  not  that  the  torment  of  the
ineradicable  impulse  which  thirsts  for  fulfilment  is  a  far
greater  evil  than  a  temperate  indulgence  in  love  (comp.
i.  240).  One  must  therefore  pronounce  the  sentence  of
Anakreon  to  be  wholly  true,  which  runs —

■XpXeTTov  to  /jlt]  (f)i\rjaai,  Not  to  love  is  hard,
^aXeirov  he  /cal  (^iXTJaat,  But  also  hard  to  love.

If  love  is  once  recognised  as  evil,  and  yet  must  be  chosen
as  the  less  of  two  evils  as  long  as  the  impulse  persists,
reason  necessarily  demands  a  third,  namely,  eradication  of
the  impulse,  i.e.,  emasculation,  if  thereby  an  eradication  of
the  impulse  be  attainable.  (Comp.  Matt.  xix.  1 1-12,  "All
men  cannot  receive  this  saying,  save  they  to  whom  it  is
civen.  For  there  are  some  eunuchs  which  were  so  born
from  their  mother's  womb;  and  there  are  some  eunuchs
which  were  made  eunuchs  of  men ;  and  there  be  eunuchs
which  have  made  themselves  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of
heavens  sake.  He  that  is  able  to  receive  it,  let  him  receive
it!")

From  the  point  of  view  of  the  endsemonology  of  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  41

individual,  this  is  in  my  opinion  the  sole  possible  result.
If  anything  cogent  is  to  be  advanced  to  the  contrary,  in
can  only  be  such  considerations  as  require  of  the  individual
a  stepping  out  of  the  sphere  of  his  egoism.  The  result  as
regards  love  is  thus  the  same  as  regards  hunger,  that  it  is
in  itself  and  for  the  individual  an  evil,  and  its  justification
can  only  be  sought  in  this,  that  it  conduces  to  the  progress
of  development  in  the  manner  shown  in  Chap.  ii.  B.

4.  Compassion,  Friendship,  and  Domestic  Felicity. — Com-
passion, on  which,  according  to  Aristotle,  mainly  the
pleasure  in  the  tragical  (comp.  my  "  Aphorismen  iiber  das
Drama"),  and,  according  to  Schopenhauer,  all  morality
depends,  is,  as  every  one  knows,  a  feeling  composed  of
pain  and  pleasure.  The  reason  of  the  pain  is  clear;  it  is
simply  the  fellow-feeling  with  the  obvious  pain  of  another,
which  may  be  so  severe  as  to  allow  no  trace  of  pleasure
to  survive  in  the  compassion,  but  converts  it  wholly  into
heart-rending  woe,  whose  awfulness  impels  to  avert  the
gaze.  Think  of  the  spectacle  of  a  battlefield  after  the
light,  or  a  man  lying  in  uncontrollable  convulsions.

But  whence  the  pleasurable  feeling  found  in  moderate
compassion  conies  is  more  difficult  to  understand.  Of  the
satisfaction  caused  by  the  possible  affording  of  assistance,
there  is  here,  of  course,  no  question,  for  this  comes  after
the  commiseration.  The  mischievous  joy  of  malignity  is  the
only  pleasurable  feeling  which  the  sight  of  another's  suffer-
ing is  able  directly  to  arouse,  but  this  any  one  can  very
well  distinguish  from  the  mild  pleasure  of  compassion.

1  see  no  other  possibility  of  comprehending  the  pleasure
in  compassion,  and  have  also  nowhere  found  the  slightest
attempt  at  any  other  explanation  than  this,  that  the  con-
trast of  foreign  suffering  with  one's  own  freedom  from  this
suffering  at  once  excites  and  removes  the  latent  aversion  to
the  endurance  of  such  suffering,  and  causes  the  removal
to  be  distinctly  realised.  Hereby,  certainly,  the  pleasure
in  compassion  is  declared  to  be  purely  egoistic,  yet  1  fail


42  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

to  see  how  this  can  detract  from  the  dignity  or  the  noble
consequences  of  compassion.  It  is  in  perfect  harmony
with  this  that,  for  very  finely  strung,  self-renouncing
natures,  compassion  is  a  highly  unpleasant  stimulant,  a
true  torment,  which  they  seek  in  every  way  to  avoid,
whilst  man  indulges  his  compassion  with  greater  ease  the
ruder  he  is,  and  that,  further,  at  the  spectacle  of  very
great  suffering  even  the  coarser  mind  can  so  far  forget
itself  in  others'  well-being,  that  the  same  effect  arises  as
when  more  finely-feeling  souls  view  a  smaller  misery,  so
that  compassion  is  still  only  pain.  If  the  coarse  multi-
tude revels  in  alien  suffering,  one  must  not  forget  that  it
also  possesses  sufficient  bestiality  to  unite  with  the  com-
passion more  or  less  the  delight  in  cruelty,  which  takes
pleasure  in  alien  misery  as  such ;  one  must,  therefore,
exercise  caution  in  citing  the  instance  of  the  coarse  mul-
titude to  decide  the  question  whether  pleasure  or  pain
predominates  in  compassion  as  such.  According  to  my
subjective  judgment  the  latter  is  decidedly  the  case;  but
whether  the  judgment  of  others  tallies  with  my  own  or
not,  it  is  undoubted  that  the  emotional  crudeness  of  man-
kind on  the  average  is  steadily  decreasing,  and  that  with
decreasing  crudeness  the  pain  in  compassion  is  more  and
more  gaining  the  upper-hand  over  the  pleasure.

But  now  the  case  turns  out  still  more  unfavourably  for
pleasure  when  we  take  into  account  the  immediate  con-
scquences  of  compassion  in  the  mind.  Compassion,  namely,
at  once  excites  the  desire  to  assuage  others'  woe,  and  this
is  also  the  end  of  this  instinct.  This  desire  finds,  however,
only  in  very  rare  cases  a  partial,  still  more  rarely  a  total
satisfaction  ;  it  will,  therefore,  far  more  frequently  excite
pain  than  pleasure.

If,  then,  the  title  of  the  less  of  two  evils  cannot  be  de-
nied to  the  instinct  of  compassion  as  a  corrective  and  re-
stricter  of  egoism,  and  of  the  injustice  springing  from  the
latter,  yet  in  itself  regarded  it  is  still  always  an  evil,  for  it
brings  to  the  sufferer  more  pain  than  pleasure. Comp.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  43

Spinoza,  Eth.,  part  iv.  Prop.  50  :  "  Compassion  is  for  a  man
who  does  not  live  according  to  the  guidance  of  reason  in
itself  bad  and  useless.  Proof :  For  compassion  is  (accord-
ing to  Def.  18)  pain,  thus  (according  to  Prop.  48)  in  itself
had.  The  good,  however,  that  follows  from  it  .  .  .  we
seek  to  do  according  to  the  mere  command  of  reason,"  &c.

Of  sociality  and  friendship  the  same  cannot  be  said,
although  it  lias  often  been  asserted,  and  for  certain  dis-
positions also  rightly.  Thus,  e.g.,  La  Bruyere  says,  "  Tout
notre  mal  vient  de  ne  pouvoir  etre  seul."  (We  may  com-
pare also  Schopenhauer,  "  Parerga,"  i.  444-458.)

Put  certainly  it  may  be  maintained  that  the  sociable
instinct  is  an  instinctive  need  arising  from  the  weakness
and  impotence  of  the  individual  whose  satisfaction,  like
health  and  freedom,  just  places  man  at  the  level  where  he
is  able  to  pile  up  certain  positive  enjoyments,  and  that
only  a  small  part  of  true  friendship— which,  moreover,  is
so  rare — represents  a  value  positively  exceeding  the  zero-
point  of  feeling.

As  there  are  herding  animals,  so  is  Man  a  social  ani-
mal. Impotent,  unprotected  against  the  forces  of  Xature,
and  at  the  mercy  of  every  foe,  his  instinct  directs  him
to  cultivate  the  society  of  his  fellows.  Here  it  is  really
the  felt  want  that  begets  the  need,  and  the  pleasure
of  this  sociality  is  only  the  removal  of  that  want  or
need.

In  addition  to  warding  off  distress  and  hostile  attacks,
in  the  second  place,  the  social  community  has  the  ad-
vantage over  solitary  effort  in  facilitating  the  production
of  positive  achievements,  e.g.,  domestic  works,  economic
or  artistic  production,  the  increase  of  culture  or  know-
ledge through  exchange  of  thought,  the  collection  of
interesting  novelties;  all  this  a  society  renders  more
possible,  but  does  not  as  such  effect;  it  is  only  the
foundation,  which  may  remain  unutilised  or  utilised  in
the  most  varied  fashion.  It  is  thus  in  this  point  only  the
potentiality  of  pleasure,  but  not  pleasure  itself ;  this  be-


44  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

longs  rather  to  the  structures  to  be  reared  on  this  founda-
tion, and  must  be  sought  in  these,  not  in  sociality.  Nay,
even  the  positive  pleasure  which  may  be  built  up  on  its
basis  may  for  the  most  part  be  attained  in  like  or  little-
altered  fashion  even  in  solitude.

That,  on  the  other  hand,  sociality,  through  the  regard
for  others,  and  the  constraint  which  it  imposes  upon  the
individual,  is  attended  by  very  real  inconveniences,  and
occasionally  with  hopeless  misery,  our  "  societies  "  prove.

From  social  life  springs  a  greater  mutual  interest,  i.e.,
an  increased  sympathy.  If  in  each  individual  the  sum
of  pleasure  should  outweigh  the  sum  of  pain,  then  also  as
regards  each  individual  the  sum  of  joy  in  common  would
outweigh  the  sum  of  sorrow  in  common,  did  not  the
weakening  of  sympathetic  joy  prevent  this  through  the
envy  which  is  unavoidable  even  in  respect  of  the  dearest
friend.  But  since  in  the  life  of  the  individual  the  sum  of
pain  exceeds  the  sum  of  pleasure,  so  sympathy  for  the
same  likewise  must  consist  of  predominant  pain,  and  this
can  in  no  case  be  balanced  by  the  circumstance  that
one  is  sure  of  sympathy  for  one's  own  sorrows  and  joys
in  the  breasts  of  friends.  Certainly  we  pine  for  con-
solation, but  when  one  well  considers  it,  what  sort  of
consolation  can  it  afford  that  one  with  one's  own  dis-
agreeables and  vexations  spoils  the  fair  humour  also  of
one's  friend  ?

Nevertheless,  the  solitary  endurance  of  grief  or  vexa-
tion is  so  tormenting,  that  we  feel  ourselves  relatively
happy  in  being  able  to  pour  it  out,  although  in  recompense
the  vexation  of  our  friend  will  vice  versa  be  poured  out  on
ourselves.  Here,  too,  it  turns  out  that  the  enhancement
of  mutual  sympathy  in  friendship  is  the  less  of  two  evils,
of  which  the  other  only  appears  the  greater  on  account
of  one's  own  weakness.

When,  therefore,  the  highly  lauded  bliss  of  friendship
is  subjected  to  a  true  estimation,  it  is  found  to  depend
partly  on  man's  feebleness  in  enduring  suffering,  since,  in


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  45

fact,  very  strong  characters  are  least  in  need  of  friend-
ship, partly  however  in  pursuing  a  common  end ;  in  a  word,
on  similarity  of  interests,  whence  also  the  apparently
more  inseparable  friendships  are  loosened  or  expire  when
on  one  side  the  dominant  interests  change,  so  that  they
now  no  longer  correspond  to  those  of  the  other.  The
pleasures  attained  through  mutually  pursued  interests
can,  however,  also  only  be  put  down  to  the  account  of
these  interests,  not  directly  to  that  of  friendship.  The
firmest  community  of  interests  exists  in  marriage;  the
community  of  goods,  of  earnings,  of  sexual  intercourse,
and  of  the  education  of  children  are  strong  bonds,  which,
in  alliance  with  the  polar  completion  of  the  spiritual
qualities  of  both  sexes,  certainly  suffice  to  found  a  strong
and  lasting  friendship,  which  also  perfectly  suffices  with-
out the  aid  of  love  in  the  narrower  sense  to  explain  the
beautiful  and  sublime  phenomena  of  readiness  for  self-
sacrifice  in  married  life.  Add  to  that  the  powerful  force
of  habit.  As  the  dog  maintains  the  sublimest  and  most
touching  friendship  and  fidelity  for  his  master,  to  whom
not  his  own  choice  but  chance  and  custom  have  bound
him,  so  also  the  relation  of  spouses  is  essentially  an
alliance  of  habit;  wherefore  both  mariage  des  convenance
and  love-matches  after  a  series  of  years  exhibit  on  the
average  the  same  physiognomy.

Duhring,  who  in  his  "Worth  of  Life  "  pleads  the  cause
of  love,  and  asserts  that  it  does  not  disappear  in  marriage,
comes  (pp.  1 1 3-1 14)  himself  to  the  following  conclusion  : —
"  The  love  of  married  couples  may,  therefore,  in  power-
fulness  of  its  effects,  perhaps  not  lag  behind  passionate
love.  The  feeling  is  only  latent,  as  it  were,  emerges,  how-
over,  in  all  its  force  when  a  hostile  fate  has  to  be  en-
countered. The  forces  which  once  maintained  a  living
play  of  sensation  now  in  the  matured  relation  are  in
equipoise,  to  become  again  percejrtible  for  feeling  on  any
disturbance  of  the  equilibrium."  If  the  feeling  is  latent,
it  does  not  exist  fur  consciousness ;  and  if  it  emerges  into


46  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

consciousness  merely  on  some  disturbance,  it  is  only  felt
as  pain  ;  hence,  in  either  case,  makes  nothing  for  the
value  of  life,  which  is  here  alone  under  discussion.  The
magnitude  of  its  effects  may,  however,  be  just  as  well
derived  from  friendship  and  the  attachment  of  habit.

In  any  case,  there  is  in  most  marriages  so  much  dis-
cord and  vexation,  that  when  one  looks  with  unprejudiced
eye,  and  is  not  deceived  by  the  vain  attempts  at  dissimu-
lation, one  hardly  finds  one  in  a  hundred  that  is  to  be
envied.  This  is  simply  due  to  the  imprudence  of  men
and  women,  who  also  do  not  endeavour  in  little  things  to
accommodate  themselves  to  mutual  weaknesses ;  to  the
accidental  way  in  which  characters  are  assorted  in  mar-
riage ;  to  the  equal  insistance  on  rights  where  indulgence
and  friendship  should  compromise ;  to  the  convenience  of
discharging  all  displeasure,  vexation,  and  ill-humour  on  the
nearest  person,  who  must  listen ;  to  the  mutual  irritability
and  embitterment  which  is  increased  by  every  fresh  case
of  a  supposed  infringement  of  rights ;  to  the  sorry  con-
sciousness of  being  chained  to  one  another,  the  absence
of  which  would  prevent  a  host  of  inconsideratenesses
and  disharmonies  through  fear  of  consequences.  Thus  we
get  that  matrimonial  cross,  which  can  so  little  be  regarded
as  exceptional,  that  Lessing  is  not  so  far  wrong  when  he
says —

"  No  more  than  one  bad  wife  has  ever  yet  been  known  ;
The  pity  only  is,  each  holds  her  for  his  own."

This  does  not  at  all  contradict  the  fact  that  the  power
of  habit  at  once  asserts  its  right  and  sets  itself  in  violent
opposition  when  a  disturbance  or  solution  of  the  marriage
is  threatened  from  without.  In  both  cases  it  is  always
only  the  painful  side  of  the  relation  which  imposes  itself
on  consciousness.  The  rending  of  the  worst  marriage,
which  furnished  a  genuine  hell  for  the  partners,  always
causes  so  much  pain  to  the  survivor,  that  I  have  heard  an
experienced  man  say,  "  If  a  marriage  is  ever  to  be  broken,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  47

then  the  earlier  the  better ;  the  more  prolonged  and  closer
the  ties  of  habit,  the  more  enduring  the  pain  of  separa-
tion." One  has  only  to  draw  from  this  perfectly  correct
judgment  the  logical  consequence,  then  is  separation  best
before  union.

Sensible  people,  whose  judgment  is  not  biassed  by  impulse,
are  also  usually  quite  clear  respecting  this,  that,  from  the
rational  standpoint  of  individual  well-being,  non-marriage
is  better  than  marriage.  If  no  love  and  no  external  ends
(rank,  wealth)  impel  to  the  marriage  contract,  there  is,  in
fact,  only  one  reason  for  choosing  marriage  as  the  supposed
lesser  of  two  evils ;  thus,  for  a  girl  to  evade  the  terrors  of
old-maidhood,  for  a  man  to  avoid  the  inconveniences  of
bachelorhood,  for  both  to  escape  the  torments  of  the  un-
satisfied instinct  or  the  consequences  of  illicit  gratification.

Commonly,  however,  they  make  the  experience  that
they  have  been  bitterly  deceived  concerning  the  greater
of  the  two  evils,  and  only  shame  and  considerate  tender-
ness forbids  them  to  confess  it.  How  uncomfortable  also
the  unsatisfied  instinct  to  found  a  household  and  family
may  become  for  old  bachelors  and  spinsters  has  been
already  mentioned  (Chap.  i.  B.)

When,  now,  the  parties  are  married,  they  begin  to  long
for  children — another  instinct,  for  the  understanding  can
hardly  possess  this  longing.  The  instinct  goes  so  far  as
to  urge  to  the  adoption  of  others'  children,  and  to  the
education  of  them  as  if  they  were  one's  own.

That  the  latter  also  is  no  act  of  reflection  is  already
evident  from  the  instinct  of  monkeys,  cats,  and  many
other  mammals  and  birds  that  do  exactly  the  same.
Moreover,  by  this  procedure  an  already  existing  child  is
merely  put  into  a  better  situation  of  life  than  would  else
have  fallen  to  its  lot.  It  would  be  different  if  a  child  still
to  be  created,  to  be  fashioned  say  in  a  retort  by  a  chemical
process,  were  to  be  adopted  in  default  of  one's  own.

"  Let  one  only  imagine,"  says  Schopenhauer  ("  Parerga,"
ii.  pp.  321-322),  "that  the  generative  act  was  neither  a


48  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

want  nor  accompanied  by  extreme  pleasure,  but  an  affair
of  pure  rational  reflection :  could  then  the  human  race
continue  to  exist  ?  Would  not  rather  every  one  have  so
much  compassion  for  the  coming  generation  as  to  prefer
to  spare  it  the  burden  of  existence,  or  at  least  be  unwilling
to  take  on  itself  (the  responsibility)  of  imposing  such  burden
in  cold  blood  ?  "

Besides  the  direct  instinct  to  rear  children,  the  desire
for  children  with  people  in  easy  circumstances  or  increas-
ing in  wealth  has  yet  another  ground.  These,  namely,  at
a  certain  stage  of  life  begin  to  perceive  that  they  them-
selves have  no  enjoyment  of  their  surplus  wealth ;  if,
however,  they  were  in  consequence  to  forego  the  cares  of
business,  their  interest  in  life  would  be  gone,  and  they
would  fall  a  prey  to  the  dreariest  emptiness  of  existence
and  ennui.

To  escape  this  evil  they  desire  the  lesser  evil,  possession
of  children,  in  order  by  this  expanded  egoism  to  have  a
motive  for  the  continuance  of  their  business  activity.

But  if  one  objectively  compares  on  the  one  hand  the
joys,  and  on  the  other  the  sorrow,  chagrin,  vexation,  and
cares  which  children  bring  their  parents,  the  predominance
of  pain  can  hardly  be  doubtful,  although  the  judgment
biassed  by  instinct  strenuously  opposes  it,  especially  in
women,  with  whom  the  instinct  to  rear  children  is  far
stronger.

Let  one  first  of  all  compare  the  sum  of  satisfaction  which
is  produced  by  the  birth,  and  the  sum  of  pain  and  sorrow
which  is  called  forth  by  the  death  of  a  child  in  the  hearts
of  all  concerned.  Only  after  calculating  the  resulting
excess  of  pain  can  one  proceed  to  the  contemplation  of
their  life  itself.  To  this  end  I  recommend  the  chapter
entitled  "Mother's  Frenzy"  in  Bogumil  Goltz's  "  Zur  Char-
akteristik  und  jSTaturgeschichte  der  Frauen."

In  the  first  period  predominates  the  very  considerable
discomfort  and  trouble  of  nursing  and  of  vexation  with
careless  servants,  then  the  difficulties  with  neighbours  and


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  49

the  anxiety  of  sickness ;  later  on,  the  care  of  marrying  the
daughters  and  the  worry  over  the  follies  and  debts  of
sons ;  add  to  all  this  the  anxiety  in  procuring  the  neces-
sary means,  which  with  the  poor  is  greatest  in  the  first,
among  the  educated  classes  in  the  later  periods.  And
with  all  the  moiling  and  toiling,  all  the  worry  and  care,
and  the  constant  fear  of  losing  them,  what  is  the  real
happiness  that  children  bring  him  who  possesses  them  ?
Apart  from  the  diversion  which  they  afford  as  playthings,
and  the  occasional  gratification  of  vanity  owing  to  the
hypocritical  flattery  of  amiable  gossips — 'hope,  only  the
Iiope  of  the  future.

And  when  the  time  comes  to  fulfil  these  hopes,  and
the  children  are  still  alive  and  unspoilt,  they  quit  the
parental  home,  go  their  own  way,  usually  into  the  wide
world,  and  write  even  only  when  in  want  of  funds.  So
far  then  as  that  hope  is  egoistic,  it  is  always  deceptive;  so
far,  however,  as  the  hope  is  merely  for  the  child,  not  in
the  child,  what  then  ?

In  old  age,  as  we  shall  see,  human  beings  lose  all  illu-
sions, save  the  one  illusion  of  the  sole  instinct  remaining
to  them,  in  that  they  cherish  for  their  children  the
realisation  of  their  hopes  from  the  same  miserable  exist-
ence, whose  vanity  they  have  in  all  respects  perceived  in
their  own  case.  If  they  grow  old  enough  to  see  their
children  also  old  people,  they  certainly  lose  that  too  ;
but  then  they  hope  for  their  grandchildren  and  great-
grandchildren. Man  is  never  too  old  to  learn.

5.  Vanity.  Siusc  of  Honour,  Ambition,  Lux'  of  Fame
a  nit  J'uin  r. — Love,  honour,  and  the  acquisitive  instinct
are  in  the  mental  sphere  probably  the  three  must  powerful
moving  springs.  "We  shall  here  consider  the  second  of
these.  Honour  may  be  divided  into  an  objective  and
subjective  honour.  A  man's  objective  honour  is  in  general
terms  others'  estimation  of  him.

VOL. III.  D


£3
c  =  \


50  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

We  may  divide  objective  honour  into —

/  A.  Outward  Honour  :

a.  Repute  of  Possession.

b.  „ „ Position.

c.  „ „  Rank.

d.  „ „  Beauty.
Inward  Honour  :

a.  Reputation  for  Industry.

b.  „  „ Intelligence  and  Culture.

c.  Moral  Reputation,
(a)  For  Charity.

g  c  C  (/3)  For  Justice.

vA  -}  d.  Civil  Honour.

£k  (__  e.  Female  (Sexual)  Honour.

Negative  honour  each  one  inherently  possesses  until  he
loses  it;  positive  honour  must  be  acquired  by  circumstances
(birth,  actions,  achievements).  The  former  denotes  only
the  zero-point  of  worth ;  the  latter  positively  exceeds  the
same.  The  repute  of  possession  depends  on  power ;  that
of  position  on  power  and  performance ;  easily  ossifies,
however,  in  forms  coming  down  from  earlier  times.  The
reputation  of  rank  is,  so  far  as  it  exceeds  the  reputation
of  the  power  and  labour  connected  with  rank,  an  artificial
creation  of  the  state,  to  enable  it  to  pay  low  salaries.
The  repute  of  beauty  must  not  be  looked  for  among  our-
selves, but  among  peoples  that  have  the  sense  for  the
beautiful  (ancient  Greeks).  The  repute  of  industry  is
proportional  to  the  economic  value  of  the  work ;  that  of
intelligence  and  culture  especially  forms  a  substitute  for
labour,  when  mental  work  is  not  regarded  as  work
(respect  of  peasants  for  scholarship).  Moral  honour  is
positive  only  in  active  love ;  that  of  justice  is  merely
negative ;  likewise  will  and  sexual  honour,  which  latter
only  applies  to  woman.

Subjective  honour  is  twofold  :  the  direct  subjective
honour  of  a  man  is  his  estimation  of  himself ;  indirect  is
his  estimate  of  the  estimate  of  himself  by  others,  or  his
estimate  of  objective  honour.


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  51

The  former  is  called  self-estimation,  self-respect,  self-
esteem,  pride  ;  if  the  estimate  remains  ueloio  the  true
value  :  modesty,  humility ;  if  it  surpasses  the  true  value :
over-estimate  of  self,  conceit,  arrogance ;  the  latter,  on  the
contrary,  is  called  vanity.  Although  men  may  refuse  to
allow  this  word  in  the  case  of  noble  efforts,  essentially  it
is  the  same,  whether  a  girl  is  vain  of  the  report  of  her
"beauty  or  a  poet  of  the  fame  of  his  works.  Both  parts
together,  thus  pride  and  vanity,  make  up  subjective  honour,
which  now,  according  to  the  object  of  the  estimation,  admits
of  the  same  division  as  objective  honour.  As  regards  the
negative  part,  it  is  called  sense  of  honour ;  as  regards  the
positive,  ambition.  The  direct  and  indirect  part  of  sub-
jective honour  may  stand  to  one  another  in  very  different
relations  of  intensity ;  commonly,  however,  the  latter  will
preponderate  ;  indeed  so  far  preponderate  that  one  often
meets  with  the  view,  as  if  subjective  honour  only  consisted
in  this  evaluation  of  the  valuation  of  others  ;  whereas,  on
the  contrary,  this  is  vanity  pur  et  simple  to  assign  any
value  to  the  judgment  of  others  concerning  one's  own
worth,  whilst  one  at  the  same  time  denies  all  value  to
oneself,  thus  regarding  the  judgment  of  others  as  false.

Pride,  the  high  estimate  of  oneself,  is  an  enviable  qua-
lity, no  matter  whether  the  estimate  is  true  or  false,  if
one  only  regards  it  as  correct.  Certainly  an  inflexible
pride  is  rare;  mostly  it  has  to  sustain  alternating  struggles
with  doubt,  or  even  despair,  which  cause  more  pain  than
pride  itself  pleasure.  Pride  also  increases  the  sensitive-
ness to  external  opinion,  and  is  on  its  part  compelled  to
adopt  the  hypocritical  mask  of  modesty,  if  it  will  steer
elear  of  unpleasantnesses.  All  this  may  be  considered
pretty  well  to  balance  the  pleasure  of  extreme  self-esteem.
Put  now,  as  for  that  sense  of  honour  and  ambition  which
rests  for  the  most  part  or  exclusively  on  vanity,  although
they  may  for  our  present  stage  of  development  be  valuable
practical  instincts,  yet  one  cannot  deny  that  in  the  first
place  they  are  vain,  i.e.,  rest  on  illusions,  and,  secondly,


52  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

that  they  procure  for  him  who  is  possessed  by  them  a
thousand  times  more  pain  than  pleasure.

Female  chastity  alone  protects  social  relations  from
complete  disorder.  The  citizen  sense  of  honour  restrains
the  as  yet  blameless  from  trespasses  or  crimes,  from  which
neither  the  fear  of  temporal  nor  of  eternal  punishment
could  deter.  Scholarly  ambition  spurs  on  the  boy  and
youth  in  their  arduous  acquisition  of  the  material  of  culture
demanded  by  our  age.  The  ambition  to  achieve  something
great,  which,  in  regard  of  rare  and  considerable  perfor-
mances and  deeds,  is  called  lust  of  fame,  sustains  the
starving  artist  or  scholar,  whose  creative  force  would  be
paralysed  if  the  impossibility  of  ever  in  the  least  particular
satisfying  his  ambition  or  love  of  fame  could  be  demon-
strated to  him.  Thus  the  sense  of  honour  prevents
greater  evils  and  ambition  furthers  the  evolution  of  hu-
manity ;  but  apart  from  the  circumstance  that,  with  the
higher  development  and  power  of  reason,  subjective  honour
may  very  well  be  dispensed  with,  and  its  good  effect  other-
wise produced  (one  may  recall  the  difference  between  the
French  bravery  from  point  d'honncur  and  the  German  from
sense  of  duty),  yet  at  all  events  the  individual,  the  instru-
ment of  the  impulse,  must  suffer  therefrom.

The  possession  of  negative  honour  can  afford  no  pleasure,
save  when  it  has  been  recovered  after  apparent  loss  (e.g.,
through  calumny) ;  in  itself  it  answers  only  to  the  zero-
point  of  sensation,  as  it  represents  only  the  zero-point  of
worth.  It  is  thus,  as  all  similar  moments,  a  fertile  source
of  pain,  but  no  source  of  pleasure,  except  through  the  quite
special  and  rarely  occurring  interruption  of  displeasure.

Ambition,  however,  is  certainly  a  positive  impulse,  and
indeed  one  of  those  "  which,  like  salt  water,  makes  one  the
more  thirsty  the  more  one  drinks."

Wherever  one  listens  one  hears  the  stereotype  lamen-
tations of  Government  functionaries  and  officers  at  neglect
and  tardy  promotion,  the  wailings  of  artists  and  scholars  at
suppression  by  envy  and  cabals,  everywhere  vexation  at  the


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  33

undeserved  favouring  of  others.  For  a  hundred  mortifica-
tions of  ambition  there  is  hardly  one  satisfaction ;  the
former  are  bitterly  felt,  the  latter  received  as  long-deserved
tribute  of  justice,  if  not  with  the  repining,  that  they  did
not  come  earlier.  The  general  over-estimate  of  self  causes
every  individual  to  raise  extravagant  claims  ;  the  universal
mutual  envy  and  disparagement  of  merit  causes  the  re-
fusal of  even  just  claims.  Every  satisfaction  of  ambition
only  serves  to  screw  up  one's  claims  more  highly,  and  in
consequence  it  must  be  a  triumph  outdoing  all  former
ones  that  can  produce  a  fresh  satisfaction,  whilst  each  of
the  former  ones  does  not  obtain  equal  recognition  on
account  of  this  deficit  of  pain.

Take  the  case  of  a  young  public  singer  ;  she  rises  step
by  step  to  a  certain  elevation  in  the  favour  of  the  public ;
the  triumphs  connected  with  this  rise  of  favour  she
claims  as  her  right ;  life  in  them  is  to  her  as  the  air  which
she  breathes  ;  she  is  amazed  if  ever  they  are  wanting.  But
a  younger  rival  conies  at  last,  and  thrusts  her  into  the
second  rank,  as  she  her  predecessors;  and  the  fall  from  her
height  is  a  thousand  times  more  painful  to  her  than  its
converse  was  pleasurable,  whilst  she  hardly  felt  as  happi-
ness the  actual  tenure  of  the  same.

As  in  this  instance,  so  with  all  ambition  and  lust  of
fame  ;  even  when  the  achievements  or  works  remain,
they  do  not  always  maintain  the  same  interest  for  the
public.

Hut  now,  in  addition  to  all  this,  ambition  is  vain,
i.e..,  rests  on  illusion.  Even  the  estimate  of  worth,  as  it
obtains  in  objective  honour,  depends  in  part  on  illusion.
I  need  only  mention  the  artificially  inflated  honour  of
rank  and  nobility  derived  from  the  .Middle  Ages,  but
among  us  already  almost  extinct  in  its  old  significance.
And  even  where  the  value  that  objective  honour  prizes  is
no  illusory  one,  yet  its  estimate;  is  far  too  often  false.  The
,-u.r  jiojiiiI "1  vox  del  only  holds  in  questions  that  are  vital
questions  for  the  development  of  the  people,  and  where,  in


54  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

consequence,  the  Unconscious  instinctively  guides  the  judg-
ment of  the  masses.  In  all  other  things  the  vox  populi  is
so  blind,  dazzled  by  outward  show,  misled  by  claquers,
given  over  to  commonplace,  and  without  understanding
for  the  good,  true,  and  beautiful,  that  one  rather  may  be
almost  sure  it  is  on  a  wrong  tack.  (Comp.  Schopenhauer,
"  Parerga,"  ii.  chap,  xx.)  In  all  cases  that  are  not  vital
questions  of  development  or  finally  settled  by  science,  one
may  be  confident,  a  'priori,  that  the  majority  are  wrong
and  the  minority  right;  nay,  a  joint  judgment  is  even  so
difficult,  that,  when  a  number  of  clever  people  agree,  they
almost  certainly  perpetrate  some  folly.

To  such  a  judgment  that  man  surrenders  his  life-hap-
piness who  makes  ambition  his  guiding  star.  Even  in
small  matters  certainly  no  one  would  continue  to  con-
cern himself  about  the  opinions  of  mankind,  before
whom  could  be  laid  all  the  calumnies  and  adverse
judgments  uttered  by  friends  and  acquaintances  behind
his  back.  And  now  as  to  the  ambition  which  fishes
for  orders,  dignities,  and  titles !  Every  one  knows  that
they  are  not  apportioned  to  merit,  but  in  the  best  case
to  him  who  is  favoured  by  fortune,  or  to  length  of  service  ;
to  those  who  happen  to  have  influential  relatives  or  advo-
cates, to  the  dinger  and  flatterer,  or  even  as  reward  for
services  not  of  the  cleanest ;  and  yet — incredible  to  relate
■ — the  world  is  greedy  for  them  !

But  now  suppose  the  object  of  objective  honour  had  a
value,  and  the  judgment  of  those  in  whose  judgment  objec-
tive honour  consists  were  correct,  still  ambition  would  be
empty  ;  for  what  sort  of  value  can  it  have  for  a  man
what  others  think  and  judge  of  him  ?  None  whatever,
except  so  far  as  the  character  of  their  action  towards  him
is  at  the  same  time  determined  by  their  judgment  on  him.
In  this,  however,  the  opinion,  as  such,  is  quite  indifferent,
and  is  only  regarded  as  means  of  thereby  attaining  a
particular  kind  of  action.  This  is,  therefore,  no  ambition
in  the  ordinary  sense,  as  little  as  we  call  him  covetous


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  55

who  strives  to  get  money,  but  who  also  spends  all  that  lie
gets;  it  is  the  assigning  a  value  to  objective  honour  as
such  that  makes  ambition  and  the  sense  of  honour,  and
the  circumstance  that  with  the  objective  honour  partial!//
also  the  conduct  of  men  towards  the  honoured  one  be-
comes different  and  more  advantageous  to  him,  is  only  a
gladly  accepted  accidental  consequence.

For  the  most  part,  indeed,  the  modification  of  action
will  be  limited  to  this,  that  the  behaviour  becomes  more
deferential,  thus  to  an  expression  of  adjudgment  of  objec-
tive honour,  which,  to  a  sensible  man,  must  be  just  as
indifferent  as  the  opinion  itself.  True  utility  hardly  flows
at  all  from  positive  objective  honour,  only  harm  from
injured  subjective  honour,  so  that  finally  all  the  signifi-
cance of  objective  honour  consists  in  this,  that  one  has  to
guard  against  harm  through  injury  to  negative  honour.
All  the  subjective  value  of  an  objective  honour  as  such
rests,  however,  manifestly  on  imagination,  for  the  theatre
of  my  joys  and  sorrows  is  still  my  head  and  not  the  head
of  otlurs;  thus  it  can  neither  add  to  nor  take  away  from
my  weal  and  woe  what  other  people  think  of  me,  therefore
their  opinion  as  such  can  have  no  effective  value  for
in'1,  consequently  ambition  is  vain.  The  sense  of  honour
which,  according  to  our  explanation,  relates  to  negative
honour,  is  indeed  abstractedly  just  as  insignificant;  but
this  much  can,  at  any  rate,  be  said  for  it,  that  if  one  once
lives  among  men,  one  must  at  least  act  as  if  one  had  some
regard  for  objective  honour,  because  otherwise  the  world
would  fall  on  one  as  the  crows  on  the  owl  in  daylight.

If  herewith  I  declare  the  sense  of  honour  and  ambition
to  be  empty  and  illusory,  by  no  means  is  any  judgment
pronounced  on  the  value  of  the  objects  of  honour ;  I  have-
even  to  a  certain  extent  the  greatest  regard  for  the  same,
e.g.,  for  morality.  But  if  such  objects  have  a  value,  they
have  it  not  becnuse  they  are  objects  of  honour,  as  the
wrong-headed  might  think,  but  because  they  are  directly
fidiciiic. Most  distinctly  is  this  so  with  posthumous  fame ;


56  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Spinoza  can  indeed  not  be  the  better  for  it  that  Colle-
gian N.  says,  "  That  was  a  clever  fellow ; "  but  that  he
was  able  to  think  such  thoughts,  therein  lay  his  satis-
faction. Undoubtedly  what  renders  me  happy  may  lie  in
this,  that  I  am  conscious  of  doing  or  accomplishing  some-
thing for  the  good  of  others ;  but  that  is  still  always
the  sympathetic  joy  in  a  real  happiness,  whereas,  on
the  contrary,  the  recognition  of  the  value  of  my  deeds  or
performances  procures  these  others  by  no  means  pleasure,
but  rather  displeasure.  The  difference  is  the  same  as
when  I  bestow  something  on  a  beggar;  do  I  rejoice  that
through  my  gift  his  distress  is  momentarily  relieved,  my
joy  has  a  real  object;  do  I  watch  for  his  "Thank  you,
sir,"  or  "God  bless  you,"  in  order  to  relish  the  recog-
nition, I  am  a  vain,  foolish  man.

Thus  has  also  the  desire  of  honour  appeared  to  be,  if  a
useful,  yet  also  an  illusory  instinct,  causing  more  pain  than
pleasure.  (Comp.  Schopenhauer,  "  Parerga,"  i. ;  "  Aphor-
isms on  Worldly  Wisdom,"  chaps,  i.,  ii.,  and  especially  iv.)

With  the  lust  of  power  it  is  just  the  same.  So  far  as
it  is  a  mere  endeavour  after  freedom,  it  is  not  yet  a
positive  impulse ;  so  far  as  the  power  of  ruling  is  only
sought  to  procure  for  one's  self  more  enjoyments  by  its
help  is  it  mere  means  to  alien  ends,  and  must  be  measured
by  the  value  of  those  enjoyments.  There  is,  however,
also  a  passion  for  commanding  and  ruling  as  such.  It  is
clear  that  this  is  possible  only  at  the  expense  of  infring-
ing the  same  impulse,  and,  moreover,  the  impulse  for
liberty  in  the  ruled.  Further,  however,  the  same  holds
20od  of  it  as  of  ambition  and  loss  of  fame :  the  more  one
drinks  of  it,  the  thirstier  one  becomes.  The  accustomed
power  is  no  longer  enjoyed,  but  without  doubt  all  resist-
ance to  the  same  most  painfully  felt,  and  the  greatest
additional  sacrifices  made  for  its  removal.  On  the  whole,
and  with  regard  to  the  consequences  for  others,  then,
the  love  of  power  is  a  far  more  pernicious  passion  than
ambition.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  57

6.  Religious  Edification. — Already  in  Chap.  ix.  B.  we
mentioned  that  the  exaltation  of  religious  feeling  in
devotion  and  edification,  which  is  always  more  or  less  of
a  mystical  nature,  is  able  to  afford  so  great  a  bliss  that  it
carries  its  subject  above  all  earthly  sorrows.  But  in  the
first  place,  these  high  degrees  of  exaltation  are  rare,  for  as
they  are  essentially  of  a  mystical  nature,  they  cannot  be
acquired  by  industry  and  trouble,  but  presuppose  a  dis-
position, a  peculiar  talent,  as  much  as  art-enjoyment ;
and,  secondly,  they  are,  like  all  pleasure,  not  to  be  had
without  a  characteristic  displeasure.

One  comes  to  see  this  best  when  one  considers  the  life
of  penitents  and  saints.  The  highest  degrees  of  religious
exaltation  are  hardly  conceivable  without  a  prolonged
mortification  of  the  "flesh,"  i.e.,  not  only  of  sensual  appe-
tites, but  of  all  secular  pleasures.  Barely  is  this  renuncia-
tion supported  by  the  consciousness  of  the  illusory  nature
of  earthly  pleasure  and  the  predominance  of  the  pain  simul-
taneously arising  from  earthly  longings,  for  that  requires
philosophy,  but  for  the  most  part  the  foregoing  of  earthly
felicity  is  felt  as  a  true  sacrifice,  whereby  the  higher
mystical  religious  felicity  is  to  be  purchased,  so  that  the
subject  of  it  properly  speaking  never  frees  himself  from
the  lamentation  on  the  loss  of  earthly  happiness  itself.
But  however  that  be,  the  long-suppressed  natural  impulses
surge  up  from  time  to  time  only  the  more  mightily,  and
the  violence  of  the  struggles  which  the  renouncers,  cer-
tainly in  ever  rarer  but  ever  more  powerful  relapses,  have
to  sustain  testifies  to  the  magnitude  of  the  torments  ex-
perienced by  them  for  the  sake  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,
until  at  last  habit  and  bodily  infirmity  gradually  induce
a  more  equable  state. — Of  the  bodily  pains  and  priva-
tions of  Asceticism  itself  I  shall  be  silent,  since  it  is,  if
decidedly  a  very  effective,  yet  not  indispensable  means  to
the  attainment  of  the  religious  mystical  exaltation.

When  we  pass  to  the  lower  stages  of  edification  which
come  into  contact  with  secular  life,  an  item  of  pain  not


58  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

mentioned  above  becomes  especially  important :  fear  of
one's  own  unworthiness,  doubt  of  the  divine  grace,  anxiety
concerning  the  future  judgment,  the  fear  of  the  burden
of  past  sins,  however  small  the  latter  may  appear  in  the
eyes  of  others.  Taken  all  in  all,  pleasure  and  pain  will
weigh  tolerably  equally  even  in  religious  feeling ;  but
should  really  an  excess  of  pleasure  be  the  result,  the  pos-
sibility of  which  I  should  more  readily  admit  in  this
sphere  than  in  any  other  (with  the  exception  of  art  and
science),  the  other  consideration  must  also  be  taken  into
account,  that  this  pleasure  also  is  illusory.  "VYe  have
already  laid  bare  this  illusion  in  Chap.  ix.  B. ;  it  briefly
consists  in  this,  that  the  endeavour  immediately  to  grasp
and  to  enjoy  in  conscious  feeling  the  identity  of  the  one
Unconscious  with  the  conscious  subject,  which  exists  in
reality  and  may  easily  be  comprehended  by  the  under-
standing as  rational  truth,  must  in  its  nature  of  necessity
remain  without  result,  since  consciousness  cannot  possibly
transgress  its  own  limits,  thus  cannot  apprehend  the
Unconscious  as  such,  therefore,  also,  not  the  unity  of  the
Unconscious  and  the  conscious  individual.

If  the  awakening  and  delivering  from  illusion  is  with
the  progressive  evolution  of  humanity  inevitable  in  any
sphere,  it  is  in  the  religious.  One  cannot  say  that  the
present  time  of  unbelief  is  just  as  transitional  as,  e.g.,
that  of  the  cultured  ancient  world  at  the  birth  of  Christ ;
although  more  religious  periods  than  the  present  may
recur,  yet  a  similar  era  of  faith  to  that  of  the  Catholic
Middle  Ages  has  been  for  ever  rendered  impossible  by
the  universal  modern  mental  culture.  Even  the  Middle
Ages  were  only  possible  because  classical  culture  had  been
buried  beneath  ruins,  and  this  we  have  now  no  more  to  fear.
The  more  nations  cultivate  their  rational  tendencies,  the
more  they  come  to  stand  and  advance  on  their  own  feet,
i.e.,  on  their  consciousness,  the  more  they  lose  their  mystical
talent ;  this  is  the  provisional  talent  of  youth,  the  matu-
rity of  conscious  understanding  attends  the  manhood  of


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  59

nations.  "We  may  analogically  conclude  from  the  gradual
destruction  of  religious  illusions  that  also  the  destruction
of  other  illusions  will  assuredly  be  in  time  accomplished,
as  soon  as  they  are  no  longer  needed  as  springs  of  pro-
gress, whether  they  be  superseded  by  other  powerful  im-
pulses (reason),  or  the  goal  be  attained  in  the  direction  of
their  special  efficiency.  So  far  as  the  delight  of  religion
consists  in  the  hope  of  transcendent  felicity  after  death,  it
will  be  dealt  with  later  on.

7.  Immorality.  —  Immoral  action  or  wrong -doing  pro-
ceeds from  the  egoism  inevitably  attending  individualism,
and  consists  originally  in  this,  that  in  order  to  procure  a
gratification  or  to  avoid  a  pain,  I  inflict  on  one  or  several
other  individuals  a  greater  pain.  All  other  forms  of  wrong-
doing are  derived  from  this  original  one.  It  is  therefore
clear  that  the  essence  of  wrong  or  the  immoral  consists  in
this,  to  alter  the  proportion  of  pleasure  and  pain  in  the
world  unfavourably  to  pleasure,  since  the  pain  of  suffer-
ing wrong  is  greater  than  the  pleasure  (or  the  spared  pain)
of  doing  wrong.  It  follows  from  this,  the  greater  the
immorality  the  greater  the  sufferings  of  the  world.  (To
apply  the  idea  of  justice  to  this  proportion  is,  as  has
been  shown  above,  altogether  inadmissible.)  Suppose,
then,  pleasure  and  pain  were  perfectly  balanced  in  the
world  (which  case  truly,  as  one  among  infinitely  many
possible  proportions,  has  a  'priori  an  infinitely  small
probability),  the  existence  of  immorality  would  im-
mediately induce  the  preponderance  of  pain.  In  an  in-
trinsically evil  world,  however,  it  will  cause  the  cup  of
misery  to  overflow  the  more,  as  no  harm  imposed  by
Fate  pains  so  acutely  as  that  which  one's  fellow-beings
have  inflicted.  As  regards  the  vileness,  worthlessness,
malice,  and  meanness  of  mankind,  Schopenhauer  indulges
in  vivid  descriptions,  which  can  hardly  be  pronounced
overdrawn,  and  the  repetition  of  which  I  must  here  dis-
pense with. Only  one  thing  I  will  here  add,  namely,  that


60  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  imprudence  of  man  often  produces  the  same  effect  as
malignity,  in  that  it  is  often  the  cause  of  the  bitterest
torments  to  one's  neighbours,  without  bringing  any  advan-
tage or  enjoyment,  as  wickedness  manifestly  does.

If,  however,  wrong-doing  increases  the  suffering  of  the
world,  on  the  other  hand,  right-doing  is  by  no  means  able
to  diminish  the  same,  for  it  is,  indeed,  nothing  else  but
the  maintenance  of  the  status  quo  before  the  first  wrong,
thus  no  positive  elevation  above  the  level  line.  jSTo  one
in  possession  of  his  clear  sight  will  have  any  enjoyment
therefrom,  unless  when  the  fear  of  wrong  is  taken  away
from  him.  He,  however,  who  gives  every  one  his  due
can  have  no  motive  for  pleasure  at  all,  for  he  has  curbed
ids  individual  will,  and  yet  has  done  no  more  than  his
duty.  A  genuine  joy  only  the  exercise  of  positive  morality,
of  active  charity,  can  afford ;  yet  it  will  always  be  con-
joined for  the  doer  with  the  pain  of  sacrifice,  for  the  re-
ceiver with  the  pain  of  shame  at  benefits  received.  This
augmentation  of  the  pleasure  of  the  world  through  active
charity  is  of  no  account  in  comparison  with  the  mass  of
immorality.  At  all  events,  the  positive  morality  of  active
charity  is  also  only  to  be  regarded  as  a  necessary  evil,  which
may  serve  to  alleviate  a  still  greater  one.  It  is  far  worse
that  there  are  alms-receivers  than  it  is  good  that  there
are  alms-givers,  and  only  the  Talmud  finds  distress  and
poverty  in  order  that  the  rich  may  have  occasion  to  show
their  good  works.  Accordingly,  all  wrorks  of  charity  only
soothe  the  greater  or  lesser  woes  springing  from  human
necessity.  Were  man  free  from  suffering,  self-sufficient,
and  without  needs,  like  a  god,  what  would  he  want  with
works  of  charity  ?

8.  Scientific  and  Art-Enjoyment. — As  feels  the  wearied
traveller,  when,  after  long  wandering  in  the  desert,  he  at
last  espies  an  oasis,  so  do  we  feel  when,  on  approaching  Art
and  Science,  at  last  a  gleam  of  light  appears  in  the  night
of  struggle  and  suffering. When  Schopenhauer  himself  in


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  6r

the  "  Parerga  "  (2  Aufl.  ii.  448)  insisted  that  the  mental  con-
dition in  artistic  or  scientific  reception  or  production  is
mere  painlessness,  one  might  think  that  he  had  never
known  the  state  of  ecstasy  or  rapture  into  which  one  may
fall  over  a  work  of  art  or  a  newly  opening  sphere  of  science.
But  if  he  had  seen  the  positive  nature  of  such  a  state  of
supreme  enjoyment,  he  could  no  longer  have  been  able  to
assert  that  it  was  involuntary  and  unmotived,  but  he
would  have  seen  that  it  is  the  condition  of  supreme  and
perfect  positive  satisfaction,  and  satisfaction  of  what,  \i  not
of  a  will  ?  Certainly  not  of  the  vulgar  practical  interest  or
will,  but  of  the  endeavour  after  knowledge,  or  after  that
harmony,  after  that  unconscious  logic  under  the  veil  of
sensuous  form ;  in  short,  after  that  somewhat  in  which
beauty  consists,  no  matter  wherein  it  consists.  That
ecstatic  rapture  {e.g.,  over  a  performance  of  music,  over  a
picture,  a  poem,  a  philosophical  treatise)  is  certainly  some-
thing extremely  rare  ;  even  the  capacity  for  it  is  only  the
endowment  of  favoured  natures,  and  even  these  will  not
be  able  to  boast  of  too  many  such  moments  in  their  life.
This  is  as  it  were  a  compensation  which  falls  to  the  lot  of
such  sensitive  natures  for  the  pains  of  life,  which  they
must  feel  far  more  strongly  than  other  men,  whose  obtuse-
tiess  makes  much  easier  to  them.

Whether  at  the  same  time  the  latter  do  not  on  the
whole  fare  better  is  hardly  doubtful ;  for  since  pain  so
much  preponderates  in  life,  a  blunter  feeling  for  it  would
not  be  too  highly  paid  by  the  deprivation  of  a  pleasure
never  missed  though  great  in  itself,  and  in  every  case  con-
fined  to  a  few  moments  of  life.  This  is  confirmed  by  the
fact  that  men  on  the  average  think  so  much  less  of  the
value  of  life,  the  finer  their  feelings  and  the  more  intellec-
tual they  are.  What  holds  good  of  tin;  extreme  case  holds,
however,  just  as  well  of  the  intermediate  stages,  which
iill  up  the  interval  between  the  capacity  for  the  highest
ecstasy  and  insensibility  to  all  and  every  art.  From
the  circumstance  that  every  one  is  indifferent  to  this  or


62  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

that  art  one  can  certainly  not  conclude  in  general  to  the
obtuseness  of  his  feelings,  but  certainly  when  anybody  is
indifferent  to  art  in  general.

Now  let  any  one  ask  himself  what  percentage  of  the
earth's  inhabitants  altogether  are,  in  any  degree  worth
mentioning,  susceptible  to  artistic  and  scientific  enjoy-
ment, and  one  will  cease  to  rate  the  importance  of  art  and
science  for  the  world's  happiness  in  general  too  highly.  Let
one  consider  further  how  small  a  percentage  of  the  re-
cipients, again,  are  able  to  procure  for  themselves  the
enjoyment  of  personal  creation,  of  artistic  or  scientific
production,  which  considerably  exceeds  that  of  reception.

In  estimating  this  reception  of  the  common  people,  one
should,  however,  not  forget  to  eliminate  the  causes  of
interest  independent  of  art  itself;  thus,  e.g.,  curiosity
or  pleasure  in  the  horrible  or  gruesome,  the  interest  in
national  singers  or  story-tellers,  the  delight  in  dancing
stimulated  by  popular  music,  the  regard  for  practical
utility  in  the  interest  in  scientific  communications,  &c.
But  among  the  educated  classes  many  affect  an  interest,
and  consequently  a  capacity  of  enjoyment,  in  regard  to
art  and  science  which  they  do  not  possess.  One  has
only  to  remember  how  many  are  tempted  to  become
artists  and  scholars  by  the  prospect  of  a  career  which
perhaps  pleases  them  better  on  account  of  its  freedom,
without  having  any  vocation  for  the  same.  If  one  rejected
all  the  uncalled  and  untalented,  the  ranks  of  scholars  and
artists  would  sensibly  melt  away.  The  prospect  of  future
position  and  the  facilities  of  entrance  (scholarships,  &c.)
tempt  to  the  scholar's  career ;  the  freedom  of  the  voca-
tion and  the  nature  of  the  work,  which  appears  more  like
sport,  often,  however,  the  mere  hope  of  profit,  entice  to
the  artist's  life.  Think  of  the  unhappy  girls  who  prepare
themselves  for  becoming  music-mistresses.  Further,  let
one  take  into  account  everything  that  is  not  produced  by
pure  love  of  art  and  science,  but  by  ambition  and  vanity.
Let  once  the  artist  or  savant  attain  the  certaintv  that  no


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  63

one  will  ever  know  the  authorship  of  his  works,  although
hereby  ambition  is  by  no  means  entirely  disappointed,
since  a  man's  name  is  something  accidental  and  indiffe-
rent, especially  for  the  future,  yet  more  than  the  half  of
the  pleasure  in  his  performances  will  be  taken  away.
Were  there,  however,  a  means  of  really  at  the  same  time
depriving  all  artists  and  scholars  of  all  ambition  and
vanity,  assuredly  production  would  almost  cease,  if  it  were
not  compelled  to  be  mechanically  continued  for  the  sake
of  bread.

But  now  the  troop  of  dilettanti !  How  little  sense  and
love  for  the  subject,  how  terrible  the  want  of  all  under-
standing, how  dependent  on  fashion  and  pretentious
show, — and  yet  this  dilettante  crowding  of  the  arts  and
sciences  !  The  riddle  may  thus  be  read :  not  for  their
own  sake  are  the  arts  sought,  but  as  showy  tinsel  to  adorn
one's  own  dear  self.  The  equally  unintelligent  critics  are
enraptured  at  the  dress  if  the  person  pleases  them,  and
despise  it  if  they  have  no  other  ground  for  flattering  the
person  ;  they  then  contemn  the  dilettante  performance  the
more  profoundly  the  more  genuine  value  it  possesses,  be-
cause they  think  themselves  bound  to  abash  with  fitting
scorn  the  audacious  assumption  that  any  object  may  possess
intrinsic  merit.  Of  course,  under  such  circumstances,  the
aim  becomes  to  produce  startling  effects  in  as  many  direc-
tions as  possible,  in  order  to  dazzle  every  blockhead  in
the  easiest  way.

This  is  the  principle  of  modern  education,  especially  of
girls  ;  a  couple  of  drawing-room  pieces  on  the  piano,  a
few  songs,  a  little  foliage-drawing  and  flower-painting,  to
chatter  in  a  few  modern  languages  and  to  read  the  literary
scribble  of  the  day,  then  they  are  "finished."  What  else
i.s  it  than  systematic  instruction  in  vanity,  in  every  accep-
tation of  the  term?  And  with  this  juggling  can  one
believe  in  delight  in  art?  In  aversion  for  art,  rather,
winch  reveals  itself  from  the  moment  of  marriage,  when
vanity  no  longer  gets  the  better  of  love  of  ease. With


64  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

boys  it  is  not  much  better.  They  too  must  play  the  part
of  dilettanti  for  the  sake  of  their  parents'  vanity.  And
then  in  music,  as  universal  instrument,  the  unlucky,
encyclopaedic,  soulless  piano !  In  science,  likewise,  am-
bition and  vanity  must  aid.  Only  ambitious  boys  are
able  to  go  willingly  to  school;  considering  the  subjects
taught  and  our  scholastic  methods,  ambition  apart,  learn-
ing is  scarcely  conceivable  without  extreme  aversion.

Add  to  this  that  in  science,  quite  otherwise  than  in  art,
the  enjoyment  of  reception  is  extremely  small  compared
with  that  of  production,  because  the  ardent  longing  fails
for  that  knowledge  of  whose  sure  and  easy  attainment  one
is  beforehand  convinced.  Who  to-day  is  still  able  to  have
a  tithe  of  the  enjoyment  from  the  knowledge  of  photo-
graphy or  the  electric  telegraph  that  the  inventors  had,
or  even  as  those  who  at  the  time  of  invention  watched
each  new  advance  with  eagerness  ?

If  now  we  deduct  all  the  receptivity  and  enjoyment  in
art  and  science  which  depend  on  mere  appearances  or
affectation,  whether  they  are  affected  from  ambition  and
vanity  or  for  the  sake  of  gain,  or  because  such  a  career
has  once  been  adopted  for  other  reasons,  of  the  seeming
enjoyment  of  art  and  science  existing  in  the  world  a  very
considerable,  I  believe  by  far  the  larger  part,  will  fall  away.
The  remainder,  however,  does  not  exist,  without  being  pur-
chased by  a  certain  displeasure,  although  I  shall  by  no
means  dispute  that  the  pleasure  of  enjoyment  predominates.
This  is  clearest  in  the  pleasure  of  producing.  As  is  well
known,  no  master  ever  yet  fell  from  heaven,  and  the  study
which  is  requisite  before  one  is  ripe  for  a  remunerative
productivity  is  disagreeable  and  toilsome  and  mostly
brings  little  pleasure,  unless  through  overcome  difficulties
and  hope  of  the  future.  In  every  art  the  technique  must
first  be  acquired,  and  in  science  one  has  first  to  attain  the
height  of  the  special  department  if  production  is  not  to
lag  behind  what  already  exists.  AVhat  wearisome  books
has  one  not  to  read  only  to  conscientiously  convince  one-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  65

self  that  there  is  nothing  valuable  in  them,  and  others,
again,  to  pick  a  grain  of  gold  out  of  a  heap  of  sand  !
Truly  these  are  no  small  sacrifices.  When  one  at  last  has
advanced  so  far  in  one's  preparations  and  preliminary
studies  as  to  be  able  to  produce,  the  really  sweet  moments
are  still  only  those  of  conception,  succeeded  by  long  periods
of  mechanical  elaboration.  And  not  always  is  one  disposed
for  production.  If  it  were  not  for  the  urgent  wish  to
complete  the  work  in  a  definite  space  of  time ;  if  ambi-
tion or  love  of  fame  did  not  act  as  an  incentive,  or  out-
ward circumstances  compel  execution;  lastly,  did  not  the
gaping  spectre  of  ennui  lurk  behind  idleness,  very  fre-
quently the  pleasure  to  be  expected  from  production  would
not  conquer  the  love  of  ease ;  nay,  in  spite  of  all,  one  is
tempted  only  too  often  to  cease  labouring  at  the  precious
work.

The  musician  and  scientific  teacher,  moreover,  easily  be-
come disgusted  with  their  calling  through  the  monotony
of  their  compulsory  professional  duties.  The  dilettante
is  still  worse  off  with  his  production.  His  taste  and
understanding  are  usually  in  advance  of  his  facility  of
performance,  and  hence  his  performances  do  not  satisfy
him,  unless  he  be  very  vain  and  conceited. — Uelatively
less  are  the  feelings  of  pain  accompanying  receptive  en-
joyment. In  Science,  however,  they  are  far  greater  than
in  Art ;  e.g.,  the  reading  of  a  strictly  scientific  book  is  in
itself  a  labour,  the  undergoing  of  which  always  costs  a
certain  amount  of  effort — an  effort  which  most  people
would  never  make  for  the  sake  of  a  possible  enjoyment.

Least  fatiguing  is  the  receptive  enjoyment  of  Art,  and  X
shall  almost  appear  to  trifle  if  I  mention  the  disagreeables
connected  therewith  ;  yet  they  are  important,  since  with
increasing  love  of  ease  {e.g.,  in  age)  they  art?,  in  fact,  able
to  deter  most  receptive  minds  from  obtaining  the  enjoy-
ment of  art.  They  are  the  visiting  of  the  galleries,  the
heat  and  closeness  of  the  theatres  and  concert-rooms,  the
risk  of  catching  cold,  the  fatigue  of  seeing  and  hearing

VOL.  III.  E


66  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

which  is  wont  to  be  so  severe,  because  payment  has  to  be
made  for  viewing  the  whole  gallery  or  hearing  the  entire
concert,  whilst  half  of  the  entertainment  were  sufficient.
Of  the  enjoyment  of  amateur  performances  and  the  subse-
quent debt  of  compliments  I  would  rather  be  silent,  as  my
readers  may  perhaps  be  amateurs  themselves.

The  result  then  is,  that  of  the  few  inhabitants  of  the
earth  who  seem  called  to  enjoy  science  or  art,  very  few
are  really  called,  and  most  affect  the  call  from  ambition,
vanity,  the  desire  of  gain,  or  other  reasons ;  that  those
to  whose  lot  such  enjoyments  really  fall  must  yet  pay
for  them  with  all  kinds  of  less  or  greater  sacrifice  of
pleasure ;  that  thus,  on  the  whole,  the  excess  of  pleasure
which  is  produced  by  science  and  art  as  such  in  the  world
is  exceedingly  small  compared  with  the  sum  of  existing
misery  ;  and  that  this  excess  of  pleasure  is,  moreover,  dis-
tributed to  those  individuals  who  feel  the  pain  of  existence
more  profoundly  than  others — so  much  more  profoundly
than  others  that  the  pleasure  they  obtain  is  far  from
being  a  compensation.  Lastly,  it  must  be  added  that  this
species  of  enjoyment  more  than  any  other  spiritual  plea-
sure is  limited  to  the  present,  whilst  others  usually  are
enjoyed  in  anticipation.  This  is  connected  with  the  pecu-
liar circumstance  previously  discussed  at  length,  that  the
same  sense-perception  which  affords  satisfaction  also  evokes
the  will  which  is  satisfied.

9.  Sleep  and  Dreams. — So  far  as  sleep  is  dreamless,  it
is  a  complete  inactivity  of  the  brain  and  brain-conscious-
ness, for  as  soon  as  the  brain  becomes  at  all  active,  it
begins  to  sport  with  images.  Such  an  unconscious  state
renders  also  all  pleasurable  or  painful  feeling  impossible  ;
but  if  a  nervous  stimulation  occur  which  must  excite
pleasure  or  pain,  it  also  interrupts  the  inactive  state  of
the  brain.  Unconscious  sleep,  therefore,  as  regards  the
properly  human  or  brain-consciousness,  must  be  consi-
dered as  equal  to  the  zero-point  of  sensation. This  does


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  67

not  preclude  other  nerve-centres,  like  the  spinal  cord  and
ganglia,  from  continuing  to  be  conscious ;  this  is  even
necessary  for  the  continuance  of  respiration,  digestion,
blood-circulation,  &c;  but  this  is  still  merely  a  profoundly
animal  consciousness,  occupying  somewhat  the  level  of  an
inferior  fish  or  worm,  which  can  have  only  very  slight
importance  in  the  account  of  human  happiness.  I3ut  also
in  this  animal  consciousness  of  the  lower  nerve-centres
alternate  pleasure  and  pain  ;  in  the  normal  and  undis-
turbed exercise  of  the  vegetative  functions  a  pleasure  can
only  be  felt  in  case  that  animal  consciousness  suffices  for
the  perception  of  this  pleasure.  Every  disturbance,  how-
ever, is  immediately  felt  as  pain,  and  pain  always  procures
for  itself  the  degree  of  consciousness  that  is  necessary  for
its  perception.

There  is  one  source  of  error  which  may  lead  to  our
assuming  a  clearer  satisfaction  in  unconscious  sleep  than
can  in  fact  exist ;  this  is  the  comfortable  feeling  that
one  often  detects  on  falling  to  sleep  or  awaking,  i.e.,  in
passing  from  the  dormant  to  the  waking  state  and  con-
versely. But  here  the  cerebral  consciousness  is  still  actual,
and  that  satisfaction  manifestly  a  perception  of  the  cerebral
consciousness  ;  one  therefore  forgets  that  just  this  cerebral
perception  of  satisfaction  disappears  in  dreamless  sleep.
Of  the  satisfaction,  however,  which  my  lower  nerve-centres
feel  1  can  form  no  conception,  because  /  am  simply  and
only  my  brain-consciousness.  Yet,  notwithstanding,  un-
conscious sleep  is  the  relatively  happiest  condition,  because
it  is  the  only  painless  one  known  to  us  in  normal  life.

As  for  dreams,  all  the  troubles  of  the  waking  state  are
prolonged  into  the  dormant  condition,  but  not  the  one
thing  which  may  in  a  measure  reconcile  the  cultivated
with  life — the  pleasures  of  Science  and  Art.  Add  to  that
that  a  joy  cannot  well  be  otherwise  expressed  in  dreams
than  as  a  pleasant,  cheerful  mood,  e.g.,  the  feeling  of  being
disembodied,  of  floating,  flying,  and  the  like,  whilst  dis-
pleasure is  expressed  not  only  as  mental  mood,  but  also  in


68  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

all  sorts  of  definite  inconveniences,  vexation,  chagrin,  quar-
relling, and  conflict,  inability  to  accomplish  one's  desires,
or  other  cross  purposes  and  disappointments.  On  the
average,  therefore,  the  verdict  with  regard  to  the  worth  of
dreams  will  be  in  accordance  with  that  on  the  real  life,
but,  on  certain  sides,  will  be  far  more  unfavourable.

Palling  to  sleep  is,  if  one  can  fall  quickly  to  sleep,  a
pleasure,  but  yet  only  because  fatigue  had  made  waking  a
torment,  and  falling  to  sleep  frees  me  from  this  torment.
Awakening  is  also  said  by  many  people  to  be  pleasurable.
I  have,  however,  never  found  it  so,  and  fancy  that  this
assertion  rests  on  a  confusion  with  the  pleasure  which
consists  in  not  being  obliged  to  rise  when  actually  weary,
but  in  being  able  to  go  on  slumbering  with  semi-con-
sciousness. But  how  few  people  are  in  a  position  to  enjoy
this  pleasure  !  That  an  awakening  quickly  passing  into  a
state  of  complete  vigilance  should  be  a  pleasure  to  anybody
I  cannot  believe  ;  I  regard  it  rather  as  a  pain,  since  one  has
once  more  to  exchange  the  ease  of  rest  and  sleep  for  the
drudgery  of  the  clay.  That  on  being  wide-awake,  and
after  a  sufficient  period  of  sleep,  the  fatigue  of  the  past
evening  has  disappeared  and  the  status  quo  of  capacity  for
work  and  enjoyment  is  restored,  cannot  possibly  pass  for
positive  pleasure,  since  only  the  level  of  sensation  has
been  again  attained.  But  it  certainly  is  a  decided  pain
when  one  rises  fatigued,  not  having  had  one's  fill  of  sleep.
In  this  position,  inability  to  spare  sufficient  time  for  sleep
before  work,  we  find,  however,  a  large  part  of  the  poorer
classes  of  all  nations.  Even  of  Westphalian  peasants  I
have  heard  that  the  whole  family,  after  the  field-work  of
the  day,  is  compelled  to  spin  for  some  hours  into  the
night,  although  this  labour  is  worth  little  more  than  a
farthing  an  hour.

10.  The  Acquisitive  Instinct  and  Comfort. — Under  the
acquisitive  instinct  I  here  mean  especially  the  effort  to
possess  beyond  what  is  absolutely  necessary,  i.e.,  beyond


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  69

dwelling,  food,  and  clothing  for  self  and  family.  I  need
hardly  set  myself  to  prove  the  small  percentage  of  the
population,  even  in  civilised  communities,  for  whom  a
satisfaction  of  this  impulse  is  possible,  as  modern  statistics
speak  both  loudly  and  terribly.  If  we  ask,  however,  what
advantage  a  possession  beyond  the  necessary  can  afford,  it  is
especially  this,  that  as  a  capital  sum,  and  still  more  through
its  permanent  investment,  it  protects  from  distress  and  re-
moves the  fear  of  future  distress.  But  this  utility  is  no  posi-
tive one,  it  only  secures  from  future  and  wards  off  present
pain  (fear  and  anxiety).  In  the  second  place,  property
gives  the  power  of  attaining  positive  gratifications ;  it  be-
gets the  repute  of  possession;  it  confers  power  and  influence
over  those  who  expect  advantages  from  my  possessions  ;  it
purchases  the  pleasures  of  the  palate,  and  even  the  delights
of  love;  in  short,  property,  or  its  symbol,  money,  is  the
enchanter's  wand,  which  procures  access  to  all  the  enjoy-
ments of  life.  But  now  we  already  know  that  all  these
enjoyments  not  only  rest  on  illusions,  but  even  the  endea-
vour after  them  on  the  whole  always  brings  more  pain  than
pleasure ;  that  thus  all  endeavour  after  them  is  doubly
foolish.  The  pleasures  of  the  palate  and  the  enjoy-
ments of  science  and  art  are  the  only  exceptions.  The
former,  however,  have  again  the  disadvantage  that  their
privation,  when  they  are  withdrawn  by  change  of  circum-
stances, is  felt  far  more  painfully  than  their  possession
was  before  found  agreeable.  To  procure  the  gratifications
of  .science  and  art,  money  is  undoubtedly  convenient,  yet
one  cannot  say  that  much  is  required.  But  as  for  the
purchase  of  love,  one  should  remember  the  two  following
points:  first,  what  Goethe  says —

"  In  vain  thy  mistress'  heart  to  bend,
The  gold  into  her  hip  dost  throw  ;
Love  must  for  nought  her  raptures  lend,
If  thou  love's  joys  wilt  truly  know."

And  then,  what  holds  good  of  the  purchased  possession
of  women  far  more  than  of  spontaneous  surrender,  that


70  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

hereby,  and  in  its  consequences  for  her  whole  life,  the
woman  experiences  far  more  of  pain  than  the  purchasing
man  can  ever  obtain  of  pleasure.  So  far,  then,  as  riches
lead  to  the  desire  for  women,  and  increase  ambition  and
love  of  domination,  they  are  absolutely  detrimental  to
life-happiness.  Still  more  pernicious,  however,  does  the
acquisitive  instinct  become  if  it  forgets  that  property  is
only  an  intrinsically  worthless  means  to  further  ends,  and
regarding  it  as  end  in  itself,  turns  into  covetousness  and
avarice.  Then,  indeed,  just  as  ambition  and  love  them-
selves, it  rests  only  on  illusion,  and  becomes  through  the
insatiableness  of  the  instinct,  whose  thirst  is  extinguished
by  no  satisfaction,  whose  least  non-satisfaction,  however,
causes  pain,  a  true  torment.

If  nothing  could  be  added  to  the  foregoing,  the  real
importance  of  the  acquisitive  instinct  for  the  happiness  of
life  would  be  exhausted  with  protection  from  future  want
and  with  the  procuring  of  the  pleasures  of  science  and  art
together  with  the  gratifications  of  the  palate  ;  in  that  case
we  should  have  to  ascribe  to  this  impulse  rather  an
economic  value  as  an  instinct  careful  for  the  evolution  of
humanity,  than  of  direct  importance  for  the  welfare  of
those  concerned;  but  we  have  not  yet  mentioned  its  most
important  function  in  the  latter  respect,  to  wit,  the  making
life  comfortable.  The  keeping  of  servants,  equipages,  com-
fortable dwellings  in  town  and  country,  of  majordomos
and  stewards,  what  is  the  object  of  it  all  except  to  make
life  comfortable  ?  For  the  value  of  luxury  as  such  is
always  wholly  illusory.

But  is  comfort  a  positive  pleasure,  or  does  its  agreeable-
ness  not  rather  consist  in  the  removal  of  discomfort  and
reduction  of  the  same  to  the  threshold  of  sensation  ?
Active  motion,  exercise,  effort,  and  labour  are  disagree-
able ;  passive  motion  and  repose,  on  the  contrary,  are  com-
fortable ;  but  although  one  may  understand  how  effort
and  motion  may  produce  pain  by  means  of  the  invasion
of  bodily  health  caused  by  the  expenditure  of  force,  yet


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  71

it  is  absolutely  unintelligible  how  repose,  unchanged  per-
sistence, is  to  produce  a  positive  pleasure  ;  it  can  manifestly
only  represent  the  zero-point  of  sensation.

We  accordingly  come,  strange  to  say,  in  the  case  of  that
which  excites  the  greatest  envy,  wealth,  to  the  same  nega-
tive result  as  in  the  case  of  the  bare  prolongation  of  existence
wherewith  we  began.  This  is  certainly  significant  and
characteristic  for  the  worth  of  life.

It  is  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  acquisitive  impulse  can
always  only  be  means  to  further  ends,  and  its  value  must
be  measured  by  their  value  ;  but  that  in  no  case  can  it  lay
claim  to  intrinsic  worth,  and  that,  when  it  does  so,  it
immediately  falls  into  the  rank  of  illusory  impulses  that
produce  an  excess  of  pain.  Compare  on  this  Luke  xii.  15  :
"  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  covetousness :  for  a  man's  life
consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he
possesseth;"  and  Matt.  vi.  19-21  and  24-34.

11.  Envy,  Jealousy,  Chagrin,  Pain  and  Lamentation  for
the  Past,  Repentance,  Hatred,  Vindictiveness,  Anger,  Sensi-
tiveness, and  other  qualities  and  passions  of  which  common
sense  sees  that  they  bring  more  pain  than  pleasure  (comp.
vol.  ii.  pp.  36-37),  I  need  not  specifically  notice,  especially
as  there  is  reason  to  hope  that,  as  time  goes  on,  they  will  be
more  and  more  suppressed  by  the  reason.  In  estimating
the  present  state  of  the  world  they  still,  however,  weigh
heavily  in  the  balance.

12.  Hope.

"  And,  however  hard  the  burden,
That  he  faint  not  by  the  way,
Hope  with  dreams  of  bliss  enduring
Feeds  him  till  his  dying  day  !  "

However  ill  it  goes  with  man,  so  long  as  a  spark  of.
vital  force  glows  within  him,  lie  clings  to  hope  of  future
happiness.  Were  there  no  hope  in  the  world,  despair
would  be  the  order  of  the  day,  and  notwithstanding  the


72  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

instinct  of  self-preservation  and the  fear  of  death,  we
should  have  to  record  innumerable  suicides.

Thus  hope  is  the  necessary  auxiliary  instinct  of  the
self-preserving  impulse;  it  is  that  which  alone  renders
possible  for  us  poor  fools  the  love  of  life  in  defiance  of
our  understanding.

Hope  is  a  trait  of  character.  There  are  people  who  from
natural  disposition  always  see  the  future  black,  others  who
always  regard  it  of  rosy  hue  (Dyskoly  and  Eukoly).  Eukoly
springs  from  a  certain  elasticity  of  the  mind,  an  abundance
of  energy  and  vitality,  which  is  not  diminished  by  the  most
palpable  experiences,  and  after  the  heaviest  strokes  of  fate
raises  its  head  with  the  old  spirit.  No  quality  of  character
is  so  dependent  on  the  general  bodily  constitution  and
the  influences  of  the  blood-circulation  on  the  nerves  and
brain  as  this  tendency  to  look  hopefully  upon  the  future.
No  quality  of  character,  however,  is  so  important  in
respect  to  the  subjective  influence  of  thought  in  con-
sidering the  question  of  the  worth  or  worthlessness  of  life.
As  now  manifestly,  even  with  the  greatest  worthlessness  of
life,  hope  is  a  useful  instinct  (whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  if
life  really  possessed  a  value,  one  could  not  see  what  would
be  the  utility  of  a  gloomy  view  as  a  mental  charac-
teristic), we  must  be  extremely  on  our  guard  against  a
corruption  and  perversion  of  our  judgment  by  the  former
instinct.

Without  doubt  hope  is  a  very  real  pleasure.  But  what,
then,  does  one  hope  ?  Unquestionably  to  catch  and  re-
tain pleasure.  But  if  happiness  is  not  to  be  had,  because,
as  long  as  one  lives,  pain  always  preponderates  over  plea-
sure, it  follows  that  hope  is  a  contradiction  and  worthless  ;
that  it  is  indeed  the  illusion  icar  e^o^ijv;  that  its  function
is  just  to  dupe  us,  i.e.,  to  make  fools  of  us,  in  order  only  that
we  may  endure  to  perform  our  yet  uncomprehended  task.
But  he  who  has  once  acquired  the  conviction  that  hope
itself  is  as  worthless  and  illusory  as  its  object,  must  very
soon  find  his  instinct  of  hope  enfeebled  and  depressed  by


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  73

this  cognition  of  the  understanding  ;  the  only  thing  which
still  remains  possible  to  him  as  object  of  hope  is  not
the  greatest  possible  happiness,  but  the  least  possible
unhappiness.  This  was  already  seen  by  Aristotle  (Eth.
Nicom.,  vii.  12)  :  6  (ppovifios  to  akvirov  8ico/cei,  ou  to  y)Bv.
Therewith,  however,  all  ijositive  significance  is  stripped
from  hope.

But  even  he  who  never,  or  not  completely,  has  dis-
covered the  illusory  meaning  of  hope,  might  yet,  at  least
for  his  past  (for  instinct  only  misleads  him  as  regards  the
future),  be  compelled  to  allow  that  nine-tenths  of  all  hopes,
nay,  far  more,  are  frustrated,  and  that  in  most  cases  the
bitterness  of  disappointment  was  greater  than  the  sweet-
ness of  hope.  The  correctness  of  this  assertion  is  confirmed
by  the  rule  of  common  prudence  that  our  expectation
should  always  be  at  a  minimum,  as  only  in  that  case  are
we  able  fully  to  enjoy  what  good  there  is  in  things,  and
otherwise  the  immediate  enjoyment  of  the  present  time
might  be  impaired  by  the  deceived  expectation.  Conse-
quently for  the  instinct  of  hope  also  the  result  is  yielded
that  it  is  both  illusory,  and  within  the  sphere  of  its
special  illusions  rather  brings  more  pain  than  pleasure.

1 3.  Rcsumd  of  the  First  Stage  of  Illusion. — Suppose  it  lay
in  the  nature  of  the  will  to  produce,  as  it  were,  in  gross
an  equal  amount  of  pleasure  as  of  pain,  yet  the  net  result
of  pleasure  and  pain  would  in  general  be  modified  un-
favourably to  pleasure  by  the  following  five  factors  : — ■

(a.)  Xervous  fatigue  increases  the  repugnance  to  pain,
diminishes  the  effort  to  retain  pleasure;  thus  increases
the  pain  of  pain,  diminishes  the  pleasure  in  pleasure.

(A.)  The  pleasure  which  arises  through  the  cessation  or
remission  of  a  pain  cannot  by  a  long  way  balance  this
pain,  and  of  this  kind  is  the  largest  part  of  existing
pleasure.

(r:.)  Tain  thrusts  itself  on  consciousness,  which  must
feel  it ; not  so  pleasure,  which  must,  as  it  were,  be  dis-


74  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

covered  and  inferred  by  consciousness,  and  is  therefore
very  often  lost  to  consciousness  where  the  motive  for  its
discovery  is  wanting.

(d.)  Satisfaction  is  short  and  quickly  fades  ;  pain  en-
dures, so  far  as  it  is  not  limited  by  hope,  so  long  as
desire  exists  without  satisfaction  (and  when  does  not
such  exist  ?).

(c.)  Equal  quantities  of  pleasure  and  pain  united  in  a
consciousness  are  not  of  equal  value ;  they  do  not  com-
pensate one  another,  but  pain  remains  in  excess,  or  the
exclusion  of  every  sensation  is  preferred  to  the  question-
able union.

These  five  items  produce  by  their  co-operation  approxi-
mately the  same  result  as  if  pleasure,  as  Schopenhauer
deems,  were  something  negative,  unreal,  and  pain  the
alone  positive  and  real.

If  one  considers  the  several  phases  of  life,  the  various
desires,  impulses,  ambitions,  passions,  and  states  of  mind,
they  fall,  according  to  their  importance  as  conducive  to
real  happiness,  into  the  following  groups : —

(a.)  Such  as  bring  only  pain,  or  as  good  as  no  pleasure
at  all  (comp.  No.  1 1).

(b.)  Such  as  represent  only  the  zero-mark  of  sensa-
tion, or  the  level  of  life,  the  privation  of  certain  kinds  of
pain,  as  health,  youth,  liberty,  a  competence,  comfort,  and
in  largest  part  also  communion  with  one's  fellows,  or
sociality.

(c.)  Such  as  have  a  real  importance  only  as  means  to
ends  lying  beyond  them,  whose  value  therefore  can  only
be  measured  by  the  value  of  these  ends,  which,  however,
regarded  as  ends  in  themselves,  are  illusory,  e.g.,  striving
after  possessions,  power,  and  honour,  partly  also  sociality
and  friendship.

(d.)  Such  as  bring  indeed  a  certain  pleasure  to  the
actor,  but  to  him  or  the  sufferers  a  pain  far  outweighing
this  pleasure,  so  that  their  total  effect,  and  reciprocity
being  supposed,  also  the  effect  for  all  concerned  is  pain,


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  75

e.g.,  wrong-doing,  lust  of  power,  clioler,  hate  and  vindic-
tiveness  (even  so  far  as  they  keep  within  the  bounds  of
right),  sexual  seduction,  and  the  food-instinct  of  flesh-
eaters.

(e.)  Such  as,  on  the  average,  cause  those  experiencing
them  far  more  pain  than  pleasure,  e.g.,  hunger,  sexual
love,  love  of  children,  compassion,  vanity,  ambition,  lust
of  fame,  lust  of  power,  hope.

(/)  Such  as  rest  on  illusions,  which  must  be  seen
through  in  the  progress  of  mental  development,  where-
upon then  indeed  the  pain  arising  through  them  is  just  as
much  diminished  as  the  pleasure,  but  the  latter  far  more
speedily,  so  that  hardly  anything  remains  of  it,  e.g.,
love,  vanity,  ambition,  lust  of  fame,  religious  edification,
hope.

(g.)  Such  as  are  perceived  with  clear  consciousness  as
evils,  and  yet  are  voluntarily  undertaken  in  order  to  avoid
other  evils  that  are  regarded  as  still  greater  (no  matter
whether  they  are  so  or  not),  e.g.,  work  (instead  of  want
and  ennui),  marriage,  adopted  children,  and  also  the  sur-
rendering oneself  to  those  impulses,  of  which  one  has
perceived  that  they  bring  preponderating  pain,  the  sup-
pression of  which,  however,  is  regarded  as  still  more
tormenting.

(It.)  Such  as  bring  preponderating  pleasure,  although  a
pleasure  purchased  by  more  or  less  pain,  e.g.,  art  and
science,  which,  however,  fall  to  the  lot  of  relatively  few,
and  with  still  fewer  meet  with  a  genuine  love  for  and
capacity  of  enjoying  them;  which  few,  again,  are  just  those
individuals  who  feel  more  acutely  the  other  sorrows  and
pains  of  life.

In  all  this  one  should  bear  constantly  in  mind  the
assertion  of  Spinoza,  "that  we  neither  endeavour  after,  will,
yearn  fur,  nor  desire  any  tiling  because  we  hold,  it  to  be  good,
hut  rather  that  ive  hold  it  to  be  good  because  we  endeavour
after,  will,  yearn  for,  and  desire  it  "  (Eth.,  pt.  3,  prop.  9,
obs.),  and always and  everywhere apply this truth  as


76  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

corrective  to  one's  emotional  judgment  rebelling  against
the  results  of  rational  reflection.

If,  then,  we  put  together  the  general  and  special  con-
siderations, there  emerges  the  undoubted  result  that  at
present  pain  not  only  preponderates  in  the  world  in
general  to  a  high  degree,  but  also  in  each  single  individual,
even  him  who  is  placed  in  the  most  favourable  circum-
stances conceivable.  It  further  follows  that  the  less  sensi-
tive individuals,  and  those  endowed  with  a  more  obtuse
nervous  system,  are  better  off  than  the  more  sensitive
natures,  because  with  the  less  amount  of  the  perceived
pleasure  and  pain  the  difference  in  favour  of  pain  edso
becomes  less.  This  thoroughly  agrees  with  empirical  ob-
servation in  the  case  of  man,  and  has,  however,  universal
validity  on  account  of  its  deductive  character,  so  that  it
may  be  extended  also  to  animals  and  plants.

It  is  in  accordance  with  experience  that  the  individuals
of  the  lower  and  poorer  classes  and  of  ruder  nations  are
happier  than  those  of  the  elevated  and  wealthier  classes
and  of  civilised  nations,  not  indeed  because  they  are
poorer  and  have  to  endure  more  want  and  privations,  but
because  they  are  coarser  and  duller.  One  need  only
remember  "  the  shirt  of  the  happy  man,"  in  which  story
there  lies  a  deep  truth.  And  accordingly  I  also  maintain
that  the  brutes  are  happier  {i.e.,  less  miserable)  than
man,  because  the  excess  of  pain  which  an  animal  has  to
bear  is  less  than  that  which  a  man  has  to  bear.  Only
think  how  comfortably  an  ox  or  a  pig  lives,  almost
as  if  it  had  learned  from  Aristotle  to  seek  freedom
from  care  and  sorrow,  instead  (like  man)  of  hunting
after  happiness.  How  much  more  painful  is  the  life  of
the  more  finely-feeling  horse  compared  with  that  of  the
obtuse  pig,  or  with  that  of  the  proverbially  happy  fish  in
the  water,  its  nervous  system  being  of  a  grade  so  far
inferior !  As  the  life  of  a  fish  is  more  enviable  than
that  of  a  horse,  so  is  the  life  of  an  oyster  than  that  of  a
fish,  and  the  life  of  a  plant  than  that  of  an  oyster,  until


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  77

finally,  on  descending  beneath  the  threshold  of  conscious-
ness, we  see  individual  pain  entirely  disappear.

On  the  other  hand,  the  higher  sensibility  sufficiently
explains  why  men  of  genius  are  so  much  more  unhappy
in  their  lives  than  ordinary  men,  to  which  must  be
added  (at  least  among  reflective  geniuses)  the  penetra-
tion of  most  illusions.  This  is  in  accordance  with  the
result  of  the  foregoing  examination,  which  taught  us  that
the  individual  is  so  much  the  better  off  the  more  he  is
entangled  in  the  illusion  created  by  the  instinctive  impulse
("  He  that  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow." —
Ecclesiastes) ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  it  has  corrupted  his
judgment  on  the  true  proportion  of  past  pleasure  and  pain,
and  in  consequence  he  feels  his  misery  less,  and  is  not  so
oppressed  by  this  feeling  of  misery ;  and,  secondly,  there
remains  to  him  in  every  direction  the  happiness  of  hope,
whose  partial  frustration  is  quickly  followed  by  new  hopes,
whether  in  the  same  or  in  another  direction.  He  lives,
therefore,  always  in  dreamland,  and  in  all  present  misery
consoles  himself  with  the  illusion  which  promises  him  a
golden  future.  (Kiithchen  von  Heilbronn  or  Mr.  Micawber
in  "  David  Copperfield  "  will  readily  occur  to  the  reader.)

This  felicity  of  the  illusive  reverie  is  especially  cha-
racteristic of  youth.  Every  youth,  every  girl,  regards  him
or  her  self  more  or  less  as  the  hero  or  the  heroine  of  a
romance,  and  they  console  themselves  for  their  present
misfortunes  or  reverses,  as  in  their  novel-reading,  with  the
prospect  of  the  radiant  conclusion;  only  with  the  differ-
ence that  it  never  comes,  and  that  they  forget  that  behind
the  seemingly  brilliant  conclusion  of  the  story  lurks  the
common  drudgery  of  life.

Of  the  rich  assortment  of  youthful  hopes,  however,  with
advancing  age  and  experience  one  after  the  other  is  seen
to  be  illusory,  and  the  man  is  relatively  far  poorer  in  illu-
sions than  the  youth,  ambition  and  the  desire  of  property
usually  alone  remaining.

These,  too,  also  are  perceived  to  be  illusory  by  the  old


78  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

man,  unless  ambition  ossifies  into  childish  vanity,  the
acquisitive  instinct  into  avarice  ;  and  among  sensible  old
men  one  finds,  in  fact,  no  more  illusions  having  reference
to  the  life  of  the  individual,  save,  of  course,  the  instinctive
love  of  children  and  grandchildren.

The  result  of  individual  life  is,  then,  that  all  is  surren-
dered ;  that,  as  the  Preacher  sees,  "All  is  vanity,"  i.e.,  illu-
sory, worthless.

In  the  life  of  humanity  this  first  stage  of  the  illusion  and
its  abandonment  is  represented  by  the  ancient  (Jewish-
Greek-Roman)  world.  In  the  earlier  Asiatic  empires  the
tendencies  of  life  and  thought  afterwards  distinguished  are
all  too  intermingled.  Mosaism  most  openly  declares  the
faith  in  the  attainability  of  individual  terrestrial  felicity,
both  in  its  promises  and  also  in  its  general  optimistic
world-view  without  a  transcendent  background.  In  Greece
the  same  tendency  is  exhibited  in  a  nobler  fashion  in  the
enjoyment  of  art  and  science,  and  in  a  certain  aesthetic
conception  of  life.  Hellenism  also  rejoices  in  an  endea-
vour after  a  refined  individual  earthly  happiness,  since  the
TTokiTela  is  merely  to  afford  maintenance  and  protection.
Think  of  the  utterance  of  the  dead  Achilles  in  the  "  Odys-
sey" (xi.  488-491) —

"  Speak  not  lightly  to  me  of  death,  0  famous  Odysseus  ;
Rather  would  I  as  a  serf  act  as  the  serf  of  another,
A  man  of  little  possessions,  with  scanty  means  of  subsistence,
Than  rule  as  a  ghostly  monarch  the  ghosts  of  all  the  departed."

The  well-known  pessimistic  chorus  in  the  masterpiece
of  the  aged  Sophocles  must  not  be  taken  as  an  expression
of  Hellenic  feeling ;  it  and  other  similar  passages,  as  well
as  the  significant  melancholy  found  in  masterpieces  of
Hellenic  art  in  the  midst  of  all  the  seeming  satisfaction,
prove  that  even  at  that  time  gifted  individuals  were  able
to  peer  through  the  illusions  of  life,  to  which  the  spirit  of
their  own  age  surrendered  itself  without  the  faintest  cri-
tical reflection.

The  Eoman  republic  certainly  adds  a  new  element :


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  79

the  endeavour  after  happiness  in  and  through  the  en-
hancement of  the  splendour  and  power  of  the  strict
Fatherland.  After  this  effort  at  the  attainment  of  univer-
sal empire  proves  illusory  in  respect  of  felicity,  a  degraded
form  of  Greek  speculation  is  adopted  by  Rome  in  the  shape
of  the  shallowest  Epicureanism,  and  the  ancient  world
lingers  out  its  day  in  the  utmost  disgust  of  life.

Second  Stage  of  the  Illusion.

Happiness  is  conceived  attainable  by  the  individual  in
a  transcendent  life  after  death.

On  this  extreme  weariness  of  life  of  the  ancient  world
falls  the  kindling  ray  of  the  Christian  Idea.  The  founder
of  Christianity  completely  adopts  the  contempt  and  weari-
ness of  earthly  life,  and  draws  from  them  their  last  and
most  repulsive  consequences  (comp.  F.  A.  Muller,  "  Briefe
iiber  die  Christliche  Eeligion,"  Stuttgart,  Kotzle,  1870).

Only  to  those  who  feel  the  misery  of  existence,  sinners,
outcasts  (Samaritans  and  publicans),  oppressed  (slaves
and  women),  poor,  sick,  and  suffering,  but  not  to  those
who  feel  themselves  well  off  and  comfortable  in  the
earthly  life,  does  he  bring  his  gospel  (Matt.  xi.  5  ;  Luke
vi.  20-23;  Matt.  xix.  23-24;  Matt.  xi.  28).  He  rejects
everything  natural,  not  even  laws  of  nature  does  he
acknowledge  (Matt.  xvii.  20) ;  he  speaks  slightingly  of  the
ties  of  family  (Matt.  x.  35-37;  Matt.  xix.  29;  Matt,  xi.
47-50) ;  lie  requires  sexual  continence  (Matt.  xix.  1 1-12) ;
lie  condemns  the  world  and  its  goods  (Luke  xii.  15;
Matt,  vi.  25-34;  I  John  *•  15-16  ;  Luke  xvi.  15) ;  declares
it  to  be  impossible  simultaneously  to  attain  earthly  and
heavenly  bliss  (Matt.  vi.  19-21,  and  24;  John  xii.  25;
Matt.  xix.  23-24),  and  demands,  therefore,  voluntary
poverty  (Matt.  xix.  21-22;  Luke  xii.  ^^;  Matt.  vi.  25,
and  31-34).  Nowhere  and  in  no  respect  does  Christ
prescribe  asceticism,  although  voluntary  restraint  and
the  fewest  possible  wants,  whence  it  is  clear  that  he


So  -  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

assumes  pain  to  increase  with  the  number  of  wants  and
desires.  He  regards  his  age  as  so  corrupt  (Matt,  xxiii.
27;  Matt,  xvi.  2-3)  that  the  day  of  judgment  must  be
near  at  hand  (Matt.  xxiv.  33-34),  and  the  quintessence
of  his  teaching  is,  patiently  to  bear  this  life  of  affliction
in  the  terrestrial  vale  of  tears  as  one's  cross  (Matt.  x.
38),  and  to  follow  him  in  worthy  preparation  and
cheerful  hope  of  the  blessedness  of  a  future  eternal  life
(Matt.  x.  38-39).  "  These  things  I  have  spoken  unto
you,  that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace.  In  the  ivorld  ye
shall  have  tribulation :  but  be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  over-
come the  world"  (John  xvi.  33).

This  is  the  fundamental  difference  between  the  older
Judaism  and  Christianity;  the  promises  of  the  former
have  reference  to  the  life  here  ( "  that  it  may  be  well
with  thee,  and  thou  mayest  live  long  on  the  earth " ),
those  of  the  latter  to  the  life  beyond;  and  this  earthly
vale  of  tears  has  only  a  meaning  as  preparation  and  trial
for  the  life  hereafter  (1  Peter  i.  5-7);  in  itself ,  however,
of  no  value  whatever ;  on  the  contrary,  the  earthly  life
is  composed  of  tribulation  (John  xvi.  33)  and  daily  tor-
ment and  evil  (Matt.  vi.  34 :  "  Sufficient  unto  the  day
is  the  evil  thereof "  ).  Love  makes  this  limbo  more  bear-
able, and  is  also  the  test  of  worthiness  (Eom.  xiii.  8-10 ;
Matt.  xxii.  37-39) ;  faith  and  hope  of  the  hereafter  enable
us  to  "overcome  the  world"  or  "to  be  delivered  from  the
world,"  i.e.,  from  evil  and  sin.

The  redemption  of  the  world  through  Christ  comes  to
pass,  therefore,  through  this,  that  all  men  follow  him  in
despising  the  world,  and  in  living  in  faith  and  hope  of
a  hereafter ;  but  not  through  his  death  with  the  subse-
quent Judaical  conception  of  the  same  as  a  purifying  sin-
offering,  of  which  Christ  himself  assuredly  would  not  have
heard  for  a  moment.

This  is  the  historical  and  only  important  content  of
the  doctrine  preached  by  Jesus,  to  which,  at  the  most,
the  rejection  of  an  outward  ritual  and  all  priestly  media-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  81

tion  in  worship  is  to  be  added.  Christian  virtue  also
follows  on  its  negative  side  from  contempt  of  the  flesh,
whence  all  sin  arises,  on  its  positive  side  from  the
supreme  commandment  of  love.

All  that  relates  to  earthly  relations  themselves  is  so
unimportant  and  indifferent  to  him,  that  he  either  fits
himself  to  the  existing  order  with  smiling  contempt
(Matt.  xxii.  21 ;  Matt.  xvii.  24-27),  or  only  gently  hints
at  what  is  desirable,  e.g.,  self-government  and  indepen-
dent jurisdiction  (Matt,  xviii.  15-17)  of  the  communistic
society.  All  other  ideas,  which  we  are  accustomed  to
regard  as  Christian,  were  already  current  in  the  ancient
world,  but  outside  India  the  combination  of  contempt
of  the  world  and  intense  belief  in  an  eternal  transcendent
blessedness  was  new.  It  was  the  peculiar  world-redeem-
ing Idea  which  saved  the  dying  antiquity  from  its
despair  and  world-weariness,  in  that  it  condemned  the
flesh  and  enthroned  the  spirit,  conceived  the  natural
world  as  the  kingdom  of  the  devil  (John  xiv.  30,  and  xvii.
9),  and  only  this  transcendent  world  of  the  spirit  as  the
kingdom  of  God  (1  John  iv.  4,  and  v.  19),  which  latter
certainly,  according  to  Christ  himself,  could  even  here  have
its  commencement  in  the  hearts  of  believers ;  as  Paul
(Rom.  viii.  24)  very  truly  says,  "For  we  are  saved  by  hope."

Contempt  for  the  world  combined  with  a  transcendent
life  of  the  spirit  had,  indeed,  in  India  already  found  a
place  in  the  esoteric  doctrine  of  Buddhism ;  had,  however,
in  the  first  place,  not  become  known  to  the  Western
mind  ;  in  the  second  place,  in  India  itself  was  only  within
the  reach  of  a  narrow  circle  of  celibate  adepts ;  and,
thirdly,  had  soon  been  submerged  in  exoteric  frenzy,  so
that  the  thought  only  attained  realisation  in  the  eccentric
phenomena  of  hermits  and  penitents;  fourthly,  it  did  not
originally  spring  up  in  a  soil  so  fertile  by  reason  of
previous  corruption;  fifthly,  it  did  not  possess  in  the
same  degree  the  cosmopolitan  side,  the  idea  of  the
universal  human  brotherhood  and  the  divine  fatherhood

VOL.  III.  F


S2  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

(Matt,  xxiii.  8-9)  ;  sixthly  and  lastly,  what  is  most  im-
portant, it  knows  indeed  an  eternal  transcendent  blessed-
ness for  those  finally  released  from  terrestrial  existence,
but  no  individual  immortality.  Christianity,  however,
which  promises  a  resurrection  (of  the  flesh),  and,  accord-
ingly, an  individual  everlasting  life  in  the  transcendent
kingdom  of  God,  thereby  appeals  more  directly  to  human
egoism,  and  consequently  inspires  the  believer  with  a  far
more  felicific  hope.  In  this  satisfying  hope  the  Christian
world  has  hitherto  lived,  and  still  for  the  most  part  con-
tinues to  live.

We  have  already  seen  above,  under  the  head  of  Eeligious
Edification,  that  the  pleasure  arising  from  religious  hope
and  devotion  is  also  not  without  pain,  partly  resulting
from  the  rebellion  of  the  instinctive  impulses  against  their
unnatural  suppression,  partly  consisting  in  the  doubts
concerning  one's  own  worthiness  and  the  procuring  of  the
divine  favour,  and  in  the  fear  of  the  last  judgment.  Add
to  that  the  required  repentanee  and  contrition  for  one's
own  sins  and  sinfulness,  even  when  one  is,  properly
speaking,  not  conscious  of  wrong-doing.  Whether  the
religious  pain  or  pleasure  predominates  will  essentially
depend  on  the  character;  frequently,  however,  with  the
genuine  believer  hope  will  predominate.  Pity  only  that
this  hope,  too,  like  all  others,  rests  on  an  illusion.  I
abstain  here  from  a  searching  examination  of  the  doctrine
of  the  individual  perpetual  existence  of  the  soul,  and
simply  refer  to  Chaps,  ii.  and  vii.,  Sect.  C,  according  to
which  the  individuality  both  of  the  organised  body  and
of  consciousness  is  only  a  phenomenon,  that  disappears
with  death,  and  only  the  substance,  the  One  Unconscious,
remains,  which  evoked  this  phenomenon  partly  by  its
own  individuation  as  atoms,  partly  by  its  direct  action  on
the  atomic  groups  combined  to  form  a  body.

I  may  remark  that  the  cosmic  theory  of  Jesus  was  far  too
naive  and  childish  to  consider  possible  the  separation  of
body  and  soul,  and  the  isolated  continuance  of  the  latter.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  83

Hence  also  the  adoption  of  "  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh  "
into  the  third  article  of  the  Confession  of  Faith  is  quite
in  the  sense  of  Christ.  Passages  certainly  are  to  be
found  in  John  and  Paul  which  throw  light  on  the
nature  of  the  eternal  life  little  in  harmony  with  the  pro-
mises of  Christ,  but  their  consequences  were  never  drawn.
Pev.  x.  5,6:''  And  the  angel  .  .  .  sware  by  him  that
liveth  for  ever  and  ever  .  .  .  that  there  should  he  time  no
lunger."  I  Cor.  xiii.  8 :  "  Charity  never  faileth ;  but
whether  there  be  prophecies,  they  shall  fail ;  whether
there  be  tongues,  they  shall  cease ;  ivhether  there  he  knoio-
ledge,  it  shall  vanish  away."

The  latter  passage  announces  the  cessation  of  all  con-
sciousness, the  former  the  ceasing  of  all  change  in  that
condition ;  both  abolish  individuality,  or  at  least  its
significance.  That  in  all  the  important  systems  of  mo-
dern philosophy  (apart  from  Kant's  inconsequence  and
Schelling's  later  declension)  there  is  no  room  for  an  indi-
vidual immortality  no  one  save  the  self-deluded  can  for  a
moment  doubt.  I  shall,  however,  although  very  rapidly,
summarise  the  opinions  of  certain  ancient  and  modern
thinkers.

In  Plato's  "Timseus"  (ed.  Steph.,  iii.  p.  69)  wTe  read:
"  And  of  the  divine  (existences)  he  himself  becomes  the
fashioner.  The  generation  of  mortals,  however,  he  in-
trusted to  his  own  children ;  and  they  imitating,  having
received  the  immortal  foundation  of  the  soul,  surrounded
it  with  a  mortal  body,  and  gave  it  as  vehicle  the  whole
body,  and  built  in  it  another  kind  of  soul — the  mortal,
receptive  of  fearful  and  inevitable  feelings,  first  pleasure,
the  greatest  bait  of  evil ;  then  pains,  warding  off  the  good,
and  again  boldness  and  fear,  senseless  counsellors ;  then
anger,  slow  to  cease,  and  seductive  hope  ;  and  having
mingled  these  with  irrational  perception  and  love  ready
to  attempt  all  things,  compounded  by  necessity  the  race
of  mortals."

Prom  this,  together  with  Plato's  theory  of  Knowledge,


84  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

it  follows  that  he  placed  the  immortal  soul  exclusively  in
truthful  cognition,  i.e.,  the  vision  of  the  Platonic  Ideas,
which  in  its  very  nature  admits  no  individual  distinctions,
although  this  consequence  may  never  have  been  clear  to
Plato  himself.

Aristotle  occupies  the  same  point  of  view.  De  An.,  i.  4,
408,  a,  24  ff.,  he  denies  to  the  vov>;  ttoititikos,  as  he  calls
the  immortal  part  of  the  soul,  not  only  love  and  hate,  but
also  memory  and  discursive  thinking  (SiavoetaOat) ;  from
other  passages  we  gather  that  the  vovs  iroLTjriKo^  (or  active
understanding)  is  the  eternal,  universal,  unchangeable,
and  inaccessible  to  all  external  impressions  in  man ;  it  is
accordingly  altogether  incomprehensible  how  it  could  be
individual.

Spinoza,  who  certainly  proceeds  from  other  presupposi-
tions, comes  to  the  same  result.  "  The  human  mind  can-
not be  absolutely  annihilated  with  the  body,  but  there
remains  something  of  it  which  is  eternal "  (Eth.,  part  v.
prop.  23).  As  is  clear  from  the  proof  of  this  proposition,
by  "  eternal "  the  "  enduring  "  is  by  no  means  to  be  under-
stood, but  only  the  being  logically  contained  in  the  Idea
of  the  Absolute  Substance  (part  v.  prop.  22).  "  Our  mind
can  only  be  called  enduring  and  its  existence  be  denned
by  a  certain  time,  so  far  as  it  includes  the  actual  existence
of  the  body"  (ibid.)  If  we  now  ask  which  part  of  the
mind  is  to  be  affirmed  eternal,  i.e.,  contained  as  necessary
moment  in  the  eternal  Idea  of  God,  we  are  able  so  far  to
determine  it  that  it  can  only  be  the  purely  active,  not  the
passive  mind  affected  by  the  body.  To  the  latter  part
belong,  however,  all  the  passions  and  emotions,  sense-
perception,  ideation,  and  memory ;  they  are  all  accord-
ingly dependent  on  the  existence  of  the  body,  and  cannot
endure  after  its  death  (part  v.  prop.  34,  21).  Even  love
belongs  to  the  transitory  perturbations  of  the  soul,  and
must  perish  with  the  body ;  only  the  intellectual  love
springing  from  intellectual  intuition  (part  v.  prop.  33)
with  which God  loves himself calmly  and  dispassion-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  85

ately  (prop.  17,  corollary),  only  this  purely  contemplative
absorption  in  the  logical  necessity  of  the  Absolute  is
eternal  (prop.  34,  corollary).  Strictly  speaking,  then,  there
is  nothing  eternal  in  mind  but  the  third  species  of  intel-
lectual perception  (prop.  33,  proof;  comp.  above,  vol.  i.  p.
22,  obs.)  This,  however,  and  the  consciousness  of  him-
self, of  God,  and  of  the  eternal  necessity  of  things  spring-
ing from  it  along  Math  the  sequent  mental  repose,  only
the  wise  man  will  really  possess,  whilst  the  mind  of  the
uncultivated  is  absorbed  in  passive  sensation.  As  soon,
therefore,  as  "  the  uncultivated  ceases  to  feel,  he  also
ceases  to  be  "  (prop.  42,  obs.) ;  so  that,  properly  speaking,
we  can  only  speak  of  an  eternal  part  of  the  mind  in  the
cultured  and  wise.1  If  we  ask,  finally,  how  we  are  to  con-
ceive the  eternal  being  of  the  active  part  of  the  spirit,  the
required  answer  is  given  in  part  ii.  prop.  8,  to  wit,  since
the  mind  is  the  idea  of  the  body,  the  mind,  before  and
after  the  actual  existence  of  the  body,  is  the  idea  of  a  non-
existent thing.  Of  such  ideas,  however,  the  proposition
mentioned  affirms  that  they  must  be  contained  in  the
infinite  idea  of  God,  as  the  formal  essences  of  individual
things  or  modes  in  God's  attributes,  which  is  elucidated
in  the  observation  by  the  manner  in  which  the  infinitely
numerous  ideas  of  describable  rectangles  are  contained
iu  the  idea  of  a  given  circle,  although  they  are  not  actually
drawn  therein.  We  should,  however,  say  that  only  the
formal  possibility  of  these  rectangles  is  given,  and
accordingly  that  in  the  eternal  absolute  idea  the  idea  of
a  particular  individual  mind  is  only  potentially  con-
tained, which  implicit  potentiality,  however,  is  only  ex-
plicated realiter  at  the  moment  when  the  individual  mind

1  As  is  well  known,  (Joethe  like-  fecundated  human  ovum,  there  al-
wise  inclined  to  this  view  of  a  re-  ways  lies  more  sense  in  drawing  the
servation  of  immortality  for  the  line  for  the  immortals  at  the  111-
aristocracy  of  mind  ;  and,  in  fact,  tcllectual  aristocracy  of  humanity
if  one  insists  on  maintaining  the  than  in  arbitrarily  placing  it  between
immortality  of  the  intellectually  Bushman  and  orang-outang,  or  he-
eminent,  and  at  the  same  time  does  tween  the  seventh  and  ninth  month
notadmit  the  immortality  of  the  souls  of  the  embryonic  life,
of infusoria  or  the  soul of  the  first


86  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

attains  to  actual  existence  in  an  organism.  With  this
interpretation  there  is  just  as  little  to  be  said  against
Spinoza's  eternity  of  individual  minds  as  (say)  against
the  eternity  of  any  particular  mathematical  truth.

In  Leibniz  this  at  least  is  deserving  of  notice,  that  he  is
unable  to  assign  as  the  individual  limitation  of  the  monads
anything  but  the  body,  and  therefore  ventures  to  assert
the  immortality  of  the  soul  only  with  a  simultaneous  im-
mortality of  a  body  peculiar  to  it  and  inalienable.  At  the
present  stage  of  physical  science  the  statement  of  the
latter  hypothesis  is  its  own  criticism.

Schelling  expresses  himself  in  like  manner  as  Spinoza
(i.  6,  60-61):  "The  eternal  element  of  the  soul  is  not
eternal  on  account  of  the  absence  of  a  beginning  or  end  to
its  duration,  but  it  has  altogether  no  relation  to  time.  It
can  therefore  also  not  be  called  immortal  in  the  sense  in
which  this  concept  includes  that  of  an  individual  per-
petuity. ...  It  is  therefore  a  mistaking  of  the  genuine
spirit  of  philosophy,  to  place  the  immortality  above  the
eternity  of  the  soul  and  its  being  in  the  Idea,  and,  as
appears  to  us,  a  distinct  misunderstanding  to  conceive  the
soul  at  death  denuded  of  sensibility,  and  yet  to  possess  an
endless  individual  existence." — Fichte  and  Hegel  entirely
adopt  this  view,  and  Schopenhauer  goes  still  farther,  in
that  with  him  only  the  will,  never  knowledge,  is  eternal.

In  the  monistic  systems,  be  they  Naturalism,  Pantheism,
or  Personal  Pantheism,  there  can  be  no  talk  of  indi-
vidual immortality  without  the  grossest  inconsistency,
and  just  as  little  in  the  pluralistic  Materialism ;  it  remains
a  matter  of  discussion,  therefore,  only  in  the  system  of  a
psychical  Individualism  or  in  Theism  proper.  As  for  the
former,  I  know  of  no  elaborated  system  of  psychical
Individualism  that  does  not  lead  to  the  more  or  less
open  confession  of  impotency  to  stand  by  Pluralism
as  a  metaphysical  ultimate.  Leibniz  concludes  with
the  all-comprehending  central  monad,  which,  in  truth,
absorbs  the  whole  Monadology ;  Herbart  with  the  double


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  87

entry  of  the  God-Creator  of  faith  by  the  side  of  the
known  absolute  positions  of  the  many  simple  Reals.  We
have,  then,  strictly  only  to  do  with  Theism,  if  also  with  a
shame-faced  Theism.  Even  in  Theism,  however,  as  we
saw  before  (vol.  ii.  pp.  266-269),  the  individual  is  guaran-
teed continued  existence  only  as  long  (we  will  not  say)  as
God  does  not  issue  his  annihilating  hat,  but  God  as  con-
stantly renews  his  conserving  action.  Now  one  might  allege
the  abstract  possibility  that  God  should  let  the  individual
endure  to  the  world's  end,  and  even  appeal  to  the  analogy
of  the  atoms,  which,  although  also  mere  manifestations  of
divine  will,  doubtless  severally  possess  an  unbroken  ex-
istence from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  world.  In
opposition  to  this,  however,  we  may  refer  to  Chaps,  vi.  and
xi.  C,  in  which  the  concept  of  individuality  is  analysed,
and  the  great  difference  between  the  simple  will-act  in  the
atom  and  the  very  compound  individual  we  call  man  is
pointed  out.  The  atomic  will  can  be  constant  because  it  is
simple  ;  the  stream  of  will-acts  of  the  Unconscious,  which
is  directed  upon  a  particular  individual  organism,  cannot
possibly  have  a  longer  duration  than  the  object  on  which  it
is  directed.  If  the  organism  has  entered  into  dissolution
and  the  organic  individual  has  lost  its  existence;  if,  in  con-
sequence, the  consciousness  has  ceased  that  was  bound  to
this  organism  and  had  stored  up  its  ideal  treasures,  and  pos-
sessed the  determining  ground  of  its  individual  character,
in  the  molecular  arrangement  of  the  cerebral  molecules  of
the  same,  then  is  the  fasciculus  of  actions  of  the  Uncon-
scious, which  afforded  this  individual  mind  its  metaphysical
foundation,  without  an  object,  and  thereby  becomes  im-
possible as  continued  action.  The  'power  to  will  is  not
thereby  altered,  but  this  is  no  longer  individual,  but  resides
in  the  universal  and  unique  unconscious  essence.  Were
there  even  a  similar  organism  created  on  which  the  Un-
conscious should  direct  similar  actions,  it  would  still  be
another  individual,  not  the  same  as  the  deceased,  since
continuity  of  existence  would  be  wanting. Unwarranted


88  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

as  would  be  the  assertion  that  before  the  organic  develop-
ment of  the  ovum  and  the  spermatozoon,  whence  a  future
man  arises,  the  same  man  possessed  an  individual  psy-
chical antenatal  life,  no  less  unjustified  would  be  the
assumption  that  after  the  destruction  of  the  organism  the
man  might  possess  an  individual  psychical  after-life.
What  is  enduring  is  the  substance  that  is  manifested  in
this  particular  man,  but  this  substance  is  not  individual.

Thus,  then,  also,  the  hope  of  an  individual  duration  of
the  soul  turns  out  to  be  an  illusion,  and  therewith  the
main  nerve  of  the  Christian  promises  is  cut,  the  Christian
Idea  outgrown.  The  draft  on  the  life  hereafter,  which  is
to  compensate  for  the  miseries  of  the  life  here,  has  only
one  fault :  place  and  date  of  discharge  are  forged.  Egoism
finds  this  result  cheerless  ;  to  it  indeed  immortality  was  a
postulate  of  the  heart;  and  with  the  observation  that
postulates  of  the  heart  can  establish  no  metaphysical
verities  (as  Jacobi  and  Schleiermacher  fancy),  its  comfort-
able condition  ceases.  But  the  sterling  soul  that  puts  its
trust  in  self-renunciation  and  love  does  not  find  this  result
cheerless.  To  the  unselfish  the  guarantee  of  an  endless
self-affirmation  appears  not  merely  worthless,  but  dis-
quieting and  abhorrent,  and  all  the  attempts  to  demon-
strate immortality  as  an  emotional  postulate  on  any  other
basis  than  that  of  the  grossest  self-love  utterly  fail  (comp.
my  essay,  "  1st  der  pessimistische  Monismus  trostlos  ? "  in
the  "  Ges.  philosoph.  Abhandlungen,"  No.  iv.)  Even  the
humblest  form  of  the  desire  for  immortality,  the  wish
to  live  on  in  one's  works,  deeds,  and  achievements,  is
egoistic ;  for  one  may  indeed  rightly  desire  the  continued
production  of  good  deeds  and  the  continued  influence  of
useful  and  admirable  works,  but  the  insertion  of  the  dear
self  into  this  wish,  the  demand  that  it  shall  be  just  my
deeds  and  works  that  shall  bear  fruit  for  the  future  of
the  world,  is,  if,  humanly  speaking,  excusable,  yet  always
an  ethically  unjustified  selfishness,  which  becomes  even
vanity  when  it  requires  the  grateful  preservation  of  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  Sg

name  and  its  memory  among  the  men  who  derive  a  benefit
from  the  deeds  and  works.

Since  all  longing  for  immortality  is  egoism,  it  would
seem  to  be  of  small  importance  to  all  who  have  been
"  saved  by  hope  "  in  the  immortality  dogma  whether,  after
the  destruction  of  the  hope  in  individual  immortality,
Christianity,  with  its  transcendent  optimism  as  regards
the  truth  of  an  eternal  blessedness  in  general,  in  contrast
to  the  originally  purely  negative  Buddhism,  is  right  or
wrong;  for  he  to  whom  immortality  is  a  postulate  of  the
heart  is  also  always  so  far  egoist  as  to  say,  "  What  is  the
greatest  future  blessedness  to  me,  if  /  do  not  feel  and
enjoy  it  ? "

But  how  stands  it  in  general  with  that  everlasting
blessedness  according  to  our  premisses  ?  The  only  Un-
conscious is  all-knowing  and  all-wise,  cannot  therefore
become  wiser ;  it  has,  as  Aristotle  says,  no  memory,
therefore  can  learn  nothing  from  the  experience  which  it
gets  (suppose)  in  the  world.  Consequently,  when  the  world
has  once  ceased  to  be,  and  the  fleeting  moment  of  contrast
between  the  torment  of  willing  and  the  peace  of  non-
willing  is  past,  it  is  precisely  in  the  same  condition  as  it
was  before  the  creation  of  the  world ;  as  blessed  as  it
formerly  was  is  it  now  again,  neither  more  nor  less:  the
world-process  can  never  help  it  to  a  greater  bliss  than  it
possessed  before,  unless  it  should  find  it  in  the  process
itself.  (This  latter  case  we  do  not,  however,  consider
here,  for  it  would  be  only  the  secular  life  itself,  whereas
we  are  inquiring  concerning  the  bliss  of  the  ultra-mundane
condition.)  If,  then,  through  terrestrial  life  we  can  make
no  addition  to  the  felicity  of  that  ante-mundane  state,
but  after  the  close  of  the  world-process  merely  relapse  into
that  former  condition,  the  question  arises  of  what  nature  it
was.  it  is  clear  that  if  there  had  been  willing,  there  would
also  have  been  act,  therefore  process,  and  the  Unconscious
would  not  have  been  acosmic;  the  acosmic  state  could  only
be  that  of  non-willing. But  now  we  have  seen  (Chap.  i.  C.)


90  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

that  until  the  world  existed  thought  could  only  be  urged
by  volition  from  non-existence  into  existence ;  for  in
itself  thought  had  no  impulse  and  no  motive  to  emerge
from  non-being  into  being,  therefore  before  the  occurrence
of  volition  there  was  also  no  actual  thinking;  conse-
quently, before  the  origin  of  the  world  neither  willing
nor  thinking,  i.e.,  nothing  actual  at  all,  nothing  but  the
quiescent,  inactive,  self-enclosed  essence  without  existence.
As  long  as  volition  lasts,  so  long  will  the  process  and  its
phenomenon  in  consciousness,  the  cosmos,  last ;  if,  then,
one  day  the  world  shall  be  no  more,  there  will  be  no
willing,  consequently  also  no  thinking  more  (since  the
unconscious  thinking  always  only  becomes  so  far  actual
as  the  interest  of  the  will  requires  it),  i.e.,  it  will  again,  in
the  same  sense  of  the  term  as  above,  be  nothing.  This  is
also  the  state  alluded  to  in  the  words  of  the  Apostles,
that  there  shall  be  no  more  time  nor  knowledge.  As
long,  then,  as  the  world  exists  is  there  cosmic  process,  and
as  much  happiness  or  unhappiness  as  this  includes ;  be-
fore the  genesis  and  after  the  cessation  of  the  world  and
the  world-process  is — actually — Xothing.

Where  now  is  the  promised  bliss  ?  In  the  world  it
may  and  can  not  be,  and  the  nothingness  after  the  world
could  at  the  best  be  relatively  happier  or  unhappier  than
an  earlier  condition,  but  not  a  positive  blessedness  or
unblessedness  (comp.  Aristot.,  Eth.  1ST.  i.  u,  noo,  a,  13).
Certainly  if  the  world  is  the  state  of  the  unblessedness  of
the  creative  Being  of  the  world,  in  comparison  with  that
nothingness  will  be  blessedness ;  but  unfortunately  this
contrast  can  only  be  drawn  in  the  condition  of  exist-
ence, not  in  that  of  non-existence,  since  in  the  latter
there  is  neither  thought  nor  feeling — for  either  would  be
already  actuality,  which  is  excluded — the  one  would  pre-
suppose actual  imagination,  the  other  even  actual  reflec-
tion on  a  memory  of  the  former  intra-mundane  state  im-
plying comparison  with  the  present,  and  the  participation
of  the  will  in  this  reflection,  all  which  is  simply  impossible.


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  91

Thus  thinks  Buddhism  with  its  "Nirvana;"  thus
Schopenhauer ;  but  not  so  Christianity.  This  is  as  little
satisfied  with  such  a  reduction  to  the  zero-point  of
sensation,  to  painlessness  and  absence  of  happiness,  as
the  common  egoistic  understanding  that  claims  the  ful-
filment of  its  instinctive  striving  after  happiness  as  its
natural  right.  Christianity  does  not  indeed  strictly  allow
a  right  to  happiness,  but  it  demands  its  renunciation
only  to  enhance  the  value  of  the  undeserved  gift  of  grace
of  a  happiness  hereafter,  and  the  individual  Christian
foregoes  his  pretended  right,  only  because  he  is  assured
of  the  satisfaction  of  his  claims  by  express  covenant.
Christianity  must  have  a  positive  world-goal  or  renounce
the  principle  that  at  bottom  distinguishes  it  from  Bud-
dhism, i.e.,  abdicate.  As,  however,  no  satisfactory  ex-
planation can  make  this  practical  postulate  intelligible,
every  justification  of  the  positive  transcendent  bliss  that
refuses  to  rest  content  with  a  confessedly  unintelligible
divine  promise  must  issue  in  a  more  or  less  fantastic
presentation  of  Nirvana,  which,  of  course,  in  the  character
of  its  phantasmagoria  follows  the  direction  of  and  changes
with  the  culture  of  the  time.  The  Christian  theory  of
the  world  is  simply  incapable  of  rising  to  the  complete
resignation  of  happiness  ;  even  Christian  asceticism  is
out-and-out  selfish.  Hence  it  is  no  wonder  if  we,  who
are  still  more  or  less  entangled  (I  will  not  say,  in  the
Christian  faith,  but)  in  the  Christian  philosophy,  indig-
nantly resent  the  complete  renunciation  of  happiness.
A  prolonged  historical  discipline,  and  the  discipline,
moreover,  of  a  non-Christian  purely  secular  period,  is
needed  to  prepare  mankind  for  this  extreme  demand.
This  period,  however,  we  shall  soon  become  acquainted
with  as  the  third  stage  of  Illusion.

Hut  now,  if,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Christian  hope  of
blessedness  rests  on  an  illusion,  that  necessarily  dis-
appears in  the  further  course  of  the  development  of
consciousness  ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  mission  of  the


92  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

gospel  through  Jesus,  and  its  eager  reception  by  the
nations,  in  spite  of  Greek  philosophy,  that  had  long  risen
above  this  childish  standpoint,  can  certainly  only  be  un-
derstood as  a  direct  intervention  of  the  Unconscious  in  the
genius  of  the  founders  and  the  popular  instinct  of  the
rage  for  conversion,  the  question  arises,  what  then  was  the
object  of  this  illusion  ?  The  answer  is  simply  this,  that
this  second  stage  is  the  necessary  link  between  the  first
and  the  third,  because  through  despair  of  the  first  stage  of
the  illusion,  Egoism  is  not  yet  so  far  broken  as  not  to
cling  with  both  arms  to  the  only  egoistic  hope  still  re-
maining to  it.  Not  till  this  anchor  too  breaks,  and  the
complete  despair  of  attaining  happiness  for  one's  dear
self  has  taken  possession  of  the  soul,  not  till  then  does
it  become  receptive  for  the  self-denying  thought,  to  work
only  for  the  weal  of  future  generations,  to  lose  itself  in
the  universal  movement  for  the  future  good  of  the  whole.

Eome  had  indeed  possessed  and  practised  this  self-
renunciation,  but  only  for  the  sake  of  increasing  the
power  of  a  single  branch  of  the  human  family;  it  had,
therefore,  as  it  were,  expanded  individual  egoism  into  a
race- egoism,  and  in  this  spirit  chased  the  phantoms  of
boundless  ambition  and  lust  of  power ;  but  now  the  ques-
tion becomes  the  expansion  of  the  egoistic  into  a  cosmic
consciousness  and  endeavour,  of  sell-seeking  "personal  feel-
ing into  soil-denying  impersonal  feeling,  into  the  conscious-
ness that  the  individual  and  the  nation  are  nothing  but
a  wheel  or  a  spring  in  the  vast  world-machine,  and  have
no  other  task  than  to  do  their  duty  as  such,  to  further  the
movement  of  the  whole,  which  alone  is  of  consequence.

For  such  a  thought,  for  such  a  self-renunciation,  the
ancient  world  was  of  course  not  ripe,  and  there  was  an  ex-
ternal secondary  reason,  as  it  were,  for  the  interim  exist-
ence of  Christianity  in  the  circumstance  that  so  much
technical  progress  had  to  be  made  before  the  possible
opening  of  a  world-communication,  and  that  the  future
elements  of  telluric  social  life,  the  nationalities,  had  first


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  93

to  be  created.  Apart  from  all  this,  there  is  exhibited,
however,  a  decided  advance  from  the  first  to  the  second
stage  of  the  illusion,  namely,  in  the  acquired  conviction
that  happiness  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  present  phase  of
the  evolution,  just  as  in  the  transition  from  the  second  to
the  third  stage  the  advance  consists  in  the  attained  per-
ception, that  the  way  to  redemption  from  the  misery  of
the  present,  in  the  first  place,  is  not  to  be  sought  outside
the  icorld-proccss,  but  lies  in  the  world-process  itself;  that
thus  the  future  redemption  of  the  world  is  not  to  be
found  in  abstention  from  life,  but  in  devotion  to  life  ;  that,
however,  again  this  devotion  to  life,  which  for  its  own
sake  would  be  an  absurdity,  has  only  a  meaning  for  the
sake  of  the  future  of  the  process  of  the  whole.

This  passage  from  the  second  to  the  third  stage  is  cer-
tainly with  human  weakness  hardly  otherwise  to  be  con-
ceived than  through  a  partial  mistaking  of  the  latter  truth,
i.e.,  than  through  a  partial  relapse  into  the  first  stage  of
the  illusion  ;  for  how  is  man  to  attain  to  a  sufficiently
strong  faith  in  a  future  happiness  on  earth  if  he  regards
the  present  state  as  miserable  in  every  respect,  and  all
attainable  happiness  in  the  life  of  the  present  as  vain  ?

Accordingly  we  see  with  the  principle  of  free  investiga-
tion and  criticism  set  up  by  the  Reformation,  although
negatively,  it  is  true,  the  commencement  of  the  decompo-
sition of  the  Christian  dogma  and  the  destruction  of  its
promises  ;  but  at  the  same  time  we  see  appear,  in  place  of
the  Christian  "  salvation  in  the  hope  of  the  hereafter,"  the
regeneration  of  ancient  art  and  science,  the  sudden  growth
of  municipal  wealth  and  commerce,  and  the  progress  of
the  practical  arts,  the  universal  expansion  of  the  mental
horizon  ;  in  a  word,  the  reaicakcning  lore  of  the  world.

The  gigantic  progress  in  all  directions  after  so  long  a
stagnation  kindled  hope  into  still  greater  expectations,  and
there  thus  arose,  as  ever  in  the  epochs  of  much-promising
progress,  a  period  of  optimism,  whose  chief  theoretical
representative  is  Leibniz. (At  the  present  moment,  when


94  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  formation  of  nationalities  is  nearing  its  end,  there  pre-
vails a  similar  optimism  in  political  affairs.)  Only  slowly
and  gradually  can  the  power  of  an  idea  so  great  as  the
Christian  be  broken.  This  is  especially  interesting  to  ob-
serve in  the  most  recent  philosophy.  Kant,  growing  dizzy
at  the  unfathomable  consequences  of  his  principle,  turns
back  and  prescribes  his  soul  as  quickly  as  possible  to  the
Christian  God,  solemnly  reinstated  by  the  practical  cate-
gorical imperative ;  Hegel  tries,  by  the  juggle  of  a  symbolic
dialectic,  to  save,  at  any  rate,  some  of  the  leading  ideas  of
Christianity ;  Schelling,  with  a  start,  pauses  at  the  very
edge  of  the  abyss,  and  meekly  returns  at  the  end  of  his
system  to  the  positive  dogma  of  revelation,  with  a  perfectly
serious  deduction  of  the  three  Persons  of  the  Christian
Trinity  from  the  potentialities  of  being.

There  is  only  one  who  completely  and  in  all  respects
breaks  with  Christianity,  and  denies  it  all  significance
for  the  future — Schopenhauer — to  be  sure  only  to  relapse
into  Buddhist  asceticism,  and  without  being  able  to  rise  to
the  thought  of  the  possibility  of  a  positive  principle  for
the  historical  future,  without  the  trace  of  an  under-
standing and  a  love  for  the  great  endeavours  of  our  time,
which  are  abundantly  represented  in  all  other  recent
philosophers.  Day  by  day  secular  aims  palpably  gain  in
power,  extent,  and  interest ;  Antichrist  is  evidently  advan-
cing more  and  more,  and  soon  Christianity  will  only  be  a
shadow  of  its  medieval  greatness — will  again  be,  what  it
exclusively  was  at  its  origin,  the  last  consolation  of  the
poor  and  wretched.

Third  Stage  of  the  Illusion.
Happiness  relegated  to  the  future  of  the  world.

Characteristic  of  this  stage  is  the  idea  of  immanent  deve-
lopment, its  application  to  the  world  as  a  whole,  and  the
belief  in  a  cosmic  evolution.  In  ancient  philosophy,  with
the  exception  of  Aristotle,  we  can  find  no  trace  of  this,  but


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  95

even  in  Aristotle  the  application  of  the  conception  is  sub-
stantially limited  to  the  natural  evolution  of  the  indivi-
dual, and  on  the  mental  side,  at  any  rate,  exerted  no
epoch-making  influence  on  contemporaries  or  posterity.

Eome  recognised  a  development  only  as  development  of
the  power  of  Eome.  To  the  inherently  stationary  and
stagnant  Judaism  the  idea  of  development  is  so  strange
and  repugnant,  that  even  a  Mendelssohn  could  maintain
and  defend  against  a  Lessing  the  impossibility  of  progress.

Catholic  Christianity  is  likewise  self-complete  and  per-
fect ;  it  strives  only  after  an  extension  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  not  after  the  enriching  of  its  substance  ;  the  evolu-
tion of  dogma  in  the  first  centuries  takes  place  against  its
will,  as  it  were,  simply  from  the  endeavour  to  attain  a  fixed
form.  The  Eeformers  also  had  by  no  means  the  intention
of  carrying  the  development  of  Christianity  farther,  but
only  of  purifying  it  from  abuses  that  had  crept  in,  and  of
restoring  it  to  its  original  form.

Even  Spinoza's  rigid  necessity,  whose  soulless  and  aim-
less character  causes  the  ever-varying  forms  of  existence
to  appear  only  as  an  indifferent,  I  might  almost  say,  capri-
cious and  fortuitous  sport,  has  no  place  for  the  notion  of
evolution ;  it  is  Leibniz  who  first  discovers  it,  as  it  were,
afresh,  but  also  immediately  works  it  out  in  all  its  signi-
iicance  and  varied  application,  and  in  this  sense  may,  to  a
certain  extent,  be  regarded  as  the  positive  apostle  of  the
modern  world.

Lessing  makes  a  magnificent  use  of  the  same  in  his
"  Education  of  the  Human  Eace ; "  the  works  of  Schiller
are  penetrated  by  it ;  Herder  gives  it  expression  in  his
"  Ideas  on  the  1'hilosophy  of  the  History  of  Mankind,"
and  Kant  in  several  essays  on  the  Philosophy  of  History,
animated  by  the  genuine  philosophic  spirit  (Werke,  Ed.
vii.,  Nos.  xii.,  xv,  xix.)  Most  full  and  profound  is  this
thought  in  Hegel,  for  whom  indeed  the  whole  world  is
nothing  but  a  self-realising  of  the  Idea  (cp.  Ges.  philos.
Abhandl.,  No.  ii. :  "  Ueber  die  nothwendige  Umbildung  der
Hegerschcn  Philosophic  aus  ihrem  Grundprincip  heraus  ").


96  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

That  the  whole  cosmic  mechanism  is  one  great  process
of  development  emerges  ever  more  distinctly  as  result  of
modern  positive  science.  Astronomy  no  longer  limits  itself
merely  to  the  genesis  of  the  planetary  system ;  by  the  help
of  spectrum  analysis  it  reaches  farther  into  the  cosmos,  in
order,  by  a  comparison  of  the  present  states  of  remote  suns
and  nebulae,  to  comprehend  the  same  as  different  stages  of
an  evolution  in  which  one  part  has  advanced  more  quickly,
another  more  slowly,  but  whose  sum  can  only  be  con-
ceived as  a  collective  cosmic  evolution.  Photometry  and
spectrum  analysis  combined  seek  to  ascertain  the  continua-
tion of  the  same  in  the  formation  of  the  several  planets ;
and  chemistry  and  mineralogy  unite  to  determine  more
precisely  the  phase  of  evolution  of  our  planet  before  that
period  of  refrigeration,  whose  gradual  progress  to  the  pre-
sent time  is  told  in  the  stony  memorials  of  geology,  in
hieroglyphics  that  are  being  continually  deciphered.  Bio-
logy interprets  to  us  from  the  petrified  remains  of  past
ages  the  history  of  the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms  (cp.
C.  Chap,  x.) ;  and  archaeology,  supported  by  comparative
philology  and  anthropology,  unveils  to  us  the  pre-historical
period  of  development  of  the  human  race,  whose  magnifi-
cent tableau  of  advancing  civilisation  is  displayed  in
history,  revealing  at  the  same  time  glimpses  of  the  future
(cp.  Chap.  x.  13).  What  the  several  sciences  offer  piece-
meal Philosophy  has  to  comprehend  with  all-embracing
glance,  and  to  recognise  as  the  development  of  the  world-
whole  providentially  guided  by  the  all-wisdom  of  the
Unconscious  according  to  pre-determined  plan  to  a  benefi-
cent goal.

In  the  case  of  the  individual  it  is  not  difficult  to  con-
vince one's  self  of  the  fact  of  an  evolution  One  sees  it
indeed  on  all  hands  every  day.  The  more  difficult,  how-
ever, is  it  so  to  assimilate  the  thought  of  the  development
of  a  whole  consisting  of  many  individuals  as  to  gain  for
it  an  «Z/ra-egoistic  interest;  for  from  nothing  is  it  more
difficult  to  free  ourselves  than  from  the  instinct  of
egoism.


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  97

Extremely  instructive  in  this  reference  is  "  Der  Einzige
und  sein  Eigenthum,"  by  Max  Stirner,  a  book  that  nobody
interested  in  practical  philosophy  should  leave  unread.
This  book  subjects  all  ideals  having  an  influence  on  prac-
tice to  a  destructive  criticism,  and  shows  them  to  be  idols
that  only  possess  power  over  the  Ego  so  far  as  the  latter
concedes  such  to  them  in  its  self-mistaking  weakness.  It
cleverly  and  piquantly  demolishes  with  forcible  reasons
the  ideal  aims  of  political,  social,  and  humanitarian  Liberal-
ism ;  and  shows  how  the  Ego  alone  can  be  the  smiling
heir  of  all  these  ideals  thus  reduced  to  impotent  nothings.
If  these  considerations  only  had  the  purpose  of  confirm-
ing the  theoretical  position  that  I  can  as  little  step  out
of  the  frame  of  my  self-hood  as  out  of  my  skin,  nothing
need  be  added  ;  but  as  Stirner  professes  to  have  found
in  the  Idea  of  the  Ego  the  absolute  standpoint  for  action,
he  either  falls  into  the  same  error  that  he  had  combated
in  the  case  of  the  other  ideals,  such  as  Honour,  Freedom,
Itight,  &c,  and  places  himself  at  the  mercy  of  another
enthralling  idea,  whose  absolute  sovereignty  he  recog-
nises, not  however  for  this  or  that  reason,  but  blindly  and
instinctively,  or  he  conceives  the  Ego  not  as  idea  but  as
reality,  and  with  no  other  result  than  the  perfectly  empty
and  meaningless  tautology  that  I  can  will  only  my  own
will,  think  only  my  own  thoughts,  and  that  only  my  own
thoughts  can  become  motives  of  my  willing — a  fact  as
undeniable  by  his  opponents  as  by  himself.  If,  however,
and  only  in  that  case  has  his  conclusions  any  sense,  he
means  that  we  ought  to  acknowledge  the  Idea  of  the  Ego
as  the  only  governing  one,  and  to  admit  all  other  ideals
only  so  far  as  they  have  a  value  for  the  former,  he
should  first  have  examined  the  idea  of  the  Ego.  He
would  then  before  all  have  found  that,  as  all  the  other
ideals  are  the  cues  of  instincts  in  pursuit  of  special  ends,
so  the  Ego  is  the  cue  of  a  universal  instinct,  egoism,
that  is  related  to  the  special  instincts  somewhat  as  a
season  to a  day  ticket,  of  which  many  special  instincts

VOL. III.  G


98  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

are  only  derivatives  in  particular  cases,  and  with  which,
therefore,  we  can  get  along  tolerably  well  after  all  other
instincts  have  been  banished,  which  even,  on  the  contrary,
is  never  entirely  to  be  dispensed  with  as  long  as  we  live.

Thus  it  is  certainly  more  pardonable  to  accord  an  un-
conditional sovereignty  to  this  instinct  than  to  any  other ;
hut  although  in  the  abstract  the  error  is  the  same  in  the
two  cases,  the  consequences  are  far  worse  in  the  exclusive
homage  paid  to  egoism.  Other  instincts,  namely,  if  they
are  only  sufficiently  strong,  can  frequently  be  pacified,
although  commonly  only  with  sacrifice  of  happiness  on
the  whole,  which  makes  them  unprofitable ;  but  egoism
is,  according  to  our  former  inquiries,  never  to  be  satisfied,
because  it  always  procures  an  excess  of  pain.

This  perception,  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  ego
or  the  individual  the  denial  of  the  will  or  forsaking  of
the  world  and  renunciation  of  life  is  the  only  rational
course,  Stirner  entirely  misses.  It  is,  however,  an  in-
fallible specific  for  an  over-balanced  egoism.  Whoever
has  once  realised  the  preponderating  pain  that  every
individual  must  endure,  with  or  without  knowledge,  in  his
life,  will  soon  contemn  and  scorn  the  standpoint  of  the
self-preserving  and  would-be  enjoying — in  a  word,  self-
affirminrj  ego.  He  who  has  come  to  hold  lightly  his
egoism  and  his  ego  will  hardly  insist  upon  the  same  as
the  absolute  pivot  on  which  everything  must  turn,  will
rate  personal  sacrifice  less  highly  than  usual,  will  less
reluctantly  accept  the  result  of  an  investigation  whicli
exhibits  the  Ego  as  a  mere  phenomenon  of  a  Being  that
for  all  individuals  is  one  and  the  same.

Contempt  of  the  world  and  life  is  the  easiest  path  to
self-denial;  only  by  this  path  has  a  morality  of  self-denial,
like  the  Christian  and  Buddhist,  been  historically  possible.
In  these  fruits  which  it  bears  for  facilitating  the  infinitely
difficult  self-renunciation  lies  the  immense  and  hardly  to
be  sufficiently  estimated  ethical  value  of  Pessimism.

But  lastly,  had  Stirner  approached  the  direct  philoso-


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  99

pineal  investigation  of  the  Idea  of  the  Ego,  he  would  have
seen  that  this  idea  is  just  as  unsubstantial  and  brain-
created  a  phantom  (cp.  "  Das  Ding  an  Sich,"  sect,  iii., "  Das
transcendentale  Subject"),  as,  for  instance,  the  Idea  of
honour  or  of  right,  and  that  the  only  being  which  an-
swers to  the  idea  of  the  inner  cause  of  my  activity  is
something  non-individual,  the  Only  Unconscious,  which
therefore  answers  just  as  well  to  Peter's  idea  of  his  ego
as  Paul's  idea  of  his  ego.  On  this  deepest  of  all  bases  rests
only  the  esoteric  ethics  of  Buddhism,  not  the  Christian  ethics.
If  one  has  firmly  and  thoughtfully  made  this  cognition  his
own,  that  one  and  the  same  Being  feels  my  and  thy  pain,
my  and  thy  pleasure,  only  accidentally  through  the  inter-
vention of  different  brains,  then  is  the  exclusive  egoism
radically  broken,  that  is  only  shaken,  though  deeply  shaken,
by  contempt  of  the  world  and  of  life ;  then  is  the  stand-
point of  Stirner  finally  overcome,  to  which  one  must  at
some  time  have  entirely  given  adhesion  in  order  to  feel  the
greatness  of  the  advance;  then  first  is  Egoism  sublated  as
a  moment  in  the  consciousness  of  forming  a  link  in  the
world-process,  in  which  it  finds  its  necessary  and  rela-
tively, i.e.,  to  a  certain  degree,  authorised  place.

There  occurs,  namely  at  the  end  of  each  of  the  preced-
ing stages  of  the  illusion,  and  before  the  discovery  of  the
next,  the  voluntary  surrender  of  individual  existence —
suicide,  as  a  necessary  consequence.  Both  the  life- weary
heathen,  and  the  Christian,  despairing  at  once  of  the  world
and  his  faith,  must  in  consistency  do  away  with  them-
selves ;  or  if,  like  Schopenhauer,  they  believe  themselves
unable  to  attain  by  tins  means  the  end  of  the  abolition
of  individual  existence,  they  must  at  any  rate  divert  their
will  from  life  to  quietism  and  continence,  or  even  asceti-
cism. It  is  the  height  of  self-deception  to  see  in  this
saving  of  the  dear  Ego  from  the  discomfort  of  existence
anything  else  than  the  grossest  selfism,  than  a  highly
refined  Epicureanism,  that  has  only  taken  a  direction  con-
trarv  to  instinct  through  a  view  of  life  opposed  to  instinct.


ioo  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

In  all  Quietism,  whether  with  brutish  inertness  it  is  con-
tent merely  to  eat  and  drink,  or  loses  itself  in  idyllic  love
of  Nature,  or  in  reverie  natural  or  artificially  induced  (by
narcotics)  passively  revels  in  the  images  of  a  luxuriant
fancy,  or  surrounded  by  the  refinements  of  a  luxurious  life,
languidly  drives  away  ennui  with  the  choicest  morsels  of  the
arts  and  sciences — in  all  this  Quietism  the  Epicurean  trait
is  unmistakable,  the  inordinate  desire  to  pass  life  in  the
manner  most  agreeable  to  the  individual  constitution,  with
a  minimum  of  effort  and  displeasure,  unconcerned  about
the  thereby  neglected  duties  to  fellow-men  and  society.
But  even  asceticism,  which  is  apparently  the  counterpart  of
Egoism,  is  also  always  egoistic,  even  when  it  does  not,  like
the  Christian,  hope  for  reward  in  an  individual  immor-
tality, but  merely  hopes,  by  the  temporary  assumption  of
a  certain  pain,  to  attain  the  shortening  of  the  evil  of  life
and  individual  deliverance  from  all  continuation  of  life
after  death  (new  birth,  &c.)  In  the  suicide  and  in  the
ascetic  the  self-denial  is  as  little  deserving  of  admiration
as  in  the  sick  person  who,  to  escape  the  prospect  of  a  per-
petual toothache,  reasonably  prefers  the  painful  drawing
of  the  tooth.  In  both  cases  there  is  only  well-calculated
egoism  without  any  ethical  value  ;  rather  an  egoism  that
in  all  such  situations  of  life  is  immoral,  save  when  the
possibility  of  fulfilling  one's  duties  to  one's  relatives  and
society  is  entirely  cut  off.

It  is  otherwise  when  interest  for  the  development  of
the  whole  takes  deep  root  in  the  heart,  and  the  individual
feels  himself  a  member  of  the  whole — a  member  filling
a  more  or  less  valuable  but  never  quite  useless  place  in
the  general  evolution.  Then  will  it  be  requisite,  for  the
sake  of  filling  this  place,  to  devote  oneself  with  genuine
joy  in  self-sacrifice  to  the  life  which,  from  the  point  of
view  of  the  Ego,  was  rejected  not  only  as  useless  good,
but  as  sure  torment,  because  the  suicide  of  a  still  capable
individual  not  only  saves  the  whole  no  pain,  but  even
increases  its  torment,  lengthening  it  out  by  the  necessity,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  101

needing  considerable  time,  of  procuring  a  substitute  for
the  amputated  limb.  Then  there  further  results  the
obvious  demand  to  fill  up  the  life  preserved  out  of  self-
denial  for  the  sake  of  the  whole  in  a  manner  subserving
no  longer  individual  comfort,  but  the  welfare  of  the  whole,
which  is  not  to  be  accomplished  by  passive  receptivity,
not  by  indolent  repose  and  the  timid  avoidance  of  contact
with  the  struggle  of  existence,  but  by  active  production,
by  untiring  action,  by  self-denying  plunging  into  the
vortex  of  life,  and  participation  in  the  common  econo-
mic and  mental  work  of  civilisation.  That  alone  would
render  Quietism  a  deadly  sin,  that  its  more  general  ex-
tension would  jeopardise  and  convert  in  a  short  time  into
continually  increasing  retrogression  all  the  achievements
of  civilisation,  which  mankind  has  conquered  with  such
difficulty  in  the  thousands  of  years.  History  teaches
however,  how  boundless  is  the  wretchedness  of  a  people
retrograding  in  civilisation,  nay,  how  hardly  even  the  mere
pause  of  civilisation,  impeded  progress,  presses  upon  a
people.  For  as  the  life  of  the  individual  organism  is  a
sum  of  continual  acts  of  the  vis  mcdicatrix,  so,  too,  is  the
life  of  the  political  and  social  organism  only  possible  as  a
continual  strain  of  all  available  force  for  the  warding  off
of  the  disturbing  and  injurious  influences  constantly  lying
on  the  watch  on  all  sides  for  points  of  attack.

Thus,  then,  the  instinct  of  egoism,  or  instinct  of  indi-
vidual life,  is  to  a  certain  extent  reinstated  by  ivnsciocs-
urss,  but  no  longer  as  absolute  or  sovereign  power,  but
with  the  extent  resulting  from  its  aim  for  the  whole,  and
limited  by  the  recognition  and  respect  for  the  striving  of
other  individuals  likewise  necessary  for  the  process. — As
Kgoism  in  general,  so  also  those  instincts  are  rehabilitated
by  consciousness  which,  like  compassion,  sentiment  of
equity,  have  a  value  for  the  whole,  or,  as  love  and  honour,
a  value  for  the  future;  they  are  now  voluntarily  adopted
with  the  consciousness  of  personal  sacrifice  for  the  sake  of
the  whole  and  of  progress. This  personal  sacrifice,  made


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNL
pa w  \  'IHARA  COLLEGE  LTttl


io2  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

for  life  by  the  very  devotion  to  it,  finds  then  its  revjard  in
the  hope  of  the  future  of  the  evolution,  of  the  growing
improvement  of  the  circumstances  of  life,  and  the  felicity
beckoning  the  creative  Being  of  the  world,  whose  life  is
also  mine.

This  hope  of  a  future  positive  happiness  of  humanity,
and  the  co-operation  for  its  sake  in  the  process  of  the
whole,  forms  the  third  stage  of  the  illusion,  whose  exami-
nation is  now  our  task.  I  trust  and  believe  that  most  of
those  readers  who  have  thus  far  followed  the  discussion
with  approval  will  not  part  company  with  me  at  this
point.  They  can  and  must  not,  if  they  would  not  cease
to  be  the  children  of  their  age,  which  is  itself  at  the
beginning  of  the  third  stage  of  the  illusion,  and  hope-
fully hails  and  eagerly  rushes  to  fulfil  the  promises  of  the
golden  future.  Providence  takes  care  that  the  anticipa-
tions of  the  silent  thinker  do  not  disarrange  the  course  of
history  by  prematurely  gaining  too  many  adherents.  The
only  apparently  related  contemporary  political  and  social
pessimism  of  certain  governments  in  the  condition  of
youthful  ferment  or  decay  is  a  product  of  passing-
constellations  destined  to  be  overcome ;  it  will  and  must
pass  over  into  political  and  social  optimism,  and  has  no-
thing to  do  with  my  metaphysical  pessimism,  which  does
not  exclude,  but  includes,  the  political,  social,  or  other
optimism.

"When  we  were  occupied  with  the  criticism  of  the  first
stage  of  the  illusion,  it  was  not  possible  to  avoid  occasional
glimpses  into  the  future  shaping  of  the  world ;  nay,  we
may  go  so  far  as  to  assert  that  the  attentive  reader  must
have  already  found  in  that  criticism  of  the  first  stage  the
criticism  of  the  third.

To  save  repetition,  I  therefore  beg  that  the  resume
(JSsO.  13)  of  the  critique  of  the  first  stage  may  be  re-read
in  this  sense,  and  the  reader  will  be  convinced  of  the
truth  of  my  assertion  that  those  results  contain  far  more
than  was  then  concluded  from  them  for  the  refutation  of


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  103

the  first  stage  of  the  illusion.  Thus,  e.g.,  the  proof  of  the
proposition  that  the  pain  of  non-satisfaction  is  always
and  fully  felt,  but  the  pleasure  of  satisfaction  only  under
favourable  circumstances,  and,  with  considerable  deduc-
tions, holds  good  not  merely  for  the  present,  but  quite
universally.

However  great  the  progress  of  mankind,  it  will  never
get  rid  of,  or  even  only  diminish,  the  greatest  of  suffer-
ings— sickness,  age,  dependence  on  the  will  and  power  of
others,  want,  and  discontent.  However  many  the  remedies
found  against  diseases,  diseases,  especially  the  tormenting
slighter  chronic  ills,  always  increase  in  quicker  progression
than  medical  science.  Cheerful  youth  will  always  form
only  a  fraction  of  mankind,  and  the  other  part  be  com-
posed of  morose  age.  The  hunger  due  to  the  indefinite
increase  of  the  human  race  will  always  be  the  portion  of
a  large  stratum  of  the  population,  which  has  more  hunger
than  it  can  satisfy,  which,  by  reason  of  deficient  nutriment,
shows  a  long  bill  of  mortality;  in  short,  which  continually
succumbs  to  a  considerable  percentage  in  the  bitter  struggle
with  want  (comp.  ii.  23,  iii.  28-30).  The  most  contented
peoples  are  the  rude  peoples  living  in  a  state  of  nature,
and  the  uneducated  classes  of  civilised  peoples ;  with  the
increasing  cultivation  of  the  people  grows,  as  experience
shows,  its  discontent.

That  stratum  of  the  population  living  on  the  borders
of  hunger  felt  formerly,  and  in  part  now  feels,  its  misery
only  as  long  as  the  stomach  gnawed;  but  the  farther  the
world  gets  the  more  threatening  becomes  the  spectre  of
the  poverty  of  the  masses,  the  more  fearful  does  the  whole
consciousness  of  their  wretchedness  take  possession  of
those  wretched  ones.  The  social  question  of  the  present
day  rests  in  the  last  resort  upon  a  heightened  conscious-
ness of  the  working  classes  of  the  wretchedness  of  their
situation,  whilst  actually  this  situation  is  truly  golden
in  comparison  with  that  of  two  hundred  years  ago,  when
nothing  was  known  of  a  social  question.


104  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Immorality,  if  one  measures  by  the  standard  of  the
disposition,  has  not  grown  less  since  the  establishment  of
a  primitive  human  society  to  the  present  day,  only  the
form  in  which  the  criminal  character  expresses  itself  is
changed. Apart  from  variations  of  the  ethical  character
of  nations  on  the  large  scale,  everywhere  we  see  the  same
proportion  of  egoism  and  charity,  and  when  the  atrocities
and  barbarities  of  former  times  are  pointed  to,  we  should
also  not  forget  to  take  into  account,  on  the one hand,
the  probity  and  honesty,  the  clear  feeling  of  equity,  and
the  reverence  for  consecrated  custom  of  ancient  peoples
living;  in  a  state  of  nature,  and,  on  the  other,  the  "row-
ing  deceit,  falsehood, cunning, chicane, non-regardance
of  property  and  of  the  well-founded,  but  no  longer  un-
derstood, instinctive  morality accompanying  civilisation.
(Cp.  the  descriptions  and reflections of  Wallace  on  the
almost  paradisaical  purity  of  manners  and  singleness  of
heart  of  the  Malays  at  the  close  of  his  book  of  travels,
"  The  Malay  Archipelago.") Theft, fraud, and forgery
increase,  despite the penalties annexed  to  them, more
rapidly than the gross and serious crimes (such as
robbery,  murder, rape, &c.) decrease ; the basest  self-
interest  shamelessly  rends  asunder  the  most  sacred  bonds
of the family and friendship wherever  it comes  into
collision with them,  and only the  infallible  execution
of the punishments assigned by  the state  and  society
prevents  the  brutal  cruelty  of  ruder  times,  which  imme-
diately breaks  forth  again  and  reveals  human  bestiality  in
all  its  hideousness,  when  the  bonds  of  law  and  of  order  are
loosened  or  rent,  as  in  the  Polish  Eevolution,  the  last  year
of  the  American  Civil  War,  or  the  horrors  of  the  Paris
Commune in the spring of 1871. Xo ; thus far  the
wickedness  and  the  all-devouring  selfishness  of  man  has
not  lessened;  it  is  only  artificially  dammed  in  by  the  dikes
of  the  law  and  of  civil  society;  knows,  however,  in  place
of  the  open  overflow  how  to  find  a  thousand  secret  paths
by  which  it  percolates  the dams. The degree of the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  105

immoral  disposition  has  remained  the  same,  but  it  has
discarded  ths  cloven  foot  and  walks  about  in  conventional
costume;  the  thing  and  its  consequences  remain  the  same,
the  form  alone  becomes  more  elegant.

The  time  is  at  hand  when  theft  and  illegal  fraud  will
be despised as vulgar  and clumsy  by  the more clever
rogue,  who  knows  how  to  keep  his  attacks  on  his  neigh-
bour's property  within  the  letter  of  the  law. I  would,
however,  rather  have  run the occasional risk  of  being
slain among  the ancient Germans than  in  the  modern
civilised  state  to  have  to  regard  every  man  as  a  rogue  and
rascal  until  I  have  undeniable  proof  of  his  honesty. We
may  conclude  by  analogy  that  however  refined  the  form
in  which  immorality  may  hereafter  appear,  it  will  still
remain  equally  immoral  and  equally  a  source  of  pain  to
those  suffering  the  wrong. For  although  it  may  justly
be  objected  that  in  the  primitive  and  patriarchal  forms
of  society  morality  rests  on  unconscious  custom,  and  has
declined  with  this  foundation  without,  owing  to  the  in-
adequateness  of  all  religious  and  philosophical  individual
ethics,  having  found  a  substitute,  but  which  the  future
will find in a social ethic elevating  morality  step by
step  through  the  replacement  of  unconscious  moral  tact
by  consciousness; if,  further,  one  may  also  point  to  this,
that the eruditio or "  decrudescence" of  feeling  must
necessarily  afford,  and,  in  part,  has already  afforded,  in
benevolent  institutions, systems of poor-relief, care for
the sick,  the mentally  imbecile,  blind,  deaf  and  dumb,
criminals,  societies  for  the  protection  of  animals,  &c,  a
broader  field  to  the  same  extent  of ethical foundation,
yet  such  a  real  increase  of  the  fund  of  morality,  in  part
ameliorating  the  character  through  repeated  practice,  in
part directly  applying its lever to ethical feeling, is
completely balanced by the sharpened sensibility for
wrongs endured, although in the mildest and most
refined  form. If  rude  men  cleave  one  another's  skulls
with  the  utmost  nonchalance,  yet  the  sensitive  and  cul-


io6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tured  feel  very  acutely  even  the  slightest  want  of  con-
sideration, and  how  much  more  the  fine  edge  of  subtle
malice !  Accordingly,  as  regards  the  question  concern-
ing the  total  suffering  called  forth  by  immorality,  growing
morality  and  increasing  sensibility  to  injuries  are  at  least
balanced ;  nay,  with  increasing  culture  the  moral  standard
even  rises,  which  now  brands  the  same  action  as  much  more
immoral  than  formerly,  and  with  reference  to  this  neces-
sary raising  of  the  standard,  one  may  even  say  that  the
sum  of  immoral  action  increases,  because  the  augmenta-
tion of  the  moral  fund  does  not  keep  pace  with  the  raising
of  the  standard  for  the  ethical  judgment,  but  remains  be-
hind the  latter.  But  even  supposing  morality  actually  to
increase  to  an  ideal  state,  yet  it  could  scarcely  reach  the
threshold  of  feeling,  because  the  exclusion  of  all  wrong
is  still  not  happiness,  and  positive  morality  only  a  pal-
liative of  helpless  human  want  (cp.  p.  60,  and  vol.  ii.
365).  The  latter  finds  expression  in  the  saying,  that  the
endeavours  of  the  future  must  aim  at  rendering  super-
fluous, and  obviating  by  a  firm  organisation  of  the  most
varied  forms  of  social  solidarity,  private  beneficence  and

voluntary  works  of  charity.

One  phase  of  life,  which,  with  a  certain  mental  consti-
tution, may  doubtless  afford  positive  happiness,  piety,  is,
of  course,  at  our  third  stage  of  the  illusion  a  surmounted
standpoint,  at  least  its  principal  arteries,  the  immortality-
dogma  and  prayer  are  ligatured.  Were  it  not  so,  the  third
stage  of  the  illusion  would  not  be  pure,  but  mixed  with  the
second,  which  indeed  may  in  reality  be  very  common,  but
in  our  rational  survey,  where  the  points  of  view  must  be
kept  well  apart,  must  not  be  assumed.  But  at  all  events,
one  will  not  be  able  to  deny  that  with  progressive  civili-
sation the  average  decrease  of  the  religious  illusion  more
and  more  diminishes  its  importance  of  the  same  for
our  estimation,  and  the  time  is  not  far  off  when  an
educated  person  will  no  longer  be  capable  of  the  en-
joyment of religious edification  in  the  previous sense,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  107

but  at  the  most  will  be  able  to  fashion  a  sort  of  private
religious  cultus  out  of  the  consciousness  of  the  mystical
connection  with  the  All-One.

The  two  other  factors,  to  which  we  had  accorded  a
positive  excess  of  pleasure,  Science  and  Art,  will  also
alter  their  position  in  the  future  of  the  world.  The  more
we  look  back,  the  more  is  scientific  progress  the  work  of
a  few  eminent  men  of  genius,  whom  the  Unconscious
creates  as  its  organ,  to  accomplish  what  is  not  to  be
attained  with  the  forces  of  the  average  conscious  human
understanding.  The  more  we  approach  the  present  day,
the  more  numerous  become  the  scientific  workers,  the
more  co-operative  their  work.  Whilst  the  geniuses  of
former  times  resembled  magicians  who  cause  an  edifice
to  spring  up  out  of  nothing,  the  spiritual  works  of
modern  times  may  be  compared  to  the  construction  of
an  industrious  body  of  builders,  in  which  each  adds  his
stone  to  the  great  building,  a  larger  or  smaller,  according
to  his  strength.  The  method  of  the  future  will  become
more  exclusively  inductive,  and  the  fundamental  char-
acter of  scientific  work  be  not  depth  but  breadth.  Thus
there  will  be  ever  less  need  of  the  men  of  genius,  and
therefore  ever  less  wrought  by  the  Unconscious.  As
society  is  levelled  by  the  civilian's  black  coat,  so  also  in
spiritual  reference  we  are  steering  more  and  more  to-
wards a  level  of  respectable  mediocrity.  It  follows  from
this  that  the  pleasure  in  scientific  production  is  becoming
ever  less,  and  the  world  is  limited  more  and  more  to  the
receptive  enjoyment  of  science.  This,  however,  is  only
considerable  where  the  wrestling  and  struggling  after
truth  has  been  personally  experienced,  not,  however,
where  truth  is  presented  to  one  like  a  baked  pasty.  Then
often  the  pleasure  of  knowing  hardly  balances  the  effort
of  acquiring,  and  the  practical  utility  of  the  acquisition  or
ambition  must  yield  the  proper  motives  of  learning.

A  similar  state  of  things  takes  place  in  Art,  although
this  has  a  more  favourable  outlook  than  Science. In  it,


jo8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

too,  the  productive  men  of  genius  will  become  ever  rarer
the  more  humanity  leaves  behind  it  the  spontaneous  life
of  childhood  and  the  transcendent  ideals  of  its  enthu-
siastic youth,  and  is  careful  for  the  comfortable  furnish-
ing of  its  earthly  home,  the  more  in  manhood  the  social,
economical,  and  practical  scientific  interests  gain  the
upper  hand.  Art  is  then  no  longer  what  it  was  to  the
youth,  the  sublime  beatific  goddess ;  it  is  only  a  distrac-
tion enjoyed  with  half-attention  as  a  refreshment  from
the  toils  of  the  day,  an  opiate  for  ennui,  or  an  amuse-
ment after  the  seriousness  of  business.  Hence  an  ever-
extending  dilettante  superficiality,  and  a  neglect  of  all
earnest  tendencies  of  art  to  be  enjoyed  only  with
strenuous  application.  The  artistic  production  of  the
manhood  of  humanity  estranged  from  the  ideal  naturally
reflects  the  same  facile  dilettante  superficiality,  skil-
fully mastering  the  form  and  living  on  the  treasures  of
the  past,  and  no  longer  produces  men  of  genius,  because
they  are  no  longer  needs  of  the  time,  because  that  would
be  to  throw  pearls  before  swine,  or  even  because  the
age  has  advanced  beyond  the  stage  to  which  men  of
genius  belonged  to  one  more  important.  To  protect  my-
self from  misunderstanding,  I  expressly  observe  that  I  do
not  by  this  characteristic  intend  to  denote  the  present
time,  but  a  future,  on  whose  threshold  our  century  stands,
and  of  which  the  present  offers  only  a  weak  foretaste.
Art  will  be  on  the  whole  to  humanity  in  its  manhood
somewhat  what  the  Berlin  farce  is  to  the  Berlin  stock-
jobber of  an  evening.  This  view  is  certainly  only  to  be
proved  by  the  analogy  of  the  development  of  humanity
with  the  life-periods  of  the  individual,  and  by  the  confir-
mation which  this  analogy  finds  in  the  previous  course  of
development  and  the  already  tolerably  distinctly  percep-
tible aims  of  the  next  period.

As  regards  the  practical  instincts  which  depend  on
illusion,  like  love  and  honour,  there  are  three  cases :
either  men  never  lose  them  at  all, — then  the  pain  arising


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  109

from  them  always  remains  ;  or  men  entirely  lose  them, —
then  along  with  the  pleasure  they  certainly  also  lose  the
pain,  and  have  become  relatively  much  happier,  which
means,  however,  nothing  more  than  that  life  has  become
so  much  poorer,  and  has  so  much  nearer  approached  the
zero-point  or  level  of  sensation, — has,  however,  also  become
conscious  of  its  poverty  and  worthlessness.  One  may
somewhat  compare  both  states  with  a  miser  who  rejoices
over  the  treasures  in  his  chest,  until  one  fine  day  he  opens
the  chest  and  finds  it  empty;  only  in  this  image  the  tor-
ment really  endured,  even  in  the  first  state  along  with  the
illusion  of  happiness,  is  not  expressed.  The  third  pos-
sible, and  at  the  same  time  most  probable  case,  is  that  men
only  partially  lose  these  instincts,  that  they  indeed  quite
see  through  their  illusory  character,  and  in  consequence
somewhat  diminish  the  force  of  the  impulse  by  reason,  but
are  never  able  completely  to  destroy  it.  This  case  con-
tains the  pains  of  both  the  others  combined.  For  the
miser  who  has  seen  quite  well  that  his  chests  are  empty
now  falls  into  the  delusion  of  wishing  to  regard  them,
(iespite  his  clear  and  better  rational  insight,  as  still  full,
and  is  all  the  time  rational  enough  to  understand  his
aberration  without  being  able  to  deliver  himself  from  it.
He  has  at  the  same  time  the  rational  consciousness  of  the
poverty  of  his  life,  of  the  illusory  nature  of  his  pleasure
and  pain  springing  from  these  impulses,  and  of  the  great
predominance  of  pain.  He  has  therefore  now  also  the
lull  consciousness  of  the  torments  to  which  he  is  con-
demned, the  rational  endeavour  to  suppress  these  im-
pulses, and  the  painful  feeling  of  the  impotence  of  his
rational  will  over  instinctive  impulse.  "Wherefore  Goethe
says  quite  correctly,  "  Nature,  as  the  sternest  of  tyrants,
punishes  that  man  who  destroys  illusion  in  himself  and
others"  (vol.  xl.  p.  386),  and  yet  can  and  will  this  de-
struction of  the  illusion  not  be  spared  humanity.  Piti-
less and  cruel  is  this  work  of  the  destruction  of  illusion,
like the  rough pressure of the hand  that  wakes  one


no  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sweetly  dreaming  to  the  torment  of  reality.  But  the  world
must  onwards;  the  goal  cannot  be  approached  in  dreams,
it  must  be  wrestled  for  and  conquered,  and  only  through
pain  lies  the  path  to  redemption.  The  individual  rightly
sees  the  reconciliation  of  this  difference  as  regards  himself  in
the  complete  surrender  of  egoism,  and  the  self-renouncing
thought  that  the  love  and  instinct  to  found  a  household
is  yet  to  the  advantage  of  the  future,  in  that  they  call
into  existence  the  new  generation,  and  thus  serve  the
purpose  of  progress ;  but  it  would  be  a  manifest  contra-
diction if  a  generation  should  always  only  exist  for  the
succeeding  one,  whilst  each  hy  itself  is  wretched.  This
pointing  ever  forward  awakes  the  involuntary  thought
that  progress  is  not  for  the  sake  of  progress,  but  for
the  sake  of  a  goal  beyond  the  progress.  The  like
answer  may  be  made  to  the  objection  that  the  illusive
instincts,  as  honour,  the  acquisitive  impulse,  love,  help  to
further  evolution.  This  is  certainly  true,  but  it  can  lend
those  instincts  no  value  as  regards  real  happiness  so  long
as  we  can  attribute  no  endsemonological  value  to  the  en-
hancement of  the  evolution.  It  is  forgotten  in  these  replies
that  the  process  as  such  is  only  the  sum  of  its  moments.

Let  us  now  cast  a  glance  at  the  belauded  progress  of  the
world,  "Wherein  does  it  consist?  how  are  we  made  happy  ?
Progress  in  art  one  would  not  be  warranted  in  rating  highly:
although  our  modern  works  of  art  are  richer  in  ideas,  yet
the  artistic  form  was  more  perfect  in  antiquity,  and  the
resuscitated  Greeks  would  with  perfect  truth  declare  our
works  of  art  in  all  departments  to  be  thoroughly  bar-
barous. (Think  of  our  romances  and  stage-plays,  of  our
statues  and  exhibitions  of  pictures,  of  our  architecture,
and  the  monotonous  temperament  in  music  !)  The  more
the  ideal  content  of  our  works  of  art  threatens  to  burst
the  confining  form,  the  further  are  these  works  removed
from  the  pure  notion  of  art,  that  is  rooted  in  absolute
harmony  of  form  and  matter.  Space  unfortunately  pre-
vents my  working  out  these  suggestions  in  detail.

Scientific  progress  contributes  in  a  purely  theoretical


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  in

reference  little  or  nothing  to  the  happiness  of  the  world,
but  in  practical  reference  they  stand  in  good  stead  political,
social,  moral  and  technical  progress.  The  influence  of
science  on  moral  progress  I  may  regard  as  insignificant,
as  also  in  political  and  social  respects  it  must  not  be  rated
too  highly,  since  in  these  departments  theory  for  the
most  part  hobbles  after  instinctive  practice.  On  the  other
hand,  it  is  of  incalculable  importance  in  the  progress  of
the  practical  arts.  But  what  do  these  achieve  for  human
happiness  ?  Manifestly  nothing  but  afford  the  possibility
of  social  and  political  progress  and  increase  the  con-
veniences of  life,  and  perhaps  also  superfluous  luxury  !
Partly  this  takes  place  directly,  partly  by  the  facilitation
and  perfection  of  commercial  communication.  Factories,
steamships,  railways,  and  telegraphs  have  done  nothing
positive  for  the  happiness  of  mankind ;  they  have  only
diminished  a  part  of  the  impediments  and  inconveniences
by  which  man  was  previously  confined  and  oppressed.
If  a  more  rational  cultivation  of  the  soil  and  a  facilitated
importation  from  less  populated  regions  has  placed  a
greater  supply  of  food  at  the  command  of  the  civilised
nations,  this  certainly  has  had  the  result  that  the  number
of  the  population  of  these  civilised  nations  have  in  part
very  considerably  increased;  but  is  the  happiness  or  the
'misery  of  the  individual  and  the  community  thereby
increased?  Especially  when  we  remember  that  with
increasing  population  the  number  of  the  millions  living
on  the  verge  of  starvation  likewise  increases.  The
augmented  food-supply  of  the  earth,  the  augmented  com-
fort and  the  augmented  luxury  taken  together  repre-
sent the  augmented  national  wealth  or  terrestrial  wealth.
Tin's  latter,  likewise,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  growth  of
positive  happiness.  In  the  first  place,  it  effects  nothing
but  an  increase  of  the  population,  and  therefore  of  misery  ;
secondly,  its  high  appreciation  depends  on  the  illusion
created  by  the  instinctive  acquisitive  impulse;  thirdly,
its consequence is  a diminution of pain, and an ap-


U2  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

proximation  to  the  zero-point  of  sensation  that  is  never
attainable.  The  only  positive  utility  of  the  growth  of
opulence  is  that  it  sets  free  for  mental  exertion  energies  that
before  were  absorbed  in  the  struggle  with  want,  and  that
it  thereby  accelerates  the  progress  of  the  world,  lliis  result
appertains,  however,  only  to  the  process  as  such,  by  no
means  to  the  individuals  or  nations  concerned  in  the  pro-
cess, who  yet  imagine  that  they  are  working  for  themselves
in  increasing  their  national  wealth.

The  last  great  advances  of  the  world  which  remain  to
be  considered  are  the  political  and  social.  Let  us  assume
the  most  perfect  State  to  be  realised  and  the  peoples  of
the  earth  to  have  solved  their  political  problem  in  a  com-
plete manner.  What  then  does  one  get  by  this  political
framework  ?  A  snail-shell  without  the  snail,  an  empty
form  that  waits  its  filling  up.  Mankind  does  not  live  in
order  to  be  governed,  but  it  is  governed  in  order  to  be  able
to  live  (in  the  highest  sense  of  the  term).  All  the  well-
known  problems  of  the  State  are  of  a  negative  nature.
They  are  protection  against,  security  for,  defence  from,  &c.
Where  the  State  fulfils  positive  objects  {e.g.,  instruction)  it
trespasses  on  the  sphere  of  Society,  wdiich,  in  the  imma-
turity of  the  latter,  may  occasionally  become  necessity.  The
most  perfect  state  does,  therefore,  nothing  but  place  man  in
a  situation  where  he  can  begin  to  live  without  fear  of  un-
warranted attacks,  i.e.,  to  unfold  his  forces  and  capabilities
in  all  directions,  which  do  not  infringe  the  rights  of  others.
Thus  the  ideal  of  the  State  also  simply  places  man  at  the
threshold  of  his  felicity.

With  the  social  ideals  it  is  not  different.  They  show  how
to  lighten  to  a  certain  extent  the  struggle  with  want  for  the
necessaries  of  life  through  the  principle  of  the  solidarity  of
the  community  and  other  expedients.  They  teach  how  to
alleviate  as  far  as  possible  the  torments  and  cares  which  one
draws  upon  oneself  through  the  satisfaction  of  the  instincts
of  founding  a  household  by  the  best  possible  arrange-
ment of  the  family  relations  ;  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  113

education  of  children  at  the  least  possible  cost,  &c. — The
question  is  always  only  the  mitigation  of  evils,  not
attainment  of  positive  happiness.  The  sole  apparent  excep-
tion is  the  increase  of  the  collective  wealth  resulting  from
co-operation,  but  this  has  been  already  dealt  with  above.

These,  then,  would  be  the  main  lines  of  the  world's
progress.  So  far  as  they  rest  on  realities,  they  agree  in
lifting  man  more  and  more  from  the  depths  of  his  misery  to-
wards the  level  of  sensation.  Were  the  ideal  goals  attained,
the  zero  or  indifference  point  of  feeling  as  regards  these
phases  of  life  would  be  attained;  but  as  ideals  always  remain
ideals,  and  the  progress  of  humanity  may  indeed  approach,
but  never  reach  them,  even  in  these  directions  the  world
will  never  attain  the  height  of  the  zero-point,  but  always
remain  below  it,  pain  being  still  in  excess.

One  may  become  clear  with  regard  to  the  endecmono-
logical  value  of  the  world's  progress  even  without  consider-
ing it  in  detail.  One  has  only  to  reflect  on  the  analogous
case  of  the  individual.  He  who  comes  into  a  better
position  in  life  will  in  passing  from  worse  to  better  cer-
tainly feel  pleasure.  This  pleasure,  however,  disappears
with  astonishing  rapidity ;  the  new  and  better  circum-
stances are  taken  as  matter  of  course,  and  the  man  does
not  feel  himself  a  hair's-breadth  the  happier  than  in  his
former  position.  (The  transition  from  better  to  worse
worse  produces  a  much  more  lasting  pain.)  It  is  just  so
with  a  nation,  just  so  with  humanity  at  large.  Who  feels
himself  better  off  now  than  thirty  years  ago  because  now
there  are  railways  and  then  there  were  none  ?  And  should
the  difference  still  be  felt  by  older  persons,  assuredly  not
by  those  who  have  been  born  since  the  existence  of
railways.  With  the  increased  means  nothing  more  lias
increased  than  tvishes  and  needs,  and  in  their  train  dis-
content. And  even  should  mankind  ever  succeed  in  get-
ting rid  of  the  infectious  diseases  by  preventive  and  eradi-
cating measures — the  hereditary  by  more  rational  sexual
unions  (contingent  on  a  relaxation  of  the  present  unnatur-

vol.  111.  11


H4  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ally  limited  and  almost  blind  struggle  for  existence),
the  rest  by  the  progress  of  hygiene  and  medicine ;  should
it  ever  succeed  in  preparing  aliment  from  inorganic  sub-
stances in  chemical  laboratories,  and  in  limiting  multipli-
cation without  restraining  the  instinct  of  propagation  in
accordance  with  the  available  means  of  subsistence, — yet
all  this  progress  would  offer  nothing  positive,  but  only
remove  or  mitigate  the  worst,  and  in  part  most  unnatural,
evils  of  existing  physical  and  social  circumstances.  But
at  the  same  time  they  would  cause  the  question  to  become
the  more  burning,  What  then  to  do  with  this  life,  with
what  substance  of  inner  worth  it  is  to  he  filled  ?  what  is  to
compensate  for  the  bearing  of  the  burden  of  life  rendered
placid  by  the  simplest  elementary  considerations  ?

"Whereas  before  the  discomfort  of  existence,  so  far  as
it  was  felt,  was  referred  to  external  evils  and  defects,
and  the  attainment  of  a  comfortable  condition  hoped  for
from  the  removal  of  the  external  evils  most  sensibly  felt
at  the  time,  the  error  that  lies  in  this  projection  of  the
cause  of  discomfort  is  the  more  perceived  the  more  the
palpable  external  ills  of  human  life  are  removed  by  the
world's  progress ;  and  in  proportion  as  this  escape  from
the  pessimistic  insight  into  the  essential  nature  of  the
personal  will  is  cut  off,  in  the  same  degree  grows  the  per-
ception that  pain  is  immanent  to  will ;  that  the  wretched-
ness of  existence  is  founded  in  existence  itself,  and  is
dependent  on  external  circumstances  more  in  appearance
than  in  reality.  Consequently  every  approach  to  the
ideal  of  the  best  life  attainable  on  earth  must  make  the
question  as  to  the  absolute  value  of  this  life  only  an  ever
■more  burning  one,  since  both  the  continually  increasing
perception  of  the  illusory  nature  of  most  positive  plea-
sures, as  the  ever  clearer  and  clearer  insight  into  the  in-
evitableness  of  the  misery  lurking  in  one's  own  breast,  like
a  goblin  perpetually  changing  its  shape,  co-operates  to  this
result.  As,  according  to  Paul,  the  law  given  to  the  Jews
was  precisely  the  "  strength  "  of  sin  (i  Cor.  xv.  56),  so  is  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  115

utmost  world-progress  the  "strength"  of  the  pessimistic  con-
sciousness of  humanity.  And  just  because  it  is  so,  and  only
because  it  is,  is  the  utmost  possible  progress  a  'practical
postulate.  In  the  fact  that  men  usually  only  desire
progress  because  they  hope  to  become  happier,  Ave  may
see  the  practically  wholesome  fascination  of  the  third  stage
of  the  illusion,  through  which  the  Unconscious  stimu-
lates men  to  tasks  which  for  the  most  part  they
would  be  incapable  of  imposing  on  themselves  if  they
penetrated  the  true  purposes  of  the  Unconscious.  But  if
it  is  true,  that  the  enhancement  of  consciousness  to  the
point  of  a  general  pessimistic  consciousness  of  humanity
is  the  purpose  of  the  Unconscious  directly  preceding  the
final  purpose  (as  we  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter),  then
from  our  standpoint  the  progress  of  the  world  is  precisely
so  urgent  a  requirement  because  it  leads  to  this  goal.

In  the  resume'  of  the  first  stage  of  the  illusion  we  saw
that  peoples  in  a  state  of  nature  are  not  more  wretched,  but
more  happy,  than  civilised  peoples  ;  that  the  poor,  low,  and
rude  classes  are  happier  than  the  rich,  aristocratic,  and
cultivated ;  that  the  stupid  are  happier  than  the  clever  ;  in
general,  that  a  being  is  the  happier  the  obtuser  is  its
nervous  system,  because  the  excess  of  pain  over  pleasure
is  so  much  less,  and  the  entanglement  in  the  illusion  so
much  greater.  But  now  with  the  progressive  development
of  humanity  grow  not  only  wealth  and  wants,  but  also  the;
sensibility  of  the  nervous  system  and  the  capacity  and
education  of  the  mind,  consequently  also  the  excess  of
felt  pain  over  felt  pleasure  and  the  destruction  of
illusion,  i.e.,  the  consciousness  of  the  paltriness  of  life,
of  tin:  vanity  of  most  enjoyments  and  endeavours  and
the  feiding  of  misery;  there  grows  accordingly  Lo/hmhcry
diul  also  the  consciousness  of  misery,  as  experience  shows,
and  the  often-asserted  enhancement  of  the  happiness  of
the  world  by  the  progress  of  the;  world  rests  on  an  alto-
gether superficial  appearance.  (Tins  is  especially  to  1  e
laid to heart by those who perhaps are not (pate in


n6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

accord  with  me,  that  at  the  present  time  the  sum  of  pain
in  the  world  outweighs  the  sum  of  pleasure.)

As  the  suffering  of  the  world  has  increased  with  the
development  of  organisation  from  the  primitive  cell  to  the
origin  of  man,  so  will  it  further  increase  with  the  pro-
gressive development  of  the  human  spirit  until  one  day
the  goal  is  attained. It  was  a  childish  short-sightedness
when  Eousseau,  from  the  perception  of  increasing  suffer-
ing, drew  the  conclusion  :  the  world  must,  if  possible,  turn
Lack — back  to  the  age  of  childhood. As  if  the  childhood
of  humanity  had  not  been  misery ! No  ;  if  once  back-
wards, then  farther,  ever  farther,  to  the  creation  of  the
world! But  we  have  no  choice. We  must  forwards,  even
if  we  desire  it  not. It  is  not,  however,  the  golden  age  that
lies  before  us,  but  the  iron ;  and  the  dreams  of  the  golden
age  of the future prove  still  more  empty  than  those
of the past. As the burden becomes  heavier to the
bearer  the longer  the  road on  which he carries  it,  so
will  also  the  suffering  of  mankind  and  the  consciousness
of  its  misery  increase  and  increase  until  it  is  insupport-
able. We  may  also  employ  the  analogy  with  the  ages
of the  individual. As the  individual  at  first  as  child
lives for the moment,  then as youth  revels in tran-
scendent ideals, then as  man  strives  after glory, and
subsequently possessions and practical science, until,
finally,  as  old  man,  perceiving  the  vanity  of  all  endeavour,
he  lays  to  rest  his  weary  head,  longing  for  peace,  so,  too,
Humanity. We  see  nations  arise,  mature,  and  perish  ;  we
find  also  in  Humanity  the  clearest  symptoms  of  growing
older.  Why  should  we  doubt  that,  after  the  energetic  activity
of  manhood,  for  it,  too,  one  day  old  age  will  come,  when,
consuming  the  practical  and  theoretical  fruits  of  the  past,
it  enters  upon  a  period  of  ripe  contemplation,  wThen  with
melancholy  sorrow  it  overlooks  at  a  single  glance  all  the
sufferings  so  unthinkingly  of  its  past  life-career,  and  com-
prehends the  whole  vanity  of  the  previously  supposed
goals  of  its  endeavour  ?


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  117

There  is  only  one  difference  between  it  and  the  indi-
vidual. Hoary  humanity  will  have  no  heir  to  whom  it
may  bequeath  its  heaped-up  wealth,  no  children  and
grandchildren,  the  love  of  whom  might  disturb  the  clear-
ness of  its  thought.  Then  will  it,  imbued  with  that
sublime  melancholy  which  one  usually  finds  in  men  of
genius,  or  even  in  highly  intellectual  old  men,  hover  like
a  glorified  spirit  over  its  own  body,  as  it  were,  and  as
(Edipus  at  Colonos,  feel  in  the  anticipated  peace  of  non-
existence the  sorrows  of  existence  as  if  they  were  alien
to  it,  no  longer  passion,  but  only  a  sell-comjiassion.  That
is  the  heavenly  serenity,  the  divine  repose,  that  breathes
in  Spinoza's  Ethics,  when  the  passions  are  swallowed  up
in  the  abyss  of  reason  because  they  are  clearly  and  dis-
tinctly grasped  as  ideas.  But  even  if  we  assume  that
pure  passionless  state  attained,  if  even  the  sorrow  in
self-compassion  is  glorified,  it  yet  does  not  cease  to  be
grief ,  i.e.,  pain.  The  illusions  are  dead,  hope  is  extinct;
for  what  is  there  still  to  hope  ?  The  dead-tired  humanity
drags  along  its  frail  earthly  body  wearily  from  day  to
day.  The  highest  attainable  were  indeed  painlessness,  for
where  is  positive  happiness  still  to  be  sought  ?  In  the
vain  self-sufficiency  of  the  knowledge  that  all  is  vanity,
or  that  in  the  contest  with  those  vain  impulses  reason
now  usually  remains  victor  ?  Oh,  no ;  such  vainest  of
all  vanities,  such  arrogance  of  the  intellect  has  long  been
surmounted !  But  even  painlessness  is  not  attained  by
hoary  humanity,  for  it  is  still  not  pure  spirit ;  it  is
feeble  and  frail,  and  must  nevertheless  work  in  order  to
live,  and  yet  does  not  know  for  what  it  lives  ;  for  it  has
indeed  the  illusions  of  life  behind  it,  and  hopes  and  ex-
pects ^nothing  more  from  life.  It  has,  as  every  very  aged
and  self-knowing  man,  only  one  wish  more  :  repose,  peace,
eternal  dreamless  sleep  that  may  soothe  its  weariness.
After  the  three  stages  of  illusion  of  the  hope  of  a  positive
happiness  it  has  finally  seen  the  folhj  of  its  endeavour;
it  finally  foregoes  all  positive  happiness,  and  longs  only


nS  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

for  absolute  painlessness,  for  nothingness,  Nirvana.  But
not,  as  before,  this  or  that  man,  but  mankind  longs  for
nothingness,  for  annihilation.  This  is  the  only  conceiv-
able end  of  the  third  and  last  stage  of  the  illusion.

"We  began  this  chapter  with  the  question  whether  the
being  or  the  not-being  of  the  present  world  deserves  the
preference,  and  have  been  obliged  to  answer  this  question,
after  conscientious  consideration,  thus,  that  all  secular
existence  brings  with  it  more  pain  than  pleasure.  As
cause  of  this  disproportion  we  have  seen  those  moments
collected  under  (i.)  in  the  first  stage  of  the  illusion,
which  bring  it  about  that  all  volition  must  necessarily  be
attended  by  more  pain  than  pleasure,  that  thus  all  voli-
tion is  foolish  and  irrational.  Even  then  the  only  pos-
sible result  was  clearly  to  be  perceived  ;  the  whole  sub-
sequent inquiry  was  merely  the  empirical  inductive  proof
of  the  correctness  of  that  consequence,  which  we  certainly
could  not  omit  if  we  were  to  proceed  surely.

If  this  result  appears  to  the  reader  who  has  had  the
patience  to  accompany  me  so  far  a  cheerless  one,  I  must
assure  him  that  he  was  in  error  if  he  sought  to  find  con-
solation and  hope  in  philosophy.  For  such  ends  there  are
books  of  religion  and  edification.  Philosophy,  however,
has  but  a  single  eye  for  truth,  unconcerned  whether  what
it  finds  suits  the  emotional  judgment  entangled  in  the
illusion  of  instinct  or  not.  Philosophy  is  hard,  cold,  and
insensitive  as  a  stone ;  floating  in  the  ether  of  pure
thought,  it  endeavours  after  the  icy  cognition  of  what  is,
its  causes,  and  its  essences.  If  the  strength  of  man  is
unequal  to  the  task  of  enduring  the  results  of  thought,
and  the  heart,  convulsed  with  woe,  stiffens  with  horror,
breaks  into  despair,  or  softly  dissolves  into  world-pain,
and  for  any  of  these  reasons  the  practical  pyschological
machinery  gets  out  of  gear  through  such  knowledge, —
then  philosophy  registers  these  facts  as  valuable  pyscho-
logical material  for  its  investigations.  It  likewise  registers
it  when  the  result  of  these  considerations  in  the  sym-


M  ETA  PHY  SIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  119

pathising  soul  of  the  more  strongly  built  natures  is  a  right-
eous indignation,  a  manly  wrath  clenching  the  teeth,  a
fervid  fury  at  the  frenzied  carnival  of  existence,  or  when
this  rage  turns  into  a  Mephistophelean  gallows-humour,
that  with  half-suppressed  pity  and  half-unrestrained
mockery  looks  down  with  a  like  sovereign  irony  both  on
those  caught  in  the  illusion  of  happiness  and  on  those
dissolved  in  tearful  woe, — or  when  the  heart  wrestling
with  fate  spies  after  a  last  way  of  deliverance  from  this
hell.  To  philosophy  itself,  however,  the  unspeakable
wretchedness  of  existence — as  manifestation  of  the  folly
of  volition — is  only  a  TRANSITION-MOMENT  of  the  theoretical
development  of  its  system.


( 120 )


XIV.

THE GOAL OF EVOLUTION AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CON-
SCIOUSNESS (TRANSITION  TO  PRACTICAL  FHILOSOPHY).

We  saw  in  Chap.  xii.  C.  (vol.  ii.  pp.  359-361)  that  the
chain  of  final  causes  is  not,  like  that  of  phenomenal
causality,  to  be  conceived  as  endless,  because  every  end
in  respect  of  the  following  one  in  the  chain  is  only  means;
therefore  in  the  end-positing  understanding  the  whole
future  series  of  ends  must  always  be  present,  and  yet  a
completed  endlessness  of  ends  cannot  be  present  in  it.
(Cp.  Ges.  Phil.  Abhandl.,  No.  ii.,  "  Ueber  die  nothwendige
Umbildung  der  Hegel'schen  Philosophic  aus  ihrem  Grund-
princip  heraus.")

Accordingly  the  series  of  final  causes  must  be  finite,
i.e.,  they  must  have  a  last  or  ultimate  end,  which  is  the
goal  of  all  the  intermediate  ends.  Further,  we  have  seen
(vol.  ii.  p.  365,  vol.  iii.  pp.  60  and  106)  that  justice  and
morality  by  their  very  nature  cannot  be  final  ends,  but
only  intermediate  ends ;  and  the  last  chapter  has  taught
us  that  also  positive  happiness  cannot  be  the  goal  of  the
world-process,  because  not  only  is  it  not  attained  at  every
stage  of  the  process,  but  even  its  contrary,  misery  and
unblessedness,  is  at  all  times  attained,  which  besides  in-
creases in  the  course  of  evolution  by  destruction  of  the
illusion  and  with  the  heightening  of  consciousness.

It  is  altogether  absurd  to  conceive  evolution  as  end  in
■itself,  i.e.,  to  ascribe  to  it  an  absolute  value ;  for  evolution
is  still  only  the  sum  of  its  moments ;  and  if  the  several
moments  are  not  only  worthless,  but  even  objectionable,
so  too  is  their  sum,  the  process. Many  indeed  call  free-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  121

dom  the  goal  of  the  process.  To  me  freedom  is  nothing
positive,  but  something  privative,  the  absence  of  con-
straint. I  cannot  understand  how  this  is  to  be  regarded
as  (joal  of  the  evolution,  if  the  Unconscious  is  one  and
all,  and  therefore  there  is  no  one  from  whom  it  could
suffer  constraint.  If,  however,  there  is  anything  positive
in  the  notion  of  freedom,  it  can  only  be  the  consciousness
of  inner  necessity,  the  formal  in  the  rational,  as  Hegel
says.  Then  is  an  increase  of  freedom  identical  with  an
increase  of  consciousness.  Here  we  come  to  a  point
already  frequently  mentioned.  If  the  goal  of  evolution  is
anywhere  to  be  looked  for,  it  is  certainly  on  the  path
where  we,  so  far  as  we  can  overlook  the  course  of  the
evolution,  perceive  a  decided  and  continuous  progress,  a
gradual  advance.

This  is  only  and  solely  the  case  in  the  development  of
consciousness,  of  conscious  intelligence,  but  here  also  in
unbroken  ascent  from  the  origin  of  the  primitive  cell  to
the  standpoint  of  humanity  of  the  present  day,  and  with
the  highest  probability  farther  as  long  as  the  world
lasts.  Thus  Hegel  says  (xiii.  p.  36) :  "  All  that  happens
in  heaven  and  on  earth  happens  eternally;  the  life  of
(Jod  and  all  that  takes  place  in  time  has  this  sole  aim,
that  the  spirit  attain  self-knowledge,  become  its  own
object,  find  itself  become  independent,  unite  itself  with
itself ;  it  is  duplication,  alienation,  but  in  order  to  find
itself  to  be  enabled  to  come  to  itself."  Likewise  Schelling  :
"  To  the  Transcendental  philosophy  Nature  is  nothing
but  the  organ  of  self -consciousness,  and  everything
in  Nature  is  only  necessary  because  only  throiujh  such  a
Nature  can  self-consciousness  be  achieved  "  (Werke,  i.  3,
]).  273) ;  "  and  consciousness  is  that  with  which  the  whole
creation  is  concerned"  (ii.  3,  p.  369).  Individuation,  with
its  train  of  egoism  and  wrong-doing  and  wrong-suffering,
serves  the  origination  of  consciousness ;  the  acquisitive
impulse  serves  the  enhancement  of  consciousness  by  the
liberation of the mental energies through increasing


122  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

opulence,  likewise  vanity,  ambition,  and  the  lust  of  fame
by  spurring  on  the  mental  activity ;  sexual  love  serves  it
by  improving  mental  capacity ;  in  short,  all  those  useful
instincts  that  bring  the  individual  far  more  pain  than
pleasure  may  often  impose  the  greatest  sacrifices.  By  the
way  of  the  unfolding  of  consciousness  must  then  the  goal
of  evolution  be  sought,  and  consciousness  is  beyond  a
doubt  the  proximate  end  of  Nature — of  the  world.  The
question  still  remains  open  whether  consciousness  is  really
ultimate  end,  therefore  also  self-end,  or  whether  it  again
serves  only  another  end  ?

One's  own  object  consciousness  can  assuredly  not  be.
"With  pain  it  is  born,  with  pain  it  consumes  its  existence,
with  pain  it  purchases  its  elevation ;  and  what  does  it
offer  in  compensation  for  all  this  ?  A  vain  self-mirroring  !
"Were  the  world  in  other  respects  fair  and  precious,  the
empty  self-satisfaction  in  the  contemplation  of  its  reflected
image  in  consciousness  might  at  any  rate  he  excused,
although  it  would  always  remain  an  infirmity  ;  but  an
out-and-out  miserable  world,  that  can  never  have  any  joy
in  the  sight  of  itself,  but  must  condemn  its  own  existence
as  soon  as  it  understands  itself,  could  such  a  world  be
said  to  have  a  rational,  final,  and  proper  end  in  the  ideal
apparent  duplication  of  itself  in  the  mirror  of  conscious-
ness ?  Is  there  then  not  enough  of  real  wretchedness
that  it  should  be  repeated  in  the  magic  lantern  of  con-
sciousness ?  No  ;  Consciousness  cannot  possibly  be  the
ultimate  object  of  the  world-evolution  guided  by  the  all-
wisdom  of  the  Unconscious.  That  would  only  mean
doubling  the  torment,  preying  on  one's  own  vitals.
Still  less  can  one  suppose  that  the  purely  formal  determi-
nation of  action  according  to  laws  of  conscious  reason  can
be  a  rational  man's  aim  ;  for  why  should  the  reason  deter-
mine action,  or  why  should  action  be  determined  by
reason  apart  from  the  diminution  of  pain  thereby  to  be
induced  ?  Wrere  there  not  painful  being  and  willing,
no  reason  need  trouble itself  about its determination.


META PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  123

Consciousness  and  the  continuous  enhancement  of  the
same  in  the  process  of  the  world's  development  can  thus
in  no  case  be  end  in  itself ;  it  can  merely  be  means  to
another  end,  if  it  is  not  to  float  aimlessly  in  the  air,  whereby
then  also  regressively  the  whole  process  would  cease  to
be  evolution,  and  the  whole  chain  of  natural  ends  would
hang  aimlessly  in  the  air ;  thus,  properly  speaking,  would,
as  ends,  be  annulled  and  declared  irrational.  This  assump-
tion contradicts  the  all- wisdom  of  the  Unconscious,  there-
fore it  only  remains  for  us  to  search  for  the  end  which  the
development  of  consciousness  subserves  as  means.

But  where  to  get  such  an  end  ?  The  observation  of  the
process  itself,  and  of  that  which  mainly  grows  and  pro-
gresses in  it,  leads  only  to  the  knowledge  that  it  is  Con-
sciousness ;  morality,  justice,  and  freedom  have  already
been  set  aside.

However  much  we  may  ponder  and  reflect,  we  can  dis-
cover nothing  to  which  we  could  assign  an  absolute  value,
nothing  that  we  could  regard  as  end  in  itself,  nothing
that  so  affects  the  world-essence  in  its  inmost  core,  as
Happiness.  After  happiness  strives  everything  that  lives,
according  to  endsemonist  principles  motives  influence
us,  and  our  actions  are  consciously  or  unconsciously
guided.  On  happiness  in  this  or  that  fashion  all  systems
of  practical  philosophy  are  grounded,  however  much  they
may  think  to  deny  their  first  principle.  The  endeavour
after  happiness  is  the  most  deeply  rooted  impulse,  is  the
essence  of  the  will  itself  seeking  satisfaction.  And  yet  the
investigations  of  the  last  chapter  have  shown  that  this
endeavour  is  exposed  to  objections ;  that  the  hope  of  its
fulfilment  is  an  illusion;  and  that  its  consequence  is  the
pain  of  disillusion,  its  truth  the  misery  of  existence  ;  have
taught  us  that  the  progressive  evolution  of  consciousness
has  the  negative  result  of  gradually  perceiving  the  illusory
character  of  that  hope,  the  folly  of  that  endeavour.  Be-
tween the  will  striving  after  absolute  satisfaction  and  feli-
city and  the  intelligence  emancipating  itself  more  and  more


124  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

from  the  impulse  through  consciousness  a  deeply  pervading
antagonism  cannot  therefore  be  mistaken.  The  higher  and
more  perfectly  consciousness  develops  in  the  course  of
the  world-process,  the  more  is  it  emancipated  from  the
blind  vassalage  with  which  it  at  first  followed  the  irra-
tional will ;  the  more  it  sees  through  the  illusions  aroused
in  it  by  impulse  for  the  cloaking  of  this  irrationality,  the
more  does  it  assume  a  hostile  position  in  opposition  to  the
will  struggling  for  positive  happiness,  in  which  it  com-
bats it  step  by  step  in  the  course  of  history,  breaks  through
the  ramparts  of  illusions  behind  which  it  is  entrenched
one  after  the  other,  and  will  not  have  drawn  its  last  con-
sequences until  it  has  completely  annihilated  it,  in  that
after  the  destruction  of  every  illusion  only  the  knowledge
remains  that  every  volition  leads  to  unblessedness,  and
only  renunciation  to  the  best  attainable  state,  painlessness.
This  victorious  contest  of  consciousness  with  the  will  as  it
empirically  meets  our  eyes  as  result  of  the  world-process,
is  now,  however,  anything  but  accidental ;  it  is  ideally
contained  in  consciousness,  and  is  necessarily  posited  along
with  its  development.  Tor  in  Chap.  iii.  C.  we  saw  that  the
essence  of  consciousness  is  emancipation  of  the  intellect
from  the  will,  whereas  in  the  Unconscious  the  idea  only
appears  as  servitor  of  the  will,  because  there  is  nothing
but  the  will  to  which  it  can  owe  its  origin,  being  incap-
able of  self-origination  (cp.  C.  chap.  i.  vol.  ii.  p.  59).

Further,  we  know  that  in  the  sphere  of  ideation  the
logical,  rational,  rules,  which  is  intrinsically  just  as  repug-
nant to  the  will  as  the  will  to  it;  whence  we  conclude
that  if  the  idea  has  only  attained  the  necessary  degree  of
independence,  it  will  have  to  condemn  everything  con-
tra-rational (anti-logical)  that  it  finds  in  the  irrational
(alogical)  will,  and  to  annihilate  it.  Thirdly,  we  know  from
the  foregoing  chapter  that  there  follows  from  volition
always  more  pain  than  pleasure ;  that  therefore  the  will
that  wills  happiness  attains  the  contrary,  unhappincss  ;
therefore  most  irrationally  and  for  its  proper  torment  digs


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  125

its  teeth  into  its  own  flesh,  and  yet  on  account  of  its
unreason  can  be  taught  by  no  experience  to  desist  from
its  unblessed  willing.  From  these  three  premises  it  neces-
sarily follows  that  consciousness,  so  far  as  it  attains  the
necessary  clearness,  activity,  and  fulness,  must  also  more
and  more  perceive,  and  accordingly  contest  to  the  last,  the
irrationality  of  volition  and  endeavour  after  happiness.
This  contest,  hitherto  recognised  by  us  only  a  posteriori,
was  accordingly  not  an  accidental,  but  a  necessary  result
of  the  creation  of  consciousness ;  it  lay  therein  a  priori
'preformed.  But  now,  if  consciousness  is  the  proximate
end  of  Nature  or  the  world ;  if  we  necessarily  need  for
consciousness  a  further  end,  and  can  absolutely  think  no
other  true  end  than  the  greatest  possible  happiness ;  if,  on
the  other  hand,  an  endeavour  after  positive  happiness  that
is  identical  with  volition  is  preposterous  because  it  only
attains  unblessedness,  and  the  greatest  possible  attainable
state  of  happiness  is  painlessness;  if,  lastly,  it  lies  in  the
notion  of  consciousness  to  have  for  result  the  emancipation
of  the  intellect  from  the  will,  the  combating  and  final
annihilation  of  willing,  should  it  be  any  longer  doubtful
that  the  all-knowing  Unconscious  thinking  end  and  means
at  once  lias  created  consciousness  for  that  very  reason,  to
redeem  the  will  from  the  unblessedness  of  its  willing,  from
which  it  cannot  redeem  itself, — that  the  real  end  of  the
world -process,  to  which  consciousness  serves  as  final
means,  is  this,  to  realise  the  greatest  possible  attainable  state
of  happiness,  namely,  that  of  painlessness  ?

We  have  seen  that  in  the  existing  world  everything  is
arranged  in  the  wisest  and  best  manner,  and  that  it  may
be  looked  upon  as  the  best  of  all  possible  worlds,  but  that
nevertheless  it  is  thoroughly  wretched,  and  worse  than
none  at  all.  This  was  only  to  be  comprehended  in  such
wise  (cp.  conclusion  of  Chap.  xii.  C),  that,  although  the
"  What  and  How"  in  the  world  (its  essence)  might  be  de-
termined by  an  all-wise  Reason,  yet  the  "  That "  of  the
world  (its  existence)  must  be  posited  by  something  abso-


1-6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

lutely  irrational,  and  this  could  only  be  the  will.  This
consideration  is  for  the  rest  only  the  same  applied  to  the
world  as  a  whole  that  we  have  long  known  as  applied  to
the  individual.  The  atom  of  body  is  attractive  power,  its
"  What  and  How,"  i.e.,  attraction  according  to  this  or  that
law,  is  Presentation;  its  "That,"  its  existence,  its  reality,
its  force,  is  will.  Thus  also  the  world  is  what  it  is  and
how  it  is  as  presentation  of  the  Unconscious,  and  the
unconscious  idea  has  as  servant  of  the  will,  to  which  it
itself  is  indebted  for  actual  existence,  and  as  compared
with  which  it  has  no  independence,  also  no  counsel  and
no  voice  in  the  "  That "  of  the  world.  The  will  is  essen-
tially only  non-rational  (destitute  of  reason,  alogical),  but
in  that  it  acts,  it  becomes  through  the  consequences  of  its
volition,  irrational  (contrary  to  reason,  anti-logical),  inas-
much as  it  attains  unblessedness,  the  contrary  of  its  voli-
tion.1 ISTow  to  bring  back  this  irrational  volition,  which
is  guilty  of  the  "  That "  of  the  world,  this  unblessed  voli-
tion into  non-volition  and  the  painlessness  of  nothingness,
this  task  of  the  logical  in  the  Unconscious  is  the  deter-
minator  of  the  "  What  and  How  "  of  the  world.  For  the
lieason  the  question  therefore  is  to  repair  the  mischief
done  by  the  irrational  Will.  The  unconscious  idea  re-
presents the  will,  if  not  positively  as  will,  yet  negatively
as  the  negative  of  the  logical,  or  as  its  own  limit,  i.e.,  as
the  non-logical ;  but  it  has  in  the  first  place  and  as  such
no  power  over  the  will,  because  it  has  no  independence
in  respect  of  it,  therefore  it  must  employ  an  artifice  to

1  We  must  not  regard  this  alogi-  logical  in  contrast  to  the  logical,
cal,  which  afterwards  becomes  an  an-  and  encountering  it  as  such.  Were
tilogical,  as  a  something  that  under-  there  no  logical  principle,  were  the
goes  change,  but  it  is  per  se  alogi-  other  principle,  which  is  not  the
cal,  so  far  as  it  is  out  of  all  relation  logical,  the  only  one,  its  activity
and  contact  with  the  logical,  and  could  also  never  be  termed  anti-
keeps  entirely  aloof  from  this,  whilst  logical,  and  so  far'it  is  accidental  to
it  shows  itself  as  anti-logical  by  com-  the  alogical  that  it  afterwards  be-
ing into  relation  with  the  logical  comes  anti-logical,  in  the  same  sense
through  its  activity,  which  latter  as  it  is  accidental  to  it  that  there  is
now  cannot  avoid  rinding  in  this  altogether  beside  and  beyond  it  a
activity  of  the  alogical  a  contrast  to  logical  principle.
its  own  nature,  therefore  an anti-


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  127

utilise  the  blindness  of  the  will,  and  to  give  it  such  a
content,  that  by  a  peculiar  turning  back  upon  itself  in
individuation  it  falls  into  conflict  with  itself,  whose  result
is  consciousness,  i.e.,  the  creation  of  an  independent  power
opposed  to  the  will,  in  which  it  can  now  begin  the  contest
with  the  will.  Thus  the  world-process  appears  as  a  per-
petual struggle  of  the  logical  with  the  non-logical,  ending
with  the  conquest  of  the  latter.  If  this  conquest  were
impossible,  if  the  process  were  not  at  the  same  time  de-
velopment to  a  fairly  beckoning  goal,  if  it  were  intermin-
able, or  even  one  that  exhausted  itself  in  blind  necessity
or  contingency,  so  that  all  wit  would  in  vain  endeavour  to
steer  the  ship  into  harbour,  then,  and  only  then,  would
this  world  be  really  absolutely  cheerless,  a  hell  without
an  exit,  and  dumb  resignation  the  only  philosophy.  But
we  who  perceive  in  Nature  and  history  only  a  single
grand  and  marvellous  process  of  development,  we  be-
lieve in  a  final  victory  of  the  ever  more  radiantly  shining
reason  over  the  unreason  of  blind  volition ;  we  believe  in  a
goal  of  the  process  that  brings  us  release  from  the  torment
of  existence,  and  to  whose  induction  and  acceleration  we
too  may  contribute  our  mite  in  the  service  of  reason.  (Cp.
my  demonstration  of  the  self-annulling  of  the  process
from  the  notion  of  development,  Ges.  Phil.  Abhandl.,  No.
ii.  pp.  50-55-)

The  main  difficulty  consists  in  this,  how  the  termination
of  this  contest,  the  final  redemption  from  the  misery  of
volition  and  existence  into  the  painlessness  of  non-willing
and  non-being,  in  short,  how  the  entire  annulling  of
volition  by  consciousness  is  to  be  conceived.  There  is
only  one  attempt  to  solve  this  problem  known  to  me,
namely,  that  of  Schopenhauer,  in  sects.  68-71  of  the  first
volume  of  the  "  World  as  Will  and  Idea,"  which  essen-
tially agrees  with  the  similar  but  more  obscure  designs  of
the  mystical  ascetics  of  all  ages,  and  of  the  doctrine  of
P.uddha,  as  Schopenhauer  himself  very  plainly  shows
(cp.  W.  as  W.  and  L,  ii.  chap,  xlviii.)


128  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

The  main  point  of  this  theory  consists  in  the  assump-
tion that  the  individual,  in  virtue  of  the  individual  cogni-
tion of  the  misery  of  existence  and  the  unreason  of  volition,
is  able  to  cause  his  personal  willing  to  cease,  and  thereby
to  be  individually  annihilated  after  death,  or,  as  Buddhism
expresses  it,  to  be  no  more  born  again.  It  is  obvious  that
this  assumption  is  altogether  incompatible  with  the  funda-
mental principles  of  Schopenhauer,  and  only  his  inability
to  grasp  the  notion  of  development  renders  explicable  the
shortsightedness  which  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  get
rid  of  this  palpable  inconsistency  in  his  system.  This
inconsequence  must  here  be  indicated  very  briefly. — The
will  is  for  him  the  ev  ical  irav,  the  sole  being  of  the  world,
and  the  individual  only  subjective  appearance,  in  strict-
ness never  objectively  actual  phenomenon  of  this  essence.
But  even  if  it  were  the  latter,  how  should  it  be  possible
for  the  individual  to  negate  his  individual  will  as  a  whole,
not  merely  theoretically  but  also  practically,  as  his  indi-
vidual volition  is  only  a  ray  of  that  Only  "Will  ?  Scho-
penhauer himself  rightly  declares  that  in  suicide  the
negation  of  the  will  is  not  attained,  but  it  is  said  to  be
attained  in  the  highest  conceivable  degree  in  voluntary
starvation  (cp.  W.  als  W.  und  V.,  3  Aufl.  i.  474).  That
sounds  indeed  almost  absurd,  if  one  remembers  his  de-
claration "  that  the  body  is  the  will  itself,  objectively
regarded  as  a  phenomenon  in  space,"  whence  it  imme-
diately follows  that  with  the  annulling  of  the  individual
will,  also  its  appearance  in  space,  the  body  must  disappear.
According  to  our  view,  with  suppression  of  the  individual
will  at  least  all  the  organic  functions  dependent  on  the
unconscious  will,  as  heart-throb,  respiration,  &c,  must
instantly  cease,  and  the  body  collapse  as  corpse.  That
this  too  is  empirically  impossible  will  be  doubted  by
nobody;  but  whoever  is  obliged  to  first  kill  his  body  by
refusal  of  food  proves  by  that  very  act  he  is  not  able  to
deny  and  abolish  his  unconscious  will  to  live.

But  supposing  the  impossible  to  be  possible,  what  would


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  129

be  the  consequence  ? One  of  the  many  rays  or  individual
objectifications  of  the  One  Will,  that  which  related  to  this
individual,  would  be  withdrawn  from  its  actuality,  and
this  man  be  dead. That  is,  however,  no  more  and  no  less
than  happens  at  every  decease,  no  matter  to  what  cause  it  is
due,  and  to  the  Only  Will  the  consequences  would  have
been  the  same  if  a  tile  had  killed  that  man;  it  continues
after,  as  before,  with  unenfeebled  energy,  with  undimin-
ished avidity,  to  lay  hold  of  life  wherever  it  finds  it  and
can  lay  hold  of  it ;  for  to  acquire  experience  and  become
wiser  by  experience is  impossible to  it,  and  it cannot
suffer  a  quantitative  abatement  of  its  essence  or  its  sub-
stance  through the withdrawal of a merely one-sided
direction  of  action. Therefore  the  endeavour  after  indi-
vidual negation  of  the  will  is  just  as  foolish  and  useless,
nay,  still  more  foolish,  than  suicide,  because  it  only  attains
the  same  end  more  slowly  and  painfully :  abolition  of  this
appearance  without  altering  the  essence,  which  for  every
abolished  individual  phenomenon  is  ceaselessly  objectified
in  new  individuals. Accordingly  all  asceticism  and  all
endeavour  after  individual  negation  of  will  is  perceived
and  proved  to  be  aberration,  although  an  aberration  only
in  procedure,  not  in  aim. And  because  the  goal  which  it
endeavours  to  gain  is  a  right  one,  it  has  when  rare,  by  ever
whispering  in  the  world's  ear  a  memento  mori,  as  it  were,
and  provoking  a  presentiment  of  the  issue  of  all  endeavour,
a  high  value  ;  it  becomes,  however, injurious  and  pernicious
when,  attacking  whole  nations,  it  threatens  to  bring  the
world-process  to  stagnation,  and  to  perpetuate  the  misery
of  existence. What  would  it  avail,  e.g.,  if  all mankind
should  die  out  gradually  by  sexual  continence? The  world
as  such  would  still  continue  to  exist,  and  would  find  itself
substantially  in  the  same  position  as  immediately  before
the  origin  of  the  first  man;  nay,  the  Unconscious  would
even he  compelled  to  employ the next opportunity  to
fashion a new man or a similar  type,  and the  whole
misery  would  begin  over  again.

VOL.  III.  I


130  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

If  we  look  more  deeply  into  the  nature  of  asceticism
and  personal  negation  of  will,  and  to  the  position  which
it  occupies  in  the  historical  process  in  its  highest  flower-
ing in  pure  Buddhism,  it  appears  as  the  issue  of  the
Asiatic  pre-Hellenic  period  of  development,  as  the  union
of  hopelessness  for  here  and  hereafter  with  the  still  un-
eradicated  egoism  which  thinks  not  of  the  redemption  of
the  whole  hut  only  of  its  own  individual  redemption.  As
we  briefly  pointed  out  above  (cp.  pp.  ioo-ioi)  the  im-
morality and  perniciousness  of  this  standpoint  for  the
whole  of  humanity  and  the  world-process,  so  now  the  folly
of  the  same  is  revealed  for  the  individual  who  builds  upon
it,  in  that  the  personal  hope  of  redemption  has  turned  out
illusory,  consequently  every  means  made  use  of  for  this  end
(thus  also  Quietism,  so  far  as  it  is  not  to  serve  an  individual
or  nationally  coloured  Epicureanism,  but  to  lead  to  redemp-
tion through  individual  negation  of  the  will)  is  absurd.

Schopenhauer,  too,  means  at  bottom  something  different
to  what  he  says.  Before  him,  too,  hovers  in  shadowy  out-
lines, as  the  only  goal  worthy  of  effort,  a  universal  negation
of  will,  as,  e.g.,  the  following  passage  proves  :  "  After  what
was  said  in  the  second  book  on  the  connection  of  all
phenomena  of  will,  I  think  I  may  assume  that  with  the
highest  phenomenon  of  will  (humanity),  the  weaker  reflec-
tion of  the  same,  animality  (and  the  still  lower  forms  of
objectification  of  will),  would  also  pass  away,  as  with  the
full  light  the  penumbras  disappear  "  (W.  a.  W.  u.  V.,  3
Aufl.  i.  449).  On  the  following  page  he  points,  among
others,  to  the  biblical  passage  (Bom.  viii.  22)  in  which  it
is  said,  "  For  we  know  that  the  whole  creation  groaneth
together "  for  the  redemption ;  it  expects,  however,  its
redemption  "from  us  which  have  the  first-fruits  of  the
spirit."  Such  deeper  perspectives  are,  however,  neverthe-
less, out  of  the  question  for  Schopenhauer's  expressly
declared  standpoint,  not  only  because  their  consideration
would  require  a  surrender  of  the  latter,  but  also  because
the  following  out  of  them  is  not  at  all  possible  with the


META PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  131

unliistorical  world-theory  of  his  subjective  idealism.  It
only  becomes  so  when  the  reality  of  time  and  the  posi-
tive meaning  of  the  temporal,  i.e.,  historical,  development
is  acknowledged,  through  whose  cumulative  progress  the
prospect  opens  up  of  a  future  attainment  of  such  states
of  humanity  as  may  enable  that  which  now  appears
absurd  one  day  to  obtain  realisation.

For  him,  who  has  grasped  the  idea  of  development,  it
cannot  be  doubtful  that  the  end  of  the  contest  between
consciousness  and  the  will,  between  the  logical  and  the  non-
logical,  can  only  lie  at  the  goal  of  evolution,  at  the  issue
of  the  world-process ;  for  him  who  before  all  holds  fast
to  the  universality  and  unity  of  the  Unconscious,  the
redemption,  the  turning  back  of  willing  into  non-willing,
is  also  only  to  be  conceived  as  act  of  each  and  all,  not  as
individual,  but  only  as  cosmic-universal  negation  of  will,
as  the  act  that  forms  the  end  of  the  process,  as  the  last  mo-
ment, after  which  there  shall  be  no  more  volition,  activity,
or  time  (liev.  x.  6).  That  the  cosmic  process  cannot  be
thought  without  an  end  in  time,  cannot  be  of  endless
duration,  is  presupposed  ;  for  if  the  goal  lay  at  an  infinite
distance,  a  finite  duration  of  the  process,  however  Ion"-,
would  bring  no  nearer  the  goal,  that  would  still  remain
infinitely  remote.  The  process  would  thus  no  longer  be  a
means  for  reaching  the  goal,  consequently  it  would  he  pur-
poscless  and  aimless.  As  little  as  it  would  comport  with  the
notion  of  development  to  ascribe  an  infinite  duration  in  the
past  to  the  world-process,  because  then  every  conceivable
development  must  be  already  traversed,  which  yet  is  not
the  case,  just  as  little  can  we  allow  to  the  process  an
endless  duration  for  the  future;  both  would  abolish  the
idea  of  development  towards  a  goal,  and  would  put  the
world-process  on  a  level  with  the  pouring  of  water  into  a
sieve  of  the  daughters  of  Danaus.  The  complete  victorv
of  the  logical  over  the  alogical  must  therefore  coincide
with  the  temporal  end  of  the  world-process,  the  last
dav.


132  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Whether  humanity  will  be  capable  of  so  high  an
enhancement  of  consciousness,  or  whether  a  higher  race
of  animals  will  arise  on  earth,  which,  continuing  the  work
of  humanity,  will  attain  the  goal,  or  whether  our  earth
altogether  is  only  an  abortive  attempt  to  reach  such
goal,  and  it  will  only  be  reached,  when  our  little  planet
has  long  been  reckoned  to  the  frozen  celestial  bodies,  on
a  planet  invisible  to  us  of  another  fixed  star  under  more
favourable  conditions,  is  hard  to  say.  Thus  much  is
certain,  wherever  the  process  may  come  to  an  end,  the
goal  of  the  process  and  the  contending  elements  will
always  be  the  same  in  this  world.  If  really  humanity  is
able  and  called  to  bring  the  world-process  to  a  final  issue,
it  will  at  all  events  have  to  do  this  at  the  height  of  its
development  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances  of
the  earth's  habitableness,  and  therefore  we  do  not  need
for  this  case  to  trouble  about  the  scientific  perspective  of
a  future  congelation  and  refrigeration  of  the  earth,  since
then  long  before  the  occurrence  of  such  a  terrestrial  re-
frigeration the  world-process  altogether  would  have  been
arrested,  and  the  existence  of  this  kosmos  with  all  its
world-lenses  and  nebulse  have  been  abolished.

Schopenhauer  does  not  hesitate  to  declare  man  equal
to  the  task,  but  he  is  only  so  decided  because  he  conceives
the  problem  in  an  individual  sense,  whereas  we  must
apprehend  it  universally,  when  it  of  course  requires
quite  other  conditions,  which  we  shall  soon  examine  more
closely.  However  that  be,  of  the  world  known  to  us
we  are  the  first-fruits  of  the  spirit  and  must  bravely
wrestle.  If  victory  does  not  follow,  it  is  not  our  fault.
If,  however,  we  are  capable  of  victory,  and  we  should
only  miss  obtaining  it  through  indolence,  we,  i.e.,  the
creative  being  of  the  world,  which  is  one  with  us,  would
have  to  bear  so  much  the  longer  as  immanent  punish-
ment the  torment  of  existence.  Therefore  vigorously
forward in the world-process  as  workers  in  the Lord's


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  133

vineyard,  for  it  is  the  process alone  that  can  bring  re-
demption ! l

Here  we  have  reached  the  point  where  the  philosophy
of  the  Unconscious  gains  a  principle  which  alone  can  form
the  basis  of  practical  philosophy.  The  truth  of  the  first
stage  of  the  illusion  was  despair  of  existence  here;  the
truth  of  the  second  stage  of  the  illusion  was  despair
also  of  the  hereafter ;  the  truth  of  the  third  stage  of  the
illusion  was  the  absolute  resignation  of  positive  happiness.
All  these  points  of  view  are  merely  negative;  practical
philosophy  and  life,  however,  need  a  positive  stand-
point, and  this  is  the  complete  devotion  of  the  personality
to  the  world-process  for  the  sake  of  its  goal,  the  general
world-redemption  (no  longer,  as  in  the  third  stage  of  the
illusion,  in  the  hope  of  a  positive  happiness  in  some  later
phase  of  the  process).  Otherwise  expressed,  the  prin-
ciple of  practical  philosophy  consists  in  this,  to  make  the
ENDS  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS  ENDS  OF  OUR  OWN  CONSCIOUS-
NESS, which  follows  immediately  from  the  two  premises,
that,  in  the  first  place,  consciousness  has  made  the  goal
of  the  world-redemption  from  the  misery  of  volition  its
own  goal ;  and,  secondly,  that  it  has  the  persuasion  of  the
all-wisdom  of  the  Unconscious,  in  consequence  of  which
it  recognises  all  the  means  made  use  of  by  the  Unconscious
as  the  most  suitable  possible,  even  if  in  the  special  case
it  should  be  inclined  to  harbour  doubts  thereon.  Since
selfishness,  the  original  source  of  all  evil,  which  theo-
retically, by  the  acknowledgment  of  Monism,  has  already
been  ascertained  to  be  naught,  can  practically  be  effectively
broken  by  nothing  else  than  the  cognition  of  the  illusory
nature  of  all  endeavours  after  positive  happiness,  the  re-
quisite perfect  devotion  of  the  personality  to  the  whole  is

1 I  hardly  need  specially  call  the  the  rest  of  Nature,  not  in respect  of

reflective reader"s  attention to  the  sin,  but  of  eril. The former would

[joint that the notion  of redemp-  he perfectly  meaningless,  the  latter

tion is here extended from the  is  an  unavoidable  consequence  of  the

individual  to humanity  and  the  all-  fnonistic  theory,
one  world-essence  sentient  in  it  and


134  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

at  this  standpoint  more  readily  attainable  than  at  any  other
(p.  98).  Further,  since  the  dread  of  pain,  the  fear  of  the
eternal  prolongation  of  the  sensually  present  pain,  yields
always  a  far  more  energetic  motive  for  effective  action  than
the  hope  of  a  felicity  represented  as  future,  at  this  stand-
point instinct  will  be  restored  to  its  rights  far  more  power-
fully than  in  the  third  stage  of  the  illusion  by  the  mere
suppression  of  egoism  (pp.  99-102),  and  the  affirmation
of  the  will  to  live  -proclaimed  provisionally  alone  true  ;
for  only  in  complete  devotion  to  life  and  its  •  pains,  not
in  cowardly  renunciation  and  withdrawal,  is  anything
to  be  achieved  for  the  world-process.  The  reflecting  reader
will  also,  without  further  suggestion,  understand  how  a
practical  philosophy  erected  on  these  principles  should  be
shaped,  and  that  such  an  one  cannot  contain  the  dis-
union, but  only  the  full  RECONCILIATION  with  life.1  It  is
now  also  obvious  how  only  the  unity  of  Optimism  and
Pessimism,  here  expounded,  of  which  every  human  being
carries  in  himself  an  obscure  image  as  his  norm  of  action,
is  able  to  give  an  energetic,  and  indeed  the  strongest
conceivable  impulse  to  effective  action,  whilst  the  one-
sided Pessimism  from  nihilistic  despair,  the  one-sided
and  really  consistent  Optimism  from  easy  unconcern  must
lead  to  Quietism.  [For  those  readers  who  regard  the  stand-
point of  our  time,  which  I  call  the  third  stage  of  the
illusion,  the  true  one,  and  who  are  not  inclined  to  deem  it
possible  that  this  too  will  ever  be  recognised  in  the  manner
indicated  by  me  as  illusion  by  the  further  historical  deve-
lopment of  the  consciousness  of  humanity,  I  will  only  re-
mark, that  the  principles  here  expressed  (to  make  the  ends
of  the  Unconscious  ends  of  consciousness,  &c.)  remains
just  as  valid  for  them,  as  the  observations  made  on  occasion
of  the  third  stage  of  the  illusion  with  respect  to  egoism
(suicide,  Quietism,  &c.)  retain  their  validity  from  the
point  of  view  here  reached,  since  it  is  for  both  indifferent

1  Cp. Ges. Phil. Abhandlungen, No. iv.  : "  1st der  pessirnistische
Monismus  trestles  ? "


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  135

whether  the  final  goal  of  the  world-development  be  con-
ceived positively  or  negatively.]

We  have  in  conclusion  still  to  deal  with  the  question,
in  what  manner  the  end  of  the  world-process,  the  relega-
tion of  all  volition  to  absolute  non- volition,  with  which,  as
we  know,  all  so-called  existence  (organisation,  matter,
&c),  co  ipso  disappears  and  ceases,  is  to  be  conceived.  Our
knowledge  is  far  too  imperfect,  our  experience  too  brief,
and  the  possible  analogies  too  defective,  for  us  to  be  able,
even  approximately ;  to  form  a  picture  of  the  end  of  the  pro-
cess ;  and  I  beg  the  gentle  reader  not  to  take  the  following
for  an  apocalypse  of  the  end  of  the  world,  but  only  for  hints
which  are  to  prove  that  the  matter  is  not  quite  so  unthink-
able as  it  might  well  appear  to  many  at  the  first  blush.
But  even  those  whom  these  aphorisms  on  the  mode  of
conceiving  that  event  may  far  more  repel  than  the  bare
enouncement  of  the  same,  I  beg  not  to  be  misled  as  to
the  proved  necessity  of  that  only  possible  goal  of  the  world-
process  by  the  difficulties  which  attend  the  comprehension
of  the  "  How  "  at  a  point  so  remote  from  the  end.1  Of
course,  we  can  only  contemplate  the  case  that  mankind,
and  not  another  species  of  living  beings  unknown  to  us,
is  called  to  solve  the  problem.

The  first  condition  of  the  success  of  the  work  is  this,
that  by  far  the  largest  part  of  the  Unconscious  Spirit
manifesting  itself  in  the  present  world  is  to  be  found  in
humanity ;  for  only  when  the  negative  part  of  volition
in  humanity  outweighs  the  sum  of  all  the  rest  of  the
will objectifying itself in the organic and inorganic

1 Experience  has  shown  me  that  monest  prudence  to  suppress  in  the

all  limiting  clauses  in  respect  of  the  first  edition  these  four  pages,  literally

purely problematical  nature  of the  indifferent  for  the  book  as  a  whole.

following  suggestions  are  insufficient  It  is  always  more  profitable  for  the

to guard against an intentional  author  not  to  expose  too  much  tile

or  unintentional  misunderstanding,  difficulties  of  a subject which  are

as  though  positive  assertions  of  any  for the time being insoluble  ; for

kind  whatsoever  were  meant  to  be  the  advance  of science, on  the  con-

made  here  upon  the "  How "  of  the  train/, the clearest exposure  is most

end. If  I  wrote  for  success,  it  would  jidcantayeous.
certainly  have  only  been  the  com-


136  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

world,  only  then  can  the  human  negation  of  will  annihi-
late the  tvhole  actual  volition  of  the  world  without  residuum,
and  cause  the  whole  kosmos  to  disappear  at  a  stroke  by
withdrawal  of  the  volition,  which  alone  gives  it  existence.
(That  is  here  the  only  question,  not  as  to  a  mere  suicide
of  humanity  en  masse,  the  complete  inutility  of  which  for
attaining  the  goal  of  the  world-process  has  already  been
proved  above.)  This  supposition  now,  that  one  day  the
major  part  of  the  actual  volition  or  of  the  functioning
Unconscious  Spirit  may  be  manifested  in  humanity,  seems
to  possess  no  difficulty  in  principle.  On  the  earth  we  see
man  ever  suppressing  other  animal  and  vegetable  life,  save
those  animals  and  plants  that  he  employs  for  his  own
use.  Future  still  undreamt-of  advances  in  chemistry  and
agriculture  may  permit  the  increase  of  the  earth's  popu-
lation to  a  very  considerable  degree,  although  it  already
now  amounts  to  upwards  of  1300  millions,  a  relatively
small  part  of  the  solid  land  supporting  as  dense  a  popula-
tion as  the  means  of  obtaining  nourishment  known  at  our
present  stage  of  civilization  allow.  Of  the  stars  only  a
comparatively  small  part  have  entered  upon  that  brief
period  of  refrigeration  which  permits  of  the  existence  of
organisms ;  but  not  to  mention  that  for  the  raising  of  a
luxuriant  organisation  quite  other  conditions  are  required
than  merely  the  right  temperature  {e.g.,  irradiation  through
rays  of  light,  suitable  atmospheric  pressure,  existence  of
water,  right  mixture  of  the  chemical  constituents  of  the
atmosphere,  &c),  of  that  insignificant  number  which  at  all
support  organisation,  only  a  very  small  part  again  will
be  able  to  produce  beings  of  a  stage  of  organisation  ap-
proximating to  the  human.  The  sidereal  developments  are
measured  by  such  immense  intervals  that  it  is  a  priori  ex-
tremely improbable  that  the  existence  of  a  highly  organised
species  on  another  star  should  coincide  with  the  duration  of
mankind  on  earth. — But  now  how  much  greater  is  the
spirit  that  manifests  itself  in  a  cultivated  man  than  that  in
an  animal  or  a  plant ;  how  much  greater  than  that  in  an


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  137

unorganised  complex  of  atoms  !  One  must  not  commit  the
error  of  estimating  the  strength  of  the  active  will  merely
*by  the  mechanical  effect,  i.e.,  by  the  degree  of  the  resist-
ance of  atomic  forces  overcome ;  this  would  be  extremely
one-sided,  since  the  manifestation  of  the  will  in  the
atomic  forces  is  only  the  lowest.  The  will,  however,  has
many  other  aims,  and  a  contest  of  the  most  violent  desires
can  take  place  without  any  perceptible  influence  on  the
position  of  the  atoms.  Therefore  the  hypothesis  seems  to
me  to  be  by  no  means  far-fetched,  that  one  day  in  a  remote
future  humanity  may  combine  in  itself  such  a  quantity  of
spirit  and  will,  that  the  spirit  and  will  active  in  the  rest
of  the  world  is  considerably  outweighed  by  the  former.

The  second  condition  of  the  possibility  of  victory  is,  that
the  consciousness  of  mankind  be  penetrated  by  the  folly
of  volition  and  the  misery  of  all  existence  ;  that  it  have
conceived  so  deep  a  yearning  for  the  peace  and  the  pain-
lessness of  non-being,  and  all  the  motives  hitherto  making
for  volition  and  existence  have  been  so  far  seen  through  in
their  vanity  and  nothingness  that  that  yearning  after  the
annihilation  of  volition  and  existence  attains  resistless  au-
thority as  a  practical  motive.  According  to  the  last  chap-
ter, this  condition  is  one  whose  fulfilment  in  the  hoary  age
of  humanity  we  may  expect  with  the  greatest  probability,
when  the  theoretical  cognition  of  the  misery  of  exist-
ence is  truthfully  comprehended,  and  this  cognition  gra-
dually more  and  more  overcomes  the  opposing  instinctive;
emotional  judgment,  and  even  becomes  a  practically  effi-
cient feeling,  which,  as  a  union  of  present  pain,  memory  of
former  pain  and  fore-feeling  of  care  and  fear — becomes  a
collective  feeling  in  every  individual,  embracing  the  whole
life  of  the  individual,  and  through  sympathy  the  whole
world,  which  at  last  attains  unlimited  sway.  Doubt  as  to
the  general  motive  power  of  such  an  idea  at  first  certainly
arising  and  communicated  in  more  or  less  abstract  form,
would  not  be  authorised,  for  it  is  the  invariably  observed
course  of  historically  regulative  ideas  which  have  arisen  in


138  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  brain  of  an  individual,  that  although  they  can  only  be
communicated  in  abstract  form,  they  penetrate  in  course  of
time  into  the  heart  of  the  masses,  and  at  last  arouse  their
will  to  a  passionateness  not  seldom  bordering  on  fanaticism.
But  if  ever  an  idea  was  born  as  feeling,  it  is  the  pessimistic
sympathy  with  oneself  and  everything  living  and  the  long-
ing after  the  peace  of  non-existence;  and  if  ever  an  idea  was
called  to  fulfil  its  historical  mission  without  turbulence  and
passion,  silently  but  steadily  and  persistently  in  the  interior
of  the  soul,  it  is  this.  Since  experientially  the  individual
negation  of  the  will  at  variance  with  the  ends  of  the  Uncon-
scious furnished  in  such  numerous  cases  a  sufficient  motive
for  overcoming  the  instinctive  will  to  live  in  quietistic
ascetic  self-immolation  (certainly  without  any  metaphy-
sical result),  it  is  not  obvious  why  at  the  end  of  the  world-
process  the  universal  negation  of  will  fulfilling  the  purpose
of  the  Unconscious  should  not  likewise  be  able  to  afford
a  sufficient  motive  for  overcoming  the  instinctive  will  to
live,  especially  as  everything  har  d  is  the  more  easily  exe-
cuted the  greater  the  co-operation.  It  should  further  be
noted  that  humanity  has  still  a  life  of  many  generations  in
which  to  gradually  subdue  and  deaden,  by  habit  and  heredi-
tary influence,  the  passions  opposing  the  pessimistic  feeling
and  the  longing  after  peace,  and  to  strengthen  the  pessimis-
tic disposition  by  hereditary  transmission.  Even  now  we
may  remark  that  the  natural  force  of  passion  and  its  de-
moniac power  has  to  yield  no  inconsiderable  domain  to  the
levelling  and  enfeebling  influences  of  modern  life,  and  this
enfeebling  process  will  attain  results  the  more  considerable
the  more  law  and  morals  restrict  personal  caprice,  and  the
more  rationally  life  is  managed  according  to  the  pattern  of
trivial  worldly  prudence  from  childhood  upwards.  It  is
one  of  the  signs  of  humanity's  growing  old  that  not  a
growth,  but  a  diminution  of  the  energy  of  feeling  and  of
passion  opposes  the  growth  of  intellectual  clearness;  that
thus  the  influence  of  conscious  intellect  in  the  provinces
of  feeling  and  willing,  undeniably  present  at  every  stage,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  139

is,  for  a  twofold  reason,  constantly  on  the  increase,  until
in  old  age  it  becomes  decidedly  dominant.  From  this
point  of  view,  too,  the  possibility  therefore  appears  any-
thing but  remote  that  the  pessimistic  consciousness  will  one

day  become  the  dominant  motive  of  voluntary  choice.

We  may  modify  this  second  condition  in  such  a  way  that
not  all  humanity,  but  only  a  part  thereof,  need  be  pene-
trated by  this  consciousness,  provided  that  the  spirit  that
is  manifested  in  it  be  the  larger  half  of  the  active  spirit  of
the  universe.

The  third  condition  is  a  sufficient  communication  be-
tween the  peoples  of  the  earth  to  allow  of  a  simultaneous
common  resolve.  On  this  point,  whose  fulfilment  only
depends  on  the  perfection  and  more  dexterous  application
of  technical  discoveries,  imagination  has  free  scope.

If  we  assume  these  conditions  as  given,  there  is  a  possi-
bility that  the  majority  of  the  spirit  active  in  the  world
may  form  the  resolve  to  give  up  willing.

There  now  arises  the  further  question  whether,  in  the
nature  of  the  will,  its  functional  activity  and  the  mode
of  its  determination  by  motives,  the  possibility  is  at  all
given  of  attaining  a  universal  negation  of  the  will,  sup-
posing the  preponderating  part  of  the  actual  world- will
to  be  contained  in  that  mass  of  conscious  mind  which
resolves  a  tempo  to  will  no  more,  no  matter  whether  this
supposition  be  fulfilled  within  humanity  or  another  species,
or  only  under  quite  other  conditions  of  existence  of  a
future  phase  of  development  of  the  kosmos  ?  We  have  to
go  back  for  the  decision  of  this  last  question  to  our  know-
ledge of  the  nature  of  volition  and  the  laws  of  motivation
following  therefrom  (comp.  Chap.  xi.  B.),  it  being  always
assumed  that  these  must  remain  identical  in  every  possible
form  of  objectification  of  the  will.

It  admits  of  no  doubt  that  a  special  volition  in  man,  a
desire,  affection,  or  passion,  may,  in  certain  circumstances,
be  neutralised  by  the  inlluence  of  conscious  reason  in  the
special  case. If,  e.g.,  I  aim  at  honour  by  a  deed or  a


Uo  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

work,  and  my  reason  tells  me  that  those  whose  recognition
I  covet  are  fools  and  blockheads,  this  insight,  if  it  is  suffi-
ciently convincing  and  potent,  is  able  to  allay  my  ambition,
at  least  in  this  case.  But  now  all  psychologists  are  agreed
that  such  a  suppression  is  not  to  be  conceived  by  direct
influence  of  the  reason  on  the  desire  to  be  suppressed,  but
only  indirectly  by  the  motivation  or  excitement  of  an  oppo-
site desire,  which  now  on  its  part  comes  into  collision  with
the  first,  the  result  of  which  is  that  they  neutralise  one
another.  Only  in  this  manner  is  the  suppression  of  the
positive  world-will  to  be  conceived  that  Schopenhauer
calls  the  will  to  live.  Conscious  cognition  cannot  directly
diminish  or  suppress  the  will,  but  it  can  only  excite  an
opposite,  therefore  negative  will,  which  diminishes  the
intensity  of  the  positive  will.  Quite  inadmissible  accord-
ingly is  Schopenhauer's  doctrine  of  the  quietive  of  the  will
consisting  in  an  altogether  different  mode  of  knowledge,
before  which  the  motives  are  to  be  inefficient,  and  which
shall  be  the  only  possible  case  of  an  incursion  of  the
transcendent  freedom  of  the  will  into  the  world  of  phe-
nomena (cp.  W.  a.  W.  u.  V.,  Bd.  ii.  p.  476-477).  Such
incomprehensible,  utterly  unjustified  miracles  are  with
our  view  superfluous.  How  beautifully,  on  the  contrary,
Schelling  says  (ii.  3,  p.  206),  "  Even  God  cannot  otherwise
conquer  the  will  than  through  itself."

If  in  the  struggle  of  the  special  desires  often  two
desires  effect  no  reciprocal  suppression  in  spite  of  the
struggle,  this  happens  either  because  they  are  only  par-
tially opposed,  but  partially  pursue  different  side-ends,
therefore  their  paths  form  only  an  angle,  as  it  were ;  or  it
happens  because  the  one  desire  is  indeed  in  fact  continu-
ally annihilated,  but  just  as  continually  is  instinctively
bom  anew  from  the  persistent  ground  of  the  Unconscious,
so  that  there  arises  the  appearance  of  its  not  being  altered
at  all.  In  the  opposition  of  the  affirmation  and  negation
of  will  the  contrast  is  so  mathematically  strict  that  the
former  case  certainly  cannot  occur,  and  for  an  immediate


MET  A  PHY  SIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  141

resurgence  of  the  world-will  after  its  total  annihilation
there  is  at  any  rate  entirely  wanting  the  analogy  with  the
single  desire,  because  in  the  latter  the  background  of  the
actual  world- will,  in  the  former,  however,  nothing  actually
any  longer  remains.  (For  the  rest,  the  possibility  of  a
resurgence  will  receive  notice  in  the  following  chapter.)
As  long,  then,  as  the  opposition  of  the  will  motived  by
consciousness  has  not  yet  attained  the  strength  of  the
world-will  to  be  suppressed,  so  long  will  the  continually
annihilated  part  continually  reassert  itself,  supported  on
the  remaining  part,  which  also  further  secures  the  positive
direction  of  the  will ;  but  as  soon  as  the  former  has  attained
the  same  strength  as  the  latter,  there  is  no  obvious  reason
why  both  should  not  completely  paralyse  one  another  and
reduce  to  zero,  i.e.,  be  destroyed  without  residuum.  A  nega-
tive excess  is  therefore  inconceivable,  because  the  zero-point
is  the  goal  of  the  negative  will,  which  it  will  not  transgress.
The  motivation  or  excitement  of  the  negative  will  by
conscious  knowledge  is,  according  to  the  analogy  of  the
excitement  of  a  special  negative  desire  through  rational  in-
sight, not  merely  conceivable,  out  demanded ;  for  here  in  the
universal,  just  as  in  the  individual,  the  ground  on  which
reason  sets  in  motion  the  conscious  will  of  opposition  is
no  other  than  an  endamionological  one — regard  to  the  attain-
ment of  the  happiest  possible  state,  beyond  which  goal  the
positive  unconscious  will  in  its  blindness  darts  to  its  misery.
This  endeavour  after  the  greatest  possible  state  of  satis-
faction, which  the  blind  will  only  seeks  from  want  of
understanding  in  a  perver.-c  direction,  thus  belongs  actually
quite  universally  to  the  nature  of  the  will  itself,  and
wherever  in  the  kosmos  so  high  a  consciousness  may
arise  that  it  perceives  the  absurdity  of  the  way  to  the
goal,  there  necessarily  a  conscious  volition  is  motived  by
tins  knowledge,  which  seeks  to  attain  the  greatest  possible
s;ate  of  satisfaction  by  the  opposite  path,  namely,  by  way
of  negation  of  the  will.


142  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

The  result  of  the  last  three  chapters  is,  then,  as  follows.
Volition  has  by  its  nature  an  excess  of  pain  for  its  conse-
quence. Volition,  which  posits  the  "  That "  of  the  world,
thus  condemns  the  world,  no  matter  how  it  may  be  consti-
tuted, to  torment.  To  obtain  redemption  from  this  un-
blessedness  of  volition,  which  the  all- wisdom  or  the  logical
element  of  the  unconscious  Idea  cannot  directly  effect,
because  it  is  itself  in  bondage  to  the  Will,  the  logical  in
the  Unconscious  procures  the  emancipation  of  the  Idea
through  consciousness  in  that  it  thus  dissipates  the  will  in
individuation,  so  that  its  separate  tendencies  turn  against
one  another.  The  logical  principle  guides  the  world-
process  most  wisely  to  the  goal  of  the  greatest  possible
evolution  of  consciousness,  which  being  attained,  con-
sciousness suffices  to  hurl  back  the  total  actual  volition
into  nothingness,  by  which  the  process  and  the  world  ceases,
and  ceases  indeed  without  any  residuum  whatever  whereby
the  process  might  be  continued.  The  logical  element
therefore  ensures  that  the  world  is  a  best  possible  world,
such  a  one,  namely,  as  attains  redemption,  not  one  whose
torment  is  perpetuated  endlessly.


( 143 )


XV.

THE ULTIMATE PRINCIPLES.

We  have  in  our  previous  inquiries  ever  and  again  met
with  two  principles,  Will  and  Idea,  without  the  assump-
tion of  which  no  explanation  would  be  possible,  and  which
are  really  principles,  i.e.,  original  elements,  because  every
attempt  to  resolve  them  into  simpler  elements  appears  from
the  first  hopeless,  but  all  previous  endeavours  to  refer  one
to  the  other  are  to  be  regarded  as  miscarrying.  We  have,
however,  also  nowhere  needed  other  than  these  two  prin-
ciples for  our  explanations,  and  what  perhaps  might
be  regarded  as  principia,  feeling  or  sensation  and  con-
sciousness, we  have  seen  to  be  phenomenal  consequences  of
our  principles.  Other  elementary  activities,  as  imagining,
willing,  perceiving,  or  feeling,  have,  so  far  as  I  know,  never
been  introduced  even  tentatively  in  any  spiritualistic
philosophy,  so  that  he  alone  could  find  fault  with  our
adhering  to  Will  and  Idea  wdio,  on  his  part,  should  furnish
the  proof  that  the  previously  received  elementary  func-
tions of  the  mind  are  not  the  right  ones,  and  show  what
others  are  to  be  put  in  their  place.

Now,  as  concerns  our  conceptions  of  these  principia,  we
proceeded  here  too  purely  empirically,  and  inductively.
We  understood  them,  in  the  first  place,  as  the  ordinary
intelligence  formed  in  the  leading-strings  of  the  Teutonic
languages  apprehends  them,  and  altered,  extended,  and
limited  them  as  the  scientific  need  of  explaining  facts
required.  The  starting-point  of  our  philosophising  is
accordingly  anthropological,  so  far  as  the  linguistic  popular


H4  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

consciousness  and  philosophic  empiricism  derive  both
from  the  inner  experience  of  the  mental  activity  of  men.
In  fact,  this  starting-point  appears,  after  a  little  reflection,
the  only  possible  one.  Only  what  we  are  able  to  under-
stand by  analogy  with  ourselves,  only  that  are  we  able  at  all
to  understand  of  the  world  ;  and  were  we  not  ourselves
a  piece  of  the  world,  and  had  not  our  anthropological  ele-
mentary functions,  like  all  the  other  phenomena  of  this
world,  grown  out  of  the  common  simple  fundamental
principles  of  this  world,  then  with  the  absence  of  resem-
blance and  analogy  between  us  and  the  rest  of  this  world
all  possibility  also  of  an  understanding  of  the  same
would  be  cut  off  for  us.  But  supported  precisely  on
this  intimate  affinity  of  ourselves  with  other  products  of
Nature  and  with  the  common  metaphysical  roots  of  all,
we  may  confidently  indulge  in  a  cautious  use  of  analogy,
and  risk  the  analogous  transference  of  the  anthropological
principia  to  the  rest  of  Nature,  if  we  only  proceed  criti-
cally enough  in  the  separation  of  those  peculiarities  which
distinguish  us  men  from  the  rest  of  Nature.

Thus  we  extended  the  anthropological  principles  Will
and  Idea  by  recognition  of  the  same,  first  in  the  descend-
ing scale  of  animals,  then  in  the  independent  lower
nerve-centres  of  the  human  organism,  then  in  the  kingdom
of  the  lower  animals  and  protists,  then  in  the  vegetable
kingdom,  then,  lastly,  in  the  domain  of  inorganic  matter.
AYe  felt,  however,  compelled  by  criticism,  at  the  stages
more  removed  from  man,  more  and  more  to  strip  off  that
which  in  self-observing  man  most  strikes  the  eye,  namely,
Consciousness,  but  also  at  the  same  time  perceived  that
even  in  the  highest  forms  of  the  mental  activity  of  man
.such  volition  and  ideation  play  the  most  significant  part
as  is  free  from  the  form  of  consciousness  ;  that  man  too  is
what  he  is  only  by  this,  that  the  same  unconscious  spirit
dwells  in  him  which  he  long  admired  in  silence  in  the
manifestations  of  the  phenomena  of  Nature  of  less  devel-
oped consciousness. "We  understood,  further,  that this


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  145

unconscious  spirit  must  be  the  common  bond  of  the
world  and  the  support  of  the  unity  of  the  creative
plan  prevailing  in  it ;  nay,  that  it  must  altogether  be
the  indivisible  metaphysical  essence,  as  whose  objective
phenomena]  the  only  apparently  substantially  separated
natural  individuals  are  to  be  regarded.  Thus  before  our
searching  glance  the  principles  "  Unconscious  Will "  and
"Unconscious  Idea"  coalesced  to  form  the^one  universal
spiritual  world-essence,,  which  the  dark  impulse  of  man-
kind has  always  sought  by  the  most  diverse  paths  and
denoted  by  the  most  diverse  names,  but  yet  everywhere
at  a  certain  stage  of  culture  has  apprehended  as  spirit.
As  said,  we  can  comprehend  of  the  nature  of  such  a
being  only  just  so  much  as  is  revealed  of  this  nature  also
in  ourselves  through  the  medium  of  internal  experience,
as  we  ourselves  are  its  phenomena  and  apprehend  ourselves
as  such,  as  its  principles  are  also  visibly  unfolded  in  us  ;
only  he  who  denies  the  essential  identity  and  continuity
of  the  world  and  the  harmony  of  the  principles  efficient  in
it  with  the  principles  "producing  it,  would  be  able  to  blame
our  procedure  as  anthropopathic ;  and  only  the  absolute
abandonment  of  thought  of  the  most  thorough-going  scep-
ticism would  remain  if  this  mode  of  procedure  were  repu-
diated in  principle.  The  warning  against  anthropopath-
ism  is  only  justified  so  far  as  it  is  limited  to  the  sharpest
critical  severance  from  the  ultimate  principles  of  all
that  could  anyhow  belong  to  the  special  phenomenal  form
of  the  world-essence  in  man  or  in  the  animal  kingdom,
or  in  some  narrow  group  of  objectifications  of  the  All-
one,  not  exhausting  Nature  in  its  totality.  In  this  direc-
tion, however,  I  believe  I  have  in  fact  also  conscientiously
satisfied  the  most  far-going  and  most  scrupulous  require-
ments, which  is  best  proved  by  this,  that  the  principles
Will  and  Idea  are  apprehended  in  the  highest  degree
of  a  universality  destitute  of  all  empirical  particularity,
namely,  as  generally  as  the  necessity  of  at  all  retaining
a  positive  and  precise  concept  any  way  admits. Thus  is

VOL.  III.  K


146  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

every  unwarrantable  and  spurious  anthropopathism  most
carefully  avoided,  without  abandoning  the  only  path  of
understanding  that  our  position  in  the  world  renders
possible  for  us,  but  also  permits,  i.e.,  justifies  by  results,
without  therefore  from  an  ultra-scepticism  distrusting
and  disdaining  genuine  anthropopathism,  which  indeed
only  reaches  just  as  far  as  we  ourselves  are  of  metaphysical
essence  (or  in  theological  language :  of  divine  origin).

If  now,  according  to  the  results  of  our  previous  inquiries,
the  two  principles  Will  and  Idea,  conceived  in  metaphysical
essential  unity,  actually  suffice  for  the  explanation  of  the
phenomena  presented  to  us  in  the  known  world,  they  form
the  apex  of  the  pyramid  of  inductive  knowledge,  and  it  only
remains  to  us  in  conclusion  to  take  one  more  view  of  the
height  thus  scaled,  when  a  comparison  with  the  ultimate
principles  of  existing  philosophical  systems  may  not  be
uninteresting.  This  chapter  forms,  accordingly,  the  direct
continuation  of  Chap.  iv.  A.,  Chaps,  i.,  vii.,  viii.  C,  and  in
part  also  of  Chaps,  xi.,  xii.,  and  xiv.  C,  whose  contents  I
beg  the  gentle  reader  particularly  to  bear  in  mind.

The  contents  of  the  present  chapter  may  perhaps  possess
least  interest  for  the  reader  who  has  had  but  little  philo-
sophical culture,  because  more  than  all  the  foregoing  they
lose  themselves  in  the  analysis  of  notions  which  in  general
extend  to  the  bounds  of  abstraction  and  of  our  intelligence.
However,  on  the  one  hand,  the  relation  here  first  more
precisely  indicated  of  my  point  of  view  to  the  systems  of
the  most  important  philosophers,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
the  stricter  discussion  of  the  notions  whose  significance
and  mutual  relations  had  hitherto  for  the  most  part  been
presupposed,  should,  on  account  of  the  clearing  up  of
many  points  previously  left  in  obscurity,  be  a  sufficient
inducement  to  a  reader  who  has  followed  what  has  gone
before  with  interest  not  to  leave  this  concluding  chapter
unread.

If  the  value  of  scientific  conclusions  be  estimated  solely
according  to  the  degree of  their  certainty  or  accuracy,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  147

undoubtedly  the  value  of  the  same  is  less  the  further  they
are  removed  from  the  ground  of  the  facts  to  he  explained,
because  their  probability  becomes  less,  and  then  the
value  claimed  by  the  apex  of  the  pyramid  of  knowledge
would  be  least.  However,  for  the  determination  of  value,
yet  other  elements  than  merely  the  degree  of  probability
should  be  taken  into  account,  which  may  be  summed-
up  in  the  degree  of  importance  which  these  results  would
have  in  comparison  with  other  objects  of  knowledge,
supposing  that  they  were  all  apprehended  with  the
probability  1,  i.e.,  with  absolute  certainty.  As  for  this
factor,  the  value  of  the  apex  of  the  pyramid  of  knowledge
manifestly  exceeds  all  other  possible  objects  of  know-
ledge, and  therefore  I,  for  my  part,  shall  not  be  weary
in  contributing  my  mite  to  the  better  establishment  of
the  last  metaphysical  principles,  hoping  that  very  soon
some  other  may  come  who  may  go  still  farther.  On  the
other  hand,  however,  I  hope  that  my  successors  will  find
the  lose  of  the  pyramid  built  so  well  and  firmly  by  me
as  to  be  able  to  build  farther  thereon,  and  will  not  have
cause  to  demolish  the  same  in  its  essential  parts.

1.  Retrospect  of  Earlier  Philosophers. — Of  the  great  philo-
sophers, those  most  in  accordance  with  our  principles  are
Plato  and  Schelling,  Hegel  and  Schopenhauer,  and  indued
the  two  latter  represent  one-sided  extremes  (Hegel  the
logical  element,  Schopenhauer  the  Will),  whilst  Plato  and
Schelling  so  fur  occupy  a  connecting  and  intermediate
position,  that  in  neither  does  there  exist  a  complete
equilibrium  of  the  two  sides,  but  in  Plato  the  Idea,  in
Schelling's  last  system  the  Will  has  chief  importance.

Plato's  best-known  and  most  important  principle  (cp.
the  masterly  presentation  of  the  Platonic  principles  in
Zeller,  Pliilos.  der  Griechen,  2  Anil.,  ii.  1,  pp.  441-471)
is  the  Platonic  Idea,  the  world  of  Ideas,  or  the  nature  of
the  many  ideas  included  in  the  One  (the  tv)  highest  Idea
or  the  Idea  absolutely,  which  he  more  precisely  defines  as


148  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  Idea  of  the  good,  i.e.,  the  absolute  end,  and  which  is  to
him  identical  with  the  Divine  Eeason.  Plato  conceives  the
Idea  as  in  the  eternal  repose  of  unchangeable  indepen-
dent Being,  and  only  exceptionally,  and  with  manifest  in-
consistency, does  he  here  and  there  (especially,  in  mythical
representations)  ascribe  to  it  also  efficient  operation,  an
activity.

Since  the  self-enclosed  Idea  would  never  have  reason
for  going  out  of  itself,  it  needs  a  second,  equally  important
principle,  the  ground  of  the  Heraclitean  flow  of  all  things,
the  moving  spring  of  the  world-process.

This  second  is,  accordingly,  as  opposed  to  the  eternal
repose  of  the  Idea,  the  principle  of  absolute  change,  the
ever  coming  and  going,  and  never  genuinely  being ;  where-
fore he  also  calls  it  the  relatively  non-being  (firj  6v) ;  but
yet  it  is  that  which  receives  the  ideas  as  its  content,  and
ushers  them  into  the  whirl  of  procession.  Whilst  the
Idea  is  the  measured,  self-enclosed,  that  is  the  measure-
less, in  itself  unlimited  (aireipov) ;  whilst  the  Idea  (even
number)  is  in  itself  only  qualitatively  determined,  that
brings  the  element  of  quantity  into  the  phenomenon.
There  belongs  to  it  "  all  that  is  capable  of  more  or  less,
of  stronger  or  weaker,  and  of  excess ; "  wherefore  Plato
calls  it  also  the  "  great  and  little."

Whilst  the  Idea  is  the  Good,  and  all  the  good  in  the
world  springs  from  it,  the  aireipov  is  the  Bad,  and  the
cause  of  all  the  bad  and  evil  in  the  world  (Aristot,
Metaph.  i.  6,  end),  is  that  blind  Necessity  found  pre-
existent  by  the  world-forming  Intelligence,  that  senseless
Cause,  which  could  not  be  perfectly  overcome  by  Eeason,
that  irrational  residue  that  we  always  get  over  when  we
abstract  from  things  all  that  is  image  of  the  Idea.

From  the  marriage  of  the  two  opposed  principles  arises
the  World,  which  we  know  through  sense-perception.
Both  principles  have  this  in  common,  that  they  are  not
affected  by  the  change  of  the  phenomenon,  but  stand  above
it  as  transcendent  (^copieraC)  essences.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  149

The  agreement  of  the  Platonic  results  with  our  own
is  obvious ;  we  only  need  to  translate  the  realm  of  the
jicr  se  existing  Ideas  into  that  of  the  unconscious  Pre-
sentation (that  is  indeed  also  conceived  by  us  as  intuitive
and  non-temporal,  i.e.,  eternal)  and  the  intensive  prin-
ciple of  absolute  change  into  the  Will.

It  is  also  remarkable  that  Plato  asserts  that  this  anret-
pov  is  in  no  way  cognisable,  neither  by  thought  nor  by
perception,  which  entirely  agrees  with  our  view,  that
the  Will  as  such  is  a  something  for  ever  inaccessible  to
Consciousness.  [When  Plato  sometimes  characterises  the
aireipov  also  as  x^Par  T077-09,  this  is  certainly  just  as  figura-
tive as  the  expression  he^ap,evrj  (reservoir)  and  ifcfxayehv
(soft  substance,  in  which  a  form,  here  the  Idea,  is  im-
printed), and  means,  as  the  expressions  etcelvo,  ev  &  'yiyve-
tcu,  and  <puat<;  ra  izavra  adfiara  Be-^ofxevrj,  testify,  no-
thing more  than  that  wherein  the  ideas  find  their  stand,
place,  locality,  or  room  for  reception  and  unfolding,  just
as  he  sometimes  assigns  to  the  ideal  world  an  intelligible
suprarnundane  place  (to7to9  voijtos).  Less  strict  still  is  the
expression  v\rj  (matter),  substituted,  not  by  Plato  him-
self, but  by  Aristotle  and  later  writers  for  the  aTreipov.]

ScJuqycnhauer's  philosophy  is  contained  in  the  proposi-
tion :  AVill  alone  is  Thing  proper,  the  Being  of  the  world.
Hence  it  follows  that  the  presented  object  is  only  a — mani-
festly accidental — product  of  brain,  and  that  there  is  only
so  much  reason  to  be  found  in  the  whole  world  as  the
fortuitously  arisen  brain  chooses  to  put  into  it.  For  what
can  proceed  from  an  absolutely  irrational,  senseless,  and
blind  principle  but  an  irrational  and  senseless  world  ?  If
there  is  a  trace  of  srn.sc  in  it,  it  can  only  have  crept  in  by
chance!  As  little  as  a  Mind  Will  can  propose  to  itself  ends,
so  little  can  it  choose  and  realise  lit  means  to  its  ends;
and  thus  the  conscious  intellect  can  with  Schopenhauer
in  truth  appear  only  as  a  parajiite  of  the  Will,  that,  fur
removed  from  being  willed  by  this  latter,  has  rather  settled
upon  it  in  some  incomprehensible  fashion,  God  only  knows


150  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

whence,  like  the  mildew  on  the  plant.  It  is  obvious  that
the  absolutely  irrational,  taken  as  principle,  must  be  very-
much  poorer  and  infertile  than  the  absolutely  rational,
the  Idea  and  Thought.  There  is  also  needed  a  remarkable
restraint  to  put  up  with  the  absolutely  irrational  and  its
poverty  as  principle.  Hence  the  dilettante  colouring,
which,  with  all  its  intellectual  wealth,  the  philosophising
of  Schopenhauer  possesses,  hence  the  sigh  of  relief  when,
in  the  third  book  of  "  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea,"  one
approaches  the  great  inconsequence  of  the  system,  the
Idea.

On  the  other  hand,  one  cannot  sufficiently  admire  and
praise  the  wisdom  of  the  Unconscious,  that  it  created  so
confined  a  genius,  to  show  posterity  what  can  and  what
cannot  be  achieved  with  that  principle  in  its  isolation.
The  one-sided  elaboration  of  this  principle  was  in  the
genetic  course  of  development  of  philosophy  just  as  neces-
sary as  the  pointing  of  the  opposite  extreme  in  Hegel.

How  closely  the  two  philosophers  are  connected  is
rendered  evident  by  the  undesigned  coincidence  that  the
principal  works  of  both  philosophers  appeared  in  the  year
1818,  when  one  at  the  same  time  recalls  the  utterance  of
Hegel  (xv.  p.  6 1 9),  "  Where  several  philosophers  synchro-
nously appear,  they  will  represent  different  aspects  of  a
single  whole."

As  certainly  as  Schopenhauer  was  incapable  of  com-
prehending Hegel,  so  certainly  must  Hegel,  if  he  had
known  him,  have  shrugged  his  shoulders  over  Schopen-
hauer; both  stood  so  far  from  one  another,  that  every
point  of  contact  was  wanting  for  mutual  recognition.

If  Kant's  Criticism  was  compelled  to  decline  every  at-
tempt at  a  theoretical  metaphysic,  and  Fichte  begins  the
positive  metaphysical  evolution  of  the  most  recent  philo-
sophy with  the  dialectic  treatment  of  self-consciousness,
Hegel  sums  up  this  development  till  the  close  of  the  first
third  of  the  century,  in  that  he  receives  from  Schelling
the  principle  which  till  then  had  been  its  more  or  less


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  151

unconscious  moment :  the  Idea  alone  is  the  Being  of  the
world ;  logic  is  consequently  ontology ;  the  dialectic  self-
movement  of  the  concept  is  the  world-process.  This
principle  is,  as  compared  with  the  complete  poverty  of
the  Schopenhauerian,  the  absolutely  rich ;  for  all  that  the
world  is,  it  is  indeed  through  the  Idea;  something  may
he  done  with  it,  therefore,  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at
that  it  produced  four  systems  when  its  antipode  exhausted
itself  in  one.

Hegel  in  his  logic  measured  the  Platonic  realm  of  the
per  se  existing  Idea  :  he  tried  to  surprise  the  Idea  in
the  process  of  its  eternal  self-deliverance  from  barest
being,  and  thus  far  his  principle  was  within  its  right.
But  when  the  realm  of  the  per  se  existing  Idea  had  been
traversed  in  all  directions,  the  principle  reached  its
limits ;  for  though  the  Idea  was  omnipotent  in  its  own
sphere,  one  thing  remained  unattainable  by  it,  the  res,
reality;  "  for  real  is  just  that  which  cannot  be  created  by
mere  thought  "  (Schelling,  i.  3,  p.  364).

The  principle,  however,  though  one-sided,  was  regarded
as  all-inclusive,  and  had  to  be  worked  out  in  this  one-
sidedness,  in  order  to  show  here,  too,  distinctly  how  far
it  extends  and  how  far  not.  On  the  other  hand,  how-
ever, it  lay  pre-indicated  in  the  dialectic  movement,  that
the  logical  Idea,  after  it  had  exhausted  itself  on  its  own
ground,  must,  with  dialectical  necessity,  demand  the  other
of  itself,  or  the  negative  of  itself,  and  this  could  only  be
— the  alogical.

With  this  plain  acknowledgment,  however,  the  Logical
would  have  had  to  renounce  its  absolute  sovereignty,
would  have  had  to  acknowledge  and  admit  an  equally
authorised  principle,  that  the  truth  is  found  in  and  reality
depends  once  on  the  conilict  and  time  union  of  these  last
and  highest  contrasts.  Then,  however,  logic  would  also
have  had  to  declare  that  that  Alogical  is  only  accidentally,
namely,  looked  at  only  from  its  own  point  of  view,  the
negative,  but  in  truth,  from  a  higher  point  of  view,  the


152  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

positive,  which  first  of  all  realises  the  Logical,  whereas
without  this  positive  it  is,  with  its  whole  stock  of  ideas,
equal  to  nothing.

This  demand  upon  absolute  Idealism  all  at  once  to
declare  its  own  principle  negative  was  for  man — at  least
for  that  man  who  had  carried  it  to  its  height — too
much.  Certainly  Hegel  allows  here  and  there  the  feel-
ing to  break  through  that  the  negative  of  the  logical
element  deserves  notice  and  makes  possible  the  passage
of  the  Idea  into  actuality,  but  he  suppresses  the  stirrings
of  this  feeling  in  their  origin,  only  not  to  approach  too
near  his  dear  Idea.  He  tries  to  comply  with  the  impera-
tive compulsion  to  do  justice  to  the  alogical  element,
everywhere  thrusting  itself  on  the  observer  in  the  world,
by  preposterously  drawing  the  alogical  self-contradic-
tion into  the  logical,  in  that  he  gives  to  his  dialectical
method  (intended  to  be  at  once  ideal-  and  real-dia-
lectical) inner  contradiction  as  an  integral  element  of  its
process  ;  whereas  in  truth  the  contradiction  of  the  logi-
cal can  always  only  be  kindled  by  the  existing  logical
not  posited  by  it.  But  now  even  Hegel  himself  observes
that,  on  the  one  hand,  he  does  not  thereby  exhaust  the
demands  of  the  actual  as  regards  their  alogical  character,
and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  he  therewith  burdens  his
logical  Idea  with  the  responsibility  for  things  which  it
cannot  bear  without  losing  its  character  of  the  logical.
Accordingly,  he  takes  refuge  in  his  category  of  the  Con-
tingent, which  must  always  bear  the  brunt  when  the
details  of  a  phenomenon  withdraw  themselves,  or  even
only  appear  to  withdraw,  from  explanation  through  the
principle  of  the  logical  Idea.  But  the  contingent  as  little
as  self-contradiction  has  a  place  within  the  logical  prin-
ciple and  within  the  "  What "  of  the  world  determined  by
it ;  for  the  logical  principle  is  only  determined  logically,
i.e.,  necessarily ;  and  therewith  the  contingent  is  simply
excluded  from  it  (and  relegated  to  the  sphere  of  the
alogical). But  just  this  compulsion,  in  addition  to  the


MET  A  PHY  SIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  153

self-contradiction  already  drawn  into  the  logical,  to  have
recourse  to  the  category  of  the  contingent  ought  to  have
shown  Hegel  that,  after  abstracting  all  that  is  logically
posited  in  phenomena,  there  is  really  only  an  alogical
residue,  and  that  there  must  therefore  be  an  alogical
beside  the  logical,  not  merely  in  the  same.  With  this
recognition  Hegel  would,  however,  at  once  have  got  quit
of  the  motive  which  had  urged  him  to  credit  the  incon-
sistency of  an  alogical  in  the  logical,  i.e.,  he  would  have
been  able  to  refine  his  inherently  contradictory  dialec-
tical process  into  a  consistent  logical  process,  which
the  alogical  only  underlies  as  impelling  moment  of  the
process.

Thus  much  is  universally  recognised,  the  relation  of  logic
to  the  Philosophy  of  Nature  is  in  Hegel  himself  obscure
and  obliterated.  From  consistently  carrying  out  his  prin-
ciple, and  (with  Michelet)  maintaining  that  Nature  can
only  be  called  externalised  logic,  or  logic  in  its  alterity,  so
far  as  the  moments  of  the  dialectic  process  united  in  logic
have  fallen  asunder,  Hegel  is  protected  by  a  certain  instinc-
tive timidity  which  teaches  him  that  with  the  consistent
carrying  out  of  his  principle  he  sins  against  his  own  method,
which  unconditionally  demands  the  alogical  as  the  equally
authorised  negation  of  the  logical  idea ;  but  he  is  again
deterred  from  satisfying  this  demand  by  the  consequences
of  that  step,  which  manifestly  destroy  his  own  principle,
that  the  Idea  is  the  sole  substance.

This  contradiction  explains  why  the  transition  from  the
Idea  to  Nature,  on  all  occasions  when  Hegel  mentions  it
{e.g.,  "  Phanomenologie,"  p.  610;  "  Logik,"  Ed.  ii.  p.  399-
400;  '"'  Encyclopedic,"  Bd.  i.  §  43  and  §  244),  is  dealt  with
in  an  unusually  aphoristic  manner,  frequently  changed  in
new  editions,  and,  moreover,  dressed  up  in  unsuitable  and
figurative  expressions  (sacrifice,  unfolding,  alienation,  dis-
mission, reflection  of  the  Idea,  &c.)  The  difference  on
this  point  has  first  clearly  revealed  itself  in  the  divisions
of  the  Hegelian  school.


154  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Let  us  bestow  one  more  glance  upon  the  question  how
much  Hegel  felt  in  silence  the  necessity  of  the  alogical  as
counterpoise  of  the  logical.  At  the  close  of  the  larger
"  Logic  "  he  says  of  the  absolute  Idea,  that,  enclosed  in  the
sphere  of  pure  thought,  it  is  still  logical ;  whence  it  is  to
be  concluded  that  its  emergence  from  this  into  another
sphere  must  be  the  passage  into  the  no  longer  logical,  i.e.,
into  the  alogical.

In  the  "  Phanomenologie,"  p.  610,  he  says,  "  Knowledge
knows  not  only  itself,  but  also  the  negative  of  itself,  or  its
limit."  Here,  indeed,  we  might  be  inclined  to  suppose
that  the  non-logical  must  be  intended  by  this  negative ;
but  he  again  entirely  weakens  the  effect  by  declaring  this
"  knowing  its  own  limit "  to  be  sufficient  for  sacrifice  or
alienation.  In  the  "  Logic,"  vol.  ii.  p.  400,  he  further  says,
"  Because  the  pure  idea  of  knowing  is  so  far  enclosed  in
subjectivity,  it  is  impulse  to  abolish  this."  Here  he  feels
even  that  the  going  beyond  the  Idea  can  only  be  an  affair
of  the  Will.  Altogether  impossible,  however,  is  the  thought
that  this  "willing  of  the  Idea  to  emerge  from  the  Idea"  can
come  from  itself,  from  the  eternal  repose  of  its  being-for-
self,  which  must  rather  be  considered  equivalent  to  the
absolutely  self-sufficient  peace,  the  untroubled  self- enclosed
contentment.

Not  only  would  it  be  incomprehensible  how  the  Idea
could  of  its  own  accord  come  to  precipitate  its  eternal
purity  into  the  vortex  of  the  real  process,  but  it  would  be
the  height  of  absurdity  if  it,  that  encloses  all  knowledge
in  itself,  willed  to  sacrifice  its  blessed  peace  of  non-tem-
poral eternal  calm  without  external  compulsion,  in  order  to
fall  a  prey  to  the  torment  of  the  process,  the  unblessed-
ness  of  volition,  the  misery  of  real  existence.  No,  not
absolute  Eeason  itself  can  all  at  once  become  irrational,
but  the  irrational  must  be  a  second  or  other  lying  outside
Eeason.

If  it  lay  in  the  nature  of  the  logical  to  pass  out  of  itself
into  the  alogical,  this  occurrence  would  be  necessary  and


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  155

eternal,  and  one  could  never  speak  of  a  conclusion  of  the
process,  of  a  redemption.

It  is  also  indeed  only  the  negative  relative  determination
(relative,  namely,  to  the  logical  Idea)  of  that  opposite  of
the  Idea  to  be  the  alogical ;  its  positive  determination,
however,  is  this,  to  be  principle  of  change,  origin  of
reality,  will ;  and  when  Hegel  in  the  above  passage  sud-
denly throws  in  this  determination  to  be  impulse,  it  is  quite
clear  indeed  that  he  has  procured  it  purely  from  the  em-
pirical need  of  explaining  the  reality  of  Nature.

But  this  is  also,  in  fact,  the  only  possible  way  to  come  to
the  knowledge  of  the  Will.  A  priori  one  could  at  the  most
only  know  the  Idea  and  all  that  follows  from  the  Idea ;  the
existence  of  the  Will,  however,  is,  at  all  events,  only  to  be
concluded  a  posteriori.  For  every  a  priori  purely  logical
or  purely  rational  philosophy  can  only  assert  ideal  relations,
but  not  real  existences  ;  it  can  at  most  say,  "  If  something  is,
it  must  be  thus"  but  it  can  never  show  tlud  something  is  ;
this  only  experience  can  do,  i.e.,  the  conflict  with  the  ex-
tant will  (existence)  in  the  perception  of  consciousness.
This  answers  quite  to  the  circumstance  that  the  Idea  only
determines  the  "  What"  of  things,  but  the  Will  their  "That;"
thus  the  Idea  can  also  only  so  far  comprehend  things  as  it
determines  them,  therefore  never  their  real  existence.

This  necessary  step  in  philosophy,  which  Hegel  had
been  unable  to  take,  Schelling  accomplished x  in  his  last
system,  when,  as  indicated  in  Chap.  vii.  C,  he  perceived
the  purely  logical  character  of  previous  philosophy,  de-
clared it  to  be  negative,  and  in  opposition  to  it  raised  the
demand  for  a  positive  philosophy  beginning  with  the
immemorial  being  only  to  be  known  through  experience.
(Cp.  Schelling's  "  Critique  of  the  Hegelian  Philosophy,"
in  i.  10,  pp.  126  to  164,  especially  pp.  146  and  1 51-157;
further,  ii.  3,  fourth  and  fifth  lectures.)

1  Compare  my  memoir  serving  as  ling's  positive  Philosophic  alsEinheit
a  necessary  complement  and  elnci-  von  Hegel  und  Schopenhauer,"  Ber-
dation  of  this  whole  chapter,  "  Schel- lin,  Otto  Lowenstein,  1869.


156  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

So  far  as  Schelling's  deductions  are  critical  and  prepa-
ratory they  are  excellent,  but  as  soon  as  he  begins  to
deliver  his  positive  philosophy  itself  he  becomes  weak,
wavers  between  an  explanatory  argumentative  procedure,
a  dialectic  method  and  the  sudden  and  unmotived  intro-
duction of  new  leading  concepts,  to  lose  himself  soon  in
the  shoals  of  a  mystical  theogony  and  the  details  of  Chris-
tian theology.  This  is  simply  due  to  the  circumstance
that,  to  preserve  consistency  with  his  own  past,  he  becomes
unfaithful  to  his  better  knowledge,  that  the  principle  of
positive  philosophy  is  only  to  be  gained  a  posteriori  from
experience,  accordingly  by  the  inductive  path.

[Because  Schopenhauer  in  the  main  (e.g.,  W.  as  W.  and
I.,  2d  Book,  and  "  On  the  Will  in  Nature ")  proceeds  in-
ductively, he  accomplishes  so  much  more  as  regards  this
problem,  although  he  is  not  particularly  clear  about  his
method,  and  why  it  is  the  only  correct  one.]

Nevertheless  Schelling's  last  system  (unity  of  positive
and  negative  philosophy)  has  a  high  value,  in  that  it
embraces  the  principle  of  Hegel  (the  Idea)  and  that  of
Schopenhauer  (the  Will)  as  co-ordinate,  equally  authorised
and  equally  indispensable  sides  of  the  one  principle  (cp.
i.  io,  242-243 ;  i.  8,  328).  Schelling  very  decidedly  sees
in  that  "  cxtrcdogical  nature  of  existence  "  (ii.  3,  95),  in  that
"  incomprehensible  basis  of  reality  "  (i.  7,  360),  the  Will.
That  something  is  is  only  perceived  by  the  resistance
which  it  opposes ;  the  only  thing  capable  of  resistance,
however,  is  the  Will  (ii.  3,  206).  It  is  therefore  the  Will
that  accords  its  That  to  the  whole  world  and  to  every  single
thing;  the  Idea  can  only  determine  the  Wliat.  In  his
"  Treatise  on  the  Essence  of  Human  Freedom,"  that  ap-
peared in  1809  (thus  long  before  the  writings  of  Scho-
penhauer), he  said  (Werke,  i.  7,  p.  350),  "There  is  in  the
highest  and  last  resort  no  other  being  at  all  than  volition.
Volition  is  original  being,  and  to  this  alone  are  adapted
all  its  predicates — groundlessness,  eternity,  independence
of  time,  self-affirmation. All  philosophy only  aims  at


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  157

finding  this  highest  term."  And  in  his  "  anthropological
scheme"  (i.  10,  p.  289)  one  finds,  "  1.  Will  is  the  proper
spiritual  suhsta?ice  of  man,  the  ground  of  everything,  the
originally  matter-producing,  the  only  thing  in  man,  the
cause  of  being."

In  contrast  to  this  he  declares  in  the  same  place  the
understanding  to  be  "  the  not  creating,  hut  regulating,
limiting,  giving  measure  to  the  infinite  boundless  Will."

With  this  corresponds  the  principles  of  the  Pytha-
goreans, the  airetpov  (unlimited),  and  the  Trepaivov  (limit-
ing), or  elhoTToiovv  (giving  form  or  notion),  (i.  10,  243).
If  the  ideal  principle  is  an  Understanding  in  which  is  no
Will  (ii.  2,  112;  ii.  1,  375,  L.  14-16),  the  real  principle  is
a  "  Will  in  which  is  no  Understanding  "  (i.  7,  359).  "  All
willing,  however,  must  will  somewhat"  (ii.  1,  462),  an
objectless  willing  is  only  =  vague  desire,  "  the  longing  that
the  Eternal  One  feels  for  self-deliverance  "  (i.  7,  359).  The
Word  of  this  longing  is,  however,  the  Presentation — that
Presentation  which  is  at  the  same  time  the  Understanding
(i.  7,  361),  or  "the  ideal  principle"  (i.  7,  395).  In  the
"  utterance  of  this  word  "  is  found  the  union  of  the  ideal
and  the  real  principle  from  which  the  existence  to  be
explained  arises.

In  his  later  expositions  Schelling  endeavours  to  deduce
these  principles  from  the  concept  of  Being  as  the  elements
of  it  which  cannot  be  thought  away,  an  undertaking  which
plainly  reveals  its  infutility  by  this,  that  all  real  progress
can  only  be  gained  by  the  reinstatement  of  the  concrete
determinations.  Here  the  being-able-to-be  (potentia  exis-
tendi)  answers  to  the  Will,  the  purely  {i.e.,  non-potential,
idealiter)  being  to  the  Idea.  On  the  being-able-to-be  lie
says  (ii.  3,  pp.  205-206),  "  But  now  the  being-able-to-be  of
which  we  here  speak  is  not  conditioned ;  it  is  the  uncon-
ditioned potentia  cxistcndi;  it  is  that  which  can  pass  un-
conditionally and  without  further  mediation  a  potentia  ad,
actum.  But  now  we  know  no  other  passage  a  potentia  ad
actum  than  in  volition. Will  in  itself  is  potentiality  tear


158  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

£%°X*IV>  willing  the  act  /car  ii;oxvv-  The  transition  a
potentia  ad  actum  is  everywhere  only  transition  from  not-
willing  to  willing.  The  immediately  being-able-to-he,
therefore,  is  that  which,  in  order  to  be,  needs  nothing  but
just  passing  from  not-willing  to  willing.  Being  consists
for  it  simply  in  the  willing  ;  it  is  in  its  being  nothing  else
than  willing.  No  actual  being  is  without  an  actual  willing,
however  qualified,  conceivable."  —  The  being-able-to-be
is  the  Will  per  se,  the  not  yet  objected,  but  only  primitive
Will,  that  indeed  can  will  (else  it  would  indeed  not  be
Will),  but  simply  does  not  yet  Will ;  the  Will  before  its
manifestation  (ii.  3,  pp.  212-213).

If  this  Will  is  kindled  into  willing,  if  it  becomes  active,
it  therewith  surrenders  its  freedom,  its  being-able-not-to-
be,  and  lapses  into  blind  being,  like  Spinoza's  substance.
As  such,  it  becomes  the  "  Sinister,"  "  the  source  of  all  dis-
pleasure and  dissatisfaction"  (ii.  3,  226).

The  purely  being  or  the  Idea  is  neither  potentiality  nor
act,  for  act  is  only  that  which  proceeds  from  potentiality
Schelling  calls  its  state  actus  jourus. — I  remark  here  that
Schelling  endeavours,  for  the  sake  of  the  Christian  Trinity,
to  make  his  principles  and  their  substantial  unity  into  per-
sons, and  for  that  end  to  ascribe  to  each  of  the  three  a  will
of  its  own,  which  is  altogether  absurd.  That  one  may  not
feel  the  preposterousness  of  this  too  distinctly,  he  suppresses
in  his  later  expositions  as  far  as  possible  the  tenet  that
the  concrete  determination  of  the  "  purely  being "  is  the
"  Idea." (See  further  my  essay  mentioned  above.) •

There  is  a  remarkable  passage  in  Irenosus,  i.  12,  1,
where  the  latter  is  giving  an  account  of  Ptolemy.  As
this  same  passage  proves  how  early  that  perception
attained  distinct  expression  which  declares  a  creation
from  the  pure  Idea  to  be  impossible,  I  shall  set  it  down
here  :  —  7rpa>TOV  <yap  ivvoi]drj  7rpo/3aX€lv,  (prjalv,  elra
iOeXrjae.  .  .  .  to  6ekiip.a  rolvvv  Bvvafiis  iyivero  t?)?
evvoias.  ivevoei  fxev  jap  7)  evvola  rr)v  7rpoj3a\i)v.  ov
pukvroi 7rpofiuiXks.1v  aiirrj icaQ kavrrjv rjSvvaro,  a evevoet.


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  159

ore  he  rj  tov  6e\rjfiaT0^  Si/va/ii?  eire^evero,  Tore,  b  evevoet,
irpoefiaXe.  (For  first  he  thought  to  produce,  then  he
willed. — The  Will  thus  became  the  power  of  Thought.
For  Thought  thought  indeed  the  creation,  but  it  could  not
itself  produce  from  itself  what  it  thought.  But  when
the  power  of  Will  was  added,  then  it  produced  what  it
thought.)

The  essential  agreement  of  our  principles  with  those  of
the  greatest  metaphysical  systems  (Spinoza  we  still  re-
serve) can  only  serve  to  strengthen  us  in  the  conviction
that  we  are  on  the  right  path.  Let  us  now  consider
somewhat  more  minutely  each  of  the  principles.

2.  The  Will. —  Volition  represents  the  superiority  of  the
real  over  the  ideal.  The  ideal  is  the  ideal  object  per  se,
the  real  is  the  willed  idea  of  the  Idea  as  content  of  Will.

Equally  diffused  with  the  belief  in  Matter  is  the  con-
ception of  the  vulgar  Theism,  that  the  real  is  not  the
apparition  of  the  will-action  itself  of  the  creative  Being  of
the  world,  but  a  dead,  arrested  product,  a  caput  mortuum  of
a  former  long-extinct  activity  of  Will,  the  act  of  creation,
and  that  the  proper  representative  of  this  caput  mortuum
is  matter.  From  this  prepossession  we  have  already,  in
Chap.  vii.  C,  delivered  ourselves,  where  we  saw  that  there
is  only  the  Unconscious  and  its  activity,  but  no  third.  As
long  as  this  notion  of  a  dead  matter  was  not  overcome,
there  certainly  only  remained  the  two  ways  of  appre-
hending it :  either  as  uncreated  eternal  substance,  with
Materialism,  or  as  caput  mortuum  of  a  former  act  of  crea-
tion, however  difficult  it  might  be  to  form  a  clear  idea  of
such  a  dead  product ;  but  after  material  substance  had
been  perceived  by  us  to  be  a  chimera,  pure  matter  a
system  of  atomic  forces,  and  the  material  world  an  ever-
changing  date  of  equilibrium  of  very  many  intersecting
will- (activities  (cp.  vol.  ii.  pp.  241-243),  there  remained  no
longer  any  reason  for  assuming  dead  rem  mints  of  former
productivity,  and  we now  perceived the  lieal at  every


160  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

moment  of  the  process  to  be  present  will-activity,  therefore
the  existence  of  the  world  a  continuous  act  of  creation  (cp.
vol.  ii.  pp.  268-269).  This  is  doubtless  also  the  meaning
of  the  "  second  corollary  "  at  the  beginning  of  Schelling's
"Philosophy  of  Nature"  (Werke,  i.  3,  p.  16):  "Nature
nowhere  exists  as  product;  all  the  several  products  in
Nature  are  only  apparent  products,  not  the  absolute  pro-
duct, in  which  the  absolute  activity  exhausts  itself,  and
that  always  becomes  and  ever  is."

This  conception  by  no  means,  as  might  appear  at  first
sight,  contradicts  the  physical  axiom  that  the  effect  of  a
once-acting  cause  persists ;  for  the  state  newly  induced,
in  which  consists  the  physical  effect  (e.g.,  a  movement  of
this  or  that  direction  and  velocity),  certainly  persists,  sup-
posing  the  object  to  persist  whose  state  it  is,  i.e.,  supposing
that  this  object  is  continually  posited  anew.

It  is  coherent  with  this  view  of  the  persistence  of  the
world  as  a  continuous  act  of  creation  that  we  can  no
longer  regard  volition  as  separated  from  the  act :  volition
is  itself  the  act.

This  truth  appears  clearer  in  the  case  of  the  atomic
will,  as  discussed  in  Chaps,  v.  and  xi.  C.  If  it  appears
otherwise  in  psychology,  this  is  to  be  explained  thus  : —

(1.)  When  act  is  employed  in  the  wider  sense,  it  must
be  understood  as  external  activity  of  the  will ;  if,  on  the
other  hand,  act  is  taken  in  the  narrower  sense,  namely,
only  as  the  intended  mode  of  efficiency,  undoubtedly  only
that  willing  is  identical  with  the  act  which  accomplishes
its  will,  but  not  that  which  indeed  does  and  works,  but  is
impeded  in  the  execution  of  the  deed  in  the  intended
manner  by  external  unconquerable  impediments.

(2.)  Only  the  volition  directed  to  the  present  is  iden-
tical with  the  act,  a  volition  directed  to  the  future,  how-
ever, is  also  no  proper  categorical  volition,  but  only  a
hypothetical  volition,  a  resolution  or  an  intention.

(3.)  By  act  one  understands  in  psychology  only  a  do-
ing of the  whole person,  but  not  those  movements of


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  161

the  brain-molecules  caused  by  the  Will,  which  in  them-
selves are  not  powerful  enough  to  call  forth  an  external
action  of  the  body,  or  are  hindered  by  other  cerebral
vibrations  acting  in  the  contrary  sense.

Therefore  in  psychology  certainly  only  the  whole  pre-
sent volition  of  the  individual,  i.e.,  the  resultant  of  all
the  simultaneous  single  wills  or  desires,  is  identical  with
the  act,  whilst  the  simultaneous  components  exhaust
their  mutual  action  in  the  brain  so  far  as  they  do  not
become  act  in  the  resultant.  Strictly  taken,  however,
the  movement  of  the  cerebral  molecules  is  also  a  com-
ing of  the  will  into  external  operation,  i.e.,  an  act,  and
in  this  sense  is  also  every  single  desire  in  the  indivi-
dual an  act,  only  that  it  is  perhaps  prevented  by  other
cerebral  vibrations  from  realising  itself  in  its  whole  pos-
sible range ;  e.g.,  hunger  produces  cerebral  vibrations  in  the
beggar,  that  would  compel  him  to  stretch  out  his  hand  to
the  bread  in  the  baker's  shop ;  the  dread  of  the  theft  pro-
duces other  cerebral  vibrations,  which  prevent  this  par-
ticular movement;  but  both,  the  positive  as  the  negative
desire,  are  in  act  expressed  as  cerebral  vibrations.

"  The  Will  per  se  is  potentiality  /car  e^o^v,  volition
actuality  icar  e^o-^/jv."  This  declaration  of  Schelling
must  certainly  be  assented  to.  Thus  much  is  at  least
universally  recognised,  that  volition  is  to  be  regarded  as
an  act  dependent  on  a  power,  and  this  potency,  this
being-able-to-will,  of  which  we  know  nothing  more  than
this,  that  it  can  will,  we  call  Will.  Whatever  lie  a
being-able-to-will,  the  possibility  must  be  open  to  it  to
be,  under  certain  circumstances,  a  non-willing,1  i.e.,  the
notion of the being-able-to-will includes that of the

1  "  To  a  certain  extent  it  is  a  priori  the  present  oiacrToKn. If,  now,  the

obvious,  in Common language  self-  former i.s  the phenomenon of the

understood, that that which now  will  ivy  of  life,  the  other  will  1>"  the

produces the phenomenon of the-  phenomenon of the non-willing  of

world must  also  bo capable of  not  the'  same.- In  reply  to  certain silly

doing  this,  consequently  of  remain-  objections  I  remark,  that  the  nega-

iri'l  at  rest,  or, in other words, that  tion  of  the  will  to live  by  no main*

there must also he a avaroXn to  imports the  annihilation of  a  sab
VOL.  III.  L


1 62  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

being  able  not-to-will,  or  the  being-able-to-will  is  only
a  correctly  chosen  name  if  that  which  is  denoted  by  it  is
at  the  same  time  also  a  being-able  not-to-will  on  occasion.
If,  namely,  the  being-able-to-will  were  deprived  of  this
possibility  of  not-willing  on  occasion,  it  would  be  a  not-
being-able  not-to-will  or  being-obliged-to-will,  and,  indeed,
not  a  being-obliged-to-will  conditionally  under  certain
circumstances  or  for  a  certain  time,  but  an  eternally
unalterable  being-obliged-to-will.  This  would,  however,
upset  the  notion  of  the  being-able-to-will  or  of  poten-
tiality, and  only  leave  the  notion  of  the  absolute  ground-
less willing  that  wills  to  all  eternity.  Superfluous  as  would
be  the  notion  of  force  in  presence  of  an  eternal  motion,  so
superfluous  would  be  the  notion  "Will  (as  potentiality  of
volition)  in  presence  of  an  eternal  willing ;  willing  would
then  be  non-potential  actus  purus.  On  this  assumption
all  possibility  not  only  of  an  individual,  but  also  of  a  uni-
versal redemption,  would  be  cut  away ;  all  hope  of  a  cessa-
tion of  the  process  (whether  intended  and  striven  for,  or
accomplishedaccordingto  blind  law  and  fortuitously)  would
be  destroyed.  The  cheerlessness  of  such  an  assumption
can  of  course  be  for  us  no  argument  against  its  admissi-
bility or  probability  ;  we  shall,  therefore,  in  another  direc-
tion, have  to  test  its  validity.

The  eternity  of  willing  conditions  the  endlessness  of  the

dance,  but  the  mere  act  of  not-  the  point  of  view  of  actual  reality,
willing"  (i.e.,  the  negation  of  the  equal  to  nothing  ;  yet  we  may  well
act  of  volition)  ;  "the  same  that  has  try  and  conceive  what  it  intrinsi-
hitherto  tvilled  wills  no  longer.  Since  cally  is,  namely,  the  being  able  to
we  know  Substantial  Being,  the  will  and  not  will.  This  Schopen-
Will  as  Thing  per  se,  merely  in  and  hauer  overlooked,  although  properly
through  the  act  of  willing,  we  are  in  the  above  word  "capable"  (of
incompetent  to  say  or  conceive  what  producing  or  not  producing  the
it  can  further  be  or  do"  (this  addi-  world)  he  has  himself  enounced  it.
tion  "or  do"  is  very  inapt),  "after  The  quoted  passage  shows  that  those
it  has  renounced  this  acting  ;  there-  adherents  of  Schopenhauer  who  con-
fore  negation  is  for  us,  who  are  ceive  the  Will  as  Essential  Being
the  phenomenon  of  willing,  a  pas-  obliged  to  will,  and  not  capable  of
sage  into  nothing"  (Schopenhauer,  abstaining  from  willing,  cannot  here
"Parerga,"  §162).  The  inactive  Sub-  appeal  to  their  master,  but  have  only
stantial  Being  " remaining  in  repose"  modified  for  the  worse  his  deeper
is  undoubtedly  for  us,  who are  at  views.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  163

process,  and  indeed  both  forwards  and  backwards.  In  the
endlessness  of  the  process  forwards  there  lies  no  difficulty,
because  the  same  is  at  every  moment,  at  every  now,  merely
ideal,  postulated,  not  real,  given.  It  remains  for  ever  pure
problem,  posited  progression  with  negation  of  an  end,  and
therefore  never  lies  under  the  contradiction  of  the  completed
endlessness.  On  the  other  hand,  the  part  of  the  process
realised  at  every  moment  always  succumbs  to  this.  Thought
can  just  as  easily  from  the  given  Xow  follow  the  path
backwards  indefinitely  as  the  path  forwards,  but  that  proves
nothing  at  all  as  regards  the  real  process,  which  pursues
its  course  in  an  inverse  direction  to  this  ascent  of  thought
into  the  past.  The  infinity  that  remains  an  unsatisfiable
ideal  postulate  to  regressive  thinking  is  to  be  complete
accomplished  result  to  the  forward  process ;  and  here
occurs  the  contradiction  that  an  -mfinity  (if  also  only  one-
sided) is  given  as  finished  realisation.  Schopenhauer,
too,  is  perfectly  clear  concerning  the  impossibility  of  this
(W.  a.  W.  u.  V.;  3  Anil.  i.  p.  592, 1.  23-27,  and  p.  539,  1.  9
to  the  foot),  only  for  our  problem  this  is  of  no  account,
because  he  denies  the  reality  of  time,  and  therewith  of
the  process,  and  deals  with  the  question  of  the  world's
beginning  or  non-commencement  only  in  the  subjectively
idealistic  sense,  where  thought  just  as  little  finds  a  limit
in  itself  backwards  as  forwards  (ibid.,  p.  594).  The  reality
of  the  process,  however,  includes  the  iiuiteness  of  the
same  backwards,  i.e.,  its  beginning  before  a  finite  time
reckoned  from  the  present  moment.  The  point  of  com-
mencement of  the  process  (with  and  through  which  time
begins)  is  therefore  the  boundary-point  between  time  and
lirndrss  eternity;  only  in  the  former  was  the  Will  willing,
in  the  latter  it  was  accordingly  not-willing.  It  is  here-
with proved  that  the  willing  can  under  certain  circum-
stances lie  also  a  not-willing,  whereby  at  once  the  neces-
sity is  posited  of  supposing  behind  the  actual  willing  a
being-able-to-will  (and  not-to-will),  a  potentiality  of  Mull-
ing, a  will. Since,  on  the  other  side  of  the  commencement


1 64  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  the  process,  this  potentiality  was  without  actuality,
the  possibility  remains  that  fresh  circumstances  may
occur  where  it  again  becomes  a  potentiality  without
actuality,  i.e.,  it  is  now  possible  that  the  real  process  is
also  finite  forwards.  (The  necessity  of  the  future  end  of
the  process  is  not  to  be  proved  from  the  notion  of  the
process  or  of  time,  but  only  from  that  of  development,
on  the  assumption  that  the  world-process  is  develop-
ment,—  as  I  have  shown  at  the  close  of  the  fre-
quently mentioned  essay,  "  Ueber  die  Umbildung  der
Hegel'schen  Philosophic,"  in  the  Ges.  Philos.  Abhandl.,
No.  ii.)

It  follows,  then,  from  the  impossibility  of  a  regressive
or  progressive  infinite  world-process  that  volition  as  such
cannot  be  eternal ;  that  it  is  not  an  ultimate  capable  of
and  needing  no  further  explanation,  but  that  before  its
rise  there  must  have  been  something  that  was  not  indeed
itself  volition  but  yet  contained  the  power  of  willing.
But  this  we  call  the  pure  will.  When  we  come  to  this
conception  from  the  recognition  of  the  fact  that  one  and
the  same  now  wills,  now  does  not  will,  we  have  in  this
conception  established  the  elements  of  being-able-to-will
and  being-able-not-to-will.  This  is,  however,  to  be  taken
as  a  contradictory,  not  as  a  contrary  opposition.  A  con-
trary opposition  is  the  counter-struggling  of  volition  split
into  a  positive  and  a  negative  part,  as  we  have  assumed  at
the  end  of  the  world-process.  Here  two  opposed  species
of  the  genus  "  willing  "  are  given,  but  the  not- willing,  of
which  there  is  question  before  the  beginning  of  the  pro-
cess, is  the  purely  privative  negation  of  the  genus  willing
in  general ;  for  only  when  a  positive  willing  is  already
given  can  an  antagonistic  negation  arise  as  actively-
negative  willing.  The  being-able-not-to-will  is  conse-
quently also  not,  like  the  being-able-to-will,  to  be  under-
stood as  active  power,  but  as  merely  passive  possibility  of
the  intermission  of  the  use  of  the  active  power.

The  now  justified  relation  of  potentiality  and  act,  will


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  165

and  volition,  appears  indeed  eminently  clear  and  obvious ;
it  becomes,  however,  again  more  involved  as  soon  as  we
direct  our  glance  to  the  real  passage  of  the  pure  poten-
tiality (still  without  actuality)  into  the  act  of  volition.
We  know,  namely,  from  Chap.  iv.  A.,  that  volition  can
only  truly  exist  when  it  is  definite  volition,  i.e.,  when  it
wills  something  determinate,  and  that  the  determination
of  that  which  is  willed  is  an  ideal  determination,  i.e.,  that
volition  must  have  a  presentation  for  its  content.

On  the  other  hand,  we  know,  from  Chap.  i.  C,  that  the
Idea  cannot  of  itself  become  existential, — not  pass  from
non-being  into  being, — for  otherwise  it  would  be  poten-
tiality or  will,  or  contain  this  in  itself, — that  thus  only  the
Will  can  give  it  existence.  But  here  we  are  caught  in  a
circle.  Volition  is  first  to  become  existential  through  the
presentation  and  the  presentation  first  through  volition.
Through  the  Will  per  se,  i.e.,  so  far  as  it  is  mere  poten-
tiality and  not  actual,  certainly  no  effect  (action)  can  be
produced  on  the  Presentation,  but  the  Will  can  mani-
festly only  act  so  far  as  it  is  not  mere  potentiality.  If
now,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Will  as  pure  potentiality  can-
not act  at  all,  thus  also  not  on  the  Idea  ;  if,  on  the  other
hand,  Volition  as  act  proper  only  becomes  existential
through  the  Idea,  and  yet  the  Idea  cannot  of  itself  become
existential,  there  only  remains  the  hypothesis  that  the
Will  acts  on  the  Idea  in  a  condition  intermediate  as  it
were  between  pure  potentiality  and  true  act,  in  which  it
indeed  has  already  emerged  from  the  latent  repose  of  pure
potentiality,  thus  seems  to  be  actual  as  compared  with  the
latter,  but  still  has  not  yet  attained  to  real  existence,  to
complete  actuality.  This  may  be  considered  to  be  rela-
tively potential.  Not  as  if  this  intermediate  state  were
intercalated  as  time-interval  between  the  ante-mundane
repose  and  the  real  world-process — this  is,  as  we  shall  see
hereafter,  impossible — but  it  represents  only  the  moment
of  the  initiative.  Any  one  accustomed  to  think  under  the
notion  Will  or  faculty  of  initiation  might  say  that  there


1 66  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

is  no  will  at  all  in  his  sense  within  the  world-process,
since  Volition  is  here  continuous  state  become  fatal,  in
which  merely  the  ideal  content  is  changed,  and  that  only
that  moment  of  the  initiative  determining  the  elevation
of  the  will  for  the  whole  duration  of  the  world-process
is  the  true  will-act.  Thus  much  is  certain,  that  of  the
two,  Will  and  Idea,  the  initiative  can  only  be  ascribed
to  the  former,  and  that  the  state  of  the  will  at  the
moment  of  the  initiative  is  other  than  it  was  before
the  same,  and  other  than  it  will  be  when  the  original
impulse  has  done  its  duty,  and  has  become  full-action  by
participation  of  the  Idea.  As  we  must  consider  still  more
closely  this  condition  of  the  Will  in  the  initiative  (in
the  "  impulse  "  of  Fichte  transferred  to  the  absolute),  we
require  a  fixed  designation  for  the  same  and  choose  the
expression  "  empty  {i.e.,  still  devoid  of  content)  willing."

Schelling,  too,  is  acquainted  with  this  empty  willing.
He  says  (ii.  i,  p.  462),  "But  now  a  distinction  important
for  all  that  follows  presses  on  us  of  itself — of  the  willing,
that  is  properly  objectless,  that  wills  only  itself  (=  Sucht),
and  of  the  willing,  that  is  filled  and  remains  as  product  of
that  first  willing."

Empty  volition  is  not  yet,  for  it  lies  still  before  that
actuality  and  reality  which  we  are  accustomed  alone  to
comprehend  under  the  predicate  Being ;  it  is  substantive,
however,  not  merely  like  the  Will  per  se,  as  pure  poten-
tiality, for  it  is  indeed  a  consequence  of  this,  and  accordingly
is  related  to  it  as  act.  If  we  desire  to  apply  the  right
predicate,  we  can  only  say :  Empty  volition  becomes ;
becoming  is  employed  in  that  eminent  sense  in  which  it
signifies  not  transition  from  one  form  into  another,  but
into  being  from  absolute  not-being  {pure  essence).  Empty
willing  is  the  struggling  for  being,  which  can  only  attain
being  if  a  certain  external  condition  is  satisfied.  If
the  will  in  itself  is  the  will  able  to  will  (consequently
also  able  not  to  will,  or  velle  et  nolle  pot  ens),  the  empty
volition is the will that has decided itself to will


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  167

(thus  can  no  longer  not-will)  the  will  willing  to  will
indeed,  but  not  yet  able  to  accomplish  the  willing  by  itself
alone  (telle  volens,  sed  velle  non  rpotens),  till  the  presenta-
tion is  added,  which  it  can  will.

Empty  volition  is  thus  actual  so  far  as  it  struggles  after
its  realisation,  but  it  is  not  actual  so  far  as  it  cannot
attain  this  realisation  of  itself  without  the  accession  of  an
external  circumstance.  As  mere  form  it  can  only  become
actually  existential  when  it  has  attained  its  fulfilment ;
this  fulfilment  it  can,  however,  not  find  in  itself,  because
it  is  only  form  and  nothing  more.  "Whilst,  therefore,  the
endeavour  of  definite  volition  has  the  realisation  of  its
content  (its  assertion  against  opposite  endeavours)  for
goal,  the  effort  of  the  empty  willing  has  no  other  goal
than  this,  to  realise  itself,  itself  as  form,  to  obtain  posses-
sion of  itself,  to  be,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  to  will,  i.e.,
to  come  to  itself.

Another  tendency  than  this,' to  emerge  from  the  vacuity
of  the  pure  not  yet  existent  form,  cannot  be  at  all  ima-
gined in  the  absolutely  idealless  and  blind  Will.  One
might  say  its  content  or  goal  is  the  negation  of  its  want
of  content,  if  this  were  not  self-contradictory  and  at  the
same  time  materially  false,  so  far  as  by  that  a  notional,  i.e.,
ideal,  content  was  indicated,  so  that  the  empty  volition
would  then  again  have  an  ideal  content,  and  would  be
capable  of  existence  through  this  alone.  The  relation  is
rather  a  positive  one;  the  potentiality  contains  in  itself
the  formal  element  of  the  act  as  abstract  being,  not  yet
posited,  ainl  the  initiative  strives  also  to  posit  it  as  that
which  it  intrinsically  is,  i.e.,  as  pure  form  of  the  act,
which,  however,  never  could  succeed  as  long  as  the  other
equally  indispensable,  namely,  material  moment  of  the
act  is  wanting.  Thus  it  remains,  so  far  as  the  latter  is  no:
added  to  the  empty  volition,  in  an  unceasing  p>vrP"re<hiess  to
spring,  without  ever  coming  to  the  point ;  it  remains  at  the
stage  of  a  becoming,  from  which  nothing  becomes,  in  which
nothing  emerges. The  willing-to-will  pines  for  fulfilment,


1 68  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  yet  the  form  of  the  will  cannot  be  realised,  till  it  has
grasped  a  content ;  as  soon  and  as  far  as  it  has  done  this,
volition  is  again  no  longer  empty  volition,  no  longer  willing
to  will,  but  definite  willing,  willing  something.  The  state
of  pure  volition  is  therefore  an  eternal  pining  for  fulfil-
ment, which  can  only  be  given  to  it  through  the  idea,  i.e.,
it  is  absolute  unblessedness,  pain  without  pleasure,  even
without  pause.  So  far  as  empty  volition  is  only  momentary
impulse,  that  immediately,  at  the  same  moment  at  which
it  emerges,  grasps  the  idea  as  content  (identical  with  it,
therefore  not  able  to  withdraw  from  it),  so  far  it  does  not
attain  realiter  to  the  separate  existence  of  such  an  ante-mun-
dane unblessedness,  although  the  latter  is  the  condition  of
the  origin  of  the  world,  thus  natura  prius.  But  undoubt-
edly it  also  attains  realiter  an  ea^ra-mundane  unblessedness
of  empty  willing  beside  the  satisfied  world-will.  For  the
Will  is  potentially  infinite,  and  in  the  same  sense  its  initia-
tive, empty  volition,  is  infinite.  The  Idea,  however,  is  finite  in
its  notion  (although  in  itself  capable  of  infinite  perfection),
so  that  also  only  a  finite  part  of  empty  volition  can  be
satisfied  by  it  (and  only  a  finite  world  can  arise).  There
remains,  therefore,  an  infinite  excess  of  the  hungry  vacant
willing  besides  and  beyond  the  satisfied  world- will,  which
in  fact,  until  the  return  of  the  total  will  to  pure  poten-
tiality, falls  irretrievably  into  unblessedness.  The  reader
may  remember  that,  according  to  Chap.  iii.  C,  every  non-
satisfaction  of  a  will  co  ipso  begets  consciousness.  The
sole  content  of  this  single  extra-mundane  consciousness  is,
as  we  saw  above  (vol.  ii.  pp.  257-258),  not  exactly  an  idea,
but  absolute  pain  and  unblessedness,  whilst  in  the  world
(in  the  fulfilled  volition)  there  exists  only  a  relative  pain,
i.e.,  an  excess  of  pain  over  pleasure.

Will  and  Presentation,  both  of  which  were  before  the
commencement  of  the  real  process,  something  pre-exis-
tent,  or,  as  Schelling  says,  "super-existent,"  are  therefore
united  in  the  (partial)  fulfilment  of  empty  volition  through
the  (whole)  idea  into  fulfilled  volition  or  the  willed  idea,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCOXSCIOUS.  169

wherewith  the  act  is  attained  as  real  existence.  We  may
call  this  combination  of  willing  and  picturing  to  form
existing  filled  volition,  which,  regarded  from  the  side  of
the  will,  is  an  educing  and  seizing  of  the  idea,  by  the  same
right  from  the  side  of  the  presentation  a  surrendering  to
the  will ;  for  devotion  also  is  an  altogether  passive  fact
which  demands  no  positive  activity,  but  only  exchidcs
all  negative  activity,  all  resistance,  It  appears  here  very
clearly  that  Will  and  Idea  are  related  to  one  another  as
male  and  femede,  for  the  truly  feminine  never  goes
beyond  an  unresisting  passive  devotion.  If  we  would
carry  the  image  further,  the  Idea  is  before  being  (as
purely  being)  in  the  state  of  blessed  innocence ;  but  the
Will,  that  has  put  itself  into  the  state  of  unblessedness
through  elevation  from  pure  potentiality  into  empty  voli-
tion, drags  the  Presentation  or  Idea  with  it  into  the  whirl-
pool of  being  and  the  torment  of  the  process,  and  the  Idea
gives  itself  up  to  it,  sacrifices  its  maiden  innocence,  as  it
were,  for  the  sake  of  its  final  redemption,  that  it  cannot
find  in  itself.  In  that  the  Idea  is  not  at  all  capable  of  an
active  resistance  to  the  Will,  and  that  the  blind  roving  Will
cannot  at  all  avoid  seizing  this,  because  it  is  the  only
thing  seizable,  and  lies  before  its  nose,  as  it  were ;  in  a
word,  in  that  the  essential  identity  of  the  Will  and  the
Idea  makes  a  non-concurrence  of  both,  after  the  impulse
lias  once  been  given,  impossible,  nothing  is  changed  in
that  relation  of  the  two  to  one  another.  What  was
before  an  unintelligible  fact  is  now  elevated  into  the
sphere  of  necessity,  and  thereby  at  the  same  time  the
proof  of  the  above  assertion  is  given  that  an  interval
of  empty  volition  between  the  moment  of  the  initiative
and  the  real  world-process  is  impossible,  because  the  Idea
necessarily  sees  itself  in  the  first  moment  of  the  initiative
of  the  will  dragged  into  the  vortex  of  the  process,  so  that
the  beginning  of  the  vague  time  posited  by  empty  volitive
is  likewise  the  commencement  of  the  time  determined  by
the  Idea. From  this  embrace  of  the two super-existent


170  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

principles,  of  the  being-able-to-be  that  decides  to  be  and
of  the  purely  being  is  therefore  being  engendered ;  as  we
already  know,  it  has  from  the  father  its  "  That,"  from  the
mother  its  "  What  and  How."

We  saw  that  the  Will  is  insatiable ;  however  much  it  has
it  always  wants  more,  for  it  is  potentially  infinite;  and  yet
its  satisfaction  can  never  be  infinite,  because  a  satisfied
or  completed  infinity  would  be  a  realised  contradiction.
Strictly  it  is  therefore  quite  indifferent  whether  that  piece
of  the  empty  volition  which  has  found  a  fulfilment  in  the
Idea  is  great  or  small,  i.e.,  whether  the  world  is  great  or
small  (in  the  intensive  sense),  for  the  satisfied  volition
will  always  be  related  to  empty  volition,  as  something
finite  to  an  infinite,  which  is  possible  because  it  is  related
to  it  as  actuality  to  potentiality.  Since  accordingly  empty
volition  is  and  remains  infinite,  it  is  also  altogether  indif-
ferent for  the  infinite  absolute  unblessedness  of  this  empty
volition  whether,  besides  its  infinite  unblessedness  miti-
gated by  no  pleasure,  however  slight,  a  world  of  pain  and
pleasure  exists  or  not.

We  certainly  detect  none  of  that  extra-mundane  un-
blessedness of  the  void  willingly,  for  we  belong  to  the
vjorld,  to  the  fulfilled  willing.  Lastly,  we  can  by  no
means  adopt  the  opinion  that  the  will  furnished  with  an
ideal  content,  e.g.,  the  atomic  forces,  is  not  obliged  to
endure  considerable  non-satisfactions  and  painful  sensa-
tions, although  we  can  say  with  certainty  that  before  the
origin  of  the  organic  consciousness  it  can  feel  no  satisfac-
tion as  pleasure.  According  to  all  this  the  infinite  un-
blessedness would  be  perpetuated  if  the  possibility  of  a
radical  redemption  were  not  given.

This  possibility  exists,  however,  as  we  know,  in  the
emancipation  of  the  Idea  from  the  Will  through  conscious-
ness. The  latter  certainly  demands  in  the  course  of  the
process  still  greater  sacrifices ;  for  although  it  indeed
enables  pleasure  to  be  felt,  it  also  renders  pain  the  more
oppressive  through  reflection,  so  that  the  intra-mundane


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  171

pain,  as  we  have  seen,  does  not  fall,  but  rises  with  the
enhancement  of  consciousness  on  the  whole ;  but  through
the  final  redemption  this  enhancement  of  pain  becomes
purposive.  This  ultimate  redemption  is  perfectly  com-
patible with  our  principles,  for  although  at  the  end  of  the
world  only  the  satisfied  will  is  directly  brought  to  turn
round,  yet  this  is  the  only  actual  and  existential  will,
and  is  consequently  related  as  regards  its  real  power
to  the  mere  empty  willing  struggling  for  existence  as
an  actual  to  a  non-actual,  as  a  something  to  a  nothing,
although  of  perfectly  homogeneous  nature.  If,  then,  the
existential  volition  suddenly  becomes  nothing  through  an
existential  willing-not-to-will,  the  willing  in  this  manner
itself  determines  itself  to  the  willing-no-more,  in  that  the
whole  volition  parting  into  two  equal  and  opposite  direc-
tions swallows  up  itself,  thus  as  a  matter  of  course  also
the  empty  willing-to-will  (not-being-able-to-will)  ceases,
and  the  return  to  the  pure  independent  potentiality  is
accomplished,  the  Will  is  again  what  it  was  before  all
volition,  will  able  to  will  and  not  to  will ; — for  the  being
able  to  will  is  certainly  not  in  any  vray  to  be  taken
from  it.

To  wit,  there  is  in  the  Unconscious  neither  an  experi-
ence nor  a  memory ;  the  Unconscious  can  therefore  also
not  be  altered  through  the  accomplished  world-process ;  it
can  neither  have  acquired  anything  that  it  did  not  possess
before,  nor  have  lost  anything  formerly  possessed ;  it  can
neither  have  filled  its  former  ante-mundane  emptiness
witli  the  memory  of  the  wealth  of  the  process  passed
through  nor  receive  any  instruction  through  the  experience
had  in  the  same,  to  guard  itself  henceforward  from  the
repetition  of  its  former  faux  pas  (for  for  all  this  remi-
niscence and  memory,  nay,  even  reflection  would  be
required) ;  in  a  word,  it  is  in  no  other  situation  than
before  the  first  commencement  of  that  process.  Is  this
so,  however,  and  in  the  impossibility  of  maintaining  a
memory  in  the  Unconscious  must  the  flattering  illusion  of


172  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  hope  of  final  peace  rejoicing  perhaps  in  its  finality-
after  the  close  of  the  world  -  process  be  set  aside  as
a  pious  delusion  (cp.  pp.  89-90),  the  possibility  un-
doubtedly remains  open  that  the  potentiality  of  the  Will
decides  once  again  to  will,  whence  then  the  possibility  im-
mediately follows  that  the  world-process  may  often  have
played  the  same  tune  before.  Let  us  pause  for  a  moment
in  order  to  determine  the  degree  of  the  probability.

The  Will  able  to  will  and  not-will,  or  the  potentiality
which  can  determine  itself  to  being  or  not,  is  the  abso-
lutely free.  The  Idea  is  by  its  logical  nature  condemned
to  a  logical  necessity ;  volition  is  the  potentiality  that
has  lost  itself,  which  has  forfeited  its  liberty  to  be  able
not-to-ioill ;  only  potentiality  before  the  act  is  free,  is  the
determined  and  determinable  by  no  reason,  that  abyss
that  is  itself  the  abyss  of  all.  As  little  as  its  freedom  is
limited  outwardly  so  little  is  it  inwardly  ;  it  only  becomes
limited  inwardly  at  the  moment  when  it  is  also  annihi-
lated,— when  the  potentiality  itself  externalises  itself.  We
see  at  once  that  this  absolute  freedom  is  the  stupidest
thing  that  one  can  imagine ;  which  is  quite  in  accor-
dance with  the  circumstance  that  it  is  only  conceivable
in  the  Alogical.

If,  now,  there  is  nothing  at  all  that  determines  volition
or  non- volition,  it  is  mathematically  speaking  accidental
whether  at  this  moment  the  potentiality  wills  or  does  not
will,  i.e.,  the  probability  =  -J.  Only  when  the  probability
of  each  of  the  possible  cases  is  =  |,  only  where  absolute
chance  comes  into  play,  only  then  is  absolute  freedom
conceivable.  Freedom  and  chance  are,  as  absolute  notions,
notions,  i.e.,  deprived  of  all  relations,  identical.  In  the
same  manner  Schelling  conceives  the  relation  when  he
says  (ii.  I,  p.  464),  "  Volition,  that  is  for  us  the  com-
mencement of  another  world  posited  outside  the  idea  .  .  .
is  the  primitively  accidental, — the  primitive  chance  itself."

Now,  were  the  potentiality  in  time,  the  probability
would, as time  is infinite, be  =  1,  i.e., certainty,  that


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  173

the  potentiality  resolves  in  time  once  again  to  become
actual ;  but,  as  the  potentiality  is  outside  time,  which
indeed  the  actual  first  creates,  and  this  extra-temporal
eternity  is  not  at  all  distinguished  in  temporal  reference
from  the  moment  (as  great  and  small  are  not  distinguished
as  regards  colour),  so  is  also  the  probability  that  the
potentiality  determines  itself  to  volition  in  its  extra-
temporal  eternity  equal  to  this,  that  it  determines  itself
thereto  instantaneously,  i.e.,  =  \.  It  follows  from  this
that  the  redemption  from  volition  can  be  regarded  as  no
fiual  one,  but  that  it  only  reduces  the  pain  of  volition  and
being  from  the  probability  1  (which  it  has  during  the
world-process)  to  the  probability  h,  thus  always  affords  a
gain  not  to  be  despised  in  practice.

Of  course,  the  probability  of  future  events  cannot  be
influenced  by  the  past,  consequently  the  co-efficient  of
probability  of  \  for  the  repeated  emergence  of  the  will-
ing from  potentiality  cannot  thereby  be  diminished,  that
the  latter  had  already  once  before  resolved  to  will,  but
when  one  a  priori  considers  the  probability  that  the
emergence  of  volition  from  potentiality  repeat  itself  with

the  whole  world-process  n  times,  it  is  manifestly  =  w)a  just

as  the  a  'prior I  probability  of  throwing  heads  n  times  in
succession  with  a  coin.

►Since  with  the  end  of  one  world-process  time  ceases
till  tin;  beginning  of  the  next  there  is  no  time-pause;  but
the  state  of  affairs  is  precisely  the  same  as  if  the  poten-
tiality  had  at  the  moment  of  the  annihilation  of  its  former
act  externalised  itself  anew  into  act. It  is,  however,  clear

that  n  increasing,  the  probability  -  -  becomes  so  small  that

it  is  practically  sufficient  for  consolation.

3.  The  Presentation  or  Idea. — Let  us  now  pass  to  the
other  super-existent,  Presentation,  and  once  more  take
particular  notice  of  its  relation  to  the  I'latonic  idea.


174  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Aristotle  calls  the  Platonic  ideas  ovaiat,  a  term  that
Plato  himself  to  our  knowledge  never  employed,  which
at  any  rate  with  Aristotle  means  something  altogether
different  from  what  we  now  understand  by  "  substance,"
and  which  would  be  best  translated  by  "entities."  Por
Plato  himself  one  can  hardly  assert  more  than  that  he
conceived  the  Ideas  as  objective  existences,  and  denied
that  they  are  only  in  the  mind,  that  they  are  mere  know-
ledge of  some  person ;  further,  indeed,  he  did  not  go  in
the  discussion  of  their  nature,  but  he  is  contented  with
opposing  them  to  the  perishable  flux  of  the  sensible
world  as  the  truly  being  (6Wa>9  6v),  as  the  independent
being  (ov  avro  icaO'  avro),  and  the  unchangeable  (ovSeirore
ovSafir)  ovSafitoS  aSXolatatv  ovSe/Jtlav  evBe^o/xevov).  If
Aristotle  strives  after  more  precise  definition  by  calling  the
Ideas  ovaiat,  the  later  Platonists  and  the  Neo-Platonic
school  on  the  other  hand  conceived  the  Ideas  as  eternal
thoughts  of  the  Deity.

Both  interpretations  it  is  probable  were  in  the  mind
of  Plato  himself  ;  for  although  the  eternal  thoughts  of  the
Deity  cannot  be  substances  in  the  modern  sense  of  the
phrase,  yet  it  is  no  contradiction  at  all  to  call  them  ovaiat
in  the  Aristotelian  sense,  just  because  they  are  eternal
thoughts  of  the  Deity,  therefore  have  an  essential  being
for  ever  self-identical.

Certainly  Plato  would  never  have  allowed  that  they  are
a  knowledge,  that  they  are  conscious  thoughts  of  Deity,  for
thereby  they  would  be  altogether  deprived  of  their  objec-
tivity, which  was  the  chief  point  to  him.  When  Plato
identifies  the  Idea  with  the  Divine  Eeason,  this  can  only
mean  that,  by  a  very  explicable  license  of  speech,  he  iden-
tified the  essential  being  with  its  sole  eternal  activity.

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  we  have  to  understand  by  the
Platonic  ideas  eternal  unconscious  thoughts  (of  an  imper-
sonal Being),  where  the  "eternal"  does  not  mean  an  end-
less duration,  but  that  which  is  out  of  time,  elevated
beyond  all  time.  Por  us  too  the  unconscious  presentation
is  an  extra-temporal,  unconscious,  intuitive  Thought,  which


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  175

represents  to  consciousness  an  altogether  objective  essen-
tiality. The  main  difference  between  the  Platonic  and
our  view  lies  in  the  meaning  which  he  assigns  to  the  word
"  being,"  namely,  whilst  after  the  precedent  of  Parmenides,
he  regards  unchangedbleness  as  the  criterion  of  true  being,
nnchangeableness  appears  now  to  us  indifferent  for  being,
but  on  the  contrary  we  demand  unconditionally  that  true
being  should  have  reality.

Thus  Plato  comes  to  declare  the  Idea  to  have  being  in
the  most  proper  sense,  whereas  we  are  obliged  to  regard  it
as  somewhat  non-being,  of  which  more  hereafter.

With  Plato  there  takes  place  such  an  interpenetration
in  the  abstract  realm  of  ideas,  that  all  are  contained  in
One  Idea.  I,  too,  have  repeatedly  pointed  to  the  mutual
interpenetration  of  the  presentations  in  the  Unconscious,
and  their  coinherence  {e.g.,  of  end  and  means),  a  state
that  simply  follows  from  the  non-temporal  character  of
the  unconscious  presentation,  where  the  moments  of  thought
separated  in  time  in  discursive  thought  must  necessarily
be  found  in  one  another.  But  whereas  Plato  denotes  the
coinherence  of  the  whole  world  of  ideas  in  the  peculiar
Pythagorean  abstract  fashion  as  the  One,  and  then  deter-
mines this  One  materially  as  the  Good,  we  shall  not  be
able  to  rest  content  with  any  of  these  determinations.
Since  the  notion  of  the  Good  in  the  ethical  sense,  as
already  often  remarked,  must  not  be  referred  to  the  All-
One  existence,  which  Plato  too  seems  to  feel,  we  shall  be
obliged  to  interpret  the  good  itself  in  the  Platonic  sense
as  the  higher  logical  end,  as  the  final  end  determining  all
the  intermediate  ends  and  means,  that  the  all-wise  World-
lieason  assigns  to  itself.  Thus  understood,  we  too  may'
appropriate  the  Platonic  unity  of  the  Idea.  The  Idea,
actualised  in  every  moment  of  the  world-process  is  one
embracing  in  itself  all  the  separate  ideas  to  be  simul-
taneously realised  as  integral  elements,  and  the  uniting
point  of  this  collective  Idea  is  the  self-identical  world-end
unchanged  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  process,
or  true  end of the  world-process,  which  indeed  is  only


176  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

implicitly  thought  in  each  single  moment,  but  which
teleologically  determines  the  whole  content  of  the  intui-
tion of  each  instant  as  means  to  it.  The  end  is  posited
by  the  Idea  itself,  and  the  determination  of  the  special
matter  of  intuition  of  the  All- One  is  again  logically
determined  by  the  end ;  accordingly  the  total  content  of
the  intuition  of  the  All-One  is  from  the  beginning  to  the
end  of  the  process  pure  self-determination  of  the  Idea.

We  can,  however,  not  stop  here,  but  must  further  ask,
why  does  the  Idea  determine  itself  in  this  way  and  not
otherwise  ?  If  this  self-determination  is  a  necessary  one,
following  from  its  own  nature,  as  we  must  assume,  the
question  is  properly  only  how  to  perceive  the  peculiar
nature  of  the  Idea,  in  consequence  of  which  it  sees  itself
compelled  to  determine  itself  thus  and  not  otherwise.
When  we  have  perceived  this  inmost  nature  of  the  Idea,
we  possess  that  from  which  the  whole  content  of  the  Idea
necessarily  follows  in  virtue  of  its  pre-formed  self-deter-
mination ;  we  have  gained  the  most  precise  expression  for
the  principle  that  we  hitherto  have  called  Idea,  but  which
in  strictness  is  only  Idea  when  and  so  far  as  it  has  entered
into  being,  i.e.,  become  content  of  a  will.  The  required
determination  for  the  inmost  nature  of  the  Idea  now  can
no  longer  be  a  material  one,  for  it  must  indeed  also  hold
good  beyond  all  ideal  content  (before  the  beginning
of  the  world  -  process) ;  the  matrix  of  the  unfolding
of  the  whole  material  wealth  of  the  world  of  ideas,  the
ground  of  the  self-determination  of  the  Idea  to  this  and
no  other  content,  can  only  be  a  formal,  no  longer  a
material  principle  ;  it  must  be  the  same  immanent  formal
principle  of  the  Idea  that  is  manifested  in  its  self-deter-
mination of  the  ideal  means  to  the  ideal  end,  i.e.,  the
logical  formal  principle.

By  logic  was  formerly,  and  in  part  still  is,  understood
theory  of  thinking  in  the  widest  extent ;  but  in  order  to
understand  what  is  here  meant  by  the  logical,  we  must
first  of  all  abstract  from  that  too  general  conception  all


,)


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  177

that  is  specifically  psychological  and  anthropological,
e.g.,  the  special  doctrine  of  method,  which  provides  a
guide  to  research  in  the  various  departments  of  human
inquiry,  and  the  theory  of  knowledge,  which  investigates
the  problem  whether  and  how  consciousness  may  trans-
gress its  immanent  sphere  and  attain  to  being  per  se.  We
must  further  remove  from  it  the  framework  of  Ontology,
which  the  human  consciousness  has  contrived  with  the
help  of  the  categories  for  the  better  understanding  of
existence,  but  which  itself  is  only  an  implicit  part  of  the
material  content  of  the  Idea,  and  only  seems  to  be  formal
because  it  is  abstract.  Finally,  we  must  deduct  all  that
appertains  only  to  the  discursive  form  of  the  manifesta-
tion of  the  logical  in  consciousness,  and  not  to  the  logical
as  such,  thus  the  diremption  of  the  logically  connected
moments,  which  may  be  likened  to  the  exhibition  of  an
illuminated  point  as  a  shining  line  in  a  quickly  rotating
mirror.  It  is  the  logical  formal  principle  that  causes  the
moments  successively  related  in  the  discursive-logical
thought-process  of  consciousness  (e.g.,  the  terms  of  a  conclu-
sion) to  stand  to  one  another  in  actual  logical  relation;  but
that  the  related  moments  are  discursively  sundered  is  due
only  to  the  nature  of  conscious  thought,  not  to  the  logical
principle,  which  is  ever  inherently  unconscious,  and  even
in  the  discursively  logical  process  of  consciousness  is  in-
terposed between  every  pair  of  terms  as  a  timeless  uncon-
scious factor,  so  that  it  is  not  to  bo  wondered  at,  that  it  is
also  manifested  as  such  in  the  implicit  intuitive  thinking
of  the  unconscious  Idea  and  its  self-determination  (cp.
Chap.  vii.  I).,  vol.  i.  pp.  314-3  16).  The  logical  principle  is
in  theological  language  the  divine  reason  ;  in  metaphysical,
the  very  simplest  primitive  reason,  from  which  everything
rational  is  derived.  As  primitive  reason  it  is  the  formal
regulator  of  the  material  self-determination  of  the  Idea;
it  is  generally  the  formal  aspect  of  the  unconscious  intui-
tion of  the  All-One,  whose  material  aspect  is  the  Idea  in
VOL.  in.  M


178  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  narrower  sense.  Lastly,  it  is  the  matrix  from  which
the  not  yet  existing  Idea  is  unfolded  at  the  beginning  of
the  world-process.

If  we  would  now  more  precisely  specify  what  the
Logical  or  the  primitive  Reason  is,  not  for  the  Idea,  but  in
itself,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  keep  to  the  old  enouncement
of  the  logical  formal  principle  under  the  form  of  the  laws
of  identity  and  contradiction,  i.e.,  not  to  the  discursive
expression  of  these  laws,  but  to  the  logical  element  con-
tained in  them.  The  two  are  one,  and  only  the  positive
and  negative  expression  of  the  same  thing,  but  at  the
same  time  also  the  positive  and  negative  mode  of  mani-
festation of  the  same  principle.  The  logical  formal  prin-
ciple in  the  shape  of  the  law  of  identity  is  absolutely
unproductive  (the  A  =  A  leads  to  nothing) ;  it  has  been
the  error  of  all  logistic  philosophers  that  they  regarded
the  logical  principle  as  positively  creative,  and  even
imagined  it  possible  to  attain,  by  its  means,  to  a  positive
content  of  the  world,  to  a  positive  final  aim  of  the
same.  All  positive  teleology  is  therefore  a  still-born  child,
because  the  positive  end  must  be  a  creation  of  the  logi-
cal principle  in  the  positive  sense,  but  the  latter  is  in  the
positive  form  altogether  uncreative,  nay,  of  itself  could
never  attain  to  a  process,  but' must  persist  in  pure  identity
with  itself.

Not  so  the  negative  aspect,  although  here  certainly"
the  logical  formal  principle  can  only  be  manifested  if
a  non-logical  is  present,  which  the  logical  can  oppose
with  its  negation.  The  inner  conflict  of  the  void  Will
that  wills  willing  and  yet  cannot  will,  that  aims  at
satisfaction  and  reaches  dissatisfaction,  is  such  a  non-
loincal ;  the  volition  itself  is  the  negation  of  the  Law  of
Identity,  in  that  it  annuls  persistence  in  identity,  and
demands  that  A  (pure  potentiality)  do  not  remain  A,
but  change  into  B  (the  act) ;  it  is  therefore  the  nega-
tion of  the  positively  logical,  and  therewith  challenges
the  logical  formal  principle  to  manifestation  in  a  nega-


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  179

tive  sense.1  The  logical  negates  the  negation  of  itself :
it  says,  "  The  contradiction  (namely,  to  me,  the  logical)
is  not  to  be ; "  and  in  saying  that  it  proposes  to  itself
an  end,  namely,  the  abolition  of  the  alogical,  of  voli-
tion. Certainly  this  end,  that  follows  from  the  negative
mode  of  manifestation  of  the  logical  principle,  is  itself
only  negative,  directed  against  the  genuinely  positive  in
volition,  that  only  from  the  standpoint  of  the  logical
appears  relatively  negative.  In  the  same  sense  will  also,
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  logical,  the  end  —  the
suppression  of  volition — appear  as  negation  of  the  nega-
tion of  itself,  i.e.,  as  double  negation,  i.e.,  as  something
relatively  positive,  but  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
alogical  the  end  remains  a  purely  negative  one,  as  is  con-
firmed by  the  result,  reduction  to  nought.  Accordingly
we  too  must  hold  by  the  expression  of  a  negative  final
end,  in  contrast  to  the  impossible  positive  final  end  (in
the  sense  of  an  emanation  from  the* logical  principle  in
its  positive  form),  and  shall  have  to  lay  stress  on  the  fact
that  here  teleology  altogether,  in  the  last  resort,  has  only
been  saved  by  the  absurdity  of  all  search  after  a  positive
end  and  the  untenability  of  all  positive  teleology  being
apprehended  through  the  principle  of the  logical  itself,

1  It  can  hardly  be  necessary  to  that  the  "What"  of  the  world  is  con-
call  to  mind  that  the  determination  trived  most  judiciously  and  wisely,
of  the  "Alogical"  and  "Logical,"  and  thereby  points  to  the  action  of  a
here  deduced  from  the  nature  of  the  wise  and  logical  principle,  which  we
two  principles  "Will"  and  "  uncon-  have  perceived  in  its  manifestation
scions  intuitive  Idea,"  had  already  to  be  unconscious  intuitive  pnacn-
been  proved  by  the  inductive  path,  tation.  It  seemed  to  mo  expedient
The  chapter  on  the  Misery  of  Exist-  to  show  here  once  more  that  the  con-
(  nee,  n.umi  ly,  had  inductively  proved  trary  course'  also  loads  to  the  under-
that  the  existence  of  this  world  is  standing  of  the  Whole,  i.e.,  that  from
worse  than  would  be  its  non  exist-  the  very  nature  of  the  pvsehieal  ele-
ence  ;  that  therefore,  the  "  That  "  of  mentary  functions  "willing  and  per-
the  world,  or  its  existence,  must  owe  ceiving,"  expanded  into  attributes  of
its  origin  to  an  irrational  or  alogi-  the  All-One,  follows  atone  the  alogi-
cal principle,  but  at  the  same  time  cal  and  logical  character  of  the  same,
alsfi  that  this  irrational  principle,  because  in  this  manner  the  organic
which  proceeds  to  make  the  world  connection  of  all  the  terms  in  the  tra-
into  a  wretched  one,  is  rnlit'ion.  On  versed  circle  of  thought  becomes  far
the  other  hand,  it  has  been  shown  more  conspicuous.
by  all the preceding investigations


i So  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

and  by  the  adoption  of  a  negative  teleology,  i.e.,  a  teleology
with  absolutely  negative  end,  but  which  from  the  point  of
view  of  logical  speculation  is,  on  account  of  the  double
negation  contained  in  it,  just  as  positive  as  a  directly
positive  teleology  could  ever  be.

We  see,  then,  that  we  may  and  must  go  beyond  Plato's
determination  of  the  One  Idea  as  the  Good  or  the  end,  to
the  higher  determination  of  the  ideal  principle  as  the
formal-logical.  The  eternity  of  the  Ideas  is  not  to  be  un-
derstood, as  if  they  one  and  all,  just  as  they  are  after-
wards realised,  lay  from  the  very  first  and  for  ever  boxed
up  in  the  ideal,  and  only  waited  for  the  Will  to  realise
them ;  for  then  the  infinite  empty  volition  must  realise
the  whole  mass  of  Ideas  at  a  stroke,  which  would  only
yield  an  eternal  chaos,  but  no  development.  Eather  must
the  Ideas  always  unfold  themselves  by  self-determina-
tion from  their  formal  principle  only  in  the  extent  in
which  they  are  to  be  realised  by  the  Will  in  the  course
of  development;  and  this  extent  is  determined  by  the
constant  final  purpose  on  the  one  hand,  and  by  the  stage
of  development  of  the  world  at  any  time  attained  on  the
other.  The  eternity  of  the  Ideas  is  therefore  not  to  be
understood  as  eternal,  even  if  only  ideal,  existence,  but  only
as  eternal  pre-formation  or  possibility.  The  logical  is  in
itself  to  be  regarded  as  a  purely  formal  principle,  which
is  stimulated  to  the  ideal  productivity  of  its  content  only
by  the  other  of  itself,  the'  alogical.  We  may  say  there  is
no  pure  logic,  i.e.,  no  manifestation  of  the  logical  purely
in  and  by  itself;  there  is  only  applied  logic,  i.e.,  manifesta-
tion of  the  logical  in  and  by  its  other,  the  alogical.  Only
through  applied  logic  is  the  ideal  principle  that  is  primo
loco  pure  formal  principle  filled  with  an  ideal  content
(first  the  end,  and  then  the  succession  of  means  to
attain  this  end).

Thus  understood,  our  ideal  principle  also  essentially
agrees  with  that  of  Hegel  (for  the  Absolute  Idea  of  Hegel
is  nothing  more  than  that  to  which  the  empty  husk  of


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  1S1

thought,  the  notion  of  pure  being  identical  with  nothing,
has  determined  itself  in  virtue  of  its  immanent  logical
formal  principle  in  the  progress  of  the  evolution  itself),
except  that  one  has  in  the  word  "Absolute  Idea"  an
empty  sign,  which  is  only  filled  when  the  whole  develop-
ment has  been  gone  through ;  whilst  the  more  familiar
"  logical "  denotes  the  formal  moment  of  the  self-determi-
nation in  the  extra-temporal  ideal  evolution.

The  process  in  the  Idea  per  se  is,  as  Hegel  him-
self says,  an  eternal,  i.e.,  extra-temporal  one,  consequently
it  is  also  strictly  again  no  process  but  an  eternal  result,
a  being-in-one  of  all  the  moments  mutually  determined
to  all  eternity ;  and  this  being-in-one  of  the  moments
determining  one  another  appears  to  us  only  as  process
when  we  artificially  sunder  them  in  discursive  thought.
For  this  reason  I  cannot  allow  that  the  logical  determi-
nation of  that  which  at  every  moment  emerges  into
actuality  takes  place  through  dialectic  in  the  Hegelian
sense,  because  in  the  sphere  of  the  ultra-temporal  eternity,
where  we  might  at  any  rate  speak  of  a  peaceful  juxta-
position and  intermingling  of  contradictory  representations,
no  process  is  possible  than  that  which  necessarily  presup-
poses time,  and  on  the  other  hand,  again,  in  the  piece  of
the  Absolute  Idea  emerging  at  a  particular  moment  into
reality  the  main  requirement  of  the  Hegelian  dialectic,  the
existence  of  contradiction,  is  wanting, — quite  apart  from
this,  that  a  dialectic  process  in  the  Hegelian  sense  can  only
take  place  between  concepts,  these  crutches  of  discursive
thinking,  whereas  all  unconscious  thinking  occurs  in  con-
crete intuitions.

When  Plato,  who,  properly  speaking,  had  no  idea  of
laws  of  Nature,  assumed  also  transcendent  ideas  of  every-
thing of  which  he  could  abstract  common  notions,  this
was  a  childish  point  of  view,  which,  as  Aristotle  reports
at  a  later  period,  excited  suspicion  even  in  his  own  mind.

We  know  now  that  all  inorganic  Nature  is  a  conse-
quence  of  the  atomic forces acting according to  their


182  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

immanent  laws  (which  are  comprised  in  their  Idea),  and
only  with  the  origin  of  organisms  is  there  an  accession
of  genuinely  new  Ideas.  We  know  also  that  as  all  the
Ideas  receive  their  determination  from  the  Logical,  and  in
strictness  are  altogether  nothing  but  applications  of  the
logical  to  given  cases,  the  idea  of  the  world-process  is  the
application  of  the  logical  to  empty  volition.  With  Hegel  the
latter  is  represented  by  that  which  forms  the  commencing
and  starting-point  of  logic,  pure  being,  identical  with
nothing  ;  for  this  is  the  only  form  under  which  the
impulse  to  self-alienation  foreign  to  the  logical  can  exhibit
itself  to  the  logical  principle.

We  have  seen  that  the  Idea  first  becomes  existent
when  the  Will  grasps  it  as  content,  and  consequently
realises  it ;  but  what  then  is  it  previously  1  At  all  events,
not  yet  existent,  a  super-existent  like  the  Will  or  empty
volition.  As  the  Will  in  volition  passes  out  of  itself  (as
potentiality),  so  is  the  Idea  put  outside  itself  (as  super-
existent)  by  the  Will.  This  is  the  radical  difference
between  the  two  :  the  Will  itself  ejects  itself ;  the  Idea  is
translated  into  being  by  the  Will  (as  one  in  the  condition
of  not-being).

Could  the  Idea  pass  of  itself  into  being,  it  would  indeed
be  potentiality  of  being, — would  therefore  be  itself  Will.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Idea  not  yet  translated  into
being  can  also  not  absolutely  not  be  (ov/c  elvat),  else  the
Will  could  also  make  nothing  of  it ;  it  can  only  be  a
not-yet-being  in  a  special  sense  (fiij  6v).  Now,  if  it  is  to
be  neither  active  being  nor  potentiality  of  being,  nor  also
absolutely  nothing,  what  then  remains  ?  Language  wants
an  appropriate  word  for  the  designation  of  this  concept.
One  might  be  inclined  to  call  this  state  latent  being,
which,  even  when  it  is  made  manifest  by  the  Will,  yet
never  becomes  free  being,  but  always  only  being  as  ideal
content  of  a  being  in  acta.  From  the  actus  the  latent
being  of  the  Idea  before  its  seizure  by  the  Will  is  distin-
guished by  this,  that  by  the  word  actus,  on  the  one  hand,


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  1S3

one  involuntarily  always  thinks  of  a  preceding  poten-
tiality that  is  here  wanting,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  an
actual  being,  an  efficient  activity,  whose  strict  contrary
is  that  still,  calm,  latent  being,  altogether  self-enclosed,
never  spontaneously  going  out  of  itself.  The  word  actus
therefore  is  at  most  suitable  so  far  as  this  state  like
the  actus  forms  a  contrast  to  potentiality,  but  a  con-
trast that  is  of  quite  a  different  kind  from  that  of  actus.
Schelling  seeks  to  make  this  relation  of  the  concepts
evident  by  terming  this  state  actus  purus,  i.e.,  an  actus
that  is  pure  or  free  from  potentiality,  or  translates  this
fxj]  ov,  "  the  purely  (i.e.,  non-potential)  being.'"'  It  is,
however,  clear  that  these  expressions  are  by  no  means
happy,  since,  in  spite  of  the  most  satisfactory  elucida-
tions, they  must  always  leave  the  impression  of  a  '"'wooden
iron."  This  defect  of  expression,  which  arises  through  a
vain  struggling  with  the  limitations  of  language,  however,
by  no  means  prejudices  the  result,  that  the  Idea  before
being  sucked  into  the  vortex  of  being  by  the  Will  elevated
to  being  must  be  thought  in  a  relatively  non-existent
state,  which,  elevated  above  the  real  Being  arising  from
the  co-operation  of  Will  and  Idea  (i.e.,  super-existent;,
must  be  thought  in  this  super-existent  sense  as  a  non-
potential  (i.e.,  also  unsubstantial),  hidden,  still,  pure  being.
Inevitably  as  Schelling  was  led  to  this  definition  so  was
Hegel  also  obliged  to  give  to  the  Idea  as  first  and  most
original  determination  that  of  pure  being,  which,  in  com-
parison with  a  later  filled  bein;_r,  is  as  good  as  nothing,
except  that  in  Hegel's  panlogism  by  this  determination
the  alogical  is  at  the  same  time  smuggled  in  as  moment
of  the  initiative  of  the  process. — -As  we  called  the  Will
before  its  elevation  pure  potentiality  or  pure  faculty,  we
may  describe  the  Idea  before  its  transportation  into  being
the  realm  of  pure  possibility.  Both  expressions  agree  in
determining  their  object  by  a  reference  to  something
future;  the  difference,  however,  is  that  this  relation  is  in
"  faculty  "  an active,  in  "possibility  "  a  passive  one. The


1 84  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Will  as  per  se  simply  and  purely  formal  admits  of  no
distinction ;  in  the  Idea,  however,  we  have  to  distinguish
first  the  ideal  principle  as  formal  moment  of  self-deter-
mination, and,  secondly,  the  Idea  as  the  infinite  wealth
of  the  possible  forms  of  development  which  it  hides  in
its  bosom.  So  far  as  the  latter  collectively  are  pre-
destined by  the  "  purely  being  "  formal  element  of  the
logical  for  the  possible  case  of  their  birth,  they  stand  im-
plicitly as  mere  ideal  possibilities  precisely  in  the  same
eternal  logical  relation  which  is  revealed  on  their  entrance
into  being.  But  so  far  as  they  form  in  a  special  sense
the  realm  of  pure  possibility,  in  an  altogether  different
sense  to  the  formal-logical  principle  underlying  them,
from  which  they  are  unfolded  when  once  their  hour  is
come,  so  far  can  the  principle  of  latent  (or,  according  to
Schelling,  pure)  being  appertaining  to  their  matrix  never
be  attributed  to  them,  but  must  be  reserved  for  the  Idea
as  formal-logical  principle  of  the  ideal  self-unfolding.

We  have  seen  that  it  is  in  truth  the  Will,  more  precisely
empty  volition,  which  entrudes  the  Idea  out  of  its  purely
independent  being  into  a  being  with  external  relations,  in
that  it  seizes  it  once  for  all  as  its  content,  but  that  the  Idea
as  fulfilment  of  the  Will  determines  and  develops  itself  in
virtue  of  its  logical  formal  moment.

This  proposition  holds  good  from  the  first  moment  when
the  Idea  is  externalised  by  the  Will  to  the  moment  when
Being  is  extinguished  with  the  turning  back  of  the  Will ;
at  every  moment  the  sum  of  presentations  which  forms  the
content  of  the  Will  is  a  definite  one,  and  indeed  that  definite,
phase  of  the  evolutionary  process  of  the  One  World-Idea
whose  inner  multiplicity  it  composes,  and  it  is,  since  this  evo-
lutionary process  of  the  World-Idea  is  a  purely  logical  one,
altogether  and  exclusively  logically  determined,  or,  what
comes  to  the  same  thing,  posited  as  regards  its  "What"
with  logical  necessity.  But  since,  as  we  know,  the  "  What "
of  the  world  is  at  any  moment  only  the  realised  content  of
the  Will,  the  "  What "  of  the  world  is  at  every  moment  of


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  185

the  world-process  determined  by  logical  necessity.  Be-
cause it  is  logically  necessary  (for  the  main  aim)  that  there
be  development  (in  order  to  the  genesis  and  enhancement
of  consciousness),  because  the  necessity  of  evolution  in-
cludes the  necessity  of  time,  thus  time  and  the  change
of  content  in  time  belongs  to  the  logically  necessary  con-
tent of  the  Idea  itself,  therefore  the  realisation  also  of  this
content  is  presented  as  a  definite  process  in  time  (cp.  what
was  said  regarding  Space,  vol.  ii.  p.  181).

The  above  proposition  holds  for  every  single  event  just
as  much  as  for  the  whole,  for  each  individual  forms  indeed
an  integral  part  of  the  whole,  and  is  as  such  an  integral
part  determined  by  the  whole,  since  each  several  exist-
ence and  event  is,  as  regards  its  "What,"  only  and
wholly  Idea,  therefore  a  link  in  the  inner  organic  manifold
of  the  one  and  whole  World-Idea  at  any  time.  If  now
the  toted  content  of  the  world-idea  at  every  moment
is  logiccdly  determined  throughout  (namely,  on  the  one
hand,  by  the  stable  final  end,  on  the  other  hand  by  the
phase  of  development  of  the  process  attained  at  the  last
moment),  and  if  each  single  'part  is  determined  by  the
whole,  each  single  existence  and  happening  is  also  at  every
moment  logicedly  determined  and  conditioned.  If,  e.g.,  this
liberated  stone  falls,  the  falling  takes  place  with  this  or
that  velocity  for  no  other  reason  than  because  it  is  logically
necessary  under  these  circumstances,  because  it  would  bo
illogical  if  at  this  moment  something  else  happened  to  the
stone.  Certainly  that  the  stone  altogether  can  still  fall  at
this  moment,  that  it  is  still  there  to  fall,  that  the  earth  is
still  there  to  draw  it  to  itself,  this  depends  on  the  persist-
ence of  the  Will;  fordid  the  Will  cease  at  the  moment
to  will,  therefore  the  world  to  be,  it  would  no  longer  he
logical  that  the  stone  should  fall.

We  see  here  the  two  (dements  which  go  to  make  up
causality.  That  the  stone  which  I  now  let  go  falls,
depends  on  the  continuance  of  the  willing  beyond  this
moment ;  but  that  it  falls,  and  falls  indeed  with  such  and


1 86  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

such  velocity,  depends  on  this,  that  it  is  logical  that  it  is
thus,  and  would  be  illogical  if  it  were  otherwise.  That  in
general  anything  comes  to  pass,  that  the  effect  follows,  de-
pends on  the  Will ;  that  the  effect,  if  it  follows,  follows
with  necessity  as  this  and  no  other,  depends  on  the  Logical.
That  indirectly  the  cause  is  determinative  of  the  effect  is
quite  clear,  for  only  under  those  circumstances  which  collec-
tively are  termed  "cause"  is  it  logical  that  this  effect  follows.

According  to  this,  causality  is  another  name  for  logical
necessity,  that  attains  actuality  through  the  Will.

Having  thus  perceived  purpose  to  he  the  positive  side
of  the  logical,  we  shall  now  be  able  unconditionally  to
subscribe  the  proposition  of  Leibniz,  "  causes  efficientes
'pendent  a,  causis  finalibus  •  "  but  we  also  know  that  it  only
expresses  a  part  of  the  truth,  that  the  whole  world-process
is  in  its  content  only  a  logical  process,  but  in  its  existence  a
continual  act  of  Will.  Only  by  this,  that  phenomenal  equally
with  final  causality  is  comprehended  as  logical  necessity ;
only  by  this,  that  the  logical  necessity  of  the  process  is
admitted  in  all  its  phases,  and  physical  causation  and  final
causality  (we  may  add  as  a  third  "  motivation  ")  are  per-
ceived to  be  only  different  projections,  in  which  universal
determination,  regarded  under  different  points  of  view,  pre-
sents itself ;  only,  by  this,  I  say,  has  at  bottom  a  universal
teleological  apprehension  of  the  world-process  become  pos-
sible. For  if  every  moment  of  the  process  is  to  be  altogether
and  without  residue  a  link  in  the  chain  of  physical  causa-
tion, and  each  at  the  same  time  altogether  and  without
residue  a  link  in  the  chain  of  final  causality,  this  is  only
possible  under  one  of  the  following  three  conditions :  either
causation  and  final  causality  have  their  identity  in  a  higher
unity,  of  which  they  form  merely  different  aspects  of  the
apprehension  through  the  discursive  thinking  of  man,  or
both  chains  stand  in  a,  pre-established  harmony,  or  the  pre-
sent link  in  the  chain  of  causation  only  accidentally  agrees
with  the  present  link  in  the  chain  of  final  causes  (as  one
and  the  same  event). Chance  would  once  and  a  way  bu


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  187

possible,  but  not  in  constant  repetition ;  the  pre-established
harmony  is  miracle  or  the  renunciation  of  comprehension  ;
thus  only  the  first  case  remains,  if,  with  Spinoza,  one
will  not  entirely  abandon  final  causality.

The  notion  of  logical  necessity  is  the  superordinate  of
causation,  final  causality,  and  motivation ;  all  necessity,
causal, final,  and  deterministic  (by  motive),  is  only  necessity
therefore  because  it  is  logical  necessity.  It  is  false  to  main-
tain, with  Kant  and  so  many  moderns,  that  there  is  no
other  than  a  subjectivistic  notion  of  necessity,  but  it  is  true
that  all  happening  and  existence  as  such  would  be  mere
factncss  devoid  of  all  necessity  if  the  formal-logical  moment
did  not  import  the  compulsion  of  necessity  into  objective
reality,  precisely  as  we  are  conscious  of  it  in  our  subjective
thinking.  But  whoever  concedes  the  objective  reality  of
the  world  {i.e.,  independent  of  the  consciousness  of  the
subject)  can  no  longer  deny  the  necessity  of  the  operation
of  the  laws  of  Nature,  unless  he  commits  the  absurdity
of  assuming  that  quality  of  matter-of-factness,  which  the
abstraction  of  empirically  exceptionless  rules  affords  and
imposes  upon  us,  to  be  fortuitous.  Since  the  probability
of  such  a  continually  recurring  accidental  order  which
compels  us  to  formulate  abstract  laws,  is  infinitely  small,
the  probability  that  an  objective  necessity  answers  to
and  underlies  the  subjectively  abstracted  rule  borders
on  certainty.  Certain  as  is  the  existence  of  an  objective
necessity  in  the  world,  so  certain  is  it  that  everything
happening  in  the  world  is  logically  determined  ami  con-
ditioned, simply  because  the  notion  of  necessity  is  only
tenable  as  logical  necessity.  Thus  and  only  thus  are  the
difficulties  resolved  which  the  concept  of  causality  has
caused  from  Hume  to  Kirchmann.

4.  The  Identical  Substance  of  both  Attributes. — We  now
approach  the  question  whether  the  Idea  is  attribute  or
substance,  whether  it  is  the  thought  of  a  Being  before,

behind,  or  above  it,  or  whether  it  in  its  turn  is  itself  an


188  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ultimate  ?  We  have  seen  that  Plato  did  not  definitely  decide
in  favour  of  any  of  these  views.  Hegel  asserts  that  the
Concept  is  sole  substance,  that  the  Idea  is  God,  whilst
Schelling  denies  the  self-movement  of  the  Concept  postu-
lated by  Hegel  (Werke,  i.  10,  p.  132):  "There  lies  there-
fore in  the  asserted  necessary  movement  a  double  illu-
sion:  (1.)  In  that  for  thought  the  Notion  is  substituted,
and  this  is  represented  as  something  moving  itself,  and
yet  the  Notion  would  of  itself  lie  perfectly  immovable  if
it  were  not  the  notion  of  a  thinking  subject,  i.e.,  if  it  were
not  thought ;  (2.)  In  that  one  imagines  thought  is  only
impelled  by  an  inherent  necessity,  whilst  it  yet  manifestly
has  a  goal  towards  which  it  strives."

In  the  first  place  I  would  remark,  that  the  difference  of
the  two  views,  although  important  enough  theoretically,
yet  is  hardly  so  important  as  it  might  appear  at  the  first
glance,  because  we  find  ourselves  here  already  in  a  region  of
the  super-existent,  where  our  conceptions  finally  leave  us  in
the  lurch  ;  and  even  when  they  appear  to  us  sufficient,  are
indeed  hardly  able  to  cover  that  transcendent  objectivity  in
the  way  in  which  metaphysics  only  too  easily  imagines.

Nevertheless  thus  much  stands  firm,  that  of  whatever
kind  this  or  the  final  metaphysical  principles  of  a  system
may  be,  our  thinking  always  finds  itself  under  the  inevi-
table compulsion  to  conceive  the  same  either  as  function-
ing substances,  or,  however,  to  assume  a  substance  behind
them  as  whose  attributes  they  appear,  and  which  is  func-
tional as  active  subject  when  the  principles  become  ope-
rative. Thus  we  cannot  think  the  Idea  of  Hegel  or  the
unconscious  intuitive  Perception  otherwise  than  as  either
itself  raised  to  substance,  or,  however,  as  supported  by
another  substance  as  attribute.  We  have  likewise  in  the
"Will  of  Schopenhauer  only  the  choice  of  substantialising
the  Will  itself  or  of  regarding  it  as  attribute  of  a  substance
lying  behind  it.  Our  thinking  is  absolutely  unable  to  think
a  function  without  active  subject,  which  at  the  same  time
must,  as  ultimate  principle  resting  upon  itself,  be  metaphy-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  189

sical  substance.  We  cannot  think  perception  without  a  per-
ceiving, volition  without  a  willing  subject;  and  the  only
question  is,  whether  we  will  think  and  can  think  as  per-
ceiving subject  the  Idea  itself,  as  willing  subject  the  Will
itself,  or  whether  we  find  ourselves  caused  to  assume  a
support  of  the  attributes  of  willing  and  perceiving  lying
behind  them.  This  necessity  of  thought  goes  even  behind
the  functions  as  such,  and  tracks  the  principles  into  the
condition  of  their  super-existent  calm  and  concealment.
Even  there  we  must  distinguish  in  the  "  being-able-to-be  "
and  "  purely  being  "  between  that  which  can  be  or  purely
is,  and  the  states  of  the  being-able-to-be,  or  purely  being.
The  necessity  of  this  separation  in  our  thinking  is  not  to
be  disputed.  The  only  question  is  whether  one  is  to
ignore  it  as  merely  subjective,  or  whether  one  must  allow
it  to  be  transcendent  and  objective,  a  question  which  is
hardly  to  be  decided  a  'priori.

Hegel  would  have  had  to  do  the  former  if  he  had  dealt
with  this  alternative  ;  the  latter  is  the  point  of  view  of
Schelling.  In  the  former  case  one  speaks  of  the  whole
Idea  or  the  vjhole  Will  irrespective  of  this  distinction  as
Substance  ;  in  the  latter,  the  subject  that  is  functional  or
that  supports  the  state  is  posited  as  substance,  the  function
or  the  state  as  Attribute.  In  the  former  case,  the  Idea  or
the  Will  is  the  whole,  therefore  substance  and  attribute  at
once  ;  in  the  latter,  they  are  in  the  narrower  sense  only
the  function,  or  that  which  is  state,  thus  only  attribute,
and  presuppose  a  substance  behind  themselves  as  their
functioning  substance  or  their  substrate.

The  difference  only  becomes  important  when  we  have
to  do  with  a  duality  of  principles  and  with  their  mutual
relation.  Hegel  and  Schopenhauer,  each  of  whom  only
allows  one  of  the  two  principles,  have  logically  no  reason,
to  make  that  separation,  since  it  would  be  needless  for  them;
but  as  the  need  of  the  unit])  of  the  two  principles,  Idea  and
Will,  makes  itself  felt,  is  the  carrying  out  of  that  division
called  for. Although,  namely,  the  functions  or  states  of


190  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ideation  and  volition  are  different,  still  this  does  not  prevent
our  positing  the  substantial  element  of  the  two  principles,
or  the  subject  of  both  functions,  that  which  knows  and  that
which  wills,  as  one  and  the  same.  So  far  as  the  substantial
identity  and  only  functional  difference  of  the  two  principles
is  recognised,  we  have  reached  Spinoza's  one  substance  with
two  attributes.

The  indispensable  requirement  of  the  essential  or
substantial  identity  of  Will  and  Idea  is  thus  at  the
same  time  decisive  also  for  the  question  as  to  the  sub-
stantial or  attributive  character  of  the  Idea  by  itself  and
of  the  Will  by  itself.  That  requirement  is  altogether
inevitable.  If  Will  and  Presentation  were  separate  sub-
stances, the  possibility  of  their  influence  on  one  another
would  be  as  little  obvious  as  the  possibility  of  a  real
action  on  one  another  of  distinct  individuals  is  conceiv-
able according  to  the  principles  of  a  consistent  pluralism
(cp.  above,  vol.  ii.  p.  230  ff.)  It  would  not  be  apparent
how  the  one  is  to  enter  into  relation  with  the  other,  how
the  Will  can  grasp  the  logical  as  its  content,  how  the  logical
can  find  itself  compelled  to  react  against  a  foreign  alogical
not  appertaining  to  it  at  all  and  its  anti-rational  doings.
If,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  one  and  the  same  essence  which
is  these  two,  i.e.,  of  which  and  in  which  they  are  attributes,
the  intimate  connection  of  both  is  so  much  matter  of  course
that  its  contrary  even  becomes  impossible.  The  same  that
is  the  one  is  also  the  other;  the  wilier  is  the  perceiver,
and  the  perceiver  is  the  wilier, — only  the  willing  and  the
perceiving  is  different,  not  the  wilier  and  the  perceiver.
Volition  is  non-rational,  but  the  reason  of  the  wilier  is  just
the  idea ;  perception  is  without  energy,  but  the  power  of  the
perceiver  is  simply  volition.  It  is  no  contrary  opposition
of  opposed  tendencies  of  one  and  the  same  activity'for  such
would  annul  each  other,  or  at  best  allow  the  excess  of  the
one  quantitatively  superior  tendency  to  subsist;  it  is  also  no
negatively  contradictory  opposition  between  two  terms,  of
which  only  the  one  is  positive,  the  other,  however,  negative


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  191

or  privative  as  regards  the  first,  but  it  is  a  positively  contra-
dictory opposition,  in  which  each  term  is  positive  in  a  quite
different  sphere,  thus  certainly,  in  relation  to  the  other,  is
not  what  the  other  is.  Such  a  contrast  involves  also  no  in-
consistency; the  Will  and  the  Logical,  or  power  and  wisdom
in  the  Absolute,  contradict  one  another  as  little  as,  say,  the
redness  and  the  perfume  in  a  rose  or  goodness  and  truthful-
ness in  a  man.  There  are  not  two  drawers  in  the  Unconsci-
ous, in  one  of  which  lies  the  irrational  Will,  in  the  other  the
powerless  Idea,  but  they  are  two  poles  of  a  magnet  with
opposite  qualities,  on  whose  opposition  the  world  rests  in
its  unity ;  as  in  a  magnet  we  do  not  succeed  in  isolating
the  north  magnetic  function  from  the  south  magnetic,  but
with  continued  division  of  the  magnet  the  double  activity
or  polarity  itself  appears  bound  to  the  smallest  pieces,  so
also  are  the  two  attributes  of  the  Unconscious  inseparably
united,  in  each  single  function  of  the  All-One  however  in-
significant, as  matter  and  form,  as  ideal  and  realising  mo-
ment.  It  is  not  a  blind  man  who  carries  a  lame  man  showing
the  way,  but  it  is  a  single  whole  and  sound  one,  that  certainly,
however,  cannot  see  with  the  legs  and  walk  with  the  eyes.
If  Will  and  Presentation  were  separate  substances,  an
insurmountable  dualism  would  pjervade  the  world,  and
leave  its  mark  in  the  soul  of  the  individual  —  but  of
such  a  dualism  there  is  nowhere  any  trace.  Monism,
towards  which,  as  we  have  seen,  all  tends,  would  there-
with be  absolutely  annulled,  and  a  pure  dualism  put
in  its  place.  Xow  at  length  is  the  secret  dread  of  this
division,  which  was  a  disturbing  element,  especially  in
Chap.  vii.  ('.,  removed  by  our  recognising  the  same  as  a
dualism  only  of  attributes,  which  does  nut  prejudice  the
unity  of  the  substance,  but  which  cannot  possibly  be  done
away  with  when  in  general  an  existence  is  to  be  explained.
A  pure  and  absolute  one  is  equally  a  self-contradictory
conception  with  a  pure  and  absolute  many,  as  Plato  long
ago  showed  in  his  "  1'armenides."  To  be  possible,  whether
as  concept  or  as  existent,  the  unity  of  the  One  must  be


1 92  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

unity  of  an  inner  manifoldness  or  plurality,  which  plurality
is  most  simply  duality.  The  inner  duality  is  accordingly  an
indispensable  condition  of  the  All-One  on  the  side  of  its
existence,  or,  in  other  words :  untenable  as  is  every  abso-
lute dualism,  so  indispensable  a  supposition  is  a  relative
immanent  dualism  for  the  truth  of  absolute  Monism.

This  becomes  still  clearer  if  we  consider  the  necessity
of  the  explanation  of  the  process.  Could  even  a  non-plural
One  exist,  it  yet  could  only  exist  as  absolutely  rigid,  identi-
cally self-persistent,  and  we  should  never  reach  the  possi-
bility of  a  process.  To  explain  a  process  Ave  necessarily
need  a  peace-disturber  in  the  rigid  repose  of  the  All-One,
that  seizes  the  initiative  in  order  to  interrupt  the  same.
But  even  such  moment  of  the  initiative  alone  would
yield  no  actual  process,  but  would  at  the  most  reach  the
mere  velleity  of  the  process  (empty  volition).  That  an  actual
process  may  come  to  pass  there  must  be,  beside  the  com-
mencing factor,  at  least  one  more  that  encounters  the  former,
and  indeed  in  the  double  sense  of  the  term  of  succouring
and  opposing  ;  for  only  from  the  co-operation  and  counter-
action of  at  least  two  moments  can  a  process  result.  The
second  only  helps  the  first  to  attain  that  which  it  wills  to
attain  with  its  initiative,  the  process,  as  we  saw  more  fully
above  ;  on  the  other  hand,  however,  only  two  factors  are
required,  because  from  the  standpoint  of  the  second  the
first  is  a  something  that  should  not  be,  against  which  the
second  feels  itself  compelled  by  its  nature  to  turn,  in  order
to  make  that  which  ought  not  to  be  again  the  not-being.
In  this  sense  Schelling  also  says  (i.  io,  247),  "  There  would
altogether  be  no  process  if  there  were  not  something  which
should  not  be,  or  which  at  least  was  in  a  wag  in  which  it
should  not  be  "  (namely,  the  being-able-to-will  as  blindly
willing,  or,  as  Schelling  usually  says,  the  being-able-to-be
as  blindly  being).

That  something  ought  not  to  be  as  it  is  can  always  only
lie  said  from  a  certain  point  of  view,  and  indeed  only  from
a  point  of  view  opposed  to  that  of  the  being  in  question  ;


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  193

thus,  e.g.,  it  can  only  be  said  from  the  point  of  view  of
the  Logical  that  the  Alogical  as  such  should  not  be,  so  that
in  the  last  resort  the  turning-against-willing  of  the  Logical,
and  therewith  the  possibility  of  the  process,  rests  on  this,
that  a  logical  opposition  exists  between  the  two  attri-
butes, i.e.,  that  the  one  is  not  what  the  other  is  (the
Will  not  logical,  and  the  Idea  not  endowed  with  Will).
Only  from  the  logical  opposition  of  the  two  in  the  One
can  a  process  arise.  Xot,  indeed,  that  this  logical  oppo-
sition forthwith  and  immediately  becomes  a  real  anti-
nomy, in  the  sense  in  which  we  apprehend  the  contradic-
tion between  the  divided  will-acts  of  the  All-One  as  a  real
conflict,  for  to  this  end  there  is  wanting,  as  we  know,  to
the  logical  Idea  self-dependence  and  independence  of  the
Will,  as  well  as  all  energy  of  action ;  rather  this  opposi-
tion remains  eminently  a  logical  one,  and  only  indirectly
leads  to  a  real  opposition,  in  that  a  part  of  the  Will  is
in  the  course  of  the  process  brought  by  means  of  the
emancipation  of  the  conscious  Idea  to  turn  as  negative
volition  against  the  positive  volition,  until  with  continued
enhancement  of  consciousness  the  negative  part  of  voli-
tion is  so  far  augmented  as  to  be  able  to  paralyse  the
positive,  and  thus  to  hurl  back  that  which  ought  not  to
be  into  non-being.  That  which  forms  the  real  opposition
is  accordingly  always  volition  with  opposite  content,  and
Will  and  Presentation  as  such  never  come  into  real  oppo-
sition, but  remain  in  the  logical  opposition  appertaining
to  them  by  nature.  But  undoubtedly  the  halves  of  voli-
tion turned  against  one  another  bear  the  stamp  of  this
opposition,  because  in  positive  volition  the  (still  uncon-
scious) presentation,  while  bound  to  surrender  itself  to
the  will-to-live,  serves  to  bring  the  latter  to  the  point
where  the  conscious  presentation  in  pessimistic  self-know-
ledge comprehends  the  folly  of  the  Will,  and  now  motives
the  willing  of  the  willing-no-longer.

The  exclusion  of  such  a  misunderstanding  seemed
desirable  in  order  not  to  render  difficult,  or  to  prevent,

VOL. III.  N


i94  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

by  this  erroneous  assumption  of  a  real  conflict  between  the
attributes,  the  understanding  of  the  inseparable  unity  of
both  attributes,  as  we  have  just  expounded  it.

Precisely  in  the  same  manner  does  Schelling  apprehend
the  Dualism  in  Monism  (Werke,  ii.  3,  p.  218):  "The
identity  must  rather  be  taken  in  the  strictest  sense  as
substantial  identity.  The  meaning  is  not  that  potential
being  and  pure  being  are  severally  conceived  as  independent
being,  i.e.,  as  Substance  (for  Substance  is  what  exists  in
independence  of  aught  else).  They  are  not  themselves  Sub-
stance, but  only  determinations  of  the  One  super-actual.
The  meaning,  therefore,  is  not  that  there  is  potential  being
and  pure  being,  but  the  meaning  is,  that  the  very  Same,
i.e.,  the  same  Substance,  is  in  its  unity,  and  without  thereby
becoming  twain,  potential  being  and  pure  being."

One  might  call  this  Substance  identical  in  Will  and
Presentation,  this  individual  Single  Being,  which  only
supports  those  abstract  generalities,  "  the  absolute  sub-
ject," as  that  "which  can  be  related  to  nothing  else,  and
to  which  all  else  is  related  as  Attribute"  (Schelling,  ii.  1,
318);  but  unfortunately  the  word  Subject  is  so  ambigu-
ous that  one  may  easily  call  forth  misunderstandings  by
its  employment  (e.g.,  if  we  should  take  it  here  as  corre-
lated to  an  object).  On  the  other  hand,  if  one  is  entitled
to  call  anything  original  the  Absolute  Spirit,  assuredly
every  reader  not  prepossessed  by  Hegel's  arbitrary  limita-
tion of  the  word  Spirit  to  its  manifestation  in  the  restricted
form  of  consciousness  will  allow  that  it  must  be  this  unity
of  Will  and  Perception,  of  Power  and  Wisdom,  this  One
Substance,  that  everywhere  both  wills  and  perceives, —
as  we  have  hitherto  called  it,  the  Unconscious.  The
One  "  super-existent,  which  is  all  that  is,"  we  may  there-
fore now  define  as  pure,  unconscious  (impersonal,  but
indivisible,  therefore  individual)  Spirit,  according  to
which  our  Monism  may  be  more  precisely  characterised  as
spiritualistic  Monism.  Herewith  have  we  reached  the  apex
of  the  pyramid,  and  have  advanced  the  elucidation  of  the


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  195

concept  "  the  Unconscious,"  provisionally  outlined  in  I.  3
to  cognition  of  the  first  order.

To  come  to  an  understanding  with  Spinoza  we  have,
lastly,  still  to  emphasise  the  following  points  of  difference.
It  would  be  a  great  error  if  we  tried  to  conceive  the  rela-
tion of  our  substance  to  our  attributes  in  the  way  in  which
this  has  been  done  by  many  interpreters  of  Spinoza,  namely,
as  if  the  former  were  the  potentiality  of  the  Attributes,
and  these  were  its  actus  or  activities.  With  regard  to  the
notion  of  Potentiality  we  are  quite  out  of  danger,  for  the
potentiality  of  Being  or  Willing  is  itself  the  One  of  the
Attributes,  and  the  other  we  have  expressly  defined  as  the
pure  Being,  which  has  issued  from  no  Potentiality.  To
neither  of  these,  therefore,  can  Substance  stand  in  the
relation  of  Potentiality,  and  neither  is  Actus,  which  pro-
ceeded from  a  Potentiality.  This  is  a  cardinal  difference
from  Spinoza,  with  whom  manifestly  Substance  appears  as
the  potentiality  of  the  Attributes.  But  we  may  agree  with
Spinoza  in  this,  that  Existence  is  only  to  be  found  in  the
ejected  (e^Lard/xevov  or  i^earafxevov)  Mode  ;  to  Substance
as  such,  with  all  its  attributes,  however,  only  subsistence
appertains  (which  underlies  the  eject,  subsistit).

The  second  difference  lies  in  the  definition  of  that  one  of
the  two  Attributes  which  Spinoza,  after  the  precedent  of
Des  Cartes,  calls  Extension.  But  now  Thought  and  Exten-
sion are  no  contrasts,  for  Extension  is  indeed  also  in  Thought.
Only  Thought  and  real  Extension,  which  is  intended  by
Spinoza,  form  a  contrast.  However,  between  the  concepts
Thought  and  real  Extension,  the  opposite  again  is  not  be-
tween "Thought"  and  "Extension,"  but  between  "Thought"
and  "  Keal "  or  "  Ideal  and  Ileal ; "  it  is  not  Extension
that  makes  Beality,  but  it  itself  must  first  be  made  real,
in  order  to  form  a  contrast  with  Thought.  The  second
attribute  of  Spinoza  must  therefore  be  that  which  makes
real,  not  merely  Extension,  but  also  all  the  rest  of  the
Ideal;  but  this  is  no  other  than  Will.  Then  first,  when
for Extension  we put  Will, does Spinoza's  Metaphysic


196  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

become  what  it  should  be,  but  then  also  the  apex  of  our
pyramid  coincides  with  the  One  Substance  mystically  pos-
tulated by  Spinoza.

Beyond  that  which  is  the  Substrate  of  everything  Exist-
ing no  Philosophy  can  go.  Here  we  stand  at  the  inher-
ently insoluble  problem  of  problems.  The  earth  rests  on
the  elephant,  the  elephant  stands  on  the  tortoise,  and  the
tortoise  ?  ?  The  ability  to  become  rigid  before  the  problem
of  groundless  subsistence,  as  before  a  Gorgon's  head,  is  the
true  touchstone  of  metaphysical  talent.  The  contentment
with  the  regress  to  God-Creator,  or  a  surrogate  of  the
same,  is  the  proper  mark  of  speculative  indolence.  An
attempted  dialectic  self-generation  of  the  first  beginning
would  be  the  acme  of  a  reason-killing  sophistic.  For  Con-
ception, Nothing  and  Something  are  at  least  equally  war-
ranted, but  only  for  conception,  which  always  presupposes
the  subsistence  of  Thought.  But  whence  this  subsistence
preceding  the  Concept  ?  If  nothing  at  all  were,  no  World,
no  Process,  and  no  Substance,  as  also  no  one  to  philoso-
phically marvel,  there  would  be  nothing  wonderful  in
that — it  would  be  eminently  natural,  and  there  would  be
no  problem  to  solve ;  but  that  there  is  a  self-subsistent,  an
ultimate,  on  which  everything  depends  (were  this  only  the
Hegelian  Concept  itself),  that  is  so  unfathomably  wonder-
ful, so  absolutely  alogical  and  senseless,  that  poor  little
man,  after  he  has  once  realised  this  last  of  all  problems,
and  has  beaten  a  long  time  with  the  arms  of  his  reason
impotently  at  the  bars  of  this  prison  of  the  not-non-being,
completely  ceases  to  wonder  at  the  details  of  the  world-
contrivance,  pretty  much  as  an  illuminated  modern  scientist,
meeting  on  an  aerial  journey  beyond  the  clouds,  undertaken
for  scientific  purposes,  with  a  fairy  castle  of  the  spirits
of  the  air,  might,  in  measureless  astonishment  at  the  mere
existence  of  this  castle,  hardly  find  breath  enough  to
wonder  at  the  interior  arrangements.  It  is  for  this  meta-
physical problem  also  absolutely  indifferent  what  we  regard
as  ultimate,  whether  a  self-conscious  God  or  Spinoza's  Sub-


M ETA  PHY SIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  197

stance,  the  Notion  or  the  Will,  the  Subjective  Dream  or
Matter — it  is  all  the  same  ;  there  remains  a  self -subsisting
Somewhat  with  its  peculiar  constitution  as  an  ultimate.  This
Somewhat,  with  its  constitution,  however,  how  comes  it  to
subsist,  and  to  subsist  with  such  characters,  since  from
Xothing  nothing  can  come  ?  A  self-conscious  God  must,
in  despair  at  the  insolubility  of  this  riddle  of  his  eternal
subsistence,  go  mad,  or,  if  it  were  possible,  turn  suicide !
The  nature  of  the  human  mind  certainly  stands  in  its  ob-
tuseness  far  too  low  not  soon  to  grow  accustomed  even  to
the  highest  of  the  marvels  surrounding  it,  and  at  last  to
regard  the  exact  formulating  of  the  problem,  not  its  solu-
tion, as  its  office;  and  yet  it  is  well  as  it  is  that  the  philo-
sophical pathos  only  flames  up  in  moments  of  exaltation,
in  order,  viz.,  that  the  subordinate  problems  may  receive
their  due  of  wonder.

5.  The  Possibility  of  Metaphysical  Knowledge. — Here  our
course  ends  ;  we  will,  however,  in  conclusion,  pay  some
attention  to  the  question  whether  and  how,  from  the  stand-
point  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,  metaphysical  cog-
nition is  possible.

This  question  is  not  unimportant,  for  often  the  most
considerable  metaphysical  systems,  that  explain  the
whole  world  in  a  coherent  and  even  acceptable  fashion,
stand  puzzled  before  the  problem  how,  according  to  their
own  presuppositions,  the  cognition  of  metaphysical  con-
nection maintained  by  them  is  possible.  At  this  place,  of
course,  a  Theory  of  Knowledge  cannot  be  expected,  but
only  a  sketch  of  the  point  of  view  at  which  we  find  our-
selves as  regards  that  question.

The  Gneco-Eoman  philosophy  issued  in  Scepticism  be-
cause it  did  not  succeed  in  finding  a  criterion  of  Truth,  and
consequently  despaired  of  a  settlement  of  the  question
whether  Knowledge  is  possible.  The  dogmatism  of  modern
philosophy  was  in  like  manner  broken  by  Hume,  whose
pitiless  criticism  Kant  carried  still  further  and  deeper.


198  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

But  at  the  same  time  Kant  was  on  the  other  side  the
genius  who  initiated  the  phase  of  evolution  of  the  most
recent  philosophy.  Whilst  Greek  philosophy  had  use-
lessly tormented  itself  with  the  impossible  demand  to
iind  in  knowledge  itself  a  mark  that  should  impress  on
it  the  stamp  of  truth,  Kant  went  hypothetically  to  work,
and  asked  "  Apart  from  the  question,  whether  there  is  a
true  cognition,  of  what  sort  must  the  metaphysical  condi-
tions be  if  such  is  to  be  possible  ?  "

All  the  most  recent  philosophy,  with  the  exception  of
Schelling's  last  system,  stands  with  more  or  less  conscious-
ness at  this  point  of  view :  the  conditions  of  the  possibility
of  knowing  form  their  metaphysic.  As  first  and  funda-
mental condition  of  the  possibility  of  all  knowledge,  the
homogeneity  of  thought  and  its  transcendent-objective
object  may  be  asserted,  since  with  a  heterogeneity  of  thought
and  thing  absolutely  no  harmony  of  the  two,  i.e.,  truth,
and  still  less  a  consciousness  of  this  agreement,  i.e.,  cogni-
tion, is  possible.  Without  this  assumption  only  two  stand-
points are  possible :  that  of  naive  Eealism  and  that  of  Sub-
jective Idealism.  The  former  fails  to  see  that  everything
that  I  can  express  in  words  and  reach  with  my  thoughts
can  always  only  be  my  own  thoughts,  but  never  a  reality
lying  beyond  the  same ;  that  thought  can  never  denude
itself  of  the  character  of  thought,  and  erroneously  con-
fuses thought  itself  or  the  thinkable  (intelligible)  with
that  which  lies  beyond  thought  (trans-intelligible),  which
as  a  truly  imaginary  quantity  is  believed  by  thinking  when
it  thinks  its  thoughts.  The  second  standpoint  corrects  this
error  (as  regards  the  things  per  se  still  remaining  for  Kant),
but  it  commits  the  other  fault  of  denying  that  which  is
placed  beyond  the  limit  of  thinking,  because  it  is  un-
attainable  to  thinking,  and  therewith  annihilates  the  pos-
sibility of  all  knowledge,  in  that  thinking  is  lowered  to  a
dream  without  object  and  therewith  without  truth.  This
is  opposed  by  the  Philosophy  of  Identity,  in  that  it  sup-
poses the  transcendent  element  in  cognition  to  be  consub-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  199

stantial  with  thinking,  and  urges  with  justice  "  that  on  no
other  possible  supposition  is  a  knoivledge  conceivable  "  (Schel-
ling,  i.  6,  138),  because  on  no  other  supposition  is  a  har-
mony of  thought  with  its  presumed  (transcendent)  object
possible.  This  identity  of  Thought  and  Being  thus  quite
indirectly  established  (of  which  the  ancients  had  hardly
an  inkling)  is  henceforth  the  unshakable  fundamental  pro-
position of  all  philosophy,  is  however  variously  appre-
hended. In  Schelling's  "  System  of  Identity  "  it  is,  as  with
Leibniz,  a  species  of  pre-established  harmony,  in  virtue
of  which  the  individual  consciousness  unfolds  its  subjec-
tive world  from  its  limited  point  of  view  according  to  the
same  forms,  categories,  and  complete  determinations  as  the
world  beyond  is  developed,  although  this  harmony  more
easily  finds  a  foundation  in  the  Monism  of  the  one  abso-
lute intelligence  or  reason  of  Schelling  than  in  the  Mo-
nadology  of  Leibniz.  Hegel  overcomes  the  difficulty  by
resolving  everything  into  the  one  dialectical  process  of
Idea,  in  which  no  one  thing  opposes  another  as  alien  or
distinct  (as  with  Schelling  and  Leibniz  the  "  windowless"
monads  do),  but  each  posits  itself  with  regard  to  each  in
all  possible  kinds  of  relations  (among  which  are  also
Causality  and  Reciprocity).  If  Hegel  thus,  on  the  one
hand,  makes  a  great  advance  beyond  Schelling,  on  the
other  hand  he  takes  a  step  backward  when,  in  the  great
confusion  of  the  general  dialectic,  he  completely  obliterates
the  distinction  between  thought  and  its  object,  the  distinc-
tion between  subjective  thought  and  that  which  is  beyond
it,  by  systematically  confounding  the  point  of  view  of  the
individual  and  the  absolute  thinking,  of  conscious  and
unconscious  thinking.  To  render  these  distinctions  per-
fectly clear,  to  separate  these  points  of  view  anew  and
strictly,  I  took  for  my  task.  To  me  the  Beyond  of  con-
scious thinking  is  unconscious  thinking;  it  is  an  unattain-
able Beyond,  for  consciousness  cannot  think  unconsciously ;
if  it  thinks  "unconscious  thinking,"  /'/  thinks  its  own  con-
scious thought  and  yet  supposes  something  else,  precisely


200  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

as  when  it  thinks  "  the  thing  that  has  being."  (Cp.  "  Das
Ding  an  sich  und  seine  Beschaffenheit,"  pp.  74-76.)  But
yet  the  hither  as  the  further  side  is  thinking,  and  so  far  as
this  consubstantiality  reaches,  reacts  the  possibility  of  an
agreement,  truth,  cognition.  It  is  to  be  observed  here,
first,  that  the  Beyond  of  conscious  thinking  lies  just  as
much  within  as  without  one's  own  individuality ;  secondly,
that  the  concrete  agreement  of  the  thing  with  the  conscious
thought  of  the  same  is  effected  by  a  double  causality —
between  the  thing  and  the  unconscious  part  of  the  indi-
vidual (to  which  also  the  body  belongs),  and  between  this
and  one's  consciousness;  and  thirdly,  that  the  causal  con-
straint felt  by  consciousness  and  referred  to  a  transcendent
reality  and  the  distinction  made  between  the  same  and  the
logical  necessity  of  purely  ideal  relations  is  only  intelli-
gible on  the  supposition,  that  from  both  sides  a  Will  enters
into  the  ideal  conflict  and  makes  this  a  real  one.  This  Will
is,  no  matter  whether  one  contemplates  an  alien  will  or
one's  own,  no  longer  merely  beyond  consciousness  (like
unconscious  thinking),  but  it  is  beyond  the  idced  altogether,
both  conscious  and  unconscious  thinking.  That  it  never-
theless gives  rise  to  far  fewer  difficulties  than  unconscious
thinking  is  due  to  this,  that  it  does  not  at  all  affect  the  ideal
content,  but  only  impresses  on  it  the  meaning  of  reality,
otherwise  however  leaves  the  perceived  object  unchanged.
According  to  these  considerations  it  can  no  longer  be
doubtful  how  the  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  is  related
to  those  contrasts  :  Thought  and  Thing,  mens  and  ens,
ratio  and  res,  Spirit  and  Nature,  Ideal  and  Keal,  Subjec-
tive and  Objective.  We  know  that  Being  is  a  product  of
the  non-logical  and  logical,  of  Will  and  Bepresentation ;
that  its  "  That  "  is  posited  by  volition,  its  "  What,"  how-
ever, is  the  ideational  content  of  that  volition,  thus  not
merely  // omogeneous  with  the  Idea,  but,  because  itself  Idea,
identiced  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  term,  but  that  the
Beal  is  distinguished  from  the  Ideal  by  that  which  lends
reality  to  the  Ideal,  by  the  Will. Thus  also  Spirit  and


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  201

Nature  are  no  longer  different,  for  the  original  uncon-
scious spirit  is  that  in  its  independent  being  which  in  the
actual  combination  of  its  moments  is  Nature,  and  as
result  of  the  natural  process  conscious  spirit,  or  spirit  in
the  narrower  (Hegelian)  sense  of  the  term.  But  as  con-
cerns the  Subjective  or  Objective,  these  are  altogether
relative  conceptions,  which  first  appear  with  the  origin  of
consciousness,  for  in  the  unconscious  Volition  and  the  un-
conscious Presentation  these  have  no  place  ;  the  Uncon-
scious is  exalted  above  those  contrasts,  since  its  thinking  is
by  no  means  subjective,  but  for  us  objective,  in  truth,  how-
ever, transcendent-absolute.  We  can  therefore  also  in
strictness  not  say  that  the  Unconscious  is  the  Absolute
Subject,  but  only  that  it  is  what  alone  can  become  Subject,
just  as  it  is  what  alone  can  become  Object,  simply  because
there  is  nothing  beside  the  Unconscious  :  and  thus  under-
stood, we  may  certainly  call  it  the  absolute  Subject  and
the  absolute  Object,  notwithstanding  that  as  Unconscious
it  is  exalted  above  the  opposition  of  the  Subjective  and
Objective.

We  have  seen  that  consciousness  only  occurs  on  a
collision  of  different  directions  of  the  Will,  of  these  then
each  is  the  objective  for  the  other,  and  each  the  subjective
in  opposition  to  the  other  objective  to  it,  presupposing  that
both  directions  of  the  Will  occupy  relations,  which  do  not
prevent  the  possibility  of  the  arising  of  consciousness  by
their  lying  beneath  the  threshold  of  consciousness.

If,  e.g.,  one  supposes  the  atoms  above  the  threshold  of
consciousness,  the  atomic  force  A  would  become  objective
to  the  atomic  force  15,  and  conversely;  the  atomic  force  A,
on  the  other  hand,  itself  become,  in  contrast  to  the  objec-
tivity of  B,  subjective  and  conversely.  Thus  would  tin;
Unconscious  become  in  two  ways  conscious  in  A  and  B,
both  objectively  and  subjectively.

After  having  thus  seen  that  the  union  of  all  the  above-
named  contrasts  results  from  our  principles,  we  come  back
to  the  question  as  to  the  possibility  of  knowledge. It  was


202  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

then  proved  by  the  most  recent  philosophy  that  a  system
resting  on  the  sublation  of  those  contrasts  is  the  only  true
one,  in  case  there  be  at  all  a  genuine  cognition ;  but
whether  there  be  such,  of  this  all  proof  was  wanting  after
as  before.  It  was  in  assuming  the  same  as  dogmatic,  as
the  pre-Kantian  dogmatism,  nay,  the  possibility  did  not
even  occur  to  it,  that  any  one  with  justice  may  deny  and
must  deny  the  possibility  of  an  absolute  knowing  (Eeason)
till  proof  thereof  has  been  obtained  (cp.  Schelling,  ii.  3,

P-  74).

Its  whole  philosophising  rested,  therefore,  on  a  con-
dition that  perfectly  hovered  in  the  air,  the  whole  was
a  hypothetical  philosophising  from  an  unproved  sup-
position.

Accordingly  our  latest  philosophy  likewise  could  con-
sistently only  dissolve  in  Scepticism.  That  this  Scepti-
cism is  in  the  younger  philosophically  educated  world  (so
far  as  it  has  surmounted  an  immature  Dogmatism)  the
prevailing  one,  can  hardly  be  disputed ;  that  the  same  has
received  no  scientifically  consistent  elaboration  (Aenesi-
demus  only  attacks  Kant)  lies  only  in  this,  that  the
palpable  results  of  the  exact  sciences  and  the  practical
interests  now  absorbing  all  attention  are  altogether  un-
favourable to  Philosophy,  in  that  they  too  much  distract
theoretical  thinking  and  discourage  the  pursuit  of  it
to  its  last  consequences.  To  proceed  further,  there
are  manifestly  only  two  ways  :  either  we  must,  in  order
to  establish  the  hypothetical  result  of  the  Philosophy  of
Identity,  directly  prove  that  a  genuine  cognition  exists, —
yet  with  such  an  endeavour  one  would  only  relapse  into
the  inherently  vain  efforts  of  the  Greeks  (cp.  Kant's
Werke  v.  Eoskr,  ii.  p.  62-63),  or  we  must  really  avail  our-
selves of  the  most  recent  progress,  and  approach  the  pro-
blem at  the  opiiosite  end  to  the  Greeks,  i.e.,  we  must  by
a  path  altogether  different  from  that  hitherto  attempted,
accessible  and  evident  to  all,  directly  prove  the  material
identity  of  Thought  and  Peing. This  path  can  only  be


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  203

that  traversed  by  us,  the  successive  inductive  ascent  from
experience.

Now  certainly  the  proof  led  by  this  path  must  itself
be  a  knowledge,  if  it  is  to  prove  anything ;  we  might
therefore  think  that  we  have  merely  only  in  appearance
got  a  step  further,  but  in  reality,  just  as  before,  stand  with
our  feet  in  the  air.  This  is,  however,  not  so ;  rather  the
state  of  the  case  is  as  follows : —

Formerly  it  was  said  :  "  If  there  is  a  knowledge,  it  is
material  identity  of  Thought  and  Being ;  "  go  beyond  this
simple  conditional  proposition  we  cannot.

Now  we  say :  "  (1)  If  there  is  a  knowledge,  it  must  rest
on  material  identity  of  Thought  and  Being,  therefore  also
be  to  be  found  in  immediate  experience  (affection  of
thought  by  being)  and  the  logically  correct  inferences  from
the  same ;  (2)  the  inferences  from  experience  establish
the  material  identity  of  Thought  and  Being;  (3)  from  this
identity  follows  the  possibility  of  knowledge."

Herewith  we  have  entered  into  a  closed  circle,  where
each  term  conditions  the  others,  no  matter  with  which  we
begin,  whilst  before  we  had  only  a  conditional  proposition
without  back-  and  breast- work  as  it  were.  There  accord-
ingly undoubtedly  remains  still  the  possibility  that  this
whole  circle  of  psychological  and  metaphysical  conditions
is  a  merely  suljective  tqypearance,  which  consciousness  is
compelled  to  form  for  itself  by  an  inexplicable  necessity;
that  there  is  therefore  in  fact  still  no  knowledge  and  no
identity  of  Thought  and  Being,  and  the  circle  of  mutually
supporting  relations  built  thereon  a  mere  chimera.  For
certainly  the  transcendent  and  not  merely  subjective  exist-
ence of  that  circle  cannot  in  all  strictness  prove  to  be  abso-
lute truth,  just  because  consciousness  is  condemned  to  this
circle,  and  can  never  assume  a  standpoint  outside  the  same,
from  which  the  nature  of  that  circle  could  be  judged,  for  the
single  reason  that  the  possibility  of  cognition  cannot  be;
known  without  knowledge.

Although  then  the  absolute  impossibility  of  the  contrary


204  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

cannot  be  proved,  yet  by  that  circle  the  probability  that
there  is  both  knowledge  as  well  as  identity  of  Thought
and  Being  has  become  very  much  greater  than  it  was
before  in  that  simple  conditional  proposition,  devoid  of  all
support  both  in  front  and  behind  ;  it  has  become  so  great
that  the  possibility  of  the  contrary  is  no  longer  practically
of  account.  Scepticism  is,  therefore,  not  annihilated,  but
acknowledged  to  be  theoretically  warranted,  as  it  is  also  in
fact  the  preservative  against  all  relapse  into  the  dogmatic
narrowness  of  belief  in  absolute  knowledge,  i.e.,  in  the  at-
tainableness  of  an  absolute  truth  as  the  only  worthy  office
of  the  science  of  sciences,  philosophy.  But  whilst  we
must  thus  acknowledge  absolute  scepticism  to  have  for
all  time  and  notwithstanding  any  possible  advance  of
science  to  a  justifiable  existence,  we  have  at  the  same
time  reduced  its  range  to  such  a  degree  that  its  importance
disappears,  for  the  practice  not  only  of  life,  but  also  of
science.

If  we  contemplate  this  result  concerning  the  possibility
of  knowledge  in  general,  it  agrees  remarkably  with  that
which  must  by  degrees  be  on  all  sides  granted  for  the
knowledge  of  every  special  truth  (so  far  as  it  is  not  of  a
formal  logical  kind),  that  there  is  for  us  no  truth,  i.e.,
probability  of  the  value  i,  but  only  more  or  less  consider-
able probability,  which  never  reaches  I,  and  that  we  must
be  perfectly  content  when  in  our  cognition  we  reach  a
degree  of  probability  which  robs  the  possibility  of  the  con-
trary of  practical  importance  (cp.  also  Introductory,  I.  b.)


APPENDIX.
THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.


207 )


I.

Introduction. — The  deep  obscurity  in  which  the  func-
tions of  the  central  organs  of  the  nervous  system  were
wrapt  until  a  few  generations  ago,  has  in  the  course  of
the  present  century  been  cleared  up  at  many  points,  and
in  the  last  decennium  these  points,  illuminated  by  the
light  of  knowledge,  have  so  increased  that  a  certain  com-
prehension of  the  facts  as  a  connected  whole  is  now  within
our  reach.  However  conscious  the  possessors  of  this
knowledge  may  still  be  of  its  incompleteness  and  super-
ficiality, it  must  yet  be  welcomed  as  a  first  foundation  of
the  physiology  of  the  central  organs,  and  is  already  in  a
position  to  furnish  hints  in  different  directions,  which  are
of  value  partly  for  the  psychological,  partly  for  the  natural-
philosophical  elaboration  of  experience.

Unfortunately,  until  a  short  time  ago  there  existed  no
work  which  collected  into  a  clear  whole,  and  thereby  made
accessible  to  wider  circles  the  communications  with  respect
to  this  particular  branch  of  physiology  that  are  scattered
in  scientific  books  and  journals.  Perhaps  Maudsley  in  the
first  physiological  part  of  his  "Physiology  and  Pathology
of  Mind"  had  come  nearest  to  the  mark;  however,  the
second  edition  of  this  work  bears  the  remote  date  1868.  and
cannot  therefore  contain  the  results  of  the  most  recent  pro-
gress of  science.1  On  the  other  hand,  the  "Grundziige  der
physiologischen  Psychologic  "  of  L'rofessor  Wilhclm  Wundt

1  [Since  the  original  was  stereo-  Patholnr/y of Mind, 1S76. The

typed  another  edition  has  appeared  :  Patho/o;/y  of  Mind,  being  the  third

The  Physiology  of  Mind, being  the  edition of  the  second part "f The

first part of a third edition, re-  Physiolo'jy  ami Patho/of/y  of  Mind.

vised, enlarged, and in  great  part  recast, enlarged, and rewritten,

rewritten, of The Physiology and  1879. — Til. ]


2o8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

(Leipzig:  Engelmann,  1873  and  1874)  fulfil  the  function
of  a  compendium  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  along  with
a  physiology  of  the  sense-preceptions  (in  the  2d  and  3d
sees.)  offer  substantially  a  physiology  of  the  nervous  sys-
tem, and  specially  of  its  central  organs  (in  the  1st,  4th,
and  5 tli  sees.)  To  be  sure  this  compendium,  just  on
account  of  the  wealth  and  the  concentration  of  its  contents,
is  more  a  book  for  study  and  for  reference  than  for  the
general  reader,  and  the  sobriety  of  the  elaboration  of  the
mass  of  material  amounts  almost  to  dryness,  by  the  author
avoiding  with  almost  painful  anxiety  every  flight  of
thought  beyond  the  empirical  data.  Of  unfavourable  in-
fluence in  this  direction  was  evidently  the  influence  of
the  dry  and  unfruitful  Herbartian  philosophy,  by  which
Wundt  is  unmistakably  affected,  notwithstanding  his
frequent  criticism  of  the  fundamental  views  of  Herbart.
The  doctrine  of  the  emotions  and  impulses  (in  chap,  xx.)
loses  almost  all  value  by  this  dependence  on  Herbart  and
by  the  retention  of  his  error,  "  That  it  is  not  the  emotions
which  govern  the  ideas,  but  that  the  emotions  rather
spring  from  the  ideas  themselves"  (p.  818),  or  that  "all
manifestations  of  will  arise  from  ideas  "  (and  those  con-
scious ones)  (p.  622).  This  perverse  conception  of  course
prevents  him  from  at  all  comprehending  the  unconscious
life  of  the  feelings  and  impulses,  its  connection  with
the  inmost  core  of  individuality,  the  character,  and  the
thoroughgoing  dependence  of  the  intellectual  life  both  in
the  healthy  and  in  the  morbid  condition  on  the  sphere  of
the  will.  But  just  that  which  is  wanting  in  Wundt  is  with
Maudsley  a  regulating  fundamental  idea  of  his  conception
of  the  healthy  and  morbid  life  of  the  mind,  and  he  attains
by  means  of  it  the  most  surprising  results.

Thus  Wundt  and  Maudsley  are  complementary  to
one  another.  To  the  richer  and  more  precise  material
of  the  former  the  latter  brings  the  fine  psychological
observation  of  a  tried  mental  physician,  and  by  his  often
ingenious  side-remarks  offers  an  abundance  of  valuable


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 209

stimulus  to  thought.  The  fundamental  importance  for
the  conscious  of  the  unconscious  psychical  life,  the
thorough  dependence  of  the  former  on  the  latter,  as  well
as  the  primacy  of  the  will,  is  with  Maudsley  a  firm  con-
viction. As  predecessors  in  respect  of  the  knowledge  of
unconscious  mental  life,  he  cites,  in  his  unacquaintance
with  German  philosophy,  hardly  any  one  but  Hamilton,
Carlyle.  and  Jean  Paul  Friedrich  Richter.

For  Wundt,  who,  in  his  earlier  studies  on  the  genesis  of
sense-perception,  had  independently  reached  the  theory
of  unconscious  inferences,  the  hypothesis  of  Herbart  that
the  will  results  from  the  dynamic  of  ideas  was  fraught
with  serious  consequences,  in  that  he  was  induced  there-
by to  limit  the  scope  of  his  own  earlier  doctrine.  And
undoubtedly  the  theory  of  unconscious  inference  can-
not but  appear  a  very  venturesome  and  doubtful
hypothesis  when  completely  isolated  and  arbitrarily
limited  by  the  denial  of  unconscious  mental  life  in
all  other  directions.  Nevertheless  Wundt's  restriction
of  the  doctrine  of  unconscious  inference  (which,  accord-
ing to  his  own  statement  on  p.  708,  is  thoroughly  accepted
by  the  more  recent  "  Psychology,"  so  far  as  it  does  not
take  a  Xativistic  direction)  merely  amounts  to  this,  that
the  unconscious  connection  of  those  moments  which  we
reproduce  in  discursive  logical  form  is  not  to  be  re-
garded as  <i  discursive  one  (which  I  myself  have  always
and  everywhere  emphatically  asserted)  ;  and  only  because
Wundt  does  not  observe  that  the  form  of  Logic  in  and
of  itself  is  a nythi '/if/  hut  discursive,  but  first  becomes  so
through  reception  into  the  form  of  consciousness,  only  for
that  reason  does  the  acknowledgment  of  a  logical  connec-
tion in  the  unconscious  genesis  of  perception  appear  to  him
hazardous  (cp.  pp.  424,  460-461,  637,  708-711).  The
error  of  Wundt,  in  refusing  to  acknowledge  the  essence
of  the  logical  save  in  the  discursive  form  of  reflection,
seems  to  stand  in  close  connection  with  his  other  errone-
ous opinion,  that  consciousness  also  only consists  in the

VOL.  III.  0


210  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

form  of  discursive  reflection,  i.e.,  in  the  connection  between
ideas  separated  in  time,  brought  about  by  memory  and
reflection  (cp.  pp.  825-827,  829,  837).  It  is,  however,  not
evident  why  a  conscious  centre  should  not  be  conceived
which  once  in  a  lifetime,  and  then  never  again,  has  a  per-
ception, and  yet  retains  this  in  full  clearness  of  conscious-
ness. Whether  this  perception  leaves  behind  a  memorial
trace,  whether  this  trace  suffices  to  lead  to  reproduction
on  renewed  excitement,  and  whether  the  intelligence  of
the  organ  suffices  to  recognise  this  reproduction  as  such
(i.e.,  as  memory),  all  that  is  for  the  consciousness  of  the
first  perception  entirely  indifferent  and  without  influence.
Wundt  thus  mistakes  in  two  directions  the  derived  and
secondary  character  of  conscious  reflection.  In  the  first
place,  he  fails  to  see  that  all  discursiveness  of  conscious
ideation  is  composed  of  single  acts  of  consciousness,
each  of  which  possesses  the  intuitive  evidence  of  sense ;
and,  secondly,  that  all  that  is  logical  in  the  discursive
sequence  rests  on  the  implicit  logical  connection  of  the
moments  of  unconscious  intuition.  By  taking  as  the  type
of  consciousness  in  general  his  cerebral  consciousness  in
the  form  most  familiar  to  him  of  discursive  reflection,  with-
out going  back  to  its  genetic  elements,  Wundt  lapses  into
false  conclusions  on  two  sides;  he  denies  the  character
of  the  logical  as  of  consciousness  when  he  misses  the
characteristics  of  discursive  reflection.

These  preliminary  remarks  may  suffice  to  prove  that
even  the  two  best  books  which  we  possess  for  acquiring
an  insight  into  the  physiology  of  the  central  organs  of
the  nervous  system,  taken  singly,  do  not  meet  the  wants
of  the  layman,  whilst  to  treat  them  as  complementary
requires  a  tolerable  amount  of  labour  and  independent
criticism.  I  think  therefore  that  the  following  attempt  to
discuss  the  most  important  points  of  our  present  know-
ledge, in  all  brevity,  and  leaving  on  one  side  all  ana-
tomical and  physiological  detail,  will  not  be  unwelcome
to  wider  circles  of  the  scientifically  educated  public.


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  211

2.  Nerve- Fibre  and  Ganglion- Cell. — All  the  nervous  ele-
ments of  the  organism  are  divisible  into  two  clearly  dis-
tinguishable kinds — conducting  fibres  and  ganglionic  cells.
AVhen  the  organism  is  intact,  the  conducting  fibres  are  not
determined  to  isolated,  independent  action,  but  merely
serve  to  propagate  or  transfer  a  stimulus:  (1.)  From
the  peripheral  sense-organs  to  ganglionic  cells;  (2.)  from
ganglionic  cells  to  bundles  of  muscular  fibres  or  secreting
membranes ;  (3.)  from  one  ganglionic  cell  to  another.
They  thus  serve  to  connect  periphery  and  centre,  or  to
unite  several  centres.  The  ganglionic  cells,  on  the  other
hand,  exercise  the  central  functions  ;  they  receive  the
impulses  propagated  from  the  periphery,  independently
modify  the  same,  and  either  neutralise  them  by  their
internal  resistance,  or  are  determined  to  a  partial  libera-
tion of  their  reserved  force,  which  then  leads  to  peri-
pheral actions  by  shorter  or  longer  circuits  and  by
centrifugal  paths.  The  ganglionic  cells,  moreover,  in-
fluence the  nutrition  of  the  nerve-fibres  which  proceed
from  them ;  nerves  severed  from  their  centres  of  innerva-
tion become  atrophied  (Wundt,  p.  107).

But  now  it  would  not  be  correct  so  to  conceive  the  differ-
entiation as  if  the  conducting  elements  were  only  passive
translators,  the  ganglionic  cells  only  active  organs;  the
conducting  fibres  also  possess  their  own  activity,  and  also
the  grey  nerve-substance  made  up  of  ganglionic  cells  may
serve  to  propagate  stimuli.  Only  because  the  path  of
resistance  in  the  nerve-fibre  is  relatively  much  smaller
than  in  the  ganglionic  cell  is  it  more  suited  for  conduction
than  the  latter;  and  only  because  in  the  ganglion-cell  the
stored-up  force  is  much  greater  than  in  the  nerve-fibre
is  it  more  fitted  than  the  latter  for  active  operations.
Until  the  transferred  excitement  is  extinguished  through
the  resistance  on  conduction  every  stimulus  is  also  pro-
pagated in  the  grey  matter,  unless  the  energy  therein  con-
tained can  be  discharged  in  another  direction,  where  the
path  of  resistance  is  less. Thus,  e.g.,  the  grey  matter  of


212  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

the  spinal  cord  after  section  of  the  white  strands  consisting
of  conducting  fibres  is  unmistakably  capable  of  the  propa-
gation of  not  too  feeble  stimuli ;  and  the  circumstance  that
with  often-repeated  conduction  in  a  particular  direction  the
nerve-substance  adapts  itself  to  this  function,  thus  the
resistance  is  diminished  by  habit,  makes  possible  the
phenomenon  so  important  for  the  existence  of  the  organ-
ism of  the  spontaneous  compensation  of  disturbances  by
the  vicarious  function,  not  only  of  other  plexi  of  fibres,
but  also  even  of  the  grey  matter  (Wundt,  p.  271).

The  molecular  accommodation  of  nervous  matter  to
the  work  most  frequently  thrust  upon  it  also  makes  it
explicable  why  the  nerve-fibres  that  are  in  connection
with  the  organs  of  sense  are  most  exercised  in  centripetal,
the  fibres  ending  in  muscles,  on  the  other  hand,  most  in
centrifugal  conduction,  and  meet  with  less  resistance  in
the  corresponding  direction.  That  they  do  not  under
normal  circumstances  conduct  in  the  reverse  direction  is
in  any  case  not  provable,  since  we  have  no  means  of
making  the  effect  perceptible,  if  such  a  conduction  takes
place.  In  motor  nerves  the  already-mentioned  depend-
ence of  the  nutritive  condition  on  the  corresponding
ganglion  cells,  in  sensory  nerves  the  centrifugal  current
of  innervation  of  attention  and  the  central  mode  of  origin
of  illusions  of  the  senses,  tells,  however,  for  the  existence
of  such  opposite  nerve  currents.  However,  these  reversed
nervous  currents  are  in  any  case  of  another  constitution
and  form  in  their  vibrations  than  the  normal  ones,  and
since  the  adaptation  and  customary  diminution  of  the  path
of  resistance  has  always  reference  only  to  one  particular
kind  of  stimulus,  the  same  nerve  may  very  well  be  employed
in  the  centrifugal  conduction  of  this  and  the  centripetal
propagation  of  that  vibration,  whilst  it  opposes  consider-
able resistance  to  the  particular  conduction  in  the  opposite
sense.  That  for  the  rest  this  resistance  also  is  not  insur-
mountable has  been  shown  by  the  experiments  of  Philipeaux
and  Vulpian,  in  which  they  succeeded  in  forming  a  union


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  213

between  the  cut  ends  of  neighbouring  motor  and  sensory
nerves,  and  in  thereby  obtaining  a  considerable  inversion  of
the  direction  of  function  (Wundt,  p.  227).  The  experiment
proves  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  most  important  thing  for
the  nervous  process  is  the  form  of  vibration,  which  is
determined  by  the  peripheral  and  central  end-organs  and
handed  over  to  the  fibre,  and  that  there  can  henceforth  be
no  more  talk  of  "  specific  energies  "  of  nerves  in  the  sense
of  an  absolute  immutability.  When,  on  the  other  hand,
Wundt  grants  (p.  361  ff.)  that  exercise  in  processes  of  a
particular  form  of  vibration  and  direction  of  propagation  is
able  to  impregnate  nervous  matter  with  such  a  molecular
disposition  "  that  every  disturbance  of  the  molecular  ecmi-
librium  that  occurs  calls  forth  this  particular  mode  of
motion  ; "  when  further  he  is  obliged  to  admit  that  this
adaptation  is  only  partly  individually  accmired,  but  rests  in
the  main  on  an  innate,  inherited  predisposition,  it  is  not
obvious  why  the  older  expression  "  specific  energy  "  should
not  be  also  further  retained  in  the  revised  modern  sense  ;
at  the  most,  one  might  convert  it  into  the  other :  "  specific
disposition."

This  "  specific  disposition"  becomes  an  actual  "energy"
by  representing  not  merely  a  diminution  of  the  resistance
of  the  path  to  a  particular  form  of  vibration,  but,  at  the
same  time,  a  certain  tension  or  potential  energy,  which
with  given  stimuli  is  liberated  as  living  force  or  energy  of
motion.  Thus  the  work  which,  e.g.,  the  galvanised  motor
nerve-fibre  performs  in  preparing  a  muscular  contraction
is  by  no  means  a  mere  propagation  of  the  received
energy  in  unchanged  form,  but  it  is  an  effect  from
its  own  store  of  force,  for  whose  liberation  the  stim-
ulus only  gives  the  external  impulse.  Ihit  now  with-
out an  internal  regulation  any  stimulus  which  oversteps
the  threshold  would  suffice  to  discharge  the  v:hole  force
stored  up  in  the  nerve-fibre;  the  reaction  would  be  violent,
and  the  nerve  would  for  a  long  time  be  incapable  of  the
repetition  of  a  similar  performance. In  the  mechanism


214  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  the  nerve,  therefore,  along  with  the  exciting  potencies
inhibitory  ones  must  also  be  inserted,  which  help  to  fix
the  threshold-value  of  the  stimulus,  and  to  limit  the  dis-
charge of  nerve-fibre  according  to  intensity  and  duration.
If  the  curve  of  contraction  of  a  stimulated  frog's  thigh  be
graphically  represented  on  a  vibrating  pendulum,  which
renders  perceptible  to  the  senses  the  course  of  the  reaction,
there  first  occurs  a  well-marked  rise,  which  illustrates  the
growing  predominance  of  the  exciting,  potencies,  but  then
a  quick  descent,  which  terminates  in  a  depression  below
the  level  of  zero.  After  this  transitory  predominance  of
the  inhibitory  influences,  the  excitement  dies  away  in
weaker  waves  (Wundt,  pp.  247-253).  The  more  capable
of  performance  the  nerve  is,  the  greater  are  not  only  its
exciting,  but  also  its  inhibitory  powers  ;  the  exhaustion
is  shown  in  still  higher  degree  in  the  diminution  of  the
inhibitory  influences  (whereby  especially  the  duration  of
the  reaction  is  prolonged)  than  in  diminished  strength  of
the  reaction.  The  difference  of  the  reaction  on  weak  and
strong  stimuli  is  less  in  the  exhausted  than  in  the  fresh
nerve. — An  increase  of  irritability  results  with  quickly
succeeding  repetition  of  the  same  stimulus,  when  the  im-
pressions are  in  a  certain  measure  added  together.

Quite  analogously,  only  in  changed  relations  of  in-
tensity are  the  processes  set  up  in  the  ganglion-cell.  One
is  able  to  make  a  comparison  between  them  by  causing
the  same  scale  of  stimuli  to  act  at  one  time  directly  on
the  motor  nerve,  at  another  time  on  the  sensory  nerves  of
the  same  half  of  the  body  issuing  at  the  same  height  of
the  spinal  cord.  Ganglion-cell  and  nerve-fibre  are  related
to  one  another  pretty  much  as  a  boiler  with  a  valve
not  easily  to  be  moved  to  one  furnished  with  a  valve
moving  with  facility.  From  the  latter  the  steam  more
easily  escapes  because  with  less  tension,  whilst  with
the  former  the  valve  is  only  opened  by  vapours  of
greater  tension,  thus  also  streaming  out  with  greater
force  (Wundt,  p.  268). Because  the  ganglion-cell  offers


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 215

a  far  greater  resistance  than  the  nerve,  it  absorbs
stimuli  which  call  forth  considerable  reactions  on  direct
application  to  the  nerves ;  the  threshold  of  stimula-
tion is  thus  raised.  In  the  same  way,  also,  above  the
threshold  of  stimulation  the  period  of  latent  stimulation
is  longer,  because  greater  resistances,  stronger  inhibitory
potencies  must  be  overcome.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
reaction  has  once  occurred,  the  greater  store  of  energy  of
the  ganglion-cell  discharges  also  a  greater  energy,  i.e.,  the
reaction  is  stronger  with  similar  stimuli,  and  is,  moreover,
even  with  such  a  choice  of  the  stimuli  that  the  heights
of  contraction  become  equal,  of  longer  duration  (Wundt,
p.  261  ff.)  The  summation  of  rapidly  succeeding  similar
stimuli  is  still  more  perceptible  and  of  still  greater  import-
ance in  the'  ganglion-cell  than  in  the  nerve.  The  aggre-
gate activity  of  rhythmically  recurrent  stimuli,  which  taken
singly  lie  below  the  threshold  of  stimulation,  is  the  key
to  the  understanding  of  the  genesis  of  most  sensations  of
moderate  strength,  which  are  almost  all  of  them  clue  to
the  combination  of  stimuli,  each  one  of  which  would  by
itself  (as,  e.g.,  an  isolated  wave  of  sound  in  a  tone)  be  inef-
fectual. The  condition  of  exhaustion,  too,  is  manifested
altogether  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  nerve ;  a  special
form  of  exhaustion  is,  however,  that  due  to  nerve-poisons
{e.g.,  for  the  ganglion-cells  of  the  spinal  cord  by  strych-
nine). Although  the  duration  of  latent  stimulation  is
increased  in  poisoning  by  strychnine,  yet  the  irritability
is  considerably  enhanced  (even  beyond  the  irritability
of  the  motor  nerve),  and  every  stimulus  acts  in  the
same  manner  as  with  the  healthy  ganglion-cell  a  whole
series  of  similar  stimuli ;  all  reactions  become  stronger
and  more  persistent,  vehement  even  to  convulsion  ;  small
and  great  stimuli  soon  call  forth  reactions  of  like  strength,
and  finally,  the  spinal  cord  reacts  on  every  stimulus  with
convulsions  (Wundt,  pp.  263-264).

Pathologically  this  condition  is  designated  as  "  irritable
weakness;"  an  understanding  of  it  is,  as  Maudsley  shows,


2i6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  foundation  of  the  correct  understanding  of  all  the
morbid  states  of  the  central  organs  of  the  nervous  system.
The  loss  of  the  normal  proportion  of  stimulus  and  reaction
is  the  sign  of  a  morbid  disorder ;  it  is  the  simplest  form
of  the  "  aberration  "  of  the  ganglion-cell.  The  "  errant "
ganglion-cell  has  no  more  force  at  its  disposal  than  the
healthy  one,  but  it  wastes  the  same  in  reacting  on  every
feeble  stimulus ;  it  squanders  it  in  tetanus.

The  madness  of  little  children  and  of  the  brutes  (with  the
exception  of  those  nearest  to  man)  consists  essentially  in
an  aberration  of  the  ganglion-cells  of  the  medulla  oblongata
and  spinal  cord,  in  a  disturbed  grouping  of  the  nerve
elements  in  any  cell,  and  in  consequence  thereof  also  in  a
disturbed  co-ordination  of  the  single  central  cell-groups.
These  are  here  no  longer  functional  as  a  purposive  physio-
logical whole,  but  every  group  reacts  tetanically  on  the
small  organic  stimuli  affecting  it,  which  remain  unno-
ticed in  the  healthy  life,  and  thereby  becomes  incapable
of  retaining  feeling  with  its  neighbouring  groups.  The
result  is  incoherent  convulsions,  as  in  St.  Vitus's  dance.
The  convulsions  may,  however,  also  proceed  from  higher
central  points,  which  mediate  the  reflexes  to  sense-percep-
tion ;  then  they  stand  in  relation  to  actual  or  imaginary
sense-perceptions,  and  manifest  themselves  as  combative,
destructive,  or  murderous  impulse.  Of  this  kind  is  the
raging  of  a  mad  elephant,  or  the  delirium  of  a  maniac,
who  perceives  the  smell  of  sulphur  in  his  nose,  sees  his
supposed  persecutors  as  devilish  shapes  surrounded  with
fiery  flames,  and  believes  he  has  to  contend  with  them  or
an  imaginary  lion  for  his  life. — Lastly,  aberration  in  the
sphere  of  conscious  volition  and  ideation  is  an  aberration
of  the  ganglion-cells  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres ;  frenzy
consists  of  spasmodic  ideas  and  feelings,  as  St.  Vitus's
dance  consists  of  motor  reflex  convulsions.

It  would  be  altogether  wrong  if  one  tried  to  see  in  the
molecular  disorder  of  the  ganglion-cell,  which  squanders
its  store  of energy  in  a  manner disproportional  to the


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  217

stimuli,  a  condition  of  heightened  power  and  capacity  of
execution ;  the  morbidly  degenerate  irritability,  in  spite
of  its  externally  destructive  effects,  can  only  be  inter-
preted as  a  symptom  of  iveakness.  Even  the  explosion  of
a  steam-engine  proves  nothing  with  respect  to  the  effi-
ciency and  solidity  of  the  machine,  but  rather  that  it  had  a
weak  place.  The  elevated  self-satisfaction  and  the  extra-
vagant merriment  of  an  incipient  maniac,  or  the  deli-
rium of  a  raving  madman  are  just  as  little  a  proof  of  the
strength  and  efficiency  of  the  grey  matter  of  their  brains
as  the  motor  reflex  convulsions  of  that  of  a  spinal
cord  poisoned  by  strychnine ;  in  both  cases  only  the
morbidly  enhanced  consumpition  of  energy  is  revealed,
and  therefore  the  irritable  weakness  must  in  all  cases
draw  after  it  torpid  weakness.  All  mania  ends  in  de-
rangement of  intellect  or  weakness  of  mind,  all  cramps
in  complete  exhaustion  of  the  organs  concerned,  or  of
the  whole  organism.  The  irritable  weakness  of  the
ganglion-cells  spontaneously  appearing  in  the  organism
is  only  the  first  stage  of  a  process  of  degeneration,  which
is  accelerated  by  irritability  the  more  the  increased  con-
sumption of  cncnjij  coincides  with  an  already  diminished,
potential  energy. —  if  we  comprehensively  consider  wherein
consists  the  difference  between  the  nervous  matter  in  the
ganglion-cell  and  in  the  (alone  active)  axis  cylinder  of  the
nerve-fibre,  it  may  bo  thus  succinctly  stated,  that  in  the
latter  the  chemical  decomposition,  in  the  former  recom-
position  during  functional  repose  preponderates  (Wundt,
p.  266).  The  former  is  evinced  by  this,  that  the  nerve-fibre,
abandoned  to  itself,  i.e.,  separated  from  its  province,  lias  no
power  to  maintain  itself,  but  degenerates ;  the  latter  fol-
lows from  this,  that  the  ganglionic  substance  during  func-
tional repose  not  only  repairs  its  own  waste  which  it  has
suffered  in  the  exercise  of  function,  but  also  provides  the
nerve-fibres  that  spring  from  it  with  energy  for  defraying
their  expenditure.  Thus,  under  normal  circumstances,  in
the  fibre  the  consumption  of  force,  in  the  cell  the  produc-


2i 8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tion  of  force  preponderates.  If,  now,  the  condition  of
irritable  weakness  occurs  in  the  cell,  not  only  is  far  more
force  consumed  in  all  functional  exercise,  but  also  in
consequence  of  the  more  frequent  exercise  of  function  the
total  duration  of  functional  rest  is  diminished,  when  not
(as  in  the  maniacal,  often  deprived  for  weeks  of  sleep)
reduced  approximately  to  zero,  and  this,  moreover,  in  a
condition  in  which  probably  the  capacity  for  chemical
recomposition  is  diminished.  In  that  case  the  occurrence
of  total  exhaustion  of  the  organism,  and  with  a  longer
duration  or  more  frequent  recurrence  of  the  attacks,  the
morphological  and  chemical  degeneration  of  the  nerve-
centres  is  the  necessary  issue.

The  stated  fundamental  distinction  between  the  nervous
matter  in  the  ganglion-cell  and  that  in  the  axis  cylinder
of  the  nerve-fibre  is  consequently,  as  is  also  shown  by  the
occurrence  of  pathological  degeneration  in  the  grey  nerve
matter,  not  one  of  hind,  but  only  of  degree,.  Expenditure  of
energy  takes  place  in  the  cell  by  decomposition,  as  well  as
storing  up  of  energy  in  the  fibre  by  recomposition,  and  only
in  the  normal  physiological  condition  of  the  organism  is
the  opposite  tendency  'predominant  in  either.  Accord-
ingly, in  this  gradual  difference  no  reason  can  be  found
for  a  heterogeneity  of  substance  in  cell  and  fibre.  The
actions  are,  on  the  whole,  similar  in  both,  and  the  dif-
ference extends  no  further  than  the  differentiation  of  a
physiological  organ  into  several  subdivisions  for  the  better
fulfilment  of  modified  purposes  by  more  perfect  division
of  labour.  This  result  is  important  for  the  understanding
of  the  truth  that  the  psychical  life  does  not  cease  with
the  ganglion-cell,  but  extends  even  to  the  nerve-fibre  and
beyond.

3.  The  Spinal  Cord. — If  we  neglect  the  ganglion-cells
united  in  the  sympathetic  plexus  of  nerves  and  dispersed
in  various  organs,  all  the  rest  are  massed  in  the  grey
matter  of  the  spinal  cord  and  brain. In  the  former  the


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 219

grey  matter  forms  four  united  columns,  of  which  those
situated  right  and  left  correspond  to  the  lateral  halves  of
the  body,  whilst  the  two  anterior  ones  are  distinguished
from  the  two  posterior  by  the  motor  nerves  issuing  from
the  former,  the  sensory  nerves  from  the  latter.  These  four
columns  now  are  surrounded  by  an  envelope  of  white
nerve-matter,  in  which  are  collected  the  ascending  sensory
and  the  descending  motor  fibres.

From  this  it  first  of  all  results  that  there  is  no  direct
path  to  the  higher  nerve-centres  for  the  nerves  of  the
body  issuing  from  the  spinal  cord,  but  that  the  same  spot
of  the  grey  matter  of  the  spinal  cord  from  which  the  par-
ticular nerve  springs  must  always  be  passed  in  centrifugal
and  centripetal  conduction.  In  other  words,  the  conduct-
ing fibres  in  the  spinal  cord  are  not  directly,  but  only  by
the  intervention  of  ganglionic  cells,  united  with  the  nerves
of  the  body ;  and  in  every  conduction  from  the  brain
to  the  muscles  or  conversely,  ganglionic  cells  of  the  spinal
cord  co-operate  as  active  links,  which  reilectorially  pro-
pagate the  stimulus,  so  far  as  it  lies  for  them  above  the
threshold.

It  further  results  from  the  above-named  arrangement
that  sensory  and  motor  fibres  never  spring  simultaneously
from  one  and  the  same  ganglion-cell  of  the  spinal  cord;
that  thus  a  reiiex  from  a  sensory  to  a  motor  fibre  is  com-
pounded of  several  separate  re  ilexes  of  at  least  two  gan-
glionic cells  (one  in  the  posterior  and  one  in  the  anterior
cornu).  The  simple  reflexion  in  a  single  ganglion-cell  of
the  spinal  cord  can  always  include  only  one  kind  of  trunk-
nerve,  and  the  other  term  must  consist  of  fibres  connecting
other  ganglion-cells — be  they  neighbouring  and  co-ordi-
nate, higher  and  superordinate  or  lower  and  subordinate
cells— be  it  a  plexus  of  primitive  fibres  connecting  neigh-
bouring cells,  or  an  ascending  or  descending  nerve-
fibre.  It  is  important  to  make  clear  this  co-operation  of
several  ganglionic  cells  of  different  functional  importance
in  the  occurrence  of  the  simplest  reiiex  of  the  spinal  cord,  in


220  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

order  thereby  to  open  the  way  for  a  better  comprehension
of  the  entangled  co-operation  and  subordination  between
the  different  central  organs.

If  the  conducting  fibres  that  run  in  the  white  sub-
stance of  the  spinal  cord  always  remained  on  the  same
side  on  which  they  arise,  the  two  halves  of  the  body
would  have  no  communication  with  one  another  at  all  for
weak  stimuli  of  sensation  and  movement,  which  are  ex-
tinguished by  the  resistance  of  the  grey  matter ;  on  that
account  there  takes  place  a  partial  transference  of  nerve-
fibres  from  the  one  lateral  half  of  the  spinal  cord  to  the
other.  Since  a  co-operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  body
only  appears  to  be  requisite  with  stronger  motor  stimuli,
which  besides  are  conducted  through  the  grey  matter,  this
decussation  of  the  motor  fibres  extends  only  to  a  small
fraction,  as  follows  from  this,  that  with  unilateral
section  of  the  spinal  cord  only  weak  disturbances  of
movement  become  visible  on  the  uninjured  half  of  the
body ;  with  stimuli  producing  sensation,  on  the  other
hand,  an  exact  connection  of  the  two  halves  of  the
body  is  requisite  for  weak  stimuli,  and  therefore  the
decussation  of  the  sensory  conducting  fibres  is  a  far  more
considerable  one  (Wundt,  pp.  1 14-1 1 5).  In  the  higher  cen-
tral organs,  too,  this  order  everywhere  recurs,  that  the
connection  between  the  two  halves  of  the  body  is  estab-
lished partly  by  bridges  of  grey  matter  or  by  special  com-
missures (i.e.,  conducting  communicating  strands),  partly
by  decussation  of  the  paths.

Of  special  interest  is  this  relation  in  the  chiasma  of  the
optic  nerve,  which  was  formerly  regarded  as  the  point
where  the  two  optic  nei ves  crossed.  But  that  is  only  true
of  animals  with  outwardly-turned  eyes,  which  have  no
common  held  of  vision  for  the  two  eyes ;  whereas,  on  the
contrary,  with  man  and  animals  with  a  binocular  field  of
vision,  only  the  half  of  the  fibres  of  any  nerve,  and  that  too
the  one  turned  inward,  passes  over  to  the  other  side,
whereas  the  outer  halves  remain  uncrossed. The  con-


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  221

sequence  of  this  is,  that  the  left  halves  of  both  retinas  are
combined  in  the  left,  the  right  halves  of  both  retinas  in
the  right  corpus  quadrigeminum.  In  animals  with  out-
wardly turned  eyes  injury  of  a  corpus  quadrigeminum
causes  blindness  of  the  opposite  eye,  but  in  man  disease
of  one  corpus  quadrigeminum,  liemiopia,  i.e.,  blindness  or
destruction  of  vision  in  the  left  or  right  half  of  the  two
retinas  (Wundt,  p.  146).  It  is  obvious  that  only  by  this
blending  of  the  similarly  situated  halves  of  the  two
peripheral  organs  in  one-half  of  the  central  organ  is  the
blending  of  corresponding  impressions  on  the  two  retinas
explained,  i.e.,  the  riddle  is  solved  of  single  vision  with  two
eyes,  and  I  have  specially  discussed  this  example  because
we  have  according  to  its  analogy  to  imagine  the  whole
arrangement  of  our  nervous  system,  which,  in  spite  of  the
tico-sidedness,  both  of  the  central  and  also  of  the  peripheral
organs  of  sensation,  yet  leads  to  an  indivisible  sensation  of
our  body  even  for  the  weakest  stimuli.  Only  the  union
by  central  bridges  or  commissures  with  partial  peripheral
decussations  of  the  paths  makes  this  result  possible,  and
helps  us  out  of  a  condition  in  which  we  should  feel  the
two  halves  of  our  body  as  if  they  were  two  separate  bodies ;
and  it  only  remains  to  the  thinking  consciousness  to  grasp
these  separate  sensations  into  a  unity,  just  as  the  owner
of  an  estate  can  manage  two  properties  entirely  separated
from  each  other  with  the  help  of  a  single  ledger.  It  is
true  the  necessity  of  the  union  by  commissures  with. partial
decussation  of  the  paths  holds  good  only  for  the  spinal  cord
and  the  hinder  and  middle  parts  of  the  brain,  but  not  for
the  fore-brain  or  cerebrum,  and  that  for  the  twofold
reason  that  in  the  first  place  the  union  of  the  cerebral  hemi-
spheres by  commissures  and  arcuate  fibres  into  a  single
indivisibly  functioning  organ  is  a  far  more  intimate  one
than  in  the  afore-named  centres ;  and,  secondly,  because
the  motor-impulses  of  the  cerebrum  must  always  first  pass
through  media  (at  any  rate  through  the  motor  ganglia  of
the  peduncle  of  the  cerebrum),  in  which  the  blending  in


222  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

question  is  already  performed  by  partial  crossing  of  the
paths,  so  that  a  repetition  of  these  means  would  be  super-
fluous. The  cerebral  hemispheres  are  therefore  in  man
the  only  organ  in  which  the  decussation  of  the  afferent
unilateral  paths  is  not  a  partial  but  a  total  one.

That  the  spinal  cord  in  its  grey  matter  is  a  central
organ  of  lower  order  with  a  certain  relative  independence
may  now  be  considered  as  pretty  generally  acknowledged.
Maudsley  says :  "  There  can  be  no  difficulty  in  admitting
that  the  spinal  cord  is  an  independent  centre  of  so-called
aim-working  acts  that  are  not  attended  with  conscious-
ness "  (i.e.,  brain-consciousness).  "  It  is  the  centre,  how-
ever, not  only  of  co-ordinate  action  the  capability  of
which  has  been  implanted  in  its  original  constitution,
but  also  of  co-ordinate  action  the  power  of  which  has
been  gradually  acquired  and  matured  through  individual
experience.  Like  the  brain,  the  spinal  cord  has,  so  to
speak,  its  memory,  and  must  be  educated "  (p.  149).
"  In  fact,  if  any  one  attends  to  his  ordinary  actions  during
the  day,  it  will  be  surprising  how  small  a  proportion  of
them  are  consciously  willed,  how  large  a  proportion  of
them  are  the  results  of  the  acquired  automatic  action  of
the  organism"  (p.  152).  "Of  these  unconscious  or  in-
voluntary actions  a  great  part  is  plainly  due  to  the
independent  power  of  reaction  which  the  ganglionic  cells  of
the  spinal  cord  have"  (p.  136).  "The  anencephalic  infant,
in  which  absence  of  brain  involves  an  absence  of  con-
sciousness, not  only  exhibits  movements  of  its  limbs,  but
is  capable  also  of  the  associated  reflex  acts  of  sucking  and
crying"  (p.  137).  "  Piliiger1  touched  with  acetic  acid  the
thigh  of  a  decapitated  frog  over  its  internal  condyle  ;  it
wiped  it  off  with  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  foot  of  the
same  side ;  he  thereupon  cut  off  the  foot,  and  applied  the
acid  to  the  same  spot ;  the  animal  attempted  to  wipe  it  off
again  with  the  foot  of  that  side,  but,  having  lost  its  foot,
of  course  could  not. After  some  fruitless  efforts,  there-

1  Pfluger,  "Die  sensorischen  Functionen  des  Riickenmarks"  (Berlin,  1853).


'PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  223

fore,  it  ceased  to  try  in  that  way,  seemed  unquiet,  '  as
though  it  were  searching  for  some  new  means,'  and  at
last  it  made  use  of  the  foot  of  the  other  leg,  and  succeeded
in  wiping  off  the  acid.  .  .  .  Notably  we  have  in  this
striking  experiment  not  merely  contraction  of  muscles,
but  combined  movements  in  due  sequence  for  a  special
purpose ;  we  have  actions  that  have  all  the  appearance  of
being  instigated  by  will  and  guided  by  intelligence  in  an
animal  the  recognised  organ  of  whose  intelligence  and
will  has  been  removed.  So  much  was  Pfliiger  impressed
by  this  wonderful  adaptation  of  means  to  an  end  in  a
headless  animal,  that  he  actually  inferred  that  the  spinal
cord,  like  the  brain,  was  possessed  of  sensorial  functions.
Others,  who  would  scarce  admit  Pfliiger's  supposition  to  be
true  of  man,  have  thought  that  it  might  be  so  of  some
of  the  lower  animals.  Instead  of  grounding  their  judg-
ment of  the  complex  phenomena  in  man  on  their  ex-
perience of  the  simpler  instances  exhibited  by  the  lower
animals,  they  have  applied  to  the  lower  animals  what  I
believe  to  be  their  subjective  misinterpretation  of  the
complex  phenomena  in  man  "  (p.  138).

Maudsley  here  announces  an  important  methodological
principle  for  comparative  physiology  and  psychology,
which  I  have  also  followed  above  in  Sect.  A.  Chap,  i.,  and
for  the  observance  of  which  I  have  often  been  reproached
by  scientific  specialists.  Nevertheless,  this  principle  ought
to  be  self-evident  to  every  naturalist,  and  it  is  only  the
psychological  prejudice  :  that  no  consciousness  can  inhabit
my  organism  of  which  my  consciousness,  i.e.,  the  con-
sciousness of  my  cerebral  hemispheres,  is  not  aware, —
which  has  closed  even  to  a  Wundt  the  comprehension  of
the  fundamental  fact  of  physiological  psychology,  namely,
the  capacity  of  every  ganglionic  cell  to  be  conscious.

4.  The  Inner  Psychical  Aspect  of  the  Reflex  Process. —
The  conception  of  rellexion  may  be  taken  in  a  narrower
and  a  wider  sense. In  the  former  case  it  signifies  the  irn-


224  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

mediate  passing  over  of  a  stimulus  of  sensation  to  the
motor  nerve  issuing  in  the  same  centre  ;  in  the  latter  case
it  signifies  any  reaction  of  a  centre  on  a  stimulus  con-
ducted from  any  quarter  whatever. We  have  already  seen
that  even  the  apparently  simple  reflexion  of  a  centre  of
the  spinal  cord  is  a  complicated phenomenon,  which  is
compounded  of  single  actions  of  several  ganglion-cells  of
the  posterior  and  anterior  cornua,  each  of  which  is  only
to  be  subsumed  under  the  notion  reflexion  in  the  wider
sense. In  the  same  way  also,  however,  the  apparently
immediate  reflexion  passes  gradually  into  ever  more  com-
plicated forms,  as  I  have  already  shown  above  in  Sect.  A.
Chap,  v.,  so  that  the  collective  mental  functions  of  man
fall  under  the  notion  of  reflexion  in  the  wider  sense. For
the  latter  says  nothing  more  than  that  no  ganglionic  cell
performs  its  office  without  a  stimulus,  but  it  says  nothing
about  the  kind  of  stimulus  or  the  kind  of  function. As
the  stimulus  acting  on  a  sensory  nerve  may  arise  from  a
mechanical,  chemical,  thermal,  or  electrical  source,  so  can
the  stimulus  of  a  sensory  nerve-fibre  soliciting  a  ganglionic
cell  to  be  functional  arise  from  a  neighbouring  ganglion-
cell,  from  a  fibre  communicating  between  a  co-ordinate,
superordinate,  or  subordinate  centre,  or  perhaps  from  a
motor  nerve-fibre ; 1  and  the  reaction  need  by  no  means  be
immediately  an  innervation  of  a  motor  nerve,  but  may  con-
sist of  a  propagation  of  the  actively  modified  stimulus  to
neighbouring  cells  or  to  conducting  fibres  which  lead  to
co-ordinate,  superordinate,  or  subordinate  centres. Every
function of a  brain-cell which appears subjectively  as
abstract  idea  would  then  be  a  reflex  due  to  a  stimulus
received  from  another  cell  or  from  a  sensory  nerve,  which
would  be  subjectively  presented as excitement of  the
conception  through  association  of  ideas  or  through  sense-
perception.

1  On  the  assumption  namely  that  nerves themselves to the central
the  direct  sensations  of  the  muscular  organs, which however  is a  hypo-
contractions  (which  are  not  effected  thesis  not  to be  accepted without
by tactile sensations of adjacent  consideration,
tissues)  are  conveyed  by  the  motor


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 225

If,  on  the  other  hand,  one  characterises  as  "  reflex "
only  the  whole  group  of  individual  reactions  which  lie
between  the  irritation  of  sensory  nerves  as  first  term
and  the  function  of  motor  nerves  as  final  term,  one  does
not  thereby  avoid  the  fact  that  the  highest  functions  of
the  mind  come  under  the  notion  of  lienexion.  For  if  the
stimulus  at  all  lies  above  the  threshold  of  reflexion,  i.e..  if
it  is  not  absorbed  and  extinguished  on  its  way  in  the  cen-
tral organs  through  the  resistance  in  conduction,  it  must
also,  under  all  circumstances,  finally  lead  to  motor  reaction,
however  long  it  may  in  the  mean  time  wander  about  within
the  central  organs  from  one  ganglion-cell  to  another,  or,  to
speak  psychologically,  however  many  reflections  and  con-
flicts of  desire  may  be  intercalated  between  perception  and
voluntary  resolution.  In  this  way  of  looking  at  the  matter
likewise  the  question  then  is  only  concerning  a  difference
of  degree  in  the  number  of  connecting  links  between  stimu-
lus of  sensation  and  movement  of  reaction;  and  this  num-
ber gradually  rises  from  the  simplest  reflex  contractions  to
the  most  complicated  processes  needed  for  the  control  and
management  of  the  external  world.

"  For  moderate  irritation  of  a  limited  part  of  the  skin
with  a  certain  mean  degree  of  excitability  draws  after  it  a
reflex  contraction  only  in  that  group  of  muscles  which  is
provided  with  motor  roots,  issuing  at  the  same  elevation
and  on  the  same  side  as  the  irritated  sensory  fibres.  If  the
stimulus  or  irritability  increases,  the  excitement  also  first
passes  over  to  the  motor  root-fibres  of  the  other  half  of
the  body  which  issue  at  the  same  height ;  lastly,  with
still  greater  increase  it  spreads  with  increasing  intensity
first  up  and  then  down  "  (the  former  on  the  sensory,  the
latter  on  the  motor  paths  of  the  spinal  cord),  "  so  that
finally  the  muscles  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  which  receive
their  nerves  from  the  spinal  cord  and  medulla  oblon-
gata, are  sympathetically  affected.  Accordingly,  every
sensory  fibre  by  means  of  a  branch  path  of  the  first  order
stands  in  connection  with  the  motor  fibres  arising  on  the

vol.  hi.  p


226  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

same  side  and  at  the  same  level,  by  one  of  the  second  order
with  those  emerging  on  the  opposite  side  at  the  same
level,  by  branches  of  the  third  order  with  those  emerging
higher  up,  and  finally  by  that  of  a  fourth  order  also  with
those  arising  far  lower'  down"  (Wundt,  pp.  116-117).
While  with  increasing  intensity  of  stimulation  greater  re-
sistances are  overcome  (or  with  increasing  irritability  all
resistances  reduced),  the  branch  paths  of  the  higher  orders
must  pari  passu  be  brought  into  requisition ;  and  in  the
same  proportion  also  increases  the  number  of  the  central
intermediate  links  concerned  in  the  total  motor  reaction.
This  increase  now  takes  place  very  rapidly  as  we  pass
from  the  spinal  cord  to  the  co-operation  of  the  higher
centres  ;  the  reflexions  then  increase  in  complication  in
quick  progression,  without  thereby  losing  their  reflex
character.

However,  then,  one  may  look  at  the  matter,  the  con-
clusion is  not  to  be  resisted  that  all  the  functions  of  the
central  nervous  system,  and  therewith  all  our  manifesta-
tions of  life  and  mental  activity,  fall  under  the  concep-
tion of  reflex  action.  We  must  make  this  thought
entirely  our  own,  when  it  loses  the  character  of  a  paradox.
It  imports,  in  fine,  nothing  more  than  the  axiom  of  suffi-
cient reason  in  metaphysics.  If  the  latter  be  translated
into  the  language  of  nervous  physiology  it  runs,  "  No  gang-
lionic cell  is  functional  without  a  sufficient  reason,  which
is  called  a  stimulus ;"  and  translated  into  the  language
of  psychology  it  runs,  "  No  volition  without  motive."
Both  are  familiar  self-evident  truths,  but  which  perhaps
open  up  a  fruitful  prospect  if  we  bring  them  into  con-
nection by  help  of  the  notion  "  reflexion  "  under  the  point
of  view  of  physiological  psychology.  We  have,  namely,
before  us  the  problem  to  make  internal  experience  more
intelligible  by  means  of  the  external,  and  conversely.

The  physiologist  causes  his  beheaded  and  poisoned  frog
to  make  a  movement  of  contraction,  and  thereby  obtains
indubitable evidence that the relatively simple reflex


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 227

action  observed  rests  on  a  mechanism.  The  psychologist  sees
in  motivation  a  reflex  act,  and  gains  the  equally  indubitable
conviction  that  reflexion  is  a  psychical  process  in  which  a
volition  uniformly  follows  on  a  sensation  in  accordance  with
the  true  nature  of  the  character.  The  physiological  psycho-
logist, as  soon  as  he  perceives  that  the  essence  of  reflexion
must  in  both  events  be  homogeneous,  has  to  advance  to  the
conclusion,  "  Consequently  reflex  contraction  is  a  volition
excited  by  sensation  in  the  particular  centre,  and  the
genesis  of  volition  is  a  mechanism  conformable  to  law."
The  materialistic  physiologists  do  not  need  much  pressing
to  accept  the  last  half  of  this  conclusion  ;  but  per  contra
the  first,  although  they  cannot  fail  to  see  that  logically
they  must  allow  either  loth  or  neither.  For  the  rest,
psychology  long  ago  dreamt  of  a  "  physiological  psycho-
logy," talked  of  a  statics  and  dynamics  of  desires  and
ideas  ;  and  after  all  nothing  is  excluded  by  the  admission
of  the  mechanics  of  reflexion  but  the  indeterminism  of
the  will,  long  ago  perceived  to  be  untenable.  If  one  once
admits  that  the  subjectively  psychical  acts  correspond
to  objectively  material  functions,  of  course  all  objective
mechanics  of  molecular  motions  in  the  nervous  system
must  correspond  to  the  subjective  mechanics  of  desires
and  ideas,  and  conversely.  All  the  more  astonishing
must  it,  however,  appear  when  the  physiologists,  who
confirm  this  afresh,  will  not  see  the  psychological  re-
verse of  their  apparently  materialistic  medal,  namely,
that  every,  even  the  smallest,  reflex  action  is  a  volition
which  is  motived  by  a  sensation.  Sensation  is  only  so  far
as  it  becomes  conscious  (certainly,  however,  only  becomes
conscious  for  the  particular  ganglionic  cell  or  the  centre
in  question;  ;  volition  stands  in  and  of  itself  beyond  all
consciousness;  and  whether  in  the  particular  case  it
appears  in  consciousness  formally  as  intensive  feeling  of
innervation,  or  materially  as  qualitative  perceived  motion,
is  dependent  on  circumstances,  and  in  any  case  highly
improbable  for  simpler  reflexes  in  subordinate  centres.


22S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Wundt  has  precluded  himself  from  this  insight  both
by  his  above-mentioned  prejudice  in  regard  to  conscious-
ness, as  also  by  his  distorted  conception  of  the  will.  His
remark  is  correct :  "  If  one  tries  to  determine  where  the
mechanism  ceases  and  where  the  will  begins,  the  question
is  altogether  falsely  proposed.  For  one  here  opposes  con-
ceptions to  one  another  which  are  not  oppositcs  at  all  "
(p.  822).  But  he  does  not  draw  from  this  the  unavoidable
inference  that  in  that  case  either  sensation  and  will,  in
defiance  of  internal  experience,  must  be  denied  even  in  the
highest  mental  functions,  or  they  must  also  be  admitted  in
the  lowest  reflex  processes,  because  both  sides  are  related
to  each  other  as  inner  and  outer.  Were  these  notions  "  a
mere  fiction  "  (ibid.)  in  the  latter  case,  they  must  be  so  also
in  the  former;  were  that  inner,  psychical  side  of  the
process  and  the  metaphysical  substance  of  an  "unconscious
soul  "  which  supports  it  after  the  admission  of  the  external
mechanism  in  the  simple  reflexion  "  a  superfluous  and
meaningless  addition  "  (Hid,),  it  would  be  so  also  in  the
achievements  of  the  genius  and  the  hero.

Maudsley  comes  very  near  the  truth,  but  he  is  too  much
of  an  Englishman  to  grasp  what  is  apparently  so  paradoxi-
cal with  a  firm  hand.  He  says  :  "  Wherever  an  afferent
nerve  issues  from  the  cell  or  group  of  cells  in  the  cortical
layers  of  the  hemispheres,  and  an  efferent  nerve  issues
from  the  cell  or  group  of  cells,  there  is  the  possible  or
actual  centre  of  a  particular  volition ;  .  .  .  volition  or
will  simply  expresses  the  due  co-ordinate  activity  of  the
supreme  centres,  not  otherwise  than  as  the  co-ordinate
activity  of  the  spinal  cord  or  medulla  oblongata  might  be
said  to  represent  its  will  "  (p.  444).

This  not  merely  "might,''  but  "must"  undeniably
be  said,  if  one  desires  to  be  a  physiological  psychologist
in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  and  would  not  by  such
timidity  in  drawing  conclusions  forfeit  the  right  of  infer-
ence in  a  reverse  direction,  namely,  from  the  physio-
logical to  the  psychological  aspect of phenomena,  from


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  229

material  to  psychical  mechanics.  Maudsley  had  the
less  reason  to  evade  the  acknowledgment  of  a  will  in
the  lower  centres,  as  he  even  admits  the  necessity  of  the
perception  of  the  stimulus  in  the  same,  which  indeed
requires  the  genesis  of  a  consciousness,  which  the  will
does  not.  On  the  other  side,  the  unwonted  step  is  made
more  difficult  for  him,  in  the  first  place,  by  the  English
not  having,  as  the  German,  two  different  designations  for
Willc  and  Willkdr ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  because,
like  a  true  English  empiricist,  he  entertains  an  almost
superstitious  dread  of  treating  the  abstract  conception  of
the  will  as  an  ideal  entity,  i.e.,  of  straying  into  the  province
of  metaphysics.1

In  this  question  also  it  holds  good  that  for  comprehend-
ing the  complicated  events  in  human  consciousness  a
sure  foundation  for  judgment  must  be  gained  from  the
simple  relations  in  lower  animals.  On  this  point
Maudsley  himself  writes  as  follows:  "The  simplest  mode
of  nervous  action  in  man,  comparable  to  that  of  the  lowest
animals  that  possess  nerve,  is  exhibited  by  the  scattered
ganglionic  cells  belonging  to  the  sympathetic  system
which  are  concerned  in  certain  organic  processes.  The
heart's  action,  for  example,  is  due  to  the  ganglionic  cells
diffused  through  its  substance.  Meissner  has  shown  that
nerve-cells  disseminated  through  the  tissues  of  the  intes-
tines govern  their  motions  ;  and  Lister  thinks  it  probable
that  cells  scattered  in  the  tissues  preside  over  the  contrac-
tions of  the  arteries,  and  over  the  remarkable  diffusion  of
the  pigment  granules  which  takes  place  in  the  stellate
cells of  the frog's skin. The separate elements  of  the

1  I  should  much  like  to  know  what  sessed  by  the  attraction  of  the  atom

such an empiricist  understands by  A  and  the  atom  I!  ;  hut  if Newton

"explanation" and "principles of  had  had  the  same  ghost-fear  of  the

explanation,"  and whether  he  ima-  "  abstract  idea  "  of  attraction  which

gines it  possible  without  ascending  .Maudsley has of that of Will, he

to  "  general  principles  "  to  give  any  would  never  have  been  ahle  to  set

explanation, were it only of the-  up  gravitation  as  a  universal  prin-

simplest  physical  phenomenon. Con-  ciple  of  matter.
crete reality is of course only pos-


230  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tissues  are  co-ordinated  by  the  ganglionic  nerve-cells  of
the  sympathetic  system ;  and  these  co-ordinating  centres,
again,  are  found  to  be  under  the  control  of  the  cerebro-
spinal centres.  In  the  spinal  cord  the  ganglionic  nerve-
cells  are  collected  together,  and  so  united  that  groups  of
them  and  connected  groups  of  them  become  independent
centres  of  combined  movements,  simultaneous  and  succes-
sive, in  answer  to  stimuli  ;  this  arrangement  representing
the  entire  nervous  system  of  those  animals  in  which  no
organs  of  special  sense  have  yet  appeared  "  (p.  108).

Only  those  who  "  have  applied  to  the  lower  animals
their  subjective  misinterpretation  of  the  complex  pheno-
mena in  man"  (p.  139),  will  be  prepared  to  dispute  that
these  lower  animals  have  sensation  and  will;  for  the
common  objection,  that  in  these  organisms  all  vital  mani-
festations are  only  reflexes,  no  longer  avails,  since  we  have
perceived  the  like  in  the  highest  mental  functions.  On
the  contrary, it  is  precisely  the  lowest  animals  that  are  suited
to  demonstrate  visibly,  as  it  were,  that  every  reflex  action
even  of  the  simplest  ganglionic  cell  has  just  as  much  a
subjective  and  psychical  as  an  objective  and  physical  side,
and  that  the  former  again  falls  into  a  conscious  and  an
unconscious  psychical  part.  The  stimulus  or  the  motive
must  be  conscious  in  the  ganglionic  cell  as  sensation  if
it  is  above  the  threshold ;  the  reaction  of  the  will  or  the
result  of  the  reflex  process,  looked  at  from  within,  only
becomes  conscious  at  higher  stages  of  intelligence  by  com-
parative reflexion;  the  passage  from  stimulation  to  reaction,
from  motive  to  volition,  the  properly  punctual  saliens  in
reflexion,  remains  for  ever  concealed  from  the  light  of
consciousness;  and  yet  there  lies  therein  just  the  enig-
matic problem,  Why  then  does  this  particular  sensation
act  as  a  motive  to  this  volition  ?

The  materialistic  conception  finds  the  answer  very  easy
by  simply  seeking  the  reason  in  the  objective  physical
mechanism  of  the  movements.  But  that  means  allow-
ing the  two-sidedness  of  a  psychical  and  physical  character


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 231

only  to  the  first  and  last  term  of  the  process,  and  refusing
it  to  the  middle  term,  the  spark  which  passes  from  one  to
the  other ;  in  other  words,  it  means  degrading  the  psychical
factor  in  the  reflex  to  the  dead  passivity  of  a  mere  mirror-
ing of  certain  members  of  the  then  alone  actual  external
process,  or  the  depressing  of  the  psychical  to  a  sort  of
accidental  appendix  of  the  external  event,  which  in  certain
phases  of  the  latter  emerges  in  an  inexplicable  fashion.

In  opposition  to  such  an  external  conception  it  must  be
remembered  that  the  objective  material  event,  just  as  the
inner  events  of  consciousness,  are  only  two  parallel  and
polar-opposed  phenomenal  forms  of  one  existence  reveal-
ing itself  in  both,  which  is  always  more  transparent  to  the
view  from  the  subjective  than  the  objective  side,  because
the  former  view  is  at  any  rate  a  direct  one,  but  the  latter
only  mediated  by  the  subjective  appearance  of  the  objective
phenomenon.  Whether  there  is  an  objectively  real  physi-
cal process,  apart  from  a  consciousness  apprehending  it,  is
at  the  very  least  a  disputed  question,  which  is  even  answered
in  the  negative  by  the  idealistic  theory  of  cognition ;  but  even
if  the  Realism  which  affirms  it  is  in  the  right,  it  is  so  only
on  the  ground  of  inner  subjective  phenomenal  experience,
which  is  equally  indisputable  for  idealists  as  realists.  To
the  latter  consequently  appertains  once  for  all  the  higher
certainty ;  on  it  alone  can  the  realistic  belief  in  an  exter-
nal reality  he  supported,  and  every  inference  of  the  latter,
which  leads  it  to  a  negation  of  the  certainty  of  immediate
inner  experience  withdraws  from  under  itself  the  ground
on  which  it  stands.  Therefore  psychological  experience
must  always  remain  the  immutable  standard  by  which  the
supposed  external  experience  and  the  inferences  therefrom
have  to  be  verified.

The  being  underlying  the  appearance  begins  for  the
inner  psychological  series  of  events  just  where  con-
sciousness ceases,  and  the  unconscious-psychical  founda-
tion of  the  consciousness  of  the  sensation  is  itself  that
which, turned towards others like itself, constitutes


232  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

the  objective  phenomenon.  This  unconscious-psychical
foundation  of  the  reflex  process  in  the  ganglion- cell  is,
however,  definable  most  accurately  as  a  will,  which  is
subject  to  a  law  such  that  a  certain  motive  determines  it
to  a  certain  volition.  (It  remains  here  perfectly  obscure
whether  this  will  is  a  result  of  the  combination  merely  of
the  molecular  wills  of  the  cell,  or  whether  other  voli-
tional factors  enter  into  it  in  addition.)  In  no  case  is  it
justifiable  to  ignore  this  unconsciously. psychical  foun-
dation, and  to  affix  the  subjective  inwardness  as  accidental
appendix  of  certain  moments  of  the  external  physical
process,  tvhich  is  itself  only  objective  phenomenon.  Volition
is  a  psychical  act  not  merely  in  its  conscious  or  un-
conscious existence  (as  result  of  material  mechanics,  as
Materialism  supposes),  but  also  in  the  whole  history  of  its
origination  as  due  to  the  psychical  motive  and  the  law  of
its  psychical  reaction.

5.  The  Teleological  Character  of  the  Reflex  Function. —
The  most  certain  proof  of  the  inner  psychical  side  of  the
reflex  process  is  the  teleological  character  of  this  reaction,
which  is  expressed  in  the  thoroughgoing  purposiveness  of
the  physiological  (not  pathological)  reflexes. — As  a  matter
of  course,  this  purposiveness  cannot  take  place  with
a  scale  of  stimulation  unlimited  above  and  below.  As
our  ear  in  the  deepest  tones  does  not  hear  a  tone,  but  a
droning  noise,  in  the  highest  is  aware  no  longer  of  a
tone,  but  of  an  acute  pain,  as  our  eye  does  not  distin-
guish objects  with  a  very  feeble  illumination,  and  is
dazzled  and  destroyed  by  a  brightness  all  too  bright,
without  the  adaptation  of  these  organs  being  thereby
defective,  the  purposive  reflexes  can  also  be  looked  for
only  within  certain  finite  limits  of  the  scale  of  stimula-
tion, but  these  limits  will  themselves  again  be  ideologically
determined.  Should  the  centres  react  on  all  too  feeble
stimuli,  they  would,  as  a  morbid  centre  actually  does,
squander their store of force by reason of the weak


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  233

stimuli  ceaselessly  playing  around  them,  instead  of
sparing  it  for  the  uses  where  its  expenditure  is  of  value
for  the  life  of  the  organism.  On  the  other  hand,  should
the  centres  be  constituted  so  solidly  and  firmly  that  even
the  most  violent  attacks  could  not  disorganise  them,
they  would  possess  a  constitution,  which  would  make
them  less  suited  to  their  more  delicate  offices,  without
ever  satisfying  the  intrinsically  absurd  demand  of  an
absolute  indestructibility.  The  fact  that  abnormally  strong
stimuli  produce  convulsions  in  the  centres  and  act  in
a  disorganising  fashion  is  therefore  just  as  little  as  the
other  fact,  that  the  suitable  reaction  only  begins  with  a
certain  intensity  of  stimulation,  calculated  to  render
doubtful  this  teleolo<ncal  character  of  the  reflexes,  but
rather  only  serves  to  set  it  in  the  true  light.

Further,  it  is  to  be  noticed,  as  we  said  above,  that  with
increasing  strength  of  the  stimulus  ever  more  and  higher
centres  are  drawn  into  action ;  hence  it  results  that  the
character  of  the  reaction  must  change  with  the  intensity
of  the  stimulus.  But  even  this  does  not  tell  against,  but
for  the  purposiveness  of  the  reflexes  ;  for  it  is  precisely
for  the  good  of  the  organism  that  it  does  not  respond  to
weak  stimuli  merely  with  toeaker,  but  also  with  other  motor
reactions,  than  to  strong  stimuli,  which  act  at  the  same
point.  These  purposive  differences,  now,  are  reached  by
the  threshold  of  stimulation  being  different  for  the  reflex
actions  of  the  different  centres.  With  the  weakest  stimu-
lus only  the  centre  in  which  the  particular  sensory  nerve
immediately  terminates  solicits  to  reflexion,  and  the  conse-
quence is  a  simple  contraction,  which,  e.g.,  suffices  to  drive
away  a  Ay  from  the  hide  of  an  ox,  or  to  push  aside  the
oppressive  fold  of  a  man's  dress,  or  to  change  the  uncom-
fortable position  of  a  leg  during  sleep.

Purposeless,  therefore,  the  reflexes  cannot  be  called  even
with  the  weakest  stimuli  above  the  threshold  (as  by
Wundt,  p.  823)  ;  only  the  motor  sphere  of  innervation  for
the  centre,  which  alone  reacts  on  the  weakest  stimuli,  is


234  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

a  confined  one,  and  therefore  also  the  change  of  the  ex-
ternal circumstances  to  be  effected  by  it  very  narrowly
limited.  As  more  and  higher  centres  are  reached  by  the
propagated  stimulus,  this  motor  sphere  of  innervation  of
all  the  centres  sharing  in  the  reflexion  extends,  and  there-
with the  possibility  of  combined  muscular  movements  to
change  the  external  situation  announced  by  the  stimu-
lus. To  the  sphere  of  motor  innervation  governed  by  a
central  spot  must  the  impulses  of  innervation  proceeding
from  it  of  course  correspond,  if  they  are  not  inadequate
from  the  very  first,  and  therefore  to  be  called  unsuitable,
and  therefore,  in  fact,  for  a  single  ganglionic  cell  that
reflex  action  which  is  teleologically  demanded  is  a  quite
other  one  than  for  a  larger  group  of  ganglionic  cells  acting
in  concert,  and  for  a  cell  in  the  lower  part  of  the  spinal
cord  quite  other  than  for  one  in  the  upper,  and  for  this
again  another  than  for  one  in  the  medulla  oblongata.
The  reaction  can  only  be  called  purposive  at  any  point
when  it  has  regard  to  the  maximum  of  what  is  attainable
from  this  point.  This  is  not  sufficiently  estimated  by
Wundt,  whilst  he  cannot  of  course  avoid  the  acknowledg-
ment of  the  too  evident  purposiveness  in  the  case  of  mean
intensities  of  stimulation.

"  A  decapitated  frog  moves  its  leg  against  the  pincers
with  which  it  is  irritated,  or  it  wipes  away  with  its  foot
the  drop  of  acid  applied  to  its  skin.  It  sometimes  tries
to  withdraw  from  a  mechanical  or  electrical  irritation  by
a  leap.  When  brought  into  an  unusual  position,  e.g.,
placed  on  its  back,  it  perhaps  returns  to  its  previous  pos-
ture. Here,  then,  the  stimulus  does  not  introduce  merely
a  movement  in  general,  which  spreads  from  the  irritated
part  with  increasing  intensity  of  the  stimulus  and  growing
irritability,  but  the  movement  is  adapted  to  the  external
impression.  In  the  one  case  it  is  a  movement  of  defence ;
in  a  second  it  aims  at  getting  rid  of  the  stimulus;  in  a
third  at  removal  of  the  body  from  the  sphere  of  the  irrita-
tion; in  a  fourth,  finally,  at  restoration  of  the  previous


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 235

posture.  Still  more  clearly  does  this  purposive  adaptation
to  the  stimulus  stand  out  in  the  experiments  conducted
by  Piluger  and  Auerbach,  in  which  the  ordinary  condi-
tions of  movement  are  somewhat  changed.  A  frog,  for
example,  whose  leg  has  been  cut  off  on  the  side  on  which
it  is  irritated  by  acid,  first  makes  some  fruitless  attempts
with  the  amputated  stump,  then,  however,  pretty  regu-
larly chooses  the  other  leg,  which  is  wont  to  remain  at
rest  when  the  animal  is  unmutilated.1  If  the  decapitated
frog  be  fastened  by  its  back,  and  the  inner  side  of  one  of
its  thighs  be  sprinkled  with  acid,  it  tries  to  get  rid  of  the
latter  by  rubbing  the  two  thighs  against  one  another ;  but
if  now  the  moved  thigh  be  separated  far  from  the  other,
after  a  few  vain  attempts  it  suddenly  stretches  this  one
out  and  pretty  accurately  reaches  the  point  which  was
irritated.2  Lastly,  if  one  breaks  the  upper  thighs  of  de-
capitated frogs,  and  cauterises,  whilst  they  are  stretched
on  their  bellies,  the  region  of  the  anus,  in  spite  of  the
disturbing  nature  of  the  treatment,  they  correctly  touch
the  cauterised  spot  with  the  feet  of  the  broken  limbs.
These  observations,  ivhich  may  be  varied  in  diverse  ways,
show  that  the  animal  entirely  deprived  of  its  brain  can
adapt  its  movements  to  the  changed  condition  in  a  way
which,  if  consciousness  and  will  were  concerned,  would
manifestly  presuppose  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  position
of  the  whole  body  and  of  its  several  parts  "  (p.  824).

That  Wundt,  with  the  latter  inference,  so  far  as  it  relates
to  a  conscious  knowledge  of  one's  own  body,  overshoots
the  mark  lie  himself  allows  in  the  observation  that  even
man,  with  his  very  clear  consciousness,  and  though  perfectly
master  of  his  will,  does  not  j)ossess  the  same ;  whence  he
should  conversely  have  concluded  that  in  those  actions  of
the  spinal  cord  also  consciousness  and  will  may  be  present
without  the  need  of  a  conscious  knowledge  of  the  relative
position  of  the  parts  of  the  body. Had  he  not  omitted  this

! Pfliiyr,  "Die  sensori.schen  Functionen  des  Riickenmarks,"  p.  125.
-  Auerbach  in  (Junxbar'js  "  Zeitschrift  f.  klin.  Med.,"  iv.  p.  487.


236  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

conclusion  he  would  also  have  found  no  reason  in  the
mechanical  conception  of  the  reflex  processes  for  doubting
the  existence  of  consciousness  and  will  in  the  same,  since
indeed  the  same  mechanical  conception  in  the  case  of  the
functions  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres  does  not  seem  to
give  rise  in  him  to  any  doubt.

He  says :  "  It  is  certainly  admitted  that  the  self-regu-
lations, which  must  be  presupposed  in  order  to  explain
the  manifold  modifications  of  animal  movements  without
consciousness,  are  partly  of  an  extraordinarily  complicated
nature  ;  but  if  one  once  admits  the  principle  of  mechanism,
where  is  the  limit  to  the  animal  machine?"  (p.  822).  How-
ever, Wundt  would  have  to  apply  the  same  remark  also
to  the  mechanics  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  thus  by  his
argumentation  would  arrive  at  the  denial  of  conscious-
ness and  will  altogether.  If  the  argument  fails  in  this
latter  case,  it  has  no  weight  at  all — an  inevitable  conse-
quence of  its  dependence  on  the  opposition  of  mechanism
and  will,  already  declared  by  him  himself  to  befaidty. —
The  Cartesian  doctrine  that  animals  are  walking  automata,
which  merely  ape  us  with  the  semblance  of  a  psychical
life,  is  looked  upon  to-day  by  every  feeling  man  as  an
almost  revolting  error.  How  long  will  it  still  last  before
our  modern  physiologists  finally  free  themselves  from  the
not  smaller  error  in  principle,  that  the  organic  manifesta-
tions of  life  of  the  lower  central  organs  of  the  nervous
system  are  mere  mechanical  contrivances  without  any
spark  of  inner  life  ?

It  is  precisely  physiological  psychology  which  must  feel
itself  compelled  to  conclude  in  a  contrary  sense  and  to
say :  "  If  the  whole  life  of  the  central  organs  when  objec-
tively regarded  consists  in  molecular  mechanics,  and  yet
in  our  consciousness  a  purposive  thinking  and  willing
corresponds  to  this  mechanics,  this  purposiveness  which
makes  its  appearance  in  the  cerebrum  also  in  the  form  of
consciousness  must  already  inhere  from  the  first  in  all  the
functioning  of ganglion-cells,  although  it  be  not  every-


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  237

■where  conscious  as  such,  for  in  the  last  resort  nothing  can
emerge  but  that  for  which  a  foundation  has  already  been
laid  in  the  lower  phases  of  development."  It  is  just  the
materialistically  inclined  physiologist,  who  looks  upon
conscious  thought  and  volition  as  a  merely  passive  re-
flex of  the  external  order,  as  a  transitory  accidental
appendix  in  certain  phases  of  the  molecular  mechanics  of
nerve,  who  is  entirely  precluded  from  ascribing  inde-
pendent activity  to  consciousness,  and  consequently  has
no  choice  at  all  but  to  explain  the  undeniable  purposive-
ness  which  appears  in  conscious  thought  and  volition  as  a
purposiveness  of  molecular  nerve-mechanics,  i.e.,  it  is
precisely  Materialism  which  cannot  avoid  recognising  pur-
posiveness in  the  function  of  the  ganglion-cell,  if  it  will
not  cut  itself  off  from  every  explanation  of  purposiveness
in  consciousness,  in  its  own  reflections  and  resolutions.

Actual  purposiveness  Materialism  can  of  course  only
acknowledge  with  the  help  of  Darwinism,  which  repre-
sents the  purposive  molecular  dispositions  as  arising  in
the  ganglion-cells  by  natural  selection.  If  this  attempted
explanation  proves  generally  insufficient1  without  the
foundation  of  metaphysical  teleological  principles,  it  par-
ticularly does  so  in  this  special  case  ;  for  it  is  not  exactly
clear  how,  beside  so  many  other  far  more  important  indivi-
dual variations,  an  altogether  trilling  more  or  less  of  reflex
dispositions  in  the  grey  matter  of  the  spinal  cord  can
be  decisive  for  the  competitive  capacity  of  an  animal.
Lamarck's  principle  of  gradual  perfection  by  exercise  avails
here  just  as  little  ;  for  even  if  we  conceive  the  purposive
modifications  of  function  which  are  to  be  established  by
exercise  as  proceeding  from  the  spinal  cord  or  higher
centres,2  yet  pasfdee  consciousness  cannot  explain  the  jinr-

1 Comp.  my  memoir :"  Truth  and  likened to the  performances of a

Krror  in  Darwinism  : A  Critical  Kx-  man who  is  prevented  by  his  servi-

position of  the Theory  of Organic  tuile  to  a  strict  master  from  working

Development." Berlin,  C.  Duncker,  out his  many-sided  tendencies,  and

1S75.  is  obliged  to  constantly  devote  hiin-

-  The functions of the spinal  self to  a  well-defined and limited

curd  in  the  higher  animals  may  be  sphere  of  labour. The  spinal  cord  of


23S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

posiveness  of  these  modifications,  because  the  purposive-
ness  of  its  own  psychical  associations  is,  according  to  the
materialistic  view,  only  to  be  itself  explained  by  the  pur-
posiveness  of  molecular  mechanics.  Wherefore  Wundt  is
also  entirely  in  the  right  when  he  warns  us  to  hold  fast
to  this,  that  the  assumption  of  a  spinal  consciousness  and
will  does  not  in  any  way  contribute  to  the  clearing  up  of
the  problem  of  purposive  actions  (p.  829);  only  he  ought  in
consistency  to  go  further,  and  admit  that  a  higher  degree
of  consciousness  can  just  as  little  contribute  thereto  as  a
lower  one ;  that  a  brain- consciousness  is  for  the  explanation
of  design  in  bodily  movements  just  as  much  a  fifth  wheel
in  the  waggon  as  a  spinal  consciousness;  that  the  brain
consciousness  can  least  of  all  serve  to  explain  the  pur-
posiveness  of  the  spinal  reflexes,  and  that  therefore  the
principle  of  Lamarck  also,  so  long  as  merely  conscious
consideration  is  regarded  as  cause  of  the  purposive  modifi-
cation of  function,  moves  in  a  circle.1

One  only  escapes  this  fallacious  revolution  in  a  circle  by
assuming  that  those  purposive  modifications  of  function,
which  come  about  with  frequent  repetition  by  the  fixing
of  molecular  tendencies  and  diminished  resistance,  proceed
from  an  unconscious  ideological  principle,  whose  efficacy  in

the  higher  animals  is,  as  it  were,  sim-  characteristic  of  English  science  for

plified  by  its  constant  necessitation  the  writer  to  resist  the  temptation  of

to  hodman's  services  for  the  behoof  transcribing  it: — "If  it  be  said  that

of  the brain  ;  but  the  inference  is  the  gradual  building  up  by  education

illogical  that  it  has  lost  conscious-  of this embodied design into the

ness  and  will (which  it  manifestly  constitution  of  the  nervous  centres

possesses  in  the  lower  animals),  since  is  itself  evidence  of  design,  then  we

indeed in the sphere of activity  can  only  answer  that  such  a  proposi-

reserved  to it it displays distinct  tion  is  merely  a  statement  in  other

intelligence,  and  in  abnormal  patho-  words  of  the  fact  that  things  are  as

logical cases  is  wont  to  take  part  they  are"  {i.e.,  are  here  constituted

also in the vicarious execution of  and  operate  ideologically),  "and  add

more  independent  tasks.  the  expression  of  a  conviction  that

1  Maudsley, who, from  his  mate-  science  cannot  enter  into  the  coun-

rialistic  point  of  view,  keenly  feels  cils of creation" (p. 156). One

the  insolubility  of  the  unavoidable  wonders how  an English  scientist

teleological  problem,  gets  rid  of  the  has  courage  to  go  on  investigating,

difficulty  in  genuine  English  fashion  Even a Maudsley is still green

by appealing to the unsearchable  wood !
divine counsels. The locus is too


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 239

this  perfecting  of  the  nerve-centres  is  only  a  special  case
of  its  general  teleological  efficiency  as  organising  principle.
As  the  external  mechanics  of  the  material  processes  and
the  inner  mechanics  of  conscious  ideas  and  desires  are
co-ordinate  phenomena  of  one  and  the  same  metaphysical
substance,  so  is  also  the  regularity  of  this  outer  and  inner
mechanic  (not  the  parallelism  of  a  pre-established  har-
mony, but)  a  coherent  efflux  from  the  indivisible  essence
of  this  metaphysical  substance.  Even  at  this  point  of
view  there  remains  the  passivity  of  consciousness,  but  the
latter  now  no  longer  appears  as  an  attribute  of  matter,
but  of  an  immaterial  substance,  whose  other  attribute  is
the  manifestation  of  material  energy ;  thus  the  psychical
is  not  here  confined  to  the  sphere  of  consciousness,  but
reaches  deeper  than  this,  namely,  into  the  metaphysical
Ens  itself.  Then  also  conscious  design  in  thinking  and
resolving  is  no  longer  regarded  as  a  passive  reflection
from  the  sphere  of  purposive  molecular  mechanics,  but  it
is  like  this,  an  immediate  manifestation  of  the  teleological
nature  of  the  metaphysical  substance  itself  (the  uncon-
scious spirit) ;  what  is  there  dead  externality,  whose  spi-
ritual stamp  is  first  discovered  by  a  thinking  mind,  is
here  immediate  perception  of  the  inmost  nature  of  the
spirit  itself  in  itself.

Without  comprehending  the  parallelism  of  the  two
problems,  both  remain  insoluble,  i.e.,  both  the  teleological
character  of  the  external  mechanisms  and  their  origin,  and
also  the  conscious  purposive  activity  of  the  human  mind
must  in  their  isolation  from  one  another  appear  as  trans-
cendent questions,  to  penetrate  into  which  is  a  hopeless
undertaking.  On  the  other  hand,  from  the  moment  when
inner  and  outer  are  perceived  to  be  two-sided  phenomena
of  One  Being,  ami  the  sameness  of  the  teleological  problem
in  loth  forms  of  the  phenomenon  is  comprehended,  the
single  reason  for  tile  teleological  character  both  of  the
external  material  mechanics  and  of  the  conscious  mental
function  must  be  sought  in  one  and  the  same  constitution


240  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

of  the  metaphysical  substance,  of  which  both  sides  of  the
phenomena  are  only  accidents,  and  it  is  now  the  purpo-
sive character  immediately  known  to  us  of  our  own  mind
which  affords  the  key  to  the  understanding  of  that  nature
of  the  metaphysical  substance  which  is  in  question,  to  wit,
causes  us  to  perceive  it  as  the  unconsciously  Logical,  which
must  be  ideologically  active  as  content  of  a  will  or  a  force.
Therefore  is  it  also  so  important  to  see  clearly  that  the
inner  psychical  aspect  of  the  process  intervening  between
stimulus  and  reaction  and  conscious  perception  appertain
to  all,  even  the  lowest  nerve-centres, — not  as  if  the  attri-
bution of  consciousness  to  the  same  could  contribute  any-
thing directly  to  the  explanation  of  the  purposiveness  of  the
functions  (which  I  have  never  asserted),  but  because  it  is
important  to  remain  always  aware  of  the  two-sidedness  of
the  phenomenon,  and  never  to  let  the  key  which  most
directly  opens  the  teleological  nature  of  the  metaphysical
substance  drop  from  our  hands.

How  the  higher  unity  of  causality  and  teleology  which
is  here  maintained  is  to  be  conceived  cannot  be  more
fully  entered  upon  in  this  place.1  I  will  here  only  remark
this  much,  that  the  time  is  approaching  with  giant
strides  when  our  natural  science  will  cease  to  speak  of
"  dead  matter."  Already  the  most  distinguished  natural
philosophers  recognise  the  interior,  psychical  side  of
atoms  ; 2  and  already  there  is  the  glimmering  of  an  appre-
hension that  the  key  to  the  nature  of  the  simplest  laws
of  the  mechanics  of  the  atom,  which  hitherto  has  been
considered  to  be  an  absolute  datum,  must  be  sought  in  this
psychical  aspect  of  the  atoms,  and  is  to  be  found  in  the
analogies  of  our  own  psyche.3


3


1  Conip. my writings  : "  Truth  3  Zollner  says  (pp.  326,  327):  "As

and  Error  in  Darwinism,"  sect.  vii.  one sees, by this assumption, all

("  Mechanism  and  Teleology  ");  and  local changes of matter, whether

J. H. v. Kirchmann's "Realistic  they take place in the inorganic

Theory  of  Cognition,"  Nos.  15-22.  or organic  bodies of nature, are

-  Comp.  among  others,  A.  Zollner,  subject to the following law,

"  TJeber die  Natur  der  Kometen  "  which  was  already  substantially  ex-

(Leipzig,  1872),  pp.  320-327.  pressed above  (p. 217)  : "All  the


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  241

The  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy  signifies  in  meta-
physical reference  only  the  nnchangeableness  of  the  actual
world- will  on  the  side  of  its  intensity ;  this  law  is,  how-
ever, purely  formal,  and  only  teaches  us  :  if  this  quantum
of  mechanical  energy  is  converted  into  another  form,  e.g.,
into  heat,  then  it  will  furnish  such  and  such  a  quantum  of
heat. But  whether  this  mechanical  energy  is  in  the  given
case  converted  into  heat  or  any  other  form,  or  whether  it
is  transformed  into  tension by  removal  from  its centre,
or  whether  it  is  for  the nonce  not  converted  at  all,  on
these points the abstract  formal  law  of  the conserva-
tion of energy  says nothing. On  the  decision  of  these
questions  in  every  single  instance  depends,  however,  the
whole  content  of  the  world-jjroccss ;  therefore  all  that  deter-
mines the content  of  the cosmic  process,  i.e.,  the  whole
sphere  of  the  logical  Idea,  is  not  affected  by  the  law  of  the
conservation  of  energy. Accordingly  the  law  of  the  con-
servation of  energy  only  proves  to  be  the  abstract  formal
framework,  within  which  the  logical  necessity  of  the  ma-
terial content  is  manifested,  and  the  qualitative  determi-
nation of  tilings,  by  means  of  causality  and  teleology  ob-
tains scope  for  display. The  law  of  the  immutability  of
the  absolute  quantum  of  force  accordingly  requires  to  be
supplemented  by  other  natural  laws  which  determine  the
<:  How "  of  the force at every point  of the  unchange-
able total;  and  only  in  these  latter  laws  can,  nay,  must
the  teleological  character  of  the  metaphysical  substance
of the atoms  attain expression  : their striving after
satisfaction of their special  will and their instinctive
warding  off  of  pain  (which  springs  from  repression  of  this
will). As,  metaphysically  speaking,  the  cosmic  process  is
compounded of Will and unconscious-logical Idi'A, of
which  two  moments  the former  determines  the  "  That,"


activities  of natural existences  are  confined sphere  of  phenomena  look
determined by the sensations of  as if  they  followed the unconscious
pleasure  and  pain; and  arc indeed  purpose  of  reducing  the  total  of  pain-
such that  the movements  within  a  ful  sensations  to  a  Minimum."
VOL. III.  Q


242  .  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

the  latter  the  "  What  and  How  "  at  every  instant  of  the
process :  so,  scientifically  speaking,  the  world-process  is
compounded  of  the  unchangeable  cosmic  quantum  of
energy  and  of  the  laws  determining  the  conversion  of
energy  in  the  particular  cases,  and  this  exact  parallel-
ism of  the  two  ways  of  regarding  the  cosmic  process
may  pass  for  a  new  proof  that  the  metaphysical  distinc-
tion of  the  moments  Will  and  Idea  should  be  called
anything  but  arbitrary,  but  is  deeply  founded  in  the
essence  of  things,  and  is  precisely  adapted  to  enlighten
natural  science  on  the  deeper  significance  of  its  first
principles.

There  is  a  further  question  whether  the  teleological
laws  of  Xature  that  materially  determine  the  conversion
of  force  in  respect  to  the  mechanics  of  the  atom  are  also
sufficient  to  explain  the  uniform  teleological  behaviour
of  the  ganglion-cell,  or  whether  with  this  union  of  atoms
and  molecules  into  an  organic-psychical  individual  of  a
higher  order  new  laws  must  be  supposed  to  come  into
play,  which  point  to  a  specific  difference  between  the
unconscious  individual  aim  of  a  ganglion-cell  and  the  com-
bined unconscious  ends  of  the  atoms  and  molecules  that
constitute  it.  From  such  a  varying  unconscious  purpose,
coincident  with  a  variously  constituted  individual  wTill  or
individual  character,  varying  laws  of  motivation  would
then  at  once  follow,  inasmuch  as  a  differently  constituted
unconscious  individual  will  is  compelled  to  feel  pain  and
pleasure  by  different  external  circumstances.  —  An  im-
perfect example  may  make  this  clear.  In  chemistry,  the
law  holds  good  that  if  several  substances  are  brought
together  in  a  condition  capable  of  reaction,  the  molecular
displacements  are  such  that  the  algebraic  sum  of  the
positive  and  negative  amounts  of  heat  thereby  developed
to  become  a  maximum.  To  this  law  the  actions  in  the
cell  of  the  spinal  cord  poisoned  with  strychnine  or  in
the  cerebral  cell  of  the  maniac  seems  to  correspond,
where  the  chemical processes  tend  to  the  squandering


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  243

of  the  stored-up  potential  energy.  The  influences  in
the  healthy  ganglionic  cell,  on  the  other  hand,  running
counter  to  this  conversion,  which  we  have  called  the
inhibitory  potencies,  and  in  which  the  specific  fitness  of  the
function  of  the  ganglia  is  first  manifested,  seem  to  point
to  a  new  law  of  a  higher  order  limiting  the  play  of  the
chemical  molecular  laws.  However,  this  is  to  be  con-
sidered as  merely  an  illustrative  example,  and  must  not
be  taken  for  more  than  it  is  worth.

If  now  it  should  turn  out  that  the  teleological-uniform
mechanics  of  the  ganglion-cell  rests  on  natural  laws
which  do  not  result  from  the  mere  combination  of  the
mechanical  laws  of  the  atom,  the  atoms  also  could  no
longer  be  looked  upon  as  the  substrata  of  such  laws  of  a
higher  order,  because  one  and  the  same  individual  sub-
ject cannot  be  substrate  of  opposite  mutually  limiting
natural  laws.  A  metaphysical  substratum  must  then  be
introduced  for  the  additional  laws  of  a  higher  order,
which,  together  with  the  material  atoms  composing  the
cell,  would  in  combination  constitute  the  entire  individual
of  this  ganglion-cell.

From  the  side  on  which  we  have  entered  upon  this
investigation,  it  might  perhaps  appear  premature  to
attempt  to  give  a  definitive  decision  on  this  question.
But  as  we  have  already  seen  that  this  ultimate  substra-
tum would  coincide  with  the  organising  principle  which
directs  the  teleological  perfecting  of  the  ganglion-cell  as
an  integral  element  of  the  perfection  of  the  collective
organic  type,  and  as  this  organising  principle,  as  meta-
physical support  of  the  universal  organic  law  of  de-
velopment, must  necessarily  be  conceived  as  something
superadded  to  the  material  atoms,  we  shall  from  this
side  likewise  venture  to  decide  our  foregoing  alternative
in  favour  of  an  additional  metaphysical  agent,  which
connects  the  manifold  of  the  outer  and  inner  atomic
functions  in  the  ganglion  cell  into  an  external-teleo-
logical as  well  as  into  au  internal-psychical  unity,  and


244  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

thus  exalts  the  cell  into  an  internally  as  well  as  externally
indivisible  organic-psychical  individual.

To  be  sure,  whoever  either  denies  the  teleological  char-
acter of  molecular  mechanics  in  the  ganglion-cell  (as  the
older  Materialism),  or  ignores  it  as  an  intrinsically  in-
soluble transcendent  problem  having  no  point  of  con-
tact with  science  (as  Maudsley),  or,  lastly,  admits  it
indeed  as  fact,  but  thinks  to  explain  it  from  blindly
necessary  and  accidental  causes  (as  Darwinism  and
Wundt),  such  an  one  will  only  act  consistently  when
he  declines  at  the  outset  every  metaphysical  or  un-
conscious-psychical principle  in  addition  to  the  atoms,
and  conceives  the  conscious  as  well  as  the  unconscious
psychical  phenomena  in  the  ganglion-cell  as  simply
phenomenal  combinations  of  the  psychical  functions  of
the  atoms  concerned.1  He,  on  the  other  hand,  who  regards
the  teleology  of  material  mechanics  as  of  consciousness  as
parallel  emanations  of  the  unconsciously  logical  and  teleo-
logical nature  of  the  metaphysical  substance  (underlying
both  aspects  of  the  phenomenon),  will  (even  apart  from
the  necessity  of  an  organising  principle  as  supporter  of
the  law  of  organic  development)  rather  incline  to  the
other  side  of  the  alternative,  and  expect  that  the  (as
compared  with  the  laws  of  the  mechanics  of  the  atom)
higher  forms  of  manifestation  of  teleology  which  come  to
light  in  the  ganglion-cell,  and  the  internal  and  external
unity  which  exalts  the  ganglion-cell  to  the  rank  of
individuality,  spring  from  superadded  functions  of  the
metaphysical  substance,  which  subordinate  the  isolated
atomic  functions  to  the  single  unconscious  individual  pur-
pose of  a  higher  order.

A  play  of  innumerable  atoms,  acknowledging  no  supe-
rior but  the  One  substance  to  whom  they  owe  their  being,
must be more congenial to the democratic, levelling,

1  Comp. the anonymous work, of  Descent" (Berlin, 1S72), chaps.
"The  Unconscious  from  the  Stand- iv.  and  v.
point  of  Physiology  and  the  Theory


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. ^45

disorganising  tendency  of  the  Romance  nations,  which
however  cannot  dispense  with  the  sway  of  one  all-
powerful  Caesar  if  universal  anarchy  is  not  to  prevail.
An  organic  construction  of  the  cosmos,  in  which  the
atomic  forces  or  individuals  of  the  first  order  only  play
the  part  of  the  simplest  and  lowest  building-stones,  and
in  each  individual  of  a  higher  order  are  held  together
by  an  inner  tie  for  a  concrete  purpose,  in  order  again  on
their  part  to  serve  as  building  material  for  still  higher
individual  aims,  such  a  gradual  construction  will  be  more
agreeable  to  the  Germanic  mind  which  knows  that  wher-
ever a  living  architectonic  work  of  art  is  to  be  brought
to  pass,  levelling  must  be  foregone,  and  submission  be
willingly  given  to  the  higher  purpose.

6.  The  Four  Chief  Grades  of  Nerve-Centres. — "In  deal-
ing with  the  function  of  the  nervous  system  in  man,  it
is,  then,  most  necessary  to  distinguish  different  nervous
centres : —

'•'  1.  The  primary  centres,  or  ideational  centres,  consti-
tuted by  the  grey  matter  of  the  convolutions  of  the
hemispheres. They  are  superordinate  to

"  2.  The  secondary  nervous  centres,  or  sensory  centres,
constituted  by  the  collections  of  grey  matter  that  lie
between  the  decussation  of  the  pyramids  and  the  floors
of  the  Lateral  ventricles.  These  are  subordinate  to  the
primary  and  superordinate  to

"  3.  The  tertiary  nervous  centres,  or  centres  of  reflex
action,  constituted  mainly  by  the  "rev  matter  of  the
spinal  cord;  which  again  are  superordinate  to

"4.  The  organic  nervous  centres,  as  we  might  call  them.
belonging  to  the  sympathetic  system.  They  consist  of  a
set  of  ganglionic  bodies  distributed  mainly  over  the
viscera,  and  connected  with  one  another  and  with  the
spinal  centres  by  internuntiant  cords.

"  Hach  distinct  centre  is  subordinated  to  the  centre
immediately above  it,  but is  at the  same  time  capable


246  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  determining  and  maintaining  certain  movements  of  its
own  without  the  intervention  of  its  supreme  centre.
Tor  example,  the  rhythmical  contractions  of  the  heart
are  kept  up  by  the  ganglia  distributed  through  its  sub-
stance, and  accordingly  continue  for  a  time  after  the
removal  of  the  organ  from  the  body.  But  the?e  local
powers  are  not  left  uncontrolled:  terminal  branches  of
the  vagus  nerve,  or  rather  branches  of  a  motor  nerve
called  the  spinal  accessory,  which  go  with  the  vagus  to
the  heart,  are  connected  in  some  way  with  the  ganglia  ;
and  when  the  vagus  is  irritated  the  ganglia  are  controlled
and  cease  to  act  upon  the  heart,  which  conies  to  a  stand-
still in  a  relaxed  condition.  The  organisation  of  the
entire  nervous  system  is  such  that  a  due  independent
local  action  is  compatible  with  the  proper  control  of  a
superior  central  authority.  The  ganglionic  cells  of  the
sympathetic  co-ordinate  the  energy  of  the  separate
elements  of  the  tissue  in  which  they  are  placed,  and
thus  represent  the  simplest  form  of  a  principle  of  indi-
viduation. Through  the  cells  of  the  spinal  centre  the
functions  of  the  different  organic  centres  are  so  co-ordi-
nated as  to  have  their  subordinate  but  essential  place  in
the  movements  of  animal  life ;  and  herein  is  witnessed  a
further  and  higher  individuation.  The  spinal  centres  are
similarly  controlled  by  the  sensory  centres ;  and  these,  in
their  turn,  are  subordinate  to  the  controlling  action  of  the
cerebral  hemispheres,  and  especially  to  the  action  which,
revealing  itself  in  consciousness  as  will,  represents  the
most  complete  co-ordination  of  the  functions  of  the  hemi-
spheres, and  is  the  highest  display  of  the  principle  of
individuation"  (Maudsley,  p.  1 09-110).

Two  remarks  may  be  made  on  the  above  division  :
in  the  first  place,  that  a  preferable  succession  would  be
an  inverse  one,  and  the  denomination  "primary  centres"
would  better  suit  the  "  organic  "  ganglia ;  and,  secondly,
that  the  designation  of  spinal  centres  as  reflex  centres  is
misleading,  since  even  the  "  organic  "  centres  and  sensory


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  247

and  ideational  centres  are  only  reflectorially  active,  as
already  discussed.  Moreover,  it  must  be  held  as  settled  that
the  differences  between  the  ganglion-cells  of  the  different
centre  are  only  gradational,  which  have  only  been  formed
by  differentiation  from  the  common  structure  of  the  gang-
lion-cell in  the  succession  of  animal  life,  and  that  this  uni-
versal foundation  of  each  single  ganglion-cell — in  spite  of
any  partial  elaboration  in  a  particular  direction — has  been
preserved.  There  are  in  the  ganglion-cells,  just  as  in  the
nerve-fibres,  specific  energies  in  the  sense  of  impregnated
dispositions  to  definite  functions ;  but  here,  as  there,  this
specification  is  only  relative,  not  absolute,  and  everywhere
it  works  in  the  frames  previously  indicated  by  the  general
nature  of  the  ganglion-cell:  stimulus  and  reaction,  percep-
tion and  will.

Corresponding  to  the  relativity  of  the  specific  energies
of  the  ganglion-cells,  the  transition  from  the  centres  of
one  kind  to  those  of  another  is  also  rather  gradual  than
abrupt.  If  the  ganglia  of  an  excised  frog's  heart  incite
the  latter  to  beat  for  hours,  and  react  on  a  stimulus  with
a  rhythmical  contraction,  the  different  position  in  the
body  more  than  the  specific  reflex  energy  serves  to  dif-
ferentiate these  ganglia  from  the  lower  centres  of  the
spinal  cord.  The  medulla  oblongata,  forms  a  kind  of
transition  between  the  spinal  cord  and  the  sensory  gan-
glia of  the  brain,  and,  so  far  as  its  historic  evolution  is
concerned,  certainly  belongs  to  the  brain,  but  functionally
stands  far  closer  to  the  spinal  cord.  The  increasing
extent  of  the  sphere  of  motor  innervation  as  we  ascend
the  spinal  cord  is  especially  noticeable  in  the  medulla
oblongata.  The  latter  is  also,  moreover,  distinguished
from  the  other  reflexes  of  the  spinal  cord  by  a  more
ingenious  combination  of  numerous  movements  for  ob-
taining definite  effects,  "so  that  the  mode  of  combina-
tion is  often  brought  about  by  a  self-regulation  which  is
founded  in  the  reciprocal  relation  of  several  reflex  mechan-
isms"  (Wu'iidt,  p.  178). In  the  spinal  cord  the  ganglion


248  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

cells  at  the  different  levels  are  tolerably  uniformly  ordered
in  the  four  columns  of  the  grey  medulla'.  Only  in  the
medulla  oblongata  is  this  symmetrical  distribution  inter-
rupted, in  that  larger  groups  of  ganglion-cells  are  fused
into  compact  distinctly  isolated  nuclei,  which  are  united
with  one  another,  as  with  the  parts  above  and  below,  by
means  of  conducting  fibres.  Such  nuclei  then  serve  definite
groups  of  complicated  processes  of  movement,  that  partly,
like  the  regulation  of  the  heart-beat  and  inspiration,  are
persistent  rhythmical  functions  which  approximate  to  those
of  the  vegetative  ganglia  (e.g.,  movement  of  the  intestines,
tone  of  the  vessels).  By  the  union  of  two  or  several  reflex
centres  with  one  another  an  alternating  action  is  made
possible,  e.g.,  between  a  centre  of  inspiration  and  another
of  exspiration  (p.  181);  the  former  (like  most  of  the  so-
called  automatic  functions  of  lower  centres)  is  set  agoing
by  the  stimulus  of  insufficiently  aerated  blood,  the  latter
by  the  sensation  of  the  inflation  of  the  lungs  mediated  by
the  sensory  nerves  (p.  177).  Similarly  Wundt  assumes
special  centres  in  the  medulla  oblongata  for  the  accelera-
tion of  the  beating  of  the  heart  and  for  its  slowing  and
inhibition,  for  the  distension  of  the  vessels  and  for  their
contraction  (p.  185),  for  vomiting,  for  the  act  of  swallowing,
and,  lastly,  for  coughing  and  sneezing,  which  pass  over  into
the  mimic  reflexes  of  laughing,  crying,  sobbing,.  &c.  (pp.
176,  178).  In  the  latter,  reflexes  of  the  sensory  ganglia
already  co-operate  with  those  of  the  medulla  oblongata
to  produce  a  combined  indivisible  action.

Those  centres  which  Maudsley  comprehends  under  the
name  of  sensory  centres  (although  this  name  will  not
altogether  fit  the  cerebellum,  which  is  included  anions
them)  form  in  many  lower  animals,  in  which  the  Fore-
brain  (or  cerebrum)  essentially  acts  only  as  olfactory
ganglion,  the  highest  stage  of  development  of  their  cen-
tral nervous  system,  and  is  quite  sufficient  for  their  vital
purposes. These  animals  move  about  with  pretty  much


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  249

the  same  security  and  adjust  their  actions  with  the  same
appropriateness  to  the  sensibly  perceived  external  circum-
stances as  a  human  somnambulist  whose  cerebral  func-
tions are  completely  suspended  (M.,  p.  252).  "Trousseau
mentions  a  young  amateur  musician  subject  to  epileptic
vertigo  who  sometimes  had  a  fit  lasting  for  ten  or  fifteen
seconds  whilst  playing  the  violin.  Though  he  was  per-
fectly unconscious  of  everything  around  him,  and  neither
heard  nor  saw  those  whom  he  was  accompanying,  he  still
went  on  playing  in  time  during  the  attack  "  ( M.,  p.  15  1).

Similarly  is  it  with  the  capability  of  certain  idiots  to
master  certain  difficult  feats  of  skill  with  long-continued
training,  which  they  at  last  perform  with  astonishing
adroitness  (M.)  If  one  removes  from  a  rat  the  cerebral
hemispheres  along  with  the  corpora  striata  and  optic
thalami,  on  every  repetition  of  a  loud  and  abrupt  noise,
such  as  cats  are  wont  to  make,  it  makes  a  spring  to  escape
(XL)  Mammals  or  birds  from  which  all  the  parts  of
the  brain  lying  above  the  corpora  cpuadrigemina  are
removed  follow  the  movements  of  a  burning  taper  with
their  head,  thus  still  perceive  the  impression  of  light;
and  likewise  "  frogs  [under  operation],  which  are  con-
strained to  make  movements  of  escape  by  cutaneous
irritation,  avoid  an  obstacle  placed  before  them"  (W.,
p.  194).

All  this  proves  that,  besides  the  perception  of  sense-
impressions  through  the  consciousness  of  the  cerebral
hemispheres,  there  must  be  an  additional  perception
through  a  special  consciousness  of  the  sensory  ganglia  not
included  within  the  former,  which  Maudsley  expressly
acknowledges  and  very  decidedly  emphasises.  One
must  only  distinguish  between  a  perception  in  the  sphere
of  self-conscious  intelligence  and  one  in  the  sphere  of
(merely)  conscious  sense-activity  (SI.)  But  just  in  the
same  way  we  must  also  assume  a  will  in  the  sensori-
motor sphere,  which  for  the  rest  does  not  need  to  be  like
the  perception  of  the  sense-impression  serving  as  a  motive


250  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

to  a  conscious  one.  When  Maudsley  assumes  a  "  sensorial
madness  "  arising  through  disease  of  the  sensory  ganglia
(p.  248),  in  which  hallucinations  of  sense  or  morbid
reaction  lead  to  a  pathological  condition,  with  the  cere-
bral consciousness  either  suspended  or  persisting,  but  in-
capable of  resisting  the  sensori-motor  will,  the  action  of
the  ganglia  motived  by  sense-perception,  entering  into  con-
flict with  the  cerebral  will  and  emerging  victorious  from
this  struggle,  must  necessarily  be  itself  designated  will.1

We  arrive  at  the  same  result  when  we  compare  this
sensori-motor  sphere  in  man  and  the  higher  animals
with  the  psychical  life  of  those  animals  whose  nervous
system  has  not  yet  at  all  risen  beyond  the  stage  of  sensory
centres  :  as  little  as  we  can  deny  these  animals  a  will,  so
little  can  we  refuse  it  to  the  functions  of  the  human  sen-
sory ganglia.  The  same  holds  good  of  the  fitness  of  the
sensori-motor  reflexes.  In  those  animals  where  the  pres-
ence of  conscious  perception  and  will  is  beyond  dispute,
the  purposive  character  of  their  relations  to  the  external
world  is  too  evident  for  us  to  doubt  the  existence  of  an
intelligence  which  it  is  true  has  not  yet  reached  so  far  as
the  formation  of  abstract  ideas  or  even  to  self-conscious-
ness, but  yet  is  a  preliminary  step  to  this  cerebral  intelli-
gence of  the  higher  animals.

Here,  too,  the  parallelism  with  the  well-known  per-
formances of  the  sleep-walker,  indicative  in  part  of  highly
developed  intelligence,  forms  a  good  illustration.  In  both
there  occurs  an  adhesion  of  impressions,  i.e.,  a  memory ;
but  the  stage  of  reflection,  which  is  indispensable  for  a
recognition,  is  wanting  in  them,  i.e.,  a  conscious  recollection,
and  the  memory  therefore  manifests  itself  not  so  much  on
the  side  of  representation  as  on  that  of  will,  i.e.,  consists

1  In  such  a  case  one  may  often  logical  excesses,  thus  also  cannot  be
say  that  the  madman  was  perfectly  made  responsible  for  actions  corn-
conscious  of  the  difference  between  mitted  in  this  way.  The  legislation
good  and  evil;  that  however,  despite  of  different  states  would  then  need
of  it,  he  was  not  in  a  position  to  keep  a  rectification  in  respect  to  the  ques-
back  his  diseased  will  from  patho-  tion  of  accountability.


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 251

essentially  only  in  the  ease  of  the  connection  between
perception  and  voluntary  reaction.  This  memory  there-
fore furthers  the  elaboration  of  the  instinctive  facility
and  accuracy  with  which  the  most  frequent  and  most
important  vital  actions  are  performed  by  animals  and
man.  Even  in  somnambulists  who  periodically  lapse
into  their  spontaneously  somnambulistic  condition,  a  cer-
tain memory  is  unmistakable.  For  example,  they  con-
tinue tasks  which  were  left  unfinished  on  the  last  attack
at  the  right  point,  and  the  finished  work  shows  that  the
intellectual  bond  with  what  went  before  had  been  un-
broken. But  at  the  same  time,  of  course,  the  conscious-
ness of  the  cerebral  hemispheres  can  have  no  memory  of
that  which  the  intelligence  of  their  cerebral  ganglia
wrought  in  the  somnambulistic  state,  just  because  it
was  suppressed  during  that  activity,  and  could  conse-
quently receive  no  impression  for  revival.

In  the  psychical  functions  of  the  sensory  centres,  also,
just  as  in  those  of  the  centres  of  the  spinal  cord,  there  is
exhibited  the  interweaving  of  conscious  and  unconscious
psychical  activity.  I  need  only  mention  the  circumstance
that  most  of  the  animal  instincts  fall  into  the  department
of  sensori-motor  action,  e.g.,  all  building  instincts.  To
whom  would  not  occur  the  comparison  of  the  singing-bird,
which  monotonously  repeats  the  melodic-rhythmical  period
of  its  species,  with  the  epileptic  violin-player  wiio  plays
the  once-learned  piece  during  ids  attack  ?  Save  that
the  singing-bird  is  at  once  aware  of  and  enjoys  his  song
with  his  cerebral  consciousness,  which  was  not  possible
for  the  epileptic.

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  repeat  at  this  place  the
argumentation  of  the  preceding  section,  which  here  only
acquires  still  greater  force.  The  ganglionic  cells  of  the
.sensory  centres  also  act  reilectorially  and  mechanically,
not  therefore  less  purposively  however,  but  only  the
mere  so,  as  their  sphere  of  motor  innervation  and  their
inner  faculty  of  elaborating  perceptions  is  greater  than  in


252  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  case  of  the  spinal  cord.  In  the  sensory  centres,  like-
wise, the  psychical  subjectivity  goes  hand  in  hand  with
the  external  mechanism  of  the  molecular  motions,  and
their  consciousness  is  so  much  richer  and  clearer  as  the  im-
pressions conducted  from  the  higher  sense-nerves  are  more
numerous  and  precise  than  those  which  the  centres  of  the
spinal  cord  receive  from  the  general  nerves  of  the  body,
and  as  their  faculty  of  elaborating  perceptions  is  greater
than  that  of  the  latter.  This  higher  development  of  the
purposive  external  mechanics  and  of  the  intelligence  is,
however,  merely  the  two-sided  phenomenal  expression  of
a  higher  (unconscious)  purpose,  which  determines  the  in-
dividual life  of  the  organ  in  question.  Here,  as  there,  the
reaction  of  the  will  on  a  motive,  the  mental  elaboration  of
impressions  by  the  co-operation  of  many  cells,  and  the
purposive  modification  of  function,  by  whose  repetition
the  purposive  disposition  of  the  organ  is  perfected,  go
on  altogether  unconsciously.  These  three  highest  perform-
ances of  the  organic-psychical  individual,  which  are  funda-
mentally only  one  and  the  same  function  looked  at  from
different  sides,  make  up,  however,  the  inmost  core  of  the
individuality  of  the  organ.  It  might  be  called  the  actu-
ality of  its  individual  purpose,  which  is  the  same  thing  as
the  teleological  function  of  the  metaphysical  substance,
whose  accidents  or  modes  are  the  inner  psychical  and
external  material  phenomenon  of  the  individualised  organ.
It  would  be  a  great  error  to  try  to  see  in  this  prepon-
derating importance  of  the  unconscious  psychical  function  in
the  sensory  centres  any  difference  in  kind  from  the  func-
tions of  the  cerebrum.  What  is  added  in  the  cerebrum
is  in  essence  only  the  degree  of  the  elaboration  of  the
perceptions,  or,  to  speak  in  physiological  language,  the
path  within  the  organ  which  the  stimulus  traverses  from
its  first  entrance  till  the  discharge  into  motor  reaction.
While  this  stimulus  in  passing  from  one  cell  to  another
liberates  afresh  in  each  a  reflexion  (perception  and  reac-
tion), it  unfolds  into  a  successive  chain  of  conscious  ideas,


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 253

forming  the  discursive  reflexion  which  is  intercalated  be-
tween sense-perception  and  visible  reaction,  and  determines
the  nature  of  the  latter.  But  in  this  increase  of  the  absolute
number  of  conscious  moments,  the  proportion  of  this  num-
ber to  that  of  the  co-operating  unconscious  acts  is  by  no
means  increased  ;  for  every  progression  of  a  stimulus  from
one  cell  to  another  is  a  reflex  act,  which  is  per  se  uncon-
sciously performed ;  and  the  same  holds  good  of  the
reception  of  the  stimulus  by  the  cell  in  question  and  its
conversion  into  conscious  perception.  All  advance  in
discursive  reflection  is  unconscious,  and  it  is  as  it  were
only  the  footsteps  of  this  advance  which  attain  to  con-
sciousness. But  it  is  rarely  that  several  such  footsteps
stand  so  near  one  another  that  we  can  follow  the  indi-
vidual steps ;  for  the  most  part,  their  relation  to  one
another  points  to  more  or  fewer  great  leaps  of  unconscious
psychical  function,  in  which  the  links  of  the  logical  chain
are  only  implicitly  contained  between  the  conscious  ex-
tremes.

The  development  which  these  thoughts  have  received
above  in  Section  B.  has  been  so  frequently  misconstrued
from  the  scientific  side  as  speculative  mysticism,  that  it
is  a  peculiar  satisfaction  to  me  to  be  able  to  cite  in  confir-
mation the  opinion  which  the  English  empiricist  Maudsley
has  formed  through  his  own  medical  treatment  of  mental
disease  and  psychological  observation.  The  testimony  will
be  tin:  less  carped  at  by  naturalists,  as  Maudsley  himself
inclines  to  Materialism,  and  tries  to  go  as  far  as  he  can
with  a  materialistic  inteipretation  of  his  psychological
observations,  lie  certainly  does  not  everywhere  succeed,
even  in  his  own  opinion,  and  least  of  all  at  the  critical
points,  as  we  have  already  seen  in  one  instance.

The  existence  of  an  "unconscious  life  of  the  mind"
Maudsley  declares  to  be  established  beyond  a  doubt,  and
says  :  "  It  is  a  truth  which  cannot  be  too  distinctly  borne
in  mind,  thai  consciousness  is  not  co-extensive  with  mind"
(p.  25);  and  adds,  that  "  the  most  important  part  of  mental


254  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

action,  the  essential  process  on  which  thinking  depends,
is  unconscious  mental  activity "  (p.  34).  "  He  whose
brain  makes  him  conscious  that  he  has  a  brain  is  not  well,
but  ill;  and  thought  that  is  conscious  of  itself  is  not
natural  and  healthy  thought  "  (p.  41).  "An  active  con-
sciousness is  always  detrimental  to  the  best  and  most
successful  thought ;  the  thinker  who  is  actively  attentive
to  the  succession  of  his  ideas  is  thinking  to  little  purpose.
What  the  successful  thinker  observes  is  that  he  is  con-
scious of  the  words  which  he  is  uttering  or  writing,  while
the  thought,  unconsciously  elaborated  by  the  functional
action  of  the  brain,  flows  from  unpenetrated  depths  into
consciousness.  .  .  .  Reflection  is  then,  in  reality,  the  reflex
action  of  the  cells  in  their  relation  to  the  cerebral  ganglia ;
it  is  the  reaction  of  one  cell  to  a  stimulus  from  a  neigh-
bouring cell,  and  the  sequent  transference  of  its  energy  to
another  cell— the  reflection  of  it "  (p.  308).  "  The  brain  not
only  receives  impressions  unconsciously,1  registers  impres-
sions without  the  co-operation  of  consciousness,  elaborates
material  unconsciously,  calls  latent  residua  again  into
activity  without  consciousness,  but  it  responds  also  as  an
oroan  of  organic  life  to  the  internal  stimuli  which  it
receives  unconsciously  from  other  organs  of  the  body "
(p.  35).  "  Not  only  is  the  actual  process  of  the  association
of  our  ideas  independent  of  consciousness,  but  that  assimi-
lation or  blending  of  similar  ideas,  or  of  the  like  in  different
ideas,  by  which  general  ideas  are  formed,  is  in  no  way
under  the  control  or  cognisance  of  consciousness  "  (p.  30).
"  In  composition  the  writer's  consciousness  is  engaged
chiefly  with  his  pen  and  with  the  sentences  which  he  is
forming;  while  the  results  of  the  brain's  unconscious
working,  matured  by  an  insensible  gestation,  emerge  from

1  This  only  means  here  that  such  This  distinction  is  lacking  in  Mauds-
impressions  can  lie  below  the  thres-  ley,  because  he  does  not  firmly  hold
hold  of  the  collective  consciousness  that  a  stimulus  cannot  be  at  all  per-
of  the  cerebral  hemispheres;  if,  ceived  without  either  being  perceived
however,  they  are  to  do  something,  by  a  consciousness  or  producing  such
they  must  lie  above  the  threshold  a  one.
of  the  particular  cell-consciousness.


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  255

unknown  depths  into  consciousness,  and  are  by  its  help  em-
bodied in  appropriate  words  "(p.  30).  "When  the  individual
brain  is  a  well-constituted  one,  and  has  been  duly  cultivated,
the  results  of  its  latent  activity  rising  into  consciousness
suddenly  sometimes  seem  like  intuitions ;  they  are  strange
and  startling,  as  the  products  of  a  dream  ofttimes  are,  to
the  person  who  has  actually  produced  them"  (p.  32).
"  The  best  thoughts  of  an  author  are  always  the  unwilled
thoughts  which  surprise  himself ;  and  the  poet  under  the
inspiration  of  creative  activity  is,  so  far  as  consciousness
is  concerned,  being  dictated  to.  If  we  reflect,  we  shall
see  that  it  must  be  so ;  the  products  of  creative  activity,
in  so  far  as  they  transcend  the  hitherto  experienced,  are
unknown  to  the  creator  himself  before  they  come  forth,
and  cannot  therefore  be  the  result  of  a  definite  act  of  his
will ;  for  to  an  act  of  will  a  conception  of  the  result  is
necessary"  (p.  33).  "Therefore  it  comes  to  pass  at  times
that,  in  the  investigation  of  a  new  order  of  events  by  an
intellect  which  is  in  genial  sympathy  with  Nature,  the  law
of  them  explicitly  declares  itself  as  by  a  flash  of  intui-
tion after  comparatively  few  observations.  The  imagina-
tion successfully  anticipates  the  slow  results  of  patient
and  systematic  research,  flooding  the  darkness  with  the
light  of  a  true  interpretation,  and  thus  illuminating  the
obscure  relations  and  intricate  connections.  Therein  a
well-endowed  and  well-cultivated  mind  manifests  its  un-
conscious harmony  with  Nature.  The  brightest  Hashes  of
genius  come  unconsciously  and  without  effort;  growth  is
not  a  voluntary  act,  although  the  gathering  of  food  is"
(p-  53  0'  "  ^s  m  *-ne  child  there  is  no  consciousness  of  the
cijo,  so  in  the  highest  development  of  humanity,  as  repre-
sented by  these  our  greatest,  a  similar  unconsciousness  of
the  ego  seems  to  have  been  reached;  and  the  individual,
in  intimate  and  congenial  sympathy  with  Nature,  carries
forward  in  organic  evolution  with  a  child-like  uncon-
sciousness and  a  child-like  success"  (p.  61).  " liules  and
systems  are  necessary  for  the  ordinarily  endowed  mortals,


256  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

whose  business  it  is  to  gather  together  and  arrange  the
materials;  the  genius,  who  is  the  architect,  has,  like  Nature,
an  unconscious  system  of  his  own.  It  is  the  fate  of  its
nature,  and  no  demerit,  that  the  caterpillar  must  crawl :
it  is  the  fate  of  its  nature,  and  no  merit,  that  the  butterfly
must  fly  "  (p.  64).  "  It  is  not  by  introspective  prying  and
torture  of  its  own  self-consciousness  that  mankind  evolves
the  genius  ;  the  mature  result  of  its  unconscious  develop-
ment flows  at  due  time  into  consciousness  with  a  grateful
surprise,  and  from  time  to  time  the  slumbering  centuries
are  thus  awakened  "  (p.  66)}

If  such  a  genius  suddenly  emerges  at  the  right  time
as  fruit  of  an  unconscious  development  in  unconscious
harmony  with  all  Nature,  which  has  been  nourished  on  a
material  blindly  prepared  by  others,  such  an  unconscious
psychical  process  must  be  looked  upon  as  in  the  highest
sense  a  telcological  event,  for  the  explanation  of  which
Maudsley  probably  would  only  refer  to  the  unsearchable
councils  of  the  Creator.  Otherwise  expressed,  the  in-
sufficiency of  all  materialistic  explanations  in  the  un-
conscious-psychical processes  is  evident  the  more  we  rise
to  an  ever  more  highly  organised  centre  (whether  within
one  and  the  same  organism  or  among  the  many  differ-
ently constituted  individuals  of  the  human  race).  But
since  the  differences  are  not  of  a  fundamental  kind,  but
only  depend  on  a  difference  of  the  stage  of  development
of  the  common  primitive  foundations  of  the  ganglionic
cell,  this  result  must  also  reflect  its  light  upon  the  con-

1 "  Not  unamusing,  though  some-  fly  ; amusing, because  the patient

what  saddening, is  it, however,  to  worker  is  supremely  astonished  at  a

witness  the  painful  surprise  of  the  result  which,  though  preparing,  he

man  of  observation,  his  jealous  in-  nowise  foresaw;  saddening,  because

dignation and clamorous outcry,  individually  he  is  annihilated,  and

when the result  at  which he  and  all  the  toil  in  which  he  spent  his

his fellow-labourers have been so  strength is swallowed up in the

patiently,  though blindly,  working,  product which, gathering up the

when the genius-product of the  different  lines  of  investigation  and

century which he has helped to  thought, and giving to them a

create, starts into life — when the  unity  of  development,  now  by  epi-

metamorphosis is completed, and  genesis  ensues  "  (p.  67).
the  caterpillar  has  become  a  butter-


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 257

ception  of  tlie  simplest  reflex  processes  in  the  ganglion
cell.

7.  The  Morphological  Significance  of  the  Parts  of  the
Brain. — The  morphological  interpretation  of  the  different
parts  of  the  brain  has  only  been  founded  on  reliable  prin-
ciples since  embryology  has  come  to  the  aid  of  compara-
tive anatomy,  the  importance  of  which  was  first  clearly
recognised  by  Baer.  In  the  lower  orders  of  worms,  e.g.,  the
Turbellaria,  the  entire  central  nervous  system  consists  of
the  bilobed  supra-cesophageal  ganglion,  from  which  nerve-
threads  radiate  to  the  different  parts  of  the  body.  In  the
Annelida  and  Articulata  this  supra-cesophageal  ganglion
has  expanded  into  an  oesophageal  ring,  and  this  is  con-
tinued into  the  ventral  cord ;  in  the  larvae  of  the  Ascidians,
in  the  Amphioxus,  and  the  Vertebrata,  on  the  contrary,
the  supra-cesophageal  ganglion  has  been  prolonged  into
the  spinal  cord.  In  the  larva  of  the  Ascidians  and  the
Amphioxus  the  spinal  cord  is  still  a  simple  uniform
strand,  which  seems  to  terminate  in  precisely  the  same
way  before  and  behind,  and  only  with  more  exact  obser-
vation can  there  be  perceived  in  front  a  slight  rounded
extremity.  In  the  Cyclostome  fishes  (Myxine  and  Petro-
myzon),  at  a  further  stage  of  embryonic  development,
this  vesicle  becomes  a  pyriform  swelling,  and  thus  forms
the  primitive  basis  of  the  vertebrate  brain;  but  then  it
is  differentiated  by  cross  constrictions  into  several  vesicles
which  lie  behind  one  another  in  a  straight  line,  and  this
process  of  constriction  recurs  in  the  embryonic  develop-
ment of  all  the  vertebrata  without  exception.

At  the  outset  there  are  formed  three  sections — Fore-
brain,  middle  brain,  and  hind-brain;  the  first  might  be
designated  the  olfactory  ganglion,  the  second  the  optic
ganglion,  the  third  the  auditory  ganglion.  Jiut  soon  there
appears  a  further  differentiation,  the  Intermediate-brain
being  detached  from  the  Fore-brain,  and  the  After-brain
from the Hind-brain; the former, might be termed

VOL.  Ill,  it


258  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  finer  organ  for  the  perceptions  of  the  sense  of
touch,  the  latter  the  centre  for  the  automatic  regulation
of  complicated  organic  functions  subservient  to  life.
In  the  Cyclostome  fishes  these  five  divisions  lying
in  a  straight  line  behind  one  another  and  tolerably
equal  in  value,  are  preserved  without  essential  change
of  form;  in  the  cartilaginous  fishes  Middle-brain  and
After- brain  are  prominently  developed;  in  the  higher
vertebrata,  on  the  other  hand,  Fore-brain  and  Hind-brain,
so  that  the  former  overlaps  the  Intermediate  and  Middle
brain,  the  latter  the  After-brain.  A  distinction  of  a
similar  kind  again  occurs  between  the  reptilia  and
birds,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  mammalia  on  the
other.  In  the  former,  the  Middle-brain  and  the  middle
part  of  the  cerebellum  undergo  a  relatively  important
development ;  in  the  latter,  the  Fore-brain  more  and
more  overshadows  all  the  other  parts,  so  that  at  last
in  monkeys  and  man  it  even  overlaps  the  Hind-
brain.1

In  the  human  brain  there  belong  to  the  Fore-brain  the
two  cerebral  hemispheres,  corpora  striata,  corpus  callosum
and  fornix ;  to  the  Intermediate-brain  the  optic  thalami
and  the  other  parts  which  surround  the  so-called  third  ven-
tricle, together  with  the  infundibulum  and  pineal  body;
to  the  Middle-brain  the  corpora  quadrigemina  and  the
aqueduct  of  Sylvius ;  to  the  Hind-brain  the  hemispheres
of  the  cerebellum  and  the  middle  lobe ;  to  the  after-brain
the  medulla  oblongata,  together  with  the  fourth  ventricle,
the  pyramids,  olivary  bodies,  &c.  The  original  functions
of  the  five  parts  have  been  preserved  unchanged  for
the  intermediate-brain,  middle-brain  and  after-brain ;  on
the  other  hand,  the  Hind-brain  or  cerebellum  has  its
functional  sphere  already  considerably  enlarged  in  the
Amphibia  and  lower  mammalia,  and  the  Fore-brain  or
cerebrum  has  in  the  higher  mammalia  attained  such
general  importance  for all  the  functions  of  perception,

1  Comp.  Hackel's  Anthropogenie,  p.  514-529.


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  259

that  its  original  destination  as  olfactory  centre  only  claims
an  inconsiderable  part  of  the  organ.

According  to  experiments  by  Gudden,  the  brain  of  new-
born birds,  whose  eyes  had  been  extirpated,  remained
undeveloped,  whilst  in  rabbits  the  development  of  the
brain  was  not  thereby  impeded  (Wundt,  p.  194) ;  this
proves  how  much  more  important  a  part  the  function  of
the  corpora  quadrigemina,  excited  by  the  visual  sense,
plays  in  the  mental  life  of  birds  than  in  that  of  mammals.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  olfactory  nerve  of  new-born
dogs  be  divided,  they  are  no  longer  capable  of  any  intel-
lectual and  emotional  development,  and  give  the  impres-
sion of  unsympathetic  and  feeble-minded  individuals.
This  proves  how  much  the  mental  life  of  these  mammals
depends  on  the  sense  of  smell.

Now,  if  we  consider  that  the  intelligence  displayed  by
the  Middle-brain  and  Fore-brain,  as  we  saw  in  the  pre-
ceding section,  is  only  different  in  degree,  it  might  appear
almost  a  matter  of  accident  that  just  the  Fore-brain
or  the  olfactory  ganglion,  and  not  the  tactile,  visual,
or  auditory  ganglion,  has,  in  the  higher  vertebrata,  at-
tained so  enormous  a  development,  that  the  groups  of
ganglion-cells  adjunct  to  the  original  olfactory  ganglion
have  become  a  kind  of  universal  centre,  in  which,  in
addition  to  the  olfactory  organ,  the  other  sense-organs
also,  nay,  even  all  the  parts  of  the  body  and  the  lower
centres,  obtain  a  central  representation.  The  import-
ance to  life  of  the  olfactory  organ  taken  alone  would
hardly  afford  sufficient  explanation  of  this;  more  perti-
nent seems  the  consideration  that  the  Fore-brain  occu-
pies a  position  of  polar  antagonism  to  the  spinal  cord
and  medulla  oblongata,  that  it  lies  peripherally  in  respect
to  the  centre  or  centres  of  gravity  of  the  central  nervous
system.  This  sounds  perhaps  paradoxical,  but  has  all
the  deeper  significance.  As  the  whole  nervous  system
arises  phylogenetically  and  embryologically  from  the
skiu-.sen.se  lamina,  i.e.,  from  the  extreme  periphery  of  the


26o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

organism,  that  part  of  the  central  nervous  system  also,
which  leads  to  the  mental  centre  of  self-consciousness,
must  have  a  peripheral  importance  for  the  organism  as
such  and  its  organic  life.

For  the  organism  as  such  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the
central  nervous  system  lies  neither  in  the  too  little
efficient  spinal  cord,  nor  in  the  cerebral  hemispheres,
whose  conscious  -  spiritual  purposive  activity  already
appears  as  something  transcending  the  immediate  ends  of
organic  life,  but  in  the  parts  interposed  between  Fore-brain
and  spinal  cord,  which  guide  the  universal  reflex  processes
of  the  organism  and  adapt  its  vital  actions  to  the  external
circumstances  mirrored  in  sense- perception.  This  rela-
tion finds  also  an  anatomical  expression  in  the  circum-
stance that  the  groups  of  ganglion-cells  in  the  stem  of
the  brain  and  the  spinal  cord  aggregate  into  central
medullary  masses,  which  send  out  conducting  fibres
towards  the  periphery ;  in  the  hemispheres,  however,  the
grey  matter  forms  an  external  cortical  layer  to  which
tend  the  diverging  conducting  paths  of  the  trunk
of  the  brain.  This  contrast  is  not  yet  clearly  de-
veloped in  the  more  solid  or  less  hollow  cerebrum  of
fishes  and  amphibia ;  here  the  whole  mass  of  the  hemi-
spheres is  traversed  by  grey  matter  in  an  irregular  fashion,
so  that  we  have  before  us  a  transitional  stage  from  the
formation  of  the  nucleus  to  the  cortex.  The  cerebellar
hemispheres,  on  the  other  hand,  exhibit  already  in  fishes
a  clearer  severance  of  the  cortical  layer  from  the  nucleus
(comp.  W.,  p.  55-56,  note),  and  this  development  of  the
cerebellum  in  excess  of  the  cerebrum  proves  that  the
former  has  in  these  animals  also  to  perform  functions  of  a
higher  order.

Having  already  briefly  discussed  in  the  foregoing  section
the  functions  of  the  after-brain  or  medulla  oblongata,  we
now  proceed  to  the  consideration  in  detail  of  the  four  other
parts  of  the  brain.

8.  The  Centres  of  the  Space-Senses. — Of  all  the  parts  of


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 261

the  brain,  the  function  of  the  Middle-brain  or  of  the
corpora  quadrigernina  (called  bigemina  in  lower  vertebrata)
has  been  longest  and  most  certainly  known.  The  paral-
lel development  of  the  corpora  quadrigernina  with  the
acuteness  of  the  sense  of  sight  in  the  animal  kingdom
leaves  us  to  infer  that  this  centre  has  the  office  of  working
up  the  visual  impressions,  and  of  reflectorially  calling
forth  those  movements  which  are  in  relation  with  visual
impressions.  Destruction  of  the  corpora  quadrigernina
produces  not  only  blindness,  but  also  paralysis  of  the
movement  of  the  eye  and  accommodation.  One  must
therefore  assume  that  the  cerebral  hemispheres  only
receive  the  visual  perceptions  in  the  form  prepared  by  the
corpora  quadrigernina,  and  that  only  those  movements
which  are  caused  by  a  co-operation  of  visual  and  other
sense -impressions  proceed  from  the  hemispheres,  but
that  such  movements  or  modifications  of  continuous
movements,  which  are  exclusively  determined  by  impres-
sions of  sight,  are  independently  cared  for  mainly  by  the
corpora  quadrigernina.  The  accommodation  of  the  eyes  is
governed  by  the  posterior,  the  ocular  movements  by  the
anterior  tubercles  of  the  corpora  quadrigernina ;  and  ac-
cording to  Adamuk,  stimulation  of  the  anterior  tubercles
on  the  right  side  produces  movements  of  both  eyes  to  the
left,  on  the  left  side  movements  to  the  right.  The  stimu-
lation of  the  front  of  the  anterior  tubercles  causes  the
visual  axes  to  assume  a  horizontal  direction  ;  that  of  the
middle  part  raises  and  renders  them  convergent ;  that
of  the  hindermost  part  leads  to  a  downward  movement,
with  still  stronger  convergence  (Wundt,  p.  147).

Not  quite  so  well  established  is  the  significance  of  the
(improperly  named)  optic  tlialami  or  of  the  intermediate-
brain.  Wundt  (p.  198)  probably  correctly  regards  them
as  the  tactile  cadre,  according  to  the  analogy  of  the  just-
mentioned  visual  centre,  i.e.,  as  the  organ  which  mediates
"the  functional  union  of  locomotion  with  the  sensa-
tions of  touch  "  (perhaps  also  with  the  muscular  sense


262  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

or  specific  feeling  of  muscular  movement).  The  optic
thalami  also  act  independently  of  the  will  of  the  cere-
bral hemispheres  as  primary  regulators,  whereby  certainly
the  will  of  the  hemispheres  is  not  precluded  from  em-
ploying them,  in  order  to  enable  more  complicated  move-
ments to  be  executed  by  them  on  a  given  command.
At  all  events,  they  must  in  all  bodily  movements,  even
though  initiated  by  the  will  of  the  hemispheres,  co-ope-
rate as  regulators,  without  which  the  estimation  of  the
movement  as  a  whole  and  in  all  its  parts  would  be  want-
ing. We  are,  namely,  always  compelled  to  estimate  the
degree  of  our  several  muscular  contractions  according  to
the  position  which  the  particular  muscles  assume  at  any
moment  in  relation  to  the  other  parts  of  the  body ;  but  this
position  is  ascertained  by  the  sense  of  touch.  If  the
service  of  the  latter  is  interrupted,  the  visual  sense  can  in
an  extreme  case  act  vicariously  for  the  sense  of  touch,  as
in  the  case  of  a  person  suffering  from  Tabes  dorsualis
of  the  spinal  cord,  whose  tactile  feeling  in  the  lower
limbs  had  been  lost ;  or  in  the  instance  of  a  woman
with  anaesthesia  of  one  arm,  who  always  let  her  child
fall  when  she  averted  her  gaze  from  it.  The  compensa-
tion of  the  visual  sense  is  here  always  imperfect,  and
never  attains  the  direct  certainty  of  reflex  action  like
the  regulation  by  the  sense  of  touch  executed  by  the  optic
thalami.  If  the  optic  thalamus  be  injured  on  one  side,
this  reflex  regulation  is  destroyed  for  one-half  of  the  body.
Whilst  now  the  muscles  of  one-half  the  body  act  cor-
rectly, those  of  the  other  are  smitten  by  a  sudden  help-
lessness, which  looks  astonishingly  like  paralysis,  without
indeed  being  paralysis  ;  and  the  result  is  an  unsymme-
trical  locomotion,  which  is  called,  on  account  of  the  ten-
dency to  rotation  of  the  head,  "  circus  movement"  (Wundt,
p.  196-199).  That  there  is  no  actual  paralysis  is  evident
from  this,  that  the  disturbance  comes  to  an  end  in  course
of  time  by  the  will  of  the  hemispheres  learning  to  correct
the  faulty movements. The purposive movements  to


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 263

escape  made  by  rabbits  or  frogs  after  removal  of  their
hemispheres  and  corpora  striata  sequent  on  cutaneous  irri-
tation may  be  referred  to  the  optic  thalami  as  their  centre.
A  confirmation  of  this  hypothesis  is  the  circumstance  that
such  a  frog,  after  injury  of  one  optic  thalamus,  carries  out
its  attempts  to  flee  in  the  form  of  circus  movement.

The  close  juxtaposition  of  the  corpora  quadrigemina
and  optic  thalami,  the  demonstrable  paths  of  communica-
tion between  them,  and  the  circumstance  that  in  lower
vertebrata  (e.g.,  frogs)  the  optic  thalami  are  insignificant,
and  their  functions  partially  performed  by  the  corpora
quadrigemina,  seems  to  point  to  a  closer  connection  of  the
two  centres,  which  would  correspond  to  the  close  affinity
of  the  senses  of  sight  and  touch.  These  two  are  the  only
spatial  senses  which  we  possess — senses,  i.e.,  which  spread
out  their  sensations  in  space ;  and  the  supposition  does
not  seem  to  me  unfounded  that  the  ideal  fusion  of  the
tactile  and  visual  space  into  the  indivisible  space-percep-
tion which  we  are  wont  unconsciously  to  effect  must  have
here  a  similar  physiological  foundation,  as  the  blending  of
the  visual  space  of  the  right  eye  with  that  of  the  left  eye
into  an  indivisible  visual  space  possesses  in  the  chiasma
of  the  optic  nerve.  In  the  same  way  it  is  not  improbable
that  the  union  of  the  corpora  quadrigemina  with  the  optic
thalami  can  independently  introduce  certain  movements,
which  may  be  termed  reilexes  to  such  space-perceptions,  as
are  combined  of  sensations  of  sight  and  touch.

These  assumptions  will  hardly  meet  with  opposition
when  we  remember  that  the  left  half  of  the  corpora  quad-
rigemina only  contains  the  left  half  of  the  binocular  visual
image,  the  right  half  only  the  corresponding  right  one,  so
that  both  halves  of  the  image  can  only  be  brought  to  blend
into  a  single  and  whole  image  by  the  co-operation  of  both
halves  of  the  organ.  Finally,  these  suppositions  also  find
support  in  this,  that  for  the  regulation  of  the  position
of  the  several  bodily  parts  in  space  there  is  yet  a  second
organ,  the  posterior  brain  or  cerebellum,  which,  it  is  true
is  influenced  also  by  the  other  sense-organs  (especially  the


264  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

senses  of  hearing  and  equilibrium  and  sense  of  sight),  but
likewise  is  especially  determined  in  its  functions  by  the
sense  of  touch.  One  may  comprehend  from  this  develop-
ment of  the  Hind-brain  exceeding  its  original  purpose  as
auditory  ganglion  that  the  intermediate-brain,  or  the  optic
thalami,  may  lag  behind  in  their  development  in  most
animals,  without  prejudice  to  the  organism;  it  would,
however,  not  harmonise  with  our  views  on  the  purposive
economy  of  the  organism  if  two  organs  existed  to  fulfil  a
single  purpose.  We  shall  rather  have  to  assume  that  the
perceptions  of  the  sense  of  touch  which  take  place  in  the
optic  thalami  and  those  which  occur  in  the  cerebellum  are
made  use  of  in  an  altogether  different  way.  Whilst  in  the
cerebellum  the  impressions  of  touch  are  pre-eminently
combined  with  those  of  the  sense  of  equilibrium,  so  as  to
gain  as  perfect  a  total  perception  as  possible  of  the  position
of  the  whole  body  and  of  its  several  parts  in  space,  the
intuition  of  the  tactile  space  seems  to  be  prepared  in  the
optic  thalami  for  the  perception  of  the  cerebral  hemi-
spheres, in  like  manner  as  that  of  visual  space  in  the  cor-
pora quadrigemina,  and  to  be  fused  into  the  indivisible
tactile-visual  space  even  before  the  entrance  into  the
hemispheres.  If  this  mode  of  conceiving  the  matter  is
correct,  it  also  explains  why  the  consciousness  of  the
hemispheres  feels  itself  unable  to  dissolve  again  the
fusion  of  tactile  and  visual  space,  although  in  abstract
reflection  it  perceives  the  heterogeneity  and  duality  of  the
two  spaces  to  be  beyond  a  doubt.  If  this  fusion  were  only
a  product  of  the  activity  of  the  hemispheres,  there  would
probably  be  no  particular  difficulty  in  producing  again  the
whole  element  in  intuition  also.  The  like  holds  of  the
impossibility  of  decomposing  the  superficial  extension  of
the  visual  perception  into  its  non-spatial  elements  of  sen-
sation; whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the  possibility  of  this
process  with  the  third  dimension  of  space  or  that  of  depth
is  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  supposition  that  the  chief
part  of  the  genesis  of  the  perception  of  depth  only  apper-
tains to  the  hemispheres.


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 265

9.  The  Cerebellum. — The  theory  of  the  functions  of  the
cerebellum  is  still  open  to  considerable  doubt.  It  is
certain  that  the  opinion  of  Gall  of  a  close  relation  of  the
same  to  the  sexual  functions  is  incorrect ;  the  centre  for
the  latter  is  rather  still  to  be  sought  in  the  medulla
oblongata.1  On  the  other  hand,  the  parallelism  in  the
development  of  the  muscling  of  the  body  and  of  the  cere-
bellum which  runs  through  the  whole  vertebrate  kingdom
shows  that  this  organ  must  be  of  importance  for  an  ener-
getic innervation  of  the  muscles,  and  that  the  muscles
under  normal  circumstances  draw  a  considerable  part  of
their  impulse  of  innervation  from  the  cerebellum.  This,
however,  does  not  entitle  us  to  designate  with  Luys  the
cerebellum  the  source  of  energy  of  all  motor  innervation,
since  even  after  destruction  of  the  cerebellum  any  ener-
getic movements  may  be  called  forth  by  all  the  other
centres,  and  these  latter  can,  to  a  certain  extent,  compen-
sate for  the  loss  of  the  cerebellum.

What  we  know  with  the  utmost  certainty  of  the  cere-
bellum, because  we  do  not  demonstrate  it  by  vivisection,
but  by  the  most  numerous  experiments  in  the  living  man,
is  the  fact  that  it  is  the  organ  of  dizziness  in  all  its  forms.
Dizziness  may  be  produced  by  unilateral  injuries  of  the
organ,  by  one-sided  pressure  on  the  same,  by  cross  conduc-
tion of  a  galvanic  current,  finally  by  the  visual  perceptions
of  moving  objects,  nay,  even  by  merely  imaginary  ideas  of
possible  movements,  which  are  connected  with  certain  visual
perceptions.  As  is  well  known,  dizziness  is  a  phenomenon
not  subject  to  caprice,  i.e.,  to  the  will  of  the  cerebral  hemi-
spheres, and  exhibits  itself  as  disturbance  of  the  involun-
tary regulation  of  the  bodily  movements.  As  partial
disturbance  of  the  function  of  the  cerebellum  produces
partial  disturbance  of  sensation  in  both  eyes  (here  too  the
decussation  is  a  partial  one  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the
corpora  quadrigemina),  it  produces  an  altered  idea  of  the
situation  of  the  eyeball,  and  thereby  an  apparent  motion

1  Lon^et,  Anatomy  and  Physiology  <>f  the  Nervous  System  ;  I.  615.


266  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  objects,  to  which  there  is  added  with  greater  degrees  of
dizziness  an  obscuration  of  the  field  of  vision.  Since  the
organ  continues  to  be  functional,  and  endeavours  to  adapt
the  deportment  to  the  sensations,  if  the  sensations  are  patho-
logically perverted,  this  adaptation  must  lead  to  objectively
distorted  muscular  movements,  and  these  are  the  rotatory
movements,  which  accompany  every  dizziness,  although  in
the  weakest  degrees  of  giddiness  the  particular  impulses
of  innervation  of  the  cerebellum  are  paralysed  by  opposite
ones  on  the  part  of  the  cerebrum  (W.,  p.  207-221).

If  we  now  ask  how,  of  all  the  central  organs  subserving
the  regulation  of  the  bodily  movements  with  respect  to
their  situation  in  space,  it  is  precisely  the  auditory  ganglion
that  has  come  to  be  the  most  important,  the  key  to  this
enigma  must  lie  herein,  that  the  specific  sense  of  equilibrium
is  in  the  closest  connection  with  the  organ  of  hearing,  and
therefore  has  also  been  assigned  for  its  central  representa-
tion in  the  first  degree  to  the  same  ganglion  as  the  sense  of
hearing.  This  sense  of  equilibrium  is  located  in  the  three
semi-circular  canals,  which  must  be  termed  a  manometer
for  the  inner  hydrostatic  pressure  variously  exerted  in
the  direction  of  the  three  axes  situated  at  right  angles
to  one  another,  and  whose  injury  calls  forth  the  same
phenomena  of  giddiness  and  rotatory  movements  as  those
of  the  cerebellum  itself.  This  organ  of  equilibrium  ascer-
tains the  right  position  of  the  head  in  respect  of  the  line
of  gravity,  and  as  the  attitude  of  the  body  in  relation  to
the  head  is  determined  by  sensations  of  touch,  indirectly
the  position  of  the  body  as  a  whole.  It  is  clear  that  this
sense  of  equilibrium  could  only  be  developed  pari  passu
with  the  evolution  of  the  corresponding  centre,  and  that
this  correlative  development  of  the  cerebellum  must  consist
in  the  unfolding  of  reflex  tendencies  with  a  view  to  the
regulation  of  the  deportment  according  to  the  sensation
of  equilibrium.  Thus  the  development  of  the  centre  for
the  sense  of  equilibrium  soon  outstripped  that  of  the
centre  for  the  sense  of  hearing  in  the  Hind-brain,  and
whilst  the  sense  of  hearing  probably  found  pretty  early  a


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  267

second  central  representation  in  the  Fore-brain,  the  centre
of  equilibrium  set  itself  with  other  subsidiary  aids  to  fulfil
its  own  task,  in  the  first  place,  in  alliance  with  the  nervous
bundles  of  the  sense  of  touch  of  the  whole  body,  in  the
second  place,  in  conjunction  with  the  sense  of  sight.

From  this  connection  there  also  results  an  explanation
of  the  circumstance  that  amon^  vertebrate  animals  living
in  water  and  air  the  development  of  the  cerebellum  is,
on  the  whole,  more  considerable  than  in  animals  living
on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  For  in  creeping  and  walking
the  sense  of  touch  aided  by  the  horizontal  surface  of  the
ground  already  affords  a  tolerable  support,  which  makes
the  regulation  according  to  the  sense  of  equilibrium  to
appear  less  urgent,  but  in  flying,  and  quite  specially  in
swimming  in  deep  water,  the  sense  of  equilibrium  affords
the  chief,  if  not  the  sole,  foundation  of  regulation.

In  man  the  original  connection  of  cerebellum  and
sense  of  hearing  is,  strictly  speaking,  only  displayed  in
two  points — firstly,  in  that  the  nervous  constitution  of
the  organ  of  hearing  is  developed  in  the  embryo  from
the  vesicle  of  the  Hind-brain ;  and,  secondly,  in  that  the
musical  rhythm  received  through  the  ear  involuntarily
impels  to  rhythmical  movements.  We  shall  not  go  far
wrong  if  we  designate  the  cerebellum  the  centre  for  dancing,
and  the  fact  that  a  weary  troop  marches  on  with  fresh
elasticity  with  the  striking  up  of  military  music  is  ex-
plained by  the  fact  that,  instead  of  the  fatigued  cerebrum,
corpora  striata,  and  optic  thalami,  now  the  cerebellum  as
fresh  organ  especially  undertakes  the  innervation  of  the
muscles.  Although  almost  all  the  senses  seem  to  possess
a  tolerably  perfect  central  representation  in  the  cerebellum,
yet  on  its  destruction  the  sense-perception  of  the  cerebral
hemispheres  is  not  affected.  This  is  proved  by  the  latter
receiving  no  class  of  sense-perceptions  (not  even  those  of
hearing)  through  the  medium  of  the  cerebellum  in  the
sense  in  which  they  receive  the  visual  perceptions  through
the  medium  of  the  corpora  quadrigemina.


268  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

The  hemispheres  of  the  cerebellum  are,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  hemispheres  of  the  cerebrum,  the  sole  centre,
which  has  developed  a  cortical  layer  of  grey  matter,  and
this  circumstance  points  to  the  fact  that  the  passage  from
the  compact  nuclear  formation  to  that  of  a  superficial
distribution  serves  in  both  cases  the  same  end.  This  end
can  only  be  the  reflexion  of  the  provinces  of  the  body  in
provinces  of  the  grey  cortical  layer.  A  compact  nucleus  is
more  adapted  to  the  collection  of  impressions  streaming
in  from  the  periphery  into  an  indivisible  whole.  Where,
however,  the  point  in  question  is  how  to  act  on  any  single
province  of  the  whole  body  apart  from  the  rest,  a  super-
ficial distribution  of  the  acting  layer  will  be  a  more  suit-
able formation  for  the  distinct  separation  of  the  motor  in-
nervation of  different  provinces  than  a  compact  nucleus
affording  no  facilities  for  the  separation  of  the  several
parts.  Although  the  attempt  to  prove  the  mirroring  of
the  provinces  of  the  body  in  the  cortical  layer  of  the
cerebellum  has  not  as  yet  succeeded,  we  shall  still  be
obliged  to  assume  it,  relying  on  the  analogy  of  the  cortical
layer  of  the  cerebrum,  where  this  proof  has  recently  been
forthcoming  for  the  several  parts.

Whether  the  functions  of  the  cerebellum  are  really  ex-
hausted with  the  performances  of  which  we  have  spoken
must  be  considered  as  at  least  doubtful.  In  any  case,  it
is  in  the  vertebrate  animal  kingdom  the  first  centre  to  be
developed,  and  even  in  man  the  most  highly  developed
centre  next  to  the  Fore-brain,  and  it  would  certainly  be
rash  to  assert  that  our  knowledge  had  at  present  exhausted
the  purpose  of  this  organ.

10.  The  Fore-Brain. — By  the  experiments  of  Fritsch
and  Hitzig  definite  centres  of  innervation  have  been
proved  to  exist  in  the  grey  cortical  layer  of  the  cerebral
hemispheres  for  particular  groups  of  muscles  {e.g.,  for  the
extensors  of  the  fore-leg,  the  flexors  of  the  fore-leg,  the
muscles  of  the  neck,  the  muscles  of  the  hind-leg,  &c),


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 269

lying  together  in  a  limited  part  of  the  anterior  and  lateral
surface  (W.,  p.  168).  The  places  in  question  have  already
reacted  on  weak  galvanic  currents,  and  if  the  stimulation
of  other  parts  has  not  hitherto  been  followed  by  motor  or
sensory  effects,  that  perhaps  lies  partly  in  an  unsuitable
intensity  and  quality  of  the  stimuli  applied,  partly  in  the
rapid  blunting  of  the  irritability  in  consequence  of  the
exposure  of  the  brain.  Extirpation  of  the  motor  centre
alluded  to  causes  disturbance  of  the  movements  in  ques-
tion of  some  duration,  but,  in  course  of  time,  a  normal
state  of  things  recurs.

Another  part  of  the  anterior  lobes  has  long  been  known
by  pathological  observations  as  a  centre  of  language.
Speechlessness  or  aphasia  is  divided  into  an  atactic  and
an  amnesic  kind ;  in  the  former  the  patient  will  not
succeed  in  giving  the  conception  which  floats  before  his
mind  its  linguistic  sign ;  in  the  latter,  different  words  are
confused  with  one  another.  Perhaps  this  difference  points
to  two  different  centres,  which  must  co-operate  in  the  func-
tion of  language  (W.,  p.  230). — Further  supports  for  the
exact  determination  of  the  distribution  of  the  central  seat
of  perception  and  innervation  are  still  entirely  wanting,
and  the  assertions  of  phrenology  rest  on  weak  foundations.1

1  From  recent  experiments  on  ing  even  to  refusal  of  food.  Further,
monkeys,  in  which  single  parts  of  the  according  to  him,  the  various  senses
brain  were  electrically  irritated  and  have  the  following  central  represen-
then  made  inactive  by  destruction,  tation  in  the  cerebrum  :  vision  in  the
David  Ferrier  asserts  that  he  has  "angular  gyrus,  "hearing  in  the  upper
obtained  results  which,  if  they  are  half  of  the  superior  temporo-sphe-
confirmed,  would  again  represent  an  noidal  convolutions,  common  sen-
appreciable  progress  in  our  know-  sation  (tactile  sense)  in  the  "  Hippo-
ledge  of  the  physiology  of  the  campus  major"  and  the  uncinate
brain  (comp.  "Proceedings  of  the  convolutions,  smell  in  the  "subiculum
Royal  Society,"  vol.  xxiii.,  Xo.  162).  of  Amnion"  or  the  "uncinate  con-
He  first  asserts  that  removal  of  volution,"  taste  in  the  lower  part
the  frontal  regions  and  posterior  of  the  "  temporo- sphenoidal  lobe."
lobes  impairs  neither  the  power  of  All  these  central  representations  cor-
feeling  nor  the  capacity  of  moving  ;  respond  to  tin-  sense-organ  of  the
but  that  the  former  disturbs  in-  opposite  half  of  the  body,  with  the
telligence  and  attentive  observa-  exception  of  the  olfactory  centres,
tion,  and  the  latter  calls  forth  a  which  correspond  to  the  nostrils  of
state  of  depression  of  common  feel-  the  same  side.


270  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

In  the  large  hemispheres  more  than  in  any  other  part  of
the  brain  the  several  groups  of  ganglia  can  act  vicariously
for  one  another,  and  therefore  injuries  and  disturbances,
which  do  not  at  the  same  time  affect  the  corpora  striata  or
the  peduncle  of  the  cerebrum,  disappear  more  easily  and
completely  than  in  any  other  centre  whatsoever.  Con-
siderable losses  of  substance  of  both  hemispheres,  or  one-
sided loss  of  a  whole  hemisphere,  are  sustained  by  pigeons
without  permanent  change  in  their  behaviour,  and  by  rabbits
and  dogs  with  a  certain  loss  of  intelligence.  Even  in  man
total  destruction  of  a  cerebral  lobe  without  palpable  dis-
turbance has  often  been  observed,  although  here  more
widespread  injuries  of  both  sides  are  always  sure  to  be
accompanied  by  motor  disturbances,  more  rarely  by  those
of  the  senses  or  of  the  psychical  functions  (W.,  p.  222).

These  facts  prove  that,  although  specific  tendencies  to
definite  functions  are  found  in  the  cortical  layer  of  the
cerebrum  at  certain  places,  these  specific  energies  have  here
still  only  a  relative,  not  an  absolute,  importance ;  that
here,  too,  they  are  only  a  consequence  of  habituation  to  a
certain  kind  of  action  continued  for  generations,  whose
nature  again  is  conditioned  by  the  commissural  connections
and  the  stimuli  conveyed  by  the  same  (W.,  p.  23 1).  If  these
connections  and  the  relations  to  the  rest  of  the  nervous
system  depending  thereon  change,  in  spite  of  the  (partly
innate,  partly  individually  acquired)  dispositions  in  a  short
time  other  specific  functions  are  exercised  by  the  parts
concerned,  so  that  no  break  occurs  in  the  psychical  and
organic  functions  as  a  whole.

This  substitution  is  favoured  partly  by  the  anatomically
uniform  nature  of  the  grey  cortical  substance  in  all  parts
of  the  hemispheres,  partly  by  the  extraordinarily  rich  and
numerous  connections  of  the  several  parts  with  one
another.  These  connections,  if  we  disregard  the  fibres  of
the  Corona  forming  the  continuation  of  the  ascending
path,  are  of  three  kinds:  (1)  the  callosal  fibres  which
form commissures between similarly  situated parts of


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  271

both  hemispheres ;  (2)  the  arcuate  fibres  which  unite  the
cortical  surface  of  neighbouring  sinuses ;  and  (3)  the
longitudinal  commisures  which  put  remote  parts  of  each
single  hemisphere  into  communication  with  one  another

(W.,p.  157).

It  is  only  the  abundance  and  excellence  of  these  paths
which  makes  possible  such  a  facile  psychical  communi-
cation of  all  the  ganglionic  cells  of  the  anterior  brain
with  one  another,  that  their  more  vivid  perceptions  flow
together  into  a  single  consciousness  by  the  act  of  communi-
cation and  comparison,  which,  e.g.,  does  not  obtain  between
the  perceptions  of  the  cerebellum  and  those  of  the  fore-
brain.  Now,  as  that  consciousness  which  philosophises
and  writes  books  is  the  consciousness  of  the  cerebral  hemi-
spheres, it  is  evident  that  it  cannot  know  anything  directly
of  a  consciousness  of  the  cerebellum ;  it  is  an  ignor-
ing of  the  impossibility  of  gazing  directly  into  the  con-
sciousness of  the  cerebellum  with  the  philosophising  con-
sciousness, when  Wundt  and  others  think  they  can  from
this  fact  deny  a  consciousness  of  the  cerebellum  and  of  the
sensory  centres  (W.,  p.  713-715).  Undoubtedly  there
exist  paths  of  communication  between  all  the  other  nerve-
centres  and  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  so  that  not  merely
all  peripheral  provinces  of  the  body,  but  also  all  subordinate
central  organs  obtain  representation  in  them ;  but  these
connections  must,  for  telcological  considerations,  he  rendered
difficult  in  order  that  the  whole  advantage  of  the  division
of  labour  among  independent  centres,  and  the  disburdening
from  common  work  thereby  effected,  and  the  concentra-
tion on  mental  interests,  may  not  he  lost  again  for  the  fore-
brain.  Either,  therefore,  the  existing  paths  will  serve  only
for  transmitting  commands  to  the  executive  sub-oilicers,  or
(as  on  the  part  of  the  corpora  quadrigemina)  to  conduct
the  synthetically  prepared  material  of  sensation,  or  only
specially  powerful  and  strong  impressions  are  telegraphed
to  the  fore-brain.  In  all  cases,  however,  the  large  hemispheres
are  conscious  of  the  stimuli  conducted  from  other  centres


272  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

(just  as  those  directly  received  from  sense  organs)  only
as  their  own  stimulations,  for  what  is  perceived  is  only  the
modification  of  one's  own  condition  by  the  stimulus.  Re-
ciprocal action  is  wanting  in  the  same  sense  in  which  it  takes
place  among  the  ganglion-cells  of  the  hemispheres,  and
from  which  the  compound  phenomenon  of  a  consciousness
of  a  higher  stage  of  individuality  results  through  the  com-
parison of  both  perceptions  in  both  cells.  In  lower
animals,  e.g.,  the  Cyclostome  fishes  (Myxine  and  Petro-
myzon),  where  no  one  of  the  five  parts  of  the  brain  has
attained  decided  predominance,  but  all  five  regulate  their
affairs  separately,  such  co-ordination  as  there  is  being  due
to  simple  superposition,  although  the  parts  are  not  without
organic  connection,  there  can  be  just  as  little  talk  about  an
indivisible  consciousness  as  representative  of  the  organic
unity  of  the  individual  as  in  a  tapeworm,  a  piece  of  coral,
or  an  oak  tree,  although  in  these  instances  the  relations
between  the  different  consciousnesses  become  ever  looser.
The  Myxine  has  not  one  but  fixe  brain-consciousnesses,
which  only  in  their  totality,  along  with  the  numerous  con-
sciousnesses of  the  spinal  cord  and  other  cells,  represent
the  whole  psychical  life  of  the  animal.  Man  is  altogether  in
the  same  case;  one  of  those  five,  however,  the  consciousness
of  his  cerebral  hemispheres,  has  been  so  uniquely  developed
in  advance  of  all  the  others,  and  has  acquired  such  a  pre-
dominance over  the  latter,  that  it  includes  in  itself  not
only  qualitatively  and  quantitatively  the  chief  part  of  the
psychical  life  of  the  individual  man,  but  also  has  be-
come, by  taking  the  lead  in  the  government  of  the  motor
muscles,  the  psychical  counterpart  of  the  organic  unity  of
the  human  individuality.  Wundt  altogether  mistakes  these
relations  when  he  lays  down  the  false  proposition  that  the
consciousness  of  a  coherent  nervous  system  must  always
be  a  single  one,  and  that  therefore  within  a  nervous  system
different  co-  or  sub-ordinate  kinds  of  consciousness  may  be
assumed  to  be  impossible  (714  above,  715  below).

It  was  mentioned  above  that  the  fore-brain  is  originally


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 273

an  olfactory  ganglion;  in  the  human  embryo  the  deve-
lopment of  the  nervous  foundation  of  the  organ  of  smell
still  proceeds  from  the  most  anterior  vesicle  of  the  brain.
Even  in  the  cartilaginous  fishes  the  olfactory  organ  is
prominently  developed,  and  the  anterior  part  of  the  Fore-
brain  is  prolonged  into  two  "  olfactory  lobes  "  which  in
many  higher  vertebrata  unite  to  form  an  "  olfactory  bulb."
In  man,  where  not  only  the  hemispheres  have  attained
an  extraordinary  size  as  organs  of  ideational  activity,  but
also  the  sense  of  smell  falls  into  the  background  as  com-
pared with  the  other  senses,  the  olfactory  centre  is  also
of  moderate  size,  and  is  tolerably  concealed  in  the  basal
part  of  the  head  of  the  corpora  striata.  The  circumstance
that  fibres  of  the  olfactory  nerve  as  well  as  bundles  of
motor-fibres  of  the  peduncle  of  the  cerebrum  meet  here
leads  us  to  conclude,  that  from  this  spot  those  reflexes  are
effected  which  are  initiated  by  odorous  impressions  (W.,
p.  202).

The  remaining  mass  of  the  corpora  striata,  together  with
the  nucleus  lenticularis,  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  intermedi-
ary for  the  conduction  of  the  impulses  of  the  will  from  the
lobes  of  the  hemispheres  to  the  muscles  (W.,p.  203).  This
is  confirmed  both  by  vivisection  and  in  the  case  of  man
by  pathological  evidence,  as  also  by  the  parallelism  of  the
development  of  the  hemispheres  and  corpora  striata  in
the  animal  kingdom.  The  disturbances  of  movement  of
the  nature  of  paralysis  after  apoplectic  fits  spring  very
frequently  from  apoplectic  inhibitions  of  function  in  the
corpora  striata,  and  in  man  the  result  of  disease  of  the
corpora  striata  and  of  the  motor  parts  of  the  hemispheres
is  pretty  much  alike,  save  that  in  the  latter  case  recovery
takes  place  much  more  easily.  The  corpora  striata  are
accordingly  (apart  from  the  olfactory  centre)  to  be  desig-
nated centres  for  the  co-ordination  of  voluntary  movements
(initiated  by  the  hemispheres).  They  execute  on  a  single
voluntary  impulse  combined  movements,  whose  mode  of
combination  may be  partly  innate,  partly  acquired by

vol.  in.  s


274  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

practice,  but  which  are  still  always  felt  as  voluntary  move-
ments so  far  as  the  hemispheres  are  conscious  of  their
impulse  of  innervation,  and  merely  not  conscious  of  the
intermediary  functions  concerned  in  the  execution  of  the
mandate.

ii.  The  Co-operation  and  Subordination  of  the  Nerve-
centres. — Having  in  the  preceding  sections  examined  the
functions  of  the  different  parts  of  the  nervous  system,
we  are  in  a  position  to  render  an  account  to  ourselves  of
the  purposive  connection  of  the  whole.

Whoever  should  approach  the  organism  of  the  higher
vertebrata  with  the  preconceived  opinion  that  in  it,  as  in
the  plant,  everything  is  accomplished  by  democratic  co-
operation of  cell-individuals  with  equal  rights,  would,  when
he  considered  the  intensive  concentration  of  the  sway  of
the  higher  over  the  lower  elements  and  of  the  cerebral
hemispheres  over  the  whole,  be  convinced  that  he  was  pos-
sessed by  prejudice.  Whoever,  on  the  other  hand,  from
the  standpoint  of  a  one-sided  psychology  should  bring
with  him  the  opposite  opinion  that  a  single  central  organ
guides  and  governs  all,  that  nothing  happens  without  its
order,  and  everything  happens  only  as  it  has  been  pre-
scribed even  to  the  smallest  detail,  would  again  have  to
be  taught  by  the  facts  that,  in  spite  of  a  rigid  centralisa-
tion for  the  common  interests  of  the  collective  organism,
and  in  spite  of  a  certain  sovereignty  of  the  supreme
authority,  this  latter  is  yet  relieved  of  all  pettifogging
details,  because  the  principle  of  the  self-government  of  sub-
ordinate spheres  is  thoroughly  carried  out  in  a  remark-
able manner.  The  whole  organism  is  only  developed  and
preserved  by  the  continual  self-activity  of  all  the  single
individual  cells,  as  the  state  only  by  the  self-activity  of  all
the  citizens  ;  but  the  social  activity  of  these  individuals  is
not,  as  in  the  simple  form  of  a  small  democratic  republic,
uniformly  distributed,  but  graduated  in  many  ways.

The  individuals  arrange  themselves  in  groups  or  families


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES 275

of  the  most  diverse  form,  each  of  which  represents  a  higher
stage  of  individuality,  and  endeavours  to  fulfil  a  higher
individual  aim ;  the  groups  likewise  coalesce  into  circles,
and  these  into  provinces,  and  the  provinces  obtain  a  govern-
ment of  their  own  through  special  functionaries.  As  such
a  province  we  may  understand  the  sum  of  those  parts  of
the  organism  which  are  traversed  and  innervated  by  one
and  the  same  nerve.  The  magistracy  of  the  provin-
cial government  of  such  a  province  would  be  the  first
centre  in  the  spinal  cord  (or  in  the  brain)  with  which
the  particular  nerve  comes  in  contact,  i.e.,  into  which
it  enters  or  from  which  it  springs.  These  provincial
governments  now  have  further  governing-bodies,  which
however  are  only  distinguished  partially  by  local  demarca-
tion from  the  sub-offices  pertaining  to  them,  in  another
part  by  qualitative  separation  of  their  departments  like  the
various  ministries  within  the  same  central  government.
Lastly,  over  these  different  provinces  is  enthroned  the  chief
of  the  executive,  who,  howrever,  has  at  the  same  time
reserved  to  himself  a  province  of  his  own  for  independent
work.  The  various  ministers  here,  however,  form  no
council,  but  each  rules  independently  over  his  own  sphere;
and  although  between  related  provinces  direct  communi-
cation takes  place  to  facilitate  common  functions,  yet  the
establishment  of  complete  unanimity  is  not  left  to  their  col-
lective agreement,  but  is  assured  by  the  direction  which
they  collectively  receive  from  the  highest  power  in  the
state.

This  supreme  governor  occupies,  then,  pretty  much  the
position  of  a  gifted  monarch  who  performs  the  part  of  his
own  prime  minister  without  thereby  limiting  the  spon-
taneous action  of  any  minister  in  his  own  department,  or
of  the  president  of  a  republic  who  disdains  being,  like  a
constitutional  prince,  merely  the  dot  upon  the  i,  and  not
only  reigns,  but  also  actually  governs.  Thus  the  organism,
as  model  of  an  artistic  union  of  guiding-head,  indepen-
dent  provincial  government,  local  self-government, and


276  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

individual  self-activity,  keeps  the  right  mean  between
democratic  anarchy  and  centralised  autocracy.1  What
this  organisation  of  Nature  has  least  affinity  with  is  the
constitutional  system  with  its  parliamentary  machinery
and  the  ideal  brutality  of  its  government  by  majorities.
However,  it  would  perhaps  be  hazardous  to  reproach
Nature  that  it  also  has  not  followed  this  doctrinaire
model,  which,  until  quite  recently,  passed  pretty  generally
as  the  ideal  of  political  organisation.  It  were  rather
worth  considering  whether,  conversely,  our  modern  politi-
cal wisdom  might  not  derive  a  stimulus  to  fresh  revision
of  its  doctrines  from  the  study  of  the  arrangement  of  the
natural  organism.

Through  the  provinces  being  in  great  part  not  demarcated
from  one  another  by  localisation  of  the  sphere  of  govern-
ment, but  by  the  qualitative  difference  of  offices,  there
results  the  peculiar  phenomenon  that  each  province  of  the
body  is  represented  in  more  than  one  brain-centre,  and
according  to  the  nature  of  the  stimulus  or  motive  can
derive  its  impulses  of  innervation  now  from  this,  now
from  that  centre.  This  result  is  one  of  the  most  impor-
tant achievements  of  modern  nerve  -  physiology,  and
thoroughly  disposes  of  the  popular  prejudice  that  for
every  province  of  the  body  a  single  corresponding  centre
has  to  be  sought  in  the  brain.  Undoubtedly  the  brain
forms  in  a  certain  sense  a  reflected  image  of  the  whole
body  according  to  its  provinces  of  innervation.  It  is  also
correct  that  this  reflected  image  is  in  one  respect  simpler
than  the  original,  namely,  so  far  as  a  physiological  element
in  the  centre  corresponds  to  a  sphere  of  motor  innervation
of  relatively  considerable  extent,  whose  joint  action  is
effected  by  the  former  by  means  of  a  single  impulse.  But
in  another  direction  the  reflected  image  is  more  complete

1  "  The  cells  are  individuals,  and  are entirely dependent upon the

as  in  the  state, so  here,  there  are  well-being  and  contentment  of  the

individuals  of  higher  dignity  and  of  humble  workers  in  the  spinal  cord,

lower  dignity  ; but  the  well-being  which  do  so  great  a  part  of  the  daily

and  power  of  the  higher  individuals  work  of  life"  (M.  l8o.)


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 277

than  the  original,  because  it  does  not  offer  a  single,  but
(like  the  image  of  a  mirror  cut  with  facettes)  a  repeated
reflection  (W.,  p.  227-228).  In  this  way,  e.g.,  all  the  pro-
vinces of  the  body  are  represented  both  in  the  cortex  of
the  cerebrum  and  in  that  of  the  cerebellum,  and,  moreover,
even  in  the  optic  thalami  and  in  the  corpora  striata,  and,
lastly,  by  far  the  largest  part  once  again  in  the  spinal
cord,  including  the  medulla  oblongata.  One  and  the  same
movement  of  a  bodily  province,  namely,  can  be  innervated
by  a  reflexion  from  the  spinal  cord  or  medulla  oblongata,
or  be  excited  by  the  optic  thalami  on  occasion  of  tactile
sensations,  or  be  called  forth  by  the  cerebellum  to  pre-
serve one's  balance,  or  spring  from  the  corpora  striata,
which  have  received  their  impulse  from  the  cerebral
hemispheres,  or,  lastly,  perhaps  be  also  produced  directly
by  the  latter  (with  evasion  of  all  the  other  centres  except
the  spinal  cord).

Now  every  one  of  the  centres  which  have  been  named
(with  the  exception  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres)  can  again
send  the  same  motor  impulse  downwards  on  two  sorts  of
occasions,  or  in  each  of  these  centres  the  stored-up  energies
can  be  set  free  in  one  of  the  directions  pre-designated  by
the  existing  tendencies  by  means  of  stimuli  of  two  dif-
ferent kinds  :  firstly,  through  such  as  are  conducted  from
lelovj,  and  secondly,  to  such  as  are  conducted  from  a
superior  centre.  The  former  are  the  perceptions  conveyed
by  sensory  nerves,  the  latter  are  the  result  of  the  direct
action  of  the  higher  governing  bodies  ;  in  botli  cases  the
centre  in  question  reacts  independently,  conformably  to
its  individual  purpose,  on  the  received  stimulation  ;  in  both
cases  we  have  therefore  to  do  with  a  reflex  act,  which  reveals
the  inner  teleology  of  the  independent  mode  of  action  of
the  centre  (W.,  p.  830).

Marshall  Hall  had  based  his  reflex  theory  on  the
assumption  of  separate  paths  for  reflexes  on  the  one
hand,  and  for  the  sensory  and  motor  excitements  leading
to  and  coming  from  the  brain  on  the  other. This  assump-


278  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tion  can,  however,  be  established  neither  physiologically
nor  anatomically ;  on  the  contrary,  everything  favours  the
identity  of  both  paths  in  the  sense  just  explained.  In
the  more  simply  constructed  spinal  cord  of  fishes  anatomi-
cal inquiry  renders  it  directly  probable  "  that  the  same
ganglion  cells  which  give  off  motor  fibres  to  the  nerve-
roots  effect  by  ascending  processes  a  union  with  the  more
highly  situated  motor  centres,  and  by  others  running  back-
wards with  the  sensory  parts"  (W., p.  121-122).

It  is  clear  that  an  arrangement  of  the  sensory  and
motor  paths  making  possible  the  mode  of  action  laid
down,  must  correspond  to  the  repeated  reflexion  of  all  or
very  many  provinces  of  the  body  by  means  of  the  different
centres.  We  may  connect  with  this  what  was  remarked
above  in  Section  3  on  conduction  in  the  spinal  cord.  We
there  saw  how  the  possibility  of  the  reflexes  of  the  spinal
cord  was  bound  up  with  the  further  conduction  of  the
stimuli  of  sensation  to  higher  centres.  In  the  uppermost
part  of  the  spinal  cord  or  in  the  medulla  oblongata  all  the
motor  and  all  the  sensory  fibres  unite  into  a  motor  and  a
sensory  main  path,  each  of  which  again  divides  in  the
medulla  oblongata  into  several  branches.  The  main  motor
path  first  divides  into  two  main  branches,  of  which  one
leads  through  the  peduncle  of  the  cerebrum  to  the  fore-
brain,  and  the  other  to  the  parts  of  the  middle-brain.  The
former  remains  purely  motor,  the  latter  enters  in  the
centres,  where  it  terminates,  into  direct  connection  with
parts  of  the  sensory  path.  The  former  divides  into  two
sub-divisions,  of  which  one  directly  leads  to  the  motor  part
of  the  cortex  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  whilst  the  other
terminates  in  the  corpora  striata  and  nucleus  lenticularis ;
the  latter  main  branch,  on  the  other  hand,  divides  into
three  subdivisions.  Of  these,  the  one  leads  through  the
laqueus  to  the  corpora  quadrigemina,  the  others  through
the  tegmentum  to  the  optic  thalami,  and  the  third  finally
to  the  cerebellum  (W.,  p.  165).

Thus  we  see  how  each  of  the  different  centres  has  its


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  279

share  in  the  main  conduction  which  leads  downwards
to  the  provinces  of  the  body.  That,  for  the  rest,  each  of
these  ramifications  not  merely  represents  a  part  of  the
corporeal  provinces,  but  all  taken  together,  is  only  made
possible  by  this,  that  all  the  conducting  fibres  are  in-
terrupted both  on  their  entrance  into  the  spinal  cord,
and  also  further  above  by  ganglion-cells,  so  that  an
association  of  many  conducting  fibres  coming  from  below
repeatedly  takes  place  by  means  of  the  grey  matter,  and
a  carrying  forward  of  the  conduction  in  an  upward
direction  through  several  co-ordinate  fibres,  each  of  which
has  now  the  same  significance  for  all  the  conducting  fibres
below  in  connection  with  it.

The  course  of  the  chief  sensory  path  is  in  this  dis-
tinguished from  that  of  the  motor  path,  that  only  a  small
part  of  it  leads  directly  to  the  cortex  of  the  cerebrum ;  a
second  branch  turns  here  too  to  the  cortex  of  the  cere-
bellum, and  a  third  in  several  subdivisions  to  the  an-
terior and  middle  ganglia  of  the  brain  (W.,  p.  165-166).
The  latter  branch  offers  here,  at  all  events,  a  partial
compensation  for  the  small  size  of  the  branch  leading
direct  to  the  cortex  of  the  cerebrum,  because  it  is  to  be
assumed  that  the  consciousness  of  the  hemispheres  re-
ceives the  chief  part  of  its  sense-perceptions  (with  per-
haps the  sole  exception  of  the  perceptions  of  hearing)
only  through  the  intervention  of  the  sensory  ganglia,
which  work  up  the  stimuli  of  the  sensory  nerves  inde-
pendently into  orderly  and  complete  perceptions.  The
sensory  paths  to  the  great  hemispheres,  whether  direct
or  through  the  sensory  ganglia,  seem  to  find  their  cen-
tral ending  in  such  districts  of  the  cortex  as  lie  behind
the  fissure  of  Sylvius,  so  that  thus  in  general  the  an-
terior parts  of  the  cortical  layer  are  to  be  regarded
more  as  motor,  the  posterior  more  as  sensory,  central
parts  (W.,  p.  167),  and  would  stand  in  a  similar  relation  to
one  another  as  the  anterior  and  posterior  columns  of  the
grey  matter  of  the  cord.


2£o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

The  varied  manner  whereby  one  and  the  same  move-
ment may  be  set  up,  and  the  variety  of  the  inter-
mediate stages  which  a  motor  impulse  issuing  from  the
cerebral  hemisphere  can  traverse,  afford  a  clear  in-
sight into  the  relative  facility  with  which,  on  the  func-
tions of  a  centre  being  disturbed,  an  adjustment  can
take  place  by  the  vicarious  action  of  other  centres.  One
can,  of  course,  here  not  leave  out  of  sight  the  fact  that
pathological  processes  for  the  most  part  acquire  in
course  of  time  a  wider  distribution,  and  thereby  fre-
quently again  destroy  the  adjustment  which  has  already
taken  place.  That,  however,  even  in  those  cases  where
only  a  single  centre  loses  its  functions  there  occurs  a
strong  disturbance  of  all  motor  phenomena,  is  an  ar-
gument in  favour  of  the  view  that  in  normal  circum-
stances the  path  for  any  complex  movement  innervated
by  the  hemispheres  is  that  which  is  best  exercised  and
usually  employed.

Complete  incapability  of  motion  or  paralysis  is  there-
fore only  induced  by  arrest  of  the  function  of  several
chief  centres,  or  by  interruption  of  the  chief  motor  path
from  the  brain  to  the  body.  An  incomplete  paralysis,
however,  presents  an  entirely  different  picture,  according
as  the  disturbance  of  function  or  arrest  of  conduction
relates  to  the  Fore-brain  or  to  the  Intermediate,  Middle,
and  Hind  brains.  In  both  cases  the  execution  of  all
movements  is  still  possible;  but  in  the  former  case  it
occurs  only  as  involuntary  movement  of  reflexion  or
regulation ;  in  the  latter  case  only  as  voluntary  move-
ment. If  the  arrest  of  function  concerns  the  Fore-
brain  or  the  cms  cerebri,  the  influence  of  conscious  will
(innervation  of  the  hemispheres)  is  impaired,  but  the
involuntary  movements  remain  untouched  by  it  {jpar-
esia).  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  arrest  of  function  con-
cerns the  middle  parts  of  the  brain  or  the  paths  leading
thereto  (laqueus  and  tegmentum),  the  conscious  will
(after  overcoming  the  first  disturbance)  retains,  it  is  true ,


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 281

its  sway  over  every  single  province  of  innervation,  but  the
regulation  and  involuntary  combination  of  movements  is
wanting  {ataxy).  In  the  former  case,  the  sick  person
has  to  make  great  efforts  to  overcome  the  arrest  of  func-
tion by  the  innervation  of  the  hemispheres,  and  his
movements  become  truly  troublesome  and  difficult,  his
gait  drawing.  In  the  latter  case,  the  will  of  the  hemi-
spheres  must  see  to  all  the  detail  of  movement,  for  which,
in  other  cases,  the  subordinate  centres  would  make  far  better
provision,  and  the  movements  thereby  become  unsure  (even
perhaps  trembling),  the  gait  hesitating  (W.,  p.  205-206).

A  question  which  must  not  be  left  undiscussed  is  the
following  : — On  what  does  it  depend  whether  a  stimulus
affecting  the  periphery  of  the  body  liberates  at  once  a
reflex  reaction  in  the  particular  spinal  centre,  or  only  in
some  one  of  the  higher  centres  ?  The  mere  strength  of
the  stimulus  alone  cannot  here  be  decisive ;  for  it  is
indeed  true  that  a  stimulus  propagates  with  certainty  its
excitation  to  a  greater  height  the  stronger  it  is,  and  that  no
centre  remains  closed  to  the  strongest  stimuli ;  but,  on  the
other  side,  we  also  know  that  the  weakest  of  all  stimuli
are  able  to  reach  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  and  that  in  the
normal  state  of  waking  life  reflexes  of  the  subordinate
centres  can  only  be  set  up  in  consequence  of  a  relatively
very  small  part  of  all  the  stimuli  affecting  the  organism.
This  state  of  things  is  explained  by  the  general  law  that,
as  the  ganglion-cell  exerts  on  the  nerve-fibre  an  inliuence,
so  every  higher  centre  on  those  subject  to  it,  which  simul-
taneously lowers  the  reflex  irritability  of  the  lower  centres,
and  diminishes  the  resistance  in  conducting  to  the  higher
centre.  This  centrifugal  current  of  innervation,  inhibitory
in  respect  of  the  spontaneity  of  the  lower  centres  but
helpful  for  the  perception  of  the  higher  centre,  exists,
in  the  first  place,  as  a  persisting  tone  in  the  whole
nervous  system ;  secondly,  it  is  reflectorially  called  forth
in  a  more  intense  degree  on  the  preliminary  announcement
of  stimuli ;  and,  thirdly,  it  can  be  voluntarily  sent  out  from


282  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  cerebral  hemispheres  as  result  of  a  conscious  reflex
process.  The  latter  case  gives  us  the  psychological  inter-
pretation of  the  inner  nature  of  this  current  of  innervation,
which  now  appears  on  its  negative  side  as  inhibiting  will,
on  its  positive  side  as  attention.

It  is  well  known  that  the  involuntary  inclination  to
reflex  movements  (e.g.,  to  shrink  on  being  tickled,  or  to
dance  with  expressive  dance-music)  may  be  suppressed  by
the  conscious  will,  which  must  have  different  degrees  of
energy  according  to  the  strength  of  the  reflex  tendency.
This  however  means,  in  physiological  language,  that  the
cerebral  hemispheres  may  innervate  the  reflex  centres  in
question  in  such  a  way  that  their  reflex  irritability  is
momentarily  lowered,  or  that  their  tendency  to  reflexion
is  paralysed  by  negative  impulses.  To  the  same  series
of  phenomena  belongs  the  fact  that  the  conscious  will
in  the  healthy  waking  state  keeps  in  check  the  instinc-
tive impulses  which  are  rooted  in  lower  central  organs
(e.g.,  food-  and  sex-instinct),  but  that  in  dreams,  when
the  activity  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres  is  enfeebled,  or
on  morbid  disturbance  of  the  same,  these  impulses  press
forward  in  ruthless  and  shameless  fashion,  and  in  mad-
men, e.g.,  often  enough  seek  their  satisfaction  without
restraint  in  the  crudest  fashion.  It  is  teleologically
of  the  highest  importance  that  the  reflex  actions  of
the  lower  centres  only  display  their  unchecked  activity
precisely  when  the  cerebrum  is  deprived  of  power  by
sleep,  or  is  claimed  by  another  direction  of  the  attention ;
it  is  just  the  same  as  in  political  life,  where  the  governor
of  a  province  only  acts  without  reserve  on  his  own  initia-
tive, when  the  prince  is  not  present  to  take  his  supreme
resolves,  or  if  he  be  otherwise  occupied,  and  cannot  there-
fore concern  himself  at  the  moment  with  the  affairs  of  a
province.

I  have  (comp.  vol.  i.  p.  1 31-132,  174-176,  275-276,
and  vol.  ii.  p.  105-108)  represented  attention  as  a  centri-
fugal current  of  innervation  facilitating  conduction,  which


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES.  283

may  be  caused  partly  by  reflex  ideation,  partly  by  in-
going stimuli,  and  this  often-impugned  conception  is  con-
firmed in  all  the  main  points  by  the  thoroughgoing  investi-
gations of  Wundt  (W.,  p.  717-725).

Suppose  some  one  is  reading  a  book,  and  a  person  pre-
sent in  the  room  puts  a  question  to  him ;  undoubtedly
the  subject  of  the  question  will  not  immediately  affect
the  consciousness  of  his  hemispheres,  but  yet  the  latter
have  been  stimulated.  It  is,  as  it  were,  a  notice-signal,
such  as  the  telegraphist  sends  before  forwarding  a  dispatch.
This  stimulus  suffices  to  turn  reflectorially  the  current  of
innervation  of  attention  in  this  particular  direction,  and  the
result  is,  that  the  consciousness  of  the  hemispheres  after
an  interval  takes  notice  of  the  question  perceived  in  the
auditory  centre,  and  not  yet  obliterated  there.  Here
appears  the  importance  of  highly  developed  independent
sensory  ganglia,  which  perceive  the  impressions  as  ordered
perceptions  before  the  consciousness  of  the  hemispheres
notes  anything  of  the  occurrence  of  a  perception.

In  the  same  way  as  the  cerebral  hemispheres  send  forth
the  innervation-current  of  attention  and  of  the  arrest  of  the
will  to  the  sensory  ganglia  and  sensori-motor  centres  as  re-
flexion on  the  stimulus  provisionally  conducted  thither,  in
the  same  way  must  we  conceive  such  currents  as  radiating
from  the  middle  parts  of  the  brain  to  the  sensory  nerves
and  to  the  medulla  oblongata  and  spinal  cord,  and  from
every  superior  part  of  the  medulla  oblongata  and  spinal
cord  to  every  lower  part  of  the  same,  partly  as  persisting
tone,  partly  as  momentary  reflectorial  strengthenings  of
this  tone.  On  the  persisting  tone  of  this  inhibitory  current
depends  the  balance  of  chemical  composition  and  decom-
position in  the  lower  centres,  i.e.,  their  nutrition  (M.,  p.
179),  in  like  fashion  as  that  of  the  nerve-fibre  on  the
inhibitory  current  '.of  the  ganglion-cell  from  which  it
springs  (comp.  above,  Section  2).  "  The  increased  ir-
regular activity  "  (in  comparison  with  the  co-ordination
effected  by  higher  centres) "  of  the lower  centres  that


284  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

have  escaped  from  control  betokens  degeneration:  it  is
like  the  turbulent,  aimless  action  of  a  democracy  without
a  head"  (M.,  p.  179).  This  must  never  be  forgottea  in
the  consideration  of  the  appropriateness  of  the  reflexes  of
the  lower  nerve-centres,  that  they  only  fulfil  their  normal,
proper,  and  most  frequently  proposed  task  on  the  supposi-
tion of  the  presence  of  higher  guides,  to  whose  orders
they  readily  submit;  that  the  reflex  action  on  commands
coming  from  above  is  the  usual  case,  and  reflexion  on  a
peripheral  stimulus  in  the  absence  of  higher  instructions
only  the  rarer  exception.

The  influence  of  the  inhibitory  current  coming  from
above  is  experimentally  demonstrable,  and  that  too  in  a
twofold  way.  Namely,  if  a  part  of  the  nervous  system
be  separated  from  its  higher  centres,  the  inhibitory  current
is  interrupted,  and  this  interruption  comes  immediately  to
manifestation  in  the  considerably  increased  irritability  of
the  part  isolated  above.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  con-
nection of  the  parts  remains  unaffected,  but  higher  centres
be  stimulated  {e.g.,  the  upper  part  of  the  spinal  cord)  by
stimuli  conducted  thither,  their  heightened  activity  makes
itself  also  manifest  in  a  strengthening  of  the  inhibitory
current,  i.e.,  the  irritability  of  the  lower  centres  is  now
found  to  be  reduced  below  the  normal  state  (W.,  pp.  174
and  118).  The  enhancement  of  the  irritability  of  the
lower  centres  in  the  first  case  is  also  demonstrable  by
slicing  away  the  hemispheres  and  adjoining  parts  from
above  downwards.  These  experiments,  in  conjunction
with  preliminary  psychical  observations,  are  quite  decisive,
and  unambiguously  prove  the  artistic  and  purposive
organisation  of  the  nervous  system,  in  which  the  lower
energies  are  kept,  it  is  true,  prepared  and  always  ready
for  action,  but,  at  the  same  time,  are  held  in  check  by
the  superior  authorities,  as  a  squadron  of  skilful  riders
and  snorting  steeds  by  the  will  of  the  leader,  until  the
moment  seems  to  have  arrived  for  unchaining  these
energies  by  a  nod.


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES. 285

12.  Organism  and  Soul. — After  the  foregoing  expositions
it  can  hardly  be  necessary  to  point  out  that,  in  the  present
state  of  nerve-physiology,  the  old  question  as  to  "the
seat  of  the  soul,"  which  in  philosophical  reference  could
only  have  been  raised  by  an  erroneous  metaphysic,  is  now
deprived  of  all  significance  on  the  physiological  side  also.

The  older  philosophy  could  only  propose  this  question
so  long  as  it,  in  the  first  place,  looked  on  the  soul  as
a  metaphysical  individual,  independently  existing  apart
from  the  organism  belonging  to  it  (monad) ;  and,  secondly,
as  subjected  to  objective-spatial  determinations,  being,
e.g.,  of  punctual  magnitude  and  locally  fixed.  Now,  one
may  indeed  look  upon  the  soul  as  psychical  substance  yer
sc,  but  as  such  it  is  not  individual  (not  monad).  One  may
also  regard  it  as  psychical  individual;  as  such,  however,  it
is  not  to  be  conceived  as  freed  from  the  body,  by  which
alone  it  can  be  individualised.  Further,  one  may  conceive
it  in  objective-spatial  relations,  but  only  in  and  through
the  organism,  in  the  unity  through  which  it  alone  becomes
individual;  abstracted  from  body  it  is  non-spatial  in  respect
to  the  objective  real  space,  and  can  merely  copy  in  its
idea  a  subjective-ideal  space  according  to  the  former.  The
soul  conceived  in  its  serparation  from  the  body  is  thus  not
individual  and  non-spatial,  and  there  can  be  no  talk  of  a
place  or  scat  of  the  same ;  the  soul  understood  as  organic-
psychical  individual  is  just  as  long,  thick,  and  broad  as  the
body  or  living  organism,  and  cannot  have  any  seat  in  it.

Physiology  and  physiological  psychology,  namely,  teach
us  that  we  have  to  assume  perception  and  will  (and  as
mediator  between  both  the  unconscious-teleological  uni-
formity of  the  metaphysical  substance)  wherever  a  reflexion
takes  place.  This  happens,  however,  not  only  in  every
ganglion- cell,  but  even  in  the  axis  cylinder  of  every
stimulated  nerve-fibre.  For  we  have  seen  above,  in
Section  2,  that  even  in  the  conducting  fibre  the  stimulus
lights  upon  inhibiting  agencies  which  wholly  or  partially
absorb  it,  and  on  stored-up  tension,  which,  in  consequence


286  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  this  absorption  (psychically  :  perception)  of  the  stimu-
lus, becomes  free  (psychically  :  will).  The  same  relation,
however,  recurs  in  the  protoplasmic  content  of  every
living  cell  in  the  body  (comp.  C.  Chap.  iv.  2).  Now,
as  the  organism  as  such  only  reaches  as  far  as  the  life
of  its  parts,  as  this  life  consists  in  reflexion,  whose
inner  psychical  side  cannot  be  entirely  wanting,  the  in-
dividual soul  also  reaches  as  far  as  the  organism  in  the
narrower  sense,  and  both  only  end  where  the  living
organism  is  bounded  by  dead  excretions  of  its  earlier  vital
processes.

Accordingly,  so  far  as  the  soul  is  conceived  as
unit  and  individual,  its  objectively  spatial  determination
coincides  with  that  of  the  organism ;  but  this  does  not
prevent  our  recognising  the  inner  organization  and  the
different  value  of  the  organs  just  as  much  on  the  psy-
chical as  on  the  material  side  of  the  phenomenon.  Psy-
chical functions  are  connected  with  all  the  organic  vital
functions  of  the  cells  in  the  body,  but  in  the  economy  of
the  psychical  individuality  the  psychical  functions  of  the
different  cells  have  an  importance  at  least  as  distinct  as
their  organic  functions  for  the  economy  of  the  organic  in-
dividuality ;  nay,  the  difference  is  far  greater  still  on  the
psychical  side.

We  have  seen  how  the  psychical  functions  rise  in  gradual
succession  from  muscular  fibres  to  nerve-fibres,  from  these
to  the  vegetative  ganglion-cell,  and  from  this,  lastly,  to  the
cells  of  the  spinal  cord,  medulla  oblongata,  sensory  centres,
and  cerebral  hemispheres.  The  gradual  character  of  this
step-by-step  advance  of  functions,  which  is  unambiguously
illustrated  in  the  parallel  scale  of  the  animal  kingdom,
leaves  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  same  principle  is  exhi-
bited at  all  stages,  and  that  it  is  a  serious  error  to  try  to
seek  the  soul  only  in  the  highest  link  of  this  long  chain,
namely,  exclusively  in  the  cerebral  hemispheres  of  man
(and  at  any  rate  of  the  highest  mammals).  This  older  con-
ception, in  which  Wundt  is  still  in  the  main  entangled,


PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVE-CENTRES  287

whilst  Maudsley  has  positively  surmounted  it,  lapses  into
the  old  error  of  the  localisation  of  the  mind,  in  that  it  desig-
nates a  part  of  the  Fore-brain  (the  cerebral  hemispheres)
as  sole  "  seat "  of  the  soul.  AVe  must  break  definitively
with  this  error.  Only  particular  psychical  functions  are
assigned  to  particular  parts  of  the  nervous  system.  Soul
in  general  is  crcryichere  and  nowhere,  according  as  one
understands  the  term.  The  individual  soul,  however  (as
unconscious  unitary  totality  of  the  psychical  functions  of
the  organically  psychical  individual),  is,  per  se,  nowhere,
and,  referred  to  the  external  phenomenal  side  of  the
organically  psychical  individual,  it  reaches  as  far  as  the
organism.

As  concerns  the  relation  between  the  internal  and
external  phenomenon,  one  must  hold  fast  to  this,  that
the  immediate  content  of  consciousness  is  never  able  to
explain  the  processes  of  the  material  phenomenon  in  the
organism,  but  that  the  converse  also  holds  good,  as  must  at
length  be  granted  by  all  sober  men  of  science.  If  one
is  not  inclined  absolutely  to  forego  all  explanation,  and
to  confess  to  the  ignorabimus  of  Du  Bois-Eeymond,  one
must  admit  that  only  one  way  remains  open  by  which  an
explanation  can  at  least  not  be  called  impossible.  That
way,  however,  consists  in  this,  that  we  derive  the  inner
uniformity  of  the  conscious  mental  functions  and  the
outer  uniformity  of  the  counterpart  of  the  material  forces
from  a  common  source,  and,  moreover,  not  from  such  a  one
as  formerly  might  have  arranged  by  a  single  act  the
harmony  of  both  uniformities  for  all  time  (by  pre-estab-
lished harmony),  but  from  a  source  which  is  immanent
with  its  essence  in  all  the  inner  and  outer  phenomena,
and  in  living  activity  constantly  brings  its  essence  to
two-sided  manifestation  (comp.  above,  Section  5).  This
source  of  the  inner  and  outer  uniformity  can  accordingly
be  no  other  than  the  nature  of  the  metaphysical  substance
itself,  which  is  the  indivisible  essence  of  botli  sides  of  the
phenomenon,  as  well  for  each  single  individual  of  higher


288  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

or  lower  order,  as  also  for  the  individual  of  the  highest
and  lowest  rank,  i.e.,  for  the  world  as  a  whole.

Without  going  back  to  the  mysterious  bond  which
closely  unites  the  outer  organic  individuality  with  the
inner  psychical,  it  is  impossible  to  grasp  the  organic-
psychical  individuality  as  real  living  and  concrete  unity ;
it  is,  in  other  words,  impossible  to  study  physiological
psychology.  This  bond,  however,  can  by  no  means  be
sought  in  the  sphere  of  the  phenomenon,  whether  external
material  or  inner  conscious-mental,  since  we  indeed  started
with  the  perception  that  each  side  of  the  phenomenon,
even  taken  in  its  totality,  is  unable  to  explain  the  other
side.  Consequently  this  bond  can  only  be  sought  beyond
matter,  as  beyond  consciousness,  i.e.,  physiological  psycho-
logy is  forced  by  its  own  definition  to  pass  over  into  the
sphere  of  metaphysics.  When  this  irrefragable  truth  first
becomes  generally  and  clearly  perceived,  the  day  of  recon-
ciliation between  Physical  Science  and  Philosophy,  which
so  long  (and  not  without  teleological  warrant)  have
shunned  one  another,  will  begin  to  break  with  beaming
splendour,  and  a  new  era  of  science  begin.

The  bond,  however,  which  unites  organism  and  con-
sciousness into  the  indivisible  organic-psychical  indivi-
duality— the  living  spring  whence  issues  the  uniformity
of  the  material  and  conscious-mental  order  in  ever-renewed
harmony — this  essence,  which  is  revealed  in  both  aspects  of
the  phenomenon,  is  the  Unconscious,  or  the  Unconscious
Spirit  in  its  twofold  character  of  energetic  Will  and  logical
(therefore  also  purposive)  Idea,  and  this  All-One  Uncon-
scious it  is  which  is  designated  in  its  functional  individua-
tion "  unconscious  soul."


ADDENDA.


VOL.  III.


( 291 )


ADDENDA.


VOL. I.

P.  7,  note,  last  1. — Comp.  also  my  "  Erlauterungen  zur
Metaphysik  des  Uubewussten "  (Berlin,  Carl  Duncker,
1 874),  p.  8-i  i.

P.  20,  1.  24. — The  second  enlarged  edition  of  "  Das  Ding
an  Sich"  appeared  in  1875,  with  the  title  "Kritische
Grundlegung  des  transcendentalen  Eealismus "  (Berlin,
Carl  Duncker).

P.  23,  1.  17. — A  thorough  investigation  of  the  part
which  the  Unconscious,  in  the  sense  of  an  unconscious-
logical  mental  function,  plays  in  the  whole  Kantian
philosophy,  but  quite  specially  in  the  Critique  of  Judg-
ment, and  next  to  that  in  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,
has  been  undertaken  by  Johannes  Volkelt  in  his  disserta-
tion "Kant's  Stellung  zum  unbewusst  Logischen"  (Phil.
Monatshefte,  1873,  ^d.  ix.  Heft  2  and  3),  and  in  his  work
"Das  Unbewusste  und  der  Pessimismus"  (Berlin,  F.
Ilenschel,  1873),  p.  44-62.  He  shows  in  both  places
"that  the  deepening  of  the  Kantian  philosophy  must
always  of  necessity  lead  further  into  the  realm  of  the
Unconscious,"  since  in  all  departments  of  Kantian  inquiry
there  appear  contradictions  in  the  solutions  given  by
Kant,  which  call  for  removal,  and  can  only  be  elimi-
nated by  the  introduction  of  the  conception  of  the  Un-
conscious. Kant  has,  therefore,  also  in  this  respect,  as


292  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

in  so  many  others,  laboured  and  performed  less  for  the
progress  of  philosophy  by  his  solution  than  by  his  state-
ment of  problems ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  has  also  more
truly  paved  the  way  for  the  recognition  of  the  Un-
conscious than  many  a  one  who  had  far  more  distinctly
grasped  the  Unconscious  as  an  isolated  conception.

P.  28,  1.  25. — Likewise  in  regard  to  the  Hegelian  philo-
sophy J.  Volkelt  makes  some  excellent  remarks  in  his  book
"  The  Unconscious  and  Pessimism  "  (p.  62-78),  where  it  is
made  clear  "  that  the  unconsciously  logical  must  form  its
vital  clement "  (p.  62),  and  that  "  Hegelianism  pre-emi-
nently possesses  the  inherent  tendency  to  develop  the
principle  of  the  Unconscious  in  its  whole  extent "  (p.  76).
If  with  Kant  the  Unconscious  occupies  somewhat  the
position  of  an  unsuspected  presupposition,  which  a  thinker
hardly  ventures  to  own  to  himself,  with  Hegel  the  uncon-
sciousness of  the  Idea  in  its  being  per  se  forms  a  self-
evident  presupposition,  which,  by  very  reason  of  its  self-
evidence,  he  does  not  further  discuss ;  whereas  exposed,
as  it  is,  to  most  misunderstanding  and  hostility,  it  is
precisely  the  point  which  needed  the  most  unequivocal
articulation  and  thorough  proof.  Accordingly  the  Un-
conscious appears  in  Hegel  also  an  Unconscious  in  the
literal  sense  of  the  term,  although  intrinsically  and  sub-
stantially it  pervades  and  determines  the  whole  content
of  his  philosophy.

P.  28,  1.  32. — For  the  rest,  there  may  be  found  in
Hegel's  works  a  sufficient  number  of  passages  to  prove
to  the  incredulous  that  the  conception  of  Hegelianism
just  indicated  was  really  that  of  the  master  himself,
and  these  have  been  skilfully  collected  by  Volkelt.  The
expression  "  objective  thought "  Hegel  finds  "  unsuitable,
because  thought  is  usually  too  much  employed  as  ap-
pertaining only  to  mind,  to  consciousness "  (Encyclop.,
§  24).  If  the  inner  side  of  the  world  be  designated
Thought,  nothing  of  the  nature  of  consciousness  should
thereby  be  attributed  to  it. The  logical  in  the  world


ADDENDA.  293

should  rather  form  a  S)Tstem  of  thought  devoid  of  con-
sciousness (ibid.,  Appendix,  p.  45  ff.)  Hegel  declares  the
office  of  Logic  to  be  to  elevate  the  categories  originally
only  instinctively  active  in  the  form  of  impulses  to  the
stage  of  consciousness  (Works,  iii.  p.  18-19).  Instinct,
however,  he  calls  purposive  activity  acting  in  an  unconscious
fashion  (Encyclop.,  §  360).  In  his  "  ^Esthetics  "  he  says
(2d  ed.,  i.  p.  53):  "Fancy  has  a  mode  of  production  that
is  at  the  same  time  of  the  nature  of  instinct,  in  that  the
essentially  symbolical  and  sensuous  character  of  art-work
must  possess  a  subjective  existence  in  the  artist  as  native
tendency  and  natural  impulse,  and  as  unconscious  action
be  also  the  expression  of  the  man  on  his  natural  side."

P.  29,  1.  36. — The  essence  of  the  Unconscious  remains
altogether  indefinite  in  the  following  observation,  which
for  the  rest  proves  that  Schopenhauer  had  a  correct  feel-
ing of  the  importance  which  a  profound  analysis  of  the
Unconscious  must  acquire  at  least  for  psychology  and
aesthetics :  "  All  that  is  original,  and  therefore  all  that  is
genuine  in  man,  acts  as  such  unconsciously,  like  the  forces
of  Nature.  What  has  passed  through  consciousness  has
thereby  become  a  representation.  Accordingly  all  genuine
and  sterling  qualities  of  the  character  and  of  the  mind  are
originally  unconscious,  and  only  as  such  do  they  make  a
deep  impression.  Everything  of  the  kind  that  is  conscious
lias  been  already  touched  up,  and  is  intentional,  easily
passes  therefore  into  affectation,  i.e.,  deceit.  What  man
performs  unconsciously  costs  him  no  trouble,  can,  however,
also  not  be  accomplished  by  any  trouble.  Of  this  kind
is  the  formation  of  original  conceptions,  as  they  underlie
and  form  the  core  of  all  genuine  achievements.  Therefore
only  the  innate  is  genuine  and  will  stand  its  test,  and
every  one  who  desires  to  achieve  anything  must  in  every
ease,  in  action,  in  ivriting,  in  culture,  follouj  rales  without
bring  aware  of  them  "  (Parerga,  vol.  ii.  §  352).

P.  32. — According  to  Herder,  "Nature  thinks  bettor
than  man." Ilaym  dec]  ires  (Preuss.  Jahr..  Hd.  xxxi.,  1873,


294  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Heft  i,  p.  43)  that  he  is  speaking  of  the  unerring  Uncon-
scious, which  "  includes  in  itself  a  kind  of  omniscience  and
omnipotence,  of  the  one  organic  Principium  of  Nature,  of
the  organic  Omnipotence  distributed  everywhere,  support-
ing or  restoring  life,"  from  which  he  might  just  as  well  de-
duce the  growth  of  crystals  or  the  instincts  of  animals,  or,
lastly,  the  life,  endeavour,  and  fate  of  man.  On  the  preced-
ing page  Haym  quotes  a  sentence  from  a  letter  of  Jacobi
to  the  Princess  of  Galizin :  "  Our  consciousness  develops
from  something  that  as  yet  had  not  consciousness,  our  thought
from  something  which  has  not  yet  thought,  our  reflection
from  something  which  has  not  yet  reflected,  our  will  from
something  which  has  not  willed,  our  rational  mind  from
something  which  was  never  rational  soul.  A  mechanical
lever — which  need  not  therefore  be  quite  void  of  sense —
was  everywhere  the  first."

P.  39,  1.  3. — An  excellent  account  of  the  services  of
the  philosophical  physiologists  may  be  found  in  Volkelt,
"The  Unconscious  and  Pessimism,"  p.  78-26.  Why
Carus  could  not  become  the  standard-bearer  of  a  new
school,  of  a  band  of  adherents  collected  round  the  flag
of  the  Unconscious,  is  there  shown  on  p.  83-86  (comp.
also  A.  Taubert,  "  Der  Pessimismus  und  seine  Gegner,"
p.  160).

P.  40,  1.  12. — The  somewhat  modified  position  which
Wundt  takes  up  in  his  most  recent  work  with  regard  to
the  notion  of  the  Unconscious  is  noticed  in  the  Appendix,
"On  the  Physiology  of  the  Nerve- Centres"  (comp.  above,
p.  208-210).

P.  41,  1.  14. — For  the  rest,  the  sentence  quoted  has  been
anticipated  by  George  Christopher  Lichtenberg,  in  whom
is  found  the  following  passage  :  "  We  become  conscious  of
certain  ideas  which  do  not  depend  on  ourselves ;  others —
so  at  least  we  believe — depend  on  ourselves  ;  where  is  the
boundary  ?  We  only  know  of  the  existence  of  our  own
sensations,  ideas,  and  thoughts.  It  thinks,  one  ought  to
say,  just  as  one  says,  It  lightens. To  say  cogito  is  already


ADDENDA.  295

too  much,  as  soon  as  one  translates  by  I  think. To  assume
to  postulate,  the  ego,  is  a  practical  necessity."

P.  42. — In  a  manner  independent,  as  it  would  seem,  of
the  Continental  evolution,  the  conception  of  the  Uncon-
scious has  gained  a  place  in  English  literature  in  the  last
decennia ;  it  is  a  philosopher,  a  historian,  and  a  physician
in  whom  it  has  found  its  clearest  expression.  Hamilton
has  inferred  the  existence  of  unconscious  ideas  chiefly
from  the  circumstance  (comp.  "  Lect.  on  Metaph.,"  i.  p.  352
ff.)  that  on  the  revival  of  a  former  train  of  thought  some-
times a  whole  series  of  intermediate  links  seems  to  be
overleapt — an  argument  certainly  of  little  value  in  this
form.  The  best  clue  to  Carlyle's  position  in  respect  to
the  conception  of  the  Unconscious  is  afforded  by  the  essay
entitled  "  Characteristics "  (which  first  appeared  in  the
Edinburgh  Bcvieiv,  No.  cviii.,  and  was  afterwards  reprinted
in  his  collected  essays).  Of  all  English  authors  Maudsley
has  most  decidedly  and  most  thoroughly  grasped  and
defended  the  conception  of  the  Unconscious,  except  that
he  seeks  to  interpret  the  Unconscious  as  far  as  possible
materialistically.  The  Appendix  is  sufficiently  occupied
with  Maudsley's  views  (comp.  above  p.  253-256)  to  render
it  unnecessary  to  characterise  them  further  here.  Lastly,
Lewes  ought  to  be  cited  as  an  English  author  who  has
admitted  the  notion  of  the  Unconscious  in  a  certain
direction.

However  defective  and  incomplete  may  be  the  notices
here  collected,  they  may  yet  suifice  for  the  purpose  of
showing  that  the  principle  of  the  Unconscious,  as  every-
thing historically  important,  has  been  arrived  at  by  a
gradual  process  of  formation  and  growth ;  that  all  phases
and  schools  of  philosophy,  from  the  oldest  times  to  the
present  day,  more  or  less  strive  after  this  principle  (comp.
J.  Volkelt,  "I)as  Unbew.  u.  d.  Pess.,"  the  first  part,
"  History  of  the  Unconscious  "),  and  that  in  the  present
work  I  have  only  more  plainly  asserted  and  shown  the
deep  significance  of  this  principle,  as  well  as  most  com-


296  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

pletely  established  it,  but  have  by  no  means  aired  it  as  a
brand-new  discovery  (or,  as  it  has  been  more  maliciously
called,  "  invention  ").

P.  46,  note,  last  1. — That  it  is  in  general  lawful,  nay,
even  imperative,  to  introduce  into  philosophical  inquiries
the  notion  of  probability,  which  in  modern  natural  philo-
sophy is  already  universally  acknowledged  to  be  the  sole
foundation  of  all  human  knowledge ;  and  that  even  in
philosophy,  when  discussing  problems  which  admit  of
various  solutions,  an  effort  must  be  made  to  determine
the  probability  of  the  assumption  of  different  conceiv-
able hypotheses  as  far  as  seems  possible,  can  only  be
disputed  by  two  parties,  namely,  on  the  one  side,  by
that  school  which  regards  the  problem  of  philosophy  ex-
clusively as  the  ascertainment  of  an  absolute  certainty,  and
declares  all  other  knowledge  save  a  supposed  absolute  one
to  be  essentially  unphilosophical ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
from  the  opposite  quarter  of  an  absolute  scepticism,  which
questions  the  possibility  of  all  knowledge,  not  only  abso-
lute, but  also  relative,  and  denies  to  man  the  capability  of
establishing  any  distinction  between  truth  and  untruth.
Almost  all  past  philosophy  has  oscillated  between  these
two  extremes.  When  the  pretension  to  absolute  know-
ledge has  once  more  justly  become  ridiculous  for  a  time,
scepticism  regains  the  upperhand,  and  it  is  then  set  up  as
the  sole  problem  of  philosophy  to  show  that  philosophising
is  nonsense.  In  fact,  it  is  hardly  comprehensible  how
to-day,  after  so  many  failures  of  systems  giving  them-
selves out  to  be  absolute  truth,  after  such  clear  disclosures
of  the  gradual  attainment  of  truth,  after  such  distinct  per-
ception of  the  insufficiency  of  the  instruments  of  human
knowledge  in  presence  of  the  overwhelming  extensive
and  intensive  magnitude  of  the  universe,  there  can  still
always  be  found  ingenuous  people  who  declare  the  problem
of  philosophy  to  be  that  of  absolute  knowledge,  and  ven-
ture to  assert  all  knowledge  to  be  unphilosophical  which
renounces  the  claim  to  absolute  certainty. That  certain


ADDENDA.  297

knowledge  is  and  must  remain  the  ideal  of  our  cogni-
tive efforts  is  not  to  be  doubted ;  but  one  might  at  the
present  day  sufficiently  know  that  ideals  are  just
what  are  not  to  be  found  in  actuality ;  that  they  rather
only  form  the  asymptote,  which  the  curve  of  historical
development  more  and  more  approaches  without  ever
meeting.  But  equally  mistaken  is  it  on  the  other  side,
when  the  impossibility  of  realising  the  ideal  as  such  is
perceived,  straightway  to  reject  the  ideal  as  a  phantom
without  any  real  significance,  or  to  declare  real  and
ideal  to  be  infinitely  wide  apart,  and  therefore  incom-
mensurable. Were  scepticism  right,  all  our  supposed
knowledge  would  be  equally  wide  of  the  truth  (for  if  it
once  touched  it  by  accident,  we  could  indeed  know
nothing  of  this  concidence) ;  accordingly  all  possibility
of  an  historical  evolution  of  knowledge,  all  possibility
of  science,  all  perceivable  or  declarable  distinction  be-
tween knowledge,  faith,  and  crazy  imagination  would
be  abolished.  One  only  needs  to  become  conscious  of
these  consequences  of  a  thoroughgoing  sceptical  prin-
ciple to  see  how  insupportable  it  is  for  the  human  mind ;
and  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  humanity  ever  again  relapses
from  scepticism  into  the  dogma  of  the  attainability  of
absolute  knowledge,  only,  after  a  little  time,  once  more
to  exhibit  its  utter  untenability.  We  are  saved  from
this  barren  circle  only  by  the  open  acknowledgment  of
the  relative  truth  and  relative  untruth  of  the  two  ex-
tremes. The  dogma  of  absolute  knowledge  is  right  in
setting  up  its  ideal,  and  in  the  belief  that  the  endeavour
after  this  ideal  is  not  fruitless.  Scepticism  is  right  in
denying  the  complete  attainability  of  this  ideal  to  be
ever  humanly  possible.  lint  the  former  is  wrong  when  it
misapprehends  the  distinction  between  ideal  and  reality,
and  denies  off-hand  validity  to  everything,  which  cannot
claim  to  be  faultless  realisation  of  the  ideal;  the  latter
is  wrong  when  it  abolishes  the  possibility  of  distinguishing
in  human  knowledge  different  degrees  of  approximation  to


298  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  ideal  or  remoteness  therefrom.  It  must  be  strenuously
maintained  that  a  different  dignity  appertains  to  different
degrees  of  cognition,  because  without  this  even  practical
life  becomes  a  senseless  hurly-burly.  If,  however,  one
chooses  to  ascribe  to  scientific  knowledge  a  higher  dignity
than  to  unscientific  imagining  and  thinking,  to  the  know-
ledge conscious  of  its  material  proof  a  higher  worth  than
to  the  groundless  conviction  of  a  faith  which  rests  merely
on  postulates  of  feeling,  or  on  the  personal  authority  of
him  who  transmits  it,  or  maybe  on  morbid  fixed  ideas,  then
there  is  no  other  means  available  but  to  quantitatively
determine  the  degrees  of  the  approximation  of  knowledge
to  the  cognitive  ideal  of  certainty,  whether  this  determina-
tion be  made  in  numerical  form  or  in  the  less  distinct
shape  of  an  emotional  estimate  of  quantity  without
numerical  expression.  If  Leibniz  was  right,  that  there
is  no  assertion,  however  false,  in  which  there  does  not
lie  a  grain  of  truth,  and  no  truth,  however  sublime,
with  which  there  is  not  some  untruth  mingled  by
reason  of  its  expression  in  language,  then  there  is  also  no
thinking,  believing,  or  knowing  in  which  an  unclear  feel-
ing does  not  point  to  the  intermixture  of  true  and  untrue
elements.  It  behoves  us  to  scientifically  purify  this  feel-
ing, and  to  determine  the  proportion  of  true  and  untrue
elements,  in  order  precisely  to  define  the  degree  of  approxi-
mation of  our  knowledge  to  certainty.  If  one  wished  to
express  the  dignity  of  our  knowledge  by  the  proportion
of  its  true  and  false  elements,  as  happens  in  a  wager  about
the  truth  of  an  assertion,  one  would  have  a  proportion
between  two  variables,  which  would  render  difficult  the
comparison  between  several  such  proportions.  It  is
better  therefore  to  express  the  worth  of  the  knowledge  by
the  ratio  between  the  true  elements  contained  therein  and
the  totality  of  the  elements  supposed  to  be  true,  or,  in
other  words,  one  takes  the  constant  cognitive  ideal  of
certainty  as  standard  of  worth,  as  I,  and  expresses  the
degree  of  the  approximation  of  knowledge  to  certainty  by


ADDENDA.  299

the  degree  of  approximation  of  a  proper  fraction  to  unit}-.
Whoever  has  once  made  himself  familiar  with  this  mathe-
matical mode  of  expression  will  soon  feel  its  natural  fit-
ness, and  easily  get  accustomed  to  fix  his  indefinite  emo-
tional estimate  of  the  worth  of  a  cognition  by  means  of  a
coefficient  of  probability,  whose  magnitude  may  always  be
conceived  as  fluctuating  between  a  least  and  a  greatest
limit,  and  accordingly  as  affected  with  a  probable  error.

P.  51. — Objections  have  been  raised  from  various  sides
against  this  employment  of  the  calculus  of  probabilities,
which,  however,  have  betrayed  for  the  most  part  far  too
considerable  a  defect  of  comprehension  for  it  to  be  re-
warding to  occupy  ourselves  more  closely  with  them,  and
which  one  and  all  do  not  enter  upon  the  point,  which  I
have  already  indicated  (vol.  i.  p.  48,  note)  as  that,  where
the  concrete  applicability  of  the  argumentative  processes
in  question  may  most  easily  miscarry.

I  will  only  mention  here  one  opponent,  partly  because
his  fallacious  objections  possess  a  certain  plausibility,
partly  because  he  has  called  my  attention  to  the  neces-
sity of  a  supplement  to  my  argumentation  for  the  benefit
of  readers  slow  of  comprehension  or  ill-disposed,  which  I
had  thought  I  might  leave  as  superfluous  to  the  intelli-
gence of  the  reader  himself.  Albert  Lange,  in  his  "  His-
tory of  Materialism  "  (2d  ed.,  vol.  ii.  p.  280-283,  and  p.
307-309),  disputes  the  applicability  of  the  entire  inferen-
tial process  to  the  problems  of  Nature,  so  far  as  concerns
regressive  inferences  from  phenomena  to  their  causes,
and  that  on  the  ground  that  the  actual  as  a  special  case
of  very  many  possibilities  must  always  appear  extremely
improbable  a  priori,  a  circumstance,  however,  which
would  not  affect  its  reality,  as  the  fraction  of  probability
means  nothing  more  than  the  degree  of  our  subjective  un-
certainty (p.  282  1.  1 5-1 1  fr.  b.,  p.  283  1.  3-6  fr.  a.)  He
supports  this  denial  on  the  ground  that  the  whole  theory
of  probability  presupposes  an  abstraction  of  the  efficient
causes,  of  which  we  are  entirely  ignorant,  whereas  certain


300  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

general  conditions  are  known  to  us  on  which  we  base  our
calculation  (p.  282  1.  1 1—7  fr.  h.)  Were  the  latter  asser-
tion correct  there  would  he  no  reply  to  the  suggested
inference  therefrom;  but  in  fact  it  requires  an  important
modification.  If,  namely,  the  co-operating  causes  which
we  abstract  were  absolutely  unknown  in  all  respects,  there
could  be  no  talk  of  probability  at  all;  the  calculus  of
probability  is,  on  the  other  hand,  only  possible  on  the
supposition  that  the  co-operating  causes  of  which  ab-
straction is  made  are  accidental  causes.  But  by  acci-
dental causes  in  the  sense  of  the  calculus  of  probabili-
ties are  to  be  understood  such  as  are  not  in  this  form
indispensable  to  the  occurrence  of  the  phenomenon  in
question,  therefore  also  are  not  constantly  met  with  in
the  same,  but  so  change  that  their  influence  is  more
completely  compensated  the  more  frequently  the  occur-
rence is  repeated.  The  estimate  afforded  by  the  calculus
of  probabilities  rests  on  the  supposition  of  a  complete
compensation  of  the  accidental  co-operating  causes  in
infinitely  numerous  repetitions.  Such  accidental  causes
are,  e.g.,  in  inorganic  nature  the  causes  which  condition
the  falling  of  the  die  on  this  or  that  side,  in  organic
nature  those  which  give  rise  to  monstrosities  and  arrested
developments.

Only  by  leaving  out  of  sight  this  fundamental  assump-
tion of  the  calculus  of  probabilities  can  Lange  deny  the
admissibility  of  a  regressive  inference  from  perceived  effects
to  the  nature  of  the  causes.  If,  e.g.,  I  approach  a  game  of
rouge  et  noir,  in  which  I  see  red  appear  twenty  times  in
succession,  there  is  certainly  no  doubt  that  this  event  may
be  produced  by  a  mere  combination  of  accidental  causes  ;  but
little  as  this  possibility  is  to  be  doubted,  yet  the  extraordi-
nary small  probability  of  the  same  gives  me  the  right  to
conceive  also  the  other  possibility,  that  a  constant  cause  is
present  which  favours  red.  Lange  will  certainly  charge
no  one  with  drawing  a  wrong  conclusion,  who  should  hesi-
tate to  risk  his  money  in  such  a  game,  because  the  suspicion


ADDENDA.  301

(i.e.,  the  inference  of  probability)  at  once  occurs  that  the
play  is  contrived  with  a  view  to  deception,  although  the
possibility  is  always  conceded  that  this  suspicion  may  be
erroneous.  But  if  Lange  admits  the  validity  of  such  an  infer-
ence,he  cannot  refuse  the  like  to  my  examples ;  he  must  then
be  able  to  prove  a  priori  that  the  class  of  constant  causes
which  I  suppose  is  impossible.  His  objection,  totally  de-
void of  all  proof,  in  fact  amounts  to  this.  The  inferential
process  he  cannot  by  rights  impugn,  but  he  only  tries  to
question,  from  the  prejudiced  standpoint  of  a  materialistic-
mechanical  view  of  the  world,  the  admissibility  of  the
hypothetical  goal  to  which  it  is  applied.  From  the  point
of  view  of  the  calculus  of  probabilities,  such  a  procedure
would  only  be  legitimate  if  from  the  first  such  an  enor-
mous probability  were  assigned  to  the  mechanical  view
of  the  world,  forbidding  the  resort  to  metaphysical
principles  (not  merely,  to  mythological  personal  spirits),
that  even  the  counter-instances  of  the  highest  probability
had  no  power  to  shake  that  probability.  Were  this  the
case,  all  philosophy  and  metaphysics,  as  Lange  thinks,
would  be  impossible ;  whether  it  be  so  is  first  to  be  de-
termined by  my  investigation,  and  in  the  meantime  it
appears  to  me  an  unscientific  prejudice,  a  mere  petitio
principii,  whose  untruth  will  become  more  and  more
apparent.

Lange  tries  to  strengthen  his  protest  against  the  resort
to  metaphysical  principles  by  a  simile,  when  he  asserts
that  by  the  same  method  upon  the  frequent  recurrence  of
good  luck  in  games  of  chance  one  might  prove  with  equal
probability  the  co-operation  of  a  Fortuna  or  a  spiritus
familiaris.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  here  wanting  the
elimination  of  constant  material  causes  presupposed  by  me
in  my  discussion,  i.e.,  before  such  inference  to  a  Fortuna
an  exact  investigation  must  be  made  whether  the  dice  or
the  arrangement  of  the  game  of  rouge  et  noir  is  not  affected
by  errors  which  act  as  constant  causes.  But  suppose  this
inquiry  were  carried  out  with  extreme  precision,  and  had


302  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

yielded  a  negative  result,  nothing,  in  fact,  could  be  alleged
against  the  inference  to  a  Fortuna  as  constant  cause  save
the  circumstance,  that  the  non-existence  of  such  a  mytho-
logical personage  has  on  other  grounds  a  considerably
greater  probability  than  the  evidence  for  its  existence
furnished  by  the  game.  That  this  is  actually  the  case  it
will  not  be  necessary  to  prove ;  but  precisely  on  that
account  the  example  can  prove  nothing  against  the  intro-
duction of  impersonal  metaphysical  principles  for  the
explanation  of  the  processes  of  organic  formation,  since  for
the  non-existence  of  these  such  an  overpowering  proba-
bility is  by  no  means  established.  Lange  has,  therefore,
by  no  means,  as  he  purposed,  pointed  out  a  methodologi-
cal error  in  my  explanation,  but  he  has  only  revealed  the
blinding  power  of  the  materialistic  prejudice  by  which
he  is  possessed.

But  now  it  is  further  to  be  considered  that  the  parallel
drawn  between  a  man  winning  ten  times  in  succession
and  the  origin  of  organic  fitness  in  Nature  proves  nothing
for  an  altogether  different  reason,  in  that,  namely,  Lange
speaks  only  of  one  man  who  gains  in  a  single  case  ten
times  in  succession,  whereas  the  marvellous  conjunction
of  the  conditions  of  organic  adaptation  is  repeated  in  in-
numerable cases  simultaneously  and  successively.  That
this  particular  man  is  favoured  by  a  Fortuna  would  only
be  a  conclusion  analogous  to  that  of  a  purpose  in  organic
Nature,  if  this  man  not  only  gained  in  one  game  ten  or
twenty  times  on  doubling  his  stakes,  but  had  this  unheard-
of  luck  his  whole  life  long  on  all  the  gaming-tables  of  the
world,  and  if  a  failure  of  this  unheard-of  luck  belonged
in  his  case  as  much  to  the  class  of  exceptions  as  abortions
to  the  exceptions  of  purposive  organic  formation.  Con-
versely Lange  would  only  then  be  right  that  the  reality  of
the  a  priori  improbable  in  organic  Nature  does  not  sum-
marily compel  the  regressive  inference  to  a  constant  cause,
if  the  occurrence  of  this  a  priori  improbable  harmonious
fitness  were  as  rare  an  exception  among  innumerable  un-


ADDENDA.  303

successful  malformations  and  deformities  as  the  ten  or
twenty  times  successive  gain  is  a  rare  exceptional  case  in
games  of  chance  (altogether  corresponding  in  the  degree
of  its  rareness  to  the  a  priori  theory  of  probability).  This
colossal  difference  is  so  evident  as  to  make  its  over-
sight by  Lange  very  surprising ;  it  would  by  itself  suffice
to  render  impotent  all  the  attacks  of  Lange  upon  my
exposition.

P.  71,  last  1. — These  remarks  must  suffice  as  a  justifica-
tion that  no  other  term  than  "  Will "  has  been  selected
for  the  designation  of  the  single  principle  undoubtedly
underlying  all  the  manifestations  of  the  volitional  sphere.
This  term,  rightly  hit  upon  by  Schopenhauer,  only
met  with  such  violent  opposition  in  the  philosophy  of
the  schools,  because  the  psychology  of  the  latter  was
entirely  confined  to  the  department  of  conscious  psychical
activity,  and  aimed  at  detaching  this  as  something  speci-
fically higher  and  alien  from  its  unconscious  natural  basis,
so  that  the  extension  of  a  term  chiefly  borrowed  from
conscious  mental  life  to  unconscious  psychical  functions
appeared  to  it  a  crime  against  the  majesty  of  the  mind
already  artificially  disengaged  from  Nature.  The  more
the  doctrine  of  the  essential  identity  of  the  conscious  mind
with  unconscious  Nature  has  gained  acceptance,  the  more
admirers  and  imitators  Schopenhauer's  use  of  the  expres-
sion "  Will  "  lias  found.  (Comp.  Goring,  "  System  der
Kritischen  Philosophic,"  Leipzig,  Voit  &  Co.,  1874,  part  i.
chap,  iii.,  especially  p.  68-71,  where  various  objections  to
the  conception  of  unconscious  will  are  refuted.)

P.  74,  1.  34. — If  recent  investigations  have  shown  that  in
certain  parts  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres  there  are  also
found  motor  nerve-endings,  yet  the  following  sufficiently
weighty  arguments  taken  by  themselves  are  not  thereby
affected.

P.  77,  1.  2. — In  order  that  a  movement  may  ensue  cor-
rectly, i.e.,  in  the  right  proportion  of  the  intensity  of  all
its  components,  a  clear  perception  of  the  position  of  the


304  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

particular  bodily  parts  must  not  only  be  present  at  the
beginning  of  the  movement,  but  also  during  the  successive
moments  of  execution ;  it  is,  however,  requisite  for  this
that  both  the  sense  of  touch  as  well  as  the  muscular  sense
(or  muscular  feeling)  be  correctly  functional.  Only  when
the  right  feeling  of  the  position  of  the  parts  is  given  (for
the  rest,  this  feeling  need  not  take  place  in  the  cerebrum,
but  will  usually  have  its  material  substratum  only  in  the
cerebellum,  optic  thalami,  or  corpora  striata),  only  then  can
the  degree  of  motor  innervation  be  rightly  estimated,  and
be  controlled  by  a  comparison  of  the  perceived  feeling  of
muscular  movement  during  the  nearly  completed  move-
ment with  the  muscular  feeling  anticipated  by  the  idea,
i.e.,  be  strengthened,  or  hindered,  or  modified  during  action.
Thus  undoubtedly  the  muscular  feeling  anticipated  by  the
idea  (but  only  through  the  controlling  comparison  with
the  muscular  feeling  perceived  before  and  during  move-
ment) can  serve  as  regulator  of  movement,  but  the  regulator
is  something  different  from  the  producing  or  impelling
factor,  and  from  that  which  directs  the  impulse  of  innerva-
tion to  definite  nerve-endings  and  determines  the  quality
of  the  movement.  Maudsley  calls  the  latter  element
"motor  intuition  or  percept^  distinguishing  it  (Physiol,  of
Mind,  p.  465)  just  as  much  from  the  conscious  representa-
tion of  the  intended  movement  as  from  the  muscular  feeling,
and  assumes  that  the  receptive  muscular  feeling  is  indeed
necessary  for  its  origin  and  elaboration  (in  man  perhaps,  cer-
tainly not  in  animals),  but  that  it  is  necessary  neither  for  the
latent  existence  nor  for  the  active  function  of  the  motor
intuition,  inasmuch  as  the  necessary  regulation  by  the  mus-
cular sense  may  be  provided  for  by  another  sense,  e.g.,  the
visual  sense  (comp.  above  in  the  Appendix,  p.  261-262).
Maudsley  holds  the  intervention  of  the  intuitions  of  move-
ment to  be  just  as  indispensable  in  the  reflex  action
following  -on  a  sense-perception  as  in  voluntary  move-
ment after  a  conscious  idea,  and  regards  it  as  self-evident
that  these  motor  intuitions  are  tinconscious  ("  Phys.  and


ADDENDA.  305

Path,  of  Mind,"  pp.  177  and  187).  By  the  latter,  however,
he  understands  only  molecular  predispositions,  that  are
functional  without  consciousness,  at  least  without  coming
into  the  consciousness  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres.  That
such  predispositions  co-operate  in  the  production  of  volun-
tary movements  at  the  most  diverse  places  of  the  cen-
tral organs  of  the  nervous  system  is,  of  course,  not  to  be
disputed.  Indeed,  in  the  complicated  action  of  lifting  the
finger,  every  nerve-fibre  and  every  ganglion-cell  which  is
irrigated  by  the  current  of  innervation  issuing  from  the
cerebrum  displays  its  special  inherited  or  acquired  mole-
cular powers,  and  only  by  such  participation  of  the
subordinate  nerve-centres  does  it  become  possible  also  in
voluntary  movements  for  a  single  impulse  of  innervation
issuing  from  the  cerebrum  to  bring  about  so  complex  a
result  of  aptly  compounded  muscular  actions.  The  main
difficulty  still  remains,  how  the  ideational  cells  in  the
cerebral  hemispheres  are  to  send  forth,  conformably  to  the
ideal  content  of  the  particular  ideas,  impulses  of  inner-
vation, which  are  distinguishednot  only  by  the  intensity
and  quality  of  the  innervation,  but  also  by  the  different
direct  Ion  of  the  emission,  so  far,  namely,  as  the  termina-
tions of  the  fibres  to  be  in  each  case  affected  are  to  be
sought  at  different  places  of  the  cerebrum.  It  is  the  trans-
lation of  the  ideal  matter  of  representation  (the  words,
"  little  finger  "  or  "  fore-finger  ")  into  mechanical  action,
which  will  for  ever  render  futile  all  mere  mechanical
explanations.

P.  80,  1.  14.  —  In  a  depreciatory  criticism  in  "Ausland,"
1872,  No.  40,  in  which  J.  H.  Klein,  from  the  standpoint
of  natural  science,  breaks  his  staff  over  the  Philosophy
of  the  Unconscious,  the  foregoing  passage  is  particularly
cited  as  a  glaring  proof  oi  the  frivolous  superficiality  and
worthlessness  of  my  work  (p.  939),  and  Darwin's  exact
method  of  investigation  held  up  to  me  as  a  model  (p.
943).  Here  Ilerr  Klein  has  only  made  the  little  mistake
of  overlooking  that,  precisely  in  the  point  attacked,  not

vol.  III.  U


306  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

only  Darwin  entirely  agrees  with  me,  but  also  the  most
important  of  the  examples  quoted  (as  well  as  those  on
p.  81)  are  borrowed  directly  from  Darwin's  "Origin  of
Species."  Herr  Klein  further  warns  every  one  against  a
philosopher  who  so  far  contradicts  himself  as  to  assert  at
the  beginning  of  a  chapter  that  different  instincts  appear
with  a  like  bodily  constitution  in  different  species,  and
at  its  close  tries  to  prove  why  within  THE  same  species  like
instincts  must  follow  from  like  bodily  constitutions  (p.
941).  "  May  God  protect  exact  science  from  such  super-
ficiality !  "  (p.  939).

P.  102,  1.  18. — The  garden  spider  goes  into  the  rain-
corner  of  its  web  a  day  before  change  of  weather,  and
begins  a  day  before  the  return  of  fine  weather,  perhaps
already  in  the  midst  of  rain,  to  examine  its  web.  "  Fine
weather,  however,  does  not  then  last  long.  Sometimes
the  spider  pulls  its  web  to  pieces,  and  then  builds  an
entirely  new  one.  This  is  a  sure  sign  of  fine  weather.
With  more  exact  observation  it  may  be  discovered  that
the  web  is  not  always  similar ;  its  meshes  are  now  wider,
now  narrower.  If  they  are  wide,  it  is  a  sign  that  fine
weather  will  at  the  most  last  live  days,  but  if  they  are
close,  one  may  safely  reckon  on  eight  fine  days  "  ("  Aus-
land,"  1875,  No.  18,  p.  360).  One  easily  sees  that  for
the  catching  of  flies  the  closer  web  is  certainly  the  more
advantageous,  but  that  in  consideration  of  the  destruction
of  the  web  by  rain  and  wind  there  is  necessary  for  the
spider  a  certain  frugality  in  the  employment  of  the  pro-
ductive power  of  its  spinning  glands,  which  is  estimated
according  to  the  future  state  of  the  weather.

P.  131,  1.  27. — The  sensation  of  black  is,  namely,  the  sen-
sation of  that  process  of  chemical  restitution  or  recomposi-
tion  of  nervous  matter  which  is  opposed  to  the  process  of
consumption  or  decomposition  appearing  in  consciousness
as  sensation  of  white  (according  to  Hering's  physiological
theory  of  light  and  colour,  comp.  "Naturalist,"  1875,  No.
9). The  chemical  recomposition  of  all  nervous  matter


ADDENDA.  307

(and  especially  of  the  conducting  fibres)  is,  however,
stimulated  and  guided  by  centrifugal  currents  of  innerva-
tion from  the  particular  centres,  and  we  become  partially
conscious  of  this  current  of  innervation  in  sense-nerves
terminating  in  the  cerebrum  as  attention  (comp.  above,  p.
282-284).  Ik  is  thus  one  and  the  same  thing  whether  we
say :  In  nerve-fibres  without  terminal  organs  of  visual
perception,  or  in  the  parts  of  the  retinal  image  repre-
sented by  no  primitive  nervous  fibres  the  corresponding
recomposition  is  wanting,  because  the  external  occasions
to  decomposition  are  wanting ;  or  whether  we  say  :  When
centrifugal  sense-stimuli  are  never  conducted,  no  centri-
fugal current  of  innervation  can  come  to  pass,  which,
indeed,  must  first  arise  reflectorially.

P.  139. — I  can  now  no  longer  look  upon  the  example
quoted  as  stringent  proof  of  what  should  be  proved  at
this  place ;  for  in  fact,  even  in  the  normal  state,  besides
the  one  main  path  of  reflexion  (which  leads  by  the
shortest  route  from  the  place  of  insertion  of  the  sensory
to  that  of  the  motor  nerve  in  the  grey  matter  of  the  spinal
cord),  there  exist  a  number  of  side-paths  of  greater  or  less
resistance,  which  are  brought  into  requisition  according  to
the  varying  amount  of  the  stimulus  and  the  irritability.
If,  now,  the  main  path  is  destroyed,  the  branch  paths
become  functional,  when  either  the  applied  stimulus  is
adequate  or  the  irritability  of  the  spinal  cord  suffi-
ciently increased.  (The  latter  takes  place  partly  by '
means  of  strychnine,  partly  by  the  separation  of  the
spinal  cord  from  the  brain  and  its  inhibitory  influences.)
liut  it  is  noticeable  that  the  side-paths  pass  through
more  central  places  of  grey  matter  the  more  circuits
they  make,  and  that  every  passage  of  the  excita-
tion through  grey  matter  (on  account  of  the  inhibitory
influences  and  specific  stores  of  energy  ready  for  libera-
tion contained  in  the  ganglion-cells)  is  no  longer  simple
conduction,  but  itself  again  a  reflexion.


3o8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

The  greater  circuit,  therefore,  a  stimulus  makes  before
it  again  emerges  as  motor  reaction,  the  more  complicated
becomes  the  composition  of  the  total  reflexion  from  a
whole  series  of  simple  reflexes,  in  each  of  which  the
problem  of  the  inner  psychical  aspect  and  purposiveness
of  the  reflex  is  repeated.  Consequently,  if  the  above  ex-
ample does  not  directly  prove  what  it  ought  to  prove,
it  yet  tells  far  less  for  the  opposite  purely  mechanical
conception,  but  leaves  the  problem  recurring  at  every
moment  always  open.  But  this  problem  is  hereby  resolved,
that  the  purposiveness  of  the  reflex  mechanisms  has  it-
self been  gradually  brought  about,  and  is  teleologically
modifiable ;  that  the  existing  dispositions  or  accessory
mechanisms  have  themselves  only  arisen  through  a
sum  of  purposive  functions,  which  were  possible  witlumt
these  mechanisms ;  and  that  they  continue  to  readjust
themselves  by  suitable  modification  of  the  functions,  which
with  frequent  repetition  produce  a  modification  in  the
existing  molecular  dispositions.

P.  142,  last  1. — Compare  this  chapter  with  the  Appendix,
especially  Sections  3,  4,  5,  6,  and  ir.

P.  157,  1.  6. — The  conspicuous  statements  are  taken
from  Burdach's  "  Physiology."  If  in  the  given  form  they
do  not  appear  altogether  tenable  before  the  tribunal  of
the  physiology  of  the  day,  this  does  not  alter  the  general
fact  under  discussion.  It  is  precisely  modern  physiology
which  sees  itself  more  and  more  driven  to  the  recognition
of  vicarious  functions,  and  biology  finds  in  the  theory
of  descent  and  the  gradual  differentiation  of  the  various
organs  from  original  homogeneous  tissues  the  key  to
the  possibility  of  those  occurrences,  which  appear  from
this  point  of  view  as  a  kind  of  ancestral  reminiscence  on
the  part  of  the  tissue  of  a  phylogenetic  period  of  develop-
ment, when  the  division  of  labour  in  the  organism  had
not  yet  progressed  so  far.

P.  161,  1.  2. — The  preceding  passage,  which  already
appeared  in  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  is  the  clearest


ADDENDA.  3og

proof  how  little  they  have  understood  the  purport  of  my
theory  who  imagine  I  desire  in  any  case  to  supersede  or
set  aside  physico-chemical  explanation  employing  efficient
material  causes  by  metaphysical  explanations.  Nothing
is  further  from  me  than  an  undertaking  so  senseless
and  so  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of  modern  science.
On  the  contrary,  no  speculative  philosopher  has  ever  so
readily  acknowledged  the  independent  claims  of  Physical
science  and  rated  their  value  as  highly  as  I  myself,
who  hold  it  to  be  the  undoubted  and  hopeful  task  of
physical  science  to  investigate  the  efficient  material
causes  of  material  phenomena,  and  who  esteem  it  the
"  duty "  of  the  investigator  of  Nature,  as  such,  not  to
be  led  astray  in  this  search  after  efficient  material
causes  by  the  intermixture  of  metaphysical,  teleological,
or  other  principles  of  explanation.  This  recognition  of
physical  science  in  the  department  of  material  pheno-
mena and  their  causal  connection  cannot,  however,  blind
me  (like  some  "  modern  "  philosophers)  to  the  perception
that  neither  do  material  phenomena  exhaust  the  pheno-
menon of  cosmic  existence,  nor  the  causal  connection,  as
such,  the  cognition  of  the  material  phenomena  in  their
property  of  uniformity  ;  that  thus  beyond  natural  science
and  its  solutions  yet  other  problems  await  solution.
Now  so  far  as  a  natural  philosopher  claims  to  be  at  the
same  time  " homo  sapiens"  i.e.,  a  cultured  and  thoughtful
man,  one  must  require  of  him  that  he  be  conscious  of
the  limits  of  his  special  science  and  their  non-coinci-
dence with  the  limits  of  human  knowledge  in  general,
and  foster  even  a  certain  general  human  interest  for
more  general  philosophical  efforts.  On  the  other
hand,  it  is  not  to  be  required  of  any  man  who  does
not  claim  to  lie  a  scientific  specialist  that,  in  oc-
cupying himself  with  certain  problems,  lie  should
especially  aiin  at  extending  the  present  Held  of  natural
scientific  knowledge,  i.e.,  search  after  a  causal  ex-
planation of material phenomena by material causes


310  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

beyond  the  measure  of  the  enlightenment  afforded  by  con-
temporary science.  He  will  leave  this  side  of  the  scientific
physical  problem  of  humanity  to  the  specialists,  and  be
by  no  means  hindered  by  this  renunciation,  but  rather
placed  in  a  better  position  to  devote  his  full  powers  in  a
fruitful  way  to  the  other  side  of  the  problem,  which  just
as  little  allows  of  neglect.  But  when  natural  philosophers
so  much  mistake  the  state  of  affairs,  that  they  account  any
application  of  philosophical  principles  of  explanation  and
■every  personal  renunciation  of  independent  investigation
in  the  sphere  of  natural  science  as  a  kind  of  sin  against
the  Holy  Ghost,  one  can  only  as  much  lament  such  a
professional  limitation  of  the  field  of  view  as  the  terrorism
which  many  champions  of  this  school  exert  on  public
opinion,  not  without  a  certain  success  in  confusing  the
public  mind  as  to  what  really  constitutes  the  genuine
"scientific  spirit."  It  seems  high  time  to  openly  protest
against  this  terrorism,  and  to  point  out  earnestly  and  em-
phatically to  the  credulous  victims  of  popular  scientific
lectures  and  journals,  that  physical  science  and  its  strict
inquiry  into  material  causes  is  always  only  one  aspect
(and  that,  too,  subordinate  to  the  mental  sciences)  of
science  in  general.  Otherwise  there  is  danger  lest  physical
science  may  in  our  own  time  strive  after  an  autocracy  just
as  unjustifiable,  and,  if  possible,  still  more  dangerous,  than
that  actually  possessed  by  theology  in  the  Middle  Ages.

P.  181. — Maudsley  says  in  his  "Physiology  of  the  Mind,"
p.  1 1 8,  "The  idea  that  vomiting  must  take  place  when  a
qualmish  feeling  exists  will  certainly  hasten  vomiting,  and
there  is  a  very  remarkable  instance  in  the  Philosophical
Transactions  of  a  man  who  could  for  a  time  stop  the
motion  of  his  heart  by  composing  himself,  and  then  either
conceiving  vividly  or  directly  willing  what  was  to  happen.
There  are  examples  of  the  influence  of  ideas  upon  the
involuntary  muscles,  and  they  accord  with  what  has  been
previously  said  of  the  subordination  of  the  organic  nerve-
centres  to  the  cerebro-spinal  system. Some  people  eve  n


ADDENDA.  311

are  able,  through  a  vivid  idea  of  shuddering  or  of  some-
thing creeping  over  their  skin,  to  produce  a  cutis  anserina
or  goose's  skin.  The  immediate  effect  of  the  idea  in  this
case,  however,  is  probably  to  excite  the  appropriate  sensa-
tion, which  thereupon  gives  rise  to  the  sequent  pheno-
mena.

"  Examples  of  the  action  of  ideas  upon  our  voluntary
muscles  are  witnessed  in  every  hour  of  our  waking  life.
Very  few,  in  fact,  of  the  familiar  acts  of  a  day  call  the
will  into  action  :  when  not  sensori-motor,  they  are  usually
prompted  by  ideas."

The  unconscious  influence  of  fancy  in  dreams  is  very
clearly  manifested  even  in  those  persons  who  are  not
sufficiently  nervous  in  the  waking  state  to  collect  decided
experiences  in  this  respect  in  their  own  person,  where,  e.g.,
the  dream-idea  of  being  injured  or  wounded  at  particular
parts  of  the  body  can  excite  clear  local  sensation  of  pain,
which  disappears  on  waking.

Although  I  think  I  am  able  to  give  a  thoroughly  natural
explanation  of  cutaneous  bleedings  by  the  influence  of
fancy,  yet  in  presence  of  the  religious  vertigo  which  has
recently  again  manifested  itself  in  connection  with  this
subject,  truth  requires  the  admission,  that,  according
to  my  more  exact  information,  no  case  has  hitherto  been
established  where  the  phenomena  in  a  stigmatic  have
been  scrutinised  and  pronounced  spontaneous  bleeding
by  physicians  unprejudiced  (i.e.,  inaccessible  to  Catholic
sacerdotal  influence)  and  of  the  first  scientific  rank.  On
the  contrary,  several  cases  have  been  made  public  where
such  an  inquiry  has  proved  the  object  of  religious  super-
stition to  be  the  result  of  an  illusion  (comp.  "  Deutsche
Klinik,"  1875,  No.  1-3  ;  "  Louise  Lateau's  Three  Predeces-
sors in  Westphalia,"  by  Dr.  Briick,  Member  of  the  Sanitary
Board).  It  is  at  the  same  time  by  no  means  necessary  to
imagine  deceit  in  the  ordinary  sense,  although  its  possi-
bility is  not  excluded.  The  persons  of  whom  such  bleed-
ings have been related are almost without exception


312  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

hysterical  women,  with  thoroughly  ruined  nervous  systems
and  more  or  less  deranged  mental  constitutions,  who  are
swayed  by  perverted  impulses,  and  in  regard  to  the  usual
significance  of  their  actions  cannot  be  called  accountable.
The  instinctive  cunning  and  love  of  dissimulation  in  the
female  character,  which  in  such  individuals  is  for  the  most
part  abnormally  developed  previous  to  their  illness,  is  in
the  condition  of  hysteria  directed  to  apparently  quite  sense-
less objects,  and  often  calls  forth  an  astonishing  ingenuity
in  order  to  deceive  in  a  perfectly  purposeless  way  even
the  nearest.  It  is  quite  common  for  the  natural  feminine
vanity  to  throw  itself  in  such  cases  upon  the  morbid  condi-
tion itself,  in  order  to  arouse  interest  through  the  unusual-
ness  of  its  phenomena,  and  not  rarely  is  united  with  this  the
perverted  impulse  of  self-injury  and  physical  self-torture,
in  order  to  revel  and  luxuriate  in  the  imagination  of  an
imposed  martyrdom.  Even  the  soberest  and  calmest
spectators  are  usually  almost  impotent  in  presence  of  such
hysterical  derangement;  one  may  imagine  how  easily  a
sympathetic  environment  may  strengthen  the  whims  of
the  patient,  and  convert  them  into  real  fixed  ideas.  Over
and  above  this,  there  is  usually  found  in  a  family  where
such  a  morbid  character  arises  an  hereditary  disposition,
which  appears  in  less  degree  also  in  other  members  of  the
family.  If,  then,  a  mother  or  sister  gives  herself  up  to
admiring  and  fostering  the  perversities  of  the  sick  person,
she  not  only  confirms  her  in  her  delusions,  but  probably
helps  the  realisation  of  her  hysterical  tendencies,  i.e.,  be-
comes an  accomplice  in  the  eventual  delusion.  Now  as
madness  in  the  female  sex — both  real  and  hysterical  mad-
ness— for  the  most  part  gravitates  only  in  two  directions,
in  the  sexual  or  in  the  religious  (or  in  both  simultaneously),
it  is  evident  that  nothing  must  be  more  suited  to  streng-
then and  to  guide  into  special  channels  such  perverted
tendencies  than  a  religious  exaltation,  and  specially  the
amalgamation  artfully  nourished  by  the  Catholic  Church  of
sexual  excitement,  delight  in  cruelty,  and  religious  ecstasy,


ADDENDA. "  313

caused  by  the  ardent  absorption  of  the  phantasy  in  the  tor-
tures of  the  heavenly  bridegroom.  Add  the  priest,  who
supports  the  unfortunate  one  in  her  delusion,  and  probably
declares  the  self-inflicted  injuries,  into  which  the  spiritual
revelling  in  martyr-agonies  explodes  in  the  state  of  over-
strain, to  be  symbolic  signs  of  divine  grace,  then  the  sick
person  readily  enough  believes  she  is  following  a  direct
divine  behest  by  frequently  evoking  these  symbolic  marks,
and  may  very  easily,  in  spite  of  her  objective  fraud,  have
the  firm  subjective  conviction  of  being  a  selected  instrument
of  divine  grace  when  she  sees  the  religious  effects  which
she  exerts  on  the  credulous  who  flock  to  her.  Everywhere
where  priests  are  behind  the  scenes  one  may  assume
it  probable  at  the  outset  that  this  is  the  true  state  of  the
case,  and  the  probability  of  an  objective  delusion  becomes
certainty  if,  beside  the  stigmatisation,  other  phenomena
are  related  which  contradict  the  laws  of  organic  life  {e.g.,
the  year-long  abstinence  from  food  in  the  waking  state).
But  it  is  not  these  unfortunates  who  should  be  relegated
as  impostors  to  the  house  of  correction,  where  several  of
them  have  been  incarcerated,  but  the  priests,  to  whose
shameless  love  of  domination  even  the  morbid  obscura-
tion of  the  human  mind  serves  as  a  welcome  means  to
more  surely  befool  the  masses  they  have  cunningly
stupefied. — For  the  rest,  these  remarks  are  not  to  be
taken  as  deliverances  on  the  possibility  of  spontaneous
cutaneous  exudations,  but  only  to  protect  myself  from
being  quoted  as  sponsor  for  ultramontane  sacerdotal
craft.

P.  182,  last  L — Many  cures  are  only  seemingly  sympa-
thetic, inasmuch  as  remedies  are  applied  whose  medicinal
effect  is  not  known,  either  merely  by  the  parties  concerned
or  even  by  the  faculty  of  medicine  of  the  day.  Such  co-
operating causes  are  excluded  in  sympathetic  cures  by
mere  conjuration.  The  best  accredited  and  most  striking
effects  of  conjuration  may  well  consist  in  the  stopping  of
bleedings  (contraction  of  the  veins  and  capillaries  by  the


314  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

nervous  agitation  of  the  charmed  person)  and  in  the
assuaging  of  pain  caused  by  burns.

P.  200,  1.  35. — Comp.  Ernst  Hackel's  "  Anthropogenie,
oder  Entwickelungsgeschichte  des  Menschen,"  Leipzig,
Engelmann,  1876.

P.  202. — With  regard  to  the  critical  objection  that  in
this  chapter  the  clues  afforded  by  Darwinism  with  respect
to  the  origin  of  purposive  adaptations  in  organisms
are  left  unnoticed,  the  following  is  to  be  observed.  Dar-
winism, even  if  it  were  right  in  all  its  assertions,  offers
at  the  most  an  explanation  why  the  fertilised  ovum
brings  with  it  this  or  that  constitution  for  its  onto-
genetic course  of  development;  this  individual  develop-
ment itself,  however,  it  does  not  discuss  at  all,  but  assumes
it  as  a  physiologically  given  fact,  that  such  an  organism
unfolds  from  such  a  germ.  There  is  in  this,  however, nothing
but  a  lack  of  philosophical  wonderment,  an  incapacity  to
apprehend  the  problem.  Eor  all  phylogenetic  develop-
ment is  compounded  of  a  series  of  ontogenetic  develop-
ments, and  therefore  the  former  can  never  explain  the
latter  but  rather  presupposes  it,  although  it  is  correct
that  a  definite  individual  development  is  conditioned  in
the  mode  and  manner  of  its  course  by  the  phylogenetic
development  which  has  preceded  it.  But  the  first  ques-
tion always  is  to  comprehend  how  an  individual  develop-
ment is  at  all  possible;  and  this  problem  is  altogether
independent  of  the  explanation  of  phylogenetic  evolu-
tion, which  is  indeed  only  compounded  of  individual
developments,  as  the  building  of  bricks  or  the  plant  of
cells.  Wherefore,  also,  an  independent  investigation  of
the  problem  of  individual  organic  development  is  philoso-
phically as  much  authorised  as  demanded,  quite  apart  from
the  question  whether  Darwinism  is  right.

Undoubtedly  this  inquiry  must  be  completed  by  test-
ing the  solution  which  Darwinism  offers  of  the  problem
of  phylogenetic  evolution.  This  is  done  in  Chap.  x.  C,  and
still  more  thoroughly  in  my  memoir,  "  Truth  and  Error  in


ADDENDA.  315

Darwinism."  The  result  is  that  all  Darwin's  principles
of  explanation  are  only  tenable  and  available  for
any  sort  of  explanation  of  natural  phenomena  on  the
foundation  of  a  tacitly  presupposed  but  openly  rejected
"  organising  principle."  At  bottom  this  is  nothing  more
than  the  confirmation  of  the  a  priori  and  self-evident
proposition  regressively  gained  by  criticism,  that  all  phy-
logenetic  development  is  only  compounded  of  a  series  of
ontogenetic  processes  of  evolution,  and  that  the  onto-
genetic development  as  such  is  accordingly  not  explicable
from  a  phylogenetic  evolution,  but  only  by  an  organ-
ising principle  which  guides  and  secures  the  purposive
(isolated  and  correlative)  variation  and  transmission.

P.  200,  1.  21. —  Without  question  it  may  be  very  attrac-
tive to  analyse  psychologically,  to  classify,  and  to  investi-
gate in  their  causal  relations  all  the  numerous  veils  and
disguises  in  which  the  longing  after  sexual  union  conceals
itself  according  to  the  character  and  the  circumstances
(as  has  also  been  frecpuently  attempted,  especially  by  the
French) ;  but  even  if  such  a  psychology  of  love  succeeded
in  giving  an  intelligent  account  of  the  whole  inexhaus-
tible variety  of  the  forms  which  love  can  assume,  yet
nothing  would  be  thereby  gained  for  the  understanding
of  love  so  long  as  the  fundamental  problem  were  not
made  perfectly  precise  and  satisfactorily  solved.  This
fundamental  problem  of  love  must,  however,  of  course,
turn  on  that  which  is  not  diverse  but  common,  and
this  common  element  in  the  apparently  heterogeneous
expressions  of  the  one  passion  is  manifestly  nothing  else
but  the  longing  for  sexual  union.  What  is  problemati-
cal in  this  point  is,  however,  this:  how  the  corporeal  or
mental,  aesthetic  or  emotional,  pleasure  which  one  finds  in
a  person  can  lead  to  the  altogether  heterogeneous  wish  for
sexual  union  with  the  same,  and  can  increase  this  wish
to  a  passion  ?  This,  and  nothing  else,  is  the  fundamental
problem  of  love ;  and  whoever  does  not  perceive  the
problem,  or  whoever  does  not  find  anything  at  all  wonder-


316  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

f  ul  or  problematical  therein,  will  least  of  all  be  enabled  to
solve  it,  and  all  the  psychological  studies  of  such  a  one
concerning  love  can  only  be  a  more  or  less  clever  prattle
on  side  issues.  We  can  only  hope  for  a  solution  of  the
problem  when  the  essence  of  sexual  love  has  been  rightly
apprehended  as  the  longing  veiled  by  more  or  fewer  acces-
sories for  sexual  union  with  a  particular  individual.

P.  242,  last  1. — Comp.  here  A.  Taubert,  "  Der  Pessimis-
mus  und  seine  Gegner,"  Berlin,  C.  Duncker,  1873,  No.
4,  "  Die  Liebe."

P.  249,  L  2. — The  usual  division  into  sensuous  and  in-
tellectual feelings  and  impulses  is  doubtless  warranted,  if
thereby  the  different  nature  and  worth  of  the  spheres  is
sought  to  be  indicated  to  which  the  particular  feelings  and
impulses  are  related  through  the  ideas  with  which  they
are  connected,  but  it  becomes  an  unauthorised  distinction
when  it  imports  more  than  this  qualitative  difference  of
the  particular  spheres  of  representation,  and  is  employed
to  impeach  the  homogeneity  of  the  will  in  itself  and
its  satisfaction  or  n  on  -satisfaction.  (Comp.  here  Goring,
"  System  of  Crit.  Phil.,"  part  i.  chap,  vi.,  "  The  division  of
the  impulses  and  feelings  into  sensuous  and  intellectual,"
p.  107  ff. ;  also  chap,  iv.,  "The  falsity  of  the  distinction
between  lower  and  higher  will,"  p.  78-87.)

P.  249,  1.  15. — The  more  opposition  this  proposition  has
encountered,  which  is  so  simple,  but  appears  so  surprising
and  almost  paradoxical  to  thinkers  unaccustomed  to  ab-
stracting from  the  simply  concomitant  representations  of
feelings,  the  more  do  I  rejoice  that  on  this  point  I  can
appeal  to  no  less  an  authority  than  Kant.  He  says  in  the
"  Crit.  of  Pract.  Reason "  (Werke,  viii.  131):  "  The  repre-
sentations of  objects  may  be  ever  so  heterogeneous;  they
may  be  ideas  of  the  understanding,  even  of  the  reason,  in
contrast  to  ideas  of  sense ;  yet  the  feeling  of  pleasure  by
whose  instrumentality  they  properly  come  to  be  the  deter-
mining ground  of  the  will  (the  expected  agreeableness,
satisfaction,  which  incites  to  the  production  of  the  object)


ADDENDA.  317

is  not  only  of  the  same  kind,  inasmuch  as  it  can  always
only  be  empirically  known,  but  also  in  that  it  affects  one
and  the  same  vital  energy,  which  is  manifested  in  the
faculty  of  desire,  and  in  this  respect  can  differ  in  nothing
out  degree  from  every  other  determining  ground "  (that
is,  from  every  feeling  called  forth  by  another  determin-
ing reason).  "  How  otherwise  should  we  be  able  to  insti-
tute a  quantitative  comparison  between  two  determining
grounds  altogether  different  in  their  intellectual  clothing
so  as  to  give  the  preference  to  that  one  which  most  affects
the  faculty  of  desire  ? "

P.  250,  note,  last  1. — That  desire  is  more  original  than
the  state  of  feeling  whose  production  is  "desired  is  shown
in  numerous  cases  when  violent  desire  already  enters  into
consciousness  in  the  stage  of  tormenting  unrest,  whilst
its  content  or  its  aim  is  still  completely  unconscious.
Maudsley  says  in  his  "  Phys.  of  Mind,"  p.  355-356:  "In
the  child,  as  in  the  idiot,  we  frequently  witness  a  vague
restlessness,  evincing  an  undefined  want  of  or  desire  for
something  of  which  itself  is  unconscious,  but  which,  when
obtained,  presently  produces  quiet  and  satisfaction :  the
organic  life  speaks  out  with  an  as  yet  inarticulate  utter-
ance. Most  striking  and  instructive  is  that  example  of
the  evolution  of  organic  life  into  consciousness  which  is
observed  at  the  time  of  puberty,  when  new  organs  come
into  action  and  exert  their  physiological  influence  upon
the  brain ;  vague  and  ill-understood  desires  give  rise  to
obscure  impulses  that  have  no  defined"  (rather:  con-
scious) "aim,  and  produce  a  restlessness  which,  when
misapplied,  is  often  mischievous.  The  amorous  appetite
thus  first  declares  its  existence.  But  to  prove  how  clearly
antecedent  to  individual  experience  it  is,  and  how  little  it
is  indebted  to  the  consciousness  which  is  a  natural  sub-
sequent development,  it  is  only  necessary  to  reiiect  that
even  in  man  the  desire  sometimes  attains  to  a  knowledge
of  its  aim,  and  to  a  sort  of  satisfaction,  in  dreams,  before
it  does  so  in  real  life.  .  .  .  These  simple  reflections  might


318  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  themselves  suffice  to  teach  psychologists,  if  they  would
condescend  to  them,  how  far  more  fundamental  than  any
conscious  mental  state  is  the  unconscious  mental  or  cere-
bral life."

The  relation  of  will  and  feeling  and  the  reasons  for  the
assumption  that  the  latter  is  to  be  conceived  as  a  conse-
quence of  the  former,  and  not  conversely,  is  discussed  by
Goring,  together  with  a  refutation  of  the  contrary  opinions,
in  his  "System  of  Crit.  Phil.,"  vol.  i.  pp.  50,  60-65,  and
89-95.  (Comp.  also  in  the  same,  chap,  v.,  "  The  separa-
tion of  the  emotional  faculty.")

P.  276, 1.  3. — In  dreams  this  creative  activity  is  well
known  to  us  all.  We  all  possess  it,  as  our  dreams  prove ;
but  its  degree  is  usually  so  low  that  it  cannot  assert  itself
in  the  waking  state  against  the  twofold  competition  of
the  impressions  of  perception  and  of  the  abstract  associa-
tions of  thought.  Accordingly  the  study  of  the  creations
of  dream-fancies  affords  a  serviceable  preparation  and  ex-
cellent aid  to  the  comprehension  of  the  creations  of  artistic
fancy,  although  the  difference  between  a  thoughtless
dreaming  and  a  sober  creative  fancy  must  not  be  over-
looked. I  refer  for  these  things  to  the  memoir  of  Johannes
Volkelt,  "Die  Traum-Phantasie  "  (Stuttgart,  1875),  which
combines  in  an  equal  degree  critical  sobriety  and  specu-
lative penetration,  and  works  up  everything  hitherto
achieved  in  this  department  (comp.  in  particular,  No.  15,
"  The  Unconscious  in  Dream-Fancy  ").

P.  280,  note.— What  Schiller  thought  of  the  Uncon-
scious in  artistic  production  in  a  scientific  form  appears
from  his  letter  to  Goethe  on  the  27th  March  1801.  He
there  says :  "  A  few  days  ago  I  attacked  Schelling  for
an  assertion  in  his  '  Transcendental  Philosophy '  that
'  in  Nature  a  primal  Unconscious  is  to  be  elevated  to
consciousness ;  in  Art,  on  the  contrary,  the  procession
is  from  consciousness  to  the  unconscious.'  It  is  true  he
is  dealing  here  only  with  the  contrast  between  the  pro-
ducts of  Nature  and  of  Art,  and  so  far  he  is  quite  right.


ADDENDA.  319

I  fear,  however,  that  '  Messieurs  les  Idealistes '  are  so
absorbed  in  their  Ideas  as  to  take  all  too  little  notice  of
experience,  and  as  experience  shows  the  poet  likewise
begins  with  the  Unconscious,  nay,  may  think  himself  lucky
if  he  only  gets  so  far  through  the  clearest  consciousness  of
his  operations  as  to  re-discover  undimmed  in  his  completed
labour  the  first  obscure  whole-idea  of  his  work.  Without  such
an  obscure  but  powerful  whole-idea,  which  is  antecedent
to  everything  technical,  no  poetic  work  can  come  into  being,
and  poetry,  methinks,  just  consists  in  this,  in  being  able
to  utter  and  impart  that  Unconscious,  i.e.,  to  translate  it
into  an  object.  The  non-poet  may  just  as  well  as  the  poet
be  affected  by  a  poetic  idea,  but  he  cannot  body  it  forth  ;
lie  cannot  represent  it  with  the  force  of  necessity;  just  as
the  non-poet  as  well  as  the  bard  may  produce  a  product
consciously  and  with  necessity,  but  such  a  work  does  not
take  its  rise  in  the  Unconscious,  and  does  not  end  there.
It  remains  only  a  work  of  reflection.  The  Unconscious,
combined  with  reflection,  makes  the  poetic  artist."  The
"  obscure  whole-idea  "  is  not  to  be  confused  with  the  uncon-
scious idea,  but  is  already  a  conscious  reflexion  of  the
latter,  and  not  even  the  first  which  emerges  in  conscious-
ness, but  is  brought  about  by  a  vague  moody  sensation.
Schiller  was  well  aware  of  this  also,  and  expresses  it  in
his  letter  to  Goethe  of  the  18th  March  1796  :  "In  me  the
feeling  is  at  first  without  definite  and  clear  object ;  this  is
formed  only  later.  A  certain  musical  word  conies  first,
and  with  me  the  poetical  idea  only  follows  this."  He
writes  to  Korner  on  the  1st  December  1788  :  "Ye  critics,
or  however  ye  may  be  called,  be  abashed  or  tremble  in
presence  of  the  instantaneous  transitory  frenzy  which  is
found  in  all  true  creators,  and  whose  longer  or  shorter
duration  distinguishes  the  thinking  artist  from  the
dreamer.  Hence  your  lamentations  over  infertility,  be-
cause ye  too  early  reject  and  too  strictly  select  (scil.  from
among  the  ideas  streaming  in  pelc-mele)!'  But  not  merely
the  beginning,  but  also  the  continuation  of  artistic  produc-


320  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tion  appears  to  him  conditioned  by  the  Unconscious,  and
at  the  close  of  the  twentieth  of  his  letters  on  the  aesthetic
education  of  mankind  he  declares  "  that  the  mind  in
the  aesthetic  condition  certainly  acts  freely,  and  free  in
the  highest  degree  from  all  compulsion,  but  by  no  means
free  from  laws,  and  that  this  cesthetic  freedom  is  only  dis-
tinguished from  logical  necessity  in  thought,  and  from  moral
necessity  in  volition,  through  the  laws  according  to  which  the
mind  proceeds  not  being  represented,  and  because  they  meet
with  no  resistance,  not  appearing  as  necessitation."  Who-
ever in  this  way  draws  his  poetical  ideas  from  unconscious
inspiration,  and  artistically  shapes  them  according  to  laws
acting  unconsciously  in  him,  is  a  genius.  "When  the
genius  has  by  his  products  furnished  the  rule,  science  can
collect  these  rules,  compare  them,  and  try  whether  they  are
to  be  brought  under  one  more  general,  and  finally  under  a
single  principle.  But  since  it  proceeds  from  experience,  it
has  only  the  limited  authority  of  empirical  science.  It
can  merely  lead  to  a  rational  imitation  of  given  cases,  but
never  to  a  positive  extension.  All  progress  in  art  must
come  from  genius,  criticism  merely  leads  to  faultlessness  "
(Letter  to  Korner  of  the  3d  February  1794).  These  un-
ambiguous testimonies  to  the  truth  of  the  Unconscious  are
the  more  valuable  as  they  spring  from  the  self-observa-
tion of  a  great  poet,  who  did  not,  like  Goethe,  for  instance,
draw  without  effort  from  the  fountain  of  the  Unconscious,
but  earnestly  strove  after  clearness  and  thoughtfulness,  and
wrestled  with  the  artistic  form  in  earnest  critical  labour,
which  might  not  unnaturally  have  tended  to  the  over-esti-
mate of  his  reflective  industry.

P.  314,  1.  29. — It  is  in  ethno-psychological  respects
extremely  characteristic  that  the  treatment  of  geometry
among  the  Greeks  aims  at  a  rigorous  discursive  mode  of
proof,  and  sedulously  ignores  the  most  obvious  intuitive
demonstrations ;  whereas  that  of  the  Hindoos,  in  spite  of
an  endowment  for  arithmetic  far  surpassing  the  Greeks,
is  yet  entirely  based  on  direct  intuition,  and  is  usually


ADDENDA.  321

confined  to  an  artificial  construction  in  support  of  intui-
tion, to  which  the  one  word  "  see  ! "  is  appended.  The
Greeks  always  aim  at  strictly  proving  the  smallest  step  in
thought,  and  often  employ  ingenious  trains  of  discursive
reasoning  in  proof  of  the  simplest  proposition,  in  order  not
to  be  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  direct  intuition,  which
does  not  rank  with  them  as  proof.  Accordingly  they  have
constructed  an  imposing  system  of  geometry,  which  at
the  same  time  contains  a  methodical  guide  to  the  solution
of  all  problems  not  admitting  of  direct  treatment.  Among
the  Hindoos,  on  the  other  hand,  every  proof  of  a  geometri-
cal proposition  is  a  happy  flash  of  intelligence,  and  the
A^arious  propositions  are  placed  in  juxtaposition  without
any  connection  ;  therefore,  in  spite  of  their  luxuriant  fancy
and  intuitional  power,  and  in  spite  of  their  achievements
in  arithmetic  and  algebra,  far  out-stripping  those  of  the
Greeks,  they  never  got  far  in  geometry,  and  have  attained
only  a  very  imperfect  insight  into  its  elements.  It  must,
however,  be  styled  wonderful  that  Schopenhauer,  who  had
no  knowledge  of  these  historical  facts,  was  led  by  his
peculiar  kinship  with  the  Indian  mind  to  make  demands
in  reference  to  the  treatment  of  geometry  which  must  be
termed  a  reawakening  of  the  Indian  mode  of  thought.
As  our  whole  modern  mathematics  has  grown  out  of  a
synthesis  of  the  Euclidian  geometry  with  the  Arabian
algebra  borrowed  from  the  Hindoos,  so  at  the  present
time  the  necessity  of  taking  account  in  geometry  of  the
Indian  element  of  intuition  is  becoming  more  and  more  re-
cognised on  the  part  of  pedagogical  science.  But  although
much  may  thereby  be  rendered  simpler,  easier,  and  clearer,
yet  the  proposal  of  Schopenhauer  to  base  geometry  alto-
gether upon  intuition  is  essentially  impracticable,  and  dis-
cursive proof  will  always  have  to  go  hand  in  hand  with
this  to  control  intuition.

P.  315. — As  an  example  of  what  has  been  said  with  re-
spect to  the  Indian  mode  of  treating  geometry,  we  may  give
the  Indian  proof  of  the  Pythagorean  theorem,  of  which  the

VOL.  III.  x


322


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.


figure  of  Schopenhauer  is  only  a  special  case.  This  proof
depends  on  the  circumstance  that  the  square  of  the  hypothe-
nuse  as  well  as  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  other  sides  is
equal  to  a  third  magnitude,  namely,  the  quadrupled  triangle
plus  the  square  on  the  difference  of  the  other  two  sides.


j
i

As  in  the  equilateral  triangle  the  latter  is  equal  to  zero,
the  general  proof  takes  the  form  of  that  for  the  equilateral
triangle  (comp.  Hankel,  "  Zur  Geschichte  der  Mathematik
im  Alterthum  und  Mittelalter,"  Leipzig,  1874,  p.  209).
Without  doubt  this  oldest  of  all  the  numerous  proofs
which  have  been  subsequently  attempted  is  by  far  the
best,  because  it  is  the  most  evident,  simple,  and  instruc-
tive. But  that  it  rests  on  immediate  intuition  will  hardly
be  asserted  by  any  one  speaking  precisely,  since  the
equality  of  the  two  magnitudes  in  question  which  is  to
be  proved  must  always  be  first  concluded  from  their  per-
ceived equality  with  a  'third,  which  latter,  moreover,  is
differently  presented  to  intuition  in  the  two  figures,  and
is  only  identical  in  conception.

P.  331,  L  11. — To  be  sure,  Schopenhauer  submitted  to
these  realistic  concessions  only  in  his  later  period.  In
the  earlier  period  of  his  productivity,  when  he  subscribes
to  a  more  consistent  idealism,  he  most  decidedly  denies  all
causal  influence  of  things  in  themselves  on  our  faculty  of
representation  (W.  as  W.  and  I.,  3d  ed.,  i.  516,  581),  and
thereby  logically  arrives  at  a  conception  of  the  subjective


ADDENDA.  323

phenomenal  world  of  waking  life,  which  is  distinguished
from  that  of  the  dream  by  no  essential  mark,  but  only
by  the  accidental  one,  that  a  continuity  of  connected
memory  exists  between  the  divisions  of  the  day  of  the
waking  life,  which  is  entirely  wanting  between  the  noc-
turnal segments  of  the  dream-life  (ibid.,  i.  21,  and  Volkelt's
"  Dream-Phantasy,"  p.  194-203).  In  fact,  if  the  transcen-
dent causality  of  things  in  themselves  on  our  presentative
faculty  be  denied,  all  assignable  distinction  between  the
objects  of  the  dream  and  those  of  waking  perception  ceases;
for  the  difference  of  the  two  kinds  of  subjective  appear-
ance only  consists  in  this,  that  the  instinctive  necessi-
tation  to  the  transcendental  reference  of  the  matter  of
consciousness  to  an  existence  independent  on  consciousness
is  in  the  dream  a  deceptive  illusion,  in  the  waking  state,
however,  an*  instinctive  truth,  which  has  its  real  correlate
in  the  transcendent  causal  action  on  perception  of  that
which  exists  per  se  so  far  as  the  quality  of  the  objects  of
perception  is  conditioned  by  the  nature  of  that  which
exists  per  se.

P.  332,  1.  5. — Modern  Physical  Science  acknowledges
very  decidedly  a  view  of  the  world  in  which  the  forms  of
existence  and  of  movement,  Space  and  Time,  have  trans-
cendent validity.  It  assumes  (just  as  Kant  and  Schopen-
hauer in  his  later  period)  that  our  sense-perception  is
certainly  in  general  subjectively  conditioned,  but  that  in
the  special  concrete  case  its  occurrence  and  constitution  is
determined  by  the  causal  action  of  things,  whose  exist-
ence is  supposed  to  be  independent  of  our  perception  of
the  same,  i.e.,  of  things  in  themselves  in  the  Kantian
sense.  Physical  Science  knows  that  all  our  souse-quali-
ties (Light,  Colour,  Sound,  Heat,  Odour,  Sweetness,  &c.)
only  come  to  pass  through  the  co-operation  of  these
things  acting  on  us  and  our  subjectivity;  that  thus  these
cannot  appertain  to  the  world  of  things  in  themselves  ;
nevertheless  it  asserts  that  the  mode  and  manner  of  our
concrete  sensation  may  be  dependent  on  the  mode  of  the


324  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

arrangement  of  the  constituent  elements  of  things  in
themselves  and  the  forms  of  their  motion.  This  hypo-
thesis, which  in  Physical  Science  does  not  pass  for  hypo-
thesis, but  as  certainty,  however  involves  the  assumption
that  Space  and  Time  are  the  forms  of  existence  of  this
world  of  things  in  themselves  transcending  consciousness.
For  a  definite  order  or  grouping  of  atoms  presupposes
the  existence-form  of  Space;  causal  action  on  the  sense-
organ  at  a  definite  point  of  time  of  the  subjective  flow  of
ideas  the  form  of  Time  as  transcendent  real  form  of
the  action  of  things  in  themselves;  and  the  forms  of
(mechanical  and  molecular)  motion,  from  which  arises  the
grouping  of  the  atoms  at  any  point  of  time,  and  on  which
depends  the  mode  of  action  of  the  complex  of  atoms  on
our  sense-organs,  can  manifestly  only  be  conceived  as
real  processes  transcending  consciousness  if  the  forms  of
which  they  are  compounded,  i.ev  Space  and  Time,  have
transcendent  validity.  Thus  the  scientific  world  of  the
self-moving  atoms,  on  the  one  hand,  is,  in  fact,  a  world  of
things  in  themselves  in  the  Kantian  sense,  and,  on  the
other  hand,  a  world  in  the  forms  of  Space  and  Time.  It
is  not  a  subjective  phenomenal  world,  for  atoms  have  never
manifested  themselves  to  any  physicist.  It  is  intelligible
in  the  Kantian  sense,  so  far  as  it  lies  beyond  the  possi-
bility of  all  experience,  and  is  a  world  existing  in  and  for
itself,  whose  existence  and  inner  movement  is  assumed  to
be  thoroughly  independent  of  any  representation  of  a  con-
sciousness. It  is  thus  in  every  respect  only  to  be  styled
a  world  of  things  in  themselves,  and  as  such  it  can  indeed
only  be  justified  if  the  object  of  its  supposition  be  to
explain  the  transcendental  objectivity  of  our  phenomenal
objects  and  the  transcendent  conditionality  of  our  percep-
tion. But,  nevertheless,  it  is  a  world  of  space  and  time,
and  can  only  be  such  if  anything  is  to  be  at  all  explained
by  its  assumption.  Let  the  atom  be  denuded  of  its  mate-
riality and  deprived  of  extension,  thus  be  spiritualised  into
the  immaterial  monad,  it  yet  always  retains  its  punctual


ADDENDA.  325

place  in  relation  to  other  atoms,  its  distance  from  them,
its  direction  and  velocity  in  approximation  and  removal
from  them,  thus  purely  spatial  and  temporal  determina-
tions. Should  Physical  Science  try  to  make  the  attempt
to  denude  the  atoms  of  these  determinations  also,  all
possibility  of  an  explanation  of  subjective  phenomena
would  be  cut  away,  thus  the  hypothesis  of  a  real  world  of
atoms  would  have  all  scientific  ground  withdrawn  from
tinder  its  feet,  A  spaceless  and  timeless  world  of  spiritual
monads  would  ab  initio  render  any  Physical  Science  impos-
sible, and  all  scientific  explanations  based  on  the  opposite
assumption  would  then  not  only  be  valueless,  but  even
vicious  in  principle.  In  fact,  a  world  of  spiritual  monads
without  Space  and  Time  (or  vicarious  forms  of  existence
and  motion)  is  also  metaphysically  impossible,  since  the
Absolute  Spirit  before  its  outward  action  in  Space  and
Time  is  unfolded  neither  actually  nor  plurally.  Space
and  Time  are  the  forms  in  which  the  All-Spirit  realises
itself  in  manifold  existence  from  its  essential  unity  and
ideality ;  they  are  the  forms  of  its  self-individualising
manifestation,  in  which  its  essence  is  revealed  or  appears.
It  is  accordingly  no  wonder  that  the  investigators  of
Nature  themselves,  with  their  confused  perception  of  the
problems  of  the  theory  of  cognition,  should  regard  the  scien-
tific view  of  the  world  now  in  a  realistic,  now  in  an  idealistic
sense.  If  one  starts  with  the  view  that  the  transcendent
real  world  is  devoid  of  light,  colourless,  soundless,  &c,  nay,
even  non-material,  and  consists  merely  in  a  magical  play
of  imaginary  points,  one  may  well  be  inclined  with  Kant
to  seek  reality  in  empirical  perception  as  subjective  pheno-
menon, and  to  regard  things  in  themselves  as  a  transcen-
dent  province  of  intelligible  things  of  thought  and  properly
unapproachable.  Conversely,  if  one  starts  from  this,  that
the  predicate  of  reality  can  only  be  assigned  to  a  thing
existing  in  and  for  itself,  i.e.,  independently  of  every  con-
sciousness representing  it,  there  is  no  doubt  that  not  the
ever-shifting  suhjective  phenomenal  world  of  consciousness,


326  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

but  the  world  of  the  complex  of  atoms  existing  of  them-
selves or  the  world  of  the  objective  phenomenon  of  the
world-essence  is  to  be  styled  real,  the  more  so  as  it  (just  as
the  subjective  phenomenal  world)  subsists  in  the  forms  of
space  and  time,  and  the  phenomenal  objects  of  conscious-
ness only  receive  a  real  objectivity  by  being  transcenden-
tally  referred  to  the  immediately  real  things  in  themselves,
and  have  a  practical  and  epistemological  meaning  for  con-
sciousness simply  as  representatives  of  these  latter.  Thus
the  scientific  cosmic  theory,  when  looked  at  more  closely,
wears  indeed  the  air  of  a  transcendental  realism,  which  has
as  much  risen  above  subjective  idealism  (which  in  strict-
ness declares  the  thing  in  itself  to  be  a  mere  negative
limiting  notion,  an  indestructible  illusion  of  our  waking  as
of  our  dreaming  consciousness)  as  naive  realism  (which
converts  uncritically  the  objects  of  the  subjective  pheno-
menal world  into  absolute  things  in  themselves).  The  same
consequence  of  a  transcendental  realism  results  from  a  criti-
cal development  of  the  philosophical  theory  of  cognition,  as
I  have  shown  in  my  writings,  "  Kritische  Grundlegung  des
transcendentalen  Realismus,"  and  "  J.  H.  v.  Kirchmann's
erkenntnisstheoretischer  Eealismus,"  so  that  in  this  de-
partment also  the  full  agreement  and  union  of  Philosophy
and  Physical  Science,  here  too  so  long  at  variance,  is  now
restored.

P.  341,  1.  36. — Compare  with  this  statement  and  that
on  p.  309,  1.  13,  vol.  i.,  the  similar  view  of  Lotze  on  the
a  priori  in  his  "  Logik,"  book  iii.  chap.  3,  particularly
p.  520.


VOL. II.

P.  50,  1.  23. — (Comp.  also  vol.  i.  pp.98  and  133.)  Time,
as  we  saw,  vol.  i.  p.  346,  first  enters  into  the  psychi-
cal processes  through  the  continuance  of  the  molecular


ADDENDA.  y.f

vibrations.  When,  e.g.,  a  stimulus  is  propagated  by  a
sensory  nerve  to  some  point  in  a  centre,  there  felt,  trans-
lated into  will  and  propagated  as  motor  impulse  by  motor
paths  to  the  muscles,  the  time  of  conduction  in  the  sen-
sory nerve  as  in  the  motor  nerve  is  to  be  deducted  from
the  total  duration  of  the  reflex  process.  There  still  re-
mains the  time  which  is  required  in  the  ganglion-cells  of
the  centre,  first,  to  extinguish  the  conveyed  stimulus  by
the  inhibitory  influences  (period  of  latent  stimulation),
and,  secondly,  to  allow  the  exciting  forces  to  increase  until
they  have  reached  a  degree  sufficient  to  innervate  the
motor  nerves  (this  degree  might  be  termed  the  threshold
of  motor  innervation).  The  sum  of  the  two  latter  times
constitutes  in  physiological  language  the  central  period
of  reaction.  It  is  considerably  augmented  by  the  circum-
stance that  a  single  ganglion -cell  does  not  suffice  for
a  reflexion,  but  several  always  participate,  so  that  in
each  extinction  of  the  stimulus  and  discharge  of  the
stored-up  energies  is  repeated.  The  reaction-time  be-
comes a  minimum  when  the  places  of  insertion  of  the
sensory  and  motor  nerve  (as  in  the  spinal  reflexes)  lie  very
close  to  one  another;  it  is  augmented  in  proportion  as
more  ganglion-cells  are  traversed  by  the  stimulus  before
the  same  is  outwardly  discharged  as  motor  impulse.  The
latter  retardation  attains  its  maximum  in  the  cerebral
hemispheres  and  their  elaboration  of  the  conveyed  im-
pressions by  conscious  reflexion.  The  fluctuating,  hesitat-
ing, and  doubting  is  of  longer  duration  the  more  cells  are
drawn  into  action,  i.e.,  the  further  the  reflexion  is  spun  out
before  the  resolution  to  act  is  taken.  But  with  all  that,
each  single  action  of  the  Unconscious  woven  into  this  pro-
cess is  timeless,  i.e.,  in  each  single  cell  there  is  no  time  to
be  interposed  letween  Sensation  and  will,  although  both,
in  consequence  of  the  repeated  molecular  undulations,
possess  a  certain  temporal  extent,  which  may  in  part  be
coincident  (as  the  duration  of  every  cause  coincides  with
that  of  the  effect  to  the  merest  fraction).


328  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

P.  86,  1.  5. — Comp.  the  preceding  addendum  to  p.  50, 1.  23.

P.  89, 1.  5. — If  we  enter  more  minutely  into  the  phy-
siological aspect  of  the  question,  in  place  of  the  atom,
the  ganglionic  cell,  as  indivisible  nerve-element  .with  an
indivisible  consciousness,  is  the  order  of  individuals  to
be  particularly  taken  account  of.  The  ganglion-cell  pos-
sesses a  certain  individual  force  or  individual  will,  which,
through  its  individual  character  (or,  in  physiological  lan-
guage, through  its  inherited  or  acquired  specific  energies),
is  led  to  manifest  itself  in  certain  favoured  directions.
The  satisfaction  of  this  individual  will  can,  as  we  shall
soon  see,  only  be  felt  as  pleasure  by  reflective  compa-
rison with  the  pain  of  non-satisfaction ;  the  repression
of  the  same,  or  the  suppression  and  enforced  inhibition
of  its  manifestation  makes  itself,  on  the  contrary,  imme-
diately perceptible  as  a  painful  feeling  (qualitatively
coloured  by  unconscious  representations).  Now  we  know
from  the  Appendix  that  the  satisfaction  of  the  individual
will  of  a  ganglion-cell,  or,  in  physiological  language,
the  actualising  of  its  predispositions  in  specific  energies,
consists  chemically  in  a  decomposition ,  i.e.,  that  the  dis-
charge of  force  or  transformation  of  tension  into  vis  viva
is  effected  by  a  decomposition  of  complex  chemical  com-
pounds into  simpler  ones.  Chemical  combination,  whereby
the  tension  or  store  of  work  is  accumulated  as  a  normal
process  of  nutrition,  proceeds  in  the  state  of  repose  so
slowly  in  comparison  with  the  suddenness  of  the  discharge,
that  at  each  single  moment  without  doubt  the  threshold
of  consciousness  (at  least  for  the  collective  consciousness
of  the  ganglion-cell)  is  not  overstepped.  It  is  otherwise  if
an  external  stimulus  is  conveyed  to  the  cell  through  the
immerging  fibres.  In  this  case  the  stimulus  is  mainly  ex-
tinguished by  the  inhibitory  influences,  and  only  secondarily
after  an  interval,  during  which  the  stimulus  has  become
latent,  does  the  cell  answer  by  an  active  discharge  of  force
The  stimulus  consists  in  a  current  of  innervation,  i.e.,  in  a
series  of  impulses  of  vital  force. That  this  vis  viva  is  extin-


ADDENDA.  329

guished  or  absorbed  by  the  inhibitory  influences  of  the  cell
physically  only  admits  of  the  interpretation  that  it  is
transformed  into  tension,  and  this  transformation  is  com-
pressed into  a  space  of  time  sufficiently  confined  to  be
felt  as  contrast  to  the  natural  direction  of  the  individual
will,  i.e.,  as  pain.  The  qualitatively  coloured  pain  thus
felt  acts  now  as  motive  to  the  manifestation  of  will,  and
the  reaction  of  will  is,  as  it  were,  the  attempt  to  free  one-
self from  the  pain  of  the  imposed  constraint.  This  second
phase  of  the  reflex  process  in  the  ganglion-cell  does  not,  in
the  first  place,  enter  into  consciousness  by  itself,  but  only
so  far  as  the  painful  feeling  is  paralysed  and  disappears
from  consciousness  through  the  satisfaction  of  the  mani-
festation of  will  or  discharge  of  force.  The  matter  of
consciousness  is  thus  essentially  composed  of  sensations,
which  arise  through  the  extinction  of  inflowing  stimuli  in
ganglion-cells  by  means  of  their  inhibitory  influences.

On  the  other  hand,  the  mere  process  of  conduction,  so  far
as  it  is  understood  as  mechanical  propagation  of  the  received
stimulation  without  absorption  and  active  regeneration  of
living  force,  cannot  lead  to  the  genesis  of  sensation,1  at  least
not  of  sensation  in  nerve-elements,  but  at  the  most  in  the
atoms  constituting  them  (where  the  absorption  and  regene-
ration of  vis  viva  is  to  be  traced  in  each  single  vibration).
Accordingly,  it  might  seem  as  if  the  nerve-fibre,  as  such,
were  incapable  of  sensation,  because  it  only  mechanically
conveys  the  peripheral  or  central  energies  of  stimulation.
But  we  have  already  seen  in  the  Appendix  that  the  nerve-
fibre  also  possesses  a  store  of  force  of  its  own,  which  it
sets  free  as  the  result  of  stimulation,  and  that  in  its  course

1  Maudsley  says,  op.  cit.,  p.  305  :  immediately  outwards  in  the  reac-
"When  the  whole  energy  of  an  idea  tion.  .  .  .  The  persistence  for  a  time
passes  immediately  outwards  in  ideo-  of  a  certain  degree  of  intensity  of
motor  action,  then  there  is  scarce  energy  in  the  ideational  circuit  would
any,  or  there  maybe  no,  conscious-  certainly  appear  to  be  the  condition
nessof  it;  in  order  that  there  may  of  consciousness."  This  is,  how-
he  consciousness  of  the  idea,  it  is  ever,  only  possible  if  the  energy  of
necessary  not  only  that  its  excitation  the  stimulus  is  absorbed  by  the  cell
reach  a  certain  intensity,  but  that  i.e.,  converted  into  tension,
the  whole force of it  do  not  pass


330  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

a  part  of  the  stimulus  is  absorbed.  Only  the  tendency  to
decomposition  is  in  the  fibre  far  greater  than  in  the  cell,  and
at  the  same  time  the  store  of  active  force  and  the  inhibi-
tory influences  far  less  than  in  the  latter.  On  the  other
side,  it  would  be  an  extravagant  idea  if  we  believed  that
in  the  ganglion-cell  the  whole  living  force  of  every  stimu-
lus is  annihilated,  and  the  reactive  innervation  generated
afresh  exclusively  from  the  existing  store  of  force ;  rather
is  this  only  an  extreme  case  for  a  cell  destined  solely
for  central  functions.  But  at  the  same  time  all  gan-
glion-cells are  also  more  or  less  predisposed  for  direct
conduction  (e.g.,  all  bodily  pains  are  conducted  through
the  grey  strands  of  the  spinal  cord  to  the  brain,  whilst  the
white  strands  only  conduct  the  painless  sensations  of  the
tactile  and  muscular  sense).  The  oftener  a  ganglion-cell
has  conveyed  a  stimulus  in  a  particular  direction,  the
more  is  it  accustomed  to  this  path,  and  with  the  less  ex-
penditure of  its  own  energy  does  it  perform  its  work,  i.e.,
a  so  much  larger  part  of  the  received  energy  of  stimulation
it  propagates  unabsorbed,  and  a  so  much  smaller  part  of  the
energy  of  stimulation  it  absorbs,  to  replace  it  from  its  own
resources.  The  less,  however,  the  absorbed  part  of  the
energy  of  stimulation  becomes,  the  weaker  becomes  the
sensation,  i.e.,  the  sensation  is  the  more  enfeebled  in  the
passage  of  the  stimulus  through  a  cell,  the  more  the  cell
is  exercised  in  conducting  in  this  particular  direction,  and
sinks  with  a  certain  degree  of  exercise  below  the  threshold
of  consciousness.  This  exercise  is,  however,  always  related
only  to  a  particular  kind  (form  of  vibration)  of  stimulus,
and  must  be  acquired  anew  for  a  newly  occurriug  un-
wonted kind  of  stimuli.  Thus  then  is  it  also  possible
that  the  absorbed  part  of  the  energy  of  stimulation  in  the
nerve-fibres  remains  for  the  ordinary  kinds  of  stimuli  under
normal  circumstances  below  the  threshold,  whilst  the
nerve-fibre  may  again  bring  into  use  its  capacity  to  feel,
either  if  unusual  stimuli  are  conveyed  to  it,  or  if  it  is  placed
under  abnormal  circumstances  {e.g.,  through  the  enhance-


ADDENDA.  331

ment  of  its  irritability  in  consequence  of  separation  from
its  centre).

The  physiological  mode  of  looking  at  the  matter,  there-
fore, altogether  confirms  the  above  supposition  that  it  is
the  collision  of  two  wills  opposed  in  their  content  from
which  consciousness  springs.  The  individual  will  of  the
nerve-element  is  disturbed  in  its  equilibrium  by  the  will
of  the  stimulus  invading  its  repose ;  the  elastic  intercep-
tion of  this  disturbance  is  the  absorption  of  the  stimulus
by  conversion  of  its  vis  viva  into  tension,  a  self-preserving
process  on  the  part  of  the  cell  that  is  diametrically  opposed
to  its  tendency  to  will-manifestation,  i.e.,  to  the  discharge
of  its  tension  into  living  force.  The  conflict  with  the
individual  will,  the  forcing  of  the  same  from  its  position
of  equilibrium  into  the  direction  opposed  to  its  own  ten-
dency, is  felt  as  pain,  and  the  restitution,  or  the  second
act  of  the  self-preserving  process  of  the  nerve-element,  is
the  discharge  of  the  reaction,  which  at  first  aims  only
at  the  restoration  of  the  state  of  equilibrium;  but,  the
opportunity  for  the  manifestation  of  will  once  being
given,  goes  beyond  the  state  induced  by  the  stimulus,
namely,  discharges  an  excess  of  tension  accumulated  by
nutrition.

P.  93,  1.  18. — Comp.  on  this  section  my  "Erliiut.  zur
Met.  d.  Unb.,"  p.  42-49.

P.  118,  last  1.— Comp.  my  "Erliiut.  zur  Met.  d.  Unb.,"  p.
49-51.

P.  148,  1.  23. — According  to  recent  investigations  by
Kleinenberg  ("Hydra,"  Leipzig,  1872),  the  differentia-
tion of  the  protoplasm  into  nerves  and  muscular  fibre
already  begins  with  the  Hydra  or  the  fresh-water  polypes,
but  in  such  wise,  that  it  is  the  same  cell  whose  peripheral
rotund  form  plays  the  part  of  a  sensitive  cutaneous  cell,
whilst  its  central  fibrous  processes  serve  as  the  contractile
element,  i.e.,  as  prototype  of  the  muscle-cell,  in  that  they
are  excited  to  contract  by  the  external  part.  Kleinenberg
has  called  these  cells  "  neuro-muscular  cells."  They  exhibit,


332  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  transition  from  the  more  lowly  organisms,  in  which  all
parts  of  the  protoplasm  of  a  cell  uniformly  act  as  nervous
and  muscular  elements,  to  the  higher  ones,  where  the
functions  are  not  merely  distributed  to  different  parts  of
the  same  cell,  but  the  different  functioning  elements  have
become  differentiated  into  separate  cell-layers.

P.  155,  note,  last  1. — An  attempt  to  eliminate  the  concept
of  force  from  molecular  physics  has  recently  been  made
by  Alexander  Wiesner  ("Das  Atom,"  Leipzig,  1874);  as,
however,  in  this  writer  philosophical  acumen  and  mathe-
matical aptitude  are  alike  wanting,  and  his  explanations,
regarded  even  from  a  purely  physical  point  of  view,
appear  but  little  tenable  and  plausible,  the  development
of  molecular  physics  is  hardly  likely  to  be  furthered  by
this  attempt.  Although  Wiesner  is  perfectly  clear  as  to
the  necessity  of  removing  the  idea  of  matter  from  the
atom,  yet  a  certain  remnant  thereof  remains  clinging  to
his  atom,  because  with  the  reduction  of  all  force  to  energy
of  motion  there  would  otherwise  remain  no  subject  of  the
motor  function.  The  attempt  to  regard  the  corporeal
atoms  as  the  converging,  the  ether  as  the  sphere  of  the
parallel  atoms,  can  hardly  claim  serious  consideration,
especially  as  all  coercive  force  is  wanting  to  the  united
atoms. — Another  and  far  more  important  memoir  by
A.  Pfeilsticker  bears  the  title  "  Das  Kinetsystem,  oder
Elimination  der  Eepulsivkrafte  und  tiberhaupt  des  Kraft-
begriffs  aus  der  Molecular  -  Physik "  (Stuttgart,  1873).
Here,  however,  the  author  would  be  misunderstood  if  the
title  were  thought  to  imply  that  the  writer  denies  the  con-
cept of  force  altogether.  The  author's  intention  is  only
the  perfectly  proper  one,  to  take  the  idea  of  force  out  of
the  sphere  of  mathematical  physics  as  such,  simply
to  hand  it  over  to  metaphysics,  and  in  the  mechanics  of
the  atom,  in  place  of  force,  to  be  satisfied  with  its  most
direct  expression,  acceleration.  The  work  performed  by
a  force  is  most  directly  measured  by  the  magnitude  of  the
acceleration  called  forth  by  it  in  other  atoms ;  mechanics,


ADDENDA.  333

therefore,  needs  the  standard  for  the  magnitude  of  the
force  as  surrogate  of  the  idea  of  force  itself.  In  this,  as
we  know,  there  is  nothing  new,  and  Pfeilsticker  merely
makes  use  of  a  certain  modification  in  the  meaning  of
certain  expressions  and  formula?  in  order  to  make  more
complete  the  agreement  between  the  metaphysical  idea  of
force  and  its  mathematical  surrogate.  It  does  not,  how-
ever, occur  to  him  to  deny  that  the  "  property "  of  an
atom  "  to  cause  changes  of  movement  according  to  certain
laws"  in  other  atoms  (p.  14)  must  be  philosophically
retained  as  metaphysical  cause  of  these  uniform  changes
of  motion,  i.e.,  as  force  behind  acceleration.

P.  158,  1.  15, — It  used  to  be  assumed  that  the  ether
alone  filled  up  the  space  between  the  celestial  bodies.
This  view  is,  at  the  present  time,  more  and  more  receding
before  the  other,  that  the  permanent  gases  in  a  state
of  extreme  attenuation  occupy  this  intermediate  space.
That  the  intervals  between  the  planets  are  filled  with
permanent  gases  may  at  the  present  time  be  assumed  as
tolerably  certain,  but  that  also  between  the  several  suns
of  our  world-lens  the  corporeal  molecules  of  the  gases  are
not  wanting  can  now  likewise  be  regarded  as  probable.
Accordingly,  if  the  ether  has  lost  its  importance  as  a  hypo-
thetical medium  for  the  filling  up  of  cosmic  space,  it  has  in
compensation  continually  gained  in  recent  times  in  signifi-
cance as  an  hypothesis  for  the  explanation  of  the  constitu-
tion of  matter.  Edlund's  remarkable  "  Theory  of  Electricity,"
for  which  I  venture  to  prophesy  an  important  future,  rests  on
the  assumption  that  the  non-electric  state  of  a  body  is  the
condition  of  static  equilibrium  between  the  ether-atoms
contained  in  it  and  the  whole  of  the  ether  outsidcit,  whilst
positive  or  negative  disturbances  of  this  state  of  equili-
brium represent  the  two  species  of  electricity  (cp.  "  Natur-
forscher,"  1872,  Xos.  21  and  23  ;  1873,  Nos.  24,  39,  41).
The  propagation  of  the  light-vibrations,  whose  transversal
direction  must  pass  for  strictly  proved,  is  with  this
state  of things  only  mathematically  intelligible  if the


334  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

atoms  which  are  its  substrates  essentially  follow  other
laws  than  the  body-atoms  subject  to  the  laws  of  gravita-
tion. Experiments  on  interference  seem  to  show  that  the
ether  as  medium  of  the  light-vibrations  is  to  be  regarded
as  at  rest  in  relation  to  the  motion  of  the  earth,  so  that  to
our  apprehension  it  seems  to  stream  through  the  pores  of
our  atmosphere  with  a  velocity  which  is  approximately
equal,  but  opposed  to,  that  of  the  earth  in  the  mundane
space.  Eecently  Maxwell  has  set  up  an  "electro-
magnetic theory  of  light,"  which  proceeds  from  the
fundamental  thought  that  the  medium  of  electricity  and
that  of  light  is  one  and  the  same  medium,  namely,  the
ether  (Xaturf.,  vi.  p.  159).  He  has  in  a  theoretical
way,  as  a  consequence  of  his  hypothesis,  developed  the
condition  that  the  square  root  of  the  di-electric  constant
must  be  equal  to  the  refractive  power  of  light;  and  the
empirical  confirmation  of  this  law,  both  for  various
substances  (Naturf.,  vi.  p.  247),  and  also  for  different
axes  of  a  crystal,  by  the  experiments  of  Boltzmann  is  well
calculated  to  give  a  strong  support  to  the  theory  of
Maxwell.  But  even  apart  from  electricity  and  light,  the
hypothesis  of  the  ether  is  indispensable  for  the  consti-
tution of  the  solid,  rigid  bodies,  which  can  never  be
explained  by  merely  attracting,  but  always  only  by  the
mutual  action  of  attracting  and  repelling  forces.  This
has  hitherto  been  recognised  by  all  mathematical  phy-
sicists ;  the  first  interesting  attempt  to  constitute  solid
bodies  merely  from  attractive  forces,  and  to  eliminate
the  repulsive  or  ether- atoms  from  this  part  of  mathe-
matical physics,  is  that  by  Pfeilsticker  in  his  memoir
"Das  Kinetsystem"  (Stuttgart,  1873).  Unfortunately,
however,  the  suppositions  there  made  (infinity  of  mat-
ter) are  of  so  doubtful  a  kind,  and  the  indications  afforded
so  scanty  and  provisional  (the  memoir  is  only  to  be  the
precursor  of  a  detailed  "  Kinetology "),  that  no  opinion
on  the  alleged  solubility  of  the  problem  can  be  formed.
On  the whole,  therefore,  so far  the  hypothesis  of  the


ADDENDA.  335

repulsive  ether-atoms  will  have  to  pass  for  just  as  well-
founded  as  that  of  the  attractive  corporeal  atoms.

P.  158,  1.  24.- — If  one  recognises  the  mutual  penetrabi-
lity of  the  atoms  (cp.  p.  170),  it  undoubtedly  follows  from
the  consideration  of  freely  mobile  corporeal  atoms,  that
they  must  vibrate  through  one  another  without  hindrance
(because  the  velocity  with  which  they  travel  will  be  infin-
itely great  as  the  attraction  at  an  infinitely  little  distance),
and  after  the  backward  swing  must  return  to  their  point
of  departure  to  begin  their  play  over  again  (Pfeilsticker's
"  Kinetsystem,"  sects,  ii.  and  vi.)  A  gradual  diminution
of  the  amplitude  of  body-atoms  vibrating  through  one
another  and  final  reduction  to  zero  would  only  be  possible
with  a  sort  of  frictional  resistance,  which  is  excluded  in
the  case  of  freely  movable  atoms.  But  the  case  appears
to  be  different  when  the  empirical  fact  of  relatively  rigid
combinations  of  atomic  groups  is  taken  note  of,  how-
ever it  be  explained ;  for  in  it  there  is  then  given
such  an  arrest  of  the  free  movement  of  the  atoms  as
must  finally  induce  their  coming  together.  If,  then,  as
Pfeilsticker  maintains,  the  rigid  corporeal  atoms  were
explicable  without  repulsive  forces,  the  gradual  union  of
corporeal  atoms  into  a  point  must  also  be  conceivable,
and  therefore  his  assertion  seems  unjustified  that  several
atoms  can  only  be  united  in  a  point  if  they  are  originally
created  in  this  form.  On  the  other  hand,  the  other  re-
mark (p.  29)  is  excellent,  that  homogeneous  atoms  (no
matter  what  their  nature),  if  they  are  once  united  in  a
point,  can  no  longer  be  separated  by  internal  or  external
influence,  even  if  they  possess  no  attraction  for  one  another;
for  every  action  would  always  affect  both  atoms  equallyt
thus  never  be  able  to  produce  a  different  effect  in  both.

P.  170,  1.  10. — My  assertion  of  the  perfect  penetrability
of  the  corporeal  atoms  has  certainly  appeared  to  many  a
physicist  accustomed  to  the  dogma  of  impenetrability  a
philosophical  paradox,  and  it  affords  me  therefore  par-
ticular satisfaction  to  be  able  to  point  to  an authority


336  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

like  Dr.  Albert  Pfeilsticker,  all  whose  calculations  in  his
"  Kinetsystem "  depend  on  the  absolute  penetrability  of
the  atoms  as  on  a  self-evident  supposition.  When  Dr.
Alexander  Wiesner  in  his  memoir  "  Das  Atom  "  (Leipzig,
Thomas,  1874)  controverts  "  Pfeilsticker's  penetrability
theory,"  he  does  this  simply  on  the  ground  of  a  remnant
of  the  old  prejudice  of  matter  that  clings  to  him
despite  all  his  protestations,  without  which  remnant
nothing  "  movable  "  would  remain  for  him,  since,  as  above
remarked,  he  desires  thoroughly  to  eliminate  the  notion
of  force.

P.  171,  1.  10.  —  An  instructive  instance  of  the  fixity  of
sense-prejudices  is  afforded  by  Albert  Lange,  who,  in  his
"  History  of  Materialism,"  gives,  in  a  special  section,  "Force
and  Matter"  (Thomas's  trans.,  vol.  ii.  p.  351-397,  Eng.
and  For.  Phil.  Library),  an  instructive  sketch  of  the  his-
torical development  of  the  physical  and  chemical  atomic
theory,  and  of  the  present  views  of  natural  philoso-
phers on  the  relation  of  force  and  matter.  He  there,  so
far  as  criticism  is  concerned,  agrees  substantially  with  my
foregoing  disquisition;  remains,  however,  almost  avowedly
wavering  between  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  because  he  sees
the  impossibility  of  retaining  the  concept  Matter,  and  yet
does  not  venture  to  take  the  only  consistent  step  which  suc-
cessfully solves  the  problem.  He  blames  Biichner  because>
from  his  lay  point  of  view,  he  "  cannot  sufficiently  free
himself  from  the  sensuous  idea  of  compound,  apparently
compact,  bodies,  such  as  our  touch  and  eye  present  them
to  us.  The  professed  physicist,  at  least  the  mathematical
physicist,  cannot  make  the  least  step  in  his  science  with-
out freeing  himself  from  such  ideas  "  (p.  370).  The  result
of  his  historical  exposition  comes  to  this :  "  That  the
progress  of  the  science  has  led  us  more  and  more  to  put
force  in  the  place  of  matter,  and  that  the  increasing  ex-
actness of  research  more  and  more  resolves  matter  into
force.  The  two  ideas,  therefore,  do  not  stand  so  simply
as abstractions beside each other; but  the  one  is  by


ADDENDA.  337

abstraction  and  inquiry  resolved  into  the  other,  yet  so  that
there  is  always  something  left "  (p.  379).  Nothing  could
be  objected  to  the  last  clause  if  it  only  meant  that  in  the
previous  phases  of  molecular  physics  such  an  unresolved
remainder  of  matter  has  heen  left ;  but  it  does  not  follow
from  that  that  the  process  of  resolution  in  question  must
stop  at  a  definite  limit,  and  must  for  all  time  necessarily
still  retain  a  matter  undefinable  and  valueless  for  explana-
tion behind  the  forces  alone  of  account  for  scientific  pur-
poses. On  the  contrary,  the  previous  course  of  science  un-
doubtedly demands  the  making  a  clean  sweep  of  the  last
remnant  of  the  sensuous  prejudice  blamed  in  the  case  of
Buchner.  If  matter,  as  such,  is  resolved  into  forces,  the  sub-
stance supporting  the  force-effects  demanded  by  the  nature
of  our  thinking  can  no  longer  be  matter  as  such,  which  is
constituted  of  these  force-effects  (p.  293,  above) ;  but  still
less  can  it  be  the  abstract  ghost  of  a  matter  remaining
after  the  deduction  of  all  forces,  the  only  definition  of
which  is  limited  to  its  being  a  substantial  support  of  the
dynamic  effects.  Ihit  if  nothing  remains  of  the  union  of
force  and  matter  but  the  union  of  force  with  the  category
required  by  thought  of  substantiality,  the  problem,  in-
soluble according  to  Lange,  is  very  easily  solved  by  the
simple  recognition  that  it  is  force  and  only  force  to  which
the  predicate  of  substantiality  belongs.  Herewith  the  "in-
dispensable "  support  of  the  force-effects  at  once  ceases  to
be  "  incomprehensible  "  (p.  395),  and  the  "  limit  of  natural
knowledge'"'  erected  by  sense-prejudice  falls  away  as  a  mock-
ing subjective  phantom.  If  matter  as  such  can  not  be  hypo-
statised  because  it  is  proved  to  be  result  of  force-effects,  if
the  idea  of  stuff  has  been  itself  volatilised  into  the  mere
category  of  substance,  it  is,  in  fact,  undiscoverable  why  it
"never  at  all  occurs"  (p.  395)  to  Lange  to  connect  the
indispensable  category  of  .substantiality  with  the  only
qualify  which  turns  out,  on  the  analysis  of  matter,  to  be  its
real  core,  namely,  force,  i.e.,  to  recognise  this  itself  with
Leibniz  as  the  true  and  only  substance.  The  only  assign-
VOL.  III.  y


338  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

able  reason  for  this  is,  that  Lange  imagines  that  he  can  in
his  philosophising  retain,  even  in  the  last  and  highest  prin-
ciples, sensuous  intuitiveness,  and  with  the  surrender  of
these  must  lose  the  scientific  ground  under  his  feet.  This
is,  of  course,  a  prejudice  of  the  crudest  sensualistic  empiri-
cism, which  has  no  idea  that  all  science  just  begins  with
the  elevation  of  sense-intuition  into  conception.  Hence
it  is  but  matter  of  course  that  his  resistance  to  the  sur-
render of  intuitiveness  occurs  at  this  point  much  too
late;  for  the  category  of  substantiality,  into  which  the
concept  of  stuff  is  for  him  volatilised,  is  yet  as  abstract  as
possible;  and  of  force,  he  himself  confesses  (p.  371)  that
it  "  cannot  be  at  all  adequately  represented  in  forms  of
sense :  we  help  ourselves  by  pictures,  such  as  the  lines  of
the  figures  in  the  doctrines  of  mathematics,  without  ever
confounding  these  pictures  with  the  notion  of  force."  Had
Lange  consistently  held  fast  to  this  simple  truth,  the  false
appearance  of  incomprehensibility  arising  from  the  per-
verse struggling  for  sensible  intuitiveness  in  the  highest
principles  would  have  disappeared  of  itself.

P.  200,  1.  27. — Hackel  still  maintains  in  his  "  Anthro-
pogenic "  (p.  246)  the  morphological  equivalence  of  the
segments  in  the  articulata  and  vertebrata,  relying  on
the  point  that  in  the  embryo  of  the  vertebrate  the  rest
of  the  vertebne  are  ordinarily  developed  from  the  anterior
vertebne  that  are  first  to  make  their  appearance,  as  the
divisions  of  the  annelids  arise  by  terminal  gemmation.
But  "  Si  duo  faciunt  idem,  non  est  idem,"  i.e.,  the  mor-
phological meaning  of  an  ontogenetic  metameros  is  only
certainly  to  be  perceived  from  the  phylogenetic  devel-
opmental history  of  the  same.  Here,  however,  on  trac-
ing the  annelids  to  their  origin,  we  find  a  chain  of
similar  individual  organisms,  whilst  the  ancestors  of  the
vertebrates  nowhere  exhibit  such  a  chain,  but  always
only  a  single  organism  (e.g.,  Amphioxus),  whose  cord  is
ossified  at  a  certain  stage  of  development  in  order  to
attain  a  firmer  skeleton,  but  at  the  same  time  is  inter-


ADDENDA.


339


nally  articulated  for  the  sake  of retaining greater  mo-
bility.

P.  219,  1.  19. — Hiickel  asserts  that  the  homogeneity  of
the  mass  in  the  non-nucleated  protozoa  is  proved  by  the
microscopic  observation  of  the  pigment-corpuscles,  which
have  been  offered  the  Moner  "  to  devour,"  that  move  un-
impeded and  uniformly  in  all  directions  in  the  body  of
the  protozoon.  Of  course,  according  to  this,  the  truth  of
the  following  propositions  must  be  admitted :  "  Every
part  may  receive  and  digest  food ;  every  part  is  irritable
and  sensitive ;  every  part  may  be  moved  independently ;
and  every  part  is,  lastly,  also  capable  of  propagation  and
regeneration"  ("Anthropogenic,"  p.  381).  Only  we  must
understand  by  "part"  a  piece  of  an  empirical  size,  and  by
no  means  a  chemical  molecule  of  the  albumen  in  question  ;
only  on  this  supposition  can  we  speak  of  a  homogeneity
of  the  Moneres  in  contrast  to  the  nucleated  Amoebae,  but
by  no  means  in  the  chemical  signification  of  the  word.
For  that  even  the  lowest  animals  are  not  "  structure-
less," as  a  solution  of  albumen,  is  manifestly  shown  by
the  distribution  of  the  granules  through  the  whole  pro-
toplasmic mass.  The  functions  of  nutrition,  movement,
and  sensation  are  also  performed  in  the  nucleated  cells;
not  by  tin;  nucleus,  but  by  the  nucleated  protoplasm,
and  only  the  function  of  propagation,  i.e.,  the  initiative
to  cell-division,  is  in  the  case  of  the  latter  centralised
at  the  nucleus,  whilst  in  the  Moneres  this  also  is  still  de-
centralised. What  part  in  all  these  functions  is  played
by  the  granules,  on  that  point  I.  will  make  no  conjec-
tures; at  all  events,  they  suffice  to  enable  us  to  speak
of  a  morphological  structure  in  addition  to  the  chemical
structure  of  the  protoplasm,  and  distinguish  the  living
lumps  of  protoplasm  specifically  from  all  albuminous
droplets  externally  resembling  them.  If  the  clicmiad
structure  of  the  proteid  substances  were  alone  sufficient
to  cause  the  vital  phenomena  of  the  protoplasm,  it  would
at  least  be  very  surprising  that  all  attempts  to  produce


340  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Moneres  from  finely  distributed  albuminous  droplets  have
hitherto  remained  without  result.

P.  247,  1.  11. — J.  H.  v.  Kirchmann  asserts  in  his  me-
moir "  On  the  Principle  of  Eealism,"  p.  43  :  "  In  truth,
then,  the  ideation  of  the  Unconscious  has  all  the  deter-
minations which  make  knowledge  in  man  a  conscious
knowledge,"  and  seeks  to  prove  this  assertion  in  the
following  manner :  "  Xow  we  find  in  conscious  knowledge
(1.)  that  it  has  a  content  wholly  in  the  form  of  knowledge;
(2.)  that  it  knows  at  the  same  time  this  form  itself,
or  that  knowledge  knows,  besides  its  content,  at  the  same
time  itself  as  knowledge  (is  conscious  of  itself) ;  (3.)
that  knowledge  can  embrace  the  many  dispersed  ideas  re-
ceived one  after  another  and  relate  them  to  one  another
in  the  most  varied  manner,  in  virtue  of  the  forms  of  rela-
tion inherent  in  it ;  and  (4.)  that  knowledge,  in  spite  of
the  plurality  of  its  content  and  of  its  ideas  being  separated
in  time,  still  knows  itself  as  One.  Now  of  these  deter-
minations affecting  the  form  of  knowledge,  the  Uncon-
scious thinking  of  the  All-One  possesses,  according  to  the
explanations  of  the  author,  unquestionably  those  under
I,  3,  and  likewise  4;  for  the  rationality  attributed  to  it,
which  is  essentially  expounded  as  relation  of  the  single
ideas  in  the  form  of  means  to  others  as  ends,  belongs
indeed  to  the  determination  under  3,  and  the  all-unity  of
the  Unconscious  leads  also  to  the  determination  under  4.
But  even  the  determination  under  2  cannot  be  denied  to
the  thinking  of  the  Unconscious,  because  only  thereby  is
the  picking  out  of  the  suitable  means  from  the  whole  mass
of  ideas  possible  in  the  special  cases  of  the  auxiliary  inter-
vention of  the  Unconscious,  and  because  the  contrast  of  Voli-
tion and  Ideation  must  be  likewise  contained  in  it  as  known,
since  the  goal,  the  suppression  of  the  Will  by  conscious
thinking,  can  only  thereby  be  represented  by  it  at  all."

On  this  the  following  is  to  be  remarked.  Nos.  3  and  4
concern  the  union  of  the  scattered  given  empirical  thought-
material  in  consciousness,  or  the  connecting  relations  of  the


ADDENDA.  341

content  of  thought,  which  is  cut  up  both  in  space  and
time  through  the  narrowness  and  discursiveness  of  per-
ception. Unconscious  thinking,  however,  does  not  need
subsequently  to  collect  the  inner  manifold  of  its  con-
tent into  a  unity,  because  it  is  originally  an  indivisible
totality,  not  an  aggregate  of  scattered  fragments.  It
need  not  at  all  become  conscious  of  its  own  unity,
because  its  internal  plurality  is  not  given  to  it,  like  con-
scious perception,  but  posited  by  it  itself,  and  indeed
is  posited  in  an  indissoluble  unity.  As  little  as  the
form  of  unity  has  to  be  subsequently  applied  to  the
matter  of  the  unconscious  Idea,  so  little  have  the  rela-
tions in  which  the  many  moments  and  parts  of  this
matter  stand  to  one  another  and  the  whole.  So  far
as  these  relations  may  be  contained  in  intellectual  in-
tuition in  general,  so  far  do  they  lurk  implicitly  in  the
matter  of  unconscious  perception,  without  the  latter  need-
ing to  become  conscious  of  their  presence  in  abstract
explication ;  so  far,  however,  as  the  relations  of  our  con-
scious thinking  depend  on  its  discursiveness,  so  far
can  they  in  general  find  no  entrance  into  unconscious
ideation.  The  assertion  of  Kirchmann  that  his  points
Xos.  3  and  4  find  application  to  unconscious  thinking  in
my  sense  is  then  certainly  erroneous.  But  as  concerns
the  point  Xo.  I,  the  expression  made  use  of  in  the  same,
"form  of  knowledge,"  is  altogether  ambiguous.  If  it
merely  implies  as  much  as  "form  of  ideality"  (in  opposi-
tion to  the  form  of  reality  or  of  existence),  nothing  more
is  posited  by  it  than  the  community  emphasised  by  me
(and  cited  by  Kirchmann  shortly  before)  of  an  ideal
content  without  any  reality  of  its  own  for  the  uncon-
scious and  conscious  presentation.  If,  however,  "  form  of
knowledge"  means  the  same  as  "  form  of  consciousness,"
then  it  is  precisely  the  point  in  dispute,  whether  this
determination  belongs  to  unconscious  perception,  so  that
Kirchmann  cannot  render  as  a  reason  for  its  affirmation
what  is  only  the  affirmation  itself.


3+2  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

It  is,  according  to  this,  clear  that,  of  the  four  points  men-
tioned by  Ivirchmann,  only  the  second  touches  the  core  of
the  pending  question,  although  he  leaves  something  to  be
desired  in  clearness  of  expression.  It  is  declared  to  be
a  characteristic  form  of  conscious  knowledge  that  con-
sciousness not  merely  knows  its  own  content,  but  that  it
knows  it  also  as  content  in  contrast  to  its  form,  i.e.,  that
it  has  it  for  object,  wherewith  at  the  same  time  the  know-
ledge of  itself  is  connected  as  subject.  In  truth,  the
hno'idedge  of  the  form  of  consciousness  as  such,  and  of
the  opposition  of  the  matter  to  the  same,  is  only  a  result
of  a  higher  development  of  conscious  intellect,  but  it
remains,  therefore,  still  correct  that  the  actual  existence
of  this  contrast  of  form  and  matter  of  consciousness  and
the  objectivity  of  the  matter  resulting  from  it  is  charac-
teristic for  conscious  thinking.  This  is,  however,  only  the
case  because  for  unconscious  thinking  this  separation
and  this  opposition  of  form  and  matter  of  knowledge,  of
subject  and  object  of  the  thinking  act,  does  not  exist,  be-
cause here  subject  and  object  are  in  direct  identity,  or
rather  still  remain  in  indifference,  have  not  yet  stepped  out
of  their  original  non-separation.  This  contrast  first  arises
from  the  real  conflict  of  opposing  and  mutually  inhibit-
ing individual  wills.  In  the  All-One,  that  has  nothing
outside  itself,  there  is  nought  conceivable  that  could
disturb  the  identity  of  the  subject-object  in  the  Uncon-
scious Idea  and  lead  to  the  separation  of  reflecting  know-
ledge from  thing  known. — Kirchmann  gives  two  reasons
why  unconscious  knowledge  must  at  the  same  time  be
knowledge  of  itself  as  knowledge,  i.e., consciousness  (or,  more
precisely,  self-consciousness),  whose  probative  force,  how-
ever, has  not  become  very  clear  to  me,  even  taken  in  the
sense  of  its  author.  He  asserts,  namely,  that,  in  the  first
place,  the  selection  of  the  most  suitable  means  from  the
whole  multitude  of  ideas,  and,  secondly,  the  presentation  of
volition  as  contrast  of  the  logical,  is  not  possible  without
knowledge  of  knowledge. But  now  the  suitable  means  are


ADDENDA.  343

not  deliberately  set  apart  from  a  whole  mass  of  actual  in-
appropriate representations,  but  of  all  possible  representa-
tions only  those  become  efficient  which  are  logically  de-
manded (demanded,  e.g.,  as  means  to  end).  It  is  not  obvious
what  influence  the  logical  or  teleological  determination  of
the  quality  of  the  awakening  Idea  could  have  on  the  destruc-
tion of  the  indifference  of  subject  and  object  or  of  form
and  matter  in  the  Unconscious  Idea.  (Other  objections
to  the  unconsciousness  of  the  Absolute  Idea  derived  from
the  positing  of  purpose  have  been  already  discussed,  vol.
ii.  p.  255  ff.)  As  little  evident  is  it  how  from  the  circum-
stance that  the  willing  must  for  the  Idea  be  a  known  one,
the  other  assertion  is  to  be  derived  that  the  coming  to
knowledge  of  the  Will  through  the  Idea  must  be  conscious,
or  that  with  this  knowledge  there  must  be  reflection  on
the  knowledge  as  such.  Not,  as  Kirchmann  thinks,  as  re-
presented goal,  but  as  starting-point,  must  volition  in  some
way  or  other  become  conscious,  in  order  that  a  process
may  at  all  come  to  pass  (see  further  vol.  ii.  p.  256-258,
and  vol.  iii.  p.  163-169).  However,  this  consciousness  is
one  entirely  undetermined  in  content,  that  only  gives  an
impulse  to  the  unfolding  of  the  Idea,  but  does  not  enter
into  its  content. — Thus,  on  closer  investigation,  disappears
every  semblance  of  probative  force  for  the  proof  attempted
by  Kirchmann  of  his  assertion  that  the  ideation  of  the  Un-
conscious has  all,  or  even  only  any  one,  of  the  determina-
tions which  make  knowledge  in  man  conscious  knowledge.

P.  271,  1.  12. — Comp.  here  my  memoir  "Die  Selbst-
zersetzung  des  Christenthums  und  die  Religion  der  Zu-
kunft,"  2  Auil.,  Berlin,  C.  Duncker,  1874,  particularly
chap.  vii. :  "Die  historischen  Bausteine  zur  .Religion  der
Zukunft."

P.  271,  1.  31. — On  the  appearance  of  the  sixth  edition
of  this  work  it  was  still  unknown  to  me  that  the  hope
here  expressed  had  already  begun  to  receive  its  reali-
sation in  a  "  Christliche  Dogmatik "  that  had  appeared
simultaneously  with my first edition (Zurich,  Orell &


34-1  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Fiissli,  1869).  The  author  (A.  E.  Biedermann,  Professor
in  Ziirich)  of  this  book,  which  I  regard  not  merely  as  the
most  important  theological,  but  also  as  one  of  the  most  dis-
tinguished speculative  achievements  of  the  last  generation,
may  well  claim  a  like  position  in  the  Protestant  theology
of  the  last  third  of  this  century  to  that  of  Schleiermacher
in  the  first  third,  and  stands  in  a  similar  relation  to  Hegel
as  Schleiermacher  to  Plato  and  Spinoza.  In  place  of  the
nebulosity  of  Schleiermacher,  he  offers,  however,  a  concen-
trated wealth  of  acute  speculative  thought,  and  stands  on  the
shoulders  of  the  historico-critical  school,  whose  results  he
does  not  hush  up  like  the  compromising  theology,  but  ac-
cepts in  all  their  clear  fulness,  and  turns  to  good  account  as
negative  transition  to  his  own  positive  speculation,  which
is  to  unfold  the  proper  thought-content  of  the  represent-
able  elements  in  the  historical  dogmas  now  breaking  up
through  their  immanent  contradictions.  If  the  historical
continuity  of  Christianity  were  in  any  wise  to  be  saved,  it
would  without  doubt  be  in  this  way ;  to  my  mind,  how-
ever, the  harmony  of  the  thought  historically  trans-
mitted with  that  finally  sifted  out  by  speculation  is  so
far-fetched,  that  in  the  end  only  the  name  is  saved,  con-
cealing something  altogether  new.  But  what  is  pertinent
here  is  the  fact  that  speculative  reforming  tendencies  are
showing  themselves  in  the  circles  of  Protestant  theology
itself,  which  sooner  or  later  must  gather  round  their
ilag  all  who  seek  to  retain  a  living  Christianity,  thus
are  averse  to  a  rigid  orthodoxy,  and  yet  find  themselves
just  as  much  repelled  by  the  rationalistic,  illuminated,  and
pale  sentimental  irreligiosity  of  liberal  Protestantism  as
by  the  obscurity  and  hushing-up  system  of  the  theology
of  compromise.  The  speculative  content  of  this  new
reformed  theology  as  a  purified  Hegelianism  is  very
closely  allied  to  the  principles  advocated  by  me,  although
in  some  points  it  departs  from  it  in  substance,  in
others  only  in  terminology  (cp.  especially  the  sections
"DasWesen  Gottes,"  §  617-631 ;  "Das  Dasein  Gottes,"


ADDENDA.  345

§  632-640;  and  "Der  Begriff  des  absoluten  Geistes,"
§696-717).

Biedermann  too  seeks  for  the  higher  synthetic  unity  of
a  view  of  the  world,  which  conceives  the  Absolute  only
as  the  vital  force  poured  out  in  the  All  and  of  one,
which  apprehends  it  as  spiritual  personality,  and  sees  in
both  only  partially  true  modes  of  thinking,  which  must
be  sublated  in  the  higher  conception  of  the  impersonal
absolute  Spirit  (p.  645).  That  he  terms  the  former  view
the  pantheistic,  appears  to  be  an  unessential  difference  of
expression ;  it  seems  to  me  that  the  etymology  of  the
wTord  "pantheistic"  would  not  at  all  admit  of  the  setting
aside  of  the  immaterial  spiritualistic  moment,  and  that  a
view  which  comprehends  the  Absolute  only  as  unspiritual
natural  force  can  only  receive  the  name  of  Naturalism
or  Naturalistic  Monism,  but  not  that  of  Pantheism.  On
the  other  hand,  the  latter  term  is  properly  covered  by  the
principle  of  an  impersonal  Absolute  Spirit,  for  which
Biedermann  lias  not  missed  the  adequate  expression.  His
attempted  synthesis  of  Theism  and  Pantheism  is  therefore
substantially  quite  the  same  as  that  which  is  aimed  at  in
my  synthesis  of  Naturalistic  Monism  and  Theism,  namely,
Spiritualistic  Monism  or  Pantheism.

Biedermann  openly  acknowledges  that  the  understand-
ing must  necessarily  be  led  to  conceive  the  indivisible
absolute  ground  of  the  inner  purposiveness  of  the  world  as
impi  rsonal  and  immanent,  and  that  every  attempt  to  refer
the  immanent  conformity  to  law  and  purpose  to  the  wise
will  of  a  personal  Creator  not  only  denudes  it  of  its  absolute-
ness, but  also  brings  the  immanent  purpose  of  the  world
into  an  insoluble  antinomy  with  the  personal  aims  of  its
Creator  (§  628).  lie  declares  that  God  is  not  merely  imma-
nent in  the  world  in  his  action,  and  transcendent  to  it
in  his  being,  but  that  he  is  immanent  to  it  as  very
ground  of  its  existence,  and  that  this  groundedness  of  the
world  is  his  being  itself,  that  does  not  lie  as  an  otherness
behind  it  (p.  C2(j) ;  that  a  transcendence  of  God  in  respect


346  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  the  world  can  only  be  asserted  so  far  as  he  remains  un-
affected by  the  forms  of  particular  existence  of  the  world
(Spaceness  and  Timeness),  i.e.,  as  he  is  indeed  everywhere
and  always  immanent  to  finite  existence  as  its  ground,  but
yet  himself  is  in  no  place  and  in  no  time  (ibid.)  Nowhere
have  I  found  the  arguments  against  the  personality  of  the
Absolute  Spirit  marshalled  with  such  thoroughness,  clear-
ness, and  acuteness  as  by  Biedermann.  He  shows  that
all  the  proofs  of  the  existence  of  God  can  only  lead  to  the
conception  of  an  impersonal  Absolute  Spirit  as  ground  of
the  natural  and  moral  order,  but  that  the  mind  only  arrives
by  an  illegitimate  leap  at  the  supposition  of  a  personality
of  the  Absolute  Spirit  (§  632-640).  He  further  main-
tains that  every  one  of  the  attributes  of  God  assumed  on
the  part  of  theology,  thought  out  in  all  its  consequences,
leads  to  an  antinomy  between  the  absoluteness  and  the
personality  of  God,  which  can  always  only  be  regarded  as  a
specialised  expression  of  the  general  contradiction  existing
between  these  conceptions  (§  617-631).  Lastly,  he  deals
with  this  contradiction  in  its  general  form,  and  shows  the
untenability  of  all  the  attempts  made  from  the  most  diverse
sides  to  obscure  or  to  overcome  it  (§  716).  To  these  de-
monstrations of  Biedermann,  which  excellently  supple-
ment my  own,  I  refer  all  readers  who  might  not  feel  satis-
fied and  convinced  by  my  expositions,  which  could  not
possibly  penetrate  far  into  the  theological  domain  within
the  limits  of  the  present  book.

When  we  consider  that  Biedermann's  work  was  composed
before  the  appearance  of  the  first  edition  of  the  "Philosophy
of  the  Unconscious,"  we  should  not  be  surprised  that  the
author  still  holds  to  the  Hegelian  categories  of  the  Being-in-
self  and  Being-for-self  of  the  Absolute  Spirit;  that  he  speaks
of  a  reflection  of  the  natural  processes  and  of  the  acts  of
individual  spirits  in  the  pure  Being-in-self  of  the  Abso-
lute Spirit  (p.  638),  and  accordingly  of  a  self-consciousness
of  the  latter  (p.  561).  It  is,  however,  easily  discernible
that,  with  Biedermann's  metaphysical  point  of  view,  there


ADDENDA.  347

is  no  longer  any  necessity  at  all  for  the  assumption  retained
by  him  from  the  traditional  Theism  that  everything  ejected
into  natural  actuality  from  the  absolute  Idea  by  the  ab-
solute Will  notwithstanding  that  it  does  not  cease  to  be
comprehended  in  the  creative  Idea  of  the  Absolute  Spirit,
is  again  superfluously  reflected  in  the  Absolute,  and  thus
becomes  conscious  in  the  same.  That  in  certain  acts  such
a  reflection  takes  place  is  true,  but  they  are  in  comparison
with  the  total  action  of  the  Absolute  only  ■partial  reflec-
tions, and  can  therefore  also  only  produce  'partial  apper-
ceptions, i.e.,  finite  individual  consciousnesses,  but  not  lead
to  an  indivisible  collective  .consciousness  of  the  Absolute
Spirit,  to  a  divine  self-consciousness.  If  there  really  were
such  an  absolute  self-consciousness,  this  would  be  the  abso-
lute Ego, i.e., the  absolute  Personality,  at  least  in  intellectual
reference,  and  Bicdermann's  argument  against  the  person-
ality of  the  Absolute  would  in  this  respect  be  adduced
in  vain.  But  since  that  assertion  is  only  a  theistic  re-
miniscence, no  longer  fitting  in  with  Biedermann's  meta-
physical Pantheism,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  consistent
following  out  of  his  perception  of  the  untenability  of  the
Personality  of  the  Absolute  Spirit  will  lead  him  likewise
to  abandon  the  self-consciousness  and  the  consciousness,
and  therewith  to  come  over  in  principle  to  our  point
of  view.  How  near  he  stands  to  the  latter,  despite  his
apparently  opposite  mode  of  expression,  even  in  his
"  Christliche  Dogmatik,"  is  best  proved  by  §  627,  dealing
with  the  divine  omniscience.  We  there  read :  "In  order
to  comprehend  the  knowledge  of  God  as  absolute,  as  omni-
science, the  doctrine  of  the  Church  commands  us  to  think
away  all  the  discursive  elements  of  finite  human  know-
ledge (§409).  But  the  more  this  is  actually  done,  the  man
disappears  also  all  analog//  with  a  personal  knowing,  and
there  only  remains  the  impersonal  spirituality  of  the  imma-
nent ground,  of  the  world,  in  which  everything  that  Hows
from  it  is  of  necessity  (?)  again  reflected  in  it  (?)."  Apart
from  this  "being  reflected,"  by  which  the  thought  is  dis-


343  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

figured,  it  is  clear  enough  that  "  the  pure  spirituality  of
the  essentially  single  ground  of  the  whole  world-pro-
cess" (p.  566),  which  is  to  admit  of  no  analogy  with,  per-
sonal  knowing,  is  intended  to  affirm  precisely  the  same
as  my  unconscious  intuition  of  the  absolute  Idea,  ex-
cept that  it  is  here  not  yet  clearly  elevated  into  scien-
tific consciousness,  that  the  form  of  human  knowledge,
which  must  be  abstracted  from  absolute  knowledge,  is
nothing  more  than  the  form  of  consciousness.

Before  we  quit  Biedermann,  another  inconsequence
must  be  pointed  out,  which  likewise  must  be  regarded
as  a  concession  to  the  traditional  Theism,  namely,  he
asserts  that,  although  personality  must  be  excluded  from
the  notion  of  the  Absolute  Spirit,  it  is  yet  the  only  pos-
sible image  through  which  the  essential  being  of  God  can
be  brought  home  to  us,  although  inadequately,  and  that
the  religious  feeling  cannot  dispense  with  the  imagina-
tive realisation  of  God  (p.  645-646).  Granted  that  the  un-
suitable image  of  a  spiritual  personality  is  always  a  rela-
tively truer  representation  than  that  of  an  unspiritual
natural  force,  granted  also  that  human  thinking  can  never
entirely  extricate  itself  from  the  soil  of  sensuous  percep-
tion, it  yet  by  no  means  follows  from  these  premises  that
the  "absolute  personality"  is  and  always  must  remain
the  only  possible  kind  of  the  representation  of  God.  For
there  is  no  dualism  of  concept  and  percept  in  human
thinking,  but  thinking  is  itself  "  as  pure  thinking  only  a
scientific  elaboration  of  our  perceptions'''  (p.  646).  If,
accordingly,  this  process  of  elaboration  has  once  reached
such  a  point  that  the  determination  of  personality  is  to  be
unconditionally  eliminated  from  the  idea  of  the  Absolute
Spirit,  all  relapse  into  a  surmounted  stage  of  this  elabo-
rative  process  of  the  ideas  is  to  be  unconditionally  avoided,
— notwithstanding  the  circumstance  that  even  so  there  is
still  a  residuum  of  perceptional  elements  in  the  concept  of
the  Absolute  Spirit, — and  consequently  without  impairing
religious  feeling.

P.  286,  1.  3. — Yeast  still  proved  after  cooling  from  —  1 1 30


ADDENDA.  349

C.  a  vital  stimulator  of  fermentation  ("  Xaturforscher,"
1874,  No.  37,  p.  351).

P.  287,  1.  5. — As  these  scientific  facts  are  among  those
cited  in  my  book  which  have  encountered  the  most
opposition,  it  affords  me  the  greater  satisfaction  to  be
able  to  point  to  the  memoir  of  a  modern  exact  natu-
ralist (Prof.  W.  Preyer,  "  Ueber  die  Erforschung  des
Lebens,"  Jena,  Mauke,  1873),  who  not  only  gives  a  con-
nected history  of  the  respective  discoveries  (from  Leu-
wenhoek's  discovery  in  the  year  1701)  (p.  25-31  and
p.  49-64),  but  also  entirely  agrees  with  my  view  that
the  condition  in  question  exhibits  the  absolute  cessation
of  all  life,  in  contrast  to  all  states  of  vital  function,
however  reduced.  He  says  (p.  31):  "And  yet  there  are
very  many  at  the  present  day  who  would  declare  all
the  observations  and  experiments  I  have  cited,  even  those
instituted  by  myself,  illusions.  Since  such  experiments
can,  however,  be  easily  instituted  (I  have  demonstrated
the  facts  in  my  own  laboratory  and  auditorium  very  fre-
quently for  years),  the  doubts  will  certaiidy  gradually
disappear,  and  the  old  views  of  life  be  for  ever  aban-
doned."— I  therefore  beg  every  one  who  intends  to  dis-
pute the  statements  in  question  first  to  make  himself  ac-
quainted with  the  passages  referred  to  of  the  above-men-
tioned brochure.  Preyer  can  the  less  be  objected  to  on
the  scientific  side  as  surety  as  he  is  an  avowed  materialist,
and  even  from  the  fact  that  life  may  for  a  long  time  com-
pletely cease  in  an  organism  and  then  re-awaken,  hastily
thinks  to  be  able  to  draw  capital  for  his  materialism.

P.  291,  1.  18. — A  similar  case  to  the  stratified  grains
of  Famintzin  is  presented  by  the  interesting  experi-
ments of  Moritz  Traube  ("Journal  of  the  Meeting  of
Scientific  Investigators  in  Breslau,"  1S74,  p.  191),  who
by  introducing  drops  of  glue  into  diluted  tartaric  acid
obtained  the  chemical  precipitate  of  a  colloid  membrane.
The  imitation  of  an  organic  cell  thus  obtained  showed
by  intussusception  of  water  the  analogue  of  organic
growth. "With  a  proper  concentration  of  the  two  agents,


35o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  compression  of  the  molecules  in  the  membrane
is  such  that  the  passage  of  the  chemically  different
molecules  is  prevented ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  endos-
mosis  of  aqueous  molecules  into  the  interior  of  the  cell
goes  on  unhindered.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  drop
swells,  and  the  membrane  is  stretched  by  the  pressure
from  within  like  a  soap-bubble.  It  would  soon  burst,
if  the  still  undissolved  glue  in  the  interior  did  not
form  a  reservoir,  whence  it  may  be  recruited.  The  water,
namely,  that  has  effected  an  entrance,  dissolves  some  glue,
and  as  soon  as  the  interstices  between  the  molecules  of  the
membrane  become  by  the  stretching  of  the  latter  so  great,
that  the  molecules  of  the  glue  and  of  the  tannic  acid  can
communicate  with  one  another  through  the  same,  new
molecules  are  precipitated  owing  to  this  chemical  contact,
which  arrange  themselves  in  the  tissue  of  the  mem-
brane, and  thereby  strengthen  it.  If  the  drop  of  glue
is  attached  in  hanging  fashion  to  the  glass  rod  supporting
it,  the  concentration  of  the  gelatinous  solution  is  every-
where pretty  much  the  same,  and  the  increase  there-
fore tolerably  equal  at  all  parts,  so  that  the  spherical
shape  is  on  the  whole  preserved  with  the  augmentation.
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  drop  is  attached  lying  or
standing  to  the  upper  end  of  the  glass  rod,  the  solution
of  glue  is  arranged  by  the  influence  of  gravity  in  hori-
zontal layers,  that  become  ever  more  diluted  above
(remote  from  the  glue-reservoir).  In  consequence  of
this,  the  parts  of  the  membrane  at  the  top  of  the  cell
are  more  unfavourably  situated  as  regards  the  nutritive
material;  they  become  thinner  than  the  others,  and  there-
fore yield  more  to  the  equal  hydrostatic  pressure.  The
result  is  that  at  the  apex  of  the  cell  the  tension  of  the
membrane  is  strongest,  therefore  also  the  opportunity
of  growth  greatest,  i.e.,  that  the  cell  stretches  most  in
the  direction  opposed  to  gravity,  thus  grows  into  a
horizontal  sac. — These  experiments  are  well  adapted  to
explain  the  most  elementary  processes  of  organic  cell-
growth and the partial dependence of the favoured


ADDENDA.  351

direction  of  growth  on  the  direction  of  gravity,  on  the
mechanical  side,  in  that  they  set  up  analogous,  but  also
certainly  only  analogous,  relations.  For  the  difference
is  at  once  evident  that  in  the  organic  cell-growth  the
nutritive  matter  is  received  from  without,  whilst  here  it  is
given  to  the  cell  as  an  internal  store  of  gelatinous  material,
and  the  cell  swells  only  through  the  absorption  of  water.
The  living  cell  contains  the  phases  of  youth,  age,  and
death  morphologically  preformed  in  itself;  the  glue-
cell  is  simply  limited  in  its  growth  to  the  quantity  of
its  given  store  of  food;  it  does  not  die  of  decrepitude,
but  because  it  has  emptied  its  food-reservoir  (in  case
the  membrane  holds  out  so  long).  The  organic  cell  lives
by  morphological  and  chemical  moulting,  i.e.,  by  change
of  matter;  for  that  there  is  required,  however,  not  merely
reception  of  m otter,  but  also  excretion  of  matter.  The
glue-cell  has  no  excretion  of  matter,  and  therefore  no
change  of  matter,  i.e.,  no  life ;  there  takes  place  in  it  no
chemical,  and  still  less  a  morphological  moulting  process.
The  only  chemical  reaction  that  takes  place  in  it  is  the
first  precipitate  and  the  subsequent  gradual  strengthen-
ing of  the  membrane;  this  process  belongs,  however,  in
the  organic  cells  to  the  vital  process  only  so  far  as
secretion  belongs  to  the  vital  process  of  an  organism,
and  the  secretion  as  such  can  just  as  little  be  called
living  as  the  shell  of  the  snail,  the  web  of  the  spider,
or  the  urine  of  man  are  called  a  living  part  of  these
organisms.  Like  the  Moneres,  most  cells  pass  their
youth,  when  they  are  most  alive  and  perform  the  cliief
part  of  their  functions,  without  precipitating  a  mem-
brane, and  with  the  secretion  of  such  an  encysting-
stage  already  begins,  in  which  the  living  intercourse
with  the  outer  world  is  limited  or  entirely  abolished.
This  excluding  precipitated  membrane  is  therefore  as
little  as  the  calcareous  capsule  of  the  gargol  or  triehine
to  be  considered  a  living  part  of  the  organism,  but  at
the  most  as  a  caput  mortuum  of  past  vital  action.  That
vital action was secretion ; but secretion can only be


352  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

considered  a  vital  function  when  it  occurs  as  result  of
the  change  of  matter  or  of  the  moulting  of  a  living  or-
ganism, and  we  can  never  reason  backwards  from  the
external  resemblance  of  a  chemical  superficial  precipi-
tate with  the  superficial  secretion  of  living  cells  to  a
vital  process,  when  the  criterion  of  such,  the  regular  and
predetermined  change  of  matter,  is  obviously  wanting. — It
seemed  necessary  to  recall  these  important  differences
between  the  organic  cell  and  the  inorganic  glue-cell  in
order  to  avert  hasty  conclusions,  which  might  be  drawn
on  the  part  of  materialism  from  these  in  themselves
extremely  interesting  experiments,  although  their  con-
triver would  certainly  be  least  inclined  to  overlook,
in  their  resemblance,  the  difference  in  principle  of  the
two  phenomena.

P.  328,  1.  7. — Another  distinguished  botanist,  N.  Prings-
heim,  at  the  close  of  an  examination  of  the  connected
series  of  forms  of  the  Sphacelariaj,  which  leads  from  the
simple  Confervas  -  like  EctocarpeaB  through  the  genera
Halopteris,  Stypocaulon,  &c,  to  the  Cormophytes  -  like
genus  Cladostephus,  expresses  himself  in  the  following
manner  (Transactions  of  the  Physical  Division  of  the
xicademy  of  Science  of  Berlin,  1873,  extracted  in  the
Xaturf.,  1874,  Xo.  4) :  "Here  a  more  favourable  progressive
adaptation  of  the  variations  to  the  life-conditions  in  which
they  have  arisen  is  neither  supposable  nor  demonstrable.
The  differences  of  form  that  arise  nowhere  exhibit  distinct,
physiologically  advantageous  peculiarities ;  they  depend
essentially  on  slight,  gradual  variations  in  anatomical
structure,  and  in  the  position  of  4rhe  ramifying  systems. —
With  these  simple  creatures  this  struggle  (for  existence)  is
limited  to  at  the  most  a  struggle  for  room.  The  only
point  that  would  here  be  of  importance,  the  variety,  the
number,  and  the  self-preserving  power  of  the  reproduced
forms,  speaks  in  no  plain  manner  for  the  observance
of  the  direction  which  the  series  has  taken  in  its  develop-
ment. In  contemplating  these  and  other  similar  series
among  the  lowest  plants,  we  cannot  fail  to  see  that  the


r


ADDENDA.  353

first  variations  of  form  in  these  simplest  organisms  are
of  a  purely  morphological  character,  i.e.,  that  they  have
no  demonstrable  relation  to  any  physiological  functions
whatever  that  are  of  importance  for  the  maintenance  of
life.  The  existence  of  such  purely  morphological  series
appears  to  me  decisive  on  the  question  as  to  the  causes
of  the  formation  of  species.  Do  not  the  series  —  not
to  go  beyond  the  Algae — of  the  Protococcacese,  Palmel-
lacere,  Desmidiacese,  Diatomese,  Conferva?,  Ulothrithese,
Ceramieae,  Polysphoniese,  &c,  consist  of  such  purely  mor-
phological species  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  Dar-
winian theory?  Yet  in  all  these  series  an  evolution  of
the  forms,  proceeding  from  the  simple  to  the  complex,
from  the  imperfect  to  the  perfect,  is  unmistakable.
Thus  these  lower  purely  morphological  series  decidedly
tell  in  favour  of  the  view,  that  the  struggle  for  exist-
ence docs  not  of  itself  nvfice  to  explain  the  accumu-
lation of  the  form  -  variations  in  a  constant  direction
from  the  simple  to  the  manifold  through  the  whole
created  series.  This  struggle  presupposes,  indeed,  of
necessity,  the  physiologically  more  favourable  nature  of
the  arising  variations,  and  the  accumulation  of  these
favourable  qualities  in  the  favoured  direction.  These
conditions  are,  however,  ivanting  in  the  development  of
the  purely  morphological  series  of  species  of  the  lowest
plants.  Here  those  interned  guiding  force*  which  urge
on  the  development  of  the  ever-accumulating  variations
in  the  favoured  direction  appear  in  their  purity,  unmixed
with  the  effects  of  the  struggle  for  existence,  ami  do  not
allow  a  doubt  of  their  existence."

P.  328,  1.  19. — Another  zoologist,  Mori  fa  Wagner,  is,
equally  with  Kblliker,  an  adherent  of  the  theory  of  Descent,
but  at  the  same  time  regards  the  theory  of  Natural  Selec-
tion as  not  merely  of  itself  insufficient,  but  even  false  and
wholly  worthless.  Now  this  is  manifestly  too  extreme
an  opposition;  but  the  arguments  against  the  Darwinian
over-estimate  of  the  theory  of  Natural  Selection  which
Wagner  has  marshalled  in  various  treatises,  and  recently

VOL.  III.  ^


354  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

in  "Ausland"  (1875,  May  to  July),  are  at  all  events  well
worthy  of  notice.  His  view  is,  that  the  local  separation
of  several  or  a  few  individuals  of  an  existing  species  is
not  only,  as  also  Darwin  admits,  a  favourable  circumstance
for  the  origin  of  a  new  species,  but  the  indispensable  con-
dition, and  at  the  same  time  forms  the  sufficient  cause  of
this  occurrence.  If  even  his  assumption  were  true,  that  the
return  of  the  novel  variation  into  the  stock  by  crossing  is
to  be  prevented  by  no  other  means  than  by  local  separa-
tion of  one  or  several  pairs  (which  at  all  events  is  still
unproven),  yet  the  separation  could  always  only  be  con-
dition, but  never  cause  of  the  formation  of  a  new  spe-
cies, and  the  question,  which  principle  positively  calls
forth  those  important  variations  of  separated  individuals
that  are  merely  protected  from  destruction  by  separa-
tion, would  still  remain  open  after  as  before.  The  very
examples  cited  by  Wagner  are  such,  that  a  recession
to  Geoffroy's  principle  of  the  influence  of  changed  ex-
ternal circumstances  on  the  organism  must  here  appear
still  more  insufficient  than  the  Darwinian  insistance  on
the  principle  of  selection ;  and  that  Wagner  too,  when
perfecting  his  "  Seclusion  Theory "  on  the  positive  side,
must  necessarily  come  to  recognise  "  inner  guiding  forces  "
as  an  "  indwelling  tendency  of  development,"  i.e.,  an  organ-
ising principle  determining  the  direction  of  the  variation.
P.  329,  1.  24. — The  conjecture  here  thrown  out  by  me
has  in  the  meantime  been  verified  by  a  discovery  of  the
marine  apothecary,  A.  Bavay,  in  the  volcanic  rocky  island
Guadeloupe,  according  to  which  a  species  of  small  frogs
(IL/lodes  martinicensis),  found  there  in  great  abundance
owing  to  the  absence  of  marshes  and  fresh  water  for
their  life  as  tadpoles,  simply  pass  through  the  tadpole-
stage  within  the  ovum,  and  emerge  from  the  shell  complete
tailless  little  frogs  ("  Naturforscher,"  1873,^0.  17).  In
this  particular  case,  the  putting  back  of  the  metamorphosis
into  the  embryonic  life  has  certainly  led  to  no  further
development-series  of  higher  organisms ;  but  the  example
offers  us  at  least  an  analogy,  according  to  which those


ADDENDA.


355


reptiles  also,  from  which  the  higher  orders  of  the  animal
kingdom  have  sprung,  may  have  developed  from  amphibia.

P.  331. — Comp.  with  this  chapter  my  book  "  Wahrheit
und  Irrthum  im  Darwinismus;  eine  kritische  Darstel-
lung  der  organischen  Entwickelungstheorie,"  Berlin,  Carl
Duncker,  1875.

P.  334,  1.  14. — Comp.  my  "  Erlauterungen  zur  Metaphy-
sik  d.  Unbew.,"  p.  52-57.

P.  344,  1.  29. — Comp.  with  this  section  my  "Erlaute-
rungen zur  Metaphysik  d.  Unbew.,"  p.  57-74.


VOL. III.

P.  4,  1.  16,  and  in  A.  Taubert,  "  Der  Pessimismus  und
seine  Gegner"  (Berlin,  C.  Duncker,  1873),  p.  70-76.  That
even  Hegelianism  is  an  evolutionism  not  hostile  to,  but  in-
clusive of  Pessimism  ;  that  it  only  views  with  a  too  hard
and  cold  indifference  the  crushing  of  innumerable  indivi-
dual destinies  by  the  iron  wheel  of  historical  progress,  but
at  the  same  time  recognises  the  tragic  fate  of  everything
finite  to  be  consumed  in  the  contradiction  of  its  own  exis-
tence, has  been  excellently  shown  by  J.  Volkelt  ("Das
Unbew.  u.  d.  Pess.,"  p.  246-255).

P.  12,  1.  3. — Comp.  here  Taubert,  "Der  Pessimismus  und
seine  Gegner,"  Xo.  2,  "The  worth  of  life  and  its  estimation."

P.  13,  last  1.  but  one. — Comp.  Taubert's  "  Pessimismus,
p.  27-28.

P.  15,  1.  15. — Or  if  an  unconscious  will  should  actually
exist,  it  is  yet  too  weak  to  render  itself  observable  by  its
non-satisfaction;  and  we  may  conclude  a  fortiori  that
this  degree  of  will  must  be  too  weak  to  make  itself  per-
ceptible by  its  satisfaction.

P.  27,  1.  17. — Comp.  with  this  section  Taubert's  "  Pes-
simismus," Xo.  3,  "The  privative  goods  and  work."

P.  41,  1.  4. — Comp.  also  vol.  i.  p.  241,  1.  20.  Only  un-
fortunately the  point  of  view  of  the  reconciliation  of  in-
stinct with  a  consciousness  enlightened  by  a  philosophic


356  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

monism  still  remains  a  theoretical  postulate,  that  in  prac-
tical reference  must  be  realised  by  continuous  conflict  and
ethical  wrestling  with  an  unbroken  and  persistent  egoism.
The  reconciliation  which  philosophy  offers,  the  ethicising  of
natural  impulse,  is  no  possession  to  be  acquired  once  for  all
and  then  maintained  without  effort,  but  it  is  the  enduring
struggle  of  the  reason  of  the  All-one  Unconscious  arrived
at  consciousness  with  the  necessarily  given  selfishness  of
natural  individuality,  which  only  when  waged  with  ener-
getic untiring  zeal,  and  favoured  by  the  bent  of  the  original
character,  leads  to  the  habitual  harmony  of  virtue.  This  is,
however,  not  to  be  supposed  the  ordinary  point  of  view  of
human  consciousness  at  the  present  time  any  more  than
is  the  naive,  still  perfectly  unbroken  sway  of  natural  in-
stinct ;  rather  is  the  discordancy  of  individual  conscious-
ness and  its  selfishness  with  the  demands  reaching
beyond  the  individual  of  the  instinctive  and  the  philo-
sophical reason  to  be  regarded  as  the  normal  condition,
whether  this  disharmony  is  only  beginning  to  show  itself
in  the  innocence  of  native  ingenuousness,  whether  it  has
developed  to  the  bitter  length  of  an  apparently  inextin-
guishable conflict;  or,  lastly,  whether  with  the  postulate
of  the  subordination  of  the  individual  will  to  the  All-
Will  a  final  solution  and  the  method  of  reconciliation
are  revealed.  And  just  because  each  fresh  human  being
has  always  anew  the  destiny  to  give  birth  to  and  to
conquer  this  discord  in  himself,  because,  however,  the  con-
quest is  wont  soonest  to  succeed  when  it  has  behind  it  the
struggle  of  youth  (which  is  the  proper  time  of  sexual
love),  I  thought  myself  warranted  in  my  examination  in
assuming  the  discord  of  the  conscious  individual  will  with
the  unconscious  purpose  as  the  empirically  given  normal
condition  (comp.  vol.  i.  p.  232).

P.  41,  1.  8. — Comp.  on  this  section  Taubert's  "  Pessi-
mismus,"  No.  4,  "  Love."

P.  42,  1.  2. — Comp.  Taubert's  "  Pessimismus,"  No.  5,
"  Compassion."

P.  48,  1.  34, — Thus the instinct to contract marriage


ADDENDA.  357

and  found  a  family,  and  the  desire  to  possess  and  to
rear  children,  appears  one  of  a  number  of  connected
instincts  that  mock  egoism  with  delusive  expectations,
but  are  of  the  utmost  importance  for  the  maintenance  of
the  world-machinery  and  the  progress  of  the  world-pro-
cess. As  love  has  the  purpose  of  producing  the  most
capable  succeeding  generation  possible,  so  the  instinct  to
conclude  a  marriage  and  found  a  family  serves  to  educate
the  generation  thus  produced  to  the  utmost  excellence
possible.  As  long  as  it  is  an  irrefragable  truth  that  no
foundling-hospital  nurture  and  orphan-house  education
can  replace  the  maternal  care  and  family  education,  so
long  will  all  the  revolutionary  plans  directed  against  the
existence  of  marriage  and  the  family  be  dashed  to  pieces
on  the  unconscious  reason  of  history  ;  for  however  much
they  may  demonstrate  that  (what  admits  of  no  doubt)
marriage  brings  with  it  the  greatest  inconveniences  and
that  (what  is  very  doubtful)  people  would  be  better  off
with  the  abolition  of  this  social  arrangement,  yet  the
comfort  of  the  spouses  comes  only  in  quite  a  secondary
fashion  into  the  question  as  to  the  value  of  marriage,
since  the  family  does  not  primarily  exist  for  the  sake  of
the  married  couples,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  children.
Hence  there  lies  hidden  in  the  belief  subjectively  so  un-
reasonable of  the  lovers  in  the  imperishability  of  their
love  so  deep  an  objective  reason.  This  illusion  is  only
the  bait  to  lead  egoism  to  sacrifice  its  freedom,  by  im-
posing upon  itself  the  legal  bond  of  a  permanent  social
fellowship,  to  which  without  this  illusion  it  would  at  least
with  far  more  difficulty  submit.

P.  60,  1.  31. — Comp.  hereon  Taubert's  "Pessimismus,"
No.  7,  "  Happiness  as  virtue."

P.  66,  1.  26. — Comp.  here  Taubert's  "  Pessimismus,"  No.
7,  "  Happiness  as  aesthetic  view  of  the  world,"  and  No.  6,
"  Enjoyment  of  Nature."

P.  88,  1.  8. — The  most  complete  and  searching  "Critique
of  the  Idea  of  Immortality"  in  a  small  compass  of  a
strictly  scientific  character  is  to  be  found  in  Diedermann's


35 S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

"  Christliche  Dogmatik  "  (§  949-973),  where  it  is  shown
that  a  religious  interest  has  been  taken  in  immortality  by
historical  Christianity  only  by  reason  of  erroneous  sup-
positions, but  that  in  truth  the  question  as  to  continued
existence  after  death  is  indifferent  for  religion,  and  can-
not be  answered  otherwise  than  in  the  negative  on  the
part  of  anthropology  and  metaphysics.

P.  88,  1.  27. — Comp.  also  Taubert's  "  Pessimismus,"  No.
9,  "  Happiness  hereafter."

P.  115, 1.  2. — Comp.  with  this  Taubert's  "  Pessimismus,"
No.  10,  "  Happiness  as  realisable  in  the  future  of  the
world."

P.  129,  1.  22. — We  see  from  this  that  the  individual
negation  of  Will,  even  if  it  could  lead  to  any  result,  would
yet  only  concern  the  concrete  phenomenon,  without  ever
altering  the  essential  being  underlying  this  phenomenon.
But  if  the  assertion  should  be  seriously  maintained  that
the  individual  negation  of  will  can  affect  and  deny  the
essence  of  the  will  to  live  itself,  it  would  immediately
follow  on  monistic  suppositions  that  then  the  first  indi-
vidual actually  accomplishing  in  himself  the  negation  of
will  must  annihilate  the  All-Will,  the  will  to  live  in
its  absolute  totality,  i.e.,  the  whole  world  at  a  blow.  This
consequence  even  Schopenhauer  sees  himself  compelled
occasionally  to  admit.  He  says  (W.  as  W.  a.  I.,  trans,  by
Haldane  and  Kemp,  i.  p.  167),  after  showing  that  the  unity
of  the  will  is  unaffected  by  the  plurality  of  the  stages
of  objectification  and  the  number  of  individuals  at  any
stage,  as  follows  : — "  We  may  therefore  say  that  if,  per  im-
2?ossible,  a  single  real  existence,  even  the  most  insignificant
were  to  be  entirely  annihilated,  the  whole  world  would
necessarily  perish  with  it.  The  great  mystic  Augelus  Sile-
sius  feels  this  when  he  says —

'  I  know  God  cannot  live  an  instant  without  me,
He  must  give  up  the  ghost  if  I  should  cease  to  be.' "

From  this  passage  it  is  evident  to  him  himself  that  such
an  assumption  can  only  be  made  per  impossible. In  his


ADDENDA.


359


individual  theory  of  redemption  he  has  obviously  left
this  impossibility  out  of  sight,  when  he  endeavours  to
maintain  a  difference  in  effect  between  suicide  and  an
ascetic  mortification  of  the  body  and  of  the  will  to  live.

P.  142. — Comp.  my  "Erl.  z.  Met.  d.  Unb.,"  p.  33-35  and
p.  74-80.

P.  154,  last  1.— Comp.  my  "  Erl.  z.  Met,  d.  Unb.,"  p.

I  2—22.

P.  173,  1.  32. — Comp.  on  the  preceding  section  my  "  Erl.
z.  Met.  d.  Unb.,"  p.  35-40.  V.  Kirchmann  has  protested
auainst  the  application  of  the  calculus  of  probabilities  in
the  case  before  us  ("Princip.  des  Pealismus,"  p.  46-47),
because  the  principles  of  the  calculus  of  probabilities  are
only  admissible  on  the  assumption  of  a  regularly  acting
causality,  which  supposition  is  here  not  satisfied.  In  oppo-
sition to  this,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  a  rigid  uniform
causality  excludes,  on  the  contrary,  all  computation  of  pro-
babilities, which  latter  rather  presupposes  the  assumption
of  non-causal  chance,  and  is  altogether  dependent  thereon.
Xow  we  certainly  know  that  chance  apart  from  causality
has  no  place  within  the  world-process,  and  therefore  the
whole  calculus  of  probabilities  is  in  strictness  based  on  a
mere  fiction.  This  fiction  is  only  possible  on  account  of
the  insufficiency  of  our  knowledge  of  the  causes  acting  in
the  concrete  case,  since  with  perfect  knowledge  of  these  we
should  no  longer  talk  of  probability,  but  of  certainty.  On
the  other  hand,  however,  this  fiction  is  indispensable  for
our  cognition,  since  probability  offers  us  the  unly  compen-
sation for  the  certainty  we  are  always  desiderating.  Thai,
now  in  spite  of  its  fictitious  basis  the  calculus  of  pro-
bability yields  results  relatively  so  exact  lies  in  tin'-,
that  with  a  more  frequent  recurrence  of  the  same  event
for  the  most  part  only  a  part  of  the  co-operant  causes
remains  constant;  another  part,  however,  is  so  far  vari-
able that  the  effects  compensate  one  another  more
completely,  the  more  frequently  the  event  is  repeated.
The  constant  causes,  which  are  seen  to  be  such,  can  now
not  be  the  basis  of  the  calculus  of  probability,  since  their


360  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

effects  must  be  assumed  to  be  necessary;  the  variable
causes  that  compensate  one  another,  however,  do  not
afford  an  opening  for  the  calculus  of  probabilities,  because
they  act  in  each  single  case  with  regular  causality,  but
rather  precisely  because  in  a  larger  series  of  cases  their
action  is  neutralised,  i.e.,  because  the'  same  result  turns
out  as  if  no  causality  had  acted  at  all,  but  as  if  the  varia-
tions of  the  severed  cases  had  been  purely  accidentcd.  What
is  here  within  the  world-process  a  mere  fiction  (which
certainly  is  not  only  practically  harmless,  but  even  a  posi-
tively useful  surrogate  of  the  true  state  of  the  case),  is  in
the  instance  of  the  uncaused  resolve  of  the  Will  to  will
perfect  truth ;  the  calculus  of  probabilities,  which  is  only
abusively  applied  to  the  properly  strictly  necessary  events
within  the  world-process,  is  rightly  applicable  in  this
unique  example.

P.  184,  1.  22. — The  "  Idea "  means  in  this  passage  not
(as  V.  Kirchmann  misunderstands  it — "  Princ.  d.  Eeal.,"  p.
36-37)  "the  whole  unconscious  mass  of  representations  of
the  first  attribute,"  but  the  Idea  as  logical  formal  principle,
as  matrix  of  an  infinite  possible  unfolding  of  unconscious
intuitions  ;  for  of  an  actual  mass  of  representations  there
can  of  course  be  no  question  at  the  commencement  of  the
process,  when  the  Will  seizes  the  Idea.

P.  186,  1.  10. — Comp.  with  this  the  inquiries'!  on  the  na-
ture of  causality  in  my  memoir,  "  J.  H.  v.  Kirchmann's
erkenntnisstheoretischer  Eealismus,"  No.  15-22  (Berlin,
C.  Duncker).

P.  187,  1.  32. — Comp.  on  this  section  my  "  Erl.  z.  Met.
d.  Unb.,"  p.  28-35.

P.  194,  1.  3.— Comp.  my  "Erl.  z.  Met.  d.  Unb.,"  p.
22-28.


PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON, AND CO.
