Philosophy of the Unconscious, Vol. 1
Eduard von Hartmann (W. C. Coupland, trans.) (1884)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Eduard von Hartmann's Philosophie des Unbewussten (1869) — the book that made 'the unconscious' a philosophical concept decades before Freud. Vol. 1: phenomenology of the unconscious. W. C. Coupland's 1884 English translation (3 vols).

========================================================================

PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY.


VOLUME  XXV


VOL.  T.


PHILOSOPHY


THE UNCONSCIOUS.


EDUAED  VON  HAETMANN.


SPECULATIVE  RESULTS  ACCORDING  TO  THE  INDUCTIVE
METHOD  OF  PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.


authorise!}  translation

BY

WILLIAM  CIIATTERTOX  COUPLAND,  M.A. B.Sc.

IN  THREE  VOLUMES.
VOL.  I.


LONDON:

TltUBNER & CO., LUDGATE HILL

1S84.

[All  rijlils  restrved.]


BALLANTYNE, HANSON  AND  CO.
EDINBURGH AND LONDON


3 CI


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA
SANTA  BARBARA  C '  '  E  "!  LIBRAWT


V  .


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I.


translator's  preface ......

extracts  from  the  author's  prefaces  to  the  seventh,
eighth,  and  ninth  editions ....


PACE

vii


INTRODUCTORY.

I.  GENERAL  PRELIMINARY  OBSERVATIONS ...  I

(a)  OBJECT  OF  THE  WORK ....  I

(b)  METHOD  OF  RESEARCH AND  MODE  OF  EXPOSITION  6

(c)  PREDECESSORS IN RESPECT OF THE CONCEPTION

OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS . . .  1 6

II.  HOW  DO  WE  COME  TO  ASSUME  AN  AIM  IN  NATURE? .  43


(A)  THE  MANIFESTATION  OK  THE  UNCONSCIOUS
IX  BODILY  LIFE.


I. THE  UNCONSCIOUS  WILL  IN  THE  INDEPENDENT  FUNCTIONS
OF  THE  SPINAL  CORD  AND  GANGLIA

II. UNCONSCIOUS IDEATION IN THE EXECUTION OK VOLUN
TARY MOVEMENT .....

III.  THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  INSTINCT

IV.  THE  UNION  OF  WILL  AND  IDEA

V. THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  REFLEX  ACTIONS


VI. THE UNCONSCIOUS IN THE REPARATIVE POWKI!
NATURE  ....


59


I4.i


vi  CONTENTS.

PAGE

VII. THE  INDIRECT  INFLUENCE  ON ORGANIC FUNCTIONS OF

CONSCIOUS  PSYCHICAL  ACTIVITY .  .  .  1 69

( I.) THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  CONSCIOUS  WILL  .  169

(2.)  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  CONSCIOUS  IDEATION  .  1 79

VIII. THE  PLASTIC  ENERGY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS  .  .  184

(B)  THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND.

I. INSTINCT  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND  .  .  .  .205

II. THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  SEXUAL  LOVE  .  .  .  220

III.  THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  FEELING  ....  243

IV.  THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  CHARACTER  AND  MORALITY  .  260

V. THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  ^ESTHETIC  JUDGMENT  AND  IN

ARTISTIC  PRODUCTION  .....  269

VI. THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  ORIGIN  OF  LANGUAGE  .  293

VII. THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THOUGHT  .  .  .  30 1

VIII. THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  ORIGIN  OF  SENSE-PERCEPTION  325

IX. THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  MYSTICISM ....  354


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.


The  author  of  the  following  work  has  so  clearly  explained
its  purport,  both  in  the  course  of  the  work  itself  and  in
the  prefatory  remarks,  that  few  words  are  required  by  way
of  introduction  from  a  foreign  pen.  It  is  true  the  class  of
books  to  which  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  "  be-
longs is  all  but  unrepresented  in  our  literature,  but  the
absence  of  similar  home-productions  can  no  longer  be  held
to  imply  either  an  inability  to  comprehend  their  scope  or
an  indifference  to  their  results.  To  what  shall  we  attribute
the  welcome  accorded  of  late  to  certain  reproductions  and
elucidations  of  the  master- works  of  modern  Transcendental-
ism, if  not  to  the  awakening  of  a  long-repressed  desire  to
re-examine  the  foundations  of  a  spiritual  fabric,  for  whose
stability  an  instinctive  confidence  alone  made  answer  ?
To  many  two  attitudes  of  mind  have  become  insupport-
able— that  of  total  unconcern  about  fundamental  truth,
and  that  of  unthinking  acquiescence  in  the  admission  of
merely  juxtaposed  and  uncommunicating  spheres  of  posi-
tive knowledge  and  impenetrable  nescience.  What  would
you  have,  says  the  scientist,  but  an  ever-widening  view  of
Nature's  operations? — is  it  not  enough,  cries  the  theologist,
to  be  sure  that  there  is  a  God,  although  "His  ways  are
past  finding  out?"  To  questions  so  different  in  sub-lance.
but  so  alike  in  their  flavour  of  self-complacency,  this  book
is  in  effect  an  answer. That  Yon  Hartmann  appr  ciates


viii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.

the  gains  of  positive  inquiry  no  reader  of  a  work  replete
with  illustrations  from  all  the  sciences  will  for  a  moment
doubt;  but,  on  the  other  side,  he  is  an  unfaltering  ontologist,
and  believes  no  less  firmly  that  he  that  hath  eyes  to  see
can  divine  the  riddle  of  the  universe,  and  that  there  is
no  peace  for  the  intellect  and  heart  until  Eeligion,  Philo-
sophy, and  Science  are  not  merely  "  reconciled,"  but  are
seen  to  be  one,  as  root,  stem,  and  leaves  are  organic  ex-
pressions of  one  same  living  tree.

The  English  reader  may  wish  to  know  something  of  the
author  himself,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  production
of  this  book.  More  than  enough  has  been  written  on  this
subject  in  Germany,  but  all  that  need  be  said  on  the
matter  here  may  be  told  in  a  very  few  words.  Dr.  Ed-
uard  von  Hartmann  is  a  retired  military  officer,  compelled
almost  at  the  outset  of  his  career  to  abandon  his  profession
through  a  serious  affection  of  the  left  knee-cap.  Con-
strained to  alter  his  plan  of  life,  the  width  and  varied
nature  of  his  attainments  (mostly  independently  acquired)
caused  him  not  a  little  embarrassment.  After  some  waver-
ing, and  after  casting  many  longing  looks  on  the  fair  realms
of  art,  in  some  of  whose  departments  his  talents  would
doubtless  have  commanded  success,  he  obeyed  the  whispers
of  his  most  powerful  genius,  and  yielded  himself  up  once
and  for  all  to  the  calls  of  a  career  of  philosophical  author-
ship. It  will  be  noticed  by  the  reader  with  what  keen
satire  he  speaks  of  the  professed  students  and  teachers  of
the  Science  of  Sciences.  In  this  he  is  at  one  with  his
immediate  forerunner,  and  a  far  older  and  more  potent
name.  But  the  circumstances  of  modern  life  are  quite
other  than  they  were  in  the  age  of  the  Sophists  ;  and  posi-
tions that  did  not  cramp  the  genius  of  a  Kant,  a  Schelling,
and  a  Hegel,  can  hardly  of  necessity  be  the  fortresses  of
orthodox  opinion  the  modern  free-lance  would  have  the
world  believe.  At  the  same  time  we  can  well  imagine
that  the  atmosphere  of  a  University  would  hardly  have
been  favourable  to  that  direct  intercourse  with  the  mind


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  ix

of  the  people  which  the  literary  spirit  of  our  author  craved ;
and  Von  Hartmann,  like  Socrates,  doubtless  took  good
counsel  of  his  "  Daemon,"  when  he  went  straight  to  the
public,  and  confided  in  his  own  intellectual  strength  to
give  him  a  wide  and  attentive  hearing.

In  the  spring  of  1868,  when  in  his  twenty-seventh
year,  Eduard  Von  Hartmann  placed  in  the  hands
of  a  well-known  Berlin  bookseller  the  original  draught
of  the  work  now  translated,  with  the  title  "  Philosophy
of  the  Unconscious,  Popular  Physiological-Psychogical-
Philosophical  Inquiries  on  the  Manifestation  and  Es-
sential Nature  of  the  Unconscious,  and  the  Origin  and
Meaning  of  Consciousness."  The  publisher,  with  unusual
penetration,  saw  the  value  of  the  work,  and  in  November
1868  the  book  appeared  in  one  volume,  the  first  words  of
the  proposed  title  alone  being  retained.

Since  1868  Von  Hartmann  has  been  an  untiring  and
voluminous  writer.  The  full  list  of  his  publications  ex-
tends to  about  a  score  of  volumes,  some  of  them  running  to
700  or  800  pages,  to  say  nothing  of  magazine  articles  and
such  like  trifles.  Any  one  who  would  pronounce  an  ade-
quate judgment  on  the  author's  philosophical  powers  would
have  undoubtedly  to  make  acquaintance  with  the  more
important  of  these ;  and,  in  justice  to  the  author,  I  append
a  few  words  of  his  own  concerning  the  book  which  has
made  his  reputation.  "  It  is  not  the  product  of  reflection
and  maturity,  but  the  bold  experiment  of  juvenile  talent,
presenting  all  the  defects  and  qualities  of  the  work  of
youth.  Fifteen  years  have  passed  since  the  manuscript
first  went  to  press,  and  I  should  conceive  many  things
differently  to-day  than  I  presented  then."  This  unripe-
ness has  been  in  a  measure  corrected  by  the  Appendix
and  supplementary  notes,  and  the  reviewer  should  bear
these  in  mind  when  exercising  his  critical  function.  That
the  work  is  open  to  criticism  of  various  kinds  the  present
translator  does  not  for  a  moment  doubt;  but,  when  criti-
cism has  done  its  worst,  he  believes  that  there  will  be


x  TRANSLA  TOR'S  PREFA CE.

enough  of  worth  left  to  justify  the  enthusiasm  the  "  Philo-
sophy of  the  Unconscious  "  has  evoked  in  the  land  of
its  birth,  as  also  to  secure  it  a  welcome  from  a  wide  circle
of  new  and  appreciating  readers.

London,  March  1 884.


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.


That  I  am  in  general  no  friend  of  prefaces,  the  previous
six  editions  of  this  book  have  proved.  When,  however,  a
work  meets  with  so  kindly  and  indulgent  a  reception  as
the  present  one,  it  might  be  interpreted  as  a  kind  of  affec-
tation in  the  author  if  he  persistently  avoided  that  direct
communication  with  his  readers  which  is  customary  in
prefaces.  As  I  know  myself  to  be  as  free  from  such
prudery  as  from  obtrusiveness,  I  will  no  longer  abstain
from  appearing  before  the  curtain  in  the  usual  fashion,  and
from  discussing  certain  points  of  a  somewhat  external  or
even  personal  nature, — the  less,  as  the  attacks  of  opponents
on  my  character  and  private  life  have  already  compelled
me,  by  a  frank  description  of  my  course  of  life,1  to  afford
my  readers  the  requisite  materials  for  forming  a  judgment
of  their  own  on  the  value  of  those  attacks.

I  can  truly  say  that  never  was  author  more  surprised  by
the  success  of  his  book  than  I  by  that  of  the  "  Philosophy
of  the  Unconscious."  A  moderate  acquaintance  with  the
history  of  the  book-trade  as  regards  philosophical  literature
would  alone  have  sufficed  to  destroy  any  possible  illusion  of
a  young  author's  vanity  ;  the  lamentations  of  Schopenhauer
<>n  the  tardiness  with  which  a  really  important  work  makes
its  way,  bore  emphatic  testimony  to  the  compatibility  of  a
certain  self-consciousness  with  incredulity  concerning  out-
ward literary  results  ;  public  opinion  at  the  time  of  the

1  Cf.  "Die  Gegenwart,"  1875,  Nr. Aufsiitze geinuinverdtiindlichi'ii In-
1 '. The  article  has  been  reprinted halts."
in  the "Gesammelte Studien  uiul


xii  PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.

formation  of  the  North  German  Alliance  appeared  more-
over as  unfavourable  as  possible  for  the  reception  of  a
systematic  philosophical  work ;  and  lastly,  I  was,  at  the
bottom  of  my  heart,  far  too  much  of  a  Pessimist  not  to  be
prepared  for  the  worst,  as  was  only  naturally  to  be  ex-
pected from  the  apathy  of  the  public  as  regards  philoso-
phical things  in  general,  and  the  ill-will  of  the  professional
class  towards  the  dilettante  interloper  in  particular.  If  the
result  proved  this  prognosis  to  be  erroneous,  the  reason
was  partly  that  it  had  been  founded  only  on  an  obser-
vation of  symptoms  discernible  on  the  mere  fringe  of  the
spiritual  life ;  partly  that  journalism  busied  itself  with  un-
wonted energy  with  the  new  venture ;  partly,  lastly,  that
my  publisher  had  taken  an  especial  interest  in  my  efforts,
and  zealously  exerted  himself  to  push  the  sale  of  the  book
(all  risks  being  from  the  first  taken  on  his  own  shoulders).

The  importance  of  the  latter  fact  had  been  entirely  over-
looked by  Schopenhauer,  who  had  imagined  that  it  was
enough  to  write  an  important  book  and  to  print  it  at  his
his  own  cost,  and  the  rest  was  the  affair  of  the  public.
This  view  is,  however,  just  as  one-sided  as  the  opposite
one,  that  an  altogether  worthless  book  of  an  unknown
author  without  any  attraction  for  the  public,  even  in  a
bad  sense,  could  be  helped  to  a  trade  success  by  a  mere
publisher's  puff.  Whilst  all  the  industry  of  a  publisher
in  respect  of  a  book,  that  is  not  recommended  by  one
reader  to  another,  always  leads  only  to  commercial  loss,
it  is  true  that  what  is  good  and  important,  commonly  at
the  end  of  a  chapter  of  accidents,  is  preserved  from  total
oblivion,  but  it  may  have  to  make  its  way  with  extreme
slowness.

If  Schopenhauer  had  had  my  good  fortune  to  find  a
publisher,  who  would  have  personally  interested  himself
for  his  great  work,  those  long  decennia  of  entire  neglect
would  have  been  spared  him,  which  contributed  so  much
more  and  more  to  embitter  his  peculiarly  constituted  mind,
and  to  paralyse  his  rich  creative  powers. The  consequence


PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.  xiii

would  have  been,  that  the  German  nation  would  have
been  imbued  a  generation  earlier  with  the  rich  spirit  of  the
Schopenhauerian  Philosophy,  and  that  the  leisured  philo-
sopher would  have  received  a  powerful  stimulus  to  apply
his  extraordinary  talent  during  his  long  lifetime  to  the
accomplishment  of  far  more  numerous  and  varied  under-
takings. In  both  respects  the  indirect  effects,  as  regards
the  present  mental  horizon  of  the  educated  public  in
Germany,  might  have  been  simply  incalculable.

That  Reviews  of  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  "
appeared  in  so  unusually  large  a  number,  was  doubtless
owing  to  the  circumstance  that  this  book  was  discovered
to  afford  a  fit  subject  for  discussion,  not  only  by  the  pro-
fessed philosophical  magazines  and  the  ordinary  literary
journals,  but  also  by  most  of  the  more  considerable  re-
views both  at  home  and  abroad,  by  the  majority  of  the
theological  periodicals,  by  the  most  influential  political
newspapers  of  Germany  and  Austria,  as  well  as,  lastly,  by
certain  educational  and  medical  papers,  and  that  the  pub-
lishing house  had  not  omitted  to  send  copies  for  review  to
all  these  categories  of  periodical  literature.  The  book  was
acknowledged,  even  by  its  chief  opponents,  in  spite  of  the
utmost  deprecation  of  its  fundamental  tendency  and  par-
ticular assertions,  to  be  yet  for  the  most  part  a  noteworthy
phenomenon  of  recent  philosophical  authorship,  and  found
perhaps  among  the  reviewers  of  the  literary  and  political
journals  so  many  warm  friends,  because  among  these  the
philosophy  of  Schopenhauer  had  prepared  the  ground  for
its  comprehension.  The  two  critics  who  were  the  first
decidedly  to  point  out  the  significance  of  tin1  book  were
Councillor  Dr.  Pudolph  Gottschall,  and  Dr.  David  Asher;
those  who  perhaps  exercised  the  relatively  largest  in-
fluence on  the  rapid  diffusion  of  the  book.  Dr.  Heinrirh
Landesmann  (Hieronynius  Lorm),  and  Dr.  Carl  Paron  du
Prel.  All  four  stood  substantially  under  the  inflm  nee  of
Schopenhauer.  But,  likewise,  on  the  part  of  certain  Hege-
lians, the  book  earlv  received  warm  acknowledgments,  r.<j  .


xiv  PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.

from  Professor  Dr.  Ernst  Kapp,  and  Dr.  Max  Schasler
(President  of  the  Philosophical  Society  of  Berlin).  It
would  lead  me  too  far  to  cite  here  all  the  names  of  those
to  whose  kind  indulgence  in  their  public  criticism  of  my
efforts  I  owe  aid  and  encouragement  to  further  labour ;  to
all  these  men  I  herewith  render  my  sincere  thanks.

Not  less,  however,  do  I  owe  my  highly-esteemed  op-
ponents and  foes  the  greatest  gratitude,  who,  by  their
unwearied  attacks  on  my  performances  and  efforts,  have
ever  and  anon  turned  the  flagging  attention  of  the  public
to  my  writings,  and  have  kept  alive  the  interest  therein.
Unhappily  I  must  own,  that  among  the  many,  who  felt
themselves  called  to  critically  annihilate  me,  there  were
only  very  few  who  could  be  deemed  competent  to  speak
on  such  questions.  This  phenomenon  is  quite  natural,
and  is  ever  recurring ;  the  first  polemical  demonstrations
against  a  novel  doctrine  are  almost  always  lacking  in  that
unprejudiced  perception  and  matter-of-fact  objectivity,
which  can  only  appear  in  the  course  of  time  through
a  gradual  clearing-up  of  speculative  differences.

But  now  that  a  philosophical  book  by  a  hitherto  un-
known author  should  so  rapidly  make  its  way  in  so  many
circles  of  the  educated  public,  and  that  so  many  writers
should  be  induced  to  undertake  its  critical  examination
in  books,  pamphlets,  and  journals,  further  needs  for  its
explanation  the  recognition  of  two  pre-suppositions  founded
on  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  namely,  in  the  first
place,  &  fierce  philosophical  hunger  on  the  part  of  the  public
at  large,  concealed  beneath  the  apparently  extreme  apathy
in  regard  to  philosophical  inquiries ;  and,  secondly,  a  state
of  unusual  prostration  of  the  Guild-philosophy  profes-
sionally bound  to  satisfy  this  need.  The  attitude  of  con-
tempt and  scorn  of  philosophy  so  fashionable  in  the  fifth
and  sixth  decades  of  the  century  had,  at  the  end  of  the
last  decennium,  attained  a  pitch  which  had  something
forced  and  affected  about  it,  like  the  old  whistling  of  the
peasant-boy  at  the  dark  churchyard;  the  unmetaphysical


PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.  xv

empiricism,  which  little  by  little  began  to  become  alarmed
at  its  self-glorification,  was  ripe  for  a  sudden  conversion,
and  what  had  prevented  this  conversion  for  so  many  years
was  only  the  forbidding  aridity  and  poverty  of  the
academical  philosophy,  which  could  not  but  strengthen
the  common  contempt  of  philosophy  in  the  minds  of  its
entertainers.  At  this  juncture  appeared  the  "  Philosophy
of  the  Unconscious;"  the  public  was  able  to  absorb  so
relatively  large  a  number  of  copies  of  this  metaphysical
work,  because  it  had  become,  during  the  long  period  of
philosophical  unproductivity,  as  parched  as  a  field  after
a  prolonged  drought,  and  the  exaggerated  estimate  fre-
quently formed  of  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  "
must  be  in  large  measure  attributed  to  the  circumstance,
that  its  value  was  measured  against  the  background  of
the  contemporary  book-market  of  the  Guild-philosophy,
which  gave  it  an  intrinsically  undeserved  prominence  by
the  force  of  contrast.

The  rapidly  succeeding  editions  offered  an  opportunity
to  continually  revise  the  matter  of  the  work,  to  more  fully
elucidate. those  passages  which  had  given  rise  to  frequent
misunderstandings,  to  fill  up  minor  gaps  which  had  become
perceptible  in  the  sequence  of  thought,  to  open  up  more
varied  prospects,  if  only  by  short  indications,  to  lay  bare
more  evidently  and  to  fathom  more  deeply  the  inner  con-
nection of  the  principles,  and  to  take  account  of  the  re-
levant progress  of  the  special  sciences  in  supplementary
paragraphs.  Welcome  as  this  opportunity  was  to  me  on
several  grounds,  no  less  burdensome  was  its  frequent
repetition.  To  work  additions  into  a  finished  book  is  a
far  more  troublesome  and  time-absorbing  occupation  than
one  may  think  who  has  not  himself  attempted  it;  and
what  was  eminently  distracting  and  disagreeable  was  the
annual  recurrence  of  the  press  corrections.  T>>  me  the
first  reading  through  of  what  I  have  myself  written  is  an
extremely painful task;  but to  be obliged  to be always


xvi  PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.

reading  one's  own  production  over  and  over  again  be-
comes at  last  so  loathsome,  that  one  gets  to  wonder  how
a  third  person  can  find  any  interest  in  it.  Accordingly
I  felt  it  as  a  kind  of  release  when  the  publishing  firm
proposed,  on  the  preparation  of  the  fifth  edition,  to  stereo-
type the  text.  I  felt  very  sensibly  what  important  con-
siderations oppose  such  a  fixation  of  the  work  of  a  living
author,  but  it  still  remained  open  to  me  to  supplement
subsequent  additions,  and  the  wish  to  free  myself  from
the  annual  corrections,  and  once  for  all  to  have  done  with
the  book,  was  too  urgent  for  me  to  be  deterred  by  such
scruples.  It  is  a  painful  position,  when  a  writer  has
given  his  interest  and  thought  to  new  tasks,  and  is  con-
stantly hindered  and  distracted  by  the  firstlings  of  his
brain,  who  have  become  real  powers,  ever  anew  claiming
at  the  hands  of  their  father  their  right  to  further  care  and
culture.

That  part  of  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,"
which  for  some  years  had  least  satisfied  my  augmented
demands,  was  Section  A,  on  "  The  Manifestation  of  the
Unconscious  in  Bodily  Life."  No  one  will  wonder  at
this  who  is  familiar  with  the  progress  of  Physiology  in
general  and  that  of  Nervous  Physiology  in  particular  in
the  last  decennium.  When  in  the  winter  1864-65  I  wrote
this  section,  the  sources  from  which  I  had  drawn  my
material  were  even  then  not  of  the  newest  date;  I  name
in  particular  "Wagner's  Dictionary  of  Physiology,"  and
the  manuals  of  Physiology  by  Johannes  Miiller,  Valentin,
and  Burdach.1  For  certain  chapters  {e.g.,  that  on  the
Preparative  Power  of  Nature)  I  was  simply  compelled  to
have  recourse  to  older  works,  or  to  the  writings  of  Burdach,
because the more recent Physiology  carefully  ignored

1  That to preserve the popular  my  disparagement by some  of  my

character  of  my  hook  I  have  studi-  opponents,  wherefore I  now  in  the

ously refrained from quoting the  Appendix  and  Addenda  furnish  my

authorities  for  my  examples  in do-  vouchers,
tail  has  been  largely  laid  hold  of  to


PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.  xvii

everything  that  could  not  be  forced  into  the  materialistic
mould.  Here,  however,  a  change  for  the  better  deserves
to  be  signalised.

On  the  preparation  of  the  third  and  fifth  editions  I  hesi-
tated considerably  whether  I  should  not  subject  Section  A
to  a  complete  reconstruction,  but,  after  mature  reflection,
came  to  a  negative  conclusion.  A  philosophical,  far  more
than  any  other  scientific  work,  is  bound  to  take  account
in  its  disposition  and  architectonic  of  artistic  considera-
tions, which  of  course  need  only  have  unconsciously  co-
operated in  its  composition.  And  as  it  is  a  dubious
affair  to  alter  an  architectural  plan  or  a  drama,  so  too
in  the  architectonic  of  a  philosophical  work,  one  removes
undeniable  errors  and  defects,  and  introduces  fresh  in-
congruities and  disharmonies,  of  which  there  had  been
no  thought.  The  connoisseur  always  sees,  thereafter,
that  the  work  is  not  out  of  one  mould,  that  he  has  patch-
work and  piece-work  before  him.  Letter  is  it,  in  such  a
case,  one  leaves  the  old  with  its  defects  just  as  it  is,  and
adds  something  altogether  new.  This  holds  good  not  only
for  works  of  art,  but  also  for  philosophical  works ;  for  no-
where is  it  less  imperative  to  set  forth  the  truth  as  finished
result  than  in  Philosophy,  where,  on  the  contrary,  what  is
strictly  instructive  and  stimulating  for  the  reader  is  to
be  sought  in  the  opening  the  mental  eye  to  a  growing
and  broadening  truth.  Accordingly  I  have  preferred  nut
to  withhold  from  the  new  readers,  whom  the  "  Philosophy
of  the  Unconscious"  hopes  to  obtain  in  this  new  edition,
the  original  draught  of  Section  A,  but  instead  of  a  re-
modelling of  the  same,  to  add  as  an  Appendix  a  disserta-
tion "On  the  Physiology  of  the  Nerve-Centres,"  from
which  they  may  perceive  in  what  mnnner  I  should  now
treat  this  part  in  the  event  of  a  fresh  composition.  Al
the  same  time  this  Appendix  serves  as  a  si/]>j>ff//it  n(  to
Section  A,  the  knowledge  of  which  it  pivsupposfS  in
respect  to  the  present  advanced  stage  of  our  knowle  !ge  of
the  physiology  of  the  Nervous  System. LV  frum

VOL.  I.  b


xviii PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.

the  text  of  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  "  I  have
endeavoured  to  avoid,  so  far  as  the  necessary  connection
of  the  dissertation  admitted.  As  this  Appendix  is  a
physiological,  so  my  book,  "  Truth  and  Error  in  Darwinism  "
[reproduced  entire  in  the  "  Journal  of  Speculative  Philo-
sophy "  (St.  Louis,  1877-78)]  forms  a  biological  comple-
ment to  the  natural-philosophical  part  of  the  "  Philosophy
of  the  Unconscious,"  especially  to  Chapter  VIII.  A;  the
close  connection  of  the  two  supplementary  writings  will
not  escape  the  attentive  reader.

I  am  quite  conscious  of  the  difficulty  of  my  position
with  regard  to  contemporary  representatives  of  Physical
Science.  They  are  either  adherents  of  the  old  school,  i.e.,
they  pay  homage  to  a  so-called  exact  empiricism,  which
never  ventures  to  elevate  its  glance  from  the  scrutiny  of
the  particular  to  a  more  general  survey  of  the  great  whole,
and  cross  themselves  in  the  presence  of  all  philosophy ;
or  they  aim  at  a  natural-philosophical  theory  of  the  world
— are  thus  adherents  of  Darwinism  in  its  crass  mechanical
and  anti-teleological  form.  The  one  class,  as  matter  of
course,  has  a  horror  of  all  philosophy  as  such,  no  matter
whether  the  latter  endeavours  on  its  part  to  strike  up  an
alliance  with  Physical  Science  or  not;  the  other  class
recognises,  indeed,  in  principle  the  necessity  of  an  under-
standing between  Natural  Science  and  Philosophy,  but
thinks  it  sees  in  the  teleological  metaphysic  espoused  by
me  the  opponent  of  that  philosophy,  to  which  alone  it  hopes
to  throw  a  bridge.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  one  part
of  scientists  ignores  me  because  I  am  jihilosojrficr,  the  other
combats  me  because  I  am  such  a  philosopher.  But  already
the  first  signs  of  a  rising  generation  are  discernible,  which
recognises  not  only  the  title  of  philosophy  in  general,
but  also  the  title  of  an  idealistic  philosophy  beside  and
above  the  mechanical  cosmic  theory  of  the  Sciences  of
Matter,  a  union,  which  alone  is  able  to  reconcile  that
Idealism,  to  which  the  German  people  owes  its  great-
ness, with the  results  of  the  most  recent  investigation,


PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.  xix

and  to  obviate  a  total  breach  between  the  Future  and  the
Past,  between  the  Intellect  and  the  Heart.  It  is  my  firm
conviction  that  the  exclusively  mechanical  Cosmism  of
Darwinism  is  only  an  historical  transition  from  the  prior
shallow  Materialism  to  a  complete  and  whole  Ideal-realism,
and  will  only  serve  to  effect  and  facilitate  the  passing
of  the  living  and  rising  generation  of  physical  inquirers
from  one  pole  to  the  other.  In  furthering  this  indispen-
sable and  inevitable  reconciliation  of  modern  Physical
Science,  and  its  grand  but  one-sided  results,  with  the
idealistic  culture  of  our  nation,  I  believe  that  I  am  in
fact  doing  a  better  service  to  Natural  Science  than  those
exclusive  devotees  of  the  same,  who  possess  the  in  itself
estimable  courage  of  consistency,  of  desiring  to  subject
the  whole  modern  theory  of  the  world  to  a  radical  trans-
formation, according  to  the  partial  method  of  Physical
Science,  in  which  the  highest  spiritual  treasures  of  our
civilisation  must  perforce  fall  a  sacrifice  to  consistency.

Until  the  coming  race  of  naturalists  acknowledges  my
efforts  in  this  direction  I  must  be  satisfied  with  the
recognition,  which  has  already  been  accorded  thereto  in
rich  measure  by  those  representatives  of  our  idealistic
culture,  who,  far  removed  from  ignoring  or  condemning
the  results  of  modern  physical  science,  perceive  the
necessity  of  an  organic  fusion  of  the  same  with  idealism,  but
have  hitherto  missed  a  suitable  leader  in  the  solution  of
this  problem  declared  impossible  by  the  exclusive  repre-
sentatives of  Physical  Science  itself.  On  this  ground
for  some  time  even  Theology  has  begun  to  prize  in  me  a
valuable  ally,  although  hardly  any  one  lias  more  plainly
declared  than  I,  that  Christianity  is  no  longer  a  vital
factor  of  our  developing  civilisation,  and  has  already
traversed  all  its  phases.

On  this  point  I  am  perfectly  clear,  that  in  future  as
hitherto  1  shall  please  no  party  and  no  school;  'out  jus!
as  certain  also  am  1  that  this  is  at  least  a  negative  con-
dition for  evervthimr  important,  although  this  character-


xx  PREFACE  TO  THE  SEVENTH  EDITION.

istic  applies  just  as  well  to  the  fanciful  and  absurd.
Although,  however,  I  may  give  satisfaction  to  no  party
and  to  no  school,  yet  at  least  all  know  precisely  and  un-
ambiguously where  I  stand,  since  what  I  will  and  what  I
mean,  I  have  at  all  times  said  straight  out,  and  sometimes
perhaps  all  too  clearly.  In  fact,  this  frank  attitude  of  mine
has  made  it  very  easy  for  the  dissident  schools  to  take  up
on  their  part  likewise  a  clear  position  in  regard  to  me,
what  is  displeasing  to  them  to  blame  and  reject,  and  what
is  congenial  to  them  to  acknowledge  with  respect.

EDUAED  VON  HAETMANN.

Berlin,  October  1875.


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  EIGHTH  EDITION.


Although,  since  the  appearance  of  the  seventh  edition
the  unfavourable  circumstances  of  the  times  have  pressed
in  an  unusual  degree  on  the  whole  book  trade,  and
scientific  literature  in  particular  has  been  most  seriously
affected  by  the  contraction  of  the  literary  budget  of  the
reading  public,  yet  it  is  permitted  me  to  issue  an  eighth
edition,  and  I  feel  the  greater  debt  of  gratitude  to  the
public  for  this  persistent  and  unusual  sympathy,  as  two
years  ago  it  was  considered  that  the  demand  for  the
"  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  "  in  Germany  had  been
sufficiently  met  for  some  time  to  come  by  the  first  six
editions.  If  the  erroneousness  of  this  conjecture  forms,  on
the  one  side,  for  the  author  a  grateful  encouragement  to
his  labours,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  not  to  be
denied  that  in  the  extensive  sale  which  the  "  Philosophy  of
the  Unconscious  "  has  found  in  the  circles  of  the  general
public  (the  first  seven  editions  represent  over  ten  thousand
copies)  there  lies  a  not  inconsiderable  danger  for  the  cor-
rect estimate  of  the  collective  philosophical  tendencies
of  the  author,  because  a  historically  established  judgment
on  the  part  of  experts,  which  might  serve  as  a  standard  to
the  laity,  has  not  yet  been  formed,  and  the  judgment  of  the
laity  is  commonly  determined  more  by  what  strikes  the
eye  than  by  the  less  readily  discernible  inner  nature  of
things.  Only  too  many  of  those,  who  buy  or  borrow  the
"  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,"  feel  their  "  metaphysical
need"  satisfied  when  they  have  turned  over  the  chapters
on  Love  and  the  Misery  of  Existence,  and  think  th<  y  may


xxii  PREFACE  TO  THE  EIGHTH  EDITION.

now  chime  in  with  a  good  conscience  when  the  topic  of
conversation  is  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious."
"  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,  Continuator  of  Schopen-
hauer, fashionable  representative  of  Pessimism,"  such  one-
sided and  often  uncomprehended  catchwords  are  sufficient
to  legitimate  them  as  connoisseurs  ;  the  phrases  get
attached  to  the  name  "  Hartmann "  like  a  label,  which
must  henceforth  adhere  to  it  as  if  they  were  a  part  of  the
author's  own  signature.  Had  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Un-
conscious "  lived  through  its  two  or  three  instead  of  eight
editions  in  nine  years,  and  had  it  not  broken  through  the
sphere  of  a  scientific  circle  of  readers  in  this  time,  it  is
probable  the  fame  of  its  author  would  have  been  less  in
advance  of  his  performances,  but  in  compensation  his
name  would  not  have  been  linked  with  so  one-sided  a
signature,  which  at  present  forms  a  hindrance  to  the  un-
prejudiced estimation  of  his  later  achievements.

My  opinion  by  no  means  implies  that  the  conquest  of
the  strata  of  the  reading  public,  who  hitherto  have  stood
aloof  from  all  philosophy,  is  to  be  deplored  because
obtained  through  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,"
but  only  that  the  stopping  half-way  of  such  readers  is
to  be  deplored.  The  clearness  and  intelligibility  of  the
"  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious "  has  been  abundantly
praised;  but  this  is  still  only  very  relative,  merely  conspi-
cuous by  comparison  with  other  philosophical  works.  And
no  one  has  ever  asserted  that  for  the  sake  of  general  intelli-
gibility I  have  anywhere  omitted  to  dig  below  the  problems
as  deeply  as  lay  in  my  power;  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Un-
conscious "  is  thus  anything  but  popular  in  the  sense  of
the  popularisation  of  scientific  results.  In  fact  we  hear,
even  from  most  laymen,  who  approach  its  reading  unpre-
pared, that  they  have  not  understood  the  main  discussions.
What  then  alone  can  give  the  key  for  judging,  remains
-zr/i-understood ;  but  what  also  without  this  key  appears
in  itself  clear  and  intelligible,  is,  because  conceived  out
of  its  systematic  connection,  necessarily  r/u's-understood.


PREFACE  TO  THE  EIGHTH  EDITION.  xxiii

As  an  introduction  to  the  author's  sphere  of  thought,  are
now  to  be  mentioned  in  the  first  rank,  the  "  Gesammelte
Studien  und  Aufsiitze  gemeinverstandlichen  Inhalts,"
especially  their  first  three  sections,  which  may  serve  the
purpose  of  obviating  at  the  outset  many  errors  and  mis-
understandings with  regard  to  the  tendencies  of  the
author.  In  the  second  rank,  the  writings  on  "  The  Self-
Disintegration  of  Christianity"  [translated  in  the  "lieli-
gio-Philosophical  Journal,"  vols.  29-31,  appearing  in
Chicago],  and  "Truth  and  Error  in  Darwinism"  [see  p.
xviii.],  of  which  the  former  appears  suited  to  render  clear
the  contrast  of  the  author  to  the  shallow  negativity  of  a  D.
F.  Strauss,  and  to  show,  that  if  he  combats  Christianity,
he  does  this  not  to  combat  religion,  but  to  serve  religion,
and  to  bring  again  to  honour  and  to  render  possible  that
which  has  become  impossible  through  its  defenders.  The
study  on  Darwinism  is  certainly  only  to  be  recommended
to  such  readers  as  have  already  been  instructed  by  a  more
detailed  work  on  the  aims  and  argumentations  of  Darwin-
ism ;  as  the  knowledge  of  this  burning  question,  however,
belongs  at  the  present  time  to  the  elements  of  a  higher
culture, "this  supposition  will  for  the  most  part  be  already
fulfilled,  or  if  not,  yet  be  readily  enough  made  good.
Together  witli  the  "  natural  philosophical  contributions  "
(sec.  C.)  of  the  "Gesammelte  Studien  und  Aufsiitze,"
this  writing  forms  a  suitable  naturalistic  preparation  fur
the  reading  of  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious."

As  every  philosophical  system  is  the  product  of  its
time,  and  its  historical  and  scientific  significance  can  only
be  rightly  estimated  in  its  connection  with  the  history  of
philosophy,  the  most  important  preparation  for  the  under-
standing of  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  "  is  an  ac-
quaintance with  the  preceding  systems  of  German  specu-
lation, and  with  the  position  which  the  former,  according
to  the  author's  aim,  is  intended  to  occupy  as  regards  the
latter.  To  afford  tins  historical  introduction  is  the  func-
tion of  sect.  D  of  the  "Gesammelte  Studien  und  Auf.-atxe,''


xxiv  PREFACE  TO  THE  EIGHTH  EDITION.

entitled  "  The  philosophical  starry  triad  of  the  nineteenth
century."  Here,  without  doubt,  the  layman  will  en-
counter many  a  difficulty ;  but  if  he  allows  himself  to  be
deterred  thereby,  he  has  no  prospect  of  overcoming  the
like  difficulties  in  the  still  more  condensed  hints  of  the
"Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,"  whilst  that  which  remains
obscure  in  the  reading  of  that  introduction  can  very  well
be  cleared  up  subsequently  by  acquaintance  with  the
author's  circle  of  ideas  in  their  systematic  connection.

If  the  above-mentioned  natural-philosophical  prepara-
tion serves  the  purpose  of  making  intelligible  to  the
reader  the  reconciliation  and  fusion  of  modern  physical
science  and  philosophy  attempted  by  me,  this  historical
introduction  will  enable  him  to  comprehend  the  synthe-
sis accomplished  by  my  philosophy  of  two  philosophical
mental  tendencies  apparently  so  antipathetic,  which
have  been  fruitful  and  decisive  for  the  mental  life  of
Germany  in  the  last  two  generations :  Hegelianism  and
Schopenhauerianism.  The  historical  significance  of  my
philosophy  must  essentially  be  sought  in  the  two  men-
tioned syntheses;  which  of  the  two  in  an  historical  point
of  view  deserves  the  pre-eminence,  might  be  difficult  for
contemporaries  to  determine.  From  the  historical  point
of  view  the  chief  value  of  the  Principle  of  the  Uncon-
scious may  have  to  be  sought  in  this,  that  only  by  this
principle  are  those  two  syntheses  rendered  possible.

The  most  important  test  for  the  verifying  of  philosophi-
cal systems  in  real  life  is  to  be  seen  in  the  solution  of
the  ethical  problems  resulting  from  them.  The  author  of
a  highly  defective  theoretical  philosophy  obtains,  if  not  a
justification,  yet  to  a  certain  extent  an  excuse  and  per-
sonal rehabilitation,  if  he — at  whatever  cost  of  philoso-
phical consistency — advances  a  powerful  and  valuable
moral  cosmic  theory.  Put  when  such  an  one  makes
good  its  claim  in  a  form  possessing  certain  advantages
over  all  earlier  moral  standpoints  as  a  natural  conse-
quence of  the  theoretical  principles,  then  the  latter  obtain


PREFACE  TO  THE  EIGHTH  EDITION.  xxv

thereby  a  highly-important  indirect  confirmation,  and  the
whole  system  acquires  in  such  a  case  a  far  higher  phi-
losophical and  practical  value.  The  exposition  of  the
ethical  standpoint  will  be  the  more  important  for  a
philosopher,  and  he  will  the  more  urgently  wish  the  cog-
nisance of  the  same  before  the  pronouncing  of  a  general
judgment  on  his  point  of  view,  the  more  original  his  theo-
retic cosmic  theory  is,  the  more  it  contains  elements  de-
viating from  current  opinion,  i.e.,  paradoxical,  and  the  more
occasion  it  gives  on  this  ground  to  erroneous  inferences
respecting  the  practical  consequences  flowing  therefrom.
That  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,"  particularly  in
consequence  of  the  incoherent  apprehension  of  its  pessi-
mism and  confusion  with  the  system  of  Schopenhauer,  has
led  to  the  grossest  misunderstandings  as  regards  its  practi-
cal consequences,  and  has  thereby  called  forth  reproaches
as  severe  as  groundless,  is  sufficiently  well  known;  and  in
order  that  such  mistakes  may  be  avoided  for  the  future,  I
would  emphatically  advise  that,  where  it  is  practicable,
my  readers  should  make  themselves  previously  acquainted
with  my  ethical  views  before  they  undertake  the  reading
of  the  "Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious."  The  "  Phanome-
nologie  des  sittlichen  Pewusstseins,"  now  in  the  press,  in
which  those  views  are  expounded,  is  an  altogether  popular
work,  which,  in  contrast  to  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Uncon-
scious," requires  no  previous  knowledge  in  a  philosophical
or  scientilic  reference,  is  independently  constructed  from
its  foundation,  and  is  therefore  very  suitable  for  being  read
without  any  previous  acquaintance  with  the  rest  of  my
philosophical  efforts.  Whoever  has  first  made  acquaint-
ance with  my  second  chief  work  will  without  doubt
regard  my  first  main  work  with  quite  other  eyes,  because
he  brings  with  him  at  Starting  a  definite  opinion  on  the
practical  fertility  of  the  ideas  developed  therein,  which
may  be  described  as  the  counterpart  of  the  paradoxical  im-
pression commonly  received  by  unprepared  readers.

However  much  weight may  be  assigned,  in  judging  a


xxvi  PREFACE  TO  THE  EIGHTH  EDITION.

system,  to  the  sides  hitherto  discussed,  it  will  yet  remain
indisputable  that the  decisive  point for the  theoretical
estimation  of  such  must  be  sought  in  the  fundamental
theory  of  knowledge. The  theory  of  knowledge  is  the  true
philosophies  prima  ;  with  the  right  or  wrong  attitude  to  the
problems  of  the  theory  of  knowledge  the  decision  is  already
made,  whether  the  particular  thinker  is  on  the  right  or
wrong  road  in  his  efforts  to  solve  the  metaphysical  prob-
lems, and  this  holds  more  than  ever  good  of  a  system  of  the
present  time,  which  has  brought  to  full  consciousness  the
importance  of  the  theory  of  knowledge,  first  placed  in  the
right  light  by  Kant,  after  its  treatment  had  been  pushed  on
one  side  by  the  great  successors  of  Kant  as  a  matter  already
settled  by  Kant. The  whole  reach  of  the  theoretical  con-
trast, in  which  I  find  myself  with  respect  to  Schopenhauer
as  to  all  others  standing  theoretically  on  Kantian  ground,
he  alone  is  able  to  appreciate  who  has  taken  the  trouble
to  go  through  my  writings  specially  devoted  to  these  ques-
tions. Such  an  one  will,  however,  no  longer  be  able  to  mis-
understand the  relation  of  my  system,  merely  hinted  at  in
the  "Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,"  to  the  problems  of  the
theory  of  knowledge,  as  has  happened  on  the  part  of  those
readers  of  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  "  who  ima-
gined they  could  characterise  me,  despite  that  diametrical
opposition  to Schopenhauer,  simply  as his continuator.
All  readers,  who  stand  substantially  on  the  ground  of  the
Kantian  transcendental  Idealism,  as  represented  by  Fichte,
by  Schelling  in  his  youth,  by  Schopenhauer,  and  by  a  part
of  the  Hegelian  school,  I  must  beg  to  read  my  writings  con-
cerning the  theory  of  Cognition  before  the  "  Philosophy  of
the  Unconscious,"  and  the  same  holds  good  in  a  metaphy-
sical respect  of  my  memoir  "on  the  Dialectical  Method"
for  all  adherents  of  Hegel,  who  still  see  in  his  method  an
essential and inseparable element of his philosophical
achievements. For  laymen,  on  the  contrary, who  have
hitherto  kept  off  the  mistaken  paths  of  subjective  Ideal-
ism and  the  Hegelian  Dialectic,  the  reading  of  the  speci-


PREFACE  TO  THE  EIGHTH  EDITION. xxvii

lied  writings  may  be  less  necessary  and  not  even  recom-
mendable  before  acquaintance  with  the  Philosophy  of  the
Unconscious,  because  the  material  difficulties  to  be  over-
come in  them  might  easily  deter  from  further  philosophical
studies.  Only  the  preface  to  the  second  edition  of  the
"Kritische  Grundlegung  des  transcendentalen  Eealismus"
I  could  wish  to  see  read  also  by  laymen  he/ore  the  Philo-
sophy of  the  Unconscious,  because  they  will  get  there-
from at  any  rate  an  inkling,  that  I  raise  the  claim,  to  have
made  the  first  decided  step  in  the  Theory  of  Knowledge
since  Kant.

I  conclude  with  some  words  from  my  preface  to  the
French  Translation,  p.  iii.,  "La  philosophe  de  l'lncon-
scient  n'est  pas  un  systeme :  elle  se  borne  a  tracer  les
lineaments  principaux  d'un  systeme.  Elle  n'est  pas  la
conclusion,  mais  le  programme  d'une  vie  entiere  de  travail:
pour  achever  l'ceuvre,  la  sante  et  une  longue  vie  seraient
necessaires."  May  there  be  found  in  the  sum  of  my  other
publications  the  honest  attempt  at  a  payment  on  account
of  the  assumed  obligation,  and  the  "  Philosophy  of  the
Unconscious  "  be  henceforth  read  and  judged  as  an  integral
part  of  the  totality  of  my  philosophical  works.

EDUAED  VOX  HAETMAXX.
Berlin,  January  1878.


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  NINTH  EDITION.


As  the  eighth  edition  of  this  work  appeared  simultaneously
with  my  second  principal  work,  so  I  issue  the  ninth
simultaneously  with  my  third  principal  work.  If  at  the
close  of  the  preface  of  the  eighth  edition  I  described  the
"  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  "  as  the  programme  of  my
life,  the  two  other  extant  chief  works  yield  the  proof  that
hitherto  at  any  rate  good  will  has  not  been  wanting  to
carry  out  the  programme.

The  "  Phanomenologie  des  sittlichen  Bewusstseins,"
which  appeared  at  the  end  of  the  year  1878,  is  no  com-
plete system  of  Ethics,  but  only  the  first  introductory  part
of  such,  and  therefore  described  by  its  title  as  "Prolegomena
to  every  future  Ethics."  The  System  of  Ethics  would
with  me  embrace,  besides  this  introductory  ethical  doctrine
of  Principles,  a  Social  Ethic  and  an  Individual  Ethic.
The  working  out  of  an  Individual  Ethic  appeared  to  me
least  urgent,  that  of  Social  Ethic,  on  the  contrary,  very
desirable  indeed,  but  yet  bound  up  with  considerable
material  difficulties,  which  it  is  hoped  will  receive  some
illumination  by  the  progress  of  social-political  legislation.
Accordingly,  while  for  the  treatment  of  Social  Ethics  some
delay  might  appear  desirable,  I  had  excellent  reasons  for
the  speedy  presentation  of  my  "Religious  Philosophy;"  for,
for  the  treatment  which  Social  Ethics  might  eventually
experience  at  my  hands  then;  were  numerous  hints  to  he
found,  both  in  the  "  Phanomenologie  des  sittlichen  !'-■•-
wusstseins"  as  well  as  in  other  of  my  writings;  1  ut  my
attitude  towards  Religious  Philosophy  could  on  the  las..-


xxx  PREFACE  TO  THE  NINTH  EDITION.

of  the  "Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious"  and  the  little
monograph  on  the  Self-disintegration  of  Christianity  hardly
even  approximately  be  rightly  estimated.

The  "  Phanomenologie  des  sittlichen  Bewesstseins "
turned  the  polemic  of  the  philosophers  and  theologians
against  me  into  a  new  phase.  Hitherto  I  had  been  met  with
the  argument  that  Pessimism  must  be  intrinsically  with-
out an  Ethic;  but  now,  when  the  Ethics  of  Pessimism
had  in  principle  come  to  light,  that  argument  could  no
longer  hold  water,  and  it  was  now  contended  that  this
Ethics  was  worth  nothing,  because  it  was  the  Ethics  of
Pessimism.  Thereby  the  contest  concerning  Pessimism
was  renewed,  but  also  at  the  same  time  carried  over  to  a
new  battlefield.  I  felt  moved  to  plunge  into  this  dis-
cussion with  some  journalistic  disquisitions  and  essays,
which,  at  the  end  of  1880,  were  collected,  and  appeared
in  pamphlet  form  under  the  title  "  Zur  Geschichte  und
Becrriindun^  des  Pessimismus."  The  first  shows  that  not
Schopenhauer  but  Kant  is  the  father  of  the  Pessimism
advocated  by  me,  whereas  Schopenhauer  has  one-sidedly
disfigured  and  spoilt  the  Kantian  Pessimism ;  the  second
refutes  the  objections  which  deny  that  Pessimism  is  a
problem  of  science,  or  soluble  by  science ;  the  third  has
the  task  of  sharply  separating  the  ethically  valuable  Pessi-
mism advocated  by  me  from  sundry  ethically  questionable
and  injurious  varieties  of  Pessimism,  and  the  fourth  gives
a  phenomenology  of  Suffering,  as  it  were,  which  already
serves  as  a  transitional  chord  from  Ethics  to  the  Philosophy
of  Beligion.

The  effects  of  my  "  Phanomenologie "  on  the  public
reach  manifestly  less  widely  and  more  deeply  than  those
of  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  ;  "  the  polemic  called
forth  by  the  former  is,  it  is  true,  not  yet  free  from  obli-
quities and  misunderstandings,  but  it  is  far  more  scientific,
more  intelligent  and  thorough  than  that,  which,  in  the
first  four  years  after  the  appearance  of  the  "  Philosophy
of  the  Unconscious,"  saw  the  light. The  polemic  on  the


PREFACE  TO  THE  NINTH  EDITION.  xxxi

"  Phanomenologie  "  has  manifestly  not  a  little  contributed
to  correct  the  previous  judgment  of  the  "  Philosophy  of  the
Unconscious,"  and  to  silence  much  superficial  chatter.  I
hope  that  this  will  be  the  case  in  still  higher  degree  with
my  "  Philosophy  of  Beligion,"  which  yields  the  proof  that
my  philosophy  is  just  as  little  non-religious  as  non-ethical,
but  in  both  respects  stands  in  perfect  continuity  with  the
previous  course  of  development  of  the  consciousness  of
humanity.

In  the  "  Philosophy  of  Religion"  my  standpoint,  as  I  have
already  indicated  in  the  closing  section  of  the  "  Self-dis-
integration of  Christianity,"  specially  represents  a  syn-
thesis of  the  Christian  and  Indian  Eeligions,  or  a  synthesis
of  Hegelianism  and  Schopenhauerism.  For  that  purpose  it
was  important  to  me  to  come  to  terms  with  the  present
leading  representatives  of  a  speculative  Christian  Theo-
logy, as  this  has  been  developed  from  the  twofold  starting-
point  of  Hegel  and  Schleiermacher.  I  have  done  this  in
the  memoir :  "  Die  Krisis  des  Christenthums  in  der  mo-
dernen  Theologie."  As  in  the  "  Self-disintegration  "  I  had
criticised  the  vulgar  liberal  Protestantism,  so  here  specu-
lative Protestantism,  and  by  how  much  the  latter  is  phi-
losophically more  considerable  and  of  greater  religious
worth  than  the  former,  so  much  the  more  important  is
also  the  critique  of  the  latter  than  that  of  the  former,
lint  as  the  subject  is  more  difficult  and  requires  a  subtler
handling,  the  later  writing  has  by  no  means  received  the
s;ime  amount  of  notice  as  the  former;  it  may  be  that  this
is  owing  in  part  to  the  circumstances  of  the  times.

My  third  principal  work  consists  now  of  two  parts;  the
first,  historically  critical  part,  appeared  at  the  end  of  1SS1,
under  the  title  :  "  Das  religiose  Pewusstsein  der  Menschheit
im  Stufengang  seiner  Kntwickelung;"  the  second,  sy.-te-
mat ic  part,  is  issued  simultaneously  with  tins  ninth  edition
"i  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,"  under  the  title,
"  Die  lieligion  ties  Ceistes."  The  first  part  deduces  from
the  previous  course  of  evolution  of  the  religious  com i i  -


xxxii  PREFACE  TO  THE  NINTH  EDITION.

ness  of  humanity  by  immanent  criticism  that  stage  as  his-
torical postulate,  to  which  Eeligion  must  accordingly  in
consistency  be  elevated ;  the  second  part  systematically
carries  out  the  point  of  view  merely  hinted  at  in  the  first,
not,  however,  in  dogmatic,  but  in  phenomenological  form,
i.e.,  by  a  psychological  analysis  of  the  religious  conscious-
ness and  by  deduction  of  its  metaphysical  postulates  and
ethical  consequences.

EDUARD  VON  HARTMANK


Berlin,  August  iSc


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.


INTEODUCTOEY.


General  Preliminary  Observations.

(a.)  Object  of  the  Work

"  To  have  ideas,  and  yet  not  be  conscious  of  them, —
there  seems  to  bo  a  contradiction  in  that ;  for  how  can
we  know  that  we  have  them,  if  we  are  not  conscious  of
them  ?  Nevertheless,  we  may  become  aware  indirectly
that  we  have  an  idea,  although  we  be  not  directly
cognisant  of  the  same"  (Kant,  "  Anthropology,"  sec.  5,
"  Of  the  ideas  which  we  have  without  being  conscious
of  them").  These  clear  words  of  the  great  clear  thinker
of  Konigsberg  offer  at  once  a  starting-point  for  our  in-
vestigation, and  the  field  of  inquiry  itself.

The  sphereof  Consciousness  is  like  a  vine-clad  hill  which
has  been  so  often  ploughed  up  in  all  directions,  that  the
thought  of  further  labour  has  become  almost  loathsome
to  the  public  mind  ;  for  tin;  looked-for  treasure  is  never
found,  although  rich  and  unexpected  crops  have  sprung
from  the  well  -  worked  soil.  Mankind  very  naturally
began  its  researches  in  Philosophy  with  the  examination
of  what was  immeliately  given  in  Consciousness; may

Vol.. I.  A


2  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

it  not  now  be  lured,  by  the  charm  of  novelty  and  the
hope  of  a  great  reward,  to  seek  the  golden  treasure  in
the  mountain's  depths,  in  the  noble  ores  of  its  rocky
beds,  rather  than  on  the  surface  of  the  fruitful  earth  ?
Undoubtedly  auger  and  chisel  and  prolonged  irksome
labour  will  be  needed  before  the  golden  veins  are  reached,
and  then  a  tedious  dressing  of  the  ore  ere  the  treasure  be
secured.  Let  him,  however,  who  is  not  afraid  of  toil
follow  me.  Is  not  indeed  the  supreme  enjoyment  to  be
found  in  labour  itself?

The  conception  "  unconscious  idea  "  is  certainly  some-
what paradoxical  to  the  naive  understanding,  but  the
contradiction  contained  therein  is — as  Kant  says — only
apparent.  For  if  we  can  only  be  cognisant  of  the  actual
contents  of  consciousness — thus  can  have  no  knowledge
of  aught  out  of  consciousness  —  by  what  right  do  we
assert  that  that,  whose  existence  is  revealed  in  conscious-
ness, could  not  also  exist  outside  our  consciousness  ?
Truly  in  such  a  case  we  should  be  able  to  affirm  neither
existence  nor  non-existence,  and  accordingly  would  have
to  rest  content  with  the  assumption  of  non-existence,
until  in  some  other  way  we  acquired  the  right  to  make
a  positive  affirmation  of  existence.  This  has  gene-
rally been  the  view  adopted  up  to  the  present  time.
The  more,  however,  Philosophy  has  abandoned  the
dogmatic  assumption  of  immediate  cognition  through
sense  or  understanding,  and  the  more  it  has  perceived
the  highly  indirect  cognisability  of  everything  previously
regarded  as  immediate  content  of  Consciousness,  the
higher  naturally  has  risen  the  value  of  indirect  proofs
of  existence.  Accordingly,  reflective  minds  have  from
time  to  time  appeared,  who  have  felt  constrained  to  fall
back  upon  the  existence  of  unconscious  ideas  as  the  cause
of  certain  mental  phenomena  otherwise  totally  inexpli-
cable. To  collect  these  phenomena,  to  render  probable
the  existence  of  unconscious  ideas  and  unconscious  will
from  the  evidence  of  the  particular  cases,  and  through  their


INTRODUCTORY.  3

combination  to  raise  this  probability  to  a  degree  border-
ing on  certainty,  is  the  object  of  the  first  two  sections  of
the  present  work.  The  first  treats  of  phenomena  of  a
physiological  and  zoopsychological  nature,  the  second
deals  with  the  department  of  mental  science.

By  means  of  this  principle  of  the  Unconscious  the
phenomena  in  question  at  once  receive  their  only  possible
explanation,  an  explanation  which  either  has  not  been
expressly  stated  before,  or  could  not  obtain  recognition,
for  the  simple  reason  that  the  principle  itself  can  only
be  established  through  a  comparison  of  all  the  rele-
vant phenomena.  Moreover,  by  the  application  of  this
as  yet  undeveloped  principle,  a  prospect  opens  up  of
quite  novel  modes  of  treating  matters  hitherto  supposed
to  be  perfectly  well  known.  A  number  of  the  contra-
rieties and  antinomies  of  earlier  creeds  and  systems  are
reconciled  by  the  adoption  of  a  higher  point  of  view,
embracing  within  its  scope  opposed  aspects  as  incom-
plete truths.  In  a  word,  the  principle  is  shown  to  be
in  the  highest  degree  fruitful  for  special  questions.  Far
more  important  than  this,  however,  is  the  way  in  which
the  principle  of  the  Unconscious  is  imperceptibly  ex-
tended beyond  the  physical  and  psychical  domains  to
achieve  the  solution  of  problems  which,  to  adopt  the
common  language,  would  be  said  to  belong  to  the
province  of  metaphysics.  These  consequences  How  so
simply  and  naturally  from  the  application  of  our  prin-
ciple to  physical  and  pyschological  inquiries,  that  the
transition  to  another  department  would  not  be  remarked
at  all,  if  the  subject-matter  of  those  questions  were  not
otherwise  familiar  to  us.  There  is  a  genera!  tendency  of
thought  towards  this  single  principle.  In  each  succeed-
ing chapter  one  piece  more  of  the  world  cri/.slu Ui.<<.<,  w<  w
were,  around  this  nucleus,  until,  expanded  to  all-unit //.  it
embraces  the  Cosmos,  and  at  last  is  suddenly  revealed  as
that  which  has  funned  the  core  of  all  great  philosophies,
the Substance of Spinoza, the Absolute Kgo of  Fh  lite,


4  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Schelling's  Absolute  Subject-Object,  the  Absolute  Idea  of
Plato  and  Hegel,  Schopenhauer's  Will,  &c.

I  beg,  therefore,  no  one  to  take  offence  at  this  notion
of  unconscious  representation  if  at  first  it  have  little
positive  significance.  The  positive  content  of  the  con-
ception can  only  be  gradually  acquired  in  the  course  of
the  investigation.  Let  it  at  first  suffice  that  an  un-
known cause  of  certain  processes,  outside  of  and  yet  not
essentially  foreign  to  Consciousness,  is  thereby  signi-
fied, receiving  the  name  "  idea,"  because  it  has  in
common  with,  what  is  known  in  Consciousness  an  ideal
content,  which  itself  has  no  reality,  but  can  at  the  most
resemble  an  external  reality  in  the  ideal  image.  The
notion  of  unconscious  will  is  clearer  in  itself,  and
appears  less  paradoxical  (comp.  Chap.  A.  i.  conclusion).
As  it  will  be  shown  in  Chap.  B.  iii.  that  Feeling  can  be
resolved  into  "Will  and  Idea,  these  two  being  thus  the
only  fundamental  psychical  functions  which,  according
to  Chap.  A.  iii.,  are  inseparably  one,  so  far  as  they  are
conscious,  I  designate  the  united  unconscious  will  and
unconscious  idea  "  the  Unconscious."  Since,  however,
this  unity  again  only  rests  upon  the  identity  of  the
unconsciously  willing  and  unconsciously  thinking  sub-
ject (Chap.  C.  xv.  4),  the  expression  "  the  Unconscious  "
denotes  also  this  identical  subject  of  the  unconscious
psychical  functions, — a  something  in  the  main  unknown,
it  is  true,  but  of  which  we  may  at  least  affirm,  that
besides  the  negative  attributes  "  being  unconscious  and
exercising  functions  unconsciously,"  it  possesses  also  the
essentially  positive  attributes  "  willing  and  represent-
ing." As  long  as  our  speculation  does  not  transgress
the  limits  of  individuality,  this  may  be  sufficiently
clear.  When  we,  however,  view  the  world  as  a  whole,
the  expression  "  the  Unconscious "  acquires  the  force
not  only  of  an  abstraction  from  all  unconscious  individual
functions  and  subjects,  but  also  of  a  collective,  com-
prehending the  foregoing  both  extensively and inten-


INTRODUCTORY.  5

sively.  Lastly,  it  will  appear  from  Chap.  C.  vii.  that
all  unconscious  operations  spring  from  one  same  subject,
which  has  only  its  phenomenal  revelation  in  the  several
individuals,  so  that  "  the  Unconscious  "  signifies  this  One
Absolute  subject.  This  must  suffice  as  a  general  indica-
tion of  our  theme.

"  Philosophy  is  the  history  of  philosophy," — to  that
I  subscribe  with  all  my  heart.  He,  however,  who  should
take  this  assertion  to  mean  that  truth  is  to  be  found  in
the  past  alone  would  fall  into  a  very  serious  error ;  for
there  is  a  dead  and  a  living  past  in  the  history  of  Philo-
sophy, and  life  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  present.  Thus
in  a  tree,  the  solid  stem  of  dead-wood  which  defies  the
storm  is  formed  by  the  growth  of  earlier  years,  and  a
thin  layer  alone  contains  the  life  of  the  mighty  plant,
until  in  the  next  year  it  too  is  numbered  with  the  dead.
It  was  not  the  leaves  and  flowers,  which  captivated  the
beholders  in  bygone  summers,  that  gave  enduring  strength
to  the  tree, — these  at  the  most  contributed,  when  fallen
and  faded,  to  manure  its  roots, — it  was  the  slight  and
unregarded  annular  growth  of  the  stem,  and  the  insigni-
ficant young  shoots,  that  increased  its  girth,  height,  and
solidity.  It  is  not  merely  strength  for  which  the  living
ring  is  debtor  to  its  dead  forefathers,  but  by  holding  them  in
its  embrace,  expansion  likewise ;  wherefore  for  the  newly
sprouting  ring,  as  for  the  tree,  the  first  law  is  really  to
embrace  and  enfold  all  its  predecessors,  the  second,  to
grow  from  the  root  upwards  self-dependently.  The  pro-
blem how  to  fulfil  these  two  conditions  in  Philosophy
verges  on  the  paradoxical,  for  they  who  overlook  the
situation  have  usually  lost  the  ingenuousness  necessary
for  making  a  true  beginning,  and  he,  who  attempts  a
new  departure,  generally  presents  some  crude  dilettante
product  from  having  insufficiently  appreciated  the  pre-
vious historic  evolution.

I  believe  that  the  principle  of  the  Unconscious,  which
forms the focus in which all the rays of  our  inquiry


6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

meet,  when  conceived  in  its  generality,  may  not  improperly
be  regarded  as  a  new  point  of  view.  How  far  I  have
succeeded  in  penetrating  into  the  spirit  of  the  previous
development  of  Philosophy  I  must  leave  to  the  judgment
of  the  reader.  I  will  only  remark  that,  having  regard  to
the  plan  of  the  work,  the  proof,  that  nearly  everything
that  can  be  looked  upon  as  genuine  heart-wood  in  the
history  of  Philosophy  is  embraced  in  the  final  results,
must  be  limited  to  brief  hints,  which  have  in  part  been
more  elaborated  in  various  special  inquiries,  to  which
reference  will  be  made  at  the  proper  place.


(b.)  Method  of  Research  and  Mode  of  Exposition.

Three  leading  methods  of  research  are  to  be  distin-
guished— the  dialectic  (Hegelian),  the  deductive  (from
above  downwards),  and  the  inductive  (from  below  up-
wards). The  dialectic  method  I  must,  without  now
entering  upon  reasons  pro  or  con}  entirely  exclude,  for
the  reason  that,  at  least  in  the  accepted  form  of  it,  it  is
ill-adapted  for  common  comprehension,  a  feature  which
cannot  here  be  overlooked.  The  advocates  of  that
method,  who  are  above  all  others  bound  to  recognise  the
relativity  of  truth,  will,  it  is  hoped,  not  condemn  the
present  work  on  account  of  its  naturalistic  character,
especially  when  they  consider  the  positive  stand  made
against  common  opponents,  and  its  utility  as  a  pro-
pedeutic for  non-philosophers.  We  have  then  to  weigh
the  comparative  advantages  of  the  deductive  or  descend-
ing, and  of  the  inductive  or  ascending  method.

Man  arrives  at  the  scientific  stage  when  he  tries  to
comprehend  and  explain  to  himself  the  totality  of  the
phenomena  which  surround  him.  Phenomena  are  effects
whose  causes  he desires  to  know. As different  causes

1 My  own  opinion  will  be  found  in  a  monograph  entitled  "Ueber  die
dialektische  Methodo"  (Berlin,  1864,  C.  Duncker).


INTRODUCTORY.  7

may  have  the  same  effect  {e.g.,  friction,  the  galvanic
current,  and  chemical  changes,  Heat),  so,  too,  a  single
effect  can  have  different  causes.  The  cause  assumed  for
an  effect  is  consequently  only  a  hypothesis,  which  can  by
no  means  possess  certainty,  but  only  a  probability,  to  be
determined  by  extraneous  considerations.

Let  the  probability  that  XJ1  is  the  cause  of  the  pheno-
menon E  be  =  ult  and  the  probability  that  U2  is  the
cause  of  \J1  be  —  u.-,,  then  the  probability  that  U2  is  the
remote  cause  of  E  =:  ult  u2 ;  from  which  it  is  clear  that
at  every  stage  backwards  in  the  chain  of  causation  the
coefficients  of  probability  of  the  several  causes  in  respect
of  their  proximate  effects  go  on  multiplying,  i.e.,  become
continually  smaller  (e.g.,  -^  multiplied  by  itself  nine  times
becomes  about  -jL_.)  If  the  degree  of  probability  of  the
causes  did  not  again  rise  through  the  number  of  hypo-
thetical causes  becoming  fewer,  and  through  more  effects
being  explicable  by  a  single  cause,1  the  probabilities
would  soon  by  continual  multiplication  reach  values  so
small  as  to  be  unserviceable.  Now  if  the  causes  of  all
cosmical  phenomena  could  be  regressively  traced,  until
they  were  referred  to  one  or  a  few  ultimate  causes  or
principles,  Science,  which  is  one,  as  the  world  is  one,
might  attain  perfection  by  way  of  the  inductive  method.

Supposing,  however,  any  one  to  have  solved  this  pro-
blem in  a  more  or  less  complete  form,  the  question  still
remains,  whether,  in  imparting  his  convictions  to  others,
he  would  do  better  to  follow  the  track  from  phenomena
backwards  and  upwards  to  the  original  causes,  or  to
deduce  the  existing  world  from  such  first  principles  ?
We  are  dealing  here  with  an  alternative;  for  when
Schelling  in  his  final  system  asserts  the  necessity  of  a
combination  of  both  processes,  beginning  (see  Werke,
Abth.  ii.  r>d.  3.  S.  151,  Anin.)  with  a  negative  ascending
philosophy, and concluding with a positive descending

1  The  increase  takes  place  according  to  the  formula  develop  d  on  pp.  53
and  54.


8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

philosophy,  this  duplication  is  only  made  possible  by
assigning  a  distinct  sphere  to  each,  and  by  retaining  the
former  for  the  purely  logical  domain.  In  other  words,
he  applies  the  inductive  method  only  to  facts  of  inner
thought  -  experience  (comp.  Werke,  ii.  I ,  pp.  321  and
3  26),  whilst  in  his  positive  philosophy  he  seeks  to  exhibit
the  highest  Idea  thus  obtained  as  result  as  the  really  Exis-
tent and  the  principle  of  all  Being  (comp.  ii.  3,  p.  150),
endeavouring  to  derive  therefrom  the  facts  of  outer  ex-
perience by  means  of  the  deductive  method.  (Krause's
ascending  and  descending  didactic  order  is  somewhat
similar.)  Even  if  the  results  thus  deductively  obtained
in  any  way  satisfied  the  demands  of  Science,  still  such
an  arbitrary  separation  of  inner  and  outer  experience
could  not  be  scientifically  justified ;  and  in  any  case,  as
regards  the  latter  province,  the  oef ore-mentioned  alter-
native would  again  present  itself,  whether  the  ascending
or  descending  method  be  preferable  for  exposition.  The
decision  must  undoubtedly  be  given  in  favour  of  the
ascending  or  inductive  method  ;  for —

1.  As  the  person  to  be  guided  dwells  in  the  lower
region  of  fact,  his  proper  starting-point  is  there,  and
his  upward  course  is  always  from  the  known  to  the
\mknown.  On  the  other  hand,  to  place  him  at  the
outset  at  the  point  of  view  of  first  principles  would
necessitate  a  salto  mortalc,  and  then  he  would  have  to
proceed  from  one  unknown  point  to  another,  only  reach-
ing the  known  again  at  the  conclusion  of  his  journey.

2.  Every  one  is  persuaded  that  his  own  opinion  is
the  correct  one,  and  consequently  distrusts  any  novel
doctrine.  lie  must,  therefore,  know  hoio  another  has
arrived  at  his  sublime  results,  if  his  own  distrust  is  to  be
removed,  and  this  requires  the  employment  of  the  ascend-
ing method.

3.  Men  are  secretly  inclined  to  distrust  their  own
understandings,  as  well  as  obstinately  to  stand  by  opinions
once adopted. It  is therefore exceedingly  difficult to


INTRODUCTORY.  9

convince  any  person  by  deduction,  because  lie  always  dis-
trusts the  method,  even  when  he  has  no  specific  objec-
tion to  raise;  whereas  in  induction  he  needs  think  less
strenuously  and  exactly,  but  can,  as  it  were,  touch  the
truth  by  sight  and  direct  perception.

4.  Deduction  from  first  principles,  supposing  it  to
be  absolutely  flawless,  may  perhaps  be  imposing  by
its  vastness,  compactness,  and  subtlety,  but  does  not
produce  conviction.  For  since  the  same  effects  can
arise  from  different  causes,  in  the  most  favourable  case
deduction  only  proves  the  possibility  of  these  principles,
by  no  means  their  necessity;  it  does  not  even  give  them
a  coefficient  of  probability,  as  the  inductive  method
does,  never  advancing  beyond  the  bare  notion  of  pos-
sibility. To  speak  figuratively,  it  is  undoubtedly  in-
different, if  we  want  to  become  acquainted  with  the
lihine,  whether  we  travel  up-stream  or  down-stream;
but  for  the  dweller  at  the  mouth  of  the  lihine  the
natural  course  is  up-stream,  for  if  a  magician  should
come  and  transport  him  in  a  twinkling  to  the  source  of  a
certain  river,  he  would  be  wholly  unable  to  tell  if  it  were
really  the  source  of  the  Rhine,  and  whether  he  is  not
about  to  undertake  a  long,  tedious  journey  in  vain.  And
when  he  arrives  at  this  river's  mouth,  and  finds  himself
in  an  unfamiliar  region  instead  of  in  his  own  home,  the
wizard  perhaps  tries  to  persuade  him  that  it  really  is
his  home,  and  many  a  one  readily  credits  him  for  the
sake  of  the  beautiful  journey  itself.

After  what  has  been  stated,  it  would  be  inexplicable
how  anybody  who  had  arrived  at  his  principles  by  the
inductive  path  should  take  the  deductive  method  for
their  communication  and  proof ;  and,  in  fact,  this  never
occurs.  The  truth  is,  that  philosophers  who  deduce  their
systems  (whether  the  method  be  revealed  or  concealed),
have  arrived  at  their  principles  by  the  only  way  save
induction  which  is  open  to  them,  viz.,  by  a  sort  of  mystical
flight,  as  will be shown in  Chap.  13.  ix. In their case


io  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

deduction  is  the  attempt  to  descend  from  the  mystically
acquired  results  to  the  reality  to  be  explained,  and  that
too  by  a  path,  which  has  always  possessed  a  fascination
for  system-loving  minds  dazzled  by  the  certainty  of  the
results  attained  in  the  very  different  science  of  mathe-
matics. For  such  philosophers  deduction  is  certainly  the
appropriate  method,  since  their  given  starting-point  is
the  upper  region  of  thought.  Apart  from  the  circumstance
that  both  the  method  of  proof  itself  as  well  as  the  prin-
ciples to  be  proved  must  always,  as  everything  human,  be
defective,  and  that  accordingly  deduction  always  leaves
an  unfilled  interval  between  primary  principles  and  the
reality  to  be  explained,  the  worst  feature  of  the  case  is
that  deduction  cannot  prove  its  own  principles,  as  Aristotle
long  ago  showed,  in  the  most  favourable  case  obtaining  for
them  only  a  bare  possibility,  but  not  a  definite  probability.
The  principles  may  perhaps  gain  somewhat  in  comprclicn-
sibility  by  the  process,  but  no  power  of  convincing,  and
the  attainment  of  a  conviction  of  their  correctness  is  left
exclusively  to  mystic  reproduction,  as  their  discovery
consisted  in  mystical  production.  It  is  the  greatest
misfortune  for  Philosophy,  so  far  as  it  employs  this
method,  that  the  assurance  of  the  truth  of  its  results  is
not  communicable  as  in  the  case  of  inductive  science  ;
and  even  the  comprehension  of  its  content,  as  is  well
known,  is  no  easy  matter,  because  it  is  infinitely  diffi-
cult to  pour  a  mystical  conception  into  an  adequately
scientific  mould.  Philosophers,  however,  only  too  fre-
quently deceive  both  themselves  and  their  readers  with
regard  to  the  mystical  origin  of  their  principles,  and  try,
in  the  absence  of  good  proofs,  to  give  them  a  scientific
support  by  subtle  sophisms,  the  worthlessness  of  which
escapes  notice  through  the  firm  belief  of  the  truth  of  the
result,  Here  is  the  explanation  of  the  circumstance,
that  people  (save  in  the  rare  exception  of  a  certain
mental  affinity)  feel  an  extreme  repugnance  to  the  study
of the philosophers,  when  they  turn  to  their  proofs  and


INTRODUCTORY.  u

deductions,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  are  attracted  and
fascinated  in  the  highest  degree  by  the  imposing  com-
pactness of  their  systems,  their  grand  views  of  the
world,  their  flashes  of  genius  illuminating  the  darkest
recesses,  their  deep  conceptions,  their  ingenious  apereus,
their  psychological  acumen.  It  is  the  mode  of  proof
that  inspires  the  man  of  science  with  his  instinctive
aversion  to  Philosophy, —  an  aversion  which  in  our  own
time,  when  in  every  department  of  life  Eealism  is
triumphant  over  Idealism,  has  risen  to  supreme  con-
tempt.

It  follows  further  from  the  deductive  method  of  the
philosophers,  that  discussion  can  only  arise  on  special
points  in  so  far  as  they  follow  from  principles  with
respect  to  which  there  is  no  dispute.  But  now,  inasmuch
as  the  whole  system  is  enounced  as  a  consequence  of
first  principles,  even  supposing  all  conclusions  to  be
correctly  drawn,  it  can  only  be  accepted  or  rejected  as
a  whole,  according  as  one  rejects  or  accepts  the  first
principles  ;  whilst  in  a  philosophy  of  induction  which
has  been  built  up  from  below,  i.e.,  on  generally  admitted
and  empirically  established  facts,  assent  may  be  granted
up  to  a  certain  point,  and  then  the  observer  may  go  his
own  road,  having  crained  many  hints  for  future  use  from
a  careful  study  of  the  solid  sub-structure.  It  is  accord-
ingly evident  why  every  deductive  system  stands  more
or  less  alone,  like  the  spider  in  its  web,  because  all
differences  are  enclosed  in  the  first  principles,  with
regard  to  which  there  will  never  be  agreement,  if  we
are  bound  to  make  a  commencement  with  them.  On
the  other  hand,  in  the  different  inductive  philosophical
systems  (which,  alas  !  do  not  yet  exist),  a  feeling  of
solidarity  would  arise  through  the  possession  of  a
common  foundation,  just  as  in  inductive  science  in  general,
where  every  strictly  scientific  step,  once  taken,  is  always
a  step  gained,  and  where  even  the  smallest  e.ift  is  grate-
fully accepted. Lastly, it is obvious from what has


12  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

been  said,  why  the  deductive  philosophy  has  never  yet
succeeded  in  reaching  the  majority  of  the  educated,  but
has  had  to  be  contented  with  a  limited  public,  and  why
it  has  been  just  as  little  successful  in  bridging  over  the
vast  gulf  which  separates  it  from  the  reality  to  be  ex-
plained.

Those  philosophies,  on  the  contrary,  where  the  in-
ductive method  has  been  adopted,  and  all  the  natural
sciences  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term,  have  un-
doubtedly obtained  precious  results  of  a  secondary  kind
and  gained  ground  for  the  future,  but  still  are  very  far
indeed  from  having  reached  ultimate  principles  and  the
true  unity  of  science.

Thus  a  chasm  yawns  between  the  methods;  induction
cannot  attain  to  first  principles  and  to  system,  nor  can
pure  speculation  arrive  at  explanation  of  the  actual  or
communicate  its  wisdom.  It  may  be  concluded  from
this  that  the  whole  truth  cannot  be  comprehended  from
one  side  alone,  but  that  the  matter  must  be  approached
simultaneously  from  both  sides,  and  a  survey  made
from  opposite  stations  in  order  to  find  out  the  salient
points,  where  a  bridge  can  be  thrown  across.  For
the  case  is  not  an  entirely  hopeless  one.  Thoughts
crystallise  both  from  above  and  from  below,  as  the
mass  of  melted  sulphur  coalesces  when  the  most  pro-
minent needles  interlace,  but  not  before.  We  have
arrived  at  a  point  in  the  history  of  science  where  the
pioneers  meet,  like  two  miners  who,  in  their  subterranean
galleries,  hear  each  other's  knocking  through  the  party-
walls.  For  inductive  science  has  in  recent  times  made
such  vast  progress  in  all  branches  of  inorganic  and
organic  nature,  and  even  in  the  region  of  mind,  that
attempts  of  the  kind  indicated  find  a  very  different
ground  on  which  to  work  than,  e.g.,  those  of  an  Aristotle,
Paracelsus,  Bacon,  and  Leibniz.  On  the  other  hand,
however,  the  period  embracing  the  close  of  the  last  and
beginning  of  the present century,  brilliant beyond  all


INTRODUCTORY.  13

former  periods,  lias  enriched  the  speculative  mind  in  so
many  ways,  that  both  parties  once  more  face  each  other
as  equals.  But  at  the  same  time  the  world  has  become
more  aware  of  a  direct  antagonism  of  method  which
before  was  less  apparent,  and  hence  it  has  come  to  pass
that  each  investigator  is  wont  to  declare  himself  for  oik;
of  the  two  tendencies  much  more  definitely  than  was
formerly  the  case.  The  present  time  needs  a  spokesman
who  has  comprehended  both  sides  with  equal  love  and
devotion,  who  is  capable,  if  not  of  mystical  production,
yet  of  reproduction,  and  at  the  same  time  has  made  a
survey  of  exact  science  and  appreciates  the  strictness  of
the  exact  inductive  method.  He  should  clearly  recog-
nise, too,  the  nature  of  the  problem  before  him,  viz.,  to
combine  the  speculative  (mystically  gained)  principles
with  the  highest  results  hitherto  attained  of  inductive
science  according  to  inductive  method,  in  order  to  bridge
over  the  gulf  between  the  two,  and  to  elevate  what  have
hitherto  been  merely  subjective  convictions  to  the  rank
of  objective  truths.  It  was  in  reference  to  this  great
and  seasonable  problem  that  I  chose  the  motto,  "  Specu-
lative results  according  to  inductive  scientific  method  !  "
Xot  that  I  thought  myself  to  possess  a  mind  sufficiently
comprehensive  for  the  solution  of  this  problem,  or  at  all
believed  that  I  had  offered  in  the  present  work  a  satis-
factory solution, — that  is  far  from  me.  If  I  merit  any
praise,  it  is  for  having  distinctly  declared  a  problem,
already  recognised  and  attacked  in  different  ways,  to  be
the  philosophic  problem  of  a  time  suffering  conspicuously
from  speculative  exhaustion,  for  resolving  to  contribute
my  mite  towards  its  solution,  and  so  giving  to  others  a
possibly  needed  stimulus;  but  above  all,  because  1  have
taken  up  the  matter  on  a  side  hitherto  neglected,  but
rich in promise  beyond  all others.1 At  the same  time

1  Tlio  astonishingly  favourable  re-  mo  to  he  essentially  ilue  to  a  reco^-
coption,  which  the  previous  editions  11  it  ion  of  the  seasonable!!'  of  m_\
of  this  work  have  met  with,  seems  to efforts.


14


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.


my  design  imposes  upon  me  the  duty  of  submitting  my-
self to  the  judgment  of  both  tribunals,  the  scientific  as
well  as  the  philosophical.1  Gladly  do  I  do  this,  however;
for  I  hold  all  speculation  to  be  baseless,  which  contradicts
the  clear  results  of  empirical  investigation,  and  conversely
hold  all  conceptions  and  interpretations  of  empirical  facts
to  be  erroneous,  which  contradict  the  strict  results  of  a
purely  logical  speculation.

I  may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  say  also  a  few  words
upon  the  mode  of  exposition.  My  first  rule  has  been
•  '•eneral  intelligibility  and  brevitv.  The  reader  will
accordingly  find  no  citations  except  such  as  could  be
worked  into  the  text ;  all  polemic  has  been  avoided  as
far  as  possible,  unless  it  was  indispensable  for  the  elu-
cidation of  a  conception.  My  trust  is  greater  in  the
convincing  power  of  what  positive  truth  there  may  be
contained  in  my  work  than  in  negative  criticism,
however  incisive.  Further,  instead  of  dwelling  upon
the  errors  and weaknesses  of  great  men,  which receive


1  The  criticisms  and  replies,  whe-
ther philosophical  or  scientific,  which
have  come  under  my  notice,  have
not  succeeded  in  shaking  my  opin-
ions on  any  material  point,  but
have  rather  strengthened  them  in
several  instances.  In  the  Addenda
to  the  earlier  editions  I  sought  as
much  as  possible  to  avoid  polemics,
and  allowed  myself  for  the  first  time
in  the  Appendix  to  the  seventh
edition  somewhat  greater  liberty  in
this  respect.  I  have  permitted  my-
self more  freedom  in  respect  to
controversy  in  some  minor  writings.
A  fuller  treatment  of  strictly  scien-
tific  questions  will  be  found  in
"  Truth  and  Error  in  Darwinism,"
and  "Contributions  to  a  Philosophy
of  Nature"  (Section  G.  of  "Gesam-
melte  Studien  und  Aufsiitze  ge-
meinvcrstiindlichen  Inhalts";,  as  well
as  in  the  Appendix  to  the  present
volume,  "On  the  Physiology  of  the
Nerve-Centres."  My  place  in  the
historical  development  of  philosophy


is  indicated  in  "  Das  philoso-
phische  Dreigestirn  des  19.  Jahr-
hunderts"  (Section  1).  of  the  "  Ges.
Studien  u.  Aufsiitze  " ),  and  the
"  Elucidations  of  the  Metaphysic
of  the  Unconscious."  The  following
writings  give  a  clue  to  my  position
in  respect  to  the  problems  of  the
theory  of  knowledge  and  metho-
dology : — "  Kritische  Grundlegung
des  transcendentalen  Realismus,"
2<1  ed.  ;  "  J.  II.  v.  Kirchmann's
erkenntnisstheoretischer  Realismus"
and  "  L'eber  die  dialektische  Me-
thode."  On  the  religious  ques-
tions of  the  present  day  I  have
expressed  my  opinions  in  the
tractate  "  Die  Selbstzersetzung
des  Christenthums  und  die  Reli-
gion der  Zukunft,"  2d  ed..  and  a
few  excursuses  in  the  field  of  ,Es-
thetics  are  to  be  found  in  "  Aesthe-
thische  Studien"  (Section  B.  of
the  "Gesamnielte  Studien  und  Auf-
siitze "  .


INTRODUCTORY.  15

sentence  in  being  forgotten  in  course  of time, I have
preferred  to  render  prominent  their  grandest  ideas,  where
they  presagingly  foreshadow  in  vague  outline  what  only
the  future  can establish in complete detail. Further,
the opportunity for  interesting side-remarks,  for more
thorough  but  prolix  proofs,  detailed  deductions,  &c,  has
often been  left unused, so as to avoid a lengthened
treatment, which would be serviceable to but a few
readers. Accordingly,  in  the  majority  of  instances,  with
the  exception  of  those  which  deal  with  fundamentals,  the
chapters  are  almost aphoristic,  because I believe that
most readers will prefer a short exposition affording
stimulus  to self-reflection to an exhaustive treatment
of the subject. In the handling of the topics the
reader's  convenience  has  also  been considered as  far  as
possible,  in  that  each  chapter  forms a  little  treatise by
itself  on  a  limited  subject  (a  few  only  making  an  excep-
tion  to this which belong  inseparably  together, as,  e.g.,
Chap.  C.  vi.  and  vii.) The  chapters  of  the  first  two  sec-
tions together  and  severally  prove the existence of the
Unconscious ; their  concord  and  demonstrative  force  is  a
source of  mutual  support, and they sustain  each other
reciprocally  like  a  pile  of  arms; thus  the  later  support
the  earlier. I  therefore  beg  the  reader  kindly  to  reserve
his  judgment,  at  least  until he has finished Section A.
Should,  however,  the  proof  of  this  or  that  chapter  appear
to  be  faulty,  the inferences  of  the  others  are not neces-
sarily thereby condemned,  just as one or many  of  the
weapons may  be taken from a  pyramid of piled arms
without its collapsing. Lastly, I crave indulgence so
far as the several physiological and zoological fads
employed  as  examples  are  concerned,  in  respect to  which
a. layman may easily make a slip, without,  however,
prejudicing  the  main  argument.


1 6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

(c.)  Predecessors  in  respect  of  the  Conception  of  the
Unconscious.

What  a  time  elapsed  before  in  the  history  of  Philo-
sophy the  antithesis  of  Spirit  and  Nature,  Thought  and
Being,  Subject  and  Object,  emerged  into  clear  conscious-
ness, an  antithesis  which  now  governs  all  our  thinking !
For  the  primitive  man  as  natural  existence  felt  his  body
and soul to be one, he instinctively anticipated this
identity, and  his understanding must have  reached a
high  degree  of  consciousness,  before  he  could  so  far  free
himself  from  this  instinct  as  to  perceive  the  full  force  of
the  contrast. Nowhere  in  all  Greek  philosophy  do  we
find  this  opposition  clearly  expressed,  still  less  its  signi-
ficance recognised,  but  least  of  all  in  the  classical  period.
If  this  holds  good  of  the  opposition  of  the  Peal  and  the
Ideal,  ought we  to  be  surprised  that  the  contrast  of  the
Unconscious  and  the  Conscious  should  still  less  occur  to
the  primitive  understanding,  and  therefore  should  arise
much  later  in  the  history  of  Philosophy ;  nay, that  at
this  very  day  most  educated  people  hold  it  to  be  absurd
to  speak  of  unconscious  thinking  ? For  the  Unconscious
is  so  much  terra  incognita  to  the  natural consciousness,
that  it  regards  the  identity  of  having  an  idea  and  being
conscious  of  a  tiling  as  quite  self-evident  and indubitable.
This  naive  point  of  view  was  taken  by  Descartes  (Prin.
Phil.,  i. 9),  and  still  more  decidedly  by  Locke (Essay
on  the Human  Understanding, book  ii.  chap.  1,  sec.  9):
"  To ask  at  what  time  a  man  has  any  ideas  is to ask
when  he  begins  to  perceive,  having  Ideas  and  Perception
being  the  same  thing  ; "  or  sec. 19:"  Por  it  is  altogether
as  intelligible  to  say  that  a  body  is extended  without
parts, as that  anything  thinks  without  being  conscious
of  it. They  who  talk  thus  may,  with  as  much  reason,
if  it  be  necessary  to  their  hypothesis,  say that  a  man
is  always  hungry,  but  that  he  does  not  always  feel  it ;
whereas  hunger  consists  in  that  very  sensation,  as  think-


INTRODUCTORY.  17

ing  consists  in  being  conscious  that  one  thinks."  It
is  clear  that  Locke  postidatcs  these  propositions  in  all
simplicity.  The  assertion,  repeatedly  made,  that  Locke
has  proved  the  possibility  of  unconscious  ideas  is  there-
fore quite  incorrect,  lie  only  proves  from  a  proposition
taken  for  granted,  that  the  mind  can  have  no  idea  with-
out the  man  being  conscious  thereof,  because  otherwise
the  consciousness  of  the  man  and  that  of  the  mind  would
constitute  two  different  persons,  and  that  consequently
the  Cartesians  were  wrong  in  asserting  that  the  soul,
as  thinking  being,  must  think  incessantly.  Locke  is
accordingly  the  first  and  only  one  to  give  full  and
scientific  expression  to  this  tacit  supposition  of  the  naive
understanding.  By  this  step,  however,  an  opportunity
was  naturally  afforded  Locke's  great  opponent,  Leibniz,  of
perceiving  its  one-sidedness  and  untruth,  and  of  making
the  discovery  of  unconscious  ideas,  whereas  all  earlier
philosophers  silently  inclined  to  the  one  or  the  other  view,
but  in  general  failed  to  distinctly  envisage  the  problem.

Leibniz  was  led  to  his  discovery  through  the  endeavour
to  save  innate  ideas  and  the  ceaseless  activity  of  the
perceptive  faculty.  For  when  Locke  had  proved  that
th"  soul  cannot  consciously  think  if  the  man  is  not  con-
scious thereof,  and  yet  should  be  always  thinking,  there
remained  nothing  for  it  but  to  assume  an  iinconscion*
thinking.  He  therefore  distinguishes  j^rccption,  ideation,
and  apperception,  conscious  ideation  or  simply  conscious-
ness (Monadologie,  sec.  14),  and  says:  "11  no  s'en  suit
pas  de  ce  qu'on  ne  s'appereoit  pas  de  la  pensee,  qu'elle
cesse  pourcela"  (Xouveaux  Essais  sur  l'Lntendement
llumain,  book  ii.  chap.  1,  sec.  10).  What  Leibniz  c  >n-
tributes  to  the  positive  establishment  of  bis  new  con-
ception is  certainly  very  scanty,  but  be  deserves  immense
credit  for  instantly  perceiving  with  the  eye  of  genius  the
ranje  of  his  discovery,  for  penetrating  (sec.  1  5)  into  the
dark  inner  laboratory  of  human  feelings,  passions,  and
actions,  and  for  recognising  habit  and  much  else  as  effects

Vol.. I.  I'.


1 8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  an  important  principle  only  too  briefly  expounded.  He
declares  unconscious  ideas  to  be  the  bond  "  which  unites
every  being  with  all  the  rest  of  the  universe,"  and
explains  by  their  means  the  pre-established  harmony  of
the  monads,  in  that  every  monad  as  microcosm  uncon-
sciously represents  the  macrocosm  and  its  position  therein.
I  cheerfully  confess  that  it  was  the  study  of  Leibniz
which  first  incited  me  to  the  present  investigation.

With  regard  to  the  so-called  innate  ideas,  he  likewise
finds  a  point  of  view  which  has  obtained  general  accept-
ance (book  i.  chap.  3,  sec.  20):  "They  are  nothing  but
natural  aptitudes,  that  is  to  say,  active  and  passive  dis-
positions ; "  (chap.  1,  sec.  25):  "Actual  knowledge  is
certainly  not  innate,  but  only  what  one  may  call  virtual
knowledge,  just  as  the  figure  outlined  by  the  veins  of  the
marble  is  in  the  marble  before  these  are  discovered  in
the  process  of  working  them."  Leibniz  meant  to  say
what  Schelling  later  (Works,  div.  i.  vol.  iii.  pp.  528,  529)
more  precisely  expressed  in  the  words :  "  So  far  as  the
Ego  produces  everything  out  of  itself,  so  far  is  all  .  .  .
knowledge  a  priori.  But  in  so  far  as  we  are  not  con-
scious of  this  productivity,  so  far  is  there  nothing  in  us
a  priori,  but  everything  is  d  posteriori.  .  .  .  There  are
thus  notions  a  priori  without  there  being  innate  notions.
Not  conceptions,  but  our  own  nature  and  its  whole
mechanism  is  that  which  is  innate  to  us.  .  .  .  In  that
we  place  the  origin  of  the  so-called  notions  d  priori  out-
side the  sphere  of  consciousness,  ivherc  for  us  also  the
objective  world  tahes  its  rise,  we  assert  with  the  same
evidence,  and  with  equal  right,  that  our  knowledge  is  in
origin  out-and-out  empirical  and  entirely  d  priori."

But  now  comes  the  weak  side  of  Leibniz's  theory  of
unconscious  ideas,  already  apparent  in  their  usual  name,
"  pctitcs  perceptions."  Having  in  his  discovery  of  the  in-
finitesimal calculus,  and  in  many  parts  of  Natural  Philo-
sophy, in  Mechanics  (Best  and  Motion),  in  the  Law  of
Continuity,  &c,  introduced  with  the  most  brilliant  success


INTRODUCTORY.  19

the  notion  of  the  (so-called  mathematical)  infinitely  little,
Leibniz  was  tempted  to  conceive  the  petites  perceptions  as
ideas  of  too  low  an  intensity  to  affect  consciousness.  He
thereby  destroyed  with  one  hand  what  he  seemed  to  have
built  up  with  the  other — the  true  notion  of  the  Uncon-
scious as  a  province  opposed  to  Consciousness,  and  its
significance  for  feeling  and  action.  For  if,  as  Leibniz
himself  maintains,  natural  disposition,  instinct,  the  pas-
sions— in  short,  the  mightiest  influences  in  human  life —
take  their  rise  in  the  sphere  of  the  Unconscious,  how
are  they  to  be  shaped  by  ideas  which  are  withdrawn
from  consciousness  simply  on  account  of  their  weakness  ?
Would  not  the  more  powerful  conscious  ideas  prevail  at
the  decisive  moment  ?  This,  however,  is  of  minor  interest
to  Leibniz,  and  for  the  main  objects  of  his  consideration,
innate  ideas  and  the  constant  activity  of  the  soul,  his
assumption  of  the  infinitely  little  consciousness  certainly
suffices.  Accordingly,  most  of  his  examples  of  petite*
perceptions  have  reference  to  ideas  of  a  low  degree  of  con-
sciousness, e.g.,  sensuous  perception  during  sleep.  For  all
that,  Leibniz  retains  the  glory  of  having  been  the  first  to
affirm  theexistence  of  ideas  of  which  we  are  not  conscious,
and  to  recognise  their  vast  importance.

Nearer  to  Leibniz  than  is  commonly  thought  stands
Hume,  whose  theoretical  philosophy,  it  is  true,  is  almost
limited  to  a  single  point,  Causality,  but  who  within  that
limited  sphere  has  looked  round  him  with  a  clearer  and
bolder  eye  than  even  Kant,  Hume  does  not  dispute  the
fact  of  Causality,  he  only  opposes  the  empiricists  (Locke)
with  respect  to  its  abstraction  from  experience,  the  <i
pnorixls  (Cartesians)  with  respect  to  its  apodietic  cer-
tainty. On  the  other  hand,  lie  concedes  to  the  empiii-
cists  the  applicability  of  Causality  to  experience  and
practical  affairs,  and  the  a  prior  id  a  through  his  indin  d
proof  ef  the  principle  affords  a  support  for  the  assertion
t  hat  our  thinking  and  inferring  according  to  causa'.
is  a  manifestation  unconscious! it  to  oi/rs<  Yes  of  an  ti


20  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

power  far  removed  from  our  discursive  thinking,  which,  like
the  astonishing  instinct  of  animals,  must  be  looked  upon
as  an  original  gift  of  nature  ("Inquiry  Concerning  Human
Understanding").  The  reality  of  an  objectively  real  world,
independent  of  the  perception  of  the  subject,  is  imme-
diately inferred  from  sensuous  perception  by  means  of  such
a  natural,  blind,  but  powerful  instinct.  As,  however,  we
directly  know  only  our  own  mental  representation,  it  is
certainly  directly  indemonstrable,  that  it  is  the  effect  of  an
external  object  different  from,  but  resembling  it.  In  his
acute  criticism  of  the  Berkeleian  Idealism,  Hume,  however,
shows  himself  so  thoroughly  penetrated  by  the  conscious-
ness, that  every  subjective  idealism  carried  out  to  its  last
consequence  can  only  end  in  a  scepticism  absolutely  in-
fertile and  practically  repudiated  by  its  champions,  that
he  is  protected  from  the  Kantian  error  of  an  exclusively
subjective  conception  of  causality ;  and  at  the  conclusion
of  his  inquiries  he  advocates  the  hypothetical  restitution
of  the  critically  purified  causal  instinct  as  the  only
justifiable  point  of  view.  (I  have  taken  a  similar  course
in  my  work,  "  Das  Ding  an  sich  und  seine  Beschaffenheit,"
C.  Duncker,  1871.)

That  Kant  borrowed  the  notion  of  unconscious  ideation
from  Leibniz  is  easily  to  be  detected  from  the  passage
quoted  at  the  beginning  of  this  treatise.  That  he  also
attributed  great  importance  to  the  subject  is  proved  by
the  following  passage  of  sec.  5  of  the  "Anthropology :  " —
"  Innumerable  are  the  sensations  and  perceptions  whereof
we  are  not  conscious,  although  we  must  undoubtedly
conclude  that  we  have  them,  obscure  ideas  as  they  may
be  called  (to  be  found  in  animals  as  well  as  in  man).
The  clear  ideas,  indeed,  are  but  an  infinitely  small  fraction
of  these  same  exposed  to  consciousness.  That  only  a
few  spots  on  the  great  chart  of  our  minds  are  illuminated
may  well  fill  us  with  amazement  in  contemplating  this
nature  of  ours."  If  Kant  in  this  passage  identifies  the
unconscious  and  the  obscure  ideas  for  the  purposes  of  his


INTRODUCTORY.  21

"  Anthropology,"  the  "Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason"  shows
that  he  recognised  and  indicated  the  distinction,  but  did
not  comprehend  its  full  importance.  The  clear  is  opposed
to  the  obscure,  the  consents  to  the  unconscious  idea ;  but
not  every  conscious  idea  is  a  clear  idea,  nor  is  every
obscure  idea  unconscious.  Only  that  conscious  idea  is
clear  in  which  the  consciousness  reaches  to  the  conscious-
ness of  the  discrimination  of  that  very  idea  from  others :
when  consciousness  is  not  adequate  to  that,  the  con-
scious idea  is  obscure.  Not  all  obscure  ideas  are  there-
fore unconscious ;  "  for  a  certain  degree  of  consciousness,
which,  however,  does  not  suffice  for  memory,  is  not  want-
ing in  several  obscure  ideas"  (Kant's  Werke  ed.  Rosenkranz,
ii-  P-  79Z>  Obs.)  If  for  the  practical  ends  of  anthro-
pology the  contrast  of  clear  and  obscure  ideas  seems  to
Kant  to  be  sufficient,  for  the  theory  of  knowledge  in
general  it  yields  in  importance  to  that  of  the  conscious
and  unconscious  idea.  "  Idea  is  the  genus  (rcpracscntatio).
Under  it  falls,  the  idea  accompanied  by  consciousness
(perccptio)  "  (ibid.,  ii.  258).  Consciousness,  whose  pre-
sence distinguishes perceptio  from  the  unperceived  rcprac-
scntatio, is  not  so  much  itself  idea,  "  but  its  form  in
general,  so  far  as  it  can  be  called  knowledge"  (ii.  279).
It  is  the  absence  of  this  form  which  distinguishes  the
unconscious  from  the  conscious  idea.  According  to  Kant
the  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding  (categories)  seem
to  belong  to  the  unconscious  ideas,  so  far  as  they  lie
beyond  cognition,  which  cognition  only  becomes  possible
through  a  Mind  function  of  the  soul  (ii.  77)  spontaneously
binding  up  the  given  manifold  of  the  perceived  ideal
material  into  a  synthesis  (ii.  76).  If  we  penetrate  by
the  aid  of  consciousness  into  the  nature  of  this  synthesis,
we  certainly  recognise  therein,  so  far  as  it  is  generally
■nted,  the  pure  concept  of  the  understanding  (ii.  77) ;
but  the  part  that  the  unconscious  category  as  '•genu  or
foundation"  (ii.  66)  plays  in  bringing  about  conscious
knowledge  (the  "  Schematism  of  the  pure  understanding")


22  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

remains  an  "  art  hidden  in  the  depths  of  the  soul,"  hardly
ever  to  be  laid  bare  (ii.  125).  Unfortunately  Kant  did
not  attain  the  same  degree  of  insight  in  reference  to  the
d  priori  forms  of  intuition  as  in  the  case  of  the  forms  of
thought.  One  example  of  the  rare  keenness  of  his  per-
ception, however,  may  be  mentioned.  Kant  was  the
first  who  sought  in  the  Unconscious  for  the  essence  of
sexual  love  (Anthropology,  sec.  5).

Kant's  glances  beyond  the  sphere  of  conscious  human
knowledge  extend,  however,  still  further  than  we  have
hitherto  shown ;  but  he  himself  touched  this  other  pro-
vince only  in  the  way  of  suggestion,  because  his  philoso-
phic goal  was  always  apodictic  certainty,  and  he  was  obliged
to  confess  that  in  this  department  our  knowledge  rests  only
on  probability,  i.e.,  according  to  his  terminology,  is  pro-
blematical (ii.  211).  The  above-mentioned  classification
of  ideas  is  incomplete  in  so  far  as  the  second  species,
opposed  to  the  conscious  idea,  is  unnamed.  This  is,
however,  according  to  Kant's  terminology,  the  "  intel-
lectual intuition,"  which  does  not  appear  in  the  classifica-
tion. The  conscious  presentation  (perception)  further
falls,  according  to  Kant,  into  (subjective)  feeling  and
(objective)  knowledge,  and  the  latter  again  into  intuition
and  conception.  Feeling  and  intuition  are  not  intellectual,
but  sensuous ;  conception  is  not  intuitive,  but  discursive  ;
sensuous  intuition  is  derived  intuition,  not  original  as  the
intellectual  (ii.  720) ;  discursive  knowledge,  again,  effected
by  the  mediation  of  the  categories,  is,  it  is  true,  intel-
lectual, but  not  intuitive  (ii.  211).  Intellectual  intuition1
is  accordingly  left  for  the  non-perceived  idea.  The  per-
ceived or  conscious  idea  is  different  from  its  object ;  the
non-perceived  idea  is  one  with  it,  in  that  it  itself  gives


1  Spinoza  also  has,  besides  cogni-  This  has  the  mind,  so far  as  it  is

tion through sense-perception and  eternal,  not  the  finite  and  perishable

abstract conception, a third kind  individual  mind  (part  v.  prop. 31),

of  cognition  by  way  of  intellectual  for its  formal cause, and it alone

intuition or intuitive knowledge  furnishes really  adequate ideas on

(Ethics, part  ii. prop. 40, obs. 2).  the  nature  of  God  and  of  things.


INTRODUCTORY.  23

it  or  produces  it  (ii.  741,  742).  It  is  not  the  derived
and  dependent  human  understanding  (conscious  intellect)
as  such  which  possesses  such  an  intellectual  intuition,
but  only  the  primordial  Being  (ii.  720)  or  the  divine
understanding  (ii.  741),  for  which  the  production  of  its
"  intelligible  objects  "  is  at  the  same  time  the  creation  of
the  world  of  noumena  (viii.  234).  Whether,  and  how
far,  the  obscure  ideas  without  any  consciousness  are  to
be  explained  by  the  penetration  of  the  original  intellectual
intuition  of  the  primordial  Being  into  the  derived  human
understanding,  are  points  on  which  Kant  never  expressed
himself:  Schelling  was  the  first  energetically  to  pursue
that  line  of  inquiry.  It  is  interesting,  however,  to  see,
how  Heinrich  Heine  adopted  the  Kantian  notion  of  intel-
lectual intuition  to  explain  the  mysterious  lightning-
Hashes  of  genius  (comp.  Heine's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  142,  and
168,  169).

Although  Kant  had  by  no  means  intended  to  enounce
a  metaphysic  proper,  still  he  had  pretty  plainly  fore-
shadowed the  only  metaphysic  possible  in  a  system  of
pure  reason  in  the  above-mentioned  intellectual  intuition
of  the  Absolute  which  produces  the  intelligible  world,  so
that  his  immediate  continuator,  Ficlite,  could  only  proceed
further  on  the  path  indicated.  According  to  the  latter,
"  God's  existence  "  is  "  merely  knowledge  itself"  (Fichte's
Werke,  ii.  pp.  129,  130),  substantial  knowledge  only
however,  to  which,  as  infinite,  consciousness  can  never  be
ascribed.  Without  doubt  it  is  necessary  for  knowledge
to  become,  self-consciousness,  but  with  equal  necessity  is
ii  thereby  riven  into  the  plural  consciousness  of  manifold
individuals  and  persons  (vii.  130.  132).  As  substantial
knowledge  (i.e.,  as  inert;  content  of  knowledge  without  the
form  of  consciousness  .  God  is///''  infinite  licason  in  which
the  finite  is  contained;  he  is  likewise  the  infinite  Will
which  supports  and  retains  all  individual  wills  in  their
spheres,  and  the  medium  of  their  communication  (ii.
}Oi. ^02). If  it  be  necessarv  to  denv  consciousness  to


24  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  Unity  of  the  infinite  Eeason  and  the  infinite  Will,
in  spite  of  its  absolute  infinite  knowledge,  or  rather
precisely  on  that  account,  still  more  must  personality,
the  very  conception  of  which  implies  limitation,  be
refused  (ii.  334,  33  5).  It  is  clear  from  this  that  all
the  elements  of  the  Unconscious  are  to  be  found  in
Fichte,  but  they  appear  only  casually,  as  vague  hints
scattered  here  and  there,  and  these  promising  thought-
blossoms  were  soon  buried  under  later  growths  without
having  borne  any  fruit.

The  conception  of  the  Unconscious  was  much  more
closely  related  to  the  Faith  Philosophy  (Hamann,  Herder,
and  Jacobi),  which  properly  rests  upon  it ;  but  that
philosophy  was  so  obscure  and  incapable  of  rationally
comprehending  its  own  basis,  that  it  never  got  so  far
as  to  discover  its  proper  cue.

On  the  other  hand,  we  find  in  Schelling  the  concep-
tion of  the  Unconscious  in  its  full  purity,  clearness,  and
depth ;  it  is  worth  while  therefore  to  glance  aside  for
a  moment  to  observe  the  way  in  which  he  arrived  at
it.  The  following  passage  throws  most  light  on  the
subject  (Schelling's  Werke,  div.  i.  vol.  x.  pp.  92,  93):
"  The  meaning  of  this  (the  Fichtean)  subjective  Idealism
could  not  be  that  the  Ego  freely  and  voluntarily  posited
the  world  of  things,  for  far  otherwise  would  the  Ego
will  if  upon  it  depended  external  existence.  .  .  .  Put
all  this  gave  Fichte  no  concern.  ...  It  falling  now  to
my  lot  to  take  up  the  Problem  of  Philosophy  at  the
point  where  Fichte  had  left  it,  I  had  above  all  to  see
how  that  undeniable  and  inevitable  necessity "  (with
which  its  representations  of  the  external  world  confront
the  Ego),  "  which  Fichte  only  seeks  as  it  were  to  scold
away  with  words,  could  be  united  with  the  Fichtean
notions,  with  the  asserted  absolute  substance  of  the
Ego.  It  soon  became  clear  that  the  external  world  is
certainly  only  here  for  me,  so  far  as  I  myself  am
here  and  conscious  to  myself  (that  is self-evident),  but


INTRODUCTORY.  25

that  also  conversely,  in  the  act  of  self-presentation,  I
am  conscious  that,  along  with  the  revealed  /  am,  I  lind
also  the  world  already — there — existing,  that  thus  in
no  case  does  the  already  conscious  Ego  produce  the  world.
Nothing,  however,  prevented  the  receding  with  this  now
self-conscious  Ego  to  a  moment  when  it  was  nut  yet
conscious  of  itself,  and  the  assuming  a  region  beyond  the
present  consciousness,  and  an  activity  which  no  longer
itself,  but  only  through  its  result,  comes  into  conscious-
ness." (Cf.  also  Schelling's  Werke,  Abth.  i.  Bd.  3,  S.
348,  349.)  The  circumstance,  that  Schelling  had  to
derive  the  notion  of  the  Unconscious  from  the  hypothesis
of  the  Fichtean  Idealism,  is  probably  the  reason  why
his  many  line  observations  concerning  this  conception
exerted  so  little  influence  on  the  culture  of  his  time,
since  the  Litter  needed  an  empirical  derivation  in  order
to  perceive  its  necessity.  Besides  the  passage  previously
quoted  when  speaking  of  Leibniz  other  citations  will  be
made  from  Schelling  in  the  course  of  our  inquiries.  At
this  point  I  must  content  myself  with  transcribing  the
following  suggestive  remark  (Werke,  i.  3,  p.  624): — "In
all,  even'  the  commonest  and  most  everyday  production,
there  co-operates  with  the  conscious  an  unconscious
activity."  The  working  out  of  this  principle  in  the  dif-
ferent departments  of  empirical  psychology  would  have
supplied  an  it  jiosferiori  foundation  for  the  notion  of  the
Unconscious.  Schelling,  however  (except  in  the  ease  of
lesthetic  production),  not  only  failed  to  do  this,  but  he  even
asserts  elsewhere  (Werke,  i.  3,  p.  349):  "  The  ajsthetie  alone
is  such  an  activity"  (one  at  the  same  time  conscious  a:,  i
unconscious).

Nevertheless,  with  what  purity  and  depth  Schelling  in
his  original  thinking  had  seized  the  notion  of  lie  l'n-
conscious  is  proved  by  the  following  important  passage
(i.  3,]).  600) :  "  This  eternally  Unconscious,  which,  as  were
it  the  eti  rnal  sun  in  tin'  kinyrfom  of  spirits,  is  hidden  by  it  ;
own  untroubled  liitht,  and  although  itself  never  becoming


26  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Object,  impresses  its  identity  on  all  free  actions,  is  withal
the  same  for  all  intelli^ents,  the  invisible  root  of  which
all  intelligences  are  only  the  powers,  and  the  eternal
mediator  between  the  self-determining  subjective  in  us
and  the  objective  or  intuited,  at  once  the  ground  of  con-
formity to  law  in  freedom,  and  of  freedom  in  conformity
to  law."  He  denotes  by  this  mode  of  expression  what
Fichte  named  the  substantial  Knowledge  without  con-
sciousness, or  the  impersonal  God  as  Unity  of  infinite
Reason  and  infinite  Will,  a  unity  embracing  the  many
individual  wills  with  their  finite  reason.  Schelling  too
went  so  far  as  in  1801  to  fix  upon  the  absolute  Reason
as  the  first  and  highest  principle  of  his  Philosophy  of
Identity,  and  therewith  to  give  a  concrete  realisation  to
his  "eternally  Unconscious,"  to  which  in  the  year  1809
he  added  the  Will  as  a  principle  of  even  higher  import-
ance (i.  7,  350).

As  in  the  course  of  Schelling's  historical  development
the  Idealism  of  Fichte  retreated  into  the  background,  so
did  the  conception  of  the  Unconscious  experience  the
same  fate.  Whilst  in  the  Transcendental  Idealism  it
plays  a  leading  part,  in  the  writings  which  appeared  soon
after  it  is  hardly  even  mentioned,  and  later  still  it
disappears  almost  entirely.  The  mystical  Philosophy  of
iSTature  also  of  Schelling's  school,  which  (especially
Schubert)  is  so  much  occupied  with  the  sphere  of  the
Unconscious,  has.  so  far  as  I  know,  nowhere  concerned
itself  with  a  development  and  examination  of  this  concep-
tion. Far  better  did  the  divining  poet-mind  of  Jean  Paul
Friedrich  Bichter  know  how  to  appreciate  Schelling's  Un-
conscious, and  we  quote  the  following  passages  from  his
last,  unfinished  work  "Selina:"  "Our  measurements  of
the  rich  territory  of  the  IMe  are  far  too  small  or  narrow
when  we  omit  the  immense  realm  of  the  Unconscious,
this  real  interior  Africa  in  every  sense.  In  every  second
only  a  few  illuminated  mountain-tops  of  the  whole  wide
globe  of  memory  are  turned towards the  mind,  and  all


INTRODUCTORY.  27

the  rest  of  the  world  remains  in  shadow."  "  Nothing  is
left  for  the  receptacle  and  throne  of  the  vital  energies
hut  the  great  kingdom  of  the  Unconscious  in  the  soul
itself."  "  In  the  case  of  certain  men  we  immediately
survey  the  whole  cultivated  soul,  even  to  the  borderland
marked  by  emptiness  and  sterility ;  but  the  kingdom  of
the  Unconscious,  at  once  a  kingdom  of  the  unfathomable
and  the  immeasurable,  which  possesses  and  rules  every
human  mind,  makes  the  barren  rich  and  pushes  back
their  boundaries  into  the  invisible."  "  Is  it  not  a  con-
solatory thought,  this  concealed  wealth  in  our  soul  ?
May  we  not  hope  that  we  perhaps  unconsciously  love
God  more  heartily  than  we  know,  and  that  a  calm  instinct
for  the  second  world  works  in  us,  while  we  yet  con-
sciously give  ourselves  up  so  entirely  to  the  external
one  ? "  "  We  see  indeed  daily  how  the  conscious  be-
comes the  unconscious,  how  the  soul  without  conscious-
ness guides  the  fingers  according  to  the  laws  of  harmony,
whilst  it  incites  consciousness  to  new  relations  and  actions.
When  we  behold  the  complicated  relations  of  muscle  and
nerve,  we  are  astonished  at  contractions  and  pressures  of
the  most  delicate  kind  without  conscious  volition."

In  Hegel,  just  as  in  Schelling's  later  works,  the  notion
of  the  Unconscious  does  not  clearly  appear,  except  in  the
introduction  to  the  lectures  on  the  "  Philosophy  of  His-
tory," where  he  reproduces  the  ideas  of  Schelling  on  this
subject,  quoted  below  in  Chap.  Y>.  x.  Nevertheless  Hegel's
absolute  Idea,  in  its  pure  selfhood,  before  its  unfolding
into  Nature,  thus  also  before  its  return  to  itself  as  Spirit,
in  that  condition  in  which  it  is  the  unveiled  Truth,  the
(Jodhead,  as  it  were,  in  its  eternal  essence  before  the
creation  of  the  world  and  a  Unite  mind,  thoroughly  agrees
with  Schelling's  "  eternally  Unconscious,"  if  it  is  also  only
one  aspect  of  the  same,  viz.,  tin1,  logical  or  the  ideational,
coincident  with  Fichte's  "  substantial  knowledge."  and  his
infinite  Reason  devoid  of  consciousness.  With  Hegel,  too,
Thought  only  attains  to  consciousness  when,  tin


28  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

mean  of  its  externalisation  into  Nature,  it  passes  from
mere  being-in-self  to  being-for-self,  and  having  become  an
object  to  itself,  has  come  to  itself  as  spirit.  The  Hegelian
God  as  starting-point  is  at  first  being  per  se  and  uncon-
scious, only  God  as  result  is  being  "  for-self "  and  con-
scious, is  Spirit.  That  the  attaining-to-being-for-self,  the
becoming-an-object  to  self  is  really  a  coming-to-conscious-
ness, is  clearly  expressed  by  Hegel  in  vol.  xiii.  pp.  3  3  and
46  of  his  collected  works.  The  theory  of  the  Unconscious
is  the  necessary,  if  also  hitherto  for  the  most  part  only
tacit  presupposition  of  every  objective  or  absolute  Idealism,
which  is  not  unambiguously  Theism.  Every  metaphysic
which  looks  upon  the  Idea  as  the  prius  of  Xature  (from
which  again  the  subjective  mind  arises)  must  think  the
Idea  as  unconscious,  so  long  as  it  is  still  plastic  and  has
not  yet  emerged  from  its  being  before  and  in  Xature
into  intuitive  consciousness  in  the  subjective  mind, —
unless  the  shaping  Idea  take  the  form  of  the  conscious
thought  of  a  self-conscious  God.  As  highest  form  of
absolute  Idealism,  Hegelianism  most  certainly  has  to  yield
to  this  necessity,  since  its  Idea  is  something  very  different
from  the  conscious  thought  of  an  originally  self-conscious
God ;  rather  "  God "  is  only  a  convenient  name  for  the
(self-unfolding)  Idea.

It  may  be  said,  therefore,  that  the  theme  of  the  present
book  is  mainly  the  elevation  of  Hegel's  unconscious  Philo-
sophy of  the  Unconscious  into  a  conscious  one  (cf.  my
essay,  "  Ueber  die  nothwendige  Umbildung  der  Hegel'-
schen  Philosophic  aus  ihrem  Grundprincip  heraus,"  in
the  "Gesammelte  philosoph.  Abhandlungen,"  No.  II.,
Eerlin,  C.  Duncker).  But  also  all  those  who,  influenced
more  or  less  by  Plato  and  Hegel,  generally  assume
only  Ideas  as  the  moulding  principles  of  Xature  and
History,  and  a  guiding  objective  Peason  revealing  itself
in  the  world-process,  without  being  willing  to  confess  to
a  self-conscious  God-creator,  all  these  are  already  uncon-
scious adherents  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious.


INTRODUCTORY.  29

The  task  of  an  author  of  the  same  way  of  thinking,  when
addressing  sympathetic  readers,  can  have  no  other  object
than  to  show  what  consequences  flow  from  the  principles
they  have  adopted,  and  to  confirm  them  in  their  opinions
by  the  most  cogent  reasoning.

Schopenhauer  acknowledges  as  metaphysical  principle
only  the  Will,  whilst  Ideation  is, according  to  him,  a
cerebral  product  in  a  materialistic  sense — an  assertion  not
made  clearer  by  the  explanation  that  the  matter  of  the
brain  is  merely  the  visibility  of  a  (blind,  that  is  unthink-
ing) Will. The  Will,  the  sole  metaphysical  principle  of
Schopenhauer,  is  therefore,  of  course,  an  unconscious  Will.
Thought,  on  the  other  hand,  which  with  him  is  only  the
phenomenon  of  a  metaphysical  principle,  and  therefore,  as
thought,  not  itself  metaphysical,  can,  even  where it is
unconscious,  never  be  comparable  with  the  unconscious
Idea  of  Schelling,  which  I  myself  place  by  the  side  of
unconscious  Will,  as  metaphysical  principle  of  equal  value.
Ikit  also,  apart  from  this  distinction  of  the  metaphysical
and  phenomenal,  the  "  unconscious  rumination,"  of  which
Schopenhauer  speaks  in  two  passages,  which  are  in  per-
fect accord  (W.  a.  W.  u.  V.  3,  Auil.  ii.  S.  148,  and  Parerga-
2  Aufl.  S.  59),  and which  he assigns to the interim-  of
the  brain,  refers  indeed  only  to  the  obscure  and  confused
ideas  of Leibniz  and  Kant — ideas  which  are  too  weakly
illuminated by  the light  of  consciousness  to stand out
clearly,  which  are thus merely  below the threshold  of
distinct  consciousness, and are differentiated from the
clearly conscious ideas  only  in  degree (not essentially).
Schopenhauer  thus  gets  no  nearer  the  true  conception  of
the absolutely  unconscious  idea in these two apereus
(which  for  the  rest  have  had  no  iniluenee  on  his  philo-
sophy)  than in another place,  where he speaks <  f  the
separate consciousness of subordinate norve-ceiitivs in
the  organism  (YY.  a.  W.  u.  V.,  ii.  291  ). An  opening  f<>r
the  true,  absolutely  unconscious  idea  is  certainly  ali
by the system of Schopenhauer,  but only  at :h  ■ p<>!::i


30  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

where  it  becomes  faithless  to  itself  and  self-contradictory,
when  the  Idea,  which  is  originally  only  another  kind  of
intuition  of  the  cerebral  intellect,  becomes  a  metaphy-
sical entity,  preceding  and  conditioning  real  individuation
(cf.  the  essay,  "  Ueber  die  nothwendige  Umbildung  der
Schopenhauer'schen  Philosophie  aus  ihrem  Grundprincip
heraus,"  in  my  "  Gesammelte  philosophische  Abhand-
lungen,"  No.  III.,  Berlin,  C.  Duncker,  1872).  Schopen-
hauer himself,  however,  shows  no  apprehension  of  this,
so  that,  for  example,  it  does  not  occur  to  him  to  bring
forward  the  Idea  to  explain  the  adaptation  of  means
to  ends  in  Nature,  which  rather  in  genuine  idealistic
fashion  he  regards  as  a  merely  subjective  appearance,
arising  through  the  disruption  of  the  One  Eeality  into
the  co-existence  and  succession  of  Space  and  Time,
whereby  essential  unity  is  revealed  in  the  form  of
a  teleological  relation  essentially  non-existent,  so  that
it  would  be  to  turn  things  upside  down  to  seek  Reason
in  the  purposive  activity  of  Nature.  But  in  this
he  altogether  fails  to  perceive  that  the  unconscious  Will
of  Nature  co  ipso  presupposes  an  unconscious  Idea  as  goal,
content,  or  object  of  itself,  without  which  it  would  be
empty,  indefinite,  and  objectless.  Accordingly,  in  the
acute  and  instructive  observations  on  instinct,  sexual
love,  life  of  the  species,  &c,  the  unconscious  Will  com-
ports itself  precisely  as  if  it  were  bound  up  with  uncon-
scious representation,  without  Schopenhauer  knowing  or
admitting  it.  To  be  sure  Schopenhauer,  who  as  all  philo-
sophers and  human  nature  generally  in  mature  life  im-
perceptibly gravitated  more  and  more  from  Idealism
to  Realism,  secretly  felt  a  certain  compulsion  to  take  the
step  which  Schelling  long  ago  had  taken  beyond  Fichte,
the  step  from  subjective  to  objective  Idealism  ;  but  he
himself  could  not  summon  up  suflicient  courage  to  disavow
decidedly  the  standpoint  of  his  youth  (in  particular,  the
first  book  of  his  chief  work),  and  left  this  task  to  his  dis-
ciples (Frauenstiidt,  Bahnsen). Accordingly  we  only  find


INTRODUCTORY.  31

a  few  hints,  which,  carried  further,  would  have  changed
the  whole  character  of  his  system,  e.g.,  the  passage
"Parerga,"  2d  edit.  ii.  291  (to  which  Freiherr  du  Prel
has  referred  in  Cotba's  "  Deutscher  Vierteljahrsschrift,"
No.  129),  where  he  suggests  the  possibility,  that  after
death  a  higher  form  of  the  incognitive  consciousness  might
be  added  to  the  "  intrinsically  incognitive  Will,"  devoid
of  the  contrast  of  subject  and  object.  I3ut  now  every
consciousness  is  co  ipso  consciousness  of  an  object  with
more  or  less  clearly  conscious  reference  to  the  correlative
notion  of  subject,  therefore  a  consciousness  in  which  this
opposition  ceases  is  inconceivable ;  but  an  unconscious
cognition  without  this  object  were  conceivable,  and
Schopenhauer  very  nearly  approached  it  in  his  descrip-
tion of  the  intuitive  idea  (W.  a.  W.  u.  V.,  i.  §  34  ;  cf.  also
my  above-named  essay).  It  must  therefore  be  granted
that  Schopenhauer  divined  the  truth,  but  gave  it  a  faulty
expression,  and  thereby  was  prevented  from  inserting
this  conception  in  his  system  in  its  only  possible  place.
His  odious  prejudice  against  Schelling  alone  hindered  him
from  finding  in  that  writer  the  very  thing  he  wanted,  and
that  which  in  the  passage  alluded  to  he  vainly  struggles
to  obtain.

Only  after  these  citations  from  European  philosophers
do  I  venture  to  refer  to  the  Oriental  philosophy,  parti-
cularly that  of  the  Yedas.  As  it  is  characteristic  of  the
Oriental  mind  to  be  less  systematic  in  its  thinking  but
quicker  in  divining  the  occult,  and  to  be  more  open  to  the
slight  whispers  of  genius,  there  are  in  the  philosophical
systems  of  the  Hindoos  and  the  Chinese  yet  unlifted
treasures,  in  which  we  are  often  surprised  to  find  anti-
cipated the  results  of  many  thousand  years  of  Western
development.  In  the  philosophy  of  the  Vcdas  the
Absolute  is  called  llrahma,  and  has  the  three  attributes
Sat  (being,  substantiality),  ("it  (absolute  unconscious
knowledge),  and  Amanda  (intellectual  rapture).  As
absolute  Knowinjness.  Drahma  is  called  C'aitanja  (S  ':.


32  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

penhauer's  eternal  Eye  of  the  world,  absolute  subject  of
knowledge,  at  the  same  time  intelligible  Ego  of  all  per-
cipient individuals,  Kutasta-Giva  Saksin).  The  identity
of  the  real  and  the  ideal  is  most  emphatically  asserted  ;
for  if  the  ideal  were  not  the  real,  it  would  be  unreal,  and
if  the  real  were  not  the  ideal,  it  would  be  degraded  to
dead  matter  without  sustaining  i'orce  (Graul,  Tamulische
Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  p.  78,  No.  141).  "There  is  no  dis-
tinction of  knowcr,  knowledge,  and  knowable  in  the  highest
mind,  (rather)  this  (Brahma)  is  illuminated  by  itself  in
virtue  of  its  own  essence,  which  is  spirit  and  bliss "
(ibid.,  p.  188,  No.  40).  "Teacher. — That  purely  spiritual
C'aitanja  perceives  all  bodies.  Since,  however,  he  is  not
himself  body,  he  is  also  perceived  in  nothing.  Pupil, —
If  he,  although  knowledge,  is  yet  cognised  by  nothing,
how  can  he  be  knowledge  ?  Teacher. — The  syrup-juice
also  does  not  bring  itself  into  experience,  yet  in  virtue
of  the  senses  different  from  that  juice  which  perceive  it,
we  say  that  it  is  of  a  sweet  nature.  So  one  cannot  doubt
that  knowledge  belongs  to  the  self  which  perceives  all
things  (as  its  substance).  Pupil. — Is  then  Brahma  a
somewhat  that  is  perceived  or  that  is  not  perceived  ?
Teacher. — Neither.  That  which  lies  beyond  (above  these
two  categories)  (substantial  knowledge),  that  is  Brahma.
Pupil. — How  then  can  we  perceive  it  ?  Tectclier. —
That  is  just  as  if  somebody  should  say :  Have  I  speech
or  not  ?  Although  thy  essence  be  knouiedge,  dost  thou
yet  ask  :  How  is  knowledge  ?  Art  thou  not  ashamed  ?  "
(ibid.,  p.  148,  No.  2).  Absolute  knowledge  is,  ac-
cording to  this,  neither  conscious  of  itself  (because
then  without  distinction  of  subject  and  object),  nor
immediately  conscious  to  another,  because  it  lies  be-
yond the  sphere  of  the  directly  discernible.  Still  it  is
existentially  cognisable  by  us,  because  in  all  knowledge
it  is  that  which  knows,  in  all  perception  that  which
perceives,  and  is  even  intrinsically  cognoscible,  if  only
negatively  (according  to  the  foregoing  examination),  as


INTRODUCTORY.  33

un-conscious  and  un-limited  knowledge.  The  Unconscious
has,  in  fact,  been'as  clearly  and  exactly  characterised  in  this
old  Indian  book  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy  (Panrfadasa-
prakarana)  as  by  any  of  the  latest  European  thinkers.

Eeturning  now  to  the  latter,  we  may  cite  Herbart,
who  understands  by  "  non-conscious  ideas "  such  "  as
are  in  consciousness  without  our  being  aware  of  them "
(Werke,  v.  p.  342),  i.e.,  without  our  "  observing  them  to
be  ours  and  referring  them  to  the  Ego,"  or,  in  other
words,  without  connecting  them  with  self-consciousness.
There  is  no  danger  of  this  conception  being  confounded
with  the  true  Unconscious ;  but  there  is  another  notion
of  Herbart's  which  must  be  noticed  on  account  of  the
application  of  it  by  Fechner,  viz.,  that  "  of  ideas  below
the  threshold  of  consciousness,"  which  only  stand  for  an
endeavour  after  representation  more  or  less  removed  from
realisation,  but  themselves  are  "  by  no  means  actual  re-
presentation," rather  signify  for  consciousness  less  than
nothing,  "  an  impossible  quantity "  (Herbart,  Works,  v.
PP-  339~342)-  Herbart  arrives  at  this  rather  puzzling
conception  through  his  desire  to  retain,  in  the  spirit
of  Leibniz,  a  gradual  continuity  in  the  passage  from
actual  ideas  to  the  slumbering  ideas  of  memory,  and
conversely,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  a  reciprocal
action  of  these  slumbering  ideas,  without  condescending
to  a  materialistic  mode  of  explanation  of  these  processes,
in  the  sense  of  seeing  in  them  only  material  cerebral
processes  of  a  strength  insufficient  for  excitation  of  con-
sciousness.

Put  now,  at  the  present  stage  of  science,  it  is  not
difficult  to  see  that  the  so-called  slumbering  ideas  of
memory  are  not  ideas  in  acta,  in  activity,  but  merely
dispositions  of  the,  brain  facilitating  the  revival  of  ideas.
As  a  string,  when  caused  to  sound  by  aerial  vibrations,
always  yields  the  same  note,  the  note  A  or  C,  for  instance,
if  it  be  attuned  to  A  or  C;  so  does  one  or  another  idea
arise  more  easily  in  the  brain,  according  as  the  distribution
vol.  1.  c


34  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  tension  of  the  cerebral  molecules  induces  a  more
ready  response  with  one  or  another  kind  of  vibrations
on  an  appropriate  stimulus.  And  just  as  the  string
does  not  respond  merely  to  homologous  vibrations,  but
also  to  those  which  only  slightly  differ  from  or  are
simply  related  to  its  own ;  so  the  vibrations  of  the  pre-
disposed molecules  of  a  cerebral  cell  are  not  aroused
merely  by  one  kind  of  vibratory  impulse,  but  also  by
stimuli  slightly  disproportional  or  harmonically  related
to  the  predisposition  (a  connection  discernible  in  the  laws
of  association  of  ideas).  What  tuning  is  to  the  string,  is
the  permanent  change,  which  a  vivid  idea  leaves  behind  it
in  distribution  and  tension  of  the  molecules,  to  the  brain.
Although  these  cerebral  predispositions  are  of  the  highest
importance,  since  the  quality  of  the  feeling  with  which  the
mind  reacts  depends  on  the  form  of  the  brain- waves,  (on
the  one  hand  all  memory  depending  on  them,  and  on  the
other  the  character  of  the  individual  being  essentially
conditioned  by  the  sum  of  the  various  inherited  predis-
positions— cf.  Chap.  C.  x.),  still  such  an  arrangement  of
passive  material  molecules,  favouring  the  genesis  of  certain
ideas,  cannot  be  termed  Ideation,  albeit  it  may,  according
to  circumstances,  co-operate  as  condition  in  the  production
of  an  idea,  and,  indeed,  of  a  conscious  idea.  But  now,  as
the  endless  continuance  of  vibrations  once  excited  in  the
brain  is  out  of  the  question,  (for  the  powerful  resistances
there  encountered  must  put  an  end  to  every  movement
in  a  finite,  and  indeed  tolerably  brief  time),  Herbart's
unconscious  condition  of  the  idea  could  only  obtain
within  the  limits,  which  are  fixed  on  the  one  hand  by  the
cessation  of  movement,  and  on  the  other  by  the  cessation
of  conscious  representation  with  unarrested  movement  of
the  cerebral  vibrations,  supposing  the  two  limits  not  to
coincide.  The  question  then  is:  (i.)  Do  all  degrees  of
intensity  of  cerebral  vibrations  give  rise  to  ideation,  or
does  ideation  only  commence  when  a  certain  degree  of
intensity  is  reached  ?  and  (2.)  Is  a  conscious  mental  state


INTRODUCTORY.  35

excited  by  cerebral  vibrations  of  any  intensity,  or  only
by  those  of  a  certain  strength  ?

Fechner  has  approached  these  questions  in  his  cele-
brated work  "  Psychophysik."  His  train  of  thought  is  as
follows :  It  is  not  every  sensuous  stimulus  that  causes
sensation,  but  only  a  stimulus  of  a  certain  amount,  which
is  called  the  threshold  of  stimulation  ;  e.g.,  a  sounding  bell
is  heard  only  at  a  certain  distance.  If  several  homogeneous
stimuli,  imperceptible  when  taken  singly,  are  added  to-
gether, there  arises  conscious  sensation,  as  in  the  case  of
several  distant  bells  sounding  simultaneously  which  would
not  be  separately  heard,  or  the  rustling  of  the  leaves  in
the  forest.  It  might  be  suggested  that  the  stimulus
below  the  threshold  produces  no  sensation,  for  the  simple
reason  that  it  is  not  strong  enough  to  overcome  the  re-
sistance offered  in  the  sense-organ  and  nerves  as  far  as  the
central  organ,  but  that  the  mind  reacts  with  the  appro-
priate sensation  on  the  smallest  stimulus  when  the  latter
has  reached  the  centre  itself.  This  assumption  alone,
however,  is  not  sufficient,  since  it  does  not  fit  the  case
of  differential  sensation.  For  homogeneous  stimuli,  when
varying  in  intensity,  arouse  different  sensations  ;  but  here,
too,  the  variations  must  exceed  a  certain  degree  (the
threshold  of  differential  stimulation),  if  the  sensations  are
to  be  perceived  as  different.  Here  clearly  the  resistances
of  the  nerve-iibres  cannot  be  made  responsible  for  the
phenomenon,  since  each  of  the  sensations  is  large  enough
to  overcome  them.  On  the  other  hand,  different  principles
cannot  bo  sot  up  for  the  threshold  of  simple  stimulation
and  the  threshold  of  differential  stimulation,  since  the
first  is  reducible  to  the  second  case,  when  in  the  latter
one  stimulus  —  0.  Consequently  there  only  remains  the
assumption  that  the  vibrations  at  the  centre  must  exceed
a  certain  degree  before  feeling  ensues.  What  here
holds  good  for  sensation  holds  of  course  for  every  other
mental  slat'1,  and  thus  the  second  question  is  decided.
It remains  to ascertain whether the  stimuli  below the


36  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

threshold  cause  the  mind  to  react  at  all,  the  result  being
unconscious  sensation  or  idea,  or  whether  the  mind's  re-
action only  begins  at  the  threshold.

Let  us  hear  Fechner  further.  The  so-called  Law  of
Weber  runs,  "  Constant  differences  in  the  intensities  of
homogeneous  sensations  correspond  to  constant  quotients
of  their  respective  stimuli ;  "  and  the  highly  ingenious  for-
mula hence  derived  by  Fechner  is  y  —  h  log  j,  where  y  is

the  sensation  following  on  the  stimulus  /3,  b  the  threshold
of  stimulation,  i.e.,  the  value  of  the  stimulus,  which
being  exceeded  y  exceeds  the  value  0,  and  k  is  a  con-
stant, which  contains  the  relation  of  the  measuring  units
of  ft  and  y.  (J.  J.  Miiller  gives  a  very  interesting  ideo-
logical deduction  of  this  formula  in  the  "  Proceedings  of
the  Eoyal  Academy  of  Sciences  of  Saxony,"  12th  De-
cember 1870,  where  he  shows  that  only  by  assuming  this
relation  between  stimulus  and  sensation  is  "  the  difference
of  sensation  conditioned  by  diversity  of  stimuli  indepen-
dent of  the  excitability,  and  the  difference  of  sensation
conditioned  by  diversity  of  excitability  independent  of  the
stimulus,"  two  conditions  on  which  alone  consciousness  is
in  a  position  to  keep  asunder,  and  thereby  to  recognise,  the
effects  due  to  the  stimuli  and  the  excitability  respectively.)
If  now  (3  becomes  smaller  than  b,  i.e.,  the  intensity  less
than  the  threshold- value  of  the  stimulus,  y  becomes  nega-
tive, and  sinks  as  much  below  0,  as  (3  sinks  below  b  (with
/3=0  y  is  =z  — oc).

These  negative  ys  now  Fechner  calls  "  unconscious
sensations,"  with  the  full  consciousness,  however,  of  hav-
ing only  employed  a  license  of  speech,  to  signify  that  the
sensation  y  is  the  more  removed  from  reality  the  further
y  sinks  below  0,  i.e.,  that  an  ever  greater  increment  of
stimulation  is  required  in  order  first  to  restore  the  zero
value  of  y,  and  then  to  recall  the  latter  to  the  limit  of
reality.  The  negative  sign  before  y  accordingly  signifies
here  (as  elsewhere  often  the  imaginary)  the  insolubility


INTRODUCTORY.  37

of  the  problem,  from  the  given  quantity  of  a  stimulus  to
calculate  a  sensation.

The  real  meaning  of  the  negative  sign,  Fechner  very
properly  says,  can  only  be  disclosed  by  the  comparison  of
the  rational  calculation  with  the  explained  facts.  Accord-
ingly he  dismisses  the  common  illustration  of  heat  and
cold  as  not  to  the  point,  and  discountenances  the  alge-
braic summation  of  positive  and  negative  <y's,  as  being
no  less  inadmissible  than  operating  with  positive  and
negative  pieces  of  surface  in  calculating  areas  by  means
of  rectangular  co-ordinates.

"  Mathematically  the  opposition  of  the  signs  can  just
as  well  be  referred  to  the  contrast  of  reality  and  non-
reality,  as  of  increment  and  decrement  or  directions.  In
the  system  of  polar  co-ordinates  it  signifies  the  opposi-
tion of  reality  and  non-reality  of  a  line,  but  in  such  a
way  that  greater  negative  values  mean  a  greater  distance
from  reality  than  smaller  ones.  There  cannot  be  the
least  objection  to  transfer  to  sensation  as  function  of
a  stimulus  that  which  is  valid  for  the  radius  vector  as
function  of  an  angle  "  (Psychophysik,  ii.  p.  40).  What
holds  good  here  for  the  algebraic  expression  of  the  func-
tion, holds,  of  course,  also  for  its  geometrical  illustration
by  a  curve,  where  again  the  visible  connection  of  the
positive  and  negative  part  might  warp  the  judgment.  It
is  clear  that  it  is  difficult  to  find  a  significant  expression  for
the  negative  y's  which  would  not  give  rise  to  misunder-
standing. Perhaps  the  best  course  would  be  to  say,  without
more  ado,  "  unreal  sensation."  However,  Fechner  is  not  to
be  reproached  tor  the  arbitrary  use  of  the  phrase  '•uncon-
scious sensation,"  since  he  is  not  aware  of,  or  at  any
rate  dors  not  recognise,  our  positive  signification  of  the
Unconscious.  What  is  worse  is  that  Fechner  was  after-
wards so  inconsequent  as  to  allow  himself'  to  bo  ded  ive  1
by  the  continuity  of  the  geometrical  curves  below  the,
threshold,  and  to  speak  of  a  real  connection  of  the  con-
sciousnesses of  dill'erent  individuals  below  the  threshold.


38  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

I  have  entered  into  this  matter  at  such  length,  because
I  desired  to  protect  myself  against  any  confusion  of  my
view  of  the  Unconscious  with  Fechner's  conception  of
unconscious  sensation,  and  to  pay  at  the  same  time  my
tribute  of  respect  to  his  excellent  work.  I  also  wished
to  avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  of  making  the  reader
acquainted  with  the  conception  of  the  Threshold,  which
is  of  importance  in  very  dissimilar  departments  of  science,
and  which  we,  too,  cannot  dispense  with  in  our  inquiries.
That  for  the  rest  the  stimulation  of  the  brain  must  be  of
a  certain  intensity,  in  order  to  compel  the  mind  to  react
at  all,  is  teleologically  quite  comprehensible ;  for  what
would  become  of  us  poor  wretches,  if  we  were  obliged
continually  to  react  on  the  infinite  quantity  of  infinitely
small  stimuli,  which  incessantly  play  around  us  ?  But  if
the  mind  once  reacts  on  a  cerebral  stimulus,  consciousness
is  also  co  epso  given,  as  will  be  shown  in  Chap.  C.  iii.  In
that  case  these  reactions  can  no  longer  remain  unconscious.
If  hereupon  any  one  should  have  recourse  to  the  theory
of  the  infinitely  little  consciousness,  he  would  find  that
theory  refuted  by  experiments,  showing  that  conscious
sensation  decreases  continuously  down  to  the  zero  point,
to  which  the  threshold  of  stimulation  corresponds,  thus,
in  fact,  successively  possessing  the  infinitely  small  values
above  the  threshold,  where  an  infinitely  little  consciousness
is  actually  found,  but  at  the  threshold  itself  becoming
0,  i.e.,  absolutely  ceasing.  I  refer  for  confirmation  to
Fechner's  work.

The  conception  of  the  Unconscious  lias  not  as  yet  been
much  introduced  into  Natural  Science.  An  honourable
exception  to  the  indifference  of  scientific  men  is  afforded
by  the  well-known  physiologist  Carus,  whose  works
"  Psyche  "  and  "  Physis  "  are  substantially  an  investiga-
tion of  the  Unconscious  in  its  relations  to  corporeal  and
mental  life.  How  far  ho  has  succeeded  in  his  attempt,
and  how  much  I  have  borrowed  from  him  in  my  own
work,  I  leave  to  the  judgment  of  the  reader. I  only


INTRODUCTORY.  39

add,  that  the  idea  of  the  Unconscious  is  purely  pre-
sented by  this  writer,  free  from  every  infinitely  little  con-
sciousness. Besides  the  works  of  Carus,  the  notion  of
the  Unconscious  has  obtained  recognition  in  a  few  special
disquisitions,  a  recognition,  however,  seldom  extending
beyond  the  sphere  of  the  particular  inquiry.  Thus,  e.g.,
1'erty,  in  his  book  "  Ueber  das  Seelenleben  der  Thiere  "
(Leipzig  and  Heidelberg,  1865),  finds  himself  drawn  on
to  a  derivation  of  instinct  from  unconscious  movements,
and  likewise  Wundt,  in  his  "  Beitriige  zur  Theorie  der
Sinneswahrnehmung"  (Leipzig  and  Heidelberg,  1862;  also
in  Henle's  and  Pfeuffer's  "  Zeitschr.  f.  ration.  Medicin,"
1858  and  1859),  admits  the  necessity  of  referring  the
origin  of  sensuous  perception  and  of  consciousness  in
general  to  unconscious  logical  processes,  "  since  the  pro-
cesses of  perception  are  of  an  unconscious  nature,  and
only  their  results  are  wont  to  appear  in  consciousness  "
(ibid,  p.  436).

"  The  suggestion  of  the  logical  character  of  the  processes
of  perception,"  he  says,  "  is  a  hypothesis  of  no  lower  order
than  any  other  assumption  which  we  make  in  reference  to
the  ground  of  natural  phenomena  ;  it  possesses  the  essen-
tial requirement  of  every  well-grounded  theory,  that  it  be
at  once  the  simplest  and  most  appropriate  expression  under
which  the  facts  of  observation  can  be  subsumed  "  (p.  437).
"  If  the  first  act  of  apprehension,  which  yet  belongs  to  the
sphere  of  the  unconscious  life,  is  already  a  process  of  in-
ference, the  law  of  logical  development  is  thereby  shown  to
hold  even  for  this  unconscious  life  ;  it  is  proved  that  there
is  not  merely  a  conscious,  but  also  an  unconscious  thinking.
We  believe  we  have  hereby  completely  proved  that  the.
assumption  of  unconscious  logical  processes  is  not  merely
competent  to  explain  the  results  of  the  processes  of  percep-
tion, but  that  it  in  fact  also  correctly  declare*  the  real  nature
of  these  processes,  although  the  proeo.-ses  themselves  are  not
accessible  to  immediate  observation"  (p.  438).  "Wundt
is  well  aware  that  the  expression  '  unconscious  inference


40  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

is  an  improper  one  ;  "  only  when  translated  into  conscious
life  does  the  psychical  process  of  perception  take  the  form
of  inference  "(p.  1 69).  The  unconsciously  logical  processes
are  carried  on  "  with  a  certainty  and  regularity "  which
would  be  impossible  in  conscious  inference,  where  there
exists  the  possibility  of  error  (p.  1 69).  "  Our  mind  is
so  happily  designed  that  it  prepares  for  us  the  most
important  foundations  of  cognition,  whilst  we  have  not
the  slightest  apprehension  of  the  modus  operandi.  This
unconscious  soul,  like  a  benevolent  stranger,  works  and
makes  provision  for  onr  benefit,  pouring  only  the  mature
fruits  into  our  laps"  (p.  375).

Helmholtz  adopts  this  view  in  essentials,  although,
more  cautious  than  Wundt,  he  occupies  himself  solely  with
the  external  aspect  of  the  matter.  At  all  events,  he  admits
this  much  :  "  We  must  diverge  somewhat  from  the  beaten
track  of  psychological  analysis,  in  order  to  satisfy  our-
selves, that  we  have  here  to  do  with  the  same  sort  of
mental  activity  that  is  operative  in  inferences  commonly
so  called"  (Popular  Scientific  Lectures,  ii.  p.  92).  He
finds  the  difference  to  consist  only  in  the  external  cir-
cumstance, that  conscious  conclusions  are  wrought  out  by
means  of  words  (which  does  not  meet  the  case  of  animals
and  the  deaf  and  dumb),  whilst  the  unconscious  inferences
or  inductions  have  only  to  do  with  sensations,  images  of
memory,  and  intuitions  (where  it  is  nut  obvious  why  the
latter  should  "  never"  be  "  expressible  in  the  usual  form
of  a  logically  analysed  inference  ").  Helmholtz  deserves
especial  praise  for  expressly  pointing  to  the  fact  that  con-
scious inferences,  after  the  requisite  material  of  repre-
sentation has  been  fully  supplied  and  elaborated,  thrust
themselves  upon  us  precisely  like  unconscious  inferences,
"without  any  exertion  on  our  part"  (i.e.,  on  the  part  of
our  own  consciousness),  with  all  the  energy  of  an  external
natural  force  (p.  95).  Independently  of  the  aforemen-
tioned, Zollner  also  found  himself  driven  to  the  assumption
of unconscious  inferences for  an explanation of those


INTRODUCTORY.  41

pseudoscopic  phenomena  which  defy  a  merely  physiological
explanation.  (Cf.  Poggendorf's  Annalen,  1  860,  vol.  ex.  p.
500  ff.,  and  his  recent  work,  "  On  the  Nature  of  Comets ;
Contributions  to  the  History  and  Theory  of  Knowledge,"
2d  ed.,  Leipzig,  1872.)  Further,  we  are  vividly  reminded
of  Wundt's  unconscious  soul,  which  works  for  us  like
another  being,  when  Bastian  begins  his  "  Contributions  to
Comparative  Psychology"  (Berlin,  1868)  with  the  words
(p.  1 ),  "  That  it  is  not  ice  who  think,  but  that  it  thinks  in
us,  is  clear  to  him  who  is  wont  to  pay  attention  to  the
internal  processes."  This  "  it  "  lies,  however,  as  appears
from  pp.  120,  121,  in  particular,  in  the  Unconscious.
However,  this  investigator  does  not  attempt  to  do  more
than  throw  out  some  rather  vague  suggestions.

In  the  current  treatment  of  History,  likewise,  there  are
indications  that  the  achievements  of  Schelling  and  Hegel
(of  which  we  shall  speak  in  Chap.  B.  x.)  have  not  yet
been  quite  forgotten  at  the  present  day.  Thus  Freitag
says,  in  the  preface  to  the  first  volume  of  his  "  Bilder  aus
der  deutschen  A^ergangenlieit,"  5th  ed.,  vol.  i.  pp.  23,  24:
"  All  great  creations  of  popular  force, — ancestral  religion,
custom,  law,  polity, — are  to  us  no  longer  the  outcome  of
individual  effort ;  they  are  organic  products  of  a  higher  life,
which  in  every  ago  only  attains  manifestation  through  the
medium  of  the  individual,  and  in  all  ages  gathers  up  into
itself  the  spiritual  wealth  of  individuals  into  a  mighty
whole.  .  .  .  Thus  one  may  speak,  without  intending
anything  mystical,  of  a  national  soul.  .  .  .  Put  no  loivjer
conscious,  not  so  purposive  (?)  and  rational  as  the  volition
<»('  the  individual  man,  is  this  life  of  the  people.  All  thai
is  free  and  rational  in  history  is  the  achievement  of  in-
dividuals ;  the  national  energy  works  untiringly  with  tin1
dark  compulsion  of  a  primitive  -power,  and  its  spiritual
productivity  sometimes  corresponds  in  a  surprising  man-
ner to  the  formative  2:>roccsses  of  the  silenfh/  creatm
forces  of  nature,  which  urge  stem,  leaves,  and  blossom  ui;t
of  the  seed-grain  uf  the  plant." It  is  the  same  thought


42  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

carried  further,  that  underlies  the  works  of  Lazarus  on
"  Volkerpsychologie  "  (cf.  my  essay,  "  Ueber  das  Wesen
des  Gesammtgeistes,"  in  the  "  Gesammelte  philosophische
Abhandlungen,"  Xo.  v.)

In  ^Esthetics,  Carriere  in  particular  has  laid  stress  on
the  importance  of  unconscious  mental  activity,  and,  sup-
porting himself  on  Schelling,  shows  the  interposition  of
conscious  and  unconscious  mental  activity  to  be  indis-
pensable for  every  artistic  achievement.  An  interesting
contribution  to  the  Unconscious  in  ^Esthetics  is  made  by
llotscher  in  an  essay  on  the  Demonic  (in  his  "  Dramatur-
gische  und  asthetische  Abhandlungen").  Of  the  various
ways  in  which  the  conception  of  the  Unconscious  has
been  turned  to  account  since  the  appearance  of  the  first
edition  of  the  present  work,  no  notice  can,  of  course,  be
taken  here.


( 43 )


II.

HOW  DO  WE  COME  TO  ASSUME  AN  AIM  IN  NATURE  ?

ONE  of  the  most  important  and  familiar  manifestations
of  the  Unconscious  is  Instinct,  and  the  conception  of
Instinct  rests  on  that  of  Purpose.  An  examination  of
the  latter  is  therefore  indispensable  to  our  inquiry,  and
as  it  does  not  well  fit  into  Section  A.,  I  have  relegated
it  to  the  Introduction.  It  is  possible  that  the  ensuing
treatment  will  incur  the  reproach  of  aridity  ;  and  any
one  with  an  aversion  for  discussions  involving  calculations
of  probability  may,  if  already  convinced  of  the  validity
of  the  assumption  of  an  Aim  in  Nature,  pass  over  the
present  chapter.  But  I  cannot  refrain  from  adding  that
the  way  in  which  this  important  problem  is  here  resolved,
at  least' on  its  formal  side,  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  both  novel
and  also  the  only  possible  one.

The  notion  of  Design  has  played  a  highly  important
part  in  the  speculations  of  many  great  thinkers,  and  has
formed  the  foundation  of  a  considerable  portion  of  their
systems  ;  as  in  the  case  of  Aristotle  and  Leibniz.  Kant
was,  of  course,  obliged  to  deny  its  reality  outside  conscious
thought,  as  he  did  not  admit  the  reality  of  time  (cf.
Trendelenburg,  "  Logische  Untersuchungen,"  chap.  viii.  5).
Modern  Materialism  likewise  denies  its  reality,  because
it  refuses  to  admit  the  existence  of  mind  apart  from  an
animal  brain.  In  our  modern  physical  science  the  notion
of  Design,  chiefly  through  the  inlluenee  of  Hanm,  has
rightly  fallen  into  discredit,  because  it  had  so  often  served
as  the  convenient  resource'  of  indolent  reasoners  to  avoid
the  arduous  search  after  efficient  causes,  and  because  in


44  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  part  of  natural  science  concerned  with  matter  alone,
Design  as  a  spiritual  cause  must  necessarily  be  excluded.
Spinoza  was  completely  blinded  to  the  fact  of  Purpose  in
Nature,  because  he  believed  final  causality  to  be  in  con-
tradiction with  logical  necessity,  whereas  it  is  in  truth
identical  with  it  (Chap.  C.  xv.  3).  Darwinism  denies
adaptation  in  Nature,  not  as  fact,  it  is  true,  but  as  principle,
and  thinks  itself  able  to  comprehend  the  fact  as  result  of
mindless  causality ;  as  if  Causality  itself  were  anything
more  than  a  logical  necessity,  discernible  by  us '  only  as
fact  (not  on  the  side  of  the  internal  principle),  and  as  if
the  adaptation,  actually  manifested  as  result  at  the  end
of  a  series  of  events,  must  not  have  been  from  the  very
first  the  prius  of  these  adjustments  as  plan  or  principle  !
But  if,  on  the  one  hand,  so  great  and  honest  a  spirit  as
Spinoza  could  look  in  Nature's  face  and  deny  Design,  if,
on  the  other  hand,  Purpose  seems  to  others  to  play  a
part  so  important,  and  even  the  freethinking  Voltaire
does  not  venture  to  explain  away  the  evidence  of  an
Aim  in  Nature,  however  inconvenient  and  incompatible
with  the  rest  of  his  opinions  its  admission  might  be,  there
must  indeed  be  something  very  peculiar  about  the  idea.

The  notion  of  a  purposed  End  is  derived  in  the  first
instance  from  the  experience  of  our  own  conscious  mental
activity.  My  end  is  a  future  event  imagined  and  willed
by  me,  the  realisation  of  which  I  am  not  in  a  position  to
bring  about  directly,  but  only  through  a  chain  of  causa-
tion (means).  If  I  do  not  imagine  the  future  occurrence,
it  does  not  exist  for  me ;  if  I  do  not  will  it,  I  do  not
purpose  it ;  it  is  indifferent  or  repugnant  to  me.  If  I
can  directly  realise  it,  the  causal  link,  the  means,  falls
away,  and  along  with  it  disappears  also  the  notion  of
a  designed  end  (which  is  only  the  term  of  a  relation
the  other  member  of  which  is  the  concept,  means),  for
action  then  follows  immediately  upon  volition.  When  I
see  that  I  am  not  able  to  realise  my  will  directly,  and
recognise  the means  as efficient cause of  the end, the


INTRODUCTORY.  45

willing  of  the  end  becomes  to  me  a  motive,  i.e.,  efficient
cause  for  the  willing  of  the  means ;  this  in  its  turn
becomes  efficient  cause  for  the  realisation  of  the  means
through  my  act,  and  the  realised  means  becomes  efficient
cause  of  the  realisation  of  the  end.  Thus  we  have  a
triple  causality  with  the  four  terms :  Willing  of  the  end,
willing  of  the  means,  realising  of  the  means,  realising  of
the  end.  Only  in  rare  cases  is  all  this  confined  to  the
purely  subjective  mental  sphere,  e.g.,  in  the  composition
of  a  poem,  the  elaboration  in  the  mind  of  any  artistic
conception,  or  other  mental  effort.  More  commonly  we
find  three  of  the  four  different  modes  of  causality  imme-
diately presented,  namely,  causality  between  mental  and
mental  event  (willing  of  the  end,  willing  of  the  means),
mental  and  material  event  (willing  and  realisation  of  the
means),  and  between  material  and  material  event  (means
and  end).  The  fourth  kind  of  causality  too,  that  between
material  and  mental  event,  also  often  occurs  ;  it  lies  then,
however,  before  the  beginning  of  our  reflection  in  the
motivation  of  the  willing  of  the  end  through  impressions
of  sense.  It  is,  therefore,  evident  that  the  union  of  willed
and  realised  end,  or  final  causation,  is  by  no  means  some-
thing existing  by  the  side  of  or  even  despite  causality,
but  that  it  is  only  a  particular  combination  of  different
kinds  of  causality,  such  that  the  first  and  last  terms  are
identical,  only  the  one  ideal  and  the  other  real,  the  one
presented  in  the  willed  idea,  the  other  in  reality.  Far
from  destroying  the  exceptionless  charaeter  of  the  law  of
causation,  it  rather  prcsujyoscs  it,  and  that  too  not  only
between  matter  and  matter,  but  also  between  mind  and
matter,  and  mind  and  mind.  It  denies  freedom  to  the
single  empirical  mental  act,  and  brings  it  too  under  the
necessity  of  the  law  of  causality.  This  may  lie  1111'  first
word  towards  coming  to  an  understanding  with  the  oppo-
nents of  the  doctrine  of  final  causes.

Let us assume that  M  has  been observed to be an
efficient  cause  of  Z,  and  let  all  the  material  circumstances


46  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

n.n.  existing  at  the  moment  of  the  occurrence  of  M  have
been  ascertained.  Farther,  let  the  proposition  be  ad-
mitted that  M  must  have  a  sufficient  efficient  cause.
!N~ow  three  cases  are  possible :  either  the  sufficient  cause
of  M  is  contained  in  n.n.,  or  certain  other  circumstances,
but  those  material,  which  have  escaped  observation,  are
still  wanting,  or,  lastly,  the  sufficient  cause  of  M  is  not  to
be  found  on  the  material  plane,  consequently  must  be
sought  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  The  second  case  con-
tradicts the  assumption,  that  all  the  material  circum-
stances, which  immediately  preceded  the  occurrence  of
M,  are  contained  in  n.n.  If  such  a  condition  is,  strictly
speaking,  incapable  of  being  satisfied,  since  the  whole
position  of  the  system  of  the  world  would  have  to  be
taken  into  account,  yet  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  cases
are  very  rare,  where  conditions  essential  to  the  occurrence
can  lie  outside  a  well-defined  region,  and  no  unessential
circumstance  need  be  taken  note  of ;  e.g.,  the  circumstances
essential  to  the  spider's  spinning  nobody  will  look  for
outside  the  spider,  (say)  in  the  moon.  If  we  then
assume  the  probability,  that  any  material  circumstance
essential  to  the  event  has  not  been  taken  note  of,  and
therefore  not  contained  in  n.n.,  to  be  so  small  that  it
may  be  neglected,1  there  remain  only  the  two  cases,
that  the  sufficient  cause  is  contained  in  n.n.,  or  is  of  a
spiritual  nature.  That  the  one  or  the  other  case  must
occur  is  their  certainty,  i.e.,  the  sum  of  their  probabilities
is  equal  to  1  (which  signifies  certainty).  If  now  the  pro-
bability that M is caused by  n.n.  =  -  ,  then  the pro-

\ 1 Z-l;

bability  that it has a mental cause  =  1  -  ~  = — —

i  It  must  always  be  remembered,  able  for  calculation  does  the  probable

that  events  are  never  probable,  but  error,  which  every  coefficient  of  pro-

alwavs  necessary,  to  an  omniscient  bability  possesses, become  so  great

being,  and  that  it  is  only  our  ignor-  as  to  make  the  value  of  the  latter  illu-

ance  which  makes  possible  that  mi-  sory.  Otherwise,  if  the  probable  errors

certainty, which is the  foundation  in  the  statement  of  the  problem  are

of  the  calculus  of  probability. Only  confined  within  moderate  limits,  the

when  our  ignorance is  utterly  dis-  probable  error  in  the  result  in  our

proportionate  to  the  knowledge  avail-  examples  becomes  inappreciable.


INTRODUCTORY.  47

the  smaller  1  becomes,  the  larger  x  becomes,  the  more
x

-i

approaches  to  1,  i.e.,  to  certainty. The  probability

X

-  would  become  equal  to  0,  if  we  had  the  direct  proof  in

x

our  hands  that  M  is  not  caused  by  n.n.  ;  if,  for  instance,
a  case  could  be  established  where  n.n.  is  present  and  M
has  not  occurred.  This  is  certainly  impossible  with  the
whole  of  n.n.,  since  every  spiritual  cause  must  have  ma-
terial connections,  but  we  shall  often  succeed  in  eliminat-
ing at  least  one  or  more  of  the  circumstances  n.n.,  and
the  fewer  the  number  of  the  circumstances  n.n.  to  be
regarded,  which  being  present  the  event  M  at  any  time
occurs,  the  easier  becomes  the  determination  of  the  proba-
bility that  they  do  not  contain  the  sufficient  cause  of  M.
To  make  the  matter  clearer  let  us  take  an  example.
That  brooding  on  the  egg;  is  the  cause  of  the  young  bird
being  hatched  is  an  observed  fact.  The  material  circum-
stances (n.n.)  immediately  preceding  the  brooding  (M)
are  the  existence  and  the  constitution  of  the  egLr,  the
existence  and  the  bodily  constitution  of  the  bird,  and
the  temperature  of  the  place  where  the  egg  lies  ;  further
material  circumstances  are  inconceivable.  The  probability
is  in  the  highest  degree  small,  that  these  circumstances
are  sufficient  to  cause  the  cheerful  and  lively  bird  to
abandon  its  customary  and  instinctive  way  of  life  and  to
prompt  it  to  a  wearisome  brooding  over  its  eggs;  for
though  the  increased  pressure  of  blood  in  the  abdomen
may  produce  a  heightened  feeling  of  warmth,  this  is  not
diminished,  but  increased,  through  the  quiet  sitting  in
the  warm  nest  on  the  blood-hot  egizs. We already  se  ■

•  • 1  —  1

that  the  probability is  very  small,  and  '  approa

X  X

1.  If  we,  however,  put  the  question  the  other  way,  viz.,
whether  a  case  is  known  to  us  where  bird  and  egjs  ;;!•■•
the  same  and  yet  incubation  does  not  take  place,  we  aiv
met  bv  the  case  of  birds  which  have  made  their  lies:  ■ in


48  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

hot  forcing-houses  and  have  omitted  to  brood,  just  as  the
ostrich  hatches  its  eggs  only  in  the  night — in  hot  Nigritia
not  at  all.  Accordingly  of  the  circumstances  n.n.,  bird  and
eggs  are  obvious]y  not  sufficient  causes  of  the  brooding  (M),
and  there  remains  as  the  only  material  circumstance,  which
could  avail  to  make  the  cause  sufficient  or  complete,  the
temperature  of  the  nest.  No  one  will  think  it  probable
that  the  lower  temperature  is  the  direct  occasion  of  the
incubation,  consequently  for  the  particular  event  the
existence  of  a  spiritual  cause,  through  which  alone  the
ascertained  influence  of  temperature  on  the  event  can  be
thought  to  be  brought  about,  becomes  as  good  as  certain,
although  at  the  same  time  the  question  of  the  precise
nature  of  this  spiritual  cause  still  remains  open.

The  estimation  of  the  probability  is  not  always  as  easy
as  in  this  instance,  and  very  rarely  when  M  is  simple  will
it  approach  so  near  to  certainty.  In  lieu  thereof  we  are
usually  helped  by  the  circumstance  that  M,  the  observed
cause  of  Z,  for  the  most  part  is  not  simple,  but  consists
of  different  independent1  events,  Px  P2>  P3j  P4<  &c.  If  we
now,  again,  in  the  first  instance,  leave  on  one  side  the
question  whether  all  the  essential  material  circumstances
have  been  taken  into  account,  we  have  to  ascertain :

The  probability,


that  P:  has  its  sufficient  cause  in  n.n.
P,

3J  -1 •>  15  55  55


^


r*


l

ih
l

i

ih
i

2' A


i  To  ascertain  the  actual  indepen-  application,  however,  does  not  here
dence  of  the  co-operating  conditions  concern  us.  where  we  are  only  deal-
in  any  given  case  may  often  be  very  ing  with  the  establishment  of  the
difficult,  and  a  main  source  of  error,  formal  side  of  the  purposive  thought-
This  material  difficulty  in  practical  process.


INTRODUCTORY.  49

Hence  the  probability,  that  M  has  its  sufficient  cause

in  n.n.  = - ' ; for M  is  the  sum of the events

7h  Pt  ;»3  P*

Pj,  P2,  P3,  P4 ;  consequently,  if  M  is  to  be  produced  by
n.n.,  both  Pv  and  P2,  also  Pz,  1\,  must  at  the  same  time
be  produced  by  n.n.  This  probability  is,  however,  the
product  of  the  several  probabilities. (If,  e.g.,  on  the  first

throw  of  a  die,  the  probability  of  throwing  2  =  r,  on  the
second  likewise  =  -„,  the  probability  of  throwing  2  with

both  dice  at  once  =  s  '  z.) Consequently,  the  probability

that  M  is  not  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  n.n.,  that  it
accordingly  still  requires  a  spiritual  cause

= 1 1 =  Pi  Pi  Pa  Pi ~ 1

Pi  Pt  Pa  P*  Pi  P2  Pa  Pi

Here,  then,  px  p2  p3  pi  is  what  x  was  before,  and  it
appears  from  this  that  px>  p2>  p3t  and  p±  only  need  to  be
individually  a  little  greater  than  s/  2  =  1*189,  conse-
quently — ,  — ,  — ,  and  —  each  a  little  less  than  0,S4,
1  J Pi Ih Ps  Pi

for  px  p-2  ps  pi  as  product  of  the  four  factors  to  become

T) 1) 11 7) "■— 1

greater  than  2,  and ' !  : greater  than ~. In


Pi  Pi  Pa  Pi


V


other  words,  if,  for  the  several  events  Px,  P2,  P:5,  P4,  the

probability of a spiritual cause  (  1  - ,  &c.  j  is only

small  (<  OiG),  yet  for  their  sum  M  its  value  rises
as  the  number  of  distinct  events  which  go  to  make
up M becomes larger. l^O-i ^ the probability of

a  spiritual  cause bo  for  each  on  the average  onlv  .

( 1 M  n 1 1 1 1 4

1  - ,  then  =  = -_ = O'S, conse-

V  PI  Pi P-i Pi J'i  ;>

quently  =  0-4096  and 1-  -  =  0-5901,

" Pi ft  P.:  Pi  Pi Pi ft 1  .

a  very  respectable  probability of  about '.. One easih
Vol.. I.  D


;i,.


50  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sees  that  those  parts  of  M,  which  undoubtedly  result  merely
from  n.n.,  are  self- eliminated  from  the  calculation,  since
their  probability  enters  as  1  into  the  product  of  the  rest,
i.e.,  leaves  it  unchanged.

Let  us  consider  an  example  of  this case  also. As
cause  of  vision  (Z)  a  multitude  (M)  of  conditions  (P1?  P2,
P3,  P4)  have  been  observed,  the  most  important  of  which
are  the  following: — (i.)  Special  bundles  of  nerves  issue
from  the  brain,  which  are  of  such  a  nature  that  each
stimulus  affecting  them  is  perceived  in  the  brain  as  a
sensation  of  light;  (2.)  They  terminate  in  a  peculiarly
formed  very  sensitive  nervous  tissue  (retina) ;  (3.)  Be-
fore the  latter  is  placed  a  camera-obscura  ;  (4.)  The  focal
distance  of  this  camera  is  in  general  adapted  to  the  indices
of  refraction  from  air  into  the  ocular  humours  (except  in
the  case  of  aquatic  animals)  ;  (5.)  By  means  of  various
contractions  the  focal  distance  is  capable  of  being  changed
for  longsighted  persons  from  a  few  inches  to  infinity  ;  (6.)
The  quantity  of  light  to  be  admitted  is  regulated  by  the
contraction  and  dilatation  of  the  iris,  whereby  an  addi-
tional aid  to  clear  vision  is  afforded  by  the  cutting  off
of  the  peripheral  rays ; (7.) The  segments  of  the  rods
or cones continuous with the nerve-endings form a
mosaic,  so  contrived,  that  each  segment  changes  light-
waves of  definite  wave-lengths  (colour)  into  stationary
waves,  and  thus  produces  in  the  appropriate  primitive
nerve-fibre  the  physiological  colour- vibrations  ; (8.)  Bi-
nocular vision  conditions  the  perception  of  solidity  and
reveals  the  third  dimension  of  space ;  (9.)  The  two  eyes
may  be  simultaneously  moved  by  means  of  special  nerve-
bundles  and muscles, but  only  in the same direction,
thus  unsymmetrically  in  reference  to  the  muscles  ;  (10.)
The clearness of the visual pictures increasing  from
periphery  to centre  prevents  the  otherwise  unavoidable
distraction  of  the  attention; (11.) The  reflex  turning  of
the  visual  axis  to  the  brightest  point  of  the  field  of  vision
facilitates  education  by  the  medium  of  sight  and  the  for-


INTRODUCTORY.  51

mation  of  the  ideas  of  space;  (12.)  The  constant  flow  of
tears  keeps  the  surface  of  the  cornea  transparent  and  re-
moves the  dust ;  (13.)  The  secluded  position  in  the  bony
socket,  tiie  lids  which  close  reflectorially  on  the  approach
of  danger,  the  eyelashes  and  eyebrows,  protect  the  organ
from  being  rendered  useless  by  external  influences.

All  these  thirteen  conditions  are  necessary  for  the
existence  and  maintenance  of  normal  vision  ;  they  are  all
there  at  the  birth  of  the  child,  although  the  occasion  for
their  exercise  has  not  yet  been  afforded  ;  the  circum-
stances preceding  and  accompanying  their  origin  (n.n.)  are
accordingly  to  be  sought  in  procreation  and  the  life  of
the  foetus.  The  physiologists,  however,  it  may  safely  be
said,  will  never  succeed,  with  the  least  show  of  probability,
in  exhibiting  the  sufficient  cause  for  the  origin  of  all  these
conditions  in  the  blastoderm  of  the  fertilised  ovum  and
the  material  fluids  which  supply  it :  one  cannot  see  why
the  child  should  not  develop  even  without  optic  nerve  or
without  eye  at  all.  Suppose  now,  however,  that  we  fell
back  upon  our  ignorance,  although  that  is  a  bad  ground
for  positive  probabilities,  and  assumed  a  tolerably  high
probability  for  the  development  of  any  of  the  thirteen
conditions  from  the  material  conditions  of  embryonic  life,
say  -A-  (a  probability  which  but  a  small  portion  of  our
most  certain  knowledge  possesses),  still  the  probability
that  all  these  conditions  follow  from  the  material  rela-
tions of  the  embryonic  life  is  only  0913  =  0-254.  The
probability,  therefore,  of  a  spiritual  cause  being  required  for
the  sum  of  conditions  =  O740,  i.e.,  almost  |[.  In  truth,
however,  the  several  probabilities  perhaps  =  0"25,  or  at  the
most0"5,and  accordingly  the  probability  of  a  spiritual  cause
for  the  whole  =  099999S;)  or  0-99988,  i.e.,  certainty.

We  have  just  seen,  how  from  material  events  nr  ma  if
eonelii'le  to  the  co-operation  of  spiritual  causes,  witliout  tin
latter  beinj  open  to  immediate  inspect i'Oi.  From  this  to
the  recognition  of  final  causes  there  is  but  one  step.
A  spiritual cause  for  material  events  can  only  consist  of


52  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

spiritual  activity ;  and,  moreover,  where  the  spirit  has  to
work  outwardly,  Will  must  be  present,  and  the  idea  of
what  the  Will  wills  cannot  be  wanting,  as  is  more  fully
discussed  in  Chap,  iv,  A.  The  spiritual  cause  is  thus
Will  in  union  with  Idea,  the  idea  namely  of  the  material
event  which  is  to  be  brought  about  (M).  We  assume
here,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  that  M  proceeds  directly
from  a  spiritual  cause,  which  is  by  no  means  necessary.
Let  us  ask  further,  what  can  be  the  cause  of  M  being
willed  ?  Here  the  causal  chain  is  at  once  broken,  if  we
do  not  adopt  the  simple  natural  hypothesis,  the  willing
of  Z.  Now,  it  is  obvious  that  Z  cannot  influence  the
event  as  real  existence,  but  only  idealiter,  i.e.,  as  mental
object,  according  to  the  axiom  that  the  cause  must  be
prior  to  the  effect.  That,  however,  willing-of-Z  is  a  suffi-
cient motive  for  willing-of-M  is  likewise  a  self-evident
proposition,  for  whoever  wishes  to  produce  the  effect  must
also  will  to  produce  the  cause.  To  be  sure  on  this  hypo-
thesis we  only  obtain  a  genuine  explanation,  if  the  willing-
of-Z  is  in  itself  more  comprehensible  to  us  than  the  willing-
of-M.  The  sufficient  motive  of  the  willing-of-Z  must  then
lie  either  in  the  realisation  of  Z,  or  in  a  willing  of  Zlt  which
Zx  follows  on  Z  as  its  effect ;  a  consideration  admitting  of
indefinite  repetition.  The  more  evident  is  the  last  motive
at  which  we  stop,  the  more  probable  does  it  become  that
the  willing-of-Z  is  cause  of  the  willing-of-M. — It  is  easy
to  see  that  this  is,  in  point  of  fact,  the  course  of  our
speculation  with  regard  to  natural  ends.  We  have  seen,
for  example,  that  the  bird  broods  because  it  wills  to
brood.  We  must  either  be  satisfied  with  this  barren
result  and  forego  all  explanation,  or  we  must  ask  why
is  brooding  willed  ?  Answer  :  because  the  development
and  hatching  of  the  young  bird  is  willed.  We  are  still
in  the  same  plight;  we  therefore  inquire  further,  why  is
the  development  of  the  young  bird  willed  ?  Answer :
because  propagation  is  willed  ;  and  this,  because  the  con-
tinued duration  of  the  species,  despite  the  shortness  of


INTRODUCTORY.  53

the  individual  life,  is  willed ;  and  here  we  get  a  motive
which  may  provisionally  satisfy  us.  We  are  accordingly
entitled  to  assume,  that  the  willing  of  the  development
of  the  young  bird  is  the  cause  (no  matter  whether  direct
or  indirect)  of  the  willing  of  the  brooding,  i.e.,  that  the
former  is  aimed  at  through  the  mean  of  brooding.  (The
point  is  not,  whether  the  bird  is  conscious  of  this  aim
or  not,  although  the  supposition  would  be  absurd  in  the
case  of  a  young  bird  bred  in  seclusion,  for  whence
could  it  have  derived  the  conscious  knowledge  of  the
effect  of  incubation  ?)  Certainly  there  always  remains
the  possibility  that  an  immaterial  cause  is  at  the  bottom
of  the  event  M,  without  its  being  motived  by  the  will
to  produce  Z ;  consequently  the  probability  that  Z  is
purposed will be  a  product  of  the  probability  that  M

has a spiritual cause (l  -  -J,  and  of  the  probability

that  this  spiritual  cause  has  the  willing  of  Z  for  its  cause

-;  the  product  (l  -  7^ must, however, of course be

smaller  than  either  of  the  factors,  since  every  pro-
bability is  less  than  1.  Here,  too,  the  probability
may  be  considerably  increased,  if  the  several  conditions
(l\,  P2,  P3,  P4),  of  which  M  is  usually  compounded,  be
taken  into  account.  The  probability  that  Z  is  aimed
at by means of Px is, according to the foregoing,

( 1  - ) ,  if is  the  probability  that  the  immaterial  cause
1\ 'J  1 'h

has  for  its  cause  the  willing  of  Z :  accordingly  the  proba-
bility that  1\  has  not  Z  in  view  =  1  -  ( 1  -  ~  )  '- Con-

v lh'  'A-
sequently  the  probability  that  neither  1\,  nor  P2,  nor  P:!,

nor  P4  has  Z  for  end,  i.e.,  that  Z  is  in  nowise  aimed  at
through  M  =  the  product  of  the  several  probabilities

-[i-(i-  '-)-!]  [i-(i-  1)1][&c

l..n_ V lh)  <h


54  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Consequently  the  probability  that  M  in  any  part  thereof  has
Z  for  its  end,  i.e.,  the  probability  that  Z  is  at  all  an  end  with
respect  to  M,  is  equal  to  the  complement  of  this  quantity

in  respect  of  1,  =  1  -  { '  1  -  (l  -  —^-. -,-,  &c,  are

1..M  V  pj  qi Pl*pa

genuine  fractions,  just  as  — ,  — >  &c,  consequently  also

1  -  I,  and  (l  -  I)  I,  and  1  -  (l  - I)  -,

Pi  x Pi 9i  Pi 2i

and  so  on,  consequently  also  their  product,

1 . .  n \ Vx>  ?1

Hence  it  follows,  that  this  product  becomes  smaller  the
larger  the  quantity  n  becomes  ;  for  if  n  increases  to  1  the
newly-introduced  factor  is

\ wT+lv  qii  +  i"

This  factor,  like  the  product,  is  a  genuine  fraction,  there-
fore the  product  of  both  must  be  a  genuine  fraction,  which
is  smaller  than  either  of  the  two  factors,  q.  e.  d. — From  the

circumstance  that  n  increasing  ) (  becomes  smaller,  it

1  . .  n

follows  that  n  increasing  1  —  ) (  becomes  larger ;  ac-

1  .  .71

cordingly  this  probability  also  grows  with  the  number  of
conditions  of  which  M  is  compounded. Let


(i-i)l,(i-L)  i>

\ pl  )  q, \ pJ (J,


—  3  .

—  4  '


be  on  the  average  =  4r,  i.e.,  let  the  probability,  that  each
of  the  conditions  of  Z  taken  singly  has  this  particular
end  in  view,  be on  the  average  =  ^,  consequently  very

improbable. Then  1  -  (1  -  — )— is  on  the  average

this  raised  merely  to  the  fourth  power  gives  ^— p  conse-
quently

,_[l_(l _!)!]* ="<>'*;


INTRODUCTORY.  55

i.e.,  there  results  on  the  whole  a  very  fair  probability,  for
any  one,  who  should  bet  2  to  1  on  the  existence  of  Design,
would  still  win.  The  application  to  the  example  of  vision
is  obvious.

We  learn  from  the  above,  that  those  effects  in  particular
can  safely  be  regarded  as  ends,  which  need  for  their  pro-
duction a  considerable  number  of  causes,  each  of  which  lias
a  certain  probability  of  being  means  to  the  particular  end.
It  is,  therefore,  no  wonder  that  just  the  most  general  pheno-
mena of  Nature  have  always  been  most  widely  admitted  to
be  ends.  For  example,  the  existence  and  continuance  of
organic  nature  as  end  of  its  own  arrangements,  as  well  as
of  those  of  inorganic  nature.  It  is  precisely  here  that  an
infinite  number  of  causes  co-operate  to  secure  one  grand
result,  the  continuance  of  organisms.  So  far  as  these
causes  lie  in  the  organisms  themselves,  they  are  divisible
into  those  which  conduce  to  the  maintenance  of  the  indi-
vidual, and  those  which  subserve  the  preservation  of  the
species.  Both  of  these  points  have  seldom  wanted  recog-
nition as  natural  ends.  If  we  now  call  such  an  end
cognised  with  the  greatest  possible  certainty  Z,  we  know
that  none  of  its  many  causes  can  be  wanting,  if  it  is  to
be  attained  ;  thus,  e.g.,  not  M.  Now  since  I  know  that
both  Z  and  M  were  willed  and  imagined  he/ore  their  real
existence,  and  I  see  that  among  others  the  external  cause
Mt  is  requisite  fur  the  occurrence  of  M,  the  assumption,
that  M,,  too,  was  willed  and  imagined  before  its  real  exist-
ence, obtains  a  certain  probability  through  this  regressive
inference.  "Whether,  namely,  M  be  realised  through  the
immediate  action  of  a  spiritual  cause,  or  indirectly  in  that
it  follows  from  material  causes,  of  which  a  few  or  several
are  spiritually  caused,  in  both  cases  M,  may  be  willed  and
represented  before  its  real  existence  as  means  to  the  end
M.  In  the  latter  case  this  is  perfectly  clear,  but  also  in
the  former  case  the  immediate  interweaving  of  a  spiritual
cause  in  the  realisation  of  M  does  not  preclude  the  mate-
rial causes  of  M,  and  therefore  of  M,,  springing  in  larger


56  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

or  smaller  part,  from  spiritual  causes,  which  had  M  and  Z
for  their  ends.  In  organic  nature  this  is  even  the  normal
state  of  the  case.  The  result  of  this  reasoning  in  any
case  is  a  certain  probability  that  M2  is  also  aimed  at,  and
although  it  may  not  be  in  itself  great,  still  it  is  always  a
strengthening  of  the  directly  obtained  degree  of  probability
which  is  not  to  be  despised,  since  all  later  links  in  the
chain  have  the  benefit  of  this  probability  by  its  repetition
at  every  stage.

From  these  considerations  it  is  evident  that  the  ways,
in  which  ends  are  perceived  in  Xature,  are  multifariously
combined.  No  claim  is  set  up  for  the  application  of
such  calculations  in  practice,  but  they  serve  to  clear  up
the  principles  which  more  or  less  unconsciously  regulate
the  logical  procedure  of  every  one  who  correctly  reflects
on  this  subject,  and  who  does  not  dogmatise  thereon
from  the  lofty  heights  of  some  d  'priori  system.  The
examples  adduced  in  this  chapter  are  not  intended  to
serve  as  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  Teleology,  but  only  for
the  elucidation  and  illustration  of  the  abstract  exposi-
tions, which  likewise  will  assuredly  convert  no  opponent
to  the  hypothesis  of  ends  in  Xature,  for  only  examples
en  masse  can  do  that ;  but  perhaps  they  will  lead  some,
who  thought  themselves  to  have  outgrown  the  belief  in
Purpose  as  manifested  in  Xature,  to  weigh  alleged  in-
stances thereof  more  carefully  and  impartially  ;  and  no
other  than  this,  viz.,  as  a  preparation  for  Section  A.  of
our  inquiry,  was  the  design  of  the  present  chapter.


A.


THE  MANIFESTATION  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS
IN BODILY  LIFE.

''  The  Materialists  endeavour  to  show  that  all,  even  mental  pheno-
mena, are  physical :  and  rightly  :  only  they  do  not  see  that,  on  the
other  hand,  everything  physical  is  at  the  same  time  metaphysical." —
Schopenhauer.


( 59 )


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  WILL  IN  THE  INDEPENDENT  FUNCTIONS
OF  THE  SPINAL  COED  AND  GANGLIA.

The  time  has  gone  by  when  the  animals  were  con-
trasted with  the  free  man  as  locomotive  machines,  as
soulless  automata.  Deeper  insight  into  the  life  of  animals,
strenuous  effort  to  understand  their  language  and  the
motives  of  their  actions,  has  shown  that  with  respect  to
mental  capacity  man  differs  from  the  brutes  in  degree
and  not  in  kind,  just  as  the  brutes  differ  among  them-
selves ;  that  in  virtue  of  this  higher  capacity  he  has
created  a  more  perfect  form  of  speech,  and  thereby  has
gained  in  the  course  of  generations  that  perfectibility
which  is  wanting  to  the  brutes,  owing  to  their  imperfect
means  of  communication.  We  accordingly  know  now,
that  we  cannot  compare  the  educated  man  of  to-day
with  the  animals,  without  being  unjust  to  the  latter,  but
only  the  peoples  which  are  but  little  removed  from  the
state  in  which  they  were  fashioned  by  the  hand  of  Nature  ;
for  we  know  that  even  our  own  race,  privileged  as  it
now  is  by  higher  aptitudes,  was  once  what  these  still
are,  and  that  our  present  higher  qualities  of  brain  and
mind  have  been  only  gradually  attained  through  the  law
of  hereditary  transmission  of  acquired  power.  Thus  the
animal  kingdom  is  presented  to  us  as  a  finished  scale  of
being,  with  pervading  analogies.  The  fundamental  spiri-
tual faculties  must  be  essentially  the  same  in  all,  and
what  in  the  higher  members  appear  to  be  new  faculties
arc  only  secondary  powers,  which  have been  developed


60  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

in  certain  directions  by  the  higher  culture  of  common
elementary  capacities.  In  all  beings  these  fundamental
or  primitive  activities  of  the  mind  are  willing  and  think-
ing ;  for  feeling  (as  I  shall  show  in  Chap.  iii.  B)  may,  with
the  help  of  the  Unconscious,  be  developed  from  these
two.

We  shall  speak  in  this  chapter  only  of  the  Will.  It
is  scarcely  to  be  doubted,  that  what  we  regard  as  imme-
diate cause,  of  our  action  and  call  Will  is  to  be  found  in
the  consciousness  of  animals  as  causal  moment  of  their
action,  and  must  also  be  called  Will,  if  we  cease  to  give  our-
selves airs  of  superiority  by  employing  different  names  for
the  very  same  things  (as  devouring,  swilling,  littering,  for
eating,  drinking,  child-bearing).  The  dog  will  not  separate
from  its  master ;  it  wills  to  save  the  child  which  has  fallen
into  the  water  from  the  well-known  death ;  the  bird  will
not  let  its  young  be  injured ;  the  cock  will  not  share  his  hen
with  another,  &c.  I  know  there  are  many  people  who  think
they  elevate  man,  when  they  ascribe  as  much  as  possible
in  the  life  of  animals,  especially  the  lower  ones,  to  "  reflex
action."  If  these  persons  have  in  their  minds  the  ordinary
physiological  sense  of  the  term  reflex  action,  involuntary
reaction  on  an  external  stimulus,  it  may  safely  be  said
that  either  they  have  never  observed  animals,  or  that
they  have  eyes  but  they  see  not.  If  however  they
extend  the  meaning  of  reflex  action  beyond  its  usual
physiological  acceptation,  they  are  assuredly  right,  but
then  they  forget :  firstly,  that  man,  too,  lives  and  moves
in  pure  reflex  actions — that  every  act  of  will  is  a  reflex
action ;  and  secondly,  that  every  reflex  action  is  an  act  of
will,  as  we  shall  show  in  Chap.  V.

Let  us  then  retain  provisionally  the  usual  narrower
acceptation  of  reflex  action,  and  speak  only  of  such  acts
of  will  as  are  not  reflexes  in  this  sense,  i.e.,  are  not  in-
voluntary reactions  of  the  organism  on  external  stimuli.
There  are  two  marks  in  particular  whereby  volition  may
be  distinguished  from  reflex  actions  : firstly,  emotion,  and


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  61

secondly,  consistency  in  carrying  out  an  intention.  Reflex
actions  are  mechanical  and  passionless ;  but  one  need  not
be  skilled  in  the  art  of  physiognomies  to  clearly  perceive
the  presence  of  an  emotion  even  in  the  brutes.  It  is
well  known  that  several  species  of  ants  wage  war  with  one
another,  one  state  subjugating  and  enslaving  the  citizens
of  another  state,  in  order  to  obtain  labourers  for  its  opera-
tions. These  wars  are  waged  by  a  warrior  caste,  whose
members  are  larger  and  stronger,  and  provided  with  more
powerful  nippers.  It  is  only  necessary  to  have  once  wit-
nessed this  army  knocking  at  the  hostile  edifice,  to  have
seen  the  workers  withdraw  and  the  warriors  come  out  to
do  battle,  with  what  bitterness  the  fight  is  carried  on,
and  how,  after  an  unsuccessful  contest,  the  constructors
of  the  building  surrender  themselves  captive,  to  have  no
longer  any  doubt  that  this  premeditated  raid  shows  a
very  decided  will,  and  is  something  altogether  different
from  reflex  action.  The  like  is  the  case  with  the  swarms
of  robber-bees.

Iteflex  action  disappears  and  reappears  with  the  ex-
ternal stimulus,  but  it  cannot  form  a  purpose,  which  it
pursues'  under  changed  external  circumstances  with  ap-
propriate change  of  means.  E.g.,  when  a  decapitated  frog,
having  remained  quiet  a  long  time  after  the  operation,
suddenly  begins  to  make  natatory  movements  or  to  hop
away,  one  might  be  inclined  to  look  upon  this  as  men:
physiological  reflex  action,  as  result  of  the  irritation  of
the  terminations  of  the  divided  nerve  by  the  air.  But
when  the  frog  in  various  experiments,  the  cutaneous
irritation  and  the  part  affected  being  the  same,  overcomes
different  obstacles  in  a  different  way,  but  equally  suited
to  tin;  purpose;  when,  having  taken  a  fixed  direction,
and  being  turned  therefrom,  it  tries  with  rare  obstinacy
constantly  to  regain  it ;  when  it  creeps  away  under  a
cupboard  or  into  other  odd  corners,  manifestly  to  seek
protection  from  its  persecutors, —  there  is  unmistakable
evidence  of  non-reflectorial  acts  of  will,  regarding  which


62  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

even  the  physiologist  Goltz  justly  concludes  from  his
careful  experiments,  that  there  is  no  avoiding  the  assump-
tion of  an  intelligence  not  confined  to  the  cerebrum,  but
astricted  to  various  central  organs  for  the  exercise  of
different  functions  (e.g.,  to  the  corpora  quadrigemina  for
the  maintenance  of  equilibrium).

From  this  example  of  the  decapitated  frog  and  the  voli-
tion of  all  invertebrate  animals  (e.g.,  insects)  it  follows  that
110  brain  at  all  is  requisite  for  the  exercise  of  will.  Since
in  the  invertebrata  the  oesophageal  ganglia  take  the  place
of  the  brain,  we  must  assume  that  these  also  suffice  for
the  act  of  will,  and  in  the  above-mentioned  frog  cere-
bellum and  spinal  cord  must  have  supplied  the  place  of
the  cerebrum.  But  we  cannot  confine  the  will  of  inver-
tebrate animals  to  the  oesophageal  ganglia ;  for  when  the
anterior  part  of  one  bisected  insect  continues  the  act
of  devouring,  and  the  posterior  part  of  another  the  act
of  propagation,  when  praying  crickets  with  their  heads
cut  off  even  seek  their  females  for  days,  find  them  and
copulate,  just  as  if  they  were  unscathed,  it  is  tolerably
clear  that  the  will  to  devour  has  been  an  act  of  the
oesophageal  ring,  but  the  will  to  propagate,  in  these  cases
at  least,  an  act  of  other  ganglia  of  the  trunk.  The  like
independence  of  the  will  in  the  different  ganglia  of  one
and  the  same  animal  is  observed,  when  the  two  halves  of
a  divided  earwig,  or  of  an  Australian  ant,  turn  against
one  another,  and,  under  the  unmistakable  influence  of  the
passion  of  anger  and  lust  of  fighting,  contend  furiously
with  their  antennre  till  exhaustion  or  death  ensues.  But
we  must  not  limit  the  activity  of  the  will  even  to  gan-
glia ;  fur  we  find  voluntary  action  even  in  animals  of  a
very  low  type,  where  the  microscope  of  the  anatomist
has  discovered  no  trace  either  of  muscular  fibrin  or  of
nerves,  but  only  the  fibroin  of  Mulder  (now  called  pro-
toplasm). Here  probably  the  semifluid  slimy  substance
of  the  animal,  as  in  the  first  stages  of  embryonic  de-
velopment, fulfils  in  an  inferior  manner  those  conditions


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  63

to  which  the  nerve  substance  owes  its  irritability,  and
special  fitness  as  an  instrument  of  the  will,  viz.,  the  easy
mobility  and  polarisability  of  the  molecules.  Let  any
one  take  a  glass  of  water  containing  a  polype,  and
place  it  in  such  a  position  that  a  part  of  the  water  is
illuminated  by  the  sun;  the  polype  will  instantly  propel
itself  out  of  the  dark  towards  the  illuminated  part  of  the
water.  If  now  a  living  infusorion  be  placed  therein  and
it  approaches  within  a  few  lines  of  the  polype,  the  latter
perceives  it — God  only  knows  how — and  produces  a  whirl-
pool with  its  arms,  in  order  to  draw  it  within  its  grasp.
On  the  other  hand,  should  a  dead  infusorion,  a  small
vegetable  organism,  or  a  particle  of  dust,  approach  quite
as  close,  it  does  not  trouble  itself  at  all  about  it.  The
polype  then  perceives  the  animalcule  to  be  living,  draws
therefrom  the  inference  that  it  is  fit  for  food,  and  adopts
means  to  bring  it  within  reach  of  its  mouth.  Not  seldom
also  one  may  see  two  polypes  in  bitter  conllict  over  a
prize.  No  one  will  venture  to  call  a  will  guided  by  a
sense-perception  so  fine  and  so  clearly  manifested  phy-
siological reflection  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,
otherwise  we  should  have  to  term  it  reflex  action  when
the  gardener  bends  the  bough  of  a  tree  to  reach  its  fruit.
Accordingly,  when  we  see  acts  of  will  in  animals  destitute
of  nerves,  we  can  certainly  not  hesitate  to  recognise  the
same  in  ganglia.

This  result  is  also  suggested  by  comparative  anatomy,
which  teaches  that  the  brain  is  an  aggregation  of  ganglia
connected  with  nerve-iibres,  and  that  the  spinal  cord  in
its  central  grey  matter  is  likewise  a  series  of  ganglia
which  have  coalesced.  The  Articulata  are  the  first  to
show  a  weak  analogue  of  the  brain  in  the  form  of  two
nodules  connected  by  the  (esophageal  ring  and  also  of
the  spinal  cord  in  the  so-called  ventral  cord,  the
latter  containing  ganglia  united  by  fibivs,  each  of
which  answers  to  a  segment  and  pair  of  legs.  Ac-
cordingly physiologists assume as many independent


64.  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

centres  in  the  spinal  cord  as  there  are  pairs  of  spinal
nerves  issuing  therefrom.  Among  the  Vertebrata  there  are
fishes,  whose  brain  and  spinal  cord  consist  of  a  number
of  ganglia,  which  lie  in  a  row  behind  one  another.  The
composition  of  a  central  organ  from  several  ganglia  is
positively  confirmed  by  the  metamorphosis  of  insects,
when  certain  ganglia,  which  are  separate  in  the  larva
state,  appear  consolidated  at  a  more  advanced  stage  of
development.

These  facts  may  suffice  to  prove  the  essential  resem-
blance of  brain  and  ganglia,  brain-will  and  ganglia-will.
But  now,  if  the  ganglia  of  lower  animals  have  their  inde-
pendent wills,  if  the  spinal  cord  of  a  decapitated  frog
has  its  will,  why  should  not  the  so  much  more  highly
organised  ganglia  and  spinal  cord  of  the  higher  animals
and  of  man  also  have  their  will  ?  If  in  insects  the
will  to  devour  lies  in  anterior,  the  will  to  procreate  in
posterior  ganglia,  why  in  man  should  not  such  a  division
of  labour  be  likewise  provided  for  his  will?  Or  is  it
conceivable  that  the  same  natural  phenomenon  should  in
the  less  perfect  form  exhibit  effects  which  are  entirely
wanting  in  the  more  perfect  form  ?  Or  must  we  suppose
that  in  man  the  conduction  is  so  good,  that  every  gan-
glionic volition  is  immediately  transmitted  to  the  brain
and  appears  in  consciousness  undistinguishable  from  the
volition  generated  in  the  brain  ?  This  may,  perhaps,
be  true  to  a  certain  extent  for  the  upper  parts  of  the
spinal  cord,  certainly  not  for  all  the  rest,  since  the
channels  of  sensation  from  the  hypogastric  plexus  are
almost  imperceptible.  Xo  other  course  is  left  open,  then,
but  to  ascribe  independent  wills  to  the  human  ganglia  and
spinal  cord,  the  manifestations  of  which  it  only  remains
empirically  to  prove.  That  in  the  case  of  higher  animals
the  muscular  movements  which  effect  external  actions  are
more  and  more  under  the  control  of  the  cerebellum,  and
consequently  centralised,  is  well  kncwn.  Facts,  there-
fore, will  not  be  forthcoming  here  to  any  great  extent  ;


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  65

and  tins  is  doubtless  the  reason  why  hitherto  the  inde-
pendence of  the  ganglionic  system  in  higher  animals  has
been  so  little  recognised  by  physiologists,  although  de-
fended by  the  most  recent  investigators.  Those  volun-
tary acts,  on  the  contrary,  which  are  actually  to  be
ascribed  to  the  ganglia,  have  been  usually  regarded  as
reflex  actions,  whose  stimuli  are  said  to  exist  in  the
organism  itself,  which  stimuli  accordingly  were  arbitrarily
assumed  when  they  were  not  assignable.  In  part  these
assumptions  may  be  justified ;  they  then  belong  to  the
chapter  on  Reflex  Actions.  It  is  not  a  large  part,  how-
ever, in  any  case,  and,  moreover,  it  cannot  do  any  harm,
to  consider  here  even  those  which  are  reflex  actions
proper  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Will,  since  it  will
be  hereafter  proved  that  every  reflex  action  contains  an
unconscious  Will.

The  independent  movements  effected  by  the  sym-
pathetic nervous  system,  i.e.,  without  the  co-operation  of
brain  and  spinal  cord,  are  :  ( I .)  The  beating  of  the  heart ;
(2.)  the  movements  of  the  stomach  and  the  intestines  ;  (3.)
the  tonic  contractions  of  the  lower  part  of  the  alimentary
canal  and  muscular  coats  of  the  arteries;  (4.)  an  important
part  of  the  processes  of  organic  life,  so  far  as  they  depend
on  nervous  action.  The  intermittent  type  of  movement
is  shown  in  the  beating  of  the  heart,  tone  of  the  arteries,
and  movements  of  the  intestines;  and  the  persistent  move-
ments are  illustrated  by  the  other  processes.  The  beating  of
the  heart,  as  may  be  seen  in  an  exposed  frog's  heart,  begins
with  the  contraction  of  the  veme  cava) ;  the  contraction  of
the  auricles  follows,  then  that  of  the  ventricles,  and  finally
that  of  the  bulbus  aorta'.  In  an  excised  frog's  heart,
sprinkled  with  salt  water  the  cardiac  ganglia  continue  to
perform  their  function  of  stimulating  the  heart  to  beat
for  hours  together.  In  the  case,  of  the  intestines  the
movement  begins  at  the  lower  part  of  the  oesophagus,  and
progresses  vermicularly  from  above  downwards,  one  wave
hardly  completing  its  course  before  the  next  begins. Have

VOL. I.  ]•


66  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

not  these  movements  of  the  intestines  the  most  surprising
resemblance  to  the  creeping  of  a  worm,  with  the  simple
difference  that  the  worm  propels  itself  forward  on  its  sup-
port, whilst  here  the  worm  is  fastened,  and  the  (inner)
support,  the  masses  of  food  and  the  faeces  are  pushed
forward  ?  Should  the  one  be  called  Will  and  not  the
other  ?  The  "  tone "  is  a  slight  muscular  contraction,
which  is  ceaselessly  exhibited  by  all  muscles  during  life,
even  in  sleep  or  swoon.  In  the  case  of  muscles  subser-
vient to  volition  (the  cerebral  will),  it  is  maintained  by  the
spinal  cord,  and  there  is  only  no  movement  of  the  limbs,
because  the  actions  of  the  opposing  muscles  (antagonists)
neutralise  one  another.  Where,  therefore,  there  are  no
opposing  muscles  (as,  e.g.,  in  the  circular  sphincters),  the
contraction  is  clearly  manifested,  and  can  only  be  over-
come by  strong  pressure  of  the  fa3ces.  The  tone  of  the
intestines,  arteries,  and  veins  depends  on  the  sympathetic
system,  and  the  latter  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  cir-
culation of  the  blood.  Lastly,  as  concerns  secretion  and
nutrition,  these  can  be  influenced  by  the  nerves,  partly
by  means  of  dilatation  and  contraction  of  the  capillary
vessels,  partly  by  tension  and  relaxation  of  the  membranes
concerned  in  osmosis,  partly  through  the  setting  up  of
chemical,  electrical,  and  thermal  currents.  All  these
functions  are  carried  on  exclusively  by  subordinate  ganglia
through  the  agency  of  the  sympathetic  fibres  found  in  all
nerve-trunks,  which  are  chiefly  distinguishable  from  the
sensory  and  motor  fibres  by  the  absence  of  a  medullary
sheath.

The  surest  proofs  of  the  independence  of  the  ganglionic
system  are  derived  from  Bidder's  experiments  on  frogs.
The  spinal  cord  having  been  completely  destroyed,  the
animals  lived  often  six,  sometimes  ten  weeks  (with  gra-
dually slackening  heart-beat).  On  destruction  of  the
brain  and  spinal  cord,  the  medulla  oblongata  alone  being
spared  (for  breathing),  they  lived  six  days ;  when  this
also  was  destroyed,  the  beating  of  the  heart  and  circulation


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  67

of  the  blood  could  be  still  observed  even  on  the  second
day.  The  frogs  whose  medulla  oblongata  had  been  pre-
served ate  and  digested  their  worms  after  six-and-twenty
days,  whilst  micturition  took  place  regularly.

Besides  the  above-mentioned  tone  of  the  voluntary
muscles,  the  spinal  cord  (including  the  medulla  oblongata)
regulates  all  involuntary  movements  of  the  voluntary
muscles  (reflex  movements,  see  Chap.  V.)  and  the  respi-
ratory movements.  The  latter  have  their  central  organ
in  the  medulla  oblongata;  and  not  merely  a  large  number
of  the  spinal  nerves,  but  also  the  i\r.  phrenicus,  acccssorius,
Willisii,  vagus,  and  facialis,  co-operate  in  the  production
of  these  highly  complicated  movements.  Although  the
cerebral  will  is  able  for  a  short  time  to  strengthen  or  to
suppress  the  respiratory  movements,  it  can  never  entirely
abolish  them,  since,  after  a  little  pause,  the  will  of  the
spinal  cord  regains  the  upper  hand.

The  independence  of  the  spinal  cord  on  the  brain  is
likewise  proved  by  many  beautiful  physiological  experi-
ments. A  hen,  from  which  Plourens  had  removed  the
entire  cerebrum,  sat  indeed  motionless  as  a  rule  ;  but  on
going  to  sleep  it  tucked  its  head  under  its  wings ;  on
waking,  it  shook  itself  and  preened  its  feathers.  When
pushed,  it  ran  forward  in  a  straight  line ;  when  thrown
into  the  air,  it  Hew.  It  did  not  eat  spontaneously,  but
<>nly  swallowed  the  food  thrust  into  its  bill.  Voit  re-
peated these  experiments  with  pigeons.  They  first  fell
into  a  deep  sleep,  from  which  they  only  awoke  after  a
few  weeks;  then,  however,  they  flew  and  moved  of  their
own  accord,  and  comported  themselves  in  such  a  manner
as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  existence  of  their  sensations  .
only  intelligence  was  lacking,  and  they  did  not  spontane-
ously take  food.  Thus  a  pigeon,  having  thrust  its  beak
against  a  suspended  wooden  pendulum,  caused  it  to  swing
for  upwards  of  an  hour  till  Voit's  return,  so  that  the  pen-
dent spool  over  and  over  again  struck  its  heal-;.  On  lie
other  hand,  such  a  brainless  pigeon  endeavours  to  eva  i ..


68  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

hand  trying  to  grasp  it,  to  carefully  avoid  obstacles  in  its
flight,  and  can  settle  cleverly  on  narrow  supports.  Babbits
and  guinea-pigs,  whose  cerebrum  has  been  removed,  run
freely  about  after  the  operation ;  the  behaviour  of  a  de-
capitated frog  has  been  already  mentioned.  All  these
movements,  as  the  preening  of  its  feathers  by  the  hen,
the  leaping  of  rabbits  and  frogs,  take  place  without
noticeable  external  stimulus,  and  are  so  like  the  same
movements  in  uninjured  animals  that  it  is  impossible  to
assume  a  difference  in  the  underlying  principle  in  the  two
cases :  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other,  there  is  a  manifes-
tation of  will.  Now  we  know  that  the  higher  animal  con-
sciousness is  conditional  on  the  integrity  of  the  cerebrum
(see  Chap.  ii.  C),  and  when  this  is  destroyed,  it  is  said
these  animals  are  without  consciousness,  and  accordingly
act  and  will  unconsciously.  But  the  cerebral  conscious-
ness is  by  no  means  the  sole,  but  merely  the  highest  con-
sciousness of  the  animal,  the  only  one  which  in  higher
animals  and  in  man  attains  to  self-consciousness,  to  the
ego,  therefore  also  the  only  one  which  I  can  call  my
consciousness.  That,  however,  the  subordinate  nerve-
centres  must  also  have  a  consciousness,  if  of  a  vaguer
description,  plainly  follows  from  the  continuity  of  the
animal  series,  and  a  comparison  of  the  ganglionic  con-
sciousness of  the  Invertebrata  with  that  of  the  independent
ganglia  and  central  parts  of  the  spinal  cord  of  the  higher
animals.

It  is  beyond  a  doubt  that  a  mammal  deprived  of  its
brain  is  always  capable  of  clearer  feeling  than  an  uninjured
insect,  because  the  consciousness  of  its  spinal  cord  stands
in  any  case  higher  than  that  of  the  ganglia  of  the  insect.
Accordingly  this  will,  which  gives  evidence  of  itself  in
the  independent  functions  of  the  spinal  cord  and  the
ganglia,  is  by  no  means  to  be  at  once  declared  to  be  in
itself  unconscious ;  we  must  rather  provisionally  assume
that  for  the  nerve-centres  from  which  it  proceeds  it
certainly  may  become  more  or  less  clearly  conscious. On


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  69

the  other  hand,  compared  with  the  cerebral  consciousness
which  a  man  exclusively  recognises  as  his  consciousness,
it  is  certainly  unconscious,  and  it  is  accordingly  shown
that  there  exists  in  us  an  unconscious  will,  since  these
nerve-centres  are  all  contained  in  our  corporeal  organism,
therefore  in  us.

It  seems  requisite  to  add,  in  conclusion,  a  remark  with
respect  to  the  sense  in  which  the  word  Will  is  here  taken.
We  started  with  understanding  by  this  word  a  conscious
intention,  which  is  the  ordinary  signification.  We  have
found,  however,  in  the  course  of  our  investigation,  that  in  a
single  individual,  but  in  different  nerve-centres,  there  may
exist  consciousnesses  and  wills  more  or  less  independent  of
one  another,  each  of  which  can  at  the  most  be  conscious  for
the  nerve-centre  through  which  it  is  expressed.  In  say-
ing this,  the  usual  limited  meaning  of  Will  is  necessarily
abandoned  ;  for  I  must  now  recognise  another  will  in  me
than  that  which  has  been  exerted  through  my  brain,  and
lias  thereby  become  conscious  to  me.  After  these  limita-
tions of  meaning  have  fallen  away,  we  can  no  longer  avoid
understanding  by  Will  the  immanent  cause  of  every
movement  in  animals,  which  is  not  produced  reflectorially.
This  may  also  be  taken  as  the  sole  characteristic  and  in-
fallible mark  of  the  will  of  which  we  are  conscious,  that  it
is  a  cause  of  preconceived  action.  It  is  now  seen,  that
it  is  somewhat  accidental  to  the  will,  whether  it  passes
through  the  cerebral  consciousness  or  not;  its  essence
remains  thereby  unaffected.  What  then  in  the  present
work  is  denoted  by  the  word  "Will  "  is  no  other  than  the
same  essential  principle  in  both  cases.  If,  however,  it  is
particularly  desired  to  distinguish  the  two  kinds  of  will,  for
conscious  will  language  already  offers  a  term  exactly  cover-
ing this  conception — Freewill — whilst  the  word  Will  must

retained  for  the  general  principle.  Will,  we  know,  is  the
resultant  of  all  contemporaneous  desires;  if  this  struggle
ui  desire  is  consciously  waged,  it  appears  as  choice  of  ihe
result,  or  freewill,  whilst  the  origin  of  the  unconscii  us  will


70  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

is  withdrawn  from  consciousness,  consequently  even  the
semblance  of  choice  among  desires  cannot  here  occur.
One  sees  from  the  existence  of  this  term  Freewill,  that
the  idea  of  a  more  general  will  with  non-selected  content
or  aim,  whose  actions  thus  appear  to  consciousness  not
as  free,  but  as  inward  compulsion,  has  long  been  in  the
popular  consciousness.

I  do  not  merely  rely  upon  the  precedent  of  Schopen-
hauer and  the  wide-spread  acceptance  (even  abroad)  that
this  use  of  the  word  Will  has  already  found,  but  upon  the
fact,  that  no  other  word  in  general  use  in  the  Teutonic  lan-
guages is  more  appropriate  to  designate  the  broad  principle
which  is  treated  of  in  the  present  and  following  chapter.
"Desire"  is  volition  still  incomplete,  in  the  making,  as
it  were,  one-sided  as  not  having  yet  stood  the  test  of
resisting  other  desires.  It  is  only  an  unfinished  product
of  the  psychological  laboratory  of  Volition,  not  the  final
collective  expression  of  the  activity  of  the  whole  indi-
vidual (be  it  of  higher  or  of  lower  order).  It  is  only  a
component  of  the  will,  which,  in  consequence  of  being
paralysed  by  other  opposite  desires,  may  be  condemned  to
remain  velleity.  If  "desiring"  cannot  be  substituted  for
"  willing,"  still  less  can  "Impulse ;"  since  it  not  only  suffers
from  the  same  one-sidedness  and  limitation  as  desire,  but
does  not  even  include  the  notion  of  actuality.  It  rather
only  represents  the  latent  disposition  to  certain  one-sided
tendencies  to  action,  which,  if  they  become  actual  in
consequence  of  some  motive,  are  no  longer  called  impulse
but  desire.  Every  impulse  thus  denotes  a  definite  aspect,
not  of  volition,  but  of  the  character,  i.e.,  the  tendency  of  the
latter  to  react  on  certain  classes  of  motives  with  desires
of  a  fixed  direction  {e.g.,  sexual  impulse,  migratory  impulse,
acquisitive  impulse,  &c  ;  cf.  the  phrenological  "  instincts  "
or  "  primitive  faculties  ").  As  specific  predispositions  the
impulses  rightly  stand  for  inner  springs  of  action,  just
as  motives  represent  the  outer  ones.  Impulse  then,  as
guch,  has  necessarily  a  definite  concrete  content,  which  is


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  71

conditioned  by  the  physical  predispositions  of  the  general
bodily  constitution  and  the  molecular  constitution  of  the
central  nervous  system.  Will,  on  the  other  hand,  as  uni-
versal formal  principle  of  movement  and  change,  stands
altogether  behind  the  concrete  dispositions,  which,  when
conceived  as  informed  by  the  will,  are  called  impulses,
and  is  realised  in  the  resulting  volition,  which  receives  its
particular  content  through  the  psychological  mechanism  of
motives,  impulses,  and  desires  (cf.  Chap.  iv.  B.)  Although
in  the  lower  animals  and  in  the  subordinate  central  organs
of  man  this  mechanism  is  simple  in  comparison  with  that
of  the  human  brain,  it  is  none  the  less  present,  and  easily
reveals  itself  in  reflex  movements.  Even  in  the  case  of
the  independent  functions  of  the  spinal  cord  and  ganglia
the  inherited  innate  material  predisposition  of  the  medulla
oblongata  to  effect  the  respiratory  movements  may  very
well  be  called  a  "  respiratory  impulse,"  if  only  it  be  not
forgotten  that  behind  this  material  arrangement  stands
the  principle  of  the  will,  without  which  it  could  as  little
be  functional  as,  say,  the  innate  cerebral  disposition  for
compassion,  and  that  the  exercise  of  the  respiratory  move-
ments themselves  is  an  actual  willing,  whose  direction
and  content  is  conditioned  by  such  predisposition.


( r-  )


ii.


UNCONSCIOUS IDEATION IN THE EXECUTION OF
VOLUNTARY MOVEMENT.

I  will  to  lift  my  little  finger,  and  the  finger  is  lifted.
Does,  then,  my  will  directly  move  my  finger  ?  Xo ;  for
if  the  brachial  nerve  be  divided  the  will  cannot  move
it.  Experience  teaches  that  for  every  movement  there  is
only  one  part,  namely,  the  central  ending  of  the  nerve-
fibres  concerned,  which  is  able  to  carry  into  effect  the
volitional  impulse  for  this  particular  movement  of  this
particular  member.  Should  this  one  part  be  injured,  the
will  would  have  just  as  little  power  over  the  member,  as
it  would  have  if  the  nervous  communication  between
that  place  and  the  muscles  were  interrupted.  The  motor
impulse  itself  we  cannot,  intensity  apart,  imagine  to  be
different  for  different  nerves  ;  for  since  the  excitation  in
all  motor  nerves  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  homogeneous,  it
cannot  be  otherwise  with  the  excitation  at  the  centre,
whence  the  current  issues ;  consequently  movements  only
differ  in  this,  that  the  central  endings  of  different  motor
nerves  are  affected  by  the  volitional  impulse,  and  thereby
different  muscles  are  constrained  to  contract.  "We  may  thus
picture  to  ourselves  the  central  termination  of  motor  fibres
in  the  brain  as  a  kind  of  keyboard.  The.  touch  is,  inten-
sity apart,  always  the  same ;  the  touched  keys  alone  are
different.  If,  then,  I  intend  a  specific  movement,  e.g.,  the
lifting  of  the  little  finger,  what  is  required  is  to  compel
those  muscles  to  contract  which  by  their  combination
produce  this  movement,  and  for  that  purpose  to  strike


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  73

with  the  will  that  chord  in  the  keyboard  of  the  brain,  the
single  keys  of  which  set  the  related  muscles  in  motion.
If  in  framing  the  chord  one  or  more  false  keys  are  struck,
there  occurs  a  movement  which  does  not  correspond  with
the  one  intended ;  e.g.,  in  making  a  slip  in  speaking,  mis-
writing,  tripping,  in  the  awkward  handling  of  children,
&c.  It  is  true  the  number  of  the  central  endings  of  fibres
in  the  brain  is  considerably  smaller  than  that  of  the  motor
fibres  in  the  nerves,  provision  being  made  through  the
intervention  of  a  peculiar  mechanism,  to  be  further  men-
tioned in  Chap.  V.,  for  the  simultaneous  excitation  of  many
peripheral  fibres  by  means  of  one  central  fibre.  However,
the  number  of  dilferent  movements  within  the  power  of
the  conscious  will,  consequently  dirigible  by  the  brain,  is,
by  means  of  a  thousand  little  modifications  of  direction
and  combination,  for  each  single  limb  sufficiently  large — for
the  whole  body,  indeed,  simply  immeasurable  ;  so  that  the
probability  would  be  infinitely  small  that  the  conscious  idea
of  the  lifting  of  the  little  linger  should,  without  causal
connection,  coincide  with  the  actual  elevation.  The  mere
mental  representation  of  the  lifting  of  the  little  finger
cannot  act  on  the  central  nerve-endings,  since  they  have
nothing  to  do  with  one  another ;  the  mere  will,  however,
as  motor  impulse,  would  be  absolutely  blind,  and  there-
fore the  striking  of  the  right  key  would  be  left  to  pure
chance.  If  there  were  no  causal  connection  at  all,  prac-
tice could  avail  nothing  ;  for  nobody  finds  in  his  conscious-
ness an  idea  or  a  feeling  of  this  infinite  number  of  central
endings.  Thus,  if  accidentally  once  or  twice  the  conscious
idea  of  the  lifting  of  the  finger  should  coincide  with  the
executed  movement,  experience  would  have  nothing  to
go  upon;  and  on  the  third  occasion  when  the  man  v.
to  raise  his  finger,  the  touch  of  the  right  key  would  bo  as
much  left  to  chance  as  in  the  former  cases.  It  is.  then,
clear  that  practice  can  aid  the  linking  of  intention  and
execution  only  if  there  be  a  causal  nexus  between  the
two, in  which  case  certainly  the  passage  from  one  t  1  the


74  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

other  is  facilitated  by  repetition  of  the  process.  The  pro-
blem placed  before  us,  then,  is  to  find  the  causal  nexus ;
without  it  practice  would  be  an  empty  word.  It  is,  besides,
in  most  cases  not  at  all  necessary,  namely,  in  the  case  of
almost  all  animals,  which  run  and  leap  just  as  well  at  the
first  attempt  as  after  long  practice.  From  this  it  follows,
in  the  second  place,  that  all  attempts  at  explanation  are
unsatisfactory,  which  intercalate  such  a  causal  link  as  can
only  be  perceived  by  the  accidental  association  of  idea  and
movement.  The  conscious  muscular  feeling  preceding  the
intended  movement,  for  example,  which  can  only  be  ac-
quired and  imprinted  on  the  memory  by  repetition,  might
perhaps  suffice  for  explanation  in  the  case  of  man,  but  not
for  the  far  larger  part  of  natural  existences,  the  animals,
since  before  any  experience  of  muscular  feeling  they  exe-
cute with  marvellous  accuracy  the  most  extensive  combined
movements  agreeably  to  the  conscious  idea  of  the  end.
For  instance,  an  insect  just  born  correctly  alternates  its
six  logs,  as  if  locomotion  were  nothing  new  to  it,  and  a
young  brood  of  partridges,  hatched  by  a  domestic  hen  in
the  stable,  invariably,  in  spite  of  all  precautions,  imme-
diately and  correctly  employ  the  motor  muscles  of  their
legs  to  reconquer  freedom  for  their  parents,  and  know
how  to  use  their  beaks  for  picking  up  and  crushing  any
insect  they  meet  with,  as  if  they  had  already  performed
the  operation  a  hundred  times.

It  might  perhaps  be  thought  that  the  cerebral  vibra-
tions answering  to  the  conscious  idea,  "  I  will  to  lift  the
little  finger,"  occur  in  that  region  of  the  brain  where
the  nerves  have  their  central  terminations ;  this  is,  how-
ever, anatomically  incorrect,  since  the  conscious  ideas
have  their  seat  in  the  cerebrum,  but  the  motor  nerve-
endings  are  found  in  the  medulla  oblongata  or  cere-
bellum. Just  as  little  can  a  mechanical  propagation  of
the  vibrations  of  the  conscious  representation  to  the  nerve-
endings  afford  an  explanation  of  the  touching  the  right
keys. We  should  then  be  obliged  to  assume  that  the  con-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  75

scious  idea,  "  I  will  to  move  my  little  finger,"  is  localised
clscvshcre  in  the  cerebrum  than  the  other  conscious  idea,
';  I  will  to  move  my  fore-finger,"  and  that  each  of  the  places
in  the  cerebrum  corresponding  to  a  particular  idea  of  any
sort  of  movement  to  be  executed  stands,  in  virtue  of  an
inherited  mechanism,  in  intimate  connection  with  the
central  ending  of  the  motor  nerves  needed  for  realising
these  ideas,  and  with  that  alone.  The  consequences  of
this  strange  supposition  would  be  stranger  still ;  e.g.,  the
conscious  idea,  "  I  will  to  lift  the  five  fingers  of  the  right
hand,"  would  occur  simultaneously  in  the  five  places  of
the  cerebrum  which  are  appropriated  to  the  several  ideas
of  the  five  liftings  of  the  fingers ;  whereas  one  would  be
much  more  inclined  to  assume,  that  the  ideas  of  willing  to
lift  this  or  the  other  finger  are  distinguished  in  the  material
substratum  of  the  brain  rather  by  a  small  modification
of  the  form  of  vibration  than  by  definite  localisation.
Further,  were  it  only  the  propagation  of  the  molecular
vibrations  to  the  central  endings  of  the  motor  nerves
resulting  from  such  a  conscious  idea,  which  sufficed  for
the  performance  of  the  movement,  such  a  conscious  idea
as  "  I  will  to  lift  the  little  finger,"  should  always  call  forth
movement.  With  such  a  mechanism  of  fixed  and  isolated
channels,  not  only  would  error  be  impossible,  but  also  that
indescribable  impulse  of  the  will  would  be  superfluous,
which,  as  experience  teaches,  must  first  be  added  to  that
conscious  idea  before  an  effect  takes  place.  Lastly,  where
no  mistake  was  possible,  no  increase  of  accuracy  or  cer-
tainty, as  result  of  any  influence  whatever,  would  be
conceivable;  practice  also  could  have  no  influence  on
the  causal  link  between  conscious  idea  and  executed
movement.  This  consequence,  however,  contradicts  ex-
perience as  much  as  the  impossibility  of  error,  and
therefore  discredits  the  hypothesis  of  a  mechanical  com-
munication. Suppose,  however,  there  really  did  exist  such
a  mechanism,  Materialism  would  be  obliged  further  to
assume  that  it  is  transmitted by inheritance, and was


76  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

gradually  formed  in  our  primitive  ancestors  by  practice
and  habit.  In  this  genetic  theory,  where  a  part  of  this
mechanism  comes  into  existence  from  time  to  time,  the
problem  of  a  causal  connection  between  conscious  idea
and  execution  of  movement  would  again  arise  in  the  form
in  which  we  now  have  it — its  possibility,  to  wit,  without
the  help  of  an  already  existing  mechanism  for  the  given
case.  The  theory  of  transmitting  mechanisms  would
therefore  only  push  our  problem  farther  back,  not  solve
it,  and  the  solution  given  below  would  even  then,  if  that
theory  were  correct,  be  the  only  possible  one.

Lastly,  to  return  once  more  to  the  ascription  of  the
muscular  feeling  of  intended  movement  to  the  memory
of  earlier  cases  of  casual  association,  this  explanation  is
shown  to  be  one-sided  and  insufficient,  not  only  because
at  the  best  it  could  only  claim  to  explain  the  possibility
of  exercise  and  perfection  with  an  already  existing  causal
connection,  not  the  connection  itself,  but  also  because,  in
fact,  it  rfces  not  even  explain  that,  but  only  pushes  the  problem
one  step  farther  back.  Before  it  was  not  clear  how  the
striking  of  the  right  brain-keys  by  the  volitional  impulse  is
to  be  effected  through  the  idea  of  the  lifting  of  the  finger ;
now  it  is  not  clear,  how  this  result  is  to  be  brought  about
by  the  idea  of  the  muscular  feeling  in  the  finger  and  lower
arm,  since  the  one  has  as  little  to  do  with  the  position  of
the  motor  nerve-endings  in  the  brain  as  the  other,  yet  it
is  these  which  have  to  be  affected  if  the  right  event  is  to
take  place.  Of  what  direct  use  is  an  idea  referring  to  the
finger  for  the  selection  of  the  point  to  be  excited  in  the
brain  by  the  will  ?  That  there  exists  an  idea  of  the  mus-
cular feeling  somclhics,  but  comparatively  rarely,  I  do  not
at  all  deny ;  that  if  present  it  may  be  an  important  link
in  the  chain  terminating  with  movement,  I  just  as  little
deny;  but  this  I  do  deny,  that  for  the  comprehension  of
the  sought-for  union  anything  is  gained  by  its  intercala-
tion,— the  problem  is  only  carried  a  little  farther  back.
For  the  rest,  this  intercalation  has  the  less  importance,  as


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  77

in  the  majority  of  cases  where  this  muscular  feeling  at
all  exists  prior  to  movement  it  exists  unconsciously.

Let  us  once  more  gather  up  what  we  know  concerning
the  problem,  and  the  solution  will  press  on  us  of  itself.  A
will  is  given  whose  content  is  the  conscious  idea  of  the
lifting  of  a  finger,  indispensable  as  means  for  executing
a  voluntary  impulse  at  the  fixed  point  P  in  the  brain  ;
required  a  method  by  which  the  voluntary  impulse  may
strike  precisely  the  point  P  and  no  other.  The  mechanical
solution  of  a  transmission  of  vibrations  appeared  impos-
sible ;  practice  before  the  problem  was  solved  an  empty,
meaningless  word ;  the  interpolation  of  the  muscular
feeling  as  conscious  causal  middle  term  one-sided  and
no  explanation.  From  the  impossibility  of  a  mechanical
material  solution  it  follows  that  the  intermediate  link
must  be  of  a  spiritual  nature ;  from  the  decided  absence
of  a  sufficient  conscious  link  it  follows  that  the  same
must  be  unconscious.  Prom  the  necessity  of  a  voluntary
impulse  at  the  point  P  it  follows  that  the  conscious  will
to  lift  the  finger  produces  an  unconscious  will  to  excite
the  point  P,  in  order,  by  means  of  the  excitation  of  P,
to  attain'  the  object,  lifting  the  finger ;  and  the  content
of  the  will  to  excite  P,  again,  presupposes  the  uncon-
scious idea  of  the  point  P  (cf.  Chap.  iv.  A.)  The  idea  of
the  point  P  can,  however,  only  consist  in  the  idea  of  its
position  with  reference  to  the  other  points  of  the  brain,
and  herewith  the  problem  is  solved:  "Every  involuntary
movement  presupposes  the  unconscious  idea  of  the  position
of  the  corresponding  nerve-endings  in  the  brain."  Now
also  is  it  comprehensible  how  their  dexterity  is  innate  in
the  animals,  the  knowledge  just  spoken  of  and  the  skill  to
apply  it  being  born  with  them,  whilst  man,  in  consequence
of  the  immature  and  pulpy  state  of  his  brain  at  birth,  only
gradually,  by  long  practice,  succeeds  in  turning  to  good
account  his  innate  unconscious  knowledge  in  accurate  and
powerful  muscular  innervation,  it  is  now  also  intelligible
how  muscular  feeling  can  sometimes  annear  as  the  con-


78  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

necting  link.  The  excitation  of  this  muscular  feeling  is
related  to  the  lifting  of  the  finger  as  means  to  end,  in  such
a  way,  however,  that  it  is  one  step  nearer  to  the  idea  of  the
excitation  of  the  point  P  than  the  idea  of  the  lifting  of  the
finger.  It  is  thus  a  medium  which  can  be  interpolated,  but
is  better  overleaped.

We  may  then  regard  it  as  established  that  every,  even
the  slightest  movement,  whether  due  to  conscious  or
unconscious  intention,  presupposes  the  unconscious  idea
of  the  appropriate  central  nerve-endings  and  the  uncon-
scious will  to  stimulate  the  same.  We  have  accordingly
made  a  great  advance  beyond  the  results  of  the  first
chapter.  There  (cf.  pp.  68,  69)  we  only  spoke  of  the
relatively  unconscious ;  there  the  reader  was  only  to  be
accustomed  to  the  thought  that  mental  processes  go  on
within  him  (as  an  indivisible  spiritual-corporeal  organism)
of  which  his  consciousness  (i.e.,  his  cerebral  consciousness)
does  not  dream ;  here,  however,  we  have  come  across
mental  events  which,  if  they  do  not  attain  to  conscious-
ness in  the  brain,  cannot  certainly  be  conscious  for  the
other  nerve-centres  of  the  organism  :  we  have  thus  found
something  unconscious  for  the  entire  individual.


( 79 )


III.

THE UNCONSCIOUS IN INSTINCT.

Instinct  is  purposive  action  without  consciousness  of  the
purpose.  No  one  would  call  Instinct  purposive  action
1  accompanied  by  consciousness  of  the  purpose,  where
therefore  the  action  is  a  result  of  reflection;  just  as
little  a  purposeless  blind  action,  such  as  the  furious
outbursts  of  rabid  or  irritated  animals.  I  do  not  think
that  the  above  definition  can  be  objected  to  by  those
who  assume  the  existence  of  instinct ;  but  whoever  thinks
it  possible  to  refer  all  actions  usually  called  instinctive  to
conscious  reflection  does,  in  fact,  deny  instinct  altogether,
and  oucrht  accordinglv  to  strike  the  word  "instinct"  out
of  his  vocabulary. But  of  this  later  on.

First  of  all,  assuming  the  existence  of  instinctive  actions
in  the  sense  of  the  definition,  they  might  be  explained  :
(i.)  As  a  mere  consequence  of  corporeal  organisation ;  (2.)
as  a  cerebral  or  mental  mechanism  contrived  by  Nature  ;
(3.)  as  a  result  of  unconscious  mental  activity.  In  the
first  two  cases  the  idea  of  purpose  lies  far  back;  in  the
last  it  immediately  precedes  action.  In  the  first  two  an
arrangement  given  once  for  all  is  used  as  means,  and
purpose  is  only  once  concerned  in  constituting  this  arrange-
ment;  in  the  latter,  the  end  is  imagined  in  every  single
case. Let  us  take  the  three  cases  in  order.

Instinct  is  not  the  mere  result  of  bodily  organisation-,
for:  (((.)  Instincts  are  quite  different  with  simiher  lodilj/
structures.  All  spiders  have  the  same  spinning  apparatus,
hut  one  kind  constructs  its  web  radiallv,  another  in  an


So  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

irregular  manner ;  a  third  does  not  construct  a  web  at  all,
but  lives  in  hollows,  over  the  walls  of  which  it  spins,
closing  the  entrance  with  a  door.  Almost  all  birds  have
essentially  the  same  organisation  for  building  nests  (beak
and  feet),  and  how  infinitely  diverse  are  their  nests  in
form,  architecture,  mode  of  fastening  (standing,  clinging,
hanging),  locality  (caves,  holes,  corners,  forked  branches,
shrubs,  the  ground),  and  excellence,  how  different  often
in  the  species  of  the  same  genus,  e.g.,  Parus  (titmouse),
Several  birds  do  not  build  nests  at  all.  Most  birds  with
webbed  feet  swim,  but  some  not,  e.g.,  upland  geese,  which
seldom  or  never  enter  the  water,  or  the  frigate-bird,  which
is  always  hovering  in  the  air,  and  which  no  one  except
Audubon  has  ever  seen  alight  on  the  surface  of  the  sea.
Just  as  little  do  the  different  varieties  of  the  song  of
birds  depend  on  the  difference  in  their  vocal  organs,  or
the  peculiar  architecture  of  bees  and  ants  on  their  bodily
organisation;  in  all  these  cases  the  organisation  only  capa-
citates for  singing  or  building  in  general,  but  has  nothing
to  do  with  the  mode  of  execution.  Sexual  selection,
likewise,  has  nothing  to  do  with  organisation,  since  the
disposition  of  the  sexual  organs  in  any  animal  would  be
as  well  adapted  for  the  members  of  numberless  foreign
species  as  for  an  individual  of  its  own  species.  The  nur-
ture, protection,  and  training  of  the  young  can  still  less  be
considered  dependent  on  the  bodily  structure.  The  same
may  be  said  of  the  place  where  the  insect  lays  its  eggs,  or
the  selection  of  the  spawn  of  their  own  kind  on  which  the
male  fish  discharge  their  seed.  The  rabbit  burrows,  but  not
the  hare  with  similar  organs  for  digging,  but  it  less  needs  a
subterranean  place  of  refuge  on  account  of  its  greater  speed.
Some  birds  that  fiy  remarkably  well  are  stationary  birds
(e.g.,  kites  and  other  birds  of  prey),  and  many  moderate
iiyers  {e.g.,  swallows)  take  the  longest  journeys.

(b.)  The  same  instincts  appear  with  different  organisations.
Birds  with  and  without  climbing  feet,  monkeys  with  and
without  prehensile  tails,  squirrel,  sloth,  puma,  &c,  live


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  81

on  trees.  The  Mole-Cricket  burrows  with  the  prominent
fossorial  organs  of  its  anterior  extremities,  the  Burying
Beetle  digs  without  any  arrangement  for  the  purpose.
The  Hamster  carries  in  its  winter  stores  with  its  cheek-
pouches,  3  centim.  long  and  ij  centim.  broad,  the  field-
mouse  does  the  same  without  any  special  apparatus.  Birds
live  in  the  water  just  as  well  without  as  with  web  feet ;  at
any  rate,  Divers  (Podiceps)  and  Waders  (Fulica)  are  excel-
lent aquatic  birds,  although  their  toes  are  only  fringed  by
a  web.  Birds  with  elongated  tarsus  and  long  unconnected
toes  are  for  the  most  part  marsh- birds,  but  with  the  same
structure  of  the  feet  the  Moor-hen  (Ortygometra)  is  almost
as  much  an  aquatic  bird  as  the  Water-hen,  and  the  Crake
(Crex)  is  almost  as  much  a  land-bird  as  the  quail  or  the
partridge.  The  migratory  impulse  is  manifested  with
equal  intensity  by  animals  of  the  most  different  orders,  and
irrespective  of  the  outfit  with  which  they  undertake  their
journey  by  water,  land,  or  air.

It  must  accordingly  be  admitted  that  Instinct  is  in  a
high  degree  independent  of  bodily  organisation.  That
a  certain  kind  of  bodily  organisation  is  conditio  sine
qua  non  of  its  manifestation  is  a  matter  of  course  ;  for
without  sexual  parts  no  procreation,  without  certain  appro-
priate organs  no  artificial  construction,  without  spinnerets
no  spinning ;  but  in  spite  of  this  no  one  can  say  that
organisation  is  the  cause  of  instinct.  The  mere  existence
of  an  organ  does  not  furnish  the  slightest  motive  for  the
exercise  of  a  corresponding  activity;  for  that  there  must
be  at  tcast  a  feeling  of  pleasure  in  the  use  of  the  organ;
this  may  then  serve  as  motive  to  action.  But  even  then,
if  the  agreeable  feeling  affords  an  incentive  to  action,
only  the  ///'//,  not  the  how,  of  this  activity  is  determined
by  the  organisation.  The  law  of  action,  however,  is  pre-
cisely that  which  constitutes  the  problem  to  be  solved.
Xobody  would  call  it  instinct  if  the  spider  caused  the
secretion  to  How  from  its  over-filled  spinning-glands  in
order to procure the satisfaction of tiie discharge, or

VOL. I.  1


82  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

if  the  fish,  for  the  same  reason  simply  discharged  its
seed  into  the  water.  The  instinct  and  the  marvel  consist
in  this,  that  the  spider  spins  threads  and  makes  the
threads  into  a  web,  and  that  the  fish  discharges  its  seed
only  on  the  eggs  of  its  own  species.  Lastly,  the  agree-
able sensation  in  the  use  of  the  organs  is  an  altogether
insufficient  motive  for  the  activity  itself ;  for  what  is  at
once  grand  and  awe-inspiring  in  instinct  is,  that  its  behests
are  obeyed  with  utter  disregard  of  all  personal  well-being,
even  at  the  cost  of  life  itself.  Were  merely  the  pleasant
feeling  of  the  emptying  of  the  spinning  glands  the  motive
why  the  caterpillar  spins,  it  would  only  continue  to  spin
till  its  glandular  sac  was  emptied,  but  it  would  not  per-
petually repair  a  continually  destroyed  web  till  it  died
of  exhaustion.  It  is  just  the  same  with  all  other  instincts,
the  causes  of  which  are  apparently  personal  pleasure.
As  soon  as  the  circumstances  are  altered,  so  that  in
place  of  individual  weal  individual  sacrifice  occurs,  their
higher  origin  is  unmistakably  shown.  Thus,  e.g.,  it  might
be  said  that  birds  tread  for  the  sake  of  sexual  enjoyment,
but  why  then  do  they  no  longer  repeat  the  treading  when
the  proper  number  of  eggs  is  laid  ?  The  sexual  impulse
indeed  still  exists,  for,  if  an  cg.g  be  taken  from  the  nest,
they  recommence  treading  and  the  hen  lays  another  egg,
or,  if  they  belong  to  the  cleverer  birds,  they  quit  the
nest  and  rear  a  fresh  brood.  A  hen  of  Igncx  torquilla
(Wryneck),  whose  deposited  egg  was  continually  removed
from  the  nest,  kept  on  laying,  each  egg  being  smaller
than  the  preceding,  until  at  the  twenty-ninth  egg  the  bird
was  found  dead  in  the  nest.  If  an  instinct  does  not  stand
the  test  of  a  sacrifice  imposed  at  the  cost  of  individual
well-being,  if  it  really  merely  proceeds  from  the  endeavour
after  bodily  pleasure,  it  is  not  true  instinct,  and  can  only
be  so  deemed  by  mistake.

Instinct  is  not  a  cerebral  or  mental  mechanism  implanted
lij  Nature,  so  that  the  instinctive  action  could  be  executed
without  individual  (if  also  unconscious)  mental  activity,


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  83

and  without  an  idea  of  the  purpose  of  the  action,  after  the
manner  of  a  machine, — the  end  being  conceived  once  for
all  by  Nature  or  a  Providence,  which  had  so  contrived
the  psychical  organisation  that  only  a  mechanical  use  of
the  means  remained  to  the  individual.  The  suggestion
now  is,  that  a  psychical,  not  a  physical,  organisation  is
the  cause  of  instinct.  This  explanation  would  be  at  once
acceptable,  if  any  instinct  appertaining  to  an  animal  were
functional  vnthout  intermission.  This  is  not  true,  however,
of  any  instinct,  for  each  waits  upon  a  motive;  which,
according  to  our  view,  signifies  the  occurrence  of  appro-
priate external  circumstances  making  possible  the  attain-
ment of  the  end  by  those  means  which  instinct  wills  ;
not  till  then  is  instinct  functional  as  actual  will,  with
action  at  its  heels;  before  the  motive  is  present,  instinct
remains  latent,  as  it  were,  and  is  not  functional.  The
motive  appears  in  the  mind  in  the  form  of  sensuous  pre-
sentation, and  the  connection  is  constant  between  the
active  instinct  and  all  sense-perceptions,  which  indicate
that  the  opportunity  has  arrived  for  the  attainment  of  the
purpose  of  the  instinct.  The  psychical  mechanism  would
accordingly  have  to  be  sought  in  this  constant  connection.
We  should  again  have  to  imagine  a  sort  of  keyboard;  the
struck  keys  would  be  the  motives,  and  the  resounding
notes  the  functional  instincts.  This  might  be  satisfactory
in  spite  of  the  remarkable  fact  that  keys  altogether
different  give  out  the  same  sound,  if  only  instinct  were
really  comparable  to  definite  tones,  i.e.,  if  one  and  the
same  instinct  really  always  reacted  in  one  and  the  same
way  on  the  appropriate  motives.  This,  however,  is  not
tin'  case,  but  the  only  constant  element  is  the  uiicou-
sciiius  purpose  of  the  instinct;  the  instinct  itself,  however,
like  tin:  willing  of  the  menus,  varies  just  as  much  a-  the
means  to  be  appropriately  applied  vary  according  to  ti.e
external  circumstances.  A\i  hypothesis  which  rejYets  ;>,,.
unconscious  idea  of  the  end  in  each  single  ease  is  a<-i  0:0-
iinjlv condemned; for if it were desired to ivmin hi


84  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

addition  the  idea  of  this  mental  mechanism,  for  every
variation  and  modification  of  the  instinct  a  special  con-
stant arrangement  according  to  external  circumstances,
a  new  key  with  a  tone  of  another  timbre  would  have  to
be  inserted,  whereby  the  mechanism  would  be  infinitely
complicated.  That,  however,  with  every  variation  in  the
means  selected  by  instinct  the  end  is  constant  should
be  a  sufficiently  clear  indication,  that  such  an  endless
mental  complexity  is  not  needed,  but  in  lieu  thereof  the
unconscious  representation  of  an  end  is  all  that  need  be
assumed.

Thus,  e.g.,  for  the  bird  which  has  laid  its  eggs,  the  constant
end  is  to  hatch  the  chickens ;  accordingly,  if  the  external
temperature  is  insufficient,  it  sits  upon  them,  a  proceeding
omitted  only  in  very  warm  countries,  because  the  animal
sees  the  goal  of  its  instinct  attained  without  its  assistance.
In  warm  countries  many  birds  only  brood  by  night.  With
us,  too,  if  by  chance  small  birds  have  made  their  nests  in
hot  forcing-houses,  they  sit  but  little  or  not  at  all.  How
repugnant  is  the  supposition  of  a  mechanism  which  con-
strains the  bird  to  brood  as  soon  as  the  temperature  falls
below  a  certain  degree ;  how  simple  and  clear  the  assump-
tion of  an  unconscious  purpose  which  compels  the  willing
of  the  appropriate  means,  but  of  which  process  only  the
final  term,  as  a  will  immediately  preceding  action,  comes
into  consciousness  !  In  South  Africa  the  sparrow  begirds
its  nest  with  thorns  as  a  protection  against  snakes  and
apes.  The  eggs  laid  by  the  cuckoo  always  resemble  in
size,  colour,  and  marking  the  eggs  of  the  nest  wherein  they
are  laid ;  e.g.,  in  that  of  Sylvia  rufa,  they  are  white  with
violet  spots  ;  of  Sylvia  hippolais,  rose-coloured  with  black
spots;  of  Beguhis  ignicapellus,  dark  red;  and  the  resem-
blance is  so  perfect  that  the  eggs  are  scarcely  to  be  dis-
tinguished save  by  the  structure  of  the  shell.  And  yet
Drehm  enumerates  some  fifty  species  of  birds  in  whose
nests  cuckoos'  eggs  were  found  (Illustrirtes  Thierleben,  vol.
iv.  p.  197). Only  through  an  oversight,  when  the  cuckoo  is


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  85

surprised,  is  an  egg  ever  deposited  in  a  wrong  nest,  as  well
as  occasionally  left  to  perish  on  the  ground,  if  the  mother
was  unable  to  find  a  suitable  nest  at  the  right  time. —
Huber  by  special  contrivances  prevented  bees  from  carry-
ing on  their  instinctive  mode  of  building  from  above  down-
wards, whereupon  they  built  from  below  upwards,  and
even  horizontally.  Where  the  outermost  cells  are  attached
to  the  roof  of  the  hive  or  lean  against  the  wall,  the  prisms,
which  are  agglutinated  together  by  their  base  alone,  are
not  hexagonal  but  pentagonal,  for  more  durable  fastening.
In  autumn  bees  lengthen  the  existing  honey  cells,  if  there
are  not  enough  of  them;  in  spring  they  shorten  them
again  in  order  to  obtain  broader  passages  between  the
combs.  If  the  honeycombs  have  become  too  heavy,  they
replace  the  waxen  walls  of  the  highest  (supporting)  cells
by  thicker  ones,  formed  of  wax  and  propolis.  If  working-
bees  are  introduced  into  the  cells  destined  for  drones,  the
workers  apply  the  corresponding  flat  rootlets  instead  of
the  round  ones  belonging  to  the  drones.  In  the  autumn
they  regularly  kill  the  drones,  but  allow  them  to  live  if
the  queen  is  lost,  that  they  may  impregnate  the  young
queen  which  is  to  be  reared  from  the  larvae  of  female
workers.  Huber  observed  that  they  barred  the  entrance
of  their  hive  against  raids  of  hawk-moths  with  artificial
constructions  of  wax  and  propolis  ;  they  only  carry  in
propolis  when  they  want  to  make  any  improvements  or
for  special  purposes.  Spiders  and  caterpillars  also  show
a  remarkable  skill  in  repairing  their  ruined  web,  which
is  quite  a  different  kind  of  work  from  the  first  manufac-
ture of  a  web.

The  examples  cited,  which  might  be  indefinitely  added
to,  sufficiently  prove  that  instincts  are  not  actions  mechani-
cally performed  in  accordance  with  fixed  rules,  but  that
they  are  rather  very  closely  adapted  to  circumstances,  and
are  capable  of  such  great  modifications  and  variations,  that
they  sometimes  seem  to  be  converted  into  their  oppusites.
Many  will  be  inclined  to  ascribe  this  modification  to  con-


86  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

scious  reflection  on  the  part  of  the  animals  ;  and  certainly
in  animals  more  highly  endowed  in  most  cases  a  combina-
tion of  instinctive  activity  and  conscious  reflection  is  not
to  be  denied.  However,  I  believe  that  the  examples
a  Jduced  satisfactorily  prove  that  there  are  also  many  cases
where,  without  any  intervention  of  conscious  reflection,
the  ordinary  and  extraordinary  actions  arise  from  the
same  source ;  that  they  are  either  both  true  instinct  or
both  results  of  conscious  reflection.  Or  is  it  really  a
different  power  which  causes  the  bee  to  build  in  the
middle  hexagonal,  at  the  edge  pentagonal  prisms;  which
leads  the  bird  to  brood  over  its  eggs  in  the  one  set  of
circumstances,  and  not  to  brood  in  the  other  set;  which
causes  the  bees  now  pitilessly  to  murder  their  brethren,
now  to  give  them  their  life ;  which  teaches  birds  the
architecture  of  their  species  and  their  special  measures
of  precaution;  which  leads  the  spider  to  spin  its  web,
and  mend  it  when  injured  ?  If  it  be  granted  that  the
modifications  of  instinct,  together  with  its  most  usual
fundamental  form,  which  is  often  quite  indeterminable,
spring  from  a  single  source,  then  the  allegation  of  con-
scious reflection  is  self-refuted  later  on,  where  the  same
objection  is  brought  against  instinct  in  general.  It  may,
perhaps,  not  be  improper  to  anticipate  here  the  conclu-
sion of  a  subsequent  chapter,  namely,  that  instinct  and
organic  formative  activity  contain  one  and  the  same  prin-
ciple, only  manifested  under  different  circumstances,  and
that  they  shade  into  one  another  without  any  definite
boundaries.  Admit  this,  and  it  is  evident  that  instinct
cannot  depend  on  the  organisation  of  the  body  or  of  the
brain,  since  it  would  be  much  more  correct  to  say  that
organisation  arises  through  a  manifestation  of  instinct.
This,  however,  only  by  the  way. —

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  now  to  direct  our  atten-
tion again  more  closely  to  the  notion  of  a  psychical
mechanism,  when  it  will  appear  that,  apart  from  the  fact
that  it  explains  very  little,  it  is  so  obscure  that  it  hardly


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  87

conveys  any  idea  at  all.  The  motive  appears  in  the  mind
in  the  form  of  a  conscious  sensuous  presentation.  This  is
the  first  term  of  the  process ;  the  last  term  appears  as
conscious  will  to  some  particular  action.  Both,  however,
are  quite  heterogeneous,  and  have  nothing  in  common  with
ordinary  motivation,  which  consists  exclusively  in  this —
that  the  idea  of  pleasure  or  displeasure  begets  the  desire
to  attain  the  former  and  avoid  the  latter.  In  instinct,
pleasure,  for  the  most  part,  appears  as  a  concomitant
phenomenon,  although,  as  we  have  already  seen,  it  is  not
at  all  necessary;  but  the  full  power  and  grandeur  of  instinct
is  only  shown  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  individual.  But  the
real  problem  is  here  a  far  deeper  one,  for  every  idea  of  a
pleasure  presupposes  that  this  pleasure  has  been  already
experienced.  It  follows  again  from  this  that  in  the  former
case  a  will  was  present,  in  the  satisfaction  of  which
pleasure  consisted,  and  whence  the  will  comes  heforc  the
pleasure  is  known,  and  without  a  bodily  pain,  as  in  the
case  of  hunger,  urgently  demanding  relief,  is  the  very  ques-
tion, since  one  may  see  in  the  case  of  any  solitary  animal
that  the  instinctive  impulses  appear  before  it  can  have
got  to  know  the  pleasure  of  their  satisfaction.  In  instinct
there  must,  therefore,  be  a  causal  connection  between  the
sensuous  presentation  which  serves  as  motive  and  tin;
will  to  aet  instinctively,  with  which  the  pleasure  of  the
satisfaction  that  follows  has  nothing  to  do.  This  causal
connection,  as  we  know  from  our  human  instincts,  does
not  enter  exponentially  into  consciousness  ;  consequently,
if  it  is  to  be  styled  a  mechanism,  it  can  only  be  either
a  (non-conscious)  mechanical  conduction  and  conversion
of  the  vibrations  of  the  presented  motive  into  the  vibra-
tions of  the  willed  action  in  the  brain,  or  an  unconscious
mental  mechanism.  In  the  first  case,  it  would  be  very
wonderful  that  this  transaction  should  remain  unc  mscious,
since  the  process  is  so  powerful  that  the  will  resulting
from  it  overcomes  all  other  considerations,  every  other
will,  and  such  cerebral  vibrations  alwavs  become  conscious.


88  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

It  is  also  difficult  to  form  an  idea  of  the  way  in  which  this
conversion  could  take  place,  so  that  the  end  set  up  once  for
all  should  be  attained  by  the  resulting  will  with  the  varying
circumstances.  If  the  other  case, — an  unconscious  mental
mechanism, — be  assumed,  the  process  cannot  well  be  con-
ceived under  any  other  form  than  that  which  holds  good  of
mind  in  general,  thinking  and  willing.  Between  the  con-
scious motive  and  the  will  to  the  instinctive  action  a  causal
connection  has  to  be  imagined  by  means  of  unconscious
ideation  and  volition,  and  I  know  not  how  this  connection
can  be  more  simply  conceived  than  by  represented  and
willed  purpose.  We  have  now  reached  the  mechanism
peculiar  to  mind,  and  immanent  of  Logic,  and  have  found
the  unconscious  idea  of  purpose  to  be  the  indispensable
link  in  the  case  of  each  single  instinctive  action.  Accord-
ingly, the  notion  of  a  dead,  external,  preordained  mental
mechanism  is  abolished  of  itself,  and  changed  into  the
immanent  mental  life  of  Logic  ;  and  we  have  reached
the  only  remaining  mode  of  conceiving  a  real  instinct :
Instinct  is  conscious  willing  of  the  means  to  an  unconsciously
willed  end.  This  conception  explains  in  an  unforced  and
simple  way  the  whole  problem  offered  by  instinct,  or,  more
correctly,  in  thus  declaring  the  true  nature  of  instinct
everything  problematical  vanishes.  In  a  separate  essay  on
Instinct,  the  notion  of  unconscious  mental  activity,  as  yet
unfamiliar  to  our  educated  public,  would  perhaps  arouse
opposition  ;  but  here,  where  in  each  chapter  new  facts  are
adduced,  proving  the  existence  of  this  unconscious  mental
activity  and  its  striking  significance,  any  scruple  due  to
the  novelty  of  this  thought  will  be  evanescent.

Although  compelled  decidedly  to  reject  the  notion  that
instinct  is  merely  the  action  of  a  pre-arranged  mechanism,
I  did  not  at  all  intend  to  exclude  the  supposition  of  con-
stitutional tendencies  of  the  brain,  of  the  ganglia,  and
of  the  body  as  a  whole,  determining  the  nervous  current
more  easily  and  more  conveniently  into  one  channel  rather
than  into  another. This  predisposition  is  then  either  a


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  89

result  of  habit,  graving  its  lines  deeper  and  deeper,  and
at  last  leaving  indelible  traces  behind  it,  either  in  the
special  individual  or  by  inheritance  in  a  series  of  genera-
tions, or  it  is  expressly  called  forth  by  the  unconscious
formative  impulse,  in  order  to  facilitate  action  in  a
particular  direction.  The  latter  case  will  have  more
application  to  the  external  organisation — e.g.,  the  weapons
and  working  implements  of  animals — the  former  more  to
the  molecular  constitution  of  brain  and  ganglia,  especially
in  respect  to  the  ever-recurring  fundamental  power
of  instinct — e.g.,  the  hexagonal  form  of  the  cell  of  the
bee.  We  shall  see  later  on  (B.  Chap,  iv.)  that  the  sum
of  individual  modes  of  reaction  on  all  possible  kinds  of
motives  is  called  the  individual  character,  and  (C.  Chap,
xi.  2)  that  this  character  is  essentially  dependent  on  a
constitution  of  brain  and  body  in  lesser  degree  acquired
by  the  individual  by  habit,  in  greater  part  inherited.
Since,  now,  in  the  case  of  instinct,  we  have  to  do  with  a
mode  of  reaction  on  certain  motives,  we  may  speak  here
too  of  character,  although  we  are  not  so  much  con-
cerned with  the  character  of  the  individual  as  of  the
race.  Accordingly,  in  the  case  of  character  in  respect  of
instinct,  the  question  is  not  how  one  individual  is  dis-
tinguished from  another,  but  how  one  animal  class  is
distinguished  from  another.

If  such  a  predisposition  of  brain  and  body  for  certain
active  tendencies  be  called  a  mechanism,  in  a  certain
sense  that  may  be  allowed  to  pass  ;  but  it  should  be  re-
marked: (1.)  that  all  deviations  from  the  customary  form
of  any  instinct,  so  far  as  they  cannot  be  ascribed  to  con-
scious reflection,  are  not  specifically  provided  for  in  this
mechanism;  (2.)  that  inheritance  is  only  possible  through
the  continual  guidance  of  the  embryonic  development  by
a  well-adjusted  unconscious  formative  activity  (certainly
again  influenced  by  the  predispositions  given  in  the  germ  :
13.)  that  the  engraining  of  the  tendency  in  the  transmit-
ting individual  could  only  take  place  by  long  hahituath  n


90  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

to  the  same  mode  of  action,  accordingly  instinct  without
auxiliary  mechanism  is  the  cause  of  the  origin  of  the
auxiliary  mechanism ;  (4.)  that  all  instinctive  actions
which  only  occur  rarely  or  merely  once  in  the  lifetime  of
an  individual  {e.g.,  those  relative  to  propagation  and
metamorphosis  in  the  case  of  the  lower  animals,  and  all
such  instinctive  forbearance  when  a  contrary  effect  would
be  followed  by  death)  cannot  well  be  engrained  by  habit,
but  a  ganglionic  constitution  predisposing  thereto  could
only  be  produced  by  purposive  creation  ;  (5.)  that  even
the  ready-made  auxiliary  mechanisn  does  not  precisely
necessitate,  but  merely  'predisposes  the  Unconscious  to  this
particular  instinctive  action  (as  is  shown  by  deviations  from
the  type),  so  that  the  unconscious  purpose  always  remains
stronger  than  the  ganglionic  predisposition,  and  only  finds
occasion  to  choose  among  the  means  lying  ready  to  hand
those  nearest  and  most  suitable  to  the  constitution.

We  now  approach  more  closely  the  question  we  have
reserved  to  the  last :  "  Is  there  such  a  thing  as  a  true
instinct,  or  are  the  so-called  instinctive  actions  only
results  of  conscious  premeditation  ?  "  In  favour  of  the
latter  hypothesis  there  might  be  cited  the  well-known
experience  that  the  more  limited  the  range  of  the  con-
scious mental  activities  of  any  being,  the  stronger  is  wont
to  be  the  executive  faculty  in  the  particular  limited  direc-
tion relatively  to  the  extent  of  the  total  capacity.  This
experience,  frequently  confirmed  in  the  case  of  man,  and
certainly  applicable  to  animals  also,  finds  its  explanation
in  the  circumstance  that  the  degree  of  this  performance
is  only  in  part  dependent  on  the  mental  structure,  in  part
also,  however,  on  the  exercise  and  improvement  of  the
natural  disposition  in  this  special  direction.  Tims,  e.g.,  a
philologist  is  unskilful  in  legal  processes  of  thinking,  a
naturalist  or  mathematician  in  philological,  an  abstract
philosopher  in  poetic  invention,  quite  apart  from  special
talent,  solely  in  consequence  of  one-sided  mental  cultiva-
tion and  practice. Xow  the  narrower  the  sphere  of  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  91

mental  activity  of  any  being,  the  more  is  the  whole  culture
and  training  concentrated  in  this  single  direction,  conse-
quently it  is  no  wonder  that  the  resulting  performances  in
this  line  are  enhanced  through  the  narrowing  of  the  field
of  view  relatively  to  the  total  capacity.  But  if  this  pheno-
menon be  used  to  explain  the  action  of  instinct,  the
limitation  "relatively  to  the  total  capacity"  must  not  be
left  out  of  sight.  Since,  however,  the  lower  the  rank  in
the  animal  scale  the  less  the  total  capacity,  and  yet  the
instinctive  performances  remain  in  respect  to  perfection
tolerably  equal  at  all  stages  of  the  animal  kingdom,  whereas
those  effects  which  unquestionably  proceed  from  con-
scious reflection  are  manifestly  proportional  to  the  mental
capacity,  it  seems  to  follow  that  in  the  case  of  instinct
we  have  to  do  with  some  other  principle  than  conscious
understanding.  "We  further  see  that  the  conscious  per-
formances of  animals  are  in  fact  similar  in  kind  to  our
own  ;  that  they  are  made  possible  through  teaching  and
instruction  and  are  perfected  by  exercise.  Even  in  the  case
of  animals  it  is  said  understanding  only  comes  with  years.
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  instinctive  actions,  the
peculiarity  is  just  this,  that  they  are  performed  just  as
perfectly  by  animals  growing  up  in  solitude  as  by  such  as
have  enjoyed  the  instruction  of  their  parents,  and  that  the
success  is  as  great  on  the  very  first  occasion,  prior  to  all
experience  and  exercise,  as  at  any  later  period.  Here
too,  the  difference  in  principle  is  unmistakable.  Then
experience  teaches:  the  more  limited  and  weak  an  under-
standing, the  more  sluggish  the  flow  of  idea-,  i.e.,  the
slower  and  heavier  its  conscious  thinking.  This  is  .
t rated  both  by  human  beings  of  di He-rent  mental
and  by  the  brutes,  so  far  as  instinct  does  not  come  into
play.  Hut  instinct  has  this  peculiarity,  that  it  never
t;  lavs  and  hesitates,  but  instantaneously  openitcs,  ::'  the
motive  for  its  operation  consciously  occurs.  This  rapidity
1  :'  resolution  in  instinctive  action  is  met  with  alike  i:i
the  lowest  and  in  the  highest  animals. This  is  ,  :.


92  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

circumstance  pointing  to  a  difference  in  principle  of  instinct
and  conscious  reflection.

Lastly,  as  concerns  the  pitch  of  performance,  a  hurried
glance  at  once  detects  the  want  of  proportion  between
the  same  and  the  stage  of  mental  development.  Look
at  the  caterpillar  of  the  Emperor  Moth  (Saturnia pavonia
minor).  It  devours  the  leaves  of  the  shrub  whereon  it
was  hatched;  at  the  most,  moves  when  it  rains  to  the
underside  of  the  leaf,  and  changes  its  skin  from  time  to
time ;  that  is  its  whole  life,  which  hardly  allows  one  to
look  for  even  the  most  limited  education  of  the  intelli-
gence. But  now  it  spins  its  cocoon  for  the  chrysalis  state,
and  constructs  for  itself  a  double  arch  of  bristles  meeting
at  their  apices,  very  easy  to  open  from  within,  but  which
opposes  on  the  outside  sufficient  resistance  to  any  attempts
to  penetrate  into  it.  If  this  contrivance  were  a  result  of
its  conscious  understanding,  it  would  require  the  following
train  of  thought :  "  I  shall  enter  the  chrysalis  state,  and,
immovable  as  I  am,  be  at  the  mercy  of  every  adver-
sary ;  therefore  I  will  spin  myself  a  cocoon.  Since,  how-
ever, as  butterfly  I  shall  not  be  able  to  make  a  breach  in
the  web  either  by  mechanical  or  chemical  means  as  many
other  caterpillars  do,  I  must  leave  an  aperture  for  egress  ;
but  that  my  persecutors  may  not  make  use  of  it,  I  shall
close  it  with  elastic  bristles,  which  I  can  easily  bend
apart  from  the  inside,  but  which  will  offer  resistance  ex-
ternally, according  to  the  theory  of  the  arch."  That  is
really  asking  too  much  of  the  poor  caterpillar  !  And  yet
each  step  of  this  argumentation  is  indispensable  if  the
result  is  to  be  correctly  got  at.

This  theoretical  discrimination  of  Instinct  from  the
conscious  activity  of  the  understanding  could  easily  be
misinterpreted  by  the  opponents  of  my  way  of  regarding
the  matter,  as  if  I  asserted  a  wide  gulf  to  exist  between
the  two  in  practice  likewise.  The  latter,  however,  is  by
no  means  my  opinion;  on  the  contrary,  I  have  already
pointed  to  the  possibility  of  both  kinds  of  psychical  activity


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  93

being  combined  in  different  proportions,  so  that  through
their  intermixtures  in  different  degrees,  there  occurs  a
gradual  transition  from  pure  instinct  to  pure  conscious
reflection.  We  shall,  however,  see  later  on  (B.  Chap,  vii.)
that  even  in  the  highest  and  most  abstract  rational  acti-
vity of  the  human  consciousness  there  are  certain  factors
of  the  highest  importance,  which  essentially  agree  with
that  of  instinct.

On  the  other  side,  however,  the  most  wonderful  mani-
festations of  instinct  not  only  occur  in  the  vegetable
kingdom  (as  we  shall  see  in  C.  Chap,  iv.),  but  also  in
those  lowest  organisms  of  the  simplest  structure,  in  part
unicellular,  which  in  any  case  stand  far  below  the  higher
plants  in  conscious  intelligence,  but  to  which  such  a
power  is  usually  denied.  If  in  such  microscopic  unicel-
lular organisms,  in  respect  of  which  the  question  whether
they  are  of  animal  or  of  vegetable  nature  is  devoid  of
meaning,  we  must  admire  instinctive  adjustments  which
far  exceed  merely  reflectorially  stimulated  movements,
then  every  doubt  must  be  laid  to  rest,  whether  there
really  exists  an  instinct,  the  derivation  of  which  from
conscious  rational  activity  appears  radically  hopeless.  I
adduce  as  an  example  a  recently  observed  phenomenon,
which  is  perhaps  more  astonishing  than  anything
previously  recognised,  because  the  problem  is  therein
solved  of  accomplishing,  with  incredibly  simple  means,
various  ends  to  which  in  higher  animals  a  complicated
system  of  motor  organs  is  subservient.

Arcclla  vulgaris  is  a  lump  of  protoplasm  in  a  concavo-
convex,  brown,  finely  perforated  shell,  from  the  concave
side  of  which  it  protrudes  through  a  circular  opening,  by
means  of  processes  (pseudopodia).  If  a  drop  of  water,
containing  living  arcella!  be  observed  through  a  miero-
.  a  specimen  may  usually  be  seen  accidentally  lyinu'
on  its  back  at  the  bottom  of  the  drop  of  water,  making  vain
efforts  for  one  or  two  minutes  to  grasp  a  firm  point  with
its psi  udopo  iia. Then  there  suddenly  appear  generally


94  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

from  two  to  five,  sometimes  even  more,  dark  specks  in  the
protoplasm  at  a  mean  distance  from  the  periphery,  and
usually  at  regular  intervals  from  each  other,  which  are
quickly  enlarged  to  distinct  spherical  air-bubbles,  and  at
last  fill  a  respectable  part  of  the  hollow  of  the  shell,  thereby
thrusting  out  a  portion  of  the  protoplasm.  The  number
and  size  of  the  several  bubbles  are  in  inverse  proportion.
After  five  to  twenty  minutes  the  specific  gravity  of  the
Arcella  is  so  far  reduced  that  the  animalcule,  lifted  from
the  water  by  its  pseudopodia,  is  carried  towards  the  upper
surface  of  the  drop,  on  which  it  now  walks.  Then  after  five
to  ten  minutes  the  bubbles  disappear,  the  last  little  speck
by  jerks,  as  it  were.  If,  however,  as  the  result  of  an
accidental  twist,  the  Arcella  comes  up  to  the  surface  of
the  drop,  the  vesicles  continue  to  grow,  but  only  on  one
side,  becoming  smaller  on  the  other;  in  consequence
of  which  the  shell  assumes  a  position  more  and  more
oblique,  and  at  last  vertical,  until  finally  one  of  the  pro-
cesses takes  firm  hold,  and  the  whole  turns  over.  Trom
the  moment  that  the  animal  gains  a  firm  footing  the
vesicles  become  smaller,  and  the  experiment  may  be
repeated  as  often  as  it  pleases  after  their  disappearance.
The  places  of  the  protoplasm  which  form  the  bubbles
continually  change ;  the  non-nucleated  protoplasm  of  the
pseudopodia  alone  does  not  contain  air.  With  longer
fruitless  endeavours  there  occurs  visible  exhaustion  ;  the
animal  abandons  the  attempt  for  a  time,  and  renews  it
after  a  pause  for  refreshment.  Engelmaun,  the  discoverer
of  this  phenomenon,  says  (Pfliiger's  Arcliiv  fiir  Physiologic,
vol.  ii.)  :  ''The  changes  of  volume  usually  take  place  in
all  air-bubbles  of  the  same  animal  simultaneously,  in  the
same  way  and  in  the  same  degree.  There  are,  however,
not  a  few  exceptions.  Frequently  some  grow  or  diminish
much  quicker  than  others.  It  may  even  happen  that  one
air-bubble  beeomes  smaller  while  another  increases.  All
these  changes  are  throiKjltout  perfectly  adapted  to  their  end.
The  formation  and  growth  of  the  air-bubbles  has  for  object


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  95

the  bringing  the  animal  into  such  a  position  that  it  can
maintain  itself  by  means  of  its  pseudopodia.  When  this
end  is  attained  the  air  disappears,  without  our  being  in  a
position  to  discover  any  other  reason  for  this  disappear-
ance. ...  If  these  circumstances  be  taken  note  of,  it
is  possible,  with  almost  complete  certainty,  to  foretell
whether  an  Arcella  will  develop  air-bubbles  or  not,  and,
in  case  gas-bubbles  are  already  in  existence,  whether  they
will  expand  or  become  smaller.  ...  In  the  power  of  chang-
ing their  specific  gravity  the  Arcelke  possess  a  remarkable
expedient  for  rising  to  the  surface  of  the  water  or  for
settling  at  the  bottom.  They  not  only  avail  themselves
of  these  means  under  the  abnormal  circumstances  in
which  they  find  themselves  during  microscopic  investi-
gation, but  also  under  normal  circumstances.  This  is
concluded  from  the  fact  that  at  the  surface  of  the  water,
where  they  live,  a  few  specimens  are  always  found  to
contain  air-bubbles." —

Those  whom  the  foregoing  instances  do  not  constrain
to  reject  the  explanation  of  instinct  by  conscious  reflec-
tion must  admit  the  demonstrative  force  of  the  follow-
ing highly  important  testimony  of  facts.  Thus  much  is
certain,  that  the  reilection  of  conscious  understanding  can
only  take  into  account  such  data  as  are  given  in  con-
sciousness ;  if,  then,  it  can  be  definitely  proved  that  data
indispensable  for  the  result  cannot  possibly  be  conscious!  1/
known,  it  is  thereby  proved  that  the  result  cannot  spring
from  conscious  deliberation.  The  only  way,  according  to
the  common  assumption,  whereby  the  knowledge  of  ex-
ternal facts  can  be  obtained  is  sensuous  perception;  we
have  then  to  show  that  knowledge  indispensable  to  the
result  cannot  possibly  be  obtained  by  means  of  sensuous
perception.  The  following  are  the  points  to  be  proved:
Firstly,  that  the  facts  in  question  belong  to  the  future,
and  all  data  are  wanting  in  the  present  circumstances
w  herefrom  to  infer  their  occurrence  in  the  future  ;  secon  iiy,
that  the  facts  in  question  do  indeed  exist  at  the  present


96  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

time,  but  are  manifestly  closed  to  conscious  apprehension
by  the  circumstance,  that  only  the  experience  of  former
cases  can  supply  material  for  the  interpretation  of  the
data  afforded  by  sensuous  perception,  and  this  experi-
ence, so  observation  shows,  is  excluded.  It  would  make
no  difference,  as  far  as  our  argument  is  concerned,  if,
as  I  hold  to  be  probable,  in  the  progress  of  physiological
knowledge,  all  examples  about  to  be  cited  for  the  first
case  should  turn  out  to  belong  to  the  second,  as  has
undeniably  happened  with  many  examples  formerly
adduced.  For  an  a  priori  knowledge  without  any  ap-
pulse  from  the  side  of  sense  is  hardly  to  be  called  more
wonderful  than  a  knowledge  which  is  evinced,  indeed,
on  occasion  of  certain  sensuous  perceptions,  but  can  only
be  conceived  to  be  connected  therewith  by  such  a  chain
of  inferences  and  applied  knowledge,  that  its  possibility
must  be  decidedly  denied  in  the  state  of  the  faculties  and
development  of  the  particular  animals. — An  example  of
the  first  case  is  afforded  by  the  instance  of  the  larva
of  the  Stag-beetle  in  digging  for  itself  a  suitable  cavity,
on  occasion  of  passing  into  the  chrysalis  state.  The
female  larva  digs  a  hole  as  large  as  itself;  the  male,
however,  though  of  the  same  size,  one  as  large  again,
because  the  horns  which  will  hereafter  be  developed  are
about  the  length  of  the  animal.  The  knowledge  of  this
circumstance  is  indispensable  to  the  result,  and  yet  every
indication  is  wanting  at  the  time  whereby  to  infer  this
future  event.  The  following  is  an  example  of  the  second
case : — Ferrets  and  buzzards  fall  upon  blind-worms  or
other  non-poisonous  snakes  without  more  ado,  and  seize
them  just  as  they  come  in  their  way  ;  the  adder  however,
even  if  they  have  never  seen  one  before,  they  grasp
with  the  greatest  circumspection,  and  try  first  of  all
to  crush  its  head,  in  order  to  avoid  being  bitten.  Since
there  exists  nothing  else  capable  of  inspiring  fear  in
the  adder,  if  this  behaviour  is  to  proceed  from  conscious
reflection,  the  conscious  knowledge  of  the  dangerous  char-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  97

acter  of  its  bite  is  indispensable.  But  now,  as  this  can
only  be  gained  by  experience,  and  yet  the  same  precaution
is  observed  by  animals  that  have  been  kept  in  confine-
ment from  their  birth,  it  cannot  proceed  from  reflection.
On  the  other  hand,  there  evidently  follows  from  these
two  examples  the  fact  of  an  unconscious  cognition  of
particular  circumstances,  the  existence  of  an  immediate
knowledge  without  the  intervention  of  sensuous  percep-
tion and  consciousness.

This  has  always  been  recognised  and  indicated  by  the
words  fore-feeling  and  presentiment.  But,  on  the  one
hand,  these  terms  have  reference  only  to  the  future,  not  to
that  which  exists  at  the  present  time  but  is  imperceptible
owing  to  its  remoteness ;  on  the  other,  they  denote  only
the  slight,  vague,  undefined  resonance  in  consciousness  of
the  unerring  and  sure  state  of  unconscious  knowledge.
Accordingly,  the  word  fore-feeling  is  appropriate  so  far  as
vagueness  and  indefiniteness  are  suggested,  whilst  at  the
same  time  it  is  easy  to  see  that  no  mere  feeling  devoid
of  all,  even  unconscious  ideas,  can  have  any  influence  on
the  result,  but  only  a  mental  representation,  since  this
alone  contains  knowledge.  The  presentiment  reverberat-
ing in  consciousness  may  certainly,  in  certain  circum-
stances, be  tolerably  distinct,  so  that  among  human  beings
it  can  be  fixed  in  thoughts  and  words;  but  even  in  man,
as  our  experience  teaches  us,  this  is  not  the  case  with  the
instincts  proper,  for  in  their  case  the  resonance  of  uncon-
scious knowledge  in  consciousness  is  mostly  so  weak,  as
to  be  actually  expressed  only  in  accompanying  feelings  or
moods,  and  to  form  only  an  infinitely  small  fraction  of
common  feeling.  That  such  an  obscure  sympathy  on  the
part  of  consciousness  is  quite  insufficient  to  give  the  cue
1 1 1  conscious  reflect ion  is  evident.  On  the  other  hand, it  is
also  clear  that  conscious  reflection  would  be  superfluous,
since  the  particular  rational  process  must  have  been
already  unconsciously  performed:  for  every  vague  Tire-
sentiment  in  consciousness  is  only  the  consequence  of  a

VOL. I.  O


93  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

definite  unconscious  knowledge,  and  the  knowledge,  of
which  we  are  here  speaking,  is  almost  always  the  idea  of
the  purpose  of  the  instinctive  action,  or  one  closely  con-
nected therewith.  E.g.,  in  the  case  of  the  larva  of  the
Stag-beetle,  the  aim  is  to  have  room  for  the  two  sprout-
ing horns ;  the  means,  to  procure  room  by  excavation ;
the  unconscious  perception,  the  future  growth  of  the  two
horns.  Lastly,  all  instinctive  actions  give  the  impression
of  absolute  certainty  and  self-assurance,  and  there  never
occurs  in  them,  as  in  conscious  resolution,  any  delay,  doubt,
or  hesitation,  never  (as  will  be  shown  in  C.  Chap,  i.)  any
genuine  error,  so  that  one  cannot  possibly  ascribe  to  the
obscure  nature  of  the  presentiment  such  an  invariable
precise  result;  indeed  this  feature  of  absolute  accuracy
is  so  characteristic,  that  it  may  pass  for  the  only  clear
defining  mark  of  action  from  instinct  when  compared  with
action  from  conscious  reflection.  From  this,  however,  it
again  follows  that  a  principle  altogether  different  from  that
which  underlies  conscious  action  must  be  at  the  bottom  of
instinct,  and  that  can  only  be  found  in  the  determination  of
the  will  by  a  process  lying  in  the  Unconscious,  for  which
this  character  of  undoubted  self-assurance  is  claimed  in
all  the  following  inquiries.

Some  may  be  surprised  that  I  have  ascribed  to  instinct
an  unconscious  knowledge,  produced  by  no  sensible  expe-
rience, and  yet  unerring ;  but  this  is  no  consequence  of  my
view  of  Instinct,  but  rather  a  strong  support  of  this  view,
derived  directly  from  the  facts.  Accordingly  we  cannot
be  spared  the  trouble  of  considering  a  number  of  examples
illustrative  of  this  point.  In  order  to  be  able  to  use  a
single  word  for  the  unconscious  knowledge,  which  has
not  been  acquired  by  way  of  sensuous  perception,  but  is
met  with  as  an  immediate  possession,  I  shall  (as  "  presen-
timent," for  the  reasons  assigned,  is  not  suitable)  employ
the  term  "  clairvoyance,"  which,  it  must  be  clearly  under-
stood, will  here  only  have  the  force  of  the  given  definition.

Let  us  now  consider  in  order  a  few  examples  from  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  99

instincts  of  fear  of  enemies,  appetence,  the  migratory
impulse,  and  propagation.  —  Most  animals  know  their
natural  enemies  before  any  experience  of  their  hostile
intentions.  Thus  a  flock  of  young  pigeons  becomes
alarmed,  even  without  an  older  guide,  and  scatters  if  a
bird  of  prey  approaches.  Oxen  and  horses,  indigenous
in  regions  where  there  are  no  lions,  no  sooner  scent  a
nocturnal  prowler  than  they  become  restless  and  anxious.
Horses,  on  crossing  a  bridle-path  which  ran  past  the  old
house  of  the  beasts  of  prey  of  the  Berlin  Zoological
Garden,  were  wont  to  become  terrified  and  restless  on
scenting  their  wholly  unknown  enemies.  Sticklebacks
swim  quietly  about  among  the  rapacious  pikes,  which  do
not  attempt  to  attack  them  ;  for  if  by  oversight  a  pike  ever
actually  attempts  to  swallow  a  stickleback,  the  latter  with
its  projecting  dorsal  spines  sticks  in  his  throat,  and  the
pike  must  infallibly  die  of  hunger;  accordingly  cannot
transmit  his  painful  experience  to  posterity.  The  fore-
sight of  the  ferret  and  buzzard  in  regard  to  adders  has
been  already  mentioned  ;  similarly  it  was  observed  that
a  young  Honey-buzzard,  on  being  presented  with  its
first  wasp,  only  devoured  the  animal  after  it  had  crushed
the  sting  out  of  its  body.  In  some  countries  the  people
live  chiefly  on  dog's  flesh.  Bogs  in  the  presence  of  these
people  are  said  to  become  quite  wild  and  ungovernable,  as
if  they  recognised  in  them  foes  whom  they  would  like  to
attack.  This  is  the  more  remarkable,  as  dog's  fat  out-
wardly applied  (e.g.,  rubbed  on  the  shoes),  attracts  dogs
by  its  smell.  A  young  chimpanzee,  at  the  first  sight  of
a  gigantic  snake,  was  observed  by  Grant  to  fall  into  the
greatest  alarm  ;  and  even  among  us  human  beings,  too,  it
is  not  so  rare  for  a  Gretchen  to  spy  out  a  Menhistophcles.
Very  remarkable  is  it  that  the  insect  Hombex  attacks  ami
slays  a  L'arnope  wherever  it  finds  one,  without  making
any  use  of  the  corpse.  We  know,  however,  that  the  latter
lies  in  wait  for  the  eggs  of  the  Bombex,  and  is  thereto: e
the  natural  foe  of  its  race. The  phenomenon  well  k:


ioo  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

to  the  tenders  of  oxen  and  sheep  as  "the  goading  of
cattle  by  the  gadfly  "  furnishes  analogous  evidence.  If  a
"  breeze  "  or  gadfly  approaches  a  herd,  the  latter  become
quite  wild  and  run  hither  and  thither  in  confusion  as  if
beside  themselves,  because  the  hatched  larvae  from  the
eggs  of  the  fly  deposited  on  their  hide  penetrate  the  skin
and  cause  painful  festerings.  These  gadflies,  which  have
no  sting,  very  much  resemble  the  stinging  gadflies,  and
yet  the  latter  are  but  slightly,  the  former  extremely,  feared
by  cattle.  As  the  consequences  of  the  painless  deposition
of  the  eggs  only  make  their  appearance  after  a  consider-
able lapse  of  time,  a  conscious  inference  of  the  connection
cannot  be  assumed.

Xo  animal,  whose  instinct  has  not  been  killed  out  by
unnatural  habits,  eats  poisonous  herbs;  even  the  ape,
spoiled  by  residence  among  men,  may  with  safety  be
employed  in  the  primitive  forests  as  a  fruit-taster,  as  it
rejects  with  a  cry  the  poisonous  fruits  which  are  offered
it.  Every  animal  chooses  just  those  vegetable  or  animal
substances  for  its  food  which  suit  its  digestive  organs,
without  having  received  any  instruction  on  the  matter,
even  without  a  previous  use  of  the  organ  of  taste.  If  now
it  must  certainly  be  assumed  that  smell,  and  not  sight,  is
the  critical  organ  for  the  discrimination  of  materials,  still
it  is  no  less  enigmatical  how  the  animal  recognises  that
which  suits  its  digestion  by  odorous  rather  than  by  visual
impression.  Thus  the  kid  cut  from  the  womb  by  Galen
enjoyed  milk  alone  of  all  the  proffered  food  and  drink,
refusing  to  touch  aught  else.  The  Hawfinch  splits  the
cherry-stone  by  turning  it  in  such  a  way  that  the  beak
exactly  hits  the  suture,  and  it  does  this  as  well  with  its
first  cherry-stone  as  with  its  last.  Pinches,  martens,  and
weasels  make  little  holes  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  egg
about  to  be  drained  of  its  contents,  that  the  air  may  rush
in  and  facilitate  suction.  Animals  not  merely  know  their
proper  food,  but  also  often  seek  appropriate  remedies  with
correct personal diagnosis and unacquired therapeutic


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  101

knowledge.  Thus  dogs  often  eat  a  good  deal  of  grass,
especially  couchgrass,  when  they  are  sick ;  as,  for  instance,
according  to  Lenz,  when  they  are  afflicted  with  worms,
which  are  evacuated  enveloped  in  the  undigested  grass,
or  if  they  want  to  remove  splinters  of  bone  from  their
stomach.  They  make  use  of  thorny  rest-harrows  as  laxa-
tives. Fowls  and  pigeons  pick  lime  from  walls  and  roofs
if  their  food  does  not  afford  enough  lime  to  form  egg-shells.
Little  children  eat  chalk  when  they  have  heartburn,  and
pieces  of  charcoal  if  they  suffer  from  flatulence.  We  also
find,  under  certain  circumstances,  these  special  nutritive  or
curative  instincts  in  adult  human  beings  when  unconscious
nature  gains  the  upper  hand,  e.g.,  among  the  pregnant,
whose  capricious  appetites  probably  make  their  appearance,
when  a  certain  state  of  the  foetus  renders  a  particular  com-
position of  blood  desirable.  Field-mice  bite  out  the  germs
of  the  gathered  grain,  that  they  may  not  sprout  in  winter.
A  few  days  before  the  coming  of  cold  weather  the
squirrel  gets  in  its  stores  most  diligently,  and  then
closes  its  dwelling.  The  birds  of  passage  go  from  our
regions  to  warmer  lands  at  a  time  when  they  have  no
lack  of  food,  and  when  the  temperature  is  considerably
higher  than  at  the  period  of  their  return ;  the  like  holds
good  of  the  time  when  animals  go  into  winter  quarters,
which  beetles  frequently  do  in  the  warmest  days  of
autumn.  When  swallows  and  storks  find  their  way
home  again,  travelling  hundreds  of  miles  over  lands
totally  different  in  appearance,  it  is  ascribed  to  the  keen-
ness of  their  sense  of  locality;  but  when  pigeons  and
dogs,  after  having  been  turned  round  twenty  times  in  a
sack  and  carried  off  to  an  unknown  region,  nevertheless
run  home  in  a  straight  line,  no  one  can  say  anything
more  than  that  their  instinct  has  guided  them,  i.e..  the
clairvoyance  of  the  Unconscious  has  enabled  them  to
divine  the  right  path.  In  years  when  there  will  he  an
early  winter,  most  birds  of  passage  begin  to  make  pre-
parations  for their  departure sooner  than usual. If a


UNIVERSITY OF  CALIFORNIA
SANTA  BARBARA  COLLEGE  LIBRA:


102  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

very  mild  winter  is  imminent,  many  species  do  not  de-
part at  all,  or  migrate  only  a  short  distance  southwards.
If  a  severe  winter  occurs,  the  tortoise  makes  its  winter
abode  deeper.  If  grey  geese,  cranes,  &c,  soon  withdraw
from  the  spots  in  which  they  had  made  their  appearance
at  the  beginning  of  spring,  there  is  a  prospect  of  a  hot
and  dry  summer,  when  the  deficiency  of  water  in  those
places  would  render  breeding  impossible  to  marsh  and
w^ater  birds.  In  years  when  floods  occur,  the  beaver
builds  its  dwelling  higher;  and  in  Kamtchatka,  when  a
flood  is  imminent,  the  field-mice  suddenly  withdraw  in
a  body.  If  a  dry  summer  is  approaching,  in  April  or
May  spiders  weave  their  pensile  toils  several  feet  in
length.  When  in  winter  house-spiders  run  to  and  fro,
boldly  contend  with  one  another,  construct  new  and
numerous  webs  one  over  another,  cold  will  set  in  in
from  nine  to  twelve  days ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  they
conceal  themselves,  there  will  be  a  thaw.

I  do  not  by  any  means  doubt,  that  many  of  these
precautionary  measures  in  view  of  future  states  of  the
weather  are  conditioned  by  a  sensitive  appreciation  of
certain  present  atmospheric  states,  which  escape  our
notice;  these  perceptions,  however,  invariably  have  re-
ference only  to  present  states  of  the  weather,  and  what
can  the  conscious  common  sensations  produced  by  the
present  state  of  the  weather  have  to  do  with  the  idea
of  the  future  weather?  Surely  no  one  will  credit  the
animals  with  the  power  of  calculating  the  weather  months
in  advance  from  meteorological  indications,  and  with  the
faculty  of  foreseeing  floods.  A  mere  feeling  of  this  kind
of  present  atmospheric  influences  is  nothing  more  than
the  sensuous  perception  which  serves  as  motive,  for  a
motive  must,  indeed,  always  be  present  if  an  instinct  is
to  become  active.1 Xevertheless,  it is certain  that the

1  When  such  a  motive  in  the  form  premonitory instinct. Thus, e.g.,

of an  actual perception  is  entirely  when  birds  of  passage  at  the  usual

wanting,  there  is  wanting  also  the  time  leave  their  winter  quarters  for

occasion  for  the  manifestation  of  the  the far  north, they may on their


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  103

prevision  of  the  state  of  the  weather  is  a  case  of  uncon-
scious clairvoyance ;  the  stork  departing  for  the  south
four  weeks  earlier  than  is  customary,  knowing  as  little  as
the  stag,  which,  when  a  cold  winter  is  at  hand, 'allows  a
thicker  skin  than  usual  to  grow.  Animals  have  in  their
consciousness  a  feeling  of  the  present  state  of  the  weather ;
on  this  their  action  follows  precisely  as  if  they  had  the
idea  of  the  future  state  of  the  weather.  They  do  not,
however,  possess  the  latter  idea  in  their  consciousness.
Accordingly,  there  only  remains  as  natural  connecting
link  the  unconscious  idea,  which,  however,  is  always  a
clairvoyant  intuition,  because  it  contains  something  which
is  neither  directly  given  to  the  animal  by  sense-perception,
nor  can  be  inferred  from  the  perception  through  its  powers
of  understanding.

Most  wonderful  of  all  are  the  instincts  relating  to  the
propagation  of  the  race.  Every  male  discovers  the  female
of  its  species  with  a  view  to  sexual  union,  but  certainly  not
guided  merely  by  outward  resemblance  to  itself  ;  for  in
many  kinds  of  animals, — e.g.,  hermit-crabs, — the  sexes  are
so  radically  different  in  form,  that  the  male  would  in  that
case  be  led  to  copulate  with  the  females  of  thousands  of
other  species  rather  than  with  those  of  its  own.  In  some
butterflies  there  exists  a  polymorphism,  according  to  which
not  only  male  and  female  are  distinct,  but  even  in  the
female  sex  itself  there  occur  two  quite  distinct  forms  of
the  same  species,  of  which  one  commonly  belongs  to  the
natural  mimicry  of  a  remote  and  well-protected  species.
And  yet  the  males  have  intercourse  only  with  the  females
of  their  own  specie-,  never  with  strangers  which  perhaps
bear  a  closer  resemblance  to  themselves.  In  the  insect-
order  Strcpsiptera  the  female  is  an  ill-shaped  worm,  which
dwells  ;ill  its  life  long  in  the  posterior  segment  of  the  body
ot  a  wasp,  and  only  protrudes  with  its  lenticular  horny

arrival  suffer  distress  by  an  unu.su-  away,  thoy  could  not  have  had  1  v<  n
ally  lati'  spring,  of  which,  of  course,  the  slightest  intimation  through  at-
in  a  spot  many hundreds  of miles niospherie  influences.


104  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

head  between  two  abdominal  rings  of  the  latter.  The
male,  which  lives  only  a  few  hours,  resembling  a  moth  in
appearance,  recognises  its  female  by  this  stunted  protu-
berance, and  fecundates  the  eggs  through  a  canal  opening
immediately  below  the  animal's  mouth.

Before  any  experience  of  the  significance  of  child-
bearing,  the  pregnant  animal  is  impelled  to  seek  seclusion,
in  order  to  prepare  a  couch  for  its  young  in  a  cave  or  other
sheltered  spot ;  the  bird  builds  its  nest  as  soon  as  the  eggs
mature  in  the  ovary.  Land-snails,  crabs,  tree-frogs,  toads,
enter  the  water,  marine  tortoises  go  upon  land,  many
sea-fish  ascend  rivers,  to  lay  their  eggs  where  the  fit  condi-
tions of  their  development  are  alone  to  be  found.  Insects
lay  their  eggs  in  very  various  places — in  the  sand,  on
leaves,  under  the  skin  and  nails  of  other  animals,  often
in  places  where  the  future  food  of  the  larva  is  not  yet
in  existence,  e.g.,  in  the  autumn  on  trees  which  do  not
sprout  till  the  spring,  or  in  the  spring  on  blossoms  which
only  bear  fruit  in  autumn,  or  on  caterpillars,  which  only
in  the  pupa-state  serve  as  food  and  protection  to  the
parasitic  larvae.  Other  insects  lay  their  eggs  in  places,
whence  they  are  conveyed  to  the  proper  place  of  their  de-
velopment by  many  circuitous  courses,  e.g.,  certain  gadflies
on  the  lips  of  horses,  others  on  those  parts  which  horses
are  wont  to  lick,  whereby  the  eggs  pass  into  the  entrails  as
their  place  of  development,  and  when  matured  are  voided
with  the  ordure.  The  bovine  gadflies  select  the  most
powerful  and  soundest  animals  with  such  accuracy,  that
cattle-dealers  and  farmers  entirely  rely  upon  them,  and
take  by  preference  the  animals  whose  skins  show  most
traces  of  being  the  pasture  of  the  gadfly's  grubs.  This
selection  of  the  best  oxen  by  the  gadflies  can  scarcely
be  the  result  of  conscious  trial  and  reflection,  when
experienced  traders  take  them  for  their  masters.  The
wall-wasp  makes  a  hole  in  the  sand  several  inches  deep,
deposits  its  eg<j;  in  the  same,  and  packs  in  a  layer  of
footless  green  maggots  approaching  the  pupa-state,  there-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  105

fore  well  nourished  and  able  to  live  a  long  time  without
food,  but  so  close  together  that  they  cannot  stir  nor  enter
the  pupa  condition  themselves,  and  just  as  many,  and  no
more,  as  the  larva  will  require  before  its  transformation
into  a  chrysalis.  A  species  of  wasp,  Cerceris  buprcsticida,
which  itself  only  lives  on  pollen,  places  by  the  side  of  each
of  its  eggs,  preserved  in  subterranean  cells,  three  specimens
of  the  genus  Buprestis,  which  it  becomes  possessed  of  by
lying  in  wait  for  them  when  they  emerge  from  the  chrysalis
condition,  and  then  slaying  them  in  their  weak  condition,
at  the  same  time  seeming  to  apply  a  juice  which  keeps
them  fresh  and  suitable  for  food.  Several  species  of  wasps
open  the  cells  of  their  larvae  as  soon  as  these  have  con-
sumed their  food,  in  order  to  replenish  them,  and  then
close  them  again.  In  a  similar  way  ants  constantly
choose  the  right  moment  when  their  larvae  are  ripe  for
hatching  in  order  to  open  for  them  the  cocoon,  from  which
they  could  not  free  themselves.  What,  now,  does  an
insect,  whose  life  in  the  case  of  but  few  species  endures
longer  than  for  one  deposition  of  eggs,  know  of  the  con-
tents and  the  favourable  place  for  the  development  of  its
eggs  ?  what  does  it  know  of  the  kind  of  nutriment  which
the  hatched  larvae  will  need,  and  which  is  quite  different
from  its  own  ?  what  does  it  know  of  the  quantity  of  food
which  is  needed  ?  what  can  it  know,  i.e.,  have  in  its
consciousness,  of  all  this?  And  yet  its  action,  its  efforts,
and  the  high  importance  which  it  attributes  to  these  tilings,
prove  that  the  animal  has  a  knowledge  of  the  future.  It
can  then  only  be  unconscious  clairvoyance  ;  and  110  less
certainly  must  it  be  clairvoyance  which  arouses  in  animals
ju-t  at  the  right  moment  the  will  to  open  the  ceils  or  the
cocoon,  when  the  larvae  have  finished  their  stuck  of  fund,
or  are  ripe  for  hatching.

The  cuckoo,  whose  eggs,  as  is  the  case  with  other  1
do not need one or two, but seven to eleven hays to
mature  in the  ovary,  which  therefore  cannot  itself  hatch
its  ergs,  because  the first  would  be  rotten  before  the  last


106  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

was  laid,  deposits  them  in  the  nests  of  other  birds,  of  course
only  one  egg  in  each  nest.  But  in  order  that  the  birds  may
not  perceive  and  reject  the  strange  egg,  it  is  not  only  much
smaller  than  one  would  expect  from  the  size  of  the  cuckoo,
because  the  latter  only  finds  its  opportunity  with  small
birds,  but  also,  as  has  been  mentioned,  it  is  strikingly  like
the  other  eggs  of  the  nest  in  colour  and  marking.  Now,
as  the  cuckoo  prefers  to  seek  out  a  nest  in  which  to  deposit
some  days  beforehand,  it  might  be  thought,  with  regard
to  the  choice  of  nests,  that  the  egg  which  is  maturing
assumes  the  colour  of  the  eggs  of  the  nest,  because  the  preg-
nant cuckoo  is  thinking  of  the  same;  but  this  explanation
does  not  meet  the  case  of  nests  which  are  hidden  in  hollow
trees  (e.g.,  Sylvia  phcsnicurus),  or  which  have  the  shape  of  a
baking-oven  with  a  narrow  entrance  (e.g.,  Sylvia  rufa).  In
these  cases  the  cuckoo  can  neither  slip  in  nor  look  in ;  it
must  even  deposit  its  egg  from  the  outside  and  put  it  in
with  its  beak  ;  it  can  thus  not  at  all  perceive  by  its  senses
how  the  other  eggs  of  the  nest  look.  If  now,  notwith-
standing, its  own  egg  precisely  resemble  the  others,  this
can  only  be  due  to  unconscious  clairvoyance,  which  regu-
lates the  colour  and  marking  in  the  ovary.  Should,  how-
ever, the  supposition  be  correct,  that  one  and  the  same
female  cuckoo  always  deposits  in  the  nests  of  one  and  the
same  species  of  bird,  and  accordingly  always  eggs  of  the
same  colour  and  marking,  the  problem  would  only  assume
the  converse  form,  and  the  question  would  arise,  How  does
the  cuckoo  learn  what  nest-eggs  its  own  eggs  look  like,  if
she  cannot  peep  into  the  particular  nests  ?

An  essential  support  and  confirmation  of  the  existence
of  clairvoyance  in  the  instincts  of  animals  lies  in  the  facts,
which  also  prove  a  clairvoyant  intuition  in  the  case  of
human  beings  under  certain  circumstances.  The  curative
instincts  of  children  and  the  pregnant  have  been  already
mentioned.  For  the  most  part,  however,  conformably  to
the  higher  stage  of  the  human  consciousness,  there  occurs
here,  along  with  the  unconscious clairvoyance,  a  strong


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  107

reverberation  in  consciousness  which  exhibits  itself  as  more
or  less  clear  presentiment.  It  is,  moreover,  in  harmony
with  the  greater  independence  of  the  human  intellect  that
this  presentiment  does  not  exclusively  occur  with  reference
to  the  direct  execution  of  an  action,  but  sometimes  also
manifests  itself  as  pure  idea,  without  conscious  will,  quite
apart  from  any  deed  about  to  be  done,  if  only  the  condition
is  satisfied,  that  the  object  of  this  divination  powerfully
stimulates  the  will  of  the  diviner.  After  suppression  of  an
intermittent  fever  or  other  illness,  it  not  seldom  happens
that  the  sick  person  precisely  foretells  the  time  at  which
an  attack  of  convulsions  will  ensue  and  end.  The  same
happens  almost  without  exception  in  spontaneous,  and
often  in  artificially  produced  somnambulism  :  the  Pythia,
as  is  well  known,  always  announced  the  time  of  her  next
ecstasy.  Likewise  in  somnambulistic  states  the  remedial
instincts  are  often  expressed  in  divination  of  the  appro-
priate medicaments,  which  have  as  often  led  to  brilliant
results,  as  they  seem  to  contradict  the  present  standpoint
of  science.  The  prescription  of  remedies  is  certainly
also  the  only  use  which  respectable  magnetisers  make
of  the  half-sleep  of  their  somnambules.  "  It  some-
times also  occurs  that  quite  healthy  persons,  before  giving
birth  to  a  child,  or  in  the  very  beginning  of  an  illness,
have  a  near  presentiment  of  their  approaching  death,
the  fulfilment  of  which  can  hardly  be  explained  as  a  mere
coincidence,  for  otherwise  it  should  far  more  rarely  occur
than  the  non-fulfilment,  whereas  the  i'act  is  just  the
contrary;  moreover,  many  of  these  persons  exhibit  neither
longing  for  death  nor  fear  of  it,  audit  cannot  therefore  1  e
explained  as  the  effect  of  imagination."  (From  the  work
of  the  celebrated  physiologist  Purdach,  "  Hlieke  in's
Leben,"  chapter  "  Presentiment,"  whence  a  great  p  :rt  of
our  more  striking  instances  is  borrowed.)  This  pr
tun  'nt  of  death,  exceptional  in  the  ca-c  of  man,  is  quite
common  among  animals,  even  those  which  neither  know
nor  comprehend  death. They  creep  away,  when  the}


10S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

(their  end  approaching,  into  places  as  remote,  lonely,  and
concealed  as  possible;  this  is,  e.g.,  the  reason  why,  even  in
towns,  the  corpse  or  skeleton  of  a  cat  is  so  seldom  found.
We  must  only  assume  that  the  unconscious  clairvoyance,
although  essentially  alike  in  man  and  animal,  evokes  pre-
sentiments of  different  distinctness  ;  thus,  e.g.,  the  cat  is
urged  purely  instinctively  to  creep  away  without  knowing
why ;  but  in  man  there  awakens  the  clear  consciousness
of  the  near  end.  But  there  are  presentiments  not  merely
of  one's  own  death,  but  also  of  that  of  dearly-loved  per-
sons with  whom  we  are  closely  linked,  as  is  proved  by
the  many  stories  where  a  dying  man  in  his  death-hour
has  appeared  to  his  friend  or  spouse  in  a  dream  or  vision,
narratives  which  are  found  among  all  peoples  and  in  all
times,  and  in  part  undoubtedly  contain  genuine  matter  of
fact.  Closely  allied  is  the  faculty  of  second-sight,  formerly
common  in  Scotland  and  now  in  the  Danish  isles,  whereby
certain  persons  not  in  an  ecstatic  state,  but  in  the  full
possession  of  their  senses,  foresee  future  or  distant  events
which  have  an  interest  for  them,  as  deaths,  battles,  great
conflagrations  (as  Swedenborg  the  burning  of  Stockholm),
arrival  or  fate  of  distant  friends,  &c.  (cf.  Ennemoser,
"  History  of  Magic,"  2d  ed.,  §  86).  In  many  persons  this
clairvoyance  is  limited  to  the  decease  of  acquaintances  or
neighbours ;  the  instances  of  such  corpse-seeresses  are
numerous,  and  are  remarkably  well,  even  judicially,  at-
tested. Transiently  this  faculty  of  second-sight  is  found  in
ecstatic  states,  in  the  spontaneous  or  artificially  produced
somnambulism  of  higher  degrees  of  waking  dreams,  as
well  as  in  clear  moments  before  death.  Frequently  the
presentiments  in  which  the  clairvoyance  of  the  Uncon-
scious is  revealed  to  consciousness  are  dark,  incompre-
hensible, and  symbolical,  because  they  are  obliged  to  take
a  sensible  form  in  the  brain,  whilst  the  unconscious  idea
cannot  partake  of  the  form  of  sensibility  (see  C.  Chap,  i.) ;
wherefore  it  is  so  easy  to  regard  what,  in  mental  moods,
dreams,  or  the  images  of  sick  persons,  is  accidental  as


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  109

significant.  The  great  liability  to  error  and  to  self-decep-
tion resulting  herefrom,  and  the  facility  for  intentionally
deceiving  other  people,  as  well  as  the  preponderating
disadvantage  which,  as  a  general  rule,  the  knowledge  of
the  future  brings  to  man,  enhance  beyond  all  doubt  the
practical  mischief  of  all  endeavours  to  obtain  a  know-
ledge of  the  future.  This  cannot,  however,  derogate  from
the  theoretic  importance  of  this  department  of  phenomena,
and  cannot  in  any  case  hinder  the  recognition  of  the  true
facts  of  clairvoyance,  even  if  buried  beneath  a  confused
mass  of  nonsense  and  deceit.  It  is  true  the  prevailing
rationalistic  and  materialistic  tendency  of  our  time  funis
it  convenient  to  deny  or  to  ignore  all  facts  of  this  class,
because  they  cannot  be  comprehended  from  a  material-
istic point  of  view,  and  cannot  be  brought  to  the  test  of
experience  according  to  the  inductive  method  of  difference;
as  if  the  latter  were  not  just  as  inapplicable  in  ethics,
social  science,  and  politics !  But  for  impartial  judges  the
absolute  denial  of  all  such  phenomena  is  consistent  only
with  ignorance  of  the  accounts,  which,  again,  arises  from
the  not  wishing  to  become  acquainted  with  them.  I  am
convinced  that  many  impugners  of  all  human  divination
would  judge  differently,  or  at  least  more  cautiously,  if
they  thought  it  worth  their  while  to  make  themselves
acquainted  with  the  reports  of  the  more  striking  facts  ;
and  1  am  of  opinion  that  at  the  present  day  nobody  need
be  ashamed  of  adopting  a  view  which  all  great  minds
of  antiquity  (Epicurus  excepted)  have  acknowledged,
whose  possibility  hardly  any  great  modern  philosopher
has  ventured  to  dispute,  and  which  the  champions  of  the
German  "enlightenment"  were  so  little  inclined  to  rele-
gate to  the  province  of  old  wives'  fables,  that  Goethe  has
even  related  an  example  of  second-sight  in  his  own  life,
which  was  confirmed  even  to  the  smallest  detail.

Ill-adapted  as  I  should  think  this  class  of  phenomena
for  forming  the  sole  foundation  of  a  scientiii  •  belie:'.  I
nevertheless  think  them  hf-hlv  worth v  of  mention  as  a


no  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

complementary  extension  of  the  series  of  phenomena  pre-
sented to  our  view  in  the  clairvoyance  of  animal  and
human  instincts.  And  precisely  because  they  form  a  con-
tinuation of  this  series  (the  reverberation  in  consciousness
merely  being  stronger)  do  they  lend  support  to  the  testi-
mony of  instinctive  action  to  its  own  character,  as  their
probability  is  itself  strengthened  by  analogy  with  the  clair-
voyance of  instinct.  This,  and  the  wish  not  to  have  missed
an  opportunity  of  lifting  my  voice  against  a  fashionable
prejudice,  is  the  reason  why  I  have  allowed  myself,  in  a
scientific  work,  to  make  mention,  if  only  incidentally,  of
matters  so  little  credited  at  the  present  day.

We  have  to  mention,  in  conclusion,  one  more  species  of
instinct,  which  is  likewise  in  the  highest  degree  instructive
with  regard  to  its  essential  nature,  and  at  the  same  time
again  shows  how  impossible  it  is  to  avoid  the  hypothesis
of  clairvoyance.  In  the  previous  examples  every  being
acted  for  its  own  interest,  except  in  the  case  of  the  instinct
of  propagation,  when  such  action  is  always  for  the  benefit
of  other  individuals,  namely,  the  offspring :  we  have  still
to  consider  the  cases,  where  among  several  individuals
there  exists  such  a  solidarity  of  instinct,  that,  on  the  one
hand,  the  performance  of  every  individual  stands  all  in
good  stead,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  valuable  work  can  only
be  done  by  the  consentaneous  co-operation  of  many.  In
higher  animals  this  instinctive  reciprocal  action  also  takes
place,  but  it  is  here  more  difficult  to  distinguish  from
union  as  result  of  conscious  volition,  as  language  makes
possible  a  more  perfect  communication  of  mutual  plans
and  intentions.  Nevertheless  we  shall  again  distinctly  see
this  effect  of  an  instinct  of  the  masses  in  the  origin  of
language  and  the  great  political  and  social  movements  in
the  history  of  the  world.  Here  we  are  dealing  with  ex-
amples as  simple  and  clear  as  possible,  and  therefore  turn
our  attention  to  lower  animals,  where  the  means  of  com-
munication, in  the  absence  of  voice,  mimetics,  and  phy-
siognomy, are  so  imperfect,  that  the  harmony  and  blending


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  m

of  the  performances  of  individuals  in  the  main  work  can-
not possibly  be  ascribed  to  conscious  agreement  through
the  medium  of  language.

According  to  Huber's  observations  (Nouvclles  Observa-
tions sur  les  abeilles),  on  the  building  of  new  combs  a
part  of  the  larger  working  bees,  which  had  taken  their  fill
of  honey,  took  no  part  in  the  ordinary  occupations  of  the
rest,  but  kept  perfectly  quiet.  After  four-and-twenty
hours,  laminse  of  wax  had  formed  under  their  abdominal
segments.  This  the  bee  drew  out  with  its  hinder  foot,
chewed,  and  formed  into  a  band.  The  waxen  laminae  thus
prepared  were  then  glued  to  the  roof  of  the  hive.  When
one  bee  had  in  this  way  used  up  its  laminae  of  wax
another  followed,  which  continued  the  same  work.  Thus
was  formed  a  small,  rough,  perpendicular  wall,  half
a  line  in  thickness,  attached  to  the  hive.  Xow  came
one  of  the  smaller  working  bees,  which  had  an  empty
abdomen,  examined  the  wall,  and  made  in  the  middle  of
one  of  its  sides  a  shallow  semi-oval  excavation,  piling  up
the  extruded  wax  round  its  edge.  After  a  short  time  it
was  relieved  by  another  bee  of  a  like  kind,  and  in  this  way
more  than  twenty  bees  succeeded  one  another.  During
this  time,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  wall  another  bee  had
begun  to  make  a  similar  excavation,  but  in  correspondence
with  the  edge  of  the  excavation  on  the  hither  side.  This
bee,  too,  was  relieved  by  fresh  workers.  Meanwhile  other
bees  approached,  drew  waxen  lamina)  from  under  their
abdominal  segments,  and  therewith  raised  the  edge  of  the
little  waxen  wall.  A  succession  of  fresh  workers  continued
to  excavate  the  ground  for  new  cells,  whilst  others  persisted
in  the  endeavour  to  bring  those  which  had  been  already
eommenced  into  regular  form,  and  likewise  to  prolong  the
prismatic  walls  of  the  same.  All  this  time  the  bees  en
the  opposite  side  of  the  waxen  wall  continued  tu  work
according  to  the  same  uniform  plan,  in  most  exact  agree-
ment with  the  working  bees  on  the  hither  side,  until  at  last
the  cells  of  both  sides  were  finished  in  ail  their  admirable


112  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

regularity,  and  with  a  complete  interlinking,  not  only  of
those  cells  in  juxtaposition,  but  also  of  those  opposed  to
one  another  by  their  pyramidal  bases.  Now  imagine  beings
limited  to  sensuous  means  of  communication,  desirous  of
agreeing  upon  a  common  purpose  and  plan,  how  they  would
misinterpret  each  other's  intentions,  would  dispute  and
quarrel ;  how  often  something  preposterous  would  be  done,
how  work  would  have  to  be  pulled  to  pieces  and  done  over
again ;  how  for  this  business  too  many  would  press  in,  for
that  too  few  would  be  found;  what  a  running  to  and  fro
there  would  be  before  each  one  had  found  his  proper  place  ;
how  now  too  many  would  offer  to  relieve  their  comrades,
and  now  there  would  be  a  deficiency  of  hands,  as  we  iind  in
the  combined  efforts  of  human  beings,  standing  so  much
higher  in  the  scale  of  existence.  We  see  nothing  of  all
this  among  bees ;  on  the  contrary,  it  rather  looks  as  if  an
invisible  supreme  architect  had  laid  before  the  assembly
the  plan  of  the  whole,  and  had  impressed  it  upon  each
individual ;  as  if  every  kind  of  labourer  had  learnt  his
destined  work,  place,  and  order  of  affording  relief,  and
was  informed  by  some  signal  of  the  moment  when  his
turn  came.  But  yet  all  this  is  mere  result  of  instinct;
and  as  by  instinct  the  plan  of  the  whole  hive  indwells
in  each  single  bee  in  unconscious  clairvoyance,  so  a  com-
mon instinct  urges  each  individual  to  the  work  to  which
it  is  called,  at  the  right  moment ;  only  by  such  means  is  the
wonderful  quiet  and  order  possible.  What  conception  one
should  form  of  this  mutual  instinct  can  only  be  cleared
up  much  later  on,  but  its  possibility  is  now  evident,  since
each  individual  must  have  an  unconscious  clear  vision  of
the  plan  of  the  whole,  and  all  the  means  available  at  the
moment,  of  which,  however,  only  that  part  which  falls  to  his
lot  enters  his  own  consciousness.  Thus,  e.g.,  the  larva  of  a
bee  spins  its  silken  cocoon,  but  other  bees  must  set  the  en-
closing waxen  roof  thereon ;  the  plan  of  the  whole  cocoon
is  thus  present  to  all  concerned  unconsciously,  but  each
one  only  performs  its  own  part  in  the  affair  with  conscious


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  113

volition.  That  the  larva,  after  its  metamorphosis,  must  be
liberated  from  its  cocoon  by  other  bees  has  been  already
mentioned,  likewise  that  the  female  bees  kill  the  drones
in  autumn,  so  as  not  to  have  to  maintain  their  useless
messmates  during  the  winter,  and  that  they  only  allow
them  to  live,  if  it  be  necessary  to  impregnate  a  new  queen.
While  the  eggs  are  maturing  the  workers  are  busy  con-
structing cells  for  their  reception,  and  usually  for  just  the
number  of  eggs  the  queen  will  lay,  and,  moreover,  in  the
order  in  which  the  eggs  will  be  laid,  namely,  first  for  the
workers,  then  for  the  drones,  then  for  the  queens.  Here
again  it  is  obvious  that  the  instinctive  actions  of  the
workers  are  dependent  upon  concealed  organic  processes,
which  can  manifestly  only  have  an  influence  upon  them
through  an  unconscious  clairvoyance.  In  the  common-
wealth of  the  bee,  the  productive  and  the  sexual  energy,
elsewhere  united,  are  personified  in  three  kinds  of  in-
dividuals ;  and  as  in  an  individual  the  members,  so  here
the  individuals  themselves  stand  in  inner,  unconscious,
spiritually  organic  union.

We  have  then  in  this  chapter  obtained  the  following
results :— Instinct  is  not  the  result  of  conscious  reflection —
not  a  consequence  of  bodily  organisation — not  mere  result
of  a  mechanism  founded  in  the  organisation  of  the  brain —
not  the  effect  of  a  dead,  and  essentially  foreign  mechanism,
externally  adhering  to  the  mind — but  the  individual's  ou.11
activity,  springing  from  his  inmost  nature  and  character.
The  end,  to  which  a  definite  kind  of  instinctive  action
is  subservient,  is  not  conceived  once  for  all  by  a  mind
standing  outside  the  individual  like  a  providence,  and  the
nee  :ssity  to  act  conformably  thereto  externally  thrust
upon  the  individual  as  something  foreign  to  him  ;  but  the
end  of  the  instinct  is  in  each  single  case  unconsciously
willed  ami  imagined  by  the  individual,  and  the  choice  of
means  suitable  to  each  special  case  unconsciously  made.
Frequently  the  knowledge  of  the  purpose  of  the  unconscious
cognition  is  not  at  all  ascertainable  by  sense-perce;  ti  m.

vol.  1.  n


114  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Then  the  characteristic  attribute  of  the  Unconscious  is
shown  in  the  clairvoyant  intuition,  of  which  there  is  an
echo  in  Consciousness  as  presentiment,  either  feeble  and
evanescent,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  man  in  particular,  more
or  less  distinct ;  whilst  the  instinctive  action  itself,  the
adoption  of  the  means  to  the  unconscious  end,  is  always
vividly  realised  in  consciousness,  because  otherwise  correct
execution  would  be  impossible.  Lastly,  clairvoyance  is
manifested  also  in  the  co-operation  of  several  individuals
for  a  common  unconscious  end.

Clairvoyance  has  hitherto  been  an  incomprehensible
empirical  fact,  and  it  might  be  objected  :  "  I  would  rather
put  up  with  instinct  as  an  incomprehensible  fact."  To  this
it  is  replied,  firstly,  that  we  find  clairvoyance  also  apart
from  Instinct  (especially  in  man) ;  secondly,  that  clair-
voyance is  far  from  occurring  in  all  instincts  ;  that  thns
instinct  and  clairvoyance  are  empirically  given  as  two
distinct  facts,  in  which  perhaps  clairvoyance  may  serve
to  explain  instinct,  but  not  conversely  ;  and,  lastly,  in  the
third  place,  that  the  clairvoyance  of  the  individual  will
not  be  found  to  be  so  incomprehensible  a  fact,  but  will,  in
the  sequel  of  the  investigation,  receive  a  sufficient  ex-
planation, whereas  the  comprehension  of  instinct  in  every
other  way  must  be  foregone.

The  conception  here  worked  out  is  the  only  one  which
enables  us  to  comprehend  instinct  as  the  inmost  core
of  every  being ;  that  it  really  is  so  is  shown  by  the  im-
pulse of  self-preservation  and  race- maintenance,  which
pervades  the  whole  creation,  by  the  heroic  spirit  of  sac-
rifice, with  which  the  well-being  of  the  individual,  nay,
life  itself,  is  offered  as  a  sacrifice  to  instinct.  Look  at
the  caterpillar,  which  continues  to  mend  its  web  till  it
succumbs  through  weakness  ;  at  the  bird,  which  dies  of
exhaustion  in  laying  its  eggs  ;  at  the  restlessness  and  grief
of  all  migratory  animals  when  prevented  from  migrating.
An  imprisoned  cuckoo  always  dies  in  the  winter  from
despair  at  not  being  able  to  depart ;  the  vineyard  snail,


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  115

also,  if  denied  its  "winter  sleep.  The  weakest  animal,  when
a  mother,  accepts  the  struggle  with  the  strongest  opponent,
and  cheerfully  suffers  death  for  its  young;  an  unsuccessful
human  lover  becomes  crazed,  or  commits  suicide,  as  is
evidenced  by  ever-fresh  victims.  A  woman,  on  whom
the  Cesarean  section  had  once  been  successfully  per-
formed, was  so  little  deterred  from  further  sexual  inter-
course by  the  certain  prospect  of  a  repetition  of  this  fearful
and  generally  fatal  operation,  that  she  afterwards  thrice
underwent  the  same  operation.  And  we  are  to  believe
that  such  a  demonic  power  is  exercised  by  something
engrafted  on  the  mind  as  a  mechanism  foreign  to  our
being's  core,  or  through  a  conscious  reflection  which  rarely
advances  beyond  a  bald  egoism,  and  which  is  altogether
incapable  of  such  sacrifices  for  the  race  as  are  exempli-
fied in  the  procreative  and  maternal  instincts  !

In  conclusion,  we  have  still  to  consider  the  question
how  it  happens  that  instincts  are  so  uniform  with  hi  an
animal  species,  a  circumstance  which  has  not  a  little  con-
tributed to  strengthen  the  view  of  the  engrafted  spiritual
mechanism.  It  is,  however,  evident  that  like  causes  have
like  effects,  whence  such  a  phenomenon  is  explained  of
itself.  For  in  any  animal  species  the  fundamental  cor-
poreal structure  is  the  same,  also  the  faculties  and  de-
velopment of  the  conscious  understanding  (which  is  not
the  case  with  man,  nor  to  a  certain  extent  with  the  highest
animals,  to  which  their  greater  individuality  is  in  part
due).  The  external  conditions  of  life  are  likewise  tolerably
the  same,  and  so  far  as  they  are  essentially  different,  the
instincts  also  arc:  different — a  point  which  hardly  requires
any  illustration  (V/l  pp.  79,  80).  But  from  similar  mental
and  Unlily  constitutions  (under  which  like  eeivhral  and
ganglionic  predispositions  are  comprehended)  ami  si)
(sternal  r  1  re  lunula  11  ccs  there  necessarily  follow,  as  a  logical
equenee,  similar  life-purposes;  from  like  aims  and
like  inner  and  outer  circumstances  follows,  howevei
choice of  means, i.e.,  like  instincts. The  last two  -;••;-


n6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

would  not  be  granted  without  any  limitation  if  one  were
dealing  with  conscious  reflection,  but  since  these  logical
consequences  are  drawn  by  the  Unconscious,  which  un-
failingly adopts  the  right  course  without  hesitation  or
delay,  they  also  always  directly  result  from  like  premises.
Thus  even  the  last  point  which  might  be  urged  in  sup-
port of  opposite  views  is  explained  by  our  conception  of
instinct.

I  conclude  this  chapter  with  the  words  of  Schelling
(I.  vol.  vii.  p.  455)  :  "There  is  no  better  touchstone  of
a  genuine  philosophy  than  the  phenomena  of  animal  in-
stinct, which  must  be  ranked  among  the  verv  greatest  bv
every  thoughtful  human  being."


( H7 )


IV.
THE  UNION OF  WILL  AND IDEA.

In  every  volition  the  change  into  another  state  than  the
present  is  willed.  A  present  state  is  always  given,  even  if
it  be  pure  rest ;  from  this  present  state  alone,  however,
willing  could  never  arise  unless  there  were  the  possibility,
at  least  the  ideal  possibility,  of  something  else.  The  one
state,  which  should  really  and  ideally  allow  of  nothing  else,
would  be  complete  in  itself,  without  being  able  to  pass
out  of  itself,  even  idealiter,  for  this  passing  out  of  itself
would  be  already  its  otherness.  That  volition  also,  which
wills  the  persistence  of  the  present  state,  is  only  possible
through  the  idea  of  the  cessation  of  such  state,  which  is
held  in  aversion,  thus  through  a  double  negation;  without
the  idea  of  cessation,  uniting  of  persistence  would  be  im-
possible. The  position  is  impregnable,  then,  that  for
volition  two  things  especially  are  necessary,  of  which  the
one  is  the  present  state,  and  that,  too,  as  starting-point.
The  other,  the  end  or  goal  of  volition,  cannot  bo  the  now
present  state,  for  we  always  possess  the  present  out  and
cut.  Thus  it  would  be  absurd  still  to  will  it:  it  can  a!
the  most  produce  satisfaction  or  dissatisfaction,  hut  :.•  1
willing.  It  cannot,  then,  bo  an  existing,  but  merely  a
imn-cristing  state,  which  is  willed,  and  willed,  moreover,
in  f/t<-  /<>/■/, t  of  existence.  The  state  can  only  pass  ;':•:::
non-being  into  being  through  the  becoming,  and  if  it  arrives
at  bring  through  the  becoming,  the  moment  hit:,  rt  >
called  present  is  ]>nsf,  and  a  new  present  has  arriv- I,  w

1  m  fro /n the  former moment  is  still  re. L'ins


nS  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

former  moment  is,  however,  that  of  willing,  consequently  it
is  a  future  state,  whose  presentness  is  willed.  This  future
state  must  then  be  contained  in  willing  as  the  otherness
of  the  now  present  state,  and  furnish  volition  with  its  end
or  goal,  without  which  it  is  not  thinkable.  But  now,  as
this  future  state  without  present  existence  cannot  be
realiter  in  the  present  act  of  willing,  and  yet  must  be
therein  in  order  to  be  possible,  it  must  necessarily  be  con-
tained in  it  idcaliter,  i.e.,  as  representation ;  for  the  ideal
is  exactly  the  same  as  the  real,  only  without  reality,  as
conversely  reality  in  things  is  that  unique  somewhat  in
them  which  cannot  be  brought  about  by  thinking,  and
which  exceeds  their  ideal  content  (cf.  Schelling's  Works,
div.  i.  vol.  iii.  p.  364).  In  the  same  way,  too,  the  (positively
thought)  present  state  can  only  become  the  starting-point
of  volition  so  far  as  it  enters  into  the  idea  (in  the  widest
sense  of  the  word).  We  have,  then,  in  willing,  two  ideas —
that  of  a  present  state  as  starting-point,  that  of  a  future
state  as  ultimate  point  or  goal ;  the  former  is  conceived  as
idea  of  a  present  reality,  the  latter  as  idea  of  a  reality  still
to  be  procured.  Now  will  is  the  endeavour  to  procure
reality,  or  the  endeavour  to  pass  from  the  state  repre-
sented by  the  former  into  that  represented  by  the  latter
idea.  This  endeavour  itself  does  not  admit  of  descrip-
tion and  definition,  because  we  are  confined  to  the  sphere
of  ideas,  and  the  endeavour  is,  per  se,  something  heteroge-
neous to  the  idea  ;  one  can  only  say  of  it  that  it  is  the
immediate  cause  of  change.  This  endeavour  is  the  ever-
identical  empty  form  of  volition,  which  awaits  replenish-
ing with  the  most  varied  content  of  imagination ;  and  as
every  empty  f  orm  is  an  abstraction  without  any  oilier  reality
than  that  which  it  obtains  by  its  content,  so  likewise  this.
Volition  is  existential  or  actual  only  through  the  relation
between  the  idea  of  the  present  and  future  state  ;  if  this
relation  be  abstracted,  the  conception,  which  cannot  be
found  without  it,  is  deprived  of  reality,  of  existence.  Xo
one  can  in  reality  merely  will,  without  willing  this  or  that :


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  119

a  will  which  does  not  will  something,  is  not ;  only  through
the  definite  content  does  the  will  obtain  the  possibility  of
existence,  and  this  content  (not  to  be  confused  with
motive)  is,  as  we  have  seen,  Idea.  Therefore,  no  volition
without  mental  object,  as  Aristotle  said  long  ago  (De  An.
iii.  10,  433,  b.  27) :  ope/cri/cov  8e  ovk  dvev  <j)avTaaia<>.

One  must,  at  the  same  time,  guard  against  the  false
conclusion  that,  whenever  one  thing  is  proved  to  be
contained  in  another  thing  without  being  contained  in  it
realiter,  the  assertion  is  implicitly  made  that  it  must  be
contained  in  it  idealiter.  This  would  be,  in  fact,  a  logi-
cally incorrect  conversion  of  the  true  proposition  that
the  ideal  is  the  same  as  the  real,  only  without  reality.
That  I  am  far  from  making  this  faulty  conversion  I  have
already  given  evidence,  in  seeking  to  explain  memory  and
character  by  latent  tendencies  of  the  brain  to  particular
molecular  vibrations,  and  in  that  I  look  upon  volition  as
actual  manifestation  of  power,  that  is,  of  the  will.  The
former,  namely,  are  quiescent  material  states  (definitely
related  positions  of  atoms),  which  may  perhaps  be  looked
upon  as  the  realisation  of  an  idea  implicitly  containing
future  states  within  it,  but  can  never  themselves  be  called
ideal  (cf.  Ges.  philos.  Abhandlungen,  Xo.  II.  pp.  35-37) ;
the  latter,  on  the  contrary  (the  potentiality  of  volition),  is
only  the  formal  condition  of  actuality  in  general  without
any  definite  content.  Volition,  abstracted  from  its  content,
is  potentially  possible,  but  thus  it  is  also  only  the  purely
formal  side  of  the  deiinite  act  of  will.  The  content  itself
of  this  act  of  will  is  never  to  be  conceived  otherwise  than
as  representation  or  idea;  for  volition  is  not  anything
material,  in  whose  stationary  parts  future  differences  might
be  predetermined  by  certain  spatial  relations,  but  it  is
something  immaterial,  and  the  not  yet  existent  future  to
be  realised  by  it  must  consequently  be  contained  in  it  in
an  immaterial  manner.  J  Hit  further,  the  content  of  will
is  always  thoroughly  deiinite,  only  in  this  way  and  not
otherwise  attaining  realisation,  thus  not  to  be  characterisi  d


120  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

as  potentiality,  which  would  only  express  the  formal  con-
dition of  realisation  in  general,  but  not  the  definite  "  What"
of  such  realisation.  Without  a  fully  determinate  content
of  the  yet  non-existent  reality,  no  realisation  would  be
possible,  because  infinitely  diverse  possibilities  remain
open.  This  determinateness  of  content  of  a  something  not
yet  really  existing,  which  at  the  same  time  is  to  be  given
immaterially,  is  now  by  no  means  to  be  thought  other-
wise than  as  ideal  determinateness,  i.e.,  as  representation.
This  condition  is  immediately  known  to  us  in  conscious
volition,  and  introspection  can  at  any  moment  assure  us
that  that  which  is  willed  is  before  its  realisation  nothing
else  than  idea  of  an  object.

But  the  naturalness  and  self-evidence  of  this  relation
between  will  and  idea  (as  the  two  poles  about  which  the
whole  life  of  the  mind  turns),  and  the  impossibility  of
finding  any  substitute  for  the  idea  as  content  of  will  (i.e.,
as  immaterial,  not  yet  realised  determinateness  of  volition),
constrain  us  to  assume  that  the  whole  content  of  will  is
idea,  no  matter  whether  the  will  and  idea  be  conscious
or  unconscious.  In  assuming  will  we  assume  idea  as  its
determining  and  distinguishing  content,  and  whoever
refuses  to  recognise  the  ideal  (unconscious)  content  of
representation  as  the  What  and  How  determinative-  of
action  must,  to  be  consistent,  also  refuse  to  speak  of  an
unconscious  will  as  the  inner  cause  of  the  phenomenon.
This  simple  consideration  exposes  the  singular  defective-
ness of  the  system  of  Schopenhauer,  in  which  the  Idea  is
by  no  means  recognised  as  the  sole  and  exclusive  content
of  Will,  but  a  false  and  subordinate  position  is  assigned
it,  whilst  the  maimed  and  blind  Will  nevertheless  alto-
gether comports  itself  as  if  it  had  a  notional  or  ideal  con-
tent.1 But  whoever,  like  Bahnsen,  e.g.,  denies  that  the

1  When Dr. /. Fraucnstudt as-  that  the  system  of  Schopenhauer  is

sents to my explanations (Sunday  only  tenable  after  a  revision  in  the

supplement  of  the  Yoss.  Ztg. ,  1S70,  sense of the text, I can only ex-

Xo. S, and "Unsere Zeit," Nov.  press  my  satisfaction  ;  but -when  he

1S69.  p. 705),  and  thereby admits  maintains that the system is not


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  121

will  as  potentiality  of  volition  is  something  purely  formal
and  absolutely  empty — whoever  sees  in  it,  instead  of  an
attribute  of  the  all-one  substance  common  to  all  beings,
an  individual  essence  subsisting  and  existing  a  se  and  per
se — has  only  the  alternative  (if  discontented  with  a  postu-
lated nondescript  defying  human  comprehension),  either  to
define  the  characteristic  essence  of  this  individual  potency
itself  as  ideal  determination  (thus  merely  needlessly  trans-
ferring the  completing  idea  from  volition  to  the  pure  Will),
or  to  go  over  entirely  to  Materialism,  i.e.,  to  surrender  the
will  as  metaphysical  principle,  and  to  make  it  identical
with  the  parts  of  the  brain  prearranged  in  this  or  that
way,  whose  function  then  would  be  volition.

It  may  be  advisable  to  touch  here,  at  least  by  way  of
suggestion,  on  a  few  points  which  are  adapted  to  confirm
the  proposition,  that  no  kind  of  volitional  activity  is  pos-
sible without  ideal  content  of  representation.

First  of  all,  it  would  be  a  gross  error  to  deny  the  ideal
content  of  volition  because  volition  is  strictly  necessitated.
This  argument  would  before  all  things  prove  too  much ;
for,  in  the  first  place,  it  would  just  as  much  destroy  the
activity  of  volition  as  the  ideality  of  the  content,  if  it  in
fact  reduced  the  necessitated  event  to  a  dead  passivity,
purely  outwardly  determined  and  deprived  of  every  suit-
determination  from  within ;  and,  secondly,  would  place
conscious  volition  in  precisely  the  same  category  as  the
unconscious  volition  of  a  falling  stone,  since  on  the  o:.e
hand  the  former  is  just  as  strictly  determined  and  neces-
sitated as  the  latter  ;  on  the  other  hand,  however,  the
falling  stone,  if  it  had  consciousness,  would  (according  to
the  well-known  declaration  of  Spinoza)  believe  it  acted
freely.  The  objection  simply  ignores  the  truth  that  there
is  no  purely  passive  necessitation  at  all,  that  rather  ail

ilcfi  ctive in  the manner ppccificd,  faithful to the doctrine of tin  ir

In-  is  contradicted by the facts of  master by rejecting a-

the  case  ;  ami  historically  those  fob  the  unconscious ia^aii u  :■  r wLi h

lowers  of  Schopi  nhaui  r  are  more  in  I  contend.

the right, who think they remain


122  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

necessitation  includes  autonomous  activity, — autonomous
because,  in  the  way  in  which  anything  reacts  against  the
forces  influencing  it,  it  follows  the  immanent  laws  of  its
own  nature.  This  holds  good  of  the  force  of  gravitation
of  the  stone  which  reacts  on  the  terrestrial  mass,  or  of
the  elasticity  of  the  billiard-ball  reacting  against  the
inertia  of  the  cushion,  just  as  well  as  of  the  human  char-
acter reacting  against  the  conscious  motives.  If  now  we
view  the  physical  forces  as  will-forces,  we  cannot  avoid
regarding  as  an  ideal  determination  the  internal  determi-
nation of  the  same  by  the  immanent  laws  of  the  particular
stage  of  the  objectified  will,  which  in  every  case  is  the
necessary  prius  of  real  activity,  i.e.,  the  content  of  volition
before  completed  realisation,  in  this  case  also  as  Presenta-
tion (cf.  C.  Chap,  v.)

A  second  point  is,  that  the  notion  of  necessitation  or  of
the  necessity  of  events  is  only  to  be  maintained  against
the  subjectivist  deniers  of  an  objective-real  necessity,  if
the  purely  external  event  is  regarded  as  determined  and
brought  about  by  an  inner  logical  compulsion,  which,
moreover,  can  be  the  only  sense  of  a  regularity  of  nature
conformable  with  that  of  logic  (cf.  the  conclusion  of  No.
3  of  Chap.  xv.  C.)  But  if  all  necessity  is  logical,  this
(unconscious)  logic  can  only  penetrate  the  manifestation
of  the  blind  and  intrinsically  alogical  Will,  if  its  content
is  not  again  itself  alogical  Will,  but  logical  Idea.

The  third  point,  which  I  wished  to  mention,  leads  us
into  the  province  of  the  theory  of  cognition.  Thought
cannot  throw  off  the  nature  of  thought ;  it  may  perhaps
deny  itself  as  conscious  thought,  but  it  thereby  attains  so
little  positivity,  that  even  the  right  to  this  negation  of
itself  is  lacking,  so  long  as  it  is  powerless  to  make  any
positive  statement  beyond  the  sphere  of  its  own  conscious-
ness. Thought  thus  either  never  goes  beyond  itself,  or
the  true  positive  content  of  what  is  beyond  its  sphere  of
consciousness  must  itself  again  be  thought,  representation,
ideal  content. Now  since  the  causality  which  evokes  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  123

act  of  sensation  is  the  sole  direct  bond  of  union  between
consciousness  and  its  otherness,  the  content  of  this  causal
affection  which  sensation  follows  must  be  an  ideal  one.
Here  we  come,  through  want  of  an  explanation  to  satisfy
the  demands  of  the  theory  of  cognition,  to  the  same  truth
as  we  reached  before  from  metaphysical  considerations,
namely,  that  the  causal  necessitation  or  real  causality  must
have  an  ideal  content,  although  this  is  here  demonstrated
merely  for  the  act  of  sense-impression  (cf.  Das  Ding  an
Sich  und  seine  Beschaffenheit :  Berlin,  C.  Duncker,  1871,
especially  pp.  74-76).

We  now  then  know  that,  wherever  we  meet  with  a
volition,  a  representation  must  be  united  with  it,  at  the
very  least  that  which  ideally  represents  the  goal,  object,
or  content  of  the  volition ;  the  other  idea,  the  starting-
point,  might  possibly  become  equal  to  zero,  if  the  will
takes  its  rise  in  pure  nothingness.  However,  we  have
nothing  to  do  with  this  case  in  empirical  phenomena;  on
the  contrary,  the  starting-point  is  here  given  once  for  all
as  the  positive  feeling  of  a  present  condition.  Accordingly
every  unconscious  volition  also  which  actually  exists  must
be  united  with  ideas,  for  in  our  former  examination
nothing  cropped  out  in  reference  to  the  distinction  of  con-
scious and  unconscious  will.  The  positive  feeling  of  the
present  state  must  even  in  conscious  volition  always  be
conscious  to  the  nerve-centre  to  which  the  volition  is
referred,  since  a  materially  excited  sensation,  if  it  is  pre-
sent, must  always  be  conscious  ;  on  the  other  hand,  in
unconscious  volition  the  idea  of  the  aim  or  object  of  volition
must  also,  of  course,  be  unconscious.  Thus  even  in  sub-
ordinate nerve-centres  an  idea  must  be  united  with  every
actual  volition,  and  one,  moreover,  according  to  the  nature
of  the  will  either  relatively  to  the  brain,  or  absolutely  un-
conscious. For  when  the  ganglionic  will  wills  to  contract
the  cardiac  muscle  in  a  particular  manner,  it  must  first
of  all  possess  the  idea  of  this  contraction,  for  othorw;  •
God  oulv  knows  what  could  be  contracted,  but  not the


124  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

cardiac  muscle.  This  idea  is  in  any  case  unconscious
in  respect  of  the  brain,  but  in  respect  of  the  ganglia  pro-
bably conscious.  But  now,  as  we  saw  in  the  second
chapter  in  the  case  of  voluntary  movements  of  the  cerebral
will,  the  contraction  must  be  effected  by  the  arising  of  a
will  to  excite  the  appropriate  central  endings  of  the  motor
nerve-fibres  in  the  ganglia.  That  again  implies  an  idea
of  the  position  of  these  central  nerve-endings,  and  this
idea,  analogous  to  the  unconscious  idea  of  the  position  of
the  motor  nerve-endings  in  the  brain,  must  be  conceived
as  absolutely  unconscious.  In  correspondence  with  these
ideas  the  will  to  contract  the  cardiac  muscle  will  also
have  to  be  thought  as  a  relatively  unconscious  one,  the
will  to  excite  the  appropriate  nerve-endings  in  the  cardiac
ganglia  which  effects  its  realisation  as  absolutely  uncon-
scious.

Vie  have  seen  that  volition  is  an  empty  form,  which  only
finds  in  the  idea  a  content  giving  it  actuality,  but  that
this  form  itself  is  something  heterogeneous  to  the  idea,
and  therefore  not  to  be  defined  by  concepts,  sui  generis,
namely,  that  which,  being,  it  is  true,  in  itself  still  unreal,  in
its  operation  causes  the  passage  from  the  ideal  to  the  actual
or  real.  Volition  is  thus  the  form  of  the  cetusality  of  the  ideal
with  respect  to  the  real;  it  is  nothing  but  operation  or  acti-
vity, pure  going-out-of-self,  whilst  the  idea  is  pure  being-
with-self  and  abiding-in-self.  But  if  the  fundamental
distinction  of  the  form  of  the  will  from  that  of  the  idea
consists  in  the  outwardly  efficient  causality  and  the  going
out  of  self,  the  latter,  as  a  something  self-enclosed,  must  be
without  external  causality,  if  the  just  stated  difference  is
not  again  to  be  abolished.  For  ideation  always  accom-
panies volition,  and  if  the  idea  also  possessed  an  external
causality,  the  distinction  between  will  and  idea  would  in
fact  be  abolished,  whilst  we  should  have  again  to  find  and
to  characterise  afresh  the  two  different  moments  within
each!  Therefore  we  prefer  to  retain  for  these  polar
moments  the  words  "Will  and  Idea,  and  assume  a  con-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  125

nection  between  the  two  when  we  find  them  united.
"We  have  already  done  this  in  the  case  of  "Will ;  it  still
remains  in  future  to  recognise  "Will  in  the  Idea  wher-
ever the  latter  displays  an  outward  causality.  Aristotle
has  expressed  this  too  (De.  An.  iii.  10,  433,  a.  9)  :  koX  ■>)
(pavraaia  Be,  orav  Kiifj,  ov  Kivet  avev  ope^ews,  i.e.,  "but  the
presentative  faculty,  when  it  acts  externally,  does  not  act
without  a  Will."

As  we  have  seen  above  that  the  strict  followers  of
Schopenhauer  are  willing,  indeed,  partially  to  recognise
the  unconscious  will,  but  not  the  necessity  of  its  being
fdled  with  unconscious  representation  or  idea,  so  the
Hegelians  and  Herbartians,  if  they  rightly  understand  their
masters,  may  perhaps  readily  recognise  the  unconscious
idea  or  representation,  but  will  not  grant  the  necessity  of
the  unconscious  will.  As  the  former,  without  being  aware
of  it,  implicitly  think  the  idea  in  the  matter  of  volition,
so  the  latter  think  the  Will  in  the  impulse  and  faculty  of
self-realisation  of  the  Idea,  or  in  the  conflicting  energies
of  the  psychological  mental  representations,  without  mak-
ing explicitly  clear  to  themselves  this  important  implicit
thought.  'Misled  perhaps  by  Herbartian  influences,  some
of  our  recent  physiologists  also  make  the  idea,  as  such,
without  more  ado,  produce  physiological  effects  in  the
body.

The  first  application  we  would  make  of  the  proposition
here maintained  is  to  confirm the statement,  that the
unconscious  idea  of  the  position  of  the  central  endings
of  motor  nerve-fibres  cannot  operate  without  the  will  to
excite  those  places,  and  that  the  mere  unconscious  idea  of
an  instinctive  purpose  can  be  of  no  avail  if  the  end  is  m>t
al ;  1  willed  ;  for  only  by  will i ??  g  the  end  can  the  icilli
the  means  be  evoked,  and  only  by  the  willing  of  the  n
these  means  themselves. "What  is  here  said  of  the  in  lim
live  purpose  of  course  holds  equally  good  of  every  1  ;'. r
unconscious  idea  of  an  end  which  will  pn  1: in

the  following  chapters.


126  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

In  conclusion,  we  can  now  more  closely  consider  the
question  of  the  difference  between  the  conscious  and  the
unconscious  will.  A  will,  the  content  of  which  is  formed
by  an  unconscious  idea,  could  at  the  most  be  consciously
perceived  according  to  its  empty  form  of  volition,  and  acts
of  will  of  that  kind  could  then  at  the  most  only  be  dis-
criminated by  consciousness  as  different  in  degree  ;  on  the
other  hand,  it  can  no  longer  be  perceived  by  consciousness
as  this  specific  will,  since  its  specific  nature  is  only  deter-
mined by  its  content.  Accordingly,  for  such  a  will  the
application  of  the  word  "  conscious "  is  unconditionally
excluded,  as  in  no  case  can  more  be  said  than  that  this
specific  will  becomes  conscious.  Moreover,  experience  also
teaches  us  that  we  know  so  much  the  less  of  a  will  the
fewer  the  ideas  or  feelings  accompanying  it  which  reach  the
cerebral  consciousness.  Accordingly,  it  almost  seems  as
if  will  as  such  were  not  generally  accessible  to  conscious-
ness, but  became  so  only  through  its  marriage  with  the
idea.  (This  is  proved,  in  fact,  in  Chap.  iii.  C.)  However
that  may  be,  we  can  now  assert  that  an  unconscious  will  is
a  will  with  imconscious  idea  as  content,  for  a  will  with
conscious  idea  as  content  will  always  be  conscious  to  us.
If,  in  saying  this,  the  distinction  between  conscious  and
unconscious  will  is  only  traced  back  to  the  equally  diffi-
cult distinction  between  conscious  and  unconscious  idea,
yet  an  essential  simplification  of  the  problem  is  thereby
obtained.


( 127 )


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN REFLEX ACTIONS.

"  At  the  present  time  those  actions  are  called  reflex  in
which  the  existing  stimulus  does  not  directly  affect  either
a  contractile  tissue  or  a  motor  nerve,  but  a  nerve  which
imparts  its  state  of  excitement  to  a  central  organ,  where-
upon, through  the  mediation  of  the  latter,  the  stimulus
overflows  on  to  motor  nerves,  and  then  for  the  first  time
is  made  apparent  by  muscular  movements."1  This  ex-
planation seems  to  me  as  good  a  one  as  the  physiologists
are  able  to  give,  and  no  qualification  of  the  same  can  bo
found  which  does  not  exclude  certain  classes  of  reflex
action  generally  recognised  by  this  name ;  and  yet  it  is
easy  to  see  that  it  is  much  wider  than  physiology  intends,
since  all  movements  and  actions  find  a  place  among  them,
whose  antecedent  is  not  a  thought  which  lias  arisen
spontaneously  in  the  brain,  but  is  directly  or  indirectly  a
sense-impression.  To  pursue  further  this  gradual  passage
of  the  lowest  reflex  movements  into  conscious  voluntary
actions,  we  must  examine  various  examples.

If  a  freshly  excised  frog's  heart,  which  pulsates  slowly.
be  irritated  by  the  prick  of  a  needle,  there  arises  inde-
pendently of  the  rhythm  of  the  beat  a  systole  (contrac-
tion) in  the  normal  succession  of  the  parts.  Before  the
complete  extinction  of  irritability  a  time  occurs  when  the

1 Wafer's  Handworterbuch der  of  earlier  investigal . oftin

Physiologic, vol. ii. p. 51-*, article  come very near the truth. e<  111-

•■  Nervous Physiology,"'. by Yelk-  jure also the excellent n.<  n.oir of

maim. On the historical develop-  J. \V. Arnold: "The Doctrine :

inent  of  the  notion  of relhx move-  Keflex  1'unctions. "'
nieiit.  and  for  an  estimate  of  the  views


128  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

irritation  is  only  succeeded  by  a  local  contraction  of
decreasing  extent.  If  the  heart  be  divided  when  it  is
still  powerful,  but  in  such  a  way  that  there  remain  con-
necting portions  between  the  parts,  stimulation  of  the  one
part,  in  which  a  ganglion  is  contained  in  the  muscular
substance,  produces  contraction  of  both  parts ;  on  the
other  hand,  irritation  of  the  other  part,  which  contains  no
ganglion,  is  only  succeeded  by  local  contraction.  It  follows
from  this,  that  the  normal  systole  sequent  on  stimulation
is  no  simple  phenomenon  of  the  stimulus  of  a  contractile
tissue,  but  a  reflex  movement  mediated  by  the  embedded
ganglia.  Other  experiments,  e.g.,  the  division  of  the
spinal  cord  by  small  cross  sections,  &c,  render  it  probable
that  any  nerve-centre  may  effect  reflex  actions.  The  more
this  nerve-centre  is  developed  the  higher  is  the  degree  of
propriety  and  adroitness  in  complicated  movements  ex-
hibited in  its  reflex  actions.  Volkmann  says  (Hwb.  ii.
545) :  "  When  different  muscles  are  combined  to  produce  a
reflex  movement,  whether  synchronous  or  successive,  the
combination  is  always  mechanically  appropriate.  I  mean,
the  simultaneously  active  muscles  support  one  another,
e.g.,  in  producing  a  flexure,  and  those  which  are  active  in
succession  unite  in  the  judicious  continuation  and  com-
pletion of  the  already  commenced  movement.  If  a  de-
capitated frog  in  an  extended  position  be  stimulated  in
the  hind  leg  sufficiently  powerfully,  the  flexors  and
adductors  of  both  legs  first  of  all  act  in  combination,
next  the  legs  are  drawn  towards  the  body,  the  extensors
are  combined  for  joint  extension,  and  the  total  result  is  a
more  or  less  regular  actual  movement,  whether  of  swim-
ming or  leaping.

"  In  many  cases  the  reflectorial  movements  have  not  only
the  character  of  fitness,  but  even  a  certain  dasli  of  inten-
tion. Young  dogs  whose  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  I  had
destroyed,  sparing  the  medulla  oblongata,  when  I  took
them  roughly  by  the  ears  tried  to  get  rid  of  my  hand
with  the  fore-paw. One  often  sees  decapitated  frogs  rub


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  129

a  violently  filliped  part  of  the  skin  (only  possible  by  an
alternating  play  of  the  antagonists),  and  tortoises,  which
are  injured  after  decapitation,  withdraw  into  their  cara-
pace." The  medulla  oblongata,  as  the  most  developed
nerve-centre  after  the  brain,  is  also  that  which  effects
the  most  complicated  reflex  movements,  as,  e.g.,  respiration
with  its  modifications :  sobbing,  sighing,  laughing,  crying,
coughing;  also  sneezing  on  irritation  of  the  nasal  mem-
brane, swallowing,  and  vomiting  on  gentle  pressure  (by
a  morsel)  or  tickling  of  the  throat  and  palate ;  laughing
ensues  on  tickling  the  external  skin,  coughing  on  irritation
of  the  larynx.

Very  important  for  the  whole  life  of  man,  and  indicative
of  much  more  complicated  'events  in  the  central  organs,
are  the  reflex  movements  called  forth  by  sense-percep-
tions ;  certainly  a  class  of  phenomena  to  which  physio-
logy lias  not  yet  given  sufficient  attention,  because  they
can  only  be  studied  with  the  whole  living  body,  and
partly  only  psychologically  in  one's  own  person.  It  is,
however,  manifest  that  this  mode  of  investigation  has
great  advantages  over  that  on  mutilated  corpses  or  animals
with  their  brains  removed,  since  in  organisms  which  have
just  suffered  death,  or  undergone  the  severest  operations,
or  have  been  treated  with  strychnine,  one  can  by  no
means  assume  a  normal  capacity  of  reacting  on  the  part
of  the  lower  central  organs,  which  stand  in  such  direct
correspondence  with  the  destroyed  parts.  Moreover,  in
decapitated  animals  the  medulla  oblongata  ami  the  large
cerebral  ganglia,  which  probably  should  be  reckoned  to
tin1  spinal  cord,  or  at  least  not  to  the  brain,  have  also  been
removed.  All  this  sufficiently  explains  the  purposeless
character  of  the  reflex  movements  in  some  of  these  ex-
periments, where  one  is  unable  to  eliminate  the  patholo-
gical elements.

The  proximate  reflex  movements  called  forth  by  a  scr.se-
impression  consist  in  this,  that  the  particular  sense-org;ui
is  brought  into  the  position,  tension.  &c,  requisite  for  clear

VOL I.  1


130  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

perception. In  touch  there  arises  a  movement  to  and  fro
of  the  finger ;  in  taste,  secretion  of  saliva  and  movement
to  and  fro  of  the  sapid  matter  in  the  mouth ;  in  smelling,
dilatation  of  the  nostrils  and  short,  quick  inspirations;
in  hearing,  tension  of  the  tympanic  membrane  and  move-
ments of  the  ears  and  head ;  in  vision,  convergence  of
both  optic  axes  towards  the  point  of  greatest  stimulation,
accommodation  of  the  lens  for  distance,  and  of  the  iris
to  the intensity  of  light. All  these movements,  with
the  exception  of  the  last  named,  can also  be  executed
voluntarily,  but  only  by  means  of  the  idea  of  the  altered
sense-impression ;  only  with  difficulty  or  not  at all by
the  direct  idea  of  the  movements. E.g.,  when  the  inves-
tigating oculist  holds  up  his  finger  as  a  mark  for  the
patient  and  bids  him  look  up  towards  the  right,  there
frequently occur  the most distorted  movements  of  the
eyes  and  eyelids, but not  the  one  desired. With en-
hanced  vividness of the impression, the head, arms,
and  whole  body  not seldom take involuntary  part in
these reflex actions. Further,  through  the  medium  of
the  ear  reflex  movements  are  set  up  in  the  organs  of
speech,  for,  as  is  well  known,  children  and  animals  learn
to  talk  in  consequence  of  the  involuntary  impulse  which
compels  them  to  reproduce  what  has  been  heard. The
like  occurs  in  the  catching  of  melodies,  where  the  pheno-
menon is  more  easily  observed,  and  in  adults  also. With-
out this  reflexion  it  would  be  impossible  to  train  birds  to
whistle  tunes. The  reflex  compulsion  to  utter  words  one
is  accustomed  to  hear  spoken  may  even  be  observed  in
our  own  thinking. Here,  according  to  a  process  exempli-
fied in  a  still  higher  degree  in  the  production  of  dream-
images  and  hallucinations,  the  thought  of  the  word  which
is  not  yet  an  object  of  sense  causes  a  centrifugal  current
of  innervation  towards  the  auditory  nerve,  as  the  reflex
consequence  of  which  a  centripetal  current  brings  back
the  auditory  sensation  of  the  word,  and  this  calls  forth
in  the  organs  of  speech  the  reflex  movements  of  the  loud


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  131

or  subdued  utterance.  The  undisciplined  man,  e.g.,  the
uneducated  or  passionately  excited  man,  thinks  aloud.  It
requires  the  constraint  of  education  to  think  silently,  and
even  then  one  will  almost  always,  if  on  the  watch  for  it,
detect  a  muscular  feeling  in  the  organ  of  speech,  which
is  a  weaker  form  of  that  which  would  arise  in  the  utter-
ance of  the  words,  and  thus  manifestly  represents  a  ten-
dency to  action. In  reading  it  is  just  the  same.

One  of  the  most  important  reflex  actions  of  the  cere-
brum, especially  in  respect  to  sense-perception,  is  that
centrifugal  current  of  innervation  which  we  call  Atten-
tion, and  which  is  essential  for  all  tolerably  clear  per-
ception. It  arises  as  reflex  action  on  a  stimulus,  which
affects  the  sensory  nerve  of  the  organs  of  sense.  If  the
brain  is  otherwise  too  much  occupied  to  react  on  such
stimuli,  this  action  does  not  take  place,  and  then  the
sense-impression  escapes  us  without  becoming  perception.
This  current  of  innervation  can  be  directed  to  the  several
pans  of  a  sense-perception  {e.g.,  to  any  part  of  the  field  of
vision  or  an  instrument  in  the  orchestra),  which  explains
the  fact  that  one  often  sees  and  hears  just  that  for  which
the  present  state  of  the  brain  has  a  particular  susceptibility,
which  is  also  in  accordance  with  many  of  the  phenomena
of  somnambulism.  It  is  also  the  partial  failure  of  this
current  of  innervation,  which  renders  comprehensible  the
otherwise  inexplicable  difference  between  the  absent  and
frfoc&parts  of  the  held  of  vision.  We  may  also  voluntarily
direct  this  stream  of  innervation  to  certain  parts  of  the
body,  and  thereby  bring  into  consciousness  as  perceptions
the  usually  unobserved  sensations  which  all  parts  of  the
body  are  continually  producing;  e.g.,  I  can  feel  my  finger-
tips if  1  carefully  attend  to  them;  (think  also  of  the
hy]  ochondriacal).  A  boundary-line  between  such  currents
of  innervation  as  are  produced  by  conscious  will,  and
those  which  follow  as  reflex  action  011  impressions  of
sense  when  the  interest  of  the  brain  is  fully  gained,
can  no  more  be  discovered  and  drawn  here  than  in  ai.v


132  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

other  department  of  these  phenomena.  Very  remarkable
are  many  of  the  reflex  movements  which  are  effected  by
the  eye  and  the  sense  of  touch.  The  eye  not  only  protects
itself  reflectorially  from  injuries,  which  it  sees  approaching,
by  closure,  bending  of  the  head  and  body,  or  the  holding
up  of  the  arm,  but  it  also  protects  other  threatened  bodily
parts  in  the  same  way,  nay,  even  other  things.  For  ex-
ample, if  a  glass  falls  from  the  table,  the  sudden  catching
at  it  is  just  as  much  reflex  movement  as  the  ducking
of  the  head  when  a  stone  is  coming  towards  us,  or  the
parrying  of  the  thrusts  in  fencing  ;  for  in  the  one  as  in  the
other  case  the  resolution  after  conscious  reflection  would
come  much  too  late.  Must  one  really  pronounce  that  a
different  principle  which,  in  the  one  case,  causes  the  young
dog  deprived  of  its  brain  to  thrust  aside  with  its  paw  a
hand  nipping  its  ear,  and  in  the  other  causes  the  human
being  to  ward  off  by  the  sudden  raising  of  the  arm  a
threatening  blow  perceived  by  the  eye  ?  The  most  wonder-
ful reflectorial  performances  of  the  combined  senses  of  sight
and  touch  consist,  however,  in  the  complicated  movements
involved  in  preserving  one's  balance,  as  in  sliding,  walk-
ing, riding,  dancing,  leaping,  performing  gymnastic  exer-
cises, skating,  &c,  in  part  spontaneous  (especially  in  the
case  of  animals),  in  part  acquired  by  practice,  an  original
capacity  being  always  presupposed.  If  one  leaps  a  ditch,
it  is  not  easy  to  leap  beyond  the  farther  brink,  although
one  may  be  able  to  leap  much  farther  on  level  ground  ;  but
the  eye,  through  an  unconscious  reflection,  brings  it  about
that  just  sufficient  muscular  force  is  applied  to  reach  the
opposite  side,  and  this  unconscious  will  is  often  stronger
than  the  conscious  one  to  leap  farther.  It  is  remark-
able that  all  the  afore-mentioned  functions  are  executed
much  more  easily,  more  certainly,  and  even  more  gracefully,
if  they  are  performed  without  conscious  volition  as  simple
reflex  movements  of  the  sensations  of  sight  and  touch.
Every  intervention  of  the  cerebral  consciousness  operates
only  inhibitively  and  disturbingly:  hence  mules  walk  more


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  133

surely  than  men  in  dangerous  paths,  because  they  are
not  disturbed  by  conscious  reflection,  and  somnambulists
go  and  climb  in  the  unconscious  state  where,  if  con-
scious, they  would  infallibly  meet  with  an  accident.  For
conscious  reflection  always  brings  along  with  it  doubt
and  hesitation,  and  this  frequently  a  fatal  tardiness ;  the
unconscious  intelligence,  on  the  other  hand,  is  always
beyond  a  doubt  more  certain  to  seize  the  right  course,  or
rather  doubt  never  occurs  to  it,  and  therefore  it  almost
always  does  the  right  thing  at  the  right  moment.  Even
prelection  and  playing  from  notes,  if  consciousness  be
otherwise  occupied  or  asleep,  can  take  the  form  of  mere
reflex  movements  following  on  impressions  of  feeling,  as
cases  have  been  observed  where  reading  aloud  has  been
continued  a  certain  time  after  falling  asleep,  or  pieces  of
music  have  been  better  played  in  dreamy  unconscious
states  than  when  wide  awake.  That  reading  or  playing
from  notes  can  often  be  continued  quite  unconsciously  and
without  the  slightest  after-memory  of  the  subject-matter,
when  consciousness  is  occupied  with  other  fascinating
thoughts,  any  one  can  observe  for  himself.  Nay,  even
sudden  curt  answers  to  quick  questions  have  often  some-
thing reilectorially  unconscious  about  them,  when  they
drop  out  unawares  like  a  pistol-shot,  and  afterwards  one  is
often  astonished  or  ashamed  if  they  have  been  unsuitable
to  the  occasion  and  the  company.

More  important,  however,  than  all  that  has  been  hitherto
noticed  is  the  consideration  that  there  is  no,  or  almost  no,
voluntary  movement  which  must  not  at  the  same  time  1  e
regarded  as  a  combination  of  reflex  actions.  I  mean  this:
Anatomical  investigations  show  that,  in  the  upper  part  of
the  spinal  cord  the  number  of  the  primitive  ill  ires  amounts
to  only  a  very  small  fraction  of  the  primitive  fibres  of  all
the  nerves,  which  are  destined  to  call  forth  movement
through  the  conscious  will,  that  is,  by  the  brain.  I >nt  now,
as  the  path  from  the  brain  to  the  nerves  supplying  the
muscles  is,  with  few  exceptions,  only  through  the  ui  \ v


134  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

part  of  the  spinal  cord,  it  follows  that  a  fibre  in  the  upper
part  of  the  spinal  cord  must  be  destined  to  innervate  a
great  number  of  muscular  nerve-fibres  of  the  same  part.
A  direct  anastomosis  (interlacing,  connecting)  of  the  fibres
might  be  imagined,  but  this  assumption  seems  highly  im-
probable according  to  anatomical  observations,  and  we
are  also  compelled  to  abandon  it  from  the  circumstance
that  one  and  the  same  movement  is  now  stimulated  by
the  brain,  now,  in  consequence  of  some  other  stimulation,
is  independently  executed  by  the  central  organs  of  the
spinal  cord,  and  admits  an  immense  variety  of  the  most
delicate  and  intricate  modifications,  whilst  a  direct  anas-
tomosis must  necessitate  the  same  invariable  movements.
In  addition  to  this,  the  brain,  which  gives  the  order  to
execute  a  complicated  series  of  movements,  has  itself  no
idea  of  this  complication,  but  only  a  collective  idea  of  the
result  (as  in  speaking,  singing,  walking,  dancing,  running,
leaping,  performing  gymnastic  exercises,  fighting,  riding,
skating),  so  that  the  whole  detail  of  execution,  which  is
requisite  for  the  total  result  intended,  is  intrusted  to  the
spinal  cord.  (Let  any  one  ask  himself  whether  he  knows
anything  of  the  muscular  contractions  necessary  for  utter-
ing a  word  or  for  singing  a  colorature.)  Accordingly  the
only  mode  of  conceiving  the  matter  remaining  seems  to  me
to  be  this :  that  the  current  of  innervation,  which  carries
the  conscious  volition  of  the  total  movement  from  the
brain  to  the  central  organ  of  such  movement  in  the
spinal  cord,  and  which  is  for  the  brain,  indeed,  centrifugal,
but  for  the  nerve-centre  of  the  movement  centripetal,
that  this  current  is  felt  as  sensation  by  the  motor  centre
just  as  well  as  an  impression  coming  from  the  peripheral
parts  of  the  body,  and  that  the  consequence  of  this  sensa-
tion is  the  occurrence  of  the  intended  movement.  But  it
is  clear  that  we  here  again  see  the  definition  of  reflex
movement  to  hold  good,  as  soon  as  we  resolve  to  employ
the  relative  conceptions  of  centrifugal  and  centripetal
currents  in  their  right  relations.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  135

One  easily  sees  that  there  is  hardly  a  movement  which,
even  if  it  is  originated  by  the  cerebral  consciousness,  is  not
first  conducted  once  or  several  times  to  another  motor
centre,  and  there  visibly  executed.  Consciousness  can,  it
is  true,  decompose  movements  to  a  certain  extent,  and  give
a  conscious  impulse  to  any  partial  movement  (this  is  in-
deed the  way  we  learn  to  make  the  movement),  but,  in  the
first  place,  every  such  partial  presentation  will  probably
find  no  other  path  to  the  muscles  than  through  the  grey
matter  of  the  motor  centres,  thus  always  retaining  the  cha-
racter of  a  reflex;  secondly,  even  the  simplest  motor  elements
accessible  to  the  cerebral  consciousness  still  require  highly
complicated  combinations  of  movement  for  their  execution,
into  which  consciousness  never  penetrates  {e.g.,  the  utter-
ance of  a  vowel  or  the  singing  of  a  note) ;  and,  thirdly,  if
its  simple  elements  are  as  far  as  possible  intended  by  the
conscious  will,  the  whole  movement  has  something  ex-
tremely slow,  coarse,  awkward,  and  heavy  about  it,  whilst
the  very  same  movement  is  executed  with  the  greatest
facility,  speed,  certainty,  and  elegance,  if  only  the  final
result  was  intended  by  the  cerebral  consciousness,  and  the
execution  was  intrusted  to  the  motor  centres  in  question.
One  has  only  to  think  of  the  phenomenon  of  stammering.
The  stammerer  often  speaks  quite  fluently  if  he  does  not
at  all  think  of  the  utterance,  and  his  consciousness  is  occu-
pied  only  with  the  matter  of  his  speech,  but  not  with  the
mode  of  realisation  ;  but  as  soon  as  he  thinks  of  the  utter-
ance and  desires  to  form  this  or  that  sound  by  conscious
volition,  he  does  not  succeed,  and  in  its  stead  all  sorts
of  concomitant  movements  occur,  which  may  even  become
convulsive.  It  is  just  the  same  witli  scrivener's  cramp
and  all  the  above-mentioned  bodily  exercises,  in  which  the
main  thing  is  that  they  become  second  nature,  i.e.,  that  the
conscious  will  ceases  to  trouble  itself  about  the  details.
Through  this  way  of  conceiving  tin1  matter  the  phenomenon
becomes  for  the  first  time  explicable,  \vhy  often  a  single
impulse  of  the  conscious  will  suffices  to  introduce  a  long


136  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

series  of  periodically  recurring  movements,  which  lasts
until  it  is  interrupted  by  a  new  volitional  impulse.  "With-
out this  arrangement  all  our  ordinary  actions,  as  walking,
reading,  playing,  speaking,  &c,  would  absorb  an  amount
of  the  volitional  impulses  of  the  brain  which  must  very
soon  result  in  fatigue.  It,  however,  proves  also  the  inde-
pendence of  the  lower  nerve-centres,  and  most  decidedly
refutes  the  above  assumption  of  a  direct  anastomosis  of
the  nerves.  It  may  also  now  be  comprehensible  how  it
comes  to  pass  that  so  many  actions  and  occupations,
whose  slightest  details  must  be  attended  to  in  their
conscious  acquisition,  later  on,  with  prolonged  practice  and
habit,  are  performed  quite  unconsciously,  as  knitting,  play-
ing on  the  piano,  reading,  writing,  &c.  All  the  work,  then,
which  during  acquisition  was  done  by  the  brain,  has  been
handed  over  to  subordinate  nerve-centres  ;  for  these  can
call  into  play  an  habitual  combination  of  certain  activities
just  as  efficiently  as  the  brain  in  thinking  or  in  learning
by  heart.  That,  however,  then  the  activities  become  for
the  most  part  unconscious  to  the  brain,  gives  them  in
respect  to  the  brain  a  certain  resemblance  to  instinctive
actions,  whilst  indeed,  in  respect  to  the  nerve-centre
which  presides  over  the  activity,  practice  and  custom  is
the  precise  opposite  of  instinct.

That  all  the  phenomena  hitherto  considered  have  essen-
tially the  same  underlying  principle,  it  is  not  very  difficult
to  see.  We  started  with  the  reflectorial  movements
produced  by  irritation  of  peripheral  parts  of  the  body,
and  found  a  purpose  most  decidedly  expressed  therein,
both  in  the  result  of  the  whole  movement  and  in  the
simultaneous  and  successive  combinations  of  the  most
different  muscles ;  nay,  in  part,  most  decidedly  expressed
even  in  an  alternating  play  of  the  antagonists.  We  then
passed  on  to  the  reflex  movements  produced  by  means  of
sense-perceptions,  and  found  here  the  same  fact,  only  often
with  a  dash  of  higher  intelligence,  in  that  the  higher
central  points  of  the  spinal  cord  came  more  into  play.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  137

Lastly,  we  noticed  that  reflex  actions,  in  which  the  ex-
citing stimulus  is  an  innervating  current  from  the  brain
to  the  other  central  organs  concerned,  are  produced  by  the
conscious  will,  and  did  not  remark  here  any  quantitative
increase  of  effects  as  compared  with  the  reflex  movements
produced  through  sense-perceptions  ;  naturally  enough,  for
the  intelligence  revealed  in  reflection  depends  far  more  on
the  stage  of  development  of  the  reflecting  central  organ
than  on  the  nature  of  the  stimulus.

That,  in  fact,  the  brain  also  can  become  a  central  organ
of  reflex  actions,  we  cannot  doubt  from  the  analogy  of  its
structure  with  the  other  centres.  In  reflex  actions  of  the
ganglionic  system  and  in  individuals  deprived  of  brains,
perception  by  the  brain  is  excluded  ;  but  this  may  very
well  accompany  the  reflex  actions  of  the  spinal  cord  in  the
case  of  sound  organisms.  In  this  case,  however,  only  the
stimulation,  but  not  the  will  to  move,  is  felt  in  the  brain ;
but  the  latter  must  manifestly  also  have  place  if  the
brain  itself  is  to  be  a  central  organ  of  reflection.  Such
cases  are,  however,  already  familiar  to  us  ;  e.g.,  the  catching
at  a  falling  glass  or  the  parrying  of  a  previously  seen  blow
may  have  these  characteristics.  Accordingly  we  shall  not
be  able  to  avoid  regarding  them  as  reflex  actions,  if  only
the  link  between  perception  of  the  action  and  the  will  to
execute  it  lies  outside  the  cerebral  consciousness,  which  re-
ceives additional  confirmation  from  the  fact  that  conscious
reflection  would  manifestly  come  too  late.  To  the  same
category  belongs  a  part  of  the  not  quite  unconscious  pre-
lection and  preluding,  or  the  rapid  answers  to  sudden
questions,  or  the  sudden  taking  off  the  hat  at  the  unex-
pected greeting  of  an  unknown  person.  Cerebral  reflection
frequently  surpasses  the  reflection  of  the  spinal  cord,  and
prevents  its  occurrence;  e.g.,  a  decapitated  frog  scratches
the  nioped  place  on  the  skin,  a  living  one  hops  aw;;y.
Here  is  seen  the  direct  transition  from  cerebral  reflec-
tion to  conscious  psychical  activity,  between  which  no
line  can  be  drawn. There  follows  from  this  the  unity  of


138  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  principle  underlying  all  these  phenomena.  There
are,  therefore,  only  two  logical  ways  of  looking  at  these
things  :  either  the  mind  is  everywhere  only  the  last  result
of  material  processes,  both  in  the  brain  and  in  the  rest  of
the  nervous  life  (then,  however,  purpose  would  also  have
to  be  everywhere  denied  when  not  posited  by  conscious
nervous  activity),  or  the  soul  is  everywhere  the  principle
lying  at  the  basis  of  material  nervous  processes,  causing
and  regulating  them,  and  consciousness  is  only  a  pheno-
menal form  of  the  same,  brought  about  by  means  of  these
processes.  We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  which  of  these  two
assumptions  better  suits  the  facts.

The  next  point  we  have  to  investigate  is  the  question,
whether  the  phenomena  we  are  considering  may  be  looked
upon  as  effects  of  a  dead  mechanism,  or  whether  we  are  not
compelled  to  conceive  them  as  consequences  of  an  intelli-
gence immanent  in  the  central  organs,  in  which  case  the
foregoing  alternative  may  provisionally  remain  undiscussed.
Let  us  first  turn  to  physiology.  The  skin  of  a  frog's  thigh
being  pricked  by  a  needle,  we  see  both  legs  drawn  up,
provided  the  little  piece  of  spinal  cord  from  which  issue
the  crural  nerves  remains  intact.  The  prick  of  the  needle
manifestly  affects  only  one  primitive  nerve-fibre,  since
within  a  circle  of  a  certain  size  the  position  of  the  pricked
place  cannot  be  distinguished  ;  the  number  of  motor  fibres
put  in  action  by  the  same  is,  however,  enormously  large,
for  it  can  embrace  the  whole  body.  The  direct  anasto-
mosis of  the  sensory  and  motor  nerves  is  hereby  rendered
improbable  in  the  highest  degree.  It  becomes,  however,
still  more  so  by  the  circumstance  that  the  same  motor  fibres
react,  when  this  or  that  place  in  the  skin  of  the  frog's  thigh
is  pricked,  when  according^  different  sensory  nerve-fibres
convey  the  stimulus  to  the  centre.  Besides,  microscopic
investigations  not  only  give  no  support  to  this  supposition,
but  what  is  more,  Kolliker  has  directly  observed  the  emer-
gence of  motor  fibres  from  globules  of  grey  nerve-matter
(central  organ),  and  it  is  now  generally  supposed  that  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  139

central  origin  of  all  the  nerve-fibres  must  be  sought  in
the  ganglion-cells,  i.e.,  the  peculiar  spherical  or  radiated
cells  of  the  grey  nerve-matter.  The  stimulus  conducted
by  the  sensory  fibres  must  accordingly,  in  any  case,  be
first  received  by  the  central  organ,  and  through  this  be
conducted  to  the  motor  nerves ;  in  no  other  way  could
any  sensory  fibre  possibly  be  in  a  position  to  act  upon
any  motor  fibre  of  the  same  centre  (as  is  actually  the
case).  But  if  all  the  stimuli  are  first  received  by  the
central  organ,  and  are  only  propagated  from  this  to  the
motor  nerves,  then  the  materialistic  explanation  of  reflex
actions  by  a  peculiar  mechanism  of  the  channels  of  con-
duction becomes  quite  impossible ;  for  no  laws  and  contri-
vances can  at  all  be  imagined  which  should  allow  one  and
the  same  current  to  pass  over  now  to  near,  now  to  remote
parts,  should  cause  the  reactions  to  follow  now  in  this,  now
in  that  order,  nay,  should  even  permit  an  alternating  play  of
the  antagonists  to  occur  on  a  simple  stimulus  (as  in  the  rub-
bing of  the  filliped  part).  The  impossibility  of  a  pre-estab-
lished mechanism  is,  however,  physiologically  demonstrable
in  a  much  more  striking  way.  If  one  divides  the  spinal  cord
throughout  its  whole  length  by  a  longitudinal  section,  the
rapacity  for  reflex  movements  is  not  affected ;  it  is  only
limited  to  the  half  of  the  body  irritated  on  each  occasion.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  connecting  bridge  be  left  between
the  two  separated  halves  at  any  place  whatsoever,  or  if,  at
some  distance  from  each  other,  now  the  left  and  then  the
right  half  of  the  spinal  cord  be  cut  across,  so  that  all  the
longitudinal  fibres  are  severed,  general  reflex  movements
may  bo  excited  by  stimulation  of  each  main  point.  This  is
probably  the  clearest  proof  that  the  motor  reaction  is  not  a
consequence  of  the  predetermined  paths  of  the  conduction
of  the  stimulus,  but  that  the  current  after  destruction  of
the  usual  channels  makes  for  itself  new  path*,  in  order  to
bring  about  the  suitable  reflex  movements,  provided  only
that  the  parts  be  not  completely  isolated.  There  must
then  be  a  principle  superior  to  the  material  laws of  con-


140  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

duction  of  the  nerve-currents,  which  brings  about  this
change  of  circumstances,  in  virtue  of  which  the  courses
of  these  currents  are  changed,  and  this  principle  can  only
be  an  immaterial  one.  This  is  also  verified  by  the  circum-
stance, that  the  union  of  reflex  movements  is  for  the
most  part  capable  of  being  dissolved  by  conscious  volition
and  exercise.

Forcible  as  are  these  anatomical-physiological  reasons,
they  are  still  not  the  strongest  of  all.  If  the  conformity
to  the  end  in  view  which  appears  in  reflex  actions  were
one  externally  predetermined,  brought  on  the  scene  by  a
material  mechanism,  then  the  capability  of  accommodating
movements  to  the  nature  of  the  circumstances,  this  inex-
haustible wealth  of  combinations,  each  of  which  is  suitable
to  its  special  case,  would  be  plainly  inexplicable.  "We
should  rather  expect  a  constant  recurrence  of  a  few  simi-
lar complex  movements,  whereas  a  single  glance  at  the
infinite  number  of  combinations,  as  exemplified  in  the
simple  case  of  preserving  one's  balance,  is  sufficient  to
establish  the  conviction  of  an  immanent  fitness — an  indi-
vidual providence,,  as  we  have  already  come  to  know  it
when  considering  Instinct.  We  are  absolutely  obliged,
then,  so  to  represent  to  ourselves  the  event  that  the
stimulus  is  perceived  as  idea,  and  through  the  idea  of  the
danger  or  feeling  of  pain  connected  therewith  the  idea  of
relief  through  the  corresponding  counter-movement  is
produced,  which  now  becomes  the  object  of  volition.  That
the  nerve-centres  of  the  spinal  cord  and  ganglia  possess  the
capacity  of  willing  we  have  already  settled  ;  that  the  cases
being  strictly  parallel,  they  must  also  possess  sensibility  is
evident  at  once;  but  since  no  sensation  can  be  imagined
without  a  certain  degree  of  consciousness,  however  small,
they  also  possess  a  certain  consciousness.  The  beginning
and  the  end  of  the  process,  the  perception  of  the  stimulus
and  the  will  to  move,  are  then  the  functions  which  we
have  no  hesitation  in  ascribing  to  every  nervous  centre.
The  only  question  is,  whether  the  link  between  them,  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  141

positing  of  design,  can  also  be  a  function  of  conscious  in-
tellectual association  of  these  nerve-centres  ?  Now  this
must  certainly  be  denied,  for  we  have  indeed  seen,  that
the  effects  of  reflexion  are  of  so  great  importance  to  the
organism,  just  because  they  so  far  surpass  the  perform-
ances of  the  conscious  reflection  of  the  brainin  ease, speed,
and  accuracy.  This  is,  however,  precisely  the  character
of  the  unconscious  idea,  as  we  have  become  acquainted
with  it  in  the  case  of  instinct,  and  have  learnt  further  to
know  it  in  other  ways.  Accordingly  all  that  we  have
adduced  in  the  case  of  instinct  against  its  origination
through  conscious  reflection  holds  here  in  a  still  higher
degree,  partly  because  the  instantaneousness  of  the  effect
is  more  striking  in  the  present  case,  and  is  in  still  greater
contrast  with  the  sluggishness  of  conscious  thought  in
beings  low  down  in  the  scale,  partly  because  we  have
here  to  do  in  the  case  of  animals  especially  with  lower
centres,  whilst  we  only  find  results  of  conscious  reflection
at  all  worth  mentioning  where  the  cerebral  functions  of  the
higher  birds  and  mammals  come  into  play.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  we  contemplate  the  animals  whose  chief  centres  are
about  on. a  par  with  the  lower  human  nerve-centres,  we
observe  the  greatest  obtuseness  and  stupidity  (e.g.,  in  most
amphibia  and  fishes),  in  contrast  to  which  one  cannot  help
being  struck  by  the  wonderful  accuracy  and  fitness  with
which  instinctive  actions  are  performed,  ever  increasing  in
significance  and  extent  in  proportion  to  the  entire  mental
life  of  the  animal.  Here  there  is  none  of  that  hesi-
tancy of  discursive  thought,  none  of  that  shrewd  and
cautious  consideration,  which  we  observe  in  higher  ani-
mals, but  the  instinctive  action  instantly  follows  on  the
impression,  whereas  reflection  would  often  cost  even  the
human  brain  a  considerable  time,  ami.  when  the  action  is
inappropriate,  as  may  well  happen  in  sense-illusions  in
tin'  conscious  perception  of  causes,  the  pernicious  error
is  embraced  with  equal  certainty.  We  are  compelled  to
designate  tins  attribute  of  the  unconscious  idea,  in  c  utrast


142  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

to  discursive  thinking,  an  immediate  intellectual  intuition,
and  wherever  we  meet  with  the  (not  relatively  to  this  or
that  centre,  but  absolutely)  unconscious  idea,  we  shall  find
this  to  be  its  characteristic.

This  comparison  with  instinct  will  decidedly  protect  us,
then,  from  regarding  the  immanent  fitness  of  reflex  move-
ments as  produced  by  conscious  thought.  The  psychical
autopsy  of  those  reflex  movements  whose  central  organ  is
the  brain  entirely  agrees  with  this ;  the  first  and  last  term
of  the  psychical  process,  the  perception  of  the  stimulus,
and  the  will  to  move  fall  within  the  consciousness  of
the  organ,  but  not  the  uniting  middle  terms,  which  must
contain  the  idea  of  design.  The  only  mode  of  appre-
hending the  matter,  which  is  possible  after  our  ex-
amination, is  then  this :  that  the  reflex  movements  are
the  instinctive  actions  of  the  subordinate  nerve-centres,
i.e.,  absolutely  unconscious  presentations,  which  embody
the  will  of  the  reflex  action  (conscious  for  the  parti-
cular centre,  but  unconscious  for  the  brain),  in  conse-
quence of  the  perception  of  the  stimulus.  In  addition
to  this  perception  in  the  reflecting  centre,  the  stimulus
can,  by  conduction,  also  be  felt  in  the  brain ;  but  there
is  then  a  second  perception,  which  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  rellex  movement  and  its  occurrence.  Instincts
and  reflex  actions  are  also  alike  in  this,  that  they  exhibit
essentially  similar  reactions  in  the  individuals  of  the  same
animal  species  witli  similar  stimuli  and  motives.  This
circumstance  has  given  strength  to  the  opinion  that  a  dead
mechanism  is  present  instead  of  unconscious  mental  acti-
vity and  immanent  adaptation  ;  but  this  circumstance  as
an  objection  to  our  view  is  invalidated  by  the  considera-
tion, that  it  is  capable  of  an  easy  explanation  in  the  manner
indicated  at  the  close  of  the  chapter  on  Instinct.


( 143 )


VI.

THE UNCONSCIOUS IN THE REPARATIVE  POWER  OF  NATURE.

When  the  nest  of  the  bird,  the  web  of  the  spider,  the
cocoon  of  the  caterpillar,  the  shell  of  the  snail  are  injured, —
when  the  bird  is  stripped  of  a  portion  of  its  feathery  robe, —
the  sufferers  repair  the  loss  which  may  imperil  or  impede
their  future  existence. We  have  already  seen  that  some
of  these  phenomena  must  be  ascribed  to  instinct,  and  can
we  fail  to  perceive  the  striking  analogy  of  the  other  cases  ?
We  have  seen  that  there  is  an  unconscious  idea  of  purpose,
which,  united  with  Will,  dictates  the  conscious  willing  of
the  means  to  attain  it ;  and  are  we  to  doubt  that  we  have
to  do  with  the  same  thing,  when  the  sphere  of  iniluence
is  no  longer  external,  but  the  body  itself,  since  we  are  not
able  to  draw  the  line  where  the  body  proper  begins  and
ends,  as  in  the  cocoon  of  the  caterpillar,  the  shell  of  the
snail,  the  feather-garment  of  the  bird,  or  between  excretion
and  secretion  ? If  we  deprive  the  polype  of  its  tentacles
or  the  worm  of  its  head,  the  creature  must  die  for  want  of
food  ;  and  if  tiie  animal  replaces  the  tentacles  or  the  head
and  continues  to  live,  can  anything  but  the  unconscious
idea  of  their  indispensableness  be  the  fundamental  cause
of  the restoration? Let  it  not  be  replied  that  the  differ-
ence between  instinct  and  the  vis  medicatrix  lies  in  this,
that  in  the  former  case  the  perceiving  and  willing  of  the
means  are,  at  any  rate,  conscious,  but  in  the  latter  case  these
also  are  unconscious. I-'or  after  the  discussion  on  the  inde-
pendence of  the  lower  nerve-centres,  it  cannot  be  doubti i
that  the  willing  of  the  means  may  very  well  somehow  and


144  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

somewhere  reach  the  stage  of  consciousness  in  the  lower
nerve-centres,  e.g.,  the  small  ganglionic  cells,  from  which
the  sympathetic  nerve-fibres  which  regulate  nutrition  arise,
even  if  the  chief  centre  of  the  animal  knows  nothing  at
all  about  it.  On  the  other  hand,  no  one  will  confidently
decide,  whether  and  how  far  in  the  lower  animals  in  the
case  of  instinct  even  the  willing  of  the  means  is  a  con-
scious act.

Let  us  now  look  a  little  closer  at  the  effects  of  the  vis
medicatrix.  In  the  case  of  the  Hydras  every  part  of  the
mass  is  replaced,  so  that  a  new  animal  is  formed  out  of
each  piece,  whether  the  division  be  transverse  or  longitu-
dinal, or  the  creature  be  even  cut  into  shreds.  Among  the
Planarice  every  segment,  if  it  only  amounts  to  one-tenth
or  one-eighth  of  the  whole  body,  becomes  a  fresh  animal.
Among  the  Annelids  or  worms  restoration  follows  only  after
transverse  section,  when  head  or  tail  is  always  regenerated.
In  some  cases  the  animal  may  be  cut  into  pieces,  and  yet
each  single  piece  develops  into  a  perfect  example  of  its
kind.  It  seems  here  clear  enough  that  if,  after  any  one
of  these  indefinitely  numerous  sections,  the  separated  part
always  furnishes  a  specimen  manifesting  the  typical  idea
of  its  kind,  this  effect  cannot  be  due  to  a  dead  causality,
but  the  type-form  must  be  present  in  each  piece  of  the
animal.  But  an  Idea  can  only  exist  either  realiter  in  its
external  manifestation  as  realised  idea,  or  idealiter  so  far
as  it  takes  the  form  of  mental  picture,  and  in  and  through
the  2^'cscnlaiive  act.  Hence  every  fragment  of  the  animal
must  have  the  unconscious  image  of  the  type  according
to  which  it  accomplishes  this  regeneration;  just  as  the  bee
before  the  construction  of  its  first  cell,  and  without  ever
having  seen  the  like,  carries  in  itself  the  unconscious  re-
presentation of  the  hexagonal  cell,  accurate  to  half  an
angular  minute,  or  as  every  bird  must  unconsciously  have
an  idea  of  the  form  of  the  nest  and  mode  of  song  char-
acteristic of  its  species,  before  it  has  had  any  experience  of
the  same.  And  observing  the  process  of  regeneration,  e.g.,  of


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  145

a  divided  earthworm,  a  white  bud  may  be  seen  sprout-
ing at  the  cut  part,  which  gradually  becomes  larger,  then
acquires  narrow,  closely  packed  rings,  expanding  on  all
sides,  and  contains  prolongations  of  the  digestive  canal,
the  vascular  system,  and  the  ganglionic  cord.  It  requires
a  strong  faith  to  suppose  that  the  nature  of  the  exudation
at  the  wounded  part  and  the  vicinity  of  the  corresponding
organs  are  sufficient  to  bring  about  a  further  growth  of  the
animal.  But  when  one  sees  how  from  two  similar  cut
surfaces,  separated  by  several  rings,  there  is  formed  on
the  one  side  the  head  with  its  special  organs,  on  the  other
the  tail  with  its  organs,  and  with  organs  too  which  have
nothing  at  all  analogous  in  the  remaining  portion  of  the
trunk,  the  assumption  of  a  dead  causality,  of  a  material
mechanism  without  an  ideal  factor,  becomes  a  sheer  im-
possibility.

In  addition  to  this  there  are  various  secondary  circum-
stances, which  most  clearly  prove  that  the  idea  of  what
must  be  executed  in  the  special  case  to  realise  the  type
is  the  originally  determining  element  in  these  events.  If
the  animal  is  not  full-grown,  and  a  part  of  it  be  violently
removed,- the  regenerated  part  does  not  correspond  to  the
former  state  of  the  animal,  but  is  constituted  as  such  part
would  have  been  had  the  normal  p>roccss  of  development
never  heen  interrupted.  This  may  be  seen  if  the  leg  of  a
young  salamander  or  the  tail  of  a  tadpole  be  cut  off.
Somewhat  similar  is  the  case  of  the  horns  of  the  stag,
which  are  annually  renewed  as  long  as  the  youthful  vigour
of  the  animal  remains;  but  when  the  development  of  the
organism  has  reached  its  highest  point  and  the  vigour
declines,  the  last  pair  of  horns  either  remains  till  death,
or  the  pair  annually  reproduced  becomes  in  extreme  ago
shorter  and  simpler.

Further,  the  force  directed  to  this  restoration  of  a  part  is
greater  the  inure  important  such  part  is  for  the  continued
existence  of  the  animal :  thus,  e.g.,  according  to  Spallanzani,
worms  regenerate  their  heads before  their  tails,  and  in

VOL. I.  K


1-46  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

fishes  the  restoration  of  the  amputated  fins  takes  place  in
the  order  of  their  importance  as  motor  organs ;  thus  the
caudal  fins  first,  then  the  pectoral  and  ventral,  and  lastly
the  dorsal  fins.  Should  the  force,  or  more  accurately  the
power,  of  the  unconscious  will  in  moulding  its  material
and  the  external  circumstances  be  insufficient  for  the  re-
generation of  a  part  in  the  normal  way,  still  the  type  of
the  class  always  gleams  through  the  malformations  which.
then  arise.  Thus,  e.g.,  if  only  one  tentacle  instead  of  two
grows  again  on  a  snail's  head  which  has  been  cut  off,
this  one  has  two  eyes,  and  men  who  have  lost  one  joint
of  a  finger  sometimes  have  a  nail  growing  on  the  second.

o  DO

The  more  a  part  is  exposed  to  injury,  the  more  easily  is  it
regenerated.  Thus,  e.g.,  the  rays  of  the  Asterias,  the  legs
of  spiders,  the  tentacles  and  antennae  of  snails  and  beetles,
the  tails  of  lizards,  possess  a  considerable  regenerative
power  on  account  of  their  liability  to  injury.  For  the  most
part,  it  is  some  special  joint  from  which  the  regeneration
most  easily  proceeds,  in  which  case  the  connected  limb
is  extremely  fragile ;  and  if  injury  occurs  anywhere  else,
an  additional  limb  is  frequently  throicn  off  at  that  spot.
Crabs,  for  example,  do  this.  Spiders  likewise  free  them-
selves at  the  cost  of  a  leg  when  they  find  it  grasped  or
compressed ;  but  if  the  animal  be  held  fast  whilst  the  leg
is  squeezed,  it  cannot  afterwards  thus  unceremoniously
throw  oif  the  same,  but  it  first  entangles  the  leg  in  its
web,  then  propels  itself  with  the  other  legs,  and  in  this
way  wrenches  it  off.  This  is  manifestly  instinct;  and
when  the  crab  spontaneously  throws  off  the  injured  leg,
is  that  to  be  called  something  fundamentally  different
from  instinct  ?  And  yet  rejection  of  the  injured  limb  is
merely  the  first  act  of  restoration.  Still  more  wonderful
is  the  instinct  of  the  Holothuriae  which  live  in  the  Pliilij  -
pine  Islands  of  the  South  Sea.  These  devour  coral  sand,
and  if  they  be  taken  from  their  native  haunts  and  trans-
ferred to  clear  sea-water,  they  of  their  own  accord  eject
from  the  anus  the  intestinal  canal,  with  the  branchiae  and


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  147

all  other  organs  connected  therewith,  in  order  to  form  new
viscera  more  in  harmony  witli  the  altered  medium.  (A
Holothuria  burdened  with  needles  or  knives  literally
jumps  out  of  its  skin,  rejecting  it  without  in  any  way
injuring  its  interior.)

The  higher  we  ascend  in  the  animal  scale,  the  less
potent,  as  a  rule,  becomes  the  vis  medicatrix,  being  least
influential  in  man.  As  long,  therefore,  as  human  physiology
was  exclusively  studied,  it  was  possible  for  the  error  to
arise  that  a  merely  material  mechanism  produces  remedial
effects ;  but  as  anatomy  first  began  to  yield  important
results  when  it  was  studied  comparatively,  and  psychology
is  just  beginning  to  afford  true  enlightenment  through  a
similar  procedure,  so  in  physiology  only  comparative  in-
vestigation can  give  genuine  insight.  But  when  we  have
once  got  on  the  right  track  through  a  clear  understanding
of  relations  in  the  case  of  the  lower  animals,  it  will  not
be  difficult  to  recognise  this  view  also  as  the  only  possible
one  in  the  higher  stages  of  organisation.

The  reasons  for  the  limitation  of  the  vis  medicatrix
in  the  higher  animal  classes  are  partly  internal,  partly
external..  The  inmost  and  deepest  ground  is  that  the
organising  force  turns  always  more  and  more  away  from
the  outworks,  and  bends  its  whole  energy  to  reach  the
final  "oal  of  all  organisation,  the  organ  of  consciousness,
in  order  to  raise  this  to  even  higher  perfection.  The
external  grounds  are  that  the  organs  of  the  higher  animal
classes  are  more  solid,  and  also,  in  consequence  of  the
mode  of  life  of  these  creatures,  are  much  less  liable  to
fracture  and  mutilation,  but  at  the  most  are  exposed  to
wounds  and  injuries,  for  the  majority  of  which  the  heal-
ing power  of  Nature  is  sufficient;  and  further,  that  the
ler  solidity  of  structure  makes  replacement  on  a  large
physically  and  chemically  difficult.  Tor,  on  the  1  no
hand,  we  see  even  in  lower  animals  that  aquatic  animals,
on  account  of  containing  a  greater  quantity  of  moisture,
'ss  a  greater  recuperative  power  than  land  animals  of


148  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  same  species,  e.g.,  water  and  earth  worms.  On  the  other
hand,  the  chief  mass  of  the  animals  capable  of  extensive
restoration  consists  of  the  same  tissues  which  in  man  also
exhibit  the  highest  recuperative  power,  e.g.,  the  tissues
which  mostly  give  solidity  to  invertebrate  animals  (skin,
hairs,  scales),  cellular  tissue,  vascular  system,  or  even  the
elementary  organic  substance  of  the  lowest  classes.  That,
however,  these  external  grounds  are  not  sufficient  we  see
from  the  Vertebrata,  for  instance,  in  their  second  lowest
class,  the  Amphibia,  many  of  which  exhibit  a  quite  won-
derful recuperative  energy.  Spallanzani  saw  among  Sala-
manders the  four  legs  with  their  ninety-eight  bones,  besides
the  tail  with  its  vertebrae,  reproduced  six  times  within  three
months ;  in  others,  the  lower  jaw,  with  all  its  muscles,
vessels,  and  teeth,  was  regenerated.  Blumenbach  saw  even
the  eye  restored  within  the  space  of  a  year,  if  the  optic
nerve  remained  uninjured,  and  a  part  of  the  coats  of  the
eye  remained  behind  in  the  orbit.  In  the  case  of  frogs
and  tortoises  the  legs  also  are  sometimes  regenerated,  but
only  as  long  as  they  are  young,  and  even  then  but  slowly.
As  the  psychical  power  of  the  individual  is  at  first  active
in  an  exclusively  external  manner,  and  then  with  the
advance  of  age  more  and  more  withdraws  inwards,  and
throws  itself  on  the  improvement  of  the  conscious  life  of
the  mind  ;  so  also  in  all  beings  the  vis  medicatrix  is  the
more  potent  the  younger  they  are,  accordingly  greatest  of
all  in  the  case  of  embryos  and  all  larva?,  which  must  be
regarded  as  embryos.  We  cannot,  therefore,  wonder  that
the  same  law  obtains  in  the  animal  series  as  a  whole,  where
in  the  wider  sense  the  lower  are  related  to  the  higher  as
embryos  or  imperfect  stages  of  development.

A  very  remarkable  case  is  the  regeneration  of  the
cerebral  hemispheres,  observed  by  Voit  in  a  pigeon  which
had  been  deprived  of  its  brain.  After  five  months,  the
intelligence  of  the  animal  having  manifestly  increased
during  the  latter  part  of  that  time,  a  white  mass  shoved
itself  in  the  place  of  the  removed  cerebral  hemispheres,


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  149

which  possessed  altogether  the  appearance  and  consistency
of  the  white  substance  of  the  brain,  and  which  also  passed
uninterruptedly  and  imperceptibly  into  the  peduncles  of
the  cerebrum,  which  had  not  been  removed.  Primitive
nerve-fibres  with  double  borders  were  clearly  to  be  seen,
also  ganglionic  cells.

If  we  now  pass  to  the  Mammalia,  and  to  man  in
particular,  we  certainly  do  not  find  such  striking  pheno-
mena as  in  the  lower  animals,  but  always  enough  to
convince  us  that  the  dead  causality  of  material  processes
is  insufficient,  and  that  it  is  a  psychical  power  which,
aided  by  the  unconscious  representation  of  the  type,  and
the  means  requisite  for  the  end  of  self-preservation,  brings
about  those  circumstances  in  consecpuence  of  which  the
restoration  of  the  normal  condition  must  ensue,  according
to  general  physical  and  chemical  laws.  In  every  disturb-
ance this  process  occurs,  unless  the  power  of  the  uncon-
scious will  in  mastering  its  circumstances  is  too  small,  so
that  the  disturbance  induces  a  permanent  abnormity  or
death.  No  medicine  can  do  more  than  aid  that  process
and  facilitate  the  mastering  of  the  disturbing  circum-
stances, b.ut  the  positive  initiative  (the  will)  must  always
proceed  from  the  organism  itself.

Let  us  first  consider  the  consolidation  of  severed  tissues
and  the  renovation  of  a  destroyed  surface.

The  first  condition  of  every  new  formation  (except  in
the  epithelial  layers)  is  inflammation.  According  to  J.
M  tiller,  inflammation  is  "  compounded  of  the  phenomena
cf  a  h  cal  injury,  a  local  tendency  to  decomposition,  and
an  augmented  organic  activity  which  energetically  strives
to  maintain  the  equilibrium  against  the  tendency  to  u
position."  What  Miillcr  calls  the  ''local  injury,"  Virchow
calls  the  pathological  stimulus.  lie  says  (Spec.  Path.  u.
Ther.,  i.  72): — ''As  long  as  only  functional  disturi  anc>  -:
are  observed  to  follow  on  an  irritation,  so  hug  do  wo
speak  of  irritation;  it  nutritive  disturbances  are  observ-
able in  addition  to  the  functional,  we  call  it  inilamma-


ISO  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tion."  He  then  further  calls  nutritive  disturbance  what
Miiller  calls  the  local  tendency  to  decomposition.  Virchow
insists  quite  specially  upon  the  third  factor,  the  effective
activity  of  the  inflamed  cells.  The  most  striking  pheno-
menon in  inflammation  is  the  increased  flow  of  blood
to  the  part  where  the  new  formation  is  to  take  place,
showing  itself  in  redness  and  increased  heat.  The  law,
that  the  partially  increased  or  diminished  blood-pressure
accommodates  itself  to  the  need  of  blood  in  the  several
organs,  is  hardly  ever  to  be  explained  from  physical  causes
alone,  since  the  propulsive  action  of  the  heart  is  uniform
in  respect  of  the  whole  circulation.  So  far  then  as  the
phenomenon  is  not  to  be  explained  by  the  increased
active  absorption  of  the  inflamed  cells,  there  must  be
assumed  a  direction  of  the  physical  circumstances  through
the  willing  of  the  means  to  accomplish  the  represented
end.  (In  the  normal  course  of  development,  an  increased
congestion  takes  place  at  the  age  of  puberty,  during
pregnancy,  and  in  the  abdominal  vessels  of  the  bird  at
the  time  of  brooding  ;  a  diminution  when  the  organs  cease
to  be  functional,  or  irreplaceable  members  have  been
lost.  Xo  less  wonderful  is  the  permanently  fluid  condition
of  the  blood  within  the  blood-vessels,  whereas  it  immedi-
ately  coagulates  on  issuing  therefrom,  even  without  comin"
in  contact  with  air.)

In  every  section  of  the  animal  body  vessels  are  cut
through;  these  must  first  of  all  be  closed,  which  takes
place  through  the  coagulation  of  the  outflowing  blood.  In
the  larger  trunks  an  inner  and  an  outer  plug  is  formed,
which  is  easily  detached  soon  after  its  formation,  if  the
flow  of  blood  is  increased  by  external  stimulation.  In
arteries,  where  the  pressure  of  blood  is  considerable,  the
organism  is  sometimes  helped  by  a  swoon.  The  coagulated
mass  does  not,  however,  enter  into  any  firm  union  with  the
walls,  but,  like  every  means  of  relief  employed  at  an  earlier
stage  of  the  healing  process  which  has  become  unnecessary,
is  subsequently  absorbed. After  about  twelve  hours,  a


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  151

pale  fluid  (plastic  lymph)  is  secreted,  which  generally
immediately  afterwards  condenses  to  a  membranous
opaque  neoplasm,  which  closes  up  the  wound  and  be-
comes concrescent  with  the  neighbouring  parts.  The
neoplasm  is  not  mere  exuded  blood  serum,  but  a  secretion
from  the  blood  of  just  as  definite  a  character  as  any  other
fluid  secretion.  It  is  also  no  amorphous  pulp,  but  a  net-
work of  cells  thoroughly  permeated  by  copious  intercel-
lular fluid,  and  is  formed  by  proliferation  of  the  con-
nective tissue  which  has  been  laid  bare  by  the  wound.
It  forms  the  matrix  for  every  organic  new  formation,
and  blood-vessels,  sinews,  nerves,  bones,  skin,  all  proceed
therefrom  by  gradual  change  of  the  cells.  "  The  first  step
to  healing  then  consists  in  this :  Abundant  cells  come
into  existence  by  means  of  (?)  inflammation,  especially
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  capillary  vessels.  These
are  changed  by  proliferation  of  their  nuclei  into  cell-
cones,  and  successful  artificial  injection  of  the  blood-
vessels proves  that  then  fine  passages  without  special  walls
are  made  between  the  new-formed  cells,  into  which  the
injected  mass  directly  penetrates  from  the  capillaries.  Ac-
cordingly there  arises  a  provisional  course  for  the  blood,
which  presents  the  appearance  of  an  intercellular  net.
The  same  process  takes  place  from  the  opposite  surface  of
the  wound,  and  thus  it  happens  that  through  the  contact
of  these  paths,  several  of  which  expand  and  become  actual
vessels,  the  disturbed  circulation  is  restored  to  its  normal
state."  (Dr.  Otto  Barth  in  the  "  Erganzungsbl.,"  vol.  vi.
p.  C30.)  In  this  way,  in  the  first  instance  only,  the  plexus
of  capillary  vessels  is  restored;  subsequently,  however,
also  larger  blood-vessels  are  brought  again  into  connec-
tion after  reabsorption  of  the  plugs.  In  the  Achilles'
tendon  of  a  dog,  the  regeneration  of  an  excised  piece,  five
lines  in  length,  within  four  months  has  been  observed,  and
in  nerves  from  which  a  piece  was  excised,  a  gradual  ap-
proximation of  the  two  ends,  with  or  without  linal  uni  in.
Movement  and  sensation  can  in  this  wav  be  restore  1  with-


152  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

out  the  newly  formed  mass,  even  when  it  exhibits  fibrilla-
tion, exactly  corresponding  to  tendons  and  nerves  proper,
the  correspondence  being  even  less  close  in  the  case  of
muscle  ;  but  the  assimilation  of  the  new  formation  to  the
old  gradually  increases.

When  a  tubular  structure  is  severed,  the  neoplasm  first
forms  an  envelope,  called  a  sheath  or  capsule,  which  by
means  of  its  vessels  brings  the  injured  part  also  into  organic
connection  with  the  circumjacent  structures.  Thus,  e.g.,  in
the  case  of  the  fracture  of  a  bone,  when  the  sheath  hardens
into  the  provisional  callus.  At  the  same  time,  both  open-
ings of  the  medullary  cavity  are  closed  by  a  similar  callus,
formed  from  the  lining  membrane  of  the  bone.  Meanwhile
the  terminal  surfaces  of  the  bone  are  so  far  involved  in  the
inflammation  of  the  circumjacent  parts  that  they  them-
selves pass  into  a  state  of  inflammation,  and  can  give  rise
to  a  neoplasm,  which,  as  a  whole,  is  slowly  converted  from
a  firm  jelly  into  true  cartilage,  and  then  gradually  ossified;
although,  according  to  Yirchow,  osseous  or  marrow  cells
can  also  arise  directly  from  it,  as,  according  to  the  same
authority,  all  three,  cartilage,  bone,  and  marrow  cells,
may  be  directly  converted  into  one  another.  Whilst  this
process  is  effecting  the  renovation  proper,  the  expedients
of  the  intermediate  stages,  the  provisional  callus,  as
well  as  the  gelatine  contained  in  the  circumjacent  parts,
are  softened  and  reabsorbed,  the  medullary  cavity  also
restored,  the  dense  substance  of  the  callus  becoming  first
cellular,  then  thinner  and  thinner,  and  finally  disappear-
ing. The  bone  recomposed  in  this  way  exhibits  an  unin-
terrupted connection  witli  the  old  ends,  and  exactly  the
same  formation  in  substance  and  vessels.  An  excavation
of  the  radius  and  ulna  of  a  dog  six  lines  in  length  was
completely  filled  with  bony  substance  after  forty  days.
If  the  inner  layer  of  a  piece  of  bone  perishes,  the  regene-
ration begins  from  the  outer  one,  and  conversely,  if  the
whole  bone  perishes,  the  membrane  inside  the  bone  ami
periosteum  replaces  it,  after  being  first  freed  from  bone.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  153

Should  these  also  perish,  the  piece  in  question  is  enclosed
by  a  new  piece,  which  is  formed  partly  of  the  ends  of  the
bone  which  have  remained  sound,  partly  of  the  surround-
ing soft  parts.

In  canals  which  are  formed  of  mucous  membrane,  as
the  intestinal  canal,  or  excretory  ducts  of  glands,  this
neoplasm  likewise  forms  a  capsule  or  sheath,  on  the  inner
side  of  which  the  particular  canal  is  re-formed,  whilst
the  dead  edges  of  the  old  piece  are  thrown  off  and  car-
ried away  by  the  newly  formed  canal.  In  the  case  of
displacement  of  the  intestines  or  strangulated  hernia,
pieces  of  the  intestine  several  inches,  nay,  even  a  foot  in
length,  are  often  removed  through  the  anus,  and  the  di-
gestive canals  are  restored.  Is  it  possible  that  the  rejec-
tion of  a  strangulated  piece  of  intestine  is  regulated  by
another  principle  than  that  which  governs  the  rejection
of  the  claw  of  an  injured  crab,  or  the  casting  off  of  a
spider's  leg?

If  the  external  surface  of  any  structure  is  destroyed,  it
is  replaced  in  the  same  way,  and  the  process  is,  on  the
whole,  a  higher  one  than  in  the  case  of  union  of  severed
parts,  because  the  catalytic  action  of  the  homogeneous
adjoining  tissue  can  exert  far  less  influence.  The  neoplasm
appears  here  in  the  form  of  granulations,  i.e.,  it  is  richer  in
vessels,  and  exhibits  a  number  of  reddish  prominences.  In
this  way  new  skin  is  formed  on  a  part  laid  bare,  which,  at
first,  owing  to  the  absence  of  a  substratum  of  fat,  lies
closely  on  the  muscles,  but  later  on  resembles  the  rest  of
the  skin.  Suppuration  only  occurs  spontaneously,  when
the  injury  has  been  of  such  a  kind  that  the  parts  of  the
tissue  are  to  a  great  extent  rendered  incapable  of  continu-
ing the  vital  functions  (mortified),  so  that  it  is  necessary
to  separate,  i.e.,  to  reject,  these  mortified  tissues  from  the
organism,  and  to  replace  them  by  new  formations  (e.<j„  in
contusions,  gunshot  wounds,  &c.)  When  this  task  is  ac-
complished, the  suppuration  ceases  as  spontaneously  as  it-
occurred;  when  there  are  no  parts  to  be  thrown  oii


154  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

healing  takes  place  "per  primam  intentioncm"  without
any  suppuration.  It  is  true  suppuration  occurs  only  too
frequently  here  also,  just  as  in  the  former  case  the  suppu-
ration often  continues  beyond  the  requisite  extent,  some-
times even  to  exhaustion,  but  it  is  not  then  a  suppura-
tion which  is  spontaneously  set  agoing  by  the  organism,
but  one  produced  and  relatively  maintained  by  injurious
external  influences,  namely,  through  the  germs  of  para-
sitic organisms  floating  in  the  air,  which  may  make  the
slightest  wound  become  malignant  and  fatal.  The  disin-
fection, by  dressings  of  carbolic  acid,  &c,  of  the  air  thus
reaching  the  wound  obviates  these  injurious  external  in-
fluences, and  thus  experimentally  proves  the  correctness
of  the  above  assertions.

Mucous  membrane  can  change  into  epithelium  if  it  is
necessitated  by  abnormal  circumstances  to  form  an  external
surface  (e.g., in  the  case  of  prolapsed  and  everted  rectum  or
uterus).  In  amputations  the  organism  produces  a  stump
which  encloses  all  the  hitherto  existing  canals  (medul-
lary cavity  of  the  bone  and  vessels),  and  serves  for  the
present  use  of  the  limb.  The  bone  is  well  rounded  off;
the  two  bones  of  the  fore-arm  or  leg,  by  growing  together
at  the  lower  end,  obtain  the  firm  connection  which  is
usually  given  by  the  wrist  or  ankle-joint;  the  vessels  and
the  afflux  of  blood  are  limited  to  this  now  diminished
need,  and  the  stump  forms  a  strong  fibrous  skin,  which
quickly  scales.  The  fibrous  structure  of  the  stump  also
partially  extends  to  the  adjoining  muscular  fibres,  nerves,
and  now  useless  vessels.

Let  us  now  turn  to  some  other  remarkable  phenomena
of  the  vis  mcdicatrix  in  man  and  mammals.

A  complete  regeneration  of  the  crystalline  lens  has  often
been  observed  in  mammals  from  whom  it  had  been  re-
moved, and  even  in  human  beings  couched  for  cataract  an
imperfect  regeneration  of  the  lens  sometimes  takes  place.
If  after  such  an  operation  the  upper  lip  of  the  wound
of  the  cornea  protrudes  and  cleaves  to  the  outer  edge  of


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  155

the  lower  lip  with  its  inner  edge,  both  lips  afterwards
become  soft  and  swollen,  and,  when  the  swelling  is  lost,
both  are  found  to  be  in  the  same  plane.  In  this  way  the
disturbing  effect  is  obviated,  which  such  an  unevenness  of
the  cornea  would  necessarily  produce  in  respect  of  vision.
When  an  osseous  fracture  cannot  heal,  the  organism  seeks
to  help  itself  in  some  other  way.  The  fractured  ends  close
and  round  themselves  off,  and  are  either  kept  together
by  a  fibrous  cord  into  which  the  callus-sheath  has  been
converted,  or  by  a  cylindrical  ligament,  or  united  by  a
so-called  false  joint,  the  one  end  forming  a  cavity  which
receives  the  other  spherical  end.  Both  ends  are  enclosed
by  a  fibrous  capsule,  and,  like  other  places  exposed  to
friction,  receive  the  requisite  lubrication  by  means  of
a  newly  formed  synovial  sac.  A  similar  process  takes
place  in  limbs  which  have  not  been  set ;  the  abandoned
socket  is  filled  up,  and  at  the  place  where  the  head  of  the
joint  now  lies  there  is  formed  a  new  one  with  the  other
appurtenances  of  the  joint.

Very  remarkable  is  the  formation  of  excretory  passages
answering  a  purpose,  when  certain  secretions  in  the  inte-
rior of  a  structure  have  no  natural  vent,  and  unless  such
■were  formed  would  destroy  the  organ.  This  is  especially
the  case  in  all  normal  secretions,  when  the  natural  drains
are  stopped  up;  fistula:  are  then  formed  by  the  nearest,
or  rather  the  most  suitable  path,  making  a  way  out-
wards {e.g.,  lachrymal,  salivary,  bilious,  urinary,  f;eeal
fistula1).  They  perfectly  resemble  the  normal  excretory
ducts  of  the  glands,  in  that  the  cellular  tissue  is  converted
at  the  walls  of  the  passage  into  a  mucous  membrane
insentient  to  the  particular  matter  carried  oil'.  They  cannot
p  'Ssihly  be  healed  over  so  long  as  the  natural  outlet  is
no!  restored,  but  then  they  heal  of  themselves  quickly
and  easily. One  cannot  see  any  material  reason  why  this

Lion,  which  is  certainly  obliged  to  establish  an  exci
ton-  channel  through  dissolving  and  liquefying  the  cellu-
lar tissues,  effects  this  considerable  destruction  onlv  i


156  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

one  direction  of  the  channel,  whilst  on  all  other  sides  the
attacks  are  proportionately  too  evanescent  for  the  pur-
pose ;  why  the  direction  in  which  this  violent  chemical
decomposition  is  manifested  is  precisely  the  most  appro-
priate for  the  new  drain,  and  why  this  drain  shows  not
merely  signs  of  destruction,  but  rather  of  organic  recon-
struction. Sometimes  such  channels,  especially  in  the
case  of  pus-fistuhe,  extend  through  several  other  organs
before  they  can  reach  the  outside,  e.g.,  from  the  liver  to
the  stomach  or  the  intestine,  or  through  the  diaphragm
into  the  lungs.  This  process  is  perhaps  most  remarkable
in  internal  mortification.  The  excretory  canals  (or  drains)
then  arise,  if  merely  the  inner  layer  of  a  bone  perishes,
in  the  vicarious  external  layer ;  but  if  this  also  perishes,
in  the  new  environing  bony  substance  from  the  very  com-
mencement of  its  formation,  and  moreover,  without  suppura-
tion being  perceived.  They  are  round  or  oval  canals,  lined
with  a  smooth  membrane,  passing  from  the  membrane
inside  the  bone  to  the  periosteum,  open  externally  by  a
smooth  edge,  and  are  subsequently  prolonged  by  means  of
a  fistula  to  the  outer  surface.  They  cannot  in  any  way  be
permanently  healed  over  as  long  as  dead  pieces  of  bone
lie  within  the  newly  formed  bone,  but  close  spontaneously
when  these  have  been  removed.

Connected  to  a  certain  extent  with  the  foregoing  is  the
killing  and  shrivelling  of  the  embryo,  the  evacuation  of
the  remains  by  newly  made  paths,  or  the  encysting  of
these  remains  when  child-bearing  is  impossible.

Further  worthy  of  note  is  the  elaboration  of  a  particular
secretion  by  quite  other  organs  than  those  properly  con-
cerned with  this  secretion,  when  the  latter  are  incapable
of  performing  their  functions.  The  secretions,  which  play
so  great  a  part  in  the  economy  of  the  organism,  are,  as  is
well  known,  never  present  in  the  blood  as  such,  but  always
only  in  their  elements,  and  only  during  and  after  separation
from  the  blood  obtain  their  proper  chemical  composition
(wherefore,  also,  the  secretory  courses  are  longer  the  higher


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  157

the  nature  of  the  secretion).  We  must  therefore  usually
look  upon  the  organs  of  secretion  as  the  cause  of  the  spe-
cial chemical  nature  of  the  secretions.  So  much  the  more
must  it  surprise  us  that,  under  certain  circumstances,  when
this  or  that  organ  cannot  perform  its  function,  but  yet  the
retention  of  those  matters  in  the  blood  which  heretofore
were  separated  out  of  it  by  means  of  secretion  might
become  dangerous  to  the  organism,  that  under  such  cir-
cumstances other  organs  also  are  able  to  perform  this  act
of  secretion  in  an  approximately  similar  way,  and  thus
to  secure  the  continued  existence  of  the  organism.  The
material  expedients,  which  the  unconscious  will  makes
use  of  for  this  end,  can  only  be  looked  for  in  a  temporary
change  of  the  secreting  membranes  of  the  vicarious  secre-
tory organs,  whereby  they  are  accommodated  to  their
vicarious  secretions,  just  as  we  observe  such  an  influence
of  the  will  on  the  secretory  organs  in  terror,  anger,  &c.

Let  us  look  at  a  few  examples.  Urine  acts  as  such
fatally  in  the  blood  ;  in  the  blood  there  are  only  its
elements,  but  these,  too,  require  to  be  excreted  if  the
organism  is  not  to  be  destroyed.  In  guinea-pigs  whose
renal  arteries  had  been  ligatured,  peritoneum,  pericar-
dium, pleura,  cavities  of  the  brain,  stomach,  and  intes-
tines secreted  a  brown  fluid  redolent  of  urine ;  the  tears
also  smelt  of  urine,  and  the  testes  contained  a  fluid
very  similar  to  urine.  With  dogs  there  ensued  vomit-
ing of  urine  ;  in  rabbits,  fluid  discharge  of  the  bowels.
In  men,  whose  sweat  has  possessed  a  decided  odour  of
urine,  post-mortem  examination  usually  brings  to  light
causes  of  suppressed  urinal  secretion.  With  persons  in
whom  the  ordinary  passages  have  been  completely  ob-
structed, daily  vomiting  of  urine  has  often  been  observed
for  years.  In  the  case  of  a  girl  with  such  a  constitution.
evacuation  took  place  through  the  breasts  till  her  four-
teenth year.  In  other  cases  of  suppressed  urination.
urinal  discharge  showed  itself  through  the  skin  of  the
armpits. Also  in  defeneration  of  the  kidnevs.  when  the


158  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

latter  could  no  longer  secrete  urine,  or  when  there  was
a  want  of  connection  with  the  bladder,  normal  micturition
is  said  to  have  been  observed  for  years,  whence  some  would
infer  a  vicarious  capability  of  the  bladder  itself  for  the
secretion  of  urine. — A  great  number  of  observations  proves
the  secretion  of  lacteal  moisture  through  the  kidneys,  the
skin  of  the  navel,  the  groin,  thighs,  back,  ulcers,  and  peri-
toneum, on  inflammation  of  the  peritoneum  which  had
arisen  in  consequence  of  suppressed  lacteal  secretion.  In
that  mode  of  formation  of  jaundice  where  the  action  of
the  liver  (as  subsequently  shown  by  dissection)  has  been
arrested,  the  secretion  of  bile  must  take  place  in  the
minutest  blood-vessels,  since  all  the  organs,  even  fibrous
tissue,  cartilage,  bones,  and  hairs,  are  penetrated  by  the
coloured  constituents  of  bile.

A  very  remarkable  phenomenon  is  the  constancy  of
the  temperature  of  warm-blooded  animals  under  the  most
varied  changes  of  external  circumstances.  We  are  far
from  being  acquainted  with  all  the  circumstances  whereby
this  constancy  is  rendered  possible ;  but  this  much  is
certain,  that  the  most  efficient,  perhaps  the  only,  factors
independent  of  the  animal  itself,  are  the  regulation  of  the
quantity  of  food,  the  excretions,  and  respiration.  Now,
since  the  constant  temperature  of  a  class  of  animals  is
manifestly  that  most  favourable  for  its  chemical  processes,
we  must  recognise  an  act  of  nature's  sanative  power  in  every
act  of  the  organism  which  accommodates  the  conditions  to
changing  circumstances.  The  observation  that  the  quan-
tity of  cutaneous  as  of  pulmonary  respiration  (of  carbonic
acid  and  water)  varies  in  brief  intervals  without  percep-
tible cause,  but  in  longer  intervals  of  several  hours  remains
pretty  constant,  is  manifestly  connected  with  this.

Noteworthy  is  the  mechanical  and  chemical  capacity
of  resistance  on  the  part  of  living  tissues,  which  imme-
diately ceases  with  death.  It  is  best  observed  in  the
stomach  and  intestines.  The  gelatinous  ^ledusaj  digest
animals provided with spiny cuirasses without being


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  159

injured  ;  the  stomachs  of  birds  comminute  pieces  of  glass
and  bend  iron  nails  without  being  wounded  (for  stomach-
wounds  notoriously  heal  very  slowly,  and  would  accord-
ingly not  easily  escape  observation).  The  intestinal  canal
of  Plaice  and  Blennies  is  often  entirely  stopped  up  with
sharp  mussel-shells,  and  after  death  is  cut  through  with
a  little  shaking.  As  a  greater  mechanical  solidity  of  the
living  tissue  is  not  to  be  thought  of,  these  phenomena  are
only  explicable  by  reflex  movements,  in  consequence  of
which  the  part  threatened  on  occasion  of  a  movement
of  the  sharp  object  gives  way,  and  the  other  parts  bring
the  sharp  object  into  a  less  dangerous  position.  Just  as
wonderful  is  the  resistance  which  the  stomach  opposes
to  the  chemical  attacks  of  a  particularly  pungent  gastric
juice.  There  are  examples  where  the  degenerated  gastric
juice  began  immediately  after  death  to  destroy  the  stomach,
and  also  decomposed  a  fresh  animal's  stomach,  without
any  injury  occurring  during  life.  The  like  takes  place
in  other  acrid  secretions  and  their  secretory  organs.

After  these  examples,  let  us  proceed  once  more  to  the
refutation  of  some  objections  to  the  vis  medicatrix  as  a
purposive  manifestation  of  unconscious  volition  and  idea-
tion. Although  I  think  that  I  have  proved  by  many
reasons  the  utter  insuiliciency  of  materialistic  attempts
at  explanation,  still  it  seems  important  once  more  brieily
to  indicate  the  unsatisfactory  character  of  the  two  chief
materialistic  arguments.  They  run  thus:  (1.)  The  exist-
ing assimilates  the  freshly  added  material  by  catalysis
and  cell-growths  ;  and  (2.)  the  constitution  of  every  secre-
tion is  dependent  on  the  constitution  of  the  nutritive  iluid
and  the  secreting  membrane.

The  first  statement  is  refuted  by  the  fact  that  new
formations  take  place  in  the  body  at  different  ti
which  receive  no  assistance  from  similar  tissues,  i  ecause
they  either  altogether,  or  at  this  particular  pan  of  the
organism,  appear  for  the  first  time,  e.f/.,  at  the  diheren;
stages of embryonic development, birth, puierty. ami


160  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

pregnancy.  But  besides  the  fresh  formations  and  secre-
tions, several  secretions  are  periodical,  whether  normally
or  morbidly,  and  then  also  the  recurrence  of  the  secretion
cannot  arise  from  the  contact  of  the  secretion,  since  this
is  non-existent.  In  the  same  way  the  regeneration  of
solid  structures  is  not  directly  dependent  on  the  seat  of
development.  Thus,  e.g.,  we  have  seen  that  the  neoplasm
for  the  required  renovation  of  the  bony  mass  has  also  in
great  part  exuded  from  the  other  neighbouring  tissues.  In
the  same  way  mucous  membrane  is  formed  in  fistulse,  and
skin  on  granulations  without  contact  with  similar  tissues.
As  little,  then,  as  one  can  fail  to  acknowledge,  on  the  one
hand,  that  this  principle  of  assimilation  by  catalytic  action
offers  a  remarkable  expedient  for  husbanding  energy  in
the  economy  of  the  organism,  so  little,  on  the  other  side,
can  the  facts  be  ignored,  which  show  that  the  unconscious
will  can  produce  a  state  of  things  in  the  organism  wherein
products  may  be  formed  according  to  chemical  laws,  which
are  not  caused  by  adjoining  similar  tissues,  but  which  are
most  accurately  adjusted  to  the  present  life-stage  or  mo-
mentary need  of  the  organism.

As  concerns  the  second  point,  the  dependence  of  the
secretion  on  the  secreting  membranes,  this  principle  is
likewise  in  general  correct ;  only  one  must  not  forget  that
the  difference  of  the  secretions  of  one  and  the  same  organ
at  different  times,  the  fresh  introduction  of  secretions  at
certain  vital  stages,  the  interniittence  and  recurrence  of
others,  as  well  as  the  doctrine  of  vicarious  secretions,  still
leaves  open  the  question  with  regard  to  the  inconstant
character  of  the  secreting  membranes ;  that  thus  the  phe-
nomenon is  correctly  explained  so  far  as  its  proximate
efficient  cause  is  concerned,  but  that  this  efficient  cause.,
on  its  side,  only  admits  one  ultimate  explanation,  namely,
an  ideal  one.  With  such  provisional  explanation  the  man
of  science  has  done  his  nearest  duty,  and  nobody  will
impugn  it,  if  he  only  grants  that  the  question  is  just  as
open  as  before,  if  only  he  does  not  assert  that  he  has


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  161

achieved  everything  by  this  proximate  explanation,  for  then
he  immediately  comes  into  collision  with  the  facts.

Another  objection  is,  that  the  procedure  of  the  organism
is  not  always  suitable,  but  that  the  same  phenomena  which
at  one  time  effect  a  cure  at  another  time  produce  disease,
or  aggravate  an  existing  morbid  condition.  I  hold  this
to  be  entirely  untrue.  I  assert,  on  the  contrary,  in  the
first  place,  that  diseases  never  arise  spontaneously  from  the
psychical  basis  of  the  organism,  but  that  they  are  imposed
and  thrust  on  it  by  disturbances  from  without;  and,  secondly,
that  all  the  changes  effected  by  the  organism  in  the  normal
condition  of  its  functions  with  direct  reference  to  these
disturbances  are  adapted  to  their  removal ;  assertions  which
I  shall  at  once  proceed  to  make  good.

The  first  question  is,  What  is  disease  ?  Disease  is
not  abnormity  of  form,  for  there  are  abnormal  forms,  as
giants,  dwarfs,  excessive  number  of  fingers,  irregular  course
of  veins,  which  nobody  accounts  diseases.  Disease  is  not
a  state  which  endangers  the  continued  existence  of  the
organism,  for  many  diseases  do  not  do  this.  It  is  not  a
state  which  causes  pain  and  trouble  to  the  consciousness
of  the  individual,  for  this,  too,  is  not  the  case  in  many
diseases.  Disease  is  an  abnormity  in  the  organic  functions,
which  certainly  may  have  abnormities  of  structure  both
as  cause  and  as  consequence.  In  the  former  case  we  are
wont  to  term  even  abnormity  of  structure  disease.  Taken
strictly,  however,  another  abnormity  of  the  functions  must
have  preceded  this  abnormal  formation  as  its  cause;  for  as
long  as  all  functions  are  exercised  normally,  the  occurrence
of  abnormal  formations  is  impossible.  E.g.,  phthisis  may
be  caused  by  tubercles;  these  can  be  inherited,  but  in  the
individual  from  which  the  tuberculosis  of  the  family  takes
its  rise,  the  tubercles,  in  case  they  are  nut  again  inherit*  d
or  grafted  by  contagion  (through  tuberculous  nurse's  milk,
milk  of  tuberculous  cows,  inhalation  of  the  products  vi
decomposed  pulmonary  tubercles,  &c),  must  necessarily
have  arisen  through  abnormal  functions. When  thus  we

Vol.  i.  L


1 62  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

investigate  into  the  cause  of  a  disease,  we  must  in  every
case  come  back,  in  the  last  resort,  to  an  abnormity  of
function  with  normal  structure  of  the  functioning  organs ;
for  as  long  as  structural  abnormities  co-operate,  we  have
not  tracked  the  causal  series  to  the  end.

If  we  now  ask  how  the  primary  cause  of  all  diseases,
abnormity  of  function  with  normal  structure,  is  possi-
ble, experience  and  speculation  agree  in  answering,  Only
through  disturbance  from  outside,  but  not  from  within
through  a  spontaneous  psychical  act  of  the  organism.
These  disturbances  may  be  of  very  various  kinds: — (i.)
Mechanical  influences,  as  all  kinds  of  inner  or  outer  in-
jury. (2.)  Chemical  influences,  (a)  through  the  intro-
duction of  substances  which  directly  disturb  the  normal
relations  by  causing  new  combinations,  e.g.,  in  poisoning
by  arsenic,  sulphuric  acid,  most  mineral  medicines ;  (b)
through  chemical  contagion,  infection  in  the  widest  sense,
also  by  atmospheric  changes  which  predispose  to  diseases
not  properly  infectious.  (3.)  Organic  influences,  intro-
duction of  (microscopically  minute)  vegetable  or  animal
organisms,  which,  feeding  on  the  body  and  propagating,
disturb  the  chemical  composition  or  the  morphological
cell-structure  of  the  affected  organism.  In  many  diseases
it  is  still  doubtful  whether  their  infectious  character  is  to
be  referred  to  chemical  action  by  contact  or  to  organic  germs
{e.g.,  plague,  syphilis,  variola,  diphtheria,  typhoid  fever,
cholera,  intermittent  fever,  &c),  although  the  latter  is  ever
gaining  more  probability.  (4.)  Abnormity  in  the  propor-
tion of  the  ingesta  and  egesta.  If  the  latter  preponderate,
there  ensues  loss  of  bulk,  weakness,  &c. ;  if  the  former,
generally  hypertrophy,  which  is  manifested  in  different
forms  according  to  the  matters  in  excess  (tubercles,
scrofula,  gout,  obesity,  &c.)  (5.)  Unsuitable  quality  of  the
ingesta,  producing  disturbances  in  the  digestive  organs,
and  through  abnormal  composition  of  the  blood  also  in  the
nutrition.  Dad  air  can  in  this  way,  by  altering  the  com-
position of  the  blood,  produce  putrid  fever,  &c. (6.)  Im-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  163

proper  modes  of  living,  e.g.,  absolute  inaction  of  a  muscle
produces  weakness  and  atrophy,  since  its  alimentation
is  based  on  the  supposition  of  movement.  Sedentary
occupations  disturb  digestion  on  the  same  ground,  and
transference  to  a  foreign  climate  demands  accommodation
of  the  body  to  the  new  environment,  or  is  followed  by
disease.  (7.)  Inherited  bodily  defects  or  tendencies  to
disease.  Here  the  primary  external  causes  of  the  disease
are  to  be  found  in  the  act  of  generation,  where  the  trans-
mission is  effected,  and  all  succeeding  members  of  the
family  inheriting  the  disease  receive  at  birth  the  fatal
germs  as  their  portion  on  the  journey  of  life,  which  the
.remedial  energy  of  Nature  is  just  as  little  able  to  cope
with,  as  a  chronic  illness  directly  aroused  by  outer  dis-
turbances.

I  believe  that  all  diseases  may  be  referred  to  these  or
similar  disturbances,  if  it  be  always  at  the  same  time
borne  in  mind  that  one  has  to  go  back  to  the  first  cause
of  the  phenomenon,  and  not  to  consider  the  superficial
symptoms  of  the  disease  itself.  Nay,  even  the  latter  is
frequently  already  an  act  of  the  vis  medicatrix,  the  crisis
of  a  series  of  preceding  diseases  or  abnormities,  which  are
only  more  or  less  withdrawn  from  consciousness  (thus,  e.g.,
in  all  eruptive  diseases,  gout,  fevers,  inflammations,  &c.)
The  vis  medicatrw,  with  its  crises,  sometimes  even  anti-
cipates the  outbreak  of  that  disease  which  must  result
from  an  abnormity  of  formation  (as,  e.g., in  the  killing  and
evacuation  of  the  fcetus  which  could  not  be  born) ;  and  so
far  it  is  correct  that  phenomena  are  called  forth  through
spontaneous  psychical  acts  of  the  Unconscious  in  the
organism,  which  we  term  disease,  because  they  are  abnor-
mal, and  in  part  painful  processes.  In  that  ca.se.  however.
they  only  obviate  a  more  dangerous  disease:  they  are  the
choice  of  a  lesser  evil  intentionally  called  forth  to  avoid  a
greater  one,  and  are  thus,  strictly  regarded,  processes  not  of
disease,  but  of  healing.  It  mav  also  lumpen  that  death
ensues in this spontaneously  evoked  crisis,  because  the


1 64  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

unconscious  will  does  not  possess  sufficient  power  for  get-
ting the  better  of  the  disturbances ;  but  then  it  would
quite  certainly  have  occurred  without  the  test  of  a  crisis,
whilst  there  was  the  bare  possibility  of  the  vis  medicatrix
being  victorious.  Should  some  diseases  still  remain  inex-
plicable as  external  derangements,  this  would  not  impair
the  correctness  of  the  principle  that  the  psychical  basis
of  organic  formation  cannot  become  diseased,  for  almost
all  the  facts  tell  in  favour  of  this  principle,  and  none
against  it,  since  the  tracing  back  of  the  few  exceptions  to
external  disturbances  may  be  expected  from  the  science
of  the  future.  I  cannot,  therefore,  adopt  the  hypothesis
set  up  by  Carus  to  explain  the  similarity  of  diseases,  viz.,
that  the  Idea  of  the  organism  is,  as  it  were,  seized  and
possessed  by  the  Idea  of  a  disease.  The  fact  seems  to  me
sufficiently  explained  by  the  similar  reaction  of  similar
organisms  on  similar  disturbances;  and,  in  truth,  the  same
disease  never  wears  precisely  the  same  appearance,  but  is
at  least  as  different  as  the  individuals  themselves.  This
circumstance  alone  tells  against  the  above  hypothesis,  that
no  pathological  formation  has  yet  presented  itself,  which
has  not  its  prototype  in  normal  physiological  formations.
Virchow  says  (Cellularpathologie,  p.  60) :  "  There  is  no
other  kind  of  heterology  in  morbid  tissues  than  the
improper  mode  of  origination,  and  the  impropriety  con-
sists in  this,  that  a  tissue  is  produced  at  a  place  or
time  when  it  should  not  have  been  produced,  or  in  a
degree  which  deviates  from  that  of  the  typical  form.
Every  heterology  is  then,  more  exactly  characterised,  a
heterotopy,  an  dbcrratio  loci,  or  an  aherratio  temporis,  a
heterochrony,  or,  lastly,  a  merely  quantitative  deviation,
heterometry."  The  theory  of  ideal  types  of  disease,  which
take  possession  of  organisms,  could  only  have  a  certain
figurative  authorisation  where  animals  or  plants  are  the
causes  of  disease,  as  in  prurigo,  rot,  corn-blight,  &c,  i.e.,  in
the  science  of  parasites,  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  term.
As  concerns  the  so-called  mental  diseases,  the  tradi-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  165

tional,  and,  in  spite  of  opposition,  still  generally  accepted
view,  is,  that  every  disturbance  of  conscious  psychical
action  is  produced  by  a  disturbance  of  the  brain,  as  the
organ  of  consciousness,  whether  this  cerebral  disturbance
be  brought  about  directly  or  through  disease  of  the  spinal
cord  and  nerves.  Even  where  psychical  shocks  bring  on
mental  disease,  we  must  probably  assume  a  cerebral  dia-
thesis, mostly  inherited,  which  is  only  revealed  by  such
an  exciting  cause.  Without  doubt,  even  in  these  cases,  a
disturbance  of  the  brain  is  to  be  assumed  as  the  cause  of
the  disturbance  of  consciousness,  this  disturbance  of  the
brain  being  provoked,  indeed,  not  by  a  material,  but  by
a  psychical  shock,  but  at  all  events  produced  by  an
external  influence,  of  which  the  conscious  mental  states
are  only  reporters  and  interpreters.  The  proposition  that
the  Unconscious  itself  neither  falls  sick  nor  can  jwoduce
sickness  in  its  organism,  but  that  all  sickness  is  the
result  of  a  disturbance  from  without,  thus  remains  unim-
peached.

As  for  the  second  point,  the  doubtful  propriety  of  the
precautions  of  the  vis  medicatrix  against  disease,  the  most
important  factor,  which  must  not  be  left  out  of  sight,  is
the  limitation  of  the  power  of  the  will  in  mastering  its
circumstances.  If  the  will  of  the  individual  were  omni-
potent, it  would  not  be  finite  and  individual;  accordingly
there  must  be  disturbances  which  it  cannot  get  rid  of.
As  now  the  pi  ants  in  the  organism  which  the  will  can  lav
hold  of  are  likewise  very  limited,  i.e.,  its  power  has  verv
di liferent  limits  in  different  parts,  a  preconceived  end  must
naturally  often  be  reached  by  the  most  wonderfully  circui-
tous paths,  so  that  the  representation  of  the  end  with  the
means  employed  by  the  organism  often  entirely  escapes
the  unpractised  eye,  and  is  only  understood  by  the  pro-
founder  glance  of  science,  which  perceives  the  impossibility
of  shorter  cuts  to  the  goal.  As  now  scientific  L'hysiology
and  Pathology  are  still  so  young,  one  need  not  be  surprised
if  li.ey  even  yet  have  only  penetrated  a  very  little way


1 66  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

into  the  operations  of  organic  life,  and  if  they  must  often
have  to  put  up  with  a  guess  concerning  the  multitude  of
connecting  links,  but  also,  and  more  frequently,  fail  to
settle  the  question  whether  there  might  not  have  been
a  still  more  appropriate  course  than  the  one  actually
chosen.  Every  perceived  adaptation  is  proof  positive  of
psychical  action  not  to  be  invalidated,  but  a  thousand
ill-understood  connections  of  cause  and  effect  can  afford
no  negative  argument  against  the  existence  of  a  psychical
basis.  This  is  by  no  means,  however,  the  state  of  the
case,  but  in  almost  all  instances  where  we  see  a  manifestly
unsuitable  action  on  the  part  of  the  organism,  we  can
render  a  satisfactory  account  of  the  phenomenon.  The
spontaneous  origin  of  disease,  which  might  also  have  been
included  in  the  list,  has  been  already  dealt  with.  A  great
number  of  other  cases  are  accounted  for  as  follows  : — The
means  offered  for  getting  rid  of  the  disturbance  do  not
conform  to  the  intentions  of  the  organism,  because  dis-
turbances from  other  quarters  prevent  this,  so  that  by  a
second  malady  the  efforts  to  suppress  the  first  are  rendered
fruitless.  This  case  is  of  very  frequent  occurrence,  only
it  is  often  difficult  to  discover  the  second  disturbing  cause,
which  may  be  very  deep-seated,  and  at  the  same  time  be
very  insignificant  in  itself.  In  the  last  resort  it  is  then
always  again  the  insufficient  power  of  the  individual  will
(in  the  present  instance  in  setting  aside  the  second  disturb-
ance), whereby  the  means  applied  are  misdirected,  and  do
not  lead  to  the  goal.  A  special  case  of  insufficient  power  is
when,  on  a  particularly  intense  strain  in  a  certain  direc-
tion, the  will  is  not  able  to  keep  within  definite  bounds.
Thus,  e.g.,  in  the  healing  of  a  broken  bone,  when  an  active
tendency  to  the  formation  of  bone  is  required,  the  sur-
rounding portions  of  muscle  and  sinew  mostly  become
ossified  also ;  but  in  that  case  the  organism  afterwards
repairs  its  error  as  far  as  possible ;  thus,  in  the  present
instance,  the  ossiiied  contiguous  parts  are  reduced  after
healing  to  their  normal  condition.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  167

How  limited  is  the  power  of  the  individual  will  is  also
shown  by  the  following  example: — During  pregnancy,  when
the  unconscious  will  must  be  concentrated  on  the  forma-
tion of  the  child,  occasionally  osseous  fractures  will  not  at
all  heal,  whilst  after  a  successful  delivery  they  heal  quite
well.

The  last  possible  objection  would  be  this  :  The  appro-
priate reaction  follows  on  every  disturbance  in  virtue  of  a
mechanism  provided  for  the  creature,  without  the  partici-
pation of  the  individual  pysche.  Whoever  has  followed
my  exposition  thus  far  will  require  no  refutation  of  this.
We  have  seen  the  impossibility  of  a  material  mechanism  ;
that  of  a  psychical  one  is  evident  to  any  one  who  weighs
the  endless  multiplicity  of  the  disturbances  which  occur,
and  considers  that  the  function  of  each  single  organ,  as
of  the  whole  body,  is  no  other  than  that  of  ceaselessly
warding  off  and  neutralising  approaching  disturbances,  and
that  only  in  this  way  is  existence  maintained.  Accord-
ingly, if  the  fitness  of  these  compensations  for  the  purpose
of  self-preservation  be  once  granted,  it  is  impossible  to
avoid  the  idea  of  an  individual  providence,  for  it  can
only  be  the  individual  itself  that  conceives  the  purpose
according  to  which  it  acts.  The  truth  which  emerges  so
clearly  in  this  and  the  foregoing  chapter  cannot  fail  to
reinforce  the  refutation  of  the  same  objection  in  the  case
of  Instinct,  since  we  have  already  recognised  a  fundamental
resemblance.  It  would  be  folly  to  suppose  a  special  in-
stinctive faculty,  a  special  faculty  for  re  Ilex  movement,  a
special  faculty  for  the  vis  medicatrix,  since  in  all  these  phe-
nomena we  have  perceived  nothing  more  than  an  adaptation
of  means  to  an  end  unconsciously  presented  and  willed,
ami  it  is  only  the  different  kinds  of  exciting  external  cir-
cumstances that  call  forth  different  classes  of  reactions,
whereby, liowever,tlie  differences  are  not  so  pronounced  that
they  do  not  shade  into  one  another.  That  the  healing  ope-
rations in  the  organism  are  not.  results  of  conscious  think-
ing and  willing  will  be  doubted  by  nobody  who  rellects  how


1 68  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

small  a  share  his  consciousness  has  had  in  the  healing  of
a  wound  or  a  fracture ;  nay,  the  most  powerful  curative
effects  take  place  at  the  time  when  consciousness  is  as  far
as  possible  in  abeyance,  as  in  deep  sleep.  To  which  may
be  added,  that  the  organic  functions,  so  far  as  they  are  at
all  dependent  on  nerves,  are  regulated  by  sympathetic
nerve-fibres,  which  are  not  directly  subject  to  the  con-
scious will,  but  are  innervated  by  the  ganglionic  centres
from  which  they  spring.  If,  nevertheless,  there  reigns  in
the  organic  healing  functions  so  wonderful  a  harmony
tending  to  a  single  goal,  this  can  never  be  explained  by
the  material  inter-communication  of  these  different  ganglia,
but  only  by  the  unity  of  the  over-ruling  principle,  the
Unconscious.


( i69 )


VII.


THE INDIRECT INFLUENCE ON ORGANIC FUNCTIONS OF
CONSCIOUS PSYCHICAL ACTIVITY.


i.  Tue  Influence  of  the  Conscious  Will.

(a.)  Muscular  Contraction.

Muscular  contraction  is  manifestly  by  far  the  most  impor-
tant organic  function  dependent  on  conscious  volition,  for
it  is  that  whereby  we  move  and  act  on  the  external  world,
through  which  we  communicate  in  speech  and  writing.  It
takes  place  through  the  influence  of  the  motor  nerves,  by
a  nerve-current  flowing  from  centre  to  periphery,  a  current
which  is  evidently  related  to  the  electrical  and  chemical
stream.-,  as  we  find  them  to  be  convertible,  and  of  whose
intensity  we  can  form  no  mean  idea  when  we  see  the  con-
tracted muscles  of  the  athlete,  attached  to  the  long  lever
arms  of  the  limbs,  moreover,  sporting  with  hundredweights,
and  then  consider  what  colossal  galvanic  currents  would
be  required  to  lift  such  a  load  with  an  electro-magnet.
"We  have  already  seen  that  any  muscular  movement  is
explicable  only  by  the  repeated  intervention  of  uncon-
scious volition  and  thought,  because  otherwise  it  would
not  be  apparent,  how  the  motor  impulse  could  affect  the
part  of  the  nervous  centre  answering  to  this  consciously
represented  movement  rather  than  any  other.  We  have
further  seen  that  the  more  immediate  centres  for  most
movements  lie  in  the  spinal  cord  and  medulla  oblongata,
and that these movements are there so determined


i;o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  ordered  that  they  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  reflexes  of
these  centres,  occasioned  by  the  stimulus  of  a  relatively
small  number  of  fibres  proceeding  from  the  cerebrum,  so
that  the  first  motor  impulse  must  be  referred  to  the  central
endings  of  these  fibres  in  the  cerebral  hemispheres.  It  may
well  be  that  several  of  such  reflex  actions  take  place  in
different  nerve-centres  more  and  more  remote  from  the
brain  before  a  complex  movement  is  executed,  that,  e.g.,
in  walking,  at  first  some  few  fibres  carry  the  impulse  over
from  the  cerebrum,  where  the  conscious  will  to  walk
arises,  to  the  cerebellum  (the  organ  which  is  said  to  co-
ordinate the  larger  motor  groups),  that  then  from  there
a  larger  number  of  fibres  carry  forward  the  impulses  to
different  centres  of  the  spinal  cord,  and  finally  to  the
crural  nerves.  On  occasion  of  every  such  reflexion  the
unconscious  willing  and  conceiving  of  the  specific  motor
instinct  of  the  particular  centre  chimes  in,  and  thus  it
becomes  explicable  how  such  complex  movements  run
their  course  appropriately  and  orderly  without  any  mental
effort  whatsoever.  In  every  centre  the  impulse  is  felt  as
stimulus  and  converted  into  a  new  impulse,  so  that  in  the
strictest  sense  we  can  only  speak  of  the  motor  nerve-
current  from  the  last  centre.

The  question  now  arises,  how  the  will  is  able  to  produce
the  innervating  current.  "VVe  can  only  fall  back  on  the
analogies  of  the  related  and  (physically)  better  known
currents,  and  on  the  a  priori  suggestion,  that  the  entire
apparatus  of  the  motor  nervous  system  has  probably  been
inserted  in  the  organism  with  the  object  of  making  it
possible  for  the  will  to  produce  the  necessary  mechanical
effects  with  the  smallest  possible  mechanical  effort ;  in
other  words,  that  the  motor  nervous  system  is  a  mechani-
cal power  like  the  winds,  or  more  truly  as  the  wall-
shattering  ordnance,  to  which  the  individual  man  has
only  to  apply  the  match.  To  produce  mechanical  motion
without  mechanical  energy  is  impossible,  but  the  energy
which  ushers  in  the  movement mav  be reduced  to a


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  171

minimum,  and  the  remaining  part  of  the  work  can  be
handed  over  to  forces  previously  stored  up  for  use.  In
artillery  this  is  the  chemical  energy  of  the  powder,  in
the  animal  that  of  the  food,  which  therefore  must  stand
in  the  same  relation  to  muscular  energy  as  the  quantity
of  powder  to  the  force  of  the  shot.  Without  some  me-
chanical energy,  however,  the  stored-up  forces  cannot  be
liberated  from  their  imprisoned  state;  accordingly  the
will  must,  at  all  events,  be  made  capable  of  performing
mechanical  work.  If,  however,  the  quantity  of  this
energy  were  of  no  consequence,  it  could  put  the  muscles
into  motion  directly ;  we  must  therefore  assume  that  the
critical  point  of  the  motor  system  consists  in  this  :  How
to  reduce  the  necessary  mechanical  performance  of  the
will  to  a  minimum, — somewhat  as  the  regulating  of  the
levers  by  the  engineer  represents  a  minimum  of  effective
energy  in  relation  to  the  performances  of  the  steam-engine.
Looking  now  at  the  current  which  doubtless  has  most
affinity  with  the  nerve-currents,  viz.,  the  electrical,  we
must,  in  the  first  place,  exclude  the  mode  of  origin  by
mechanical  iniluences  (as  friction)  or  heat,  because  the
former  would  he  just  the  opposite  of  what  we  are  in  search
of,  and  the  latter  likewise  consists  of  vibrations  with  con-
siderable mechanical  oscillation  of  the  atoms.  We  must
in  any  case  disregard  modes  of  production  which  depend
on  displacement  of  the  molecules,  and  keep  to  such  as
require  only  a  rotatory  motion  of  the  same,  since  rotation
requires  infinitely  less  application  of  force  than  displace-
ment. Here  the  results  of  nerve-physiology  come  to  our
aid.  which  show  that,  whilst  the  motor-current  is  traversing
the  nerves,  all  the  molecules  of  the  latter  exhibit  an  elec-
trical polarity  in  the  same  direction,  as  in  the  magnet,
whilst  in  the  completely  indifferent  state  (which,  it  is  true,
docs  nut  occur  during  life)  the  polarities  of  the  molecules
have  no  definite  arrangement,  as  in  non-magnetic  iron,  and
thereby  neutralist!  one  another.  We  learn  from  these
experiments  that  the  nerve-molecules  possess  polarity,  and


172  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

that  the  poles,  by  rotation  of  the  molecules,  may  be  brought
into  the  same  direction.  As  the  iron  rod,  surrounded  by
a  wire,  becomes  magnetic  as  soon  as  a  galvanic  current
traverses  the  wire,  so,  if  in  any  way  the  iron  were  suddenly
magnetised,  a  galvanic  current  would  be  called  forth  in
the  wire.  In  an  analogous  way,  through  rotation  of  the
molecules,  so  that  their  polarities  are  turned  in  the  same
direction,  is  a  nervous  current  produced.

We  see  in  Physics  that  the  polar  oppositions  of  the
molecules  are  the  foundations  of  all  the  phenomena  which
we  designate  chemical,  galvanic,  frictional-electrical,  mag-
netic, &c. ;  we  have  therefore  no  reason  to  doubt  that  many
similar  phenomena  have  the  same  origin,  and  that  one  of
these  is  the  nerve- current.  The  rotation  of  the  mole-
cules in  the  centres  is  thus  the  minimum  of  mechanical
work,  which  is  left  to  the  will,  and  the  polarity  of  the
nerve-molecules  is  the  reserved  mechanical  energy,  which
liberates  the  store  of  mechanical  power  in  the  muscles,
which  is  exhausted  by  prolonged  activity,  and  is  again
restored  in  repose  through  the  chemical  replacement  of
material.  Thus  every  organism  is  comparable  to  a  steam-
engine  ;  it  is,  however,  also  at  the  same  time  stoker  and
engine-driver,  nay,  repairer  also,  and,  we  shall  subsequently
see,  even  its  own  fabricator.

As  the  mobility  of  the  molecules  is  in  all  respects
greater  in  the  fluid  state  of  matter  than  in  the  solid,  nerves
are  semi-fluid ;  but  as,  when  encountering  an  external
shock,  the  molecules  of  fluids  do  not  keep  their  places,  but
are  subject  to  considerable  displacement,  nerves  are  not
quite  fluid;  and  hence  structures,  which  carry  on  operations
analogous  to  the  nervous,  are  the  better  fitted  for  their  work,
the  more  they  possess  such  a  semi-fluid  constitution  as
well  as  polarised  molecules.  Accordingly  the  gelatin-
ous bodies  of  the  lower  aquatic  animals,  all  animal
germs,  the  plastron,  the  earlier  embryonic  conditions,  the
clotted  neoplasm,  once  in  a  state  of  plastic  fluidity,  from
which  all  new  formations  of  the  vis  medicatrix  proceed,


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  173

and  the  protoplasm  of  the  lower  and  higher  plants,  are
adapted  to  this  purpose.  The  first  principles  of  nature
being  simple,  we  cannot  doubt  that  also  all  other  effects  of
conscious  or  unconscious  will  in  organic  nature  depend  on
the  same  principle  of  molecular  polarisation,  especially  as
the  constitution  of  the  structures,  in  which  the  will  is  most
directly  manifested,  is  confirmatory  of  this  supposition.
Thus  we  cannot  otherwise  figure  to  ourselves  the  influence
of  the  will  in  chemical  processes,  as  in  new  formations
from  neoplasm  or  in  the  development  of  the  embryo,  than
as  a  skilful  use  of  the  polarity  of  the  existing  molecules,
partly  in  the  heart  of  the  formation  itself,  partly  by  means
of  currents  conveyed  to  that  quarter,  which  are  generated
elsewhere.

We  at  the  same  time  rise  above  the  view  that  the  nerves
exclusively  possess  the  capacity  of  conveying  the  determina-
tions of  the  will,  with  respect  to  which  there  has  been  so
much  dispute.  Both  the  analogies  of  nerveless  animals,
as  well  as  the  neoplasm  and  embryo,  prove  the  possibility
of  voluntary  action  and  sensibility  without  nerves  ;  but
this  does  not  preclude  the  view,  that  the  nerves  are  the
highest  kind  of  tissue  known  to  us  which  the  will  has
created  to  facilitate  its  action,  and  that  the  organism
furnished  with  nerves  would  as  little  avoid  the  employ-
ment of  the  same  to  mediate  its  voluntary  manifestations,
as  any  one  would  drive  across  country  instead  of  along
the  road.  It  is,  moreover,  clear  from  the  foregoing  that
the  power  of  the  individual  will  could  effect  infinitely
less  with  the  same  amount  of  effort,  if  the  power-engine
of  the  nervous  system  were  not  at  its  command.  (Think
of  the  efforts  of  incompletely  paralysed  bodily  parts.)
It  would  be,  however,  very  hazardous  to  fix  a  limit  for
the  exercise  of  will  without  the  aid  of  nerves,  since  the
intensity  of  volition  in  a  certain  direction  and  for  a  short
time  can  occasionally  prove  a  substitute  for  an  auxiliary
mechanism.  1  shall  not  point  to  examples  of  magic
(turning  of  the  magnetic  needle  by  the  mere  will  of  the


174  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

magnetiser  and  so  forth),  because  they  need  stronger  attes-
tation for  scientific  purposes  ;  but  various  circumstances
prove  clearly  enough  that  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  will,
as  well  as  of  sensibility,  extends  even  in  Man  beyond  the
range  of  the  nerves.  For  example,  the  sudden  turning
grey  of  the  hair  on  a  violent  emotion  ;  the  ramification  of
the  motor  nerve-fibres  in  the  muscles,  according  to  which
the  muscular  fibres  themselves  must  be  conductors  of  the
motor  current ;  the  sensibility  of  the  skin  throughout  its
entire  surface,  whilst  the  tactile  papillse  underlie  it  only
here  and  there  ;  the  action  of  the  nerves  on  the  secreting
membranes  in  their  whole  extent,  whilst  the  nerves  can
only  touch  limited  parts ;  further,  the  circumstance  that
even  nerveless  parts  of  the  human  body  can  be  rendered
sensitive  and  painful  as  soon  as  their  vitality,  i.e.,  the
mobility  and  polarity  of  their  molecules,  is  increased,  owing
to  accelerated  flow  of  blood  and  relaxation  of  tissue ;
thus,  e.g.,  the  new  flesh  formed  in  healing  wounds  is  in  the
highest  degree  sensitive  without  any  nerves,  and  inflamma-
tion of  nerveless  cartilage  and  sinews  is  even  much  more
painful  than  inflammation  of  the  nerves  themselves.
Lastly,  examples  of  embryonic  malformations  show  that
parts  may  be  formed  without  the  co-operation  of  the
nerves  leading  to  them,  e.g.,  skull-bones  without  brain,
spinal  nerves  without  spinal  cord.

(b.) Volitional  Currents  in  Sensory  Nerves.

One  kind  of  innervation- current  we  have  already  become
acquainted  with  as  the  Keflex  Action  of  Attention.  It
may,  however,  be  just  as  well  called  forth  and  strengthened
voluntarily.  The  concentration  of  attention  on  the  organs
of  generation  may  be  followed  lv  the  greatest  sexual
excitement,  and  hypochondriacs  sometimes  feel  pains  in
every  part  of  the  body  to  which  they  direct  their  atten-
tion. It  is  said  not  unfrequently  to  happen  that  persons
about  to  be  operated  on  imagine  they  feel  the  pain  of  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  175

puncture  before  the  operator's  instrument  has  actually
touched  them.  If,  when  the  eyes  are  closed,  a  finger  be
slowly  brought  to  the  tip  of  the  nose,  and  the  approxi-
mation be  very  gradual,  just  before  actual  contact  the
imaginary  contact  is  experienced  as  a  sort  of  itching
feeling.  If  I  earnestly  concentrate  my  attention  on  my
finger-tips,  I  become  aware  of  a  distinct  sensation  therein,
a  kind  of  tickling  also.  In  all  these  cases  manifestly  the
presentation  in  the  brain  of  the  expected  sensation,  com-
bined with  the  attention  directed  to  the  particular  nerves,
produces  a  peripheral  current,  which  returns  from  the
periphery  to  the  centre  as  current  of  sensation,  whether,
as  in  the  first  examples,  the  sensation  be  essentially  pro-
duced only  by  the  centrifugal  current,  or,  as  in  the  last
example,  the  current  only  strengthens  the  ever-present
stimuli,  which  are  usually  too  weak  to  be  perceptible.

The  first  case  also  occurs  on  occasion  of  every  sensuous
perception  without  sense-impression.  The  vividness  of
the  idea  depends  on  the  strength  of  the  peripheral  nerve-
current,  and  this  again  partly  on  the  interest  (participation
of  the  will)  in  the  idea,  partly  on  the  individual  disposi-
tion. There  are  persons  who  by  voluntary  effort  can  call
up  visual  images,  e.g.,  of  a  friend,  almost  with  the  distinct-
ness of  a  vision.  In  others  the  images  always  remain  pale.
If  the  volitional  current  flows  unconsciously,  the  recurrent
stream  of  sensation,  when  suihciently  vivid,  presents  itself
as  vision,  just  as  in  every  dream.  I  therefore  believe  that
there  is  no  sensuous  mental  representation  in  the  brain,
which  is  not  bound  up  with  a  current  of  innervation
towards  the  particular  sense-organ,  although  such  current
may  not  usually  extend  far  beyond  the  central  ending  of
the  nerves  of  the  organ.  I  think  we  must  conclude  this
from  the  fact  that  the  vision  only  differs  from  the  actual
sensuous  presentation  in  degree,  wherefore  its  mode  of
origin  will  likewise  only  differ  in  degree.  "We  may  also
assume  that  the  current  of  innervation  radiates  from  cen-
tre to  periphery,  and  approaches  ever  nearer  the  sense-


1 76  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

organ  itself  as  the  sensuous  perceptions  are  more  vividly
represented;  for  persons  who  perceive  indistinctly  and
weakly  feel  the  strain  of  attention  (which  certainly  is
only  a  reflex  strain  of  the  cutaneous  muscles)  in  the
upper  part  of  the  head.  The  greater  the  faculty  of  sen-
suous perception,  the  more,  when  attempting  to  form  visual
images,  does  this  feeling  of  tension  descend  towards  the
forehead,  in  the  extreme  case  reaching  the  eyes  themselves,
so  that  the  latter  feel  just  as  fatigued  after  a  persistent
effort  of  imagination  as  after  a  long,  steady  gaze.

(c.)  The  Magnetic  Nerve  Current.

The  fundamental  phenomena  of  mesmerism  or  animal
magnetism  are  at  length  to  be  looked  upon  as  scientifically
accredited.  The  electrical  discharges  of  the  electric  ray
and  eel  have  long  been  notorious,  and  the  perception  that
these  effects  proceeded  from  the  grey  nervous  matter  was
in  the  main  the  occasion  of  the  latter  being  regarded  as
the  essential  part  of  the  nervous  system.  Nevertheless  the
admission  of  the  perfectly  analogous  effects  of  the  mag-
netisers  was  long  resisted,  because  they  were  on  the  whole
too  weak  to  be  distinctly  perceptible  to  the  physicist.  I
have,  however,  been  repeatedly  present  at  these  experi-
ments, and  have  secured  myself  from  the  risk  of  deception
by  the  most  careful  investigation  of  the  locality  as  well  as
of  the  person  of  the  magnetiser.  If  the  patient  be  placed
upon  an  iron  bedstead  provided  with  a  wire  mattress,  but
in  such  a  way  that  he  is  isolated  from  the  metal  by  a
woollen  covering,  a  Leyden  jar  is  in  a  certain  measure
produced,  of  which  the  bedstead  forms  one  coating,  the
person  lying  thereon  the  other,  and  by  the  concurrent
flow  (influence)  of  the  electricity  of  the  bed  towards  the
isolating  surface,  the  electrical  effect  of  the  magnetisation
is  considerably  enhanced.  I  have  allowed  myself  to  be
magnetised  in  this  way,  and  have  distinctly  perceived  an
emission  of  sparks  causing  a  prickling  sensation  from  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  177

hand  of  the  magnetiser  as  it  gently  touched  my  skin,  as
if  through  his  touch  the  chain  of  a  weak  induction  current
or  of  a  rotating  electrical  machine  were  closed,  but  more
irregular,  according  to  the  fluctuating  exertion  of  the
magnetiser.  Whoever  is  acquainted  with  the  feeling  will
know  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to  mistake  it.  Any  one
that  has  ever  known  the  skin-sensation  thus  produced,  can
without  further  trial  distinguish  with  certainty  the  con-
tact of  a  magnetising  hand  (the  agent  exerting  sufficient
pressure)  from  a  non-magnetising  contact,  as  I  have  had
occasional  opportunity  to  observe  in  my  own  person.
Apart  from  the  artificial  increase  of  the  electrical  effect,
the  nerve-strengthening  and  vivifying  power  of  mesmerism,
stimulating  all  the  vital  functions,  is  well  known,  as  well
as  the  induction  of  wholesome  sleep,  and  of  favourable
crises  during  the  same.

Although  the  electricity  in  these  phenomena  may  be
only  a  concomitant  or  a  peripheral  conversion  of  the  proper
magnetic  force,  it  is  still  in  any  case  related  to  these
physical  forces  and  the  motor  nerve  current,  and  probably
arises,  like  the  latter,  through  the  alteration  of  the  polar
condition  of  the  molecules  in  the  centres.  It  is,  like  move-
ment, an  indirect  effect  of  conscious  will  (sometimes  also,
in  the  imposition  of  hands  of  saints,  miraculous  cures,  &c,
quite  unconscious),  but  what  exactly,  i.e.,  directly,  he  does,
and  how  he  does  it,  the  magnetiser  knows  as  little  when
magnetising  as  on  lifting  his  arm.  There;  intervenes  then
here,  as  in  all  other  descriptions  of  movement,  an  uncon-
scious will,  which  brings  it  about  that  a  magnetic  current
and  no  other  arises,  and  that  this  is  concentrated  in  the
hands,  and  not  in  any  other  part  of  the  body.  (In  order  to
become  acquainted  with  tins  group  of  phenomena  in  its
whole  extent,  Ileichenbach's  "Odic-Magnetic  Letters,"  and
his  larger  work,  "Sensitive  Man,"  should  lie  consulted."


vol.  1.


i;S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.


(d.)  The  Vegetative  Functions.

Sympathetic  nerve-fibres  probably  regulate  all  the
vegetative  functions  of  the  organism.  Conscious  will  has
no  direct  influence  upon  them,  but  we  have  seen  that  this
is  not  the  case  even  with  the  motor  and  sensory  fibres,  but
that  the  direct  agent  is  always  an  unconscious  will.  If
now  the  conscious  will  has  any  influence  at  all  on  vege-
tative functions,  the  cases  are  parallel,  and  the  difference
can  only  lie  in  the  degree  of  facility  with  which,  through
the  conscious  willing  of  any  effect,  the  unconscious  will
is  evoked  to  institute  means  to  bring  about  this  effect.
Thus,  e.g.,  if  I  will  a  stronger  salivary  secretion,  the  con-
scious willing  of  this  effect  excites  the  unconscious  will  to
institute  the  necessary  means,  namely,  it  generates  such
currents  in  the  sympathetic  fibres  which  lead  from  the
ganglionic  endings  to  the  salivary  glands  as  produce  the
intended  effect.  This  experiment  will  succeed  pretty  well
with  anybody.  In  like  manner  the  formation  of  the
secretions  in  the  organs  of  generation  is  subject  to  the
conscious  will,  which,  when  combined  with  the  above-men-
tioned voluntary  excitement  of  the  related  sensory  nerves,
may  even  lead,  in  the  case  of  irritable  persons,  to  ejacula-
tion without  mechanical  stimulation.  Mothers  are  said  to
be  able  to  produce  through  this  will  a  more  copious  lacteal
secretion,  if  the  sight  of  the  child  arouses  in  them  the  will
to  suckle.  The  ability  of  many  persons  to  blush  and  to
grow  pale  voluntarily  is  well  known,  especially  in  the  case
of  coquettish  women,  who  make  a  study  of  it ;  and  there
are,  likewise,  people  who  can  perspire  voluntarily.  I  now
possess  the  power  of  instantaneously  reducing  the  severest
hiccough  to  silence  by  my  mere  will,  whilst  it  formerly
was  a  source  of  great  inconvenience  to  me,  and  frequently
would  not  yield  to  all  the  ordinary  means.  That  a  pain,
e.g.,  toothache,  may  sometimes,  through  an  energetic  effort
to  subdue  it,  be  soothed  or  put  an  end  to,  is  well  known,


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  179

notwithstanding  that,  through  the  requisite  attention,  the
pain  is  in  the  first  instance  increased.  In  the  same  way
an  irritation  to  cough,  which  has  no  mechanical  cause,
may  be  permanently  suppressed.  There  have  always  been
people,  who  have  exercised  a  remarkable  power  over  their
bodies,  professed  jugglers,  and  such  as  have  cultivated  their
will-force  in  other  directions,  philosophers,  magicians,  and
penitents.  From  the  evidence  of  these  phenomena,  I  believe
that  we  might  possess  a  far  greater  voluntary  power  over
our  bodily  functions,  if  we  had  only  as  much  occasion
from  childhood  upwards  to  institute  experiments  and  to
practise  ourselves  therein  as  is  necessary  in  the  case  of
muscular  movements  and  mental  images ;  for  as  children
we  know  as  little  how  to  set  about  bringing  the  spoon  to
the  mouth  as  how  to  increase  the  salivary  secretion.  At
the  same  time,  however,  it  is  evident  that  the  connecting
of  the  conscious  and  the  unconscious  will  has  been  pur-
posely made  difficult  in  this  department,  because  the
intervention  of  the  conscious  will  would  generally  only
be  injurious  to  the  vegetative  functions  and  not  make
matters  better,  and  by  such  occupation  would  be  uselessly
diverted-  from  its  proper  sphere  of  thought  and  external
action.

2.  The  Influence  of  Conscious  Ideation.

The  conscious  idea  of  a  definite  effect  can  often,  without
the  conscious  will,  excite  the  unconscious  will  to  employ
the  requisite  means,  so  that  the  realisation  of  the  conscious
idea  then  appears  involuntary.  Physiology,  which  is
obliged  to  take  notice  of  these  facts,  but  dues  not  possess
the  conception  of  the  unconscious  will,  sees  itself  driven
to  make  the  absurd  assertion,  that  mere  idea  without  will
can  be  cause  of  an  external  event.  I'.ut  it'  one  retlects
upon  it,  one  finds  that  nothing  more  is  in  fact  thereby
allinned  than  that  the  notion  ''Idea"  is  in  the-e  eases
imperceptibly widened to the conception ''unconscious


1S0  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

will,"  as  discussed  in  Chap.  iv.  A.  pp.  124,  125.  I  therefore
do  nothing  more  than  call  this  unobserved  extension  of
the  general  notion  Idea  by  its  right  name,  and  represent
it  as  an  independent  link  in  the  process,  since  it  must
lie  manifestly  inadmissible  to  introduce  into  a  notion
already  established  the  marks  of  another  equally  fixed
notion  in  addition  to  its  own.

In  the  first  line  are  ranged  gestures  and  looks  taken  in
the  widest  sense.  In  the  idea  which  calls  forth  the  look
the  effect  is  not  at  all  included,  to  say  nothing  of  the
means  for  its  production ;  but  the  gestures  entirely  pre-
sent the  appearance  of  reflex  actions,  so  invariably  and
uniformly  do  they  follow  in  all  individuals.  How  con-
formable to  a  purpose  they  are  is  certainly  clear,  since
without  the  necessity  and  universality  of  the  gestures
nobody  would  understand  them,  and  without  previous
understanding  by  gestures  a  word-language  would  never
have  become  possible,  and  dumb  animals  would  be  de-
prived of  every  means  of  understanding  one  another;  even
by  far  the  largest  part  of  those  endowed  with  voice  would
be  deprived  of  their  language.  But  even  among  men,
wherever  we  mistrust  the  speech,  we  still  hold  to  the
expression  of  the  speaker.  I  dispense  myself  from  an
enumeration  of  the  phenomena  in  question,  which  may  be
gleaned  from  many  sources.

Mimetic  movements,  which  are  manifestly  likewise
reflex  actions,  form  the  second  group  of  the  phenomena.
When  we  see  an  orator  hotly  declaiming,  or  when  we  look
on  at  a  duel,  a  fencing-match,  a  bold  leap,  or  a  dance,  and
are  greatly  interested  in  the  affair,  we  make  similar  move-
ments ourselves,  so  far  as  our  attitude  allows,  or  at  least
feel  the  impulse  to  make  similar  movements,  even  if  we
suppress  it.  In  the  same  way  the  natural  man  is  prone
to  sing  the  melody  which  he  hears  played.  If  we  see
anybody  yawning,  it  is  very  difficult  to  avoid  yawning
ourselves ;  and  even  more  extensive  convulsions,  as  St.
Vitus's  dance,  epilepsy,  often  act  infectiously  on  suscep-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  181

tible  persons  through  the  mere  view  of  them;  nay,  they
can  even  become  complete  epidemics  of  a  sect  or  a  tribe.
Since  in  all  these  cases  it  is  no  material  influence  which
forms  the  bridge,  it  can  only  be  the  idea  of  these  move-
ments which  is  so  vividly  excited  by  the  spectacle  that  it
rouses  the  unconscious  will  to  execute  them.  Inasmuch
as  this  process  takes  place  within  a  nerve-centre,  and  the
last  effective  act  of  will  probably  also  becomes  conscious
in  this  centre,  it  comes  under  the  notion  reflex  movement.
The  next  group  contains  the  influence  of  conscious  re-
presentation on  the  vegetative  functions.  The  influence
of  the  most  dissimilar  emotions  on  the  functions  of  secre-
tion are  well  known  (e.g.,  vexation  and  anger  on  bile  and
milk,  terror  on  urine  or  stool,  voluptuous  pictures  on  the
semen,  &c.)  The  idea  of  having  taken  medicaments  (e.g.,
laxatives)  often  acts  just  as  well  as  the  medicaments  them-
selves. The  imagination  of  having  been  poisoned  may
actually  produce  the  symptoms  of  poisoning.  Many
Christian  enthusiasts  in  the  days  of  the  martyrs  really  felt
the  martyrs'  pains,  as  hypochondriacs  really  feel  the  dis-
eases which  they  fancy  themselves  to  have,  and  as  young
doctors  sometimes  think  they  have  all  possible  diseases  of
which  they  hear.  (There  is  a  remarkable  story  told  of  one
of  Boerhave's  pupils,  who  was  obliged  to  give  up  the  study
on  this  account.)  The  surest  way  to  be  taken  with  an
infectious  disease  is  to  be  afraid  of  it,  whilst  the  physician
under  like  circumstances  is  very  rarely  attacked.  Lively
fear  and  the  thought  of  sickness  is  of  itself  sufficient  to
cause  the  same,  without  any  infection,  especially  if  it  be
heightened  by  the  terror  of  incurring  risk.  Throughout
the  whole  of  the  Middle  Ages  there  occur  reports  of
mouikIs  and  bleedings  in  ascetic  enthusiasts,  ami  we  have
no  reason  to  refuse  credence  to  these  accounts,  when
(lerman.  Belgian,  and  Italian  physicians  of  the  proseus
century  attest as  eye-witnesses  ]  spontaneous  bleeding  as

'S S:i'/.'mr_' M--<Iirnl  Jonrn.il  of "Account of  .in (' ' Phono.

iSl.;. i. 145 I5'\ an  i ii. 1  7 j-j  : :;; ;i ;i  ;:i  I:.'  ('.;  -.;;.;.<  \  .  i'.uunt."


i82  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

certain  times.  Why  should  not  blood-vessels,  if  they
permit  blushing  and  occasionally  allow  blood-perspiration,
so  far  dilate  as  to  allow  of  bleeding  through  the  skin  ?

Similar  cases  occur  even  in  secular  life.  Ennemoser
relates  as  a  well-attested  story  a  case  where  the  strokes  of
a  soldier  condemned  to  run  the  gauntlet  are  said  to  have
afflicted  the  body  of  his  sister  with  like  pains  and  ex-
ternal cutaneous  marks.  The  much-doubted  fright  of  the
pregnant  likewise  belongs  here.  Most  physiologists  reject
the  facts  without  more  ado  because  they  cannot  explain
them.  Burdach,  Baer  (who  relates  the  case  of  his  own
sister),  Budge,  Bergmann,  Hagen  (the  two  latter  in
Wagner's  "  Handworterbuch  ")  thoroughly  admit  the  facts  ;
Valentin,  at  any  rate,  does  not  dispute  their  possibility  in
general.  J.  Miiller  admits  the  fright  of  the  pregnant  in
so  far  as  it  is  said  only  to  produce  arrest  of  formation,  but
not  as  respects  the  effecting  of  changes  at  particular  parts
of  the  body.  But  now,  on  the  one  hand,  almost  every
arrested  formation  is  a  merely  partial  one,  and,  on  the
other  hand,  we  have  so  many  examples,  both  of  the  in-
heritance of  quite  partial  marks,  moles,  as  well  as  of  partial
changes  in  our  own  body  (as  fancied  effect  of  poisons  or
drugs,  wounds  of  stigmatics),  that  there  is  no  reason  to
doubt  such  partial  influence  of  the  maternal  mind  on  the
soul  of  the  foetus,  the  latter  being  still  in  process  of  organic
formation.  Whilst  I  thus  recognise  the  fact  of  the  "  fright"
of  the  pregnant,  I  by  no  means  doubt  that  nine-tenths  of
such  stories  are  nonsense,  but  in  strictness  very  few  well-
attested  cases  would  be  sufficient.

A  great  number  of  sympathetic  or  miraculous  cures
are  allied  to  the  occurrence  of  signs  of  poisoning  after
imaginary  poisoning,  and  to  the  effects  of  drugs  without
any  having  been  taken.  As  in  those  cases  the  idea  of  the
effect  evokes  the  unconscious  will  to  procure  the  means,  and

by  Medical  Counsellor  and  Professor  Dr. F. Lefebvre, Professeur do

v. Draffe! at Miinster. Further  :  Pathologic generale et de The'ra-

"  Louise  Late.au,  sa  Vie,  ses  Fxtases,  peutique  a  Lou, vain. Louvain,  Ch.

ses  Stimulates." Medical  study by  Peters, 1S70.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  183

thereby  the  effect  itself,  so  also  here.  What  is  peculiar  to
the  case  is  the  question  in  what  way  the  unconscious  will-
ing of  the  means  is  produced  through  the  idea  of  the  effect.
The  conscious  willing  of  the  effect  does  not  seem  essential,
for  in  the  case  of  the  fright  of  the  pregnant,  and  in  the
occurrence  of  effects  which  are  even  dreaded,  the  conscious
will  can  only  be  contrary,  not  favourable,  and  yet  the  un-
conscious will  and  the  effect  make  their  appearance.  On
the  other  hand,  another  factor  is  indispensable  in  that
part  of  the  phenomena  which  proceeds  from  the  personal
will  of  the  individual,  and  not  (as  with  mother  and  foetus)
magically  through  another  will,  namely,  the  belief  in  the
occurrence  of  the  effect ;  for,  as  Paracelsus  finely  says,
"Faith  it  is  which  locks  the  will."  Where,  therefore,
the  conscious  will  makes  a  show  of  opposition  with  the
belief  in  its  own  power  of  resistance,  there  faith  calls  up
an  unconscious  will  which  hinders  the  effect  of  the  first
idea.  The  question  is  only,  which  faith  is  stronger,  that
in  the  occurrence  of  the  effect,  or  that  in  one's  own  power
of  resistance,  according  as  the  unconscious  will  inclines
to  the  one  or  the  other  side  ?  The  art  in  such  cures  is
then  only  this  :  to  inspire  the  belief  in  success,  and  be-
cause men  do  not  perceive  this  connection,  perhaps  also
such  rational  belief  would  be  too  weak  to  be  elfective,
over-faith  must  procure  faith,  and  for  that  purpose  all
sorts  of  hocus-pocus  are  employed.  Of  the  unconscious
will  the  word  holds  literally  true :  "The  more  will,  the
more  power;"  and  this  is  the  key  to  mayic.


( i«4 )


VIII.

THE PLASTIC ENERGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS.

In  the  preceding  sections  we  have  not  altogether  been  able
to  avoid  anticipating  the  theme  of  the  present  chapter.
This  was  owing  to  the  intimate  connection  of  the  subjects
successively  treated  with  the  principle  of  organic  formation,
being  indeed  at  bottom  illustrations  of  the  same,  so  that
the  attempt  to  make  any  sharp  division  would  only  have
resulted  in  the  omission  of  some  very  remarkable  pheno-
mena. We  have  seen  that  the  term  which  covers  the
larger  number  of  facts  is  that  of  Instinct;  but  one  may
almost  as  easily  include  the  phenomena  under  the  notion
of  Reflex  Action,  for  an  external  stimulus  must  always  be
present,  upon  which  action  almost  of  necessity  follows,
although  the  reflexes  may  be  of  a  considerable  degree  of
complexity.

Equally  well,  however,  may  all  the  phenomena  in  dis-
pute be  regarded  as  effects  of  Natural  Therapeutics,  for
only  when  the  external  stimulus  is  some  extraneous  op-
posing substance  can  it  act  as  a  stimulus,  otherwise  it  is
uninfluential.  The  subduing  of  the  material  is,  however,
an  act  of  the  vis  mcdicatrix.  The  special  character  of  the
formative  principle  would  then  have  to  be  referred  to  the
realisation  of  the  Idea  of  the  species  at  the  appropriate
stage  of  life,  whilst  Nature's  remedial  power  would  consist
in  the  conservation  of  the  realised  Idea.  It  is  obvious,
however,  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  warding  off  of  a  dis-
turbance is  only  possible  by  means  of  new  formations,  i.e.,


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  185

that  the  realised  Idea  cannot  maintain  itself  except  by
development,  by  the  realisation,  that  is,  of  a  new  stage  of
the  Idea  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  realisation  of
a  new  stage  of  the  Idea  involves  a  series  of  struggles  and
self-preserving  acts.  This  is  so  because  all  points  of  the
organism  are  threatened  with  disturbance  at  every  mo-
ment; and  therefore,  in  the  third  place,  the  moulding  and
constructive  instincts,  no  less  than  the  plastic  energy  with-
in the  body,  work  according  to  fixed  ideas,  which  must
be  unreservedly  looked  upon  as  integral  elements  of  the
Idea  of  the  class.  Nay,  in  the  wider  sense,  all  other  in-
stincts must  be  conceived  as  realisations  of  special  aspects
of  the  type ;  for  the  typical  idea  of  the  nightingale  would
be  incomplete  if  the  particular  note  were  omitted,  as
that  of  the  ox  without  butting,  or  that  of  the  wild  boar
without  the  gnashing  of  the  tusks,  or  of  the  swallow
without  the  semi-annual  migration.

It  accordingly  only  remains  for  us,  in  the  first  place,  to
make  a  few  remarks  with  respect  to  the  appropriateness
of  the  organising  impulse,  and,  secondly,  to  show  how  the
instances  of  the  plastic  energy  shade  imperceptibly  into
the  previously  considered  manifestations  of  the  Uncon-
scious.

As  concerns  the  adaptations  of  organic  life,  on  the
one  hand,  goodly  volumes  might  be  written  on  this  point
alone,  and,  on  the  other,  the  greatest  caution  is  required
with  respect  to  Ideological  considerations  in  detail,  teleo-
logy having  already  fallen  somewhat  into  discredit,  owing
to  the  numerous  ends  that  have  been  foisted  on  Nature
by  self-conceited  minds,  which  not  seldom  verge  on
the  ridiculous  and  absurd.  We  can  therefore  only  here
throw  out  some  brief  hints,  which  the  rather  suffice  for
our  purpose  as  at  the  present  day  the  knowledge  of  eveiy
educated  person  is  sufficient  for  their  elaboration.

I  start  from  this  —  that  the  raising  of  consciousness
presents  itself  as  the  purpose  of  the  animal  kingdom.
"Whether  one  seeks  the  end  of  this  clearer  c>  nsciuusness


i35  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UXCOXSCIOUS.

in  an  increase  of  enjoyment,  or  of  knowledge,  or  finally  of
an  ethical  moment,  the  elevation  of  consciousness  always
remains  the  direct  end  of  all  animal  organisation  (comp.
Chap.  xiv.  C.)  Why,  generally,  the  embodiment  of  the
mind  should  form  the  condition  for  the  origin  of  con-
sciousness we  shall  see  later  on  (Chap.  iii.  C),  but  the  ques-
tion we  have  now  to  ask  is,  Why  this  separation  of  organic
Nature  into  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms  ?  The  first
reason  is  that  for  the  conversion  of  inorganic  into  organic
matter,  and  of  the  lower  into  higher  organic  combinations,
there  is  required  such  an  exertion  of  unconscious  psychic
force  that  the  same  individual  possesses  no  further  energy
for  inward  growth,  because  its  force  is  used  up  in  the
vegetal  processes.  Only  when  in  the  main  no  further
advance  in  the  organic  chemical  composition  of  matter  is
required,  but  on  the  average  a  mere  maintenance  at  the
stage  already  attained,  or  a  mere  direction  of  the  sponta-
neous tendency  to  relapse  to  lower  stages  is  desired,  only
then  does  the  individual  retain  the  necessary  surplus
energy  to  form  the  pre-existing  matter  into  the  artificial
structure  of  the  organs  of  consciousness,  and  to  urge  on
the  process  of  inward  mental  development  to  the  utmost.
Hence  the  separation  of  Nature  into  the  producing  vege-
table kingdom  and  the  consuming  animal  kingdom.  But
now  producer  and  consumer  might  still  be  conceived
united  in  a  single  being,  the  vegetable  half  of  the  organism
forming  the  materials,  by  the  use  of  which  the  other  animal
half  develops  its  consciousness.  The  second  reason  for
the  separation  of  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom  is  opposed
to  this,  however.  Xamely,  it  is  evident  that  an  animal
bound  to  the  soil  on  which  it  grows  (as  the  transitional
forms  of  lower  aquatic  animals  to  the  vegetable  kingdom
.show)  is  capable  of  no  extensive  experience,  and  thereby
of  no  higher  mental  development ;  locomotion  therefore
becomes  imperative  as  a  condition  of  a  higher  stage  of
consciousness.  But  now,  if  the  materials  of  which  organic
matter  is  formed  (i.e.,  matter  alone  fitted  to  support  a


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  1S7

higher  consciousness)  must  for  the  most  part  be  drawn
from  water  permeating  the  soil,  and  an  underground  ab-
sorbing surface  of  considerable  extent  (root  fibres)  is  neces-
sary for  this  purpose,  it  is  clear,  that  no  creatures  of  the
higher  grades  of  consciousness  can  directly  arise  from  in-
organic nature,  since  locomotion  is  impossible  with  such
a  subterranean  arrangement.  We  see,  then,  the  reason
for  the  mobility  of  animals  and  the  stability  of  plants,
and  in  general  the  ground  of  a  division  of  the  two
kingdoms.

Animals  must  then  seek  their  food,  and  need  for  that
purpose  not  only  motor  organs,  but  also  organs  to  enable
them  to  distinguish  between  the  substances  appropriate
and  inappropriate  for  their  nutrition,  and  to  execute  their
movements  with  accuracy.  These  are  the  organs  of  sense.
Further,  the  organism  can  only  assimilate  matter  by
absorption ;  this  must  therefore  be  in  a  liquid  form.
The  food  of  plants  is  already  in  this  form,  but  that  of
animals  is  generally  met  with  in  a  solid  condition.  These
must  therefore  have  organs  in  order  to  bring  this  solid
food  into  the  fluid  state.  This  purpose  is  served  by  the
digestive  system,  with  its  comminuting  organs  (mouth  and
stomach),  its  dissolving  juices  (saliva  for  conversion  of
starch  into  sugar,  gastric  juice  for  solution  of  albuminous
matter,  bile  for  partial  saponification  of  fat,  and  pancreatic
juice  for  all  these  purposes  taken  together),  its  long
canals,  and,  finally,  with  its  orifice  for  the  evacuation  of
indigestible  matters.  The  chyle  vessels  which  absorb  the
chyme  are  the  root-fibres  of  the  animal.  Since,  on  account
of  its  incomparably  greater  dynamic  performances,  it  con-
sumes far  more  matter  than  the  plant,  provision  must  be
made  for  a  more  speedy  replacement.  This  purpose  is
served  by  the  system  of  the  circulation  of  the  U001I,  which
constantly  supplies  to  all  parts  of  the  organism  new  mate-
rials in  the  must  appropriate  form  for  assimilation.  As
the  chemical  process  in  the  animal  is  essentially  a  process
of return  to  an  earlier  state,  i.e.,  a  process  of  oxidation,


1 88  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

provision  must  be  made  for  the  necessary  oxygen.  Plants
require  no  special  organs  for  their  reciprocal  relations
with  the  atmosphere,  because  their  surface,  unusually  large
in  proportion  to  their  content,  sufficiently  effects  diffusion.
In  the  animal,  however,  whose  surface,  for  other  reasons,
must  be  many  thousand  times  smaller  than  that  of  plants,
the  necessary  quantity  of  oxygen  must  be  introduced
into  the  body  through  special  internal  organs  of  great
superficial  extent  (bronchial  plexus),  permitting  powerful
ventilation,  and  through  a  rapid  change  of  the  adjacent
strata  of  air  by  means  of  vibratile  cilia,  as  well  as
through  a  constitution  of  the  dividing  membranes  favour-
able to  diffusion.  This  process  of  oxidation  at  the  same
time  engenders  animal  heat,  which  is  a  condition  of  the
subtler  changes  of  organic  matter,  or  at  any  rate  spares
a  great  part  of  the  expended  energy  for  the  psychical
influence.

■  Thus  from  consciousness  as  aim  of  animal  life  we  have
deduced  the  necessity  of  five  systems — that  of  move-
ment, of  organs  of  sense,  of  digestion,  circulation  of  the
blood,  and  respiration.  What  determines  the  external
form  of  the  body  as  a  whole  is  chiefly  the  locomotive
system.  Its  fundamental  principle  is  contraction,  as  we
see  already  in  ciliary  movement  and  the  movements  of
the  lower  aquatic  animals.  As  soon,  however,  as  the
other  systems  have  attained  a  certain  degree  of  develop-
ment, the  contractile  mass  requires  points  of  support
in  the  body  itself,  in  order  to  be  able  to  perform  par-
tial movements  better,  and  in  more  varied  directions  ;
especially  is  this  need  felt  by  land  animals  (even  the
lowest).  These  points  of  support  are  obtained  by  means
of  a  skeleton,  which  is  first  formed  of  thickened  layers
of  epithelium  or  calcareous  epidermic  layers,  afterwards
in  the  Vertebrata  of  the  bony  skeleton.  These  solid
parts  serve  at  the  same  time  for  protection  to  the  soft
parts;  thus,  among  the  vertebrates,  skull  and  spinal
column  protect  the  brain  and  spinal  cord. The  organs  for


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  189

external  locomotion,  even  in  animals  tolerably  low  in  the
scale,  are  elaborated  into  special  limbs,  which  exhibit  the
most  varied  modifications,  in  conformity  with  the  ele-
ments, the  localities,  and  the  particular  food  which  may
be  assigned  the  animal.  —  To  facilitate  the  reciprocal
influence  of  mind  and  body  there  is  formed,  as  a  sixth,
the  nervous  system,  of  the  significance  of  which  mention
lias  already  often  been  made;  and  finally,  as  a  seventh,
in  the  service  not  of  the  individual  but  of  the  race,
there  is  added  the  reproductive,  system.

This  in  outline  would  be  the  teleological  deduction  of
the  construction  of  the  animal  kingdom  with  conscious-
ness as  end,  whereby  the  vegetable  kingdom  appears
merely,  or  at  least  in  the  main,  only  as  ancillary  to  the
animal  kingdom,  in  that,  on  the  one  hand,  it  prepares  the
means  of  subsistence,  and,  on  the  other,  the  materials  of
heat  and  oxygen ;  for  the  carnivorous  animals  also  live
on  the  vegetable  kingdom,  though  indirectly.  To  prove
in  detail  the  fitness  of  the  contrivances  would,  as  said
already,  detain  us  far  too  long.  I  only  call  attention  to
the  wonderful  construction  of  the  organs  of  sense,  where
the  conformity  to  an  end  most  strikingly  appears.  This
is  almost  more  the  case  with  the  organs  of  generation,
where  it  is  especially  remarkable  that,  notwithstanding
the  greatest  difference  in  other  respects,  these  organs  are
always  suitable  to  both  sexes  of  a  species,  the  rest  of  the
bodily  form  also  always  allowing  of  sexual  congress.  The,
time  of  heat  among  animals  is  always  so  arranged  that
after  the  lixed  period  of  pregnancy  the  young  appear  at
the  season  when  food  is  most  abundant.  In  many  cases
special  parts  for  the  furtherance  of  sexual  congress  spring
into  existence  at  the  time  of  heat,  which  afterwards  again
disappear.  Thus,  many  insects  get  hooks  en  the  sexual
parts  for  firmly  holding  the  female;  the  frog  has  wart-
like prominences  on  the  thumbs  of  the  anterior  feet,  which
it  inserts  into  the  body  of  the  female;  the  male  oi  the
common water-beetle,  sucking-disks attached bv  si  .'...  -


i9o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

on  the  three  first  tarsal  joints — the  female,  on  the  contrary,
furrowing  of  the  wing-sheaths.

Of  special  interest  are  the  investigations  of  Dr.  J.  Wolf
on  the  construction  of  the  human  os  femoris,  communicated
in  the  50th  volume  of  Virchow's  Archiv.  That  it  forms  a
tube,  because  it  can  thus  be  lighter  with  the  same  solidity,
was  already  well  known.  It  is,  however,  new  that  the
cross-beams  and  supports,  arranged  in  regular  curves
(cutting  one  another  at  right  angles),  which  break  through
the  bony  cavity  at  the  upper  and  lower  end  of  the  bone,
are  so  ordered  that  they  exactly  agree  with  those  con-
structions which  are  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of
mechanics,  when  the  forces  of  pressure  and  of  draught  of
the  burdened  human  femur  are  taken  into  account,  and  the
lines  of  pressure  and  draught  in  the  interior  of  the  bone
are  ascertained.  Nature,  in  order  to  render  innocuous  the
"  shearing  forces "  tending  to  inner  dislocation  and  dis-
persion, has  thus  here  realised  in  an  unconscious  way  those
technical  rules  of  mechanics,  as  they  have  been  applied  by
the  conscious  mind  only  in  very  recent  times,  and  in  a
manner  still  far  from  perfect,  in  our  modern  iron  structures
(bridges,  cranes,  &c.)

A  common  error  is  that  of  doubting  the  adaptation  of
organisms  because  certain  conditions  of  fitness  which  we
presume  to  lay  down  are  not  satisfied.  That  a  perfect
adjustment  in  every  particular  is  impossible  should  in-
deed be  obvious  to  every  one,  for  otherwise  no  disease  or
weakness  would  subdue  the  body  ;  it  would  be  immortal.
It  would  be  childish  to  demand  that  a  human  cranium
should  sustain  the  blow  of  a  hailstone  as  large  as  a  list,
and  declare  it  to  be  unsuitable  to  its  purpose  because  it
does  not  do  so,  since  its  adaptation  for  such  exceptional
cases  would  be  accompanied  by  other  and  far  greater  in-
conveniences. Of  this  kind,  however,  are  most  cases
where  it  is  asserted  that  organisms  are  ill  contrived  :  they
amount  to  this,  that  contrivances  are  wanting  which  would


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  191

be  appropriate  in  certain  cases,  but  unsuitable  in  most
other  cases  or  relations.

Another  kind  of  alleged  want  of  adaptation  is  due  to
the  constancy  of  the  morphological  fundamental  types,
which  forms  a  thoroughgoing  natural  law,  and  only
places  in  a  clearer  light  the  unity  of  all  organic  forms —
the  unity  of  the  whole  plan  of  creation.  It  is  the  lex par-
simonies, which  is  verified  also  in  the  fashioning  of  organic
forms,  in  that  Nature  finds  it  easier  to  leave  here  and  there
innocuous  superfluities  than  always  to  be  making  changes
and  executing  new  ideas  :  she  prefers  to  stop  at  the
greatest  possible  unity  of  the  Idea,  and  only  makes  just
as  many  modifications  as  are  indispensably  necessary.
Of  this  kind  are  the  rudimentary  teats  among  male
mammals,  the  eyes  of  the  blind-mole,  the  caudal  vertebrae
in  tailless  animals,  the  swimming-bladder  of  fishes  which
always  live  at  the  bottom  of  the  water,  the  extremities  of
bats  and  Cetaceoe,  and  so  forth.

Lastly,  it  should  be  remarked  that  we  must  recognise  a
clairvoyance  of  the  Unconscious  in  the  purposiveness  of  the
creative  impulse  as  in  that  of  instinct,  since  all  organs  are
developed  earlier  in  the  foetal  life  than  they  enter  into  use.
and  often  even  very  considerably  earlier  {e.g.,  sexual  organs).
The  child  has  lungs  before  it  breathes,  eyes  before  it  sees,
and  can,  indeed,  have  knowledge  of  future  states  in  no
other  way  than  by  clairvoyance,  whilst  the  organs  are
being  formed;  but  this  can  be  no  objection  to  the  plastic
activity  of  the  individual  soul,  since  this  is  not  a  whit
more  wonderful  than  the  clairvoyance  of  instinct.

Let  us  now  pass  on  to  consider  the  close  relationship  of
organic  format  ion  to  the  operations  of  instinct. — The  nests,
buildings,  and  holes  which  animals  build  and  make  are
regarded  by  everybody  as  effects  of  instinct.  The  T
bores  for  itself  with  its  shell  a  hole  in  wood,  the  1'iiolas  in
soft  rocks ;  the  Arenicola  bores  in  the  sand,  and  cements
the  sand  into  a  tube  by  means  of  the  moisture  -e  :  ;•  i  1  n
the  surface  v\  its  skin. .Seme  small  beetles  form  foi  thi  :r


192  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tender  skin  a  covering  of  dust,  sand,  and  earth ;  the  grubs
of  moths  make  for  themselves  tubes  of  hair  or  wool,
which  they  carry  about  with  them.  The  larva  of  most  of
the  Phryganea3  weaves  with  the  threads  produced  from  its
spinning  organs  wood,  leaves,  shells,  &c,  into  a  tube,
wherein  it  dwells,  and  which  it  carries  about  with  it.
The  larva  of  the  caterpillar  needs  no  foreign  material  for
spinning  its  cocoon,  in  order  to  maintain  the  necessary
seclusion  and  rest  for  the  future  change.  Here,  then,
the  dwellings  of  animals,  just  as  the  web  of  spiders  and
the  covering  of  skin  which  some  beetle-larvse  form  of  their
excrement,  is  entirely  formed  by  the  organ  itself.

Nautilus  and  Spiral  a  periodically  emerge  from  their
hemispherical  shell  and  form  for  themselves  a  larger  one,
corresponding  to  their  growth  in  the  interim,  which,  how-
ever, is  united  with  the  old  one  in  such  a  manner  that  in
process  of  time  the  shell  of  the  animal  consists  of  a  series
of  such  chambers,  ever  increasing  in  size.  In  a  similar
way  the  shells  of  snails  grow  with  their  growth,  whilst  the
Crustaceae  annually  burst  and  throw  off  their  shells  by
voluntary  movement,  just  as  the  spiders,  snakes,  and  lizards
their  skin,  birds  and  mammals  their  feathers  and  hair,  whilst
the  skin  of  the  higher  animals  continually  peels. — What
we  have  seen  hitherto  in  the  structure  as  a  whole  can
also  be  observed  in  the  several  parts,  e.g.,  the  operculum.
A  spider  (My gale  cementaria)  lives  in  a  hollow  in  marl,
which  it  makes  fast  with  a  door  consisting  of  a  dab  of
earth  hinged  on  to  the  web.  The  vineyard  snail  in  win-
ter closes  its  dwelling  with  a  lid,  which  it  fashions  together
with  its  hinge  from  exudations  of  its  own  body,  but  which
yet  is  not  united  in  any  way  with  its  body.  In  other
snails,  on  the  contrary,  the  covering  is  permanently  con-
nected with  the  animal  by  means  of  muscular  bands.
Thus  we  have  arrived  at  organic  formation  by  a  gradual
passage  from  the  building  instinct,  and  can  we  believe
that  where  the  junction  is  so  natural  the  fundamental
principles  are  different  ? As  instinct  teaches squirrels


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  193

and  other  animals  to  collect  and  garner  more  copiously
when  a  cold  winter  is  imminent,  so  dogs,  horses,  and  game
acquire  in  such  years  a  thicker  skin ;  but  when  horses  are
transferred  to  hot  climates,  after  a  few  years  they  get  no
more  winter  hair.  That  the  cuckoo  imagines  that  its
own  eggs  will  have  the  colour  of  the  eggs  of  the  nest
which  it  has  elected  to  lay  them  in,  has  been  already  re-
peatedly mentioned.  The  instinct  of  the  spider  directs  it
to  spin,  the  creative  activity  gives  it  the  organ  for  spinning.
The  instinct  of  the  working-bees  leads  them  specially  to
collect,  and  the  means  of  transport  correspond  thereto ;
they  are  even  peculiarly  favoured  by  possessing  brushes  on
their  feet  to  sweep  together  the  pollen,  and  baskets  for  col-
lecting. The  insects,  which  in  accordance  with  their  in-
stinct lay  their  eggs  on  freely  creeping  larvae,  have  formed
for  themselves  only  a  quite  short  ovipositor;  whilst  others,
which  are  compelled  to  lay  their  eggs  in  grubs  that  are
deeply  concealed  in  old  wood  (Chelostoma  maxillosa),  or  in
fir-cones,  have  very  long  ovipositors.  The  ant-eater,  which,
in  obedience  to  its  instinct,  is  directed  to  the  white  ants,
and  dies  with  any  other  food,  has  with  this  object  been
furnished  partly  with  short  legs  and  strong  claws  for
burrowing,  partly  with  its  long,  narrow,  toothless  snout,
provided  with  a  iiliform  adhesive  tongue.  The  owls,
which  are  destined  for  night-prey,  have  their  gentle,  spec-
tral flight,  in  order  nut  to  waken  the  sleepers.  Beasts  of
prey,  which,  owing  to  their  digestion,  are  instinctively
destined  for  ilesh-food,  have  been  provided  with  the  ne-
cessary strength,  speed,  weapons,  and  keenness  of  sight.
As  instinct  has  taught  many  birds  to  conceal  their  nests
by  assimilating  the  colour  of  the  same  to  the  environment,
so  has  the  creative  activity  given  protection  to  innume-
rable beings  by  causing  them  to  resemble  their  plac
abode  (especially  parasites).  Can  it  be  really  a  different
principle  which  implants  the  impulse  for  action,  and
bestows  the  means  to  give  it  effect  I

Here  is  the  place  to  refer  once  more  to  the  phenomenon
vol.  1.  n


194  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  the  formation  of  bubbles  presented  in  Arcella  vulgaris,
which,  although  manifestly  a  result  of  the  plastic  energy
of  Nature,  yet  wears  the  appearance  of  an  arbitrary  exercise
of  instinct  in  suitable  adjustment  to  the  perceived  external
circumstances.

As  concerns  reflex  movements,  we  see  a  great  number
of  the  digestive  processes  effected  by  them.  From  the
act  of  swallowing  downwards,  the  peristaltic  movements  of
gullet,  stomach,  and  intestines  are  effected  for  the  most
part  by  reflex  movements,  in  that  the  stimulus  of  the  food  at
each  spot  gives  occasion  to  further  progress  through  appro-
priate movements.  In  the  same  way  the  increase  of  the
secretions  of  saliva,  gastric  juice,  chyme,  &c,  occurring  on
the  stimulus  of  food,  is  reflex  action.  The  discharge  of
the  mass  of  excretions  likewise  ensues  through  reflex
action.  "We  have  seen  above  that  reflex  action  is  by  no
means  mechanical,  but  an  effect  of  the  unconscious  intelli-
gence.

We  come  now  to  the  most  important  parallelism,  that
with  the  recuperative  power  of  Nature.  As  we  shall  see
in  Chap.  ix.  C,  propagation  is  only  a  modified  species  of
plastic  energy,  a  creation  of  such  fresh  formations  as,  on
arriving  at  maturity,  reproduce  the  types  of  the  parental
organism  (no  matter  whether  a  distinct  separation  of  the
sexes  take  place  or  not).  But  now,  since,  as  will  be  shown
in  Chap.  vi.  C,  the  conception  of  the  organic  individual  is
a  very  relative  one,  as  in  certain  circumstances  it  is  hardly
to  be  determined  whether  the  new  product  represents  the
type  of  the  entire  individual  or  only  of  a  part,  there  is
manifestly  no  natural  break  between  the  new  formation
of  certain  organs  in  one  individual  and  the  self-multipli-
cation of  a  complex  organism  embracing  several  indivi-
duals of  a  lower  order,  which  unfolds  a  many-membered
individual  from  a  single  germ.

Another  parallelism  between  propagation  and  the  vis
medicatrix  consists  in  this,  that  unusual  fertility  of  an  un-
protected species  frequently  serves  as  a  means  of  main-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  195

taining  in  the  face  of  pursuers  an  existence  which  with-
out this  would  be  imperilled.  The  question  is  here  then
to  a  certain  extent  concerning  a  more  intense  application
of  the  natural  sanative  force  of  the  species  as  a  collective
whole,  which  provides  for  the  sufficient  reparation  of  an
unusually  severe  loss  by  over-abundant  propagation,  i.e.,
formation  of  fresh  individuals.  This  law  is  even  discern-
ible in  the  case  of  mankind,  since  after  depopulating
wars  or  epidemics  there  is  perceived  an  increase  of  the
percentage  of  births  beyond  the  average.  (Unfortunately
the  converse  does  not  hold  good  with  over-population,  for
then  only  increased  mortality  acts  as  regulator.)

We  have  already  considered  how  the  maintenance  of  a
constant  temperature  is  one  of  the  most  wonderful  achieve-
ments of  the  organism,  which  can  only  be  brought  about
by  a  marvellously  accurate  regulation  of  respiration,  of
egestion  and  ingestion.  The  future,  however,  must  here
be  taken  into  account,  namely,  whenever  future  dis-
turbances can  be  predicted  through  the  occurrence  of
their  causes.  In  conformity  with  this,  we  very  soon
see  a  correspondingly  increased  egestion  follow  every
ingestion,  before  the  blood  can  have  received  the  new
materials  {e.g.,  immediately  after  drinking  increased  mic-
turition or  perspiration,  increased  salivary  and  bilious
secretion  on  eating,  independently  of  local  stimulation
of  the  organs).  Since  at  every  moment  there  takes
place  an  alteration  of  the  quantity  of  heat,  however
slight,  the  vis  medicatriv  or  plastic  energy  must  con-
tinually be  occupied  even  with  this  point  alone.  Fur-
ther, there  belongs  to  the  digestion  of  all  food  a  special
kind  of  mechanical  and  chemical  manipulation.  AVe  see
that  flesh  cannot  at  all,  or  only  imperfectly,  be  digested
by  herbivores,  or  plants  by  carnivores;  that  bones  can  be
digested  by  birds  of  prey,  but  not  by  crows;  that  instinct
assigns  a  single  kind  of  food  to  many  animals,  without
which  they  perish ;  and  that  conversely  among  men  and
animals  idiosyncrasies  of  the  race,  or  of  the  individual,  are


196  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

found,  owing  to  which  certain  materials  remain  unassimi-
lated,  and  act  injuriously  on  the  organism.  It  follows
from  this  that  the  digestion  of  every  substance  requires
other  conditions,  and  that  it  remains  undigested  or  is
injurious,  if  the  organism  is  not  in  a  position  to  establish
these  conditions.  Accordingly,  every  act  of  digestion
presupposes  the  inducing  of  particular  conditions,  without
which  it  deranges  the  org-anism ;  here  then  wre  have  again
a  continual  occupation  of  the  vis  medicatrix  in  warding  off
disturbances,  or,  if  it  be  preferred,  of  the  formative  acti-
vity in  the  assimilation  of  material.

We  have  seen  that  in  every  injury  the  operation  of  the
vis  medicatrix  or  regeneration  is  only  possible  through  re-
formation, by  the  instrumentality  of  inflammation,  which
furnishes  neoplasm,  whence  the  parts  to  be  replaced  are
developed.  Just  as  much  does  every  increase  of  one
egestion  upon  the  suppression  of  another  depend  on  a  new
formation,  namely,  the  now  increased  secretion  of  egestion.

The  whole  nutrition  of  the  body,  in  which,  after  com-
pleted growth,  the  main  function  of  the  formative  impulse
consists,  is  one  and  the  same  with  new  formation,  and  is
related  to  the  renewal  of  all  the  parts  of  the  body,  as  the
continuous  peelings  of  the  skin  in  man  to  the  periodical
sloughing  of  snakes  and  lizards,  i.e.,  nutrition  is  a  sum  of
infinitely  numerous,  infinitely  little,  new  formations ;  new
formation  merely  nutrition  rapidly  gaining  ground,  and
therefore  more  obtrusive.  Having  thus  already  recog-
nised the  re-formation  in  regeneration  as  a  purposed  effect
of  the  unconscious  soul,  the  like  must  hold  good  of  nutri-
tion, if  we  are  obliged  to  recognise  this  too,  as  we  cannot
help  doing,  to  be  in  conformity  with  a  purpose.  Certainly
the  psychical  influence  is  less  claimed  in  the  gradual
process  of  nutrition  than  in  rapid  new  formations,  because
catalytic  action  is  more  serviceable  ;  but  that  it  can  by
no  means  be  dispensed  with  is  proved  by  the  considerable
disturbances  of  nutrition  in  the  parts  whose  nervous  con-
nections  with the centres of the  ingoing sympathetic


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  197

fibres  have  been  cut  (partly  emaciation,  partly  deteriora-
tion of  the  secretions,  partly  decomposition  of  the  blood,
in  the  more  sensitive  parts,  as  the  eyes :  inflammation
and  destruction).  The  capillary  blood-vessels,  from  which
by  endosmosis  the  structures  derive  their  nutritive  fluid,
may  be  ever  so  finely  distributed,  yet  for  every  vessel
there  remains  a  relatively  large  area,  in  which  the  parts
lying  farthest  from  the  vessel  will  also  have  to  be  cared
for,  also  muscles,  sinews,  bones,  and  nerve-substance  must
frequently  be  equally  provided  for  by  the  same  vessel ;
every  particle  must  thus  extract  from  the  nutritive  fluid
that  which  suits  it.  But  now  if  we  know  that,  accord-
ing to  chemical  laws,  both  the  structures  to  be  nourished
as  well  as  the  nutritive  fluid  have  constantly  a  tendency
to  decomposition,  which  they  obey  as  soon  as,  through
death,  or  even  before,  after  great  bodily  weakness,
the  power  of  the  unconscious  soul  over  it  has  ceased,
we  cannot  possibly  believe  that  this  assimilation  in  all
its  fine  local  gradations,  such  as  is  necessary  for  the
continuance  of  the  organism,  can  go  on  without  any
psychical  influence.  This  chemical  stability  of  the  organic
tissues  is  quite  analogous  to  the  constant  mechanical
tension  in  tonus;  both  are  only  explicable  by  an  infinite
summation  of  small  impulses  antagonistic  to  natural  de-
composition and  natural  relaxation,  and  these  impulses
can  only  issue  from  the  will.  There  thus  follows  from
a  priori  considerations  what  is  con  firmed  by  empirical
observation  on  division  of  nerves.

Hut  now  suppose  these  two  reasons,  together  with
the  identity  of  renovation  and  nutrition,  were  not  found
sufficiently  to  the  point  to  prove  the  psychical  influence
in  ordinary  nutrition,  and  one  assumed  that  the  catalytic
action  of  the  existing  tissues  were  a  sufficient  cau.-e,  still
the:  question  would  arise,  Whence  conies  this  constitution
of  the  cause  ?  Then  one  would  be  obliged  to  say.  These
structures  have  now  this  constitution  because  they  for-
merly had  it. Thus,  with  further  questioning,  a  point  would


1 98  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

be  arrived  at  when  the  nature  of  the  tissues  would  have
become  different,  and  this  change  would  first  have  to  be
explained  ;  for  this  change  is  the  reason  why  the  structures
were  from  that  moment  adapted  to  a  purpose,  and  so  re-
mained in  virtue  of  their  constitution ;  and  since  no  mate-
rialistic explanation  exists  for  this  adaptation,  it  must  be
ascribed  to  the  purposive  activity  of  unconscious  will.
But  then  this  also  becomes  the  cause  of  the  maintenance
of  the  adjustment,  and  the  necessity  of  having  recourse  to
a  psychical  influence  is  not  removed,  but  only  postponed.
Setting  aside  that  at  every  moment  of  life  we  stand  at
such  a  point  of  change,  we  might  go  back  still  farther,  for
the  present  constitution  of  the  tissues  is  not  conditioned
merely  by  the  change  itself,  but  also  by  their  consti-
tution before  the  change.  If  we  regressively  follow  this
series,  we  arrive  at  the  first  origin  of  the  structure,  which
requires  an  explanation,  whilst  in  the  course  of  develop-
ment we  must  intercalate  at  least  as  many  psychical  in-
fluences as  there  have  been  fresh  adjustments.  Now,  as
no  structure  of  the  organism  is  superfluous,  but  each  has
a  definite  purpose,  which  again  serves  as  means  to  the
preservation  of  the  individual  or  the  race,  one  will  also
see  at  this  very  commencement  a  purposive  action  of  the
will.  And,  as  certainly  as  the  first  origin  and  the  more
considerable  changes  are  important  aids  to  the  persistence
and  the  nutrition  of  a  structure,  and  facilitate  the  work  of
the  will — nay,  first  makes  it  possible  for  the  whole  extent
of  the  organism — so  certainly  are  they  not  the  sole  condi-
tions of  nutrition,  but  the  omnipresent  unconscious  will
in  the  organism,  together  with  the  unconscious  intelligence,
is  concerned  in  the  smallest  chemical  or  physical  process
simply  because  this  organism  is  threatened  in  the  smallest
untoward  event,  if  only  by  the  tendency  to  chemical  de-
composition, and  because  in  presence  of  these  ceaseless
material  disturbances  nothing  else  can  maintain  the  equi-
librium but  a  psychical  influence.  On  the  other  hand,
however,  life  is  only  possible  when  this  psychical  influence


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  199

is  reduced,  for  the  ordinary  processes,  to  a  minimum,  and
the  rest  of  the  work  is  performed  by  means  of  appropri-
ate mechanisms.  These  appropriate  mechanisms  we  meet
with  everywhere  in  the  body,  but  so  contrived  that  the
unconscious  will  reserves  to  itself  at  every  moment  the
modification  of  the  purpose  (e.g.,  in  different  stages  of  de-
velopment), as  well  as  the  independent  interference  with
the  wheels  of  the  machine,  and  the  immediate  execution
of  a  task  to  which  the  mechanism  is  unequal.  This  can-
not diminish,  but  only  increase,  our  astonishment  at  the
unconscious  intelligence ;  for  how  much  higher  does  not
the  being  stand,  which  spares  itself  the  recurring  per-
formance of  a  work  by  constructing  an  efficient  machine,
than  one  who  is  always  doing  the  same  thing  over  and
over  again  with  his  own  hands  ?  And  in  the  last  resort
there  always  remains  to  the  soul  that  unavoidable  mini-
mum of  immediate  work,  because  each  moment  brings
other  relations  and  other  disturbances,  and  no  mechanism
can  be  adapted  for  more  than  one  fixed  class  of  relations.
This,  then,  is  the  answer  to  all  objections  which  might
possibly  have  been  urged  in  the  course  of  this  investiga-
tion so  far,  with  the  notorious  appeal  to  purposive  mechan-
isms : — (1.)  The  concept  "  mechanism  "  does  not  exhaust
the  facts,  but  the  performances  of  a  mechanism,  when  it
exists,  always  leave  a  something  over  to  he  immediately
2ierformcd  oy  psychical  action;  and  (2.)  the  fitness  of  the
mechanism  includes  the  fitness  of  its  origin,  and  this  again
always  remains  the  work  of  the  soul.

If,  with  the  consideration  that  every  organic  event  has
two  causes,  a  psychical  and  a  material,  we  recede  farther
in  the  chain  of  material  causes,  we  arrive  in  all  strictness,
whatever  point  of  departure  we  may  choose,  at  the  first
fertilised  ovum  as  the  final  material  cause.  When  the
development  of  the  ovum,  wholly  or  partially,  takes  place
within  the  maternal  organism,  the  material  influences  of
the  latter  also  certainly  co-operate  ;  but  in  the  ova  of  fish
and  amphibia,  which  are  fertilised  outside  the  female  body,


200  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS..

this  is  never  the  case.  In  this  regress  it  is,  however,  to
be  remarked,  that  the  psychical  causes  become  in  general
so  much  the  more  important  than  the  material  the  younger
is  the  individual  (as  we  saw  in  the  strength  of  the  vis
medicatrix).  At  a  more  advanced  age  the  organism  for
the  most  part  lives  on  the  acquisitions  of  better  times ;
before  puberty,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  ceaselessly  occu-
pied either  with  processes  of  simple  growth  or  with  pro-
ducing new  structures,  and  in  the  life  of  the  embryo  the
importance  of  the  psychical  influences  increases  the  earlier
the  period  to  which  vre  recede.

The  just-fertilised  ovum  is  a  cell  (consisting  only  of
the  yolk),  the  wall  of  which  is  represented  by  the  vitelline
membrane,  the  contents  by  the  yolk,  and  its  nucleus  by
the  germinal  vesicle.  Among  the  higher  animals  the
blastodermic  vesicle  within  the  germinal  membrane  (in
man  about  one  two-hundredth  of  a  line)  is  the  part  from
which  alone  the  embryo,  certainly  with  the  assistance  of
the  yolk,  is  developed.  Every  part  of  the  egg  exhibits  a
thoroughly  uniform  structure  (partly  granular  with  im-
bedded droplets  of  fat,  partly  membranous  and  mucous),
and  these  homogeneous  elements- suffice  to  produce,  under
generally  similar  external  circumstances  (brood-heat  in
birds,  temperature  of  air  and  water  with  fishes  and
amphibia),  the  most  diverse  races  with  their  finest  differ-
ences and  their  immense  multitude  of  systems,  organs,
and  tissues;  for  among  the  higher  animals,  the  young,
on  emerging  from  the  c^q,  contain  almost  all  the  tissues
and  differentiations  of  the  adult  animal.  Here  the
influence  of  the  will  is  most  clearly  manifested  in  the
transformation  of  the  elements,  as  one  may  see  in  the
ova  of  fish  a  few  hours  after  (artificial)  fertilisation  the
meridional  and  equatorial  furrowings  of  the  whole  yolk,
with  which  the  development  commences,  and  which  is
followed  by  a  number  of  parallel  interlacings.  During
the  greater  part  of  the  embryonic  life  the  soul  is
occupied  with the establishment of  mechanisms  which


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  BODILY  LIFE.  201

are destined later on to save in great measure the
labour of moulding the material. We can see no
reason,  however,  why  we should not ascribe  the new
formations which here make their appearance, just
as much as the new formations of after-life, to the
purposive activity of the unconscious will; for the
greater  extent  of these  first  formations,  in  comparison
with the already existing body, can in truth estab-
lish  no qualitative distinction, and that the moment
of  the  individualisation  of  the  new  mind,  if  such  a  one
may be assumed at all, is that of fertilisation, can
certainly  not  be  involved  in  doubt. That,  however,  the
mind  in  that  period  affords  no  indication  of  consciousness
can  neither  excite  astonishment,  since  it  has  first  to  form
the  organ  of  consciousness,  nor  can  it  be  anything  but
helpful  to  its  concentration  on  the  unconscious  perfor-
mances, since,  indeed,  even  in  after-life,  the  power  of  the
Unconscious  is  most  forcibly  displayed  when  conscious-
ness is  entirely  suppressed,  as  in  remedial  crises  during
deep  sleep;  and  the  embryo,  indeed,  lies  too  in  deep  sleep.
If we, however, once more consider the question
whether in general an unconscious will can produce
bodily  effects,  we  have  in  preceding  chapters  arrived  at
the  conclusion  that  every  action  of  the  mind  on  the  body,
without  exception,  is  only  possible  by  means  of  an  un-
conscious  will ; that  such an unconscious will can be
called  forth  partly  by  means  of  a  conscious  will,  partly,
also,  through the conscious idea  of the effect without
conscious  will,  even  in  opposition  to  the  conscious  will.
Why  should  it  not,  then,  also  be  called  forth  through  the
unconscious  idea  of  the  effect  with  which  here,  even  to
demonstration,  the  unconscious  will  of  the  effect  is  bound
up,  because  the  effect  is  end  ? F>ut,  lastly,  that  the  mind,
iu  the  first  period  of  embryonic  life,  must  work  without
nerves,  can  certainly  not  militate  against  our  \'v\v.  since,
indeed,  not  only  in  nerveless  animals  do  we  see  all  psy-
chical effects  follow  without  nerves,  but  even  in  the  case  of


202  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

man  have  cited  above  sufficient  examples  of  the  kind,  and,
moreover,  the  embryo  in  the  first  period  has  just  that
semifluid  structure  of  highly  organised  matter,  which  forms
an  excellent  substitute  for  nerve-tissue  proper.

If  now,  in  the  first  place,  we  perceive  materialistic
attempts  at  explanation  to  be  insufficient ;  if,  in  the  second
place,  a  predestined  fitness  of  development  appears  im-
possible, considering  that  any  set  of  circumstances  occurs
only  once  in  a  lifetime,  and  yet  each  set  of  circumstances
requires  a  novel  reaction,  and  calls  forth  just  that  which
is  demanded ;  if,  thirdly,  the  only  remaining  mode  of
explanation,  that  this  unconscious  psychical  activity  itself
appropriately  forms  and  maintains  its  body,  has  not  only
nothing  to  be  said  against  it,  but  has  all  possible  analogies
from  the  most  different  departments  of  physiology  and  of
animal  life  in  its  favour,  the  verification  of  individual
providence  and  plastic  energy  appears  to  be  as  scienti-
fically certain  as  is  possible  in  inferences  from  effect  to
cause.  (Comp.  further,  Ges.  philos.  Abhandlungen,  No.  vi.,
"  Ueber  die  Lebenskraft.")

I  close  then  this  section  with  the  fine  words  of  Scho-
penhauer :  "  Thus  even  empirically  every  being  stands
before  itself  as  its  own  handiwork ;  but  the  language  of
Nature  is  not  understood,  because  it  is  too  simple."


B.

THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND.

"The  key  to  the  knowledge  of  the  essence  of  the  conscious  life  of
the  soul  is  to  be  found  in  the  region  of  Unconsciousness." — C.  G.
Cards.


( =o5 )


T.

INSTINCT IN THE HUMAN MIND.

Impossible  as  it  is  to  draw  a  strict  line  of  demarcation
between  body  and  mind,  no  less  impossible  is  it  to  dis-
cuss apart  the  instincts  relating  to  our  physical  and  to  our
psychical  needs.  Thus  we  have  already  in  the  preceding
section  alluded  to  several  instincts  of  the  human  mind,
as  the  capricious  appetites  of  the  sick  or  the  pregnant,
and  the  curative  instincts  of  children  or  somnambules.
A  few  others  border  on  the  bodily  instincts,  e.g.,  the  fear
of  falling  on  the  part  of  young  animals  and  children,  who,
e.g.,  are  quiet  when  carried  upstairs,  but  become  restless
when  carried  downstairs ;  the  greater  caution  and  circum-
spection of  the  movements  of  pregnant  horses  and  women  ;
the  instinct  of  mothers  to  place  the  new-born  at  the
breast,  of  children  to  suck;  the  peculiar  talent  of  chil-
dren to  distinguish  genuine  from  feigned  friendship ;  the
instinctive  shyness  in  the  presence  of  certain  strangers
which  is  wont  to  be  manifested  especially  by  pure,  in-
experienced girls;  the  good  and  bad  presentiments,  with
their  great  motive  power  to  commit  and  omit  actions,
especially  in  the  female  sex,  &c. — We  shall  consider
in  the  present  chapter  those  human  instincts  which
are  more  connected  with  the  bodily  life,  and  to  which,
therefore,  the  name  instinct  is  willingly  accorded,  whereas
an  empty  sentiment  of  human  dignity  dictates  the  refusal
of  the  term  to  all  manifestations  of  the  unconscious  more
remote  from  the  bodily  life,  but  otherwise  perfectly  analo-
gous, on  account  of  its  animal  associations.


206  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

In  the  first  place,  we  have  to  consider  some  instincts  of
aversion,  i.e.,  such  as  do  not  compel  to  actions,  but  to
omissions,  or  merely  to  those  actions  whereby  the  object
of  aversion  is  got  rid  of  or  avoided.  The  most  important
is  the  fear  of  death ;  this  is  only  a  particular  form  of  the
instinct  of  self-preservation,  other  forms  of  which  we
already  know  as  the  vis  medicatrix^lastic  energy,  migratory
impulse,  reflex  protective  movements,  &c.  It  is  not  the
fear  of  the  last  judgment  or  other  metaphysical  hypotheses,
not  Hamlet's  doubt  of  what  will  come  hereafter,  not
Egmont's  simple  delight  in  being  and  doing,  which  re-
strains the  hand  of  the  suicide,  but  instinct  does  it  with
its  mysterious  shudder,  with  its  wild  heart-beats  chasing
the  blood  madly  through  the  veins.

A  second  instinct  of  repulsion  is  Shame ;  it  has  such
exclusive  reference  to  the  generative  region  that  these
bodily  parts  are  even  named  after  it.  It  appertains  in  an
especial  degree  to  the  female  sex,  and  excites  in  them  a
characteristic  defensive  attitude,  and  is  determinative  of
the  whole  life  of  man,  of  savage  and  civilised  alike.  The
milder  form  of  heat  due  to  non-periodicity 1  and  shame
are  the  two  foundations  which  allow  of  the  elevation
of  the  sexual  relations  of  man  into  a  higher  sphere  than
that  of  the  animals.  Shame  is  something  so  little  due  to
consciousness  that  we  already  find  it  among  savage  tribes ;
certainly  in  their  case  limited  to  the  main  point,  whereas
civilisation  draws  within  its  sphere  whatever  has  any
sort  of  connection  with  sexual  relations.

An  analogous  instinct  of  aversion  is  Disgust.  It  relates
to  food  as  shame  to  sex,  and  serves  to  put  us  on  our  guard
against  those  food-ingredients  which  are  easily  mixed
with  dirt  and  impurity,  i.e.,  organic  excretions  and  organic
matter  in  a  state  of  semi-decomposition. Its  senses  are

1  Beaumarchais  rated  this  factor  statement  of  specific difference, at

so highly that he jestingly said:  all  events,  than  "  thought ;"  for  the

Boir  sans  soif,  et  faire  Vamour en  rest,  not  quite  true,  since  the  anthro-

tmit temps, e'est ce qui distingue  poid  apes  have  the  non-periodicity

Vhommc  dc  la  lite. A  much  better  of  heat  in  common  with  man.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 207

taste  and  smell,  and  it  is  scarcely  correct  when  Lessing
regards  it  as  possible  for  other  senses.  At  the  same  time
it  is  of  course  not  necessary  that  the  idea  of  eating  the
things  for  which  one  feels  disgust  should  have  been  already
entertained ;  one  is  often  previously  so  disgusted  as  to
prevent  the  thought  of  eating  arising.  There  is,  moreover,
another  much  deeper  disgust  which  has  reference  to  purity
of  the  skin,  in  order  that  perspiration  may  not  be  sup-
pressed through  the  stopping-up  of  the  pores.  Here,  at  any
rate,  the  sense  of  sight  may  be  directly  concerned. — Man
can  by  habit  more  or  less  repress  these,  as  all  other
instincts,  just  because  with  him  consciousness  has  become
a  power  which,  in  most  things,  except  those  of  supreme
importance,  is  able  to  oppose  the  Unconscious,  and  habitual
action  truly  belongs  indeed  also  to  the  sphere  of  conscious-
ness. ]>ut  the  Unconscious  can  also  be  repressed  when
that  which  would  have  been  done  instinctively  without  con-
sciousness and  habit  is  done  with  consciousness  and  from
habit;  then  the  repugnance  which  one  feels  towards  the
contrary  is  rather  a  repugnance  to  the  unusual  than  an
instinctive  repulsion.

Look  at  a  young  girl  and  boy  :  the  one  neat  and  smart,
elegant  and  mannerly,  graceful  as  a  kitten;  the  other
with  trousers  torn  in  a  recent  shindy,  awkward  and
clumsy  as  a  young  bear.  She  is  fond  of  dress  and  of
showing  herself  off,  tenderly  dandles  her  doll,  and  plays
at  cooking  and  washing  and  ironing;  while  he  builds  a
house  in  the  corner,  plays  robber  and  soldier,  rides  on
every  stall',  sees  a  sabre  or  a  gun  in  every  stick,  and  is
especially  pleased  with  the  manifestation  of  his  own
energy,  which  of  course  consists,  for  the  most  part,  in
useless  destruction.  What  a  delightful  anticipation  of
the  future  vocation,  which  is  often  to  he  observed  in  the
nmst  charming  details!  If  much  of  it  is  imitation  of
adults,  still  a  presaging  instinct  is  unmistakable,  which
guides  children,  even  in  their  sports,  to  the  exercises  which
they  will  require  in  the  future,  and  make-  them  capable


2o8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  trains  them  in  advance,  just  as  among  youug  animals
we  see  the  sportive  instinct  always  leading  them  to
activities  which  they  will  require  hereafter  in  their  inde-
pendent life  (think  of  the  kitten  and  the  reel).  In  the
play-instinct  the  will  often  procures  itself  resistances
which  it  has  to  overcome.  This  paradox  is  likewise  only
comprehensible  if  the  play-impulse  is  instinctive,  and  un-
consciously subservient  to  the  aims  of  the  future  life.  If
the  play-impulse  were  only  imitative,  boys  and  girls  would
imitate  the  same  things,  since  they  do  not  understand  the
distinction  of  sex,  and  in  strictness  do  not  even  possess  it.
How  unique  is  the  rage  for  dancing,  the  whimsicalness,
love  of  dress,  grace,  one  might  almost  say  childish  coquetry,
in  little  girls,  which  points  to  their  future  destiny  of  con-
quering men,  all  of  which  is  utterly  foreign  to  boys  with
healthy  minds !  How  characteristic  is  the  indefatigable
assiduity  with  which  they  tend,  dress,  and  dandle  their
dolls ;  how  in  harmony  is  it  with  the  tenderness  with
which  grown-up  girls  kiss  and  caress  all  strange  children
in  arms,  which  young  men  commonly  find  more  repulsive
than  young  monkeys  !

How  deeply  such  instincts  as  purity,  love  of  dress,
modesty  are  rooted  in  the  Unconscious  may  be  particu-
larly observed  in  the  blind  who  are  at  the  same  time
deaf  and  dumb.  Let  any  one  who  has  never  reflected  on
this  condition  try  to  form  a  clear  idea  of  it,  and  of  the
poverty  of  the  means  of  communication  with  the  outer
world  which  are  at  the  command  of  such  an  unfortunate.
Laura  Bridgman,  in  the  Blind  Institution  at  Boston,  who
in  her  second  year  had  lost  all  her  senses  save  touch,  was
clean  and  orderly  and  very  fond  of  dress.  If  she  had  on
a  new  article  of  clothing,  she  wished  to  go  out  to  be  seen
and  observed.  She  was  often  in  raptures  over  the  brace-
lets, brooches,  and  other  ornaments  of  the  ladies  who
visited  her.  Julia  Brace  (who  had  become  blind  and
deaf  in  her  fifth  year)  was  just  the  same.  She  examined
the  sty'e  of  hair  of  the  ladies  who  paid  her  visits,  in  order


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 209

that  she  might  imitate  it.  The  same  passion  for  dress
was  found  in  all  other  similarly  unfortunate  girls,  so  that
it  became  a  chief  means  of  reward  and  punishment.  Lucy
Reed  always  wore  a  silk  kerchief  over  her  face,  probably
because  she  thought  her  face  was  disfigured,  and  when  she
entered  an  institution,  was  only  with  the  greatest  trouble
dissuaded  from  wearing  it.  She  recoiled  from  the  touch
of  a  person  of  the  male  sex,  and  would  not  permit  caresses
of  any  kind  from  the  same,  although  she  gladly  received
and  responded  to  those  of  women,  even  when  strangers.
Laura  Bridgman  showed  in  this  respect  a  still  greater
delicacy  of  feeling,  without  any  one  being  able  to  guess
how  she  attained  to  a  notion  of  sexual  relations,  since
usually  no  man  ever  approached  her  except  the  director
of  the  institution,  Dr.  Howe.  She  had  heard  much  of
Oliver  Caswell,  likewise  blind,  deaf,  and  dumb,  as  his
arrival  in  the  institution  was  expected,  and  was  very
curious  about  her  companion  in  suffering.  When  he
arrived,  she  kissed  him;  but  then  Hew  back  like  light-
ning, as  if  terrified  at  having  done  something  improper.
She  repaired  the  smallest  disorder  in  her  dress,  like  a  girl
very  strictly  educated  in  rules  of  decorum.  Nay,  she  even
transferred  her  modesty  to  lifeless  objects.  Thus,  e.g.,
when  one  day  she  wanted  to  put  her  doll  to  bed,  she  pre-
viously went  about  the  room  to  discover  if  any  one  was
present;  and  when  she  found  Dr.  Howe,  she  turned  back
laughing,  ami  only  after  he  had  departed  did  she  undress
her  doll,  without  being  shy  before  her  instructress. —
To  teach  a  blind,  deaf,  and  dumb  child  the  laws  and  con-
ceptions of  decency  would  be  almost  impossible  if  instinct
did  not  correctly  point  them  out,  and  opportunity  alone
or  the  slightest  hint  did  not  suilice  for  the  realisation  in
conduct  of  this  immediate  unconscious  intuition.  That
this  feeling  of  modesty  really  arises  from  the  depths  of
the  psychical  nature,  is  proved  by  the  concurrence  of  its
higher  development  with  the  attainment  of  pubertv.
Thus,  e.g.,  in  the  case  of  a  blind  deaf  mule  in  11  'therhiiho

VOL. I.  O


2io  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

workhouse,  who  had  previously  lived  a  completely  animal
life,  an  entire  change  took  place  in  her  seventeenth  year :
she  became  all  at  once  just  as  attentive  to  dress  and
decency  as  other  girls  of  her  age.

Sympathy  or  fellow-feeling  is  a  reflex  mental  instinct.
As  feelings  are  divisible  into  pleasure  and  displeasure  or
into  joy  and  sorrow,  so  fellow-feeling  into  sympathetic  re-
joicing and  compassion.  Jean  Paul  says,  "For  sympathy
in  sorrow  a  man  is  sufficient,  but  sympathy  in  joy  requires
an  angel ; "  for  the  reason  that  sympathy  in  joy  can  only
arise  if  it  is  not  hindered  by  another  feeling,  envy.  This
is,  however,  the  case  more  or  less  with  all  men,  whereas
compassion  is  less  obstructed,  since  pleasure  at  the  misfor-
tune of  others  is  usually  very  slight  in  most  cases,  if  hate
and  vindictiveness  do  not  give  birth  to  it.  Thus  it  comes
to  pass  that  sympathy  in  joy  is  almost  insignificant,  whilst
compassion  has  the  greatest  importance.  Now  compassion
arises  by  way  of  reflection  through  the  sensuous  percep-
tion of  another's  suffering.  The  convulsive  motions  and
writhings  of  pain,  the  looks  and  gestures  of  grief  and
distress,  the  tears  of  sorrow,  the  groaning  and  moaning,
the  whimpering  and  rattling  in  the  throat,  are  material
signs  which  are  immediately  comprehensible  to  a  being  of
like  nature  through  an  unconscious  intelligence  ;  they  do
not,  however,  act  merely  on  the  intellect,  but  also  on  the
heart,  and  reflectorially  call  forth  similar  pains.  Cheer-
fulness and  sadness  in  a  similar  way  infect  other  people
like  convulsions.  "When  the  sense-perception  only  appre-
hends the  signs  of  pain  in  general,  the  compassion  is  only
general,  a  shudder,  or  a  quiet  woe,  or  a  thrilling  horror,
according  to  the  intensity  and  duration  of  the  observed
pain  ;  but  if  this  is  specially  known,  reflex  action  reveals
the  same  kind  of  pain  in  the  compassion,  as  soon  as  the
latter  has  surmounted  the  lowest  stage  of  general  lamen-
tation. That  the  degree  of  compassion  is  dependent  on
the  momentary  receptivity  of  the  mind  for  reflex  actions,
and  also  on  the decree  of  interest  which  is otherwise


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 211

entertained  for  the  sufferer,  is  undoubted ;  it  is,  neverthe-
less, purely  reflex  action,  as  is  strictly  proved  by  this,  that
compassion  is,  cccteris  paribus,  in  direct  ratio  to  the  clear-
ness "with  which  the  senses  perceive  the  signs  of  suffering.
For  example,  when  we  read  of  a  battle  where  ten  thousand
dead  and  wounded  are  counted  on  either  side,  we  are
scarcely  at  all  affected,  only  when  the  dead  and  wounded
are  summoned  before  our  imagination  does  our  compas-
sion stir;  but  when  we  ourselves  go  about  among  the
pools  of  blood,  the  corpses  and  the  limbs,  and  the  groan-
ing and  dying  men,  then  indeed  a  deep  horror  overcomes
us.  What  value  the  instinct  of  compassion  has  for  man,
who  only  through  mutual  help  truly  becomes  man,  is  tole-
rably plain.  Fellow-feeling  is  the  metaphysical  bond
which  overleaps  the  limit  of  individuality  on  the  side  of
feeling  ;  it  is  the  most  significant  impulse  for  the  begetting
of  such  actions  as  consciousness  declares  to  be  morally
good  or  beautiful,  more  than  merely  dutiful.  It  mainly
imparts  reality  to  that  province  of  ethics  which  is  usually
termed  "  the  duties  of  affection,"  the  reality  from  which
the  general  notion  is  subsequently  abstracted.

As  sympathy  is  the  chief  instinct  for  the  2)roduction
of  benevolent  actions,  whose  effects  extend  beyond  the
sphere  of  egoism,  so  the  instinct  of  Gratitude  appears  in
the  light  of  a  multiplier  of  the  same.  Although  gratitude
sometimes  leads  us  to  injure  a  third  person,  yet  the  case  is
rare,  and  the  expediency  of  this  instinct  upon  the  whole
is  not  to  lie  misapprehended  if  it  be  also  supplemented,
nay,  even  superseded,  in  a  perfect  system  ot"  ethics.
As  the  impulse  of  retaliation  in  respect  of  benefits  re-
ceived becomes  a  multiplier  of  morally  beautiful  actions,
so  in  respect  of  injuries  does  it  become,  in  the  charac-
ter of  the  instinct  of  revenge',  the  original  source  of
the  sentiment  of  justice.  For  as  long  as  the  commu-
nity has  not  taken  upon  itself  to  satisfy  the  passion
of  revenge,  self-vindication  is  rightly  looked  111  on  as
something holy, as a primitive institution of justice  ;


212  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  this  it  is  which  must  gradually  form,  enhance,  and
clarify  the  feeling  of  right,  until  such  conception  of
right  gains  a  solid  foundation  in  the  national  habits,
when  the  duty  of  requital  may  be  transferred  to  the
community  at  large.  It  is  by  no  means  intended  by
this  to  assert  that  sympathy  and  the  retaliatory  impulse
are  the  moments  from  which  ethics  and  jurisprudence
must  be  theoretically  derived  and  established,  which,  on
the  contrary,  I  should  not  grant ;  it  is  only  asserted  that
they  are  in  fact  practically  the  roots  from  which  those
feelings  and  actions  have  sprung,  whence  mankind  have
gained,  through  abstraction,  the  conceptions  of  the  morally
beautiful  and  of  law.

The  next  human  instinct  of  importance  is  Maternal
Love.  For  the  sake  of  comparison,  let  us  glance  back
once  more  at  the  animal  kingdom. — Most  of  the  lower
animals  have  no  need  to  trouble  themselves  about  their
young  ones,  because  these  emerge  from  the  ovum  suffi-
ciently developed ;  or  because,  by  means  of  the  various
instincts  which  have  been  already  mentioned,  they  have,
directly  or  indirectly,  brought  their  eggs  to  those  places
where  the  creatures  when  hatched  find  the  conditions  of
their  further  development  until  the  age  of  independence,
or  are  still  provided  by  the  mother  with  additional  means
of  subsistence.  The  place  which  yields  the  necessary
conditions  of  development  is  with  the  wolf-spider  a  spun
egg-bag,  which  it  fastens  to  itself  by  means  of  a  web ;  for
the  Monoculus,  a  part  of  the  oviduct  turned  inside  out,
which  protrudes  as  ovisac;  with  birds,  the  nest,  together
with  the  brood-heat  of  the  maternal  body ;  in  some  fishes
and  amphibia,  the  body  of  the  female  itself,  just  as  in  all
mammals,  but  with  this  great  difference,  that  in  the  latter
an  organic  connection  of  mother  and  foetus  persists  till
the  time  of  birth  (the  marsupial  mammals  excepted).
It  is  evident  that  here  again  the  same  thing  is  achieved  in
one  case  by  instinct  and  maternal  foresight  as  is  effected
in  another  case bv  organic  formative  activity, i.e., the


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 213

instinctive  maternal  care  for  the  development  of  the
young  till  independence  is  only  in  form,  not  in  essence,
different  from  the  procreation  and  formation  of  the  foetus.

Two  pervading  laws  here  display  themselves ;  the  first
is,  that  the  maternal  instinct  cares  for  the  young  animal
as  long  as  it  is  unable  to  care  for  itself ;  the  second,  that
this  time  of  nonage  or  childhood  in  general  lasts  the
longer  the  higher  the  class  stands  in  the  animal  scale.
This  difference  is,  on  the  one  hand,  based  on  the  simpler
conditions  of  the  nutrition  of  the  lower  animals  (especially
aquatic  animals) ;  on  the  other  hand,  on  the  metamor-
phoses when  the  earliest  life-period  is  passed  in  quite
another  form  and  under  other  nutritive  conditions  (mostly
in  the  form  of  a  lower  stage).  There  is  still,  however,  un-
doubtedly an  unexplained  remainder,  which  is  especially
evident  if  we  confine  our  attention  to  the  mammalia,  and
compare,  e.g.,  the  duration  of  the  infancy  of  a  rabbit,  a
cat,  and  a  horse.  From  these  first  two  laws  the  following
conclusion  may  be  drawn  :  The  instinct  of  maternal  love
gains  in  general  greater  significance  and  range  the  higher
we  ascend  in  the  animal  scale,  a  scale  graduated,  how-
ever, not  zoologically  but  psychologically.

While  we  see  the  majority  of  fishes  and  amphibia
persist  in  dead  indifference  to  their  young,  some  insects
exhibit  a  higher  maternal  love  in  conformity  with  their
higher  mental  activity.  Only  see  how  tenderly  ants  and
bees  nourish,  feed,  and  protect  their  eggs,  nay,  even  their
still  imperfectly  developed  larva';  how  .some  spiders  carry
their  young  about  and  carefully  feed  them  (as  the  hen
her  chickens).  Among  birds,  the  maternal  care  attains  a
high  degree;  certain  classes  of  birds,  c.y.,  some  birds  of
prey  and  birds  of  song,  decidedly  surpassing  in  mind  the
general  run  of  mammals.  The  self-saeriiicing  courage
with  which  even  the  smallest  birds  defend  their  young
against  every  enemy;  the  self-renunciation  with  which
they  bring  them  food  whilst  they  themselves  often  starve
and  Lirow  lean:  the  readiness  to  sacrili  ■■  theuiM  Ives  with


214  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

which  they  bare  their  breast  and  body  of  feathers  to  make
a  warm  couch  for  their  naked  little  ones ;  the  patience  with
which  they  afterwards  instruct  them  in  flying,  in  catching
insects,  and  other  dexterities  which  they  need  for  inde-
pendent life;  the  impatience  to  see  the  young  just  as  clever
as  themselves, — all  these  are  the  clearest  proofs  of  a  deeply
rooted  impulse ;  whilst  the  complete  extinction  of  this
tender  fondness  when  the  young  become  independent,
nay,  the  conversion  of  the  same  into  hostility,  shows  that
not  custom  or  conscious  choice,  but  an  unconscious  neces-
sity is  the  source  of  this  impulse.

The  point  of  instruction  in  particular  has  been  hitherto
far  too  much  overlooked,  for  the  animals  which  stand
mentally  higher  learn,  in  fact,  much  more  through  the
instruction  of  their  parents  than  one  thinks,  since  Nature
never  makes  use  of  double  means  to  an  end,  and  refuses  instinct
where  it  has  granted  the  means  for  conscious  'performance  or
acquisition.  Penguins  entice  their  young,  when  they  will
not  follow  them  into  the  water,  to  a  rocky  prominence,
and  then  push  them  down.  Eagles  and  falcons  guide
their  offspring  to  higher  and  higher  flights,  to  flight  in
circles  and  to  evolutions,  as  well  as  to  swoop  down  on
their  prey,  for  the  latter  purpose  flying  over  them  and
dropping  dead,  ofttimes  even  small  living  animals,  which
the  young  ones  are  only  allowed  to  devour  if  they  have
themselves  caught  them.  But  as  surely  as  the  method
of  this  instruction  is  a  conscious  mental  product  of  these
animals,  so  surely  is  the  impulse  to  instruct  their  young
in  the  main  instinct. — As  in  higher  mammals  infancy  lasts
longer,  so  not  merely  is  the  care  of  the  mother,  but  also
her  instruction  more  comprehensive.  Let  any  one  observe
how  a  cat  educates  its  young  ones,  flattering  and  reward-
ing, putting  them  right  and  punishing,  whether  it  is  not
the  faithful  image  of  human  education  by  uncultivated
mothers ;  a  parallel  confirmed  even  in  the  slightest  traits,
e.g.,  in  the  enjoyment  which  the  mother  visibly  exhibits
in  the  amusingly  knowing  consciousness  of  her  superiority.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 215

We  partially  see  already  in  birds  a  chemical  prepara-
tion of  the  food  in  the  maternal  crop.  This  instinct
is  fully  developed  in  the  case  of  the  mammal,  whose
lacteal  glands  begin  their  secretion  long  before  birth,
a  secretion  which  is  increased  by  the  sight  of  the
young,  diminished  by  their  absence.  That  which  among
birds  is  perceivable  only  in  a  very  rudimentary  form,
but  among  mammals  is  exhibited  in  the  inheritance  of
special  maternal  qualities  or  peculiarities  of  character,  in
the  fright  of  the  pregnant  and  their  capricious  appetites,
to  wit,  the  immediate  unconscious  reciprocity  between
the  soul  of  the  mother  and  the  child,  the  possession  of  the
infant's  soul  by  the  mother,  this  appears  continued  in  a
modified  way  after  birth,  and  only  gradually  disappears.
Thus  the  peculiar  phenomenon  of  contagious  visions  no-
where occurs  more  easily  than  between  the  mother  and
her  nursling,  and  both  when  pregnant  and  even  after  de-
livery, mothers,  whose  nature  has  not  been  spoilt  by  culture,
possess  a  marvellous  divination  of  their  children's  needs.
Just  as  the  wasp,  which  opens  the  hole  to  convey  new  food
to  its  lame  when  the  original  stock  has  been  consumed,  so
the  mother  guesses  when  her  child  requires  food,  and
awakes  when  the  child  is  in  want,  whereas  no  noise  can  dis-
turb the  sleep  of  fatigue.  But,  as  said  before,  this  direct
communication  between  the  mind  of  mother  and  of  child
pretty  quickly  disappears;  only  sometimes  under  extra-
ordinary circumstances,  e.g.,  in  dangerous  illnesses  of  the
child,  may  it  be  seen  to  revive.

The  question  now  is,  whether  in  mankind  maternal  love
is  really  anything  different  from  what  it  is  among  the
brutes  ;  whether  anything  else  but  instinct  can  bring  it  to
pass  that  the  most  reasonable  and  most  sedate  women,
who  have  already  enjoyed  the  highest  treasures  of  menial
culture,  are  all  at  once  prepared  to  undergo,  with  real,
heartfelt  joy,  and  for  whole  months,  the  sacrificing  nur-
ture, the  peevishness  and  sordidness,  the  toyin-s  and
silliness,  without  anv  response  whatever  on  the  part  of  the


2i6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

child,  which,  for  the  first  months,  is  nothing  more  than  a
flesh  doll,  slavering  and  befouling  its  swaddling-clothes,
which,  at  the  most,  turns  its  eyes  by  reflex  action  to  the
light  and  instinctively  stretches  out  its  arms  towards  its
parent.  Only  see  how  sucli  a  rational  woman  is  com-
pletely lost  in  admiration  of  her  child,  which  is  only  with
the  greatest  difficulty  to  be  distinguished  from  any  other ;
and  how  she  who,  in  former  days,  had  made  clever  criti-
cisms on  Sophocles  and  Shakespeare,  now  will  be  beside
herself  with  joy  because  the  little  one  so  soon  croaks  A.
And  with  all  this  the  woman  does  not,  as  the  man  might,
undergo  all  these  inconveniences  in  hope  of  what  the  child
may  hereafter  become,  but  she  is  simply  absorbed  in  the
present  joy  and  maternal  delight.  If  that  is  not  instinct,
then  I  don't  know  what  instinct  is.  Let  any  one  ask  him-
self whether  a  poor  nursery-maid  would  endure  all  that
drudgery  and  fatigue  for  the  sake  of  a  daily  wage  of  a
couple  of  pence  if  her  instinct  did  not  already  point  to
this  occupation.

That  the  maternal  care  lasts  so  long  in  the  case  of  the
human  child,  is  merely  a  special  case  of  the  above-men-
tioned law,  and  lies  in  this,  that  children  of  four  years  old
would  sooner  be  run  over  in  the  street  than  get  out  of  the
way,  whilst  a  young  cat  gets  out  of  the  way  as  soon  as  it
can  see.  "What  is  more  natural  than  that  the  protecting
instinct  of  the  mother  should  serve  as  a  providence  to  the
child,  and  that  the  little  one  should  instinctively  cling  to
its  mother's  gown  ?  All  animals  feed,  nurse,  and  look
after  their  young  until  they  can  feed  themselves,  and
is  it  likely  man,  with  his  lesser  fertility,  should  make  an
exception  to  this  general  law  ?  And  when  can  a  child
maintain  itself?  Certainly  not  until  puberty.  Accord-
ingly, the  instinctive  parental  care  must  at  least  last  till
then.  Animals  teach  their  young  the  dexterities  which  they
need  in  order  to  earn  their  living,  and  should  not  man  do
the  same  ?  Among  animals,  too,  the  hind  of  instruction  is
partly  the  result  of  conscious  thought,  but  the  instruc-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 217

tion  itself  is  natural  impulse;  and  can  it  be  otherwise
among  men,  because  the  skill  and  knowledge  which  man
needs  for  earning  a  maintenance  are  somewhat  greater
than  amon"  animals  ?  But  it  is  indeed  agreed  that
in  the  whole  animal  kingdom  no  such  psychological
leap  takes  place  as  from  the  highest  animal  to  the
moderately  civilised  man,  consequently  the  things  which
man  must  acquire,  in  proportion  to  what  he  can  instinc-
tively do,  are  more  considerable  than  among  the  highest
animals,  because  his  conscious  mind  is  just  adapted  for
these  performances,  and,  accordingly,  an  instinct  for  them
would  be  a  superfluity.  Nature,  however,  does  nothing  in
vain.  Doubtless,  however,  the  didactic  instinct  is  neces-
sity in  the  parents,  because  without  instruction  the  young
would  perish  before  acquiring  their  powers,  and  the  human
race  owes  to  this  higher  faculty  of  learning  and  this
stronger  didactic  instinct,  in  union  with  a  more  perfect
language,  its  capability  of  progressing  indefinitely,  and  to
this  its  whole  position  and  significance  in  Nature.

Among  animals,  male  and  female  have  the  same  em-
ployments. It  is  otherwise  with  the  civilised  human
being,  where  the  man  in  particular  has  to  earn  for  the
family,  and  is  pre-eminently  fitted  for  the  education
especially  of  the  male  posterity.  Only  here  and  there
among  animals  does  the  male  sex  participate  in  caring
for  posterity.  Thus  the  male  salmon  makes  a  furrow
for  the  eggs  of  the  female,  which  it  fills  up  when  they
are  fertilised.  With  most  monogamous  birds,  the  male
helps  in  building  the  nest,  alternately  broods  or  feeds  the
brooding  female,  defends  the  eggs,  and  takes  part  in  the
nurture,  nourishment,  and  protection  of  the  young.  The
like  also  takes  place  in  the  case  of  man.  It  is  a  common
phenomenon  that  all  little  children  are  extremely  repug-
nant to  men,  and  this  aversion  ceases  at  once  if  they  them-
selves have  any.  It  scarcely  admits  of  doubt  that  tin  re
is  an  instinct  of  paternal  affection,  if  feeble,  which  is  also
1  roved  bv  the  tender  love  of  fathers  to  those  children  who,


2i8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

in  consequence  of  their  miserable  bodily  and  mental  con-
dition, would  under  other  circumstances  have  only  excited
aversion  and  contempt,  or  at  the  most  pity.  But,  never-
theless, I  believe  that,  in  paternal  love,  partly  duty,
decency,  and  good  breeding,  partly  habit,  partly  conscious
friendly  inclination,  furnish  the  main  motives,  and  that
instinct,  on  the  one  hand,  only  manifests  itself  in  early
youth,  on  the  other,  in  moments  of  danger  to  the  child.
Lastly,  it  should  be  observed  that  a  true  paternal  love — I
mean  one  which  exceeds  what  decency  and  good-breeding
demands,  and  which  the  custom  of  the  environment
permits  to  grow — is  a  much  rarer  phenomenon  than  one
is  inclined  to  assume,  though  certainly  not  so  rare,  by  a
long  way,  as  the  reputed  love  of  brothers  and  sisters.
What,  however,  really  exists  of  such  father's  love,  which
does  not  simply  show  itself  in  moments  of  danger,  but
is  always  there,  is  conscious  friendship,  united  with  the
conscious  reflection  that  no  one  will  care  for  his  child
if  he  does  not,  for  the  child  for  whose  existence  he
is  responsible — a  reflection  which  alone  can  give  strength
for  the  greatest  sacrifices.  From  all  this  it  is  expli-
cable that  human  children,  even  after  their  education
has  ended,  will  not  be  so  strange  to  their  parents  as  the
young  of  animals,  for  through  the  so  much  more  pro-
longed infancy  custom  has  time  to  forge  its  chains,  and
if  there  be  any  spiritual  harmony  between  parents  and
children,  a  certain  degree  of  friendship  will  arise  with
the  aid  of  habit.  But  lastly,  the  instinct  of  parental  love
is  never  entirely  extinguished  in  the  case  of  mankind,
because  the  parents,  as  long  as  they  live,  always  have
either  the  possibility  of  making  sacrifices  for  the  welfare
of  their  children  or  of  helping  them  out  of  danger;  for
whilst  the  brute  has  entirely  to  rely  upon  itself,  man  is
only  in  a  position  to  live  humanly  in  society.  To  which
must  be  added,  in  conclusion,  that  men  in  advanced  age
repeat  the  comedy  in  the  case  of  their  grandchildren,
which  is  not  the  case  with  animals.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 219

If  in  the  man  paternal  love  is  less  of  an  instinct,  so  much
the  more  is  the  impulse  to  establish  a  household,  and  to
fulfil  his  destiny  as  father  of  a  family,  although  he  thereby
ruins  and  makes  unhappy  himself  and  the  girl  whom  he
marries,  whilst  unmarried  they  might  both  have  had  enough
whereon  to  live  comfortably.  1  do  not  speak  here  of  love,
nor  of  the  sexual  impulse  in  general ;  but  where  the  former
is  entirely  wanting,  and  the  latter  would  be  far  from
affording  any  sufficient  motive,  the  impulse  springs  up
in  the  mature  years  of  a  man's  life  to  set  up  a  household ;
and  however  clearly  the  poor  devil  may  see  that  he  will
have  to  starve  in  consequence,  whilst  as  single  he  has  a
fair  competency,  still  the  marriage  comes  off.  It  is  the
same  impulse  which  bids  the  young  four  or  five  year  old
stallion  part  from  the  family  of  his  parents,  along  with
some  of  his  sisters,  to  form  a  family  of  his  own,  and  which
compels  the  bird  to  build  its  nest.  They  know  as  little  as
that  poor  wretch,  that  the  pains  and  deprivations  which  are
instinctively  imposed  upon  them  have  no  other  purpose
than  to  make  possible  the  maintenance  of  the  race.  It  is
this  unsatisfied  impulse  which  makes  old  bachelors  feel  so
uncomfortable  ;  and  though  they  may  see  a  hundred  times
that  they  would  not  be  better  off  in  the  married  state,  all
things  considered,  yet  the  pain  of  this  unsatisfied  instinct
is  not  to  be  reasoned  away,  just  because  it  is  instinct.

The  consideration  of  the  instinct  of  love  should  now
follow.  This  point  is,  however,  so  important,  that  I  shall
•_rive  it  a  chanter  to  itself.


( 220 )


II.

THE UNCONSCIOUS IN SEXUAL LOVE.

The  stamens  of  plants  incline  when  their  pollen  is  ripe,
and  shed  it  on  the  stigma.  Fishes  pour  their  spawn  on  the
eggs  of  their  own  species  when  they  find  them  in  great
numbers ;  the  salmon,  moreover,  makes  a  furrow  for  its
female.  The  male  cuttlefish,  on  coming  in  contact  with
their  females,  throw  off  an  arm  elaborated  into  a  genera-
tive organ,  which,  penetrating  the  latter,  performs  the  re-
productive act.  In  November,  river  crawfish  fasten  under
the  belly  of  the  females  pouches  filled  with  seed,  which
in  the  spring  fertilises  the  mature  eggs.  The  male  spiders
take  up  the  seminal  fluid,  which  trickles  from  their  sexual
organs,  with  an  extremely  complicated  apparatus  con-
tained in  the  last  hollow  joint  of  their  tentacles,  and  by
help  of  the  same  apply  it  to  the  aperture  of  the  female.
The  male  embraces  the  female  frog  and  discharges  its
sperm,  whilst  the  female  simultaneous!}'  deposits  the  ova.
The  singing-bird  applies  the  opening  of  its  spermatic  duct
to  the  female  anus,  and  animals  possessed  of  a  penis  in-
troduce the  same  into  the  female  vagina.  When  fishes
pour  the  spawn,  which  they  feel  impelled  to  discharge,
only  on  the  eggs  of  their  own  kind,  when  species  of
animals  in  which  male  and  female  are  of  very  different
forms  (as,  e.g.,  glow-worms)  still  find  each  other  without
fail  in  order  to  copulate,  and  when  the  male  mammal,
in  obedience  to  an  irresistible  impulse,  always  intro-
duces its  penis  into  the  female  vagina  of  ifs  ov:n  species,
are we to suppose that there are really two different


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IX  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 221

causes  at  work,  or  is  it  not  rather  the  working  of  the
same  Unconscious,  which,  on  the  one  hand,  harmoniously
fashions  the  sexual  parts,  and,  on  the  other,  as  instinct
impels  to  their  right  use — the  same  unconscious  clairvoy-
ance which  in  creation,  as  in  use,  adapts  the  means  to  an
end,  which  does  not  appear  in  consciousness  ?

Would  man,  at  whose  command  are  so  many  means  for
satisfying  the  physical  impulse,  all  equally  efficacious  with
coitus,  be  likely  to  discharge  the  inconvenient,  disgusting,
shameless,  reproductive  function,  did  not  an  instinct  always
urge  him  anew,  often  as  he  has  experienced  that  this
mode  of  satisfaction  yields  him,  in  fact,  no  higher  sensuous
enjoyment  than  any  other  ?  But  many  do  not  attain  even
to  this  much  insight,  because,  in  spite  of  experience,  they
always  measure  future  enjoyment  according  to  the  strength
of  the  impulse,  or  are  so  possessed  by  the  impulse  during
the  act,  that  they  never  attain  the  experience.  It  might,
perhaps,  be  replied,  that  man  frequently  desires  intercourse
although  he  is  aware  of  the  impossibility  of  procreation,
e.g.,  with  the  notoriously  infertile  or  prostitutes,  or  when,  as
in  illicit  connections,  lie  seeks  to  prevent  procreation  ;  but
to  such'  we  reply  that  the  knowledge  or  intention  of  con-
sciousness has  no  direct  influence  on  the  instinct,  since
the  design  of  procreation  lies  outside  consciousness,  and
only  the  willing  of  the  means  to  the  unconscious  end
(as  in  all  instinct?)  appears  in  consciousness.  -That
the  impulse  to  sexual  union  is  an  instinct  which  mani-
fests itself  spontaneously,  and  is  by  no  means  to  be
regarded  as  a  consequence  of  the  experience  that  a
pleasure  is  to  be  expected  from  this  union,  appears
from  the  fact  that  the  sexual  impulse  as  instinct  is  uni-
versal in  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom,  whereas
venereal  organs,  which  link  a  sexual  pleasure  to  the  act
of  copulation,  are  only  to  be  found  at  a  tolerably  advanced
stage  of  the  animal  kingdom.  The  instinct  of  sexual
intercourse  is  then  something  far  earlier  and  more  original
in  the  historv  of  organisation,  since  all  organisms  destitute


222  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  venereal  organs  are  sufficiently  impelled  by  it  alone,
without  the  aid  of  sensibility.  It  is,  however,  toler-
ably plain  why  the  Unconscious  deems  special  vene-
real organs  necessary  in  the  case  of  beings  whose  con-
sciousness is  far  more  highly  developed  ;  for  the  more
consciousness  attains  independent  importance,  the  greater
is  the  risk  of  its  thwarting  the  demands  of  instinct,  the
more  desirable  does  a  bait  become  to  entice  to  the  per-
formance of  instinctive  actions.  A  proof  that  the  repro-
ductive instinct  is  no  mere  result  of  physical  craving  in
the  generative  organs  may  be  found  in  the  above-mentioned
example  of  the  treading  of  birds  (Chap.  iii.  A.  p.  82),
and  finally  in  the  phenomenon  that  the  strength  of  the
sexual  and  physical  urgency  are  to  a  certain  degree  inde-
pendent of  one  another.  For  one  finds  human  beings  with
a  strong  inclination  to  the  other  sex,  whilst  their  physical
impulse  is  so  small  that  it  almost  borders  on  impotence ;
and  conversely  there  are  persons  of  strong  physical  impulse,
and  yet  with  little  affection  for  the  other  sex.  This  is
due  to  the  fact  that  the  physical  impulse  is  dependent
on  the  accidental  physical  organisation  of  the  generative
organs,  but  the  metaphysical  impulse  is  an  instinct  which
wells  up  from  the  Unconscious.  That  does  not,  however,
preclude,  on  the  one  hand,  the  metaphysical  impulse  from
being  more  vehemently  aroused  by  a  stronger  physical
impulse,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  strength  of  the
physical  impulse  while  the  organism  is  being  fashioned
being  conditioned  by  the  strength  of  the  metaphysical
impulse.  Accordingly  the  independence  only  obtains
within  certain  limits.  Phrenology  also  recognises  the
distinctness  of  the  two  impulses,  for  whilst  the  physi-
cal craving  can  manifestly  only  be  sought  for  in  the
organisation  of  the  generative  organs  and  the  irrita-
bility of  the  whole  nervous  system,  phrenology — with
what  right  is  of  no  consequence  —  seeks  to  localise
the  sexual  impulses  in  the  cerebellum  and  circum-
jacent parts.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 223

Having  perceived  the  sexual  impulse  in  general  to  be
of  the  nature  of  instinct,  the  next  question  is,  Whether
the  like  is  true  of  the  individualisation  of  the  same,  or
whether  this  springs  from  the  conditions  of  conscious-
ness ?  Among  animals  we  distinguish  the  following
cases : — Either  the  sexual  impulse  is  merely  general,  the
selection  of  the  individual  is  entirely  left  to  chance,  and
all  intercourse  ceases  with  coition,  as,  e.g.,  among  the
lower  marine  animals,  the  fishes  which  copulate,  frogs,
Sec. ;  or  the  pairs  remain  together  for  the  time  of  one  rut,
as  most  rodents  and  several  of  the  cat  tribe ;  or  till  the
period  of  delivery,  as  bears ;  or  for  some  time  after,  till
the  young  are  more  developed,  as  most  birds,  bats,  wolves,
badgers,  weasels,  moles,  beavers,  hares  ;  or  they  remain
together  for  life  and  form  a  family.  Here,  again,  we  meet
with  polygamy  and  monogamy.  The  former  is  found
among  the  gallinaceous  birds,  the  ruminants,  the  solipeds,
pachyderms,  and  seals  ;  the  latter  among  a  few  Crustacea,
sepiae,  pigeons,  and  parrots,  among  eagles,  storks,  deer,
and  Cetacea.  We  may  reasonably  assume  that  among
monogamous  animals  the  conclusion  of  marriages,  which
are  so  faithfully  kept,  is  not  mere  result  of  chance  ;  but
that  the  motives  of  such  preference  must  be  looked
for  in  the  nature  of  the  couples  themselves.  Do  we
not  often  see,  even  in  animals  of  a  higher  mental  grade,
which  couple  irregularly,  a  sexual  selection  accompanied
by  decided  passion  (e.g.,  in  noble  stallions  and  dogs)  ?
A  widowed  eagle  usually  continues  unmarried  for  the
rest  of  her  life.  It  was  observed  that  a  stork  sought  its
female,  which  it  could  not  take  with  it  on  account  of  a
wound,  every  spring  for  three  years,  but  in  the  follow-
ing years  remained  with  her  even  during  the  winter.  In
monogamic  animals  sometimes  the  one  cannot  live  without
the  other;  thus,  e.g.,  of  a  pair  of  inseparables,  the  second
often  dies  a  few  hours  after  the  first.  The  like  has  some-
times been  observed  of  the  Kamichi,  a  South  .American
marsh- bird,  as  well  as.  of  turtledoves  and  Miiikina  apes.


224  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Woodlarks  can  only  be  kept  in  a  cage  in  pairs.  "We
cannot  suppose  that  that  which  has  overcome  the  powerful
migratory  instinct  in  the  stork,  which  kills  inseparables
in  a  short  space  of  time,  is  anything  else  than  instinct ;
otherwise  it  could  not  so  speedily  and  so  profoundly  affect
the  being's  core.  That  the  various  forms  of  the  sexual
relations  are  instincts  is  also  proved  by  their  unchange-
ableness  within  the  limits  of  the  species.  According  to
the  analogy  of  these  phenomena,  we  must  even  in  the  case
of  man  regard  the  cohabitation  of  spouses  in  marriage  as  an
institution  of  instinct  and  not  of  deliberate  consciousness,
as  also  the  tendency  to  found  a  family,  which  is  closely
connected  therewith.  The  intentional  pursuit  of  illicit
transitory  love  we  must,  on  the  other  hand,  regard  as
something  contrary  to  instinct,  which  is  only  called  forth
by  conscious  egoism.  Here,  however,  I  do  not  understand
by  marriage  the  ecclesiastical  or  civil  ceremony,  but  the
■intention  to  make  the  relation  a  lasting  one.

The  question  arises,  Whether  polygamy  or  monogamy
is  the  form  natural  to  man,  and  how  it  happens  that  the
human  is  the  only  animal  species  where  different  forms
of  sexual  relations  are  to  be  found  co-existing  ?  This
enigma  seems  to  me  resolvable  in  this  way :  that  the
instinct  of  the  man  demands  polygamy,  that  of  the  woman
monogamy  ;  that  therefore,  wherever  the  man  exclusively
rules,  polygamy  exclusively  prevails.  On  the  other  hand,
wherever,  owing  to  higher  cultivation,  man  has  accorded
to  woman  a  worthier  place,  monogamy  lias  become  the
sole  legally  valid  form ;  whilst,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  no
part  of  the  world  is  it  strictly  kept  on  the  part  of  men.
That  monogamy  is  the  form  which  will,  in  fact,  prevail
among  mankind  for  the  longest  period  of  its  existence,
is  indicated  by  the  equal  number  of  the  individuals  of
the  two  sexes.  If  adulterous  longings  are  so  hard  for
man  to  conquer,  this  is  only  an  effect  of  his  polygamous
instinct ;  but  when  a  woman,  who  has  in  her  husband
a  whole  husband,  has  adulterous  desires,  this  is  either


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 225

a  consequence  of  thorough  depravity  or  of  passionate
love.  The  difference  of  the  instinct  in  man  and  woman
may  be  easily  comprehended,  when  one  considers,  that
a  man  is  physically  competent  to  beget  upwards  of  a
hundred  children  in  a  single  year,  but  the  woman  can
only  bear  one  child ;  that  the  man  is  able  under  favourable
circumstances  to  maintain  several  women  and  their  chil-
dren, but  the  wife  can  only  dwell  in  one  man's  household,
and  feels  herself  and  her  children  injured  by  every  rival
introduced  therein ;  lastly,  that  in  case  of  adultery  only
the  husband,  not  the  wife,  runs  the  risk  of  regarding  the
children  of  others  as  his  own,  and  of  having  the  love  for
his  own  children  undermined  through  distrust  of  conjugal
fidelity.

The  sexual  instinct  in  man  having  now  been  illus-
trated both  in  the  case  of  the  race  and  of  the  individual,
there  still  remains  the  question,  why  it  is  concentrated
exclusively  on  this  individual  and  not  on  that  ?  i.e.,  the
question  of  the  determining  grounds  of  this  fastidious
sexual  selection.

That  among  human  beings,  especially  the  more  educated
classes,  the  number  of  desirable  individuals  of  the  other
sex  is  essentially  limited,  lies  in  the  hindrances  which
must  first  be  overcome,  namely,  aversion  on  both  sides,
and  modesty  especially  in  the  female  sex.  The  corporeal
contact  is  so  close,  and  is  so  multiplied  through  the
instinctive  accompanying  actions,  as  kissing,  &c.,  that
the  loathing,  if  it  is  not  already  blunted,  enters  into  its  full
right,  and  opposes  a  powerful  resistance  to  sexual  union
with  each  and  every  individual.  Shame  in  the  female
sex,  and  in  the  male  the  knowledge  of  the  resistance
which  this  shame  will  arouse  in  opposition,  are  almost
still  more  effective  limitations.  lioth,  however,  only
negatively  explain  why  this  and  that  individual  are  ex-
cluded, and  not  positively  why  this  one  is  desired.  The
sense  of  beauty  may  certainly  also  co-operate, —  just  as  one
prefers  to  ride  a  beautiful  horse,  even  apart  from  its  step,
vol.  1.  r


226  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  also  when  nobody  sees  it,  than  an  ugly  one,  although
it  is  by  no  means  obvious  what  beauty  or  ugliness  has  to
do  with  enjoyment  in  coition,  or  generally  with  the  sexual
relations  ;  for  if,  as  e.g.,  in  Shakespeare's  "All's  well  that
ends  well,"  the  wrong  person  is  foisted  upon  a  passionate
lover  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  it  manifestly  does  not
detract  from  his  enjoyment.  Vanity  also,  to  be  able  to
call  a  pretty  woman  one's  wife  before  others,  might  have
something  to  say  in  the  matter,  although  the  subject  of
this  vanity  again  requires  explanation ;  at  bottom  we  do
not  get  a  step  nearer  a  solution,  because,  in  the  first
place,  there  are  many  pretty  people,  and,  secondly,  the
handsomest  are  by  no  means  the  most  attractive  sexually.
A  better  answer  would  be :  The  man  has  to  conquer  femi-
nine modesty  in  order  to  attain  his  end ;  if  lie  has  once
begun  this  work,  which  is  only  gradually  effected,  he  has
with  this  particular  individual  a  lighter  task  before  him
than  with  others,  to  secure  a  victory  for  his  vanity.
But  although  this  may  often  enough  be  the  state  of
the  case,  still  this  answer  is  by  itself  altogether  insuffi-
cient, not  only  because  it  again  leaves  the  first  beginning
entirely  to  chance,  but  also  because,  if  this  were  the  de-
termining circumstance,  the  mistress  already  won  would
be  preferred  to  all  fresh  conquests  from  simple  con-
venience, which  certainly  is  not  true. — We  must  then
before  all  things  maintain,  that  the  physical  impulse  as
such,  or  as  one  says  the  senses,  are  by  themselves
thoroughly  incapable  of  explaining  the  concentration  of
the  impulse  on  a  specific  individual.  The  mere  stimulus
of  sense  never  leads  to  love,  but  only  to  libertinage,  pre-
ferentially to  the  unnatural,  if  it  is  only  strong  enough  and
is  not  restrained  from  such  courses  by  other  impulses.  Even
where  sense  holds  to  natural  courses,  and  seeks  to  attain  the
heightening  of  enjoyment  by  external  artifices,  where,  in
the  ominous  unbelief  in  the  metaphysical  nature  of  love,
it  imagines  itself  able  to  snatch  the  charm  of  the  latter
by  outward  gratification,  even  there  does  it  soon  become


THE  UK  CONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 227

aware,  with  disgust,  that  mere  fiesh  always  turns  to  car-
rion, and,  instead  of  love,  it  folds  to  its  heart  only  its
repulsive  corpse.  As  certainly  as  a  putative  love  without
sense  is  only  the  fleshless  and  bloodless  spectral  fancy  of
the  perverted  soul,  so  certainly  is  mere  sensuality  only
the  soulless  corpse  of  the  foam-born  goddess.  The  whole
of  the  following  proof  rests  on  this  foundation,  that  sense
can  only  explain  the  snatching  at  some  sort  of  sexual
enjoyment,  but  never  sexual  love.

It  would  seem,  then,  that  it  must  be  mental  quali-
ties, which  condition  sexual  selection.  It  is  quite  impos-
sible directly  to  suppose  this,  since  in  respect  of  sexual
enjoyment  mental  qualities  are  perfectly  indifferent,  still
more  indifferent  than  corporeal  beauty.  The  statement
could  therefore  be  only  understood  to  imply  that  mental
qualities  call  forth  a  mental  harmony  and  mutual  at-
traction, which  rest  on  conscious  foundations,  and  pro-
mise the  greatest  possible  happiness  in  future  cohabi-
tation. This  conscious  relation  of  soul?,  which  is  entirely
identical  with  the  notion  of  friendship,  would  then  con-
dition sexual  selection,  i.e.,  be  the  cause  why  the  sexual
intercourse  with  the  specially  favoured  individual  is  pre-
ferred to  all  others.  This  process  is,  in  fact,  a  very  com-
mon one,  especially  on  the  side  of  the  female  sex,  which
cannot  choose,  but  is  chosen.  It  is  by  no  means  usually
to  be  expected  that  a  bride  should  have  any  other  love
than  this  for  a  bridegroom  whom  her  parents  propose  for
her,  or  to  whom  she  has  for  the  first  time  spoken  in
private  when  he  made  his  declaration,  and  her  interest
in  whom  has  no  deeper  root  than  the  bare  supposition  of
his  being  interested  in  herself.  Having  become  betroth-
ed, she  strains  her  fancy  to  apply  to  this  single  bring
all  the  extravagances  she  has  ever  read  of  in  romances,
swears  love  for  him,  soon  herself  believes  in  it,  having  grown
accustomed  constantly  to  unite  his  image  with  her  excited
general  sensual  impulse,  and  afterwards  obeys  at  1
her duty  and her inclination,  when  she remains faith-


228  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ful  to  this  man,  the  father  of  lier  children,  for  whom  she
lias  conceived  respect  and  friendship,  and  to  whom  she  lias
grown  accustomed.  Closely  examined,  however,  all  these
ingredients — general  sexual  impulse,  fancy,  respect,  friend-
ship, fidelity  to  duty,  &c. — mingle  and  blend  them  as  one
may,  still  give  no  spark  of  what  may  and  should  be
singly  and  alone  denoted  by  the  name  love ;  and  what  ap-
pears to  be  such  is  for  the  most  part  a  delusion  of  others,
and  soon  even  of  the  actors  themselves,  since  after  the  given
pledge,  they  are  bound  in  a  becoming  fashion  to  give  away
also  a  heart  of  love,  and  for  the  rest,  in  the  happy  hours
of  betrothed  lovers,  they  sufficiently  "amuse  themselves.
The  bridegroom  believes  the  cheat  as  willingly  as  the
bride  practises  it,  for  what  does  not  man  believe  if  only
it  sufficiently  flatters  his  vanity  ?  After  the  wedding,
when  both  parties  have  other  things  to  think  of,  the  comedy
comes  to  an  end  soon  enough,  whether  it  be  played  in
earnest  or  in  jest.

The  essential  fact  of  the  matter  is,  that  the  conscious
knowledge  of  mental  qualities  can  always  and  ever  only
bring  about  conscious  mental  relations,  respect  and  friend-
ship, and  that  friendship  and  love  are  things  different  as
light  from  darkness.  Friendship  can  also  awake  no  love,
for  when,  e.g.,  in  a  friendship  between  two  young  people
of  different  sex,  a  little  love  easily  insinuates  itself,  this
is  only  a  liberation  of  the  general  sexual  impulse  in  a
direction  facilitated  by  mutual  confidences,  or  they  might
have  fallen  in  love  even  without  friendship,  and  this
slumbering  potential  love  has  been  only  aroused  through
opportunity.  But  there  may  very  well  be,  at  least  on  the
man's  side,  a  pure  friendship  without  any  sexual  in-
gredients (especially  if  the  sexual  love  is  already  fixed  in
another  quarter),  and  if  this  is  said  not  to  be  possible  on
the  woman's  side,  this  is  only  because  women  are  generally
capable  of  no  pure  and  true  friendship,  with  men  as
little  with  one  another,  because  friendship  is  a  product
of  the  conscious  mind,  but  they  are  only  capable  of  what


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 229

is  great,  when  they  draw  from  the  well  of  the  unconscious
life  of  the  soul.  That  friendship  is  a  much  more  indis-
pensable and  solid  foundation  of  a  lasting  good  relation
for  the  individual  wellbeing  of  the  married  pair  than  love
does  not  admit  of  doubt ;  and  it  is  a  fortunate  circum-
stance that  the  same  relation  of  characters  and  mental
qualities,  which  has  power  to  evoke  the  strongest  love,  forms
at  the  same  time  the  best  substructure  of  friendship,  that
is,  as  we  shall  see  later  on,  the  polar  completion,  which
includes  fundamental  harmony  as  well  as  diametrical
opposition  on  this  common  ground.  It  is  only  to  be  re-
marked that  in  friendship  the  stress  is  laid  on  harmony,
but  in  love  on  contrast,  so  that  there  still  remains  a  wide
possibility  of  divergence  between  love  and  friendship  in
the  same  persons.  At  all  events,  friendship,  which  in  the
majority  of  marriages  must  either  take  the  place  of  love
from  the  first,  or  comes  imperceptibly  to  be  substituted  for
it  in  course  of  time,  is  something  by  no  means  problema-
tical, but  the  problem,  with  which  we  are  here  concerned,  is
that  love  which  precedes  sexual  union,  and  passionately
urges  to  it.

Two  true  friends,  just  as  two  lovers  also,  cannot  live
without  one  another,  and  are  capable  of  making  sacrifices
for  each  other,  but  what  a  difference  between  friendship
and  love  !  The  one  a  beautiful  mild  autumn  evening  of
full-toned  colour,  the  other  an  awful  rapturous  vernal
tempest;  the  one  the  lightly-living  gods  of  Olympus,  the
other  the  heaven-storming  Titans  ;  the  one  self-sure  and
self-satisfied,  the  other  "hoping  and  fearing  in  passionate
pain;"  the  one  perceiving  its  limits  with  full  conscious-
ness, the  other  always  striving  after  infinitude  in  longing,
joy  and  sorrow,  "  now  shouting  in  triumph,  now  sunk  in
despair;"  the  one  a  clear  and  pure  harmony,  the  other
the  ghostly  tinkling  and  rustling  of  the  Kolian  harp,  the
eternally  incomprehensible,  unutterable,  ineffable,  because
never  to  be  grasped  by  consciousness,  the  mysterious
music soundimi  from  a  home far  far awav ;  the  one  a


230  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

bright  temple,  the  other  an  eternally  veiled  mystery.
No  year  passes  in  this  our  Europe  without  a  number  of
self-murders,  double  murders,  and  cases  of  insanity  due
to  unsuccessful  love ;  but  I  know  no  instance  of  any  one
having  killed  himself  or  lost  his  wits  through  unreturned
friendship.  That  and  the  many  existences  marred  by  love
(especially  of  women,  and  were  it  only  for  weeks  or
months)  prove  clearly  enough,  that  in  love  one  has  not
to  do  with  a  farce,  a  romantic  drollery,  but  with  a  very
real  power,  a  demon  who  ever  and  again  demands  his
victims.  The  sexual  doings  of  humanity  in  all  the  easily
pierced  masquerading  and  mumming  are  so  singular,  so
absurd,  so  comical  and  ridiculous,  and  yet  for  the  most
part  so  tragical,  that  there  is  only  one  way  of  failing  to  see
the  whole  absurdity,  that  is,  by  standing  in  the  midst  of
it,  when  it  appears  to  us,  as  to  a  drunkard  in  a  company  of
drunkards  ;  we  find  everything  quite  natural  and  in  order.
The  only  difference  is,  that  every  one  can  when  sober  have
the  instructive  spectacle  of  a  drunken  revel,  but  not
be  sexless ;  or  one  must  be  far  gone  in  years,  or  must
(as  I  myself)  have  already  observed  and  reflected  on  these
doings  before  having  taken  part  in  them,  and  then  have
doubted  (as  I  have),  whether  oneself  or  all  the  rest  of  the
world  was  crazed.  And  all  this  is  brought  about  by  that
demon,  whom  already  the  ancients  feared.

But  now,  what  then  is  that  demon,  who  thus  sprawls
himself  out  and  will  into  the  infinite,  and  makes  the  whole
world  dance  on  his  fool's  rope,  what  is  he  then  in  fine  ?
His  goal  is  sexual  satisfaction,  not  exactly  sexual  satis-
faction in  general,  but  only  with  this  particular  individual,
whatever  shift  he  may  make  to  disguise  and  deny
it,  and  however  big  he  may  talk  with  hollow  phrases.
Por  if  it  were  not  this,  what  should  it  be  ?  Return  love  ?
Xo  indeed !  With  the  hottest  return  of  love  is  no  one
seriously  contented,  even  with  the  possibility  of  con-
stant intercourse,  if  the  impossibility  of  possession  be
clear,  and  manv  a  one  in  such  a  situation  has  blown  out


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 231

his  brains.  For  the  possession  of  the  beloved  one,  on  the
other  hand,  the  lover  gives  up  everything ;  even  if  return
love  is  utterly  wanting  he  can  be  consoled  with  possession,
as  the  many  marriages  prove,  which  are  brought  about  by
base  bribing  of  the  bride,  or  the  parents,  with  rank,  wealth,
birth,  &c,  and  finally  the  instances  of  rape  confirm,  where
even  crime  is  not  shunned  by  the  demon  of  love.  But
when  the  sexual  power  is  extinguished,  there  love  also  is
extinguished ;  read  the  letters  of  Abelard  and  Heloise  ;
she  still  all  fire,  life,  and  love  ;  he  cool,  babbling  friendship.
So,  too,  immediately  after  satisfaction  passion  perceptibly
declines,  if  it  do  not  also  directly  disappear,  which,  how-
ever, often  speedily  follows,  although  friendly  and  so-
called  Platonic  love  may  always  continue.  No  passion  of
love  very  long  survives  enjoyment,  at  least  not  in  the
man,  as  all  experience  testiiies,  although  it  may  at  first
increase  for  a  brief  time;  for  whatever  subsequently  is
attributed  to  love  in  this  sense  is  mostly  feigned  for  other
purposes.  Love  is  a  tempest ;  it  does  not  discharge  its
electrical  material  in  a  single  Hash,  but  by  degrees  in  many;
and  when  it  has  discharged  itself,  then  comes  the  cool  wind,
and  the  sky  of  consciousness  gets  clear  again,  and  gazes
in  astonishment  at  the  fertilising  rain  on  the  ground,  and
the  clouds  drawing  oil'  in  the  distant  horizon.

The  goal  of  the  demon,  then,  is  really  and  truly  nothing
but  sexual  satisfaction,  and  with  a,  particular  individual,
ami  everything  connected  therewith,  as,  harmony  of  soul,
adoration,  admiration,  is  only  weak  and  false  show,  or  it  is
something  else,  something  next  door  to  love.  The  test  is
simply  this,  does  it  disappear  without  a  trace  when  the
cool  wind  comes  ?  "What  then  remains  has  not  been  love,
but  friendship.  It  is  however  hi/  no  means  thereby
aHirmed  that  he  who  is  possessed  by  this  demon  must  have
the  goal  of  sexual  satisfaction  in  his  consciousness ;  on
the  contrary,  the  highest  and  purest  love  will  not  at  all
confess  this  aim,  and  especially  in  a  first  hive  the  thought
is  certainlv  far  awav,  that  this  nameless  loimiim  should


232  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

have  merely  this  end.  Even  if  the  thought  of  sexual  union
is  obtruded  from  without,  it  is  at  this  stage  rejected  from
consciousness  with  chaste  aversion,  as  one  inadequate  to
the  infinity  of  longing  and  hope,  and  unworthy  the  un-
approachable sublimity  of  the  dreamt  ideal ;  and  only  in
later  stages  does  the  unconscious  aim  come  to  appear  in
consciousness,  though  always  as  secondary,  when  the
heavenly  dream  has  so  far  descended  to  earth  as  to  see  in
sexual  union  no  longer  a  desecration  of  its  ideal, — a  point
of  view  for  whose  speedy  advent  Nature  has  taken  good
care,  by  instinctively  compelling  the  lovers  to  pass  from
the  tenderest  glances  step  by  step  to  ever  more  intimate
bodily  contact,  each  one  bound  up  in  ever  stronger  stimula-
tion of  sense.  The  illimitable  nature  of  the  longing  and
striving  spring,  then,  precisely  from  the  ineffableness  and
incomprehensibility  of  a  conscious  goal,  which  would  be
absurd  want  of  aim,  were  not  an  unconscious  purpose  the
invisible  spring  of  this  powerful  apparatus  of  feeling, — an
unconscious  purpose,  of  which  we  can  only  say  that  the
sexual  union  of  these  particular  individuals  must  be
the  means  to  its  fulfilment.  Only  when  this  sole  and  ex-
clusive goal  has  not  }Tet  as  such  (either  not  at  all,  or  only
as  secondary  goal  of  endeavour)  entered  into  consciousness,
is  love  a  perfectly  healthy  process,  a  process  without  inner
contradiction;  only  then  does  feeling  possess  that  innocence
which  alone  lends  it  true  nobility  and  charm.  When  on
the  other  hand  sexual  intercourse  is  recognised  by  con-
sciousness as  the  only  aim  of  the  extravagance  of  the
feeling  of  love,  love  as  such  ceases  to  be  a  healthy  process  ;
for  from  that  moment  consciousness  also  perceives  the
absurdity  of  the  vastness  of  this  impulse,  the  want  of
proportion  in  means  and  end  in  relation  to  the  individual,
and  it  now  enters  into  the  passion  with  the  certainty  for
its  part  of  doing  a  stupid  thing — an  uncomfortable  feeling
from  which  it  can  just  as  little  ever  again  completely  free
itself,  as  from  egoism  itself.

Only  when  the  purpose  of  love  has  not  yet  become


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 233

conscious,  when  the  individual  concerned  does  not  know
that  the  blending  of  essence  hoped  and  longed  for  by  the
mysticism  of  love  in  the  union  with  the  beloved  one  is
only  to  be  effected  realitcr  in  a  third  party  (the  offspring)
only  then  does  it  possess  the  power  to  take  captive  the
individual  with  all  his  egoistic  interests  so  ruthlessly,  that
even  the  highest  sacrifices  appear  insignificant  and  naught
in  comparison  with  the  dreams  of  heaven,  and  the  high
purpose  of  the  Unconscious  is  fulfilled  with  perfect  re-
(jardlessness.  On  the  other  hand,  when  a  human  being,
who  has  believed  himself  to  have  overcome  the  illusion,  is
again  caught  by  consuming  passion,  love  often  shapes  itself
to  his  consciousness  as  a  gloomy  daemonic  power,  so  that
lie  appears  like  a  madman  with  full  understanding,  who,
lashed  by  the  fire  of  passion,  no  longer  even  believes  in
the  happiness,  to  which,  as  it  were  without  his  will,  he
brings  his  all  as  an  offering,  for  which  he  may  even  be
compelled  to  commit  a  crime.  Quite  otherwise  is  it  when
the  innocence  of  unconseious  youth  looks  for  the  first  time
upon  the  fata  moryana  which  the  Eden  of  promise  shows
it  in  the  refulgence  of  the  glowing  dawn.  Then  the
mystical-  presentiment  of  the  eternal  unity  of  all  uncon-
scious being,  and  of  the  unnaturalness  of  separation  from
the  beloved  one,  rises  before  it,  then  the  longing  springs
up  and  glows,  to  annihilate  the  limitations  of  individuality
which  separate  from  the  loved  one,  to  perish  and  to  be
merged  with  the  whole  self  in  that  being  that  is  dearer  to
it  than  its  own,  in  order,  like  a  phcenix  consumed  in  the
love-flames,  only  to  find  again  the  better  life  in  the
beloved  object  as  unselfish  part  of  its  own  self.  And  the
souls  which  are  one  without  knowing  it,  and  which  can
approach  no  nearer  by  ever  so  close  an  embrace  than  they
eternally  are,  pine  for  a  blending  which  can  never  be
theirs  so  long  as  they  remain  distinct  individuals.  J.ut
the  supreme  significance  of  the  sole  result,  in  which  they
actually  effect  a  real  blending  of  their  qualities,  their
virtues  and  vices  (to  say  nothing  of  older  ancestral  claims


254  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

never  to  be  silenced)  they  so  completely  misapprehend,
that  they  afterwards  think  themselves  bound  to  deny  it
to  have  been  even  the  unconscious  goal  of  their  ardent
longings  (comp.  "  Ges.  Phil.  Abhandl.,"  pp.  86,  87).

We  have  now  got  so  far  as  to  recognise  the  love  to  a
particular  individual  as  an  instinct,  for  we  have  found  in
it  a  continual  series  of  efforts  and  actions  all  working
towards  a  single  aim,  which  yet  does  not  appear  in  con-
sciousness as  the  one  sole  aim.  The  final  question  is  only
this  :  "What  is  the  significance  of  that  unconscious  purpose,
what  is  the  meaning  of  an  instinct,  which  calls  forth  such
an  obstinate  selection  in  sexual  gratification,  and  how  is
it  furthered  by  the  sight  of  just  this  particular  individual?
Of  that  which  can  interest  the  household  of  Kature  and
make  instinct  necessary,  manifestly  nothing  further  is
changed  by  the  sexual  selection  of  individuals  than  the
bodily  and  mental  constitution  of  the  child.  There  remains
then,  after  the  previous  discussion,  the  sole  possible  answer
given  by  Schopenhauer,  ("Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstel-
lung,"  vol.  ii.,  chap.  44,  Metaphysic  of  Sexual  Love),
namely,  that  the  instinct  of  love  provides  for  a  composi-
tion and  constitution  of  succeeding  generations  correspond-
ing as  far  as  possible  to  the  Idea,  of  the  human  race,
and  that  the  dreamed-of  bliss  in  the  arms  of  the  beloved
one  is  nothing  but  the  deceptive  bait,  by  means  of  which
the  Unconscious  deludes  conscious  egoism,  and  leads  to
the  sacrifice  of  self-love  in  favour  of  the  succeeding  genera-
tion, which  conscious  reflection  could  never  effect  by  itself.
It  is  the  same  principle,  in  special  application  to  man,
which  Darwin  subsequently  established  in  his  theory  of
natural  selection  as  general  law  of  nature,  namely,  that
the  ennoblement  of  the  species  is  brought  about,  in  addition
to  the  succumbing  of  the  more  unfit  specimens  of  the  race
through  the  struggle  for  existence,  by  means  of  a  natural
instinct  of  served  selection.  Xature  knows  no  higher  interests
than  those  of  the  race,  for  the  race  is  related  to  the  indi-
vidual, as  the  infinite  to  the  finite. Just  as  we  demand  of


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 235

the  individual  that  he  consciously  sacrifice  his  egoism,
nay,  his  life,  to  the  welfare  of  the  whole,  so  does  Nature
with  far  less  hesitation  sacrifice  egoism,  nay,  the  life,  of  the
individual  to  the  welfare  of  the  race  through  the  medium
of  instinct  (think  of  the  maternal  animal  which  does  not
shun  death  to  protect  its  young,  and  the  male  in  the  rut,
which  fights  even  to  death  for  the  possession  of  the  female).
This  can  certainly  only  be  called  wise  and  motherly.  We
compel  the  conscious  sacrifices  of  the  individual  through
fear  of  punishment;  Nature  is  kinder,  she  compels  them
through  hope  of  reward;  that  is  certainly  more  motherly  !
Therefore  let  no  one  complain  of  these  hopes  and  their
disillusion,  unless,  like  Schopenhauer,  he  has  to  complain
of  the  existence  and  persistence  of  Nature.  For  the  rest
the  juggling  delusion  is  as  wholesome  and  as  indispensable
as  that  which  parents  often  see  themselves  compelled  to
impose  upon  children  for  their  good.  For  of  all  natural
ends  there  can  manifestly  be  none  higher  than  the  welfare
and  most  favourable  constitution  of  the  next  generation,
since  not  that  generation  alone,  but  the  whole  future  of
the  race  is  dependent  thereon ;  thus  the  affair  is,  in  fact,
highly  important,  and  the  noise,  which  is  made  about  it  in
the  world,  by  no  means  too  great.  lUit  nevertheless  the
want  of  proportion  between  means  and  end  (love-passion
and  nature  of  the  child)  appears,  when  once  comprehended,
absurd  to  (he  consciousness  of  the  individual,  and  the  process
of  love  is  charged  for  him  with  an  inner  contradiction  to
bis  egoism;  fur  possibly  conscious  thought  in  abstracto,  but
hardly  conscious  will  in  concreto,  can  disengage  itself  from
the  point  of  view  of  egoism,  at  the  most  it  may  be  brought
by  deeper  insight  passively  to  permit  Nature's  ends  to  be
accomplished  in  preference  to  its  own.

The  description  in  detail  of  the  way  in  which  the  b  1  lily
and  mental  qualities  act  on  the,  Unconscious,  and  excite
the  unconscious  will  to  beget  this  particular  new  human
being  which  must  result  from  the  intercourse  of  these
individuals,  lias  been  given  in  a  masterlv  manner  bv  >  ho-


236  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

penliauer.  I  refer  to  the  chapter  cited  above,  and  only
give  here  a  short  abstract  for  completeness'  sake.  Two
prime  factors  are  to  be  distinguished  :  (1)  individuals  exert
a  greater  sexual  charm  the  more  completely  they  represent
corporeally  and  mentally  the  Idea  of  the  race,  and  the
more  nearly  they  approach  the  acme  of  the  procreative
power ;  (2)  that  individual  has  the  greatest  sexual  charm
for  any  other  individual  which,  as  far  as  possible,
neutralises  the  latter's  defects  by  opposite  defects,  thus
producing  a  child  which  represents  the  type  of  the
race  in  the  greatest  possible  perfection.  One  sees  that
under  the  first  head  will  come  the  bodily  and  mental
attractive  force  of  symmetry,  beauty,  nobility,  and  grace,
to  cause  the  awakening  of  sexual  love,  and  one  also  now
understands  how  it  comes  about,  namely,  by  the  circuitous
path  of  an  unconscious  final  causality,  whilst  before  it  was
not  at  all  evident  how  bodily  and  mental  excellence  could
have  anything  to  do  with  sexual  love.  The  influence  of
age  is  likewise  explained  by  the  acme  of  procreative  power
(18-28  years  for  the  woman,  24-36  for  the  man).  As
another  example,  I  may  instance  the  powerful  charm
which  a  voluptuous  female  bosom  exerts  on  the  man;  the
medium  is  the  unconscious  idea  of  the  abundant  nutrition
of  the  new-born  child.  A  powerful  muscular  frame  (e.g.,
calves)  also  promises  a  powerful  constitution  of  the  child,
and  thus  exerts  a  considerable  charm.  All  such  trifles
are  most  carefully  reviewed,  and  people  talk  about  them
with  an  air  of  importance,  but  no  one  reflects  what  an
insignificant  more  or  less  in  calves  and  bosoms  have  to
do  with  the  sexual  pleasure.

The  first  point  contains  the  reason  why ■, generally  speak-
ing, the  individuals  with  the  most  perfect  mental  and
bodily  constitution  appear  most  desirable  to  the  other  sex  ;
the  second  point,  why  the  same  persons  appear  to  have
very  different  attractive  power  fur  members  of  the  other
sex,  and  why  totally  different  natures  are  the  most  capti-
vating of  all. Both  points  may  be  anywhere  put  to  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 237

test,  and  they  are  found  confirmed  in  the  smallest  details,
if  only  a  deduction  he  always  made  for  what  is  not  desired
and  wished  for  from  immediate  instinctive  sexual  in-
clination, but  from  other  rational  or  irrational  conscious
motives.  Tall  men  prefer  short  women,  and  vice  versa;
thin,  stout;  snub-nosed,  long-nosed;  blondes,  brunettes;  the
intellectual,  the  naive;  always,  be  it  understood,  only  in
sexual  relations.  ^Esthetically,  people  do  not  generally
find  their  polar  contrasts  beautiful,  but  their  doubles.
Many  tall  women  will  also,  from  vanity,  refuse  to  marry
a  short  man.  It  is  clear  that  the  sexual  pleasure  rests  on
quite  other  suppositions  than  the  practical,  moral,  aesthetic,
and  agreeable,  which  explains  the  passionate  love  for  indi-
viduals whom  the  lover  in  other  respects  cannot  help
hating  and  despising.  Truly  passion  in  such  cases  does
all  that  is  possible  to  dazzle  the  calm  judgment,  and  to
attune  it  in  its  favour ;  it  is  therefore  decidedly  correct
that  there  is  no  sexual  love  without  blindness.  The  dis-
illusion which  occurs  on  the  decline  of  passion  essentially
contributes  to  strengthen  the  conversion  of  love  into  in-
difference or  hate,  as  we  even  find  the  latter  frequently
at  the  bottom  of  the  heart,  not  only  in  amours,  but  even
among  married  people.

It  is  well  known  that  the  strongest  passions  are  not  ex-
cited by  the  most  beautiful  individuals,  but,  on  the  contrary,
more  frequently  by  the  ugly.  This  is  owing  to  the  circum-
stance that  the  strongest  passion  consists  only  in  the  most
concentrated  individualising  of  the  sexual  impulse,  and
this  arises  only  by  the  encounter  of  qualities  in  polar
opposition.  In  nations,  where  life  is  generally  less  intellec-
tual than  sensuous,  the  bodily  qualities  almost  exclusively
decide  the  issue,  wherefore  also  among  them  the  instan-
taneous origination  of  the  most  violent  passions.  On  the
oilier  hand,  among  the  educated  classes  of  nations  of  higher
menial  development,  even  with  respi  ct  to  influence  on  the
unconscious  sexual  choice,  the  mental  qualities  outweigh
the  corporeal. Accordingly,  here  for  the  most  part  a  closer


238  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

acquaintance  is  necessary  for  the  birth  of  love,  unless  the
lucid  vision  of  the  Unconscious,  stimulated  by  the  view  of  a
certain  countenance,  serve  the  same  end,  as  may  often  occur,
especially  in  the  case  of  women,  who  stand  nearer  to  the
source  of  the  Unconscious.  But  also  among  men  of  a
highly  intellectual  cast  of  mind,  the  experience  is  suffi-
ciently common  of  a  first  meeting  with  a  rare  feminine
nature  involving  them  in  enchanted  and  indestructible
bonds,  to  seek  a  cause  for  which  the  mind  struggles  in
vain.  Ye  who  still  doubt  magic,  action  of  mind  on  mind
without  the  ordinary  means  of  rational  communication,
through  the  medium  of  symbol,  which  is  only  understood
by  the  Unconscious — will  ye  also  deny  Love  ?

The  sum  of  this  chapter  is  as  follows  :  Man  instinctively
seeks  an  individual  of  the  other  sex  to  gratify  a  physical
impulse,  in  the  illusory  expectation  of  thereby  attaining  a
higher  enjoyment  than  from  any  other  kind  of  gratifi-
cation ;  his  unconscious  aim,  therefore,  is,  in  the  main,
procreation.  Man  instinctively  seeks  that  individual  of
the  other  sex,  whose  nature  blended  with  his  own, represents
the  type  of  the  race  in  the  most  perfect  way  possible,  in  the
vain  hope  of  having  an  incomparably  higher  enjoyment  in
sexual  union  with  this  individual  than  with  any  other,
nay,  of  absolutely  partaking  the  most  exceeding  bliss.
His  unconscious  aim  therein  is  the  begetting  of  such  an
individual  as  most  completely  represents  the  Idea  of  the
race.  This  unconscious  endeavour  after  the  purest  pos-
sible realisation  of  the  Idea  of  the  race  involves  no  new
principle,  but  is  the  same  principle,  in h  .id \  governed  organic
formation  in  the  wider  sense,  applied  to  procreation  (which
is  indeed  only  a  special  form  of  organic  formation,  as
physiology  shows),  and  is  screwed  up  to  a  high  degree  of
subtility  through  the  numbers  and  fineness  of  the  differ-
ences in  the  human  race. — Among  animals  this  factor  of
sexual  selection  is  by  no  means  wanting;  it  is  only  pre-
sented in  a  simpler  form  on  account  of  the  smaller  differ-
ences, and  essentially  concerns  only  the  first  point,  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 239

selection  of  such  individuals  as  represent  as  completely  as
possible  the  type  of  the  race.  Thus,  among  many  animals
(fowls,  seals,  moles,  certain  apes),  the  males  fight  for  the
possession  of  those  females  which  appear  specially  desir-
able. These  pre-eminently  desirable  individuals  are,  among
many  gay-coloured  animals,  those  with  the  most  beautiful
colours,  and  within  the  limits  of  a  species  among  the
different  races  or  varieties,  the  individuals  of  the  same  race,
e.g.,  among  men  and  dogs.  Curs  often  make  the  greatest
sacrifices  in  order  to  come  together  with  a  bitch  of  their
own  breed  with  whom  they  have  fallen  in  love.  Not  only
will  they  run  many  miles,  but  I  know  even  a  case  where  a
dog  every  night,  in  spite  of  his  cross  clog,  visited  his
mistress  at  a  distance  of  more  than  five  miles,  and  returned
every  morning  exhausted  and  jaded  ;  as  the  clog  was  of  no
avail,  the  chain  was  put  on  him,  but  he  then  became  so  wild
that  he  was  again  liberated, as  it  w;is  feared  he  would  go  mad.
There  were  at  the  time  in  his  own  yard  a  large  number  of
bitches.  Thorough-bred  stallions,  too,  are  said  usually  to
disdain  copulation  with  common  worn-out  mares.

Schopenhauer  very  correctly  remarks,  that  we  may  con-
clude from  the  instinct  of  sexual  love,  which  we  ourselves
possess,  to  the  instincts  of  animals,  and  assume  that  even
among  them  consciousness  would  be  disappointed  of  the
expectation  of  a  special  enjoyment.  This  illusion  arises,
however,  only  from  the  impulse,  is  proportional  to  the
strength  of  the  impulse,  and  is  nothing  else  but  the  impulse
itself  combined  with  the  application  of  the  conscious  expe-
rience, that  the  pleasure  of  the  gratification  of  an  impulse
is  generally  proportional  to  the  strength  of  the  impulse,  a
supposition  which  is  not  confirmed  by  the  impulses,  whose
chief  weight  and  importance  appertains  to  the  Unconscious
(see  sec.  C.  Chap,  iii.),  and  therefore  becomes  a  deceptive
illusion.  This  remark  is,  therefore,  to  be  confined  to  those
animals  whose  consciousness  is  capable  of  such  general-
isations; among  the  lower  ones  it  stops  short  at  the  con-
straining impulse,  without  reaching  to  the  expectation  uf


240  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

enjoyment. — For  the  rest,  how  useful  also  for  the  indivi-
duals of  the  higher  kinds  of  animals  that  illusion  is,  is  seen
herein,  that  this  sexual  illusion  is  just  the  first  and  most
important  means  in  nature  for  inspiring  individuals  with
that  interest  for  one  another,  which  is  requisite,  in  order
to  make  the  mind  in  a  sufficient  degree  receptive  for
sympathy.  The  ties  of  marriage  and  of  the  family  are
therefore  even  among  animals,  as  among  rude  men,  the
first  stages  in  the  progress  to  conscious  friendship  and
morality;  they  are  the  first  flush  of  dawning  culture,
of  fairer  and  nobler  feelings,  and  general  readiness  for
sacrifice.

Some  may  perhaps  be  inclined  to  reply  that,  according
to  the  theory  of  polar  complements,  no  unhappy  love  can
occur,  but  this  is  manifestly  an  over-hasty  and  mistaken
objection.  For,  if  A  is  in  love  with  B,  that  means  B  is  a
suitable  complement  to  A,  or  A  will  beget  more  perfect
children  with  B  than  with  others.  But  now  is  it  by  no
means  necessary  for  A  to  be  a  suitable  complement  to  B,
but  B  can  perhaps  beget  more  perfect  children  with  many
others  than  with  A,  if,  e.g.,  A  is  a  rather  imperfect  pre-
sentation of  the  idea  of  the  race ;  consecpiently  B  by  no
means  needs  to  be  enamoured  of  A.  Only  when  both  are
superior  individuals  will  also  B  with  difficulty  find  an
individual  with  whom  he  can  beget  more  perfect  children
than  with  A,  and  then  are  both  simultaneously  seized  by
passion.  Then  are  they  like  the  re-found  halves  of  the
parted  primitive  man  in  the  Platonic  myth.  Add  to
this,  that,  in  such  a  case,  this  polar  accord  is  not  merely  to
the  advantage  of  the  children,  but  in  another  respect,  than
the  passion  of  love  imagines,  to  the  parents  also;  to  wit,
because,  as  before  remarked,  for  the  highest  friendship,
too,  the  polar  harmony  of  souls  is  the  favourable  condi-
tion.

Tor  the  understanding  of  those  to  whom  the  result  of
the  last  chapter  may  seem  new  and  repulsive,  I  call  atten-
tion, in  conclusion,  to  the following: — (i)  That,  as  long


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 241

as  the  illusion  of  unconscious  impulse  persists  intact,  this
illusion  has  for  feeling  the  same  value  as  truth.  (2.)  That
even  after  the  discovery  of  the  illusion,  and  before  complete
resignation  to  egoism,  thus  in  the  state  of  the  strongest
most  unbroken  contradiction  between  the  selfish  conscious,
and  the  unselfish,  unconscious  Will  working  merely  for
universal  ends,  that  even  in  this  state,  Lsay,  the  Uncon-
scious constantly  shows  itself  at  the  same  time  as  the
superior  and  the  master  of  Consciousness,  and  accordingly
the  satisfaction  of  the  conscious  at  the  expense  of  the  non-
satisfaction  of  the  unconscious  "Will  causes  more  pain  than
the  reverse.  (3.)  Lastly,  that  this  variance  of  the  general
unconscious  with  the  egoistic  conscious  Will  finds  its  posi-
tive reconciliation  in  the  truly  philosophical  point  of  view
(to  be  demonstrated  in  Chap.  xiv.  C),  where  self-renuncia-
tion, i.e.,  foregoing  individual  welfare,  and  complete  devo-
tion to  the  process  and  welfare  of  the  universal,  is  presented
as  first  principle  of  practical  philosophy,  and  thus  also  all
instincts,  absurd  to  conscious  egoism  but  beneficial  fur  the
whole,  are  fully  justified.

We  should  altogether  err,  if  we  thought  that  the  expla-
nation of  dove  by  unconscious  reference  to  an  end  in  the
child  to  be  begotten  materialised  the  eternal  spring  of  the
human  heart,  or  robbed  the  yet  innocent  feelings  of  their
line  idealistic  lustre.  Far  from  that  !  What  could  more
certainly  raise  love  above  the  coarseness  of  sensuality
and  for  ever  protect  it  from  all  relapse,  than  its  derivation
from  an  unconscious  purpose,  winch  is  only  concerned
with  generation,  but  excludes  sensuality  and  voluntuous-
ness  Hum  the  causes  of  individualised  love,  ami  only
permits  them  to  be  an  accessory  vehicle,  which  may
better  protect  the  infinite  longing  from  entirely  mis.-ing
its  unconscious  purpose  \  Philosophic  speculation  does
no  more  than  unveil  the  illusion  in  which  the  natural
man  is  entangled,  the  illusion  that  those  my.-tical  feelings
in  1/tcmscl  res  possess  a  rational  foundation  or  warrant.  At
tiie same time,  however,  it  km  laces this  illusion hv the

vol.  1.  ej


242  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

scientific  insight  that  these  feelings .  have  the  greatest
possible  authorisation,  and  rest  on  the  deepest  and  noblest
ground  of  all,  and  that  they  are,  in  fact,  infinitely  more
important  for  the  development  of  the  human  race  than
fancy  permits  itself  to  dream  (comp.,  farther  on,  Chap.  x.
B. ;  and  also  the  conclusion  of  Chap.  xi.  B.)  It  thus
gives  to  the  everlasting  theme  of  poetry,  which  hitherto
has  appeared  baseless  illusion,  by  critically  annihilating
its  imaginary  value  for  egoism,  and  assigning  it  in  com-
pensation a  quite  unexpected  significance  in  respect  of
the  welfare  of  mankind,  a  foundation  so  philosophical,
that  the  dullest  Philistine  must  cease  from  mocking  and
acknowledge  the  immense  practical  consequence  of  the
whole  affair.


( 243 )


III.

THE UNCONSCIOUS IN FEELING.

If  I  have  toothache  and  a  pain  in  my  finger,  there  are
apparently  two  kinds  of  feeling;  for  the  one  is  in  the
tooth,  the  other  in  the  finger.  Did  I  not  possess  the
ability  to  project  my  perceptions  into  space,  I  should  not
feel  two  separate  pains,  but  a  single  compound  one,  just
as  with  two  pure  tones  (without  upper  tones),  at  the  in-
terval of  an  octave,  only  one  is  absolutely  heard — the  lower
note — but  with  a  different  timbre.  The  local  difference
of  the  perception  thus  confers  upon  the  mind  the  ability
to  dissect  the  pain-harmony  into  its  elements  in  con-
formity with  the  differently  localised  perceptions — to  com-
bine one  part  with  this,  another  with  that  space-perception,
and  thus  to  establish  the  duality.  ]>ut  now  things  may
be  spatially  twofold  and  yet  incapable  of  discrimination,
as,  e.ij.,  two  congruent  triangles.  This  can  certainly  not
be  asserted  of  toothache  and  finger-ache.  In  the  first
place,  they  can  only  be  discriminated  in  degree,  i.e.,  in
intensive  quantity,  and  secondly  by  their  quality;  for
with  equal  strength  pain  vwn  be  continuous  or  intermit-
tent, burning,  cooling,  crushing,  beating,  stinging,  biting,
cutting,  drawing,  palpitating,  itching,  and  exhibit  an  ni-
hility of  variations,  bailling  all  description.

We  have  hitherto  understood  by  pain  the  whole  phriio-
menon,  but  it  is  a  question  whether  this  must  n<>t  be
philosophically  prohibited,  and  whether  we  should  not
rutin  i'  distinguish  in  this  given  whole  the  -■  •  ■  i'*  j»  reej>-
tion  and  the  smart  or  i>ai'i in  the  nam>v:er  stnst  ; lor  we


244  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

have  often  a  kind  of  perception  which  produces  neither
pleasure  nor  pain,  e.g.,  if  I  gently  press  my  finger  or  brush
my  skin.  Whilst  this  perception  remains  qualitatively
unchanged,  and  only  increases  or  diminishes  in  degree,
pleasure  or  displeasure  may  be  felt  in  addition;  and  is  the
perception  to  be  all  at  once  included  in  the  pain  or  the
pleasure  ?  "We  are  then  compelled  to  separate  them,  and
soon  perceive  that  the  twain  are  so  little  one  that  they
rather  stand  in  a  causal  relation  ;  for  the  perception  (or
a  part  thereof)  is  the  cause  of  the  pain,  since  the  latter
comes  into  existence  and  disappears  with  it,  and  never
appears  in  its  absence,  although  the  perception  may
undoubtedly  occur  without  the  pain  under  particular
circumstances.

This  separation  having  been  made,  the  closely  allied
question  arises,  whether  the  distinctions  just  noticed  really
exist  in  the  pleasure  and  pain,  or  merely  in  the  producing
and  accompanying  circumstances,  namely,  in  the  percep-
tion? That  pain  admits  of  differences  in  intensive  quantity
is  clear,  but  does  it  also  admit  qualitative  differences  ?
Most  of  the  distinctions  expressed  in  words  apply  to  dif-
ferent forms  of  intermittence,  as  beating,  drawing,  palpitat-
ing, stinging,,  cutting,  biting,  even  tickling.  Certainly  the
degree  of  pain  here  changes  continuously  with  the  degree  of
perception  according  to  certain  more  or  less  regular  types,
but  nothing  is  to  be  found  of  an  originally  qualitative
difference  of  the  pain  itself.  One  would  much  sooner
expect  this  in  the  pleasure  or  displeasure  which  is  called
forth  by  different  smells  and  tastes  ;  but  even  there  one
may  be  convinced  by  careful  introspection  that  the  quali-
tative difference  of  pleasure  or  displeasure  is  altogether
only  apparent,  and  this  illusion  arises  from  the  circum-
stance that  the  separation  of  pleasure  or  pain  and  percep-
tion has  never  hitherto  been  made,  but  both  are  wont  to
be  comprehended  with  the  perception  as  a  single  whole,
so  that  now  the  differences  of  perception  present  them-
selves as  differences  of  this  single  whole. — That  this  serara-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 245

tion  has  never  been  made  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  out  of  the
infinitely  multifarious  composition  of  psychical  states,  one
always  only  learns  to  separate  those  groups  as  independent
parts,  the  separation  of  which  has  a  real  utility  for  practical
needs.  Thus,  e.g.,  in  the  accord  of  a  full  orchestra,  not  all
tones  of  a  certain  pitch  are  separated  6ut,  no  matter  from
what  instrument  they  proceed,  including  their  upper  tones,
but  the  upper  tones  of  the  most  different  parts  of  the
scale  produced  by  any  instrument  are  fused  with  the  funda-
mental tone  of  the  instrument  into  its  timbre,  and  the
groups  of  tones  thus  formed,  which  represent  the  tones
called  forth  from  any  single  instrument,  are  alone  blended
into  the  accord,  simply  for  the  reason  that  the  knowledge
of  the  upper  tones  possesses  no  practical  interest,  but
rather  the  knowledge  of  the  timbres  of  the  instruments.
And  this  practical  mode  of  grasping  the  groups  of  tones
has  become  so  organised  in  us,  that  that,  according  to  mere
pitch,  although  it  must  manifestly  be  much  easier,  has
become  purely  impossible  to  us — so  impossible  that  only
a  few  years  have  elapsed  since  Ilelmholtz  strictly  demon-
strated the  origin  of  timbres  by  actually  combining  the
upper  tones.

Almost  as  impossible  does  it  also  seem  to  us  now,  in
self-observation  to  sharply  separate  and  keep  asunder  the
two  elements  in  the  totality  of  pleasure  or  pain  and  the
perceptions  following  and  accompanying  them;  but  that
such  separation  must  be  possible  any  one  can  see  from
this,  that  both  parts  are  related  as  cause  and  effect,  and
are  essentially  different.  Whoever  succeeds  in  making
the  trial  will  find  the  assertion  confirmed,  that  pleasure
and  displeasure  have  only  intensively  quantitative,  but  no
qualitative  differences.  Success  will  be  the  easier  the
simpler  the  examples  with  which  one  begins,  e.g.,  whether
the  pleasure  is  different  in  hearing  a  bell  if  the  note  is  c,
and  if  it  is  </.  If  insight  has  once  been  gained  in  such
simple  examples,  the  truth  will  lie  no  less  evident  if  one,
passes  gradually  to  examples  which  contain  greater  differ-


246  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ences  in  the  element  of  perception.  A  confirmation  of  the
assertion  may  also  be  seen  in  this,  that  we  are  able  to
balance  different  sensual  enjoyments  or  pains  against  one
another  (e.g.,  whether  any  one  prefers  to  lay  out  his  half-
crown  in  a  bottle  of  wine,  or  cake  and  ice,  or  beefsteak
and  beer,  or  any  other  sensuous  gratification ;  or  whether
one  will  endure  the  toothache  all  day  long,  or  rather  have
the  tooth  drawn),  which  balancing  would  not  be  possible
if  pleasure  and  pain  were  not  in  all  these  things  only
quantitatively  different  and  qualitatively  alike  ;  for  like
can  only  be  measured  by  like.

It  is  now  also  clear  that  local  differences  by  no  means
concern  the  pain  directly,  but  only  the  perception,  and
that  only  through  the  perception  does  an  ideal  separation
of  the  total  pain  occur,  one  part  of  it  being  causally  referred
to  this,  and  another  to  that  perception.  If  now,  strictly
speaking,  pain  has  no  locality,  and  only  the  perception  lias
local  relation,  the  duality  established  by  the  local  differ-
ence can  only  have  reference  to  the  perception,  but  not  to
the  pain,  and  pain  is  accordingly  not  merely  qualitatively
alike  in  all  cases,  but  is  always  only  single  in  the  same
moment.

These  considerations  are  confirmed  by  TVundt  in  his
"Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Sense-Perception."  He
says  (pp.  391,  392),  "The  essential  part  of  pain  is  identical,
whether  it  have  its  seat  in  one  of  the  objective  sense-
organs,  as  the  skin,  or  in  some  part  of  the  viscera  of
the  trunk.  As  pain,  from  whatever  cause  it  may  arise
— mechanical,  chemical  stimulus,  heat  or  cold,  &c. — is
always  of  the  same  nature,  so  it  exhibits  no  difference
in  its  essential  character,  whatever  nerves  of  the  body
sensitive  to  pain  the  pain-exciting  stimulus  may  affect.-'
He  further  shows  "  that  pain,  as  it  is  manifested  in  the
sense-organs  proper  as  only  the  highest  pitch  of  sensation,
so  in  all  the  other  sensitive  organs  it  is  nothing  else  but
the  most  intense  sensation,  which  follows  on  the  strongest
stimuli;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  all  or_ans  which  arc  at


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 247

all  capable  of  the  sensation  of  pain  have  also  power  to
serve  as  media  of  sensations,  which  cannot  be  termed  pain,
but  which  stand  in  respect  of  each  organ  for  that  which
in  the  case  of  the  sensory  organs  is  the  specific  sensation"
(p.  394).  "  If  once  attention  be  called  to  these  pre-
cursors and  successors  of  pain,  they  can  also  be  dis-
tinctly perceived,  if  they  do  not  stand  in  connection  with
preceding  or  succeeding  pains"  (p.  393).  "As  we  only
attend  to  them  when  they  rise  to  the  pitch  of  pain,
language  has  also  only  distinctive  designations  for  the
peculiarity  of  the  pain  of  different  organs"  (p.  395).  It
is,  then,  these  speciiic  organic  sensations,  corresponding  to
the  sensations  of  the  special  senses,  in  conjunction  with
the  secondary  affection  of  adjoining  tissues,  which  condi-
tion the  different  colouring  of  pain,  without  altering  the
identity  of  its  essence.

Whoever  has  apprehended  the  similarity  of  pleasure
and  displeasure  in  sensuous,  will  soon  admit  it  also  in
mental  feelings.  Whether  my  friend  A  or  my  friend  .15
dies  may  possibly  change  the  degree  but  not  the  kind
of  my  pain,  no  more  than  if  my  wife  or  my  child  dies,
although  my  love  to  both  has  been  of  quite  a  different
kind,  and  also  the  ideas  and  thoughts  which  I  entertain
on  the  nature  of  the  loss  are  quite  different.  As  pain  in
general  has  been  caused  in  this  case  through  the  repre-
sentation of  the  loss,  so  also  in  the  complex  of  feeling  and
thought  which  one  usually  comprehends  under  pain,  a
difference  is  introduced  through  the  difference  in  respect
of  the  loss;  but  if  one  again  detaches  what  is  pain  and
nothing  but  pain,  not  thought  and  not  imagination,  it
will  be  found  that  this  again  is  identical.  The  same  holds
good  of  the  pain  which  I  feel  for  the  \<  <>,  of  a  wife,  the
loss  of  properly  which  makes  me  a  beggar,  and  of  the  loss
of  my  ollice  and  my  honour  owing  to  calumny.  What  is
pain  and  nothing  but  pain  is  everywhere  only  d:Iieivut
in  degree.  Likewise  in  the  pleasure  which  1  feel  when
another,  after  a h'V.'j. resistance, yields to n.v -;ubi :u


248  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

will,  or  if  I  gain  a  prize  in  a  lottery  or  obtain  a  higher
post.

That  pleasure  and  displeasure  are  everywhere  alike
again  follows  from  this,  that  one  is  compared  with  the
other,  on  which  balancing  of  pleasure  and  displeasure  in
the  feelings  every  rational  practical  reflection,  every  resolu-
tion of  mankind  depends  ;  for  one  can  indeed  only  measure
like  by  like,  not  hay  by  straw  or  pecks  by  pounds.  In  the
fact  that  the  whole  of  human  life  and  the  determining
grounds  of  action  therein  depends  on  a  balancing  of  the
most  different  kinds  of  pleasure  and  displeasure  there  is
implicitly  and  unconsciously  contained,  as  fundamental
condition,  the  assumption  that  such  different  kinds  of  plea-
sure and  displeasure  may  in  general  be  weighed  against  one
another ;  that  they  are  commensurable,  i.e.,  that  that  which
is  compared  in  them  is  qualitatively  identical.  AVere
this  tacit  supposition  false  the  whole  of  human  life  would
rest  upon  a  prodigious  illusion,  whose  origin  and  possi-
bility would  be  absolutely  incomprehensible.  The  com-
mensurctbility  of  pleasure  and  displeasure  in  themselves,
which  is  already  expressed  in  language  in  the  nominal
identity  of  all  kinds  of  pleasure  and  pain,  must  thus  be
unconditionally  assumed  as  fact,  and  it  holds  good  not
merely  of  different  kinds  of  sensuous  pleasure,  but  just
as  much  for  sensuous  and  mental  pleasure  and  displeasure.
Think  of  a  man  who  has  the  choice  of  marrying  one  of
two  rich  sisters,  the  one  clever  and  ugly,  the  other  stupid
and  pretty.  He  weighs  the  supposed  sensuous  and  mental
pleasure  against  one  another,  and  according  as  this  or
that  appears  to  him  to  preponderate  he  makes  his  decision.
In  the  same  way  a  girl  led  into  temptation  weighs  the
pleasure  from  honour,  from  virtuous  pride,  and  the  hope
of  the  future  dignity  of  a  housewife  against  the  pleasure
from  the  promises  of  the  seducer  and  the  joys  beckoning
her  to  his  side.  Again,  a  believer  compares  the  heavenly
joys  which  are  said  to  flow  from  earthly  renunciation
with  those  earthly  joys  which  he  is  to  renounce,  and  ac-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 219

cording  to  the  apparent  predominance  of  the  one  or  the
other  does  lie  seize  the  earthly  or  the  heavenly  part.
Such  a  weighing  of  sensuous  and  spiritual  pleasure,  and
the  supposition  of  the  essential  likeness  on  which  it  rests,
would  only  be  unintelligible  if  sensuous  and  mental  were
altogether  heterogeneous  provinces  severed  by  a  fixed
gulf.  This  is,  however,  not  the  case.  The  sensuous,  too,
so  far  as  it  is  feeling,  rests  on  a  subjective  spiritual  basis  ;
and  the  spiritual  also,  so  far  as  it  fills  consciousness,  forms
only  the  blossom  of  the  tree  of  sense  on  which  it  has  grown,
and  from  which  it  can  never  be  torn.

We  consider,  then,  the  result  established  that  pleasure
and  displeasure  are  in  themselves  only  one  thing  in  all  feel-
ings, or  that  they  are  different  not  in  quality,  but  only  in
degree.  That  pleasure  and  displeasure  neutralise  one  an-
other, are  related  as  positive  and  negative,  and  the  zero
between  them  is  the  indiil'erence  of  feeling,  is  clear.
Equally  clear  is  it  that  it  is  i ml i ('Cerent  which  of  the  two
one  is  inclined  to  assume  as  positive,  just  as  indifferent  as
the  question  whether  the  right  or  the  left  side  of  the  ab-
scissa be  taken  as  positive  (that  accordingly  Schopenhauer
is  wrong  when  he  declares  displeasure  the  alone  positive
and  pleasure  its  negative;  he  thereby  commits  the  error
of  confounding  contrary  and  contradictory  opposition).

But  now  the  question  is,  what,  then,  are  pleasure  and
displeasure  ?  That  the  mental  representation  is  one  of  their
causes  we  have  seen,  but  what  are  they,  then,  themselves  !
By  mental  representation  alone  they  will  certainly  never
be  explained,  much  as  ancient  and  modern  philosophers
have  tried.  The  simplest  self-observation  gives  the  lie  to
their  unsatisfactory  deductions,  and  says  that  pleasure  an  i
displeasure,  on  the  one  hand,  and  thought  on  the  other,
are  heterogeneous  things,  which  only  with  great  straining
can  be  confounded.  On  the  other  hand,  it  lias  been
acknowledged  by  most  important  thinkers  of  all  times
that  pleasure  and  displeasure  stand  in  the  closest  connec-
tion with  the  inmost  life  of man.  with  his  interests


250  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

inclinations,  his  desires  and  strivings, — in  a  word,  with
the  kingdom  of  the  will.  Without  intending  to  enter
here  more  minutely  into  the  opinions  of  individual  philo-
sophers, it  may  comprehensively  be  said  that  all  their
opinions  may  he  reduced  to  two  fundamental  views, —
either  they  conceive  pleasure  as  satisfaction,  displeasure
as  non-satisfaction  of  desire,  or,  conversely,  desire  as  idea
of  future  pleasure,  aversion  (negative  desire)  as  idea  of
future  pain.1  In  the  former  case  will,  in  the  latter  feel-
ing, is  conceived  as  the  original.  "Which,  of  the  two  is
correct  it  is  not  difficult  to  see;  for,  in  the  first  place,  in
Instinct  will,  in  fact,  exists  before  the  representation  of
pleasure ;  its  proper  goal  is  there  another  than  the  indi-
vidual pleasure  of  satisfaction ;  in  the  second  place,  pos-
sibly through  the  explanation  of  pleasure  as  satisfaction
of  the  will  everything  in  pleasure  is  sufficiently  explained,
but  not,  conversely,  everything  in  the  will  through  the
explanation  of  the  same  as  idea  of  pleasure.  Here  the
properly  impelling  factor,  the  will,  as  active  causality,  re-
mains perfectly  incomprehensible,  just  because  the  will
is  the  cxtcrnalisalion,  but  pleasure  and  displeasure  the  re-
turn from  this  externalisation  to  self,  and  is  therewith  the
dose  of  this  process;  therefore  the  will  must  be  t 'he  pri-
mary, pleasure  the  secondary  moment.

If  we  provisionally  allow  this  view  to  pass,  we  obtain
an  unexpected  confirmation  of  the  essential  identity  of
pleasure  and  displeasure  in  all  feelings.  AVe  have  seen
before  that  volition  is  likewise  always  one  and  the  same,
and,  in  the  first  place,  is  only  discriminated  according  to
the  degree  of  strength,  and,  in  the  second  place,  according

1  Although  the  feeling  of  present  which indicate to the uprisen or

non-satisfaction may be always  actual world-will the path of its

united  with  positive  desire,  the  feel-  manifestation  in  the  world-process^,

ing of a present (but doubtfully  For desire itself  necessarily refers

enduring) relative satisfaction  fre-  to  a  not  yet  existing future state,

(juently  with  the  negative;  yet  these  could, accordingly, always only be

present  sensations  can in  no  case  be  explained  as  an  idea  or  fore-feeling

conceived as  the  desire itself, but  aroused  by  those  present  feelings  or

only  as cause of the desire (more  strengthened by  them  (coinp. ISect.

exactly,  as  occasions  or  opportunities  A.  Chap,  iv.)


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 251

to  the  object,  which,  however,  is  no  longer  will,  but  idea.
If  now  pleasure  is  the  satisfaction,  and  displeasure  the
non-satisfaction  of  the  will,  it  is  clear  that  these  also  must
always  be  only  one  and  the  same,  ami  can  merely  be
different  in  degree  ;  but  that  the  apparent  qualitative  dis-
tinctions which  they  contain  are  given  by  accompanying
ideas,  partly  by  those  which  make  the  object  of  will,  partly
by  those  which  bring  about  the  satisfaction  of  the  will.
From  this  there  results,  for  all  emotional  states,  notwith-
standing their  multiplicity,  so  great  a  simplicity  that,
according  to  the  ancient  saying,  ''simplex  sir/ill  urn  vcri,"
this  must  be  regarded  as  a  support  to  the  assertions  from
which  it  follows,  just  as  these  mutually  support  and
render  one  another  probable  through  the  force  of  analogy.

The  reasons  why  I  have  at  this  particular  place  touched
on  these  problems  of  the  conscious  psychical  life  are  con-
tained in  the  following  two  complementary  propositions
from  the  psychology  of  the  Unconscious: — (1.)  Where  one
is  conscious  of  no  will  in  the  satisfaction  of  which  an  existing
pleasure  or  displeasure  could  exist,  this  will  is  an  uncon-
scious one;  and  (2.)  the  obscure,  ineffable,  inexpressible  in
feeling  lies  in  the  ujieonsciousness  of  the  accompanying  ideas.
Because  the  conception  of  the  unconscious  will  was  want-
ing in  previous  psychology  it  could  not  conscientiously
unconditionally  accept  the  explanation  of  pleasure  as
satisfaction  of  the  will,  and  because  it  lacked  the  notion
of  the  unconscious  idea  it  did  not  know  how  to  deal  with
the  whole  province  of  the  feelings,  and  therefore  limited
its  consideration  almost  exclusively  to  the  department
of  thought.

As  example  of  a  pleasure  through  the  exercise  of  un-
conscious will,  one  may  take  the  instincts  where  the  pur-
pose lies  in  the  Unconscious,  e.g.,  the  maternal  pleasure  in
tiio  new-born  chili,  or  the  transcendent  bliss  of  the  liai  py
lover.  Here  no  will  whose  satisfaction  corresponds  to
the  degree  of  pleasure  at  all  emerges  into  consciousness;
but  we  know  the  metaphysical  p  'Wer  of  that  unconscious


252  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

will  whose  special  effects  are  the  several  instinctive  de-
sires, and  which  obtains  satisfaction  through  their  reali-
sation ;  and  it  must  be  an  exceeding  high  and  strong  will
indeed,  whose  satisfaction  has  for  its  consequence  those
phenomena  of  extravagant  pleasure,  of  which  the  poets  in
all  ages  did  not  know  how  to  sing  in  strains  sufficiently
lofty.

Another  example  is  the  sensuous  pleasure  and  pain
which  result  from  nerve-currents  of  a  certain  kind.  Lotze,
in  his  "  Medical  Psychology,"  shows  that  sensuous  pleasure
always  occurs  along  with  a  furtherance,  and  pain  with
a  disturbance  of  organic  life.  This  conscientious  investi-
gator, however,  expressly  acknowledges  that  only  a  uni-
form concomitance  can  be  established,  but  that  what  we
mean  by  pain  can  by  no  means  be  derived  from  the  general
notion  of  vital  disturbance,  that  consequently  there  must
be  a  deeper  law  connecting  the  two.  Xow  this  is  mani-
festly the  unconscious  will,  which  we  have  become  ac-
quainted with  as  principle  of  organisation,  self-preserva-
tion, and  self-restoration.  As  soon  as  disturbances  or
furtherances  in  the  sphere  of  organic  life  are  of  such  a
nature  that  they  are  telegraphed  to  the  brain,  the  satisfac-
tion or  non-satisfaction  of  this  unconscious  will  must  be
felt  as  pleasure  or  displeasure.  (For  the  refutation  of
some  replies  to  the  above  assertions  on  sensuous  pleasure
and  displeasure  I  refer  to  Lotze,  2d  book,  2d  chapter.)

That  we  very  often  do  not  know  what  it  is  we  really
will,  nay,  even  often  imagine  we  are  willing  the  contrary,
until  by  the  pain  and  pleasure  resulting  from  the  decision
we  are  instructed  concerning  our  true  will,  every  one  will
probably  have  had  opportunity  of  observing  in  himself
and  others.  In  these  doubtful  cases  we  often  naively
think  that  we  are  willing  what  appears  to  us  good  and
laudable,  e.g.,  that  a  sick  relation,  whose  heir  we  are  to  be,
may  not  die,  or  that  in  a  collision  between  the  common
weal  and  our  individual  weal  the  former  is  preferred,  or  that
an  engagement  furmerly  entered  into  may  be  kept,  or  that


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 253

our  rational  conviction  and  not  our  inclination  and  passion
may  gain  the  day.  This  belief  may  be  so  strong  that
afterwards,  if  the  decision  falls  out  contrary  to  our  sup-
posed will,  and  yet  no  grief  but  an  unbounded  joy  takes
possession  of  us,  we  do  not  know  how  to  give  over
astonishment  at  ourselves,  because  we  are  now  suddenly
aware  of  disillusion,  and  learn  that  we  unconsciously
have  willed  the  contrary  of  what  we  had  imagined.
Since,  now,  in  this  case,  we  only  conclude  to  our  proper
will  from  our  pleasure  (or  pain),  this  pleasure  is  manifestly
the  sign  of  the  satisfaction  of  an  unconscious  will.  This
becomes  still  more  evident  if  we  consider  how,  from
the  excessive  astonishment  that  such  a  will  can  have
unconsciously  existed  in  our  own  soul,  the  transition
is  quite  gradual  through  the  stages  of  slight  suspicion,
doubt,  and  conjecture  that  one  indeed  willed  otherwise
than  was  imagined  to  the  final  open  self-deception,  where
we  very  well  know  how  we  willed,  but  endeavour  to  per-
suade ourselves  and  others,  with  more  or  less  success,  that
we  willed  just  the  opposite.  Closely  allied  are  the  cases
in  which  the  temptation  to  self-deception  does  not  at  all
exist,  and  the  surprise  which  accompanies  the  pleasure
only  consists  in  this,  that  for  a  very  long  time  the  will
has  not  emerged  into  consciousness,  as,  e.g.,  when  a  friend
believed  to  be  long  dead  suddenly  enters  my  room.  Even
then  it  is  our  unconscious  will  whose  satisfaction  takes
tiie  form  of  fearful  joy,  but  I  now  do  not  need  to  infer
the  existence  of  this  will  in  myself  from  the  occurrence
of  pleasure,  but  can  directly  assume  it  from  the  mrmory
of  earlier  times,  when  I  have  often  wished  to  enclose  the
lost  friend  once  more  in  my  arms.

We  know  from  (.'hap.  iv.  A.  that  the  conscious  and
unconscious  will  are  essentially  distinguished  by  this,
that  the  idea  which  forms  the  object  of  will  is  conscious
in  the  one  case,  unconscious  in  the  other.  When  we  re-
call this  proposition,  we  perceive  the  transition  of  pleasure
or  pain  from  unconscious  will  to  those  feelings  which  are


254  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

t

somewhat  obscure  in  that  their  quality  is  entirely  or
partially  conditioned  by  unconscious  ideas.  V\&  now  see
that  the  former  is  only  a  special  case  of  the  latter,  in  that
in  the  former  the  ideas  which  form  the  content  of  the
satisfied  will  remain  unconscious,  and  perhaps  only  the
ideas  which  bring  satisfaction  become  conscious  (as,  eg.,
in  maternal  love) ;  but  this  does  not  quite  meet  the  cases
where,  immediately  on  the  occurrence  of  pleasure  or  dis-
pleasure, the  existence  and  the  kind  of  the  unconscious
will  are  inferred  by  consciousness,  because  the  latter  could
only  hesitate  between  two  or  a  very  few  species  of  will.

But  now  the  circumstances  are  rarely  so  simple  that
the  feeling  consists  in  the  satisfaction  or  non-satisfaction
of  a  single  definite  desire,  but  the  most  different  kinds  of
desires  cross  one  another  in  the  greatest  number  at  every
moment,  and  by  the  very  same  event  some  are  gratified,
others  not  gratified ;  accordingly  there  is  neither  pure  nor
simple  pleasure  and  displeasure,  i.e.,  there  is  no  pleasure
which  does  not  contain  a  pain,  and  no  pain  with  which  a
pleasure  is  not  bound  up,  but  there  is  also  no  pleasure
which  is  not  compounded  of  the  simultaneous  satisfaction
of  the  most  different  desires.  As  actual  volition  is  the
resultant  of  all  contemporaneous  desires,  so  is  also  the
satisfaction  of  the  will  the  resultant  of  all  simultaneous
satisfactions  and  non-satisfactions  of  particular  desires  ;  for
it  comes  to  the  same  tiling,  whether  one  operates  directly
with  the  resultant,  or  with  the  several  components,  and
then  takes  the  resultant  of  the  partial  results.  Xow  it
is  evident  that  one  part  of  the  several  desires  may  be
conscious,  another  may.  nay,  for  the  most  part,  will  be
unconscious;  then  is  the  pleasure  also  compounded  of
those  pleasures  which  are  determined  by  conscious  and
those  which  are  determined  by  unconscious  ideas.  The
latter  fact  must  give  that  obscure  character  to  the  quality
of  the  feeling,  that  constant  remainder,  which,  with  ail  our
effort,  can  never  be  grasped  by  consciousness.

But  there  are  other  points  besides  the  unconscious  will


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 255

where  unconscious  ideation  determines  the  speciality  of
the  feeling,  to  wit,  the  perception  or  idea  producing
the  feeling  may  he  unconscious  to  the  brain,  strange  as  it
at  first  seems.  For  it  might  be  thought  the  idea  which
produces  the  satisfaction  of  the  will  can  only  come  from
outside,  or  through  cerebrally  conscious  ideation  in  the
play  of  fancy,  and  in  both  cases  the  resort  to  conscious-
ness cannot  be  avoided.  But  in  this  it  is  forgotten  that
there  are  other  central  nervous  parts  which,  just  as
much  as  the  brain,  have  a  consciousness  per  se  which  is
capable  of  pleasure  and  pain.  But  now  one  can  well
imagine,  that  the  feelings  of  pleasure  or  pain  of  these  centres
can  easily  be  conducted  to  the  brain,  without  the  con-
duction being  so  well  contrived,  that  the  perceptions
themselves,  which  produce  in  those  centres  pleasure  or
pain,  could  reach  the  brain.  In  this  manner  the  brain
probably  receives  pleasant  and  painful  sensations  which
have  been  conducted  to  it,  but  not  their  grounds  of  origin  ;
and  therefore  such  feelings  and  moods  reflected  from
other  centres  in  the  brain  have  something  very  incom-
prehensible and  enigmatical  about  them,  although  their
power  over  the  cerebral  consciousness  is  not  seldom  very
groat.  The  latter,  then,  generally  searches  after  other
apparent  causes  of  its  feelings  which  arc;  by  no  means
the  correct  ones.  The  less  tin1  cerebral  consciousness  has
raised  itself  to  a  certain  independence  and  elevation,  the
more  power  do  the  moods  springing  from  the  relatively  un-
conscii  'Us  possess  over  it  ;  thus  in  the  female  sex  more  than
in  the  male,  in  children  more  than  in  adults,  in  the  sick
mon;  than  in  the  healthy.  Most  distinct  are  these  inilu-
ences  in  hypochondria,  hysteria,  and  at  the  period  of
important  sexual  changes,  e.g.,  pubertv  and  pregnancy.
1  iicse  influences  are  also  by  no  means  merelv  expressed
in  i)\,,mlx,  i.r.,  in  the  tlisjh>siliun  to  entertain  cheerful  or
gloomy  feelings,  but  they  even  directly  give  rise  to  j\  ■  !in>j*
in  the  cerebral  consciousness,  as  is  again  best  observed  in
persons  suffering  from  hypochondria.


256  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

"  Look  at  that  child :  what  wild  delight,  what  merry
skipping,  what  gladsome  laughter,  what  a  glistening  eye  ;
all  questioning  as  to  the  cause  would  be  in  vain,  or  the
causes  enumerated  would  he  utterly  disproportionate  to
the  glee.  And  suddenly,  and  again  without  any  con-
scious reason,  all  is  changed ;  the  child  is  quietly  lost  in
itself,  its  eye  troubled,  its  lips  pouting,  on  the  point  of
weeping,  peevish  and  sad,  whereas  a  moment  before  it
was  contented  and  full  of  mirth  "  (Carus's  "  Psyche  ").
Where  else  should  these  feelings,  whose  peculiarity  it
is  to  be  referable  only  to  unconscious  ideas,  take  their  rise
than  from  vital  perceptions  of  the  lower  nerve-centres?
That  in  man  the  power  of  these  feelings  appears  to  us  so
much  the  greater  the  less  the  independence  of  the  cere-
bral consciousness,  permits  us  to  conclude  that  among  the
animals  their  significance  is  likewise  the  greater  the
lower  we  descend  in  the  animal  scale,  which  might  be
expected  a  priori,  since  in  this  descent  the  mental  enjoy-
ments and  sufferings  of  the  human  cerebral  consciousness
dwindle  more  and  more.

One  will  now  see  how,  also,  other  sensuous  feelings  which,
in  part,  are  determined  and  accompanied  by  clearly  con-
scious perceptions  of  the  brain,  for  the  rest  remain  ob-
scure and  unintelligible  so  far  as  they  are  brought  about
by  perceptions  and  feelings  of  lower  centres.  Thus,  e.g.,
one  may  compare  the  facility  with  which  we  can  repro-
duce completely  ami  clearly,  as  mere  idea,  any  simple  feeling
that  is  determined  by  the  perception  of  the  higher  senses
leading  direct  to  the  brain,  with  the  want  of  success  in  try-
ing to  recall  clearly  and  completely  hunger  and  thirst  or
sensual  enjoyment.

Lastly,  there  remains  the  possibility  that  yet  other
unconscious  ideas  help  in  determining  the  special  nature
of  the  states  of  feeling.  We  have,  namely,  already  seen
above  that  sensuous  perception  frequently  only  has  for  its
consequence  a  sensation  of  pleasure  or  pain  if  it  occurs
with  a  certain  strength,  whilst  it  persists  of itself  IlIoiv


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 257

this  degree,  as  indifferent  objective  perception,  without  caus-
ing such  a  feeling.  But  now  hardly  any  sensuous  perception
is  quite  simple,  but  is  compounded  of  a  number  of  elements
which  are  only  combined  into  a  unity  through  the  common
act  of  perception.  Still  one  or  several  of  these  partial  per-
ceptions may  very  well  be  followed  by  feeling,  whilst  the
other  partial  perceptions  remain  indifferent  in  respect  of
feeling.  Nevertheless,  if  the  union  of  these  different  par-
tial perceptions  into  one  total  perception  is  not  accidental,
but  grounded  in  the  nature  of  the  object,  not  only  will
those  productive  of  feeling,  but  also  the  indifferent  parts
of  the  whole  perception,  blend  with  the  feeling,  and  help,
at  the  same  time,  to  determine  the  quality  of  the  whole
mental  state,  because,  indeed,  the  mind  has  no  interest  in
undertaking  the  separation  of  the  feeling-producing  from
the  indifferent  parts.  Thus,  e.g.,  every  characteristic  pro-
perty of  the  vocal  timbre  and  note  influences  the  character
of  the  pleasurable  feeling  which  is  produced  in  me  on
hearing  a  particular  singer,  and  were  it  not  that  these
slight  differences,  which  only  just  enable  me  to  distinguish
different  voices,  possess  the  power  to  produce  a  difference
in  the  degree  of  the  enjoyment,  I  should  not  be  in  a
position  to  separate  the  enjoyment,  which  I  have  experi-
enced in  hearing  this  particular  singer,  from  those  fine
shades  of  the  indifferent  perception,  without  losing  the
special  quality  of  the  feeling  experienced.  This  only
proves  thai  we  have  never  practised  ourselves  in  separat-
ing out  what  is  properly  pleasure  and  displeasure  in  our
psychical  states,  but  have  comprehended  all  states  of  the
mind  in  which  pleasure  and  displeasure  appear,  including
all  accompanying  perceptions  and  ideas  (nay,  even  desires),
under  the  term  Feeling.  One  now  sees  that  even  among
the  merely  eoneomitant  perceptions  there  may  be  some  un-
conscious for  the  brain,  as  has  just  been  shown  in  the  case
of  those  \)  rod vet  ire  of  feeling.  Still  more  important,  how-
ever, do  these  concomitant  ideas  become  when  we  pass  from
the  sphere  of  sensuous  perception  into  that  of  intellection.

VOL. I.  K


258  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

We  have  now  reviewed  in  general  the  different  modes
in  which  feeling  may  he  determined  by  unconscious  ideas,
and  perhaps  on  this  occasion  already  the  importance  of
unconscious  ideas  for  the  whole  emotional  life  may  have
also  become  visible.  This  importance  cannot  be  rated  too
highly.  Let  any  one  take  for  test  whatever  feeling  he
pleases,  and  seek  to  grasp  it  with  perfectly  clear  con-
sciousness in  its  whole  extent.  It  is  in  vain ;  for  unless
satisfied  with  the  most  superficial  explanation,  he  will
constantly  stumble  on  an  irresolvable  remainder,  which
mocks  at  every  endeavour  to  illuminate  it  with  the  burn-
ing-glass of  consciousness.  But  now,  if  one  asks,  what
then  has  been  done  with  the  part  that  has  become  clear
whilst  it  has  been  embraced  with  full  consciousness,  we
shall  be  obliged  to  say  that  it  has  been  translated  into
thoughts,  i.e.,  conscious  ideas,  and  only  so  far  as  feeling  has
been  translated  into  thoughts  has  it  become  clearly  con-
scious. But  that  feeling,  even  if  only  partially,  has  been
recast  into  conscious  ideas,  sufficiently  proves  indeed  that
it  already  unconsciously  contains  these  ideas,  for  otherwise
the  thoughts  would,  in  fact,  not  be  the  same  as  the  feeling.
If  the  previously  unconscious  part  of  feeling,  on  being
passed  through  consciousness,  shows  itself  as  material  of
thought,  we  may  suppose  the  same  also  of  the  part  of  the
feeling  not  yet  interpenetrated  by  consciousness  ;  for  both
in  the  individual  and  in  humanity  as  a  whole,  the  boun-
dary between  the  not-understood  and  the  understood  part
of  feeling  is  always  shifting.

Only  so  far  as  the  feelings  can  be  already  translated
into  thoughts,  only  so  far  are  they  communicable,  if  we
disregard  the  always  extremely  scanty  instinctive  lan-
guage of  gesture ;  for  only  so  far  as  feelings  are  capable  of
being  translated  into  thoughts  are  they  to  be  rendered
into  words.  One  knows,  however,  what  difficulty  there  is
in  the  communication  of  feelings  ;  how  often  they  are
unrecognised  and  misunderstood ;  nay,  even  how  often
they  are  declared  to  be  impossible. In  general,  feelings


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 259

can  only  be  understood  by  him  who  has  had  them  ;  only
a  hypochondriac  understands  the  hypochondriac,  only  he
who  has  loved,  the  lover.  How  often,  however,  do  we  fail
to  understand  ourselves  ;  how  enigmatical  often  are  our
own  feelings,  especially  when  they  occur  for  the  first  time;
how  liable  are  we  to  the  greatest  self-delusions  with  regard
to  them !  We  are  often  mastered  by  a  feeling  which  has
already  struck  firm  roots  in  our  inmost  being  without  our
suspecting  it,  and  suddenly,  on  some  occasion  or  other,
there  fall,  as  it  were,  scales  from  our  eyes.  One  has  only  to
remember  how  often  the  souls  of  pure  girls  are  completely
possessed  by  a  first  love,  which  they  would  with  a  good
conscience  stoutly  deny  ;  but  should  the  unconsciously
loved  one  incur  a  danger  from  which  they  can  save  him,
then  all  at  once  the  hitherto  bashful  maiden  stands  forth
in  the  full  heroism  and  sacrificing  spirit  of  love,  shunning
neither  ridicule  nor  slander.  Then,  however,  she  also
knows  at  that  same  moment  that  she  loves  and  how  she
loves.  But  as  in  this  instance  love,  so  at  least  once  in  a
lifetime  every  spiritual  feeling,  has  existed  in  us,  and  the
process  in  virtue  of  which  we  become  self-conscious  once
for  all,  is  the  translation  of  the  unconscious  ideas  which
determined  feeling  into  conscious  ideas,  i.e.,  thoughts  and
words.


( 26o )


IV.


THE UNCONSCIOUS IN CHARACTER AND MORALITY.

There  is  no  manifestation  of  will  without  an  exciting  cause
or  motive.  The  will  of  the  individual  is  primarily  poten-
tial, a  latent  force,  and  its  passage  into  the  manifestation
of  energy,  into  definite  volition,  requires  as  sufficient  reason
a  motive  which  always  possesses  the  form  of  a  mental
representation.  These  psychological  premisses  I  assume.
Volition  as  such  only  differs  in  intensity.  All  other  ap-
parent attributes  of  the  volition  belong  to  its  contents,  i.e.,
to  the  mental  pictures  of  the  objects  of  volition,  and  this
content  again  is  connected  with  the  motives.  According  to
the  kinds  of  objects  most  eagerly  desired  (as  sensual  enjoy-
ment, goods  and  gold,  praise,  honour  and  renown,  successful
love,  enjoyment  of  art  and  artistic  productions,  knowledge,
&c),  is  volition  itself  distinguished  into  different  main  ten-
dencies (impulses),  as,  e.g.,  inordinate  longing  after  enjoy-
ments of  sense,  covetousness  and  avarice,  vanity,  ambition,
and  lust  of  fame,  ardour  of  love,  artistic  impulse,  thirst
for  knowledge,  and  the  spirit  of  inquiry,  &c.

If,  now,  this  content  of  volition  were  solely  dependent
on  motives,  psychology  would  be  very  simple  and  the
mechanism  definite  for  all  individuals.  Experience  shows,
however,  that  one  and  the  same  motive,  quite  apart  from
accidental  differences  of  disposition,  acts  differently  on
different  individuals.  Public  opinion  fails  to  affect  one,
is  all  in  all  to  another.  To  this  man  the  laurel  crown  of
the  poet  or  a  beautiful  woman  seems  contemptible,  whilst
another  sacrifices  his  life-happiness  for  their  possession.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 261

One  offers  his  property  to  save  his  honour,  another  sells
it  for  a  bribe.  Good  doctrines  and  fine  examples  spur
this  man  to  emulation,  and  that  man  they  leave  unaffected.
Kational  reflection  is  here  the  determiner  of  all  action,
there  it  has  no  motive  power,  and  the  certain  prospect  of
destruction  is  not  able  to  restrain  a  third  from  his  folly,
&c.  For  the  most  part,  consciousness  can  assign  no
reason  why  this  motive  (say,  the  expected  announcement
of  a  new  scientific  discovery)  possesses  an  attraction  for
me,  why  that  one  (say,  the  announcement  that  at  the
entertainment  to  which  I  am  invited  a  gaming-table  will
be  opened)  acts  as  a  feeble  inducement.  The  most
that  can  appear  in  consciousness  in  the  shape  of  an  inter-
mediary is  the  expectation  of  a  greater  or  smaller  plea-
sure;  but  what  is  enigmatical  and  unfathomable  in  my
nature  is,  why  I  promise  myself  a  great  pleasure  from
hearing  of  a  new  discovery,  but  from  the  game  of  hazard
a  small  or  no  pleasure  at  all,  whilst  the  converse  is  the
case  with  my  neighbour.

How  a  particular  individual  will  be  affected  by  this  or
that  motive  no  one  can  say  prior  to  experience  ;  but  if  we
know  how  a  man  reacts  on  all  possible  motives,  we  know
all  his  idiosyncrasies — become  acquainted  with  his  clieir-
acter.  Character  is  then  the  mode  of  reaction  on  every
special  class  of  motives,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  a  con-
densed expression  for  the  .stimulating  power  of  every  par-
ticular class  of  desires.  As  there  is  no  motive  which
belongs  exclusively  to  one  of  these  classes,  always  or
commonly  a  greater  number  of  impulses  are  affected;  and
the  resultant  of  the  desires  hereby  simultaneously  excited
is  tin;  active  will,  which  unceasingly  and  immediately
involves  the  net  if  this  is  not  prevented  by  physical
causes.  If  we  now  ask  what  sort  of  a  process,  then,  this
reaction  of  the  will  on  motive  and  this  opposition  of  the
desires  to  the  single  resultant  is,  we  must  confess  that  we
certainly  perceive  its  existence  through  undoubted  infer-
ences from  the facts falling  within  the  domain of  con-


262  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sciousness,  but  that  we  can  say  nothing  with  regard  to  its
particular  nature,  because  our  consciousness  affords  no
knowledge  thereof.  In  any  case,  we  only  know  the  first
term,  the  motive,  and  the  last  term,  the  particular  volition
or  result ;  but  what  that  is  which  reacts  on  motive  we  can
never  experience,  no  more  than  we  can  take  a  look  into  the
nature  of  this  reaction,  which  altogether  wears  the  charac-
ter of  reflex  action  or  reflectorial  instinct,  as  we  have  seen
in  the  special  case  of  Compassion  and  some  other  impulses
in  Sect.  B.  Chap.  i.  We  have,  doubtless,  in  part,  a  con-
sciousness of  the  conflict  of  various  desires,  but  only  so  far
as  we  have,  in  former  simpler  cases,  experienced  the  various
desires  apart  as  resultants,  and  apply  our  former  experience
to  the  present  case.  How  incomplete  these  experiences
are,  however,  and  how  imperfectly  they  are  used  for  the
understanding  of  a  present  psychical  process,  every  one
doubtless  will  have  experienced  in  his  own  person.

How  often  do  we  fancy  that  we  have  weighed  with  the
utmost  care  the  strength  of  all  operative  desires,  and  dis-
regarded none;  and  yet,  when  it  comes  to  action,  see,  to
our  extreme  surprise,  that  our  subtle  calculation  does  not
fit  the  case,  for,  lo  and  behold,  another  and  altogether
different  resultant  appears  as  sovereign  will.  (The  re-
marks on  an  unconscious  will  contained  in  the  last  chap-
ter, pp.  252,  253,  will  recur  to  the  reader.  Compare  also
Chap.  iii.  C.)  It  appears,  then,  that  there  is,  in  fact,  only
one  sure  token  of  the  proper,  true,  and  final  will,  that  is,
the  deed  (no  matter  whether  it  succeeds,  or  is  at  the  first
attempt  checked  by  external  circumstances),  but  that  every
other  supposition  of  consciousness  with  regard  to  what
one  properly  wills  remains  uncertain,  frequently  deceptive,
conjecture,  which  by  no  means  depends  on  an  immediate
conscious  cognition  of  the  will,  but  on  analogies  of  experi-
ence and  their  artificial  combination.  Often  the  firmest
resolve,  the  strictest  intention  is  dispersed  by  action  like
spray  before  the  wind,  when  the  true  will  emerges  from
the night of the Unconscious, whilst the intentional


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 263

will  was  only  one-sided  or  partial  desire,  or  was  only
imagined  by  consciousness,  and  did  not  exist  at  all.  If,
however,  the  man  never  acts,  as,  e.g.,  in  the  case  where
he  is  impressed  with  the  impossibility  of  execution,  he
never  knows  with  absolute  certainty  what  it  is  he
really  wills  at  the  bottom  of  his  heart.  The  so-called
conscious  choice  of  the  will  and  its  hesitancy  is  by  no
means  a  conscious  hesitancy  of  the  will,  but  a  vacillation
of  the  intellect  in  estimating  the  motives  and  realising
present  and  future  circumstances  as  affected  by  volition.
But  if  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  knowledge,  there  is
none  about  the  will ;  e.g.,  the  vacillation  of  my  choice,
whether  I  should  marry  the  clever  and  ugly  or  the  stupid
and  pretty  sister,  is  no  vacillation  of  my  will,  which,
meantime,  does  not  emerge  at  all,  but  of  my  understand-
ing with  respect  to  the  greatness  of  the  advantages  and
disadvantages  to  be  expected  in  either  case.  After  the
intellect  has  chosen,  the  motive  is  prepared  for  the  will,
namely,  the  idea  of  the  sum  total  of  satisfaction  to  be
expected  in  either  case.

We  may  then  regard  it  as  settled  that  the  laboratory
of  volition  is  hidden  in  the  Unconscious ;  that  we  can
only  get  to  see  the  finished  result,  and  then  only  at  the
moment  when  it  in  fact  comes  to  practical  application ;
and  that  the  glances  which  we  succeed  in  throwing  into
the  laboratory  are  only  able  to  afford  some  uncertain  in-
formation by  the  help  of  mirrors  and  optical  apparatus,
which,  however,  never  reveal  those  unconscious  depths
of  the  soul  where  occur  the  reaction  of  the  will  on
motives  and  its  passage  into  definite  volition.

If  we  must  now  confess  that  the  excitations  of  the
will  remain  for  us  eternally  covered  with  the  veil  of  the
Unconscious,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  we  are  also
not  so  easily  able  to  review  the  causes  which  condition
the  stimulating  power  of  different  desires,  or  the  dissimilar
reaction  of  the  will  of  different  individuals  on  the  same
motives  ;  we  must  be  provisionally  satisfied  with  seeing  in


264  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

them  the  inmost  nature  of  the  individual,  and  therefore
call  their  effect  very  appropriately  character,  i.e.,  mark
or  token  of  the  individual.  This  much,  however,  we  have
seen,  that  this  inmost  core  of  the  individual  soul  whose
efflux  is  the  character,  that  most  strictly  practical  ego  of
the  human  being,  to  which  one  reckons  desert  and  guilt,
and  ascribes  responsibility,  that  this  peculiar  essence
which  we  ourselves  are  is  still  more  remote  from  our  con-
sciousness and  the  sublimated  ego  of  pure  self-conscious-
ness than  anything  else  in  us ;  that  we  can  most  easily
get  to  know  this  deepest  core  of  ourselves  in  the  same
way  as  we  come  to  know  that  of  other  men,  namely,  by
inferences  from  action.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know
them."  This  saying  holds  good  also  for  self-knowledge ;
and  how  much  do  we  deceive  ourselves  therein  in  fancy-
ing we  have  performed  actions  from  quite  other  motives,
especially  better  motives,  than  is  actually  the  case,  as  we
sometimes  by  chance  learn  to  our  shame !  (For  the  con-
tinuation of  the  examination  of  Character,  see  the  second
half  of  Chap,  xi.,  sect.  C.)

It  may  not  be  superfluous  to  throw  a  side-glance  at  the
essence  of  the  ethical  from  this  point  of  view.  There  has
been  much  dispute  on  the  point  whether  virtue  can  be
taught,  and  theoretically  one  may  still  dispute  about  it  as
much  as  in  Plato's  time,  but  the  practical  psychologist  has
at  no  time  doubted  that,  apart  from  habit,  that  second
nature  of  the  soul,  which  is  a  breaking-in,  in  the  strict
sense,  because  fear  is  the  all-tamer,  that  without  habit,  I  say,
no  teaching  is  able  to  produce  morality,  but  only  to  awaken
an  existing  moral  consciousness  through  the  presentation
of  suitable  motives,  which  otherwise,  perhaps,  would  not
reach  the  pupil  in  tins  mode  and  strength.  Fur  it  is  evi-
dent that  morality  is  not  a  predicate  of  thought,  but  of
will.  The  emergence  of  the  will  into  actuality  as  reaction
on  motive  we  have,  however,  recognised  as  a  thoroughly
unconscious  act,  which  is  partly,  it  is  true,  dependent  on
the  nature  of  the  motive,  but  in  another  part  on  the  mode


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 265

of  reaction  and  strength  of  the  will.  The  motive  is  always
merely  idea,  and  can  thus  not  have  the  predicate  moral;  con-
sequently there  remains  for  morality  only  that  unconscious
factor  which  must  be  looked  upon  as  part  of  the  character,
and  belongs  to  the  inmost  core  of  individuality.  This  foun-
dation of  the  character  may,  as  has  been  said,  probably  be
modified  by  practice  and  habit  (through  intentional  or
accidential  partiality  of  the  motives  appearing  before  con-
sciousness), but  never  by  teaching ;  for  the  finest  know-
ledge of  ethics  is  dead  knowledge  if  it  does  not  act  as
motive  on  the  will,  and  whether  it  shall  do  so  depends
solely  on  the  nature  of  the  individual  will  itself,  i.e.,  on
the  character.  Thus  we  see  also  historically  that  the
people  who  most  of  all  have  morality  on  their  lips  often
have  least  morality  in  their  character;  that  people  of
eminent  mental  and  scientific  capacity  and  culture  are
not  seldom  morally  worthless  people;  and  that  conversely
the  purest,  most  unsullied  morality  is  to  be  found  in  people
of  slight  mental  cultivation,  who  have  never  occupied
themselves  with  ethical  problems,  who  often  have  never
enjoyed  a  good  education,  and  on  whom  the  bad  examples
surrounding  them  never  acted  as  incentives,  but  only  as
deterrents.  Accordingly  we  further  see  that  all  religions,
whatever  their  ethical  creed  may  be,  exert  equally  much
or  equally  little  influence  on  their  confessors ;  nay,  even
that  different  stages  of  culture  may  possibly  affect  the
coarseness  or  fineness  of  the  form  of  the  crimes  and  mis-
demeanours, but  have  no  real  influence  on  the  morality
of  the  character  and  the  goodness  and  purity  of  the  heart.
<  >n  the  other  hand,  the  morality  of  one  people  as  compared
with  that  of  another  is,  together  with  its  national  charac-
ter, exclusively  determined  by  its  manners  and  the  habits
resulting  from  education  ;  but  the  national  manners  again
are,  apart  from  the  accidents  of  external  position,  environ-
ment, and  inner  development,  dependent  on  the  notional
churned  r.

The  conclusion  is:  The  ethical  element  in  man,  i.e..  that


266  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

which  conditions  the  character  of  opinions  and  actions,
lies  in  the  deepest  night  of  the  Unconscious.  Conscious-
ness may  perhaps  influence  actions  by  emphatically  pre-
senting those  motives  which  are  adapted  to  react  on  the
unconscious  ethical,  but  whether  and  how  this  reaction
follows,  consciousness  must  calmly  await,  and  first  learn
wThen  the  will  proceeds  to  action,  whether  such  will  agrees
with  the  conceptions  which  it  entertains  of  moral  and
immoral.

It  is  hereby  proved  that  the  process  of  origination  of
that  to  which  we  assign  the  predicates  moral  and  immoral
lies  in  the  Unconscious.  We  must  now,  in  the  second
place,  show  that  these  predicates  denote  qualities  which
do  not  inhere  in  their  subject  in  and  of  themselves,  but
which  express  only  relations  of  the  same  to  a  quite  definite
standpoint  of  a  higher  consciousness,  i.e.,  that  these  predi-
cates are  only  creations  of  consciousness,  and  never  can
belong  to  the  Unconscious  in  itself.  It  immediately  follows
from  this  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  talk  of  a  moral  instinct,
since  it  is  true  the  actions  of  mankind  as  such  flow  from
the  unconscious  or  instinctive  part  of  character,  e.g.,  through
the  instincts  of  compassion,  gratitude,  revenge,  selfishness,
sensuality,  &c. ;  but  this  unconscious  production  can  never
have  anything  to  do  with  the  notions  moral  and  immoral,
because  they  are  only  engendered  by  consciousness,  and  a
conscious  instinct  would  be  a  contradictio  in  adjecto.  The
latter  remark  should  protect  me  from  being  credited  with
maintaining  an  instinctive  conscience  ;  on  the  contrary,  I
hold  conscience  to  be  no  simple  fact,  but  a  very  complex
one,  the  development  of  which  from  the  very  nume-
rous factors  of  consciousness  can  never  be  definitely
proved.

We  also  call  lifeless  natural  phenomena,  wind,  air,  por-
tents, good  and  bad;  further,  we  assign  these  predicates
to  animals  and  savages  or  young  children,  but  they  only
pass  into  moral  and  immoral  when  we  make  beings  respon-
sible for  their  operation. But  we  then,  again,  hold  beings


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 267

responsible  for  their  actions  when  their  consciousness  is
developed  to  such  a  degree  that  they  can  themselves
understand  the  notions  of  moral  and  immoral,  and  make
them  responsible  only  for  those  actions  which  their  con-
sciousness was  not  prevented  from  measuring  by  its
own  standard.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  we  call  one
and  the  same  action  moral  or  immoral  in  one  being  but
not  in  another.  For  example,  the  strict  sense  of  pro-
perty which  we  find  in  many  animals  within  their  own
species  and  narrow  community  {e.g.,  among  wild  horses
within  the  herd  in  respect  to  pastures  and  provender)  we
do  not  designate  a  moral,  but  only  a  good  quality.  Thus
we  cannot  call  it  immoral  when  wild  peoples  offer  even
their  wives  to  their  guests ;  on  the  contrary,  as  a  part  of
hospitality,  this  might  be  called  moral,  because  their  con-
sciousness is  at  any  rate  developed  up  to  this  stage,  but  not
to  the  comprehension  of  modesty  in  sexual  intercourse.
In  a  little  child,  we  can,  at  the  most,  only  term  bad  those
malignant  outbreaks  which  at  a  riper  age  would  cause  the
same  character  to  be  condemned  as  immoral.  Itevenge
for  bloodshed  would  among  ourselves  be  called  immoral ;
among  peoples  of  less  culture  it  is  a  moral  institution ;
among  quite  rude  savages  a  mere  act  of  passion  which
can  be  styled  neither  moral  nor  immoral.  These  examples
may  suffice  to  prove  that  moral  and  immoral  are  not  quali-
ties of  the  persons,  or  of  their  actions  in  themselves,  but
only  judgments  on  them  from  a  point  of  view  taken  by
consciousness — relations  between  those  beings  and  their
actions  on  the  one  hand,  and  this  standpoint  of  a  higher
stage  of  consciousness  on  the  other;  lhat  thus  Nature,  so
far  as  it  is  unconscious,  dues  not  kiuiw  the  distinction  of
moral  and  immoral.  Yes,  Nature  is  in  itself  tint  good  or
bad,  but  is  ever  nothing  else  but  natural,  i.e.,  self-adequate.
For  tin;  universal  natural  Will  has  nothing  outside  itself,
because  it  includes  everything  and  is  itself  everything;
thus  there  can  for  it  be  nothing  good  or  bad,  but  only  for
an  individual  will  ; for  a  relation  between  a  will  and  an


268  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

external  object  is  already  necessarily  presupposed  in  the
notions  good  and  bad.

In  all  this  we  by  no  means  desire  to  disparage  the  value
of  the  critical  point  of  view  adopted  by  consciousness ;  we
only  seek  to  avoid  the  error  of  supposing  conceptions  to  be
possible  outside  this  specific  point  of  view  which  only
arise  in  relation  to  it.  Certainly,  if  a  consciousness  be
assumed  external  and  prior  to  Nature  (in  a  personal  God),
one  may  also,  from  the  point  of  view  of  this  conscious-
ness, measure  the  world  by  the  standard  of  these  concep-
tions ;  but  if — as  we  shall  be  constrained  to  do  for  reasons
hereafter  to  be  assigned — we  reject  a  consciousness  outside
the  union  of  mind  and  matter,  the  possibility  also  dis-
appears of  applying  the  standard  of  those  conceptions  to
the  whole  unconscious  world, — a  point  on  which  much
unprofitable  labour  has  been  expended.  But  all  this  by
no  means  lowers  the  value  of  those  notions,  for  as,  in  spite
of  all  partiality  and  limitation,  consciousness  for  this
world  of  individuation  surpasses  in  importance  the  Un-
conscious, so,  in  the  last  resort,  the  moral  stands  higher
than  the  natural;  indeed,  consciousness  being  ultimately
also  only  an  unconscious  product  of  Nature,  the  moral  also
is  not  an  antithesis  of  the  natural,  but  only  a  higher  stage
of  it,  to  which  the  natural  has  risen  through  its  own
energy  and  the  instrumentality  of  consciousness.

I  must  here  content  myself  with  these  brief  indications,
as  an  ethic  worked  out  in  this  spirit  would  require  a
treatise  to  itself.  I  have  also  deemed  it  necessary  to
forego  explicitly  considering  why  and  how  judgments,  with
the  predicates  moral  and  immoral,  must  arise  at  a  certain
stage  of  consciousness,  and  what  the  content  of  those
notions  is.  I  thought  1  might  the  more  readily  do  this  as
the  general  understanding  of  those  conceptions  met  with  in
ordinary  life  appeared  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  our
present  inquiries.


( 269 )


V.

THE UNCONSCIOUS IX THE ^ESTHETIC JUDGMENT  AND IN
ARTISTIC PRODUCTION.

With  regard  to  the  perception  of  the  Beautiful  there
have  been  current  from  early  times  two  extreme  opinions,
which,  in  the  various  attempts  at  compromise,  have  ob-
tained very  different  recognition.  One  party,  taking  its
rise  from  Plato,  rely  on  this,  that  in  Art  the  human
mind  transcends  the  beauty  revealed  in  Nature,  and  hold
this  to  be  impossible  unless  there  indwell  in  the  soul  an
idea  of  the  beautiful,  a  certain  aspect  of  which  is  termed
an  Ideal,  and  which  serves  as  a  criterion  of  what  is  and  is
not  beautiful  in  Nature,  so  that  the  aesthetic  judgment  is  a
priori  and  synthetic.  The  other  party  point  out  that  in
those  creations  of  art  which  approximate  must  closely
to  the  alleged  ideals  there  are  contained  no  elements
which  Nature  herself  does  not  offer  to  the  view ;  that  the
idealising  activity  of  the  artist  only  consists  in  an  elimina-
tion of  the  ugly,  and  in  the  collecting  and  combining  of
those  elements  of  beauty  which  Nature  exhibits  apart ;
and  that  aesthetic  science  has  in  its  progress  more  and
more  demonstrated  the  psycho-genesis  of  the  a'Sthetic
judgment  from  given  psychological  and  physiological  con-
ditions, so  that  we  may  confidently  expect  a  complete
illumination  of  this  province,  and  its  purification  from  all
a  priori  and  supernatural  conceptions.

L  hold  that  each  side  is  partly  right,  partly  wrong.
The  empiricists  are  right  when  they  ailirm  that  every
aesthetic  judgment  must  be  founded  en  psychological  and
physiological conditions ; and  accordingly  it  is, strictly


270  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

speaking,  they  alone  who  create  scientific  ^Esthetics;  whilst
the  idealists,  by  their  hypothesis,  cut  away  the  founda-
tions of  such  science,  and  in  strictness  have  only  advanced
./Esthetics  so  far  as  they  were  at  the  same  time  more  or
less  consciously  empiricists,  i.e.,  substantially  limited  the
science  through  empirical  reception  of  the  matter  afforded
by  experience.  But  suppose  the  empiricists  had  obtained
their  end,  and  had  completely  analysed  the  aesthetic
judgment,  they  would  only  thereby  have  proved  its  objec-
tive connection  with  other  spheres — its  world-citizenship,
as  it  were,  in  the  realm  of  spirit  as  a  natural  existence,
but  would  have  left  untouched  its  subjective  origin  in  the
individual  consciousness,  or  would  have  maintained  some-
thing altogether  false  by  their  implicit  assertion  that  the
objective  connection  and  the  process  of  origination  in  the
subjective  consciousness  are  identical,  which  is  contradicted
by  all  unprejudiced  introspection,  and  the  testimony  of
the  simplest  as  of  the  most  cultivated  taste.  The  idealists
are  far  nearer  the  truth  when  they  allege  that  this  process
is  something  lying  beyond  consciousness,  antecedent  to  the
conscious  aesthetic  judgment,  consequently  something  a
priori  in  respect  of  the  latter.  They  are  again  in  the
wrong,  however,  when  they  annihilate  all  process  in  this
a  priori  by  their  ready-made  ideal,  which  is  derived  God
knows  whence,  of  whose  existence  consciousness  knows
nothing,  whose  objective  connection  with  other  psychical
phenomena  must  remain  for  ever  incomprehensible,  and
whose  rigidity  stamps  it  as  insufficient  when  we  con-
sider the  endless  variety  of  its  illustrations.

As  soon  as  aesthetic  Idealism  wishes  to  do  more  than
set  up  its  principle  in  general,  as  soon  as  it  enters  more
intimately  into  the  wealth  of  the  given  manifold,  it  sees
itself  compelled  to  confess  the  untenability  of  the  abstract
ideal,  which  is  a  vague  unity,  and  to  admit  that  the
Beautiful  is  only  possible  in  the  most  concrete  particu-
larity, because  individually  intuited  (e.g.,  the  human  ideal
as  masculine  and  feminine;  the  former  again  as  ideal  of


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 271

the  child,  boy,  youth,  man,  old  man ;  the  ideal  of  the  man
again  as  ideal  of  a  Hercules,  Odysseus,  Zeus,  &c.) ;  that  thus
the  concrete  ideal  must  be  no  longer  a  vague  unity,  but
an  indefinite  plurality  of  the  most  definite  types.  To  assert
the  eternal  existence  of  these  infinitely  numerous  concrete
ideals  would  be  to  set  infinitely  numerous  miracles  in  the
place  of  the  one  miracle  of  the  abstract  ideal.  If,  to
escape  this  difficulty,  the  vague  ideal  is  posited  as  a  fluid
unity  concreting  into  plurality  according  to  circumstances,
this  process  of  concretion  must  still  proceed  in  a  mind  ;
but  the  inability  of  the  absolutely  indeterminate  one  ideal
of  beauty  to  concrete  itself  by  its  own  power  would  have
to  be  recognised,  since  no  content  could  come  of  itself
from  that  which  is  perfectly  void  of  content.  The  creative
process  in  the  unconscious  mind,  as  whose  result  the  con-
crete ideal  springs  into  consciousness,  accordingly  finds
no  help  at  all  in  the  hypothetically  abstract  ideal ;  it
also,  however,  no  longer  needs  help,  for  it  carries  the
formal  principle  of  aesthetic  formation  in  itself,  and  does
not  need  to  seek  it  first  in  the  impossible  absolute  ideal  of
beauty.  Only  in  this  sense  of  a  concrete  ideal  to  be  un-
consciously created  in  the  concrete  case,  recent  aesthetic
idealists  even  (like  Schasler)  understand  the  aesthetic
ideal;  and  aesthetic  Idealism  so  understood  is  ripe  for
reconciliation  and  fusion  with  aesthetic  Empiricism,  when
it  recognises  that  precisely  through  its  correct  understand-
ing of  the  formal  process  as  a  priori  and  unconscious  it
is  bound,  a  posteriori,  to  borrow  empirically  from  conscious-
ness the  aesthetic  content  of  this  infinite  wealth  of  concrete
ideals  to  which  analysis,  reflection,  and  speculation  may
then  be  applied.

To  take  a  very  simple  example.  The  abstract  idealists
would  be  obliged  to  judge  tone,  harmony,  and  timbre
according  to  an  ideal  tone,  ideal  harmony,  and  ideal
timbre,  and  according  to  their  approximation  to  the  latter
to  determine  their  tone-colour;  whilst  Helmholtz  ("On
the  Sensations  of  Tone  ")  proves  that  in  all  three  cases


272  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

pleasure  is  to  be  conceived  as  negation  of  a  displeasure,
which  arises  through  disturbances  in  the  ear  in  the  form
of  noise,  dissonance,  and  disagreeable  timbre  similar  to
the  flickering  of  light.  This  displeasure  is  not  sesthetical,
but  just  as  much  a  weak  physical  pain  as  colic,  tooth-
ache, or  the  pain  produced  by  drawing  a  slate-pencil
across  a  slate.  Thus  the  aesthetic  pleasure  in  the  sensuous
part  of  music  has  been  proved  to  be  objectively  con-
nected with  physical  pain,  but  the  mode  of  origin  of  the
eesthetic  judgment — ''  this  tone,  this  harmony,  this  timbre
is  beautiful " — is  by  no  means  this,  that  I  am  conscious
while  listening  :  "  I  feel  now  no  pain  through  disturb-
ances, and  yet  a  gentle  excitement  of  the  function  of  the
organ,  ergo  I  feel  pleasure."  Nothing  of  all  these  or  such-
like processes  is  found  in  consciousness,  but  in  our  con-
sciousness the  pleasure  is  co  ijjso  contemporaneous  with
the  listening;  it  is  then  as  if  brought  forth  by  enchant-
ment, without  the  most  strained  attention  being  able  to
detect  in  the  subjective  event  a  clue  to  the  mode  of  origin.
This  by  no  means  precludes  the  objectively  recognised
connection  being  really  completed  in  the  Unconscious  as
process ;  this  is,  even  according  to  my  view,  that  which  is
alone  probable,  but  the  result  is  the  only  thing  which
enters  into  consciousness,  and  that,  too,  in  the  first  place,
momentarily,  after  the  complete  perception  of  the  sen-
suous observation ;  so  that  here  again,  also,  there  is  veri-
fied the  instantaneousness  of  the  process  in  the  Uncon-
scious, its  compression  into  the  timeless  instant ;  and,
secondly,  not  as  aesthetic  judgment,  but  as  feeling  of
pleasure  or  displeasure.

The  latter  point  must  be  looked  at  still  more  closely,
and  will  best  serve  to  clear  up  any  remaining  obscurity.
As  Locke  showed,  the  words  which  denote  sensuous  quali-
ties of  bodies,  as  "  sweet,  red,  soft,"  have  a  double  meaning,
which  in  practice  are  treated  as  identical  by  the  common
human  understanding  without  harm.  In  the  first  place,
they  denote the  state  of the  mind  in  perception and


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 273

sensation ;  and,  secondly,  that  quality  of  external  objects
which  is  presumed  as  cause  of  this  psychical  state.  Every
sensation  is  in  itself  individual,  but  when  the  common
portions  are  abstracted  from  different  series  of  similar
sensations,  there  are  acquired  the  notions  <:  sweet,  red
soft ; "  and  when  the  objective  causes  of  these  abstract
sensations  are  treated  as  qualitative  elements  of  things
already  known  from  other  effects,  there  arise  the  judg-
ments :  "  Sugar  is  sweet,  the  rose  is  red,  the  fur  is  soft."

The  same  process  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  aesthetic  judg-
ment. The  mind  finds  in  itself  a  number  of  sensations,
which,  although  bound  up  with  individual  peculiarities,
have  yet  so  much  resemblance  that  an  identical  portion
can  be  set  apart :  this  receives  the  name  Beautiful.  Now
when  the  cause  of  this  sensation  is  referred  to  external
objects  which  are  constructed  of  simultaneously  occurring
perceptions,  this  cause  is  stamped  as  the  quality  of  these
objects  and  likewise  receives  the  name  Beautiful;  thus
there  arises  the  judgment:  "The  tree  is  beautiful."  It
should  not  surprise  us  that  common  sense  almost  always
refers  the  notion  only  to  the  cause,  rarely  to  the  sensation,
for  the  same  occurs  also  in  "  sweet,  red,  soft,"  and  has  its
good  ground  in  practice,  since  his  own  sensations  can  only
be  of  interest  to  the  practical  man  so  far  as  they  instruct
him  witli  respect  to  the  external  world.

The  aesthetic  judgment  is  either  impossible  to  him  who
is  lacking  in  aesthetic  feeling,  who  has  no  joy  in  beauty,  or
it  is  an  unemotional  abstraction  from  acquired  general  rules
without  subjective  truth,  it  follows  from  this  that  the
aesthetic  juibjment  is  not  a  priori,  but  rather  a  pustcriari  <  1
empirical;  for  both  the  external  object  and  the  aesthetic
pleasure  are  given  through  experience,  and  the  external
cause  of  pleasure  can  only  lie  in  the  object,  as  the  cause
of  the  sweet  sensation  of  taste  only  in  the  sugar.  ^Esthetic
■pli'tisi/rr  itself,  however,  which  is  found  in  consciousness
as  an  equally  inexplicable  fact,  as  the  sensation  of  tone,
taste,  colour,  &c,  and  l.ke this  occurs  in  any  inner  ex-

voL.  1.  s


274  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

perience  as  something  ready  made  and  given,  may  owe
its  origin  only  to  a  process  in  the  Unconscious  ;  this  might
then  be  called  just  as  well  as  any  other  sensation  some-
thing a  priori,  were  not  this  expression  merely  in  use  for
conceptions  and  judgments.

The  ability  to  feel  aesthetically  (like  the  ability  to  feel
sweet,  sour,  bitter,  rough,  &c),  called  Taste,  can  certainly,
like  the  taste  of  the  tongue  and  of  the  palate,  be  formed
and  exercised  to  react  on  fine  differences;  it  can  also  by
powerful  custom,  that  second  nature,  be  alienated  from  its
first  nature,  instinct,  and  spoiled ;  but  in  every  case  the  sen-
sation presents  itself  as  a  given  fact,  subject  to  no  caprice.
But  now  aesthetic  sensation  is  distinguished  from  merely
sensuous  feelings  in  this,  that  it  stands  on  the  shoulders  of
the  latter;  that  it  uses  them  perhaps  as  material,  also  as
concomitant  presentations  through  which  its  special  quality
is  in  every  case  determined;  but  that  as  feeling  it  stands
above  them  and  is  built  upon  them.  If,  therefore,  the
unconscious  genesis  of  the  sensuous  qualities  is  an  imme-
diate reaction  of  the  soul  on  the  nerve  irritant,  the  uncon-
scious genesis  of  aesthetic  sensation  is  rather  a  reaction  of
the  soul  on  ready-made  sensuous  feelings, — a  reaction  of
the  second  order,  as  it  were.  This  is  the  reason  why  the
origin  of  sensuous  feeling  will  probably  always  remain
veiled  in  impenetrable  obscurity,  whilst  we  have  already
partially,  in  the  discursive  form  of  conscious  representa-
tion, reconstructed  and  comprehended,  i.e.,  conceptually
resolved,  the  process  of  origin  of  aesthetic  sensation.

"We  have  as  little  to  trouble  ourselves  here  about  the
essence  of  the  Beautiful  as  about  the  essence  of  the
Moral  in  the  last  chapter.  As  it  there  sufficed  us  that
the  predicate  'moral  could  only  be  applied  to  actions  from
the  point  of  view  of  consciousness,  but  that  the  actions
themselves,  to  which  this  predicate  is  given  or  refused,
are  in  the  last  resort  incalculable  reactions  of  the  Uncon-
scious, so  the  only  point  to  be  considered  here  is  the
cognition  that  the  aesthetic  judgment  is  an empirically


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 275

established  judgment,  but  has  its  foundation  in  aesthetic
feeling,  whose  origination  falls  entirely  within  the  Un-
conscious.

If  we  now  pass  from  the  passive  reception  of  the  beau-
tiful to  its  active  production,  a  short  consideration  of  the
creative  fancy,  and  consequently  of  fancy  or  imagina-
tion, seems  in  general  indispensable.  (Comp.  also  above
A.  Chap.  vii.  1,  b,  pp.  174,  175.)  The  sensuous  faculty  of
presentation,  imagination,  or  fancy,  in  its  widest  sense,  has
very  different  degrees  of  vividness  in  different  persons.
According  to  Fechner's  statements,  which  are  confirmed
by  my  own  numerous  trials  of  others,  women  have  this
power  in  a  higher  degree  than  men,  and  of  the  latter,
those  least  of  all  who  are  accustomed  to  think  abstractly
and  to  neglect  the  external  world.  In  the  lowest  degree,
colours  cannot  at  all  be  imagined,  and  forms  only  very
indistinctly,  without  fixity,  with  shifting  outlines,  generally
only  perceptible  for  brief  moments ;  with  higher  degrees
of  imagination,  plain,  not  too  large  images  can  be  dis-
tinctly represented  without  effort,  stationary,  in  lively
colours ;  and  by  turning  the  head,  objectively  fixed  or
concurrently  moving  at  will.  In  the  highest  degree,  the
vividness  and  distinctness  does  not  at  all  yield  to  that  of
the  sense-impression  ;  the  images  can  be  arranged  at  plea-
sure both  in  the  black  held  of  vision  of  the  shut  eye,  and
in  the  held  of  vision  filled  by  external  sense-impressions
(witness  that  painter  who  let  his  model  sit  for  only  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  and  then  by  an  effort  of  will  called  up
the  image  of  the  same  sitting  on  the  chair,  and  afterwards
portrayed  it,  so  that  as  often  as  he  raised  his  eye*  he  saw
the  person  quite  distinctly  seated  on  the  chair).  Further,
whole  compositions,  trains  of  many  figures,  or  elaborate
orchestral  compositions,  can  be  carried  about  nieivly  in
idea  for  months  without  loss  of  definition,  as  we  know
of  Mozart  that  he  never  recorded  his  compositions  on
paper  until  necessity  drove  him  to  it,  but  then  often
wrote  down  the  several  orchestral  parts  without  the  score


276  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

{e.g.,  the  overture  to  "  Don  Juan"),  and  this  work  became
so  mechanical  to  him,  that  he  is  said  to  have  conceived
other  compositions  at  the  same  time.  I  considered  these
illustrations  as  not  without  utility  for  giving  the  reader,
who  may  be  lacking  in  this  intuitive  power,  some  idea
of  the  practicability  of  framing  conceptions  at  once  vast
and  indivisible.  Experience  proves  that  there  never  was
a  true  genius  who  did  not  possess  this  faculty  of  sensuous
intuition  in  a  large  degree,  at  least  in  his  own  department.
Moreover,  there  is  no  question  that  if,  in  our  sober,  rational
age,  such  examples  are  still  possible,  that  in  earlier  ages,
when  sensuous  intuition  was  much  more  practised  and
cultivated,  and  was  less  kept  under  by  abstract  thinking,
when  man  surrendered  himself  still  more  unreservedly  to
the  good  and  evil  whisperings  of  his  genius  or  daemon,
it  is  conceivable  that,  as  among  the  saints,  martyrs,
prophets,  and  mystics,  so  also  among  inspired  artists,
a  blending  of  voluntary  sense-intuition  and  involuntary
hallucination  may  have  taken  place,  wdiich  had  nothing
shocking  for  these  children  of  a  more  fortunate  Nature,
not  yet  at  variance  with  their  august  mother,  but,
on  the  contrary,  was  so  much  esteemed,  as  a  condition
of  every  production  of  the  Muses,  that  the  enthusiastic
Plato  has  bequeathed  us  the  declaration  (Pluedrus) :
"What  an  excellent  man  produces  in  divine  frenzy,  wliich
is  letter  than  sober  reflection,  namely,  the  divine,  in  that  the
soul  recognises  as  in  a  brightly  shining  after-image  what
it  looked  upon  in  the  hour  of  rapture,  walking  in  the  foot-
steps of  Deity,  and  which  beholding,  it  is  necessarily
filled  with  rapture  and  love."  "  Frenzy  is  not  absolutely
an  evil,  but  through  it  the  greatest  goods  came  to  Hellas."
And  even  at  the  time  of  Cicero  poetic  inspiration  was
called  furor  poeticus.  In  modern  times,  Shaftesbury  in
particular  has  laid  stress  upon  the  fundamental  importance
of  enthusiasm  for  the  origination  of  everything  true,  great,
and  beautiful.

If  we  now,  however,  look  at  the  forms  of  fancy  them-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 277

selves,  we  find,  on  decomposing  them  into  their  elements,
even  when  we  take  up  the  wildest  productions  of  Oriental
extravagance,  nothing  which  could  not  have  been  obtained
by  means  of  sensuous  perception  aided  by  a  retentive
memory.  We  can  discover  no  new  simple  colour,  no
simple  smell,  taste,  tone.  Even  in  the  realm  of  space,
which  allows  the  greatest  scope  for  novel  constructions,
we  find  in  arabesques  only  the  familiar  elements  of  the
straight  line,  the  circle,  the  ellipse,  and  other  well-known
curves ;  nay,  even  in  the  animals  of  fable  we  rarely  find
parts  derived  from  the  inorganic  and  vegetable  world,  and
conversely.  Invention  is  limited  to  disjoining  familiar
ideas  and  rearranging  the  severed  parts.  If,  now,  any-
body possesses  a  lively  imagination,  at  the  same  time  a
fine  sense  for  the  beautiful,  and  a  copious  store  of  re-
membered ideas  ever  at  command,  wherein  the  beautiful
elements  are  particularly  richly  represented,  it  will  not
be  difficult  for  him,  by  leaning  on  Xature,  that  is,  on
given  sense-perceptions,  by  eliminating  ugly  and  inserting
beautiful  elements,  which  yet  do  not  offend  against  truth
and  unity,  to  create  in  an  artistic  fashion.  E'.y.,  when  any
one  paints  a  portrait,  essential  truth  is  lost  by  simply
rendering  the  chance  aspect  of  the  person.  This  would
be  a  mechanical,  not  an  artistic  performance.  But  when
the  artist  places  the  person  in  such  a  light,  position,
direction,  and  attitude  that  he  shows  himself  in  the  most
favourable  manner  possible;  when,  of  the  various  moods
and  expressions  during  the  sitting,  the  artist  retains  that
which  makes  the  finest  impression  ;  and  accordingly  re-
presses or  lets  pass  all  unfavourable  and  non-beautiful
traits  and  singularities,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  brings
into  the  foreground  and  places  in  a  favourable  light  all
advantageous  traits  and  details,  perhaps  even  adding  new
ones  so  far  as  the  truth  of  the  idea,  i.e.,  the  likeness,  allows,
then  he  has  produced  a  work  of  art,  for  he  has  idealised.

Thus  works  ordinary  talent ;  it  produces  artistically  by
means  of  rational  selection  and  combination,  guided  by  its


27S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

aesthetic  judgment.  At  this  point  stands  the  ordinary
dilettante  and  the  majority  of  professional  artists.  They
one  and  all  cannot  comprehend  that  these  means,  sup-
ported by  technical  routine,  may  perhaps  accomplish
something  excellent,  but  can  never  attain  to  anything
great,  can  never  pass  out  of  the  well-worn  groove  of  imi-
tation nor  produce  an  original  ivorh  ;  for,  if  they  admitted
that,  they  must  perforce  abjure  their  calling  and  declare
their  life  to  be  a  failure.  Here  everything  is  still  done
with  conscious  choice ;  there  is  wanting  the  divine  frenzy,
the  vivifying  breath  of  the  Unconscious,  which  appears
to  consciousness  as  higher  inexplicable  suggestion,  which
it  is  forced  to  apprehend  as  fact  without  ever  being
able  to  unravel  its  law.  Conscious  combination  may,  in
course  of  time,  be  acquired  by  effort  of  the  conscious
will,  by  industry,  endurance,  and  practice.  The  creation
of  genius  is  an  unwilled,  passive  conception ;  it  does  not
come  with  the  most  earnest  seeking,  but  quite  unex-
pectedly, as  if  fallen  from  heaven,  on  journeys,  in  the
theatre,  in  conversation,  everywhere  where  it  is  least  ex-
pected, and  always  suddenly  and  instantaneously.  Con-
scious combination  works  out  laboriously  the  smallest
details,  and  gradually  constructs  a  whole  with  painful
hesitation  and  head-splitting,  with  frequent  rejecting  and
resuming  of  the  single  parts.  The  conception  of  genius
receives  the  whole  from  one  mould,  as  gift  of  the  gods,
unearned  by  toil ;  and  it  is  just  the  details  which  are
wanting  to  it — must  be  wanting,  because  in  the  larger  com-
positions (grouped  images,  poetic  works)  the  human  mind
is  too  narrow  to  obtain  more  than  the  most  general  total
impression  at  a  single  glance.  Combination  procures  the
unity  of  the  whole  by  laborious  adaptation  and  experi-
mentation in  detail,  and  therefore,  in  spite  of  all  its  labour,
never  accomplishes  its  purpose,  but  always  allows,  in  its
bungling  work,  the  conglomerate  of  the  details  to  be
visible.  Genius,  in  virtue  of  t'he  conception  from  the
Unconscious,  has.  in  the  necessary  appropriateness and


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 279

mutual  relations  of  the  several  parts,  a  unity  so  perfect  that
it  can  only  be  compared  to  the  unity  of  natural  organisms,
which  likewise  springs  out  of  the  Unconscious.

These  phenomena  are  confirmed  by  all  true  geniuses
who  have  instituted  and  communicated  self-observations
thereupon,1  and  every  one  who  has  ever  had  a  truly
original  thought  in  any  direction  can  find  it  proved  in
his  own  person.  I  will  here  only  quote  an  observation
of  the  no  less  artistic  than  philosophical  Schelling  (Trans-
cend. Idealism.,  pp.  459,  460):  '"'...  As  the  artist  is  urged
to  production  involuntarily,  and  even  with  inner  aversion
(accordingly  among  the  ancients  the  expressions  pati  deum,
&c,  and  hence  in  general  the  idea  of  inspiration  through
extraneous  afflation),  so  the  objective  is  also  added  to  his
production  as  it  were  without  his  action,  i.e.,  itself  merely
objectively." [P.  454  he  says :  "  Objective  is  only  what


1  One  of  the  purest  geniuses,  i.e.,
least  possibly  influenced  by  reflec-
tion, and  at  the  same  time  a
thoroughly  honest,  childlike  nature,
was  Mozart,  who  expresses  himself
in  a  letter  (see  Jahn's  "  Mozart,"  vol.
iii.  pp.  423-425)  in  the  following  re-
markable manner  with  respect  to
his  artistic  productions  :  "  And  now
I  come  to  the  most  difficult  point  of
all  in  your  letter,  and  one  which  I
should  prefer  to  pass  by  altogether,
because  my  pen  is  not  at  my  service
for  anything  of  the  sort.  But  yet
I  will  make  an  attempt,  even  if  you
should  find  it  somewhat  ridiculous.
What,  you  ask,  is  my  method  in
writing  and  elaborating  my  large
and  lumbering  things  ?  I  can  in
fact  say  nothing  more  about  it  than
this:  I  do  not  myself  know  and
can  never  find  out.  When  I  am  in
particularly  good  condition,  perhaps
riding  in  a  carriage,  or  in  a  walk
after  a  good  meal,  and  in  a  sleepless
night,  then  the  thoughts  come  to
me  in  a  rush,  and  best  of  all.  Whence
and  Itoir  — that  I  do  not  hno/r  and  cttn-
not  learn.  Those  which  please  me
1  retain  in  my  head,  and  hum  them
perhaps also  to  myself — at  least  so


others  have  told  me.  If  I  stick  to
it,  there  soon  come  one  after  an-
other useful  crumbs  for  the  pie,
according  to  counterpoint,  harmony
of  the  different  instruments,  &c,  &c.
That  now  inflames  my  soul,  namely,
if  I  am  not  disturbed.  Then  it  goes
on  growing,  and  I  keep  on  expand-
ing it  and  making  it  more  distinct,
and  the  thing,  however  long  it  be,
becomes  indeed  almost  finished  in
my  head,  so  that  I  afterwards  sur-
vey it  at  a  glance,  like  a  goodly
picture  or  handsome  man,  and  in
my  imagination  do  not  hear  it  at
all  in  succession,  as  it  afterwards
must  be  heard,  but  as  a  simulta-
neous whole.  That  is  indeed  a  feast  !
All  the  finding  and  making  onhi  <jois
on  in  me  as  in  a  vinj  vivid  dream.
l>ut  the  rehearsal — all  together,  that
is  best  of  all.  What  now  has  thus
come  into  being  in  this  way.  that  I
do  not  easily  forget,  ;e_'am,  ami  it
is  perhaps  the  best  gift  winch  the
Lord  (iod  has  given  me.  When  now
I  afterwards  come  to  write  it  down,
1  take  out  of  the  sack  of  my  brain
wdiat  has  been  previously  garnered
in  the  aforesaid  luaum  r.  Accord-
ingly  it gets  pretty  quickly on to


280  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

arises  without  consciousness;  the  properly  objective  in  the
intuition  must  therefore  also  not  be  procurable  with  con-
sciousness."] "  Just  as  the  man  of  destiny  does  not  execute
what  he  wills  or  intends,  but  what  he  is  obliged  to  exe-
cute through  an  incomprehensible  fate  under  whose  in-
fluence he  stands,  so  the  artist,  however  full  of  design  he
is,  yet,  in  respect  of  that  which  is  the  properly  objective
in  his  production,  seems  to  stand  under  the  influence  of
a  power  which  separates  him  from  all  other  men,  and
compels  him  to  declare  or  represent  things  which  he  him-
self does  not  completely  see  through,  and  whose  import  is
infinite."

In  order,  however,  to  avoid  misunderstanding,  I  must
still  add  the  following.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  by  no
means  indifferent  what  soil  the  genius  has  prepared  in
his  mind  in  order  that  the  germs  which  fall  into  it  from
the  Unconscious  may  shoot  up  in  luxuriant  organic  forms,
for  when  they  fall  on  rock  or  sand  they  languish.  That
is  to  say,  the  genius  must  be  practised  and  educated  in  his
own  department,  have  stored  up  in  his  memory  a  rich
supply  of striking images,  and  indeed  with  a  selection

paper  ;  for,  as  has  been  said,  it  is  both  outwardly  and  inwardly.  At
properly  speaking  already  finished  ;  any  rate,  I  know  that  I  have  as
and  will,  moreover,  also  be  seldom  little  given  mj'self  the  one  as  the
very  different  from  what  it  was  pre-  other.  With  this  let  me  off  now  and
viously  in  the  head.  Accordingly  I  for  ever,  my  very  good  friend  ;  and
may  be  disturbed  in  writing,  and  do  not  at  all  think  that  I  break  off
even  all  sorts  of  things  may  go  on  from  any  other  reason  than  that  I
around  me,  still  I  go  on  writing  ;  do  not  know  how  to  go  on.  You,
even  also  chatting  at  the  same  time,  a  scholar,  have  no  idea  how  bitter
namely,  of  hens  and  <^ee>e,  or  of  this  has  already  been  to  me."  Comp.
Dolly  and  Joan,  &c.  But  now,  with  for  confirmation  of  this  the  opinions
respect  to  my  works,  how  everything  of  Schiller,  as  expressed  in  the  re-
altogether  assumes  just  that  form  or  markable  poem  "  Happiness,"  sug-
manner  that  they  are  Mozartian,  gested  in  all  probability  by  the
and  not  in  the  style  of  anybody  else,  patent  contrast  between  the  ease  of
it  just  amounts  to  this,  that  my  nose  genius  as  illustrated  in  the  creations
is  just  so  long  and  crooked  that  it  of  Goethe,  and  his  own  reflective
has  become  Mozartian,  and  not  as  work.  Comp.  further  my  essay  on
in  other  people.  For  I  am  unable  Otto  Ludwig  :  "  From  a  Poet's
to  characterise  it  more  particularly.  Workshop,"  in  the  "  Austrian
Tt  is,  however,  very  natural  that  Weekly  Journal  for  Science  and
people  who  reallv  have  an  exterior  Art,"  1872,  Xo.  41.
should  also  look  differently  to  others


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 281

of  the  beautiful,  which  must  be  effected  with  nice  dis-
crimination. For  this  material  is  the  body  in  which  the
Idea  yet  in  the  Unconscious  and  formless  will  take  shape.
If  the  artist  has  corrupted  his  a3sthetic  judgment,  and  as
a  consequence  has  received  with  predilection  unlovely
material,  this  bad  ground  too  will  introduce  improper
elements  into  the  seed-corn  which  derives  it  nourishment
from  it,  and  thus  the  plant  will  not  thrive.

In  the  second  place,  in  what  has  been  said  it  is  not
asserted  that  every  work  of  art  arises  from  a  single  concep-
tion ;  thus  episodes  show  in  the  simplest  form  the  union
of  different  conceptions. For  the  most  part,  however,  it
is  a  single  conception  which  furnishes  the  fundamental
idea ;  where  that  is  not  so,  the  unity  of  the  work  of  art
always  suffers. The  unity  of  the  original  total  conception,
however,  by  no  means  excludes — in  greater  works  it  even
requires — support  by  partial  conceptions,  conceptions  of
the  second  order,  as  it  were. For  if  rational  work  alone
is  to  fill  up  the  entire  interval  between  the  first  concep-
tion and  the  completed  work,  there  is  a  danger  in  the
absence  of all  specialities,  unavoidable  in  the  iirst  con-
ception of  larger  works,  of  the  want  of  conception  in  the
different  parts  of  the  work  becoming  perceptible,  just  as
in  lesser  works  of  purely  rational  construction,  or  of  the
unity  of the  whole idea  being  injuriously  affected  by
greater  changes  in  the  parts. For  all  that,  there  remains
a  great  field  for  the  exercise  of  the  understanding;  and
if  the  genius  is  wanting  in  requisite  energy,  endurance,
industry, and rational  judgment, the gifted conception
will  bear  no  fruits  fur  the  artist  and  humanity;  for  tin;
work  remains  either  uncommenced  or  unfinished,  or  worked
out  only  in  outline  and  imperfectly  (slovenly  executed).
Undoubtedly the understanding should always at the
same  time  remain  conscious  of  its  position  of  service,  as
it  were. It  must  not  be  hypercritical,  and  desire  to  treat
professorially  the inspirations of  the Unconscious, else
it  spoils  the  work,  introducing  by  partial  improvements


282  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

a  deterioration  in  many  other  respects,  and  destroying
or  disturbing  the  organic  unity  and  naturalness  of  the
work  of  art.  How  far,  however,  the  work  of  reason  may
be  admitted  without  disturbing  the  conceptions  of  the
Unconscious,  this  again  not  itself,  but  only  the  aesthetic
taste  or  tact  of  the  artist,  i.e.,  his  unconsciously  founded
feeling  of  beauty,  has  power  to  determine,  and  on  that
account  during  the  entire  duration  of  the  exercise  of  the
reasoning  faculty,  the  Unconscious  must  keep  guard  over
the  conscious  understanding  as  overseer  of  the  marches.
This  is  the  reason  why  Schelling,  and  after  him  Carriere
(comp.  above,  p.  42),  were  able  to  explain  all  artistic  acti-
vity as  a  constant  interfusion  of  unconscious  and  con-
scious activity,  in  which  each  side  is  equally  indispensable
to  the  other  for  bringing  the  result  to  pass.

Thirdly,  the  observation  that  the  unconscious  will  has
no  influence  on  the  carrying  out  of  the  conception  must
not  be  misunderstood.  Conscious  will  in  general  is
mainly  just  its  indispensable  condition ;  for  only  when
the  whole  soul  of  a  man  lives  and  moves  in  his  art  do
all  the  threads  of  his  interest  converge  therein,  and  there
is  no  power  which  would  be  able  permanently  to  turn
the  will  from  this  its  highest  endeavour ;  only  then  is
the  influence  of  the  conscious  mind  on  the  Unconscious
powerful  enough  to  attain  truly  great,  noble,  and  pure
inspirations.  On  the  other  hand,  conscious  will  has  no
influence  at  the  moment  of  conception ;  nay,  a  strained
conscious  seeking  after  it,  a  one-sided  concentration  of
the  attention  in  this  direction,  immediately  hinders  the
reception  of  the  Idea  from  the  Unconscious,  because  the
causal  nexus  of  the  two  terms  in  respect  of  such  extra-
ordinary demands  of  the  Unconscious  is  so  subtile,  that
every  preoccupation  of  the  consciousness  in  this  direction
must  act  disturbingly,  every  actual  one-sided  tension  of
the  parts  of  the  brain  concerned  makes  the  ground  to  be
traversed  uneven.  Hence  the  occurrence  of  the  concep-
tion, when  quite  other  parts  of  the  brain  are  occupied


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 2S3

with  quite  other  thoughts,  as  soon  as  through  a  still
looser  association  of  ideas  the  impulse  is  given  to  the
causality  of  the  Unconscious  ;  but  such  an  impulse  there
must  he,  if  it  is  also  for  the  most  part  immediately  for-
gotten again,  for  the  universal  laws  of  mind  can  even
here  not  be  transgressed.

In  the  fourth  and  last  place,  it  is  to  be  noted  that
the  fructifying  conception  is  never  wanting,  even  in  the
rational  works  of  mere  talent,  but  is  merely  limited  to
such  small  amounts  that  they  elude  ordinary  introspection.
But  when  once  what  is  characteristic  in  this  process
has  been  comprehended  in  the  case  of  rare  genius, —
and  we  consider  that  there  are  innumerable  degrees  from
it  to  talent,  from  talent  to  the  talentless  worrying  the
bare  understanding  by  the  help  of  learnt  rules, — an
abundance  of  examples  will  soon  present  themselves
which  more  or  less  exhibit  the  character  of  inspiration
from  the  Unconscious ;  as,  for  instance,  when  one  is
engaged  in  any  work,  this  or  that  improvement  suddenly
occurs  at  quite  another  time,  and  the  like.  To  any  one
doubting  this,  I  shall,  in  conclusion,  prove  that  every
combination  of  sensuous  presentations,  when  it  is  not
left  purely  to  chance,  but  is  to  lead  to  a  definite  end,
receives  the  help  of  the  Unconscious.

The  laws  of  the  association  of  ideas  or  sequence  of  thought
contain  three  essential  moments:  (1.)  the  evoking  idea;
(2.)  the  idea  called  up;  and  (3.)  the  special  interest  lead-
ing to  the  calling  up  of  the  idea.  As  for  the  inter-
relations of  the  first  two  apart  from  the  third,  and  the
laws  of  their  connection,  they  must  be  referred  essentially
to  the  mechanical  causality  of  the  molecular  vibrations
of  the  brain,  to  the  greater  or  less  affinity  of  the  cerebral
vibrations  corresponding  with  the  exciting  idea  to  the
various  latent  dispositions  in  the  brain  (called  by  the  im-
proper expression,  ''slumbering  ideas  of  memory").  (Conip.
pp.  35,  34.)  Such  a  limitation  of  our  consideration  to  the
exciting  and  the  excited  idea  would,  I  conceive,,  be  justified


284  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

only  if  there  are  conditions  in  human  life  in  which  man
is  free  not  only  from  every  conscious  purpose,  but  also
from  the  sway  or  co-operation  of  every  unconscious
interest,  every  passing  mood.  This  is,  however,  a  con-
dition hardly  ever  occurring,  for  even  if  one  in  appearance
completely  abandons  his  train  of  thought  to  accident,  or
if  one  abandons  oneself  entirely  to  the  involuntary  dreams
of  fancy,  yet  always  other  leading  interests,  dominant
feelings  and  moods  prevail  at  one  time  rather  than  at
another,  and  these  will  always  exert  an  influence  on  the
association  of  ideas.  Of  still  greater  influence,  however,
must  of  course  be  some  special  motive  determining  the
train  of  thought  to  a  particular  goal,  and  this  point  (cited
above  as  No.  3)  it  is  also  with  which  we  have  here  par-
ticularly to  deal.

For  example,  if  I  look  at  a  right-angled  triangle,  all
manner  of  ideas  may  become  connected  with  it  without
any  particular  reason ;  but  if  I  am  asked  for  the  proof  of
some  proposition  which  I  should  be  ashamed  not  to  know,
I  have  a  particular  notion  for  linking  on  to  the  presenta-
tion of  the  triangle  those  ideas  which  are  serviceable  for
the  demonstration.  It  is  this  interest  in  the  end  then
which  conditions  the  manner  of  the  association  of  ideas
in  the  different  cases.  For  if,  in  the  case  of  the  triangle,
otherwise  any  other  possible  idea  might  occur  to  me,  only
not  exactly  that  one  which  I  want,  and  this  interest  in  the
discovery  of  the  proof  brings  it  about  that  suitable  ideas
arise  which  otherwise  most  probably  would  not  have  been
called  up,  still  a  motive  must  be  the  cause  of  this.  But
now,  who  is  the  intelligent  being  who  seeks  out,  among
innumerable  possible  ones,  the  idea  corresponding  to  an
end  on  this  stimulus  of  some  motive  ?  It  is  certainly
not  consciousness  ;  for  in  semi-conscious  dreams  always
only  such  ideas  as  correspond  to  the  main  interest  of
the  moment,  but  unintended,  occur;  in  the  intentional
search  of  consciousness  in  the  drawers  of  memory,  on  the
other  hand,  one  is  often  just  left  by  it  in  the  lurch. Aids


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 285

may  doubtless  be  used  if  what  is  wanted  will  not  occur
to  me,  but  it  is  not  got  by  importunity ;  and  often,  when
one  is  thrown  into  perplexity  by  such  failures,  the  idea
in  question  comes  hours,  nay,  days  afterwards,  suddenly
rained  in  upon  consciousness,  when  one  least  of  all  was
thinking  of  it.  One  sees,  then,  that  it  is  not  conscious-
ness that  selects,  since  it  is  completely  blind,  and  receives
each  piece  which  is  fetched  from  the  treasury  of  memory
as  a  gift.

If  consciousness  were  the  selector,  it  would  indeed  be
able  to  see  by  its  own  light  what  was  eligible,  which,  as
is  well  known,  it  is  not,  since  only  that  which  is  already
selected  emerges  from  the  night  of  the  Unconscious.  If,
then,  consciousness  were  the  selector,  it  would  grope  about
in  absolute  darkness,  could  accordingly  not  possibly  choose
appropriately,  but  only  take  at  random  what  first  came  to
hand.  That  unknown  one.  however,  does  choose  judi-
ciously in  fact,  namely,  in  accordance  with  the  special
purpose.  According  to  psychology,  which  only  knows
of  conscious  psychical  activity,  there  is  here  a  manifest
contradiction.  For  experience  testifies  that  an  appropriate
selection  of  ideas  takes  place  before  their  emergence,  ami
denies  that  this  selection  is  undertaken  by  consciousness.
For  us,  who  have  already  become  acquainted  with  the
purposive  activity  of  the  Unconscious  on  many  sides,
there  is  here  only  a  fresh  support  of  our  view.  It  is
just  a  reaction  of  the  Unconscious  upon  the  motive  of
the  conscious  will,  which,  in  the  form  of  its  manifestation
and  in  its  occasional  non-appearance  on  severe  partial
tension  of  the  brain,  perfectly  agrees  with  the  creative
power  of  the  artist.

The  reflection  just  made  holds  good  of  the  association  of
ideas  in  abstract  thinking  as  v:dl  as  in  sensuous  imagininy
and  artistic  combination.  If  a  result  is  to  he  arrived  at,
the  right  idea  must  readily  offer  itself  at  the  right  time
from  the  storehouse  of  memory;  and  that  it  is  just  the
right  idea  which  appears,  for  that  the Unconscious  alone


286  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

can  make  provision.  All  aids  and  artifices  of  the  under-
standing can  only  facilitate  the  office  of  the  Unconscious,
but  never  take  it  away.

A  suitable  and  yet  simple  example  is  wit,  which  is  a
mean  between  artistic  and  scientific  production,  since  it
pursues  artistic  aims  with,  for  the  most  part,  abstract
material.  Every  witticism  is,  according  to  the  common
expression,  a  flash.  The  understanding  may  perhaps  make
use  of  aids  to  facilitate  the  flash ;  practice,  especially  in
the  case  of  puns,  can  impress  the  material  more  vividly
on  the  memory,  and  altogether  strengthen  the  verbal
memory ;  talent  may  endow  particular  persons  with  an
ever-sparkling  wit, — in  spite  of  all  that,  every  single
witticism  remains  a  gift  from  above  ;  and  even  those  who
think  they  are  privileged  in  this  respect,  and  have  wit
completely  in  their  power,  must  have  the  experience
that  just  when  they  most  wish  to  compel  it,  their  talent
denies  them  its  services,  and  that  nothing  but  worn-out
absurdities  or  witticisms  learnt  by  rote  will  out  of
their  brain.  These  folk  know  also  quite  well  that  a
bottle  of  wine  is  a  far  readier  means  of  setting  their
faculty  a-going  than  any  intentional  effort.

If  we  have  gathered  from  the  foregoing  that  all  human
artistic  production  depends  on  an  intrusion  of  the  Un-
conscious, it  will  no  longer  excite  surprise  to  find  the
laws  of  beauty  contained  as  much  as  possible  in  those
organisms  of  Xature  which  we  have  recognised  as  the
most  immediate  apparition  of  the  Unconscious.  This
point  could  not  well  have  been  mentioned  before  ;  it  is,
however,  one  important  reason  the  more  for  the  regular
coming  into  being  of  organisms  according  to  pre-existing
Ideas.  Let  one  only  look  at  a  peacock's  feather.  Every
barb  of  the  feather  receives  its  nutriment  from  the  shaft ;
the  nutriment  is  the  same  for  all  barbs  ;  the  colouring
matters  are  for  the  most  part  not  yet  present  in  the
shaft,  but  are  first  separated  from  the  common  nutritive
fluid in the barbs themselves. Every barb receives


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 2F7

different  colouring  matters  at  different  distances  from
the  shaft,  which  are  sharply  separated  from  one  another.
The  distances  of  these  borders  of  colour  from  the  shaft
are  different  in  the  case  of  every  barb.  How  are  they
determined  ?  By  the  aim  of  giving  closed  figures,
peacock's  eyes,  in  the  juxtaposed  layers  of  the  barbs.
And  how  can  this  end  be  determined  ?  Only  by  the
beauty  of  the  marking  and  brilliancy  of  colour.

How  insufficient,  from  the  aasthetic  point  of  view,  does
the  Darwinian  theory  appear  !  It  shows  that,  on  the
supposition  that  the  capability  of  producing  coloured
markings  in  the  plumage  is  transmissible  by  inheritance,
the  a3Sthetic  taste  of  the  animals  in  sexual  selection
must  enhance  the  beauty  of  the  plumage  in  the  course
of  generations  through  predominant  propagation  of
beautifully-marked  individuals.  Undoubtedly !  Thus  a
more  may  be  developed  from  the  less,  but  whence  comes
the  less  ?  If  the  coloured  marking  is  not  already  pre-
sent in  the  plumage,  how  is  a  sexual  selection  possible
in  the  coloured  marking  ?  Accordingly,  that  which  is
to  be  explained  must  be  already  there,  if  in  less  degree.
The  Darwinian  theory  rests  on  the  assumption  that  such
ability — in  this  case  that  of  producing  coloured  marks —
is  transmissible  by  inheritance.  The  transmission  of  a
capacity  to  successors  presupposes,  however,  its  pre-
sence in  the  progenitors.  And  supposing  the  conception
of  inheritance  were  tolerably  clear,  which  it  by  no
means  is  (least  of  all  when  the  separate  inheritance  of
different  qualities  in  the  different  sexes  of  the  same  kind
is  taken  into  account),  it  by  no  means  explains  the
capacity  itself  in  the  descendant,  but  only  how  this
individual  has  obtained  the  possession  of  this  capacity.
The  capacity  itself  remains,  even  with  Darwin,  the
qualitas  occulta;  he  makes  no  attempt  at  all  to  pene-
trate into  its  essence;  he  only  proves,  indeed,  that  inheri-
tance combined  with  sexual  selection  is  able,  in  part
intensinh/,  to  enhance  such  an  already  existing  capacity


2S8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

in  single  instances,  partly  to  procure  their  further  dis-
tribution extensively.  It  contributes  nothing  at  all  to  the
explanation  of  its  essence  and  its  first  origination.  It
can,  for  example,  never  show  how  the  individual  bird
begins  so  to  distribute  the  deposits  of  colour  on  its
feathers  that  they,  apparently  irregular  in  the  several
feathers  and  barbs,  produce  in  their  juxtaposition  regular
and  beautiful  markings.  But,  lastly,  if  sexual  selection
be  rightly  given  as  a  reason  for  the  intensive  and  ex-
tensive enhancement  of  such  capacity,  the  next  question
is  this  :  —  How  does  the  individual  attain  to  a  sexual
selection  in  respect  of  beauty  ?  If  we  can  only  answer
this  question,  especially  in  the  case  of  marine  animals
of  a  low  grade,  who  are  surely  to  be  credited  with  but
little  conscious  aesthetics,  by  supposing  an  instinct  the
unconscious  aim  of  which  is  concerned  with  beautifying
the  species,  Darwin  is  manifestly  involved  in  a  circle.
We  shall,  however,  perceive  in  this  instinct  a  means
employed  by  Nature  for  attaining  its  end  with  less
trouble  than  if,  foregoing  the  assistance  of  the  trans-
mission of  slight  improvements  of  the  bodily  constitu-
tion, all  at  once  it  willed  the  production  of  the  greatest
possible  beauty  in  all  individuals  singly.  In  other  words,
we  admire  a  less  troublesome  indirect  attainment  of  the
end,  instead  of  one  more  difficult  and  indirect,  as  before
in  the  mechanisms  of  the  individual  organism;  and  to
have  discovered  this  mechanism  in  its  universality  is
the  indisputable  merit  of  Darwin  ;  only  one  cannot,  as
the  Materialist,  believe  that  therewith  the  last  word  has
been  spoken.

In  a  similar  way  one  may  see  in  the  improvement  of
the  florescence  how  the  impulse  to  beauty  lies  in  the
mysterious  life  and  motion  of  the  plant  itself,  which  in
the  wild  state  is  only  too  much  oppressed  and  stifled  in
the  struggle  for  existence,  As  the  plants  are  in  a  measure
freed  from  this  struggle  the  endeavour  after  beauty  breaks
through,  and  from  the  most  insignificant  blossoms  of  wild


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 289

plants  there  arise  the  most  splendid  flowers  under  our
very  eyes.  And  be  it  observed,  the  enticement  of  insects
required  to  effect  fertilisation  by  means  of  a  more  vivid
colouring  cannot  possibly  account  for  this  embellishment,
since  our  most  beautiful  garden  flowers  have  full,  that
is,  unfruitful  blossoms,  and  can  only  be  increased  in  a
non-sexual  way.  Here  we  have  the  proof  that  the  im-
pulse to  its  beautiful  unfolding  lies  in  the  plant  itself,  and,
in  the  case  of  wild-flowers,  is  only  supported,  but  by  no
means  produced,  by  the  preference  of  the  insects  which
visit  them.  Darwin  has  never  made  an  attempt  to  explain
how  those  varieties  or  departures  from  the  normal  type
are  possible  which  excel  the  latter  in  beauty,  and  which
man  has  only  to  preserve  from  perishing  in  the  struggle  for
existence,  that  this  superiority  may  be  maintained.

But  the  same  holds  good  of  all  beauty  in  the  vegetable
and  animal  kingdom,  even  that  of  the  general  form.  I
declare  it  to  be  a  first  principle  that  every  living  thing  is
as  beautiful  as  it  can  be,  regard  being  had  to  its  mode  of
life  and  propagation.  As  we  saw  before  that  the  absolute
fitness  of  every  arrangement  is  limited :  on  the  one  side,
by  other  aims,  whose  realisation  it  would  oppose,  on  the
other  side,  through  the  resistance  of  the  rigid  material,
to  whose  laws  the  organising  principle  must  bend  and
adapt  itself,  precisely  in  the  same  manner  is  the  beauty  of
every  part  limited  in  all  directions  by  its  conformity  to  the
(■lid  in  view,  where  it  is  of  practical  importance  for  the
being,  and  secondly,  through  the  resistance  of  the  stubborn
material,  whose  laws  must  be  respected.  Thus,  e.g.,  the
tendency  to  the  unfolding  of  the  greatest  brilliancy  of
colour  possible  among  the  weaker  animals  (small  birds,
beetles,  butterflies,  moths,  &c.)  is  limited  by  the  necessitv
of  their  concealing  themselves  from  their  }  eisecutors  bv
assimilation  to  the  colour  of  their  surroundings,  unle.-s
they  are  secured  from  their  eventual  foes  by  a  disagree-
able smell  or  taste  (>\g..  lIelieonithe\  or  iy  an  inn  em
trable hard  shell  (hard beetle.-  . "WheieVer,  in  a  species,

vol..  1.  1


290  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  higher  claims  of  existence  and  its  power  of  competing
in  the  struggle  allow  of  the  unfolding  of  a  certain  beauty
in  form  and  colour,  there  it  forces  its  way  unchecked,  even
when  it  appears  perfectly  purposeless  and  worthless  for
the  competition  of  the  species  in  the  struggle  for  existence.
(Think  of  the  splendour  of  colour  of  lower  marine  animals,
or  the  beauty  of  certain  caterpillars,  which  are  not  propa-
gated as  such,  in  which  accordingly  no  sexual  selection
can  take  place,  so  far  as  their  beauty  is  concerned,  in  the
pupa  state.)  Among  animals  adapted  for  rapid  flight
the  need  of  hiding  themselves  is  a  matter  of  small  con-
cern, but  immediately  becomes  important  when  flight  is
out  of  the  question,  e.g.,  among  brooding  birds.  Here
we  see,  in  all  birds  which  brood  in  the  open  nest,  that
that  sex  to  which  the  office  of  brooding  exclusively
belongs  wears  a  duller  dress  than  the  other.  Of  smaller
birds,  both  sexes  can  only  wear  a  robe  of  brighter  hue
among  those  species  which  brood  in  a  closed  nest  con-
cealing the  brooding  bird,  whilst  a  distribution  of  the
unconcealed  office  of  brooding  between  the  sexes  ex-
cludes both  from  a  brilliant  plumage.  In  like  manner,
almost  all  species  of  butterflies  not  absolutely  protected
by  an  intolerable  smell  or  taste  are  more  or  less  poly-
morphous ;  i.e.,  whilst  the  males  are  beautifully  coloured
and  marked,  the  females,  which  must  live  after  copulation
till  the  maturity  and  deposition  of  the  eggs,  are  more
dingy  in  hue,  or  they  copy  in  their  external  appearance
tolerably  remote  species  enjoying  a  special  protection.
Where  a  gorgeous  plumage  would  be  an  injurious  endow-
ment during  the  whole  of  life,  Nature  frequently  still
seeks  to  pay  its  tribute  to  beauty  by  a  glittering  wedding
garment,  which  is  exchanged  after  a  short  time  for  a
duller  garb,  as  if  it  wished  to  glorify  with  a  gleam  of
poetry  the  life  of  the  feathered  airy  dweller  in  its  happy
sra-ino-  of  love  bv  a  fleeting  ray  of  beauty.

Interesting  as the  contemplation  of  organic  nature  is
from  the  aesthetic  point  of  view,  we cannot  enter  upon


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 291

it  here  for  want  of  space,  and  must  content  ourselves
with  the  foregoing  suggestions,  the  development  of  which
we  leave  to  the  reader.  If  we,  however,  assume  our
assertions  to  be  admitted,  the  difference  between  the
artistic  production  of  man  and  of  Nature  lies,  in  the  last
resort,  not  in  the  essence  and  origin  of  the  conception
of  the  Idea,  but  only  in  the  mode  of  its  realisation.  In
Nature's  beauty  the  Idea  is  nowhere  presented  to  a  con-
sciousness before  the  execution,  but  the  individual,  who
is  at  the  same  time  marble  and  sculptor,  realises  the  Idea
perfectly  unconsciously;  in  human  artistic  production,  on
the  other  hand,  the  instigation  of  consciousness  intervenes.
The  Idea  is  not  directly  realised  as  natural  existence,  but
as  cerebral  vibrations,  which  confront  the  consciousness
of  the  artist  as  construction  of  fancy,  whose  conversion
into  external  reality  depends  on  the  conscious  will  of  the
artist.

If,  in  conclusion,  we  sum  up  the  result  of  this  chapter,
we  obtain  the  following : — The  discovery  of  the  beautiful
and  the  creation  of  the  beautiful  by  man  proceed  from
unconscious  processes,  whose  results,  the  feeling  of  the
beautiful  and  the  discovery  of  the  beautiful  (concep-
tion), are  presented  in  consciousness.  These  moments
form  the  starting-point  of  farther  conscious  work,  which,
however,  at  every  instant  needs  more  or  less  the  support
of  the  Unconscious.  The  underlying  unconscious  pro-
cess is  entirely  withdrawn  from  introspection,  but  it
undoubtedly  unites  in  every  single  case  the  same
terms,  which  an  absolutely  correct  .Esthetics  would
give  in  discursive  succession  as  the  foundation  of  the
beautiful.  That  such  a  transformation  and  resolution
into  concepts  and  discursive  thinking  is  at  all  possible,
affords  proof  that  we  have  not  to  do  in  the  unconscious
process  with  anything  essentially  foreign,  but  that  in
this  and  the  analytic  processes  of  a'Sthetic  science  only
the  form  is  distinguished  as  intuitive  and  discursive
thinking in general, tut that thought in itself,  or the


292  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

logical  element,  and  the  moments,  from  whose  intuitive
logical  union  beauty  results,  are  common  to  both  and
identical.  This  holds  good,  without  doubt,  just  as  much
for  the  elementary  judgments  of  so-called  formal  beauty,
as  for  the  material  beauty  of  the  highest  ideas  presented  in
adequate  sensible  manifestation.  (Leibniz  called  the  dis-
covery of  musical  proportions  an  unconscious  arithmetic,
and  the  beauty  of  geometrical  figures  is  in  direct  ratio  to
the  wealth  of  mathematical  ideas  and  logical-analytical
relations,  which  in  the  aesthetic  intuition  of  the  same
determines  the  judgment  as  its  unconscious  and  im-
plicit content.)  If  the  notion  of  the  beautiful  was  not
susceptible  of  logical  analysis,  if  the  beautiful  were  not
merely  a  particular  manifestation  of  the  logical,  we  should
certainly  be  obliged  to  recognise  in  the  creative  Uncon-
scious, besides  the  logical  essence,  which  we  have  hitherto
found  to  be  the  only  active  element,  an  additional  some-
what, heterogeneous,  out  of  all  relation  with  it.  But  the
history  of  ^Esthetics  indicates  too  unmistakably  the  goal
of  this  science,  the  derivation  of  all  and  every  beauty
from  logical  moments  (in  application  to  real  data  of
course),  to  allow  of  our  being  diverted  by  the  imperfect
character  of  current  explanations  from  believing  in  this
final  aim.


( -93 )


VI.


THE UNCONSCIOUS IX  .THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE.

<;  As  without  language  not  only  no  philosophical,  but  no
human  consciousness  at  all  is  conceivable,  the  founda-
tions of  language  could  not  have  been  consciously  laid;
and  yet  the  deeper  we  penetrate  into  it,  the  more  clearly
does  it  appear  that  its  invention  far  surpasses  in  pro-
fundity those  of  the  highest  conscious  product.  It  is
with  language  as  with  human  beings  ;  we  think  we  behold
them  come  blindly  into  existence,  and  at  the  same  time
cannot  doubt  their  unfathomable  significance  even  in  the
smallest  particular."  In  these  words  of  Schelling  (Works,
div.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  52)  the  subject  of  the  present  chapter
has  been  foreshadowed.

Let  us  consider  first  the  philosophical  value  of  the
grammatical  forms  and  the  formation  of  concepts.  In  every
more  developed  language  we  find  the  distinction  of  subject
and  predicate,  of  subject  and  object,  of  substantive,  verb,
and  adjective,  and  the  same  conditions  for  the  construc-
tion of  sentences.  In  the  less  developed  languages  these
fundamental  forms  are  at  least  distinguished  by  their  posi-
tion in  the  sentence.  Whoever  is  acquainted  with  the
history  of  philosophy  will  know  how  much  it  owes  to
these  grammatical  forms  alone.  The  notion  of  the  judg-
ment is  unquestionably  abstracted  from  the  grammatical
sentence  by  the  omission  of  the  verbal  form.  The  cate-
gories of  substance  and  accident  are  derived  in  the  same
way  from  subject  and  predicate  ;  the  discovery  of  a  corre-
sponding natural  antithesis  of  substantive  and  verbis  still


294  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

an  unsolved,  perhaps  very  fruitless  philosophical  problem  ;
here  conscious  speculation  is  still  far  behind  the  unconscious
creation  of  the  genius  of  humanity.  That  the  philosophical
notions  of  subject  and  object,  which  in  strictness  were
wanting  to  the  consciousness  of  antiquity  but  to-day  openly
govern  speculation,  have  been  developed  from  gramma-
tical notions  in  which  they  lay  involved  unconsciously
pre-formed,  is  certainly  not  improbable,  since  their  desig-
nation already  implies  it.  A  corresponding  gain  to  philo-
sophy from  the  other  parts  of  the  sentence,  e.g.,  the  so-called
more  remote  object  or  the  third  person,  is,  I  am  convinced,
yet  to  be  expected.  Through  such  bringing  into  conscious-
ness of  the  metaphysical  thought,  to  which  the  verbal  form
serves  as  dress,  it  is  true  no  new  relations  are  created;  but
such  as  hitherto  have  only  existed  in  consciousness  in  a
roundabout  way,  and  as  a  united  whole  only  vaguely  or
instinctively,  are  reduced  to  conscious  unity,  and  can  now
for  the  first  time  serve  as  a  sure  foundation  of  further
speculation;  just  as  in  mathematics  the  circular  and  elliptic
functions  and  the  functions  of  Abel  all  at  once  reduce  to
system  certain  long-known  series,  and  thereby  for  the  first
time  render  possible  their  general  use.  Lazarus  denotes
this  by  the  expression,  "  Condensation  of  thought."

"When  in  the  history  of  the  world  the  human  mind  is
for  the  first  time  astonished  at  itself  and  begins  to  philo-
sophise, it  finds  a  language  ready  made  for  it,  fitted  out
with  all  the  wealth  of  forms  and  notions ;  and  "  a  great
part — perhaps  the  greatest  part — of  the  office  of  the
reason,"  as  Kant  says,  "  consists  in  dismembering  the
notions  which  it  already  finds  in  itself."  It  finds  the
cases  of  declension  in  the  substantive,  adjective,  pronoun,
the  voices,  tenses,  and  moods  of  the  verb,  and  the  immea-
surable wealth  of  ready-made  notions  of  object  and  rela-
tion. All  the  categories,  which  for  the  most  part  represent
the  most  important  relations,  the  fundamental  notions  of
all  thought,  as  being,  becoming,  thinking,  feeling,  desiring,
motion, force,  activity, &c,  lie  before  it as  ready-made


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 295

material,  and  it  requires  thousands  of  years  only  to  find
its  whereabouts  in  this  wealth  of  unconscious  speculation.
Even  at  the  present  day  the  philosophising  mind  commits
the  error  of  the  beginner  of  taking  too  wide  a  circuit,  and
so  neglecting  that  which  lies  nearest  to  it,  and  is  perhaps
also  the  most  difficult.  Still  to  this  day  there  is  no
philosophy  of  language,  for  what  really  goes  by  that  name
is  altogether  fragmentary,  and  what  is  usually  offered  as
such  are  pretentious  appeals  to  human  instinct,  which
afford  no  explanation  at  all  (just  as  in  Esthetics).  But
if  the  first  Greek  philosophers  merely  kept  to  the  ex-
ternal world,  yet  philosophy,  the  farther  it  has  pro-
gressed, has  ever  more  clearly  perceived  that  the  under-
standing of  one's  own  thinking  is  the  first  task,  and
that  this  is  admirably  furthered  by  raising  the  spiritual
treasures  which  are  buried  in  the  language  of  the  dis-
coverer, and  that  the  hoary  tradition  of  language,  the
garment  of  thought,  should  not  be  desecrated  by  flaunting
rags ;  for  language  is  the  Word  of  God,  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures of  philosophy ;  it  is  the  revelation  of  the  genius  of
humanity  for  all  time.  How  much  a  l'lato,  Aristotle,
Kant,  Sclielling,  and  Hegel  owe  to  language  the  attentive
student  will  not  fail  to  see.  Often  the  source  whence
they  have  derived  the  first  incentive  to  certain  results
seems  to  have  been  tolerably  unconscious  even  to  them-
selves (e.g.,  in  Sclielling,  the  subject  of  being  as  not-being
or  potentiality  of  being,  and  the  object  of  being  as  merely
being).

The  next  inquiry  has  reference  to  the  question  whether
language  improves  with  the  progress  of  civilisation.  Up  to
a  certain  point  this  is  undoubtedly  the  case;  for  the  lan-
guage of  primitive  man  must  undoubtedly  have  been  hardly
distinguishable  from  the  vocal  and  gesture  speech  of  the
brutes,  and  we  know  that  every  language  which  is  now  a
language  of  inilexions  has  been  brought  quite  gradually  to
perfection  through  the  stages  of  monosyllabic  (e.g.,  Chinese),
agglutinate  (e.g.,  Turkish),  and  incorporating  speech  (e.g.,


296  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

language  of  the  Indians).  But  if  one  understands  the
above  question  in  this  sense,  whether  after  the  attainment
of  that  state  of  culture  which  must  be  looked  upon  from
the  first  as  a  condition  of  an  inflexional  language,  language
continues  to  improve  with  yet  higher  culture,  not  only  must
this  question  be  answered  in  the  negative,  but  its  contrary
must  be  affirmed.  Certainly  with  progressive  culture  new
objects  make  their  appearance,  consequently  new  concep-
tions and  relations,  therefore  also  new  words  (e.g.,  all  that
concerns  railways,  telegraphs,  and  joint-stock  companies).
There  results  from  this  a  material  enrichment  of  language.
This,  however,  does  not  contain  anything  philosophical.
Philosophical  conceptions  (the  categories,  &c.)  remain  the
same,  they  become  neither  more  nor  less,  with  few  excep-
tions, as  consciousness  and  the  like,  conceptions  which  the
ancients  of  the  classical  period  possessed  only  vaguely,
but  not  explicitly  and  consciously.  In  the  same  way  the
series  of  abstractions,  which  reduce  the  endless  multiplicity
of  sensuous  phenomena  for  practical  use  into  abstractions
of  different  orders,  experience  no  considerable  changes.
For  if  the  special  sciences,  e.g.,  zoology  and  botany,
sometimes  change  their  ideas  of  kinds  a  little,  in  part
this  does  not  at  all  affect  practical  life,  in  part  these
changes  are  excessively  small  compared  with  the  con-
stancy of  most  of  the  classes  of  notions.  The  formal  part
of  language,  however,  wherein  consists  its  properly  philo-
sophical value,  undergoes  a  process  of  decomposition  and
of  levelling  pari  jiasse  with  the  progress  of  civilisation.
The  levelling  of  the  Eomance  languages,  especially  the
French,  affords  an  example,  an  instance  far  more  striking
than  that  of  the  levelling  of  the  German  language  in  the
Gothic,  Old  High  German,  Middle  and  Xew  High  German.
The  position  of  the  parts  of  the  sentence  and  of  the  sen-
tences being  fixed  once  for  all,  leaves  no  room  for  liberty
of  expression ;  a  declension  exists  no  longer,  a  neuter  gender
just  as  little,  the  tenses  are  reduced  to  four  (in  German
even  to  two),  the  passive  voice  is  wanting,  all  final  syllables


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 297

are  worn  off;  the  affinity  of  syllabic  stems,  so  expressive  in
natural  languages,  has  for  the  most  part  become  unrecog-
nisable through  attrition,  thrusting  out  of  consonants  and
other  disfigurements,  and  the  capability  of  forming  com-
pounds is  lost.  And  yet  German  and  French  are  lan-
guages infinitely  rich  and  expressive  compared  with  the
dreary  smoothness  of  the  English,  which,  in  a  grammatical
point  of  view,  is  again  approaching  with  rapid  strides  the
starting-point  of  the  evolution,  the  Chinese.  On  the  other
hand,  the  farther  we  recede  historically  the  greater  be-
comes the  wealth  of  forms.  Greek  has  its  middle,  dual,
and  aorist,  and  an  incredible  capability  of  composition.
The  Sanskrit,  as  the  oldest  of  the  inflexional  languages
known  to  us,  is  said  to  excel  all  others  in  beauty  and
copiousness  of  forms.  It  results  from  this  review  that
language  needs  no  higher  development  of  culture  for  its
formation,  but  that  such  development  is  rather  injurious
to  it,  in  that  it  is  never  able  to  preserve  from  corruption
that  which  the  past  has  elaborated,  not  even  when  it
devotes  a  conscious  and  careful  effort  to  its  preservation
and  improvement  (as,  e.g.,  the  Academic  Franchise).  The
linguistic  development  is  carried  on  not  only  on  the  large
scale  and  as  a  whole,  but  also  in  detail  with  the  calm
necessity  of  a  natural  product,  and  the  forms  of  language,
even  at  the  present  day,  go  on  growing,  deriding  all  the
efforts  of  consciousness,  as  if  they  were  independent  crea-
tions to  which  the  conscious  mind  only  serves  as  a  medium
of  their  proper  life.1  Doth  this  result  and  also  the  specu-
lative depth  and  grandeur  of  language,  as  well  as,  in  line,
its  marvellous  organic  unity,  which  far  exceeds  the  unity
of  a  methodical  systematic  construction,  should  preserve
us  from  regarding  language  as  a  product  of  conscious
acute  reflection.  Schelling  has  said: — ''Tin1  spirit  which
created  language — and  that  is  nut  the  spirit  of  the  iii'Uvi-

1  C"i:ip.  fJoliinr.au,  "  Inquiries  nn fur  Flulosnphie  und rhilosophisxhe
Ih'fTercnt Expressions of Sporadic Kritike,"'  vol.  lii.  p.  llM  If.
Life."  2d  part, in  the "  Zeitschrift


293  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

dual  members  of  the  people — has  conceived  it  as  a  whole,
just  as  creative  Xature  when  she  forms  a  skull  has  already
in  her  view  the  nerve  which  is  to  traverse  it."

To  which  the  following  may  be  added : — For  the  labour
of  an  individual,  the  foundation  is  much  too  complicated
and  rich.  Language  is  a  work  of  the  masses — the  people.
For  the  conscious  labour  of  many,  however,  it  is  too  in-
divisible an  organism.  Only  the  instinct  of  masses,  as
exhibited  in  the  life  of  the  hive  and  the  ant-hill,  can
have  created  it.  Further,  although  languages  spring  from
different  centres  of  development,  deviate  essentially  from
one  another,  yet  the  course  of  development  is,  in  the
main,  so  similar  on  all  the  different  theatres  of  human
culture,  and  with  the  most  diverse  national  characters,
that  the  agreement  of  the  fundamental  forms  and  the
structure  of  the  sentence  in  all  stages  of  development
is  only  explicable  by  a  common  instinct  of  humanity  for
forming  language,  by  an  all-pervading  spirit  which  every-
where guides  the  development  of  language  according  to
the  same  laws  of  bloom  and  decay. — Those  to  whom  all
the  foregoing  reasons  do  not  appear  decisive,  must  per-
force allow  the  following,  taken  along  with  the  above,
to  be  conclusive,  viz. :  That  all  conscious  human  thought
is  only  possible  by  the  help  of  language,  since  we  see
that  human  thought  without  language  (in  the  unedu-
cated deaf  and  dumb,  and  also  among  healthy  men  who
have  grown  up  without  human  education),  in  the  most
favourable  case,  very  little  exceeds  that  of  the  cleverest
domestic  animals.  Without  language,  or  with  a  merely
animal  vocal  language  devoid  of  grammatical  forms,  a
thinking  so  acute  that  the  marvellously  profound
organism  of  universally  identical  fundamental  forms
should  emerge  as  its  conscious  product,  is,  therefore,
quite  inexplicable.  Rather,  all  progress  in  the  develop-
ment of  language  will  be  the  first  condition  of  progress
in  the  elaboration  of  conscious  thought,  not  its  conse-
quence, in  that  (like  every  instinct)  it  occurs  at  a  time


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 299

when  the  culture  of  the  people,  as  a  whole,  makes  pro-
gress in  the  elaboration  of  thought  a  necessity.

Altogether,  in  the  same  way  then  as,  beyond  a  doubt,
the  language  of  animals,  in  some  ways  so  highly  de-
veloped, or  the  language  of  feature,  gesture,  and  natural
sound  of  primitive  man,  is  in  production  as  in  import  a  work
of  instinct,  precisely  in  the  same  way  must  also  human
verbal  language  be  a  conception  of  genius,  a  work  of  the
instinct  of  multitudes.  For  the  rest,  this  result  is  con-
firmed by  the  most  eminent  and  gifted  linguists  of  this
century.  Thus,  e.g.,  Heyse,  in  his  "  System  of  Philology,"
says :  "  Language  is  a  natural  product  of  the  human
mind;  its  production  is  necessarily  effected,  without
thoughtful  intention  and  clear  consciousness,  from  an  inner
instinct  of  the  mind."  Accordingly,  to  him  language  is
a  product  "  not  of  the  particular  subjective  mind,  or  reflec-
tive understanding  as  free  activity  of  the  individual  as
such,"  but  "  of  the  universal  objective  mind,  of  human
reason  in  its  natural  foundation."  In  like  manner,
Wilhelm  von  Humboldt  ("  Ueber  das  vergleichende
Sprachstudiuni,"  sec.  13)  says:  "Thinking  of  the  natural
instinct  of  animals,  we  may  call  language  an  intellectual
instinct  of  the  reason."  "  It  is  of  no  avail  to  allow
thousands  and  thousands  of  years  for  its  invention.
Language  could  not  be  invented  unless  its  type  were
latent  in  the  human  understanding.  ...  If  any  one
imagines  that  the  invention  of  language  may  take
place  gradually  and  progressively,  by  a  reciprocal
action,  as  it  were, — that  through  a  portion  more  of
invented  language  man  can  become  more  man,  and  by
this  advance  again  invent  more  language,  he  misunder-
stands the  inseparableness  of  human  consciousness  and
human  speech."  Language  "  cannot,  properly  speaking,
be  taught;  it  can  only  be  evoked.  "We  can  only  favour
the  conditions,  and  then  leave  it  to  its  own  unfolding  "
(eonip.  below,  p.  303  J)'.)  "  How  could  the  learner,  merely
through  the  expansion  of  his  own  developing  conscious-


300  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ness,  master  the  spoken  thought,  if  there  were  not  in
speaker  and  hearer  the  same  essence,  but  differentiated
for  the  sake  of  individual  existence  and  communion,  so
that  a  symbol  so  refined  and  yet  so  personal  as  is  the  arti-
culate sound  suffices  to  affect  both  parties  harmoniously
like  a  mediator  ?  "  "  The  comprehension  of  another's
meaning  could  not  rest  on  a  process  of  internal  spon-
taneity, and  intercourse  through  the  medium  of  speech
would  be  something  quite  other  than  the  awakening  of
the  hearer's  linguistic  faculty,  if  beneath  all  individual
differences  there  were  not  a  common  human  nature."
Humboldt  concludes,  then,  as  we  shall  establish  with
greater  generality  farther  on,  from  the  nature  of  language
alone  :  "  That  discrete  individuality  is  in  general  only  a
phenomenon  of  the  conditioned  existence  of  spiritual
beings ;  "  that  the  conscious  human  mind  and  language
have  sprung  from  the  common  primitive  foundation  of
the  universal  spirit.  H.  Steinthal,  in  his  celebrated  book,
"  Der  Ursprung  der  Sprache,"  concludes  his  excellent
objective  criticism  of  his  predecessors  with  the  following
formulation  of  the  problem  : — "  Language  is  not  innate  in
man,  not  revealed  by  God — man  has  produced  it ;  but  not
the  mere  organic  nature  of  man,  but  his  mind;  and
finally,  not  the  thinking  conscious  mind.  What  mind
then  in  humanity,  i.e.,  what  form  of  action  of  the  human
mind  has  produced  language?"  What  other  answer  is
conceivable  to  this  than  that  of  the  unconscious  spiritual
activity,  which  with  intuitive  correctness  acts  here  in
natural  instincts,  there  in  intellectual  instincts  ;  here  in
the  individual,  there  in  the  co-operative  instincts ;  and
everywhere  alike,  everywhere  with  infallible  clairvoyant
accuracy  answers  to  the  greatness  of  the  need  ?


;oi


VII.

THE UNCONSCIOUS IN THOUGHT.

Ix  the  last  chapter  but  one  (pp.  283-285)  we  saw  that
every  effort  at  recollection  with  a  definite  object  requires
the  aid  of  the  Unconscious,  if  the  right  idea  is  to  be
recalled,  because  consciousness  does  not  embrace  the  slum-
bering ideas  of  memory,1  accordingly  cannot  choose  among
them.  If  an  unsuitable  idea  crops  up,  consciousness  im-
mediately perceives  it  to  be  inappropriate  and  rejects
it ;  but  all  memories  which  have  not  yet  emerged,  but
are  only  on  the  point  of  emerging,  lie  beyond  its  field  of
view,  thus  also  outside  of  its  choice;  the  Unconscious  alone
can  make  the  appropriate  choice.  It  might,  perhaps,  be
suggested  that  past  ideas  are  revived  quite  accidentally,
and  that  consciousness  keeps  on  rejecting  the  wrong  one,
until,  at  last,  the  right  one  makes  its  appearance.  In
abstract  thinking  such  cases  certainly  do  occur,  where
one  rejects  live  or  even  more  ideas  before  the  right
one  occurs.  In  such  cases,  however,  the  process  is  pretty
much  the  same  as  in  the  guessing  of  riddles,  or  the
solution  of  a  problem  by  trial,  in  that  consciousness  of
itself  does  not  exactly  know  what  it  wants,  i.e.,  that  it
knows  the  condition  of  fitness  only  in  the  form  of
abstract formula." of words or numbers, but not in

1 I hero  call attention  once  more  atall.but  with  molt rular  dispositions

to thf point that tli«' expression  of the lirain for  ivrtain  \  ihratioiis,

'■  sluitili'  rin,' ideas of memory" is  on  whieh  the Unconscious  n  acts  in

an  improper  one,  since  we  have  lure  the  particular  instance  with  certain

to  tio  neither  with  conscious  nor  un-  conscious  ideas,
conscious  ideas,  tlnu  not  with ideas


302  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

immediate  intuition  ;  so  that,  in  every  single  case,  it
must  first  insert  the  concrete  value  into  the  formulae,
and  see  whether  the  thing  agrees.  By  this,  however,  it
is  evident  that  the  reaction  of  the  Unconscious  on  a
motive,  which  is  itself  so  obscure  that  it  can  only  become
clear  by  application  to  the  concrete  case,  must  be  a
more  imperfect  one  than  when  the  object  is  apparent
in  an  immediately  concrete  and  intuitive  manner,  as  in
the  search  for  an  appropriate  partial  presentation  to
complete  an  image,  or  verse,  or  melody,  when  so  pro-
tracted a  trial  much  more  rarely  takes  place.  In  the
flash  of  wit  this  will  happen  still  more  rarely;  witticisms
obtained  by  a  process  of  trial  generally  fall  very  flat.  But
even  in  those  cases,  where  experience  shows  a  repeated
rejection  of  the  revived  ideas,  it  should  not  be  forgotten
that  all  these  rejected  ideas  are  by  no  means  absolutely
fortuitous  in  respect  of  the  particular  object,  but  always
tend  to  this  goal,  although  they  may  not  hit  the  nail
upon  the  head.  But  even  when  this  mark  is  wanting
to  them,  one  is  obliged  to  admit  that  the  ideas,  which,
apart  from  the  particular  end  in  view,  would  merely
arise  according  to  other  laws  of  thought-succession,  are
just  as  numerous,  and  that  then  in  very  rare  cases,  after
five  or  ten  ideas  have  been  rejected,  the  appropriate  one
would  be  revived,  but  in  most  cases  a  far  greater  number
of  attempts  would  be  requisite.  The  consequence  of
this  would  be  the  impossibility  of  producing  any  regular
train  of  thought;  we  should  soon  give  up  the  dispro-
portionate effort  through  sheer  fatigue,  and  surrender
ourselves  only  to  spontaneous  dreaming  and  impressions
of  the  senses,  like  the  inferior  animals.

In  thinking,  the  point  is,  that  the  right  idea  occur  at
the  right  moment ;  the  intellectual  genius  (apart  from
the  rapidity  of  the  movement  of  thought)  is  only  hereby
distinguished  from  the  stupid,  fools,  boobies,  imbeciles,  and
madmen.  Tor  inference  is  always  of  the  same  kind.  No
madman  and  no  dreamer  has  ever  drawn  a  false  simple


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 303

conclusion  from  his  premisses,  only  their  premisses  are
frequently  valueless.  Sometimes  they  are  intrinsically
erroneous,  sometimes  they  are  too  narrow  or  too  wide,
sometimes  certain  irrelevant  premisses  are  assumed,
sometimes  several  successive  inferences  are  run  into  one ;
and  these  errors  are  committed,  because  it  is  not  every
simple  conclusion  that  is  actually  thought;  moreover,  every
following  conclusion  tacitly  implies  new  premisses.  But
wrongly  to  draw  a  simple  conclusion  from  given  pre-
misses is,  in  my  view,  just  as  much  beyond  the  bounds
of  possibility,  as  that  an  atom  pushed  by  two  forces
should  move  otherwise  than  in  the  diagonal  of  the
parallelogram  of  forces.

The  essence  of  thinking  is  that  the  right  ideas  occur
at  the  right  time.  Let  us  examine  this  proposition  a  little
more  closely.  By  thought,  in  the  narrow  sense,  is  meant
the  dividing,  combining,  and  comparing  of  ideas.  The  divi-
sion may  consist  in  the  cutting  up  of  a  space  or  time-whole,
or  in  abstracting  certain  attributes.  Every  idea  is  divisible
into  an  infinite  number  of  species.  The  essential  point,
then,  is  how  the  line  is  drawn  between  the  portion  which
one  wishes  to  retain  and  that  which  one  desires  to  let
go.  The  main  object  of  abstraction  is  to  grasp  many
sensible  particulars  into  a  common  notion.  This  can  only
contain  what  is  alike  in  all ;  the  partition  must,  then,
be  so  made  that,  of  all  the  simple  ideas,  only  what  is
similar  is  retained,  and  the  dissimilar  let  go.  In  other
words,  the  idea  of  the  common  portion  must  occur  to
one  possessed  of  the  particulars.  This  is  as  distinctly  a
Hash  which  cannot  be  forced,  as  in  our  former  examples  ;
for  millions  of  men  stave  at  the  same  objects,  and  only  one
gifted  brain  grasps  the  concept.  How  much  richer  in
ideas  is  not  the  educated  than  the  uneducated  man  !
And  the  only  reason  of  this  is  the  interest  in  the  idea
with  which  the  former  has  been  inspired  by  education
and  instruction;  for  one  cannot  directly  furnish  anybody
with  a  conception  ;  one  may  assist  him  in  his  abstraction


304  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

by  bringing  forward  very  many  sensuous  particulars  and
excluding  already  familiar  conceptions,  but  he  must  in
the  end  find  the  notion  for  himself.  A  considerable  dif-
ference in  talent  cannot,  however,  be  supposed  between
educated  and  uneducated  on  the  average ;  accordingly,  it
can  only  be  the  interest  in  the  discovery  which  con-
ditions the  difference  in  the  abundance  of  conceptions.
The  like  also  holds  good  of  the  different  mental  resources
of  man  and  brute,  although  here,  certainly,  natural
endowment  co-operates.  The  greatest  discoveries  of
theoretical  science  often  consist  merely  in  the  discovery
of  a  new  conception,  in  the  cognition  of  a  piece  common
to  several  other  notions  which  has  hitherto  been  dis-
regarded, e.g.,  the  discovery  by  Newton  of  the  conception
gravitation.  If  it  is  interest  which  conditions  the  elicit-
ing of  the  common  element,  the  first  flash  of  the  concep-
tion is  the  appropriate  reaction  of  the  Unconscious  on  this
stimulus  of  interest.

If  this  holds  good  of  notions,  which  consist  only  in  the
separation  of  a  common  portion  of  many  given  ideas,  so
much  the  more  must  it  hold  of  such  as  contain  the  rela-
tions of  different  ideas  to  one  another,  e.g.,  equality,  in-
equality, unity,  plurality  (number),  totality,  negation,
disjunction,  causality,  &c. ;  for  here  the  concept  is  a  true
creation,  certainly  out  of  given  material,  but  still  a  creation
from  something  not  at  all  to  be  found  as  such  in  the  given
ideas.  E.g.,  equality  cannot  as  such  inhere  in  the  dice  A
and  I),  for  if  Li  is  not,  A  cannot  have  equality  with  1),  but
when  13  arises,  this  cannot  change  the  constitution  of  A  ;
thus  A  cannot  acquire  a  quality  through  the  origin  of  B
which  it  had  not  before,  consequently  also  not  ( quality
with  1).  The  notion  of  equality  can,  therefore,  nut  lie  in
the  things,  just  as  little  in  the  perceptions  as  such  pro-
duced by  things,  for  the  same  line  of  argument  may  be
adopted,  consequently  the  notion  of  equality  must  be  first
created  by  the  mind;  but  the  mind  also  cannot  arbitrarily
declare  two  presentations  to  be  equal  or  unequal,  but  only


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 305

when  the  ideas,  apart  from  place  and  time,  are  identical,
i.e.,  if  the  two  presentations,  succeeding  one  another  at
the  same  spot  in  the  field  of  vision  without  a  time-interval,
would  give  the  impression  of  a  single  fixed  unchanged
presentation.  Since  this  condition  can  never  be  satisfied
realiter,  the  process  can  only  be  that  the  mind  conceptually
separates  the  identical  portion  of  the  two  ideas.  If  it  then
perceives  that  the  individual  residue  only  consists  of  the
space  and  time  elements  of  the  ideas,  and  does  not  affect
their  matter,  it  calls  them  equal,  and  thus  acquires  the
notion  of  equality.  It  is,  however,  easy  to  see  that,  if  this
whole  process  is  to  be  carried  on  consciously,  the  mind
must  already  possess  the  faculty  of  abstraction,  and  con-
sequently the  notion  of  resemblance,  in  order  to  be  able  to
separate  the  common  portion  of  two  representations,  i.e.,
must  possess  what  it  has  to  find,  which  is  a  contradiction.
There  remains  then,  since  every  human  and  animal  mind
has  this  conception,  nothing  but  the  assumption  that  this
process  is  in  the  main  carried  on  unconsciously,  and  only
the  result  as  concept  of  equality,  or  this  judgment,  "A  and
13  are  alike,"  comes  into  consciousness.

How  indispensable  the  faculty  of  abstraction  and  the
notion  of  resemblance  contained  therein  is  even  for  the
first  foundations  of  all  thinking  I  shall  briefly  show  by
the  instance  of  memory.

All  human  beings  and  animals  know,  when  an  idea  or  a
perception  occurs,  whether  they  are  already  familiar  with
the  matter  of  the  same  or  not,  i.e.,  whether  the  perception  is
new,  arises  for  the  first  time,  or  whether  they  have  had  it
before.  A  mere  idea,  united  with  the  consciousness  that
it  has  had  a  previous  existence  as  a  sense-percept,  is  called
Jfniid/'i/.  The  recognition  of  sensuous  perceptions  is  not
denoted  by  this  term,  but  is  at  least  as  important.  The
( pies t ion  is.  How  does  tie1  mind  discover  the  mark  v\  former
/.-/ii'ir/,  ,i,/r;  which  in  a  i  cannot  lie  in  the  idea  itself,  since
every  idea  in  ami  by  itself  appears  as  .-  :..  ■  : '.  ing  new?
The  most  obvious  answer  is,  Through  the  ass<  Nation  of

vol,  1.  u


3o6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ideas  ;  for  similarity  is  one  of  the  main  conditions  of  revival.
When,  then,  a  perception  makes  its  appearance  a  second
time,  the  slumbering  memory  is  aroused,  and  the  mind  has
now,  in  place  of  one  image,  two,  a  vivid  and  a  weak  one,  and
the  latter  an  instant  later,  whilst  it  only  finds  a  single  one
in  the  case  of  new  perceptions.  Since  it  does  not  know  itself
as  cause  of  the  second  weak  image,  it  assumes  the  earlier
vivid  one  to  be  the  cause  of  the  same ;  but  since,  on  the
other  hand,  the  reason  why  the  weak  image  appears  in
some  cases,  not  in  others,  cannot  well  lie  in  the  perceptions
themselves,  it  assigns  the  cause  of  this  appearance  to  a
different  disposition  of  the  presentative  faculty.  If,  along
with  the  faint  idea,  the  mind  had  without  more  ado  the
consciousness  that  the  idea  had  been  in  the  mind  before,
the  matter  would  be  explicable,  but  what  is  incompre-
hensible in  the  affair  is  just  this  :  how  it  can  come  by  this
consciousness  from  what  has  gone  before  ?  The  problem
would  not  thereby  be  solved,  but  only  its  object  pushed
back  a  step  farther.  But  here,  now,  we  are  helped  by  the
consideration  of  similar  sense-impressions,  which  follow
one  another  in  such  quick  succession,  that  the  after-image
of  the  first  has  not  yet  died  away  when  the  second  occurs.
Here  the  mind  knows  accordingly  (i.)  the  identity  of  the
after-image  with  the  original  impression,  in  virtue  of  the
continuous  fading  of  the  latter;  (2.)  it  knows  from  the
weakened  impression  that  the  external  object  has  ceased
to  act,  and  that  only  its  copy  remains ;  (3.)  it  knows  that
the  sudden  strengthening  of  the  after-image  occurring
immediately  on  the  second  impression  is  an  effect  of  the
latter;  (4.)  it  perceives  ' the  equality  in  content  of  the
second  impression  with  the  strengthened  copy  of  the  first.
From  these  premises  it  concludes  that  the  disposition
of  the  representative  faculty,  which  conditioned  the  rise
of  the  weak  image  after  the  second  impression,  was  the
existence  of  the  after-image  of  the  first,  and  that  the
second  impression  was  the  same  as  the  first.  As,  now,
such  examples  are  repeated  with  different  degrees  of  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 307

fading  of  impressions,  it  is  analogically  concluded  that
there,  too,  when  the  after-image  of  the  first  is  no  longer
present  on  the  occurrence  of  the  second  impression,  the
disposition  in  question  of  the  representative  faculty
consists  in  a  slumbering  copy,  and  consequently  the  con-
sciousness of  previous  knowledge  results  every  time  an
idea  calls  up  a  weaker  one  resembling  it.  Thus,  e.g.,  when
images  rise  before  the  mind  in  reverie,  they  must  first
attain  to  a  certain  degree  of  completeness,  before  by  asso-
ciation they  bring  the  whole  situation  lived  through  for  a
moment  before  the  mind  as  a  second  image,  and  only  at  that
moment  does  the  consciousness  suddenly  spring  up  that
one  has  experienced  the  tiling  before ;  not  till  then  is  the
awakened  memory  consciously  apprehended  as  memory.

One  sees  what  an  enormous  apparatus  of  complicated
reflection  is  requisite  in  order  to  produce  so  apparently
simple  a  fundamental  phenomenon,  and  that  it  is  quite
impossible  in  those  times  of  the  infancy  of  man  and
animal,  when  these  notions  were  formed,  that  such  a  pro-
cess should  take  place  in  consciousness,  especially  as  all
tlic  inferences  here  drawn  already  presuppose  the  ability  to
recognise  tlic  ideas  as  well knoicn.  There  therefore  remains
nothing  for  it  but  to  suppose  that  this  process  also  takes
place  in  the  Unconscious,  and  only  its  result  instinctively
appears  in  consciousness.  The  certainty  also  of  a  prior
experience,  which  memory  affords  with  not  too  great  an
interval  between  the  two  impressions,  could  never  be
attained  by  means  of  this  artificial  fabric  of  hypotheses
and  analogies.

Another  example  is  afforded  by  Causality.  Without
doubt  this  idea  is  to  be  evolved  logically,  namely,  by  a
calculation  of  probabilities,  starting  from  the  bare  pre-
supposition of  pure  chance,  i.e.,  absence  of  causation.  If,
namely,  under  such  and  such  circumstances  an  event  has
occurred  n  times,  the  probability  that  under  the  same
circumstances  it  will  occur  next  time  is  '''.'.  Suppose,
now,  we  call  the  occurrence  of  the  event  necessary  when


3o8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

its  probability  becomes—  I,  then  from  this  the  probability
can  be  evolved  that  the  occurrence  of  the  event  is  neces-
sary or  not  necessary.  But,  as  Kant  showed,  there  is  no
meaning  in  causation  beyond  the  necessity  of  the  occurrence
under  the  circumstances  in  question,  since  the  notion  of  pro-
duction is  one  arbitrarily  introduced,  and  is,  in  fine,  only
an  improper  figure  of  speech.

Thus  we  can  show  the  probability  that  this  or  that
phenomenon  is  caused  by  these  or  those  circumstances,
and,  in  fact,  our  knowledge  reaches  no  farther.  Assuredly
no  one  will  believe  that  this  is  the  way  in  which  children
and  animals  arrive  at  the  notion  of  causality,  and  yet
there  is  no  other  way  to  advance  beyond  the  notion  of
mere  succession  to  that  of  necessary  sequence  or  effect ;
consequently  this  process  also  must  take  place  in  the
Unconscious,  and  the  notion  of  causality  enter  into  con-
sciousness as  its  ready-made  result.

The  same  proof  may  also  be  given  of  the  other  ideas  of
relation  :  they  can  all  only  be  developed  discursively  by
way  of  logic,  but  these  developments  are  all  so  delicate
and  in  part  so  complicated,  that  they  cannot  possibly  be
wrought  out  in  the  consciousness  of  beings  which  form
these  conceptions  for  the  first  time ;  accordingly  they
appear  in  consciousness  as  something  ready  formed.
ISTow  he,  who  sees  the  impossibility  of  getting  these  con-
ceptions from  without  and  the  necessity  of  forming  them
himself,  asserts  their  a  priority;  whoever,  on  the  other
hand,  takes  his  stand  on  the  fact  that  such  formative
processes  have  no  place  at  all  in  consciousness,  but  that
their  results  are  rather  given  to  it  as  something  ready
formed,  must  maintain  their  a  posteriority.  Plato  had  a
feeling  of  the  two-sided  truth  when  he  called  all  learning
Ticminiscence.  Schelling  expresses  it  in  the  assertion,
"  So  far  as  the  Ego  produces  everything  from  itself,  all
.  .  .  knowledge  is  a  jniori ;  but  so  far  as  we  are  not
conscious  of  this  productivity,  so  far  is  .  .  .  everything
a  posteriori.  .  .  .  There  are  thus a  priori  ideas  without


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 309

there  being  innate  ideas  "  (comp.  above,  p.  24).  Thus  all
the  really  a  priori  is  a  something  posited  by  the  Uncon-
scious, which  only  conies  into  consciousness  as  result.  So
far  as  it  is  the  prius  of  what  is  given,  of  the  immediate
content  of  consciousness,  so  far  is  it  still  unconscious ;  in
that  consciousness  reflects  on  the  content  it  finds,  and
concludes  therefrom  to  th.Q  prius  producing  it,  it  perceives
a  posteriori  the  unconsciously  active  a  priori  (comp.  in
addition  "  Das  Ding  an  Sich,"  pp.  66-73,  83-90).  The
ordinary  empiricism  fails  to  perceive  the  a  priori  element
in  the  mind;  philosophical  speculation  fails  to  see  that
everything  a  priori  in  the  mind  is  only  cognisable  a
posteriori  (inductively).

The  uniting  of  presentations,  again,  may  be  a  joining
together  in  space  or  in  time,  as  in  plastic  or  musical  com-
positions, then  it  belongs  to  artistic  production ;  or  a  com-
pounding of  conceptions  into  an  indivisible  idea,  as  in  the
formation  of  definitions  ;  or  an  union  of  ideas  through
forms  of  relation,  where  one  seeks  the  reason  for  the  con-
sequent, the  matter  for  the  form,  the  like  for  the  like,  for
the  one  alternative  the  other,  for  the  particular  the
general,  or  conversely.  In  every  case  one  idea  is
possessed,  and  another  is  sought  to  satisfy  the  given
relation.  One  has  either  in  oneself  what  is  sought  as
latent  memory  or  not.  In  the  latter  case  we  have  first
to  discover  it,  either  directly  or  indirectly  ;  in  the  former,
the  important  point  is  that  just  the  right  one  among  the
many  ideas  of  memory  conies  to  the  surface.  In  both
cases  a  reaction  of  the  Unconscious  is  required.

The  relation  of  the  general  to  the  particular  has  its
simplest  verbal  expression  in  the  judgment,  when  the
subject  represents  the  particular,  the  predicate  the  general.
To  everv  particular,however,there  are  vervmanvuniversals
which  are  all  contained  in  it;  therefore  every  subject  may
very  well  receive  several  predicates  ;  but  which  is  tin;
appropriate  one  depends  solely  on  the  aim  of  the  train  of
thought. In  judging,  therefore,  the  same  difficulty  recurs


3 to  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

how  the  right  idea  is  to  come  into  the  mind,  no  matter
whether  a  predicate  is  sought  for  a  subject  or  a  subject
for  a  predicate,  since  several  particulars  are  in  truth
included  under  one  universal.

The  relation  of  reason  and  consequent  possesses  special
importance  for  thought.  It  is  always  presented  in  the
form  of  the  syllogism,  which  in  its  simple  form  must
always  be  correctly  drawn,  and  may  be  proved  by  the  law
of  contradiction.  But  now  it  is  pretty  evident  that  the
syllogism  does  not  bring  out  anything  new  whatsoever,  as
has  been  proved  by  John  Stuart  Mill  and  others,  for  the
universal  major  premiss  implicitly  contains  the  special
case  in  itself,  which  is  only  made  explicit  in  the  con-
clusion. But  now  as  anybody  can  be  convinced  of  the
major  as  universal  only  by  being  convinced  of  all  its  appli-
cations, he  must  also  be  already  convinced  of  the  con-
clusion, or  he  is  not  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  major
premiss ;  and  if  the  major  has  no  certain  but  only  pro-
bable validity,  the  conclusion  also  must  have  the  same
coefficient  of  probability  as  the  major.  It  is  hereby
proved  that  syllogism  in  no  way  increases  knowledge  if
once  the  premises  are  given,  which  is  in  perfect  agree-
ment with  the  circumstance  that  no  rational  human
being  thinks  in  syllogisms,  but  along  with  the  thought  of
the  premises  has  eo  i])So  already  thought  the  conclusion
at  the  same  time,  so  that  the  syllogism  never  enters  into
consciousness  as  a  special  mode  of  thought.  Accordingly,
syllogism  can  have  no  immediate,  but  only  a  mediate
significance  for  cognition.  In  truth,  in  &W.  particular  cases
(where  the  minor  is  supplied)  we  are  concerned  with
discovering  the  appropriate  major ;  when  this  is  found,
the  conclusion  is  at  once  in  our  consciousness — nay,  even
the  major  often  remains  an  unconscious  term  of  the
process.  Of  course  the  same  proposition  can  serve  as
minor  fur  many  majors,  just  as  a  subject  may  be  supplied
to  many  predicates  ;  but  just  as,  for  the  particular  pur-
pose of  a  judgment,  only  one  predicate  affords  that  deter-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 311

mination  of  the  subject  which  can  serve  to  carry  the
train  of  thought  forward  to  the  desired  goal,  so  also  only-
one  determinate  major  premiss  can  help  to  produce  that
conclusion  which  can  advance  this  train  of  thought.  The
point  then  is,  from  among  those  universal  propositions
suspended  in  memory  with  which  the  given  case  may  be
combined  as  minor  premiss,  to  summon  just  that  one
which  is  wanted  into  consciousness,  i.e.,  our  general
assertion  is  confirmed  here  too.  E.g.,  if  I  want  to  prove
that  the  angles  at  the  base  of  an  isosceles  triangle  are
equal  to  one  another,  I  only  need  to  remember  the  general
proposition  that  in  every  triangle  equal  angles  are
opposite  to  equal  sides  ;  as  soon  as  this  has  become  clear
to  me  and  I  remember  it,  the  conclusion  also  is  co  ipso  there.
As  when  somebody  asks  me  what  I  think  of  the  weather,
and  at  the  same  time  makes  the  remark  that  the  baro-
meter lias  considerably  fallen,  I  only  need  to  remember
the  general  proposition  that  after  every  considerable  fall
of  the  barometer  the  weather  changes,  then  I  have  my
conclusion  as  a  matter  of  course  :  "  The  weather  will
change  to-morrow."  Here,  even  beyond  the  shadow  of  a
doubt,  the  universal  major  premiss  will  remain  uncon-
scious, and  the  conclusion  appear  as  a  matter  of  course.

If  we  ask,  however,  how  (with  the  exception  of
mathematics)  we  come  by  the  general  major  propositions,
examination  shows  that  it  is  by  way  of  induction,  in  that
from  a  larger  or  smaller  number  of  perceived  special
cases  the  general  rule  is  deduced  with  greater  or  less
probability.  This  probability  is  really  implicitly  con-
tained in  the  cognition  of  the  major,  and  among  people
educated  and  accustomed  to  think,  can  be  arrived  at
numerically  by  bargaining  and  higgling  about  the  condi-
tions of  a  wager  proposed  for  the  nearest  special  case.
But  of  course  one  has  usually  only  an  obscure  idea  of  the
coefficient  of  probability,  which  consequently  is  any-
thing but  csuct,  so  that,  e.g.,  a  tolerably  high  probability
is  constantly  confused  with  certainty  (ride  religious  beliefs).


3i2  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Nevertheless,  by  the  proposal  of  a  wager  both  upper  and
lower  limits  may  very  soon  be  found,  by  which  the
quantity  of  probability  is  always  to  a  certain  degree
determined,  and  with  acute  minds  these  limits  may  be
approximated  to  one  another  by  continued  examination  of
the  conditions  of  the  wager.

The  question  how  one  arrives  at  the  belief  in  the  general
rule  is  divisible,  then,  into  the  two  questions:  (i.)  how
do  we  come  to  pass  at  all  from  the  particular  to  the  uni-
versal ?  and  (2.)  how  do  we  obtain  the  coefficient  which
represents  the  probability  of  a  real  value  of  the  general
expression  that  has  been  found  ?  The  former  is  only
explained  by  the  -practical  need  of  general  rules,  without
which  man  would  be  quite  helpless,  since  he  would  not
know  whether  the  earth  would  sustain  his  next  step,  or
the  trunk  of  a  tree  the  next  time  support  him  on  the
water.  It  must  then  be  pronounced  a  happy  idea,  pro-
duced by  the  urgency  of  necessity,  for  in  the  particular
cases  themselves  there  is  nothing  at  all  to  lead  to  their
comprehension  into  a  general  rule.  The  second,  however,
is  explained  by  inductive  logic,  so  far  as  one  understands
by  induction  the  logical  deduction  of  a  coefficient  of  proba-
bility. It  is  true  the  objective  connection  is  made  evident
by  this,  but  the  subjective  process  of  consciousness  does
not  know  these  artificial  methods  :  the  natural  understand-
ing instinctively  induces,  and  finds  the  result  as  some-
thing pre-formed  in  consciousness,  without  being  able  to
give  any  further  account  concerning  the  How.  There
remains  then  nothing  for  it  but  to  admit,  that  the  uncon-
scious logical  in  man  relieves  the  consciously  logical  of  an
office,  which  is  requisite  for  the  existence  of  mankind,  and
yet  exceeds  the  power  of  the  unscientific  consciousness.
Tor  when  I  have  often  seen  rain  or  storms  occur,  along
with  such  and  such  signs  in  the  sky,  I  form  the  general
rule,  with  a  degree  of  probability  of  real  validity  depen-
dent on  the  number  of  observations,  without  knowing
anything  about  Mill's  inductive  methods  of  Agreement,


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 313

Difference,  liesidues,  or  Concomitant  Variations;  and  yet
my  result  agrees  with  the  scientific  so  far  as  the  vagueness
of  my  coefficient  of  probability  can  confirm  an  agreement,
and  if  one  takes  account  at  the  same  time  of  the  possibly
influential  positive  sources  of  error,  as  interest,  &c.

Hitherto  we  have  always  only  taken  note  of  tolerably
simple  processes  of  thought — its  elements,  as  it  were ;
there  still  remain,  however,  the  cases  where,  in  the  midst
of  a  conscious  chain  of  thought,  several  logically  necessary
links  are  overleapt  by  consciousness,  and  yet  almost
invariably  the  correct  result  appears.  Here,  again,  the
Unconscious  will  manifest  itself  to  us  very  clearly  as
intuition,  intellectual  vision,  direct  knowledge,  immanent
logic.

If  we  first  regard  mathematics  in  this  light,  it  appears
that  two  methods  prevail  in  it,  the  deductive  or  discursive
and  the  intuitive.  The  former  mode  of  proof  consists  in
gradual  inferences,  according  to  the  law  of  contradiction,
from  admitted  premises,  thus  answering  in  the  main  to
the  consciously  logical  and  its  discursive  nature :  it  is
usually  taken  to  be  the  sole  and  exclusive  method  of
mathematics,  because  it  alone  claims  to  be  method  and
demonstration.  The  other  method  must  renounce  all
claim  to  being  a  mode  of  argument,  but  is  nevertheless  a
form  of  proof,  therefore  method,  because  it  appeals  to
natural  feeling,  to  sound  common-sense,  and  by  intellectual
intuition  teaches  at  a  glance  as  much  as,  nay,  even  more
than,  the  deductive  method  after  a  tedious  demonstration.
It  comes  before  consciousness  with  its  result,  with  the  con-
straining force  of  logic,  and  that,  too,  without  hesitation
and  rellection,  but  instantaneously,  and  has  accordingly
the  character  of  the  unconsciously  logical.  A'.//.,  nobody
who  looks  at  an  equilateral  triangle,  if  he  has  compre-
hended the  question,  will  for  a  moment  deubt  whether
the  angles  are  equal.  The  deductive  method  can  cer-
tainly prove  it  to  him  from  still  simpler  premises,  but
the certaintv  of  his  intuitive knowledge will assuredlv


314  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

not  be  increased  thereby  ;  on  the  contrary,  if  it  is  proved
to  him  very  neatly  by  calculation,  and  without  percep-
tion of  the  figure,  he  ■will  obtain  less  assurance  than  from
simple  intuition ;  he  then  merely  learns  that  it  must
be  so  and  cannot  be  otherwise,  but  here  he  sees  that  it
actually  is  so,  and  still  more,  that  it  is  necessarily  so :  he
sees,  as  it  were,  as  living  organism  from  within,  what
appears  to  him  by  deduction  merely  as  effect  of  a  dead
mechanism.  He  sees,  so  to  speak,  the  "how"  of  the
matter,  not  merely  the  "  that ;  "  in  short,  he  feels  much
more  satisfied.

It  is  Schopenhauer's  merit  to  have  rightly  emphasised
the  value  of  this  intuitive  method,  although  he  unduly
slights  the  deductive  method  on  that  account.  All  the
axioms  of  mathematics  rest  on  this  mode  of  proof,
although,  like  more  complex  propositions,  they  may
just  as  well  be  deduced  from  the  law  of  contradiction  ;
only,  by  reason  of  the  simple  nature  of  the  subject,
intuition  acts  here  so  strikingly  in  respect  of  conviction,
that  we  almost  regard  the  man  as  a  fool  who  desires
to  deduce  such  principles.  It  accordingly  happens  that
nobody  has  applied  the  necessary  acuteness  to  really
refer  all  the  axioms  of  mathematics  to  the  law  of  con-
tradiction in  application  to  given  elements  of  space  and
number  ;  hence  the  fixed  idea  of  many  philosophers  (e.g.,
Kant)  that  this  reduction  is  not  possible.  But  as  surely
as  these  axioms  are  logical,  so  surely  is  their  deduction
possible  from  the  sole  fundamental  law  of  logic,  the  law
of  contradiction.

The  axioms  of  mathematics  are  altogether  useless  for
clear  heads  ;  these  might  commence  the  study  of  mathe-
matics with  axioms  of  a  much  more  complex  kind  ;  but
our  mathematics  is  intended  for  schools,  where  even  the
stupidest  must  be  taught,  and  these  need  to  comprehend
the  axioms  as  logically  necessary.  The  discursive  or
deductive  method  is  adapted  for  everybody,  because  it
proceeds  step  by  step,  but  intuition  is  a  matter  of  talent ;


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 315

what  the  one  sees  at  a  glance  is  apprehended  by  the
other  only  very  circuitously.  At  a  more  advanced  stage
it  is  possible,  by  the  reforming  of  geometrical  figures,
inversion,  superposition,  and  other  constructive  aids,  to
assist  intuition ;  but  a  point  is  soon  reached  where  even
a  clear  head  can  go  no  farther,  and  recourse  must  be  had
to  the  deductive  method ;  e.g.,  in  the  case  of  the  isosceles
right-angled  triangle,  the Pythagorean  theorem  may  be


made  evident  to  the  eye  by  folding  over  the  square  of
the  hypothenuse ;  but  in  the  scalene  it  is  only  to  be
comprehended  deductively. — It  follows  from  this,  that  the
intuitive  faculty  far  too  soon  leaves  our  most  accomplished
mathematicians  in  the  lurch  for  much  progress  to  be
made  by  its  means.  All  depends  upon  the  degree  of
the  capacity;  and  there  is  nothing  absurd  in  supposing
a  higher  mind  so  completely  master  of  the  intuitive
method  that  it  can  altogether  dispense  with  the  deductive.
The  difficulty  of  intuition  is  pre-eminently  shown  very
soon  in  algebra  and  analysis;  only  prodigious  talents,  like


316  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Dahse,  are  here  capable  of  an  intuition  which  is  able  to
conceive  and  to  deal  with  large  numbers  as  a  whole.  More
frequently  one  finds  among  mathematicians  the  ability,
in  an  orderly  chain  of  inference,  to  make  intuitive  leaps
and  to  omit  a  number  of  terms,  so  that  from  the  premises
of  the  first  argument  immediately  the  conclusion  of  the
ensuing  third  and  fifth  springs  into  consciousness.  All  this
allows  us  to  conclude  that  the  discursive  or  deductive
method  is  only  the  lame  walking  on  stilts  of  conscious  logic,
whilst  rational  intuition  is  the  Pegasus  flight  of  the  Un-
conscious, which  carries  in  a  moment  from  earth  to  heaven.
The  whole  of  mathematics  appears  from  this  point  of  view
as  the  tools  and  implements  of  our  poor  mind,  which,
obliged  laboriously  to  heap  stone  on  stone,  yet  can  never
touch  the  heavens  witli  its  hand,  although  it  build  beyond
the  clouds.  A  mind  standing  in  closer  connection  with
the  Unconscious,  then,  would  instantaneously  grasp  the
solution  of  every  profound  problem  intuitively,  and  yet
with  logical  necessity,  as  we  do  in  the  simplest  geometrical
problems;  and  it  is  accordingly  not  wonderful  that  the
embodied  calculations  of  the  Unconscious,  without  trouble
being  given  to  it,  agree  with  such  mathematical  precision
in  the  greatest  as  in  the  smallest  matter;  as,  e.g.,  in  the  cell
of  the  bee,  the  angle  at  which  the  planes  are  inclined  to  one
another,  however  exactly  it  be  measured  (to  halt-angular
minutes),  agrees  with  the  angle  which,  with  the  form  of  the
cell,  affords  the  minimum  of  surface,  in  this  case  of  wax,
for  the  given  space  (comp.  also  p.  190,  on  the  construction
of  the  femur).

\\\  all  this  we  cannot  doubt  that  in  intuition  the  same
logical  links  are  present  in  the  Unconscious,  only  what
follows  serially  in  conscious  logic  is  compressed  into  a
point  of  time.  That  only  the  last  term  comes  into  con-
sciousness is  due  to  the  circumstance  that  it  alone  possesses
interest  for  us  ;  but  that  all  the  others  are  present  in  the
Unconscious  may  be  perceived,  if  the  intuition  be  in-
tentionally  repeated  in such a way that only  the  one


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 317

before  the  last,  then  the  term  before  that,  &c,  emerges
into  consciousness.  The  relation  between  the  two  kinds
is  then  to  be  conceived  as  follows :  The  intuitive  leaps
the  space  to  be  traversed  at  a  bound;  the  discursive  takes
several  steps ;  the  space  measured  is  in  both  cases  pre-
cisely the  same,  but  the  time  required  for  the  purpose  is
different.  Each  putting  of  the  foot  to  the  ground  forms  a
point  of  rest,  a  station,  consisting  of  cerebral  vibrations
which  produce  a  conscious  idea,  and  for  that  purpose  need
time  (a  quarter  — two  seconds).  The  leaping  or  stepping
itself,  on  the  other  hand,  is  in  both  cases  something
momentary,  timeless,  because  empirically  falling  into
the  Unconscious ;  the  process  proper  is  thus  always
unconscious,  the  difference  is  only  whether,  between  the
conscious  stations  for  halting,  greater  or  lesser  tracts  be
traversed.  In  the  case  of  small  steps,  even  the  heavy
and  clumsy  thinker  feels  sure  that  he  does  not  trip ;  with
greater  leaps,  however,  the  danger  of  stumbling  increases,
and  only  the  dexterous  and  nimble  brain  attempts  them
with  advantage.  The  dull  brain  suffers  a  twofold  loss  of
time  with  its  greater  discursiveness  of  thought.  In  the
first  place,  the  halt  at  each  single  station  is  greater  in  its
case,  because  the  single  idea  needs  longer  time  to  become
conscious  with  the  same  clearness;  and,  in  the  second  place,
it  must  have  more  pauses.  That,  however,  really  the  pre-
cise process  is  in  every,  even  the  smallest  step  of  thought,
intuitive  and  unconscious,  on  that  point,  after  what  has
been  said,  scarcely  any  doubt  can  well  remain.

I)iit  even  outside  of  mathematics  we  can  follow  the
interblendingof  the  discursive  and  intuitive  method.  The
practised  chess-player  possibly  reviews  in  his  mind  the
result  0/  tlti-i  and  that  move  three  or  four  moves  ahead,
but  it  does  not  at  all  occur  to  him  to  consider  a  hundred
thousand  other  possible  moves,  five  or  six  of  which  the  bad
chess-player  perhaps  considers,  without  lighting  on  the  two
which  alone  claim  the  attention  of  the  proficient.  1  low  now
does  it  come  to  pass  that  the  latter  does  not  at  all  lake  note


318  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  these  five  or  six  moves,  which  would  probably  only  be
revealed  as  less  good  after  two  to  three  other  moves  had  been
made  ?  He  looks  at  the  chessboard,  and  without  reflection
he  immediately  sees  the  only  two  good  moves.  This  is  the
work  of  a  moment,  even  if  he  be  a  passing  spectator  of  a
game  played  by  others.  In  the  same  way  the  general  of
genius  sees  the  point  for  the  demonstration  or  the  decisive
attack,  also  without  reflection  (comp.  above,  p.  23,  the
reference  to  Heine).  Practice  is  a  word  which  here  does
not  at  all  affect  the  question ;  practice  can  facilitate
reflection,  but  never  supply  the  want  of  it  except  in
mechanical  works,  where  another  nerve-centre  acts  vicar-
iously for  the  brain.  But  here,  where  we  are  dealing  with
something  quite  different,  the  question  is,  What  instan-
taneously makes  the  appropriate  choice  if  it  is  not  con-
scious reflection  ? Manifestly  the  Unconscious.

Look  at  the  antics  of  a  young  ape.  Cuvier  tells  of  a
young  Bhunder  (Macacus  Rhesus)  (see  Brehm's  Illustr.
Thierleben,  i.  64):  "  After  about  the  lapse  of  a  fortnight  it
began  to  separate  from  its  mother,  and  at  once  exhibited
in  its  first  steps  an  adroitness,  a  strength,  which  could
not  but  excite  universal  astonishment,  practice  and
experience  both  having  been  wanting.  The  young
Bhunder  from  the  very  first  clung  to  the  perpendicular
iron  bars  of  its  cage,  and  clambered  up  and  down  accord-
ing to  its  fancy;  perhaps  made  also  a  few  steps  on  the
straw ;  sprang  of  its  own  accord  from  the  summit  of  its
cage  on  to  its  four  hands,  and  then  again  against  the
bars,  to  which  it  clung,  with  a  velocity  and  accuracy
which  would  have  done  honour  to  the  most  experienced
monkey."  How  does  this  ape,  just  released  from  the
skin  of  its  mother,  upon  whose  breast  it  has  hitherto
hung,  come  to  measure  aright  the  force  and  direction  of
its  leaps  ?  How  does  the  lion,  springing  at  the  distance  of
twelve  feet  upon  its  prey,  calculate  the  curve  with  the
proper  angle  and  velocity  ?  How  thg  dog  the  curve  of
the  morsel  which  it  catches  so  cleverlv  at  any  distance


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 319

and  at  any  angle  ?  Practice  only  facilitates  the  action  of
the  Unconscious  on  the  nerve-centres,  and  where  these
are  already  sufficiently  prepared  for  their  office  without
practice  we  see  even  this  practice  dispensed  with,  as  in
the  above-mentioned  ape;  but  that  which  is  substituted
for  the  lacking  mathematical  calculation  can,  as  in  the
cell-structure  of  the  bee,  only  be  mathematical  intuition
combined  with  the  instinct  to  execute  the  movement.

As  concerns  the  overleaping  of  conclusions  in  ordinary
thought,  this  is  a  very  well-known  experience.  Without
this  acceleration  thought  would  be  of  such  a  snail's-pace
that,  as  now  frequently  happens  in  the  case  of  human
beings  with  sluggish  brains,  in  many  practical  reflections
one  would  arrive  too  late  with  one's  result,  and  would
hate  the  whole  labour  of  thought  on  account  of  its  cum-
brousness,  as  it  is  now  hated  and  avoided  merely  by
specially  lazy  thinkers.  The  simplest  case  of  skipping  is
when  the  conclusion  is  immediately  drawn  from  the  minor
premiss  without  our  being  conscious  of  the  major  premiss  ;
but  also  one  or  several  actual  conclusions  are  sometimes
omitted,  as  we  have  already  seen  in  mathematics.  This
commonly  happens  only  in  one's  own  thinking;  in  com-
munication we  have  regard  to  the  understanding  of  others,
and  recover  the  principal  intermediate  links  that  have  pre-
viously remained  unknown.  Women  and  the  uneducated
frequently  neglect  this,  and  then  there  arise  those  leaps
in  their  trains  of  thought  which  may  lie  convincing  to  the
speaker,  although  the  hearer  is  wholly  unable  to  see  how
he  is  to  get  from  point  to  point.  Any  one  accustomed  to
introspection  will  Ik;  able  to  catch  himself  making  consi-
derable leaps  in  carrying  on  a  train  of  thought  and  in
drawing  inferences,  if  he  make  this  review  directly  after
prosecuting  a  new  and  very  interesting  study  with  zeal
and  success.

An  observation  of  Jessen,  the  well-known  student  of
mental  disease,  on  an  allied  topic,  is  interesting  ("  L'sy-(
chology," pp.  235,  236),  which 1 will take the  liberty  of


32o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

quoting  : — "  When  we  reflect  on  anything  with  the  whole
force  of  our  mind,  we  may  fall  into  a  state  of  entire
unconsciousness,  in  which  we  not  only  forget  the  outer
world,  but  also  know  nothing  at  all  of  ourselves  and  the
thoughts  passing  within  lis.  After  a  shorter  or  longer
time,  we  then  suddenly  awake  as  from  a  dream,  and
usually  at  the  same  moment  the  result  of  our  meditation
appears  clearly  and  distinctly  in  consciousness,  without  our
knowing  how  we  have  reached  it.  Also,  in  a  less  severe
meditation,  there  occur  moments  in  which  a  perfect
vacancv  of  thought  is  combined  with  the  consciousness
of  our  own  mental  effort,  to  which  in  the  next  moment
a  more  vivid  stream  of  thought  succeeds.  Certainly  some
practice  is  required  to  combine  serious  reflection  with
simultaneous  self  -  observation,  as  the  endeavour  to
observe  thoughts  in  their  origin  and  their  succession
may  easily  produce  disturbances  of  thinking  and  arrest
the  evolution  of  our  thoughts.  Eepeated  attempts,
however,  put  us  in  a  position  clearly  to  perceive  that
in  fact  in  every  arduous  reflection  a  constant  inner
pulsation,  or  a  changing  ebb  and  flow  of  thoughts,  as
it  were,  takes  place — a  moment  in  which  all  thoughts
disappear  from  consciousness,  and  only  the  consciousness
of  an  inner  mental  strain  remains,  and  a  moment  in
which  the  thoughts  stream  in  in  greater  fulness  and  dis-
tinctly emerge  into  consciousness.  The  lower  the  ebb,
the  stronger  the  succeeding  flood  is  wont  to  be;  the
stronger  the  previous  inner  tension,  the  stronger  and
livelier  the  contents  of  the  emerging  thoughts."  The
purely  empirical  observations  of  this  fine  mental  observer
are  a  confirmation  of  our  way  of  regarding  the  matter,
the  more  above  suspicion  as  he  is  not  at  all  acquainted
with  our  conception  of  unconscious  thinking,  and  never-
theless is  constrained  to  the  verbal  acknowledgment  of
our  assertions  (in  the  passages  in  italics)  by  the  pure
*  force  of  facts;  although  his  subsequent  attempts  at  ex-
planation, which are in essentials (brainless  thinking)


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 321

quite  correct,  do  not  hit  the  nail  on  the  head,  just
because  they  do  not  grasp  the  notion  of  the  Unconscious
as  principle  of  thought  apart  from  a  brain.  The  con-
sciousness of  mental  effort  observed  in  these  processes  is
only  the  feeling  of  the  tension  of  the  brain  and  the  scalp
(by  reflex  action).  The  moments  of  vacancy  of  conscious-
ness that  are  described,  on  which  the  result  follows  without
our  hcing  aware  how  it  has  bec?i  arrived  at,  are  those  very
moments  when,  in  the  productive  thinking  out  of  a  zeal-
ously pursued  object  of  study,  the  skipping  of  a  longer
train  of  inferences  takes  place.

Truly  man  is  so  accustomed  to  find  in  his  consciousness
results  of  which  he  is  quite  ignorant  how  he  has  come  by
them,  that  in  any  particular  case  he  is  not  wont  to  wonder
at  it  in  the  least;  and  therefore  it  is  also  natural  that
an  inquirer  should  not  first  reach  the  notion  of  the  Un-
conscious from  this  starting-point.  But  as  in  general  the
reaction  of  the  Unconscious  is  wont  most  frequently  to
fail  when  one  intentionally  seeks  to  stimulate  it,  so  in  the
eager  and  intentional  reflection  on  a  subject  this  effective
entrance  of  the  Unconscious  might  be  less  easy  to  estab-
lish to  the  satisfaction  of  the  majority,  than  in  the  so-
called  mental  digestion  and  assimilation  of  the  received
nutriment,  which  does  not  occur  on  a  conscious  impulse,
but  at  an  indeterminate  time,  and  is  only  announced  by
the  results,  which  opportunely  occur  without  our  having
been  consciously  occupied  with  the  affair.  (Schopenhauer
calls  this  "unconscious  rumination,"  com}*,  above,  p.  29.)
Thus  it  regularly  happens  with  me  when  I  have  read
a  work  which  presents  new  points  of  view  essentially
opposed  to  my  previous  opinions.  The  proofs  of  such
ingenious  ideas  are  often  rather  weak  ;  and  even  if  they
are  good  and  apparently  irrefutable,  still  no  human
being  can  be  so  rapidly  converted  from  his  old  opinions,
for  lie  can  advance  just  as  good  grounds  Un-  the  latter,
or,  if  he  cannot  do  so  himself,  he  confides  in  himself  and
not  the  new  author  and  thinks :  counter-proofs  will  be
vol.  I.  x


322  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

found,  although  I  am  not  at  present  acquainted  with
them.  Then  there  intervene  other  occupations ;  the
matter  is  not  sufficiently  important  to  hunt  for  counter-
arguments, for  which  search  must  be  made  in  books,
often  for  weeks,  nay,  months  ;  in  short,  the  first  impression
gets  weak,  and  the  whole  affair  is  in  time  forgotten.
Sometimes,  however,  it  is  different.  If  the  new  ideas
have  made  a  really  deep  impression,  they  may  be  referred
provisionally,  unaccepted,  as  undecided  questions,  to  the
court  of  memory,  may  even  be  obstructed  by  other  occu-
pations, or,  still  better,  intentionally  laid  on  one  side,  in
order  to  be  thought  of  again.  Nevertheless  the  matter  is
only  apparently  laid  to  rest,  and  after  days,  weeks,  or
months,  when  the  wish  and  opportunity  arise  to  give  an
opinion  on  the  question,  we  find  to  our  very  great
astonishment  that  we  have  undergone  a  mental  regenera-
tion on  the  point,  that  the  old  opinions  which  we  had
taken  for  actual  conviction  up  to  that  moment  have  been
entirely  renounced,  and  that  new  ones  have  already  become
quietly  lodged  there.  This  unconscious  mental  process
of  digestion  and  assimilation  I  have  several  times  experi-
enced in  my  own  case,  and  have  always  had  a  certain
instinct  not  to  disturb  this  process  prematurely  by  con-
scious reflection  in  real  questions  of  principle  affecting
the  general  view  of  the  world  and  of  the  mind.

I  am  of  opinion  that  even  in  more  unimportant  ques-
tions, as  soon  as  they  only  awaken  interest  witli  sufficient
vividness,  thus  in  all  concerns  of  practical  life,  the  process
described  always  affords  the  right  and  true  decision,  and
that  the  conscious  reasons  will  only  be  subsequently  right
when  the  judgment  lias  been  already  formed.  The  ordi-
nary understanding,  however,  which  does  not  pay  atten-
tion to  these  processes,  really  imagines  that  it  is  swayed
in  its  opinion  by  the  reasons  which  have  been  sought  for,
whilst  an  acuter  self-observation  would  teach  it  that  these
only  come  in  the  cases  alluded  to  when  its  view  is  already
fixed,  its  resolution  taken. In  saying  this,  it  is  by  no


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 323

means  asserted  that  the  Unconscious  is  not  determined
by  logical  reasons.  This  is  most  undoubtedly  the  case ;
it  is  only  tolerably  indifferent  so  far  as  concerns  the  cer-
tainty of  the  decision,  at  any  rate  at  first,  whether  the
reasons  afterwards  sought  for  by  consciousness  agree  with
those  reasons  which  have  determined  the  Unconscious  or
not !  In  the  case  of  acutely  thinking  brains  the  former,
with  the  great  majority  the  latter,  will  be  prevailingly  the
case,  and  accordingly  the  phenomenon  is  explained,  that
people  often  seem  to  derive  such  firm  conviction  from
such  bad  reasons,  and  allow  themselves  to  be  dispossessed
of  it  with  much  dilliculty  by  the  best  counter-arguments.
It  lies  just  in  this,  that  the  true  unconscious  reasons
are  not  at  all  known  to  them,  and  therefore  are  not  to  be
refuted.  It  is  here  indifferent  whether  their  conviction
contains  truth  or  not;  also  of  errors  (which  as  said  never
arise  from  false  conclusions,  but  from  the  insufficiency
and  falsehood  of  the  premisses),  those  are  most  diilicult  to
eradicate  which  are  the  result  of  an  unconscious  process
of  thought  (e.g.,  in  political  opinion  those  which  are  un-
consciously rooted  in  professional  and  class  interests).

If  now,  however,  any  one  should  be  led  by  these  con-
siderations to  lightly  estimate  conscious  ratiocination,  such
an  one  would  fall  into  serious  error.  Just  because,  in
conclusions  attained  at  a  bound,  errors  easily  slip  in,  it  is
imperatively  necessary  in  important  questions  to  render
the  individual  terms  clear  by  discursive  thought,  and  to
descend  by  such  small  stages  of  thought  that  one  may  be
as  far  as  possible  protected  from  errors  in  the  conclusion.
Just  because  in  the  opinions,  whose  true  proof  lies  in  the
Unconscious,  the  perversion  of  the  judgment  by  interests
and  inclinations  is  withdrawn  from  all  control  and  has
such  free  scope,  it  is  doubly  necessary  to  draw  tin-  subjec-
tive proof  to  the  light,  and  to  confront  it  with  the  results
of  discursive  logical  inferences,  since  only  in  the  latter  is
there  to  be  found  a  certain,  if  also  always  a  very  defective,
guarantee uf objectivity. If the subjective prejudices


324  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

be  stronger  for  the  moment,  conscious  logic  gains  ground
with  time,  if  not  in  one,  yet  in  the  course  of  many  genera-
tions. But  even  in  this  emergence  of  certain  truths  to  the
light  of  consciousness,  and  in  their  struggle  and  victory
over  dominant  ideas  of  the  time,  there  rules  again,  as  we
shall  see  hereafter,  an  unconscious  logic,  a  historical  pro-
vidence, which  has  never  been  perceived  more  clearly  than
bv  Heszel.


(  3-5  )


VI  IT.
THE UNCONSCIOUS IN THE ORIGIN OF SENSE- PERCEPTION.

Kant  in  his  "  Transcendental  ^Esthetic  "  maintained  that
Space  was  not  passively  received  by  the  mind,  but  spon-
taneously produced  by  it, — hereby  causing  an  entire  philo-
sophical revolution.  But  now,  why  has  this  correct  state-
ment been  at  all  times  so  stoutly  opposed  by  common
sense,  as  well  as,  with  few  exceptions,  by  the  scientific
mind  ?

i.  Because  Kant,  and  after  him  Fichte  and  Schopen-
hauer, drew  from  a  true  proposition  subjective-idealistic
consequences,  which  were  false  and  repugnant  to  the  in-
stinct of  the  healthy  reason.

2.  Because  Kant  had  given  faulty  proofs  of  his  correct
assertion;  which  in  truth  proved  nothing  at  all.

3.  Because  Kant,  without  giving  any  further  account  of
it,  speaks  of  an  unconscious  process  in  the  mind,  whilst
the  previous  mode  of  treatment  only  knew  and  regarded
as  possible  conscious  mental  processes,  but  consciousness
denies  a  spontaneous  production  of  Space  and  Time,  and
witli  perfect  truth  insists  upon  their  being  given  in  sense-
perception  us  fa  its  accomplis.

4.  Because  Kant  put  Time,  of  which  this  proposition
dors  not  hold  good,  oh  a  level  with  Space.

These  four  points  we  have  successively  to  consider,  since
the  unconscious  production  of  Space  is  the  indispensable
foundation  of  sensuous  perception,  with  which  conscious-
ness takes  its  rise  and  which  in  its  turn  is  the  foundation
of  all  conscious  thought.


326  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS. .

Ad.  I.  In  the  first  place,  assuming  it  be  proved  that
Space  and  Time  can  in  no  other  way  find  an  entrance  to
thought  than  by  the  spontaneous  activity  of  the  latter,  it
by  no  means  follows  from  this  that  Space  and  Time  can
have  real  existence  exclusively  in  thought,  and  not  also
outside  thought  in  the  real  world.  The  overhasty  nature
of  this  conclusion,  which  Kant  actually  draws,  and  through
which  he  comes  to  the  denial  of  the  transcendental  reality
of  space  and  to  the  one-sided  ideality  of  his  system,  has
been  shown  by  Schelling  ("  Exposition  of  the  Process  of
Nature,"  Werke,  i.  10,  314-321)  and  Trendelenburg  ("On
a  Gap  in  Kant's  Proof  of  the  Exclusive  Subjectivity  of
Space  and  Time,"  in  the  third  volume  of  the  "  Historical
Contributions,"  No.  vii.)  It  is  more  fully  discussed  in
my  essay,  "  The  Thing  in  Itself  and  its  Constitution "
(Berlin:  C.  Duncker,  1871),  particularly  in  the  last  two
sections  :  vii.  "  Space  and  Time  as  Forms  of  the  Thing
in  Itself  ;  "  and  viii.  "  Critique  of  the  Transcendental
yEsthetic."  Here,  however,  we  can  only  consider  with
all  brevity  the  reasons  which  render  it  probable  that
Space  and  Time  are  just  as  much  forms  of  existence  as
of  thought.

(«.)  "We  have  first  to  give  a  clear  statement  of  the
reasons  for  believing  in  the  real  existence  of  a  Non-Ego,
or  an  external  world  lying  beyond  the  Ego.  Only  two
hypotheses  are  logically  possible.  Either  the  Ego  uncon-
sciously fashions  the  world  of  appearance  from  its  own
essence,  in  which  case  the  Ego  alone  really  exists,  and
per  conscqucntiam  every  reader  must  deny  the  existence  not
only  of  external  things  but  of  all  other  men;  or  there
exists  a  Non-Ego  independent  of  the  Ego,  and  the  repre-
sentation of  the  external  world  in  the  Ego  is  the  product
of  these  two  factors.  "Which  of  these  hypotheses  is  the
more  probable  must  be  decided  by  this;  which  more
easily  explains  the  phenomenal  world  ?  either  is  conceiv-
able.

(a.)  Sense- impressions  have  a  degree  of  vividness  which


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 327

pure  ideas  produced  by  our  own  mental  activity  are  wont
only  to  attain  in  morbid  states.  Moreover,  they  often
(especially  in  the  years  of  childhood)  bring  real  additions
to  the  stock  of  knowledge,  whereas  the  class  to  which
they  are  opposed  is  always  made  up  of  familiar  memories
and  portions  of  the  same.  This  is  easily  explained  by
the  assumption  of  an  external  world,  hardly  from  the  Ego
alone.

(/3.)  For  the  origination  of  a  sense-impression  the  feeling
of  the  open  sense  is  requisite  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  feel-
ing of  the  open  sense  does  not  necessarily  produce  a  sense-
impression,  e.g.,  in  darkness,  anosmia.  This  is  easily
explained  by  the  influence  of  an  external  world,  hardly
from  the  Ego  alone.

(7.)  Sensuous  representations  arise  according  to  the  law
of  the  succession  of  thought  from  antecedent  representa-
tions in  accordance  with  the  particular  mood,  etc. — Sensuous
impressions  for  the  most  part  appear  suddenly  and  un-
expectedly, and  always  disconnected  with  the  internal
train  of  thoughts.  This  phenomenon  is  only  possible  with-
out action  of  an  external  world  if  the  law  of  mental
succession  holds  good  at  one  time  and  not  at  another,
strictly  explicable  it  is  not  even  on  this  assumption  from
the  Ego  alone.

(8.)  Most  impressions  have  this  peculiarity,  that  their
assumed  object  is  also  simultaneously  inferred  from  another
impression  of  another  sense  {e.g.,  a  dish  of  food  may  be
simultaneously  seen,  smelt,  tasted,  touched).  This  is
easily  explained  by  the  action  of  an  external  world,  hardly
by  mere  internal  mental  processes.  For  if  one  should
assume  that  the  co-existent  sense-impressions  mutually
arouse  one  another,  e.g.,  the  visual  impression  of  a  dish  of
food  brings  with  it  the  odorous  impressions,  the  olfactory
sense  being  open,  he  would  lie  refuted  by  the  fact  that  the
sense  of  smell  and  sight  may  be  alternately  opened  and
closed,  and  yet  each  time  receive  the  appropriate  sense-
impression  of  the  food. Should  any  one  in  reply  to  this


328  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

make  the  further  assumption,  that  not  merely  the  simul-
taneous, but  also  the  antecedent  visual  impression  of  the
viands  have  power  to  produce  the  odorous  impression  of
the  same  and  conversely,  he  would  be  met  by  the  circum-
stance that  on  the  alternate  opening  and  closing  of  the
two  senses,  the  visual  impression  can  be  had  at  one  time
but  not  at  another,  namely,  when  the  viands  are  removed,
so  that  the  odorous  impression  under  otherwise  similar
circumstances  would  call  forth  the  visual  impression  at  one
time  but  not  at  another,  which  contradicts  the  principle,
"  Like  causes,  like  effects."  (See  further  Wiener,  "  Grund-
ziige  der  Weltordnung,"  Band  3,  under  "  Proof  of  the
Reality  of  the  External  World.")

(e.)  Things,  i.e.,  the  causes  of  the  impressions  of  sense,
act  on  one  another  according  to  laws  strictly  definite.
Now,  if  the  impressions  of  sense  are  to  be  explained  from
the  Ego  alone,  these  laws  must  be  transferable  to  the
inner  mental  processes.  But  this  is  not  so ;  for  only  in
the  rarest  cases  do  the  sense-impressions  of  cause  and
effect  follow  one  another  as  cause  and  effect  in  the  out-
ward world.  Often,  on  the  contrary,  the  effect  is  per-
ceived at  one  time  and  the  cause  at  another  and  later
time ;  but  a  later  sense-impression  cannot  be  the  cause  of
an  earlier  one.

(f)  Every  Ego,  besides  the  idea  of  its  own  body,  re-
ceives also  ideas  of  a  great  number  of  extraneous  bodies
similar  to  its  own,  in  which  reside  mental  faculties  similar
to  its  own.  It  finds  that  all  these  existences  announce
the  same  representations  concerning  Ego  and  ]STon-Ego,
and  that  their  declarations  concerning  the  constitution  of
the  external  world  partly  agree  with  one  another  in  a
surprising  manner,  partly  check  one  another,  and  lead
to  the  conviction  of  error.  Each  Ego  sees  these  exist-
ences born,  grow,  die  like  itself;  it  receives  from  them
protection,  help,  and  instruction  during  the  age  of  child-
hood, when  its  own  force  and  knowledge  is  insufficient ;
and  receives  at  every  period  of  its  life,  directly  or  in-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 329

directly  (through  books)  instruction  from  others,  in  which
thoughts  occur  which  it  is  compelled  to  confess  itself
unable  to  grasp.  It  learns  by  the  aid  of  teachers  to  follow
backwards  the  succession  of  its  fellow-beings,  and  to  per-
ceive a  plan  in  history  in  which  it  is  obliged  to  look  upon
itself  as  a  link.  All  this  is  almost  impossible  with  the
sole  existence  of  the  Ego,  but  easily  to  be  explained  by
the  existence  of  one  external  world  common  to  all  Ego's,
which  includes  within  it  the  bodies  of  these  reciprocally
acting  Ego's.  As  other  Ego's  can  only  act  on  me  through
their  bodies,  every  inference  to  the  transcendent  reality
of  other  Ego's  is  illegitimate  if  it  is  not  mediated  by  the
inference  to  the  transcendent  reality  of  my  own  and  other
bodies,  and  founded  thereon.

(77.)  The  internal  ideas  can  be  called  forth,  retained,  and
repeated  at  pleasure  by  the  conscious  will,  the  impres-
sions of  sense — the  sense-organ  being  open — are  entirely
independent  of  the  conscious  will.  This  is  easily  to  be
explained  by  the  action  of  an  external  world,  hardly  from
the  Ego  alone.  An  unconscious  will  would  in  that  case
have  to  produce  things,  and  then  mirror  to  the  con-
sciousness of  the  solitary  Ego  the  semblance  of  an  ex-
ternal world — a  piece  of  juggling  in  which  there  would
be  no  rhyme  or  reason  at  all,  and,  as  the  preceding  para-
graphs prove,  the  wildest  whim  and  caprice  would  have
to  be  united  with  the  strictest  regularity  in  an  incom-
prehensible fashion,  and  the  highest  wisdom  would  be
wasted  on  a  bubble,  a  lunatic  dream.

One  sees  from  what  has  been  adduced  that  the  pro-
bability of  the  existence  of  a  Non-Ego  existing  indepen-
dently over  against  the  Ego,  and  causally  inlluencing  the
Ivgo,  is  as  great  as  it  could  possibly  be,  and  that  here
ajain  natural  instinct  is  justified  by  scientific  reflection.
From  this  necessity  of  having  an  external  transcendent
causality  for  the  origination  (if  sense-impressions  even
Kant  and  Fichte  could  not  fret*  themselves,  although
they  deny it in words; for. witli Kant,  the emitait t>f


33Q  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

intuition  is  absolutely  given  ;  and  although  lie  thereby  con-
tradicts his  own  doctrine  of  the  merely  immanent  import
of  Causality,  he  yet  says  repeatedly  and  expressly  that
that  whereby  this  content  is  given  is  the  thing  in  itself
(comp.  "  The  Thing  in  Itself,"  sect  iv.,  "  The  Transcendent
Cause,"  and  v.  "  Transcendent  and  Immanent  Causality  ").
Fichte,  again,  after  all  his  unsuccessful  attempts  to  weave
the  Non-Ego  entirely  from  the  Ego,  cannot  do  without  an
external  impulse  for  this  activity  of  the  Ego,  and  this  im-
pulse stands  with  Fichte  for  the  true  Non-Ego.  Berkeley,
too,  suggests  a  transcendent  cause  for  every  perception,
referring  everything,  however  (overleaping  the  world  of
things  in  themselves),  without  distinction,  directly  to  the
Absolute,  i.e.,  foregoes  the  attempt  to  explain  our  per-
ceptions, and  every  attempt  to  penetrate  the  mystery  of
the  real  connections  of  their  special  originating  causes.

If  it  is  now  established  that  even  the  most  consistent
Idealists  have  not  had  the  courage  to  be  consistent  to  the
extent  of  denying  an  independent  Non-Ego,  if  the  feeling
is  not  to  be  got  rid  of  that  perception,  on  the  whole,  is
something  thrust  upon  one  from  without  in  opposition  to
one's  own  will,  it  results  with  the  same  certainty,  from
what  has  been  stated,  that  the  distinctions  also  in  sensuous
perceptions  are  not  produced  by  the  Ego,  but  are  thrust  upon
it  by  the  Non-Ego.  For  insight  would  not  at  all  be  en-
larged if  the  Non-Ego  were  always  one  and  the  same,  and
consequently  always  acted  in  one  and  the  same  way,
supplying  merely  an  external  shock.  For  then  it  would
again  be  left  to  the  Ego,  in  strange  caprice  to  suspend
on  the  ever-identical  impulse  of  the  Non-Ego  now  this,
now  that  spatial  or  temporal  determination  or  category
of  thought  as  an  indifferent  cloak,  and  in  this  way
itself  to  construct  the  whole  How  and  What  of  the
external  world,  the  impulse  only  guaranteeing  the  That.
In  this  all  the  before-mentioned  difficulties  repeat  them-
selves unchanged.  Thus  even  Schopenhauer  lets  the  dis-
tinctions in  the  intuitions  of  the  world  of  representation


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 331

be  altogether  conditioned  by  corresponding  modifications
in  the  essential  will  of  the  things-in-themselves,  which
through  them  become  representable  in  thought  (Parerga,
§  103  b).  By  this,  however,  he,  in  fact,  again  leaves  room
for  the  transcendent  causality  which  he  has  expressly
rejected  in  words,  for  how  are  the  things-in-themselves  of
this  horse  or  this  rose  to  set  about  determining  my
representations  of  either  according  to  the  modifications  of
their  nature,  unless  by  a  transcendent  causality,  which  is
immediately  manifested  as  definite  affection  of  my  sense-
organs  ?

Every  single  determination  in  perception  must  then  be
conceived  as  effect  of  the  Xon-Ego  ;  and  as  different  effects
presuppose  different  causes,  we  obtain  a  system  of  as
many  differences  in  the  Xon-Ego  as  there  exist  distinc-
tions in  perception.  Now,  certainly  these  differences  in
the  Xon-Ego  might  be  of  a  non-spatial  and  non-temporal
character,  and  Space  and  Time  forms  belonging  to  thought
alone ;  but  then  these  differences  must  have  place  in  the
other  objective  forms,  which  would  have  to  run  parallel
to  the  objective  forms  of  Space  and  Time,  since,  without
other  fonns  of  being  replacing  Space  and  Time  in  the
Xon-Ego,  no  corresponding  difference  could  have  place
therein.  This  assumption  of  other  but  corresponding
forms  in  the  Xon-Ego,  which  seems  to  have  hovered  before
Eeinhold  and  afterwards  Herbart  in  their  intelligible  Space
and  Time,  would,  quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  it  ex-
cludes the  possibility  of  any  objective  knowledge  of  things,
contradict,  without  offering  any  equivalent  advantage,
the  generally  observed  law  that  Xature  always  chaoses
the  simplest  means  to  its  ends.  Why  should  it  make  use
of  four  forms  when  it  could  get  along  quite  as  well  and
even  better  with  two  ?  The  parallelism  of  these  pairs
of  forms  in  Existence  and  Thought,  and  their  recipro-
city, which,  in  fact,  exists  in  perception  and  action,  would
require  a  pre-established  harmony,  which,  on  our  assump-
tion, would  resolve  itself  into  the  identitv  of  the  forms.


332  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Hegel  likewise  says  (Larger  Logic,  Introd.,  p.  8) :  "  If
they  (the  forms  of  the  Understanding)  cannot  be  deter-
minations of  the  thing-in-itself,  still  less  can  they  be
determinations  of  the  Understanding,  to  which  at  least
the  dignity  of  a  thing-in-itself  should  be  assigned."

(b.)  Mathematics  is  the  science  of  the  presentations  of
Space  and  Time,  as  our  thought  forms,  and  cannot  other-
wise form  them.  Now,  if  we  measure  a  real  triangle,
given  not  by  thought,  but  by  successive  perceptions  which
may  be  too  great  for  simultaneous  intuition,  and  find  in
all  similar  attempts  at  measurement  the  same  law  con-
firmed which  pure  thought  gave  us,  that  the  sum  of  the
angles  =  2  E ;  further,  if  we  take  note  that  the  deter-
minations of  the  perception  are  something  necessarily
imposed  on  the  mind  by  the  system  of  differences  in  the
Non-Ego,  thus  have  their  causes  in  differences  of  the
Non-Ego,  it  follows  from  the  empirical  confirmation  of
the  mathematical  laws,  to  which  there  is  no  exception,
that  the  distinctions  in  the  Non-Ego  obey  laws  which
certainly  must  correspond  to  the  forms  of  the  latter,  but
run  so  entirely  parallel  with  the  rational  laws  of  Space
and  Time,  that  here  again  the  assumption  of  a  pre-estab-
lished harmony  is  unavoidable,  whilst  an  identity  of  the
laws  agreeing  with  the  identity  of  the  forms  requires  no
such  forced  assumption.

(c.)  The  senses  of  Sight  and  Touch  receive  their  impres-
sions from  qualities  of  body  altogether  different,  by  quite
distinct  media  and  quite  different  physiological  processes ;
nevertheless  wTe  obtain  from  them  spatial  perceptions
which  exhibit  as  great  an  agreement  as  possible,  and  which
confirm  one  another.  Now,  were  the  objects  not  them-
selves in  Space,  but  existed  in  any  other  form  of  being,  it
would  be  in  the  highest  degree  wonderful  that  they  should
produce  in  the  mind  in  such  different  ways  such  congruent
spatial  figures ;  thus,  e.g.,  the  seen  ball  never  appears  as
felt  die  or  anything  else,  but  as  felt  ball.  On  the  assump-
tion of  Space  as  real  form  of  existence  this  puzzle  vanishes.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 333

(d.)  Only  sight  and  touch,  but  none  of  the  other  senses,
are  able  to  arouse  in  the  mind  the  perception  of  Space.
(For  when  we  hear  where  a  sound  comes  from,  the  compari-
son of  the  strength  of  the  sound  in  the  two  ears  is  chiefly
relied  upon  ;  comp.  p.  337.)  Kant  entirely  overlooked  this,
otherwise  he  could  not  have  set  up  his  division  of  outer
(Space-sense)  and  inner  (Time-)  sense.  To  subjective
idealism  this  whim  of  the  mind  is  absolutely  incompre-
hensible, which  nevertheless  occurs  with  the  appearance
of  external  necessity ;  but  it  is  just  as  incomprehensible
if  other  corresponding  forms  are  assigned  to  existence.
Only  the  physiological  consideration  of  the  local  construc-
tion of  the  different  sense-organs  can  here  afford  a  ready
explanation  ;  but  if  the  body  and  the  senses  do  not  exist
in  Space,  here,  too,  all  possibility  of  comprehension  is  pre-
cluded.

These  four  considerations  taken  together  render  it  highly
probable  that  common  sense  is  right  in  believing  that
Space  and  Time  are  just  as  much  objective  forms  of  exist-
ence as  subjective  forms  of  thought.  This  formal  identity
of  thought  and  being  is  almost  self-evident  for  one  who
assumes  their  essential  identity  (comp.  C.  Chap,  xiv.)

Ad.  11.  As  we  do  not  intend  to  dispute  but  to  assume
the  assertion  of  Kant  placed  at  the  head  of  this  chapter,
there  is  no  reason  to  show  here  why  the  Kantian  proof
is  no  proof,  and  leaves  the  question  quite  open  (comp.
"The  Tiling  in  Itself,"  viii.  "  Kritik  tier  Transcendentalen
yKsthetik").  We  shall,  however,  offer  other  reasons  in
lieu  thereof.

A  naive  theory  of  immediate  perception  regarded  the
sense-impressions  as  images  of  the  things,  which  perfectly
correspond  to  them,  as  the  reflected  image  to  its  object.
"When  Locke  and  modern  physical  science  had  made  the
complete  heterogeneity  of  the  sensation  and  the  quality
of  the  object  the  common  property  of  science,  the  retinal
imrcji  which  was  perceived  in  the  e//cx  of  utlcr  /<<  iit<i<  was
substituted  for  the  thine:,  and  the  sensation  in  its  content


334  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

was  now  said  to  be  identical  with  the  retinal  image  as
formerly  with  the  thing, — a  view  which  is  still  a  common
one.  It  was,  however,  thereby  forgotten  that  it  is  something
quite  different  to  perceive  an  objective  image  within  the
extent  of  an  eye  in  the  eye  of  another  with  one's  own  eyes,
or  even  to  have  the  visual  sensation  determinable  only
according  to  angular  degrees  without  absolute  superficial
magnitude.  It  was  forgotten  that  the  mind  does  not  sit  as
a  second  eye  behind  the  retina  and  look  at  this  image  ;  it
was  not  seen  that  one  committed  the  same  fault  as  before
in  the  case  of  things,  only  in  a  more  disguised  fashion;
for  what  appears  to  another  eye  as  a  retinal  image  is  in
this  eye  itself  nothing  but  vibrating  molecules,  just  as  well
as  that  which  in  things  appears  to  the  beholder  as  colour,
brightness,  &c,  are  in  the  objects  only  molecular  vibra-
tions. People  accordingly  allowed  themselves  to  be  duped
by  the  pleasure  of  having  discovered  a  camera  obscura  in
the  eye,  and  considered  the  former  problem  to  be  solved,
whereas  it  had  only  been  shelved  for  an  external  question.
The  physiology  of  the  eye  has  since  discovered  that  the
eye  is  not  a  camera  to  exhibit  diminutive  images  to  the
mind  on  the  retinal  ground,  but  a  photographic  apparatus,
which  so  changes  the  molecular  vibrations  of  the  retina
chemically-dynamically,  that  modes  of  vibration  which
have  hardly  any  resemblance  to  the  light  vibrations  in
the  ether  are  handed  on  to  the  optic  nerve  to  be  propa-
gated farther,  so  that  those  modifications  of  light,  e.g.,
which  are  felt  as  colour,  are  in  the  nerve  combinations  of
variously  strong  functions  of  three  different  kinds  of  end-
organs  in  the  retina,  whilst  the  corresponding  modifica-
tions of  the  physical  ray  of  light  are  only  discriminated
by  the  wave-lengths  of  the  vibrations.  Further,  light  has
a  velocity  of  about  200,000  miles  in  a  second,  the  process
in  the  optic  nerve  only  one  of  about  a  hundred  feet.

Thus  much  is  established,  that  the  qualitative  conver-
sion of  light  vibrations  on  their  entrance  into  the  retina
is  of  the  greatest  importance,  and  would  give  the  final


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 335

death-blow  to  the  view  which  assigns  an  importance  to
the  image  on  the  retina  accidentally  observable  by  other
eyes,  if  the  idea  were  not  in  itself  absurd,  that  the  optic
nerve,  like  a  second  eye,  looks  at  this  image — and  then  ?
But  perhaps  the  central  organ  of  vision  (the  corpora
quadrigemina),  as  a  third  eye,  looks  at  the  image  of  the
optic  nerve,  and  then  the  central  organ  of  thought  (the
cerebral  hemispheres),  as  fourth  eye,  the  image  of  the
corpora  quadrigemina,  and  then,  perhaps,  a  definite  cen-
tral cell  or  the  cerebral  centre  of  consciousness  as  fifth
eye,  the  image  of  the  cerebrum,  not  to  push  the  matter
directly  to  the  sixth  eye  of  a  punctual  central  monad
having  its  seat  at  some  place  or  other  in  the  brain  !  For
this  much  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  physiologically  estab-
lished, that  the  sensation,  of  sight  can  at  the  earliest  take
place  in  the  central  part  into  which  the  optic  nerve  runs
in  the  corpora  quadrigemina,  but  not  in  the  course  of  the
optic  nerve  itself.  On  the  entrance  of  the  nerve  into  the
centre,  however,  we  must  assume  another  conversion  of
the  modes  of  vibration,  on  account  of  the  altered  structure
of  the  nervous  matter,  and  because  the  importance  of  the
central  parts  for  perception  would  cease  if  the  form  of
vibration  remained  unchanged,  because  then  the  sense
must  react  with  sensation  on  the  vibrations  of  the  optic
nerve.  In  the  corpora  quadrigemina  again,  however,
those  extended  ///w/^/^-processes,  in  which  the  space-
intuition  is  always  found  as  an  integral  element,  cannot
take  place.  As  such  have  their  seat  in  the  cerebral
hemispheres,  so  also  the  visual  sensations,  which  underlie
the  space-intuition,  just  as  the  sensations  of  touch,  which
again  are  developed  at  another  spot  in  the  brain,  must  be
first  (''inducted  to  the  cerebrum,  in  order  there,  by  help  of
thought,  to  acquire  the  extension  of  the  space-intuition.

If,  now,  the  object-image  on  the  retina  can  be  compared
with  a  mosaic,  which  resembles  the  thing  itself  in  its
'  1  ■  urti  ns,  yet  the  isolated  primitive  nerve-fibres  are  far
too  much  interlaced  for  an  ideal  section  of  the  untie  nerve


336  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

on  its  entrance  into  the  corpora  quadrigemina  to  exhibit
an  order  and  position  of  the  fibres  corresponding  to  the
retinal  image;  and  even  worse  founded  would  be  the
assumption  that  in  the  central  organ  itself  there  occurs
such  a  localised  affection  of  cells,  that  between  it  and  the
retinal  image  a  like  proportionality  of  extensive  relations
obtains  as  between  retinal  affection  and  thing.  But  since
these  affected  cells  in  the  central  organ  itself  would  even
then  be  still  relatively  dependent,  and  would  communi-
cate with  one  another  only  by  fixed  paths,  even  on  such
an  unjustified  assumption,  it  would  still  not  be  clear  how
the  consciousness  resulting  as  aggregate  phenomenon  from
the  plural  cell-consciousness  could  come  to  order  sensations
in  an  extension,  which  should  correspond  to  the  relative
positions  of  the  affected  cells.  There  is  no  bridge  between
the  real  spatial  position  of  the  material  parts  which
produce  sensations  and  the  ideal  spatial  position  of  the
conscious  sensations  ordered  in  extensive  intuition ;  for
space  as  real  form  of  existence  and  space  as  conscious
ideal  form  of  intuition  are  as  incommensurable  as  the
real  and  the  imaginary  part  of  a  complex  number,  although
both  are  in  themselves  subject  to  the  same  formal  laws.
This  is  also  the  reason  why  even  the  physiologically
untenable  theories  of  a  single  ultimate  central  cell  (how
soon  must  it  get  fatigued !)  or  of  a  punctual  central
monad  are  altogether  incapable  of  forming  this  bridge.
If  real  and  conscious  ideal  space  are  heterogeneous  spheres,
of  which  the  one  can  have  no  part  in  the  other,  real
space-relations  of  the  sensation-forming  material  parts
cannot  have  any  influence  on  sensation  at  all;  the  'posi-
tion of  the  sensitive  parts  of  the  brain  is  indifferent,  and
only  the  mode  of  vibration,  dependent  partly  on  the
nature  of  the  central  parts,  partly  on  the  intensity  and
quality  of  the  conveyed  motion,  can  influence  the  character
of  the  resulting  intuition.

This law, which must be self-evident a  priori to
every  philosopher,  for  the  rest,  has  already  been  formulated


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 337

on  the  physiological  side,  and  can  hardly  be  seriously  im-
pugned. Lotze  thus  expresses  it : — Identical  vibrations
of  different  central  molecules  call  forth  ^indistinguishable
sensations,  so  that  several  simultaneously  vibrating  mole-
cules of  identical  form  of  vibration  produce  a  sensation,
which  qualitatively  resembles  the  sensation  excited  by
any  one  of  these  molecules,  but  quantitatively  possesses
the  degree  of  strength  of  the  sum  of  all  the  single  sensa-
tions. If  a  person  smells  with  one  nostril,  he  has  the
same  sensation,  only  more  faintly,  as  if  he  smelt  with
two  ;  and  if  the  tactile  nerves  of  the  nose  did  not  feel  the
stream  of  permeating  air,  the  olfactory  nerve  alone  would
not  in  the  normal  state  perceive  the  smell  of  the  left  and
right  nostril  as  different.  The  like  holds  good  of  taste,  if
it  affects  a  smaller  or  larger  part  of  the  tongue  and  palate  ;
only  the  simultaneous  tactile  feelings  of  contact,  of  the
contraction  of  the  skin,  &c.,  distinguish  the  place  touched  ;
the  taste  itself  becomes  only  stronger  or  weaker.  Whether
a  sound  reaches  the  left  or  right  ear  is  only  perceived  by
the  feelings  of  tension  excited  simultaneously  in  the  ear,
partly  directly,  partly  reflectorially.  Here,  too,  it  is  not
at  all  the  auditory  nerve,  but  tactile  nerves,  especially  in
the  richly-supplied  tympanum,  which  condition  the  feeling
of  localisation,  as  clearly  follows  from  Ed.  Weber's  diving
experiments,  which  prove  that  this  local  feeling  remains
only  so  long  as  the  auditory  passages  are  lilled  with
air,  but  is  lost  if  the  tympana  are  rendered  inactive
by  the  filling  of  the  auditory  passages  with  water.  In
vision  we  receive  different  impressions  from  the  same
point  of  liydit,  it  is  true,  if  its  image  falls  on  differently
situated  places  of  one  or  both  eyes  ;  but  the  impressions
are  not  to  be  distinguished  when  they  fall  on  correspond-
ing parts  of  both  eyes.  In  a  well-contrived  arrangement}
of  the  experiment  one  is  not  at  all  aware  whether  onu
sees  a  light  with  the  right  or  with  the  left,  or  with  both
eyes  at  once,  if  information  on  the  point  cannot  le  ob»
tained  by  other  expedients.  The  visual  impressions  <  f
VOL.  I.  Y


338  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

corresponding  points  of  the  two  eyes  are  combined  into  a
single  strengthened  impression.

According  to  Lotze's  theory  we  should  not  be  able  to
distinguish  whether  a  pain,  feeling,  touch,  &c,  affects  the
right  or  left  half  of  the  body,  unless,  owing  to  the  want
of  symmetry,  even  in  the  smallest  particular,  of  the  two
halves  of  the  body,  the  accompanying  sensations  of  ten-
sion, extension,  pressure,  &c,  were  not  the  same  on  the
right  half  of  the  body  as  on  the  left,  so  that  by  this
qualitative  incongruence  of  the  sensations,  with  the  help
of  practice,  we  are  enabled  to  distinguish  right  and  left
in  our  own  body. In  hearing,  taste,  and  smell,  also,  as
already  mentioned, such attendant circumstances are
present,  making  possible  a  certain  discrimination  of  con-
gruent sensations,  according  to  the  place  acted  on ;  but  it
is important,  that here the nerve-trunks which medi-
ate the  specific  sensation  and  those  which  report  the  ac-
companying differences  are  different,  whence  it  follows,
that  if,  by  cutting  off  the  latter,  or  by  other  well-contrived
elimination of the accompanying differences, the pure
sense-perceptions  are  excluded  from  the  experiment,  these
are  no  longer  able  to  afford  the  consciousness  of  local  differ-
ences, and are thus altogether  unable  to  produce  space-
intuitions. Otherwise  is  it  with  the  senses  of  Touch  and
Sight. Every  similar  sensation  of  Touch  at  various  parts
of  the  skin  is  combined  with  characteristic  accompanying
differences,  which  are  founded  on  the  particular  displace-
ment, tension,  extension,  and  participation  of  juxtaposed
and  underlying  sensitive  parts,  when  pressure  is  exerted
on  the  skin,  according  to  the  softness  or  hardness,  the
special  form  of  the  limb,  nature  of  the  subjacent  parts,
thickness  of  the  sensitive  tactile  corpuscles,  &c,  and  which
are  almost  all  conducted  to  the  brain  through  the  same
nerve-trunks. In the  same  way  a  similar sensation  of
colour  or  light  is  associated  with  characteristic  differences,
according to the point of the retina that is affected,
which  are  founded : (i)  on  the  decreasing  distinctness  of


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 339

the  perception  of  similar  impressions  from  the  centre  to  the
periphery ;  (2)  on  the  currents  induced  in  the  neighbour-
ing fibres,  which  again  have  a  different  issue,  according  to
the  position  of  the  latter  with  respect  to  the  point  of  the
clearest  vision ;  (3)  on  the  reflex  motor  impulse  to
rotate  the  eye-ball,  which  upon  every  affection  of  a  spot
in  the  retina  has  for  its  eonsecpaence  that  the  point  of
most  distinct  vision  strives  to  occupy  the  place  of  the
affected  retinal  point.

These  three  moments  in  conjunction  give  a  different
stamp  to  the  similar  sensations  of  every  retinal  fibre,  to
which  Lotze,  the  author  of  this  theory,  gives  the  name
of  local  sign.  These  differences  also  are  partly  conducted
to  the  brain  by  the  optic  nerve,  partly  felt  in  the  brain
itself  through  the  resistance,  which  the  will  must  oppose
to  the  reflex  tendency  to  rotate  the  eye,  in  order  to  prevent
it.  It  is  now  comprehensible  how,  in  contrast  to  the  sen-
sations of  smell,  taste,  and  hearing,  precisely  the  sensations
of  sight  and  touch  can  suggest  to  the  mind  the  intuition  of
space,  to  wit,  because  with  these  the  stimulus  conveyed  by
every  single  primitive  nerve-fibre  has  its  qualitative  dfji-
nitencss  through  a  well-organised  system  of  accompanying
differences,  so  that  the  vibrations  excited  in  different  nerve-
fibres  by  similar  external  stimuli  so  far  turn  out  different,
that  they  can  not  blend  in  the  mind  into  a  single  strength-
ened sensation,  but  yet  so  far  resemble  each  other  that
the  qualitatively  similar  portion  can  easily  be  perceived
by  the  mind  in  the  sensations  produced  through  them.
According  to  this  we  can  only  find  the  general  law  con-
finned  by  the  apparent  exceptions,  that  identical  vibrations
of  different  parts  of  the  brain  blend  into  one  sensation
strengthened  in  degree;  a  law  which  both  appears  highly
plausible  a  priori,  and  also  empirically  has  not  only  no
fact  against  it,  but  without  it  the  phenomena  of  the  lower
senses  already  mentioned  would  be  simply  inexplicable.
According  to  this  law  the  vibrating  molecule  is  perfectly
indifferent to the mind, its mode of vibration alone


34 o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

has  an  influence  on  the  mind ;  and  when  we  see  certain
parts  of  the  body  (the  nerves),  certain  parts  of  the  nervous
system  (the  grey  matter),  certain  parts  of  the  brain  especi-
ally appropriated  to  higher  influences  of  a  definite  kind,
we  can  only  ascribe  this  to  the  circumstance  that  these
parts  are  adapted,  by  reason  of  their  molecular  constitu-
tion, either  exclusively  or  chiefly,  to  the  production  of
that  kind  of  vibrations,  which  alone  or  chiefly  are  capable
of  exerting  these  influences  on  the  mind.

If  we  now  look  upon  this  law  as  established,  and
Lotze's  theory  of  local  signs  (apart  from  the  question
whether  those  especially  employed  by  him  are  exactly
the  right  ones)  as  assured,  we  still  do  not  get  beyond  the
result,  that,  in  sight  or  touch  the  mind  receives  from
every  primitive  nerve-fibre,  through  the  intervention  of
the  brain,  a  special  sensation,  which  is  prevented  by  its
individual  character  from  blending  with  others,  but  yet  is
so  like  the  others  that  it  is  an  easy  thing  for  the  mind  to
perceive  as  such  the  similar  foundation  which  they  all
possess.  But  we  in  no  way  get  from  this  sum  of  simul-
taneous qualitatively  similar  and  yet  different  sensations  to
their  distribution  in  space,  as  presented  in  the  field  of
vision  and  the  cutaneous  field  of  touch ;  we  always  stop
short  at  the  qualitative  and  intensive  quantitative  or
graduated  distinctions  of  the  several  sensations,  and  can
in  no  way  see  how  it  is  possible  for  the  extensively
quantitative  or  locally  extended  to  be  imported  into
sensation  from  the  vibrations  of  the  brain  molecules,
since  it  is  not  the  position  of  the  single  molecule  in
the  brain,  but  only  the  duration,  form,  &c,  of  its  vibra-
tions which  has  influence  on  sensation,  and  these
moments  do  not  contain  the  elements  of  extensive
quantity,  which  might  stand  in  some  relation  or  other
to  the  extensive  quantity  of  the  retinal  image.  On  the
other  hand,  in  virtue  of  the  system  of  local  signs,  the
exten-ive  proximity  and  distance  of  the  points  of  the
retinal  intake  from  one  another,  or  their  actual  contact,  is


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 341

changed  into  greater  or  less  qualitative  differences  of  the
corresponding  sensations,  or  least  difference ;  and,  accord-
ingly, a  material  is  presented  to  the  mind,  which,  if  the
latter  spontaneously  reconverts  this  system  of  qualitative
differences  into  a  system  of  local  relations,  now  compels  the
mind  with  necessity  to  assign  such  a  place  to  every  sensa-
tion in  the  space-image  as  corresponds  to  its  qualitative
determinateness ;  so  that  there  is  no  room  for  caprice  in
regard  to  the  space-determinations  of  a  figure  given  by
a  sum  of  qualitatively  distinct  elements  of  sensation,  but
the  mind  is  necessarily  compelled  to  reconstruct  the  same
in  the  relations  in  which  the  image  on  the  retina  appears
to  the  eye  of  an  onlooker,  in  conformity  with  experience.

Wundt  expresses  the  thoughts  just  presented  as
follows  : — "  The  union  offered  by  colligation"  (aggregation,
comprehension)  "  is  a  purely  external  one,  in  which  the
united  sensations  are  preserved  as  individual  sensations.
Ihit  the  synthesis,  in  Mending  these  intimately  united
sensations  by  the  preparatory  process  of  colligation,
produces  a  third  element,  which  was  not  yet  contained  in
the  individual  sensations  as  such.  Synthesis  is,  therefore,
the  strictly  constructive  element  in  perception ;  it  educes
from  the  unrelated  existing  sensations  something  new,
which  undoubtedly  contains  in  itself  the  sensations"  (hut
now  no  longer  like  the  mere  colligation  as  connected
individual  sensation*),  "but  yet  is  something  quite,  distinct
from  the  sensations."  (''  lieitr.  z.  Theorie  d.  Sinneswahr.,"
]>.  443.)  These  generally  valid  propositions  he  makes
mure  precise  on  the  following  page,  in  reference  to  the
synthesis  occurring  in  the  formation  of  the  spatial
visual  perception  : — "  Thus  the  synthesis  in  perception
i-  a  creative  activity,  in  that  it  constructs  space,  hut  this
creative  activity  is  by  no  means  a  free  one;  1ml.  the
impressions  and  the  outer  impulses  co-operating  in  the
svnthesis  necessarily  compel  space  to  L-  reconstructed  with
complete  fidelity."

That  school  of  empiristic  physiology,  which  endeavours


342  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

to  represent  as  indispensable  a  construction  (or,  with
reference  to  the  retinal  image,  reconstruction)  of  space
consequent  on  the  given  sense-impressions  by  a  creative
synthetic  function  of  the  mind,  chiefly  employs  the
artifice  of  evoking  the  visual  space-perception  by  help  of
the  sense  of  touch,  and  the  tactile  space-perception  by
help  of  the  sense  of  sight.  Now,  it  is  doubtless  correct,
that  both  senses,  in  the  finer  elaboration  of  their  space-
perceptions,  essentially  support  one  another;  still,  it
would  be  impossible  that  both  together  should  create
space,  unless  it  were  already  concealed  in  each  singly.
Thus,  experience  shows  that  persons  born  blind  can
acquire  and  elaborate,  even  more  finely  than  seeing
persons,  the  space-perceptions  of  the  sense  of  touch
without  help  of  vision,  and  that,  on  the  other  side,  per-
sons born  blind  who  have  been  operated  on,  on  obtaining
their  sight,  before  any  attempt  to  bring  the  new  visual
perceptions  into  relation  with  the  tactile  perceptions
familiar  to  them,  apprehend  at  once  the  visual  space  of
at  least  two  dimensions. — In  the  next  place,  the  oppo-
nents of  the  creative  production  of  space  attempt  the
same  sophism  within  each  of  the  two  senses,  in  the  rela-
tions between  the  field  of  sight  at  rest  (or  field  of  touch)
on  the  one  side,  and  the  feelings  of  movement  of  the
eyeball  (or  the  tactile  members)  on  the  other.  15ut  now
it  is  also  here  at  once  clear  that,  if  either  the  quiescent
field  of  vision  or  of  touch,  or  the  feeling  of  muscular
movement,  does  not  possess  extension,  no  combination,
however  ingenious,  of  these  non-spatial  sensations  can
originate  space-extension  without  the  addition  of  a  crea-
tive constructive  synthesis.  Even  here,  these  "  empirics  "
have  empiricism  against  them;  for  although,  in  reference
to  the  sense  of  touch,  the  experimental  separation  of
tactile  sensation  and  motor  feeling  has  not  yet  been
accomplished,  yet  the  fact  is  established,  that  in  persons
born  blind,  who  have  been  operated  upon,  the  super-
ficial extension  of  the  visual  impressions  is  given  from


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 343

the  first  moment  of  seeing,  and  is  by  no  means  only
gradually  acquired  by  numerous  attempts  at  combining
the  sensations  of  the  optic  nerve  with  the  feelings  of
movement  of  the  eyeball.  But  even  supposing  that  it
were  true,  that  the  union  of  passive  sensation  and  feeling
of  movement  offered  sufficient  material  to  the  mind  (in
local  signs)  for  the  space-construction,  yet,  even  then,  a
creative  synthesis  would  still  be  required,  because  sensa-
tions with  differences  merely  qualitative  and  intensive
could  never  attain  without  it  to  an  indivisible  extensive
perception.  But  as  the  feeling,  excited  by  the  vibrating
molecules  of  the  brain,  can  only  be  discriminated  quali-
tatively and  intensively  (comp.  p.  339),  and  in  no  case
can  any  relations  whatsoever  exist  between  the  space  of
their  position  or  movement  and  the  space  of  the  image
of  perception  (comp.  335,  336),  the  creative  synthetic
function  must  be  a  purely  spiritual  function  of  the
Unconscious.

We  may  therefore  say,  in  direct  opposition  to  Schopen-
hauer, that  the  sole  ground  for  the  assumption  of  the
a-priority  of  the  space-intuition  is  the  impossibility  of
conceiving  the  same  to  have  arisen  by  mere  brain-func-
tion. If  Schopenhauer  were  right,  that  space,  as  a  form
of  intuition,  is  merely  a  predisposition  in  the  organisation
of  the  brain,  which  reacts  on  the  stimulus  of  visual  or
tactile  sensations  in  the  manner  peculiar  to  it,  this
cerebral  predisposition  might  be  explained  according  to
the  biological  theory  of  descent  by  a  transmission  con-
firmed  and  perfected  from  generation  to  generation,  only
the  genesis  of  the  space-intuition  in  the  lowest  animals
and  vegetable  animals  (a  far  greater  marvel  than  the
same  phenomenon  in  human  consciousness),  and  the
gradual  expansion  of  this  original  germ  being  left  to  the
direct  action  of  the  Unconscious.  A  predisposition  for
the  more  many-sided  and  liner  development  of  the  space-
producing  sensation,  augmented  by  transmission,  I,  too,
assume  in  the  brain;  but  this  only  concerns  the material


344  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

which  excites  the  unconscious  mind  to  the  position  of
space,  and  determines  the  How  of  the  space-intuition  in
the  individual — in  no  case  can  it  relieve  the  mind  of  the
spontaneous  act  of  giving  a  space-extension  to  the  quali-
tatively ordered  material,  i.e.,  the  spontaneous  reconstruc-
tion of  space,  but  only  facilitate  it  and  enrich  its  content.
We  have  now  got  to  understand,  I  think,  how  it  happens
that  only  the  visual  and  tactile  senses,  but  not  the  other
senses,  can  evoke  the  space-intuition ;  we  have  also  com-
prehended the  causal  connection,  whereby  the  mind  is
compelled  to  reconstruct  just  those  space-relations  which
correspond  to  the  objective  space-relations  in  the  retina
or  tactile  retina ;  but  why  the  mind  at  all  converts  the
sum  of  qualitatively  distinct  feelings  into  an  extensive
space-image,  for  that  we  cannot  see  any  reason  in  the
physiological  process ;  we  are  obliged  even  to  question
whether  such  exists,  and  can  admit  only  a  teleological
reason,  because  through  this  marvellous  process  alone
does  the  mind  procure  a  basis  for  the  cognition  of  an
external  world,  whereas,  without  the  space-intuition,  it
could  never  go  beyond  itself.

Ad.  III.  If  we  perceive  this  aim  to  be  the  sole  reason,
we  must  look  upon  the  process  in  question  itself  as  an
instinctive  action,  as  a  purposive  activity  without  pur-
posive consciousness.  We  have  accordingly  again  arrived
at  the  sphere  of  the  Unconscious,  and  must  recognise  the
position  of  space  in  the  perception  of  the  individual  con-
sciousness (just  as  the  position  of  space  in  creation  of  the
real  world),  as  an  action  of  the  Unconscious,  since  this
process  is  by  so  much  anterior  to  the  possibility  of  any
consciousness  that  it  can  never  be  looked  upon  as  any-
thing conscious.  Kant,  however,  has  nowhere  so  expressed
himself,  and  considering  the  usual  clearness  and  fearless-
ness of  this  great  thinker,  one  must  conclude  that  he
never  distinctly  realised  the  complete  unconsciousness
of  this  same  process.  From  this  defect  of  his  exposition
arose, however, the opposition of sober common sense


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 345

to  his  doctrine,  which  knew  that  Space  was  given  as  a
fact  independent  of  the  individual  consciousness,  and,
indeed,  in  the  space-relations  from  which  only  a  protracted
effort  of  abstraction  detached  the  concept  of  Space,  which
last  of  all  the  negation  of  limit  determined  as  infinite,
whilst,  according  to  Kant,  the  one  infinite  space  stands
as  the  original  product  of  thought,  in  virtue  of  which
spatial  relations  alone  become  possible.  In  all  this,
then,  common  sense  was  right,  and  Kant  wrong,  but  in
one  point,  and  that  the  chief,  Kant  was  right,  that  the
form  of  space  does  not  stalk  into  the  mind  from  out-
side by  means  of  physiological  processes,  but  is  spontane-
ously produced  by  it.  But  whereas  Kant  looks  upon
Space  as  an  almost  accidental  form  of  sensibility  due  to
the  organisation  of  our  nature,  which  might  have  been
altogether  different,  and  which  has  no  prototype  beyond
subjectivity,  we  assert  that  Space  has  been  given  us  as  a
real  form  of  existence,  so  that  the  Unconscious  formally
performs  one  and  the  same  function,  when  there  planning
in  its  unconscious  representation  the  plurality  of  individuals
to  be  created  in  space-relations,  in  order  thereby  to  give
to  the  will'a  spatially-realisable  content,  or  here  extending
the  sensations  given  in  qualitatively-ordered  series  (mathe-
matical dimensions)  into  the  spatial  intuition.  Contingency
and  caprice  would  now  have  to  be  sought  merely  in  a
possible  deviation  from  the  path  once  entered  upon,  not
in  the  carrying  out  of  the  form  of  individuation  of  space
adopted  once  for  all  for  this  world  (whether  from  logical
necessity  or  from  choice).

Ad.  IV.  'Time  has  so  much  analogy  with  Space  as  a
form  of  Thought  and  Being  that  they  have  ever  been
treated  of  together,  and  a  thinker  has  always  held  similar
opinions  concerning  both.  This  circumstance  also  tempted
Kant  to  subject  them  to  a  common  treatment  in  his
"  Transcendental  ^Esthetic."  Yet,  the  differences  between
Space  and  Time,  familiar  to  everybody,  are  important
enough  to  call for a difference  of  treatment. I :' Time


3+6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

were  not  directly  transferable  from  the  physiological  pro-
cess into  the  perception,  it  would,  without  doubt,  be  just
as  independently  produced  by  the  mind  as  Space.  Per-
ception, however,  does  not  require  this ;  for  when  we
assumed  that  the  mind  reacts  with  a  definite  sensation
on  cerebral  vibrations  of  a  definite  form,  it  was  already
implied  that,  if  the  stimulus  is  repeated,  the  reaction  is
also  repeated,  whether  the  stimuli  follow  one  another  in
constant  unbroken  order,  or  intermittently.  From  this  it
further  follows  that  sensation  must  last  as  long  as  these
forms  of  the  vibrations  last,  and  another  sensation  only
follows  with  change  of  the  mode  of  vibration,  for  which,
again,  another  is  substituted  after  a  certain  interval.  But
the  succession  of  unlike  or  diverse  sensations  is  hereby
immediately  given  without  our  needing  to  have  recourse,
as  in  the  case  of  Space,  to  a  spontaneous  instinctive  crea-
tion of  the  mind,  no  matter  whether  the  affair  is  conceived
materialistically  or  spiritualistically,  for  in  both  cases  the
objective  succession  of  vibrations  is  translated  into  a  sub-
jective succession  of  sensations.

On  the  other  hand,  one  might  seem  to  be  able  to  sustain
the  assertion  that  Time  is  not  immediately  imported  into
perception  from  the  cerebral  vibrations,  by  appealing  to
the  fact  that  we  regard  every  single  feeling  as  a  momen-
tary, consequently  timeless  reaction  of  the  mind,  in  which
case  certainly  from  a  series  of  such  momentary  timeless
psychical  acts  no  temporal  perception  could  directly
arise,  since  the  intervals  between  these  moments  would
be  absolutely  void,  and  consequently  could  not  be  esti-
mated. On  closer  examination  the  impossibility  is  imme-
diately apparent ;  for  only  two  cases  are  possible  if  sensa-
tion is  to  be  something  instantaneous.  Either  it  springs
from  the  momentary  state  of  the  brain,  or  it  occurs  only
at  the  close  of  a  certain  period  of  cerebral  movement.
The  former  is  intrinsically  impossible,  for  the  moment
contains  no  movement,  consequently  nothing  that  can  act
upon  the  mind;  the  latter,  however,  may  just  as  easily


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 347

lead  to  absurdity,  because  the  reason  for  the  mind  reacting
with  sensation  just  after  a  definite  period  of  time  and  not
before  and  not  after,  while  the  movement  calmly  continues
in  the  same  manner,  is  by  no  means  evident.  If  one
arbitrarily  chose  to  assume  a  complete  period  of  oscilla-
tion as  this  time,  it  is  not  clear  where  the  oscillation
begins  and  ends,  the  starting-point  being  something  arbi-
trarily chosen  by  us ;  or  it  is  not  obvious  why  a  semi-
oscillation,  or  a  quarter  or  other  smaller  portion,  should
not  accomplish  the  same,  since,  indeed,  the  law  of  the
whole  vibration  is  completely  contained  in  the  smallest
portion  of  the  whole  vibration.  As  the  conceivably  smallest
portion  already  contains  the  law  of  the  whole  vibration,  it,
too,  must  contribute  its  quota,  and  thus  we  come  again  to
the  continuity  of  sensation.  That  these  differentials  of
sensation,  so  to  speak,  do  not  become  conscious — that
rather  a  not  inconsiderable  fragment  of  a  second  is  requi-
site before  a  sensation  can  be  individually  taken  note  of
by  consciousness  as  a  definite  integral  of  these  differential
effects — might,  perhaps,  be  due  to  the  circumstance —
firstly,  that  a  change  in  the  form  of  vibration  which
produces  change  of  sensation  is  physically  not  to  be
comprehended  from  the  fragment  of  a  vibration,  not  even
after  a  single  entire  vibration,  but  after  several  vibrations,
by  gradual  passage  of  one  form  of  vibration  into  another;
and,  secondly,  that,  as  in  a  string  caused  to  move  sym-
pathetically by  a  resonant  note,  every  single  vibration
taken  alone  accomplishes  too  little,  and  that  only  the
effects  of  many  similar  vibrations  gradually  added  can
gain  a  perceptible  influence,  which  rises  above  the  thresh-
old of  stimulation  (see  Introductory  I.  c,  p.  34  IV.)  This
temporal  addition,  combined  with  the  spatial  addition  of
the  effects  of  many  molecules  simultaneously  vibrating  in
the  same  manner,  makes  it  comprehensible  how  move-
ments so  minute  as  those  in  the  brain  call  forth  in  the
mind  such  powerful  impressions,  as,  e.g.,  a  cannon-shot  or
thunder-clan.


348  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

We  have  now  reviewed  the  four  points  above  indicated,
and  I  hope  to  have  herewith  not  unessentially  contributed
to  an  understanding  between  philosophy  and  physical
science,  between  which  a  wide  gulf  has  yawned  since  the
time  of  Kant.  Our  result  is  this :  Space  and  Time  are
forms  both  of  Being  and  of  (conscious)  Thought.  Time  is
immediately  translated  into  sensation  from  being,  from
the  vibrations  in  the  brain,  because  it  is  contained  in  the
form  of  the  single  cerebral  molecular  vibration  in  the  same
way  as  in  the  external  impulse.  Space,  as  form  of  per-
ception, must  be  created  by  an  act  of  the  Unconscious,
because  neither  the  space-relations  of  the  single  cerebral
molecular  vibration,  nor  the  space-relations  of  the  dif-
ferent vibrating  parts  of  the  brain,  have  any  similarity
or  direct  relation  to  the  spatial  figures  and  the  spatial
relations  of  position  either  of  the  real  things  or  of  the
objects  presented ;  but  the  spatial  determinations  of  per-
ceptions are  probably  governed  by  the  system  of  local
signs  in  the  senses  of  Sight  and  Touch.  Determinations
of  time,  as  well  as  of  space,  accordingly,  are  presented  to
consciousness  as  something  ready-formed,  given,  are  thus
also  rightly  accepted  as  empirical  facts,  since  consciousness
has  no  idea  of  the  producing  processes  of  the  same.  From
these  given  concrete  determinations  of  Space  and  Time
more  general  ones  are  afterwards  abstracted,  and  the  con-
cepts Space  and  Time  are  gained  as  final  abstractions,  to
which  as  subjective  ideas  infinity  is  justly  ascribed  as  a
negative  predicate,  because  no  conditions  exist  in  the
subject  to  place  a  limit  to  the  possible  extension  of  these
ideas.

Having  in  this  way  made  sure  of  [he  origin  of  the
determinations  of  space  and  time  as  the  foundation  of
all  perceptions,  we  must  return  to  the  question  of  the
connection  of  cerebral  vibration  and  sensation — to  the
question,  why  the  mind  reacts  on  this  form  of  vibration
with  this  particular  sensation.  That  there  prevails  here  a
perfect  regularity  we  cannot  doubt,  considering  the  general


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 349

uniformity  of  Nature.  "We  see  the  same  sensations  always
follow  with  the  same  individual  on  the  same  external
stimuli  unless  a  demonstrable  change  of  the  bodily  dis-
position takes  place,  which  must,  of  course,  announce
itself  in  modified  cerebral  vibrations.  That  also  in
different  individuals,  so  far  as  there  is  bodily  agreement,
the  same  stimuli  call  forth  similar  sensations,  it  is  true
we  can  never  directly  establish ;  but  as  all  demonstrable
variations  certainly  depend  on  varying  structure  of  the
sense-organs  and  nerves,  we  have  no  ground  to  suppose
in  this  point  an  exception  to  the  general  uniformity  of
Nature,  and  accordingly  assume  that  like  cerebral  vibra-
tions call  forth  in  all  individuals  like  sensations.  As
this  regular  causal  connection  between  this  form  of  vibra-
tion and  this  sensation  is  in  itself  not  more  wonderful
than  any  other  incomprehensible  uniform  causal  con-
nection in  the  material  world,  e.g.,  electricity  and  heat,
is  tolerably  clear.  On  the  other  side,  however,  we
incline  without  much  hesitation  to  the  opinion,  that
here,  as  there,  causal  links  are  present,  which  refer  the
hitherto  existing  complication  of  these  events  to  simple
laws,  whose  manifold  interweaving  brings  to  pass  the
majority  of  observed  phenomena.  Accordingly,  if  we
cannot  bring  ourselves  to  stop  at  the  result  thus  gained
as  a  final  one,  but  must  suppose  in  these  processes
different  connected  links,  yet  this  much  is  clear,  that,
so  far  as  they  belong  to  the  psychical  domain,  they  must
exclusively  belong  to  the  province  of  the  Unconscious.  It  is
thus  an  unconscious  process  by  which  the  acid  appears  to
us  sour,  sugar  sweet,  this  light  red,  that  blue,  these  aerial
vibrations  as  the  note  A,  those  as  (J.  This  is  all  that
can  be  said  about  the  origin  of  the  quality  of  sensation,
so  far  as  our  present  knowledge  extends.

With  all  this  qualitative,  intensively  and  extensively
quantitative  determination  of  sensation,  we  can,  however,
never  get  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  subject.  For  the  sense
of  sight  represents  locally  extended  images  superficially,


350  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

but  without  any  determination  with  respect  to  the  third
dimension,  so  that  the  area  lies,  so  far,  purely  within
the  mind — is  purely  subjective ;  so  that  the  mind  is
not  at  all  aware  of  the  eye  as  organ  of  vision,  thus
knows  the  visual  image  neither  before  the  eye  nor  in
the  eye,  but  merely  possesses  it  internally,  just  as  a
faint  idea  of  memory  can  only  be  conceived  in  the  in-
terior space  of  the  mind,  and  without  reference  to
external  space.  Similarly  is  it  with  the  perceptions  of
the  sense  of  touch.  Here,  too,  there  is  only  superficial
extension,  which  corresponds  to  the  surface  of  the  body,
only  much  vaguer  than  in  vision.  Here  only  by  means
of  the  simultaneity  of  the  same  perception  at  several
places,  united  with  certain  feelings  of  muscular  move-
ment, do  experiences  occur,  with  whose  help  the  mind
can  effect  the  fixation  of  the  tactile  perceptions  on  the
epidermis  by  other  processes,  so  that  these  can  now  be
fixed  in  respect  to  the  third  dimension,  as  it  were.  Many
physiologists  assert,  indeed,  that  this  is  immediately  the
case,  according  to  the  law  of  the  eccentric  phenomenon,
and  I  shall  not  dispute  it ;  this  much  is  settled,  that
when  this  point  is  reached,  when  the  internal  sensations
are  so  fixed  in  respect  of  the  third  dimension  that  they
coincide  objectively  with  the  epidermis  of  the  body,  and,
according  to  my  view,  in  the  case  of  the  eye  with  the
retina — that  then  it  is  still  by  no  means  apparent  how
the  step  is  to  be  taken  outwards  from  the  subjective  in
virtue  of  'perception  or  of  conscious  thought.  For  perception,
at  the  most,  never  points  beyond  the  limit  of  one's  own
body — in  my  view  even  remaining  within  the  mind  with-
out pointing  to  one's  own  body  at  all.  No  conscious
process  of  thought  developing  itself  by  means  of  the
preceding  experiences,  moreover,  leads  to  the  supposition
of  an  external  object ;  here,  again,  instinct,  or  the  Un-
conscious, must  lend  a  helping  hand  in  order  to  fulfil
the  purpose  of  perception,  the  cognition  of  the  external
world. Accordingly,  the  animal  and  the  child  instinc-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 351

tively  projects  its  sense-perceptions  as  objects  outside
itself ;  and,  accordingly,  to  this  day,  every  uninstructed
human  being  thinks  he  perceives  the  things  themselves,
because  his  perceptions,  with  the  determination  of  ex-
ternality, instinctively  become  objects  to  him.  Thus  only
is  it  possible  that  the  world  of  objects  stands  there  ready
for  any  being,  without  the  idea  of  the  subject  occurring  to
it,  whilst  in  conscious  thought  subject  and  object  must
necessarily  spring  simultaneously  from  the  ideational
process.  It  is,  therefore,  wrong  to  posit  the  concept  of
causality  as  mediator  for  a  conscious  segregation  of  the
object,  for  objects  are  there  long  before  the  causal  con-
cept has  arisen ;  and  even  were  this  not  the  case,  yet,
even  then,  the  subject  must  be  simultaneously  gained  with
the  object.  Undoubtedly,  from  the  'philosophic  point  of
view,  causality  is  the  sole  means  of  getting  beyond  the  mere
ideational  process  to  the  subject  and  object ;  undoubtedly
for  the  consciousness  of  the  cultivated  understanding,
the  object  is  only  contained  in  perception  as  its  external
cause;  undoubtedly  the  unconscious  process,  which  lies
at  the  bottom  of  the  first  apperception  of  the  object,  may
be  analogous  to  this  philosophic  conscious  process, —
thus  much  is  certain,  that  the  process,  as  whose  result
the  external  object  confronts  consciousness  ready  formed,
is  a  thoroughly  unconscious  one,  and  consequently,  if
causality  plays  a  part  in  it — which  for  the  rest  we  can
never  directly  determine, — it  can  yet  by  no  means  be
said,  as  by  Schopenhauer,  that  the  a  priori  yiren  concept
of  causality  produces  the  external  object,  because,  in  this
mode  of  expression,  the  action  must  be  conceived  as  a
(■(iiiscious  one,  which  it  decidedly  cannot  be,  because  it
is  formed  much  later,  and,  moreover,  at  first  from  re-
ciprocal relations  of  the  already  formed  objects.

Having  got  so  far  in  this  way  as  to  see  in  perceptions
external  objects,  the  next  point  to  be  considered  is  the
elaboration  of  the  perceptions,  e.g.,  in  vision  the  sight  of  dis-
tance reckoned  from  the  eye,  single  vision  with  two  eyes,


352  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sight  of  the  third  dimension  in  bodies,  &c,  and  what  corres-
ponds thereto  in  other  senses,  as  is  discussed  at  length  in
so  many  manuals  of  physiology,  psychology,  &c.  The
processes  which  bring  about  this  closer  understanding,
belong  partly,  indeed,  to  consciousness ;  in  greater  part,
however,  they  fall  into  the  domain  of  the  Unconscious
(comp.  Wundt  "  Beitrage  zur  Theorie  der  Sinneswahrneh-
mung,"  as  well  as  the  passages  cited  above,  p.  39).  "  As
the  formation  of  perception  by  the  single  eye  depends
upon  a  series  of  psychical  processes  of  an  unconscious
kind,  so  also  the  formation  of  binocular  perception  is
nothing  but  an  unconscious  process  of  inference.  .  .  .  Thus
it  is  not  merely  the  special  perception  of  depth  to  which
the  binocular  act  of  vision  necessarily  leads,  but  it  is,  in
addition,  the  representation  of  reflection  and  lustre,  which
arises  therefrom  in  an  altogether  corresponding  uniform
manner  "  (Wundt,  pp.  373,  374).  "  They  (the  unconscious
psychical  processes)  are  not  merely  those  which  form  per-
ceptions out  of  the  unrelated  sensations,  but  those  also
which  bind  the  more  immediate  and  simple  perceptions
themselves  again  into  more  compound  ones,  and  thus  bring
order  and  system  into  the  possession  of  our  mind,  before
with  consciousness  that  light  is  brought  into  this  possession,
which  first  teaches  us  ourselves  to  know  it "  (ibid.  375).

"VVe  might  easily  deceive  ourselves  concerning  this  rela-
tion, if  we  only  reflected  on  the  tardiness  with  which  the
human  child  attains  to  the  full  mastery  of  sense-percep-
tion. But  if  more  exact  investigation  enables  us  here  to
perceive  without  difficulty,  how  small  the  elaboration  of
conscious  thought  is  with  children  at  the  time,  when  they
already  possess  this  understanding  of  perception  in  full
measure,  the  unconsciousness  of  all  the  needful  processes
among  animals  is  evident  at  the  first  glance.  The  certainty
with  which  these  move  soon  after  their  birth,  the  propriety
with  which  they  comport  themselves  with  respect  to  the
outer  world,  would  be  impossible,  if  they  did  not  instinc-
tively possess  this  understanding  of  their  sense-perceptions.


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 353

If,  as  should  properly  be  done,  we  include  under  sensuous
perception  in  the  wider  sense  this  full  comprehension  of
the  sense-impressions,  we  see  that  the  coming  to  pass  of
sensuous  perception,  which  forms  the  foundation  of  all
conscious  mental  activity,  is  dependent  on  a  whole  series
of  unconscious  processes,  without  which  aids  on  the  part
of  instinct  Man  and  Animal  would  perish  helplessly,  since
they  would  lack  the  means  of  perceiving  and  of  making
use  of  the  outer  world.


vol.  1.


( 354 )


IX.


THE UNCONSCIOUS IN  MYSTICISM.

The  word  "  mystical "  is  in  everybody's  mouth ;  every-
body knows  the  names  of  celebrated  mystics,  everybody
knows  examples  of  the  mystical.  And  yet  how  few  under-
stand the  word,  whose  signification  itself  is  mystical,  and
therefore  can  only  be  rightly  comprehended  by  him  who
has  within  him  a  mystical  vein,  however  weak  it  be.  Let
us  try  to  get  at  the  essence  of  the  matter,  by  reviewing
the  various  leading  phenomena  presented  in  the  mysticism
of  different  times  and  individuals.

We  find  among  the  largest  number  of  mystics  a  turning
away  from  active  life  and  a  falling  back  upon  quietistic
contemplation,  even  a  striving  after  mental  and  bodily  an-
nihilation. This  cannot,  however,  express  the  essence  of
mysticism ;  for  the  world's  greatest  mystic,  Jacob  Bohme,
managed  his  household  affairs  in  a  methodical  fashion,
worked  hard,  and  educated  his  children.  Other  mystics
plunged  so  deeply  into  practical  affairs  as  to  come  forward
in  the  character  of  world -reformers;  others  professed
theurgy  and  magic,  or  practical  medicine,  and  undertook
journeys  for  scientific  purposes. — Another  series  of  pheno-
mena, with  higher  degrees  of  mysticism,  are  bodily  fits,
as  convulsions,  epilepsies,  ecstasies,  imaginations  and
fixed  ideas  of  hysterical  women  and  hypochondriacal  men,
visions  of  ecstatic  or  spontaneously-somnambulistic  per-
sons. All  these  wear  so  much  the  character  of  bodily
disease,  that  the  essence  of  mysticism  certainly  cannot


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 355

be  looked  for  in  them,  although  they  are  for  the  most
part intentionally produced by voluntary fasting, as-
ceticism, and  continued  concentration  of  the  fancy  on  one
point. Those,  who  in  the  history  of  mysticism  evoked  sucli
repulsive  phenomena,  we  should  at  the  present  day  com-
miserate in  mad-houses,  but  in  their  own  time  they  were
adored  as  prophets  and  persecuted  and  slain  as  martyrs ;
such  unfortunates,  e.g.,  as  took  themselves  to  be  Christ
(Isaiah  Stiefel,  1600)  or  God  the  Father  himself. Never-
theless, it  might  be  said  the  visions  and  ecstasies  pass
gradually  into  those  purer  and  higher  forms  to  which
history owes so much ; granted, certainly, — only this
variable  element  must  not  be  claimed  as  the  essence  of
mysticism. — A  third  form is  asceticism. It is  a  mad
frenzy  or  a  morbid  delight  when  it  is  not  embraced  as  an
ethical  system,  which,  however,  is  the  case  with  Indian,
Neo-Persian,  and  Christian  penitents. Even  then  this  is
not  necessarily  mysticism,  since,  on  the  one  hand,  Scho-
penhauer has  given  us  the  proof  that  a  person  may  be  a
clear  thinker  and  yet  regard  asceticism  as  the  only  correct
system ; and, on  the  other  hand, mysticism  is  just  as
compatible  with  the  most  unbridled,  inordinate  longing
after  enjoyments as  with  the strictest asceticism. A
fourth  series  of  phenomena  in  the  history  of  mysticism
are  the  wonders  of  the  prophets,  saints,  and  magicians
occurring  in  every  age. All  that  remains  after  tolerably
strict  criticism  of  these  reports  reduces  itself  to  operations
of  healing,  which  may  be  comprehended  partly  as  simply
therapeutic,  partly  as  conscious  or  unconscious  magnetism,
partly  as  sympathetic  action,  and  admitted  into  the  series
of natural  laws, if the magical-sympathetic action of
mere  will  be  allowed  to  pass  as  natural  law. As  long
as  this  is  refused,  the latter  certainly  remains  intrinsi-
cally mystical; but  as  soon  as  one  gets  accustomed  to
the  phenomenon,  it  is  not  more  mystical  than  the  opera-
tion of  any other  natural  law, of  which we can  make
nothing  at  all,  and  vet  do  not  on  that  account  call  mystical.


356  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Hitherto  we  have  spoken  of  how  mystics  have  acted
and  lived,  we  have  still  to  mention  in  what  way  they  have
spoken  and  written.  In  the  first  place,  we  are  struck  by
the  prevailingly  figurative  mode  of  expression,  sometimes
plain  and  simple,  but  more  often  high-sounding  rant,  not
seldom  accompanied  by  an  equal  extravagance  in  the
matter  as  in  the  form.  This  depends  partly  on  the
nations  and  times  to  which  the  particular  mystics  belong ;
but,  as  we  meet  with  the  same  phenomenon  among  poets
and  other  writers,  we  cannot  find  therein  the  sure  mark
of  the  mystic.  Further,  we  see  in  mystical  writings,
on  the  one  hand,  an  exuberance  of  allegory,  a  love  of
far-fetched  exegesis  (as  of  the  Bible,  the  Koran,  and
other  writings  or  legends),  or  a  mass  of  formularies
(drawn  from  the  Jewish,  Mohammedan,  and  Chris-
tian cultus) ;  on  the  other  side,  a  schematism  of  an  un-
scientific philosophy  of  Nature,  full  of  fantastic  and
fanciful  analogies  (Albertus  Magnus,  Parcelesus,  and
others  in  the  Middle  Ages ;  Schelling,  Oken,  Steffens,
Hegel,  in  more  recent  times).  In  these  two  phenomena
likewise,  essentially  alike,  and  only  different  in  their  sub-
ject, we  cannot  find  the  character  of  the  mystical.  "We  see
therein  only  the  characteristic  tendency  of  the  human
mind  to  systematise  its  conceptions,  led  astray  by  igno-
rance or  disregard  of  the  material  and  the  principles  of  the
natural  sciences — playing  at  building  card-houses,  which
the  after- comer,  who  builds  other  card-houses,  often  does
not  give  himself  the  trouble  of  blowing  over,  but  which
rather  collapse  of  themselves,  although  not  without  having
previously  imposed  on  many  another  child.  A  character-
istic, too,  to  which  it  has  been  often  believed  one  may  hold,
is  incomprehensibility  and  obscurity  of  style,  because  it  is
tolerably  common  to  all  mystical  writings.  However,  it
is  not  to  be  forgotten,  firstly,  that  very  few  mystics  have
reduced  their  thoughts  to  writing,  many  have  not  even
spoken,  or  done  nothing  more  than  narrate  their  visions;
and  secondly,  that  very  many  other  writings  are  incom-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 357

prehensible  and  obscure,  to  which  neither  their  authors
nor  other  people  would  apply  the  epithet  mystical,  for
obscurity  of  expression  may  arise  from  obscurity  of
thought,  deficient  mastery  of  the  material,  awkwardness
of  style,  and  many  other  causes.

Consequently,  none  of  the  phenomena  hitherto  con-
sidered are  fitted  to  reveal  the  nature  of  the  mystical ;  but
any  one  of  them  may,  perhaps,  serve  to  set  off  a  mystical
background,  but  is  then  only  a  dress  casually  put  on  by
mysticism,  and  may  just  as  well  at  another  time  have
nothing  at  all  to  do  with  mysticism.  The  question  now,
then,  is  with  respect  to  the  common  core  and  centre  of
all  these  phenomena  in  the  cases  in  which  we  regard  them
as  drapery  of  a  mystical  background.  Any  one  would
go  quite  astray  who  should  regard  Iteligion  as  this  com-
mon kernel.  Religion,  as  naive  belief  in  revelation,  is
not  in  the  least  mystical,  for  what  has  become  manifest  to
me  through  an  authority  recognised  by  me  as  perfectly
valid,  what  can  there  be  at  all  mystical  in  that,  so  long  as
I  am  absolutely  content  with  this  external  revelation  ?
And  no  religion  asks  more.  But,  further,  it  is  also  easy  to
see  that  there  is  a  mysticism  of  irreligious  superstition
{e.g.  black  magic),  or  a  mysticism  of  self-deification,  which
sets  all  good  and  bad  gods  at  defiance,  or  a  mysticism
of  irreligious  philosophy,  although  experience  shows  that
the  hitter,  at  any  rate,  prefers  to  make  an  external
alliance  with  positive  religion  {e.g.  Xeoplatonism).  In  all
this  we  should  not  fail  to  perceive  that  Religion  is  the
ground  and  soil  on  which  mysticism  springs  up  most
easily  and  luxuriantly;  but  it  is  by  no  means  its  only  hot-
lied.  Mysticism  is  rather  a  creeping  plant,  which  grows
up  exuberantly  on  any  support,  andean  agree  equally  well
with  the  extremest  opposites.  Arrogance  and  humility,
love  of  power  and  endurance,  egoism  and  self-renuncia-
tion, continence  and  sensual  excess,  self-eastigation  and
inordinate  love  of  enjoyments,  solitude  and  sociality,  con-
tempt for  the  world  and  vanity,  quietism  and  active  life,


358  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

nihilism  and  world-reformation,  piety  and  impiety,  illu-
mination and  superstition,  originality  and  brutal  stupidity,
— all  are  equally  compatible  with  mysticism.

Accordingly  we  have  got  so  far  as  to  see  in  all  such
extremes,  in  all  the  above-mentioned  phenomena  histori-
cally presented  among  the  mystics,  not  the  essence  of
mysticism,  but  excrescences,  which  have  been  produced
partly  by  the  spirit  of  the  times  and  national  character ;
partly  by  individual  morbid  disposition ;  partly  by  per-
verted religious,  moral,  and  practical  principles  ;  partly  by
the  infectious  example  of  mental  derangement;  partly
through  dissatisfaction  with  the  pressure  of  rude  times,
which,  in  secular  life,  had  nothing  at  all  enticing  to  offer,
but  could  only  deter  the  aspirant;  partly  by  the  danger
subsequently  to  be  mentioned  of  soaring  too  high  inherent
in  the  final  goal  of  mysticism  itself ;  partly  by  a  concate-
nation of  all  sorts  of  causes  resulting  from  the  foregoing
and  other  circumstances.

This  negative  examination  appeared  to  me  indispensable
in  order  to  clear  up  the  notion  of  the  mystical,  which  for
most  people  is  compounded  of  a  total  of  these  morbid  out-
rjroivths  of  mysticism,  and  thereby  prevents  the  recognition
of  mysticism  in  its  purer  forms  of  manifestation.  If  now
we  once  more  return  to  consider  the  core  of  all  these
phenomena  of  genuine  mysticism,  this  much  will  be  evi-
dent, that  it  must  be  deeply  founded  in  the  inmost  nature
of  man  (if,  like  artistic  tendencies,  it  is  not  developed  in
every  one,  at  any  rate  uniformly  in  every  one,  or  in  the
same  directions) ;  for  with  more  or  less  diffusion  it  has
accompanied  the  history  of  civilisation  from  early  pre-
historic times  to  the  present  day.  It  has  doubtless
changed  its  character  with  the  spirit  of  the  times,  but
no  advance  of  civilisation  has  ever  been  able  to  repress
it;  it  lias  maintained  itself  just  as  unconquerable  in  pre-
sence of  the  infidelity  of  materialism  as  against  the  terrors
of  the  Inquisition.  But  mysticism  has  also  performed
priceless  civilising  services  for  the  human  race. Without


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 359

the  mysticism  of  Neo-pythagoreanism,  the  Johannean
Christianity  would  never  have  arisen ;  without  the  mys-
ticism of  the  Middle  Ages,  the  spirit  of  Christianity
would  have  been  submerged  in  Catholic  idolatry  and
scholastic  formalism ;  without  the  mysticism  of  the  per-
secuted heretical  communities  from  the  beginning  of  the
eleventh  century,  which,  in  spite  of  all  suppressions,  ever
sprang  up  again  with  renewed  energy  under  another  name,
the  blessings  of  the  Preformation  would  never  have  dis-
pelled the  darker  shades  of  the  Middle  Age  and  opened
the  portals  of  the  new  era.  Without  mysticism  in  the
mind  of  the  German  people,  and  among  the  heroes  of
modern  German  poetry  and  philosophy,  we  should  have
been  so  completely  inundated  by  the  shallow  drifting
sand  of  the  French  materialism  in  the  last  century,  that
we  might  not  have  got  our  heads  free  again  for  who  knows
how  long.  As  for  the  human  race  as  a  whole,  so  also  for
the  individual.  So  long  as  it  keeps  free  from  sickly  and
rank  outgrowths,  mysticism  is  of  inestimable  worth.  For
we,  in  fact,  see  that  all  mystics  have  felt  exceedingly
happy  in  developing  their  mystical  tendencies,  and  have
cheerfully  endured  all  sorts  of  privation  and  sacrifice  in
order  to  remain  faithful  to  their  bent.  One  has  only  to
think  of  Jacob  Bohme  and  the  inexpressible  cheerfulness
which  accompanied  him  through  all  his  trials,  which  yet
certainly  arose  from  a  pure  source,  and  neither  withdrew
him  from  his  civil  duties  nor  was  troubled  by  foolish  self-
tormentings.  Think  of  the  mystical  saints  of  antiquity,
as  Pythngoras,  Hotinus,  Porphyry,  &c,  who  certainly
practised  extreme  moderation  and  restraint,  but  no  self-
tormentings.  Genuine  mysticism  is  then  something  deeply
founded  in  the  inmost  essence  of  man,  i/i  ihrlf  healthy,
if  also  easily  inclining  to  morbid  growths,  and  of  high
value  both  for  the  individual  and  for  humanity  at  large.

Put  what  is  it  in  fine?  If  we  think  away  all  that
is  worthless  in  the  phenomenon,  there  will  remain  feeling,
thought,  and  will,  an  1  indeed  the  content  vi  each  of  the


35o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

three  will  also  be  able  to  occur  non-mystically,  namely,
of  thought  and  feeling  in  philosophy  and  religion,  of  will
as  conscious  magical  will-action  (only  one  single  content
of  feeling  making  an  exception,  because  it  can  ever  be
only  mystically  produced,  as  we  shall  immediately  see).
But  if  now  in  all  other  cases  it  is  not  the  matter  which
contains  the  specifically  mystical  element,  it  must  be  the
special  v:ay  in  which  the  matter  comes  into  consciousness
and  is  in  consciousness ;  and  upon  this  we  will  first  hear
some  mystics,  when,  after  the  previous  explanations,  we
shall  not  be  surprised  to  find  names  which  are  not  usually
reckoned  among  the  mystics,  just  because  these  represent
mysticism  most  free  from  disturbing  accessories.

All  founders  of  religion,  and  prophets,  have  declared
that  they  have  either  received  their  wisdom  personally
from  God,  or,  in  composing  their  works,  delivering  their
speeches,  and  doing  their  wonders,  have  been  inspired  by
the  Divine  Spirit,  which  most  of  the  higher  religions  have
made  an  article  of  faith.  It  has  also  been  believed  of  the
later  saints  who  have  introduced  any  new  doctrine  or
mode  of  life  and  repentance,  that  not  the  human  but  the
Divine  Spirit  taught  them,  and  they  themselves  believed
it.  Fuller  information  is  given  us  by  Jacob  Bohme  : —
"  I  say  before  God  .  .  .  that  I  do  not  myself  know  how
it  happens  to  me  that,  without  having  the  impelling  will,
I  do  not  even  know  what  I  should  write.  For  when  I
write  the  Spirit  dictates  it  to  me  in  great,  wonderful
knowledge,  that  I  often  do  not  know  whether  I  am  in  my
spirit  in  this  world,  and  rejoice  exceedingly,  since  then
the  constant  and  certain  knowledge  is  given  to  me,  and
the  more  I  seek  the  more  I  find,  and  always  more  deeply,
that  I  also  often  think  my  sinful  person  too  small  and
unworthy  to  teach  such  secrets,  when  the  Spirit  spreads
my  banner  and  says,  '  See,  thou  shalt  live  for  ever  therein
and  be  crowned,  why  art  thou  afraid  ? '  "  In  the  same
way,  in  the  "Aurora,"  he  gives  his  reader  the  advice  "that
he  should  ask  of  God  His  Holy  Spirit. For  without  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 361

illumination  of  the  same  thou  wilt  not  understand  these
secrets,  for  the  mind  of  man  is  a  fast  lock,  that  must  first
be  opened ;  and  that  no  man  can  do,  for  the  Holy  Spirit
is  the  only  key  to  it.""  As  little  as  he  holds  it  possible
for  another  reader,  could  he  himself  understand  his  own
writings  if  the  Spirit  should  abandon  him. — We  go  further
and  find  that  the  Quakers  set  up  the  principle  of  subordi-
nating the  institution  of  the  school,  human  wisdom,  and
the  written  word,  and  trusting  solely  to  an  inner  light. —
Bernhard  of  Clairvaux  says:  "Faith  is  a  sure  fore-feeling
of  a  not  yet  wholly  unveiled  truth  grasped  by  the  will,
and  is  based  on  authority  or  revelation ;  the  (inner)  intui-
tion (contcmjrfatio),  on  the  contrary,  is  the  certain  and  at
the  same  time  manifest  cognition  of  the  invisible."  This
is  carried  further  by  his  school  (Eichard  and  Hugo  of  St.
Victor),  by  which  inner  revelation  is  designated  the  deeper
mystical  knowledge,  which  becomes  the  portion  only  of
the  elect,  as  illumination  of  reason  by  the  Spirit,  as  super-
natural power  of  knowledge,  as  inner  immediate  intuition,
which  is  exalted  above  reason, —

The  champion  of  modern  mysticism  against  rationalistic
enlightenment  is  Ilamann.  He  desires  to  know  the  con-
tent of  the  outer  divine  revelation  vitally  regenerated  from
the  soil  of  his  own  spirit,  and  to  find  the  solution  of  all
contradictions  in  self-evident  faith,  which  comes  to  him
from  feeling,  from  the  immediate  revelation  of  truth.
What  he  shadowed  forth  Jacobi  elaborated.  He  says  (in
various  places) :  "  Conviction  by  means  of  proofs  is  a
second-hand  certainty,  rests  on  comparison,  and  can  never
be  perfectly  sure  and  complete.  Now  if  every  acceptation
of  truth  which  does  not  spring  from  rational  grounds  is
faith,  conviction  from  grounds  of  reason  must  itself  come
from  faith,  and  receive  its  force  solely  from  it. — He  who
knows  must  in  the  last  resort  depend  on  sensation  or  a
feeling  of  the  mind. — As  there  is  a  sensuous  intuition
through  sense,  so  there  is  also  a  rational  one  through
reason. — Each  in  its  province  is  the  final  and  uncondition-


362  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ally  valid. — Reason,  like  the  faculty  of  the  feelings,  is  the
incorporeal  organ  for  the  perceptions  of  the  super-sensible.
Rational  intuition,  although  given  in  exalted  feelings,  is
yet  truly  objective. — Without  the  positive  rational  feeling
of  a  higher  than  the  world  of  the  senses,  the  understand-
ing could  never  transgress  the  sphere  of  the  conditioned."

Fichte  and  Schelling  accepted  these  views,  whilst  Kant
in  his  categorical  imperative  only  made  use  of  them  under
the  guise  of  formal  knowledge  of  the  understanding.
Fichte  says  in  the  Introductory  Lectures  to  the  Theory
of  Science,  "  This  doctrine  presupposes  an  entirely  new
inner  sense-organ  through  which  a  new  world  is  given,
that  does  not  at  all  exist  for  the  ordinary  man.  It  is
not  exactly  excogitating  and  creating  a  novelty,  a  some-
thing not  already  given,  but  the  bringing  together  and
reducing  to  unity  of  the  given  by  means  of  a  new  and
yet  to  he  developed  sense."  This  "  Rational  Faith  "  of  Jacobi
receives  from  Schelling  its  most  appropriate  name — in-
tellectual intuition — which  is  set  up  by  the  latter  as  the
indispensable  organ  of  our  transcendental  philosophising,
as  the  principle  of  all  demonstration,  and  as  the  unprov-
able, self-evident  ground  of  all  evidence,  in  a  word,  as  the
absolute  act  of  knowledge, — as  a  kind  of  cognition  which
must  always  remain  incomprehensible  from  the  conscious
empirical  point  of  view,  because  it  has'  not  like  it  an
object,  because  it  cannot  at  all  appear  in  consciousness,  but
Mis  outside  of  it  (comp.  Schelling,  I.,  1,  pp.  181,  182).
Thus  have  we  followed  this  mode  of  attaining  to  the  con-
sciousness of  a  content  from  the  crude  figurative  expression
of  a  personal  divine  communication  down  to  Schelling's
intellectual  intuition,  and  have  herein  found  that  which
makes  a  feeling  or  a  thought  mystical  in  form.

If  we  ask  how  we  have  to  conceive  this  immediate
knowledge  through  intellectual  intuition,  Fichte  and
Schelling  give  us  answers  on  this  point  also.  Fichte  says,
in  the  "Facts  of  Consciousness": — "Man  has  in  general
nothing  but  experience, and he comes by everything


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 363

whereto  he  attains  only  through  experience,  through  life
itself.  In  the  theory  of  the  sciences,  too,  as  the  absolute
highest  potency,  above  which  no  consciousness  can  rise,
nothing  can  at  all  occur  which  does  not  lie  in  actual
consciousness  or  in  experience,  in  the  highest  sense  of
the  term."  And  Schelling  corroborates  ("  Works,"  ii.  vol.  i.
p.  326): — "For,  to  be  sure,  there  are  also  those  who
speak  of  thought  as  an  antithesis  to  all  experience,
as  if  thought  itself  were  not  certainly  also  experience  I "
Immediate  or  mystical  knowledge  is  here  very  well
included  in  the  notion,  experience,  because  it  is  pre-
viously found  "in  actual  consciousness"  as  given,  without
the  will  being  able  to  make  any  change  in  it.  No  matter
whether  this  datum  is  given  from  within  or  from  without,
conscious  will  has,  in  either  case,  nothing  to  do  with  it,
and  consciousness,  to  which  its  unconscious  background
is  just  as  unconscious,  must  accordingly  accept  its  in-
spirations as  something  extraneous,  whence  arises  the
belief  in  divine  or  demoniac  inspiration  of  the  intellectual
intuition  in  earlier  times,  and  among  those  untrained  in
philosophy.  Since  consciousness  knows  that  it  has  not
derived  it's  knowledge  directly  or  indirectly  from  sense-
perception,  thereby  being  pre-eminently  immediate  know-
ledge, it  can  only  have  arisen  through  inspiration  from
the  Unconscious,  and  we  have  accordingly  compre-
hended the  essence  of  the  mystical — as  the,  filling  of
consciousness  with  a  content  (feeling,  thovght,  desire)
through  involuntary  emergence  of  the  same  from  the  Un-
conscious.

We  must  accordingly  claim  clairvoyance  and  presenti-
ment as  essentially  mystical — a  subdivision  of  mysticism,
so  far  as  it  has  reference  to  thought, — and  shall  not  be
able  to  avoid  finding  something  mystical  also  in  every
instinct,  namely,  so  far  as  the  unconscious  clairvoyance
of  instinct  appears  in  consciousness  as  presentiment,  faith,
or  certainty.  I  shall  further  meet  with  assent  after
these  considerations  and those  of the  earlier ch;u>ters,


364  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

if,  even  in  the  most  ordinary  psychological  processes,  I
characterise  those  thoughts  and  feelings  as  mystical  in
form,  which  owe  their  origin  to  an  immediate  intrusion
of  the  Unconscious,  thus  before  all  the  aesthetic  feeling
in  contemplation  and  production,  the  origin  of  sensuous
perception  and  the  unconscious  processes  in  thinking,
feeling,  and  willing  generally.  This  perfectly  justifiable
application  meets  with  resistance  only  from  vulgar  pre-
judice, which  sees  marvel  and  mystery  only  in  the  extra-
ordinary, but  finds  nothing  obscure  or  marvellous  in  the
things  of  every-day  life — only  because  there  is  nothing
rare  and  unusual  in  it.  Certainly,  one  does  not  call  a
man,  who  only  carries  about  in  himself  these  ever-
recurring  mysteries,  a  mystic;  for  if  this  word  is  to  mean
more  than  human  being,  it  must  be  reserved  for  the
men  who  participate  in  the  rarer  phenomena  of  mysti-
cism, namely,  such  inspirations  of  the  Unconscious  as  go
beyond  the  common  need  of  the  individual  or  of  the
race,  e.g.,  clairvoyants,  through  spontaneous  somnambulism
or  natural  disposition,  or  persons  with  a  darker  but  fre-
quently active  power  of  presentiment  (Socrates'  "  Daim-
onion ").  I  should  also  not  object  to  the  designating  as
mystics,  in  the  province  of  their  art,  all  eminent  art-
geniuses,  who  owe  their  productions  predominantly  to
inspirations  of  their  genius,  and  not  to  the  work  of  their
consciousness,  be  they  in  all  other  concerns  of  life  as
clear-headed  as  possible  (e.g.,  Phidias,  yEschylus,  Raphael,
Beethoven) ;  and  he  alone  could  take  offence  who  has
himself  so  little  of  the  mystical  vein  in  him,  that  the
incommensurability  of  the  genuine  work  of  art  with  any
rationalistic  standard,  as  well  as  the  infinity  of  its  con-
tent, in  respect  of  all  attempts  at  definition,  has  not  yet
at  all  entered  into  his  consciousness.

In  philosophy  I  should  like  to  extend  the  notion  still
further,  and  call  every  original  philosopher  a  mystic,
so  far  as  he  is  truly  original ;  for  in  the  history  of
philosophy  no high  thought  has ever  been  brought  to


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 365

light  by  laborious  conscious  trial  and  induction,  but  lias
always  been  apprehended  by  the  glance  of  genius,  and
then  elaborated  by  the  understanding.  Add  to  that,  that
philosophy  essentially  deals  with  a  theme  which  is  most
intimately  connected  with  the  one  feeling  only  to  be
mystically  apprehended,  namely,  the  relation  of  the  indi-
vidual to  the  Absolute.  All  that  has  gone  before  only
concerned  such  matter  of  consciousness  as  can  or  could
arise  in  no  other  way,  thus  is  here  only  called  mystical,
because  the  form  of  its  origin  is  mystical;  but  now  we
come  to  an  item  of  consciousness,  which,  in  its  inmost
character,  is  only  to  be  apprehended  mystically,  which
thus  also,  materially,  may  be  called  mystical;  and  a
human  being  who  can  produce  this  mystical  content  will
have  to  be  called  pre-eminently  a  mystic.

To  wit,  cmiscious  thought  can  comprehend  the  identity
of  the  individual  witli  the  Absolute  by  a  rational  method,
as  we  too  have  found  ourselves  on  the  way  to  this  goal
in  our  inquiry ;  but  the  Ego  and  the  Absolute  and
their  identity  stand  before  it  as  three  abstractions,  whose
union  in  the  judgment  is  made  probable,  it  is  true,
through  the  preceding  proofs,  yet  an  immediate  feeling
of  this  identity  is  not  attained  by  it.  The  authoritative
belief  in  an  external  revelation  may  credulously  repeat
the  dogma  of  such  a  unity — the  living  feeling  of  the
same  cannot  be  engrafted  or  thrust  on  the  mind  from
without,  it  can  only  spring  up  in  the  mind  of  the  believer
himself;  in  a  word,  it  is  to  be  attained  neither  by  philo-
sophy nor  external  revelation,  but  only  mystically,  by
one  with  equal  mystical  proclivities,  the  more  easily,
indeed,  the  move  perfect  and  pure  are  the  philosophical
notions  or  religious  ideas  already  possessed.  Therefore
this  feeling  is  the  content  of  mysticism,  /car  t£o^?}z',
because  it  finds  its  existence  only  in  it,  and,  at  the  same
time,  the  liigJtc*t  and  ultimate,  if  also,  as  we  have  seen
before,  by  110  means  the  only  aim  of  all  those  who  have
devoted  their  lives  to  mysticism. IS'av,  we  mav  even  ^o


366  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

so  far  as  to  assert  that  the  production  of  a  certain  degree
of  this  mystical  feeling,  and  the  enjoyment  lurking  in  it,
is  the  sole  inner  aim  of  all  religion,  and  that  it  is,  there-
fore, not  incorrect,  if  less  significative,  to  apply  the  name
religious  feeling  to  it.

Further,  if  the  highest  blessedness  lurks  in  this  feeling
for  its  possessor,-  as  is  confirmed  by  the  experience  of  all
mystics,  the  transition  is  manifestly  easy  to  the  endeavour
to  heighten  this  feeling  in  degree,  by  seeking  to  make
the  union  between  the  Ego  and  the  Absolute  ever  closer
and  more  intimate.  But  it  is  also  not  difficult  to  see
that  we  have  here  arrived  at  the  point  previously  indi-
cated, where  mysticism  spontaneously  degenerates  into
the  morbid,  by  overshooting  its  mark.  Undoubtedly  we
must  elevate  ourselves  for  this  purpose  a  little  above
the  standpoint  hitherto  attained  in  our  investigations.
The  unity,  namely  of  the  Absolute  and  the  individual,
whose  individuality  or  egoity  is  given  through  con-
sciousness, thus,  in  other  words,  the  unity  of  the  un-
conscious and  conscious,  is  once  for  all  given,  inseparable
and  indestructible,  except  by  destruction  of  the  indi-
vidual ;  wherefore,  however,  every  attempt  to  make  this
unity  more  close  than  it  is,  is  so  absurd  and  useless.  The
way  which,  historically,  has  almost  always  been  taken,  is
that  of  the  annihilation  of  consciousness — the  endeavour
to  let  the  individual  perish  in  the  Absolute.  This,  how-
ever, contains  a  great  error,  as  if,  when  the  goal  of  anni-
hilation of  consciousness  was  reached,  the  individual  still
existed ;  the  Ego  at  once  desires  to  be  annihilated,  and
to  subsist  in  order  to  enjoy  this  annihilation.  Conse-
quently this  goal  has  hitherto  been  always  only  im-
perfectly attained  on  both  sides,  although  the  accounts  of
the  mystics  enable  us  to  perceive  that  many  on  this  path
have  attained  an  admirable  height,  or  rather  depth,  so  that
I  shall  adduce  a  few  illustrations.  (True  self-annihilation
is,  of  course,  only  suicide  ;  but  here  the  contradiction  is  too
patent  for  it  to  have  often  been  the  result  of  mysticism.)


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 367

Michael  Molinos,  the  father  of  Quietism,  says,  among
the  eight-and-sixty  propositions  of  his  celebrated  "  Spiritual
Guide,"  condemned  by  Innocent  VI. : — "  Man  must  anni-
hilate his  powers,  and  the  soul  annihilates  itself  when  it
ceases  to  effect  anything.  And  if  the  soul  has  attained
the  mystical  death,  it  can — having  now  returned  to  its
fundamental  cause,  to  God — will  nothing  further  than
what  God  wills."  The  mystics  of  the  earlier  part  of  the
Middle  Ages  distinguish  in  different  ways  a  greater  or
smaller  number  of  stages ;  the  last  is  always  absorption,
the  same  state  as  we  already  find  described  among  the
Buddhist  gymnosophists,  the  modern  Persian  Ssufis,  and
the  Hesychasts  or  quietists  or  Omphalists  of  Mount  Athos.
It  is  said  that  in  absorption  the  human  being  is  no  longer
aware  of  his  body,  perceives  nothing  external  at  all,
nay  not  even  his  inner  self.  "  To  think  of  absorption  is
already  to  emerge  from  absorption."  To  die  to  one's
ownuess,  to  completely  annihilate  personality,  and  to  let
one's  self  be  lost  in  the  divine  essence,  is  expressly  de-
manded. Nay,  even  the  essential  forms  of  consciousness,
space,  and  time  must  disappear,  as  we  gather  from  a
conversation  of  the  prophet  with  Ssaid,  where  the  latter
says : — "  Day  and  night  have  disappeared  for  me  like  a
flash  of  lightning ;  I  embraced  at  once  eternity  before
and  after  the  world  ;  to  those  in  such  a  state  a  hundred
years  and  an  hour  are  one  and  the  same."  All  this  is
confirmed  by  the  endeavour  after  identification  with  the
Absolute,  through  annihilation  of  the  individual  con-
sciousness.

The  other  equally  conceivable  way  to  the  enhancement
of  unity  would  be  the  endeavour  to  let  the  Absolute
perish  in  the  Ego;  this  way  also  has  been  tried  by  high-
souring  minds,  but  it  is  so  daring,  and  the  goal  and  the
power  and  means  at  the  command  of  the  individual  so
disproportionate,  that  we  need  take  no  further  account
of  it.

From  mystics  proceeded  the  religious  revelations,  from


368  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

mystics  philosophy ;  mysticism  is  the  common  source  of
both.  It  is  true  that  fear  first  created  gods  on  earth,  so
far  as  it  was  fear,  which  first  stirred  up  the  fancy  of
mystical  brains,  but  what  they  created  was  their  own,
and  fear  had  no  part  therein.  But  when  the  first  gods
were  once  there,  they  propagated  among  themselves,  and
fear  lost  its  function.  Accordingly  the  old  assertion  so
highly  valued  by  theologians,  of  the  god-consciousness
dwelling  in  man  is  no  fable,  if  there  be  also  perfectly
godless  individuals  and  peoples,  in  whom  it  has  never
emerged ;  mysticism  is  Adam's  scion,  and  its  children
are  the  ideas  of  the  gods  and  their  relation  to  man.  How
elevated  and  pure  these  ideas  may  have  been  even  in  quite
early  times  in  the  esoteric  doctrines  of  many  peoples,  is
shown  in  the  case  of  the  Hindus,  who  have  in  effect
implicitly  possessed  the  whole  history  of  philosophy,  pre-
senting in  figurative  and  undeveloped  form  what  we
exhibit  only  too  abstractly  through  only  too  many  writers
and  volumes.

Thus  I  see  in  the  whole  history  of  philosophy  nothing
else  than  the  conversion  of  a  mystically-begotten  content
from  the  form  of  the  image  or  the  unproved  assertion
into  that  of  the  rational  system,  for  which  certainly  often
a  new  mystical  production  of  single  parts  is  required,
which  a  later  age  finds  already  contained  in  the  ancient
writings. — It  is  naturally  not  wonderful,  that  from  the
moment  when  philosophy  and  religion  get  to  be  separated,
they  both  deny  their  human-mystical  origin ;  the  former
seeks  to  present  its  results  as  rationally  acquired,  the
latter  as  external  Divine  revelation.  For  as  long  as  the
mystic  abides  by  his  results,  without  trying  to  give  them
a  rational  foundation,  he  is  not  yet  philosopher,  and  this
only  becomes  possible  by  his  giving  conscious  reasoning
its  rights.  But  this  he  will  not  do  until  he  prefers  the
latter  to  mysticism,  and  then  he  likes  to  renounce  and
forget  the  mystical  source  of  his  results,  which  will  not  be
difficult  for  him,  considering  the  obscurity  of  their  mode


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 369

of  origin.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  mystic  thinks  little
of  conscious  reason,  or  naturally  inclines  to  fanciful  expo-
sition, he  will  seek  a  pictorial-symbolical  expression  for
his  results,  which  of  course  can  always  be  only  an  acci-
dental and  imperfect  one.  Now,  as  soon  as  he  himself
or  his  successors  become  incapable  of  grasping  the  idea
lurking  behind  the  symbols,  and  take  those  themselves  for
the  truth,  they  cease  again  to  be  mystics  and  become  re-
ligionists. As  they  themselves  can  neither  mystically
reproduce  their  symbols,  nor  are  these  rationally  compre-
hensible, they  must  appeal  to  the  authority  of  the  founder
for  the  truth  of  the  same,  and  as  human  authority  appears
too  small  for  such  important  affairs — possibly,  too,  the
founder  himself  has  already  claimed  to  be  recipient  of
divine  communications — their  truth  is  referred  to  the
divine  authority  itself.  Thus  arise  the  moulds  which
shape  the  dogmatic  content  of  religion.  The  more  ade-
quate are  the  symbols  of  the  mystical  Idea,  the  purer  and
sublimer  is  the  religion ;  the  more  abstract  and  philoso-
phical, however,  must  also  the  symbols  be;  the  more
inadequate  and  sensuous  they  are,  the  more  does  religion
sink  into  superstitious  idolatry  and  sacerdotal  formalism.
Now  he  who  takes  the  symbols  of  religion  again  merely  as
symbols,  and  wishes  to  grasp  the  idea  dwelling  behind
them,  steps  out  of  religion  as  such,  which  requires,  and  must
require,  literal  belief  in  the  symbols,  and  becomes  again  a
mystic ;  and  this  is  the  usual  way  in  which  mysticism  is
formed,  by  clearer  heads  finding  the  historically  given
religion  unsatisfactory,  and  desiring  to  grasp  the  profoundei
ideas  which  lurk  behind  its  symbols.  One  sees  now  how
closely  related  religion  and  mysticism  are,  and  how  they
are  yet  somewhat  different  in  principle  ;  one  sees  also
why  an  established  church  must  always  be  hostile  to
mysticism.

If  we  now  ask  how  it  came  to  pass  that  mysticism,  which
brought  to  men  the  first  revelations  of  the  super-sensible
did  not  stop  there,  but  became  convene. I  into  philosophy

VOL.  1.  -  a


3?o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

and  religion,  the  reason  of  this  is  shown  in  the  vagueness
of  the  purely  mystical  result,  which  must  necessarily  strive
to  acquire  a  form.  As  little  as  the  mystical  is  in  itself
communicable,  so  little  is  it  comprehensible  for  the  con-
sciousness of  the  thinker  himself;  it  is  like  everything
unconscious  —  a  definite  content  to  consciousness  only
when  it  has  entered  the  forms  of  sensibility,  as  light,
clearness,  vision,  image,  symbol,  or  abstract  thought.
Previously  it  is  only  absolutely  indefinite  feeling,  i.e.
consciousness  experiences  nothing  but  blessedness  or  un-
blessedness  absolutely.  If,  now,  the  feeling  first  becomes
definite  in  images  or  thoughts  of  a  certain  kind,  there
dwells  in  this  image  or  thought  alone  for  consciousness
the  content  of  the  mystical  result ;  and  it  is  consequently
no  wonder  that,  if  with  the  weakening  of  the  mystical
energy  the  inspirations  fail,  consciousness  cleaves  to
these  sensuous  residua — least  of  all,  when  others  do  this,
to  whom  only  these  residua,  and  not  the  feelings  united
therewith,  can  be  imparted,  not  that  undefined  somewhat
which  tells  the  productive  mystic  that  his  images  and
thoughts  are  still  always  an  incomplete  expression  of
the  super-sensual  idea.  But  communication  requires  still
more :  the  other  party  desires  to  have  not  merely  the
What  of  the  mystical  results,  but  also  the  Why,  for  the
productive  mystic  receives,  it  is  true,  through  the  way  in
which  he  arrives  at  it,  an  immediate  certainty,  but  whence
is  a  third  person  to  obtain  conviction  ?  Eeligion  helps
itself  here  with  the  surrogate  of  authoritative  faith  annihi-
lating independent  judgment ;  philosophy,  however,  tries
rationally  to  prove  what  it  has  mystically  received,  and
thereby  to  make  the  private  property  of  the  mystic  the
public  property  of  thinking  humanity.  Only  too  fre-
quently, as  could  not  well  be  otherwise,  considering  the
difficulty  of  the  subject,  these  rational  proofs  are  unsuc-
cessful, in  that  they,  apart  from  what  is  really  incorrect
in  them,  depend  again  themselves  on  suppositions,  of  the
truth  of  which conviction can  only  be mystically ac-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 371

quired.  And  thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  different
philosophical  systems,  however  imposing  they  are  to
many,  yet  have  only  full  probative  force  for  the  author
and  for  some  few  who  are  able  to  reproduce  mystically
in  themselves  the  underlying  suppositions  (e.g.,  Spinoza's
Substance,  Fichte's  Ego,  Schelling's  Subject-Object,  Scho-
penhauer's Will),  and  that  those  philosophical  systems,
which  rejoice  in  most  adherents,  are  just  the  poorest  of
all  and  most  unphilosophical  (e.g.,  Materialism  and  ratio-
nalistic Theism).

Were  I  now  to  name  the  man  whom  I  regard  as  the
flower  of  philosophical  mysticism,  I  should  pronounce  the
name  of  Spinoza:  his  starting-point,  the  mystical  Sub-
stance, his  ultimatum x  the  mystical  love  of  God,  in  which
God  loves  himself,  and  all  else  sun-clear,  according  to
mathematical  methods.

Certainly  Spinoza  did  not  think  himself  a  mystic,  but
rather  supposed  he  had  proved  everything  so  surely  that
all  must  see  it ;  and  yet  his  system,  imposing  as  it  is,  has
nothing  convincing  about  it,  and  convinces  so  few,  be-
cause one  must  first  be  convinced  of  Substance  in  Spinoza's
sense,  which  only  a  mystic  can,  or  a  philosopher  who  at
the  close  of  his  system  has  reached  the  same  by  another
path,  and  then  no  longer  needs  Spinozism.  Similarly  is
it,  however,  with  all  other  systems,  excepting  the  few
which,  like  those  of  Leibnitz  and  the  English,  begin  from
below,  but  then  also  do  not  get  far,  and,  properly  speaking,
are  not  to  be  called  systems.  The  complete  rational
proof  of  the  mystical  results  can  only  appear  at  the  close
of  the  history  of  philosophy,  for  the  latter  consists,  as  has
been  said,  altogether  in  the  search  for  this  proof.

Finally,  we  must  not  omit  to  call  attention  to  the  risk
of  error  which  lies  in  mysticism,  and  which  is  so  much

1 By  his  third  kind  of  knowledge  manner,  ami  with full conviction  of

[the intellectual intuition, comp.  certainty (comp. "  Ethics part v.,

above,  p. 22 Obs.), by which alone  l'rop. 25, l'rop. 36 (>l>s., Prop. .\2

those fundamental ideas  of his  sys-  l'rop.). Spino/.a himself admits the

triu  can  be  grasped  in  un  adequate  mystical  nature  of  these  conceptions.


372  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

worse  in  this  than  in  rational  thought,  because  the  latter
has  in  itself,  and  in  the  co-operation  of  others,  the  control
and  hope  of  improvement,  but  the  error  which  has  crept
in  in  mystical  form  is  ineradicable.  One  must  not  thereby,
however,  conceive  the  matter  as  if  the  Unconscious  im-
parted false  inspirations,  but  it  then  imparts  none  at  all,
and  consciousness  simply  takes  the  images  of  its  uninspired
fancy  for  inspirations  of  the  Unconscious,  because  it  longs
for  them.

It  is  just  as  difficult,  to  distinguish  a  genuine  inspiration
of  the  Unconscious  in  the  waking  state  in  a  mystical
mood  from  mere  freaks  of  fancy,  as  a  clairvoyant  dream
from  an  ordinary  one ;  as  in  the  latter  case  only  the  result,
so  in  the  former  only  the  purity  and  inner  worth  of
the  result,  can  decide  this  question.  But  as  true  inspira-
tions are  always  rare  conditions,  it  is  easy  to  see  that
among  all,  who  ardently  long  for  such  mystical  suggestions,
very  many  self-deceptions  must  occur  for  one  true  in-
spiration ;  it  is  therefore  not  astonishing  how  much  non-
sense mysticism  has  brought  to  light,  and  that  it  must
in  consequence  be  extremely  repugnant  to  every  rational
mind.


EXD OF VOL. I.
