In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom
========================================
Franz Hartmann (1890) — Hartmann's Rosicrucian history — the theosophical-era account of the Rosy Cross. Source: https://archive.org/details/inpronaostemple00hartgoog. Public domain.

IN THE PRONAOS 

OF THE 

Temple of Wisdom. 

Containina tbe Ibietori? 

OF THE 

TRUE AND THE FALSE 

ROSICRUCIANS. 

WITH AN INTRODUCTION INTO THE MYSTERIES 
OF THE 

Ibetmetic Ipbilosopbis. 

FRANZ HARTMANN, M.D. 

Xon5on : 

THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY, 

7, Duke Street, Adelphi. 

OCCULT PUBLISHING CO., BOSTON, MASS., U.S.A. 

1890. 

[all rights reserved.] 

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1890, by 

Franz Hartmann, M.D., in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at 

Washington, D C. 

CONTENTS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Occult literature— Allegorical language of the Rosier ucian books— Its 
secret meaning. 

II. 

THE HERMETIC PHILOSOPHY, 

The Neoplatonists— Ammonius Saccas— Plotinus — Malchus Porphyrins 
— Jamblichus— Proclus — Hierocles. 

III. 

MEDIi^VAL PHILOSOPHERS. 

•* Magic," according to Cornelius Agrippa. 

IV. 

AMONG THE '* ADEPTS." 

The "Brotherhood of the Golden and Rosy Cross" — Occult and 
mysterious powers — Adepts and Sages — Alchymists and Goldmakers — 
The True History of Flamel— The Count de Saint Germain — Cagliostro — 
The art of making alchemical gold — Well-authenticated facts. . 

V. 

THE ROSICRUCIAN *' ORDERS." 

"History" of the " Rosicrucians " — The •* Universal Reformation;" 
the " Fama Fratemitatis " and the " Confessio " — Truth and fiction — The 
" Chemical Marriage of Christian Rosencruetz " — Valentin Andreas— The 
*' Sphinx Rosacese " — Andreas von Carolstadt — Theophrastus Paracelsus 
— Rosicrucian literature. 

VI. 

PSEUDO-ROSICRUCIANS. IMPOSTORS AND FOOLS. 

Mysticism during the Middle Ages — " Secret Societies " — Schroepfer — 
J. C. Woellner and Bischofswerder — Political influence — The •* Jesuits,*' 
and the " Illuminati " — Weishaupt— King Frederic William II. 

VII. 

IN THE PRONAOS OF THE TEMPLE OF THE TRUE CROSS. 

The Cross and the Rose — Rosicrucian Rules— The Duties of a Rosi- 
crucian — The Secret Signs of the Rosicrucians — Rosicrucian Jewels — 
Rosicrucian Symbols— Signs from the heart of the celestial mother— Signs 
referring to the divine child. 

VIII. 

ALCHEMY. 

The science and art of Alchemy — "The Prima Materia " — The ".Spiritus 
Universalis" — The *• Secret Fire" — The four alchemical rules — ^The five 
things necessary to observe in the practice of Alchemy — Axiomata Her- 
metica. 

TO 

Marie, Countess of Caithness, 
duchesse de pomar, 

AND 

TO ALL WHO HAVE DISCOVERED THE TRUE CROSS BY 

ENTERING INTO THE LIGHT THROUGH 

THE POWER OF THE FIRE, 

THIS BOOK IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED 

BY 

The AUTHOR. 

mOLOGIGALUBl^RY 

Ill 

■III 

ii: 

lo Preface, 

Little would it benefit us if we knew of the existence of suh- 
light only from reading about it in books, and were incapable to 
see the light and to enjoy the rays of the sun. What would it 
serve us if we theoretically knew all about the constitution of the 
terrestrial sun if we were encompassed by darkness ? What 
good would it do to us to be informed about all the qualities of 
the divine powers of God, if we could recognise nothing divine 
within our own selves. 

No man can show to another the light if the latter is incapable 
to see it himself ; but the light is everywhere ; there is nothing 
to hinder a person to see it, except his love for the darkness. 
His love for the illusions of his terrestrial phase of existence 
causes him to regard these illusions as real, and to relegate the 
Real to the realm of fancy and dreams. Nevertheless, that 
which seems now the true light to him will be as darkness when 
his consciousness awakens to the perception of the light of the 
spirit. 

As light is incomprehensible except by its contrast to dark- 
ness, I have not only selected some of the best portions of the 
writings of the ancient hermetic philosophers and mediaeval 
" Rosicrucians " ; but I have also taken the trouble to collect a 
few facts from the great storehouse of human follies to be found 
in the fools* paradise of the visionary and dreamer; but for 
those who earnestly wish to enter the path and to follow the 
Light, I have added some of the most precious gems, taken from 
the books of the sages ; whose meaning will be incomprehensible 
to the would-be wise ; while those who are unsophisticated will 
find therein a great deal of wisdom. 

THE AUTHOR. 

FRO 

O U F 

R C U 

M I L 

A S G 

M 

A G N 

U S V E S T 

I 

T H 

O 

N 

O 

R 

L A E T U 

S L O 

Q 

u 

O 

R 

H 

O C N A T 
REM 
A R I 
TAG 
ANT 
C D U 

I 

O 

N 

I 

INTRODUCTION. 

In the popular books of to-day, dealing with the origin of 
religion, we find it stated that they originated from fear. It is 
described how our ancestors, while in a savage state, and being 
unacquainted with the revelations made by modern science, saw 
the lighning flash, and heard the noise of thunder and watched 
other natural phenomena, whose origin they could not explain, and 
how they came to the logical conclusion that such things must 
be produced by some extra cosmic supernatural and intellectual 
power, which might some day take a notion to destroy their 
possessions; and which must, therefore, be flattered and pro- 
pitiated so that it might be kept in a good humour. 

Such a scientific explanation of the origin of religion and the 
belief in God may satisfy the speculating brain of the rationalist 
and thinker, who, living entirely in the moonshine of his own 
imagination has no perception for the light of that knowledge 
which belongs to the spirit of man ; but such a theory will not 
satisfy the heart in which there is still a spark of the divine life, 
and which, therefore, feels the presence of an universal and higher 
power that is not a product of nature, but superior to her. A religion 
having such a merely logical origin would be truly the religion of 

1 2 Introduction, 

the devil, because it would be thoroughly false. It would be merely 
a system teaching how God may be cheated and eternal justice be 
made to come to nought. True religion has nothing to do with 
fear nor with logical speculation, and its true origin rests in the 
fundamental relation which the human soul bears to the divine 
origin of the spiritual power by which she is inhabited. It is the 
divine spirit in man itself, recognising intuitively and through the 
instrumentality of man the presence of the universal spirit in 
nature. This divine power is truly " occult," because it cannot be 
perceived by any external means, neither can its existence be 
logically proved to those who are not capable to feel it ; it will for 
ever remain a mystery to the " Adam " of earth ; because it is 
divine and can therefore be intellectually known to man only 
when he has entered into a state of divinity. 

Nevertheless, it is a quality inherent in the nature of man that 
he wishes to know intellectually that whose presence he intui- 
tively feels, and there have, therefore, at all times been men curious 
to know the nature of God, and attempted to break by their 
intellectual efforts a hole through the veil that covers the sanctuary 
of the great mystery, so that they may peep through it, and 
gratify their curiosity. From the vagaries of such speculators, 
visionaries and pseudo-philosophers has originated a false system 
of theology, mysticism, and superstition, which is even to-day 
often regarded as being Occultism and Theosophy. 

The soul of man stands in the same relation to that spiritual 
power that fills the universe, as the flowers of the field to the 
light of the terrestrial sun. A plant deprived of life will sicken 
and die, and a soul in which the spirit of holiness does not exist 
will become degraded lower than the soul of the animals; 
because animals are not given to arguing ; they act according to 
the laws of their nature, while the possession of an intellect 
enables man to act unnaturally, and in opposition to divine law. 

But there have also been other men, who, by remaining 
natural and obedient to divine law, have grown into a state of 
spirituality superior to the merely intellectual state, and in the 
course of their interior unfoldment, their inner senses have be- 
come opened, so that they could not only intuitively feel, but also 
spiritually perceive this light of the spirit. Such men are the 
true Mystics, Rosicrucians, and Adepts, and with them the 
historian and antiquarian has nothing to do ; because they are 

Introduction. i J 

beyond his reach of investigation. A " History of Rosicrucians '' 
could, at best, be a history of certain persons who " were supposed 
to have been spiritually enlightened." It would have to remain 
for ever uncertain whether a person mentioned in such a " his- 
tory " had really been a Rosicrucian or not ; becaus'e that which 
constitutes a man a saint and a sage does not belong to this 
earth and cannot be examined by mortal men ; it is that part of 
man of which the Bible speaks when it is written, " We live 
upon the earth ; but our soul is in heaven." 

External investigation can only deal with external things; 
that whose existence depends on a form can deal only with 
forms; but all forms are merely fictitious to him* who recog- 
nises by the power of his spiritual perception the truth which the 
form represents. The whole of nature is an expression of truth ; 
but there are few who can realize the truth expressed in nature. 
We are all more or less caricatured images of the truth which 
we are originally intended to represent. As long as we have 
ourselves merely a fictitious existence, owing to the non-recogni- 
tion of the truth within our own selves, we merely know the 
caricature which we represent, but not our true, real self. 

Wisdom, as a principle, is inconceivable unless it becomes 
manifest in the wise, and only the wise are fc^pable to recognise 
it. A man without knowledge knows nothing. It is not man in 
his aspect as a being without any principle who can know any 
principle whatever ; it is always the principle itself that recog- 
nises itself in other forms. Thus, if a person wants to know the 
truth, the truth must be alive in him ; if there is no truth in him, 
he can perceive no truth, neither within himself nor in external 
nature. For ever the truth is crucified between two " thieves " 
called " superstition " and " scepticism," and if we see only one 
of the crucified thieves, we are liable to mistake him for the 
truth ; but the two forms of the thieves are distorted, or, to ex- 
press it more correctly, the truth is distorted in them. Only 
when we are capable to recognise the straight form of the 
Saviour hanging between the two distorted thieves, will we see the 
difference and know where to search for the Redeemer. 

For those in whom the truth has not yet become a living 
power, fictitious forms are necessary to show them the way, but 
the majority of the ignorant see only the fiction; there being no 
truth within themselves, there is nothing to perceive the truth in 

14 Introduction, 

the form. For this reason the " Secret Symbols of the Rosicru- 
cians "^ will for ever remain " secret " to all who have not the 
living truth within their own hearts, and they will not compre- 
hend them, in spite of all the explanations produced. These, 
however, in whom the truth struggles to become alive and who 
are striving not merely for the gratification of their curiosity, but 
who love the truth for its own sake and without any personal 
consideration, may be aided a great deal by the study of the 
books of the Rosicrucians and their secret symbols, in the same 
way as a traveller in a foreign country may be aided by those who 
have travelled there before him and know the way. They can 
indicate to him the road through the desert and the places where 
sweet water may be found, but they cannot carry him, he is to 
do the walking himself. 

Divine wisdom is not of man's making, neither is it invented 
by him. There is no other way to obtain it than by receiving it 
willingly within one's own heart. If it enters there, then will 
the storm of contending opinions subside, and the sea of thought 
be as clear as a mirror in which we may see the truth. Then 
will the truth itself become strong in ourselves, and we shall 
know God, not by reading a description of Him in books but in 
and through His own power, or, to express it in the words of 
the Bible, we shall attain knowledge of Him " by worshipping 
Him in Spirit and in Truth." 

Like the allegorical language of the Bible and other religious 
books, the Rosicrucian writings are utter nonsense and incom- 
prehensible, if taken in an external sense and applied from a 
material point of view. Merely external reasoning, far from 
being an aid in their understanding, is rather an obstacle in the 
way ; but to him who looks at them with the understanding that 
comes from the spirit, they are full of divine wisdom. 

The Rosicrucians say, " A person who knows Divine truth has 
attained the highest and desires nothing more ; for there can be 
nothing higher than the attainment of the truth. In comparison 
with this treasure, worldly possessions sink into insignificance : 
for he who possesses the highest has no desire for that which 
is low ; he who knows the reality does not care for illusions. 
Scientific and philosophical speculations i/i regard to what may 
possibly be true are useless to him who feels and perceives the 
truth ; he does not need to speculate about that which he already 

Introduction, 1 5 

sees and knows. He does not require great riches, for the wants 
of his physical form are few and simple, and moreover, by the 
action of the spirit within, radiating in an outward direction, the 
material principles composing his physical form become more 
and more sublimated and etherealized, and independent of the 
necessities of the material plane ; until at last, having stripped . 
off the last sheath of the gross and visible form, and having made 
that principle conscious which gives life within the visible inner 
body, he may live entirely in the latter, invisible to mortal eyes, 
independent of material conditions, an ethereal spirit surrounded ' 
by indescribable beauties, in possession of powers of whose exis- 
tence mortal man does not dream — an ethereal spirit, but never- 
theless a real and living man." (i.) 

And, again, the Rosicrucians say of him who has tasted of the 
living water of truth, the true " Elixir of Life " : — 

" Blessed is he who is above want and poverty, above disease 
and death, who cannot be touched by that which gives pain, 
who does not require another roof over his head than the sky, 
no other bed than the earth, no other nutriment than the air, 
and who is above all those wants for which mortals are 
craving." (2.) 

" God humiliates the vain and exalts the humble. He punishes 
the proud with contempt; but to the modest He sends His angels 
with consolation. He throws the evil disposed into a wilder- 
ness ; but to the kind-hearted He opens the portals of heaven." ( ^.) 

(i.) It will readily be perceived that all this refers to the '* Inner Man," 
and not to his mortal physical frame. It is neither the physical body with 
its external senses, nor the perishing mind of man which can know divine 
truth. It is only divine truth in man that can know iis own self. No man 
can attain true knowledge of any spiritual power, unless that power 
becomes alive in him and he identified v/ith it. Occultism is not a ques- 
tion of what one should know, nor of what one should do ; but of what 
one must be. If the inner man has become truly spiritual, not merely in 
his imagination, but in his will ; then his awakened spirit will penetrate 
even through the physical form and change its nature in the same sense as 
darkness is consumed by light. 

(2.) All this refers not to the man of terrestrial flesh ; but to him who 
has been regenerated in the life of the spirit. The elementary body of 
man is not above disease and death ; nor above that which gives pain. 
That body requires to be sheltered against the elements whereof it is 
made ; and needs terrestrial food ; but the man of the celestial kingdom 
is free. His home is as wide as his thoughts can reach, and his nutriment ' 
is the " Manna " from heaven. 

(3.) " God •' (according to Jacob Boehme) is the will of divine wisdom. 
He who rises up in his self-conceit will fall ; because he will be full of his 

1 6 Introduction. 

" Avoid the books of the Sophists ; they are full of errors ; 
for the foundation upon which their knowledge rests is their 
fancy. Enter the realm of the real, and divide with us the 
treasures which we possess. We invite you, not by our own 
choice, but by the power of the Divine Spirit whose servants we 
are." (4.) 

" What does the animal know about intellectual pleasures ? what 
does the Sophist know about the joys of the spirit ? Would it not 
be a precious thing if we could live and think and feel as if we 
had been living and thinking and feeling ever since the beginning 
of the world, and were to continue thus unto its end ? Would it 
not be delightful to know all the secrets of Nature and to read 
that book in which is recorded everything that has happened in 
the past, or which will exist in the future ? Would you not rejoice 
to possess the power to attract the highest instead of being at- 
tracted by that which is low, and to have pure spirits instead of 
animals assembling around you ?" (5.) 

Are such powers attainable by man ? It would be useless to 
attempt to prove it to those who have no desire to attain them ; 
and even if it were proved, what would it benefit those who are poor 
to prove to them that there are others in possession of treasures 
which for the former do not exist ? Can the existence of powers 
be proved to one who has no capacity for their perception or 
comprehension ? Even a miracle would prove nothing except that 
something unusual and unexplained had occurred. 

delusive knowledge, and the will of the Eternal cannot awaken divine 
wisdom in him. True humility does not consist in abject fear ; but in the 
highest sense of dignity, such as can be felt only by him who feels that 
God is in and with him. 

(4.) The " sophists " are those sceptical inquirers who diligently examine 
the external shell of the fruit that grows upon the tree of knowledge ; 
without knowing that there is a kernel withm the fruit. They persuade 
themselves that there is no kernel, and imagine that those who are capable 
to perceive by the power of the spirit the light that shines from 'the 
interior fountain, are dreamers ; while they themselves little know that 
their own life is merely a sleep and their fancied knowledge a dream. 

5.) The spirit of man is not of this world ; it belongs to eternity. There 
never was a time when the spirit of man was not ; even since the beginning 
ofcreation ; neither is its presence limited to this planet Earth. He who- 
succeeds in merging his consciousness with that of the divine spirit that 
overshadows his personality, and which is his own real self, will know his 
past forms of existence and see the future ; but the animal principles in 
man cannot partake of that state ; they die and enter again into the Chaos, 
the storehouse for the production of forms. 

Introduction^ \J 

The Fama Fraternitatis says : \^ The impossibility to reveal 
such secrets to those who. are not sufficieptly spiritually de- 
veloped to. receive them is the, cause that many misconceptions 
and prejudices have existed among the public in regard to the 
Rosicrucians. Grotesque and fabulous stories, whose origin can 
only be traced to the ignorance or malice of those who invented 
them, have been circulated and grown in intensity and absurdity 
as they travelled through the ranks of the gossippers. False- 
hoods cannot be eradicated without injuring the roots of the truth, 
and evil intentions grow in strength whenever they find resis- 
tance. It is not always useful to contradict the false statements 
made by the ignorant or wilful deceiver ; but what is the testi- 
mony of the blind worth when they speak of what they believe 
they have seen ? arid what value can be attached to the state- 
ments of the deaf when they describe what they believe they 
have heard ? What does the untruthful know of the truth, the 
godless of God, the foolish of wisdom, and the unbeliever of faith ? 
They may think that they are right, nevertheless they are wrong ; 
they may accuse others of harbouring illusions, while they live 
in illusions themselves. Envy, hate, jealousy, bigotry and super- 
stition are like coloured glasses, which cause him who looks 
through them to see nothing in its true aspect, but everything in 
coloured light." 

Thus it appears that the " Rosicrucians," in speaking oE their 
society, mean something very different from any terrestrial and 
external organization of persons calling themselves, for some 
reason or other, " Rosicrucians " ; but of a spiritual union, a 
harmony of divine and conspiritual, but, nevertheless, individual 
powers, such as the angels are supposed to be, and which. are 
not concerned in any history connected with the tomfooleries of 
external life. 

It is of that spiritual " association " of which they speak when 
they say : — 

** Our community has existed ever since the first day of 
creation, when God spoke the word, * Let there be light,' and it 
will continue to exist till the end of time. It is the society of 
the children of light, whose bodies are formed of light, and who 
live in the light for ever. In our school we are instructed by 
Divine wisdom, the heavenly bride, whose will is free, and who 
comes to him whom she selects. The mysteries which we know 

B 

i8 Introduction. 

embrace everything that can possibly be known in regard to God, 
Nature, and Man. Every sage that has ever existed has 
graduated in our school, in which he could have learned true 
wisdom. We have among our members such as do not inhabit 
this globe ; our disciples are distributed all over the universe. 
They all study one book, and follow only one method of studying 
it Our place of meeting is the temple of the Holy Spirit per- 
vading all nature, easily to be found by the Elect, but for ever 
hidden from the eyes of the vulgar. Our secrets cannot be sold 
for money ; but they are free to everyone who is capable to 
receive them. Our secrecy is not caused by an iinwillingness to 
j?ive; but by the incapacity to receive on the part' of those that 
ask for instruction. 

" There is only one eternal truth ; there is only one fountain 
of love. Love cannot be given, it must be born in the human 
^eart. Wherever the quickening takes place, we attend to the 
birth of divine love. We are in possession of a light that illu- 
mines the profoundest depths of the darkness and enables us to 
know the deepest of mysteries. We have a fire by which we 
are nourished and by which wonders may. be performed in 
nature. 

" Everything in this world is subject to our will, because our 
will is one and identical with the law ; nevertheless, our will is 
free and bound by no law. 

"Do you wish to become a member of our society ? If so, 
enter Within your own heart and hearken to the voice of the 
Silence. Seek for the Master within yourself, and listen to his 
instructions. Learn to kn-ew the Divinity that seeks to manifest 
itself within your soul. Throw away your imperfections and 
become perfect in God." 

THE HERMETIC PHILOSOPHY. 

Tria sunt mirabilia. Deus et Homo. Mather et Virgo. Triniis et Unus. 

There is only one eternal truth and consequently only 
one divine wisdom. If 'we wanted to trace the history of 
those Jn whom that wisdom became manifest back to their 
origin, we would have to step out of time and space and 
•enter into eternity. We would have to go back to the first 
days of creation, when " the spirit of God moved upon the 
waters," when the " first initiator" (i) instructed a race of 
semi-spiritual beings, constituted very differently from the 
human beings as we now know them upon this planet. The 
externally reasoning historian speaks of the wisdom- 
religion of the ages, as if it were some system invented by 
man and evolved from the gradually unfolding speculative 
power of the reasoning intellect ; but the Occultist knows 
that divine wisdom is eternal and always the same ; all that 
differs is the form of its manifestation, according to the 
capacity of the minds in which it seeks for expression. A 
history of the doctrines of the Rosicrucians might, therefore, 
begin with an exposition of the doctrine of the Vedas or the 
ancient books of Egypt ; but as these subjects have been 
extensively treated in H. P. Blavatsky*s "Secret Doctrine" 
and other books, we will merely see in what shape the her- 
metic philosophy presented itself to the minds of the 
neoplatonic philosophers, 

I. H. P. Blavatsky. "The Secret Doctrine." 

20 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

NEOPLATONISTS. 

Ammonius Saccas. 

This philosopher, who lived about* 190 a.d., was the 
founder of the Neoplatonic School, He was the son of 
Christian parents, and received a Christian education, but 
departed from this system and became a " philosopher." He 
gained a living by carrying burdens for pay, and yet he was 
one of the greatest philosophers of that age, and well 
acquainted with the Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy. His 
disciples were Erenmos, Ongenes^ Plotinus, and Longinus. 

Plotinus. 

Plotinus was born at Lykopolis in Egypt in the year 
205 A.D. He received his education at Alexandria. He 
took part in the war of the Emperor Gordianus in Persia, 
and went afterwards to Rome, where he established his 
school of philosophy. Here he obtained great renown and 
was respected by all. It is said that during the 26 years he 
lived in Rome he did not have a single enemy. Even the 
Emperor GallienuSy one of the greatest villains, respected and 
honoured him. 

Plotinus fell sick. As the physician Eustachius entered 
the room in which Platinus was dying, the latter exclaimed,, 
joyfully, " I am now going to unite the God that lives within 
myself with the God of the Universe." 

The mind of Plotinus was continually directed towards 
the Divine genius who accompanied him, — his own higher 
self. . He cared little about his physical body, and having 
been asked about the day when the latter was born, he re- 
fused to tell it, saying that such, a trifling matter was of too 
little jitiportance to waste any words about. 

Phenomenal existence was to him an error, a mistake, a low 
and undesirable condition, union with the Divine principle the 
highest aim of existence. He ate very little, took no meat, and 
lived a life of chastity. Porphyry^ another one of the disciple 

NeoplatonisiSu 2 1 

of Saccas, having become envious of the renown of Plotinus, 
attempted to use black magic against him, but without 
success ; and finally said that the soul of Plotinus was so 
strong that the most powerful Will directed against his soul 
could not penetrate it, and rebounded upon the sender. 
Plotinus, however, felt that magic influence, and expressed 
himself to that effect. 

According to the philosophy of Plotinus, God is the 
foundation of all things. There is only one Substance; 
Matter and Form are merely illusions, or shadows of the 
Spirit. God is eternal and everywhere. He is pure 
light, a Unity, the basis of all existence and thought. The 
Mind {yov^ is the image of this Unity ; it is, so to say, the 
image created by the Eternal by looking within itself. Thus 
the Mind is the product or creation of God, and yet God 
itself, and receiving its power from the latter. The Mind is 
the eternal activity of the Eternal. It is Light, primordial 
and unchangeable. Thought and every thinkable object 
exists within the mind. The world of Mind is the internal 
world ; the external, sensual world is the external expression 
of the former. Mind being a Unity, and all beings and objects 
consisting of Mind substance, all are fundamentally identical, 
but they differ in form. 

The activity by which the inner world of Mind came 
into existence is an interior power acting towards the centre. 
If an external world, corresponding to the inner world, is 
to come into existence, there must be another activity by 
which this internal activity is reversed, so as to be directed 
towards the periphery. This centrifugal activity is the Soulj 
a product or reaction of the centripetal activity of the Mind, 
in other words a product of Thought, entering within itself. 

There is a universal law according to which something 
real may produce something approaching its own state of 
perfection, but not quite as perfect as itself, and therefore 
the activity of the soul resembles the activity of the mind, 
but is not as perfect as the latter. 

The Soul, like the Mind, is living thought, but unlike 

22 In the Pronaos, of the Temple of Wisdom, 

the Mind, subject to continual change. The soul, un- 
like the mind, does not see things within her own self^ 
but sees them in the mind. The activity of the soul is 
directed outwardly, that of the mind inwardly ; the percep- 
tions of the soul are not so clear as those of the mind. The 
soul, like the mind, is a kind of light ; but while the light of 
the mind is self-luminous, that of the soul is a reflection of 
the former. 

According to the eternal laws of order and harmony- 
existing in the whole organism of Nature, all souls become 
after a certain time separated from the mind, or — to express 
it more correctly — the distance between the soul and the 
centre of mind increases, and they assume a more material 
state. Moving away from the Divine intelligence they enter 
the state of matter, they descend into matter. At each 
step towards materialization their forms become more 
dense and material, the souls in the air have an airy, those 
upon the earth an earthly material form. The activity of 
the soul produces other and secondary activities. Some of 
the latter have an upward tendency, others follow lower 
attractions. The upward-tending activities are Faith, 
Aspiration, Veneration, Sublimity, etc. ; the downward 
tendencies produce reasoning, speculations, sophistry, etc. ; 
the lowest activity of the soul is the purely vegetative 
power, sensation, assimilation, instinct, etc. 

The ultimate aim of the activity of Nature is the 
attainment of self-knowledge. Whatever Nature produces 
in a visible form, has also a supersensual form, giving shape 
to gross matter, so that the form may become an object for 
recognition. Nature is nothing but a living soiil, she is 
the product of a higher, interior activity, the Universal Mind. 
There is only one fundamental living power in Nature, the 
power to imagine; there is only one result of the activity of 
this ^ovftr J formation f or perception of form, and the same 
process which takes place in Nature, takes also place in 
the nature of man. 

All formations of matter are produced by the soul residing 

Neoplatonists, 23 

therein. All forms are filled with an interior life, even if not 
manifested outwardly. The Earth is like the wood of a tree, 
wherein life exists ; the stones resemble twigs which have 
been cut oft from the tree. In the stars, as well as in the 
Earth, is Divine Life and Reason. 

The sensual world and each existence therein has an 
interior soul, and this soul is all that is lasting about those 
forms; the external appearance is nothing more than an 
appearance. 

The World of Intelligence f is an unchangeable living Unity 
wherein there is no separation by space or. change in time. 
In that world exists everything that tSy but there is neither 
production nor destruction, neither past nor future 
It is not in space, and requires no space. If we say 
the world of intelligence is everywhere, we mean to express 
the idea that it is in its own being, and, therefore, within 
itself. 

The world of Intelligence is the world of Spirit. There is 
a supreme Intelligence, wherein are germinally (potentially) 
contained all objects and all intellects, and there are as many 
individual intellects as can possibly be contained in that 
world of intelligence. The same may be said about the SouL 
There is a supreme Over-Soul, and as many individual souls 
as can be contained therein ; and the latter stand in the same 
relationship to the former as a species to the one class to 
which it belongs. There are different kinds of species in 
a class, yet all originate in the latter. Each species has a 
character of its own. Likewise, in the intellectual world 
there must be some certain qualities to produce souls of 
various kinds, and the souls must be in possession of various 
degrees of thought-power, else they would all be identical in 
every detail. 

There is nothing absolutely without Reason in Nature^ 
although the manifestations of the principle differ vastly in 
the various forms. Even animals, which seem to be 
unreasonable, possess a reason which guides their instincts. 
Everything that exists has its origin in Reason, and there 

24 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdonu 

can be nothing absolutely unreasonable in Nature ; but there 
are innumerable modes in which Reason becomes manifest, 
because these manifestations are modified by external and 
internal conditions and circumstances. The inner, spiritual 
man is far more reasonable than the external one. In the ex- 
ternal world Reason manifests itself as observation, logic 
and speculation ; but in the world of intelligence Reason is 
manifest in direct perception of the truth. 

The aim of the internal action of reason is to produce an 
objective form. As differentiation proceeds and the various 
powers unfold, they continually lose some of their attributes, 
and the ultimate products are less perfect than the original 
power; but the circumstances in which they are placed 
give rise to the origin of new attributes, and thus a step is 
made towards rising again into a higher state. 

Thus the world of intelligence is a radiation from the 
fundamental original centre, and the world which we perceive 
with our senses is a product of the world of intelligence. 
The state of imperfection and mutability of all things in the 
external world is caused by their remoteness from the great 
centre. The Universe is a product of three funda- 
mental principles of existence; it is a great living being 
or organism, in which all its constituent parts are intimately 
connected together, and no part in that universe can act 
without causing a certain reaction in all other, even distant 
parts ; because throughout the whole there is only one soul, 
whose activity, manifesting itself in all parts, constitutes the 
organism of the whole. All parts are connected together 
by that universal power which constitutes the One Life in the 
universe. All souls lead, so to say, amphibious existences. 
Sometimes they are attracted more to the sensual plane and 
become interwoven with the latter ; at other times they follow 
the attraction of Reason, from whence they originated, and 
may become united with it. The soul ultimately becomes divided ^ 
the higher elements rise to the higher, planes, the lower 
ones sink still lower when they are no more held up by 
their connection with the higher ones. Whenever the 

Neopldtonists. 2$ 

incarnation of a human being takes place, the soul furnishes 
the mortal body with some of her own substance, but 
she does not, as a whole, belong to the body; and 
only that part of the soul which has become thoroughly 
amalgamated with the body takes part in the pains, and 
pleasures of the latter. Man's evil desires come only from 
that part of his soul, which is thus mixed with the body, and, 
therefore, the evil consequences of man's evil actions befall 
merely the animal man — that is to say, his living animal 
principle — but not the real man or the spirit, connected with 
the higher elements of the soul. The more the soul is 
attracted to the vulgar and low, the more grossly material 
will the organism with which she clothes herself become. 
After death the gross substances must be purified or 
destroyed, while the pure elements, rise up to the 
source from whence they came, until the time for a new 
incarnation in a form of flesh has arriVed'-v This process is 
repeated until the soul has attained sufficient knowledge to 
become inaccessible to the attraction of that whieh is4ow. In 
this sense man's terrestrial existence may well be looked 
upon as being a punishment for harbouring evil desires and 
inclinations. Intellectual labour is an activity belonging to a 
lower state of existence, and is necessary because the 
original faculty of the soul of directly perceiving the truth 
has been lost. If the soul desires to obtain this faculty again, 
she must free herself from all intellectual conceptions, and 
penetrate into the formless. If she desires to reach up to 
the original inconceivable fountain of all, she must leave 
her own conceptions behind, she must become free from all 
sensual perceptions and intellectual speculations, free of 
thought and speech, and live in a state of spiritual 
contemplation. ; That which is beyond intellectual conception 
can be seen, but can neither be conceived nor described in 
words. Seeing is better than believing, knowledge is better 
than logic ; spiritual knowledge is one, but human science 
is a multiplicity, and has nothing to do with the eternal 
Unity, from which all things take their origin. 

26 In the Pronaos^ of the Temple of Wisdom^ 

It is of the utmost importance that men should be 
instructed about their own nature, their origin, and their ulti- 
mate destiny ; because an intellectual person is not inclined to 
undertake a labour, unless he is convinced about its useful- 
ness. Spiritual perception is a power, which cannot be 
imparted, but which must be gained by efEort. 

If a person does not know that such a power exists, or if 
he cannot realize its usefulness, he will make no efforts to 
attain that state, his mind will remain without illumination, 
and he will not be able to see the truth. He may 
feel the existence of the truth, like a man may feel 
love for an unknown ideal, of which he does not know 
whether or not it exists ; but he whose mind is illumined 
sees the object of his love, the light which illumines the 
world. This light is present everywhere. But it exists 
relatively only for those who are able to see, perceive, feel, 
and embrace it, by reason of their own similarity to it. To 
make the matter still more comprehensible, let us say that 
if the soul throws off her impediments and enters that state 
again in which she originated from the Eternal, then will 
she be able to see and feel the Eternal. If, after having 
received these instructions, rf person is too indolent to 
follow them, he will have no one to blame but himself if he 
remains in darkness. Let all, therefore, try to tear 
themselves loose from that which is low and sensual, and 
become united with the supreme power of God. 

If you desire to find the Supreme, you must free your 
thoughts of all impressions coming from the external world, 
purify your mind of all figures, forms, and shapes. 

God is present in all, even in those who do not recognise 
Him ; but men flee from God, they step out of Him, or, to 
speak more correctly, out of themselves. They cannot 
grasp Him before whom they are thus fleeing, and, having 
lost themselves, they hunt after other gods. But if the 
soul progresses on the road to perfection, begins to realize 
her own higher state of existence, to know that the fountain 
of eternal life is within herself, and that she, therefore, has 

Ncoplatonists, • ■ ■■ ' 27 

no need to hunt after external things, but can find all that is 
desirable in the divine element within herself ; if she begins 
to understand that in" that Gbd within is her whole life and 
being, and that she must flee from the realm of illusions to 
live and exist in Him, then will the time come when she will be 
able to see Him, and to see herself as an ethereal beings 
illumined by a super-terrestrial light. She will see herself 
even as the pure Divine Light itself, as a God, radiant in 
beauty, but becoming dark again as her light is rendered 
heavy if it approaches the shadows of the material plane. 

Why does not the soul remain in that state of light ? 
Merely because she has not yet freed herself fully from the 
attractions of matter. If she has become entirely free of 
these attractions, she will remain in that light, and know 
that she is one with it. In this state there is no perceiver 
and no object of perception, there is merely perception, and 
the soul is that which she perceives. She is, for the time 
being, identified with the object of her perception, and^ 
therefore, this state is something beyond the intellectual 
comprehension of man. 

Having been united and identical with it, the soul carries 
its image within herself when she returns to herself. She 
then knows that during the time of her union with the 
Eternal she was the Eternal itself, and there was no 
difference between herself and the former. In herself there 
was no motion, no sensation, no desire after anything else^ 
. neither was there thought nor conception. She was exalted 
and resting in her own being, she was, so to say, rest itself^ 
in a state surpassing all conceptions of beauty or virtue. A 
soul entering into this sublime state, in which there is no 
form and no image, cannot be supposed to enter anything 
illusive. A soul which sinks into illusions degrades herself^ 
and enters the region of evil and darkness ; but the exalted 
soul enters into herself ; she is then neither in a state of 
being nor of non-being, but in one which is inconceivable 
and above all being* 

28 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

MaLCHUS PORPHYRIUa* 

This philosopher was a disciple of Phtinus, and was born 
in Batanea, in Syria, in the year 233 a.d. He died at 
Rome in the year 304 a.d. He says that only one single 
time during his life did he succeed in obtaining his union 
with God, while his teacher, Plotinus, wsLsfour times blessed 
in this manner. 

Porphyry says, in regard to the Soul : — The embodied 
soul is like a traveller who has lived a long time among 
foreign nations, and has, therefore, not only forgotten 
the costumes of his own country, but also adopted those of 
the foreigners. When such a traveller returns from his 
voyage, and desires to be welcomed by his friends and 
relatives, he attempts to lay off his foreign manners, and to 
return again to his former way of acting and thinking. 
Likewise the soul, while banished from her celestial home, 
and being forced to inhabit a physical form, acquires certain 
habits from the latter, and if she desires to return to her 
former state, she must lay aside all she has adopted from 
her terrestrial form. She must try to put off not merely the 
gross .physical mask in which she is dressed, but also her 
more interior envelopes, so that she may enter, so to say, in 
a state of nudity into the realm of bliss. 

There are two poisonous sources from which man drinks 
oblivion of his former condition, and which cause him to 
become forgetful of his future destiny, namely, sensual 
pain and sensual pleasure. By the action of these two, but 
especially by the action of the latter, desires and passions are 
created, and these attract the soul to matter and become the 
cause of her corporification. Thus the soul is, so to say nailed 
to the body^ and the ethereal vehicle of the soul is rendered heavy 
and dense. We should avoid everything which may excite 
sensuality, because wherever sensuality is active, reason 
and pure intelligence cease their activity. ' We should, 
therefore, never eat for the mere pleasure of eating, but only 
eat as much as is necessary to nourish the body. Super- 

Neoplatonists, 29 

fluous, and especially animal food, strengthens the bonds 
which bind the soul to matter, and withdraw her from the 
Divinity and from divine things. The wise, being a priest of 
God, should seek to remain free of all impurities while he is 
in the temple of Nature, and he should never so far forget his 
dignity as to approach the Source of all Life while he himself 
constitutes a grave for the dead bodies of animals. He 
should select for his nutriment only the pure gifts of his 
terrestrial mother. If we could avoid all kind of food, we 
should become still more spiritual. 

In regard to the difference existing between corporeal and 
incorporeal things. Porphyry says : — " The Incorporeal 
. governs the Corporeal, and is, therefore, present everywhere, 
although not as space, but in power. The corporeal 
existence of things cannot hinder the Incorporeal from 
being present to such things as it desires to enter into 
relation with. The Soul has therefore the power to extend her 
activity to any locahty she may desire. She is a power 
which has no limits, and each part of her, being independent 
of special conditions, can be present everywhere, provided 
she is pure and unadulterated with matter. Things do not 
act upon each other merely by the contact of their corporeal 
forms, but also at a distance, provided they have a soul, 
because the higher elements of the soul are everywhere,, 
and cannot be enclosed in a body, like an animal in a cage,, 
or a liquid in a bottle. The universal soul, being essentially 
one and identical with the infinite supreme Spirit, may, by 
the infinite power of the latter, discover or produce every- 
thing, and an individual soul may do the same thing if she is 
purified and free from the body." 

"The realm of the soul, being semi-material, has its 
nhabitants possessing semi-material (astral) forms. Some 
of them are good, others evil ; some are kindly disposed 
towards manj^^ others are malicious. Both classes have 
ethereal but changeable bodies ; the good ones are masters 
of their bodies and desires, the evil ones are governed by the 
desires of their bodies. They are all powers for good or 

30 In the Pronaos of the TempU of Wisdom, 

for evil, divine, animal, or diabolic invisible influences 
creating, by their interior activity, passions, desires, vices, 
and virtues in the soiils of beings. The more evil they are, 
xhe more do their forms approach the corporeal state. They 
then live on the exhalations of matter ; they induce men to 
murder and to kill animals, they enjoy the vapours arising 
from the victims, and grow fat by absorbing the ethereal 
substances of the dying. They are, therefore, always ready 
to incite men to wars and crimes, and they collect in great 
crowds in places where men or animals are killed." 

Porphyry ridicules the idea that gods, being wiser, more 
powerful, and superior to man, could be coaxed, persuaded 
or forced to do the will of man or conform to his desires. 
He repudiates the theory that clairvoyance, prophecy, etc., 
were the results of the inspiration by external gods, but says 
that they are a function of the Divine Spirit within man ; and 
that the exercise of this function becomes possible when the 
soul is put into that condition which is necessary to exercise 
it. '' The consciousness of man may be centred within or 
beyond his physical form ; and according to conditions a 
man may be, so to say, out of himself or within himself, or 
in a state in which he is neither wholly without nor within, 
but enjoys both states at once." He also states that there 
are many invisible beings, which may take all possible forms 
and appear as gods, as men, or as demons, that they are 
fond of lying and masquerading, and of pretending to be the 
souls of departed men. 

It is said that Porphyry was several times during his 
prayers levitated into the air, even to the height of ten yards 
or more, and that on such occasions his body appeared to be 
surrounded by a golden light. " THe gods are everywhere, 
and he whose soul is filled with such a divine influence to 
the exclusion of lower influences is, for the time being, the 
god which that influence represents, possessing his attributes 
and ideas. The nature of the union of the soul with God 
■cannot be intellectually conceived or expressed in words; 
he who accomplishes it is identical with God, he is Divinity 

Neoplaiottists, 3 1 

itself, and there is no difference between him and the latter. 
The gods are not called down to us by our prayers ; but 
Ave rise up to them by our own holy aspirations and efforts ; 
we are connected with them by the all-embracing power of 
love." 

Jamblichus, 

This philosopher was a disciple of Porphyry, and died 
about 333 A.D. He says : — 

" If the soul rises up to the gods, she becomes god-like and 
able to know the above and the below ; she then obtains the 
power to heal diseases, to make useful inventions, to institute 
wise laws. Man has no intuitive power of his own; his 
intuition is the result of the connection existing between his 
soul and the Divine Spirit ; the stronger this union grows, 
the greater will be his intuition or spiritual knowledge. Not 
all the perceptions of the soul are of a divine character ; 
there are also many images which are the products of the 
lower activity of the soul in her mixture with material 
elements. Divine Nature, being the eternal fountain of Life, 
produces no deceptive images ; but if her activity is perverted, 
such deceptive images may appear. If the mind of man is 
illumined by the Divine Light, the ethereal vehicle of his 
soul becomes filled with light and shining." 

Proclus. 

Proclus lived at By zany ^ 412 — 485. He was a hermetic 
philosopher and mystic, having often prophetical visions and 
dreams. It is said that he had the spiritual power of 
producing rain by his " prayer " and of preventing earth- 
quakes. He was very pious and self-denying, and on some 
.occasions his head seemed to be surrounded by a glory of 
light. . . 

He says that the soul of nian consists of many coats ; 
some more dens^, and others of a more ethereal character, 
each one being a fundamental principle, changeable only in 
regard to its form. " The soul can only return to. her divine 

32 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

state after having been purified of her earthly desires. Her 
reason and free will must take part in the sufferings 
belonging to the material state, until she attains knowledge 
and becomes free f rotn desires. For this purpose she clothes 
herself at certain periods in a physical form (reincarnates as 
a human being), until she has laid oft her desires. The 
more the soul frees herself fiom her gross external coats 
(principles) the higher can she rise." 

HiEROCLES. 

This philosopher says : — " The intelligent soul-substance 
received from the Demiurgos (Logos) an inseparable 
immaterial body, and entered thus into being. She is, 
therefore, neither corporeal nor incorporeal, but comparable 
to the sun and the stars, which are the product of an 
immaterial substance. This soul-body, which human beings 
as well as " spirits " possess, is of a shining nature. 
The vehicle of the soul is contained within the material 
body of man; it breathes Life into the lifeless and 
soulless physical organism, and contains the harmony of the 
latter. The Life Principle of man is the inner being which 
produces the activity of Life in the organism. The inner 
man consists of an intelligent substance and an immaterial 
(transcenden tally material) body. The visible material form is 
the production and image of the interior man. The external 
form consists of the animal, unintellectual, gross-material 
body. By the process of purification of the gross-material and 
ethereal bodies, a separation of living substance and dead 
matter is effected^ and thus man may render himself capable 
of having intercourse with pure spirits. 

During the year 529, the imperial bigot Justinian closed 
the. schools of Philosophy at Athens^ and their last represen- 
tatives, IsodoruSy Damascius, and Simplicius went to Persia. 
They expected to find in the East freedom of thought, 
tolerance, and wisdom. It was said that Chosroes, the King 
of Persia, was a philosopher, and they hoped to obtain his 
protection. But they soon found that the philosophy of 

Neoplatonists, 33 

that King was very superficial, and that he was a cruel, 
passionate, and ignorant tyrant, varnished over with some 
superficial learning. Disappointed, they returned to Greece. 
This was the experience of the last of the Neoplatonic 
philosophers, such as were publicly known, and a .long 
obscuration of the sun of wisdom took place, until a ray of 
light broke again through the clouds during the 15 th 
century. 

34 ^« ihe Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

MEDIAEVAL PHILOSOPHERS. 

Centrum in Trigone Centri 

The external world ^is an image of the interior world. 
The astronomy of the visible starry sky is an external 
reproduction of astrological processes taking place in the 
invisible heavens, and the revolutions of the planets which 
are within the reach of observation by our physical senses, 
are symbols by means of which the action of spiritual powers 
existing in the universe are represented. As the earth has 
her seasons of heat and cold, according to her position which 
she occupies in regard to the sun, and as she approaches 
the sun at certain times and recedes at others, likewise 
there are regular periods at which the human mind seems 
to come nearer to the spiritual sun of divine wisdom, and 
there are other times when a period of darkness and ma- 
terialism exists. During the times of perihelion, receptive 
minds will find it easier to rise up in their thoughts to the 
fountain of eternal [truth; while during the aphelion it 
requires greater efforts to approach the divine luminary. 
During the time of the Middle Ages there appears such a 
perihelion to have taken place, and a wave of spirituality 
was passing over the world, illuminating the minds of those 
who were receptive for wisdom ; while in the minds of the 
vulgar it merely aroused the emotional element, causing 
among them an epidemic of superstition, which manifested 
itself on the external [^plane as the development of witch- 
craft and sorcery. There were many hermetic philosophers 
of great prominence living during those times. Foremast 

Mediceval Philosophers, 35 

6f all must be mentioned Theophrastus Paracelsus, of 
Hohenheim; Jacob Boehme, Cornelius Agrippa, Basilius 
Valentinus, Robert Fludd, and many others too numerous 
to be named. As the lives and the philosoph}^ of the two 
former ones have already been explicitly dealt with in my 
other books, I will select from the rest the writings of 
Cornelius Agrippa as a type of what was taught by those 
mediaeval philosophers. 

Magic, according to Cornelius Agrippa. 

Cornelius Agrippa of Nettesheim was born of a noble 
family at Coeln (Cologne) on September 14, in the year i486. 
He was a philosopher, physician, lawyer, theologian, 
soldier, and also a statesman. He studied the Occult 
Sciences, and is said to have been a good Alchemist. He 
also organized at Paris a secret society for the purpose of 
studying the secret sciences. He drew upon himself the 
hatred and malice of the clergy, whose evil practices he 
desired to reform, and he was consequently denounced as a 
black magician and sorcerer, and there are even to-day 
nearly as many fabulous stories circulating about him as there 
are in regard to the reputed black magician. Doctor Faustus, 
He was an open enemy of the Holy Inquisition, continually 
persecuted by the latter, and therefore he had to change his 
place of residence very often. While only twenty-four 
years of age he wrote his celebrated work, " Occulta 
Philosophia," which in his riper age he greatly improved. 
His study of the occult side of nature led him to realize the 
fact that the truth cannot be found in illusions, even if they 
belong to the supersensual plane of existence, and he 
therefore says in his book, " De Vanitate Scientiarum " : 
^' He who does not prophesy in the truth and power of God, 
but by means of daemons and evil spirits, errs. He who 
produces illusions by magic spells, exorcisms, citations, 
conjurations, philtres, and other daemoniacal methods 
deserves to be punished in hell *' 

36 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

Cornelius Agrippa made great effort to restore the true 
meaning of the term " Magic " : a term which means the 
exercise of spiritual functions which are in possession of the 
wise; but the ignorant even to this day use the term 
" Magic," when they want to talk about Sorcery and Villainy^ 
which is not wisdom, but the very thing opposed to it. In. 
regard to his book he says : " I have written it in such a 
manner that those who are wise will find therein all the 
information they desire ; but to the evil disposed and the 
sceptic the door to the mysterious realm will remain closed, 
no matter how hard they may struggle to enter it. If you 
possess the power of seeing with the eye of reason, the 
whole sublime magic science will appear before your sight,, 
and you will know the powers which Hermes, Zoroaster,, 
and Apollonius knew." 

" The Key to the highest and divine philosophy of the 
mysterious powers of nature is reason. The brighter the sun 
of reason shines, the more powerful will the intellect grow,, 
and the easier will it become for us to accomplish even the 
most wonderful things. But if the intellect is in the bonds 
of flesh, if it cannot overcome the errors received by 
inheritance and false education, it will be unable to penetrate 
into the divine mysteries of nature and God. He who 
wants to enter into the sanctuary must die. He must die 
to the world and to external sensual attractions, die to his 
animal instincts and desires. Not that by such a death the 
soul would become separated from the body ; but the soul 
must be able to step out of the latter. Therefore Paulus 
writes to the Colossians : ' You have died and your life is 
hidden with Christ in God ' ; and at another place he says t 
* I know a man (but whether he was in the body or out of 
the body I do not know, God knows it) he was exalted into 
the third heaven.' Such a death must he die who wishes to 
know God, and only few are privileged to do so." 

" Whatever we read about the irresistible powers 
of the Magic Art, of the wonderful sights of the 
Astrologers, etc., will be found to be fables and lies as 

MedicBVal Philosophers, 37 

soon as wb take those things in their external and literal 
meaning. Their external forms cover internal truths, and 
he who desires to see those truths must be in possession of 
the divine light of reason, which is in possession of very 
few. Therefore those who attempt to solve the problems 
of the divine secrets of nature by the reading of books will 
remain in the dark ; they are led away from the light of 
reason by the illusive glare of their erring intellect ; they 
are misguided by the tricks of external astral influences 
and by erroneous imaginations. They fall continually into 
error by seeking beyond their own selves that which exists 
within themselves. You must know that the great cause of 
all magic effects is not external to ourselves, but operating 
within ourselves, and this cause can produce all that the 
Magicians, Astrologers, Alchemists, or Necromancers ever 
produced. Within ourselves is the power which produces 
all wonderful things. 

Nos habitat^ non tartara^ sed nee sidera coeii 
Spiritus in nobis, qui vigeiy ilia facit 

" Magic Science embraces a knowledge of the most 
sublime and exalted truths, the deepest mysteries in 
nature, the knowledge of the nature of matter and energy, of 
the attributes and qualities of all things. By uniting the 
powers of nature and combining the lower with its corre- 
sponding higher counterpart the most surprising effects may 
be produced. This science is therefore the highest and 
most perfect of all ; she is a sacred and exalted philosophy 
the culminating point of all." 

Agrippa regards nature as being a trinity ; an elementary 
(corporeal) astral and spiritual world, and the lower principles 
are intimately connected with the higher ones, forming thus 
four more intermediary states ; that is to say, seven in all. 

The cause of all activity in the universe is the omnipresent 
principle of Life (being identical with the Will), a. function 
of the universal, spirit. This life principle causes the 
ethereal Soul to act upon the gross element of Matter. 

38 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

" The Spirit — the Primum mobile — is self-existent and is 
motion ; the body, or the element of matter, is in its essence 
without motion, and differs so much from the former that an 
intermediary substance is required by which the Spirit can 
be united with the body. This intermediary spiritual 
substance is the soul, or the fifth essence (quinta essentia) 
because it is not included in the four states of matter, which 
are called the four elements, but constitutes a fifth element, 
or a higher state of matter which is perceptible to the 
physical senses. This soul of the world is of the same 
form as the world ; because as the spirit in man acts upon 
all the members of his body by means of man's soul, likewise 
the universal spirit by means of the soul of the universe 
pervades and penetrates all parts of the latter. There is 
nothing in the world which does not contain a spark of this 
universal power ; but spirit is most active in those things 
or beings in whom the activity of soul is strongest. 

This astral spirit can be rendered very useful to us if we 
know how to separate it from the other elements, or if we 
use such things as contain an abundance of it. There are 
certain things in which this principle is not so deeply sunk 
into or so strongly amalgamated with the body as it is in 
others, and such things act powerfully and may produce 
quickly their counterparts. 

This is the great alchemical agent, and in it are contained 
all productive and generative powers. If this spirit is 
extracted from gold or silver and united with some other 
metal it transforms the latter into gold, respectively silver. 

There is such a great harmony and unity in nature that 
every superior power sends its rays through intermediary 
links down to the lowest, and the most inferior thing may 
rise up through the scale to the highest. Thus the lowest is 
connected with the highest comparable to a string of a musical 
instrument, which vibrates in its whole length if touched at 
one end. If the lower is acted on it reacts upon the higher^ 
and the highest corresponds to the lowest. 

A thing of very small size may produce a great effect (as 

Mediceval Philosophers. 39 

may be seen by the growth of a tree from a seed), but this 
cannot take place with an elementary quality (physical force). 
The hidden powers may accomplish a great deal, because they 
are the properties of the form to which they belong; but 
the elemetary (mechanical or physical) forces, being material, 
require a great deal of matter to* produce great effects upon 
matter. The powers belonging to the form are called occult 
powers, because their causes are hidden ; that is to say, even- 
the sharpest intellect cannot thoroughly conceive of their 
nature, and what the philosophers know about them they 
have learned rather by observation and experience, than by 
intellectual reasoning. 

God created man in His own image. The universe 
is the image of God and man is the image of nature. 
Man is therefore, so to say, the image of the image; 
in other words a MicrocosmoSy or little world. The world 
is a reasonable, living, and immortal being ; man is equally 
reasonable, but he is mortal, or at least divisible. Hermes 
Trismegistus says that the world is immortal, because no 
part of it is ever annihilated. Nothing is ever annihilated, 
and if " to die " means to be annihilated, then is " dying " a 
term without any reason for its existence ; because there is 
ao death in nature. If we say that a man dies, we do not 
mean to imply that anything of that man perishes; we 
only mean to say that his body and soul become separated 
from each other. The true image of God is His Word, 
Wisdom, Life, Light, and Truth ; they exist through Him, 
and the (spiritual) soul is their image. This is the reason 
why it is said that we (man in its primitive purity as a 
spiritual being) have been created in the image of God, and 
not in the image of the world or its creatures. God can 
neither be touched with the hand, nor be heard with the 
external ear, nor be seen with the external eye, and likewise 
the spirit of man can neither be seen, heard, or touched in 
this manner. God is infinite and cannot be overpowered by 
anything, and likewise is man's spirit (spiritual soul) free 
and can neither be forced nor limited. In God is contained 

40 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdant, 

the whole world and everything existing therein, and 
likewise in the will of man is contained every part of his 
body. Man being thus stamped and sealed in the image of 
God as His counterpart, necessarily clothed himself in a 
form, representing the true image of nature. He is therefore 
called the second or little world ; he contains everything 
contained in the great world, and there is nothing existing 
in the latter which is not also truly existing within the 
organism of man. In him are contained all the elements 
(principles), each principle according to its own qualities; 
in him is the ethereal astral body, the vehicle of his soul, 
corresponding to the firmament of the world; in him is the 
vegetative power, of plants, the principle of sensation, 
manifest in the animal kingdom, the divine spirit, divine 
reason, and the divine mind. All this is contained in man, 
united to a unity and belonging to him by divine right. 
Man is therefore called by the Bible " the whole creation," 
and in his. aspect as the Microcosm he contains not only all 
parts of the world, but also contains and comprehends the 
divinity itself. 

The natural Soul is the Medium by which the Spirit 
becomes united with the flesh and the body, thro igh which 
the latter lives and acts and exercises its functions. This 
Medium is intelligent, but also so to say corporeal ; or to 
express it perhaps more correctly, the soul takes part in the 
materiality of the physical body. This is the dootrine of all 
hermetic philosophers. Man consists of the higher, the 
intermediary, and the lower principles. The higher ones 
are called the illuminated spiritual soul, and Moses speaks 
of it figuratively as having been breathed by God into the 
nostrils of. man. The lowest is the animal soul (anima 
sensitiva). The apostle Paulus calls it the animal man. The 
intermediate part is the rational soul which connects the 
animal soul with the divine mind and takes part in the nature 
of the two extremes. This part, to become free, must 
be separated from the lower elements by the power of 
the Will of which the apostle says, that it is living and 

Mediaeval Philosophers, 41 

cutting like a sword. The divine principle never sins and 
never consents to sin; but the animal principle sinks 
continually lower in animal desires unless it is held up by the 
divine spirit. The highest part of ourselves is never subject 
to punishment, knows nothing of the sufferings of the lower 
principle ; but returns after being separated from the lower 
principles to its divine source ; but that part which is called 
the rational soul, and which being free, may choose between 
the higher or lower, will, if it continually clings to the 
highest, become united with God and immortal in him ; but 
if the intellectual principle clings to that which is evil, it will 
become ultimately evil, and grow to be a malicious demon. 

God is the centre of the world and enters the heart of 
man, like a sun-ray. As the spirit of God descends, it sur- 
rounds itself with an ethereal substance, forming the Astral 
body J the vehicle of the soul (the fiery chariot of the soul). 
From the centre of the heat the spirit radiates into all parts 
of the body and pervades all its members, combining its own 
vehicle with the natural heart of the body and with the 
soul substance generated within the heart. By means of 
the soul it mixes with and amalgamates with the fluids 
(the blood, nerve currents, etc.), and with all organs of 
the body. The soul is therefore equally near to all organs, 
although she radiates from one organ into another in the 
same sense as the heat of a fire is intimately connected with 
air and water, if it is carried from fire to water by means of 
the air. In this way we may form a conception of the pro- 
cess, by which the immortal spirit by means of its immortal 
ethereal vehicle may be enabled to adhere to and mix with a 
dense, mortal, material body. If by disease or otherwise the 
connection between different parts of the same organism is 
interrupted, the spirit returns again to the heart. If the life- 
principle leaves the heart, the spirit departs with the ethereal 
vehicle and the physical organism dies. 

The first Light in God is beyond intellectual conception, 
and can therefore not be called a conceivable light ; but as 
it enters the mind it becomes intellectual light and may be 

42 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom^ 

intellectually conceived. Entering into the soul it may not 
only be conceived, but also understood. It is incorporeal. 
When it enters into the ethereal vehicle it takes form, 
invisible to the physical senses ; but when it penetrates the 
elementary (physical) organism, it becomes also visible to the 
external perception. By this gradual progression of this 
divine Light from Spirit into dense Matter our spirit may 
obtain great power. It is possible that if the thoughts of the 
wise are directed with great intensity upon God, the divine 
light illuminates the mind and radiates its rays through all the 
parts of the dark and gross body, causing even the latter to 
become illuminated like a luminous star, and to change its 
attraction to the earth, so that it may be raised up into the 
air, and thus it has happened that even the physical bodies 
of men have been carried away to some distant locality. So 
great is the interior power of the spirit over the external 
body that the former may lift the latter up and take him to 
that place where man's thought travels or where he desires 
or dreams to be. 

Man's power to think increases in proportion as this 
ethereal and celestial power or light penetrates his mind, and 
strengthening his mental faculties, it may enable him to see 
and perceive that which he interiorly thinks, just as if it 
were objectively and eternal. Spirit being unity and 
independent of our ideas of space, and all men having 
therefore essentially the same spirit, the souls of men 
existing at places widely distant from each other may thus 
enter into communication and converse with each other 
exactly in the same manner as if they had met in their 
physical bodies. In this state man may perform a great 
many things in an exceedingly short period of time, so that 
it may seem to us as if he had required no time at all to 
perform it. But not everybody can do so; it can only be 
done by those whose imagination and power of thought is 
very strong. Such a man (an Adept) is able to comprehend 
and understand everything by the light of the universal 
power or guiding intelligence with which he is spiritually 
united. 

Mediosval Philosophers, 43 

But if imagination possesses such a power that it cannot be 
impeded or restrained by the obstacles presented by time or 
distance, if it can even communicate itself to the heavy 
physical body and carry the latter with it ; then it will be 
reasonable to believe that thought becomes still more power- 
ful if it becomes free and may follow its natural inclinations, 
instead of being held back by the attractions of the sensual 
plane. In each man there is such a power, which is the 
inherent property of his soul by right of the divine origin 
of the latter ; but this power is not equally developed in all 
men, but stronger in some, weaker in others, and according 
to the state of its development the possibility to use it 
differs in different individuals. 

By this power two persons being bodily far distant from 
each other may exchange their thoughts, or one may impress 
his thoughts upon another, and such a power may be used 
for good or for evil purposes. Weak-minded persons may 
thus be fascinated by stronger minds, or be made to fall in 
love with the person by whom they are thus fascinated. The 
instrument of fascination is the spirit, and the organ by which 
it eminently expresses itself is the eye. Thus the spirit of 
one person may enter the heart of another by way of the 
eyes, and kindle a fire therein which may burn and com- 
municate itself to the whole body. If two persons look into 
the eyes of each other, their spirits come in contact, and 
mix and amalgamate with each other. Thus love may 
be caused by a look in a moment of time, like a wound caused 
suddenly by an arrow. The spirit and the blood of a person 
thus affected then turn towards him who fascinated it, like 
the avenging spirit and the blood of a murdered person 
turns against the murderer. 

The passions of the soul which adhere to the imagination 
may, if they are sufficiently strong, not only produce changes 
in the organism to which they belong, but also be transferred 
upon another organism, and thus impressions may be made 
by the will of a person upon the elements and external things, 
and thus diseases of the soul or body may be caused or 

44 I^ ih^ Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

cured. The state of the soul is the principal cause of the 
condition df the external body. A strong, exalted soul, stimu- 
lated by a strong and active imagination, may not merely 
cause health or disease in her own organism, but also in that 
of others with which she comes in contact. Evil disposed 
persons may exert a very evil influence upon others by their 
look. The invisible forces emmanating from the soul through 
the eye are much more powerful, stronger, hotter, and more 
active than the emanations of the physical body. The 
soul-force of a person entering within the soul sphere of 
another acts therein not less strong than it would act if it had 
originated in the latter. By such means one man may exert 
an influence upon the mind and character of another. 

The spirit may accomplish a great deal by the power of 
Faith, This power is a firm confidence or conviction, based 
upon the knowledge that one can and will accomplish his 
purpose. It is a strong, unwavering attention which gives 
strength to the work, causing, so to say, an image in our 
mind of the power which is necessary to accomplish the 
work, and of the work which is to be accomplished in, by, 
and through ourselves. We must, therefore, in all magic 
operations, apply a strong will, a vivid imagination, a con- 
fident hope, and a firm faith ; all of which combined will assist 
in producing the desired result. 

It is well known that if a rich person has confidence and 
faith in his physician, he is more liable to be benefited by 
the latter than if he mistrusts him, and often the presence of 
the physician in whom the patient has faith benefits, the 
latter more than the remedies which he uses. The presence 
of a spiritually-minded physician who possesses a strong 
soul, and who desires to help the patient, is a power which 
is often sufficiently strong to change the pathological activity 
of the spul-elements of the patient (of which the physical 
processes taking place in the organism are merely the 
external expression), and thus to restore the patient. Every 
physician ought therefore be a magician in a certain 
sense. He ought not to doubt in the least that he will be 

Mediceval Philosophers. 45 

successful in. that which he attempts to accomplish. He 
ought not even to permit a th^^ght of the possibility of 
a failure to enter -his mind; because as a firm faith may 
accomplish wonderful things, likewise doubt disperses the 
active power of the operator and renders it ineffective. In 
such a case the spiritual activity vibrates, so to say, between 
two extremes : it lacks the projecting impulse to enter the 
physical organism of the patient, it becomes diffused in 
space and is lost. 

In this power of the spirit over the element of matter by 
jneans of the soul rests the power of certain signs, images^ 
formulas, incantations, words, etc., and many wonderful 
experiments may thus be produced. The activity of the 
spirit strengthens the soul ; by the will and imagination of 
the spirit the soul receives strength to act upon matter. 

There is a spiritual power residing in the soul of man 
which enables the latter to attract, influence, and change 
things. If the power of the soul mounts to a certain height 
she may overpower the elements which hold her in bonds ; 
for that which is above attracts and subjects that which is 
below f and the latter partakes of the changes of the former. 
Therefore, a man who has rendered himself capable to receive 
celestial gifts, by making use of the aspirations (functions) of 
his soul and employing natural things, may influence another 
being who is less spiritually strong, and force him to obey. 

He may cure another by the power of his will or cause 
him to be sick or kill him ; he may make him joyful or sad^ 
fill him with fear, admiration, respect, veneration, etc. 

The root from which all such effects spring is a strong 
and decided will supported by the spiritual influence coming 
from and through the heart. An opposing spiritual activity 
will, if the latter surpasses the former in strength^ 
neutralize or repulse it, or weaken its influence. 

If a man becomes subject to a fascination, it is not his 
intellectual principle, but his sensual (animal) soul which is 
thus affected. The intelligent and spiritual part in man 
cannot be thus magically influenced. If the organism of a 

46 In the Pronaos of the Temple of IVisdom, 

man is suffering it suffers according to its animal and 
terrestrial, and not in his spiritual or celestial aspect. The 
intelligent and spiritual part of man can merely know that 
such influences are acting upon the lower principles by a 
certain sensation which is communicated from the lower 
to the higher elements. Intelligent man feels the influence 
which is exercised by external conditions upon his animal 
constitution ; but he is not himself subject to their influences. 
Everything belonging to the above moves that which 
is next to it below according to its degree and order, not 
merely in the visible, but also in the invisible part of nature. 
Thus the Universal Soul moves the individual souls, the 
Mind acts upon the animal, and the animal upon the vege- 
tative principle. Each part of the world acts upon every 
other part, and each one is capable to be moved by another ; 
and upon each part of the lower world acts the higher world, 
according to the attributes and conditions of the former, just 
as one part of the animal organism acts upon another. 

There is an art, knoivn only to few, by which the purified 
and faithful (intellectual) soul of man may be instructed and 
illuminated, so as to be raised at once from the darkness of 
ignorance to the light of wisdom and knowledge. There is 
also an art, by which the knowledge gained by the impure 
and unfaithful may be taken away from their mind and 
memory and they thus be reduced to their former state of 
ignorance. 

Apuleius says that the human soul may be put into a state 
of sleep, so that she will forget her terrestrial condi- 
tions and turning her whole being towards her divine origin, 
she will become illuminated by the divine light, and not only 
be able to see the future and to prophesy it correctly, but 
also to receive certain spiritual powers. On such occasions 
the divine inspiration and illumination may be so great, as 
even to communicate itself to other persons near, and to in- 
fluence them in a similar manner. 

Persons in a state of receptivity or passivity may become 
mediums through which divine demons (influences) may be 

Mediceval Philosophers. 47 

attracted within the body of man and cause men to perform 
wonderful things. If the soul of such a person breaks 
away from the bonds of the body and surrenders herself to 
the power of imagination, she may become the habitation of 
demons of a lower order, which may enable her to perform 
extraordinary things. Thus we may see that a person who 
has never had any instructions in painting may suddenly 
exercise that art and produce an artistic work, etc., etc. If the 
soul enters entirely the intellectual sphere, she may become 
the habitation of another class of demons and obtain great 
knowledge in regard to human and external things, and man 
may thus become suddenly a great philosopher, physician, 
orator, etc., without having learned those things; but if 
the soul rises up entirely to the region of divinity, she may 
become the habitation of divine spiritual influences, and 
obtain a knowledge of divine mysteries. 

Only those who are pure-minded and spiritual can 
possess true magic powers. Thought is the supreme power 
in man, and pure spiritual thought is the miracle-worker 
within him. If the thought of man is bound to the flesh, 
deeply amalgamated with it and occupied with animal 
desires, it loses its power over the divine elements, and 
therefore among those who seek to exercise magic powers 
there are few who succeed. If we desire to become 
spiritually developed we must try to find out how we can 
free ourselves of our animal instincts and desires and 
become rid of our sensuality and passions, and we must, 
furthermore, attempt to rise up to a state of true spirituality. 
Without accomplishing these two propositions we will never 
rise up to that state which is necessary to obtain magic 
powers, which result from the spiritual elevation and dignity 
of man. 

We should therefore attempt to remove all external 
impediments which are in the way of our spiritual 
development and live m a state of purity. Our thoughts 
should be continually directed inwardly and within 
ourselves ; for within ourselves is the element of conscious- 

48 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

ncss, knowledge, and power. Nothing hinders us to develop 
and exercise our own powers, except our misconceptions, 
imaginations, and external desires. Therefore the divine 
influences will only come to him who liberates his soul of 
all such hindrances, carnal desires, prejudices, and halluci- 
nations. A diseased eye cannot bear to look at the light ; 
an impure soul is repulsed by the divine light of truth. 

Such a process of development and unfolding is not 
accomplished at once, but requires time and patience; a 
neophyte cannot immediately understand the mysteries of 
initiation when he enters the sacred precincts. The soul 
must be gradually accustomed to the light until the power 
of spiritual thought is unfolded, and the latter being, 
continually directed towards the divine light, becomes at last 
united with it. If the soul is perfectly purified and 
sanctified she becomes free in her movements ; she sees and 
recognizes the divine light and she instructs herself, while 
she seems to be instructed by another. In that state she 
requires no other admonition or instruction except her own 
thought, which is the head and guide of the soul. She is 
then no more subject to terrestrial conditions of time, but 
lives in the eternal, and for her to desire a thing is to 
possess it already. 

C. Agrippa here adds the following instructions, copied 
from Boethius : — 

" The guides on the road to perfection are Faith, Hope, and 
Charity, and the means to attain this object are Purity, Temperance, 
Self-control J Chastity, Tranquility of Mind, Contemplation, Adora- 
tion (Ecstasy), Aspiration, and Virtue J^ 

If the highest state of spiritual development is attained, 
the spirit, endowed with the highest spiritual activity of the 
soul, attracts the truth, and perceives and knows at once the 
conditions, causes, and effects of all external and internal, 
natural and divine things. It sees them within the eternal 
truth like in a mirror of Eternity. By this process Man, 
while he still remains in eternal nature, may know all that 
exists in the internal and external world, and see all things. 

Mediaeval Philosophers. 49 

not merely those which are, but also those which have been/ 
or which will exist in the future, and, moreover, by being 
united and identified with the divine power (The Logos), he 
obtains the power to change things by the power of his 
(spiritual) Word. Thus man being within nature may be 
above her and control her laws." 

Those who are able to read the works of Cornelius 
Agrippa by the light of internal reason, will see that a single 
page of his books contains more wisdom than whole libraries 
filled with the speculations and theories of our modern 
philosophers, and his name and doctrines will be remembered 
and admired when all the illusions and hallucinations of 
the latter will have sunk into the oblivion which they 
deserve. 

50 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

AMONG THE " ADEPTS." 

A BELIEF in the existence of persons endowed with 
abnormal or extraordinary psychic faculties or magical 
powers, by which they can produce wonderful effects, such 
as are not to be explained by the commonly accepted 
theories of external science, is nothing new. The Bible and 
the " Acta Sanctorum " are full of accounts of so-called 
" miracles/' a term which signifies something wonderful, 
but for all that not anything contrary to the laws of nature. 
Such " wonders " are performed by the power of the 
spiritually awakened will. The Yoga philosophy gives a 
specification of these powers, and describes how they may 
be acquired. 

To those powers belongs the art of making oneself invisible ; 
of leaving one's body at will and returning to it again ; of 
projecting one's soul to a distant place; of prolonging 
physical life for a long period of time ; of transforming base 
metals into pure gold by alchemical means ; of creating sub- 
jective illusions which appear to the spectators as objective 
realities, and of performing numerous other feats, such as 
belong to the department of Magic, white or black. 

There is sufficient evidence going to show that during the 
time of the Middle Ages there were numerous people exist- 
ing in whom such psychic faculties had been more or less 
developed. It was a time during which the imagination of 
the people as a whole was more active and more directed 
toward the supersensual and metaphysical aspect of the 
world. There was more of the true faith, and likewise more 
superstition to be found than at present, and faith as well 
as fear are active powers, capable to produce results on the 
astral plane. From the true faith, the result of spiritual 
knowledge, spring the powers of the Adept ; from fear and 
superstition, the phenomena of obsession and sorcery. 
Persons in possession of magic powers, and especially thos 

Among the ** Adepts " $1 

who were supposed to know the secrets of Alchemy, were 
called " Adepts," " Rosicrucians," or " Philosophers," and 
the greatest of them were supposed to belong to some 
secret and mysterious society, called " the Brotherhood of the 
Golden and Rosy Cross" 

If we allow a great deal of poetical liberty in the descrip- 
tions of the members of this fabulous order, charging it to 
the fruitful imagination of the writers living at the time of 
the " knights errant," nevertheless, there remains a con- 
siderable amount of historical evidence going to show that 
there were persons endowed with abnormal powers; 
although there is no evidence whatever that they were 
united among themselves by any external association or 
sect. Neither would such a farce ever be necessary among 
those whose internal senses were opened, and who would 
be drawn together by the ties of the spirit. Having the 
power of interior perception, they would surely not need any 
external passwords and signs. The true brothers of the 
Golden and Rosy Cross were and still are a spiritual society, 
and therefore the efforts made at that time of finding a real 
and living, indisputably true Rosicrucian, were as unavailing 
as was at a more recent period the effott made by a certain 
London society of proving the existence of real and living 
Adepts. 

The Rosicrucians have been celebrated in prose 
and in verse ; and their virtues have been extolled 
by some, while others have denounced them as 
impostors. Some writers describe them as beings of a 
superior character, possessed of apparently supernatural 
knowledge and powers, as men of noble appearance and 
exercising an invisible but irresistible influence over 
all with whom they come into contact. They describe 
them as having the power to read the hearts of men, and to 
cure the diseases of their bodies by wonderful medicines, 
or merely by the touch of their hands. They are loved by 
all and they love all ; but their hearts are invulnerable to 
sexual love. They never marry. They are sometimes 

2 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

described as being of fabulous age, and still appearing in 
the full vigour of manhood ; as being great travellers and 
speaking the language of each country where they 
temporarily reside, as fluently and correctly as if it were 
their own native tongue ; as possessing the power of render- 
ing themselves invisible, and again, as often appearing 
unexpectedly, when their presence is most urgently needed. 
They are possessed of immense treasures, and have the 
power to transmute base metals into gold, and yet they 
despise riches and are contented to live in poverty. They 
are the wisest of all men, and the knowledge of even the 
most learned cannot be compared with what they know. 
They do nothing whatever for the purpose of obtaining 
fame, for they are dead to ambition ; nevertheless their fame 
spreads wherever they appear. They are universally 
honoured, but they seek not for honour, and prefer to remain 
unnoticed. Palaces are at their disposal, but they prefer the 
hut of a beggar. They are not proud of their personal 
attributes, but it is the majesty of the divine principle 
manifesting itself in them, and shining even through the 
material envelope called the physical body, which sur- 
rounds them with an aura commanding the respect and 
veneration of all who approach. The glory of supermun- 
dane light which shines through their forms is so great that 
they may even appear luminous in darkness.* 

♦ Before us is a paper, printed in Leipzig, dated May 26th, 1761, which 
gives the latest news from Koln (Cologne). It says : •* The two prophets 
who have been imprisoned in this place are still keeping the attention of 
our citizens on the alert. The court has not yet decided what shall be 
done. It is useless to chain them, because they possess the wonderful 
power of bursting even the strongest chains, as it they were threads of 
linen, and they have done so in the presence of many. They can even in 
the darkest night see all objects in their prison, because there Is an un- 
earthly light shining around their heads and coming out of their eyes, which 
illuminates their surroundings. They seem to be young men, and yet 
they say that they were at Constantinople in the year 1453, at the time of 
Mohamed II. ; tney say that they were intimately acquainted with the 
last Christian emperor at that place. Constantine Palaeologus, and they 
are in possession of letters written by him and his wife and sister. They 
say that at the time when they were at Constantinople they were already 
over 300 years of age . They speak Persian and Chinese and other languages 
fluently ; they live on nothing but a little bread and water. They per- 

Among the ^^ Adepts'' 53 

The following is taken from a book entitled " Hermippus 
Redivivus^ which we will abbreviate as much as possible. 

The Sieur Paul Lucas^ who, by the order of Louis XIV., 
travelled through Greece and Africa in search of antiquities, 
says, " Being at Broussa, we went to a little mosque. We 
were introduced into a cloister, where we found four 
Dervishes, who invited us to their dinner. One of these, 
who said that he was of the country of the Usbeks (a Tartar 
tribe) appeared to me more learned than the rest ; and I verily 
believe he spoke all the languages of the world. After we had 
conversed for a time in the Turkish language, he asked me 
whether I could speak Latin, Spanish or Italian. We then 
spoke in Italian ; but he noticed by my accent that this was 
not my mother tongue, and when I told him that I was a 
native of France, he spoke to me in as good French as if he 
had been brought up at Paris. I asked him how long he had 
stayed in France, and he answered that he had never been 
there, but that he desired to visit that country. This man 
was so learned that, judging from his discourse, he seemed 
to have lived at least a century; but according to his 
external appearance he was not more than thirty years of age; 

" He told us that he was one of seven friends who had 
wandered all over the world with a view of perfecting their 
studies; that at parting they always appointed another 
meeting at the end of twenty years in a certain town, and 
that the first who came would wait for the rest. I perceived 
that Broussa was the place appointed for their present meet- 
ing. There were a few of them present already, and they 
seemed to converse with each other with a freedom which 
spoke of old, acquaintance rather than merely accidental 
meeting. We spoke of religion, natural philosophy, 
chemistry, alchemy and the Kabala. I told him that the 
latter, and especially the notion of the ' Philosopher's 

formed some wonderful cures in the neighbouring villages before they 
were arrested ; savage dogs and wild animals appear to treat them with 
reverence ; they seem to be well acquainted with the books written by the 
ancient philosophers, and talk about Pythagoras with great respect. We 
do not know what to think about these men. Etc., etc." 

54 1^^ the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

Stone/ were considered by modern savants as mere 
chimeras. He seemed to know all about ♦ it, and 
answered : ' The true sage hears all things without being^ 
scandalized at them ; but though he may have so much 
politeness as not to shock any ignorant person by his denial 
when they talk of such things ; yet, let me ask you whether 
you think that he is obliged to sink his understanding to a 
level with vulgar minds because they are not able to raise 
their thoughts to an altitude equal to his ? When I speak of 
a sage, I mean that kind of a man to whom alone the title 
" philosopher " properly belongs. He has no sort of tie to 
the world ; he sees all things die and revive without con- 
cern ; he has more riches in his power than the greatest of 
kings, but he tramples them under his feet, and this 
generous contempt sets him even in the midst of indigence 
above the power of events.' 

'* I said : ' With all these fine maxims, the sage dies as well 
as other people. What imports it, therefore, to me when I 
die, to have been either a fool or a philosopher, if wisdom 
has no prerogative over folly, and one is no more a shield 
against death than the other ? ' 

" ' Alas ! ' he answered, ' I see you are absolutely 
unacquainted with our sublime science, and have never 
known true philosophy. Learn from me, then, my 
friend, that such an one as I have described dies 
indeed, for death is a debt which Nature enacts, 
and from which therefore no man can be exempt; 
yet he dies not before his utmost time is fixed. But 
then you must observe that this period approaches near 
a thousand years, and to the end of that time a sage may 
live. He arrives at that end through the knowledge he has 
of the true medicine. Thus he is able to ward off whatever 
may impede the animal functions of his body or injure the 
temperature of his nature ; and is enabled to acquire the 
knowledge of whatever comes within the cognizance of man. 

" Aboriginal man knew the secrets of Nature by the use of 
his reason, but it was this same reason which blotted his 

Among the ^^ Adepts'' 55 

knowledge again from his mind, for having attained this 
kind of natural knowledge, he began to mingle with it his 
o>wn notions and ideas. This created a confusion which 
was the effect of a foolish curiosity, and he reduced thereby 
the work of the Creator to a state of imperfection ; and this 
is the error which the true sage attempts to redress. The 
other animals act only by their instinct, which they have 
preserved as they obtained it at first, and they live as long 
MOW as they did when they first came into existence. Man 
is a great deal more perfect than they ; but has he still pre- 
served that prerogative which he had in the beginning, or 
has he not lost long ago the glorious privilege of living a 
thousand years, which, with so much care, he should have 
studied to preserve ? This the true sages have accomplished, 
and that you may no more be led into mistakes, let me, 
assure you that this is what they call the Philosopher's Stone 
which is not a chimerical science, but a real thing. It is, 
however, known to a few only, and indeed ' it is impossible 
that it should be made known to the most of mankind, whom 
avarice or debauchery destroys, or whom an impetuous desire 
of life prematurely kills.' 

'* ' Surprised at all I heard, I said : ' Would you, then, 
persuade me that all who have possessed the Philosopher's 
Stone have likewise lived a thousand years ? ' * Without 
doubt,' answered he, gravely, ' for whenever a mortal is 
favoured with that blessing, it depends entirely on his own 
will whether he shall reach that age of a thousand years, as 
in his state of innocence the first man might have done.' 

" I took the liberty to mention the illustrious Flamel, who, 
I said, had possessed the Philosopher's Stone, but was now 
dead as far as I knew. As I mentioned that name, he 
smiled at my simplicity, and said with an air of mirth : ' Do 
you really believe Flamel is dead ? No, no, my friend, do noi 
deceive yourself, for Flamel is living still. It is not above 
three years ago since I left him and his wife in the Indies ^ 
and he is one of my best friends.' He was going to tell me 
how he made Flamel's acquaintance, but stopping himself, he 

56 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

said : ' That is little to the purpose. I will rather give you 
his true history with respect to which, in your country, I 
daresay, you are not very well acquainted.' 

''A little before the time of Flamel there was a 
Jew of our fraternity; but as through his whole life 
he had a most ardent affection for his family, he could 
not help desiring to see them after it once came to 
his knowledge that they were settled in France. We fore- 
saw the danger of his voyage, and did all we could to 
persuade him not to undertake that journey. We succeeded 
for a while in detaining him ; but at last the passion of see- 
ing his family grew so strong upon him that he went. At 
the time of his departure, he made us a solemn promise to 
return to us as soon as it was possible. He arrived at Paris, 
and found there his father's descendants in the highest 
esteem among the Jews. There was also a Rabbi, who 
was a true philosopher at heart, and who had long been in 
search of the great secret. Our friend did not hesitate to 
make himself known to his relatives, he entered into friendly 
relations with them, and gave them an abundance of light. 

" ' But as the matter requires a long time to prepare it, 
he put into writing the whole process, and, to convince his 
nephew that he had not told him falsehoods, he made the 
" projection " in his presence of some ninety pounds of base 
metal, and turned it into pure gold. The Rabbi, full of 
admiration, did all he could to persuade our brother to 
remain with him, but in vain ; for the latter had made up his 
mind not to break the promise to return to us. When the 
Jew found this out, he changed his affection into hatred, and 
his avarice stifling the admonitions of his conscience, he 
resolved to extinguish one of the lights of the universe. 
Dissembling his black design, he begged the sage to remain 
with him only for a few days. He then executed his 
execrable purpose of murdering our brother, and made 
himself master of his medicine. 

" ' Such horrible actions never remain very long 
unpunished. Some other crimes he had committed came to 

Among the ''Adepts:' 57 

light, the Jew was imprisoned, convicted, and burned 
alive. 

" ' Soon after this a persecution of the Jews began in France. 
Flamel, who was more reasonable than his enraged country- 
men, and whose honesty was known, became a friend of 
the Jews, and a Jewish merchant entrusted him with all his 
books and papers, among which were those of the criminal 
who had been burned alive, and also the book of our brother ; 
which had never been carefully examined by the merchant. 
When Flamel examined that book, his curiosity became 
aroused by certain figures contained therein, and he began 
to suspect that it contained great secrets. He got the first 
leaf, which was written in Hebrew translated, and from the 
little he learned from that, he became convinced that his 
suspicion was well founded ; but knowing also that great 
caution was necessary, he took the following steps : He 
went into Spain, and, as Jews were settled in many parts 
of that country, he applied in every place to which he came 
to the most learned, and engaged each of them to translate 
a leaf of the book. Having thus obtained a translation of 
the whole, he returned to France. When he came home, he 
undertook with his wife the prescribed labours, and in the 
progress of time they arrived at the secret, by which they 
acquired immense riches, which they employed in building 
public edifices, and in doing good to a great many people. 

" ' Fame is often accompanied by great dangers ; but a true 
sage knows how to extricate himself from all kind of perils. 
Flamel saw that he was in danger of being suspected to 
possess the Philosopher's Stone, a suspicion which might 
have caused the loss of his liberty, if not that of his life, and 
he thought of means to escape all danger. By his advice, his 
wife pretended to be dangerously sick, and when it was re- 
ported that she had died, she had already safely passed the 
frontier of Switzerland. They buried in her place a wooden 
image in one of the churches which he had founded. Some 
time aftei*wards he used the same stratagem for himself and 
joined his wife. You know that there could have been no 

58 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

great difficulty in doing this, since in every country, if a 
man has sufficient money, physicians and priests are always 
at his service, ready to say or do whatever he directs them. 
He moreover left a last will dnd testament, directing that a 
pyramid should be erected to his memory and that of his 
wife. Since that time both have led a philosophic life, resid- 
ing sometimes in one country and sometimes in another. 
This, depend upon my word, is the true history of Flamel 
and his wife.' " 

The well-known fact that the Adepts and alchemists 
of the middle ages were continually subject to persecutions^ 
to imprisonment, punishment, torture and death, is the cause 
that the names of only few of them became publicly known. 
One reputed alchemist was the Count de Saint Germain^. 
who lived in 1770 at the Court of France. He appeared 
to be about forty years of age ; some said he was ninety,, 
he himself gave his age as being 370 years. He possessed 
the art of making artificial diamonds and precious stones, 
he was clairvoyant, could read people's thoughts and fore- 
tell future events. He possessed an " album," in which 
many of the most celebrated persons of the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries had signed their names ; he was able to 
write with both hands at one and the same time, with each 
on different subjects. 

A somewhat similar character was the Count Cagliostro^ 
whose physical form was born in Italy and received the name 
Giuseppe Balsamo, The latter was incarcerated in the castle 
San Angelo at Rome^ and is believed to have died in one of 
its dungeons. The problem of Cagliastro will not be solved 
by our historians until they study the true nature of man 
in its normal and abnormal aspects, when they may, perhaps, 
discover the fact that two personalities may inhabit one 
physical organism, and that a man may, perhaps, be a Cagli- 
ostro at one time and a Balsamo at another.* 

* Whether or not the body of a person may be inhabited simultaneously 
or alternatively by two different individualities, may be a matter for doubt ; 
but the phenomena of obsession and hypnotism go to show that this is 
not impossible. Cagliostro said that he was born in the East, and it is 

Among the " Adepts:' Sq 

I have carefully read the proceedings of the trial of the 
renowned Count Cagliostro before the tribunal of the inquisi- 
tion in Rome, and I have found no proof whatever of his 
having been an impostor. To everyone acquainted with even 
the elementary teachings of occultism, the phenomena 
which occurred in his presence do not appear at all unex- 
plainable, or as having b«en the products of imposture ; but 
what appears wonderful is the illogical consequence and 
ignorance of the witnesses for the prosecution, who adrfiit 
the occurrence of phenomena in his presence, which could 
not have been produced by his tricks, while in the same 
breath they denounce him to be an impostor. 

To arts of this kind belongs that of making pure gold 
or silver artificially, of transforming base metals into nobler 
ones ; of preparing a Universal Panacea out of the principle 
of Life ; of curing all diseases ; of preparing a lamp which,, 
by the manner in which it burns, indicates the state of health 
of an absent friend, with whom it is sympathetically con- 
nected ; of producing a similar sympathetic or magnetic con- 
nection between a person and a jewel, a tree, or a mirror ; of 
producing a living miniature image of the world in a closed 
glass globe ; of causing the forms of vegetables or animals 
to reappear out of their ashes after they have been burnt ; 
of producing artificially man (Homunculi) without the 
assistance of a female organism ; of preparing a fluid, which 
rises and falls within the bottle where it is contained, 
according to the increasing or decreasing moon ; of preparing 
a glass wherein it will thunder, and lightning will appear,. 

certain that he had connections there ; nevertheless, it was proved that he 
was born in Italy, and that his name was Balsamo. This would, of 
course, convict him at once among the ignorant of his times and among 
our writers of encyclopaedias as being an impostor. Nevertheless, a more 
definite knowledge of the true constitution of man might explain the 
mystery. That which is the fundamental reality in man, is the will. The 
phenomena of so-called hypnotism show that the will of one person may 
oe made to act in another, and during the time that a persDn is obsessed 
by the will of another, he is also under the influence of the memory of the 
latter. Those acquainted with occult laws will not find it incredible that 
the person of Balsamo was influenced aid used by some eastern human 
spirit, whose name was Cagliostro, and that during such times Balsama 
believed himself to be, and actually v/as, Cagliostro. Modern spiritualism 
has a legion of similar facts. 

6o In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

whenever the same takes place in the air ; of producing an 
inextinguishable magic fire, an ever-burning lamp ; a magic 
mirror, where events can be seen taking place in any 
other part of the world ; a perpetuum mobile^ whose rotation 
is caused by the rotation of the earth ; a divining rod, for 
finding water or minerals, or whatever one wishes to find ; 
a magic ring, which warns the wearer of any approaching 
danger, and reveals to him many secrets ; of causing love 
or hate at will ; of making pearls, diamonds, or any other 
jewels, which cannot be distinguished from natural ones, or 
causing them to grow larger ; of obtaining power over the 
elemental spirits of Nature and causing them to render 
services; of causing the astral spectres of dead persons 
to appear and talk and answer questions, and many other 
similar feats, too numerous to mention. 

We call that wonderful which is not within our experience, 
and the causes of which we cannot explain ; we are daily 
surrounded by marvels, and witnessing the most marvellous 
phenomena, the causes of which we cannot explain ; but we 
do not look at them with a sceptical eye, nor are we at all 
surprised that they occur. On the contrary, we should be 
-extremely surprised if they once ceased to occur; this 
merely because we are accustomed to see such things every 
day. We are surrounded by phenomena of an occult and 
magic nature, and we live in a laboratory of alchemy. We 
see how out of a hard little stone — kernel or seed — a germ 
appears, and grows into a big tree, although we are sure that 
there was no such tree in the kernel ; and what would be 
still more astonishing if it were not of daily occun*ence, is 
that out of a certain kind of seed a certain species of plant 
only will grow, and no other. We see how out of an eg'g a 
living bird appears, and yet if we examine the same kind ol 
egg as long as it is fresh, and open it, we find therein 
nothing living, and nothing that resembles a bird. We also 
know that the parent bird does not put a bird into the egg 
after it is laid, for we may hatch out eggs by artificial heat, 
and thus produce birds out of the eggj and there is surely 

Among the ^^ Adepts r 6i 

no bird in the heat. We see how out of a vegetable 
substance animal substance can grow, for we feed our cattle 
on grass, hay, and corn, and yet we are certain that there is 
no flesh in the grass or corn. We see the ever-burning 
light of the sun spending its heat year after year. We 
know of nobody who supplies him with fuel, and yet it seems 
to have always the same temperature. We know that the 
globe whereon we live revolves and flies with tremendous 
velocity through space, and yet we do not feel it move, nor 
do we fall head foremost down in the abyss of space when 
at night it turns the dark side away from the sun ; we see 
that the storm blows down houses and trees, and yet that 
which does the damage is nothing but thin air; we see 
the body of water of our rivers and lakes, and if we 
attempt to step on its surface we sink ; but a few weeks or 
months afterwards we may try it again and find it as hard 
as rock, able to bear the weight of the skating crowd. 
There are a thousand other similar marvels in Nature, too 
numerous to mention. 

There are many stories told of these Adepts, and 
the wonderful things they sometimes performed; how,, 
in mid-winter, they caused beautiful flowers to grow 
out of the floor of a room, or produced a shower of roses- 
in places where no roses were to be found ; how some of 
them were seen simultaneously in two different places, 
speaking and acting in each; how they sometimes were 
attended and served by " supernatural " beings appearing in 
human forms ; how they were sometimes able to read the 
future, or see what was going on at a place hundreds of 
miles away from them; how they could speak languages 
which they had never studied ; knew the contents of books- 
which they had never read ; could swallow poison without 
being harmed; make themselves invisible and visible at 
will, etc., etc. But the most interesting parts of our 
research, and at the same time the most pertinent to our 
object in view, will be historical accounts referring to their 
ability to make pure gold in an artificial manner — or, to speak. 

62 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

more correctly, to transmute other metals into gold, and 
make gold grow. We shall therefore give a few abbreviated 
accounts of such authenticated facts : — 

I. The following account is taken from the acta of 
the judicial faculty of Leipzig, whose legal decision was 
given in August, 171 5. (Responsio Juridica Facultatis 
Juridicae Lipsiensis.) A few years ago a man arrived late 
in the evening at the residence of the Countess of 
Erhach^ the castle of. Tanketstein^ and asked to be per- 
mitted to enter it, and to hide there a few days, as he 
had accidentally killed a deer belonging to the Palatine of 
Palatia^ who was, therefore, pursuing him to take his life, 
and he asked to be protected. The Countess at first 
refused ; but when she saw the man she was so much 
impressed with his noble appearance that she consented, and 
the stranger was given a room, where he stayed for a few 
days. After that he asked for an interview with the 
Countess, and when admitted to her presence, he expressed 
his thanks for the protection given to him, and offered that, 
as a token of his gratitude, he would transmute her silver 
ware into gold. The Countess at first could not believe that 
such a thing was possible, but she at last consented to have 
an experiment made with a silver tankard, which the stranger 
melted and transmuted into gold. She thereupon sent this 
^old to the city and had it tested by a goldsmith, who found 
it to be gold of the purest kind. She then permitted the 
stranger to melt and transmute all her silver spoons, plates, 
dishes, etc., into gold, which he did, and finally he took his 
leave and went away, having received a comparatively small 
sum of money as a gift from the Countess. Soon after this 
event, the husband of the Countess, who seems to have been 
a spendthrift, and who had been away from home for 
several years, serving as an officer in some foreign country, 
returned, because he had heard that his wife had become 
suddenly rich. He claimed half of the gold for himself, but 
the Countess refused to acknowledge his claims. The case 
came, therefore, before the Court, and the husband supported 

Among the ^' Adepts P 63 

his claims by the fact that he was the lord of the territory 
{Dominus territorii) upon which the castle belonging to 
his wife was located, and that according to the laws of the 
country all treasures found upon that land were lawfully his. 
He therefore requested that the gold should be sold, and 
from the proceeds new silver ware should be bought for the 
Countess, and the surplus be given to him. The defendant 
claimed that artificially produced gold could not come under 
the consideration of a law referring to buried treasures, 
and that therefore the said law could not be applied in her 
case ; that, moreover, the silver had been transmuted into 
gold for her own benefit, and not for that of another, and 
she begged the Court to be permitted to remain in undis- 
turbed possession of it. The Court decided in her favour. 

2. Another authenticated case is that of an Adept by the 
name of Sehfeld^ who Hved in Rodaun^ a small place in the 
vicinity of Vienna. He made gold out of tin and spent it 
freely. The proprietor of the house where he resided, a 
man named Friedrich^ gained the confidence of the Adept, 
and told his family about the doings of Sehfeld. The con- 
sequence was that soon rumours and gossip began to spread. 
Sehfeld was accused of sorcery, and appealed for protection 
to the Austrian Emperor, saying that he was engaged in 
making certain chemical colours of which he possessed the 
secret. It is said that Sehfeld paid 30,000 florins into the 
Imperial Treasury to obtain this protection, which he 
enjoyed for several months. Friedrich and the members of 
his family often were present when Sehfeld made gold, and 
they say that after melting the tin, he sprinkled a small 
quantity of a red powder upon the molten mass, when the 
latter began to foam and exhibited all kinds of colours. 
After an hour or so it was allowed to cool, and all the tin 
was then transmuted into pure gold. One day Friedrich 
attempted to make the experiment himself. Having obtained 
some of the red powder from Sehfeld, he melted the tin 
while Sehfeld was absent, and sprinkled the powder upon 
it ; but the latter had no effect upon the tin and did not mix 

64 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

with it. After a while, Sehfeld entered the room where the 
experiment was made, and as he entered the mass began 
to foam and turned into gold. The security which he 
enjoyed did not last long, for after a few months new 
rumours were put into circulation, the envy, greed and 
jealousy of the neighbours were aroused, he was accused of 
practising unlawful sciences, and he was arrested at night 
and imprisoned in the fortress of Temeswar, where he 
remained over a year, sternly refusing to tell his secret, and 
saying that no amount of physical torture would be able to 
make him reveal it. The ' governor of the fortress of 
Temeswar, General Baron vqn Engelshofen, was so much 
charmed by the noble appearance and open character of 
Sehfeld, that he went to Vienna and spoke to the Emperor 
about Sehfeld, declaring his opinion that the latter was 
innocent. The Emperor soon afterwards, while hunting 
boars in a forest near Rodan, sent for Friedrich, and 
received from him a detailed account of his experiences with 
Sehfeld, and became convinced that the latter was not a 
villain ; but he would not believe that he was able to make 
gold, and expressed his doubts to that effect. Upon this^ 
Friedrich, who was an honest man, exclaimed, " Oh ! your 
Majesty, if at this moment God were to come down from 
heaven, and say, * Friedrich, you are mistaken ; Sehfeld 
cannot make gold ! ' I would answer him, ' Dear God, it is 
nevertheless true that he can make it, because I know it to 
be so.' " Upon this, the Emperor, struck with the sincerity of 
the man, ordered that Sehfeld should be permitted to go 
where he pleased, and make whatever experiments he 
chose; but that he should not leave Austria, and should 
always be accompanied by two trustworthy officers who 
should never permit him to go out of their sight. Two of 
the best and most trustworthy officers belonging to noble 
families were selected for that purpose. He made several 
little excursions in their company ; but not long afterwards 
Sehfeld and his two guards disappeared and never returned, 
nor has any trace of them ever been discovered. The 

Among the ** Adepts J* 65 

historian adds that it is not probable that those two rich and 
noble officers would have sacrificed their career and also 
their reputation by thus deserting without having a sufficient 
cause or inducement to do so. Researches made in the 
house of Friedrich seemed to indicate that Sehfeld prepared 
his red powder out of some sky-blue minerals, probably some 
sulphuret of copper. 

3. An apothecary at Halle made the acquaintance of a 
stranger, whom he found to be in possession of some 
chemical secrets. Having been invited to visit the stranger 
in his lodgings he went there, and after having talked about 
Alchemy, the claims of which the apothecary denied, the 
stranger showed him a certain red powder^ and offered to give 
some of it to the apothecary so that the latter could make an 
•experiment himself. With a very little spoon he took some 
of the powder out of the box wherein it was contained, but 
the apothecary objected that such a small quantity would 
not be sufficient to make the experiment. Upon this the 
stranger threw the powder back into the box, wiped the 
spoon, to which some of the powder adhered, on a piece of 
cotton, wrapped the cotton in a paper, and gave it to the 
apothecary, telling him that even this would be sufficient for 
that purpose. Having returned home, the apothecary took a 
big silver spoon, melted it in a crucible, and threw the 
cotton upon it. The molten metal began immediately to boil 
and to foam, and to exhibit thetnost beautiful colours. After 
a while he took the crucible from the fire and poured the 
metal into a mould. The next morning he examined it and 
found that it was the purest gold, and there were some 
ruby-red drops on the top, which seemed to have been the 
surplus of the red powder whjch the metal had not absorbed. 
The apothecary hurried immediately to the lodging of the 
Adept to tell him of his success ; but the latter had gone, 
and no one knew where he went. A sum of money, more 
than sufficient to pay for his lodging, was found upon the 
table in his room. The silver which the apothecary employed 
in this experiment weighed i^ ounces, and the gold which 
he 'gained weighed i \ ounces, which he sold to a goldsmith 

E 

(i6 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

for 36 thalets. The gain in weight was, therefore, 20 per 
cent., which maybe accounted for by the fact that the specific 
gravity of gold is greater than that of silver. Unfortunately^ 
the ruby-red pearls on the surface of the gold were lost 
during the excitement caused by the discovery that the mass 
was actual gold, else they might have been used to trans- 
mute a far greater quantity of silver into gold. 

4. During the reign of the Emperor Leopold^ a monk of 
the Order of St. Augustine, named Wenzel Seller^ found a 
certain red powder in his convent, which proved to be the 
" Red Lion " of the Alchemists. By means of this powder^ 
Seiler transformed a quantity of tin into gold in the presence 
of the Emperor and his Court. The Emperor ordered that 
certain medals were to be made of this artificially produced 
gold, and he divided them out among the noblemen of his 
Court. He also, as a reward, gave to that monk the title of 
Freiherr von Rhcinhurgy and appointed him as master of the 
Imperial mint in Bohemia. The medal, of which one is now 
in the family of Count Leopold Hoffmann^ in Brieg^ shows- 
upon the top the bust of the Emperor Leopold, with the 
following words: — ^^ Leopoldus Dei Gratia Romanorum 
Imperxtor semper Augustus Gemianice Huugarice et Bohemice 
RexP The reverse side is not stamped, but there is engraved 
t hereon a verse, saying : — 

Axis Wenzel Sellers Pulvers Macht 
Bin ich von Zinn zu Gold gemacht. 

5. The most indisputable proof (if appearances can 
prove anything) of the possibility of transmuting base 
metals into gold, may be seen by everyone who visits 
Vienna; it being a medal preserved in the Imperial treasury 
chamber, and it is stated that this medal, consisting originally 
of silver, has been partly transformed into gold, by 
alchemical means, by the same Wenzel Seiler who was 
afterwards made a knight by the Emperor Leopold I. and 
given the title Wenzeslaus Ritter von Reinburg. 

The medal is of oval shape; its long diameter is 37, and 
the short one 40 centimetre. Its specific gravity is 19*3^ 

Among the "Adepts." 

67 

68 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

and its weight 7,2CX)'4 grammes. Its value is estimated to 
correspond to 2,055 Austrian ducats. 

As indicated in the accompanying figure, about one-third 
of the upper part is silver, and the remaining part gold. 
The two incisions were made in 1883, for the purpose of 
examining the medal, to see whether it was pure or merely 
gilded. The examination was made on request of Professor 
A. Bauer, of Vienna. 

One side of the medal shows the portraits of the ancestors 
of the Emperor, up to King Pharamund, the other side has 
the following inscription : — 

Sacratissimo 

Potentissimo et invictissimo 

Romanorum imperatori 

Leopoldo I. 

Arcanorum naturae scrutatori curiosmo 

Genuinum hoc verae ac perfectae 

Metamorphoseos metallicae 

specimen 

pro exiguo anniversarii diei nominalis 

mnemosyno 

cum omnigenae prosperitatis voto 

humillima veneratione offert et dicat 

Joannes Wenzeslaos de Reinburg 

numini majestatique eius 

devotissimus 

anno Christi MDCLXXVII. die festo 

S. Leopoldi 

cognomine pii olim marchionis Austriae' 

nunc autem patron! augustissimae 

Domus austriacae 

Benignissimi. 

It seems, however, that there is nothing perfectly reliable 
in this world of illusions, and it is therefore necessary to 
state that Wenzel Seiler was afterwards regarded as an 
impostor, and sent back to his monastery. Later on, how- 
ever, the Emperor received him again into his favour, and 
even paid his numerous debts, the existence of which is 
quite incomprehensible if he actually had the power to 
make gold by alchemical means. 

The Rosicrucian '' Orders^ 69 

THE ROSICRUCIAN "ORDERS." 

Why is there so much perplexity about the mysterious 
order of the Rosicrucians ? Let us ask in return, Why is 
there so much perplexity about that mysterious being called 
" Man " ? The answer is that man is a spiritual being, 
inhabiting the spiritual world, which he has never entirely 
left ; while the terrestrial personality in which he manifests 
himself during his earthly life is an inhabitant of this planet. 
That which the historian and the scientist know about man 
is merely that which refers to his physical body ; while 
nothing is known to them about his real self. To imagine 
that such knowledge is true anthropology is like imagining 
that we know all about a man if we once see the coat which 
he wears. Likewise the true Rosicrucians, whether they still 
walk upon the earth in a visible form, or whether they 
inhabit the astral plane, are spiritual powers, such as are 
beyond the reach of examination of the externally reasoning 
historian or scientist. They are people who, as the Bible 
expresses it, " live upon the earth, but whose consciousness 
is in heaven." 

The vulgar sees only the external form, but not the spirit 
which is the true inhabitant of that form. To discern the 
latter, the power of spiritual discernment is required. The 
coat which a man wears does not make the man ; to pour 
water over a person does not make him a true Christian, and 

70 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

to have one's name entered into the register of some society 
calling itself '' Rosicrucian," does not endow one with the 
rosy and golden light of love and wisdom that comes from 
the unfoldment of the " Rose " within the centre of one's 
soul. 

But it is far easier to undergo some external ceremony 
than to die the mystic death which is required for the pur- 
pose of passing through the " Gates of Gold " ; it is easier 
to profess a creed than to acquire true knowledge ; and for 
this reason we find during the Middle Ages not less than at 
this present time many people who imagine that they could 
be made into Rosicrucians and Adepts, by joining some 
society dealing with mystical subjects. 

In the beginning of the 17th century Germany was over- 
run, not only by monks and nuns and religious fanatics of all 
kinds, but also by a great many impostors and adventurers. 
There were pretended Alchemists, Astrologers, Fortune- 
tellers, and there was a universal mania among the people to 
pry into the secrets of Nature, and to enrich themselves by 
alchemical processes, or, if need be, by the help of the devil. 
This epidemic of superstition and folly seemed to require 
a strong remedy, and as foolish people are not accessible to 
reasonable arguments, it occurred to some sharp-witted 
mind to try the more caustic remedy of sarcasm. There 
appeared in the year 16 14 two pamphlets, written by the 
same author, entitled, " Universal and General Reformation of 
the Whole Wide World/* and the ^^ Fama Fratemitatis ; or, 
Brotherhood of the Laudable Order of the R.C, (Rosicrucians), 
a message to the Governments, nobles, and scientists of 
Europe'* This book was out of print during the last century, 
and Frederic Nicolai, in Berlin, had it reprinted in the year 
1 78 1, falsifying, however, its date, inserting 1681 instead 
of the correct date, and " Regensburg " instead of '' Berlin." 
Another edition of the Fama Fratemitatis appeared at 
Frankfurt-on-Maine in the year 1827, and to this was added 
an additional part, entitled " Confessio** 

These books, soon after they first appeared, made a great 

The Rosicrucian ** Orders.^* 7 1 

impression upon the public mind, and were immediately 
translated into several languages. The Universal Reformation 
is a satirical work. Its most interesting contents are an 
account of the meeting of a supposed Congress for the purpose 
of reforming the world. The story is as follows : — At the 
time of the Emperor Justinian, Apollo takes a look at the 
world, and finds it to be full of vices and wickedness. He 
therefore makes up his mmd to call together a meeting of all 
the wise and virtuous men of the country to consult together 
how this evil might be remedied. Unfortunately, among all 
of them there is none to be found who is possessed of 
sufficient virtue and intelligence to give the desired advice. 
Apollo therefore assembles the seven ancient sages of 
Greece and three Romans, Marcus^ Cato^ and Seneca. A 
young Italian philosopher, by the name of Jacob Mazzonius, 
is appointed secretary. The congregation meets in the 
delphic Palatium ; and now follow the speeches which were 
held. The sages talk the most egregious nonsense. Thales, 
for instance, advises that a window should be inserted in the 
breast of every man, so that the people could look into his 
heart. Solon has become a communist, and wants to divide 
out all the public and private property, so that all should 
have equal parts. Bias proposes to prohibit all intercourse 
between the people, to destroy the bridges and to forbid 
using ships. Cato desires that God should be asked to send 
another deluge, to destroy the whole feminine sex and all 
males over 20 years of age; and to request Him to invent a 
new and better method of procreation. All the sages 
dispute and contradict each other, and finally it is resolved 
to cite the diseased century and make it come into court, 
so that the patient may be closely investigated. The 
century is brought in. It is an old man with a healthy- 
looking face, but having a weak voice. They examine him, 
and find that his face is painted, and a further investigation 
shows that not a single part of his body is without some 
disease. The savants then come to the conclusion that they 
cannot cure him ; but they do not want to adjourn without 

72 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

having it appear that they had done something very useful 
and important, so they impose a new tax upon cabbage, 
carrots and parsley. They publish the document with a 
great deal of swagger and self-praise, and the delighted 
people jubilate and applaud. " 

The meaning of this pamphlet, which was written 
for the purpose of throwing ridicule upon a certain class of 
people who wanted to improve the world at once and to 
show the absurdity and impossibility of such an undertaking, 
was plain enough, and it seems incredible that its purpose 
should have been misunderstood. That there were any 
people who took the matter seriously shows the extreme 
ignorance and want of judgment of the common people of 
those times, and forms an interesting episode for the 
student of history and intellectual evolution. The other 
pamphlet which accompanied the former is the celebrated 
Fama Frafemitatis, The Universal Reformation threw 
ridicule upon the self-constituted " world-reformers," and 
this second pamphlet now invites these would-be reformers 
to meet, and it, at the same time, gives them some useful hints 
as to what they might do to attain their object ; advising- 
them that the only true method for improving the world is to 
begin by improving themselves. This pamphlet being like 
the other one, a satire upon the would-be reformers and so- 
called Rosicrucians, might, for all that, have been written by 
a genuine Rosicrucian, for it contains true Rosicrucian 
principles, such as are advocated by the Adepts. It shows 
the insufficiency of the scientific and theological views of 
those times. It ridicules the imbecility of the pretended 
Alchemists, who imagined that by some chemical process they 
could transform lead into gold ; but in doing so it gives good 
advice, and under the mask of divulging the laws and objects 
of some mysterious Rosicrucian Society, it indicates certain 
rules and principles, which afterward formed the basis of an 
organised society of investigators in Occultism, who adopted 
the name Rosicrucians, 

Added to this, Fama Fratemitatis is the story of the 

The Rosicrucian ^^ Orders ^ 7 j 

" pious, spiritual, and highly-illuminated Father," Fr. R.C. 
Christian Rosencreutz, It is said that he was a German 
nobleman, who had been educated in a convent, and that 
long before the time of the Reformation he had made a 
pilgrimage to the Holy Land in company with another 
brother of this convent, and that while at Damascus they 
had been initiated by some learned Arabs into the mysteries 
of the secret science. After remaining three years at 
Damascus, they went to Fez, in Africa, and there they 
obtained still more knowledge of magic, and of the relations 
existing between the macrocosm and microcosm. After hav- 
ing also travelled in Spain, he returned to Germany, where 
he founded a kind of a convent called Sanctus Spirifus, and 
remained there writing his secret science and continuing his 
studies. He then accepted as his assistants, at first three,- 
and afterwards four more monks from the same convent in 
which he had been educated, and thus founded the first 
society of the Rosicrucians. They then laid down the 
results of their science in books, which are said to be still in 
existence, and in the hands of some Rosicrucians. It is 
then said that 120 years after his death, the entrance to his 
tomb was discovered. A staircase led into a subterranean 
vault, at the door of which was written. Post annos CXX. 
patebo. There was a light burning in the vault, which 
however, became extinct as soon as it was approached. The 
vault had seven sides and seven angles, each side being five 
feet wide and eight feet high. The upper part represented 
the firmament, the floor the earth, and they were laid out in 
triangles, while each side was divided into ten squares. In 
the middle was an altar, bearing a brass plate, upon which 
were engraved the letters, A. C. R. C, and the words. Hoc 
Universi Compendium vivus mihi Sepulchrum feci. In the 
midst were four figures surrounded by the words, Nequa- 
quam Vacuum. Legis Jugum. Lihertas Evangelii. Dei 
Gloria Intacta. Below the altar was found the body of 
RosencreuZy intact, and without any signs of putrefaction. In 
his hand was a book of parchment, with golden letters marked 

74 I^ ihe Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

on the cover with a T (Testamentum ?), and at the end was 
written, Ex Deo naximur. In Jesu morimur. Per Spiritunt 
Sanctum revivisctmus" There were signed the names of the 
brothers present at the funeral of the deceased. 

In the year 1615, a new edition- of these pamphlets 
4ippeared, to which was added another one, entitled Confessio; 
or, " the Confession of the Society and Brotherhood of the 
R. C. ; " giving great promises about future revelations, but 
ending with the advice to everybody that until these 
revelations were made the people should continue to believe 
in the Bible. 

All these pamphlets had — as will be shown farther on — 
one and the same author, and as the " General Reformation " 
was of an entirely satirical character and a pure invention, 
having no more foundation, in fact, than the Don Quixote de 
la Mancha of Cervantes^ there is no reason whatever why we 
should believe that the succeeding pamphlets should have 
been meant seriously, and that the story of the returned 
knight. Christian RosencreuZy should have been anything 
more than an allegory. Moreover, there is no indication of 
what became of the body of that knight after it was once 
discovered, nor that the temple of the Holy Ghost (Sanctus 
Spiritus) exists anywhere else but in the hearts of men. 

The whole object of these pamphlets seems to have been 
to present great truths to the ignorant, but to dish them up 
in a fictitious form, appealing to the curiosity of the people, 
^nd to the prevailing craving for a knowledge of the mysteries 
of Nature, which the majority of the people of these times 
wanted to know for the purpose of obtaining selfish and 
personal benefits. 

The beauty of the doctrines which shone through these 
satirical writings were so great and attractive that they 
'excited universal attention; but at the same time the 
-craving of the majority of the people for the mysterious was 
so great that it blinded their eyes, and rendered them 
incapable of perceiving the true object of the wTiter, which 
was to ridicule the pretensions of dogmatic science and 

The Rosicrucian ** Orders." 75 

theology, and to draw the people up to a higher conception 
of true Christianity. The belief in the existence of a real 
secret organization of Rosicrucians, possessed of the secret 
liow to make gold out of lead and iron, and of prolonging life 
by means of taking some fluid in the shape of a medicine, 
was universal; and quacks and pretenders of all kinds 
roamed over the country and helped to spread the super- 
stitions, often selling worthless compounds for fabulous prices 
as being the " Elixir of Life ; " while others wasted their 
fortunes and became poor in making vain efforts to transmute 
metals. 

A flood of writings appeared, some attacking and some 
defending the Rosicrucian Society, which was supposed to 
•exist, but of which no one knew anything. Some people, and 
even some of the well-informed ones, believed in the 
existence of such a society ; others denied it. But neither 
one class nor the other could bring any positive proofs for 
their beliefs. People are always willing to believe that 
which they desire to be true, and everyone wanted to be 
admitted as a member of that secret society, of which nobody 
was certain whether it existed at all ; and if anyone boasted 
of being a Rosicrucian, or succeeded in creating the 
impression that he was one, he awed the ignorant, and was 
regarded by them as a very favoured person, and in this way 
impostors and adventurers often succeeded in preying upon 
the pockets of the rich. 

Those who wanted to be taught magic and sorcery 
•desired that a society or school where they might learn such 
things should exist; and because they desired it they 
believed in its existence. If no genuine Rosicrucian could be 
found, one had to be invented. If the true Rosicrucian 
society was not to be had, imitations of what was believed 
to constitute a Rosicrucian society had to be organized. In 
this way numerous societies were formed, calling themselves 
'' Rosicrucians " ; and '^ Rosicrucianism" took various shapes. 

One of the most important publications, and which is 
calculated to throw light upon the mysterious subject of 

^6 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

Rosicrucianism which still perplexes the learned, is the 
Chymical Marriage of Christian RosencreutZy printed in 1616. 
This, again, was written to throw ridicule upon the vain and 
self-conceited dogmatists, scientists, and " gold-makers " of 
those times, while at the same time it contains high and 
exalted truths, disguised in an allegorical form, but easily to- 
be perceived by the practical Occultist, and by him only. It 
can easily be seen that the style and tendencies of this publi- 
cation have a great deal of resemblance to that of the Fa ma 
Fraternitatis, Now it has been ascertained beyond any doubt 
that the author of the " Chemical Marriage " was Johann Val- 
entin Andreae,'*' who wrote it while a young student in the 
years 1602 and 1603 i^ Ttlbingen. He acknowledges this 
in the history which he gives of his life, and he adds that he 
intended to give a true picture of the popular follies of 
that time. This renders it extremely probable that he was 
also the author of the '^ General Reformation, " of the Con- 
fession and of the story of Christian Rosencreutz, and this 
probability amounts to almost conviction if we take into 
consideration the discovery made afterwards, that the 
'^ General Reformation " is nothing else but a literal trans-^ 
lation of a part of a book from Boccalini Ragguagli di Parmaso, 
Andreae was a great admirer of that author, and he also 
adopted his style in his Mythologia Christiana; it is there- 
fore plain that he also made the above-named translation,, 
and added it to his " Kama Fraternitatis." Both writings,, 
in fact, form a complement to each other. In the " General 
Reformation " the political would-be-reformers are held up 
to ridicule, and in the " Kama " the mystical dreamers,, 
imaginary theosophists, pretended gold-makers, and sup- 
posed discoverers of the universal panacea are castigated. 
There can be no reasonable doubt that this was Andreae's 

* Dr. Johann Valentin Andreae was born Aug. 17, 1586, at Herrenberg, in 
Wurtemberg, and died an abbot of Adelsberg, at Stuttgart, June 27, 1654. 
He spoke several languages, was well versed in theology, mathematics, 
history, and the natural sciences. He was of a noble mind, anxious to- 
do good, and an original character;' Herder describes him as a rose among 
the thorns. 

The Rosicrucian '* Orders,*^ jy 

object, and, moreover, his intimate friend. Professor Besoldt, 
in Ttibingen, acknowledged it in saying that the character of 
both books was plain enough, and that it was very strange 
that so many intelligent people had been led by the nose to 
mistake their meaning. Andreae himself, without, however, 
acknowledging himself to be their author, expressed himself 
to the effect that the whole was a satire and a fable. In 
his " confession " he says : (Sc.) rtsisse semper Rosicrucianam 
Jahulum et curiositatis fraterculos futsse in sectatum\ and in 
his paper entitled '* Turns Babel y seu judiciorum de Frater- 
nitatae Rosaccae cruets chaosy^ he speaks still .more plainly 
upon this subject. It seems to have been his object in this 
latter publication to help those to become sober again who 
had become intoxicated b}r misunderstanding the former pub- 
lications, for he exclaims : " Listen, ye mortals ! In vain 
will ye wait for the arrival of that fraternity ; the comedy is 
over. TYiefama has played it in, the fama has played it 
out," etc., etc. Still there were many who were not satisfied 
with this explanation, and who believed that it had been 
Andreae's intention to cause by his fama^ a secret society of 
the scientists of his age to come into existence ; but Andreae 
was too wise to attempt such an absurdity and to apply to 
the most unreasonable persons of his age to form a reasonable 
society. 

The question why he should have selected the name 
'* Rosicrucian " for his imaginary society is not difficult to 
answer. The Cross and the Rose were favourite symbols 
among the Alchemists and Theosophists long before anything 
of a " Rosicrucian Society " was known. Moreover, in his 
own coat of arms, as in that of Luther, there was a cross 
and four roses, a circumstance which probably led him to 
select that name. 

There is, perhaps, very rarely a fable or work of fiction 
invented which is not based upon some fact, however 
disconnected such facts may be with the subject. A work, 
entitled Sphinx Rosceea^ printed in 1618, makes it appear 

t Andreae's autobiography. Weismann, hist. eccl. P. ii., p. 936. 

78 In the Pronaos of the Temph of Wisdom. 

very plausible that the writer of the Fama Fratemitatis^ in 
inventing the story of Christian Rosencreutz and his three 
brothers, whose number was afterwards increased by four 
more, had certain originals in his mind, which served as 
prototypes to construct his story. The author of that Sphinx 
says that the idea of forming such a society for the general 
reformation of mankind arose from the success of Luther's 
Reformation; that the knight, Christian Rosencreutz, was,, 
in reality, no other person than a certain Andreas von Caroh 
stadt^ an adventurer, who had travelled a great deal, but 
never been in Palestine. He made himself so obnoxious to 
the clergy of his time, whom he desired to reform, that they,, 
after his death, put the following Epitaph upon his grave : — 
Carolstaditis Pestis Ecclesiae venonissimay tandem a Diabolo 
occisiis est. This means : " Here lies Carols tadt, who was a 
poisonous plague to the Church until the devil killed him at 
last." The three supposed associates of Rosencreutz were the 
friends of Carolstadt, the reformer Zwingliy Oecolompadius^ 
and BiiccruSy and the four others, who were supposed to have 
been added afterwards, were probably Nicalaus PalarguSy 
Marcus Stuhner^ Martin CelliiriuSy and, finally, Thomas 
Munster^ all of which persons were more or less known on 
account of their desire to aid in reforming the Church. 

As the people became infatuated with the idea of becoming 
Rosicrucians, and no real society of Adepts could be found,, 
they organized Rosicrucian societies without any real 
Adepts, and thus a great many so-called Rosicrucian 
societies came into existence. There was one such society 
founded by Christian Rose in 1622, having head centres in 
the Hague, Amsterdam, Nuremberg, Mantua, Venice, Ham- 
burg, Dantzig and Erfurt. They used to dress in black, and 
wore at their meetings blue ribbons with a golden wreath 
and a rose. As a sign of recognition the brothers wore a 
black silk cord in the top button hole. This ornament was 
given to the neophytes after they had promised under oath 
to be strangled by such a cord rather than reveal the secrets 
which they were supposed to possess. They also had 

77?^ Rosicrucian " Orders^ 79- 

another sign, consisting of the '^ tonsure," such as is used to-- 
day by the Roman CathoHc clergy, meaning a small round 
shaven spot on the top of the head, originating probably 
from the custom of the Buddhist priests, who shave their 
whole head. Hence many of them wore a wig, in order not 
to be recognised as belonging to the brotherhood. They 
led a very quiet life, and were devout people. On all high 
festivals, very early at sunrise they would leave their resi- 
dence, and go out through the gate of the town facing the 
east. When another one of them appeared, or when they 
met at other places, one would say : Ave Frater I to which 
the other would answer, Rosae et Aureae; then the first one 
said CruciSy then both together said : Benedictus Dens Domi- 
nus nosteVy qui nobis dedit Signum ! They also had for the 
sake of legitimation a large document, to which the Impe-- 
rator affixed the great seal.''' 

There was another " Rosicrucian society," formed at Paris 
in the year 1660 by an apothecary named Jacob Rose. This 
society was dissolved in 1674, in consequence of the noto- 
rious case of wholesale poisoning by the ill-reputed Marquise 
de Brinvillier. 

Whether or not there ever were any real Adepts and 
genuine Alchemists among the members of these Rosicru- 
cian societies, we are, of course, not in a position to affirm,- 
We are satisfied to know that Adepts do exist and that 
Alchemy is a fact ; but whether they had anything to do 
with these orders we do not know, nor do we care about it,^ 
as it is now of no consequence whatever. All that we know 
for certain in regard to this matter is, that there existed at 
that time persons in possession of an extraordinary amount 
of occult knowledge, as is shown by the books they have 
left ; but whether these persons belonged or did not belong 
to any organized society, is absolutely useless to know. 

During the life of Theophrastus Paracelsus^ he was the 
intellectual centre to which Alchemists, Occultists, Mystics, 

♦ Extracted from the " Sphinx." Vol. I., No, i. 

•So In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

Reformers and Rosicrucians were attracted, but there is no 
indication that he was a member of any society of men 
calling themselves "Rosicrucians." There is, likewise, no 
indication that after the time of Paracelsus any organized 
society of true Adepts, calling themselves " Rosicrucian 
Society," ever existed. Some of the greatest minds of that 
age were engaged in occult research, and were naturally at- 
tracted together by the bonds of sympathy ; but however 
much they may have been united in the spirit (in the temple 
of the Holy Ghost), there is no indication that they had an 
organized society on the external plane, nor would any real 
Adepts need any other but spiritual signs of recognition. 

A book printed in 17 14, and written by Sinecrus Renatus^ 
contains the remarkable information that some years ago the 
Masters of the Rosicrucians had gone to India, and that none 
of them at present remained in Europe. This is not at 
all improbable; for the moral atmosphere of Europe is at 
the present time not very congenial for spiritual develop- 
ment, nor very inviting to those who, while progressing 
on the Path of Light, are reincarnating in physical 
forms. 

As all researches after a real Rosicrucian society con- 
sisting of genuine Adepts were naturally fruitless, the 
excitement caused by the Fama fratemitis gradually ceased, 
and there was not much said or written about them until 
between the years 1756 and 1768, when a new degree ojf 
Freemasonry came into existence, called the '^ Rosicrucian 
Knights," or the order of Rose-croix^ or the Knights of the 
Eagle and Pelican; but we should in vain search among 
these knights for any genuine Adept, or even for anyone 
possessed of occult knowledge or power ; for as our modern 
churches have lost the key to the mysteries which were 
once entrusted to their guardianship, and have degenerated 
into places for social gatherings and religious pastime, so 
our modern Masons have long ago lost the Word, and will 
not— find it again unless they dive below the surface of 
-external ceremonies and seek for it in their own hearts. 

The Rosicrucian ^^ Orders ^ 8 1 

The most important books written during the time of the 
Rosicrucian controversy were the following : — 

/. Books Written in Favour of the Rosicrucians: 
(Titles translated from the German.) 

Fanta Ftatemitatis^ or the discovery of the laudable Order 

of the Rosy Cross. — Anonym, ^ Frankfurt, 1615. 
Confessioy or Confession of the Fraternity of the Rosy 

Cross. — Anonym,, Frankfurt, 1615". 
Opinion regarding the laudable Order of the Rosy Cross, by 

AdamBruxius, M.D., 1616. 
Message to the Philosophical Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, 

by Valentin Tschirnessus, Goerlitz. 
Thesaurus Fidei, or warning to the novices of the Fraternity 

of the Rosy Cross, 16 19. 
Fons Gratiae, by Trenaeus Agnostus, C.W., 1619. 
Raptus PhilosophicuSy or Philosophical Revelations for the 

Fraternity of the R.C., 16 19, by Rhodophilus Stanso- 

phorus, 
Silentium Post Clamores, An apology resp. Defence, by 

R,M.F, 16 1 7. 
Frater Crucis Rosacae, or. What kind of people are the Rosi- 
crucians? By M,A,0,FIV., i6iy. 
Speculum Constantiae, Appeal to new members of the R.C. 

Society, by Trenaeus Agnostus, CIV., 161 8. 
Themis Aurea. The Laws and Regulations of the laudable 

Fraternity of the R.C, by Michael Maier, Imp, Cons. 

Com, Eq, Ex,, 161 8. 
Tintinabulum Sapnorum, or. The Discovery of the blessed 

Fraternity of the Order of the R.C, by Trenaeus 

Agnostus, CIV,, 161 9. 
Frater Non Frater, Admonitions to the disciples of the 

R.C., 1619. 
Prodromus Rhodo-Stauroticus, Directions for the practice 

of Alchemy, 1620. 

82 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

Colloquium Rhodo-Stauroticum. A discourse regarding the 

Fraternity of the R.C., 162 1. 
Rosencreutz Ch. Chemical Marriage, Anno 1459? (1781). 

//. Writings Inimical to the Rosicrucians, 

Benevolent Advice regarding the Fama and Confessio of the 
R.C., by And, Ubavius M,D,^ P,C,^ Sae, Theolog. and 
Philosoph,y 1 61 6. 

Sphinx Rosceea, Suspicions in regard to the mysteries of 
the R.C., by Christophorus Nigfinus Philomusus and 
TheologuSf 16 1 8, 

The New Arabian and Moorish Fraternity ^ by Eusebius 
Christianus, a carrier of the wooden cross. 

Speculum Ambitionis, or A Mirror for Ambition^ in which 
may be seen how the Devil has brought all sorts of new 
orders into existence. A refutation of the doctrines of 
that new sect, called Rosicrucians, by J oh, Hintner^ 
1620. 

Tomfoolery Discovered^ or. Christian Refutation of the so- 
called Brothers of the Rosy Cross, showing that these 
people are not of God, but of the Devil. A timely 
warning to all pious Christians. By Joh, Silvert Aegl, 
1617. 

The more important modern books on Rosicrucianism are : 
Semlet^s " Collections to the history of the Rosicrucians " ; 
Bouterwek^s ** Origin of the R.C. ; Murr, "The true origin 
of Rosicrucians and Freemasons " ; Buhle, " Origin and his- 
tory of the R C. " ; Nicolai, *' Remarks about the history of 
the Rosicrucians and Freemasons " ; Herder, " An article in 
the German Metcury of March, 1782, and reprinted in 
Herder's Philosophy and History,* vol. 15, p. 258 ; Arnold, 
" History of the churches and heretics," part ii., lib. xvii., 
cap. 18; Rossbach, "Joh. Valentin Andreae and his age," 
Berlin, 1 8 19. There are numerous books on Alchemy, 
Theosophy, and Occuk Science which have been written by 
people supposed to have been Rosicrucians ; but they give 

The Rosicrucian '' Orders^ 83 

no account of the history of the latter. The most prominent 
are the works of Theophrastus Paracelsus^ Jacob Boehme, 
Cornelius Agrippa of Nettesheim; Robert FludcPs " Summum 
Bonum " ; John Amdt, " Silentium Dei," and " The true 
Christendom"; Simon Studion^ "Naometria"; Trenaeus 
PhilaletheSf " Lumen de Lumina," and innumerable others, 
which may be drawn into this category ; but perhaps the 
most interesting of all is an illustrated work which is now 
out of print, and has become very rare, and which is entitled 
'' The Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians of the Sixteenth and 
Seventeenth Century"* and from which a great deal of informa- 
tion contained in this present volume is taken. 

* This book has been reprinted and published with the fac-similes of the 
plates by the *• Occult Publishing Company " of Boston, Mass. 

84 

In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

Vade retro satanas. Nunquam mihi suade vana. 
quae libas. Ipse venena bibas. 

Sunt mala 

PSEUDO-ROSICRUCIANS— IMPOSTORS AND 
FOOLS. 

The fool's paradise is the world of self-created illusions, without the 
recognition ot the underlying eternal truth. 

The Devil is God inverted. Falsehood is truth perverted. 
The spirit produces the form to be its true image ; but, for 
all that the form does not always represent the true 
qualities of the spirit. Thus the sun shines upon the 
earth, and his rays produce wholesome and poisonous 
growths, and the spirit of Christ for ever remains in His 
glory, even if a thousand of so-called " Christian " sects, 
misrepresent Him, so that His image can no more be 
recognised in them. Likewise the true Brothers of the 
Golden and Rosy Cross still exist, even if the name of 
their order has been misused by impostors and fools. 

The age at which the idea of Rosicrucian societies be- 
came popular was a time when orders of all kinds were 
flourishing. Monasteries, convents, and religious orders 
were the plagues of the country; in some places the 
Catholic clergy, in others the Protestant clergy, were, so ta 

Pseudo-Rosicrucians — Impostors and Fools. 85 

say, omnipotent. The work of the great Reformation had 
only begun its work, and free thought and free speech were 
little known. The Protestant clergy were not less intolerant 
than the Catholics who preceded them, and in some places 
the latter were still in possession of all the authority they 
possessed at the time of the Inquisition. 

In consequence of the power of the Church over the 
citizens of the country — a power which the former abused 
very freely — it became necessary to have secret societies 
and places where the members could secretly meet and 
exchange their opinions without being overheard by spies 
and traitors. Secret orders of all kinds were, therefore, 
existing in great numbers, and foremost of all were the 
Freemasons, an order which, on account of the strength of 
its principles, has continued to exist. At that time Masonry 
was not what it is now. A writer of those times, in a work 
published in 1666, informs us that it was neither a political 
nor a Christian institution, but a truly secret organization, 
which admitted such men as members who were anxious to 
obtain the priceless boon of liberty of conscience, and to 
avoid clerical prosecution. 

But the air of mystery which hung about the masonic 
lodges was also very attractive to all who were mystically 
inclined. Then, as now, strange rumours circulated about 
the doings of the Masons, wild stories were whispered about 
among the ignorant, which the clergy of those times, like 
their brothers of the present day, helped to start, circulate, 
and exaggerate. They were accused of practising black 
magic and sorcery, and some even accused them of being in 
league with devils. 

All these things served to attract to the masonic lodges 
not merely those who were desirous of freedom of speech, 
but also those who desired to learn forbidden secrets ; and, 
moreover, adventurers of all kinds sought to gain admittance 
and sometimes succeeded. Many of the masonic brothers 
attempted to study and practise alchemy; and there are 
some accounts proving that sometimes successful alchemical 

86 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

experiments were made in the lodges. But, generally 
speaking, then, as now, those who joined a lodge for the 
purpose of having some very important secrets revealed to 
them, were sadly disappointed, for besides the external 
ceremonies and forms, which they were sworn not to reveal, 
and which were of no further importance, they were informed 
of nothing which would have been worth revealing. They 
went from one degree to another, paying large sums for 
being admitted into higher degrees, and still no revelations 
were made, and all they learned on such occasions was 
some other form of ceremony, a knowledge of which was 
hardly worth the price they paid for it. 

It is, therefore, not surprising that when the Rosicrucian 
mania broke out, and when the most exaggerated accounts 
about the great powers of that order were fully believed, 
that the Masons opened their ranks to anyone who was 
supposed to be a Rosicrucian, and that if the latter succeeded 
in making the brothers believe that he was actually such a 
favoured person, he would at once gain a great deal of 
influence in the lodge. These circumstances opened the 
doors of the masonic lodges to a great many strolling 
adventurers, vagabonds, charlatans, and mountebanks ; and 
especially the Catholic as well as the Protestant " Jesuits *' 
were not slow to see their advantage, and to gain admission 
to the lodges under the disguise of Rosicrucians. 

They pretended to be in communication with certain 
unknown superiors, some grand patriarch of Jerusalem, or 
some invisible somebody, whose orders had to be obeyed 
without asking any questions, but whose names must not be 
revealed ; and to make such supposed orders more effective, 
.they produced letters and documents apparently coming 
from such superiors, but which they had written and sealed 
themselves. On some occasions they performed sleight- 
of-hand tricks, produced sham apparitions of ghosts and 
deceased persons, for the purpose of deluding the members 
of the lodge, and to make them believe in their supernatural 
powers. Thus they made Freemasonry their tool and used 

Pseudo-Rosicrucians — Impostors and Fools. 87 

the power which they gained for the advancement of their 
own interests. 

Volumes might be filled with amusing accounts of the 
doings of the pseudo-Rosicrucians ; but we have only room 
for a few examples, and shall, for that purpose, select those 
whose influence in history was of considerable importance. 

One of the adventurers, of whom it is still doubtful 
whether or not he possessed any occult powers, was the 
reputed Schroepfer^ a bankrupt inn-keeper of Leipzig. His 
only object seemed to be to make as much money as he 
could, and to spend it as fast as he made it. He assumed 
the name "von Steinbach," and pretended to be a French 
Colonel, and to have been appointed by the Duke of Orleans 
as secret ambassador, sent to reform masonry, and to 
establish a connection with the Jesuits, who were at that time 
driven away. These Jesuits, he said, were in possession of an 
enormous amount of treasure, which they had entrusted to 
his care ; but his intention was to use that money for the 
benefit of the country, and whoever wanted to obtain a share 
of it would have to come to confession and to better his life. 

It is almost incredible that any sane person should have 
believed such nonsense; nevertheless, when a prospect of 
obtaining money is held out, most people are ready to believe 
almost anything. Moreover, Schroepfer had a wonderful 
power of gaining the confidence of those who came near him, 
and he had some knowledge of chemistry, which gave him 
a scientific air, and so it happened that even some people 
of high social position believed in his assertions. 

To gain full power over his dupes, he deposited in a bank 
at Frankfurt a sealed package, to be returned to him 
whenever he desired it > this package was said to contain 
several millions in bank-notes, but which, as might have been 
supposed, contained nothing but brown paper. On the 
strength of that supposed deposit, which " could not then be 
touched," he borrowed large sums of money. He even 
gained the confidence of the Duke of Cairland, in whose 
presence he caused the apparition of the Chevalier de Saxe to 

88 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

appear in the palace. This scene is described by an eye- 
witness as follows : — " The large room wherein the ghost was 
to appear had the form of a theatre,. and had formerly been 
used for the purpose of giving private plays and operas. The 
spectators were sitting in a half-circle, and they received 
strict orders not to leave their seats under any circum- 
stances, nor to touch nor examine any of the apparatus for 
the conjuring process, else the most dread conseqences 
would follow. They had, furthermore, to swear that they 
would not reveal afterwards what they had seen. The Duke 
and his Minister, von Wurmb, and other dignitaries were 
present. Schroepfer appeared, nodded to the assembly, 
and walked in a haughty manner up to the platform. The 
Duke had desired to see the apparition of the Chevalier de 
Saxe, and Schroepfer consented. Suddenly all the candles 
in the rooiji went out at once, and every one present felt a 
feeling of horror creeping over him. At the same time a 
stupefying smoke of some incense which Schroepfer was 
burning filled the room. Gradually the platform grew more 
light, while the place for the spectators remained in darkness. 
A kind of bluish light shone upon the faces of the latter, 
which gave to every one of them a ghostly appearance. 
Gradually a cloud became visible in the background of the 
stage. At first it was only like a thin mist, but slowly it 
grew more solid. Gradually it assumed the outlines of a 
human form. The details of the figure became clearer, 
the face could be seen and recognised ; there was the living 
image of the Chevalier de Saxe. 

" The Duke, seeing his dead relative standing before him, 
broke out in an exclamation of horror. The apparition lifted 
its arm. Every one was terrified ; none dared to speak. 
There were deep sighs. 

" Then the ghost began to speak in a hollow voice, com- 
plaining that he had been disturbed in his sleep in the grave. 

" The Duke appeared to be near fainting ; but being a 
courageous man, he rose with an effort, and it seemed for a 
moment that his reason was to be victorious over superstition. 

Pseudo-Rostcrucians — Impostors and Fools, 89 

" Laying his hand on his sword, he exclaimed, ' Illusion of 
hell ! Go back to the place from whence you came ! ' 

" At that moment the sword dropped from his hand, as if 
he had been suddenly paralyzed. The apparition was gone 
and the room was dark. Suddenly, as quickly as they had 
been extinguished, the candles began to burn again, and we 
all saw the conjuror in his long habit of black velvet, looking 
still paler than usual, the sweat standing upon his forehead, 
resembling' a man who has just escaped some great danger. 
Having recovered, he turned to the Duke and reproached 
him. 

" ' Your Excellency,' said Schroepfer, ' may congratulate 
^rourself that we have not all been killed. Only the most 
powerful cpnjurations on my part could prevent the 
apparition from murdering us. It was the most terrible hour 
of my life.' 

" The Duke excused himself, and finally begged pardon, 
promising to be more obedient at some future occasion." 

^' There were a great many people of whom Schroepfer had 
borrowed money, sometimes even large sums, and they all 
grew impatient, and wanted to be paid. Schroepfer was 
forced to produce the package from the bank, and it was 
found to be worthless. But even that was not sufficient tp 
destroy the confidence of his dupes. They persuaded 
themselves that he was a high Rosicrucian Adept, who was 
only testing their faith. ^" Can we, in our ignorance," they 
said, " read the Master's heart and know his intentions ? 
Perhaps he is going to take away our earthly Mammon, 
and give us for it the imperishable philosopher's stone." 

" At last, however, the measure was full ; the creditors 
refused to be fed any longer on idle promises ; they wanted 
their money. So they selected a deputation from their midst, 
and sent them to Leipzig, where Schroepfer had gone to 
escape their importunity. When they entered his room he 
bade them welcome in a kind manner and full of assurance. 

" I have already been informed of your coming," he said, 
" and have been waiting for you." 

90 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

" Then," they answered, " you will also know that we have 
come for the purpose of obtaining a settlement of our 
financial affairs." 

'* What !" exclaimed Schroepfer, appearing to be astonished^ 
" do you doubt me ? " 

" >fot I," answered the one addressed ; " but some of my 
friends do." 

" And you, sir ? " asked Schroepfer, turning to another 
one and fixing his eyes upon him. 

The person addressed trembled, and began to stammer an 
excuse ; but Schroepfer, whose face assumed a triumphant 
smile, continued : — 

" Oh, you of little faith ! ye are worse than the doubting 
Thomas, more obstinate than Peter, who thrice denied his 
Master. I have opened before you the portals of the spirit 
world and made you see its inhabitants, and you still doubt 
my power. I wanted to lead you into the innermost 
sanctuary, and to make you richer than all the kings of this 
earth ; but you have not stood the test imposed upon you. 
Shame upon you ! Without faith and confidence no miracle 
can be performed. Doubt is the great sin of the world." 

" Mercy, great master ! " exclaimed one ; " do not 
punish the innocent with the guilty. I did not doubt." 

" I know it," answered Schroepfer ; " and for the sake of 
one just man, I will forgive the sins of all. The mammon 
after which your sinful heart hankers, you shall receive; 
what I promised will be done ; but it would have been better 
for you if you had chosen the hidden wisdom instead of 
possessions which perish." 

They then begged his pardon, and at last he became less 
stern and forgave them their doubts. He promised not only 
to unveil to them all the secrets of the true Rosicrucians, 
but he also appointed a certain day for the payment of his 
debt. 

The revelations about the secrets never came; but 
the day appointed for the payment of the debt arrived. In 
the evening preceding that eventful day, Schroepfer invited 

Pseudo-Rosicrucians — Impostors and Fools. 91 

all his creditors to his house. The supper which was served 
was excellent, the wine of the first quality. Schroepfer 
was in high spirits, more talkative than usual, and amused 
his guests by some clever sleight-of-hand tricks, attributing 
it, of course, all to the spirits. Midnight passed, and the 
guests prepared themselves to depart for their residences^ 
but the host objected. 

" I shall not let you go," he said, "you may all sleep here^ 
and in the morning, even before sunrise, I will show you 
something entirely new. Heretofore I have shown you dead 
people whom I have called back into life ; but this morning 
I will show you a living man whom you will believe to be 
dead." He then took up his glass filled with wine, and 
caused it to jingle by bringing it in contact with the glasses, 
held by the others, with each one successively. As he 
approached the last one, his glass broke into pieces. 

" What does this mean ? " . asked one. 

" The fate of mankind," answered Schroepfer. " The 
wine of life has escaped, the vessel broke to pieces ; I am 
fatigued enough to die." 

He fell asleep, and the guests followed his example,, 
sleeping in armchairs and on lounges as well as they could 
manage it. Early in the morning Schroepfer called to them 
to awake ; telling them that it was time to go. They all 
went together out of the town to an almost solitary place 
called the " Rosenthal." Schroepfer was silent, and 
appeared to be very serious. Having arrived at the place of 
destination, he ordered his companions to remain where he 
posted them. 

" Do not move," he said, " until 1 call you to help me to 
raise the buried treasure. I am now going into that grove> 
where you will soon see a wonderful apparition." 

With a satirical smile on his pale face he turned away and 
disappeared in the bushes. Soon a sound as of a pistol-shot 
sounded from there. They thought that it was perhaps 
fired by some hunter, and paid no further attention to \U 
They waited. One quarter of an hour after another passed 

•92 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

away, and nothing happened. They did not dare to leave 
their places, fearing to rouse the anger of the magician by 
their disobedience. The mist of the morning had turned 
into a fine rain, which made their position very uncomfort- 
able. They grew impatient, and consulted with each other 
what was to be done. While they were discussing the 
subject, some proposing to follow Shroepfer into the bushes, 
and others objecting, saying that by doing so they might 
interrupt his incantations, or at least give him a welcome 
-excuse for not obtaining the treasure, a stranger approached. 
His appearance was so sudden that it almost appeared 
miraculous. 

" I know," said the stranger, " for whom you are waiting. 
Schroepfer will not come ; he is dead." 

" You lie ! " exclaimed one of the company, being very 
indignant about this intrusion. 

Instead of answering, the stranger gave a certain secret 
sign which proved him to be one of the superiors of a high 
masonic order. All present bowed respectfully. 

" Follow me," he said, " and you will see that I told you 
the truth." 

They followed him into the thicket, and there they found 
the magician dead upon the sod. He held a pistol in his 
hand ; the ball had penetrated his heart. 

Thus perished a man who, although he was an impostor, 
may nevertheless have been in possession of some occult 
knowledge, but who had not strength enough to resist the 
temptations of the senses, and who misused his powers for 
the gratification of his personal self. 

Johann Christoph Woellner was the son of a Protestant 
clergyman, who resided near Spandau, and became preacher 
of the Evangelical community at Grossbehnitz, near Berlin. 
While in this position he succeeded in seducing the daughter 
of his patron, the General Itzenplitz, and the family at last 
consented to a marriage which they could not prevent. The 
affair was still more scandalous on account of the publicly 
known fact that Woellner made love to the mother of the 

Pseudo'Rosicrucians — Impostors and Fools, 95 

girl before he married the latter. By this marriage he 
acquired a considerable fortune. He was very much inclined 
to mysticism, and soon became one of the most active and 
prominent members of the Rosicrucians. His name in the 
lodge was Chrysophron^ and by the influence of his friends 
he obtained an influential position, which he used for the 
advancement of his own selfish interests, and finally he 
obtained a position at the Prussian Court. 

He appeared externally very modest and meek ; while at 
the same time his conceit and ambition were without limits,, 
and no means were too vile to him, if by them he could 
accomplish his purpose. His low forehead indicated a 
person of very little intelligence, but a great deal of cunnings 
His little eyes were continually looking downwards; his 
manners were those of a pious coxcomb. Sympathetic souls 
find each other, and he therefore became very intimate with 
Bischofswerder^ another pseudo-Rosicrucian, who was 
Minister of State and favourite of King Frederic William H. 
of Prussia, and he in company with his friend worked 
together for the destruction of the religious liberty of the 
people, as shall be described further on. 

Another of the same class was the psistor Johann August 
Starky an Evangelical preacher, but secretly a Catholic, and 
in league with the Jesuits. He was an extraordinary 
hypocrite. Still worse, but more ridiculous, was his disciple,, 
the pseudo-Rosicrucian Mayr^ a very eccentric character 
and a great fanatic. He was limping, bald-headed, squinted^ 
and of most unprepossessing appearance. A broad trunk,, 
with an immense hydrocephalic head rested upon thin, weak 
legs. He usually wore black pantaloons and vest, and an 
orange-coloured coat. While preaching, he shot with a 
pistol from the pulpit at a man who slept during the sermon^, 
and wounded him, exclaiming, " I will wake you up ! " He 
had all kinds of religions. In the morning he went to the 
Catholic mass, next he preached in the Protestant church,, 
then spent his afternoons in the Jewish synagogue or with the 
Mennonites, and in the evening he went to the masonic lodge^ 

94 I^ 'A^ Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

These were some of the types of the " Rosicnicians " which 
infested the masonic lodges of those times, and it is a marvel 
that they did not destroy masonry. Some of them were 
impostors, others were dupes, and not a few imposed upon 
their dupes, while at the same time they were the dupes of 
others. This confusion of incompatible elements, such as 
freethinkers, pietists, reasonable men, and superstitious fools, 
could not fail to bring on a separation within the lodges, 
and they naturally became divided into two parts, of which 
one represented progression and tolerance, the other one 
bigotry and superstition. Among the latter class was the 
•" Society of the Cross," who at their initiation had to take the 
following oath : " In the name of the crucified I swear to break 
all ties which bind me to my father, mother, brothers, sisters, 
wife, relatives, friends, sweethearts, king, benefactors, or 
to any other human being, whom I may have sworn to obey, 
so that I may belong entirely to Christ." 

The Crown Prince, afterwards King Frederic William II. 
of Prussia, was himself a member of a masonic lodge and a 
great admirer of Woellner and Bischofswerder, who exerted 
their nefarious influence over him, and whenever the 
unfortunate prince appeared to become subject to doubts 
regarding the supernatural powers of his friends, they 
quieted him again by causing the spectre of some dead friend 
to appear before him, which was not at all difficult to do, as 
they were in possession of all the paraphernalia necessary 
to perform sleight-of-hand tricks, such as magic lanterns, 
electric batteries, etc. ; and there was no danger of being 
detected in these tricks, as the spectators had to remain 
within a certain " magic " circle, which they were not 
permitted to leave ; and it was always said that a disobe- 
dience to the orders of the magician would be followed by 
the direst consequences, or perhaps be fatal to all. 

The greatest enemies of the so-called ** Rosicrucians" 
were the Illuminati, a secret organization, radiating through- 
out the whole of Germany. At their head stood the councillor 
JVeishaupi, formerly professor at the University of Ingolstadt^ 

Pseudo'Rosicrucians — Impostors and Fools, 95 

in Bavaria. He had been educated in his youth in a Jesuit 
convent, but afterwards became a bitter enemy of that order. 
He wanted to liberate the people from the bonds of bigotry 
by spreading his cosmopolitan ideas, and he founded the 
order of the Illuminati^ using the already existing masonic 
symbols and formulae. He proclaimed that the object of his 
order was not to interfere with the Church or State, but 
that it intended to work for the moral improvement of 
humanity, to do good, to prevent evil, and to spread useful 
knowledge to all parts of the world. The necessary 
requirements to become a member of his order ar^ described 
by him as follows : — 

" He who is not deaf to the voice of suffering, whose 
heart is open to charity, and who is the brother and friend 
of the unfortunate, is our brother. He should love all 
creatures, and not cause pain even to a worm. He ought 
to be constant in adversity, indefatigable in doing good, 
courageous in overcoming difficulties. He should not look 
with contempt upon the weak; he should be above all 
selfish and personal considerations, and be anxious to 
benefit mankind. He should avoid idleness, and not 
consider any kind of knowledge to be below his dignity 
to investigate. But the main object of his life should be 
the attainment of self-knowledge. He who cares for virtue 
and truth for its own sake will not care for the applause of 
the vulgar. He who dares to do that which his own heart 
commands him to do is fit to become a member of our 
order." 

His order, Hke all secret orders, possessed the charm 
which always surrounds that which is mysterious. It had 
three degrees ; the first one consisted of the novices and the 
minervales. After passing an examination, the candidate 
was accepted into a higher degree, consisting of the lesser 
and the higher degree of Illuminati^ and finally followed the 
highest degree, the Priests. According to Weishaupt's 
ideas, the main object of true religion was to lift man up to 
a higher conception of his true nature and destiny, and 

96 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

thereby bring him up to a realization of this higher state of 
human dignity. This could not be accomplished by force, 
but merely by the spreading of knowledge, displacing error 
and superstitioQ« He thought that if men could once realize 
the necessity of virtue and be all united by brotherly love, 
immorality, vice, degradation, and poverty would cease to- 
exist, and men would become their own rulers and guides. 

He furthermore attempted to prove that true (esoteric^ 
Christianity was not a popular religion, or a religion for the 
vulgar, but that it was a system of philosophy, given in 
symbols, comprehensible only to those who were far enough 
advanced to be instructed in it, and it was the duty of the 
lUuminati to study the esoteric side of the religious Systems,, 
and to try to comprehend their meaning. 

The highest rank in the highest degree was that of Regent, 
The Regents were the superiors of the order, and only the 
most useful and virtuous members were admitted to that 
rank, after having passed through long and severe 
probations.* 

Soon the Illuminati became objects of fear and suspicion 
for the Governments, especially in Bavaria. A Protestant 
clergyman, Lange, was accidentally killed by a stroke of 
lightning. When his body was examined by the authorities^ 
they found some papers regarding the order, and a list of 
some of its prominent members. This was the signal for a 
universal inquisition and persecution. Many of the noblest 
and most eminent persons were imprisoned or banished, 
others fled, and a price was set upon Weishaupt's head, 
who, however, escaped to Gotha^ where he found an 
asylum, t 

Still the order of the Illuminati continued to exist, and 
between them and the Rosicrucians there existed the same 

* See Weishaupt, " Intercourse with Man." 

I This took place in the year 1758, under the reign of Maximillian Joseph, 
who has been called The Beloved on account of his goodness. The doctrines 
of Weishaupt were none other than the doctrines of Christ ; but they were 
not in conformity with the personal interests of autocratic " Christian " 
priests, who have ever been the real enemies of the truth and light, and 
the servants of darkness and evil. 

Pseudo-Rosier ucians — Impostors and Fools, 97 

animosity as now between the Liberals and the Ultramon^ 
ianesy or between Progressionists and Conservatives. Each 
party denounced the other one, and each party had some 
just cause; for the Rosicrucians attempted to push the 
people still lower into darkness and superstition, while the 
Illuminati gave them a light which the people did not 
understand, and by undermining the authority of the priest- 
hood, which governed the people by fear, they also 
undermined the authority of the law, by which the people 
must be ruled, as long as they cannot rule themselves. 

King Frederic the Great cared nothing about these 
religioug quarrels. In his dominions everyone was at 
liberty to follow the religion which suited him best ; and all 
the efforts of the Rosicrucians were therefore directed to 
maintain their power over the Crown Prince, and in this 
they succeeded. The Crown Prince was a good-hearted but 
weak-minded man, whose strength had been to a certain 
extent exhausted by too much sensual enjoyment. He often 
had spells of great moral depression and brooded over his 
regrets for the past. He needed some comfort and consola- 
tion, and this he attempted to find sometimes in the arms of 
the Countess of Lichtenau; at other times in those 
of the pietists and " Rosicrucians," Bischofswerder and 
Woellner, 

These *' Rosicrucians " used all the means they o6uld to 
obtain power. They calumniated Frederic the Great, and 
saw in him their greatest enemy, because his liberal 
measures hindered them from forcing their narrow-minded 
ideas and bigotry upon the people. They frightened the 
credulous Crown Prince by painting and exaggerating to 
him the dire consequences of the spreading of " irreligious " 
•doctrines. They proposed to restore the Inquisition in a 
Protestant shape. 

Frederic the Great died; Frederic William II. became 
King; but he was ruled by Bischofswerder and 
Woellner, and by his mistresses. One of the first suc- 
cessful attempts of the former was to restore to a 

G 

98 Li the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

great extent the power of Rome in Protestant Germany. 
Woellner became Minister of the religious department, and 
soon followed the issue of the infamous " religious edict " 
of July 9, 1788. In this edict everybody was warned by 
order of the King to subordinate his own reason to the 
dogmas of the Church ; and those who should contravene 
this order were threatened with the loss of the offices they 
held and with imprisonment. They generously permitted 
everybody to believe what he pleased, but they strongly 
prohibited any expression of opinion in regard to religious 
matters, if such opinions were not sanctioned by the Church. 
But those who should dare to ridicule a clergyman were 
threatened with the heaviest punishment. At the same 
time ct';is?/r(^ was established, so that nothing could be printed 
and published without having first been submitted to the 
clerical authorities for approval. 

The excitement caused by this shameful edict was terrible. 
The Illuminati led by the bookseller Nicolay^ at Berlini- 
protested against it; but their writings were confiscated. 
Woellner surrounded himself with " Rosicrucians " and 
pietists and a " spiritual examination board " was instituted,, 
which examined every candidate for an office in regard to- 
his creed before he could be appointed. They examined all 
clergymen and school teachers and ejected everyone who was 
not a hypocrite and who dared to say what he thought 
They published a miserable catechism written in bad Latin, in 
which was prescribed what a person would have to believe 
before he could pass the examination. Pietistic schools and 
hymn-books were introduced and everything possible was 
attempted to make the people more stupid than they already 
were. 

The disgrace which was brought upon the name 
" Rosicrucians " by these pseudo-Rosicrucians was so great 
that even to this day everything connected with Rosicru- 
cianism is believed by the public in Germany to be identical 
with bigotry, pietism, hypocrisy, knavery, animaHsm, and 
absurdity. 

APPENDIX 

THE PRINCIPLES 

OF THE 

YOGA-PHILOSOPHY 

OF THE 

ROSICRUCIANS AND ALCHEMISTS. 

The following pages were originally intended to form the 
basis of a separate work, entitled "^4 Key to the Secret Symbols 
of the Rosicrucians.'* As the idea of bringing out such a book 
has been abandoned for the present, they have been added as 
a suitable appendix to the foregoing historical notes. 

It will be found that the doctrines presented herein 
contain the most profound secrets, especially in regard to the 
** resurrection of the flesh." They go to show that the 
physical body is neither a useless nor a despicable thing, and 
that Matter is as necessary to Spirit, as Spirit to Matter. 
Without the presence of a* living body no resurrection could 
take place ; neither could the Spirit have any relative 
existence without th\5 presence of a material form. The state 
of Nirvana is not to be attained by merely dreaming about it, 
and before Man can rise superior to anything he must have 
attained that to which he desires to become superior. Only 
from the soul resurrected within the body of flesh arises the 
glorified spirit. 

In the Pronaos of the Temple of the True Rosy Cross. lol 

V^Ni' 

^^j,N\uB Ejus /^ 

Ex Deo nascimur. In jesu morimur. Reviviscimus per 
Spirittim Sanctum. 

IN THE PRONAOS OF THE TEMPLE OF THE 

TRUE ROSY CROSS. 

Our salvation is the life of Christ in us. 

The place or state wherein the tiue Rosicrucian lives is 
far too exalted and glorious to be described in words. 
When we enter the vestibule of the temple of the true 
Rosy Cross, we enter into a region of unalloyed bliss and 
happiness. There is an effulgence of super-terrestrial light, 
where all laborious thinking and exercise of the imagination 
for the purpose of drawing logical inferences about the 
unknown, ceases, for in that light is the realm of pure know- 
ledge ; to live there is to perceive, and to perceive is to 
know. Into that paradise of celestial consciousness nothing 
impure can enter. No room is there for terrestrial flesh and 
blood; but the spiritual beings which inhabit that realm 
are made of the flesh and body of " Christ," in other words, 
of the substance of the spiritual soul. 

I02 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

H. P. Blavatsky, in her '* Key to Theosophy," says that 
there are beings having attained a state of spiritual con- 
sciousness which would entitle them to enter the state of 
Nirvana ; nevertheless, out of compassion for mankind, they 
still remain residents of this earth, inhabiting invisibly for 
mortal eyes the astral plane of our planet. In that, she 
describes the true order of the Golden and Rosy Cross as a 
spiritual Brotherhood, and if one of these superior beings, 
for some purpose or other, reincarnates in a human body 
upon this planet, then will there be a real Rosicrucian in a 
visible form upon this earth. 

The " history " of that " brotherhood " is the history of 
the evolution of the world, and that of the spiritual re- 
generation of the soul and the body of man ; for although 
each of these individual beings had its own terrestial history 
and experiences in passing through many incarnations upon 
this planet, nevertheless, in its essential points the history 
of all is alike, and consisted in the conquering of the low 
and the unfoldment of the high. They all had to bear the 
Cross of suffering before they could become crowned with 
victory ; they all ^had to crucify their selfish and personal 
will, and die in regard to all that attracts the soul to the 
sphere of earthly desires and illusions before they could 
have the spiritual faculties of their souls unfolded like the 
Rose whose leaves are unfolded by the rays of the rising 
sun. 

ROSICRUCIAN RULES. 

1. Love God above all. 

To " love God " means to love wisdom and truth. We 
can love God in no other way than in being obedient to Divine 
law; and to enable us to exercise that obedience conscientiously 
requires knowledge of the law, which can only be gained by 
practice. 

2. Devote your time to your spiritual advancement. 

As the sun without leaving his place in the sky sends his rays 
upon the earth to shine- upon the pure and the impure, and to 

Rosicrucian Rules. 103 

illuminate even the most minute material objects with his light ; 
likewise the spirit of man may send his mental rays into matter 
to obtain knowledge of all terrestrial things ; but there is no need 
that the spirit should thereby lose its own divine self-conscious- 
ness, and be itself absorbed by the objects of its perception. 

3. Be entirely unselfish. 

Spiritual knowledge begins only where all sense of self ceases. 
AVhere the delusion which causes man to imagine himself to be 
a being separated and isolated from others ends, there he 
begins to realize his true state as an all-embracing universal 
and divine self-conscious power. 

4. Be temponitey modesty energetic^ and silent. 

The door to the inner temple is called ** Contentment " ; but 
no animal can enter therein, only he who walks uprightly, being 
conscious of his true dignity as a human being. Without energy, 
nothing can be accomplished ; and only in the silence, when all 
thoughts and desires are at rest, can the Divine harmonies pene- 
trate to the internal ear. 

5. Learn to know the origin of the metals contained ivithin thyself 
Ignorance is the cause of suffering. That which is material 
must be crucified and die. so that that which is spiritual may be 
resurrected and live. 

6. Beware of quacks and pretenders. 

He who claims to be in possession of knowledge knows 
nothing ; only he through whom the Word of wisdom speaks is 
wise. 

7. Live in constant adoration of the highest good. 

The worm seeks for pleasure among abomination and filth ; 
but the free eagle spreads his wings and rises up towards the 
sun. 

8. Learn the theory before you attempt the practice. 

He who travels with a trustworthy guide will be safer than he 
who refuses to profit by the experience of another. 

9. Exercise charity towards all beings. 

All beings are one in the spirit; divided from each other 
merely by the illusion of form. He who is charitable towards 
another form in which the universal One Life is manifest, saves 
suffering to his own self. 

1 04 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

10. Read the ancient hooks of wisdom. 

Books are to the unripe mind that which the mother's milk is 
to the nursling. We must receive drink from others until we 
have gained sufficient strength and experience to descend to the 
living fountain within ourselves, and to draw from there the 
water of truth. 

1 1 . Try to understand their secret meaning. 

That which is external may be seen with the external eye ; 
but that which is spiritual can only be seen with the eye of the 
spirit. 

These are the eleven rules which ought to be followed by 
those who desire to enter the temple of the Rosy Cross ; 
but the Rosicrucians have a twelfth rule, an Arcanum^ in which 
great powers reside, but of which it is not lawful to speak. This 
Arcanu^m will be given to those who deserve it, and by its aid they 
will find light in the darkness, and a guiding hand through the 
labyrinth. This Arcanum is inexpressible in the language of 
mortals, and it can, therefore, only be communicated from heart to 
heart. There is no torture strong enough to extract it from the 
true Rosicrucian ; for even if he were willing to reveal it, those 
who are unworthy of it are not capable of receiving it. 

THE DUTIES OF A ROSICRUCIAN. 

Those who are dead in the flesh will read the following with 
the external understanding ; those who live in the spirit will see 
its internal meaning, and act accordingly. 

The duties of a true Rosicrucian are : — 

1 . To alleviate suffering and to cure the sick without accepting any 
remuneration. 

The medicine which they give is more valuable than gold ; it 
is of an invisible kind, and can be had for nothing everj^where. 

2. To adopt the style of their clothing to the costumes of the country 
wherein they reside for the time being. 

The clothing of the spirit is the form which he inhabits, and 
must be adapted to the conditions of the planet whereon he 
resides. 

Rosicrucian Rules. lOj 

3. To meet once a year in a certain place. 

Those who do not meet at that place, when their terrestrial 
career is over will have their names taken out of the book of 
life. 

4. Each member has to select a proper person to he his successor. 
Each man is himself the creator of that being whose persoa-^ 

ality he adopts on the next step on the ladder of evolution. 

5. The letters R.C. are the emblem of the order. 

Those who have truly entered the order will bear the marks 
upon their body, which cannot be mistaken by him who is 
capable of recognising them. 

6. The existence of the Brotherhood is to be kept secret for one htmdred 
years, beginning from the time when it was first established. 

Nor will the " hundred years " be over until man has 
awakened to the consciousness of his own divine nature. 

THE SECRET SIGNS 0/ THE ROSICRUCIANS. 

There are sixteen signs by which a member of the order of 
the Rosicrucians may be known. He who possesses only a few 
of those signs is not a member of a very high degree, for the true 
Rosicrucian possesses them all. 

1. The Rosicrucian is Patient. 

His first and most important 'victory is the conquest of his 
own self. It is the victory over the LION, who has bitterly 
injured some of the best followers of the Rosy Cross. He is not 
to be vanquished by a fierce and inconsiderate attack made upon 
him ; but he must be made to surrender to patience and 
fortitude. The true Rosicrucian tries to overcome his enemies by 
kindness, and those who hate him by gifts. He heaps not curses,, 
but the burning ' fire of love upon their heads. He does not 
persecute his enemies with the sword, or with faggots, but he 
suffers the weeds to grow with the wheat until they are both 
matured, when they will be separated by Nature. 

2. The Rosicrucian is Kind. 

He never appears gloomy or inelancholy, or with a scowl or 
sneer upon his face. He acts kindly and politely towards every- 
body, and is always ready to render assistance to others.. 

io6 In the Pronaos of the Temple of JVisdom. 

Although he is different from the majority of other people, still 
he tries to accommodate himself to their ways, habits and man- 
ners, as^much as his dignity will permit. He is, therefore, an 
agreeable companion, and knows how to converse with the rich 
as well as with the poor, and to move among all classes of society 
so as to command their respect ; for he has conquered the bear of 
vulgarity. 

3. The Rosicrucian knows no Eniy. 

Before he is accepted into the order he must go through the 
terrible ordeal of cutting off the head of the snake of envy ; 
which is a very difficult labour, because the snake is sly, and 
easily hides itself in some corner. The true Rosicrucian is 
always content with his lot, knowing that it is such as he 
deserves it to be. He never worries about the advantages or 
riches which others possess, but wishes always the best to 
everybody. He knows that he will obtain all he deserves, and 
he cares not if any other person possesses more than he. He 
expects no favours, but he distributes hisj favours without any 
partiality. 

4. The Rosicrucian does not Boast, 

He knows that man is nothing but an instrument in the hands 
-of GOD, and that he can accomplish nothing useful by his own 
will ; the latter being nothing but the will of GOD perverted in 
man. To GOD he gives all the praise, and to that which is 
mortal he gives all the blame. He is in no inordinate haste to 
accomplish a thing, but he waits until he receives his orders 
from the Master who resides above and within. He is careful 
what he speaks about, and uses no unhallowed language. 

5. The Rosicrucian is not Vain. 

He proves thereby that there is something real in him, and 
that he is not like a blown-up bag filled with air. Applause or 
blame leaves him unaffected, nor does he feel aggrieved if he is 
-contradicted or encounters contempt. He lives within himself, 
and enjoys the beauties of his own inner world, but he never 
desires to show off his possessions, nor to pride himself on any 
•spiritual gifts which he may have attained. The greater his gifts, 
^he greater will be his modesty, and the more will he be willing 
•to be obedient to the law. 

Rosicrucian Rules, 107 

6. The Rosicrucian is not Disorderly. 

He always strives to do his duty, and to act according to the 
order established by the law. He cares nothing for 
externalities, nor for ceremonies. The law is written within his 
heart, and therefore all his thoughts and acts are ruled by it. 
His respectability is not centred in his external appearance, but 
in his real being, which may be compared to a root from which 
all his actions spring. The interior beauty of his soul is 
reflected upon his exterior, and stamps all his acts with its seal ; 
the light existing in his heart may be perceived in his eye by an 
expert ; it is the mirror of the Divine image within. 

7. The Rosicrucian is not Ambitious. 

There is nothing more injurious to spiritual development and 
expansion of the soul than a narrow mind and a selfish 
character. The true Rosicrucian always cares much more for 
the welfare of others than for his own. He has no private or 
personal interest to defend or foster. He always seeks to do 
good, and he never avoids any opportunity which may present 
itself for that purpose. 

8. The Rosicrucian is not Irritable. 

It is evident that a person who works for the benefit of the 
whole will be hated by those whose personal advantages are not 
benefited thereby ; because selfishness is opposed to magnani- 
mity, and the claims of the few are not always compatible with 
the interests of the community. The Rosicrucian will therefore 
be often resisted by narrow-minded and short-sighted people ; he 
•will be slandered by calumniators, his motives will be misrepre- 
sented, he will be misjudged by the ignorant, ridiculed by the 
would-be wise, and taunted by the fool. All such proceedings, 
how^ever, cannot excite or irritate the mind of the true Rosicru- 
cian, nor disturb the divine harmony of his soul ; for his faith 
rests in the perception and knowledge of the truth within 
himself. The opposition of a thousand ignorant people will not 
induce him to desist from doing that which he knows to be noble 
and good, and he will do it even if it should involve the loss of 
his fortune or of his life. Being able and accustomed to direct 
his spiritual sight towards the divine, he cannot be deluded by 
the illusions of matter, but clings to the eternal reality. Being 
surrounded by angelic influences, and listening to their voices, 
he is not affected by the noise made by the animals. He lives ia 

lo8 In the Pronaos oj the Temple of Wisdom. 

the company of those noble beings, who were once men like 
others, but who have become transfigured, and who are now 
beyond the reach of the vulgar and low. 

9. The Rosicrucian does not think evil of others. 

Those who think evil of others see merely the evil which 
exists within themselves reflected and mirrored forth in others. 
The Rosicrucian is alw^ays willing to recognise in everything that 
which is good. Tolerance is a virtue by which the Rosicrucian is 
eminently distinguished from others ; and by which he may be 
known. If a thing appears to be ambiguous, he suspends his. 
judgment about it until he has investigated its nature ; but as 
long as his judgment is not perfect, he is more inchned to form a 
good opinion than an evil one about everything. 

10. The Rosicrucian loves justice. 

He, however, never sets himself up as a judge over the faults 
of others, nor does he wish to appear to be wise by censuring the 
mistakes of others. He does not enjoy gossip, and cares no more 
about the foolishness committed by others, than he would about 
the buzzing of a fly or the capers of a monkey. He finds no 
pleasure in Hstening to political or personal quarrels, disputations, 
or mutual recriminations. He cares nothing for the cunningness 
of a fox, the dissimulation of a crocodile, or the rapacity of a 
w^olf, and is not amused by the stirring up of mud. His nobility 
of character lifts him up into a sphere far beyond all such trifles 
and absurdities, and being above the sensual plane, wherein 
ordinary mortals find their happiness and enjoyment, he Hves 
with those who do not think evil of each other, who do not 
rejoice about an injustice done to their brother, or make merry 
about his ignorance, and enjoy his misfortunes. He enjoys the 
company of those who love the truth, and who are surrounded 
by the peace and harmony of the spirit. 

11. The Rosicrucian loves the truth. 

There is no devil worse than falsehood and calumny. 
Ignorance is a nonentity, but falsehood is the substance of eviL 
The calumniator rejoices whenever he has found something upon 
which to base his lies and to make them grow like mountains. 
Opposed to it is the truth, it being a ray of light from the eternal 
fountain of GOOD, which has the power to transform man into a 
divine being. The ROSICRUCIAN seeks, therefore, no other 

Rosicrucian Jewels, 109 

light but the light of truth, and this light he does not enjoy alone, 
but in company of all who are good and filled with its divine 
majesty, whether they live on this earth or in the spiritual state ; 
and he enjoys it above all with those who are persecuted, 
oppressed, and innocent, but who will be saved by the truth. 

12. The Rosicrucian knows how to be silent. 

Those who are false do not love the truth. Those who are 
foolish do not love wisdom. The true Rosicrucian prefers to 
enjoy the company of those who can appreciate truth to that of 
those who would trample it with their feet. He will keep that 
which he knows locked up within his heart, for in silence is 
power. As a minister of state does not go about telling to 
everybody the secrets of the king ; so the Rosicrucian does not 
parade before the public the revelations made to him by the king 
within, who is nobler and wiser than all the earthly kings and 
princes ; for they only rule by the authority and power derived 
from Him. His secrecy ceases only when the king commands 
him to speak, for it is then not he who speaks, but the truth 
that is speaking through him. 

13. The Rosicrucian believes that which he knows. 

He believes in the immutability of eternal law, and that every 
cause has a certain efifect. He knows that the truth cannot lie, 
and that the promises made to him by the king will be fulfilled, 
if he does not himself hinder their fulfilment. He is, therefore, 
inaccessible to doubt or fear, and puts implicit confidence in the 
divine principle of truth, which has become alive and conscious 
within his heart. 

14. The Rosicrucian' s hope is firm. 

Spiritual hope is the certain conviction resulting from a 
knowledge of the law, that the truths recognised by faith will 
grow and be fulfilled ; it is the knowledge of the heart, and very 
different from the intellectual speculation of the reasoning brain. 
His faith rests upon the rock of direct perception and cannot 
be overthrown. He knows that in evervthing, however evil 
it may appear to be, there . is a germ of good, and he hopes 
that in the course of evolution that germ will become developed, 
and thus evil be transformed into good. 

15. The Rosicrucian cannot be vanquished by suffering. 

He knows that there is no light without shadow, no evil 
without some good, and that strength only grows by resistance. 

no In the Protiaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

Having oiice recognised the existence of the Divine principle 
within everything, external changes are to him of little 
importance, and do not deserve great attention. His main object 
is to hold on to his spiritual possessions, and not to lose the 
crown which he has gained in the battle of life. 

1 6. The Rosicrucian will always remain a member of his society. 
Names are of little importance. The principle which presides 
over the Rosicrucian Society is the truth ; and he who knows 
the truth, and follows it in practice, is a member of the society 
over which the truth practises. If all names were changed and 
all languages altered, the truth would remain the same ; and he 
who lives in the truth will live even if all nations should pass 
away. 

These are the sixteen signs of the true Rosicrucians, which 
have been revealed to a pilgrim by an angel who took away the 
heart of the pilgrim, leaving in its place a fiery coal, which is 
now incessantly burning and glowing with love of the universal 
brotherhood of humanity. 

ROSICRUCIAN JEWELS, 

The most valuable jewel of the Rosicrucians is WISDOM^ 
which is represented by a pure DIAMOND in the centre of the 
ROSE, but the CROSS is adorned with twelve jewels of priceless 
value, in all of which the power that resides in the truth is 
manifested. These jewels are : 

1. Jasper (dark green). The power of active light, multiplying 
itself to a sevenfold degree, and evolving seven states of the one 
light, by which the seven states of darkness may be consumed, 

2. Hyacinth (yellow). LOVE, born from the matrix of Light^ 
manifesting itself as it grows, and emitting red rays. Its power 
overcomes the spirit of anger and violence. 

3. Chrysolite (white). Princely wisdom. It confounds that 
which is foolish and vain, subdues it, and comes out of the battle 
victorious. 

4. Sapphire (blue). Truth ; originating and growing out of its 
own essence. It overcomes doubt and vacillation. 

5. Smaragd (green). The blooming spring in its eternal 
justice, destroying the unjust attributes of a perverted and de- 
generate nature, and opening the fountain of infinite treasures. 

Rosicriician Symbols. 1 1 r 

6. Topaz (golden). The symbol of peace, mild and pleasant. 
It sufiEers no impurity or division to exist, neither does it admit 
that which causes separation and quarrels. It heals ruptures- 
and cures wounds. 

7. Amethyst (violet). Impartiality, equilibrium of justice and 
judgment. It cannot be falsified, bent, or counterfeited. It 
weighs all things in the scales of justice, and is opposed to fraud^ 

cruelty, or tyranny. 

8. Beryl (diverse colours). Meekness, humility ; the equal 
temperature of the spirit, being kind and good, and overcoming 
wrath, stubbornness, and bitterness. 

9. Sardis (light red). The high magical FAITH, growing 
into power, and destroying fear, scepticism, and superstition. 

10. Chrysoprase (light green). Invisible power and strength,, 
overcoming all opposition, allowing nothing to remain which 
could possibly resist the law. 

11. Sardonyx {stniped). Triumphant JOY and gladness, flow- 
ing from the eternal fountain of happiness, destroying all sorrow 
and sadness. (May it bless you !). 

12. Chalcedony (striped). The crown of Victory, dominion,, 
glory. The keystone and the greatest of all miracles, turning 
everything to the glorification of GOD. 

ROSICRUCIAN SYMBOLS. 

SIGNS FROM THE HEART OF THE CELESTIAL 
MOTHER, 

(From the work of Antonio Ginther. August Vindelicorum. 

1741.) 

Prcenesis. A ship in the open sea, with a floating anchor^ 
and a star shining overhead, with the inscription : Hac mon- 
strante viam. 

Emblema i. An open book with the name MARIA, and a 
heart transfixed by a sword, with the inscription : Omnibus in 
omnibus, 

2. A seven-headed monster threatened with a club. Inscrip- 
tion : In virtute tua. 

112 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

3. A closed and sealed door with an angel attempting to open 
it. Inscription : Signatur ne perdatur, 

4. A landscape representing an island. The sun rises and 
the stars shine. Inscription : Aurora ah lacrymis. 

5. An orange tree bearing fruits, of which the inner part is 
■sweet, while the rind is bitter. Inscription : Duke amarum, 

6. An altar with a fire upon it, in which a heart is burning, 
sending out a sweet odour. Inscription : In odorem suavitatifi. 

7. A pure white lily in a flower-pot, standing in a garden. 
Inscription : Virginei laus prima pudoris. 

8. An angel separating wheat from chaff by means of a sieve. 
Inscription : Dimittit manes, 

9. A ring with a jewel exhibited upon a table. Inscription : 
Honori invincem. 

10. A globe illuminated by the full moon. Inscription : Plena 
sibi et aliis, 

11. Jacob's ladder with seven steps, reaching from the earth 
up to heaven. Inscription : Descendendo ascendendo. 

12. A sun-dial attached to the wall of a tower. Inscription : 
Altissimtis obmimbrat. 

13. The signs of the Zodiac, with the sun passing through the 
^ign of the Virgin. Inscription : Jam mitius ardet. 

14. A hen brooding in a stable, brooding over eggs. Inscrip- 
tion : Parit in alieno. 

15. Two palm-trees, inchned towards each other. Inscription : 
Blando se pace salutant. 

16. A grape-vine, cut from the trunk, is weeping. Inscription : 
Ut gaudeas mero/ 

17. A plant, representing a myrrh. Inscription : Amara sed 
^alubris. 

18. A painter's easel, with a cloth ready for painting. Inscrip- 
tion : Qua forma placebit, 

19. A heart transfixed by a sword. Inscription : Usque ad 
divisionem anima. 

20. Two doves pecking at each other. Inscription : Amat et 
castigat, 

2 1 . A passion flower. Inscription : Delectat et cruciat, 

22. Wolves and sheep, eagles and- bats, basking together in 
the sunshine. Inscription : Non possentibus offert. 

Rosicrucian Symbols. 113' 

r 23. A bird, sitting between thorns and thistles. Inscription : 
His ego sustentor. 

. 24. Ivy winding around a dead tree. Inscription : Nee mors 
separavit 

25. Two hearts in a winepress. Inscription : Cogit in unum. 

26. A crocodile shedding tears while eating a man. Inscrip- 
tion : Plorat et devorat, 

27. Wolf devouring a sheep. Inscription : Non est qui redimat. 

28. Tulips inclining toward the rising sun. Inscription: 
Languexitin umbra. 

29. Two stringed musical instruments ; a hand plays upon 
one. Inscription : Unam tetigis se sat est, 

30. A white lily growing between thorns. Inscription: Trans- 
Jbcum suavius. 

31. The prophet Jonah thrown into the raging sea. Inscrip- 
tion : Merger ne mergantur, 

32. The setting sun and the evening star. Inscription : 
Sequitur deserta cadentem, 

33. A cross with a snake wound around it. Inscription : 
Pharmacumnon venenum. 

34. Eagle, rising towards the sun. Inscription : Ad te levavi 
cculos. 

35. A squirrel standing upon a log, floating in the water and 
rowing. Inscription : Ne merger. 

. ^6. Light tower, illuminating the ocean. Inscription : Erantibus 
una micat. 

37. Rock standing in a stormy sea. Inscription : Non com- 
movebitur. " ' 

38. A diamond exposed upon a table. Inscription : In puritate 
pretium. 

39. Grafting a tree. Inscription : Accipit in sua. 

40. A man hanging upon a tree. Inscription : Non est hactutior 
umbra. 

.41. A flock of sheep, each one bearing the letter T upon the 
forehead. Inscription : Non habet redargutionem. 

42. Chandelier with seven lights. Inscription : Non extinguetur, 

43. A solar eclipse. Inscription : Morientis sideris umbra. 

44. The setting sun and a rainbow shedding tears. Inscription : 
Desinit in lacrymas. 

H 

114 I^ the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

45- Cypress blown at by winds coming from the four quarters 
of the world. Inscription : Concussio firmat 

46. Two hearts surrounded by thorns, with nails and a dagger* 
Inscription ; Vulneratum vulnerat, 

47. A heart transfixed by a sword and instruments of torture. 
Inscription : Supereminet omnes. 

48. Beehive, and bees flying around flowers. Inscription t 
Currtt in odorem. 

49. A chemical furnace with retorts, from which drops are 
falling. Inscription : Calor elicit imbres. 

50. A man sowing grain into furrows. Inscription : Ut surgat 
in ortum. 

51. A cloth spread upon a field and sprinkled with water* 
Inscription ; A lacrymis candor, 

52. Ocean waves and a bird flying through the furrows of 
water. Inscription : Mersa non mergitur, 

53. Noah's dove with an olive branch. Inscription : Emergere 
nuntiat orbem. 

54. Flying eagle carrying a lamb. Inscription :• Tulit prcedeam 
tartari. 

55. Rain descending upon flowers. Inscription : Duke refri- 
gerium. 

56. Plumb-line and level. Inscription : Recta a recto, 

57. A hot iron upon an anvil. Inscription : Dum calet, 

58. Solitary bird sitting in a cave. Inscription : Gemit dilectum^ 
stium, 

59. Elephant drinking blood flowing from a grape. Inscrip- 
tion : Acuitur in pralinm. 

60. Bird escaping from a nest. Inscription : Ad sidera sursum,^ 

61. Sunrise rays shining into a heart of adamant. Inscription.-: 
Intima lustrat. 

62. A flying bird attached to a string. Inscription : Cupia 
dissolvi, 

6^. Two birds of Paradise flying upwards. Inscription : 
Innixa ascendit. 

64. A triple crown made of silver, iron, and gold. Inscription : 
Curso completo. 

65. The statue of Dagon thrown down and broken to pieces, 
A corpse. Inscription : Cui honorem honorem. 

Rosicructan Symbols. 115 

66. The Red Sea dividing for the passage of the Israelites. 
Inscription : lUue iter quo ostendum, 

67. Labyrinth with a human figure therein. A hand extended 
from heaven holds a thread reaching down to the figure. Inscrip- 
tion : Hac duce tuta via est. 

68. A camp. Among the tents is a standard bearing the image 
of a man. Inscription : Prasidium et decus, 

69. A clock, whose finger points to the second hour. Inscrip- 
tion : Ultima secunda. 

70. Ship at sea carrying a light. Fishes and birds are 
attracted by the glow. Inscription : Veniunt ad lucem, 

Epilogus, — Noah's ark in tranquil water. Inscription : Non 
mergitury sed extoUitiir. 

SIGNS REFERRING TO THE DIVINE CHILD, 
(From the above-mentioned work.) 

Prcenesis. — A hen with chickens under her wings. A hawk 
preying in the air above. Inscription : Sub umbra alarum 
tuarum. 

Emblema i. A figure kneeling and holding a book wherein is 
represented a fiery heart. Inscription : Tolle lege, 

2. Altar upon which a fire is lighted by a sunray. Inscription : 
Extinctos suscitat ignes. 

3. Sunray falling through a lens and setting a ship on fire. 
Inscription : Ignis ab Primo. 

4. Sun shining upon a lambskin extended upon the earth. 
Inscription : Descendit de cce is. 

5. A chrysalis upon a leaf. Inscription : Ecce venio, 

7. The sea and the rising sun. Inscription : Renovabit faciem 
terras. 

8. A rising sun eclipsed by the moon. Inscription : Condor ut 
exorior, 

9. A chicken and an eagle in the air. The former is protected 
against the latter by a shield. Inscription : A facie persequentis, 

10. A rose in the midst of a garden. Inscription : Hcec miht 
sola placet. 

Ii6 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wiscbtn, 

11. A lamb burning upon an altar. Inscription: Deus non 
despicies, 

12. Dogs hunting. Inscription : Fuga sahitefn. 

13. A lamb dying at the foot of a cross. Inscription : 
Obediens usque ad mortem. 

14. The ark of the covenant. Rays of lightning. Inscription : 
Procul este profanL 

15. Sun in the midst of clouds. Inscription : Fulgura in 
pluvium fuit, 

16. Sun shining upon sheep and wolves. Inscription : Super 
robes et maios, 

17. A well and a pitcher. Inscription : Hauriar, non 
exhauriar, 

18. Animals entering the ark. Inscription : Una salutem, 

19. Shepherd carrying a lamb. Inscription : Onus meum leve, 

20. Sheep drinking at a well. The water is stirred by a pole. 
Inscription : Similem dant vulnera formam, 

21. A dove sitting upon a globe. Inscription : Non sufficit una. 

22. Light penetrating the clouds. Inscription : Umbramfugat 
Veritas. 

23. A vineyard and the rising sun. Inscription : Pertransiit 
heneficiendo. 

24. Three hearts with a sieve floating above them. Inscription : 
Ccelo contrito resurgent. 

25. Swan cleaning his feathers before proceeding to eat. 
Inscription : Antequam comedum. 

26. A hungry dog howling at the iiioon. Inscription : Inanis 
impetus. 

27. Ark of the covenant drawn by two oxen. Inscription: 
Sancta sancte. 

28. A winepress. Inscription : Premitur utexprimat. 

29. An opening bud. Inscription: Vtdneri bus profunda opee. 

30. Amor shooting arrows at a heart. Inscription : Donee 
attingam. 

31. Cross and paraphernalia for crucification. Inscription: 
Prcebet non prohibet. 

32. A sunflower looking towards the rising sun. Inscription : 
Usque ad occasum. 

33. Drops of sweat falling down in a garden. Inscription : 
Tandem resoluta venit. 

Rosicruciati Symbols. 117 

34. Sword protruding from the clouds. Inscription : Cado 
noncedo. 

35. Hammer and anvil, a forge and a fire. Inscription : 
Ferendo^ non feriendo, 

^6. A ram crowned with thorns upon an altar. Inscription : 
Victima coronata, 

37. A sheep carrying animals. Inscription: Quam grave portat 
onus. 

38. A crucified person and a snake upon a tree. Inscription : 
Unde mors unde vita. 

39. A tree shedding tears into three dishes. Inscription : Et 
loesa medelam, 

40. A spring fountain. Inscription : Rtgat ut erigat. 

41. A heart offered to an eagle. Inscription : Redibit ad 
Dominum. 

42. A heart upon a cross surrounded by thorns, crowned with 
a laurel. Inscription : Pignus amabile pads. 

43. Bird persecuted by a hawk seeks refuge in the cleft of a 
. rock. Inscription : Hoc tuta sua sub antro. 

44. Target with a burning heart in the centre ; Amor shooting 
arrows at it. Inscription : Trahe mi post te. 

45. Pelican feeding her young ones with her own blood. 
Inscription : Ut vitam habeant. 

47. Phoenix sinking into the flames. Inscription : Hie mihi 
duke mori. 

48. Blood from a lamb flowing into a cup. Inscription : 
Purgantes temperat ignis. 

49. Clouds from which proceed rays of lightning. Inscription : 
Lt4X recto fatumque noscenti. 

50. Eagle flying towards the sun. Inscription : Tunc facie ad 
faciem. 

Epilogus. — A hedgehog, having rolled in fruits, is covered with 
them. Inscription: Venturi providus avi. 

He who can see the meaning of all these allegories has his eyes open. 

TABULA SMARAGDINA. 

VERBA SECRETORUM KffiRMETIS. 

It is. beyond any doubt, most certain and true, that the Below is like 
the Above, and thereby can be accomplished the miracle of one 
only thing. As all things are derived from only one thing, by 
the will and the word of the One who created it in his mind ; likewise all 
things result from this unity by the order of nature. Its father is the sun, 
its mother the moon ; the air carries it in its womb ; its nurse is the 
earth. This thing is the origin of all perfections that exist throughout the 
world. Its power is most perfect when it has again been reduced to 
earth. 

Separate the earth from the fire, and the subtle from that which is 
gross ; act with prudence, understanding, and modesty. It rises up from 
the earth to the heavens, and returns again to the earth, taking unto itself 
the power of the Above and the Below. Thus you will obtain the glory of 
the whole world. Therefore discard all ignorance and impotency. This is 
the strongest of all powers, for it overcomes all subtle things, and can 
penetrate through all that is gross. Thus was the world created, and 
from this originate rare combinations, and are wrought miracles of various 
kinds. Therefore have I been called Hermes Trismegistus, having 
obtained three-parts of the wisdom of the whole world. This is what is 
to be said about the masterwork of the alchymical art. 

Alchemy, 119 

ALCHEMY. 

Quae sunt in superis hac inferioribus insunt ; Quod monstrat coelum, id 
terra frequenter habet. Ignis, Aqua et Fluitans, due sunt contraria ; 
Felix talia si jungis, sit tibi scire satis. 

Alchemy is that science which res,ults from a knowledge 
of God, Nature, and Man. A perfect knowledge of either 
of them cannot be obtained without the knowledge of the 
other two, for these three are one and inseparable. 
Alchemy is not merely an intellectual, but a spiritual science; 
because that which belongs to the spirit can only be 
spiritually known. Nevertheless, it is a science dealing 
with material things, for spirit and matter are only two 
opposite manifestations or " poles " of the eternal one. 
Alchemy is an art, and as every art requires an artist to 
exercise it, likewise thi? divine science and art can be 
practised only by those who are in possession of the divine 
power necessary for that purpose. It is true that the 
external manipulations required for the production of certain 
alchemical preparations may, like an ordinary chemical pro- 
cess, be taught to anybody capable of reasoning ; but the 
results which he would accomplish would be without life, 
for only he in whom the true life has awakened can awaken 
it from its sleep in the prima materia^ and cause visible 
forms to grow from the Chaos of nature. 
"" Alchemy in its highest aspect deals with the spiritual 
regeneration of man, and teaches how a god may be made 
put of a human being or, to express it more correctly, how 
to establish the conditions necessary for the development of 
divine powers in man, so that a human being may become a 

I20 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

god by the power of God, in the same sense as a seed 
becomes a plant by the aid of the four elements, and the 
action of the invisible fifth. Alchemy in its more material 
aspect teaches how minerals, metals, plants, and animals^ 
and men, may be generated, or made to grow from their 
" seeds " ; or, in other words, how that generation, which is 
accomplished during long periods of time in the due course 
of the action of natural laws, may be accomplished in a com- 
paratively very short time, if these natural laws are guided 
and supplied with material, by the spiritual knowledge of 
man. There is no doubt in my mind that gold can be made to 
grow by alchemical means ; but it requires an Alchemist to 
make the experiment succeed, and he who is attracted by 
the power of gold will not obtain possession of the spiritual 
power necessary to practise that art. 

It is not the object of these pages to furnish proof to the 
sceptic that Alchemy is a truth, nor to furnish arguments on 
the strength of which the incredulous may become persuaded 
to believe in its possibility. To believe in a thing of which 
one has no knowledge would be of little benefit ; but those 
who have some spiritual knowledge of Alchemy, perhaps 
having studied it in some former incarnation, may receive 
some benefit from a perusal of this chapter, as it may serve 
to bring that which they already spiritually know to the 
understanding of their mind.* 

It is a mistake to confound Alchemy with Chemistry. 
Modern Chemistry is a science which deals merely with the 
external forms in which the element of matter is manifesting 
itself. It never produces anything new. We may mix 
and compound and decompose two or more chemical bodies 
an unlimited number of times, and cause them to appear 
under various different forms, but at the end we will ha\7e 

• There are two kinds of knowledge in man, namely, that which belongs 
to his spirit (Budhi)^ and that which belongs to his mind (Manas). The 
former is, so to say, the quintessence of what man has learned in previous 
incarnations ; the latter is that which he has learned in his present life. 
If he were to succeed to rise up in his mind to the sphere of his spirit, to 
unite his Budhi with his Manas ; then would the mind share the know- 
ledge which the spirit possesses. 

Alchemy. I2I 

no augmentation of substance, nor anything more than the 
combinations of the substances that have been employed at 
the beginning. Alchemy does not mix or compound any- 
thing, it causes that which already exists in a latent state to 
become active and grow. Alchemy is, therefore, more 
comparable to botany or agriculture than to Chemistry; and, 
in fact, the growth of a plant, a tree, or an animal is an 
alchemical process going on in the alchemical laboratory of 
nature, and performed by the great Alchemist, the power of 
<jod acting in nature. 

The nature of Alchemy is clearly explained by Johannes 
Tritheim, who says : — 

" God is an essential and hidden fire in all things, and 
especially in man. That fire generates all things. It has- 
generated them, and will generate them in the future,, 
and that which is generated is the true divine light in all 
eternity. God is a fire ; but no fire can burn, and no light 
appear within nature without the addition of air to cause the 
combustion, and likewise the Holy Spirit in you must act as 
a divine ' air ' or breath, coming out of the divine fire an 
, breathing upon the iire within the soul, so that the light 
will appear, for the light must be nourished by the fire, and 
this light is love and gladness and joy within the eternal 
deity. This light is Jesus, having emanated from eternity 
from Jehovah. He who has this light not within himself 
is in the fire without light ; but if the light is in him, then 
is the Chn'st in him, and takes form in him, and such a 
person will know that light as it exists in nature. 

" All things such as we see are in their interior fire and 
light, wherein is hidden the essence of the spirit. All things 
are a trinity of fire, light, and air. In other words, ' Spirit,* 
the ' father,' is a divine superessential light ; the ' son,' 
the light having become manifest ; the ' holy spirit ' a divine 
superessential air and motion. The fire resides within the 
heart and sends its rays through the whole body of man, 
causing it to live ; but no light is born from the fire with- 
out the presence of the spirit of holiness.'* 

1 22 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

To express this in other words we may say — All things 
are made of thought^ and exist in the universal mind (the 
astral light)^ and within each is latent the will^ by whose 
action they may become developed and their powers un- 
folded. This takes place under favourable circumstances 
by the slow and unconscious action of the universal will 
acting in nature, and may be accomplished in a very short 
time by the aid of the conscious will of the alchemist ; but 
before the will of a person can accomplish such wonders in 
external substances, his will must first become self- 
conscious within itself; the light that shines from the 
centre of his own heart, must become living and bright 
before it can act upon those substances with which the 
Alchemist deals. He in whom this divine light of the 
Christ (the Aima) has not awakened to life, is virtually 
asleep in the spirit, and can act upon spiritual things no 
more than a man can deal with material substances while 
he sleeps ; but this fact will hardly be acknowledged or 
comprehended by the superficial scientist and rationalist, 
who imagine themselves to be fully awake, and therefore the 
secrets of alchemy are an inexplicable mystery to them, 
which can be disposed of in no other way than by being 
denied or laughed away. Alchemy was known at the most 
ancient times. It was no secret to the initiates among the 
ancient Brahmins and the Egyptians ; and the Bible, if read 
in the light of the Cabala ^ will be found to be the descrip- 
tion of an alchemical process. The ^Aleph fc^ represent 
three fiery flames, nevertheless, it is only one letter. In 
Magic it means AOH^ the Father, the one from which all 
the rest take their origin, the Alpha and likewise the 
Omega, the beginning and also the end. As the air causes 
the fire to burn and to emit a light, likewise the Holy Spirit 
{without whose presence nothing can be accomplished) 
nourishing the divine fire with the soul, causes the living 
light of the Christ to become manifest. This is also 
indicated in the three first letters of the word rT^tt^M^S, 
for the 3 means '' Ben," the son ; the M AOH, the father; 

Alchemy, 123 

and ^ means " Ruach," or spirit. This, then, is a trinity 
of father, son, and spirit, and its quality is indicated by the 
following syllable n^tt^, indicating the true generation, for 
the tt^ is the letter symbolizing the fire, and the "^ the 
light. The pronounciation of the former is like the hissing 
of the flame, but the latter issues mildly from the fire, as it 
is likewise born mildly and humbly within the human soul 
while the 3 symbolizes the spirit and the power of the 
outspoken word. 

The " Song of Solomon^^ in the Old Testament^ is a 
description of the processes of alchemy. In this Song the 
Stibjectum is described in Cant. /., 5 ; the Lilium artis 
in C ii,^ I ; the Preparation and Purification in C. «., 4; 
the Fire in C. iV., 7, and C iv.^ 16 ; the Putrefaction in C. «i., 
I ; Sublimation and Distillation in C. iii,y 6 ; Coagulation 
and Change of Colours, C. v.^ 9 to 14; Fixation, C ii, 12, 
and C viiif 4; Multiplication, C. vi., 7; Augmentation 
and Projection, C. viii, 8, etc., etc. 

With all this it must not be supposed that the practice 
of Alchemy consists merely in the exercise of the will and 
the imagination, or that the products obtained are merely 
imaginary and intangible or invisible to mortal eyes. On 
the contrary, no alchemical processes can be accomplished 
without the presence of visible and tangible matter, as it is 
so to say a spiritualizing of '' matter/' There is no trans- 
formation of '' matter " into " spirit,'* as some people 
believe, for each of the seven principles of eternal nature is 
unchangeable, and remains for ever in its own centre, in the 
same sense as darkness cannot be turned into light, 
although a light may be kindled within the darkness, in 
consequence of which the darkness will disappear. Like- 
wise within each material form there sleeps the divine spirit, 
the light, which may become awakened to life and activity, 
and illuminate the body and cause it to live and to grow. 
Of the qualities of the powers of that light, or even of its 
existence, modern chemistry has no knowledge and no 
names to describe it ; but they are described under various 

1 24 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wtsdom. 

names in the Bible, and in the still older religious books of 
the East. 

There is a visible substance and an invisible one; a 
tangible water and one that is beyond the reach of percep- 
tion by the physical senses ; a visible fire and an invisible 
magic fire ; neither can either of these accomplish anything 
without the other, for in the practice of Alchemy, as in the 
regeneration of man, that which is above must be made to 
penetrate that which is below, so that the lower may enter 
into a higher state of existence. 

THE ''PRIMA materia:' 

If we wish to know nature we must learn to know God, and 
God cannot be known without a knowledge of one's own divine 
self. The spiritual substance of which external visible nature is 
an imperfect expression and manifestation, has been called 
" Prima Materia '' ; it is the material for the formation of a new 
heaven and a new earth. It is like " water," or a '' crystalline 
ocean," if compared with our grossly material earth, it is at once 
fire, water, air, and earth, corporeal in its essence, and never- 
theless, incorporeal relatively to our physical forms. 

In it as the *' ChaoSy' are contained the germs, or seeds, or 
** potencies " of all things that ever existed, and of all that ever 
will exist in the future. It is the soul, or corpus of nature, and 
by means of the magic fire^ it may be extricated from all sub- 
stances, and be rendered corporeal and visible. It is a unity, 
and nevertheless a trinity, according to its aspects as Sulphur^ 
Mercury^ and Salt. These three are distinct qualities charac- 
terising the spirit of light, and nevertheless they are nothing 
different from the essence of the light, and this light is eternal 
nature, or the soul of the world. 

This primordial matter contains the powers that go to form 
minerals and metals, vegetables and animals, and everything 
that breathes ; all forms are hidden within its depths, and it is 
therefore, the true principium or beginning of all things. It is 
the play and battle ground for all the astral influences that come 
from the stars and the birthplace of the beings that inhabit the 

Alchemy. 125 

astral plane, not less than of those that are born into the (to us) 
visible world. It is the womb of eternal nature from which 
ever3rthing that exists is born by the power of the spirit acting 
within. From its fertile soil are produced good and evil fruits, 
wholesome and noxious plants, harmless and poisonous animals, 
for God is no distinguisher of persons, or favouring any 
particular individual ; each receives its share of life, and will, 
according to its capacity to receive, and each becomes ultimately 
that which its character destines it to be. 

THE " SPIRITUS universalis;' 
Without which no alchemical experiment will succeed. 

Johannes Tritheim^ an abbott and alchemist, whose writings are 
plainer and more comprehensible than any other alchemical 
book, says : — 

All things have been made by the power of the divine 
word, which is the divine] spirit or breath that emanated 
from the divine fountain in the beginning. This breath 
is the spirit or soul of the world, and is called the " spiritus 
mundi" It was at first like air, and contracted into a 
fog or nebular substance, and afterwards became "water" 
{Akasa). This " water " was at first all spirit and life, because it 
was permeated by and made alive by the spirit. It was dark in 
the depths ; but through the outspoken word the light became 
generated therein, and then the darkness was illumined by the 
light, and the " soul of the world " (the astral light) had its 
beginning. This spiritual light, which we call ** Nature," or the 
soul of the world, is a spiritual body, which, by means of 
Alchemy, can be made tangible and visible ; but as it exists in 
an invisible state, therefore is it called " spirit." 

" This is an universal and living fluid diffused throughout the All 
of Nature, and which pervades all- beings. It is the most subtle of 
all substances, the most powerful on account of its inherent 
qualities, penetrating all bodies, and causing the forms in which 
it is active to live. By its action it frees the forms of all 
imperfections, and renders the impure pure, the imperfect 
perfect, and causes that which is mortal to become immortal 
by becoming fixed therein." 

126 In the Prottaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

** This essence or spirit has emanated from the centre in the 
beginning, and is incorporated into the substance of which the 
world is formed. It is the Salt of the Earthy and without its 
presence the grass would not grow, nor the fields be green ; and 
the more this essence is condensed, concentrated, and coagulated 
in the forms, the more enduring will they become. This 
substance is the most subtle of all things, incorruptible, 
unchangeable in its essence, pervading the infinity of space. The 
3un and the planets are merely condensed states of this universal 
principle, and they distribute their abundance from their throb- 
bing hearts, and send them into the forms of the lower worlds 
and into all beings, acting through their own centres, and leading 
the forms higher Up on the road to perfection. The forms in 
which this living principle becomes fixed become perfect and 
permanent, so that they will neither rust nor decay, nor be 
changed on being exposed to the air ; neither can such forms be 
dissolved by water, nor be destroyed by fire, nor eaten up by 
the elements of the earth. 

" This spirit can be obtained in the same manner in which it 
is communicated to the earth by the stars ; and this takes place by 
means of water, which serves as its vehicle. It is not the 
Philosopher's Stone^ but the latter may be prepared of it by 
causing that which is volatile to become fixed. 

" I admonish you to pay strict attention to the boiling of the 
water, and not to allow your minds to be disturbed by things of 
minor importance. Boil it slowlj', and let it putrefy until it 
attains the proper colour, for in the water of Life is contained 
the germ of wisdom. By the art of boiling the water will become 
transformed into earth. This earth is to be changed into a pure 
crystalline fluid, from which an excellent red fire is produced ; 
but this water and fire, grown together into one essence, produces 
the great Panacea^ composed of meekness and strength : the lamb 
and the lion in one." 

THE SECRET FIRE. 

In H. P. Blavatsky's book " The Voice of the Sileticey^ the secret 
fire of the Achemists is described as " Kundalini" the " serpen- 
tine," or annular working power in the body of the ascetic. " It 
is an electric fiery occult or Fohatic power, the great pristine 

Alchemy, 127 

force which underlies all organic and inorganic matter " ; and in 
another place the author says : " It is an electro-spiritual force, 
a creative power which, when aroused into action, can as easily 
kill as it can create." 

This point is the reason why the secrets of Alchemy are nor 
divulged to the curious, and why only those who have gained 
the power to control their own self will be told how that power 
can be aroused in man. 

In regard fo this " secret fire," the Rosicrucians say : 

The potentialities in nature are aroused by the action of the 
secret fire, assisted by the elementarj' fire. The secret fire is 
invisible, and is contained within all things. It is the most 
potential and powerful fire, with which the external visible fire 
cannot be compared. It is the fire with which Moses burned the 
golden calf, and that which Jeremiah hid away, and which 
seventy years after was found by the knowing ones, but which^ 
by that time had become a thick water. (2 Maccab, I. and II.) 

Without the possession of this magic fire, no alchemical process 
can be accomplished, and therefore it is recommended in the 
** Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians," that the student gf 
Alchemy should above all seek for the fire. 

THE FOUR ALCHEMICAL RULES, 

1. Follow Nature. 

It is useless to seek for the sun by the light of a candle.^ 

2. First know ; then act. 

Real knowledge exists in the triangle composed of seeing^ 
feelings and understanding. 

3. Use no vulgar processes. Use only one vessel^ one fire^ 
one instrument. 

The door to success lies in the unity of will and purpose and 
the proper adaptation of the means to the end. There are many 
roads leading to the celestial centre. He who follows the chosen 
path may succeed, while he who attempts to walk on many paths 
will be delayed. 

4. Keep the fire constantly burning. 

If the molten metals are allowed to cool off before they are 
transformed into higher ones, they will become hard again, and 

128 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom. 

the whole process will have to be recommenced from the 
beginning. Use the inextinguishable lamp. Its light will not 
go out unless it is driven away by force. 

THE FIVE THINGS NECESSARY TO OBSERVE IN THE 
PRACTICE OF ALCHEMY, 

1. To recognise the true Prima Materia. 

It is to be found everywhere ; but if you do not find it in your 
own house, you will find it nowhere. It is a living substance 
that can be discovered only in places inhabited by man. It is 
the only substance from which the Philosopher's Stone can be 
prepared, and without that substance no genuine silver or gold 
can be made. In thirty pounds of ordinary mercury, there is 
usually not more than one pound of the true substance ; and a 
hundred pounds of ordinary sulphur usually contain not more 
than one pound of that which is useful. It can only be found 
above the earth, but not below it. It is before everybody's eyes ; 
no one can live without it ; everybody uses it ; the poor usually 
possess more of it than the rich ; the ignorant esteem it highly, 
but the learned ones often throw it away. The children play with 
it in the street, and yet it is invisible. It can be perceived by 
the sense of feeling, but it cannot be seen with the material eye. 

2. Use for the preparation of the Prima Materia onty the rose- 
coloured blood of the Red Lion and the pure white gluten of the 
Eagle. 

Let your Will be strong, but without anger, and your Thoughts 
be pure from that which infects the lower strata of the earth's 
atmosphere. Let the fire of the divine Will penetrate deeply 
within your soul, and elevate your mind to the highest regions 
of thought. 

3. Obtain the sacred Fire. 

It is not of man's making ; it cannot be bought, but it is given 
for nothing to those who deserve it. 

4. Then follow Multiplication and Increase y for ivhich purpose 
weight and measure are necessary. 

Weigh all things with the scales of justice, and measure them 
by the rule of reason. 

Alchemy, 129 

5* The fifth is the Application^ that is to say the Projection upon 
the metals. 

This will be accomplished by nature without artificial aid. 

AXIOM ATA HERMETIC A, 

1. Whatever may be accomplished by a simple method should not 
be attempted by a complicated one. 

There is only one Truth, whose existence requires no proof, 
because it is itself proof enough to those who are capable of 
perceiving it. Why should we enter into complexness to 
seek for that which is simple ? The sages say : " Ignis et Azoth 
tibi sufficiunt,^' The body is already in your possession. All 
that you require is the fire and the air. 

2. No substance can be made perfect without long suffering. 
Great is the error of those who imagine that the Philosopher's 

Stone can be hardened without being first dissolved; their 
time and labour is wasted. 

3. Nature must be aided by art whenever she is deficient in 
power. 

Art may be the handmaid of nature, but cannot supplant her 
mistress. Art without nature is always unnatural. Nature 
without art is not always perfect. 

4. Nature cannot be amended except in her own self 

The nature of a tree cannot be changed by trimming the 
branches or by the addition of ornaments ; it can be improved 
only by improving the soil upon which it grows, or by grafting. 

5. Nature enjoy Sy comprehends^ and overcomes nature. 

There is no other actual knowledge than the kaowledge of self. 
Every being can only truly realize its own existence, but not that 
of any element entirely foreign to it. 

6. He who does not know motion does not knowfuitme. 

Nature is the product of emotion. At the moment in which 
eternal motion should cease, all nature would cease to exist. 
He who does not know the motions that are taking place in his 
body is a stranger in his own house. 

7. Whatever produces the same effect as is produced by a com* 
pound is similar to the latter, 

I 

1 30 In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom, 

The One is greater than all the rest of the numbers, for from 
it an infinite variety of mathematical magnitudes may be evolved, 
but no change is possible without the all-pervading presence of 
the One, whose qualities are manifest in its manifestations. 

8. No one can pass from one extreme to another except through a 
medium. 

An animal cannot become divine before it becomes human. 
That which is unnatural must become natural before its nature 
can become spiritual. 

9. Mefals cannot be changed into other metals without having 
been first reduced to prima materia. 

The self-will, opposed to the divine, must cease before the 
divine Will can enter into the heart. We must become 
unsophisticated, like children ; before the word of wisdom can 
speak in our mind. 

10. The unripe must be assisted by the ripe. 

Thus fermentation will be induced. The law of Induction 
rules in all departments of nature. 

11. /« the Calcination the Corpus is not reduced ^ but augmented y 
in quantity. 

True asceticism consists in giving up that which one does not 
want after having received something better. 

12. In Alchemy nothing can bear fruit without having first been 
fnortified. 

The light cannot shine through matter unless the matter has 
become sufficiently refined to allow the passage of the rays. 

13. That which kills produces life; that which causes death causes 
resurrection ; that which destroys creates. 

Nothing comes out of nothing. The creation of a new form is 
conditioned by the destruction (transformation) of the old one. 

14. Everything containing a seed may be augmented^ but not 
without the assistance of nature. 

It is only through the seed that the fruit bearing more seeds 
comes into existence. 

.15. Each thing is multiplied and augmented by means of a mala 
and female principle, . 

Matter produces nothing unless penetrated by power. Nature 
creates nothing unless impregnated by Spirit. Thought remains 
unproductive unless rendered active by Will. 

Alchemy. 131 

16. The virtue of each seed is to unite itself with each thing 
belonging to its own kingdom. 

Each thing in nature is attracted by its own nature represented 
in other things. Colours and sounds of a similar nature form 
harmonious units, substances that are related with each other 
can be combined, animals of the same genus associate with each 
other, and spiritual powers unite with their own kindred germs. 

1"]. A pure womb gives birth to a pure fruit. 

Only in the innermost sanctuary of the soul will the mystery 
of the spirit be revealed. 

1 8. Fire and heat can only be produced by motion. 
Stagnation is death. The stone thrown into the water forms 

progressively radiating circles, which are produced by motion. 
The soul that cannot be moved cannot be elevated, and becomes 
petrified. 

19. The whole method is begun and finished by only one 
method : the boiling. 

The great Arcanum is a celestial spirit, descending from the 
sun, the moon, and the stars, and which is brought into per- 
fection in the saturnine object by continuous boiling until it attains 
the state of sublimation and power necessary to transform the 
base metals into gold. This operation is performed by the 
hermetic fire. The separation of the subtle from the gross must 
be done carefully, adding continually water ; for the more earthly 
the materials are, the more must they be diluted and made 
to move. Continue this process until the separated soul is re- 
united with the body. 

20. The entire process is accomplished through nothing else but 
Water. 

It is the same Water over which the Spirit of God moved in the 
beginning, when darkness was upon the face of the deep. 

21. Each thing comes from and out of that into which it will be 
resolved again. 

That which is earthy comes from the earth; that which 
belongs to the stars is obtained from the stars ; that which is 
spiritual comes from the Spirit, and returns to God. 

22. Where the true principles are absent y the results will be imper- 
fect. 

Mere imitations cannot produce genuine results. Merely 

132 In the Pronaos ,of the Temple of Wisdom. 

imaginary love, wisdom, and power can only be efiEective in the 
realm of illusions. 

23. Art begins where nature ceases to act. 

Art accomplishes by means of nature that which nature is 
unable to accomplish if unaided by art. 

24. The hermetic art is not attained by a great variety of methods, 
the Lapis is only one. 

There is only one eternal, unchangeable truth. It may appear 
under many different aspects ; but in that case it is not the truth 
that changes : it is we who change our modes of conceiving of it. 

2 5. The substance of which the Arcanum is prepared should be 
pure, indestructible, and incombustible. 

It should be pure of grossly material elements, indestructible 
by doubt, and incapable of being burned up in the fire of 
passion. 

26. Do not seek for the seed of the Philosopher's Stone in the 
Elements. 

Only at the Centre of the fruit is that seed to be found. 

27. The substance of the Philosopher's Stone is mercurial. 
Those that are wise are seeking for it in the mercury; the 

fool seeks to create it out of. his own empty brain. 

28. The seed of the metals is in the metals, and the metals are born 
of themselves. 

The growth of the metals is very slow ; but it may be hastened 
by the addition of Patience. 

29. Use only perfect metals. 

Crude mercury, such as is usually found in European countries, 
is perfectly useless for this work. Worldly wisdom is foolishness 
in the eyes of the Lord. 

30. That which is hard and thick must be made subtle and thin 
by calcination. 

This is a very painful and tedious process, because it is 
necessary to remove even the root of evil, and this causes the 
heart to bleed, and tortured nature to cry out. 

31. The foundation of this art is to reduce the corpora into 

ARGENTUM VIVUM. 

This is the Solutto Sulphuris Sapientium in Mercurio. A science 
without life is a dead science ; an intellect without spirituality is 
only a false and borrowed light. 

Alchemy^ 133 

32. In the solution the solvent and the dissolved must remain 
together. 

Fire and water must be made to combine. Thought and love 
must remain for ever united. 

T,^. If the seed is not treated by warmth and moisture ^ it zvill be 
useless. 

Coldness contracts and dryness hardens the heart, but the fire 
of divine love expands it, and the water of thought dissolves the 
residua. ' '\ 

34. The earth produces no fruit unless moistened repeatedly. 

No revelation takes place in the darkness except through the 
light. 

35. The moistening takes place by water, with which it has the 
closest affinity. 

The body itself is a product of thought, and has therefore the 
closest affinity with the mind. 

^6, Everything dry naturally tends to attract the moisture which 
it requires to become complete in its constitution. 

The One, from which all things are produced, is perfect ; and 
therefore all things contain within themselves the tendency and 
possibility for perfection. 

37. A seed is useless and impotent unless it is put in its appro- 
priate matrix. 

A soul cannot devetop and progress without an appropriate 
body, because it is the physical body that furnishes the material 
for its development. 

38. Active heat produces in that which is moist blackness; in that 
which is dry, whiteness; and in that which is white, a yellow colour. 

First comes mortification, then calcination, and afterwards 
the golden glow produced by the light of the sacred fire illumi- 
nating the purified soul. 

39. The fire must be moderate, uninterrupted, slow, equal, moist, 
warm, white, light, all-embracing, enclosed, penetrating, living, inex- 
haustible, and the one used by nature. 

It is the fire that descends from heaven to bless all mankind. 

40. All operations must take place in only one vessel and ivithout 
removing it from the fire. 

The substance used for the preparation of the Philosopher's 
Stone should be collected only in one place and not be dispersed 

134 I^ ^^^ Pronaos ^of the Temple of Wisdom, 

in many places. If the gold has once lost its brightness, it is 
difficult to restore it. 

41. The vessel should be well closed, so that the water may not run 
out ofity or the air escape; it ought to be hermetically sealed y because 
if the spirit were to find a place to escape^ the power would be lost; 
and furthermore it should be well closed^ so that nothing foreign and 
impure can enter and become mixed with it. 

There should always be put at the door of the laboratory a 
sentinel with a flaming sword to examine all visitors, and to reject 
those that are not worthy to be admitted. 

42. Do not open the vessel until the moistening is completed. 

If the vessel is prematurely opened, most of the labour is lost. 

43. The more the Lapis is nursed and nourished^ the more will it 
increase. 

Divine wisdom is inexhaustible ; the limitation exists only in 
the capacity of the form to receive it. 

The End. 

Allen, Scott & Co., Printers, 30, Bouverie Street, E.G. 

THE SBOK/ET DOOTE/IITE : 

The Synthesis of Science, Religion, and Philosophy. 
By H. P. BLAVATSKY (author of " ISIS UNVEILED "). 2 vols. 

Price £2 2s. 

ISIS UNVEILED: 

A Master K^ to the Mysteries of Ancient ttnd Modern Science and 

Theology. 
By H. P. BLAVATSKY. 2 vols. Price £2 2s. 

THE KEY TO THEOSOPHY, 

._ MADAME BLAVATSKY'S NEW BOOK,- 

Being a ckar Exposition in the Form of Question and Answer of the 

£tbtC0t SctencCt anD pbiloaopbi^t 

For the Study of which the Theosophical Society has been founded. 

CONTENTS : 

I. Theosophy and the Theosophical Society. 

II. Exoteric and Esoteric Theosophy. 

III. The Working System of the T. S. 

IV. Relations of the T. S. to Theosophy. 
V. Fundamental Teachings of Theosophy. 

VI. Theosophical Teachings as to Nature and Man. 

VII. On the Various Post-mortem States. 

VIII. On Reincarnation or Re-Birth. 

IX. On the Kama-Loka and Devachan. 

X. On the Nature of our Thinking Principle. 

XI. On the Mysteries of Reincarnation. 

XII. What is Practical Theosophy ? 

XIII. On the Misconceptions about the T. S. 

XIV. The •• Theosophical Mahatmas." 

CONCLUSION. 
The Future of the Theosophical Society. 

APPENDIX. 

Cloth, 307 pages. Price 5/- 

THE VOICE OF THE SILENCE : 

BEING EXTRACTS FROM 

Ube JSooIt of tbe (Bol&en precepts. 

Transi^ted by H. p. BLAVATSKY. Price 2b. 6d. 

THEOSOPHICIL PD6USHIN6 SOCIETY, 7, Duke Street, Adelphi, W.C. 

The Art of Divining by Punctuation^ according to Cornelius Agrippa 
and Others. An entirely new work by 

FRANZ HARTMANN, M.D. 

Price 3s. 6d. with seventy pages of diagrams. 

*'A11 thinkers and workers should possess this most interesting work." 

GEMS FROM THE EAST, 

B ;rbco0opbical JSittbdas JSoofi. 
Compiled by H.P.B. 

BEAUTIFULLY EMBELLISHED WITH SKETCHES AND SYMBOLS 6F 
THE ORIENT. 

Price 3s. 6d. 

THE LIFE OF JEHOSHUA, 

THE PROPHET OF NAZARETH. 

An Occalt Study, and a Key to the Bible, containing the history of an 

Initiate, by 

FRANZ HARTMANN, M.D. Price 7s. 6d. 

THE ASTRAL LIGHT, 

An attempted Exposition of certain Occult Principles in Nature with some 
remarks upon Modem Spiritualism. 

ByNIZEDA. Price 2s. 6d. 

Ee - INCARNATION : 

A STORY OF FORGOTTEN TRUTH. 

By E. D. WALKER, pp. 347. Price 3s. Cd. 

"One of the best works on this most interesting subject." 

" Transactions of tlie BMsky Lodge (London) 

. OF THE 

THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, IN ELUCIDATION OF THE SECRET 
DOCTRINE." - - 
PRICE Is. 6d. 

A BUDDHIST CATECHISM. 

According to the Sinhalese Canon. 
By col. H. S.^OLCOTT. Price One Shilling. 

THEOSOPHICAL PDBLISHIM SOCIETY, 7, Duke StreeUdelpM, ¥.C. 

fCQ fi ■ 1 9 72 

3 2044 038 509 527 

BAKIMAHV, Franz 

In the pronaos of the tanple 
of wisdom, ,,, 

L96 

R08 

H333i 
1890
