Philosophy of the Unconscious, Vol. 2
Eduard von Hartmann (W. C. Coupland, trans.) (1884)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Hartmann's Philosophy of the Unconscious, Vol. 2: metaphysics of the unconscious. Coupland's 1884 translation.

========================================================================

VOL.  II.


THE

ENGLISH  AND  FOREIGN
PHILOSOPHICAL  LIBRARY.


VOLUME  XXVI.


PHILOSOPHY


THE UNCONSCIOUS.


EDUAED  VON  HAETMANN.


SPECULATIVE  RESULTS  ACCORDING  TO  THE  INDUCTIVE
METHOD  OF  PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.


autljoriseti  translation

BY

WILLIAM  CIIATTEKTON  COUPLAKD,  M.A.,  B.Sc.

IN  THREE  VOLUMES.
VOL.  II.


LONDON:

TRUBNELl & CO., LUDGATE HILL.

1884.

[All  rights  reserved.}


BALLANTVNE, HANSON  AND  CO.
EDINBURGH AND LONDON


UNlVrT>FTTY  OT?  r  '  LIFORNIA
SANTA  BAiiiiAIiA  GuLLEGE  LIBRARY


-r3 £7


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.


(B)  THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND

{continued.)

PAGE

X. THE UNCONSCIOUS IN HISTORY ....  I

XI. THE VALUE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS AND OP CONSCIOUS-
NESS  FOR HUMAN LIFE  .  .  .  .28

(C)  METAPHYSICS  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

I.  THE  DIFFERENTIA  OF  CONSCIOUS  AND  UNCONSCIOUS
MENTAL  ACTIVITY  AND  THE  UNITY  OF  WILL  AND  IDEA
IN THE UNCONSCIOUS .....  47

II.  BRAIN AND GANGLIA AS CONDITIONS OF ANIMAL CON-

SCIOUSNESS ......  62

III.  THE ORIGIN OF CONSCIOUSNESS  .  .  .78

( I.) THE  BECOMING-CONSCIOUS  OF  THE  IDEA  . .  78
(2.) THE BECOMING-CONSCIOUS OF BAIN AND BLEA-

SERE 93

(3.) THE UNCONSCIOUSNESS  OF  THE  WILL . .  96

(4.) CONSCIOUSNESS  HAS  NO  DEGREES . .  104

(5.)  THE  UNITY  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS . . .  I13


vi  CONTENTS.

PAOE

IV. THE UNCONSCIOUS  AND CONSCIOUSNESS IN THE VEGE-
TABLE  KINGDOM . . . . .  Iig
(i.) THE UNCONSCIOUS PSYCHICAL ACTIVITY OF

PLANTS  .  .  .  .  .120

(2.) CONSCIOUSNESS  IN  THE  PLANT . .  1 38

V. MATTER  AS  WILL AND IDEA . . .  1 54

VI. THE CONCEPTION OP INDIVIDUALITY . .  1 86

VII. THE ALL-ONENESS OF THE UNCONSCIOUS . .  222

VIII. THE UNCONSCIOUS AND THE GOD OF THEISM . .  245

IX. THE ESSENTIAL NOTION OF GENERATION FROM THE
STANDPOINT OF THE UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY OF

THE UNCONSCIOUS .....  276

X. THE ASCENDING EVOLUTION OF ORGANIC LIFE ON THE

EARTH .......  298

XI. INDIVIDUATION ......  332

(i.) POSSIBILITY AND MANNER OF  EFFECTING INDI-
VIDUATION . . . .  332

(2.) INDIVIDUAL  CHARACTER ....  344

XII. THE SUPREME WISDOM OF THE UNCONSCIOUS AND THE

PERFECTION OF THE  WORLD .  .  .  .30


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

x.

THE UNCONSCIOUS IN HISTORY.

Nature  and  History,  or  the  origin  of  organisms  and  the
development  of  the  human  race,  are  two  parallel  problems.
In  both  cases  the  question  runs :  particular  contingency
or  universal  necessity,  dead  causality  or  living  conformity
to  an  end,  mere  sport  of  atoms  and  individuals  or  a  single
plan  and  general  superintendence  ?  He  who  has  decided
the  question  with  respect  to  Xature  in  favour  of  design
will  have  no  difficulty  in  doing  the  same  in  regard  to
history.  The  only  thing  likely  to  mislead  in  the  latter
case  is  the  semblance  of  personal  freedom.  But  I  think  I
may  confidently  appeal  to  the  general  consensus  of  modern
philosophers  in  respect  to  this  matter  of  the  freedom  of  the
will,  to  the  effect  namely  that  an  empirical  freedom  in
any  single  act  of  volition  in  the  sense  of  unconditional-it  y
is  altogether  out  of  the  question,  since,  like  every  other
natural  phenomenon,  it  falls  under  the  law  of  causality,
and  necessarily  follows  from  the  state  of  the  man's  mind
at  any  given  moment,  and  the  motives  which  are  acting
upon  him.  Further,  that  if  a  claim  be  set  up  for  a  freedom
of  the  will  on. (side  natural  causality,  this  must  at  led  be
rtovyht  (I  do  not  say,  found)  in  the  supersensible  sphere
( m n nil us  noumenon),  in  Kant's  intelligible  character,  but
can  in  no  case  apply  to  the  specific  volitional  act,  since  any

VOL. II.  A


2  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

such  act  is  always  in  time,  consequently  belongs  to  the
sphere  of  the  phenomenal  world,  and  is  accordingly  sub-
ject to  the  law  of  causality,  i.e.,  necessity.  This,  and  the
reasons  why  we  are  liable  to  the  illusion  of  a  belief  in  the
will's  freedom,  may  be  studied  in  Schopenhauer's  essay
"  On  the  Freedom  of  the  Will."

But  suppose  we  even  admitted  the  empirical  freedom
of  the  will,  if  we  recognise  a  purposive  evolution  in  history
at  all,  this  could  only  be  the  result  of  the  freedom  of  indi-
viduals if  the  consciousness  of  the  step  next  to  be  taken,  in
its  full  significance  and  in  all  its  consequences,  were  pos-
sessed by  every  one  freely  co-operating  in  the  historic
movement,  before  he  actively  intervened.

Undoubtedly  since  the  close  of  the  last  century  we
have  been  making  approaches  to  that  ideal  state  where  the
human  race  consciously  accomplishes  its  destiny,  but,  save
for  a  few  superior  minds,  this  is  still  a  remote  condition
of  things,  and  nobody  will  maintain  that  by  far  the  larger
part  of  the  way  already  traversed  has  been  conquered  in
this  wise.  Tor  the  aims  of  the  individual  are  always  sel-
fish, each  one  seeks  only  to  further  his  own  well-being,
and  if  this  conduces  to  the  welfare  of  the  whole,  the  merit
is  certainly  not  his ;  the  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  so  few
that  they  are  of  no  account  in  respect  of  the  whole.  But
the  wonderful  part  of  the  matter  is,  that  even  the  mind,
which  wills  the  bad,  works  the  good,  that  the  results  be-
come, by  combination  of  many  different  seliish  purposes,
quite  other  than  what  each  individual  had  imagined,  and
that  in  the  last  resort  they  always  conduce  to  the  welfare
of  the  whole,  although  often  the  advantage  is  somewhat
remote,  and  centuries  of  retrogression  seem  to  contradict
it;  this  contradiction,  however,  is  only  apparent,  for  they
serve  the  purpose  of  breaking  the  strength  of  an  old
system,  that  room  may  be  made  for  a  new  and  better  one,
or  of  allowing  a  vegetation  to  grow  corrupt,  in  order  that
it  may  manure  the  ground  for  something  fresh  and  fairer.
Even  thousands  of  years  of  stagnation  on  one  spot  of  earth


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 3

should  not  mislead  us,  if  only  this  phase  of  culture  has
fulfilled  its  appointed  office,  and  if  only  at  the  same
time  the  process  of  evolution  goes  forward  at  another
place.

Just  as  little  should  we  expect,  as  is  often  and  un-
reasonably the  case,  that  at  one  and  the  same  place  all  the
various  branches  or  tendencies  should  enjoy  an  unchecked
progress,  and  complain  of  stagnation  and  retrogression,  if
any  particular  branch,  for  which  perhaps  one  has  a  per-
sonal preference,  falls  into  decay.  The  evolution  proceeds
on  the  large  scale,  although  only  one  or  a  few  factors  are
in  active  progress  and  other  fields  lie  fallow ;  for  at  the
proper  time  these  others  will  again  be  taken  in  hand,  and
in  such  a  way  that  the  elevation  already  attained  is  em-
braced in  the  new  phase  of  the  evolution  (think  of  Eaphael
and  Phidias,  Gothe  and  Euripides).  What  is  apt  to  blind
the  observer  to  the  general  development  of  humanity  is
really  a  too  narrow  limitation  of  the  view,  which  keeps
the  eye  fixed  on  certain  painful  and  apparently  incurable
political  or  social  diseases,  or  on  the  momentary  ruin  of
one's  favourite  intellectual  hopes,  instead  of  opening  it
wide  to  embrace  vast  historical  scenes,  which  would  make
plain  not  only  the  great  civilising  events  of  the  present
time,  but  also  reveal  the  multiplicity  of  the  ways  of  his-
tory, and  the  possibility  and  probability  of  an  improvement
of  these  painful  conditions  by  a  path  not  dreamt  of,  and
perhaps  even  contemned.  But  in  yet  another  sense  a  too
narrow  restriction  of  the  historic  horizon  may  blind  to  the
great  truth  of  evolution,  namely,  if  of  the  long  period  of
humanity's  unfolding  all  too  small  a  portion,  say  the  last
thousand  years  (called  in  the  narrower  sense,  "  historic  ")
be  selected,  and  the  brilliant  age  of  Pericles  or  of  Augustus
be  compared  with  the  present  era.  The  naivete  accuracy
and  delicacy  of  feeling  of  the  aesthetic  culture  of  those
times  may  deceive  us  for  a  moment  with  respect  to  the
superiority  of  our  own,  but  the  delusion  disappears  as
i-oon  as  we  reilect  that  the  age  of  Pericles  possessed  these


4  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

excellences only instinctively  and unconsciously, as  is
shown  by  the  fact  that  even  so  deep  and  circumspect  a
thinker  as  Plato,  with  such  models  before  him,  could  con-
struct so  poor  a  theory  of  aesthetics  and  an  ideal  consti-
tution so  remote from  actual  needs. Not  the  shallow
common  sense  of  the  Eomans,  but  the  Germans  of  the  last
century,  converted  into  the  conscious  and  now  inalienable
possession  of  humanity  what  the  Greeks  only  wrought  out
by  instinct;  and  which  we  can  no  longer  execute,  because
in  all departments  of  art  we  have  advanced  in  feeling
from  the  plastic  to  the  pictorial. The  naive  delicacy  of
taste,  for  which  antiquity  was  distinguished  in  all  direc-
tions, is  naturally  also  far  more  easily  destroyed  by  rude
external  influences or  inner  decay  than  the  more  sub-
stantial mental  culture  of  the  present  day,  with  its  rich
material  knowledge  and  self-conscious  capacity,  which  is
protected  from  sinking  into  oblivion  by  a  thousand  ex-
pedients. Other  differences  consist  in  this,  that  in  anti-
quity the  cultivated  portion  of  the  world  was  very  small
compared  with  that  of  the  present  day,  when  culture  has
spread  more  or  less  among  all  vigorous  races  and  peoples,
and  new  parts  of  the  world  have  been  taken  possession  of
by  the  civilised  peoples  of  Europe. At  the  same  time,
however,  within  the  civilised  races  also  education  is  ever
extending  to  larger  circles  and  strata  of  the  population,
so  that  for  a  twofold  reason  the  cultured  and  mentally
advanced  society  of  the  present  day  forms  a  very  much
larger  quota  of  the  total  population  of  the  earth  than
heretofore,  and  is  growing  with  the  greatest  rapidity  pre-
cisely at  the  present  moment. But  now  as  we  have  to  do
not  with  the  development  of  men  but  of  humanity,  this
increase  in  breadth  is  not  less  important  than  the  growth
in  deptli — apart  from  the  circumstance  that  the  imperish-
ability of  what  has once been  won  is  guaranteed  by  a
probability  advancing  in  geometrical  progression.

It  is  true  that  the  free  possession  of  the  fruits  of  civili-
sation is  still  hampered  and  embittered  by  the  struggle


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  5

with  the  threatening  shades  of  the  Middle  Ages  reach-
ing into  our  own  time  ;  but  we  must  not  allow  ourselves
to  be  blinded  by  the  struggle  against  these  no  longer
justifiable  existences  to  the  historical  value  of  the  same  in
the  past,  and  their  abiding  significance  for  the  evolution
of  humanity.  The  utterly  barbarous  tribes  of  the  Ger-
manic migrations  required  during  their  infancy  a  strict
schooling,  in  which  the  physiological  processes  of  transmu-
tation and  fusion  simultaneously  went  on,  as  whose  result
we  have  the  nationalities  of  Europe  of  the  present  day.
If  antiquity  especially  developed  the  beautiful  in  sense
and  fancy,  if  the  culture  of  the  understanding  to-day
gives  us  the  right  to  declare  the  forms  of  mediaeval  life
to  be  relatively  barbarous,  it  was  the  task  of  German-
ism to  complete  the  deepening  of  the  heart,  though  natur-
ally in  a  one-sided  fashion,  and  this  it  could  accomplish
effectively  by  the  aid  of  no  other  civilising  impulse  than
the  transcendent  ideals  of  Christianity.  It  would  be
unjust  to  refuse  to  recognise  that  the  working-out  and
development  of  the  profoundest  forces  of  the  German
mind,  which  will  ever  remain  a  possession  to  humanity
after  separation  from  that  native  soil,  is  essentially,  if  not
exclusively,  due  to  the  imaginative  inner  life  of  the
Middle  Ages.  Whoever  has  got  the  better  of  the  elements
hostile  to  civilisation  inherent  in  the  popular  Christianity
is  for  ever  secured  from  relapsing  into  the  elements  of
past  periods  of  the  development  of  humanity,  which  are
hostile  to  civilisation,  whereas  the  most  highly  cultured
Greek  or  Roman  had  still  before  him  the  Christian  phase
of  evolution.

Such  an  injustice  to  the  Middle  Ages  Buckle  and  his
school  are  guilty  of  when  they  set  up  the  conscious  under-
standing, which  undoubtedly  is  higher  than  sense,  fancy,
and  heart,  and  ought  to  govern  these,  as  sole  measure  of
advance  in  culture,  which  it  by  no  means  is,  since  the
harmonious  elaboration  of  all  the  mental  forces  appertains
thereto; and  since  the  understanding  alone,  without  the


6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

foundation  of  powerfully  developed  sensibility,  fancy,  and
heart,  would  only  produce  wasted  shadows,  but  not  men
capable  of  any  earnest  task.  The  source  of  this  error  is
this, — that  the  English,  even  down  to  the  present  day,  are
essentially  at  that  rationalistic  standpoint  which  we  occu-
pied in  the  last  century;  and  that  these  historians  of  civili-
sation, instead  of  trying  to  discover  the  unconsciously
impelling  ideas  of  history,  fancy  they  can  explain  them
as  a  product  of  conscious  reflection.  Unconscious  reason,
namely,  unfolds  itself,  as  we  have  just  seen,  just  as  much
in  sensibility,  fancy,  and  heart,  as  in  the  reflection  of  the
conscious  understanding ;  and  it  again  is  evidence  of  an
all  too-narrow  glance,  when  the  regulative  element  of
modern  life  is  looked  upon  as  that  which  is  most  im-
portant for  all  time,  and  as  a  standard  of  culture  valid  for
all  time.  In  opposition  to  such  a  straitening  of  the
history  of  civilisation  into  a  "  History  of  Eationalism "
Hegel's  attempts  at  a  Philosophy  of  History  retain  their
full  value,  since  in  them  the  discussion  always  and  alone
turns  upon  the  (unconscious)  ideas  underlying  the
epoch.

The  opposite  view  of  Schopenhauer  with  repect  to  His-
tory rests  on  his  conception  of  time  as  purely  subjective
phenomenal  form,  according  to  which  all  that  happens  is
an  exclusively  subjective  appearance,  wherefore  history  is
a  subjective  tissue  of  representations  devoid  of  truth.  He
blinds  himself  to  the  manifest  contradiction  of  this  view,
to  the  mighty  organism  of  the  historic  evolution  of  hu-
manity, on  the  one  hand,  by  reflecting  only  on  the  indif-
ferent and  accidental  framework  of  facts  (succession  of
kings,  battles,  &c),  instead  of  on  the  content  of  historical
culture,  which  is  entirely  neglected  by  him  ;  and,  on  the
other  hand,  by  confounding  the  demand  for  a  heightening
of  individual  comfort  with  the  demand  for  a  civilised  pro-
gression of  humanity  as  a  whole.  Happiness  certainly
does  not  keep  pace  with  human  progress,  but  this  does
not  militate  against  the  truth,  that  this  progress,  both  in


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  7

the  inner  mental  world  and  in  the  forms  of  social  life,  really
exists,  and  leads  to  ever  higher  development.

If  anything  is  calculated  to  prove  the  great  progress  in
spiritual  matters  from  the  Greeks  to  the  present  clay,  it  is
the  progress  of  philosophy  and  especially  that  of  the  German
and  English  philosophy  of  the  last  two  hundred  years.
Philosophy  as  the  final  summariser  of  the  ideas  which
support  a  period  of  civilisation,  and  as  the  flower  of  the
historic  self-consciousness  of  the  Unconscious  Idea,  may
be  taken  as  the  most  faithful  representative  of  the  spiritual
horizon  of  a  section  of  time  in  the  narrowest  and  most
compact  frame  ;  the  progress  of  the  development  of  ideas,
which  we  perceive  in  the  history  of  philosophy,  shows
us  as  through  a  diminishing  glass  the  quintessence -of  the
spiritual  possessions  of  the  corresponding  ages  in  their
various  phases  of  development.  That  in  the  different
philosophies  there  is  really  a  development  was  first  shown
by  Heirel,  who  constructed  from  the  earlier  detached  in-
tellectual torsos  an  organically  connected  and  harmonious
monumental  group.  Undoubtedly  the  individual  colla-
borateurs  had  either  no  idea  at  all  of  this  concatenation,
or  possessed  indeed  only  a  highly  defective  knowledge  of
a  limited  number  of  their  predecessors,  and  just  as  their
profoundest  principles  instinctively  welled  up  from  the
depths  of  the  Unconscious,  so  instinctively  did  they  them-
selves divine  the  truth  in  regard  to  the  place,  which  they
had  to  occupy  in  the  evolution,  so  that  the  modern  his-
toriography of  Philosophy  must  be  characterised  as  the
bringing  to  consciousness  of  the  unconscious  relations  ob-
taining between  different  philosophies,  in  consequence  of
which  they  unconsciously  form  a  great  development
series.  Put  now,  when  we  consider  that  at  the  same  time
each  of  these  philosophies  is  only  the  most  conscious
expression  of  the  period  of  civilisation  which  has  just
attained  its  acme,  thus  only  the  last  budding  branch,  which
lias  sprung  from  the  common  hidden  root,  whence  all  the
achievements  of  this  portion  of  time  in  the  most  diverse


8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

directions  have  harmoniously  sprung, — then  it  is  evident,
that  the  epochs  of  civilisation  taken  as  a  whole  must
be  as  much  related  as  phases  of  an  ascending  development
series,  as  those  common  roots  of  the  characteristic  perform-
ances of  eacli  one  of  them  (i.e.  their  unconsciously  impel-
ling ideas),  or  as  their  most  conscious  forms  of  expression
(the  standard  philosophies).  What  should  be  regarded  as
the  unconscious  impelling  Idea  in  any  particular  period,  can
only  be  determined  by  the  Unconscious  itself  in  reference
to  the  phase  of  development  which  is  ideally  indispensable
at  that  "precise  time.  For  the  human  individuals  them-
selves, who  perform  the  tasks  answering  to  this  phase,
before  they  even  in  a  small  measure  attain  to  the  con-
sciousness of  the  unconscious  Idea,  by  which  they  are
impelled,  cannot  possibly  be  the  cause  of  this  phase  of
the  Idea,  since  humanity  only  attains  a  consciousness  of
the  introduction  of  the  same  into  the  collective  organism,
and  of  the  necessity  of  just  these  phases  of  development
in  this  period  of  time  long  after  the  close  of  the  period  in
question.

Now  the  means  whereby  a  particular  phase  of  the  Idea
is  actualised  in  a  certain  period  are  of  two  kinds,  namely,
on  the  one  side  the  implanting  an  instinctive  impulse  in
the  masses,  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  production  of  men
of  genius  as  finger-posts  and  pioneers.  This  mysterious
impulse  which  works  in  the  masses  from  time  to  time
in  the  form  of  tribal  migrations,  emigrations  of  multitudes,
crusades,  religious,  political  and  social  national  revolutions,
and  guides  the  same  with  truly  demonic  power  to  a  goal
of  which  they  are  unconscious,  is  still  ever  "right  con-
scious of  its  way"  if  it  also  for  the  most  part  believes,  that
this  way  leads  to  quite  another  goal  than  is  actually  the
fact.  For  in  the  cases,  where  the  masses  do  not  altogether
rush  headlong  forward,  blind  with  rage,  and  without  con-
scious aim,  but  have  an  end  in  view,  this  conscious  aim  is
commonly  a  worthless  or  perverse  one,  whereas  the  true
purpose of  history in  these  revolutions  is only subse-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  9

quently  unveiled. — In  like  manner,  even  without  exactly
inflaming  the  masses,  history  attains,  by  the  initiative  of
eminent  individuals,  results  which  were  quite  beside  the
conscious  purposes  of  such  men.  (Think  in  particular  of  the
fertile  marriage  of  different  national  civilisations,  how  with
the  national  exclusiveness  of  earlier  times  they  could  have
been  produced  only  by  means  of  vast  expeditions  for  the
sake  of  conquest,  as,  e.g.,  those  of  Alexander,  of  Csesar,  the
Koman  expeditions  of  the  German  Emperors,  nay,  even
the  European  revolutions  evoked  by  Napoleon.  Only
an  unhistoric  sense  can  make  light  of  the  fields  strewed
with  the  corpses  of  these  heroes  duped  by  the  Uncon-
scious, whence  have  sprung  harvests  so  fruitful  and  rich
in  blessing.)  Other  ends  are  attained  by  the  Unconscious
in  a  more  peaceful  way,  when  it  calls  forth  the  right  genius
at  the  right  time,  who  is  enabled  just  to  solve  that  problem,
whose  solution  his  age  urgently  needs.1  Xo  more  calamitous
gift  for  the  individual  than  genius,  for  the  men  of  genius
are,  even  with  apparent  outward  good  fortune,  yet  always
those  men  who  most  deeply  and  irremediably  feel  the
wretchedness  of  existence.  But  men  of  genius  are  not  here
for  their  own  sake,  but  for  humanity ;  and  for  humanity
it  is  quite  indifferent,  whether  in  fulfilling  their  task  they
feel  miserable,  or  even  perish  in  distress.  The  right  man
has  never  been  wanting  at  the  right  time ;  and  the  cry
sometimes  heard,  that  men  are  lacking  for  certain  urgent
tasks,  only  proves  that  the  problems  have  been  wrongly
proposed  by  human  consciousness,  that  they  do  not  at  all  (or
at  least  not  now)  lie  in  the  plan  of  history,  and  that  con-
sequently even  the  most  gifted  men  would  vainly  expend
their  mental  energies  on  these  problems  (at  least  at  this
time). (Such  an  absolutely  insoluble  problem,  e.g.,  is  the

1  As  the  most  natural  and  easiest  this  prominent  human  being  (cf.  Dr.

means  to  this  end  appears  the  bring-  Carl  Freiherr  du  l'rel  :  "  The  .Meta-

ing  together  of  two  persons  suited  to  physic  of  Sexual  Love  in  its  relation

produce  the required individuality  to  History,"  in  the  "  Aust.  Journal

by  a  love  kindled  in  them  with  the  for  He.  and  Art.,"  1S72, No.  34J.
unconscious purpose of begetting


io  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

regeneration  and  strengthening  of  States  doomed  to  decay
and  dissolution.  A  temporarily  insoluble  problem,  on  the
other  hand,  is  the  revival  of  original  production  in  some
special  field  of  mental  work,  which,  at  the  moment  in  the
hands  of  Epigoni,  must  lie  fallow  for  a  season,  before
a  new  phase  of  development  commences  under  the  influ-
ence of  a  new  and  fertile  idea.)  This  pre-established
harmony,  so  to  say,  between  historic  problems  and  indi-
viduals with  a  special  faculty  for  solving  them,  reaches
so  far,  that  even  technical  inventions  (in  a  practically
available  form)  are  effected  always,  but  then  also  always,
oidy  when  the  pre-conditions  for  their  fruitful  utilisa-
tion, as  well  as  the  need  of  such  aids  to  culture,  are
given.

Now  the  collective  inner  spiritual  evolution  of  humanity
forms  the  proper  content  of  the  history  of  humanity;
whereas  State,  Church,  and  Society,  notwithstanding  their
organic  character  and  their  organic  development,  still,  in
respect  of  the  inner  spiritual  evolution,  have  only  the
value  of  a  scaffolding  which,  produced  by  the  unconscious
mental  activity  of  individuals,  now  on  its  side  again  sup-
ports and  furthers  the  elaboration  of  the  conscious  mind,
by  not  only  protecting  and  securing  it,  but  also  as  an
accessory  mechanism  saving  one  great  part  of  the  spiritual
labour,  and  lightening  another.

Like  every  bodily  part  the  cerebrum  also  is  strength-
ened by  use  and  exercise,  and  made  more  capable  of  new
allied  performances ;  but  as  in  every  bodily  part,  so  in  the
cerebrum  the  vigour  and  material  perfection  acquired  by
the  parents  is  transmissible  to  the  child.  This  transmis-
sion is  not  directly  demonstrable  in  each  single  case ;  but,
on  the  average,  taking  one  generation  with  another,  it  is  a
fact,  and  it  is  likewise  a  fact  that  there  is  a  latent  trans-
mission, which  only  reveals  its  fruits  in  the  second  or  third
generation  {e.g.,  when  somebody  inherits  from  his  maternal
grandfather  a  luxuriant  red  beard  and  fine  bass  voice).
As  each  generation  further  elaborates  its  conscious  intel-


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. n

lect,  thus  also  further  perfects  its  material  organ,  in  the
course  of  generations  these  additions,  imperceptibly  small
in  a  single  generation,  amount  to  clearly  visible  quantities.
It  is  no  mere  figure  of  speech,  that  children  are  now  born
more  clever,  and  that,  less  childish  than  formerly,  they
even  in  childhood  show  a  tendency  to  become  prematurely
knowing.  As  the  offspring  of  trained  animals  are  more
adapted  for  similar  training  than  offspring  captured  when
wild,  so  also  the  children  of  a  human  generation  are  the
more  clever  in  making  acquisitions  in  the  various  depart-
ments of  practice  and  theory,  the  greater  the  advance
already  made.  I  doubt,  e.g.,  whether  a  Greek  boy  could
ever  have  become  an  excellent  productive  musician  in  the
modern  sense,  because  his  brain  was  without  those  in-
herited predispositions  for  the  wide  field  of  musical  har-
mony, which  modern  humanity  of  western  Europe  has
only  gained  through  an  historic  development  of  more  than
fifteen  generations.  An  Archimedes  or  Euclid,  in  spite  of
their  relative  mathematical  genius,  would  have  evinced
no  little  awkwardness  as  pupils  of  an  instruction  in  the
higher  mathematics.

Thus  all  spiritual  progress  causes  an  enhancement  of
the  executive  capacity  of  the  material  organ  of  the  in-
tellect, and  this  becomes  through  inheritance  (on  the
average)  the  enduring  possession  of  humanity — a  position
scaled  facilitating  further  advance.  That  is,  the  progress
in  the  spiritual  possession  of  humanity  goes  hand  in  hand
with  the  anthropological  development  of  the  race,  and
stands  in  reciprocal  relation  with  it ;  all  progress  on  the
one  side  stands  the  other  side  in  good  stead.  There  must,
accordingly,  be  also  an  anthropological  ennoblement  of  the
race,  which  springs  from  other  causes  than  that  mental
progress,  which  furthers  the  intellectual  evolution.  Of
the  latter  kind,  is,  e.g.,  the  improvement  of  the  race  by
sexual  selection  (B.  (Jhap.  ii.) — which  ceaselessly  exerts
its  unnoticed  but  powerful  effects — or  the  competition  of
races  and  nations  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  which  is


12  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

waged  among  mankind  under  natural  laws  just  as  piti-
lessly as  among  animals  and  plants.  No  power  on  earth
is  able  to  arrest  the  eradication  of  the  inferior  races  of
mankind,  which,  as  relics  of  earlier  stages  of  development
once  also  passed  through  by  ourselves,  have  gone  on  vege-
tating down  to  the  present  day.  As  little  as  a  favour  is
done  the  dog  whose  tail  is  to  be  cut  off,  when  one  cuts  it
off  gradually,  inch  by  inch,  so  little  is  there  humanity  in
artificially  prolonging  the  death-struggle  of  savages  who
are  on  the  verge  of  extinction.  The  true  philanthropist,
if  he  has  comprehended  the  natural  law  of  anthropological
evolution,  cannot  avoid  desiring  an  acceleration  of  the  last
convulsions,  and  labouring  for  that  end.  One  of  the  best
means  is  the  support  of  missions,  which  (according  to  a
truly  divine  irony  of  the  Unconscious)  has  done  more  to
further  this  purpose  of  Nature  than  all  the  direct  attempts
of  the  white  race  at  the  annihilation  of  savages.  The
quicker  this  eradication  of  the  peoples  living  in  a  state  of
nature  incapable  of  competition  with  the  white  race  is
proceeded  with,  and  the  quicker  the  whole  earth  is  ex-
clusively occupied  by  races  hitherto  the  highest,  the  more
quickly  will  the  struggle  of  different  stocks  within  the  high-
est race  burst  forth  into  immense  proportions,  the  sooner
will  the  spectacle  of  the  absorption  of  the  lower  race  by  the
higher  be  repeated  among  stocks  and  peoples.  But  the  dif-
ference is,  that  these  peoples  are  far  more  equal,  thus  far
more  capable  of  competition,  than  the  lower  races  (except
the  Mongolian)  have  hitherto  shown  themselves  in  presence
of  the  Caucasian  race.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  struggle
for  existence  between  nations,  because  waged  with  more
equal  force,  must  bs  much  more  fearful,  bitter,  persistent,
and  attended  with  greater  sacrifices,  than  between  races,  as
we  shall  see  later  on  (C.  chap,  x.),  that  the  struggle  for  ex-
istence is  in  general  the  more  bitter  and  the  more  merciless,
but  at  the  same  time  also  the  more  advantageous  for  the
progressive  evolution  of  the  race,  the  nearer  are  the
species  or  varieties  that  compete  with  one  another.


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 13

It  is  relatively  indifferent  whether  this  struggle  for
existence  between  peoples  and  races  assumes  the  form  of
physical  struggle  with  weapons,  or  whether  it  takes  place
in  other  apparently  more  peaceful  forms  of  competition.
It  would  be  a  great  error  to  suppose  that  war  is  the  cruel-
est  or  even  only  the  most  effective  form  of  annihilating  a
competitor ;  it  is  only  the  most  obvious,  because  rudest
— but  on  that  very  account  also  the  ultima  ratio  for  a
people  which  sees  itself  overreached  by  its  competitor  in
the  so-called  peaceful  clashing  of  interests.  The  sacrifices
of  even  the  greatest  war  are  insignificant  compared  with
the  annihilation  of  millions  and  millions  of  human  beings
who  perish  when,  e.g.,  a  people  is  drained  by  another  of
higher  industrial  development  by  means  of  commerce,  and
deprived  of  a  part  of  its  previous  source  of  earning  a  live-
lihood (com]).  Carey's  "  Principles  of  Political  Economy,'-'
on  the  effects  of  the  English  blood-sucking  system  in
India,  Portugal  and  elsewhere).  "While  by  means  of  this
struggle  for  existence  the  earth  becomes  more  and  more
the  exclusive  possession  of  the  most  highly-developed
peoples,  not  only  does  the  entire  population  of  the  earth
become  more  civilised,  but  also  by  means  of  the  differen-
tiations conditioned  by  forms  of  soil  and  climate  within
the  people  that  has  attained  the  hegemony  new  germs
of  development  are  always  being  scattered,  which  indeed,
again,  can  only  be  unfolded  by  means  of  the  cruel  struggle
for  existence.

Awful  as  is  the  prospect  of  this  perpetual  struggle  from
the  endaemonist  point  of  view,  equally  magnificent  does
it  appear  from  the  teleological  in  respect  to  the  goal  of  an
extreme  intellectual  development.  One  must  only  ac-
custom oneself  to  the  thought  that  the  Unconscious  can
be  led  astray  neither  more  nor  less  by  the  lamentation  of
milliards  of  human  individuals  than  by  that  of  as  many
animal  individuals,  if  only  these  torments  further  develop-
ment, and  thereby  its  own  main  design.

I  said  above,  that  the  fact  of  an  evolution  of  humanity


14  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

may  certainly  be  doubted  if  one  contemplate  too  limited
sections  of  history;  we  may  now  say,  that  one  can
only  in  that  case  doubt  evolution,  but  not  if  the  total
duration  of  humanity,  from  its  first  appearance  on  earth
till  the  future  perspective  just  hinted  at,  be  surveyed  with
a  single  glance.  The  time  has  gone  by  when  a  Creuzer
and  a  Schelling  supposed  a  primitive  people  endowed  with
all  wisdom,  from  whose  decay  the  race  of  mankind  had
developed.  To-day,  comparative  philology  and  compara-
tive mythology,  ethnology,  anthropology,  and  archaeology,
unite  in  their  teaching  that  the  state  of  culture  of  our
forefathers  was  the  ruder  and  more  primitive  the  more
remote  the  era  to  which  we  descend.  When  three  to  four
thousand  years  ago  the  Aryans  began  in  small  detach-
ments that  national  migration,  whose  present  result  is  the
rule  of  the  Indo-Germanic  stocks  from  the  Indian  Ocean
to  the  Pacific,  they  already  possessed  a  considerable  civili-
sation, which  can  only  have  been  the  result  of  the  ante-
cedent ten  thousands  of  years.  Already  provided  with  a
language  furnished  with  inflexions,  with  fruitful  and  pro-
found philosophical  nature-myths,  with  technical  instru-
ments for  agriculture,  the  shaping  of  dwellings  and  clothes,
they  make  their  first  appearance  in  history.  Much  as  we
have  gained  in  culture  since  then,  yet  it  holds  good  here
more  than  anywhere  that  ail  commencement  is  difficult,  and
doubtless  it  was  a  far  greater  and  therefore  also  more  pro-
tracted task  to  work  up  to  such  an  elevation  from  the
primitive  condition  of  speechless  human  animals,  than,
once  in  possession  of  such  means  of  culture,  especially
such  an  incomparable  language,  to  subjugate  Nature  ever
more  and  more,  and  to  outstrip  the  backward  races  in  ever-
increasing  progression.

If  language,  mythology,  and  technology  form  the  spirit-
ual content  of  that  pre-historic  period  of  civilisation,  the
family  expanded  to  the  trihe  is  the  form  in  which  this
content  is  embraced.  Whilst  the  sexual  instinct  brought
together  man  and  woman  to  found  a  family,  it  was  on  the


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 15

one  hand  the  instinctive  social  instinct  (Grotius)  which
hindered  the  atomistic  sundering  of  blood-relations  of  the
first  and  second  degree ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the
struggle  for  existence,  the  war  of  all  against  all  (Hobbes),
the  hostility  of  foreign  neighbours  to  one  another,  which
necessarily  brought  about  an  increase  of  the  power  of
attack  and  defence  by  the  closest  solidarity  of  the  family
and  the  clan.  Thus  the  head  of  the  family  grew  into  the
elder  of  the  clan  or  patriarch,  and — with  increasing  expan-
sion of  the  clan  into  the  tribe — into  the  chief  of  the  tribe,
or  patriarchial  king.  In  this  condition  do  we  find  the
Aryans,  when  they  conquered  Hindostan  ;  the  Greeks,
at  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war;  the  Germans,  in  their
tribal  migrations.  It  is  true  that  animals  also  found
families,  also  wage  war  with  one  another ;  but  they  imme-
diately relapse  into  the  inorganic  mass  of  the  herd,  as  soon
as  more  than  the  family  in  the  narrow  sense  remain  to-
gether, whereas  the  clan  is  organically  parted  into  families,
and  therefore  really  exhibits  the  higher  unity  of  the  latter.
Wherefore  the  union  of  the  three  instincts  (sexual  im-
pulse, social  impulse,  and  instinct  of  enmity  of  all  to  all)
is,  in  fact,  in  man  something  new  and  higher  than  in  the
animal,  and  makes  him  the  ffiov  ttoXitlkov  of  Aristotle.

The  higher  unconscious  content  of  those  instincts  in
the  case  of  man  is  shown  in  this,  that  its  proximate  pro-
ducts, the  family,  the  clan,  and  the  tribe,  must  be  regarded
as  the  germinal  vesicle  and  embryo  of  all  later  political,
ecclesiastical,  and  social  forms.  The  head  of  the  family  is
first  Icing  (leader  in  battle,  exclusive  representative  of  the
family  to  the  outer  world,  and  judge,  with  power  of  life
and  death)  ;  secondly,  priest  (in  the  then  exclusive  family
worship) ;  and  thirdly,  teacher  and  taskmaster  of  his  own
people.  These  three  departments  are  here  still  united  in
inseparable  unity;  or,  more  correctly,  they  have  not  yet
at  all  worked  themselves  out  of  their  state  of  indifference.
This  emergence  does  not  take  place  suddenly  but  gradu-
ally; each  of  the  three  spheres  has  the  tendency  to  de-


1 6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

velop  into  a  formal  organism,  which  dominates  according
to  possibilities  the  other  life-spheres.  That  one  of  the
three  spheres  now,  on  whose  elaboration  in  an  historical
period  most  popular  energy  is  expended,  in  fact  rules
during  this  period.  But  since  the  departments  can  only
be  worked  at  one  after  another,  it  lies  in  the  nature  of  the
case  that  the  sides  which  first  emerge  must  implicitly  con-
tain in  themselves  those  which  are  not  yet  unfolded,  so
far  as  the  latter  do  not  still  remain  in  the  primitive  bosom
of  the  family.

The  development  of  the  State  is  everywhere  the  first
and  most  urgent  requirement ;  but  the  ecclesiastical  and
social  functions,  so  far  as  they  have  emerged  from  the
family  circle,  must  be  supplied  at  the  same  time  (thus,  e.g.,
in  the  Grseco-Koman  constitution,  where  the  kingly  high-
priests,  and  also  in  the  republican  phase  the  ecclesi-
astical institutions  were  integral  parts  of  the  State).  In
Hindostan,  a  few  centuries  after  the  conquest  by  the
Aryans,  there  took  place  that  powerful  revolution,  whereby
the  military  nobility  was  almost  exterminated,  and  the
rule  of  the  priesthood  was  permanently  established  down
to  the  present  day.  In  the  West  this  revolution  (which
in  India  stifled  all  germs  of  progress)  happily  took  place
after  a  complete  cycle  of  the  political  development  of
antiquity;  a  circumstance  which,  after  the  expiration  of
the  mediaeval-ecclesiastical  phase  of  development,  made
possible  the  re-birth  of  German  life,  even  in  political  and
mental  respects,  by  means  of  the  renascence  of  antiquity.

As  the  Church  only  appeared  as  the  second  element,  it
could  not  absorb  the  already  existing  State  in  the  same
way  as  in  antiquity  the  State  the  yet-undeveloped
Church ;  but  it  could  push  it  back  into  the  second  rank,
and  itself  occupy  the  first  place.  Whilst  in  the  last
century  secular  life  again  gained  the  upper  hand  over  the
spiritual,  it  was  only  in  appearance  the  State  as  such  that
gained  the  victory  over  the  Church.  In  truth  it  is  the
social  interests  which  have  repressed  the  ecclesiastical,  and


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 17

only  because  society  as  such  is  still  occupied  in  fashioning
an  organ  of  its  own  has  it  been  provisionally  the  State
that  has  outstripped  the  Church  in  the  perception  and
advocacy  of  certain  social  and  especially  economic  interests,
and  so  in  general  has  obtained  precedence  of  her ;  whilst,
on  the  other  hand,  the  hitherto- existing  Church  likewise
derives  its  best  power  of  persistence  from  certain  social
functions  which  she  still  vicariously  champions.  This
phase  is,  therefore,  particularly  interesting,  because  it  offers
something  really  new  under  the  sun.

The  commencement  of  the  evolution  of  society  as  such
into  an  independent  organism  beside  Church  and  State  is
something  so  new,  that  there  are  only  a  few  who  notice  it
at  all.  Most  people  think,  because  the  organism  of  the
State  must  at  present  vicariously  perform  social  functions
(e.g.,  instruction  of  youth,  care  of  the  poor,  guaranteeing
of  interest  for  industrial  undertakings),  that  these  things
are  really  State-functions,  and  then  perhaps  commit  the
error,  like  Lassalle,  of  expecting  from  it  the  establish-
ment of  associations  for  purposes  of  production,  instead
of  rather  co-operating  in  the  organisation  of  society,  and
transferring  to  the  latter  social  functions  hitherto  performed
by  the  State.  But  where  exceptionally  the  ideal  separa-
tion of  State  and  Society,  and  the  necessity  of  gradually
procuring  a  real  separation  is  recognised,  there  perhaps  we
hear  talk  of  a  necessary  and  irreconcilable  strife  between
them,  instead  of  the  harmony  of  political  and  social  in-
terests (Cueist).  Negatively  expressed,  Society  embraces
the  wide  sphere  of  life-relations  and  forms  of  intercourse,
that  are  not  given  in  the  conceptions  State  and  Church  ;
positively  expressed,  it  is  the  organisation  of  labour  in  the
widest  sense.  The  organisation  of  labour  especially  signi-
fies the,  ordering  and  regulating  of  the  division  of  labour
between  the  sexes  and  individuals;  but,  in  addition  also,
the  preparation  of  youth  for  their  life-work,  and  the  care
of  those  who  have  become  incapable  of  work. The  notion

of  the  division  of  labour  of  course  includes  the  highest  as
vol.  11.  b


1 8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

the  lowest,  unqualified  manual  labour  as  well  as  the
mental  labour  of  the  investigator  and  artist,  and  not  less
the  labour  of  education  and  of  social  self-government.  It
is  evident  that  "  Society,"  in  this  sense,  in  fact  embraces
all  forms  of  civilised  life  except  State  and  Church ;  a
meaning  in  which  it  has  hitherto  been  understood  only
by  Lorenz  Stein.  The  tendency  of  this  working-out  of  a
social  organism  (Socialism)  is  to  limit  the  freedom  of  com-
petition, which  has  been  the  means  of  emancipating  labour
from  its  former  shackles,  in  favour  of  a  systematic  division
of  labour,  and  to  prevent  the  gain  of  one  (as  in  free  com-
petition) being  only  too  often  purchased  at  the  dispropor-
tionate loss  of  another.  But,  as  said,  this  phase  is  still  so
much  in  its  very  commencement,  that  the  How  of  such
organisations  as  will  infallibly  arise  in  the  future  is  thus
far  quite  indeterminable.

We  will  now  bestow  one  more  hasty  glance  on  the
development  of  the  forms  of  the  State,  the  Church,  and
(if  only  as  yet  implicit)  Society.

I  shall  first  try  to  describe  with  a  few  strokes  the
outline  of  the  development  of  the  Idea  of  the  State,  as  it
appears  to  me.  History  exhibits  three  main  contrasts  in
the  life  of  the  State,  large  state  and  small  state,  republic
and  monarchy,  indirect  and  direct  government.  The  pro-
blem is,  to  unite  large  state  and  republic  as  the  prefer-
able forms,  the  means  to  that  end  indirect  government.
The  patriarchal  chieftainships  and  royalties  show  us  the
union  of  small  state  and  monarchy,  the  Asiatic  despotisms
that  of  the  large  state  and  monarchy.  Here  only  one
man  has  civil  liberty,  all  others  are  bond-slaves  or  thralls
of  the  ruler.  The  Creek  town  and  district  republics  are
the  first  specimens  of  the  Republic.  Favoured  by  the
natural  divisions  of  their  small  country,  the  Greeks
could,  even  in  their  petty  states,  exhibit  the  republican
form  of  government  as  an  aristocracy  of  free  citizens,
ruling  over  twice  as  many  slaves.  The  Roman  Empire
combines  the  Creek town-republic  with  the  Asiatic  des-


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 19

potism  of  the  Great  State ;  in  place  of  the  despot  appears
the  Roman  citizenship,  and  all  subjugated  lands  contain
only  slaves.  When  therefore  the  republican  power  of  the
Roman  citizens  waned,  it  likewise  relapsed  into  the  Mon-
archy of  the  Great  State. — Germany  brings  a  new  prin-
ciple into  the  idea  of  the  State  by  its  system  of  feudalism,
that  of  indirect  government  or  the  pyramidal  graduated
system  of  rule,  whereas  antiquity  only  knew  direct  govern-
ment. The  ancients  had  only  free-men  and  slaves,  but
now  appears  a  gradation  of  freedom  from  the  king  down
to  the  thrall,  in  that  each  man  is  lord  of  his  own  vassals.
f  might  therefore  call  the  State  of  the  Middle  Ages  the
monarchical  pyramid. — Lastly,  the  modern  world  utters
the  decisive  word  with  its  postulate  of  universal  human
freedom  ;  it  aims  at  large  states  having  their  natural  limits
in  nationalities,  it  revives  the  Greek  town-republic  in  the
self-government  of  the  towns  and  communes,  and  finds
in  the  principle  of  representation  by  chosen  deputies  a
means  of  rearing  a  republican  pyramid,  of  which  up  to  this
time  the  best,  but  by  no  means  perfect,  example  exists  in
North  America,  but  which  must  and  will  at  some  time  or
other,  with  the  universal  spread  of  civilisation,  embrace  all
the  countries  of  the  earth,  since  the  sovereignty  of  the
national  states  is  just  as  much  a  moment  to  be  sublated
as  that  of  the  territorial  states. — The  constitutional  hybrid
of  monarchy  and  republic  is  nothing  but  a  prodigious
palpable  lie,  and  has  an  historical  authorisation  only  as
a  transitional  form  and  the  political  school  of  nations.
In  the  Federal  Republic,  which  certainly  will  come  to
pass  when  the  individual  states  have  become  republics,
the  state  of  nature  in  which  communities  at  first  exist
will  pass  into  the  state  of  right,  and  self-protection  bv
war  into  legal  protection  by  the  federal  republic,  as  the
natural  condition  and  self-protection  of  the  individual
passes  into  the  legal  condition  and  legal  protection  on
the  formation  of  the  State.  (Here  is  opened  the  possibi-
lity of  a  termination  of  the  striumle  for  existence  alluded


2o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

to  on  page  25,  namely  when  tolerably  uniform  climates
are  occupied  by  the  same  people  organised  in  the  universal
State,  and  competition  between  the  peoples  inhabiting
different  climates  is  excluded  by  the  limits  of  their  capa-
city of  climatic  accommodation,  which  assigns  them  dif-
ferent geographical  areas  of  diffusion.)

The  second  of  the  forms  to  be  noticed,  the  Church,  has  a
more  limited  and  more  one-sided  function  than  State  and
Society ;  for  whilst  the  latter  simultaneously  subserve
many  interests,  and  satisfy  many  needs,  the  Church  sub-
serves exclusively  the  need  of  the  religious  sentiment,
and  indeed  not  of  any  religious  sentiment,  but  only  of
that,  which  either  requires  for  its  full  satisfaction  a
common  cultus,  or  feels  itself  far  too  weak  to  rely  on  the
consciousness  and  feeling  of  the  individual  self,  and  now
seeks,  by  means  of  the  external  institution  of  the  visible
Church,  a  palpable  external  support  in  lieu  of  the  in-
ternal. As  a  natural  consequence,  with  the  growth  of  the
solidity  of  the  inner  spiritual  substance  of  mankind  the
visible  Church  must  lose  in  importance.  Xevertheless
at  the  present  standpoint  of  civilised  nations  the  Church
is  still  a  factor  of  the  highest  importance,  and  will  still
long  remain  so,  even  when  it  takes  the  third  place  (after
Society  ami  State).

As  already  mentioned,  the  State  is  the  first  of  the  three
forms  to  unfold  itself,  and  the  Church  is  bound  up  with
it.  Even  there,  where  exceptionally  (as  in  Judaism)  the
State  is  from  the  commencement  an  ecclesiastical  State  or
theocracv,  it  does  not  advance  beyond  the  national  limi-
tation of  theocracy.  The  idea  of  a  cosmopolitan  Church
or  theocracy  can  always  be  only  the  result  of  a  religious
revolution.  Thus  in  India,  Buddhism  :  on  the  shores  of  the
Mediterranean,  Christianity,  broke  up  the  earlier  national
narrowness  of  ecclesiastical  institutions,  and  thereby  inau-
gurated an  oriental  and  an  occidental  Middle  Age.  This
cosmopolitism  of  the  Mediseval  Church  is  of  the  greatest
significance,  and  most  important  in  results  both  politically


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 21

and  socially,  for  it  gives  for  the  first  time  a  solidarity  of  con-
sciousness to  the  members  of  different  peoples  and  States,
thereby  extends  both  extensively  and  intensively  the
peaceful  intercourse  of  different  peoples  with  one  another,
and  prepares  the  cosmopolitan  consciousness  of  modern
times,  which  is  based  on  the  social  principle  of  Humanity,
and  surmounts  the  barriers  of  ecclesiastical  antitheses,  just
as  the  cosmopolitism  of  the  Mediaeval  Church  had  burst
the  barriers  of  the  constitutional  antagonisms  which  it
embraced.  Thus  the  Church  naturally  leads  us  to  the
third  form,  Society.

Social  development  exhibits  four  leading  phases,  of
which  the  first  three  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  stages  pre-
paratory to  the  fourth,  in  which  for  the  first  time  Society
is  unfolded  as  an  independent,  co-ordinate  form.

The  iirst  phase  is  the  free  state  of  nature,  where  every
one  only  works  for  himself  and  his  family,  as,  e.g.,  among
the  Indian  hunting-tribes.  From  this  condition  an  ascent
to  greater  comfort,  and  thereby  to  greater  civilisation,  is
impossible,  because  in  the  atomistic  freedom  of  individuals
there  is  no  motive  to  bring  about  the  division  of  labour,
through  which  alone  that  economy  of  labour  is  possible,
which  is  indispensable  for  a  production  in  excess  of  the
momentary  needs  of  life,  i.e.,  of  an  elevation  of  national
well-being  through  the  accumulation  of  capital.

The  second  phase  is  that  of  'personal  ride,  where  the
lord  is  the  proprietor  of  the  persons  or  the  working-powers
of  his  slaves  or  thralls.  Here  the  lord  soon  finds  it  to
his  interest  to  introduce  a  division  of  labour  among  his
slaves,  whose  work  now  produces  an  excess  beyond  their
and  his  requirements,  which  is  applied  to  establish  a  stock-
in-trade  (capital).  Thus  national  wealth  grows  through
accumulation  of  capital,  to  the  advantage,  however,  cer-
tainly only  of  the  master,  not  of  the  serf.  The  .Roman
Kmpiie  and  the  Middle  Ages  afford  an  example  of  this
S*ar_!'C.

Toe  third  phase,  winch  is  only  rendered  po.-sible  by  the


22  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

prolonged  agency  of  the  second,  is  that  of  the  rule  of  capital.
In  this  period  the  lixed  capital,  hitherto  alone  of  import-
ance, is  surpassed  by  free  capital,  and  driven  more  and
more  to  become  mobile  if  it  is  not  to  lose  disproportion-
ately in  value.  This  process  goes  on  simultaneously  and
in  reciprocation  with  the  greatest  mitigation  and  abolition
of  bond-service,  whereby  the  power  of  labour  becomes  a
free  commodity,  and  falls  under  the  general  laws  of  price
(which  is  determined  by  supply  and  demand).  As  capital
can  organise  the  division  of  labour  on  a  far  grander  scale,
a  far  larger  quota  of  the  total  labour  will  also  now  become
superfluous  for  present  needs  and  available  for  the  future,
i.e.,  for  productive  investment ;  thus  also  the  increase  of
capital  and  the  growth  of  national  comfort  must  proceed  far
more  rapidly  than  in  the  foregoing  phase.  But  here  too
this  increase  of  national  wealth  is  essentially  to  the  advan-
tage of  the  possessors  of  capital  alone,  since  that  part  of  it
which  falls  to  the  working  classes  is  immediately  followed
by  a  numerical  increase  of  the  labouring  classes,  which  in
the  redistribution  always  keeps  the  share  falling  to  each
individual  at  the  level  of  the  usual  indispensable  minimum
for  maintaining  life.  Experience  at  least  confirms  this  for
the  industrial  forces  of  labour  accessible  to  the  market  of
the  world. — But  free  capital  also  is  an  Idea,  which  unfolds
and  attains  maturity,  only  to  perish  after  its  task  has  been
fulfilled,  and  to  make  place  for  other  structures.  Its
historical  task  also  is  transitional,  and  only  consists  in
preparing  the  ground  for  the  next  stage,  just  as  the  func-
tion of  slavery  consisted  in  preparing  and  making  possible
the  rule  of  capital.

The  fourth  and  last  phase  is  that  of  free  association.  If,
namely,  the  value  of  slavery  and  rule  of  capital  was
only  to  be  measured  by  the  degree  in  which  they  made
possible,  and  introduced  a  division  of  labour,  and  thereby
economy  of  labour,  these  always  still  highly  imperfect  coer-
cive measures  of  history,  which  bring  in  their  train  accom-
panying unutterable  misery,  must  become  superfluous  as


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 23

soon  as  the  character  and  understanding  of  the  workman
are  developed  to  the  degree  of  civilisation,  in  order  by  free
conscious  agreement  to  undertake  an  appropriate  part  of
the  work  in  the  universal  division  of  labour.  As  before
the  difficulty  was,  to  educate  the  freed  slave  to  voluntary
labour,  so  now  the  difficulty  is  to  educate  the  labourer,  in
order  that  when  set  free  from  the  yoke  of  this  rule  of
capital,  he  may  adequately  fill  in  the  association  the  place
assigned  him.  To  conduct  this  education  (by  means  of
Schultze-Delitzsch  Unions,  better  school-teaching,  la-
bourers' educational  unions,  &c),  is  the  most  important
social  problem  of  the  present  day.  Tree  association  the
future  will  of  itself  bring  forth,  if  one  cannot  yet  exactly
say,  with  what  means  and  ways,  whether  by  some  kind  of
peaceful  development,  or  by  catastrophes  which  will  exceed
in  awfulness  all  that  has  hitherto  happened  in  history. — In
this  last  phase  the  actual  payment  of  money  (except  coins)
will  be  made  just  as  superfluous  by  the  general  introduc-
tion of  banking,  as  in  the  foregoing  stage  barter  was  super-
seded by  the  use  of  money.

If  the  rule  of  capital  has  already  done  much  more  for
the  division  of  labour  than  slavery,  free  association  will
far  exceed  the  former  in  an  incomparably  higher  degree
(think  of  an  indivisible  organisation  of  production  and
sale  on  the  whole  earth  analogous  to  the  indivisible  poli-
tical organisation  of  the  whole  earth).  In  correspondence
herewith  the  growth  of  material  wealth  will  take  place
much  more  rapidly  than  at  present,  supposing  that  it
be  not  neutralised  or  outstripped  by  the  increase  of  the
number  of  the  population,  which  to  be  sure  has  its  limits
assigned  it  by  the  maximum  of  nutritive  plants  pro-
duced on  the  whole  earth  and  of  fishes  yielded  by  the
waters  ;  or,  if  one  takes  into  account  the  inorganic  Gon-
dii ions  of  the  means  of  subsistence,  by  the  limited  habit-
able space  of  the  earth's  surface.

The  goal  of  this  social  evolution  would  be,  that  every
one,  with  a  period  of  work  which  allowed  him  sufficient


24  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

leisure  for  his  intellectual  culture,  should  lead  a  comfort-
able existence,  or,  as  one  is  wont  to  say  with  a  more
sonorous  expression,  an  existence  conformable  to  the
dignity  of  man.  Thus,  as  the  final  political  state  would
secure  to  man  the  external  and  formal,  the  final  social  con-
dition would  afford  him  the  material  possibility  of  ulti-
mately fulfilling  his  positive  and  proper  task,  for  the
fulfilment  of  which  the  internal  conditions  must  neces-
sarily be  sought  in  the  before-noticed  mental  or  intellectual
development.

If  in  this  entire  development  we  cannot  miss  a  single
plan,  a  clearly-prescribed  aim,  towards  which  all  stages
of  development  are  tending;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we
must  allow  that  the  several  actions  which  prepared  or
led  up  to  these  stages  had  by  no  means  this  conscious
goal,  but  that  the  human  being  almost  always  aimed  at
something  else,  effected  something  else,  we  must  also  ac-
knowledge that  something  else  than  the  conscious  intention
of  the  individuals,  or  the  accidental  combination  of  the
several  actions,  is  occultly  operative  in  history,  that  "  far-
reaching  glance,  which  already  discovers  from  afar,  where
this  lawlessly  roaming  freedom  is  conducted  in  the  bond
of  necessity,  and  the  selfish  aims  of  the  individual  uncon-
sciously tend  to  the  perfection  of  the  whole "  (Schiller,
vol.  vii.  pp.  29..  30).  Schelling  expresses  this  in  the  System
of  Transcendental  Idealism  (Works,  i.  3,  p.  594) :  "  In  free-
dom there  shall  be  necessity,  means  then  as  much  as:
Through  freedom  itself,  and  in  that  I  think  to  act  freely,
there  shall  unconsciously,  i.e..  without  my  assistance,  come
to  pass  what  I  did  not  intend.  Otherwise  expressed:  to
the  conscious,  that  is,  that  freely  determining  activity
which  we  have  before  deduced,  there  shall  be  opposed
an  unconscious  one,  whereby,  in  spite  of  the  unlimited
expression  of  freedom,  something  arises  quite  involun-
tarily, and  perhaps  even  against  the  will  of  the  actor,
which  he  himself  could  have  never  realised  by  means  of
his  own  volition. This  proposition,  however  paradoxical


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 25

it  may  appear,  is  indeed  nothing  else  but  the  transcen-
dental expression  of  the  generally  accepted  and  presup-
posed relation  of  freedom  to  a  concealed  necessity,  which
is  called  now  fate,  now  providence,  without  anything
"being  clearly  thought  by  the  one  or  the  other;  that  rela-
tion, in  virtue  of  which  human  beings,  through  their  free
action  itself,  and  indeed  against  their  will,  are  compelled
to  be  causes  of  something  which  they  never  willed,  or
conversely  in  virtue  of  which  something  must  fail  and  go
wrong,  which  they  have  willed  with  freedom  and  with  the
exertion  of  all  their  energies  "  (Ibid.  p.  598).  "  But  this
necessity  itself  can  only  be  conceived  by  means  of  an
absolute  synthesis  of  all  actions,  from  which  everything
that  happens,  thus  also  all  history,  is  developed,  and  in
which,  because  it  is  absolute,  everything  is  so  weighed  and
calculated  beforehand,  that  all  that  may  happen,  however
contradictory  and  inharmonious  it  may  appear,  yet  has
and  finds  in  it  its  point  of  union.  This  absolute  synthesis
itself,  however,  must  be  placed  in  the  Absolute,  which  is
the  intuitive  and  eternally  and  universally  objective  in  all
free  action."  Whoever  has  well  understood  this  passage,
of  which  it  may  be  said  that  it  represents  the  view  of  all
philosophers  since  Kant,  and  the  substance  of  which  has
been  reproduced  in  detail  by  Hegel  in  the  introduction  to
his  "Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  History,"  for  such  an
one  I  have  nothing  to  add. — To  any  one  who  prefers  to
stop  at  the  conceptions  Fate  or  Providence,  one  can  only
object  that  he  can  therewith  frame  no  clear  idea  how  my
act,  whether  it  is  the  work  of  my  freedom,  or  the  product
of  my  character  and  the  efficient  motives,  how  this  my
deed  is  to  actualise  another  than  my  will,  say  of  a  God
enthroned  in  heaven.  There  is  only  one  way  in  which  this
demand  is  capable  of  fulfilment,  if  this  God  descends  into
my  bosom,  and  my  will  is  to  me  in  an  unconscious  way
at  the  same  time  God's  will,  i.e.,  if  I  unconsciously  will
something  quite  different  to  what  my  consciousness  ex-
clusively thinks  to  will  ;  if,  further,  consciousness  errs  in


26  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UXCOXSCIOUS.

the  choice  of  the  means  to  its  end,  but  the  unconscious
will  appropriately  chooses  this  same  means  for  its  purpose.
Otherwise  is  this  psychical  process  not  at  all  thinkable,
and  as  much  as  this  is  said  in  the  first  half  of  the
passage  from  Schelling. — But  now,  if  we  cannot  do  with-
out an  unconscious  will  in  addition  to  the  conscious  will ;
if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  add  the  long  known  clairvoyance
of  unconscious  representation,  why  bring  a  transcendent
God  in  addition  into  the  affair,  when  the  individual  is
sufficient  of  himself  with  the  faculties  familiar  to  us  ?
What  then  is  this  fate  or  providence  but  the  rule  of  the
Unconscious,  the  historic  instinct  in  the  actions  of  man-
kind, as  long  as  just  their  conscious  understanding  is  not
yet  mature  enough  to  make  the  aims  of  history  their  own  ?
What  is  the  impulse  to  form  a  State  but  an  instinct  of
the  masses  like  the  linguistic  instinct,  or  the  gregarious
impulse  of  insects,  only  mixed  with  more  infusions  of  the
conscious  understanding  ?

If,  in  the  animal,  as  we  have  seen,  instinct  always
appears  just  when  a  need  is  not  to  be  satisfied  in  any
other  way,  what  wonder  if  also  in  all  branches  of  the
historical  evolution  the  right  man  is  always  born  at  the
right  time,  whose  inspired  genius  perceives  and  satisfies
the  unconscious  needs  of  his  time  ?  Here  the  proverb
holds  good :  When  the  need  is  most,  the  help  is  nearest.

Why  should  we  trouble  a  god  who  stands  without  and
pushes  and  guides  from  the  outside  in  the  case  of  the
historical  instinct  of  man,  when  we  have  not  found  it
necessary  in  the  case  of  ail  the  other  instincts  ?  Only
thru,  if  in  the  progress  of  the  inquiry  it  should  appear,  that
the  unconscious  in  the  individual  has  nothing  individual
in  it  except  the  reference  of  this  its  activity  to  this
definite  individual,  then  will  Schelling  be  ri^ht  also  in
the  second  part  of  the  quoted  passage,  that  the  Absolute
is  the  percipient  (clairvoyant)  in  all  such  action,  and  its
absolute  synthesis  (inweaving),  or  as  Kant  once  expresses
it  (Works,  vii.  $6j),  that  "  Instinct  is  the  voice  of  God,"


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 27

but  now  of  the  God  in  one's  own  breast,  the  immanent
God.

If  we  have  found  the  stopping  short  at  the  idea  of  a
fate  or  a  providence  to  be  inadmissible,  it  is  not  to  be
understood,  that  these  ways  of  looking  at  the  matter,  just
as  that  of  the  exclusive  self-activity  of  individuals  in
history,  are  in  themselves  illegitimate,  but  only,  that  they
are  one-sided.  The  Greeks,  Romans,  and  Mohammedans
are  quite  right  in  their  idea  of  ei/xap/xepT]  or  fate,  so  far  as
this  signifies  the  absolute  necessity  of  all  that  happens  in
the  thread  of  causality,  so  that  every  link  of  the  series
is  determined,  predetermined  by  the  foregoing,  thus  the
whole  series  by  the  commencing  link.

Christianity  is  right  in  its  idea  of  Providence,  for  all
that  happens  happens  with  absolute  wisdom,  with  abso-
lute fitness,  i.e.,  as  means  to  the  fore-seen  end,  by  the
never-erring  Unconscious,  which  is  itself  the  absolutely
logical.  At  any  moment  only  one  thing  can  be  logical,
and  therefore  always  only  one  thing  can,  and  this  the
one  logically  demanded,  must  happen,  just  as  fitly  as
necessarily  (comp.  further  on  C.  Chap.  xv.  3).  Lastly,  the
modern  rationalistic  empirical  conception  is  right,  that
history  is  the  exclusive  result  of  the  self-activity  of  the
individuals  determining  themselves  according  to  psycholo-
gical laws  without  any  miracle  of  an  incursion  of  higher
powers.  But  the  supporters  of  the  first  two  views  are
wrong,  in  denying  the  spontaneity,  those  of  the  latter,  in
denying  fate  and  providence,  for  only  the  union  of  all  three
points  of  view  is  the  truth.  But  this  very  union  was  self-
contradictoiy,  as  long  as  one  assumed  merely  conscious
self-activity  of  the  individual.  It  is  the  cognition  of  the
Unconscious  which  at  once  makes  this  possible  and  evi-
dent, by  bringing  into  scientific  clearness  the  hitherto  only
mystically  postulated  identity  of  the  individual  with  the
Absolute,  yet  without  effacing  their  difference,  which  is  ;>..
no  less  one  than  that  of  metaphysical  essence  and  pheno-
menal existence  (comp.  C.  Chap,  vi.-viii.  and  xi.J


( 28 )


XL


THE VALUE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS AND OF CONSCIOUSNESS
FOE HUMAN LIFE.

1  have  hitherto  made  sufficiently  conspicuous  the  value
df  the  Unconscious,  so  that  it  might  appear  that  I  was
desirous  of  exalting  the  Unconscious  in  comparison  with
consciousness.  To  repel  such  a  charge,  to  recall  the  value
of  conscious  thinking,  and  to  compare  the  worth  of  the
conscious  and  unconscious  and  their  respective  offices,  is
the  object  of  the  present  chapter.

Let  us  first  consider  the  worth  of  the  Conscious,  of
conscious  reflection,  therefore,  and  of  the  application  of
acquired  conscious  knowledge  for  mankind.

The  fundamental  cpiestion  would  be  this  :  "  Can  reflec-
tion and  knowledge  determine  action  and  character,  and
in  what  manner?"  The  affirmative  answer,  with  which
common  sense  would  not  be  backward,  might  be  placed  in
doubt  through  the  consideration,  firstly,  that  the  specific
will,  from  which  action  proceeds,  springs  from  a  reaction
of  the  character  on  motive,  a  process  which  remains  for
ever  closed  to  consciousness ;  and  secondly,  that  volition
and  ideation  are  incommensurable  things,  because  they
belong  to  quite  different  spheres  of  mental  activity.  Their
heterogeneity  and  incommensurability  are  however  limited
by  this  circumstance,  that  an  idea  forms  the  content  of  the
will,  and  an  idea  its  motive  or  exciting  cause,  and  the
eternal  unconsciousness  of  the  process  engendering  the
will  would  only  make  any  knowledge  of  the  connection
of  motive  and  desire  entirely  impossible,  if  either  character
were  in  itself  quickly  alterable,  or  there  were  no  necessary


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 29

uniformity  in  the  process  of  motivation,  but  a  freedom  of
the  will  in  the  sense  of  the  Indeterminists.  As  neither
condition  obtains,  the  possibility  is  open  to  every  one,  like
the  physician  with  those  drugs,  whose  physiological  effect
is  incomprehensible  to  him,  to  collect  an  empirical  know-
ledge of  what  desire  is  called  forth  by  what  motive  and  in
what  degree.  So  far  as  human  characters  resemble  each
other  in  general,  this  cognition  will  be  general  empirical
psychology,  but  so  far  as  characters  are  different,  it  will
be  special  knowledge  of  self  and  man  (Science  of  Char-
acter). If  we  combine  with  this  the  knowledge  of  those
psychological  laws  according  to  which  the  excitability  of
the  different  kinds  of  desires  is  temporarily  changed,  as,
e.g.,  the  laws  of  our  moods,  of  passion,  of  habit,  &c,  and  if
we  secure  ourselves  in  the  maimer  shortly  to  be  considered
from  the  illusions  of  the  intellect,  that  are  produced  by
passions,  then  if  all  these  conditions  are  ideally  satisfied,
we  shall  be  able  to  predict  any  moment  the  kind  and
degree  of  the  resulting  desire  in  respect  of  any  motive,  and
the  errors  regarding  the  issue  of  the  unconscious  will-pro-
ducing process  mentioned  in  Chapters  III.  and  IY.  will
disappear  of  themselves.

Xow  as  every  motive  can  only  take  the  form  of  the
idea,  and  the  revival  of  ideas  is  subject  to  the  influence
of  the  conscious  will,  by  voluntarily  calling  up  an  idea
known  as  motive  of  a  certain  desire,  there  follows  from
what  has  been  said  the  possibility  of  indirectly  arousing
this  desire.  Further,  as  the  will  is  nothing  but  the  re-
sultant of  all  contemporaneous  desires,  and  as  the  union
of  all  the  components  into  the  one  resultant  has  the
simple  form  of  an  algebraic  sum,  because  indeed  all  the
components  in  respect  of  a  future  action  can  have  only
two  directions,  positive  or  negative,  there  follows  further
the  possibility  of  intluencing  the  resultant  by  arousing  one
or  more  new  desires  through  a  voluntary  representation  of
the  appropriate  motives,  or  by  strengthening  those  already
present. The  same  means  is  also  available  for  suppress-


3o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

ing  such  desires  as  would  certainly  not  so  soon  attain  to
manifestation  in  action  on  external  grounds,  but  which
act  prejudicially  through  disturbance  of  the  mind,  confu-
sion of  the  intellect,  production  of  useless  feelings  of
pain,  &c.  But  conscious  reflection  can  never  influence  a
present  desire  directly,  but  only  mediately,  by  arousing
an  opposite  one. — That  this  stated  mode  of  influencing
the  will  through  the  intellect  is  in  fact  the  only  possible
one,  and  that  which  always  occurs  in  practice,  will  readily
be  granted  by  everybody  who  makes  this  department  of
psychology  a  little  the  subject  of  his  reflection.  This,  as
well  as  the  circumstance  that  the  subject  is  somewhat
wide  of  our  proper  theme,  deters  me  from  further  discuss-
ing ir.  I  will  merely  further  add,  that  only  from  this
point  of  view  can  a  change  of  character  through  conscious
reflection  be  explained.  We  have,  namely,  seen  the  possi-
bility of  determining  the  issue  in  every  single  case  other-
wise than  by  merely  leaving  it  to  the  action  of  the  motives
spontaneously  presenting  themselves,  and  thereby  the
possibility  of  successfully  making  head  agaiust  the  emo-
tions which  are  most  easily  excited  in  consequence  of  the
now  formed  character,  and  therefore  most  frequently
arise.  If  now  this  suppression  regularly  occurs  on  every,
occasion  for  a  longer  time,  according  to  the  law  of  habit,
by  the  persistent  inactivity  and  non-satisfaction  of  the
particular  impulse,  its  liability  to  stimulation  will  be
enfeebled ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  frequently  and
strongly  excited  tendencies  will  be  strengthened,  i.e.,  the
character  will  be  changed.  In  the  same  manner  the  pos-
sibility of  a  change  of  character  by  means  of  conscious
reflection,  certainly  only  with  the  help  of  long  habit,  be-
comes intelligible  (conip.  Phil.  Monatshefte,  vol.  iv.  Hft,  5,
on  Bahnsen's  Ethology).

The  above  fundamental  question  is  herewith  answered
in  the  affirmative  in  both  its  parts,  and  we  can  now  take
a  brief  survey  of  what  conscious  reflection  and  knowledge
have  to  offer  to  man  as  regards  practice.


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 31

I.  Prevention  of  illusions  of  knowledge  due  to  influence  of
emotions. — We  have  already  seen  how  the  emergence  of
ideas  is  essentially  dependent  on  a  momentary  interest.
Hence  it  happens  that,  with  a  predominant  one-sided
interest,  e.g.,  emotions,  probable  reasons  for  the  case  in
accordance  with  the  interest  always  preferentially  enter
into  consciousness,  and  fewer  contrary  reasons;  that  seem-
ing reasons  pro  are  too  readily  assumed  to  be  perceived  to
be  faulty;  but  that  seeming  reasons  contra,  if  they  at  all
crop  up,  are  immediately  unmasked,  and  even  good  reasons
contra  depreciated  or  refuted  by  seeming  reasons,  and  thus
error  arises.  Xo  wonder,  therefore,  that  terror,  anger,
sensuous  desire  can  so  deprive  us  of  our  wits  that  we  no
longer  know  what  we  say  or  do,  that  hate  causes  us  to  see
only  faults  in  our  enemies;  love,  merely  excellences  in  our
loved  ones;  that  fear  paints  in  gloomy,  hope  in  rosy  hues ;
that  the  former  allows  us  often  no  longer  to  perceive
obvious  resources,  the  latter  makes  the  most  improbable
probable,  if  it  only  corresponds  to  our  wishes,  that  we
mostly  err  to  our  own  advantage,  rarely  to  our  disadvan-
tage, and  only  too  frequently  hold  that  to  be  fit  and  just
which  is  to  our  own  advantage.

Interest  even  insinuates  itself  into  pure  science,  for  a
favourite  hypothesis  sharpens  the  glance  for  everything
confirmative,  and  causes  us  to  overlook  the  plainest  coun-
ter-evidence, or  to  let  go  out  at  one  ear  what  comes  in  at
the  other.

There  are  two  remedies  for  this  :  the  first  is,  that  one
form  once  for  all  an  empirical  coefficient  of  reduction  de-
pendent on  the  degree  of  the  passion  or  interest,  and  mul-
tiply this  in  any  single  case  by  the  acquired  coefficient  of
probability  of  the  judgment;  the  second,  that  one  allows
no  passion  to  attain  the  degree  where  it  begins  to  per-
ceptibly affect  the  judgment.  The  latter  means  will  alone
stand  the  test,  but  is  not  a  general  favourite,  because
inconvenient,  and  only  attainable  by  long  practice  in  self-
command  ;  the  former  entirely  fails  in  the  case  of  strung


32  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

emotions  and  passions,  when  all  the  mental  powers  are
concentrated  on  a  single  point ;  moreover  the  magnitude
of  the  coefficient  of  reduction  is  often  difficult  to  fix,  the
actual  estimate  of  the  degree  of  personal  passion  still  more
difficult. — The  value  of  intellectual  clearness  (crwcppoavvr))
is  pretty  obvious  in  a  verbal  dispute,  where  the  one  allows
himself  to  be  carried  away  by  passion,  and  not  the  other.
Among  women  almost  every  real  dispute  passes  into  a
personal  one,  whether  clothed  in  the  most  delicate  irony
or  in  the  choicest  Billingsgate.  Still  more  conspicuous  is
the  value  of  sobriety  and  restraint  of  emotions  in  cases
of  peril.

2.  Prevention  of  thoughtlessness  and  irresolution. — The
largest  part  of  all  the  remorse  in  the  world  arises  from  in-
considerate action,  in  which  the  possible  consequences  of
the  deed  in  all  its  bearings  were  not  considered,  the  result
being  painful  surprise  on  their  appearance.  If  the
evil  consequences  fall  back  upon  the  doer  himself,  incon-
siderateness  becomes  levity.  All  this  remorse  would
accordingly  be  spared  by  more  deliberation  in  action.
Irresolution  on  the  other  hand  proceeds  partly  from  want
of  courage,  partly  from  want  of  confidence  in  one's  own
reflective  powers.  The  characteristic  of  courage  may,
however,  be  supplied  by  conscious  reason,  since  courage  is
risking  one  evil  to  avoid  another,  or  to  gain  an  advantage,
on  the  supposition  that  the  chances  are  favourable  to  the
attempt,  whether  in  consequence  of  the  relative  magni-
tude of  the  two  evils  or  the  probabilities  of  their  occur-
rence. Want  of  confidence  in  one's  own  reflective  powers
is  likewise  corrected  by  reflection  itself,  when  we  say  to
ourselves  that  no  one  can  do  more  than  is  in  his  power  ;
that  therefore  if  he  have  done  the  utmost,  he  may  calmly
await  the  result  of  the  action,  but  that  too  long  reflection
as  a  rule  not  merely  helps  no  more  than  a  brief  reflection,
but  by  delaying  action,  does  more  harm  than  any  possible
improvement  of  the  result  can  bring  advantage.

3.  Appropriate  selection  of  means  to  end. — If  an  aim  is


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 23

irrational,  it  is  itself  an  inappropriate  means  to  the  main
aim  of  every  being,  the  greatest  possible  sum  of  happiness
in  life,  which,  if  not  clearly  conscious  to  every  one,  yet  as
faintly  sounding  organ-point  is  heard  in  all  the  chords  of
life.  But  even  where  the  ends  are  rational,  or  their  choice
and  estimation  does  not  devolve  upon  the  individual,  but
only  the  choice  of  the  means  is  entirely  or  partially  left
to  him,  by  irrational  selection  of  the  means  unspeak-
able evil  is  wrought,  which  can  never  be  made  good
again.  In  important  cases  this  is  sufficiently  striking;  but
far  greater  is  the  influence  in  the  thousand  j>etty  cares,
drudgeries,  comforts  and  discomforts,  pleasantnesses  and
unpleasantnesses  of  the  day,  in  the  intercourse  of  business,
office,  vocation,  society,  family  life,  the  relationship  of
master  and  servant.  It  is  especially  in  these  cases,  where
the  immediate  ends  are  partly  frustrated  by  improper
means,  partly  attained  at  a  disproportionate  expense,  and
where  accordingly  people  make  the  life  of  themselves  and
others  far  more  difficult  and  bitter  than  it  already  is,  by
all  kinds  of  distress,  torment,  trouble,  vexation,  and  spite.
And  far  more  of  all  this  comes  from  the  limited  insight  of
the  average  man  and  his  unsuitable  choice  of  means  to
the  end  in  view,  than  from  evil  will,  so  that  one  is  often
tempted  to  exclaim,  "Would  that  people  were  more  wicked,
if  they  were  only  less  stupid !  "

4.  The  determination  of  the  will  not  according  to  the,
passion  of  the  'moment,  hat  according  to  the  principle  of
the  greatest  possible  personal  happiness. — The  brute,  with
the  few  exceptions  of  the  higher  animals  trained  by
man,  is  essentially  dependent  on  the  momentary  sen-
suous and  instinctively  aroused  emotion.  Where  instinct
does  not  involve  a  reference  to  the  future,  the  conscious-
ness of  the  animal  also  does  not  easily  concern  itself
therewith,  and  only  too  often  must  it  sutler  from  the  con-
sequences of  its  absolute  levity.  Alan,  through  his  more
highly-developed  consciousness,  enjoys  the  privilege  of
being able to oppose to the passions of the sensuous

vol.  11.  U


34  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

moment  desires,  which  are  voluntarily  produced  by  repre-
sentations of  the  future,  and  has  therein  a  means  of
securing  for  the  Ego  of  the  future  an  ideal  equality  with
the  Ego  of  the  present.  But  now,  owing  to  the  less  vivid
character  of  voluntary  ideas,  the  strength  of  the  oppos-
ing desires  is  considerably  circumscribed,  and  they  are  no
longer  able  to  offer  a  successful  resistance  to  a  tolerably
strong  emotion  begotten  by  the  sensuous  present.  Such
an  emotion  rather  hurries  the  man  back  to  the  stage  of
animality,  and  if  he  re-emerge  from  it  with  moderate  loss
and  repentance,  he  may  thank  his  lucky  stars.  If,  then,
the  claim  of  the  future  Ego,  and  the  principle  of  the
greatest  possible  personal  happiness,  is  to  be  preserved,
there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  prevent  the  growth  of  the
passions  to  so  overpowering  a  degree,  i.e.,  to  suppress  them
earlier,  most  surely  and  most  easily  in  their  origin.  Here  we
have  found  the  second  reason  for  suppressing  the  emotions.
An  important  office  of  reflection  further  is,  to  decide  which
of  the  many  simultaneous  aims  of  life  that  run  athwart
one  another  at  any  moment  deserves  to  be  supported,  in
order  at  any  moment  to  contribute  as  much  as  possible  to
the  total  happiness ;  for  the  continually  changing  circum-
stances also  require  that  we  continually  change,  sometimes
entirely  let  go,  sometimes  resume  at  a  more  favourable
time,  the  aims  for  whose  attainment  one  happens  to  be
labouring.

5.  Value  of  conscious  reason  for  morality. — Most  im-
moral actions  are  completely  prevented  by  a  prudent
egoism,  which  proceeds  according  to  the  principle  of  the
greatest  possible  personal  happiness,  especially  in  a  State
with  an  orderly  system  of  law,  and  a  society  which
punishes  with  its  contempt  such  immoralities  as  the  State
cannot  punish.  That  not  many  cases  remain  in  which
the  ordinances  of  morality  cannot  be  established  in  an
egoistic  manner  is  sufficiently  proved  by  this,  that  so
many  ethical  systems  are  openly  or  disguisedly  based  on
egoism  and  the  principle  of  the  greatest  possible  personal


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 35

happiness,  e.g.,  the  Epicurean,  the  Stoic,  the  Spinozistic.
For  all  such  cases  one  sees  that  the  exercise  of  reason
hitherto  spoken  of  must  suffice  for  morality,  and  in
point  of  fact,  along  with,  custom  brought  about  by  com-
pulsion, this  reference  to  egoism  is  almost  the  only  suc-
cessful way  to  teach  and  to  improve  morality.  What  is
not  attained  by  it  is  hardly  at  all  attainable  from  the  point
of  view  of  individual  ethics.  ^

If  one,  however,  disregards  the  practically  vital  effect  of
a  rule  of  conduct,  and  contemplates  the  theoretical  value
of  the  ethical  systems,  there  will  hardly  be  any  doubt  that,
whatever  theoretical  foundations  of  ethics  be  assumed,  they
can  only  be  such  as  consist  of  principles  of  conscious  reason,
if  they  possess  any  scientific  ground  whatsoever,  and  are
to  be  capable  of  supporting  a  system.  I  shall  not,  how-
ever, say  more  on  this  point  now,  in  order  not  to  wander
too  far  from  our  theme.

6.  Correct  clioice  of  a  calling,  occupation  of  leisure,  inter-
course, and  friends. — "  Whoever  is  born  with  a  talent,  finds
therein  his  fairest  existence  "  (Gothe),  therefore  it  is  very
important,  on  the  one  hand,  to  recognise  one's  talent,  which
may  be  very  considerable  and  yet  be  entirely  missed ;  and,
on  the  other  hand,  in  youthful  enthusiasm  for  an  object,
not  to  imagine  a  talent  which  one  does  not  possess.  Were
both  cases  not  frequent,  so  many  men  would  not  miss
their  vocation,  the  choice  of  which,  in  spite  of  all  limita-
tions, affords  the  individual  tolerably  wide  scope.  Still
more  difficult  is  it  to  detect  the  chief  among  several
talents  ;  more  easy,  on  the  other  hand,  to  make  the  equally
important  choice  of  the  dilettante  occupation  of  leisure,
because  so  much  does  not  depend  on  alternation,  and
time  is  thereby  gained  for  experimenting.  As  the  choice
of  a  calling  requires  a  large  self-knowledge,  so  the  choice  of
intercourse  and  of  friends  requires  a  large  knowledge  of  the
world  and  of  men.  Tins  is  a  human  need;  and  one  has
not  to  choose  whether,  but  with  whom  one  will  associate.
The  importance  of  the  matter  may  be  imagined  when  we


36  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

consider  how  the  possession  of  a  single,  entirely  congenial
and  true  friend  is  able  to  afford  consolation  in  the  greatest
misfortunes,  hut  what  bitter  disappointments  may  be  pre-
pared by  the  choice  of  unsuitable  friends.  Nevertheless
one  often  sees  friendships  concluded  and  persisted  in  for  a
long  time,  which  are  so  little  harmonious  that  one  would
think  the  people  must  be  smitten  with  blindness.  In
fact,  however,  did  not  human  beings,  in  their  heart  of  hearts,
actually  regard  themselves  as  as  unreasonable  as  they
are,  it  would  not  be  possible  for  reconciliations  so  com-
monly to  take  place  after  occurrences  which,  referred  to
faults  of  character,  could  never  be  forgiven,  and  are  only
to  be  excused  by  unreason,  wherefore  men  are  fond  of
designating  their  mad  pranks  aberrations. — The  imprudent
choice  of  a  friend  is  most  bitterly  avenged  in  marriage,
because  here  the  loosening  of  the  relations  is  supremely
difficult ;  and  yet  this  is  a  case  where  regard  is  paid  to
almost  anything  else  (beauty,  money,  family)  than  to
harmony  of  character.  Were  people  not  afterwards  so
intellectually  indifferent  about  fitting  well  or  ill,  when
they  see  that  they  have  been  mistaken  in  each  other,  there
would  be  many  more  bad  marriages  in  the  world  than
there  are.

J.  Suppression  of  useless  feelings  of  pain. — Pleasure  and
pain  consist  in  satisfaction  and  non-satisfaction  of  desire,
which  are  produced  by  converse  with  the  outer  world,  and
which  man  can  only  influence  by  reacting  on  the  external
circumstances,  which  is  the  end  of  all  action.  If  his  power
does  not  extend  so  far  as  to  procure  the  satisfaction  of
his  desires,  he  must  just  bear  the  pain,  and  can  then  only
diminish  or  annihilate  it  by  diminishing  or  annihilating
the  desire,  in  the  non-satisfaction  of  which  the  pain  con-
sists. If  one  consistently  carries  this  out  in  the  case  of
every  pain,  the  exciting  capacity  of  the  desires  is  blunted
in  accordance  with  the  law  of  habit,  consequently  the
future  feelings  of  pleasure  are  as  much  diminished  as
the  future  feelings  of  pain. "Whoever  is  of  my  opinion,


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 37

that  on  the  average  in  human  life  the  sum  of  the  painful
feelings  far  outweighs  the  sum  of  the  pleasurable  feelings,
must  perforce  admit  this  general  principle  of  hebetation
as  logical  consequence  of  this  view.  But  whoever  does  not
at  all  or  only  in  a  qualified  sense  assent  to  this  opinion,  I
refer  to  the  not  inconsiderable  number  of  those  painful
feelings  which  are  opposed  to  no  feeling  of  pleasure  at  all,
i.e.,  in  which  the  satisfaction  of  the  underlying  desire  lies
outside  the  domain  of  possibility,  as  e.g.,  in  pain  for  past
events  which  cannot  happen  over  again,  vexation,  impa-
tience, envy,  spite,  remorse,  which  can  bring  no  moral
profit,  further  excessive  sensibility,  groundless  jealousy,
immoderate  anxiety  and  care  for  the  future,  too  lofty  expec-
tations of  life,  &c.  Only  consider  how  much  the  life  of
humanity  would  gain  if  one  could  eradicate  every  one  of
these  foes  of  the  mind's  peace — the  advantage  would  be
incalculable ;  and  yet  it  is  open  to  every  one  to  purify  his
life  from  these  disturbers  of  his  freedom  by  the  application
of  conscious  reason,  if  only  he  does  not  at  once  lose  heart
for  the  struggle  through  a  few  unsuccessful  attempts.
Thus  we  have  found  here  a  third  ground  for  the  suppres-
sion of  the  passions.

8.  The  highest  and  most  enduring  human  enjoyment
afforded  Inj  the  search  for  truth. — The  more  concentrated
and  vehement  is  an  enjoyment,  the  shorter  time  can  it  last,
before  reaction  sets  in,  and  the  longer  one  must  wait  for
its  repetition ;  think  of  the  delights  of  the  table  and  of
the  amatory  impulse  in  particular.  The  calmer,  clearer,
and  purer  an  enjoyment  is,  the  longer  it  can  endure,  the
fewer  pauses  it  needs  for  recreation  ;  compare  the  musi-
cal, poetical  and  scientific  pleasures.  Tims  it  happens,
that  the  strongest  enjoyments,  on  account  of  the  brevity
of  their  duration  and  their  necessary  rarity,  are  not  the
greatest  in  amount,  that  rather  the  most  spiritual,  above
all  the  scientific,  afford  a  far  larger  total  of  pleasure  in  the
same  time  by  reason  of  their  duration.  The  other  reasons
why  the  enjoyment  which  lies  in  striving  after  truth  is


3S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  highest,  are  so  well  known,  that  I  will  spare  my
readers  an  enumeration  of  them.  Moreover,  no  one  will
doubt  that  we  owe  the  mass  of  our  science,  especially  the
abundance  and  elaboration  of  its  material,  to  conscious
reason.

9.  The  support  of  artistic  production  by  conscious  labour
and  criticism. — I  can  here  appeal  in  the  main  to  what  has
been  said  in  Chap.  V.,  B.  Although  the  Unconscious  lias
to  furnish  the  invention,  yet  in  the  first  place  criticism
must  step  in  to  prevent  feeble  execution  and  to  purify
what  is  good  from  excess  of  phantasy ;  and  secondly,  con-
scious work  must  fill  up  the  pauses,  when  the  inspirations
of  the  Unconscious  are  silent,  and  the  conscious  concen-
tration of  the  will  must  carry  the  work  to  completion  with
iron  industry,  if  enthusiasm  for  the  same  is  not  to  perish
of  ennui  on  the  road. —

What  has  been  hitherto  said  with  regard  to  the  value  of
conscious  reason  and  knowledge  could,  having  regard  to  our
main  object,  only  consist  of  hasty  hints,  which  may  have
been  all  too  trite  ;  the  opportunities  for  interesting  psycho-
logical remarks  could  not  but  be  passed  over  unused,  and
the  living  clothing  of  the  dry  abstraction  be  left  to  the
reader,  and  yet  such  a  comparison  could  not  be  omitted,
in  order  to  offer  a  counterpoise  to  the  value  of  the  Uncon-
scious, which  was  made  prominent  in  all  the  earlier
chapters.

I  may  perhaps  be  permitted  to  state  these  points  quite
succinctly  once  again.

1.  The  Unconscious  forms  and  preserves  the  organism,
repairs  its  inner  and  outer  injuries,  appropriately  guides
its  movements,  and  mediates  its  employment  by  the  con-
scious will.

2.  The  Unconscious  supplies  every  being  in  its  instinct
with  what  it  needs  for  self-preservation,  and  for  which  its
conscious  thought  does  not  suffice,  e.g.,  man  the  instincts
for  comprehending  sense-perception,  for  the  formation  of
language  and  political  constitutions,  and  manv  other  things.


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 39

3.  The  Unconscious  preserves  the  species  through  sexual
and  maternal  love,  ennobles  it  through  selection  in  sexual
love,  and  conducts  the  human  race  historically  steadily  to
the  goal  of  its  greatest  possible  perfection.

4.  The  Unconscious  often  guides  men  in  their  actions
by  hints  and  feelings,  where  they  could  not  help  them-
selves by  conscious  thought.

5.  The  Unconscious  furthers  the  conscious  process  of
thought  by  its  inspirations  in  small  as  in  great  matters,
and  in  mysticism  guides  mankind  to  the  presentiment  of
higher,  supersensible  unities.

6.  It  makes  men  happy  through  the  feeling  for  the  beau-
tiful and  artistic  production. —

If  now  we  institute  a  comparison  between  the  Conscious
and  Unconscious,  it  is  first  of  all  obvious  that  there  is
a  sphere  which  is  always  reserved  to  the  Unconscious,
because  it  remains  for  ever  inaccessible  to  consciousness.
Secondly,  we  find  a  sphere  which  in  certain  beings  only
belongs  to  the  Unconscious,  but  in  others  is  also  ac-
cessible to  consciousness.  Both  the  scale  of  organisms
as  well  as  the  course  of  the  world's  history  may  teach  us
that  all  progress  consists  in  magnifying  and  deepening  the
sphere  open  to  consciousness  ;  that  therefore  in  a  certain
sense  consciousness  must  be  the  higher  of  the  two.  Fur-
ther, if  in  man  we  consider  the  sphere  belonging  both  to
the  Unconscious  and  also  to  consciousness,  this  much  is
certain,  that  everything  which  any  consciousness  has  power
to  accomplish  can  be  executed  equally  well  by  the  Un-
conscious, and  that  too  always  far  more  strikingly,  and
therewith  more  quickly  and  more  conveniently  for  the
individual,  since  the  conscious  performance  must  be  striven
lor,  whereas  the  Unconscious  comes  of  itself  and  without
('('fort.  This  convenience  of  abandoning  oneself  to  the
Unconscious,  its  feelings  and  inspirations,  is  tolerably
familiar,  and  hence  the  conscious  use  of  reason  is  so  de-
cried in  all  and  every  one  by  the  indolent.  That  the
lb. conscious can really outdo all  the performances of


4o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

conscious  reason,  is  what  we  should  not  only  a  priori
expect  of  the  clairvoyance  of  the  Unconscious,  but  we  see
it  also  realised  in  those  fortunate  natures  which  possess
everything  that  others  must  acquire  with  toil,  who  never
have  a  struggle  of  conscience,  because  they  always  spon-
taneously act  correctly  and  morally  in  accordance  with
feeling,  can  never  comport  themselves  otherwise  than  with
tact,  learn  everything  easily,  complete  everything  which
they  begin  with  a  happy  knack,  and  live  in  eternal  harmony
with  themselves,  without  ever  reflecting  much  what  they
do,  or  even  experiencing  difficulty  and  toil.  In  respect  to
action  and  behaviour,  the  fairest  specimens  of  these  in-
stinctive natures  are  only  seen  in  women,  who  then  surpass
all  imaoination  in  their  bewitching  womanliness. —

But  now  what  disadvantage  lies  in  this  self-surrender
to  the  Unconscious  ?  This,  that  one  never  knows  where
one  is  or  what  one  has ;  that  one  gropes  in  the  dark,  while
one  has  got  the  lantern  of  consciousness  in  one's  pocket ;
that  it  is  left  to  accident,  whether  the  inspiration  of  the
Unconscious  will  come  when  one  wants  it ;  that  one  has
no  criterion  but  success,  what  is  an  inspiration  of  the
Unconscious,  and  what  a  wrong-headed  flash  of  whimsical
fancv,  on  what  feeling  one  may  rely,  and  on  what  not ;
finally,  that  one  does  not  practise  conscious  judgment  and
reflection,  which  can  never  be  entirely  dispensed  with,  and
that  then  in  any  case  which  occurs  one  must  put  up  with
wretched  analogies  instead  of  rational  inferences  and  all-
sided  survey.  Only  the  Conscious  one  faious  as  one's  own,
the  Unconscious  confronts  us  as  something  incomprehen-
sible, foreign,  on  whose  favour  we  are  dependent ;  the  Con-
scious is  possessed  as  ever-ready  servant,  whose  obedience
may  be  always  compelled;  the  Unconscious  protects  us  like
a  fairy,  and  has  always  something  uncomfortably  demonic
about  it.  1  may  be  proud  of  the  work  of  consciousness,  as
my  own  deed,  the  fruit  of  my  own  hard  labour;  the  fruit  of
the  Unconscious  is  as  it  were  a  gift  of  the  gods,  and  man
only  its  favoured  messenger;  it  can  therefore  only  teach


THE UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 41

him  humility.  The  Unconscious  is,  as  soon  as  it  is  there,
complete  from  top  to  toe,  has  no  judgment  on  itself,
and  must  therefore  be  taken  just  as  it  is, — the  Conscious
is  its  own  measure,  it  judges  itself,  and  improves  itself,  and
is  to  be  changed  any  moment,  as  soon  as  a  newly-gained
cognition  or  changed  circumstances  require  it.  I  know
what  in  my  consciously  obtained  result  is  good,  and  what
it  lacks  for  perfection,  therefore  it  gives  me  the  feeling  of
security,  because  I  know  what  I  have ;  but  also  that  of
modesty,  because  I  know  that  it  is  still  imperfect.  The
Unconscious  leaves  no  room  for  improvement.  A  man
can  never  acquire  greater  perfection  in  the  works  of  the
Unconscious,  because  his  first  as  his  last  appear  as  invol-
untary inspirations, — consciousness  contains  in  itself  the
infinite  perfectibility  of  the  individual  and  of  the  race,  and
therefore  fills  man  with  the  infinite  striving  after  the  per-
fection which  blesses.  The  Unconscious  is  independent
of  the  conscious  will  at  any  moment,  but  its  functioning  is
altogether  dependent  on  the  unconscious  will,  the  funda-
mental emotions,  passions,  and  main  interests  of  mankind,
— the  Conscious  is  subject  to  the  conscious  will  at  every
moment,  and  can  entirely  emancipate  itself  from  interest
and  the  emotions  and  passions.  Action  in  conformity
with  the  inspirations  of  the  Unconscious  consequently  ex-
clusively depends  on  the  innate  and  acquired  character,
and  is  good  or  bad  accordingly, — action  from  conscious-
ness may  be  regulated  according  to  principles  which  reason
dictates.

After  this  comparison  there  will  be  no  hesitation  iu
admitting  consciousness  to  be  for  us  the  more  important,
and  herewith  confirming  our  previous  conclusion  from  the
organic  series  and  the  progress  of  history.  Wherever  con-
sciousness is  able  to  replace  the  Unconscious,  it  ovjld  to
replace  it,  just  because  it  is  to  the  individual  the  higher,
and  such  objections  to  it  as  that  the  constant  application  of
conscious  reason  renders  pedantic,  costs  too  much  time,
&c,  are  mistaken,  for  pedantry  only  arises  from  impcrfd


42  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

use  of  the  reason,  when  in  applying  general  rules  one  does
not  take  account  of  the  particular  differences,  and  reflection
costs  too  much  time  only  with  deficient  material  of  know-
ledge and  unsatisfactory  theoretical  preparation  for  prac-
tice, or  with  irresolution,  which  can  only  he  ohviated
by  the  use  of  reason  itself.  One  ought,  therefore,  to  try
to  expand  the  sphere  of  conscious  reason  as  much  as  pos-
sible, for  therein  consists  all  the  progress  of  the  world-
process,  all  the  salvation  of  the  future.  That  this  sphere
is  not  positively  transgressed,  for  that  provision  is  made
by  its  impossibility ;  but  another  danger  certainly  lurks
in  such  an  attempt,  and  this  is  the  place  for  warning  on
that  head.  Conscious  reason,  namely,  is  only  denying,
criticising,  contrasting,  correcting,  measuring,  comparing,
combining,  classifying,  inducing  the  general  from  the
particular,  ordering  the  particular  case  according  to  the
general  rule ;  but  it  is  never  creatively  productive,
never  inventive.  Here  man  is  entirely  dependent  on  the
Unconscious,  as  we  have  seen  before,  and  if  he  loses  the
faculty  of  hearing  the  inspirations  of  the  Unconscious,  he
loses  the  spring  of  his  life,  without  which  he  would  drag
on  his  existence  monotonously  in  the  dry  schematism  of
the  general  and  particular.  The  Unconscious  is,  there-
fore, indispensable  for  him,  and  woe  to  the  age  which
violently  suppresses  its  voice,  because  in  one-sided  over-
estimate of  the  conscious-rational  it  will  only  give  heed
to  the  latter.  Then  it  falls  irrecoverably  into  a  vapid,
shallow  rationalism,  which  struts  about  in  childish  senes-
cent knowingness,  without  being  able  to  do  anything  posi-
tive for  its  posterity,  as  the  time  of  the  Wolff-Mendelssohn-
Nicolai  mock-enlightenment  at  which  we  now  smile.  Not
with  rude  fist  should  one  crush  the  tender  germs  of  the
unconscious  inspirations,  when  they  shall  come  again,  but
watch  for  them  with  childlike  devotion,  and  tenderly  touch
and  cherish  them.  And  this  is  the  danger  to  which  every
one  is  exposed  who  one-sidedly  tries  to  make  his  existence
entirely  dependent  on  conscious  reason,  when  he  desires


THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 43

to  transfer  it  to  art  and  feeling  and  everything,  and  tries
to  renounce  the  rule  of  the  Unconscious  wherever  it  seems
to  him  possible.  Wherefore  occupation  with  the  arts  is  so
necessary  a  counterpoise  to  the  rationalistic  education  of
our  time,  as  that  in  which  the  Unconscious  finds  its  most
immediate  expression,  certainly  not  such  a  technical  art-
exercise  as  is  carried  on  at  the  present  day  from  fashion
and  vanity,  but  initiation  into  the  feeling  for  the  beautiful,
into  the  comprehensive  and  the  true  spirit  of  art.  Equally
important  is  it  to  make  youth  more  acquainted  with
animal  life  as  the  unadulterated  spring  of  pure  Nature,  in
order  that  it  may  learn  to  understand  in  it  its  own  essence
in  simplified  form,  and  may  quicken  and  refresh  itself
therein  as  a  relief  from  the  unnaturalness  and  distortion
of  our  social  states.  Further,  one  ought  to  be  quite  par-
ticularly on  one's  guard  against  making  the  female  sex
too  rational,  for  where  the  Unconscious  must  first  be  re-
duced to  silence,  success  is  only  attained  at  the  cost  of
repulsive  caricatures ;  but  where  the  unconscious  ten-
dency harmonises  with  the  demands  of  consciousness,  it  is
a  useless  and  in  general  injurious  task.  Woman  namely
is  related  to  man,  as  instinctive  or  unconscious  to  rational
or  conscious  action ;  therefore  the  genuine  woman  is  a
piece  of  Nature,  on  whose  bosom  the  man  estranged  from
the  Unconscious  may  refresh  and  recruit  himself,  and  can
again  acquire  respect  for  the  deepest  and  purest  spring  of
all  life.  And  to  preserve  this  treasure  of  the  eternal
womanly,  the  woman  also  should  be  as  far  as  possible
shielded  by  the  man  from  all  contact  with  the  rough
struggle  of  life,  where  it  is  needful  to  display  conscious
force,  and  should  be  restrained  in  the  sweet  natural
bonds  of  the  family.  Undoubtedly  also  the  high  worth
of  woman  for  man  is  found  only  in  the  period  of  transi-
tion, when  the  division  between  Conscious  and  Unconscious
lias  already  taken  place,  but  the  reconciliation  of  the  two
lias  not  yet  been  completed.  This  transitional  stage  in
which  at  the  present  day  all  civilised  nations  still  are,


44  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

will  also  not  be  spared  the  individual  in  his  period  of
development  for  the  whole  future,  and  therefore  the
eternal  womanly  will  remain  for  all  time  an  indispensable,
complementary,  and  educating  moment  for  the  youth  of
the  male  sex.  It  is  not  saying  too  much  that  for  a  young
man  noble  female  intercourse  is  far  more  helpful  than
male,  and  in  a  greater  degree  the  more  philosophical  the
man's  bent ;  for  female  intercourse  is  related  to  the  male,
as  the  survey  obtained  in  actual  life  to  the  survey  in  books.
Lack  of  male  intercourse  may  be  compensated  by  books,
of  female  never. — Lastly,  we  ought  constantly  to  keep
before  our  own  and  others'  eyes  all  that  we  owe  to  the
Unconscious,  as  a  counterpoise  to  the  advantages  of  con-
scious reason,  in  order  that  the  already  half-exhausted
spring  of  everything  true  and  good  may  not  completely
dry  up,  and  humanity  enter  upon  a  premature  old  age ;
and  to  direct  attention  to  this  need  was  one  powerful
impulse  more,  determining  me  to  reduce  to  writing  the
thoughts  presented  in  this  work.


c.

M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

"  Come  to  Physics,  and  see  the  Eternal  !  " — Schklling.


( 47 )


THE  DIFFERENTIAE  OF  CONSCIOUS  AND  UNCONSCIOUS
MENTAL  ACTIVITY  AND  THE  UNITY  OF  WILL  AND  IDEA
IN  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

1.  The  Unconscious  docs  not  fall  ill,  but  conscious
mental  activity  can  sicken  if  its  material  organs  suffer
disturbances,  whether  from  bodily  causes,  or  through
violent  shocks,  arising  from  violent  mental  emotions.
This  point,  so  far  as  we  are  able  to  enter  upon  it,  has  been
already  touched  upon  in  the  chapter  on  the  Vis  Mediatrix
(vol  i.  1 6 1- 1 68).

2.  The  Unconscious  does  not  grow  weary,  but  all  con-
scious mental  activity  becomes  fatigued,  because  its
material  organs  become  temporarily  unserviceable,  in  con-
sequence of  a  quicker  consumption  of  material  than
nutrition  can  repair  in  the  same  time.  Undoubtedly,
fatigue  may  be  avoided  by  occupying  a  different  sense,  or
by  changing  the  object  of  thought  or  of  sense-perception,
because  then  other  organs  and  parts  of  the  brain  are
brought  into  requisition,  or  at  least  the  same  organs  are
constrained  to  a  different  kind  of  activity;  but  the  general
fatigue  of  the  central  organ  of  consciousness  is  not  to  be
prevented,  even  by  the  change  of  objects,  and  with  every
new  object  takes  place  the  sooner,  the  longer  attention
lias  already  been  absorbed  with  other  objects,  until  at  last
complete  exhaustion  ensues,  which  is  only  to  be  compen-
sated by  fresh  absorption  of  oxygen  during  sleep.  The
more  we  approach  the  sphere  of  the  Unconscious  the
less  is  fatigue  observable,  as,  for  example,  in  the  depart-
ment of  the feelings,  and the  less defined  they  are  in


48  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

consciousness,  for  so  much  the  more  does  their  proper
essence  belong  to  the  Unconscious.  Whilst  a  thought  is
probably  not  to  be  retained  in  consciousness  without
interruption  for  more  than  two  seconds,  and  thinking
grows  weary  in  a  few  hours,  one  and  the  same  feeling
remains,  with  fluctuating  intensity  it  is  true,  but  uninter-
ruptedly, often  for  days  and  nights,  nay,  for  months,  and
if  it  at  last  becomes  blunted,  yet,  in  contrast  to  thinking,
the  receptivity  for  other  feelings  does  not  appear  to  be
impaired,  and  these  then  do  not  grow  weary  earlier  than
they  would  otherwise  have  done.  The  latter  assertion
only  so  far  needs  limitation,  as  the  frame  of  mind  is  to  be
taken  notice  of  at  the  same  time. — Before  falling  asleep,
when  the  intellect  becomes  weary,  the  feelings  which
oppress  us  emerge  the  more  powerfully  because  they  are
not  impeded  by  thoughts,  so  strongly  indeed  that  they
often  prevent  sleep.  Even  in  dream  vivid  feelings  are
often  much  more  frequent  than  clear  thoughts,  and  very
many  dream-images  manifestly  owe  their  origin  to  present
feelings.  Further,  let  any  one  remember  the  restless
night  before  an  important  event;  the  waking  of  the
mother  at  the  slightest  cry  of  her  child,  accompanied  with
total  insensibility  to  other  stronger  noises ;  the  awaking
at  a  fixed  hour,  if  a  decided  volition  has  been  exerted  to
that  end,  and  the  like.  All  this  proves  the  unwearied
persistence  of  the  feelings,  the  interest  and  the  will  in
the  Unconscious,  or  even  with  quite  weak  affection  of
consciousness,  whereas  the  wearied  intellect  rests,  or  at
the  most  idly  gazes  on  the  juggle  of  dreams.  Where  we
have  to  do  with  that  condition  which,  of  all  those  that
are  at  all  accessible  to  our  observation,  lies  most  deeply
in  the  Unconscious  and  least  emerges  into  consciousness,
the  ecstasy  of  the  mystics,  there,  agreeably  to  the  nature
of  the  case,  the  fatigue  is  also  reduced  to  a  minimum,  for
"  a  hundred  years  are  as  one  hour,"  and  even  bodily
fatigue,  as  in  the  winter  sleep  of  animals,  becomes  almost
obliterated by the  incredible slackening  of all organic


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  49

functions  ; — think  of  the  ever-praying  pillar-saints,  or  the
Indian  penitents  and  their  distorted  postures.

3.  All  conscious  Ideation  has  the  form  of  Sensibility ;
unconscious  Thought  can  only  be  of  a  non-sensuous  hind. —
We  think  either  in  images,  when  we  directly  receive  the
sense-impressions  and  their  transformations  and  combina-
tions from  memory,  or  we  think  in  abstractions.  These
abstractions  are,  however,  also  merely  abstracted  from
sense-impressions,  and  however  much  is  allowed  to  drop
out  in  abstracting,  so  long  as  anything  is  retained  at  all,
it  can  only  be  something  that  already  inhered  in  the
whole  from  which  abstraction  was  first  made,  i.e.,  even  the
abstract  ideas  are  for  us  only  remnants  of  sense-impressions,
and  have  consequently  the  form  of  sensibility. — That  the
sense-impressions  which  we  receive  from  tilings  have  no
resemblance  to  these  is  already  sufficiently  known  by
natural  science.  Further,  every  sense-perception  is  co
ipso  united  with  consciousness,  i.e.,  it  always  excites  the
latter,  whenever  it  does  not  light  on  an  already  exist-
ing sphere  of  consciousness  and  is  apperceived  by  this.
The  Unconscious,  accordingly,  if  it  willed  to  represent
things  in  the  form  of  sensibility,  would  not  only  represent
them  inadequately,  but  it  would  always,  in  this  mode  of
perception,  step  out  of  the  sphere  of  unconscious  into
that  of  conscious  mental  activity,  as  it  does  in  fact  do
in  the  individual  consciousness  of  organisms.  If  we
then  inquire  into  the  nature  of  the  unconscious  spiritual
activity  of  the  Unconscious,  it  follows  from  what  has
been  said  that  it  can  not  take  on  the  form  of  sensibility.
]>ut  now  as  consciousness  on  its  part,  as  we  have  seen
above,  can  represent  nothing  at  all  unless  in  the  form  of
sensibility,  it  follows  that  now  and  never  can  conscious-
ness frame  a  direct  conception  of  the  mode  and  manner
in  which  the  unconscious  idea  is  presented  ;  it  can  only
know  nrgatircly  that  the  former  is  represented  in  no
way  of  which  it  can  form  any  idea.  One  can,  at  the  most,
form  the  very  probable  supposition  that  things  are  repre-

VOL.  II.  I)


50  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sented  in  the  unconscious  idea  as  tliey  are  in  themselves,
since  it  would  be  far  from  intelligible  why  things  should
appear  to  the  Unconscious  otherwise  than  they  are  ;  rather
things  are  what  they  are  just  because  they  are  represented
by  the  Unconscious  thus,  and  not  otherwise.  Certainly
this  explanation  throws  no  light  on  the  nature  of  the  idea
itself,  and  we  do  not  become  wiser  in  respect  to  the  mode
and  manner  of  unconscious  representation.

4.  The  Unconscious  does  not  vacillate  and  doubt;  it
needs  no  time  for  reflection,  but  instantaneously  grasps  the
remit  at  the  same  moment  in  which  it  thinks  the  whole
logical  process  that  produces  the  result,  all  at  once,  and
not  successively,  which  is  the  same  thing  as  not  thinking  it
at  all,  but  discerning  the  result  immediately  in  intel-
lectual intuition  with  the  infinite  penetration  of  the
purely  logical.  This  point  also  we  have  already  often
mentioned,  and  have  everywhere  found  so  thoroughly
confirmed,  that  we  might  employ  it  as  an  infallible
criterion,  in  order  to  decide,  in  any  particular  case,
whether  we  had  to  do  with  the  action  of  the  Unconscious
or  with  a  conscious  performance.  Wherefore  the  con-
viction of  this  proposition  must  be  essentially  gained
from  the  sum  of  our  previous  considerations. — Here  I
shall  only  add  the  following  : — The  ideal  philosophy  de-
mands an  intelligible  world  without  space  and  time,
which  is  opposed  to  the  phenomenal  world,  with  its
forms  valid  for  conscious  thought  and  being,  space  and
time.  How  Space  is  posited  only  in  and  with  Nature  we
shall  see  later  on ;  here  we  are  concerned  with  Time.
Now,  if  we  may  assume  that  the  Unconscious  compresses
every  process  of  thought,  along  with  its  results,  into  a
moment,  i.e.,  into  no  time,  the  thinking  of  the  Unconscious
is  timeless,  although  still  in  time,  because  the  moment  in
which  there  is  thought  has  its  temporal  place  in  the
remaining  series  of  temporal  phenomena.  If  we,  how-
ever, reflect  that  this  moment  in  which  there  is  thought
is  only  perceived  in  the  coming -to -manifestation  of  its


META PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  51

result,  and  the  thought  of  the  Unconscious  in  each
special  case  only  acquires  existence  for  a  definite
entrance  into  the  phenomenal  world  (for  it  does  not
need  reflections  and  resolutions),  the  conclusion  is
obvious  that  the  thought  of  the  Unconscious  is  only  so
far  in  time  as  the  entering  into  manifestation  of  this
thought  is  in  time,  but  that  the  thought  of  the  Un-
conscious, apart  from  the  phenomenal  world  and  from
entrance  into  it,  would  in  fact  be  not  only  timeless,  but
also  non-temporal,  i.e.,  out  of  all  time.  Then,  too,  we
should  cease  to  speak  of  ideational  activity  of  the  Un-
conscious in  the  strict  sense  ;  but  the  world  of  possible
representations  would,  as  ideal  existence,  be  enclosed  in
the  bosom  of  the  Unconscious,  and  the  activity,  as  being
something  temporal,  at  least  time-positing,  in  its  very
notion,  would  only  begin  in  the  moment  that  from  this
quiescent  ideal  world  the  one  or  other  of  all  possible
presentations  enters  into  real  manifestation,  which  comes
to  pass  precisely  through  this,  that  it  is  laid  hold  of
by  the  will  as  its  content,  as  we  shall  subsequently  see
at  the  end  of  the  present  section.  We  should  have
hereby  comprehended  the  realm  of  the  Unconscious  as
the  metaphysically  tenable  side  of  Kant's  intelligible
world. — It  is  in  thorough  agreement  with  this  that  dura-
tion only  enters  into  conscious  thought  through  the
material  organ  of  consciousness;  that  conscious  thought
only  requires  time  because  the  cerebral  vibrations  on
■which  it  rests  require  time,  as  I  have  briefly  shown  in
Sect.  B.,  chap.  viii.  (vol.  i.  pp.  346,  347).

5.  The  Unconscious  docs  not  err.- — The  proof  of  this  pro-
position must  be  confined  to  establishing  that  that  which,
on  a  superficial  view,  might  be  taken  for  errors  of  the  Un-
conscious, on  nearer  inspection  could  not  be  so  regarded.
Thus,  e.g.,  the  supposed  errors  of  instinct  may  be  reduced
to  the  four  following  cases  : —

{a.)  Where  no  special  instinct  exists,  but  merely  an
organisation,  which,  owing  to  the  exceptional  strength  of


52  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

certain  muscles,  preferentially  contracts  these  muscles.
Thus,  e.g.,  the  aimless  butting  of  young  cattle  as  yet  desti-
tute of  horns,  or  when  the  secretary-bird  (serpent-eater)
crushes  all  its  food  with  its  strong  legs  before  devouring
it,  although  this  has  only  a  purpose  in  the  case  of  living
snakes.  In  these  cases  the  organisation  is  there  to  render
superfluous,  and  to  supply  the  place  of,  a  special  instinct
which  would  be  suitable  in  certain  cases  ;  the  organisation,
however,  urges  to  the  same  movements  that  are  appro-
priate in  certain  cases,  in  other  cases,  also,  where  they  are
superfluous  and  useless.  But  as  the  Unconscious  does  the
work  once  for  all  through  the  machinery  of  the  organisa-
tion which  it  otherwise  would  have  to  do  in  each  single
case,  one  would  still  have  to  recognise  this  arrangement
itself  as  suitable  on  account  of  the  saving  of  energy  to
the  Unconscious,  if  in  certain  cases  this  organisation  acted
not  only  superfluously  but  even  inappropriately  and  in-
juriously, and  if  only  the  number  of  the  cases  where  it
is  suitable  considerably  preponderates.  But  of  this  no
single  example  is  known  to  me.

(b.)  Where  instinct  is  killed  by  unnatural  habits,  a  case
which  frequently  occurs  in  man  and  the  domestic  animals,
e.g.,  when  the  latter  devour  on  the  pastures  poisonous
weeds  and  plants  which  they  avoid  in  a  state  of  nature,
or  when  man  artificially  accustoms  many  animals  to  a
food  contrary  to  their  nature.

(c.)  Where  instinct,  for  accidental  reasons,  is  not  func-
tional; thus  the  inspiration  of  the  Unconscious  is  entirely
wanting,  or  occurs  in  so  feeble  a  degree  that  other  opposing
impulses  overcome  it,  e.g.,  when  an  animal  does  not  shun
its  natural  enemy,  and  thereby  falls  a  sacrifice  to  one  whom
other  animals  of  its  kind  are  wont  instinctively  to  flee,  or
when  maternal  affection  is  so  slight  in  a  pig  that  the  desire
for  food  leads  it  to  devour  its  offspring.

(d.)  Where  instinct,  indeed,  performs  its  functions  cor-
rectly on  the  occurrence  of  a  conscious  idea,  but  this
conscious  idea  contains  an  error. If,  e.g.,  a  hen  broods  on


MET  A  PHY  SIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  53

a  piece  of  chalk  rounded  like  an  egg  that  has  been  placed  .
under  it,  or  the  spider  carefully  nourishes  a  bundle  of
cotton  substituted  for  its  ovisac,  in  both  cases  it  is  the
conscious  idea  that  errs  in  consequence  of  defective  sense-
perception,  which  takes  the  chalk  for  an  egg,  the  ball  of
cotton  for  an  ovisac.  Instinct,  however,  does  not  err,  for
it  quite  rightly  makes  its  appearance  on  the  presentation.
It  would  be  unreasonable  to  require  that  the  clairvoyance
of  instinct  should  be  here  manifested  to  correct  the  error
of  conscious  representation ;  for  the  clairvoyance  of  in-
stinct always  is  only  concerned  with  just  those  points
which  conscious  perception  is  in  general  not  able  to  attain,
but  not  with  those  for  which  the  mechanism  of  sense-
knowledge  suffices  in  all  ordinary  cases.  But  even  if  this
claim  were  set  up,  one  could  never  say  that  the  Uncon-
scious erred,  but  only  that  it  did  not  come  into  play  with
its  clairvoyance  when  it  should  have  come  into  play.

To  these  four  cases  everything  might  easily  be  referred
which  one  might  be  tempted  to  regard  as  apparent  errors
of  instinct.  What  in  the  human  mind  might  be  taken
for  false  and  bad  inspirations  of  the  Unconscious  might
be  still  more  easily  refuted.  When  one  hears  of  mistaken
clairvoyance,  one  may  be  as  sure  one  is  dealing  with
intentional  or  unintentional  deception,  as  in  dreams  which
do  not  prove  true,  that  they  are  not  suggestions  of  the
Unconscious.  In  the  same  way,  one  may  take  it  for
granted  beforehand  that  all  the  morbid  and  worthless
excrescences  of  mysticism  or  in  artistic  conceptions  do
not  spring  from  the  Unconscious,  but  from  consciousness,
namely,  from  morbid  excesses  of  the  fancy,  or  from  per-
verted education  and  formation  of  principles,  judgment,
and  taste.  Lastly,  one  must  distinguish  how  far,  and  to
what  degree.,  the  influence  of  the  Unconscious  has  reached
in  any  particular  case.  For  I  may,  e.g.,  brood  over  some
invention,  and  have  already  made  a  start  in  a  particular
direction  ;  when,  now,  I  am  cracking  my  brain  over  a  certain
point  which  seems  to  me  to  be  alone  wanting  to  complete


54  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  whole,  I  shall  certainly  have  to  thank  the  Uncon-
scious if  this  suddenly  occurs  to  me.  But  now  the  in-
vention need  by  no  means  be  herewith  finished  in  a
serviceable  fashion,  for  I  may  possibly  have  erred  in  my
belief  that  only  this  one  point  was  wanting  to  complete
the  whole,  or  the  whole  may  be  completed  but  be  worth
nothing  at  all  ;  and  yet  one  cannot  assert  that  the  sugges-
tion of  the  Unconscious  was  mistaken  or  bad,  for  it  was
decidedly  good  and  right  as  regards  the  point  which  I
was  in  search  of,  only  the  point  sought  was  not  the  right
one.  If  another  time  a  suggestion  of  the  Unconscious
instantly  shows  the  invention  complete  in  all  its  outlines,
this  latter  inspiration  has  only  gone  further ;  but  correct
and  apt  for  the  purpose,  so  far  as  they  go,  they  are  both,
as  are  all  influences  of  the  Unconscious.

6.  Consciousness  only  acquires  its  value  by  means  of
memory,  i.e.,  through  the  property  of  the  cerebral  vibra-
tions to  leave  behind  abiding  impressions  or  molecular
changes  of  such  a  kind,  that  in  future  the  same  vibra-
tions are  more  easily  excited  than  heretofore,  in  that  the
brain  now  responds  more  easily,  as  it  were,  to  the  same
stimulus.  This  makes  possible  the  comparison  of  present
perceptions  with  former  ones,  without  which  all  forma-
tion of  conceptions  would  be  almost  impossible ;  in
general  terms,  it  renders  possible  the  collection  of  ex-
periences. Conscious  thought  increases  in  perfection
according  to  the  abundance  of  the  materials  of  memory,
the  store  of  conceptions  and  judgments,  and  the  exercise
of  thought.  To  the  Unconscious,  on  the  other  hand,  we  can
ascribe  no  memory,  since  we  can  comprehend  the  latter
only  with  the  help  of  the  impressions  persisting  in  the
brain ;  and  memory  may,  in  whole  or  in  part,  be  tempo-
rarily or  for  ever  lost  by  injuries  of  the  brain.  The
Unconscious  also  thinks  everything  which  it  needs  for  a
special  case  implicitly  in  an  instant ;  it  therefore  needs  to
institute  no  comparisons;  just  as  little  does  it  need  ex-
periences, since,  in  virtue  of  its  clairvoyance,  it  knows  or


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  55

can  know  everything  as  soon  only  as  the  will  requires
it  with  sufficient  urgency.  The  Unconscious  is  therefore
always  perfect,  so  far  as  it  can  be  in  conformity  with
its  nature,  and  a  further  perfection  in  this  direction  is
unthinkable.  If  advance  is  to  be  made  beyond  that,  it
must  take  place  through  a  change  of  the  direction  itself,
i.e.,  through  the  transition  from  the  Unconscious  into
consciousness.

7. In the Unconscious, Will and Representation are
united  in  inseparable  unity  ;  nothing  can  be  willed  which
is  not  presented,  and  noticing  can  oe  presented  ivhich  is  not
vjilled. In consciousness,  on  the contrary,  undoubtedly
also  nothing  can be  willed  which  is  not  presented,  but
something  may  be presented without  its being  willed.
Consciousness  is  the  possibility  of  the  emancipation  of  the
intellect  from the  will. — The  impossibility  of  a  volition
without presentation has been already discussed in
Sect.  A.,  chap.  iv. ;  here  we  are  concerned  with  the  im-
possibility of  an  unconscious  idea  without  the  conscious
will  to  its  realisation,  i.e.,  without  this  unconscious  idea
being at the same time content  or  object  of an un-
conscious will. This  relation  is  clearest  in  instinct  and
the  unconscious  presentations which have reference  to
bodily processes. Here  every single  unconscious idea
is  accompanied  by  an  unconscious  will,  which  stands  to
the  general  will  of  self-preservation  and  preservation  of
the  species  in  the  relation  of  willing  the  means  to  the
willing  of the end. Tor that all instincts,  with  few-
exceptions,  follow  the  two  main purposes in nature —
preservation of self and of the race- — can hardly be
doubted,  whether  we  look  to  the  origin  of  reflex  move-
ments, the healing  actions  of nature, organic  formative
processes  and  animal  instincts, or  to  the  instincts  con-
cerned with the  understanding  of sensuous  perception,
the  formation  of  abstractions  and  indispensable  ideas  of
relation,  the  formation of language,  or  to  the  instincts
of  shame,  disgust,  selection  in  sexual  love,  &c. It  would


56  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

be  a  bad  look-out  for  men  and  animals  if  even  only  one
of  these  were  wanting  to  them,  e.g.,  language  or  the
formation  of  ideas  of  relation,  both  alike  important  for
animals  and  man.  All  instincts  that  do  not  appertain  to
the  preservation  of  self  or  the  species  have  reference  to  the
third  chief  end  in  the  world — perfection  and  ennoblement  of
the  species — a  something  that  especially  makes  its  appear-
ance in  the  human  race.  Under  the  general  willing  of
this  end  falls  the  willing  of  all  special  cases  as  means,
where  the  Unconscious  furthers  historical  progress,  be
it  in  thoughts  (mystical  acquisition  of  truths)  or  deeds,
whether  in  the  individual  (as  in  heroes  of  history),  or
in  masses  of  the  people  (as  in  the  constituting  of  states,
migrations  of  nations,  crusades,  revolutions  of  a  political,
ecclesiastical,  or  social  kind,  &c.)  There  still  remains
the  action  of  the  Unconscious  in  the  sphere  of  the  beau-
tiful and  in  that  of  conscious  thought.  In  both  cases  we
have  already  been  obliged  to  confess  that  the  incursion
of  the  Unconscious  is,  indeed,  independent  of  the  con-
scious will  of  the  moment,  but  rather  altogether  de-
pendent on  the  interior  interest  in  the  object,  on  the
deep  needs  of  the  mind  and  heart  for  attaining  this
particular  goal ;  that  it  is,  it  is  true,  tolerably  indepen-
dent of  the  circumstance  whether  one  is  consciously
occupied  just  at  the  moment  with  the  subject,  but  that
it  very  much  depends  on  a  lasting  and  urgent  occupation
with  the  same.  If,  now,  the  profound  spiritual  interest
and  need  of  the  heart  is  already  itself  a  will  essentially
unconscious,  only  in  slight  degree  entering  into  conscious-
ness, or  at  least,  like  the  earnest  occupation  with  a  subject,
is  highly  adapted  to  arouse  and  to  excite  the  unconscious
will;  if,  further,  the  suggestion  ensues  the  more  easily,
the  more  profound  is  the  interest,  and  the  more  it  has
withdrawn  from  the  clear  heights  of  consciousness  into  the
dark  abysses  of  the  heart,  i.e.,  into  the  Unconscious,  we
shall  certainly  be  authorised  in  assuming  in  these  cases
likewise  an  unconscious  will. In  the  mere  apprehension


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  57

of  the  beautiful,  however,  we  shall  certainly  be  obliged  to
acknowledge  an  instinct  which  belongs  to  the  third  main
purpose,  the  perfection  of  the  race,  for  one  has  only  to
think  what  the  human  race  would  be,  what,  in  the  most
fortunate  case,  it  could  attain  to  at  the  end  of  history,
and  how  much  more  wretched  this  wretched  human  life
would  become,  if  nobody  knew  the  feeling  of  the  beautiful.
There  only  remains  yet  one  more  point,  which  perhaps
will  present  no  difficulty  to  most  readers ;  I  mean  clair-
voyance in  dreams  which  come  true,  visions,  spontaneous
and  artificial  somnambulism.  But  whoever  accepts  these
phenomena  will  be  soon  convinced  that  the  unconscious
will  is  always  co-operative.  When  clairvoyance  refers  to
the  prescribing  of  remedies  to  one's  self,  this  is  at  once
evident,  and  a  clairvoyant  prescription  of  remedies  for
other  persons  I  should  be  strongly  inclined  to  doubt,  un-
less they  were  intimates,  whose  welfare  was  almost  as
much  a  matter  of  concern  to  the  clairvoyants  as  their
own.  Prophetic  dreams,  forebodings,  visions,  or  flashes  of
thought,  which  have  other  objects,  refer  either  to  important
points  of  one's  own  future,  warning  against  danger,  con-
solation fur  sorrow  (Goethe's  vision  of  his  double),  and  the
like,  or  they  make  disclosures  concerning  beloved  persons,
wife  and  child,  announce,  e.g.,  the  death  of  the  absent,
or  imminent  misfortune;  or,  lastly,  they  relate  to  events
of  awful  magnitude  and  extent,  which  touch  every  human
heart,  e.g.,  the  conflagration  or  large  cities  (Swedenborg),
especially  of  one's  native  town,  &c.  In  all  these  cases  one
sees  how  closely  the  suggestion  of  the  Unconscious  is
bound  up  with  the  inmost  volitional  interest  of  mankind  ;
in  all  these  cases  one  is  also,  therefore,  entitled  to  assume
u\\  unconscious  will,  which  stands  for  the  universal  interest
iiniilr,  specific  for  this  'particular  case  yet  unknown  to  con-
sciousness. Never  will  the  clairvoyance  of  a  human  being
light  of  itself  on  things  which  are  not  most  intimately
interwoven  with  the  core  of  his  own  being;  but  as  for  the
answers of  artificial  somnambulists to  indifferent  ques-


53  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tions,  I  may  be  permitted  to  doubt  their  derivation  from
the  Unconscious,  as  much  as  I  feel  bound  to  contemn
those  magnetisers  as  vain  braggarts  or  deceitful  charlatans,
who  do  not  scruple  to  put  other  questions  to  somnambules
than  such  as  have  reference  to  personal  well-being.  Al-
though the  somnambulistic  state  is  more  receptive  for  the
suggestions  of  the  Unconscious  than  any  other,  yet  only  a
very  small  part  of  what  occurs  to  a  somnambulist  is  the
suggestion  of  the  Unconscious,  and  experienced  magnetisers
know  well  enough  how  much  one  has  to  take  care  lest  the
fancies  and  dissimulation  peculiar  to  women  deceive  even
in  the  somnambulist  state,  without  the  somnambulist  her-
self having  the  conscious  intention  to  deceive.

We  may  assume,  as  result'of  this  inquiry,  that  we  know
no  unconscious  idea  which  may  not  be  united  with  un-
conscious will,  and  that,  too,  when  we  consider  that  the
unconscious  idea  is  something  quite  other  than  that  which
appears  in  consciousness  as  conception  or  inspiration  of
the  Unconscious  ;  the  former  and  the  latter  are  rather
related  as  essence  and  phenomenon,  but  at  the  same  time
also  as  cause  and  effect.  We  shall  thus  find  it  very  in-
structive that  the  unconscious  will  directly  united  with
the  unconscious  presentation,  which  represents  the  applica-
tion of  the  general  interest  to  the  particular  ease,  consists  in
nothing  else  than  in  the  willing  of  the  realisation  of  its
unconscious  representation,  if  by  realisation  we  understand
manifestation  in  the  natural  world,  and,  moreover,  imme-
diately in  consciousness  as  representation  in  the  form  of
sensibility  by  excitation  of  the  appropriate  cerebral  vibra-
tions. This  is,  however,  the  true  unity  of  will  and  idea,
that  the  will  wills  absolutely  nothing  but  the  realisation
of  its  own  content,  i.e.,  the  representation  united  with  it.
On  the  other  hand,  if  we  consider  consciousness  and  the
grand  apparatus  brought  into  play  for  its  production,  and
remember  from  the  last  chapter  of  the  foregoing  section
what  we  shall  more  exactly  prove  in  chapter  xiii.  of  the
present  section,  that  all  progress  in  the  scale  of  beings  and


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  59

in  history  consists  in  the  expansion  of  the  sphere  where
consciousness  prevails,  but  that  this  extension  of  rule  can
only  be  conquered  by  liberation  of  consciousness  from  the
sway  of  passion  and  interest,  in  a  word — the  will — and
by  sole  subjection  to  conscious  reason,  the  conclusion  is
obvious  that  the  progressive  emancipation  of  the  intellect
from  the  will  is  the  proper  motive  and  main  purpose  of
the  creation  of  consciousness.  This  would  be,  however,
absurd  if  the  Unconscious  as  such  already  contained  the
possibility  of  this  emancipation,  for  the  whole  vast  appa-
ratus for  introducing  consciousness  would  then,  with  this
intention,  be  superfluous.  From  this,  and  from  the  phe-
nomenon that  we  are  nowhere  acquainted  with  an  un-
conscious idea  without  unconscious  will,  I  conclude  that
will  and  idea  can  only  exist  in  inseparable  unity  in  the
Unconscious ;  for  it  would  be,  to  say  the  least,  very  won-
derful if  unconscious  representation  separately  existed
and  we  nowhere  observed  it. — To  this  may  be  added  the
following  confirmatory  consideration. —

Thought  or  ideation,  as  such,  is  perfectly  self-contained,
has  no  volition  at  all,  no  endeavour,  or  anything  like  it ;
it  has  also,  as  such,  no  pain  or  pleasure ;  is  therefore  also
quite  unconcerned.  All  this  does  not  attach  to  ideation,
but  to  volition.  Consequently,  ideation  can  never  find
in  itself  a  moment  impelling  to  change;  it  will  comport
itself  absolutely  indifferently,  not  only  with  respect  to  its
being  thus  or  thus,  but  also  with  respect  to  its  being
or  not-being,  since  all  this  is  quite  indifferent  to  it,  be-
cause it  is  in  fact  altogether  unconcerned.  It  follows  from
this  that  ideation,  since  it  has  neither  an  interest  in  its
own  existence,  nor  any  endeavour  after  the  same,  can  also
find  in  itself  no  ground  at  all  for  passing  from  non-being
into  being,  or,  if  one;  prefers,  from  potential  being  into
odv.nl  being,  i.e.,  that  it  requires  for  the  existenee  of  every
o dual  representation- a  basis  outside  ideation  itself.  This
basis  is,  for  conscious  ideation,  matter  in  the  form  of  sense-
impressions  or  cerebral  vibrations  ;  for  unconscious  idea-


60  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tion  it  cannot  be  this,  otherwise  it  too  would  attain  to
consciousness,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  third  chapter  ;  con-
sequently for  this  material  substratum  there  only  remains
the  unconscious  will.  This  perfectly  accords  with  our  expe-
rience, for  everywhere  it  is  the  interest,  the  definite  will,
which,  directed  to  the  particular  case,  compels  the  idea
into  being.  The  particular  will,  however,  besides  the
power  of  volition,  shows  also  a  definite  (ideational)  content,
and  this  content  it  is  which  determines  the  quality  or
essence  of  the  unconscious  idea  of  the  next  moment,
which  it,  however,  could  not  determine  if  its  existence
were  not  demanded  by  the  willing  of  the  foregoing  mo-
ment, and  made  possible  by  the  persistence  of  the  form
of  volition  even  up  to  this  moment. — I  will  here  once
more  add  the  remark,  that  since  the  act  immediately
follows  the  will,  there  can  be  no  spiritual  activity  in  the
Unconscious  save  at  the  moment  of  the  commencing  act.
Even  when  the  will  is  too  weak  for  the  realisation  of  its
content  and  for  overcoming  the  present  resistance,  this
holds  good  ;  for  either  the  deed  consists  in  the  abortive
attempt,  or  the  Unconscious  immediately  thinks  the  ap-
propriate preparatory  means  instead  of  the  end.  But,
possibly  repeated  impulses  on  the  part  of  the  Unconscious
may  be  requisite,  namely,  when  the  mechanical  progress
of  the  act  stumbles  upon  obstacles  which  must  be  over-
powered by  'modified  action.

An  objection  might  here  be  raised,  namely,  that  the
Unconscious  loills  only  the  final  results,  but  must  think
the  whole  thought-process  leading  to  these  results ;  but
whoever  has  attentively  read  Xo.  4  of  this  chapter  will
have  already  found  there  the  answer  to  this  objection.
Unconscious  thought  embraces  all  the  terms  of  a  process,
reason  and  consequent,  cause  and  effect,  means  and  end,  &c,
in  a  single  moment,  and  thinks  them,  not  before,  beside,
or  beyond,  but  in  the  result  itself ;  it  never  thinks  them
except  through  the  result.  Therefore,  this  thinking  cannot
be  regarded  as  a  special  thinking  outside  the  result;  it  is


MET  A  PHY  SIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  61

rather  implicitly  contained  in  the  thinking  of  the  result,
without  ever  being  explicated  ;  consequently  the  result
is  that  which  is  alone  thought  in  our  ordinary  sense,  and
the  proposition  holds  that  only  that  can  be  unconsciously
thought  which  is  willed. — Moreover,  even  in  the  ordinary
category  of  unconscious  thought,  in  means  and  end,  one
may  say  that  the  end  implicitly  thought  in  the  idea  of
the  willed  means  is  also  implicitly  willed.

According  to  the  foregoing,  the  sole  activity  of  the  Un-
conscious consists  in  willing,  and  the  unconscious  repre-
sentation filling  the  will  is  only  a  non-temporal  content,
merely  dragged  along  with  it,  as  it  were,  into  time.  Voli-
tion and  activity  are  accordingly  identical  or  reciprocal
notions.  Only  through  them  is  Time  posited  ;  only  through
them  is  the  idea  hurled  from  potential  into  actual  being,
from  being  in  the  essence  into  being  in  the  phenomenon,
and  therewith  into  time.  Quite  otherwise  is  it  with  the
conscious  idea,  which  is  a  product  of  different  factors,  of
which  one,  the  cerebral  vibrations,  is  from  the  first  subject
to  duration.


( 62 )


II.


BRAIN AND GANGLIA AS CONDITIONS OF ANIMAL
CONSCIOUSNESS.

Almost  all  naturalists,  physiologists,  and  physicians  •  are
materialists,  and  the  more  the  knowledge  and  method  of
physics and physiology  is  diffused  among  the  educated
public,  the  more  does  the  materialistic  view  of  the  world
gain  ground. What  is  the  cause  of  this  ? The  simplicity
and  impressive evidentness of the facts on  which  the
materialistic conception  of  the animal  and  human  soul,
the  only  spiritual  being  known  to  us,  is  supported. Only
those  unacquainted  with  these  facts,  as  the  unscientific
multitude,  or  the  learned  world  without  physical  and  phy-
siological knowledge,  or  those  who  approach  these  facts
with  the  preconceived opinions of  religious  or  philoso-
phic systems,  can  alone  remain  outside  their  influence ;
they  must  absolutely  convince  every  unprejudiced  think-
ing man,  because  they need  only  to be taken  just as
they are  ;  they declare their  meaning with  such  naive
plainness  that  it  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  look  for  it.  And
this naive clearness and directness, this forcible self-
evidence,  which  can  only  be  denied  with  violence,  this  it  is
which  secures  for  the  materialistic  conception  of  the  mind
so  great  a  superiority  over  the  difficult  and  subtle  deduc-
tions and  probabilities,  over  the  arbitrary  assumptions  and
often  distorted  consequences,  of  the  spiritualistic  psycho-
logy, which induces all clear  heads averse  to mysti-
philosophic speculation  to enrol themselves under  the
banner of Materialism,  which is  simple  as  the  Nature
that  teaches  it,  and  clear  and  precise  in  all  its  correct  con-
sequences as  this  its  august  mother. That  Materialism


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  63

thereby  offends  the  religious  systems  can  in  our  time  only
gain  it  the  more  adherents ;  but  that  it  contradicts  specu-
lative philosophy,  that  does  not  trouble  it  at  all ;  for  how
few  men  have  a  speculative  need  ;  how  far  fewer  still  philo-
sophical culture  ?  Accordingly  Materialism  has  neither
the  need  nor  the  capacity  to  investigate  the  not-understood
abstractions,  such  as  force,  matter,  &c.,  of  which  its  system
consists,  and  it  comports  itself  to  the  higher  questions  of
philosophy  partly  sceptically,  in  that  it  denies  that  their
solution  lies  on  this  side  the  limits  of  the  human  under-
standing, partly  it  denies  the  title  of  these  questions  alto-
gether. Thus  it  feels  quite  comfortable  in  its  skin  in  all
directions,  and  is  perfectly  contented  with  the  daily  pro-
gressive discoveries  of  the  natural  sciences,  in  the  good
faith  that  everything  which  man  calls  experience  must  be
derived  from  the  pursuit  of  the  special  sciences.  It  is,
accordingly,  no  wonder  that  Materialism  gains  whereas
Philosophy  loses  ground  ;  for  only  a  philosophy  which
takes  full  account  of  all  the  results  of  the  natural  sciences,
and  accepts  without  reservation  the  perfectly  legitimate
point  of  departure  of  Materialism,  only  such  a  philosophy
can  hope  to  make  a  stand  against  Materialism,  if  at  the
same  time  it  fulfils  the  condition  of  being  universally
intelligible,  which  the  philosophy  of  Identity  and  absolute
Idealism  unfortunately  is  not.

The  first  attempt  to  receive  Materialism  into  Philosophy
in  an  intelligible  fashion  was  made  by  Schopenhauer,  and
not  the  least  part  both  of  his  merit  and  of  his  growing
popularity  is  due  to  this  attempt.  But  his  compromise  was
unsatisfactory  ;  it  allowed  Materialism  the  intellect,  and
reserved  to  speculation  the  will.  This  violent  dismem-
bering is  his  weak  point;  for  if  once  conscious  ideation
and  thought  is  handed  over  to  Materialism,  it  has  full
r;ght  to  claim  also  conscious  feeling, and  therewith  conscious
desire  and  volition,  since  the  physiological  phenomena  have
the  same  expression  for  all  conscious  activities  of  mind.  It
ia  entirely  inconsequent  of  Schopenhauer  to  refer  the  stores


64  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

of  memory,  together  with  the  intellectual  foundations,
talents,  and  aptitudes  of  the  individual,  to  the  consti-
tution of  the  brain,  and  to  exclude  from  the  same  and  to
hypostatise  as  an  individual  metaphysical  essence,  in
defiance  of  his  fundamental  monistic  principle,  the  char-
acter of  the  individual,  which  just  as  easily,  if  not
more  easily,  is  capable  of  such  an  explanation.  In  fact,
there  are  no  means  of  overturning  the  first  fundamental
proposition  of  Materialism,  "  All  conscious  mental  activity
can  only  come  to  pass  by  normal  function  of  the  brain,"
but  by  the  ignoring  or  subtle  explaining  away  of  facts.
But  now,  as  long  as  any  one  knows  or  will  know  no
other  than  conscious  mental  activity,  this  proposition
asserts,  "All  mental  activity  can  only  come  to  pass  through
brain  function."  The  conclusion  is  obvious :  "  Either
all  mental  activity  is  pure  function  of  the  brain,  or  a
product  of  brain  function  and  something  else,  which  is
inherently  incapable  of  expression,  but  is  purely  poten-
tial, and  only  attains  expression  in  and  by  the  normal  brain
function,  which  now  appears  as  mental  activity."  It  is
evident  that  a  decision  between  these  alternatives,  all  others
being  laid  aside  as  useless,  meaningless  ballast,  is  hardly  to
be  evaded.  Quite  otherwise  does  the  matter  appear  as  soon
as  one  already  recognises  unconscious  mental  action  as  the
original  and  primary  form,  without  whose  assistance  con-
scious mental  activity  would  be  paralysed.  Then  the  pro-
position only  says,  "  Conscious  mental  activity  can  only
take  place  through  the  function  of  the  brain."  With
respect  to  unconscious  mental  activity,  on  the  other  hand,
it  says  nothing  at  all ;  it  remains,  therefore,  since  all  the
phenomena  demonstrate  their  independence  of  brain  func-
tions, as  something  self-dependent,  and  only  the  form  of
consciousness  appears  conditioned  by  matter.

~We  pass  on  now  briefly  to  present  the  facts,  the  theo-
retical expression  for  which  is  the  above  proposition.

i.  The  brain  is  in  formal  and  material  respects  the
highest  product  of  organic  formative  activity.


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  65

"  We  find  in  the  brain  mountains  and  valleys,  bridges
and  aqueducts,  beams  and  arches,  vices  and  hoes,  claws
and  Amnion's  horns,  trees  and  sheaves,  harps  and  sounding
staves,  &c,  &c.  Nobody  has  perceived  the  significance  of
these  strange  forms  "  (Huschke  in  "  Skull,  Brain,  and  Soul
of  Man  ").

There  is  no  animal  organ  which  has  tenderer,  more
wonderful,  more  varied  forms,  finer  and  more  peculiar
structure.  The  ganglionic  cells  of  the  brain  send  off  primi-
tive fibres,  and  are  in  part  mutually  connected  and  in
part  surrounded  by  the  same.  These  primitive  fibres,
hollow  tubes  filled  with  an  oily,  coagulable  content,  about
TuVo^h  line  in  thickness,  again  intertwine  and  cross  one
another  in  the  strangest  fashion.  Unfortunately  the
difficult  anatomy  of  the  brain  is  still  as  backward  as  its
chemical  investigation ;  but  even  from  the  latter  we  already
know  this  much,  that  the  chemical  composition  of  the
brain  is  by  no  means  as  simple  as  was  formerly  believed;
that  it  is  exceedingly  different  at  different  places  ;  that  the
peculiar  cerebral  fats  with  their  phosphorus  content  play
a  great  part  in  it,  and  find  other  matters  there  which
occur  in  no  other  tissue  in  the  same  way,  e.g.,  cerebrin
and  lecithin.  Tor  the  rest,  how  backward  our  chemistry
still  is  in  regard  to  such  investigations,  one  may  infer  from
the  fact  that  it  cannot  distinguish  blood  or  pus  which
is  infected  with  contagious  matter  from  healthy  blood;
that  the  differences  between  isomeric  substances  (of  the
same  composition,  but  of  unlike  qualities  owing  to  different
atomic  position,  as  is  shown  by  the  different  refraction  of
light  and  rotation)  frequently  vanish  on  analysis,  so  that
it  is  only  now  beginning  to  discover  a  number  of  finely
distributed  metals  by  means  of  spectrum  analysis,  minute
quantities  of  which  in  organic  substances  may  be  of  the
greatest  importance.  All  these  things  acquire  the  more
importance  the  higher  the  organic  tissues  with  which  one
is  concerned.

2. In  the  brain  the  change  of  material  is  more  rapid

VOL.  II.  E


66  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

than  in  any  other  part  of  the  body,  wherefore  also  the
ilow  of  blood  is  disproportionately  much  stronger.  This
points  to  a  concentration  of  vital  activity  in  the  brain,
such  as  takes  place  in  no  other  part  of  the  body.

3.  The  brain  (by  which  in  this  section  the  cerebrum
is  always  alone  to  be  understood)  has  no  direct  import-
ance for  the  organic  functions  of  bodily  life.  This  is
proved  by  the  experiments  of  Flourens,  who  showed  that
animals  from  which  the  brain  had  been  removed  can  live
and  thrive  for  months  and  years.  Care  must  certainly  be
taken  that  the  operation  itself  and  the  accompanying  loss
of  blood  be  not  too  violent,  and  does  not  reduce  too  much
the  force  of  the  animal;  wherefore  the  experiment  can  only
perfectly  succeed  in  those  animals  from  which  the  brain
may  be  removed  without  too  much  difficulty,  e.g.,  fowls.
From  these  first  three  points  it  may  be  concluded  that  the
brain,  the  flower  of  the  organism  and  the  seat  of  the  most
vital  activity,  must  have  a  mental  destination,  since  it  has
no  corporeal  one.

4.  With  increasing  perfection  of  the  brain  or  of  the
ganglia  representing  it  increases  the  mental  capacity  in
the  animal  kingdom,  whereas  the  corporeal  functions  of
all  animals,  clever  or  stupid,  may,  as  a  rule,  be  performed
equally  well.  As  low  down  as  the  Insects  it  is  strikingly
manifest  how  the  size  of  the  cephalic  ganglia  is  proportional
to  the  intelligence  of  the  orders  and  species.  The  Hymen-
optera  have  in  general  larger  ganglia  than  the  stupid
beetles,  and  they  are  particularly  large  in  the  clever  ants.
In  the  case  of  the  vertebrates,  one  must  make  the  inner
space  within  the  skull  the  ground  of  comparison,  as  this
includes  the  central  organs  of  motion,  which  of  course
must  correspond  in  size  to  the  mass  of  nerve  and  muscle
of  the  animal,  in  order  to  be  able  to  expend  the  requisite
energy  on  its  motor  impulses.  If  we  now  merely  consider
the  cerebrum  proper,  there  appears  in  animals  of  not  too  dif-
ferent size  a  clear  parallelism  between  quantity  of  brain  and
intelligence. So  far,  however,  as  in  animals  of  very  different


M  ETA  PHY  SIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  67

size  {e.g.,  very  small  and  very  large  clogs,  canary  birds  and
ostrich),  this  parallelism  appears  disturbed,  a  qualitative
compensation  of  the  cerebrum  is  distinctly  perceptible,
especially  by  abundant  and  deep  convolutions  and  furrows.
5.  The  mental  tendencies  and  executive  capacity  of
mankind  are  in  proportion  to  quantity  of  brain,  so  far
as  the  quality  of  the  same  does  not  give  rise  to  ex-
ceptions. "According  to  the  exact  measurements  of
Peacock,  the  weight  of  the  human  brain  gradually  and
very  rapidly  increases  up  to  the  twenty-fifth  year,  re-
mains at  this  normal  weight  up  to  the  fiftieth,  and
thenceforward  gradually  diminishes.  According  to  Sims,
the  brain,  which  increases  in  bulk  till  the  thirtieth  or
fortieth  year,  only  attains  the  maximum  of  its  volume
between  the  fortieth  and  fiftieth  year.  The  brain  of  old
people  becomes  atrophied,  i.e.,  smaller;  it  shrivels,  and
there  arise  hollow  spaces  between  the  several  convolu-
tions, which  before  were  firmly  attached  to  one  another,
jiy  this  the  substance  of  the  brain  becomes  tougher,  the
colour  greyer,  the  blood-content  less,  the  convolutions
narrower,  and  the  chemical  constitution  of  the  brain  of
the  old  man,  according  to  Schlossberger,  again  approaches
that  of  the  earliest  life-period"  (Biichner,  Force  and  Matter,
5th  edit.,  p.  109).  The  average  weight  of  the  brain,
according  to  Peacock,  amounts  in  the  man  to  fifty,  in  the
woman  to  forty-four  ounces ;  according  to  Hoffmann,  the
difference  amounts  only  to  two  ounces.  Lauret  drew
from  the  measurements  of  two  thousand  heads  the  result,
that  both  the  circumference  as  well  as  the  diameter,
measured  at  different  places,  is  always  less  in  women  than
in  men.  Whilst  the  normal  weight  amounts  to  three  to
three  and  a  half  pounds,  the  brain  of  Cuvier  weighed  over
four  pounds.  Inherited  mental  imbecility  always  shows
a  surprisingly  small  brain;  conversely  abnormal  smallness
of  brain  is  always  combined  with  imbecility.  Panhappe
proves  from  782  cases  the  gradual  diminution  of  the  brain's
weight  in  correspondence  with  the  decrease  of  intelligence


68  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

in  madness  or  with  the  depth  of  mental  disturbance.  In
all  cretins  brain  and  skull  are  surprisingly  small,  the  latter
exhibiting  assymmetry  and  deformity ;  the  hemispheres  in
particular  are  wasted.  The  brain  of  the  negro  is  much
smaller  than  that  of  the  European,  the  forehead  retreating,
the  skull  less  in  circumference,  generally  more  animal;
the  natives  of  Xew  Holland  lack  the  higher  parts  of  the
brain  in  a  surprising  degree.  Also  the  structure  of  the
European  skull  has  made  no  slight  advance  in  historic
times.  Especially  with  the  progress  of  civilisation  the
anterior  region  of  the  head  becomes  prominent  at  the
expense  of  the  posterior,  as  is  proved  by  excavations
relating  to  widely  different  times.  The  same  relation
also  occurs  in  general  between  the  rude  and  cultured
classes  of  the  present  day,  as,  among  other  things,  the
experiences  of  hatmakers  confirm.  That  here  not  isolated
cases,  but  only  average  numbers  are  decisive,  is  matter  of
course  ;  individual  exceptions,  e.g.,  of  clever  people  having
a  small,  stupid  people  a  large  skull,  must  be  referred
partly  to  the  thickness  of  the  skull,  partly  to  the  differ-
ence of  plan  and  finish,  partly  to  the  form  of  the  convolu-
tions and  the  quality  of  the  brain.

What  we  know  of  the  iniluence  of  quality  is  but  little,
but  still  something ;  e.g.,  the  child's  brain  is  more  pulpy,
richer  in  water,  poorer  in  fat  than  that  of  the  adult;  the
differences  between  grey  and  white  matter,  the  microscopic
peculiarities,  are  only  gradually  formed ;  the  so-called
fibrillation  of  the  brain,  very  distinct  in  the  adult,  is  im-
perceptible in  the  child's  brain ;  the  plainer  this  fibrilla-
tion becomes,  the  more  decided  appears  also  the  mental
activity ;  the  brain  of  the  foetus  has  very  little  fat,
consecpiently  little  phosphorus,  but  the  fatty  matter  in-
creases until  birth,  and  after  birth  tolerably  rapidly.  In
animals  also  the  brain  has,  on  the  average,  more  fat  the
higher  they  are  in  the  scale,  and  the  smaller  the  brain
in  proportion  to  the  intelligence  of  the  animal,  e.g.,  in
the  horse. This  fat  seems  to  be  very  important,  for  in


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  69

animals  caused  to  starve  the  brain  does  not,  like  other
organs,  lose  a  part  of  its  fatty  matter. — On  the  number,
depth,  and  form  of  the  actions  of  the  brain  depends,  with
equal  volume,  the  size  of  its  surface, — a  highly  important
factor,  which  may  neutralise  a  less  weight.  On  the  aver-
age, the  convolutions  and  furrows  are  the  more  numerous,
deeper,  and  more  complicated  the  higher  the  species  of
animals  or  race  of  man.

It  would  now  be  comprehensible  if  an  exception  were
formed  to  the  law  of  the  proportion  of  brain  mass  and
mental  endowment  by  some  few  animals,  the  largest  of
the  present  day,  exceeding  the  human  brain  in  bulk.
Nevertheless,  even  this  apparent  deviation  only  depends
on  a  preponderance  of  those  parts  of  the  brain  which  serve
the  nervous  system  of  the  body  as  central  organs  of  volun-
tary motion  and  sensation,  and  which,  partly  on  account
of  the  larger  number  and  thickness  of  the  nervous  strands
concurring  in  them,  partly  on  account  of  the  greater
mechanical  development  of  energy  needful  for  the  motion
of  a  greater  mass,  cannot  but  show  a  larger  volume.  On
the  other  hand,  the  anterior  parts  of  the  brain,  which
especially  preside  over  the  functions  of  thought,  in  no
animal  attain,  even  in  respect  of  quantity,  the  same  perfec-
tion as  in  man.

6.  Conscious  thinking  strengthens  the  brain,  as  all
activity  its  organs,  and  the  manifested  energy  of  thought
is  always  accompanied  by  consumption  of  material.  As
any  muscle,  if  it  is  considerably  exercised,  becomes  stronger
and  increases  in  bulk  {e.g.,  the  calves  of  dancers),  so,  too,
the  brain  becomes  more  capable  of  thinking  through  exer-
cise of  thought,  and  increases  in  quality  and  quantity.

Albers  in  Dunn  relates  that  he  dissected  the  brains  of
several  persons  who  had  been  exceeding  mentally  active
for  several  years;  in  all  he  found  the  brain  substance  very
iirm,  the  grey  matter  and  the  convolutions  strikingly
developed.  The  increase  in  bulk  is  proved  partly  by  the
difference  in  the  cultivated  and  lower  ranks,  partly  by  the


70  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

increment  due  to  the  progressive  civilisation  of  Europe,
both  of  which  certainly  only  reaching  an  amount  capable
of  measurement  in  virtue  of  hereditary  transmission.

That  all  thought  is  connected  with  the  consumption  of
the  materials  of  the  brain  follows  from  the  simple  phe-
nomenon of  the  fatigue  of  thought,  which  without  it  would
be  incomprehensible.  Mental  just  as  much  as  bodily
labour  not  only  increases  the  desire  for  food  in  order  to  re-
place the  waste  of  tissue,  but  according  to  Davy's  measure-
ments even  animal  heat  also,  as  is  announced  by  ac-
celerated breathing,  which  takes  place  in  order  to  again
decarbonise  the  blood,  whose  carbonisation  is  more  freely
induced  by  the  quicker  interchange  of  material.

Further,  it  is  well  known  that  sedentary  manual  occu-
pations without  bodily  effort,  as  tailoring,  cobbling,  light
manufacturing,  are  those  which  produce  most  dreamers,
religious  and  political  fanatics;  whereas  severe  bodily
manual  labour  leaves  the  brain  no  force  for  thinking ;  for
the  body,  like  every  machine,  has  only  a  certain  stock  of
vital  force  at  its  disposal,  and  if  this  is  converted  into
muscular  energy,  there  remains  nothing  over  for  the  play
of  the  cerebral  molecules  for  thinking.  Any  one  can  see
this  in  his  own  case.  No  one  will  be  able  during  a  con-
siderable leap  to  carry  further  a  train  of  thought  once
set  a-going,  or  simultaneously  to  run  a  race  and  to  medi-
tate profoundly ;  even  in  slow  walking  one  involuntarily
stops  when  thoughts  are  concentrated,  and  not  seldom  the
outward  man  falls  into  complete  rigidity  in  the  pro-
foundest  meditation.  All  this  points  to  a  consumption  of
vital  force  in  thinking,  or  what  is  the  same  thing,  a
chemical  consumption  of  material,  for  this  produces  living
force.

7.  Every  disturbance  of  the  integrity  of  the  brain
produces  a  disturbance  of  conscious  mental  activity,
unless  the  function  of  one  hemisphere  is  carried  on  by  the
corresponding  part  of  the  other  hemisphere ;  for  as  every
human  being  chiefly  sees,  hears,  and  smells  with  one  eye ,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  71

ear,  and  nostril,  and  after  one  side  of  the  sense-organs  has
been  rendered  useless  sense-perception  still  continues  by
means  of  the  other  side,  so  every  human  being  chiefly
thinks  with  one  half  of  the  brain,  as  often  the  physiognomy,
especially  the  forehead,  allows  us  to  see;  and  likewise  after
one  half  of  the  brain  has  been  rendered  partially  useless,
the  other  half  can  undertake  the  whole  function  of  thought,
as  one  half  of  the  lungs  the  whole  function  of  breathing.
This  substitution  is  always  with  the  brain  the  rarer  case,
and  only  occurs  when,  in  the  first  place,  the  morbid  or
injured  part  does  not  impair  the  functions  of  the  rest  of
the  brain,  which,  however,  mostly  takes  place  in  one  way
3r  another,  e.g.,  through  propagation  of  pressure,  and  when,
secondly,  the  injury  is  of  such  a  kind  that  it  entirely
abolishes  the  functions  of  the  particular  part,  and  does
not  simply  render  them  abnormal;  for  then  there  is  de-
veloped just  the  disturbed  mental  activity,  which  renders
valueless  the  results  of  the  sound  functions  of  the  other
parts.  If  now  such  disturbed  functions  of  morbid  parts
all  at  once  cease,  or  relieve  the  rest  of  the  brain  of  the
pressure  which  it  has  hitherto  experienced,  the  normal
function  of  the  other  part  of  the  brain  again  appears  as
clear  mental  activity, — a  case  which  not  seldom  takes
place,  especially  in  progressive  destruction  of  morbid  parts
shortly  before  death,  and  then  presents  the  phenomenon,
surprising  to  the  layman,  of  a  last  spiritual  transfiguration
after  long  mental  aberration.

In  the  above-mentioned  experiments  of  Flourens  on
fowls  with  extirpated  brains,  the  animals  remained  as  in
deep  sleep,  sitting  on  any  spot  where  they  were  placed  ;  all
capability  of  receiving  sense-impressions  was  completely
extinguished,  and  they  had,  therefore,  to  be  supported  by
artificial  feeding;  on  the  other  hand,  the  reflex  movements
proceeding  from  the  spinal  cord,  e.g.,  swallowing,  flying,
running,  were  preserved.  "  If  one  removes  the  two  hemi-
spheres of  a  mammal  by  slices,  the  mental  activity  sinks
the  lower  the  farther  the  loss  of  substance  has  proceeded.


72  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

When  the  ventricles  of  the  brain  are  reached,  complete
unconsciousness  is  wont  to  occur"  (Valentin).  "What
stronger  proof  of  the  necessary  connection  of  mind  and
brain  will  any  one  require  than  that  which  is  afforded  by

the  knife  of  the  anatomist  when  he  cuts  away  the  soul
piece  by  piece  ?  "  (Biichner).

Inflammation  of  the  brain  causes  delusion  and  madness;
an  effusion  of  blood  on  the  brain,  stupefaction  and  perfect
loss  of  consciousness ;  a  lasting  pressure  on  the  brain  (e.g.,
hydrocephalus,  children's  dropsy),  weakness  of  under-
standing and  idiocy ;  a  surcharging,  e.g.,  in  the  drowning
and  the  intoxicated,  or  evacuation  of  the  blood-vessels  of
the  brain,  produces  swoons  and  loss  of  consciousness;  the
quicker  blood-circulation  of  a  simple  fever  produces  the
delirium  of  fever,  which  indeed  is  also  a  temporary  in-
sanity ;  pressure  of  blood  in  intoxication  by  alcohol  intro-
duces the  mental  disturbance  well  known  as  the  state  of
drunkenness;  opium,haschisch,and  other  narcotics,  severally
another  state  of  intoxication  peculiar  to  it,  each  of  which
is  identical  with  certain  states  of  frenzy.

Parry  was  able  to  suppress  attacks  of  madness  by  a
compression  of  the  cervical  artery,  and  according  to
Flemming's  experiments  the  same  procedure  produces  in
the  healthy  sleep  and  flitting  dreams.  Short-necked  men
and  animals  are,  on  the  average,  more  sanguine  than  long-
necked,  because,  in  consequence  of  less  remoteness  from
the  heart,  a  more  vivid  blood-circulation  takes  place  in
their  brain.  The  so-called  after-diseases  of  the  brain,  in
consequence  of  more  serious  injuries  or  even  internal
diseases,  also  many  apoplexies,  affect  quite  specially  the
memory,  either  destroy  it  entirely  or  weaken  it  in  general,
or  abolish  memory  for  certain  categories  of  knowledge,  e.g.,
merely  for  language,  without  any  paralysis  of  the  organ  of
language,  the  understanding  being  otherwise  clear  (apha-
sia), or  exclusively  for  all  proper  names,  or  the  language
of  a  particular  country,  or  the  events  of  certain  years,  or
notions  of  time  (especially  with  destruction  or  rendering


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  73

inactive  of  particular  parts  of  the  brain).  Many  extremely
striking  examples  of  the  foregoing,  and  of  the  recovery  of
the  lost  knowledge  after  easing  the  part  of  the  brain  in  ques-
tion, are  to  be  read  in  Jessen's  "  Psychology." — Stronger
proofs  that  memory  depends  on  permanent  changes  of
certain  parts  of  the  brain,  which  on  certain  stimulations
contribute  to  the  easier  reproduction  of  former  vibrations,
can  scarcely  be  desired,  than  that  certain  sets  of  ideas,  with
the  becoming  unserviceable  of  certain  parts  of  the  brain
lose,  and  with  their  return  to  the  normal  state  regain,
the  capability  of  re-emerging  into  consciousness.

The  well-known  experience  that  no  class  of  diseases
depends  to  so  great  an  extent  on  transmission  as  that  of
mental  diseases,  points  tolerably  clearly  by  itself  to  the
circumstance  that  all  mental  disturbances  depend  upon
(direct  or  indirect)  disturbances  of  brain  function  ;  for
we  can  well  conceive  anomalies  of  the  central  organs
of  the  nervous  system  to  be  inherited  by  way  of  material
generation  (just  as  tuberculosis,  scrofula,  cancer,  and
other  diseases),  but  never  immaterial  psychical  anoma-
lies, of  the  possibility  of  which  we  can  frame  no  conception
at  all  (coin]),  vol.  i.  pp.  164,  165).

8.  There  is  no  conscious  mental  activity  outside  or  Ic-
liind  tlie  cerebral  function  ;  for  if,  in  conformity  with  the
foregoing,  we  may  assume  it  proved  that  every  disturb-
ance of  the  normal  functions  of  the  brain  disturbs  the
activity  of  consciousness,  we  may  well  assume  it  as  certain
that,  with  the  complete  abolition  of  the  cerebral  function,
the  activity  of  consciousness  is  likewise  actually  abolished,
and  not  merely  its  manifestation  prevented.

Were  there  not  this  progressive  derangement  of  consci-
ousness running  parallel  to  the  degree  of  disturbance  of
brain  function,  and  passing  quite  gradually  through  all
stages  of  idiocy  into  the  loss  of  all  consciousness  (except
that  which  manifests  itself  in  the  reflex  instincts  of  the
spinal  cord),  the  supposition  would,  of  course,  be  possible
tiiat  a  withdrawal  of  consciousness  upon  itself  might  take


74  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

place,  in  which  merely  every  manifestation  of  the  same
is  suppressed ;  but,  as  the  case  stands,  this  possibility,  to
which  one  can  only  have  recourse  at  all  as  a  desperate
attempt  to  save  one's  prepossessions  in  favour  of  a  precon-
ceived system,  has  too  low  a  probability  for  it  to  deserve
the  notice  of  an  unprejudiced  inquirer.  In  addition  to
the  parallelism  above  mentioned,  and  the  circumstance
that  the  entire  apparatus  of  nature  would  be  super-
fluous for  the  setting  up  of  consciousness,  if  conscious-
ness could  exist  without  it,  the  want  of  memory  tells
against  it;  for  if  consciousness  during  the  inactivity  of  the
brain  withdrew  upon  itself,  yet  a  memory  thereof  should
remain  behind.  Others  think  to  evade  this  circumstance
when  they  assume  a  double  individual  consciousness
(thus  also  double  personality  [!]  in  everybody),  namely,
one  free  from  the  body  and  a  brain-consciousness,  whereby
the  former  is  to  be  unconscious  for  the  latter.  Whatever
cogency  there  is  in  the  argument  for  this  double-sidedness
of  the  mind  refers  entirely  to  the  spiritual  background  of  the
brain-consciousness  distinguished  by  us  as  the  Unconcious,
which  certainly  those  who  only  know  conscious  mental
activity  must  hold  to  be  a  second  consciousness ;  what,
however,  is  adduced  expressly  for  the  duality  of  con-
sciousness is  very  unfortunately  chosen.  First  of  all,  the
consciousness  of  the  magnetic  sleep  is  claimed  as  non-
embodied  consciousness,  which,  however,  is  only  differ-
entiated from  the  consciousness  of  dreams  in  the  ordinary
sleep  by  this,  that  the  communication  with  the  external
senses  is  somewhat  less  impeded,  and  the  functioning
part  of  the  brain  is  found  in  a  state  of  artificial  hyperes-
thesia (over-irritation,  over-sensibility),  which  has  for  its
consequence  that,  firstly,  the  influence  of  the  Unconscious
can  more  easily  find  an  entrance  into  consciousness,  and
that,  secondly,  the  amplitude  of  the  cerebral  vibrations
with  equal  vividness  of  the  presentation  is  less  than  at
other  times,  and  consequently  leaves  behind  fewer  impres-
sions  of  memory, which  in most  ordinary dreams un-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  75

doubtedly  remain  after  the  disappearance  of  the  hyper-
esthesia of  the  brain,  but  are  too  weak  to  return  into
conscious  memory  upon  the  usual  stimuli.

Accordingly  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  dream-conscious-
ness can  just  as  well  include  the  memories  of  the  wak-
ing state  as  its  own,  but  not  conversely.  In  general,
the  somnambulistic  is  so  closely  allied  to  the  ordinary
dream  through  the  movements  of  sleep  and  the  different
stages  of  night-walking  and  spontaneous  somnambulism,
that  it  is  quite  impossible  to  see  in  it  an  unembodied
consciousness.  And  then  also  one  does  not  get  far
with  the  consciousness  of  these  states ;  they  are  rather
to  be  called  a  dreamy  semi-consciousness  than  an  en-
hanced consciousness.  So  the  heightened  mental  per-
formances which  are  sometimes  observed,  always  only
resembling  brief  flashes  of  light,  are  to  be  reckoned  partly
to  the  facilitated  suggestion  of  the  Unconscious,  partly
to  cerebral  hyperesthesia,  which  has  for  consequence  an
easier  revival  of  ideas,  as  then  in  such  states  memories
from  early  times  of  apparently  long  -  forgotten  things
make  their  appearance,  which  were  so  weak  that  in  the
normal  state  of  the  brain  no  stimuli  of  sufficient  intensity
to  arouse  them  had  made  their  appearance.  Thus  all  is
naturally  explained  by  familiar  laws,  without  that  am-
biguous hypothesis  being  anywhere  useful.

A  still  more  unfortunate  instance  for  the  disembodied
consciousness  is  the  already  mentioned  recurrence  of  con-
sciousness which  sometimes  occurs  before  death.  Here
again,  too,  an  inner  hyperesthesia  of  the  brain  co-operates
with  outward  anesthesia,  which  sometimes  produces  that
transfiguration  of  tie  spirit  which  has  its  prophecies  and
sharpness  of  memory  in  common  with  the  somnambulistic
state,  its  joyful  rest  and  calm  painless  cheerfulness  in
common  with  the  same  nervous  state  (analgesia)  in  the
highest  degree  of  torture  and  certain  narcotic  intoxications.
The  external  anesthesia  is  there  only  the  natural  counter-
poise to  the  inner  hyperesthesia  ;  we  find  the  same  like-


y6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

wise  in  the  ecstasy  of  mystic  ascetics,  in  somnambulists,
after  slight  administrations  of  chloroform,  and  many
other  narcotics,  e.g.,  haschisch ;  also  in  several  states  of
frenzy  it  is  sometimes  exhibited.  Thus  this  feeling  of
freedom  from  the  body  by  no  means  proves  a  diminution,
but  rather  a  heightening  of  the  irritability  of  the  brain,
and  anything  but  the  disembodiment  of  consciousness.
States  entirely  similar  induce  similar  phenomena  just  before
drowning.  Lastly,  if  the  criterion  of  the  disembodied  con-
sciousness is  maintained  to  be  the  abolition  of  time  in  the
sequence  of  thought,  this  would  be  equivalent  to  the
intuitive,  timeless,  momentary,  implicit  thinking,  which
contradicts  all  discursive  consciousness,  as  a  something
requiring  the  comparing  of  explicit  ideas.  But  in  the
examples  only  the  more  rapid  course  of  thought  is  specified,
as  it  occurs  in  states  of  the  highest  cerebral  irritation,  in
narcotic  poisonings,  before  drowning,  and  the  like,  and
has  always  been  familiar  as  "  flight  of  ideas "  in  certain
forms  of  frenzy.  What  wonder  that  in  an  over-stimulated
brain  the  ideas  follow  one  another  much  more  rapidly
than  usual  ?  Altogether,  so  long  as  the  ideas  follow  one
another  in  time,  they  prove  the*  action  of  matter,  through
the  vibrations  of  which  time  first  comes  into  thought ;
so  far,  however,  as  thought  is  disembodied,  it  is  timeless,
and  therewith  unconscious.

What  we  have  proved  in  this  chapter  of  the  human  con-
sciousness, as  the  highest  known  to  us,  in  which  one  might
soonest  suppose  an  independence  from  the  body,  holds
of  course  also  of  the  ganglia  of  the  lower  animals,  which
are  the  equivalents  of  the  brain  of  the  Arertebrata ;  and  it
holds  just  as  much  of  the  special  consciousness  of  every
independent  ganglion  in  man  and  the  higher  and  lower
animals  ;  and  it  holds,  finally,  also  of  the  substances  which,
in  the  lower  animals,  form  the  central  nervous  system  ;
and  likewise,  if  a  consciousness  should  be  made  out  in  the
plants  or  inorganic  substances,  it  holds  also  for  this.

As  conclusion  to  this  chapter,  a passage  of  Schelling


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  77

may  find  a  fitting  place  (Werke,  i.  3,  497),  which  sums  up
the  contents  of  the  same  in  a  few  words,  although  the
assertion  in  Schelling's  mouth  has  a  somewhat  different
turn  owing  to  the  background  of  transcendental  idealism  :
"  Xot  the  presentation  itself,  but  rather  the  consciousness
thereof  is  conditioned  by  the  affection  of  the  organism  ;
and  if  empirism  limits  its  assertion  to  the  latter,  nothing
can  be  alleged  against  it."


( 78 )


III.

THE ORIGIN OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

I.  The  Becoming-Conscious  of  the  Idea. — Consciousness  is
not  a  quiescent  state,  but  a  process — a  continual  becoming-
conscious.  That  this  mental  process,  to  which  conscious-
ness owes  its  origin,  cannot  be  immediately  apprehended
by  the  consciousness  of  the  observer,  is  a  matter  of  course  ;
for  that  which  first  produces  consciousness  must  of  course
lie  behind  consciousness,  and  be  inaccessible  to  conscious
introspection.  We  can  thus  only  hope  to  attain  to  our
goal  by  an  indirect  path.

The  first  condition  is  that  we  define  the  notion  of  con-
sciousness more  sharply  than  was  hitherto  necessary. — In
the  first  place,  it  must  be  distinguished  from  self-conscious-
ness. My  self-consciousness  is  the  consciousness  of  my-
self, i.e.,  the  consciousness  of  the  subject  of  my  mental
activity.  By  subject  of  my  mental  activity,  however,  I
understand  that  part  of  the  whole  cause  of  my  mental
activity  which  is  not  external,  and  accordingly  the  inner
cause  of  the  same.  Self-consciousness  is  thus  only  a
special  case  of  the  application  of  consciousness  to  a  defi-
nite object,  namely,  to  the  supposed  inner  cause  of  mental
activity  which  is  denoted  by  the  name  Subject.  It  is  not
the  active  subject  itself  which  becomes  in  the  act  of  self-
consciousness  the  content  of  consciousness  or  object  of
consciousness,  but  it  is  only  the  idea  of  the  subject,  re-
gressively  inferred  by  means  of  the  category  of  causality
from  the  activity  of  the  subject,  that  becomes  the  object
of  consciousness. The  active  subject  itself  remains  just


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  79

as  inaccessible  to  consciousness  as  the  external  thing  in
itself,  to  which  it  corresponds  as  internal  thing.  All
belief  in  an  immediate  self-apprehension  of  the  Ego  in  the
act  of  self-consciousness  depends  on  the  same  self-delusion
as  the  naive  realistic  belief  in  the  immediate  conscious
apprehension  of  the  thing  in  itself  that  exists  independ-
ently of  consciousness.  Consciousness  as  such  is,  con-
sequently, according  to  its  own  notion,  free  from  con-
scious reference  to  the  subject,  in  that  in  and  for  itself
it  refers  only  to  the  object  (i.e.,  not  to  the  external  corre-
late of  the  object  of  ideation  or  the  thing  in  itself,  but
merely  to  the  represented  object  which  results  from  the
ideational  process,  and  presents  itself  as  content  of  con-
sciousness), and  only  becomes  self-consciousness  by  the
idea  of  the  subject  becoming  accidentally  object  to  it.  It
follows  from  this  that  no  self-consciousness  can  be  con-
ceived without  consciousness,  but  undoubtedly  conscious-
ness without  self-consciousness.  Only  for  conscious  re-
flection as  it  takes  place  in  the  brain  of  the  philosopher,
who  stands  in  thought  outside  the  process  and  objectively
regards  it,  but  not  for  the  subject  of  the  process  itself,
must  object  and  subject  be  simultaneously  given,  and  in  the
same  degree.  For  it  lies  in  the  conceptions  themselves
that  subject  and  object  require  each  other  as  correlatives  ;
but  this  correlation  is  patent  only  to  the  conscious-
ness of  the  philosopher,  not  to  the  unreflecting  feeling
of  the  natural  man,  and  therefore  to  the  latter  in  the
intuitive  apprehension  of  the  concrete  object  the  relation
of  the  concept  of  the  object  to  the  concept  of  the  sub-
ject, and  especially  the  latter  remains  unconscious.  (See
more  particularly  below,  pp.  56-58.)  —  Still  less  than
with  self-consciousness  has  consciousness  to  do  with  the
notion  of  'personality ,  or  the  identity  of  all  the  subjects  of
very  different  mental  activities — a  notion  which  is  for  the
most  part  comprehended  in  the  word  self-consciousness,  a
practice  which  we  shall  also  in  future  follow  for  the  sake
of  simplicity.

But  now,  what  is  consciousness  ? Does  it  merely  con-


So  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sist  in  the  form  of  sensibility,  so  that  the  two  conceptions
are  identical  ?  No  ;  for  the  Unconscious  also  must  have
conceived  the  form  of  sensibility,  otherwise  it  could  not  so
aptly  have  furnished  the  same.  We  could,  however,  also
conceive  a  consciousness  as  possible  with  quite  other  forms,
if  a  world  were  otherwise  fashioned,  or  if,  besides  and
beyond  our  space-time  world,  yet  other  worlds  exist  in
other  forms  of  being  and  consciousness,  which  contains
no  inherent  contradiction,  since  these  worlds,  however
numerous,  could  not  at  all  disturb  or  affect  one  another,
and  the  One  Unconscious,  free  of  all  these  forms,  would  be
the  same  for  all.  The  form  of  sensibility  can  thus  only  be
regarded  as  something  added  to  consciousness,  accidental,
not  as  something  necessary,  essential. — Or  shall  we  say
that  consciousness  consists  in  memory  ?  Memory  is  cer-
tainly no  bad  criterion  of  consciousness,  for  the  more  vivid
consciousness  is,  the  stronger  must  the  cerebral  vibrations
be,  and  the  stronger  these  are,  the  stronger  must  be  the
permanent  impression  they  leave  behind  in  the  brain,  i.e.,
the  easier,  and  witli  equal  stimulus  the  stronger,  memory
becomes.  One  easily  overlooks,  however,  the  circumstance
that  memory  is  only  an  indirect  consequence  of  the  essence
of  consciousness  ;  it  cannot  possibly,  therefore,  form  its
essence  itself.  Just  as  little  can  the  nature  of  conscious-
ness consist  in  the  possibility  of  the  comparison  of  ideas,  for
this  again  is  only  a  consequence  of  the  form  of  sensibility,
especially  of  time  ;  and,  moreover,  consciousness  may  be
present  in  the  greatest  intensity  if  only  a  single  idea  fill
the  mind  without  any  object  of  comparison.

According  to  all  this,  we  have  only  one  certain  support
which  must  guide  us  on  the  right  way,  namely,  the  result
of  the  preceding  chapter — the  cerebral  vibrations,  more
generally  material  movement,  as  conditio  sine  qua  non  of
consciousness.  Also,  if  we  posit  as  many  worlds  as  we
please  with  other  forms  than  space  and  time,  yet,  if  the
parallelism  of  being  and  thought  is  to  be  retained,  some-
thing must  exist  in  them  corresponding  to  matter,  and  an
activity  of  the  same  answering  to  motion  must  then  like-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCOXSCIOUS.  Si

wise  be  condition  of  consciousness. — Accordingly,  if  we
suppose  the  essence  of  consciousness  to  be  founded  in  its
material  origin,  and  at  the  same  time  remember  that  the
unconscious  mental  activity  must  of  necessity  be  looked
upon  as  something  immaterial,  on  closer  consideration
two  cases  present  themselves :  cither  we  adhere  to  "  Will
and  Idea "  as  that  which  is  common  to  unconscious  and
conscious  representation,  and  posit  the  form  of  the  Un-
conscious as  the  original,  but  that  of  consciousness  as  a
product  of  the  unconscious  mind  and  the  material  action
on  the  same ;  or  we  divide  the  whole  system  of  mental
activity  between  Materialism  and  Spiritualism  in  such  a
way  that  the  conscious  spirit  belongs  to  the  former,  the  un-
conscious to  the  latter,  i.e.,  we  assume  that  the  unconscious
mind  indeed  has  a  self-dependent  existence  independent
of  matter,  but  that  the  conscious  mind  is  an  exclusive
product  of  material  processes  without  any  co-operation  of
unconscious  mind.  The  alternative,  after  our  previous
inquiries  on  the  co-operation  of  the  Unconscious  in  the
genesis  of  all  and  every  conscious  mental  process,  is  not
difficult  to  decide.  The  essential  similarity  of  conscious
and  unconscious  mental  action  alone  causes  a  fundament-
ally different  origin  for  both  to  appear  unthinkable;
at  least,  this  cutting  up  of  the  spiritual  system  and  the
distribution  of  its  separate  parts  to  different  fundamental
conceptions  would  appear  more  arbitrary  than  that  of
Schopenhauer  in  respect  to  Will  and  Intellect.  Add  to
this,  that  we  shall,  in  Chapter  v.,  resolve  matter  itself
into  Will  and  Idea,  and  thus  prove  the  essential  likeness  of
Mind  and  Matter  ;  that  thus  Materialism  could  offer  us  no
final  resting-place.  We  must,  therefore,  make  our  own  the
former  of  the  two  assumptions.

But  now  it  is  at  once  evident  that  we  again  have  not
yet  grasped  the  essence  of  consciousness,  for  we  only
know  its  factors— on  the  one  side,  mind  in  its  original
unconscious  state;  on  the  other  side,  the  movement  of
the  matter  which  acts  upon  it. In  any  case,  the  origin  of

VOL. II.  F


82  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

consciousness  can  only  be  given  in  the  mode  and  manner
in  which  ideation  comes  to  its  object.  Of  matter  con-
sciousness knows  nothing ;  thus  the  process  producing
consciousness  must  lie  in  the  mind  itself,  if  also  matter
gives  the  first  impulse  to  it.  Material  movement  deter-
mines the  content  of  representation,  but  the  nature  of
consciousness  does  not  lie  in  this  content,  for  the  same
content  can  indeed,  the  form  of  sensibility  being  abstracted,
be  also  conceived  as  unconscious.  But  now,  if  conscious-
ness can  lie  neither  in  the  content,  nor  also,  as  we  have
seen  before,  in  the  sensuous  form  of  the  idea,  it  cannot  at
all  lie  in  the  idea  as  such,  but  must  be  an  accident,  which
comes  to  the  idea  from  elsewhere.

This  is  the  first  important  result  of  our  investigation,
which  certainly,  at  the  first  glance,  may  seem  to  conflict
with  the  ordinary  views,  but  on  closer  inspection  must
soon  display  its  correctness  to  every  observer,  and  shall
immediately  receive  fuller  elucidation.  The  common  error
is  therefore  to  be  ascribed  to  this,  that  we,  for  the  most
part,  think  of  consciousness  as  something  inhering  only  in
the  Idea,  in  that  we  forget  the  apperception  of  Pleasure
and  Pain;  hence  it  is  taken,  without  investigation,  on
trust  and  credit,  as  something  immanent  in  the  idea,
especially  as  long  as  the  unconscious  idea  is  not  more
precisely  known ;  and  accordingly  the  question  is  never
raised,  To  what  then  does  the  idea  owe  the  accident
of  consciousness  ?  who  assigns  it  this  predicate,  as  it
were  ?  when  one  would  soon  observe  that  it  cannot  itself
give  it  to  itself.  But  if  the  consciousness-producing  pro-
cess, in  spite  of  its  material  occasion,  must  necessarily  be
of  a  spiritual  nature,  there  remains  nothing  but  the
Will.

We  have  seen  in  Chapter  i.  of  the  present  section  how
Will  and  Idea  are  united  in  the  Unconscious  in  an  in-
separable unity,  and  shall  further  see  in  the  final  chapters
how  the  salvation  of  the  world  depends  on  the  emanci-
pation  of the intellect  from  the  will,  the  possibility  of


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  83

which  is  given  in  consciousness,  and  how  the  whole
world-process  is  tending  solely  towards  this  goal.  Con-
sciousness on  the  one  hand,  and  the  emancipation  of  the
idea  from  the  will  on  the  other,  we  have  thus  already
recognised  as  standing  in  the  closest  connection ;  we  only
need  to  go  one  step  further  and  to  declare  their  identity,
and  we  have  found  the  answer  to  the  riddle  in  harmony
with  the  results  just  obtained.  The  essence  of  the  con-
sciousness of  the  idea  is  the  extrication  of  the  same  from
irs  native  soil,  the  realising  will,1  and  the  opposition  of  the
will  to  this  emancipation.  We  had  previously  found  that
consciousness  must  be  a  predicate  which  the  will  imparts
to  the  idea ;  we  can  now  also  assign  the  content  of  this
predicate ;  it  is  the  stupefaction  of  the  will  at  the  existence
of  the  idea  not  willed  and  yet  sensibly  felt  by  it.  The  idea,
namely,  as  we  have  seen,  has  in  itself  no  interest  in  its
own  existence,  no  endeavour  after  being;  therefore,  as  long
as  there  is  no  consciousness,  it  is  always  only  called  forth
by  the  will.  Thus  the  mind  before  the  rise  of  con-
sciousness can  have  according  to  its  own  nature  no  other
ideas  than  those  which,  called  into  being  by  the  will,
form  the  content  of  the  will.  Then  organised  matter
suddenly  breaks  in  upon  this  self-contained  peace  of  the
Unconscious,  and  in  the  reaction  of  sensation  occurring
according to necessary law thrusts upon the aston-

1 This emancipation must not,  tion of a definite volition. Tin's

however, be understood as if the  only  is  meant  by  the  emancipation

conscious idea hovered,  as it were,  of the idea, from the will, that

in  the  pure  ether of  the ideal out  the conscious idea, unlike the

of all relation to the will. This  unconscious idea, alone possible

i- already sufficiently refuted by  as content of a will realising it

the: previous expositions of the  (comp.  above,  p.  58), can and does

present  hook,  and will be  directly  exist without its being directly

still more evident, if it turns out  evoked by a will which possesses

that  the  predication  of  consciousness  it  as  a  content  to  be  realised  ;  that

issuing  from  the  will  itself  is,  at  the  it  is idea pre-eminently free from

saini; tin]'-, non-satisfaction of the  every effort  at self-realisation, but

will,  ij ., foiling of pain; that the  without  prejudice  to all other pos-

conscious  idea consists of sensuous  sible  relations  to  the  will,  nay,  even

elementary sensations, and every  without  prejudice  to  the  possibility

such  sensuous  elementary  sensation  of  afterwordx  becoming  itself  again

is, at the same time, non-satisfac-  content  of  will.


84  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

ished  individual  spirit, an  idea  which  falls  upon  it  as  from
the  skies,  for  it  finds  in  itself  no  will  to  this  idea.  For
the  first  time  "  the  matter  of  intuition  is  given  to  it  from
without."  The  great  revolution  has  come  to  pass,  the
first  step  to  the  world's  redemption  taken ;  the  idea  has
been  rent  from  the  will,  to  confront  it  in  future  as  an
independent  power,  in  order  to  bring  under  subjection  to
itself  its  former  lord.  This  amazement  of  the  will  at  the
rebellion  against  its  previously  acknowledged  sway,  this
sensation  which  the  interloping  idea  produces  in  the  Un-
conscious, this  is  Consciousness.

To  speak  less  figuratively,  I  conceive  the  process  in  the
following  way : — There  arises  the  idea  impregnated  from
without.  The  unconscious  individual  mind  is  amazed  at
the  unwonted  circumstance  that  an  idea  exists  without
being  willed.  This  amazement  cannot  proceed  from  the
will  alone,  for  the  will  is  indeed  the  absolutely  irrational,
thus  also  too  blind  for  wonderment  and  surprise;  but  it
can  also  not  proceed  from  the  representation  alone,  for
the  idea  impregnated  from  without  is  as  it  is,  and  has  no
reason  to  be  surprised  at  itself ;  all  the  rest  of  the  ideal
sphere,  however,  except  this  one,  is,  as  we  know,  fast  bound
in  the  Unconscious  in  inseparable  unity  with  the  will.
Consequently,  in  the  first  place,  the  startling  can  only  be
effected  by  both  sides  of  the  unconscious  will  and  idea  in
union,  i.e.,  by  an  in-formed  will,  or  a  willed  idea  ;  and
secondly,  that  which  in  the  startling  is  idea  can  only
exist  through  a  will  whose  content  it  forms.  Accord-
ingly, the  matter  is  only  to  be  conceived  in  this  way,  that
the  idea  impregnated  from  without  acts  on  the  will  as
motive,  and,  moreover,  evokes  such  a  will  as  has  fur  its
content  to  negate  it;  for  should  the  now  excited  will  be
related  affirmatively  to  it,  there  would  again  be  no  oj) posi-
tion and  no  consciousness.  The  excited  will  must  thus  be
related  negatively  to  it,  and  the  startling  is  the  moment
of  origin  of  this  negating  will,  the  sudden,  momentary
occurrence  of  the  opposition  of  the  will. But  the  word


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  85

"startle"  also  signifies  nothing  further  in  ordinary  language,
only  that  the  process  in  our  human  experience  is  an  oppo-
sition suddenly  occurring  between  conscious  moments,  but
here  takes  place  between  unconscious  moments.

Lastly,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  the  opposing  will  is
too  weak,  with  respect  to  the  idea  impregnated  from  with-
out, to  carry  through  its  negating  intention ;  it  is  thus  an
impotent  will  to  which  satisfaction  is  refused,  which,  con-
sequently, is  linked  with  pain.  Thus  every  process  of  the
becoming  conscious  is,  eo  ipso,  united  with  a  certain  displea-
sure. This  is,  as  it  were,  the  vexation  of  the  unconscious
individual  mind  at  the  interloping  idea  which  it  must
endure  and  cannot  get  rid  of.  It  is  the  bitter  medicine
without  which  there  is  no  healing — a  medicine,  to  be  sure,
which  at  every  moment  is  swallowed  in  such  very  small
doses  that  its  bitterness  escapes  self-perception. —

The  peculiar  difficulty  of  this  exposition  appears  to  be,
how  it  is  possible  that  matter  in  the  form  of  the  vibrating
molecule  should  be  able  to  plunge  into  the  peace  of  the
unconscious  will  itself,  and  that,  too,  in  the  double  sense ;
how  it  has  power,  as  matter,  to  affect  the  mind ;  and  how
the  mind  is  at  all  able  to  enter  into  communication  with
anything  external  ?  This  difficulty  thus  essentially  con-
cerns the  old  problem  of  the  reciprocal  influence  of  body
and  mind,  which  we  are  here  neither  able  to  evade,  like
Kant  and  Fichte,  by  converting  the  body  into  a  subjective
appearance  of  the  mind,  nor,  as  Materialism,  by  converting
the  mind  into  an  external  appearance  resulting  from
objective  material  processes,  but  which  we  must  boldly
face,  since  the  (unconscious)  mind  and  matter  both  pass
for  real.  Already,  at  the  beginning  of  A.  Chap,  vii.,  this
problem  met  us  in  reference  to  the  medium  whereby  the
will  realises  itself  in  the  body,  especially  in  the  muscular
movements  ;  here  it  is  the  reverse  of  the  question  at  which
we  have  arrived,  namely,  how  the  mental  idea  can  be  con-
ditioned by  the  organism.  There  the  question  reduced
itself  to  this:  how  the  will  can  influence  the  movements


86  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  the  central  nerve-molecule,  here  to  this,  how  the  move-
ments of  the  central  nerve-molecule  can  influence  the  idea?
There  we  were  obliged  to  assume  the  realisation  of  the
unconscious  will  to  be  effected  by  an  unconscious  one
(A.  Chap,  ii.) ;  here  we  must  contemplate  the  origin  of  the
conscious  idea  as  brought  about  by  unconscious  mental
reactions.  There  the  (unconscious)  will,  directly  influ-
encing the  molecule,  was  to  be  conceived  united  with
unconscious  representation  ;  here  we  must  suppose,  for  the
sake  of  coming  to  pass  of  the  sensation,  an  unconscious
will  conceived  as  essential  factor.  The  direct  reciprocation
thus  in  both  cases  exists  between  the  forms  of  movement
of  central  nerve-molecules  on  the  one  hand,  and  un-
conscious mental  functions  on  the  other,  in  which,  as  we
quite  generally  know  from  A.  Chap,  iv.,  an  union  of  un-
conscious will  and  unconscious  idea  always  takes  place.

If,  now,  matter  and  unconscious  mind  were  really  hete-
rogeneous departments  of  existence,  as  the  dualistic  view
prevailing  since  Descartes  in  the  consciousness  of  Euro-
pean culture  assumes,  it  would  in  fact  not  be  apparent
how  the  infiuxus  pliysicus  presupposed  in  these  processes
could  be  possible.  Fortunately,  however,  it  will  turn  out  in
C.  Chap.  v.  that  matter  itself  is  in  its  essence  nothing  else
whatever  but  unconscious  mind,  whose  representations  are
only  limited  to  spatial  attraction  and  repulsion  of  uniformly
varying  intensity,  and  whose  volitional  manifestations  con-
sist in  the  realising  of  this  limited  ideational  province.  If
we  at  this  place  anticipate  this  identity  of  being  subse-
quently to  be  demonstrated,  it  is  immediately  comprehen-
sible that  the  reciprocal  action  of  body  and  soul  can  no
longer,  as  before,  be  frustrated  by  the  incapability  of  bridg-
ing the  gulf  between  heterogeneous  substances.  The  psy-
chical will  can  just  as  well  include  in  itself  in  the  ideas,
which  form  its  content,  spatial  relations  and  change  of  ex-
isting spatial  relations,  as  can  the  atomic  will  of  a  cerebral
atom.  Both  can  accordingly  just  as  easily  collide  with
one  another  and  conclude  their  collision  by  a  compromise


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  87

as  two  opposing  atomic  wills.  In  both  cases  the  weaker
will  must  in  the  compromise  yield  the  more  the  weaker
it  is  than  its  opponent.  When,  e.g.,  there  exists  the  will
to  a  special  bodily  movement,  it  will,  for  the  most  part,
considerably  surpass  in  intensity  the  single  cerebral  atomic
wills,  which  would  per  se  follow  only  their  own  mechanical
laws,  and  therefore  usually  sufficiently  carry  its  point.
When,  on  the  other  hand,  such  a  special  will  is  not  aroused
and  concentrated,  there  the  cerebral  atomic  wills  excited
by  the  propagated  stimulus  of  the  sense-organs  produce  a
relatively  considerable  effect  on  the  psychical  will  directed
to  the  organism,  i.e.,  in  the  compromise  resulting  from  this
conflict  of  will  it  will  now  also,  on  its  part,  have  a  rela-
tively considerable  share  in  concession  and  accommoda-
tion, only  that  this  share,  on  its  side,  is  not,  as  on  the  side
of  matter,  presented  spatially  as  objective  phenomenon
(which  merely  arises  from  the  difference  to  be  hereafter
mentioned  in  C.  Chap,  xi.,  that  the  directions  of  the  will  in
the  atomic  wills  exclusively  intersect  at  a  single  point  when
prolonged  backwards,  and  thereby  produce  the  appearance
of  a  localisation  of  the  seat  of  force).

As  matter,  as  objective  real  phenomenon  (i.e.,  independent
of  every  intelligence  intuiting  it),  could  not  at  all  come
to  be  without  two  or  more  atomic  wills  intersecting  and
falling  into  conflict  with  one  another  in  their  volitional
manifestations,  so  also  the  primitive  conscious  representa-
tion of  sensation  as  subjective  ideal  phenomenon  only  be-
comes possible  through  precisely  the  same  conflict.  An
atomic  will  existing  isolated  and  alone  in  the  world
would  have  no  objective  existence  at  all,  because  the
possibility  would  be  wanting  to  it  of  self-objectivation,
i.e.,  of  bringing  its  essence  to  external  manifestation.  An
isolated  and  sole-existing  incorporeal  individual  mind
(assumed  per  impossibile)  would,  even  if  it  should  display
ever  so  much  unconscious  will  and  idea,  yet  never  attain
to  the  subjective  manifestation  of  consciousness.  An  ad
libitv.w number  of  atomic  wills  and  of  individual  minds,


83  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

which  were,  however,  isolated  from  one  another,  and  in-
capable of  thrusting  against  one  another  and  clashing  with
their  wills,  would  be  altogether  in  the  same  position  as
one  existing  solitary  and  alone.  Only  when  the  radiating
will  meets  with  a  resistance  by  which  it  is  checked  or
broken  can  it  lead  to  objective  manifestation  of  existence,
to  the  subjective  phenomenon  of  consciousness.  Such  a
resistance  it  can,  however,  only  find  in  its  like,  in  another
will  with  which  it  has  a  certain  common  sphere  of  action,
whilst  the  tendency  and  goal  of  the  latter  is,  in  a  certain
sense,  opposed  to  its  own.  The  common  sphere  of  action
makes  contact  possible ;  the  opposite  tendency  and  goal
condition  the  collision  in  encounter,  which  finds  its  solu-
tion in  the  compromise  determined  by  the  content  of
both.  The  yielding  of  each  of  the  colliding  wills  is  now,
however,  no  longer  willed  by  it,  but  forced,  pressed  upon
it  by  the  other  will,  which  is  for  it  mainly  only  resistance,
and  the  compromise  as  result  does  not  correspond  to  the
goal  of  volition  on  either  side,  so  that  a  contrast  between
the  willed  and  attained  arises,  just  as  between  the  centri-
fugal function,  as  it  were,  of  the  volition  itself  and  the
centripetal  rebound  on  collision.  Now,  the  breaking  of
the  will  on  the  resistance  of  a  foreign  will  crossing  it,  or
the  centripetal  rebound,  is  sensation,  and,  moreover,  as
non-satisfaction  of  the  will,  £>am-sensation.  As  non-
satisfaction  of  a  definite  will,  i.e.,  one  filled  with  a  definite
ideational  content,  sensation  is  also  cpv.alitatively  determined,
i.e.,  sensation  characterised  by  a  (here  unconscious)  idea-
tional content.  (Comp.  B.  Chap,  iii.)  As  cpualitatively
definite  sensation,  however,  it  is  element  of  the  conscious
idea,  ami  in  so  far  it  may  even  be  described  as  elementary
conscious  representation.  The  predicate  of  consciousness
enters  into  the  sensation  just  through  the  exhibited  con-
trast, and  this  contradiction  between  volition  and  impres-
sion of  the  resistance  answers  to  what  I  have  above  named
by  an  expression  transferred  from  the  conscious  mental
life  to  the  unconscious,  the  startling  of  the  will  at  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  89

intruding  idea  not  willed  by  itself.  Perhaps  the  more
general  mode  of  treatment  here  entered  upon  may  contri-
bute to  the  comprehension  of  the  matter,  and  allow  it  to
be  more  clearly  perceived  that  the  figures  there  employed
were,  in  fact,  only  employed  as  figures.

The  difficulty  which  occasioned  this  digression  is,  how-
ever, not  yet  exhausted  by  the  foregoing.  In  spite  of  the
admitted  essential  identity  of  mind  and  matter,  the  second
question  always  remains  open — how  the  psychical  indi-
vidual will  can  at  all  come  in  contact  with  any  other  will
than,  in  fact,  with  the  atomic  will  of  the  brain,  since,  e.g. ,
it  is  indeed  not  able  decidedly  to  touch  and  to  collide  with
other  psychical  individual  wills  ?  We  must  here,  too,
anticipate  and  acknowledge  the  future  course  of  the  in-
quiry— that  the  possibility  of  such  a  contact  and  collision
would  not  be  visible  if  the  individual  mind  on  the  one
hand  and  the  atoms  of  matter  on  the  other  were  discrete
substances.  It  only  becomes  comprehensible  on  the  assump-
tion that  they  are  merely  different  functions  of  one  and
the  same  essence,  and,  moreover,  of  an  unconscious
essence  ;  for  were  it  conscious,  there  would  be  the  common
consciousness  in  all  functions,  and  through  the  conflict
anticipated  by  the  common  consciousness,  and  brought  to
conclusion  in  it,  as  it  were,  it  could  no  more  attain  to
special  consciousness,  whereas  in  the  root  of  one  uncon-
scious essence  the  separated  functions  have  just  only  the
necessary  common  bond  for  reciprocal  influence,  but  yet
still  room  enough  for  the  establishment  of  separated  con-
sciousnesses, as  it  were,  on  their  broken  points  or  jolted
peripheral  endings.  Now  it  is  true  a  reciprocal  influence
in  general  is  made  possible  through  the  common  meta-
physical root  of  the  substance,  but  the  latter  does  not  of
itself  suffice  to  introduce  this  coincidence  of  certain  func-
tions at  their  separated  peripheral  ends.  Yov  that  there
is  also  necessary,  as  a  second  condition,  that  the  ideational
contents  of  these  wills  should  contain  in  themselves  the
common  sphere  of  their  contact,  just  as  well  as  the  oppo-


go  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

site  tendency  ;  and  this  second  condition  is  simply  not  ful-
filled between  the  different  individual  minds,  but  doubtless
between  the  atomic  wills,  which,  in  their  ideal  content,
contain  also  the  spatiality  of  their  relations  (creating  in  its
realisation  the  one  objective  space).  This  is  the  metaphy-
sical reason  why  minds  only  communicate  through  their
bodies.  The  bodies  move  and  act  in  the  one  objective  space
as  in  their  common  sphere  in  which  they  may  collide  ;
minds,  however, have  neither  a  direct  relation  to  this  general
space  of  matter  (for  the  subjective  consciousness-space
is,  for  every  mind,  a  different  one,  unapproachably  self-
enclosed),  nor  do  they  possess  another  analogous  sphere  of
direct  spiritual  encounter,  as  the  bodies  (or  rather  their
atoms)  possess  them  in  space.

The  conditions  of  a  mutual  sphere  for  the  contact  of
different  wills  are,  however,  also  given  between  the  mind
and  the  body  connected  with  it.  In  C.  Chap,  ix.,  namely,
we  shall  see  that  the  individual  mind  or  the  soul  of  a
body  is  nothing  more  than  the  sum  of  the  functions  of  the
xVll-one  Unconscious  directed  to  this  corporeal  organism.
This  organism,  i.e.,  this  then  and  there  ordered  aggregate
of  atoms,  is  thus  the  goal  expressly  included  in  the  un-
conscious ideal  content  of  the  total  will-functions  of  this
individual  mind.  There  cannot  be  in  this  individual  mind
a  single  function  which  does  not  unconsciously  refer  to
this  organism,  and  which  does  not  include  even  quite
definite  parts  of  this  organism  or  quite  definite  spatial
changes  of  position  of  such  parts  in  its  ideal  content  (say,
e.g.,  the  excitation  of  certain  cerebral  vibrations  of  a  meta-
physical thought).  Each  individual  mind  accordingly
possesses  the  possibility  of  colliding  with  the  atomic  wills
of  its  organism,  but  only  with  those  of  its  own,  not  with
those  of  any  other,  because  its  organism  alone  is  included,
conformably  to  its  spatial  relations,  in  the  (unconscious)
content  of  representation  of  its  functions,  but  not  any
other.  Every  function  of  the  All-one  Unconscious,  namely,
which  is  related  to  another  organism,  truly  belongs  to  the


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  91

sum  of  the  functions  directed  to  this  other  organism,
i.e.,  to  its  soul  or  individual  mind.1 — We  hardly  need
remind  the  reader  that  the  possibility  of  a  collision  of
wills  for  both  kinds  of  reciprocation  between  body  and
mind  holds  good  not  merely  for  that  where  the  mind  is
the  preponderating  determining  part  of  the  compromise,
but  also  where  it  is  the  prevailingly  yielding  or  receptive
part,  i.e.,  not  merely  for  the  influence  of  the  will  on  the
body,  but  also  for  the  arousing  of  ideas  by  means  of
impressions  of  sense  and  brain.  If  the  function  of  the
individual  mind  rightly  affects  the  atomic  wills  of  the
brain,  conversely  also,  as  a  matter  of  course,  must  the
atomic  wills  of  the  brain  just  as  correctly  affect  this  same
individual  mind.

Through  these  elucidations,  in  part  forestalling  the  con-
tents of  subsequent  chapters,  our  exposition  of  the  origin
of  consciousness  may  have  received  illumination,  and  this
may  serve  as  an  excuse  for  the  digression  from  the  regular
course  of  the  inquiry.  Hints,  intelligible  to  a  certain
degree,  of  such  an  origin  of  consciousness  from  an  opposi-
tion of  different  moments  in  the  Unconscious,  I  have  only
found  in  Jacob  Lohme  and  Schelling.  The  former  says
(of  the  divine  contemplation,  c.  i.  8)  :  "  Nothing  can
become  manifest  to  itself  without  repugnance;  for  if  it
has  nothing  to  oppose  it,  it  is  ever  going  out  of  itself,
and  does  not  return  to  itself;  but  as  it  does  not  return  to
itself,  as  to  that  whence  it  originally  proceeded,  it  knows

nothing  of its  primitive  state." Similarly Schelling

says  (Werke,  i.  3,  p.  576):  "If,  however,  the  Absolute  is
to  appear  to  itself,  it  must  on  its  objective  side  be  depen-
dent on  something  else,  on  something  foreign.  ]kit  this
dependence  does  not  belong  to  the  Absolute  itself,  but
merely  to  its  cqipearance."  — — -

The  contrast  between  Will  and  Idea  is  still  more  height-

1  Through  this  consequence  of  the  the  idea  or  representation  i>f  tin-
doctrine  ol  the  Unconscious,  Spi-  body,  receives  for  the  first  time  a
nozu's  proposition, that  the  soul  is comprehensible  signification.


92  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

ened  by  the  idea  not  being  directly  given  through  material
movement,  but  only  through  the  uniform  reaction  of  the
unconscious  psychical  on  this  action.  It  accordingly  follows,
that  the  unconscious  individual  mind  must  answer  with
an  activity  (of  sensation)  which  is,  as  it  were,  peripherally
thrust  upon  it  through  the  impression  produced  on  its
volition  by  a  foreign  manifestation  of  will.  In  this
manner  chiefly  arise  the  simple  qualities  of  sense-impres-
sions, as  sound,  colour,  taste,  &c,  from  whose  mutual
relations  all  sensuous  perception  is  built  up,  from  which
again,  by  reproduction  of  the  cerebral  vibrations,  memo-
ries, and  by  partial  dropping  out  of  the  content  of  the  latter
abstract  conceptions  arise.  In  all  cases  of  conscious
thought  we  have  to  do  with  cerebral  vibrations,  which
affect  the  individual  mind  and  compel  to  uniform  reac-
tion ;  in  all  cases  the  sensible  qualities  are  the  results  of  this
reaction,  and  of  these  elements  the  total  conscious  pre-
sented world  is  composed.  If,  now,  these  elements  always
excite  the  process  which  produces  consciousness,  and
thereby  become  conscious,  it  will  not  surprise  us  that  also
the  combinations  of  these  elements  takes  part  in  conscious-
ness, although  the  kind  of  combination  is  often  produced
by  the  will  itself.

Hereby  the  apparent  contradiction  is  explained  that
ideas  which  are  evoked  by  the  will,  consequently  not
opposed  to  this  will,  may  yet  become  conscious  because
they  just  consist  of  elements  which  have  become  ideas
through  extorted  reactions  of  the  Unconscious.  The  will,
namely,  can  only  evoke  a  conscious  idea  through  the  par-
ticular memory  being  aroused,  i.e.,  by  former  cerebral
vibrations  being  reproduced.  Before  the  conscious  idea
is  there,  it  must  be  contained  as  content  in  the  uncon-
scious will,  certainly  in  non-sensuous  form,  otherwise  the
will  indeed  would  not  be  able  to  excite  this  idea.  Further,
as  means  to  this  end,  the  point  of  attack  in  the  brain  must
be  unconsciously  represented,  whence  the  particular  vibra-
tions of  memory  may  be  excited  and  the  stimulation  of


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  93

the  same  be  willed.  Further,  however,  even  the  uncon-
scious will  does  not  go,  for  it  can  only  produce  the
idea  in  the  sensuous  form  as  reaction  on  these  vibra-
tions ;  now  occur  the  vibrations  and  the  reaction  of  the
Unconscious  happens,  compelled,  as  ever,  by  a  lawful
reaction,  and  therewith  the  consciousness  of  the  represen-
tation is  also  given.  The  like  holds  good  also  of  the  co-
operation of  the  Unconscious  in  the  coming  to  pass  of
sensuous  perception,  as  before  taken  note  of.  It  also
holds  good  when  the  conscious  representation  becomes
content  of  a  will,  which  is  then  termed  conscious  will ;  fur
the  conscious  representation  must  previously  be  present
in  conscious  form  before  the  will  can  grasp  it  in  this  form
and  make  it  its  content.  But  if  the  idea  once  possesses  the
conscious  form,  it  does  not  lose  the  same  again,  on  account
of  the  will  combining  with  it,  because  its  elements,  which,
as  long  as  it  exists,  must  reproduce  themselves  ever  and
ever  anew,  always  do  this  in  conscious  form.

2.  The  Becoming  Conscious  of  Pain  and  Pleasure. — If
we  have  always  hitherto  spoken  of  the  becoming  conscious
of  the  Idea,  it  was  not  thereby  meant  that  the  idea  is
the  sole  object  of  consciousness.  The  exclusive  reason  for
this  limitation  was  rather  the  endeavour  not  to  make
more  difficult  the  penetration  into  this  difficult  province
by  prematurely  increasing  the  objects  and  complexity  of
the  points  of  view.  This  is  the  sole  reason  why  we  have,
instead  of  speaking  of  the  general  "  object  of  the  becoming
conscious,"  treated  the  problem  from  its  especially  char-
acteristic side.  But  now,  if  the  principle  thus  gained  of
the  origin  of  consciousness  is  to  be  held  correct,  it  must  be
adapted  to  every  possible  content  of  the  becoming  con-
scious. There  must  be  logically  deducible  from  it  what
elements  can  enter  into  consciousness,  what  not,  in  that
they  are  brought  one  after  another  within  the  formula.  This
we  will  now  do  with  Pain,  Pleasure,  and  Will,  which  re-
main along  with  the  Idea  as  po.-sible  objects  of  conscious-
ness. What  we  thus  a  priori  derive  as  consequences  of


94  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.

our  principle  must  prove  to  be  correct  a  posteriori  in  the
face  of  experience.  In  this  a  posteriori  confirmation  we
have,  then,  the  controlling  test  of  the  principle  that
everything  which  experience  offers  us  as  a  something  to  be
explained  also  actually  flows  from  it,  whilst  we  gained  the
principle  itself  originally  a  priori  by  elimination  of  the
incorrect  assumptions  from  all  possible  ones,  when  finally
only  one  remained  to  us.

If,  after  the  principle  is  thus  justified  a  priori  and  a
posteriori,  it  may  possibly  be  desired  that  I  should  show  how
and  in  what  way  there  results  from  the  process  indicated
just  that  which  we  know  in  inner  experience  as  con-
sciousness, this  demand  would  be  just  as  improper  as  one
made  upon  the  physicist  to  show  how  from  the  aerial
waves  and  the  arrangement  of  our  ear  that  results  which
in  inner  experience  we  know  as  sound.  The  physicist
only  shows  us,  and  can  only  show,  that  that  which  is
subjectively  felt  as  sound  consists,  objectively  regarded,  in
a  process  which  is  compounded  of  such  and  such  vibra-
tions. In  the  same  way  I  can  only  show  that  that  which
we  know  in  subjective  apprehension  as  consciousness,
objectively  regarded  is  a  process,  which  is  built  up  in
such  and  such  a  way  out  of  such  and  such  terms  and  factors.
To  experience  more  I  hold  to  be  impossible,  and  therefore
to  ask  for  more  improper  ;  for  in  order  to  understand  the
How  of  the  transmutation  of  the  objective  process  into  sub-
jective sensation,  one  would  be  obliged  to  adopt  a  third
point  of  view,  which,  is  neither  subjective  nor  objective,
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  is  both  at  once.  This  stand-
point, however,  the  Unconscious  alone  possesses,  whereas
consciousness  is  just  the  division  into  subject  and  object.

Feeling  can  be  pleasure  or  pain,  satisfaction  or  non-
satisfaction  of  the  will ;  all  else,  as  shown  in  B.  Chap,
iii.,  are  more  precise  determinations,  which  belong  to  the
department  of  ideation.  The  non-satisfaction  of  the  will
must  always  become  conscious,  for  the  will  can  never
will  its  own  non-satisfaction;  consecpiently  non-satisfaction


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  95

must  be  thrust  on  it  from  without ;  consequently  the  condi-
tion of  the  origin  of  consciousness  is  fulfilled  in  the  start-
ling of  the  will  at  something  not  issuing  from  itself,  and
yet  really  existing  and  making  itself  felt,  the  partial  com-
pulsion to  yield  on  the  collision  with  another  will,  and
the  contrast  of  this  rebound  with  the  goal  striven  after  ;
and  experience  corresponds  to  it  entirely,  in  that  nothing
speaks  more  emphatically  to  consciousness  than  pain —
pain  conceived  also  as  freed  from  the  nearer  determinations
belonging  to  the  idea.

The  feeling  of  pleasure  or  the  satisfaction  of  the  will
cannot  be  conscious  in  and  for  itself,  for  while  the  will
realises  its  content,  and  thereby  brings  on  its  own  satis-
faction, nothing  takes  place  which  could  come  into  opposi-
tion with  the  will ;  and  since  all  compulsion  from  without
is  wanting,  and  the  will  only  gives  place  to  its  own  con-
sequences, it  can  arrive  at  no  consciousness.  Otherwise
does  the  matter  appear  when  a  consciousness  has  already
established  itself,  which  collects  and  compares  observations
and  experiences.  This  soon  learns  from  the  many  non-
satisfactions  to  know  the  resistances  which  oppose  every
will  in  the  external  world,  as  well  as  the  external  conditions
which  are  necessary  if  the  realisation  of  the  will  is  to
succeed.  As  soon  as  it  is  compelled  to  acknowledge  these
external  conditions  of  success,  and  therewith  satisfaction
as  something  partially  or  wholly  conditioned  from  with-
out, consciousness  appertains  to  pleasure  also. — All  this  is
thoroughly  confirmed  by  experience.

One  sees  especially  in  infants  that  they  give  very
expressive  signs  of  pain  for  weeks  before  the  slightest
truce  of  pleasure  is  legible  in  their  countenances  and
gestures.  Clear  confirmation  is  afforded  by  the  case  of
pampered  children,  who  are  wont  always  to  get  their  way,
and  wlio  accordingly  do  not  know  what  to  make  of  it  when
for  once  their  wish  is  not  complied  with.  These  children
have,  in  fact,  as  good  as  no  enjoyment  at  all  from  the
satisfaction  of  their  desires;  however,  the  latter  remain,  for


96  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  most  part,  unconscious.  About  the  only  enjoyment
they  have  is  from  satisfaction  of  the  senses  (eating  of
sweetmeats),  because  the  solicitude  of  the  environment
cannot  here  save  them  disagreeable  comparisons.  How
much,  however,  our  assertion  fits  even  the  case  of  adults,
doubtless  every  observer  of  his  race  will  admit ;  for  any
kind  of  satisfaction  which  permanently  recurs  without
interruption  by  non-satisfaction  ceases  to  be  a  conscious
satisfaction,  i.e.,  a  conscious  enjoyment,  as  soon  as  one
begins  to  think :  it  must  be  so  indeed,  and  cannot  be  at
all  otherwise.  On  the  other  hand,  even  a  slight  satisfac-
tion enters  into  consciousness  as  pleasure,  the  more
vividly  the  more  distinctly  it  is  seen  that  we  owe  it  to
external  circumstances,  because,  in  spite  of  its  being
always  willed,  one  has  rarely  been  able  to  procure  it.

3.  The  Unconsciousness  of  the  Will. — Now  as  concerns
the  Will  itself,  we  have  hitherto  called  it  conscious  when
it  has  a  conscious,  unconscious,  when  it  has  an  unconscious
idea  for  its  content.  It  is,  however,  easy  to  see  that  this
is  only  a  figurative  expression,  since  it  only  refers  to  the
content  of  the  will ;  but  the  will  itself  can  never  become
conscious,  because  it  can  never  contradict  itself.  There
may  very  well  be  several  desires  at  variance  witli  one
another,  but  volition  at  any  moment  is  in  truth  only  the
resultant  of  all  the  simultaneous  desires,  consequently  can
always  be  only  conformable  to  itself.  If  now  conscious-
ness is  an  accident  which  the  will  bestows  upon  that  of
which  it  is  compelled  to  recognise  not  itself,  but  some-
thing foreign  as  its  cause,  in  short,  what  enters  into
opposition  with  it,  the  will  can  never  impart  consciousness
to  itself,  because  here  the  thing  to  be  compared  and  the
standard  of  comparison  are  one  and  the  same ;  they  can
never  be  different  or  at  all  at  variance  with  one  another.
The  will  also  never  gets  so  far  as  to  recognise  something
else  as  its  cause ;  rather  the  appearance  of  its  spontaneity
is  indestructible,  since  it  is  the  primal  actuality,  and  all
that  lies  behind  it  potential,  that  is,  unreal. Whilst  dis-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  97

pleasure,  then,  must  always  become  conscious,  and  pleasure
can  become  so  under  certain  circumstances,  the  will  is  said
never  to  be  able  to  become  conscious.  This  latter  result  per-
haps appears  unexpected,  yet  experience  fully  confirms  it.

We  have  seen  in  A.  Chap.  vii.  that  only  a  conscious
idea  is  able  to  excite  the  unconscious  will  to  any  move-
ment or  action,  even  without  a  motive  proper  being  con-
tained in  the  idea.  But  if  the  idea  contains  a  motive
at  all,  a  proper  ground  of  excitement,  the  excitation  of  the
unconscious  desire  must  certainly  follow.  If,  now,  the
man  has  the  conscious  idea  of  a  movement,  and  thereupon
sees  himself  execute  this  movement  with  the  certainty  of
not  being  necessitated  from  outside,  he  instinctively  con-
cludes that  the  cause  of  the  movement  lies  in  himself,  and
this  inner  unknown  cause  of  movement  he  calls  will.
That  the  conception  thus  attained  only  rests  on  causality
just  as  little  detracts  from  the  instinctive  apprehension  of
its  reality,  as  it  detracts  from  that  of  the  external  objects,
that  we  possess  them  only  as  unknown  external  causes  of
our  sense-impressions,  and  as  it  detracts  from  the  subject
of  ideation  or  the  intellectual  ego  that  we  know  it  only
as  unknoion  internal  cause  of  ideation.  The  one  as  the
other  we  fancy  we  directly  apprehend  because  we  do  not
attain  it  by  conscious  reflection,  but  through  unconscious
processes,  and  philosophic  contemplation  must  first  teach
us  that  all  these  notions  are  for  us  intangible  essences,
whose  only  hold  on  our  thought  lies  in  their  causality,
without  this  knowledge  being  detrimental  to  the  imme-
diate instinctive  certainty  of  their  direct  possession.
In  the  same  way  a  writer  thinks  he  has  the  feeling
directly  in  the  point  of  the  pen  itself,  whilst  the  simplest
consideration  teaches  him  that  he  has  it  only  in  his
fingers,  and  unconsciously  applies  the  principle  of  causa-
lity without  being  able  to  avoid  the  unconscious  illusion
of  his  tactile  sense,  only  that  here  the  correction  suc-
ceeds much  sooner  than  in  those  deeply  rooted  psycho-
logical illusions.

VOL.  II.  G


93  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

When  a  man  has  once  in  the  way  indicated  grasped  the
conception  of  will  (albeit  by  a  process  of  unconscious
thinking),  he  very  soon  observes  that  ordinary  ideas  rarely
draw  after  them  phenomena  of  motion,  but  always  such  as
contain  the  feeling  of  a  pleasure  or  displeasure,  and  that,
too,  according  as  actions  are  persistent  and  in  themselves
attractive,  or  repellent.  Prom  this  he  becomes  acquainted
empirically  with  the  law  of  motivation,  according  to  which
each  representation  of  pleasure  excites  positive  desire,  each
idea  of  displeasure  negative  or  repellent  desire.  This  law
is  exceptionless,  and  all  instances  to  the  contrary  rest  on
an  error ;  e.g.,  when  a  past  enjoyment  is  represented,  and
yet  not  again  desired  or  wished  over  again,  it  follows  from
that  that  it  would  now  no  more  be  enjoyment.  If  other
opposed  desires,  which  simultaneously  arise,  suppress  the
emergence  of  this  desire,  so  much  force  is  consumed  in  the
suppression  as  the  desire  would  have  had  had  it  arisen.
When,  now,  the  man  has  perceived  this  law  of  motivation
to  be  exceptionless,  he  knows  that  every  time  a  desire  is
united  with  the  representation  of  a  feeling  of  pleasure  or
displeasure,  and  supposing  other  desires  or  external  cir-
cumstances not  to  hinder  the  execution  of  the  correspond-
ing movement,  he  sees  the  latter  ensue.  This  process,
again,  goes  on  unconsciously,  and  whereas  the  man  before
only  possessed  the  notion  of  volition  as  cause  of  an  effect,
he  has  it  now  as  effect  of  a  cause.  With  that,  however,
he  has  the  possibility  of  perceiving  it  also  then  in  himself,
if  its  effect,  the  execution,  is  prevented  by  other  desires  or
external  circumstances.

Further,  the  man  sees  a  gradual  proportion  between  the
sensuous  vividness  of  the  presentation  and  the  magnitude
of  the  presented  pleasure  and  displeasure,  on  the  one  hand,
and  the  violence  of  the  movements,  the  energy  of  the  action,
the  duration  of  the  attempts  at  action,  on  the  other,  and
concludes  therefrom  that  also  the  link  intermediate  be-
tween the  two  ends  of  the  causal  chain  must  stand  in  a
proportional  relation  to  each  of  them  ;  hereby  he  obtains  a


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  99

measure  of  the  intensity  of.  the  will. — The  points  mentioned
would  certainly  suffice  for  mediate  knowledge  and  the
appearance  of  a  direct  cognition  of  the  will ;  however,  they
are  still  somewhat  of  an  external  nature,  and  the  illusion
becomes  still  much  greater  through  other  accompanying
circumstances.  It  is,  namely,  only  in  the  very  rarest  cases
that  the  desire  can  obtain  satisfaction  at  the  very  moment
of  its  arising ;  there  always  elapses  a  shorter  or  longer  time
before  realisation  takes  place,  and  so  long  lasts  a  feeling  of
non-satisfaction,  of  unpleasant  expectation  and  deprivation
(tension,  impatience,  longing,  yearning),  certainly  for  the
most  part  sweetened  by  hope,  which  either  is  prolonged  until
the  gradual  disappearance  of  the  desire,  or  induces  by
a  perception  of  impossibility  and  destruction  of  hope  the
full  non-satisfaction  and  displeasure  (with  an  undiminished
persisting  violent  desire  despair),  or  finally  passes  into
satisfaction  and  pleasure.  These  feelings  are  the  constant
attendants  or  successors  of  desire,  and  can  only  arise
through  it.  They  also  enter  into  consciousness,  and  are
here  the  proper  and  most  immediate  representatives  of  the
desire,  which  it  is  true  one  can  again  only  properly  appre-
hend as  cause  of  the  same,  but  which  one  thinks  to  grasp
immediately  through  the  above-mentioned  illusion.  Just
as  desire  in  general  is  perceived  in  the  feelings  spoken  of,
so  every  special  kind  of  desire  is  perceived  through  the
special  and  peculiar  kind  of  the  feelings  accompanying  it.
The  constant  connection  of  the  two  hereby  becomes  visible,
that  the  special  kind  of  desire  is  indeed  already  deter-
mined for  consciousness  by  the  kind  of  motive  and  the
kind  of  ensuing  actions.  Yet  the  possibility  of  error  still
remains  open,  especially  in  the  cases  where  the  accom-
panying feelings  (longing  and  hope  in  general)  are  the  sole
signs  of  the  presence  of  the  will.  Then  the  mistake  easily
occurs  of  seeking  the  desire  giving  rise  to  these  feelings  in
other  well-known  desires,  whereas  the  same  are  entirely
guiltless  thereof.

This  case, for  example,  occurs  in  the instincts,  most


ioo  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

distinctly  in  love,  where  the  willing  of  the  metaphysical
end  is  unknown  to  the  lover,  who,  on  this  account,  erro-
neously lays  the  extravagant  longing  and  hope  merely  to
the  account  of  the  willed  means  (intercourse  with  this  par-
ticular individual),  and  accordingly  imagines  a  quite  special
enjoyment  in  intercourse  with  such  individual,  and  is  then
so  disagreeably  smitten  with  disillusion.  This  is  not  con-
tradicted by  the  fact  that  there  may  notwithstanding  be
•consummate  bliss,  because  the  unconscious  clairvoyance
of  the  metaphysical  goal  begets  an  extravagant  longing,
which  again  awakens  an  extravagant  hope  of  an  extrava-
gant enjoyment,  whose  essence,  however,  consciousness  is
unable  to  express,  and  which  is  never  realised.  Here,  too,
the  saying  holds :  "  Hope  was  thy  allotted  portion."

Those  concomitant  feelings  of  desires  are  generally  of
a  highly  peculiar  and  characteristic  nature,  conditioned
at  the  same  time,  for  the  most  part,  by  bodily  feelings
which  are  reflectorially  called  forth  in  adjoining  parts  of
the  body  by  the  respective  cerebral  affections.  Think  of
anger  and  its  rush  of  blood ;  of  fear  and  terror,  with  their
arrest  of  the  circulation,  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  trem-
bling ;  the  suppressed  sob,  vexation,  and  grief,  with  their
life-corroding  influences  ;  impotent  rage,  with  its  choking
and  bursting  sensations  ;  affection,  with  its  tears  and  its  re-
laxed breast  and  stomach  ;  longing,  with  its  consuming  woe  ;
sensuous  love,  with  its  gushing  glow  ;  vanity,  with  its  heart-
leapings  ;  effort  at  thought  and  strained  reflection  or  con-
sidering, with  its  peculiar  reflex  feelings  of  tension  at
different  parts  of  the  scalp,  according  to  the  part  of  the
brain  subjected  to  strain  ;  defiance,  inflexible  obstinacy,  and
fixed  resolution,  with  their  peculiar  muscular  contrac-
tions ;  disgust,  with  its  anti-peristaltic  movements  of  the
fauces  and  stomach,  &c,  &c.

How  much  the  character  of  these  feelings  is  dependent
on  such  bodily  admixtures  will  be  easily  granted  by  every
one.  How  much  it  is  simultaneously  conditioned  by
accompanying  unconscious representation  has  been  dis-


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  101

cussed  at  the  end  of  Chap.  iii.  B. — If,  now,  the  man  thinks
to  apprehend  the  will  directly  in  consciousness  in  three
ways  (i)  from  its  cause,  the  motive;  (2)  from  its  accom-
panying and  succeeding  feelings  ;  and  (3)  from  its  effect,
the  act ;  and  all  the  time  (4)  has  the  content  or  object  of  the'
will  as  representation  actually  in  consciousness, — it  is  no
wonder  that  the  illusion  of  being  immediately  conscious
of  the  will  itself  is  very  tenacious  and  firmly  fixed  by
long  habit,  so  that  it  allows  the  scientific  view  of  the
eternal  unconsciousness  of  the  will  itself  only  with  diffi-
culty to  make  way  and  to  obtain  a  firm  footing  in  the  mind.
But  let  any  one  only  once  carefully  test  himself  with  several
instances,  and  my  assertion  will  be  found  confirmed.  If
any  one  at  first  believes  himself  conscious  of  the  will
itself,  he  soon  observes,  on  closer  examination,  that  he
is  only  conscious  of  the  conceptual  representation  "I will"
and  at  the  same  time  of  the  idea  which  forms  the  con-
tent of  the  will ;  and  if  he  pursues  the  investigation,  he
finds  that  the  ideal  presentation  "I  will"  has  always
simultaneously  arisen  in  one  of  the  stated  three  ways  or
in  several,  and  nothing  more  is  found  in  consciousness,
even  after  the  most  searching  examination.  One  thing,
however,  is  still  very  remarkable,  viz.,  if  (as  happens  to
everybody)  we  are  vexed  that  our  previous  opinion  has  to
be  abandoned,  and  one  says  to  oneself,  "Still  1  can  will
what  and  when  I  will,  and  know  that  I  can  will,  and
now,  e.g.,  I  do  will,"  yet  that  which  is  taken  for  direct
perception  of  the  will  is  nothing  else  but  reilex  oodily
fcflhtfjs  vaguely  localised,  and,  indeed,  feelings  of  defi-
ance, obstinacy,  or  even  merely  of  decided  firm  resolve.
Hue,  then,  arises  the  semblance  of  consciousness  of  the
will  itself  in  the  second  mode,  from  accompanying  feel-
ings. Tiiis,  too,  will  be  found  verified  certainly  only  when
one,  gives  oneself  the  trouble  to  make  trial  of  it.

finally,  however,  1  have  to  mention  yet  one  last  deci-
sive reason  for  the  unconsciousness  of  all  will,  which  quite
directly  decides  the  question. Every  man  k  notes  what  he


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA
SANTA  BARBARA  COLLEGE  WBR.


102  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

wills  only  so  far  as  he  possesses  the  knowledge,  of  his  own
character  and  of  the  psychological  laws,  the  sequence  of
motive  and  desire,  feeling  and  desire,  and  the  strength  of
different  desires,  and  can  from  these  calculate  beforehand
the  result  of  their  struggle,  or  their  resultant,  the  will.
Entirely  to  fulfil  this  requirement  is  the  ideal  of  wisdom,
for  only  the  ideally  wise  man  always  knows  what  he  wills  ;
all  other  men,  however,  know  the  less  what  they  will  the
less  they  are  accustomed  to  study  themselves  and  the
psychological  laws,  to  keep  their  judgment  always  free
from  disturbance  by  passion,  and,  in  a  word,  to  make
conscious  reason  (as  suggested  in  Chap.  xi.  B.)  the  motive  of
their  life.  Therefore  a  man  knows  the  less  what  he  wills
the  more  he  abandons  himself  to  the  Unconscious,  the
inspiration  of  feeling.  Children  and  women  rarely  know
it,  and  only  in  the  simplest  cases ;  animals  probably  still
more  rarely.  Were  knowledge  of  the  will  not  an  in-
direct constructive  calculation,  but  a  direct  conscious
apprehension,  as  in  pleasure,  displeasure,  and  representa-
tion, it  would  be  absolutely  incomprehensible  how  it
should  so  frequently  come  to  pass  that  we  firmly  believe
we  have  willed  one  thing  but  are  taught  by  the  act  that
we  have  willed  another.  (Comp.  vol.  i.  pp.  252  and  262.)
In  the  case  of  something  directly  entering  into  conscious-
ness, e.g.,  pain,  there  can  be  no  room  for  error;  that  of
which  we  have  immediate  self-apprehension  truly  exists,
for  we  apprehend  it  immediately  in  its  own  nature.

Since  the  will  in  and  of  itself  is  under  all  circumstances
unconscious,  it  is  now  also  comprehensible  that,  for  the  be-
coming conscious  of  pleasure  or  displeasure,  the  will  itself
is  precisely  similarly  circumstanced,  whether  it  is  united
with  a  conscious  or  an  unconscious  representation.  For  the
becoming  conscious  of  displeasure,  which  indeed  is  already
in  opposition  with  will  in  such  and  such  a  manner,  it  is
obviously  indifferent  whether  the  idea  wdiich  forms  the
content  of  will  is  conscious  or  unconscious ;  at  the  most,
it  might  appear  of  importance  for  the  becoming  conscious


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE UXCOXSCIOUS.  103

of  pleasure.  If  the  content  of  the  will  is  a  conscious  repre-
sentation, the  possibility  of  the  becoming  conscious  of  its
satisfaction  is  clear  without  more  ado  ;  perhaps  also,  if  it
is  an  unconscious  idea,  this  possibility  exists  with  the  help
of  accompanying  feelings  and  perceptions.  If,  namely,  in
n  cases  these  accompanying  feelings  and  perceptions  have
had  for  their  consequence  m  times  a  displeasure  and  n  —  m
times  none,  one  instinctively  concludes  that  these  feelings
and  perceptions  may  be  the  work  of  an  unconscious  will
which  was  not  satisfied  m  times,  i.e.,  produced  pain,  whence
it  immediately  follows  that  it  must  be  satisfied  n  —  m
times.  Thus  this  satisfaction  may,  in  consequence  of  the
contrast,  also  attain  to  consciousness  with  a  will  whose
content  always  remains  unconscious,  if  it  is  only  accom-
panied by  regularly  recurring  marks,  which,  in  place  of
the  idea  which  forms  its  content,  can  figure  as  represen-
tative of  the  inherently  eternally  unconscious  will.  This
must  be  added  as  supplementary  to  Chap.  iii.  B.,  where
these  points  could  not  be  weighed.

The  insight  thus  obtained  of  the  unconsciousness  of  the
will  in  itself  throws  an  interesting  light  on  ever-recurring
endeavours  in  the  history  of  philosophy  to  resolve  will
into  idea ;  I  merely  name  the  most  prominent — Spinoza,
and  in  recent  times  Herbart  and  his  school  with  the  most
detailed  attempt  in  this  respect.  This  endeavour,  which
in  less  degree  is  manifested  also  by  Hegel,  would  be  utterly
inexplicable  in  the  case  of  such  great  thinkers,  if  the  will,
which  in  its  essence  is  entirely  heterogeneous  to  the  idea,
were  something  immediately  given  in  consciousness;  they
become,  however,  through  the  circumstance  that  one
never  finds  in  consciousness  the  ivill  itself,  but  always  only
the  idea  of  the  will,  not  only  explicable,  but  authorised  and
demanded  for  the  exclusively  conscious  standpoint,  since  the
will  has  actual  existence  only  in  the  sphere  of  the  Uncon-
scious. It  is,  therefore,  also  characteristic  that  just  the
most  dilettante  of  all  considerable  philosophers,  Schopen-
hauer,  disregarding this requirement  of strict  thought,


104  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

claims  to  have  found  the  will  as  core  of  his  own  being
directly  in  consciousness.  As  the  philosophising  of  com-
mon sense  thinks  to  grasps  things  immediately  in  external
perception,  just  as  dogmatically  did  Schopenhauer  imagine
himself  to  have  apprehended  the  will  immediately  in  inner
experience.  Criticism  annihilates  the  one  as  the  other
dogmatic  semblance  of  instinct,  but  science  gives  again  to
cognition,  as  conscious  mediate  possession,  what  it  has
destroyed  of  blind,  immediate  instinctive  faith.

4.  Consciousness  has  no  degrees. — Our  principle  has  yet
to  stand  one  final  test.  If,  namely,  our  assumption  is
correct,  that  consciousness  is  a  phenomenon  the  essence
of  which  consists  in  the  opposition  of  the  will  to  some-
thing not  proceeding  from  it  and  yet  sensibly  present,  that
thus  only  those  elements  of  ideation  or  feeling  can  become
conscious  which  light  upon  a  will  found  in  opposition
with  them,  i.e.,  on  a  will  which  does  not  will  or  negates
them,  it  follows  from  this  that  consciousness  can  as  little
as  naught  or  negation  have  differences  of  degrees.  The
question  is  one  of  a  pure  alternative  :  "  Becoming  conscious
or  remaining  unconscious  ?  "  If  the  will  comports  itself
affirmatively,  the  latter  occurs ;  if  it  is  negatively  related,
the  former.  There  is  no  stronger  or  weaker  in  negation,
for  negation  is  a  positive,  not  a  comparative  conception.
There  may,  indeed,  be  a  partial  and  complete  negation,  but
this  is  not  difference  in  the  negation,  but  in  the  negated
object,  and  can,  therefore,  establish  no  difference  of  degree  in
negation  itself.  A  partial  negation  must  in  our  case  have
for  its  consequence  the  becoming  conscious  of  the  one  and
the  remaining  unconscious  of  the  other  part,  but  in  no
case  could  there  emerge  a  difference  of  degree  in  conscious-
ness as  such.

What  becomes  conscious,  the  object  or  the  content  of
consciousness,  may  then  show  a  more  or  less;  but  con-
sciousness itself  can  only  be  or  not  be,  never  be  more  or
less.  Undoubtedly  the  will  also,  which  by  its  negating
of  the  object  posits  the  becoming  conscious  of  the  same,


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  105

may  exhibit  difference  of  degrees,  be  stronger  or  weaker ;
but  the  strength  of  this  will,  presupposing  that  it  at  all
lies  above  the  threshold,  has  no  influence  at  all  on  the
alternative,  "becoming  conscious  or  not,"  only  whether  its
content  be  affirmatively  or  negatively  related  to  the  object
of  the  becoming  conscious  affords  ground  for  a  decision.
Hence  no  difference  in  the  degree  of  consciousness  can
be  derived  from  the  strength  of  the  opposing  will ;  either
something  becomes  conscious  or  does  not  become  conscious ;
in  no  case  can  it  become  more  or  less  conscious.  I  will
try  to  make  this  state  of  the  case  still  clearer  by  an
example  in  the  matter  of  willing.

If  I  will  to  give  something  to  a  beggar,  I  certainly  will
more  if  I  give  him  a  half-crown  than  if  I  give  him  a
penny  ;  this  is  the  more  or  less  of  content,  which  does
not  at  all  touch  the  question  of  the  intensity  of  will  as
such,  for  the  will  itself  may,  in  both  cases,  be  equally
strom:,  whether  I  intend  to  present  him  with  half-a-
crown  or  a  penny.  On  the  other  hand,  with  the  same
content  the  will  may  have  very  different  strength  ;  e.g.,
if  of  two  men  each  wills  to  give  the  beggar  a  penny,  the
one  may  possibly  be  dissuaded  from  so  doing  by  a  very
slight  cause,  whereas  the  will  of  the  other  overcomes
strong  counter-motives.  This  is  the  degree  of  difference
of  the  will  as  such.  The  degree  of  difference  of  the
content  we  have  in  consciousness  also ;  the  graduated
difference  of  consciousness  as  such  must,  on  the  other
hand,  be  wanting  according  to  the  a  'priori  derivation
from  our  principle;  should  this  a  priori  consequence  of
the  same  not  be  confirmed  by  experience,  this  would  be
an  indirect  attack  on  the  principle  itself.

"What  especially  stands  in  the  way  of  the  empirical
recognition  of  that  proposition  is  the  confusion  of  the
notion  consciousness  with  two  other  allied  notions,  first
attention,  secondly  self-consciousness. — Attention  we  have
already  repeatedly  (vol.  i.  pp.  1 31- 132,  174-175,  also
275,  276)  seen  to  be  a  nerve-current,  produced  both  rellec-


io6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

torially  as  well  as  voluntarily,  which  runs  its  course  in
sensory  nerve- fibres  from  centre  to  periphery,  and  serves
the  purpose  of  heightening  the  conductivity  of  nerves,
especially  for  weak  stimuli  and  weak  differences  of
stimuli.  Attention  accordingly  consists  of  material
nervous  vibrations.  Inasmuch  as  these  run  from  centre
to  periphery,  it  is  inevitable  that  they  should,  even  with-
out giving  rise  to  perception,  be  reflected  from  periphery
to  centre.  Moreover,  through  attention  a  number  of
muscles  are  contracted  for  every  sensory  sphere,  in  order
to  facilitate  the  reception  of  the  perception  by  the  organ  ;
and  lastly,  certain  other  muscles,  especially  muscles  of
the  scalp,  are  refiexively  contracted.  These  three  move-
ments agree  in  this,  in  bringing  sensations  to  the  organ  of
consciousness  by  means  of  material  vibrations,  i.e.,  atten-
tion as  such  is  an  object  of  perception,  and  consequently  of
consciousness.  One  may  be  easily  convinced  of  this  if
in  the  dead  of  night  one  has  occasion  to  listen  atten-
tively for  a  signal,  or  to  look  towards  the  horizon  to  see
whether  a  rocket  will  be  sent  up.  If  for  pure  ideation
certainly  also  muscular  tension  of  the  sense-organ  is
absent,  yet  the  reflex  tension  of  the  muscle  of  the  scalp
remains  (whence  the  word  "cracking  one's  brain"),  and  the
effect  of  the  nervous  vibrations  as  such.  Wherefore  also
that  attention  is  distinctly  felt  which  is  not  directed
to  an  external  sense,  but  merely  to  the  inner  ideational
life  of  the  brain,  as  any  one  may  easily  observe  in  himself
when  he  is  searching  for  a  word  that  has  escaped  him.

Attention  enhances  the  irritability  of  the  parts  which
it  affects,  and  thereby  facilitates  both  the  revival  of
former  ideas  and  also  the  perception  of  weak  stimuli  and
differential  stimuli.  We  cannot  definitely  assert  that  it
magnifies  the  amplitude  of  the  vibrations,  because  the
intensity  of  a  sensation  (e.g.,  intensity  of  sound)  is  not
perceptibly  increased  by  enhancement  of  attention.  Yet
this  also,  as  I  hold  to  be  extremely  probable,  may  be
merely  apparent,  in  that  the  increase  of  intensity  has


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  107

already  begun  unconsciously  to  abate,  just  as  the  mag-
nifying of  an  object  by  nearer  approach  is  not  easily
perceived,  and  the  comparison  of  two  circular  openings
equidistant  from  the  eye  is  not  essentially  easier  than
that  of  two  unequal  ones  at  a  greater  distance. — Be  that,
however,  as  it  may,  this  much  is  certain,  that  we  have  a
double  estimate  in  every  sensation,  both  of  the  strength
of  the  sensation,  so  far  as  it  depends  on  the  stimulus,
and  also  of  the  degree  of  the  applied  attention ;  that  thus
an  element  is  added  to  perception  through  the  cerebral
vibrations  of  attention,  which  makes  the  total  perception
richer  and  more  comprehensive  (quite  apart  from  the
circumstance  that  all  sensations  cannot  at  all  reach  the
brain  and  its  consciousness  without  a  certain  degree  of
reflex  attention).  The  like  holds  good,  however,  for  mere
cerebral  ideas,  and  in  still  greater  degree.

An  idea  emerging  from  memory  is  also  enriched  and
heightened  by  attention.  It  is  certainly  not  changed  in
its  general  contents,  but  whereas  in  an  idea  for  which
one  is  inattentive  everything  is  misty  and  dissolving,  pale
and  colourless,  indiscernible  as  if  at  a  great  distance,  the
outlines,  colours,  and  details  become  the  more  defined,
vivid,  and  closer  the  higher  the  degree  of  attention.  The
reason  of  this  is,  that  all  our  ideas  rest  on  sense-impres-
sions, and  only  in  these  do  the  pale,  spectral  notions  become
clothed  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  that  the  sensuous  repre-
sentations become  so  much  the  more  plastic  and  vivid,  the
larger  is  the  part  of  the  special  nerve  of  sense  and  organ
of  sense  which  is  drawn  into  sympathy,  the  wider  the  repre-
sentation is  peripherally  projected  outside.  In  sense-per-
ception there  thus  occurs  by  the  increase  of  attention
an  enrichment  of  content  only  so  far  as,  by  means  of  the
enhanced  conductivity,  also  slighter  concomitant  details
reach  the  cerebral  consciousness,  and  the  perception  of
the  vibrations  of  attention  themselves  becomes  more
intense.  In  the  idea  of  memory,  however,  beside  thesis
moments  there  is  also  added  the  enhancement  of  sen-
suous vividness  and  definition.


10S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

To  this  must  in  all  cases  be  added  the  hitherto  un-
mentioned  prevention  of  disturbance  by  other  perceptions,
which  is  of  the  highest  importance.  Usually,  namely,
there  exists  in  the  waking  state  a  certain  sense  of  atten-
tion in  the  whole  sensitive  nervous  system,  which
naturally  is  feeble  for  any  single  point  of  the  same,  and
is  only  enhanced  reflexively  in  this  direction  by  a  more
strongly  acting  stimulus.  Accordingly  there  usually
arises  a  great  division  and  distraction  of  attention,  so  that
consciousness  finds  in  itself  an  infinitely  mixed  content
of  merely  weak  perceptions.  But  if  now  there  takes
place  a  severe  strain  of  attention  in  a  particular  direc-
tion, thus,  e.g.,  on  a  sense  or  the  brain  only,  this,  with
the  limited  sum  of  energy  of  the  organism,  can  only
happen  at  the  expense  of  attention  in  all  other  direc-
tions, and  therefore  all  partial  enhanced  attention  is  a
concentration  of  the  same,  which  forms  a  contrast  to  the
distraction.  Instead  of  the  infinitely  numerous  weak
perceptions,  consciousness  now  finds  as  its  content  one
energetic  idea,  whilst  the  sum  of  all  other  perceptions  is
reduced  to  a  minimum.  One  sees  that  the  content  has
essentially  changed  so  much  that  it  perfectly  suffices
for  the  explanation  of  the  changed  state;  there  is  nothing
present  winch  pointed  to  a  gradual  change  of  conscious-
ness in  itself.  It  is,  however,  on  the  other  hand,  obvious
how  easily  a  defective  discrimination  of  attention  and
consciousness  may  lead  to  the  opinion  that  consciousness,
just  as  much  as  attention,  has  degrees ;  and  it  will  often
be  found  that  consciousness  is  spoken  of  where  attention
is  meant.  Attention  may  have  degrees,  because  it  con-
sists of  nervous  vibrations,  and  in  all  nervous  vibrations
the  magnitude  of  the  vibrations  of  amplitude  conditions
the  intensity  of  the  sensation ;  consciousness,  however,
can  have  no  degrees,  because  it  is  an  immaterial  reaction,
which  either  does  or  does  not  occur,  but,  if  it  occurs,
always  takes  place  in  the  same  way.

The  distinction  between  consciousness  and  self-conscious-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  109

ness  has  been  already  indicated  at  the  beginning  of  this
chapter.  Self-consciousness  can,  of  course,  not  be  con-
ceived without  consciousness ;  how  far  a  complete  absence
of  self-consciousness  can  be  in  fact  established  must  still
remain  doubtful,  since,  indeed,  self-consciousness  also  is
in  the  first  instance  instinctively  born  as  so-called  slight
self-feeling.  Tims  much  is  certain,  that  a  very  clear
consciousness  occurs  pretty  often  with  the  minimum  of
self- consciousness ;  nay,  even  the  more  clear  becomes
the  objective  consciousness  in  the  same  individual,  the
more  self-consciousness  disappears.  Nobody  is  in  a  posi-
tion really  to  enjoy  a  work  of  art  unless  he  really  forgets
himself.  In  the  same  way  self-consciousness  almost  entirely
ceases  when  one  is  steeped  in  some  scientific  book ;  but
when  one  is  productive  and  absorbed  in  deep  reflection,
then  one  is  so  absent  not  merely  from  the  surroundings,
but  even  from  oneself,  that  no  thought  remains  for  one's
own  most  important  interests ;  nay,  even,  on  being  sud-
denly addressed,  one  has  first  to  recollect  one's  own  name.
And  yet  in  these  moments  consciousness  is  clearest  of  all,
just  because  it  is  wholly  merged  in  the  subject,  i.e.,  atten-
tion has  reached  the  highest  degree  of  concentration.  This
absorption  in  a  subject  is,  however,  necessary  wherever
the  ideational  process  is  called  upon  to  do  something  con-
siderable, except  in  practical  questions  of  personal  interest,
because  here  all  the  aims  of  the  whole  life  are  to  be  re-
garded in  their  importance  with  respect  to  one  another;
thus  the  identity  of  the  Egos  of  different  times,  the  per-
sonality, plays  a  leading  part.  For  the  same  reason,  how-
ever, exclusively  practical  natures  also,  who  can  never
forget  themselves  and  their  aims  and  interests,  are  regularly
devoid  of  every  higher  scientific  and  artistic  faculty.

Oik;  sees,  then,  that  consciousness  and  self-consciousness
are  very  different  things;  nevertheless  the  confusion  of
the  two  is  something  quite  common.  For  example,  one
.says  of  a  somnambulist  that  in  that  state  he  is  without
consciousness,  whilst  his  performances  (poems,  written  com-


no  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

positions)  attest  a  very  clear  consciousness ;  but  he  is  cer-
tainly without  full  self-consciousness,  since  his  attention,
steeped  in  a  one-sided  object,  is  wanting  to  all  other  per-
ceptions that  do  not  cohere  with  this  particular  object,
and  therefore  also  no  remembrance  of  the  other  aims  and
interests  arises  in  him  which  do  not  touch  this  object.

So  far  as  complete  self-consciousness  includes  the  memory
of  all  ends  and  interests  which  previous  Egos  have  ever
had,  we  often  talk  of  recollection ;  and  where  one  may
correctly  say  a  man  was  at  such  and  such  moment,  in
such  and  such  an  action,  without  his  senses  or  without
self-consciousness,  one  often  says  incorrectly  he  was  with-
out consciousness.  On  the  other  hand,  one  often  says,
when  somebody  loses  or  has  lost  consciousness  {e.g.,  in
swoon,  stupefaction),  he  is  or  is  becoming  senseless,  or  is
losing  self-consciousness ;  in  this  case  the  confusion  of  the
words  says  too  little,  as  in  others  too  much.  Now,  however,
it  is  clear  that  self-consciousness  has  degrees,  for  it  is
most  perfect  when  it  merely  embraces  the  Ego  of  present
mental  activity,  and  is  the  more  perfect,  i.e.,  its  degree  is
the  higher,  the  more  Egos  of  past  or  future  action  it
embraces.  For  self-consciousness  is  not  indeed,  like  con-
sciousness, bare,  empty  form,  but  it  is  consciousness  of  a
quite  definite  content,  the  self ;  and  as  this  definite  content
already  belongs  to  its  notion,  the  degree  of  self-consciousness
must  also  rise  and  fall  with  the  degree  of  this  content.
Consciousness,  on  the  other  hand,  leaves  its  content  quite
undetermined;  it  only  requires  a  content  at  all,  if  it  is
to  come  to  manifestation,  to  reality ;  in  its  essence,  how-
ever, it  is  pure  form,  and  therefore  its  notion  cannot
admit  of  differences  of  degree  in  consequence  of  the  vary-
ing nature  of  the  perfectly  indifferent  content.  But  if  this
difference  between  consciousness  and  self-consciousness  is
not  yet,  or  at  least  not  in  this  respect,  cleared  up,  it  is  no
wonder  that,  through  the  frequent  confusion  of  the  two
notions,  one  becomes  imperceptibly  accustomed  to  believe
also  in  gradual  differences  in  consciousness  itself. Still


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  in

more  pardonable  becomes  the  illusion  when  attention
and  self-consciousness  mingle  ;  when,  e.g.,  I  listen  to  a
signal  with  fullest  self-consciousness,  knowing  that  my
whole  life-happiness  is  dependent  thereon,  and  the  sound
of  a  distant  shot  finally  reaches  the  ear,  I  can  also  fall
into  the  error  that  the  consciousness  with  which  I  have
now  heard  the  sound  is  degrees  higher  than  that  with
which  I  should  have  casually  heard  it  as  a  passer-by.
But  if  one  conscientiously  deducts  the  several  elements  :
first  the  thought  that  the  whole  Ego  of  the  future  depends
on  the  sense-perception  of  the  next  moment,  then  the
thought  that  it  is  I  myself  who  am  intentionally  straining
my  attention,  then  the  muscular  tension  and  the  percep-
tion of  the  attention  as  such  ;  finally,  the  strengthening
of  the  sensuous  perception,  its  greater  definiteness,  &c,
one  will  be  obliged  to  grant  that  the  residue  remaining  to
consciousness  as  such  is  the  same  in  both  cases,  and  that
the  differences  only  affect  partly  the  content  presented  to
consciousness  by  the  brain,  partly  self-consciousness.

After  the  common  illusions  of  human  introspection
have  been  thus  laid  bare,  the  assertion  will  have  lost  its
paradoxical  air  that  the  so-called  highest  and  lowest  con-
sciousness, that  of  man  and  the  lowest  animals,  are  as
consciousness  quite  alike,  and  are  only  distinguished  by
the  content  presented  to  them.  We  saw  that  the  simple
sensuous  qualities,  of  which  all  sense-perception  is  com-
pounded, are  reactions  of  the  Unconscious  on  the  material
vibrations  of  the  central  organ  (brain,  ganglia,  animal  and
vegetable  protoplasm) ;  it  is  matter  of  course  that  the
reactions  take  place  according  to  the  kind  of  the  vibra-
tions, turn  out  the  stronger  and  more  vivid  the  stronger
are  the  vibrations,  and  are  more  definitely  compounded
and  more  clearly  discriminated  from  other  similar  sensa-
tions, the  more  definite  and  varied  are  the  vibrations,  and
the  fewer  differences  of  external  stimuli  they  bring  to
manifestation  in  the  central  organ.

It is accordingly obvious that the eye of  the  snail,


H2  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

which,  according  to  exact  observations,  must  literally  com-
pensate all  the  five  senses  without  its  being  able  to  distin-
guish therewith  more  than  bright  and  dark  in  general,
that  this  eye  causes  vibrations  in  the  central  organ,  which,
neither  in  respect  of  vision,  smell,  taste,  hearing,  and  touch,
exhibit  such  great  differences  as  in  animals  with  distinct
sense-organs,  nor  are  capable  even  of  considerable  variety
within  each  of  these  special  provinces  of  sensation.  But
that  which  gives  the  power  of  distinguishing  one  percep-
tion from  another  confers  also  dcfiniteness,  and  therefore
perceptions  are  the  more  indefinite  the  lower  we  descend
in  the  animal  kingdom.  This  indefiniteness  is  only  to
be  conceived  in  such  a  way  that  in  the  perception  the
detail  is  wanting  which  in  higher  organisations  determines
differences.  If  we  eliminate  this  detail  from  perception,
it  will,  however,  become  poorer  in  content,  for  there  only
remains  over  the  universal,  which  is  ever  the  same  in  the
midst  of  difference.  All  indefiniteness  of  perception  thus
depends  on  poverty,  whereas  richness  in  content  is  the
ground  of  definiteness  and  distinguishability.  We  can  now
say  wherein  the  distinction  of  an  apparently  lower  con-
sciousness consists :  in  the  slight  intensity  and  the  poverty
of  the  content  presented  to  it;  in  the  material  scantiness  both
of  the  individual  perception  and  idea,  and  of  the  whole  acces-
sible mass  of  ideas.  When  I  look  at  a  single  point  of  light
on  a  dark  night,  I  see  it  sharply  defined  as  a  point  with  a
definite  degree  of  brightness  and  the  background  in  a  defi-
nite degree  of  darkness.  I  also  see  both  in  quite  definite
colours  :  this  is  the  wealth  which  lies  in  this  single  per-
ception. The  snail,  however,  does  not  see  this  point  at  all,
or,  if  it  is  very  bright,  it  sees  a  weak  shimmer  of  light
before  it,  and  of  all  else  it  sees  nothing :  that  is  the  poverty
of  its  perception.

But,  moreover,  the  snail  sees  with  much  less  intensity,
because  with  less  attention.  The  enfeeblement  of  atten-
tion in  all  other  directions,  coincident  with  concentration
in  a  single  one,  proves  the  limited  total  amount  of  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  113

same  for  a  definitely  constituted  being,  which  manifestly
is  related  to  its  total  nervous  energy.  Nothing  is  more
obvious  than  that  the  total  quantity  of  attention  varies
in  the  animal  series  with  the  development  of  the  whole
nervous  system.  Thus  a  snail  with  the  utmost  possible
strain  of  attention  at  a  point  of  light  will  hardly  be  able  to
apply  as  much  attention  as  I,  when  I  do  not  in  the  least
think  about  that  point  of  light  at  all ;  for  the  central
oman  of  the  snail  stands  in  any  case  lower  than  mv
corpora  quadrigemina  which  receive  the  visual  impressions,
and  beyond  which  they  do  not  reach  when  the  brain  is
occupied  with  other  matters.  We  have  now  a  tolerable
picture  of  the  consciousness  of  the  lower  animals  with  a
single  perception ;  and  yet  consciousness  is  always  the
same,  only  the  matter  presented  to  it  is  so  much  weaker
and  scantier.

The  disproportion  is  still  more  increased  when  we  take
into  account  the  whole  thought-material  which  under-
lies comparison,  abstraction,  and  combination;  then  we  soon
see  that  the  indefiniteness  and  obscurity  of  the  single  idea
is  still  more  exceeded  by  the  poverty  of  the  whole  sum  of
experiences  which  are  at  the  command  of  such  an  animal
and  by  the  incapacity  of  a  central  organ  to  retain  suffi-
ciently in  memory  the  experiences  once  had,  or  at  all  to
work  them  up  into  more  manageable  partial  ideas  (concepts).
This  hardly  needs  further  development.  The  result  of  it
all  is  the  confirmation  of  the  proposition  derived  from  our
principle,  that  consciousness  as  such,  i.e.,  in  its  form,  is
everywhere  the  same,  and  is  only  differentiated  by  the
matter  presented  to  it;  for  nowhere  did  we  have  occasion
to  ascribe  to  consciousness  itself  differences  of  degree,  as
we  are  obliged  to  do,  e.g.,  in  the  will,  even  apart  from  its
content  ;  the  principle  has  thus  stood  even  this  final  test.

5.  The  Unity  of  Consciousness. — At  the  close  of  this
chapter  the  question  forces  itself  upon  us,  <:  What  is  unity
oj  euiisciousncss?"  We  can,  of  course,  agreeably  to  our
principles,  only  regard  the  question  here  from  the  empirical

Vol..  II.  n


ii4  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

side.  Thus  we  cannot  refer,  for  example,  to  the  unity  of  the
underlying  individual  psychical  essence,  because  we  do  not
yet  know  anything  at  all  of  this  psychical  existence,  its  in-
dividuality, and  its  unity,  but,  on  the  contrary,  can  only
learn  something  of  it  by  answering  this  question.  Moreover,
the  advocates  of  indivisible  individual  souls  must  allow
that  even  the  unity  of  consciousness  may  be  resolved  into
a  multiplicity  of  strictly  separated  and  perfectly  incoherent
consciousnesses,  whereas  they  must  acknowledge  the  unity
of  the  mind  underlying  these  different  consciousnesses.
I  allude  only  to  such  examples  as  Jessen  cites  in  his
"  Psychology,"  of  a  girl  who,  after  an  intense  lethargy,  had
lost  all  her  memory  without  enfeeblement  of  her  mental
faculties  and  capacity  for  instruction.  She  had  to  begin
again  to  learn  her  alphabet.  The  attacks  were  repeated,
and  after  each  the  memory  of  the  immediately  preceding
portion  of  her  life  had  disappeared,  whilst  that  of  the  one
before  the  last  reappeared  in  its  place  unweakened,  so  that
she  always  resumed  her  studies  as  if  she  had  left  them  off
before  the  last  attack  but  one.  This  example  only  presents
phenomena  in  a  more  striking  and  complete  form,  which  in
a  weaker  degree  and  more  partial  way  may  be  observed
everywhere.  We  can  only  recognise  a  unity  of  conscious-
ness between  a  past  and  present  moment  where  in  the  pre-
sent there  is  the  memory  of  this  past  moment,  or  where
there  is  at  least  a  possibility  of  this  memory.  In  strictness
one  can  speak  of  a  real  or  actual  unity  of  consciousness
only  in  the  case  of  actual  memory,  whereas  with  merely
possible  memory  the  unity  of  consciousness  is  merely
possible  or  potential.

If  we  further  see  what  we  have  in  actual  memory,  what
is  added  to  a  representation  when  I  know  it  as  a  well-
known  idea  or  memory,  it  is,  according  to  B.  Chap.  vii.
vol.  i.  pp.  305,  306,  an  instinctive  feeling,  which,  analysed
into  its  discursive  moments,  has  the  following  meaning  : — I
have  in  addition  to  the  main  idea  a  very  much  weaker
contiguous  idea  excited  by  the  former,  which  I  know  to


META PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  115

be  in  causal  relation  with  a  former  similar  idea.  Place
and  time  of  this  former  idea  may  likewise  be  fixed  by
means  of  the  accompanying  circumstances  of  the  same
surging  up  in  memory.

It  is  thus  nothing  but  the  comparison  of  a  present  and
a  past  representation,  that  determines  the  unity  of  con-
sciousness between  temporally  separated  moments.  The
possibility  of  this  comparison  is  attained  by  this :  that  of
two  present  ideas  the  one  represents  the  present,  the  other
the  past ;  and  the  latter  again  becomes  possible  by  this  :
that  I  know  the  present  idea  to  be  in  causal  connection
with  a  former  one  similar  to  it.  While,  now,  of  the  two
ideas,  the  one  represents  the  past,  consciousness  comprehends
in  this  indivisible  act  of  comparison  the  representations  of
the  present  and  past  consciousness  into  one,  and  therewith
becomes  conscious  of  the  unity  of  consciousness  for  that
past  and  the  present  representation.  To  wit,  if  I  have
two  conscious  representations,  there  exists  a  consciousness
of  the  one  and  a  consciousness  of  the  other  idea;  and  I
should  never  have  the  right  of  maintaining  a  unity  of
these  two  consciousnesses  if  I  could  not  prove  it.  But
now,  when  I  bring  together  two  ideas  for  comparison,  I
merge  both  consciousnesses  in  the  third  consciousness  of
the  comparison,  and  in  this  way  have  brought  their  unity
to  immediate  intuition.  The  comparison  is  thus  the
moment  which  first  of  all  makes  possible  the  thought  of
a  unity  of  consciousness,  and  with  the  possibility  of  com-
]  arison  the  possibility  of  the  unity  of  consciousness  also

Ceases.

As  we  have  here  seen  the  act  of  comparison  to  be  the
judge  ei'  the  unity  of  consciousness  of  a  past  and  a  present,
t.<'.,  temporally  separate  representations,  so  does  it  also
■  in  respect  of  spatially  separated  ideas,  i.e.,  such  as
are  excited  by  different  material  parts.  A  human  brain
has  a  certain  magnitude,  and  the  representations  which
arise  at  one  end  of  it  are  many  inches  removed  from  those
arising  at  the  other  end ;  nevertheless  we  do  not  doubt  the


n6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

unity  of  the  cerebral  consciousness.  The  reason  is  simply
this :  that  in  the  healthy  waking  state  every  idea  arising
anywhere  in  the  brain  may  be  compared  with  any  one
arising  anywhere  else.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ideas  of
the  spinal  cord  and  the  ganglia,  as  they  must  of  necessity
exist  in  reflex  movements,  &c,  in  injuries  of  the  viscera  and
the  like,  have  in  general  no  unity  of  consciousness  along
with  the  cerebral  representation;  they  have  rather  each
their  separate  conscious  existence,  since  they  cannot  be
taken  up  into  a  common  conscious  act  of  comparison.
Only  a  few  strong  sensations  of  the  lower  nerve-centres
are  comparable,  and  a  unity  of  consciousness  possible
so  far  as  it  is  exhibited  in  common  feeling.  Whilst  for
the  different  nerve-centres  of  an  organism  this  unity  of
consciousness  is  established  with  stronger  stimulation  of
the  one  or  the  other,  it  is  in  no  way  to  be  established  for
the  nerve-centres  of  different  individuals,  unless  with
partial  coalescence  of  two  organisms  by  abortion,  or  be-
tween mother  and  foetus,  where  echoes  of  such  unity  of
consciousness  are  found  for  strong  stimulations.

The  cause  of  these  phenomena  is  obvious.  In  the
brain,  beside  the  special  commissures,  innumerable  nerve-
fibres  traverse  the  whole  mass  and  establish  a  manifold
intimate  union  of  every  particle  with  the  rest ;  the  spinal
cord  has  already  a  much  more  imperfect  union  with  the
brain  ;  the  sympathetic  nervous  system  is  only  connected
with  it  by  the  single  nervus  vagus.  In  individuals  which
have  grown  together  only  more  or  less  casual  concrescence
of  subordinate  nerve-strands  can  take  place ;  in  the  case
of  separate  individuals  all  union  is  wanting.  The  more
perfect  is  the  path  between  the  functional  part  of  the
central  nerves,  the  less  stimulus  it  needs  to  propagate  the
stimulus  of  the  one  to  the  other  unenfeebled  and  undis-
turbed; the  more  imperfect  and  longer  the  paths  of  con-
duction, the  greater  the  resistances,  the  stronger  must  be  the
stimuli,  if  they  are  to  be  propagated  to  the  other  central  spot,
and  the  more  obscure  and  more  effaced  are  thev  on  arrival.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  117

For  him  who  is  accustomed  to  the  endless  intermingling
of  the  phenomena  of  physical  vibrations  without  any  mutual
disturbance,  this  mode  of  viewing  the  nervous  processes,
according  to  which  each  thought  at  one  spot  of  the  brain  is
simultaneously  telegraphed  to  all  other  spots,  will  not
appear  strange  ;  it  is  impossible  to  interpret  the  anatomi-
cal construction  of  the  brain  with  its  numerous  connecting
fibres  in  any  other  manner.  The  capability  of  conduction
it  is  then,  in  fact,  which  physically  conditions  the  unity  of
consciousness,  and  with  which  this  is  'proportional.  We
lay  down,  then,  as  a  principle:  Separate  material  parts  give
separate  consciousness,  a  proposition  which  is  as  much  re-
commended a  priori  as  the  distinct  individuals  confirm
it  empirically.  As  long  as  the  Australian  ant  is  an
animal,  its  fore  and  after  body  acts  with  undivided  con-
sciousness ;  as  soon  as  one  has  cut  it  in  pieces,  the  unity
of  consciousness  is  abolished,  and  both  parts  turn  against
one  another. — We  further  assume  :  the  comparison  of  two
ideas  produced  at  different  places  only  becomes  possible
by  the  vibrations  of  the  one  place  being  carried  over  to
the  other  unenfeebled  and  undisturbed;  only  by  the  com-
parison of  the  two  representations  is  the  abolition  of  their
two  consciousnesses  in  the  indivisible  consciousness  of  the
act  of  comparison  possible ;  with  it,  however,  we  may
add,  it  is  also  co  ipso  given.  (The  metaphysical  condition
of  the  identity  of  the  psychical  unconscious  substance,
which  will  be  discussed  in  Sect.  C.  Chap,  vii.,  is  here,  of
course,  tacitly  assumed.  Without  it  the  physical  condi-
tion of  nerve-conduction  would  be  just  as  vague  as  the
former  without  the  latter.)  The  Siamese  twins  refused  to
play  draughts  with  one  another,  thinking  that  this  would
be  as  if  the  right  hand  should  play  with  the  left.  The
negresses  coadjunct  at  the  lower  part  of  the  back,  who
allowed  themselves  to  be  exhibited  at  the  beginning  of
1873  in  Berlin,  under  the  name  of  the  two-headed  nightin-
gale, are  said  to  have  sympathetic  feelings  of  their  mutual
sensations  in  the  lower  extremities.,  i.e.,  possess  a  unity  of


nS  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

consciousness  with  respect  to  a  certain  sensitive  area  in
spite  of  the  duality  of  their  persons.  But  if  one  imagined
the  union  of  the  brains  of  two  men  possible  by  a  bridge
as  capable  of  conduction  as  is  that  between  the  two
hemispheres  of  the  same  brain,  a  mutual  and  indivisible
consciousness,  including  the  thoughts  of  both  brains,  would
immediately  embrace  the  hitherto  separate  consciousnesses
of  both  persons  ;  each  would  no  longer  be  able  to  distin-
guish his  own  thoughts  from  those  of  the  other ;  i.e.,  they
would  no  longer  know  themselves  as  two  Egoes,  but  only
as  one  Ego,  as  my  two  cerebral  hemispheres  also  only
know  themselves  as  one  Ego.


( H9 )


IV.


THE UNCONSCIOUS  AXD CONSCIOUSNESS  IN THE VEGETABLE
KINGDOM.

The  question  of  the  animation  of  the  vegetable  kingdom
is  an  old  one ;  outside  Judaism  and  Christianity  it  has
been  almost  everywhere  affirmed.  Our  time,  which  has
been  nourished  by  the  theories  of  these  two  systems  of
belief,  and  has  not  yet  by  a  long  way  bridged  over  the
gulf  between  spirit  and  sense,  rent  asunder  by  Chris-
tianity, lias  with  difficulty  admitted  the  kinship  of  men
and  animals;  no  wonder  that  it  has  not  yet  been  able
to  elevate  itself  to  the  admission  of  the  vegetable  soul,
since  its  physiology  is  accustomed  to  regard,  even  in  the
animal,  the  organic  functions  and  reflex  actions  as  merely
material  mechanisms.  The  subject  has  been  best  treated
by  Fechner  in  his  memoir,  "  Xanna ;  or,  The  Psychical
Life  of  Plants"  (Leipzig,  1848),  if  also  with  an  infu-
sion of  much  of  the  fantastical;  comp.  further  Schopen-
hauer, "  On  Will  in  Nature,"  chap.  "  Vegetable  Physio-
logy," and  Autenrieth,  "  Views  on  Nature  and  Psychical
Life."  I  shall  content  myself  with  giving  a  short  exposi-
tion of  the  doctrine,  and  with  showing  the  considerably
greater  clearness  which  is  introduced  into  the  whole  ques-
tion by  the  distinction  of  unconscious  and  conscious  psy-
chical activity.  I  am  convinced  that  many  a  one,  who
was  obliged  to  maintain  a  negative  position  owing  to  the
previous  mode  of  treatment,  will  be  reconciled  to  the
doctrine  of  plant-animation  when  the  notions  of  the  Un-
conscious and  Consciousness  are  kept  cpuite  apart.


120  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

I.  The  Unconscious  Psychical  Activity  of  Plants. — The
plant  has,  like  the  animal,  organic  plastic  activity,  vis
mcdicatrix,  reflex  movements,  instinct,  and  the  impulse
towards  the  beautiful;  and  if  in  the  animal  the  pheno-
mena must  be  regarded  as  unconscious  effects  of  a  soul,
ought  they  not  also  so  to  be  in  the  plant  ?  If  the  uncon-
scious psychical  performances  of  the  plant  do  not  rise  to
the  mental  processes  of  the  animal,  but  remain  entirely
sunk  in  corporeity,  should  therefore  their  soul  be  less
soul,  if  that  which  it  accomplishes  is  just  as  perfect  in
its  sphere  as  that  achieved  by  the  animal  in  its  sphere,
nay,  even  far  superior,  because  it  builds  up  the  refrac-
tory inorganic  substances  into  higher  and  higher  stages,
whereas  the  animal,  on  the  whole,  only  guides  and  watches
over  their  natural  degeneration  ?  Let  us  consider  the
several  movements  in  their  order.

(a.)  Organic  Formative  Activity. — This  works,  as  in  the
animal,  according  to  a  typical  generic  idea,  which,  it  is  true,
allows  a  great  latitude  in  respect  of  number  of  branches,
leaves,  &c.,  but  nevertheless  is  still  perfectly  definite  in
the  law  of  arrangement  of  the  leaves,  the  form  of  leaf,
inflorescence,  and  internal  structure.  This  morpholo-
gical type  possesses  the  greatest  constancy  and  unchange-
ability,  although  the  nearer  definition  of  the  same  for  the
physiological  functions  is  tolerably  indifferent.  Accord-
ingly, one  cannot  look  upon  this  constancy  as  a  result  of
useful  adaptation  in  the  struggle  for  existence ;  rather
one  has  to  perceive  in  the  morphological  type  of  the
vegetable  kingdom  essential  results  of  an  ideal  forma-
tive impulse  of  the  Unconscious. — As  in  the  ascending
organisation  of  the  animal  kingdom  typical  anticipations
are  especially  remarkable  which  only  become  suitable  at
higher  stages,  we  have  to  mark  such  anticipations  of  the
unconscious  formative  impulse  of  Nature  in  the  vegetable
kingdom  likewise.  Thus,  e.g.,  higher  Algse  exhibit  an  axis
with  lateral  regularly  arranged  expansions  which  would
at  once  be  designated  by  the  ignorant  as  stem,  root,  and


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  121

leaves,  whilst  according  to  the  dogma  of  the  botanical
system  the  Algae  are  root  and  leafless  plants.  Hence  the
botanist  calls  the  leaves  of  the  Sargassum  only  "  leaf-like
expansions/'  and  the  roots  "root-like  structures,"  which
want  at  the  apex  the  "  root-cap," — and  we  will  not
disturb  him  in  his  "faith.

It  is  true  one  can  divide  the  plant  as  one  may  divide
lower  animals,  so  that  each  part  still  possesses  the  capa-
bility of  again  completing  the  type  from  itself.  But  as  in
animals,  so  also  in  plants,  the  division  is  by  no  means  un-
limited, if  a  completion  is  to  remain  possible.  In  the
plant,  too,  all  parts  are  in  reciprocal  connection.  Every
part  nearer  the  earth  works  up  the  materials  precisely  as
the  proximate  part  must  receive  it  for  further  elaboration.
The  root  of  an  oak  would  never  nourish  a  beech,  nor  a
tulip-bulb  a  hyacinth.  There  takes  place  also  in  the  plant
a  harmonious  interaction  of  all  the  parts,  and  this  can
only  conduce  to  the  end  of  the  exhibition  of  the  specific
type  in  all  the  successive  stages  of  development.

If  in  winter  one  conducts  a  branch  of  a  tree  standing  in
the  open  air  into  a  hothouse,  the  tree  unfolds  its  leaves
and  flowers,  whilst  the  rest  of  the  tree  retains  its  rigidity.
The  water  required  by  the  tree  for  this  purpose  is  absorbed
by  the  roots,  as  observation  shows.  Thus  the  latter  are
stimulated  to  increased  absorption  by  the  increased  vital
action  of  a  branch  (Decandolle,  "Vegetable  Physiology,"  i.
j6).  How  far  a  direct  union  by  conduction  takes  place
between  the  several  parts  of  the  plants  we  do  not  know,
although  the  spiral  vessels  appear  to  point  to  that;  but
we  just  as  little  know  in  the  case  of  the  animal  how
far  the  harmonious  interworking  of  the  performances  of
the  single  parts  is  effected  by  conduction,  and  how  far  it
is  due  to  direct  clairvoyance,  as  that  of  the  individuals  in
the  commonwealth  of  bees  or  ants.

Propagation  takes  place  in  the  animal  and  vegetable
kingdoms  on  precisely  the  same  principles,  by  cellular
division,  spores  or  budding,  and  sexual  generation. The


122  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

similarity  in  both  provinces  is,  especially  in  the  first  stages
of  generation,  so  striking,  that  precisely  the  same  reasons
necessitate  the  assumption  of  an  unconscious  psychical
influence  in  the  origin  of  the  plant  as  in  the  origin  of  the
animal.  The  embryonic  states  certainly  part  company
very  soon  after,  as  is  not  otherwise  to  be  expected,  accord-
ing to  the  difference  of  the  types  to  be  produced  ;  but  in
both  the  progressive  development  is  a  continuous  struggle
of  the  organising  soul  with  the  tendency  of  the  material
elements  to  decomposition,  degeneration,  and  destruc-
tion of  form.  Only  by  the  constant  prevention  of  these
degenerating  processes  and  ceaseless  reinstatement  of
the  circumstances  urging  to  continued  formation,  is  it
possible  at  any  moment  for  the  formed  organic  matter
to  get  the  better  of  the  relatively  formless  inorganic
matter,  for  a  new  higher  stage  of  the  specific  type  to  be
realised.

Every  single  cell  takes  part  in  these  operations ;  for  the
living  part  of  every  plant,  as  of  every  animal,  consists  of
the  sum  of  the  living  cells,  except  that  in  animals  on  the
average  the  changes  of  form  and  fusion  of  the  cells  are
somewhat  more  extensive,  and  the  intercellular  substance
secreted  and  nourished  by  the  cells  is  more  copious.  The
cell  is  the  chemical  laboratory  for  the  preparation  of  the
various  organic  combinations ;  the  division  and  amalgama-
tion of  the  cells  are  the  sole  means  for  the  setting  up  of
the  external  form.  At  the  same  time  just  as  strict  a  divi-
sion of  labour  is  carried  out  as  in  the  animal ;  one  kind
of  cells  has  to  form  this  material,  another  that.  As  in
the  animal  the  cells  are  elaborated  into  bones,  muscles,
sinews,  nerves,  connective  tissues,  and  epithelial  cells ;
so  in  the  plant  into  medullary  cells,  wood  cells,  cortical
cells,  sap  cells,  starch  cells,  &c.  Each  cell  absorbs  only
those  substances  which  it  can  make  use  of,  or  if  it  takes
up  aught  else,  it  sends  this  on  unassimilated.  A  circula-
tion of  sap  takes  place  in  each  single  cell,  and  likewise  in
the  whole  plant. It  is  true  open  vessels  do  not  exist,  but


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  123

the  circulation  of  the  sap  is  effected  by  the  endosmose  and
exosmose  of  the  several  cells  ;  still,  however,  a  perfect  circu-
lation of  ascending  and  descending  juices  takes  place,  as  a
similar  circulation  takes  place  in  all  the  parts  of  the  animal
body  that  are  wanting  in  nutritive  vessels  (e.g.,  in  the
deciduous  parts  of  the  umbilicus,  the  bones,  sinews,  cornea,
&c),  or  with  which  the  nutritive  vessels  do  not  directly
communicate.  Hales  cemented  a  tube  to  the  upper  end  of
a  lopped  vine  seven  inches  long;  in  the  first  experiment  the
height  of  the  sap  which  had  risen  from  the  surface  of  the
section  into  the  tube  amounted  to  2 1  feet ;  in  the  second,
quicksilver  poured  in  from  above  was  raised  to  the  height
of  38  inches.  Hales  calculates  from  this  the  energy  of  the
ascending  sap  to  be  equal  to  five  times  the  force  of  the
blood  in  the  femoral  artery  of  a  horse.  One  sees  what  in
the  higher  animal  is  due  to  the  heart's  action  is  in  the
plant  the  sum  of  the  united  absorption  of  all  the  sap  cells.
This  difference  frequently  recurs,  that  the  same  actions  in
the  animal  are  produced  by  centralisation,  in  the  plant
by  decentralisation  :  in  the  animal  monarchically,  in  the
plant  in  republican  fashion.  But  the  absorption  by  the
cells  is  by  no  means  merely  mechanical ;  it  takes  place
rather  with  selection  of  direction  and  material,  for  other-
wise no  circulation  and  no  distribution  of  nutritive  matters
to  different  cells  could  take  place.

The  directions  of  the  growth  of  plants  and  parts  of
plants  are,  as  a  whole,  conditioned  by  gravitation  and
light,  now  in  the  sense  that  they  coincide  with  the  direc-
tions of  these  forces ;  now  in  this,  that  they  strive  to  place
themselves  in  a  transverse  position  with  respect  to  the
latter;  now  in  such  a  way  that  both  forces  neutralise  one
another.  The  complications  hence  arising  become,  how-
ever, still  more  intricate  by  this :  that  certain  plants
change  their  behaviour  to  these  determining  forces  accord-
ing to  the  phases  of  their  stage  of  development,  if  they
are  brought  by  special  circumstances  into  a  position
where  their  normal  behaviour  would  be  inappropriate  in


124  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

respect  of  their  vital  needs.  Thus  Duchartre  found,  under
the  bottom  of  a  water-butt,  numerous  fungi  of  the  Mush-
room family  which  had  been  compelled  to  grow  from  above
downwards,  but  had  deviated  from  the  perpendicular  at
least  300,  and  of  which  those  more  developed  with  open-
ing and  spreading  caps  exhibited  a  geniculate  bending
of  the  stalk  upwards,  about  5mm  from  its  end,  through
which  the  normal  position  of  the  opened  cap  was  restored.
Seven  examples  of  Clariceps,  which  were  artificially
brought  into  the  inverted  position  in  a  glass  tube,  showed
an  analogous  behaviour,  only  that  the  stalks  formed  here
no  angle  but  an  arc  of  3  to  5mm  ("  Der  Naturforscher,"
1S70,  p.  194).

In  organic  adaptation,  likewise,  the  vegetable  will  bear
comparison  with  the  animal  kingdom.  There  is  even
much  which  in  animals  is  cared  for  by  instinct,  but
which  in  plants,  on  account  of  their  greater  weight,  is  pro-
vided for  by  organic  mechanisms,  which  again  can  be  set
up  only  by  unconscious  psychical  activity.  Here,  too,  the
transitions  are  of  such  a  kind  that  Ave  cannot  always
sharply  distinguish  mechanisms  and  instincts.

First  there  is  a  series  of  phenomena  for  the  better
nutrition  of  plants  by  retaining  putrefying  animal  matters.
The  aborted  leaves  of  the  common  Teazel — Dipsacus  fullo-
num — form  about  the  stem  a  kind  of  basin,  which  is  filled
with  rain-water,  and  in  which  many  accidentally  drowned
insects  are  often  found.  The  like  is  found  in  a  tropical
parasitic  plant  —  Fillandsia  utriculata.  The  Sarraceniae
have  leaves  which,  latterly  rolled  together,  form  an  ochrea,
and  are  in  part  provided  with  opercula.  Short,  stiff  hairs
prevent  imbibing  insects  from  returning  from  the  water-
holding  ochrea.  Nepenthes  destillatoria  has  the  urn  with
an  operculum  as  appendix  of  the  shallow  leaves.  It  closes
the  opercula  by  night  and  secretes  sweetish  water,  entic-
ing insects,  which  by  day  is  again  gradually  evaporated
from  the  open  urn.  The  sweetness  of  the  water  is  pro-
duced  by hairy,  glandular, excretory organs. Dioncca


MET  A  PHY  SIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  125

muscipula  has a  lobed  divided  appendage  on  each  leaf,
which  is  closely  set  with  small  glands,  with  six  aculeoe  in
the middle and setaceous cilia  at  the  edge. When  an
insect,  attracted  by  the  juice,  sits  on  the  two  lobes,  these
shut  up,  and  only  again  open  when  the  animal  has  become
quiet,  i.e.,  when  it  is  dead. Curtis  sometimes  found  the
captured  fly  enveloped  in a  slimy  substance,  which  ap-
peared to  act  as  a  solution  on  the  same. The  sun-dew,
Drosera,  has  very  red  bristly  hairs on the  leaves,  each
of  which  terminates  in  a  gland,  from  which  in  hot  weather
a  small  viscid pearly  drop  is  exuded. This  viscid  sap
retains  small  insects ;  the  hairs  quickly  curve  over  the  same,
and  gradually  the  whole  leaf  bends  back  with  the  apex
towards  the  base  (A.  W.  Eoth,  "  Beitriige  zur  Botanik,"
1  Till.,  1782,  p.  60). This  sap  is  at  the  same  time  poison-
ous for  insects  (also  unwholesome  for  sheep),  and  thereby
compensates  for  what  the  plant  wants  in  quick  irritability.
Both  often  found  in  the  open  air  leaves  of  the  Sun-dew
bent  together,  which  always  enclosed  insects  more  or  less
in  a  state  of  decay. "  Let  any  one  imagine  in  boggy  water
small  utricular  leaves,  bent  together  into  a  hollow  tube
with  open  mouth,  irritable  at  their  borders,  with  hair-like
soft  threads,  whilst  the  opening  acts  at  the  same  time
venomously  on  small  animals,  and  the  inner  surface of
the  cylindrical  tube  adapted  for  absorption. One  would
thus  have  an  image,  which  would  be  compounded  of  the
convolute or  urn-shaped leaves  of the Sarracenia  and
Nepenthes,  of  the  irritability of  the leaf-appendages  of
the Jhomea, and of the irritable but poison-secreting
hairs of the  Drosera. One gets,  however, also  at the
same  time  the  actual  picture  of  the  organisation  of  a  small
insect remarkable  for  its instinct — the  green hydra of
sweet  water,  Hydra  viridis  L."  (Autenrieth);  for  the  touch
of  tin;  mouth  of  this  creature  also  acts  poisonously. That
such  plants  thrive  more  luxuriantly  on  products  of  animal
putrefaction absorbed by  the leaves is experimentally
proved  in  the  case  of  the  Dioiuea.


126  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Very  wonderful  also  are  those  contrivances  in  plants
which  subserve  sexual  propagation.  In  erect  flowers
the  stamens  are  generally  longer  than  the  pistils ;  in
pendulous  ones,  the  reverse.  Where  the  pollen  grains
cannot  without  assistance  fall  on  the  stigmata,  and  the
wind  is  not  sufficient  to  carry  them  away,  insects  have  to
perform  this  office.  Hence  the  attractive  bright  colours
of  flowers,  their  far-reaching  scent,  which  is  always
developed  most  strongly  in  the  daytime,  when  the  insects
most  suited  to  the  particular  flower  swarm ;  hence  the
sweet  sap  at  the  base  of  the  flower,  which  compels  the
dainties-loving  animal  to  creep  deep  enough  within,  so
that  it  brushes  off  with  its  bristly  body  the  pollen,
which  then  comes  to  adhere  to  the  pistil,  either  of
the  same  or  of  another  flower.  In  the  Asclepiadese
and  Orchids  the  pollen  adheres  to  the  insect  by  means
of  a  sort  of  bird-lime.  Aristolochia  clcmatitis  has  a
bellied  flower  with  a  narrow  entrance,  which  by  means
of  lateral  hairs  prevents  the  exit  of  the  little  midges  that
have  crept  in.  These  swarm  about  in  their  prison  until
they  have  stripped  off  the  pollen  with  their  feathered
antennas  and  brought  it  to  the  stigma.  Immediately  after
fructification  the  hairs  begin  to  dry  up  and  fall  off,  and
release  the  flies  from  their  prison.

If  the  pollen  grains  become  wet,  they  expand  and  burst ;
then  fertilisation  becomes  impossible.  In  this  way  rainy
weather  becomes  very  injurious  at  the  blossoming  of  the
grain.  The  precautionary  measures  of  the  flowers  for
escaping  the  wet  are  very  numerous.  In  the  Vine  and
the  species  of  llampions  fertilisation  takes  place  under  the
protection  of  the  petals  cohering  by  their  tips  ;  in  the  Legu-
minosce  the  standard  (vexillum)  accords  the  same  protection;
in  the  Labiatse,  the  upper  lips  of  the  corolla;  in  the  species
of  Calyptranthe,  the  operculate  calyx.  Many  plants  close
their  corolla  when  it  is  about  to  rain  (this  is  instinct) ;
many  also  by  night  to  protect  themselves  from  the  dew;
others  at  night-time  bend  round  their  flower-stalks,  so


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  127

that  the  open  side  of  the  corolla  is  turned  aside.  Impatiens
noli  me  tangere  hides  even  its  flowers  under  its  leaves  by
night.  In  most  aquatic  plants  dry  fertilisation  is  rendered
possible  by  this,  that  they  do  not  bloom  before  their  stalks
have  reached  the  surface  of  the  water.  The  Alga  fixed  to
the  sea-bottom  flowers  in  leafy  folds,  which  it  is  true  are
open  laterally,  but  hinder  the  entrance  of  the  water  by
means  of  excreted  gases.  The  Water-crowfoot  {Ranunculus
aquaticus),  whose  flowers  are  flooded  at  high  water,  is
protected  by  the  pollen  dropping  out  of  the  anthers  at  a
time  when  the  flower  is  still  a  close,  air-containing  bud.
The  "Water-nut  {Trapa  natans)  lives  at  the  bottom  of  the
water  until  flowering  time,  when  the  petioles,  ranged  side
by  side  into  a  kind  of  leaf-rose,  swell  to  cellular  bladders
filled  with  air,  and  raise  the  whole  plant  to  the  surface  of
the  water.  Thus  florescence  and  fructification  take  place
in  the  air.  When  this  is  over,  the  bladders  are  filled  with
water,  and  the  plant  sinks  again  to  the  bottom,  where  it
then  brings  its  seed  to  maturity.  Still  more  complicated
is  the  arrangement  of  the  species  of  Utricula  for  the  same
purpose.  Their  strongly  ramified  roots  are  covered  with
a  multitude  of  small  round  bladders  (utriculi)  possessing
a  kind  of  movable  lid,  and  filled  with  a  mucus  that  is
heavier  than  water.  By  means  of  this  ballast  the  plant
is  retained  at  the  bottom  of  the  water,  until  at  flowering
time  the  mucus  is  got  rid  of  by  excreted  gases.  It  now
slowly  rises  to  the  surface,  flowers  and  fructifies,  and  is
then  again  drawn  down,  whilst  the  root  again  secretes
mucus,  which  now  on  its  part  drives  out  the  air  from  the
little  sac  (I )ecandolle,  "Vegetable  Physiology,"  ii.  87).  The
Yallisneria  is  an  aquatic  plant  with  distinct  sex  (dioecious),
which  grows  attached  at  the  bottom  of  the  water.  The
llower  of  the  female  plant  sits  on  a  long  screw-shaped  stalk,
which  subsequently  extends  and  lifts  the  flower  above  the
water.  The  male  plant  has  a  shaft  tending  straight
upwards.  The  four-leaved  spathe  is  split  into  four  pieces
through  further  expansion  of  the  inner  parts,  and  now  the


128  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

male  organs  of  fructification  swim  freely  about  in  the
water  in  thousands.  As  soon  as  a  female  flower  is
fertilised  the  stem  again  spirally  contracts,  and  thus  the
seeds  are  brought  to  maturity  below. — Also  in  Serpi-
cula  vcrticillata  the  male  flowers,  when  near  rupture,  are
released  from  the  opened  spathes  and  swim  to  the  female,
whereby  they  rest  on  the  apices  of  the  replicate  sepals
and  petals.

"  One  species  of  plant  jerks  ingeniously  far  and  wide
the  ripe  seed-grains  by  means  of  the  elasticity  of  the
capsule  which  flies  open  spontaneously.  The  beards  of
oats  are,  on  the  contrary,  wound  round  spirally,  and  are
so  hyproscopic  that  the  first  rain  unrolls  them,  and  com-
pels the  thereby  backwards-thrust  grain  to  creep  under
the  nearest  clod,  and  so  to  betake  itself  beneath  the  earth
for  future  sprouting.  Other  plant-seeds  are  provided  with
wings  or  plumose  pappus,  in  order  to  be  borne  through  the
air.  Others  even  have  little  hooks,  in  order  to  cling  to
passing  animals,  that  they  may  be  again  dispersed  by  these
means  to  other  places"  (Autenrieth,  151).  The  ripe
fruits  of  the  Stork's-bill  are  jerked  off,  by  the  curling
back  of  the  indurated  styles,  three  to  four  feet  from  the
plant.  The  extending  style,  by  becoming  damp,  makes
a  spiral  revolution,  which  chiefly  causes  the  sharp  point
of  the  seed  to  strike  the  earth  somewhere,  into  which
it  must  now  penetrate.  If  drier  weather  occurs,  little
bristles  on  the  seed-corn,  which  act  as  barbs,  prevent  a
recoil,  and  the  shortening  is  followed  by  a  drawing  of  the
style  towards  the  grain,  so  that  now,  with  repeated  mois-
tening, the  newly  gained  point  of  support  for  the  end  of
the  style  permits  a  deeper  penetration  into  the  ground.
Since  the  lower  part  of  the  style  itself  is  also  provided
with  barb-like  bristles,  on  change  of  weather  the  fruit
can  interpenetrate  the  soil  even  to  complete  disappear-
ance in  the  manner  of  a  corkscrew.

Many  seeds  cover  themselves  for  protection  with  a  hard
shell,  and  in  order  to  be  devoured  and  carried  farther  by


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  129

animals,  which  in  their  excrements  directly  supply  them
with  manure,  they  envelop  themselves  in  savoury  pulp
(stone-fruit,  grapes,  gooseberries,  currants,  &c),  or  they
peripherally  surround  a  carnose  nucleus  (strawberries,  &c.)
The  seeds  of  aquatic  plants  are  usually  heavier  than
water,  and  accordingly  sink  to  the  bottom.  Those  of  most
lofty  trees,  on  the  contrary,  are  light,  and  are  transported
on  the  surface  of  the  water  far  and  wide  to  new  stations
by  wind  and  current.  The  mango-tree  (JRhizophora  mangle)
grows,  at  the  mouths  of  rivers  and  on  flat  sea-shores,  in
the  mud,  so  far  as  the  same  is  covered  over  by  the  salt
flood,  thrives  therefore  only  on  a  narrow  strip,  wherefore
the  seeds  must  take  firm  root  beside  the  mother  tree.
On  the  receptacle  of  the  flower  of  this  tree  now  there  is
gradually  produced  a  pulpy  hollow  growth,  by  which  the
seed,  with  the  help  of  a  stalk  ij  inch  long,  is  pushed
out,  so  that  after  about  a  year  it  depends  perpendicularly.
The  seed  itself  is  10  inches  long,  thicker  and  heavier
towards  the  free  end,  but  terminating  with  a  puncheon-
shaped  point.  It  sprouts  within  its  covering,  and  even
develops  an  important  root.  Through  its  form  and  weight
the  falling  seed  penetrates  water  and  mud  three  to  four
feet,  and  penetrates  the  ground  yet  one  inch  more,  where
it  can  then  soon  fasten  itself  with  its  root. — These  ex-
amples may  suffice  to  show,  that  even  the  vegetable  soul
performs  sufficiently  wonderful  works  in  setting  up  ap-
propriate mechanisms,  whose  end  is  even  in  part  tolerably
remote.

(b.)  The  Recuperative  Tower  of  Nature.  —  Animals  have
each  organ  only  just  as  often  as  the  whole  organism
requires  it  for  its  maintenance  ;  hence  the  endeavour
to  replace  a  lost  one  in  the  same  way.  The  Idea  of  the
plant  demands  a  numerically  unlimited  repetition  of  the
same  organs  ;  wherefore  also  a  partial  loss  usually  is  not
prejudicial  to  the  persistence  of  the  whole.  Here,  then,
no  reason  exists  for  restoring  the  lost  parts  at  the  same
place and  in  the  same  manner,  since  the  plant  finds  it

VOL.  II.  I


130  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

much  easier  to  accomplish  the  replacement  at  other  places
by  means  of  the  already  existing  buds.  Nevertheless,
sufficient  opportunities  are  afforded  for  seeing  that  in  the
plant  likewise  the  vis  mcdicatrix  is  active,  it  is  only  neces-
sary to  deprive  a  plant  of  a  certain  class  of  organs  which
is  essential  for  its  existence,  e.g.,  all  the  roots,  when  it
will  immediately  put  forth  new  roots,  or  die  when  it  has
no  longer  the  requisite  force.  Also  the  process  of  cica-
trising wounds  or  cut  surfaces  is  altogether  analogous  to
that  of  animals.

Finally,  in  the  plant  as  in  the  animal,  the  whole  life
is  an  infinite  sum  of  infinitely  numerous  acts  of  the
vis  niedicatrix,  since  at  each  moment  the  destructive
physical  and  chemical  influences  must  be  paralysed  and
met.

(c.)  Reflex  Movements.  —  The  physiologists  distinguish
reflex  movement  and  "  simple  stimulation  of  contractile
tissue."  This  is  correct  when  one  inquires  wrhere  the
reflexion  of  the  stimulus  into  motion  takes  place;  namely,
whether  the  seat  of  reaction  lies  at  the  stimulated  spot
itself  or  at  another;  it  is,  however,  a  mistake  to  try  to
find  herein  a  difference  of  principle.  The  essence  of  re-
flexion in  both  cases  is  conversion  of  an  active  stimulus
nto  reactive  motion  ;  an  absolute  restriction  to  the  irri-
tated point  is  at  the  same  time  never  met  with ;  but
•whether  the  conduction  proceeds  a  little  further  or  not
can  make  no  difference  in  principle.  That  which  stamps
a  reactive  movement  as  reflex  action  is  the  inadequacy  of
merely  material  natural  laws  for  its  production ;  only
when  we  can  rest  content  with  these  {e.g.,  elasticity7,
chemical  reaction),  only  then  can  we  deny  reflex  action,
whose  essence  is  an  unconscious  psychical,  an  instinctive
reaction.  Whether  a  reflexion  is  effected  by  nerves  and
muscles,  or  by  other  equivalent  mechanism,  can  by  no
means  justify  a  difference  in  principle,  since  the  strictly
active  matter  is  still  always  the  protoplasm,  whether  free
or  enclosed  in  various  kinds  of  cells.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  131

If  the  water  inhabited  by  a  polype  be  shaken,  the
polype  contracts  into  a  bundle.  This  will  be  called  by
every  one  reflex  action,  no  matter  whether  in  future,  in
the  homogeneous  slimy  mass  of  the  polype,  the  analogues
of  nerves  and  muscles  be  discovered  or  not.  And  when
the  Mimosa  pudica,  shaken  by  the  tread  of  the  passer-by,
shrinks  along  with  its  leaves,  is  this  not  reflex  action  ?
When  the  irritated  penis  is  erected  in  virtue  of  change  of
blood-circulation,  this  is  admitted  to  be  reflex  movement,
and  in  the  case  of  the  plant  is  not  the  altered  sap-circu-
lation to  be  considered  just  as  good  a  means  to  reflex
movement  ?  For  the  plant  indeed  does  not  need  the  con-
tinuous quick  movements  for  which  the  animal  requires
its  muscles,  accordingly  muscles  would  be  a  useless  luxury
for  it.  In  the  animal  the  sign  of  reflexion  is  that  about
the  same  reaction  occurs,  whether  one  applies  a  mechanical,
chemical,  thermal,  galvanic,  or  electric  stimulus ;  the  same
is,  however,  also  the  case  with  plants,  whereas  dead  me-
chanisms are  wont  to  respond  only  to  a  quite  definite
stimulus.  Strong  electric  shocks  annihilate  animal  as
well  as  vegetable  irritability.  If  a  needle,  connected  with
the  positive  pole  of  a  galvanic  battery,  be  stuck  through
the  stalk  of  a  barberry  flower,  and  the  wire  of  the  negative
pole  be  united  with  a  petal  by  means  of  a  lightly  affixed
moist  piece  of  paper,  at  the  moment  of  closing  the  chain
the  stamen  belonging  to  the  leaf  springs  over  to  the  pistil.
If  the  pole  be  changed,  the  current  is  less  active,  just  as
animal  preparations  more  powerfully  react  when  the  nega-
tive pole  is  united  with  the  peripheral  end.  On  opening
the  chain  no  movement  takes  place,  just  as  with  frog's
thighs.  According  to  lUondeau  the  constant  current,
with  application  of  the  necessary  precautions,  acts  on  the
Mimosa  pudica  just  as  little  as  on  animal  muscles  as
a  motor  stimulus,  whilst  the  intermittent  induction  cur-
rent proves  to  be  a  very  violent  stimulus.  The  part  of
an  irritated  animal  slowly  returns  to  its  position  on  the
abolition  of  the  stimulus  ;  thus,  e.g.,  an  irritated  oyster  or


132  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

polype  quickly  shrinks,  but  opens  slowly.  A  repetition
of  the  stimulation  blunts  the  irritability,  rest  restores  it.
Further,  the  irritability  manifests  itself  differently  accord-
ing to  condition  of  health,  age,  sex,  season,  state  of  the
weather,  and  other  circumstances.  All  this  occurs  with
plants  precisely  as  with  animals.

The  reflex  movements  of  the  Dioncca  muscipula  I  have
already  mentioned  above.  If  an  insect  deposits  itself  on  a
leaf  of  the  same,  it  is  first  of  all  retained  there,  being
caught  by  the  hairs,  and  then  gradually  the  whole  leaf
coils  round  it.  Here  we  have  upon  a  simple  stimulus  at
a  single  spot  a  partly  simultaneous,  partly  appropriate
successive  participation  of  many  places  of  the  leaf,  precisely
as  we  are  accustomed  to  find  in  animals,  only  that  instead
of  the  monarchical  command  of  a  nerve  centre,  a  republican
participation  of  all  the  parts  in  harmonious  agreement  has
place.  The  phenomenon  is  more  centralised,  and  therefore
more  animal-like  in  all  leaves,  anthers,  &c,  where  the  seat
of  reaction  is  to  be  sought  in  the  joints,  by  which  these
parts  are  fastened.

In  many  flowers  the  ripe  anthers  gradually  spontaneously
incline  towards  the  pistil,  in  some  a  joint  is  formed,  which,
on  the  stimulus  of  some  insect,  jerks  the  pollen  on  to  the
stigma.  In  others  the  crooked  stigma  is  also  irritable,
and  extends  on  a  stimulus  affecting  it,  whereby  it  carries
off  pollen  from  the  anthers.  Mimosa  padica  has  bipinnate
leaves,  and  the  leaflets,  nerves,  the  chief  leaf-stalk,
nay,  even  the  branch,  have  each  their  special  move-
ment. If  cautiously  avoiding  all  shaking,  some  strong
acid  be  applied  to  a  leaflet  by  degrees,  all  the  adjacent
leaves  close  up ;  according  to  Dutrochet,  the  velocity  of
propagation  amounts  from  eight  to  fifteen  millimetres  in
a  second  in  the  leaf-stalks,  in  the  stigma,  at  the  most,
from  two  to  three  millimetres.  Here  the  conductivity  is
actually  visible.  The  same  result  is  reached  when  a  leaf-
let is  gently  scorched  ;  the  leaves  fold  up  much  beyond
that  required  by  the  effect  of  the  heat. Briicke,  and  sub-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  133

sequently  Bert,  proved  that  in  this  remarkable  plan:  the
spontaneous  movement.?,  which  consist  in  a  raising  and
lowering  of  the  petiolei  according  to  the  time  cf  day,  aie
to  be  well  distinguished  Irom  trie  movements  resulting
from  stimulation,  since  the  capacity  of  the  plant  for  the
latter  is  paralysed  by  ether  vapours,  which,  indeed,  act
likewise  narcotically  on  the  nervous  system  of  the  animal,
whereas  the  former  are  propagated  unchanged.  That  the
diurnal  elevations  and  depressions  depend  on  regular
alternations  of  the  sap-circulation  is.  undoubted ;  by  what
means  the  tension  of  the  upper  and  lower  knots  on  the
petioles  is  changed  on  occasion  of  a  stimulus  has  indeed
not  been  directly  established  for  Mimosa  pudica,  but
certainly  for  the  above-mentioned  pollen  of  Herberts
vulgaris.  Here,  namely  (as  in  most  vegetable  parts),  an
opposite  tension  on  the  part  of  various  tissues  takes
place,  in  that  the  exterior  coating  strives  to  shorten
the  filament,  the  underlying  protoplasm  endeavours  to
lengthen  it.  If,  now,  a  suitable  stimulus  approaches  the
inner  side  of  the  filament,  the  protoplasm  contracts ;
and  while,  in  this  way,  the  previous  equilibrium  of  the
tensions  is  changed  in  favour  of  the  exterior  coating,  this
can  realise  its  tendency  to  shortening,  and  by  this  means
bends  the  filament.  The  action,  which  liberates  the  play
of  existing  forces,  is  thus  here  a  contraction  of  the  proto-
plasm, precisely  as  in  lower  animals  or  as  in  muscles  of
higher  ones.

Jt  is  impossible  to  mistake  the  thorough-going  analogy
between  the  reflex  actions  of  animals  and  plants;  the
differences  reach  only  just  as  far  as  the  general  arrange-
ment of  the  organisms  and  as  the  special  ends  of  each
reaction  differ.  If,  now,  the  reflex  actions  in  animals
have  once  for  all  been  recognised  as  in  the  last  resort  acts
of  a  psychical  nature,  one  cannot  avoid  claiming  this  un-
conscious psychical  element  also  for  plants,  just  as  one
must  reckon  it  to  every  animal  part,  which  is  still  per  se
capable  of  reflex  movements.


134  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

(d)  Instinct. — We  saw  already  in  the  animal  kingdom
the  inseparability  of  instinct,  reflex  movement,  and
organic  formation ;  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  they  can
still  less  be  separated,  for,  on  the  one  hand,  on  account  of
the  defective  means  of  movement  for  the  plant,  organic
formation  must  accomplish  much  by  appropriate  mecha-
nisms which  the  animals  perform  with  instinctive  move-
ment (think  of  coition  and  the  dissemination  of  the  seeds),
and  on  the  other  side  the  consciousness  of  plants  stand  so
low,  that  the  difference  between  the  stimulus  of  reflex
movement  and  the  motive  of  instinctive  action  must
shrink  to  a  minimum.  Nevertheless  we  shall  still  find
abundant  traces,  which  unmistakably  confront  us  as  the
same  as  that  which  we  call  instinct  in  the  animal
kingdom.  A  polype  instinctively  betakes  itself  from  the
shaded  half  of  its  vessel  to  that  illuminated  by  the  sun,
and  when  Oscillatorise  do  the  same,  when  the  sunflower
almost  dislocates  its  neck  in  order  to  turn  its  face  to  the
sun,  is  that  not  to  be  called  instinct  ?  Dutrochet  relates
in  his  Hech.  p.  131  :  "I  saw  the  leaf  of  a  plant  standing  in
the  open  air,  whose  upper  surface  was  covered  with  a
small  board,  try  to  withdraw  itself  from  the  screen  by
means  which  were  not  always  the  same,  but  were  always
of  a  kind  winch  must  most  easily  and  quickly  lead  to  the
goal;  thus  this  happened  now  by  means  of  a  lateral  bend-
ing of  the  leaf-stalk,  now  by  a  bending  of  the  same  leaf-
stalk towards  the  pedicle."

Knight  saw  a  vine-leaf,  whose  under  side  was  illumi-
nated by  the  sun,  and  whose  approach  to  a  natural  posi-
tion he  had  blocked  in  every  way,  make  almost  every
possible  attempt  to  turn  to  the  light  the  right  side,  with
which  it  was  mainly  necessitated  to  respire.  After  it  had
for  a  few  days  attempted  to  approach  the  light  in  a  cer-
tain direction,  and  by  bending  back  its  lobes  had  almost
covered  its  whole  under-side  therewith,  it  spread  itself  out
and  removed  further  from  the  window  of  the  glass-house,
in  order  to  approach  the  light  in  the  opposite  direction


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  135

(Treviranus,  Beitrage,  119).  Frank  (Die  natiirl.  wage-
reclite  Richtung,  &c,  Leipzig,  1870)  has  recently  con-
firmed this,  and  extended  it  to  a  number  of  other  plants.
According  to  him  also  it  is  noticeable  that  this  movement
is  always  executed  by  the  shortest  course,  the  leaf  turning
now  up,  now  down,  now  right,  now  left.  The  wonder  is
not  diminished  by  the  circumstance  that  the  leaves,  or
leaf-stalks,  lose  this  capability  when  their  growth  is
complete,  except  when  they  are  provided  with  special
cushion-like  swellings  at  the  base  of  the  stem,  wdiich  on
every  occasion  may  again  receive  changes  of  dimension,
which  during  the  period  of  growth  are  to  be  looked  upon
as  relatively  violent  modifications  of  the  same. — Dutrochet
covered  the  terminal  leaf  of  a  three-leaved  bean-leaf
(Phaseolus  vulgaris)  with  a  small  board.  As  the  shortness
of  the  special  leaf-stalk  made  retreat  impossible  to  the
leaflet,  this  took  place  by  the  bending  of  the  joint  petiole,
whereas  in  the  dark  the  board  was  not  evaded.  "  If,"
says  the  investigator,  "  one  sees  how  many  means  are  here
applied  to  attain  the  same  end,  one  will  be  almost  tempted
to  believe  there  dwells  here  a  secret  intelligence  which,
chooses  the  most  appropriate  means  for  the  attainment  of
the  end."  So,  driven  by  the  simple  power  of  facts,  does  a
naturalist  utter  a  truth,  which  is  only  incomprehensible  to
him,  because  lie  is  not  acquainted  with  unconscious  psy-
chical activity.  That  there  is  here  no. mere  rellex  action
on  a  stimulus  is  easy  to  see,  for  it  is  just  the  want  of  a
necessary  stimulus  which  is  evaded.

Tolerably  familiar  are  the  phenomena  of  vegetable
sleep,  whereby  the  leaves  are  partly  lowered,  partly  in-
verted, the  flowers  lower  their  heads  or  shut  up.  In  fact,
these  phenomena  have  been  already  mentioned  and  find
their  end  in  protecting  the  pollen  grains  from  the  dew.
That  the  depression  of  the  petals,  however,  does  not  depend
on  mere  exhaustion,  we  may  easily  convince  ourselves  ;
in  their  bent  condition  they  are  rather  in  a  state  of  ten-
sion and  elastic. Malva  peruviana,  by  rearing  the  leaves


136  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

round  the  stalk  at  the  tip  of  the  branches  forms  in  the
dormant  condition  a  kind  of  funnel,  under  which  the
young  flowers  or  leaves  are  protected ;  Impatiens-noli-me-
tangere  forms  out  of  the  depressed  upper  leaves  an  arch
for  the  young  sprouts,  some  others  enclose  the  flowers  by
folding  the  leaflets  of  their  compound  leaves.  The  time
for  sleep  and  waking  are  as  different  for  plants  as  for
animals.  Many  of  our  plants  bend  towards  the  sun,
others  punctually  keep  fixed  times,  no  matter  into  what
climate  they  are  transferred,  no  matter  whether  it  be
summer  or  winter.  One  sees  from  this  that  these  perio-
dical movements  also  are  partially  independent  of  ex-
ternal stimuli  and  arise  purely  from  internal  conditions
of  the  plant  itself;  they  are  simply  instinctively  regu-
lated efforts.

In  many  plants  the  stamina  incline  towards  the  pistil
for  purposes  of  fertilisation,  shed  their  pollen,  and  then
return  to  their  position ;  in  others  the  pistil  moves
towards  the  stamens  ;  in  yet  others,  both  mutually  seek
each  other  (Treviranus,  Physiologie  der  Gewachse,  ii.  389).
In  Lilium  supcrbum,  Amaryllis  formosissima,  and  Pan-
cratium maritimum,  the  anthers  successively  approach
the  stigma.  In  Fritillaria  pcrsica,  they  alternately  bend
towards  the  style.  In  Phus  coriaria,  two  or  three  filaments
simultaneously  protrude,  describe  a  quadrant,  and  bring
their  anthers  quite  close  to  the  stigma.  In  Saxifraga  tridac-
tih/tcs,  muscoidcs,  aizoon,  gramdata,  and  cotyledon,  two
stamens  approach  each  other  from  opposite  sides  above
the  stigma,  and  again  spread,  after  they  have  scattered  their
pollen,  in  order  to  make  room  for  others.  In  Pamassicc
2xdustris  the  male  parts  move  to  the  female  in  the  same
order  in  which  the  pollen  matures,  and  indeed,  when  they
approach  the  stigma,  quickly  and  at  once,  when  they  again
separate  after  fertilisation,  in  three  periods.  In  Tropmolum
they  elevate  themselves  one  after  the  other  from  the  origi-
nally depressed  filaments  at  the  period  of  full  bloom,  and
after  the  anthers  have  shed  their  pollen  on  the  stigma


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  137

bend  down  again,  in  order  to  make  room  for  others.
One  cannot  wish  for  a  clearer  indication  of  instinct  than
is  presented  in  these  examples ;  for  here  the  motive  is
the  presence  of  the  stigma,  and  the  maturity  of  the  pollen,
hut  the  order  in  which,  and  the  fashion  in  which  the
stamens  move  to  and  fro  wears  just  as  much  the  sem-
blance of  caprice  as  any  animal  movement  can.

Eemarkable  are  the  instinctive  movements  of  climbing
plants  {vide  Mohl,  On  the  Winding  of  Tendrils).  Such  a
plant  first  grows  somewhat  perpendicularly  upwards,  then
its  stalk  bends  horizontally,  and  describes  circles,  in  order
to  seek  a  support  in  the  environment,  just  as  an  eyeless
caterpillar  describes  circles  with  its  anterior  parts  to  seek
a  new  leaf.  The  longer  the  pistil  grows  the  larger,  of
course,  become  the  circles ;  that  is,  if  the  plant  finds  no
support  in  the  environment  it  seeks  it  in  a  wider  circuit.
Finally,  if  the  stalk  can  no  longer  support  its  own  weight
it  falls  to  the  ground,  and  now  creeps  further  in  a  straight
direction.  If  it  now  finds  a  support  it  might  either  take
no  notice  of  it,  or,  for  convenience  sake,  run  indeed  further
along  the  earth  in  order  not  to  be  obliged  to  climb;  in
point  of  fact,  however,  it  immediately  grasps  its  support
and  climbs  up  by  it  spirally.  Yet  here,  too,  the  plant
still  proceeds  by  way  of  selection ;  the  flat  side  (especially
in  the  young  stalk)  does  not  wind  itself  about  dead
organic  or  inorganic  supports,  but  only  about  living
plants,  by  which  it  eagerly  climbs  upwards,  fur  the  roots
cleaving  to  the  earth  soon  die,  and  it  is  then  entirely
assigned  to  the  food,  which  it  imbibes  with  its  papillae
from  the  clasped  plant.  Every  creeping  plant  by  nature
either  moves  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  If  one  unrolls  a
young  convolvolus  from  its  support  and  winds  it  round
again  in  the  opposite  direction,  it  will  return  into  its
original  spiral  direction,  or  will  surrender  its  life  in  the
endeavour.  This  too  answers  to  the  animal  instincts.  If
however,  one  allows  two  such  plants  mutually  to  embrace
without  foreign  support,  and  so  to  climb  by  one  another's


133  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

aid,  the  one  voluntarily  changes  its  solitary  direction  in
order  to  make  this  mutual  embrace  possible  (Farmer's
Magazine,  repeated  in  the  Times  of  the  13th  July  1848).
Thus,  instead  of  adapting  itself  to  the  powerful  change,
the  plant  prefers  to  sacrifice  its  life  ;  but  when  this  change
is  judicious,  it  anticipates  it  of  its  own  accord.  Here  one
finds  even  the  variability  of  animal  instinct  in  the  most
remarkable  form.

(e)  The  Instinct  for  Beauty  in  plants  cannot  in  this  place
be  further  proved.  I  hold  the  assertion  to  be  correct  also
for  the  vegetable  kingdom,  that  every  being  builds  itself
up  as  beautifully  as  is  compatible  with  the  ends  of  its
existence,  and  so  far  as  it  can  subdue  the  stubborn
material.  Whether  one  considers  the  greatest  or  the  least
in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  the  stately  oak  or  the  micro-
scopic moss ;  whether  one  looks  to  the  whole  or  the  indivi-
dual, to  the  glorious  primaeval  forest  or  the  fir  cone,  every-
where that  truth  will  be  found  confirmed.

Thus  we  have  again  found  the  five  moments  in  the
vegetable  kingdom  in  which,  as  in  the  animal  kingdom,
we  perceived  the  effects  of  the  Unconscious  in  bodily  life.
Accordingly,  we  are  no  longer  warranted  in  refusing  to
the  plant  unconscious  will  and  unconscious  presentation.
That  we  perceive  no  higher  mental  phenomena  in  the
plant  need  not  surprise  us,  since,  indeed,  the  purpose  of
the  vegetable  kingdom  is  altogether  only  this — to  prepare
the  ground,  the  food,  and  the  atmosphere  for  the  animal
kingdom,  although  we  must  also  admit  that  at  the  same
time  the  creative  principle  works  itself  out  independently
in  the  vegetable  kingdom  in  its  own  fashion.

2.  Consciousness  in  the  Plant. — The  result  thus  far  was
not  difficult  to  foresee,  and  needed  no  great  penetration.
More  difficult,  however,  is  the  question  whether  in  the
plant  there  also  dwells  a  consciousness.

Old  as  Natural  Science  is  the  dispute  concerning  the
vegetable  or  animal  nature  of  certain  organisms,  and  even
at  the  present  day  it  is  as  little  capable  of  decision  as  in


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  139

the  time  of  Aristotle,  for  the  simple  reason  that  as  an
alternative  it  does  not  admit  of  decision.

Plants  and  animals  have,  as  organic  beings,  certain
attributes  in  common ;  by  other  attributes  they  are  dis-
tinguished according  to  their  different  offices  in  the  house-
hold of  Nature.  But  now,  if  all  vital  phenomena  are
reducible  to  so  simple  a  form,  that  those  distinguishing
qualities  more  or  less  disappear,  and  essentially  only  those
common  to  the  two  kingdoms  remain,  the  differences  be-
tween plant  and  animal  must  also  disappear,  and  it  is
foolish  to  maintain  a  dispute  which  in  its  nature  must  be
without  result.  Microscopic  observation  is  so  far  ad-
vanced that,  if  there  were  criteria  for  the  vegetable  or  the
animal  nature,  they  could  certainly  not  escape  the  inves-
tigator, and  the  dispute  would  have  ended  long  ago ;  that
there  are,  in  fact,  no  criteria  mutually  admitted  by  the
two  contending  parties,  is  a  proof  that  there  is  no  distinct
agreement  as  to  the  point  of  dispute  itself.  Were  the
facts  accepted  without  prejudice,  the  inference  could  only
be  that  one  had  hitherto  narrowed  too  much  the  sphere  of
the  qualities  common  to  the  two  kingdoms,  that  there  are
far  fewer  differences  between  animal  and  plant  than  one
had  previously  supposed,  and  that  these  differences  became
only  in  their  extreme  forms  so  striking  that  nobody  can
mistake  them.  Quite  recently  this  way  of  looking  at  the
matter  has  also  gained  ground  in  scientific  circles,  the
strictest  development  of  the  same  being  the  attempt  of
Hiickel  to  set  up  a  third  kingdom  of  Protista  before  the
vegetable  and  animal  kingdom,  although  he  may  perhaps
have  extended  its  borders  too  far,  and  his  criterion  of  non-
sexual reproduction  may  turn  out  to  be  untenable,  because
the  possession  of  sexual  generation  alike  by  animal  and
plant  points  to  a  common  origin,  i.e.,  to  its  existence  already
in  the  realm  of  Protista.  Altogether  the  attempt  to  give
fixed  definition  to  the  naturally  fluctuating  boundaries
between  the  Protist  kingdom  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
animal  and  vegetable  kingdom  on  the  other,  must  be  just


Uo  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

as  vain  as  the  earlier  endeavour  in  respect  to  the  two
latter  kingdoms.

This  mode  of  regarding  the  matter  is  also  the  only  one
which  can  be  approved  by  geology.  Whilst  the  terrestrial
creation  now  subsists  by  the  equilibrium  of  the  produc-
tions of  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom,  manifestly  the
first  foundation-stone  of  organic  nature  could  only  be  laid
by  such  beings  as  contained  this  equilibrium  in  themselves,
and  accordingly  stood  still  at  the  point  of  indifference  be-
tween animal  and  vegetable.  One  of  the  most  important
of  these  wonderful  beings,  to  which  the  history  of  this  earth
appears  to  owe  the  whole  chalk  formation,  has  been  dragged
to  light  by  recent  explorations  of  the  sea-depths,  and  been
called  Bathybius.  In  what  way  this  slimy  gelatinous  net
with  interspersed  protoplasmic  nuclei  filling  up  the  sea-
bottom,  and  secreting  little  heaps  of  microscopic  calca-
reous shells  (Coccoliths)  is  fed  and  thrives  in  the  absence
of  every  ray  of  light,  is  up  to  this  time  a  riddle.  Only
from  such  an  insignificant  commencement  could  the  de-
velopment begin  on  different  sides,  in  that  marine  animals
arose,  which  lived  on  these  undifferentiated  Protista  (Po-
lyps, &c),  and  as  their  counterpoise  the  first  stages  of  de-
cided vegetable  structures  became  possible.  The  more  the
two  kingdoms  became  peopled,  the  more  were  means  of  sub-
sistence placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  higher  animal  classes,
the  more  higher  classes  of  vegetable  could  again  exist  on
the  living  and  dead  products  of  these  animals,  and  the
evolution  thus  kept  pace  in  the  two  kingdoms,  as  geology
teaches,  whilst  within  each  kingdom  the  lower  grades  gene-
rally always  preceded  the  higher.  Prom  this  one  should,
however,  draw  the  conclusion  that  vegetable  kingdom  and
animal  kingdom  are  not  subordinate,  but  co-ordinate  de-
partments of  creation,  and  that  the  animal  kingdom,  when
it  holds  itself  entitled  to  take  rank  above  the  vegetable
kingdom  in  virtue  of  the  higher  development  of  conscious-
ness, owes  this  power  entirely  to  the  pre-eminence  of  the
latter  in  organic  reference,  since  the  latter  forms  for  it  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  141

materials,  to  the  leisurely  consumption  of  which  it  owes
its  own  higher  consciousness.  If,  now,  the  consumption
of  material,  which  is  formed  in  foreign  organisms,  suffices
to  define  the  action  of  parasitism  (for  the  dwelling  of  the
parasite  is  indifferent,  as,  for  example,  the  chamber-bug),
the  animal  kingdom  as  a  whole  may  be  called  a  'parasite
of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  In  this  respect  the  animal
kingdom  resembles  the  crreat  class  of  fungi,  which,  al-
though,  according  to  morphological  analogies,  hitherto
reckoned  to  plants,  yet  can  only  be  termed  vegetable  para-
sites. There  are  wanting  to  them,  namely,  the  vegetable
"  philosopher's  stone,"  the  arcanum,  by  whose  help  the
vegetable  converts  inorganic  matter  into  organic  chloro-
phyll, and  they  are  therefore  just  as  much  as  the  animal
kingdom  consigned  to  the  consumption  of  ready-formed
organic  matter.

This  contrast  of  formation  and  consumption  is  now,
however,  not  to  be  taken  so  strictly,  as  if  the  plant  merely
produced,  the  animal  merely  consumed,  rather  do  we  see
in  every  animal  also  processes  partly  of  the  higher  elabo-
ration of  received  material  (e.g.,  the  formation  of  cerebral
fats),  partly  of  the  conversion  of  the  same  without  relapse,
partly  of  decomposition  and  recomposition  in  the  course
of  the  process  of  digestion  and  assimilation.  On  the  other
hand,  we  see  in  every  plant  a  consumption  here  and  there
of  the  products,  which  it  has  itself  formed  at  other  places
(we  have  only  to  think  of  the  processes  of  retrogression  in
flowers,  their  inspiration  of  oxygen  and  excretion  of  car-
bonic acid).  In  yeast,  fungi,  and  some  other  unicellular
plants,  we  even  find  a  remarkable  ambiguity  of  such
a  kind,  that  they  are  able  to  take  up,  indeed,  the  nitrogen
requisite  for  their  organic  production  from  ammonia,  the
carbon,  however,  only  from  higher  ternary  combinations.
There  can,  accordingly,  on  both  sides  be  a  dispute  only  of  a
more  or  less;  every  animal  is  in  part  of  vegetable,  every  plant,
in  part,  of  animal  nature ;  where  one  side  clearly  dominates
the  other,  we  rightly  term  the  whole  according  to  that


142  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

side ;  but  where  both  are  in  tolerable  equipoise,  a  one-
sided designation  is  difficult — nay,  even  inadmissible.
We  can  now  also  find  it  no  longer  wonderful,  if  one
and  the  same  being  exhibits  for  one  part  of  its  life  an
eminently  vegetable,  during  another  part  an  eminently
animal  nature.  There  is  no  greater  metamorphosis  at
those  stages  near  the  point  of  indifference,  than  that  of
insects,  frogs,  or  fishes.  Certainly,  whoever  regards
animals  as  animated  organisms,  but  plants  as  merely
empty  soulless  husks,  such  an  one  must  be  brought  to
despair  by  that  fluctuation  of  the  boundary  of  the  two
kingdoms,  and  the  harmless  passing  over  from  the  one  to
the  other.  We  shall,  however,  see  in  these  facts,  in  con-
junction with  the  previous  considerations  of  this  chapter,
only  one  more  proof  that  plant  and  animal  have  much
more  in  common  than  our  age  is  accustomed  to  suppose.

As  concerns  the  external  general  form,  plants  lose  at
lower  stages  their  foliate  type,  and  assume  simply  articu-
lated, or  rotundate,  more  or  less  enclosed  forms  (e.g.,  Con-
fervte,  Fungi).  On  the  other  hand  one  finds  striking
similarities  with  higher  vegetable  forms  among  the  lower
animals.  "  Some  (coral  animals)  grow  as  leaves  rolled  one
over  another,  like  a  cabbage-head,  others  consist  of  deli-
cate, crisp,  irregularly  arranged  leaflets.  The  surface  of
every  leaf  is  covered  by  polyp-blossoms,  by  whose  growth
and  secretion  it  has  arisen.  Not  less  may  we  detect
resemblances  with  an  oak  or  acanthus  twig,  with  fungi,
mosses,  and  lichens "  (Dana  in  Schleiden's  and  Froriep's
Not.,  1847,  June  No.  48).

The  chemical  substances  can  certainly  not  establish  a
difference.  Linnaeus  thought  we  must  regard  several  cal-
careous  marine  plants,  such  as  corallines,  as  animals,  just
because  he  regarded  the  formation  of  chalk  as  a  monopoly
of  the  animal  kingdom.  Silicious  coats  of  mail  are  found
both  in  vegetable  (Diatomacese)  as  in  animal  (Infusoria)
organisms.  The  similarity  of  the  vegetable  and  animal
proteids  is  well  known ;  the  Fungi  especially  are  rich  in


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  143

animal-like  compounds;  in  the  mantle  of  the  Ascidians
and  other  salpae-like  Tunicata  is  found  ligneous  fibre  ;
chlorophyll  (leaf  -  green)  has  been  proved  to  exist  in
Turbellariffi  (rotifers)  and  in  Infusoria.

Often  different  species  of  a  genus  were  reckoned  partly
to  the  vegetable  kingdom,  partly  to  the  animal  kingdom,
e.g.,  the  species  of  Alcyonium  are  all  in  the  main  of  so
similar  a  nature,  that  Linnaeus  certainly  was  not  wrong
in  including  them  in  one  genus.  Nevertheless,  some
of  them  are  the  not  inaptly  named  Animalia  ambigua
(according  to  Pallas),  which  accordingly  are  very  well
ranked  among  the  Amorphozoaria,  e.g.,  Alcyonium  cidaris
(Donati),  cydonium  (Leba),  and  ficiforme  (Sotander,  Ellis,
and  Marsigli).  Others  were  generally  reckoned  to  the
vegetable  world,  thus,  especially,  eg.,  several  specimens  of
the  synonymous  genus  Peziza,  so  rich  in  species.  In  yet
others  not  only  the  animal,  but  even  the  polyp  nature  is
so  decidedly  evinced,  that  they  have  been  separated  from
the  Sponges  and  ranked  among  the  Polypifera  at  the
same  time  with  the  addition  of  a  second  generic  name,  so
that  Lolularia  digitata,  jpalmata,  and  arhorca,  from  the
Alcyonaria  of  the  animal  corals,  are  synonymous  with  Alcy-
onium lobatum,  palmatum,  and  arboreum.  The  primaeval
species  Manon  peziza  is  compounded  of  an  animal  and  a
plant  name.  Here  we  find  only  phenomena  from  other
departments  of  the  animal  kingdom  again,  where,  e.g.,
some  rotifers  are  reckoned  to  the  worms,  others  to  the
infusoria,  a  species  Cercaria  to  the  worms,  other  species
of  the  same  genus  to  the  spermatozoids  (?)

The  small  vesicles  of  which  the  red-colouring  matter
of  snow  consists  (Protococcus  nivalis),  were  regarded  by
Agardb,  Decandolle,  Hooker,  linger,  Martin,  Harvey,
Ehrenberg,  as  Algae  ;  the  latter  sowed  them  even  on  fresh
snow  and  observed  their  propagation  ;  the  tiny  young
plants  bore  a  finely-grained,  lobed  receptacle  and  rootlets,
but  no  trace  of  animal  character.  Voigt  and  Meyen
subsequently  found,  that  the red- colouring  matter  pre-


144  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sented  rather  the  form  and  movement  of  infusoria,  and
Shuttleworth  finally  distinguished  therein  partly  Algae,
partly  Infusoria.  These  contradictions  are  cleared  up  by
Flotow's  careful  observations  on  a  quite  allied  little  plant
or  animal  (Hcematococcus  pluvialis)  living  in  rain-water.
This  showed  at  first  merely  a  vegetable  nature,  was  con-
verted however  in  infusions  under  suitable  circumstances
by  different  intermediate  steps  clearly  traceable,  into  an
infusory  animalcule  (Astasia pluvialis)  with  proboscidiform,
sometimes  even  furcate  feelers  and  all  the  signs  of  inde-
pendent movement.  Shuttleworth's  Astasia  nivalis  showed
itself  related  in  red  snow.  Kutzing  ("  On  the  Metamor-
phosis of  Infusoria  into  the  lower  forms  of  Algae,  Nord-
hausen  1844")  observed,  that  the  infusorium  Chlamido-
monas  pulvisculus  changed  many  times,  e.g.,  into  a  decided
species  of  Algae,  Stygeolconimn,  stellare,  and  into  other
formations  of  an  algous  character,  which  certainly  in
form  partially  resembled  sedentary  forms  of  infusoria
(Tetraspora  lubrica  or gelatinosa,Palmella  botryoides,  species
of  Protococcus  and  Gyges).  The  same  asserts  the  conversion
of  the  infusorium  Eiichelys  pulvisculus  into  a  Protococcus
and  finally  into  an  Oscillatoria.  In  a  whole  series  of  algae
(Zoospermae)  and  yet  other  lower  plants  (Fungi,  Star-jelly),
the  germinal  granules,  spores  or  sporidia  have  an  infuso-
rian-like  form,  and  move  by  means  of  cilia  or  whip-
shaped  organs,  and  there  are  even  certain  forms  among
them,  which  Ehrenberg  recognised  as  infusoria.  An  alto-
gether similar  state  of  things  is  observed  in  the  embryos
of  many  polyps  and  Medusa?,  they  too  go  through  a
period,  in  which  by  means  of  cilia  they  produce  a  simul-
taneous rotatory  and  progressive  movement,  before  they
settle  themselves  for  further  evolution,  they  have  also  the
form  of  infusoria  and  no  mouth.  Unger  ("  The  Plant  in
the  Moment  of  becoming  Animal ")  observed  of  the
sporidia  of  a  small  Alga  [Vauchcria  clavata,  or  Ectosperma
clavata),  that,  when  liberated  from  the  mother  cell,  they  at
first  raise  themselves  in  the  water  and  revolve  several


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  145

times  in  quick  movement  similar  to  an  infusorium,  that
then  moments  of  repose  arbitrarily  alternate  "with  move-
ment, and  that  they  carefully  avoid  all  obstacles  in  the
most  surprising  manner,  wind  themselves  extremely
cleverly  through  the  threads  of  the  Vaucheria,  and  always
avoid  each  other  in  such  a  way  that  two  never  collide.

The emission of mucilaginous filaments indistinctly
formed  and again coalescing,  which  is  characteristic  of
many  kinds  of  inferior  animals,  is  also  found  in  certain
plants  (Myxomycetes). — A  small  thread-like  species  of  Algoe
exhibits,  as  long  as  it  actively  vegetates,  a  threefold  move-
ment— an  alternating  slight  curvature  of  the  anterior  fila-
ment, a  half-pendulous,  self-elastic,  to-and-fro  bending  of
the  anterior  half,  and  a  gradual  advance. "These  move-
ments have  something  strange,  I  might  say  uncanny,  about
them"  (Schleiden,  Grundziige,  ii.  549). The  Oscillatorhe
and  the  Zoospores  of  several  kinds  of  alga?  {e.g.,  Vaucheria
scssilis)  move  just  like  polyps  to  the  illuminated  part  of
the  vessel ;  other  Zoospores  (e.g.,  of Ulothrix  speciosa)  flee
from  the  same,  yet  others  (those  of  the  families  of  Ste-
phanosatcra)  avoid  both  intense  illumination  and  darkness,
and collect at semi-dark places. — 1'andorine, an Alga
living  in fresh-water  pools, affords an example of the
family  of  the  Volvocinea3 ;  it  consists  of  sixteen  pyramidal
cells,  which,  with  their  bases  turned  outwards,  form  by  their
elu.se  attachment  to  one  another  an  ovate  collective  body.
Every  cell  has  at  its  base  a  colourless  spot  on  which  rest
several  cilia,  by  means  of  which  the  organism  swims  about,
brum  this  mobility  its  animal  nature  was  for  a  long  time
inferred,  and  Ehrenberg  called  the  red  pigment  granule
found  beside  each  ciliated  part,  an  eye.

AVe  see  that  all  the  marks  which  have  been  set  up
on  different  sides  as  decisive  do  not  hold,  such  as  partial
or  total  locomotion,  spontaneous  movement,  morphological
and  chemical  differences,  mouth  and  stomach.  As  con-
cerns the  oral  apeiture,  it  is  in  the  sea-blubber  {Rhizos-
toma  Curicri),  a  Medusa  of  the  Mediterranean  one  to  two

VOL.  J  I.  K


146  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

feet  in  diameter,  replaced  by  numerous  openings  and
canals  in  its  eight  arms ;  further,  a  mouth  is  entirely
wanting  in  many  intestinal  worms,  Cercariao,  infusoria,
and  embryos ;  the  Gregarinse,  which  are  found  in  abund-
ance as  parasites  in  the  digestive  canals  of  insects  and
other  animals,  have  not  only  no  oral  aperture,  but  also  no
cilia — no  visible  organs  at  all ;  they  are  simply  cells  with
visible  nuclei.  To  speak  of  a  stomach  where  the  mouth
is  wanting  is  without  meaning,  for  then  we  may  call  the
interior  of  every  cell  its  stomach.

These  statements  may  suffice  to  justify  the  previous
general  remarks. — What  is  now  contributed  by  this  exa-
mination to  the  solution  of  the  question regarding  the
consciousness  of  plants  is  as  follows : — We  have  seen  that
plant  and  animal  have  something  distinct,  somewhat  in
common,  and  that  we  may  fairly  well  collect  the  total  of
the  common  characters,  if  in  both  kingdoms  we  descend
so  far  down  the  scale  of  organisation,  until  we  come  to
those  structures  where  the  differences  disappear,  and  essen-
tially only  the  common  element  remains. If  we  now  find
that  in  this  common  element  sensation  and  consciousness  is
still  included,  that  thus  the  lowest  vegetable  organisms
possess  sensation  and  consciousness,  we  shall  look  round
for  the  material  conditions  to  which  here  sensation  and
consciousness  appear  to  be  linked ;  and  supposing  these
material  conditions  are  fulfilled  in  higher  plants  in  the
same  or  still  higher  degree,  we  shall  consider  ourselves
warranted  in  ascribing  also  to  the  higher  plants  a  similar,
but  higher,  measure  of  sensation  and  consciousness  to  that
which  we  may  suppose  to  exist  in  those  lower  ones. Since
we  do  not  directly  know  how  the  plant  feels,  but  only  how
we  ourselves  feel,  we  descend  the  animal  scale  guided  by
analogy,  turn  round again at  the  indifference- point  of
animal  and  plant,  which  forms  the  connecting  link  between
the  two  kingdoms,  and  likewise  under  the  guidance  of
analogy  ascend  the  scale  of  plants.

Further,  we  call  to  mind  the  result  of  the  conclusion  of


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  147

the  first  introductory  chapter  and  of  C.  Chap,  iii.,  accord-
ing to  which  each  sensation  excited  by  material  movement,
as  soon  as  it  at  all  arises,  also  arises  consciously,  whilst  if
the  material  movement  lies  below  the  threshold  of  stimu-
lation, not  only  no  conscious,  but  altogether  no  sensation
at  all  comes  to  pass.  So  far  then  as  we  can  trace  signs  of
a  sensation  excited  by  material  stimuli,  so  far  shall  we  also
be  obliged  to  regard  sensation  as  conscious,  and  thus  must
allow  the  existence  of  a  consciousness,  no  matter  how
barren  its  content  may  be.

We  must  here  recur  once  more  to  the  already  frequently
repelled  prejudice  (comp,  A.  Chap.  vii.  1.  a.,  vol.  i.  pp.  173,
174),  according  to  which  nerves  are  the  conditio  sine  qua  non
of  sensation.  That  on  this  globe,  and  up  to  this  time,  they
are  the  form  of  matter  most  suited  to  the  production  of
sensation  is  certainly  not  to  be  doubted.  It  by  no  means,
however,  follows  from  that  that  they  are  the  sole  form;
on  the  contrary,  a  multitude  of  facts  prove  that  other
forms  may  be  substituted  for  them.  The  tactile  papilhe
in  the  epidermis  are  found  at  several  parts  of  the  body  at
tolerably  wide  intervals  (as  the  sizes  of  the  ellipses  prove,
within  which  two  contacts  are  felt  as  one).  Nevertheless
every  spot  of  the  skin  is  alike  sensitive,  even  to  thermal
and  chemical  stimuli,  where  the  mere  propagation  of
mechanical  pressure  or  conduction  of  heat  is  excluded.
Lurdach  states  that  even  nerveless  parts  of  the  human
body  may  become  sensitive  as  soon  as,  with  increased
blood-pressure  and  loosening  of  the  tissue,  their  vitality
is  increased ;  so  that,  e.g.,  the  new  flesh  formed  in  heal-
ing wounds  may  be  highly  sensitive  without  any  nerves,
and  an  inflammation  of  the  nerveless  cartilage  and
kidneys  may  be  even  much  more  painful  than  an  inflam-
mation of  the  nerves  themselves.  Wundt  shows  (Beitrage,
pp.  392-395)  that  these  pains  are  always  accompanied
by  specific  organic  sensations.  Here  certainly  the  pain
of  which  the  man  is  conscious  is  localised  only  in  the
brain, but the nerve-like function of those parts is


1 43  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

thereby  proved,  i.e.,  their  capacity  to  propagate  currents
of  molecular  vibrations  which  are  similar  to  those  in
nerves.  Where,  however,  forms  of  vibration  exist  simi-
lar to  those  of  the  nerves,  they  will  also  excite  sensations
which  are  similar  to  those  excited  by  nerves,  supposing
that  they  do  not  lie  beneath  the  threshold  of  stimula-
tion. The  latter  is  in  no  case  to  be  assumed,  since
the  part  reaching  the  brain  after  so  great  a  resistance
causes  still  so  many  violent  pains.  Further,  we  have
often  seen  the  mind  act  on  the  body  without  nerves ;  e.g.,
in  the  embryonic  states  before  elaboration  of  the  nerves,
in  the  action  of  the  nerves  beyond  their  own  limits  in
muscles,  secreting  glands,  everywhere  where  the  mass  of
the  organs  concerned  must  themselves  undertake  the  last
portion  of  the  conduction,  in  the  sudden  turning  grey  of
the  hair  after  emotion,  &c.  But  now,  if  the  mind  can  act
upon  the  body  even  without  or  beyond  the  nerves,  yet  in
the  thoroughgoing  reciprocal  action  of  the  relation  of  body
and  mind,  the  body  also,  without  or  beyond  the  nerves,
can  act  upon  the  mind,  i.e.,  evoke  sensation.

Then  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  lowest  animals  (polyps,
infusoria,  several  intestinal  worms)  have  no  nerves,  for
nerves  and  muscles  go  everywhere  hand  in  hand ;  and
according  to  Dnjardin  and  Ecker  they  have  no  muscles  at
all :  in  place  of  muscular  fibrine  and  nerve  matter,  only
the  fibroine  of  Mulder  is  found  in  them.  This  substance
comports  itself  pretty  much  as  the  neoplasm  of  wounds,
and  is  therefore  at  the  present  time  generally  called  pro-
toplasm. It  is  becoming  continually  clearer  that  the
proper  support  of  life  is  in  every  cell  its  protoplasm,  and
that  the  protoplasm  of  the  cells  of  the  grey  matter  of  the
brain,  mediating  the  highest  functions  of  thought,  is  alto-
gether not  different  in  type,  but  only  in  degree,  from  the  pro-
toplasm of  the  lowest  organisms.  This  nitrogenous,  albu-
minous substance,  called  protoplasm,  is  thus  the  special
substance  in  which  the  organic  and  motor  acts  of  will
of  the  animal  mind  operate  in  conformity  with  its  ends ;


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  149

in  it  alone  can  we  therefore  look  for  that  constitution  of
organic  matter,  which  is  adapted  and  able  to  allow  material
effects  to  directly  influence  the  mind.

Add  to  that  the  relatively  high  psychical  manifestations
of  these  animals  ;  for  the  fresh-water  polyp  distinguishes,
even  at  the  distance  of  a  few  lines,  a  living  infusorium,
a  vegetable,  a  dead  and  an  inorganic  object.  Of  all  these
he  only  draws  to  himself  the  first  mentioned  by  a  whirl-
pool created  by  his  arms,  whilst  he  does  not  trouble  about
the  others ;  or  if  he  by  chance  grasps  one  of  them,  he
immediately  lets  it  go  again.  The  polyp  must  thus,  in-
deed, have  different  perceptions  of  these  different  things,
and  these  can  only  be  given  as  sensations  above  the  thres-
hold, i.e.,  as  conscious  sensations.  Further,  it  moves  out
of  the  shadow  towards  the  part  of  the  vessel  illuminated
by  the  sun,  and  often  two  polyps  struggle  over  their  prey.
The  latter  is  only  possible  if  the  polyp  possesses  the  con-
sciousness that  the  other  will  deprive  him  of  his  booty;
If,  then,  a  nerveless  animal  displays  such  high  manifesta-
tions of  consciousness,  we  should  not  be  surprised  to  find
manifestations  of  consciousness  at  the  next  lower  grade
of  the  infusoria,  and  its  many  lower  plants  at  the  same
level.  This, however,  one  would  hardly  venture  to  maintain,
that  with  the  penultimate  animal  grade  sensation  and  con-
sciousness ceases;  for  why  precisely  at  the  penultimate,
which  yet  exhibits  so  rich  a  content  of  consciousness  that
indefinitely  many  poorer  stages  can  be  imagined  before  com-
plete disappearance,  to  which  nothing  in  the  world  would
correspond  except  just  those  infusoria  and  simple  plants  ?
In  fact,  however,  a  more  exact  observation  of  the  lowest
animal  genera  of  all  renders  evident  quite  distinct  percep-
tions, as  follows  from  the  appropriate  use  of  the  given  (per-
ceived) circumstances  for  the  vital  purposes  of  the  animal.
I  need  only  mention  the  manifestly  voluntary  movements
of  A  rnll't  vvjf/aris  by  means  of  appropriately  developed
air-bubbles  (in  vol.  i.  pp.  93-95).

What  makes  the  protoplasm  of  nerves  so  well  adapted


ISO  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

both  for  mediating  the  execution  of  acts  of  will  and  for  the
production  of  sensations  is  the  semi-fluid  consistency  of  the
whole  mass,  which  furthers  the  displacement  and  rotation
of  the  molecules,  and  the  polar  nature  of  the  individual
molecule,  which  has  a  high  degree  of  chemical  organisa-
tion of  matter  for  its  condition.  The  former  is  equally
well  shown  by  the  protoplasm  of  lower  animals  and
plants.  In  every  cell  there  is  to  be  made  out  at  least  a
fluid  content  and  a  solid  wall,  commonly  also  a  nucleus ;
both  the  nucleus,  or  at  any  rate  its  environment,  as  well
as  the  boundary  of  wall  and  content,  frequently,  however,
the  whole  content  of  the  cell,  exhibit  this  semi-fluid  con-
sistency of  high  chemical  organisation,  from  which  physical
and  chemical  elements  one  may  conclude  with  probability
to  a  polar  constitution  of  the  molecules,  if  also  in  a  less
degree  than  in  nerves,  and  of  the  central  ganglion  cells,
which  likewise  consist  of  nucleus,  wall,  and  content,  espe-
cially if  one  takes  note  of  the  phenomena  of  contraction  of
all  animal  and  vegetable  protoplasm  after  electrical  stimula-
tion. These  conditions,  however,  recur  in  all  properly  living
parts  of  higher  plants,  probably  even  in  heightened  forms,
since  the  chemical  organisation  of  matter  manifestly  in-
creases in  higher  organisms,  but  in  no  case  sinks.  But
quite  specially  vegetable  protoplasm,  which,  as  we  have
seen,  brings  to  pass  the  quick  reflex  movements  of  the
higher  plants,  shows  apparently  a  perfect  identity  with
the  protoplasm  of  the  Protista  and  lowest  animals,  as  is
proved  by  the  same  behaviour  with  respect  to  the  most
different  stimuli  and  narcotics.  This  protoplasm  has,
however,  also  in  higher  animals  a  very  wide  distribution  ;
and  if  attention  was  at  first  turned  to  its  vital  action  by
those  examples,  where  its  movements  achieve  results  which
become  visible  and  startling  even  to  the  naked  eye.  at  the
present  moment  vegetable  physiology  already  studies  with
zeal  the  movements  of  protoplasm  going  on  within  the
cells  on  the  irritation  of  light,  heat,  and  other  stimuli,
which  manifestly  stand  in  the  closest  relation  to  the  life


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  151

and  propagation  of  the  cells.1  There  is  thus  quite  certainly
no  ground  for  the  assertion  that  the  sensation  and  the
consciousness  of  higher  plants  stand  below  that  of  the
lowest  plants  and  animals ;  on  the  contrary,  we  may  pre-
sume that,  although  the  total  and  partial  mobility  of  plants
of  higher  forms  decreases  in  conformity  with  their  vital
conditions,  the  sensations,  at  least  in  certain  privileged
parts,  rank  above  that  of  the  lower  plants.

The  lower  we  descend  in  the  animal  scale,  the  more
does  the  importance  of  the  sensations  related  to  diges-
tion and  the  genital  region  increase  in  comparison  with
those  arising  from  outer  stimuli.  In  plants  where  the
surface  is  more  and  more  secluded  from  the  insignificant
external  stimuli,  this  augmentation  will  go  still  further.
For  the  plant,  the  outer  world,  except  light  and  the
chemical  constitution  of  the  atmosphere,  is  continually
losing  all  interest,  and  we  only  owe  to  special  cases  the
knowledge  that  also  higher  plants  take  notice  of  certain
events  which  obtain  for  them  importance,  e.g.,  the  plants
which  capture  insects,  of  stimuli  which  affect  the  leaves,
the  climbers  of  supports,  &c.

xVfter  the  foregoing  it  will  no  longer  surprise  us  if  we
attribute  to  plants  a  sensation  (and  of  course  conscious
sensation)  of  the  stimuli  on  which  they,  whether  reflec-
torially or instinctively, react ; if we assert that  the


1  As  in  lower  animals  (e.g.,  Amne-  better  of  hibernation. As  certain

bse), so also in the protoplasm of  infusoria, after a  period of active

living  vegetable  cells, there  are  to  vitality,  enter  upon  a  period  of  in-

be  distinguished  a  state  of  activity  crustation,  so  also  do  many  vegetable

and  another  of  perfect  rest,  which  cells  that  at  maturity  surround  them-

may alternate with one another  selves  with  a  thicker  cell- wall,  which

even  several  times. Although  both  cell -wall may even remain after

states  uniformly  belong  to  life,  yet  their death (e.g., ligneous cells),

only  in  the former does there  ap-  The acme of sensibility in every

pear to be present a distinct sen-  vegetable cell one must therefore

nihility,  whereas  there  is  in  the  latter  oidy seek in a particular, some-

a  lowering  of  irritability,  which  re-  times  perhaps  very  short,  epoch  of

Kcmbles tlie amesthesia of proto-  their life, which forms the cuhni-

plasm brought about by narcotic  nating  point  of  their  vital activity,

vapours, and perhaps forms an  and accordingly for the  most  part

analogue of animal sleep, or still  falls  into  their  youthful  period.


152  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Oscillatoria  as  well  as  the  polyp  feels  light  if  it  wanders
towards  the  illuminated  part  of  its  vessel,  and  that  just
in  the  same  way  the  vine-leaf  feels  the  light,  to  which  it
endeavours  by  all  means  to  turn  its  right  side,  and  every
liower  feels  the  light,  to  which  it  on  expanding  turns  its
tiny  head.  We  maintain  that  the  leaf  of  the  Dioncca  and  of
the  Mimosa  pv.dica  feds  the  struggling  of  the  insect  before
it  reacts  on  this  sensation  by  folding  up  ;  for  it  lies  indeed
in  the  notion  of  reflex  action,  as  a  psychical  reaction,  that
a  psychical  perception  must  precede  the  same.  This  is,
however,  conscious  sensation.  We  further  maintain  that
the  plant  has  a  sensation  of  the  physical  events  of  the
organisation  which  answer  to  animal  digestion  and  of
sexual  life ;  that  the  latter  especially  takes  place  in  parts
where  the  higher  vitality  of  vegetable  existence  is  con-
centrated, where  the  plastic  activity  during  flowering
time  effects  no  longer  compounding,  but  decompounding
chemical  processes  (as  the  inhaling  of  oxygen  and  exhal-
ing of  carbonic  acid  of  the  flowers  proves) ;  whence  it  fol-
lows that  here  the  formative  forces  have  withdrawn  from
material  construction  into  a  certain  animal-like  internali-
sation,  and  become  disposable  for  more  receptive  processes.
That  the  content  of  this  consciousness  must  always  be
still  very  poor,  much  poorer,  e.g.,  than  that  of  the  wretch-
edest  worm,  hardly  admits  of  doubt ;  for  whence  should
wealth  and  definiteness  come,  such  as  is  afforded  the
animals  through  the  lowest  sense-organs  ?

We  have  thus,  in  fact,  found  consciousness  in  the  plant.
But  now  how  far  can  a  UNITY  of  consciousness  exist  in
the  plant  ? — We  have  seen  that  the  unity  of  the  con-
sciousness of  two  ideas  or  sensations  depends  on  the  pos-
sibility of  comparison,  and  this  on  the  presence  of  a  suffi-
cient communication  between  the  two  places  producing
sensation.  The  question  then  is  this  :  Does  such  a  com-
munication exist  in  the  plant  ?  Already  in  the  animal
the  converse  between  different  nerve-centres,  although
mediated by nerve-cords, was exceedingly deficient


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  153

and  the  unity  of  consciousness  in  fact  only  extant  for
very  energetic  excitements.  The  velocity  of  propaga-
tion of  the  nerve-current  in  man,  according  to  Helmholtz,
amounts  to  about  a  hundred  feet  in  a  second  ;  that  in  the
Mimosa  pudica,  as  before  mentioned,  only  to  a  few  milli-
meters. One  can  draw  from  these  velocities  a  tolerable
conclusion  as  to  the  resistances  to  conduction,  and  accord-
ingly to  the  disturbances  and  changes  of  the  propagated
results.  It  is  possible  that  the  spiral  vessels  serve  such
purposes  of  communication,  but  it  is  not  proven.  At  all
events,  with  regard  to  the  unity  of  consciousness  of  two
neighbouring  anthers,  the  connection  must  be  infinitely
weaker  than  with  that  of  brain  and  ganglia  in  man.  A
sufficiently  faithful  and  strong  conduction  will  always
only  be  able  to  exist  between  the  parts  lying  quite  near  to
one  another.  I  would  not  affirm  that  one  is  at  liberty  to
speak  of  the  indivisible  consciousness  of  a  flower, — hardly
perhaps  of  that  of  a  stamen.  The  plant  does  not,  how-
ever, need  such  a  unity  of  consciousness  as  the  animal ;  it
needs  to  institute  no  comparisons,  and  does  not  need  to
reflect  on  its  actions.  It  needs  only  surrender  itself  to  the
single  sensations,  and  let  the  same  serve  as  motives  for
the  incursions  of  the  Unconscious.  Then  have  these
fulfilled  their  purpose  ;  and  this  is  accomplished  just  as
well  by  sensations  with  separate  consciousness  as  by  those
with  one  indivisible  consciousness.


( 154 )


V.

MATTER  AS WILL AND IDEA.

Physical  science  is  concerned  with  three  inter-connected
objects  :  laws,  forces,  and  matter.  This  division  is  entirely
deserving  of  approval,  for  it  summarily  embraces  different
groups  of  phenomena  under  single  points  of  view  and
facilitates  expression.  The  question  now  is,  whether  these
three  are  really  of  different  nature ;  or  whether,  strictly
speaking,  they  are  only  one,  which,  looked  at  merely  from
different  points  of  view,  appears  in  three  different  modes  ?
Of  the  laics  this  may  well  be  allowed  without  discussion,
for  it  is  obvious  that  they  are  not  existences  hovering  in
the  air,  but  mere  abstractions  of  forces  and  substances.
Only  because  this  force  and  this  matter  are  so  and  so,  only
on  that  account  do  they  act  in  a  particular  manner ;  and
as  often  as  we  meet  with  sucli  a  force,  we  must  find  it
acting  in  just  such  a  way.  This  constancy  of  the  so-
acting,  however,  it  is  which  we  call  Law.  This  relation
is  also  pretty  generally  acknowledged,  and  we  hear,  in
fact,  materialists  always  speak  of  force  and  matter  as
their  principia,  as  something  which  of  course  includes
laws.  "We  have  in  C.  Chap.  ii.  defended  Materialism,
so  far  as  it  maintains  organised  matter  to  be  the  conditio
sine  qua  non  of  conscious  mental  activity;  we  have  in  the
preceding  inquiries  established  an  unconscious  psychical
principle  as  superior  to  matter,  and  thereby  already  shown
the  one-sidedness  of  that  Materialism  which  knows  no
other  than  material  principles.  We  have  now  arrived  at
tiie  point  where  we  must  occupy  ourselves  with that,


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  155

winch  this  one-sided  Materialism  sets  up  as  exclusive
principles  of  all  existence,  i.e.,  as  philosophical  first  prin-
ciples, force  and  matter}

I  should  consider  it  useless  to  enter  here  into  a  dialectical
discussion  of  these  conceptions ;  one  would  thereby  neither
be  sure  of  actually  treating  of  precisely  the  same  notion
as  Materialism,  nor  would  a  materialist  ever  be  induced
to  change  his  opinion  by  such  a  method.  I  hold  the  deep-
ening of  the  natural  scientific  investigation  of  matter  to  be
the  only  suitable  course.  It  is  true  the  future  may  yet
bring  inestimable  light  in  this  direction  which  we  have
not  hitherto  suspected,  yet  I  believe  that  the  outlines  of
the  only  possible  mode  of  apprehending  Matter  are  not  only
rendered  so  certain  by  the  most  recent  results  of  physics
and  chemistry  that  no  time  will  ever  shake  them,  but  that
they  offer  also  perfectly  satisfactory  resting-places  for
penetrating  into  the  last  depths  of  this  mystery. If  this


1  As  we  shall  see  that  force  is
only  a  pseudo-materialistic,  but  in
fact  a  spiritualistic  principle,  the
consequential  Materialism,  which,
however,  has  been  nowhere  advo-
cated  in  this  form,  should  before
all  things  deny  force,  i.e.,  regard
Motion  as  an  ultimate,  requiring
no  explanation,  as  an  eternal  anel
original  quality  of  matter.  The
circumstance  that  many  derivative
forces  (as  magnetic  attraction  or  re-
pulsion between  wires  traversed  by
galvanic  currents)  are,  in  fact,  only
results  of  peculiar  combinations  of
movement,  might  seduce  us  to  go
farther  on  this  road,  and  to  try,
whether  also  the  elementary  forces
of  the  general  attraction  of  masses
(gravitation)  and  of  repulsion  in
ether  could  be  explained  as  results
of  the  forms  of  movement.  For  this
purpose  the  ether  is  first  of  all
denied,  and  a  filling  of  space  with
very  rarefied  gases  supposed;  then
repulsion  is  regarded  as  a  result  of
heat-vibrations,  and  finally  gravita-
tion j-  sought  to  be  explained  either
according  to  the  analogy  of  the  attrac-


tion of  galvanic  currents  as  a  bye-
product  of  transverse  (heat  or  other)
vibrations,  or  as  a  phenomenon  result-
ing from  the  repulsion  of  peripheral
strata.  (In  both  cases,  certainly,
gravitation  would  not  be  propor-
tional to  the  mass  of  a  body,  but
to  its  plane  of  intersection  at  right
angles  to  the  direction  of  gravita-
tion.) The  whole  theory  is  still  too
much  in  an  embryonic  condition  to
admit  of  criticism.  Only  this  much
stands  firm,  that  matter,  with  all  its
contradictions,  to  be  pointed  out
farther  on,  is  here  indispensable,
since  possibly  force,  but  not  motion
itself,  may  be  the  mobile,  and  that
accordingly  this  theory  stops  at
tiro  incomprehensible  principles,
matter  and  motion  ;  whilst  we  get
along  with  force  alone,  which  is
free  from  the  contradictions  of
matter,  and  is  itself  again  not  an
incomprehensible  ultimate,  but  re-
solvable into  the  spiritual  principles
will  and  idea  ;  thus  in  this  manner
closely  joins  the  material  world
with  the  spiritual  as  consubstan-
tial.


156  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

has  not  been  the  case  hitherto,  or  at  least  not  yet  on  the
part  of  physical  science,  the  reason  simply  is  that  physical
science  has  at  bottom  always  only  so  far  an  interest  in
hypotheses  as  the  latter  either  afford  it  guidance  to  new
experiments,  or  as  they  are  indispensable  for  the  applica-
tion of  the  calculus :  in  what  goes  beyond  that  it  sees
no  practical  value,  and  therefore  is  indifferent  to  it.  We
shall  thus  have  first  to  recapitulate  what  physical  science
knows  of  the  constitution  of  matter,  and  the  forces  inher-
ing therein,  and  then  see  whether  these  results  are  capable
of  being  fathomed  in  a  simple  and  unforced  way.

If  we  imagine  a  chemically  homogeneous  body,  e.g.,
chalk,  continuously  divided,  we  arrive  at  parts  of  a  certain
size  which  cannot  be  further  divided  if  they  arc  to  remain
chalk;  if  we  succeed  in  splitting  them  up,  we  get  as
separate  portions  one  part  carbonic  acid  and  one  part
lime.  These  smallest  parts  of  a  body  are  called  molecules.1
These  act  in  different  directions  with  different  force,  be-
cause they  have  in  general  the  crystalline  ground-form  of
the  particular  chemical  substance,  or  such  an  one  from
which  this  can  be  easily  formed.  The  molecules  of  different
substances  are  thus  distinguished  by  different  forms,  also,
moreover,  by  different  weight  (molecular  weight) ;  on  the
other  hand,  in  their  grouping  into  bodies  in  the  gaseous
state  they  fill  equal  spaces  with  equal  temperature.  If
two  bodies  of  different  kinds  come  together,  the  forces  of
the  molecules  differently  active  in  different  directions,
mutually  disturb one another at the  borders of both

1  Not  to  be  confused  with  atoms,  in  reference  to  the  present  chapter,

as is done  by  the  older  physicists,  my  essay,  "Dynamism  and  Atomism

Philosophical  readers who  come  to  (Kant, Ulrici, Fechner)," in the

this  chapter  with  a  certain  prejudice  Ges. Phil. Ablandh., No. vii. — In

against  the  physical  atomic  theory,  this  place  only  this  much  need  be

I  refer  to  Fechner's memoir  "  On  remarked by way of preliminary,

the Physical and Philosophical  that  the  splitting  up  into  atoms  in

Atomic Theory" (Leipzig, 1S55),  a  metaphysical  sense  represents  no-

especially pp. 18-63 anc^  129-141,  thing  else  than  the  special  form  in

although since then the physical  which,  in  the  department  of  matter,

atomic  theory  has  been  very  much  the  general philosophical principle

further developed  by the working  of  Individuation  obtains  its  realisa-

out  of  the  Theory  of  Heat. Comp.,  tion.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  157

bodies  in  their  conditions  of  equilibrium,  which  disturb-
ances are  presented  as  electrical  excitement,  or  are  pro-
pagated as  galvanic  vibrations;  if  the  disturbance  is  suffi-
ciently strong,  a  permanent  rearrangement  and  chemical
union  of  the  different  molecules  into  more  compound  mole-
cules takes  place.  The  various  chemical  compounds  are
distinguished  by  the  number  and  position  of  the  combin-
ing molecules.  Those  molecules  which  we  have  not  as
yet  succeeded  in  decomposing  we  call  chemically  simple,
although  we  know  with  tolerable  certainty  of  several  that
they  are  compound  {e.g.,  iodine,  bromine,  chlorine  are  pos-
sibly combinations  of  o.xygen,  as  the  change  of  their  spectra
at  very  high  temperatures  appears  to  indicate ;  the  metals
perhaps  are  all  combinations  of  hydrogen),  so  that  possibly
the  number  of  chemical  elements  may  be  very  much
simplified.  Moreover,  modern  chemistry  distinguishes  the
elementary  molecules  according  to  their  behaviour  in
chemical  combinations  into  univalent  and  multivalent
molecules,  and  conceives  the  latter  as  compounds  of  several
equivalent  parts,  each  of  which  is  chemically  equivalent
to  a  univalent  molecule.  It  calls  these  parts  atoms,  and
their  relative  weights  atomic  weights.  But  already  this
difference  of  weight  proves  that  even  these  chemical  atoms
can  just  as  little  be  the  ultimate  elements  of  matter  as  the
chemical  molecules  in  their  manifold  morphological  funda-
mental forms.  The  simple  numerical  relations  of  the  atomic
weights  permit  us  to  conclude  that  all  these  parts  of  matter
are  in  the  last  resort  only  different  dispositions  of  a  varied
number  of  homogeneous  primitive  elements  or  primitive
atoms,  as  only  in  this  way  does  the  agreement  of  the  atomic
weights  with  the  specific  heat  and  that  of  the  molecular
weight  with  the  specific  weight  of  gases  appear  intelli-
gible. These  homogeneous  primitive  atoms,  which  I  shall
immediately  call  without  ceremony  atomic  bodies,  must
act  in  all  directions  with  equal  force,  and  can  thus,  (/'they
are  to  be  conceived  as  material,  only  be  imagined  spherical.
Besides  these  body-atoms  there  are  ether-atoms,  which


158  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

are  distributed  "both  in  every  body  between  the  corporeal
molecules  and  also  between  the  heavenly  bodies,  and
which  are  perceived  by  their  property  of  radiating  heat.
(A  certain  part  of  the  thermal  scale  is,  owing  to  the
structure  of  our  eyes,  only  perceived  by  us  as  light.)
The  ethereal  atoms  it  is  which,  as  environing  envelopes  of
the  corporeal  molecules,  produce  electrical  phenomena,  and
by  revolution  of  the  corporeal  molecules  (Ampere's  mole-
cular current)  magnetic  phenomena;  further,  it  is  these
which,  in  the  mutual  rebound  of  the  molecule  of  a  gas,  cause
the  elastic  repulsion ;  in  short,  they  are  a  hypothesis  which
is  nowhere  to  be  dispensed  with  when  manifestations  of
energy  are  to  be  explained,  in  which,  besides  attraction
according  to  the  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation,  repellent
forces  also  play  a  part.

Bodies  and  corporeal  atoms  attract  one  another,  and
that  too  in  the  inverse  square  of  their  distance  ;  i.e.,  the
force  of  a  corporeal  atom,  in  all  directions  of  space  taken
together,  remains  equal  at  all  distances.

Ether  and  ethereal  atoms  repel  one  another,  and  that
too  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  a  higher  than  the  second  power
of  the  distance,  the  third  at  least;  i.e.,  the  force  of  an
ethereal  atom,  in  ail  directions  of  space  taken  together,
increases  at  least  inversely  as  the  distance.1  All  body-
atoms  would  converge  to  a  point  if  the  environing  ether-
atoms  did  not  form,  as  it  were,  envelopes  round  every
material  molecule,  preventing  actual  contact.  Two  ether-
atoms  can  never  collide,  because  their  repulsion  at  infinitely
small  distances  becomes  infinitely  great.  Two  body-atoms,
however,  could  never  separate  again,  supposing  they  once
touched,  because  then  their  attraction  would  be  infinitely
great. Therefore  the corporeal  molecules  must  also  be

1  According  to  Briot  (Lehrb. d.  from  the  laws  of  the  propagation  of

mechan.  Warmetheorie.  p.  27 1),  the  light  in  doubly-refracting  media,  as

doubtful  power  of  the  distance  must  from the absence  of dispersion in

be  even  higher  than  the  fourth,  if  empty  space,  that  it  is  probably  the

the  transversal  light- vibrations  are  sixth  power  of  the  distance  to  which

to  propagate  themselves  in  the  me-  the  repulsion  of  the  ethereal  atoms

dium  of  the  ether  ;  and it follows  is  inversely  proportional.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  159

kept  asunder  within  the  chemical  combinations  by  ether-
atoms,  because  they  can  again  be  separated  by  ethereal
vibrations  (heat,  electricity).

Body  and  ether  atoms  probably  repel  one  another  at
molecular  distances.  It  used  to  be  assumed  that  they
attracted  one  another  at  the  ordinary  molecular  distances,
and  that  this  attraction  was  only  converted  into  repulsion
in  the  most  immediate  vicinity ;  this  supposition  is  also
still  the  common  one  in  the  elementary  manuals.  Up  to
a  certain  point,  the  phenomena  are  equally  well  explained
by  either  of  the  hypotheses ;  but  since,  for  the  sake  of  cal-
culation, a  decision  must  be  made  in  favour  of  one,  attrac-
tion was  accidentally  chosen.  Wiener  has  shown  (comp.
Poggendorffs  "Amalen,"  vol.  cxviii.  p.  79,  and  Wiener,
"  L>ie  Grundziige  der  Weltordnung,"  first  book)  that  the
hypothesis  of  repulsion  offers  essential  advantages  for  the
explanation  of  the  fluid  state  of  aggregation,  and  that  this
generally  agrees  better  with  our  other  physical  views.
There  is,  according  to  this  supposition,  not  as  in  Redten-
bacher's  "  System  of  Dynamids,"  a  thick  envelope  of  ether-
atoms  about  every  material  molecule,  but,  on  the  contrary,
the  ether  is  thinnest  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
the  corporeal  molecules,  accordingly  thinner  within  the
body  than  in  empty  space,  because  the  densely  packed
corporeal  molecules  partially  repel  the  ether.  As  we  shall
see  later  on  that  at  all  events  attraction  takes  place  at
greater  distances  between  body  and  ether  atoms,  the
difference  of  the  two  opposed  views  in  strictness  only  con-
sists of  a  divergence  in  respect  of  the  magnitude  of  that
distance  where  attraction  is  converted  into  repulsion;  and,
moreover,  according  to  loth  views,  this  distance  must  be
so  small  that  it  must  be  designated  molecular  distance.

The  atomic  theory,  in  the  present  phase  of  its  develop-
ment, explains  in  a  surprising  way  the  laws  of  heat  and
the  different  states  of  aggregation  induced  by  changes
of  heat  (see  Wiener,  "  Grundziige  der  Weltordnung,"  first
book ;  and  for  a  more  mathematical  treatment,  Ch.  Briot,


160  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

"Lehrbuch  der  mechanisclien  "VYiirmetheorie  ").  It  has
the  advantage  of  representing  all  the  many  so-called  forces
of  matter,  as  gravitation,  elasticity,  heat,  galvanism,  che-
mistry, &c.,  as  manifestations  of  molecular  and  atomic
forces — i.e.,  that  one  also  actually  sees  and  calculates
the  evolution  of  the  one  from  the  other, — whereas  that
Dynamism,  which,  like  the  Kantian,,  will  know  nothing
of  atoms  and  atomic  forces,  only  merely  asserts  the  origin
of  the  higher  material  forces  from  attraction  and  repulsion,
but  cannot  in  the  least  say  how  it  comes  to  pass. —

There  still  remains  one  material  force  to  he  mentioned,
vis  inerticc,  of  which  Atomism  has  hitherto  wrongly  denied
that  it  comes  under  the  conception  of  force,  or  which  it
has  treated  as  an  additional  force,  whereas  it  might  have
already  learnt  from  Kant  ("New  System  of  Eest  and
Motion,"  comp.  Kant's  YVerke,  vol.  v.  pp.  282-284,  287-
2S9,  and  409-417)  what  vis  inerticc  is,  namely,  that  it
defends  simply  and  entirely  on  the  reciprocity  or  relativity
of  movement,  which  had  been  previously  clearly  stated  by
Leibniz  (Mathemat.  Werke,  vi.  p.  252).  To  wit,  if  one
imagines  an  atom  alone  in  space,  the  notion  of  rest  or
motion  cannot  at  all  apply  to  the  same,  because  it  has
no  definite  place  in  space;  thus  also  cannot  change  this
place.  There  is,  accordingly,  no  absolute,  but  only  rela-
tive, rest  and  motion.  It  follows  from  that,  that  one
has  no  more  right  to  say,  A  moves  towards  B,  than  B
moves  towards  A ;  the  ball  moves  towards  the  target,
than  the  target  moves  towards  the  ball;  that  thus  the
resistance  which  the  target  opposes  to  the  ball  is  not
so  much  a  resistance  of  the  resting  as  of  the  moved
target,  or  its  vis  viva.  What  here  in  the  case  of  impact
immediately  strikes  the  eye  takes  place  again  in  pushing
and  pulling,  only  as  an  integration  of  infinitely  numerous
single  moments  of  repulsion  or  attraction  of  atoms  and
molecules.  In  both  cases  the  resistance  of  the  vis  incrtice
to  be  overcome  depends  on  the  reciprocity  of  attraction  and
repulsion  and  the  relativity  of  motion.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  161

To  explain  Inertia  we  thus,  in  fact,  need,  notwithstand-
ing that  it  itself  acts  as  an  opposing  force,  no  new  force  ;
we  can  get  along  perfectly  well  with  the  attraction  and
repulsion  of  corporeal  and  ethereal  atoms. — Let  us  now
see  how,  on  closer  inspection,  the  principles  previously
adduced  assume  of  themselves  a  simpler  form. —

If  we  imagine  two  corporeal  atoms,  A  and  B,  they  would
even  then  still  move  towards  one  another  if  only  A
possessed  attractive  power ;  for  in  that  A  attracts  the
atom  B,  it  necessarily,  on  account  of  the  relativity  of
motion,  just  as  much  moves  towards  B  as  it  draws  B
towards  itself.  The  same  holds  good,  however,  for  B.
Since  now  both  A  and  also  B  possess  attraction,  each
of  them  produces  the  mutual  approximation,  thus  their
actual  attraction  will  be  the  sum  of  their  individual
forces.  The  same  holds  good  for  the  repulsion  of  ether-
atoms.  But  now  curiously  one  and  the  same  corporeal
atom  is  said  to  possess  two  opposite  forces,  namely,
energy  of  attraction  fur  corporeal  atoms,  and  repulsive
force  for  ether-atoms.  An  ether-atom  has  thus  either  a
corresponding  special  repulsive  force  for  ether-atoms,  and
a  special  repulsive  force  for  corporeal  atoms ;  or,  however,
its  repulsive  force  is  equally  great  for  corporeal  and  ether
atoms,  i.e.,  one  and  the  same.  The  latter  supposition  has
nothing  against  it ;  it  will  therefore,  as  the  simpler,  in  any
case  deserve  the  preference,  torprincipia  nonsunt  multipli-
cand'a  pra  U  /'  meccssitatem.  According  to  the  latter  assump-
tion, then,  an  ether-atom  is  similarly  repellently  related
to  every  other  atom,  no  matter  what  other  forces  may
belong  to  this  atom  ;  i.e.,  if  a  corporeal  atom  meets  it,  it
repels  this  just  as  much  as  an  ether-atom,  no  matter  how
great  the  force  may  be  with  which  the  corporeal  atom
repels  the  ether-atom,  as  compared  with  the  repulsive  force
of  an  ether-atom.  Of  course  the  total  mutual  repulsion  is
the  sum  of  the  two  forces.  But  if  the  magnitude  of  the
repellent  force  of  the  corporeal  atom  is  indifferent  with
regard  to  the  repulsive  force  of  the  ether-atom,  it  must

VOL.  II.  L


t62  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

also  be  indifferent  to  it  if  this  force  becomes  =  0,  or  if  it
becomes  negative,  i.e.,  attractive,  always  supposing  that  the
total  repulsion  of  the  two  is  the  sum  of  the  single  forces.
In  the  latter  case  the  total  result  would  remain  repulsion,
as  long  as  the  repulsive  force  of  the  ether-atom  is  greater
than  the  attractive  force  of  the  corporeal  atom ;  in  the
converse  case  it  would  be  attraction.  But  herewith  we
at  once  get  rid  of  the  unnatural  assumption  of  two
mutually  contradictory  forces  in  this  corporeal  atom ;  for
the  repulsion  between  ethereal  and  corporeal  atom  remains
as  such  for  all  small  distances,  when  the  repulsion  of
the  former  is  stronger  than  the  attraction  of  the
latter,  and  the  body-atom  is  similarly  related  to  every
other  atom  by  attraction,  just  as  the  ether-atom  is
repellently  related  to  every  other  atom  in  the  same
way.  That,  however,  in  fact,  ethereal  and  corporeal  atoms
do  not  repel  one  another  at  all,  but  only  at  smaller,  dis-
tances, seems  to  me  evidently  to  result  from  the  follow-
ing :  The  material  system  is  unconditionally  to  be  regarded
&s  finite,  both  from  a  priori  considerations  and  on  astro-
nomical grounds.1  The  ether,  however,  must  extend  into
the  infinite,  if  there  be  no  limit,  where  the  attraction  of
all  the  corporeal  atoms  prevails  over  the  repulsion  of  all
the  ether  atoms ;  a  rotation  of  the  system  about  one  or
more  axes  (so  far  as  such  an  one  is  at  all  conceivable
under  the  supposition  of  the  relativity  of  motion)  would
only  strengthen  the  continual  efflux  of  the  ether-atoms
by  centrifugal  force ;  and  even  on  the  inadmissible  as-
sumption of  an  infinite  number  of  ether-atoms  to  a  finite
number  of  corporeal  atoms,  the  constant  efflux  of  ether-
atoms  in  infinite  space  would  induce  a  continuously  in-
creasing rarefaction  of  the  ether  in  the  world-system,  for
which  there  is  nothing  to  be  said.

Accordingly,  if  we  are  compelled  by  the  finiteness  of  the
material  world-system  to  assume  a  defiriite  finite  distance,

] Comp.  Zollner,  "  Ueber  die  Xatur  der  Kometen,"  3  Aufl.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  163

where  the  repulsion  of  the  ether-atom  from  the  corporeal
atom  is  equal  to  the  attraction  of  the  corporeal  atom  to  the
ether-atom,  we  immediately  get  what  we  want,  namely,
that  at  less  distances  repulsion  must  'prevail  over  attrac-
tion, since  the  repulsion  of  the  ether-atom  diminishes
much  more  quickly  with  diminution  of  the  distance  than
the  attraction  of  the  corporeal  atom.  However,  then,  one
may  regard  the  matter,  in  every  respect  the  simplest
assumption  most  recommends  itself,  that  the  corporeal
atom  has  only  attractive  force,  the  ether-atom  only  force
of  repulsion,  which  is  uniformly  manifested  towards  both
kinds  of  atoms.  At  a  particular  distance  (which  mani-
festly must  be  determined  by  the  magnitude  of  the
intended  world)  they  are  equal  to  one  another ;  the
different  law  of  their  change  with  the  distance  causes
at  greater  distances  attraction,  at  lesser  repulsion  increas-
ingly to  predominate.  At  the  distances  at  which  they
exist  between  the  molecules  of  a  body,  repulsion  probably
immensely  preponderates.  This  is,  however,  also  necessary
if,  according  to  the  assumption  of  Wiener,  the  ether-atoms
are  distributed  within  the  body  far  more  sparsely  than  in
empty  space,  and  nevertheless  must  suffice  to  hold  in
equilibrium  the  mutual  attraction  of  the  so  thickly  packed
corporeal  molecules.

Since,  if  one  steers  clear  of  the  contradiction  of  an
already  existing,  i.e.,  completed  infinity,  the  number  of  the
ether-atoms,  as  that  of  the  corporeal  atoms,  must  he  finite,
we  have  no  ground  at  all  to  assume  that  the  number  of
both  is  different;  we  may,  on  the  contrary,  rather  hold
them  to  be  equal,  since  what  the  ether-atoms  seem  to
gain  in  greater  distribution  through  space  the  corporeal
atoms  acquire  in  density  of  cohesion.  We  have  then  for
terry  hotly -at  am  an  ether-atom,  which  are  distinguished,
apart  from  the  law  of  their  change  of  force  with  distance,
only  by  the  positive  and  negative  direction  of  their  forces.
If  one  conceived  every  corporeal  atom  and  every  ethereal
atom fused  together,  all  force  would  suddenly  disappear


1 64  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

from  the  world,  for  their  antagonism  would  have  been
neutralised.  Thus  we  see  here  the  sundering  into  a  polar
dualism  to  he  the  principle  which  produces  the  material
world.

Let  us  further  inquire  what  we  are  to  understand  by
the  mass  of  a  body.  We  chiefly  measure  mass  by  weight.
As  soon,  however,  as  science  reached  the  assumption  of
the  ether,  which,  because  it  has  no  attraction,  can  also
have  no  weight,  it  was  necessary  to  take  something  else
instead  of  weight  as  the  measure  of  mass,  and,  moreover,
somewhat  that  is  common  to  ether  and  body;  as  such,  only
vis  inert/ice  is  offered.  But  now,  even  if  we  can  thus  measure
mass,  we  still  get  no  notion  of  mass  unless  we  are  content
to  grasp  it  as  the  unknown  substratum  of  equal  persistent
forces.  But  assuredly  no  one  is  really  satisfied  with  this.
Physical  science  explains  mass  to  be  the  product  of  volume
and  density,  and  this  certainly  leads  to  the  mode  in
which  all  unprejudiced  thinking  conceives  the  notion
of  mass,  provided  that,  in  the  explanation  of  density,
one  avoids  the  circle  and  does  not  again  employ  the
notion  of  mass.  Then  is  density  only  to  be  apprehended
as  the  hccpiixrj  asunder  of  equivalent  particles.  If,  now,
the  product  of  volume  and  density  remain  unchanged,
it  is  clear  that  this  is  only  possible  by  the  number  of
equivalent  particles  remaining  unchanged.  We  may  then
define  mass  absolutely  as  the  number  of  equivalent  particles,
supposing  that  in  all  things  to  be  compared  we  continue  the
division  until  we  everywhere  come  to  equivalent  particles.
It  is  immediately  evident  that  only  the  original  atoms
answer  this  requirement ;  but  this  they  really  do :  even
the  ethereal  and  corporeal  atoms  are  to  be  regarded  as
equivalent,  since  each  ether-atom  just  as  much  repels  each
body-atom  as  each  ether-atom,  and  inversely ;  conse-
quently the  reciprocity  of  their  forces,  i.e.,  their  vis  inertia;,
is  equal.  We  have,  then,  now  to  define  the  mass  of  a
thing  as  the  number  of  its  atoms,  and  herewith  furnish
the  only  possible strictly  scientific expression for that


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  165

which  each  one  more  or  less  clearly  conceives  by  the  word
mass.  It  follows,  however,  directly  from  this,  that  there
is  no  longer  any  sense  in  talking  of  the  mass  of  an  atom,
for  one  would  then  have  to  imagine  the  same  again  de-
composed into  equivalent  parts,  and  thereby  would  get  no
farther  than  one  already  is.  One  may  possibly  speak  of
the  mass  of  a  molecule,  for  this  just  consists  of  atoms;  one
may  also  say,  by  way  of  comparison,  a  corporeal  molecule
is  of  very  much  greater  mass  than  an  ether-atom  ;  but  the
masses  of  two  atoms  cannot  be  compared,  for  each  of  them
is  the  mass-unit.  Further,  it  would  be  conceivable  that,
without  interposed  ether-atoms,  n  body-atoms  should  unite
into  a  single  one,  so  as  to  become  inseparable ;  then  an
ether-atom  would  repel  each  of  these  united  atoms  with
a  single,  the  compound  with  ?i-fold  force,  and  the  com-
pound would  certainly  have  the  mass  n  ;  but  just  on
that  account  would  it  be  erroneous  to  call  it  One  atom
with  w-fold  mass;  there  always  remains,  so  long  as  the
atoms  are  conceived  as  material,  impenetrable  balls,  a  com-
plex of  n  atoms. — For  the  rest,  we  have  no  occasion  at  all
to  believe  in  the  real  existence  of  such  direct  fusions  of
body-atoms,  for  it  is  to  be  assumed  that  the  body-atoms
in  the  molecule  of  a  so-called  chemical  element  are  just
as  much  kept  asunder  by  ether-atoms  as  the  molecules  of
the  chemical  elements  in  the  molecule  of  their  chemical
compound,  which  last  is  proved  by  this,  that  they  may
be  again  separated  by  ether-vibrations  (heat,  galvanism,
&c.)  With  respect  to  the  great  differences  of  the  atomic
weights,  we  must  also  imagine  the  number  of  the  body-
atoms  united  in  an  elementary  molecule  to  be  very  great,
in  conformity  with  the  fact  that  often  hundreds  of  ele-
mentary molecules  are  united  in  the  molecule  of  a  higher
organic  combination.

The  result  of  all  this  is,  that  the  atom  is  the  unit  of
which  every  mass  is  composed,  just  as  all  numbers  are
compounds  of  One  ;  that  it  is  therefore  just  as  sensible
to  ask  what  is  the  mass  of  an  atom  as  what  is  the  num-
ber of  unity. —


1 66  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

We  come  now  to  the  last  and  most  difficult  question  :
Is  the  atom  anything  else  but  force  ?  has  the  atom  sub-
stance, and  what  are  we  to  understand  by  this  term  ? — Let
us  recall  the  way  in  which  we  arrived  at  the  atom.  As
children,  we  knock  our  heads  and  feel  pain ;  we  touch
things,  and  get  visual  and  other  impressions  from  them.
Tor  these  instinctively  localised  projected  perceptions  we
just  as  instinctively  suppose  causes  which  we  call  things.
"We  suppose  things  outside  us  which  act  upon  us,  but
especially  that  against  which  we  push  outside  we  call
matter  or  substance.  Science  does  not  stop  at  this  crude,
instinctively  sensuous,  and  practically  sufficing  hypo-
thesis, but  pursues  the  causes  of  our  perceptions  farther,
and  examines  them  more  carefully.  It  shows  us  that
visual  perceptions  are  excited  by  ethereal  vibrations,  audi-
tory perceptions  by  aerial  vibrations,  olfactory  and  gusta-
tory perceptions  by  chemical  vibrations  in  our  sense-
organs  ;  that  thus  all  these  perceptions  by  no  means
concern  a  matter,  but  a  motion,  for  whose  explanation  it
must  again  suppose  forces,  which  in  the  last  resort  turn
out  to  be  manifestations  of  combined  molecular  and  atomic
forces.  It  shows  us  further  that  the  foundation  of  all  our
tactile  perceptions,  the  so-called  impenetrability  of  matter,
or  the  resistance  which  it  opposes  to  foreign  bodies  in
attempting  to  approach  beyond  certain  limits,  may  be
the  result  of  the  repulsion  of  the  ether-atoms,  which  at
infinitely  small  distances  become  infinitely  greater  than
the  attractive  force  of  the  corporeal  atoms;  that,  how-
ever, a  direct  contact  of  the  atoms,  therefore  an  impenetra-
bility, not  as  consequence  of  force,  but  inhering  in  matter
as  such,  nowhere  occurs  at  all.  All  the  explanations  which
physical  science  gives  or  attempts  to  give  rest  on  forces ;
substance  or  matter  remains  thereby,  at  the  most,  a
spectre  idly  lurking  in  the  background,  which,  however,
is  always  only  able  to  assert  itself  at  obscure  places,  where
the  light  of  knowledge  has  not  yet  penetrated;  the  fur-
ther knowledge,  i.e.,  the  explanation  of  phenomena,  spreads


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  167

its  light,  the  more  in  the  course  of  history  does  matter,
which  in  the  naive  sensuous  intuition  still  occupies  the
whole  outer  space  of  perception,  withdraw  into  the  back-
ground.

Never,  however,  as  far  as  physical  science  reaches,  or
will  reach,  can  it  require  anything  else  than  forces  for  its
explanation.  On  the  contrary,  where,  at  the  present  day,
it  wants  the  word  substance,  it  understands  thereby,  as  by
matter,  only  a  system  of  atomic  forces,  a  dynamic  system,
and  only  employs  the  words  substance  and  matter  as  indis-
pensable summary  signs  or  formulae  for  these  systems  of
forces.

As,  now,  scientific  hypothesis  should  never  extend  far-
ther than  the  need  of  explanation  requires,  but  the  concept
Matter  serves  and  can  serve  no  scientific  need  of  expla-
nation, it  follows  from  this  that  a  concept  Matter  which
means  anything  else  than  a  system  of  forces  has  no  war-
rant and  no  place  in  physical  science,  since  it  has  indeed
itself  proved  all  that  which  sensuous  apprehension  calls
effects  of  matter  to  be  effects  of  forces.

Undoubtedly  nothing  is  more  difficult  than  to  free  our-
selves from  the  immediate  ideas  of  sense,  which  we  have
imbibed,  as  it  were,  with  our  mother's  milk,  which  have
been  instinctively  laid  hold  of  as  first  crude  but  practi-
cally sufficient  hypotheses,  and  which  by  the  habit  of  a
lifetime  have  become  a  part  of  ourselves.  There  is  need  of
industry, tranquillity,  clearness,  and  force  of  thought  to  per-
ceive the  prejudices  of  sense  and  other  prejudices  of  thought
as  such  ;  still  more  courage  does  it  require  to  break  for
good  and  all  with  that  which  has  been  once  surmounted
in  all  its  consequences;  but  even  when  one  has  done  all
this,  there  is  still  required  an  almost  superhuman  energy
of  intelligence  and  character  never  again  to  be  prejudiced,
or  at  least  secretly  influenced,  by  what  lias  been  absolutely
discredited  ;  for  there  is  no  task  more  difficult  than  this,
to  conquer  for  ourselves  only  a  full,  negative  freedom  of
thought. Precisely  because  the  prejudices  springing  from


i6S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sense  are  not  conscious  conclusions  of  the  understanding,
but  instinctive,  practically  sufficing  suggestions,  are  they
so  difficult  to  be  destroyed  and  set  aside  by  conscious
thought.  One  may  say  to  oneself  a  thousand  times  that
the  moon  at  the  horizon  has  the  same  angular  magnitude,
has  the  same  apparent  size,  as  high  up  in  the  sky ;  that
it  is  an  error  of  the  understanding  to  hold  it  to  look
smaller  up  in  the  sky  than  down  at  the  level — the  same
error  which  does  not  allow  the  vault  of  heaven  to  appear
as  hemisphere,  but  as  flattened  spheroid — all  that  cannot
bring  a  single  individual  to  see  the  moon  in  both  cases  as
of  equal  magnitude,  just  because,  in  spite  of  better  con-
scious knowledge,  the  instinctive  assumption  asserts  itself.

Such  an  instinctive  prejudice  springing  from  sensibility
is  Matter.  No  natural  philosopher  has,  in  his  science,
anything  to  do  with  matter,  except  in  so  far  as  he  decom-
poses it  into  forces,  whereby  accordingly  the  apparent
material  effects  turn  out  energies,  i.e.,  matter  is  more  and
more  resolved  into  force.  Thus,  even  at  the  present  day,
few  natural  philosophers  will  be  found  who  would  grant
the  final  consequence  of  their  own  science,  that  matter  is
nothing  but  a  system  of  forces;  and  the  reason  of  this  lies
simply  in  sensuous  prejudice.  One  forgets  that  we  indeed
just  as  little  directly  perceive  matter  as  atoms,  but  only
its  pressure,  impact,  vibrations,  &c. ;  that  this  matter  is
indeed  also  merely  a  hypothesis,  which  must  justify  itself
before  the  tribunal  of  physical  science ;  but  this  justifica-
tion is  not  merely  never  forthcoming,  but  instead  of  it  after
every  inquiry  instituted  in  any  quarter  whatsoever  evapo-
rates into  forces.  This  is  forgotten  because  one  accident-
ally knocks  one's  elbow,  and  instinctive  sensibility  shrieks
at  once  "Matter  "  into  the  reasoning. — If,  now,  we  seriously
attack  such  a  prejudice,  it  tries  to  maintain  itself  with
sophisms  ;  the  natural  philosopher  forgets  the  rules  of  his
method,  and  even  advances  a  priori  reasons  in  order  only
to  save  his  favourite  prejudice.

But  then  we  hear  it  exclaimed,  "  I  cannot  imagine  force


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  169

without  matter;  force  must  have  a  substratum  Ly  which,
and  an  object  on  which,  it  acts,  and  just  this  is  matter;
force  without  matter  is  a  non-thing." — Let  us  also  con-
sider the  d  priori  side  of  the  speculation,  after  having
perceived  that  on  the  empirical  side  the  hypothesis  of  a
substance  has  no  warrant.

In  the  first  place,  it  may  be  asserted  that  man  is  so
organised  that  he  may  think  everything  which  is  not
self-contradictory,  i.e.,  that  he  may  unite  all  conceptions
given  in  words,  provided  that  the  meaning  of  the  con-
ceptions is  clearly  and  precisely  given  to  him,  and  the
required  combination  contains  no  contradiction.  The
above  assertion  says :  "  Force  cannot  be  imagined  in  in-
dependent real  existence,  but  only  in  indissoluble  union
with  matter."  Force  is  a  clear  conception,  independent
real  existence  likewise;  accordingly  every  sound  under-
standing must  be  able  to  unite  the  two  notions,  unless  this
combination  contains  an  inherent  contradiction.  To  prove
the  latter  would  doubtless  be  difficult,  consequently  the  first
part  of  the  negative  assertion  is  false.  Properly  understood,
the  only  question  is:  Is  the  combination  thinkable?  not
whether  it  really  exists  ;  otherwise  the  speculation  would
be  no  longer  a, priori. — The  second  positive  part  of  the  pro-
position asserts  "  that  force  is  to  be  conceived  in  union  with
matter."  This  part  is  just  as  false;  one  cannot  think  the
union  of  force  and  matter,  because  one  cannot  think  matter,
for  all  conception  is  wanting  to  this  word.  Let  us  go
through  the  different  meanings  which  might  possibly  be
ascribed  to  the  word.  The  sensuous  meaning  is,  it  is  true,
quite  definite:  cause  of  felt  resistance  ;  but  it  is  resolved
into  repulsive  atomic  forces,  and  can  thus  not  be  opposed  to
the  notion  Force.  The  notion  Mass,  which,  in  a  perverse
fashion,  might  be  subsumed  under  the  notion  matter,  has
further  above  been  decomposed  into  atomic  force;  of  it,
accordingly,  the  like  holds  good;  its  confusion  with  matter
is,  besides,  only  possible  in  respect  of  the  crude  sensuous
meaning  of  matter  by  means  of  the  notion of  density.


170  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

The  physical  notion  of  impenetrability  has  likewise  been
resolved  into  the  infinitely  great  repulsive  power  of  the
ether-atoms  at  infinitely  little  distances ;  and,  moreover,
only  appertains  to  the  repulsive  ether-atoms  and  to  bodies,
i.e.,  systems  of  dynamids,  in  virtue  of  the  ether-atoms  con-
tained therein,  but  not  to  the  attractive  corporeal  atoms,
since  it  would  not  be  apparent  why,  in  fact,  a  perfect
interpenetration  and  blending  should  not  take  place
between  two  body-atoms  which  are  not  sundered  by
ether-atoms.

Finally,  there  still  remains  the  meaning,  "substratum
of  force;"  however,  I  must  confess,  to  my  misfortune,
that  I  am  just  as  little  able  to  think  anything  by  sub-
stratum as  by  matter.  Schelling  says  ("  System  of  Trans-
cend. Idealism,"  pp.  317,  318;  Werke,  i.  3,  pp.  529,  530) :
"  Whoever  says  that  he  cannot  imagine  action  without
substratum,  just  confesses  thereby  that  that  putative
substratum  of  thought  is  itself  a  mere  product  of  his
imagination ;  thus  again  is  only  his  own  thought,  which
he  in  this  way  is  compelled  to  presuppose  as  independent
ad  infinitum.  It  is  a  mere  illusion  of  the  imagination  that
after  one  has  taken  away  from  an  object  the  only  predi-
cates which  it  has,  still  something,  one  knows  not  what,
remains  of  it.  Thus,  e.g.,  nobody  will  say  impenetrability
is  implanted  in  matter,  for  impenetrability  is  matter  itself"
(which  certainly  is  only  half  the  truth).  Substratum
sometimes  means  the  same  thing  as  subject;  one  will,
however,  still  not  maintain  that  dead  matter  is  something
more  subjective  than  force.  Sometimes  substratum  means
"  the  underlying,"  i.e.,  a  causal  moment ;  of  which  there
can  be  no  question  here.  Usually  it  signifies  prop,  plainly
in  a  sensuous  meaning  of  the  word ;  the  crude  sensuous
idea  must,  however,  here  be  excluded,  and  so  our  list
ends.  In  short,  we  can  think  here  nothing  at  all  by  sub-
stratum. But  even  if  this  were  possible,  the  defenders  of
matter  would  always  still  owe  the  proof  of  the  validity  of
their  hypothesis  of  a  substratum  of  force ;  for  I  cannot  see


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  171

the  need  of  still  supposing  something  behind  force,  as  I
maintain  that  one  can  quite  well  think  force  to  be  inde-
pendently existing.  It  still  remains :  Matter  is  for  science
an  empty  word,  for  one  can  name  no  single  quality  which
shall  appertain  to  the  notion  thereby  designated;  it  is
simply  an  insignificant  word,  unless  we  are  contented
with  the  notion  of  a  "  system  of  forces,"  for  which  we
would  rather  put  "matter."  Accordingly,  it  is  settled  that
those  who  assert  they  cannot  think  force  as  independent
can  assuredly  not  think  it  in  combination  with  matter.

Further,  it  is  asserted,  "  Force  must  have  an  object  to
act  upon,  otherwise  it  cannot  act."  This  is  uncondition-
ally allowed  ;  it  is  only  disputed  that  this  object  must  be
matter.  "  The  force  of  any  atom  has  other  atoms  for  its
object;"  that  is  all  the  physical  scientific  hypothesis  re-
quires ;  what  that  is  in  the  atoms  which  serves  as  object,
about  that  physical  science  does  not  trouble  itself  at  all.
We,  however,  have  to  show  that  we  as  yet  know  in  the
atom  only  force;  that  nothing  stands  in  the  way  of  regarding
force  as  that  in  the  atom  which  serves  as  object  to  the  force
of  the  other  atom  ;  that  thus  for  this  reason  all  occasion  is
wanting  for  setting  up  the  new  hypothesis  of  matter.  In
addition  to  this,  there  is  still  the  analogy  of  the  mental
forces,  which  likewise  have  one  another  for  objects,  e.g.,
the  idea  acting  as  motive  has  the  will  as  object,  the  will
again  has  the  idea  as  object,  and  so  on.  The  pure  recipro-
city in  the  relation  of  atomic  forces  to  one  another  should
serve  as  a  warning  against  the  assumption  of  another
object  than  force  itself.

But  now,  let  us  really  assume  for  one  moment  that  the
atoms  consisted,  beside  force,  also  of  matter,  and  consider
what  difficulties  thereby  arise  for  this  idea  in  the  mutual
action  of  two  atoms,  A  and  B,  and  how  the  one  unau-
thorised and  superfluous  assumption  must  always  be  sup-
ported by  new  and  just  as  arbitrary  ones.  The  force  of  A
is  to  act  upon  the  matter  of  B  and  vice  versa,  thereby  the
matter  of  A  and  V>  approach  one  another,  whilst  the  forces


172  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

stand  out  of  all  relation  to  one  another,  the  converse  of
which  one  indeed  would  expect,  since  it  is  force  which  acts
at  a  distance,  but  not  matter,  since  force  and  force  are  of
homogeneous,  force  and  matter,  however,  of  heterogeneous
nature.  The  matter  of  A  and  B  then  approach  in  conse-
quence of  the  momentary  attraction  of  the  mutual  forces.
What  follows  from  this  ?  Manifestly  that  the  force  and
matter  of  every  atom  must  be  separated,  for  matter  is
caused  by  the  foreign  force  to  change  its  place,  but  not
force.  If,  now,  still  the  force  and  matter  of  every  atom
remain  together,  and  nevertheless  force  cannot  be  necessi-
tated by  the  force  of  the  foreign  atom  directly  to  a  change
of  place,  it  follows  with  logical  necessity  that  the  force  of
A  must  be  compelled  by  the  matter  of  A  to  change  its
place.  Therewith,  however,  acting,  consequently  activity
is  ascribed  to  matter,  whereas  it  is  in  general  absolute
passivity  which  must  be  represented  in  opposition  to  the
activity  of  force.  The  mode  and  manner  of  this  action  is,
however,  perfectly  incomprehensible,  for  if  matter  becomes
actively  acting  it  becomes  indeed  again  force.  Instead,
then,  of  force  A,  as  would  be  natural,  attracting  force  B,  it
moves  the  matter  of  B,  and  the  matter  of  B  moves  the
force  of  B.

How  force  is  to  be  "  bound  "  to  matter,  which  is  the
favourite  expression  of  the  partisans  of  matter,  I  must
confess  I  cannot  at  all  imagine.  It  would  also  be  difficult
for  them  to  answer  the  following :  Is  one  to  imagine  force
bound  to  the  centre  of  the  material  atom,  or  uniformly
distributed  over  the  whole  matter  of  the  same  ?  For  a
material  atom  must  surely  have  a  certain  size !

The  former  assumption  certainly  evades  the  difficulties
connected  with  the  other,  but  then  force  is  no  longer
strictly  bound  to  matter,  but  to  a  mathematical  point,
which  yet  cannot  possibly  be  material,  and  which  only
accidentally  coincides  with  the  centre  of  a  material  ball.
Then  the  action  of  matter  on  the  movement  of  force  is  not
at  all  comprehensible ;  rather  the  material  ball  is  a  fifth


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  173

wheel  in  the  waggon,  since  only  the  point,  the  ideal  centre
of  the  same,  is  in  question.  On  the  second  assumption  the
difficulties  are,  however,  far  greater,  for  then  indeed  from
every  point  of  the  material  atom  acts  a  part  of  the  force,
and  each  of  these  points  lias  another  distance  from  the
atom  which  is  acted  upon.  There  is  then  the  resultant
to  be  taken  of  all  these  partial  forces,  whose  point  of
attack  now  on  action  at  finite  distances  by  no  means
falls  upon  the  centre  of  the  material  atomic  sphere,  but
becomes  different  according  to  each  direction  of  action.
In  this  speculation,  however,  one  must  manifestly  imagine
the  atom  decomposed  into  an  infinite  number  of  parts,  each
of  which  is  burdened  with  an  infinitesimal  part  of  the  force.
Let  one  think  such  an  atomic  particle  as  small  as  one  will,
it  is  still  always  matter,  and  still  no  mathematical  point ;
thus  the  union  of  the  same  with  force  can  yet  again  only
be  comprehended  by  imagining  the  force  uniformly  distri-
buted within  the  same.  We  are  thus  again  constrained  to
infinite  division,  and  so  on,  i.e.,  the  material  atom  must
be  divided  infinitely  an  infinite  number  of  times,  and  in
spite  of  it  all  it  can  never  be  comprehended  how  the  force  is
distributed  to  matter,  since  one  can  absolutely  only  imagine
the  manifestation  of  simple  force  referred  to  the  mathema-
tical point,  and  this  again  is  no  longer  material.  (This  the
most  considerable  physicists  and  mathematicians,  as  Am-
pere, Cauchy,  W.  Weber,  &c,  have  recognised,  and  there-
fore admitted  that  the  atoms  must  be  conceived  as  abso-
lutely without  extension.)

Let  us,  on  the  other  hand,  consider  how  the  case  stands
without  matter.  We  have  nothing  else  to  do  but  to  retain
the  idea  of  atomic  force,  which  the  defenders  of  matter
also  possess,  that  it  is  the  final  unknown  cause  of  motion,
whose  paths  prolonged  backwards  cut  one  another  in  a
mathematical  point.  Even  he  who  assumes  the  atomic
force  to  be  equally  distributed  over  the  whole  matter  of
the  atom  can,  as  said,  not  get  rid  of  this  mode  of  view-
ing the  matter,  for  he  must  apprehend  the  total  force  of


174  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  atom  as  resultant  of  an  infinite  mass  of  punctual
forces  within  the  atom,  however  contradictory  this  re-
quirement may  be.

Further,  the  defenders  of  matter  also  assume  the  possi-
bility of  a  relative  change  of  place  of  this  point,  in  which
the  directions  of  the  manifestations  of  force  intersect.  We
leave,  provisionally,  the  question  undiscussed  whether  force
as  such,  apart  from  its  manifestations,  is  something  to
which  one  may  attribute  spatiality  or  a  place  in  space ;  if  it
has  a  place,  it  is  in  any  case  this  point  of  intersection,  and
we  will  therefore  provisionally  call  it  the  seat  of  force.
Further,  we  assume  that  the  atomic  forces  mutually  serve
as  objects,  i.e.,  that  the  mutual  attraction  of  A  and  B  pro-
duces local  change  at  the  seat  of  the  forces  in  the  sense
of  the  latter  approaching  one  another  and  separating  on
repulsion.  I  do  not  see  where  difficulties  could  be  found
here.  According  to  the  assumption  of  science,  forces  act
at  a  distance  and  are  homogeneous;  why  should  they  not
act  upon  one  another,  if  one  indeed  lias  hitherto  granted
an  action  of  force  on  the  matter  heterogeneous  to  it  and
an  action  of  dead  matter  on  the  force  heterogeneous  to  it  ?
We  only  need  assumptions  which  were  already  there,  strip
away  from  these  several  as  superfluous  and  unauthorised,
and  arrive  notwithstanding  not  only  just  as  well,  but  much
more  simply  and  more  plausibly,  at  the  goal,  and  avoid  all
the  difficulties  which  appeared  in  the  train  of  those  useless
assumptions.  If  we  reckon,  in  addition,  that  those  assump-
tions rest  on  an  empty  word  without  any  thought,  the  gain
proceeding  from  the  simplification  of  the  principles  cannot
be  rated  lightly.

There  is,  besides  this,  the  crucial  test,  that  our  present
rendering  of  Matter  reconciles  the  two  previously  distinct
parties  of  atomists  and  dynamists,  since  it  has  arisen  from
the  conversion  of  Atomism  into  Dynamism,  retains  un-
impaired all  previous  advantages  of  Atomism,  which  have
assured  it  its  exclusive  authority  in  current  physical  science,
purifies  it  of  all  the  warranted  reproaches  of  the  dynamists,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  175

and  gives  birth  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  Dynamism,
the  denial  of  matter  in  a  new,  and  more  thorough  fashion.
"We  may  therefore  rightly  call  this  conception  Atomistic
Dynamism.  Dynamism  in  its  previous  form,  apart  from
the  want  of  an  empirical  proof,  could  never  he  accepted
by  physical  science,  because  its  formlessness  made  all  calcu-
lation impossible.  If  forces  are  to  act  locally,  they  must
determine  their  effects  in  space,  and  thus  refer  the  same
to  definite  starting-points.  With  this  the  point  is  directly
given  as  starting-point  of  material  force,  wherefore  Dyna-
mism also,  as  soon  as  it  tried  to  assume  a  more  definite
shape,  was  necessarily  converted  into  Atomism,  for  it
only  then  gained  for  the  first  time  a  tangible  form,  when
it  referred  the  play  of  opposite  forces  to  force-individuals,
i.e.,  atoms.  This  point  of  view  was  advocated  by  Leibniz
in  a  tolerably  pronounced  fashion : — "  11  n'y  a  que  les
points  metaphysiqucs,  ou  de  substance,  qui  soient  exactes
et  reels. — 11  n'y  a  que  les  atonies  de  substance,  c'est  a
dire,  les  unites  reelles  et  absolument  destitutes  de  parties,
qui  soient  les  sources  des  actions  et  les  premiers  principes
absolus  de  la  composition  de  choses,  et  comme  les  demiers
elemens  de  l'analyse  des  substances."  ("  Systeme  Nouveau
de  la  Nature,"  No.  11.) — Leibniz  altogether  comprehends
"substance"  only  as  force,  and  force  is  to  him  the  only  and
genuine  substance.  Comp.  De  Primec  Philosophice  Emenda-
tione  et  de  Noiionc  Substantia.  That  he  does  this,  and  witli
tlie  notion  of  force  implicitly  insinuates  the  notion  of  the
"Will  into  substance,  is  his  main  philosophical  advance
beyond  Spinoza.  Undoubtedly  physical  science  was  then
too  much  behindhand  for  him  to  put  himself  into  active
alliance  with  it.  Schelling  would  have  succeeded  far
better,  who  very  decidely  confesses  to  a  dynamic  Atomism  ;
but  on  principle  deduces  his  assertions  a  priori,  wherefore
also  his  mode  of  looking  at  the  matter  has  not  been  able
to  obtain  any  influence  over  physical  science.  He  says
(Works,  i.  3,  p.  23)  :—

"  What  is  indivisible  cannot  be  matter,  and,  conversely,


i;6  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

it  must  then  lie  beyond  matter ;  "but  beyond  matter  is
pure  intensity,  and  this  notion  of  pure  intensity  is  ex-
pressed by  the  conception  of  action." — (P.  22)  :  "  The
original  actions,  however,  are  not  themselves  space,  they
cannot  be  regarded  as  part  of  matter.  Our  assertion  may
accordingly  be  called  principle  of  Dynamic  Atomism.
For  every  original  action  is  for  us,  just  as  the  Atom  for
the  corpuscular  philosophers,  truly  individual ;  each  is  in
itself  whole  and  self-enclosed,  and  represents,  as  it  were,
a  natural  monad."  (P.  24) :  "  In  space,  however,  only  its
effect  is  representable  ;  action  itself  is  earlier  than  space,
cxtensione  prior." —

If  thus,  on  the  one  hand,  Dynamism,  even  when  it
attained  atomistic  individualisation  of  force,  was  not  able
to  prove  itself  to  be  something  empirically  authorised,  on
the  other  hand,  at  no  time  could  Atomism  defend  itself
against  the  reproach  of  logical  contradiction,  which  was
always  brought  against  its  material  atoms.  If,  notwith-
standing, physical  science  has  inclined  to  it  with  ever-
increasing  confidence,  this  certainly  proves  a  strong  inner
compulsion,  with  which,  in  spite  of  the  acknowledged
contradiction,  the  force  of  facts  ever  and  again  urged  the
natural  philosophers  to  the  atomistic  explanation.  Atom-
istic Dynamism  satisfies  all  requirements  by  uniting  the
positive  principles  of  both  sides  in  itself.

If  we  once  more  briefly  recapitulate  these  principles,
they  run  thus  :  There  are  as  many  positive  as  negative,
i.e.,  attractive  and  repulsive,  forces.  The  directions  of
action  of  every  force  intersect  in  a  mathematical  point,
which  we  call  the  seat  of  force.  This  seat  of  force  is
movable.  Every  force  acts  upon  every  other  in  the  same
way,  no  matter  how  it  be  designated.  Positive  force  is
called  body-atom;  negative,  ether-atom.  At  a  certain
(molecular)  distance  the  repulsion  of  an  ether-atom  and
the  attraction  of  a  body-atom  are  equal  to  one  another ;
but  as  the  law  of  their  change  varies  with  their  distance,
between  ether  and  corporeal  atoms  at lesser  distances


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  177

there  prevails  repulsion,  at  greater  distances  attraction.
Corporeal  atoms  with  interposed  ether  -  atoms  keeping
them  asunder  unite  to  form  the  molecules  of  the  chemical
elements ;  these  in  the  same  way  the  molecules  of  the
chemically  compound  bodies  ;  these  the  material  bodies
themselves.  Matter  is  thus  a  system  of  atomistic  forces
in  a  certain  state  of  equilibrium.  From  these  atomic
forces  in  the  most  different  combinations  and  reactions  arise
all  the  so-called  forces  of  matter,  as  gravitation,  weight,
expansion,  elasticity,  crystallisation,  electricity,  galvanism,
magnetism,  chemical  affinity,  heat,  light,  &c. ;  nowhere,
as  long  as  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  inorganic  sphere,
do  we  need  to  call  to  our  aid  any  other  than  atomic  forces.

"We  have  accordingly  seen  that  of  the  two  materialistic
principles,  force  and  matter,  the  latter  dissolves  and  dis-
appears beneath  our  hands  into  the  former;  and  now
we  know  exactly  what  we  have  to  understand  by  force,
namely,  an  attracting  or  repelling,  positively  or  negatively
acting  point  of  force.  Now  the  notion  of  force  is  made  so
precise  that  we  are  able  directly  to  consider  the  same,
without  in  our  investigation  having  any  cause  to  fear
that  we  apprehend  it  otherwise  than  physical  science  and
Materialism  intends.  Let  us  see  what  this  conception
involves.

The  attracting  atomic  force  strives  to  bring  every  other
atom  nearer  to  it ;  the  result  of  this  endeavour  is  the
completion  or  realisation  of  the  approach.  We  have  thus
in  Force  to  distinguish  the  effort  itself  as  pure  act,  and
that  which  is  aimed  at  as  the  goal,  content,  or  object  of
tiie  endeavour.  The  endeavour  lies  before  the  execution ;  so
far  as  the  execution  is  already  posited,  so  far  is  the  effort
realised,  is  therefore  no  more ;  only  the  yet  to  be  realised,
that  is,  not  yet  realised  effort  is.  Consequently,  the  result-
ing movement  cannot  be  contained  in  the  effort  as  reality,
since  their  times  are  separate.  Were  this,  however,  not
at  all  contained  in  the  endeavour,  there  would  be  no
reason  why  the  latter  should  produce  attraction,  and  nut

VOL.  II.  M


1 78  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

something  else,  e.g.,  repulsion ;  why  it  varies  accord-
ing to  this  and  not  according  to  that  law  with  the  dis-
tance. It  would  then  be  empty,  purely  formal  endeavour,
without  definite  goal  or  content ;  it  must  thus  remain
aimless  and  without  content,  and  accordingly  resultless,
which  contradicts  experience.  Experience  rather  shows
that  an  atom  does  not  accidentally  now  attract,  now  repel,
but  remains  perfectly  consistent  and  always  equal  to
itself  in  the  aim  of  its  endeavour.  Nothing  more  is
wanting,  then,  than  that  the  effort  of  the  attractive  force
contain  in  itself  the  approximation  and  the  law  of  change
according  to  distance,  i.e.,  the  whole  variable  determina-
tion of  its  mode  of  action ;  and  yet  not  contain  in  itself
their  reality.

Since  the  striving  or  the  force  of  the  atom  is  the  pri-
mitive element  constituting  matter,  and  as  such  in  itself
simple  and  immaterial,  there  can  here  then  be  no  more
talk  of  material  predispositions ;  the  above  requirements
must  be  combined  in  an  immaterial  way.  This  is  only
possible  if  the  striving  possesses  all  the  uniformly
variable  definiteness  of  its  mode  of  manifestation  as  an
appearance  resembling  reality — as  image,  as  it  were ;  i.e.,
however,  if  it  possesses  the  same  ideally  or  as  presenta-
tion. Only  if  in  the  striving  of  the  atomic  force  the
"  what "  of  the  endeavour  be  ideally  prefigured,  only  then  is
a  determination  of  the  endeavour  at  all  given;  only  then  is
a  result  of  the  endeavour,  only  then  that  consequence  pos-
sible which  in  the  same  force-individual  always  retains
the  same  positive  or  negative  goal  of  endeavour,  but  still
acts  on  a  second  atom  from  this  particular  distance  with
this  particular  strength,  on  a  third  from  that  distance
in  that  strength.  Without  itself  changing,  the  atomic
force  changes  the  extent  of  its  action  according  .to  circum-
stances, and  that  too  with  logical  uniformity  (mechanics  =
applied  mathematics,  mathematics  =  applied  logic).  This
necessitation  by  circumstances  leaves  its  activity,  its
spontaneity  untouched,  and  requires  therefore,  neverthe-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  179

less,  the  direct  procession  of  action  from  inner  deter-
mination ;  thus  requires  ideality  as  prius  of  reality,  and
causes  the  necessitation  to  be  perceived  as  a  logical  neces-
sitation  (from  the  logical  determinateness  of  the  Idea).

But  now,  what  then  is  the  striving  of  force  other  than
will,  that  endeavour  whose  content  or  object  forms  the  un-
conscious idea  of  what  is  aimed  at  ?  Let  one  only  compare
A.  Chap.  iv.  Vol.  I.  pp.  1 17-1 12 ;  what  we  have  here  derived
from  force  we  have  there  derived  from  will.  That  the  will
is  in  its  nature  and  immediately  regarded  eternally  uncon-
scious we  have  shown,  C.  Chap.  iii.  pp.  96-104  ;  that  it
here  also  must  be  mediately  unconscious,  since  its  con-
tent is  an  unconscious  idea,  is  matter  of  course.  Not
violently  have  we  so  far  extended  the  notion  of  the  will
as  to  include  in  it  that  of  force ;  but  in  that  we  proceeded
from  the  will  of  the  cerebral  consciousness,  acknowledged
as  such,  has  this  notion  of  itself  broken  through  the  limits
drawn  for  it  by  consciousness  in  an  authorised  manner
(vol.  i.  pp.  69-71),  and  evinced  itself  gradually  as  the  effi-
cient principle  in  all  activities  of  the  animal  and  vege-
table kingdom.  Now  we  see,  to  our  astonishment,  that
if  we  would  think  anything  under  the  notion  of  a  (no
longer  derived,  but  independent)  force,  it  can  only  be
what  we  have  thought  in  the  case  of  will ;  that  thus
both  conceptions  would  be  identical  if  force  were  not
by  conventional  limitation  of  its  content  narrower,  and,
moreover,  were  used  quite  especially  for  derived  force?,
i.e.,  for  particular  combinations  and  manifestations  of
atomic  forces,  'e.g.,  elasticity,  magnetism,  muscular  force,
&c.  To  replace  the  notion  Will  by  the  notion  Force,  or
at  all  to  subsume  it  under  the  latter,  would  therefore  bo
bad,  because  force  is  properly  derivative,  only  in  the
special  scientific  sense  original  ;  will,  on  the  other  hand,
always  original ;  and  because  force,  in  the  ordinary  accep-
tation, and  in  the  view  of  common  sense,  is  a  much
more  incomprehensible  conception  than  will ;  one  is
also  accustomed  by  the  crude  sensuous  mode  of  appro-


i So  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

hension  to  think  something  especially  material  by  "  force,"
since  the  notion  is  only  carried  over  from  the  feeling  of
muscular  energy  to  other  external  objects.  So  much  more
inward  as  is  the  will  than  the  feeling  of  muscular
energy,  so  much  more  significant  is  the  word  Will  to  ex-
press the  essential  truth  than  the  word  Force.  (Comp.
Schopenhauer,  "Welt  als  Wille  und  Yorstellung  §  22,  and
Wallace,  '  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Natural  Selec-
tion.' "  Wallace  declares  himself  just  as  decidedly  against
the  retention  of  matter  along  with  force  as  for  the  voli-
tional nature  of  all  force,  and  herewith  of  the  whole
universe.)

The  manifestations  of  the  atomic  forces  are  thus  indi-
vidual acts  of  will,  whose  content  consists  in  the  uncon-
scious representation  of  what  is  to  be  performed.  Thus
matter  is  in  fact  resolved  into  Will  and  Idea.  Here-
with is  the  radical  distinction  between  spirit  and  matter
abolished ;  their  difference  consists  only  in  higher  or  lower
forms  of  manifestation  of  the  same  essence,  the  eternally
Unconscious,  but  their  identity  is  perceived  in  this,  that
the  Unconscious  manifests  itself  equally  in  mind  and
matter  as  the  intuitively — logical  Ideal,  and  dynamically
realises  the  conceived  ideal  anticipation  of  the  ac-
tual. The  identity  of  mind  and  matter  herewith  ceases
to  be  an  uncomprehended  and  unproved  postulate,  or  a
product  of  mystical  conception,  by  being  elevated  to
scientific  cognition,  and  that,  too,  not  by  killing  the  spirit,
but  by  vivifying  matter.  There  were  only  two  standpoints
hitherto  which  actually  avoided  this  dualism,  but  both
could  only  do  this  by  boldly  denying  the  truth  of  one
side.  Materialism  denied  spirit ;  Idealism,  matter.  The
former  regarded  mind  as  unsubstantial  appearance,  result-
ing from  certain  constellations  of  material  functions ;  the
latter  regarded  matter  as  unsubstantial  appearance,  result-
ing from  the  peculiarity  of  subjective  conscious  psychical
function.  The  one  is  as  one-sided  and  untrue  as  the
other,  and  the  unconquerel  strict  dualism  of  co-ordinate


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  iSr

spirit  and  matter  to  be  preferred  to  both.  Not  merely  to
evade  this  dualism  by  the  denial  of  one  aspect,  but  really
to  overcome  and  absorb  it,  is  only  in  the  power  of  a
philosophy  which  sees  in  the  subjective  conscious  mind,
as  in  matter,  only  phenomena  of  one  and  the  same  prin-
ciple in  the  subjective  or  objective  sphere  respectively
— a  principle  which  is  higher  than  both,  and  at  the  same
time  less  differentiated  than  either ;  in  a  word,  a  philo-
sophy of  the  Unconscious  (whether  Hegel's  Unconscious
Idea,  or  Schopenhauer's  Unconscious  Will,  or  the  substan-
tial unity  of  both  in  Schelling's  Eternally  Unconscious).

Let  us  now  consider  how  the  atomic  will  is  related
to  space.  Without  in  any  way  needing  to  enter  upon  the
question  concerning  the  essence  of  space,  we  may  say  this
much :  Space  may  have  a  twofold  existence,  one  real  in
bodies  or  bounded  voids,  and  one  ideal  in  the  mental  re-
presentation of  bodies  and  bounded  voids.  If  the  ideal
space  is  in  the  representation,  the  representing  cannot  be
in  the  ideal  space  which  it  first  creates ;  if  cerebral  vibra-
tions constrain  the  Unconscious  to  a  reaction  with  con-
scious perception,  this  perception  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  place  of  the  vibrating  spot  in  the  brain,  or  the  place
of  this  perceiving  man  upon  the  earth  ;  the  idea  is  thus  also
not  in  the  real  space.  Will  is  the  translation  of  the  ideal
into  the  real ;  it  adds  to  the  ideal  its  content,  that  which
bare  thinking  cannot  give  it,  by  realising  it.  Whilst  this
its  content,  which  is  always  an  idea,  also  contains  ideal-
spatial  determinations,  the  will  at  the  same  time  also
realises  these  spatial  determinations,  and  this  also  puts
space  out  of  the  ideal  into  the  real,  posits  thus  the  real
space.  (How  space  arises  in  the  ideal  does  not  here  con-
cern us ;  enough  that  it  is  the  will  that  posits  real  space.)
That  which  is  only  created  by  the  will  cannot  be  present
before  completed  willing ;  the  will  as  such  cannot  then  be
real-spatial.  With  ideal  space,  however,  the  will  has
nothing  at  all  to  do.  For  it  exists  merely  in  the  idea,
i.e.,  in  the mental representation. In short,  Will and


i82  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Idea  are  both  of  non-spatial  nature,  since  it  is  the  idea  ivhich
first  creates  the  ideal  space,  the  will  by  realisation  of  the
idea  the  veal  space.  It  follows  from  this  that  also  the
atomic  will  or  the  atomic  force  can  be  nothing  spatial,
because  it,  as  Schelling  says,  is  extensione  prior.

To  common  apprehension  this  may  for  the  moment
appear  strange,  but  the  strangeness  immediately  disap-
pears if  we  compare  it  with  the  spatial  effects  of  the  will
in  organisms.  The  will  moves  in  me  certain  nervous  mole-
cules in  such  a  manner  that  by  transmission  of  the  current
and  employment  of  the  polar  forces  in  nerves  and  muscles
my  arm  lifts  a  hundredweight.  The  will  has  thus  directly
produced  certain  spatial  changes  of  position,  which  we,  it
is  true,  do  not  more  exactly  know,  but  of  which  we  can  say
this  much,  that  their  movements  of  direction  by  no  means
meet  in  a  common  point  of  section,  but  probably  consist
of  revolutions  of  a  certain  number  of  molecules  about
their  axes.  Movement  ensues  just  in  this  manner  be-
cause the  unconscious  idea,  which  forms  the  content  of
the  will,  ideally  contains  just  this  kind  of  movement.
Did  this  representation,  on  the  other  hand,  ideally  con-
tain such  movements  or  intersect  in  a  common  point,  the
will  would  also  realise  such  movements,  and  this  it  does
in  the  atomic  will.  One  sees,  then,  that  this  common
point  of  section  of  all  manifestations  of  the  atomic  will  is
something  purely  ideal, — I  might,  not  to  be  misunder-
stood, rather  say  is  imaginary,  and  only  by  a  considerable
license  of  speech  can  be  called  the  seat  of  the  will  or  of
energy ;  for  the  only  spatial  elements  in  the  whole  affair
are  the  manifestations  of  force,  which  never  reach  the
common  point  of  section,  in  that  this  always  lies  only  in
its  ideed  prolongation.  Xevertheless  this  point  must  be
definite  in  relation  to  others,  i.e.,  the  distance  of  the  ideal
point  of  section  from  all  similar  points  of  intersection  is
determined.  Hence  it  of  course  follows  that  this  distance
may  also  be  changed,  i.e.,  that  this  point  is  capable  of
motion.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  183

"What,  then,  actually  happens  when  two  attracting
forces  approach  one  another  ?  In  the  first  place,  the  at-
traction increases ;  secondly,  the  actions  on  all  laterally
situated  atoms  so  change  their  direction  that  their  prevail-
ing ideal  points  of  intersection  must  be  conceived  brought
nearer  to  one  another ;  the  first  and  the  second  change
stand  in  such  a  relation  that  the  attraction  increases
n2  times  if  the  diminution  of  the  distance  of  the  points
of  intersection  due  to  the  displacement  in  direction  of  the
lateral  manifestations  of  force  amounts  to  n.  The  reality
is  thus  always  only  the  manifestations  of  force  which  have
a  certain  direction  and  strength,  and  the  change  of  this
direction  and  strength,  whereas  the  points  of  intersection
are  and  remain  something  ideal.  But  the  two  former,  as
mental  representation,  form  the  content  of  the  atomic
will ;  and  one  will  now  understand  how  the  will  itself  may
be  somewhat  non-spatial,  and  by  no  means  need  reside  in
the  ideal  point  of  intersection,  and  move  about  with  this,
whilst  yet  the  realisations  of  its  content  are  of  spatial
nature,  and  have  a  common  ideal  point  of  intersection,
whose  position  with  reference  to  other  ideal  points  of  inter-
section are  definite  and  variable. —

The  question  might  here  be  raised  whether  the  atoms
have  a  consciousness.  However,  I  think  that  data  are
all  too  lacking  for  any  decision  to  be  come  to  there-
upon, since  with  regard  to  the  means  required  for  the
production  of  consciousness  and  the  degree  of  movement
necessary  for  overstepping  the  threshold  of  sensation  we
still  know  next  to  nothing.  Thus  much,  however,  we  may
assert  with  confidence :  if  matter  has  a  consciousness  it
is  an  atomistic  consciousness,  and  between  the  conscious-
nesses of  the  several  atoms  no  communication  is  possible.
"Wherefore  it  is  decidedly  erroneous  to  speak  of  the  con-
sciousness of  a  crystal  or  of  a  heavenly  body,  for  in  inor-
ganic bodies  can  at  most  the  atoms  each  for  itself  possess
a  consciousness.  Of  course  this  atom-consciousness  would,
by  reason  of  poverty  of  content,  assume  the  lowest  place


1 84  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

conceivable. — Leibniz,  who  was  not  acquainted  with  the
phenomenon  of  the  threshold  of  sensation,  thought  himself
warranted  in  deriving  from  the  law  of  continuity  (natura
nonfacit  saltiis)  and  from  that  of  analogy  {avfiirvoia  iravra)
a  certain  degree  of  consciousness  for  each,  even  the  lowest,
monad.  However  this  authorisation  disappears  through
the  law  of  the  threshold.  When  carbonic  acid  gas,  e.g.,  is
more  and  more  compressed,  it  takes  up,  indeed,  a  smaller
and  smaller  space,  but  still  always  remains  gas ;  suddenly,
however,  one  reaches  a  point  where  it  is  no  longer  compres-
sible but  becomes  liquid ;  this  is,  so  to  speak,  the  thresh-
old of  the  gaseous  condition.  So  in  the  scale  of  individuals
or  monads,  consciousness  may  become  ever  poorer  and
poorer,  but  always  still  remain  consciousness,  until  sud-
denly a  point  is  reached  where  the  decrease  is  at  an  end
and  consciousness  ceases,  the  lower  limit  of  the  threshold
of  sensation  being  exceeded.  But  who  can  in  Nature
assign  this  point  with  certainty  ?

We  shall,  in  conclusion,  have  to  take  notice  of  the
question  whether,  in  our  present  mode  of  regarding  the
atoms  as  acts  of  will,  we  may  look  upon  them  as  so  many
substances,  or  not  rather  as  phenomena  of  one  substance  ?
whether  to  every  atom  there  corresponds  a  separate,  inde-
pendent, substantial  will, — as  a  matter  of  course  these  also
endowed  with  separate  faculty  of  perception, — or  whether
a  single  identical  will  underlies  these  many  counter-
working actions  and  activities  ?  After  having  perceived
only  the  opposition,  the  contradiction  of  actions,  to  be  the
spatially  real,  but  having  comprehended  the  forces  them-
selves as  something  absolutely  non-spatial,  every  reason
disappears  for  the  splitting  of  will  and  idea  in  the  eternally
non-spatial  into  an  innumerable  multiplicity  of  single
substances,  and  rather  the  impossibility  of  the  reciprocal
action  of  such  isolated  and  non-contiguous  substances
compels  us  to  assume  that  the  atoms,  just  as  all  individuals,
may  be  altogether  merely  objectively-real  phenomena  or
manifestations  of  the  All-one,  in  which,  as  in  their  common


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  185

root,  their  real  relation  to  one  another  may  be  effected
(comp.  C.  Chap.  vii.  and  xi.)  Were  the  atoms  substantially
separate  and  different,  the  spaces  fixed  by  their  uncon-
scious ideational  functions  would  be  as  numerous  as  the
atoms,  and  accordingly  the  spaces  realised  by  the  atomistic
functions  of  will  would  be  as  numerous  as  the  atoms.  There
would  then  not  at  all  come  to  pass  that  which  makes
possible  the  community  of  the  spatial  relations  of  the
atomic  functions  to  one  another,  namely,  the  one  objectivo-
phenomenal,  i.e.,  objectively-re«£  space.  Such  can  only
arise  by  the  realisation  of  the  unconscious  space-ideas,
if  these  latter  in  all  the  atoms  only  compose  the  inner
multiplicity  of  the  content  of  a  single  collective  idea;
and  this,  again,  is  only  possible  if  all  the  atomic  functions
are  functions  of  one  and  the  same  essence  as  modes  of  an
absolute  substance.  For  him,  who  elects  to  stop  short
at  the  pluralism  of  the  atoms  regarded  as  substantially
different,  there  will  always  remain  an  inexplicable  residue
even  with  our  conception  of  matter ;  this  disappears,  how-
ever, as  soon  as  the  final  unavoidable  step  to  metaphysical
Monism  has  been  taken.


( i86 )


VI.
THE  CONCEPTION OF  INDIVIDUALITY.

Individual  means  indivisible  (as  does  atom);  but  every
one  knows  that  individuals  may  be  cut  into  pieces  and
divided.  We  can  thus  only  think  of  something  as  indi-
vidual which  in  its  nature  cannot  be  divided  if  it  is  to
remain  what  it  is ;  but  this  is  the  notion  of  unity — Greek
monas  (not  to  be  confused  with  the  numerical  concept  of
the  one,  Greek  ev).  According  to  this,  the  conceptions
unity  or  monad  and  individual  coincide ;  but  one  very
soon  sees  that  unity  is  a  wider  notion  than  individual,  i.e.,
every  individual  is  a  unity,  but  not  every  unity  is  an
individual.  Thus  every  connected  form,  in  virtue  of  the
continuity  of  space,  is  a  unity.  I  cannot  divide  it  without
annihilating  it ;  still  I  shall  not  call  the  accidental  unity
of  form  of  a  clod,  e.g.,  an  individual.  Further,  every  move-
ment or  every  occurrence  possesses  a  unity  in  virtue  of  the
continuity  of  time,  e.g.,  a  tone ;  this  unity  likewise  is  not
an  individual  (comp.  V.  Kirchmann,  "  Philosophic  des
Wissens,"  vol.  i.  pp.  131-141,  285-307).  The  unity  of
coinherence  or  of  interpenetration,  as  it  appears,  e.g.,  in
colours,  mixtures  of  taste  or  smell,  and  in  different  quali-
ties of  the  same  thing,  is  reducible  partly  to  existence  in
the  same  'place,  partly  to  the  temporal  coexistence  of  different
qualities,  partly  to  the  causal  unity  of  succession,  and  can
accordingly  not  be  regarded  as  a  particular  species  of
unity.  The  unity  of  the  causal  relation  is  the  strongest
that  there  is.  We  have  to  distinguish  in  it  three  kinds  :  (1)
Unity  by  identity  of  the  cause  (as  in  the  different  percep-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  187

tions  of  a  thing) ;  (2)  unity  by  reason  of  identity  of  the
purpose  (as  in  the  many  contrivances  of  the  eye  for  see-
ing) ;  (3)  unity  by  mutual  action  of  the  parts,  so  that  the
function  of  each  part  is  cause  of  the  persistence  of  the
other. — These  unities  also  do  not  suffice  for  the  conception
of  individuality.  An  example  of  the  first  is  the  unity  of
the  many  perceptions  of  a  thing,  so  far  as  they  do  not
directly  contain  the  identity  of  place  and  time,  but  are
only  referred  to  the  thing  as  identical  causes.  Nobody
will  maintain  that  the  unity  of  the  perception  of  a  thing
is  an  individual.  In  the  second  place,  if  the  unity  of
purpose  consists  in  the  construction  of  a  building,  we
should  not  call  the  sum  of  the  workmen  whicli  have  this
purpose  an  individual.  Thirdly,  if  a  country  lives  on  the
natural  products  of  its  colonies,  and  the  colonies  only
exist  by  reason  of  the  importation  of  the  artificial  produc-
tions of  the  mother  country,  there  is  here  a  perfect  reci-
procity, and  yet  nobody  will  call  the  sum  of  colonies  and
mother  country  an  individual.

Each  of  these  unities,  then,  shows  itself  as  insufficient
to  fix  the  notion  of  the  individual.  Just  as  insufficient
are  the  external  characteristics  which  are  set  up  here  and
there  as  marks,  e.g.,  the  origin  from  a  germ  or  an  egg
(Gallesio  and  Huxley).  According  to  that,  all  the  weep-
ing willows  of  Europe  must  be  an  individual,  since  they
can  be  shown  to  be  historically  derived  from  a  single  tree
introduced  into  England  from  Asia  by  means  of  offshoots ;
thus  all  spring  from  one  germ.  According  to  that,  further,
all  the  plant-lice  (perhaps  several  millions)  which  are  pro-
duced by  parthenogenesis  in  ten  or  more  generations  in  the
course  of  a  summer,  represent  collectively  a  single  indi-
vidual. Just  as  little  as  the  derivation  from  a  single  egg  can
the  typical  idea  of  the  race  pass  as  mark  of  the  individual ;
for  the  typical  generic  idea  is  the  idea  of  the  normal  indi-
vidual, which  represents  the  race  because  it  is  free  from
accidental  peculiarities  ;  and  one  gains  this  idea  of  the
normal  individual  by  allowing  the  accidental  peculiarities


iSS  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

to  be  stripped  from  all  individuals  of  a  species,  and  only
retaining  the  uniform  common  element  in  abstraction.  It
is  here  at  once  evident  that  one  must  already  possess  the
mark  of  the  individual  in  order  to  be  able  to  compare  the
several  individuals  and  to  single  out  the  normal  type ;  that
thus  this  type  cannot  possibly  hold  good  regressively  as
criterion  of  the  individual,  since  one  would  thereby  only
revolve  in  a  circle.  But,  in  addition,  we  have  undoubted
individuals,  even  where  the  same  do  not,  or  imperfectly,
represent  the  generic  idea.  Thus  the  root  belongs  to  the
idea  of  the  plant,  the  tentacles  to  the  idea  of  the  polyp  ;
but  if  I  cut  off  the  twig  of  a  plant  or  a  piece  of  the  tube
of  a  polyp,  these  have  no  roots  or  tentacula,  and  yet  con-
tinue an  independent  existence,  since  they  carry  about
with  them  all  the  conditions  of  the  continued  existence  ;
we  cannot  possibly  denude  them  of  individuality.  Deri-
vation from  an  egg  and  the  typical  generic  idea  thus
appear  altogether  unsuitable  to  serve  as  marks  of  the
individual;  let  us  therefore  return  to  the  conception  of
unity  as  we  formerly  conceived  it.

It  is  true  the  several  kinds  of  unity  considered  were
likewise  insufficient,  but  if  each  taken  singly  is  too  wide
for  the  limits  of  the  concept  individual,  yet  the  combina-
tion of  all  these  species  of  unity  in  a  thing  afford  the
necessary  limitations.  "We  had,  namely,  demanded  unity
for  the  individual,  because  it  was  of  its  essence  that  it
should  be  indivisible ;  but  now  it  is  clear  that  this  require-
ment is  only  fulfilled,  if  not  merely  in  this  or  that  relation,
but  in  all  possible  relations  it  is  essentially  inseparable,
i.e.,  if  it  combines  in  itself  all  possible  modes  of  unity.
That  the  five  above-mentioned  varieties  of  unity  are  in
fact  all  possible  and  alone  possible,  it  is  not  difficult  to
see,  for  they  exhaust  the  three  subjective-objective  forms:
Space,  Time,  and  Causality.

We  have,  then,  gained  a  satisfactory  definition  of  the
individual :  the  individual  is  a  thing  which  unites  in
itself  all  possible  modes  of  unity  :  (i)  Space  unity  (of  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  189

form) ;  (2)  time  unity  (continuity  of  action) ;  (3)  unity  of
the  (intrinsic)  cause;  (4)  unity  of  purpose;  (5)  unity  of  reci-
procal action  of  the  parts  (so  far  as  such  are  present;  other-
wise, of  course,  the  last  disappears). — Where  the  unity  of
the  form  is  wanting,  as  in  a  beehive,  one  says  notwithstand-
ing that  all  the  other  unities  are  most  strikingly  present,
but  not  that  of  the  individual.  Where  the  continuity  of
action  is  wanting,  as  in  frozen  and  re-thawed  fishes,  in
dried-up  and  again  softened  Botifers,  there  exists,  it  is
true,  a  unity  of  the  thing,  but  I  should  consider  it  an
error  to  speak  of  unity  of  the  individual;  there  are  in
that  case  just  two  individuals,  which  are  distinct  owing
to  the  pause  in  their  vital  activity,  as  I  am  different  from
a  man  living  a  thousand  years  ago.  That  of  the  three
causal  unities  none  can  be  wanting  to  the  individual  is
doubtless  self-evident.

It  is  decidedly  of  importance  for  the  conception  of  the
individual  that  no  one  of  these  unities  is  anything  abso-
lutely fixed,  outwardly  rounded  off,  but  all  the  inferior
unities  of  the  same  kind  can  be  included  and  be  taken  up
together  with  several  of  their  like  into  a  higher  unity.  It
is  altogether  a  vain  endeavour  to  seek  for  a  definite
boundary  to  any  kind  of  unity  whatsoever;  there  are
always,  again,  higher  unities  conceivable,  which  include
them  at  the  same  time,  as  everything  finally  is  taken
up  into  the  unity  of  the  world,  and  this  may  again  be
crowned  by  a  metaphysical  unity  of  different  co-ordinated
worlds  imperceptible  to  us.  If  this  holds  good  of  the  con-
ception of  unity,  it  already  shows  that  it  also  holds  good
for  the  conception  of  the  individual,  and  that  for  this,  too,
the  external  rounding  off  and  strict  separation  is  only  in
appearance.  This  appearance  to  superficial  observation,
namely,  arises  from  this,  that  the  individual  first  comes
into  being  through  this  composition  of  all  the  above-
mentioned  unities.  li\  now,  several  individuals  are  said
to  be  contained  in  an  individual  of  a  higher  order,  there
appertains  to  that,  both  in  the  individuals  of  the  lower


i9o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  in  that  of  the  higher  order,  a  coincidence  of  all  these
kinds  of  unities ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  any  mode  of  unity
is  wanting  in  the  former  or  the  latter,  there  remains,  it
is  true,  the  subordination  of  the  other  unities  under  the
higher  ones,  but  there  is  then  no  longer  an  embracing
of  several  individuals  by  a  higher.  Even  Spinoza,  the
monist  of  purest  water,  says  (Eth.  Th.  2,  Prop.  7,  Post.  1)  :
"  The  human  body  consists  of  several  individuals  of  various
nature,  each  of  which  is  very  complex ;"  and  Leibniz  car-
ries this  idea  farther  in  his  Monadology.

Let  us  first  look  at  the  matter  in  the  case  of  immaterial
individuals,  where  the  relations  are  much  simpler.  So  far,
namely,  as  we  have  hitherto  spoken  of  individuals,  the
discussion  has  only  been  of  material  individuals ;  some-
thing quite  different  to  these,  and  by  no  means  coinciding
with  them,  are  the  immaterial  individuals,  which  therefore
require  a  quite  special  investigation.  Had  a  resolution
been  earlier  taken  to  separate  the  investigation  of  spiritual
and  material  individuals,  the  present  terrible  confusion
would  by  no  means  have  prevailed  with  regard  to  this
conception.

We  have  here  again  to  distinguish  between  consciously-
spiritual  and  unconsciously- spiritual  individuals,  and
speak  provisionally  only  of  the  former.  Locke  asserted
that  the  identity  of  a  person  exclusively  depends  on  the
identity  of  consciousness,  and  this  truth  has  been  readily
admitted  by  all  later  philosophers.  The  unity  which
may  not  be  divided,  constituting  the  individual,  is  accord-
ingly here  the  unity  of  consciousness,  which  we  have
considered  in  C.  Chap.  iii.  pp.  11 3- 11 8.  Eor  only  by  this,
that  the  consciousnesses  of  two  ideas  temporally  or  spa-
tially separate  in  the  brain  are  taken  up  into  the  common
consciousness  of  the  comparison,  i.e.,  find  in  this  their
higher  unity,  only  hereby  does  it  become  possible  that  the
subject  or  the  instinctively  supposed  cause  of  the  one  and
the  other  idea  is  recognised  as  one  and  the  same,  and
accordingly  both referred  to  a  common internal  cause


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  191

(Ego).  Only  so  far  as  the  unity  of  consciousness  extends
does  the  unity  of  the  mental  processes  by  causal  reference
to  a  common  subject  extend,  only  so  far  extends  the  con-
sciously-mental individual.

Now  we  know  that  in  the  subordinate  nervous  centres
of  men  and  animals  conscious  mental  processes  go  on,
which,  owing  to  the  excellence  of  the  communications,  are
united  into  an  intimate  unity ;  we  shall  then  be  necessarily
obliged  to  recognise  in  these  unities  spiritual  individuals.
It  cannot  be  objected  that  these  other  centres  are  mentally
too  low  to  attain  to  self-consciousness,  to  the  Me.  This
Me  is  only  instinctively  presumed,  i.e.,  it  does  not  at  all
need  to  emerge  as  self-consciousness ;  but  all  goes  on  as
if  self-consciousness  existed,  and  referred  all  actions  to
the  Ego.  This  we  still  see,  indeed,  in  the  lowest  animals
and  plants,  and  call  it  zoopsychological  sensibility.  There
is,  therefore,  nothing  in  the  way  of  comprehending  the
lower  nerve-centres  as  supporters  of  conscious  mental
individuals ;  but  when  we  further  see  that  sensations  of
different  nerve-centres  can  be  taken  up  into  one  conscious-
ness under  particular  circumstances,  which  more  or  less
occurs  in  common  feeling,  one  cannot  avoid  acknow-
ledging this  unity  of  consciousness  as  a  higher  spiritual
individual,  which  comprehends  the  lower  individuals  in
itself.  Further,  if  we  consider  that  the  properly  active
parts  of  the  white  nerve-fibres  merely  destined  for  con-
duction, namely,  their  axis  cylinders,  are  quite  the  same  as
the  grey  matter,  and  that  the  white  appearance  is  merely
produced  by  the  medullary  matter  destined  for  the  isola-
tion of  the  fibres  deposited  between  axis  cylinder  and
fibrous  membrane,  one  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion  that
the  active  parts  even  of  the  white  nerve-matter  have  a
consciousness  of  their  own  of  some  sort  or  other  of  the
vibrations,  which  they  are  certainly  only  destined  to
transmit  as  their  share  in  the  general  economy.  In
like  manner,  the  contracting  muscular  fibres,  or  the
Secreting  glands  responding  to  nerve-stimulation,  beyond


192  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

a  doubt  possess  a  certain  sensation  of  these  events,
since  they  are,  indeed,  adapted  to  propagate  the  nervous
vibrations  exciting  them  beyond  the  limits  of  the  nerve-
fibres  to  the  neighbouring  parts.  (Thus,  according
to  Engelmann,  the  peristaltic  movements  of  the  ureter
are  spontaneous  functions  of  its  unstriped  muscular
walls.)

If  we  further  remember  the  results  of  C.  Chap,  iv.,  where
we  came  upon  cell-consciousness  in  plants,  the  supposition
is  very  plausible  that  even  the  animal  cells,  in  part  still
more  highly  organised  than  the  vegetable  cells,  have  their
separate  consciousness  ;  an  assumption  which  later  on  in
this  chapter  will  receive  yet  further  confirmation.  This
much  is  certain,  that  the  animal  cells  in  great  part  live,
grow,  increase,  and  pay  their  specific  contribution  to  the
preservation  of  the  whole,  just  as  independently  as  the
vegetable  cells.  Why,  if  they  lead  just  as  independent  a
life,  should  they  not  have  just  as  independent  a  sensation  ?
Yirchow  says  ("  Cellulorpathologie,"  3d  edit.,  p.  105) :  "Only
when  we  conceive  the  absorption  of  nutritive  material  as
a  consequence  of  the  activity  (attraction)  of  the  tissue-
elements  themselves,  do  we  comprehend  why  the  several
districts  are  not  every  moment  flooded  with  blood,  that
rather  the  offered  material  is  only  taken  up  into  the  parts
according  to  the  real  need,  and  carried  to  the  several  dis-
tricts in  such  proportion  that,  in  general  at  least,  as  long
as  there  exists  any  possibility  of  conservation,  the  one
part  cannot  be  essentially  injured  by  the  others."  If  this
proper  activity  of  the  cell  holds  good  for  the  reception
of  the  nutritive  materials,  how  much  more  for  their
chemical  and  formal  conversion  !  There  are,  indeed,  large
districts  of  the  animal  body  which  are  entirely  devoid  of
nerves  and  vessels,  e.g.,  the  substance  of  the  epidermis,  ten-
dons, bones,  teeth,  fibrous  cartilage;  and  yet  a  circulation
of  moisture  through  the  cells  takes  place  as  in  plants,  and  a
life  and  an  increase  of  cells  without  stimulation  of  nerves.
If  the  animal  cells  are  capable  of  performances  so  individual,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  193

just  as  in  the  plant,  must  they  not  be,  like  those,  sup-
porters of  an  individual  consciousness  ?  The  difference  is
only  this :  in  the  animal  the  importance  of  the  individual
consciousness  of  the  cells  is  evanescent  in  comparison  with
the  individual  consciousness  of  higher  orders,  but  in  the
plant  the  cellular  consciousness  is  the  principal  thing,
because  it  is  altogether  only  in  certain  sensitive  and  privi-
leged parts,  as  flowers,  &c,  that  there  can  be  any  indivi-
dual consciousness  of  a  higher  order  worth  speaking  of.

Lastly,  should  ever  the  question  with  regard  to  the  con-
sciousness of  the  atoms  come  to  be  affirmatively  decided,
the  atoms  would,  in  fine,  be  the  conscious  individuals  of
lowest  order.  Thus  for  conscious- spiritual  individuals  we
have  found  the  superposition  of  individuals  of  higher  and
lower  orders  to  be  a  correct  representation ;  we  have  now
to  consider  the  case  of  material  individuals.

Incurring  to  the  organic  individuals,  the  difficulty  of
deciding  the  question,  what  is  the  individual,  is  still
more  evident  in  the  case  of  plants  than  in  that  of
animals.  In  the  case  of  the  higher  plants,  the  layman
especially  designates  as  individual  what  the  botanist
calls  the  stem  (cormus).  Linnseus,  Goethe,  Erasmus  Dar-
win, Alexander  Braun,  and  many  others  sought  for  the
individual  in  the  shoot,  which  answers  to  a  single  axis  of
the  plant.  Ernest  Meyer  and  others  declared  the  leaf
in  its  different  forms  (discovered  by  Goethe)  to  be  the
true  individual,  and  the  pedicle  as  lower  part  of  the  leaf.
Gaudichaud,  Agardh,  Engelmann,  Steinheil,  and  others
thought  they  had  found  the  same  in  the  pedicle,  as  whose
upper  offshoot  they  regarded  the  leaf  or  the  calyx.
Schulz-Schultzenstein,  on  the  other  hand,  tried  to  find  it  in
the  cell  groups,  called  by  him  anaphytons,  as  presented
in  the  developing  buds.  Schleiden  and  Schwann  took
the  next  step,  setting  up  the  cell  as  the  sole  individual  in
the  life  of  the  plant.  Each  of  these  views  has  important;
reasons  in  its  favour,  and,  in  fact,  each  of  them  is  so  far
right  in  maintaining  this or  that  to  be individual, but

VOL.  II.  N


194


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.


wrong  in  combating  the  other  views ;  for  the  question  is
here  not  about  an  cither,  or,  but  about  a  both,  and.  The
whole  plant  as  well  as  each  branch  and  sprig,  and  also
every  leaf  and  every  cell,  combines  in  itself  all  the
unities  which  are  necessary  for  individuality.  This  indeed
is  coming  to  be  perceived  more  and  more ;  thus  Decan-
dolle  distinguishes  five  orders  of  individuals  (cell,  bud,
offshoot,  stem,  embryo) ;  Schleiden,  three  (cell,  bud,  stem) ;
Hiickel,1  six  (cell,  organ,  counterpart,  afterpart,  shoot,
stem).

It  would  be  altogether  wrong  and  perfectly  untenable
if  spatial  separation  and  seclusion  were  asserted  to  be  the
condition  of  individuality,  for  then  twins,  only  externally
connected  at  some  part  of  the  skin  (as  the  Siamese  pair,
who  have  lived  to  upwards  of  sixty  years),  would  always
have  to  be  regarded  as  only  one  individual,  which  would
be  altogether  too  absurd.  Just  as  certainly  is  it  erroneous
to  require  in  an  individual  independence  2  of  existence


1  Comp.  his  "  Generelle  Morpho-
logie  der  Organismen."  Berlin,
Beimer,  1866,  vol.  i.  p.  251.  Chap-
ters viii.  and  ix.  of  this  work,  which
unfortunately  I  only  became  ac-
(piainted  with  after  the  appearance
of  the  fourth  edition  of  the  "  Philo-
sophy of  the  Unconscious,"  form  the
best  and  most  thorough  confirma-
tion of  the  opinion  I  have  here
expressed  concerning  the  conception
of  individuality.

2  On  this  ground  I  cannot  assent
to  HiickePs  distinction  between
morphological  and  physiological  in-
dividuality, since  the  latter  is  only
an  ill-selected  expression  for  vital
self-sufficiency  or  biological  inde-
pendence. Certainly  one  must  as-
cribe individuality  to  every  inde-
pendent and  self-preserving  living
being,  but  not  because  it  is  physio-
logically independent,  but  because
the  physiological  independence  pre-
supposes the  coinherence  of  those
various  unities  in  which  individu-
ality consists.  Hiickel  himself  de-
clares ("Generelle Morphologie,"


vol.  i.  p.  333)  the  "  physiologic  indi-
vidual "  to  be  in  its  nature  divisible,
in  contrast  to  the  infinitely  indi-
visible "  morphological  individual,"
and  therewith  openly  allows  the
contradiction  of  the  notion  in  re-
spect of  its  name.  Certainly  it  is
physiologically  important  to  settle
with  what  order  of  individuals  in
each  class  of  animals  and  plants
biological  independence  begins  ;  but
why  substitute  for  this  perfectly
sufficient  and  clear  notion  of  the
"Bion"  or  independent  vital  exist-
ence that  of  the  "  physiological  in-
dividual "  ?  On  the  other  hand,
Hiickel's  conception  of  the  mor-
phological individual  itself  con-
tains physiological  elements,  which
are  smuggled  in  unnoticed  by
means  of  the  indispensable  unities
of  purpose  and  of  the  reciprocal
action  of  the  parts.  We,  therefore,
do  not  think  we  are  going  far  astray
when  we  stop  at  the  unitarian  con-
ception of  the  organic  individual,
and  reject  Hiickel's  attempted  divi-
sion of  the  same.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  195

without  the  support  of  other  individuals  ;  one  has  only  to
think  what  would  become  of  the  infant  if  the  mother  did
not  offer  it  her  breast,  or  of  young  beasts  of  prey  if  the
parents  did  not  take  them  with  them  on  the  chase  ;  and
nobody  will  deny  individuality  to  children  and  young
animals.

In  lower  organisms  that  coalescence  which  in  the
higher  only  appears  as  abnormity  of  the  fcetal  life  uni-
formly occurs.  A  unicellular  Alga,  Pediastrum  rotula,
appears  in  the  adult  condition  only  as  a  complex  of
cells  or  a  cell-colony  of  middle  cell  and  peripherally  de-
posited marginal  cells.  The  green  protoplasmic  content
of  each  of  these  cells  parts  for  the  end  of  propagation  into
four,  eight,  sixteen,  thirty  -  two,  or  sixty  -  four  globular
branch  cells,  which  on  emergence  possess  an  independent
motion  lasting  a  tolerable  time  ;  but  then  lie  beside  one  an-
other, eight  for  every  surface,  in  order  by  growing  together
with  one  another  to  form  a  new  rosette-like  colony,  which,
although  consisting  of  eight  unicellular  Algoe,  yet  com-
ports itself  entirely  as  an  individual.  Similar  processes
are  found  in  a  few  other  Algse,  e.g.,  the  water-net  {Ilydro-
dirty  on). — In  a  polyp-stock,  every  single  animal  is  as
certainly  an  individual  as  the  whole  stock  is  an  indivi-
dual, since  its  parts,  like  the  members  of  a  so-called
simple  animal,  are  related  to  one  another  through  the
community  of  the  nutritive  process,  and  nevertheless
maintain  their  morphological  independence.  "Every
compound  zoophyte  springs  from  a  single  polyp,  and
grows  (like  a  plant)  by  continued  gemmation  into  a
tree  or  a  dome.  The  trunk  of  an  Astrsea  twelve  feet
in  diameter  unites  about  100,000  polyps,  each  of  which
takes  up  a  square  half  inch;  in  a  Porites,  whose  animal-
cules are  hardly  a  line  in  breadth,  their  number  would
exceed  live  and  a  half  millions.  In  it,  therefore,  there
are  an  equal  number  of  mouths  and  stomachs  to  a  single
zoophyte,  contributing  together  to  the  nutrition,  gemma-
tion, and  growth  of  the  whole,  and  also  united  laterally  to


196  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

one  another"  (Dana  in  Schleiden's  and  Fror.  Not.,  1847,
June,  No.  48).  Whoever  ascribes  individuality  to  an  oak-
tree  must  grant  it  also  to  such  a  polyp-tree.

The  globular  animal,  Volvox  gldbator,  is  (although  not
belonging  to  the  corals)  a  polyp-stock  formed  of  several
animalcules,  which,  sitting  on  the  circumference  of  a
sphere,  are  only  united  by  feather-like  tubes.  "  If  one
puts  some  red  or  blue  colouring  matter  into  the  water
under  the  microscope,  a  powerful  current  round  the  balls
is  very  distinctly  perceived.  This  is  a  consequence  of
the  collective  action  of  all  the  single  animalcules,  which,
like  herds  of  animals,  flocks  of  birds,  even  singing  or
dancing  human  beings  and  crowds,  possess  a  common
rhythm  and  a  common  direction,  often  even  without  the
word  of  command,  and  without  being  clearly  conscious
of  a  purpose.  Thus  float  all  polyp-stocks,  and  the
sympathetic  as  the  more  coldly  judging  naturalist  sees
herein  a  social  impulse,  which  consists  of  force  and  plia-
bility for  common  purposes,  a  condition  requiring  a  mental
activity,  which  one  may  be  betrayed  into,  but  not  justified
in  rating  too  lightly.  One  must  also  never  forget  that  all
the  single  animalcules  possess  organs  of  sensation  which
are  comparable  to  eyes,  and  that  they  accordingly  do  not
turn  themselves  blindly  about  in  the  water,  but,  as  citizens
of  a  great  world  very  remote  from  our  estimation,  share
with  us  the  enjoyment  of  a  highly  sensitive  existence,
however  proudly  we  may  bear  ourselves  "  (Ehrenberg  in
his  great  work  on  the  Infusoria,  p.  69).  This  judgment  is
so  interesting  just  because  it  shows  how  the  modest  but
great  naturalist,  overpowered  by  the  simple  facts,  recog-
nises an  instinct  of  the  masses  and  a  stirring  mental  life
at  those  lower  animal  grades.

"In  the  Mediterranean  there  is  a  rich  family  of  splen-
did swimming  -  polyps,  which  Carl  Vogt  in  particular
("Eecherches  sur  les  Animaux  inferieurs  de  la  Mediter-
ranee")  has  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  scientist.  A
young  polyp  is  developed  from  an  egg. It  begins  its  life


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  197

freely  floating  in  the  sea.  At  its  upper  end  it  forms  a
bubble,  in  which  the  air  is  set  free  which  supports  it;
at  its  lower  end  there  are  formed,  in  ever  richer  and
fairer  measure,  feelers  and  prehensile  threads  with  spe-
cial urticating  organs.  On  its  stem,  which  is  continu-
ally elongating,  there  is  formed  a  filtering  tube.  From
this  stem  arise  bud-like  shoots.  Some  of  them  form  swim-
ming bells,  which  propel  themselves,  and  consequently  the
whole  mass..  The  others  are  metamorphosed  into  fresh
polyps,  which  possess  mouth  and  stomach,  and  not
merely  collect,  but  also  digest  food  for  the  whole,  to  de-
liver it  finally  into  the  common  trunk-tube.  Finally,  yet
other  buds  attain  a  nettle-like  aspect,  and  provide  for
propagation ;  they  bring  forth  ova,  from  which  again  pro-
ceed freely-floating  polyps."  (Special  polyps  with  long
sensitive  tactile  threads  represent  the  sense-organs  or  the
intelligence  of  this  state.)  "  What  is  here  individual  ?
The  young  polyp  appears  to  us  simple,  but  out  of  it  there
is  formed  a  stem  like  a  plant.  The  stem  sends  out  ten-
tacles like  roots,  but  they  move  voluntarily,  and  grasp
prey  ;  it  forms  a  trunk  with  a  digestive  sac,  but  it  has  not
any  more  than  the  plant  a  mouth  to  make  use  of  the  sac.
It  sends  forth  buds  and  sprouts  like  the  plant,  but  every
bud  has  a  special  task,  which  it  performs  with  the  appear-
ance of  original  activity.  Special  sprouts  or  branches
endowed  with  movement  of  their  own  manage,  some
the  reception  and  digestion  of  the  food,  others  propaga-
tion. The  trunk  is  nothing  without  the  limbs,  the  limbs
nothing  without  the  trunk"  (Virchow,  "  Vier  Reden,"pp.  65,
66).  AYhoever  holds  fast  to  the  "  either-or,"  certainly  such
an  example  must  reduce  to  desperation;  but  we  see  in  the
several  members  individuals  partly  of  polyp-form,  partly
medusoid,  and,  in  the  whole,  an  individual  of  higher
order,  which  includes  in  itself  all  these  individuals.  Even
in  the  bee-  and  ant-hive  there  is  nothing  wanting  to  com-
plete the  view  of  the  whole  as  an  individual  of  higher  order
but  spatial unity,  i.e.,  the continuity  of  the  form; here


193  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

this  likewise  is  present,  and  therefore  the  individual  is
indisputable.

This  widespread  phenomenon  in  the  animal  and  vege-
table kingdom  of  a  varied  physiological  development  of
morphologically  originally  similarly  constructed  indivi-
duals of  the  same  species  is  termed  Polymorphism  (even
the  separation  of  the  sexes  comes  under  this  conception).
Kolliker  recently  discovered  an  interesting  example  in  the
family  of  the  sea-pens  (Pennatulidce).  Without  entering
into  the  morphological  significance  of  the  organs  of  the
trunk,  which  serve  as  supporters  of  the  several  animals,
it  is  to  be  said  that  here  the  sex-animals,  devouring
animals,  and  feeling-animals  are  not  different,  but  one ;
on  the  other  hand,  stunted  individuals  without  tentacles
and  sexual  organs  occur,  which  used  to  be  regarded  merely
as  warts  (granulation)  of  the  skin,  but  which  otherwise
possess  altogether  the  structure  of  the  sex-animals,  and
perhaps  have  a  particular  relation  to  the  imbibing  and  vent-
ing of  water.  It  is  one  and  the  same  principle  of  division
of  labour,  of  the  facilitation  of  a  collective  performance
by  distribution  to  various  one-sidedly  endowed  organs,
which,  in  the  organised  state  of  the  bees,  and  still  more  in
that  of  the  ants,  conditions  the  different  development  of
from  three  to  live  separate  individuals,  and  that  here  he
assigns  the  system  of  movement,  of  assimilation  of  food
and  digestion,  of  perception  and  propagation  to  diverse
individuals  coalescing  into  an  individual  of  higher  order.
It  is  just  this  principle,  however,  which  we  find  also  car-
ried out  in  the  higher  plants,  where  the  roots  provide  for
the  reception  of  nutriment,  the  leaves  for  respiration,  the
flowers  for  propagation,  whilst  a  trunk  or  stalk  gives  support
or  cohesion  to  the  whole,  as  the  middle  stem  of  the  float-
ing polyp  commonwealth.  As  in  the  bee-state  the  sexual
activity  is  personified  in  drones  and  queen,  so  also  in  the
dioecious  plants,  i.e.,  in  those  in  which  the  one  plant  bears
merely  male,  the  other  merely  female  flowers ;  and  in  the
monoecious,  where  male  and  female  flowers  are  on  one


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  109

plant,  are  these  flowers  not  to  be  called  individuals,  be-
cause they  happen  to  be  united  in  space  by  other  parts  of
thg  plant  ?

But  not  merely  in  the  remote  region  of  lower  marine
animals  do  we  thus  manifestly  find  compound  individuals.
Tie  comprehension  of  the  tape-worms,  in  which  the  head,
by  means  of  so-called  nurse-generation,  produces  an  en-
tire colony  of  hermaphrodite  sexual  animals,  leads  us  to
the  correct  estimation  of  the  anatomical  structure  of  the
annelids,  and  these  guide  us  to  that  of  the  articulata.
In  the  lower  Annulata  each  segment  has  its  gills,  its
exoansion  of  the  intestinal  canal,  its  contractile  distension
of  the  large  blood-vessel,  its  ganglia,  its  ramifications  of
tli3  nervous  and  vascular  trunks,  its  organs  of  propagation,
its  locomotor  appendages,  and  sometimes  even  its  special
piir  of  eyes.  Among  the  Articulata  the  Myriapoda
siand  nearest  to  the  Annelids ;  the  process  of  gemmation
cf  segments,  which  is  characteristic  of  the  compound
individual,  is  here  in  part  to  be  very  distinctly  observed
in  the  embryological  history  of  development ;  the  larva  of
the  milliped,  which  is  hatched  with  eight  segments,  forms,
even  in  the  first  moulting,  between  the  ultimate  and
penultimate  segment  six  new  ones.  In  the  degree  in
which  the  division  of  labour  and  perfection  of  the  type  pro-
gresses from  the  tape- worms  to  the  Annelids,  to  the  milli-
peds  and  from  these  to  the  higher  Articulata  (crabs,  spiders,
insects),  in  the  same  degree  is  there  exhibited  an  intensified
differentiation  of  the  segments  of  which  the  compound  in-
sect consists;  but  even  in  the  most  perfect  insects,  with  the
assistance  of  the  individual  and  the  pala?ontological  history
of  development  the  composition  from  segments,  which  are
conceived  as  originally  independent,  is  still  more  certainly
to  be  made  out,  and  however  far  the  differentiation  may
otherwise  be  carried,  there  yet  remain  certain  functions
(<:.;/.,  respiration)  here  always  decentralised.

The  successive  segments  of  the  A'ertebrata,  which  consist
of  a vertebra  with its osseous processes, together  with


200  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  appertaining  muscular,  vascular,  and  nervous  pairs,
unquestionably  exhibit  a  certain  analogy  with  these  suc-
cessive pieces  of  the  compound  worms  and  millipeds.
Nevertheless  this  does  not  seem  to  me  sufficient  to
place,  with  Hackel,  both  forms  on  the  same  level  of
individuality,  because  in  the  compound  worms  the  mani-
fold of  the  collective  individual  arises  by  aggregation  of
many  single  individuals,  but  in  the  Vertebrata  by  internal
differentiation.  It  makes  no  difference  here  whether  the
several  individuals  are  the  result  of  sexual  congress,  or
whether,  as  in  the  tape-worm,  they  are  produced  from  an
originally  simple  individual  by  way  of  nurse-generaticn ;
both  form  a  mutual  contrast  to  the  interior,  gradually
progressive  differentiation  of  the  vertebrate  organism,
whose  prototype,  the  Amphioxus,  forms  by  no  means  tie
analogue  of  a  compound,  but  of  a  simple  worm.  Tie
course  of  development  in  the  Invertebrata  and  Vertebra-a
is  accordingly  an  exactly  opposite  one.  In  the  former  ^t
is  the  manifold,  which  concretes  to  unity  in  increasing
measure  by  means  of  unlikeness  and  closer  connection  of
the  parts;  in  the  latter  unity  is  the  starting-point,  which
unfolds  to  the  wealth  of  the  manifold  by  enhancing  the
inner  multiplicity ;  in  the  former  case  the  individuals  of
lower  order  grow  together  to  an  individual  of  higher  order;
in  the  latter  case  an  individual  unfolds  into  individuals  of
lower  order,  and  thereby  at  least  relatively  enhances  the
degree  of  its  order  of  individuality.  Thus  it  becomes
intelligible  that,  in  spite  of  the  opposite  starting-point,
both  courses  of  development  approach  one  another  so
much  nearer  in  their  results  the  farther  they  have  pro-
gressed, i.e.,  the  more  closely  on  the  one  side  the  composing
members  have  coalesced,  and  the  more  they  have  converted
their  functions,  fulfilling  originally  merely  particular  aims,
to  serviceable  functions  of  the  higher  whole, — the  farther
on  the  other  side  the  inner  differentiation  of  the  successive
portions,  organs,  and  systems  of  organs  has  advanced.
As  the above-mentioned floating polyp -stocks  and


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UXCOXSCIOUS.  201

Pennatulidee  are  remarkable  for  the  several  individuals
composing  them  being  entirely  lowered  to  the  rank  of
differentiated  organs  of  the  higher  collective  organism,  so
conversely  we  see  that  in  the  higher  animals  the  organs
obtain  the  more  sharply  defined  individuality,  the  more
strongly  they  are  differentiated  in  their  functions  and
their  constitution.  One  may  again  distinguish  within  the
organs  three  essentially  different  grades  of  individuality  of
organ ;  the  simple,  the  compound  organs,  and  the  systems
of  organs.  The  simple  organs  (Hiickel's  organs  of  first
and  second  rank)  consist  of  a  tissue  of  one  kind  ;  the  com-
pound of  that  of  several  kinds  ;  the  systems  of  organs
are  the  indivisible  union  of  a  number  of  single  and
compound  organs  in  the  whole  organism,  so  far  as  they
serve  a  particular  functional  purpose.  Simple  organs  are,
e.g.,  the  epidermis,  whose  appendages  (hairs,  nails,  scales,
cutaneous  glands,  crystalline  lens),  cartilage,  and  several
other  vascular  and  nerveless  forms  of  the  connective
tissue ;  compound  organs  are  such  as  the  several  muscles,
nerves,  bones,  blood-vessels,  mucous  membranes.  The
sense-organs  are  mostly  of  so  complicated  a  nature  that
they  conduct  us  from  the  organs  to  the  systems  of  organs,
e.g.,  the  sum  of  the  endings  of  the  tactile  nerves  beneath
the  epidermis.  As  system  of  organs  one  may  further  cite
the  protective  system  of  the  surface  of  the  body  (epi-
dermis with  appendages),  the  system  of  the  skeleton,  the
muscular  system,  the  nervous  system,  the  vascular  or
circulatory  system,  the  intestinal  or  digestive  system,  the
respiratory  system,  the  generative  or  reproductive  system.
Of  course  between  these  different  systems  in  the  higher  ani-
mals there  takes  place  a  very  intimate  interpenetration  and
interlacing;  still  even  morphologically  their  separation  can
very  well  be  accomplished,  and  there  is  no  apparent  reason
why  the  more  intimate  fusion  should  afford  a  motive  for
doubting  the  relative  individuality  of  these  systems,  which
is  so  glaring  in  the  floating  polyps  in  spite  of  the  local
fusion,  and  in  the  communities  of  bees  and  ants  is  (level-


202  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

oped  even  to  the  partition  of  functions  among  discrete
individuals.  In  the  spatially  more  sharply  defined  simple
or  compound  individual  organs  the  acknowledgment  of
individuality  should  meet  with  still  fewer  difficulties ;
as  certainly  as  to  the  single  leaf  or  stamen  of  the  plant
belongs  a  kind  of  individuality,  so  certainly  to  a  hair  of  a
man's  head  does  a  sort  of  individuality  appertain.  In
lower  animals  single  organs  sometimes  testify  their  indi-
viduality by  releasing  themselves  from  the  collective
organism,  and  vet  eo  on  living  and  regularlv  perform  the
office  for  the  sake  of  which  they  are  there;  thus,  e.g.,
in  several  kinds  of  Cephalopods  (Argonauta,  Philonexis,
Tremoctopus)  the  males  have  a  hectocotylus,  i.e.,  an  arm
elaborated  into  a  sexual  organ,  which  performs  the  pro-
creative  act  by  being  liberated  from  the  male  and  pene-
trating into  the  female.  This  hectocotylus  was  at  first
regarded  as  a  parasite,  afterwards  as  the  rudimentary  male
of  the  respective  cuttlefish,  until  it  was  perceived  to  be
the  individualised  organ  of  the  male.

Of  importance  for  our  theme  is  likewise  the  pathological
conception  of  parasitic  formations.  I  shall  let  an  authority
in  this  field,  Professor  Virchow,  speak  for  me.  ("  Cellular
Pathology,"  pp.  427,  428) :  "  Let  one  only  remember  that
parasitism  only  gradually  comes  to  mean  something  else
than  the  notion  of  autonomy  of  each  part  of  the  body.
Every  single  epithelial  and  muscular  cell  leads  in  rela-
tion to  the  rest  of  the  body  a  kind  of  parasitic  existence,
just  as  every  single  cell  of  a  tree  in  relation  to  the  other
cells  of  the  same  tree  has  a  special  existence  belonging  to
it  alone,  and  withdraws  from  the  rest  of  the  elements
certain  matters  for  its  needs  (ends).  The  notion  of  para-
sitism in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  term  is  developed  from
this  conception  of  the  independence  of  the  several  parts.
As  long  as  the  need  of  the  remaining  parts  presupposes
the  existence  of  any  part,  as  long  as  this  part  is  useful  in
some  way  or  other  to  the  other  parts,  so  long  one  does  not
speak  of a parasite ;  it  becomes  so,  however,  from  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UXCOXSCIOUS.  203

moment  when  it  is  foreign  or  injurious  to  the  rest  of  the
body.  The  conception  of  the  parasite  is  therefore  not  to
be  confined  to  a  single  series  of  excrescences,  but  it  belongs
to  all  plastic  (formative)  forms,  but  before  all  to  the  hetero-
plastic, which  in  their  further  elaboration  do  not  produce
homologous  products,  but  new  formations,  which  are  more
or  less  unsuitable  in  the  composition  of  the  body  (at  this
particular  place)."  From  the  unmistakable  individual
independence  of  the  parasites  and  the  purely  gradual
difference  between  them  and  normal  formations  one  may
also  regressively  conclude  to  the  individual  independence
of  the  latter.

Still  more  distinct  is  the  individual  independence  in
those  structures  which  exhibit  also  morphologically  a  cer-
tain local  separation  from  the  rest  of  the  body,  and  yet  in
their  independent  functions  produce  an  effect  subserving
the  ends  of  the  entire  organism.  I  may  mention,  e.g.,  the
seminal  filaments.  The  time  has  gone  by  when  the  sper-
matozoids  were  regarded  as  independent  animals  analogous
to  the  intestinal  worms  destitute  of  mouth  and  stomach,
for  the  purpose  of  their  existence  and  above  all  their  de-
velopmental history  testify  to  the  contrary.  Nevertheless
Ave  cannot  deny  to  these  structures  an  individuality.  In
the  diluted  semen  the  filaments  may  be  seen  to  contract,  to
revolve  on  their  axes,  lash  with  their  tail,  jerk  forwards
the  head,  and  freely  fiuat  about  in  all  directions,  the
wriggling  or  screw-like  motion  of  the  tail  effecting  the
movement.  These  movements  appear  most  arbitrary  in
the  spermatozoids  of  the  animal  species  where  fertilisation
is  most  difficult,  i.e.,  in  the  mammalia,  and  become  the
more  simple  and  regular  the  more  easy  in  the  ascending
animal  scale  fertilisation  becomes  by  the  number,  size  of
the  ova,  and  arrangement  of  the  place  of  fertilisation.
That  a  certain  dependence  of  existence  on  particular  sur-
rounding external  relations,  or  even  a  linking  with  the
existence  of  other  organisms,  does  not  disprove  individu-
ality, we have  already  mentioned  before  (one  has  only


204  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

to  think  of  parasitic  animals) ;  but  the  spermatozoids  have
also  a  tolerably  long  life  outside  the  seminal  fluid  in
every  blood-hot,  chemically  indifferent  fluid,  if  they  are
only  not  hygroscopically  deformed  by  the  same.  In  the
female  organs  of  generation  of  the  mammalia  they  con-
tinue to  live  for  days,  nay,  weeks  ;  and  in  the  seed-pouches,
e.g.,  the  male  river- crawfish,  which,  in  the  rut,  attach  to
the  females  in  autumn,  or  in  the  seminal  vessels  of  humble-
bees  and  wasps  that  have  copulated  in  the  autumn,  they
continue  to  live  until  the  spring,  to  then  fertilise  the  ova
which  have  in  the  meantime  become  ripe.  This  already
proves  a  high  degree  of  independent  vital  capacity  after
the  separation  of  the  organism  producing  them.  The
morphological  type  of  all  spermatozoids  of  the  whole
animal  kingdom  are  the  zoo  spores  of  the  Protist  king-
dom, structures  of  whose  individuality  hardly  a  doubt  could
well  be  suggested.  It  is  just  the  zoo  spores  of  the  lower
organisms  which  exhibit  the  extremest  degree  of  indivi-
dual independence  (in  the  Myxomycetes  the  spores  even
increase  for  several  generations  by  fission),  and  neverthe-
less many  of  them  surrender  the  same  in  the  act  of  copula-
tion, in  which  two  or  more  individuals  lose  their  indivi-
duality and  blend  into  one  new  individual.  In  the  copula-
tion of  the  zoo  spores  we  have  to  see  the  prototype  of  the
fertilising  act,  in  which  likewise  two  individuals  (ovum
and  seed-filament)  allow  their  individuality  to  become  lost
in  that  of  a  single  new  individual.  "When  the  plasmodes
of  the  Mynomycetes  in  their  apparently  lawless  creeping
about  now  disintegrate,  now  flow  together  into  one,  we
shall  perceive  therein  a  phenomenon  merely  of  life  and
growth.  We  see,  then,  how  near  procreation  stands  to
growth  even  in  reference  to  the  act  of  copulation  of  the
materials  of  generation,  if  we  compare  with  the  confluence
of  two  plasmodes  the  congress  of  a  number  of  zoo  spores  to
form  a  plasmode.  If  here  only  a  summation  of  like  indivi-
dual forces  appears  to  be  intended,  the  thought  is  forcibly
sui^ested  of  a  neutralisation  of  invisible  individual  differ-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  205

ences  in  a  copulation  of  two  zoo  spores,  until  in  sexual
generation  this  difference  rises  to  the  height  of  a  char-
acteristic contrast  of  the  generative  substances. — If  one
should  attempt  to  dispute  the  autonomous  movements  of
the  spermatozoids  by  a  parallel  with  the  movements  of
cilia,  I  should  reply  that  in  my  view  conversely  the
autonomy  of  the  former  makes  for  that  of  the  latter.  An
alternating  movement  of  a  structure  separate  in  form,
which  demonstrably  neither  follows  on  mere  external
stimulus  nor  is  even  produced  by  central  parts,  since  it
persists  after  the  isolation  of  the  smallest  portion  of  ciliated
epithelium,  must  arise  from  a  cause  inherent  in  the  struc-
ture itself,  i.e.,  bears  the  character  of  a  certain  individuality.
That  the  movements  of  the  ciliary  hairs  of  a  surface  fre-
quently agree  with  one  another  in  such  a  way  that  regular
total  movements,  continuous  waves,  &c,  arise,  cannot
weaken  this  opinion.  The  like  is  also  found  in  the  bundles
of  spermatozoids,  where  in  each  bundle  regular  waves  flow
on  one  after  another,  or  in  those  which  are  deposited
together  in  a  thickly  packed  mass  {e.g.,  in  the  earth-worm),
where  the  beautiful,  regular  waving  is  said  to  be  compar-
able with  that  of  a  cornfield.  It  is  just  the  same  co-
operation of  many  individuals  towards  a  goal  as  in  the
organism  in  general.

There  are  Protista  (Amceha  dijjlucns  and  porrccta)
whose  sole  locomotion  consists  in  this,  that  they  shoot
out  rays  in  which  the  substance  of  the  animal  combined
with  the  points  Hows  after  one,  or  even  several,  whilst  the
previous  centre  is  thereby  narrowed  to  the  ray  remaining
behind,  which  now  withdraws  to  the  new  centre  of  gravity.
On  precisely  the  same  principle  (according  to  Van  Iteck-
linghausen)  pus  corpuscles  move  as  long  as  they  are  living;
they  too  shoot  out  radiated  processes  at  the  periphery,  and
withdraw  the  same ;  and  at  times  one  observes  that  the
viscous  content  of  the  cell  darts  after  into  such  a  ray.  The
identity  of  these  pus  corpuscles  with  the  most  common
form or the white  lymphatic bodies  was subsequently


206  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

demonstrated  by  Cohnheim,  and  their  exit  at  the  place  of
suppuration  established.  Then  Vircliow  observed  similar
phenomena  of  movement  in  the  large-tailed  cells  which
are  found  in  a  just  excised  cartilaginous  tumour.  Move-
ments had  already  been  discovered  in  the  blood  corpuscles
of  several  animals.  Without  desiring  to  place  the  pus
corpuscle  and  similar  freely  moving  structures  morpho-
logically, chemically,  or  physiologically  beside  the  cor-
responding lower  animals  in  any  way,  from  which  they
are  so  entirely  distinguished  by  their  historical  develop-
ment, I  yet  think  that  they  may  lay  claim  to  an  equal
right  of  individuality  with  those,  since  they,  if  not  animals
in  the  zoological  sense,  are  yet  beings  which  move  about
in  their  environment  just  as  purposively  and  with  the
same  appearance  of  voluntariness  and  animation  as  the
lower  infusoria.  That  the  circumstances  of  nutrition  are
accommodated  to  the  medium  entirely  answers  to  the
general  processes  in  organic  nature,  and  that  they  have
accordingly  no  mouth  and  stomach,  cannot  detract  from
their  individuality,  since  there  are  indeed  animals  also  in
whom  both  are  wanting.

The  most  recent  discoveries  on  the  immigration  and
emigration  of  these  amoeboid  corpuscles  from  the  blood
circulation  into  the  tissue  and  back  again  lift  the  process
of  nutrition  out  of  the  inorganic  into  the  organic  sphere,
in  that,  quite  analogously  to  the  procreative  process,  they
may  be  perceived  to  be  conditioned  by  the  living  indi-
viduality of  their  substrata.  The  nutritive  fluid  absorbed
from  the  intestine  as  it  enters  into  the  lymphatic  vessels
as  yet  contains  no  formed  elements,  but  doubtless  it
copiously  receives  such  from  the  lymphatic  glands ;
similarly  the  vascular  glands,  above  all  the  spleen,
are  breeding-places  of  these  amoeboid  elements.  They
pass  through  the  walls  of  the  blood-vessels  into  the
tissue  of  the  body,  in  that  at  first  a  fine  thread-like
process  is  pushed  through  a  pore  of  the  vascular  wall,
and  if  the  process,  which  lasts  for  hours,  remains  undis-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  207

turbed,  the  total  content  of  the  corpuscle  gradually  follows.
These  points  have  been  most  certainly  established,  as  the
eagerness  of  these  corpuscles  for  the  reception  of  finely
divided  pigments  facilitates  observation.  As  connective
tissue  corpuscles  they  now  penetrate  into  all  organs,  and
the  cell-wanderings  of  the  connective  tissue  enveloping  all
the  organs  have  been  even  longer  known.  When  they  have
fulfilled  their  office,  they  retreat  through  the  walls  of  the
blood-vessels  or  lymphatic  vessels  again  into  the  circula-
tion. Unfortunately  we  do  not  yet  know  anything  more
particularly  with  respect  to  the  chemical  differences  on
entrance  and  exit,  and  their  possible  regeneration  into  a
condition  capable  of  nutrition.  This  much  is,  however,
certain,  that  the  colourless  blood  corpuscles  must  also  be
regarded  as  the  origin  of  the  red  blood  corpuscles,  which
are  the  substrata  of  the  respiratory  process  in  the  widest
sense.  The  passage  from  the  one  to  the  other  form  is
guaranteed  by  numerous  intermediate  stages.  The  red
blood  corpuscles  now  present,  it  is  true,  at  their  periphery
no  visible  phenomena  of  movement ;  but  according  to  the
investigations  of  Briicke,  which  have  been  found  to  be
confirmed  also  by  other  distinguished  histologists,  the
red- coloured  amoeboid  individual  (zooid)  is  here  only
limited  with  its  movements  to  the  interior  of  its  case,
which  consists  of  a  porous,  immobile,  very  soft,  colourless,
and  vitreous  substance  (oikoid).  In  the  normal  condition
the  zooid  pervades  the  whole  oikoid,  and  leaves  in  the
centre  a  colourless  nucleus  ;  placed  in  water,  it  withdraws,
however,  from  the  periphery  to  the  centre,  so  that  now
the  former  appears  colourless,  the  latter  red;  not  rarely
one  sees  ameebiform  processes  radiate  from  the  red  centre
to  the  periphery. — In  the  face  of  such  results  in  regard  to
a  living  individuality  of  the  supports  of  the  nutritive  and
respiratory  process  in  animal  organisms,  the  naturalists
in  question  have  seen  themselves  constrained  to  the
admission  that  only  the  view  of  the  organism  as  a  com-
plex of living elementary beings is capable of doing


2o8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

justice  to  the  phenomena.  Each  of  these  individual
beings  floats  about  independently  in  the  lymph  or  the
blood,  and  antonomously  executes  its  functions  pre-
designated  for  it  by  its  own  individual  nature,  and  yet
the  results  fit  as  organically  together  as  if  a  secret  tie
united  these  beings,  or  a  secret  commander  guided  their
performances  according  to  a  higher  plan.

But  even  before  these  recent  surprising  clues  to  the
supports  of  nutrition  and  respiration,  thinking  naturalists,
on  considering  the  cell  as  the  elementary  fundamental
form  of  all  organic  construction,  have  felt  themselves
compelled  to  the  acknowledgment  of  living  individuality
within  the  externally  limited  organism.  "  All  life  is
bound  to  the  cell,  and  the  cell  is  not  merely  the  vessel  of
life,  but  it  is  itself  the  living  part"  (Virchow,  "  Vier  Peden,"
p.  54).  "  What  is  the  organism  ?  A  community  of  living
cells,  a  little  state,  well  provided  with  all  appurtenances
of  upper  and  under  officials,  servants  and  masters,  great
and  small"  (p.  55').  "Life  is  the  activity  of  the  cell;  its
special  character  is  the  special  character  of  the  cell "  (p.
10).  "Peculiar  appears  to  us  the  mode  of  activity,  the
special  function  of  the  organic  matter,  but  yet  it  happens
in  no  other  way  than  the  activity  and  function  which
Physics  reveals  in  non-living  nature.  The  entire  speciality
is  limited  to  this,  that  the  greatest  multiplicity  of  material
combinations  is  packed  together  in  the  smallest  space ;
that  every  cell  represents  in  itself  a  seat  of  most  intimate
effects,  most  manifold  material  combinations  with  one
another,  and  that  therefore  results  are  attained  which
nowhere  else  occur  in  nature,  since  nowhere  else  is  a
similar  intimacy  of  effects  known"  (p.  11).  "If  wTe  will
not  make  up  our  minds  to  distinguish  between  collective
individuals  and  single  individuals,  the  conception  of  indi-
vidual in  the  organic  branches  of  physical  science  must
either  be  abandoned  or  be  strictly  confined  to  the  cell.
To  the  former  result  both  the  systematic  materialist  as  well
as  the  spiritualist  must  logically  come;  the  unprejudiced


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  209

realistic  view  of  Nature  appears  to  lead  to  the  latter,  in
as  much  as  only  in  this  way  is  the  unitarian  concep-
tion of  life  assured  for  the  whole  sphere  of  vegetable
and  animal  organisms"  (pp.  73,  74).  This  is  the  final
result  of  Virchow  ;  one  sees  that  he  grazes  the  truth,  with-
out having  the  courage  to  grasp  it  firmly.  What  concerns
us  here  is  his  well-established  conception  of  the  cell,  which
he  has  further  elaborated  according  to  the  suggestions  of
Schleiden  and  Schwann,  and  therewith  lias  raised  animal
physiology  and  pathology  to  a  new  level,  so  to  say ;  comp.
Virchow,  "Cellularpathologie,"  especially  chaps,  i.  and  xiv.
That  organisms  in  general  consist  of  cells,  and  moreover  of
so  many  microscopically  minute  ones,  for  that  there  is  the
teleological  ground  that  nutrition  can  only  be  effected  by
endosmosis.  Endosmosis  is  only  possible  through  very
thin,  firm  walls.  Thus  if  with  these  thin  walls  the  neces-
sary solidity  is  to  be  attained,  the  whole  system  must  be
a  complex  of  very  small  cells.  How  great  is  the  number
of  cells  is  proved  by  the  following  quotation  :— *

"  At  Zurich,  near  the  Tiefenhof,  stands  an  old  linden-
tree  ;  every  year,  when  it  puts  on  its  ornament  of  leaves,
it  forms,  according  to  the  estimate  of  oSageli,  about  ten
billions  of  newly  living  cells.  In  the  blood  of  an  adult
man  there  circulate,  according  to  the  calculations  of
Vierordt  and  Welcker,  at  every  moment,  sixty  billions
(think  :  60,000,000,000,000)  of  minutest  cellular  bodies  "
(Virchow,  p.  55).

After  all  this,  we  cannot  doubt  that  we  have  before  us
in  every  cell  an  individual ;  but  whether  with  the  cell  we
have  readied  the  lowest  grade  of  the  individual,  which  is
still  organism,  this  may  still  appear  doubtful.

AVe  distinguish,  namely,  in  most  cells:  cell- wall,  cell-
content,  kernel  or  nucleus,  and  usually  also,  in  addition,
kernel-corpuscle  or  'nucleolus.  These  parts  are  decidedly
to  be  regarded  as  organs  of  the  cell,  having  their  special
functions.  The  cell-wall  regulates  the  income  and  out-
going according  to  quantity  and  quality ;  the  nucleolus  takes

VOL.  II.  0


210  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

care  for  propagation  or  increase  of  the  cells  (cells  without
nucleolus  are  infertile) ;  the  nucleus  secures  the  continu-
ance of  the  cell,  and  probably  directs  the  chemical  trans-
formations and  productions  in  the  interior  of  the  cell.
If  the  relative  independence  of  these  organs  is  to  be
regarded  as  established,  one  can  hardly  dispute  whether
they  are  still  organic  individuals,  for  undoubtedly  within
every  such  sphere  there  takes  place  an  organic  reci-
procal action  of  the  parts  for  the  sake  of  the  function  to
be  exercised.

This  relative  independence  of  the  organs  of  the  cell,
inferred  by  me  a  priori,  has  recently  received  a  needed
confirmation  through  the  inquiries  and  observations  of  the
botanist  Hanstein,  which  he  has  made  especially  on  the
cells  of  some  vegetable  capillaries,  but  also  on  the
parenchyma  cells  of  different  plants.  In  the  large  hair-
cells  of  the  Cucurbitacese  and  many  Composite,  e.g.,  one
sees  the  cell-nucleus  suspended  about  the  middle  of  the
cell  by  protoplasmic  bands,  "  like  the  spider  in  its  web."
The  protoplasmic  bag-like  covering  of  the  nucleus,  the
bands,  and  the  cell-wall  exhibit  the  most  varied  move-
ments, by  means  of  which  the  main  and  side  currents  of
the  fluid  cell-content  circulating  in  the  cell  must  be
explained.  Independent  of  the  latter,  however,  because
without  reference  to  their  direction,  and  often  even
opposed  to  it,  are  the  movements  of  the  cell-nucleus,
which  require  now  a  few  minutes,  now,  however,  even
several  hours,  to  traverse  about  the  space  of  the  cell.
Xow  they  are  rectilinear,  now  frequently  interlaced,  now
the  nucleus  intersects  the  cell  crosswise,  now  it  creeps
along  clinging  to  a  wall.  By  this  both  nucleus  and
nuclear  envelope  and  bands  constantly  change  their
form,  and  the  nuclear  corpuscle  changes  its  situation  in
the  nucleus. — In  the  division  of  the  cell,  also,  charac-
teristic modes  of  movement  take  place.  In  the  first
place,  the  nucleus  repairs  to  the  centre,  and  the  bands
draw  nearer  to  form  a  heap  of  plasma. Then  the  nuclear


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  211

corpuscle  first  divides  into  two,  and  thereupon  the
nucleus  is  halved  by  a  fine,  just  perceptible  border,
until  the  division  reaches  also  the  protoplasmic  mass,  in
which  gradually  a  new  wall  of  cellulose  is  formed.  Now
the  two  new  nuclei  (in  medulla  -  parenchyma  -  cells  of
Dicotyledons)  betake  themselves  tolerably  quickly  to  the
wall,  creeping  to  opposite  sides  of  the  old  cell-wall,  where
they  rest  a  certain  time  before  they  again  begin  their
normal  life.  "  Thus,  then,  the  cell-nucleus,  through  the
changeability  of  its  own  form,  as  well  as  through  the
still  greater  one  of  its  covering,  and  through  the  restless
shifting  and  remodelling  of  the  bands  which  issue  from
it  and  keep  it  in  suspension,  acquires  a  striking  resem-
blance to  a  young  plasmode  or  an  amcebiform  organism.
Xay,  it  resembles  such  an  one  during  its  creeping  about
to  such  a  degree,  that  substantially  only  the  union
with  the  wall-protoplasm  serves  as  a  point  of  distinction."
According  to  this,  Ilanstein  adopts  the  above-mentioned
view  of  Briicke,  "  according  to  which  the  whole  proto-
plasmic system  must  be  conceived  as  an  individualised
organism,  i.e.,  a  living,  moving,  proper  being,  consisting
of  nucleus,  peripheral  envelope,  and  radial  or  net-like
uniting  members,  and  found  within  its  self-formed  shell,
the  cellulose  wall,  in  continual  motion,  which  consists
in  a  gliding  hither  and  thither,  and  a  consequent  shifting
and  constant  remodelling  of  the  internal  articulation.  As
the  mollusc  not  only  constructs  its  own  shell,  but  moves
within  the  same,  so  the  protoplasmic  body  within  its  cellu-
lar membrane.  Not  the  currents  in  the  bands,  not  the  cell
nucleus,  not  the  primordial  sac per  se  are  the  seat  and  cause
of  the  movement.  The  whole  protoplasmic  hod//,  which  is
not  a  substance,  but  an  organism,  moves  in  all  its  parts,  now
simultaneously,  now  alternately,  as  indivisible,  amcebiform,
vitalised,  proper  being,  which  of  course  in  the  higher  plants
is  only  partial  existence  of  a  larger  whole"  ("  JJotanischo
Ztg.,"  1872,  Xos.  2  and  3).

If  in  the  Monera  or  protoplasmic  primitive  animals  the


212  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

observation  of  the  microscope  cannot  establish  any
morphological  differentiation  of  the  apparently  homo-
geneous slimy  clot,  there  still  follows  from  the  fact
that  the  essentially  different  behaviour  of  the  Monera  in
propagation  and  nutrition  has  already  necessitated  the
discrimination  of  seven  different  kinds,  that  doubtless  an
inner  differentiation  must  exist.  If  the  viscidity  or  ten-
acity of  an  extremely  fluid  water-drop  is  at  its  surface
very  much  greater  than  in  its  interior,  and  this  difference
increases  in  an  astonishing  degree  in  aqueous  albuminous
solutions,  it  must  certainly  obtain  in  a  viscous  proto-
plasmic drop  or  clot,  even  when  the  condensation  at  the
surface  does  not  reach  such  a  degree  as  to  become  visible
to  the  eye  as  solid  cell-envelope,  to  say  nothing  of  its
being  separable  as  isolated  membrane;  the  statements
with  respect  to  cells  destitute  of  membranes  or  plasmic
clots  are  therefore  always  to  be  understood  cam  grano
salts.  Even  when  an  intussusception  of  solid  pigment-
molecules  is  proved  by  means  of  amcebiform  movements,  a
certain  viscosity  of  the  state  of  aggregation  of  the  surface
is  always  apparent,  but  considerable  difference  of  the
state  of  aggregation  between  surface  and  content  is  by
no  means  refuted.  (The  formation  of  an  envelope  in
drops  has  recently  been  very  well  observed  by  Famintzin
in  solutions  of  carbonate  of  lime,  by  allowing  concen-
trated solutions  of  chloride  of  calcium  and  carbonate  of
potash  to  act  upon  one  another  with  gradual  addition  of
water.)  In  a  similar  manner,  as  a  condensation  takes
place  at  the  surface  even  before  it  becomes  visible,  can
a  condensation  also  take  place  at  the  centre  without
being  perceptible  to  the  eye.  Under  all  circumstances,
however,  the  superficial  condensation  must  occasion  a
functional  difference  from  the  less  dense  content,  as  is
manifested  in  the  absorption  of  booty.  In  the  same
way  the  inner  condensation  of  the  centre  must  condition
a  functional  difference,  as  it  appears  in  the  division
proceeding from  within. Where,  then, cell-membrane


M ETA  PHY SIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  213

and  nucleus  appear  to  be  wanting,  whilst  yet  the  cell
manifestly  performs  the  functions  thereto  appertaining,
there  must  necessarily  exist  analogues  of  these  organs
imperceptible  to  the  eye.  Only  in  this  way  can  we
understand  the  development  of  nucleated  membranous
cells  from  simple  plasmic  clots,  as  required  by  the  Theory
of  Descent.  How  overhasty  it  were,  relying  on  the  mere
visible  appearance,  to  deny  a  differentiation  of  the  Monera
into  organs  of  various  functions  is  eminently  proved,
besides  the  indiscernibility  of  an  actual  membrane  at
the  apices  of  several  cilia,  by  the  analogy  with  the
just  fertilised  ovum,  in  whose  apparent  molecular  homo-
geneity those  differences  must  yet  exist,  so  that  in  its
development  to  the  child  "  the  finest  mental  and  bodily
peculiarities  of  the  parents  are  afterwards  manifested  in
the  same.  We  must  here  stand  still  in  wonderment  and
admiration  before  the  almost  infinite  delicacy  of  albumin-
ous matter"  (Hackel,  "Xatiirliche  Schopfungsgesehichte,"
2d  edit,  p.  179).

These  would,  then,  be  the  lowest  individuals  which
could  be  called  organic.  There  is  a  question,  how-
ever, whether  we  are  altogether  entitled  to  require  of  an
individual  that  it  be  organism.  This  much  is  certain,  as
long  as  a  thing  has  parts,  so  long  must  these  parts  be  in
organic  reciprocal  connection,  if  the  teleological  unity  of
relation  is  not  to  fail ;  i.e.,  as  long  as  a  thing  has  parts  it
must  be  organism,  if  it  is  to  be  individual.  ]5ut  how  if
a  thing  has  no  more  parts?  If  of  a  thing  with  parts  one
requires  the  most  intimate  causal  relation  of  the  parts
only  that  it  may  possess  the  greatest  possible  unity  in  all
directions,  should  then  this  greatest  possible  unity  not
exist  in  yet  far  higher  degree  where  the  thing  is  in  its
nature  simple,  i.e.,  without  parts,  thus  this  requirement
is  from  the  first  rendered  superfluous  ?  The  unity  of
place,  cause,  and  purpose  is,  co  ipso,  given  with  the  sim-
plicity of  the  thing;  but  tin:  requirement  of  reciprocity  of
the  parts,  winch  in  the  compound  tiling  was  a  necessary


214  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

evil,  has  here  been  fortunately  superseded,  since  all  the
parts  are  reduced  to  one,  which  is  at  the  same  time  the
whole ;  the  unity  of  the  simplicity  is  thus  much  stronger
than  the  unity  of  the  reciprocation  of  the  parts.  It  does
not  detract  from  the  worth  of  the  present  argument  when
the  notion  of  unity  is  asserted  to  he  inapplicable  to  the
simple,  for  we  had  only  reached  the  notion  of  unity  by
seeking  what  is  individual,  i.e.,  what  in  its  nature  cannot
he  divided.  This  is,  however,  undoubtedly  at  least  as
much  the  case  in  the  simple  as  in  the  complex  unity,  nay,
even  still  more  than  in  the  latter,  for  the  unity  consisting
of  united  parts  always  carries  in  itself  the  possibility  of
resolution  into  parts,  but  not  the  simple.

Such  a  simple  thing,  which  thus  has  the  highest  claim
to  the  conception  of  the  individual,  we  are  cognisant  of,
however,  in  the  immaterial  functional  atomic  force,  which
consists  in  a  single  continued  act  of  will.  Save  the  atoms
there  can  be  no  individuals  in  the  inorganic  sphere,  for
everything  which  consists  of  several  atoms  has  these  for  its
parts,  and  must  accordingly  be  organism  if  it  is  to  be  indi-
vidual. It  is  thus  wrong  to  call  a  crystal  or  a  mountain
an  individual.  On  the  other  hand,  we  may  very  well  call
the  heavenly  bodies,  so  far  as  they  are  still  living,  indi-
viduals, for  they  are  then  in  fact  organisms ;  but  with
their  extinction  the  individuality  also  perishes,  as  in
animals  and  plants.  "Whoever  doubts  that  a  living
Astrum,  such  as  the  earth,  is  an  organism,  need  only
study  the  mutual  action  of  atmosphere  and  interior
in  the  circulation  of  water,  the  reciprocal  action  of
stratification  and  lower  animal  kingdom,  as  well  as
the  strata  among  themselves  in  the  metamorphosis  of
rocks,  and  the  mutual  action  of  the  organic  kingdoms.
In  short,  let  him  study  geology,  meteorology,  and  the
household  of  Xature  on  the  large  scale.  He  will  every-
where find  revealed  the  essence  of  the  organic  world,
preservation  and  improvement  of  form  oy  change  of
rmattcr,  without  it  being  thereby  implied  that  the  direct


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  215

participation  of  the  will  of  the  Unconscious  (beyond
the  atomic  forces  in  the  actual  combinations  and  the
organisms  concerned  in  the  formation  of  the  strata)  is
requisite  for  that  end.

Let  us  now  consider  how  the  conscious  individual  is
related  to  the  material,  or,  better  expressed,  external
individual.  It  is  at  once  evident  that  only  where  an
external  individual  is  given  can  a  conscious  individual
become  possible ;  but  a  conscious  individual  need  not
arise  in  every  external  individual.  The  external  indi-
vidual is  thus  a  condition,  hut  not  the  sufficient  reason,  of
the  conscious  individual.

We  have  seen  that  a  certain  kind  of  material  motion
with  a  certain  intensity  is  the  condition  of  the  origin  of
consciousness.  All  those  external  individuals  must  thus
be  excluded  from  the  production  of  a  conscious  individual
which  do  not  fulfil  these  conditions  in  the  character  or
strength  of  their  movements.  It  is  just  possible  that  the
atomic  forces,  perhaps  also  several  cells  of  a  too  solid  or  a
too  fluid  nature,  are  in  this  case.  Inorganic  masses  without
external  individuality  have  evidently  also  no  conscious
individuality,  for  even  if  the  several  atoms  are  to  have
their  consciousness,  this  would  always  remain  in  atomistic
dispersion  through  lack  of  a  uniting  bond,  but  could  never
reach  a  higher  unity.  "Where  we  first  find  visible  traces
of  consciousness  is  in  the  cell  with  semi-fluid  content  (pro-
toplasm of  the  protists) ;  here  undoubtedly  the  unity  of
consciousness  is  introduced  through  the  same  conditions  as
its  origin,  since  the  part  of  the  cell-content  satisfying  these
conditions  is  distributed  homogeneously  to  all  sides  of  the
cell.  We  shall  then  be  permitted  to  assume  that  where
consciousness  is  present  in  a  cell,  an  inner  conscious  indi-
viduality also  corresponds  to  the  external  individuality.

Where  several  cells  coalesce  to  form  an  individual  of
higher  order,  the  consciousnesses  of  the  single  cells  by  no
means  need  be  united  into  a  higher  unity,  for  this  depends
on  the  presence  and  excellence of the communication.


216  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

However,  the  assertion  may  not  appear  venturesome,  that
between  fresh,  vitally  active  cells  there  always  takes
place  a  certain  amount,  however  small,  of  communication
— at  least  always  between  two  neighbouring  cells ;  the
question  is  only  whether  the  degree  of  excitement  also
exceeds  the  threshold  of  stimulation.  If  through  the
sensation  of  a  cell  there  is  likewise  produced  a  sensa-
tion in  the  adjoining  parts  owing  to  irradiation,  there
manifestly  takes  place  an  indirect  influence  from  each
cell  to  every  other ;  and  although  so  indirect  and  mani-
festly minute  an  influence  on  several  cells,  on  account  of
the  increasing  resistance,  must  necessarily  remain  very  soon
below  the  threshold,  and  consequently  does  not  authorise
us  to  speak  of  a  conscious  individuality  of  the  whole,  yet
a  certain  solidarity  of  interests  is  here  not  to  be  mis-
taken. If,  according  to  this,  a  conscious  individual  of
higher  order  by  no  means  need  correspond  to  every  ex-
ternal individual  of  higher  order,  yet  this  much  is  certain,
that  different  conscious  individuals  can  only  then  unite
to  form  a  conscious  individual  of  higher  order,  if  the  ex-
ternal individuals  corresponding  to  them  are  fused  into
an  individual  of  higher  order;  for  the  communication
necessary  for  the  unity  of  consciousness  can  only  be  set
up  through  the  medium  of  highly  organised  matter,  but
this  directly  sets  up  the  unity  of  the  form,  of  the  organic
interaction,  &c,  in  short,  the  external  individual  of  higher
order.

Our  assertion  is  thus  verified  in  every  respect — that
the  external  individuality  is  possibly  condition,  but  not
sufficient  cause  of  the  conscious  individuality,  because  the
latter  also  presupposes  three  further  conditions — a  cer-
tain mode,  a  certain  strength  of  material  movement,  and,  in
individuals  of  higher  order,  a  certain  excellence  of  con-
duction. If  one  of  these  three  conditions  is  not  satisfied,
no  conscious  individual  can  correspond  to  the  external
individual.

I  believe  that  the  division  and  discussion  of  the  outer


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  217

and  inner  individual  here  worked  out  may  essentially
contribute  to  the  clearing  up  of  the  question  of  indivi-
duality ;  it  is  the  necessary  complement  to  the  cognition
of  the  relativity  of  the  conception  of  individuality.

The  relativity  of  the  conception  of  individuality  is  for
the  rest  no  new  cognition  of  the  last  decennia.  Spinoza
says,  as  already  mentioned  above :  "  The  human  body
consists  of  several  individuals  of  various  nature,  each  of
which  is  very  composite ; "  and  Goethe :  "  Each  living
thing  is  no  single  thing,  but  a  manifold;  even  if  it
appears  to  us  as  individual,  it  still  remains  a  collection
of  living,  independent  existences,  which  resemble  one
another  in  idea,  in  design,  but  may  phenomenally  be  like
or  similar,  unlike  or  dissimilar.  The  more  imperfect  the
creature  is,  the  more  are  these  parts  like  or  similar  to  one
another,  and  the  more  do  they  resemble  the  whole.  The
more  perfect  the  creature  is,  the  more  dissimilar  are  the
parts  to  one  another.  The  more  similar  the  parts  are  to
one  another,  the  less  are  they  subordinated  to  one
another.  The  subordination  of  the  parts  points  to  a  more
perfect  creation."  (The  latter  observation  expresses  what
we  have  tried  to  illustrate  by  the  simile  of  the  monarchical
and  republican  form  of  government.)

The  relativity  of  the  notion  of  individuality  was  dis-
cussed most  thoroughly  by  Leibniz,  although  his  mode  of
regarding  the  matter  is  essentially  distinguished  from
ours,  in  consequence  of  his  different  conception  of
"  body."  With  Leibniz,  each  monad  has  an  unchangeable
and  imperishable  body  peculiar  to  it,  which  forms  its  fence,
and  through  which  its  fmitude  is  established.  This  body
is  not  substance,  any  more  than  the  soul  of  the  monads,
partially  conceived,  is  substance  ;  and  between  this  body
and  the  soul  there  exists  no  pre-established  harmony,  since
it  would  here  be  superfluous;  but  they  are  both  only
moments,  differently  directed  forces,  of  one  and  the  same
simple  substance,  the  monad,  which  is  its  natural  unity  ;
and  this  is  Leibniz's  identity  of  soul  and  body  (thought


218  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  extension).  This  inalienable  body  is,  however,  some-
thing purely  metaphysical,  and  nothing  physical ;  at
the  most,  in  the  case  of  the  atoms,  can  we,  in  a  certain
sense,  allow  the  Leibnizian  conception  to  pass  in  physical
respects.  In  all  individuals  or  monads  of  higher  order,
on  the  contrary,  the  idea  of  an  inalienable  body  in
addition  to  the  visible  body,  compounded  of  other  monads
or  atoms  (an  idea  which  has  long  made  a  spectral  appear-
ance under  the  name  of  an  ethereal  body),  has  been
happily  set  aside  by  science :  we  now  know  that  all
organisms  only  maintain  their  existence  by  means  of  change
of  matter.  We  will,  however,  do  Leibniz  no  injustice;
what  he  conceived  by  the  body  peculiar  to  the  monad  is,
at  all  events,  a  metaphysically  far  more  tenable  thought.
I  suppose  that  he  intended  thereby  to  express  nothing
more  than  the  capacity  of  the  immaterial  monad  to  pro-
duce certain  spatial  effects, — a  faculty  which  doubtless
pertains  to  all  monads,  the  highest  as  well  as  the  lowest,
and  which  only  by  means  of  the  peculiar  reference  of
the  lines  of  action  to  a  point  in  the  atom-monads,  and
their  combination  for  sensuous  perception  from  outside,
evokes  the  phenomenon  of  corporeity.  But,  at  any  rate,
"  body  "  is  not  a  happily  selected  word  for  describing  the
power  of  acting  in  space,  as  only  the  combination  of  the
lowrest  kind  of  spatial  forces  has  a  right  to  this  term.  Let
us  leave  on  one  side,  however,  this  inalienable  monadic
body,  and  consider  how  Leibniz  conceives  the  composition
of  the  monads.

When  several  monads  come  together,  they  form  either
an  inorganic  aggregate  or  an  organism. In  the  organism

O  CO CO  o

are  contained  higher  and  lower  monads,  in  the  inorganic
aggregate  only  inferior  monads ;  therefore  in  the  former
there  takes  place  subordination,  in  the  latter  only
co-ordination  of  the  monads.  The  higher  the  grade  of
the  organism,  the  more  prominent  is  the  predominance
of  one  monad  in  perfection  in  comparison  with  all  the
others. This  is  then  called  central  monad. The  higher


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  219

monads  are  obscurely  and  imperfectly  represented  by  the
lower  ones ;  the  lower  by  the  higher,  on  the  other  hand,
clearly  and  perfectly.  "  Et  une  creature  est  plus  parfaite
q'une  autre  en  ce  qu'on  trouve  en  elle  ce  qui  sert  h,  rendre
raison  a  priori  de  ce  qui  se  passe  dans  l'autre,  et  c'est
par  la,  qu'on  dit,  quelle  agit  sur  l'autre.  Mais  dans
les  substances  simples  ce  n'est  qu'une  influence  ideate
d'une  monade  sur  l'autre"  ("  Monodologie,"  Nos.  50,  51,
p.  709).

Leibniz  denies  the  influxus  physicus  between  the  mo-
nads when  he  says  these  have  no  windows  through  which
anything  could  shine ;  the  influxus  idcalis  which  he
puts  in  its  place  consists  for  him  only  in  an  accord  a
priori  of  that  which  the  monads  picture,  i.e.,  in  a  pre-
established  harmony.  But  now  the  relation  of  the  central
monad  in  an  organism  to  the  sum  of  the  subordinate
monads  is  that  which  has  at  all  times  been  called  the
relation  of  soul  and  body.  Between  this  body  and  the
soul  there  exists,  then,  according  to  Leibniz,  certainly  pre-
established  harmony.

The  relation  between  the  soul  and  the  complex  change-
able body  Leibniz  adopted  from  Aristotle.  It  is  the  rela-
tion of  ivepyeta  and  vXrj,  spontaneously  operative  form  or
Idea,  and  the  material  in  which  the  Idea  works.  The  rela-
tion of  soul  and  inalienable  proper  body,  on  the  other
hand,  Leibniz  adopted  from  Spinoza,  according  to  whom
the  one  substance  everywhere  appears  with  the  two  in-
separable attributes — Thought  and  Extension.  Both  rela-
tions coincide  in  a  remarkable  manner  in  the  lowest,  the
atom-monads,  and  that  too  through  the  simple  artifice  of
Nature,  of  referring  all  the  efficient  tendencies  of  such  a
monad  to  a  point.  Unfortunately  Leibniz  did  not  suffi-
ciently separate  these  two  meanings  of  body,  tending  to
confusion,  and  has  therefore  been  frequently  misunder-
stood.

What  is  essential  for  us  in  the  Leibnizian  doctrine  is  the
aircrreciation  of  several  monads  or  individuals  into  a  com-


22p  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

pound  which  (as  body)  is  subordinate  to  a  monad  or  an
individual  of  higher  order  (as  soul).  Had  the  results  of
modern  physics,  anatomy,  physiology,  been  at  the  command
of  Leibniz,  he  would  not  have  neglected  to  carry  further
his  theory  with  respect  to  atoms,  cells,  and  organisms ;  but
as  it  was,  it  remained  only  a  stroke  of  genius  without
the  necessary  empirical  supports. — What,  on  the  other
hand,  we  can  not  accept  is  the  artificial  and  unsatisfactory
hypothesis  of  the  pre-established  harmony,  by  which  all
real  happening  is  altogether  abolished,  and  the  world-
process  is  disintegrated  into  an  unrelated  juxtaposition  of
separate  trains  of  ideas  in  inactive  isolated  monads.  If
Leibniz  expressly  excludes  all  real  influence  of  the  mo-
nads on  one  another,  yet  the  infiuxus  idcalis  which  he
puts  in  place  of  the  infiuxus  %)hysicus  is  an  ill-chosen,  be-
cause misleading  expression.  For  undoubtedly,  according
to  him,  the  content  of  the  chain  of  ideas  in  each  monad
must  at  any  given  point  of  time  correspond  to  the  ideal
chain  of  every  other  monad  in  a  certain  fashion,  but  this
correspondence  (chiming,  harmony)  is  by  no  means  said
to  result  from  this,  that  (say)  the  idea  of  a  monad
determines  by  an  ideal  influence  the  simultaneous
idea  of  another  (as  one  might  indeed  suppose  from
the  wording  infiuxus  idcalis),  but  from  this,  that  the
content  of  the  flow  of  ideas  has  been  predetermined  or
predestined  from  all  eternity  and  for  ever  and  ever  for
every  monad,  and  is  predestined,  moreover,  in  such  a  way,
that  between  the  various  trains  of  ideas  there  always
exists  a  certain  harmony.  The  harmony  thus  predeter-
mined or  pre-established  is  accordingly  a  sportive  mechan-
ism, which,  moreover,  is  quite  aimless  ;  for  if,  for  example,
the  various  ideal  currents  had  a  velocity  so  different  that
harmony  never  took  place  between  them,  the  monads  would
notice  nought  thereof,  and  would  behave  themselves  just  the
same  as  in  the  contrary  case.  This  theory,  which  abolishes
all  influence  of  the  monads  on  one  another,  thus  all  causa-
lity, is  consequently  perfectly  useless.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  221

"What  further  distinguishes  us  from  Leibniz  is  the
knowledge  we  have  gained — firstly,  that  the  organic  indi-
vidual of  higher  order  only  subsists  in  the  particular  unity
of  the  individuals  of  lower  order,  and  that  the  conscious
individual  altogether  only  arises  through  a  reciprocal  action
of  certain  material  parts  of  the  organic  individual  with  the
Unconscious.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  central  monad
or  the  central  individual,  neither  in  respect  of  the  organism
nor  in  respect  of  consciousness,  is  something  standing  be-
yond or  outside  the  subordinate  monads  or  individuals,  but
that  if,  in  the  higher  individual,  something  else  is  con-
tained in  addition  beyond  the  union  of  the  inferior  indi-
viduals, tins  can  only  be  an  unconscious  factor.  But  in
regard  to  this  unconscious  factor,  which  we  have  come  to
know  as  the  regent  in  the  organic  and  conscious  life  of
the  individual,  the  question  may  arise  whether  we  have  to
do  with  a  central  monad  separcde  for  each  individual,  or
whether  the  functions  of  the  Unconscious  proceed  from  a
being  identical  and  common  for  all  individuals  ?  Since,  in
conclusion,  even  Leibniz  saw  himself  compelled  to  trans-
form the  unrelated  coadjacency  of  his  windowless  monads
into  their  coinherence,  i.e.,  to  take  up  all  monads  into
an  absolute  central  monad,  one  may  also  put  the  question
thus :  Do  the  bundles  of  rays  of  unconscious  psychical
functions  in  the  different  individuals  point  directly  to  one
and  the  same  absolute  centre,  or  do  they  in  the  first  in-
stance lead  to  different  relative  centres,  and  only  mediately
through  these  to  the  universal  centre  of  the  world  ?  In
this  culminates  the  question  with  respect  to  the  indivi-
duality of  the  Unconscious,  after  one  has  assured  oneself
in  general  of  the  unity  of  the  Unconscious  as  such.  In
cunfurmity  witli  the  importance  of  this  problem  we  discuss
it  in  a  chapter  of  its  own.


( 222 )


VII.

THE ALL-ONENESS OF THE UNCONSCIOUS.

That  to  the  Unconscious,  as  actively  manifested  in  an
organic  and  individual  consciousness,  there  is  not  wanting
strict  unity,  is  probably  at  once  evident  We  altogether
know  the  Unconscious  only  by  means  of  causality ;  it  is
just  the  cause  of  all  those  events  in  an  organic  and  con-
scious individual  which  lead  us  to  suppose  a  psychical  and
yet  not  conscious  cause.  All  that  we  have  found  within
this  Unconscious  of  distinctions  or  parts  is  limited  to  the
two  moments  Will  and  Idea,  and  of  these  we  have  also
indeed  again  perceived  the  inseparable  unity  in  the  Un-
conscious. But  in  case  some  one  should  insist  that  Will
and  Idea  are  to  be  conceived  as  different  parts  of  the  one
Unconscious,  yet  their  reciprocity  in  the  motivation  of
the  Will  through  the  Idea  and  arousing  of  the  Idea
by  means  of  the  interest  of  the  Will  would  be  quite  un-
mistakable. What  in  the  organism  we  were  still  com-
pelled to  apprehend  as  unity  through  mutual  action  of  the
parts  is  in  the  One  cause  of  these  events  taken  up  into
the  unity  of  the  end,  to  which  these  several  activities  of
the  one  and  another  part  are  all  posited  only  as  common
means.  The  unity  of  Time  in  the  continuity  of  action  is
likewise  present.  The  unity  of  Space  can  here,  of  course,
be  no  longer  spoken  of,  because  we  have  to  do  with  a  non-
spatial  being ;  in  the  effects,  however,  it  is  just  as  much
present  as  the  unity  of  Time.  Thus  much,  then,  is  settled,
that  the  unity  of  the  psychically  Unconscious  in  the  indi-
vidual is  the  strictest  one  can  find. It  is,  however,  not


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  223

implied  in  this  that  there  are  unconsciously  psychical  in-
dividuals, for  if  the  unity  of  the  Unconscious  were  so
strict  that  it  undividedly  embraced  in  itself  all  the  uncon-
sciously-psychical, wherever  it  might  be  operative  in  the
world,  there  would  be  only  one  Unconscious,  and  not  several
Unconscious ;  then  there  would  be  also  no  longer  indivi-
duals in  the  Unconscious,  but  the  entire  Unconscious
would  be  as  one  single  individual,  without  subordinate,  co-
ordinate, or  super-ordinate  individuals.  Since  also  Matter
and  Consciousness  are  phenomenal  forms  of  the  Uncon-
scious, this  being  would  then  be  the  all-embracing  indi-
vidual which  is  all-being,  the  absolute  individual,  or  the
individual  /car  ^oyfjv.

In  organisms  we  had  no  occasion  to  raise  the  question
whether  we  then  had  actually  several  things  and  not  one
before  us,  because  the  spatial  distinction  of  the  form
answered  it  by  anticipation.  In  the  case  of  consciousness
we  have  answered  the  question,  which  could  hardly  be
decided  c\  priori,  in  conformity  with  internal  experience,
which  teaches  us  that  the  consciousness  of  Peter  and
Paul,  of  brain  and  abdominal  ganglia,  are  not  one,  but
many  and  different.  In  the  Unconscious,  however,  this
question  is  robbed  of  half  its  force ;  since  the  essence  of
the  Unconscious  is  non-spatial,  and  the  inner  experience  of
consciousness  of  course  says  nothing  at  all  about  the  Un-
conscious. Xobody  is  directly  aware  of  the  unconscious
suhject  of  his  own  consciousness.  Everybody  knows  it  only
as  the  in  itself  unknown  psychical  cause  of  his  conscious-
ness. What  ground  could  he  have  for  the  assertion  that
this  unknown  cause  of  his  consciousness  is  another  than
that  of  1  lis  neighbour,  whose  immediate  knowledge  is  just
as  limited  as  his  own  ?  In  a  word,  immediate  inner  or
outer  experience  affords  us  no  aid  in  deciding  this  impor-
tant alternative,  which  accordingly  is  provisionally  a  per-
fectly open  question.  In  such  a  case  the  maxim  carries
full  authority  that  principles  are  not  to  be  unnecessarily
multiplied,  and  that  in  the  absence  of  direct  experience


224  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  simplest  assumptions  are  always  to  be  entertained.
According  to  this,  the  unity  of  the  Unconscious  would
have  to  be  supposed  so  long  as  the  opponent  of  this
simplest  assumption  had  not  satisfactorily  relieved  him-
self of  the  onus  probandi  incumbent  upon  him.  But  of  this
no  attempt  is  yet  known  to  us  ;  for  Herbart's  proposition,
"  As  much  appearance,  so  much  indication  of  existence,"
can  manifestly  only  serve  to  prove  the  many-sidedness,  but
not  the  multiplicity  of  being,  since,  as  is  well  known,  one
and  the  same  being  appears  for  the  most  part  quite  diffe-
rent according  to  different  aspects.  That  the  assumption
of  direct  unity  is  really  much  simpler  hardly  needs  special
proof,  since  here  there  is  only  question  of  the  relations  of
the  actor  to  his  activities,  and  of  the  reciprocal  action  of
the  activities  of  one  and  the  same  actor;  whereas,  on  the
opposite  assumption,  the  relations  of  different  actors  to
their  activities,  and,  moreover,  those  of  the  actor  and
his  activities  inter  se,  are  in  question,  the  latter  of  which
must  either  be  acknowledged  to  be  quite  inexplicable,  or
be  explained  by  the  further  perfectly  inaccessible  and  in-
comprehensible relations  of  these  many  actors  to  the  Abso-
lute standing  over  them  and  including  them.

Only  because  the  one  part  of  my  brain  has  a  direct  com-
munication with  the  other  is  the  consciousness  of  the  two
parts  unified  (conf.  C.  Chap.  iii.  5.  pp.  1 13-1 18) ;  and  could
we  unite  the  brains  of  two  human  beings  by  a  path  of  com-
munication equivalent  to  the  cerebral  fibres,  both  would
no  longer  have  two,  but  one  consciousness.  Could  a  union
of  two  consciousnesses  into  one,  such  as  actually  occurs,  be
at  all  possible  if  the  Unconscious,  from  which  conscious-
ness is  born  as  a  sequel  of  natural  stimulation,  were  not
already  in  itself  one  ?

The  entire  ant  has  one,  the  divided  ant  two  conscious-
nesses ;  and  if  one  sews  together  the  halves  of  two  diffe-
rent polyps  (thus  two  previously  divided  consciousnesses),
one  polyp  will  result  with  a  single  consciousness.  Wealth
and  poverty  of  consciousness  can  make  no  difference  in


MBTAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  22;

these  inquiries  involving  matters  of  principle.  As  little
as  any  one  can  deny,  after  the  foregoing  considerations,  that
he  has  as  many  (more  or  less  separate)  consciousnesses
as  he  has  nerve-centres,  nay,  even  as  he  has  vital  cells,  so
much  will  every  one  rightly  oppose  the  assertion  that  he
has  as  many  unconsciously  acting  souls  as  he  has  nerve-
centres  or  cells.  The  unity  of  purpose  in  the  organism,
the  right  operation  of  each  single  part  at  the  right  moment,
in  short,  the  wonderful  harmony  of  the  organism,  would
be  inexplicable,  in  fact,  only  comprehensible  as  pre-
established  harmony,  unless  the  soul  in  the  body  were  one
and  indivisible,  acting,  however,  synchronously  in  all  parts
of  the  organism  where  its  action  is  required, — unless  it
were  one  and  the  same  soul  which  regulates  here  breathing.
there  excretion,  which  here  in  the  brain  conditions  the
brain-consciousness,  there  in  the  ganglia  the  ganglia-con-
sciousness. If  the  cutting  into  shreds  of  the  lower  animals
shows  us  that  the  same  mind,  which  before  governed  the
different  parts  in  the  whole  animal  and  produced  the  dif-
ferent kinds  of  consciousness,  continues  also  to  be  func-
tional unaltered  after  division,  can  we  then  believe  that  the
corporeal  section  may  also  have  cleft  the  soul  and  divided  it
into  two  parts,  can  by  division  of  a  mere  aggregate  of  atoms
the  non-spatial  soul  accidentally  governing  them  be  at  all
conceived  as  affected,  save  so  far  as  the  conditions  of  its
activity  are  changed  ?

But  if  the  soul  in  two  artificially  separated  pieces  of
an  animal  is  still  one,  must  it  not  remain  undivided  also
in  the  spontaneous  throwing-off  of  buds,  claws,  &c.  ?
and  likewise  in  bisexual  generation,  where  one  her-
maphrodite animal  begets  with  itself  (e.g.,  tape-worm)?
(Sec  more  particularly  the  ninth  chapter.)  If  the  un-
conscious soul  in  the  separate  portions  of  an  insect,  or
in  the  stem  and  the  detached  buds,  is  still  one,  must  it
not  lie  the  same  also  in  the  insects  separate  by  nature  of
a  community  of  bees  or  ants,  which  even  without  union
of  the organisms in  space  still  act  as  harmoniously  on

vol.  11.  r


226  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

one  another  as  the  several  parts  of  the  same  organism?
Should  not  the  clairvoyance,  which  we  have  found  every-
where recurring  in  the  invasions  of  the  Unconscious,  and
which  is  so  supremely  astonishing  in  the  limited  indivi-
dual, should  not  it  alone  invite  this  solution,  that  the
apparently  individual  acts  of  clairvoyance  are  simply
announcements  of  the  everywhere  identical  Unconscious,
wherewith  at  once  everything  miraculous  in  clairvoy-
ance disappears,  since  now  the  seer  is  also  the  soul  of  the
seen  ?  And  if  it  is  possible  for  the  unconscious  soul  of
an  animal  to  be  simultaneously  present  and  purposively
active  in  all  organs  and  cells  of  the  animal,  why  should  not
an  unconscious  world-soul  be  simultaneously  present  and
purposively  efficient  in  all  organisms  and  atoms,  since
indeed  the  one  as  the  other  must  be  thought  as  unrea-
lised ?

What  opposes  this  conception  is  only  the  old  prejudice
that  the  soul  is  the  consciousness ;  so  long  as  one  has  not
risen  above  this  view  and  perfectly  extirpated  every
obscure  remnant  of  such  a  belief  from  his  mind,  so  long
must  that  all-unity  of  the  Unconscious  be  certainly  covered
by  a  veil.  Only  when  one  has  come  to  see  that  conscious-
ness does  not  belong  to  the  essence,  but  to  the  phenomenon,
that  thus  the  plurality  of  consciousness  is  only  &  plurality
of  the  appearance  of  the  One,  only  then  will  it  be  possible  to
emancipate  oneself  from  the  power  of  the  practical  instinct,
which  always  cries  "I,  I,"  and  to  comprehend  the  essential
unity  of  all  corporeal  and  spiritual  phenomenal  individuals,
which  Spinoza  apprehended  in  his  mystical  conception  and
declared  the  One  Substance.  It  is  no  contradiction  to  the
all-unity  of  the  Unconscious  that  the  individual  self-feel-
ing, which  at  first  is  present  only  as  slight  practical  instinct,
with  growing  elaboration  of  consciousness  is  ever  more
heightened  and  sharpened  to  pure  self-consciousness,  that
thus  the  appearance  indestructible  for  conscious  thought
of  the  individual  egoity  only  emerges  the  more  dis-
tinctly, the  keener  conscious  thought  becomes ;  this,  I  say,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  227

is  no  contradiction  to  the  Monism  of  the  Unconscious,  for
all  conscious  thought  remains  indeed  entangled  in  the
conditions  of  consciousness,  and  can  by  its  nature  never
be  elevated  above  them  in  direct  fashion,  must  rather  be
the  more  wrapt  round  by  the  deceptive  veil  of  Maja,
the  more  it  displays  its  proper  nature.  The  unity  of
the  Unconscious  may  very  well  exist  at  the  same  time,
of  that  namely,  which  never  can  come  into  consciousness,
because  it  lies  behind  it,  as  the  mirror  can  never  mirror
itself  (at  the  most  its  own  image  in  a  second  mirror).
Certainly  as  long  as  one  has  not  rigidly  separated  and
explicated  the  Unconscious,  so  long  that  objection  exists
in  full  force,  and  so  long  can  the  idea  of  the  all-unity  not
be  rationally  comprehended  and  approved,  but  only  be
mystically  conceived,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  con-
sciousness.

Another  point  which  is  often  made  use  of  as  cheap
ridicule  against  Monism  is  the  paradox  that  the  One
contends  with  itself  as  a  self-parted  being,  that,  e.g.,  the
One  Existence  is  in  conflict  with  itself,  like  two  hungry
wolves,  each  of  whom  endeavours  to  devour  the  other.
Two  problems  are  here  intermingled :  firstly,  the  problem
of  the  sundering  of  the  One  into  the  many,  and,  secondly,
the  question  how  the  Many,  if  they  are  indeed  only
realisations  or  objectifications  or  phenomena  of  the  One
can  turn  against  one  another  in  strife  and  discord.  The
first  problem,  that  of  individuation,  will  be  treated  of  in
a  special  chapter  (C.  Chap,  xi.),  and  only  under  the  presup-
position that  this  will  be  solved  in  a  satisfactory  manner
l.s  there  any  sense  in  occupying' ourselves  with  the  second
question,  here  I  shall  oidy  say  this  much,  that  a  self-
disunion  would  oidy  be  incomprehensible  if  the  One
surrendered  its  unity  (and  with  it  a  piece  of  its  essence);
that,  on  the  contrary,  a  self-disunion  into  a  secondary
(beeau.se  phenomenal)  plurality,  in  which  unity  is  pre-
served in  plurality,  just  brings  multiplicity  into  the
abstract unity, or, more accurately expressed, that a


22S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sundering  of  the  One  into  plurality  cannot  be  objection-
able, if  thereby  be  meant  not  a  splitting  of  the  one  sub-
stance into  many  isolated  substances,  but  manifestations  of
the  one  existing  and  abiding  being  in  a  plurality  of  func-
tions. But  if  this  plurality  of  different  functions  is  once
given,  then,  in  consequence  of  the  circumstance  that  they
are  functions  of  one  being,  the  ideal  difference  of  their
content  must  necessarily  exert  an  ideal  influence  on  one
another  striving  after  equilibrium,  which  ideal  compromise,
however,  becomes  a  real  conflict  through  this,  that  the
ideal  moments  compromising  one  another  are  at  the  same
time  contents  of  real  acts  of  will.  It  is  thus  altogether
the  same  process  that  takes  place  in  the  consciousness  of
the  individual  as  a  struggle  between  different  efforts,
desires,  and  passions ;  just  as  a  contest  is  possible  here
notwithstanding  the  unity  of  the  mind,  whose  functions
are  the  intersecting  desires,  so  also  in  the  all-one  Uncon-
scious. The  struggle  of  two  passions  in  a  human  mind  in
fury  and  destructive  mercilessness  need  not  in  truth  shun
comparison  with  the  struggle  of  two  hungry  wolves.  The
only  difference  is  this,  that  what  takes  place  in  the  sub-
jective field  within  an  individual  is  withdrawn  from  the
direct  observation  of  another,  whereas  the  struggle  of
different  individualised]  acts  of  will  of  the  Unconscious
hereby  possesses  an  objective  phenomenal  reality,  that
the  individuals  engaged  in  conflict  directly  sensuously
affect  one  another  and  other  unconcerned  individuals.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  question  is  proposed  in  these
terms,  "  Why  must  the  several  functions  of  the  One  Being
be  so  constituted  that  they  collide  with,  instead  of  running
undisturbed  beside,  one  another?"  the 'answer  is  to  be
sought  in  C.  Chap.  hi. :  "  Without  collision  of  different
acts  of  will  no  consciousness," — and  consciousness  it  is
that  is  in  point.

Hitherto  we  have  shown,  on  the  one  hand,  that  there  is
and  can  be  no  reason  which  tells  against  the  unity  of
consciousness,  and  have,  on  the  other  hand,  adduced  various


M  ETA  PHY  SIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  229

a  'posteriori  grounds  of  probability  for  the  same.  We  can,
however,  also  settle  the  question  directly  by  deduction
from  already  established  presuppositions,  thus  a  priori  in
the  Aristotelian  sense  of  the  word.

The  Unconscious  is  not  confined  to  space,  for  it  first
posits  space  (the  idea  the  ideal,  the  will  by  realisation  of
the  idea  the  real).  The  Unconscious  is  thus  neither  great
nor  small,  neither  here  nor  there,  neither  in  the  finite  nor
in  the  infinite,  neither  in  the  figure  nor  in  the  point,
neither  anywhere  nor  nowhere.  Hence  it  follows  that
the  Unconscious  can  have  no  difference  of  a  spatial  nature
in  it,  save  so  far  as  it  posits  the  same  in  imaging  and
acting.  We  are  accordingly  not  permitted  to  say :  that
which  acts  in  an  atom  of  Sirius  is  something  else  than
that  which  acts  in  an  atom  of  the  earth,  but  only:  it  acts
in  a  different  manner,  namely,  locally  different.  We  have
two  effects  without  the  right  to  suppose  two  beings  for
these  effects ;  for  the  difference  of  the  effects  only  allows
us  to  conclude  to  a  difference  of  the  functions  in  the  being  ;
the  difference  of  two  functions,  however,  by  no  means  to
the  non-identity  of  the  functioning  being.  We  must
reiterate  :  we  are  compelled  to  stop  short  at  the  simplest
assumption  (the  identity  of  the  functioning  essence)  until
the  opponents  have  furnished  proof  of  non -identity;  on
them,  not  on  us,  lies  the  burden  of  proof,  since  they  sup-
pose many,  we  only  one.  At  any  rate,  this  much  has  been
strictly  demonstrated  by  us,  that  no  plurality  of  its  essence
can  appertain  to  the  Unconscious  by  means  of  space-deter-
minations, simply  because  no  space-determinations  apper-
tain to  it.  In  temporal  differences  this  is  much  clearer  still,
since  we  are  indeed  thus  accustomed  to  acknowledge  the
identity  of  the  continuously  acting  being  despite  all  tem-
poral difference,  in  spite  of  the  earlier  or  later  occurrence  of
the  effects.  But  now  there  are,  objectively  speaking,  none
other  than  spatial  differences;  for  what  we  else  know  as
differences,  the  difference  of  ideas  inter  se  and  the  difference
of  willing  and  thinking,  are  internal subjective  differences


230  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  different  activities  of  the  same  essence  or  subject,  but
not  a  difference  of  different  essences  or  subjects.  Of
the  difference  of  different  ideas  inter  se  this  is  at  once
clear,  but  it  also  holds  good  of  the  difference  of  the  two
fundamental  activities  willing  and  thinking,  pervading  all
individuals  of  the  realm  of  nature,  for  the  Unconscious  is
one  in  willing  as  in  conceiving,  only  that  it  here  wills
and  there  thinks;  it  is  related  to  those  activities  as  Spinoza's
substance  to  its  attributes.  (More  in  detail  in  C.  Chap,
xiv.  4.)  All  distinction  known  to  us  between  existing
things  turns  upon  spatial  and  temporal  determinations.
Space  and  time  are  the  sole  princiyium  individucdionis
known  to  us.  To  assert  with  Schopenhauer  that  they  are
the  only  j)ossible  prineipium  individucdionis  would  be  to
assert  too  much,  for  there  might  be  worlds  in  which  other
forms  of  existence  than  space  and  time  obtain.  But  apart
from  this,  that  the  burden  of  proof  of  the  existence  of  such
falls  on  the  shoulders  of  opponents,  and  until  the  impos-
sible production  of  this  proof  we  have  not  to  trouble  our-
selves about  such  empty  possibilities,  yet  even  such  forms
of  existence  in  their  particular  worlds,  just  as  space  and
time  witli  us,  would  only  have  phenomenal  existence,  i.e.,
it  could  be  shown  that  they  can  just  as  little  be  determina-
tions of  the  Unconscious  as  space  and  time  with  us,  and
they  would  accordingly  be  just  as  imsuitable  as  these
would  be  for  establishing  a  plurality  of  essence  in  the
Unconscious.  If,  then,  the  Unconscious  can  be  burdened
with  a  plurality  of  being  neither  by  spatial  nor  other
differentia?,  it  must  just  be  a  simple  unity.

We  may  further  add  an  indirect  proof  to  this  direct  one
from  admitted  presuppositions.  Suppose  the  case,  namely,
that  the  phenomenal  separation  of  individuals  did  not  rest
merely  on  a  plurality  of  functions  of  the  existence  under-
lying them,  but  on  a  non-identity  of  the  essence,  on  a
plurality  of  existing  substances,  no  real  relations  would
be  possible  among  the  individuals  as  they  in  fact  exist.
This  is  one  of  the  greatest  achievements  of  the  ureat


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  231

Leibniz,  that  in  spite  of  its  extremely  fatal  (and  for  his
system  even  ruinous)  consequences,  he  admitted  this  pro-
position honourably  and  candidly.  Herbart  occupies  here
a  far  inferior  position,  for  after  having  made  from  the
plurality  of  appearance  the  false  inference  to  the  plurality
(instead  of  the  many-sidedness)  of  existence,  he  posits  the
mutual  disturbances  of  these  many  existences  (simple
reals)  as  something  self-evident,  instead  of,  like  Leibniz,
conceding  it  to  be  something  impossible.  Whoever  once
recognises  several  substances  (i.e.,  several  beings,  each  of
which  is  self-subsistent,  and  would  continue  to  subsist
even  if  everything  else  round  about  were  suddenly  to
cease  to  exist),  must  also  confess  that  these  monads  can
not  only  have  no  windows  through  which  an  injluxus
idecdis  could  shine,  but  also  that  there  is  no  possibility  of
seeing  how  entities,  which  participate  in  nought  and  have
nothing  in  common,  should  be  able  to  come  into  any
metaphysical  contact  whatsoever.  Each  individual  must
rather  represent  an  isolated  world  for  itself.  If  one  tried
to  suppose  a  metaphysical  bond,  to  which  would  fall
the  part  of  a  mediator,  the  difficulty  to  resolve  would  be,
how  this  newly  added  substance  should  be  able  to  enter
into  real  relation  with  each  of  the  existing  substances.
For  if  one  tried  to  imagine  this  tie  somewhat  as  a  function
of  the  Absolute  or  as  the  Absolute  itself,  it  is  to  be  re-
marked, on  the  contrary  (apart  from  the  circumstance
that  in  many  substances  the  discussion,  strictly  speaking,
cannot  be  of  One  Absolute,  but  only  of  as  many  absolutes
as  substances),  that  a  real  relation  between  a  so-called
xVbsolute  and  one  of  several  substances  only  appears  less
incomprehensible  than  the  relation  between  two  of  the
many  substances,  because  fancy  is  more  readily  inclined  to
ascribe  to  the  so-called  Absolute  the  power  of  incomprehen-
sible achievements.  The  iniluence  of  the  Absolute  on  the
many  only,  however,  becomes  comprehensible  if  the  so-
called  Absolute  is  converted  from  a  substance  actually
limited  by  the  many  into  an  unlimited,  genuinely  all-em-


232  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

bracing  substance,  which  thus  contains  the  many  as  integral
parts  of  itself.  But  then,  in  truth,  the  many  are  denuded
of  their  independence  and  substantiality,  and  degraded  to
sublated  moments  of  the  one  absolute.  This  step,  which
again  in  the  last  resort  dissolves  the  intended  Pluralism
into  Monism,  both  Leibniz  in  the  all-embracing  central
monad,  as  well  as  Herbart  in  the  credited  god-creator,  saw
themselves  necessitated  to  take,  without  however  re-
cognising the  incompatibility  of  this  change  with  the
retention  of  the  foundations  of  their  systems,  and  without
employing  this  step  for  the  explanation  of  the  infiuxus
physicus,  or  the  causality  of  the  monads  among  themselves,
which  must  necessarily  miscarry  without  it,  but  results
in  a  perfectly  unforced  manner  from  the  essential  identity
of  the  many  in  the  One.

Although  Pluralism  is  not  able  to  maintain  itself  in
its  proper  form  as  soon  as  it  realises  its  own  conse-
quences, it  yet  tries  to  maintain  itself  in  the  illusory
light  of  consciousness  in  a  more  modest  form  as  it  were
within  a  reluctantly  admitted  Monism.  The  inherently
contradictory  conception  of  derived  substance  is  especially
employed  for  this  purpose.  Substance  is  that  which  is  in
itself  (not  in  another)  and  subsists  through  itself  (without
the  aid  of  another)  ;  the  derived  substance,  however,
is  said  not  to  be  in  itself,  but  in  the  absolute  substance,
and  not  to  subsist  through  itself,  but  only  through  the
absolute  substance.  Derived  substance  thus  evinces  itself
as  not-substance ;  it  evinces  itself  as  particular  mode  and
manner  (modus)  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Absolute,
or,  as  we  now  say,  as  phenomenon.  Xow  Pluralism  fur-
ther tries  to  at  least  raise  the  phenomenon  of  the  indi-
vidual mind  to  a  higher  category  of  phenomena,  or  to
lower  the  rest  of  phenomena  one  degree,  as  if  they  were
mediate  results  of  that  phenomenon.  This  is,  however,
so  incorrect,  that  in  a  certain  sense  the  contrary  is  true,
so  far,  namely,  as  the  individual  mind  results  on  the
one  side  only  from  the  material  phenomena. The  light


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  233

radiating  from  the  unconscious  central  sun  strikes  upon
the  concave  mirror  of  organisms,  and  is  reflected  and
united  in  the  focus  of  the  self-conscious  mind.  In  this
way  arise  the  separate  centres  of  the  individual  conscious
minds,  but  with  these  the  absolute  centre  does  not  com-
municate directly,  but  only  by  means  of  the  unconscious
rays  (functions)  affecting  the  organism  (the  brain),  which
are  reflected  from  this  to  the  focus  of  consciousness.  None
of  those  functions  which  are  ascribed  to  the  unconscious
rule  of  the  organism  proceed  from  these  separate  centres;  if
there  is  in  respect  of  the  latter  a  separate  centre  still  to
be  assumed  for  every  individual,  there  must  be  a  second
leside  that  first  one  ;  in  this  second  one  then  we  must
imagine  the  functional  rays  issuing  from  the  absolute
centre  to  be  bent  or  broken.  How  such  a  refraction  is
to  take  place  in  such  an  imaginary  centre  would  be  here
quite  unintelligible,  whilst  reflection  on  the  organism  or
its  organ  of  consciousness  is  a  perfectly  intelligible  image.
Through  the  accumulated  difficulties  of  these  separate
centres,  however,  the  explanation  of  the  facts  would  not
be  in  the  least  assisted,  i.e.,  these  mathematical  points
of  refraction  of  the  function-rays  of  the  absolute  centre,
not  to  be  conceived  as  substantial  but  ideal,  form  a  merely
embarrassing  and  uselessly  interpolated  hypothesis.

However  we  may  try  to  save  for  the  individuals  a  reality
and  independence  exceeding  that  of  simple  phenomenality,
it  is  love's  labour  lost  if  intended  to  favour  the  unphilo-
sophical  partiality  of  the  consciousness  doting  upon  its
own  ego.  As  all  plurality  of  individuation  belongs  to  the
sphere  of  phenomenality,  everything  placed  beyond  phe-
nomenality also  falls  outside  the  plurality  of  the  individuals
into  the  all-one  Unconscious  and  its  direct  activity.  Only
in  this  way  lias  the  absolute  central  monad  of  Leibniz  the
power  to  strip  off  the  contradiction  which  clings  to  it,
namely,  by  identifying  itself  again  with  Spinoza's  One
substance,  in  which  the  many  individuals  or  monads  are
reduced  to  depemlent  phenomenal  forms  or  modes.


234  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

This  going  back  of  Leibniz  on  Spinoza  is,  however,  as
little  a  retrogression  as  the  falling  back  of  modern  physi-
cal science  :  in  both  cases,  through  the  progress  of  experi-
ence and  induction,  one  is  enabled  to  comprehend  and  to
prove  a  posteriori  the  mystical  conceptions  of  genius  of  an
elder  mind.  Such  a  falling  back  upon  great  predecessors
is  thus  a  genuine  progress  and  a  permanent  gain,  for  it
may  be  allowed  me  once  more  to  mention  that  the  course
of  philosophy  is  the  transformation  of  the  mystical  concep-
tions of  genius  into  rational  cognition. (Conf.  B.  Chap,  ix.)

Wherever  we  may  look  among  the  original  philosophi-
cal or  religious  systems  of  the  first  rank,  everywhere  do
we  meet  with  the  tendency  to  Monism,  and  it  is  only  stars
of  second  or  third  magnitude  which  find  satisfaction  in
an  external  dualism  or  still  greater  division.  Even  in
declared  polytheistic  religions,  as  the  Greek  and  the  dif-
ferent Northern  mythologies,  one  perceives  this  tendency
to  Monism,  both  in  the  oldest  conceptions,  and  in  the  later
modes  of  feeling  of  deeper  religious  minds  ;  and  even  in  the
more  philosophical  ways  of  thinking  of  Christian  Monism,
the  world  is  only  a  phenomenon  posited  by  God,  which  has
only  continuance  (subsistence)  so  long  as  it  is  preserved,  i.e.,
is  being  continually  renewed.  All  systems  tending  to  Mon-
ism have  not  succeeded  in  really  reaching  it,  yet  one  feels
the  unmistakable  need  of  a  unitarian  world-conception,
and  only  the  shallowest  religions  and  philosophical  sys-
tems have  rested  contented  with  an  external  dualism  {e.g.,
Ormuzd  and  xYhriman,  God  and  World,  World-Orderer  and
Chaos,  Force  and  Matter,  &c),  or  any  sort  of  plurality.
There  is  no  conception  which  the  impressionable  mystic
mind  more  readily  adopts  than  this — to  apprehend  the
world  as  an  indivisible  Being,  to  feel  oneself  as  part
of  this  Being,  but  a  part  in  which,  at  the  same  time,
indwells  the  whole,  and  penetrated  by  this  contrast  to
indulge  the  religious  feeling  of  the  sublimity  of  this
vast  Being  and  the  sense  of  the  ego's  participation
therein. Owing  to  Christianity  this  one  existence  has


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  USCOXSCIOUS.  235

been  called  in  thp  Teutonic  languages  God,  and  the
view  which  asserts  that  this  one  existence  is  the
all  or  the  whole  has  been  accordingly  entitled  Pan-
theism (in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term).  Rightly  un-
derstood, one  may  certainly  let  the  word  pass.  I  prefer,
however,  on  account  of  the  misunderstandings  to  which  it
is  exposed,  the  synonymous  term  Monism,  according  to
our  explanation  of  Pantheism.  Orthodox  Catholicism
and  shallow  rationalistic  Protestantism,  both  of  which
thought  to  exalt  God  while  they  lowered  him  (attributing
to  him  human  passions),  have  undoubtedly  always  con-
demned and  burnt  as  heretics  the  deeper  minds  in  the
Christian  Church  who  perceived  and  declared  the  need  of
this  Monism  [e.g.,  Eckhard,  Giordano  Bruno),  but  out  of  all
such  persecutions  the  tendency  to  the  monistic  purifying
of  Christianity  has  always  emerged  in  greater  strength,
and  lias  been  ever  gaining  in  influence  over  discerning
minds.  Schelling  says :  "  That  in  God  alone  is  being,
and  therefore  all  being  is  only  the  being  of  God;  this
thought  neither  reason  nor  feeling  can  take  away.  It
is  the  thought  to  which  alone  all  hearts  beat "  (Werke,
Abth.  ii.  vol.  ii.  p.  39) ;  and  "  That  everything  is  from
God  has  been  at  all  times  felt,  as  it  were;  nay,  one  may
say  :  just  this  is  the  true  primitive  feeling  of  humanity  "
(Werke,  Abth.  ii.  vol.  iii.  p.  280).  This  mystic  primitive
feeling  of  mankind  in  the  form  of  a  tendency  to  Monism
often  indeed  only  realised  in  an  extremely  defective
manner,  but  with  the  exception  of  the  sceptics  always
perceptible,  runs  like  a  red  streak  through  all  philosophy
from  the  oldest  Indian  traditions  down  to  the  present  day.
Since  a  survey,  however  hurried,  of  the  whole  period  would
be  impracticable  witli  our  space,  I  limit  myself  to  sketch-
ing with  a  few  strokes  the  most  recent  epoch  in  this
respect.

The  being  which  underlies  the  appearance  of  the  object
of  perception  was  called  by  Kant  the  "  thing  of  itself."
It  is  remarkable  that  Kant  never  drew  from  his  doctrine


235  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

that  space  and  time  do  not  belong  to  the  thing  of  itself,
hut  only  to  its  appearance,  the  rather  obvious  conclusion
that  there  cannot  be  things  of  themselves,  but  only  thing
of  itself  in  the  singular,  since  all  plurality  only  arises
through  space  and  time.  On  the  other  hand,  he  himself
(Kant,  Werke,  ii.  288,  289,  and  303)  made  the  remark,
that  the  thing  of  itself  and  the  intelligible  underlying  the
empirical  ego  could  hardly  be  one  and  the  same  existence,
since  between  the  two  there  positively  could  be  no  further
difference  specified.  This  is  one  of  the  touches  where  the
involuntary  tendency  of  great  minds  towards  Monism  can-
not be  denied.  That  Kant,  nevertheless,  was  so  timid  in
his  inferences  lay  in  this,  that  he  formed  the  commence-
ment of  the  modern  epoch  of  philosophy,  an  epoch  in
which  the  work  formerly  concentrated  on  one  or  two  men
of  genius  had  to  be  distributed  over  the  shoulders  of
several,  because  this  work  became  the  more  difficult  the
more  often  the  old  problems  re-emerged  in  novel  and
sharper  form,  and  the  more  the  circuit  of  knowledge  and
of  experience  expanded.

What  Kant  entertained  as  timid  supposition,  that  the
thing  of  itself  and  the  active  subject  might  be  one  and
the  same  existence,  Schopenhauer  declared  as  catgorical
assertion,  in  that  he  recognised  the  will  as  the  positive
character  of  this  essence.  (Comp.  my  "  Gesammelte
philos.  Abhandlungen,"  No.  iii.)  It  has  already  been
mentioned  above  (i.  29,  30,  and  120;,  that  Schopenhauer's
Will  altogether  comports  itself  as  if  it  were  united  with
perception,  without  Schopenhauer  admitting  it.

Fichte  mistook  the  truth  of  the  Kantian  hint.  He
denies  to  the  appearance  of  the  thing  all  existence
independent  of  the  perceiving  subject,  and  turns  it  into
a  phenomenon  entirely  posited  by  the  perceiving  sub-
ject. Thus  the  thing  of  itself  loses  its  immediate  essen-
tial being  in  the  Ego.  Only  what  exists  in  the  form  of
an  ego  has  with  Fichte  being,  and  dead  Nature,  so  far  as
it  does  not  enter  into  this  form,  remains  a  phenomenon


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  237

purely  subjective,  i.e.,  merely  posited  by  the  subject.  But
Eichte  also  was  compelled  to  bend  in  his  own  fashion  to
Monism ;  the  Ego  is  denuded  of  the  accidental  character
of  this  or  that  limited  empirical  ego,  being  raised  to  the
Absolute  Eo-o.  The  Absolute  Ego  is  the  existence  which
alone  is  all  the  different,  accidental,  empirical  limited
egos,  for  the  Being  which  is  developed  in  the  process  of
the  Absolute  Ego  is  the  same  which  produces  this  process
in  its  accidental  empirical  limitation  ;  so  that  herewith
the  many  egos  also  again  became  lowered  only  to  pheno-
mena of  the  One  Absolute.

Schelling  tries  in  his  Transcendental  Idealism  to  deduce
the  wealth  of  the  external  world,  with  its  manifold  deter-
minations which  had  shrunk  with  Eichte  into  the  bald
abstraction  of  the  non-ego,  from  the  activity  of  the
ego.  But  while  he  explains  the  agreement  of  the  intui-
tions of  the  various  limited  egos  from  the  equally  strongly
emphasised  unity  of  the  infinite  intelligence  or  of  the
Absolute  Ego  in  the  finite  intelligences^  limited  egos,  the
standpoint  of  transcendental  idealism  necessarily  leads  him
to  the  Natural  Philosophy,  where,  without  reference  to  the
limited  ego's,  he  undertakes  to  directly  deduce  the  extra-
mundane  determinations  from  the  absolute  ego  or  pure
subject,  and  here,  among  other  natural  determinations,  of
course,  also  lights  upon  the  mind  and  its  products.  In
botli  systems  he  proceeds  from  the  identity  of  subject  and
object;  only  this  absolute  subject-object  makes  its  appear-
ance at  one  time  more  from  the  subjective,  at  another
time  more  from  the  objective  side.

The  method  hereby  employed  of  the  pure  subject
gradually  positing  itself  as  object,  which  withdraws  from
all  objectification  into  its  gradually  enhanced  subjectivity,
led  Hegel  to  his  dialectical  method.

"  The  method  is  only  the  movement  of  the  concept
itself,  but  with  the  significance  that  the  concept  is  all,  and
its  movement  the  universal  absolute  activity."

Hegel perceived  that  the deduction of .Schelling  has


238  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

either  no  value  at  all,  or  a  purely  logical  value  as  process
iu  the  realm  of  thought,  but  he  claimed  that  his  logic  built
upon  this  is  at  the  same  time  ontology ;  that  the  concept  is
all,  i.e.,  sole  substance  and  sole  absolute  subject,  and  that  the
world-process  is  pure  dialectical  self-movement  of  the
concept ;  that  thus  there  remains  no  room  for  the  exist-
ence of  a  strictly  non-logical,  i.e.,  alogical  (not  anti-logical)  ;
for  in  his  imposing  compact  system  the  world  was  ex-
hausted with  the  concept  raised  to  the  absolute  Idea,  with
the  absolute  Idea  sundered  in  nature  and  returned  to  itself
in  the  spirit. (Comp.  my  "  Ges.  phil.  Abhandl,"  No.  ii.)

Schelling  in  his  last  system  (comp.  "  Schelling's  Positive
Philosophic  als  Einheit  von  Hegel  und  Schopenhauer,"
Berlin,  0.  Lowenstein,  1869,  especially  the  second  and
third  sections)  maintained  the  negativity,  i.e.,  purely  logical
or  purely  rational  constitution,  of  the  Hegelian  philosophy  ;
he  thus  denied  that  it  can  say  what  and  how  it  is,  and  only
allowed  that  it  can  say,  If  somewhat  is,  it  must  be  thus.
He  declared  that,  in  the  Hegelian  and  all  the  philosophies
preceding  it  there  can  only  be  question  of  an  eternal  hap-
pening. "  An  eternal  event  is,  however,  no  event.  Con-
sequently, the  whole  idea  of  that  process  and  that  move-
ment is  self-illusory ;  properly  speaking,  nothing  has
happened ;  everything  has  only  taken  place  in  thoughts,
and  this  whole  movement  was  only  a  movement  of
thought"  (Werke,  i.  10,  pp.  124-125).

He  declares  existence  to  be  the  genuinely  super-rational ',
which,  as  actuality,  can  now  and  never  be  in  the  reason,
but  only  in  experience  (Werke,  ii.  3,  p.  69),  and  in
this  respect  calls  nature  and  experience  that  which  is
foreign  to  the  reason  (ibid.,  p.  yd).  If  the  absolute  or
highest  Idea  has  no  real  value,  if  it  is  no  longer  anything
more  than  bare  Idea,  if  it  is  not  the  actually  existing  (ii.  3,
p.  150),  even  this  Idea  could  never  be  Thought  if  it  were
not  thought  of  a  thinking  subject  (i.  10,  p.  132).  One
must  then  in  a  twofold  respect  go  beyond  the  Idea  as
such  to  a  being  beyond  and  independent  of  thought,  to


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  239

something  anticipating  all  thought  (ii.  3,  p.  164),  to  an
immemorial  existence.  As  long  as  we  speak  of  the  stand-
point of  the  purely  rational  or  negative  philosophy  of  the
existing,  we  properly  speak  of  the  same  only  according
to  its  essence  or  its  conception ;  more  cannot  be  obtained
a  priori ;  the  question,  however,  with  which  positive
philosophy  begins  runs  according  to  that :  what  (gram-
matical subject)  is  the  existing  (grammatical  object)  ?  Or,  as
Schelling  also  expresses  himself,  what  makes  the  thing
be  or  "becomes  cause  of  being  {air [a  rev  elvai)  to  this
which  is  not  being  (/xtj  6v),  mere  all-potentiality  ?  "  "  The
One  is  known  hereby  or  herein  that  it  is  the  Universal
Being,  the  irav,  the  being  according  to  content  (not
efficient  being).  It  is  therewith  cognised  and  distin-
guished from  other  simple  existences,  as  the  single  exist-
ence which  is  all"  (ii.  3,  p.  174).

If  the  passage  from  the  Transcendental  Idealism  already
cited  in  the  Introduction  (i.  p.  25)  be  compared  with  this,
it  will  be  found  that  Schelling  in  his  first  system  con-
ceived under  the  name  "  eternally  unconscious  "  essen-
tially that  which  he  raised  in  his  third  system  to  be  the
foundation  of  his  Positive  philosophy.

Thus  we  have  seen  in  all  philosophies  of  the  modern  epoch
this  tendency  to  Monism  more  or  less  perfectly  realised  in
one  fashion  or  another.  "What  in  the  historic  evolution
is  exhibited  as  the  culminating  point  of  the  speculative
work  of  modern  times,  the  "individual  which  is  all  being  "
of  Schelling,  that  we  have  evolved  a  posteriori  by  the
inductive  path,  or  rather  involuntarily  gained  as  it  were,
but  now  no  longer  as  a  speculative  principle  accessible  only
to  few,  but  with  the  perfectly  valid  proof  of  its  empirical
authorization,  By  carefully  separating  the  sphere  of  the
Unconscious  from  that  of  consciousness,  and  recognising
consciousness  as  a  mere  phenomenon  of  the  Unconscious
(C.  Chap,  iii.),  the  contradictions  were  resolved  in  which
the  natural  consciousness  was  entangled  and  caught  in  its
endeavour  after  a  monistic  view. But  not  merely  con-


240  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sciousness,  but  also  matter  had  proved  to  be  a  mere
appearance  of  the  Unconscious,  and  everything  in  the
world  which  is  not  exhausted  by  the  conceptions  Matter
and  Consciousness,  as  organic  formation,  the  instincts,  &c,
had  been  revealed '(in  Sections  A.  and  B.)  as  the  most
immediately  and  easily  cognisable  effects  of  the  Uncon-
scious.

Herewith  were  (i)  Matter,  (2)  Consciousness,  and  (3)
Organic  formation,  Instinct,  &c,  comprehended  as  three
modes  of  action  or  modes  of  appearance  of  the  Uncon-
scious, and  the  latter  as  the  essence  of  the  world.  Lastly,
after  we  had  penetrated  with  the  understanding  the  con-
ception of  individuality  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  proper
nature  of  the  Unconscious  on  the  other,  so  far  as  re-
quisite, the  ultimate  reason  for  the  assumption  of  a  plu-
rality of  being  in  the  Unconscious  disappeared  beneath
our  hands  ;  all  plurality  henceforth  only  belonged  to  the
phenomenon,  not  to  the  essence  which  posits  the  former,
but  this  is  the  One  Absolute  Individual,  the  single  exist-
ence, wliich  is  All,  whereas  the  world  with  its  glory  is
reduced  to  the  bare  phenomenon  ;  but  not  to  a  subjectively
posited  phenomenon,  as  in  Kant,  Fichte,  and  Schopen-
hauer, but  to  an  objectively  (as  Schelling,  Werke,  ii.  3,  p.
280,  says:  "  divinely")  posited  phenomenon,  or,  as  Hegel  ex-
presses it  (Werke,  vi.  p.  97),  to  the  "  mere  phenomenon,  not
only  for  us,  but  of  itself."1 What  appears  to  us  as  matter

1  This  objectively  posited  pheno-  indispensableness of this conneet-

menal  world,  or  this  world  of the  ing  link, and of trying  to recede

ajjpearance in itself, is the indis-  from  the  subjective  phenomena  of

pensable causal  link between the  consciousness directly  to  the ulti-

monistic  essence  on  the  one  hand,  mate  being,  instead  of  acknowledg-

and the subjective phenomenal  ing one objectively existing (ia

mental-picture  worlds of  the  many  Kantian  terminology,  transcendent)

different  consciousnesses  on  the  other;  world  of  things  (according  to  Kant,

whilst  it  is  related  to  the  sole  Un-  things of  themselves) as  archetype

conscious  as  the  appearance  to  the  of  these  many  subjective  worlds  of

substance,  it is related  to its  sub-  perception,  which  certainly,  referred

jective reflected images in the  to  the  sole  existence,  appears  indeed

numerous conscious individuals  as  only as "  the living garment of

the  thing  of  itself  to  its  (subjective)  Deity." As  Kant  in  his  old age

phenomenon. Subjective  Idealism  and  his  school  tried  to  repair  this

commits  the  error  of  ignoring  the  subjective  error  of  his  "  Kritik  d.  r.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.


241


"is  the  mere  expression  of  an  equilibrium  of  opposite
activities  "  (Schelling's  Werke,  i.  3,  p.  400),  what  appears
to  us  as  consciousness  is  likewise  a  mere  expression  of
a  conflict  of  opposite  activities.  That  piece  of  matter
yonder  is  a  conglomerate  of  atomic  forces,  i.e.,  of  fiats
of  the  Unconscious,  to  attract  from  this  point  of  space
in  this  intensity,  to  repel  from  that  point  in  that  in-
tensity. Let  the  Unconscious  intermit  these  acts  of  will
and  annul  them,  at  the  same  moment  this  piece  of
matter  has  ceased  to  exist ;  let  the  Unconscious  will
anew,  and  the  matter  is  there  again. Here  the  prodigy  of


V.,"  so  Schelling  that  of  Fichte  by-
setting  up  his  Philosophy  of  Nature ;
so,  filially,  the  aged  Schopenhauer,
and  still  more  his  disciples,  through
the  recognition  of  a  reality  of  the
objectifi cations  of  the  One  Will,
independent  of  the  regarding  con-
scious subject.  (Comp.  what  is  said
above,  B.  Chap.  viii.  vol.  i.  pp.  328-
331.)  On  the  side  of  the  theory
of  Knowledge  and  of  Metaphysics
the  stream  of  tendency  is  unmistak-
able towards  the  conception  of  the
objective  phenomenon  ;  in  it  there  is
found  the  permanent  kernel  of  the
theistic  conception  of  Creation  and
Preservation  (comp.  C.  Chap,  viii.,
also  above,  pp.  228  and  230-  of  the
pantheistic  conception  of  Emana-
tion, the  scientific  conception  of  the
"System  of  I)ynamids"  (comp.  C.
Chap,  v.),  of  the  Schelling-Schopen-
hauerian  conception  of  the  objec-
tifieation  of  the  Absolute  Subject,
i.e.,  Will,  of  the  Herbartian  notion
of  thi-  "Absolute  Position,"  in  con-
trast to  the  position  merely  relative
to  consciousness,  i.e.,  to  the  sub-
jective position  or  phenomenon,  in
short  everything  is  found  in  it
that  has  ever  been  thought  with
regard  to  the  relation  of  existence
toits  metaphysical  ground.  That
the  word  "phenomenon."  is  here
used  in  the  hirtii/j/ii/xinil  sense  can-
not |)(;  objected  to  on  the  score  that
the  theory  of  Cognition  has  ob-
tained possession  of  it  since  the
rise  of  subjective  Idealism  ;  for
Vol.. IJ.


the  metaphysical  signification  was,
till  the  time  of  Kant,  the  jjrevail-
ing  one,  although  it  must  be  al-
lowed that  in  the  confusion  between
Metaphysics  and  theory  of  Cogni-
tion that  special  to  the  latter  theory
was  likewise  contained  therein.
After  the  complete  separation  of
the  problem  of  Metaphysics  and
theory  of  Knowledge,  the  word
'!  phenomenon  "  also  had  to  be
differentiated  (into  "  objective  "
and  "  subjective  "),  which  is  the
more  endurable,  as  different  con-
trasts ("essence"  and  "thing  of
itself  :")  are  available  for  the  two
parts.  It  might  be  well,  there-
fore, not  to  get  rid  of  the  word
phenomenon  also  for  the  meta-
physical relation,  since  much  of  that
which  Kant  erroneously  asserted  of
the  subjective  appearance  actually
holds  good  of  the  objective.  This
arises,  however,  from  the  circum-
stance, that  with  Kant  Metaphysics
was  absorbed  just  as  one-sidedly  by
the  theory  of  Cognition,  as  before
him  for  the  most  part  the  theory
of  Cognition  was  swallowed  up  by
Metaphysics,  or  in  other  words,  be-
cause he  entirely  carried  over  into
subjectivity  all  the  "  what "  of
existence,  and  left  nothing  but  the
pure  "  that  "  for  the  t/tiny  hi)  itself,
so  that  it  naturally  became  barer
than  the-  barest  metaphysical  essence,
and  a  distinction  between  the  two
became  an  impossibility.


(I


242  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  creation  of  tlie  material  world  is  lost  in  the  everyday
marvel  of  its  'preservation,  renewed  every  moment,  which
is  a  continuous  creation.  The  world  is  only  a  continuous
series  of  sums  of  peculiarly  combined  will-acts  of  the
Unconscious,  for  it  is  only  so  long  as  it  is  continuously
2J0sited  ;  let  the  Unconscious  cease  to  will  the  world,  and
this  play  of  intersecting  activities  of  the  Unconscious
ceases  to  be.

It  is  an  illusion  disappearing  before  thorough  reflection,
an illusion  of the senses  in  the  widest  sense,  when  we
think  we have in the world, the xon-ego, something
directly  real. It is  an  illusion  of the egoistic  instinct
when  we  think  we  have  in  ourselves,  in  our  ideal  ego,
something  directly  real. The  world  consists  only  of  a
sum  of  activities  or  will-acts  of  the  Unconscious,  and  the
ego  consists  of  another  sum  of  activities  or  will-acts  of
the  Unconscious. Only  so far  as  the  former activities
intersect  the  latter  does  the  world  become  sensible  to  me;
only  so  far  as  the  latter  intersect  the  former  do  I  become
sensible  to  myself. In  the  sphere  of  the  mental  repre-
sentation or  pure  Idea,  the  ideally  opposed  peacefully  exist
side  by  side,,  and  for  the  most  part  form  logical  combina-
tions calmly  and  without  storms. Does,  however,  a  will
seize  these  ideal  opposites and  make  them  its  content,
then  the  will-acts  filled  with  opposite  content  enter  into
opposition  ;  they  pass  into  real  conflict  (comp.  above,  p.
228),  in  which  they  mutually  resist  and  threaten  to  de-
stroy one  another,  when  either  the  one  succeeds  entirely
or  both  partially,  so  that  they  compel  one  another  to  a
compromise. Only  in  this  conflict,  the  mutually  offered
resistance  of  the  individually  parted  will-acts  of  the  All-
One,  arises  and  consists  that  which  we  call  reality. Not  an
inactive  passive  substratum,  like  the  matter  criticised  in
C.  Chap,  v.,  is  presented,  but  only  an  active  actual  function
can claim  the predicate of  actuality. This table,  e.g.,
testifies  its  actuality  to  me  through  the  forces  of  repulsion
which  the  ether-atoms  of  its  superficial  molecules,  when


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  243

opposed  to  the  superficial  molecules  of  my  body,  exert  in
quickly  increasing  progression  on  approximation  beyond  a
particular  limit.  This  collision  of  the  atomic  wills  consti-
tuting it  with  the  atomic  wills  constituting  my  body  is  a
part  of  the  efficiency  or  actuality  of  the  table,  and  the
totality  of  its  actuality  consists  in  the  sum  of  all  the  colli-
sions which  occur  between  the  atomic  wills  constituting
the  table  and  all  the  other  atoms  of  the  world.  If  there
were  nothing  in  the  world  but  this  table,  its  reality  would
certainly  be  a  far  more  limited  one,  but  it  would  never
be  Gjuite  abolished,  because  the  atomic  wills  constituting
the  table,  if  also  no  longer  externally,  yet  always  still
among  themselves,  would  come  into  active  collision.  If,
however,  one  imagined  all  the  atoms  of  the  world  save
one  suddenly  annihilated,  the  actuality  or  reality  of  this
one  would  be,  in  fact,  thereby  annihilated,  since,  owing  to
the  want  of  an  object  of  the  manifestation  of  its  force,  it
would  be  incapable  of  action,  that  is,  of  being  actually
manifested.

Let  the  Unconscious  change  the  combination  of  acti-
vities or  acts  of  will  which  constitute  me,  and  I  have
become  another ;  let  the  Unconscious  intermit  these
activities,  and  I  have  ceased  to  be.  Jam  a  phenomenon,
like  the  rainbow  in  the  cloud.  Like  it,  /  am  born  of  the
c '.(incidence  of  relations,  become  another  in  every  second
because  these  relations  become  other  in  every  second,
and  shall  dissolve  when  these  relations  are  dissolved.
AVhat  is  sulstancc  in  me  is  not  I.  In  the  same  spot
another  rainbow  may  at  some  time  or  other  stand,
which  perfectly  resembles  this  one,  but  yet  is  not  the
same,  for  temporal  continuity  is  wanting  ;  so  in  my  stead
an  ego  perfectly  resembling  me  may  also  at  some  time  or
other  stand,  but  that  will  not  be  me.  The  sun  alone  is
always  shining,  which  is  transiently  reflected  from  yonder
cloud  ;  only  the  UNCONSCIOUS  for  ever  rules,  which  is  also
mirrored  in  my  brain.

The  results  indicated  here  in  broad  outlines  will  find  in


244  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Chapters  ix.  to  xi.  a  varied  application  and  development,
which  it  is  hoped  will  contribute  to  make  them  appear
less  repellent  to  readers  previously  confined  to  the  way  of
thinking  of  the  practical  sensuous  instinct ;  but  first  we
will  try  still  further  to  elucidate  the  results  hitherto
reached  by  comparing  the  All-one  Unconscious  with  that
God-conception,  which  our  educated  classes  are  wont  to
obtain  from  the  school-Metaphysic  of  the  religions  dis-
seminated in  Europe.


( 245 )


VIII.

THE UNCONSCIOUS AND THE GOD OF THEISM.

The  question  may  very  probably  be  asked  at  the  present
stage  of  our  inquiry — Admitting  that  the  actions  of  the
All-One  displayed  in  the  individual  are  unconscious  so
far  as  the  individual  is  concerned,  what  is  the  proof
that  they  are  not  conscious  in  the  All-One  Existence
itself  ?  The  simplest  answer  to  this  query  consists  in
transferring  the  onus  probandi  to  its  propounder.  It  is
not  for  me  to  prove  that  the  unconscious  physical
functions  which,  as  such,  are  sufficient  for  explanation,
may  not  on  the  other  side  be  conscious  in  the  All-One ;
but  those,  who  desire  to  make  this,  so  far  as  the  explana-
tion of  the  phenomena  is  concerned,  entirely  valueless  and
gratuitous  addition  to  the  hypothesis,  have  to  adduce  the
proof  of  their  assumption,  which  until  then  must  be
regarded  as  pure  assertion,  and  accordingly  to  be  scien-
tifically ignored.  Although  this  would  suffice  for  setting
aside  the  foregoing  objection,  I  shall  nevertheless  enter  more
fully  into  the  matter,  because  the  consideration  of  this
point  will  contribute  to  the  more  exact  comprehension  of
the  Unconscious.

If  hitherto  Theism  has  usually  eagerly  insisted  on
assigning  to  God  a  consciousness  of  his  own  in  the  sphere
of  his  divinity,  this  has  happened  for  two  reasons,  both
of  which  had  their  justification,  but  from  which  an  illegi-
timate conclusion  was  drawn,  because  the  possibility  of
an  unconscious  intelligence  had  never  been  conceived.
These  two  grounds  are, — Firstly,  As  regards  man,  re-
pugnance to  the  thought,  in  default  of  a conscious Cod,


246  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  being  a  product  of  blind  natural  forces,  unintended,  un-
matched, purposeless  and  transient  result  of  a  fortuitous
necessity.  Secondly,  As  regards  God,  the  fear  of  thinking
this  supreme  existence,  which,  to  honour  to  the  utmost,  it
was  deemed  necessary  in  scholastic  fashion  to  furnish  with
the  sum  of  all  conceivable  perfections,  to  be  destitute  of
that  excellence  which  passes  with  the  human  mind  for
the  highest,  viz.,  clear  consciousness  and  distinct  self-
consciousness.  Both  scruples,  however,  disappear  before
a  correct  estimation  of  the  principles  of  the  Unconscious,
which  hold  the  golden  mean  between  a  Theism  con-
structed of  the  floating  human  ideal  made  absolute  and  a
naturalism,  in  which  the  highest  flowers  of  the  mind  and
the  eternal  necessity  of  natural  law,  from  which  they  have
sprung,  are  mere  result  of  a  casual  actuality,  imposing  to  us
on  account  of  our  impotence — the  right  mean  between  con-
scious teleology,  which  is  conceived  after  the  human  pro-
totype, and  entire  renunciation  of  final  causes.  This  right
mean  just  consists  in  the  recognition  of  a  final  causality,
which  however  is  not  represented  according  to  the  pattern
of  conscious  human  purposive  activity  by  discursive  reflec-
tion, but  as  immanent  unconscious  teleology  of  an  intui-
tive unconscious  intelligence  is  revealed  in  natural  objects
and  individuals  by  means  of  the  same  activity  which,  in
the  last  chapter,  we  described  as  continual  creation  or
conservation,  or  as  real  phenomenon  of  the  All-One
Existence.

In  our  inability  positively  to  apprehend  the  mode  of
perception  of  this  intelligence  (comp.  above,  p.  49),  we
are  only  able  to  indicate  it  through  the  contrast  to  our
own  form  of  perception  (consciousness),  thus  only  to  char-
acterise it  by  the  negative  predicate  of  Unconsciousness.  But
we  know  from  the  previous  inquiries  that  the  function  of
this  unconscious  intelligence  is  anything  but  blind,  rather
far-seeing,  nay,  even  clairvoyant,  although  this  seeing  can
never  be  aware  of  its  own  vision,  but  only  of  the  world,
and  without  the  mirrors  of  the  individual  consciousnesses


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  247

can  also  not  see  the  seeing  eye.  Of  this  unconscious
clairvoyant  intelligence  we  have  come  to  perceive  that  in
its  infallible  purposive  activity,  embracing  out  of  time
all  ends  and  means  in  one,  and  always  including  all  neces-
sary data  within  its  ken,  it  infinitely  transcends  the  halt-
ing, stilted  gait  of  the  discursive  reflection  of  consciousness,
ever  limited  to  a  single  point,  dependent  on  sense-percep-
tion, memory,  and  inspirations  of  the  Unconscious.  "We
shall  thus  be  compelled  to  designate  this  intelligence,
which  is  superior  to  all  consciousness,  at  once  unconscious
and  super-conscious.  With  this  recognition,  however,  the
two  preceding  scruples  with  regard  to  the  unconsciousness
of  the  All-One  disappear.  If  the  latter  possesses  a  super-
conscious  intelligence,  all-knowing  and  all-wise,  with  all
its  unconsciousness,  which  teleologically  determines  the
content  of  creation  and  of  the  world-process,  ive  stand
here  neither  as  accidental  product  of  the  forces  of  Nature,
nor  is  God  dwarfed  by  denying  Him  this  mode  of  con-
sciousness.

Accordingly  the  dread  on  the  part  of  Theism  of  degrad-
ing its  God  by  denying  him  consciousness  appears  so  un-
founded, that  the  danger  is  rather  the  contrary  of  degrad-
ing him  by  the  predication  of  consciousness,  since  his
mode  of  thinking  is,  in  truth,  above  consciousness.  That
which  is  really  an  unconditional  pre-eminence  is  rational
intelligence,  which  our  Unconscious  possesses  just  as  truly
as  the  God  of  Theism,  but  that  which  is  just  the  limitation
in  our  human  intelligence,  the  form  of  consciousness  de-
pending on  the  division  of  subject  and  object,  of  that
Theism  must  too  of  necessity  denude  its  deity,  if  it  will
make  it  its  "most  perfect  of  all"  existences.  Beyond
question  for  us  men,  consciousness  and  self-consciousness
are  marks  of  superiority,  but  yet  not,  like  rational  intelli-
gence, absolute  marks,  but  only  relative  and  conditioned,
i.e.,  they  pass  witli  us  as  prerogatives  only  because  we
stand  within  the  world  of  individuation  and  its  limit*,  and
need  for  the  greatest  possible  furtherance  of  our  individual


248  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

aims,  as  sharp  a  severance  as  possible  of  our  self  from
other persons and  from  the  impersonal  outer  world, —
considerations  which,  as  a  matter  of  course,  fall  away  for
the  All-One  Being,  which  has  nothing  outside  itself. In
and  ly  itself,  however,  and  apart  from  the  special  problems
which  arise  through  a  position  within  the  sphere  of  in-
dividuation for  a  limited  intelligence,  consciousness  is  no
excellence,  but  in  comparison  with  the  unity  of  attributes
in  the  Unconscious  appears  as  a  defect,  as  a  disturbance
in  the  absolute  peace  of  the  clairvoyant  unreflecting  in-
tuition, as  a  rent  in  the  harmony  of  the  attributes  of  the
All-One,  which  posits  dissidence  in  the  place  of  concord,
and  snatches  out  of  their  indifference  and  sunders  sub-
ject  and  object,  the  moments  reconciled  and  united  in
the  absolute  Idea  (comp.  "  Ges.  phil.  Abhandlg.,"  p.  64),
through  this  disunion. The  opposition  of  attributes  for
the  genesis  of  consciousness,  and  the  emergence  of  subject
and  object  from  indifference,  is  not  at  all  possible  within  the
self-sure  and  self-enclosed  absolute  Idea  as  such ;  it  rather
presupposes  the  splitting-up  of  the  total  function  of  the
All-One  into  the  plurality  of  individuation,  and  the  cross-
ing or  the  collision  of  the  numerous  tendencies  of  will
which  thus  arise with their  partially  opposite content.
Only  by  such  conflict  of  the  partial  will  with  other  partial
wills,  through  the  disagreement  of  the  ideal  content  of  the
partial  will  with  the  compromise  thrust  upon  it,  does  that
shock  become  possible  which  causes  the  severance  of  sub-
ject and  object  in  consciousness. (Comp.  C.  Chap.  iii.  1.)
This  consciousness  is  based  on  a  representation  imposed
on  the  mind  by  its  body,  i.e.,  on  sense,  and  attains  a  super-
sensible content  only  by  discursive  reflection  through  the
medium  of  abstraction.

All  these  limitations  must,  as  Theism  itself  acknow-
ledges, be  removed  from  its  God;  but  thereby  consciousness,
which  is  dependent  on  these  limitations,  is  itself  abolished.
If  consciousness  can  only  be  described  as  limitation,  the
negation  of this limitation  can no longer  be regarded


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  249

as  positive  defect  in  the  All-One,  since  freedom  from
limitation  is  rather  a  sign  of  superiority.  Nevertheless,
the  positive  superiority  in  point  of  content  is  formally  a
defect,  justj  as  the  absence  of  poison-glands  in  the  boa-
constrictor,  which  it  does  not  need  on  account  of  its
greater  strength,  or  the  absence  of  sin  in  the  orthodox  pic-
ture of  Christ  is  a  formal  defect. — Already  when,  in  C.  Chap,
ii.,  we  arrived  inductively  at  the  conclusion  that  there  is
no  consciousness  without  a  brain,  ganglia,  protoplasm,  or
other  material  substratum,  the  hypothesis  of  a  trans-
cendent and  indivisible  consciousness  of  the  world-soul
was  set  aside,  since  the  search  after  a  material  substratum
making  possible  this  unity  of  consciousness  would  be
hopeless.  By  the  investigations  of  C.  Chap.  iii.  this
knowledge  instinctively  arrived  at  was  at  the  same  time
proved  by  way  of  pure  speculation,  since  the  metaphysical
ground  of  the  impossibility  of  a  consciousness  without
individuation  and  without  separation  of  body  and  mind
was  made  evident.  If  the  limits  of  sensibility  and  finite
individuality  are  set  aside,  as  the  notion  of  God  of  itself
demands,  and  the  limited  representation  be  expanded  to
the  Absolute  Idea,  still  the  pure  matter  of  representation
remains,  and  by  the  removal  of  all  finite  opposition  and
collision  we  strip  off  also  the  form  of  consciousness.  If
one  still,  for  one  moment,  tried  to  imagine  the  impossible
demand  satisfied,  that  consciousness  should  be,  never-
theless, preserved  as  form  of  representation,  yet  this  form
also  would  have  to  be  taken  as  infinitely  elevated  above
the  consciousness  known  to  us,  and  it  would  then  be  at
once  apparent  that  the  infinite  form  is  equivalent  to  pure
formlessness ;  that  the  absolute  consciousness  demanded  for
Cod  must  again  prove  to  be  identical  with  the  absolute!//
Unconscious;  so  that  thus  even  for  this  extreme  stand-
point, the  phraseology  being  shown  to  be  equivalent,  every
motive  for  opposing  our  absolutely  Unconscious  must  per-
force disappear.  (Comp.  Hchte's  Collected  Works,  vol.  i.
pp.  100-253;  vol.  v.  pp.  2G6  and  457).


250  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Unquestionably,  besides  its  value  for  the  individual
as  such,  consciousness  has  also  in  addition  a  universal
significance  for  the  redemption  of  the  world,  i.e.,  for
the  conversion  of  the  World-will  and  its  return  to
the  original  condition  before  the  commencement  of  the
world-process  (comp.  below,  C.  Chap,  xiv.)  ;  for  this  final
purpose  the  All-One  does  in  fact  need  consciousness,  and
accordingly  it  possesses  the  same, — namely,  in  the  sum  of
individual  consciousnesses,  whose  common  subject  it  is.1

We  have,  namely,  seen  that  the  one  Unconscious  is,  in
fact,  the  support  or  subject  of  all  individual  conscious-
nesses, and  that  the  individuals  as  such  are  only  pheno-
menal combinations  of  an  organism  with  the  actions  of  the
Unconscious  directed  to  the  same.  He  who  accordingly
has,  strictly  speaking,  the  consciousness  of  Peter  and  Paul,  is
not  Peter  and  Paul,  by  which  those  phenomenal  combina-
tions are  denoted,  but  the  All-One  Unconscious  itself.
Undoubtedly  the  consciousness  which  the  Unconscious  has
in  individuals  is  a  more  or  less  limited  one,  but  any  other
is  simply  impossible.  This  consciousness  always  suffices
to  lead  to  the  self-consciousness  of  the  Absolute,  namely,
to  the  knowledge  that  the  proper  self  of  Peter  and  Paul
is  the  All-One  Existence.2 That  this  self-consciousness

1  With  Spinoza,  likewise,  the  in-  possesses  no  other  self-consciousness
finite  intellect  of  God  (comp.  Ethics,  than  this.  Much  as  Hegel  insists
Part  I.  Proposition  31,  Dem.),  to  be  that  the  Absolute  is  not  merely  sub-
distinguished  indeed  from  the  attri-  stance,  but  also  subject  (of  conscious-
bute  of  the  absolute  thought;  is  only  ness),  yet  it  always  becomes  con-
the  sum  of  the  infinitely  numerous  seious,  even  according  to  his  own
finite  intellects,  of  which  it  is  com-  doctrine,  only  in  the  limited  indi-
pounded  as  of  its  integral  parts  viduals.  From  the  erroneous  pre-
(Part  V.  Proposition  40,  Obs.)  Each  supposition  that  consciousness  is  a
of  these  infinitely  numerous  intel-  necessary  and  eternal  moment  in  the
lects  is  the  Idea  of  a  body  or  ex-  Absolute,  there  logically  follows  for
tended  thing  (2  Proposition  11  and  Hegel  nothing  more  than  the  eter-
13),  and  by  that  not  merely  human  nity  of  the  process  of  Nature,  thus
intellects  are  to  be  understood,  but  the  infinite  duration  of  a  world  filled
the  Ideas  of  all  natural  objects  in  with  things  so  highly  organised  that
general,  which  indeed  are  all  more  the  self-consciousness  of  the  Absolute
or  less  animated  (2  Obs.  13),  whose  never  dies  out;  but  there  by  no  means
sum  thus  exhausts  the  ideal  content  follows  from  that  false  premiss  the
of  the  universe.  persistence  of a transcendent  con-

2  In  Hegel  also  the  Absolute  Idea  sciousuess  in  the  Absolute  in  itself.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  251

of  the  Absolute  in  the  individuals  is  a  reflex  one,  again
lies  in  the  nature  of  self-consciousness,  which  is  impos-
sible except  on  the  basis  of  reflection.  Thus  it  would  be
shown  to  those,  whose  minds  are  disquieted  by  the  denial
of  consciousness  and  self- consciousness  to  the  All-One,
that  it  really  does  possess  such  consciousness  and  self-
consciousness  as  is  compatible  with  the  character  of  these
conceptions,  namely,  limited  consciousness  and  reflex  self-
consciousness,  which  certainly  must  not  be  sought  in  the
limitless  and  unreflective  All-One  as  such,  but  in  it  as
subject  of  the  individual  consciousnesses,  since  only  the
functions  of  the  All-One  directed  to  a  particular  organism
form  a  limited  part  of  its  total  activity,  and  attain  to  reflec-
tion in  the  organ  of  consciousness  of  the  organism. —

If  we  for  a  moment  assume  what  is  unthinkable,  that
the  Absolute  still  possesses  over  and  above  the  conscious-
ness and  self-consciousness  which  it  has  in  individuals
another  peculiar  to  itself,  we  immediately  see  insoluble
difficulties  to  arise  in  respect  of  the  relation  of  this  absolute
self-consciousness  to  those  of  individuals.  We  formerly
assumed,  namely,  relying  on  the  presumed  unconsciousness
of  the  Ail-One,  agreeably  to  experience,  that  consciousnesses
which  arise  at  separate  places,  i.e.,  not  sufficiently  con-
nected by  nervous  communications,  are  separate  conscious-
nesses. This  could,  however,  scarcely  be  maintained  on
the  supposition  of  an  absolute  self-consciousness.  Does
such  an  absolute  consciousness  once  exist  in  the  subject
of  two  individual  consciousnesses,  the  required  nervous
communication  appears  to  play  a  right  pitiable  and  super-
fluous part  beside  such  a  metaphysical  bond  of  union,
whilst  on  the  contrary  its  significance  is  at  once  evident
if  there  is  only  an  unconscious  identical  subject  of  the
individual  consciousnesses.  If  the  functions  of  the  All-One
which  the  latter  determines  to  the  particular  organisms
are  unconscious  functions,  they  are  sufficiently  separated
by  their  different  goals  not  to  allow  of  any  confluence  of
the  consciousness  arising  in  organisms  by  way  of  reflec-


252  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tion.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  conscious  functions
of  a  self-conscious  being,  they  are  related  and  connected
by  this  consciousness  to  the  higher  unity  of  that  self-con-
sciousness, so  that  it  is  no  longer  at  all  comprehensible
how  these  functions,  after  their  reflection  or  turning  round
in  the  organs  of  consciousness,  should  be  able  to  part  into
two  consciousnesses,  instead  of  enriching  the  one  absolute
consciousness  with  modified  content.  It  accordingly  be-
comes not  only  incomprehensible  how  the  consciousnesses
of  Peter  and  Paul  are  separate  consciousnesses,  but  how
altogether  a  limited  individual  consciousness  can  arise
without  its  matter  and  its  form  being  immediately  swal-
lowed up  and  digested,  bones  and  all,  by  the  absolute  con-
sciousness, i.e.,  annulled  as  individual  consciousness.  But
still,  supposing  a  limited  disparate  individual  consciousness
to  have  arisen,  the  functions  of  the  All -One  exercised
through  the  same,  in  case  they  were  conscious,  would
allow  the  absolute  consciousness  to  shine,  as  it  were,  in
upon  the  individual  consciousness  ;  for  one  would  not  be
able  to  see  how  these  functions  should  denude  themselves
of  the  form  of  the  absolute  consciousness  once  adher-
ing to  them,  and  indeed  essentially  connected  with  them
according  to  the  assumption  of  the  Theists,  on  their
entrance  into  the  individual,  and  on  the  formation  of  his
special  consciousness.  The  individual  must  in  all  direc-
tions be  refulgent  with  the  light  of  the  absolute  conscious-
ness, and  the  absolute  consciousness  lie  open  to  its  view.
All  these  consequences,  contradicted  by  experience,  fall
away  when  we  reject  the  impossible  supposition  of  the
absolute  consciousness  in  the  All-One.

Monism  can  by  no  means  endure  any  absolute  conscious
world-substance,  and  only  the  declension  from  Monism  to
the  Pluralism  of  one  creating  and  many  created  substances
makes  possible  the  anthropopathic  assumption  of  a  conscious
God ;  truly  also  only  at  the  cost  of  comprehension  of  the
possibility  of  inner  relations  between  the  creature  and  its
transcendent  Creator,  which can  then  at  the  best  only


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  253

be  conceived  as  the  magical  hocus-pocus  of  the  possession
of  one  personal  mind  by  another.

A  God  whose  reality  only  consists  in  his  spirituality,
and  whose  spirituality  is  manifested  exclusively  in  the
form  of  consciousness,  undeniably  becomes  with  distinct
consciousness  also  a  God  parted  recditcr  from  the  world,
an  external  transcendent  Creator.  On  the  other  hand,  he
who  seeks  and  desires  an  immanent  God,  a  God  who
descends  into  our  breast  and  dwells  therein,  a  God  in
whom  we  live  and  have  our  being,  as  every  profounder
religion  must  demand,  and  as  Christianity  and  Judaism
(Deut.  vi.  4,  xxx.  11 ;  Isa,  Ixvi.  1)  also  actually  demand,
must  make  clear  to  himself  that  the  All-One  can  only
indwell  in  individuals  if  it  is  related  to  them  as  the  essence
to  its  phenomena,  as  the  subject  to  its  functions,  without
being  parted  therefrom  by  a  consciousness  of  its  own,  or,
in  other  words,  that  one  and  the  same  activity  can  only
then  be  simultaneously  and  without  collision  of  two  con-
sciousnesses activity  of  the  individual  and  of  the  All-One,
if  the  All-One  diffuses  itself  as  impersonal  AVill  and  un-
conscious Intelligence  through  the  universe  with  its  personal
and  conscious  individuals.  As  God,  by  granting  a  per-
sonal consciousness,  becomes  parted  from  the  world,  with
every  action  there  inevitably  arises  the  clear  alternative,
cither  activity  of  God  or  activity  of  the  individual;  a
third,  a  combination  of  both  activities  without  collision
of  the  different  conscious  wills,  would  be  only  possible
exceptionally  and  fortuitously,  but  not  as  a  frequent
occurrence  or  at  all  as  general  rule  (comp.  above,  Y>.  Chap.
x.  pp.  24-27).—

AVe  have  admitted  that  it  is  the  Unconscious  itself
which  attains  consciousness  in  the  organised  individuals.
It  follows  from  this  that  the  sui'licient  reason  of  its  be-
coming conscious  must  be  given  in  the  Unconscious,  or,
more  briefly,  the  Unconscious  must  be  regarded  as  cause
of  consciousness.  It  would,  however,  be  very  vicious
reasoning  to  try  to  draw  the  inference  that  Consciousness


25+  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

must  already  inhere  in  the  said  Unconscious,  else  other-
wise it  could,  not  come  out  of  it.  This  conclusion  "would,
"be  just  as  incorrect  as  the  conclusion  often,  in  fact,  drawn
by  savages  and  the  uncultured,  that  the  fire  must  always
lurk  as  fire  in  the  steel  and  flint,  since  otherwise  it  could
not  leap  forth  as  sparks  on  their  impact.  This  much
only  is  correct,  that  there  must  be  contained  in  the  cause
the  sum  of  all  the  indispensable  and  sufficient  conditions
in  order  that  the  effect  may  emerge  or  result  from  them;
but  the  requirement  that  the  effect  be  already  contained
as  such  in  the  cause,  i.e.,  already  in  the  form  in  which
it  appears  as  effect,  is  by  no  means  coincident  with  this,
for  then  the  occurrence  of  the  effect  would  be  no  change
at  all,  thus  also  no  causality,  but  only  the  becoming  visible
of  a  something  long  existent.  We  saw  above  that  the
arising  of  individual  consciousnesses  from  an  absolute  con-
sciousness can  never  be  rendered  intelligible ;  from  an
Unconscious,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  quite  comprehensible,
if  only  the  Unconscious  contains  in  itself  all  the  condi-
tions, which  are  requisite  and  sufficient  in  order  to  allow
of  consciousness  resulting  as  form  of  otherwise  given  and
determined  Presentation  or  Sensation.  As  these  condi-
tions, however,  we  have  in  C.  Chap.  iii.  recognised  the
duality  of  the  attributes  and  the  possibility  of  an  opposi-
tion of  the  functions  compounded  of  them,  and  these  con-
ditions we  must  accordingly  necessarily  presuppose  in
the  Unconscious.  Whoever  regards  the  stated  conditions
as  incorrectly  defined  will  be  obliged  to  suppose  others  in
their  stead  in  the  Unconscious,  although  he  may  leave
them  also  quite  indefinite  if  he  only  guards  himself  from
the  error  of  setting  up  consciousness  itself  as  the  indis-
pensable condition  of  the  origin  of  consciousness, — an
assertion  which  must  be  characterised  as  entirely  devoid
of  foundation, — whereas  the  most  cogent  reasons  for  the
contrary  have  been  already  partly  discussed  above,  partly
will  soon  come  before  us  for  discussion.

The  above-mentioned  objection  would  only  acquire  a  cer-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  255

tain  tinge  of  justification  if  it  appealed  to  this,  that  accord-
ing to  the  teleological  conception  of  the  Philosophy  of  the
Unconscious  (comp.  below,  C.  Chap.  xiv.  3),  consciousness
does  not  proceed  from  the  Unconscious  as  an  accidental
or  causally-necessary,  thus,  at  all  events,  blind  result,  but
that  it  is  teleologically  posited  by  the  Unconscious,  i.e.,
intended  for  the  sake  of  a  higher  end,  in  which  certainly
the  ideal  anticipation  is  contained.  It  might  then  be
supposed  that  this  ideal  anticipation  of  consciousness  or
the  teleological  forethinking  of  consciousness  must  itself
represent  a  consciousness,  and,  moreover,  a  higher  stage  of
consciousness.  Apart,  however,  from  the  implicit  form  in
which  in  the  Unconscious  the  thinking  of  the  end  includes
the  thinking  of  the  means,  and  conversely,  the  following
is  yet  to  be  considered.

The  thinking  of  consciousness  only  necessarily  presup-
poses a  higher  consciousness,  if  consciousness  is  thought
as  consciousness,  i.e.,  in  the  subjective  mode,  as  the  subject
(if  consciousness  feels  itself  affected  by  its  consciousness.
Uut  thus  it  is  quite  certain  the  Unconscious  does  not  think
its  consciousness,  since  its  thinking  is  altogether  absolutely
opposed  to  our  subjective  thinking,  so  that  it  would  have
to  be  designated  objective  thinking  if  this  designation  were
not  just  as  one-sided  and  accordingly  inappropriate.  "We
have  already  seen  in  C.  Chap.  i.  that,  with  regard  to  the
mode  of  ideation  of  the  Unconscious,  we  can  only  make
the  assertion  that  it  does  not  perceive  as  we  perceive.  If
we  then  would  ]  ositively  say  what  exactly  the  Uncon-
scious thinks  when  it  employs  consciousness  as  an  inter-
mediate end  of  a  further  final  end,  since  subjectivity  is
excluded,  nothing  can  remain,  but  firstly,  the  objective  pro-
c<*s,  whose  subjective  phenomenon  is  consciousness;  and,
secondly,  the  effect  of  the  emancipation  of  the  Idea,  from
the  Will  which  results  from  this  process  (comp.  above,  C.
Chap.  iii.  1).  Hereby  the  two  iixed  points  are  gained,
which  alone  are  concerned  in  the  teleological  forethinking
of  consciousness,  namely,  means  and  end,  whilst  the  sub-


256  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

jective  inner  side  of  consciousness  is  accidental  in  a  teleo-
logical  reference,  and  is  therefore  not  affected  by  the  ideal
anticipation  of  the  event.

One  might,  however,  put  the  objection  in  still  more
general  form  and  say,  e.g.,  To  posit  ends  means  to  pro-
vide for  the  future :  how  now  can  an  Unconscious,  i.e.,
unconscious  of  itself  as  a  present  reality,  be  conscious  of
itself  as  future  ?  Now  I  might  of  course  appeal  to  this,
that  all  this  purposive  activity  is  in  respect  to  the  merely
negative  ultimate  end  (the  universal  negation  of  the  will)
likewise  only  a  negative  one,  thus  only  turns  on  this
pivot,  to  abolish  the  present  state  (of  the  arisen  world-Will),
not  to  introduce  a  positive  future  one.  However,  the
purposive  activity  on  the  one  hand  would  always  per-
ceive the  future  state  of  privation  as  limitation  of  the
present  state  which  was  to  be  annulled,  and  on  the  other
hand  the  foregoing  of  the  representation  of  the  future  state
as  goal  of  the  process  would  little  accord  with  the  omni-
scient clairvoyance  of  the  Unconscious,  which  we  have
everywhere  found.  This  appeal,  however,  is  not  at  all
needed,  since  an  error  lurks  in  the  inference  of  the  objec-
tion.— In  the  sphere  of  individuation,  namely,  for  the
most  part,  only  individual  ends  are  pursued,  individual
states  aimed  at,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  participation  of
other  individuals  in  the  states  aimed  at;  accordingly  this
exclusiveness  of  what  is  purposed  naturally  renders  in-
dispensable the  sharp  and  clear  discrimination  of  the
substratum  of  the  purposed  state  from  other  individuals.
Otherwise  is  it  in  the  sphere  of  the  All-One  Unconscious,
where  every  distinction  of  different  substrata  of  the
purposed  state,  and  likewise  every  exclusion  of  one  in
favour  of  another,  ceases,  because  the  phenomenal  mani-
fold does  not  reach  into  the  sphere  of  the  metaphysical
existence  (as  we  have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter).
Here,  one  may  say,  state  is  absolutely  state,  i.e.,  all-embracing
state,  beyond  which  at  any  time  there  is  no  state.  If,
then,  in  the  sjmere  of  the  All-One  Unconscious  a  future


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  257

state  is  purposed,  it  is  purposed  as  absolute,  i.e.,  all-
embracing  state,  which  has  nothing  beyond  itself,  and
regarding  which  therefore  the  question  as  to  the  support
of  the  state,  as  a  perfectly  meaningless  one  so  far  as  the
purposive  process  is  concerned,  cannot  at  all  be  proposed
in  a  rational  fashion.  It  follows  from  this,  that  it  is
absurd  to  transfer  the  reflection  of  consciousness  on  the
substratum  of  the  purposed  state  to  which  we  are  accus-
tomed from  the  inertia  of  habit  also  to  the  purposive
activity  of  the  Unconscious.  For  we  already  see  in  indi-
vidual instincts  that  the  individual  takes  care  for  its  own
future,  without  therefore  knowing  that  it  is  its  own  future
veil-being  for  which  it  cares,  and  we  see  even  in  the  race
instincts  that  the  individual  exerts  itself  for  general  ends,
thus  for  alien  subjects,  without  any  idea  for  whom  it
torments  and  sacrifices  itself.

Only  thus  much  then  remains  tenable  in  the  above
objection,  that  the  Unconscious  must  know  the  condi-
tion to  be  negated,  and  which  it  can  only  know  in  that  it
finds,  feels  it  in  itself,  since  the  condition  is  indeed  not
spontaneously  jDosited  by  the  unconscious  Imagination
itself,  as  all  later  intuitions ;  i.e.,  there  in  fact  results  here,
from  the  need  of  explanation  of  the  purposive  activity  of
the  Unconscious,  a  posteriori  the  necessity  of  the  assump-
tion of  a  transcendent  extramundane  consciousness,  which
feels  its  own  content  as  a  state  to  be  negated,  i.e.,  as  un-
blesscd?iess  or  torment,  —  an  assumption  the  necessity  of
which  we  shall  subserpiently,  in  C.  Chap.  xv.  2,  a  priori
perceive  to  be  founded  in  the  nature  of  the  will  and  the
laws  of  the  origination  of  consciousness.  Observe,  this
niiujlc  tra/iisccndent  consciousness  of  the  All-One  which  we
have  hitherto  found  occasion  to  assume  has  not  for  content
an  idea  or  representation,  but  it  has  fur  sole  content  the
ahsoluO  ///  indefinite  transcendent  pain  or  unMcsscdncss  of  the
void  infinite  will,  which  vague  metaphysical  discomfort
forms,  as  the  .state  to  be  negated,  the  necessary  starting-
point of the unconscious teleological activity, as that

VOL.  II.  li


25 S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

which  ought  not  to  be  the  firm  foundation  of  the  world-
process.  The  consciousness  here  allowed,  which  has  arisen
only  through  the  mischievous  elevation  of  the  quiescent
will  into  volition,  and  must  again  cease  with  the  return
of  the  will  to  its  original  state  of  self-enclosed  peace  (all
this  will  be  proved  and  elucidated  in  Chap.  xv.  C),  can
obviously  give  Theism  no  occasion  to  triumph  at  the
necessity  of  a  consciousness  in  the  Unconscious.  The
attempt,  however,  to  deduce  from  the  final  purpose  of
the  world-process  a  consciousness  with  richer  content
than  that  here  specified  turns  out,  at  all  events,  a  vain
endeavour.

If  we  gather  together  once  more  our  reflections  on  the
question  as  to  the  consciousness  of  the  All- One,  there
emerges  the  result  that,  besides  the  notionlcss  conscious-
ness of  indefinite  discomfort  at  the  uplifted  and  unsatis-
fied world- will,  the  All- One  only  possesses  a  limited  con-
sciousness in  conscious  individuals,  which,  however,  suffices
it  for  the  aims  of  the  world-process,  and  that  the  peculiar
mode  or  form of its  all-knowing  and  all- wise  intuition
(absolute  idea) is such of which, for lack of positive
statements,  we  can  only  say  this  much,  that  it  is  elevated
above  that form  which  we  know as  consciousness,  i.e.,
that negatively defined  it  is unconscious,  vaguely  but
positively  defined  superconscious. According  to  this  we
must  declare  the  endeavour  still  to  ascribe  to  the  All-
One  an  exclusively  divine  consciousness,  conceived  accord-
ing to  the  analogy  of  the  human,  a  not  smaller  anthro-
popathic error and degrading limitation of God than
that  of  the  biblical  writings,  when  they  ascribe  to  him
anger,  vengeance,  and  similar  qualities  measured  by  our
own  experiences. (Even  pious  Church  Fathers  like  Au-
gustine have  been  disquieted  by  such  reflections  on  the
consciousness  of  God.) If  this  holds  good  of  consciousness
in  general,  so  much  the  more  must  we  maintain  it  of  the
endeavour  to  posit  in  God  as  special  content  of  such  a
consciousness  the  idea  of  the  All-One  itself,  i.e.,  to  credit


MET  A  PHY  SIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  259

him  with  a  self-consciousness. However,  we  shall  have  to
examine  this  point  a  little  more  closely. —

The  transcendent  consciousness  allowed  by  me  has  for
its  sole  and  only  content  absolutely  indefinite  pain,  but
no  idea,  least  of  all  the  idea  of  the  All-One  itself.  The
consciousness  which  the  All-One  has  in  its  individuals
has,  it  is  true,  for  thousands  of  years  been  elevated  by
philosophic  thinkers  to  the  consciousness  of  the  All-One
itself,  therefore  to  the  self-consciousness  of  the  All-One,
but  this  is  only  an  intra-mundane,  not  extra-mundane
self-consciousness  of  the  All-One,  such  as  Theism  re-
quires. But  we  can  at  least  negatively  affirm  this  with
confidence  of  the  unconscious  representation  of  the  All-
One  or  the  Absolute  Idea,  that  it  has  in  the  self-satisfaction
of  its  own  pure  intuition  just  as  little  occasion  for  re-
flection in  general  as  for  a  definite  reflection  on  itself  or  on
something  else ;  not  on  anything  else,  since  there  exists
nothing  else  besides  itself;  not  on  itself,  since  reflection  on
itself  presupposes  reflection  on  something  else.  But  in  the
unity  of  the  Absolute  Idea  the  ground  of  the  separation
of  subject  and  object  is  just  that  which  is  wanting,  there-
fore also  their  appearance  to  one  another,  which  consti-
tutes consciousness,  is  also  wanting,  and  in  particular  there
is  wanting  the  bending  round  of  the  ideational  activity
towards  its  origin,  the  turning  back  to  the  active  subject  as
goal  of  representation,  which  retroversion  of  the  activity  of
thought  is  precisely  what  is  characteristic  of  the  notion  of
self-consciousness  as  we  have  abstracted  it  from  human  self-
consciousness.  The  Absolute  Idea  embraces  all  that
is,  for  its  ideal  determinations  become  indeed  as  content
of  will  those  phenomena  whose  sum  we  call  the  world.
The  unconscious  thought  of  substance  accordingly
exhausts  the  sum  of  all  its  modes,  and  so  far  as  its  whole
proper  nature  is  unfolded  therein,  itself  as  the  sum  of  its
unfolded  moments  (in  its  otherness^, — but  itself  only  in
this  sense,  not  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  notion  of


260  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

self-consciousness,  as  active  centre  of  emanation.1  To
grasp  the  latter  retroversion  or  reflection  is  required,
which  takes  place  in  the  brains  of  individuals,  whereby
the  intuitive  character  of  the  presentation  is  lost,  but
instead  thereof  the  self-consciousness  of  the  All-One  in
the  strict  sense  is  really  gained — only  of  course  not  as  extra-
mundane,  transcendent — and  at  the  same  time  as  one  which,
beside  the  notion  of  the  All-One  as  active  world-centre,
embraces  only  a  very  small  part  of  its  phenomena,  not,  as
the  unconscious  idea,  its  whole  plenitude.  As  the  light-
sphere,  consisting  of  light  rays,  illuminates  the  whole
space,  but  not  the  point  from  which  it  issues,  unless  a
reflection  of  its  own  beams  takes  place  at  reflecting  sur-
faces, and  thereby  a  turning  back  of  the  direction  of  these
rays,  so  the  intuitive  ideal  total  activity  of  the  All-One
may  cognise  the  All,  only  not  the  point  whence  it  issues,
the  active  centre  of  the  All,  unless  certain  bundles  of
these  rays  are  broken  in  the  brain  of  an  organism  into
consciousness,  which  then,  however,  must  of  necessity  be  a
one-sided,  limited,  no  all-embracing  absolute  consciousness.
The  previous  considerations,  in  combination  with  the
argument  stated  below  derived  from  the  evil  of  the  world,
seem  sufficient  to  render  evident  the  perfect  untenability
of  a  specifically  divine  consciousness  and  self-conscious-
ness in  the  All-One.  In  this  way  of  thinking  we  find
ourselves  in  perfect  accord  with  the  views  of  modern
German  philosophy.  Here,  too,  neither  in  Fichte's  earlier
doctrine,  where  the  Absolute  is  represented  by  the  unreal
unsubstantial  abstract  moral  world-order  (Fichte's  Werke,

1  Only  in  this  sense  does  Spinoza  pure forms  of these  ideas  without

speak  of  a  self-knowledge  of  God.  regard to their extended objects

The  idea,  which  in  God  is  actual,  is  (2 Prop. 21 Obs.), and, moreover,

ever  unique, all-embracing  (Ethics,  includes  as  posited  with  logical  ne-

Part ii. Prop. 4), which includes  cessity. God  as subject or  natura

in  itself  all  individual  intellects  as  naturans  therefore  does not know

the ideas of the modes of  exten-  himself  as  subject  of  the  cognitive  ac-

sion  (comp.  above  p.  250  Obs.)  and  tivity  or  of  the  attribute  of  thought,

the ideas of all these intellects,  but as object  of the  same,  i.e.,  as

or  the  ideas  of  these  ideas  (Ethics,  natura  naturata  (comp. I Prop.  29

ii. Props. 20 and 21), i.e., the  Obs.)


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  261

v.  1 86,  187,  264,  368),  nor  in  his  later  doctrine,  where  it
stands  as  the  eternally  unchangeable  veiled  Being  behind
our  consciousness  which  reveals  it  (Werke,  v.  441,  442),
nor  in  Schelling  (comp.  his  "Werke,  i.  1,  p.  180;  i.  3,  p.
497;  i.  4,  p.  256;  i.  7,  p.  53,  54,  and  67,  68),  nor  in
Hegel  (which,  to  be  sure,  is  denied  by  the  reactionary
part  of  the  Hegelian  school),  nor  in  Schopenhauer  does
the  Absolute  possess  a  consciousness  outside  of  the
individuals  pervaded  by  it  (comp.  also  vol.  i.  pp.  23-
3 1 ;  Introductory  i.  c,  the  remarks  on  the  philosophers
named). —

After  these  conclusions  concerning  the  consciousness
and  self-consciousness  of  God,  we  shall  hardly  expect  a
more  favourable  result  in  regard  to  the  notion  of  per-
soncdity,  to  which  Theism  is  wont  to  attach  so  much
importance  as  predicate  of  its  God,  that  it  is  precisely
in  order  to  save  it  that  it  still  insists  so  urgently  on
the  untenable  predicates  of  consciousness  and  self-con-
sciousness, even  after  former  scruples  (comp.  above,  p.
245  ff.)  against  setting  aside  these  anthropopathic  predi-
cates of  God  have  been  removed  by  the  recognition  of  the
unconscious-superconscious  reflectionless-intuitive  intelli-
gence in  the  All-One.  Xothing  would  stand  in  the  way
of  the  application  of  the  notion  personality,  if  its  definition
were  limited  to  an  individuality  combined  with  will
and  intelligence,1  and  it  was  certain  that  no  inadequate
anthropopathic  accessory  notions  were  interpolated.  But
unfortunately  the  guarantee  of  this  is  so  small,  that,  on  the
contrary,  the  predicate  of  personality  has  almost  always
been  employed  only  with  the  intention  of  thereby  smug-
gling in  unsuitable  ideas,  which,  however,  are  perhaps
consoling  to  the  heart.  In  a  jural  sense,  the  notion  of
personality  rests  on  the  criteria  of  civil  independence;
this conception  has,  of  course,  no  sense  in  reference  to

1  Only  in  this  sense  is  Schelling  God  (comp.  his  definition  of  person-
willing  in  his  later  "  Philosophy  of  ality  :  Werke,  ii.  7,  p.  281,  and  my
Revelation"  to  understand  Theism  memoir,  "  Sehelling's  Positive  Phil-
as  doctrine  of  the  One  tri-personal  osophie,"  pp.  42,  43,  Ubs. )


:62


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.


God.  Ethically  the  notion  of  personality  implies  the
capacity  of  judging  one's  own  actions  and  the  moral
responsibility  conditioned  by  the  same,  but  this  transfer-
ence of  a  relation,  which  is  highly  important  between
separate  and  opposed  individuals,  to  the  absolute  all-em-
bracing Individual  appears  inadmissible,  because  there  are
no  individuals  beside  itself,  but  only  in  itself,  and  because
even  these  latter  are  only  manifestations  of  itself,  pheno-
mena, not  substances,  therefore  cannot  be  co-ordinated  with
the  substance,  through  which  alone  they  are,  as  the  notion
of  the  ethical  relation  would  require.1


1  Those  readers  who  have  been
accustomed  to  think  the  conception
of  freedom  inseparably  united  with
the  ethical  conception  of  personality
are  reminded:  (i.)  That  freedom
may  be  temporarily  abolished  along
with  accountability,  without  per-
sonality being  thereby  abolished.
(2.)  That  this  concept  of  freedom
only  contains  a  relation  to  the
concept  of  personality  when  it
is  opposed  to  the  freedom  of  indi-
vidual assertion  on  the  part  of
other  individuals,  but  that  then,
for  the  before-mentioned  reason,  it
is  not  transferable  to  the  All-One,
since  the  latter  has  nothing  what-
ever to  oppose  itself  to.  (3.)  That  the
notion  of  the  freedom  of  human  will
rests  altogether  on  an  illusion  (comp.
the  commencement  of  Chap,  xi.,  sect.
B.),  and  accountability  does  not  rest
on  a  quality  of  the  will,  but  of  the
intellect,  and,  moreover  of  the  dis-
cursive intellect,  cannot  therefore  be
applied  to  the  All-One.  If  there
were  a  human  freedom,  it  could  not
be  analogically  transferred  to  the
All-One  ;  if  it  were  transferable  it
would  still  import  no  trace  of  a
notion  of  personality  into  the  All-
One  ;  but  if  it  were  purified  from
amalgamation  with  this  alien  con-
cept, there  would  finally  be  nothing
ascribed  to  the  All  -  One  by  this
transference  which  does  not  already
appertain  to  our  Unconscious  as
such. The contrast of a foreign


compulsion,  which  is  necessary  to
give  the  notion  of  freedom  its  special
content,  is  wanting  here,  but  the  Un-
conscious is  undoubtedly  absolutely
free  inasmuch  as  it  derives  all
its  decisions  from  itself,  and  can  be
affected  by  nothing  external.  It
further  actually  possesses,  according
to  our  investigations,  the  ability
only  erroneously  ascribed  to  man,
to  intervene  at  any  moment  spon-
taneously as  cause  in  the  lawfully
given  phenomenal  series,  which  adds
a  new  factor  determining  the  pro-
cess to  the  existing  ones,  and  con-
tinually exercises  this  faculty  in  its
teleological  interpositions.  Lastly,
it  shows  itself,  as  we  shall  see  in  Chap,
xv.  O,  before  the  decision,  by  which
it  certainly  ties  its  own  hands  until
the  reintroduction  of  the  status  quo
ante,  as  free  to  comport  itself  ration-
ally or  irrationally,  i.e.,  to  remain  in
the  place  of  non- volition  or  to  ele-
vate itself  to  Volition,  i.e.,  to  the
world-creation  ;  man,  on  the  con-
trary, even  then  acts  according  to
the  absolutely  rational  plan  of  the
world,  i.e.,  rationally,  where  he
imagines  he  is  acting  counter  to  the
same,  i.e.,  irrationally.  The  All-
One  Unconscious  accordingly  pos-
sesses all  possible  freedom,  and  can
by  no  means  acquire  any  not  yet
possessed  freedom  in  addition  to
the  same  through  the  erroneous
assumption  of  a  human  freedom.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  263

Ideologically  the  concept  of  personality  consists  in  the
existence  of  a  consciousness  with  respect  to  the  identity
of  the  conscious  subjects  underlying  all  the  temporally
distinct  acts  of  self-consciousness  in  the  same  conscious-
ness (comp.  p.  79),  is  thus  the  result  of  a  tolerably  com-
plex reflection  on  a  number  of  reflective  acts  of  self-appre-
hension comprehended  by  'memory.  Since  God  in  his
absolute  intuition  is  raised  far  above  all  reflection  (even
above  that  of  simple  self-consciousness,  to  say  nothing  of
the  reflection  of  the  identity  of  the  subjects  of  those  acts
of  reflection),  and  as,  moreover,  such  a  reflection,  in  the
absence  of  any  existence  from  which  he  could  distinguish
himself,  would  be  for  him  perfectly  superfluous  and  tauto-
logical, the  ideological  concept  of  personality  also  can  have
no  application  to  God,  any  more  than  the  jural  or  ethical.
The  attempt,  from  religious  considerations,  to  save  the
ideological  personality  of  God  at  any  price,  necessarily
leads  by  its  consequences  to  the  fantastic  assumption  of
an  eternal  nature  in  God  elevated  above  material  temporal
Nature  and  different  from  it  (Jacob  Bohme  and  Franz  von
Baader),  in  order  to  render  possible  an  eternal  process  in
God  with  self-discrimination  and  reintegration  as  his
actual  temporal  nature  makes  possibly  the  temporal  world-
process,  with  the  resulting  separation  of  subject  and  object
in  the  finite  consciousnesses,  which  are  indeed  collectively
consciousnesses  of  the  All-One  Existence.  One  sees  from
this  how  weak  an  hypothesis  must  be  when  its  most
important  advocates  confess  themselves  compelled,  in  order
to  maintain  it,  to  have  recourse  to  such  artificial,  fantastic,
and  wholly  imaginary  auxiliary  hypotheses.

According  to  these  considerations,  it  seems  most  suit-
able not  to  give  to  the  notion  of  personality  so  wide  a
sense  as  is  given  in  the  above  definition,  in  order  thereby
to  make  it  applicable  to  God.  There  are  many  indivi-
duals endowed  with  vnll  and  intelligence,  which  do  not  on
that  account  admit  of  the  concept  of  personality  (animals,
low savages, idiots, &c), and to which we therefore


264  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

refuse  this  designation.  Why  should  we  not  exercise  the
same  restraint  with  regard  to  an  individual  which  no
longer  answers  to  that  conception,  because  it  is  elevated
above  all  the  limitations  which  form  the  marks  of  the
conception  on  its  different  sides  ?  Here,  too,  the  degrada-
tion of  the  Supreme  Being  does  not  lie  on  the  side  of
those  who  refuse  the  predicate  of  personality,  but  on  the
part  of  those  who  ascribe  it.  Nay,  looked  at  more  closely,
the  lowering  of  God  turns  out  to  be  the  secret  purpose  of
the  affair,  i.e.,  one  seeks  in  God  a  person  (according  to  the
human  standard),  in  order  by  this  kind  of  co-ordination  of
God  with  the  ego  seeking  consolation  from  him  to  bring
it  about,  that  one  may  place  oneself  on  intimate  foot-
ing, as  it  were,  with  God,  as  with  a  revered  equal,  in
order,  on  pouring  out  the  heart  before  him,  to  make  more
sure  of  a  humanly  sympathising  understanding  of  one's
own  emotion.  Even  the  Christian  apostles,  with  the
growing  purification  of  the  God-idea,  began  to  have  an
inkling  of  the  unsuitableness  of  this  childish  behaviour,
at  which  the  naive  anthropopathic  imagination  of  the
older  Judaism  had  taken  no  offence;  and  the  more  sub-
limely the  God-concept  shaped  itself  with  the  progressive
development  of  Christian  Theism  through  the  contact
with  Hellenic  philosophy,  the  more  the  religious  soul  in
its  intellectual  confusion  saw  itself  impelled  to  take  refuge
in  a  mediating  human  personality  (Christ,  subsequently
the  Virgin  Mary  and  the  saints).  As  the  Eeformation
found  itself  compelled,  after  the  abolition  of  prayer  to  the
saints,  to  lay  more  stress  upon  the  human  personality  of
Christ  than  in  Catholicism,  so  in  consequence  of  the
now  disappearing  Christ-belief,  Theism  is  trying  again
to  bring  God  himself  nearer  to  man  from  his  abstract
remoteness  by  imparting  more  human  features,  and  this
is  the  most  important  reason  for  the  emphasising  of  the
personality  of  God,  although  incompatible  with  the  idea  of
the  same.  But  when  one  considers  that,  from  the  philo-
sophical point  of  view,  the  practical  nerve  of  prayer  is


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  265

already  paralysed  by  a  purely  subjective  signification  and
activity  being  ascribed  to  it  according  to  the  modern
view  of  the  world,  the  value  of  the  emotional  postulate,
contradicted  by  thought,  appears  also  from  this  side  more
than  doubtful.  For  when  I  have  once  perceived  the
illusory  nature  of  belief  in  an  objective  meaning  and
efficacy  of  prayer,  the  nature  of  the  object  to  which  the
prayer  is  conceived  or  addressed  has  become  perfectly
indifferent,  since  in  truth  we  are  here  only  dealing  with
a  monologue,  to  which  the  possible  jugglery  of  a  conscious
self-deception  in  respect  of  a  feigned  auditor  can  give
no  value.  With  this  now-a-days  unavoidable  admission
that  the  meaning  of  prayer  is  reduced  to  the  value  of  a
soliloquising  soul-expectoration  on  self-rectitude  (Schleier-
macher,)  disappears,  even  within  the  pale  of  Theism,
every  practical  motive  of  religion,  for  hankering  after  the
clothing  of  God  with  the  predicate  of  personality  in
the  proper  sense  of  the  term  at  the  expense  of  good
logic.

But  with  the  renunciation  of  the  predicate  of  personality
disappears  again,  as  remarked  above,  the  practical  religious
interest  in  maintaining  the  personal  divine  self- conscious-
ness, and  with  this  the  last  interest  in  the  assertion  of  an
exclusive  transcendent  consciousness  of  the  All- One.  The
practical  religious  interest  being  set  aside  which  could
not  bring  itself  to  abandon  all  these  conceptions  in  spite
of  their  long-proved  untenability,  the  notional  difficulties
and  philosophic  proofs  fully  assert  themselves,  and  compel
that  Theism,  which  endeavours  to  purify  itself  from  the
crude  naturalness  of  an  anthropopathic  representation  of
God  and  to  attain  tenable  metaphysical  conceptions,  to  take
the  last  necessary  step  in  this  process  of  purification  and
profounder  thinking,  from  which  it  has  hitherto  recoiled
from  a  mistaken  religious  motive.  The  result,  however,
which  emerges  in  this  last  and  now  inevitable  step  of
the  self-purification  of  Theism,  is  the  same  as  that  which
tiie Philosophy of the Unconscious on its own part


266  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

from  quite  another  side  brings  to  Theism,  and  the  old
supports  of  the  latter  have  gradually  become  one  after  the
other  so  rotten  and  crumbling  that  it  should  rejoice  when
another  new  one  is  offered  it.

That  all  the  attributes  of  the  divine  intelligence  (all-
knowledge,  all-wisdom,  all-presentness)  are  also  appli-
cable to  the  clairvoyant  unconscious  intuition  of  our  All-
One,  will  be  more  precisely  shown  at  the  beginning  of
Chap.  xii.  C,  and  we  have  already  admitted  the  omni-
potence of  the  Unconscious  Absolute  Will.  When  we
add,  that  we  have  in  the  last  chapter  recognised  the  Un-
conscious as  the  Individual  in  a  pre-eminent  sense  (p.  223
ff.,  and  240-243),  and  that  the  former  claims  of  Theism
to  personality,  self-consciousness,  and  consciousness  of
God  in  their  previous  sense  have  become  untenable,  but
that  all  that  is  tenable  in  the  same  is  actually  satisfied  by
our  Unconscious,  it  is  clear  that  on  this  side  a  difference
in  principle  between  a  Theism  that  rightly  understands
itself  and  the  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious  cannot  be
found. —

This  might  appear  still  more  plain  in  another  direction,
namely,  in  reference  to  the  relation  of  the  individual  to
the  All-One ;  but  here  too  we  shall  see  that  a  well-under-
stood Theism  must  necessarily  move  away  some  steps
from  the  vulgar  conception,  and  then  likewise  coincides
with  our  point  of  view.  Theism  namely  is  originally
dualism,  in  that  it  ascribes  just  as  much  substantiality  to
the  world  as  to  God.  It  is  true  this  dualism  is  one  only
existing  since  the  creation  of  the  world  (conceived  as  in
time),  thus  no  regressively  eternal  one,  but  it  is  intended
to  be  a  forwards  eternal  one,  in  that  the  substance  of  the
higher  creature  is  also  conceived  as  eternal.  The  dualism
is  therefore  indeed  only  the  result  of  the  act  of  creation,
but  it  is  now  in  operation,  and  moreover  determined  not
to  disappear  again.  Such  a  dualism  is,  however,  philo-
sophically untenable,  and  irresistibly  tends  to  relapse
into  Monism. We  have  in  the  last  chapter  (pp.  230-234)


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  267

seen  that  a  seriously  held  dualism  abolishes  and  reduces
to  Occasionalism  or  Pre-established  Harmony — two  equally
untenable  refuges  from  difficulty — the  empirically  given
and  a  priori  demanded  causality  of  individuals  among  one
another,  and  that  causality  as  infiuxus  physicus  necessarily
demands  the  taking  up  of  individuals  as  phenomena  into
the  one  absolute  substance.  We  can  here  reach  the  same
result  by  a  consideration  of  the  notion  of  creation,  which
forms  a  distinguishing  fundamental  conception  of  Theism. —
A  consistent  dualism  must  assume  that  the  world  fashioned
as  substance  by  the  creative  act  would  continue  to  subsist,
even  if  the  creator  were  suddenly  annihilated  ;  only  on
this  condition  would  the  world  be  a  permanent  residuum
of  a  completed  act  of  creation,  only  on  this  condition  true
and  genuine  substance.  This  consequence  is,  however,  too
strong  even  for  Theism  itself,  and  it  therefore  foregoes  the
regarding  the  world  as  a  mere  completed  result  of  a  single
creative  act;  it  lets  its  God  permanently  act  the  part  of
world-restorer  or  world-governor,  as  the  world-architect
of  Greek  dualism  in  presence  of  the  chaos  of  the  eternal
uncreated  matter.  For  this  matter,  however,  and  strictly
taken  also  for  the  individual  immortal  spirits  called  into
actuality,  Theism  tries  to  retain  the  notion  of  a  created
sulstance,  a  caput  mortuum  of  a  former  long  past  creative
act,  which  residuum,  it  is  true,  God  has  the  power  again  to
annihilate,  if  it  seems  good  to  him,  but  which  without  such
a  divine  interposition  would  of  itself  be  imperishable.
However,  Theism  must  soon  perceive  that  it  is  here  in
presence  of  the  same  difficulty,  of  the  same  belittling  of
God,  in  that  this  residuum  would  then  also  continue  to  exist
if  God  were  annihilated,  and  that  therewith  an  indepen-
dence limiting  God's  absoluteness  would  have  to  be  ac-
corded it.  This  scruple  could  only  be  laid  to  rest  if,  on
God's  annihilation, continued  subsistence  were  denied  to  the
creature  ;  the  creature  must  collapse  into  nothingness,  if
the  creator  withdraws  his  hand  from  it  even  only  for  a
moment;  but  this  is  only  possible  if  continued  existence


268  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

is  conditioned  by  a  continuously  active  function  of  God,
by  an  act  of  will  renewed  every  moment.

Such  a  conserving  activity  of  God,  which  prevents  the
constantly  threatened  falling  back  of  the  creature  into  no-
thingness, is  now,  however,  in  no  way  different  from  the
first  creative  act,  which  summoned  the  creature  out  of
nothing;  for  both  substitute  for  the  non-existence  of  the
creature  its  existence;  i.e.,  however,  the  conservation  of
the  creation  by  God  is  to  be  more  precisely  defined  as  con-
tinuous creation.  Herewith  is  the  untenable  notion  of  the
caput  mortuum  of  a  past  act  of  creation  stripped  off,  no
matter  whether  this  past  is  reckoned  at  thousands  of  years
or  seconds,  and  the  existence  of  the  creation  is  in  every
moment  understood  as  creative  act  of  the  same  moment.
Creation  out  of  nothing,  which  was  emphasised  by  the
Jewish- Christian  Theism  in  contrast  to  Greek  dualism,  in
order  to  render  prominent  the  absence  of  an  eternal  matter
existing  before  God,  is  then  to  be  understood  in  this  way,
that  that  wherefrom  God  creates  is  his  own  creative  energy,
that  the  whole  real  existence  of  the  creature  consists
purely  in  the  divine  creative  power  directed  to  the  same,
and  its  whole  essence  at  every  moment  purely  consists  in
the  content  which  the  divine  creative  act  of  this  moment
pours  into  it.

About  thus  far  has  Theism  progressed  in  the  philoso-
phical purification  of  its  conceptions  ;  it  is,  however,  easy
to  see  that  herewith  the  notion  of  substance  has  ceased  to
be  applicable  to  the  creature,  since  it  no  longer  has  subsist-
ence at  all,  save  through  the  absolute  divine  substance.
Thus  only  the  latter  manifesting  itself  in  a  continuous  crea-
tive act  of  will  is  the  subsistent  or  self-existent,  but  the  crea-
ture itself  and  its  existence  is  only  the  manifestation  or  the
revelation  of  the  functions  of  the  Absolute  directed  to  its  con-
stant creation  or  preservation,  or,  in  brief,  an  appearance1  of


1  By  this  expression  we  must,  of  ance"  of  the  theory  of  knowledge,
course,  not  in  the  remotest  manner  which  is  the  correlate  to  the  concep-
think of the "  subjective appear- tion  of  the  "  thing  of  itself  "  of  the


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  269

the  All-One  Being.  The  real  existence  and  the  essence  of
the  creature  is  hereby  not  at  all  impugned,  since  we  have
indeed  already  seen  that  what  we  call  its  reality  only  con-
sists of  the  sum  of  the  acts  of  will  which  are  functional  in
it  (comp.  above,  pp.  242,  243).  The  notion  of  creation  is,
however,  through  the  setting  aside  of  the  conception  of
the  created  substance,  resolved  into  that  of  the  continuous
manifestation  of  the  absolute  will  and  the  absolute  idea,
i.e.,  into  that  of  the  Appearance  of  the  absolute  Being.
The  individual  who  has  penetrated  to  this  conception
thereby  attains  for  his  religious  feeling  the  desired  con-
viction that  he  at  every  moment  owes  to  God,  and  to  him
alone,  his  whole  being  and  all  he  is ;  that  he  is  nothing  at
nil  but  in  him  and  through  him,  and  that  the  being  in
him  is  God's  being  itself.  Thus  also  dualism  has  dis-
appeared from  Theism,  and  by  dealing  in  earnestness
with  pure  Monism  has,  at  the  same  time,  gained  for  the
ardently  devotional  religious  feeling  the  consciousness  of
an  intimacy  of  relation  between  God  and  man,  which  is
not  even  remotely  to  be  reached  as  long  as  man  by  the
perverse  self-contradictory  notion  of  a  created  substance  is
opposed  as  a  foreign,  independent,  self-contained  personal
substance  to  God,  who  may  now  solve  the  puzzle  how  to
enter  into  the  man  separated  substantially  from  him.  The
purely  monistic  view  of  the  world  is  also  alone  capable
of  laying  the  metaphysical  foundation  of  an  ethic  exempt
from  the  interference  of  all  sovereign  individual  caprice
(comp.  Schopenhauer),  which  could  only  attain  general
validity  on  the  ground  of  a  pluralistic  individualistic
(.allies,  if  the  conception  of  the  divine  revelation  of  a
universally  obligatory  moral  canon  were  tenable.  That
profounder  intimacy  of  the  relation  of  the  individual  to
the  Absolute  and  this  better  foundation  of  ethics,  which
[Monism  affords  as  compared  with  dualistic  Theism,  and  for

same  theory,  whilst  we  have  here  to  nomenon,  which  is  the  correlate  to
do  with  the  notion  of  the  divinely  or  the  metaphysical  conception  of  the
objectively  posited,  or  objective  phe- "  essence  :'  ;comp.  above,  p.  24IJ.


270  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  sake  of  which  the  mystical  theosophists  and  theologians
of  the  West  have  always  shown  a  strong  and  decided
inclination  to  Pantheism,  the  purely  Aryan  religions  of
India  possessed  long  before  the  origin  of  Christianity ;
whilst,  on  the  contrary,  Christianity  from  its  Semitic
origin  retained  the  dualism  between  creator  and  crea-
tion, at  any  rate  in  the  orthodox  doctrines  of  the  chief
confessions.  Whilst,  however,  the  pantheistic  religions  of
India,  entangled  in  the  error  of  the  eternity  of  the  pheno-
menon and  not  acknowledging  the  real  existence  of  time,
were  unable  to  elevate  themselves  to  an  historical  world-
theory,  and  therefore  allowed  their  believers  to  be  lost
in  dreams  and  perish  in  unhistorical  Quietism,  the
Jewish-Christian  Theism,  on  the  contrary,  has  in  com-
pensation for  its  other  defects  developed  an  historical
world-view,  in  which  the  all-wise  providence  on  the  basis
of  natural  process  guides  the  historical  process  according
to  a  teleologically  predetermined  plan  to  a  rational  goal ;
from  this  belief  in  a  rational  historical  evolution  which
has  found  ever  clearer  expression  have  the  European
nations  derived  the  strength  of  their  devotion  to  the
historical  process.

At  the  present  time,  when  the  more  special  forms  of  the
Christian  religion  are  manifestly  outlived,  and  the  faith  in
the  providentially  guided  historical  evolution  has  besides
passed  into  the  flesh  and  blood  of  modern  civilisation,  the
essential  question  is  how  to  liberate  from  the  deciduous  shell
and  to  unite  with  the  real  substance  of  the  pantheistic  Indian
religions  this  remaining  kernel  of  Theism,  in  order  through
these  ideas,  which  have  grown  purely  out  of  the  spirit  of
our  Aryan  stock,  to  gain  a  religious  profundity  and  en-
hancement of  the  intensity  of  religious  and  ethical  feeling,
which  would  be  a  vivifying  renewal  of  our  irreligious  age
clinging  convulsively  to  the  mere  externals  of  religion.
That  the  old  creed  is  no  longer  tenable,  and  is  still
only  artificially  and  violently  preserved  as  a  mummy,  is
generally  felt  and  admitted. But  that  by  mere  critical


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  27 r

negation  nothing  is  directly  gained,  unless  at  the  same
time  fresh  elements  of  religious  feeling  are  introduced,
would  be  just  as  generally  recognised  if  one  did  not
frequently  despair  of  discovering  these  new  positive
elements.  If  these  are  anywhere  to  be  found,  they  lie
in  that  genuine  and  imperishable  core  of  pure  Aryan
Pantheism,  which  must  be  fused  with  the  circuitously
attained  historical  world-view  of  Judaism  and  Christianity,
in  order  by  this  concrescence  to  reach  a  position  that
unites  the  advantages  of  both  sides  without  their  defects,
and  therefore  stands  higher  than  either  of  them  singly,
In  this  sense  we  may  say :  we  stand  directly  before  the
time  when  the  Jewish-Christian  cosmic  theory  has  only
the  choice  of  dying  entirely  out  or  of becoming  pantheistic.
The  metaphysical  foundation  of  this  transformation,  how-
ever, which  was  prepared  by  the  pantheistic  and  mystical
philosophies  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  the  Reformation
(Scotus  Erigena,  Martin  Eckhart,  Giordano  Bruno,  Jacob
Pohnie,  Spinoza),  has  been  philosophically  laid  and  built
on  by  the  most  recent  German  philosophers,  whose  par-
tially authorised  and  valuable  endeavours  and  tendencies
have  coalesced  into  a  provisional  unity  in  the  principle
of  the  Unconscious.  Precisely  in  our  own  time,  when
the  opposition  between  the  unmediated  extremes  of  a
rigid  theistic  dogmatism  and  an  irreligious  atheistic  natural-
ism is  threatening  to  become  more  irreconcilable,  the
golden  mean  of  a  spiritualistic  Monism  or  Pantheism,
which  supplies  both  parties  with  a  bridge  fur  mutual
understanding  and  union  on  neutral  soil,  appears  to  be
of  the  highest  importance  for  the  peaceful  spiritual  de-
velopment of  modern  society. — ■

Having  endeavoured  to  prove  the  evanescence  of  the
main  differences  between  the  Unconscious  and  the  God
of  Theism  with  the  philosophical  purification  of  Theism,  a
cardinal  point  must  in  conclusion  not  be  left  unmentioned.
Theism,  namely,  asserts  that  the  existence  of  the  world  is
an intended  consequence  of  God's  goodness  and  omni-


272  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

science,  and  sees  itself  therefore  driven  in  presence  of  evil
to  the  necessity  of  attempting  a  theodicy,  the  impossibility
of  which  had  already  been  convincingly  proved  by  Kant
in  a  special  treatise.  We  do  not  deal  here  with  the
optimism  of  those  who,  like  Jewish  Theism,  find  the
whole  world  and  the  life  in  it  wonderfully  glorious,  and
hold  evil  to  be  evanescent  as  compared  with  the  happiness
which  exists  beside  it ;  we  also  do  not  insist  on  the
necessity  of  a  theodicy  in  regard  to  moral  evil,  which  for
the  rest  indeed  were  indifferent,  if  it  did  not  contribute
to  the  increase  of  suffering;  we  only  ask  an  account  of
that  Theism  which,  like  the  Christian,  grants  the  pre-
ponderating woe  and  misery  in  this  world  (comp.  C.  Chap,
xiii.),  and  yet  regards  the  resolution  to  create  the  world
as  an  efflux  of  the  divine  all-knowledge  and  all-wisdom.
The  consolation  of  immortality  is  no  help  here,  for  also  in
the  other  world  the  number  of  the  blessed  will  be  very
small  compared  with  that  of  the  torment  of  the  suffering
damned  (Matt.  vii.  13-14;  xxii.  14).  The  only  partially
accepted  doctrine  of  the  future  restoration  of  every  creature
at  the  end  of  all  things  is  in  itself  too  problematical  to
deserve  consideration,  and  leaves  open  the  question  why
the  world  must  be  miserable  until  then.  As  now  it  would
never  do  to  make  God  the  author  of  evil,  Theism  sees
itself  compelled  to  seek  the  origin  of  evil  outside  God,  i.e.,
since  save  God  only  his  creature  exists,  in  the  creature.
A  moral  guilt  of  the  first  (?)  human  pair  is  said  to  have  had
the  deterioration  of  nature  for  its  natural  consequence,  so
that  God  must  now  look  on  while  milliards  suffer  for
the  trespass  of  a  couple  of  individuals  dead  thousands  of
years  ago,  i.e.,  guiltlessly ;  since,  however,  notwithstanding
the  connection  between  human  fall  and  deterioration  of
Nature,  between  moral  guilt  and  natural  world  misery,
appeared  all  too  bold,  a  superhuman  creature  must  be
introduced,  a  devil,  who  ruined  and  brought  into  disorder
the  fair  creation  of  God.  Tor  a  more  childish  time  this
theodicy,  by  means  of  the  two scapegoats,  Lucifer  and


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  273

Adam,  might  be  well  enough ;  we  only  smile  now  at
such  fancies.  We  repudiate,  however,  at  the  same  time,
in  principle,  every  attempt  to  disburden  God  of  the
responsibility  for  the  world-misery  by  shifting  the  same
on  to  any  of  his  creatures  whatsoever,  since,  in  the  first
place,  such  an  independence  of  the  creature  crossing  the
intentions  of  God  is,  according  to  our  foregoing  discussion,
not  conceivable ;  and  since,  secondly,  an  all-knowing  and
all-wise  God  must,  at  the  moment  of  creation,  foresee  and
take  account  of  the  voluntary  decisions  of  his  creatures
under  all  circumstances,  and  all  the  indirect  consequences
of  their  action  as  terms  of  the  question,  whether  it  would
be  wise  to  create  a  world  with  such  a  history.

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  it  is  quite  immaterial,  and  does
not  at  all  affect  the  serious  nature  of  the  responsibility,
whether  the  intelligence  of  God,  which  is  active  in  this
resolve  to  create  a  world,  is  assumed  to  be  conscious  or
unconscious. "Were  the  divine  intelligence  at  all  concerned
in  the  decision  whether  a  world  should  be  created  or  not,
the  actual  result  of  this  decision  in  the  case  of  affirmation
would  be  an  inexcusable  cruelty  towards  the  created  sub-
stances on  the  assumption  of  dualistic  Theism,  but,  on  the
assumption  of  Monism,  the  frenzy  of  a  divine  asceticism,
a  divine  self-laceration. If  an  absolute  intelligence  (no
matter  whether  conscious  or  unconscious)  really  be  one  of
the  attributes  of  God,  as  indeed  we  too  assume,  it  is,  in
view of  the  misery  of  the  world,  impossible  that  it  can
have  taken  part  in  the  decision  in  question,  thus  impossible
that  it  was  active  and  efficient  during  the  exaltation  of
the  will  which  decided  on  the  "  That  "  of  the  world. Only
if  the  existence  of  the  world  was  decided  by  the  act  of  a
blind  will  illuminated  by  no  ray  of  rational  intelligence,
only  then  is  this  existence  comprehensible ;  only  then  is
God  as  such not  to  be  made  responsible  for  the  same.
Such  a  non-participation  of  intelligence  in  the  world's  origin,
however,  cannot  be  explained  by  Theism  in  any  of  its  forms ;
it  must  maintain  it  to  be  simply  impossible  on  the  as-
VOL.  II.  S


274  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

sumption  of  an  eternal  interior  spiritual  life  of  a  self-con-
scious God.  With  our  principles,  however,  it  is  perfectly
comprehensible,  nay,  even  not  otherwise  to  be  expected
a  priori,  because,  namely  (according  to  C.  Chap,  i.),  the
Idea  of  itself  has  no  interest  in  being,  and  can  only  be
posited  by  the  raising  of  the  will  out  of  non-being  into
being,  thus  neither  before  nor  during  the  elevation  of  the
will  is  existent,  but  only  becomes  so  through  the  same.
Suppose  then  the  elevation  of  the  blind  will  into  actual
volition  {i.e.,  the  moment  of  the  initiative  preceding  every
actual  intelligence  in  the  All-One)  sufficed,  as  we  shall
hereafter  see,  to  posit  the  "That"  of  the  world,  it  would
thereby  be  explained  how,  despite  the  omniscience  of  God
{during  the  world-process),  the  unfortunate  commencement
could  have  come  to  pass.

But  now  arises  a  second  question  :  Why  did  not  God  in
the  first  moment  when  he  became  seeing,  i.e.,  his  all- wise
intelligence  entered  into  being,  repair  the  error  Mindly
committed,  and  turn  his  will  against  himself  ?  Incom-
prehensible and  unpardonable  as  the  first  commencement
would  be  without  the  hypothesis  of  a  blind  action,  no  less
incomprehensible  and  unpardonable  would  be  the  laisser-
aller  of  this  misery  with  open  eyes  if  the  possibility  of  an
immediate  recall  remained  open.  Here  we  are  again  aided
by  the  inseparability  of  the  idea  from  the  will  in  the
Unconscious,  the  unfreedom  and  dependence  of  the  idea
on  the  will,  in  consequence  of  which  the  former  has
indeed  to  determine  its  "  What,"  its  goal  and  its  content,
but  not  its  "  That  and  whether."  We  shall  see  that  the
whole  world-process  only  serves  the  one  purpose  of  emanci-
pating the  Idea  from  the  will  by  means  of  consciousness,
in  order  by  the  opposition  of  the  Idea  to  induce  the  peace
of  the  will.  Were  now  this  end  attainable  without  con-
sciousness, or  did  such  a  consciousness  in  the  sense  of
an  emancipation  of  the  Idea  from  the  will  exist  at
the  beginning  of  the  world-process  in  God,  the  whole
cosmic  process  would  be  foolish  and  aimless,  in  that  it


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  275

would  be  struggling  to  attain  somewhat  that  either  is  not
at  all  requisite  for  the  object,  or  that  existed  long  ago.
This  consideration  affords  the  last  decisive  reason  against
the  assumption  of  a  transcendent  consciousness  in  God  in
the  sense  of  an  emancipation  of  the  idea  from  the  will,
if  the  contrary  reasons  assigned  above  were  not  more
than  sufficient.  This  last  argument,  be  it  observed,  is
thoroughly  inductive,  drawn  from  the  empirical  fact  of
the  misery  of  the  world,  and  derives  its  force  solely  from
this,  that  no  hypothesis  involving  a  conscious  God  is  able
to  explain  the  fact  without  contradiction.

Although,  since  Spinoza's  identification  of  God,  Sub-
stance, and  Nature,  the  God-idea  has  to  a  certain  extent
obtained  a  citizen's  rights  in  philosophy,  I  still  hold  the
origin  of  an  idea  to  be  so  important  for  its  comprehension,
that  it  seems  to  me  advisable  to  avoid  as  far  as  possible
in  philosophy  an  idea  with  an  origin  so  exclusively
religious  as  God.  I  shall  therefore  continue  as  a  rule  to
employ  the  expression,  "  The  Unconscious,"  although  the
previous  discussion  has  shown  that  I  should  have  more
right  to  the  use  of  the  word  "  God  "  than  Spinoza  and
many  others.  Although  the  formal  negativity  of  my
terminology  for  an  out-and-out  positive  Being  must  for
a  length  of  time  be  inadequate,  yet  it  will  retain  its
proper  prophylactic  value  as  long  as  the  anthropopathic
error  of  the  consciousness  of  the  Absolute  prevails  to  a  con-
siderable  extent.  "When,  however,  the  negative  predicate
of  unconsciousness  is  'universally  recognised  as  a  self-evident
predicate  of  the  Absolute  no  longer  needing  distinct
enouncement,  then  undoubtedly  this  negative  designation
will,  in  the  historical  progress  of  philosophy,  have  long
been  replaced  by  one  more  appropriate  and  positive.


( 276 )


IX.


THE  ESSENTIAL  NOTION  OF  GENERATION  FROM  THE  STAND-
POINT OF  THE  UNIVERSALITY  AND  UNITY  OF  THE
UNCONSCIOUS.

We  will  now  employ  our  recently  obtained  point  of  view
to  clear  up  a  few  questions,  which  either  have  occupied
philosophers  for  thousands  of  years,  or  precisely  at  the
present  time  have  acquired  special  interest  among  the
general  public.  It  wull  be  shown  how  the  solutions
which  flow  from  the  principles  already  obtained  are  in
full  accordance  with  what  the  facts  to  be  explained
require,  and  what  an  unlaboured  criticism  of  possible
explanations  leaves  over.

The  first  of  these  questions  concerns  the  nature  of
Generation.  Formerly  two  theories  contended  concerning
generation,  Creatianism  and  Traducianism.  The  former
assumed  a  psychical  new  creation  on  every  occasion  of
procreation ;  the  latter,  a  transference  of  parts  of  the
paternal  souls  to  the  child.  The  former  accordingly
affirms  in  every  case  of  procreation  a  creation  out  of
nothing,  a  new  miracle  ;  and  is,  therefore,  unacceptable  to
the  more  sober  thinking  of  modern  times ;  the  latter,
however,  contradicts  the  facts.  For  if  a  man  with  the
requisite  number  of  women  could  easily  beget  over  a
hundred  children  in  the  course  of  a  year,  during  the  time
of  his  procreative  power,  accordingly,  many  thousands,
and  yet  notoriously  no  diminution  of  his  soul  takes  place  ;
on  each  act  of  generation  the  part  given  off  to  the  child
must  have  been  much  less  than  the  thousandth  part
of the  minimum which could just be traced as the


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  277

soul's  loss.  With  such  a  tiny  piece  of  soul  manifestly
the  child  could  not  for  the  length  of  time  get  along,
still  less  his  children  and  children's  children,  which,  in
decreasing  progression,  would  soon  acquire  only  the
billionth  part  of  a  soul  ;  accordingly,  the  transferred  piece
could  only  be  regarded  as  a  germ,  which  is  capable  of
growth.  Under  a  germ  one  understands,  however,  a
formal  power  which  is  able  to  draw  to  itself  and  to
assimilate  foreign  material  elements,  and  thereby  to  grow.
If,  then,  the  infant  soul  were,  at  its  engendering,  only  a
germ,  the  question  occurs,  Where  are  the  foreign  elements
to  be  sought  by  which  it  is  augmented  ?  The  materialists
answer  very  simply  :  The  soul  is  only  a  result  of  material
combinations ;  accordingly  with  the  growth  of  the  organ-
ism and  its  noble  parts  the  soul  also  grows.  This  view  we
can  of  course  not  accept,  but  it  is  at  least  clear  and  self-
consistent.  But  if  we  still  ask  where  the  elements  to  be
drawn  upon  are  to  be  sought,  there  remains  nothing  but
the  general  spirituality,  the  impersonal  psychical,  in  a
word,  the  Unconscious.  From  this,  accordingly,  the  piece
given  off  from  the  parent-souls  to  the  child-soul  must
draw  its  stock  of  increase.

But  why,  then,  is  a  soul-gevm  wanted,  as  the  organic
germ  can  take  the  place  of  the  same  ?  Does  the  child  in
the  womb  need  another  kind  of  psychical  activity  than
that  of  organic  formation  ?  And  when  by  means  of  this
unconscious  psychical  activity  an  organ  is  created  in  the
brain  for  conscious  mental  activity,  is  there  then  needed
yet  another  medium  of  attraction,  in  order  that  the  Un-
conscious may  turn  its  activity  in  this  direction,  than  the
presence  of  this  organ  itself?  Why,  then,  this  unnatural
hypothesis  of  the  given-off  soul-germs,  by  which  one  must
cither  think  of  one-sided  tendencies  of  the  parental  souls,
which  are  no  aid  to  explanation,  or  diminutive  souls,
hatched  and  detached,  as  it  were — a  horrible  idea?

And  how,  then,  came  these  soul-buds  first  to  get  into
the  organic  procreative  germs,  since  both  must  be  conceived


278  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

as  arising  independently  of  one  another  ?  Is  there  on
every  seminal  emission  with  each  of  the  millions  of  sper-
matozoa a  piece  of  soul  carried  away  at  random,  or  does
the  detached  diminutive  soul  of  the  father  travel  into  the
particular  spermatozoon,  if  the  same  has  had  the  good
fortune  to  light  upon  an  ovum  of  its  own  species  capable
of  fecundation  ?  And  how  does  the  diminutive  soul  of  the
father,  held  in  reserve,  learn  which  spermatozoon,  emitted
during  coitus  hours  or  days  before,  causes  the  fertilisation
of  an  ovum  ?

If  the  child's  soul  is  drawn  from  the  well  of  the  univer-
sal world-spirit,  represents  as  it  were  the  psychical  appur-
tenance crystallised  round  the  newly  arisen  organic  germ,
this  conveys  an  essentially  different  idea  from  that  of
Creatianism,  where  the  soul  in  the  moment  of  generation
is  created  by  God  out  of  nothing.  Further,  this  view  does
not,  like  Creatianism;  render  unintelligible  the  transmis-
sion of  psychical  qualities,  in  that  the  organic  germ  is  con-
ditioned by  the  qualities  of  the  parents  and  the  spirit
crystallising,  as  it  were,  from  the  Unconscious,  is  again
modified  according  to  the  qualities  of  the  organic  germ.
In  this  sense,  by  transmission  of  the  constitution  of
the  brain  spiritual  qualities  may  just  as  well  be  trans-
ferred from  parents  to  children  as  a  finger  in  excess  or  a
morbid  diathesis.  On  the  other  hand,  the  addition  of  a
genius  to  the  infant  soul,  demanded  by  higher  historical
considerations,  remains  unrestricted;  for  if  the  Unconscious
needs  special  organs  for  its  revelation,  it  prepares  them  also
in  due  time ;  it  will  create  in  an  organism  which  offers  itself
as  especially  appropriate  an  organ  of  consciousness,  which
is  capacitated  for  unusually  lofty  psychical  achievements.

If  in  this  way  we  escape  the  main  inconvenience  of
Tradu danism  and  Creatianism,  it  is  still  always  not  to  be
denied  that  as  long  as  one  regards  the  soul  of  the  indi-
vidual not  merely  in  its  activity,  but  also  in  its  essence,
its  substance,  as  something  self-enclosed  and  limited,  both
with  respect  to  other  individual  souls  and  also  with  respect


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  279

to  the  universal  spirit,  that  so  long  the  theory  of  genera-
tion has  its  great  difficulties ;  for  the  rending  of  a  new  soul
from  the  universal,  and  the  attaching  of  the  same  to  the
new  organic  germ,  is  a  very  dubious  proceeding,  whether
we  regard  this  individualising  of  a  new  soul  as  a  process  of
gradual  crystallisation  going  hand-in-hand  with  the  bodily
development  of  the  germ,  or  whether  we  regard  it  as  a  single
momentary  act,  in  which  the  new  soul  is  engrafted  ready
made  on  the  germ.

However,  as  soon  as  one  remembers  the  results  of  our
last  chapter  but  one,  the  matter  begins  to  grow  clear,  for
now  the  soul  both  of  each  of  the  parents  as  well  as  of  the
child  is  only  the  sum  of  the  activities  of  the  one  Unconscious
directed  to  the  particular  organism.1

Now  the  souls  of  the  parents  are  not  separate,  self-exist-
ing substances,  can  accordingly  give  off  nothing  of  their
substance,  and  the  child  has  no  need  to  acquire  any  special
individualised  soul,  but  its  soul  is  likewise  only  the  sum  of
the  activities  of  the  Unconscious  directed  at  any  moment
on  its  organism.  Could  the  parents  really  give  off  a  portion
of  their  souls  to  the  child,  they  would  still  only  draw  from
the  great  dish  from  which  they,  as  all  three,  are  fed.

Now  there  is  also  nothing  wonderful  in  this,  that  the
infant  soul  only  grows  gradually  in  proportion  to  the
body,  for  the  more  developed  becomes  the  organism,  the
more  varied,  rich,  and  noble  becomes  the  sum  of  the  ac-
tivities of  the  Unconscious  directed  upon  it.  With  our
principle  not  only  is  the  miraculous  lost,  but  also  that
unique  character  that  generation  otherwise  possesses ;  it
becomes  an  act  essentially  similar  to  conservation  and
renovation  even  in  spiritual  reference,  as  it  has  long  been

1  We hardly need remind the  this  only  happened  because,  for  the

reader that wherever the word  understanding  of the  matter  there

"  soul  "  occurs  in  the  first  two  sec-  treated  of,  the  current  conception  of

tions  of  this  book,  it  must  not,  after  the  soul  sufficed,  and  by  premature

tlii-  explanation  of  the  last  chapter,  insistance  on  the  monistic  point  of

be  understood  otherwise  than  in  the  view  a  proper  understanding  of  the

sens.;  of  the definition here  given,  subject by  the philosophically  un-

If  in  the  earlier  sections  the  monistic  trained reader would have been

view  of  the  soul  was  less  prominent,  rendered  needlessly  difficult.


2So  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

so  acknowledged  in  material  reference.  Should  the  Un-
conscious cease  to  direct  its  activity  (as  sensation,  idea-
tion, will,  organic  formation,  instinct,  reflex  action,  &c.)  at
any  moment  whatsoever  upon  any  existing  organism,  the
latter  would  at  the  same  moment  be  bereft  of  soul,  i.e.,  be
dead,  and  would  be  unsparingly  crushed  by  the  laws  of
matter,  just  as  the  matter  of  this  organism  would  cease  to
be  as  soon  as  the  Unconscious  intermitted  the  acts  of  will
in  which  its  atomic  forces  consist.  Just  as  well,  however,
as  the  Unconscious  at  any  moment  animates  every  organism
capable  of  animation,  will  it  also  animate  the  newly  aris-
ing germ  according  to  its  capability  of  being  animated.
Add  to  this,  that  the  moment  is  not  at  all  to  be  determined
when  the  germ  becomes  from  a  part  of  the  maternal  the
independent  organism,  if  one  does  not  let  the  solution  at
birth  pass  for  such.  As  long,  however,  as  the  organism  of
the  child  is  a  part  of  the  maternal  organism,  and  is  nour-
ished by  it,  so  long  we  have  still  to  do  with  a  process  which
in  essence  is  not  distinguishable  from  any  other  organic
formation.  This  will  become  more  clear  if  we  glance  at
the  gradual  progress  from  the  lower  kinds  of  propagation  to
sexual  generation.

The  simplest  kind  is  fission,  an  ordinary  case  of  the
increase  of  cells,  but  also  not  rare  in  infusoria  and  other
animals.  That  in  a  division  of  one  animal  into  two  there
can  be  no  talk  of  a  division  of  the  substance  of  the  soul
has  been  already  repeatedly  mentioned.  There  is  a  gra-
dual transition  from  fission  to  gemmation,  for  the  bud  too  is
developed  as  part  of  the  maternal  organism,  until,  rendered
capable  of  independent  existence,  it  drops  off  (polyps,  &c.)

A  difference  in  principle  in  the  process  of  formation
cannot  be  asserted,  whether  the  animal  replaces  lost  parts
or  forms  buds  for  multiplication.  In  the  cases,  however,
where  the  buds  are  characteristically  presented  as  such,  and
are  no  longer  to  be  confused  with  simple  fission,  their
development  from  a  single  cell  deposited  in  the  maternal
tissue  at  any  part  of  the  body — germ-cell — is  always  to


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  281

be  recognised.  Now  it  can  manifestly  make  no  essential
difference  at  what  part  of  the  maternal  organism  the  germ-
cell  is  found  from  which  the  new  organism  is  developed,
whether  this  place  lies  at  the  side,  or  at  an  extremity,  or
on  the  arms,  or  in  the  abdominal  cavity  of  the  animal,
or  in  a  distinct  ovarium.  The  two  latter  cases  are  dis-
tinguished from  increase  by  gemmation  as  increase  by
germ-cells  in  the  narrower  sense.  The  germ-cells,  which
are  developed  in  the  abdominal  cavity  or  in  a  special  sac,
mostly  exhibit  a  marked  external  resemblance  in  form
and  size  to  the  ova  of  the  higher  animals.  Nay,  one  may
even  assert  they  are  not  to  be  distinguished  morphologi-
cally from  these.

In  many  animals  (e.g.,  plant-lice)  multiplication  by
germ-cells  already  alternates  with  sexual  propagation,  or
one  generative  act  is  sufficient  to  fertilise  the  germ-cells
(or  ova)  for  several  successive  broods.  An  insect  belonging
to  the  Diptera,  Cecidomyia,  by  sexual  propagation  begets
larvae  which,  living  under  the  bark  of  decaying  apple-trees,
develop  without  copulation  in  a  species  of  ovary  offspring
so  advanced,  that  they  come  into  the  world  in  a  form  re-
sembling that  of  the  mother.  In  some  butterflies  also  the
remarkable  phenomenon  of  virgin  generation  or  parthe-
nogesis  takes  place,  likewise  in  a  whole  series  of  lower
Crustacea ;  in  both  the  offspring  born  without  fertilisation
are  exclusively  females;  in  the  black  humblebees,  wasps,
and  bees,  on  the  other  hand,  conversely,  the  males  come
forth  from  unfertilised,  the  females  from  fertilised  eggs.
Whilst  among  the  bees  only  the  queen  lays  eggs,  which  it
can  at  will  bring  into  contact  with  spermatozoa  reserved
from  a  former  copulation  or  not,  in  the  humblebees  and
wasps  the  bearers  of  the  male  and  female  offspring  are
separate  individuals;  the  females,  namely,  that  have  sur-
vived the  winter,  which  had  copulated  in  the  autumn,
bring  forth  female  young;  these  females  born  in  spring,
however,  now  produce  without  being  fecundated  the
males for  the autumn coupling. — The  germ-cell  or the


282  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

unfertilised  ovum  develops  in  a  manner  perfectly  analo-
gous to  the  fertilised  ovum,  only  that  the  former  does  not
need  the  appulse  of  fertilisation ;  yet  there  are  accredited
examples  of  the  ova  of  animals  that  only  increase  sexually,
which  were  notoriously  unfertilised,  entering  into  the  pro-
cess of  yolk-furrowing,  as  if  they  were  fertilised.  (Such
cases  were,  e.g.,  observed  years  ago  in  the  ova  of  pigs  by
the  anatomist  Bischof  in  Munich.)  It  is  true  their  energy
did  not  reach  very  far,  and  they  remained  at  the  first
stages  of  embryonic  development.  Under  certain  circum-
stances, however,  even  here  the  process  of  growth  of  the
egg  can  proceed  to  a  tolerably  advanced  stage;  thus,  e.g.,
it  has  long  been  known  that  hens  without  contact  with  a
cock  sometimes  lay  unfertilised  eggs,  which  have  accord-
ingly traversed  a  tolerably  long  course  of  development  from
their  microscopic  origin.

The  seminal  corpuscle  penetrating  into  the  yolk-mem-
brane with  the  point  of  its  head,  and  there  probably
exchanging  by  endosmosis  its  substance  with  the  yolk,
does,  therefore,  nothing  else  in  the  first  instance  but  give  to
the  yolk-mass  a  powerful  impulse  towards  entering  upon
the  furrowing  process, — an  impulse  which  is  indispensable
under  favourable  circumstances  for  ova,  under  all  circum-
stances for  germ-cells.  The  transmission  of  qualities  also
on  the  father's  side,  on  the  other  hand,  proves  that  the
union  of  procreative  materials  with  the  higher  development
of  sexual  generation  certainly  acquires  a  still  profounder
significance,  in  that  through  the  mingling  of  the  matter  of
generation  there  is  produced  a  real  blending  of  the  parental
qualities.  The  copulation  of  certain  zoospores  naturally
occurs  to  the  mind  as  prototype  of  this  process,  in  which
nothing  but  the  united  force  of  two  cells  appears  to  be
decisive  as  long  as  no  difference  of  the  combining  elements
is  to  be  made  out,  either  in  their  own  nature  or  in  their
origin.

According  to  the  foregoing,  we  can  see  nothing  further
in  the  formation  of  new  organisms  through  a  female  animal,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  283

whether  with  or  without  the  aid  of  a  male  organism,  than
an  organic  formation,  which  is  distinguished  from  other
organic  formation,  e.g.,  the  fresh  development  of  certain
previously  non-existent  organs  at  certain  periods  of  life,
not  in  the  essence  of  the  process,  but  only  by  the  end
which  the  newly  formed  object  subserves,  in  that  this  end
lies  in  all  other  organic  formation  (with  the  exception  of
the  lacteal  secretion  in  mammals)  within,  and  only  in
generation  without,  the  forming  individual.  If,  now,  the
new  formation,  no  matter  from  what  beginnings,  has  at-
tained a  degree  which  renders  it  capable  of  existence  as
an  independent  organism,  there  follows  the  liberation  from
the  maternal  organism,  an  act  to  which  we  can  hardly  be
inclined  to  ascribe  any  psychical  importance,  which  goes
beyond  the  reflectorial-instinctive  accommodation  to  the
changed  life-conditions  {e.g.,  in  mammals,  occurrence  of
respiration).

Thus  it  is  also  empirically  confirmed  that  the  organism
of  the  embryo,  of  the  foetus,  and  of  the  child,  just  as  much
as  any  other  part  of  a  finished  organism,  has  at  every  stage
and  every  moment  of  its  life  'precisely  as  much  soul  as  it
needs  for  its  own  bodily  preservation  and  continued  develop-
ment, and  as  its  organs  of  consciousness  are  able  to  grasp.
That,  however,  the  Unconscious  lays  hold  of  life  wherever
it  can,  and  that  in  this  respect,  too,  quite  apart  from  its
connection  with  the  maternal  organism,  the  animation  of
the  new  germ  relatively  to  its  capability  of  animation  is
oidy  the  special  case  of  a  universal  natural  phenomenon,
will  become  still  more  evident  from  a  few  examples.

In  Autenrieth's  "  Views  of  the  Life  of  Nature  and  of  the
Soul,"  we  find  on  pp.  265-266  the  following  notes:  "Thus
also  Lister  (Kirby  and  Spence,  'Introduction  to  Entomo-
logy'), Bonnet  and  Stickney,  saw  caterpillars  and  pup;e  of
butterflies,  and  larvae  of  the  Tijmla  oleracca  freeze  into
lumps  of  ice,  and  on  being  thawed  revive. — According  to
the  more  exact  observations  of  Spallanzani  ("  Opuscoli
di  Fisica  Animale  e  Vegetabile,"  Modena,  vol.  ii.  p.  236),


284  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  tiny  rotifers,  Furcularia  rediviva  Lamarck,  which  are
found  in  boggy  water  and  in  the  sand  from  gutters,  if  they
are  not  exposed  to  the  open  air,  but  covered  in  a  little
sand-heap,  and  left  to  dry  along  with  it,  after  the  lapse
of  three  or  even  four  years  (during  which  time  the  dried
sand  has  been  preserved  in  a  glass  or  a  chip-box),  some-
times revive  as  soon  as  the  dry  sand  is  moistened  afresh
with  water,  except  that  the  longer  they  are  kept  in  the
dried  state,  the  smaller  is  the  number  which  again  become
living  and  perform  all  the  ordinary  life-functions.  They
revived,  however,  although  by  the  process  of  drying  they
had  become  so  indurated  (and  they  usually  possess  merely
a  gelatinous  body),  that,  if  one  pricked  them  with  the
point  of  a  needle,  the  body  burst  like  a  particle  of  salt
into  several  pieces.  Thus  these  animalcules  may  be
alternately  dried  and  rendered  lifeless  eleven  times,  and
yet  when  mollified  in  water  again  return  to  life.  They
also  do  not  lose  their  capability  of  becoming  reanimated
if  they  freeze  along  with  the  water,  and  then  are  exposed
even  to  a  cold  of  19°  R.  below  freezing-point;  just  as  in
their  dried-up  state  they  may  be  exposed  even  to  540
above  freezing-point  without  losing  the  capability  of
reviving  by  the  aid  of  water,  whilst,  if  they  are  in  the
living  condition,  they  perish  utterly  in  warm  water  of
even  26V

Ibid.,ip.  20: — "John  Franklin  ('First  Voyage  to  the
Shores  of  the  Polar  Sea'),  in  the  winter  of  1820-1821,  on
his  first  voyage  to  the  North  American  coasts  of  the  Arctic
Ocean,  saw  fishes  freeze  immediately  on  emerging  from
the  water,  and  become  so  solid  an  icy  mass  that  they  could
be  cloven  by  the  axe  into  pieces — even  their  viscera  pre-
senting a  mere  solid  frozen  lump.  Nevertheless,  some  of
these  fishes  when  warmed  at  the  fire,  without  previous
injury,  recovered  their  vitality.  A  carp,  notwithstanding
that  it  had  been  for  six-and-thirty  hours  completely  frozen,
recovered  so  completely  that  it  was  able  to  throw  itself
about  with  considerable  energy."


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  28 5

"When  Ellis  ("  Voyage  to  Hudson's  Bay  ")  was  wintering
on  the  River  Nelson  at  Hudson's  Bay,  a  perfectly  frozen
lump  of  black  autumn-flies  was  found ;  on  being  brought
near  the  fire  they  revived.  He  reported  that  frogs  are
often  found  there  on  the  shores  of  the  lakes  as  firmly  frozen
as  the  ice  itself,  which  yet,  thawed  by  a  moderate  tempera-
ture, recovered  to  such  a  degree  that  they  crept  from  one
place  to  another.

Thoroughly  frozen  trees,  too,  can,  after  being  slowly
thawed,  revive  and  put  forth  fresh  leaves.1

Hunter  found,  however,  from  his  experiments,  that  when
a  fish  perished  rather  slowly  in  the  intense  cold,  and  then
was  frozen,  it  became  incapable  of  being  recalled  to  life  by
thawing,  on  which  account  the  attempt  is  unsuccessful  to
freeze  an  entirely  warm-blooded  animal  and  to  try  to  re-
vive it  by  thawing ;  and  we  must  renounce  the  hope  of
ever  again  beholding  in  life,  even  under,  favourable  circum-
stances, say  an  elephant  or  rhinoceros  of  the  primeval
world,  preserved  quite  whole  in  the  polar  ice,  as  one  has
found  toads  in  rocks  in  which  they  must  have  been  en-
closed for  centuries,  perhaps  thousands  of  years,  and  which
when  liberated  hopped  about  quite  briskly.

When  modern  authorities  declare  the  reanimation  of
frozen  warm-blooded  animals  to  be  impossible  on  account
of  a  decomposition  of  the  blood  induced  by  the  frost,  they
are  met  by  the  most  recent  investigations  of  Schenk,  ac-
cording to  which  a  temperature  of  —  30,  sometimes  even  a
briefer  refrigeration  to  —  70,  is  borne  quite  well  by  blood
corpuscles,  salivary  corpuscles,  spermatozoa,  and  even  by

1  Ildlcborus  nif/cr  and  Bellis  perm-  ping  of  which  occasions  death.  Ac-
tus freeze  on  the  occurrence  of  cold  cording  to  Cohn's  direct  microscopi-
in  all  stages  of  florescence,  and  con-  cal  observations,  e.y.,  cells  of  Nitdla
tinue  to  grow  after  being  thawed,  a  syncarpa  perish  on  being  cooled
circumstance  which  occurs  more  than  below  —  30  C,  whilst  the  proto-
once  in  winters  of  variable  tern-  plasmic  contents  of  the  primordial
perature.  Gcippert  saw  expanded  sac  are  disorganised  by  the  freezing
flowers  for  weeks  in  this  state.  Of  of  the  water.  Other  plants,  on  the
course  there  is  for  each  species  of  contrary,  die  even  some  degrees
plant,  even  for  those  which  bear  cold  above  freezing-point,
best,  a  definite  limit, the  overstep-


286  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

fertilised  ova,  notwithstanding  their  more  advanced  state
of  life,  motion,  and  development.  (Pox  lymph,  even  after
prolonged  cooling  to  —  78°,  loses  none  of  its  force.)  If  the
proceedings  on  the  questions  appertaining  to  this  subject
are  not  yet  closed,  yet  the  instances  quoted  are  in  general
sufficient  to  render  plausible  the  a  priori  belief  that
every  trace  of  life  can  disappear  from  an  organism,  and
that  notwithstanding  the  ability  to  begin  a  new  life-career,
under  favourable  circumstances,  can  remain  intact,  if  only
none  of  those  changes  have  taken  place  in  the  same  which
render  anatomically  or  physiologically  impossible  the  re-
sumption of  the  life-functions  after  the  restoration  of  the
normal  circumstances.  For  this  it  is  necessary  that  both
during  the  lifeless  condition  (induced  by  dying  or  freezing,
or  by  hermetically  sealing),  as  well  as  in  the  passage  from
the  normally  vital  to  the  lifeless  condition  {e.g.,  through  the
rapidity  of  the  freezing),  a  chemical  or  histological  change
detrimental  to  future  vital  activity  be  prevented.  On  the
other  hand,  such  changes  are  indifferent  as  regards  resus-
citation which  only  destroy  the  normal  character  of  the
future  vital  functions,  and  cause  the  organism  to  awake
to  a  merely  pathological  life,  which  is,  however,  soon  again
extinguished  of  itself.

In  Botifers  one  might  assume  that  the  drying  up  never
goes  so  far  as  to  allow  of  any  interchange  of  matter,  so
that,  strictly  speaking,  one  would  not  have  to  do  with  an
absolute  stoppage  of  the  vital  functions,  but  with  their
reduction  to  a  minimum  (as  in  winter  sleep).  But  even
this  assumption  fails  when  it  is  a  question  of  frozen
bodies,  as  hard  as  stone,  in  the  winter  cold  of  the  polar
regions,  or  of  toads  which  have  been  enclosed  in  rocks
for  centuries,  or  even  still  longer.  For  the  latter,  a
minimum  of  exchange  of  matter,  which  one  may  conceive
to  be  brought  about  by  the  water  percolating  the  rock,
must  have  sufficed  in  the  enormous  stretch  of  time  for
the  animal's  consumption.  In  the  case  of  frozen  organisms,
however,  only  a  slight  superficial  evaporation  can  have


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  2 87

taken  place.  Vital  function,  however,  is  rendered  impos-
sible both  by  the  absence  of  the  most  general  physical
conditions  of  the  organic  change  of  matter,  endosmosis,  as
also  by  the  indispensableness  of  a  fluid  state  for  every
chemical  reaction.

Now,  if  it  be  granted  that  in  the  utterly  frozen  body  every
organic  function,  i.e.,  all  vital  activity,  is  impossible,  the  body
is  deprived  of  every  trace  of  life,  i.e.,  it  is  absolutely  lifeless;
its  condition  is  then  specifically  and  totally  different  from  all
states  of  depressed  vital  function,  like  sleep,  hibernation,
swoon,  tetanus,  apparent  death ;  the  body  in  this  condition
bears  the  same  relation  to  life  as  an  inorganic  body.

It  is  of  course  intrinsically  unimportant  whether  one
applies  the  epithet  dead  to  the  body,  for  that  concerns
only  the  definition  of  the  notion  dead.  If  one  absolutely
identifies  lifeless  and  dead,  as  is  natural,  one  will  do  so ;
if  one,  however,  makes  a  distinction  between  the  two  con-
ceptions, and  calls  only  that  lifeless  object  which  cannot
become  again  living  dead,  one  will  not  do  so.  The  latter
view  could,  however,  result  only  from  the  prejudice  that
what  is  dead  cannot  again  become  alive, — a  proposition,  of
course,  not  to  be  proved  a  'priori,  but  only  to  be  induced
from  experience,  and  which  for  a  long  time  might  pass  for
true.  But  now,  when  facts  come  to  light  showing  that  some-
thing dead  can  under  certain  circumstances  become  alive
again,  one  should  rather  recognise  the  exception  to  the
induction  hitherto  assumed  as  a  universally  valid  axiom,
than  arbitrarily  restrict  the  conception  "dead"  for  the
sake  of  the  old  prejudice.  This  remark  would  certainly
be  idle,  if  that  prejudiced  limitation  of  the  concept  dead
did  not  also  entail  the  further  prejudice,  that  the  abso-
lutely lifeless  need  not  also  be  void  of  soul,  which  one
would  rather  have  thought  self-evident;  for  the  soul  of  a
body  is  indeed  only  the  sum  of  the  functions  or  activities
if  the  Unconscious  referring  to  it,  which  for  the  sake  of
brevity  are  called  its  vital  functions.

From  the  circumstance  that  an  organism,  so  long  as  it


2S8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

is  frozen,  possesses  neither  life  nor  soul,  it  follows  that  if
after  a  certain  time  life  and  soul  return  to  it,  this  soul
can  no  longer  be  regarded  as  one  and  the  same  with  that
inherent  in  it  before  the  passing  into  the  frozen  state,
since  for  the  sameness  of  two  temporally  divided  souls  the
temporal  continuity  of  the  activities  of  the  former  with  the
activities  of  the  latter  is  requisite ;  but  by  no  means  can
the  sameness  of  the  organism  in  question  and  the  similar
nature  of  the  souls  depending  upon  it  be  deemed  suffi-
cient. If,  to  speak  with  the  vulgar,  on  the  cessation  of
life  the  old  soul  has  gone  away,  with  the  reappearance  of
life  another  soul  might  just  as  well  as  the  former  one  have
taken  up  its  abode  in  the  organism.  The  absurdity  of  this
way  of  regarding  the  subject  is,  however,  immediately
evident,  if  one  reflects  that  the  Unconscious  is  all  in  all,
and  remembers  that  old  and  new  soul  are  activities  of  the
same  essence  of  the  All-One  directed  to  the  same  organ-
ism that  sends  life  again  immediately  into  the  organisms,
so  far  as  is  possible,  according  to  the  laws  of  matter.

One  sees  from  these  examples  that  it  makes  no  diffe-
rence to  Nature  whether,  as  ordinarily,  the  vital  organisms
enjoy  a  continuity  of  their  vital  functions,  or  whether  a
body  hitherto  incapable  of  life  becomes  at  this  moment
vital ;  as  the  possibility  of  life  is  given,  the  Unconscious  ani-
mates it,  in  that  it  directs  upon  it  the  psychical  functions
adapted  to  its  constitution.  If  we  then  assume  the  case,
that  the  germ  of  a  young  organism,  which  we  commonly
have  seen  arise  as  an  integral  element  in  the  life- course  of
the  maternal  organism,  that  such  a  germ,  liberated  from  all
dependence  on  an  already  existing  life,  suddenly  begins  to  be,
it  must  just  as  infallibly  as  the  thawed  fish  or  the  mollified
rotifer  in  the  first  moment  of  its  organic  capacity  for  life
be  animated  by  the  Unconscious,  and  such  a  phenomenon
should  now  no  longer  be  regarded  as  an  isolated  exception.

To  this  view  I  refer  any  one  who  should  assert  that  the
unfertilised  ovum  is  not  yet  animated,  and  only  receives
its  soul  at  the  moment  of  fertilisation,  which,  indeed,  in


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  289

lower  animals,  for  the  most  part,  takes  place  outside  the
maternal  organism ;  although,  this  conception  not  only  runs
counter  to  our  view  of  the  animation  of  every  cell,  but
also  fails  to  explain  the  evolution  of  the  germ-cell  without
fertilisation.  But  at  any  rate  our  doctrine  finds  a  sufficient
application  in  the  instance  of  spontaneous  generation,  or
the  arising  of  organic  beings  from  inorganic  matter  with-
out a  maternal  organism.  Such  an  original  generation
must  have  taken  place,  for  geology  shows  that  the  earth  has
gradually  cooled  down  from  a  molten  mass  to  our  present
temperature  ;  but  now,  as  no  organisms  can  exist  at  a
temperature  higher  than  that  required  for  the  coagula-
tion of  albumen,  the  earth  must,  for  the  longest  part  of
its  existence,  have  been  uninhabited;  and  as  it  is  now
actually  peopled  by  organisms,  there  must  of  necessity
have  been  a  point  of  time  when  the  first  being  or  beings
came  into  existence,1  whereas  before  this  time  there  only
existed  inorganic  matter.  Here  the  conception  of  spon-
taneous generation  is  satisfied.

I  do  not  say  that  at  that  point  of  time  no  organic,  but
only  that  no  organised  matter  was  in  existence;  on  the
contrary,  I  believe  we  must  assume  that,  under  the  in-
fluence of  a  humid  atmosphere,  very  rich  in  carbonic  acid,
of  greater  heat,  of  light,  and  strong  electrical  influences,
even  by  the  inorganic  path  highly  complex  combina-
tions of  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen  were
formed,  which  the  chemists  of  to-day,  on  account  of  their
especial  occurrence  in  organic  beings,  have  designated  by
the  improper  name  of  organic  substances.

Very  recent  chemical  investigations  have  succeeded  in
refuting  the  earlier  assumption,  that  organic  substances
could  not  be  obtained  by  an  inorganic  path,  by  facts  so

1  Winn  Thomson  (speech  at  the  must  always  be  destroyed  by  the
British  Association  for  the  Advance-  heat  produced  in  cleaving  the  at-
ment  of  .Science  at  Kdinburgh,  1S71)  inosphere  before  reaching  the  earth's
suggests  a  transferring  to  our  earth  surface,  if  they  had  not  been  pro-
of genua  elsewhere  developed  by  viously  killed  by  cold  in  the  niun-
lueans  of  meteoric  .-tones,  he  has  to  dane  space,
meet  the  difficulty  that  t-.uch  germs

VOL.  II.  T


290  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

striking,  that  it  now  only  seems  a  question  of  time  when  man
shall  obtain  complete  mastery  over  the  province  of  organic
chemistry  likewise.  Synthetic  chemistry  is  already  in  the
organic  department  on  a  level  with  analytic  chemistry.  A
number  of  the  most  talented  investigators  {e.g.,  Berthelot)
devote  their  energies  to  it,  and  well-nigh  every  month  it
has  new  and  striking  triumphs  to  report.  The  problem
of  producing  the  acids,  aldehydes,  and  alcohols  belonging
to  the  so-called  fat  series  from  inorganic  elements  is  to
be  regarded  as  solved  in  principle,  and  the  discoveries  in
the  so-called  aromatic  series  (to  which  most  liquid  com-
bustibles, organic  colouring  matters,  essences,  and  perfumes
belong)  take  place  with  such  rapidity  and  with  such  cer-
tainty, that  we  now  hardly  need  to  ascertain  more  than
the  organic-chemical  constitution  of  such  bodies  in  order
to  be  sure  of  their  synthesis  in  advance.  But  the  keen
eye  of  the  chemist  gazes  still  farther;  the  resinous  and
saccharine  substances  are  beginning  to  reveal  their  true
nature,  and  to  awaken  unbounded  hopes  for  the  future  of
organic  synthesis.

If  thus  the  boundary-line  between  inorganic  and  organic
matter  has  long  fallen  away,  that  between  inorganic  and  or-
ganic form  begins  more  and  more  to  waver.  Undoubtedly
the  compound  organic  types  exhibit  forms  for  which  (with
the  exception  of  the  radiated  type)  no  analogy  is  found  in
inorganic  nature ;  but  we  must  not  forget  that  life  dwells
also  even  in  the  great  kingdom  of  unicellular  organisms,
and  the  cell  finds,  in  fact,  its  analogue  in  inorganic  nature.
In  the  first  place,  most  fluids  possess  at  their  surface  a
considerably  greater  density  and  tenacity  than  in  their
interior,  a  difference  which  appears  nowhere  more  plainly
than  in  albumen  and  its  solutions.  If  in  every  drop  an
analogy  here  presents  itself  with  the  often  infinitely  delicate
cellular  membrane,  the  resemblance  becomes  a  surprising
morphological  identity  with  starch-granules  in  the  micros-
copic corpuscles  of  carbonate  of  lime,  which  Famintzin  pre-
cipitated by  bringing  together  saturated  solutions  of  chloride


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  291

of  calcium  and  carbonate  of  lime.  Here  is  exhibited  the
same  nucleus,  the  same  stratification,  the  same  concrescence
of  several  granules,  the  same  augmented  capacity  of  resist-
ance of  the  internal  layer  to  acetic  acid  as  in  the  starch
granules.  It  follows  from  this,  in  the  first  place,  that
starch  granules  are  not  living  cells,  but  lifeless  secre-
tions of  other  living  elements,  a  magazine  of  material  des-
tined for  future  reconsumption.  But  it  also  follows  that
the  cell-form,  with  nucleus  and  membrane,  of  itself  proves
nothing  at  all  with  respect  to  the  existence  of  organic  life,
not  even  when  it  has  organic  matter  for  its  contents,  but
that  for  life  something  quite  other  is  required  than  organic
matter  and  organic  form,  something  ideal,  which  manifests
itself  in  the  preservation  and  elaboration  of  the  form  by
the  interchange  of  matter,  whilst  every  conservation  of  the
form  by  passive  conservation  of  the  matter  is  related  to
life  as  a  mummy,  which  at  the  most  deludes  the  naked  eye
with  the  semblance  of  life.

I  said,  therefore,  it  is  probable  that  before  the  coming
into  existence  of  the  simplest  organisms,  so-called  organic
combinations  of  a  lower  stage  were  already  in  existence,
which  rendered  the  building  up  of  an  organism  from  them
essentially  easier,  as  water,  carbonic  acid,  and  ammonia,  by
which  complete  organisms  are  nourished.  For  the  forma-
tion of  the  primitive  germ  these  organic  substances  would
then  have,  at  least,  played  the  part  of  manure,  which  now
arises  from  the  process  of  decomposition  of  organisms.
The  probability  that  these  first  organisms  lived  in  water
is  generally  recognised;  that  they  must  have  been  very
simple  beings,  simple  cells  standing  at  the  indifference-
point  between  plant  and  animal,  has  been  already  shown
in  Sect.  C.  Chap.  iv.  Now,  however  the  process  itself  may
be  conceived  in  detail,  this  must  be  firmly  held,  that  the
Unconscious  apprehended  and  realised  t\\Q  first  possibility  of
organic  life  that  occurred.  "When  previously,  in  discussing
sexual  generation,  we  conceived  the  "moment"  of  the
animation  of  the  germ,  as  if  the  Unconscious  approaches  a


292  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

formed  germ  in  order  to  animate  it,  this  was  only  admissible
because,  in  harmony  with  the  traditional  mode  of  apprehen-
sion, we  tacitly  supposed  the  unconscious-psychical  activi-
ties requisite  for  the  formation  of  the  germ  to  proceed  from
the  parental  organisms  ;  but  now,  as  such  a  distinction
has  no  place  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  All  and  Only
Unconscious,  we  must  call  to  mind  that  the  animation  of
the  germ  does  not  follow,  but  precedes  the  origin  of  the
germ,  i.e.,  that  the  germ  can  only  come  into  existence  by
the  Unconscious  causing  a  special  activity  to  effect  its  ori-
gination, which  -predestines  its  typical  form  in  accordance
with  the  possibilities  given  by  the  existing  conditions,
precisely  as  in  the  plastic  energy  of  the  vis  medicatrix  the
typical  form  of  the  leg  growing  again  on  the  salamander  is
predestined  by  the  activity  of  the  Unconscious.  Here,  as
there,  no  inorganic  laws  of  Nature  are  contradicted,  none
assumed  to  be  inactive  even  for  a  moment,  but  they  are
only  employed  for  a  higher  purpose ;  something  is  formed
which  could  not  have  come  to  pass  solely  by  the  co-opera-
tion of  the  laws  of  inorganic  Nature,  and  which  only
becomes  possible  through  the  will  of  the  Unconscious
stepping  in  and  inducing  a  state  of  affairs  in  which  now,
by  the  normal  action  of  the  inorganic  laws  of  Nature,  a
new  form  capable  of  new  performances  is  fashioned.

As  the  Unconscious  hourly  seeks  to  realise  and  to
retain  life  in  millions  of  germs,  which  indeed  are  soon
again,  often  even  at  their  origin,  dashed  to  pieces,  owing
to  unfavourable  circumstances,  through  the  pitiless  neces-
sity of  inorganic  laws,  so  when  first  life  seethed  on  the
earth's  surface  millions  of  primitive  germs  may  have  been
nipped  in  the  bud  before  life  succeeded  in  taking  firm
footing,  as  it  were,  on  the  earth.  But  when  once  it  had
succeeded  in  producing  one  or  a  few  organisms,  the  Uncon-
scious had  freer  play  from  this  conquered  basis  of  opera-
tions;  it  could  now  secure  the  aid  of  parental  procreation,
and  by  its  help  maintain  and  extend  the  conquered
ground  with  propoitionately  less  effort. For  it  is  mani-


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.


293


festly  very  much  easier  to  draw  together  the  organic  sub-
stances diffused  and  distributed  in  the  water  about  an
existing  organism  than  around  an  ideal  point ;  it  is  very
much  more  easy  to  effect  the  requisite  chemical  transfor-
mations and  modifications  by  assimilation  aided  by  the
contact  action  of  a  given  organism  than  without  such  ;
and  it  is  very  much  easier  to  produce  the  typical  form  of
the  cell,  with  its  ever-richer  inner  articulation,  through  the
simple  artifice  of  cell-division  with  the  help  of  furrowing,
than  from  amorphous  matter.

It  needs,  then,  at  all  events,  an  infinitely  far  less  effort 1
of  the  will,  to  form  organisms  by  the  aid  of  those  already
existent,  than  without  the  same,  just  as  in  the  case  of  a
higher  animal  it  needs  a  far  less  effort  to  act  on  tissue
with  the  help  of nerves than  without. "We  may  then


1  It  might  appear  to  superficial
observation  as  if  the  resistance  which
the  Unconscious  finds  in  inorganic
matter  to  its  organising  activity
were  an  instance  against  the  all-unity
of  the  Unconscious.  This  is,  how-
ever, by  no  means  the  case.  We
have  seen  above  that  the  strife
and  struggle  of  the  individualised
natural  forces  or  formations  of  the
Unconscious  is  a  necessary  condition
for  the  coming  to  jjass  of  the  objec-
tive phenomenal  world  and  for  the
origin  of  consciousness  in  particular
(comp.  pp.  227,  228)  ;  here  occurs
only  a  special  case  of  this  general
truth.  As  little  as  an  organisation
could  proceed  from  mere  inorganic
matter  without  an  organising  prin-
ciple, so  little  could  the  organising
principle  realise  itself  in  organisms,
if  it  did  not  find  matter  pre-existent.
The  Unconscious  must,  therefore,
previously  create  a  matter  in  order
to  be  able  to  create  organisms,  the
substrata  of  consciousness,  and,
moreover,  a  matter  subjected  to
exceptionless  laws,  because  only  in
such  is  the  setting  up  of  accessory
mechanisms  possible,  which  always
perforin  the  same  tasks.  That,
however,  such  a  matter,  comporting
itself according to its own laws,


which  of  itself  does  not  tend  to  the
formation  of  organisms,  opposes  a
certain  resistance  to  the  activity
of  the  Unconscious,  which  con-
strains it  to  the  formation  of
organisms,  is  self-evident,  and  it
is  no  wonder  that  this  resistance,
varying  in  amount  according  to  the
accidental  configuration  of  the  na-
tural forces  active  at  any  spot,  can
under  certain  circumstances  assume
such  proportions  that  the  Uncon-
scious, interested  only  in  the  uni-
versal, not  in  the  single  case,  forbears
to  master  the  difficulties  that  pre-
sent themselves,  since  it  more  easily
attains  by  another  path,  or  attains
indeed  at  other  places,  often  enough
for  the  purposes  of  the  whole  process,
the  same  end.  (This  explains,  e.g.,
abortions  in  consequence  of  material
disturbances  of  embryonic  develop-
ment.)— According  to  these  observa-
tions, the  expression  "effort,"  if  one
only  keeps  aloof  from  every  anthro-
popathic  suggestion,  need  no  longer
appear  unsuitable  for  the  designa-
tion of  the  degree  of  the  intensity
of  the  will,  the  application  of  which
is  requisite  in  behalf  of  the  organisa-
tion for  the  overcoming  of  occasional
material  resistance.


294  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

assume  that  the  same  application  of  force  or  will,  whereby
a  cell  comes  to  be  by  means  of  spontaneous  generation,  is
sufficient  to  form  many  millions  of  cells  by  cell-division.

But  now  we  have  found  that  Nature  altogether  is  bent
upon  attaining  her  ends  with  the  least  possible  application
of  force  ;  that  she  everywhere  prefers  the  setting  up  of  me-
chanical contrivances  for  utilizing  the  inorganic  molecular
forces  actually  present  to  direct  intervention ;  at  any  rate,
however,  she  tries  to  limit  these  interpositions,  since  in  the
last  resort  they  are  not  quite  to  be  done  away  with,  to  a
minimum  of  expended  force.

Thus  we  saw  (Sect.  A.  Chap.  i.  a)  that  the  nervous  system
of  animals  is  nothing  else  than  such  a  force-saving  machine,
which  by  means  of  the  slight  triggers  and  levers  of  the  brain
overcomes  hundredweights  attached  to  the  limbs.  We
saw  (Sect.  A.  Chap.  iii.  v.  vi.  viii.  and  C.  iv.)  a  number  of
contrivances  in  animals  and  plants  so  arranged  that  the
facilitation  of  stimuli  by  these  provisions,  or  even  their
purely  mechanical  mode  of  action,  rendered  special  instincts
superfluous.  Conversely  we  saw  instincts  employed  to
render  needless  extensive  efforts  in  organic  formation,  e.g.
(B.  Chap.  ii.  and  v.),  the  instinct  of  sexual  selection  to
achieve  an  improvement  of  the  race  in  respect  of  beauty
and  otherwise;  the  next  chapter  will  furnish  us  with
more  examples  of  a  like  kind,  which  prove  with  what
delicacy  the  Unconscious  everywhere  endeavours  to  attain
its  ends  in  the  most  mechanical,  i.e.,  least  troublesome
manner.

From  this  point  of  view  now  likewise  sexual  generation
appears  as  a  mechanism  replacing  spontaneous  generation
by  an  immense  saving  of  energy.

As  a  rational  man  does  not  ride  across  country  when
there  is  at  hand  a  turnpike  road,  neither  does  the  Uncon-
scious after  establishing  a  nervous  system  in  an  animal
still  effect  muscular  contraction  by  direct  action  of  the  will
on  the  muscular  fibres,  nor  continue  to  make  use  of  spon-
taneous generation  when  sexual  generation  is  open  to  it.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  295

This  law  derived  from  the  nature  of  spontaneous
generation  has  very  recently  attained  its  complete  em-
pirical confirmation,  in  that  the  microscope  has  uniformly
revealed,  where  one  had  formerly  supposed  spontaneous
generation,  sexual  generation,  and  at  the  present  day
no  single  case  of  actual  spontaneous  generation  has  been
observed,  notwithstanding  that  the  microscope  has  very
carefully  swept  the  province  of  minute  life  in  all  direc-
tions.

I  do  not  at  all  dispute  that  the  possibility  is  at  any
moment  open  of  establishing  spontaneous  generation  at
the  present  time  ;  I  even  concede  that  the  negative  proof,
that  now  there  can  be  no  spontaneous  generation,  must
always  remain  for  experientialism  an  impossibility ;  but
nevertheless  we  may  well  assume  that  an  assertion,  in
which  theory  and  empirical  observation  agree,  has  a  con-
siderable probability  in  its  favour.

For  the  reader  not  conversant  witli  the  interesting  facts
relating  to  this  subject  I  add  a  short  notice  of  the  same.

Aristotle  believed  that  most  of  the  lower  animals  arose
by  spontaneous  generation.  A  few  centuries  ago  spon-
taneous generation  was  assumed  for  intestinal  worms  and
infusoria,  although  for  a  long  time  voices  were  heard
suggesting  the  possible  overlooking  of  parental  germs.
First  the  modes  of  immigration  and  different  states  of
the  intestinal  worms  were  scientifically  established ;  then
it,  was  shown  that  infusions  boiled  for  more  titan  five
hours,  which  came  in  contact  only  with  heated  air,
gave  rise  to  no  organisms.  The  advocates  of  spontaneous
generation,  however,  justly  replied  that  the  heating  of  the
air  must  also  destroy  the  capability  of  the  production  of
organisms.

Schroder  and  Duscli  first  showed  that  a  plug  of  cotton
twenty  inches  in  length  filtrates  the  air  in  such  a  way
that  it  allows  no  organisms  to  arise. — Pasteur  examined
the  germs  floating  in  the  air  by  catching  them  in  gun-
cotton  and  dissolving  the  latter in ether and  alcohol.


296  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

lie  found  the  same  to  answer  in  all  respects  to  the
otherwise  familiar  germs  of  the  lowest  animals.  He  also
positively  proved,  that  they  are  the  cause  of  the  develop-
ment of  organisms  in  the  infusions,  by  introducing  along
with  the  heated  air  a  small  plug  of  cotton  containing
germs,  and  the  organisms  always  appeared,  as  if  the  air  had
had  free  access.  Pasteur  even  compared  by  an  ingenious
method  the  relative  quantities  of  the  germs  contained  in
the  air  at  different  localities.  Eecently  Crace-Calvert
ascertained  by  his  exact  investigations  that  temperatures
of  100°  C.  do  not  essentially  affect  the  minute  organisms
in  question ; *  that  at  149  °  C.  only  those  which  develop  in
solution  of  gelatine  become  incapable  of  germination,  but
that  for  the  destruction  of  the  germinal  power  of  the
organisms  which  develop  in  the  other  experimental  solu-
tions a  temperature  of  204°  C.  is  requisite.  Accordingly
the  assumption  of  a  spontaneous  generation  in  infusions
has  been  scientifically  set  at  rest  once  for  all.

I  will  mention  one  more  case,  the  origination  of  Monas
amyli.  A  swarm  of  unicellular  infusoria  was  seen  to  arise
in  starch  granules,  and  it  was  thought  that  spontaneous
generation  was  being  witnessed.  But  when  the  history  of
these  creatures  was  traced  farther,  one  saw  them  become
liberated  on  the  final  disruption  of  the  starch  granule,
each  seek  a  fresh  starch  granule  and  completely  cover  it,
expanding  after  the  fashion  of  the  Amoebae  This  thin
little  skin  on  the  surface  of  the  grain,  the  animal,  which
had  swallowed  the  corn,  as  it  were,  and  now  slowly  digested
it  in  layers,  had  previously  escaped  observation.  Xow,  of
course,  the  origin  of  the  brood  was  recognised  as  endogenous
increase.

The  law  of  reproduction  is  so  universal  in  Nature,  that
not  only  no  case  of  the  parentless  origin  of  an  animal  or
a  plant  is  known  to  us,  but  even  not  a  case  of  the  parentless
origin  of  a  cell  in  an  existing  organism.

1  Those  capable  of  resisting  higher  according  to  the  same  investigator
temperatures  are.  according  to  Ferd.  the  germs  of  Bacterium  are  killed
Cohn,  the  germs  of  Penicillium,  whilst already  at  8o°  C.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  297

If  spontaneous  generation  could  occur  anywhere,  one
would  certainly  expect  to  find  it  in  a  spontaneous  arising
of  cells  in  the  juices  of  an  existing  organism,  where  both
the  temperature  and  the  chemical  composition  of  organic
matter  affords  the  most  favourable  suppositions  conceiv-
able ;  but  in  vain.  Even  within  the  organism  cell  only  arises
from  cell.

All  sober-minded  naturalists  allow  that,  from  the
negative  results  of  the  most  careful  investigations  with
(Air  present  perfect  instruments,  there  results  a  high  pro-
bability for  the  supposition  that  spontaneous  generation
does  not  take  place  at  the  present  day.  From  the  proba-
bility of  this  assumption  one  must  however  regressively
conclude  that  the  spontaneous  generation  even  of  the
simplest  Protozoa  must  be  none  so  easy  and  simple  an
affair,  and  that  for  the  re-establishment  of  the  same  quite
other  conditions  are  required  than  a  mere  mechanical
individuation  of  existing  protein  substances.  "Were  it
not  so,  the  spontaneous  generation  of  Protozoa  from
protein-containing  fluids  must  be  observable  under  the
microscope  with  the  proper  temperature,  illumination,
ozone-containing  air,  &c. ;  but  even  supposing  a  case  of
successful  experiment,  it  would  still  never  appear  credible
that  such  a  Moner,  which  always  belongs  to  a  well-defined
species  in  virtue  of  its  mode  of  nutrition  and  propagation,
could  arise  and  functionally  persist  by  the  mere  play  of
inorganic  atomic  forces  (comp.  also  pp.  212,  213  and  291-
293),  without  psychical  influences  from  the  Unconscious
ideallv  regulating  the  mode  of  this  activity.


X.

THE ASCENDING  EVOLUTION OF ORGANIC LIFE
ON THE EARTH.

We  have  in  the  last  chapter  shown  the  probability  of  the
assertion  that  the  Unconscious  expended  its  energy  in
spontaneous  generation  only  as  long  as  was  necessary,
i.e.,  until  reproduction  could  be  substituted  for  it.  From
the  same  first  principle  of  Nature  of  the  greatest  possible
saving  of  energy  directly  follows  also  the  other  proposition,
presupposed  as  self-evident  in  the  preceding  considerations,
that  spontaneous  generation,  i.e.,  a  direct  production  from
unorganised  matter,  can  only  have  reference  to  the  very
simplest  forms  of  organic  life ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  for
the  genesis  of  higher  life-forms  the  Unconscious  will  by
no  means  choose  the  course  of  direct  production,  so  diffi-
cult for  the  simplest  beings,  but  a  mode  of  origination
effected  by  gradual  stages.  Not  that  I  would  maintain
the  absolute  impossibility  of  the  direct  original  creation
of  a  higher  animal ;  on  the  contrary,  I  have  always  main-
tained the  "Will  can  do  what  it  will,  if  it  only  wills  with
sufficient  intensity  to  overcome  the  opposing  acts  of  will.
Not  that  I  would  deny  the  theoretic  possibility  that  even
within  the  range  of  the  inorganic  laics  of  Nature,  at  certain
moments  of  terrestrial  development,  the  Unconscious
could  have  set  up  a  direct  spontaneous  generation  of
higher  animals  ;  to  presume  to  decide  the  point  were
folly.  Only  this  much  I  assert,  that  a  direct  spontaneous
generation  of  higher  organisms  would  have  required  an
enormous  application  of  force,  an  expenditure  of  energy


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  299

which  would  have  infinitely  exceeded  that  requisite  for
the  original  creation  of  the  simplest  cell ;  that  therefore
the  infallibly  logical  in  the  Unconscious,  agreeably  to  the
principle  of  the  attainment  of  all  ends  with  the  least
possible  expenditure  of  energy,  could  not  but  prefer  to
the  spontaneous  generation  of  higher  organisms  a  mode
of  production  effected  by  many  transitional  stages,  each
of  which,  besides  paving  the  way  for  higher  beings,  served
in  addition  other  and  independent  ends,  and  at  the  same
time  was  attainable  with  a  relatively  trifling  expenditure
of  force  by  means  of  a  plastic  principle  of  descent.

If  we  ask  plainly,  what  would  be  needed  for  the  spon-
taneous generation  of  a  higher  organism  ?  the  answer  is  :  in
the  first  instance,  organic  substances  of  not  too  low  chemical
composition  in  sufficient  quantity  and  sufficient  concen-
tration. "Where,  however,  are  these  more  easily  to  be  found
than  in  an  already  existing  inferior  organism  1  In  any  case,
therefore,  the  direct  transformation  of  an  already  existing
inferior  organism  into  a  higher  one  (e.g.,  of  a  worm  into  a
fish)  would  offer  fewer  difficulties  than  the  spontaneous
generation  of  the  latter  without  the  assistance  of  an  exist-
ing organism.  But  here  too  the  difficulties  would  always
be  still  so  great,  that  an  enormous  application  of  the  energy
of  the  Unconscious  would  be  required  to  surmount  them ;
for  the  already  established  forms  and  elaborated  organs  of
the  lower  organism  must  for  the  most  part  be  first  anni-
hilated, in  order  to  give  place  to  the  corresponding  forms
and  organs  of  the  higher  being.  This  not  inconsiderable
negative  work,  of  previously  annihilating  what  had  been
created,  in  the  embryonic  development  of  the  lower  organism,
is  manifestly  altogether  avoided  if  the  metamorphosis
begins  at  stages  of  development  so  early  that  these  specific
forms  and  organs  of  the  lower  stage  are  never  brought
to  perfection,  but  in  lieu  thereof  at  once  those  of  the
higher  grade.  Strictly  then  one  can  only  speak  in  an
ideal  sense  of  a  metamorphosis,  for  only  the  ideal  type,
which  proceeded  according  to  the  ordinary  course  of  de-


300  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

velopment  from  the  germ  of  the  lower  organism,  has
yielded  to  the  realisation  of  a  different  ideal  type,  but  in
reality  no  transformation,  but  only  an  embryonic  develop-
ment has  taken  place.  Even  Agassiz,  a  leading  upholder
of  the  distinct  creation  of  species,  admits  that  this  creation
could  only  have  taken  place  in  the  form  of  ova,  and  that
for  the  development  of  these  asexually  created  ova  there
must  at  the  same  time  have  been  created  similar  conditions
to  those  under  which  the  sexually  produced  ova  now
develop,  which  indeed  comes  to  this,  that  foster  parents,
of  course  from  other  species,  must  have  been  provided  for
the  ova  needing  parental  care.

But  now  I  ask,  which  conception  is  the  more  monstrous,
this,  that  an  individual  of  a  higher  species  is  evolved  from
the  ovum  of  a  lower  species,  or  this,  that  the  ovum  of  the
higher  species  was  made  at  a  stroke  by  spontaneous  gene-
ration, an  ovum,  indeed,  from  which  absolutely  nothing  but
this  higher  species  could  proceed,  and  in  which  conse-
quently all  the  characters  of  the  higher  species  were  al-
ready implicitly  contained  ?  It  is,  moreover,  to  be  remarked
that  the  ova  of  the  highest  and  those  of  the  lowest  animals
are  morphologically  and  chemically  so  similar,  and  the
first  stages  of  development — of  embryonic  development —
are  so  uniform,  that  they  are  not  at  all  or  scarcely,  and  even
then  for  the  most  part  only  by  accidental  signs,  to  be  dis-
tinguished. It  is  of  no  avail  to  rely  on  this,  that  usually
all  the  characters  of  the  genus  are  actually  implicitly  con-
tained in  the  fertilised  ovum  of  a  species.  However  correct
this  (for  the  rest  indemonstrable)  view  may  be,  yet  an  ovum
must  always  have  already  passed  through  a  number  of
stages  of  development  before  it  can  possess  independent
existence,  and  the  young  be  hatched  by  the  action  of  solar
heat,  or  the  animal  heat  of  the  foster  parents,  or  the  tem-
perature of  the  earth  for  the  time  being,  not  to  mention
that  the  ova  of  the  animals  which  bring  forth  living
young  never  attain  this  independence.  Where  now  shall
this  development  of  the  ovum  before  self-dependence  have


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  301

taken  place ;  whence  is  it  supposed  to  have  got  its  stock  of
albumen,  unless  from  a  female  animal ;  whence  came  the
first  focus  for  the  primitive  yolk-sac,  unless  it  lay  in  an
ovary?  Albumen  is  in  truth  not  so  common  in  inor-
ganic nature  that  the  spontaneous  generation  of  a  yolk-sac
were  something  easy.  At  all  events,  it  would  have  cost
the  Unconscious  infinitely  more  difficulty  to  produce  by
spontaneous  generation  such  an  egg,  possessed  of  all  the
characters  of  the  higher  species  to  be  newly  created,  than
either  to  evolve  an  individual  of  the  new  higher  species
from  an  ovum  containing  the  characters  of  another  inferior
kind,  by  obliterating  these  characters  always  merely  fore-
shadowed in  the  germ,  and  adding  new  ones,  or  however
to  develop  the  ovum  containing  entire  the  characters  of
the  new  higher  species  in  the  ovary  of  an  individual  of
a  lower  species,  or,  lastly,  to  make  use  of  both  expedients  at
the  same  time,  i.e.,  to  develop  an  ovum  particularly  favour-
ably constituted  in  view  of  the  new  species,  both  in  the  ovary
of  the  inferior  individual,  as  well  as  after  quitting  the  same
with  the  modifications  necessary  for  attaining  the  higher
species.  Where  is  the  natural  origin  of  the  individual  un-
less in  the  ovum  ?  Where  is  the  natural  origin  of  the  ovum
unless  in  the  ovary  of  a  female  animal  ?  How  incon-
siderable appear  the  difficulties,  which  the  Unconscious
has  to  overcome  in  the  evolution  of  a  higher  organism
from  the  womb  of  a  lower,  to  the  colossal  difficulties
which  would  oppose  it  in  the  original  creation  of  the
higher  organism,  When  we  have  thus  only  a  choice
between  these  two  assumptions,  we  shall  unhesitatingly
decide  for  the  former,  that  the  higher  species  proceeds  by
reproduction  from  the  lower,  but  by  a  reproduction  with
modified  development  of  the  ovum,  as  Kolliker  (Siebold
and  Kolliker,  Zeitschrift  fur  wissenschaftl.  Zoolog.  and
Medic,  1S65,  Heft  3),  who  adopts  this  point  of  view,  calls
it,  "  heterogeneous  generation."

We  have  hereby  gained  a  fixed  support  for  the  interme-
diate stages  presupposed  from  the  very  first  for  the  produc-


302  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tion  of  higher  animals ;  it  is  a  scale  of  ever  higher  and
higher  species  by  which  the  organising  Unconscious
realises  the  highest  organisms.  Certain,  however,  as  is
this  general  result,  no  less  certain,  however,  is  it  that  we
cannot  stop  there.

Although  we  have  proved  in  Sect,  A.  Chap.  viii.  that
the  Unconscious  is  active  at  every  moment  of  organic
formation  at  every  part  of  the  organism,  and  makes  its
influence  felt  quite  specially  in  the  relatively  impetuous
embryonic  development,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  to
be  denied  that,  as  everywhere  where  it  is  possible,  so  also
for  the  evolution  of  the  ovum  the  Unconscious  has,  as  far
as  possible,  facilitated  its  intervention  and  reduced  the
material  actions  to  a  minimum  by  previously  established
mechanisms.  Accordingly,  in  all  probability,  there  exists
in  the  male  and  female  reproductive  materials  an  energy
intentionally  implanted  by  it  itself  at  earlier  stages,
which  enables  these  substances  to  develop  under  the
requisite  psychical  guidance  more  easily  in  the  direction
predesignated  in  the  parental  organism  than  in  any
other.  Now  since  the  Unconscious  always  follows  the
line  of  development  previously  indicated,  as  the  direction
corresponding  in  general  to  its  predetermined  ends,  and
offering  the  least  resistance  to  realisation,  if  it  has  no
particular  reason  for  deviation  for  a  particular  purpose ;
and  since  such  a  reason  is  wanting  in  ordinary  genera-
tion, teller e  the  sole  end  is  the  preservation  of  the  species,
it  usually  takes,  in  the  psychical  guidance  of  embryonic
development,  the  course  indicated  as  the  easiest  by  the
qualities  previously  imparted  by  itself  to  the  materials  of
generation,  i.e.,  the  begotten  resembles  the  begetters,  and  this
phenomenon  is  called  the  "  transmission  or  inheritance  of
qualities."

From  such  a  universal  teleological  rule  the  Unconscious
is  the  less  inclined  to  deviate  the  more  general  is  its
scope,  e.g.,  from  the  inorganic  laws  of  Nature  not  at  all.
Since  now  the  difficulties are  already  sufficiently  great,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  303

■which  arise  through  the  transcending  of  old  species  and
the  adding  on  of  new7  characters,  the  Unconscious  will  seek
to  withdraw7  itself  as  far  as  possible  from  those  difficulties,
which  it  would  have  to  overcome  in  the  annihilation  of
such  characters  of  the  old  species  as  could  or  should
not  be  taken  over  into  the  new  species,  and  will  for  this
purpose  seek  to  create  the  new  higher  species  from  those
species  in  which  only  new  characters  are  to  he  added,  but
the  fewest  possible  or  no  extant  positive  characters  are  to
be  destroyed,  i.e.,  from  relatively  imperfect  species,  pro-
vided with  few  specific  characters,  affording  much  scope
for  further  development,  but  not  from  species  already
highly  developed,  strongly  differentiated,  and  endowed  with
many  and  definite  characters.

This  is  fully  confirmed  by  the  palaeontological  history
of  the  animal  kingdom.  Every  important  order  of  the
animal  kingdom  resembles  the  branch  of  a  huge  tree,  and
at  a  particular  geological  period  is  developed  from  lowdy
beginnings  into  higher  forms.  It  is  not  these  latter,  how-
ever, that  resemble  the  extremities  of  the  branch,  whence,
under  the  changed  circumstances  of  a  later  geological
period,  a  new  animal  order  arises, — for  they  have  by
abundance  of  decided  characters  strayed,  as  it  were,  into
a  cut  de  sac, — but  those  imperfect  primitive  stocks  of  the
order,  that  have  maintained  themselves  in  the  struggle  for
existence  with  trouble  and  difficulty  all  through  the
earlier  period  against  their  far  superior  descendants,
the  shy  offshoots  of  the  branch,  as  it  were,  standing
nearest  to  the  trunk,  from  which,  by  addition  of  new
and  hitherto  non-existing  characters,  the  new  order  sub-
sequently arises.  This  is  a  general  law  of  Nature,  the
special  application  of  which  to  the  development  of
humanity  has  lung  been  familiar  to  every  student  of
history.  If  the  races  or  stocks,  which  at  a  certain  time
represent  the  summit  of  the  human  evolution,  have
fallen  into  stagnation  (or  temporary  depravity),  there
appear  less  developed  virgin  races  or  stocks,  as  it  were


304  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

on  the  theatre  of  history,  to  develop  speedily  to  a  height
which  decidedly  exceeds  the  bloom  of  the  previous  most
advanced  races  (pp.  11-13).  It  is  the  same  in  the  de-
velopment of  the  animal  kingdom,  only  that  the  advance
in  organisation  always  going  hand  in  hand  with  growing
intelligence  is  there  more  obvious  than  in  the  case  of  man,
who,  with  the  exception  of  the  increased  development  of
brain,  forms  and  fashions  the  organs  of  his  growing  culture
into  external  instruments  (instead  of  like  the  animal  into
bodily  organs). — Defective  as  is  our  knowledge  of  the
transitional  stages,  derived  from  the  forms  preserved  in  the
existing  fauna  and  the  palreontological  remains  hitherto
found,  it  yet  perfectly  suffices  to  sustain  the  above  assertion.
After  the  Crustacea  have  attained  their  maximum  de-
velopment in  the  crabs,  the  Arachnida  make  their  ap-
pearance with  the  very  imperfect  mites  ;  after  these  have
reached  their  limits  in  the  spider,  there  follows  in  the
insects  a  retrogression  to  the  inferior  lice.  The  highest
forms  of  the  Mollusca  are  the  Sepire,  of  the  Articulata  the
Hymenoptera ;  both  are  far  more  highly  organised  than
the  lowest  known  fishes,  both  possessed  a  form  as  per-
fect as  that  met  with  to-day,  before  the  Vertebrata  existed
at  all.  But  they  were  too  one-sidedly  and  too  completely
differentiated  for  a  class  to  spring  from  them  requiring
quite  other  fundamental  structural  conditions.  Fishes
rather  developed  from  Ascidians,  Worms,  and  Crustaceans.
For  reasons  easy  to  understand,  the  oldest  fossil  fishes
belong  only  to  the  transitional  forms  of  the  Crustacea,
because  the  other  two  classes  were  too  soft  to  leave  fossil
remains ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  transitional  forms  of  the
latter  have  remained  as  two  species  down  to  the  present
day.  The  almost  transparent  little  lancelot,  two  inches
long,  living  on  the  coasts  of  the  Xorth  Sea  and  Mediter-
ranean, Ampliioxus  lanceolatus  Pall,  possesses  no  skull  and
no  vertebral  column,  but  only  a  simple  massive  cartila-
ginous cord  as  support  of  the  nervous  axis,  no  brain
separated  from  the  spinal  cord,  no  heart  no  spleen,  only


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  305

a  coecum  in  lieu  of  a  liver,  no  coloured  blood,  no  proper
fins,  but  merely  a  narrow  membranous  border  expanded
at  the  caudal  extremity.  Just  as  Linnaeus  bad  regarded
another  fish  (Myxine)  as  a  worm,  so  had  Pallas  taken
the  Amphioxus  for  a  slug  (Limaz) ;  but  recent  anato-
mical investigations  have  proved  that  it  is  constructed
on  the  type  of  the  Vertebrata,  represents  the  lowest
known  stage  of  fishes,  and  altogether  must  pass  for  the
prototype  or  primitive  form  of  the  whole  vertebrate  king-
dom, as  the  immediate  descendant  of  the  oldest  Verte-
brata of  the  primaeval  world,  whose  relatives  undoubtedly
peopled  the  primitive  seas  in  innumerable  quantities.
The  Amphioxus  is  most  related  to  the  Ascidians  '(a
kind  of  mollusc),  in  which  not  only  in  embryonic  de-
velopment1 (as  in  certain  lower  worms)  the  peculiar
formation  of  the  so-called  germinal  membrane,  hitherto
regarded  as  characteristic  of  the  vertebrate  type,  presents
a  similar  appearance  to  that  of  Amphioxus,  but  which
even  at  a  certain  stage  of  their  development  possess
the  cartilaginous  groundwork  of  the  vertebral  column,
although,  to  be  sure,  they  afterwards  lose  it  again.

Passing  from  the  fishes  to  the  Amphibia,  a  transition  is
again  presented  only  in  imperfect  and  lowly  forms,  whilst
the  two  classes  part  company  from  one  another  the  more
they  are  developed  in  their  characteristic  one-sidedness.
The  scaly  salamander  living  in  the  Amazon,  or  Lepidosiren
paradoxa  Natt.,  is  an  animal  three  feet  long  with  a  fish-
liko  form,  with  gills  and  a  scaly  covering,  which  altogether
answers  to  that  of  the  osseous  fishes. Two  fins  on  the  head

1  Embryology  is  now  one  of  the  direct  ancestors,  especially  of  the
most  imp  'T't.uit  aids  and  sources  of  more  remote  ones,  may  be  indicated
inquiry  for  the  theory  of  descent,  in  a  form  so  abbreviated,  nay,  even
since  we  may  say  generally  that  proceed  by  such  leaps,  that  the  eye
every  animal  in  its  embryonic  de-  of  the  investigator  only  perceives
velopim  lit  liriefly  repeats  the  stages  the  likeness  to  the  remote  ances-
of  organisation  of  the  embryonic  tors,  when  he-  comprehends  them  by
development  of  all  its  direct  ances-  the  light  of  the  study  of  the  em-
tors.  Forms  which  do  not  lie  in  the  bryology  of  intermediate  stages  of
direct  line  of  descent,  but  only  in  organisation  (c.'j-,  Mammal  and  As-
side  lines,  are  never  met  with  ;  but  cidian  through  Amphioxus).
the  development-series  even  of  the

VOL.  II.  U


306  PHILOSOPHY 'OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  two  on  the  belly  indicate  the  anterior  and  posterior
limbs.  Besides  the  gills,  however,  the  animal  has  also
a  pair  of  lungs,  which  open  by  an  air-passage  into  the
oesophagus  ;  accordingly  an  organisation  such  as  never
occurs  in  the  true  fishes,  but,  indeed,  in  the  fish-like  Sau-
rians,  e.g.,  Proteus.  Respiration  and  circulation  accordingly
assign  the  scaly  salamander  to  the  higher  class  of  the  Am-
phibia, whereas  all  the  rest  of  the  organisation  is  that  of  a
fish.  If  we  now  consider  the  stage  of  development  of
the  animal  simply  as  vertebrate,  it  stands  as  low  in  the
scale  as  possible.  Its  skeleton  is  only  imperfectly  ossified,
the  vertebral  column  consists  of  an  undivided  cartilagi-
nous cord,  to  which  the  ossified  vertebral  arches  are  fitted.
Similar  to  Lepidosiren  is  constructed  the  Protopterus
living  in  Western  Africa,  which  in  the  flooded  marshes
only  needs  gills,  in  the  dried-up  marshes,  however,  lungs.
Huxley,  fifteen  years  ago,  found  these  marks  sufficient
to  fix  the  derivation  of  the  double-breathing  scaly  sala-
mander from  the  circular-scaled  cartilaginous  fishes,  a
determination  no  longer  doubtful  since  the  discovery  of
an  animal  (Ceratodus)  by  KrefTt  in  the  river  Burnett
(Queensland),  which  is  exactly  intermediate  between  the
cartilaginous  fishes  and  scaly  salamanders  (figured  and
described  in  the  "  Ergiinzungsbl.,"  vi.  p.  227).  It  may
accordingly  be  regarded  as  proved  that  the  Amphibia  (and
along  with  these  also  the  higher  animals)  spring  from  the
cartilaginous  fishes,  and  that  the  osseous  fishes  now  mostly
peopling  the  waters  form  a  side-branch  in  the  pedigree
of  the  animal  kingdom,  in  which  they  rank  decidedly
higher  than  the  cartilaginous  fishes. — These  examples  may
suffice  to  verify  and  to  illustrate  our  assertion.

These  facts,  which  Darwin  admits,  cannot  be  explained
by  his  assertion  that  the  strict  constancy  of  the  trans-
mission of  qualities  is  in  every  case  determined  by  the
duration  of  their  persistency,  and  that  every  species  is
the  less  inclined  to  deviate  from  its  specific  character
the  older  it  is. There  lies  in  this  assertion  the  truth


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  307

that  young  species  stand  nearer  to  the  original  stock
than  older  ones,  which,  unmindful  of  their  origin,  as
it  were,  have  become  arrested  in  their  limited  idiosyn-
crasies, and  that  therefore  young  species  of  common  descent
show,  even  among  one  another,  more  affinity  and  capa-
bility of  mixture  than  older  ones.  Such  young  species
which  give  rise  in  crossing  to  hybrid  races,  are  called  fluent
species,  in  contrast  to  the  self-contained  fixed  species,
in  which  each  hybrid  race  again  speedily  perishes  by
reversion  to  the  stock.  Such  fluent  species  are,  e.g.,  the
species  of  dogs,  finches,  mice,  whilst  the  races  of  man  are
in  the  stage  of  transition  from  fluid  to  fixed  species;  at
that  stage,  indeed,  when  between  the  more  remote  forms  of
the  series  no  permanent  hybrid  race  is  any  longer  to  be
obtained. — Decidedly  incorrect,  on  the  contrary,  is  the
above  assertion  of  Darwin,  so  far  as  he  asserts  that
universally  and  uniformly  the  capability  of  varying  de-
creases with  the  length  of  persistence ;  rather  the  artificial
breeding  of  plants  and  animals  has  hitherto  revealed  no
difference  in  the  capacity  for  variation  of  old  and  young
species.  But  suppose  the  assertion  were  correct,  we
should  in  consequence  expect  just  the  contrary  of  what  it
is  said  to  explain ;  for  as  the  more  perfect  and  highly
differentiated  species  are  always  of  more  recent  existence,
accordingly  are  younger  than  their  less  perfect  stem  forms,
the  latter,  as  the  older,  would  be  less  adapted  for  com-
mencing a  new-development  series,  whereas  thefacts  teach
the  contrary.  We  must  therefore  maintain  that  more
perfect  species  do  in  fact  vary  just  as  easily  and  just  as
much  as  the  more  imperfect,  if  they  are  caused  so  to  do
by  change  of  circumstances;  only  the  former  have  not  the
tendency  to  be  so  easily  converted  into  higher  orders  as
the  latter ;  and  why  this  is  not  the  case,  and  why  this
conversion  into  a  new  order  only  takes  place  when
within  the  previous  order  the  abundance  of  the  more
perfect  forms  is  exhausted,  can  never  be  proved  from  the
assumptions  of  the  Darwinian  theory. —


308  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Having  become  acquainted  in  heterogenous  generation
■with  the  one  expedient  employed  by  the  Unconscious  to
facilitate  the  formation  of  new  species,  let  us  observe  its
operation  a  little  more  closely.  Hitherto  we  have  not  at
all  taken  into  consideration  how  far  in  heterogeneous
generation  the  offspring  may  differ  from  the  parents.  It
is,  however,  clear  that  the  Unconscious,  in  the  formation
of  higher  species,  will  make  no  unnecessary  leaps,  but
draw  the  boundaries  as  close  as  possible  to  one  another.
A  leap  there  certainly  always  is,  for  otherwise  indefinitely
numerous  generations  "must  fill  up  the  gap  between  one
species  and  the  next,  which  in  the  limited  period  of  deve-
lopment of  organisation  on  the  earth  is  impossible.  But  at
any  rate,  the  actual  step  will  overleap  no  species  lying
directly  in  the  line  of  development,  but  at  the  most  pass
at  once  to  the  next  higher  species.

Here  we  approach  the  question  hoiv  far  a  species  may
lie  from  the  nearest  related  one,  or  how  the  notion  of  a
species  may  exclude,  on  the  one  hand,  differences  that  are
greater  than  specific,  on  the  other  hand,  those  that  are
less  than  specific  ;  or,  in  a  word,  the  question  with  regard
to  the  definition  of  the  term  Species.  But  now  every  un-
prejudiced naturalist  admits  that  such  limitations  of  the
idea  of  species  are  not  at  all  found  in  Nature,  but  that  it
passes  by  very  fine  degrees  on  the  one  side  into  the
notion  of  the  variety  or  of  the  race,  and  on  the  other  hand
into  that  of  the  family,  or  however  one  calls  the  nearest
higher  class ;  that  accordingly,  as  in  all  quantitatively
limited  notions,  it  is  a  matter  of  subjective  caprice  and  of
mutual  agreement  how  far  one  shall  extend  the  notion
of  species ;  that,  indeed,  on  the  whole  there  is  agreement
as  to  those  anatomical  and  outward  marks  which  apper-
tain to  a  difference  of  species,  but  that  naturally  at  the
boundaries  differences  of  opinion  will  always  remain  as
to  the  application  of  this  notion.  Some  have  thought  to
settle  the  dispute  by  setting  up  as  a  criterion  of  the
specific  difference  of  two  animals  the  impossibility  of
begetting  fertile  offspring. But,  in  the  first  place,  two


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  309

animals  are  not  necessarily  very  different  because  they
can  beget  no  fertile  offspring,  but  they  are  unable  to
engender  fertile  offspring  because  they  exceed  a  certain
limit  of  difference,  and  this  mark  would  accordingly  not
concern  the  essential  notion,  but  only  a  corollary  of  the
specific  difference.  Secondly,  however,  the  limit  of  the
generation  of  fertile  offspring  is  just  as  fluent  as  the  idea
of  a  species,  since  only  the  relative  number  of  procreative
acts  giving  rise  to  fertile  offspring  becomes  less,  the  more
diverse  are  the  animals  ;  but  no  one  can  assert  before
the  trial  of  infinitely  numerous  experiments  that  a  pro-
creation of  fertile  offspring  is  impossible  between  these
two  animals.  Thirdly  and  lastly,  this  mark  is,  in  fact,  in
not  a  few  cases,  in  contradiction  with  the  established  use
of  the  idea  of  species,  for  from  animals  universally  recog-
nised as  specifically  distinct  fertile  offspring  have  been
obtained  by  crossing,  e.g.,  from  horse  and  ass  (in  Spain),
from  sheep  and  goat,  from  goldfinch  and  siskin,  from
Mathiola  madercnsis  and  incana,  from  Calceolaria  planta-
ginea  and  integrifolia,  and  many  more ;  nay,  even  volun-
tary crossings,  without  the  intervention  of  man,  have  been
found  to  take  place  between  wild  or  half-wild  animals
(between  dog  and  she-wolf,  fox  and  bitch,  steinboc  and  goat,
dog  and  jackal,  &c.) ;  and  there  are  numerous  mongrel
breeds  which  yield  fertile  offspring  indefinitely,  e.g.,  hybrids
of  hare  and  rabbit,  of  wolf  and  dog,  goat  and  sheep,  camel
and  dromedary,  lama  and  alpaca,  vicuna  and  alpaca,
steinboc  and  goat,  &c.  On  the  other  hand,  the  state  of
the  case  varies  much  with  races.  Some  can,  others  will
not  at  all  intermingle  ;  with  others,  again,  fertility  is
actually  very  much  limited  in  the  course  of  generations.
As  little  as  the  fertility  of  hybrids  for  species  in  general,
so  little  can  the  incapability  of  yielding  persistent  hybrid
races  with  other  species  be  regarded  as  an  absolute  mark
of  fixity  of  species  (in  contrast  to  fluent).  This  con-
trast, too,  is  only  to  be  limited  quantitatively  ;  for,  in
the  first  place,  the  question  always  is  with  which  other


310  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

species  the  hybridism  is  attempted;  and,  secondly,  even
in  the  now  most  fixed  species,  sometimes,  if  very  rarely,
surprising  reversions  to  an  ancestral  form  make  their
appearance  (atavism).

Accordingly  if  we  are  comp'elled  to  maintain  the  fluent
and  conventional  character  of  the  idea  of  species,  if  we
must  grant  that  there  is  in  nature  only  less  and  greater
differences,  but  in  such  abundant  gradations  that  from  the
least  noticeable  individual  shade  of  difference  to  the  extreme
difference  between  the  higher  and  the  lower  organisms
there  takes  place  a  transition  by  small  stages  unnoticeable
by  us  (comp.  Wallace's  "  Contributions  to  Natural  Selec-
tion "),  then  neither  in  the  idea  of  Species  nor  in  a  similar
narrower  or  wider  notion  can  there  exist  a  compulsion  for
the  Unconscious,  regulating  the  minimum  interval  of  its
steps  in  the  progressive  development  of  the  organisation,
but  the  smallest  extent  of  the  leaps  of  heterogeneous  gene-
ration will  still  only  have  to  be  sought  in  the  magnitude
of  the  modifying  resistances  and  the  ends  pursued  by  the
Unconscious  (e.g.,  attainment  of  certain  stages  of  organi-
sation in  certain  intervals  of  time).  But  now,  as  we  know,
not  perfect  similarity,  but  only  general  resemblance,  is  found
between  parents  and  children,  for  the  various  material
circumstances  bring  about  in  generation  individual  varia-
tions from  the  ideal  normal  type,  which  perfectly  to  level
would  require  an  altogether  useless  expenditure  of  force  on
the  part  of  the  Unconscious,  since  these  individual  varia-
tions usually  and  in  the  main  are  neutralised  of  themselves
by  the  inter-mixture  of  families.  Accordingly  one  has
not  to  wonder  at  the  unlikeness,  but  rather  at  the  like-
ness of  parents  and  child ;  for  if  the  Unconscious  should
behave  in  all  generation  within  the  same  species  in  the
same  way,  and  save  itself  the  labour  of  a  continually
neutralising  interposition,  the  differences  between  beget-
ters and  begotten  which  would  arise  through  the  diversity
of  the  material  circumstances  would  be  still  far  greater
than  experience  now  shows  us. Nevertheless,  we see


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  311

cases  occur  in  which  the  Unconscious  prefers  to  send
monsters  into  the  world  to  endeavouring  to  overcome
the  existing  material  difficulties. — The  remaining  indivi-
dual differences  are  undoubtedly  great  enough  to  lead
quickly  to  an  essential  alteration  of  the  type,  and  the
Unconscious  need  only  hinder  the  neutralising  of  these
differences  by  crossing  in  those  cases  in  which  the  varia-
tions answer  to  its  progressive  plan,  either  by  directly
retaining  them  or  by  an  external  mechanism;  thus,  again,
a  large  part  of  the  expenditure  of  energy  is  in  this  manner
saved.

That  such  origins  of  species  by  the  summation  of  indi-
vidual variations  have  actually  occurred,  numerous  animal
classes  in  our  geological  collections  prove,  when  the  collec-
tors  do  not  discard  the  inconvenient  intermediate  stages,
which  will  not  fit  into  any  artificial  division.  "  Numberless
are  the  species  of  ammonites  that  have  been  described  ;
annually  new  ones  are  added  to  the  old,  and  whole  cases
are  filled  with  books  on  ammonites.  If  we  arrange  them
in  a  series,  the  differences  between  any  two  specimens  are
in  fact  so  inconsiderable  that  everybody  must  undoubtedly
regard  them  as  individual  peculiarities.  In  a  dozen,  how-
ever, the  small  differences  amount  to  something  consider-
able, and  in  two  dozen  the  amount  of  the  differences  has
become  so  large  that  no  resemblance  at  all  can  any  longer
be  observed  between  the  first  and  tire  last.  Here  no
specific  difference  any  longer  holds  Avater,  as  soon  as  one
lias  only  specimens  enough  to  illustrate  the  transitions"
(Fraas,  "  Vor  der  Siindfiuth,"  p.  269).  Very  much  the
same  may  be  said  of  the  Trilobites,  and  many  other  classes.
One  other  ([notation  concerning  snails.  "At  Steinheim
fWiirtemberg)  there  is  a  hill  of  tertiary  date,  which  more
than  half  consists  of  snow-white  shells  of  Valvata  multi-
formis. One  end  of  this  snail  is  extremely  turreted,  like  a
I'aludina  (twice  as  high  as  thick),  the  other  has  a  quite  fiat
umbilicus  (discoid,  its  length  one-fourth  of  its  thickness).
Even  the  most  cautious  savant,  who  employs  all  sorts  of


312  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

distinctions  for  establishing  a  species,  stands  puzzled  be-
fore the  Klosterberg  of  Steinheim,  and  must  confess  that
all  the  million  forms  on  which  his  foot  treads  pass  so  easily
and  imperceptibly  into  one  another,  that  he  can  only  speak
of  one  species  "  (Fraas,  p.  3c).  At  the  lower  part  of  the  hill
lie  the  flattest,  at  the  upper  part  the  most  turreted  forms.
In  the  thousands  of  years  that  this  hill  was  in  process  of
formation  the  species  has  in  this  manner  changed.  In  the
same  calcareous  sand  of  Steinheim  one  may  quite  dis-
tinctly trace  in  the  superposed  strata  the  gradual  severance
of  one  stem-form  into  diverging,  subsequently  sharply
separated  species  (comp.  Hilgendorfs  Communication  in
the  Monthly  Eeport  of  the  Berl.  Acad,  of  Sc,  July  1866).

If,  therefore,  we  may  look  upon  it  as  established  that
the  Unconscious  will  frequently  be  able  to  employ  for  the
production  of  a  new  species  a  sum  of  accidental  indi-
vidual variations,  that  by  no  means  implies  that  these  are
always  offered  to  the  Unconscious  in  all  those  directions
which  it  intends  to  adopt ;  there  always  remains  the
possibility,  that  just  the  most  important  advance  of  all
can  not  be  comprehended  as  accidental  variations,  but
only  as  systematically  varying  formative  processes.  I  think
we  must  even  assume  that  all  the  elevations  to  essentially
higher  stages,  which  presuppose  the  formation  of  organs
not  previously  in  existence,  cannot  be  explained  by  acci-
dental individual  variations,  although  the  latter  may  have
performed  the  main  work  in  the  thorough  elaboration  of  an
existing  type  in  all  directions.

How  can  a  change  simultaneously  occurring  at  different
parts  of  the  body,  which  exhibits  a  systematic  correlation
in  its  different  parts,  be  sufficiently  understood  by  acci-
dental variations,  e.g.,  the  formation  of  the  udder  in  the
first  marsupial,  which  must  necessarily  go  hand  in  hand
with  bearing  alive  if  the  young  are  not  to  perish  miserably
after  birth,  or  the  correlated  change  of  the  male  and  female
sexual  parts  if  copulation  is  to  remain  possible  ?  Just  as
little  can  the  principle  of  accidental  variation  be  regarded  as


M  ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  313

sufficient  where  certain  animal  forms  exhibit  peculiarities
of  anatomical  structure, which,  valueless  for  themselves,  have
a  significance  only  as  intermediate  transitional  forms  for
more  highly  developed  stages,  where  accordingly  one  clearly
sees  the  existence  anticipated  for  the  sake  of  the  future  pur-
pose, e.g.,  the  first  formation  of  a  cartilaginous  spinal  cord
in  those  primitive  fish-forms,  which  by  their  exo-skeleton
possessed  perfect  solidity  like  the  Crustacea,  whence  they
are  derived,  so  that  the  primitive  endo-skeleton  had  an
importance  not  for  themselves,  but  only  for  their  later
descendants,  which  converted  the  shell  -  cuirass  into
a  scaly  coat;  or,  e.g.,  the  brain  of  the  lowest  savages
and  primitive  men,  which  is  five-sixths  as  large  as  the
brain  of  the  most  advanced  races,  whilst  for  the  func-
tions it  subserves  the  brain  of  the  anthropoid  apes  would
quite  well  suffice,  that  only  amounts  to  one-third  of  that
of  civilised  man.  Even  Wallace  literally  says  :  "  Natural
selection  could  endow  the  savage  only  with  a  brain
which  surpasses  slightly  that  of  the  ape,  whilst  he  actually
possesses  one  which  stands  a  little  below  that  of  a  philo-
sopher." This  circumstance,  combined  with  the  fact  that
hair  is  absent  from  the  back  of  man ;  that  hand  and  foot
seem  needlessly  perfect  organs  for  the  savage,  and  that  the
human  vocal  organs,  especially  the  soft  palate,  contain
such  wonderful,  and,  for  the  savage,  useless  latent  capabili-
ties, which  only  find  application  with  higher  civilisation,
— all  these  circumstances  cause  Wallace  to  draw  the
conclusion  "that  a  superior  intelligence  guided  the  de-
velopment of  man  in  a  particular  direction  and  to  a
definite  end,  precisely  as  man  guides  the  evolution  of
many  animal  and  vegetable  forms."

The  Darwinian  theory  has  the  merit  of  having  pointed
to  the  summation  of  individual  variations  in  a  particular
direction,  and  the  change  of  a  type  thereby  rendered  pos-
sible into  that  of  another  species,  and  of  having  proved  the
same  by  copious  examples.  It  is  very  pardonable  for  a  new
and meritorious  view  when  it  exaggerates  its  range  and


3H  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

thinks  to  explain  everything,  when  in  reality  it  explains
only  some,  perhaps  even  most  facts,  and  the  more  interest-
ing is  the  above  testimony  of  Darwin's  rival  Wallace,
which  openly  confesses  the  insufficiency  of  this  theory
for  the  explanation  of  the  origin  of  Man. —

Let  us  now  consider  what  expedients  the  Unconscious
employs  in  the  cases  to  which  its  sole  remaining  task  is
limited — to  retain  the  accidentally  arisen  individual  varia-
tions, and  to  prevent  their  normal  neutralisation  and  obli-
teration by  crossing.

The  sole  expedient  already  familiar  to  us  is  the  instinct
of  individual  selection  in  the  gratification  of  the  sexual
impulse.  In  Chap.  v.  B.  we  saw  how  beauty  is  increased
and  enhanced  in  the  animal  kingdom  by  this  means ;  in
Chap.  ii.  E.  we  perceived  the  value  of  the  same  for  the  im-
provement of  the  human  race  in  every  respect,  and  cast
a  side  glance  at  the  possibility  of  similar  processes  in  the
higher  classes  of  the  animal  kingdom.  If  this  aid  is  almost
without  significance  in  the  lower  classes  of  animals,  it  in-
creases in  importance  with  the  progress  of  development,
acts,  however,  certainly  always  more  for  the  fixing  and
improvement  of  a  species  in  itself  than  for  the  passage  into
another.  Frequently,  in  place  of  the  active  selection  of  the
male,  occurs  a  passive  selection  of  the  female,  in  that  the
inflamed  males,  animated  by  a  special  fighting  instinct,
contend  for  the  possession  of  the  female,  when  of  course
the  most  powerful  and  most  active  carry  off  the  victory.

Much  more  thoroughly  operates  for  the  change  of  a
species  another  circumstance,  the  which  to  have  made
good  is  the  most  signal  merit  of  the  Darwinian  theory —
natural  selection  in  the  struggle  for  existence.

Every  plant,  every  animal,  has  in  two  respects  to  carry
on  a  struggle  for  existence :  first,  negatively  to  defend
itself  against  the  enemies  threatening  to  destroy  it,  as,  e.g.,
the  elements,  and  the  robbers  and  parasites,  who  would
prey  upon  it ;  and,  secondly,  positively  to  compete  in  ac-
quiring or  retaining  what  is  necessary  for  the  continuance


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  315

of  life,  as  food,  air,  light,  soil,  &c.  The  fleetest  animals,  those
which  know  best  how  to  conceal  themselves,  or  least  attract
notice  by  their  colour  and  form,  will  most  easily  be  able  to
elude  the  persecutions  of  their  enemies.  Of  animals  and
plants,  those  will  least  fall  a  sacrifice  to  the  injuries  of  the
weather,  storm,  frost,  heat,  wet,  dryness,  &c,  which  are
most  capable  of  resistance  to  these  circumstances  by  their
external  or  internal  organisation.  Of  beasts  of  prey,  only
the  most  active,  quickest,  most  powerful  and  craftiest  will
be  able  to  escape  hunger  when  there  is  deartii  of  food ;
of  plants,  those  which  maintain  themselves  most  vigor-
ously under  like  circumstances  will  become  more  luxu-
riant in  growth  than  others,  and,  as  regards  the  enjoyment
of  light,  air,  and  rain,  will  attain  so  decided  an  advantage
as  to  stifle  those  lagging  behind.  We  see  this  struggle  for
existence  most  frequently  entered  upon  between  different
species,  and  end  with  the  perfect  annihilation  of  one,  e.g.,
the  domestic  rat  by  the  migratory  rat.  Less  noticed  but
far  more  general  is  that  among  different  individuals  of
the  same  species.  The  latter  naturally  causes  an  improve-
ment of  the  species,  for  it  is  in  all  cases  the  feeblest  indi-
viduals which  are  excluded  by  premature  annihilation  from
the  office  of  propagation,  which  is  accordingly  exercised
by  the  cleverest  and  most  powerful  individuals  for  the
longest  period.  Besides  improvement,  however,  such  a
variation  of  the  species  can  also  take  place  that  varieties
and  races,  and  finally  new  species,  arise.  This  case
can  of  course  only  occur  if  the  external  relations  of  life
become  different;  then  will  natural  selection  favour  in
reproduction  those  individual  characters  which  especially
in  the  new  circumstances  show  special  vital  force.  The
consequence  will  thus  always  be  an  accommodation  to  the
external  conditions  of  life.  As  now  the  Unconscious  like-
wise wills  this  accommodation,  so  has  it  only  to  leave  natural
selection  in  the  struggle  for  existence  perfectly  unchecked
in  order  to  see  this  end  attained  without  trouble,  without
any  special  interposition.


316  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Such  changes  of  the  outward  conditions  of  life  may
take  place  in  very  different  ways.  In  the  first  place,  the
plant  or  the  animal  may  seek  the  same  by  wandering,  and
thus  by  local  separation  or  formation  of  colonies  protect
the  variety  about  to  be  formed  from  the  threatened  rever-
sion to  the  ancient  stock ;  secondly,  their  own  homes
may  be  sought  out  by  strange  plants  and  species  of
animals  on  their  wanderings,  and  they  may  be  compelled
to  test  and  strengthen  their  powers  in  contest  with  these ;
in  the  third  place,  by  elevations  or  depressions  the
situation  of  the  ground  and  height  above  the  sea  may
be  altered,  mountains  may  become  a  table-land,  plains
mountain-ridges,  sea-bottoms  plains,  coasts  continents,
severed  lands  be  united,  united  lands  be  separated,  &c. ;
in  the  fourth  place,  changes  of  climate,  even  apart  from
the  already  mentioned  causes,  may  occur;  and  finally,  in
the  fifth  place,  changes  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  are
altered  conditions  of  life  for  the  animal  kingdom,  and  con-
versely. These  relations  offer  a  rich  variety,  and  in  most
geographical  districts  such  changes  in  the  course  of  the
geological  development  of  the  earth's  surface  have  not
taken  place  once  but  innumerable  times.

If  a  plant  migrates  to  a  more  uniformly  moist  soil,  its
leaves  generally  become  less  divided,  more  glabrous  and
grass-green,  the  flowers  smaller  and  darker.  Conversely,
if  a  plant  settles  on  a  more  porous  and  dry  soil,  its  leaves
become  bluer,  more  procumbent,  more  divided  or  separated
into  fibres,  the  flowers  larger  and  brighter,  and  it  is
enveloped  in  a  thick  hairy  covering.  Thus  on  a  dry
calcareous  soil  Hutchinsia  brevicaulis  passes  into  H.  alpina,
Arabis  ccerulea  into  bellidifolia,  Alchcmilla  fissa  into  vul-
garis, Bctula  pubescens  into  alba ;  on  a  damp  soil  devoid
of  lime  Diantlius  alpinus  is  transformed  into  deltoides
(according  to  A.  Kerner  in  the  Austr.  Eot.  Journal).  In
the  animal  kingdom,  wThere  the  altered  outward  circum-
stances do  not  lie  so  close  together  as  the  different  soils
for  the  plant,  owing  to  the  present  average  constancy  of  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  317

geographical  and  climatic  relations,  specific  variation  by
natural  selection  has  not  yet  been  observed,  but  certainly
formation  of  strongly  marked  varieties,  especially  under
the  unintentional  influence  of  man,  e.g.,  origination  of  very
different  races  of  domestic  animals  (dogs,  cattle,  sheep,
horses);  and  bearing  in  mind  the  above-mentioned  facility
of  the  transition  from  the  race  to  the  variety,  it  may
justly  be  assumed  that  in  former  times,  when  not  seldom
a  more  rapid  transformation  of  the  external  circumstances
may  have  occurred  than  the  human  race  has  historically
recorded,  that  in  these  earlier  times  many  formations  of
new  species  may  have  come  about  by  natural  selection  in
the  struggle  for  existence. — In  opposition  to  this  it  is
maintained  that  then  the  infinitely  many  intermediate
forms  through  which  one  species  passes  into  the  other
must  be  capable  of  demonstration  in  the  strata,  whilst
yet  the  fossil  species  for  the  most  part  are  just  as  sharply,
and  still  more  sharply,  distinguishable  from  one  another
than  the  living.  This  proves  nothing  at  all ;  for  it  lies  in
the  nature  of  the  case  that  that  form  must  be  the  final
form  which  is  more  capable  of  life  than  all  the  preceding
phases,  which  therefore  conquers,  i.e.,  eradicates,  all  these
in  the  struggle  for  existence;  but  if  they  are  soon  thrust
on  one  side  by  the  final  form,  they  have  only  had  a  brief
existence  as  compared  with  the  final  form,  which  now,  as
the  best  adapted  to  the  circumstances,  persists  at  least
as  long  as  these  circumstances ;  acordingly  one  can-
not wonder  if  hitherto  so  few  transitional  forms  have
been  found  between  different  species.  That  none  of
these  have  ever  been  found  is  not  true ;  on  the  con-
trary, both  among  higher,  and  quite  specially  among
lower  animals,  an  astonishing  number  of  transitional
forms  are  found.

In  addition  to  the  examples  mentioned  above  (pp.  304-
307)  the  following  may  be  instanced.  Passing  from  the
radiate  to  the  bilateral  type,  we  are  acquainted  with-  two
series. (1)  Star-fish,  sea-urchins,  holothuriie;  in  the  latter,


31S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

■what  was  upper  and  under  has  become  back  and  front,
and  as  by  the  arrangement  of  the  so-called  ambulacra  a
new  upper  and  under  side  has  been  formed,  at  the  same
time  a  right  and  left  side  has  arisen.  (2)  Corals,  Eugosa,
slipper-shells  ;  in  the  palaeozoic  Eugosa,  the  dividing  walls
of  the  calcareous  shell  answering  to  the  septa  of  the
bodily  cavity  are  no  longer  arranged  regularly  as  in  the
other  corals,  but  at  least  in  the  interposed  after-growth
always  at  the  side  of  a  primary  dividing- wall,  so  that  in
respect  of  the  latter  a  bilateral  type  arises.  "When  the
Eugosa  develop  an  operculum  in  addition,  there  arises
the  slipper-shell,  hitherto  reckoned  to  the  Conchifera.

As  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand  fauna  is  in  general
to  be  regarded  as  an  arrested  representative  of  an  older
geological  period,  it  has  recently  furnished  us  in  the
Xew  Zealand  bridge-lizard  with  an  animal  which,  in
certain  characters  (biconcave  vertebral  axis  after  the
fashion  of  the  Saurians,  sexual  apparatus  without  male
organ),  has  remained  at  the  stage  of  the  fish-salamanders,
but  in  other  respects  has  developed  into  the  external
form  of  a  lizard,  which,  in  a  remarkable  manner,  unites
the  normal  characters  of  the  tortoises  (absence  of  teeth),
crocodiles  (immobility  of  the  four  legs),  and  snakes  (mov-
able rami  of  the  lower  jaw  united  by  a  ligament,  and
participation  of  the  ribs  in  locomotion).

Huxley  traces  back  the  pedigree  of  the  horse  of  the
modern  period  step  by  step  through  the  horses  of  older
times,  through  Hipparion  and  Hipparitherium  to  Plagio-
lophus,  which  latter  is  already  a  species  of  the  genus
Palffiotherium  (the  common  ancestor  of  the  hoof-horses
and  pachyderms),  and  in  a  similar  manner  the  musk  ani-
mals of  the  present  day  through  the  Cainotherium  of  the
Miocene  to  Dichobune  from  the  Eocene  as  primitive  form.
Gaudry  has  found  in  the  Miocene  strata  of  Pikermi
in  Greece  "  the  group  of  the  Limocyonidce,  which  is  inter-
mediate between  bears  and  wolves ;  the  genus  Hyamictis,
which unites the hvenas with the civet cats : the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  319

Ancylotherium,  which  is  related  both  to  the  extinct  masto-
don and  to  the  living  pangolin  or  scaly  ant-eater,  and  the
Helladotherium,  which  unites  the  now  isolated  giraffe  with
the  stag  and  the  antelope  "(Wallace). — A  rich  world  of  forms
reveals  itself  to  us  in  the  contemplation  of  the  genus  Croco-
dile. The  crocodiles  of  the  cretaceous  period  are  different
from  those  of  the  older  tertiary  period,  and  these  again  are
just  as  different  from  the  crocodiles  of  the  younger  tertiary
strata  as  from  those  of  the  present  clay.  Nevertheless,  the
differences  between  one  form  of  the  series  and  another  are
so  slight  that  they  are  only  discernible  by  the  eye  of  the
connoisseur. — Reptiles  and  birds  seem  to  be  two  of  the
most  widely  separated  orders,  and  yet  the  Soolenhofen  slates
have,  on  the  one  hand,  yielded  a  bird  (Archceopteryx)
which  by  its  elongated  form,  unfused  bones  between
the  hands,  and  strong  claws  on  the  wing-fingers,  far  more
closely  approaches  the  reptiles  than  the  ostrich-like  birds
of  the  present  day ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  laid  bare  a
reptile  (Compsognathus  lojigipcs),  that  not  only  (as  probably
most  Dinosauria  did)  went  exclusively  on  its  hind-legs,  but
also  in  the  parts  found  is  remarkably  similar  to  the
Archceopteryx.  The  footprints  of  reptiles  and  birds  of
that  time,  interconnected  through  all  conceivable  shades,
lead  us  to  expect  that  we  shall  yet  find  more  remains  of
intermediate  forms,  which  will  bridge  over  the  hitherto
existing  differences.

When  one  considers  that  almost  every  year  brings  to
light  new  and  surprising  intermediate  forms,  and  that
already  the  old  zoological  classification  has  become  abso-
lutely untenable,  the  appeal  of  the  opponents  of  Darwin
to  the  want  of  intermediate  forms  may,  in  fact,  bo
looked  upon  as  a  lost  battle.  One  may  at  length  regard
it  as  nn  established  fact  that,  if  one  traces  backwards
the  pedigree  of  the  now  living  kinds,  not  the  species,  but
the  genera  have  their  corresponding  representatives  in
former  geological  periods,  and  that  these  representatives
of  different  genera  and  orders  are  distinguished  in  still


3:0  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

remoter  epochs  only  as  now  different  species  of  a  genus
or  order.  Thus  Owen  in  his  "  Palaeontology "  assures
us  "  that  he  never  let  slip  a  good  opportunity  of  com-
municating the  results  of  observations,  which  prove  the*
more  generalised  structures  of  extinct  animals,  compared
with  the  specialised  forms  of  more  recent  animals."
(Comp.,  as  supplement  to  this  and  the  last  chapter,
Ernest  Hackel's  excellent  popular  work,  "  The  Natural
History  of  Creation.")

As  the  transition  from  water  to  land  animals,  so  also
that  from  water  to  land  plants  takes  place  through
amphibious  organisms.  The  anatomical  structure  of  a
stalk  and  leaf  living  in  water  must,  to  be  capable  of  life,
be  at  least  as  different  from  one  living  in  the  air  as
gills  from  lungs.  Thus  Utricidaria  vulgaris  consists  of
two  different  organisms  as  it  were,  one  of  which  is  repre-
sented by  the  part  of  a  plant  living  under  water,  the  other
by  the  branches  bearing  the  blossoms  rising  into  the  air.
In  each  of  the  three  great  divisions  of  the  vegetable  king-
dom  (Cryptogams,  Monocotyledons,  Dicotyledons)  there  are
atmospheric  plants  {e.g.,  Marsilia,  Sagittaria,  Polygonum)
which  prove  their  origin  from  aquatic  plants  by  the  cir-
cumstance that  when  one  puts  them  under  water  their
young  shoots  send  forth  stalks  and  leaves  with  the  ana-
tomical structure  of  aquatic  plants,  which  more  aerial
plants,  that  have,  as  it  were,  forgotten  their  more  remote
ancestors,  do  not  do.

Although  we  have  thus  recognised  natural  selection  in
the  struggle  for  existence  as  an  important  contributory  to
the  origin  of  new  species,  yet  I  can  by  no  means  grant  that
with  this  principle  the  history  of  the  origin  of  the  organic
world  is  at  all  exhausted.  Not  because  this  hypothesis
would  not  be  quite  compatible  with  our  presumptions
concerning  the  essence  of  the  Unconscious, — for  if  this  at
all  facilitated  matters,  it  would  be  quite  natural  for  it  to
concern  itself  only  with  the  individual,  and  leave  the
progress  of  species  to  go  on  quite  mechanically  by  itself, —


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  321

but  only,  because  the  facts  to  be  explained  are  far  more
numerous  than  the  range  of  the  principle  of  explanation,
can  I  not  deem  the  same  sufficient.

In  the  present  general  interest  in  the  Darwinian  theory
and  the  frequent  over-estimate  of  its  reach,  it  may  reward
us  to  spend  a  few  moments  in  considering  to  what  ex-
tent it  appears  to  be  insufficient  (comp.  also  vol.  i.  pp.
287-289).

If  we  assume  that  by  the  struggle  for  existence  alone
organisation  has  developed  from  the  primitive  original  cell
to  its  present  pitch,  that  thus  every  more  highly  developed
species  has  only  proceeded  from  the  proximate  lower  one
owing  to  its  having  possessed  a  higher  degree  of  vitality,
the  consequence  necessarily  follows  that  every  higher  species
on  its  own  ground  surpasses  every  lower  species  in  vitality,
and  surpasses  it  indeed  in  a  so  much  higher  degree,  the
greater  the  interval  of  their  stages  of  organisation,  since
indeed  with  every  new  advance  in  development  a  new  ac-
cession of  vitality  results,  and  these  increments  mount  up.
This  direct  consequence  is  now,  however,  in  complete  con-
tradiction with  the  facts  of  the  case,  which  yield  the  result
that  every  stage  of  organisation,  taken  as  a  whole,  possesses
the  same  vitality,  and  that  only  within  the  same  stage  of
organisation  the  different  species  or  varieties  are  distinguished
by  a  greater  or  less  vitality ;  which  harmonises  also  with
the  circumstance  that  the  struggle  for  existence  in  the  com-
petition for  the  conditions  of  life  occurs  the  more  frequently,
is  the  more  embittered,  and  the  more  certainly  terminates
in  the  complete  annihilation  of  the  one  side,  the  more  re-
lated are  the  competing  species  or  varieties,  whilst  the
species  dwell  beside  one  another  the  more  peacefully,  and
•render  'more  assistance  in  the  preservation  of  life,  the
farther  they  stand  from  one  another  in  the  pedigree  of
organisation.  In  every  locality,  if  we  disregard  the  dif-
ference of  land  and  sea,  all  the  stages  of  organisation  are
found  represented,  and  all  thrive  excellently  well  beside
one  another;  whereas,  according  to  the  Darwinian  theory,

VOL.  11.  x


322  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

taken  strictly,  at  every  locality  at  least  only  one  species,  and
that  the  highest,  must  remain,  because  this  surpasses  all
others  in  capacity  of  living  under  those  circumstances.
That  is,  however,  just  what  is  remarkable  and  grand  in
Nature,  that  every  final  type  of  a  class  is  so  perfect  in
itself,  that  one  may  indeed  go  beyond  it,  yet  only  by
adding  new  anatomical-morphological  structural  details,
but  not  by  enhancement  of  the  physiological  functions  or
of  its  accommodation  to  the  conditions  of  life,  for  both
are  finished.  Had  not  really  all  stages  of  organisation
on  the  average  the  same  vitality,  in  the  struggle  for  exist-
ence waged  for  millions  of  years  all  lower  species  must
have  long  ago  been  completely  superseded  by  the  higher
ones,  whereas  the  fossil  relics  show  that,  under  the  most
diverse  circumstances,  there  have  been  relatively  few
classes  of  animals  and  plants  which  at  the  present  time
have  not  their  perfectly  life-capable  representatives.

The  capacity  of  accommodation  of  a  class,  and  even  of
a  species,  within  its  own  limits,  is,  in  general,  far  greater
than  one  thinks.  This  follows  partly  from  the  continued
existence  of  not  a  few  species  from  their  origin  to  the
present  time,  where,  in  truth,  the  environment  has  suffi-
ciently changed,  partly  from  the  great  circles  of  distribution
of  the  classes  and  species  of  the  present  day.  Several
classes  people  the  whole  eartli  or  all  seas ;  many  species
have  a  distribution  over  twenty  to  thirty  degrees  of
latitude.  Lastly,  it  is  proved  by  the  capacity  of  acclima-
tisation of  species,  which  often  borders  on  the  miraculous,
if  the  instances  only  range  over  sufficient  periods  of  time.
Thus  the  common  peach-tree,  which  is  probably  an  Indian
plant,  would  not  thrive  in  Greece  in  the  time  of  Aris-
totle, whereas  we  get  good  peaches  at  the  present  day  in
North  Germany.  Accordingly,  the  capacity  of  accommo-
dation of  species  within  their  specific  limits,  partly  by
internal  physiological  changes  that  are  withdrawn  from
observation,  partly  by  the  formation  of  varieties,  is  so  great,
that  they  are  quite  well  able  to  adapt  themselves to  a


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  323

very  considerable  alteration  of  the  climate,  &c.,  without
degenerating.  Extremely  numerous  are  the  examples  in
which  closely  related  species  dwell  beside  one  another  in
a  locality  without  noticeable  change  of  their  relative  num-
ber, and  yet  the  struggle  for  existence  is  most  violent
precisely  within  the  specific  limits  between  varieties  and
still  slighter  differences.  Should,  however,  this  struggle
occur  or  be  absent  in  a  particular  case,,  yet  in  no  one  of
the  cases  here  considered  wTill  a  transgression  of  the  limits
of  the  species  show  itself.  Lastly,  there  will  not  easily
happen  so  great  a  change  of  external  circumstances,  nor
a  species  pass  under  such  different  circumstances,  that  the
capacity  for  accommodation  and  acclimatisation  within  the
limits  of  the  species  recognised  by  us  as  so  considerable
would  not  suffice  for  these  claims.  But  if  subsequently
a  second  change  of  the  conditions  essential  to  life  occurs
at  the  same  place,  it  will  mostly  be  a  return  to  the  formerly
existing  circumstances  ;  then  the  species  will  simply  adapt
itself  to  this  change  by  repeating  the  former  stages  in  a
reverse  direction  (as  is  observable  in  the  before-men-
tioned experiments  with  transplantation  of  plants  to
different  descriptions  of  soil),  and  there  is  again  no  occa-
sion for  the  passage  into  a  new  or  a  more  remote  species.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  second  change  of  the  con-
ditions essential  to  life  is  in  the  same  direction,  the
species  will  more  easily  become  extinct  at  this  place  {e.g.,
the  fauna  of  the  European  glacial  epoch),  than  pass  into
a  new  species,  which  is  more  remote  from  its  stock  than
its  previously  attained  standpoint.

How  could  the  commencement  of  a  new  path  of  develop-
ment, after  an  exhaustive  working  through  of  the  last
attained  stage  of  organisation,  and  perhaps  a  pause  of
thousands  of  years,  be  intelligible  from  the  struggle  for
existence  ?  "We  have  seen  that  it  is  precisely  the  more
imperfect  forms  of  the  preceding  stage  from  which  proceeds
the  development  of  the  higher  stage.  Apart  from  the
already  mentioned  circumstance  that  these  more  imper-


324  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

feet  forms  of  all  the  species  of  the  lower  stage  remain
longest  unchanged,  thus,  .according  to  Darwin's  view,  must
be  the  most  stable  and  the  least  capable  of  an  individual
variation  and  further  advance ;  apart  also  from  this,  that,
if  only  the  struggle  for  existence  had  created  the  later
forms  of  the  lower,  stage,  these  primitive  forms  must  have
all  already  changed  for  the  same  reason  and  by  the  same  pro-
cess into  more  developed  forms  of  the  same  grade,  or  indeed
*must  long  ago  have  been  annihilated  by  the  more  capable
forms  in  the  immeasurable  intervals ;  apart  from  all  this,
one  would  think  that,  if  from  some  unknown  cause  these
primitive  forms  that  have  maintained  themselves  had
actually  received  an  impulse  to  further  development,  that
then  through  the  struggle  for  existence  always  only  a  re-
petition of  the  development  lying  far  nearer  to  them  into
the  already  existing  higher  forms  of  the  same  stage  must
have  been  called  forth,  rather  than  a  transition  to  the
morphologically  diverging  higher  stage,  since  notoriously
the  higher  forms  of  the  lower  stage  show  themselves  also
under  the  new  circumstances  mostly  just  as  capable  of  life
as  the  species  of  the  higher  stage.  This  consideration
obtains  the  more  weight  the  more  geology  attains  to  the
knowledge,  that  the  climates  and  vital  conditions  of  earlier
geological  periods  (with  the  exception  of  the  first  times
after  the  cooling  of  the  earth's  surface)  always  far  more
closely  resembled  those  of  any  localities  whatsoever  of
the  present  surface  than  the  older  geology,  dreaming  of
catastrophes  and  vast  revolutions,  assumed. — Most  unin-
telligible on  Darwinian  presuppositions  is  the  passage  from
the  unicellular  to  the  multicellular  organisms,  since  it  is
just  the  incredible  indifference  of  the  unicellular  plants  to
their  environment,  i.e.,  their  capacity  of  accommodating
themselves  even  to  the  most  varied  circumstances  by  re-
latively slight  modifications,  that  makes  the  want  of  a
motive  for  the  conversion  into  compound  types  so  very
conspicuous.

Lastly,  if  one asks positively  of  what  kind are the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  325

useful  adaptations  that  arise  through  the  struggle  for
existence,  the  answer  is :  They  are  exclusively  of  a  physio-
logical nature.  Here  lies  the  proper  limit  of  the  Darwinian
principle  clearly  before  our  eyes ;  it  is  sufficient  so  long
as  it  has  to  do  with  the  elaboration  and  transformation  of
an  existing  organ  for  a  physiological  function  required  by
the  circumstances ;  it  leaves  us  in  the  lurch  when  a  mor-
phological change  is  to  he  explained.  That  morphological
changes  are  also  possible  by  the  addition  of  individual
variations  is  not  to  be  doubted,  and  Darwin  proves  it  by
many  examples,  especially  by  the  skeleton  of  pigeons ;
but  in  all  the  cited  cases  an  artificial  breeding  takes  place.
A  couple  of  teeth,  of  vertebrae,  or  a  toe  more  or  less,  a
vertebra  formed  thus  or  thus,  are  for  the  struggle  for
existence  perfectly  indifferent,  and  yet  these  are  the  marks
by  which  zoology  most  surely  distinguishes  species;  the
struggle  for  existence,  on  the  contrary,  can  obviously  only
produce  a  change  in  such  elements  of  the  organism  as
have  some  importance  for  the  same,  and  will  so  much
more  energetically  work  for  their  transformation  the
greater  their  significance  for  the  struggle  for  existence.
The  struggle  for  existence  brings  it  about  that  one  and
the  same  organ  (in  morphological  reference)  undertakes
the  most  diverse  physiological  functions,  whereas  in
species,  placed  under  similar  vital  conditions  but  of  dif-
ferent origin,  often  the  same  performance  is  carried  on  by
organs  morphologically  quite  different.  (Thus,  e.g.,  the
parasitic  mites  living  on  animal  hairs  have  an  organ  for
clinging  to  the  hair,  on  which  they  roam ;  this  is,  however,
represented  in  Listrophorus  by  the  transformed  lip,  in
Myobia  by  the  more  advanced  pair  of  feet,  in  Mycoptes  by
the  third,  or  also  at  the  same  time  the  fourth  pair  of  feet.)
With  all  these  changes,  however,  the  morphological  funda-
mental type  remains  unaltered  and  untouched.

In  the  animal  kingdom  the  thorou"h-<roing  acknowledcr-
ment  of  the  assertion  that  only  the  physiological  but  not
the  morphological  changes  are decisive  for the degree


326  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

of  vitality,  is  encumbered  with  difficulties,  because  the
occurrence  of  sympathetic  changes  frequently  causes  mor-
phological changes  to  go  also  hand  in  hand  with  the  physio-
logical change  of  an  organ,  often  at  quite  other  parts  of
the  body,  which  phenomenon,  springing  from  special  laws
of  organic  plastic  activity  of  the  Unconscious,  is  altogether
calculated  to  confuse  the  judgment.  Our  assertion,  how-
ever, appears  quite  clearly  justified  in  the  vegetable  king-
dom. The  competent  judgment  of  Nageli  ("  Origin  and
Conception  of  the  Species  of  Xatural  History,"  Munich,
1865,  p.  26)  on  this  point  runs :  "  The  highest  organisation
manifests  itself  in  two  moments,  in  the  most  varied  mor-
phological articulation,  and  in  the  most  thorough  division
of  labour.  Both  moments  usually  concide  in  the  animal
kingdom,  since  the  male  organ  also  possesses  the  same
function.  In  plants,  however,  they  are  independent
of  one  another;  the  same  function  can  be  undertaken
by  quite  different  organs  ;  even  in  closely  allied  plants
the  same  organ  can  carry  on  all  possible  physiological
functions.  Now  it  is  remarkable  that  the  useful  adapta-
tions which  Darwin  instances  as  regards  animals,  and
which  one  can  discover  in  quantities  for  the  vegetable
kingdom,  are  exclusively  of  a  physiological  nature;  that
they  always  show  the  improvement  and  transformation
of  an  organ  for  a  particular  function.  A  morphological
modification  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  which  could  be  ex-
plained by  the  Darwinian  theory  is  unknoim  to  me,  ami
I  do  not  even  see  how  it  could  take  place,  since  the
general  processes  of  formation  are  so  indifferent  as  regards
physiological  performances.  The  Darwinian  theory  requires
the  assumption,  confessed  by  itself,  that  indifferent  cha-
racters should  be  variable ;  the  useful,  on  the  contrary,  con-
stant. The  purely  morphological  peculiarities  of  plants
must  accordingly  most  easily,  the  relations  of  organisation
conditioned  by  a  definite  function  with  the  greatest  diffi-
culty be  capable  of  alteration.  Experience  shows  the  con-
trary. The  relative  positions  and  the  co-ordination  of  the


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  y.7

cells  and  organs  are  both  in  nature  and  under  cultivation
the  most  constant  and  persistent  marks.  In  a  plant  that
lias  opposite  leaves  and  quaternary  corollas  it  will  be  far
easier  to  produce  all  possible  functional  variations  in  the
leaves  than  a  spiral  arrangement  of  the  same,  although
these,  as  altogether  indifferent  for  the  struggle  of  exist-
ence, could  have  attained  no  constancy  through  natural
selection."  Had  Darwin  borrowed  his  examples  more
from  plants  than  from  animals,  he  would  perhaps  himself
have  perceived  the  limitation  of  the  action  of  the  struggle
for  existence.  It  is  clear  that  the  latter  can  only  alter
the  behaviour  of  organisms  to  the  external  conditions  of
life,  i.e.,  their  functions,  and  the  organs  only  so  far  as  the
functions  are  dependent  upon  them,  but  that  it  can  have
no  influence  on  those  qualities  of  organisms,  whose  altera-
tion as  regards  the  relations  between  the  organisms  and
the  external  world  brings  to  the  former  neither  advantage
nor  disadvantage.  To  the  latter  attributes  belong,  how-
ever, in  plants,  and  even  in  animals,  most  of  the  funda-
mental principles  of  the  morphological  type,  e.g.,  the  nume-
rical proportions  selected  for  the  same.

We  have  here  found  a  confirmation  of  our  preceding-
assertion,  that  natural  selection  in  the  struggle  for
existence  is  an  extremely  valuable  aid  for  the  exhaus-
tive elaboration  of  an  existing  type  within  the  same
organisation,  but  cannot  serve  for  the  explanation  of  the
passage,  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  stage  of  organisation,
since  a  raising  of  the  morphological  type  is  always  con-
nected with  such.  In  his  most  recent  researches  (Botan.
Mittheilungen,  1868)  on  the  behaviour  of  individuals  of
one  and  the  same  species  of  plants,  on  the  one  hand
under  the  same,  on  the  other  hand  under  different  ex-
ternal circumstances,  Niigeli  comes  to  the  conclusion
that  the  formation  of  unlike  varieties  occurs  just  as
much  under  like,  as  the  formation  of  like  varieties
under  unlike  circumstances ;  whence  we  may  conclude
as  follows: — (1.)  The  external  circumstances  do  not  suffice


328  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

as  sole  cause  of  the  formation  of  varieties,  but  pre-
suppose as  second  favourable  condition  a  quality  in-
herent in  the  plant,  a  "tendency  to  vary"  (and  that,
too,  in  definite  directions).  (2.)  But  without  a  doubt  this
inner  quality  of  the  plant  can  by  itself  suffice  to  introduce,
even  under  similar  external  circumstances,  a  formation
of  different  varieties.  This  confirms  our  preceding  as-
sumptions. Among  zoologists,  quite  recently  Kolliker
has  declared  for  the  hypothesis  of  Nageli,  that  the
transformation  of  existing  organisms  by  the  accidental
change  of  external  circumstances  yields  in  importance
and  range  to  the  tendency  inherent  in  the  organic  world
of  development  from  internal  causes  according  to  pre-
ordained laws,  no  matter  by  what  name  this  creative
principle,  this  productive  activity  is  called  ;  in  this
sense  he  desires  his  former  announcement  of  "hetero-
geneous generation"  (comp.  above,  p.  301)  to  be  inter-
preted.1

Before  quitting  the  subject,  a  special  expedient  may
be  mentioned,  the  actual  use  of  which  indeed  has  not
hitherto  been  proved,  whose  possible  application  is,  how-
ever, so  interesting,  that  I  will  not  withhold  from  the
reader  a  short  indication  of  the  same. — Until  fifteen
years  ago,  it  passed  as  a  scientific  axiom  that,  of  all
animals  that  undergo  a  metamorphosis,  only  the  most
perfect  state  is  transmissible.  Now,  however,  we  already
know  three  exceptions.  The  young  of  Leptodcra  appen-
diculata,  a  parastic  tape-worm  living  in  the  foot  of  the
common  slug,  represent  the  larva  form  of  their  parents ;
with  abundant  food  and  moisture  they  do  not,  however,
undergo  the  chrysalis  change,  but  propagate  among  one
another  any  number  of  times  without  diminution  of
fertility. A second example is that of Cecidomyia,

1 Morphologie und Entwicke-  and  30  ff. The  whole  general  in-

lungsgeschichte des Pennatuliden-  traduction  to  this  memoir  is  a  very

stammes nebst allgemeinen Be-  interesting  contribution  to  the  theory

trachtungen zur Desctndenzlehre,  of  Descent  and  to  the  criticism  of

von A. Kolliker. Frankfurt a  the  theory  of  natural  selection.
M. bei Winter, 1872, pp. 26-27,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  329

already  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter  (p.  281).  A  third,
the  Mexican  Axolotl,  whose  identity  with  the  likewise
long-known  Amblystoma  was  established  through  the
circumstance,  that  in  aquaria  the  metamorphosis  of  the
Axolotl  into  Amblystoma  was  directly  observed  in
certain  cases.  The  larva  form  of  this  animal  has  ex-
ternal gills  like  the  Proteus,  which  undergoes  no  meta-
morphosis, whereas  the  perfect  form  is  without  gills.
Now  here  manifestly  the  larva  form  is  the  older  and
original,  and  one  must  assume  that,  under  favourable
circumstances,  one  of  these  salamander-like  animals  un-
derwent a  metamorphosis  for  the  first  time,  a  change
which  was  facilitated  in  its  descendants  by  inheritance.
The  Axolotl  now  has  not  attained  the  next  stage  of
development,  where  the  metamorphosis,  as  in  most
Amphibia,  is  a  regular  phase  of  the  life-history.  As,
however,  the  progress  from  the  fish-salamanders  to  the
higher  Amphibia  takes  place  by  the  capacity  for  meta-
morphosis becoming  by  transmission  normal,  one  may
imagine  the  further  progress  from  the  Amphibia  to  the
reptiles  brought  about  by  this,  that  under  favourable
circumstances  an  Amphibian  acquires  the  power  of
bringing  forth  young  in  the  final  form,  or,  in  other  words,
of  transferring  the  metamorphosis  to  the  embryonic  life.
The  preceding  reflections  on  metamorphosis  may  be  ex-
tended to  the  alternation  of  generations  (comp.  Hiickel),
but  hitherto  data  are  too  much  wanting  for  the  attainment
of  certain  results  on  this  subject. —

If  we  briefly  epitomise  the  conclusions  of  this  chapter,
tli ere  results  from  the  principle  of  always  attaining  the
proposed  end  with  the  least  possible  expenditure  of  energy
the  following  : —

(1.)  The  Unconscious  in  the  production  of  higher
phases  of  organisation  foregoes  spontaneous  generation,
and  prefers  to  employ  already  existing  forms  of  organ-
isation.

(2.)  It  does  not  directly  transform  the  lower  form  into


33o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  higher,  but  shapes  the  latter  from  a  favourably  con-
stituted germ  of  the  lower  kind.

(3.)  It  takes  as  small  steps  as  possible,  and  forms  the
larger  differences  by  adding  together  a  number  of  small
individual  differences.

(4.)  It  makes  use  of  the  individual  variations  casually
arising  in  generation,  so  far  as  such  are  present,  in  those
directions  which  answer  to  its  own  end.

(5.)  For  maintaining  the  variations  arising,  no  matter
how  it  makes  use  of  natural  selection  in  the  struggle  for

J  DO

existence,  so  far  as  they  arc  of  greater  service  to  the
organism .

(6.)  The  Unconscious  must  (apart  from  its  continuous
interposition  in  every  organic  formation,  thus  also  in  all
generation)  display  a  direct  activity  in  the  progressive
development  of  the  organisation  :  on  the  one  hand,  in
order  with  new  germs  to  call  forth  the  variations  that  do
not  accidentally  arise ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  preserve
from  being  again  obliterated  by  crossing  the  variations
that  have  arisen,  which  belong  to  its  plan,  but  do  not
aid  the  competition  of  the  organism  in  the  struggle  for
existence. —

Lastly,  it  may  be  remarked  that,  for  the  same  reason
that  no  spontaneous  generation  takes  place  after  sexual
reproduction  has  been  rendered  possible,  the  development
of  a  new  species  from  a  lower  one  only  takes  place  if  the
species  does  not  yet,  or  at  least  not  at  this  locality,  exist.
The  development  of  a  new  species  would  thus  have  to  be
conceived  as  a  process  occurring  only  once,  or  at  least  only
a  few  times,  at  different  localities,  under  similar  circum-
stances, which  is  empirically  confirmed  by  the  favourable
results  of  the  most  recent  investigations  concerning  the
places  of  origin  or  centres  of  diffusion  of  the  species  of
plants  and  animals ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  after
a  new  species  has  once  arisen,  the  similar,  or  but
slightly  modified  reproduction  of  the  same,  is  the  normal
and  ever-repeated  process,  till  the  possible  destruction  of


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  331

the  species.  (According  to  Darwin,  the  process  of  forma-
tion of  certain  higher  species  from  their  lower  primitive
forms  must  be  repeated  as  long  or  as  often  as  the  ex-
ternal conditions  which  called  it  forth  the  first  time
last  or  occur  afresh ;  but  this  requirement  can  hardly  be
brought  into  harmony  with  the  facts  of  experience,  since
it  must  have  recourse  for  the  purpose  to  the  further  im-
probable single  appearance  of  shortly  enduring  and  never
recurring  circumstances.)  However  long,  then,  one  may
imagine  the  process  of  developing  a  new  species  to  take
(hundreds  or  thousands  of  years),  it  will  still  be  an
inconsiderably  small  part  of  the  space  of  the  essentially
similar  continuation  of  the  formed  species  (some  hundreds
of  thousands  to  ten  millions  of  years).

This  is  a  second  reason,  in  addition  to  those  already
mentioned  above,  why  so  many  more  similar  fossil  speci-
mens with  distinct  specific  characters  are  found  than  those,
which  exhibit  the  transitional  stages  between  closely  allied
species.


( 332 )


XT.

INDIVIDUATION.

I.  Possibility  and  Manner  of  Effecting  Individuation. —
If  the  Essential  Being  that  manifests  itself  in  the  world
is  sole  and  indivisible,  whence  comes  the  plurality  of
appearing  individuals  ?  whence  the  singularity  of  each  of
the  same  ?  what  is  its  object  ?  how  is  it  possible  ?

The  answer  to  these  questions  has  always  been  a  car-
dinal difficulty  for  every  explicitly  monistic  philosophy.
It  was,  in  particular,  the  rejection  or  insufficient  answering
of  the  same  that  always  paved  the  way  to  the  relapse
of  Monism  into  a  realistic  polyism  or  pluralism  (e.g.,
Leibnitz  after  Spinoza,  Herbart  after  Schelling  and  Hegel,
Bahnsen  after  Schopenhauer).  Spinoza  ignores  the  above
questions  as  much  as  the  ancients ;  he  dogmatically
declares  individuals  to  be  modi  of  the  One  substance,  but
the  development  of  the  modus  from  substance,  or  the
demonstration  why  each  modus  is  distinguished  from
another  and  forms  a  unique  existence,  he  altogether  fails
to  supply.  Subjective  idealism  (Kant,  Fichte,  Schopen-
hauer) imagines  it  has  done  enough  when  it  declares
plurality  in  the  world  to  be  subjective  appearance,  arising
through  the  forms  of  subjective  intuition — space  and  time
—  unconcerned  that,  in  the  first  place,  the  difficulty  is
only  transferred  from  the  objective  to  the  subjective
sphere,  but  remains  just  as  unsolved  here  as  it  was  there  ;
and  that,  secondly,  the  question  remains  unanswered  how
tiiis  unique  percipient  individual,  which  discriminates
itself  from  every  similar  individual,  is  possible  according


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  333

to  monistic  principles,  since  either,  if  it  is  conceived  as  one
among  many,  the  incomprehensible  real  plurality  is  again
inconsistently  introduced,  or  however  in  the  other  case,  on
the  hypothesis  of  Solipism,  again  the  limitation  of  this  whole
and  sole  perceiving  subject  remains  incomprehensible.

The  latter  side  of  the  question  was  certainly  seen  by
Schelling  (Werke,  i.  3,  p.  683) :  "  But  now  the  problem  is
just  this,  How  from  an  action  of  the  absolute  Ego  the
absolute  Intelligence,  and  how  again  from  an  action  of
the  absolute  Intelligence  the  whole  system  of  limitation,
which  constitutes  every  individuality,  may  be  explained."
The  answer  follows  on  the  next  page  :  "  If  now  the  in-
telligence remained  one  with  the  absolute  synthesis,  there
would  indeed  be  a  universe,  but  there  would  be  no  in-
telligence. If  there  is  to  be  an  intelligence,  it  must
emerge  from  that  synthesis  in  order  to  produce  it  again
with  consciousness ;  but  this  again  is  impossible  without
the  addition  of  a  special  or  second  to  that  first  limitation,
which  now  no  longer  can  consist  in  this,  that  the  intelli-
gence in  general  perceives  a  universe,  but  that  it  perceives
the  universe  precisely  from  this  fixed  point."

I  confess  that  I  should  envy  that  man  who  was  able  to
pick  out  the  truth  from  this  passage  and  its  connections,  if
he  did  not  already  possess  it.

As  for  the  Hegelian  system,  our  question  unmasks  one
of  its  weakest  points.  According  to  Hegel,  the  concept  is
the  sole  substance ;  it  is  nothing  but  the  concept,  and  the
process  of  Nature  is  an  objective  notional  dialectic.  On
the  other  side,  he  himself  confesses  that  the  Notion  just
as  little  as  the  word  is  able  to  grasp  the  simple  This  in
its  singleness — this  individual,  which  as  such  one  can  only
show,  but  not  describe.  Individual  singleness  stands
outside  the  range  of  the  concept,  and  therewith  outside
that  of  the  Hegelian  system,  if  this  will  be  consistent
with  itself.  Plurality  as  real  phenomenon  cannot  explain
the  same,  for  one  can  see  no  reason  why,  on  the  dis-
mission of  the  absolute Idea  into  Nature,  every  phase  of


334  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

development  of  the  logical  process  should  have  more  than
a  corresponding  phase  of  development  of  the  process  of
Nature.  The  dialectical  self-splitting  of  the  one  into
the  many  yields  indeed  plurality  as  pure  concept,  but  not
plurality  as  accident  of  real  phenomena ;  for  Hegel  would
never  have  maintained  the  self-disintegration  of  a  half-
crown  into  many  half-crowns  or  sixpences,  and  as  little  as
in  this  real  instance  would  the  self-division  of  the  one  be
applicable  to  a  self-splitting  of  a  world-soul  into  many
real  individuals.  Eeal  plurality  is  more  than  the  idea
of  plurality ;  it  is  a  sum  of  individuals,  none  of  which
resembles  the  others,  each  of  which  is  a  This,  nameless,
sole  (as  I  am  nameless,  sole),  each  of  which  is  attainable
by  no  conception,  but  only  by  perception.

Whoever  has  not  felt  the  need  and  the  difficulty  of
comprehending  individuation  from  the  point  of  view  of
Monism  may  securely  pass  over  the  first  half  of  this
chapter ;  he  would  find  no  interest  in  it.  For  him,  on  the
other  hand,  who  hitherto  has  kept  aloof  from  Monism
precisely  on  account  of  this  more  or  less  distinctly  con-
scious difficulty,  and  has  put  up  with  the  pluralism  of
the  real  phenomenal  world  as  an  ultimate,  for  him  lies
in  this  chapter,  taken  in  conjunction  with  Chap.  vii.  C,
the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  present  book.  In  fact,  plu-
ralism and  individualism  have  a  warrant  which  cannot
be  under-estimated  with  impunity ;  as  every  improperly
neglected  moment  always  revenges  itself  by  a  reaction
exceeding  a  justifiable  limit.  With  Fichte  the  conscious
individual  still  occupies  the  foreground,  but  its  significance
is  not  that  of  a  characteristic  sui  generis,  but  that  of  the
type  of  a  limited  absolute  intelligence,  which  is  revealed
still  more  distinctly  in  Schelling ;  whilst  with  Hegel  even
this  type  is  volatilised  into  the  abstract  category  of  the
subjective  spirit.  As  concerns  the  other  side  of  indivi-
duality as  separate  natural  existence,  with  Fichte  there
is  no  mention  of  it  at  all,  since  Nature  is  to  him  only
subjective  illusion ; with  Schelling  and  Hegel,  however,


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  335

there  is  plenty  of  reflection  and  speculation  about  abstract
natural  potencies  and  their  dialectical  play,  but  the  signi-
ficance and  the  right  of  the  natural  individual  as  such  is
perfectly  ignored,  when  it  is not  expressly denied. In
the  reaction  against  this  one-sidedness  of  abstract  idealism
and  in  the  re-erecting  of  the  standard  of  a  realism  recog-
nising the  plurality  of  things-in-themselves  lies  the  his-
torical authorisation  of  the  Herbartian  pluralism  ;  its  truth
lies  in  the  assertion  that  the  right  of  plurality  and  indivi-
duality reaches  just  as  far  as  reality  of  existence  in  general ;
its  untruth  lies in  failing  to  perceive  the  phenomenality
of  all  reality  and  all  existence. Subjective  idealism  had
had  the  right  inkling  that  reality  is  only  phenomenality,
but  it  had  distorted  and  disfigured  this  thought  by  re-
cognising no  other  than  subjective  phenomenality,  so  that
plurality  sank  to  only  subjective  illusion. When,  however,
one  has  perceived  the  existing  to  be  objective  appearance
or manifestation of  the  super-existent  (i.e.,  independent
of  the  apprehending conscious  subject),  or  existence of
the subsisting,  then are  reality and (objective) pheno-
menality perceived  to  be  identical  notions  ;  then  one,  how-
ever, also  knows  that  the  plurality,  whose  right  reaches  as
far  as  the  reality  of  the  existing  world,  has  just  as  this
only  a  phenomenal,  not  transcendent-metaphysical  validity.
Schopenhauer  obviously  steers towards  this standpoint,
but  his  adhesion  to  subjective  idealism  prevents  him  from
clearing  up  his  notion  of  the  individual  objectification  of
the  Will  and  developing  it  into  that  of  objective  phenomen-
ality ;  and  the  want  of  this  latter  notion  leads  him  again,
in  contradiction  with  his  own  principles,  to  allow  plurality
and  individuality  to  reach  also  into  the  transcendent-meta-
physical (intelligible  individual  character  and  individual
negation  of  the  will). From  this  point  it  was  possible  for
Ikihnsen  to  set  up  a  system  of  etiological  individualism  or
metaphysical  will-pluralism  and  to  reject  Schopenhauer's
Monism,  because he  saw  through  the contradictions  of
Schopenhauer's  system,  and  yet  did  not  see  how  otherwise


336  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

to  save  the  right  of  individuality.  The  notion  of  objec-
tive phenomenality  introduced  by  Schelling  and  Hegel
into  philosophy,  and  emphasised  especially  by  Frauenstadt
amongst  the  adherents  of  Schopenhauer,  explains,  how-
ever, everything  that  has  to  be  explained  in  a  more  satis-
factory and  less  one-sided  fashion.  Whilst  I  defend  and
uphold  the  uniqueness  of  the  individual  and  its  right
within  the  real  world  as  against  abstract  Idealism  and
'Monism  as  energetically  as  Herbart,  I  just  as  decidedly
dispute  every  claim  of  the  individual  to  a  transcend-
ent-metaphysical validity  extending  beyond  the  world  of
objective  appearance  as  unfounded,  unwarranted,  and  pre-
sumptuous, and  deem  even  that  Pluralism  which  flatly
denies  all  transcendent-metaphysic  behind  the  real  world
to  be  more  endurable  and  philosophical  than  that  which
inflates  the  individual  to  an  eternal  transcendent  essen-
tiality or  substance ;  for  the  former  merely  foregoes  all
metaphysic  in  favour  of  physics,  but  the  latter  has  a  false
metaphysic,  and  that  is  far  worse.  As  certainly,  however,
as  the  former  Pluralism  satisfies  all  the  justifiable  claims
of  individuality,  so  certainly  does  the  philosophy  of  the
Unconscious  also  do  this,  which  accords  to  the  individual
precisely  the  same  authority  as  that  unmetaphysical  Plural-
ism, only  that  it  adds  to  this  theory  of  the  real  world  and
its  plurality  a  metaphysic  (and  indeed,  what  is  here  in-
different, monistic  metaphysic).  The  philosophy  of  the
Unconscious  is  thus  the  genuine  reconciliation  of  monism
and  pluralistic  individualism,  in  that  it  recognises  each  of
the  two  aspects  as  authorised,  assigns  each  the  sphere
appertaining  to  it  (metaphysical  or  physical-real),  and
unites  both  in  itself  as  subletted  moments. —

Prom  the  previous  results  of  the  foregoing  chapters  the
solution  of  the  question  placed  at  the  head  of  this  chapter
follows  without  difficulty.  We  will,  however,  leave  the
question,  Why  is  there  individuation  ?  for  the  present
undiscussed,  and  consider  only  the  other,  How  is  it  possible
on  monistic  principles  ?


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  337

Stated  in  general  terms  the  answer  runs  :  "  Individuals
are  objectively  posited  phenomena,  i.e.,  they  are  willed
thoughts  of  the  Unconscious  or  particular  will-acts  of  the
same ;  the  unity  of  the  essence  remains  unaffected  by  the
plurality  of  individuals,  which  are  only  activities  (or  com-
binations of  certain  activities)  of  the  one  Essential  Being."
But  to  render  this  very  general  answer  plausible,  we  must
enter  into  details,  and  once  more  picture  to  ourselves  by
what  combination  of  what  activities  an  individual  arises,
and  how  far  each  individual  must  necessarily  be  different
from  every  other,  or  unique.

The  individuals  of  higher  order  arise,  as  we  saw  (C.
Chap,  vi.),  by  composition  from  individuals  of  lower  order,
with  the  addition  of  new  activities  of  the  Unconscious
directed  upon  the  resulting  compound ;  one  must  there-
fore begin  with  understanding  individuation  in  the  indi-
viduals of  lowest  order,  i.e.,  the  atoms.  Here,  accord-
ing to  the  present  state  of  the  scientific  hypotheses,  only
two  different  kinds  of  individuals,  repulsive  and  attractive
forces,  are  to  be  distinguished ;  within  each  of  these  groups
there  obtains  perfect  resemblance  between  the  individuals,
with  the  sole  exception  of  their  place.

Only  because  the  atomic  forces  A  and  B  act  differently
on  the  same  atoms  are  they  different,  and  because  the
lines  of  action  of  A  and  the  lines  of  action  of  B  have  dis-
tinct foci,  this  difference  is  shortly  expressed  as  A  and  B
occupy  different  places,  whilst  in  strictness  force  occu-
pies no  place  at  all,  but  only  its  effects  are  locally  dis-
criminated. But  if  one  imagined  two  equal  atoms  united
in  a  mathematical  point,  they  would  not  only  cease  to  be
(listing ■/Askable,  but  even  to  be  different,  for  they  would
(•ease  to  be  two  forces,  and  would  be  one  force  with  double
the  strength.

Here  then  the  application  of  the  answer  given  above  in
general  terms  is  in  itself  clear  and  intelligible :  the  Un-
conscious has  at  the  same  time  different  will-acts,  which
are  distinguished  by  their  content  so far  as the  space

vol.  II.  Y


338  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

relations  of  their  effects  are  differently  represented.  But
when  the  will  realises  its  content,  these  many  will-acts
enter  into  objective  reality  as  so  many  force-individuals  ;
they  are  the  first  primitive  manifestation  of  Essential
Being.  Since  every  effect  of  atomic  force  is  represented
by  the  Unconscious  as  different  from  every  other,  thus
single,  its  realisation  is  of  course  different  from  that  of
every  other  atomic  force,  thus  likewise  single,  without
prejudice  to  the  circumstance  that  it  is  in  its  nature
indistinguishable ;  the  intuitive  imagination  of  the  Uncon-
scious distinguishes  it,  however,  without  thought  in  its
space  relations,  as  well  as  one  recognises  by  perception
the  right  glove  as  right,  which  no  notion  and  no  combina-
tion of  concepts  is  ever  able  to  do.

Here  we  may  also  remember  what  was  said»(C.  Chap.  i.
3  and  4)  on  the  way  in  which  the  Unconscious  forms
representations.  The  concept  is  a  result  of  a  process  of
separation  or  abstraction,  but  the  Unconscious  always
apprehends  the  totality  of  its  matter  of  representation
without  condescending  to  a  separation  of  parts  within  the
same.  The  concept  is  a  product  of  discursive  thought,  a
sorry  make-shift  due  to  its  weakness ;  but  the  Unconscious
thinks  not  discursively  but  intuitively ;  it  thinks  concepts
only  so  far  as  they  are  contained  in  intuition  as  integral
and  undifferentiated  elements,  consequently  it  cannot  be
surprising  if  among  the  intuitions  of  the  Unconscious
there  are  such  from  which,  even  for  discursive  thinking,
no  concepts  can  be  abstracted ;  as,  e.g.,  the  perception  that
the  actions  of  the  atomic  force  A  must  be  so  directed  that
their  lines  of  direction  should  intersect  in  this  point  here,
those  of  the  atom  B,  in  that  point  there.  Consequently,
in  the  case  of  atoms,  the  difference  and  singleness  of  the
individuals  is,  in  fact,  reduced  in  the  most  direct  manner
to  the  difference  and  singleness  of  the  ideas  which  form
the  content  of  the  acts  of  will  of  which  the  individuals
consist,  in  such  wise  that  to  each  individual  there  corre-
sponds a  single  act  of  will.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  339

Unfortunately  Matter  has  never  been  comprehended  as
a  combination  of  will-acts  of  the  Unconscious,  so  that  the
sole  example  where  the  comprehension  of  individuation  is
really  simple  was  not  available.  In  all  other  cases,  how-
ever, where  we  have  to  do  with  individuals  of  higher  order,
the  comprehension  of  individuation  is  rendered  difficult
by  a  complicated  combination  of  will-acts,  changing  every
moment,  forming  the  individual.

If  we  dwell  a  moment  more  upon  the  atomic  forces  of
matter,  and  inquire  respecting  the  medium  whereby  indi-
viduation in  this  sphere  becomes  possible,  respecting  the
so-called  "principium  individuationis,"  undoubtedly  the
combination  of  space  and  time  can  alone  be  so  character-
ised; for  we  saw  that  the  atomic  forces  A  and  B,  equal  in
thought,  ari  only  distinguished  by  the  different  space  rela-
tions of  their  effects,  improperly  and  briefly  expressed
by  their  places,  and  only  omitted  at  the  time  to  add  to
"  their  effects :  "  "  at  the  same  point  of  time."  This  adden-
dum is,  however,  necessary,  for  completeness'  sake,  because
indeed  with  the  time  the  place  of  an  atom  may  change.  The
phrase  principium  individuationis  is  not,  however,  well
chosen.  It  should  be  medium  individuationis;  for  the
authorship  or  origin  of  individuation,  just  as  that  of  space
and  time,  belongs  solely  to  the  Unconscious,  namely,  the
ideal  difference  and  singleness  of  the  atoms  to  the  idea,
their  reality  however  to  the  will.

It  might  now  appear,  on  superficial  consideration,  that
here  only  the  same  thing  is  said  as  by  Schopenhauer,  who
also  claims  space  and  time  as  the  principium  individua-
tionis. However,  between  his  and  my  conception  there
exists  the  fundamental  difference,  that  with  Schopenhauer
space  and  time  are  only  forms  of  subjective  cerebral  percep-
tion, with  which  the  (speculative)  transcendent  reality  has
nothing  at  all  to  do;  that  for  him,  therefore,  all  individua-
tion is  a  mere  subjective  appearance,  to  which  corresponds
no  reality  outside  the  cerebral  consciousness.

According  to  my  conception,  on  the  other  hand,  space


34Q  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

and  time  are  just  as  much  forms  of  outward  reality  as  of
the  subjective  cerebral  perception ;  certainly  not  forms  of
the  (metaphysical-)  transcendent  Substantial  Being,  but
only  of  its  activity,  so  that  individuation  has  not  merely
an  apparent  reality  for  consciousness,  but  a  reality  apart
from  all  consciousness,  without  thereby  curtailing  plurality
of  substance.

Here  is  the  salient  point  for  understanding  the  concep-
tion of  objective  appearance  in  opposition  to  the  mere
subjective  appearance  of  Kant,  Fichte,  and  Schopenhauer.
The  possibility  of  a  plurality  and  individuation  indepen-
dent of  the  conscious  subject  perceiving  it  depends  on  the
condition,  that  the  principium  or  medium  individuationis
is  a  datum  independent  of  the  perception  of  the  conscious
subject,  i.e.,  that  space  and  time  are  not  merely  forms  of
intuition,  but  also  forms  of  existence  of  the  of  itself  exist-
ing {i.e.,  independent  of  the  representation  of  the  con-
scious subject).  Whoever  denies  this  must  necessarily  also
deny  that  another  plurality  and  individuation  than  that
posited  by  the  conscious  idea  exist — must  then  deny  that
his  wife  and  himself  are  two  individuals,  independent  of
his  mental  picture.  But  now  the  essence  of  matter  is
only  will  and  idea,  and  moreover  one  as  the  essence  of  all
being ;  plurality  only  lies  in  action,  and  is  real  plurality
only  so  far  as  at  the  same  time  a  collision  of  will-acts
takes  place  (one  atom  would  be  no  atom).  It  is  here-
with, however,  at  the  same  time  implied  that  plurality
and  individuation  (thus  also  reality,  presence,  and  exis-
tence) reside  only  in  the  manifestation  of  metaphysical
force  (comp.  above,  pp.  242-245),  only  in  the  action  of  sub-
stance, only  in  the  manifestation  of  the  hidden  ground,
only  in  the  object if  cation  of  the  will,  only  in  the  appearance
of  the  one  Essential  Being.  Plurality  is  therefore,  on  the
one  hand,  not  mere  subjective  appearance  (of  being  in  the
abstract) ;  on  the  other  hand,  however,  still  mere  appear-
ance of  the  one  essence,  therefore  we  call  it  objective
appearance. In  like  manner  we  call  space  and  time  as


M ETA  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  341

principle  of  individuation  of  the  plurality  of  the  objective
appearances,  objective  forms  of  phenomena.

Had  not  Schopenhauer  unfortunately  leant  too  much  on
Kant,  he  must  of  necessity  have  enounced  the  true  view  ;
whereas,  as  it  is,  he  persists  in  the  statement  that  the  whole
diversity  of  the  world  only  acquires  existence  through  the
first  animal  consciousness  and  in  its  perception.  Only
thus  much  truth  lies  in  this,  that  objective  manifestation
also,  in  order  to  be  real,  i.e.,  to  emerge  from  the  unconsciously
ideal  composure  into  external  reality,  needed  an  opposi-
tion between  different  acts  of  will ;  error  creeps  in  only
when  the  union  of  one  of  the  affected  will-acts  with  a  con-
scious subject  is  required  as  condition.  If  we  eliminate  this
unwarranted  requirement,  the  simple  truth  remains  that  the
objective  phenomenon  which  rests  on  the  individuation  of
the  one  into  the  many,  is  also  only  possible  in  this  plurality
without  self-contradiction.

Moreover,  there  lies  in  Schopenhauer's  assertion  that  the
world  of  individuation  comes  into  existence  only  with  the
first  conscious  subject  perceiving  it  an  incorrect  assump-
tion, as  if  the  subjective  appearance  which  the  intellect
spontaneously  constructs  out  of  the  material  processes  in
the  objective  appearance  of  its  brain  were  the  immediate
and  true  appearance  of  the  Essential  Being,  whilst  it  is,
in  fact,  very  unlike,  nay,  in  many  points  perfectly  hetero-
geneous to,  the  objective  phenomenon  (i.e.,  the  sum  of
natural  individuals  as  they  are,  independently  of  being
perceived).  Only  the  objective  phenomenon  is  the  true
and  direct  manifestation  of  the  Essential  Being ;  the  sub-
jective phenomenon,  however,  is  a  subjectively  coloured
and  distorted  copy  of  the  objective  phenomenon.  To  gain
an  adequate  thought-picture  of  the  objective  appearance
by  eliminating  that  which  merely  appertains  to  subjec-
tivity, and  by  the  scientific  investigation  of  the  objective
causes  of  the  particular  given  affection  of  the  subject,  is
the  endeavour  and  problem  of  Natural  Science  (Physics
in the widest  sense), whilst  Metaphysics  endeavours  to


342  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  ,

cognise  the  Essential  Being  according  to  its  attributes  and
its  mode  of  revelation,  which  underlies  the  objective  ap-
pearance (natural  things).  Thus,  e.g.,  matter  as  subjective
phenomenon  is  matter  with  its  palpable  sense-qualities ;  as
objective  phenomenon,  a  definitely  extended  complex  of
punctual  atoms ;  as  essence,  that  which  underlies  this
phenomenon,  the  All-one  Unconscious  with  the  attributes
will  and  idea.  The  first  is  the  sensuous,  the  second  the
physical,  the  third  the  metaphysical  definition  of  matter.

The  second  point  wherein  I  depart  from  Schopenhauer
is  this,  that  he  knows  no  atoms  at  all,  wherefore,  properly
speaking,  he  cannot  think  anything  by  "individuation
of  matter,"  because  he  cannot  say  what  are  individuals
of  mere  inorganic  matter.  The  third  is,  lastly,  that  he
naively  regards  organic  individuals  as  just  as  much  direct
objectifications  of  the  will  as  I  the  atomic  forces,  whilst  I,
following  physical  science,  suppose  the  same  to  arise  by
the  composition  of  atomic  individuals.

With  Schopenhauer,  therefore,  space  and  time  are  for
organic  individuals  principium  individuationis  in  the
same  sense  as  for  atoms,  whilst  for  the  individuals  of
higher  order  I  can  only  admit  as  direct  principium
individuationis  those  individuals  of  lower  order  of  which
the  former  are  compounded,  if  also  space  and  time,  of
course  in  the  last  resort,  always  remain  indirect  principium
individuationis,  since  indeed  the  whole  material  world  is
built  up  out  of  atomic  forces.  Only  his  subjective
idealism,  to  which  matter,  as  also  the  organic  body,  must
be  a  merely  subjective  appearance  without  corresponding
reality  beyond  consciousness,  could  lead  Schopenhauer  to
explain  the  body  as  a  direct  objectification  of  the  indi-
vidual will — an  assertion  which,  in  presence  of  the  facts
of  the  extremely  defective  control  of  the  will  over  the
body  and  of  the  change  of  matter,  which  is  the  first  condi-
tion of  all  organic  life,  can  by  no  means  be  upheld.  Ex-
perience teaches  us,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  matter
which  constitutes  our  body  is  something  foreign  and  in-


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  343

different  to  us  ;  that  it  is  being  continually  thrown  off  and
replaced  by  other  matter ;  secondly,  that  the  matter  of
our  body,  in  contrast  with  the  mind,  forms  in  the  same
way  as  the  will  of  other  persons  a  quite  real  power,  with
which  one  must  reckon  in  order  to  be  able  to  control  it
so  far  as  is  practically  necessary,  to  which  one,  how-
ever, immediately  succumbs  as  soon  as  one  either  thinks
to  be  able  to  neglect  it,  or  makes  demands  upon  it  to
the  enforcement  of  which  the  psychical  power  is  unequal.
Experience,  in  a  word,  teaches  that  matter  behaves  as
an  already  pre-existing,  to  a  certain  extent  indifferent,
crude  building  material,  which  the  plastic  individual
soul  attracts  to  and  repels  from  itself  according  to  its
needs,  whose  laws  it  must,  however,  respect,  and  dare
not  attempt  to  infringe  with  impunity.

Bearing  in  mind  the  results  of  Chap.  ix.  C,  according
to  which  the  Unconscious  realises  life  wherever  the  pos-
sibility of  life  offers  itself,  and  considering  that  organic
life  is  only  conceivable  under  the  organic  form  and  re-
quires matter  for  its  realisation,  it  is  evident  that  these
are  the  conditions  determining  the  individuation  of  organic
life  ;  for  it  must  for  its  realisation  make  use  of  a  complex
of  atoms  enclosed  within  certain  limits  of  extension,  and
put  these  into  their  appropriate  situations  and  groups,
.-:o  as  to  render  possible  the  organic  interchange  of  matter ;
the  atoms  employed,  however,  are  individuals,  i.e.,  each  of
them  is  single,  consequently  the  organically  constituted
complex  of  these  atoms,  and  the  activity  of  the  Uncon-
scious exclusively  directed  to  it,  which  together  make  up
the  higher  individual,  must  be  single.

Thus,  as  already  above  suggested,  the  lower  order  of
individuals  turns  out  to  be  medium  individual  ionis  for  the
higher. — There  would  be  no  special  gain  for  the  purpose
of  this  inquiry  in  going  deeper  into  evolution,  and  showing
in  detail  how,  for  the  many-celled  individuals,  the  cells
are  just  as  much  a  power  whose  laws  must  be  respected  as
the  matter  for  the  eelis,  for  in  the  body  a  change  of  cells  just


344  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

as  much  takes  place  as  a  change  of  matter,  if  also  much
more  slowly,  &c.  The  essential  thing  is,  that  the  individua-
tion of  organic  life  takes  place  only  in  and  through  matter,
but  the  individuation  of  the  atoms  in  and  through  space
and  time.  In  all  higher  individuals  the  general  form
requires  a  content  or  matter  in  order  to  become  concrete ;
what  was  matter  for  the  individuals  of  higher  order  be-
comes for  those  of  the  lower  order  form.  Only  with  pure
matter  is  the  last  term  of  this  series  reached ;  only  here
does  the  typical  form  become  of  itself  concrete, — become
as  it  were  itself  matter  through  the  simple  artifice  of  fixa-
tion at  the  extended  point,  through  the  device  that  here
the  directions  of  force  all  intersect  at  one  and  the  same
point.  Since  the  atomic  forces  have  no  matter  lying  out-
side them  whereby  they  may  be  individualised,  but  only
their  place,  they  are  also  discriminated  (apart  from  the
difference  between  body  and  ether  atoms)  only  by  their
place,  which  is  just  their  sole  medium  individuationis  ;
higher  individuals,  on  the  other  hand,  which  have  matter
for  their  medium  individuationis,  find  also,  besides  the  dif-
ference of  the  occupied  place,  in  the  matter  taken  into
possession  by  them,  a  rich  field  for  individual  differences.

With  this  is  first  given  in  the  case  of  individuals  of
lower  order  the  possibility  of  an  individual  character,
and  to  this  we  must  pay  some  attention,  for  it  meets  us
at  all  stages  of  organic  life,  from  the  individual  character
of  the  simplest  cell  to  that  of  the  foundations  of  the
human  mind,  as  a  phenomenon  at  first  perplexing  for
monistic  principles.

2.  Individual  Character. — Concerning  human  character
there  are  two  extreme  opinions.  The  one  (Eousseau,
Helvetius,  &c.)  asserts  that  all  men  are  at  birth  equal,
i.e.,  devoid  of  an  individual  character;  that  their  mind
is  just  as  much  a  tabula  rasa  as  regards  character  as
regards  ideas,  and  that  it  only  acquires  the  one  as  the
other  by  external  impressions,  and  the  character  in  par-
ticular by  education  and  circumstances.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  345

The  other  view  (Schopenhauer)  asserts  that  character
is  unalterable ;  that  it  manifests  itself  indeed,  as  is  natural,
differently  through  different  external  opportunities,  e.g.,
at  different  periods  of  life,  but  in  its  essence  it  is  at
once  the  man's  inalienable  and  unchangeable  nature  and
foundation,  consequently  remains  the  same  from  birth  to
death.

Each  of  these  two  views  explains  a  part  of  the  facts
very  well,  is  closed,  however,  to  another  part  of  the
facts.  If  we  ask,  which  of  the  two  views  appears
metaphysically  more  acceptable,  the  remarkable  case
occurs  that  nothing  can  be  objected  to  the  view  of  the
French  naturalists  on  the  metaphysical  side,  while,  on
the  other  hand,  that  of  the  metaphysician  Schopenhauer,
who  assumes  the  establishment  of  character  by  a  reso-
lution taken  once  for  all  out  of  time,  can  hardly  stand  the
test  of  criticism  derived  from  his  own  principles.

Schopenhauer  himself  wishes  to  be  an  absolute  monist ;
if,  then,  the  will  of  the  world  is  in  its  essence  one ;  if,
further,  the  character  likewise,  according  to  his  own
assertion,  is  nothing  but  the  peculiarity  of  the  individual
will,  the  individuality  of  the  character  can  manifestly
only  be  conceived  as  possible  in  an  individualised
activity  of  the  universal  will,  but  not  as  directly  based
on  the  essential  nature  of  the  universal  will,  since  this
always  remains  universal.  How,  however,  the  activity
of  the  will  which  produces  character  is  to  be  thought
as  extra-temporal,  of  that  I  can  form  no  idea.  I  can
only  imagine  a  being,  but  not  its  activity,  as  out  of  time,
since  activity  at  once  supposes  time,  unless  one  also  as-
sumes as  possible  an  activity  in  zero-time,  in  which  case
it  is  in  the  moment  also  again  extinguished.  The  char-
acter, however,  that  is  to  live  through  the  life-period  of
the  individual  manifestly  requires  also  an  activity  of
the  universal  will,  which  lasts  just  as  long.  Otherwise
expressed,  the  doctrine  of  the  intelligible  individual
character is a contradiction to the monistic principle


346  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

a  contradiction  also  to  the  transcendent  ideality  of  space
and  time.  For  in  the  intelligible  the  principium  indi-
viduationis  is  wanting,  consequently  also  plurality  and
individuality,  consequently  also  the  many  individual  char-
acters. The  individual  character  pre-supposes  the  indi-
vidual, or  rather  individuals,  thus  plurality,  individuality;
in  short,  the  world  of  appearances :  like  this,  it  only  becomes
possible  through  time,  through  the  temporal  activity  of  the
Universal  Intelligible  Being.

If  this  is  now  the  state  of  the  case,  it  is,  in  the  first
place,  not  at  once  obvious  why,  if  the  characters  are  in
fact  so  different  among  one  another,  each  individual
should  during  the  duration  of  life,  i.e.,  the  whole  time
in  which  this  particular  activity  of  the  individual  will
exists,  remain  the  same,  and  not  rather  continually
change.

Much  more  plausible,  metaphysically,  is  the  hypothesis
of  the  French  rationalists,  that  only  typical  generic  char-
acters, but  not  individual  characters,  are  innate ;  that,
however,  through  alteration  of  the  character  in  different
ways,  the  individual  characters  are  gradually  fashioned.
On  this  assumption  we  come  to  terms  much  more  easily
with  the  all-unity  of  the  Universal  Being,  for  the  indi-
vidual variation  of  the  originally  similar  generic  character
might  then  be  referred  to  different  brain  impressions,  each
of  which  leaves  behind  a  permanent  change  in  the  brain,
which  brings  it  about  that  thenceforward  a  molecular
movement  in  the  same  sense  as  that  called  forth  by
those  impressions  more  easily  arises  than  one  of  a  totally
different  kind  (vol.  i.  pp.  33-34).  This  is  the  way  in
which  altogether  habit  becomes  a  power  in  special  appli-
cation to  character.  The  first  action  of  a  particular  kind
is  purely  decided  by  motives,  on  the  assumption  of  a
still  undetermined  character ;  in  what  mode  and  strength
these  come  to  the  man  depends  on  external  circumstances.
If,  however,  the  first  action  turns  out  in  a  particular  way,
for  the  next  similar  case  the  motives  which  act  in  the


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  347

direction  of  the  same  decision  as  before  have  attained  a
certain  imperceptible  advantage  over  the  opposite  motives,
which  is  heightened  in  every  decision  resulting  in  the
same  way.

In  this  way  it  comes  about  that  in  the  case  of  any
particular  individual  certain  motives  exert  a  greater,
others  a  less  effect,  than  on  the  average  typical  generic
character,  and  the  sum  of  all  these  tendencies  is  the  indivi-
dual character.

According  to  this  view,  consequently,  the  individual
character  arises  especially  by  an  individual  constitution
of  the  brain,  which  is  produced  by  former  impressions
conditioned  by  external  circumstances ;  for  habit  can
exercise  a  direct  influence  only  on  the  organ  of  conscious-
ness, not  on  the  Unconscious.  Nevertheless,  with  the
constitution  of  the  brain  the  kind  of  activity  also  changes
which  the  Unconscious  directs  upon  the  same;  for  this
changes  with  every  change  of  the  organism,  and  the  brain
is  one  of  the  most  important  parts  of  it.  The  Unconscious
usually  always  calls  forth  as  a  motive  in  the  brain  the  re-
action which  is  the  easiest ;  only  where  particularly  impor-
tant, especially  general  interests  are  at  stake  in  an  action,
may  we  suppose  that  it  takes  upon  itself  the  trouble  of
answering  with  another  than  this  easiest  reaction  on  the
stimulus  of  the  motive,  a  case  which  occurs  in  all  action
according  to  unconscious  purposes,  when  the  reaction
which  otherwise  would  directly  respond  to  the  motive  fails
to  take  place,  or  is  outbidden  by  another,  exclusively  con-
ditioned by  unconscious  intermediate  terms.

In  all  cases,  however,  where  the  Unconscious  has  no
such  considerable  interest  that  it  would  reward  it  to  replace
the  reaction  most  easily  occurring  by  another,  will  also
a  customary  change  of  this  easiest  cerebral  reaction  have
as  its  consequence  a  change  of  the  activity  of  the  Uncon-
scious. The  mode  of  this  activity  is,  however,  the  char-
acter itself, — as  we  said  before  (15.  Chap,  iv.),  man's  inmost
being. It  is  no  contradiction  that  this  character  lies  in


343  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  Unconscious,  and  yet  its  nature  is  conditioned  by  the
brain,  the  special  organ  of  consciousness ;  for  the  organ  of
consciousness,  together  with  all  its  molecular  relations,
which  must  be  regarded  as  latent  dispositions  to  certain
vibrations  of  this  or  that  kind,  lies  itself  so  much  beyond
all  consciousness,  that  between  its  material  function  and
the  conscious  idea  the  whole  complex  of  those  uncon-
scious psychical  functions  is  interposed  with  which  we
have  been  hitherto  occupied.  At  the  same  time,  however,
we  must  here  call  attention  to  the  circumstance  that  the
latent  dispositions  of  the  brain  are  by  no  means  the  sole
and  sufficient  cause,  but  only  one  of  the  co-operating
conditions  for  the  determination  of  the  idea  entering  into
consciousness,  or  of  the  will  to  act ;  for  they  alone  would
never  attain  any  psychical  effect,  but  the  spontaneity  of
the  Unconscious  borrows  only  from  them  a  determining
direction  for  the  manner  of  the  unfolding  of  its  activity,
to  which  it  is  not  so  far  bound  as  not  spontaneously  to
modify  it  for  higher  purposes.

From  this  consideration  it  follows  that  a  man,  even  if  he
were  horn  without  individual  character,  would  have  acquired
as  adult  an  individual  character  deviating  more  or  less
from  the  typical  generic  character.  If  this  man  now,
however,  begets  children,  we  know  that,  according  to  the
law  of  inheritance,  the  peculiar  dispositions  of  his  brain,
deviating  from  the  typical  human  brain,  pass  on  to  some
of  his  children  more  or  less  completely.  Then  is  such
child  born  with  these  latent  dispositions,  wdiich  condition
the  individual  character,  and  as  soon  as  it  comes  into
circumstances  where  these  dispositions  are  active,  its
innate  character  comes  to  the  front.  The  phenomena  of
reversion  in  the  paternal  and  the  maternal  line,  and  the
blending  of  such  qualities  handed  on  from  different  sides,
make  the  inquiry  very  difficult  in  the  individual  case
whence  the  different  qualities  of  an  innate  character
arise ;  yet  is  the  undeniable  fact  of  the  innate  character
only  thus  to  be  explained. Whether  the^i?^  man  had  an


MET  A  PHY  SIC  OF  THE UNCONSCIOUS.  349

individual  character  is  an  altogether  idle  question ;  his
general  character  was  indeed  his  individual  character,
since  as  the  first  individual  of  his  species  he  completely
represented  the  same.  According  to  the  theory  of  descent
expounded  in  the  last  chapter,  where  the  conception  of
kind  was  found  to  be  a  somewhat  fluent  one,  every  organic
individual  (accordingly  also  the  first  man)  occupies  a  place
in  a  series  of  organic  developments,  within  which  it  receives
from  its  immediate  ancestors  a  whole  treasury  of  etio-
logical peculiarities  as  its  inheritance,  which  on  its  part
it  again  bequeaths,  modified  by  the  impressions  of  its  life
(before  procreation),  to  its  descendants.

Every  human  being  accordingly  brings  the  main  part
of  his  character  with  him  into  the  world  ;  how  large  in
proportion  to  this  is  the  part  which  he  acquires  in  addition,
depends  on  the  uncommonness  and  abnornal  nature  of
the  circumstances  in  which  he  moves.  In  most  cases
the  habits  of  one  man's  life  do  not  suffice  to  produce  far-
reaching  changes  in  the  inherited  character.  Usually
the  acquired  part  of  character  is  confined  to  fresh  unim-
portant qualities,  or  the  strengthening  of  existing  ones,  or
the  weakening  of  others  by  disuse.  The  latter  takes  place
relatively  in  least  degree,  for  as  in  all  learning  the  most
difficult  is  the  forgetting  of  what  has  been  learnt,  so  of
all  changes  of  character  the  most  difficult  is  the  sup-
pression and  weakening  of  existing  qualities.  It  is  this
in  particular  that  caused  Schopenhauer  to  maintain  the
unalterablencss  of  character.1

Whoever  is  disposed  to  doubt  the  fact  of  inheritance
of  acquired,  qualities  of  character,  I  refer  to  examples  of
the  transmission  of  distinctly  acquired  qualities.  Nobody
will  doubt  that  the  tendencies  to  disease  hereditary  in
families  must,  if  one  retraces  the  pedigree,  be  found
in  an  ancestor  who  did  not  inherit  but  acquired  them.

1  For  the  fuller  discussion  of  this  ("Beitriige zur Charakterolocde,"

theory,  as  well  as  on  the  relation  of  and "Zum Verhiiltniss zwischen

will and  motive.  T  may  refer  to  my  Wille und Motiv")  in  the  Philos.

essay  on  Julius  Bahnsen's  writings  Monatshefte,  13d.  iv.  lift.  5.


35o  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

That  amputated  arms  and  legs  and  such-like  mutilations
are  commonly  not  inherited  proves  nothing  against  our
assertion,  for  they  are  too  rough  and  palpable  infractions
of  the  typical  idea  of  the  species  for  us  to  expect  their
realisation  in  the  child,  and  yet  even  here  there  are
remarkable  exceptions.  According  to  Hackel,  a  bull
whose  tail  had  accidentally  been  wrenched  off  engendered
nothing  but  tailless  calves,  and  by  continuous  cropping
of  the  tail  for  several  generations  a  tailless  breed  of  oxen
has  been  obtained.  Guinea-pigs,  who  had  been  made  epi-
leptic by  artificial  injuries  of  the  spinal  cord,  transmitted
this  disease  to  their  descendants.  In  general  acquired
qualities  are  more  easily  transmitted ;  the  less  they  derange
the  type  of  the  species,  the  more  minute  are  the  organic
changes  in  which  they  consist.  The  latter  is,  however,  in
high  degree  the  case  with  all  cerebral  dispositions  to  certain
nervous  vibrations.  It  is  a  well-known  experience  that  the
young  of  tame  animals  become  tamer  than  the  captured
young  of  savage  animals ;  that  of  domestic  animals,  again,
those  young  promise  to  be  most  tame,  most  tractable,
most  teachable,  &c,  that  spring  from  the  tamest,  most
tractable,  most  teachable  parents.  Any  taming  of  an
animal  in  a  particular  direction  affords  so  much  the  more
prospect  of  success  the  further  the  taming  of  the  parents
has  gone  in  the  same  direction.  Young  untamed  hunting-
dogs  from  superior  parents  act  in  the  chase,  almost  of  their
own  accord,  tolerably  correctly,  whilst  with  dogs  derived
from  parents  who  have  never  been  employed  for  hunting
training  for  the  chase  is  a  fearful  work.  Sons  of  gene-
rations of  horsemen  attain  a  good  seat  and  balance  at
the  very  first  trial.  All  these  are  examples  of  acquired
qualities  which  are  nevertheless  inherited.  They  belong
entirely  to  the  subject  of  our  inquiry,  individual  character
in  the  wider  sense,  i.e.,  to  the  sum  of  bodily  and  mental
marks  which  distinguish  an  individual  of  a  higher  order
(apart,  too,  from  his  spatial  distinction  through  the  occu-
pation of  place  and  the  possession  of  a  material  body)  from
all  other  individuals.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  351

If,  in  contemplating  human  individual  character,  we
have  hitherto  kept  in  view  the  narrower  sense  of  charac-
ter, this  happened  only  because  the  controversy  specially
turns  upon  the  latter,  not  as  if  the  difference  in  mental
tendencies,  faculties,  and  talents  were  not  just  as  essen-
tial in  the  establishment  of  individual  distinctions.  But
whoever  has  followed  with  approval  our  explanation  of
character  in  the  narrower  sense  will  at  once  see  that  the'
latter  distinction  can  far  less  be  conceived  as  arising  in
some  other  way,  and  a  repetition  of  the  explanation  would
be  quite  superfluous.  How  little  character  in  the  narrower
sense  is  separable  from  mental  endowment  follows  from
this :  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  possession  of  an  intellectual
disposition  or  capacity  is  always  accompanied  by  the  im-
pulse to  use  it ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  character  in
the  narrower  sense  always  includes  mental  endowment,
since  it  is  the  source  of  the  modes  of  reaction  of  the  will
on  different  descriptions  of  motives,  and  every  mode  of
reaction  becomes  a  special  one  only  because  the  volition
following  on  a  given  motive  possesses  a  special  ideal  con-
tent diverging  from  that  of  other  individuals.  If,  then,  the
character  is  innate  (i.e.,  inherited),  so  also  is  the  special
matter  of  thought  innate,  the  willing  of  wdiich  on  a  given
motive  makes  up  the  special  character  of  the  innate  mode
of  reaction.  A  mental  representation  can,  however,  only  be
innate  as  (inherited)  slumbering  idea  of  memory, i.e.,  as  mole-
cular cerebral  disposition  to  certain  kinds  of  vibration  (comp.
vol.  i.  pp.  33-34).  In  this  way,  e.g.,  the  behaviour  of  the
untrained  young  hunting-dog  (its  attention  to  game,  the
pricking  up  of  its  ears,  its  tendency  to  fetch  and  carry
thrown  objects),  is  to  be  explained  by  a  memory  inherited
from  its  ancestors,  in  such  a  way,  however,  that  the  ideas
(of  memory)  arising  on  suitable  occasion  from  inherited
cerebral  dispositions  do  not  become  conscious  as  memories,
but  only  make  their  appearance  as  the  content  of  the
acts  of  will  called  forth  by  those  occasions  (motives).
(Here  appears  a  special  confirmation  of  Plato's  explaua-


352  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

tion  of  learning  and  reminiscence  from  a  former  life,  except
that  the  validity  of  this  explanation  is  a  very  limited  one,
and  the  earlier  life  did  not  belong  to  the  same  individual.)
In  man,  too,  a  large  part  of  the  external  manners  and
peculiarities  of  deportment  of  movement  and  of  behaviour
is  composed  of  inherited  cerebral  dispositions  of  ances-
tors affected  with  the  same  peculiarities.  That  certain
mental  talents  are  hereditary  for  several  generations  in  a
family  is  proved  by  numerous  examples  (painters,  mathe-
maticians, astronomers,  actors,  generals,  &c.)  All  such
inherited  predispositions  contribute  their  quota,  however,
to  the  constitution  of  the  total  individuality  of  the  man
in  his  uniqueness.

I  only  add,  that,  whilst  the  character  in  the  narrower
sense  is  always  again  equalised  by  cross-breeding,  and  in
the  main  remains  at  about  the  same  level  in  the  human
race — although  the  contrasts  within  the  same  become
ever  more  abundantly  worked  out  and  more  sharply
drawn — that  the  mental  endowments  and  faculties  in  the
human  race  are  liable  to  a  progressive  enhancement.  This
is  owing  to  the  circumstance  that  the  various  characters,
provided  they  are  not  eccentric,  get  through  life  about
equally  well ;  but  the  man  endowed  with  higher  mental
capacities  has  always  the  advantage  in  the  struggle
for  existence.  Still  more  than  in  individuals  does  the
truth  of  this  contrast  appear  in  nations ;  the  character
of  the  latter  has  for  their  struggle  for  existence  but
very  small  importance  in  proportion  to  their  mental  fit-
ness and  education.  Now  the  open,  upright,  and  brave,
now  the  cunning,  treacherous,  and  cowardly,  now  the  slow
and  enduring,  now  the  ready  and  quickly  recovering,
now  the  morally  strict,  now  the  corrupt,  but  always  for
the  length  of  time  the  intellectually  higher  nation  comes  off
conqueror  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  which  accordingly
in  this  sphere  also  acts  on  the  individual  differences,  con-
firming and  enhancing  them,  whether  these  have  first  arisen
fortuitously  or unconsciously  in generation,  or  through


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  353

the  outward  circumstances  of  life  or  personal  conscious
industry  (comp.  Chap.  x.  pp.  10-13).

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  throw  our  glance  backward
"beyond  the  commencement  of  human  history  on  the
history  of  development  of  organic  life,  of  which  humanity
only  forms  the  ripest  fruit,  there  appears  an  advance
of  character  and  intelligence  preserving  a  perfectly  equal
pace.  We  must  ascend  tolerably  high  in  the  animal  king-
dom before  we  find  manifestations  of  an  intelligence
which  are  more  than  the  immediate  content  of  an  act  of
will  that  takes  its  direction  from  the  present  motive.
Hence  the  innate  modes  of  reaction  or  inherited  slumbering
ideas  of  memory  have  in  those  lower  mental  spheres  a
relatively  far  higher  importance  (vol.  i.  pp.  88-89).  But
as  the  Unconscious  creates  for  itself  in  these  cerebral  or
ganglionic  dispositions  mechanisms  for  the  easier  perform-
ance of  certain  voluntary  reactions  (e.g.,  the  tendency  of
bees  to  construct  hexagonal  cells),  so  very  well  may  some-
thing similar  take  place  also  with  abstract  human  ideas,
which  frequently  recurj  and  are  of  special  importance  for
the  organisation  of  thought  (e.g.,  mathematical  notions,
logical  categories,  forms  of  language,  &c.)  Should  we
have  recourse  for  describing  such  latent  dispositions  of
brain  to  the  term  "  innate  ideas,"  this  would  be  just  as
improper  a  designation  as  the  other,  "  slumbering  ideas  of
memory  "  (comp.  i.  301  note),  since  the-idea  or  presentation
is  something  added  to  the  material  function  through  the
ideal  reaction  of  the  Unconscious,  and  is  not  dispensed  with,
but  only  facilitated  by,  the  predisposition.  It  is  also  never
to  be  forgotten  that  even  if  the  hitherto  quite  unproved  sup-
position of  cerebral  dispositions  answering  to  the  concepts
in  question  is  correct,  yet  the  unconscious  psychical  func-
tion must  always  be  the  prius  of  the  first  formation  of  a
mode  of  vibration,  from  which  the  corresponding  disposi-
tion originally  arose,  and  that  further,  in  the  case  of  other
formal  elements  of  thought,  special  reasons  oppose  the
above  supposition  (comp.  i.  343  -344). But  at  all  events,

VOL.  II.  Z


354  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

one  may  regard  this  much  as  settled,  that  the  enhancing
of  conscious  intellect  in  the  history  of  development  of
organisation  and  of  humanity  depends  not  only  on  an
increase  of  the  intensive  and  extensive  capacity  and  faculty
of  combination,  but  also  on  an  enhancement  of  the
inherited  cerebral  dispositions  for  all  practically  useful
intellectual  directions  of  activity.  We  must  not  be
puzzled  by  the  circumstance  that  in  man  (and  even  in  the
anthropoid  apes)  the  embryonic  evolution  of  the  brain  goes
on  for  a  tolerably  long  time  afterbirth  (comp.  also  i.  352-

353).

The  same  results,  which  we  preferred  to  obtain  here  by
another  path,  we  might  of  course  have  also  got  if  we  had
directly  built  upon  the  results  of  the  last  two  chapters,
and  had  kept  in  view  the  different  causes  of  the  individual
variations  from  the  origin  of  the  cell.  The  agreement  of
the  goal  to  which  both  roads  lead  may  serve  for  corrobora-
tion. The  difference  which  would  still  have  to  be  adjusted
is  the  following  :—

In  lower  organisms,  where  the  variations  are  found
essentially  in  the  bodily  structure  and  the  organic  func-
tions, we  sought  the  origin  of  the  individual  variations
more  especially  in  that  period  of  life  which  opposes  the
least  resistance  to  modifications ;  in  Man,  however,  where
the  variations  of  the  mental  qualities  are  far  more  in-
teresting than  those  of  the  bodily,  we  must  of  course
seek  the  origin  of  these  variations  in  that  period  of  life
when  the  mental  functions  are  already  active,  thus  after
birth,  and  indeed  some  little  time  after  that ;  but  yet  not
in  the  later  periods  of  life,  when  the  development  is,  as  it
were,  indurated,  but  in  the  receptive  age  of  childhood  and
youth.

Essentially,  however,  the  source  of  individual  differences
is  the  same  in  the  whole  domain  of  organisation :  external
circumstances  condition  a  varying  structure  of  the  organ-
ism, and  the  varying  structure  of  the  organism  conditions


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  355

a  variation  of  the  activity  of  the  All-One  Unconscious
directed  to  it.  These  differences  are  added  to  that  already-
conditioned  by  the  diversity  of  the  material  substratum,
and  together  form  that  total  of  differences  which  secures
to  every  individual  his  peculiar  oneness.


( 356 )


XII.

THE SUPREME WISDOM OF THE UNCONSCIOUS AND THE
PERFECTION OF THE WORLD.

At  all  times,  and  among  all  peoples,  the  wisdom  of  the
Creator,  World-orderer,  or  World-governor  has  been  the
theme  of  admiration  and  of  praise.  None  of  all  the
peoples  who  in  the  course  of  history  have  attained  even  a
moderate  degree  of  civilisation,  whatever  may  have  been
their  other  opinions  in  religion  and  philosophy,  has  been
so  barbarous  as  not  to  have  attained  this  perception,  and  to
have  given  it  more  or  less  rapturous  expression.  Although
this  expression  must,  in  part,  be  laid  to  the  account  of  a
flattery  of  the  gods  with  self-interested  objects,  yet  at  all
events  the  greater  part  of  it  remains  the  announcement
of  a  genuine  conviction.  This  conviction  thrusts  itself
already  on  the  mind  of  the  child  as  soon  as  it  begins  to
comprehend  the  remarkable  combination  of  means  and
ends  in  Nature.  He  only  who  denies  natural  ends  can
close  his  mind  against  this  conviction ;  such  a  view  can,
however,  only  be  evolved  from  systematically  ordered
philosophical  abstractions,  since  it  runs  counter  to  the  first
natural  apprehension  of  the  phenomena  of  Nature.  Before
men  form  abstractions,  they  are  most  strongly  moved  by
the  power  of  the  concrete  case,  and  the  deeper  heads  of  a
childlike  nation  may  be  lost  in  astonishment  and  reverence
at  the  perception  of  a  striking  natural  purpose  even  in  a
single  case.  Thus  it  is  related  of  an  ancient  Brahmin  that
he  was  so  affected  with  astonishment  at  the  sight  of  an
insect-capturing  plant,  that,  forgetful  of  meat  and  drink,  he
remained  seated  before  it  till  the  end  of  his  life. — Then


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  357

when  man  arrives  at  inductions  from  the  concrete  instances,
it  is  such  propositions  as  "  Nature  does  nothing  in  vain,"
"  Nature  does  everything  for  the  best,"  "  Nature  employs
for  its  ends  the  simplest  means  and  ways,"  in  which
he  already  early  acknowledges  the  wisdom  ruling  in
Nature.  This  conviction  finds  its  strongest  rational  ex-
pression in  the  period  of  Leibniz  and  Wolf.  Although
Leibniz,  in  his  denial  of  evil  in  the  world,  overshot  the
mark,  although  a  great  part  of  the  extravagant  laudations
of  the  iterators  of  the  "  best  world "  was  only  hollow
bombastic  declamation,  which  merely  injured  their  case  in
the  eyes  of  posterity,  yet  a  core  of  truth  still  remains.

If  we  consider  the  matter  in  connection  with  our  former
conclusions,  it  will  take  somewhat  the  following  shape : —
According  to  C.  Chap,  i.,  the  Unconscious  can  never  err,
nay,  not  even  doubt  or  hesitate,  but  when  the  entrance  of
an  unconscious  idea  is  wanted,  it  follows  instantaneously,
implicity  enclosing  the  process  of  reflection  occupying
time  in  consciousness  in  the  one  moment  of  its  oc-
currence, and  undoubtedly  correctly,  since  all  the  data
that  can  in  any  way  be  taken  account  of  stand  at  the
command  of  the  Unconscious  in  virtue  of  its  absolute
clairvoyance,  and  indeed  always  and  momentarily  stand  at
command,  not  as  the  data  in  conscious  reflection  that  have
first  to  be  dragged  out  by  severe  meditation  from  memory
one  after  the  other,  and  still  oftener  are  entirely  want-
ing. All  future  ends,  the  nearest  as  the  most  distant,  and
all  considerations  of  the  possibility  of  intervention  in  this
or  that  wise,  act  together  in  this  manner  at  the  moment  of
origin  of  the  required  idea,  and  thus  it  happens  that  every
interposition  of  the  Unconscious  occurs  precisely  at  the
most  suitable  moment,  when  the  whole  purpose-frame  of
the  world  requires  it,  and  that  the  unconscious  idea  which
determines  the  manner  of  the  interposition  is  the  most
suitable  of  all  possible  ones  for  this  whole  machinery  of
ends.  Such  an  interposition  of  the  Unconscious  in  a
manner  adapted  to  the  peculiarity  of  the  case  according  to


358  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

our  investigations  takes  place  at  every  moment  in  the  de-
partment of  organic  life ;  both  the  preservation  consisting
in  a  replacement  of  the  used-up  material  by  nutrition  and
in  a  ceaseless  struggle  against  invading  disturbances,  as
well  as  the  plastic  energy  manifesting  itself  partly  in  a
re-creation  of  accidentally  destroyed  parts,  partly  in  an
enhancement  of  the  individual  form  of  life,  and  also  the
plastic  energy  becoming  reproduction  through  the  setting-
up  of  fresh  individuals ;  they  all  three  are  only  conceiv-
able as  a  ceaseless  ever-renewed  interposition  of  the  Un-
conscious at  every  single  point  of  the  organism  at  once  ;
each  of  these  interpositions  being  modified  according  to  the
particular  circumstances  to  which  it  refers,  and  each  uni-
formly keeping  in  view  the  important  ends  which  they  all
subserve  in  common.

Every  natural  cause  shows  itself  accordingly  as  means
for  the  great  ends  of  Providence ;  every  natural  cause  in
the  organic  realm  presents  itself  as  including  a  direct
participation  of  the  Unconscious.  But  these  continual
interpositions  of  Providence  are  themselves  natural,  i.e.,
not  arbitrary,  but  according  to  lata,  namely,  determined
with  logical  necessity  by  the  main  design  fixed  once  for  all,
and  the  circumstances  of  the  moment  in  which  the  inter-
position takes  places.

When  the  Christian  theory  emphatically  declares  that
God's  action  is  not  merely  a  guidance  on  the  large  scale,  but
that  his  immeasurable  greatness  is  most  remarkably  dis-
played in  this,  that  it  is  everywhere  active  in  the  smallest
detail,  this  view  is  only  confirmed  by  our  researches  in
regard  to  organic  life.

The  fitness  of  the  activity  of  the  Unconscious  is  not  how-
ever herewith  exhausted,  but  as  the  cleverness  of  a  person
is  much  more  to  be  commended,  who  relieves  himself  of
an  ever-recurring  work  by  the  construction  of  an  ingenious
machine,  than  that  of  one  who  himself  performs  the  same
in  each  single  case  with  the  utmost  skill,  so  must  we  also
far  more  admire  the  wisdom  of  the  Unconscious,  when  it


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  359

saves  itself  a  part  of  its  interposition  by  mechanical
arrangements  contrived  for  the  purpose  or  even  by  a
clever  use  of  external  circumstances  {e.g.,  of  the  struggle
for  existence,  or  of  the  existing  atomic  forces),  than  when
it  solves  its  problems  by  continuous  direct  interposition
in  the  most  excellent  fashion.  Examples  of  this  we  have
already  found  in  such  numbers  in  the  course  of  our  in-
quiries that  I  consider  a  special  reference,  to  say  nothing
of  enumeration,  to  be  scarcely  necessary  here.  The  most
comprehensive  and  important  of  all  these  mechanisms,
however,  is  the  system  of  the  physico-chemical  laws  of
Nature.

But  however  many  mechanical  contrivances  the  Uncon-
scious may  employ  to  facilitate  its  labour,  these  can  never
dispense  with  the  continual  direct  interposition,  for  they
fall  according  to  their  very  nature  into  a  class  of  homo-
geneous cases,  whilst  in  reality  each  case  is  distinct  from
the  other ;  the  best-contrived  mechanism  thus  always
leaves  over  a  remnant  of  work,  which  falls  afterwards  as
before  to  the  direct  activity  of  the  Unconscious,  and  which
consists  in  the  complete  adaptation  to  the  peculiar  nature
of  the  case.  As  soon  as  the  expenditure  of  force  needed
for  the  setting-up  of  a  machine  would  become  greater
than  the  saving  of  force  attained  by  the  mechanism  (which
is  the  case  in  all  combinations  of  circumstances  which  by
their  nature  occur  but  seldom,  or  where  for  other  reasons
a  mechanism  can  only  be  constructed  with  difficulty),
there  of  course  the  direct  activity  of  the  Unconscious
must  display  itself  without  hesitation.  Of  such  a  kind
are,  e.g.,  the  incursions  of  the  Unconscious  in  human
brains,  which  determine  and  guide  the  course  of  history
in  all  departments  of  civilisation  in  the  direction  of  the
goal  intended  by  the  Unconscious.

If,  now,  according  to  all  this,  we  cannot  avoid  ascribing
to  the  Unconscious,  first,  absolute  clairvoyance  (which
answers  to  the  theological  notion  of  omniscience) ;
secondlv,  an  infallible  and  indubitable logical  concate-


360  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

nation  of  the  included  data,  and  the  most  appropriate
action  at  the  most  suitable  moment  (in  theological  lan-
guage, omniscience  united  with  supreme  wisdom) ;  and,
thirdly,  a  ceaseless  intervention  at  every  moment  and  at
every  place  (theologically  omnipresence ;  one  must  add
omnipresence  at  all  times) ;  if  we  further  consider  that
at  the  first  moment  when  the  Unconscious  became  active,
thus  at  the  moment  of  the  first  positing  and  disposing  of
this  world,  just  the  same  ideal  world  of  all  possible  con-
ceptions, thus  also  of  all  possible  worlds  and  world-goals
and  world-ends  and  their  possible  means  rested  in  the
omniscient  Unconscious, — if,  lastly,  we  take  notice  that
the  chain  of  final  causality  cannot  from  its  very  nature
be  conceived  interminable  like  that  of  bare  causality,  but
must  terminate  in  a  final  end,  because  every  preceding  link
of  the  chain  in  final  causation  must  be  conditioned  by  the
following  ;  thus  a  completed  infinity  of  ends  would  have  to
be  included  in  the  idea,  and  yet  all  the  infinitely  nume-
rous final  terms  would  hover  as  impossible  in  the  air,
because  they  wait  in  vain  for  the  true  end  which  is  to
determine  them, — we  may  with  justice  confide  that  the
world  is  contrived  and  guided  as  wisely  and  well  as  is  pos-
sible ;  that  if,  among  all  possible  ideas,  that  of  a  better  world
could  have  lain  in  the  omniscient  Unconscious,  certainly  the
better  one  woidd  have  come  to  p>ass  instead  of  the  present  one  ;
that  the  unerring  Unconscious  neither  could  have  been
deceived  in  positing  this  world  as  to  its  value,  nor  that  in
the  omni-temporal  omnipresence  of  the  Unconscious  a
pause  in  its  action  could  ever  have  been  possible,  since
by  such  a  remissness  in  the  government  of  the  world
the  better-founded  world  would  have  of  itself  deteriorated.
Consequently,  we  can  only-  regard  the  assertion  of  Leibniz
as  perfectly  justified,  "  that  the  existing  world  is  the  best
of  all  possible  ones."  To  be  sure,  the  path  by  which  we
arrive  at  the  preponderating  probability  of  this  assump-
tion is  an  indirect  one.  To  aim  at  it  by  a  direct  path  is
indeed  a  manifest  impossibility,  for  how  could  we  compre-


MET  A  PHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  361

hend  the  infinitely  many  possible  worlds,  how  sufficiently
know  the  existing  ones,  to  compare  it  exhaustively  with
these  ?  It  was  certainly,  however,  possible  for  us  to  prove
the  existence  of  those  qualities  in  the  Unconscious  in
consequence  of  which  it  must  overlook  the  possible  worlds
with  a  glance  as  it  were,  and  of  these  worlds  realise  that
one  which  attains  the  most  rational  end  in  the  most
efficient  manner.

But  now,  although  in  this  respect  we  agree  with  Leibniz,
we  can  yet  by  no  means  approve  of  his  conception  of  evil,
which  he  has  adopted  from  Athanasius  and  Augustine,
and  which  consists  in  explaining  it  as  something  purely
privative,  or  a  less  degree  of  the  good.  Were  it  declared  to
be  something  negative  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  rightly
understood,  one  could  only  approve  this,  for  pleasure  and
pain,  good  and  evil  are  in  fact  related  as  positive  and
negative,  i.e.,  as  thesis  and  antithesis ;  only  it  is  to  be
remarked  that  the  negative  has  exactly  as  much  reality  as
the  positive;  that  it  is  purely  a  matter  of  the  subjective
point  of  view,  consequently,  as  this  is  self-chosen,  an
arbitrary  affair,  which  of  two  opposites  is  termed  posi-
tive, which  negative.

But  Leibniz  had  also  too  fine  and  too  mathematical  a
head  to  attempt,  from  the  negativity  of  evil,  to  show  its
unreality.  Since,  however,  he  is  only  concerned  to  prove
this  in  majorem  Dei  gloriam,  he  does  violence  to  the  facts,
and  ascribes  to  evil  not  a  negative,  but  a  merely  privative,
and  indeed  relatively  privative  character,  i.e.,  he  asserts  :
':  Evil  is  not  the  contrary,  but  the  defect  of  the  good,  and
indeed  only  absolute  evil  could  be  the  absolute  defect  of
the  good ;  every  relative  evil,  however,  is  only  a  relative
defect,  i.e.,  a  less  degree  of  the  good."

This  is  an  actual  untruth,  for  from  the  proposition  it
would  at  once  follow  that  I  must  prefer  the  union  of  the
evil  a  with  the  good  A  to  the  possession  0/  the  latter  alone,
since  indeed  the  evil  a  is  not  by  a  long  way  absolute  evil,
i.e.,  zero-evil,  but  only  a  less  degree  of  good,  thus  increases


362  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

the  degree  of  good  contained  in  A  by  its  own  good.  The
non  'plus  ultra  of  madness  would  be,  however,  according  to
this  view,  when  somebody  to  avoid  a  great  evil  foregoes  a
good,  and  the  man  who  at  the  same  time  suffers  in  the
extremest  degree  all  conceivable  bodily  and  mental  tor-
ments would  have  to  be  called  happy  even  at  this  moment
compared  with  the  insensitive  state  of  one  under  chloro-
form, to  say  nothing  of  the  peaceful  sleep  of  death.  To
such  unnatural  perversions  does  a  false  hypothesis  lead,
that  is  invented  for  the  sake  of  certain  foregone  con-
elusions.

If  we  inquire,  however,  concerning  the  motive  in  whose
interest  it  was  set  up,  it  is  remarkable  that  this  proves  to
be  mistaken,  and  therefore  the  whole  hypothesis  super-
fluous.

It  used  to  be  thought  that  there  lay  in  the  existence  of
a  real  evil  a  contradiction  to  the  perfect  world.  Much
mischief  has  at  all  times  been  wrought  by  the  word
"  perfect."  Already  Plato  (Timoeus,  7)  and  Aristotle  regarded
the  world  as  a  sphere,  and  the  astronomical  movements  as
circular,  because  the  sphere  is  the  most  perfect  form,  and
circular  movement  the  most  perfect  movement ;  and  in
old  manuals  of  artillery,  too,  one  may  read  that  balls
are  used  for  shot  because  the  ball  is  the  most  perfect
shape.

If  "  perfect "  has  any  sense  at  all,  it  can  only  be  "  the
best  of  its  kind,"  for  nothing  can  of  course  be  better  than
possible  ;  and  only  in  this  sense  would  one  have  grounds
for  regarding  the  world  as  possible.  But  now  another
notion  was  substituted  unperceived  for  that  of  perfect,
the  immaculate  or  faultless,  representing  an  absolute
value,  filling  the  possessor  with  untroubled  blessedness.
For  such  a  perfection  of  the  world,  however,  not  the  very
least  particle  of  evidence  was  offered ;  it  was  a  baseless
supposition,  the  result  of  confusion  of  ideas.  It  was
supposed  the  best  possible  must  also  be  good,  and  it
was  not  at  all  considered  that  the  best  'possibility  of  a


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  363

thing  does  not  say  anything  whatever  as  to  its  goodness ;
that  it  therefore  may  be  as  bad  as  one  can  imagine,  nay,
that  in  certain  cases  the  extreme  of  goodness  and  the
extreme  of  badness  is  precisely  identical,  namely,  when
only  one  case  is  possible,  or  even  when  all  possible  cases
equal  one  another  in  goodness.  Thus,  then,  because  this
world  is  the  best  possible,  it  may  still  be  thoroughly  bad,
and  since  the  best  possibility  says  nothing  at  all  as  to  its
goodness//the  strongest 2^00/  of  its  badness  can  never  become
an  objection  to  its  being  the  best  possible,  and  consequently
the  refutation  of  these  objections  never  can  become  a  sup-
port to  the  assertion  of  its  being  the  best  possible,  are  there-
fore in  this  respect  quite  superfluous.

Only  if  the  defects  and  worthlessness  exhibited  prove
either  the  pursuing  of  a  reprehensible  purpose  or  an
application  of  unsuitable  means  to  demonstrably  good
ends,  only  then  would  they  establish  a  doubt  of  the  all-
wisdom  of  the  Unconscious,  and  thereby  indirectly,  but
only  indirectly,  also  of  the  best  possible  character  of
the  world.  This  is,  however,  the  case  neither  as  regards
evil,  nor  as  regards  the  morally  bad,  nor  as  regards  the
pleasant  life  of  the  immoral  and  suffering  of  the  vir-
tuous ;  the  ends  to  which  these  circumstances  would  be
inappropriate  means  must  be  the  rule  of  universal
felicity,  morality,  and  justice.  As  regards  morality  and
justice  in  particular,  both  have  only  an  importance  from
the  point  of  view  of  individuation,  i.e.,  they  belong  only
to  the  world  of  appearance,  not  to  its  essence.  Indi-
viduation requires  as  fundamental  instinct  for  the  pre-
servation of  individuals,  thus  as  fundamental  condition
of  their  possibility,  egoism;  ivithout  egoism  no  indi-
viduation ;  with  egoism  necessarily  direct  injury  of
another  fur  one's  own  advantage,  i.e.,  wrong,  wickedness,
immorality,  &c.  All  this  is  therefore  a  necessary  una-
voidable evil  for  the  sake  of  individuation,  as  I  have
already  shown  in  Chap.  viii.  A.,  vol.  i.  p.  190,  in  the
department of organic arrangements, that certain in-


364  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

evitable  evil  conditions  must  be  borne  in  spite  of  their
inappropriateness  for  certain  ends,  because  their  avoid-
ance would  be  inappropriate  for  still  more  important
ends.

The  wisdom  of  the  Unconscious  is  therefore  only  to
be  admired,  which,  in  the  first  place,. has  placed  in  the
human  breast  as  counterpoise  to  the  necessary  egoism
those  other  instincts  like  compassion,  benevolence,  grati-
tude, feeling  of  approval  and  instinct  of  retaliation,
which  serve  for  the  averting  of  much  wrong  and  pro-
duction of  positive  benefits,  and  of  which  the  retaliatory
instinct  and  the  feeling  of  approval  in  conjunction  with
the  instinct  to  form  communities  produce,  after  the  trans-
ference of  retribution  to  the  state,  the  idea  of  justice,
which  now  on  its  part  makes  the  desistance  from  wrong
by  prospective  punishment  an  affair  of  egoism,  so  that
this  annuls  itself  by  its  own  excesses.

But  quite  apart  from  this  admirable  arrangement
morality  and  justice  are  always  only  ideas,  which  have
a  significance  merely  in  regard  to  the  behaviour  of  indi-
viduals to  one  another,  or  to  the  corporations  formed  of
individuals,  but  applied  to  the  inner  being  of  the  indi-
viduals, i.e.,  to  the  One  Unconscious — apart  from  the
form  of  its  manifestation — become  meaningless.  But  now,
since  the  All-One  can  in  the  last  resort  only  be  so  far
interested  in  the  world  as  it  takes  part  in  it,  inheres
in  it  with  its  essence,  and  since  the  form  of  the  manifesta-
tion is  indeed  an  important  point  of  transition,  but  apart
from  its  reaction  on  the  Essential  Being  itself  cannot
possibly  be  a  final  end ;  so  will  also  morality  and  justice
as  formal  ideas  only  be  capable  of  estimation  in  regard
to  their  teleological  value  for  the  Unconscious,  according
to  that  standard  which  exclusively  regards  their  effect  on
its  essence.  *

This,  however,  is  only  given  by  the  sum  of  pleasure  and
pain  produced  by  morality  and  immorality,  by  justice
and  injustice,  in  all  the  participating  individuals  acting


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  365

or  suffering,  for  these  only  are  altogether  real,  not  like
morality  and  justice,  mere  ideas  of  consciousness,  and  the
Unconscious  is  the  common  subject,  which  feels  them  in
all  the  different  consciousnesses.  Thus  not  in  itself  can
moral  action  have  a  value  for  the  Unconscious,  but  only
so  far  as  it  lessens  the  sum  of  the  sorrow  to  be  felt  by
it ;  not  in  itself,  also  not  for  the  sake  of  morality  can
justice  have  a  worth,  but  only  so  far  as  it  diminishes  the
woe  to  be  felt  by  diminution  of  immoral  action.  Although,
therefore,  morality  and  justice,  as  such,  cannot  be  ends  in
the  world-process,  they  might  well  be  so  for  the  sahe
of  happiness,  if  this,  as  an  object  directly  concerning  the
essence  of  the  Unconscious,  may  be  regarded  as  end,
which  might  well  be  supposed.  As  ends  in  such  rela-
tive sense,  however,  morality  and  justice  may  certainly
be  regarded  without  being  contradicted  by  the  facts,
since,  indeed,  the  already  mentioned  instincts,  but  especi-
ally the  ever-improving  administration  of  justice,  must
be  recognised  as  means  to  the  diminution  of  immoral
and  unjust  action.  They  must,  however,  entirely  lay  aside
their  claims  to  absolute  validity,  and  content  themselves
with  a  very  subordinate  relative  importance,  to  which
is  to  be  added  that,  as  immorality  is  an  unavoidable  evil,
without  which  no  individuation  is  possible,  so  the
demand  for  a  direct  divine  administration  of  justice  is  a
piece  of  theological  unreason,  which  for  the  sake  of  an
extremely  small  utility  would  continually  put  the  laws  of
the  world  out  of  joint.  Of  happiness,  i.e.,  the  greatest
possible  diminution  of  pain  and  the  greatest  possible
enhancement  of  pleasure,  one  would  certainly  think  that
it  must  be  something  affecting  the  essence  of  the  Un-
conscious itself,  altogether  real,  co  ipso  end,  especially  since
there  is  no  other  subject  for  the  feeling  of  pain  and  pleasure
than  the  one  Unconscious  ;  in  conformity  with  this  we
do  also,  in  fact,  see  a  number  of  preparations  taken  for,
the  warding  off  of  pain  and  the  enhancement  of  pleasure.
Just  as  little  can  we  deny  that  on  the  supposition  of


366  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

individuation  and  of  the  egoism  connected  therewith,  the
inevitable  necessity  of  pain  in  the  struggle  for  existence
and  in  the  death  of  the  individual  is  given ;  yet  we  find  a
number  of  facts  that  appear  inappropriate  as  regards
happiness,  and  only  become  intelligible  when  the  other
ends  which  they  serve,  e.g.,  perfection  of  consciousness,
&c.j  are  more  important  than  happiness ;  nay,  this  is  even
the  case  with  individuation  itself.  But  now  we  cannot  at
all  understand  how  there  should  be  an  end  that  could  take
precedence  of  happiness,  since  nothing  could  more  im-
mediately affect  the  essence  of  the  Unconscious  than  this.
"We  cannot  comprehend  how  there  could  be  anything  that
would  reward  a  sacrifice  of  happiness  except  the  prospect
of  a  higher  happiness,  or  that  could  repay  the  taking  on
oneself  of  a  pain  except  the  prospect  and  avoidance  of  a
greater  pain ;  otherwise  it  would  only  be  driving  the  teeth
into  one's  own  flesh.  If  then  happiness  is  actually  to  be
the  supreme  end,  there  can  be  only  such  sufferings  as
are  unavoidable,  in  order  to  attain  on  another  side,  or
in  a  later  stage  of  the  process,  a  so  much  higher  happi-
ness, or  at  least  to  obviate  still  greater,  more  extensive,  or
more  protracted  sufferings.  But  if  there  were  no  prospect  of
this,  the  existence  of  a  world-process,  or  of  a  world  at  all,
would  not  be  rationally  intelligible,  and  the  attainment  of
God  knows  what  other  ends  could  afford  no  rational  ground
for  the  assumption  of  a  pain  exceeding  the  pleasure.

Here  now  is  the  point  where  we  again  come  back  to
Leibniz,  for  it  wTould  indeed  be  too  surprising  if  the  con-
fusion of  ideas  between  the  perfect  world  as  test  possible,  and
the  perfect  world  as  altogether  good  and  faultless,  had  not,
in  the  case  of  so  fine  a  mind  as  Leibniz,  a  hidden  support
justifying  the  drift  of  the  "  Theodicy  "  in  a  certain  fashion.
This,  however,  is  certainly  discoverable ;  for  not,  as  is
asserted,  to  show  the  supreme  excellence  of  the  world  did
Leibniz  seek  to  enhance  its  worth  by  the  privative  cha-
racter of  evil  and  the  bad,  but  to  justify  the  Creator  on
account  of  his  creation.


METAPHYSIC  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  367

To  wit,  under  all  possible  worlds  the  case  is  not  included
that  no  world  be  created,  just  because  no  world  is  also
no  world,  thus  also  no  one  of  possible  worlds;  should  it
now  turn  out  that  the  existing  world  is  worse  than  none,
the  reproach  would  fall  on  the  Creator  why  he  at  all
created  it,  since  it  would  indeed  have  been  more  rational
to  create  none.  Then  would'  the  creation  as  such,  alto-
gether apart  from  hoiv  it  turned  out,  owe  its  origin  to  an
irrational  act,  and  one  would  have  then  the  choice  either
to  assume  that  the  Eeason  of  the  Creator  had  no  part  in
this  irrational  act,  and  that  only  the  task  fell  to  it  to
continue  and  carry  out  in  the  best  possible  manner  the
original  decision  made  without  its  participation ;  or,  how-
ever, to  grant  that  the  Wisdom  of  the  Creator,  unquestion-
able in  details,  committed  on  the  large  scale  a  fundamental
error,  and  consequently  became  perfectly  unfaithful  to
itself,  namely,  if  one  wishes  to  sustain  the  assertion  that
in  that  original  act  the  totality  of  the  Creator  participated,
thus  also  his  reason.  The  second  hypothesis  is  too  mon-
strous ;  how  could  the  Supreme  Wisdom  be  so  faithless  to
itself  as  just  to  bo  guilty  of  the  greatest  unreason  at  the
most  important  moment  ?  But  Leibniz  would  and  could
just  as  little  have  adopted  the  first  supposition,  because
he  recognised  no  plurality  of  attributes  in  God.  Con-
sequently it  only  remained  for  him  to  secure  himself  in
advance  against  the  possibility  that  this  world  could  have
turned  out  worse  than  none,  and  for  this  purpose  he  invented
the  theory  of  the  privative  character  of  evil.

We,  who  seek  before  all  to  maintain  an  unprejudiced
attitude  in  this  inquiry,  shall  in  the  next  chapter  try  to
solve  the  question  empirically  whether  this  world  is  to  be
preferred  or  postponed  to  its  non-existence.  Should  then
the  latter  be  the  result,  we  shall  not  seek  to  evade  the
consequence  that  the  existence  of  the  world  owes  its  origin
to  an  irrational  act,  shall  however  not  assume  that  Reason
itself  leas  suddenly  become  irrational  in  this  one  point,  but
that  this  act  was  only  consummated  without  reason,  because


368  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.

Ileason  had  no  part  in  it.  This  is  possible  to  us,  because
we  recognise  two  activities  in  the  Unconscious,  of  which
the  one,  the  will,  is  just  the  inherently  illogical  (not  anti-
logical,  but  ^-logical),  irrational.  As  we  have  already
found  that  all  real  existence  owes  its  origin  to  the  will,  it
would,  even  a  priori,  be  only  wonderful  if  this  existence
were  not  as  such  irrational. '

But  whatever  the  decision  may  be,  in  no  case  can  an
objection  be  drawn  from  it  to  the  all-wisdom  of  the  Un-
conscious, and  to  the  proposition  that  of  all  possible  worlds
the  existing  one  is  the  lest.


END OF VOL. II.
