mmm  ssk^bl  of  isiciE

UNIVESSiTY  OFMaS.


in  2016


THE


SYDENHAM  SOCIETY


INSTITUTED

MDCCCXLIII


LONDON


MDCCCXLVII,


PRINTED  BY


C.  AND  J,  ADLARD,


BARTHOI.OM1


Ct.OSK.


THE  WORKS


OF


WILLIAM  HAKVEY,  M.D.


MEMBER  OF  THE  ROYAL  COLLEGES  OF  PHYSICIANS  AND  SURGEONS  OF  ENGLAND,
CORRESPONDING  MEMBER  OF  THE  ROYAL  ACADEMY  OF  SCIENCES  OF
GOTTINGEN,  OF  THE  IMPERIAL  SOCIETY  OF  PHYSICIANS
AND  SURGEONS  OF  VIENNA,  AND  OF  THE  4,

NATIONAL  INSTITUTE  OF  AMERICA,

ETC.  ETC.


PHYSICIAN  TO  THE  KING,  PROFESSOR  OF  ANATOMY  AND  SURGERY
TO  THE  COLLEGE  OF  PHYSICIANS


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  LATIN


WITH


A LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR


BY


ROBERT  WILLIS,  M.D.


LONDON


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SYDENHAM  SOCIETY


MDCCCXLVII.


PREFACE.


I


When,  at  tlie  instance  of  the  governing  body  of  the
Sydenham  Society,  I undertook  to  edit  the  Works  of  the
immortal  Discoverer  of  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  in
English,  I believed  that  the  chief  of  these  Works  were
already  extant  in  our  language,  in  such  a shape  as  would
make  little  more  from  an  editor  necessary  than  a careful
revision  of  the  text.  I had  unwarily  adopted  the  idea,  very
gratuitously  originated  by  Aubrey,  that  Harvey  was  what  is
ealled  an  indifferent  scholar,  and  that  the  English  versions
of  his  writings  were  the  proper  originals,  the  Latin  versions
the  translations.  Having  access  to  the  handsome  edition  of
Harvey’s  Works  in  Latin,  revised  by  Drs.  Lawrence  and  Mark
Akenside,  and  published  by  the  College  of  Physicians  in  1766,
I had  always  referred  to  that  when  the  course  of  my  studies
led  me  to  consult  Harvey.  Of  the  English  versions,  or  any
other  edition,  I knew  little  or  nothing.  On  proceeding  to  my
new  duty  of  English  editor,  however,  I immediately  saw  that
the  masterwork  of  Harvey  on  the  Motions  of  the  Heart
and  Blood,  far  from  having  the  character  of  an  originally
English  writing,  must  have  been  rendered  into  English  by
one  hut  little  conversant  with  the  subject,  that  it  was  both
extremely  rebutting  in  point  of  style  and  full  of  egregious
errors,  and  that  nothing  short  of  an  entirely  new  translation
could  do  justice  to  this  admirable  treatise,  or  secure  for  it,  at
the  present  day,  the  attention  it  deserved.  Full  of  zeal,  and


VI


PREFACE.


making  of  my  task  a labour  of  love,  I had  soon  completed  a
new  translation  of  the  Exercises  on  the  Heart  and  Blood,
with  equal  pleasure  and  profit  to  myself.

The  work  on  Generation  came  next  under  review.  The
English  version  of  this  I had  heard  it  positively  asserted  was
the  original,  was  Harvey’s  own ; here  therefore  my  business  of
editor  would  properly  begin.  But  I had  not  gone  through
a couple  of  pages  of  the  text,  before  difficulties  like  those
already  experienced  met  me  again.  That  the  statement
above  referred  to  was  erroneous,  speedily  became  apparent ;
and  a little  inquiry  enabled  me  to  discover  that  the  English
version  of  the  Exercises  on  Generation  was  the  work  of  a
physician  named  Llewellen.  Though  not  incorrect  generally,
there  was,  nevertheless,  a great  deal  that  I wished  had  been
otherwise  rendei'ed;  and  then  the  scientific  and  professional
language  of  two  centuries  back  looked  strangely  when  exa-
mined by  the  eye,  and  had  an  unusual  sound  when  tried  upon
the  ear.  Only  anxious  to  present  to  my  brethren  in  the  most
appropriate  and  attractive  form  possible,  the  writings  of  him
who  had  still  met  me  in  his  Works  and  with  his  contem-
plative look  in  his  Portrait  as  a kind  of  divinity  in  medicine,
I even  girded  myself  up  for  the  long  and  laborious  enter-
prise of  translating  anew  into  our  mother  tongue  the  work
on  Generation,  and  at  length  achieved  my  task,  not  without
difficulty.

The  short  paper  on  the  Anatomy  of  Thomas  Parr  appears
in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  in  English ; but  it  stands
there  as  a translation ; and  having  now  translated  so  much
myself,  I even  thought  it  would  be  well  to  trauslate  that  also,
and  so  it  was  achieved.

The  Letters,  though  frequently  quoted,  have  never  ap-


PREFACE.


vii

peared  in  English  before.  They  will  be  found  both  highly
interesting  and  important.  To  render  them  was  a light  and
pleasant  task.  — In  a word^  the  English  reader  is  now  pre-
sented with  an  entirely  new  translation  of  the  writings  of
William  Harvey;  everything  of  our  illustrious  countryman
worthy  of  pubhcation  that  has  come  down  to  us,  being  here
included.^

The  reader  will  perceive  that  I have  abstained  from  anno-
tation and  commentary  in  the  course  of  my  labour.  The
purpose  of  the  Council  of  the  Sydenham  Society,  as  I under-
stood it,  was  to  give  the  Works  of  William  Harvey  in  English
now,  as  he  himself  gave  them  in  Latin  two  centuries  ago.
Entirely  approving  of  this  intention,  I felt  that  anything  like
corrections  of  statements  and  opinions,  which  could  so  readily
have  been  made  under  the  lights  of  modern  physiology,  would
have  been  impertinencies,  and  I therefore  abstained  from
them.  To  have  carried  out  and  completed  the  history  of
Harvey^s  two  grand  subjects,  would  also  have  been  easy;  but


’ A certain  MS.  of  Harvey’s,  frequently  referred  to  as  bearing  the  date  of  1616,
and  containing  the  treads  of  his  6rst  course  of  Lectures  at  the  College  of  Physi-
ciarrs  on  the  Heart  and  Blood,  is  not  now  in  existenee,  or  at  all  events  is  not  now
to  be  found.  At  the  present  time  there  are  only  two  MSS.  at  the  British  Museum
whieh  hear  Haiwey’s  name.  Of  these,  one  contains  notes  oir  the  Muscles,  Vessels,
and  Nerves,  and  on  the  Locomotion  of  Animals  ; the  other  may  be  characterized  as
a book  of  Receipts  or  Prescriptions,  and  though  partly  the  work  of  a contemporary,
contains  notes  of  cases  that  oceurred  after  Harvey’s  death.  The  former  MS.  is  as
certainly  in  Harvey’s  handwriting  as  the  latter  is  not.  In  Dr.  Lawrenee’s*  time
there  must  have  been  a third  MS.  entitled  ‘ De  Anatomia  Universa,’  and  it  was
here,  in  the  index  viz.  wliich  referred  to  the  principal  facts  in  the  anatomy  of  the
heart  and  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  that  the  dates  April  16,  17,  18,  an.  1616,
were  encountered.  Mr.  Pettigrew  (Portrait  GaUery,  vol.  iv,  Harvey,  p.  8),  with  the
assistance  of  Sir  Fred.  Madden,  made  search  for  this  MS.  a few  years  ago,  but  failed
to  meet  with  it.  A renewed  seareh  for  this  important  document  has  been  attended
with  no  better  success.


* Vide  his  Life  of  Harvey,  prefixed  to  the  edition  by  the  College  of  Physicians
p.  xxxi.


PREFACE.


viii

tliis  would  liave  been  almost  as  obviously  out  of  place  as  com-
mentary, and  the  inclination  towards  such  an  agreeable  under-
taking was  also  resisted.


It  appeared,  nevertheless,  that  the  Works  of  our  great
physiological  discoverer  might  be  advantageously  prefaced  by
some  account  of  his  Life  and  Writings.  One  great  motive  with
me,  indeed,  for  undertaking  the  office  of  Editor  of  the  Works
of  Harvey  was,  that  I might  thus  find  a fitting  opportunity  for
writing  his  life,  a task  which,  in  other  eircumstances  than
those  that  now  surround  me,  it  had  still  been  a cherished
purpose  with  me  to  perform.  The  Life  of  Harvey,  by  one
who  had  maintained  a familiarity  with  anatomy  and  physi-
ology, had  always  seemed  to  me  a desideratum  in  our  medical
literature.

This  portion  of  my  work  I have  only  achieved  with
an  effort,  and  at  something  like  disadvantage.  Inces-
santly engaged  by  night  and  by  day  in  the  laborious  and
responsible  duties  of  a country  practice,  enjoying  nothing  of
learned  leisure,  but  snatching  from  the  hours  that  should
rightfully  be  given  to  rest,  the  time  that  was  necessary  to
composition,  remote  too  from  means  of  information  which  I
must  nevertheless  send  for  and  consult — for  I could  not  draw
entirely  upon  memory  and  old  recollections  of  Hai’vey,  I have
been  much  longer  about  this  work  than  its  length  might  indi-
cate. In  spite  of  many  disadvantages,  however,  I trust  it  will
be  found  that  I have  included  everything  of  moment  in  my
narrative  of  the  life  of  Harvey ; that  I have  set  his  claims  to
the  whole  and  sole  merit  of  the  discovery  of  the  Cii’culation  in
a new  and  clearer  light  than  they  have  yet  been  seen  j and
that  I have  done  more  than  any  preceding  biographer  in  exhi-
biting his  moral  nature ; for  truly  he  was  as  noble  in  nature
as  he  was  intellectually  great.


PREFACE.


IX


The  Wills  of  great  men  have  always  been  looked  on  as
calculated  to  throw  light  on  the  character  of  their  authors ;
and  I have,  therefore,  great  pleasure  in  presenting  to  the
medical  world,  for  the  first  time,  the  Will  of  William  Harvey.

It  only  remains  for  me,  in  conclusion,  to  explain  and  to
apologise  for  the  long  delay  that  has  taken  place  in  the  ap-
pearance of  this  volume.  The  work  was,  in  fact,  nearly  three-
fourths  done  more  than  a year  ago ; but  with  the  change
made  in  my  sphere  of  action  about  that  time,  all  aptitude  for
literary  labour  seemed  to  forsake  me, — the  bow,  to  use  a com-
mon metaphor,  became  unbent,  and  for  a while  resisted  every
effort  to  string  it  anew  ; and,  then,  when  restrung  at  length,
how  constantly  was  I hindered  in  my  purpose  to  use  it  !
With  this  brief  explanation,  which  will  be  so  well  appreciated
by  the  great  majority  of  my  fellow  members  of  the  Sydenham
Society,  I confidently  throw  myself  on  their  kind  considera-
tion, and  pray  them  to  pardon  the  delay  that  has  occurred.


Barnes,  Surrey  ;
Feh.  \hth,  1847.


R.  WILLIS.


TABLE  OE  CONTENTS.


PAGE

Preface . . v

Life  of  William  Harvey  .........  xv

Last  Will  and  Testament  of  William  Harvey  .....  Ixxxv


AN  ANATOMICAL  DISQUISITION  ON  THE  MOTION  OF  THE
HEART  AND  BLOOD  IN  ANIMALS.

Dedieation 3

Introduction 9

HAPTER

I.  The  author’s  motives  for  writing 19

II.  Of  the  Motions  of  the  Heart,  as  seen  in  the  Dissection  of

Living  Animals  21

III.  Of  the  Motions  of  Arteries,  as  seen  in  the  Dissection  of

Living  Animals .24

IV.  Of  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  its  Auricles,  as  seen  in  the  Bodies

of  Living  Animals  ........  2G

V.  Of  the  Motion,  Action,  and  Office  of  the  Heart 31

VI.  Of  the  Course  by  which  the  Blood  is  carried  from  the  Vena  Cava
into  the  Arteries,  or  from  the  Right  into  the  Left  Ventricle  of

the  Heart 35

VII.  The  Blood  percolates  the  Substance  of  the  Lungs  from  the  Right
Ventricle  of  the  Heart  into  the  Pulmonary  Veins  and  Left
Ventricle  40


CONTENTS.


xii

CHAPTER  PAGE

VIII.  Of  the  Quantity  of  Blood  passing  through  the  Heart  from  the
Veins  to  the  Arteries ; and  of  the  Circular  Motion  of  the

Biood 45

IX.  That  there  is  a Circulation  of  the  Blood  is  confirmed  from  the

first  proposition  .........  48

X.  The  First  Position : of  the  Quantity  of  Biood  passing  from  the
Veins  to  the  Arteries.  And  that  there  is  a Circuit  of  the
Blood,  freed  from  objections,  and  farther  confirmed  hy  Expe-
riment 52

XI.  Tlie  Second  Position  is  demonstrated  . . . • . .54

XII.  That  there  is  a Circulation  of  the  Blood  is  shown  from  the

Second  Position  demonstrated  ......  60

XIII.  The  Third  Position  is  confirmed : and  the  Circulation  of  the

Blood  is  demonstrated  from  it  . . . . . . .62

XIV.  Conclusion  of  the  Demonstration  of  the  Circulation  ...  68

XV.  The  Circulation  of  the  Blood  is  further  confirmed  hy  probable

reasons  ...........  ib.

XVI.  The  Circulation  of  the  Blood  is  further  proved  from  certain

consequences  .........  71

XVII.  The  Motion  and  Circulation  of  the  Blood  are  confirmed  from  the

particulars  apparent  in  the  Structui-e  of  the  Heart,  and  from
those  things  which  Dissection  unfolds  . . . . .75


THE  FIRST  ANATOMICAL  DISQUISITION  ON  THE  CIRCUL.\-

TION  OF  THE  BLOOD,  ADDRESSED  TO  JOHN  RIOLAN  . 89

A SECOND  DISQUISITION  TO  JOHN  RIOLAN;  IN  WHICH
MANY  OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  CIRCUL.4.TION  OF  THE  BLOOD
ARE  REFUTED 109


CONTENTS.


xiii


ANATOMICAL  EXERCISES  ON  THE  GENERATION  OF  ANLMALS  ; TO
WHICH  ARE  ADDED,  ESSAYS  ON  PARTURITION  ; ON  THE  MEM-
BRANES, AND  FLUIDS  OF  THE  UTERUS ; AND  ON  CONCEPTION.

PAGE

Dedication  ............  145

Introduction  .....  ....  151

Of  the  manner  and  order  of  acquiring  knowledge  . . . .154

Of  the  same  matters,  according  to  Aristotle  . . 158

Of  the  method  to  he  pursued  in  studying  Generation  . .163

ON  ANIMAL  GENERATION.

Wherefore  we  begin  with  the  history  of  the  hen’s  egg  . . . 169

Of  the  seat  of  generation  171

Of  the  upper  part  of  the  hen’s  uterus,  or  the  ovary  . . . 172

Of  the  infundibulum  . . . . . . . . . .179

Of  the  external  portion  of  the  uterus  of  the  eommon  fowl  . . . 180

Of  the  uterus  of  the  fowl  ..........  190

Of  the  abdomen  of  the  common  fowl  and  of  other  birds  . . 195

Of  the  situation  and  structure  of  the  remaining  parts  of  the  fowl’s  uterus  . 198

Of  the  extrusion  of  the  egg,  or  parturition  of  the  fowl,  in  general  . . 201

Of  the  inerease  and  nutrition  of  the  egg  .......  202

Of  the  covering  or  shell  of  the  egg  .......  204

Of  the  remaining  parts  of  the  egg  . . . . . .211

Of  the  diversities  of  eggs  . . . . . . . . . 216

Of  the  production  of  the  chick  from  the  egg  of  the  hen  ....  225

The  first  examination  of  the  egg  ; or  of  the  effect  of  the  first  day’s  incu-
bation upon  the  egg 228

Second  inspection  of  the  egg  .........  232

The  third  inspection  of  the  egg  ........  234

The  fourth  inspeetion  of  the  egg 243

The  fifth  inspection  of  the  egg  ........  252

The  sixth  inspection  ..........  256

The  inspection  after  the  tenth  day  .......  257

The  inspection  after  the  fourteenth  day  .......  259

Of  the  exclusion  of  the  chiek,  or  the  birth  from  the  egg  . . . 264


XIV


CONTENTS.


PAGE

Of  twin-bearing  eggs  ..........  268

Certain  deductions  from  the  preceding  history  of  the  egg  . . . 270

Of  the  nature  of  the  egg  .........  ib.

The  egg  is  not  the  product  of  the  uterus,  but  of  the  vital  principle  . • 279

The  egg  is  not  produced  without  the  hen  284

Of  the  manner,  according  to  Aristotle,  in  which  a perfect  and  fruitful  egg

is  produced  by  the  male  and  female  fowl  . . . . 287

Of  the  uses  of  this  disquisition  on  fecundity  291

The  egg  is  not  produced  by  the  cock  and  hen  in  the  way  Aristotle  would

have  it  ....  293

Nor  in  the  manner  imagined  by  physicians  294

The  male  and  the  female  are  alike  efficient  in  the  business  of  generation  . 296

Of  the  matter  of  the  egg,  in  opposition  to  the  Aristotelians  and  the  medical

writers  ..........  . 297

In  how  far  is  the  fowl  efficient  in  the  generation  of  the  egg,  according  to

Aristotle  ? And  wherefore  is  the  concurrence  of  the  male  required  ? 300

The  perfect  hen’s  egg  is  of  two  colours  .......  303

Of  the  manner  in  which  the  egg  is  increased  by  the  albumen  . . . 305

Of  what  the  cock  and  hen  severally  contribute  to  the  production  of

the  egg 307

Of  the  cock  and  the  particulars  most  remarkable  in  his  constitution  . 309

Of  the  hen  ............  313

Of  the  sense  in  which  the  hen  may  be  called  the  “ prime  efficient and  of

her  parturition  . . . 318

Of  the  manner  in  wliich  the  generation  of  the  chick  takes  place  from  the  egg  . 323

In  how  many  ways  the  chick  may  be  said  to  be  formed  from  the  egg  . 325

Fabricius  is  mistaken  with  regard  to  the  matter  of  the  generation  of  the

chick  in  ovo 327

What  is  the  material  of  the  chick,  and  how  it  is  formed  in  the  egg  . 333

Of  the  efficient  cause  of  the  generation  of  the  chick  and  foetus  . . . 340

Of  the  manner  in  which  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick  acts,  according  to

Aristotle  344

The  opinion  of  Fabricius  on  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick  is  refuted  . • 350

The  inquiry  into  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick  is  one  of  great  difficulty  . 355

Of  the  efficient  cause  of  animals,  and  its  conditions  .....  360

Of  the  order  of  generation  ; and,  first,  of  the  primary  genital  particle  . 372

Of  the  blood  as  prime  element  in  the  body 379

Of  the  inferences  deducible  from  the  course  of  the  umbilical  vessel  in

the  egg 392


CONTENTS.  XV

PAGE

Of  the  order  of  the  parts  in  generation  from  an  egg,  according  to

Fahricius  . 397

Of  the  order  of  the  parts  according  to  Aristotle  . . . . . 407

Of  the  order  of  the  parts  in  generation  as  it  appears  from  observation  . . 414

Of  certain  paradoxes  and  problems  to  be  considered  in  connexion  with  this

subject 423

Of  the  nutrition  of  the  chick  in  ovo 434

Of  the  uses  of  the  entire  egg 442

Of  the  uses  of  the  yelk  and  albumen  .......  444

Of  the  uses  of  the  other  parts  of  the  egg  ......  454

An  egg  is  the  common  origin  of  all  animals  ......  456

Of  the  generation  of  viviparous  animals 461

The  generation  of  viviparous  animals  in  general  is  illustrated  from  the

history  of  that  of  the  hind  and  doe,  and  the  reason  of  this  selection  . 466

Of  the  uterus  of  the  hind  and  doe  . . . . . . . 467

Of  the  intercourse  of  the  hind  and  doe  . . . . . . .474

Of  the  constitution  or  change  that  takes  place  in  the  uterus  of  the  deer  in

the  course  of  the  month  of  September  ......  476

Of  what  takes  place  in  the  month  of  October  . . . . . .478

Of  what  takes  place  in  the  uterus  of  the  doe  during  the  month  of

November 482

Of  the  conception  of  the  deer  in  the  course  of  the  month  of  December  . 492

Of  the  innate  heat  ..........  501

Of  the  primigenial  moisture  . . . . . . . . .513

ON  PARTURITION 521

OF  THE  UTERINE  MEMBRANES  AND  HUMOURS  . . . .551

Of  the  Humours 557

Of  the  Membranes 560

Of  the  Placenta 563

Of  the  Acetabula 566

Of  the  Umbilical  Cord 567

ON  CONCEPTION ....  573

ANATOMICAL  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  BODY  OF  THOMAS  PARR  589


VI


CONTENTS.


LETTERS.


To  Caspar  Hofmann,  m.d.  ........

To  Paul  Marquard  Siegel,  of  Hamburg  .......

To  the  very  excellent  John  Nardi,  of  Florence  .....

In  reply  to  R.  Morison,  m.d.,  of  Paris  .......

To  the  most  exceUent  and  learned  John  Nardi,  of  Florence  .

To  John  Daniel  Horst,  principal  Physician  of  Hesse-Darmstadt
To  the  distinguished  and  learned  John  Dan.  Horst,  principal  Physician  at
the  Court  of  Hesse-Darmstadt  ......

To  the  very  learned  John  Nardi,  of  Florence,  a man  distinguished  alike  for
his  virtues,  life,  and  erudition  .......

To  the  distinguished  and  accomphshed  John  Vlackveld,  Physician  of
Harlem  ...........


PAGE

593

596

603

604
610
612

613

615

616


THE  LITE  OF  WILLIAM  HARVEY,  M.D.


William  Harvey,  the  immortal  discoverer  of  the  Circu-
lation of  the  Blood,  was  the  eldest  son  of  Thomas  Harvey  and
Joan  Halke,  of  Folkstone,  in  Kent,  where  he  was  horn  on  the
1st  of  April,  1578.^  Of  the  parents  of  Harvey,  little  is
known.  His  father,  in  our  printed  accounts,  is  generally  de-
signated Gentleman,^  and  must  have  been  in  easy  circum-
stances ; inasmuch  as  he  had  a numerous  family,  consisting
of  seven  sons  and  two  daughters,  all  the  males  of  which  he  felt
himself  competent  to  launch  upon  life  in  courses  that  imply
the  possession  of  money  wealth.  William,  the  first-born,
adopted  the  profession  of  physic.  Five  of  his  brothers, —
Thomas,  Daniel,  Eliab,  Michael,  and  Matthew — were  mer-
chants, and  not  merchants  in  a small  and  niggardly  way —
non  tenues  et  sordid!,  as  Dr.  Lawrence  has  it  in  his  Life  of
Harvey,^  but  of  weight  and  substance  — magni  et  copiosi,
trading  especially  with  Turkey  or  the  Levant,  then  the  main
channel  through  which  the  wealth  of  the  East  flowed  into
Europe.  The  Harveys  were  undoubtedly  men  of  considera-
tion in  the  city  of  London,  and  several  of  them,  in  the  end,

* The  birthday  in  some  of  the  lives  is  stated  to  be  the  2d  of  April,  for  no  better
reason  apparently  than  that  All-fools’  Day  should  not  lose  its  character  by  giving
birth  to  a great  man.  William  Harvey,  I believe,  was  born  on  the  1st  of  April.

“ In  the  register  of  William  Haiwey’s  matriculation  at  Cambridge  liis  father  is
styled  Yeoman  Cantianus — Kentish  yeoman.

^ Prefixed  to  the  Latin  edition  of  Harvey’s  Works  published  by  the  Royal
College  of  Physicians,  in  two  vols.  4to,  1766.


b


xviii  THE  LIFE  OF  HARYEY.

became  possessed  of  the  most  ample  independent  fortunes.^
The  son,  whose  name  does  not  appear  in  the  list  given  above,
was  John,  the  immediate  junior  to  William.  He,  too,  was  a
man  of  note  in  his  day,  having  been  one  of  the  King’s  receivers
for  Lincolnshire,  having  sat  as  member  of  parliament  for  Hythe,
and  for  some  time  held  the  office  of  King’s  footman.  Of  the
two  sisters — Sarah  died  young ; of  the  fate  of  Anne,  or  Amy,
nothing  is  known.

Great  men  seem,  in  almost  all  authenticated  instances,  to
Jiave  had  noble-minded  women  for  their  mothers.  We  have
not  a word  of  his  age  or  generation  to  assist  us  in  forming  an
estimate  of  Harvey’s  male  progenitor ; but  the  inscription  on
his  mother’s  monumental  tablet,  in  Folkstone  church,  assures
us  that  she,  at  least,  was  a woman  of  such  mark  and  likeli-
hood, that  it  was  held  due  to  her  memory  to  leave  her  moral
portrait  to  posterity  in  these  beautiful  words,  penned,  it  may
be,  by  her  illusti’ious  eldest  son:

“A.  D.  1605,  Nov.  8th,  dyed  in  y'  50th  yeere  of  her  age,

Joan,  Wife  of  Tho  : Harvey.  Mother  of  7 Sones  & 2 Daughters.

A Godly  harmles  Woman  : A chaste  loveing  Wife :

A charitable  quiet  Neighbour  : A co'fortable  frendly  Matron :

A p'ovideut  diligent  Huswyfe  : A careful  te'der-harted  Mother.

Deere  to  her  Husband ; Reverensed  of  her  Children :

Beloved  of  her  Neighbours  : Elected  of  God.

Whose  Soule  Rest  in  Heaven  : her  Body  in  this  Grave :

To  Her  a Happy  Advantage : to  Hers  an  Unhappy  Loss.”

‘ To  show  the  esteem  in  which  the  Brothers  Harvey  were  held,  I may  mention
among  other  things  that  Ludovic  Roberts  dedicates  his  excellent  and  comprehensive
work  entitled  ‘ The  Merchant’s  Mapp  of  Commerce  ’ (Folio,  London,  1638)  to  “ The
thrice  worthy  and  worshipful  William  Harvey,  Dr.  of  Physic,  John  Harvey,  Esq.,
Daniel  Harvey,  Mercht.,  Michael  Harvey,  ilercht.,  Mathew  Harvey,  Mercht.,  Bre-
thren, and  John  Harvey,  Mercht.,  onely  sonne  to  Mr.  Thomas  Han  ey,  Mercht.,  de-
ceased.” The  dedication  is  quaint,  in  the  spirit  of  the  times,  but  full  of  right-minded-
ness, respectfulness,  and  love  for  his  former  masters  and  present  friends,  in  which
relations  the  Harveys  stood  to  Roberts.  Thomas  Harvey  died  in  1622,  as  appears
by  his  monumental  tablet  in  St.  Peter-le-Poore’s  church,  in  the  city  of  London .
Eliab  and  Daniel  lived  rich  and  respected,  the  former  near  Chigwell,  co.  Essex,  the
latter  at  Combe,  near  Croydon,  co.  Surrey.  Michael  Hai'vey  retired  to  Longford,
co.  Essex.  Matthew  Harvey  died  in  London.


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.


XIX


Epitaphs  may  not  always  be  authorities  implicitly  to  be
relied  on;  but  we  unhesitatingly  accept  of  everything  to  the
credit  of  William  Harvey’s  mother  as  a portion  of  oui’  faith.

At  ten  years  of  age,  Harvey  was  put  to  the  grammar
school  of  Canterbury^  having,  doubtless,  ah’eady  imbibed  the
rudiments  of  his  English  education  at  home  under  the  eye  of
his  excellent  mother.  In  the  grammar  school  of  Canterbury
he  was,  of  course,  initiated  into  a knowledge  of  the  Latin  and
Greek  languages — the  routine  practice  then  as  now ; and
there  he  seems  to  have  remained  until  he  was  about  fifteen
years  of  age.  At  sixteen  he  was  removed  to  Caius-Gonvil
College,  Cambridge,^  where  he  spent  from  three  to  four  years
in  the  study  of  classics,  dialectics,  and  physics,  such  discipline
being  held  peculiarly  calculated  to  fit  the  mind  of  the  future
physician  for  entering  on  the  study  of  the  difficult  science  of
medicine.  At  nineteen  (1597)  he  took  his  degree  of  B.A.
aud  quitted  the  University.  Cambridge,  in  Harvey’s  time,  was
a school  of  logic  and  divinity  rather  than  of  physic.  Then,  even
as  at  the  present  day,  the  student  of  physic  obtained  the  principal
part  of  his  medical  education  from  another  than  his  alma  mater.
In  the  16th  and  1 7th  centuries,  France  and  Italy  boasted
medical  schools  of  higher  repute  than  any  in  Europe  ; and
to  one  or  other  of  these  must  the  young  Englishman  who
dedicated  himself  to  physic  repair,  in  order  to  furnish  him-
self with  the  lore  that  was  indispensable  in  his  profession.
Harvey  chose  Italy ; and  Padua,  about  the  year  1598,  number-
ing such  men  as  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente,  Julius  Casserius,
aud  Jo.  Thomas  Minadous  among  its  professors,  Harvey’s
preference  of  that  school  was  well  founded.  There,  then,  it
was,  under  these  and  other  able  masters,  that  our  Harvey


' “ Gul.  Harvey,  Filius  ThomEe  Harvey,  Yeoman  Cantianus,  ex  Oppido  Folkston,
educatus  in  Ludo  Literario  Cantuar. ; natus  annos  16,  admissus  pensionarius  minor
in  commeatum  scholarium  ultimo  die  Mai,  1593.”  (Regist.  Coll.  Caii  Cantab.  1593.)


XX


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


drank  in  the  elementary  knowledge  which  served  him  as  a
foundation  for  that  induction  which  has  made  his  name  im-
mortal ; for  without  detracting  from  the  glory  of  Harvey,  hut
merely  in  recognizing  the  means  to  an  end,  we  may  admit  that,
but  for  the  lessons  of  his  master,  Eabricius,  Haiwey  might
have  passed  through  life,  not  unnoticed,  indeed, — for  such  as
Harvey  was  in  himself,  he  must  still  have  been  remarkable, — -
but  his  name  unconnected  with  one  of  the  most  admirable
and  useful  inferences  ever  given  to  the  world.

Having  passed  fiA'e  years  at  Padua,  Haiwey,  then  in  the
twenty-fourth  year  of  his  age  (1602),  finally  obtained  his  di-
ploma as  doctor  of  physic,  with  licence  to  practise  and  to  teach
arts  and  medicine  in  every  land  and  seat  of  learning.  Having
returned  to  England  in  the  course  of  the  same  year,  and  sub-
mitted to  the  requisite  forms,  he  also  received  his  doctor’s  degree
from  his  original  University  of  Cambridge ; and  then  coming
to  London,  and  taking  to  himself  a wife  in  his  six  and  twentieth
year,  he  entered  on  the  practice  of  his  profession.

History  is  all  but  silent  in  regard  to  the  woman  of  our
great  anatomist’s  choice.  We  only  know  that  she  was  the
daughter  of  a physician  of  the  day.  Dr.  Lancelot  Browne,  and
that  Harvey’s  union  with  her  proved  childless.  He  himself
mentions  his  wife  incidentally  as  haiing  a remarkable  pet
parrot,  Avhicli  must  also,  if  we  may  infer  so  much  from  the
pains  he  takes  in  specifying  its  various  habits  and  accomplish-
ments, have  been  a particular  favorite  of  his  own.^

In  1604,  Harvey  joined  the  College  of  Physicians,  his  name
appearing  on  the  roU  of  candidates  for  the  fellowship  in  that
year ; and  three  jmars  afterwai’ds,  1607,  the  term  of  his  pro-

* Vide  On  Generation,  p.  186.  That  Harvey  outlived  his  wife  is  certain  from  his
Will,  in  which  she  is  affectionately  mentioned  as  his  “ deare  deceased  loving  wife.”
She  must  have  been  alive  in  1645,  the  year  in  which  Harvey’s  brother  John  died,
and  left  her  £50.


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.


XXI


bation  having  passed,  be  was  duly  admitted  to  tbe  distinction
to  which  he  aspired.

We  do  not  now  lose  sight  of  Harvey  for  any  length  of  time  :
for  a number  of  years,  in  the  beginning  of  his  career,  he  was
probably  occupied,  like  young  physicians  of  the  present  day,
among  the  poor  in  circumstance  and  afflicted  in  body,  taking  vast
pains  without  prospect  of  pecuniary  reward,  but  actuated  by  the
ennobling  sense  of  lightening  the  sum  of  human  misery,  and
carried  away,  uncaring  personal  respects,  by  that  ardent  love  of
his  profession  which  distinguishes  every  true  votary  of  the  art
medical.  Harvey,  however,  had  not  only  zeal,  talents,  and
accomplishments ; he  had,  what  was  no  less  needful  to  success  :
powerful  friends,  united  brothers,  with  the  will  and  the  ability
to  help  him  forward  in  the  career  he  had  chosen.

In  the  beginning  of  1609,  he  made  suit  for  the  reversion
of  the  offlce  of  physician  to  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital,  then
held  by  Dr.  Wilkinson,  and  backing  his  suit  by  such  powerful
missives  as  the  king^s  letters  recommendatory  to  the  governors
of  the  house,  and  farther,  producing  testimonials  of  compe-
tency from  Dr.  Adkinson,  President  of  the  College  of  Physi-
cians, and  others,  his  petition  was  granted,  and  he  was
regularly  chosen  physician  in  future  of  St.  Bartholomew's
Hospital.  Dr.  Wilkinson  haring  died  in  the  course  of  the
year,  Harvey  was  first  appointed  to  discharge  the  physician^s
duties  ad  interim,  and  by  and  by  he  was  formally  elected  to
the  vacant  offlce,  14th  October,  1609.

In  his  new  position  Harvey  must  have  found  ample  scope
for  acquiring  tact  and  readiness  in  the  practical  details  of  his
profession;  though  St.  Bartholomew’s  Hospital  in  his  day
appears  to  have  borne  a nearer  resemblance  to  the  dispensary
of  these  times  than  to  the  hospital  as  we  now  understand  the
term.  Harvey  was  now  in  his  thirty-second  year,  and,  brought
before  the  public  at  so  suitable  an  age,  in  an  offlce  of  such
responsibility,  he  must  soon  have  risen  into  eminence  as  a


XXll


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


physician  and  come  into  practice.  Harv'ey,  indeed,  appears
subsequently  to  have  been  physician  to  many  of  the  most  dis-
tinguished men  of  his  age,  among  others  to  the  Lord  Chan-
cellor Bacon,  to  Thomas  Howard,  Earl  of  Arundel,  &c.

In  the  year  1615,  Harvey,  then  in  the  thirty-seventh  year  of
his  age,  was  happily  chosen  to  deliver  the  lectures  on  anatomy
and  surgery  at  the  College  of  Physicians,  fmmded  by  Dr.
Richard  Caldwal,  and  it  is  generally  allowed  that  in  the  very
first  course  he  gave,  which  commenced  in  the  month  of  April
of  the  following  year,  he  presented  a detailed  exposition  of
the  views  concerning  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  which  have
made  his  name  immortal.  Long  years  had  indeed  been
lahouinng  at  the  birth  which  then  first  saw  the  light ; cmlized
Europe,  ancient  and  modern,  had  been  slowly  contributing
and  accumulating  materials  for  its  production ; Harvey  at
length  appeared,  and  the  idea  took  fashion  in  his  mind  and
emerged  complete,  like  Pallas,  perfect  from  the  brain  of
Jove.

Tlie  circulation,  it  would  seem,  continued  to  fonn  one  of  the
subjects  in  the  lectures  on  anatomy,  which  Haiwey  went  on  de-
livering for  many  years  afterwards  at  the  College  of  Physicians ;
but  it  was  not  till  1 628  that  he  gave  his  Hews  to  theworld  at  large
in  his  celebrated  treatise  on  the  ‘Motion  of  the  Heart  andBlood,^^
having  already,  as  he  tells  us  in  his  preface,  for  nine  years
and  more,  gone  on  demonstrating  the  subject  before  his
learned  auditory,  illustrating  it  by  new  and  additional  argu-
ments, and  freeing  it  from  the  objections  raised  by  the  skilful
among  anatomists.

Some  few  years  after  his  appointment  as  their  lecturer  by
the  College  of  Physicians,  Harvey  must  have  been  chosen  one
of  the  physicians  extraordinary  to  the  reigning  sovereign,
James  I.  The  fame  of  Harvey’s  new  views  of  the  motions


• Exercitatio  Aiiatomica  de  Motu  Cordis  et  Sanguinis,  4to,  Fraucof.  ad  Moeii.,  1628.


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.  xxiii

of  the  heart  and  blood  could  not  hut  speedily  have  reached
the  wide-  open  ears  of  King  J ames,  and  this  of  itself,  to  lay  no
stress  on  the  powerful  city  interest  of  the  illustrious  anatomist,
might  suffice  to  ensure  him  such  a mark  of  distinction  as  that
just  named.  Of  the  precise  date  of  his  appointment  as
physician  extraordinary  to  the  king  we  are  not  informed;  but
in  the  letter  of  James  bearing  date  the  3d  of  February,  1623,
it  is  spoken  of  as  a thing  foregone — that  had  taken  place
some  time  ago ; for  in  this  letter  Doctor  Harvey  is  charged  in
common  with  the  physicians  in  ordinary,  with  the  care  of  the
king^s  health ; and  he  is  further  guaranteed  the  reversion  of  the
office  of  ordinary  physician  whenever,  by  death  or  otherwise,
a vacancy  should  occur.  To  the  promised  dignity,  however,
Harvey  did  not  attain  for  several  years,  not  till  after  the
demise  of  James,  and  when  Charles  had  already  occupied  the
throne  of  his  father  for  some  five  or  six  years.

Harvey  may  now  be  said  to  have  become  rather  closely
connected  with  the  court ; but  whether  this  connexion  proved
truly  advantageous  to  him  as  a philosopher  and  physiologist
may  fairly  be  questioned.  The  time  and  service  which  the
court  physician  must  necessarily  give  to  royalty  and  greatness
interfere  materially  with  the  leisure  and  privacy  that  are
indispensable  to  study  and  meditation.  But  Harvey,  who
appears  to  have  been  a man  of  singular  self-possession,  not  to
be  diverted  ftom  his  purpose  by  trifling  or  merely  ceremonial
considerations,  always  speaks  of  his  master  Charles  in  terms
of  unfeigned  love  and  respect ; and  everything  induces  us  to
believe  that  Charles  in  turn  loved  and  honoured  his  physician.
The  sovereign  seems  even  to  have  taken  a remarkable  interest
in  the  inquiries  of  the  physiologist  ; to  have  had  several  exhi-
bitions prepared  of  the  punctum  saliens  in  the  embryo  chick
and  deer,  and  to  hav^e  witnessed  the  dissections  of  many  of  the
does  which  he  so  liberally  placed  at  Harvey^s  disposal  whilst
the  anatomist  was  prosecuting  his  inquiries  into  the  subject  of


XXIV


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


generation.  Whatever  the  defects  in  Charles’s  public  and  po-
litical character,  he  must  always  he  admitted  to  have  been  a man
of  elegant  tastes,  and  of  amiable  temper  and  refined  manners  in
private.  It  was  certainly  worthy  of  the  Prince  who  appreciated,
whilst  he  commanded,  the  talents  of  a Vandyke  and  a Rubens,
that  he  also  prized  and  encouraged  the  less  brilliant,  but  not
less  useful  genius  of  a Harvey.

Harvey,  as  a physician,  must  now  have  been  at  the  zenith  of
his  reputation;  he  was  physician  in  ordinary  to  the  king,  and
we  have  seen  him  in  the  same  position  towards  some  of  the
foremost  men  of  the  age.  His  general  practice,  too,  must
have  been  extensive,  and,  if  we  look  at  the  sum  he  is  stated
to  have  left  behind  him  in  money,  his  emoluments  large.  But
he  had  not  any  lengthened  harvest  for  aU  his  early  pains ; his
connexion  with  the  court  by  and  by  came  in  the  way  of  his
continuing  to  improve  his  position ; and  then,  grievous  to  re-
late, the  appearance  of  the  admirable  Exercises  on  the  Heart
and  Blood  gave  a decided  and  severe  check  to  his  professional
prosperity.  John  Aubrey  tells  us  he  had  “bear’d  him
(Harvey)  say,  that  after  his  book  on  the  ‘ Cii’culation  of  the
Blood  ’ came  out,  he  fell  mightily  in  his  practice ; ’twas
believed  by  the  vulgar  that  he  was  crack-brained,  and  all  the
physitians  were  against  him.”  ^ Writing  many  years  after-
wai’ds,  when  the  cause  particularly  indicated  above  had
conspired  to  make  Harvey’s  practice  less,  Aubrey  informs  us
further,  that  “though  all  his  profession  would  allow  bim  to
be  an  excellent  anatomist,  I never  heard  any  that  admired
his  therapeutique  way.  I knew  several  practitioners  in  this
town  that  would  not  have  given  threepence  for  one  of  his
bills  (prescriptions),  and  [who  said]  that  a man  could  hai’dly
tell  by  his  bills  what  he  did  aim  at.”"  So  has  it  mostly  been
with  those  who  have  added  to  the  sum  of  human  knowledge  !

' Aubrey,  Lives  of  Eminent  Persons,  8vo,  London,  1813.

- Ib.,  vol.  ii,  p.  383.


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.


XXV


The  empiric  under  the  title  of  the  practical  man,  in  his
unsuspecting  ignorance,  sets  himself  up  and  is  admitted
as  arbiter  "wherever  there  is  difficulty : blind  himself,  he
leads  the  blinded  multitude  the  way  he  lists.  He  who  laid
the  foundation  of  modern  medical  science  lost  his  practice  for
his  pains,  and  the  routineer,  with  an  appropriate  salve  for
every  sore,  a pill  and  potion  for  each  particular  ache  and  ail,
would  not  give  threepence  for  one  of  his  prescriptions  !
did  not  admire  his  therapeutique  way ! ! and  could  not  tell
what  he  did  aim  at ! ! ! Ignorance  and  presumption  have
never  hesitated  to  rend  the  veil  that  science  and  modesty,
all  in  supplying  the  means,  have  still  owned  their  inability
to  raise.  If  Harvey  faltered,  who  of  his  contemporaries  could
rightfully  presume  to  walk  secure  ? And  yet  did  each  and  all
of  them,  unconscious  of  the  darkness,  tread  their  twilight
paths  assuredly ; whilst  he,  the  divinity  among  them,  with  his
eyes  unsealed,  felt  little  certain  of  his  way.  So  has  it  still
been  with  medicine ; and  the  world  must  make  many  a lusty
onward  stride  in  knowledge  before  it  can  be  otherwise.

The  first  interruption  to  his  ordinaiy  professional  pursuits
and  avocations  which  Harvey  seems  to  have  suffered  through
his  connexion  with  the  court,  occurred  in  the  beginning  of
1630,  when  he  was  engaged  “ to  accompany  the  young  Duke
of  Lenox  in  his  travels  beyond  seas.”  In  anticipation  of  a
removal  from  London,  apparently,  Harvey  had  already,  in
December  1629,  resigned  his  office  of  treasurer  to  the  College
of  Physicians,  which  he  seems  to  have  filled  for  several  years.

Of  the  course  of  Harvey^s  travels  with  the  Duke  of  Lennox
we  have  not  been  able  to  gain  any  information.  Their  way
probably  led  them  to  the  Continent,  and  it  may  have  been  on
this  occasion  and  in  this  company  that  he  "visited  Venice,  as
we  know  from  himself  that  he  did  in  the  course  of  one  of  his
journeys.  Harvey  must  have  been  in  England  again  in  1632  and
1633  ; for  in  the  former  year  he  was  formally  chosen  physician


XXVI


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


to  Charles^  and  in  the  latter  we  find  his  absence,  “by  reason
of  his  attendance  on  the  king’s  majesty,”  from  St.  Bartholo-
mew’s Hospital  complained  of  by  the  surgeons  of  that  insti-
tution, and  Dr.  Andrews  appointed  by  the  governors  as  his
substitute,  but  “without  prejudice  to  him  in  his  yearly  fee  or
in  any  other  respect.”^  Such  considerate  treatment  satisfies
us  of  the  esteem  in  which  Harvey  was  held.

In  the  early  part  of  1633  Charles  determined  to  visit  his
ancient  kingdom  of  Scotland,  for  the  ostensible  purpose  of
being  crowned  King  of  Scots.  Upon  this  occasion  Harvey
accompanied  him,  as  matter  of  course,  we  may  presume.
But  the  absence  of  the  court  from  London  was  not  of  long
duration ; and  in  the  early  autumn  of  the  same  year  we  are
pleased  to  find  Harvey  again  at  his  post  in  St.  Bartholomew’s
Hospital,  engaged  in  his  own  proHnce  and  propounding  divers
rules  and  regulations  for  the  better  government  of  the  house
and  its  officers,®  which  of  themselves  give  us  an  excellent  insight
into  the  state  of  the  hospital,  as  well  as  of  the  relative  posi-
tions of  the  several  departments  of  the  healing  art  two  centu-
ries ago.  The  doctor’s  treatment  of  the  poor  chirm’geons  in
these  rules  is  sufficiently  despotic  it  must  be  admitted;  but
the  chirurgeons  in  their  acquiescence  showed  that  they  merited
no  better  handling.  The  only  point  on  which  they  proved
restive,  indeed,  was  the  revealment  of  their  secrets  to  the
physician;  a great  outrage  in  days  when  every  man  had  his
secrets,  and  felt  fully  justified  in  keeping  them  to  himself.
But  surgery  in  the  year  1633  had  not  shown  any  good  title
to  an  independent  existence.  The  surgeon  of  those  days  was

' Vide  Records  of  Han’ey  from  the  Journals  of  St.  Bartholomew’s  Hospital,  pub.
by  James  Paget,  8vo,  London,  1846.  Harvey,  on  his  appointment  to  attend  the
Duke  of  Lennox,  applied  to  have  Dr.  Smith  chosen  his  substitute ; but  the  governors
proved  recusant : “ It  was  thought  fit  that  they  should  have  further  knowledge  and
satisfaction  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  said  !Mr.  Smith and  they  very  shortly  after-
wards gave  Dr.  Andrews,  first,  the  reversion  of  Harvey’s  oflice,  and  by  and  by  they
formally  appointed  him  Harvey’s  deputy  or  substitute.

^ Vide  Mr.  Paget’s  publication  already  quoted,  p.  13.


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.


XXVll


but  the  hand  or  instrument  of  the  physician ; the  dignitary
mostly  applied  to  his  famulus  when  he  required  a wen  re-
moved, or  a limb  lopped,  or  a broken  head  plastered  ; though
Harvey  it  seems  did  not  feel  himself  degraded  by  taking  up
the  knife  or  practising  midwifery.^  Nevertheless,  in  these
latter  days  Royal  Colleges  of  Physicians  have  been  seen  arro-
gating superiority  over  Royal  Colleges  of  Surgeons,  and  Royal
Colleges  both  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  combining  to  keep
the  practitioner  of  obstetrics  under.

From  the  year  1633  Harvey  appears  to  have  devoted  much
of  his  time  to  attendance  upon  the  king  and  retainers  of  the
court,  so  that  we  have  little  or  no  particular  information  of
his  movements  for  several  years.  We  know,  however,  from
Aubrey,  that  he  accompanied  Thomas  Howard,  Earl  of  Arun-
del, whose  physician  he  was,  in  his  extraordinary  embassy  to
the  emperor,  in  the  year  1636.^  In  the  course  of  this  journey,
Harvey  had  an  opportunity  of  visiting  several  of  the  principal
cities  of  Germany,  and  of  making  the  acquaintance  of  many
of  the  leading  medical  men  of  the  time.  The  place  of  date
of  one  of  Harvey^s  letters,  that  namely  to  Caspar  Hofmann,
from  Nuremberg,  in  the  month  of  May,  1636,  has  not  been
noticed ; but  his  presence  with  the  Earl  of  Arundel  at  once  ac-
counts for  it ; and  we  therefore  see  that  Harvey^s  offer  to
demonstrate  to  the  distinguished  professor  of  Nuremberg,  the
anatomical  particulars  which  made  the  circulation  of  the  blood
a necessary  conclusion  was  no  vain  boast,  made  at  a distance,

' Vide  his  procedure  for  the  removal  of  a sarcocele,  ‘ On  Generation,’  p.  254.
“ My  Lady  Howard  had  a cancer  in  her  breast,  which  he  did  cut  otF  and  seared.”
(Aubrey,  Lives,  p.  386.)  He  speaks  of  having  been  called  to  a young  woman  in
labour  in  a state  of  coma  (On  Generation,  p.  534) ; and  in  another  place  (Ib.  p.  437)
he  says,  in  connexion  with  the  subject  of  labour,  ‘ Hand  inexpertus  loquuor,’ —
I speak  not  without  experience.  Vide  also  p.  545,  where  he  passes  his  fingers  into
the  uterus  and  brings  away  “ a mole  of  the  size  of  a goose’s  egg;”  and  p.  546,
where  he  dilates  the  uterine  orifice  with  an  iron  instrument,  and  uses  a speculum,  &c.

“ The  embassy  left  England  the  7th  of  April,  and  returned  about  Christmas  of
the  same  year.  Vide  Crowne’s  ‘ True  Relation,’  &c.,  4to,  London,  1637.


xxviii  THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.

but  a substantial  proposition  in  presence  of  bis  opponent,  and
wbicb  there  is  tradition  at  least  to  assure  us  he  was  called
upon  to  fulfil. — Harvey  is  reported  to  have  made  a pubhc  de-
monstration of  his  anatomical  views  at  Nuremberg;,  satisfactory
to  all  present  save  Caspar  Hofmann  himself ; to  whom,  as  he
stUl  continued  to  urge  objections,  the  futile  nature  of  which
we  in  these  days  can  readily  understand,  Haryey  is  further  re-
lated to  have  deigned  no  other  answer  than  by  laying  down
the  scalpel  and  retiring,  conduct  which  we  find  in  entire  con-
formity with  our  estimate  of  the  character  of  the  mau.^

On  his  return  to  England,  in  the  winter  of  1636,  Harvey  must
have  resumed  his  place  near  the  person  of  the  sovereign,  and
by  and  by,  as  in  duty  bound,  accompanied  him  on  his  first
hostile  expedition  into  Scotland  in  1639,  when  matters
were  happily  accommodated  between  the  King  and  his  Scottish
subjects,  whom  he  had  driven  to  take  up  arms  so  righteously
in  defence  of  their  religious  hberties.  Harvey,  as  physician  to
the  person,  may  be  further  presumed  to  have  been  with  Charles
when  he  marched  towards  the  Border  the  following  year,  so
memorable  in  the  annals  of  English  history,  when  the  war
with  the  Scots  was  renewed,  when  the  king’s  authority  received
the  first  check  at  the  battle  of  Newbury,  and  when  Charles,
returning  to  his  capital  after  his  defeat,  encountered  the  still
more  formidable  opposition  of  the  English  Pai’liament.

Harvey  may  now  be  said  to  have  become  fairly  involved  with
the  Court.  From  the  total  absence  of  his  name  in  the  trans-
actions of  the  times,  it  is  nevertheless  interesting  to  observe
how  completely  he  kept  himself  aloof  from  all  the  intrigues

‘ Siegel  (P.  M.)  De  Sanguinis  Motu  Comment.,  4to,  Hamb.  1650,  informs  us  in  his
Preface,  that,  whilst  living  with  Hofmann  in  1638,  he  had  sedulously  tried  to  bring
him  to  admit  the  circulation ; Siegel  goes  on  to  say,  however,  that  it  was  in  vain,
and  indeed  that  Harvey  himself  had  failed  to  convince  him  : “ Neque  tantum  valuit
Harveus,  vel  coram  (i.  e.  in  his  presence)  cum  salutaret  Hofmanuum  in  itinere
Germanico,  vel  literis,”  &c.  The  old  man,  nevertheless,  seems  not  to  have  been
altogether  deaf  to  reason  ; Siegel  had  hopes  of  him  at  last  had  he  hut  lived  : “ Nec
dubito  quin  concessisset  tandem  in  nostra  castra.”


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.


XXIX


and  dealings  of  the  party  with  which  he  was  connected.  He
must  have  held  himself  exclusively  to  the  discharge  of  his  pro-
fessional duties.  In  the  course  of  these  he  doubtless  attended
Charles  in  his  third  visit  to  Scotland  in  the  summer  of  1641,
when  he  essayed  the  arts  of  diplomacy  with  little  better  effect
than  he  had  already  attempted  the  weight  of  prerogative  in
the  first,  and  the  force  of  arms  in  the  second  visit.

On  returning  to  London  in  the  autumn  of  the  same  year,
Charles  soon  brought  matters  to  a crisis  between  himself  and
his  English  subjects,  in  the  persons  of  their  representatives,  and
nothing  soon  remained  for  him  hut  to  unfurl  his  standard  and
proclaim  himself  at  war  with  his  people.  This  was  accordingly
done  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  summer.  But  the  Parha-
ment  did  not  yet  abandon  a seeming  care  of  the  royal  person,
and  Harvey  informs  us  himself,  that  he  now  attended  the
king,  not  only  with  the  consent,  but  by  the  desire,  of  the  par-
liament. The  battle  of  Edge-hill,  which  followed,  and  in
which  the  sun  of  fortune  shone  with  a partial  and  fitful  gleam
upon  the  royal  arms,  is  especially  interesting  to  us  from  our
Harvey  having  been  present,  though  he  still  took  no  part  in
the  affair,  and  seems  indeed  to  have  felt  very  little  solicitude
either  about  its  progress  or  its  issue,  if  the  account  of  Aubrey
may  be  credited.  “ When  King  Charles,”  says  Aubrey,  “ by
reason  of  the  tumults,  left  London,  he  (Harvey)  attended  him,
and  was  at  the  fight  of  Edge-hill  with  him ; and  during  the
fight  the  Prince  and  Duke  of  York  were  committed  to  his
care.  He  told  me  that  he  withdrew  with  them  under  a hedge,
and  tooke  out  of  his  pockett  a booke  and  read.  But  he  had  not
read  very  long  before  a bullet  of  a great  gun  grazed  on  the  ground
neare  him,  which  made  him  remove  his  station.”^  The  act  of
reading  a book  pending  an  important  battle,  the  result  of  which
was  greatly  to  influence  his  master’s  fortunes,  certainly  shows
a wonderful  degree  of  coolness  and  a remarkable  indifference
' Lives,  &c.,  vol.  ii,  p.  379.


XXX


THE  LIFE  OF  HAFVEY.


to  everything  like  military  matters.  Harvey’s  own  candid
chai’acter,  and  the  confidence  so  obviously  reposed  in  him
when  he  was  intrusted  with  the  care  of  the  Prince  and  the
Duke  of  York,  forbid  us  to  interpret  the  behaviour  into  any
lukewarmness  or  indifference  as  to  the  issue ; but  Harvey,
throughout  his  whole  career,  was  a most  peaceful  man  : he  never
had  the  least  taste  for  literary  controversy,  and  can  scarcely
be  said  to  have  replied  to  any  of  those  who  opposed  his  Hews ;
and  in  his  indifference  about  the  fight  of  Edge-hill  he  only
further  shows  us  that  he  was  not

“ Of  those  who  build  their  faith  upon
The  holy  text  of  pike  and  gun,

And  prove  their  doctrine  orthodox
By  apostolic  blows  and  knocks.”

With  his  fine  understanding  and  freedom  from  party  and
sectarian  views  of  every  kind,  he  probably  saw  that  an  appeal
to  arms  was  not  the  way  for  political  right  to  be  elicited,  or
for  a sovereign  to  settle  matters  with  his  subjects.  Harvey
had  certainly  no  turn  for  politics,^  and  when  we  refer  to
Aubrey  we  find  that  the  fight  of  Edge-hill  was  hai’dly  ended
before  our  anatomist  had  crept  back  into  his  shell,  and  become
absorbed  in  the  subjects  that  formed  the  proper  business  of  his
life.  “ 1 first  saw  him  (Harvey)  at  Oxford,  1642,  after  Edge-
hill  fight,”  says  om’  authority,  “ but  was  then  too  young  to  be
acquainted  with  so  great  a doctor.  I remember  he  came  seve-
ral times  to  our  college  (Trin.)  to  George  Bathurst,  B.D.,  who
had  a hen  to  hatch  eggs  in  his  chamber,  which  they  opened
dayly  to  see  the  progress  and  way  of  generation.”  The
zealous  political  partisan  would  have  found  no  leisure  for  re-
searches like  these  in  such  stirring  times  as  marked  the  out-

' The  author  of  the  life  of  Harvey  in  the  ‘ General  Dictionary,  Historical  and
Critical’  (folio,  Loud.  1738),  the  original  of  aU  our  other  lives  of  Harvey,  is  cer-
tainly in  error  when  he  recognizes  Harvey  as  the  tj-pe  of  the  Physician  who  takes
part  in  the  Dialogue  of  Hy.  Neville’s  Plato  Redi\-ivus,  and  assumes  that  he  “ relieved
his  abstruser  studies  by  conversations  in  politics.”  In  a third  edition  of  Neville’s
work  I find  it  stated  that  the  physician  who  did  so  was  Dr.  Lower.


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.


XXXI


break  of  the  civil  war  in  England ; the  politician  had  then
other  than  pullets’  eggs  to  hatch.

The  king’s  physician,  not  to  speak  of  the  author  of  a new
doctrine  of  the  motions  of  the  heart  and  blood,  was  sure  to
find  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  high  church  dignitaries  of  Oxford ;
and  we  accordingly  find  that,  besides  being  everywhere  hand-
somely received  and  entertained,  Harvey  had  the  honorary
degree  of  Doctor  of  Physic  conferred  on  him.  Oxford,  indeed,
when  the  king  and  comd  were  driven  from  the  metropolis,  which
was  now  wholly  in  the  hands  of  the  popular  party,  became  the
head-quarters  of  the  royal  army  and  principal  residence  of  the
king  for  several  years.  And  here  Harvey  seems  to  have
quietly  settled  himself  down  and  again  turned  his  attention
to  his  favorite  subjects.  Nor  was  the  honorary  distinction
of  doctor  of  physic  from  the  university,  which  has  been  men-
tioned, the  only  mark  of  favour  he  received.  Sir  Nathaniel
Brent,  Warden  of  Merton  College,  yielding  to  his  natural  bias,
forsook  Oxford  when  it  was  garrisoned  by  the  king,  and  began
to  take  a somewhat  active  part  in  the  proceedings  of  the
popular  party  ; he  came  forward  in  especial  as  a witness  against
Archbishop  Laud,  on  the  trial  of  that  dignitary.  Merton
College  being  thus  left  without  a head,  upon  the  suggestion,
as  it  is  said,  of  the  learned  antiquary  and  mathematician,  John
G-reaves,  and  in  vii’tue  of  a letter  of  the  king,  Harvey  was
elected  warden  some  time  in  the  course  of  1645.  This  appoint-
ment was  doubtless  merited  by  Harvey  for  his  constant  and
faithful  service  to  Charles;  but  it  may  also  have  been  bestowed
in  some  measure  as  a retort  upon  the  Parliament,  which,  the
year  before,  had  entertained  a motion  for  the  supercession  of
Harvey  in  his  office  of  physician  to  St.  Bartholomew’s  Hospital.^

' Feb.  12,  an.  164f.  “A  motion  this  day  made  for  Dr.  Mieklethwayte  to  be
recommended  to  the  warden  and  masters  of  St.  Bartholomew’s  Hospital,  to  be
physician,  in  the  place  of  Dr.  Harvey,  who  hath  withdi-awn  himself  from  his  charge,
and  is  retired  to  the  party  in  arms  against  the  Parliament.”  (Journals  of  the  House
of  Commons,  iii,  397.)


XXXll


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


Harvey,  however,  did  not  long  enjoy  his  new  ofl&ce  or  its
emoluments ; for  Oxford  having  surrendered  to  the  Parlia-
mentary forces  under  Fairfax  the  following  year,  Harvey,  of
course,  resigned  his  charge,  and  immediately  afterwards  betook
himself  to  London.  Sir  Nathaniel  Brent,  on  the  contrary,
returned  to  Oxford ; and  the  star  of  the  Parliamentarians
being  now  in  the  ascendant,  Merton  College  was  not  slow  to
reinstate  its  old  Presbjderian  warden  in  the  room  of  its  late
royalist  head.^

From  the  date  of  the  surrender  of  Oxford  (July,  1646),
Harvey  followed  the  fortunes  of  Charles  no  longer.  Of  his  rea-
sons for  quitting  the  service  of  his  old  master  we  know  nothing.
He  probably  felt  anxious  for  repose ; at  sixty-eight,  which  was
Harvey^s  age,  a man  begins  to  find  that  an  easy  chair  is  a fitter
resting-place  than  the  bare  ground,  a ceiled  roof  more  suitable
covering  than  the  open  sky — prospects  which  a continuance  of
the  strife  held  out.  Harvey,  besides,  as  we  have  seen,  had  no
stomach  for  contention  in  any  shape  or  form,  not  even  in  the


• I find  a kind  of  obloquy  commonly  thrown  on  the  memory  of  Nathaniel  Brent
for  what  is  styled  his  desertion  of  Charles  ; hut  he  never  deserted  Charles ; he  never
belonged  to  him.  Brent,  forsooth,  had  received  knighthood  at  the  royal  hands  in
former  years  ; hut  knighthoods  w-ere  sometimes  forced  upon  men  in  those  days  for
the  sake  of  the  fees,  and  often  as  means  of  attaching  men  of  mark  and  likelihood.
The  truth  is  that  Brent,  who  was  a profound  lavryer  and  scholar,  as  well  as  a
traveller,  was  greatly  attached  to  Archbishop  Abbott,  who  had  patronized  and  ad-
vanced him  through  the  whole  course  of  his  life.  In  the  differences  that  took  place
between  Abbott,  in  common  with  all  moderate  men,  and  Archbishop  Laud,  Brent
naturally  sided  with  his  friend,  led  to  do  so,  however,  not  by  blind  attachment  only,
but  by  natmal  constitution  of  mind,  which  appears  to  have  abhorred  the  notion  of  a
theocracy  in  the  civil  government  of  England,  and  to  have  been  unfitted  to  com-
prehend the  divinity  that  some  conceive  to  inhere  in  despotism.  Brent  was,  in  fact,
a man  of  such  note,  that  Charles  had  tried  to  win  him  to  his  party  many  years  before
by  various  attentions  and  the  free  gift  of  knighthood ; but  this  was  in  times  when
men  were  not  required  to  take  a side,  when  they  stood  naturally  neutral.  MTien  the
time  came  that  it  behoved  him  to  show  under  what  fiag  he  meant  to  fight,  Brent
was  not  wanting  to  his  natural  bias  and  to  independence.  He  therefore  left  Oxford
when  it  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  royal  forces,  among  other  adherents  of  the
popular  cause,  and  was  simply  true  to  his  principles,  in  nothing  false  to  a patron
or  benefaetor.


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.  xxxiii

literary  arena ; and  he  now  probably  resolved  himself  to  follow
the  advice  he  had  once  given  to  his  young  friend  Charles
Scarborough,  to  leave  ofP  gunning,”^  and  dedicate  himself
wholly  to  more  congenial  pursuits.  And  then  Charles  had
long  made  it  apparent,  even  to  the  most  ardent  of  his  adhe-
rents, that  no  faith  was  to  be  put  in  his  promise,  no  trust  to
be  reposed  in  his  royal  word.  The  wise  old  man,  verging  on
the  age  of  threescore  years  and  ten,  doubtless  saw  that  it  was
better  for  him  to  retire  from  a responsible  office,  now  become
most  irksome  and  thankless,  and  seek  privacy  and  leisure
for  the  remainder  of  his  days.  These  Harvey  found  awaiting
him  in  the  houses  of  his  affectionate  brothers — now  in  the  house
of  Eliab,  in  the  City,  or  at  Roehampton,  and  then  in  the
house  of  Daniel,  in  the  suburban’  village  of  Lambeth,  or  at
Combe  near  Croydon  in  Surrey,  in  each  of  which  Harvey
had  his  own  apartments.  The  Harveys  appear  to  have  been
united  from  first  to  last  in  the  closest  bonds  of  brotherly  love,^
and  to  have  had  a common  interest  in  many  of  their  under-
takings; and  Eliab,  as  we  shall  see,  employed  the  small  capital.


• “ Prithee  leave  off  thy  gunning  and  stay  here ; I will  bring  thee  into  practice.”
(Aubrey,  Op  cit.  p.  381.)

^ On  the  monumental  tablet  of  Thomas,  the  first  of  the  brothers  who  died,  in  the
chm'ch  of  St.  Peter’s-le-Poore,  the  mottos,  doubtless  supplied  by  a smwiving  member
of  the  family,  show  this  feeling.  The  inscription  is  as  follows  :

As  in  a Sheafe  of  Arrows.

Vis  unita  fortior.

The  band  of  Love
The  Unitor  of  Brethren.

Here  Lyeth  the  body  of  Thomas  Harvey,

Of  London,  Merchant,

Who  departed  this  life
The  2nd  of  Feby.  An.  Dom.

1622.

(Stow’s  London,  third  edit.,  fob  Lond.  1633.)

John  Harvey,  Esq.,  who  died  in  1645,  left  his  brother  William’s  wife  £50.  Eliab
Harvey  attended  particularly  to  his  brother  WilUam’s  interests  ; and  William  at  his
death  returned  Ehab’s  kindness  by  leaving  him  his  residuary  legatee.


C


XX  XIV


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


whicR  his  brother  AVilliam  miist  have  accumulated  before  the
civil  wars  broke  out^  to  such  purpose^  that  the  doctor  actuallj’
died  a rich  man.  With  his  brothers,  then,  retreating  now  to
the  “leads”  of  the  house  in  the  heart  of  the  metropohs,  now
to  the  “ caves”  of  the  one  at  Combe,  did  Harvey  continue  to
pass  his  days — but  not  in  idleness;  for  the  work  on  Generation,
with  the  subject  of  which  we  saw  him  busied  at  Oxford  several
years  before,  must  have  found  him  in  ample  occupation.  Xor
was  the  love  of  ease  so  great  in  William  Harvey,  even  at  the
advanced  age  of  seventy-one,  if  we  may  credit  some  of  the
accounts,  as  to  hinder  him  from  again  Hsiting  the  Continent,
and  making  his  way  as  far  as  Italy,  a journey  in  wliich  it  is
said  he  was  attended  by  his  friend  the  accomplished  scholar
and  gentleman.  Dr.  Ent.*

In  the  beginning  of  1651  appeared  the  second  of  Harvey’s
great  works,  that,  namely.  On  Animal  Generation.^  In  this
publication  we  have  abundant  proof  of  our  author’s  unabated
industry  and  devotion  to  physiological  science;  and  in  the
long  and  admirable  letter  to  P.  M.  Siegel,  of  Hamburg,  written
shortly  after  the  appearance  of  the  work,  we  have  pleasing
evidence  of  the  integrity  of  Harvey’s  faculties  at  the  advanced
age  of  seventy-three.

The  year  after  the  publication  of  the  work  on  Generation,
i.  e.  1652,  when  Harvey  Avas  looked  up  to  by  common  consent  as
the  most  distinguished  anatomist  and  physician  of  his  age,  the
College  of  Physicians  came  to  the  resolution  of  placing  his
statue  in  their  hall  then  occupying  a site  at  Amen-corner ; and
measures  being  immediately  taken  in  conformity  with  this
purpose,  it  was  carried  into  effect  by  the  end  of  the  rear,

' This  rather  arduous  uudertaking  in  those  days  was  accomplished,  according  to
Aubrey,  about  the  year  1649.  But  I liave  found  so  much  to  excite  doubt  in
Aubrey’s  Notes,  that  I greatly  suspect  the  accuracy  of  his  statement  about  the
journey  to  Italy.

“ De  Generatione  Animalium,  4to,  London,  1651.


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.


XXXV


when  the  statue^  with  the  following  complimentary  inscription
on  the  pedestal^  was  displayed  :

GULIELMO  HARVEIO
Viro  monumentis  suis  immortali
Hoc  insuper  Collegium  Medicorum  Londinense
posuit.

Qui  enim  Sanguini  motum
ut  et

Animalibus  ortum  dedit,

Meruit  esse
Stator  Perpetuus.'

Harvey^  in  acknowledgment^  it  may  have  been,  of  the  dis-
tinguished honour  done  him  by  his  friends  and  colleagues,
appears  about  this  time  to  have  commenced  the  erection  at
his  own  cost  of  a handsome  addition  to  the  College  of
Physicians.  It  was,  as  Aubrey  informs  us,  “ a noble  building
of  Roman  architecture  (of  rustic  work,  with  Corinthian
pilasters),  comprising  a great  parlour,  a kind  of  convocation
house  for  the  fellows  to  meet  in  below,  and  a library  above.
On  the  outside,  on  the  frieze,  in  letters  three  inches  long,  was
this  inscription  : Suasu  et  cura  Pran.  Prujeani,  Praesidis,  et
Edmundi  Smith,  elect,  inchoata  et  perfecta  est  hsec  fabrica,
An.  MDCLiii.^^^  Nor  was  Harvey  content  merely  to  erect  this
building ; he,  further,  furnished  the  library  with  books,  and
the  museum  with  numerous  objects  of  curiosity  and  a variety
of  surgical  instruments.  On  the  ceremony  of  this  handsome
addition  to  the  College  of  Physicians  being  opened,  which  took
place  on  the  2d  of  February,  1653,  a sumptuous  entertainment
was  provided  at  Harvey^s  expense,  at  which  he  received  the  pre-

‘ This  statue  perished  -with  the  building,  in  the  great  fire  of  London  in  1666,  and
seems  never  to  have  been  replaced.  The  hall  of  the  present  College  of  Physicians
is  not  graced  as  was  the  old  one  in  Harvey’s  time.  The  only  sculptures  of  Harvey  that
I know  of  are  busts,  in  the  theatre  of  the  College  of  Physicians  and  on  his  monu-
ment in  Hempstead  church,  hut  of  dates  posterior  to  their  subject,  that  at  the
College  of  Physicians  being  apparently  after  the  portrait  by  Jansen  in  the  Mbrary,
and,  as  I am  informed,  by  a sculptor  of  the  name  of  Seemacher.

^ Aubrey,  1.  c.  p.  378.


XXXVl


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


sident  and  fellows,  and  made  over  to  them,  on  the  spot,  his
whole  interest  in  the  structure.

Dr.  Prujean,  the  president  of  the  college,  going  out  of
ofhce,  as  usual,  at  Michaelmas  the  next  year  (1654),  Han'ey
was  unanimously  chosen  to  fill  the  vacant  chair.  Haxdng  been
absent  when  the  election  took  place,  a deputation  proceeded  to
his  apartments  to  apprize  him  of  the  honour  his  colleagues  had
done  themselves  and  him,  and  to  say  that  they  awaited  his
answer  on  the  following  day.  Every  act  of  Harvey^s  public  life
that  has  come  down  to  us  is  marked  not  merely  by  propriety  hut
by  grace.  He  attended  the  comitia  or  assembly  of  the  college
next  day ; thanked  his  colleagues  for  the  distinguished  honour
of  which  they  had  thought  him  worthy — the  honoiu',  as  he
said,  of  filling  the  foremost  place  among  the  physicians  of
England ; but  the  concerns  of  the  college,  he  proceeded,
were  too  weighty  to  be  intrusted  to  one  like  him,  laden  with
years  and  infirm  in  health ; and  if  he  might  be  acquitted  of
arrogance  in  presuming  to  give  advice  in  such  circumstances,
he  would  say  that  the  college  could  not  do  better  than  rein-
state in  the  authority  which  he  had  but  just  laid  down,
their  late  president,  Dr.  Prujean,  under  whose  prudent  ma-
nagement and  fostering  care  the  atfaii’s  of  the  college  had
greatly  prospered.  This  noble  counsel  had  fitting  response :
Harvey^s  advice  being  adopted  by  general  consent.  Dr.  Prujean
was  fortliAvith  re-elected  president.

The  College  of  Physicians  were  justly  proud  of  theii’  great
associate,  and  Harvey,  in  his  turn,  was  nndoubtedly  attached
to  the  college.  Here,  indeed,  as  their  lecturer  on  anatomy  and
surgery,  he  had  first  propounded  the  views  which  had  won  him
such  distinguished  credit  in  his  life,  and  which  have  left  his
name  as  a deathless  word  on  the  lips  of  men ; here  he  con-
sorted with  his  nearest  and  dearest  friends,  receiving  from  all
those  remarks  of  respectful  consideration  that  were  so  justly
his  due;  and  here,  in  fine,  the  first  place  among  the  first  men


HIS  PUBLIC  CAREER.


XXXVll


of  his  profession  had  been  tendered  to  him,  and  gracefully
declined.  To  a mind  like  Harvey’s,  and  with  the  opportunity
afforded  him  of  making  so  graceful  a concession,  the  foremost
place  was  certainly  a higher  distinction  unaccepted,  than  it
had  been  enjoyed. — The  excuse  for  declining  the  office  of
president  was  not  merely  personal : it  was  not  alone  that  he
was  an  old  man,  infirm  in  health,  and  incompetent  for  so  great
a trust;  but,  the  affau’s  of  the  college  had  greatly  thriven
under  the  prudent  management  and  constant  care  of  the  late
president,  and  it  was  no  more  than  right  that  he  who  had
but  just  laid  down  should  be  re-established  in  authority.

Harvey,  we  have  said,  was  childless  ; his  wife,  though  we
have  not  the  date  of  her  death,  he  had  certainly  lost  by
this  time.  His  only  surviving  brother  Eliab  was  lich  ; his
nephews  were  prosperous  merchants  and  on  the  road  to  the
independence  and  titles  which  several  of  them  afterwards
achieved : he,  therefore,  determined  to  make  the  College  of
Physiciaus  not  only  heirs  to  his  paternal  estate,  worth,  at  that
time,  56L  per  annum,  but  to  bestow  it  on  them  in  free  gift
during  his  life.  This  purpose  he  carried  into  effect  by  means
of  a formal  instrument,  which  he  delivered  to  the  college  in
the  month  of  July,  1656  ; the  special  provisions  in  the  deed
setthng  one  sum,  by  way  of  salary  for  the  librarian,  and
another  sum,  for  the  delivery  of  a solemn  oration  annually,  in
commemoration  of  those  who  had  approved  themselves  bene-
factors to  the  college,  and,  by  extension,  who  had  added  aught
to  the  sum  of  medical  science  in  the  course  of  the  bygone  year.^

* There  is  much  information  on  the  life  of  Harvey  in  the  inscription  upon  the
copper-plate  which  was  attached  to  Ms  portrait  in  the  old  College  of  Physicians.  I
;ive  it  entire,  anxious  to  set  before  the  reader  every  authentic  word  of  his  times  that
was  uttered  of  Haiwey.  This  inscription,  but,  unless  I mistake,  abbreviated,  may  be
found  in  printed  letters  under  the  bust  of  Harvey  in  the  theatre  of  the  Royal  College
of  Physicians :

GULIELMUS  HARViEUS,  ^

Anglus  natus,  GaUise,  Itahae,  Germanise  hospes,

Ubique  Amor  et  Desiderium,

Quern  omuis  terra  expetisset  Civem,


xxxviii  THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.

Having  thus  accompanied  Harvey  over  so  much  of  the
way  in  his  mortal  career,  let  us,  before  proceeding  further,
briefly  advert  to  his  Writings,  to  the  influence  they  had
in  the  repubhc  of  letters  during  his  life-time,  to  the  fruits  they
have  since  produced,  and  to  the  impression  still  made  on  the
mind  that  holds  communion  through  their  means  with  the
mind  that  dictated  them  so  many  years  ago. — The  intellectual
endowment  of  a man  necessarily  appears  in  his  writings ;
it  is  not  always  from  them  that  so  time  a conception  of  his
moral  character  can  he  formed.  Harvey,  however,  though  in
his  long  life  he  accomplished  but  a small  fraction  of  all  his
literary  designs,  has  still  left  us  suflicienW  from  which  to  form
an  estimate  of  him  as  a philosopher,  as  a physiologist,  and  it


Medicinae  Doctor,  CoU.  Med.  Lond.  Socius  et  Consiliarins,
Anatomes,  Chirurgiseqiie  Professor,

Regis  Jacobi  Familiae,  Caroloque  Eegi  Medicus,

Gestis  darns,  omissisque  boiioribus.

Quorum  alios  tulit,  oblatos  renuit  alios,

Omnes  meruit.

Laudatis  priseorum  ingeniis  par ;

Quos  honoradt  maxime  imitando,

Docuitque  posteros  exemplo.

NuUius  laces  si  vit  famam,

Veritatis  studens  magis  quam  glorias,

Dane  tamen  adeptus
Industria,  sagacitate,  successu  nobilis
Perpetuos  sanguinis  aestus
Circulari  gyro  fugientis,  seque  sequentis.

Primus  promulgadt  mundo.

Nee  passus  ultra  mortales  sua  ignorare  primordia,
Am'eum  edidit  de  ovo  atque  pullo  Ubrum,

Albae  gallinae  fdium.

Sic  novis  inventis  Apolliueam  ampUadt  ai-tem,

Atque  nostrum  Apolliuis  saerarium  augustius  esse
Tandem  voluit ;

Suasu  enim  et  cura  D.  D.  D"’-  Francisci  Prujeani  Pracsidis
Et  Edmundi  Smith  Electoris

An.  MDCLIII,

Senaeulum,  et  de  nomine  suo  Musaeum  borto  superstinxit.
Quorum  alteram  plurimis  libris  et  Instrumentis  Cliirurgicis,
Alterum  omnigeua  siipeUeelile  oruavit  et  instruxit,
Medicinae  Patronus  simul  et  Alumnus.


HIS  WORKS.


XXXIX


may  also  be  said  as  a mau.  Let  us  take  a brief  survey  of  bis
writings,  then,  and  wind  up  our  account  of  bis  life  witb  sucb
personal  notices  as  we  can  gather  from  contemporaries,  or  as  we
can  infer  from  bis  own  conduct  and  written  word.

ON  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD.

Harvey’s  great  work,  though  by  no  means  the  largest  in
bulk,  is  the  one  on  the  Motions  of  the  Heart  and  Blood.  It
has  been  said,  happily,  by  a recent  critical  writer,  that  “ men
were  already  practising  what  Bacon  came  to  inculcate,”  viz.
induction  upon  data  carefully  collected  and  considered  ; and
it  woulds-not  be  easy  to  adduce  a more  striking  example  of


Non  hie  anhela  substitit  Herois  Vu-tus,  impatiens  vinci
Accessit  porro  Munificentiae  decus  :

Suasu  enim  et  consUio  D“-  D"®-  Edv.  Alston!  Praesidis,
Anno  MDCLVi

Rem  nostram  angustam  prius,  annuo  lvi.  1.  reditu  auxit,
Paterni  Fundi  ex  asse  haeredem  collegium  diceus ;

Quo  nihil  lUi  chauius  Nobisve  honestius.

Unde  aedificium  sai'tum  tectum  perennare,

Unde  Bibhothecario  honorarium  suum,  suumque  Oratori
Quotannis  pendi ;

Unde  omnibus  sociis  aunuum  suum  convivium,

Et  suum  denique  (quot  menses)  conviviolum  censorihus  paraui,
Jussit.

Ipse  etiam  pleno  theatro  gestiens  se  haereditate  exuere,

In  mauus  Praesidis  syngrapham  tradidit.

Interfuitque  Oratioui  veterum  Benefactorum  novorumque  Ilhcio,
Et  Philotesio  Epulo ;

Illius  auspicium  et  pars  maxima ;

Hujus  corndva  simul  et  convivator.

Sic  postquani  satis  sibi,  satis  nobis,  satis  gloriae,

Amicis  solum  non  satis,  nec  satis  patriae,  vixerat,
Coelicolum  atria  suhiit
Jun.  iii,  MDCLVii.

Quern  pigehat  superis  reddere,  sed  pudebat  negare :

Ne  mireris  igitur  Lector,

Si  quern  marmoreum  ihic  stare  vides.

Hie  totam  implevit  tabulam.

Abi  et  merere  alteram.


xl


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


tlie  way  in  whicli  ultimate  rational  truth  is  arrived  at  by  a
succession  of  inferences  than  is  contained  in  Harvey’s  Essay
on  the  Heart  and  Blood.  Had  Bacon  written  his  Novum
Organum  from  Harvey’s  work  as  a text^  he  would  scarcely
have  expressed  himself  otherwise  than  as  he  has  done,  or  given
different  rules  for  philosophizing  than  those  which  he  has  laid
down  in  his  celebrated  treatise. i

In  his  introduction,  and  by  W'ay  of  clearing  the  ground,
Harvey  exposes  the  views  of  preceding  physiologists,  ancient
and  modern,  in  regard  to  the  motions  of  the  heart,  lungs,  and
blood,  to  the  state  of  the  arteries,  &c. — in  short,  he  gives
the  accredited  physiology  of  the  thoracic  viscera,  with  com-
ments, which  prove  it  a mass  of  unintelligible  anrV  irrecon-
cilable confusion.  There  is  room,  therefore,  for  another
interpretation,  consonant  with  reason  and  with  anatomical  fact,
and  susceptible  of  demonstration  by  the  senses.  When  he  first
essayed  himself  to  comprehend  the  motions  of  the  heart,  and
to  make  out  the  uses  of  the  organ  from  the  dissection  of  lirtng
animals,  he  found  the  subject  so  beset  with  difiicidties  that
he  was  almost  inclined  at  one  time  to  say  with  Eracastonus,
that  these  motions  and  their  purpose  could  be  comprehended
by  God  alone.  By  degrees,  however,  by  repeatiug  his  observa-
tions, using  greater  care,  and  giving  more  concentrated  atten-
tion, he  at  last  discovers  a way  out  of  the  labyrinth,  and  a
means  of  explaining  simply  all  that  had  prertously  appeared
so  obscure.  Hence  the  occasion  of  his  writing.  Such  is  the
burthen  of  the  proem  and  first  chapter.  With  Harvey’s  ad-
mirable work  now  put  in  an  accessible  shape  into  his  hands,
we  should  (did  we  proceed  with  an  analysis)  but  anticipate  the
intelligent  reader  in  the  great  pleasure  he  will  have  in  follow-
ing the  author  thi’ough  the  different  steps  of  his  argument

‘ The  No-ram  Organum  appeai-ed  in  1620.  Though  Harvey’s  work  was  not
published  till  1628,  he  had  developed  his  subject  in  1616,  and  there  is  every  reason
to  believe,  actually  written  the  ‘Exercit.  de  Motu  Cordis  et  Sanguinis’  before  1619.


HIS  WORKS.


xli


until  the  conclusion  is  reached^  and  the  inference  presents
itself  as  inevitable^  namely,  that  the  blood  must  circle  round
and  round  in  one  determinate  course,  in  the  body  as  in  the
lungs,  incessantly.  For  Harvey,  it  must  be  here  obseived,  left
the  doctrine  of  the  cii'culation  as  an  inference  or  induction  only,
not  as  a sensible  demonstration.  He  adduced  certain  circum-
stances, and  quoted  various  anatomical  facts  which  made  a
continuous  transit  of  the  blood  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,
from  the  veins  into  the  arteries,  a necessary  consequence ; but
he  never  saw  this  transit ; his  idea  of  the  way  in  which  it
was  accomplished  was  even  defective;  he  had  no  notion  of  the
one  order  of  sanguiferous  vessels  ending  by  uninterrupted  con-
tinuity, or  by  an  intermediate  vascular  network,  in  the  other
order.  This  was  the  demonstration  of  a later  day,  and  of  one
who  first  saw  the  light  in  the  course  of  the  veiy  year  when
Harvey’s  work  on  the  Heart  was  published.^-

The  appearance  of  Harvey’s  book  on  the  Motion  of  the
Heart  and  Blood  seems  almost  immediately  to  have  attracted
the  attention  of  all  the  better  intellects  among  the  medical
men  of  Europe.  The  subject  was  not  one,  indeed,  greatly
calculated  to  interest  the  mass  of  mere  practitioners;  had  it
been  a book  of  receipts  it  would  have  had  a better  chance
with  them ; but  the  anatomists  and  physiologists  and  scientific
physicians  woidd  seem  at  once  to  have  taken  it  up  and  can-
vassed its  merits.  The  conclusions  come  to  in  the  work,  there
can  be  no  question,  took  the  medical  world  by  surprise ; it
was  not  prepared  for  such  a proposition  as  a ceaseless  circular
movement  of  the  blood,  with  the  heart  for  the  propelling
organ ; for  the  latter  point,  be  it  understood,  was  even  as
great  a novelty  as  the  former.

Coming  unexpectedly,  and  differing  so  widely  from  the
ancient  and  accepted  notions,  we  cannot  wonder  that  Harvey’s
views  were  at  first  rejected  almost  universally.  The  older
' Malpighi,  horn  at  Crevalcuore,  Bologna,  the  10th  of  March,  1628.


xlii


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


intellects,  in  possession  of  tlie  seats  and  places  of  autliority,
regarded  them  as  idle  dreams ; and  upon  the  faith  of  this  con-
clusion, their  author  was  set  down  and  treated  by  the  vulgar
as  a crackbrained  innovator.  Two  years,  however,  elapsed
before  aught  in  contravention  of  the  new  doctrines  saw  the
light,  and  this  came  at  length  not  from  any  of  the  more
mature  anatomists  of  Europe — their  minds  were  made  up,
the  thing  was  absurd — but  from  a young  physician,  of  the
name  of  Primerose,  of  Scottish  descent,  but  French  by  birth.
Primerose  had  been  a pupil  of  Joannes  Hiolanus,  professor  of
anatomy  in  the  University  of  Paris;  he  had  doubtless  listened
to  his  masteUs  demonstration  of  the  absurdity  of  the  Harveiau
doctrine  of  the  circulation,  and  by  and  by  he  set  himself
down,  by  way  apparently  of  exercising  his  ingenuity,  to  try
the  question,  not  by  fact  and  experiment,  but  by  the  precepts
he  had  imbibed  from  his  teacher  and  the  texts  of  the  ancients
The  essay  of  Primerose^  may  be  regarded  as  a defence  of  the
physiological  ideas  of  Galen  against  the  innovations  of  Harvey
It  is  remarkable  for  any  characteristic  rather  than  that  of  a
candid  spirit  in  pursuit  of  truth  ; it  abounds  in  obstinate  de-
nials, and  sometimes  in  what  may  he  termed  dishonest  perver-
sions of  simple  matters  of  fact,  and  in  its  whole  course  appeals
not  once  to  experiment  as  a means  of  investigation. — Harvey,
having  already,  and  in  the  very  outset  of  his  work,  demon-
strated the  notions  nntenable  which  it  was  Primerose’s  purpose
to  reassert  and  defend,  of  course  deigned  him  no  reply ; he
could  never  dream  of  going  over  the  barren  ground  he  had  al-
ready trodden,  in  the  hope  of  conUncing  such  an  antagouist.

^mylius  Parisauus,  a physician  of  A’enice,  was  the  next  to
assail  the  Harveian  doctrine  of  the  circulation,^  and  still  with

' Entitled  ‘ Exercitationes  et  Auimadversioues  in  Librum  Haivei  de  Motu  Cordis
et  Sanguinis,’  4to,  London,  1630.

- In  Ills  work  entitled  ‘ Lapis  Lydius  de  Motu  Cordis  et  Sanguinis,’jfolio,  Venet.
1635.


HIS  WORKS.


xliii


the  old  instruments^ — the  authority  of  Galen  and  the  ancients
generally.  Parisanus  perceived  Harvey’s  views  as  directly  con-
travening an  hypothesis  to  which  he  had  formerly  committed
himselfj  namely,  that  the  spleen  was  the  organ  of  sanguifica-
tion and  the  furnisher  of  nutriment  to  the  heart ; on  this
ground  may  Parisanus  have  been  led  to  enter  the  lists  against
the  new  opinions.  But  he  proved  a most  flimsy  antagonist.
Ignorant  of  some  of  the  commonest  points  of  anatomy,  and
frequently  misinterpreting  the  writer  he  combats,  writing  him-
self in  a style  the  most  elaborately  involved,  and  consequently
obscure,  it  is  frequently  difficult  even  to  guess  at  his  mean-
ing. Like  his  countryman  of  the  poet.  Signor  Gratiano,  he

“ Speaks  an  infinite  deal  of  nothing ; more  than  any  man  in  all  Venice : his
reasons  are  two  grains  of  wheat  hid  in  two  bushels  of  chaff ; you  shall  seek  aU  day
ere  you  find  them  ; and  when  you  have  them  they  are  not  worth  the  search.”

Had  not  Dr.  Ent,‘in  his  Apology  for  the  Cii’culation,  given  the
name  a place  on  his  title-page,  Parisanus’s  opposition  would
scarcely  have  merited  mention  here.

Nearly  at  the  same  time  with  Parisanus,  Caspar  Hofmann,
the  learned  and  laborious  professor  of  Nuremberg,  attracted
particular  attention,  both  in  his  teaching  and  his  writings,  as
the  opponent  of  the  Harveian  doctrine.  The  opposition  here  is
the  more  remarkable  from  Hofmann’s  having  shaken  himself
wholly  free  from  the  authority  of  Galen,  and,  as  Siegel  says,
even  admitted  the  lesser  circulation  of  the  blood  through  the
lungs ; but  this  must  have  been  at  a later  period  of  his  life,
for  in  his  works,  up  to  Harvey’s  time,  the  idea  he  had  of  the
motion  of  the  blood  may  be  gathered  from  his  likening  it  to
a lake  or  sea  agitated  by  the  wind,  the  veins  being  the  con-
duits of  the  nutrient  blood,  the  arteries  of  the  vital  spirits.
Hofmann  was  an  adversary  whom  Harvey  held  worthy  of  notice;
and  accordingly  we  have  seen  that  our  immortal  countryman
took  advantage  of  the  opportunity,  whilst  attending  the  Earl
of  Arundel  and  his  party,  to  visit  Hofmann  at  Nuremberg,


xliv


THE  LIFE  OF  HAEVEY.


and  make  a demonstration  of  the  new  views  before  him.
Unhappily  this  was  done  in  vain^  for  Hofmann  continued  un-
convinced, though,  towards  the  end  of  his  very  long  life,  he
did  show  some  signs  of  yielding.  i

Joannes  Veslingius,  professor  in  the  University  of  Padua,
and  one  of  the  best  anatomists  of  the  age,  about  this  time,  ad-
dressed two  letters  to  Harvey,  in  which  he  politely  but  candidly
states  his  objections  to  the  new  doctrine.  One  great  difficulty
with  Veslingius  was  the  remarkable  difference  between  the
colour  of  the  arterial  and  the  venous  blood.  It  did  not  seem
possible  to  him  that  the  fluid,  which  was  of  a bright  scarlet  in
the  arteries,  could  be  the  same  as  the  dark-coloured  fluid
which  is  found  in  the  veins.  In  the  course  of  his  letter,
Veslingius  takes  occasion  to  animadvert  on  the  uncivil  tone
and  indifferent  style  of  the  productions  of  Primerose  and
Parisanus.^

But  the  theory  of  the  double  cu'culation  was  not  now  to
meet  with  opposition  only ; the  comprehensive  intellect  that  had
seized  and  worked  that  theorem  to  a rational  demonstration
was  no  longer  to  be  left  alone  against  the  world  in  its  defence.
Eoger  Drake,  a young  Englishman,  had  the  honour  of  appear-
ing in  his  inaugural  dissertation,  proposed  under  the  auspices
of  Joannes  Walseus,  the  distinguished  professor  of  Leyden,  in
1639,  as  the  enlightened  advocate  of  the  Harveian  views ; and
in  the  course  of  the  same  year,  H.  Begius  (Leroy)  also  came
forward  at  Utrecht  with  certain  Theses  favorable  to  the  doc-
trine of  the  cii’culation.  Ten  years  had  not  lessened  Prime-
rose^s  enmity  to  Harvey  and  his  views ; for,  on  the  appearance
of  these  academical  essays,  he  speedily  showed  himself  again
in  the  field  as  their  opponent,  publishing  distinct  animadver-

‘ Vide  Siegel,  De  Sang.  Motu  in  Praef.

* VesUngius’s  letters  may  be  found  in  bis  Observationes  Anatomic®  et  Epist.  Med.
ex  scbedis  potbumis,  12mo,  Hafn.  1664.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  tbe  replies
wbicb  Harvey  doubtless  \^Tote  to  these  epistles  bave  not  been  preserved.


HIS  WORKS.


xlv


sions  upon  each  of  the  inaugural  dissertations  in  the  course  of
the  year.^  Regius  (Leroy)^  a man  of  much  less  mind  and
information  than  Drake,  if  we  may  decide  from  their  works,
was,  in  turn,  not  slow  to  encounter  Primerose  and  the  spirit
in  which  he  did  so,  as  well  as  the  temper  and  taste  of  the
reply  which  Primerose,  true  to  his  controversial  nature,  very
soon  produced,®  mfiy?  to  a certain  extent,  be  imagined  from
the  titles  of  their  several  productions,  which  are  given  below.

Still  more  illustrious  advocates  of  the  Harveian  circulation
presented  themselves  in  Werner  Rolfink,^  professor  of  anatomy
at  Jena,  and  the  celebrated  Renatus  Descartes.  Rolfink,  from  his
position  and  his  popularity  as  a teacher,  had  immense  influence
in  disseminating  the  new  doctrine  over  Europe ; and  Descartes,
under  the  aegis  of  his  powerful  name,  was  no  less  effective  by
means  of  his  writings.®  Opposed  in  his  advocacy  of  the
Harveian  views  by  Vopiscus  Eortunatus  Plempius,  professor  of
Louvain,  Descartes  made  himself  still  more  thoroughly  master
of  the  subject,  and  when  he  next  appears  as  its  advocate,
which  he  does  by  and  by,  he  even  appeals  to  the  experiments
he  had  made^  on  living  animals  in  support  of  his  convictions
and  conclusions.

The  controversy  on  the  circulation  had  been  carried  on  up
to  this  time  abroad  rather  than  at  home;  Harvey  seems  to
have  won  over  to  his  side  all  the  men  of  his  own  country  who,
by  their  education  and  acquirements,  might  have  been  fitted  to
array  themselves  against  him  : his  lectures  at  the  College  of
Physicians  had  apparently  satisfied  all  his  contemporaries.
But  now  one  of  Harvey^s  own  countrymen  made  his  appear-

‘ Animadversiones  in  J.  Walsei  (Drake)_  Disputationem  quam  pro  Circulatione
Sanguinis  proposuit,  4to,  Amst.  1639.  Animad.  in  Theses  quas  pro  Circulat.  Sang.
Hen.  Regius  proposuit,  4to,  Leidae,  1640.

^ Spongia  qua  eluuntm-  sordes  Animad.  quas  Jac.  Primirosius  advers.  Theses,  &c.,
edidit.  4to,  Leidae,  1640.

^ Antidotum  adversus  Spongiam  Venenatam  Hen.  Regii,  4to,  Leidae,  1640.

'*  Epist.  duae  ad  Th.  Bartholinum  de  Motu  Chyli  et  Sanguinis,  8vo,  Leid.  1641,

^ Epist.  Cartesii,  4to,  Amst.  1668.


xlvi


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


ance  as  the  vindicator  of  the  circulation  from  the  misrepresen-
tations and  misapprehensions  of  its  adversaries.  This  was  Dr.
afterwards  Sir  George  Ent,  a good  scholar^  a respectable  ana-
tomistj  conversant  with  physical  science  generally,  a gentleman
by  his  position  and  profession,  acquainted  with  all  the  leading
men  of  letters  and  science  of  his  time,  and  in  particular,
enjoying  the  friendship  of  WilUam  Harvey.  Ent’s  work  is
entitled  'An  Apology  for  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  with  a
Reply  to  H^mylius  Parisanus.^^  In  his  letter  to  Harvey,  which
stands  in  front  of  the  work,  Ent  lets  it  appear  that  he  was  anxious
to  come  before  the  world  as  the  advocate  of  the  circiilation ;
he  first  thought  of  making  Primerose  the  particular  object  of  his
animadversions,  but  as  this  opponent  had  already  been  very
effectually  handled  by  Henry  Leroy,  he  preferred  taking  Pari-
sanus  to  task,  the  rather  as  in  dealing  with  him  he  could  also
controvert  Primerose  where  it  was  necessary. — Eut’s  Apology
is,  undoubtedly,  a learned,  though  perhaps  a somewhat  pompous
and  pedantic  book  ; still  the  writer  occasionally  shows  both
wit  and  fancy  in  handling  his  antagonist,  and  always  learning
enough  in  dealing  with  his  subject.  "Nothing,  indqed,”  to  quote
Dr.  Lawrence,®  “ can  be  more  unlike  than  Parisanus  and  Ent ;
and  it  is  not  wonderful,  therefore,  that  one  utterly  ignorant
of  physical  science  confronted  by  one  thoroughly  conversant
therein — that  one,  without  power  of  utterance,  opposed  by  one
gifted  with  eloquence — that  one,  sluggish  and  iueiT,  in  the
hands  of  one  active  and  full  of  energy,  should  be  effectually  van-
quished and  overcome.”  We  may  imagine,  nay,  we  may  be
certain,  that  Harvey  was  not  unacquainted  with  Ent’s  pui’pose
to  appear  as  the  advocate  of  hL  discovery,  nor  with  the  Apology
before  it  saw  the  light.

tiaving  observed  the  appearance  of  certain  academical  dis-

‘ Apologia  pro  Circuitione  Sanguinis,  qua  respondetur  .Eniylio  Parisano,  Svo,
Lond.  1641.

^ Harvei  vita,  ad  cap.  Operum,  London,  1766.


HIS  WORKS.


xlvii


sertations  in  defence  of  the  circulation,  we  perceive  the  apostles
of  all  new  truths,  namely,  the  youthful,  at  work.  Were  there
not  successive  generations  of  men,  the  world  would  stand  still;
the  death  of  the  individual  was  not  merely  a necessary  condi-
tion to  the  enjoyment  of  life  by  successive  generations,  hut
essential  also  to  the  onward  progress  of  mankind.  No  man
who  had  attained  to  the  age  of  40  years,  it  is  said,  was  found
to  adopt  the  doctrine  of  the  circulation;  it  had  to  win  its
way  under  the  safeguard  of  the  Drakes  and  Leroys  especially,
that  is  to  say,  of  the  youthful  and  unprejudiced  spirits  of
the  age.

Twenty  years  after  the  publication  of  the  ^ Exercitatio  de
Motu  Cordis  et  Sanguinis,’  Joannes  Riolanus,  the  younger,  was
delivered  of  his  ' Encheiridium  Anatomicum’  (8vo.  Lugd.  Batav.
1648),  in  which  he  makes  a vain  attempt  to  supplant  the
Harveian  doctrine  by  a new  and  most  extraordinary  one  of  his
own,  so  incongruous  and  unlikely,  that  in  these  days  we  are
irresistibly  led  to  form  no  very  high  estimate  of  the  intellect
that  could  have  engendered  it.  It  looks  to  us,  indeed,
at  this  time,  like  condescension  on  the  part  of  the  great
English  anatomist,  that  he  noticed  the  abortion  of  such  a
tyro  in  animal  physics  as  the  Erench  professor  here  approves
himself.  Harvey’s  genius  could  surely  have  felt  no  real
respect  for  the  illogical  intellect  of  Riolan.  But  Harvey,
when  he  noticed  Riolan’s  publication,  was  in  want  of  a good
occasion  for  a farther  development  of  his  own  views ; and  so
he  seized  on  the  Pai'isian  professor,  respectable  from  his  posi-
tion in  the  university,  and  as  physician  to  the  queen  mother
of  France,  and  made  him  his  vehicle — his  placard  bearer.
Harvey,  besides,  was  personally  acquainted  with  Riolan,  who
had  accompanied  Mary  de  Medicis  to  England  on  a visit
to  her  daughter  the  Queen  of  Charles  the  First ; on  which
occasion  Harvey  and  Riolan  had  even  held  conversations  on


xlviii


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


the  subject  of  the  circulation,  to  which  it  is  said  that  Riolan
when  face  to  face  with  the  propounder,  made  no  objection.

Riolan  is  by  no  means  totally  opposed  to  a circulation  of
the  blood;  he  would  only  limit  it  to  certain  arbitraiy  regions,
into  which  he  divides  the  body : whilst  it  goes  forward  in  one,
it  has  no  existence  in  another.  The  nature  of  his  ideas  can
be  gathered  from  Harvey’s  comments  on  them  in  his  First
Disquisition,  addressed  to  the  Coryphseus  of  Anatomists,  as
he  politely  designates  the  Parisian  professor.

Having  disposed  of  the  original  notions  of  the  author  of
the  'Encheiridium  Anatomicum,’  in  this  first  disquisition,
Harvey,  in  his  second,  returns  to  his  own  views,  which  he
proceeds  still  further  to  illustrate  and  confirm  by  additional
arguments,  observations,  and  experiments.  In  this  admirable
essay,  we  obtain  innumerable  glimpses  of  the  clearness  of
Harvey’s  judgment,  of  his  admirable  powers  of  observation,
and  the  diligent  and  excellent  use  he  made  of  them;  we  at
the  same  time  become  aware  of  the  great  loss  we  have  sus-
tained through  tlie  destruction  of  his  jMedical  Observations.
Riolan,  in  his  Encheiridium,  proposed  to  point  out  iu  the
structure  of  the  healthy  body  the  seats  of  the  various  diseases,
and  to  discuss  theii’  nature  in  conformity  with  the  opinions
that  had  been  entertained  of  them.  This  was  obviously  at
once  a barren  and  an  impracticable  route : the  matters  he  had
in  hand  could  never  have  been  other  than  abstractions,  and
his  own  observations  criticisms  on  opinions,  never  on  facts.
How  much  more  natural  and  judicious  the  coui’se  which
Harvey  proposes  to  himself,  when  he  informs  us  that  in  his
‘ Medical  Anatomy’  he  meant,  “ fi’om  the  many  dissections
he  had  made  of  the  bodies  of  persons  worn  out  by  serious  and
strange  affections,  to  relate  how  and  in  what  way  the  internal
organs  were  changed  in  their  situation,  size,  structiu’e,  figm’e,
consistency,  and  other  sensible  qualities,  from  theii’  natural


HIS  WORKS.


xlix


forms  and  appearances^  such  as  they  are  usually  described  by
anatomists;  and  in  what  various  and  remarkable  ways  they
were  affected.  Eor  even  as  the  dissection  of  healthy  and  well-
constituted  bodies  contributes  essentially  to  the  advancement
of  philosophy  and  sound  physiology,  so  does  the  inspection  of
diseased  and  cachectic  subjects  powerfully  assist  philosophical
pathology.^’  This  was  precisely  what  Morgagni  lived,  in  some
considerable  measure,  to  achieve,  and  it  is  that  which  it  has
been  the  business  of  modern  pathology,  through  the  illustrious
line  of  the  Baillies,  Laennecs,  Andrals,  Louis,  Cruveilhiers,
Carswells,  Richard  Brights,  and  many  others,  to  render  more
and  more  complete.

Riolan  never  replied  to  Harvey  ; but  neither  did  the  Parisian
Professor  attempt  to  vindicate  his  Hews,  nor  did  he  exhibit  such
candour  as  to  own  himself  otherwise  convinced  or  converted.
His  doctrine  had  no  abettors,  and  never  bore  fruit ; it  stood  a
barren  ear  amidst  the  lusty,  green,  and  copious  harvest,  that
had  already  sprung  up  and  overspread  the  lands.

Harvey  must  now,  indeed,  have  seen  his  views  assured  of
general  reception  at  no  distant  date.  The  same  year  in  which
he  himself  answered  Riolan,  Dr.  James  de  Back,  of  Amsterdam,
published  his  work  on  the  Heart,^  which  is  written  entirely  in
harmony  with  the  Harveian  doctrines,  and  the  celebrated
Lazarus  Riverius,  Professor  of  Medicine  in  the  University  of
Montpellier,  publicly  defended  and  taught  the  circulation  of
the  blood. ^ The  following  year,  Paul  Mai’quard  Siegel,  of
Hamburg,  produced  his  commentary  on  the  Motion  of  the
Blood,®  in  which  he  addresses  himself  paidicularly  to  a refuta-
tion of  Riolanus,  whose  scholar  he  had  been,  and  at  the  same
time  shows  himself  so  thoroughly  at  home  in  the  general  ques-


' De  Corde,  Amst.  1649  ; in  English,  12mo,  Lend.  1653.

“ A candour  for  which  he  was  by  and  by  summoned  hy  an  adherent  of  the  old
school  to  resign  his  chair.

' De  Sanguinis  Motu  Commentarius,  4to,  Hamb.  1650.


d


1


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


tion,  that  he  is  able  to  throw  additional  light  on  it  by  new  and
ingenious  considerations  and  experiments.

Harvey  appears  to  have  been  pleased  with  SlegeFs  produc-
tion j for  by  and  by  he  sends  the  Hamburger  his  new  work  on
Generation,  accompanied  by  an  admuable  letter,  which  has
happily  been  preserved.’^  No  one  in  reading  that  remarkable
epistle  could  suppose  that  the  pen  which  set  it  down  was  in
the  hand  of  a man  in  the  75th  year  of  his  age.

The  young  men  of  16.28  and  1630,  who  had  been  educated
in  unbelief  of  the  circulation,  were  now  coming  into  possession
of  professorial  chairs  and  places  of  distinction  ; and  having
long  escaped  from  leading-strings  and  made  inquuy  for  them-
selves, were  beginning  in  many  of  the  European  universities  to
proclaim  the  better  faith  through  further  knowledge  that  had
sprung  up  within  them.  Harvey  had  himself  received  the
seeds  of  his  discovery  in  Ital}^;  but  the  fructifying  mother  was
slow  to  recognize  him  whom  she  had  so  powerfully  concmred  to
form.  It  was  not  till  1651  that  Harvey^s  views  were  in  any
way  admitted  beyond  the  Alps,  when  Ti’ullius,  a Roman  pro-
fessor, expounded  and  taught  them.  About  the  same  time,
John  Pecquet,^  of  Dieppe,  and  Thomas  Bartholin,  the  Dane,®
men  of  original  mind  in  the  one  case,  of  extensive  learning  and
great  research  in  the  other,  gave  in  their  adhesion  to  the  new
doctrine,  and  spread  it  far  and  near  by  their  writings.  The
victory  for  the  circulation  may  finally  be  said  to  have  been  won,
when  Plempius,  of  Louvain,  the  old  antagonist  of  Descartes
on  the  subjeet,  retracted  all  he  had  formerly  written  against  it,
convinced  of  its  truth,  as  he  so  candidly  informs  us,  by  the  very
pains  he  took  to  satisfy  himself  of  its  erroueousness,  and  publicly
proclaimed  his  conversion : “ Primum  mihi  hoc  inventum  non

' Vide  p.  596.

“ Experimenta  nova  Anatomica.  Acced.  de  Motu  Sanguinis  Diss.,8vo,  Paris,  1651.

^ Anatomia  ex  Casp.  Baitholini  Parent.  Institut.  ad  Sanguinis  Circulationem.
tertium  Reforniata,  8vo,  Leid.  1651.


HIS  WORKS.


li


placuit/’  says  the  worthy  Plempius — “ This  discovery  did  not
please  me  at  all  at  firsts  as  I publicly  testified  both  by  word  of
mouth  and  in  my  writings;  but  by  and  by,  when  I gave  myself  up
with  firmer  purpose  to  refute  and  expose  it,  lo  ! I refute  and  ex-
pose myself,  so  convincing,  not  to  say  merely  persuasive,  are  the
arguments  of  the  author  : I examine  the  whole  thing  anew  and
with  greater  ca^e,  and  having  at  length  made  the  dissection  of
a few  live  dogs,  I find  that  all  his  statements  are  most  true.^^^
From  the  first  promulgation  of  the  doctrine  of  the  circula-
tion, its  progress  towards  ultimate  general  acknowledgment  can
scarcely  be  said  for  a moment  to  have  been  interrupted.  The
hostility  of  the  Primeroses  and  Parisanuses  and  Riolans  never
interfered  with  it  in  fact ; the  more  candid  spirits  were  rather
led  to  inquire,  by  the  virulence  of  these  weak  and  inconsistent
opponents,  who  thus  hastened  the  catastrophe  of  their  own  dis-
comfiture, and  the  triumph  of  the  truth.  If  men’s  minds  were
once  in  danger  of  being  led  astray,  it  was  only  for  an  instant,
and  not  so  much  through  the  opposition  of  enemies,  as  by  an
erroneous  generalization,  which  a short  interval  of  time  sufficed
to  correct.  Csecilius  Folius,  a Venetian  physician,  having  met
with  one  of  those  anomalous  instances  of  pervious  foramen  ovale
in  an  adult,  immediately  and  without  looking  farther,  jumped
to  the  conclusion  that  this  structmre  or  arrangement  was
normal,  and  that  the  blood  passed  in  all  cases  by  the  route  he
had  discovered,  from  the  right  to  the  left  side  of  the  heart.  Many
Italians  received  with  favour  the  account  which  Folius  imme-
diately published  of  his  diseovery  f and  the  natural  philosopher,
Gassendi,  having  about  the  same  period  had  another  instance
of  the  kind  which  Folius  encountered,  shown  to  him,  concurred
with  this  writer  in  his  views,  and  by  a variety  of  arguments
and  objections,  strove  to  damage,  and  did  temporarily  damage,

' Plempius,  Fundamenta  Medicina3,  fol.  Lovan.  1652,  p.  128.

^ Sanguinis  a dextro  in  sinistrum  Cordis  Ventriculum-  defliientis  facilis  reperta
via,  fol.  Venet.  1639.


lii


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


the  Harveian  doctrine.^  But  this  was  only  for  a brief  season  ;
for  Domenic  de  Marchettis^  soon  after  showed  that  Fohus  had
mistaken  an  extremely  rare  occurrence  for  a general  fact,  and
that  if  the  open  foramen  ovale  might  afford  a passage  from
the  right  to  the  left  side  of  the  heart  in  one  case,  closed  it
would  suffer  no  such  transit  in  hundreds  of  other  instances.
Gassendi,  moreover,  by  getting  stiU  more  out  of  his  depth,
soon  afterwards  showed  that  familiarity  with  general  physics
did  not  imply  a particular  knowledge  of  anatomy,  nor  give  the
power  of  reasoning  sagely  on  subjects  of  special  physiology ;
so  that  in  his  eagerness  to  assail  Harvey  he  did  injury  in  the  end
only  to  his  own  reputation.  In  short,  Harvey  in  his  lifetime
had  the  high  satisfaction  of  witnessing  his  discovery  generally
received,  and  inculcated  as  a canon  in  most  of  the  medical  schools
of  Europe ; he  is,  therefore,  one  of  the  few — his  fnend  Thomas
Hobbes  says,  he  was  the  only  one  within  his  knowledge — “Solus
quod  sciam,’^  ® who  lived  to  see  the  new  doctrine  which  he  had
promulgated  victorious  over  opposition,  and  established  in
puhlie  opinion.  Harvey’s  views,  then,  were  admitted ; the
circulation  of  the  blood,  through  the  action  of  the  heart,  was
received  as  an  established  fact  ; but  envy  and  detraction  now
began  their  miserable  work.  The  fact  was  so;  but  it  was  none  of
Harvey’s  discovering ; the  fact  was  so,  but  it  was  of  no  great
moment  in  itself,  and  the  merit  of  arriving  at  it  was  small ;
the  way  had  been  amply  prepared  for  such  a conclusion.

Let  us  look  as  impartially  as  we  may  at  each  of  these  state-
ments.

They  who  deny  the  originality  of  Harvey’s  induction,  very
commonly  confound  the  idea  of  a IMotion  of  the  blood,  with
the  idea  of  a Continuous  Motion  in  a Cii’cle.  It  would  seem

' Gassendi,  ‘De  Septo  Cordis  pervio, ’published  in  a collection  by  Severinus  Pinseus,
12mo,  Leid.  1640.

’ D.  de  Marchettis,  Anatomia,  8vo,  Padova.  1652.

^ Eleinenta  Philosopbiae  in  Prnefat.


HIS  WORKS.


liii


that  even  from  remote  antiquity,  and  by  common  consent,
mankind  had  recognized  the  blood  to  be  in  motion.  We  have
this  fact  declared  to  us  by  all  antiquity,  and  it  is  even  par-
ticularly referred  to  in  various  passages  of  the  grand  observer
of  his  age,  the  depositary  of  the  popular  science  of  all  preceding
ages — Shakespeare.  Brutus  speaks  thus  to  Portia  :

“ You  are  my  true  and  honourable  ■wife ;

As  dear  to  me  as  are  the  ruddy  drops
That  visit  my  sad  heart

language  not  more  touching  and  beautiful  than  physiologi-
cally correct.  And  again,  with  more  of  involution  and  ellipsis,
yet  with  a meaning  that  is  unmistakable,  Warwick,  by  the
bedside  of  the  murdered  Gloster,  proceeds, —

“ See  how  the  blood  is  settled  in  his  face !

— Oft  have  I seen  a timely-parted  ghost,

Of  ashy  semblance,  meagre,  pale  and  bloodless,

— Being  all  descended  to  the  labouring  heart.

Who  in  the  conflict  that  he  holds  ■with  death,

Attracts  the  same  for  aidance  gainst  the  enemy  ;

Which  with  the  heart  there  cools,  and  ne’er  returneth
To  blush  and  beautify  the  cheek  again —

— But  see,  his  face  is  black  and  full  of  blood,”  &c.

These  passages  have  actually  been  cited,  to  prove  that
Shakespeare  was  not  unacquainted  with  the  circulation ; and
there  have  not  been  wanting  some^  who  have  even  argued  that
Shakespeare  had  his  knowledge  direct  from  the  fountain-head —
from  Harvey  himself,  with  whom,  for  several  years  at  least,  he
was  contemporaneous.^

The  passages  quoted  above  are  referred  to  all  the  more
willingly,  from  their  having  preceded  the  teaching  of  Harvey
by  a few  years  only  ; but  Shakespeare  probably  referred  to

‘ Thomas  Nimmo,  Esq.,  of  New  Amsterdam,  Berbice;  “On  a passage  in  Shake-
speare’s Julius  Caesar.”  The  Shakespeare  Society’s  Papers,  vol.  ii,  p.  109.

“ Shakespeare  died  in  1616,  the  year  when  Harvey  began  to  lecture  at  the  Col-
lege of  Physicians.  Harvey  and  Shakespeare  may  very  well  have  been  acquainted,
— let  us  hope  that  they  were, — but  there  is  no  authority  for  sajung  that  they  were
friends.


liv


THE  LIFE  OF  HAKVEY.


notliing  more  than  the  accredited  opinion  that  the  blood  was
in  motion  within  the  vessels^  particularly  the  veins  of  the  body.
In  ancient  times^  indeed,  the  veins  were  regarded,  as  they  are
esteemed  by  the  vulgar  at  the  present  hour,  as  the  principal
vessels  of  the  body  ; they  only  were  once  believed  to  contain  time
blood;  the  arteries  were  held  to  contain  at  best  hut  a little  blood,
different  from  that  of  the  veins,  and  mixed  accidentally  in  some
sort  with  the  vital  spirits,  of  which  they  were  the  proper  conduits.

In  former  times,  farther, — times  anterior  to  Harvey  whether
more  remotely  or  more  nearly, — the  hver,  as  the  organ  of  the
Inemapoesis,  was  regarded  as  the  source  of  all  the  veins,  i.  e.  of
all  the  proper  blood-vessels ; the  heart,  as  the  generator  of  heat
and  the  vital  spirits,  was  viewed  as  the  mere  cistern  of  the  blood,
whence  it  was  propelled  by  the  act  of  inspiration,  and  whither  it
reverted  during  the  act  of  expu’ation,  its  flow  to  this  part  of  the
body  or  to  that,  being  mainly  determined  by  certain  excitations
there  inherent  or  specially  set  up.  By  and  by,  however,  the  liver
was  given  up  as  the  origin  of  the  venous  system  generally;  hut
such  anatomists  as  Jacobus  Sylvius,  Realdus  Columbus,  Bartho-
lomseus  Eustachius,  and  Gabriel  Fallopius,  may  be  found  op-
posing Vesalius  in  regard  to  the  origin  of  the  vena  cava,  and
asserting  that  it  takes  its  rise  from  the  liver,  not  from  the  heai’t,
as  the  great  reformer  in  modern  anatomy  had  maintained.

In  the  231’Ogress  of  anatomical  investigation,  the  valves  in  the
interior  of  the  heart,  at  the  roots  of  the  two  great  cardiac
arterial  trunks,  and  in  the  course  of  the  veins  at  large,  were
perceived  and  their  probable  uses  and  actions  canvassed.  The
general  and  prevalent  notion  was  that  they  served  to  break  or
moderate  the  force  of  the  cmrent  in  the  interior  of  tlie  vessels
or  parts  where  they  were  encountered ; though  Berengai’ius  of
Carpi,^  in  describing  the  cardiac  valves,  had  abeady  said  that
the  effect  of  the  tricuspid  A'alves,  between  the  right  auricle  and
ventricle,  must  be  to  prevent  the  blood  in  the  former  cavity
‘ Comment,  super  Auatomiam  Muiidnii,  4to,  Bonoii.  1521.


HIS  WORKS.


Iv


from  escaping  into  the  latter ; whilst  the  office  of  the  semi-
lunar valves,  at  the  origins  of  the  pulmonic  artery  and  aorta,
he  declared,  from  their  position,  must  he  to  prevent  the  en-
trance of  the  blood  of  the  great  arterial  trunks  into  the  heart.
Fabricius,  the  master  of  Harvey,  may  be  said  to  have  pei’fected
anatomical  knowledge  in  regard  to  the  valves  of  the  veins — for
he  by  no  means  first  directed  attention  to  their  existence,  or
discovered  them,  as  is  generally  asserted.  Fabricius  believed
that  their  function  was  to  act  as  obstacles  to  congestions  of
blood,  as  strengtheners  of  the  veins  and  preventives' to  their
becoming  over-distended.

Another  long  and  much  agitated  point  in  the  anatomy  of
the  sanguiferous  system,  was  the  state  of  the  septmn  ventri-
culorum  of  the  heart,  in  respect  of  permeability  or  impermea-
bility. The  reason  of  the  vast  importance  attached  to  this
point  was  connected  with  the  ancient,  and,  in  Harvey^s  time,
generally  accredited  hypothesis  of  the  Three  Spirits — the
natural,  the  vital,  and  the  animal.  The  hypothesis  to  be
brought  into  play,  was  presumed  to  require  the  intermixture
in  the  heart  of  the  two  kinds  of  blood  that  were  held  appro-
priate to  the  two  ventricles  and  to  the  arteries  and  veins  re-
spectively, and  that  were  farther  believed  to  meet  in  the
cavities  of  the  cranium,  thorax,  and  abdomen,  from  which  they
returned  to  the  heart  by  the  way  they  came,  for  a fresh  supply
of  the  spirits  {now  exhausted  or  enfeebled),  under  the  agency
of  which  all  the  important  operations  of  the  body  were  be-
lieved to  be  accomplished.

Now,  G-alen,  the  author  of  this  hypothesis,  in  order  to
obtain  an  admixture  of  the  two  kinds  of  blood,  feigned  and
described  the  partition  between  the  two  ventricles,  either  as
perforated  like  a sieve,  or  as  filled  with  depressions  of  depth
sufficient  to  entitle  them  to  be  viewed  as  constituting  a kind  of
third  ventricle — the  last  assumption  doubtless  to  accommodate
each  order  of  spirits  with  its  own  particular  officine  or  workshop.


Ivi


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


With  the  revival  of  anatomical  knowledge  in  modern  Europe,
however,  the  partition  of  the  ventricles  was  soon  perceived  not
to  be  porous  or  cribriform,  but,  as  was  first  said,  to  he  so  nearly
solid  that  any  filtration  of  blood  through  it  was  well  nigh  im-
possible (Bereugarius,  1521),  and  next,  to  be  so  completely  solid
that  all  permeation  of  blood  was  impossible  (A^esahus,  1555),
and  another  means  must  therefore  be  found  for  securing  the
necessary  admixture  of  the  two  kinds  of  blood  in  order  to  effect
the  engenderment  of  the  natural,  animal,  and  rital  spirits.

Such  was  the  state  of  anatomical  science  and  physiological
belief  on  this  particular  point  when  Michael  Seiwetus  came
upon  the  stage,  and  suggested  the  transit  of  the  blood  through
the  lungs  from  the  right  side  of  the  heart  to  the  left,  with  a
view  of  meeting  the  difficulty  which  the  undeniable  solidity  of
the  septum  ventriculorum  opposed  to  the  presumed  necessary
admixture  of  the  two  kinds  of  blood.  Servetus’s  idea,  conse-
quently— if  at  the  distance  of  three  hundred  year’s  we  may
presume  to  follow  the  mental  process  that  led  to  the  perming
of  the  remarkable  and  often-quoted  passage  which  occm’s  in
his  works — appears  to  be  nothing  more  than  a suggestion
or  proposition  as  a means  of  meeting  a difficulty ; it  is  very
much  as  though  he  had  said  : If  you  cannot  go  straight  through,
you  must  even  go  round  about.  To  so  much  and  to  no  more,  do
Servetus’s  claims  to  be  considered  a discoverer,  in  the  sense  we
would  attach  to  that  word,  amourrt.  The  passage  from  the
‘Restitutio  Christianismi'  of  Servetus,  1553,  if  viewed  from  the
point  proposed,  will  not  fail  to  set  his  title  to  he  regarded  as
the  discoverer  of  the  lesser  circulation  in  its  true  light — in
a light  under  which  it  has  not  yet  been  seen.  W e translate
so  much  of  the  passage  as  hears  on  the  question  under  renew.
“ The  vital  spirit  has  its  origin  in  the  left  venti’icle,  the  lungs
assisting  especially  in  its  generation.  It  is  a subtile  spirit  * * *
It  is  engendered  fi’om  the  mixtui’e  that  takes  place  in  the
lungs  of  the  inspu'ed  air  with  the  elaborated  subtile  blood  which


HIS  WORKS.


Ivii


the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  communicates  to  the  left.  But
this  communication  takes  place^  not  by  the  middle  septum  of
the  hearty  as  is  commonly  believed^  but  by  a remarkable  arti-
fice ; the  subtile  blood  of  the  right  side  of  the  heart  is  agitated
in  a lengthened  course  through  the  lungs^  whereby  it  is  elabo-
rated, from  which  it  is  thrown  of  a crimson  colour,  and  from
the  vena  arteriosa  (pulmonary  artery)  is  transfused  into  the
arteria  venosa  (pulmonary  veins) ; it  is  then  mixed  in  the
arteria  venosa  itself  with  the  inspired  air,  and  by  the  act  of
expiration  is  purified  from  fuliginous  vapours,  when,  having
become  the  fit  recipient  of  the  vital  spirit,  it  is  at  length
attracted  by  the  diastole.  Now,  that  the  communication  and
preparation  take  place  as  stated  through  the  lungs,  is  pro-
claimed by  the  various  conjunctions  and  communications  of
the  arterial  vein  with  the  venous  artery.  The  remarkable
size  of  the  arterial  vein  (pulmonary  artery)  confirms  this,  a
vessel  which  could  neither  have  its  actual  constitution  nor
dimensions,  nor  transmit  such  a quantity  of  the  purest  hlood
direct  from  the  heart  itself,  for  the  mere  nourishment  of  the
lungs.  Neither  would  the  heart  supply  the  lungs  in  such
proportion,  (especially  when  we  see  the  lungs  in  the  embryo
nourished  from  another  source)  by  reason  of  those  membranes  or
valves  which  remain  unopened  until  the  hour  of  birth,  as
Galen  teaches.  The  blood,  consequently,  from  the  moment  of
birth,  is  sent,  and  in  such  quantity  is  sent,  for  another  pur-
pose from  the  heart  into  the  lungs ; from  the  lungs  also  it  is
not  simple  air  that  is  sent  to  the  heart,  but  air  mixed  with
blood  is  transmitted  through  the  arteria  venosa  (pulmonary
vein).  In  the  lungs  consequently  does  the  mixture  take  place.
The  crimson  colour  is  imparted  to  the  spirituous  blood  by  the
lungs,  not  by  the  heart.  There  is  not  room  enough  in  the
left  ventricle  of  the  heart  for  so  important  and  so  great  an
admixture ; neither  is  there  space  there  for  the  elaboration
into  the  crimson  colour.  Finally,  the  septum  medium,  seeing


Iviii


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


that  it  is  without  vessels  and  properties,  is  not  adapted  to  ac-
complish that  communication  and  elaboration,  although  some-
thing may  transude  through  it.’^

The  discussion  in  this  passage  from  Servetus  oh\iously  con-
cerns the  generation  of  the  vital  spirit,  not  the  pulmonic  cir-
culation properly  so  called — that  is  altogether  secondarj'  and
subordinate.  His  mention  of  “ numerous  communications
between  the  vena  arteriosa  and  the  arteria  venosa,”  is  plainly
conjectural ; neither  he,  nor  any  one  else  for  a century  after
him,  saw  such  communications.  The  course  through  the
lungs,  then,  as  suggested  by  Servetus,  was  a mere  hypothetical
proposal  for  getting  over  the  difficulty  of  the  solid,  or  nearly
solid,  septum  ventriculoi’um.  As  to  the  means  by  which  such
a transfusion  as  he  suggests,  is  effected,  Servetus,  as  he  was
profoundly  ignorant  himself,  so  does  he  leave  his  readers  en-
tirely in  the  dark.  The  transmission  of  the  blood  from  the
right  to  the  left  side  of  the  heart,  which  Servetus  proposed,  is
in  fact,  no  great  improvement  on  the  old  efflux  and  reflux,
like  the  tides  of  Euripus,  betwixt  Attica  and  Euboea.  He  had
no  conception  of  a circle  of  the  blood  beginning  and  ending
in  the  heart.  On  the  contrary,  he  regarded  the  liver  as  the
fountain-head  of  the  blood ; and  if  he  has  any  reference  to  a
moving  power  in  connexion  with  the  heai’t,  it  is  nothing  more
than  the  diastole  or  dilatation  of  the  organ  that  is  named — a
passive  state  therefore  considered  as  an  active  and  efficient
cause,  which  is  absurd.

The  first  modern  anatomist  of  high  repute,  who  treats  par-
ticularly of  the  motion  of  the  blood,  may  be  said  to  be  Realdus
Columbus  for  Servetus,  though  educated  to  the  medical  pro-
fession, had  long  forsaken  it  for  divinity,  and  only  uses  his  old
anatomical  knowledge  as  a means  of  illustrating  a theological
dogma.  Columbus,  in  treating  of  the  heart  and  lungs,  has
certainly  much  that  is  remai’kable,  and  much  that  is  true;

’ De  Re  Anatotnica,  fo!.  Venet.  1559.


HIS  WORKS.


ILt


and  had  he  said  nothing  more  than  we  find  in  single  detached
sentences  or  paragraphs  of  his  book,  he  must  have  been  re-
garded as  having  gone  a great  length  in  the  right  direction.
The  blood,  he  says,  once  it  has  entered  the  right  ventricle
from  the  vena  cava,  can  in  no  way  again  get  back ; for  the
tricuspid  valves  are  so  placed  that  whilst  they  give  a ready  pas-
sage to  the  stream  inwards,  they  effectually  oppose  its  return.
The  blood  continuing  to  advance  from  the  right  ventricle  into
the  vena  arteriosa  or  pulmonary  artery,  once  there  cannot  flow
back  upon  the  ventricle,  for  it  is  opposed  by  the  sigmoid  valves
situate  at  the  root  of  the  vessel.  The  blood,  therefore,  agitated
and  mixed  with  the  air  in  the  lungs,  and  having  thus
in  some  sort  acquired  the  nature  of  spirit,  is  carried  by  the
arteria  venosa  or  pulmonary  vein  into  the  left  ventricle,  from
whence,  being  received  into  the  aorta,  it  is,  by  the  ramifica-
tions of  this  vessel,  transmitted  to  all  parts  of  the  body.

This  much  taken  by  itself  looks  very  like  an  exposition  of
the  circulation  of  the  blood  as  understood  at  the  present  time,
though  we  still  see  that  the  blood  must  be  made  to  participate
in  the  nature  of  spirit  before  it  enters  the  arteries,  and  is  not
the  blood  which  is  contained  in  the  veins,  and  which  nourishes
the  body  ; but  when  we  go  farther  and  turn  to  other  parts  of  his
writings,  we  see  that  Columbus  could  never  have  conceived  any
proper  idea  of  the  circulation.  For  example,  he  continues,  with
Galen,  to  regard  the  liver  as  the  origin  of  all  the  veins.  The
vena  portae,  he  says,  arising  by  innumerable  roots  from  the  con-
cavity of  the  liver,  proceeds  to  carry  blood  from  this  organ  by
different  branches  to  the  stomach,  spleen,  and  intestines,  to  the
end  that  it  may  convey  nourishment  in  the  first  case,  black  bile
in  the  second,  and  in  the  third  serve  a double  function — viz.
supply  nourishment  to  the  intestines  at  once,  and  by  a kind
of  imbibition,  obtain  nutritive  matter,  which  is  forthwith  sent
back  to  the  liver  for  elaboration  into  blood.  The  vena  cava
again,  he  describes  as  arising  from  the  convex  aspect  of  the


lx


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


liver^  whence,  by  its  ramifications,  it  carries  the  blood  that  is
requisite  to  nourish  and  maintain  every  part  of  the  body.

This  of  itself  is  enough.  But  when,  in  addition,  we  find
that  Columbus  denies  the  muscular  nature  of  the  heart,  we  are
fully  qualified  to  form  a true  estimate  of  the  conception  .which
he  could  have  had  of  the  motion  of  the  blood,  and  of  his  right
to  be  regarded  as  the  discoverer  of  its  ceaseless  circular  move-
ment.

The  next  who  is  brought  upon  the  scene  with  the  imputed
honour  of  having  had  a knowledge,  not  only  of  the  lesser,  but
of  the  greater  or  systemic  cii’culation  also,  is  Andreas
Csesalpinus,^  of  Arezzo.  The  account  which  this  celebrated
peripatetic  philosopher  gives  of  the  passage  of  the  blood  from
the  right  to  the  left  side  of  the  heart  is  essentially  the  same  as
that  given  by  Columbus.  From  the  right  ventricle  the  blood
passes  into  the  pulmonic  artery,  and  from  this,  by  numerous
anastomoses,  into  the  pulmonic  veins,  which  transmit  it  to  the
left  ventricle.  Caesalpinus  says  well  that  it  is  absurd  to  call  the
pulmonary  artery  by  the  name  of  vena  arteriosa,  on  the  mere
ground  of  its  taking  its  departure,  hke  the  vena  cava,  from
the  right  ventricle ; it  is  a true  artery,  and  is,  in  all  respects,
analogous  to  the  aorta.  The  title  of  ai'teria  venosa,  again,
given  to  the  pulmonic  vein  is  not  less  ridiculous ; inasmuch
as  this  vessel,  though  it  end  in  the  left  ventricle,  has  all  the
properties  of  the  veins  at  large.

So  far  it  looks  as  if  Caesalpinus  had  an  exact  idea  of  the
pulmonary  circulation ; indeed,  he  uses  the  word  Circidation
in  reference  to  the  transit  of  the  blood  through  the  lungs  j
but  when  we  discover  him  still  speaking  of  the  permeation
of  the  septum  ventriculorum  by  the  blood,  our  faith  in  the
extent  and  accuracy  of  his  knowledge  begins  to  waver.

With  reference  to  the  greater  or  systemic  circulation,  again,

' Quaestiones  Peripateticas,  fol.  Florent.  1569;  Quaest.  Jledicinales,  fol.  Tenet.
1593  ; De  Plantis,  Florent.  1583.


HIS  WORKS.


Ixi


Csesalpimis  speaks  of  the  swelling  of  the  veins  between  the
circle  of  pressure  and  the  extremities  of  the  vessels,  when  a
ligature  is  thrown  round  a limb  ; and  he  even  goes  so  far  as
to  state  that  the  common  opinion  which  admitted  a progressive
motion — i.  e.  a motion  from  trunks  to  branches — of  the  blood
in  the  veins  was  erroneous.  Did  we  go  no  farther  we  should
be  led  to  conclude,  as  in  Columbuses  case,  that  Csesalpinus
believed  in  the  continuous  movement  of  the  blood  in  the  veins
in  one  direction  only ; and,  as  he  has  already  spoken  of  the
exit  of  the  blood  from  the  left  ventricle,  and  of  its  reception
by  the  aorta  for  general  distribution,  it  might  forthwith  be
inferred  that,  possessed  of  the  essential  elements  of  the  greater
circulation,  he  must,  as  matter  of  course,  have  been  familiar  with
this  as  an  ultimate  result.  And  such  an  inference  has  indeed
been  drawn  for  him  by  high  authority ; but  Csesalpinus
came  not  himself  to  any  such  conclusion ; it  was  arrived  at  by
others  in  his  behalf,  and  after  the  lapse  of  almost  a century
from  the  date  of  his  first  publication.  When  we  find  Csesal-
pinus, in  other  and  closely  connected  passages  of  his  writings,
singing  the  old  cuckoo  note  about  a flux  and  reflux  of  the
blood  in  the  veins,  and  even  using  the  accredited  word — Euripus
— to  express  his  idea  of  its  tide-like  nature ; when  we  further
perceive  that  he  was  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  the  valves  of
the  veins,  and  finally  arrive  at  his  explanation  of  the  cause  of  the
swelling  which  takes  place  in  the  veins  of  an  extremity  beyond
a ligatm’e, — the  cause  with  him  consisting  in  an  effort  of  the
blood  to  get  back  to  the  focus  or  centre,  lest,  through  the
compression  of  the  veins,  it  should  he  cut  off  and  suffocated,
— we  not  only  feel  that  we  were  warranted  in  entertaining  a
wholesome  scepticism  of  the  conclusion  come  to  by  the  ad-
mirers of  Csesalpinus  in  regard  to  his  knowledge  of  a circu-
lation of  the  blood ; but  waxing  in  our  infidelity  as  we  become
farther  acquainted  with  his  thoughts  on  the  constitution  of


Ixii


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


the  bloodj  we  find  everything  opposed  to  the  likelihood  of  his
having  arrived  at  the  same  result  as  Harvey;  and^  at  length,  we
discover  that  he  neither  had  nor  could  have  had  any  tme
knowledge  of  the  circulation.  Starting  from  the  Aristotelian
doctrines  of  growth  and  nutrition  (of  which  so  much  will  he
found  in  Harvey’s  work  on  Generation),  Csesalpinus  held
that  there  were  two  kinds  of  blood,  one  for  the  growth,
another  for  the  nourishment  of  the  body.  * The  blood  which
went  to  augment  the  body,  and  which  he  designated  alimen-
tum  auctivum,  or  aliment  of  increase,  flowed  from  the  liver  into
the  vena  cava,  which  he  seems  to  have  thought  was  connected
with  the  heart  only,  ut  inde  virtus  omnis  a corde  descendat —
that  a sufficiency  of  virtue  might  he  thereby  communicated  to  it.
The  auctive  blood,  he  farther  thought,  was  attracted  into  the
ventricles  of  the  heart  by  the  inherent  heat  of  the  organ.
The  dilatation  of  the  heart  and  arteries  he  imagined  to  he  due
to  “ an  effervescence  of  the  spii’it and  the  cause  of  their
“ collapse” — not  systole,  be  it  observed,  in  the  active  sense —
was  the  appropriation  by  the  parts  of  the  body  of  the  nutritive
and  augmentative  matter.  Again,  though  Caesalpinus  speaks  of
the  intercommunication  of  the  minute  arteries  and  veins,  he
still  thought  that  it  was  only  during  sleep  that  the  blood
mixed  with  the  spirits  passed  from  the  former  into  the  latter
class  of  vessels ; for  it  is  during  sleep,  he  says,  that  the  veins
become  distended,  whilst  the  pulsations  of  the  arteries  are  then
moderated.  He  plainly  sees  no  connexion  between  a delivery
by  the  artery  and  a filling  by  the  vein.  It  is  along  with  all
this,  and  as  if  to  settle  the  question  of  the  kind  of  knowledge
Csesalpinus  had  of  the  movement  of  the  blood,  that  he  uses
the  old  word  Euripus,  to  express  his  idea  of  its  alternating  or
tide-hke  motion.

Csesalpinus,  let  us  add,  had  no  conception  of  the  heai’t  as
the  efficient  cause  of  any  motion  which  the  blood  might  have.


HIS  WORKS.


Ixiii


In  the  often-quoted  passage  from  the  work  ‘ De  Plantis/i  it  is
still  the  spirit  inherent  in,  or  associated  with,  the  blood,  that
is  the  cause  of  its  motion.

Csesalpinus,  consequently,  tried  by  a very  moderately
searching  criticism,  presents  himself  to  us  as  but  very  little
farther  advanced  than  the  ancients  in  his  ideas  on  the  motion
of  the  blood. — The  interpretation  which  successive  generations
of  men  give  to  a passage  in  a writer,  some  century  or  two  old,
is  very  apt  to  be  in  consonance  with  the  state  of  knowledge  at
the  time,  in  harmony  with  the  prevailing  ideas  of  the  day,
and,  doubtless,  often  differs  signally  from  the  meaning  that
was  in  the  mind  of  the  man  who  composed  it.  The  Avorld
saw  nothing  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  in  Servetus,
Columbus,  Csesalpinus,  or — Shakespeare,  until  after  William
Harvey  had  taught  and  written.

The  truth  is,  that  some  of  the  foremost  grounds  of
Harvey’s  claims  to  rank  as  a discoverer  are  very  commonly
overlooked.  We  always  associate  his  name  and  fame  with  the
development  of  the  ultimate  fact  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood.
But  Harvey,  as  a step  to  this  conclusion,  first  demonstrated
the  heart  as  the  means  by  which  the  circulation  was  effected;
and  he  farther  showed  that  there  was  but  one  kind  of  blood,
common  to  both  the  arteries  and  the  veins.  Up  to  his
time  the  heart  was  regarded  as  the  passive  cistern  of  the  blood,
and  the  elaboratory  of  the  vital  spirits;  it  was  not  known
as  the  moving  instrument  in  any  eflfiux  or  reflux  of  the  blood,  or
even  of  any  lesser  circulation  that  had  been  previously  asserted
or  conjectirred.  The  moving  power  was  still  the  respiratory  act.
Harvey  may  be  said  to  have  first  broached,  as  he  also  essen-
tially completed  the  physiology  of  the  heart’s  actions.  The
circular  motion  of  the  blood  followed  as  a necessary  corollary
from  these.  The  “ motion  of  the  heart”  has  even  prece-
dence in  the  title  of  his  immortal  work ; the  chapter  in  which

‘ Qua  autem  ratione  fiat  alimenti  attractio,  &c.  De  Plantis,  lib.  i,  cap.  2,  p.  3,
4to,  Florent.  1583.


Ixiv


THE  LIFE  OF  HAEVEY.


Le  first  enters  properly  on  liis  subject  (Cbap.  2),  is  devoted
to  its  consideration.  And  then,  no  physiologist  up  to  HaiTCy’s
time  had  questioned  the  existence  of  two  kinds  of  blood,  one
appropriate  to  each  order  of  vessels,  and  answering  different
ends  in  the  economy.

The  only  name  still  wanting  in  this  historical  sketch,  till
we  come  to  Harvey,  is  that  of  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente,  his
teacher  in  anatomy.  Fabricius  had  given  particular  attention,
among  other  subjects,  to  the  anatomy  of  the  valves  of  the
veins,  which  he  entitled  ostila  venarum.  Fabricius,  indeed,
possessed  so  thorough  a knowledge  of  the  vahuilar  elements  of
the  vascular  system,  that  it  is  really  astonisliing,  as  an  able
writer^  has  remarked,  that  he  should  not  have  had  clearer  ideas
on  the  functions,  among  other  things,  of  the  pulmonary  veins,
and  should  have  continued  a rigid  adherent  to  the  prejudices
which  prevailed  before  his  time.  Fabricius  could  observe,  and
he  could  describe ; but  he  wanted  the  combining  intellect  that
infers,  the  imagination  that  leads  to  new  ideas — to  discovery.
Though  he  did  little  himself,  however,  to  advance  the  sum  of
human  knowledge,  he  proved  a tooth  in  the  wheel  that  has
since  put  in  motion  the  whole  machinery  of  modern  medical
science.  He  it  was  who  sowed  the  seed,  httle  dreaming  of  its
kind,  which,  finding  one  spot  of  congenial  soil,  sprung  up  a
harvest  that  has  continued  to  nurture  the  world  of  physiological
science  to  the  present  hour.^

* Sprengel,  Geschiclite  der  Arzneikunde,  ii  Abschnitt,  4 Kapitel.

“ I pass  by  unnoticed  in  my  text  several  names  that  have  been  very  gratuitously
associated  with  the  discovery  of  the  circulation,  such  as  that  of  Father  Paul  the
Venetian,  Walter  Warner  and  Mr.  Prothero,  Honoratus  Faber,  &c.  The  claims  of
Father  Paul  have  been  satisfactorily  explained  by  Dr.  Ent  in  his  ‘ Apology,’  who  has
shown  that  instead  of  Harvey  borrowing  from  the  Alonk,  the  Monk,  through  the
Venetian  ambassador  to  London,  who  was  Harvey’s  friend,  had  borrowed  from
Harvey.  The  others  do  not  require  serious  mention.  Dr.  Freind  has  given
an  excellent  summary  of  the  entire  doctrine  of  the  circulation  in  liis  Harveian
Oration,  to  which  it  is  with  much  pleasure  that  I refer  the  reader  for  other  informa-
tion. I also  pass  by  the  still-recurring  denials  by  obtuse  and  iU-informed  individuals
of  the  truth,  or  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  evidence  of  the  tnith,  of  the  Harveian  cir-


HIS  WORKS.


Ixv


Having  now  disposed  of  the  claims  that  have  been  set  up
in  behalf  of  one  or  another  as  the  discoverer  of  the  circulation,
and  shown,  we  trust  satisfactorily,  that  these  are  all  ahke  un-
tenable, we  should  now  proceed  to  discuss  the  question  of  the
cui  bono  ? — but  this  meets  us  in  so  forbidding  an  aspect,
brimful  as  is  our  mind  -with  a sense  of  the  all-importance  of
the  knowledge  we  had  from  Harvey,  and  seems  so  little  to
belong  to  oiu’  subject,  that  we  gladly  pass  it  by  unnoticed ;
though  it  be  only  to  find  ourselves  encountered  by  that  other
topic,  but  little  more  congenial  to  our  mood  of  mind  and  inti-
mate persuasion  : The  merit  of  Harvey  as  a discoverer.  Tew,
very  few  have  been  found  to  question  this ; but  as  one  man
of  undeniable  learning  and  eminence  in  his  profession,^  has
very  strangely,  as  it  seems  to  us,  been  led  to  do  so,  it  will  not
be  impertinent  if  we  cast  away  a few  words  on  this  matter.

Discovery  is  of  several,  particularly  of  two  kinds : one  sensible
or  perceptive ; another  rational  or  inductive ; the  former  an  act
of  simple  consciousness  through  an  impression  made  on  one  or
more  of  the  senses ; the  latter  a conclusion  come  to  by  the
higher  powers  of  the  understanding  dealing  with  data  pre-
viously acquired  by  the  senses  and  perceptive  faculties. — We
look  through  a telescope,  for  example,  and  we  perceive  a star
which  no  one  else  had  seen  before ; we  note  the  fact,  and  so
become  discoverers  of  a new  star.  The  merit  here  is  not,
surely,  very  great,  though  the  added  fact  may  be  highly  im-
portant. Again,  one  of  the  planets  is  subject  to  such  perturba-
tions in  its  course  that  to  compose  exact  tables  of  its  orbit  is
held  impossible.  These  perturbations  are  referable  to  none  of
the  known  perturbing  causes.  A great  astronomer  suggests  the
influence  of  an  exterior  and  unknown  planet  as  their  cause.  A

culation.  Those  who  can  not  see,  must,  contraiy  to  the  popular  adage,  be  admitted
to  be  still  blinder  than  those  who  tcill  not  see.

' Dr.  William  Hunter.  Introductory  Lectures,  p.  59,(4to.  Lond.  1784,)  to  which
the  reader  is  referred  for  a singularly  inconsistent  and  extraordinary  string  of
passages.


e


Ixvi


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


consummate  mathematician  and  physical  astronomer  makes  trial
of  this  suggestion  : he  assumes  the  ascertained  perturbations  as
elements,  he  combines  these  under  the  guidance  of  knowledge
and  reason,  and  at  length  he  says,  if  the  cause  suggested  be  well
founded,  there  or  thereabouts  must  it  exist ; and  lo  ! on  turning
the  far-seeing  tube  to  the  point  in  space  which  he  had  indicated,
there  in  verity  gleams  a new  world,  then  first  seen,  though
launched  by  God  from  Eternity  to  circle  on  the  verge  of  our
creation ; and  he  who  bade  us  look  becomes  the  discoverer  of
a new  planet.  Who  will  dispute  the  merit  here  ? Truly,
man  does  show  the  God  within  him  when  he  uses  his  faculties
— God-like  in  themselves — in  such  God-like  fashion.  But
Harvey’s  merit,  according  to  oui’  idea,  was  of  the  selfsame
description  in  another  sphere.  The  facts  he  used  were  famiharly
known,  most  of  them  to  his  predecessors  for  nearly  a century,
all  of  them  to  his  teachers  and  immediate  contemporaries ; yet
did  no  one,  mastering  these  facts  in  their  connexion  and  se-
quence, rising  superior  to  prejudice,  groundless  hypothesis,  and
erroneous  reasoning,  draw  the  inference  that  now  meets  the
world  as  irresistible,  until  the  combining  mind  of  Harvey  gave
it  shape  and  utterance.  To  oui’  apprehension  Harvey  was  as
far  above  his  fellows  as  the  eye  of  poetic  intelligence,  that  ex-
ultingly  absorbs  the  beauties  of  the  starry  sky  and  the  green
earth,  is  above  the  mere  physical  sense  that  distinguishes  fight
from  dark.  The  late  Dr.  Barclay,  a fervent  admirer  of  Harvey,
whose  name  he  never  uttered  without  the  epithet  immortal,
has  put  the  question  of  Harvey’s  merit  both  happily  and  elo-
quently, and  it  affords  us  pleasure  to  quote  the  passage  from
the  writings  of  our  old  and  honoured  teacher  in  anatomy.
“ The  late  Dr.  Hunter,”  says  Dr.  Barclay,^  ‘‘  has  rather
invidiously  introduced  Harvey  along  with  Copernicus  and
Columbus,  to  show  that  his  merit  as  a discoverer  was  com-
paratively low.  But  what  did  Copernicus,  and  what  did
‘ On  the  Arteries,  Introduction,  p.  lk.


HIS  WORKS.


Ixvii


Columbus  ? Not  in  possession  of  more  numerous  facts  than
their  contemporarieSj  but  endowed  with  nobler  and  more
vigorous  intellects,  the  one  developed  the  intricate  system  of
the  heavenly  bodies  and  the  other  discovered  an  unheard-of
continent.  Was  it  not  in  the  same  way,  by  the  exertion  of
superior  intellect,  that  Harvey  made  his  immortal  discovery  ?
I know  not  what  has  happened  in  the  world  unseen  j but  if
I may  judge  from  the  records  of  history  and  the  annals  of
fame,  the  spii’it  of  Bacon,  the  spirits  of  Columbus,  Copernicus
and  Newton  have  not  been  ashamed  to  welcome  and  associate
with  the  congenial  spirit  of  Harvey.’^  To  this  fine  passage
there  is  little  to  be  added : Harvey’s  discovery  was  of  the
rational  and  inductive  and  therefore  higher  class,  according  to
our  estimate ; it  was  made  in  virtue  of  the  intellectual  powers
which  peculiarly  distinguish  man,  possessed  in  a state  of  the
highest  perfection,

THE  WORK  ON  GENERATION.

In  our  account  of  Harvey’s  public  career  we  found  him
busy  with  the  subject  of  Generation  at  Oxford  in  1642  ; but  he
had  certainly  turned  his  attention  that  way  at  a much  earlier
period,  for  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  his  regret,  as  expressed
to  Hr.  Ent,  for  the  destruction  of  his  papers  during  the  ciHl
war,  is  the  loss  of  his  Observations  on  the  Generation  of  Insects,
which  could  only  have  been  made  and  reduced  to  form  many
years  previously,  probably  before  his  engagement  to  accompany
the  Duke  of  Lennox  on  his  travels.  And  then  we  see  that
all  his  notes  on  the  gestation  of  the  hind  or  doe  were  made
in  the  palmy  days  of  the  first  Charles,  before  the  differences
between  him 'and  the  people  of  these  countries  had  come  to
the  arbitrement  of  arms.  Harvey  probably  occupied  a good
deal  of  his  leisure  in  arranging  and  writing  the  work  on  Gene-
ration, after  quitting  the  service  of  Charles  in  1646  ; his  practice


Ixviii


THE  LIFE  OF  HARYEY.


at  this  period  was  not  extensive,  and  he  seems  to  have  passed
much  of  his  time  in  the  country.  Harvey  appears  to  have
been  little  inchned  to  the  publication  of  this  work,  and
only  to  have  ventured  it  out  of  his  hands  with  reluctance.
Without  the  solicitations  of  Ent,  indeed,  it  would  certainly
have  been  left  iinpublished  during  his  lifetime.  Ent,  however,
succeeded  in  canudng  off  the  prize  which  his  illustrious  friend
had  showed  him,  and  lost  no  time  in  getting  it  into  types,
taking  on  himself  the  task  of  coiTecting  the  press,  and  sending
it  forth  according  to  his  own  ideas  in  fitting  form,  with  a
frontispiece,  and  a highflown  dedication  to  the  President  and
Fellows  of  the  College  of  Physicians.  Ent’s  account  of  his
interview  with  Harvey  on  the  occasion  of  obtaining  his  con-
sent to  the  publication,  though  highly  theatrical,  is  still  ex-
tremely interesting.  Saluting  the  great  anatomist,  and  asking
if  all  were  well  with  him,  Harvey  answers,  somewhat  im-
patiently as  it  seems  : How  can  it,  whilst  the  Common-

wealth is  full  of  distractions,  and  I myself  am  still  in  the
open  sea  ? And  truly,’^  he  continues,  “ did  I not  find  solace
in  my  studies,  and  a balm  for  my  spii’it  in  the  memory  of  my
obserwations  of  former  years,  I should  feel  little  desire  for
longer  life.’"’  (p.  145.)  Let  the  reader  turn  to  the  page  from
which  the  above  quotation  is  taken,  and  to  the  one  which  follows
it,  for  thoughts  and  views  that  clearly  bespeak  the  greatness  of
intellect,  the  nobleness  of  sentiment  that  distinguished  William
Harvey.  When  Ent  proceeds  to  say  that  the  learned  world,
aware  of  his  indefatigable  industry,  were  eagerly  looking  for
other  works  at  his  hands,  the  fervid  genius  of  the  poet  or  dis-
coverer still  appears  in  his  reply  : And  would  you  be  the
man,”  said  Harvey,  smiling,  “who  should  recommend  me  to
quit  the  peaceful  haven,  where  I now  pass  my  life,  and  launch
again  upon  the  faithless  sea  ? Y'ou  know  full  well  what  a
storm  my  former  lucubrations  raised.  Much  better  is  it
oftentimes  to  grow  wise  at  home  and  in  private,  than  by  pub-


HIS  WORKS.


]xix


lishing  what  you  have  amassed  with  infinite  labour,  to  stir  up
tempests  that  may  rob  you  of  peace  and  quiet  for  the  rest  of
your  days.^^  (p.  147.)  By  and  by,  however,  he  produces  his
Exercises  on  the  Generation  of  Animals,  and  though  he  makes
many  difficulties  at  first,  urging,  among  other  things,  that  the
work  must  be  held  incomplete,  as  containing  nothing  on  the
generation  of  insects,  Ent,  nevertheless,  prevails  in  the  end,
and  receives  the  papers  with  full  authority,  either  speedily  to
commit  them  to  the  press,  or  to  delay  their  publication  to
a future  time.  Ent  set  about  his  office  of  midwife,  as  he  has
it,  forthwith,  and  the  following  year  (1651)  saw  the  birth  of
the  work  on  Generation.

Physiological  science  generally  was  not  sufficiently  advanced
in  Harvey^s  time  to  admit  of  a truly  great  and  enduring  work
being  produced  on  a subject  so  abstruse,  and  involving  so
many  particulars  as  that  of  Generation.  On  the  doctrine
of  the  circulation  the  dawn  had  long  been  visible ; Harvey
came  and  the  sun  arose.  On  the  subject  of  animal  reproduc-
tion, all  was  night  and  darkness  two  centuries  ago  ; and  though
the  light  has  still  been  waxing  in  strength  since  Harvey  wrote,
it  is  only  in  these  times  that  we  have  seen  it  brightening  into
something  like  the  day.  In  Harvey’s  time  the  very  means  and
instruments  that  were  indispensable  to  the  investigation  were
not  yet”  known,  or  were  used  of  powers  inadequate  to  bring
the  prime  facts  within  the  cognizance  of  the  senses.  Harvey
doubtless  did  as  much  as  any  man  living  could  have  accom-
plished when  he  wrote.  He  announced  the  general  truth  ; Omne
animal  ex  ovo ; he  showed  the  cicatricula  of  the  egg  as  the
point  where  the  reproductive  process  begins ; he  corrected
numerous  errors  into  which  his  master  Fabricius  had  fallen ;
he  further  pointed  out  the  path  of  observation  and  experiment
as  the  only  one  that  could  lead  to  satisfactory  results  in  the
investigation  of  a subject  which  gradually  displayed  itself  as
one  of  natural  history ; and,  it  may  be  added,  by  his  wan-


]xx


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


derings  in  the  labyrinth  of  the  metaphysics  of  physiological
science^  he  did  enough  to  deter  any  one  from  attempting  to
tread  such  barren  ground  again.  In  his  work  on  the  Heart
and  Bloodj  Harvey  had  all  the  essential  facts  of  the  subject
clearly  before  him^  and  he  used  them  at  once  in  such  masterly-
wisCj  that  he  left  little  or  nothing  for  addition  either  by  himself
or  others.  Secure  of  his  footing  here^  he  could  well  dispense
Avith  “ vital  spirits/’  “ innate  heat^”  and  other  inscrutable  agen-
cies, he  could  leave  “ adequate  and  efficient  causes/’  and  other
metaphysical  phantoms  on  one  side — it  was  physics  that  he
was  dealing  with,  and  the  physician  Avas  at  home.  With  the
information  Ave  now  possess,  Ave  see  clearly  how  indifferently
weaponed  Avas  the  physiologist  of  the  year  1647  for  encountering
such  a subject  as  Animal  Generation ; a Leeuwenhoek  and  a
He  Graaf,  a Spallanzani  and  a Haighton,  a Vi^olff,  a Purkinje,
a Von  Baer,  a Valentin,  a Rudolph  T\"agner,  a Bischoff,  and
many  more,  had  successively  to  appear,  before  the  facts  of  the
subject  could  be  ascertained,  and  a Schleiden  and  a Schwann
Avere  further  necessajy  as  ultimate  interpreters  of  the  tilings
observed  before  they  could  be  either  rightly  or  wholly  under-
stood. No  Avonder  then  that  The  Physiologist  of  the  17th  cen-
tury, meets  us  in  the  guise  of  one  rather  puzzled  with  the  bur-
then he  has  made  up  his  mind  to  bear,  and,  contrary  to  his  former
Avont,  eking  out  the  lack  of  positive  knowledge  by  reiterated
disquisitions  on  topics  where  certainty  is  unattainable.

It  is  rather  curious,  moreover,  to  find  Harvey,  in  his  work
on  Generation,  not  entirely  escaping  the  pitfall  of  which  he
Avas  so  Avell  aware,  and  which  he  shunned  so  successfully  in
his  earlier  production.  In  the  work  on  the  Heart,  he  sets  out
AA'ith  the  certainty  that  the  whole  of  the  notions  of  the
ancients  on  the  heart  and  blood  are  untenable ; and  then,
taking  Nature  for  his  guide,  his  fine  intellect  never  once  suffers
him  to  stray  from  the  right  path.  In  the  book  on  Generation,
on  the  other  hand,  he  begins  by  putting  himself  in  some  sort


HIS  WORKS.


Ixxi


into  the  harness  of  Aristotle,  and  taking  the  hit  of  Fabricins
between  his  teeth  j and  then,  either  assuming  the  ideas  of  the
former  as  premises,  or  those  of  the  latter  as  topics  of  discnssion
or  dissent,  he  labours  on  endeavouring  to  find  Nature  in
harmony  with  the  Stagjuite,  or  at  variance  with  the  professor
of  Padua — for,  in  spite  of  many  expressions  of  respect  and  de-
ference for  his  old  master,  Harvey  evidently  delights  to  find
Fabricius  in  the  wrong.  Finally,  so  possessed  is  he  by  scho-
lastic ideas,  that  he  winds  up  some  of  his  opinions  upon  animal
reproduction  by  presenting  them  in  the  shape  of  logical  syllo-
gisms.

The  age  of  Harvey,  then,  was  not  competent  to  produce  a
work  on  generation, — it  was  still  an  impossible  undertaking.
Yet  has  Harvey  written  a remarkable  book  ; one  that  teems
with  interesting  observation,  and  that  presents  the  author  to
irs  in  the  character  of  the  elegant  writer,  the  scholar,  and  the
poet  as  well  as  the  discoverer — if,  indeed,  poet  and  dis-
coverer, though  variously  applied,  be  not  identical  terms.
Besides  the  points  already  referred  to,  as  immediately  con-
nected with  his  subject,  we  here  find  Harvey  anticipating
modern  surgery,  by  applying  a ligature  to  the  main  artery  of
a tumour  which  he  wished  to  extirpate,  and  so  making  its
subsequent  removal  much  more  easy.  Here,  too,  we  find  him,  a
century  and  a half  before  his  contemporaries,  in  the  most  rapidly
progressive  period  in  the  history  of  human  knowledge,  throw-
ing out  the  first  hint  of  the  true  use  of  the  lungs.  Hitherto
the  lungs  had  been  regarded  as  siirrounding  the  heart  for  the
purpose  of  ventilating  the  blood  and  tempering  or  moderating
its  heat,  the  heart  being  viewed  as  the  focus  or  hearth  of  the
innate  heat ; and  Harvey  himself  generally  uses  language  in
harmony  with  these  ideas ; but  in  one  instance,  the  lightning  of
genius  giving  him  a glimpse  of  the  truth,  he  says,  “ Air  is
given  neither  for  the  cooling  nor  the  nutrition  of  animals  * * *


Lxxii


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


it  is  as  if  heat  were  rather  enkindled  within  the  foetus  [at
birth]  than  repressed  by  the  influence  of  the  air.’^^

Had  William  Harvey  possessed  this  idea  in  his  earlier
years,  and  pursued  it  as  he  did  that  of  the  blood  never
moving  in  the  veins  but  in  one  recurrent  course,  he  would
at  least  have  prepared  the  way  for  another  grand  discovery
in  physiology  : demonstrating  the  erroneousness  of  the  ciurent
physiological  notions  on  the  use  of  the  lungs,  he  would  have  led
the  van  in  the  investigation  of  their  proper  office ; and,  had
everything  else  permitted,  he  might  even  have  anticipated
Joseph  Black  in  explaining  the  source  of  animal  heat.  But
this  was  an  impossibility  at  the  time  : chemistiy,  in  Harvey’s
daj^,  mostly  in  the  hands  of  adepts  and  charlatans,  transmuters
of  the  base  metals,  and  searchers  after  the  philosopher’s  stone
and  the  elixir  of  life,  could  have  no  attractions  for  the  clear  in-
tellect of  the  demonstrator  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood.  No
wonder,  therefore,  that  Harvey ‘'did  not  care  for  chymistrey,”
or  that  “ he  was  wont  to  speak  against  the  chymists”  (Aubrey,
1.  c.  p,  385)  ; this  anecdote  is  but  another  proof  of  Ham’ey’s
sagacity.  Harvey  then  could  only  show  himself  in  advance  of
his  age  by  questioning  its  opinions  on  the  office  of  the  lungs  as
he  does;  the  state  of  chemical  science  in  the  middle  of  the  17th
century  did  not  admit  of  his  doing  more.  Harvey,  however,
well  knew  the  vivifying  force  of  heat : he  saw  it  the  immediate
indispensable  agent  in  the  reproduction  of  a living  sentient
being,  as  it  is  probably  employed  by  the  Creator  as  main-
spring in  the  elaborate  mechanism  of  the  automatic  animal
body.

The  short  piece  on  the  Anatomy  of  Thomas  Park,  is  in-
teresting in  itself ; and  in  giving  us  a glimpse  of  Harvey’s
style  of  pathological  reasoning,  confirms  us  in  our  faith  in  the
' On  Generation,  p.  530.


HIS  WORKS.


Ixxiii


great  physiologist  as  a practitioner  of  medicine.  If  knowledge
will  not  help,  how  should  the  want  of  it  avail  ?

The  Letters  of  Great  men  generally  serve  to  make  us  more
intimately  acquainted  with  them  than  without  such  aid  we
could  have  become.  This  is  more  especially  the  case  as  respects
the  letters  that  are  written  in  the  ease  and  confidence  of
private  friendship.  It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  so  few
of  the  letters  of  this  description  that  flowed  from  the  pen  of
Harvey  should  have  come  down  to  us.  Those  addressed  to
Giovanni  Nardi,  however,  show  us  what  an  aflFectionate  and
elegant  mind  our  Harvey  possessed;  how  mindful  he  always
appears  of  former  kindnesses  to  himself  and  to  those  that  were
near  to  him ; how  anxious  that  he  should  be  cherished  in  the
memory  of  his  friends,  even  as  he  cherishes  them  in  his  own  !

The  other  letters,  we  possess  are  mostly  upon  professional
— physiological  topics;  though  the  one  addressed  from  Nurem-
berg to  Caspar  Hofmann  may,  perhaps,  be  held  an  exception  ;
for  in  this  letter  the  manly  and  candid  character  of  Harvey
displays  itself  conspicuously.  In  his  own  city  he  challenges
the  Nuremberg  professor  to  the  proof.  “ If  you  would  see
with  your  own  eyes  the  things  I assert  of  the  circulation,  I
promise  to  show  them  to  you  with  the  opportunity  atforded
me.^^  We  have  seen  that  Harvey  accompanied  the  Earl  of
Arundel  in  his  extraordinary  embassy  to  the  Emperor,  in
1636,  and  may  probably  have  been  one  of  the  party  of  which
three  members  were  barbarously  murdered  on  their  way,  from
Nuremberg  to  Ratisbon,  as  Crowne^  informs  us.  Hence  the
solicitude  which  Hollar,  the  artist,  who  also  accompanied  the
ambassador,  informed  Aubrey  the  Earl  of  Ai’undel  expressed
for  his  physician’s  safety  : “For  he  would  still  be  making  of  ex-
cursions into  the  woods,  making  observations  of  strange  trees,
plants,  earths,  &c.,  and  sometimes  like  to  be  lost ; so  that  my
‘ A True  Relation,  &c.,  p.  46.


Ixxiv


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


lord  ambassador  would  be  really  angry  witb  bim^  for  there  was
not  only  danger  of  wild  beasts  but  of  thieves.’’^

The  burthen  of  the  long  and  able  letter  to  Siegel,  of  Ham-
burg, is  still  the  Circulation.  The  one  addressed  to  IMorisou,
and  the  two  to  Horst,  treat  of  the  discovery  of  the  receptacu-
lum  chyli  and  thoracic  duct  by  Pecquet.  Harvey  has  been
bekl  wanting  to  his  greatness  in  having  refused  his  assent  to  the
facts  of  the  distinct  existence  and  special  office  of  the  lympha-
tic system.  But,  non  omnia  possumus  omnes;  Harvey  had
his  own  work  laid  out  for  him,  and  the  lymphatic  system  was
not  a part  of  it.  AsellFs  book  on  the  ‘ Lacteal  Yieus,’"  was
even  published  before  Harvey’s  own  Exercises  on  the  Heart
and  Blood  had  appeared,  and  must  have  been  familiar  to  our
physiologist ; but  that  he  failed  to  perceive  the  import  of  that
discovery,  and  never  inquired  particularly  into  it,  cannot  surely
be  rightly  laid  to  him  as  a charge ; and  then,  when  the  newly-
discovered  system  of  vessels  acquired  extension  from  the  re-
searches of  Pecquet,  Rudbeck,  and  Bartholin,  Harvey  felt  that
he  was  both  too  old  and  too  infirm  to  enter  on  the  examination
of  so  extensive  and  delicate  an  anatomical  question.  In  entire
consistency  with  his  noble  nature,  however,  and  in  striking
contrast  with  his  own  opponents,  he  nowhere  formally  denies
the  existence  of  the  new  lymphatic  vessels ; nor  does  he  once
oppose  the  authority  of  his  name  to  the  investigation  of  the
truth.  On  the  contrary,  he  states  his  objections,  “ not  as  being
obstinately  wedded  to  his  o^vn  opinion,  but  that  he  may  show
what  can  readily  be  urged  in  opposition  to  the  advocates  of  the
new  ideas.  Nor  do  I doubt,”  he  proceeds,  “ but  that  many
things  now  hidden  in  the  well  of  Democritus,  will  by  and  by  be
drawn  up  into  day  by  the  ceaseless  industry  of  a coming  age.”®

' Aubrey,  Op.  cit.  p.  384.  In  the  printed  work  the  phrase  runs  thus : “ Xot  only
danger  of  thieves,  but  of  wild  beasts.”  Crowne’s  anecdote  suggests  the  proper
reading.

“ De  Venis  Lacteis.  4to,  Milan,  1622.

^ First  Letter  to  J.  D.  Horst.


HIS  CHARACTER.


Ixxv


The  letter  to  Vlackveld  was  written  the  very  year,  within
a few  weeks  indeed,  of  his  death.  It  is  even  touching — it  is
in  vain,  he  says,  to  his  correspondent,  that  he  would  apply  the
spur ; he  has  already  felt  his  right  to  demand  his  release  from
duty;  yet  would  he  still  be  honorably  considered  by  his
contemporaries,  and  he  begs  his  friend  Ylackveld  to  love  him
to  the  last.

We  have  taken  occasion  from  time  to  time  in  the  course
of  our  narrative,  to  glance  at  the  mental  and  moral  consti-
tution, and  also  at  the  personal  character,  of  Harvey,  prin-
cipally by  way  of  inference  from  his  conduct  on  particular
occasions,  and  from  what  appears  in  his  writings.  Happily  we
have  in  addition  a few  particulars  from  the  pen  of  a contem-
porary, John  Aubrey,^  which,  though  perchance  they  do  not
harmonize  in  every  respect  with  the  facts  in  his  public  life  and
the  portrait  he  gives  us  of  himself  in  his  works,  are  neverthe-
less extremely  interesting,  and  cannot  be  left  unnoticed  in  a
Life  of  Harvey,

“ In  person,”  Anbrey  informs  us,  “ Harvey  was  not  tall,  but
of  the  lowest  stature ; round  faced ; olivaster  (like  wainscot)
complexion ; little  eye,  round,  very  black,  full  of  spirit ; his
hair  black  as  a raven,  but  quite  white  20  years  before  he
died.”  The  portrait  we  have  of  Harvey  by  Cornelius  Jansen,
in  the  library  of  the  Hoyal  College  of  Physicians,  as  well  as
of  one,  we  presume  by  Bemmel,  now  in  the  possession  of  Hr.
Richard  Bright,  corresponds  with  this  account : the  tempera-
ment is  nervous-bilious ; the  forehead  is  compact  and  square,
and  of  greater  width  than  usual  between  the  temples ; the  ex-
pression is  highly  intellectual,  contemplative,  and  manly.

“ In  temper,”  Aubrey  says,  “ he  was  like  the  rest  of  his
brothers,  very  choleric,  and,  in  his  yonnger  days,  he  wore  a
dagger,  as  the  fashion  then  was,  which  he  would  be  apt  to  draw
‘ Letters  and  Lives  of  Eminent  Persons,  2 vols.  8vo,  London,  1813.


Ixxvi


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


out  upon  every  occasion.’^  We  cannot  suppose  that  tliis  Avas
offensively,  but  merely  in  the  way  of  gesticulation,  and  to  lend
force  to  his  words ; for  in  bis  pubbc  and  literary  life,  Harvey
showed  everything  hut  a choleric  nature  : he  seems,  indeed,  at
all  times  to  have  had  his  temper  under  entire  control.  The  way
in  Avhich  Harvey  himself  speaks  of  the  rohbei’y  of  his  apartments
and  the  destruction  of  his  papers,  has  nothing  of  bitterness  or
acrimony  in  it.  With  the  opportunity  presenting  itself  to  him —
as  when  he  sends  Nardi  the  books  on  the  Troubles  in  England
— he  is  not  tempted  to  utter  even  a splenetic  word  against
the  party  which  had  been  all  along  opposed  to  his  friends,  and
by  which  he  had  suffered  so  severely.  Harvey  Avas,  probably,
a marked  man  by  Cromwell  and  his  adherents ; but  had  he
been  so  disposed  he  could  have  indulged  in  a little  vitupera-
tion without  risk  of  molestation.  The  gOA-ernment  of  England
in  the  Protector’s  time  was  still  no  tjTanny.

Harvey  appears  not  to  have  esteemed  the  fair  sex  very  highly.
He  would  say,  that  “ we  Europeans  knew  not  how  to  order  or
govern  our  Avomen,  and  that  the  Turks  were  the  only  people
who  used  them  Avisely.”  But,  indeed,  if  Aubrey  may  be
trusted,  he  did  not  think  very  much  of  mankind  in  general :
he  was  wont  to  say,  that  man  Avas  but  a great  mischievous
baboon.”  Harvey,  howcA’cr,  wived  yoimg,  and  in  his  age  he
seems  stiU  to  have  thought  that  the  old  man  was  best  tended
by  the  gentle  hand  of  a woman  not  too  far  striken  in  years.^

Harvey,  in  his  own  family  circle,  must  have  been  affec-
tionate and  kind, — characteristics  of  all  his  brothers — Avho
appear  as  Ave  have  said  to  have  lived  together  through  their
lives  in  pex’fect  amity  and  peace.  But  our  Harvey’s  sympa-
thies were  not  limited  to  his  immediate  relatives  : attachment,
friendship  was  an  essential  ingredient  in  his  natiue.  His  will
from  first  to  last  is  a piece  of  beautiful  humanity,  and  more
than  one  AvidoAA^  and  helpless  Avoman  is  there  proA’ided  for.

‘ Vide  Aubrey,  Op.  cit.  p.  381.


HIS  CHARACTER.


Ixxvii


He  seems  to  have  been  very  anxious  to  live  in  the  memory  of  his
sisters-in-law  and  of  his  nephews  and  nieces,  whose  legacies  are
mostly  given  to  the  end  that  they  may  buy  something  to  keep
in  remembrance  of  him.  To  Dr.  Ent  he  was  much  attached,
and,  besides  his  bookcases,  there  are  ‘ five  pounds  to  buy  a ring.’
Dr.  Scarborough,  who  also  stood  high  in  Harvey’s  favour,  has
his  ^ silver  instruments  of  surgery  and  his  best  velvet  gown.’

We  cannot  fancy  that  Harvey  was  at  any  time  very  eager
in  the  pursuit  of  wealth.  Aubrey  tells  us  that,  “ For  twenty
years  before  he  died,  he  took  no  care  of  his  worldly  concerns ;
hut  his  brother  Eliab,  who  was  a very  wise  and  prudent
manager,  ordered  all,  not  only  faithfully,  but  better  than  he
could  have  done  for  himself.’’  The  effect  of  this  good  manage-
ment was  that  Harvey  lived,  towards  the  end  of  his  life,  in
very  easy  circumstances.  Having  no  costly  establishment  to
maintain,  for  he  always  lived  with  one  or  other  of  his  brothers
in  his  latter  days,  and  no  family  to  provide  for,  he  could  afford
to  be  munificent,  as  we  have  seen  him,  to  the  College  of
Physicians,  and  at  his  death  he  is  reported  to  have  left  as
much  as  20,000^.  to  his  faithful  steward  and  kind  brother
Eliab,  who  always  meets  us  as  the  guardian  angel  of  our
anatomist,  in  a worldly  and  material  point  of  view.  Honoured
be  the  name  and  the  memory  of  Eliab  Harvey  for  his  good
offices  to  one  so  worthy  !

Though  of  competent  estate,  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  highest
reputation,  and  trusted  by  two  sovereign  Princes  in  succession,
Harvey  never  suffered  his  name  to  be  coupled  with  any  of
those  lower-grade  titles  that  were  so  freely  conferred  in  the
time  of  both  the  First  and  Second  Charles.  When  we  associate
Harvey’s  name  with  a title  at  all,  it  is  with  the  one  he  fairly
won  from  his  masters  of  Padua  ; by  his  contemporaries  he  is
always  spoken  of  as  Dr.  Harvey  ; we  in  the  present  day  rightly
class  him  with  our  Shakespeares,  and  our  Miltons,  and  speak  of
him  as  Harvey.  Harvey,  indeed,  had  no  love  of  ostentation  or


Ixxviii


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


display.  The  very  buildings  he  erected^  were  built  “ at  the
suggestion  and  under  the  anspices’’  of  others.

Harvey’s  mind  was  largely  imbued  with  the  imaginative
faculty  : how  finely  he  brings  in  the  classical  allusion  to  “ the
Sicilian  sea,  dashing  among  the  rocks  around  Chaiwbdis,
hissing  and  foaming  and  tossed  hither  and  thither,”  in  illus-
tration of  those  who  reason  against  the  eHdence  of  their
senses,  (p.  130.)  And  then  what  unbounded  confidence  he
has  in  Nature  (p.  153),  and  how  keenly  alive  he  is  to  her
beauties  in  every  sphere : Nature  has  not  been  sedulous  to
deck  out  animals  only  with  ornaments  ; she  has  further  thrown
an  infinite  vai’iety  of  beautiful  dyes  over  the  lowly  and  insen-
sate herbs  and  flowers,  (p.  426.)

In  Harvey  the  religious  sentiments  appear  to  have  been
active ; the  exordium  to  his  will  is  unusually  solemn  and
grand.  He  also  evinces  true  and  elevated  piety  throughout  the
whole  course  of  his  work  on  Generation,  and  seizes  every
opportunity  of  giving  utterance  to  liis  sense  of  the  imme-
diate agency  and  omnipotence  of  Deity.  He  appears,  with
the  ancient  philosophers,  to  have  regarded  the  universe  and
its  parts  as  actuated  by  a Supreme  and  all-pervading  Intelli-
gence. He  was  a great  admirer  of  Yirgil,  whose  works  were
frequently  in  his  hands,  and  whose  religious  philosophy  he
seems  also,  in  a great  measure,  to  have  adopted.  The  follow-
ing beautiful  and  often-quoted  passage  of  his  favorite  author
may  be  said  to  embody  his  ideas  on  this  subject,  as  they  appear
repeatedly  in  the  com’se  of  the  work  on  Generation : —

“ Principio  coelum  ac  terras  camposque  liquentes,

Lucentemque  globum  lunae,  Titaiiiaque  astra,

Spiritus  intus  alit,  totamque  infusa  per  artus
Mens  agitat  molem,  et  magno  se  corpore  miscet.”

— The  heavens  and  earth,  and  ocean’s  liquid  plains,

The  moon’s  bright  orb,  and  the  Titanian  stars.

Are  fed  by  intrinsic  spirit : deep  infused

Through  all,  mind  mingles  udth  and  actuates  the  mass.


HIS  CHARACTER.


Ixxix


Upon  the  purely  Deistic  notions  of  antiquity,  however,  Harvey
unquestionably  ingrafted  the  special  faith  in  Christianity.
In  connexion  with  the  subject  of  the  ^^term  utero- gestation,”
he  adduces  the  highest  recorded  examples  as  the  rule,  and
speaks  of  “Christ,  our  Saviour,  of  men  the  most  perfect;”^
in  the  will  he  farther  ^^most  humbly  renders  his  soul  to
Him  that  gave  it,  and  to  his  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ
Jesus.”

Harvey  was  very  inquisitive  into  natural  things  and  natural
phenomena.  When  he  accompanied  the  Earl  of  Arundel,  we
have  seen  that  he  would  still  be  wandering  in  the  woods,
making  observations  on  the  strange  trees  and  herbs,  and
minerals  he  encountered.  His  industry  in  collecting  facts
was  unwearied,  and  the  accuracy  with  which  he  himself  ob-
served appears  in  every  page  of  his  writings  ■,  though  we
sometimes  meet  him  amiably  credulous  in  regard  to  the  obser-
vations of  others, — as  in  that  instance  where  he  suffers  himself
to  be  imposed  upon  by  the  traveller's  tale  of  the  “ Genus
humanum  caudatum^^ — the  race  of  the  human  kind  with  tails. ^
Harvey  was  the  first  English  comparative  anatomist ; in  other
words,  he  was  the  first  physiologist  England  produced  whom
superiority  of  natural  endowment  led  to  perceive  the  rela-
tions between  the  meanest  and  the  highest  of  created  things,
and  who  made  the  simplicity  of  structure  and  of  function  in  the
one,  a means  of  explaining  the  complexity  of  structure  and
of  function  in  the  other.  “ Had  anatomists,”  he  says,  “only
been  as  conversant  with  the  dissection  of  the  lower  animals
as  they  are  with  that  of  the  human  body,  many  matters  that
have  hitherto  kept  them  in  a perplexity  of  doubt  would,  in
my  opinion,  have  met  them  freed  from  every  kind  of  difficulty.”
(On  the  Heart,  p.  35.)  Harvey  makes  frequent  and  most
effectual  use  of  his  knowledge  of  comparative  anatomy  in  his
earlier  w'ork ; and  if  the  reader  will  turn  to  the  one  on


' On  Generation,  p.  529.


= Ib.  p.  182.


]xxx


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


Greneration  (p.  423)^  and  peruse  what  is  said  on  the  subject
of  ‘parts  not  essential  to  the  being  of  the  individual/  and  will
then  visit  the  Hunterian  Museum  in  Lincoln’s  Inn  Fields,  he
will  find  that  the  great  comparative  anatomist  and  physiologist
of  the  19th  century  had  a herald  in  the  great  comparative
anatomist  and  physiologist  of  the  17th  century.  Aubrey
mentions  particularly  Harvey’s  having  “ often  said  that  of  all
the  losses  he  sustained,  no  grief  was  so  crucifpng  to  him  as
the  loss  of  his  papers  (containing  notes  of  his  dissections  of  the
frog,  toad,  and  other  animals,)  which,  together  with  his  goods
in  his  lodgings  at  'Whitehall,  were  plundered  at  the  beginning
of  the  rebellion.”  Harvey’s  store  of  individual  knowledge
must  have  been  great ; and  he  seems  never  to  have  flagged  in
his  anxiety  to  learn  more.  He  made  himself  master  of
Oughtred’s  ‘ Clavis  Mathematica’  in  his  old  age,  accoi’ding  to
Aubrey,  who  found  him  “ perusing  it,  and  working  problems
not  long  before  he  dyed.”

Aubrey  says  “ he  understood  Greek  and  Latin  pretty  well,
but  was  no  critique,  and  he  wrote  veiy  bad  Latin.  The
Circuitus  Sanguinis  was,  as  I take  it,  done  into  Latin  by  Sir
George  Ent,  as  also  his  booke  de  Generatione  Animaliumj
but  a little  booke,  in  12mo,  against  Riolan  (I  thinke)  wherein
he  makes  out  his  doctrine  clearer,  was  writ  by  himself,  and  that,
as  I take  it,  at  Oxford.”^  Aubrey,  in  his  gossiping,  is  doing
injustice  both  to  the  scholarship  and  to  the  candour  of  Harvey.
He  heard  or  knew  that  Flarvey  wrote  an  indifferent  hand,  and
this  forsooth  he  turns  into  writing  indifferent  Latin.  Every-
thing points  to  the  year  1619  as  the  period  when  the  book  De
Alotu  Cordis  et  Sanguinis  (Aubrey  does  not  even  know  the
title  !)  was  written ; Ent,  born  in  1603,  was  then  a lad  of
sixteen,  and  in  all  likelihood  had  never  heard  of  Hai’vey’s
name ; in  1628,  when  the  work  came  forth  at  Frankfort,  he
was  but  twenty-five,  and  scarcely  emancipated  from  the  leading
‘ Aubrey,  1.  c.  p.  383.


HIS  CHARACTER.


Ixxxi


strings  of  his  instructors.  The  Exercises  to  Riolan^^  which
Aubrey  cites  as  a specimen  of  Harvey’s  own  latinity,  are  at
least  as  well  wi’itten  as  the  Exercises  on  the  Heart.  And  then
our  authority  evidently  speaks  at  random  in  regard  to  the
time  and  place  when  these  Exercises  were  composed.  Harvey
never  resided  at  Oxford  after  1646^  and  Riolan’s  Encheiridium
Anatomicum^  to  which  Harvey’s  Two  Exercises  were  an  answer,
did  not  appear  till  1648  ! * Harvey’s  reply  could  not  have  been
written  by  anticipation.  It  came  out  at  Cambridge  the  year
after  Riolan’s  work — in  1649.

With  regard  to  the  work  on  Generation,  again,  had  Ent
received  it  in  English  and  turned  it  into  Latin,  this  fact
would  certainly  have  been  stated ; whereas,  there  is  only
the  information  that  he  played  the  midwife’s  part,  and  over-
looked the  press.  More  than  this,  from  what  Ent  says,  it  is
evident  that  the  printer  worked  from  Harvey’s  own  MS.
“ As  our  author  writes  a bad  hand,”  says  Ent,  “ which  no
one  without  practice  can  easily  read,  I have  taken  some  pains
to  prevent  the  printer  committing  any  very  grave  blunders
through  this, — a point  which,  I observe,  has  not  been  suffi-
ciently attended  to  in  a small  work  of  his  (The  Exercitatio
ad  Riolanum)  which  lately  appeai’ed.”^  Harvey  was  a man  of
the  most  liberal  education,  and  lived  in  an  age  when  every
man  of  liberal  education  wrote  and  conversed  in  Latin  with
ease  at  least,  if  not  always  with  elegance.  Harvey’s  Latin  is
generally  easy,  often  elegant,  and  not  nnfrequently  copious  and
imaginative ; he  never  seems  to  feel  in  the  least  fettered  by
the  language  he  is  using.

Harvey,  if  eager  in  the  acqiiirement  of  knowledge,  was  also
ready  at  all  times  to  communicate  what  he  knew,  “ and,”  as
Aubrey  has  it,  to  instruct  any  that  were  modest  and  respectful
to  him.  In  order  to  my  journey  (I  was  at  that  time  bound  for
' Epistle  Dedicatory  to  tlie  work  on  Generation.


/


XX  XU


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


Italy)  lie  dictated  to  me  ivliat  to  see,  xvliat  company  to  keep,
wliat  bookes  to  read,  liow  to  manage  my  studies — in  short,  he
hid  me  go  to  the  fountain  head  and  read  Aristotle,  Cicero,
Avicenna,  and  did  call  the  Neoteriques  s — t-hreeches.”^

Harvey  was  not  content  merely  to  gather  knowledge ; he
digested  and  arranged  it  under  the  guidance  of  the  faculties
which  compare  and  reason.  “ He  was  always  very  contem-
plative,” pursues  Aubrey,  “ and  whs  xvont  to  frequent  the
leads  of  Cockaine-house,  which  his  brother  Ehab  had  bought,
having  there  his  several  stations  in  regard  to  the  sun  and  the
wind,  for  the  indulgence  of  his  fancy.  At  the  house  at
Combe,  in  Surrey,”  which,  by  the  way,  appears  to  have  been
purchased  of  Mr.  Cockaine,  as  well  as  the  mansion  in  the  city,
“ he  had  caves  made  in  the  ground,  in  which  he  delighted  in
the  summer  time  to  meditate.  He  also  loved  darkness,”  telling
Aubrey,  “ Hhat  he  could  then  best  contemplate.^  His  thoughts
woi’king,  would  manj^  times  keep  him  from  sleeping,  in  which
case  his  way  was  to  rise  from  his  bed  and  ivalk  about  his
chamber  in  his  shirt,  till  he  was  pretty  cool,  and  then  return
to  his  bed  and  sleep  very  comfortably.”  He  treated  the  prin-
cipal bodily  ailment  with  which  he  was  afflicted  (gout)  some-
what in  the  same  manner.  The  fever  of  the  mind  being
subdued  by  the  application  of  cold  air  to  the  body  at  large,
the  fever  in  the  blood,  induced  by  gout,  was  abated  by  the  use  of
cold  water  to  the  affected  member  : “ He  woidd  then  sitt  with
his  legges  bare,  though  it  were  frost,  on  the  leads  of  Cockaine-
house,  putt  them  into  a payle  of  water  till  he  was  almost
dead  with  cold,  and  betake  himself  to  his  stove,  and  so  ’twas
gone.”  2

Harvey,  besides  being  physician  to  the  king  and  household,
held  the  same  responsible  situation  in  the  families  of  many  of
the  most  distinguished  among  the  nobles  and  men  of  eminence


Aubrey,  p.  383.


= Ibid.,  p.  384.


HIS  CHARACTER.


Ixxxiii


of  his  time — among  others  to  the  Lord  Chancellor  Bacon^
whom^  Aubrey  informs  us^  “ he  esteemed  much  for  his  witt
and  styloj  hut  would  not  allow  to  he  a great  philosopher.
Said  he  to  me^  ' He  writes  philosophy  like  a Lord  Chancellor’
— speaking  in  derision.”  Harvey’s  penetration  never  failed
him  : the  philosopher  of  fact  cared  not  for  the  philosopher  of
prescription ; he  who  was  dealing  with  the  Things^  and^  through
his  own  inherent  powers,  exhibiting  the  Rule,  thought  little  of
him  Avho  was  at  work  upon  abstractions,  and  who  only  incul-
cated the  Rule  from  the  use  which  he  saw  others  making  of  it.
Bacon  has  many  admirers,  but  there  are  not  wanting  some  in
these  present  times  who  hold,  with  his  illustrious  contemporary,
that  he  wrote  philosophy  like  a Lord  Chancellor.”

Harvey  was  also  acquainted  with  all  the  men  of  letters  and
science  of  his  age — with  Hobbes,  Dryden,  Cowdey,  Boyle,  and
the  rest.  Dryden,  in  his  metrical  epistle  to  Dr.  Charleton,
has  these  lines,  of  no  great  merit  or  significance : —

“ The  circling  streams  once  thought  hut  pools  of  blood,

(Whether  life’s  fuel  or  the  body’s  food,)

From  dark  oblivion  Hai'vey’s  name  shall  save.”

Cowley  is  more  happy  in  his  ode  on  Dr.  Harvey : —

“ Thus  Harvey  sought  for  truth  in  Truth’s  own  book
— Creation — which  by  God  himself  was  \wit ;

And  wisely  thought  ’twas  fit
Not  to  read  comments  only  upon  it.

But  on  th’  original  itself  to  look.

Methinks  in  Art’s  great  circle  others  stand
Lock’d  up  together  hand  in  hand  ;

Every  one  leads  as  he  is  led.

The  same  bare  path  they  tread,

A dance  like  that  of  Fairies,  a fantastic  round.

With  neither  change  of  motion  nor  of  ground.

Had  Harvey  to  this  road  confined  his  wit.

His  noble  cii'cle  of  tbe  blood  had  been  unti'odden  yet.”

Cowley  and  Harvey  must  often  have  encountered  ; both


Ixxxiy


THE  LIFE  OF  IIAEVEY.


had  the  confidence  of  the  king,  but  in  very  diflFerent  n ays  :
Cowley  lent  himself  to  the  privacies  and  intrigues  of  the  royal
family  and  its  adherents,  for  whom  he  even  consented  to  play  the
base  part  of  spy  upon  their  opponents.  He  was  also  the  cypher-
letter  writer,  and  the  decypherer  of  the  royal  correspondence,
and  thus  mixed  up  Avith  all  the  littlenesses  of  the  court  pai’ty,
by  wdiom  he  must  have  been,  as  matter  of  course,  despised,  as
he  was  subsequently  neglected.  HarA’ey  was  a man  of  another
stamp,  composed  of  a difFerent  clay ; and  it  gives  us  a high
sense  of  his  independence  and  true  nobility  of  nature  that  in
the  midst  of  faction  and  intrigue,  he  is  never  found  associated
with  aught  that  is  unworthy  of  the  name  of  man  in  his  best
estate.  The  war  of  party  and  the  work  of  destruction  might
be  going  on  around ; Harvey,  under  a hedge,  and  within  reach
of  shot,  was  cooly  engaged  with  his  book,  or  in  the  chamber
of  his  friend  Dr.  Bathurst,  wrapt  in  contemplation  of  the
mysteries  of  Generation.

Harvey  appears  to  have  possessed,  in  a remarkable  degree,
the  power  of  persuading  and  conciliating  those  with  whom
he  came  in  contact.  In  the  whole  course  of  his  long  life  we
hear  nothing  either  of  personal  enemies  or  personal  enmities ;
^^Man”  he  says  “comes  into  the  world  naked  and  unarmed,  as
if  nature  had  destined  him  for  a social  creature  and  ordained
that  he  should  Ih^e  under  equitable  laws  and  in  peace;  as  if  she
had  desired  that  he  should  be  guided  by  reason  rather  than  be
driven  by  force.^’^  The  whole  of  the  opposition  to  his  new
views  on  the  circulation  was  got  up  at  a distance ; all  rvithin
his  OAvn  sphere  were  of  his  way  of  thinking.  His  brethi'en
of  the  College  of  Physicians  appear  to  have  revered  him.
The  congregated  fellows  must  have  risen  to  their  feet  by
common  consent  as  he  came  among  them  on  the  memorable
occasion  after  they  had  elected  him  their  president.


■ On  Generation,  p.  425.


HIS  CHARACTER.


Ixxxv


Among  other  tastes  or  habits  -which  Harvey  had,  Aubrey
informs  us  that  “he  -was  -wont  to  drink  coffee,  -which  he  and
his  brother  Eliab  did  before  coffee-houses  -were  in  fashion  in
London/^^  This  "n^as  probably  a cherished  taste  -with  Harvey.
In  his  will  he  makes  a special  reservation  of  his  “ coffey-pot
— his  niece  Mary  West  and  her  daughter  have  all  his  plate  ex-
cept this  precious  utensil,  which,  with  the  residue,  he  evidently
desired  should  descend  to  his  brother  Eliab  as  a memorial
doubtless  of  the  pleasure  they  had  often  enjoyed  together
over  its  contents — the  brewage  from  the  ^ sober  berry.^

In  visiting  his  patients,  Harvey  “ rode  on  horseback  with  a
foot-cloath,  his  men  following  on  foot,  as  the  fashion  then  was,
which  was  very  decent,  now  quite  discontinued.  The  judges
rode  also  -with  their  foot-cloathes  to  Westminster  Hall,  which
ended  at  the  death  of  Sir  Eobert  Hyde,  Lord  Chief  Justice ;
Anthony  Earl  of  Shaftesbury  would  have  rcAuved  it,  but
scA’-eral  of  the  judges  being  old  and  ill  horsemen  would  not
agree  to  it.”^

Harvey  appears  to  have  preserved  his  faculties  unimpaired
to  the  very  last.  Aubrey,  as  we  have  seen,  found  the  anato-
mist perusing  Oughtred’s  ‘ Cla-^ds  Mathematica,^  and  working
the  problems  not  long  before  he  died  ; and  the  registers  of  the
College  of  Physicians  further  assure  us  that  Haiwey,  when
very  far  stricken  in  years,  still  lost  little  or  nothing  of  his  old
activity  of  mind.  He  continued  to  deliver  his  lectures  till
within  a year  or  two  of  his  death,  when  he  was  succeeded
by  his  friend  Sir  Charles  Scarborough,  and  he  ner^er  failed  at
the  comitia  of  the  college  when  anything  of  moment  was
under  consideration.

Accumulating  years,  however,  and  repeated  attacks  of  gout,
to  which  Harvey  had  long  been  a martyr,  at  length  asserted
their  mastery  over  the  declining  body,  and  William  Harvey,
the  great  in  intellect,  the  noble  in  nature,  finally  ceased  to  be,

^ Aubrey,  ib.  p.  386.


Op.  cit.  p.  384.


Ixxxvi


THE  LIFE  OF  HARVEY.


on  tlie  3d  of  June,  1657,  in  tRe  eigRtietR  year  of  Ris  age.
ARont  ten  o’clock  in  tRe  morning,  as  Aubrey  tells  us,  on
attempting  to  speak.  Re  found  tRat  Re  Rad  lost  tRe  power  of
utterance,  tRat,  in  tRe  language  of  tRe  vulgar.  Re  Rad  tRe
dead  palsy  in  Ris  tongue.  He  did  not  lose  Ris  otRer  faculties,
Rowever;  but  knowing  that  Ris  end  was  approaching,  Re  sent
for  Ris  nephews,  to  each  of  whom  Re  gave  some  token  of  re-
membrance,— his  watch  to  one,  Ris  signet  ring  to  another,
and  so  on.  He  farther  made  signs  to  Sambroke,  Ris  apothe-
cary, to  let  Rim  blood  in  the  tongue ; but  this  did  little  or  no
good,  and  by  and  by,  in  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which  Re
was  stricken.  Re  died ; “ the  palsy,”  as  Aubrey  has  it,  “ giHug
Rim  an  easy  passport.”

The  funeral  took  place  a few  days  afterwards,  the  body
being  attended  far  beyond  the  walls  of  the  city  by  a long  train
of  Ris  friends  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  and  the  remains
were  finally  deposited  ‘'‘^in  a vault  at  Hempstead,  in  Essex,
which  Ris  brother  Eliab  Rad  built ; Re  was  lapt  in  lead,  and  on
Ris  breast,  in  great  letters,  Ris  name — Dr.  William  Harvey,
* * * I was  at  Ris  funeral,”  continues  Aubrey,  “ and

Relpt  to  carry  him  into  the  vault.”  And  there,  at  this  hour.  Re
lies,  the  lead  that  laps  Rim  little  changed,  and  showing  indis-

’ Aubrey  gives  a positive  denial  to  “ the  scandall  that  ran  strongly  against  liini
(Harvey),  viz.  that  he  made  himself  away,  to  put  himself  out  of  his  paine,  by
opium.”  Aubrey  proceeds : “ The  scandall  aforesaid  is  from  Sir  Charles  Scar-
borough’s saying  that  he  (Harvey)  had,  towards  his  latter  end,  a preparation  of
opium  and  I know  not  what,  which  he  kept  iu  his  study  to  take  if  occasion  should
serve,  to  put  him  out  of  his  paine,  and  which  Sir  Chaides  promised  to  give  him.
This  I believe  to  be  true ; but  do  not  at  all  believe  that  he  really  did  give  it  him.
The  palsey  did  give  him  an  easie  passeport.”  (1.  c.  p.  383.)

Harvey,  if  he  meditated  anything  of  the  kind  above  alluded  to,  would  not  be  the
only  instance  on  record  of  even  a strong-minded  man  shiinking  from  a struggle
which  he  knows  must  prove  hopeless,  from  which  there  is  no  issue  but  one.  Nature,
as  the  physician  knows,  does  often  kiU  the  body  by  a very  lingering  and  painful  pro-
cess. In  his  practice  he  is  constantly  requh-ed  to  smooth  the  way  for  the  unhappy
sufferer.  In  his  own  case  he  may  sometimes  wish  to  shorten  it.  Such  requests  as
Harvey  may  be  presumed  to  have  made  to  Scarborough,  are  frequently  enough  pre-
ferred to  medical  men : it  is  needless  to  say  that  they  are  never  granted.


HIS  CHARACTER.


Ixxxvii


tinctly  tlie  outline  of  the  form  within ; for  he  lies  not  in  an
ordinary  coffin,  but  the  cerements  that  surround  the  body
immediately  invested  in  their  turn  by  the  lead.

So  lived,  so  died  one  of  the  great  men  whom  God,  in
virtue  of  his  eternal  laws,  bids  to  appear  on  earth  from  time
to  time  to  enlighten,  and  to  ennoble  mankind.^


‘ On  the  Tablet  placed  in  Hempstead  church  to  Harvey’s  memory  are  inscribed
these  words  :


GULIELMUS  HARVEIUS,

Cui  tain  colendo  Nomini  assurgunt  omnes  Academiae ;
Qni  diuturnum  sanguinis  motum
Post  tot  annorum  Millia,

Primus  invenit ;

Orhi  salutem,  sibi  immortalitatem
Consequutus.

Qui  ortum  et  geuerationem  Animalium  solus  omnium
A Pseudo-philosophia  liberavit.

Cui  debet

Quod  sibi  innotuit  humanum  Genus,  seipsam  Mediciua.
Sereniss.  Majestat.  Jacobi  et  Carolo  Britauniarum
Mouarchis  Archiatrus  et  charissimus.

Collegii  Med.  Loud.  Anatomes  et  Chirurgise  Professor
Assiduus  et  felicissimns  :

Quibus  illustrem  construxit  Bibliothecam,
Suoque  dotavit  et  ditavit  Patrimonio.

Tandem

Post  triumphales

Contemplando,  sanando,  iuveniendo
Sudores,

Varias  domi  forisque  statuas,

Quum  totuin  circuit  Microcosmum,
Medicinae  Doctor  et  Medicorum,

Improles  obdonnivit,

HI  Junii  anno  salutis  cioioclvii,  .'Etat.  LXXX.
Annorum  et  Eamae  satur.


THE  LAST  WILL  AND  TESTAMENT  OE
WILLIAM  HARVEY.  M.D.


Extracted  from  the  Registry  of  the  Prerogative  Court
of  Canterbury .

In  the  name  of  the  Almighty  and  Eternal  God  Amen  I
William  Harvey  of  London  Doctor  of  Physicke  doe  by
these  presents  make  and  ordaine  this  my  last  Will  and  testa-
ment in  manner  and  forme  following  Revoking  hereby  all
former  and  other  wills  and  testaments  -whatsoever  Imprimis
I doe  most  humbly  render  my  sonle  to  Him  that  gave  it
and  to  my  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ  Jesus  and  my
bodie  to  the  Earth  to  be  buried  at  the  discretion  of  my
executor  herein  after  named  The  personal!  estate  which
at  the  time  of  my  decease  I shalbe  in  any  way  possessed  of
either  in  Law  or  equitie  be  it  in  goods  householdstuffe  readie
moneys  debts  duties  arrearages  of  rents  or  any  other  wayes
Avhatsoever  and  whereof  I shall  not  by  this  present  will  or  by
some  Codicill  to  be  hereunto  annexed  make  a particular  gift
and  disposition  I doe  after  my  debts  Euneralls  and  Legacies
paid  and  discharged  give  and  bequeath  the  same  vnto  my
loving  brother  Mr.-Eliab  Harvey  merchant  of  London  whome
I make  Executor  of  this  my  last  will  and  testament  And
whereas  I have  lately  purchased  certaine  lands  in  North-
amptonshire or  thereabouts  commonly  knowne  by  the  name
of  Oxon  grounds  and  formally  belonging  -vnto  to  the  Earl  of
Manchester  and  certaine  other  grounds  in  Leicestershire  com-
monly called  or  knowne  by  the  name  of  Baron  Parke  and
sometime  heretofore  belonging  -\Tito  Sir  Henry  Hastings


xc


THE  WILL  OF  HARVEY.


Knight  both  which  purchases  were  made  in  the  name  of
several  persons  nominated  and  trusted  by  me  and  by  two
severall  deeds  of  declaracon  vnder  the  hands  and  seales  of  all
persons  any  waye  parties  or  privies  to  the  said  tnists  are
declared  to  be  first  vpon  trust  and  to  the  intent  that  I should
be  permitted  to  enioye  all  the  rents  and  profits  and  the
benefit  of  the  collateral!  securitie  during  my  life  and
from  and  a!"ter  my  decease  Then  upon  trust  and  for
the  benefit  of  such  person  and  persons  and  of  and  for  such
estate  and  estates  and  Interests  And  for  raysing  and  pay-
ment of  such  summe  and  summes  of  Money  Rents  Charges
Annuities  and  yearly  payments  to  and  for  such  purposes  as
from  time  to  time  by  any  writing  or  writings  to  be  by  me
signed  and  sealed  in  the  presence  of  Two  or  more  credible
witnesses  or  by  my  last  will  and  testament  in  writing  should
declare  limit  dii’ect  or  appoint  And  further  in  trust  that
the  said  Maiinors  and  lands  and  everie  paid  thereof  together
with  the  Collateral!  secmitie  should  be  assigned  conveyed  and
assured  vnto  such  persons  and  for  suche  Estates  as  the  same
should  by  me  be  limited  and  directed  charged,  and  chargeable
nevertheles  with  all  Annuities  rents  and  summes  of  mouej"
by  me  limited  and  appointed  if  any  such  shalbe  And  in  de-
fault of  such  appointment  then  to  Ehab  Harvey  his  heires
executors  and  Assignes  or  to  such  as  he  or  they  shall  nominate
as  by  the  said  two  deeds  of  declaracon  both  of  them  bearing
date  the  tenth  day  of  July  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  God  one
Thousand  sixe  Imndred  Fiftie  and  one  more  at  large  it  doth
appeare  I doe  now  hereby  declare  limit  direct  and  appoint
that  with  all  convenient  speed  after  my  decease  there  shalbe
raised  satisfied  and  paid  these  severall  summes  of  money
Rents  Charges  and  Annuities  herein  after  expressed  and
likewise  all  such  other  summes  of  Aloiiey  Rents  Chai’ges  or
Annuities  which  at  any  time  hereafter  in  any  Codicill  to  be
hereunto  annexed  shall  happen  to  be  limitcel  or  expressed


THE  WILL  OF  HARVEY.


-\C1


And  first  I appoint  so  much  money  to  be  raised  and  laid
out  vpon  that  building  which  I have  already  begun  to  erect
within  the  Colledge  of  Physicians  in  London  as  will  serve  to
finish  the  same  according  to  the  designe  already  made  Item
I give  and  bequeath  vnto  my  lo  sister  in  Law  Mrs  Eliab
Harvey  one  hundred  pounds  to  buy  something  to  keepe  in
remembrance  of  me  Item  I give  to  my  Niece  Mary  Pratt
all  that  Linnen  householdstulfe  and  furniture  which  I have
at  Coome  neei’e  Croydon  for  the  vse  of  Will  Foulkes  and  to
whom  his  keeping  shalbe  assigned  after  her  death  or  before
me  at  any  time  Item  I give  vnto  my  Niece  Mary  West
and  her  daughter  Amy  West  halfe  the  Linnen  I shall  leave
at  London  in  my  chests  and  Chambers  together  with  all  my
plate  excepting  my  Coflfey  pot  Item  I give  to  my  lo
sister  Eliab  all  the  other  halfe  of  my  Linnen  which  I shall
leave  behind  me  Item'  I give  to  my  lo  sister  Daniell  at
Lambeth  and  to  everie  one  of  her  children  severally  the
summe  of  fiftie  pounds  Item  I give  to  my  lo  Coosin  Mr
Heneage  Finch  for  his  paines  counsell  and  advice  about  the
contriving  of  this  my  will  one  hundred  pounds  Item  I
give  to  all  my  little  Godchildren  Nieces  and  Nephews  seve-
rally to  everie  one  Fiftie  pounds  Item  I give  and  bequeath
to  the  towne  of  Foulkestone  where  I was  borne  two  hundred
pounds  to  he  bestowed  by  the  advice  of  the  Mayor  thereof
and  my  Executor  for  the  best  vse  of  the  pooje  Item  I give
to  the  poore  of  Christ  hospitall  in  Smithfield  thirtie  pounds
Item  I give  to  Will  Harvey  my  godsonne  the  sonne  of  my
brother  Mich  Harvey  deceased  one  hundred  pounds  and  to  his
brother  Michaell  Fiftie  pounds  Item  I give  to  my  Nephew
Tho  Cullen  and  his  children  one  hundred  pounds  and  to  his
brother  my  godsonne  Will  Cullen  one  hundred  pounds  Item
I give  to  my  Nephew  Jhon  Harvey  the  sonne  of  my  lo
brother  Tho  Hai’vey  deceased  two  hundred  pounds  Item  I
give  to  my  Servant  John  Raby  for  his  diligence  in  my  ser-


XCll


THE  WILL  OF  HARVEY.


vice  and  sicknesse  twentie  pounds  And  to  Alice  Garth  my
Servant  Tenne  pounds  over  and  above  what  I am  already
owing  unto  her  by  my  bill  which  was  her  mistresses  legacie
Item  I give  among  the  poor  children  of  Amy  Higdon
daughter  of  my  lo  vncle  Mr  Tho  Halke  twentie  pounds  Item
among  other  my  poorest  kindred  one  hundred  pounds  to  he
distributed  at  the  appointment  of  my  Executor  Item  I give
among  the  servants  of  my  sister  Dan  at  my  Funeralls  Five
pounds  And  likewise  among  the  servants  of  my  Xephew
Dan  Harvey  at  Coome  as  much  Item  I give  to  my  Cousin
Mary  Tomes  Fifty  pounds  Item  I give  to  my  lo  Friend
Mr  Prestwood  one  hundred  pounds  Item  I give  to  everie
one  of  my  lo  brother  Eliab  his  sonnes  and  daughters  severally
Fiftie  pounds  apiece  All  which  legacies  and  gifts  aforesaid
are  chiefly  to  buy  something  to  keepe  in  remembrance  of  me
Item  I give  among  the  servants  of  my  brother  Eliah  which
shalbe  dwelling  with  him  at  the  time  of  my  decease  tenne
pounds  Furthermore  I give  and  bequeath  vnto  my  Sister
Eliahs  Sister  hlrs  Coventrey  a widowe  during  her  natural  life
the  yearly  rent  or  snmme  of  twentie  pounds  Item  I give  to
iny  Niece  Alary  West  during  her  naturall  life  the  yearly  rent
or  summe  of  Fortie  pounds  Item  I give  for  the  vse  and
behoofe  and  better  ordering  of  WiU  Foulkes  for  and  dmang
the  term  of  his  life  vnto  my  Niece  Alaiy  Pratt  the  yearly
rent  of  tenne  pounds  which  summe  if  it  happen  my  said
Niece  shall  dye  before  him  I desire  may  be  paid  to  them  to
whome  his  keej)iug  shalbe  appointed  Item  I will  that  the
twentie  pounds  wliicli  I yearly  allowe  him  my  brother  Galen
Browme  may  be  continned  as  a legacie  from  his  sister  during
his  naturall  life  Item  I will  that  the  payments  to  Air
Samuel  Fentons  children  out  of  the  profits  of  Buckholt
Lease  be  orderly  performed  as  my  deere  deceased  lo  wife  gave
order  so  long  as  that  lease  shall  stand  good  Item  I give
vnto  Alice  Garth  during  her  naturall  life  the  yearly  rent  oi’


THE  WILL  OF  HARVEY.  xciii

summe  of  twentie  pounds  Item  To  Jolin  Raby  during  bis
naturall  life  sixteene  pounds  yearly  rent  All  wbicli  yearly
rents  or  summes  to  be  paid  halfe  yearly  at  tlie  two  most
vsuall  feasts  in  the  yeare  viz  Michaelmas  and  our  Lady  day
without  any  deduction  for  or  by  reason  of  any  manner  of
taxes  to  be  any  way  hereafter  imposed  The  first  payment  of
all  the  said  rents  or  Annuities  respectively  to  beginne  at  such
of  those  feasts  which  shall  first  happen  next  after  my  decease
Thus  I give  the  remainder  of  my  lands  vnto  my  lo  brother  Eliab
and  his  heires  All  my  legacies  and  gifts  &c.  being  perform-
ed and  discharged  Touching  my  bookes  and  liouseholdstufFe
Pictures  and  apparell  of  which  I have  not  already  disposed  I
give  to  the  Colledge  of  Physicians  all  my  bookes  and  papers  and
my  best  Persia  long  Carpet  and  my  blue  sattin  imbroyedyed
Cushion  one  paire  of  brasse  Andirons  with  fireshovell  and
tongues  of  brasse  for  the  ornament  of  the  meeting  roome  I
have  erected  for  that  purpose  Item  I give  my.  velvet  gowne
to  my  lo  friend  Mr  Doctor  Scarbrough  desiring  him  and  my
lo  friend  Mr  Doctor  Ent  to  looke  over  those  scattered  rem-
nant of  my  poore  Librarie  and  what  bookes  papers  or  rare
collections  they  shall  thinke  fit  to  present  to  the  Colledge  and
the  rest  to  be  Sold  and  with  the  money  biry  better  And  for
their  paiues  I give  to  Mr  Doctor  Ent  all  the  presses  and  shelves
he  please  to  make  use  of  and  five  pounds  to  buy  him  a ring
to  keepe  or  weare  in  remembrance  of  me  And  to  Doctor
Scarbrough  All  my  little  silver  instruments  of  surgerie  Item
I give  all  my  Chamber  furniture  tables  bed  bedding  hangings
which  I have  at  Lambeth  to  my  Sister  Dan  and  her  daughter
Sarah  And  all  that  at  London  to  my  lo  Sister  Eliab  and
her  daughter  or  my  godsonne  Eliab  as  she  shall  appoint
Lastly  I desire  my  executor  to  assigne  over  the  custode  of
Will  Fowkes  after  the  death  of  my  Niece  Mary  Pratt  if
she  happen  to  dye  before  him  vnto  the  Sister  of  the  said
M^illiam  my  Niece  Mary  West  Thus  I have  finished  my  last


XCIV


THE  WILL  OF  HARVEY.


Will  in  thi’ee  pages  two  of  them  written  with  own  hand  and
my  name  subscribed  to  everie  one  with  my  hand  and  seal  to
the  last

Will  Harvey

Signed  sealed  and  published  as  the  last  will  and  testa-
ment of  me  William  Harvey  In  the  presence  of  us  Edward
Bering  Henneage  Finch  Hichard  Find  Francis  Finche
Item  I have  since  written  a Codicill  with  my  owne  hand
in  a sheet  of  paper  to  be  added  hereto  with  my  name  thereto
subscribed  and  my  seale.

Item  I will  that  the  sumes  and  charges  here  specified  be
added  and  annexed  vnto  my  last  will  and  testament  published
heretofore  in  the  presence  of  Sir  Edward  Bering  and  Ylr
Henneage  Finch  and  others  and  as  a Codicill  by  my  Executor
in  like  manner  to  be  performed  whereby  I will  and  bequeath
to  John  Bonn  sonue  of  Vincent  Benne  the  summe  of  thirtie
pounds.  Item  to  my  good  friend  IMr  Tho  Hobbs  to  buy
something  to  keepe  in  remembrance  of  me  tenne  pounds  and
to  Mr  Kennersley  in  like  manner  twentie  pounds  Item  what
moneys'  shalbe  due  to  me  from  Mr  Hen  Thompson  his  fees
being  dischai’ged  I give  to  my  friend  hlr  Prestwood  Item
what  money  is  of  mine  viz  one  hundred  pounds  in  the  hands
of  my  Cosin  Higdon  I give  halfe  thereof  to  him  towards  the
marriage  of  his  niece  and  the  other  halfe  to  be  given  to  jMrs
Coventrey  for  her  sonne  Walter  when  he  shall  come  of  yeares
and  for  vse  my  Cosin  Higdon  giving  secm’itie  I would  he
should  pay  none  Item  what  money  shalbe  due  to  me  and
Alice  Garth  my  servant  on  a pawne  now  in  the  hands  of  Air
Prestwood  I will  after  my  decease  shall  all  be  given  my  said
servant  for  her  dihgence  about  me  iu  my  siknesse  and  service
both  interest  and  priucipall  Item  if  in  case  it  so  fall  out
that  my  good  friend  Airs  Coventrey  during  her  widowhood
shall  not  dyet  on  freecost  with  my  brother  or  Sister  Ehab


THE  WILL  OF  HARVEY.


xcv


Harvey  Then  I will  and  bequeath  to  her  one  hundred  marke
yearly  during  her  widowhood  Item  I will  and  bequeath  to
my  loving  Cosin  Mr  Henneage  Finch  (more  than  heretofore)
to  be  for  my  godsonne  Will  Finche  one  hundred  pounds
Item  I will  and  bequeath  yearly  during  her  life  a rent  of
thirtie  pounds  vnto  Mrs  Jane  Nevison  Widdowe  in  case  she
shall  not  preferre  her  selfe  in  marriage  to  be  paid  quarterly
by  even  porcons  the  first  to  beginn  at  Christmas  Michaelmas
or  Lady  day  or  Midsummer  which  first  happens  after  my
decease  Item  I give  to  my  Goddaughter  Mrs  Eliz  Glover
daughter  of  my  Cosin  Toomes  the  yearly  rent  of  tenne  pounds
from  my  decease  'smto  the  end  of  five  years  Item  to  her
brother  Mr  Rich  Toomes  thirty  pounds  as  a legacie  Item  I
give  to  John  Cullen  sonne  of  Tho  Cullen  deceased  all  what  I
have  formerly  given  his  father  and  more  one  hundred  pounds
Item  I will  that  what  I have  bequeathed  to  my  Niece  Mary
West  be  given  to  her  husband  my  Cosin  Rob  West  for  his
daughter  Amy  West  Item  what  should  have  bene  to  my
Sister  Dan  deceased  I will  be  given  my  lo  Niece  her  daughter
in  Law  Item  I give  my  Cosin  Mrs  IMary  Ranton  fortie
pounds  to  buy  something  to  keep  in  remembrance  of  me
Item  to  my  nephews  Michaell  and  Will  the  sonnes  of  my
brother  Mich  one  hundred  pounds  to  either  of  them  Item
all  the  furniture  of  my  chamber  and  all  the  hangings  I give
to  my  godsonne  Mr  Eliab  Harvey  at  his  marriage  and  all  my
red  damaske  furniture  and  plate  to  my  Cosin  Mary  Harvey
Item  I give  my  best  velvet  gowne  to  Doctor  Scarbrowe.

Will  Harvey.

IMemorandmn  that  upon  Sunday  the  twentie  eighth  day
of  December  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  sixe
hundred  fiftie  sixe  I did  againe  peruse  my  last  will  which
formerly  conteined  three  pages  and  hath  now  this  fourth
page  added  to  it  And  I doe  now  this  present  Sunday


XCVl


THE  WILL  OF  HARVEY.


December  28  1656  publish  and  declare  these  foure  pages
whereof  the  three  last  are  written  with  my  owne  hand  to  he
my  last  will  In  the  presence  of  Henneage  Finch  John  Ptaby.

This  will  with  the  Codicill  annexed  was  proved  at  London
on  the  second  day  of  May  In  the  yeare  of  o\u’  Lord  God  one
Thousand  six  hundred  fiftie  nine  before  the  Judge  for  probate
of  wills  and  granting  Adcons  lawfully  authoiized  By  the  oath
of  Eliab  Harvey  the  Brother  and  sole  executor  therein  named
To  whom  Administracon  of  all  and  singular  the  goods  Chattells
and  debts  of  the  said  deceased  was  granted  and  committed  He
being  first  sworne  truely  to  administer.^


' The  •will  of  Harvey  is  wirhout  date.  But  -was  almost  certainly  made  some  time
in  the  course  of  1652.  He  speaks  of  certain  deeds  of  declaration  bearing  date  the
10th  of  July,  1651 ; andhe  provides  money  for  the  completion  of  the  buildings  ■which
he  has  “ already  begun  to  erect  within  the  College  of  Physicians.”  Now  these  struc-
tures were  finished  in  the  early  part  of  1653.  The  will  was,  therefore,  written
betw  een  Jaly'1651,  and  Pebraruy  1653.  The  codicil  is  also  undated : but  we  may
presume  that  it  was  added  shortly  before  Sunday  the  28th  of  December  1656,  the
day  on  which  Harvey  reads  over  the  whole  document  and  formally  declares  and
publishes  it  as  his  last  will  and  testament  in  the  presence  of  Lis  friend  Henneage
Finch,  and  his  faithful  servant  John  Raby.


Chas.  Dyneley
John  Iggulden


Depidy


AN  ANATOMICAL  DISQUISITION

ON  THE

MOTION  OF  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD  IN  ANIMALS.


jri


1


TO

THE  MOST  ILLUSTRIOUS  AND  INDOMITABLE  PRINCE,

CHARLES,

KING  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN,  FRANCE,  AND  IRELAND,
DEFENDER  OF  THE  FAITH.


Most  illustrious  Prince  !

The  heart  of  animals  is  the  foundation  of  their  life,  the
sovereign  of  everything  within  them,  the  sun  of  their  micro-
cosm, that  upon  which  all  growth  depends,  from  which  all
power  proceeds.  The  King,  in  like  manner,  is  the  foundation
of  his  kingdom,  the  sun  of  the  world  around  him,  the  heart
of  the  republic,  the  fountain  whence  all  power,  all  grace  doth
flow.  What  I have  here  written  of  the  motions  of  the  heart  I
am  the  more  emboldened  to  present  to  your  Majesty,  according
to  the  custom  of  the  present  age,  because  almost  all  things
human  are  done  after  human  examples,  and  many  things  in  a
King  are  after  the  pattern  of  the  heart.  The  knowledge  of
his  heart,  therefore,  will  not  be  useless  to  a Prince,  as  embracing
a kind  of  Divine  example  of  his  functions, — and  it  has  still  been


4


usual  with  men  to  compare  small  things  with  great.  Here^  at
all  events,  best  of  Princes,  placed  as  you  are  on  the  pinnacle  of
human  affairs,  you  may  at  once  contemplate  the  prime  mover  in
the  body  of  man,  and  the  emblem  of  your  own  sovereign  power.
Accept  therefore,  with  your  wonted  clemency,  I most  humbly
beseech  you,  illustrious  Prince,  this,  my  new  Treatise  on  the
Heart ; you,  who  are  yourself  the  new  light  of  this  age,  and
indeed  its  very  heart;  a Prince  abounding  in  virtue  and  in
grace,  and  to  whom  we  gladly  refer  all  the  blessings  which
England  enjoys,  all  the  pleasure  we  have  in  oui’  lives.

Your  Majesty’s  most  devoted  servant,

William  Harvey.


[London  ....
1628.]


To  his  very  dear  Friend,  Doctor  Argent,  the  excellent
and  accomplished  President  of  the  Royal  College  of
Physicians,  and  to  other  learned  Physicians,  his  most
esteemed  Colleagues.

I have  already  and  repeatedly  presented  you,  my  learned
friends,  with  my  new  views  of  the  motion  and  function  of  the
heart,  in  my  anatomical  lectures;  hut  having  now  for  nine
years  and  more  confirmed  these  views  by  multiplied  demon-
strations in  your  presence,  illustrated  them  by  arguments,  and
freed  them  from  the  objections  of  the  most  learned  and  skilful
anatomists,  I at  length  yield  to  the  requests,  I might  say  en-
treaties, of  many,  and  here  present  them  for  general  consider-
ation in  this  treatise.

Were  not  the  work  indeed  presented  through  you,  my  learned
friends,  I should  scarce  hope  that  it  could  come  out  scatheless
and  complete;  for  you  have  in  general  been  the  faithful  wit-
nesses of  almost  all  the  instances  from  which  I have  either
collected  the  truth  or  confuted  error;  you  have  seen  my  dis-
sections, and  at  my  demonstrations  of  all  that  I maintain  to
be  objects  of  sense,  you  have  been  accustomed  to  stand  by
and  bear  me  out  with  your  testimony.  And  as  this  book  alone
declares  the  blood  to  course  and  revolve  by  a new  route,  very
different  from  the  ancient  and  beaten  pathway  trodden  for  so
many  ages,  and  illustrated  by  such  a host  of  learned  and  dis-
tinguished men,  I was  greatly  afraid  lest  I might  be  charged
with  presumption  did  I lay  my  work  before  the  pubhc  at  home,


6


DEDICATION.


or  send  it  beyond  seas  for  impression,  unless  I had  first  pro-
posed its  subject  to  you,  had  confirmed  its  conclusions  by
ocular  demonstrations  in  your  presence,  had  replied  to  yom’
doubts  and  objections,  and  secured  the  assent  and  support  of
our  distinguished  President.  For  I was  most  intimately  per-
suaded, that  if  I could  make  good  my  proposition  before  you
and  our  College,  illustrious  by  its  numerous  body  of  learned  in-
dividuals, I had  less  to  fear  from  others ; I even  ventiired  to
hope  that  I should  have  the  comfort  of  finding  all  that  you  had
granted  me  in  your  sheer  love  of  truth,  conceded  by  others
who  were  philosophers  like  yourselves.  For  time  philosophers,
who  are  only  eager  for  truth  and  knowledge,  never  regard
themselves  as  already  so  thoroughly  informed,  but  that  they  wel-
come further  information  from  whomsoever  and  from  whence-
soever it  may  come;  nor  are  they  so  narrow-minded  as  to  ima-
gine any  of  the  arts  or  sciences  transmitted  to  us  by  the  an-
cients, in  such  a state  of  forwardness  or  completeness,  that  no-
thing is  left  for  the  ingenuity  and  industry  of  others ; very
many,  on  the  contrary,  maintain  that  all  we  know  is  still  in-
finitely less  than  all  that  still  remains  unknown;  nor  do  philo-
sophers pin  their  faith  to  others’  precepts  in  such  wise  that
they  lose  their  liberty,  and  cease  to  give  credence  to  the  con-
clusions of  their  proper  senses.  Neither  do  they  swear  such
fealty  to  their  mistress  Antiquity,  that  they  openly,  and  m sight
of  all,  deny  and  desert  their  friend  Truth.  But  even  as  they
see  that  the  eredulous  and  vain  are  disposed  at  the  first  blush
to  accept  and  to  believe  everything  that  is  proposed  to  them,
so  do  they  observe  that  the  dull  and  unintellectual  are  indis-
posed to  see  what  lies  before  then  eyes,  and  even  to  deny
the  light  of  the  noonday  sun.  They  teach  us  in  our  course  of
philosophy  as  sedulously  to  avoid  the  fables  of  the  poets  and
the  fancies  of  the  vulgar,  as  the  false  conclusions  of  the  scep-
tics. And  then  the  studious,  and  good,  and  true,  never  suffer
their  minds  to  be  warped  by  the  passions  of  hatred  and  envy.


DEDICATION.


/


wMcli  unfit  men  duly  to  weigli  the  arguments  that  are  ad-
vanced in  behalf  of  truths  or  to  appreciate  the  proposition  that
is  even  fairly  demonstrated  ; neither  do  they  think  it  unworthy
of  them  to  change  their  opinion  if  truth  and  undoubted  de-
monstration require  them  so  to  do ; nor  do  they  esteem  it
discreditable  to  desert  error,  though  sanctioned  by  the  highest
antiquity ; for  they  know  full  well  that  to  err,  to  be  deceived,
is  human ; that  many  things  are  discovered  by  accident,  and
that  many  may  be  learned  indifferently  from  any  quarter,  by
an  old  man  from  a youth,  by  a person  of  understanding  from
one  of  inferior  capacity.

My  dear  colleagues,  t had  no  purpose  to  swell  this  treatise
into  a large  volume  by  quoting  the  names  and  writings  of
anatomists,  or  to  make  a parade  of  the  strength  of  my  memoiy,
the  extent  of  my  reading,  and  the  amount  of  my  pains ; be-
cause I profess  both  to  learn  and  to  teach  anatomy,  not  from
books  but  from  dissections ; not  from  the  positions  of  philoso-
phers but  from  the  fabric  of  nature  ; and  then  because  I do
not  think  it  right  or  proper  to  strive  to  take  from  the  ancients
any  honour  that  is  their  due,  nor  yet  to  dispute  with  the  mo-
derns, and  enter  into  controversy  wdth  those  who  have  excelled
in  anatomy  and  been  my  teachers.  I would  not  charge  with
wilful  falsehood  any  one  who  was  sincerely  anxious  for  truth,
nor  lay  it  to  any  one^s  door  as  a crime  that  he  had  fallen  into
error.  I avow  myself  the  partisan  of  truth  alone  ; and  I can
indeed  say  that  I have  used  all  my  endeavmu’s,  bestowed  all
my  pains  on  an  attempt  to  produce  something  that  should  be
agreeable  to  the  good,  profitable  to  the  learned,  and  useful  to
letters.

Farewell,  most  worthy  Doctors,

And  think  kindly  of  your  Anatomist,

William  Harvey.

1§


AN  ANATOMICAL  DISQUISITION


ON  THE


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD  IN  ANIMALS.


INTRODUCTION.

As  we  are  about  to  discuss  tbe  motion^  action,  and  use  of
the  heart  and  arteries,  it  is  imperative  on  us  first  to  state  what
has  been  thought  of  these  things  by  others  in  their  writings,
and  what  has  been  held  bj^  the  vulgar  and  by  tradition,  in  order
that  what  is  true  may  be  confirmed,  and  what  is  false  set  right
by  dissection,  multiplied  experience,  and  accurate  observation.

Almost  all  anatomists,  physicians,  and  philosophers,  up  to
the  present  time,  have  supposed,  with  Galen,  that  the  object  of
the  pulse  was  the  same  as  that  of  respiration,  and  only  differed
in  one  particular,  this  being  conceived  to  depend  on  the  animal,
the  respiration  on  the  vital  faculty ; the  two,  in  all  other  re-
spects, whether  with  reference  to  purpose  or  to  motion,  com-
porting themselves  alike.  Whence  it  is  afiirmed,  as  by
Hieronymus  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente,  in  his  book  on  ‘ Re-
spiration,’ which  has  lately  appeared,  that  as  the  pulsation  of
the  heart  and  arteries  does  not  suffice  for  the  ventilation  and
refrigeration  of  the  blood,  therefore  were  the  lungs  fashioned
to  surround  the  heart.  From  this  it  appears,  that  whatever
has  hitherto  been  said  upon  the  systole  and  diastole,  on  the
motion  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  has  been  said  with  especial
reference  to  the  lungs.

But  as  the  structure  and  movements  of  the  heart  differ  from
those  of  the  lungs,  and  the  motions  of  the  arteries  from  those
of  the  chest,  so  seems  it  likely  that  other  ends  and  offices  will
thence  arise,  and  that  the  pulsations  and  uses  of  the  heart,
likewise  of  the  arteries,  will  differ  in  many  respects  from  the
heavings  and  uses  of  the  chest  and  lungs.  For  did  the  arterial
pulse  and  the  respiration  serve  the  same  ends ; did  the  arteries


10


ON  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD.


in  their  diastole  take  air  into  their  cavities^  as  commonly  stated,
and  in  their  systole  emit  fuliginous  vapoui’s  by  the  same  pores
of  the  flesh  and  skin ; and  further,  did  they,  in  the  time  inter-
mediate between  the  diastole  and  the  systole,  contain  air,  and  at
all  times  either  air,  or  spirits,  or  fuliginous  vapours,  what  should
then  be  said  to  Galen,  who  wTote  a book  on  purpose  to  show
that  by  nature  the  arteries  contained  blood,  and  nothing  but
blood ; neither  spirits  nor  air,  consequently,  as  may  be  readily
gathered  from  the  experiments  and  reasonings  contained  in  the
same  book  ? Now  if  the  arteries  are  filled  in  the  diastole  with
air  then  taken  into  them  (a  larger  quantity  of  air  peueti’ating
when  the  pulse  is  large  and  full),  it  must  come  to  pass,  that  if
you  plunge  into  a bath  of  water  or  of  oil  when  the  pulse  is
strong  and  full,  it  ought  forthwith  to  become  either  smaller  or
much  slower,  since  the  circumambient  bath  will  render  it  either
difficult  or  impossible  for  the  air  to  penetrate.  In  like  manner,
as  all  the  arteries,  those  that  are  deep-seated  as  well  as  those
that  are  superficial,  are  dilated  at  the  same  instant,  and  with
the  same  rapidity,  how  were  it  possible  that  air  should  pene-
trate to  the  deeper  parts  as  freely  and  quickly  through  the
skin,  flesh,  and  other  structures,  as  through  the  mere  cuticle  ?
And  liow  should  the  arteries  of  the  foetus  draw  air  into  their
ca^ities  through  the  abdomen  of  the  mother  and  the  body  of
the  womb  ? And  how  should  seals,  whales,  dolphins  and  other
cetaceans,  and  fishes  of  every  description,  living  in  the  depths
of  the  sea,  take  in  and  emit  air  by  the  diastole  and  systole  of
their  arteries  through  the  infinite  mass  of  waters?  For  to  say
that  they  absorb  the  air  that  is  infixed  in  the  water,  and  emit  their
fumes  into  this  medium,  were  to  utter  something  very  like  a mere
figment.  And  if  the  arteries  in  their  systole  expel  fuliginous
vapours  from  their  cavities  through  the  pores  of  the  flesh  and
skin,  why  not  the  spirits,  which  are  said  to  be  contained  in  these
vessels,  at  the  same  time,  since  spirits  are  much  more  subtile
than  fuliginous  vapours  or  smoke  ? And  further,  if  the  arteries
take  in  and  cast  out  air  in  the  systole  and  diastole,  like  the
lungs  in  the  process  of  respu’ation,  wherefore  do  they  not  do  the
same  thing  when  a wound  is  made  in  one  of  them,  as  is  done
in  the  operation  of  arteriotomy  ? 'MTien  the  windpipe  is  di-
vided, it  is  sufficiently  obvious  that  the  air  enters  and  returns
throiigh  the  w-ound  by  two  opposite  movements ; but  when  an


INTRODUCTION.


11


artery  is  divided,  it  is  equally  manifest  that  blood  escapes  in
one  continuous  stream,  and  that  no  air  either  enters  or  issues.  If
the  pulsations  of  the  arteries  fan  and  refrigerate  the  several
parts  of  the  body  as  the  lungs  do  the  heart,  how  comes  it,  as  is
commonly  said,  that  the  arteries  carry  the  vital  blood  into  the
different  parts,  abundantly  charged  with  vital  spirits,  which
cherish  the  heat  of  these  parts,  sustain  them  when  asleep,  and
recruit  them  when  exhausted  ? and  how  should  it  happen  that,
if  you  tie  the  arteries,  immediately  the  parts  not  only  become
torpid,  and  frigid,  and  look  pale,  but  at  length  cease  even  to  be
nourished  ? This,  according  to  Galen,  is  because  they  are  de-
prived of  the  heat  which  flowed  through  all  parts  from  the
heart,  as  its  source ; whence  it  would  appear  that  the  arteries
rather  carry  warmth  to  the  parts  than  serve  for  any  fanning
or  refrigeration.  Besides,  how  can  the  diastole  [of  the  arteries]
draw  spirits  from  the  heart  to  warm  the  body  and  its  parts,  and,
from  without,  means  of  cooling  or  tempering  them  ? Still  fur-
ther, although  some  affirm  that  the  lungs,  arteries,  and  heart
have  all  the  same  offices,  they  yet  maintain  that  the  heart  is
the  workshop  of  the  spirits,  and  that  the  arteries  contain  and
transmit  them ; denying,  however,  in  opposition  to  the  opinion
of  Columbus,  that  the  lungs  can  either  make  or  contain  spirits ;
and  then  they  assert,  with  Galen,  against  Erasistratus,  that  it
is  blood,  not  spirits,  which  is  contained  in  the  arteries.

These  various  opinions  are  seen  to  be  so  incongruous  and  mu-
tually subversive,  that  every  one  of  them  is  not  unjustly  brought
under  suspicion.  That  it  is  blood  and  blood  alone  which  is  con-
tained in  the  arteries  is  made  manifest  by  the  experiment  of
Galen,  by  arteriotomy,  and  by  wounds ; for  from  a single  artery
divided,  as  Galen  himself  affirms  in  more  than  one  place,  the
whole  of  the  blood  may  be  withdrawn  in  the  course  of  half  an
hour,  or  less.  The  experiment  of  Galen  alluded  to  is  this :
“ If  you  include  a portion  of  an  artery  between  two  ligatures,
and  slit  it  open  lengthways,  you  will  find  nothing  but  blood;”
and  thus  he  proves  that  the  arteries  contain  blood  only.
And  we  too  may  be  permitted  to  proceed  by  a like  train  of
reasoning : if  we  find  the  same  blood  in  the  arteries  that  we
find  in  the  veins,  which  we  have  tied  in  the  same  way,  as  I
have  myself  repeatedly  ascertained,  both  in  the  dead  body  and
in  living  animals,  we  may  fairly  conclude  that  the  arteries  con-


12


ON  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD.


tain  the  same  blood  as  the  veins,  and  nothing  but  the  same
blood.  Some,  whilst  they  attempt  to  lessen  the  difficulty  here,
affirming  that  the  blood  is  spirituous  and  arterious,  \-irtually
concede  that  the  office  of  the  arteries  is  to  carry  blood  from  the
heart  into  the  whole  of  the  body,  and  that  they  are  therefore
filled  with  blood ; for  spirituous  blood  is  not  the  less  blood  on
that  account.  And  then  no  one  denies  that  the  blood  as  such,
even  the  portion  of  it  which  flows  in  the  veins,  is  imbued  Avith
spirits.  But  if  that  portion  which  is  contained  in  the  arteries
be  richer  in  spirits,  it  is  still  to  be  beheved  that  these  spirits  are
inseparable  from  the  blood,  like  those  in  the  veins;  that  the  blood
and  spirits  constitute  one  body  (like  whey  and  butter  in  milk,  or
heat  [andwater]  in  hot  water),  with  which  the  arteries  are  charged,
and  for  the  distribution  of  which  from  the  heart  they  are  pro-
vided, and  that  this  body  is  nothing  else  than  blood.  But  if  this
blood  be  said  to  be  drawn  from  the  heart  into  the  arteries  by
the  diastole  of  these  vessels,  it  is  then  assumed  that  the  arteries
by  their  distension  are  filled  udth  blood,  and  not  with  the  am-
bient air,  as  heretofore ; for  if  they  be  said  also  to  become
filled  with  air  from  the  ambient  atmosphere,  how  and  when,  I
ask,  can  they  receive  blood  from  the  heart  ? If  it  be  answered  :
during  the  systole ; I say,  that  seems  impossible ; the  arteries
would  then  have  to  fill  whilst  they  contracted ; in  other  words,
to  fill,  and  yet  not  become  distended.  But  if  it  be  said;  dining
the  diastole,  they  would  then,  and  for  two  opposite  purposes,  be
receiving  both  blood  and  air,  and  heat  and  cold ; which  is  im-
probable. Finther,  when  it  is  affirmed  that  the  diastole  of  the
heart  and  arteries  is  simultaneous,  and  the  systole  of  the  two  is
also  concurrent,  there  is  another  incongruity.  For  how  can
two  bodies  mutually  connected,  which  ai’e  simultaneously  dis-
tended, attract  or  draw  anything  from  one  another;  or,  being
simultaneously  contracted,  receive  anything  from  each  other?
And  then,  it  seems  impossible  that  one  body  can  thus  at-
tract another  body  into  itself,  so  as  to  become  distended,
seeing  that  to  be  distended  is  to  be  passive,  unless,  in  the
manner  of  a sponge,  preriously  compressed  by  an  external
force,  whilst  it  is  returning  to  its  natural  state.  But  it  is
difficult  to  conceive  that  there  can  be  anything  of  this  kind  in
the  arteries.  The  arteries  dilate,  because  they  are  filled  like
bladders  or  leathern  bottles ; they  are  not  filled  because  they


INTRODUCTION.


13


expand  like  bellows.  This  I think  easy  of  demonstration;  and
indeed  conceive  that  I have  already  proved  it.  Nevertheless,
in  that  book  of  Galen  headed  ‘ Quod  Sanguis  continetur  in  Ar-
teriis/  he  quotes  an  experiment  to  prove  the  contrary:  An  artery
hanng  been  exposed,  is  opened  longitudinally,  and  a reed  or  other
pervious  tube,  by  which  the  blood  is  prevented  from  being  lost,
and  the  wound  is  closed,  is  inserted  into  the  vessel  through  the
opening.  “ So  long,^^  he  says,  “ as  things  are  thus  arranged,  the
whole  artery  will  pulsate ; but  if  you  now  throw  a ligature  about
the  vessel  and  tightly  compress  its  tunics  over  the  tube,  you  will
no  longer  see  the  artery  beating  beyond  the  ligature.^^  I have
never  performed  this  experiment  of  Galenas,  nor  do  I think  that
it  could  very  well  be  performed  in  the  living  body,  on  account  of
the  profuse  flow  of  blood  that  would  take  place  from  the  vessel
which  was  operated  on ; neither  would  the  tube  effectually
close  the  wound  in  the  vessel  without  a ligature ; and  I cannot
doubt  but  that  the  blood  would  be  found  to  flow  out  between
the  tube  and  the  vessel.  Still  Galen  appears  by  this  experi-
ment to  prove  both  that  the  pulsative  faculty  extends  from  the
heart  by  the  walls  of  the  arteries,  and  that  the  arteries,  whilst
they  dilate,  are  fllled  by  that  pulsiflc  force,  because  they  expand
like  bellows,  and  do  not  dilate  because  they  are  fllled.  like  skins.
But  the  contrary  is  obvious  in  arteriotomy  and  in  wounds ; for
the  blood  spurting  from  the  arteries  escapes  with  force,  now
farther,  now  not  so  far,  alternately,  or  in  jets;  and  the  jet  always
takes  place  with  the  diastole  of  the  artery,  never  with  the  systole.
By  which  it  clearly  appears  that  the  artery  is  dilated  by  the
impidse  of  the  blood ; for  of  itself  it  would  not  throw  the  blood
to  such  a distance,  and  whilst  it  was  dilating ; it  ought  rather
to  draw  air  into  its  cavity  through  the  wound,  were  those  things
true  that  are  commonly  stated  concerning  the  uses  of  the  arte-
ries. Nor  let  the  thickness  of  the  arterial  tunics  impose  upon
us,  and  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the  pulsative  property  pro-
ceeds along  them  from  the  heart.  For  in  several  animals  the
arteries  do  not  apparently  diff’er  from  the  veins ; and  in  extreme
parts  of  the  body,  where  the  arteries  are  minutely  subdivided,  as
in  the  brain,  the  hand,  &c.,  no  one  could  distinguish  the  arteries
from  the  veins  by  the  dissimilar  characters  of  their  coats ; the
tunics  of  both  are  identical.  And  then,  in  an  aneurism  pro-
ceeding from  a wounded  or  eroded  artery,  the  pulsation  is  pre-


14


ON  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD.


cisely  the  same  as  in  the  other  arteries,  and  }^et  it  has  no  proper
arterial  tunic.  This  the  learned  Riolanus  testifies  to,  along  with
me,  in  his  Seventh  Book.

Nor  let  any  one  imagine  that  the  uses  of  the  pulse  and  the
respiration  are  the  same,  because  under  the  infliience  of  the  same
causes,  such  as  running,  anger,  the  warm  bath,  or  any  other
heating  thing,  as  Galen  says,  they  become  more  frequent  and
forcible  together.  For,  not  only  is  experience  in  opposition
to  this  idea,  though  Galen  endeavours  to  explain  it  away,  when
we  see  that  with  excessive  repletion  the  pulse  beats  more  forcibly,
whilst  the  respiration  is  diminished  in  amount ; but  in  young
persons  the  pulse  is  quick,  whilst  respii’ation  is  slow.  So  is  it
also  in  alarm,  and  amidst  care,  and  under  anxiety  of  mind ;
sometimes,  too,  in  fevers,  the  pulse  is  rapid,  but  the  respiration
is  slower  than  usual.

These  and  other  objections  of  the  same  kind  may  be  urged
against  the  opinions  mentioned.  Nor  are  the  Gews  that  are
entertained  of  the  offices  and  pulse  of  the  heart,  perhaps,  less
bound  up  with  great  and  most  inextricable  difficulties.  The
heart,  it  is  vulgarly  said,  is  the  fountain  and  workshop  of  the
vital  spirits,  the  centre  from  whence  life  is  dispensed  to  the  se-
veral parts  of  the  body ; and  yet  it  is  denied  that  the  right  ven-
tricle makes  spirits ; it  is  rather  held  to  supply  nourishment  to
the  lungs ; whence  it  is  maintained  that  fishes  are  without  any
right  ventricle  (and  indeed  eveiy  animal  wants  a right  ventricle
which  is  unfurnished  with  lungs),  and  that  the  right  ventricle
is  present  solely  for  the  sake  of  the  lungs.

1.  Why,  I ask,  when  we  see  that  the  structm’e  of  both  ven-
tricles is  almost  identical,  there  being  the  same  apparatus  of
fibres,  and  braces,  and  valves,  aud  vessels,  and  amides,  and  in  both
the  same  infarction  of  blood,  in  the  subjects  of  om’  dissections,  of
the  like  black  colour,  and  coagulated — why,  I say,  should  their
uses  be  imagined  to  be  different,  when  the  action,  motion,  and
pulse  of  both  ai’e  the  same  ? If  the  thi’ee  tricuspid  valves  placed
at  the  entrance  into  the  right  ventricle  prove  obstacles  to  the  re-
flux of  the  blood  into  the  vena  cava,  and  if  the  tlmee  semilunar
valves  which  are  situated  at  the  commencement  of  the  pulmonaiy
artery  be  there,  that  they  may  prevent  the  retmm  of  the  blood
into  the  ventricle  ; wherefore,  when  we  find  similar  structiu’es  in
connexion  with  the  left  ventricle,  should  we  deny  that  they  ai’e


INTRODUCTION.


1 5

there  for  the  same  end,  of  preventing  here  the  egress,  there
the  regurgitation  of  the  blood  ?

2.  And  again,  when  we  see  that  these  structimes,  in  point  of
size,  form,  and  situation,  are  almost  in  every  respect  the  same  in
the  left  as  in  the  right  ventricle,  wherefore  should  it  be  main-
tained that  things  are  here  arranged  in  connexion  with  the  egress
and  regress  of  spirits,  there,  i.e.  in  the  right,  of  blood.  The  same
arrangement  cannot  be  held  fitted  to  favour  or  impede  the  motion
of  blood  and  of  spirits  indifferently.

3.  And  when  we  observe  that  the  passages  and  vessels  are
severally  in  relation  to  one  another  in  point  of  size,  viz.,  the
pulmonary  artery  to  the  pulmonary  veins;  wherefore  should  the
one  be  imagined  destined  to  a private  or  particular  purpose,
that  to  wit,  of  nourishing  the  lungs,  the  other  to  a public  and
general  function  ?

4.  And,  as  Realdus  Columbus  says,  how  can  it  be  conceived
that  such  a quantity  of  blood  should  be  required  for  the  nutri-
tion of  the  lungs ; the  vessel  that  leads  to  them,  the  vena  arte-
riosa  or  pulmonary  artery  being  of  greater  capacity  than  both
the  iliac  veins  ?

5.  And  I ask  further ; as  the  lungs  are  so  close  at  hand,  and
in  continual  motion,  and  the  vessel  that  supplies  them  is  of
such  dimensions,  what  is  the  use  or  meaning  of  the  pulse  of  the
right  ventricle?  and  why  was  nature  reduced  to  the  necessity
of  adding  another  ventricle  for  the  sole  purpose  of  nourishing
the  lungs  ?

When  it  is  said  that  the  left  ventricle  obtains  materials  for
the  formation  of  spirits,  air  to  wit,  and  blood,  from  the  lungs
and  right  sinuses  of  the  heart,  and  in  hke  manner  sends  spirituous
blood  into  the  aorta,  drawing  fuliginous  vapours  from  thence,  and
sending  them  by  the  arteria  venosa  into  the  lungs,  whence  spirits
are  at  the  same  time  obtained  for  transmission  into  the  aorta,
I ask  how,  and  by  what  means,  is  the  separation  effected  ? and
how  comes  it  that  spirits  and  fuhginous  vapours  can  pass  hither
and  thither  without  admixture  or  confusion?  If  the  mitral  cuspi-
date valves  do  not  prevent  the  egress  of  fuliginous  vapours  to  the
lungs,  how  should  they  oppose  the  escape  of  air?  and  how  should
the  semilunars  hinder  the  regress  of  spirits  from  the  aorta  upon
each  supervening  diastole  of  the  heart  ? and,  above  all,  how  can
they  say  that  the  spirituous  blood  is  sent  from  the  arteria  venalis
(pulmonary  veins)  by  the  left  ventricle  into  the  lungs  without


16


ON  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD.


any  obstacle  to  its  passage  from  the  mitral  valves,  when  they
have  previously  asserted  that  the  air  entered  by  the  same  vessel
from  the  lungs  into  the  left  ventricle,  and  have  brought  forward
these  same  mitral  valves  as  obstacles  to  its  retrogression?  Good
God  ! how  should  the  mitral  valves  prevent  regurgitation  of  air
and  not  of  blood  ?

Further,  when  they  dedicate  the  vena  arteriosa  (or  pulmonary
artery),  a vessel  of  great  size,  and  having  the  tunics  of  an  artery,
to  none  but  a kind  of  private  and  single  purpose,  that,  namely,
of  nourishing  the  lungs,  why  should  the  arteria  venalis  (or
pulmonary  vein),  which  is  scarcely  of  similar  size,  which  has
the  coats  of  a vein,  and  is  soft  and  lax,  be  presumed  to  be  made
for  many — three  or  four,  different  uses  ? For  they  will  have  it
that  air  passes  through  this  vessel  from  the  lungs  into  the  left
ventricle ; that  fuliginous  vapours  escape  by  it  from  the  heart
into  the  lungs ; and  that  a portion  of  the  spirituous  or  spiritual-
ized blood  is  distributed  by  it  to  the  lungs  for  their  refreshment.

If  they  wid  have  it  that  fumes  and  ah’ — fumes  flowing  from,
air  proceeding  tow  ards  the  heart — are  transmitted  by  the  same
conduit,  I reply,  that  natm’e  is  not  wont  to  institute  but  one
vessel,  to  contrive  but  one  way  for  such  contrary  motions  and
purposes,  nor  is  anything  of  the  kind  seen  elsewhere.

If  fumes  or  fuliginous  vapom’s  and  air  permeate  this  vessel,
as  they  do  the  pulmonary  bronchia,  wherefore  do  we  find  neither
air  nor  fuliginous  vapours  when  we  divide  the  arteria  venosa  ?
why  do  we  always  find  this  vessel  full  of  sluggish  blood,  never
of  air  ? whilst  in  the  lungs  we  find  abundance  of  air  remaining.

If  any  one  wiU  perform  Galen’s  experiment  of  diAdding  the
trachea  of  a Ihdng  dog,  forcibly  distending  the  lungs  with  a
pair  of  bellows,  and  then  tying  the  trachea  securely,  he  will  find,
when  he  has  laid  open  the  thorax,  abundance  of  air  in  the  lungs,
even  to  their  extreme  investing  tunic,  but  none  in  either  the  pul-
monary veins,  or  left  ventricle  of  the  heart.  But  did  the  heart
either  attract  air  from  the  lungs,  or  did  the  limgs  transmit  any
air  to  the  heart,  in  the  living  dog,  by  so  much  the  more  ought
this  to  be  the  case  in  the  experiment  just  referred  to.  IVho,
indeed,  doubts  that,  did  he  inflate  the  limgs  of  a subject  in  the
dissecting-room,  he  would  iustautly  see  the  air  making  its  way
by  this  route,  were  there  actually  any  such  passage  for  it  ? But
this  oflBice  of  the  pulmonary  veins,  namely,  the  transference  of
air  from  the  lungs  to  the  heart,  is  held  of  such  importance,  that


INTRODUCTION.


17


Hieronymus  Fabricius^  of  Aquapendente,  maintains  the  lungs
were  made  for  the  sake  of  this  vessel,  and  that  it  constitutes  the
principal  element  in  their  structure.

But  I should  like  to  be  informed  wherefore,  if  the  pulmo-
nary vein  were  destined  for  the  conveyance  of  air,  it  has  the
structure  of  a blood-vessel  here.  Nature  had  rather  need  of
annular  tubes,  such  as  those  of  the  bronchia,  in  order  that  they
might  always  remain  open,  not  have  been  liable  to  collapse ; and
that  they  might  continue  entirely  free  from  blood,  lest  the
liquid  should  interfere  with  the  passage  of  the  air,  as  it  so  ob-
viously does  when  the  lungs  labour  from  being  either  greatly
oppressed  or  loaded  in  a less  degree  with  phlegm,  as  they  are
when  the  breathing  is  performed  with  a sibilous  or  rattling  noise.

Still  less  is  that  opinion  to  be  tolerated  which  (as  a two-fold
matter,  one  aereal,  one  sanguineous,  is  required  for  the  compo-
sition of  vital  spirits,)  supposes  the  blood  to  ooze  through  the
septum  of  the  heart  from  the  right  to  the  left  ventricle  by  certain
secret  pores,  and  the  air  to  be  attracted  from  the  lungs  through
the  great  vessel,  the  pulmonary  vein;  and  which  will  have  it,
consequently,  that  there  are  numerous  pores  in  the  septum  cordis
adapted  for  the  transmission  of  the  blood.  But,  in  faith,  no  such
pores  can  be  demonstrated,  neither  in  fact  do  any  such  exist.  For
the  septum  of  the  heart  is  of  a denser  and  more  compact  struc-
ture than  any  portion  of  the  body,  except  the  bones  and  sinews.
But  even  supposing  that  there  were  foramina  or  pores  in  this
situation,  how  could  one  of  the  ventricles  extract  anything
from  the  other — ^the  left,  e.  g.  obtain  blood  from  the  right,  when
we  see  that  both  ventricles  contract  and  dilate  simultane-
ously ? Wherefore  should  we  not  rather  believe  that  the  right
took  spirits  from  the  left,  than  that  the  left  obtained  blood  from
the  right  ventricle,  through  these  foramina  ? But  it  is  certainly
mysterious  and  incongruous  that  blood  should  be  supposed  to
be  most  commodiously  drawn  through  a set  of  obscure  or  in-
visible pores,  and  air  through  perfectly  open  passages,  at  one
and  the  same  moment.  And  why,  I ask,  is  recourse  had  to
secret  and  invisible  porosities,  to  uncertain  and  obscm’e  chan-
nels, to  explain  the  passage  of  the  blood  into  the  left  ven-
tricle, when  there  is  so  open  a way  through  the  pulmonary  veins?

I own  it  has  always  appeared  extraordinary  to  me  that  they
should  have  chosen  to  make,  or  rather  to  imagine,  a way  through

2


18


MOTION  OF  THE


the  thick,  hard,  and  extremely  compact  substance  of  the  septum
cordis,  rather  than  to  take  that  hy  the  open  vas  venosum  or  pul-
monary vein,  or  even  through  the  lax,  soft  and  spongy  substance
of  the  lungs  at  large.  Besides,  if  the  blood  could  permeate  the
substance  of  the  septum,  or  could  he  imbibed  from  the  ventricles,
■vvhat  use  were  there  for  the  coronary  artery  and  vein,  branches
of  which  proceed  to  the  septum  itself,  to  supply  it  with  nourish-
ment ? And  what  is  especially  worthy  of  notice  is  this : if  in
the  foetus,  where  everything  is  more  lax  and  soft,  nature  saw
herself  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  bringing  the  blood  from  the
right  into  the  left  side  of  the  heart  hy  the  foramen  ovale,  from
the  vena  cava  through  the  arteria  venosa,  how  should  it  he
likely  that  in  the  adult  she  should  pass  it  so  commodiously,  and
without  an  effort,  through  the  septum  ventriculorum,  which  has
now  become  denser  by  age  ?

Andreas  Laurentius,i  resting  on  the  authority  of  Galen^  and
the  experience  of  Hollerius,  asserts  and  proves  that  the  serum
and  pus  in  empyema,  absorbed  from  the  cavities  of  the  chest
into  the  pulmonary  vein,  may  be  expelled  and  got  rid  of  with
the  urine  and  faeces  through  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  and
arteries.  He  quotes  the  case  of  a certain  person  affected  with
melancholia,  and  who  suffered  from  repeated  fainting  fits,  who
was  relieved  from  the  paroxysms  on  passing  a quantity  of  turbid,
fetid,  and  acrid  mine ; but  he  died  at  last,  worn  out  by  the  dis-
ease ; and  when  the  body  came  to  be  opened  after  death,  no
fluid  like  that  he  had  micturated  was  discovered  either  in  the
bladder  or  in  the  kidneys ; but  in  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart
and  cavity  of  the  thorax  plenty  of  it  was  met  with ; and  then
Laurentius  boasts  that  he  had  predicted  the  cause  of  the  symp-
toms. Bor  my  own  part,  however,  I cannot  but  wonder,  since
he  had  divined  and  predicted  that  heterogeneous  matter  could
be  discharged  by  the  course  he  indicates,  why  he  could  not  or
Avoidd  not  perceive,  and  inform  us  that,  in  the  natm’al  state  of
things,  the  blood  might  be  commodionsly  transferred  from  the
lungs  to  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  hy  the  veiy  same  route.

Since,  therefore,  from  the  foregoing  considerations  and  many
others  to  the  same  effect,  it  is  plain  that  what  has  heretofore
been  said  concerning  the  motion  and  fimction  of  the  heai’t  and

' Lib.  ix,  cap.  xi,  quest.  12.

^ De  Locis  Affectis.,  lib.  \i,  cap.  7.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


19


arteries  must  appear  obscure,  or  inconsistent  or  even  impossible
to  him  who  carefully  considers  the  entire  subject ; it  will  be
proper  to  look  more  narrowly  into  the  matter;  to  contemplate
the  motion  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  not  only  in  man,  but  in
all  animals  that  have  hearts ; and  further,  by  frequent  appeals
to  vi\dsection,  and  constant  ocular  inspection,  to  investigate  and
endeavour  to  find  the  truth.


CHAPTER  I.

THE  author’s  motives  FOR  WRITING.

When  I first  gave  my  mind  to  vivisections,  as  a means  of
discovering  the  motions  and  uses  of  the  heart,  and  sought  to
discover  these  from  actual  inspection,  and  not  from  the  writings
of  others,  I found  the  task  so  truly  arduous,  so  full  of  difficul-
ties, that  I was  almost  tempted  to  think,  with  Fracastorius,  that
the  motion  of  the  heart  was  only  to  be  comprehended  by  God.
For  I could  neither  rightly  perceive  at  first  when  the  systole  and
when  the  diastole  took  place,  nor  when  and  where  dilatation
and  contraction  occurred,  by  reason  of  the  rapidity  of  the  motion,
which  in  many  animals  is  accomplished  in  the  twinkling  of  an
eye,  coming  and  going  like  a flash  of  lightning ; so  that  the  sys-
tole presented  itself  to  me  now  from  this  point,  now  from  that;
the  diastole  the  same ; and  then  everything  was  reversed,  the
motions  occurring,  as  it  seemed,  variously  and  confusedly  to-
gether. My  mind  was  therefore  greatlyunsettled,  nor  did  I know
what  I should  myself  conclude,  nor  what  believe  from  others ;
I was  not  surprised  that  Andreas  Laurentius  should  have  said
that  the  motion  of  the  heart  was  as  perplexing  as  the  flux  and
reflux  of  Euripus  had  appeared  to  Aristotle.

At  length,  and  by  using  greater  and  daily  diligence,  having
frequent  recourse  to  vivisections,  employing  a variety  of  animals
for  the  purpose,  and  collating  numerous  observations,  I thought
that  I had  attained  to  the  truth,  that  I should  extricate  myself
and  escape  from  this  labyrinth,  and  that  I had  discovered  what
I so  much  desired,  both  the  motion  and  the  use  of  the  heart
and  arteries ; since  which  time  I have  not  hesitated  to  expose
my  views  upon  these  subjects,  not  only  in  private  to  my  friends.


20


MOTION  OF  THE


but  also  in  public,  in  my  anatomical  lectures,  after  tbe  manner
of  the  Academy  of  old.

These  \dews,  as  usual,  pleased  some  more,  others  less;  some
chid  and  calumniated  me,  and  laid  it  to  me  as  a crime  that  I
had  dared  to  depart  from  the  precepts  and  opinion  of  all  anato-
mists; others  desired  further  explanations  of  the  novelties,  which
they  said  were  both  worthy  of  consideration,  and  might  perchance
be  found  of  signal  use.  At  length,  yielding  to  the  requests  of
my  friends,  that  all  might  be  made  participators  in  my  labours,
and  partly  moved  by  the  envy  of  others,  who,  receiving  my
views  with  uncandid  minds  and  understanding  them  indiffer-
ently, have  essayed  to  traduce  me  publicly,  I have  been  moved
to  commit  these  things  to  the  press,  in  order  that  all  may  be
enabled  to  form  an  opinion  both  of  me  and  my  labom’s.  This
step  I take  all  the  more  willingly,  seeing  that  Hieronymus
Fabricius  of  Aquapendente,  although  he  has  accurately  and
learnedly  delineated  almost  every  one  of  the  several  parts  of
animals  in  a special  work,  has  left  the  heart  alone  untouched.
Finally,  if  any  use  or  benefit  to  this  department  of  the  republic
of  letters  should  accrue  from  my  labours,  it  will,  perhaps,  be
allowed  that  I have  not  lived  idly,  and,  as  the  old  man  in  the
comedy  says :

For  never  yet  hath  any  one  attained
To  such  perfection,  but  that  time,  and  place.

And  use,  have  brought  addition  to  his  knowledge ;

Or  made  correction,  or  admonished  him.

That  he  was  ignorant  of  much  which  he
Had  thought  he  knew ; or  led  him  to  reject
What  he  had  once  esteemed  of  highest  price.

So  will  it,  perchance,  be  found  with  reference  to  the  heart  at
this  time ; or  others,  at  least,  starting  from  hence,  the  way
pointed  out  to  them,  advancing  under  the  guidance  of  a happier
genius,  may  make  occasion  to  proceed  more  fortunately,  and
to  inquire  more  accurately.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


?1


CHAPTER  II.

OF  THE  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEART,  AS  SEEN  IN  THE  DISSECTION
OF  LIVING  ANIMALS.

In  the  first  place,  then,  when  the  chest  of  a living  animal  is
laid  open  and  the  capsule  that  immediately  surrounds  the
heart  is  slit  up  or  removed,  the  organ  is  seen  now  to  move,
now  to  be  at  rest; — there  is  a time  when  it  moves,  and  a time
when  it  is  motionless.

These  things  are  more  obvious  in  the  colder  animals,  such
as  toads,  frogs,  serpents,  small  fishes,  crabs,  shrimps,  snails  and
shell-fish.  They  also  become  more  distinct  in  wann-blooded
animals,  such  as  the  dog  and  hog,  if  they  be  attentively  noted
when  the  heart  begins  to  flag,  to  move  more  slowly,  and,  as  it
were,  to  die:  the  movements  then  become  slower  and  rarer,
the  pauses  longer,  by  which  it  is  made  much  more  easy  to  per-
ceive and  unravel  what  the  motions  really  are,  and  how  they  are
performed.  In  the  pause,  as  in  death,  the  heart  is  soft,  flaccid,
exhausted,  lying,  as  it  were,  at  rest.

In  the  motion,  and  interval  in  which  this  is  accomplished,
three  principal  circumstances  are  to  be  noted:

1.  That  the  heart  is  erected,  and  rises  upwards  to  a point,
so  that  at  this  time  it  strikes  against  the  breast  and  the  pulse  is
felt  externally.

2.  That  it  is  everywhere  contracted,  but  more  especially  to-
wards the  sides,  so  that  it  looks  narrower,  relatively  longer,
more  drawn  together.  The  heart  of  an  eel  taken  out  of  the  body
of  the  animal  and  placed  upon  the  table  or  the  hand,  shows
these  particulars;  but  the  same  things  are  manifest  in  the
heart  of  small  fishes  and  of  those  colder  animals  where  the
organ  is  more  conical  or  elongated.

3.  The  heart  being  grasped  in  the  hand,  is  felt  to  become
harder  during  its  action.  Now  this  hardness  proceeds  from
tension,  precisely  as  when  the  forearm  is  grasped,  its  tendons
are  perceived  to  become  tense  and  resilient  when  the  fingers
are  moved.

4.  It  may  further  be  observed  in  fishes,  and  the  colder
blooded  animals,  such  as  frogs,  serpents,  &c.,  that  the  heart.


22


MOTION  OF  THE


when  it  moves,  becomes  of  a paler  colour,  when  quiescent  of  a
deeper  blood-red  colour.

From  these  particulars  it  appeared  evident  to  me  that  the
motion  of  the  heart  consists  in  a certain  universal  tension — both
contraction  in  the  line  of  its  fibres,  and  constriction  in  every
sense.  It  becomes  erect,  hard,  and  of  diminished  size  during  its
action;  the  motion  is  plainly  of  the  same  nature  as  that  of  the
muscles  when  they  contract  in  the  line  of  their  sinews  and
fibres;  for  the  muscles,  when  in  action,  acquire  vigour  and
tenseness,  and  from  soft  become  hard,  prominent  and  thick-
ened: in  the  same  manner  the  heart.

We  are  therefore  authorized  to  conclude  that  the  heart,  at
the  moment  of  its  action,  is  at  once  constiicted  on  all  sides,
rendered  thicker  in  its  parietes  and  smaller  in  its  ventricles,
and  so  made  apt  to  project  or  expel  its  charge  of  blood.  This,
indeed,  is  made  sufficiently  manifest  by  the  fomth  observation
preceding,  in  which  we  have  seen  that  the  heart,  by  squeezing
out  the  blood  it  contains  becomes  paler,  and  then  when  it
sinks  into  repose  and  the  ventricle  is  filled  anew  with  blood,
that  the  deeper  crimson  colour  retm’us.  But  no  one  need  re-
main in  doubt  of  the  fact,  for  if  the  ventricle  be  pierced  the
blood  mil  he  seen  to  be  forcibly  projected  outwai’ds  upon  each
motion  or  pulsation  when  the  heart  is  tense.

These  things,  therefore,  happen  together  or  at  the  same  in-
stant: the  tension  of  the  heart,  the  pidse  of  its  apex,  which  is
felt  externally  by  its  striking  against  the  chest,  the  thickening
of  its  parietes,  and  the  forcible  expulsion  of  the  blood  it  con-
tains by  the  constriction  of  its  ventricles.

Hence  the  very  opposite  of  the  opinions  commonly  received,
appears  to  be  true;  inasmuch  as  it  is  generally  believed  that
when  the  heart  strikes  the  breast  and  the  pidse  is  felt  without,
the  heai’t  is  dilated  in  its  ventricles  and  is  filled  with  blood;
but  the  contrary  of  this  is  the  fact,  and  the  heart,  when  it  con-
tracts [and  the  shock  is  grten],  is  emptied.  Whence  the  motion
which  is  generally  regarded  as  the  diastole  of  the  heai’t,  is  in
truth  its  systole.  And  in  like  manner  the  inti’insic  motion  of
the  heart  is  not  the  diastole  hut  the  systole;  neither  is  it  in
the  diastole  that  the  heart  grows  fii’m  and  tense,  hut  in  the
systole,  for  then  only,  when  tense,  is  it  moved  and  made
vigorous.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


23


Neither  is  it  by  any  means  to  be  allowed  that  the  heart
only  moves  in  the  line  of  its  straight  fibres,  although  the  great
Vesalius,  giving  this  notion  countenance,  quotes  a bundle  of
osiers  bound  into  a pyramidal  heap  in  illustration;  meaning,  that
as  the  apex  is  approached  to  the  base,  so  are  the  sides  made  to
bulge  out  in  the  fashion  of  arches,  the  cavities  to  dilate,  the
ventricles  to  acquire  the  form  of  a cupping-glass  and  so  to  suck
in  the  blood.  But  the  true  effect  of  every  one  of  its  fibres  is
to  constringe  the  heart  at  the  same  time  that  they  render  it
tense;  and  this  rather  with  the  effect  of  thickening  and  ampli-
fying the  walls  and  substance  of  the  organ  than  enlarging  its
ventricles.  And,  again,  as  the  fibres  run  from  the  apex  to  the
base,  and  draw  the  apex  towards  the  base,  they  do  not  tend  to
make  the  walls  of  the  heart  bulge  out  in  circles,  but  rather  the
contrary;  inasmuch  as  every  fibre  that  is  circularly  disposed,
tends  to  become  straight  when  it  contracts;  and  is  distended
laterally  and  thickened,  as  in  the  case  of  muscular  fibres  in
general,  when  they  contract,  that  is,  when  they  are  shortened
longitudinally,  as  we  see  them  in  the  bellies  of  the  muscles  of  the
body  at  large.  To  all  this  let  it  be  added,  that  not  only  are
the  ventricles  contracted  in  virtue  of  the  direction  and  con-
densation of  their  walls,  but  farther,  that  those  fibres,  or  bands,
styled  nerves  by  Aristotle,  which  are  so  conspicuous  in  the  ven-
tricles of  the  larger  animals,  and  contain  all  the  straight  fibres,
(the  parietes  of  the  heart  containing  only  cii’cular  ones,)  when
they  contract  simultaneously,  by  an  admirable  adjustment  all
the  internal  surfaces  are  drawn  together,  as  if  with  cords,  and
so  is  the  charge  of  blood  expelled  with  force.

Neither  is  it  true,  as  vulgarly  believed,  that  the  heart  by
any  dilatation  or  motion  of  its  own,  has  the  power  of  drawing
the  blood  into  the  ventricles ; for  when  it  acts  and  becomes
tense,  the  blood  is  expelled;  when  it  relaxes  and  sinks  toge-
ther it  receives  the  blood  in  the  manner  and  wise  which  will
by  and  by  be  explained.


24


MOTION  OF  THE


CHAPTER  III.

OF  THE  MOTIONS  OF  ARTERIES^  AS  SEEN  IN  THE  DISSECTION
OF  LIVING  ANIMALS.

In  connexion  witli  the  motions  of  the  heart  these  thmgs
are  further  to  be  observed  hanug  reference  to  the  motions  and
pulses  of  the  arteiies  :

1.  At  the  moment  the  heart  contracts,  and  vheii  the  breast
is  struck,  when  in  short  the  organ  is  in  its  state  of  systole,  the
arteries  are  dilated,  peld  a pulse,  and  are  in  the  state  of
diastole.  In  like  manner,  when  the  right  ventricle  contracts
and  propels  its  charge  of  blood,  the  arterial  vein  [the  pid-
monary  artery]  is  distended  at  the  same  time  with  the  other
arteries  of  the  body.

2.  When  the  left  ventricle  ceases  to  act,  to  contract,  to  pulsate,
the  pulse  in  the  arteries  also  ceases;  further,  when  this  ventricle
contracts  languidly,  the  pulse  in  the  arteries  is  scarcely  jiercep-
tible.  In  like  manner,  the  pulse  in  the  right  I'entricle  failing,
the  pulse  in  the  vena  arteriosa  [pulmonary  artery]  ceases  also.

3.  Further,  when  an  artery  is  divided  or  punctured,  the
blood  is  seen  to  be  forcibly  propelled  from  the  wound  at  the
moment  the  left  ventricle  contracts;  and,  again,  when  the  pul-
monary artery  is  wounded,  the  blood  will  be  seen  spouting
forth  with  violence  at  the  instant  when  the  right  ventricle
contracts.

So  also  in  fishes,  if  the  vessel  which  leads  from  the  heart  to
the  gills  be  divided,  at  the  moment  when  the  heart  becomes
tense  and  contracted,  at  the  same  moment  does  the  blood  flow
with  force  from  the  divided  vessel.

In  the  same  way,  finally,  when  we  see  the  blood  in  arte-
riotomy  projected  now  to  a greater,  now  to  a less  distance,  and
that  the  greater  jet  corresponds  to  the  diastole  of  the  artery  and
to  the  time  when  the  heart  contracts  and  strikes  the  ribs,  and
is  in  its  state  of  systole,  we  understand  that  the  blood  is  ex-
pelled by  the  same  movement.

From  these  facts  it  is  manifest,  in  opposition  to  commonly
received  opinions,  that  the  diastole  of  the  ai’teries  corresponds
with  the  time  of  the  heart’s  systole;  and  that  the  arteries  are


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


25


filled  and  distended  by  tbe  blood  forced  into  tbem  by  tbe  con-
traction of  the  ventricles ; the  arteries,  therefore,  are  distended,
because  they  are  fiUed  hke  sacs  or  bladders,  and  are  not  filled
because  they  expand  like  bellows.  It  is  in  virtue  of  one  and.
the  same  cause,  therefore,  that  all  the  arteries  of  the  body
pulsate,  viz.  the  contraction  of  the  left  ventricle;  in  the  same
way  as  the  pulmonary  artery  pulsates  by  the  contraction  of  the
right  ventricle.

Finally,  that  the  pulses  of  the  arteries  are  due  to  the  impulses
of  the  blood  from  the  left  ventricle,  may  be  illustrated  by  blow-
ing into  a glove,  when  the  whole  of  the  fingers  will  be  found
to  become  distended  at  one  and  the  same  time,  and  in  their
tension  to  bear  some  resemblance  to  the  pulse.  For  in  the
ratio  of  the  tension  is  the  pulse  of  the  heart,  fuller,  stronger,
more  frequent  as  that  acts  more  vigorously,  still  preserving  the
rhythm  and  volume,  and  order  of  the  heart’s  contractions.  Nor
is  it  to  be  expected  that  because  of  the  motion  of  the  blood,  the
time  at  which  the  contraction  of  the  heart  takes  place,  and  that
at  which  the  pulse  in  an  artery  (especially  a distant  one,)  is
felt,  shall  be  otherwise  than  simultaneous;  it  is  here  the  same
as  in  blowing  up  a glove  or  bladder;  for  in  a plenum,  (as  in  a
drum,  a long  piece  of  timber,  &c.)  the  stroke  and  the  motion
occur  at  both  extremities  at  the  same  time.  Aristotle,^  too,
has  said,  “ the  blood  of  all  animals  palpitates  within  their  veins,
(meaning  the  arteries,)  and  by  the  pulse  is  sent  everywhere
simultaneously.”  And  further,^  “ thus  do  all  the  veins  pulsate
together  and  by  successive  strokes,  because  they  all  depend  upon
the  heart ; and,  as  it  is  always  in  motion,  so  are  they  likewise
always  moving  together,  but  by  successive  movements.”  It  is
well  to  observe  with  Galen,  in  this  place,  that  the  old  philoso-
phers called  the  arteries  veins.

I happened  upon  one  occasion  to  have  a particular  case  under
my  care,  which  plainly  satisfied  me  of  this  truth:  A certain
person  was  affected  with  a large  pulsating  tumoiu’  on  the  right
side  of  the  neck,  called  an  aneurism,  just  at  that  part  where
the  artery  descends  into  the  axilla,  produced  by  an  erosion  of
the  artery  itself,  and  daily  increasing  in  size;  this  tumour  was
visibly  distended  as  it  received  the  charge  of  blood  brought  to


‘ De  Animal,  iii,  cap.  9.


^ De  Respirat.  cap.  20.


26


MOTION  OF  THE


it  by  the  artery,  with  each  stroke  of  the  heart ; the  connexion
of  parts  was  obvious  when  the  body  of  the  patient  came  to  be
opened  after  his  death.  The  pulse  in  the  corresponding  arm
was  small,  in  consequence  of  the  greater  portion  of  the  blood
being  diverted  into  the  tumour  and  so  intercepted.

Whence  it  appears  that  wherever  the  motion  of  the  blood
through  the  arteries  is  impeded,  whether  it  be  by  compression
or  infarction,  or  interception,  there  do  the  remote  dirtsions  of
the  arteries  beat  less  forcibly,  seeing  that  the  pulse  of  the  ar-
teries is  nothing  more  than  the  impulse  or  shock  of  the  blood
in  these  vessels.


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  THE  MOTION  OF  THE  HEART  AND  ITS  AURICLES,  AS  SEEN  IN
THE  BODIES  OF  LIVING  ANIMALS.

Besides  the  motions  already  spoken  of,  ive  have  stdl  to  con-
sider those  that  appertain  to  the  am’icles.

Caspar  Bauhin  and  John  Riolan,^  most  learned  men  and
skilful  anatomists,  inform  us  from  theii’  observations,  that  if
we  carefully  watch  the  movements  of  the  heart  in  the  virtsec-
tion  of  an  animal,  we  shall  perceive  four  motions  distinct  in
time  and  in  place,  two  of  which  are  proper  to  the  amicles,  two
to  the  ventricles.  With  all  deference  to  such  authority  I say,
that  there  are  four  motions  distinct  in  point  of  place,  but  not
of  time;  for  the  two  auricles  move  together,  and  so  also  do  the
two  ventricles,  in  such  wise  that  though  the  places  be  four,  the
times  are  only  two.  And  this  occurs  in  the  following  manner:

There  are,  as  it  were,  two  motions  going  on  together;  one
of  the  auricles,  another  of  the  ventricles;  these  by  no  means
taking  place  simultaneously,  but  the  motion  of  the  auricles
preceding,  that  of  the  heart  itself  foUowiug ; the  motion  appear-
ing to  begin  from  the  am’icles  and  to  extend  to  the  ventricles.
When  all  things  are  becoming  languid,  and  the  heart  is  dring,
as  also  in  fishes  and  the  colder  blooded  animals,  there  is  a
short  pause  between  these  two  motions,  so  that  the  heart  aroused,
as  it  were,  appeal’s  to  respond  to  the  motion,  now  more  quickly.


' Bauliin,  lib.  ii,  cap.  21.  Riolan,  lib.  viii,  cap.  1.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


27


now  more  tardily;  and  at  length,  and  when  near  to  death,  it
ceases  to  respond  by  its  proper  motion,  but  seems,  as  it  were,
to  nod  the  head,  and  is  so  obscurely  moved  that  it  appears
rather  to  give  signs  of  motion  to  the  pulsating  auricle,  than
actually  to  move.  The  heart,  therefore,  ceases  to  pulsate  sooner
than  the  auricles,  so  that  the  auricles  have  been  said  to  out-
live it,  the  left  ventricle  ceasing  to  pulsate  first  of  all;  then  its
auricle,  next  the  right  ventricle;  and,  finally,  all  the  other
parts  being  at  rest  and  dead,  as  Galen  long  since  observed,  the
right  auricle  still  continues  to  beat;  life,  therefore,  appears  to
linger  longest  in  the  right  auricle.  Whilst  the  heart  is  gra-
dually dying,  it  is  sometimes  seen  to  reply,  after  two  or  three
contractions  of  the  auricles,  roused  as  it  were  to  action,
and  making  a single  pulsation,  slowly,  unwilhngly,  and  with
an  effort.

But  this  especially  is  to  be  noted,  that  after  the  heart  has
ceased  to  beat,  the  auricles  however  still  contracting,  a finger
placed  upon  the  ventricles  perceives  the  several  pulsations  of  the
auricles,  precisely  in  the  same  way  and  for  the  same  reason,  as
we  have  said,  that  the  pulses  of  the  ventricles  are  felt  in  the
arteries,  to  wit,  the  distension  produced  by  the  jet  of  blood.
And  if  at  this  time,  the  auricles  alone  pulsating,  the  point  of
the  heart  be  cut  off  with  a pair  of  scissors,  you  will  perceive
the  blood  flowing  out  upon  each  contraction  of  the  auricles.
Whence  it  is  manifest  how  the  blood  enters  the  ventricles,  not
by  any  attraction  or  dilatation  of  the  heart,  but  thrown  into
them  by  the  pulses  of  the  auricles.

And  here  I would  observe,  that  whenever  I speak  of  pul-
sations as  occurring  in  the  auricles  or  ventricles,  I mean  con-
tractions : first  the  auricles  contract,  and  then  and  subse-
quently the  heart  itself  contracts.  When  the  auiicles  contract
they  are  seen  to  become  whiter,  especially  where  they  contain
but  little  blood;  but  they  are  filled  as  magazines  or  reservoirs
of  the  blood,  which  is  tending  spontaneously  and,  by  the  motion
of  the  veins,  nnder  pressure  towards  the  centre;  the  whiteness
indicated  is  most  conspicuous  towards  the  extremities  or  edges
of  the  amides  at  the  time  of  their  contractions.

In  fishes  and  frogs,  and  other  animals  which  have  hearts
with  but  a single  ventricle,  and  for  an  auricle  have  a kind  of
bladder  much  distended  with  blood,  at  the  base  of  the  organ.


28


MOTION  OF  THE


you  may  very  plainly  perceive  this  bladder  contracting  fii'st,  and
the  contraction  of  the  heart  or  ventricle  following  afterwards.

But  I think  it  right  to  describe  what  I have  observed  of  an
opposite  character:  the  heart  of  an  eel,  of  several  fishes,  and
even  of  some  [of  the  higher]  animals  taken  out  of  the  body,
beats  without  auricles;  nay,  if  it  be  cut  in  pieces  the  several
parts  may  still  be  seen  contracting  and  relaxing;  so  that  in
these  creatm’es  the  body  of  the  heart  may  be  seen  pulsating,
palpitating,  after  the  cessation  of  all  motion  in  the  auricle.  But
is  not  this  perchance  peculiar  to  animals  more  tenacious  of  life,
Avhose  radical  moisture  is  more  glutinous,  or  fat  and  sluggish,
and  less  readily  soluble?  The  same  faculty  indeed  appears  in
the  flesh  of  eels,  generally,  which  even  when  skinned  and  em-
bowelled,  and  cut  into  pieces,  are  still  seen  to  move.

Experimenting  with  a pigeon  upon  one  occasion,  after  the
heart  had  wholly  ceased  to  pulsate,  and  the  auricles  too  had
become  motionless,  I kept  my  finger  wetted  with  saliva  and
warm  for  a short  time  upon  the  heart,  and  observed,  that  under
the  influence  of  this  fomentation  it  recovered  new  strength  and
life,  so  that  both  ventricles  and  auricles  pulsated,  contracting
and  relaxing  alternately,  recalled  as  it  were  from  death  to  life.

Besides  this,  however,  I have  occasionally  observed,  after
the  heart  and  e ven  its  right  auricle  had  ceased  pulsating, — when
it  was  in  articulo  mortis  in  short,  that  an  obscure  motion,  an
undulation  or  palpitation,  remained  in  the  blood  itself,  which  was
contained  in  the  right  auricle,  this  being  apparent  so  long  as
it  was  imbued  with  heat  and  spirit.  And  indeed  a circumstance
of  the  same  kind  is  extremely  manifest  in  the  course  of  the  ge-
neration of  animals,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  course  of  the  first
seven  days  of  the  incubation  of  the  chick:  A di’op  of  blood
makes  its  appearance  which  palpitates,  as  Aristotle  had  ah’eady
observed;  from  this,  when  the  growth  is  further  advanced  and
the  chick  is  fashioned,  the  auricles  of  the  heai’t  are  formed,
which  pulsating  henceforth  give  constant  signs  of  life.  MTien
at  length,  and  after  the  lapse  of  a few  days,  the  outline  of  the
body  begins  to  be  distinguished,  then  is  the  ventricular  part  of
the  heart  also  produced ; but  it  continues  for  a time  white  and
apparently  bloodless,  like  the  rest  of  the  animal;  neither  does
it  pulsate  or  give  signs  of  motion.  I have  seen  a similar  con-
dition of  the  heart  in  the  human  foetus  about  the  beginning  of


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


29


the  third  month,  the  heart  being  then  whitish  and  bloodless,
although  its  auricles  contained  a considerable  quantity  of  purple
blood.  In  the  same  way  in  the  egg,  when  the  chick  was  formed
and  had  increased  in  size,  the  heart  too  increased  and  acquired
ventricles,  which  then  began  to  receive  and  to  transmit  blood.

And  this  leads  me  to  remark,  that  he  who  inquires  very  par-
ticularly into  this  matter  will  not  conclude  that  the  heart,  as  a
whole,  is  the  primum  vivens,  ultimum  moriens — the  first  part
to  live,  the  last  to  die,  but  rather  its  auricles,  or  the  part  which
corresponds  to  the  auricles  in  serpents,  fishes,  &c.,  which  both
lives  before  the  heart^  and  dies  after  it.

Nay,  has  not  the  blood  itself  or  spirit  an  obscure  palpitation
inherent  in  it,  which  it  has  even  appeared  to  me  to  retain
after  death?  and  it  seems  very  questionable  whether  or  not  we
are  to  say  that  life  begins  with  the  palpitation  or  beating  of
the  heart.  The  seminal  fiuid  of  all  animals — the  prolific  spirit,
as  Aristotle  observed,  leaves  their  body  with  a bound  and  like
a living  thing;  and  nature  in  death,  as  Aristotle^  further  re-
marks, retracing  her  steps,  reverts  to  whence  she  had  set  out,
returns  at  the  end  of  her  course  to  the  goal  whence  she  had
started;  and  as  animal  generation  proceeds  from  that  which  is
not  animal,  entity  from  non-entity,  so,  by  a retrograde  course,
entity,  by  corruption,  is  resolved  into  non-entity ; whence  that
in  animals,  which  Avas  last  created,  fails  first;  and  that  which
was  first,  fails  last.

I have  also  observed,  that  almost  all  animals  have  truly  a
heart,  not  the  larger  creatures  only,  and  those  that  have  red
blood,  but  the  smaller,  and  [seemingly]  bloodless  ones  also,
such  as  slugs,  snails,  scallops,  shrimps,  crabs,  crayfish,  and
many  others ; nay,  even  in  wasps,  hornets  and  flies,  I have,
with  the  aid  of  a magnifying  glass,  and  at  the  upper  part  of
what  is  called  the  tail,  both  seen  the  heart  pulsating  myself,
and  shown  it  to  many  others.

But  in  the  exsanguine  tribes  the  heart  pulsates  slugglishly
and  deliberately,  contracting  slowly  as  in  animals  that  are  mo-
ribund, a fact  that  may  readily  be  seen  in  the  snail,  whose

' [The  reader  will  observe  that  Harvey,  when  he  speaks  of  the  heart,  always  means
the  ventricles  or  ventricular  portion  of  the  organ. — Ed.]

“ De  Motu  Animal,  cap.  8.


30


MOTION  OF  THE


heart  will  be  found  at  the  bottom  of  that  orifice  in  the  right
side  of  the  body  which  is  seen  to  he  opened  and  shut  in  the
course  of  respiration,  and  whence  saliva  is  discharged,  the  in-
cision being  made  in  the  upper  aspect  of  the  body,  near  the
part  which  corresponds  to  the  liver.

This,  however,  is  to  be  obseiwed;  that  in  winter  and  the
colder  season,  exsanguine  animals,  such  as  the  snad,  show  no
pulsations;  they  seem  rather  to  live  after  the  manner  of  vege-
tables, or  of  those  other  productions  which  are  therefore  de-
signated plant-animals.

It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  all  animals  which  have  a heart,
have  also  auricles,  or  something  analogous  to  auricles;  and
further,  that  wherever  the  heart  has  a double  ventricle  there
are  always  two  auricles  present,  but  not  otherwise.  If  you
turn  to  the  production  of  the  chick  in  ovo,  however,  you  will
find  at  first  no  more  than  a vesicle  or  auricle,  or  pulsating  drop
of  blood ; it  is  only  by  and  by,  when  the  development  has  made
some  progress,  that  the  heart  is  fashioned : even  so  in  certain
animals  not  destined  to  attain  to  the  highest  perfection  in  their
organization,  such  as  bees,  wasps,  snails,  shiimps,  crayfish,  &c.,
we  only  find  a certain  pulsating  vesicle,  hke  a sort  of  red  or  white
palpitating  point,  as  the  beginning  or  principle  of  their  hfe.^

We  have  a small  shrimp  in  these  countries,  which  is  taken
in  the  Thames  and  in  the  sea,  the  whole  of  whose  body  is
transparent ; this  creature,  placed  in  a httle  water,  has  fre-
quently aftbrded  myself  and  particular  fiiends  an  opportunity
of  observing  the  motions  of  the  heart  with  the  gi’eatest  dis-
tinctness, the  external  parts  of  the  body  presenting  no  obstacle
to  our  view,  but  the  heart  being  perceived  as  though  it  had
been  seen  through  a Avindow.

I have  also  observed  the  fii’st  rudiments  of  the  chick  in  the
course  of  the  foiirth  or  fifth  day  of  the  incubation,  in  the  guise
of  a httle  cloud,  the  sheh  having  been  removed  and  the  egg
immersed  in  clear  tepid  w’ater.  In  the  midst  of  the  cloudlet
in  qiiestion  there  was  a bloody  point  so  small  that  it  disappeared
during  the  contraction  and  escaped  the  sight,  but  in  the  re-

* [The  Editor  begs  here  to  be  allowed  to  remark  on  Harvey’s  obvious  perception
of  the  correspondence  between  that  permanent  condition  of  an  organ  in  the  lower,
and  its  transitory  condition  in  the  higher  animals. — Ed.]


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


31


laxation  it  reappeared  again,  red  and  like  tke  point  of  a pin;
so  that  betwixt  the  visible  and  invisible,  betwixt  being  and  not
being,  as  it  were,  it  gave  by  its  pulses  a kind  of  representation
of  the  commencement  of  life.i


CHAPTER  V.

OF  THE  MOTION,  ACTION,  AND  OFFICE  OF  THE  HEART.

From  these  and  other  observations  of  the  like  kind,  I am
persuaded  it  will  be  found  that  the  motion  of  the  heart  is  as
follows  :

First  of  all,  the  auricle  contracts,  and  in  the  course  of  its
contraction  throws  the  blood,  (which  it  contains  in  ample  quan-
tity as  the  head  of  the  veins,  the  store-house  and  cistern  of  the
blood,)  into  the  ventricle,  which  being  filled,  the  heart  raises
itself  straightway,  makes  all  its  fibres  tense,  contracts  the  ven-
tricles, and  performs  a beat,  by  which  beat  it  immediately  sends
the  blood  supplied  to  it  by  the  auricle  into  the  arteries ; the
right  ventricle  sending  its  charge  into  the  lungs  by  the  vessel
which  is  called  vena  arteriosa,  but  which,  in  structure  and  func-
tion, and  all  things  else,  is  an  artery;  the  left  ventricle  send-
ing its  charge  into  the  aorta,  and  through  this  by  the  arteries
to  the  body  at  large.

These  two  motions,  one  of  the  ventricles,  another  of  the  auri-
cles, take  place  consecutively,  but  in  such  a manner  that  there
is  a kind  of  harmony  or  rhythm  preserved  between  them,  the
two  concurring  in  such  wise  that  but  one  motion  is  apparent,
especially  in  the  warmer  blooded  animals,  in  which  the  move-
ments in  question  are  rapid.  Nor  is  this  for  any  other  reason
than  it  is  in  a piece  of  machinery,  inwhich,  though  one  wheel  gives
motion  to  another,  yet  all  the  wheels  seem  to  move  simultane-
ously; or  in  that  mechanical  contrivance  which  is  adapted  to
firearms,  where  the  trigger  being  touched,  down  comes  the  flint,
strikes  against  the  steel,  elicits  a spark,  which  falling  among  the

' [At  the  period  Harvey  indicates,  a rudimentary  auricle  and  ventricle  exist,  hut
are  so  transparent  that  unless  vrith  certain  precautions  their  parietes  cannot  be  seen.
The  filling  and  emptying  of  them,  therefore,  give  the  appearance  of  a speck  of  blood
alternately  appearing  and  disappearing. — Ed.]


MOTION  OF  THE


powder,  it  is  ignited,  upon  which  the  flame  extends,  enters  the
barrel,  causes  the  explosion,  propels  the  hall,  and  the  mark  is
attained — all  of  which  incidents,  by  reason  of  the  celerity  with
which  they  happen,  seem  to  take  place  in  the  twinkling  of  an
eye.  So  also  in  deglutition  ; bj^  the  elevation  of  the  root  of  the
tongue,  and  the  compression  of  the  mouth,  the  food  or  drink  is
pushed  into  the  fauces,  the  larynx  is  closed  by  its  own  muscles,
and  the  epiglottis,  whilst  the  pharynx,  raised  and  opened  by
its  muscles  no  otherwise  than  is  a sac  that  is  to  be  flUed,  is  lifted
up,  and  its  mouth  dilated ; upon  which,  the  mouthful  being  re-
ceived, it  is  forced  downwards  by  the  transverse  muscles,  and
then  carried  farther  by  the  longitudinal  ones.  Yet  are  all  these
motions,  though  executed  by  different  and  distinct  organs,  per-
formed harmoniously,  and  in  such  order,  that  they  seem  to  con-
stitute hut  a single  motion  and  act,  which  we  call  deglutition.

Even  so  does  it  come  to  pass  with  the  motions  and  action  of
the  heart,  which  constitute  a kind  of  deglutition,  a transfusion
of  the  blood  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries.  And  if  any  one,
bearing  these  things  in  mind,  will  carefully  watch  the  motions
of  the  heart  in  the  body  of  a living  animal,  he  will  perceive  not
only  all  the  particulars  I have  mentioned,  xiz.,  the  heart  be-
coming erect,  and  making  one  continuous  motion  with  its  auri-
cles; but  farther,  a certain  obscure  undulation  and  lateral  incli-
nation in  the  du’ection  of  the  axis  of  the  right  ventricle,  [the  or-
gan] twisting  itself  slightly  in  performing  its  work.  And  indeed
every  one  may  see,  when  a horse  drinks,  that  the  water  is  drawn
in  and  transmitted  to  the  stomach  at  each  movement  of  the  throat,
the  motion  being  accompanied  with  a sound,  and  yielding  a pulse
both  to  the  ear  and  the  touch ; in  the  same  way  it  is  with  each
motion  of  the  heart,  when  there  is  the  deliver^’  of  a quantity  of
blood  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries,  that  a pulse  takes  place,
and  can  be  heard  within  the  chest.

The  motion  of  the  heart,  then,  is  entirely  of  this  description,
and  the  one  action  of  the  heai’t  is  the  transmission  of  the  blood
and  its  distribution,  by  means  of  the  arteries,  to  the  very  extre-
mities of  the  body ; so  that  the  prdse  which  we  feel  in  the  ai'-
teries  is  nothing  more  than  the  impulse  of  the  blood  derived
from  the  heart.

Whether  or  not  the  heart,  besides  propelling  the  blood,  giving
it  motion  locally,  and  distributing  it  to  the  body,  adds  anything


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


33


else  to  it,  — heat,  spirit,  perfection, — must  be  inquired  into  by
and  by,  and  decided  upon  other  grounds.  So  much  may  suf-
fice at  this  time,  when  it  is  shown  that  by  the  action  of  the
heart  the  blood  is  transfused  through  the  ventricles  from  the
veins  to  the  arteries,  and  distributed  by  them  to  all  parts  of
the  body.

So  much,  indeed,  is  admitted  by  all  [physiologists],  both
from  the  structure  of  the  heart  and  the  arrangement  and  action
of  its  valves.  But  still  they  are  like  persons  purblind  or  groping
about  in  the  dark  ; and  then  they  give  utterance  to  diverse,  con-
tradictory, and  incoherent  sentiments,  delivering  many  things
upon  conjecture,  as  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  remark.

The  grand  cause  of  hesitation  and  error  in  this  subject  ap-
pears to  me  to  have  been  the  intimate  connexion  between  the
heart  and  the  lungs.  When  men  saw  both  the  vena  arteriosa  [or
pulmonary  artery]  and  the  arterise  venosse  [or  pulmonary  veins]
losing  themselves  in  the  lungs,  of  course  it  became  a puzzle  to
them  to  know  how  or  by  what  means  the  right  ventricle  should
distribute  the  blood  to  the  body,  or  the  left  di’aw  it  from  the
vense  cavae.  This  fact  is  borne  witness  to  by  Galen,  whose
words,  when  writing  against  Erasistratus  in  regard  to  the  origin
and  use  of  the  veins  and  the  coction  of  the  blood,  are  the  fol-
lowing ‘‘'You will reply,^^  he  says,  “ that  the  effect  is  so;  that
the  blood  is  prepared  in  the  liver,  and  is  thence  transferred  to
the  heart  to  receive  its  proper  form  and  last  perfection;  a state-
ment which  does  not  appear  devoid  of  reason ; for  no  great  and
perfect  work  is  ever  accomplished  at  a single  effort,  or  receives
its  final  polish  from  one  instrument.  But  if  this  be  actually
so,  then  show  us  another  vessel  which  draws  the  absolutely
perfect  blood  from  the  heart,  and  distributes  it  as  the  arteries
do  the  spirits  over  the  whole  body.”  Here  then  is  a reason-
able opinion  not  allowed,  because,  forsooth,  besides  not  seeing
the  true  means  of  transit,  he  could  not  discover  the  vessel  which
should  transmit  the  blood  from  the  heart  to  the  body  at  large  !

But  had  any  one  been  there  in  behalf  of  Erasistratus,  and  of
that  opinion  which  we  now  espouse,  and  which  Galen  himself
acknowledges  in  other  respects  consonant  with  reason,  to  have
pointed  to  the  aorta  as  the  vessel  which  distributes  the  blood  from


‘ De  Placitis  Hippocratis  et  Platonis,  vi.


3


34


MOTION  OF  THE


the  heart  to  the  rest  of  the  body,  I wonder  what  would  have  been
the  answer  of  that  most  ingenious  and  learned  man  ? Had  he
said  that  the  artery  transmits  spirits  and  not  blood,  he  would
indeed  sufficiently  have  answered  Erasistratus,  who  imagined
that  the  arteries  contained  nothing  but  spirits ; but  then  he
would  have  contradicted  himself,  and  given  a foul  denial  to  that
for  which  he  had  keenly  contended  in  his  writings  against  this
very  Erasistratus,  to  wit,  that  blood  in  substance  is  contained  in
the  arteries,  and  not  spirits ; a fact  which  he  demonstrated  not
only  by  many  powerful  arguments,  but  by  experiments.

But  if  the  divine  Galen  vill  here  allow,  as  in  other  places  he
does,  “ that  all  the  arteries  of  the  body  arise  from  the  great  ai’-
tery,  and  that  this  takes  its  origin  from  the  heart ; that  all  these
vessels  naturally  contain  and  carry  blood ; that  the  three  semi-
lunar valves  situated  at  the  orifice  of  the  aorta  prevent  the  return
of  the  blood  into  the  heart,  and  that  natme  never  connected  them
with  this,  the  most  noble  viscus  of  the  body,  unless  for  some  most
important  end  ■”  if,  I say,  this  father  of  physic  admits  all  these
things, — and  I quote  his  own  words, — I do  not  see  how  he
can  deny  that  the  great  arteiy  is  the  very  vessel  to  carry  the
blood,  when  it  has  attained  its  highest  term  of  perfection,  from
the  heart  for  distribution  to  all  parts  of  the  body.  Or  would  he
perchance  still  hesitate,  like  all  who  have  come  after  him,  even
to  the  present  hour,  because  he  did  not  perceive  the  route  by
which  the  blood  was  transferred  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries,
in  consequence,  as  I have  already  said,  of  the  intimate  con-
nexion hetAveen  the  heart  and  the  lungs  ? And  that  this  dif-
ficulty puzzled  anatomists  not  a little,  when  in  theii’  dissections
they  found  the  prdmonary  artery  and  left  ventricle  full  of  thick,
black,  and  clotted  blood,  plainly  appears,  when  they  felt  them-
selves compelled  to  affii’m  that  the  blood  made  its  way  from  the
right  to  the  left  ventricle  by  sweating  through  the  septum  of
the  heart.  But  this  fancy  I have  afready  refuted.  A new
pathway  for  the  blood  must  therefore  be  prepared  and  thrown
open,  and  being  once  exposed,  no  further  difficulty  Avill,  I believe,
he  experienced  by  any  one  in  admitting  Avhat  I have  ali’eady
proposed  in  regard  to  the  pulse  of  the  heai’t  and  arteries,  viz.
the  passage  of  the  blood  from  the  veins  to  the  ai’teries,  and  its
disti’ihution  to  the  AA'hole  of  the  body  by  means  of  these  vessels.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


35


CHAPTER  VI.

OF  THE  COURSE  BY  WHICH  THE  BLOOD  IS  CARRIED  FROM  THE

VENA  CAVA  INTO  THE  ARTERIES,  OR  FROM  THE  RIGHT  INTO

THE  LEFT  VENTRICLE  OF  THE  HEART.

Since  the  intimate  connexion  of  the  heart  with  the  lungs,
which  is  apparent  in  the  human  subject,  has  been  the  probable
cause  of  the  errors  that  have  been  committed  on  this  point,
they  plainly  do  amiss  who,  pretending  to  speak  of  the  parts  of
animals  generally,  as  anatomists  for  the  most  part  do,  confine
their  researches  to  the  human  body  alone,  and  that  when  it  is
dead.  They  obviously  act  no  otherwise  than  he  who,  having
studied  the  forms  of  a single  commonwealth,  should  set  about
the  composition  of  a general  system  of  polity ; or  who,  having
taken  cognizance  of  the  nature  of  a single  field,  should  imagine
that  he  had  mastered  the  science  of  agriculture ; or  who,  upon
the  ground  of  one  particulai’  proposition,  should  proceed  to  di’aw
general  conclusions.

Had  anatomists  only  been  as  conversant  with  the  dissection  of
the  lower  animals  as  they  are  with  that  of  the  human  body,  the
matters  that  have  hitherto  kept  them  in  a perplexity  of  doubt
would,  in  my  opinion,  have  met  them  freed  from  every  kind  of
difficulty.

And,  first,  in  fishes,  in  which  the  heart  consists  of  but  a
single  ventricle,  they  having  no  lungs,  the  thing  is  sufficiently
manifest.  Here  the  sac,  which  is  situated  at  the  base  of  the  heart,
and  is  the  part  analogous  to  the  auricle  in  man,  plainly  throws
the  blood  into  the  heart,  and  the  heart,  in  its  tiun,  conspicu-
ously transmits  it  by  a pipe  or  artery,  or  vessel  analogous  to  an
artery ; these  are  facts  which  are  confirmed  by  simple  ocular
inspection,  as  well  as  by  a division  of  the  vessel,  when  the  blood
is  seen  to  be  projected  by  each  pulsation  of  the  heart.

The  same  thing  is  also  not  difficult  of  demonstrationin  those  ani-
mals that  have  either  no  more,  or,  as  it  were,  no  more  than  a single
ventricle  to  the  heart,  such  as  toads,  frogs,  serpents,  and  hzards,
which,  although  they  have  lungs  in  a certain  sense,  as  they  have
a voice,  (and  I have  many  observations  by  me  on  the  admirable
structure  of  the  lungs  of  these  animals,  and  matters  appertain-


36


MOTION  OF  THE


ing,  which,  however,  I cannot  introduce  in  this  place,)  still  their
anatomy  plainly  shows  that  the  hlood  is  transferred  in  them  from
the  veins  to  the  arteries  in  the  same  manner  as  in  higher  ani-
mals, viz.,  hy  the  action  of  the  heart;  the  way,  in  fact,  is  patent,
open,  manifest ; there  is  no  difficulty,  no  room  for  hesitating
about  it ; for  in  them  the  matter  stands  precisely  as  it  would
in  man,  were  the  septum  of  his  heart  perforated  or  removed,
or  one  ventricle  made  out  of  two ; and  this  being  the  case,  I
imagine  that  no  one  will  doubt  as  to  the  way  by  which  the
hlood  may  pass  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries.

But  as  there  are  actually  more  animals  which  have  no  lungs
than  there  are  which  be  furnished  Avith  them,  and  in  hke  man-
ner a greater  number  which  have  only  one  ventricle  than  there
are  which  have  two,  it  is  open  to  us  to  conclude,  judging  from
the  mass  or  multitude  of  living  creatures,  that  for  the  major
part,  and  generally,  there  is  an  open  way  hy  which  the  blood  is
transmitted  from  the  veins  through  the  sinuses  or  caAuties  of
the  heart  into  the  arteries.

I have,  however,  cogitating  with  myself,  seen  further,  that
the  same  thing  obtained  most  obAiously  in  the  embiyos  of  those
animals  that  have  lungs ; for  in  the  foetus  the  four  vessels  be-
longing to  the  heart,  viz.,  the  vena  cava,  the  vena  arteriosa  or
pulmonary  artery,  the  arteria  venalis  or  piolmonary  vein,  and
the  arteria  magna  or  aorta,  are  all  connected  otherwise  than  in
the  adult ; a fact  sufficiently  known  to  every  anatomist.  The
first  contact  and  union  of  the  vena  cava  with  the  arteria  venosa
or  pulmonaiy  veins,  which  occurs  before  the  cava  opens  properly
into  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  or  gives  off  the  coro-
nary vein,  a little  above  its  escape  from  the  liver,  is  by  a lateral
anastomosis ; this  is  an  ample  foramen,  of  an  oval  form,  com-
municating between  the  cava  and  the  arteria  venosa,  or  pulmo-
nary vein,  so  that  the  blood  is  free  to  flow  in  the  greatest  abun-
dance by  that  foramen  from  the  vena  cava  into  the  arteria
venosa  or  pulmonary  A^ein,  and  left  auricle,  and  from  thence
into  the  left  ventricle ; and  farther,  in  this  foramen  ovale,  from
that  part  which  regards  the  arteria  venosa,  or  pulmonary  vein,
there  is  a thin  tough  membrane,  larger  than  the  opening,  ex-
tended like  an  operculum  or  cover ; this  membrane  in  the  adult
blocking  up  the  foramen,  and  adhering  on  all  sides,  finally
closes  it  up,  and  almost  obliterates  eveiy  trace  of  it.  This


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


37


membrane,  however,  is  so  contrived  in  the  fcetus,  that  falling
loosely  upon  itself,  it  permits  a ready  access  to  the  lungs  and
heart,  yielding  a passage  to  the  blood  which  is  streaming  from
the  cava,  and  hindering  the  tide  at  the  same  time  from  flowing
back  into  that  vein.  All  things,  in  short,  permit  us  to  believe
that  in  the  embryo  the  blood  must  constantly  pass  by  this
foramen  from  the  vena  cava  into  the  arteria  venosa,  or  pulmo-
nary vein,  and  from  thence  into  the  left  auricle  of  the  heart ;
and  having  once  entered  there,  it  can  never  regurgitate.

Another  union  is  that  by  the  vena  arteriosa,  or  pulmonary  artery,
and  is  effected  when  that  vessel  divides  into  two  branches  after
its  escape  from  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart.  It  is  as  if  to  the
two  trunks  already  mentioned  a third  were  superadded,  a kind
of  arterial  canal,  carried  obliquely  from  the  vena  arteriosa,  or
pulmonary  artery,  to  perforate  and  terminate  in  the  arteria
magna  or  aorta.  In  the  embryo,  consequently,  there  are,  as  it
were,  two  aortas,  or  two  roots  of  the  arteria  magna,  springing
from  the  heart.  This  canalis  arteriosus  shrinks  gradually  after
birth,  and  is  at  length  and  Anally  almost  entirely  withered,
and  removed,  like  the  umbilical  vessels.

The  canalis  arteriosus  contains  no  membrane  or  valve  to  di-
rect or  impede  the  flow  of  the  blood  in  this  or  in  that  direction ;
for  at  the  root  of  the  vena  arteriosa,  or  pulmonary  artery,  of
which  the  canalis  arteriosus  is  the  continuation  in  the  foetus,
there  are  three  sigmoid  or  semilunar  valves,  which  open  from
within  outwards,  and  oppose  no  obstacle  to  the  blood  flowing  in
this  direction  or  from  the  right  ventricle  into  the  pulmonary  ar-
tery and  aorta ; but  they  prevent  all  regurgitation  from  the  aorta
or  pulmonic  vessels  back  upon  the  right  venti’icle  3 closing  with
perfect  accuracy,  they  oppose  an  effectual  obstacle  to  everything
of  the  kind  in  the  embryo.  So  that  there  is  also  reason  to
believe  that  when  the  heart  contracts,  the  blood  is  regularly
propelled  by  the  canal  or  passage  indicated  from  the  right  ven-
tricle into  the  aorta.

What  is  commonly  said  in  regard  to  these  two  great  com-
munications, to  wit,  that  they  exist  for  the  nutrition  of  the  lungs,
is  both  improbable  and  inconsistent ; seeing  that  in  the  adult
they  are  closed  up,  abolished,  and  consolidated,  although  the
lungs,  by  reason  of  their  heat  and  motion,  must  then  be  pre-
sumed to  require  a larger  supply  of  nourishment.  The  same  may


38


MOTION  OF  THE


be  said  in  regard  to  the  assertion  that  the  heart  in  the  embryo
does  not  pulsate,  that  it  neither  acts  nor  moves,  so  that  nature
was  forced  to  make  these  communications  for  the  nutrition  of
the  lungs.  This  is  plainly  false ; for  simple  inspection  of  the
incubated  egg,  and  of  embryos  just  taken  out  of  the  uterus,  shows
that  the  heart  moves  precisely  in  them  as  in  adults,  and  that
nature  feels  no  such  necessity.  I have  myself  repeatedly  seen
these  motions,  and  Aristotle  is  likewise  witness  of  their  reality.
“ The  pulse,”  he  observes,  “ inheres  in  the  very  constitution  of
the  heart,  and  appears  from  the  beginning,  as  is  learned  both
from  the  dissection  of  living  animals,  and  the  formation  of  the
chick  in  the  egg.”^  But  we  further  observe,  that  the  passages
in  question  are  not  only  pervious  up  to  the  period  of  birth  in
man,  as  well  as  in  other  animals,  as  anatomists  in  general  have
described  them,  but  for  several  months  subsequently,  in  some
indeed  for  several  years,  not  to  say  for  the  whole  com'se  of
life ; as,  for  example,  in  the  goose,  snipe,  and  various  birds,
and  many  of  the  smaller  animals.  And  this  cu’cumstauce  it
was,  perhaps,  that  imposed  upon  Botallus,  who  thought  he  had
discovered  a new  passage  for  the  blood  from  the  vena  cava  into
the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart ; and  I own  that  when  I met  with
the  same  arrangement  in  one  of  the  larger  members  of  the
mouse  family,  in  the  adult  state,  I was  myself  at  first  led  to
something  of  a like  conclusion.

From  this  it  will  be  understood  that  in  the  human  embryo,
and  in  the  embiu  os  of  animals  in  which  the  communications  ai’e
not  closed,  the  same  thing  happens,  namely,  that  the  heart  by
its  motion  propels  the  blood  by  obrious  and  open  passages  from
the  vena  cava  into  the  aorta  through  the  cavities  of  both  the
ventricles ; the  right  one  recemng  the  blood  from  the  axu’icle,
and  propelling  it  by  the  vena  arteriosa,  or  pulmonary  arteiy,  and
its  continuation,  named  the  ductus  arteriosus,  into  the  aorta;
the  left,  in  like  manner,  charged  by  the  contraction  of  its  auricle,
which  has  received  its  supply  tlu'ough  the  foramen  ovale  from
the  vena  cava,  contracting,  and  projecting  the  blood  through
the  root  of  the  aorta  into  the  trunk  of  that  vessel.

In  embryos,  consequently,  Avhilst  the  lungs  are  yet  in  a state
of  inaction,  performing  no  function,  subject  to  no  motion  any


Lib.  de  Spiritu,  cap.  v.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


39


more  than  if  they  had  not  been  present,  nature  uses  the  two
ventricles  of  the  heart  as  if  they  formed  hut  one,  for  the  trans-
mission of  the  blood.  The  condition  of  the  embryos  of  those
animals  which  have  lungs,  whilst  these  organs  are  yet  in  abeyance
and  not  employed,  is  the  same  as  that  of  those  animals  which
have  no  lungs.

So  clearly,  therefore,  does  it  appear  in  the  case  of  the
foetus,  viz.,  that  the  heart  by  its  action  transfers  the  blood
from  the  vena  cava  into  the  aorta,  and  that  by  a route  as  ob-
vious and  open,  as  if  in  the  adult  the  two  ventricles  were  made
to  communicate  by  the  removal  of  their  septum.  Since,  then,
W'e  find  that  in  the  greater  number  of  animals,  in  all,  indeed,
at  a certain  period  of  their  existence,  the  channels  for  the  trans-
mission of  the  blood  through  the  heart  are  so  conspicuous,  we
have  still  to  inquire  wherefore  in  some  creatures — those,  namely,
that  have  warm  blood,  and  that  have  attained  to  the  adult  age,
man  among  the  number — we  should  not  conclude  that  the  same
thing  is  accomplished  through  the  substance  of  the  lungs,  which
in  the  embryo,  and  at  a time  when  the  function  of  these  organs
is  in  abeyance,  nature  effects  by  the  direct  passages  described,
and  which,  indeed,  she  seems  compelled  to  adopt  through  want
of  a passage  by  the  lungs ; or  wherefore  it  should  be  better  (for
nature  always  does  that  which  is  best)  that  she  should  close  up
the  various  open  routes  which  she  had  formerly  made  use  of  iu
the  embryo  and  foetus,  and  still  uses  in  all  other  animals  ; not
only  opening  up  no  new  apparent  channels  for  the  passage  of
the  blood,  therefore,  but  even  entirely  shutting  up  those  which
formerly  existed.

And  now  the  discussion  is  brought  to  this  point,  that  they
who  inquire  into  the  ways  by  which  the  blood  reaches  the  left
ventricle  of  the  heart  and  pulmonary  veins  from  the  vena  cava,
will  pursue  the  wisest  course  if  they  seek  by  dissection  to  dis-
cover the  causes  why  in  the  larger  and  more  perfect  animals
of  mature  age,  nature  has  rather  chosen  to  make  the  blood  per-
colate the  parenchyma  of  the  lungs,  than  as  in  other  instances
chosen  a direct  and  obvious  course — for  I assume  that  no  other
path  or  mode  of  transit  can  be  entertained.  It  must  be  either
because  the  larger  and  more  perfect  animals  are  warmer,  and
when  adult  their  heat  greater — ignited,  as  I might  say,  and
requiring  to  be  damped  or  mitigated ; therefore  it  may  be  that


40


MOTION  OF  THE


the  blood  is  sent  through  the  lungs,  that  it  may  he  tempered
by  the  air  that  is  inspired,  and  prevented  from  boiling  up,  and  so
becoming  extinguished,  or  something  else  of  the  sort.  But  to
determine  these  matters,  and  explain  them  satisfactorily,  Tvere
to  enter  on  a speculation  in  regard  to  the  office  of  the  lungs  and
the  ends  for  which  they  exist ; and  upon  such  a subject,  as  well
as  upon  what  pertains  to  eventilation,  to  the  necessity  and  use
of  the  air,  &c.,  as  also  to  the  variety  and  diversity  of  organs  that
exist  in  the  bodies  of  animals  in  connexion  with  these  matters,
although  I have  made  a vast  number  of  observations,  still,  lest
I should  be  held  as  wandering  too  wide  of  my  present  purpose,
which  is  the  use  and  motion  of  the  heart,  and  be  charged  with
speaking  of  things  beside  the  question,  and  rather  comphcating
and  quitting  than  illustrating  it,  I shall  leave  such  topics  till  I
can  more  conveniently  set  them  forth  in  a treatise  apart.  And
now,  returning  to  my  immediate  subject,  I go  on  with  what  yet
remains  for  demonstration.  Adz.,  that  in  the  more  perfect  and
warmer  adult  animals,  and  man,  the  blood  passes  from  the  right
ventricle  of  the  heart  by  the  A’ena  arteriosa,  or  pulmonary  artery,
into  the  lungs,  and  thence  by  the  arterise  venosse,  or  pulmonary
veins,  into  the  left  auricle,  and  thence  into  the  left  ventricle  of
the  heart.  And,  first,  I shall  show  that  this  may  be  so,  and
then  I shall  prove  that  it  is  so  in  fact.


CHAPTER  VII.

THE  BLOOD  PERCOLATES  THE  SUBSTANCE  OF  THE  LUNGS  FROM
THE  RIGHT  VENTRICLE  OF  THE  HEART  INTO  THE  PULMONARY
A'EINS  AND  LEFT  VENTRICLE.

That  this  is  possible,  and  that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent
it  from  being  so,  appears  when  we  reflect  on  the  way  in  which
water  percolating  the  earth  produces  springs  and  riA"ulets,or  when
we  speculate  on  the  means  by  AAffiich  the  sweat  passes  through  the
skin,  or  the  urine  through  the  parenchyma  of  the  kidneys.  It
is  well  known  that  persons  who  use  the  Spa  waters,  or  those  of
La  Madonna,  in  the  territories  of  Padua,  or  others  of  an  acid-
ulous or  vitriolated  nature,  or  who  simply  swallow  drinks  by  the
gallon,  pass  all  off  again  Avithin  an  horn’  or  two  by  mdne.  Such


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


41


a quantity  of  liquid  must  take  some  short  time  in  the  eoncoc-
tion  : it  must  pass  through  the  liver ; (it  is  allowed  by  all  that
the  juices  of  the  food  we  consume  pass  twice  through  this  organ
in  the  course  of  the  day;)  it  must  flow  through  the  veins,
through  the  parenchyma  of  the  kidneys,  and  through  the
ureters  into  the  bladder.

To  those,  therefore,  whom  I hear  denying  that  the  blood,  aye
the  whole  mass  of  the  blood  may  pass  through  the  substance
of  the  lungs,  even  as  the  nutritive  juices  percolate  the  liver,
asserting  such  a proposition  to  be  impossible,  and  by  no  means
to  be  entertained  as  credible,  I reply,  with  the  poet,  that  they  are
of  that  race  of  men  who,  when  they  will,  assent  full  readily,  and
when  they  will  not,  by  no  manner  of  means ; who,  when  their
assent  is  wanted,  fear,  and  when  it  is  not,  fear  not  to  give  it.

The  parenchyma  of  the  liver  is  extremely  dense,  so  is  that  of
the  kidney ; the  lungs,  again,  are  of  a much  looser  texture,  and
if  compared  with  the  kidneys  are  absolutely  spongy.  In  the
liver  there  is  no  forcing,  no  impelling  power ; in  the  lungs  the
blood  is  forced  on  by  the  pulse  of  the  right  ventricle,  the  neces-
sary effect  of  whose  impulse  is  the  distension  of  the  vessels  and
pores  of  the  lungs.  And  then  the  lungs,  in  respiration,  are  perpe-
tually rising  and  falling;  motions,  the  effect  of  which  must  needs
he  to  open  and  shut  the  pores  and  vessels,  precisely  as  in  the  case
of  a sponge,  and  of  parts  having  a spongy  structure,  when  they
are  alternately  compressed  and  again  are  suffered  to  expand.
The  liver,  on  the  contrary,  remains  at  rest,  and  is  never  seen
to  be  dilated  and  constricted.  Lastly,  if  no  one  denies  the
possibility  of  the  whole  of  the  ingested  juices  passing  through
the  liver,  in  man,  oxen,  and  the  larger  animals  generally,  in
order  to  reach  the  vena  cava,  and  for  this  reason,  that  if
nourishment  is  to  go  on,  these  juices  must  needs  get  into  the
veins,  and  there  is  no  other  way  but  the  one  indicated,  why
should  not  the  same  arguments  be  held  of  avail  for  the  passage
of  the  blood  in  adults  through  the  lungs  ? Why  not,  with
Columbus,  that  skilful  and  learned  anatomist,  maintain  and
believe  the  like,  from  the  capacity  and  structure  of  the  pul-
monary vessels ; from  the  fact  of  the  pulmonary  veins  and
ventricle  corresponding  with  them,  being  always  found  to  con-
tain blood,  which  must  needs  have  come  from  the  veins,  and
by  no  other  passage  save  through  the  lungs  ? Columbus,  and


42


MOTION  or  THE


we  also^  from  what  precedes,  from  dissections,  and  other  argu-
ments, conceive  the  thing  to  be  clear.  But  as  there  are  some
who  admit  nothing  unless  upon  authority,  let  them  learn  that
the  truth  I am  contending  for  can  he  confirmed  from  Galen’s
own  words,  namely,  that  not  only  may  the  blood  be  transmitted
from  the  pulmonary  artery  into  the  pulmonary  veins,  then  into
the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  from  thence  into  the  arteries
of  the  body,  but  that  this  is  effected  by  the  ceaseless  pulsation
of  the  heart  and  the  motion  of  the  lungs  in  breathing.

There  are,  as  every  one  knows,  three  sigmoid  or  semilunar
valves  situated  at  the  orifice  of  the  pulmonary  artery,  which
effectually  prevent  the  blood  sent  into  the  vessel  from  returning
into  the  cavity  of  the  heart.  Now  Galen,  explaining  the  uses
of  these  valves,  and  the  necessity  for  them,  employs  the  follow-
ing language  d “ There  is  everywhere  a mutual  anastomosis
and  inosculation  of  the  arteries  with  the  veins,  and  they  severally
transmit  both  blood  and  spirit,  by  certain  invisible  and  un-
doubtedly veiy  narrow  passages.  Now  if  tlie  mouth  of  the
vena  arteriosa,  or  pulmonary  arteiy,  had  stood  in  hke  man-
ner continually  open,  and  nature  had  found  no  contrivance  for
closing  it  when  requisite,  and  opening  it  again,  it  would  have
been  impossible  that  the  blood  could  ever  have  passed  by  the
invisible  and  delicate  mouths,  during  the  contractions  of  the
thoi’ax,  into  the  arteries ; for  all  things  are  not  ahke  readily
attracted  or  repelled ; but  that  which  is  light  is  more  readily
drawn  in,  the  instrument  being  dilated,  and  forced  out  again
when  it  is  contracted,  than  that  which  is  hea^y ; and  in  like
manner  is  anything  drauTi  more  rapidly  along  an  ample  con-
duit, and  again  driven  forth,  than  it  is  throngh  a narrow  tube.
But  when  the  thorax  is  contracted,  the  pulmonary  veins,  which
are  in  the  lungs,  being  driven  inwai’dly,  and  powerfully  com-
pressed on  ever}’’  side,  immediately  force  out  some  of  the  spirit
they  contain,  and  at  the  same  time  assnine  a certain  portion  of
blood  by  those  subtile  mouths ; a thing  that  could  never  come  to
pass  were  the  blood  at  liberty  to  flow  back  into  the  heard  through
the  great  orifice  of  the  pulmonary  arteiy.  But  its  return  through
this  great  opening  being  prevented,  when  it  is  compressed  on
every  side,  a certain  portion  of  it  distils  into  the  pulmonary  veins


De  Usu  pai  tiuiu,  lib.  vi,  cap.  10.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


43


by  the  minute  orifices  mentioned.”  And  shortly  afterwards,  in
the  very  next  chapter,  he  says  : “ The  more  the  thorax  contracts,
the  moi’e  it  strives  to  force  out  the  blood,  the  more  exactly  do  these
membranes  (viz.,  the  sigmoid  valves)  close  up  the  mouth  pf  the
vessel,  and  suffer  nothing  to  regxn’gitate.^^  The  same  fact  he
has  also  alluded  to  in  a preceding  part  of  the  tenth  chapter :
“ Were  there  no  valves,  a three-fold  inconvenience  would  result,
so  that  the  blood  would  then  perform  this  lengthened  course  in
vain ; it  would  flow  inwards  during  the  diastoles  of  the  lungs,
and  fill  all  their  arteries ; but  in  the  systoles,  in  the  manner  of
the  tide,  it  would  ever  and  anon,  like  the  Euripus,  flow  back-
wards and  forwards  by  the  same  way,  with  a reciprocating
motion,  which  would  nowise  suit  the  blood.  This,  however,
may  seem  a matter  of  little  moment ; but  if  it  meantime  appear
that  the  function  of  respiration  suffer,  then  I think  it  would  be
looked  upon  as  no  trifle,  &c.”  And  again,  and  shortly  after-
wards : “ And  then  a third  inconvenience,  by  no  means  to  be
thought  lightly  of,  would  follow,  were  the  blood  moved  back-
wards during  the  expirations,  had  not  our  Maker  instituted
those  supplementary  membranes  [the  sigmoid  valves] Whence,
in  the  eleventh  chapter,  he  concludes  : “ That  they  have  all  a
common  use,  (to  wit,  the  valves,)  and  that  it  is  to  prevent
regurgitation  or  backward  motion;  each,  however,  having  a
proper  function,  the  one  set  drawing  matters  from  the  heart,
and  preventing  their  return,  the  other  drawing  matters  into
the  heart,  and  preventing  their  escape  from  it.  For  nature
never  intended  to  distress  the  heart  with  needless  labour,  nei-
ther to  bring  aught  into  the  organ  which  it  had  been  better
to  have  kept  away,  nor  to  take  from  it  again  aught  which
it  was  requisite  should  be  brought.  Since,  then,  there  are  four
orifices  in  all,  two  in  either  ventricle,  one  of  these  induces,  the
other  educes.”  And  again  he  says  : “ Farther,  since  there  is
one  vessel,  consisting  of  a simple  tunic,  implanted  in  the  heart,
and  another,  having  a double  tunic,  extending  from  it,  (Galen
is  here  speaking  of  the  right  side  of  the  heart,  but  I extend  his
observations  to  the  left  side  also,)  a kind  of  reservoir  had  to  be
provided,  to  which  both  belonging,  the  blood  should  be  drawn
in  by  the  one,  and  sent  out  by  the  other.”

This  argument  Galen  adduces  for  the  transit  of  the  blood  by
the  right  ventricle  from  the  vena  cava  into  the  lungs;  but  we


44


MOTION  OF  THE


can  use  it  with  still  greater  propriety,  merely  changing  the  terms,
for  the  passage  of  the  blood  from  the  veins  through  the  heart
into  the  arteries.  From  Galen,  however,  that  great  man,  that
father  of  physicians,  it  clearly  appears  that  the  blood  passes
through  the  lungs  from  the  pidmonary  arterj'  into  the  minute
branches  of  the  pulmonary  veins,  urged  to  this  both  by  the
pulses  of  the  heart  and  by  the  motions  of  the  lungs  and  thorax ;
that  the  heart,  moreover,  is  incessantly  receiving  and  expelling
the  blood  by  and  from  its  ventricles,  as  from  a magazine  or
cistern,  and  for  this  end  is  furnished  with  four  sets  of  valves,
two  serving  for  the  induction  and  two  for  the  eduction  of  the
blood,  lest,  like  the  Euripus,  it  should  be  incommodiously  sent
hither  and  thither,  or  flow  back  into  the  cavity  which  it  shoidd
have  quitted,  or  quit  the  part  where  its  presence  was  required,
and  so  the  heart  he  oppressed  with  labour  in  vain,  and  the  office
of  the  lungs  be  interfered  with.'  Finally,  our  position  that  the
blood  is  continually  passing  from  the  right  to  the  left  ventricle,
from  the  vena  cava  into  the  aorta,  through  the  porous  structure
of  the  lungs,  plainly  appears  from  this,  that  since  the  blood  is
incessantly  sent  from  the  right  ventricle  into  the  lungs  by  the
pulmonary  artery,  and  in  like  manner  is  incessantly  drawn  from
the  lungs  into  the  left  ventricle,  as  appears  from  what  precedes
and  the  position  of  the  valves,  it  cannot  do  otherwise  than
pass  through  continuously.  And  then,  as  the  blood  is  inces-
santly flowing  into  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heard,  and  is  con-
tinually passed  out  from  the  left,  as  appears  in  like  manner,  and
as  is  obvious  both  to  sense  and  reason,  it  is  impossible  that  the
blood  can  do  otherwise  than  pass  continually  from  the  vena  cava
into  the  aorta.

Dissection  consequently  shows  distinctly  what  takes  place  [in
regard  to  the  transit  of  the  blood]  in  the  greater  number  of
animals,  and  indeed  in  all,  up  to  the  period  of  their  [foetal]
maturity ; and  that  the  same  thing  occm’s  in  adults  is  equally
certain,  both  from  Galen’s  words,  and  what  has  already  been
said  on  the  subject,  only  that  in  the  former  the  transit  is
effected  by  open  and  obvious  passages,  in  the  latter  by  the
obscure  porosities  of  the  Imigs  and  the  minute  inoscula-


' See  the  Commentary  of  the  learned  Hofmann  upon  the  Sixth  Book  of  Galen,
‘ De  Usu  partium,’  a work  which  I first  saw  after  I had  written  what  precedes.


HEAET  AND  BLOOD.


45


tions  of  vessels.  Whence  it  appears  that,  although  one  ven-
tricle of  the  heart,  the  left  to  wit,  would  suffice  for  the  distri-
bution of  the  blood  over  the  body,  and  its  eduction  from  the
vena  cava,  as  indeed  is  done  in  those  creatures  that  have  no
lungs,  nature,  nevertheless,  when  she  ordained  that  the  same
blood  should  also  percolate  the  lungs,  saw  herself  obliged  to
add  another  ventricle,  the  right,  the  pulse  of  which  should  force
the  blood  from  the  vena  cava  through  the  lungs  into  the  cavity
of  the  left  ventricle.  In  this  way,  therefore,  it  may  he  said  that
the  right  ventricle  is  made  for  the  sake  of  the  lungs,  and  for  the
transmission  of  the  blood  through  them,  not  for  their  nutrition ;
seeing  it  were  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  lungs  required
any  so  much  more  copious  a supply  of  nutriment,  and  that  of  so
much  pxirer  and  more  spirituous  a kind,  as  coming  immediately
from  the  ventricle  of  the  heart,  than  either  the  brain  with  its
peculiarly  pure  substance,  or  the  eyes  with  their  lustrous  and
truly  admirable  structure,  or  the  flesh  of  the  heart  itself,  which
is  more  commodiously  nourished  by  the  coronary  artery.


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF  THE  QUANTITY  OF  BLOOD  PASSING  THROUGH  THE  HEART
FROM  THE  VEINS  TO  THE  ARTERIES;  AND  OF  THE  CIRCULAR
MOTION  OF  THE  BLOOD.

Thus  far  I have  spoken  of  the  passage  of  the  blood  from  the
veins  into  the  arteries,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  it  is  trans-
mitted and  distributed  by  the  action  of  the  heart;  points  to  which
some,  moved  either  by  the  authority  of  Galen  or  Columbus,  or
the  reasonings  of  others,  will  give  in  their  adhesion.  But  what
remains  to  be  said  upon  the  quantity  and  source  of  the  blood  which
thus  passes,  is  of  so  novel  and  unheard-  of  character,  that  I not
only  fear  injury  to  myself  from  the  envy  of  a few,  but  I tremble
lest  I have  mankind  at  large  for  my  enemies,  so  much  doth  wont
and  custom,  that  become  as  another  nature,  and  doctrine  once
sown  and  that  hath  struck  deep  root,  and  respect  for  antiquity
influence  all  men ; Still  the  die  is  cast,  and  my  trust  is  in  my
love  of  truth,  and  the  candour  that  inheres  in  cultivated  minds.
And  sooth  to  say,  when  I surveyed  my  mass  of  evidence,  whe-


46


MOTION  OF  THE


ther  derived  from  vivisections,  and  my  various  reflections  on
them,  or  from  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  and  the  vessels  that
enter  into  and  issue  from  them,  the  symmetry  and  size  of  these
conduits, — for  nature  doing  nothing  in  vain,  would  never  have
given  them  so  large  a relative  size  without  a purpose, — or
from  the  arrangement  and  intimate  structure  of  the  valves  in
particular,  and  of  the  other  parts  of  the  heart  in  general,  with
many  things  besides,  I frequently  and  seriously  bethought  me,
and  long  revolved  in  my  mind,  what  might  he  the  quantity  of
blood  which  was  transmitted,  in  how  short  a time  its  passage
might  be  effected,  and  the  hke;  and  not  finding  it  possible
that  this  could  he  supphed  by  the  juices  of  the  ingested  ahment
■without  the  veins  on  the  one  hand  becoming  drained,  and  the
arteries  on  the  other  getting  ruptui’ed  through  the  excessive
charge  of  blood,  unless  the  blood  should  somehow  find  its  way
from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  and  so  return  to  the  right  side
of  the  heart ; I began  to  think  whether  there  might  not  be  a mo-
tion, AS  IT  WERE,  IN  A CIRCLE.  Now  this  I aftei’wards  found
to  be  true ; and  I finally  saw  that  the  blood,  forced  by  the
action  of  the  left  ventricle  into  the  arteries,  was  disti’ibuted  to
the  body  at  large,  and  its  several  parts,  in  the  same  manner
as  it  is  sent  through  the  lungs,  impelled  by  the  right  ventricle
into  the  pulmonary  artery,  and  that  it  then  passed  through  the
veins  and  along  the  vena  cava,  and  so  round  to  the  left  ventricle
in  the  manner  already  indicated.  Which  motion  we  may  be
allowed  to  eall  cii'cular,  in  the  same  way  as  Aristotle  says  that
the  ail’  and  the  rain  emulate  the  circular  motion  of  the  superior
bodies;  for  the  moist  earth,  warmed  by  the  sun,  evaporates;
the  vapours  drawn  upwards  are  condensed,  and  descending  in
the  form  of  rain,  moisten  the  earth  again ; and  by  this  arrange-
ment are  generations  of  h-\ing  things  produced;  and  in  like  man-
ner too  are  tempests  and  meteors  engendered  by  the  chcular
motion,  and  by  the  approach  and  recession  of  the  sun.

And  so,  in  all  likehhood,  does  it  come  to  pass  in  the  body,
tlu’ough  the  motion  of  the  blood;  the  various  parts  are  nou-
rished, cherished,  quickened  by  the  warmer,  more  perfect,
vaporous,  sph’ituous,  and,  as  I may  say,  alimentive  blood;
which,  on  the  contrary,  in  contact  with  these  parts  becomes
cooled,  coagulated,  and,  so  to  speak,  effete;  whence  it  returns
to  its  sovereign  the  heart,  as  if  to  its  source,  or  to  the  inmost


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


47


iLome  of  the  body^  there  to  recover  its  state  of  excellence  or
perfection.  Here  it  resuroes  its  due  fluidity  and  receives  an
infusion  of  natural  heat — powerful,  fervid,  a kind  of  treasury
of  life,  and  is  impregnated  with  spuits,  and  it  might  be  said  with
balsam ; and  thence  it  is  again  dispersed ; and  all  this  depends
on  the  motion  and  action  of  the  heart.

The  heart,  consequently,  is  the  beginning  of  life;  the  sun  of
the  microcosm,  even  as  the  sun  in  his  turn  might  well  be  de-
signated the  heart  of  the  world ; for  it  is  the  heart  by  whose
\drtue  and  pulse  the  blood  is  moved,  perfected,  made  apt  to
nourish,  and  is  preserved  from  corruption  and  coagulation;  it
is  the  household  divinity  which,  discharging  its  function,  nou-
rishes, cherishes,  quickens  the  whole  body,  and  is  indeed  the
foundation  of  life,  the  source  of  all  action.  But  of  these  things
we  shall  speak  more  opportunely  when  we  come  to  speculate
upon  the  final  cause  of  this  motion  of  the  heart.

Hence,  since  the  veins  are  the  conduits  and  vessels  that
transport  the  blood,  they  are  of  two  kinds,  the  cava  and  the
aorta ; and  this  not  by  reason  of  there  being  two  sides  of  the
body,  as  Ai’istotle  has  it,  but  because  of  the  difference  of  office;
nor  yet,  as  is  commonly  said,  in  consequence  of  any  diversity
of  structm’e,  for  in  many  animals,  as  I have  said,  the  vein  does
not  differ  from  the  artery  in  the  thickness  of  its  tunics,  hut
solely  in  virtue  of  their  several  destinies  and  uses.  A vein  and
an  artery,  both  styled  vein  by  the  ancients,  and  that  not  un-
deservedly, as  Galen  has  remarked,  because  the  one,  the  artery
to  wit,  is  the  vessel  which  carries  the  blood  from  the  heart  to
the  body  at  large,  the  other  or  vein  of  the  present  day  bringing
it  back  from  the  general  system  to  the  heart ; the  former  is  the
conduit  from,  the  latter  the  channel  to,  the  heart ; the  latter
contains  the  cruder,  effete  blood,  rendered  unfit  for  nutri-
tion ; the  former  transmits  the  digested,  perfect,  peculiarly  nu-
tritive fluid.


48


MOTION  OF  THE


CHAPTER  IX.

THAT  THERE  IS  A CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD  IS  CONFIRMED
FROM  THE  FIRST  PROPOSITION.

But  lest  any  one  should  say  that  we  give  them  M'ords  only,
and  make  mere  specious  assertions  without  any  foundation,  and
desire  to  innovate  "without  sufficient  cause,  three  points  present
themselves  for  confirmation,  which  being  stated,  I conceive  that
the  truth  I contend  for  will  follow  necessaidly,  and  appear  as  a
thing  obvious  to  all.  First, — the  blood  is  incessantly  transmitted
by  the  action  of  the  heart  from  the  vena  cava  to  the  arteries  in
such  quantity,  that  it  cannot  be  supplied  from  the  ingesta,  and
in  such  wise  that  the  "whole  mass  must  very  quickly  pass  through
the  organ ; Second, — the  blood  under  the  influence  of  the  arterial
pulse  enters  and  is  impelled  in  a continuous,  equable,  and  inces-
sant stream  through  every  part  and  member  of  the  body,  in  much
larger  quantity  than  were  sufficient  for  nutrition,  or  than  the
whole  mass  of  fluids  could  supply;  Third, — the  veins  in  like  man-
ner return  this  blood  incessantly  to  the  heart  from  aU  parts  and
members  of  the  body.  These  points  proved,  I conceive  it  will  be
manifest  that  the  blood  circulates,  revolves,  propelled  and  then
returning,  from  the  heart  to  the  extremities,  from  the  extre-
mities to  the  heart,  and  thus  that  it  performs  a kind  of  cucular
motion.

Let  us  assume  either  arbitrai’ily  or  from  exjieriment,  the  quan-
tity of  blood  which  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  "will  contain
"when  distended  to  be,  say  two  ounces,  three  ounces,  one  ounce
and  a half — in  the  dead  body  I have  found  it  to  hold  upwai’ds
of  two  ounces.  Let  us  assume  further,  how  much  less  the  heart
Avill  hold  in  the  contracted  than  in  the  dilated  state ; and  how
much  blood  it  udll  project  into  the  aorta  upon  each  contraction;
— and  all  the  world  allows  that  with  the  systole  something  is
always  projected,  a necessary  consequence  demonsti’ated  in  the
third  chapter,  and  obvious  from  the  structure  of  the  valves ;
and  let  us  suppose  as  approaching  the  truth  that  the  forndh,
or  fifth,  or  sixth,  or  even  but  the  eighth  part  of  its  charge  is
thrown  into  the  artery  at  each  contraction ; tliis  would  give  either
half  an  ounce,  or  three  di'achms,  or  one  drachm  of  blood  as


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


49


propelled  by  the  heart  at  each  pulse  into  the  aorta;  which
quantity,  by  reason  of  the  valves  at  the  root  of  the  vessel,  can
by  no  means  return  into  the  ventricle.  Now  in  the  course  of
half  an  hour,  the  heart  will  have  made  more  than  one  thousand
beats,  in  some  as  many  as  two,  three,  and  even  four  thousand.
Multiplying  the  number  of  drachms  propelled  by  the  number
of  pulses,  we  shall  have  either  one  thousand  half  ounces,  or  one
thousand  times  three  drachms,  or  a like  proportional  quantity  of
blood,  according  to  the  amount  which  we  assume  as  propelled
with  each  stroke  of  the  heart,  sent  from  this  organ  into  the
arterj^ ; a larger  quantity  in  every  case  than  is  contained  in  the
whole  body!  In  the  same  way,  in  the  sheep  or  dog,  say  that
but  a single  scruple  of  blood  passes  with  each  stroke  of  the
heart,  in  one  half  hour  we  should  have  one  thousand  scruples,
or  about  three  pounds  and  a half  of  blood  injected  into  the
aorta ; but  the  body  of  neither  animal  contains  above  four
pounds  of  blood,  a fact  which  I have  myself  ascertained  in  the
case  of  the  sheep.

Upon  this  supposition,  therefore,  assumed  merely  as  a ground
for  reasoning,  we  see  the  whole  mass  of  blood  passing  through
the  heart,  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries,  and  in  like  manner
through  the  lungs.

But  let  it  be  said  that  this  does  not  take  place  in  half  an
hour,  but  in  an  hour,  or  even  in  a day;  any  way  it  is  still
manifest  that  more  blood  passes  through  the  heart  in  conse-
quence of  its  action,  than  can  either  be  supplied  by  the  whole  of
the  ingesta,  or  than  can  be  contained  in  the  veins  at  the  same
moment.

Nor  can  it  be  allowed  that  the  heart  in  contracting  some-
times propels  and  sometimes  does  not  propel,  or  at  most  propels
but  very  little,  a mere  nothing,  or  an  imaginary  something:
aU  this,  indeed,  has  already  been  refuted;  and  is,  besides,
contrary  both  to  sense  and  reason.  For  if  it  be  a necessary  effect
of  the  dilatation  of  the  heart  that  its  ventricles  become  filled
with  blood,  it  is  equally  so  that,  contracting,  these  cavities
should  expel  their  contents ; and  this  not  in  any  trifling  mea-
sure, seeing  that  neither  are  the  conduits  small,  nor  the  con-
tractions few  in  number,  but  frequent,  and  always  in  some
certain  proportion,  whether  it  be  a third  or  a sixth,  or  an  eighth,
to  the  total  capacity  of  the  ventricles,  so  that  a like  proportion

4


50


MOTION  OF  THE


of  blood  must  be  expelled,  and  a like  proportion  received  nith
eacb  stroke  of  tbe  heart,  tbe  capacity  of  the  ventricle  con-
tracted always  bearing  a certain  relation  to  the  capacity  of  the
ventricle  when  dilated.  And  since  in  dilating,  the  ventricles
cannot  be  supposed  to  get  filled  with  nothing,  or  with  an  ima-
ginary something ; so  in  contracting  they  never  expel  nothing
or  aught  imaginarj^,  but  always  a certain  something,  auz.  blood,
in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  the  contraction.  TMience  it
is  to  be  inferred,  that  if  at  one  stroke  the  heart  in  man,  the
ox  or  the  sheep,  ejects  but  a single  drachm  of  blood,  and  there
are  one  thousand  strokes  in  half  an  horn’,  in  this  inteiwal  there
will  have  been  ten  pounds  five  ounces  expelled;  were  there  with
each  stroke  two  drachms  expelled,  the  quantity  would  of  course
amount  to  twenty  pounds  and  ten  ounces ; were  there  half  an
ounce,  the  quantity  would  come  to  forty-one  pounds  and  eight
ounces ; and  were  there  one  ounce  it  would  be  as  much  as
eighty-three  pounds  and  four  ounces;  the  whole  of  which,  in
the  course  of  one  half  hour,  would  have  been  transfused  from
the  veins  to  the  arteries.  The  actual  quantity  of  blood  expelled
at  each  stroke  of  the  heart,  and  the  circumstances  under  which
it  is  either  greater  or  less  than  ordinary,  I leave  for  pairicular
determination  aftei’Avards,  from  numerous  observations  which
I have  made  on  the  subject.

Meantime  this  much  I know,  and  would  here  proclaim  to
all  that  the  blood  is  transfused  at  one  time  in  larger,  at  an-
other in  smaller  quantity ; and  that  the  circuit  of  the  blood  is
accomplished  now  more  rapidly,  now  more  slowly,  according  to
the  temperament,  age,  &c.  of  the  indiAodual,  to  external  and
internal  circumstances,  to  naturals  and  non-naturals, — sleep,
rest,  food,  exercise,  affections  of  the  mind,  and  the  like.  But
indeed,  supposing  even  the  smallest  quantity  of  blood  to  be
passed  through  the  heart  and  the  lungs  with  each  pulsation,  a
vastly  greater  amount  would  still  be  thrown  into  the  arteries
and  Avhole  body,  than  coidd  by  any  possibility  be  supphed  by
the  food  consumed ; in  short  it  could  be  furnished  in  no  other
way  than  by  making  a circuit  and  retiu’ning.

This  truth,  indeed,  presents  itself  obriously  before  us  when
we  consider  what  happens  in  the  dissection  of  bring  animals ;
the  great  artery  need  not  be  dirided,  but  a very  small  branch
only,  (as  Galen  even  proves  in  regard  to  man,)  to  have  the  whole


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


51


of  the  blood  in  the  body,  as  well  that  of  the  veins  as  of  the  arte-
ries, drained  away  in  the  course  of  no  long  time — some  half  hour
or  less.  Butchers  are  well  aware  of  the  fact  and  can  bear  witness
to  it;  for,  cutting  the  throat  of  an  ox  and  so  dividing  the  vessels  of
the  neck,  in  less  than  a quarter  of  an  hoiu’  they  have  all  the  ves-
sels bloodless — the  whole  mass  of  blood  has  escaped.  The  same
thing  also  occasionally  occurs  with  great  rapidity  in  performing
amputations  and  removing  tumours  in  the  human  subject.

Nor  would  this  argument  lose  any  of  its  force,  did  any  one
say  that  in  killing  animals  in  the  shambles,  and  performing  am-
putations, the  blood  escaped  in  equal,  if  not  perchance  in  larger
quantity  by  the  veins  than  by  the  arteries.  The  contrary  of
this  statement,  indeed,  is  certainly  the  truth ; the  veins,  in
fact,  collapsing,  and  being  without  any  propelling  power,  and
further,  because  of  the  impediment  of  the  valves,  as  I shall  show
immediately,  pour  out  but  very  little  blood ; whilst  the  arteries
spout  it  forth  with  force  abundantly,  impetuously,  and  as  if  it
were  propelled  by  a syringe.  And  then  the  experiment  is  easily
tried  of  leaving  the  vein  untouched,  and  only  dividing  the  artery
in  the  neck  of  a sheep  or  dog,  when  it  will  be  seen  with  what
force,  in  what  abundance,  and  how  quickly,  the  whole  blood  in
the  body,  of  the  veins  as  well  as  of  the  arteries,  is  emptied.  But
the  arteries  receive  blood  from  the  veins  in  no  other  way  than
by  transmission  through  the  heart,  as  we  have  already  seen;  so
that  if  the  aorta  be  tied  at  the  base  of  the  heart,  and  the  carotid
or  any  other  artery  he  opened,  no  one  will  now  be  surprised  to
find  it  empty,  and  the  veins  only  replete  with  blood.

And  now  the  cause  is  manifest,  wherefore  in  our  dissections
we  usually  find  so  large  a quantity  of  blood  in  the  veins,  so  little
in  the  arteries;  wherefore  there  is  much  in  the  right  ventricle,
little  in  the  left;  cu’cumstances  which  probably  led  the  ancients
to  believe  that  the  arteries  (as  their  name  implies)  contained
nothing  hut  spirits  during  the  life  of  an  animal.  The  true  cause
of  the  difference  is  this  perhaps  : that  as  there  is  no  passage  to
the  arteries,  save  through  the  lungs  and  heart,  when  an  animal
has  ceased  to  breathe  and  the  lungs  to  move,  the  blood  in  the
pulmonary  artery  is  prevented  from  passing  into  the  pulmonary
veins,  and  from  thence  into  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart;  just
as  we  have  already  seen  the  same  transit  prevented  in  the  em-
bryo, by  the  want  of  movement  in  the  lungs  and  the  alternate


52


MOTION  OF  THE


opening  and  shutting  of  their  minute  orifices  and  invisible
pores.  But  the  heart  not  ceasing  to  act  at  the  same  precise
moment  as  the  lungs,  hut  sur\dving  them  and  continuing  to
pulsate  for  a time,  the  left  ventricle  and  arteries  go  on  distri-
buting their  blood  to  the  body  at  large  and  sending  it  into  the
veins ; receiving  none  from  the  lungs,  however,  they  are  soon
exhausted,  and  left,  as  it  w'ere,  empty.  But  even  this  fact  con-
firms our  views,  in  no  trifling  manner,  seeing  that  it  can  he
ascribed  to  no  other  than  the  cause  we  have  just  assumed.

Moreover  it  appears  from  this  that  the  more  frequently  or
forcibly  the  arteries  pulsate,  the  more  speedily  will  the  body
be  exhausted  in  an  hemorrhagy.  Hence,  also,  it  happens,  that
in  fainting  fits  and  in  states  of  alarm,  when  the  heart  beats
more  languidly  and  -with  less  force,  hemorrhages  ai’e  diminished
or  arrested.

Still  further,  it  is  from  this  that  after  death,  when  the  heart
has  ceased  to  heat,  it  is  impossible  by  diriding  either  the  jugular
or  femoral  veins  and  arteries,  by  any  effort  to  force  out  more
than  one  half  of  the  whole  mass  of  the  blood.  Neither  could
the  butcher,  did  he  neglect  to  cut  the  throat  of  the  ox  which
he  has  knocked  on  the  head  and  stunned,  until  the  heart  had
ceased  heating,  ever  bleed  the  carcass  effectually.*

Finally,  we  are  now  in  a condition  to  suspect  wherefore  it  is
that  no  one  has  yet  said  anything  to  the  purpose  upon  the
anastomosis  of  the  veins  and  arteries,  either  as  to  where  or  how
it  is  effected,  or  for  what  purpose.  I now  enter  upon  the
investigation  of  the  subject.


CHAPTER  X.

THE  FIRST  POSITION  : OF  THE  QUANTITY  OF  BLOOD  PASSING  FROM
THE  VEINS  TO  THE  ARTERIES.  AND  THAT  THERE  IS  A CIR-
CUIT OF  THE  BLOOD,  FREED  FROM  OBJECTIONS,  AND  FARTHER
CONFIRMED  BY  EXPERIMENT.

So  far  our  first  position  is  confirmed,  whether  the  thing  be
referred  to  calculation  or  to  experiment  and  dissection,  riz.,
that  the  blood  is  incessantly  infused  into  the  arteries  in  larger
quantities  than  it  can  he  supplied  by  the  food ; so  that  the


HEAET  AND  BLOOD.


53


whole  passing  over  in  a short  space  of  time,  it  is  matter  of  ne-
cessity that  the  blood  perform  a circuit,  that  it  return  to  whence
it  set  out.

But  if  any  one  shall  here  object  that  a large  quantity  may
pass  through  and  yet  no  necessity  be  found  for  a circulation,  that
all  may  come  from  the  meat  and  drink  consumed,  and  quote  as
an  illustration  the  abundant  supply  of  milk  in  the  mammae — for
a cow  will  give  three,  four,  and  even  seven  gallons  and  more  in
a day,  and  a woman  two  or  three  pints  whilst  nursing  a child
or  twins,  which  must  manifestly  be  derived  from  the  food  con-
sumed; it  may  be  answered,  that  the  heart  by  computation
does  as  much  and  more  in  the  course  of  an  hour  or  two.

And  if  not  yet  convinced,  he  shall  still  insist,  that  when  an
artery  is  divided  a preternatural  route  is,  as  it  were,  opened,
and  that  so  the  blood  escapes  in  torrents,  but  that  the  same
thing  does  not  happen  in  the  healthy  and  uninjured  body  when
no  outlet  is  made ; and  that  in  arteries  filled,  or  in  their  natural
state,  so  large  a quantity  of  blood  cannot  pass  in  so  short  a
space  of  time  as  to  make  any  return  necessary; — to  all  this  it
may  be  answered,  that  from  the  calculation  already  made,  and
the  reasons  assigned,  it  appears,  that  by  so  much  as  the  heart
in  its  dilated  state  contains  in  addition  to  its  contents  in  the
state  of  constriction,  so  much  in  a general  way  must  it  emit
upon  each  pulsation,  and  in  such  quantity  must  the  blood  pass,
the  body  being  healthy  and  naturally  constituted.

But  in  serpents,  and  several  fishes,  by  tying  the  veins  some
way  below  the  heart,  you  will  perceive  a space  between  the  liga-
ture and  the  heart  speedily  to  become  empty;  so  that,  unless  you
would  deny  the  evidence  of  your  senses,  you  must  needs  admit
the  return  of  the  blood  to  the  heart.  The  same  thing  will  also
plainly  appear  when  we  come  to  discuss  our  second  position.

Let  us  here  conclude  with  a single  example,  confirming  all
that  has  been  said,  and  from  which  every  one  may  obtain  con-
viction through  the  testimony  of  his  own  eyes.

If  a live  snake  be  laid  open,  the  heart  will  be  seen  pulsating
quietly,  distinctly,  for  more  than  an  hour,  moving  like  a worm,
contracting  in  its  longitudinal  dimensions,  (for  it  is  of  an  oblong
shape,)  and  propelling  its  contents ; becoming  of  a paler  colour  in
the  systole,  of  a deeper  tint  in  the  diastole ; and  almost  all  things
else  by  which  I have  already  said  that  the  truth  I contend  for


54


MOTION  OF  THE


is  established,  only  that  here  everything  takes  place  more  slowly,
and  is  more  distinct.  This  point  in  particular  may  be  observed
more  clearly  than  the  noon-day  sun : the  vena  cava  enters  the
heart  at  its  lower  part,  the  artery  quits  it  at  the  superior  part ; the
vein  being  now  seized  either  with  forceps  or  between  the  finger
and  thumb,  and  the  course  of  the  blood  for  some  space  below
the  heart  interrupted,  you  will  perceive  the  part  that  intervenes
between  the  fingers  and  the  heart  almost  immediately  to  become
empty,  the  blood  being  exhausted  by  the  action  of  the  heart ;
at  the  same  time  the  heart  will  become  of  a much  paler  colour,
even  in  its  state  of  dilatation,  than  it  was  before ; it  is  also
smaller  than  at  first,  from  wanting  blood ; and  then  it  begins
to  beat  more  slowly,  so  that  it  seems  at  length  as  if  it  were  about
to  die.  But  the  impediment  to  the  flow  of  blood  being  removed,
instantly  the  colour  and  the  size  of  the  heart  are  restored.

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  artery  instead  of  the  vein  be  com-
pressed or  tied,  you  will  observe  the  part  between  the  obstacle
and  the  heart,  and  the  heart  itself,  to  become  inordinately  dis-
tended, to  assume  a deep  purple  or  even  h-vid  colour,  and  at
length  to  be  so  much  oppressed  with  blood  that  you  will  believe
it  about  to  be  choked ; but  the  obstacle  removed,  all  things  im-
mediately return  to  their  pristine  state — the  heai’t  to  its  colour,
size,  stroke,  &c.

Here  then  we  have  evidence  of  two  kinds  of  death;  extinction
from  deficiency,  and  suffocation  from  excess.  Examples  of  both
have  now  been  set  before  you,  and  you  have  had  opportunity  of
viewing  the  truth  contended  for  with  your  own  eyes  in  the  heart.


CHAPTER  XI.

THE  SECOND  POSITION  IS  DEMONSTRATED.

That  this  may  the  more  clearly  appear  to  every  one,  I have
here  to  cite  certain  experiments,  from  which  it  seems  obrious
that  the  blood  enters  a limb  by  the  arteries,  and  returns  from
it  by  the  veins ; that  the  arteries  are  the  vessels  caiTying  the
blood  from  tbe  heart,  and  the  veins  the  returning  channels  of
the  blood  to  the  heart ; that  in  the  limbs  and  extreme  parts  of
the  body  the  blood  passes  either  immediately  by  anastomosis
from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  or  mediately  by  the  pores  of


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


55


tlie  flesh;  or  in  both  ways,  as  has  already  been  said  in  speaking
of  the  passage  of  the  blood  through  the  lungs ; whence  it  ap-
pears manifest  that  in  the  circuit  the  blood  moves  from  thence
hither;  and  from  hence  thither ; from  the  centre  to  the  extremi-
ties; to  wit ; and  from  the  extreme  parts  back  again  to  the  centre.
Finally;  upon  grounds  of  calculation;  with  the  same  elements  as
before;  it  will  he  obvious  that  the  quantity  can  neither  be  ac-
counted for  by  the  ingestU;  nor  yet  he  held  necessary  to  nutrition.

The  same  thing  will  also  appear  in  regard  to  ligatureS;  and
wherefore  they  are  said  to  draw ; though  this  is  neither  from
the  heat;  nor  the  paiu;  nor  the  vacuum  they  occasion;  nor  in-
deed from  any  other  cause  yet  thought  of ; it  will  also  explain
the  uses  and  advantages  to  be  derived  from  ligatures  in  medi-
cine; the  principle  upon  which  they  either  suppress  or  occasion
hemorrhage ; how  they  induce  sloughing  and  more  extensive
mortification  in  extremities ; and  how  they  act  in  the  castration
of  animals  and  the  removal  of  warts  and  fleshy  tumours.  But
it  has  come  to  pasS;  from  no  one  having  duly  weighed  and  un-
derstood the  causes  and  rationale  of  these  various  effects;  that
though  almost  all,  upon  the  faith  of  the  old  writers;  recommend
hgatures  in  the  treatment  of  disease;  yet  very  few  comprehend
their  proper  emplojnnent;  or  derive  any  real  assistance  from
them  in  effecting  cures.

Ligatures  are  either  very  tight  or  of  middling  tightness.  A
ligature  I designate  as  tight  or  perfect  when  it  is  drawn  so  close
about  an  extremity  that  no  vessel  can  be  felt  pulsating  beyond
it.  Such  a ligature  we  use  in  amputations  to  control  the  flow
of  blood  j and  such  also  are  employed  in  the  castration  of  ani-
mals and  the  removal  of  tumours.  In  the  latter  instances;  all
afflux  of  nutriment  and  heat  being  prevented  by  the  ligature,
we  see  the  testes  and  large  fleshy  tumours  dwindle,  and  die,  and
finally  fall  off.

Ligatures  of  middling  tightness  I regard  as  those  which  com-
press a hmb  firmly  all  around,  but  short  of  pain,  and  in  such
a way  as  stiU  suffers  a certain  degree  of  pulsation  to  be  felt  in
the  artery  beyond  them.  Such  a ligature  is  in  use  in  blood-
letting, an  operation  in  which  the  fillet  applied  above  the  elbow
is  not  drawn  so  tight  but  that  the  arteries  at  the  wrist  may  still
be  felt  beating  under  the  finger.

Now  let  any  one  make  an  experiment  upon  the  arm  of  a man.


56


MOTION  OF  THE


either  using  such  a fillet  as  is  employed  in  bloodletting,  or
grasping  the  limb  lightly  with  his  hand,  the  best  subject  for  it
being  one  who  is  lean,  and  who  has  large  veins,  and  the  best
time  after  exercise,  when  the  body  is  warm,  the  pulse  is  full,
and  the  blood  carried  in  larger  quantity  to  the  extremities,  for
all  then  is  more  conspicuous ; under  such  circumstances  let  a
ligature  he  thrown  about  the  extremity,  and  drawn  as  tightly  as
can  he  borne,  it  will  first  be  perceived  that  beyond  the  hgature,
neither  in  the  wrist  nor  anywhere  else,  do  the  arteries  pulsate,
at  the  same  time  that  immediately  above  the  ligature  the  artery
begins  to  rise  higher  at  each  diastole,  to  throb  more  violently,
and  to  swell  in  its  vicinity  with  a kind  of  tide,  as  if  it  sti’ove
to  break  through  and  overcome  the  obstacle  to  its  cm’rent ; the
artery  here,  in  short,  appears  as  if  it  were  preternaturally  full.
The  hand  under  such  circumstances  retains  its  natural  colour
and  appearance ; in  the  course  of  time  it  begins  to  fall  somewhat
in  temperature,  indeed,  but  nothing  is  drawn  into  it.

After  the  bandage  has  been  kept  on  for  some  short  time  in  this
way,  let  it  be  slackened  a little,  brought  to  that  state  or  term
of  middling  tightness  which  is  used  in  bleeding,  and  it  will  be
seen  that  the  whole  hand  and  arm  will  instantly  become  deeply
suffused  and  distended,  and  the  veins  show  themselves  tumid
and  knotted ; after  ten  or  fifteen  pulses  of  the  arteiy,  the  hand
will  be  perceived  excessively  distended,  injected,  gorged  with
blood,  drawn,  as  it  is  said,  by  this  middhng  ligature,  -without
pain,  or  heat,  or  any  horror  of  a vacuum,  or  any  other  cause
yet  indicated.

If  the  finger  be  apphed  over  the  artery  as  it  is  prdsating  by
the  edge  of  the  fillet,  at  the  moment  of  slackening  it,  the  blood
will  be  felt  to  ghde  through,  as  it  were,  underneath  the  finger  j
and  he,  too,  upon  whose  arm  the  experiment  is  made,  when  the
ligature  is  slackened,  is  distinctly  conscious  of  a sensation  of
warmth,  and  of  something,  riz.,  a stream  of  blood  suddenly
making  its  way  along  the  com’se  of  the  vessels  and  diffusing
itself  through  the  hand,  which  at  the  same  time  begins  to  feel
hot,  and  becomes  distended.

As  we  had  noted,  in  connexion  with  the  tight  ligature,  that
the  artery  above  the  bandage  was  distended  and  pulsated,  not
below  it,  so,  in  the  case  of  the  moderately  tight  bandage,
on  the  contrary,  do  we  find  that  the  veins  below,  never  above.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


57


the  filletj  swells  and  become  dilated^  whilst  the  arteries  shrink;
and  such  is  the  degree  of  distension  of  the  veins  here,  that  it  is
only  very  strong  pressure  that  will  force  the  blood  beyond  the
fillet,  and  cause  any  of  the  veins  in  the  upper  part  of  the  arm
to  rise.

From  these  facts  it  is  easy  for  every  careful  observer  to  learn
that  the  blood  enters  an  extremity  by  the  arteries ; for  when
they  are  effectually  compressed  nothing  is  drawn  to  the  mem-
ber ; the  hand  preserves  its  colour ; nothing  flows  into  it,  neither
is  it  distended ; but  when  the  pressure  is  diminished,  as  it  is
with  the  bleeding  fillet,  it  is  manifest  that  the  blood  is  instantly
thrown  in  with  force,  for  then  the  hand  begins  to  swell ; which
is  as  much  as  to  say,  that  when  the  arteries  pulsate  the  blood
is  flowing  through  them,  as  it  is  when  the  moderately  tight  liga-
ture is  applied ; but  where  they  do  not  pulsate,  as,  when  a
tight  ligature  is  used,  they  cease  from  transmitting  anything ;
they  are  only  distended  above  the  part  where  the  ligature  is
applied.  The  veins  again  being  compressed,  nothing  can  flow
through  them;  the  certain  indication  of  which  is,  that  below
the  ligature  they  are  much  more  tumid  than  above  it,  and  than
they  usually  appeaj.’  when  there  is  no  bandage  upon  the  arm.

It  therefore  plainly  appears  that  the  ligature  prevents  the
return  of  the  blood  through  the  veins  to  the  parts  above  it,  and
maintains  those  beneath  it  in  a state  of  permanent  distension.
But  the  arteries,  in  spite  of  its  pressure,  and  under  the  force
and  impulse  of  the  heart,  send  on  the  blood  from  the  internal
parts  of  the  body  to  the  parts  beyond  the  bandage.  And  herein
consists  the  difference  between  the  tight  and  the  medium
bandage,  that  the  former  not  only  prevents  the  passage  of  the
blood  in  the  veins,  but  in  the  arteries  also ; the  latter,  how-
ever, whilst  it  does  not  prevent  the  pulsific  force  from  extend-
ing beyond  it,  and  so  propelling  the  blood  to  the  extremities  of
the  body,  compresses  the  veins,  and  greatly  or  altogether  im-
pedes the  return  of  the  blood  through  them.

Seeing,  therefore,  that  the  moderately  tight  ligature  renders
the  veins  turgid,  and  the  whole  hand  full  of  blood,  I ask,  whence
is  this  ? Does  the  blood  accumulate  below  the  ligature  coming
through  the  veins,  or  through  the  arteries,  or  passing  by  certain
secret  pores?  Through  the  veins  it  cannot  come;  still  less  can  it
come  by  any  system  of  invisible  pores;  it  must  needs  arrive  by  the


58


MOTION  OF  THE


arteries,  then,  in  conformity  with  all  that  has  been  already  said.
That  it  cannot  flow  in  by  the  veins  appears  plainly  enough  from
the  fact  that  the  blood  cannot  be  forced  towards  the  heart  un-
less the  ligature  be  removed ; when  on  a sudden  all  the  veins
collapse,  and  disgorge  themselves  of  their  contents  into  the
superior  parts,  the  hand  at  the  same  time  resuming  its  natm’al
pale  colour, — the  tumefaction  and  the  stagnating  blood  have
disappeared.

Moreover,  he  whose  arm  or  wrist  has  thus  been  bound  for
some  little  time  with  the  medium  bandage,  so  that  it  has  not
only  got  swollen  and  livid  but  cold,  when  the  fillet  is  undone
is  aware  of  something  cold  making  its  way  upwards  along  \\'ith
the  returning  blood,  and  reaching  the  elbow  or  the  axilla.
And  I have  myself  been  inclined  to  think  that  this  cold  blood
rising  upwards  to  the  heart  was  the  cause  of  the  fainting  that
often  occurs  after  bloodletting : fainting  frequently  supervenes
even  in  robust  subjects,  and  mostly  at  the  moment  of  undoing
the  fillet,  as  the  vulgar  say,  from  the  turning  of  the  blood.

Farther,  when  we  see  the  veins  below  the  ligatm’e  instantly
swell  up  and  become  gorged,  when  from  extreme  tightness  it  is
somewhat  relaxed,  the  arteries  meantime  continuing  unaffected,
this  is  an  obvious  indication  that  the  blood  passes  from  the  ar-
teries into  the  veins,  and  not  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries,  and
that  there  is  either  an  anastomosis  of  the  two  orders  of  vessels,
or  pores  in  the  flesh  and  solid  parts  generally  that  are  permeable
to  the  blood.  It  is  farther  an  indication  that  the  veins  have  fre-
quent communications  with  one  another,  because  they  aU  become
turgid  together,  Avhilst  under  the  medium  ligature  applied  above
the  elbow ; and  if  any  single  small  vein  be  pricked  with  a lancet,
they  all  speedily  shrink,  and  disburtheuing  themselves  into  this
they  subside  almost  simultaneously.

These  considerations  wid  enable  any  one  to  understand  the
nature  of  the  attraction  that  is  exerted  by  ligatures,  and  per-
chance of  fluxes  generally;  how,  for  example,  the  veins  when
compressed  by  a bandage  of  medium  tightness  apphed  above
the  elbow,  the  blood  cannot  escape,  whilst  it  still  continues
to  be  driven  in,  to  wit,  by  the  forcing  power  of  the  heart,  by
which  the  parts  are  of  necessity  filled,  gorged  with  blood.  And
how  should  it  be  otherwise  ? Heat  and  pain  and  the  vis  vacui
draw,  indeed;  but  in  such  wise  only  that  pai’ts  are  filled,  not  pre-


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


59


ternaturally  distended  or  gorged,  not  so  suddenly  and  violently
overwhelmed  with,  the  charge  of  blood  forced  in  upon  them,
that  the  flesh  is  lacerated  and  the  vessels  ruptured.  Nothing
of  the  kind  as  an  effect  of  heat,  or  pain,  or  the  vacuum  force,
is  either  credible  or  demonstrable.

Besides,  the  ligature  is  competent  to  occasion  the  afflux  in
question  without  either  pain,  or  heat,  or  vis  vacui.  Were  pain
in  any  way  the  cause,  how  should  it  happen  that,  with  the  arm
bound  above  the  elbow,  the  hand  and  fingers  should  swell  below
the  bandage,  and  their  veins  become  distended  ? The  pressure
of  the  bandage  certainly  prevents  the  blood  from  getting  there  by
the  veins.  And  then,  wherefore  is  there  neither  swelling  nor
repletion  of  the  veins,  nor  any  sign  or  symptom  of  attraction  or
afflux,  above  the  ligature  ? But  this  is  the  obvious  cause  of  the
preternatural  attraction  and  swelhng  below  the  bandage,  and
in  the  hand  and  fingers,  that  the  blood  is  entering  abundantly,
and  with  force,  but  cannot  pass  out  again.

Now  is  not  this  the  cause  of  aU  tumefaction,  as  indeed
Avicenna  has  it,  and  of  all  oppressive  redundancy  in  parts,  that
the  access  to  them  is  open,  but  the  egress  from  them  is  closed  ?
Whence  it  comes  that  they  are  gorged  and  tumefied.  And  may
not  the  same  thing  happen  in  local  inflammations,  where,  so
long  as  the  swelhng  is  on  the  increase,  and  has  not  reached  its
extreme  term,  a full  pulse  is  felt  in  the  part,  especially  when
the  disease  is  of  the  more  acute  kind,  and  the  swelhng  usually
takes  place  most  rapidly.  But  these  are  matters  for  after  dis-
cussion. Or  does  this,  which  occurred  in  my  own  case,  happen
from  the  same  cause.  Thrown  from  a carriage  upon  one  occa-
sion, I struck  my  forehead  a blow  upon  the  place  where  a twig
of  the  artery  advances  from  the  temple,  and  immediately,  within
the  time  in  which  twenty  beats  could  have  been  made,  I felt  a
tumour  the  size  of  an  egg  developed,  without  either  heat  or  any
great  pain  : the  near  vicinity  of  the  artery  had  caused  the  blood
to  be  effused  into  the  bruised  part  with  unusual  force  and
quickness.

And  now,  too,  we  understand  wherefore  in  phlebotomy  we
apply  our  fiUet  above  the  part  that  is  punctured,  not  below  it ;
did  the  flow  come  from  above,  not  from  below,  the  bandage  in
this  case  would  not  only  be  of  no  sernce,  but  would  prove  a po-
sitive hinderance ; it  would  have  to  be  applied  below  the  orifice.


60


MOTION  OF  THE


in  order  to  have  the  flow  more  free^  did  the  blood  descend  by
the  veins  from  superior  to  inferior  parts  j but  as  it  is  elsewhere
forced  through  the  extreme  arteries  into  the  extreme  veins,  and
the  return  in  these  last  is  opposed  by  the  ligature,  so  do  they
fill  and  swell,  and  being  thus  fiUed  and  distended,  they  are
made  capable  of  projecting  their  charge  with  force,  and  to  a
distance,  when  any  one  of  them  is  suddenly  punctm’ed ; but  the
fillet  being  slackened,  and  the  returning  channels  thus  left
open,  the  blood  forthwith  no  longer  escapes,  save  by  drops ; and,
as  all  the  world  knows,  if  in  performing  phlebotomy  the  bandage
be  either  slackened  too  much  or  the  limb  be  bound  too  tightly,
the  blood  escapes  without  force,  because  in  the  one  case  the
returning  channels  are  not  adequately  obstructed ; in  the  other
the  channels  of  influx,  the  arteries,  are  impeded.


CHAPTEH  XII.

THAT  THERE  IS  A CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD  IS  SHOWN  FROM
THE  SECOND  POSITION  DEMONSTRATED.

If  these  things  he  so,  another  point  which  I have  akeady
referred  to,  viz.,  the  continual  passage  of  the  blood  through
the  heart  will  also  be  confirmed.  AYe  have  seen,  that  the
blood  passes  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  not  from  the  veins
into  the  arteries ; we  have  seen,  farther,  that  almost  the  whole  of
the  blood  may  be  withdrawn  from  a puncture  made  in  one  of
the  cutaneous  veins  of  the  arm  if  a bandage  properly  applied  be
used ; we  have  seen,  still  farther,  that  the  blood  flows  so  freely
and  rapidly  that  not  only  is  the  whole  quantity  which  was  con-
tained in  the  arm  beyond  the  ligature,  and  before  the  puuctui’e
was  made,  discharged,  but  the  whole  ivhich  is  contained  in  the
body,  both  that  of  the  arteries  and  that  of  the  veins.

Whence  we  must  admit,  first,  that  the  blood  is  sent  along  with
an  impulse,  and  that  it  is  ui’ged  with  force  below  the  fillet ; for
it  escapes  with  force,  which  force  it  receives  from  the  pidse  and
power  of  the  heart ; for  the  force  and  motion  of  the  blood  are
derived  from  the  heart  alone.  Second,  that  the  atflux  proceeds
from  the  heart,  and  through  the  heart  by  a course  from  the  great
veins  [into  the  aorta]  ; for  it  gets  into  the  parts  below  the  Hga-


HEAET  AND  BLOOD.


61


ture  tlirough  the  arteries,  not  through  the  veins ; and  the  ar-
teries nowhere  receive  blood  from  the  veins,  nowhere  receive
blood  save  and  except  from  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart.
Nor  could  so  large  a quantity  of  blood  be  drawn  from  one  vein
(a  ligature  having  been  duly  applied),  nor  with  such  impetuosity,
such  readiness,  such  celerity,  unless  through  the  medium  of  the
impelling  power  of  the  heart.

But  if  all  things  be  as  they  are  now  represented,  we  shall
feel  ourselves  at  liberty  to  calculate  the  quantity  of  the  blood,
and  to  reason  on  its  circular  motion.  Should  any  one,  for  in-
stance, in  performing  phlebotomy,  suffer  the  blood  to  flow  in
the  manner  it  usually  does,  with  force  and  freely,  for  some  half
hour  or  so,  no  question  but  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  blood
being  abstracted,  faintings  and  syncopes  would  ensue,  and  that
not  only  would  the  arteries  but  the  great  veins  also  be  nearly
emptied  of  their  contents.  It  is  only  consonant  with  reason
to  conclude  that  in  the  course  of  the  half  hour  hinted  at,  so
much  as  has  escaped  has  also  passed  from  the  great  veins
through  the  heart  into  the  aorta.  And  further,  if  we  calculate
how  many  ounces  flow  through  one  arm,  or  how  many  pass  in
twenty  or  thirty  pulsations  under  the  medium  ligature,  we  shall
have  some  grounds  for  estimating  how  much  passes  through  the
other  arm  in  the  same  space  of  time ; how  much  through  both
lower  extremities,  how  much  through  the  neck  on  either  side,
and  through  all  the  other  arteries  and  veins  of  the  body,  all  of
which  have  been  supplied  with  fresh  blood,  and  as  this  blood
must  have  passed  through  the  lungs  and  ventricles  of  the  heart,
and  must  have  come  from  the  great  veins, — we  shall  perceive
that  a circulation  is  absolutely  necessary,  seeing  that  the  quan-
tities hinted  at  cannot  be  supplied  immediately  from  the  ingesta,
and  are  vastly  more  than  can  be  requisite  for  the  mere  nutrition
of  the  parts.

It  is  still  further  to  be  observed,  that  the  truths  contended
for  are  sometimes  confirmed  in  another  way ; for  having  tied
up  the  arm  properly,  and  made  the  puncture  duly,  still,  if  from
alarm  or  any  other  causes,  a state  of  faintness  supervenes,  in
which  the  heart  always  pulsates  more  languidly,  the  blood  does
not  flow  freely,  but  distils  by  drops  only.  The  reason  is,  that
with  the  somewhat  greater  than  usual  resistance  offered  to  the
transit  of  the  blood  by  the  bandage,  coupled  with  the  weaker


62


MOTION  OF  THE


action  of  the  hearty  and  its  diminished  impelling  power^  the
stream  cannot  make  its  way  under  the  fillet ; and  farther,  owing
to  the  weak  and  languishing  state  of  the  heart,  the  blood
is  not  transferred  in  such  quantity  as  wont  from  the  veins  to
the  arteries  through  the  sinuses  of  that  organ.  So  also,  and
for  the  same  reasons,  are  the  menstrual  fluxes  of  women,  and
indeed  hemorrhagies  of  every  kind,  controlled.  And  now,  a
contrary  state  of  things  occurring,  the  patient  getting  nd  of  his
fear  and  recovering  his  courage,  the  pulsific  power  is  increased,
the  arteries  begin  again  to  beat  with  greater  force,  and  to  drive
the  blood  even  into  the  part  that  is  bound ; so  that  the  blood
now  springs  from  the  puncture  in  the  vein,  and  flows  in  a con-
tinuous stream.


CHAPTEE  XIII.

THE  THIRD  POSITION  IS  CONFIRMED  : AND  THE  CIRCULATION  OF
THE  BLOOD  IS  DEMONSTRATED  FROM  IT.

Thus  far  have  we  spoken  of  the  quantity  of  blood  passing
through  the  heart  and  the  lungs  in  the  centre  of  the  body,  and
in  like  manner  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins  in  the  peripheral
parts  and  the  body  at  large.  We  have  yet  to  explain,  however,
in  what  manner  the  blood  finds  its  way  hack  to  the  heart  from
the  extremities  by  the  veins,  and  how  and  in  what  way  these
are  the  only  vessels  that  convey  the  blood  from  the  ex-
ternal to  the  central  parts ; which  done,  I conceive  that  the
three  fundamental  propositions  laid  down  for  the  circulation  of
the  blood  will  he  so  plain,  so  well  established,  so  obviously  true,
that  they  may  claim  general  credence.  Xow  the  remaining
position  will  be  made  sufficiently  clear  from  the  valves  which
are  found  in  the  cavities  of  the  veins  themselves,  from  the  uses
of  these,  and  from  experiments  cognizable  by  the  senses.

The  celebrated  Hieronymus  Pabricius  of  Aquapendente,  a
most  skilful  anatomist,  and  venerable  old  man,  or,  as  the
learned  Eiolan  will  have  it.  Jacobus  Silvius,  first  gave  represen-
tations of  the  valves  in  the  veins,  which  consist  of  raised  or  loose
portions  of  the  inner  membranes  of  these  vessels,  of  extreme
delicacy,  and  a sigmoid  or  semilunar  shape.  They  are  situ-


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


63


ated  at  different  distances  from  one  another,  and  diversely  in
different  individuals ; they  are  connate  at  the  sides  of  the  veins  ;
they  are  directed  upwards  or  towards  the  trunks  of  the  veins ;
the  two — for  there  are  for  the  most  part  two  together — regard
each  other,  mutually  touch,  and  are  so  ready  to  come  into  con-
tact by  their  edges,  that  if  anything  attempt  to  pass  from  the
trunks  into  the  branches  of  the  veins,  or  from  the  greater  vessels
into  the  less,  they  completely  prevent  it ; they  are  farther  so  ar-
ranged, that  the  horns  of  those  that  succeed  are  opposite  the  mid-
dle of  the  convexity  of  chose  that  precede,  and  so  on  alternately.

The  discoverer  of  these  valves  did  not  rightly  understand  their
use,  nor  have  succeeding  anatomists  added  anything  to  our
knowledge  : for  their  office  is  by  no  means  explained  when  we
are  told  that  it  is  to  hinder  the  blood,  by  its  weight,  from  all
flowing  into  inferior  parts ; for  the  edges  of  the  valves  in  the
jugular  veins  hang  downwards,  and  are  so  contrived  that  they
prevent  the  blood  from  rising  upwards ; the  valves,  in  a word,
do  not  invariably  look  upwards,  but  always  towards  the  trunks
of  the  veins,  invariably  towards  the  seat  of  the  heart.  I,  and
indeed  others,  have  sometimes  found  valves  in  the  emulgent
veins,  and  in  those  of  the  mesentery,  the  edges  of  which  Avere
dfrected  towards  the  vena  cava  and  vena  portae.  Let  it  be  added
that  there  are  no  valves  in  the  arteries  [save  at  their  roots],
and  that  dogs,  oxen,  &c.,  have  invariably  valves  at  the  divisions
of  their  crural  veins,  in  the  veins  that  meet  towards  the  top  of
the  os  sacrum,  and  in  those  branches  which  come  from  the
haunches,  in  which  no  such  effect  of  gravity  from  the  erect
position  Avas  to  he  apprehended.  Neither  are  there  valves  in  the
jugular  veins  for  the  pui’pose  of  guarding  against  apoplexy,  as
some  have  said ; because  in  sleep  the  head  is  more  apt  to  be
influenced  by  the  contents  of  the  carotid  arteries.  Neither  ai’e
the  valves  present,  in  order  that  the  blood  may  be  retained  in
the  divarications  or  smaller  trunks  and  minuter  branches,  and
not  be  suffered  to  flow  entirely  into  the  more  open  and  capa-
cious channels ; for  they  occur  where  there  are  no  divarica-
tions ; although  it  must  be  owned  that  they  are  most  frequent
at  the  points  where  branches  join.  Neither  do  they  exist  for
the  purpose  of  rendering  the  current  of  blood  more  slow  from
the  centre  of  the  body;  for  it  seems  likely  that  the  blood  would
he  disposed  to  flow  with  sufficient  sloAvness  of  its  own  accord,


64


MOTION  OF  THE


as  it  would  have  to  pass  from  larger  into  continually  smaller
vessels^  being  separated  from  the  mass  and  fountain  head,  and
attaining  from  warmer  into  colder  places.

But  the  valves  are  solely  made  and  instituted  lest  the  blood
should  pass  from  the  greater  into  the  lesser  veins,  and  either
ruptvu’e  them  or  cause  them  to  become  varicose ; lest,  instead
of  advancing  from  the  extreme  to  the  central  parts  of  the  body,
the  blood  should  rather  proceed  along  the  veins  from  the  centre  to
the  extremities  ; but  the  dehcate  valves,  while  they  readily  open
in  the  right  direction,  entirely  prevent  all  such  contrary  motion,
being  so  situated  and  arranged,  that  if  anything  escapes,  or  is
less  perfectly  obstructed  by  the  cornua  of  the  one  above,  the
fluid  passing,  as  it  were,  by  the  chinks  between  the  cornua,  it
is  immediately  received  on  the  convexity  of  the  one  beneath,
which  is  placed  transversely  with  reference  to  the  fonner,  and
so  is  effectually  hindered  from  getting  any  farther.

And  this  I have  frequently  experienced  in  my  dissections  of
the  veins  : if  I attempted  to  pass  a probe  from  the  tnink  of  the
veins  into  one  of  the  smaller  branches,  whatever  care  I took  I
found  it  impossible  to  introduce  it  far  any  way,  by  reason  of  the
valves;  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  most  easy  to  push  it  along
in  the  opposite  direction,  from  without  inwards,  or  from  the
branches  towards  the  trunks  and  roots.  In  many  places  two
valves  are  so  placed  and  fitted,  that  when  raised  they  come  ex-
actly together  in  the  middle  of  the  vein,  and  are  there  united
by  the  contact  of  their  margins  ; and  so  accurate  is  the  adapta-
tion, that  neither  by  the  eye  nor  by  any  other  means  of  exami-
nation can  the  slightest  chink  along  the  line  of  contact  be
perceived.  But  if  the  probe  be  now  introduced  from  the  extreme
towards  the  more  central  parts,  the  valves,  like  the  floodgates  of
a river,  give  way,  and  are  most  readily  pushed  aside.  The  eflFect
of  this  arrangement  plainly  is  to  prevent  all  motion  of  the  blood
from  the  heart  and  vena  cava,  whether  it  be  upwards  towards
the  head,  or  doumwards  towards  the  feet,  or  to  either  side  to-
wards the  arms,  not  a drop  can  pass ; all  motion  of  the  blood,
beginning  in  the  larger  and  tending  towards  the  smaller  veins,
is  opposed  and  resisted  by  them ; whilst  the  motion  that  pro-
ceeds fr’om  the  lesser  to  end  in  the  lai’ger  branches  is  favoured,
or,  at  all  events,  a free  and  open  passage  is  left  for  it.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


65


But  that  this  truth  may  be  made  the  more  apparent,  let  an
arm  be  tied  up  above  the  elbow  as  if  for  phlebotomy  (a,  a,  fig.  1).


At  intervals  in  the  course  of  the  veins,  especially  in  labouring
people  and  those  whose  veins  are  large,  certain  knots  or  ele-

5


66


MOTION  OF  THE


vations  (b,  c,  d,  e,  f,)  will  be  perceived,  and  this  not  only  at
the  places  where  a branch  is  received  (e,  f),  but  also  where
none  enters  (c,  n)  ; these  knots  or  risings  are  aU  formed  by
valves,  which  thus  show  themselves  externally.  And  now  if
you  press  the  blood  from  the  space  above  one  of  the  valves,  from
H to  o,  (fig.  2,)  and  keep  the  point  of  a finger  upon  the  vein
interiorly,  you  will  see  no  influx  of  blood  from  above ; the
portion  of  the  vein  between  the  point  of  the  finger  and  the
valve  o will  be  obliterated ; yet  will  the  vessel  continue  suf-
ficiently distended  above  that  valve  (o,  o).  The  blood  being
thus  pressed  out,  and  the  vein  emptied,  if  you  now  apply  a finger
of  the  other  hand  upon  the  distended  part  of  the  vein  above  the
valve  o,  (fig.  3,)  and  press  downwards,  you  will  find  that  you
cannot  force  the  blood  through  or  beyond  the  valve ; but  the
greater  effort  you  use,  you  will  only  see  the  portion  of  vein
that  is  between  the  finger  and  the  valve  become  more  dis-
tended, that  portion  of  the  vein  which  is  below  the  valve  re-
maining all  the  while  empty  (n,  o,  fig.  3).

It  would  therefore  appear  that  the  function  of  the  valves  in
the  veins  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  three  sigmoid  valves  which
we  find  at  the  commencement  of  the  aorta  and  pulmonary  ar-
tery, \iz.,  to  prevent  all  reflux  of  the  blood  that  is  passing  over
them.

Farther,  the  arm  being  bound  as  before,  and  the  veins  look-
ing full  and  distended,  if  you  press  at  one  part  in  the  course  of
a vein  with  the  point  of  a finger  (l,  fig.  4),  and  then  with  an-
other finger  streak  the  blood  upwards  beyond  the  next  valve
(n),  you  will  perceive  that  this  portion  of  the  vein  continues
empty  (l  n),  and  that  the  blood  cannot  retrograde,  precisely
as  we  have  already  seen  the  case  to  be  in  fig.  2 ; but  the  finger
first  applied  (ii,  fig.  2,  l,  fig.  4),  being  removed,  immediately  the
vein  is  filled  from  below,  and  the  arm  becomes  as  it  appears  at
D c,  fig.  1.  That  the  blood  in  the  veins  therefore  proceeds  from
inferior  or  more  remote  to  superior  parts,  and  towards  the  heart,
moving  in  these  vessels  in  this  and  not  in  the  contrary  di-
rection, appears  most  obviously.  And  although  in  some  places
the  valves,  by  not  acting  with  such  perfect  accm’acy,  or  where
there  is  but  a single  valve,  do  not  seem  totally  to  prevent  the
passage  of  the  blood  from  the  centre,  still  the  greater  number
of  them  plainly  do  so ; and  then,  where  things  appear  contrived


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


67


more  negligently,  this  is  compensated  either  by  the  more  fre-
quent occurrence  or  more  perfect  action  of  the  succeeding  valves
or  in  some  other  way  : the  veins,  in  short,  as  they  are  the  free
and  open  conduits  of  the  blood  returning  to  the  heart,  so  are
they  effectually  prevented  from  serving  as  its  channels  of  dis-
tribution from  the  heart.

But  this  other  circumstance  has  to  be  noted  ; The  arm  being
bound,  and  the  veins  made  turgid,  and  the  valves  prominent,  as
before,  apply  the  thumb  or  finger  over  a vein  in  the  situation
of  one  of  the  valves  in  such  a way  as  to  compress  it,  and  pre-
vent any  blood  from  passing  upwards  from  the  hand ; then,
with  a finger  of  the  other  hand,  streak  the  blood  in  the
vein  upwards  till  it  has  passed  the  next  valve  above,  (n,  fig.  4,)
the  vessel  now  remains  empty ; but  the  finger  at  l being
removed  for  an  instant,  the  vein  is  immediately  filled  from  below;
apply  the  finger  again,  and  having  in  the  same  manner  streaked
the  blood  upwards,  again  remove  the  finger  below,  and  again
the  vessel  becomes  distended  as  before ; and  this  repeat,  say  a
thousand  times,  in  a short  space  of  time.  And  now  com-
pute the  quantity  of  blood  which  you  have  thus  pressed  up  be-
yond the  valve,  and  then  multiplying  the  assumed  quantity  by
one  thousand,  you  will  find  that  so  much  blood  has  passed
through  a certain  portion  of  the  vessel ; and  I do  now  beheve
that  you  will  find  yourself  convinced  of  the  circulation  of  the
blood,  and  of  its  rapid  motion.  But  if  in  this  experiment  you
say  that  a violence  is  done  to  natme,  I do  not  doubt  but  that,
if  you  proceed  in  the  same  way,  only  taking  as  great  a length
of  vein  as  possible,  and  merely  remark  with  what  rapidity  the
blood  fiows  upwards,  and  fills  the  vessel  from  below,  you  will
come  to  the  same  conclusion.


68


>JOTION  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XIV.

CONCLUSION  OF  THE  DEMONSTRATION  OF  THE  CIRCULATION.

And  now  I may  be  allowed  to  give  in  brief  my  view  of  the
circulation  of  tlie  bloody  and  to  propose  it  for  general  adoption.

Since  all  things,  both  argument  and  ocular  demonstration,
show  that  tlie  blood  passes  tlirougb  the  lungs  and  heart  by  the
action  of  the  [auricles  and]  ventricles,  and  is  sent  for  distri-
bution to  all  parts  of  the  body,  where  it  makes  its  way  into  the
veins  and  pores  of  the  flesh,  and  then  flows  by  the  veins  from  the
circumference  on  every  side  to  the  centre,  from  the  lesser  to
the  greater  veins,  and  is  by  them  finally  dischai'ged  into  the
vena  cava  and  right  auricle  of  the  heart,  and  this  in  such  a quan-
tity or  in  such  a flux  and  reflux  thither  by  the  arteries,  hither
by  the  veins,  as  cannot  possibly  be  supplied  by  the  iugesta,
and  is  much  greater  than  can  be  requu’ed  for  mere  purposes  of
nutrition;  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  conclude  that  the  blood
in  the  animal  body  is  impelled  in  a circle,  and  is  in  a state  of
ceaseless  motion;  that  this  is  the  act  or  function  which  the  heart
performs  by  means  of  its  pulse ; and  that  it  is  the  sole  and  only
end  of  the  motion  and  contraction  of  the  heart.


CHAPTER  XV.

THE  CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD  IS  FURTHER  CONFIRMED  BY
PROBABLE  REASONS.

It  will  not  be  foreign  to  the  subject  if  I here  show  fui’ther,
from  certain  familiar  reasonings,  that  the  circidation  is  matter
both  of  convenience  and  necessity.  In  the  first  place,  since
death  is  a corruption  which  takes  place  through  deficiency  of
heat,i  and  since  all  bring  things  are  wai’m,  aU  during  things
cold,  there  must  be  a particular  seat  and  fountain,  a kind  of
home  and  hear’th,  where  the  cherisher  of  natru’e,  the  original
of  the  native  fire,  is  stored  and  preseiwed ; whence  heat
and  life  are  dispensed  to  all  parts  as  from  a fountain  head;


Aristoteles  De  Respiration e,  lib.  ii  et  iii : De  Part.  Animal,  et  alibi.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


69


wlience  sustenance  may  be  derived ; and  upon  wliicli  concoction
and  nutrition,  and  all  vegetative  energy  may  depend.  Now,
that  the  heart  is  this  place,  that  the  heart  is  the  principle  of
life,  and  that  all  passes  in  the  manner  just  mentioned,  I trust
no  one  will  deny.

The  blood,  therefore,  required  to  have  motion,  and  indeed
such  a motion  that  it  should  return  again  to  the  heart;  for
sent  to  the  external  parts  of  the  body  far  from  its  fountain,  as
Aristotle  says,  and  without  motion,  it  would  become  congealed.
For  we  see  motion  generating  and  keeping  up  heat  and  spirits
under  all  circumstances,  and  rest  allowing  them  to  escape  and
be  dissipated.  The  blood,  therefore,  become  thick  or  congealed
by  the  cold  of  the  extreme  and  outward  parts,  and  robbed  of
its  spirits,  just  as  it  is  in  the  dead,  it  was  imperative  that  from
its  fount  and  origin,  it  should  again  receive  heat  and  spirits,
and  all  else  requisite  to  its  preservation — that,  by  returning,  it
should  be  renovated  and  restored.

We  frequently  see  how  the  extremities  are  chilled  by  the
external  cold,  how  the  nose  and  cheeks  and  hands  look  blue,
and  how  the  blood,  stagnating  in  them  as  in  the  pendent  or
lower  parts  of  a corpse,  becomes  of  a dusky  hue ; the  limbs  at
the  same  time  getting  torpid,  so  that  they  can  scarcely  be  moved,
and  seem  almost  to  have  lost  their  vitality.  Now  they  can  by
no  means  be  so  effectually,  and  especially  so  speedily  restored
to  heat  and  colour  and  life,  as  by  a new  afflux  and  appulsion
of  heat  from  its  source.  But  how  can  parts  attract  in  which
the  heat  and  life  are  almost  extinct?  Or  how  should  they
whose  passages  are  filled  with  condensed  and  frigid  blood,  admit
fresh  aliment — renovated  blood — unless  they  had  first  got  rid
of  then’  old  contents  ? Unless  the  heart  were  truly  that  foun-
tain where  life  and  heat  are  restored  to  the  refrigerated  fluid,
and  whence  new  blood,  warm,  imbued  with  spirits,  being  sent
out  by  the  arteries,  that  which  has  become  cooled  and  effete  is
forced  on,  and  all  the  particles  recover  their  heat  which  was
failing,  and  their  vital  stimulus  weU-nigh  exhausted.

Hence  it  is  that  if  the  heart  be  unaffected,  life  and  health
may  be  restored  to  almost  all  the  other  parts  of  the  body;  but
the  heart  being  chilled,  or  smitten  with  any  serious  disease,  it
seems  matter  of  necessity  that  the  whole  animal  fabric  should
suffer  and  fall  into  decay.  When  the  source  is  corrupted.


70


MOTION  OF  THE


there  is  nothing,  as  Aristotle  says,i  which  can  he  of  serrice
either  to  it  or  aught  that  depends  on  it.  And  hence,  by  the
way,  it  may  perchance  be  wherefore  gi’ief,  and  lore,  and  en-\y,
and  anxiety,  and  all  affections  of  the  mind  of  a similar  kind
are  accompanied  with  emaciation  and  decay,  or  with  cacochemy
and  crudity,  which  engender  all  manner  of  diseases  and  con-
sume the  body  of  man.  For  every  affection  of  the  mind  that
is  attended  with  either  pain  or  pleasure,  hope  or  fear,  is  the  cause
of  an  agitation  whose  influence  extends  to  the  heart,  and  there  in-
duces change  from  the  natural  constitution,  in  the  temperature,
the  pulse  and  the  rest,  which  impamng  all  nutrition  in  its
source  and  abating  the  powers  at  large,  it  is  no  wonder  that
various  forms  of  incurable  disease  in  the  extremities  and  in  the
trunk  are  the  consequence,  inasmuch  as  in  such  circumstances
the  whole  body  labours  under  the  effects  of  \'itiated  nutrition
and  a want  of  native  heat.

Moreover,  when  we  see  that  all  animals  live  through  food  con-
cocted in  their  interior,  it  is  imperative  that  the  digestion  and
distribution  be  perfect;  and,  as  a consequence,  that  there  he  a
place  and  receptacle  where  the  aliment  is  perfected  and  whence
it  is  distributed  to  the  several  members.  Now  this  place  is  the
heart,  for  it  is  the  only  organ  in  the  body  which  contains  blood
for  the  general  use ; all  the  others  receive  it  merely  for  their
peculiar  or  private  advantage,  just  as  the  heai’t  also  has  a supply
for  its  own  especial  behoof  in  its  coronary  veins  and  arteries ; hut
it  is  of  the  store  which  the  heart  contains  in  its  auricles  and
ventricles  that  I here  speak ; and  then  the  heart  is  the  only
organ  which  is  so  situated  and  constituted  that  it  can  distribute
the  blood  in  due  proportion  to  the  several  parts  of  the  body,
the  quantity  sent  to  each  being  according  to  the  dimensions  of
the  artery  which  supplies  it,  the  heart  serving  as  a magazine  or
fountain  ready  to  meet  its  demands.

Further,  a certaiir  impulse  or  force,  as  well  as  an  impeller  or
forcer,  such  as  the  heart,  was  required  to  effect  this  distribution
and  motion  of  the  blood ; both  because  the  blood  is  disposed
from  slight  causes,  such  as  cold,  alarm,  horror,  and  the  like,  to
collect  in  its  source,  to  concentrate  like  parts  to  a whole,  or
the  drops  of  water  spilt  upon  a table  to  the  mass  of  liquid ;


' De  Part.  Animal,  iii.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


71


and  then  because  it  is  forced  from  the  capillary  veins  into  the
smaller  ramifications,  and  from  these  into  the  larger  trunks
by  the  motion  of  the  extremities  and  the  compression  of  the
muscles  generally.  The  blood  is  thus  more  disposed  to  move
from  the  circumference  to  the  centre  than  in  the  opposite  di-
rection, were  there  even  no  valves  to  oppose  its  motion ; whence
that  it  may  leave  its  source  and  enter  more  confined  and
colder  channels,  and  flow  against  the  direction  to  which  it
spontaneously  inclines,  the  blood  requires  both  force  and  an
impelling  power.  Now  such  is  the  heart  and  the  heart  alone,
and  that  in  the  way  and  manner  already  explained.


CHAPTER  XVI.

THE  CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOB  IS  FURTHER  PROVED  FROM
CERTAIN  CONSEQUENCES.

There  are  still  certain  phenomena,  which,  taken  as  conse-
quences of  this  truth  assumed  as  proven,  are  not  without  their
use  in  exciting  belief,  as  it  were,  a posteriore ; and  which,
although  they  may  seem  to  be  involved  in  much  doubt  and  ob-
scurity, nevertheless  readily  admit  of  having  reasons  and  causes
assigned,  for  them.  The  phenomena  alluded  to  are  those  that
present  themselves  in  connexion  with  contagions,  poisoned
wounds,  the  bites  of  serpents  and  rabid  animals,  lues  venerea
and  the  like.  We  sometimes  see  the  whole  system  con-
taminated, though  the  part  first  infected  remains  sound ; the
lues  venerea  has  occasionally  made  its  attack  with  pains  in  the
shoulders  and  head,  and  other  symptoms,  the  genital  organs
being  all  the  while  unaffected ; and  then  we  know  that  the
wound  made  by  a rabid  dog  having  healed,  fever  and  a train
of  disastrous  symptoms  nevertheless  supervene.  Whence  it
appea,rs  that  the  contagion  impressed  upon  or  deposited  in  a
particular  part,  is  by  and  by  carried  by  the  returning  current
of  blood  to  the  heart,  and  by  that  organ  is  sent  to  contaminate
the  whole  body.

In  tertian  fever,  the  morbific  cause  seeking  the  heart  in  the
first  instance,  and  hanging  about  the  heart  and  lungs,  renders
the  patient  short-winded,  disposed  to  sighing,  indisposed  to  ex-
ertion; because  the  vital  principle  is  oppressed  and  the  blood


72


MOTION  OF  THE


forced  into  the  lungs  and  rendered  thick,  does  not  pass  through
their  substance,  (as  I have  myself  seen  in  opening  the  bodies  of
those  who  had  died  in  the  beginning  of  the  attack,)  when  the
pulse  is  always  frequent,  small,  and  occasionally  irregular;  but
the  heat  increasing,  the  matter  becoming  attenuated,  the
passages  forced,  and  the  transit  made,  the  whole  body  begins
to  rise  in  temperature,  and  the  prdse  becomes  fuller,  stronger
— the  febrile  paroxysm  is  fully  formed,  whilst  the  preternatui’al
heat  kindled  in  the  heart,  is  thence  diffused  by  the  arteries
through  the  whole  body  along  with  the  morbific  matter,  which
is  in  this  way  overcome  and  dissolved  by  nature.

When  we  perceive,  further,  that  medicines  apphed  extenially
exert  their  influence  on  the  body  just  as  if  they  had  been  taken
internally,  the  truth  we  are  contending  for  is  confirmed.  Colo-
cynth  and  aloes  [applied  externally]  move  the  belly,  can-
tharides  excites  the  urine,  garlic  applied  to  the  soles  of  the
feet  assists  expectoration,  cordials  strengthen,  and  an  infinite
number  of  examples  of  the  same  kind  might  be  cited.  It
will  not,  therefore,  be  found  um-easonable  perchance,  if  we
say  that  the  veins,  by  means  of  their  orifices,  absorb  some  of
the  things  that  are  applied  externally  and  carry  this  inwards
Avith  the  blood,  not  otherwise,  it  may  be,  than  those  of  the
mesentery  imbibe  the  chyle  from  the  intestines  and  cany  it
mixed  with  the  blood  to  the  liver.  For  the  blood  entering
the  mesentery  by  the  coeliac  artery,  and  the  superior  and
inferior  mesenteries,  proceeds  to  the  intestines,  from  which,
aloirg  Avitli  the  chyle  that  has  been  attracted  into  the  veins,
it  returns  by  their  numerous  ramifications  into  the  vena  portae
of  the  liver,  and  from  this  into  the  vena  cava,  and  this  in
such  wise  that  the  blood  in  these  veins  has  the  same  colour
and  consistency  as  in  other  r^eius,  in  opposition  to  what
many  believe  to  be  the  fact.  Nor  indeed  can  rve  imagine  two
contrary  motions  in  any  capillary  system — the  chyle  up-
wards, the  blood  dowmvai’ds.  This  could  scarcely  take  place,
and  must  be  held  as  altogether  improbable.  But  is  not  the
thing  rather  arranged  as  it  is  by  the  consummate  prorideuce  of
nature  ? For  Avere  the  chyle  mingled  with  the  blood,  the  crude
Avith  the  concocted,  in  equal  proportions,  the  result  would  not
be  concoction,  transmAitation,  and  sanguification,  but  rather,
and  because  they  are  severally  active  and  passive,  a mixture  or


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


73


combination,  or  medium  compound  of  the  two,  precisely  as
happens  when  wine  is  mixed  with  water  and  syrup.  But  when
a very  minute  quantity  of  chyle  is  mingled  with  a very  large
quantity  of  circulating  blood,  a quantity  of  chyle  that  bears  no
kind  of  proportion  to  the  mass  of  blood,  the  effect  is  the  same,
as  Aristotle  says,  as  when  a drop  of  water  is  added  to  a cask  of
wine,  or  the  contrary ; the  mass  does  not  then  present  itself  as
a mixture,  but  is  still  sensibly  either  wine  or  water.  So  in  the
mesenteric  veins  of  an  animal  we  do  not  find  either  chyme  or
chyle  and  blood,  blended  together  or  distinct,  but  only  blood,
the  same  in  colour,  consistency,  and  other  sensible  properties,
as  it  appears  in  the  veins  generally.  Still  as  there  is  a certain
though  small  and  inappreciable  proportion  of  chyle  or  uncon-
cocted matter  mingled  with  this  blood,  nature  has  interposed
the  liver,  in  whose  meandering  channels  it  suffers  delay  and
undergoes  additional  change,  lest  arriving  prematurely  and  crude
at  the  heart,  it  should  oppress  the  vital  principle.  Hence  in
the  embrjm,  there  is  almost  no  use  for  the  liver,  but  the
umbilical  vein  passes  directly  through,  a foramen  or  anastomosis
existing  from  the  vena  portae,  so  that  the  blood  returns  from  the
intestines  of  the  foetus,  not  through  the  liver,  but  into  the  um-
bilical vein  mentioned,  and  flows  at  once  into  the  heart,  mingled
with  the  natural  blood  which  is  retmming  from  the  placenta;
whence  also  it  is  that  in  the  development  of  the  foetus  the  liver
is  one  of  the  organs  that  is  last  formed;  I have  observed  all
the  members  perfectly  marked  out  in  the  human  foetus,  even
the  genital  organs,  whilst  there  was  yet  scarcely  any  trace  of
the  liver.  And  indeed  at  the  period  when  all  the  parts,  like
the  heart  itself  in  the  beginning,  are  still  white,  and  save  in  the
veins  there  is  no  appearance  of  redness,  you  shall  see  nothing
in  the  seat  of  the  liver  but  a shapeless  collection,  as  it  were,  of
extravasated  blood,  which  you  might  take  for  the  effects  of  a
contusion  or  ruptirred  vein.

But  in  the  incubated  egg  there  are,  as  it  were,  two  umbilical
vessels,  one  from  the  albumen  passing  entire  through  the  liver,
and  going  straight  to  the  heart;  another  from  the  yelk,  ending
in  the  vena  portse;  for  it  appears  that  the  chick,  in  the  first
instance,  is  entirely  formed  and  nourished  by  the  white ; but
by  the  yelk  after  it  has  come  to  perfection  and  is  excluded  from
the  shell ; for  this  part  may  still  be  found  in  the  abdomen  of


74


MOTION  OF  THE


the  chick  many  days  after  its  exclusion,  and  is  a substitute  for
the  milk  to  other  animals.

But  these  matters  will  be  better  spoken  of  in  my  observations
on  the  formation  of  the  foetus,  where  many  propositions,  the
following  among  the  number,  will  be  discussed  : Wherefore  is
this  part  formed  or  perfected  first,  that  last  ? — and  of  the  several
members  ; what  part  is  the  cause  of  another?  And  many  points
having  special  reference  to  the  heart,  such  as  : Wherefore  does
it  first  acquire  consistency,  and  appear  to  possess  life,  motion,
sense,  before  any  other  part  of  the  body  is  perfected,  as  Aristotle
says  in  his  third  book,  De  partibus  Animalium?  And  so  also
of  the  blood  : Wherefore  does  it  precede  all  the  rest  ? And  in
what  way  does  it  possess  the  vital  and  animal  principle  ? And
show  a tendency  to  motion,  and  to  be  impelled  hither  and
thither,  the  end  for  which  the  heart  appears  to  be  made?  In
the  same  way,  in  considering  the  pulse  : "VMierefore  one  kind  of
pulse  should  indicate  death,  another  recovery?  And  so  of  all  the
other  kinds  of  pidse,  wdiat  may  be  the  cause  and  indication  of
each.  So  also  in  the  consideration  of  crises  and  natui’al  critical
discharges ; of  nutrition,  and  especially  the  disti’ibution  of  the
nutriment;  and  of  defiuxions  of  every  description.  Finally,  re-
flecting on  eveiy  part  of  medicine,  physiology,  pathology,  se-
meiotics,  therapeutics,  wdien  I see  how  many  questions  can  be
answered,  how  many  doubts  resolved,  how  much  obscmfity  illus-
trated, by  the  truth  we  have  declared,  the  light  we  have  made
to  shine,  I see  a field  of  such  vast  extent  in  which  I might
proceed  so  far,  and  expatiate  so  widely,  that  this  my  tractate
would  not  only  swell  out  into  a volume,  which  was  beyond
my  purpose,  but  my  whole  Hfe,  perchance,  would  not  suffice  for
its  completion.

In  this  place,  therefore,  and  that  indeed  in  a single  chapter,
I shall  only  endeavom*  to  refer  the  various  particulars  that  pre-
sent themselves  in  the  dissection  of  the  heaii;  and  arteries  to
their  several  uses  and  causes ; for  so  I shall  meet  with  many
things  Avhich  receive  light  from  the  truth  I have  been  contend-
ing for,  and  which,  in  theii’  turn,  render  it  more  ob\ious.  And
indeed  I would  have  it  confii'med  and  illustrated  by  anatomical
arguments  above  all  others.

There  is  but  a single  point  which  indeed  would  be  more  cor-
rectly placed  among  oiu’  observations  on  the  use  of  the  spleen.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


75


but  which  it  will  not  be  altogether  impertinent  to  notice  in  this
place  incidentally.  From  the  splenic  branch  which  passes  into
the  pancreas,  and  from  the  upper  part,  arise  the  posterior  co-
ronary, gastric,  and  gastroepiploic  veins,  all  of  which  are  dis-
tributed upon  the  stomach  in  numerous  branches  and  twigs,
just  as  the  mesenteric  vessels  are  upon  the  intestines ; in  like
manner,  from  the  inferior  part  of  the  same  splenic  branch,  and
along  the  back  of  the  colon  and  rectum  proceed  the  hemor-
rhoidal veins.  The  blood  returning  by  these  veins,  and  bring-
ing the  cruder  juices  along  with  it,  on  the  one  hand  from  the
stomach,  where  they  are  thin,  watery,  and  not  yet  perfectly
chy lifted ; on  the  other  thick  and  more  earthy,  as  derived  from
the  faeces,  but  all  poured  into  this  splenic  branch,  are  duly  tem-
pered by  the  admixture  of  contraries ; and  nature  mingling  to-
gether these  two  kinds  of  juices,  difficult  of  coction  by  reason
of  most  opposite  defects,  and  then  diluting  them  with  a
large  quantity  of  warm  blood,  (for  we  see  that  the  quantity
returned  from  the  spleen  must  be  very  large  when  we  con-
template the  size  of  its  arteries,)  they  are  brought  to  the  porta
of  the  liver  in  a state  of  higher  preparation ; the  defects  of  either
extreme  are  supplied  and  compensated  by  this  arrangement  of
the  veins.


CHAPTER  XVII.

THE  MOTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD  ARE  CONFIRMED
FROM  THE  PARTICULARS  APPARENT  IN  THE  STRUCTURE  OF
THE  HEART,  AND  FROM  THOSE  THINGS  WHICH  DISSECTION
UNFOLDS.

I DO  not  ftnd  the  heart  as  a distinct  and  separate  part  in  all
animals ; some,  indeed,  such  as  the  zoophytes,  have  no  heart ;
this  is  because  these  animals  are  coldest,  of  no  great  bulk,  of
soft  texture  or  of  a certain  uniform  sameness  or  simplicity  of
structure ; among  the  number  I may  instance  grubs  and  earth-
worms, and  those  that  are  engendered  of  putrefaction  and  do  not
preserve  their  species.  These  have  no  heart,  as  not  requiring
any  impeller  of  nomdshment  into  the  extreme  parts;  for  they
have  bodies  which  are  connate  and  homogeneous,  and  without
limbs;  so  that  by  the  contraction  and  relaxation  of  the  whole  body
they  assume  and  expel,  move  and  remove  the  aliment.  Oysters,


76


MOTION  OF  THE


mussels^  sponges,  and  tlie  whole  genus  of  zoophytes  or  plant-
animals  have  no  heart ; for  the  whole  body  is  used  as  a heart,  or
the  whole  animal  is  a heart.  In  a great  number  of  animals,
almost  the  whole  tribe  of  inseets,  we  cannot  see  distinctly  by
reason  of  the  smallness  of  the  body  ; still  in  bees,  flies,  hornets,
and  the  like,  we  can  perceive  something  pulsating  with  the  helji
of  a magnifying  glass ; in  pediculi,  also,  the  same  thing  may
be  seen,  and  as  the  body  is  transparent,  the  passage  of  the  food
through  the  intestines,  like  a black  spot  or  stain,  may  be  per-
ceived by  the  aid  of  the  same  magnifying  glass.

In  some  of  the  bloodless^  and  colder  animals,  fui’ther,  as  in
snails,  whelks,  shrimps,  and  shell-fish,  there  is  a part  which
pulsates — a kind  of  vesicle  or  auricle  without  a heart — slowly
indeed,  and  not  to  be  perceived  save  in  the  warmer  season
of  the  year.  In  these  creatm’es  this  part  is  so  contrived  that
it  shall  pulsate,  as  there  is  here  a necessity  for  some  impulse  to
distribute  the  nutritive  fluid,  by  reason  of  the  variety  of  organic
parts,  or  of  the  density  of  the  substance ; but  the  pulsations
occur  unfrequently,  and  sometimes  in  consequence  of  the  cold
not  at  all,  an  arrangement  the  best  adapted  to  them  as  being
of  a doubtful  nature,  so  that  sometimes  they  appear  to  live,
sometimes  to  die;  sometimes  they  show  the  vitahty  of  an  animal,
sometimes  of  a vegetable.  This  seems  also  to  be  the  case  with
tlie  insects  which  conceal  themselves  in  winter,  and  lie,  as  it
were,  defunct,  or  merely  manifesting  a kind  of  vegetative  exist-
ence. But  whether  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  case  of
certain  animals  that  have  red  blood,  such  as  frogs,  tortoises,
serpents,  swallows,  may  be  made  a question  without  any  kind
of  impropriety.

In  all  the  larger  and  warmer,  because  [red-]  blooded  animals,
there  Avas  need  of  an  impeller  of  the  nutritive  fliud,  and  that
perchance  possessing  a considerable  amount  of  power.  In  fishes,
serpents,  lizards,  tortoises,  frogs,  and  others  of  the  same  kind
there  is  a heart  present,  furnished  with  both  an  amide  and  a
ventricle,  whence  it  is  perfectly  true,  as  Ai’istotle  has  observed,-
that  no  [red-]  blooded  animal  is  without  a heart,  by  the  im-
pelling power  of  which  the  nutritive  fluid  is  forced,  both  with
greater  Augour  and  rapidity  to  a greater  distance ; it  is  not


['  i.  e.  Not  ha\ing  red  blood. — Ed.]


- De  Paid.  Auimal.  lib.  iii.


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


77


merely  agitated  by  an  auricle  as  it  is  in  lower  forms.  And
then  in  regard  to  animals  that  are  yet  larger,  warmer,  and  more
perfect,  as  they  abound  in  blood,  which  is  ever  hotter  and  more
spirituous,  and  possess  bodies  of  greater  size  and  consistency,
they  require  a larger,  stronger,  and  more  fleshy  heart,  in  order
that  the  nutritive  fluid  may  be  propelled  with  yet  greater  force
and  celerity.  And  further,  inasmuch  as  the  more  perfect  animals
require  a still  more  perfect  nutrition,  and  a larger  supply  of
native  heat,  in  order  that  the  ahment  may  be  thoroughly  con-
cocted and  acquire  the  last  degree  of  perfection,  they  required
both  lungs  and  a second  ventricle,  which  should  force  the
nutritive  fluid  through  them.

Every  animal  that  has  lungs  has  therefore  two  ventricles  to
its  heart,  one  right,  another  left ; and  wherever  there  is  a right,
there  also  is  there  a left  ventricle;  but  the  contrary  of  this  does
not  hold  good : where  there  is  a left  there  is  not  always  a right
ventricle.  The  left  ventricle  I call  that  which  is  distinct  in
office,  not  in  place  from  the  other,  that  one  namely  which  dis-
tributes the  blood  to  the  body  at  large,  not  to  the  lungs  only.
Hence  the  left  ventricle  seems  to  form  the  principal  part  of
the  heart;  situated  in  the  middle,  more  strongly  marked,  and
constructed  with  greater  care,  the  heart  seems  formed  for  the
sake  of  the  left  ventricle,  and  the  right  but  to  minister  to  it ;
for  the  right  neither  reaches  to  the  apex  of  the  heart,  nor  is  it
nearly  of  such  strength,  being  three  times  thinner  in  its  walls,
and  in  some  sort  jointed  on  to  the  left,  (as  Aristotle  says ;)
though  indeed  it  is  of  greater  capacity,  inasmuch  as  it  has  not
only  to  supply  material  to  the  left  ventricle,  but  likewise  to
furnish  aliment  to  the  lungs.

It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  all  this  is  otherwise  in
the  embryo,  where  there  is  not  such  a dilference  between  the
two  ventricles;  but  as  in  a double  nut,  they  are  nearly  equal  in
all  respects,  the  apex  of  the  right  reaching  to  the  apex  of  the
left,  so  that  the  heart  presents  itself  as  a sort  of  double-pointed
cone.  And  this  is  so,  because  in  the  foetus,  as  already  said,
whilst  the  blood  is  not  passing  through  the  lungs  from  the  right
to  the  left  cavities  of  the  heart,  but  flowing  by  the  foramen  ovale
and  ductus  arteriosus,  directly  from  the  vena  cava  into  the  aorta,
whence  it  is  distributed  to  the  whole  body,  both  ventricles  have
in  fact  the  same  office  to  perform,  whence  their  equality  of
constitution.  It  is  only  when  the  lungs  come  to  be  used,  and


78


MOTION  OF  THE


it  is  requisite  that  the  passages  indicated  should  be  blocked
up,  that  the  difference  in  point  of  strength  and  other  things
between  the  two  ventricles  begin  to  he  apparent:  in  the
altered  circumstances  the  right  has  only  to  throw  the  blood
through  the  lungs,  whilst  the  left  has  to  impel  it  through  tlie
whole  body.

There  are  further  within  the  heart  numerous  braces,  so  to
speak,  fleshy  columns  and  fibrous  hands,  which  Aristotle,  in  his
third  book  on  Respiration,  and  the  Parts  of  Animals,  entitles
nerves.  These  are  variously  extended,  and  are  either  distinct
or  contained  in  grooves  in  the  Avails  and  partition,  where  they
occasion  numerous  pits  or  depressions.  They  constitute  a kind
of  small  muscles,  which  are  superadded  and  supplementary  to
the  heart,  assisting  it  to  execute  a more  powerful  and  perfect
contraction,  and  so  proving  subservient  to  the  complete  expulsion
of  the  blood.  They  are  in  some  sort  like  the  elaborate  and
artful  arrangement  of  ropes  in  a ship,  bracing  the  heart  on  every
side  as  it  contracts,  and  so  enabling  it  more  effectually  and
forcibly  to  expel  the  charge  of  blood  from  its  ventricles.  This
much  is  plain,  at  all  events,  that  some  animals  have  them
strongly  marked,  others  have  them  less  so ; and,  in  all  that  have
• them,  they  are  more  numerous  and  stronger  in  the  left  than  in
the  right  ventricle ; and  whilst  some  have  them  in  the  left,  there
are  yet  none  present  in  the  right  venti’icle.  In  the  human
subject,  again,  these  fleshy  columns  and  braces  ai'e  more  nu-
merous in  the  left  than  in  the  right  ventricle,  and  they  are  more
abundant  in  the  ventricles  than  in  the  auricles ; occasionally,
indeed,  in  the  amides  there  appear’  to  be  none  present  what-
soever. In  large,  more  muscular  and  hardier  bodies,  as  of
countrymen,  they  ar’e  numerous ; in  more  slender  frames  and  in
females  they  are  fewer.

In  those  arrimals  in  which  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  are
smooth  within,  and  entirely  without  fibres  or  muscrrlar  bands,
or  anything  like  foveae,  as  irr  almost  aU  the  smaller  birds,  the
partridge  and  the  common  fowl,  serpents,  frogs,  tortoises,  and
also  fishes,  for  the  major  part,  there  are  no  chordae  tendineae,
nor  bundles  of  fibres,  neither  are  there  any  tricuspid  valves  in
the  ventricles.

Some  animals  have  the  right  ventricle  smooth  intei’uaUy,  but
the  left  proAided  Avith  fibrous  bauds,  such  as  the  goose,
swan,  and  larger  birds ; and  the  reason  here  is  still  the  same


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


79


as  elsewhere : as  the  lungs  are  spongy,  and  loose,  and  soft,  no
great  amount  of  force  is  required  to  force  the  blood  through
them;  hence  the  right  ventricle  is  either  without  the  bundles
in  question,  or  they  are  fewer  and  weaker,  not  so  fleshy
or  like  muscles ; those  of  the  left  ventricle,  however,  are  both
stronger  and  more  numerous,  more  fleshy  and  muscular,  because
the  left  ventricle  requires  to  be  stronger,  inasmuch  as  the  blood
which  it  propels  has  to  be  driven  through  the  whole  body.  And
this,  too,  is  the  reason  why  the  left  ventricle  occupies  the  middle
of  the  heart,  and  has  parietes  three  times  thicker  and
stronger  than  those  of  the  right.  Hence  all  animals — and  among
men  it  is  not  otherwise — that  are  endowed  with  particularly
strong  frames,  and  that  have  large  and  fleshy  limbs  at  a great
distance  from  the  heai’t,  have  this  central  organ  of  greater  thick-
ness, strength,  and  muscularity.  And  this  is  both  obvious  and
necessary.  Those,  on  the  contrary,  that  are  of  softer  and  more
slender  make  have  the  heart  more  flaccid,  softer,  and  internally
either  sparely  or  not  at  all  fibrous.  Consider  farther  the  use  of
the  several  valves,  which  are  all  so  arranged,  that  the  blood  once
received  into  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  shall  never  regurgitate,
once  forced  into  the  pulmonary  artery  and  aorta  shall  not  flow
backupontheventricles.  When  the  valves  are  raised  and  brought
together  they  form  a three  cornered  line,  such  as  is  left  by  the
bite  of  a leech ; and  the  more  they  are  forced,  the  more  firmly
do  they  oppose  the  passage  of  the  blood.  The  tricuspid  valves
are  placed,  like  gate-keepers,  at  the  entrance  into  the  ventricles
from  the  venae  cavae  and  pulmonary  veins,  lest  the  blood  when
most  forcibly  impelled  should  flow  back ; and  it  is  for  this  reason
that  they  are  not  found  in  all  animals ; neither  do  they  appear
to  have  been  constructed  with  equal  care  in  all  the  animals  in
which  they  are  found ; in  some  they  are  more  accurately  fitted,
in  others  more  remissly  or  carelessly  contrived,  and  always
with  a view  to  their  being  closed  under  a greater  or  a slighter
force  of  the  ventricle.  In  the  left  ventricle,  therefore,  and  in
order  that  the  occlusion  may  be  the  more  perfect  against  the
greater  impulse,  there  are  only  two  valves,  bke  a mitre,  and
produced  into  an  elongated  cone,  so  that  they  come  together
and  touch  to  their  middle ; a circumstance  which  perhaps  led
Aristotle  into  the  error  of  supposing  this  ventricle  to  be  double,
the  division  taking  place  transversely.  For  the  same  reason.


80


MOTION  OF  THE


indeed,  and  that  the  blood  may  not  regurgitate  upon  the  pul-
monary veins,  and  thus  the  force  of  the  ventricle  in  propelling
the  blood  through  the  system  at  large  come  to  be  neutralized,
it  is  that  these  mitral  valves  excel  those  of  the  right  ventricle  in
size  and  strength,  and  exactness  of  closing.  Hence,  too,  it  is
essential  that  there  can  he  no  heart  ■without  a ventricle,  since
this  must  he  the  source  and  storehouse  of  the  blood.  The  same
law  does  not  hold  good  in  reference  to  the  brain.  For  almost
no  genus  of  birds  has  a ventricle  in  the  brain,  as  is  obrious  in
the  goose  and  swan,  the  brains  of  which  nearly  equal  that  of  a
rabbit  in  size;  now  rabbits  have  ventricles  in  the  brain,  whilst  the
goose  has  none.  In  hke  manner,  wdierever  the  heart  has  a single
ventricle,  there  is  an  amdcle  appended,  flaccid,  membranous,
hollow,  fllled  -ndth  blood ; and  where  there  are  two  ventricles,
there  are  likewise  two  auricles.  On  the  other  hand,  however,
some  animals  have  an  aiu’icle  without  any  ventricle ; or  at  all
events  they  have  a sac  analogous  to  an  auricle ; or  the  vein  it-
self, dilated  at  a particular  part,  performs  pulsations,  as  is  seen
in  hornets,  bees,  and  other  insects,  which  certain  experiments
of  my  own  enable  me  to  demonstrate  have  not  only  a pulse,  but
a respiration  in  that  part  which  is  called  the  tail,  whence  it  is
that  this  part  is  elongated  and  contracted  now  more  rarely,  now
more  frequently,  as  the  creatru’e  appears  to  be  blown  and  to
require  a larger  quantity  of  air.  But  of  these  things,  more  in
our  Treatise  on  Kespiration.

It  is  in  like  manner  evident  that  the  auricles  pidsate,  con-
tract, as  I have  said  before,  and  thi’ow  the  blood  into  the  ven-
tricles ; so  that  wherever  there  is  a ventricle  an  amide  is  ne-
cessary, not  merely  that  it  may  serve,  according  to  the  general
belief,  as  a som’ce  and  magazine  for  the  blood : for  M'hat  were
the  use  of  its  pulsations  had  it  nothing  to  do  save  to  contain?
No ; the  amides  are  prime  movers  of  the  blood,  especially  the
right  auricle,  which  is  “ the  first  to  live,  the  last  to  die  •”  as
already  said ; whence  they  are  suhser'rient  to  sending  the  blood
into  the  ventricle,  which,  contracting  incontinently,  more  readily
and  forcibly  expels  the  blood  abeady  in  motion ; just  as  the
ball-player  can  strike  the  ball  more  forcibly  and  fm’ther  if
he  takes  it  on  the  rebound  than  if  he  simply  threw  it.
Moreover,  and  contraiy  to  the  general  opinion,  since  neither
the  heai’t  nor  anything  else  can  dilate  or  distend  itself  so  as  to


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


81


draw  auglit  into  its  cavity  during  the  diastole,  unless,  like  a
sponge,  it  has  been  first  compressed,  and  as  it  is  returning  to
its  primary  condition ; but  in  animals  all  local  motion  proceeds
from,  and  has  its  original  in  the  contraction  of  some  part : it  is
consequently  by  the  contraction  of  the  auricles  that  the  blood
is  thrown  into  the  ventricles,  as  I have  already  shown,  and  from
thence,  by  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles,  it  is  propelled  and
distributed.  Which  truth  concerning  local  motions,  and  how
the  immediate  moving  organ  in  every  motion  of  an  animal
primarily  endowed  vrith  a motive  spirit  (as  Aristotle  has  it,i)  is
contractile ; and  in  what  way  the  word  i/evpou  is  derived  from
vfuw,  nuto,  contraho ; and  how  Aristotle  was  acquainted  with
the  muscles,  and  did  not  unadvisedly  refer  all  motion  in  animals
to  the  nerves,  or  to  the  contractile  element,  and  therefore  called
those  little  bands  in  the  heart  nerves — all  this,  if  I am  per-
mitted to  proceed  in  my  purpose  of  making  a particular  de-
monstration of  the  organs  of  motion  in  animals  from  observa-
tions in  my  possession,  I trust  I shall  be  able  to  make  sufficiently
plain.

But  that  we  may  go  on  with  the  subject  we  have  in  hand,
viz.,  the  use  of  the  auricles  in  filling  the  ventricles : we  should
expect  that  the  more  dense  and  compact  the  heart,  the  thicker
its  parietes,  the  stronger  and  more  muscular  must  be  the  auricle
to  force  and  fiU  it,  and  vice  versa.  Now  this  is  actually  so  ;
in  some  the  auricle  presents  itself  as  a sanguinolent  vesicle,  as
a thin  membrane  containing  blood,  as  in  fishes,  in  which  the
sac  that  stands  in  lieu  of  the  auricle,  is  of  such  delicacy  and
ample  capacity,  that  it  seems  to  be  suspended  or  to  float
above  the  heart ; in  those  fishes  in  which  the  sac  is  somewhat
more  fleshy,  as  in  the  carp,  barbel,  tench,  and  others,  it  bears
a wonderful  and  strong  resemblance  to  the  lungs.

In  some  men  of  sturdier  frame  and  stouter  make,  the  right
auricle  is  so  strong,  and  so  curiously  constructed  within  of
bands  and  variously  interlacing  fibres,  that  it  seems  to  equal
the  ventricle  of  the  heart  in  other  subjects ; and  I must
say  that  I am  astonished  to  find  such  diversity  in  this  par-
ticular in  different  individuals.  It  is  to  be  observed,  however,
that  in  the  foetus  the  auricles  are  out  of  all  proportion  large,

' In  the  book,  de  Spiritu,  and  elsewhere.

6


82


MOTION  OF  THE


which  is  because  they  are  present  before  the  heart  [the  ventri-
cular portion]  makes  its  appearance  or  suffices  for  its  office  even
when  it  has  appeared,  and  theytherefore  have,  as  itwere,  the  duty
of  the  whole  heart  committed  to  them,  as  has  ah’eady  been  de-
monstrated. But  what  I have  observed  in  the  formation  of  the
foetus  as  before  remarked  (and  Aristotle  had  ah’eady  confirmed  all
in  studying  the  incubated  egg,)  throws  the  greatest  fight  and
likelihood  upon  the  point.  Whilst  the  foetus  is  yet  in  the  giuse
of  a soft  worm,  or,  as  is  commonly  said,  in  the  milk,  there  is  a
mere  bloody  point  or  pulsating  vesicle,  a portion  apparently  of
the  umbilical  vein,  dilated  at  its  commencement  or  base;  by
and  by,  when  the  outline  of  the  foetus  is  distinctly  indicated,  and
it  begins  to  have  greater  bodily  consistence,  the  vesicle  in  ques-
tion having  become  more  fleshy  and  stronger,  and  changed  its
position,  passes  into  the  auricles,  over  or  upon  which  the  body  of
the  heart  begins  to  sprout,  though  as  yet  it  apparently  performs
no  duty ; but  when  the  foetus  is  farther  advanced,  when  the
bones  can  be  distinguished  from  the  soft  parts,  and  movements
take  place,  then  it  has  also  a heart  internately  which  pulsates,
and,  as  I have  said,  throws  blood  by  either  ventricle  from  the
vena  cava  into  the  arteries.

Thus  nature,  ever  perfect  and  di\-ine,  doing  nothing  in  vain,
has  neither  given  a heart  where  it  was  not  requii’ed,  nor  produced
it  before  its  office  had  become  necessary;  but  by  the  same  stages
in  the  development  of  every  animal,  passing  thi’ough  the  con-
stitutions of  all,  as  I may  say  (ouim,  worm,  foetus),  it  acquires
perfection  in  each.  These  points  will  be  found  elsewhere  con-
firmed by  numerous  observations  on  the  formation  of  the  foetus.

Finally,  it  was  not  without  good  grounds  that  Hippocrates,
in  his  book,  ‘ He  Corde,’  intitles  it  a muscle ; as  its  action  is
the  same,  so  is  its  function,  viz.,  to  contract  and  move  something
else,  in  this  case,  the  charge  of  blood.

Farther,  as  in  muscles  at  large,  so  can  we  infer  the  action
and  use  of  the  heart  from  the  arrangement  of  its  fibres
and  its  general  structm’e.  All  anatomists  admit  with  Galen
that  the  body  of  the  heart  is  made  up  of  various  courses  of
fibres  running  straight,  obliquely,  and  transversely,  with  refer-
ence to  one  another ; but  in  a heart  which  has  been  boiled  the
arrangement  of  the  fibres  is  seen  to  be  different : all  the  fibres
in  the  parietes  and  septum  are  circular,  as  in  the  sphincters ;


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


83


those,  again,  which  are  in  the  columnse  extend  lengthwise,  and
are  oblique  longitudinally;  and  so  it  conies  to  pass,  that  when  all
the  fibres  contract  simultaneously,  the  apex  of  the  cone  is  pulled
towards  its  base  by  the  columnse,  the  walls  are  drawn  circularly
together  into  a globe,  the  whole  heart  in  short  is  contracted,
and  the  ventricles  narrowed ; it  is  therefore  impossible  not  to
perceive  that,  as  the  action  of  the  organ  is  so  plainly  contrac-
tion, its  function  is  to  propel  the  blood  into  the  arteries.

Nor  are  we  the  less  to  agree  with  Aristotle  in  regard  to  the
sovereignty  of  the  heart ; nor  are  we  to  inquire  whether  it  re-
ceives sense  and  motion  from  the  brain?  whether  blood  from
the  liver?  whether  it  be  the  origin  of  the  veins  and  of  the
blood?  and  more  of  the  same  description.  They  who  afiirm  these
propositions  against  Aristotle,  overlook,  or  do  not  rightly  under-
stand the  principal  argument,  to  the  effect  that  the  heart  is  the
first  part  which  exists,  and  that  it  contains  within  itself  blood,  life,
sensation,  motion,  before  either  the  brain  or  the  liver  were  in
being,  or  had  appeared  distinctly,  or,  at  all  events,  before  they
could  perform  any  function.  The  heart,  ready  furnished  with
its  proper  organs  of  motion,  hke  a kind  of  internal  creature,  is
of  a date  anterior  to  the  body : first  formed,  nature  willed
that  it  should  afterwards  fashion,  nourish,  preserve,  complete
the  entire  animal,  as  its  work  and  dwelling  place : the  heart,
like  the  prince  in  a kingdom,  in  whose  hands  lie  the  chief  and
highest  authority,  rules  over  all ; it  is  the  original  and  founda-
tion from  which  all  power  is  derived,  on  which  all  power  de-
pends in  the  animal  body.

And  many  things  having  reference  to  the  arteries  farther
illustrate  and  confirm  this  truth.  Why  does  not  the  arteria
venosa  pulsate,  seeing  that  it  is  numbered  among  the  arteries?
Or  wherefore  is  there  a pulse  in  the  vena  arteriosa  ? Because
the  pulse  of  the  arteries  is  derived  from  the  impulse  of  the
blood.  Why  does  an  artery  differ  so  much  from  a vein  in  the
thickness  and  strength  of  its  coats  ? Because  it  sustains  the
shock  of  the  impelling  heart  and  streaming  blood.  Hence,  as
perfect  nature  does  nothing  in  vain,  and  suffices  under  all  cir-
cumstances, we  find  that  the  nearer  the  arteries  are  to  the  heart,
the  more  do  they  differ  from  the  veins  in  structure ; here  they
are  both  stronger  and  more  ligamentous,  whilst  in  extreme  parts
of  the  body,  such  as  the  feet  and  hands,  the  brain,  the  mesentery.


84


MOTION  OF  THE


and  the  testicles,  the  two  orders  of  vessels  are  so  much  ahke
that  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  between  them  with  the  eye.
Now  this  is  for  the  following  very  sufficient  reasons : for  the
more  remote  vessels  are  from  the  heart,  with  so  much  the  less
force  are  they  impinged  upon  by  the  stroke  of  the  heart,  which
is  broken  by  the  great  distance  at  which  it  is  given.  Add  to
this,  that  the  impulse  of  the  heart  exerted  upon  the  mass  of
blood,  which  must  needs  fill  the  trunks  and  branches  of  the
arteries,  is  diverted,  divided,  as  it  were,  and  diminished  at
every  subdivision ; so  that  the  ultimate  capillarj"  dmsions  of  the
arteries  look  like  veins,  and  this  not  merely  in  constitution  but
in  function ; for  they  have  either  no  perceptible  pulse,  or  they
rarely  exhibit  one,  and  never  save  where  the  heart  beats  more
violently  than  wont,  or  at  a part  where  the  minute  vessel  is  more
dilated  or  open  than  elsewhere.  Hence  it  happens  that  at
times  we  are  aware  of  a pulse  in  the  teeth,  in  iuflammatoiy
tumours,  and  in  the  fingers ; at  another  time  we  feel  nothing  of
the  sort.  Hence,  too,  by  this  single  symptom  I have  ascertained
for  certain  that  young  persons,  whose  pulses  are  natxu'ally
rapid,  were  labouring  under  fever;  in  like  manner,  on  com-
pressing the  fingers  in  youthful  and  delicate  subjects  dmiug
a febrile  pai’oxysm,  I have  readilj^  perceived  the  pulse  there.
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  heart  pulsates  more  languidly,
it  is  often  impossible  to  feel  the  pulse  not  merely  in  the  fingers,
but  at  the  wrist,  and  even  at  the  temple;  this  is  the  case  in
persons  afflicted  with  lipothj’mige  and  asphyxia,  and  hysterical
symptoms,  as  also  in  persons  of  very  weak  constitution  and  in
the  moribund.

And  here  sui’geons  are  to  be  advised  that,  when  the  blood
escapes  with  force  in  the  amputation  of  limbs,  in  the  removal
of  tumours,  and  in  Avounds,  it  constantly  comes  from  an  ai’tery ;
not  always  per  saltum,  however,  because  the  smaller  arteries
do  not  pulsate,  especially  if  a tomniquet  has  been  applied.

And  then  the  reason  is  the  same  wherefore  the  pulmonary
artery  has  not  only  the  structme  of  an  artery,  but  wherefore  it
does  not  differ  so  AAddely  in  the  thickness  of  its  tunics  from  the
veins  as  the  aorta  : the  aorta  sustains  a more  powerful  shock  fi’om
the  left  ventricle  than  the  pulmonary  artery  does  from  the  right ;
and  the  tunics  of  this  last  vessel  are  thinner  and  softer  than
those  of  the  aorta  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  Avails  of  the


HEART  AND  BLOOD.


85


riglit  ventricle  of  tlie  heart  are  weaker  and  thinner  than  those
of  the  left  ventricle ; and  in  like  manner^  in  the  same  degree
in  which  the  lungs  are  softer  and  laxer  in  structure  than  the
flesh  and  other  constituents  of  the  body  at  large,  do  the  tunics
of  the  branches  of  the  pulmonary  artery  differ  from  the  tunics  of
the  vessels  derived  from  the  aorta.  And  the  same  proportion
in  these  several  particulars  is  universally  preserved.  The  more
muscular  and  powerful  men  are,  the  firmer  their  flesh,  the
stronger,  thicker,  denser,  and  more  fibrous  their  heart,  in  the
same  proportion  are  the  auricles  and  arteries  in  all  respects
thicker,  closer,  and  stronger.  And  again,  and  on  the  other  hand,
in  those  animals  the  ventricles  of  whose  heart  are  smooth  within,
without  villi  or  valves,  and  the  walls  of  which  are  thinner,  as  in
fishes,  serpents,  birds,  and  very  many  genera  of  animals,  in  all
of  them  the  arteries  differ  little  or  nothing  in  the  thickness  of
their  coats  from  the  veins.

Farther,  the  reason  why  the  lungs  have  such  ample  vessels,
both  arteries  and  veins,  (for  the  capacity  of  the  pulmonary  veins
exceeds  that  of  both  the  crural  and  jugular  vessels,)  and  why  they
contain  so  large  a quantity  of  blood,  as  by  experience  and  ocular
inspection  we  know  they  do,  admonished  of  the  fact  indeed  by
Aristotle,  and  not  led  into  error  by  the  appearanees  found  in
animals  which  have  been  bled  to  death, — is,  because  the  blood
has  its  fountain,  and  storehouse,  and  the  workshop  of  its  last
perfection  in  the  heart  and  lungs.  Why,  in  the  same  way
we  find  in  the  course  of  our  anatomical  dissections  the  arte-
ria  venosa  and  left  ventricle  so  full  of  blood,  of  the  same  black
colour  and  clotted  character,  too,  as  that  with  which  the  right
ventricle  and  pulmonary  artery  are  filled,  inasmuch  as  the
blood  is  incessantly  passing  from  one  side  of  the  heart  to  the
other  through  the  lungs.  Wherefore,  in  fine,  the  pulmonary
artery  or  vena  arteriosa  has  the  constitution  of  an  artery,  and
the  pulmonary  veins  or  arteriae  venosae  have  the  structure  of
veins ; because,  in  sooth,  in  function  and  constitution,  and
everything  else,  the  first  is  an  artery,  the  others  are  veins,  in
opposition  to  what  is  commonly  believed;  and  why  the  pul-
monary artery  has  so  large  an  orifice,  because  it  transports
much  more  blood  than  is  requisite  for  the  nutrition  of  the  lungs.

All  these  appearances,  and  many  others,  to  be  noted  in  the
course  of  dissection,  if  rightly  weighed,  seem  clearly  to  illustrate


86


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD.


and  fully  to  confirm  the  truth  contended  for  throughout  these
pages^  and  at  the  same  time  to  stand  in  opposition  to  the  vulgar
opinion  ; for  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  explain  in  any  other
way  to  what  pirrpose  all  is  constructed  and  arranged  as  we  have
seen  it  to  be.


AN  ANATOMICAL  DISQUISITION


ON  THE


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


TO

JOHN  RIOLAN,  Jun.,  of  Paris;

A MOST  SKILFUL  PHYSICIAN  ; THE  CORYPHAEUS  OF  ANATOMISTS  ; REGIUS
PROFESSOR  OF  ANATOMY  AND  BOTANY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  PARIS  ;
DEAN  OF  THE  SAME  UNIVERSITY  ; AND  FIRST  PHYSICIAN  TO
THE  aUEEN,  MOTHER  OF  LOUIS  XIII.


BY  WILLIAM  HARVEY,  AN  ENGLISHMAN,

PROFESSOR  OF  ANATOMY  AND  SURGERY  IN  THE  ROYAL  COLLEGE  OF
PHYSICIANS  OF  LONDON  ; AND  PRINCIPAL  PHYSICIAN  TO
HIS  MOST  SERENE  MAJESTY  THE  KING.


Cambridge,  1619.


THE  FIRST  ANATOMICAL  DISQUISITION  ON  THE  CIRCULA-
TION OF  THE  BLOOD,  ADDRESSED  TO  JO.  RIOLAN.


Some  few  montlis  ago  there  appeared  a small  anatomical  and
pathological  work  from  the  pen  of  the  celebrated  Eiolanus,  for
which,  as  sent  to  me  by  the  author  himself,  I return  him  my
grateful  thanks. i I also  congratulate  this  author  on  the
highly  laudable  undertaking  in  which  he  has  engaged.  To
demonstrate  the  seats  of  all  diseases  is  a task  that  can  only  be
achieved  under  favour  of  the  highest  abilities ; for  surely  he
enters  on  a difficult  province  who  proposes  to  bring  under  the
cognizance  of  the  eyes  those  diseases  which  almost  escape  the
keenest  understanding.  But  such  efforts  become  the  prince  of
anatomists  •,  for  there  is  no  science  which  does  not  spring  from
preexisting  knowledge,  and  no  certain  and  definite  idea  which
has  not  derived  its  origin  from  the  senses.  Induced  therefore
by  the  subject  itself,  and  the  example  of  so  distinguished  an
individual,  which  makes  me  think  lightly  of  the  labour,  I
also  intend  putting  to  press  my  Medical  Anatomy,  or  Anatomy
in  its  Application  to  Medicine.  Not  with  the  purpose,  like
Eiolanus,  of  indicating  the  seats  of  diseases  from  the  bodies
of  healthy  subjects,  and  discussing  the  several  diseases  that
make  their  appearance  there,  according  to  the  views  which
others  have  entertained  of  them ; but  that  I may  relate  from
the  many  dissections  I have  made  of  the  bodies  of  persons  dis-
eased, worn  out  by  serious  and  strange  affections,  how  and  in
what  way  the  internal  organs  were  changed  in  their  situation,
size,  structure,  figm’e,  consistency,  and  other  sensible  qualities,
from  their  natural  forms  and  appearances,  such  as  they  are
usually  described  by  anatomists ; and  in  what  various  and  re-
markable ways  they  were  affected.  For  even  as  the  dissection


‘ Eucheiridium  Anatomicuin  et  Pathologicum.  12mo,  Parisiis,  1648.


90


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


of  healthy  and  well- constituted  bodies  contributes  essentially  to
the  advancement  of  philosophy  and  sound  physiology,  so  does
the  inspection  of  diseased  and  cachectic  subjects  powerfully  as-
sist philosophical  pathology.  And,  indeed,  the  physiological
consideration  of  the  things  which  are  according  to  nature  is  to
be  first  undertaken  by  medical  men;  since  that  which  is  in
conformity  with  nature  is  right,  and  serves  as  a rule  both  to
itself  and  to  that  which  is  amiss ; by  the  light  it  sheds,  too,  aber-
rations and  affections  against  natm’e  are  defined;  pathology
then  stands  out  more  clearly ; and  fi’om  pathology  the  use  and
art  of  heahng,  as  well  as  occasions  for  the  discovery  of  many
new  remedies,  are  perceived.  Nor  could  any  one  readily  ima-
gine how  extensively  internal  organs  are  altered  in  diseases,
especially  chi’onic  diseases,  and  what  monstrosities  among  in-
ternal parts  these  diseases  engender.  So  that  I venture  to  say,
that  the  examination  of  a single  body  of  one  who  has  died  of
tabes  or  some  other  disease  of  long  standing,  or  poisonous  na-
ture, is  of  more  service  to  medicine  than  the  dissection  of  the
bodies  of  ten  men  who  have  been  hanged.

I would  not  have  it  supposed  by  this  that  I in  any  way  dis-
approve of  the  purpose  of  Riolanus,  that  learned  and  skilful
anatomist ; on  the  contrary,  I think  it  deserving  of  the  highest
praise,  as  likely  to  be  extremely  useful  to  medicine,  inasmuch
as  it  illustrates  the  physiological  branch  of  this  science ; but  I
have  thought  that  it  would  scarcely  tm’u  out  less  profitable  to
the  art  of  healing,  did  I place  before  the  eyes  of  my  readers
not  only  the  places,  but  the  affections  of  these  places,  illustrat-
ing them  as  I proceed  with  obseiwations,  and  recording  the
results  of  my  experience  derived  from  my  numerous  dissections.

But  it  is  imperative  on  me  first  to  dispose  of  those  obseiwa-
tions  contained  in  the  work  refen’ed  to,  which  bear  upon  the
cu’culation  of  the  blood  as  discovered  by  me,  and  wliich  seem  to
require  especial  notice  at  my  hands.  For  the  judgment  of  such
a man,  who  is  indeed  the  prince  and  leader  of  all  the  anato-
mists of  the  present  age,  in  such  a matter,  is  not  to  be  hghtly
esteemed,  bnt  is  rather  to  be  held  of  greater  weight  and  autho-
rity, either  for  praise  or  blame,  than  the  commendations  or
censm’e  of  all  the  world  besides.

Riolanus,  then,  admits  our  motion  of  the  blood  in  animals,^

‘ Encliii'idion,  lib.  iii,  cap.  8.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


91


and  falls  in  with  our  conclusions  in  regard  to  the  circulation ;
yet  not  entirely  and  avowedly ; for  he  says^  that  the  blood  con-
tained in  the  vena  portae  does  not  circulate  hke  that  in  the
vena  cava;  and  again  he  states^  that  there  is  some  blood  which
cii’culatesj  and  that  the  circulatory  vessels  are  the  aorta  and
vena  cava ; but  then  he  denies  that  the  continuations  of  these
trunks  have  any  circulation,  “ because  the  blood  is  effused  into
all  the  parts  of  the  second  and  third  regions,  where  it  remains
for  purposes  of  nutrition ; nor  does  it  return  to  any  greater
vessels,  unless  forcibly  dr-awn  back  when  there  is  a great  lack
of  blood  in  the  main  channels,  or  driven  by  a fit  of  passion
when  it  flows  to  the  greater  circulatory  vessels ; ’’  and  shortly
afterwards  : “ thus,  as  the  blood  of  the  veins  naturally  ascends
incessantly  or  returns  to  the  heart,  so  the  blood  of  the  arteries
descends  or  departs  from  the  heart ; stdl,  if  the  smaller  veins
of  the  arms  and  legs  he  empty,  the  blood  filling  the  empty
channels  in  succession,  may  descend  in  the  veins,  as  I have
clearly  shown,”  he  says,  “ against  Harvey  and  Walaeus.”  And
as  the  authority  of  Galen  and  daily  experience  confii-m  the  anas-
tomoses of  the  arteries  and  veins,  and  the  necessity  of  the  cir-
cxilation  of  the  blood,  “ you  perceive,”  he  continues,  “ how  the
. circulation  is  effected,  without  any  perturbation  or  confusion  of
fluids  and  the  destruction  of  the  ancient  system  of  medicine.’^
These  words  explain  the  motives  by  which  this  illustrious
anatomist  was  actuated  when  he  was  led  partly  to  admit,  partly
to  deny  the  circulation  of  the  blood ; and  why  he  only  ventures
on  an  undecided  and  inconclusive  opinion  of  the  subject ; his
fear  is  lest  it  destroy  the  ancient  medicine.  Not  yielding  im-
plicitly to  the  truth,  which  it  appears  he  could  not  help  seeing,
but  rather  guided  by  caution,  he  fears  speaking  plainly  out,
lest  he  offend  the  ancient  physic,  or  perhaps  seem  to  retract
the  physiological  doctrines  he  supports  in  his  Antlu’opology.
The  circulation  of  the  blood  does  not  shake,  but  much  rather
confirms  the  ancient  medicine;  though  it  runs  counter  to  the
physiology  of  physicians,  and  their  speculations  upon  natural
subjects,  and  opposes  the  anatomical  doctrine  of  the  use  and
action  of  the  heart  and  lungs,  and  rest  of  the  viscera.  That
this  is  so  shall  readily  be  made  to  appear,  both  from  his  own
words  and  avowal,  and  partly  also  from  what  I shall  supply ;

' Enchiridion,  lib.  ii,  cap.  21.  • lb.  lib.  iii,  cap.  8.


92


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


viz.,  that  the  whole  of  the  blood,  wherever  it  be  in  the  liA’ing
body,  moves  and  changes  its  place,  not  merely  that  which  is
in  the  larger  vessels  and  their  continuations,  but  that  also
which  is  in  their  minute  subdivisions,  and  which  is  contained
in  the  pores  or  interstices  of  every  part ; that  it  flows  from  and
back  to  the  heart  ceaselessly  and  without  pause,  and  could  not
pause  for  ever  so  short  a time  without  detriment,  although  I
admit  that  occasionally,  and  in  some  places,  its  motion  is
quicker  or  slower.^

In  the  first  place,  then,  our  learned  anatomist  only  denies
that  the  contents  of  the  branches  in  continuation  of  the  vena
portae  circulate ; but  he  could  neither  oppose  nor  deny  this,  did
he  not  conceal  from  himself  the  force  of  his  o-wn  arguments ;
for  he  says  in  his  Third  Book,  chap,  viii,  “ If  the  heart  at  each
pulsation  admits  a drop  of  blood  which  it  throws  into  the  aorta,
and  in  the  course  of  an  hour  makes  two  thousand  heats,  it  is  a
necessary  consequence  that  the  quantity  of  blood  transmitted
must  be  great.”  He  is  farther  forced  to  admit  as  much  in  refer-
ence to  the  mesentery,  when  he  sees  that  far  more  than  single
drops  of  blood  are  sent  into  the  coeliac  and  mesenteric  arteries
at  each  pulsation ; so  that  there  must  either  be  some  outlet  for
the  fluid,  of  magnitude  commensurate  with  its  quantity",  or  the
branches  of  the  vena  portaj  must  give  way.  Nor  can  the  ex-
planation that  is  had  recoiu’se  to  writh  a riew  of  meeting  the  dif-
ficulty, viz.,  that  the  blood  of  the  mesentery  ebbs  and  flows  by
the  same  channels,  after  the  manner  of  Em’ipus,  be  received  as
either  probable  or  possible.  Neither  can  the  reflux  from  the
mesentery  be  efiFected  by  those  passages  and  that  system  of
translation,  by  which  he  will  have  it  to  disgorge  itself  into  the
aorta;  this  w^ere  against  the  force  of  the  existing  cinrent,  and
by  a contrary  motion ; nor  can  anything  like  pause  or  alterna-
tion be  admitted,  where  there  is  very  certainly  an  incessant  in-
flux : the  blood  sent  into  the  mesenteiy  must  as  inevitably  go
elsewhere  as  that  which  is  poured  into  the  heart.  And  this  is
obvious;  were  it  otherwise,  indeed,  everything  like  a circulation
might  be  overturned  upon  the  same  showing  and  by  the  same
subterfuge ; it  might  just  as  well  be  said  that  the  blood  con-
tained in  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  is  propelled  into  the
aorta  during  the  systole,  and  flows  back  to  it  dming  the  diastole,

' Vide  Cbapter  III.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


93


the  aorta  disgorging  itself  into  the  ventricle,  precisely  as  the  ven-
tricle has  disgorged  itself  into  the  aorta.  There  would  thus  be
circulation  neither  in  the  heart  nor  in  the  mesentery,  but  an
alternate  flux  and  reflux,  — a^useless  labour,  as  it  seems.  If,
therefore,  and  for  the  reason  assigned  and  approved  by  him,  a
circulation  through  the  heart  be  argued  for  as  a thing  necessary,
the  argument  has  precisely  the  same  force  when  apphed  to
the  mesentery  : if  there  be  no  circulation  in  the  mesentery,
neither  is  there  any  in  the  heart ; for  both  affirmations,  this  in
reference  to  the  heart,  that  in  reference  to  the  mesentery,
merely  changing  the  words,  stand  or  fall  together,  by  force  of
the  very  same  arguments.

He  says : “ The  sigmoid  valves  prevent  regurgitation  into
the  heart ; but  there  are  no  valves  in  the  mesentery.’^  To  this
I reply,  that  the  thing  is  not  so ; for  there  is  a valve  in  the
splenic  vein,  and  sometimes  also  in  other  veins.  And  besides,
valves  are  not  met  with  universally  in  veins ; there  are  few  or
none  in  the  deep-seated  veins  of  the  extremities,  but  many  in
the  subcutaneous  branches.  For  where  the  blood  is  flowing
natm’ally  from  smaller  into  greater  branches,  into  which  it  is
disposed  to  enter,  the  pressure  of  the  circumjacent  muscles  is
enough,  and  more  than  enough  to  prevent  all  retrograde  move-
ment, and  it  is  forced  on  where  the  way  lies  open ; in  such
circumstances,  what  use  were  there  for  valves?  But  the
quantity  of  blood  that  is  forced  into  the  mesentery  by  each
stroke  of  the  heart,  may  be  estimated  in  the  same  way  as
you  estimate  the  quantity  impelled  into  the  hand  when  you
bind  a ligature  with  medium  tightness  about  the  wi’ist:  if  in
so  many  beats  the  vessels  of  the  hand  become  distended,  and
the  whole  extremity  swells,  you  will  find,  that  much  more  than
a single  drop  of  blood  has  entered  with  each  pulse,  and  which
cannot  return,  but  must  remain  to  fiU  the  hand  and  increase
its  size.  But  analogy  permits  us  to  say,  that  the  same  thing
takes  place  in  reference  to  the  mesentery  and  its  vessels,  in  an
equal  degree  at  least,  if  not  in  a greater  degree,  seeing  that  the
vessels  of  the  mesentery  are  considerably  larger  than  those  of
the  carpus.  And  if  any  one  will  but  think  on  the  difficulty
that  is  experienced  with  all  the  aid  supplied  by  compresses,
bandages,  and  a multiplied  apparatus,  in  restraining  the  flow  of
blood  from  the  smallest  artery  when  wounded,  with  what  force


94


‘CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


it  overcomes  all  obstacles  and  soaks  tlirougb  the  whole  appa-
ratus, he  will  scarcely,  I imagine,  think  it  hkely  that  there  can
be  any  retrograde  motion  against  such  an  impulse  and  influx
of  blood,  any  retrograde  force  io  meet  and  overcome  a direct
force  of  such  power.  Turning  over  these  things  in  his  mind,
I say,  no  one  will  ever  be  brought  to  believe  that  the  blood
from  the  branches  of  the  vena  portae  can  possibly  make  its  way
by  the  same  channels  against  an  influx  by  the  artery  of  such
impetuosity  and  force,  and  so  unload  the  mesentery.

Moreover,  if  the  learned  anatomist  does  not  think  that  the
blood  is  moved  and  changed  by  a circular  motion,  but  that  the
same  fluid  always  stagnates  in  the  channels  of  the  mesentery,
he  appears  to  suppose  that  there  are  two  descriptions  of  blood,
serving  difterent  uses  and  ends;  that  the  blood  of  the  vena
portfe,  and  that  of  the  vena  cava  are  dissimilar  in  consti-
tution, seeing  that  the  one  requires  a circulation  for  its  pre-
servation, the  other  requires  nothing  of  the  kind ; which
neither  appears  on  the  face  of  the  thing,  nor  is  its  tnith
demonstrated  by  him.  Our  author  then  refers  to  “ A fourth
order  of  mesenteric  vessels,  the  lacteal  vessels,  discovered
by  Asellius  •”  and  having  mentioned  these,  he  seems  to  infer
that  they  extract  all  the  nutriment  from  the  intestines,  and
transfer  this  to  the  hver,  the  workshop  of  the  blood,  whence,
having  been  concocted  and  changed  into  blood,  (so  he  says  in  his
third  book,  chapter  the  8th),  the  blood  is  transferi’ed  from  the
liver  to  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart.  “ "Which  things  pre-
mised,^’ he  continues,^  “ all  the  difficulties  which  were  formerly
experienced  in  regard  to  the  distribution  of  the  chyle  and  blood
by  the  same  channel  come  to  an  end  ; for  the  lacteal  veins  carry
the  chyle  to  the  hver,  and  as  these  canals  ai'e  distinct,  so  may
they  be  severally  obstructed.”  But  tmly  I would  here  ask:
how  this  milky  fluid  can  be  poured  into  and  pass  thi-ough  the
hver,  and  how  from  thence  gain  the  vena  cava  and  the  ven-
tricle of  the  lieait  ? when  our  author  denies  that  the  blood
of  the  vena  portse  passes  through  the  liver,  and  that  so  a cir-
culation is  established.  I pause  for  a reply.  I wordd  fain  know
how  such  a thing  can  be  shown  to  be  probable;  especially
when  the  blood  appears  to  be  both  more  spirituous  or  subtile


' Enchiridion,  lib.  ii,  cap.  18.


= Ibid.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


95


and  penetrating  than  the  chyle  or  milk  contained  in  these
lacteal  vessels,  and  is  further  impelled  hy  the  pulsations  of  the
arteries  that  it  may  find  a passage  by  other  channels.

Our  learned  author  mentions  a certain  tract  of  his  on  the
Circulation  of  the  Blood  : I wish  I could  obtain  a sight  of  it ;
perhaps  I might  retract.  But  had  the  learned  writer  been  so
disposed,  I do  not  see  but  that  having  admitted  the  circular
motion  of  the  blood,  ^ all  the  difficulties  which  were  formerly  felt
in  connexion  with  the  distribution  of  the  chyle  and  the  blood
by  the  same  channels  are  brought  to  an  equally  satisfactory
solution ; so  much  so  indeed  that  there  would  be  no  necessity
for  inquiring  after  or  laying  down  any  separate  vessels  for  the
chyle.  Even  as  the  umbilical  veins  absorb  the  nutritive  juices
from  the  fluids  of  the  egg  and  transport  them  for  the  nutrition
and  growth  of  the  chick,  in  its  embryo  state,  so  do  the  meseraic
veins  suck  up  the  chyle  from  the  intestines  and  transfer  it  to
the  hver  j and  why  should  we  not  maintain  that  they  perform
the  same  office  in  the  adult  ? For  all  the  mooted  difficulties
vanish  when  we  cease  to  suppose  two  contrary  motions  in  the
same  vessels,  and  admit  but  one  and  the  same  continuous  mo-
tion in  the  mesenteric  vessels  from  the  intestines  to  the  liver.

I shall  elsewhere  state  my  views  of  the  lacteal  veins  when  I
treat  of  the  milk  found  in  different  parts  of  new-born  animals,
especially  of  the  human  subject ; for  it  is  met  with  in  the  me-
sentery and  all  its  glands,  in  the  thymus,  in  the  axillse,  also  in
the  breasts  of  infants.  This  milk  the  midwifes  are  in  the  habit
of  pressing  out,  for  the  health,  as  they  heheve,  of  the  infants.
But  it  has  pleased  the  learned  Riolanus,  not  only  to  take  away
cii’culation  from  the  blood  contained  in  the  mesentery;  he  affirms
that  neither  do  the  vessels  in  continuation  of  the  vena  cava,
nor  the  arteries,  nor  any  of  the  parts  of  the  second  and  thii’d
regions,  admit  of  circulation,  so  that  he  entitles  and  enumerates
as  circulating  vessels  the  vena  cava  and  aorta  only.  For  this
he  appears  to  me  to  give  a very  indifferent  reason ;2  “The
blood,”  he  says,  “ effused  into  all  the  parts  of  the  second  and
third  regions,  remains  there  for  their  nutrition;  nor  does  it

' Enchiridion,  lib.  iii,  cap.  8 : “ The  blood  incessantly  and  naturally  ascends  or
flows  baek  to  the  heart  in  the  veins,  as  in  the  ai'teries  it  descends  or  departs  from  the
heart.”

^ Enchirid.  lib.  iii,  cap.  8.


96


CmCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


return  to  the  great  vessels^  unless  forcibly  draum  back  by  an
extreme  dearth  of  blood  in  the  great  vessels,  nor,  unless  car-
ried by  an  impulse,  does  it  flow  to  the  circulatory  vessels.”
That  so  much  of  the  blood  must  remain  as  is  appropriated
to  the  nutrition  of  the  tissues,  is  matter  of  necessity;  for  it  cannot
nourish  unless  it  be  assimilated  and  become  coherent,  and  form
substance  in  lieu  of  that  which  is  lost ; but  that  the  whole  of
the  blood  which  flows  into  a part  should  there  remain,  in  order
that  so  small  a portion  should  undergo  transformation,  is  no-
wise necessary ; for  no  part  uses  so  much  blood  for  its  nutrition
as  is  contained  in  its  arteries,  veins,  and  interstices.  Nor  because
the  blood  is  continually  coming  and  going  is  it  necessary  to
suppose  that  it  leaves  nothing  for  nutriment  behind  it.  Conse-
quently it  is  by  no  means  necessary  that  the  whole  remain  in
order  that  nutrition  be  effected.  But  our  learned  author,  in
the  same  book,  where  he  affirms  so  much,  appears  almost  every-
where else  to  assert  the  contrary.  In  that  paragraph  especially
where  he  describes  the  circnlation  in  the  brain,  he  says  : “And
the  brain  by  means  of  the  circulation  sends  back  blood  to  the
heart,  and  thus  refrigerates  the  organ.”  And  in  the  same  way
are  all  the  more  remote  parts  said  to  refrigerate  the  heai-t ; thus
in  fevers,  when  the  prtecordia  are  scorched  and  burn  with  febrile
heat,  patients  baring  their  limbs  and  casting  off  the  bed-
clothes, seek  to  cool  their  heart ; and  the  blood  generally,
tempered  and  cooled  down,  as  our  learned  author  states  it  to
be  with  reference  to  the  brain  in  particular,  retuims  by  the  veins
and  reft'igerates  the  heart.  Our  author,  therefore,  appears  to
insinuate  a certain  necessity  for  a circulation  from  every  part,
as  well  as  from  the  brain,  in  opposition  to  what  he  had  before
said  in  very  precise  terms.  But  tlien  he  cautiously  and  am-
biguously asserts,  that  the  blood  does  not  retrum  from  the  parts
composing  the  second  and  thii’d  regions,  unless,  as  he  says,  it
is  drawn  by  force,  and  through  a signal  deficiency  of  blood  in
the  larger  vessels,  &c.,  which  is  most  time  if  these  words  be
rightly  nnderstood;  for  by  the  larger  vessels,  in  which  the
deficiency  is  said  to  cause  the  reflux,  I think  he  must  be
held  to  mean  the  veins  not  the  arteries;  for  the  arteries  ai'e
never  emptied,  save  into  the  veins  or  interstices  of  parts,
but  are  incessantly  filled  by  the  strokes  of  the  heart;  but  iu
the  vena  cava  and  other  returning  channels,  in  which  the  blood


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


97


glides  rapidly  on,  hastening  to  the  heart,  there  would  speedily
be  a great  deficieney  of  blood  did  not  every  part  incessantly
restore  the  blood  that  is  incessantly  poured  into  it.  Add  to
this,  that  by  the  impulse  of  the  blood  which  is  forced  with
each  stroke  into  every  part  of  the  second  and  third  regions,
that  which  is  contained  in  the  pores  or  interstices  is  urged  into
the  smaller  veins,  from  which  it  passes  into  larger  vessels,  its
motion  assisted  besides  by  the  motion  and  pressure  of  circum-
jacent parts ; for  from  every  containing  thing  compressed  and
constringed,  contained  matters  are  forced  out.  And  thus  it  is
that  by  the  motions  of  the  muscles  and  extremities,  the  blood
contained  in  the  minor  vessels  is  forced  onwards  and  delivered
into  the  larger  trunks.  But  that  the  blood  is  incessantly
driven  from  the  arteries  into  every  part  of  the  bodj',  there  gives
a pulse  and  never  flows  back  in  these  channels,  cannot  be
doubted,  if  it  he  admitted  that  with  each  pulse  of  the  heart  all
the  arteries  are  simultaneously  distended  by  the  blood  sent  into
them ; and  as  our  learned  author  himself  allows  that  the  diastole
of  the  arteries  is  occasioned  by  the  systole  of  the  heart,  and
that  the  blood  once  out  of  the  heart  can  never  get  hack  into
the  ventricles  by  reason  of  the  opposing  valves;  if  I say,  our
learned  author  believes  that  these  things  are  so,  it  will  be  as
manifestly  true  with  regard  to  the  force  and  impulse  by  which
the  blood  contained  in  the  vessels  is  propelled  into  every  part  of
every  region  of  the  body.  For  wheresoever  the  arteries  pulsate,
so  far  must  the  impulse  and  influx  extend,  and  therefore  is  the
impulse  felt  in  every  part  of  each  several  region;  for  there  is
a pulse  everywhere,  to  the  very  points  of  the  fingers  and  under
the  nails,  nor  is  there  any  part  of  the  body  where  the  shooting
pain  that  accompanies  each  pulse  of  the  artery,  and  the  effort
made  to  effect  a solution  of  the  continuity  is  not  experienced
when  it  is  the  seat  of  a phlegmon  or  furuncle.

But,  further,  that  the  blood  contained  in  the  pores  of  the
living  tissues  returns  to  the  heart,  is  manifest  from  what  we  ob-
serve in  the  hands  and  feet.  For  we  frequently  see  the  hands
and  feet,  in  young  persons  especially,  during  severe  weathei’,  be-
come so  cold  that  to  the  touch  they  feel  like  ice,  and  they  are
so  benumbed  and  stiffened  that  they  seem  scarcely  to  retain  a
trace  of  sensibility  or  to  be  capable  of  any  motion;  still  are  they
all  the  while  surcharged  with  blood,  and  look  red  or  livid.  Yet

7


98


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


can  the  extremities  be  warmed  in  no  way,  save  by  circulation;
the  chilled  blood,  which  has  lost  its  spirit  and  heat,  being  driven
out,  and  fresh,  warm,  and  -\dvified  blood  flowing  in  by  the  arte-
ries in  its  stead,  which  fresh  blood  cherishes  and  warms  the  parts,
and  restores  to  them  sense  and  motion ; nor  could  the  extremities
be  restored  by  the  warmth  of  a fire  or  other  external  heat,  any
more  than  those  of  a dead  body  could  be  so  recovered : they  are
only  brought  to  life  again,  as  it  were,  by  an  influx  of  internal
warmth.  And  this  indeed  is  the  principal  use  and  end  of  the
circulation ; it  is  that  for  which  the  blood  is  sent  on  its  cease-
less course,  and  to  exert  its  influence  continually  in  its  circuit,
to  wit,  that  all  parts  dependent  on  the  primary  innate  heat  may
be  retained  alive,  in  their  state  of  vital  and  vegetative  being,  and
apt  to  perform  their  functions;  whilst,  to  use  the  language  of
physiologists,  they  are  sustained  and  actuated  by  the  inflowing
heat  and  vital  spirits.  Thus,  by  the  aid  of  two  extremes,  riz.
cold  and  heat,  is  the  temperature  of  the  animal  body  retained
at  its  mean.  For  as  the  air  inspired  tempers  the  too  great
heat  of  the  blood  in  the  lungs  and  centre  of  the  body,  and  effects
the  expulsion  of  suffocating  fumes,  so  in  its  tmrn  does  the  hot
blood,  thrown  by  the  arteries  into  all  parts  of  the  body,  cherish
and  nourish  and  keep  them  in  life,  defending  them  from  ex-
tinction through  the  power  of  external  cold.

It  would,  therefore,  be  in  some  sort  unfair  and  extraordinary
did  not  every  particle  composing  the  body  enjoy  the  advantages
of  the  circulation  and  transmutation  of  the  blood ; the  ends  for
which  the  circulation  was  mainly  established  by  nature  would
no  longer  be  effected.  To  conclude  then:  you  see  how  cii’-
culation  may  be  accomplished  without  confusion  or  admixture
of  humours,  through  the  whole  body,  and  each  of  its  indivi-
dual parts,  in  the  smaller  as  well  as  in  the  larger  vessels ; and
all  as  matter  of  necessity  and  for  the  general  advantage;  with-
out circulation,  indeed,  there  would  be  no  restoration  of  chilled
and  exhausted  parts,  no  continuance  of  these  in  life ; since  it  is
apparent  enough  that  the  whole  influence  of  the  preseiwative
heat  comes  by  the  arteries,  and  is  the  work  of  the  cii'culation.

It,  therefore,  appeal's  to  me  that  the  learned  Eiolanus  speaks
rather  expediently  than  truly,  when  in  his  Enchiridion  he  denies
a circulation  to  certain  parts ; it  would  seem  as  though  he  had
wished  to  please  the  mass,  and  oppose  none;  to  have  wi'itten  with


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


99


such  a bias  rather  than  rigidly  and  in  behalf  of  the  simple  truth.
This  is  also  apparent  when  he  would  have  the  blood  to  make  its
way  into  the  left  ventricle  through  the  septum  of  the  heart,  by
certain  invisible  and  unknown  passages,  rather  than  through
those  ample  and  abundantly  pervious  channels,  the  pulmonary
vessels,  furnished  with  valves,  opposing  aU  reflux  or  regurgitation.
He  informs  us  that  he  has  elsewhere  discussed  the  reasons  of
the  impossibility  or  inconvenience  of  this  : I much  desire  to  see
his  disquisition.  It  would  be  extraordinary,  indeed,  were  the
aorta  and  pulmonary  artery,  with  the  same  dimensions,  proper-
ties, and  structure,  not  to  have  the  same  functions.  But  it
would  be  more  wonderful  still  were  the  whole  tide  of  the  blood
to  reach  the  left  ventricle  by  a set  of  inscrutable  passages  of  the
septum,  a tide  which,  in  quantity  must  correspond,  first  to  the
influx  from  the  vena  cava  into  the  right  side  of  the  heart,
and  next  to  the  efflux  from  the  left,  both  of  which  require  such
ample  conduits.  But  our  author  has  adduced  these  matters
inconsistently,  for  he  has  established  the  lungs  as  an  emunctory
or  passage  from  the  heart  and  he  says : The  lung  is  affected

by  the  blood  which  passes  through  it,  the  sordes  flowing  along
with  the  blood.^^  And,  again  : “ The  lungs  receive  injury  from
distempered  and  ill-conditioned  viscera;  these  deliver  an  impure
blood  to  the  heart,  which  it  cannot  correct  except  by  multiplied
circulations.^^  In  the  same  place,  he  further  proceeds,  whilst
speaking  against  Galen  of  bloodletting  in  peripneumonia  and
the  communication  of  the  veins  : Were  it  true  that  the  blood

naturally  passed  from  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  to  the
lungs,  that  it  might  be  carried  into  the  left  ventricle  and  from
thence  into  the  aorta;  and  were  the  circulation  of  the  blood
admitted,  who  does  not  see  that  in  affections  of  the  lungs  the
blood  would  flow  to  them  in  larger  quantity  and  would  oppress
them,  unless  it  were  taken  away,  first,  freely,  and  then  in  re-
peated smaller  quantities  in  order  to  relieve  them,  which  indeed
was  the  advice  of  Hippocrates,  who,  in  affections  of  the  lungs
takes  away  blood  from  every  part — the  head,  nose,  tongue,
arms  and  feet,  in  order  that  its  quantity  may  be  diminished
and  a diversion  effected  from  the  lungs ; he  takes  away  blood
till  the  bodj"-  is  almost  bloodless.  Now  admitting  the  circu-


' Lib.  iii,  cap.  G.


100


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


lation,  the  lungs  are  most  readily  depleted  by  opening  a vein ;
but  rejecting  it^  1 do  not  see  bow  any  revulsion  of  the  blood
can  be  accomplished  by  this  means ; for  did  it  flow  back  by  the
pulmonary  artery  upon  the  right  ventricle,  the  sigmoid  valves
would  oppose  its  entrance,  and  any  escape  from  the  right  ven-
tricle into  the  vena  cava  is  prevented  by  the  tricuspid  valves.
The  blood,  therefore,  is  soon  exhausted  when  a vein  is  opened
in  the  arm  or  foot,  if  we  admit  the  cumulation ; and  the  opinion
of  Fernelius  is  at  the  same  time  upset  by  this  admission,  viz.
that  in  aftections  of  the  lungs  it  is  better  to  bleed  from  the
right  than  the  left  arm;  because  the  blood  cannot  flow  back-
wards into  the  vena  cava  unless  the  two  barriers  situated  in
the  heart  be  first  broken  down.^^

He  adds  yet  further  in  the  same  place  “ If  the  circulation
of  the  blood  be  admitted,  and  it  be  acknowledged  that  this  fluid
generally  passes  through  the  lungs,  not  through  the  middle  par-
tition of  the  heart,  a double  circulation  becomes  requisite;  one
effected  through  the  lungs,  in  the  course  of  which  the  blood
quitting  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  passes  through  the
lungs  in  order  that  it  may  arrive  at  the  left  ventricle;  leaHng
the  heart  on  the  one  hand,  therefore,  the  blood  speedily  returns
to  it  again;  another  and  longer  circidation  proceeding  from  the
left  ventricle  of  the  heart  performs  the  circuit  of  the  whole  body
by  the  arteries,  and  by  the  veins  returns  to  the  right  side  of
the  heart.”

The  learned  anatomist  might  here  have  added  a third  and
extremely  short  cii’culation,  viz. — from  the  left  to  the  right
ventricle  of  the  heart,  with  that  blood  which  com’ses  thi’ough
the  coronary  arteries  and  veins,  and  by  their  ramifications  is
distributed  to  the  body,  walls,  and  septum  of  the  heart.

He  who  admits  one  cumulation,”  proceeds  our  author,  '“'can-
not repudiate  the  other ;”  and  he  might,  as  it  appears,  have
added,  “the  third.”  For  why  should  the  coronary  arteries  of
the  heart  prdsate,  if  it  were  not  to  force  on  the  blood  by  their
piilsations  ? and  why  should  there  be  coronary  veins,  the  end
and  office  of  all  veins  being  to  receive  the  blood  brought  by  the
arteries,  were  it  not  to  deliver  and  discharge  the  blood  sent
into  the  substance  of  the  heart?  In  this  consideration  let  it


' Lib.  iii,  cap.  6.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


101


be  remembered  that  a valve  is  very  commonly  found  at  the
orifice  of  the  coronary  vein,  as  our  learned  author  himself  ad-
mits,i preventing  all  ingress,  but  offering  no  obstacle  to  the
egress  of  the  blood.  It  therefore  seems  that  he  cannot  do
otherwise  than  admit  this  third  circulation,  who  acknowledges
a general  circulation  through  the  body,  and  that  the  blood  also
passes  through  the  lungs  and  the  brain.2  Nor,  indeed,  can  he
deny  a similar  circulation  to  every  other  part  of  every  other
region.  The  blood  flowing  in  under  the  influence  of  the  arte-
rial pulse,  and  returning  by  the  veins,  every  particle  of  the
body  has  its  circiilation.

From  the  words  of  our  learned  writer  quoted  above,  conse-
quently, his  opinion  may  be  gathered  both  of  the  general  cir-
culation, and  then  of  the  circulation  through  the  Imigs  and  the
several  parts  of  the  body ; for  he  who  admits  the  first,  manifestly
cannot  refuse  to  acknowledge  the  others.  How  indeed  could
he  who  has  repeatedly  asserted  a circulation  through  the  gene-
ral system  and  the  greater  vessels,  deny  a circulation  in  the
branches  continuous  with  these  vessels,  or  in  the  several  parts
of  the  second  and  third  regions  ? as  if  all  the  veins,  and  those
he  calls  greater  circulatory  vessels,  were  not  enumerated  by
every  anatomist,  and  by  himself,  as  being  within  the  second
region  of  the  body.  Is  it  possible  that  there  can  be  a circula-
tion which  is  universal,  and  which  yet  does  not  extend  through
every  part  ? Where  he  denies  it,  then,  he  does  so  hesitatingly,
and  vaccdlates  between  negations,  giving  us  mere  words.  Where
he  asserts  the  circulation,  on  the  contrary,  he  speaks  out  heartily,
and  gives  sufficient  reasons,  as  becomes  a philosopher ; and  then,
when  he  relies  on  this  opinion  in  a particular  instance,  he  de-
livers himselflike  an  experienced  physician  and  honest  man,  and,
in  opposition  to  Galen  and  his  favorite  Fernehus,  advises  blood-
letting as  the  chief  remedy  in  dangerous  diseases  of  the  lungs.

No  learned  man  and  Christian,  haring  doubts  in  such  a case,
would  have  recommended  his  experience  to  posterity,  to  the
imminent  risk,  and  even  loss  of  human  life  3 neither  would  he
without  very  sufiicient  reasons,  have  repudiated  the  authority
of  Galen  and  Fernelius,  which  has  usually  such  weight  with


' Lib.  iii,  cap.  9.


^ Lil).  iv.  cap.  2.


102


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


him.  Whatever  he  has  denied  in  the  circulation  of  the  blood,
therefore,  whether  with  reference  to  the  mesentery  or  any  other
part,  and  with  an  eye  to  the  lacteal  veins  or  the  ancient  system
of  physic,  or  any  other  consideration,  must  be  ascribed  to  his
courtesy  and  modesty,  and  is  to  be  excused.

Thus  far,  I think,  it  appears  plain  enough,  from  the  very
words  and  arguments  of  our  author,  that  there  is  a cii’culation
everywhere ; that  the  blood,  wherever  it  is,  changes  its  place,
and  by  the  veins  returns  to  the  heart ; so  that  om’  learned
author  seems  to  be  of  the  same  opinion  as  myself.  It  would
therefore  be  labour  in  vain,  did  I here  quote  at  greater  length
the  various  reasons  which  I have  consigned  in  my  work  on
the  Motion  of  the  Blood,  in  confii’mation  of  my  opiruons,  and
which  are  derived  from  the  structure  of  the  vessels,  the  position
of  the  valves,  and  other  matters  of  experience  and  obseiwation ;
and  this  the  more,  as  I have  not  yet  seen  the  treatise  on  the
Circulation  of  the  Blood  of  the  learned  writer ; nor,  indeed,
have  I yet  met  with  a single  argument  of  his,  or  more  than
his  simj)le  negation,  which  would  lead  me  to  see  wherefore  he
should  reject  a circidation  which  he  admits  as  universal,  in
certain  pai’ts,  regions,  and  vessels.

It  is  true  that  by  way  of  subterfuge  he  has  recourse  to  an
anastomosis  of  the  vessels  on  the  authority  of  Galen,  and  the
evidence  of  daily  experience.  But  so  distinguished  a person-
age, an  anatomist  so  expert,  so  inquisitive,  and  cai’eful,  should
first  have  shown  anastomoses  between  the  lai’ger  aideries  and
larger  veins,  and  these,  both  obrtous  and  ample,  hartng
mouths  in  relation  with  such  a torrent  as  is  constituted  by  the
whole  mass  of  the  blood,  and  larger  than  the  capacity  of  the
continuous  branches,  (from  which  he  takes  away  all  cu’culation,)
before  he  had  rejected  those  that  are  familiarly  known,  that
are  more  hkely  and  more  open  ; he  ought  to  have  clearly  shown
us  where  these  anastomoses  are,  and  how  they  ar-e  fashioned,
whether  they  be  adapted  only  to  permit  the  access  of  the  blood
into  the  veins,  and  not  to  allow  of  its  regru’gitatiou,  in  the
same  way  as  we  see  the  ureters  connected  with  the  urinary
bladder,  or  in  rvhat  other  manrrer  things  are  contrived.  Birt
— and  here  I speak  over  boldly  perhaps — neither  our  leai'ned
airthor  himself,  nor  Galerr,  rror  any  experience,  has  ever  sue-


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


103


ceeded  in  making  such  anastomoses  as  he  imagines^  sensible  to
the  eye.

I have  myself  pursued  this  subject  of  the  anastomosis  with
all  the  diligence  I could  command^  and  have  given  not  a little
both  of  time  and  labour  to  the  inquiry ; but  I have  never  sue-
ceeded  in  tracing  any  connexion  between  arteries  and  veins  by
a direct  anastomosis  of  their  orifiees.  I would  gladly  learn  of
those  who  give  so  much  to  Galen,  how  they  dare  swear  to
what  he  says.  Neither  in  the  liver,  spleen,  lungs,  kidneys,  nor
any  other  viseus,  is  such  a thing  as  an  anastomosis  to  be  seen ;
and  by  boiling,  I have  rendered  the  whole  parenchyma  of  these
organs  so  friable  that  it  could  be  shaken  like  dust  from  the
fibres,  or  pieked  away  with  a needle,  until  I could  trace  the
fibres  of  every  subdivision,  and  see  every  capillary  filament
distinctly.  I can  therefore  boldly  affirm,  that  there  is  neither
any  anastomosis  of  the  vena  portae  with  the  cava,  of  the  arteries
with  the  veins,  or  of  the  capillary  ramifications  of  the  biliary
ducts,  which  can  be  traced  through  the  entire  liver,  with  the
veins.  This  alone  may  be  observed  in  the  recent  liver  : all  the
branehes  of  the  vena  cava  ramifying  through  the  eonvexity  of
the  liver,  have  their  tunics  pierced  with  an  infinity  of  minute
holes,  as  is  a sieve,  and  are  fashioned  to  receive  the  blood  in  its
descent.  The  branches  of  the  porta  are  not  so  constituted,  but
simply  spread  out  in  subdmsions ; and  the  distribution  of  these
two  vessels  is  such,  that  whilst  the  one  runs  upon  the  con-
vexity, the  other  proceeds  along  the  concavity  of  the  liver  to
its  outer  margin,  and  all  the  while  without  anastomosing.

In  three  places  only  do  I find  anything  that  can  be  held
equivalent  to  an  anastomosis.  From  the  carotids,  as  they  are
creeping  over  the  base  of  the  brain,  numerous  interlaced  fibres
arise,  which  afterwards  form  the  choroid  plexus,  and  passing
thi’ough  the  lateral  ventricles,  finally  unite  and  terminate  in
the  third  sinus,  which  performs  the  office  of  a vein.  In  the
spermatic  vessels,  commonly  called  vasa  praeparantia,  certain
minute  arteries  proceeding  from  the  great  artery  adhere  to
the  venae  praeparantes,  which  they  accompany,  and  are  at  length
taken  in  and  included  within  their  coats,  in  such  a way  that
they  seem  to  have  a common  ending,  so  that  where  they  ter-
minate on  the  upper  portion  of  the  testis,  on  that  cone-shaped


104


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


process  called  the  corpus  varicosum  et  pampiniforme,  it  is  alto-
gether uncertain  whether  we  are  to  regard  their  terminations
as  veins,  or  as  arteries,  or  as  both.  In  the  same  way  are  the
ultimate  ramifications  of  the  arteries  which  run  to  the  umbili-
cal vein,  lost  in  the  tunics  of  this  vessel.

What  doubt  can  there  be,  if  by  such  channels  the  great
arteries,  distended  by  the  stream  of  blood  sent  into  them,  are
relieved  of  so  great  and  obvious  a torrent,  but  that  nature
w'ould  not  haA^e  denied  distinct  and  Ausible  passages,  vortices,
and  estuaries,  had  she  intended  to  divert  the  whole  current  of
the  blood,  and  had  Avished  in  this  way  to  deprive  the  lesser
branches  and  the  solid  parts  of  aU  the  benefit  of  the  influx  of
that  fluid?

Finally,  I shall  quote  this  single  experiment,  which  appears
to  me  sufficient  to  clear  up  all  doubts  about  the  anastomoses,
and  their  uses,  if  any  exist,  and  to  set  at  rest  the  question  of
a passage  of  the  blood  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries,  by  any
special  channels,  or  by  regurgitation.

Having  laid  open  the  thorax  of  an  animal,  and  tied  the  vena
cava  near  the  heart,  so  that  nothing  shall  pass  from  that  vessel
into  its  caAities,  and  immediately  afterwai’ds,  having  diAided
the  carotid  arteries  on  both  sides,  the  jugular  veins  being  left  un-
tonched ; if  the  arteries  be  now  perceried  to  become  empty  but
not  the  veins,  I think  it  AviU  be  manifest  that  the  blood  does  no-
Avhere  pass  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries  except  through  the
ventricles  of  the  heart.  Were  it  not  so,  as  obserA'ed  by  Galen,
Ave  shonld  see  the  veins  as  well  as  the  arteries  emptied  in  a very
short  time,  by  the  efflux  from  then.’  corresponding  arteries.

For  what  fm’ther  remains,  oh  Riolanus  ! I congratulate  both
myself  and  you : myself,  for  the  opinion  with  which  you  have
graced  my  circulation  ; and  you,  for  youi’  learned,  polished,  and
terse  production,  than  which  nothing  more  elegant  can  be
imagined.  For  the  favour  you  have  done  me  in  sending  me
this  AA'ork,  I feel  most  grateful,  and  I would  gladly,  as  in  duty
bound,  proclaim  my  sense  of  its  merits,  but  I confess  myself
unequal  to  the  task ; for  I knoAV  that  the  Enchiiidion  bearing
the  name  of  Riolanus  inscribed  upon  it,  has  thereby  more  of
honour  conferred  upon  it  than  it  can  derive  from  any  praise  of
mine,  Avhich  nevertheless  I would  yield  Avithout  reserve.  The


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


105


famous  book  will  live  for  ever;  and  when  marble  shall  have
mouldered,  will  proclaim  to  posterity  the  glory  that  belongs  to
your  name.  You  have  most  happily  conjoined  anatomy  with
pathology,  and  have  greatly  enriched  the  subject  with  a new
and  most  useful  osteology.  Proceed  in  your  worthy  career,
most  illustrious  Biolanus,  and  love  him  who  wishes  that  you
may  enjoy  both  happiness  and  length  of  days,  and  that  all
your  admirable  works  may  conduce  to  your  eternal  fame.


William  Harvey.


SECOND  DISQUISITION  TO  JOHN  RIOLAN,  JUN.,

IN  WHICH


MANY  OBJECTIONS

TO  THE

CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD


ARE  REFUTED.


A SECOND  DISQUISITION  TO  JOHN  RIOLAN.


It  is  now  many  years^  most  learned  Riolanus,  since,  with
the  aid  of  the  press,  I published  a portion  of  my  work.  But
scarce  a day,  scarce  an  hour,  has  passed  since  the  birth-day  of
the  Circulation  of  the  blood,  that  I have  not  heard  something
for  good  or  for  evil  said  of  this  my  discovery.  Some  abuse  it
as  a feeble  infant,  and  yet  unworthy  to  have  seen  the  light ;
others,  again,  think  the  bantling  deserves  to  he  cherished  and
cared  for ; these  oppose  it  with  much  ado,  those  patronize  it  with
abundant  commendation;  one  party  holds  that  I have  com-
pletely demonstrated  the  circulation  of  the  blood  by  experiment,
observation,  and  ocular  inspection,  against  all  force  and  array  of
argument ; another  thinks  it  scarcely  yet  sufficiently  illustrated
— not  yet  cleared  of  aU  objections.  There  are  some,  too,  who
say  that  I have  shown  a vainglorious  love  of  vivisections,  and
who  scoff  at  and  deride  the  introduction  of  frogs  and  serpents,
flies,  and  others  of  the  lower  animals  upon  the  scene,  as  a piece
of  puerile  levity,  not  even  refraining  from  opprobrious  epithets.

To  return  evil  speaking  with  evil  speaking,  however,  I hold
to  be  unworthy  in  a philosopher  and  searcher  after  truth ; I
believe  that  I shall  do  better  and  more  advisedly  if  I meet  so
many  indications  of  ill  breeding  with  the  light  of  faithful  and
conclusive  observation.  It  cannot  be  helped  that  dogs  bark
and  vomit  their  foul  stomachs,  or  that  cynics  should  be  num-
bered among  philosophers  ; but  care  can  be  taken  that  they  do
not  bite  or  inoculate  their  mad  humours,  or  with  their  dogs^
teeth  gnaw  the  bones  and  foundations  of  truth.

Detractors,  mummers,  and  writers  defiled  with  abuse,  as  I
resolved  with  myself  never  to  read  them,  satisfied  that  nothing


110


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


solid  or  excellent,  nothing  but  foul  terms,  was  to  be  expected
from  them,  so  bave  I beld  tbem  still  less  worthy  of  an  answer.
Let  tbem  consume  on  their  own  ill  nature ; they  will  scarcely
find  many  well-disposed  readers,  I imagine,  nor  does  God  give
that  Avhich  is  most  excellent  and  chiefly  to  he  desired — ^wisdom,
to  the  wicked;  let  them  go  on  raihng,  I say,  until  they  are
weary,  if  not  ashamed.

If  for  the  sake  of  studying  the  meaner  animals  you  should
even  enter  the  bakehouse  with  Heraclitus,  as  related  in  Aris-
totle, I bid  you  approach;  for  neither  are  the  immortal  Gods
absent  here,  and  the  great  and  almighty  Father  is  sometimes
most  visible  in  His  lesser,  and  to  the  eye  least  considerable
works,  1

In  my  book  on  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood  in  Animals,
I have  only  adduced  those  facts  from  among  many  other  obser-
vations, by  which  either  errors  were  best  refuted,  or  truth  was
most  strongly  supported ; I have  left  many  proofs,  won  by
dissection  and  appreciable  to  sense,  as  redundant  and  unneces-
sary ; some  of  these,  however,  I now  supply  in  brief  terms,
for  the  sake  of  the  studious,  and  those  who  have  expressed
their  desire  to  have  them.

The  authority  of  Galen  is  of  such  weight  with  all,  that  I
have  seen  several  hesitate  greatly  with  that  experiment  before
them,  in  which  the  artery  is  tied  upon  a tube  placed  within  its
cavity ; and  by  which  it  is  proposed  to  prove  that  the  arterial
pulse  is  produced  by  a power  communicated  from  the  heart
through  the  coats  of  the  artenes,  and  not  from  the  shock  of  the
blood  contained  within  them  ; and  thence,  that  the  arteries  dilate
as  bellows,  are  not  filled  as  sacs.  This  experiment  is  spoken  of
by  Vesalius,  the  celebrated  anatomist;  but  neither  Yesahus  nor
Galen  says  that  he  had  tried  the  experiment,  which,  however,
I did.  A^esalius  only  prescribes,  and  Galen  advises  it,  to  those
anxious  to  discover  the  truth,  and  for  their  better  assurance,  not
thinking  of  the  difficulties  that  attend  its  performance,  nor  of
its  futility  when  done ; for  indeed,  although  executed  with  the
greatest  skill,  it  supplies  nothing  in  support  of  the  opinion  which

' [To  lliose  who  hesitated  to  visit  him  in  his  kiln  or  bakehouse  ('iwi’o),  which  some
have  said  should  be  'i-wui,  rendered  a dunghill)  Heraclitus  addressed  the  words  in
the  text.  Aristotle,  who  quotes  them,  has  been  defending  the  sriidy  of  the  lower
animals. — Ed.]


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


Ill


maintains  that  the  coats  of  the  vessel  are  the  cause  of  the  pulse ;
it  much  rather  proclaims  that  this  is  owing  to  the  impulse  of  the
blood.  For  the  moment  you  have  thrown  your  ligature  around
the  artery  upon  the  reed  or  tube,  immediately,  by  the  force  of
the  blood  thrown  in  from  above,  it  is  dilated  beyond  the  circle
of  the  tube,  by  which  the  flow  is  impeded,  and  the  shock  is
broken ; so  that  the  artery  which  is  tied  only  pulsates  obscurely,
being  now  cut  off  from  the  full  force  of  the  blood  that  flows
through  it,  the  shock  being  reverberated,  as  it  were,  from  that
part  of  the  vessel  which  is  above  the  ligature ; but  if  the  artery
below  the  ligature  be  now  dmded,  the  contrary  of  what  has  been
maintained  will  be  apparent,  from  the  spurting  of  the  blood
impelled  through  the  tube;  just  as  happens  in  the  cases  of
aneurism,  referred  to  in  my  book  on  the  Motion  of  the  Blood,
which  arise  from  an  erosion  of  the  coats  of  the  vessel,  and
when  the  blood  is  contained  in  a membranous  sac,  formed  not
by  the  coats  of  the  vessel  dilated,  but  preternaturally  produced
from  the  surrounding  tissues  and  flesh.  The  arteries  beyond
an  aneurism  of  this  kind  will  be  felt  beating  very  feebly,
whilst  in  those  above  it  and  in  the  swelhng  itself  the  pulse  will
be  perceived  of  great  strength  and  fulness.  And  here  we  can-
not imagine  that  the  pulsation  and  dilatation  take  place  by  the
coats  of  the  arteries,  or  any  power  communicated  to  the  walls
of  the  sac ; they  are  plainly  due  to  the  shock  of  the  blood.

But  that  the  error  of  Vesalius,  and  the  inexperience  of  those
who  assert  their  belief  that  the  part  below  the  tube  does  not
pulsate  when  the  ligature  is  tied,  may  be  made  the  more  appa-
rent, I can  state,  after  ha\dng  made  the  trial,  that  the  inferior
part  will  continue  to  pulsate  if  the  experiment  be  properly  per-
formed ; and  whilst  they  say  that  when  you  have  undone  the
ligature  the  inferior  arteries  begin  again  to  pulsate,  I maintain
that  the  part  below  beats  less  forcibly  when  the  ligature  is
untied  than  it  did  when  the  thread  was  still  tight.  But  the
effusion  of  blood  from  the  wound  confuses  everything,  and  ren-
ders the  whole  experiment  unsatisfactory  and  nugatory,  so  that
nothing  certain  can  be  shown,  by  reason,  as  I have  said,  of  the
hemorrhage.  But  if,  as  I know  by  experience,  you  lay  bare
an  artery,  and  control  the  dmded  portion  by  the  pressure  of
your  fingers,  you  may  try  many  things  at  pleasure  by  which
the  truth  will  be  made  to  appear.  In  the  first  place,  you  will


112


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


feel  tlie  blood  coming  down  in  the  arterj’-  at  each  pulsation,  and
visibly  dilating  the  vessel.  You  may  also  at  will  suffer  the
blood  to  escape,  by  relaxing  the  pressure,  and  leaving  a small
outlet ; and  you  will  see  that  it  jets  out  with  each  stroke,  with
each  contraction  of  the  heart,  and  with  each  dilatation  of  the
artery,  as  I have  said  in  speaking  of  arteriotomy,  and  the  ex-
periment of  perforating  the  heart.  And  if  you  suffer  the  efflux
to  go  on  uninterruptedly,  either  from  the  simple  divided  artery
or  from  a tube  inserted  into  it,  you  will  be  able  to  perceive
by  the  sight,  and  if  you  apply  your  hand,  by  the  touch  likewise,
every  character  of  the  stroke  of  the  heart  in  the  jet ; the  rhythm,
order,  intermission,  force,  &c.,  of  its  pulsations,  all  becoming
sensible  there,  no  other^vdse  than  would  the  jets  from  a syringe,
pushed  in  succession  and  with  different  degrees  of  force,  received
upon  the  palm  of  the  hand,  be  obAuous  to  sight  and  touch.  I
have  occasionally  observed  the  jet  from  a dinded  carotid  artery
to  be  so  forcible,  that,  when  received  on  the  hand,  the  blood
rebounded  to  the  distance  of  four  or  five  feet.

But  that  the  question  under  discussion,  viz. — that  the  pul-
sific  power  does  not  proceed  from  the  heart  by  the  coats  of  the
vessels,  may  be  set  in  yet  a clearer  light,  I beg  here  to  refer  to
a portion  of  the  descending  aorta,  about  a span  in  length,  with
its  division  into  the  two  criu’al  trunks,  which  I removed  from
the  body  of  a nobleman,  and  which  is  converted  into  a bony
tube ; by  this  hollow  tube,  nevertheless,  did  the  arterial  blood
reach  the  lower  extremities  of  this  nobleman  during  his  life,
and  cause  the  arteries  in  these  to  beat ; and  yet  the  main  trunk
was  precisely  in  the  same  condition  as  is  the  artery  in  the  ex-
periment of  Galen,  when  it  is  tied  upon  a hollow  tube ; where
it  was  eonverted  into  bone  it  eould  neither  dilate  nor  con-
tract hke  bellows,  nor  transmit  the  pulsific  power  from  the  heart
to  the  inferior  vessels ; it  could  not  convey  a force  which  it  Avas
incapable  of  receiAung  through  the  sohd  matter  of  the  bone.  In
spite  of  all,  however,  I well  remember  to  have  frequently  noted
the  pulse  in  the  legs  and  feet  of  this  patient  whilst  he  hved,  for
I Avas  myself  his  most  attentive  physician,  and  he  my  very  par-
tieular  friend.  The  arteries  in  the  inferior  extremities  of  this
nobleman  must  therefore  and  of  necessity  have  been  dilated  by
the  impulse  of  the  blood  like  flaccid  sacs,  and  not  have  ex-
panded in  the  manner  of  bellows  through  the  action  of  their


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


113


tunics.  It  is  obvious,  that  whether  an  arteiy  be  tied  over  a
hollow  tube,  or  its  tunics  be  converted  into  a bony  and  un-
jdelding  canal,  the  interruption  to  the  pulsifie  power  in  the
inferior  part  of  the  vessel  must  be  the  same.

I have  known  another  instance  in  which  a portion  of  the
aorta  near  the  heart  was  found  converted  into  bone,  in  tbe  body
of  a nobleman,  a man  of  great  muscular  strength.  The  experi-
ment of  Galen,  therefore,  or,  at  all  events,  a state  analogous
to  it,  not  effected  on  purpose  but  encountered  by  accident,
makes  it  sufficiently  to  appear,  that  compression  or  ligature  of
the  coats  of  an  artery  does  not  interfere  with  the  pulsative
properties  of  its  derivative  branches ; and  indeed,  if  the  experi-
ment which  Galen  recommends  were  properly  performed  by  any
one,  its  results  would  be  found  in  opposition  to  the  views  which
Vesalius  beheved  they  would  support.

But  we  do  not  therefore  deny  everything  hke  motion  to  the
tunics  of  the  arteries ; on  the  contrary,  we  allow  them  the  same
motions  which  we  concede  to  the  heart,  viz.,  a diastole,  and  a
systole  or  return  from  the  distended  to  the  natural  state  ; this
much  we  believe  to  be  effected  by  a power  inherent  in  the  coats
themselves.  But  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  they  are  not  both
dilated  and  contracted  by  the  same,  but  by  different  causes  and
means ; as  may  be  observed  of  the  motions  of  all  parts,  and  of
the  ventricle  of  the  heart  itself,  which  is  distended  by  the
auricle,  contracted  by  its  own  inherent  power;  so,  the  arteries
are  dilated  by  the  stroke  of  the  heart,  but  they  contract  or
collapse  of  themselves. i

You  may  also  perform  another  experiment  at  the  same  time  :
if  you  fill  one  of  two  basins  of  the  same  size  with  blood  issuing
per  saltum  from  an  artery,  the  other  with  venous  blood  from  a
vein  of  the  same  animal,  you  will  have  an  opportunity  of  per-
ceiving by  the  eye,  both  immediately  and  by  and  by,  when  the
blood  in  either  vessel  has  become  cold,  what  differences  there
are  between  them.  You  will  find  that  it  is  not  as  they  beheve
who  fancy  that  there  is  one  kind  of  blood  in  tbe  arteries  and
another  in  the  veins,  that  in  the  artei’ies  being  of  a more  florid
colour,  more  frothy,  and  imbued  with  an  abundance  of  I know
not  what  spirits,  effervescing  and  swelling,  and  occupying  a


' Vide  Chapter  III,  of  the  Disquisition  on  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood,

8


114


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


greater  space,  like  milk  or  koney  set  upon  tke  fire.  For  vere
the  blood  which  is  thrown  from  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart
into  the  arteries,  fermented  into  any  such  frothy  and  flatulent
fluid,  so  that  a drop  or  two  distended  the  whole  cavity  of  the
aorta ; unquestionably,  upon  the  subsidence  of  this  fermenta-
tion, the  blood  would  return  to  its  original  quantity  of  a few
drops  j (and  this,  indeed,  is  the  reason  that  some  assign  for  the
usually  empty  state  of  the  arteries  in  the  dead  body  ;)  and  so
should  it  be  with  the  arterial  blood  in  the  cup,  for  so  it  is  with
boiling  milk  and  honey  when  they  come  to  cool.  But  if  in
either  basin  you  find  blood  nearly  of  the  same  colour,  not  of
very  difl'erent  consistency  in  the  coagulated  state,  forcing  out
serum  in  the  same  manner,  and  filling  the  cups  to  the  same
height  when  cold  that  it  did  when  hot,  this  will  he  enough
for  any  one  to  rest  his  faith  upon,  and  afford  argument  enough,
I think,  for  rejecting  the  dreams  that  have  been  promulgated
on  the  subject.  Sense  and  reason  alike  assure  us  that  the
blood  contained  in  the  left  ventricle  is  not  of  a different  natm’e
from  that  in  the  right.  And  then,  when  we  see  that  the  mouth
of  the  pulmonary  artery  is  of  the  same  size  as  the  aorta,  and
in  other  respects  equal  to  that  vessel,  it  were  imperative  on  us  to
affirm  that  the  pulmonary  artery  was  distended  by  a single  drop
of  spumous  blood,  as  well  as  the  aorta,  and  so  that  the  right
as  well  as  the  left  side  of  the  heart  was  filled  with  a brisk  or
fermenting  blood.

The  particulars  which  especially  dispose  men’s  minds  to
admit  diversity  in  the  arterial  and  venous  blood  are  three  in
number  : one,  because  in  arteriotomy  the  blood  that  flows  is  of
a more  florid  hue  than  that  Avhich  escapes  fi’om  a vein ; a second,
because  in  the  dissection  of  dead  bodies  the  left  ventricle  of
the  heart,  and  the  arteries  in  general,  are  mostly  found  empty;
a third,  because  the  arterial  blood  is  beheved  to  be  more  spi-
rituous, and  being  replete  with  spirit  is  made  to  occupy  a much
larger  space.  The  causes  and  reasons,  however,  wherefore  all
these  things  are  so,  present  themselves  to  us  when  we  ask  after
them.

1st.  With  reference  to  the  colour  it  is  to  be  observed,  that
wherever  the  blood  issues  by  a very  small  orifice,  it  is  in  some
measure  strained,  and  the  thinner  and  fighter  paid,  which  usu-
ally swims  on  the  top  and  is  the  most  penetrating,  is  emitted.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


115


Thus,  in  phlebotomy,  when  the  blood  escapes  forcibly  and  to  a
distance,  in  a fuU  stream,  and  from  a large  orifiee,  it  is  thicker,
has  more  body,  and  a darker  colour ; but,  if  it  flows  from  a
small  oriflce,  and  only  drop  by  drop,  as  it  usually  does  when
the  bleeding  fillet  is  untied,  it  is  of  a brighter  hue ; for  then
it  is  strained  as  it  were,  and  the  thinner  and  more  penetrating
portion  only  escapes;  in  the  same  way,  in  the  bleeding  from
the  nose,  in  that  which  takes  place  from  a leech-bite,  or  from
scarifications,  or  in  any  other  way  by  diapedesis  or  transuda-
tion, the  blood  is  always  seen  to  have  a brighter  cast,  because
the  thickness  and  firmness  of  the  coats  of  the  arteries  render
the  outlet  or  outlets  smaller,  and  less  disposed  to  yield  a ready
passage  to  the  outpouring  blood;  it  happens  also  that  when
fat  persons,  are  let  blood,  the  orifice  of  the  vein  is  apt  to  be
compressed  by  the  subcutaneous  fat,  by  which  the  blood  is
made  to  appear  thinner,  more  florid,  and  in  some  sort  arte-
rious.  On  the  other  hand,  the  blood  that  flows  into  a basin
from  a large  artery  freely  divided,  will  look  venous.  The  blood
in  the  lungs  is  of  a much  more  florid  colour  than  it  is  in  the
arteries,  and  we  know  how  it  is  strained  through  the  pulmonary
tissue.

2d.  The  emptiness  of  the  arteries  in  the  dead  body,  which  pro-
bably misled  Erasistratus  in  supposing  that  they  only  contained
aereal  spirits,  is  caused  by  this,  that  when  respiration  ceases  the
lungs  collapse,  and  then  the  passages  through  them  are  closed ;
the  heart,  however,  continues  for  a time  to  contract  upon  the
blood,  whence  we  find  the  left  auricle  more  contracted,  and  the
corresponding  ventricle,  as  well  as  the  arteries  at  large,  appearing
empty,  simply  because  there  is  no  supply  of  blood  flowing  round
to  fill  them.  In  cases,  however,  in  which  the  heart  has  ceased
to  pulsate  and  the  lungs  to  afford  a passage  to  the  blood  simul-
taneously, as  in  those  who  have  died  from  drowning  or  syncope,
or  who  die  suddenly,  you  will  find  the  arteries,  as  well  as  the
veins,  full  of  blood.

3d.  With  reference  to  the  third  point,  or  that  of  the  spirits,
it  may  be  said  that,  as  it  is  still  a question  what  they  are,
how  extant  in  the  body,  of  what  consistency,  whether  separate
and  distinct  from  the  blood  and  sobds,  or  mingled  with  these, —
upon  each  and  all  of  these  points  there  are  so  many  and  such
conflicting  opinions,  that  it  is  not  wonderful  that  the  spirits.


IIG


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


whose  nature  is  thus  left  so  wholly  ambiguous,  should  seire  as
the  common  subterfuge  of  ignorance.  Persons  of  limited  infor-
mation, when  they  are  at  a loss  to  assign  a cause  for  anything,
very  commonly  reply  that  it  is  done  by  the  spirits ; and  so  they
bring  the  spirits  into  play  upon  all  occasions ; even  as  indif-
ferent poets  are  always  thrusting  the  gods  upon  the  stage  as
a means  of  unravelling  the  plot,  and  bringing  about  the
catastrophe.

Fernelius,  and  many  others,  suppose  that  there  are  aereal
spirits  and  invisible  substances.  Fernelius  proves  that  there  are
animal  spirits,  by  saying  that  the  cells  in  the  brain  are  ap-
parently unoccupied,  and  as  nature  abhors  a vacuum,  he  con-
cludes that  in  the  living  body  they  are  filled  with  spirits,  just  as
Erasistratus  had  held  that,  because  the  arteries  were  empty  of
blood,  therefore  they  must  be  filled  with  spirits.  But  Aledical
Schools  admit  three  kinds  of  spirits  : the  natural  spiiits  flowing
through  the  veins,  the  -sfital  sphits  through  the  arteries,  and  the
animal  spirits  through  the  nen'es;  whence  physicians  say,  out
of  Galen,  that  sometimes  the  parts  of  the  brain  are  oppressed
by  sympathy,  because  the  faculty  with  the  essence,  i.  e.,  the
spirit,  is  overwhelmed ; and  sometimes  this  happens  inde-
pendently of  the  essence.  Farther,  besides  the  three  orders  of
influxive  spirits  adverted  to,  a like  number  of  implanted  or
stationary  spirits  seem  to  be  acknowledged ; but  we  have  found
none  of  all  these  spirits  by  dissection,  neither  in  the  veins,  nerves,
arteries,  nor  other  parts  of  living  animals.  Some  speak  of  cor-
poreal, others  of  incorporeal  spirits ; and  they  who  advocate
the  corporeal  spirits  will  have  the  blood,  or  the  thinner  por-
tion of  the  blood,  to  be  the  bond  of  union  with  the  soul,  the
spirit  being  contained  in  the  blood  as  the  flame  is  in  the  smoke
of  a lamp  or  candle,  and  held  admixed  by  the  incessant  motion
of  the  fluid ; others,  again,  distinguish  between  the  spirits  and
the  blood.  They  who  advocate  incorporeal  spirits  have  no
ground  of  experience  to  stand  upon;  their  spirits  indeed  are
synonymous  with  powers  or  faculties,  such  as  a concoctive
spirit,  a chylopoietic  spirit,  a procreative  spirit,  &c. — they  admit
as  many  spirits,  in  short,  as  there  are  facilities  or  organs.

But  then  the  schoolmen  speak  of  a spirit  of  fortitude,  pni-
dence,  patience,  and  the  other  virtues,  and  also  of  a most  holy
spirit  of  wisdom,  and  of  every  dirine  gift ; and  they  besides


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


117


suppose  that  there  are  good  and  evil  spirits  that  roam  about  or
possess  the  body,  that  assist  or  cast  obstacles  in  the  way.  They
hold  some  diseases  to  be  owing  to  a Cacodsemon  or  evil  spirit,
as  there  are  others  that  are  due  to  a cacochemy  or  defective
assimilation.

Although  there  is  nothing  more  uncertain  and  question-
able, then,  than  the  doctrine  of  spirits  that  is  proposed  to  ns,
nevertheless  physicians  seem  for  the  major  part  to  conclude,
with  Hippocrates,  that  our  body  is  composed  or  made  up  of
three  elements,  viz.,  containing  parts,  contained  parts,  and
causes  of  action,  spirits  being  understood  by  the  latter  term.
But  if  spirits  are  to  be  taken  as  synonymous  with  causes  of  ac-
tivity, whatever  has  power  in  the  li\dng  body  and  a faculty  of
action  must  be  included  under  the  denomination.  It  would
appear,  therefore,  that  all  spirits  were  neither  aereal  snb-
stances,  nor  powers,  nor  habits ; and  that  all  were  not  in-
corjjoreal.

But  keeping  in  view  the  points  that  especially  interest  us,
others,  as  leading  to  tediousness,  being  left  unnoticed,  it  seems
that  the  spirits  which  flow  by  the  veins  or  the  arteries  are  not
distinct  from  the  blood,  any  more  than  the  flame  of  a lamp  is
distinct  from  the  inflammable  vapour  that  is  on  fire ; in  short,
that  the  blood  and  these  spirits  signify  one  and  the  same  thing,
though  dilFerent, — like  generous  udne  and  its  spii'it;  for  as
wine,  when  it  has  lost  all  its  spirit,  is  no  longer  wine,  but  a
vapid  liquor  or  vinegar ; so  blood  without  spirit  is  not  blood,  but
something  else — clot  or  cruor ; even  as  a hand  of  stone,  or  of  a
dead  body,  is  no  hand  in  the  most  complete  sense,  neither  is
blood  void  of  the  vital  principle  proper  blood ; it  is  immediately
to  be  held  as  corrupt  when  deprived  of  its  spirit.  The  spirit
therefore  which  inheres  in  the  arteries,  and  especially  in  the
blood  which  fills  them,  is  to  be  regarded  either  as  its  act  or
agent,  in  the  same  way  as  the  spirit  of  wine  in  wine,  and  the
spirit  of  aqua  vitae  in  brandy,  or  as  a flame  kindled  in  alcohol,
which  lives  and  feeds  on,  or  is  nourished  by  itself.  The  blood  con-
sequently, though  richly  imbued  with  spirits,  does  not  swell,  nor
ferment,  nor  rise  to  a head  through  them,  so  as  to  require  and
occupj^  a larger  space, — a fact  that  may  be  ascertained  beyond
the  possibility  of  question  by  the  two  cups  of  equal  size ; it  is
to  be  regarded  as  wine,  possessed  of  a large  amount  of  spirits.


118


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


or^  in  the  Hippocratic  sense,  of  signal  powers  of  acting  and
effecting.

It  is  therefore  the  same  blood  in  the  arteries  that  is  found
in  the  veins,  although  it  may  be  admitted  to  be  more  spirituous,
possessed  of  higher  vital  force  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter ;
but  it  is  not  changed  into  anything  more  vaporous,  or  more
aereal,  as  if  there  were  no  spirits  but  such  as  are  aereal,  and
no  cause  of  action  or  activity  that  is  not  of  the  nature  of  flatus
or  wind.  But  neither  the  animal,  natural,  nor  Htal  spirits
w'hich  inhere  in  the  sohds,  such  as  the  ligaments  and  nerves
(especially  if  they  be  of  so  many  different  species),  and  are
contained  within  the  viewless  interstices  of  the  tissues,  are
to  be  regarded  as  so  many  different  aereal  forms,  or  kinds  of
vapour.

And  here  I would  gladly  he  informed  by  those  who  admit
corporeal  spirits,  but  of  a gaseous  or  vaporous  consistency,  in
the  bodies  of  animals,  whether  or  not  they  have  the  power  of
passing  hither  and  thither,  like  distinct  bodies  independently
of  the  blood  ? Or  whether  the  spirits  follow  the  blood  in  its
motions,  either  as  integral  parts  of  the  fluid  or  as  indissolubly
connected  with  it,  so  that  they  can  neither  quit  the  tissues  nor
pass  hither  nor  thither  without  the  influx  and  reflux,  and
motion  of  the  blood?  For  if  the  spirits  exhaling  from  the
blood,  like  the  vapour  of  water  attenuated  by  heat,  exist  in  a
state  of  constant  flow  and  succession  as  the  pabulum  of  the  tis-
sues, it  necessarily  follows  that  they  are  not  distinct  from  this
pabulum,  but  are  incessantly  disappearing ; whereby  it  seems
that  they  can  neither  have  influx  nor  reflux,  nor  passage,  nor  yet
remain  at  rest  without  the  influx,  the  reflux,  the  passage  [or
stasis]  of  the  blood,  which  is  the  fluid  that  seiwes  as  their  vehicle
or  pabulum.

And  next  I desfre  to  know  of  those  who  tell  us  that  the  spu’its
are  formed  in  the  heai’t,  being  compounded  of  the  vapours  or
exhalations  of  the  blood  (excited  either  by  the  heat  of  the  heart
or  the  concussion)  and  the  inspired  air,  whether  such  spirits  are
not  to  be  accounted  much  colder  than  the  blood,  seeing  that
both  the  elements  of  their  composition,  namely,  air  and  vapour',
are  much  colder?  For  the  vapour  of  boiling  water  is  much
more  bearable  tharr  the  water  itself } the  flame  of  a caudle  is
less  burning  than  the  red-hot  snuff,  and  bmiring  char’coal  than


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


119


incandescent  iron  or  brass.  Whence  it  would  appear  that  spirits
of  this  nature  rather  receive  their  heat  from  the  blood,  than  that
the  blood  is  warmed  by  these  spirits ; such  spirits  are  rather  to
be  regarded  as  fumes  and  excrementitious  effluvia  proceeding
from  the  body  in  the  manner  of  odom’s,  than  in  any  way  as
natural  artificers  of  the  tissues  ; a conclusion  which  we  are  the
more  disposed  to  admit,  when  we  see  that  they  so  speedily  lose
any  virtue  they  may  possess,  and  which  they  had  derived  from
the  blood  as  their  source, — they  are  at  best  of  a very  frail  and
evanescent  nature.  Whence  also  it  becomes  probable  that  the
expiration  of  the  lungs  is  a means  by  which  these  vapours  being
cast  off,  the  blood  is  fanned  and  purified ; whilst  inspiration  is
a means  by  which  the  blood  in  its  passage  between  the  two
ventricles  of  the  heart  is  tempered  by  the  cold  of  the  ambient
atmosphere,  lest,  getting  heated,  and  blown  up  with  a kind  of
fermentation,  like  milk  or  honey  set  over  the  fire,  it  should  so
distend  the  lungs  that  the  animal  got  suffocated ; somewhat  in
the  sameway,  perchance,  as  one  labouring  under  a severe  asthma,
which  Galen  himself  seems  to  refer  to  its  proper  cause  when
he  says  it  is  owing  to  an  obstruction  of  the  smaller  arteries,
viz.,  the  vasa  venosa  et  arteriosa.  And  I have  found  by  ex-
perience that  patients  affected  with  asthma  might  be  brought
out  of  states  of  very  imminent  danger  by  having  cupping-glasses
applied,  and  a plentiful  and  sudden  affusion  of  cold  water  [upon
the  chest] . Thus  much — and  perhaps  it  is  more  than  was  ne-
cessary— have  I said  on  the  subject  of  spirits  in  tbis  place,  for
I felt  it  proper  to  define  them,  and  to  say  something  of  their
nature  in  a physiological  disquisition.

I shall  only  further  add,  that  they  who  descant  on  the  cali-
dum  innatum  or  innate  heat,  as  an  instrument  of  nature  avail-
able for  every  purpose,  and  who  speak  of  the  necessity  of  heat  as
the  cherisher  and  retainer  in  life  of  the  several  parts  of  the  body,
who  at  the  same  time  admit  that  this  heat  cannot  exist  unless
connected  with  something,  and  because  they  find  no  substance  of
anything  like  commensurate  mobihty,  or  which  might  keep
pace  with  the  rapid  influx  and  reflux  of  this  heat  (in  affections
of  the  mind  especially),  take  refuge  in  spirits  as  most  subtile
substances,  possessed  of  the  most  penetrating  qualities,  and
highest  mobility — these  persons  see  nothing  less  than  the  won-
derful and  almost  divine  character  of  the  natural  operations  as


120


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


proceeding  from  the  instrumentality  of  this  common  agent,  viz.,
the  calidum  innatum ; they  farther  regard  these  spirits  as  of  a
sublime,  lucid,  ethereal,  celestial,  or  divine  natrrre,  and  the  bond
of  the  soul ; even  as  the  vulgar  and  unlettered,  vrhen  they  do
not  comprehend  the  causes  of  various  effects,  refer  them  to  the
immediate  interposition  of  the  Deity.  Whence  they  declare
that  the  heat  perpetually  flowing  into  the  several  parts  is  in  virtue
of  the  influx  of  spirits  through  the  channels  of  the  arteries ; as
if  the  blood  could  neither  move  so  swiftly,  nor  penetrate  so  in-
timately, nor  cherish  so  effectually.  And  such  faith  do  they
put  in  this  opinion,  such  lengths  are  they  carried  by  their  be-
lief, that  they  deny  the  eontents  of  the  arteries  to  be  blood !
And  then  they  proceed  with  trirtal  reasonings  to  maintain  that
the  arterial  blood  is  of  a peculiar  kind,  or  that  the  arteries  are
filled  with  such  aereal  spirits,  and  not  with  blood ; all  the  while,
in  opposition  to  everything  which  Galen  has  advanced  against
Erasistratus,  both  on  grounds  of  experiment  and  of  reason.
But  that  arterial  blood  differs  in  nothing  essential  from  venous
blood  has  been  already  sufficiently  demonstrated ; and  our  senses
likewise  assure  us  that  the  blood  and  spirits  do  not  flow  in  the
arteries  separately  and  disjoined,  but  as  one  body.

We  have  occasion  to  observe  so  often  as  our  hands,  feet,  or
ears  have  become  stiff  and  cold,  that  as  they  recover  again  by
the  warmth  that  flows  into  them,  they  acquire  their  natural
colour  and  heat  simultaneously  j that  the  veins  which  had  be-
come small  and  shrunk,  swell  visibly  and  enlarge,  so  that
when  they  regain  their  heat  suddenly  they  become  painful;  fr’om
which  it  appears,  that  that  which  by  its  influx  brings  heat  is  the
same  which  causes  repletion  and  colour ; now  this  can  be  and  is
nothing  but  blood.

When  an  artery  and  a vein  are  divided,  any  one  may  clearly
see  that  the  part  of  the  vein  towards  the  heart  pom’s  out  no
blood,  whilst  that  beyond  the  wound  gives  a torrent ; the  di-
vided artery,  on  the  contrary,  (as  in  my  experiment  on  the  ca-
rotids,) pours  out  a flood  of  pure  blood  from  the  orifice  next  the
heart,  and  in  jets  as  if  it  were  forced  from  a syringe,  whilst  fr'om
the  further  orifice  of  the  dirtded  artery  little  or  no  blood  escapes.
This  experiment  therefore  plainly  proves  in  what  dhection  the
current  sets  in  either  order  of  vessels — towards  the  heai’t  in  the
veins,  from  the  heart  in  the  arteries ; it  also  shows  with  what


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


121


velocity  the  current  moves,  not  gradually  and  by  drops,  but  even
with  violence.  And  lest  any  one,  by  way  of  subterfuge,  should
take  shelter  in  the  notion  of  invisible  spirits,  let  the  orifice  of
the  divided  vessel  be  plunged  under  water  or  oil,  when,  if  there
be  any  air  contained  in  it,  the  fact  wdll  be  proclaimed  by  a suc-
cession of  visible  bubbles.  Hornets,  wasps,  and  other  insects
of  the  same  description  plunged  in  oil,  and  so  suffocated,  emit
bubbles  of  air  from  their  tail  whilst  they  are  dying ; whence  it  is
not  improbable  that  they  thus  respire  when  alive;  for  all  animals
submerged  and  drowned,  when  they  finally  sink  to  the  bottom
and  die,  emit  bubbles  of  air  from  the  mouth  and  lungs.  It  is
also  demonstrated  by  the  same  experiment,  that  the  valves  of  the
veins  act  wdth  such  accuracy,  that  air  blown  into  them  does  not
penetrate ; much  less  then  can  blood  make  its  way  through
them : — it  is  certain,  I say,  that  neither  sensibly  nor  insensibly,
nor  gradually  and  drop  by  cb’op,  can  any  blood  pass  from  the
heart  by  the  veins.

And  that  no  one  may  seek  shelter  in  asserting  that  these  things
are  so  when  nature  is  distm’bed  and  opposed,  but  not  when  she
is  left  to  herself  and  at  liberty  to  act ; that  the  same  things  do
not  come  to  pass  in  morbid  and  unusual  states  as  in  the  healthy
and  natural  condition ; they  are  to  be  met  by  saying,  that  if  it
were  so,  if  it  happened  that  so  much  blood  was  lost  from  the
farther  orifice  of  a divided  vein  because  nature  was  disturbed,
still  that  the  incision  does  not  close  the  nearer  orifice,  from
w'hich  nothing  either  escapes  or  can  be  expressed,  whether  nature
be  disturbed  or  not.  Others  argue  in  the  same  way,  maintain-
ing that,  although  the  blood  immediately  spurts  out  in  such  pro-
fusion with  every  beat,  wdien  an  artery  is  divided  near  the  heart,
it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  the  blood  is  propelled  by  the
pulse  when  the  heart  and  artery  are  entire.  It  is  most  pro-
bable, however,  that  every  stroke  impels  something ; and  that
there  would  be  no  pulse  of  the  container’,  without  an  impulse
being  communicated  to  the  thing  contained,  seems  certain.  Yet
some,  that  they  may  seize  upon  a farther  means  of  defence,  and
escape  the  necessitj^  of  admitting  the  circulation,  do  not  fear  to
affirm  that  the  arteries  in  the  living  body  and  in  the  natural
state  are  already  so  full  of  blood,  that  they  are  incapable  of  re-
ceiving another  drop ; and  so  also  of  the  ventricles  of  the  heart.
Hut  it  is  indubitable  that,  whatever  the  degree  of  distension  and


122


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


the  extent  of  contraction  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  they  are  still
in  a condition  to  receive  an  additional  quantity  of  blood  forced
into  them,  and  that  tliis  is  far  more  than  is  usually  reckoned  in
grains  or  drops,  seems  also  certain.  For  if  the  ventricles  become
so  excessively  distended  that  they  wiU  admit  no  more  blood,
the  heart  ceases  to  beat,  (and  we  have  occasional  opportunities
of  observing  the  fact  in  our  -vdvisections,)  and,  continiiing  tense
and  resisting,  death  by  asphyxia  ensues.

In  the  work  on  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood,  I have
already  sufficiently  discussed  the  question  as  to  whether  the
blood  in  its  motion  was  attracted,  or  impelled,  or  moved  by  its
own  inherent  nature.  I have  there  also  spoken  at  length  of
the  action  and  office,  of  the  dilatation  and  contraction  of  the
heart,  and  have  shown  what  these  truly  are,  and  how  the  heart
contracts  during  the  diastole  of  the  arteries ; so  that  I must  hold
those  who  take  points  for  dispute  from  among  them  as  either  not
understanding  the  subject,  or  as  unwilling  to  look  at  things  for
themselves,  and  to  investigate  them  with  theii’  own  senses. ^

For  my  part,  I believe  that  no  other  kind  of  attraction  can
be  demonstrated  in  the  bring  body  save  that  of  the  nutriment,
which  gradually  and  incessantly  passes  on  to  supply  the  waste
that  takes  place  in  the  tissues ; in  the  same  way  as  the  oil  rises
in  the  wick  of  a lamp  to  be  consumed  by  the  flame.  MTience
I conclude  that  the  primary  and  common  organ  of  all  sensible
attraction  and  impulsion  is  of  the  nature  of  sinew  (nervus),
or  fibre,  or  muscle,  and  this  to  the  end  that  it  may  be  con-
tractile, that  contracting  it  may  be  shortened,  and  so  either
stretch  out,  dxaw  towai’ds,  or  propel.  But  these  topics  wib  be
better  discussed  elsewhere,  when  we  speak  of  the  organs  of
motion  in  the  animal  body.

To  those  who  repudiate  the  cu’culation  because  they  neither
see  the  efficient  nor  flnal  cause  of  it,  and  who  exclaim,  cui  bono  ?
I have  yet  to  reply,  haring  hitherto  taken  no  note  of  the
ground  of  objection  which  they  take  up.  And  ffi’st  I own  I am
of  opinion  that  our  fu’st  duty  is  to  inqube  whether  the  thing
be  or  not,  before  asking  wherefore  it  is?  for  from  the  facts
and  circumstances  which  meet  us  in  the  circulation  admitted,
established,  the  ends  and  objects  of  its  institution  ai’e  especially


* Vide  Chapter  XIV.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


123


to  be  sought.  Meantime  I would  only  ask,  how  many  things
we  admit  in  physiology,  pathology,  and  therapeutics,  the  causes
of  which  are  unknown  to  us  ? That  there  are  many,  no  one
doubts — the  causes  of  putrid  fevers,  of  revulsions,  of  the  pur-
gation of  excrementitious  matters,  among  the  number.

Whoever,  therefore,  sets  himself  in  opposition  to  the  circula-
tion, because,  if  it  be  acknowledged,  he  cannot  account  for  a
variety  of  medical  problems,  nor  in  the  treatment  of  diseases
and  the  administration  of  medicines,  give  satisfactory  reasons
for  the  phenomena  that  appear ; or  who  will  not  see  that  the
precepts  he  has  received  from  his  teachers  are  false ; or  who
thinks  it  unseemly  to  give  up  accredited  opinions ; or  who  re-
gards it  as  in  some  sort  criminal  to  call  in  question  doctrines
that  have  descended  tlirough  a long  succession  of  ages,  and
carry  the  authority  of  the  ancients  ; — to  all  of  these  I reply : that
the  facts  cognizable  by  the  senses  wait  upon  no  opinions,  and
that  the  works  of  nature  bow  to  no  antiquity;  for  indeed  there  is
nothing  either  more  ancient  or  of  higher  authority  than  nature.

To  those  who  object  to  the  circulation  as  throwing  obstacles
in  the  way  of  their  explanations  of  the  phenomena  that  occnr
in  medical  cases  (and  there  are  persons  who  will  not  be
content  to  take  up  with  a new  system,  unless  it  explains
everything,  as  in  astronomy),  and  who  oppose  it  with  their
own  erroneous  assumptions,  such  as  that,  if  it  be  true,  phle-
botomy cannot  cause  revulsion,  seeing  that  the  blood  will  still
continue  to  be  forced  into  the  affected  part ; that  the  passage  of
excrementitious  matters  and  foul  humours  through  the  heart,
that  most  noble  and  principal  viscus,  is  to  be  apprehended ; that
an  efflux  and  excretion,  occasionally  of  foul  and  corrupt  blood,
takes  place  from  the  same  body,  fr’om  different  parts,  even
from  the  same  part  and  at  the  same  time,  which,  were  the
blood  agitated  by  a continuous  current,  would  be  shaken  and
effectually  mixed  in  passing  through  the  heart,  and  many  points
of  the  like  kind  admitted  in  our  medical  schools,  which  are
seen  to  be  repugnant  to  the  doctrine  of  the  circulation, —
to  them  I shall  not  answer  farther  here,  than  that  the  cii’cu-
lation  is  not  always  the  same  in  every  place,  and  at  every  time,
but  is  contingent  upon  many  circumstances  : the  more  rapid  or
slower  motion  of  the  blood,  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the
heart  as  the  propelling  organ,  the  quantity  and  quality  or  con-


124


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


stitution  of  the  bloody  the  rigidity  or  laxity  of  the  tissues,  and
the  hke.  A thicker  blood,  of  course,  moves  more  slowly
through  narrower  channels ; it  is  more  effectually  strained  in
its  passage  through  the  substance  of  the  hver  than  through
that  of  the  lungs.  It  has  not  the  same  velocity  through  flesh
and  the  softer  parenclijonatous  structures  and  through  sine^vy
parts  of  greater  compactness  and  consistency  : for  the  thin-
ner and  purer  and  more  spirituous  part  permeates  more
quickly,  the  thicker  more  earthy  and  indifferently  concocted
portion  moves  more  slowly,  or  is  refused  admission.  The
nutritive  portion,  or  ultimate  aliment  of  the  tissues,  the  dew  or
cambium,  is  of  a more  penetrating  natiu’e,  inasmuch  as  it  has
to  he  added  everwhere,  and  to  everything  that  grows  and  is
nom’ished  in  its  length  and  thickness,  even  to  the  horns,  nails,
hair  and  feathers  j and  then  the  excrementitious  matters  have
to  he  secreted  in  some  places,  where  they  accumulate,  and  either
prove  a hurthen  or  are  concocted.  But  I do  not  imagine  that  the
excrementitious  fliiids  or  bad  humoui’s  when  once  separated,  nor
the  milk,  the  phlegm,  and  the  spermatic  fluid,  nor  the  ultimate
nutritive  part,  the  dew  or  cambium,  necessarily  circulate  with
the  blood ; that  which  nourishes  every  part  adheres  and  be-
comes agglutinated  to  it.  Upon  each  of  these  topics  and  va-
rious others  besides,  to  be  discussed  and  demonstrated  in  their
several  places,  Uz.,  in  the  physiology  and  other  parts  of  the
art  of  medicine,  as  well  as  of  the  consequences,  advantages  or
disadvantages  of  the  cii’culation  of  the  blood,  I do  not  mean  to
touch  here ; it  Avere  fruitless  indeed  to  do  so  imtil  the  cii’cu-
lation  has  been  estahhshed  and  conceded  as  a fact.  And  here
the  example  of  astronomy  is  by  no  means  to  he  followed,  in
which  from  mere  appearances  or  phenomena  that  which  is  in
fact,  and  the  reason  wherefore  it  is  so,  are  investigated.  But  as
he  who  inquires  into  the  cause  of  an  echpse  must  he  placed
beyond  the  moon  if  he  would  ascertain  it  by  sense,  and  not  by
reason,  still,  in  reference  to  things  sensible,  tilings  that  come
imder  the  cognizance  of  the  senses,  no  more  certain  demon-
stration or  means  of  gaining  faith  can  he  adduced  than  exami-
nation by  the  senses,  than  ocular  inspection.

There  is  one  remarkable  experiment  ivliich  I woxdd  have  eveiy
one  try  who  is  anxious  for  truth,  and  by  which  it  is  clearly  shown
that  the  arterial  pulse  is  owing  to  the  impulse  of  the  blood.  Let


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


12;3


a portion  of  the  dried  intestine  of  a dog  or  wolf,  or  any  other
animal,  such  as  we  see  hung  up  in  the  druggists’  shops,  be  taken
and  filled  with  water,  and  then  secured  at  both  ends  like  a
sausage : by  tapping  with  the  finger  at  one  extremity,  yon
will  immediately  feel  a pulse  and  'idbration  in  any  other  part
to  which  you  apply  the  fingers,  as  you  do  when  you  feel  the
pulse  at  the  wrist.  In  this  way,  indeed,  and  also  by  means
of  a distended  vein,  you  may  accurately  either  in  the  dead  or
living  body,  imitate  and,  show  every  variety  of  the  pulse,
whether  as  to  force,  frequency,  volume,  rhythm,  &c.  Just  as  in
a long  bladder  full  of  fluid,  or  in  an  oblong  drum,  every  stroke
upon  one  end  is  immediately  felt  at  the  other;  so  also  in  a
dropsy  of  the  belly  and  in  abscesses  under  the  skin,  we  are
accustomed  to  distinguish  between  collections  of  fluid  and  of
air,  between  anasarca  and  tympanites  in  particular.  If  a
slap  or  push  given  on  one  side  is  clearly  felt  by  a hand  placed
on  the  other  side,  we  judge  the  case  to  be  tympanites  [?] ; not,  as
falsely  asserted,  because  we  hear  a sound  like  that  of  a drum,  and
this  produced  by  flatus,  which  never  happens  [?]  ; but  because,
as  in  a drum,  every  the  slightest  tap  passes  through  and  pro-
duces a certain  vibration  on  the  opposite  side;  for  it  indicates
that  there  is  a serous  and  ichorous  substance  present,  of  such
a consistency  as  urine,  and  not  any  sluggish  or  Auscid  matter
as  in  anasarca,  which  when  struck  retains  the  impress  of  the
blow  or  pressure,  and  does  not  transmit  the  impulse.

HaAung  brought  forward  this  experiment  I may  observe,  that
a most  formidable  objection  to  the  cu’culation  of  the  blood  rises
out  of  it,  which,  however,  has  neither  been  observed  nor  adduced
by  any  one  who  has  written  against  me.  When  we  see  by  the
experiment  just  described,  that  the  systole  and  diastole  of  the
pulse  can  be  accurately  imitated  without  any  escape  of  fluid,  it
is  obvious  that  the  same  thing  may  take  place  in  the  arteries
from  the  stroke  of  the  heart,  without  the  necessity  for  a circu-
lation, but  hke  Euripus,  Avith  a mere  motion  of  the  blood  alter-
nately backwards  and  forwards.  But  we  have  already  satis-
factorily replied  to  this  difficulty;  and  noAv  we  venture  to  say
that  the  thing  could  not  be  so  in  the  arteries  of  a Imng  animal ;
to  be  assured  of  this  it  is  enough  to  see  that  the  right  auricle
is  incessantly  injecting  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  with
blood,  the  return  of  which  is  effectually  prevented  by  the


126


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


tricuspid  valves;  the  left  auricle  in  like  manner  filling  the  left
ventricle,  the  return  of  the  blood  there  being  opposed  by  the
mitral  valves ; and  then  the  ventricles  in  their  turn  are  propel-
ling the  blood  into  either  great  artery,  the  reflux  in  each  being
prevented  by  the  sigmoid  valves  in  its  orifice.  Either,  conse-
quently, the  blood  must  move  on  incessantly  through  the
lungs,  and  in  like  manner  within  the  arteries  of  the  body,  or
stagnating  and  pent  up,  it  must  mpture  the  containing  vessels,
or  choke  the  heart  by  over  distension,  as  I have  shown  it  to
do  in  the  vivisection  of  a snake,  described  in  my  book  on  the
Motion  of  the  Blood.  To  resolve  this  doubt  I shall  relate  two
experiments  among  many  others,  the  first  of  which,  indeed,  I
have  already  adduced,  and  which  show  with  singular’  clearness
that  the  blood  fiows  incessantly  and  with  great  force  and  in
ample  abundance  in  the  veins  towards  the  heart.  The  inter-
nal jugular  vein  of  a live  fallow  deer  barfing  been  exposed,
(many  of  the  nobility  and  his  most  serene  majesty  the  king,  my
master,  being  present,)  was  divided ; but  a few  drops  of  blood
were  observed  to  escape  from  the  lower  orifice  rising  up  from
under  the  clavicle  ; whilst  from  the  superior  orifice  of  the  vein
and  coming  down  from  the  head,  a round  torrent  of  blood
gushed  forth.  You  may  obseiwe  the  same  fact  any  day  in
practising  phlebotomy:  if  with  a finger  you  compress  the  vein
a little  below  the  orifice,  the  flow  of  blood  is  immediately
arrested;  but  the  pressure  being  removed,  forthwith  the  flow
returns  as  before.

From  any  long  vein  of  the  forearm  get  rid  of  the  blood  as
much  as  possible  by  holding  the  hand  aloft  and  pressing  the
blood  towards  the  trunk,  you  will  perceive  the  vein  collapsed
and  leaving,  as  it  were,  in  a furrow  of  the  skin ; but  now  compress
the  vein  with  the  point  of  a finger,  and  you  will  immediately
perceive  all  that  part  of  it  which  is  towards  the  hand,  to  enlarge
and  to  become  distended  with  the  blood  that  is  coming  from  the
hand.  How  comes  it  when  the  breath  is  held  and  the  lungs
thereby  compressed,  a large  quantity  of  aft  having  been  taken  in,
that  the  vessels  of  the  chest  are  at  the  same  time  obsti’ucted,  the
blood  driven  into  the  face,  and  the  eyes  rendered  red  and  suf-
fused? Why  is  it,  as  Aristotle  asks  in  his  problems,  that  all  the
actions  are  more  energetically  performed  when  the  breath  is
held  than  when  it  is  given?  In  like  manner,  when  the  frontal


CIECULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


127


and  lingual  veins  are  incised,  the  blood  is  made  to  flow  more
freely  by  compressing  tbe  neck  and  bolding  the  breath.  I
have  several  times  opened  the  breast  and  pericardium  of  a man
within  two  hours  after  his  execution  by  hanging,  and  before
the  colour  had  totally  left  the  face,  and  in  presence  of  many
witnesses,  have  demonstrated  the  right  auricle  of  the  heart  and
the  lungs  distended  with  blood ; the  auricle  in  particular  of  the
size  of  a large  man’s  fist,  and  so  full  of  blood  that  it  looked  as
if  it  would  burst.  This  great  distension,  however,  had  disap-
peared next  day,  the  body  having  stiffened  and  become  cold,
and  the  blood  having  made  its  escape  through  various  channels.
These  and  other  similar  facts,  therefore,  make  it  sufficiently
certain  that  the  blood  flows  through  the  whole  of  the  veins  of
the  body  towards  the  base  of  the  heart,  and  that  unless  there
was  a further  passage  afforded  it,  it  would  be  pent  up  in  these
channels,  or  would  oppress  and  overwhelm  the  heart;  as  on  the
other  hand,  did  it  not  flow  outwards  by  the  arteries,  but  was
found  regurgitating,  it  would  soon  be  seen  how  much  it  would
oppress.

I add  another  observation.  A noble  knight.  Sir  Robert  Darcy,
an  ancestor  of  that  celebrated  physician  and  most  learned  man,
my  very  dear  friend  Dr.  Argent,  when  he  had  reached  to  about
the  middle  period  of  life,  made  frequent  complaint  of  a certain
distressing  pain  in  the  chest,  especially  in  the  night  season ;
so  that  dreading  at  one  time  syncope,  at  another  suffocation  in
his  attacks  he  led  an  unquiet  and  anxious  life.  He  tried  many
remedies  in  vain,  having  had  the  advice  of  almost  every  medical
man.  The  disease  going  on  from  bad  to  worse,  he  by  and  by
became  cachectic  and  dropsical,  and  finally,  grievously  distressed,
he  died  in  one  of  his  paroxysms.  In  the  body  of  this  gentle-
man, at  the  inspection  of  which  there  were  present  Dr.  Argent,
then  president  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  and  Dr.  Gorge,
a distinguished  theologian  and  preacher,  who  was  pastor  of
the  parish,  we  found  the  wall  of  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart
ruptured,  having  a rent  in  it  of  size  sufficient  to  admit  any  of
my  fingers,  although  the  wall  itself  appeared  sufficiently  thick
and  strong;  this  laceration  had  apparently  been  caused  by  an
impediment  to  the  passage  of  the  blood  from  the  left  ventricle
into  the  arteries.

I was  acquainted  with  another  strong  man,  who  having  re-


128


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


ceived  an  injury  and  affront  from  one  more  powerful  than  him-
self, and  upon  whom  he  could  not  have  his  revenge,  was  so
overcome  with  hatred  and  spite  and  passion,  which  he  yet  com-
municated to  no  one,  that  at  last  he  fell  into  a strange  dis-
temper, suffering  from  extreme  oppression  and  pain  of  the  heart
and  breast,  and  the  prescriptions  of  none  of  the  very  best  phy-
sicians proving  of  any  avail,  he  fell  in  the  com’se  of  a few  years
into  a scorbutic  and  cachectic  state,  became  tabid  and  died.
This  patient  only  received  some  little  relief  when  the  whole  of
his  chest  was  pummelled  or  kneaded  by  a strong  man,  as  a baker
kneads  dough.  His  friends  thought  him  poisoned  by  some
maleficent  influence,  or  possessed  with  an  e\'il  spirit.  His  jugular
arteries,  enlarged  to  the  size  of  the  thumb,  looked  like  the  aorta
itself,  or  they  were  as  large  as  the  descending  aorta;  they
had  pulsated  violently,  and  appeared  like  two  long  anemdsms.
These  symptoms  had  led  to  trrfng  the  effects  of  arteriotomy  in
the  temples,  but  with  no  relief.  In  the  dead  body  I found  the
heart  and  aorta  so  much  gorged  and  distended  udth  blood,  that
the  cavities  of  the  ventricles  equalled  those  of  a buUock’s  heait
in  size.  Such  is  the  force  of  the  blood  pent  up,  and  such  are
the  effects  of  its  impulse.

We  may  therefore  conclude,  that  although  there  maybe  im-
pulse without  any  exit,  as  illustrated  in  the  experiment  lately
spoken  of,  still  that  this  could  not  take  place  in  the  vessels  of
living  creatures  without  most  serious  dangers  and  impediments.
From  this,  however,  it  is  manifest  that  the  blood  in  its  course  does
not  everywhere  pass  with  the  same  celerity,  neither  with  the
same  force  in  all  places  and  at  all  times,  but  that  it  varies  greatly
according  to  age,  sex,  temperament,  habit  of  body,  and  other
contingent  circumstances,  external  as  well  as  internal,  natinal
or  non-natural.  For  it  does  not  com’se  through  intricate
and  obstructed  passages  with  the  same  readiness  that  it
does  through  straight,  unimpeded,  and  penious  channels.
Neither  does  it  run  through  elose,  hard,  and  crowded  parts,
with  the  same  velocity  as  thi’ough  spongy,  soft,  and  permeable
tissues.  Neither  does  it  flow  and  penetrate  uith  such  swift-
ness when  the  impulse  [of  the  heart]  is  slow  and  weak,  as
when  this  is  foreible  and  frequent,  in  which  case  the  blood  is
di’i^'en  onwards  nith  rfgom’  and  in  large  quantity.  Nor  is  the
same  blood,  when  it  has  become  more  consistent  or  earthy,  so


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


129


penetrative  as  when  it  is  more  serons  and  attenuated  or  liqiiid.
And  then  it  seems  oidy  reasonable  to  think  that  the  blood  in
its  circuit  passes  more  slowly  through  the  kidneys  than  through
the  substance  of  the  heart;  more  swiftly  through  the  liver  than
through  the  kidneys;  through  the  spleen  more  quickly  than
through  the  lungs,  and  through  the  lungs  more  speedily  than
through  any  of  the  other  viscera  or  the  muscles,  in  proportion
always  to  the  denseness  or  sponginess  of  the  tissue  of  each.

We  may  be  permitted  to  take  the  same  view  of  the  influence
of  age,  sex,  temperament,  and  habit  of  body,  whether  this  be
hard  or  soft;  of  that  of  the  ambient  cold  which  condenses  bo-
dies, and  makes  the  veins  in  the  extremities  to  shrink  and  al-
most to  disappear,  and  deprives  the  surface  both  of  colour  and
heat;  and  also  of  that  of  meat  and  drink  which  render  the
blood  more  watery,  by  supplying  fresh  nutritive  matter.  From
the  veins,  therefore,  the  blood  flows  more  freely  in  phlebotomy
when  the  body  is  warm  than  when  it  is  cold.  W e also  observe  the
signal  influence  of  the  affections  of  the  mind  when  a timid  person
is  bled  and  happens  to  faint ; immediately  the  flow  of  blood  is  ar-
rested, a deadly  pallor  overspreads  the  surface,  the  hmbs  stiffen,
the  ears  sing,  the  eyes  are  dazzled  or  blinded,  and,  as  it  were,
convulsed.  But  here  I come  upon  a field  where  I might  roam
freely  and  give  myself  up  to  speculation.  And,  indeed,  such  a
flood  of  hght  and  truth  breaks  in  upon  me  here ; occasion  offers
of  explaining  so  many  problems,  of  resolving  so  many  doubts,
of  discovering  the  causes  of  so  many  slighter  and  more  serious
diseases,  and  of  suggesting  remedies  for  their  cure,  that  the  sub-
ject seems  almost  to  demand  a separate  treatise.  And  it  will  be
my  business  in  my  'Medical  Observations,^  to  lay  before  mv
reader  matter  upon  all  these  topics  which  shall  be  worthy  of  the
gravest  consideration.

And  what  indeed  is  more  deserving  of  attention  than  the
fact  that  in  almost  every  affection,  appetite,  hope,  or  fear,  our
body  suffers,  the  countenance  changes,  and  the  blood  appears
to  course  hither  and  thither.  In  anger  the  eyes  are  fiery  and
the  pnpils  contracted;  in  modesty  the  cheeks  are  suffused  with
blushes;  in  fear,  and  imder  a sense  of  infamy  and  of  shame,
the  face  is  pale,  but  the  ears  burn  as  if  for  the  evil  they  heard
or  were  to  hear;  in  lust  how  quickly  is  the  member  distended
with  blood  and  erected ! But,  above  all,  and  this  is  of  the

9


130


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


highest  interest  to  the  medical  practitioner, — how  speedily  is
pain  relieved  or  removed  by  the  detraction  of  blood,  the  apph-
cation  of  cupping-glasses,  or  the  compression  of  the  arterj^
which  leads  to  a part?  It  sometimes  vanishes  as  if  by  magic.
But  these  are  topics  that  I must  refer  to  my  ‘IMedical  Obsen^a-
tions,’  where  they  will  be  found  exposed  at  length  and  explained.

Some  weak  and  inexperienced  persons  vainly  seek  by  dia-
lectics and  far-fetched  arguments,  either  to  upset  or  establish
things  that  are  only  to  be  foimded  on  anatomical  demonstration,
and  behoved  on  the  evidence  of  the  senses.  He  who  truly  de-
sires to  be  informed  of  the  question  in  hand,  and  whether  the
facts  aUeged  be  sensible,  ■visible,  or  not,  must  be  held  bo'und
either  to  look  for  himself,  or  to  take  on  trust  the  conclusions
to  which  they  have  come  who  have  looked;  and  indeed  there
is  no  higher  method  of  attaining  to  assurance  and  certainty.
Who  would  pretend  to  persuade  those  who  had  never  tasted
wine  that  it  was  a drink  much  pleasanter  to  the  palate  than  ■
water?  By  what  reasoning  should  we  give  the  bhnd  from  birth
to  know  that  the  sun  was  luminous,  and  far  surpassed  the  stars
in  brightness?  And  so  it  is  with  the  circulation  of  the  blood,
which  the  world  has  now  had  before  it  for  so  many  years,  illus-
trated by  proofs  cognizable  by  the  senses,  and  confirmed  by
various  experiments.  No  one  has  yet  been  found  to  dispute
the  sensible  facts,  the  motion,  efflux  and  afflux  of  the  blood,  by
like  observations  based  on  the  evidence  of  sense,  or  to  oppose
the  experiments  adduced,  by  other  experiments  of  the  same
character;  nay,  no  one  has  yet  attempted  an  opposition  on  the
ground  of  ocular  testimony.

There  have  not  been  wantiug  many  who,  inexperienced  and
ignorant  of  anatomy,  and  making  no  appeal  to  the  senses  in  their
opposition,  have,  on  the  contrary,  met  it  -with  empty  assertions,
and  mere  suppositions,  "with  assertions  derived  from  the  lessons  of
teachers  and  captious  caAoUings;  many,  too,  have  vainly  sought
refuge  in  words,  and  these  not  always  very  nicely  chosen,  but
reproachful  and  contixmehous;  which,  however,  have  no  farther
effect  than  to  expose  their  utterer’s  vanity  and  weakness,  and  iU
breeding  and  lack  of  the  arguments  that  are  to  he  sought  in  the
conclusions  of  the  senses,  and  false  sophistical  reasonings  that
seem  utterly  opposed  to  sense.  Even  as  the  waves  of  the
Sicilian  sea,  excited  by  the  blast,  dash  against  the  rocks  around


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


131


Charybdis,  and  then  hiss  and  foam,  and  are  tossed  hither  and
thither;  so  do  they  who  reason  against  the  evidence  of  their
senses.

Were  nothing  to  be  acknowledged  by  the  senses  without
evidence  derived  from  reason,  or  occasionally  even  contrary  to
the  previously  received  conclusions  of  reason,  there  would  now  be
no  problem  left  for  discussion.  Had  we  not  our  most  perfect
assurances  by  the  senses,  and  were  not  their  perceptions  con-
firmed by  reasoning,  in  the  same  way  as  geometricians  proceed
with  their  figures,  we  should  admit  no  science  of  any  land;  for
it  is  the  business  of  geometry,  from  things  sensible,  to  make
rational  demonstration  of  things  that  are  not  sensible;  to  ren-
der credible  or  certain  things  abstruse  and  beyond  sense  from
things  more  manifest  and  better  known.  Aristotle  counsels
us  better  when,  in  treating  of  the  generation  of  bees,  he  says:'
“Faith  is  to  be  given  to  reason,  if  the  matters  demonstrated
agree  with  those  that  are  perceived  by  the  senses;  when  the
things  have  been  thoroughly  scrutinized,  then  are  the  senses
to  be  trusted  rather  than  the  reason.^^  Whence  it  is  our  duty
to  approve  or  disapprove,  to  receive  or  reject  everything  only
after  the  most  careful  examination;  but  to  examine,  to  test
whether  anything  have  been  well  or  ill  advanced,  to  ascertain
whether  some  falsehood  does  not  lurk  under  a proposition,  it
is  imperative  on  us  to  bring  it  to  the  proof  of  sense,  and  to
admit  or  reject  it  on  the  decision  of  sense.  Whence  Plato  in
his  Critias,  says,  that  the  explanation  of  those  things  is  not
difficult  of  which  we  can  have  experience;  whilst  they  are  not
of  apt  scientific  apprehension  who  have  no  experience.

How  difficult  is  it  to  teach  those  who  have  no  experience,  the
things  of  which  they  have  not  any  knowledge  by  their  senses!
And  how  useless  and  intractable,  and  unimpregnable  to  true
science  are  such  auditors!  They  show  the  judgment  of  the
blind  in  regard  to  colours,  of  the  deaf  in  reference  to  concords.
Who  ever  pretended  to  teach  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide,  or
from  a diagram  to  demonstrate  the  measurements  of  the  angles
and  the  proportions  of  the  sides  of  a triangle  to  a blind  man,
or  to  one  who  had  never  seen  the  sea  nor  a diagram?  He
who  is  not  conversant  with  anatomy,  inasmuch  as  he  forms  no


De  Generat.  Animal,  lib.  iii,  cap.  x.


132


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


conception  of  tlie  subject  from  the  evidence  of  his  own  eyes^  is  vir-
tually bhnd  to  all  that  concems  anatomy^  and  unfit  to  appreciate
what  is  founded  thereon ; he  knows  nothing  of  that  which
occupies  the  attention  of  the  anatomist,  nor  of  the  principles
inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  things  which  guide  him  in  his
reasonings;  facts  and  inferences  as  well  as  their  sources  are
ahke  unknowm  to  such  a one.  But  no  kind  of  science  can  pos-
sibly flow,  save  from  some  pre-existing  knowledge  of  more  ob-
vious things ; and  this  is  one  main  reason  why  our  science  in
regard  to  the  nature  of  celestial  bodies,  is  so  uncertain  and  con-
jectural. I would  ask  of  those  who  profess  a knowledge  of
the  causes  of  all  things,  why  the  two  eyes  keep  constantly
moving  together,  up  or  down,  to  this  side  or  to  that,  and  not
independently,  one  looking  this  way  another  that;  why  the  two
auricles  of  the  heart  contract  simultaneously,  and  the  hke?
Are  fevers,  pestilence,  and  the  wonderful  properties  of  v^aiious
medicines  to  be  denied  because  their  causes  are  tmknown?  Who
can  tell  us  why  the  foetus  in  utero,  breathing  no  air  up  to  the
tenth  month  of  its  existence,  is  yet  not  sufibcated?  bom  in
the  course  of  the  seventh  or  eighth  month,  and  having  once
breathed,  it  is  nevertheless  speedily  suffocated  if  its  respiration
be  interrupted.  "WTiy  can  the  foetus  still  contained  within  the
utems,  or  enveloped  in  the  membranes,  hve  without  respira-
tion; whilst  once  exposed  to  the  air,  unless  it  breathes  it  in-
evitably dies?'

Obser\dng  that  many  hesitate  to  acknowledge  the  circulation,
and  others  oppose  it,  because,  as  I conceive,  they  have  not
rightly  understood  me,  I shall  here  recapitulate  briefly  what  I
have  said  in  my  work  on  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood.
The  blood  contained  in  the  veins,  in  its  magazine,  and  where
it  is  collected  in  largest  quantity,  xflz.,  in  the  vena  cava,  close
to  the  base  of  the  heart  and  right  aiiricle,  gradually  increasing
in  temperature  by  its  internal  heat,  and  becoming  attenuated,
swells  and  rises  like  bodies  in  a state  of  fermentation,  whereby
the  auricle  being  dilated,  and  then  contracting,  in  virtue  of  its
pulsative  power,  forthwith  delivers  its  chai’ge  into  the  right
ventricle ; which  being  filled,  and  the  systole  ensuing,  the
charge,  hindered  from  returning  into  the  auricle  by  the


‘ Vide  Chapter  VI,  of  the  Disq.  on  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


133


tricuspid  valves,  is  forced  into  the  pulmonary  artery,  ■which
stands  open  to  receive  it,  and  is  immediately  distended  with  it.
Once  in  the  pulmonary  artery,  the  blood  cannot  return,  by
reason  of  the  sigmoid  valves ; and  then  the  lungs,  alternately
expanded  and  contracted  during  inspiration  and  expiration,
afford  it  passage  by  the  proper  vessels  into  the  pulmonary  veins;
from  the  pulmonary  veins,  the  left  auricle,  acting  equally  and
synchronously  with  the  right  auricle,  dehvers  the  blood  into  the
left  ventricle  j which  acting  harmoniously  with  the  right  ven-
tricle, and  all  regress  being  prevented  by  the  mitral  valves,  the
blood  is  projected  into  the  aorta,  and  consequently  impelled  into
aU  the  arteries  of  the  body.  The  arteries,  filled  by  this  sudden
push,  as  they  cannot  discharge  themselves  so  speedily,  are  dis-
tended ; they  receive  a shock,  or  undergo  their  diastole.  But
as  this  process  goes  on  incessantly,  I infer  that  the  arteries  both
of  the  lungs  and  of  the  body  at  large,  under  the  influence  of
such  a multitude  of  strokes  of  the  heart  and  injections  of
blood,  would  Anally  become  so  over-gorged  and  distended,  that
either  any  further  injection  must  cease,  or  the  vessels  would
burst,  or  the  whole  blood  in  the  body  would  accumulate  "within
them,  were  there  not  an  exit  provided  for  it.

The  same  reasoning  is  applicable  to  the  ventricles  of  the
heart : distended  by  the  ceaseless  action  of  the  auricles,  did  they
not  disburthen  themselves  by  the  channels  of  the  arteries,  they
would  by  and  by  become  over-gorged,  and  be  fixed  and  made
incapable  of  all  motion.  Now  this,  my  conclusion,  is  true  and
necessary,  if  my  premises  be  true ; but  that  these  are  either
true  or  false,  our  senses  must  inform  us,  not  our  reason —
ocular  inspection,  not  any  process  of  the  mind.

I maintain  further,  that  the  blood  in  the  veins  always  and
everywhere  flows  from  less  to  greater  branches,  and  from  every
part  towards  the  heart ; whence  I gather  that  the  whole  charge
which  the  arteries  receive,  and  which  is  incessantly  thrown  into
them,  is  dehvered  to  the  veins,  and  flows  back  by  them  to  the
source  whence  it  came.  In  this  way,  indeed,  is  the  circulation
of  the  blood  estabhshed  : by  an  efflux  and  reflux  from  and  to
the  heart ; the  fluid  being  forcibly  projected  into  the  arterial
system,  and  then  absorbed  and  imbibed  from  every  part  by  the
veins,  it  returns  through  these  in  a continuous  stream.  That  all
this  is  so,  sense  assies  us ; and  necessary  inference  from  the


134


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


perceptions  of  sense  takes  away  all  occasion  for  donbt.  Lastly,
this  is  what  I have  striven,  by  my  observations  and  experiments,
to  illustrate  and  make  known ; I have  not  endeavoured  from
causes  and  probable  principles  to  demonstrate  my  propositions,
but,  as  of  higher  authority,  to  establish  them  by  appeals  to  sense
and  experiment,  after  the  manner  of  anatomists.

And  here  I woidd  refer  to  the  amount  of  force,  even  of  vio-
lence, which  sight  and  touch  make  us  aware  of  in  the  heart
and  greater  arteries ; and  to  the  systole  and  diastole  constitut-
ing the  pulse  in  the  large  warm-blooded  animals,  which  I do
not  say  is  equal  in  all  the  vessels  containing  blood,  nor  in  all
animals  that  have  blood;  but  which  is  of  such  a nature  andamount
ill  all,  that  a flow  and  rapid  passage  of  the  blood  through  the
smaller  arteries,  the  interstices  of  the  tissues,  and  the  branches
of  the  veins,  must  of  necessity  take  place ; and  therefore  there
is  a circulation.

For  neither  do  the  most  minute  arteries,  nor  the  veins,  pul-
sate ; but  the  larger  arteries  and  those  near  the  heart  pulsate,
because  they  do  not  transmit  the  blood  so  quickly  as  they
receive  it.^  Hartng  exposed  an  artery,  and  dirtded  it  so  that
the  blood  shall  flow  out  as  fast  and  freely  as  it  is  received,  you
will  scarcely  perceive  any  pulse  in  that  vessel;  and  for  the
simple  reason,  that  an  open  passage  being  afforded,  the  blood
escapes,  merely  passing  through  the  vessel,  not  distending  it.
In  fishes,  serpents,  and  the  colder  animals,  the  heart  beats  so
slowly  and  feebly,  that  a pulse  can  scarcely  be  perceived  in  the
arteries ; the  blood  in  them  is  transmitted  gradually.  Whence
in  them,  as  also  in  the  smaller  branches  of  the  arteries  in  man,
there  is  no  distinction  between  the  coats  of  the  arteries  and
veins,  because  the  arteries  have  to  sustain  no  shock  from  the
impulse  of  the  blood.

An  artery  denuded  and  dirtded  in  the  way  I have  indicated,
sustains  no  shock,  and  therefore  does  not  pulsate ; whence  it
clearly  appeal’s  that  the  arteries  have  no  inherent  pulsative
power,  and  that  neither  do  they  derive  any  from  the  heart ; but
that  they  undergo  their  diastole  solely  from  the  impulse  of  the
blood ; for  in  the  full  stream,  flowing  to  a distance,  you  may  see
the  systole  and  diastole,  all  the  motions  of  the  heai’t — then’  order.


Vide  Chapter  III,  on  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood.


CmCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


135


force,  rhythm,  &c.,^  as  it  were  in  a mirror,  and  even  perceive
them  hy  the  touch.  Precisely  as  in  the  water  that  is  forced  aloft,
through  a leaden  pipe,  by  working  the  piston  of  a forcing-
pump,  each  stroke  of  which,  though  the  jet  be  many  feet  dis-
tant, is  nevertheless  distinctly  perceptible, — the  beginning,
increasing  strength,  and  end  of  the  impulse,  as  well  as  its
amount,  and  the  regularity  or  irregularity  with  which  it  is
given,  being  indicated,  the  same  precisely  is  the  case  from
the  orifice  of  a divided  artery ; whence,  as  in  the  instance  of
the  forcing  engine  quoted,  you  will  perceive  that  the  efflux  is
uninterrupted,  although  the  jet  is  alternately  greater  and  less.
In  the  arteries,  therefore,  besides  the  concussion  or  impulse  of
the  blood,  the  pulse  or  beat  of  the  artery,  which  is  not  equally
exhibited  in  all,  there  is  a perpetual  flow  and  motion  of  the
blood,  which  returns  in  an  unbroken  stream  to  the  point  from
whence  it  commenced — the  right  auricle  of  the  heart.

All  these  points  you  may  satisfy  yourself  upon,  by  exposing
one  of  the  longer  arteries,  and  having  taken  it  between  your
finger  and  thumb,  dividing  it  on  the  side  remote  from  the
heart.  By  the  greater  or  less  pressure  of  your  fingers,  you  can
have  the  vessel  pulsating  less  or  more,  or  losing  the  pulse  en-
tirely, and  recovering  it  at  will.  And  as  these  things  proceed
thus  when  the  chest  is  uninjured,  so  also  do  they  go  on  for  a
short  time  when  the  thorax  is  laid  open,  and  the  lungs  having
collapsed,  all  the  respiratory  motions  have  ceased ; here,  never-
theless, for  a little  while  you  may  perceive  the  left  auricle  con-
tracting and  emptying  itself,  and  becoming  whiter ; but  by  and
by  growing  weaker  and  weaker,  it  begins  to  intermit,  as  does
the  left  ventricle  also,  and  then  it  ceases  to  beat  altogether,
and  becomes  quiescent.  Along  with  this,  and  in  the  same
measure,  does  the  stream  of  blood  from  the  divided  artery
grow  less  and  less,  the  pulse  of  the  vessel  weaker  and  weaker,
until  at  last,  the  supply  of  blood  and  the  impulse  of  the  left
ventricle  failing,  nothing  escapes  from  it.  You  may  perform
the  same  experiment,  tying  the  piumonary  veins,  and  so  taking
away  the  pulse  of  the  left  auricle,  or  relaxing  the  hgatiu’e,  and
restoring  it  at  pleasure.  In  this  experiment,  too,  you  will
observe  what  happens  in  moribund  animals,  viz.,  that  the  left


' Vide  Cliapter  III,  ou  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood.


136


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


ventricle  first  ceases  from  pulsation  and  motion,  tlien  tlie  left
auricle,  next  tlie  right  ventricle,  finally  the  right  auricle;  so
that  where  the  vital  force  and  pulse  first  begin,  there  do  they
also  last  fail.

All  of  these  particulars  having  been  recognized  by  the  senses,
it  is  manifest  that  the  blood  passes  through  the  lungs,  not
through  the  septum  [in  its  course  from  the  right  to  the  left
side  of  the  heart],  and  only  through  themAvhen  they  are  moved
in  the  act  of  respiration,  not  when  they  are  collapsed  and  qui-
escent ; Avhence  we  see  the  probable  reason  wherefore  nature
has  instituted  the  foramen  ovale  in  the  foetus,  instead  of  send-
ing the  blood  by  the  way  of  the  pulmonary  artery  into  the  left
auricle  and  ventricle,  which  foramen  she  closes  when  the  new-
born creature  begins  to  breathe  freely.  We  can  also  now  un-
derstand why,  when  the  vessels  of  the  lungs  become  congested
and  oppressed,  and  in  those  who  are  affected  with  serious  dis-
eases, it  should  he  so  dangerous  and  fatal  a symptom  Avhen  the
resi^iratory  organs  become  implicated.

We  perceive  further,  why  the  blood  is  so  florid  in  the  lungs,
which  is,  because  it  is  thinner,  as  having  there  to  imdergo
filtration.

Still  further ; from  the  summary  which  precedes,  and  by
way  of  satisfjdng  those  who  are  importunate  in  regard  to  the
causes  of  the  circulation,  and  incline  to  regal’d  the  power  of  the
heart  as  competent  to  everjdhing — as  that  it  is  not  only  the
seat  and  soiu’ce  of  the  pulse  which  propels  the  blood,  hut  also,
as  Aristotle  tliinks,  of  the  power  which  attracts  and  produces
it ; moreover,  that  the  spirits  are  engendered  by  the  heart,  and
the  influxive  idtal  heat,  in  virtue  of  the  innate  heat  of  the  heart,
as  the  immediate  insti’ument  of  the  soul,  or  common  bond  and
prime  organ  in  the  performance  of  every  act  of  litahty ; in  a
word,  that  the  motion,  perfection,  heat,  and  evei'y  property
besides  of  the  blood  and  spiiits  are  derived  fr’om  the  heart,  as
their  fountain  or  original,  (a  doctrine  as  old  as  Aristotle,  who
maintained  all  these  quahties  to  inhere  in  the  blood,  as  heat
inheres  in  boiling  water  or  pottage,)  and  that  the  heart  is  the
primary  cause  of  pidsation  and  life ; to  those  persons,  did  I
speak  openly,  I should  say  that  I do  not  agree  with  the  common
opinion ; there  are  numerous  pai’ticulars  to  he  noted  in  the
production  of  the  parts  of  the  body  which  incliue  me  this  way.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


13;


but  wHcb  it  does  not  seem  expedient  to  enter  upon  bere.
Before  long,  perhaps,  I shall  have  occasion  to  lay  before  the
world  things  that  are  more  wonderful  than  these,  and  that  are
calculated  to  throw  still  greater  light  upon  natural  philosophy.

Meantime  I shall  only  say,  and,  without  pretending  to  de-
monstrate it,  propound^ — with  the  good  leave  of  our  learned
men,  and  with  all  respect  for  antiquity — that  the  heart,  with
the  veins  and  arteries  and  the  blood  they  contain,  is  to  be  re-
garded as  the  beginning  and  author,  the  fountain  and  original
of  all  things  in  the  body,  the  primary  cause  of  life ; and  this
in  the  same  acceptation  as  the  brain  with  its  nerves,  organs  of
sense  and  spinal  marrow  inclusive,  is  spoken  of  as  the  one  and
general  organ  of  sensation.  But  if  by  the  word  heart  the  mere
body  of  the  heart,  made  up  of  its  auricles  and  ventricles,  be
understood,  then  I do  not  believe  that  the  heart  is  the  fashioner
of  the  blood;  neither  do  I imagine  that  the  blood  has  powers,
properties,  motion,  or  heat,  as  the  gift  of  the  heart ; lastly,  nei-
ther do  I admit  that  the  cause  of  the  systole  and  contraction  is
the  same  as  that  of  the  diastole  or  dilatation,  whether  in  the
arteries,  auricles,  or  ventricles ; for  I hold  that  that  part  of  the
pulse  which  is  designated  the  diastole  depends  on  another  cause
different  from  the  systole,  and  that  it  must  always  and  every-
where precede  any  systole ; I hold  that  the  innate  heat  is  the
first  cause  of  dilatation,  and  that  the  primary  dilatation  is  in
the  blood  itself,  after  the  manner  of  bodies  in  a state  of  fermen-
tation, gradually  attenuated  and  swelling,  and  that  in  the  blood
is  this  finally  extinguished;  I assent  to  Aristotle^s  example  of
gruel  or  milk  upon  the  fire,  to  this  extent,  that  the  rising  and
falhng  of  the  blood  does  not  depend  upon  vapours  or  exhala-
tions, or  spirits,  or  anything  rising  in  a vaporous  or  aereal  shape,
nor  upon  any  external  agency,  but  upon  an  internal  principle
mider  the  control  of  nature.

Nor  is  the  heart,  as  some  imagine,  anything  hke  a chauffer
or  fire,  or  heated  kettle,  and  so  the  source  of  the  heat  of
the  blood ; the  blood,  instead  of  receiving,  rather  gives  heat  to
the  heart,  as  it  does  to  all  the  other  parts  of  the  body ; for  the
blood  is  the  hottest  element  in  the  body ; and  it  is  on  this  ac-
count that  the  heart  is  furnished  with  coronary  arteries  and
veins ; it  is  for  the  same  reason  that  other  parts  have  vessels,
viz.,  to  secure  the  access  of  warmth  for  their  due  conservation


138


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


and  stimulation ; so  that  the  warmer  any  part  isj  the  greater
is  its  supply  of  blood,  or  otherwise ; where  the  blood  is  in
largest  quantity,  there  also  is  the  heat  highest.  For  this  reason
is  the  heart,  remarkable  through  its  cavities,  to  he  viewed  as  the
elahoratory,  fountain,  and  perennial  focus  of  heat,  and  as  compa-
rable to  a hot  kettle,  not  because  of  its  proper  substance,  but
because  of  its  contained  blood ; for  the  same  reason,  because
they  have  numerous  veins  or  vessels  containing  blood,  are  the
liver,  spleen,  lungs,  &c.,  reputed  hot  parts.  And  in  this  way
do  I view  the  native  or  innate  heat  as  the  common  instrument
of  every  function,  the  prime  cause  of  the  pulse  among  the  rest.
This,  however,  I do  not  mean  to  state  absolutely,  hut  only  pro-
pose it  by  way  of  thesis.  ’Whatever  may  he  objected  to  it  by
good  and  learned  men,  without  abusive  or  contemptuous  lan-
guage, I shall  be  ready  to  listen  to — I shall  even  be  most
grateful  to  any  one  who  will  take  up  and  discuss  the  subject.

These  then,  are,  as  it  were,  the  very  elements  and  indica-
tions of  the  passage  and  circulation  of  the  blood,  ^iz.,  from  the
right  auricle  into  the  right  ventricle ; from  the  right  ventricle  by
the  way  of  the  lungs  into  the  left  auricle ; thence  into  the  left
ventricle  and  aorta;  whence  by  the  aideries  at  large  through
the  pores  or  interstices  of  the  tissues  into  the  veins,  and  by  the
veins  back  again  with  great  rapidity  to  the  base  of  the  heart.

There  is  an  experiment  on  the  veins  by  which  any  one
that  chooses  may  convince  himself  of  this  truth  : Let  the

arm  be  bound  with  a moderately  tight  bandage,  and  then,
by  opening  and  shutting  the  hand,  make  all  the  veins  to  swell
as  much  as  possible,  and  the  integuments  below  the  fillet
to  become  red;  and  now  let  the  arm  and  hand  be  plimged
into  very  cold  water,  or  snow,  until  the  blood  pent  up  in  the
veins  shall  have  become  cooled  down;  then  let  the  fillet  be
nndone  snddenly,  and  yon  will  perceive,  by  the  cold  blood  re-
tiu’ning  to  the  heart,  with  what  celerity  the  current  flows,  and
what  an  effect  it  prodnces  when  it  has  reached  the  heart ; so
that  yon  will  no  longer  he  sru’prised  that  some  should  faint
when  the  fillet  is  undone  after  venesection.^  This  experiment
shows  that  the  veins  swell  below  the  ligature  not  with  attenu-
ated blood,  or  with  blood  raised  by  spirits  or  vapours,  for  the


Vide  Chapter  XI,  of  the  Motion  of  the  Heait,  Xc.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


139


immersion  in  the  cold  water  would  repress  their  ebullition,  but
with  blood  only,  and  such  as  cordd  never  make  its  way  back
into  the  arteries,  either  by  open-mouthed  communications  or
by  devious  passages ; it  shows,  moreover,  how  and  in  what  way
those  who  are  travelling  over  snowy  mountains  are  sometimes
stricken  suddenly  with  death,  and  other  things  of  the  same  kind.

Lest  it  should  seem  difficult  for  the  blood  to  make  its  way
through  the  pores  of  the  various  structures  of  the  body,  I shall
add  one  illustration : The  same  thing  happens  in  the  bodies  of
those  that  are  hanged  or  strangled,  as  in  the  arm  that  is  bound
with  a fillet : aU  the  parts  beyond  the  noose, — the  face,  bps,
tongue,  eyes,  and  every  part  of  the  head  appear  gorged  with
blood,  swollen  and  of  a deep  red  or  livid  colour ; but  if  the
noose  be  relaxed,  in  whatever  position  you  have  the  body,  be-
fore many  hours  have  passed  you  will  perceive  the  whole  of  the
blood  to  have  quitted  the  head  and  face,  and  gravitated  through
the  pores  of  the  skin,  flesh,  and  other  structures,  from  the  su-
perior parts  towards  those  that  are  inferior  and  dependent,  until
they  become  tumid  and  of  a dark  colour.  But  if  this  happens
in  the  dead  body,  with  the  blood  dead  and  coagulated,  the  frame
stiffened  with  the  chill  of  death,  the  passages  all  compressed  or
blocked  up,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  how  much  more  apt  it  will  be
to  occur  in  the  living  subject,  when  the  blood  is  alive  and  re-
plete with  spirits,  when  the  pores  are  all  open,  the  fluid  ready
to  penetrate,  and  the  passage  in  every  way  made  easy.

When  the  ingenious  and  acute  Descartes,  (whose  honourable
mention  of  my  name  demands  my  acknowledgments,)  and
others,  having  taken  out  the  heart  of  a fish,  and  put  it  on  a
plate  before  them,  see  it  continuing  to  pffisate  (in  contracting),
and  when  it  raises  or  erects  itself  and  becomes  firm  to  the  touch,
they  think  it  enlarges,  expands,  and  that  its  ventricles  thence
become  more  capacious.  But,  in  my  opinion,  they  do  not  ob-
serve correctly;  for,  at  the  time  the  heart  gathers  itself  up,
and  becomes  erect,  it  is  certain  that  it  is  rather  lessened  in
every  one  of  its  dimensions ; that  it  is  in  its  systole,  in  short,
not  in  its  diastole.  Neither,  on  the  contrary,  when  it  collapses
and  sinks  down,  is  it  then  properly  in  its  state  of  diastole  and
distension,  by  which  the  ventricles  become  more  capacious.
But  as  we  do  not  say  that  the  heart  is  in  the  state  of  diastole
in  the  dead  body,  as  having  sunk  relaxed  after  the  systole,  but


140


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


is  then  collapsed,  and  without  all  motion — in  short  is  in  a state
of  rest,  and  not  distended.  It  is  only  truly  distended,  and  in
the  proper  state  of  diastole,  when  it  is  filled  by  the  charge  of
blood  projected  into  it  by  the  contraction  of  the  aTiricles ; a fact
which  sufficiently  appears  in  the  course  of  vivisections.  Descartes
therefore  does  not  perceive  how  much  the  relaxation  and  subsi-
dence of  the  heart  and  arteries  differ  from  their  distension  or
diastole ; and  that  the  cause  of  the  distension,  relaxation,  and
constriction,  is  not  one  and  the  same;  as  contrary  effects
so  must  they  rather  acknowledge  contrary  causes;  as  different
movements  they  must  have  different  motors ; just  as  aU  ana-
tomists know  that  the  fiexion  and  extension  of  an  extremity
are  accomplished  by  opposite  antagonist  muscles,  and  contrary
or  diverse  motions  are  necessaifily  performed  by  contrary  and
diverse  organs  instituted  by  nature  for  the  purpose.  Neither
do  I find  the  efficient  cause  of  the  pulse  aptly  explained  by
this  philosopher,  when  with  Aristotle  he  assumes  the  cause  of  the
systole  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  diastole,  \iz.,  an  effervescence
of  the  blood  due  to  a kind  of  ebullition.  For  the  pulse  is  a
succession  of  sudden  strokes  and  quick  percussions;  but  we
know  of  no  kind  of  fermentation  or  ebullition  in  which  the
matter  rises  and  falls  in  the  tAvinkling  of  an  eye ; the  heaving
is  always  gradual  where  the  subsidence  is  notable.  Besides,  in
the  body  of  a living  animal  laid  open,  we  can  ■with  our  eyes  per-
ceive the  ventricles  of  the  lieaii;  both  chai’ged  and  distended
by  the  contraction  of  the  auricles,  and  more  or  less  increased
in  size  according  to  the  charge ; and  farther,  we  can  see  that
the  distension  of  the  heart  is  rather  a A*iolent  motion,  the  effect
of  an  impulsion,  and  not  performed  by  any  kind  of  attraction.

Some  are  of  opinion  that,  as  no  kind  of  impulse  of  the
nutritive  juices  is  requii’ed  in  vegetables,  but  that  these  are
attracted  by  the  parts  which  requii’e  them,  and  flow  in  to  take
the  place  of  what  has  been  lost ; so  neither  is  there  any  neces-
sity for  an  impulse  in  animals,  the  vegetative  faculty  in  both
working  alike.  But  there  is  a difference  between  plants  and
animals.  In  animals,  a constant  supply  of  warmth  is  required
to  cherish  the  members,  to  maintain  them  in  life  by  the  vivi-
fying heat,  and  to  restore  pai’ts  injured  from  -without.  It  is
not  merely  nutrition  that  has  to  be  provided  for.


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD.


141


So  imicli  for  the  circulation  ; any  impediment,  or  perversion,
or  excessive  excitement  of  wliicli,  is  followed  by  a best  of  dan-
gerous diseases  and  remarkable  symptoms : in  connexion  with
tbe  veins — varices,  abscesses,  pains,  hemorrhoids,  hemorrhages ;
in  connexion  with  the  arteries — enlargements,  phlegmons,  se-
vere and  lancinating  pains,  aneurisms,  sarcoses,  fluxions,  sudden
attacks  of  suffocation,  asthmas,  stupors,  apoplexies,  and  innu-
merable other  affections.  But  this  is  not  the  place  to  enter
on  the  consideration  of  these ; neither  may  I say  under  what
circumstances  and  hoAV  speedily  some  of  these  diseases,  that  are
even  reputed  incurable,  are  remedied  and  dispelled,  as  if  by  en-
chantment. I shall  have  much  to  put  forth  in  my  Medical
Observations  and  Pathology,  which,  so  far  as  I know,  has  as
yet  been  observed  by  no  one.

That  I may  afford  you  still  more  ample  satisfaction,  most
learned  Riolanus,  as  you  do  not  think  there  is  a circulation  in
the  vessels  of  the  mesentery,  I shall  conclude  by  proposing  the
following  experiment : throw  a hgature  around  the  porta  close
to  the  hver,  in  a hving  animal,  which  is  easily  done.  You  wiU
forthwith  perceive  the  veins  below  the  hgature  swelhng  in  the
same  way  as  those  of  the  arm  when  the  bleeding  fiUet  is  bound
above  the  elbow ; a circumstance  which  whl  proclaim  the  course
of  the  blood  there.  And  as  you  stiU  seem  to  think  that  the  blood
can  regurgitate  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries  by  open  anasto-
moses, let  the  vena  cava  be  tied  in  a hving  animal  near  the  divari-
cation of  the  crural  veins,  and  immediately  afterwards  let  an
artery  be  opened  to  give  issue  to  the  blood : you  will  soon
observe  the  whole  of  the  blood  discharged  from  ah  the  veins,
that  of  the  ascending  cava  among  the  number,  with  the  single
exception  of  the  crural  veins,  which  wih  continue  fuU ; and  this '
certainly  could  not  happen  were  there  any  retrograde  passage
for  the  blood  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries  by  open  anastomoses.


1


1


ANATOMICAL  EXERCISES


THE  GENERATION  OF  ANIMALS;


TO  WHICH  ARE  ADDED

ESSAYS  ON  PARTURITION ; ON  THE  MEMBRANES,  AND  FLUIDS  OF
THE  UTERUS ; AND  ON  CONCEPTION.

BY  WILLIAM  HARVEY,

DOCTOR  OF  PHYSIC,  AND  PROFESSOR  OF  ANATOMY  AND  SURGERY
IN  THE  COLLEGE  OF  PHYSICIANS  OF  LONDON.


London,  1G5I.


To  the  learned  and  illustrious  the  President  and  Fellows
of  the  College  of  Physicians  of  London.

Harassed  with  anxious,  and  in  the  end  not  much  availing
cares,  about  Christmas  last,'  I sought  to  rid  my  spirit  of  the
cloud  that  oppressed  it,  by  a visit  to  that  great  man,  the  chief
honour  and  ornament  of  our  College,  Dr.  William  Harvey,
then  dwelling  not  far  from  the  city.  I found  him,  Democritus
hke,  busy  with  the  study  of  natural  things,  his  countenance  cheer-
ful, his  mind  serene,  embracing  all  within  its  sphere.  I forth-
with saluted  him,  and  asked  if  all  were  well  with  him  ? “ How
can  it,”  said  he,  “ whilst  the  Commonwealth  is  full  of  distrac-
tions, and  I myself  am  still  in  the  open  sea  ? And  truly,”  he
continued,  “ did  I not  find  solace  in  my  studies,  and  a balm
for  my  spirit  in  the  memory  of  my  observations  of  former  years,
I should  feel  little  desire  for  longer  life.  But  so  it  has  been,
that  this  life  of  obscurity,  this  vacation  from  public  business,
which  causes  tedium  and  disgust  to  so  many,  has  proved  a
sovereign  remedy  to  me.”

I answering  said,  “ I can  readily  account  for  this  : whilst
most  men  are  learned  through  others’  wits,  and  under  cover  of
a different  diction  and  a new  arrangement,  vaunt  themselves
on  things  that  belong  to  the  ancients,  thou  ever  interrogatest
Nature  herself  concerning  her  mysteries.  And  this  line  of
study  as  it  is  less  likely  to  lead  into  error,  so  is  it  also  more

' [This  must  have  heen  Christmas,  1650,  the  j'ear  after  tiie  violent  death  of
the  king. — Ed.]


10


146


DOCTOR  ENT’S  EPISTLE  DEDICATORY.


fertile  in  enjoyment^  inasmucli  as  each  particular  point  exa-
mined often  leads  to  others  which  had  not  before  been  sur-
mised. You  yourself,  I weU  remember,  informed  me  once  that
you  had  never  dissected  any  animal — and  many  and  many  a
one  have  you  examined, — but  that  you  discovered  something  un-
expected, something  of  wliich  you  were  formerly  uninformed.”
“ It  is  true,”  said  he  : “ the  examination  of  the  bodies  of
animals  has  always  been  my  dehght ; and  I have  thought  that
we  might  thence  not  only  obtain  an  insight  into  the  hghter
mysteries  of  nature,  but  there  perceive  a kind  of  image  or  re-
flex of  the  omnipotent  Creator  himself.  And  though  much  has
already  been  made  out  by  the  learned  men  of  fonner  times,  I
have  still  thought  that  much  more  remained  behind,  hidden  by
the  dusky  night  of  nature,  uninterrogated ; so  that  I have
oftentimes  wondered  and  even  laughed  at  those  who  have  fan-
cied that  everything  had  been  so  consummately  and  absolutely
investigated  by  an  Aristotle  or  a Galen,  or  some  other  mighty
name,  that  nothing  could  by  possihihty  he  added  to  their
knowledge.  Nature,  however,  is  the  best  and  most  faithful  in-
terpreter of  her  own  secrets  ; and  what  she  presents  either  more
briefly  or  obscurely  in  one  department,  that  she  explains  more
fully  and  clearly  in  another.  No  one  indeed  has  ever  rightly
ascertained  the  use  or  function  of  a part  who  has  not  examined
its  structure,  situation,  connexions  by  means  of  vessels,  and
other  accidents,  in  various  animals,  and  cai’efuUy  weighed  and
considered  all  he  has  seen.  The  ancients,  our  authorities  in
science,  even  as  their  knowledge  of  geogi’aphy  was  limited  by
the  boundaries  of  Greece,  so  neither  did  theii’  knowledge  of
animals,  vegetables,  and  other  natiu’al  objects  extend  beyond
the  confines  of  their  couirtry.  But  to  us  the  whole  eaidh  hes
open,  and  the  zeal  of  oru’  travellers  has  made  us  familiar  not
only  with  other  countries  and  the  manners  and  customs  of  their
inhabitants,  but  also  with  the  animals,  vegetables,  and  mine-
rals that  are  met  with  in  each.  Arrd  truly  there  is  no  nation


DOCTOR  ENT’S  EPISTLE  DEDICATORY.


147


so  barbarous  wbich  bas  not  discovered  soxnetbing  for  the  gene-
ral good,  whether  led  to  it  by  aceident  or  compelled  by  neces-
sity, which  had  been  overlooked  by  more  civilized  commu-
nities. But  shall  we  imagine  that  nothing  can  accrue  to  the
wide  domains  of  science  from  such  advantages,  or  that  all  know-
ledge was  exhausted  by  the  first  ages  of  the  world  ? If  we  do,
the  blame  very  certainly  attaches  to  our  indolence,  nowise  to
nature.

“ To  this  there  is  another  evil  added : many  persons,  wholly
without  experience,  from  the  presumed  verisimihtude  of  a pre-
vious opinion,  are  often  led  by  and  by  to  speak  of  it  boldly,  as  a
matter  that  is  certainly  known  •,  whence  it  comes,  that  not  only
are  they  themselves  deceived,  but  that  they  likewise  lead  other
incautious  persons  into  error.”

Discoursing  in  this  manner,  and  touching  upon  many  topics
besides  with  wonderful  fluency  and  facility,  as  is  his  custom,  I
interposed  by  observing,  “ How  free  you  yourself  are  from  the
fault  you  indicate  all  know  who  are  acquainted  with  you  •,  and
this  is  the  reason  wherefore  the  learned  world,  who  are  aware
of  your  unwearied  industry  in  the  study  of  philosophy,  are
eagerly  looking  for  your  farther  experiments.”

“ And  would  you  be  the  man,”  said  Harvey,  smiling,  “ who
should  recommend  me  to  quit  the  peaceful  haven,  where  I now
pass  my  life,  and  launeh  again  upon  the  faithless  sea?”  You
know  full  well  what  a storm  my  former  lucubrations  raised.
Much  better  is  it  oftentimes  to  grow  wise  at  home  and  in  pri-
vate, than  by  publishing  what  you  have  amassed  with  infinite
labour,  to  stir  up  tempests  that  may  rob  you  of  peace  and  quiet
for  the  rest  of  your  days.”

“■  True,”  said  I ; “it  is  the  usual  reward  of  Hrtue  to  have
received  ill  for  having  merited  well.  But  the  winds  which
raised  those  storms,  like  the  north-western  blast,  which  drowns
itself  in  its  own  rain,  have  only  drawn  mischief  on  themselves.”

Upon  this  he  showed  me  his  ‘ Exercises  on  the  Generation  of


148


DOCTOR  ENT’S  EPISTLE  DEDICATORY.


Animals/  a work  composed  witk  vast  labour  and  singular  care ;
and  having  it  in  my  bands,  I exclaimed,  “ Now  bave  I wbat  I
so  much  desired  ! and  unless  you  consent  to  make  tbis  work
public,  I must  say  that  you  will  be  wanting  both  to  your  own
fame  and  to  the  public  usefulness.  Nor  let  any  fear  of  farther
trouble  in  the  matter  induce  you  to  withhold  it  longer  : I gladly
charge  myself  with  the  whole  business  of  correcting  the
press.”

Making  many  difficulties  at  first,  urging,  among  other  things,
that  his  work  must  be  held  imperfect,  as  not  containing  his  in-
vestigations on  the  generation  of  insects,  I nevertheless  prevailed
at  length,  and  he  said  to  me,  “ I intrust  these  papers  to  your
care  with  full  authority  either  speedily  to  commit  them  to  the
press,  or  to  suppress  them  till  some  future  time.”  Ha^*ing  re-
turned him  many  thanks,  I bade  him  adieu,  and  took  my  leave,
feehng  like  another  Jason  laden  with  the  golden  fleece.  On
returning  home  I forthwith  proceeded  to  examine  my  prize  in
all  its  parts,  and  could  not  but  wonder  with  myself  that  such  a
treasiu’e  should  have  lain  so  long  concealed;  and  that  whilst
others  produce  their  trifles  and  emptinesses  with  much  ado,  their
messes  twice,  aye,  an  hundred  times,  heated  up,  our  Harvey
should  set  so  bttle  store  by  his  admirable  observations.  And
indeed,  so  often  as  he  has  sent  forth  any  of  his  discoveries
to  the  world,  he  has  not  comported  himself  like  those  who,
when  they  pubhsh,  would  have  us  believe  that  an  oak  had
spoken,  and  that  they  had  merited  the  rarest  honours, — a
draught  of  hen’s  milk  at  the  least.  Oui’  Haiwey  rather  seems
as  though  discovery  were  natural  to  him,  a thing  of  ease
and  of  coiu’se,  a matter  of  ordinary  business ; though  he  may
nevertheless  have  expended  infinite  laboru’  and  study  on  his
works.  And  we  have  ertdence  of  his  singular  candour  in  this,
that  he  never  hostilely  attacks  any  prertous  'svriter,  but  ever
com’teously  sets  doAvn  and  comments  upon  the  opinions  of  each;
and  indeed  he  is  wont  to  say,  that  it  is  ai’gument  of  an  indif-


DOCTOR  ENT’S  EPISTLE  DEDICATORY.  149

ferent  cause  when  it  is  contended  for  with  violence  and  dis-
temper j and  that  truth  scarce  wants  an  advocate.

It  would  have  been  easy  for  our  illustrious  colleague  to  have
woven  the  whole  of  this  web  from  materials  of  his  own ; but
to  escape  the  charge  of  envy,  he  has  rather  chosen  to  take
Aristotle  and  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente  as  his  guides,  and  to
appear  as  contributing  but  his  portion  to  the  general  fabric.
Of  him,  whose  virtue,  candour,  and  genius  are  so  well  known  to
you  all,  I shall  say  no  more,  lest  I should  seem  to  praise  to  his
face  one  whose  singular  worth  has  exalted  him  beyond  the  reach
of  all  praise.  Of  myself  I shall  only  say,  that  I have  done  no
more  than  perform  the  midwife’s  office  in  this  business,  usher-
ing into  the  light  this  product  of  our  colleague’s  genius  as  yo\i
see  it,  consummate  and  complete,  but  long  delayed,  and  fear-
ing perchance  some  envious  blast : in  other  words,  I have
overlooked  the  press ; and  as  our  author  writes  a hand  which
no  one  without  practice  can  easily  read  (a  thing  that  is  com-
mon among  our  men  of  letters),  I have  taken  some  pains  to
prevent  the  printer  committing  any  very  grave  blunders  through
this — a point  which  I observe  not  to  have  been  sufficiently  at-
tended to  in  the  small  work  of  his  which  lately  appeared.  i

Here  then,  my  learned  friends,  you  have  the  cause  of  my
addressing  you  at  this  time,  viz.  that  you  may  know  that  our
Harvey  presents  an  offering  to  the  benefit  of  the  republic  of
letters,  to  your  honour,  to  his  own  eternal  fame.

Farewell,  and  prosper.

George  Ent.

' [Doubtless  the  Exercitatio  de  Cireulatione  Sanguinis  ad  Riolanum ; 12mo,
Cantab.  1649. — Ed.]


INTRODUCTION.


It  will  not,  I trust,  be  unwelcome  to  you,  candid  reader,  if
I yield  to  tbe  wishes,  I might  even  say  the  entreaties,  of  many,
and  in  these  Exercises  on  Animal  Generation,  lay  before  the
student  and  lover  of  truth  what  I have  observed  on  this  subject
from  anatomical  dissections,  which  turns  out  to  be  very  dif-
ferent from  anything  that  is  delivered  by  authors,  whether
philosophers  or  physicians.

Physicians,  following  Galen,  teach  that  from  the  semen  of
the  male  and  female  mingled  in  coition  the  offspring  is  pro-
duced, and  resembles  one  or  other,  according  to  the  predomi-
nance of  this  one  or  of  that ; and  farther,  that  in  virtue  of  the
same  predominance,  it  is  either  male  or  female.  Sometimes
they  declare  the  semen  masculinum  as  the  efficient  cause,  and
the  semen  femininum  as  supplying  the  matter ; and  sometimes,
again,  they  advocate  precisely  the  opposite  doctrine.  Aris-
totle, one  of  Nature’s  most  diligent  inquirers,  however  affirms
the  principles  of  generation  to  be  the  male  and  the  female,  she
contributing  the  matter,  he  the  form ; and  that  immediately
after  the  sexual  act  the  vital  principle  and  the  first  particle  of
the  future  foetus,  viz.  the  heart,  in  animals  that  have  red  blood,
are  formed  from  the  menstrual  blood  in  the  uterus.

But  that  these  are  erroneous  and  hasty  conclusions  is  easily
made  to  appear : like  phantoms  of  darkness  they  suddenly
vanish  before  the  light  of  anatomical  inquiry.  Nor  is  any  long


152


INTRODUCTION.


refutation  necessary  wliere  the  truth  can  be  seen  with  one^s
proper  eyes ; where  the  inquirer  by  simple  inspection  finds
everything  in  conformity  with  reason ; and  where  at  the  same
time  he  is  made  to  understand  how  unsafe,  how  base  a thing
it  is  to  receive  instruction  from  others^  comments  without  exa-
mination of  the  objects  themselves,  the  rather  as  the  hook  of
Nature  hes  so  open  and  is  so  easy  of  consultation.

What  I shall  dehver  in  these  my  Exercises  on  Animal  Gene-
ration I am  anxious  to  make  pubhcly  known,  not  merely  that
posterity  may  there  perceive  the  sure  and  obAnous  truth,  but
farther,  and  especially,  that  by  exhibiting  the  method  of  inves-
tigation which  I have  followed,  I may  propose  to  the  studious
a new  and,  unless  I mistake,  a safer  way  to  the  attainment  of
knowledge.

For  although  it  is  a new  and  difficult  road  in  studying  na-
ture, rather  to  question  things  themselves  than,  by  turning  over
hooks,  to  discover  the  opinions  of  philosophers  regarding  them,
still  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  it  is  the  more  open  path  to
the  secrets  of  natural  philosophy,  and  that  which  is  less  likely
to  lead  into  en’or.

Nor  is  there  any  just  cause  AA'herefore  the  labour  should
deter  any  one,  if  he  will  hut  think  that  he  himself  only  fives
through  the  ceaseless  Avorking  of  his  heart.  Neither,  indeed,
would  the  way  I propose  be  felt  as  so  haiTen  and  lonely,  hut
for  the  custom,  or  Auce  rather,  of  the  age  we  five  in,  when  men,
inclined  to  idleness,  prefer  going  wi’ong  with  the  many,  to
becoming  A\dse  Avith  the  few  through  dint  of  toil  and  outlay  of
money.  The  ancient  philosophers,  whose  industry  eA-en  we  ad-
mire, went  a different  Avay  to  work,  and  by  their  unwearied
labour  and  variety  of  experiments,  searching  into  the  natui’e  of
things,  liaA^e  left  us  no  doubtful  fight  to  gvdde  us  in  oui’  studies.
In  this  Avay  it  is  that  almost  everything  we  yet  possess  of  note
or  credit  in  philosophy,  has  been  transmitted  to  us  through
the  industry  of  ancient  Greece.  But  when  we  acquiesce  in  the


INTRODUCTION.


153


discoveries  of  the  ancients,  and  believe  (which  we  are  apt  to  do
through  indolence)  that  nothing  farther  remains  to  be  known,
we  suffer  the  edge  of  our  ingenuity  to  be  taken  off,  and  the
lamp  which  they  delivered  to  us  to  be  extinguished.  No  one
of  a surety  will  allow  that  all  truth  was  engrossed  by  the  ancients,
unless  he  be  utterly  ignorant  (to  pass  by  other  arts  for  the
present)  of  the  many  remarkable  discoveries  that  have  lately
been  made  in  anatomy,  these  having  been  prineipally  achieved
by  individuals  who,  either  intent  upon  some  particular  matter,
fell  upon  the  novelty  by  accident,  or  (and  this  is  the  more
excellent  Avay)  who  following  the  traces  of  nature  with  their
own  eyes,  pursued  her  through  devious  but  most  assured  ways
till  they  reached  her  in  the  citadel  of  truth.  And  truly  in
such  pursuits  it  is  sweet  not  merely  to  toil,  but  even  to  grow
weary,  when  the  pains  of  discovering  are  amply  compensated
by  the  pleasures  of  discovery.  Eager  for  novelty,  we  are  wont
to  travel  far  into  unknown  countries,  that  with  our  own  eyes
we  may  witness  what  we  have  heard  reported  as  having  been
seen  by  others,  where,  however,  we  for  the  most  part  find


• — -minuit  prffisentia  famam  :

that  the  presence  lessens  the  repute.  It  w’ere  disgraceful,
therefore,  with  this  most  spacious  and  admirable  realm  of
nature  before  us,  and  where  the  reward  ever  exceeds  the
promise,  did  w'e  take  the  reports  of  others  upon  trust,  and  go
on  eoining  crude  problems  out  of  these,  and  on  them  hanging
knotty  and  captious  and  petty  disputations.  Nature  is  herself
to  be  addressed;  the  paths  she  shows  us  are  to  be  boldly  trodden;
for  thus,  and  whilst  we  consult  our  proper  senses,  from  inferior
advancing  to  superior  levels,  shall  we  penetrate  at  length  into
the  heart  of  her  mysteiy.


154


INTRODUCTION.


Of  the  Manner  and  Order  of  acquiring  Knoioledge.

Although  there  is  but  one  road  to  science,  that  to  Avit,
in  Avhich  we  proceed  from  things  more  known  to  things  less
knoAvn,  from  matters  more  manifest  to  matters  more  obscure ;
and  universals  are  principally  knoAvn  to  us,  science  springing
by  reasonings  from  universals  to  particulars;  still  the  comprehen-
sion of  universals  by  the  understanding  is  based  upon  the  per-
ception of  indmdual  things  by  the  senses.  Both  of  Aristotle’s
propositions,  therefore,  are  true : First,  the  one  in  his  Physics,^
Avhere  he  says,  ‘‘  The  way  is  naturally  prepared,  fi’om  those
things  that  are  more  obvious  and  clear  to  us,  to  those  things
that  are  more  obvious  and  clear  by  nature.  Foi’,  indeed,  the
same  things  are  not  both  known  to  us  and  extant  simply  :
Avhence  it  is  indispensable  to  proceed  in  this  way,  aTz.  from
those  things  that  are  of  a more  obscure  nature,  but  to  us  arc
more  apparent,  to  those  that  are  of  a nature  more  obrious  and
distinct.  Now  those  things  are,  in  the  first  instance,  more
perspicuous  and  manifest  to  us  that  are  most  confused  in  fact ;
whence  it  is  necessary  to  proceed  from  universals  to  particulars  ;
for  the  whole,  according  to  the  dictates  of  sense,  is  the  more  ob-
vious ; and  the  universal  is  a certain  whole.”  And  again,  that
other  in  his  Analytics,”  where  he  thus  expresses  liimself : “■  Sin-
gulars are  to  us  more  known,  and  are  the  first  that  exist  accord-
ing to  the  information  of  sense ; for,  indeed,  there  is  nothing  in
the  understanding  AA'hich  was  not  first  in  the  sense.  And
although  that  reasoning  is  naturally  prior  and  more  known
Avhich  proceeds  by  syllogism,  still  is  that  more  perspicuous  to
us  Avhich  is  based  on  induction.  And  therefore  do  we  more
readily  define  singulars  than  universals,  for  there  is  more  of


* Lib.  i,  c.  2,  3.


= Post.  2.


INTRODUCTION.


155


equivocation  in  universals  : whence  it  is  advisable  from  singu-
lars to  pass  to  universals.”

All  this  agrees  with  what  we  have  previously  said,  although  at
first  blush  it  may  seem  contradictory ; inasmuch  as  imiversals
are  first  imbibed  from  particulars  by  the  senses,  and  in  so  far
are  only  known  to  us  as  an  universal  is  a certain  whole  and  in-
distinct thing,  and  a whole  is  known  to  us  according  to  sense.
For  though  in  all  knowledge  we  begin  from  sense,  because,  as
the  philosopher  quoted  has  it,  sensible  particidars  are  better
known  to  sense,  still  the  sensation  itself  is  an  universal  thing.
For,  if  you  observe  rightly,  although  in  the  external  sense  the
object  perceived  is  singular,  as,  for  example,  the  colour  which  we
call  yellow  in  the  eye,  still  when  this  impression  comes  to  be
made  an  abstraction,  and  to  be  judged  of  and  understood  by  the
internal  sensorium,  it  is  an  universal.  Whence  it  happens  that
several  persons  abstract  several  species,  and  conceive  different
notions,  from  viewing  the  same  object  at  the  same  time.  This
is  conspicuous  among  poets  and  painters,  who,  although  they  con-
template one  and  the  same  object  in  the  same  place  at  the  same
moment,  and  with  all  other  circumstances  agreeing,  neverthe-
less regard  and  describe  it  variously,  and  as  each  has  conceived
or  formed  an  idea  of  it  in  his  imagination.  In  the  same  way,
the  painter  having  a certain  portrait  to  dehneate,  if  he  draw
the  outhne  a thousand  times,  he  will  still  give  a different  face,
and  each  not  only  differing  from  the  other,  but  from  the  ori-
ginal countenance;  with  such  slight  variety,  however,  that
looking  at  them  singly,  you  shall  conceive  you  have  still  the
same  portrait  set  before  you,  although,  when  set  side  by  side,
you  perceive  how  different  they  are.  Now  the  reason  is  this  :
that  in  vision,  or  the  act  of  seeing  itself,  each  particular  is
clear  and  distinct ; but  the  moment  the  object  is  removed,
as  it  is  by  merely  shutting  the  eyes,  when  it  becomes  an  ab-
straction in  the  fancy,  or  is  only  retained  in  the  memory,  it
appears  obscure  and  indistinct ; neither  is  it  any  longer  appre-


156


INTRODUCTION.


hended  as  a particular,  but  as  a sometbing  tbat  is  common  and
universal.  Seneca’  explains  this  subtlety,  according  to  Plato’s
views,  in  very  elegant  terms ; “ An  idea,”  be  says,  “ is  an
eternal  copy  of  tbe  things  that  have  place  in  nature.  I add
an  explanation  of  this  definition,  that  the  matter  may  be  made
plainer  to  you.  I desire  to  take  your  portrait ; I have  you  as
the  prototype  of  the  picture,  from  which  my  mind  takes  a cer-
tain impression  which  it  transfers  to  the  canvass.  The  counte-
nance, therefore,  which  teaches  and  directs  me,  and  from  which
the  imitation  is  sought,  is  the  idea.”  A little  farther  on  he
proceeds ; “ I have  but  just  made  use  of  the  image  which  a
painter  forms  in  his  mind,  byway  of  illustration.  Now,  if  he
would  paint  a likeness  of  Virgil,  he  forms  an  intuitive  image  of
his  subject : the  idea  is  the  face  of  Virgil,  the  type  of  his  future
work  •,  and  this  which  the  artist  conveys  and  transfers  to  his
work  is  the  resemblance  or  portrait.  VTiat  difference  is  there  ?
you  ask  : the  one  is  the  pattern  or  prototype,  the  other  the
form  taken  from  the  pattern  and  fixed  in  the  work ; the  artist
imitates  the  one,  he  creates  the  other.  A statue  has  a certain
expression  of  face ; this  is  the  Eidos,  the  species  or  representa-
tion ; the  prototype  himself  has  a certain  expression,  which  the
statuary  conceiving,  transfers  to  his  statue  : this  is  the  idea.
Do  you  desire  yet  another  illustration  of  the  distinction  ? The
Eidos  is  in  the  work ; the  idea  without  the  work,  and  not  only
without  the  work,  but  it  even  existed  before  the  work  was  be-
gun.” For  the  things  that  have  formerly  been  noted,  and  that
by  use  or  wont  have  become  fii’mly  fixed  in  the  mind  of  the
artist,  do,  in  fact,  constitute  aid  and  the  artistic  faculty ; art,
indeed,  is  the  reason  of  the  work  in  the  mind  of  the  artist.
On  the  same  terms,  therefore,  as  art  is  attained  to,  is  all  know-
ledge and  science  acquired ; for  as  art  is  a habit  with  reference
to  things  to  be  done,  so  is  science  a habit  in  respect  of  things


Epist.  58.


INTRODUCTION.


157


to  be  known ; as  that  proceeds  from  the  imitation  of  types  or
forms,  so  this  proceeds  from  the  knowledge  of  natural  things.
Each  has  its  origin  in  sense  and  experience,  and  it  is  impos-
sible that  there  can  rightly  he  either  art  or  science  without
visible  instance  or  example.  In  both,  that  which  we  perceive
in  sensible  objects  differs  from  the  image  itself  which  we  retain
in  our  imagination  or  memory.  That  is  the  type,  idea,  forma
informans ; this  is  the  imitation,  the  Eidos,  the  abstract  species.
That  is  a thing  natural,  a real  entity ; this  a representation  or
similitude,  and  a thing  of  the  reason.  That  is  occupied  with
the  individual  thing,  and  itself  is  single  and  particular ; this  is
a certain  universal  and  common  thing.  That  in  the  artist  and
man  of  science  is  a sensible  thing,  clearer,  more  perfect ; this  a
matter  of  reason  and  more  obscure : for  things  perceived  by
sense  are  more  assm’ed  and  manifest  than  matters  inferred  by
reason,  inasmuch  as  the  latter  proceed  from  and  are  illustrated
by  the  former.  Finally,  sensible  things  are  of  themselves  and
antecedent ; things  of  intellect,  however,  are  consequent,  and
arise  from  the  former,  and,  indeed,  we  can  in  no  way  attain  to
them  without  the  help  of  the  others.  And  hence  it  is,  that
without  the  due  admonition  of  the  senses,  without  frequent  ob-
servation and  reiterated  experiment,  our  mind  goes  astray  after
phantoms  and  appearances.  Diligent  observation  is  therefore
requisite  in  every  science,  and  the  senses  are  frequently  to  be
appealed  to.  We  are,  I say,  to  strive  after  personal  experience,
not  to  rely  on  the  experience  of  others ; without  which,  indeed,
no  one  can  properly  become  a student  of  any  branch  of  natural
science,  nor  show  himself  a competent  judge  of  what  I am
about  to  say  on  the  subject  of  generation ; for  without  expe-
rience and  skill  in  anatomy,  he  would  not  better  understand
me  than  could  one  born  blind  appreciate  the  nature  and  dif-
ference of  colours,  or  one  deaf  from  birth  judge  of  sounds.  I
would,  therefore,  have  you,  gentle  reader,  to  take  nothing  on
trust  from  me  concerning  the  generation  of  animals ; I appeal


158


INTRODUCTION.


to  your  own  eyes  as  my  witnesses  and  judge.  For  as  all  true
science  rests  upon  those  principles  which  hare  their  origin  in
the  operation  of  the  senses,  particular  care  is  to  be  taken  that
by  repeated  dissection  the  grounds  of  our  present  subject  he
fully  established.  If  we  do  otherwise,  we  shall  hut  come  to
empty  and  unstable  opinions ; solid  and  true  science  wiU  escape
us  altogether : just  as  commonly  happens  to  those  who  form
their  notions  of  distant  countries  and  cities,  or  who  pretend  to
get  a knowledge  of  the  parts  of  the  human  body,  from  di’awings
and  engravings,  which  but  too  frequently  present  things  under
false  and  erroneous  points  of  view.  And  so  it  is,  that  in  the
present  age  we  have  an  abundance  of  uniters  and  pretenders  to
knowledge,  but  very  few  who  are  really  learned  and  pliilo-
sophers.

Thus  much  have  I thought  good,  gentle  reader,  to  present
to  you,  by  way  of  preface,  that  understanding  the  nature  of  the
assistance  to  which  I have  trusted,  and  the  counsel  by  which
I have  been  led  in  pubhshing  these  my  observations  and  expe-
riments ; and  that  you  yourself  in  passing  over  the  same  ground,
may  not  merely  be  in  a condition  to  judge  between  Aristotle
and  Galen,  but,  quitting  subtleties  and  fanciful  conjectiu'es,
embracing  natm’e  with  your  own  eyes,  that  you  may  discover
many  things  unknown  to  others,  and  of  great  importance.


Of  the  same  matters,  according  to  Aristotle.

There  is  no  such  thing  as  innate  knowledge,  according  to
Aristotle ; neither  opinion,  nor  ai't,  nor  understanding,  nor
speech,  nor  reason  itself,  inhere  in  us  by  nature  and  from  our
birth ; but  all  of  these,  as  well  as  the  qualities  and  habitudes,
which  are  believed  to  be  spontaneoivs,  and  to  he  under  the  con-
trol of  our  will,  are  to  be  regarded  as  among  the  number  of
those  things  that  reach  us  fi’om  without  according  to  natm’e ;


INTRODUCTION.


159


sucli  as  tlie  virtues  and  tlie  Auces,  for  which  men  are  either
praised  and  rewarded  or  reproved  and  punished.  All  our  know-
ledge, therefore,  of  every  kind  has  to  he  acquired.  But  this  is
not  the  place  to  inquire  into  the  first  principles  of  knowledge.

I believe,  however,  that  it  will  not  he  useless  if  I premise  a
few  words  as  to  whence  and  how  om  knowledge  reaches  us,
both  with  a view  to  rendering  what  I shall  say  on  the  snbject
of  generation  more  readily  intelligible,  and  of  removing  any
doubts  that  may  arise  out  of  this  opinion  of  the  Stagirite,^  who
asserts  that  all  doctrine  and  discipline  based  on  reason  are  de-
rived from  antecedent  knowledge ; whence  it  seems  to  follow
that  there  is  either  no  first  knowledge,  or  that  this  must  he
innate,  a conclusion  which  is  in  contradiction  with  what  has
already  been  stated.

The  doubt,  however,  is  by  and  by  resolved  by  Aristotle^  him-
self, when  he  treats  of  the  mode  in  which  knowledge  is  ac-
quu’ed : for  after  he  has  taught  that  all  certain  knowledge  is
obtained  through  syllogism  and  demonstration,  and  made  it
manifest  that  every  demonstrative  syllogism  proceeds  from  true
and  necessary  first  principles  3 he  goes  on  to  inquire  how  prin-
ciples become  known,  and  what  the  faculty  is  that  knows ; at
the  same  time,  too,  he  discusses  the  question.  Whether  habits,
if  not  innate,  are  engendered ; and  whether,  being  innate,  they
lie  concealed  ? “We  have  not,^’  he  says,  “ these  habits  3 for  it
happens  that  they  are  concealed  from  those  who  acquire  the
most  admirable  kinds  of  knowledge  through  demonstration.
If,  however,  we  receive  them,  not  having  had  them  previously,
how  should  we  become  informed,  how  learn  from  non-antece-
dent knowledge  ? It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  they  are  neither
possessed,  nor  can  they  be  engendered  in  the  ignorant  and
those  who  are  endowed  with  no  habit.  Whence  it  is  essential
that  some  faculty  be  possessed,  not  however  any  which  were


Analyt.  post.  lib.  i,  c.  1.


“ Ib.  lib.  ii,  cap.  ult.


160


INTRODUCTION.


more  excellent,  more  exquisite  than  they.  Now  it  seems  a
thing  common  to  all  animals,  that  they  have  a congenital
power  of  judging,  which  we  call  sense.  Since  sense  is  innate,
then,  the  things  perceived  by  sense  remain  in  some  animals ; in
others  they  do  not  remain.  Those  in  whom  they  do  not  re-
main, however,  have  either  no  knowledge  at  all,  or  at  least
none  beyond  the  simple  perception  of  the  things  which  do  not
remain  ; others,  again,  when  they  perceive,  retain  a certain
something  in  their  soul.  Now,  as  there  are  many  animals  of
this  description,  there  is  already  a distinction  between  one  ani-
mal and  another;  and  to  this  extent,  that  in  some  there  is  reason
from  the  memory  of  things;  and  in  others  there  is  none,
hlemory,  therefore,  as  is  said,  follows  from  sense ; but  from  re-
peated recollection  of  the  same  thing  springs  experience  (for
repeated  acts  of  memory  constitute  a single  experience) . From
experience,  however,  or  from  the  whole  and  universal  stored
quietly  in  the  mind,  (one,  to  wit,  in  place  of  a multitude — be-
cause in  the  whole  crowd  of  particulars  there  is  one  and  the
same  universal,)  is  derived  the  principle  of  art  and  of  science :
of  art,  if  it  belong  to  production  (i.  e.  action) ; of  science,  if  it
belong  to  that  which  is  (i.  e.  the  knowledge  of  entity).  Con-
sequently there  are  neither  any  definite  habits  that  are  innate,
nor  any  habits  that  are  formed  from  other  and  more  known
habits,  but  from  sense.^^

IVom  which  words  of  Aristotle  it  plainly  appears  by  what
order  or  method  any  art  or  science  is  acquired,  viz.  The
thing  perceived  by  sense  remains ; fi’om  the  permanence  of  tlie
thing  perceived  results  memory ; from  multiphed  memoiy,  ex-
perience ; from  experience,  imiversal  reason,  definitions,  and
maxims  or  common  axioms,  the  most  certain  principles  of  know-
ledge ; for  example,  the  same  thing  under  hke  conditions  can-
not be  and  not  be ; every  aflfii’mation  or  negation  is  either  true
or  false ; and  so  on.

Wherefore,  as  we  have  said  above,  there  is  no  perfect  know-


INTEODUCTION.


161


ledge  whicli  can  be  entitled  oitrs^  tbat  is  innate ; none  bnt  wbat
has  been  obtained  from  experience,  or  derived  in  some  way
from  our  senses ; all  knowledge,  at  all  events,  is  examined  by
these,  approved  by  them,  and  finally  presents  itself  to  us
firmly  grounded  upon  some  pre-existing  knowledge  which  we
possessed : beeause  without  memory  there  is  no  experience,
which  is  nothing  else  than  reiterated  memory;  in  like  manner
memory  cannot  exist  without  endurance  of  the  things  perceived,
and  the  thing  perceived  cannot  remain  where  it  has  never  been.

The  supreme  dictator  in  philosophy  again  and  elsewhere  ex-
presses himself  very  elegantly  in  the  same  direction  “ All
men  desire  by  nature  to  know;  the  e’sddence  of  this  is  the
pleasure  they  take  in  using  their  senses,  among  which  the  sight
is  that  which  is  particularly  preferred,  because  this  especially
serves  us  to  acquire  knowledge,  and  informs  us  of  the  greatest
number  of  differences.  Nature,  therefore,  endowed  animals
with  sense  ; some  of  them,  however,  have  no  memory  from  the
operations  of  their  senses ; others,  again,  have  memory ; and
this  is  the  reason  wherefore  some  are  more  intelligent,  and
some  more  capable  of  receiving  instruction  than  others,  those,
namely,  that  want  recollection.  Some  show  discretion  inde-
pendently of  tuition  : inasmueh  as  there  are  many  that  do  not
hear,  such  as  bees  and  others  of  the  same  kind.  But  all  ani-
mals which  along  with  memory  have  the  faculty  of  hearing  are
susceptible  of  education.  Other  creatures,  again,  live  possessed
of  fancy  and  memory,  but  they  have  little  store  of  experience ;
the  human  kind,  however,  have  both  art  and  reasoning.  Now
experience  comes  to  man  through  memory ; for  many  memories
of  the  same  thing  have  the  force  of  a single  experience  : so
that  experience  appears  to  be  almost  identical  -ndth  certain
kinds  of  art  and  science  ;2  and,  indeed,  men  acquire  both  art
and  science  by  experience  : for  experience,  as  Polus  rightly
remarks,  begets  art,  inexperience  is  waited  on  by  accident.^^

^ Plato  in  Gorgias.

11


Metaph.  lib.  i,  c.  1.


162


INTRODUCTION.


By  this  he  plainly  tells  us  that  no  one  can  truly  be  enti-
tled discreet  or  well-informed,  who  does  not  of  his  own  expe-
rience, i.  e.  from  repeated  memory,  frequent  perception  by  sense,
and  diligent  observation,  know  that  a thing  is  so  in  fact.
Without  these,  indeed,  we  only  imagine  or  believe,  and  such
knowledge  is  rather  to  be  accounted  as  belonging  to  others  than
to  us.  The  method  of  investigating  truth  commonly  pursued
at  this  time  therefore  is  to  be  held  as  eiToneous  and  almost
foolish,  in  which  so  many  inquire  what  others  have  said,  and
omit  to  ask  whether  the  things  themselves  be  actually  so  or
not;  and  single  universal  conclusions  being  deduced  from  several
premises,  and  analogies  being  thence  shaped  out,  we  have  fre-
quently mere  verisimilitudes  handed  down  to  us  instead  of
positive  truths.  Whence  it  comes  that  pretenders  to  know-
ledge and  sophists,  trimming  up  the  discoveries  of  others,
changing  the  arrangement  only,  or  the  language,  and  adding
a few  things  of  no  importance,  audaciously  send  them  forth  as
their  own,  and  so  render  philosophjq  wliich  ought  to  he  certain
and  perspicuous,  obscure  and  intricate.  For  he  who  reads  the
words  of  an  author  and  fails,  through  his  own  senses,  to  obtain
images  of  the  things  that  are  conveyed  in  these  words,  derives
not  true  ideas,  but  false  fancies  and  empty  visions ; whence
he  conjures  up  shadows  and  chimeras,  and  his  whole  theorj’  or
contemplation,  which,  however,  he  regards  as  knowledge,  is
nothing  more  than  a waking  dr’eam,  or  such  a delirium  as  the
sick  fancy  engenders.

I therefore  whisper  in  your  ear,  friendly  reader,  and  recom-
mend you  to  weigh  carefully  in  the  balance  of  exact  expe-
rience all  that  I shall  deliver  in  these  Exercises  on  the  Gene-
ration of  Animals ; I would  not  that  you  gave  credit  to  aught
they  contain  save  in  so  far  as  you  find  it  confirmed  and  home
orrt  by  the  unquestionable  testimony  of  your  own  senses.

The  same  course  is  even  advised  by  Aristotle,  who,  after
having  gone  over  a great  many  particulars  about  bees,  says  at


INTRODUCTION.


163


lengtli  “ That  the  generation  of  bees  takes  place  in  this  way
appears  both  from  reason  and  from  those  things  that  are  seen
to  occur  in  their  kind.  Still  all  the  incidents  have  not  yet
been  sufficiently  examined.  And  when  the  investigation  shall
be  complete,  then  will  sense  be  rather  to  be  trusted  than  rea-
son; reason,  however,  will  also  deserve  credit,  if  the  things
demonstrated  accord  Avith  the  things  that  are  perceived  by
sense.^^

Of  the  Method  to  be  pursued  in  studying  Generation.

Since  in  Animal  Generation,  (and,  indeed,  in  all  other  sub-
jects upon  which  information  is  desired,)  inquiry  must  be  begun
from  the  causes,  especially  the  material  and  efficient  ones,  it
appears  advisable  to  me  to  look  back  from  the  perfect  animal,
and  to  inquire  by  what  process  it  has  arisen  and  grown  to  ma-
turity, to  retrace  our  steps,  as  it  were,  from  the  goal  to  the
starting  place ; so  that  when  at  last  we  can  retreat  no  further,
we  shall  feel  assured  that  we  have  attained  to  the  principles ;
at  the  same  time  we  shall  perceive  from  what  primary  matter,
and  from  what  efficient  principle,  and  in  what  way  from  these
the  plastic  force  proceeds ; as  also  what  processes  nature  brings
into  play  in  the  work.  For  primary  and  more  remote  matter,
by  abstraction  and  negation  (being  stripped  of  its  garments  as
itAvere)  becomes  mo*re  conspicuous;  and  whateA^er  is  first  formed
or  exists  primarily  in  generation,  is  the  material  cause  of  every-
thing that  succeeds.  For  example,  before  a man  attains  to
matiu’ity,  he  Avas  a boy,  an  infant,  an  embryo.  And  then  it  is
indispensable  to  inquire  further  as  to  Avhat  he  Avas  in  his  mother’s
womb  before  he  was  an  embryo  or  fetus  ; whether  made  up  of
three  bubbles,  or  a shapeless  mass,  or  a conception  or  coagulum
proceeding  from  the  mingled  seminal  fluids  of  his  parents,  or


' De  Gen.  An.  lib.  iii,  c.  10.


164


INTRODUCTION.


what  els6j  as  we  have  it  delivered  to  us  by  writers.  In  like
manner,  before  a fowl  had  attained  to  maturity  or  perfection,
— because  capable  of  engendering  its  like, — it  was  a chicken ;
previous  to  which  it  Avas  an  embryo  or  fcetus  in  the  egg  ; and
before  this,  HieronAunus  Fabricius,  of  Aquapendente,  has  ob-
served rudiments  of  the  head,  eyes,  and  spine.  But  when  he
asserts  that  the  bones  are  formed  before  tbe  muscles,  heart,
liver,  lungs,  and  precordial  parts,  and  contends  that  all  the
internal  organs  must  exist  before  tbe  ex.ternal  ones,  he  follows
probabilities  according  to  prcAnous  notions  rather  than  inspec-
tion ; and  quitting  the  evidences  of  sense  that  rest  on  anatomy,
he  seeks  refuge  in  reasonings  upon  mechanical  principles ; a
procedure  that  is  anything  but  becoming  in  a great  anatomist,
whose  duty  it  Avas  faithfully  to  nan’ate  the  changes  he  observed
taking  place  day  by  day  in  tbe  egg,  up  to  the  period  when  the
foetus  is  perfected  j and  this  the  rather  as  he  expressly  proposed
to  himself  to  Avrite  the  history  of  the  formation  of  the  chick  in
the  egg,  and  to  exhibit  in  figures  what  happens  in  the  course
of  each  successive  day.  It  would  have  been  in  harmony  Avith
such  a design,  I say,  had  we  been  informed,  on  the  testimony
of  the  senses,  of  what  parts  are  formed  first,  together,  or  sub-
sequently in  the  egg ; and  not  had  mere  opinions  or  musty
conjectures,  and  the  instances  of  houses  and  ships,  adduced  iu
illustration  of  the  order  and  mode  of  formation  of  the  pai’ts.

We,  therefore,  in  conformity  with  the  method  proposed,  shall
shoAV  in  the  first  place  in  the  egg,  and  then  iu  the  conceptions
of  other  animals,  Avhat  parts  are  first,  and  Avhat  ai’e  sub-
sequently formed  by  the  great  God  of  Nature  Avith  inimitable
proA'idence  and  intelligence,  and  most  admirable  order.  Next
Ave  shall  inquire  into  the  primary  matter  out  of  Avhich,  and  the
efficient  cause  by  Avhich  generation  is  accomplished,  and  also
the  order  and  economy  of  generation,  as  observed  by  us ; that
from  thence,  from  its  OAvn  work,  we  may  have  some  certain  in-
formation of  the  several  faculties  of  the  formative  and  vegc-


INTRODUCTION.


165


tative  soul,  and  of  the  nature  of  the  soul  itself,  judging  fi’om
its  memhers  or  organs,  and  their  functions.

This,  indeed,  cannot  he  done  in  all  animals  : first,  because  a
sufficient  number  of  several  of  these  cannot  he  commanded;
and  again,  because,  from  the  small  size  of  many,  they  escape
our  powers  of  vision.  It  must  suffice,  therefore,  that  this  is
done  in  some  kinds  which  are  more  familiarly  known  to  us,
and  that  we  refer  all  the  rest  to  these  as  types  or  standards.

We  have,  therefore,  selected  tliose  that  may  tend  to  render
our  experiments  more  undeniable,  viz.  the  larger  and  more
perfect  animals,  and  that  are  easily  within  reach.  For  in  the
larger  animals  all  things  are  more  conspicuous ; in  the  more
perfect,  they  are  also  more  distinct ; and  in  those  that  we  can
command,  and  that  live  with  us,  everything  is  more  readily
examined  : we  have  it  in  our  power  so  often  as  we  please  to
repeat  om*  observations,  and  so  to  free  them  from  all  uncer-
tainty and  doubt.  Now,  among  oviparous  animals  of  this  de-
scription, we  have  the  common  fowl,  the  goose,  duck,  pigeon ;
and  then  we  have  frogs,  aiid  serpents,  and  fishes  ; Crustacea,
testacea,  and  mollusca ; among  insects,  bees,  wasps,  butterflies,
and  silkworms ; among  viviparous  creatures,  we  have  sheep,
goats,  dogs,  cats,  deer,  and  oxen ; lastly,  w'e  have  the  most
perfect  of  all  animals,  man.

Having  studied  and  made  ourselves  familiar  with  these,  we
may  turn  to  the  consideration  of  the  more  abstruse  nature  of
the  vegetative  soul,  and  feel  ourselves  in  a condition  to  under-
stand the  method,  order,  and  causes  of  generation  in  animals
generally ; for  all  animals  resemble  one  or  other  of  those  above
mentioned,  and  agree  with  them  either  generally  or  specifically,
and  are  procreated  in  the  same  manner,  or  the  mode  of  their
generation  at  least  is  referrible  by  analogy  to  that  of  one  or
other  of  them.  For  Nature,  perfect  and  divine,  is  ever  in  the
same  things  harmonious  with  herself,  and  as  her  works  either
agree  or  differ,  (viz.  in  genus,  species,  or  some  other  proper-


Ififi


INTRODUCTION.


tion,)  so  is  her  agency  in  these  (viz.  generation  or  development)
either  the  same  or  diverse.  He  who  enters  on  this  new  and
untrodden  path,  and  out  of  the  vast  realm  of  Nature  endeavours
to  find  the  truth  by  means  of  anatomical  dissections  and  expe-
riments, is  met  by  such  a multitude  of  facts,  and  these  of
so  unusual  an  aspect,  that  he  may  find  it  more  difficult  to  ex-
plain and  describe  to  others  the  things  he  has  seen,  than  he
reckoned  it  laboui’  to  make  his  observations ; so  many  things
are  encountered  that  require  naming ; such  is  the  abundance
of  matter  and  the  dearth  of  words.  But  if  he  would  have  re-
course to  metaphors,  and  by  means  of  old  and  familiar  terms
would  make  known  his  ideas  concerning  the  things  he  has
newly  discovered,  the  reader  would  have  little  chance  of  under-
standing him  better  than  if  they  were  riddles  that  were  pro-
pounded ; and  of  the  thing  itself,  which  he  had  never  seen,
he  could  have  no  conception.  But  then,  to  have  recourse
to  new  and  unusual  terms  were  less  to  bring  a torch  to  lighten,
than  to  darken  things  still  more  with  a cloud : it  were  to  at-
tempt an  explanation  of  a matter  unknown  by  one  still  more
unknown,  and  to  impose  a gi’eater  toil  on  the  reader  to  under-
stand the  meaning  of  words  than  to  comprehend  the  things
themselves.  And  so  it  happens  that  Aristotle  is  believed  bv
the  inexperienced  to  be  obscure  in  many  places  j and  on  this
account,  perhaps,  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente  rather  intended
to  exhibit  the  chick  in  ovo  in  his  figures  than  to  explain  its
formation  in  words.

Wherefore,  coiu’teous  reader,  be  not  displeased  with  me,  if,
in  illustrating  the  history  of  the  egg,  and  in  my  account  of  the
generation  of  the  chick,  I follow  a new  plan,  and  occasionally
have  recourse  to  unusual  language.  Think  me  not  eager  for
•vainglorious  fame  rather  than  anxious  to  lay  before  you  observa-
tions that  are  true,  and  that  are  derived  immediately  from  the
nature  of  things.  That  you  may  not  do  me  this  injustice,  I
would  have  you  know  that  1 tread  in  the  footsteps  of  those  who


INTRODUCTION.


167


have  already  thrown  a light  upon  this  subject,  and  that,  wherever
I can,  I make  use  of  their  words.  And  foremost  of  all  among
the  ancients  I follow  Aristotle ; among  the  moderns,  Fabricius  of
Aquapendente ; the  former  as  my  leader,  the  latter  as  my  in-
formant of  the  way.  For  even  as  they  who  discover  new  lands^
and  first  set  foot  on  foreign  shores,  are  wont  to  give  them  new
names  which  mostly  descend  to  posterity,  so  also  do  the  dis-
coverers of  things  and  the  earliest  writers  Avith  perfect  propriety
give  names  to  their  discoveries.  And  noAv  I seem  to  hear  Galen
admonishing  us,  that  Ave  should  but  agree  aboAit  the  things,
and  not  dispute  greatly  about  the  Avords.


ANIMAL  GENERATION.


EXERCISE  THE  FIRST.

Wherefore  we  begin  with  the  history  of  the  hen’s  egg.

Hieronymus  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente,  (whom,  as  I have
said,  I have  chosen  my  informant  of  the  ivay  I am  to  follow,)
in  the  beginning  of  his  hook  on  the  Formation  of  the  Ovum  and
Chick,  has  these  words  : “ My  purpose  is  to  treat  of  the  forma-
tion of  the  foetus  in  every  animal,  setting  out  from  that  ivhich
proceeds  from  the  egg  : for  this  ought  to  take  precedence  of
all  discussion  of  the  subject,  both  because  from  this  it  is  not
difficult  to  make  out  Aristotle’s  views  of  the  matter,  and  be-
cause his  treatise  on  the  Formation  of  the  Foetus  from  the  egg,
is  hy  far  the  fullest,  and  the  subject  is  by  much  the  most  ex-
tensive and  difficult.”

We,  however,  commence  with  the  history  of  the  hen’s  egg
as  well  for  the  reasons  above  assigned,  as  because  we  can  thence
obtain  certain  data  which,  as  more  famihar  to  us,  will  serve  to
throw  light  on  the  generation  of  other  animals ; for  as  eggs  cost
little,  and  are  always  to  be  had,  we  have  an  opportunity  from
them  of  observing  the  first  clear  and  unquestionable  commence-
ments of  generation,  how  nature  proceeds  in  the  process,  and
with  what  admirable  foresight  she  governs  every  part  of  the
work.

Fabricius  proceeds  : “ Now  that  the  contemplation  of  the
formation  of  the  chick  from  the  egg  is  of  very  ample  scope,  ap-
pears from  this,  that  the  greater  number  of  animals  are  pro-


170


ON  GENERATION.


ducecl  from  ova.  Passing  by  almost  all  insects  and  the  vliole
of  the  less  perfect  animals,  which  are  oh'V'iously  produced  from
eggs,  the  greater  number  of  the  moi’e  perfect  are  also  engen-
dered from  eggs.^^  And  then  he  goes  on  to  particularize  : “ All
feathered  creatures ; fishes  likewise,  with  the  single  exception  of
the  whale  tribes ; Crustacea,  testacea,  and  all  mollusca ; among
land  animals,  reptiles,  millepeds,  and  all  creeping  things ; and
among  quadrupeds,  the  entire  tribe  of  lizards.”

We,  however,  maintain  (and  shall  take  care  to  show  that  it
is  so),  that  all  animals  whatsoever,  even  the  vhiparous,  and  man
himself  not  excepted,  are  produced  from  ova ; that  the  first  con-
ception, from  which  the  foetus  proceeds  in  all,  is  an  o'vum  of
one  description  or  another,  as  well  as  the  seeds  of  all  kinds  of
plants.  Empedocles,^  therefore,  spoke  not  improperly  of  the
oviparum  genus  arboreum,  “ the  egg-bearing  race  of  trees.”  The
history  of  the  egg  is  therefore  of  the  widest  scope,  inasmuch
as  it  illustrates  generation  of  every  description.

We  shall,  therefore,  begin  by  showing  where,  whence,  and
how  eggs  are  produced  ; and  then  inquire  by  what  means  and
order  and  successive  steps  the  foetus  or  chick  is  formed  and  per-
fected in  and  from  the  egg.

Fabricius  has  these  additional  words  ; “ The  foetus  of  animals
is  engendered  in  one  case  from  an  ovum,  in  another  from  the
seminal  fluid,  in  a thii’d  from  putrefaction;  whence  some  crea-
tures are  oviparous,  others  \d^iparous,  and  yet  others,  born  of
putrefaction  or  by  the  spontaneous  act  of  nature,  automatically.”

Such  a dhision  as  this,  however,  does  not  satisfy  me,  inas-
much as  all  animals  whatsoever  may  be  said  in  a certain  sense
to  spring  from  ova,  and  in  another  certain  sense  from  seminal
fluid ; and  thej^  are  entitled  o\dparous,  viviparous,  or  vermi-
parous,  rather  in  respect  of  their  mode  of  bringing  forth  than  of
theii’  first  formation.  Even  the  creatures  that  arise  spontane-
ously are  called  automatic,  not  because  they  spring  fr’om  putre-
faction, but  because  they  have  their  origin  fr’om  accident,  the
spontaneous  act  of  nature,  and  are  equivocally  engendered,  as  it
is  said,  proceeding  from  parents  unlike  themselves.  And,  then,
certain  other  animals  bring  forth  an  egg  or  a worm  as  then’
conception  and  semen,  from  which,  after  it  has  been  exposed


‘ Arist.  De  Gen.  Aiiim.  lib.  i.  cap.  20.


ON  GENERATION.


171


abroad,  a foetus  is  produced;  whence  such  animals  are  called
oviparous  or  vermiparous.  Viviparous  animals  are  so  entitled
because  they  retain  and  cherish  their  conception  in  their  interior,
until  from  thence  the  foetus  comes  forth  into  the  light  com-
pletely formed  and  alive.

EXERCISE  THE  SECOND.

Of  the  seat  of  generation.

“ Nature,’^  says  Fabricius,  “ was  first  solicitous  about  the
place  [where  generation  should  proceed] , which  she  determined
should  be  either  within  or  without  the  animal : within  she  or-
dained the  uterus ; without,  the  o^uim  : in  the  uterus  the  blood
and  seminal  fluid  engendering ; in  the  ovum,  however,  the  fluids
or  elements  of  which  it  consists  supplying  pabulum  for  the  pro-
duction of  the  foetus.^’

Now,  whatever  is  procreated  of  the  semen  properly  so  called
originates  and  is  perfected  either  in  the  same  place  or  in  dif-
ferent places.  All  viviparous  creatm’es  derive  their  origin  and
have  their  completion  in  the  uterus  itself ; but  oviparous  animals,
as  they  have  their  beginning  within  their  parents,  and  there  be-
come ova,  so  is  it  beyond  their  parents  that  they  are  perfected
into  the  foetal  state.  Among  oviparous  animals,  however,  there
are  some  that  retain  then  ova  till  such  time  as  they  are  mature
and  perfect ; such  as  all  the  feathered  tribes,  reptiles  and  ser-
pents. Others,  again,  extrude  their  semina  in  a state  still  im-
mature and  imperfect,  and  it  is  without  the  body  of  the  parent
that  increase,  maturity,  and  perfection,  are  attained.  Under
this  head  we  range  frogs,  many  kinds  of  Ashes,  crustaceous,
molluscous,  and  testaceous  animals,  the  ova  of  which,  when  first
extruded,  are  but  beginnings,  sketches,  yelks  which  afterwards
surround  themselves  with  whites,  and  attracting,  concocting,
and  attaching  nutriment  to  themselves,  are  changed  into  perfect
seeds  or  eggs.  Such  also  are  the  semina  of  insects  (called  worms
by  Aristotle),  which,  imperfect  on  their  extrusion  and  in  the
beginning,  seek  food  for  themselves,  upon  which  they  are  nou-
rished, and  grow  from  a grub  into  a chrysahs  : from  an  imper-
fect into  a perfect  egg  or  seed.  Birds,  however,  and  the  rest
of  the  oviparous  tribes,  lay  perfect  eggs  ; whence  without  the


172


ON  GENERATION.


uterus  the  foetus  is  engendered.  And  it  was  on  this  account
that  Fahricius  admitted  two  seats  of  generation  : one  internal,
the  uterus  ; another  external,  the  ovum.  But  he  would  have
had  more  reason,  in  my  opinion,  had  he  called  the  nest,  or  place
where  the  eggs  are  laid,  the  external  seat,  that,  to  wit,  in  which
the  extruded  seed  or  egg  is  cherished,  matured,  and  perfected
into  a foetus  ; for  it  is  from  the  differences  of  this  seat  that  the
generation  of  o'vdparous  animals  is  principally  distinguished.
And  it  is,  indeed,  a thing  most  worthy  of  admiration  to  see
these  creatures  selecting  and  preparing  their  nests  with  so  much
foresight,  and  fashioning,  and  furnishing,  and  concealing  them
w'ith  such  inimitable  art  and  ingenuity ; so  that  it  seems  impe-
rative on  us  to  admit  in  them  a certain  spark  of  the  dhine
flame  (as  the  poet  said  of  bees) ; and,  indeed,  we  can  more
readily  admii’e  than  imitate  their  untaught  art  and  sapience.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRD.

Of  the  upper  part  of  the  hen’s  uterus,  or  the  ovary.

The  uterus  of  the  fowl  is  divided  by  Fahricius  into  the  superior
and  inferior  portions,  and  the  superior  portion  he  calls  the  ovary.

The  ovary  is  situated  immediately  beneath  the  liver,  close  to
the  spine,  over  the  descending  aorta.  In  this  situation,  in  the
larger  animals  with  red  blood,  the  coehac  arteiy  enters  the  me-
sentery, at  the  origin,  namely,  of  the  emulgeut  veins,  or  a little
lower  ] in  the  situation  moreover  in  which  in  the  other  red-
hlooded  and  viviparous  animals  the  vasa  prfeparantia,  tending
to  the  testes,  take  their  origin  : in  the  same  place  at  which  the
testes  of  the  cock -bird  ai’e  situated,  there  is  the  ovary  of  the  hen
discovered.  For  some  animals  carry  their  testicles  externally ;
others  have  them  within  the  body,  in  the  loins,  in  the  space
midway  from  the  origins  of  the  vasa  prsepai’antia.  But  the
cock  has  his  testicles  at  the  very  origin  of  these  vessels,  as  if  his
spermatic  fluid  needed  no  preparation.

Aristotle*  says  that  the  ovum  begins  at  the  diaphragm ; “ I,
however,”  says  Fahricius,  “ in  my  treatise  on  Respiration,  have


‘ Hist.  Aiiim.  lib.  vi,  c.  2.


ON  GENERATION.


173


denied  that  the  feathered  kinds  have  any  diaphragm.  The  dif-
ficulty is  resolved  by  admitting  that  birds  are  not  entirely  des-
titute of  a kind  of  diaphragm,  inasmuch  as  they  have  a delicate
membrane  in  the  place  of  this  septum,  which  Aristotle  calls  a
cincture  and  septum.  Still  they  have  no  diaphragm  that  is
muscular,  and  that  might  aid  respiration,  like  other  animals.
But,  indeed,  Aristotle  did  not  know  the  muscles.^’

Thus  is  the  prince  of  philosophers  accused  and  excused  in
the  same  breath,  his  challenger  being  himself  not  free  from
error ; because  it  is  certain  that  Aristotle  both  knew  the  mus-
cles, as  I have  elsewhere  shown,  and  the  membranes,  which  in
birds  are  not  only  situated  transversely  in  the  direction  of  the
cincture  of  the  body,  but  extended  in  the  line  of  the  longitudi-
nal direction  of  the  belly,  supplying  the  place  of  the  diaphragm
[of  quadrupeds]  and  being  subservient  to  respiration,  as  I have
shown  in  the  clearest  manner  in  my  disquisitions  on  the  Bespi-
ration  of  Animals.  And,  passing  over  other  particulars  at  this
time,  I shall  only  direct  attention  to  the  fact,  that  birds  breathe
with  great  freedom,  and  in  singing  also  modulate  their  voice  in
the  most  admirable  manner,  their  lungs  all  the  while  being  so
closely  connected  with  their  sides  and  ribs,  that  they  can  neither
be  dilated  and  rise,  nor  suffer  contraction  in  any  considerable
degree.

The  bronchia  or  ends  of  the  trachea  in  birds,  moreover,  are
perforate,  and  open  into  the  abdomen  (and  this  is  an  observa-
tion which  I do  not  remember  to  have  met  with  elsewhere),  so
that  the  air  inspired  is  received  into  and  stored  up  within  the
cells  or  cavities  formed  by  the  membranes  mentioned  above.
In  the  same  manner  as  fishes  and  serpents  draw  air  into  ample
bladders  situated  in  the  abdomen,  and  there  store  it  up,  by
which  they  are  thought  to  swim  more  lightly ; and  as  frogs  and
toads,  when  in  the  height  of  summer  they  respire  more  vigo-
rously assume  more  than  the  usual  quantity  of  air  into  their  ve-
sicular lungs,  (whence  they  acquire  so  large  a size,)  which  they
afterwards  freely  expire,  croaking  a.H  the  while ; so  in  the  fea-
thered tribes  are  the  lungs  rather  the  route  and  passage  for
respiration  than  its  adequate  instrument.

Now,  had  Fabricius  seen  this,  he  would  never  have  denied
that  these  membranes  (with  the  assistance  of  the  abdominal
muscles  at  all  events,)  could  subserve  respiration  and  perform


174


ON  GENERATION.


the  office  of  the  diaphragm^  which,  indeed,  of  itself,  and  without
the  assistance  of  the  abdominal  muscles,  were  incompetent  to
act  as  an  instrument  of  respii’ation.  And,  then,  the  diaphragm
has  another  duty  to  perform  in  those  creatures  in  Avhom  it  is
muscular  or  fleshy,  \iz.,  to  depress  the  stomach  filled  with  food,
and  the  intestines  distended  with  flatus,  so  that  the  heart  and
lungs  shall  not  be  invaded,  and  life  itself  oppressed  in  its  cita-
del. But  as  there  was  no  danger  of  anything  of  this  kind  in
bii’ds,  they  have  a membranous  septum,  perfectly  well  adapted
to  the  purposes  of  respiration,  so  that  they  have  very  properly
been  said  to  have  a diaphragm.  And  were  birds  even  enthely
without  anything  in  the  shape  of  a diaphragm,  still  would
Aristotle  not  be  liable  to  criticism  for  speaking  of  the  ova
commencing  at  the  septum  transversum,  because  by  this  title
he  merely  indicates  the  place  where  the  diapliragm  is  usually
met  mth  in  other  animals.  In  the  same  way  we  ourselves
say  that  the  ovary  is  situated  at  the  origin  of  the  spermatic
vasa  praeparantia,  although  the  hen  has,  in  fact,  no  such
vessels.

The  perforations  of  the  lungs  discovered  by  me  (and  to  which
I merely  direct  attention  in  this  place,)  are  neither  obscm’e  nor
doubtful,  but,  in  birds  especially,  sufficiently  conspicuous,  so  that
in  the  ostrich  I found  many  conduits  which  readily  admitted
the  points  of  my  fingers.  In  the  tiu’key,  fowl,  and,  indeed,
almost  aU  birds,  you  will  find  that  a probe  passed  downwards
by  the  trachea  makes  its  way  out  of  the  lungs,  and  is  disco-
vered lying  naked  and  exposed  in  one  or  another  of  the  abdo-
minal cells.  Air  blown  into  the  lungs  of  these  creatures  with
a pah  of  bellows  passes  on  with  a certain  force  even  into  the
most  inferior  of  these  cells.

We  may  even  be  permitted  to  ask,  whether  in  man,  whilst  he
lives,  there  is  not  a passage  from  openings  of  the  same  kind  into
the  cavity  of  the  thorax  ? For  how  else  should  the  pus  poured
out  in  empyema  and  the  blood  extravasated  in  plemdsy  make
its  escape  ? In  penetrating  wounds  of  the  chest,  the  lungs
themselves  being  uninjured,  air  often  escapes  by  the  wound  ;
or  liquids  thrown  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  are  discharged
Avith  the  expectoration.  But  our  views  of  this  subject  will  be
found  fully  expressed  elseAvhere,  \iz.,  in  our  disquisitions  on  the
Causes,  FTses,  and  Organs  of  Respiration.


ON  GENERATION.


175


I return  to  tlie  ovary  and  the  upper  portion  of  the  fowEs
uterus,  in  which  the  rudiments  of  the  eggs  are  produced.  These,
according  to  Aristotle,'  in  the  first  instance  are  small,  and  of  a
white  colour ; growing  larger,  they  subsequently  become  of  a
paler  and  then  of  a deeper  yellow.

The  superior  uterus  of  Fabricius,  however,  has  no  existence
until  after  the  hen  has  conceived,  and  contains  the  rudiments
of  ova  within  it ; when  it  may  be  designated  as  a cluster  of
papulae.  And  he  therefore  observes  very  properly,  “ The  supe-
rior utenis  is  nothing  more  than  an  almost  infinite  congeries  of
yelks,  which  appear  collected  as  it  were  into  a single  cluster,  of
a rounded  form,  and  of  every  size,  from  that  of  a grain  of  mus-
tard to  that  almost  of  a walnut  or  medlar.  This  multitude  of
vitelli  is  aggregated  and  conjoined  very  much  in  the  manner  of  a
hunch  of  grapes,  for  which  reason  I shall  constantly  speak  of  it
as  the  vitellarium  or  raceme  of  yelks ; a comparison  which
Aristotle  himself  made  in  speaking  of  the  soft  or  scaleless  fishes,
when  he  says,^  their  ovary  or  roe  is  extruded  agglutinated  into
a kind  of  raceme  or  bunch  of  grapes.  And  in  the  same  way
as  in  a bunch  of  grapes  the  several  berries  are  seen  to  be  of
different  sizes,  some  large,  some  small,  some  of  very  diminutive
proportions,  each  hanging  by  its  several  peduncle,  so  do  we  find
precisely  the  same  thing  in  the  vitellarium  of  the  fowl.”

In  fishes,  frogs,  Crustacea,  and  testacea,  however,  matters  are
otherwise  arranged.  The  ovary  or  vitellary  here  contains  ova
of  one  uniform  size  only,  which  being  extruded  increase,  attain
maturity,  and  give  birth  to  foetuses  simultaneously.  But  in
the  ovary  of  the  common  fowl,  and  almost  all  the  rest  of  the
oviparous  tribes,  the  yelks  are  found  in  various  stages  of  their
growth,  from  dimensions  that  are  scarcely  visible  up  to  the
full  size.  Nevertheless  the  eggs  of  the  fowl  and  other  birds,
(not  otherwise  than  in  those  cases  where  the  eggs  are  all  engen-
dered and  laid  at  the  same  moment,)  ripen  their  foetuses  under
the  influence  of  incubation  in  the  same  nest,  and  produce  them
perfect,  nearly  at  the  same  time.  In  the  family  of  the  pigeons,
however,  (which  lay  and  incubate  no  more  than  two  eggs  in  the
same  nest,)  I have  observed  that  all  the  ova  crowded  together
in  the  ovary,  with  the  exception  of  a single  pair,  were  of  the  same


' Hist.  Animal,  lib.  vi,  cap.  2.


“ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  c.  8.


176


ON  GENERATION.


dimensions;  this  pair  was  very  much  larger  than  any  of  the
others,  and  already  prepared  to  descend  into  the  second  or  lower
uterus.  In  these  creatures,  therefore,  the  number  of  young  is
great,  not  because  of  the  multitude  produced  at  a time,  but  of
the  frequency  with  which  births  take  place,  viz.,  every  month.
In  the  same  way,  among  cartilaginous  fishes,  such  as  the  skates,
dog-fishes,  &c.,  two  eggs  only  come  to  maturity  together,  one  of
which  descends  from  the  right  the  other  from  the  left  corner  of
the  uterus  into  the  inferior  portion,  where  they  are  cherished,
and  where  they  finally  produce  living  foetuses,  precisely  as  hap-
pens among  ririparous  animals ; in  the  ovary,  nevertheless,
there  is  almost  infinite  store  of  ova  of  various  sizes — in  the  ray
I have  counted  upwards  of  a hundi’ed.

The  ova  of  the  other  oriparous  tribes  are  either  perfected
externally,  as  in  the  case  of  fishes,  or  they  are  concocted  or
matured,  as  in  the  instance  of  testacea,  Crustacea,  and  spiders.
Testaceous  animals  lay  their  eggs  amidst  froth ; the  crusta-
ceous  tribes,  such  as  the  shrimp,  crab,  and  lobster,  bear  them
about  with  them,  attached  to  certain  appendages ; and  the
spiders  carrj^  them  about  and  cherish  them,  laid  up  in  a kind  of
purse  or  basket,  made  of  their  web.  The  beetle  rolls  its  eggs
in  dung,  using  its  hind  legs  in  the  operation,  and  buries  them.
Now,  in  all  these  creatures  the  quantity  of  eggs  is  almost  incre-
dibly great : in  fishes  they  form  two  oblong  bladders  or  folli-
cles, as  may  be  seen  in  the  caiq),  herring,  and  smelt,  in  aU  of
which,  as  there  is  no  uterus,  but  merely  an  ovary  present,  so  is
this  sometimes  crowded  with  ova  to  such  a degree,  that  it  comes
to  surpass  the  body  in  bulk.

Of  such  ovaries  of  the  mullet  and  caiq),  salted  and  pressed,
and  dried  in  the  smoke,  was  prepared  that  article  of  food  in
such  request  among  the  Greeks  and  old  Italians,  (called  botorcha
by  the  latter,  w’a  raoiy^a,  i.  e.  salted  eggs,  by  the  former,)  and
very  similar,  we  may  presume,  to  the  masses  which  we  find  in  the
insides  of  our  smoked  heirings,  and  to  the  compact  granular
red-coloured  roe  of  our  lobsters.  The  article  prepai’ed  from
the  salted  roe  of  the  sturgeon,  which  is  called  caviare,  and  re-
sembles black  soap,  is  still  the  delight  of  epiciu’es.

In  those  fishes  that  are  highly  prolific  such  a quantity  of  eggs
is  engendered,  that  the  whole  abdomen  can  scarcely  contain
them,  even  when  they  are  first  produced,  still  less  when  they


ON  GENERATION.


177


have  grown  to  any  size.  In  fishes^  therefore^  there  is  no  part  save
the  ovary  dedicated  to  purposes  of  reproduction.  The  ova  of  these
animals  continue  to  grow  without  the  body^  and  do  not  require
the  protection  of  an  uterus  for  their  evolution.  And  the  ovary
here  appears  to  bear  an  analogy  to  the  testicles  or  vesiculae
seminalesj  not  only  because  it  is  found  in  the  same  place  as  the
testes  in  the  male,  (the  testes  in  the  cock  being  situated,  as  we
have  said,  close  to  the  origin  of  the  coehac  artery,  near  the
waist,  in  the  very  same  place  as  the  ovary  in  the  hen,)  hut  be-
cause among  fishes,  in  both  sexes,  as  the  time  of  spawning  ap-
proaches, two  follicles,  alike  in  situation,  size,  and  shape,  are
discovered,  extending  the  whole  length  of  the  abdomen ; which
increase  and  become  distended  at  the  same  period : in  the  male
with  a homogeneous  milky  spermatic  matter,  (whence  the  term
milk  or  milt  of  fishes ;)  in  the  female  with  innumerable  gra-
nules, which,  from  their  diminutive  size  and  close  texture,
in  the  beginning  of  the  season,  escape  the  powers  of  vision,  and
present  themselves  as  constituting  an  uniform  body,  bearing
the  strongest  resemblance  to  the  milt  of  the  male  regularly
coagulated.  By  and  by  they  are  seen  in  the  guise  of  minute
grains  of  sand,  adhering  together  within  their  follicles.

In  the  smaller  birds  that  lay  but  once  a year,  and  a few  eggs
only,  you  will  scarcely  discover  any  ovary.  Still,  in  the  place
where  the  testicles  are  situated  in  the  male,  there  in  the  female,
and  not  less  obviously  than  the  testicles  of  the  male,  you  wiU
perceive  three  or  four  vesicles  (the  number  being  in  proportion  to
that  of  the  eggs  of  which  they  are  the  rudiments),  by  way  of
ovary.

In  the  cornua  of  the  uterus  of  snakes  (which  resemble  the
vasa  deferentia  in  male  animals),  the  first  rudiments  of  the  ova
present  themselves  as  globules  strung  upon  a thread,  in  the
same  way  as  women^s  bracelets,  or  like  a rosary  composed  of
amber  beads.

Those  ova  that  are  found  in  the  ovary  of  the  fowl  conse-
quently are  not  to  be  regarded  as  perfect  eggs,  but  only  as  their
rudiments ; and  they  are  so  arranged  on  the  cluster,  they  suc-
ceed each  other  in  such  an  order  and  of  such  dimensions,  that
they  are  always  ready  for  each  day’s  laying.  But  none  of  the
eggs  in  the  ovary  are  surrounded  with  albumen ; there  the  yelk
exists  alone,  and  each,  as  it  enlarges,  extricates  itself  from  the

12


178


ON  GENERATION.


general  congeries  of  smaller  ones^  in  order  that  it  may  the  more
readily  find  space  to  grow.  Fabricius,  therefore,  is  right  when
he  says,i  “ The  yelks  which  are  on  the  surface  of  the  cluster
are  larger  than  those  of  the  middle,  which  are  surrounded  as  it
were  by  the  larger  ones.  The  very  smallest  of  all  the  ova  are
situated  towards  the  centre.^^  That  is  to  say,  those  that  grow
acquire  larger  dimensions  and  become  detached  from  the  rest,
and  as  this  proceeds,  the  several  yelks,  besides  their  tunica
propria,  are  invested  with  another  from  the  ovary,  which  em-
braces them  externally,  and  connects  them  with  the  base  whence
they  spring.  This  coat  is,  therefore,  entitled  the  peduncle  by
Fabricius,  and  its  office  is  that  of  a foot-stalk,  viz.  to  supply
nourishment  to  the  o\atm,  in  the  same  way  as  fruit  is  nourished
through  the  stalk  by  which  it  is  connected  with  the  tree.  “ For
this  peduncle  is  a hollow  membranous  bond  of  union,  extending
from  the  foundation  of  the  cluster  [the  stroma  of  the  ovary]  to
the  yelk,  coming  into  contact  with  which,  it  is  dilated  and  ex-
panded in  the  same  way  as  the  optic  nerve  in  the  eye,  and  covers
the  vitellus  with  an  external  tunic.  This  perchance  was  what
Aristotle  called  the  oroXoi^  o/LicpaXoio^Tiv,  or  lunbilical  appendix,
and  described  as  forming  a kind  of  tube.  This  peduncle  in-
cludes numerous  vessels,  which  are  distributed  on  all  sides
around  the  yelk.

So  much  is  accurately  related  by  Fabricius ; but  he  errs  when
he  says,  “ This  tunic  does  not  surround  the  entire  vitellus,  but
only  extends  upon  it  a little  beyond  the  middle,  very  much  in
the  manner  of  an  acorn  within  its  cup ; whence  it  comes  that
the  outer  portion  of  the  yelk,  which  is  not  invested  by  the
membrane  in  question,  presents  itself  free  from  vessels,  and  to
appearance  naked.”  The  membrane,  nevertheless,  surrounds
the  yelk  completely;  but  on  the  outer  aspect  it  is  not  very  easily
distinguished  from  the  tunica  propria,  both  of  them  being  of
extreme  delicacy.  Posteriorly,  however,  and  where  the  yelk  is
tiuned  towards  the  basis  of  the  cluster,  the  tunic  in  question
does  not  adhere  to  the  Autellus,  neither  does  it  send  any  vessels
to  this  part,  but  merely  embraces  it  m the  manner  of  a sac.

Each  vitellus  receives  a distinct  tunic  from  the  ovarian  basis ;
whence  this  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  the  common  uteinis,  since


Op.  cit.  p.  3.


ON  GENERATION.


179


nothing  is  discovered  here  except  the  cluster  or  heap  of  ova,  of
many  dijfferent  sizes,  proceeding  from  the  same  foundation.

Now,  this  foundation  or  basis  is  a body  sui  generis,  arising
on  the  spine  of  the  feathered  kinds,  connected  by  means  of  large
arteries  and  veins,  and  of  a loose,  porous,  and  spongy  texture,  in
order  that  miiltitudes  of  ova  may  be  produced  from  it,  and  that
it  may  supply  tunics  to  all ; which  tunics,  when  the  yelks  have
grown  to  their  fuU  size,  are  distended  by  them,  and  then  the
tunics  surround  the  vitelli,  in  the  manner  of  sacks  with  nar-
rower necks  and  more  capacious  bellies,  very  much  like  the
flasks  that  are  formed  by  the  breath  of  the  glass-blower.

Fabricius  then  proceeds : “ The  yelks,  as  they  proceed  from
small  beginnings,  from  the  size  of  millet  or  mustard  seeds,  and
are  at  first  not  only  extremely  small,  but  colourless,  as  Aristotle
says,  so  do  they  increase  by  degrees,  and,  according  to  Aristotle,
become  first  of  a paler  and  then  of  a deeper  yellow,  until  they
have  attained  to  the  dimensions  familiar  to  all.^^  I,  however,
have  observed  ova  vastly  smaller  than  millet  seeds,  ova  which,
hke  papulae  or  sudamina,  or  the  finest  grains  of  sand,  (such  as
we  have  indicated  as  found  in  the  roe  of  fishes,)  almost  escaped
the  powers  of  sight ; their  places,  indeed,  were  only  proclaimed
by  a kind  of  roughness  of  the  membranes.


EXERCISE  THE  FOURTH.

Of  the  infundibulum.

The  next  succeeding  portion  of  the  uterus  of  the  common
fowl  is  called  the  infundibulum  by  Fabrieius.  It  forms  a kind
of  funnel  or  tube,  extending  downwards  from  the  ovary,  (which
it  everywhere  embraces,)  and  becoming  gradually  wider,  termi-
nates in  the  superior  produced  portion  of  the  uterus.  This  in-
fundibulum yields  a passage  to  the  yelks  when  they  have  broken
from  their  foot-stalks  in  their  descent  from  the  ovary  into  the
second  uterus  (so  it  is  styled  by  Fabricius).  It  resembles  the
tunica  vaginahs  in  the  scrotum,  and  is  a most  delicate  mem-
brane, very  easily  dilatable,  fitted  to  receive  the  yelks  that  are
daily  cast  loose,  and  to  transmit  them  to  the  uterus  mentioned.


180


ON  GENERATION.


Would  you  liave  an  example  of  these  structures  ? Figure  to
yourself  a small  plant,  whose  tuberous  roots  should  represent
the  congeries  of  yelks  ; its  stalk  the  infundibulum.  Kow,  as
the  stalk  of  this  plant  dies  in  the  winter  and  disappears,  in  hke
manner,  when  the  fowl  ceases  to  lay  eggs,  the  whole  ovary,  with
the  infundibulum,  withers,  shrinks,  and  is  annulled ; the  basis
[stroma]  and  indication  of  the  roots  being  still  left.

This  infundibulum  seems  only  to  discharge  the  office  of  a
conduit,  or  tube  of  passage  : the  yelk  is  never  observed  sticking
in  it ; but  as  the  testes  at  times  creep  upwards  through  the  tu-
nic8e  vaginales  into  the  groins,  and  in  some  animals — the  hare
and  the  mole — even  become  concealed  uithin  the  abdomen,  and
nevertheless  again  descend  and  show  themselves  externally,  so
are  the  vitelli  transmitted  through  the  infundibulum  from  the
ovary  into  the  uterus.  Its  office  is  served,  and  even  its  form  is
imitated,  by  the  funnel  which  we  make  use  of  when  we  pour
fluids  from  one  vessel  into  another  having  a naiTower  mouth.


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTH,

Of  the  external  portion  of  the  uterus  of  the  common  fowl.

Fabiicius  pursues  his  account  of  the  uterus  after  having  de-
scribed the  ovary,  and  in  such  an  inverse  order,  that  he  pre-
mises a description  of  the  superior  portion  or  appendage  of  the
uterus  before  he  approaches  the  uterus  itself.  He  assigns  to  it
three  tuims  or  spirals,  with  somewhat  too  much  of  precision  or
determinateuess,  and  settles  the  respective  situations  of  these
spirals,  which  are  nevertheless  of  uncertain  seat.  Here,  too,
he  very  unnecessarily  repeats  his  definition  of  the  infundibulum.
I would,  therefore,  in  this  place,  beg  to  be  allowed  to  give  my
own  account  of  the  uterus  of  the  fowl,  according  to  the  ana-
tomical method,  which  I consider  the  more  convenient,  and  pro-
ceeding from  external  to  internal  parts,  in  opposition  to  the
method  of  Fabricius.

In  the  fowl  stripped  of  its  feathers,  the  fundament  will  be  ob-
served not  contracted  circularly,  as  in  other  animals,  hut  form-
ing a depressed  orifice,  slit  transversely,  and  consisting  of  two  bps


ON  GENERATION.


181


lying  over  against  each  otherj  the  superior  of  the  two  covering
and  concealing  the  inferior,  which  is  puckered  together.  The
superior  labium,  or  velabrum,  as  it  is  called,  arises  from  the  root
of  the  rump,  and  as  the  upper  eyelid  covers  the  eye,  so  does  this
cover  the  three  orifices  of  the  pudenda,  viz.  the  anus,  the  uterus,
and  the  ureters,  which  lie  concealed  under  the  velabrum  as
under  a kind  of  prepuce ; very  much  as  in  the  pudenda  of  the
woman  we  have  the  orifice  of  the  vulva  and  the  meatus  uriuarius
concealed  between  the  labia  and  the  nymphse.  So  that  without
the  use  of  the  knife,  or  a somewhat  forcible  retraction  of  the
velabrum  in  the  fowl,  neither  the  orifice  by  which  the  faeces  pass
from  the  intestines,  nor  that  by  which  the  urine  issues  from  the
ureters,  nor  yet  that  by  which  the  egg  escapes  from  the  uterus,
can  he  perceived.  And  as  the  two  excrementitious  discharges
(the  urine  and  the'  faeces)  are  expelled  together  as  from  a
common  cloaca,  the  velabrum  being  raised  at  the  time,  and
the  respective  outlets  exposed;  so,  during  intercourse,  the  hen
on  the  approach  of  the  cock  uncovers  the  vulva,  and  prepares
for  his  reception,  a cu’cumstance  observed  by  Fabricius  in  the
turkey  hen  when  she  is  eager  for  the  male.  I have  myself  ob-
served a female  ostrich,  when  her  attendant  gently  scratched
her  back,  which  seemed  to  excite  the  sexual  appetite,  to  lie
down  on  the  ground,  lift  up  the  velabrum,  and  exhibit  and
protrude  the  vulva,  seeing  which  the  male,  straightway  inflamed
with  a like  oestrum,  mounted,  one  foot  being  kept  firm  on  the
ground,  the  other  set  upon  the  back  of  the  prostrate  female ;
the  immense  penis  (you  might  imagine  it  a neat’s  tongue  !)
vibrated  backwards  and  forwards,  and  the  process  of  intercourse
was  accompanied  with  much  ado  in  murmuring  and  noise —
the  heads  of  the  creatures  being  at  the  same  time  frequently
thrust  out  and  retracted — and  other  indications  of  enjoyment.
Nor  is  it  peculiar  to  birds,  but  common  to  animals  at  large,
that,  wagging  the  tail  and  protruding  the  genital  parts,  they
prepare  for  the  access  of  the  male.  And,  indeed,  the  tail
in  the  majority  of  animals  has  almost  the  same  office  as  the  ve-
labrum in  the  common  fowl;  unless  it  were  raised  or  drawn
aside,  it  would  interfere  with  the  discharge  of  the  faeces  and  the
access  of  the  male.

In  the  female  red-deer,  fallow-deer,  roe,  and  others  of  the
more  temperate  animals,  there  is  a corresponding  protection  to


182


ON  GENERATION.


their  private  parts,  a membranous  velabrum  covering  the  vulva
and  meatus  urinarius,  which  must  be  raised  before  the  penis  of
the  male  can  be  introduced.

In  animals  that  have  a tad,  moreover,  parturition  could  not
take  place  unless  this  part  were  lifted  up  ; and  even  the  human
female  is  assisted  in  her  labour  by  having  the  coccyx  anointed
and  drawn  outwards  with  the  finger.

A surgeon,  a trustworthy  man,  and  with  whom  I am  upon
intimate  terms,  on  his  return  from  the  East  Indies  informed
me,  in  perfect  sincerity,  that  some  inland  and  mountainous  parts
of  the  island  of  Borneo  are  still  inhabited  by  a race  of  caudate
human  beings  (a  circumstance  of  which  we  also  read  in  Pausa-
nias),  one  of  whom,  a virgin,  who  had  only  been  captured  with
great  difficulty,  for  they  five  in  the  woods,  he  himself  had  seen,
with  a tad,  thick,  fleshy,  and  a span  in  length,  reflected  between
the  buttocks,  and  covering  the  anus  and  pudenda : so  regularly
has  nature  willed  to  cover  these  parts.

To  return.  The  structure  of  the  velabrum  in  the  fowl  is  like
that  of  the  upper  eyehd ; that  is  to  say,  it  is  a fleshy  and  mus-
cular fold  of  the  skin,  having  fibres  extending  from  the  circum-
ference on  every  side  towards  the  centre ; its  inner  surface,  hke
that  of  the  eyelid  and  prepuce,  being  soft.  Along  its  margin
also  there  is  a semicu’cular  tarsus,  after  the  manner  of  that  of  the
eyelid ; and  in  addition,  between  the  skin  and  fleshy  membrane,
an  interposed  cartilage,  extending  from  the  root  of  the  rump,
the  sickle-shaped  tarsus  being  connected  with  it  at  right  angles,
(very  much  as  we  observe  a smaU  tad  comprehended  between
the  wing  on  either  side,  in  bats).  By  this  structure  the  vela-
brum is  enabled  more  readdy  to  open  and  close  the  foramina
pudendi  that  have  been  mentioned.

The  velabrum  being  now  raised  and  removed,  certain  fora-
mina are  brought  into  view,  some  of  which  are  veiy  distinct,
others  more  obscure.  The  more  ob\ious  are  the  anus  and  ’^mlva,
or  the  outlet  of  the  faecal  matters  and  the  inlet  to  the  utenis.
The  more  obscure  are,  first,  that  by  which  the  urine  is  excreted
from  the  kidneys,  and,  second,  the  small  orifice  discovered  by
Fabricius,  “■  into  which,”  he  says,  “the  cock  immits  the  sper-
matic fluid,”  a foramen,  however,  which  neither  Antony  Idm,  a
careful  dissector,  has  indicated  in  Aldrovandus,  nor  any  one  else
except  Fabricius,  so  far  as  I know,  has  ever  obsened.


ON  GENERATION.


183


All  these  foramina  are  so  close  to  one  another  that  they  seem
almost  to  meet  in  a single  cavity,  which,  as  being  common  to
the  faeces  and  urine,  may  be  called  the  cloaca.  In  this  cavity,
the  urine,  as  it  descends  from  the  kidneys,  is  mingled  with  the
feculent  matters  of  the  bowels,  and  the  two  are  discharged
together.  Through  this,  too,  the  egg,  as  it  is  laid,  forces
itself  a passage.

Now,  the  arrangements  in  this  cavity  are  such,  that  both
excrements  descending  into  a common  sac,  the  urine  is  made
use  of  as  a natural  clyster  for  their  evacuation.  The  cloaca  is
therefore  thicker  and  more  rugous  than  the  intestine ; and  at
the  moment  of  laying  and  of  coition,  it  is  everted,  (the  velabrum
which  covers  it  being  raised  as  I have  already  said,)  the  lower
portion  of  the  bowel  being  as  it  were  prolapsed.  At  this  mo-
ment all  the  foramina  that  terminate  in  the  cloaca  are  conspi-
cuous ; on  the  return  or  reduetion  of  the  prolapsed  portion,
however,  they  are  concealed,  being  all  collected  together  as  it
were  into  the  common  purse  or  pouch.

The  more  conspicuous  foramina,  those,  viz.  of  the  anus  and
uterus,  are  situated,  with  reference  to  one  another,  differently
in  birds  from  what  they  are  in  other  animals.  In  these  the
pudendum,  or  female  genital  part,  is  situated  anteriorly  between
the  rectum  and  bladder ; in  birds,  however,  the  exerementitious
outlet  is  placed  anteriorly,  so  that  the  inlet  to  the  uterus  is
situated  between  this  and  the  rump.

The  foramen,  into  which  Fabricius  believes  the  cock  to  inject
his  fluid,  is  discovered  between  the  oriflce  of  the  vulva  and  the
rump.  I,  however,  deny  any  such  use  to  this  foramen ; for  in
young  chickens  it  is  scarcely  to  be  seen,  and  in  adults  it  is  pre-
sent indifferently  both  in  males  and  females.  It  is  obvious,
therefore,  that  it  is  both  an  extremely  small  and  obscure  orifiee,
and  can  have  no  sueh  important  function  to  perform : it  will
scarcely  admit  a fine  needle  or  a bristle,  and  it  ends  in  a blind
cavity ; neither  have  I ever  been  able  to  discover  any  spermatic
fluid  within  it,  although  Fabricius  asserts  that  this  fluid  is  stored
up  there  even  for  a whole  year,  and  that  all  the  eggs  eontained
in  the  ovary  may  be  thence  fecundated,  as  it  is  afterwards
stated.

All  birds,  serpents,  oviparous  quadrupeds,  and  likewise
fishes,  as  may  readily  be  seen  in  the  carp,  have  kidneys  and


184


ON  GENERATION.


ureters  through  which  the  urine  distils,  a fact  which  was  un-
known to  Aristotle  and  philosophers  up  to  this  time.  In  birds
and  serpents,  which  have  spongy  or  largely  vesicular  lungs,  the
quantity  of  urine  secreted  is  small,  because  they  drink  little,  and
that  by  sipping;  there  was,  therefore,  no  occasion  for  an  urinary
bladder  in  these  creatures : the  renal  secretion,  as  already
stated,  is  accumulated  in  a common  ca^uty  or  cloaca,  along  with
the  di’ier  intestinal  excrement.  Nevertheless,  I do  find  an
urinary  bladder  in  the  carp  and  some  other  fishes.

In  the  common  fowl  the  ureters  descend  from  the  kidneys,
which  are  situated  in  long  and  ample  cavities  on  either  side  of
the  hack,  to  terminate  in  the  common  ca-vity  or  cloaca.  Their
terminations,  however,  are  so  ohsciue  and  so  hidden  by  the
margin  of  the  ca\dty,  that  to  discover  them  from  without  and
pass  a fine  probe  into  them  would  be  found  impossible.  Nor
is  this  at  all  siuprising,  because  in  all,  even  the  largest  animals,
the  insertion  of  the  ureters  near  the  neck  of  the  bladder  is  so
tortuous  and  obscure,  that  although  the  luine  distils  freely  from
them  into  the  bladder,  and  calculi  even  make  their  Avay  out  of
them,  still  neither  fluids  nor  air  can  be  made  to  enter  them
by  the  use  of  any  amount  of  force.  On  the  other  hand,  in
birds  as  well  as  other  animals,  a probe  or  a bristle  passed
downwards  from  the  kidney  towards  the  bladder  by  the  ureters,
readily  makes  its  way  into  the  cloaca  or  bladder.

These  facts  are  particularly  distinct  in  the  ostrich,  in  which,
besides  the  external  orifice  of  the  common  cavity  which  the
velahrum  covers,  I find  another  within  the  anus,  ha^■ing  a round
and  constricted  orifice,  shutting  in  some  sort  in  the  manner  of
a sphincter.

Passing  by  these  particulars,  however,  let  us  tuim  to  others
that  bear  more  immediately  upon  our  subject.  The  uterine
outlet  or  vulva,  then,  or  the  passage  from  the  common  carity  to
the  uterus  of  the  fowl,  is  a certain  protnberance,  soft,  lax,
wrinkled,  and  orbicular,  resembling  the  orifice  of  the  prepuce
Avhen  closed,  or  appearing  as  if  formed  by  a prolapse  of  the  in-
ternal membrane  of  the  uterus.  Now  this  outlet  is  situated,  as
I have  said,  between  the  anus  and  rump,  and  shghtly  to  the  left
of  the  middle  line  of  the  body,  which  Ulysses  Aldi’ovandi  ima-
gines to  he  for  the  purpose  of  “ facilitating  intercoui’se,  and  the
entrance  of  the  genital  organ  of  the  cock.’’  I have  myself  ob-


ON  GENERATION.


185


served,  however,  repeatedly,  that  the  hen  turned  the  common
orifice  to  the  right  or  left  indifferently,  according  to  the  side
from  which  the  cock  approached  her.  Neither  do  I find  any
penis  in  the  cock — neither,  indeed,  could  Fabricius, — although
in  the  goose  and  duck  it  is  very  conspicuous.  But  in  its  stead
I discover  an  orifice  in  the  cock,  not  otherwise  than  in  the  hen,
although  it  is  smaller  and  more  contracted  in  her  than  in  him  ;
and  in  the  swan,  goose,  and  duck  the  same  thing  also  appears,
the  penis  of  the  male  goose  and  duck  protruding  through  this
orifice  during  intercourse.

In  a black  drake  I noticed  the  penis  of  such  a length  that
after  intercourse  it  trailed  on  the  ground,  and  a fowl  following,
pecked  at  it  greedily,  thinking  it  an  earth-worm,  as  I imagine,
so  that  it  was  retracted  more  quickly  than  usual.

In  the  male  ostrich  I have  found  within  this  pudendal  orifice
a very  large  glans,  and  the  red  body  of  the  penis,  as  we  discover
them  within  the  prepuce  of  the  horse,  resembling  a deer’s  or  a
small  neat’s  tongue  in  form  and  magnitude ; and  I have  fre-
quently observed  this  organ,  rigid  and  somewhat  hooked  during
the  coitus,  and  when  entered  into  the  vulva  of  the  female,  held
for  some  considerable  time  there  without  any  movement  : it  was
precisely  as  if  the  two  creatures  had  been  fastened  together
with  a nail.  Meantime,  by  the  gesticulations  of  their  heads
and  necks,  and  by  their  noises,  they  seemed  to  notify  their
nuptials,  and  to  express  the  great  degree  of  pleasure  they
experienced.

I have  read  in  a treatise  of  Dr.  Du  A^al,  a learned  physician  of
Rouen,  that  a certain  hermaphrodite  was  referred  to  the  sur-
geons and  accoucheurs,  that  they  might  determine  whether  it
were  a man  or  a Avoman.  They,  from  an  examination  of  the
genital  organs,  adjudged  the  party  to  he  of  the  feminine  gender,
and  a dress  in  accordance  with  this  decision  was  ordered.  By
and  by,  however,  the  individual  was  accused  of  soliciting  women,
and  of  discharging  the  man’s  office  ; and  then  it  was  found,
that  from  a prepuce,  as  from  the  private  parts  of  a woman,  a
penis  protruded,  and  served  to  perform  the  male’s  business.  I
have  myself  occasionally  seen  the  penis  of  a certain  man  so
greatly  shrunk  in  size,  that,  unless  Avhen  excited,  nothing  was
visible  in  the  Avrinkled  prepuce  above  the  scrotum  but  the  ex-
tremity of  the  glans.


186


ON  GENERATION.


In  the  horse  and  some  other  animals,  the  principal  and  am-
ple length  of  the  member  is  protruded  from  its  concealment.
In  the  mole,  too,  which  is  a small  animal,  there  is  a remarkable
retraction  of  the  penis  between  the  skin  and  muscles  of  the
belly ; and  the  vulva  in  the  female  of  this  creature  is  also  longer
and  deeper  than  usual.

The  cock,  which  is  without  a penis,  performs  copulation,  as
I imagine,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  smaller  bii’ds,  among
which  the  process  is  rapidly  executed,  and  by  mere  contact.
The  orifices  of  the  male  and  female  cloaca,  which  at  the  moment
are  protuberant  externally,  which,  especially  in  the  male,  be-
come tense  and  injected,  hke  the  glans  penis,  encounter,  and
coition  is  elfected  by  a succession  of  salutes,  not  by  any  longer
intromission  of  parts,  for  I do  not  think  that  the  organs  of  the
cock  enter  those  of  the  hen  at  all.

In  the  copulation  of  horses,  dogs,  cats,  and  the  like,  the  female
presents  her  organ  rigid  and  injected  to  the  penis  of  the  male.
And  this  also  takes  place  in  birds  which,  if  they  be  tame  and
suffer  themselves  to  be  handled,  when  inflamed  with  desire  pre-
sent their  parts,  which  will  then  be  found  resisting  and  hard  to
the  finger.

Birds  are  sometimes  so  lustful,  that  if  you  but  stroke  then.’
backs  gently  with  your  hand,  they  will  immediately  lie  down
and  expose  and  protrude  then’  uterine  orifice ; and  if  this  paid
be  touched  with  the  finger,  they  will  not  fail  to  proclaim  their
satisfaction.  And  that  the  females  may  thereby  be  made  to  lay
eggs,  as  testified  to  by  Aristotle,^  I have  myself  found  in  the
case  of  the  blackbird,  thmsh,  and  others.  I learned  the  fact,
indeed,  in  former  years  by  accident,  and  to  my  deti’iment ; for
my  nfife  had  a beautiful  parrot,  a great  pet,  learned  and  talka-
tive enough,  and  so  tame  that  it  was  allowed  to  roam  at  liberty
about  the  house : when  its  mistress  was  absent  it  sought  her
everywhere;  on  her  return  it  caressed  her,  and  loudly  proclaimed
its  joy ; when  called  to  it  would  answer;  would  fly  to  its  mistress,
and  then  seizing  her  clothes  with  beak  and  feet  alternately,  it
climbed  to  her  shoulder,  whence  creeping  down  the  arm,  it
reached  her  hand,  its  usual  seat.  When  ordered  to  speak  or
to  sing,  it  would  obey,  although  it  were  the  night  season  and


Hist.  Auim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  2.


ON  GENERATION.


187


quite  dark.  Full  of  play  and  lasciviousness,  it  would  frequently
sit  in  its  mistress’s  lap,  where  it  loved  to  have  her  scratch  its
head  and  stroke  its  back,  upon  which,  fluttering  with  its  wings
and  making  a gentle  noise,  it  testifled  the  pleasure  it  expe-
rienced. I believed  all  this  to  proceed  from  his  usual  fami-
liarity and  love  of  being  noticed  ; for  I always  regarded  the
creature  as  a male,  by  reason  of  his  proflciency  in  talking  and
singing.  For  among  birds,  the  females  rarely  sing  or  challenge
one  another  by  their  note } the  males  alone  solace  their  mates
by  their  tuneful  warblings,  and  call  them  to  the  rites  of  love.
And  it  is  on  this  account  that  Aristotle  says,^  If  partridges
he  placed  over  against  the  males,  and  the  wind  blow  towards
them  from  where  the  males  sit,  they  are  impregnated  and  con-
ceive. They  even  for  the  most  part  conceive  from  the  note  of
the  male  bird,  if  they  be  in  season  and  fuU  of  desire.  The
flight  of  the  male  over  them  will  also  have  the  same  effect,  the
male  bird  casting  down  a fertdizing  influence  upon  the  female.”
Now  this  happens  especially  in  the  spring  season,  whence  the
poet  sings


Earth  teems  in  Spring,  and  craves  the  genial  seed.

The  almighty  father,  ^ther,  then  descends.

In  fertilizing  showers,  into  the  lap

Of  his  rejoicing  spouse,  and  mingling  there

In  wide  embrace  sustains  the  progeny

Innumerous  that  springs.  The  pathless  woods

Then  ring  with  the  wild  bird’s  song,  and  flocks  and  herds

Disport  and  spend  the  livelong  day  in  love.


Not  loug  after  the  caressings  mentioned,  the  parrot,  which
had  lived  in  health  for  many  years,  fell  sick,  and  by  and  by
being  seized  with  repeated  attacks  of  convulsions,  seated  in
the  lap  of  its  mistress,  it  expired,  grievously  regretted.  Having
opened  the  body  in  search  of  the  cause  of  death,  I discovered
an  egg,  nearly  perfect,  in  the  uterus,  but  in  consequence  of  the
want  of  a male,  in  a state  of  putrefaction ; and  this,  indeed,
frequently  happens  among  birds  confined  in  cages,  which  show
desire  for  the  company  of  the  male.

These  and  other  instances  induce  me  to  believe  that  the


’ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  v,  cap.  5,  et  lib.  vi,  cap.  2.


^ Virgil,  Georg.  2.


188


ON  GENERATION.


common  fowl  and  tlie  pheasant  do  not  only  solace  their  females
with  their  crowing,  but  farther  give  them  the  faculty  of  pro-
ducing eggs  by  its  means ; for  when  the  cock  crows  in  the  night
some  of  the  hens  perched  near  him  bestir  themselves,  clapping
their  wings  and  shaking  their  heads ; shuddering  and  gesticu-
lating as  they  are  wont  to  do  after  intercomse.

A certain  bird,  as  large  again  as  a swan,  and  which  the  Dutch
call  a cassowary,  was  imported  no  long  time  ago  from  the  island
of  Java,  in  the  East  Indies,  into  Holland.  Ulysses  Aldrovan-
dus'  gives  a figure  of  this  bird,  and  informs  us  that  it  is  called
an  emeu  by  the  Indians.  It  is  not  a two-toed  bird,  like  the
ostrich,  but  has  three  toes  on  each  foot,  one  of  which  is  fur-
nished with  a spur  of  such  length,  strength,  and  hardness,  that
the  creature  can  easily  kick  through  a boai’d  two  fingers’
breadth  in  thickness.  The  cassowary  defends  itself  by  kicking
forwards.  In  the  body,  legs,  and  thighs  it  resembles  the  ostrich ;
it  has  not  a broad  bill  like  the  ostrich  however,  but  one  that  is
rounded  and  black.  On  its  head,  by  way  of  crest,  it  has  an
orbicular  protuberant  horn.  It  has  no  tongue,  and  devours
everything  that  is  presented  to  it — stones,  coals,  even  though
alight,  pieces  of  glass — all  without  distinction.  Its  feathers
sprout  in  pairs  from  each  particular  quill,  and  are  of  a black
colour,  short  and  slender,  approaching  to  hair  or  down  in  their
characters.  Its  w ings  are  very  short  and  imperfect.  The  whole
aspect  of  the  creatm’e  is  truculent,  and  it  has  numbers  of  red
and  blue  wattles  longitudinally  disposed  along  the  neck.

This  bird  remained  for  more  than  seven  years  in  Holland,
and  was  then  sent,  among  other  presents,  by  the  illustrious
Maurice  Prince  of  Orange,  to  his  serene  majesty  our  King
James,  in  whose  gardens  it  continued  to  hve  for  a period  of  up-
wards of  five  years.  By  and  by,  however,  when  a pair  of
ostriches,  male  and  female,  were  brought  to  the  same  place,  and
the  cassowaiy  heard  and  saw  these  in  a neighbouring  inclosm'e,
at  their  amours,  unexpectedly  it  began  to  lay  eggs,  excited,  as
I imagine,  through  sympathy  with  the  acts  of  an  allied  genus ;
I say  unexpectedly,  for  all  who  saw  the  cassowaiy,  judging  from
the  weapons  and  ornaments,  had  regai’ded  it  as  a male  rather
than  a female.  Of  these  eggs,  one  was  laid  entire,  and  this  1


' Oriiithol.  lib.  xx,  p.  541.


ON  GENERATION.


189


opened,  and  found  it  perfect ; the  yelk  surrounded  by  the  white,
the  chalazse  attached  on  either  side,  and  a small  cavity  in  the
blunt  end ; there  was  also  a cicatricula  or  macula  alba  present ;
the  shell  was  thick,  hard,  and  strong;  and  ha\dng  taken  off  the
top,  I had  it  formed  into  a cup,  in  the  same  way  as  ostrichs’  eggs
are  commonly  fashioned.  This  egg  was  somewhat  less  than
that  of  an  ostrich,  and,  as  I have  said,  perfect  in  all  respects.
Undoubtedly,  however,  it  was  a sort  of  accidental  egg,  and,  by
reason  of  the  absence  of  the  male,  unfruitful.  I predicated  the
death  of  the  cassowary  as  likely  to  happen  soon  when  she  began
laying,  moved  to  do  so  by  what  Aristotle  says  d “Birds  become
diseased  and  die  unless  they  produce  fruitful  eggs.”  And  my
prediction  came  true  not  long  afterwards.  On  opening  the  body
of  the  cassowary,  I discovered  an  imperfect  and  putrid  egg  in
the  upper  part  of  the  uteras,  as  the  cause  of  its  untimely  death,
just  as  I had  found  the  same  thing  in  the  parrot,  and  other  in-
stances besides.

Many  birds,  consequently,  the  more  salacious  they  are,  the
more  fruitful  are  they ; and  occasionally,  when  abundantly  fed,
or  from  some  other  cause,  they  will  even  lay  eggs  without  the
access  of  the  male.  It  rarely  happens,  however,  that  the  eggs
so  produced  are  either  perfected  or  laid;  the  birds  are  commonly
soon  seized  with  serious  disorders,  and  at  length  die.  The
common  fowl  nevertheless  not  only  conceives  eggs,  but  lays
them,  quite  perfect  in  appearance  too;  but  they  are  always  wind
eggs,  and  incapable  of  producing  a chick.  In  like  manner
many  insects,  among  the  number  silkworms  and  butterflies,  con-
ceive eggs  and  lay  them,  without  the  aecess  of  the  male,  but
they  are  still  adventitious  and  barren.  Fishes  also  do  the
same.

It  is  of  the  same  significance  in  these  animals  when  they  con-
ceive eggs,  as  it  is  in  young  women  when  their  uterus  grows  hot,
their  menses  flow,  and  their  bosoms  swell — in  a word,  when  they
become  marriageable ; and  who,  if  they  continue  too  long  un-
wedded, are  seized  with  serious  symptoms — hysterics,  furor
uterinus,  &c.  or  fall  into  a cachectic  state,  and  distemperatures
of  various  kinds.  All  animals,  indeed,  grow  savage  when  in
heat,  and  unless  they  are  suffered  to  enjoy  one  another,  become


Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iii.


190


ON  GENERATION.


changed  in  disposition.  In  like  manner  women  occasionally  be-
come insane  through  ungratified  desire,  and  to  such  a height
does  the  malady  reach  in  some,  that  they  are  heheved  to  be
poisoned,  or  moon-struck,  or  possessed  by  a devil.  And  this
would  certainly  occur  more  frequently  than  it  does,  without  the
infiuence  of  good  nurture,  respect  for  character,  and  the  modesty
that  is  innate  in  the  sex,  which  all  tend  to  tranquillize  the  in-
ordinate passions  of  the  mind.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTH.

Of  the  uterus  of  the  fowl.

The  passage  from  the  external  uterine  orifice  to  the  internal
parts  and  uterus  itself,  where  the  egg  is  perfected,  is  by  that
part  which  in  other  animals  is  called  the  vagina  or  vulva.  In
the  fowl,  however,  this  passage  is  so  intricate,  and  its  internal
membrane  is  so  loose  and  wrinkled,  that  although  there  is  a ready
passage  from  within  outwards,  and  a large  egg  makes  its  way
through  aU  without  much  difiiculty,  still  it  scarcely  seems  likely
that  the  penis  of  the  male  could  penetrate  or  the  spermatic  fluid
make  its  way  through  it ; for  I have  found  it  impossible  to  in-
troduce either  a probe  or  a bristle;  neither  could  Fabricius  pass
anything  of  the  sort,  and  he  says  that  he  could  not  even  inflate
the  uterus  with  air.  Whence  he  was  led  I fancy  to  give  an
account  of  the  utems,  proceeding  from  more  internal  to  more
external  parts.  Considering  this  structure  of  the  uterus  also,  he
denies  that  the  spermatic  fluid  of  the  male  can  reach  the  cavity
of  the  uteinis,  or  go  to  constitute  any  part  of  the  egg.^  To  this
statement  I most  willingly  subscribe;  for,  indeed,  there  is  nothing
in  the  fruitful  egg  which  is  not  also  in  the  baiTen  one ; there
is  nothing  in  the  way  of  addition  or  change  which  indicates
that  the  seminal  fluid  of  the  male  has  either  made  its  way  into
the  uterus,  or  come  into  contact  with  the  egg.  ^Moreover,  al-
though without  the  access  of  the  cock  all  eggs  laid  ai’e  winded
and  barren,  still  thi’ough  his  influence,  and  long  after  inter-


op. cit.  p.  31.


ON  GENERATION.


191


coTirsej  fruitful  eggs  are  deposited^  the  rudiments  or  matter  of
wliicli  did  not  exist  at  tlie  time  of  the  communication.

With  a view  to  explaining  how  the  spermatic  fluid  of  the
cock  renders  eggs  fecund,  Fahricius  says  “ Since  the  semen
does  not  appear  in  the  egg,  and  yet  is  thrown  into  the  uterus
hy  the  cock,  it  may  be  asked  why  this  is  done  if  the  fluid  does  not
enter  the  egg  ? Farther  ; if  not  present  in  the  egg,  how  is  that
egg  made  fruitfid  by  the  spermatic  fluid  of  the  cock  which  it  yet
does  not  contain  ? My  opinion  is  that  the  semen  of  the  cock
thrown  into  the  commencement  of  the  uterus,  produces  an  in-
fluence on  the  whole  of  the  uterus,  and  at  the  same  time  ren-
ders fruitful  the  whole  of  the  yelks,  and  Anally  of  the  perfect  eggs
which  fall  into  it ; and  this  the  semen  effects  hy  its  peculiar
property  or  irradiative  spirituous  substance,  in  the  same  manner
as  we  see  other  animals  rendered  fruitful  by  the  testicles  and
semen.  For  if  any  one  will  but  bring  to  mind  the  incredible
change  that  is  produced  hy  castration,  when  the  heat,  strength,
and  fecundity  are  lost,  he  will  readily  admit  that  what  we  have
proposed  may  happen  in  reference  to  the  single  uterus  of  a
fowl.  But  that  it  is  in  all  respects  true,  and  that  the  faculty
of  impregnating  the  whole  of  the  ova,  and  also  the  uterus  itself,
proceeds  from  the  semen  of  the  cock,  appears  from  the  custom
of  those  housewives  who  keep  hens  at  home  but  no  cock,  that
they  commit  their  hens  for  a day  or  two  to  a neighbour’s  cock,
and  in  this  short  space  of  time  the  whole  of  the  eggs  that  will
be  laid  for  a certain  season  are  rendered  prohfic.  And  this
fact  is  confirmed  hy  Aristotle,^  who  wiU  have  it  that,  among
birds,  one  intercourse  suffices  to  render  almost  all  the  eggs
fruitful.  For  the  fecundating  influence  of  the  seminal  fluid,
as  it  cannot  exhale,  so  is  it  long  retained  in  the  uterus,  to
which  it  imparts  the  whole  of  its  virtue ; nature  herself  stores
it  up,  placing  it  in  a cavity  appended  to  the  nterus,  near  the
fundament,  furnished  vdth  an  entrance  only,  so  that,  being  there
laid  up,  its  virtue  is  the  better  preserved  and  communicated  to
the  entire  uterus.”

I,  however,  suspected  the  truth  of  the  above  views,  all  the
more  when  I saw  that  the  words  of  the  philosopher  referred
to  were  not  accurately  quoted.  Aristotle  does  not  say  that


Op.  cit.  p.  37.


^ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  c.  1.


192


ON  GENERATION.


“ Birds  whicli  have  once  copulated  almost  all  continue  to  lay
prolific  eggs/’  but  simply  “ almost  all  continue  to  lay  eggs  /’
the  word  “ prolific”  is  an  addition  by  Fabricius.  But  it  is  one
thing  to  have  buds  conceiving  eggs  after  intercoui’se,  and  another
to  say  that  these  eggs  are  fruitful  through  this  intercourse.
And  this  is  the  more  obvious  from  Aristotle’s  pre\ious  words,
where  he  says,  “ Nor  in  the  family  of  birds  can  those  eggs  even
that  are  produced  by  intercourse  acquire  their  full  size  unless
the  intercourse  between  the  sexes  he  continued.  And  the  reason
is,  that  as  the  menstmal  excretion  in  w.omen  is  attracted  by
the  intercourse  of  their  husbands,  (for  the  uterus,  being  warmed,
draws  the  moisture,  and  the  passages  are  opened,)  so  in  birds
it  comes  to  pass  that,  as  the  menstruous  discharge  takes  place
very  gradually,  because  of  its  being  in  small  quantity,  it  cannot
make  its  way  externally,  hut  is  contained  superiorly  as  high  as
the  waist,  and  only  distils  down  into  the  utems  itself.  F or  the
egg  is  increased  by  tliis,  just  as  the  foetus  of  oviparous  animals  is
nourished  by  that  which  reaches  it  through  the  umhihcus.  For
when  once  birds  have  copulated,  almost  all  continue  to  lay  eggs,
hut  of  small  size  and  imperfect  /’  and  therefore  unprolific,  for
the  perfection  of  an  egg  is  its  being  fertile.  If,  therefore,
without  continued  intercom’se,  not  even  those  eggs  that  were
conceived  in  consequence  of  intercourse  grow  to  their  proper
size,  or,  as  Fabricius  interprets  it,  are  “ perfected,”  much  less
are  those  eggs  prolific  which  fowls  continue  to  lay  independently
of  intercourse  with  the  male  bird.

But  lest  any  one  shoidd  tliink  that  these  words,  “^rfor  the
uterus  warmed,  draws,  and  the  passages  are  opened,”  signify
that  the  uterus  can  attract  the  semen  masculinum  into  its  carfty,
let  them  he  aware  that  the  philosopher  does  not  say  that  the
uterus  attracts  the  semen  from  without  into  its  cavity,  hut  that
in  females,  from  the  veins  and  passages,  opened  by  the  heat
of  intercourse,  the  menstruous  blood  is  attracted  from  its  own
body ; so  in  buds  the  blood  is  attracted  to  the  utems,  warmed
by  repeated  intercourse,  whereby  the  eggs  grow,  as  the  foetus  of
oviparous  animals  grows  through  the  umbilicus.

But  what  Fabricius  adds  upon  that  carity  or  biusa,  in  which
he  thinks  the  semen  of  the  cock  may  be  stored  up  for  a whole
year,  has  been  abeady  refuted  by  us,  where  we  have  stated  that
it  contains  no  seminal  fluid,  and  that  it  exists  in  the  cock  as


ON  GENERATION.


193


well  as  in  tlie  Ren.  Wherefore^  thongh  I readily  believed  (if
by  fecnndity  we  are  to  understand  a greater  number  of  larger
eggs),  that  the  hens  of  poor  people,  indifferently  fed  in  all  pro-
babihty,  will  lay  both  fewer  and  smaller  eggs  unless  they  have
the  company  of  a cock ; agreeably  to  what  the  philosopher
quoted  avers,  viz.  : “ that  hens  which  have  once  been  trodden
continue  to  lay  larger,  better,  and  a greater  number  of  eggs
through  the  whole  of  the  year,^^  (a  result  on  which  the  abun-
dance and  the  good  quality  of  the  food  has  unquestionably  a
great  influence) ; still  that  hens  should  continue  for  a whole  year
to  lay  prolific  eggs  after  a few  addresses  of  the  cock,  appeared
to  me  by  no  means  probable  : for,  had  a small  number  of  con-
tacts sufficed  for  the  purposes  of  generation  during  so  long  a
period,  nature,  which  docs  nothing  in  vain,  would  have  con-
stituted the  males  among  birds  less  salacious  than  they  are ; nor
should  we  see  the  cock  soliciting  his  hens  so  many  times  a day,
even  against  their  inclination.

We  know  that  the  hen,  as  soon  as  she  quits  the  nest  where
she  has  just  laid  an  egg,  cackles  loudly,  and  seems  to  entice  the
cock,  who  on  his  part  crowing  lustily,  singles  her  out  and
straightway  treads  her,  which  surely  nature  had  never  permitted
unless  for  pni’poses  of  procreation.

A male  pheasant  kept  in  an  ariary  was  so  inflamed  with  lust,
that  unless  he  had  the  company  of  several  hen-birds,  six  at  the
least,  he  literally  maltreated  them,  though  his  repeated  ad-
dresses rather  interfered  with  their  breeding  than  promoted  it.
I have  seen  a single  hen-pheasant  shut  up  with  a cock-bird
(which  she  could  in  no  way  escape)  so  worn  out,  and  her  back
so  entirely  stript  of  feathers  through  his  reiterated  assaults,  that
at  length  she  died  exhausted.  In  the  body  of  this  bird,  how-
ever, I did  not  discover  even  the  rudiments  of  eggs.

I have  also  observed  a male  duck,  having  none  of  his  own
kind  with  him,  but  associating  with  hens,  inflamed  with  such
desire  that  he  would  follow  a pullet  even  for  several  hours,
would  seize  her  with  his  bill,  and  mounting  at  length  upon  the
creature,  worm  out  with  fatigue,  would  compel  her  to  submit  to
his  pleasure.

The  common  cock,  rictorious  in  a battle,  not  only  satisfies
his  desires  upon  the  sultanas  of  the  vanquished,  but  upon  the
body  of  his  rival  himself.


13


194


ON  GENERATION.


The  females  of  some  animals  are  likewise  so  libidinous  that
they  excite  their  males  by  pecking  or  biting  them  gently  about
the  head ; they  seem  as  if  they  whispered  into  their  ears
the  sweets  of  love ; and  then  they  mount  upon  theii’  backs  and
invite  them  by  other  arts  to  fruition  : among  the  number  may
be  mentioned  pigeons  and  sparrows.

It  did  not  therefore  appear  likely  that  a few  treads,  in  the
beginning  of  the  year,  should  suffice  to  render  fertile  the  whole
of  the  eggs  that  are  to  be  laid  in  its  course.

Upon  one  occasion,  however,  in  the  spring  season,  by  way  of
helping  out  Fabricius,  and  that  I might  have  some  certain  data
as  to  the  time  dm’ing  which  the  fecundating  influence  of  inter-
course would  continue,  and  the  necessity  of  renewed  communi-
cation, I had  a couple  of  hens  separated  from  the  cock  for  four
days,  each  of  which  laid  thi’ee  eggs,  all  of  which  were  prolific.
Another  hen  was  secluded,  and  the  egg  she  laid  on  the  tenth
day  afterwards  was  fruitful.  The  egg  which  another  laid  on
the  tAventieth  day  of  her  seclusion  also  produced  a chick.  It
would  therefore  seem  that  intercoiu’se,  once  or  tAvice  repeated,
suffices  to  impregnate  the  whole  bunch  of  yelks,  the  whole  of
the  eggs  that  will  be  laid  during  a certain  season.

I shall  here  relate  another  observation  which  I made  at  this
time.  When  I returned  two  of  the  hens,  which  I had  secluded
for  a time,  to  the  cock,  one  of  which  was  big  Avith  egg,  the
other  haA-ing  but  just  laid,  the  cock  immediately  ran  to  the  latter
and  trod  her  greedily  three  or  four  times ; the  fonner  he  went
round  and  round,  tripping  himself  Avith  his  Aving  and  seeming
to  salute  her,  and  wish  her  joy  of  her  return ; but  he  soon
returned  to  the  other  and  trod  her  again  and  again,  even  com-
pelling her  to  submit ; the  one  big  Avith  egg,  however,  he  always
speedily  forsook,  and  never  solicited  her  to  his  pleasure.  I
Avondered  with  myself  by  what  signs  he  knew  that  intercoxirse
Avoidd  advantage  one  of  these  hens  and  prove  unavailing  to
the  other.  But  indeed  it  is  not  easy  at  any  time  to  understand
how  male  animals,  even  from  a distance,  know  which  females
are  in  season  and  desirous  of  their  company ; whether  it  be  by
sight,  or  healing,  or  smell,  it  is  difficult  to  say.  Some  on
merely  hearing  the  voice  of  the  female,  or  smelling  at  the  place
where  she  has  made  water,  or  even  the  ground  over  which
she  has  passed,  are  straightway  seized  A\ith  desire  and  set  off


ON  GENERATION.


195


in  piu’suit  to  gratify  it.  But  I shall  have  more  to  say  on  this
subject  in  my  treatise  on  the  Loves,  Lusts,  and  Sexual  Acts  of
Animals.  I return  to  the  matter  we  have  in  hand.


EXERCISE  THE  SEVENTH.

Of  the  abdomen  of  the  common  fowl  and  of  other  birds.

From  the  external  orifice  proceeding  through  the  vulva  we
come  to  the  uterus  of  the  fowl,  in  which  the  egg  is  perfected,
sm’rounded  with  the  white  and  covered  with  its  shell.  But
before  speaking  of  the  situation  and  connections  of  this  part  it
seems  necessary  to  premise  a few  words  on  the  particular  ana-
tomy of  the  abdomen  of  birds.  For  I have  observed  that  the
stomach,  intestines,  and  other  viscera  of  the  feathered  kinds
were  otherwise  placed  in  the  abdomen,  and  differently  consti-
tuted, than  they  are  in  quadrupeds.

Almost  all  hhds  are  provided  with  a double  stomach  j one  of
which  is  the  crop,  the  other  the  stomach,  properly  so  called.
In  the  former  the  food  is  stored  and  undergoes  preparation,  in
the  latter  it  is  dissolved  and  converted  into  chyme.^  The  familiar
names  of  the  two  stomachs  of  birds  are  the  crop  or  craw,  and
the  gizzard.  In  the  crop  the  entire  grain,  &c.  that  is  swal-
lowed is  moistened,  macerated,  and  softened,  and  then  it  is  sent
on  to  the  stomach  that  it  may  there  be  crushed  and  commi-
nuted. For  this  end  almost  all  the  feathered  tribes  swallow
sand,  pebbles,  and  other  hard  substances,  which  they  preserve
in  their  stomachs,  nothing  of  the  sort  being  found  in  the  crop.
Now  the  stomach  in  bii’ds  consists  of  two  extremely  thick  and
powerful  muscles  (in  the  smaller  birds  they  appear  both  fleshy
and  tendinous),  so  placed  that,  hke  a pair  of  millstones  con-
nected by  means  of  hinges,  they  may  grind  and  bruise  the
food ; the  place  of  teeth,  which  bii’ds  want,  being  supplied  by
the  stones  which  they  swallow.  In  this  way  is  the  food  reduced
and  turned  into  chyme ^ ; and  then  by  compression  (just  as  we

' [The  word  in  the  original  is  chyle,  for  which,  in  accordance  with  modern  views,
chyme  is  substituted. — Ed.]


19G


ON  GENERATION.


are  wont,  after  having  bruised  an  herb  or  a fmit,  to  squeeze  out
the  juice  or  pulp)  the  softer  or  more  hqnid  part  is  forced  out,
comes  to  the  top,  and  is  transferred  to  the  commencement  of
the  intestinal  canal ; which  in  birds  takes  its  rise  from  the  upper
part  of  the  stomach  near  the  entrance  of  the  oesophagus.  That
this  is  the  case  in  many  genera  of  birds  is  obvious ; for  the
stones  and  other  hard  and  rough  substances  which  they  have
swallowed,  if  long  retained,  become  so  smooth  and  polished  that
they  are  unfit  to  comminute  the  food,  when  they  are  discharged.
Hence  birds,  when  they  select  stones,  tiy  them  with  their
tongue,  and,  unless  they  find  them  rough,  reject  them.  In  the
stomach  of  both  the  ostrich  and  cassowary  I found  pieces  of
iron  and  silver,  and  stones  much  worn  down  and  almost  reduced
to  nothing ; and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  \Tilgar  beheve  that
these  creatm’es  digest  u’on  and  are  nourished  by  it.

If  you  apply  the  body  of  a hawk  or  an  eagle,  or  other  bird  of
prey,  whilst  fasting,  to  your  ear,  you  will  hear  a distinct  noise,
occasioned  by  the  rubbing,  one  against  another,  of  the  stones
contained  in  the  stomach.  For  hawks  do  not  swallow  pebbles
with  a view  to  cool  their  stomachs,  as  falconers  commonly  but
erroneously  beheve,  but  that  the  stones  may  serve  for  the  com-
minution of  their  food;  precisely  as  other  buds,  which  have  mus-
cular stomachs,  swahow  pebbles,  sand,  or  something  else  of  the
same  nature,  to  crush  and  grind  the  seeds  upon  which  they  live.

The  stomach  of  buds,  then,  is  situated  within  the  cavity  of
the  abdomen,  beloAV  the  heart,  lungs  and  hver : the  crop,  how-
ever, is  without  the  body  in  some  sort,  being  situated  at  the
lower  part  of  the  neck,  over  the  os  jugale  or  meriy-thought.  In
this  bag,  as  I have  said,  the  food  is  only  macerated  and  softened ;
and  several  birds  regurgitate  and  give  it  to  theii’  young,  in
some  measure  as  quadrupeds  feed  their  progeny  with  milk  from
their  breasts ; this  occurs  in  the  whole  family  of  the  pigeons,
and  also  among  rooks.  Bees,  too,  when  they  have  returned  to
their  hives,  disgorge  the  honey  which  they  have  collected  from
the  flowers  and  concocted  in  their  stomachs,  and  store  it  in
their  waxen  cells ; and  so  also  do  hornets  and  wasps  feed  their
young.  The  bitch  has  likewise  been  seen  to  vomit  the  food
which  she  had  eaten  some  time  before,  in  a half-digested  state,
and  give  it  to  her  whelps  ; it  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  greatly


ON  GENERATION.


197


wondered  at,  if  we  see  the  poor  women,  who  beg  from  door  to
door,  when  their  milk  fails,  feeding  their  infants  with  food  which
they  have  chewed  and  reduced  to  a pulp  in  their  own  mouths.

The  intestines  commence  in  birds,  as  has  been  said,  from  the
upper  part  of  the  stomach,  and  are  folded  up  and  down  in  the
line  of  the  longitudinal  direction  of  the  body,  not  transversely
as  in  man.  Immediately  below  the  heart,  about  the  waist,  and
where  the  diaphragm  is  situated  in  quadrupeds,  for  birds  have
no  [muscular]  diaphragm,  we  find  the  liver,  of  ample  size,
di'idded  into  two  lobes  situated  one  on  either  side  (for  birds
have  no  spleen,)  and  filhng  the  hypochondria.  The  stomach
lies  below  the  liver,  and  downwards  from  the  stomach  comes  the
mass  of  intestines,  with  numerous  delicate  membranes,  full  of  air,
interposed;  the  trachea  opening  in  birds,  as  already  stated,  by
several  gaping  orifices  into  membranous  abdominal  cells.  The
kidneys,  which  are  of  large  size  in  birds,  are  of  an  oblong
shape,  look  as  if  they  were  made  up  of  fleshy  vesicles,  without
cavities,  and  lie  along  the  spine  on  either  side,  with  the  descend-
ing aorta  and  vena  cava  abdominalis  adjacent;  they  further  ex-
tend into  and  seem  to  lie  buried  within  ample  cavities  of  the  ossa
ilia.  The  ureters  proceed  from  the  anterior  aspects  of  the  kid-
neys, and  run  longitudinally  towards  the  cloaca  and  podex,  in
which  they  terminate,  and  into  which  they  pour  the  hquid
excretion  of  the  kidneys.  This,  however,  is  not  in  any  great
quantity  in  birds,  because  they  drink  little,  and  some  of  them,
the  eagle  for  example,  not  at  all.  Nor  is  the  urine  discharged
separately  and  by  itself,  as  in  other  animals ; but,  as  we  have
said,  it  distils  from  the  ureters  into  the  common  cloaca,  which
is  also  the  recipient  of  the  faeces,  and  the  discharge  of  which  it
facilitates.  The  m’ine  is  also  different  in  birds  from  what  it  is
in  other  animals;  for,  as  the  urine  in  the  generality  of  animals
consists  of  two  portions,  one  more  serous  and  hquid,  another
thicker,  which,  in  healthy  subjects  constitutes  the  hypostasis  or
sediment,  and  subsides  when  the  urine  becomes  cold ; so  is  it  in
birds,  but  the  sedimentary  portion  is  the  more  abundant,  and  is
distinguished  from  the  hquid  by  its  white  or  silvery  colour ; nor
is  this  sediment  met  with  only  in  the  cloaca,  (where  it  abounds,
indeed,  and  surrounds  the  faeces,)  but  in  the  whole  course  of  the
ureters,  which  are  distinguished  from  the  coverings  of  the
kidneys  by  their  white  colour.  Nor  is  it  only  in  birds  that


198


ON  GENERATION.


this  ahundant  thicker  renal  secretion  is  seen ; it  is  conspicuous
in  serpents  and  other  ovipara^  particularly  in  those  'whose  eggs
are  covered  with  a harder  or  firmer  membrane.  And  here,  too,
is  the  thicker  in  larger  proportion  than  the  thinner  and  more
serous  portion ; its  consistency  being  midway  between  thick
urine  and  stercoraceous  excrement : so  that,  in  its  passage
through  the  ureters,  it  resembles  coagulated  or  inspissated
milk  j once  discharged  it  soon  concretes  into  a friable  mass.


EXERCISE  THE  EIGHTH.

Of  the  situation  and  structure  of  the  remaining  parts  of
the  fowl’s  uteims.

Between  the  stomach  and  the  fiver,  over  the  spine,  and
where,  in  man  and  other  animals  the  pancreas  is  situated;
between  the  tnink  of  the  porta  and  the  deseending  cava;  at
the  origin  of  the  renal  and  spermatic  arteiies,  and  where  the
cseliac  artery  plunges  into  the  mesenteiy,  there,  in  the  fowl
and  other  birds,  do  the  ovary  and  the  cluster  of  yelks  present
themselves;  hartng  in  their  front  the  trunk  of  the  porta,  the
guUet,  and  the  orifice  of  the  stomach : behind  them,  the  vena
cava  and  the  aorta  descending  along  the  spine ; above  the  fiver,
and  beneath  the  stomach,  fie  adjacent.  The  infimdibulum,
therefore,  which  is  a most  delicate  membrane,  descends  from
the  ovary  longitudinally  "with  the  spine,  between  it  and  the
gizzard.  And  from  the  infimdibulum  (between  the  gizzai’d,
the  intestines,  the  kidneys,  and  the  loins,)  the  processns  nteri
or  superior  portion  of  this  organ  descends  with  a great  many
turnings  and  cells  (like  the  colon  and  rectum  in  man),  into  the
uterus  itself.  Now  the  uterus,  which  is  continuous  with  this
process,  is  situated  below  the  gizzard,  between  the  loins,  the
kidneys,  and  the  rectum,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,
close  to  the  cloaca;  so  that  the  egg  sruTounded  with  its  white,
which  the  uterus  contains,  is  situated  so  low  that,  ■with  the
fingers,  it  is  easy  to  ascertain  whether  it  be  soft  or  hard,  and
near  tlie  laying.

Tlie  uterus  in  the  common  fowl  vai'ies  both  in  point  of  size


ON  GENERATION.


199


and  of  structure.  In  the  fowl  that  is  with  egg,  or  that  has  lately
laid^  it  is  very  different  from  what  it  is  in  the  pullet,  the  uterus
of  which  is  fleshy  and  round,  hke  an  empty  purse,  and  its
cavity  so  insignificant  that  it  would  scarcely  contain  a bean ;
smooth  externally,  it  is  wrinkled  and  occupied  by  a few  longi-
tudinal plicae  internally ; at  first  sight  you  might  very  well
mistake  it  either  for  a large  urinary  bladder  or  for  a second
smaller  stomach.  In  the  gravid  state,  however,  and  in  the  fowl
arrived  at  maturity  (a  fact  which  is  indicated  by  the  redder
colour  of  the  comb),  the  uterus  is  of  much  larger  dimensions
and  far  more  fleshy;  its  plicae  are  also  larger  and  thicker,  it  in
general  approaches  the  size  which  we  should  judge  necessary  to
receive  an  egg;  it  extends  far  upwards  in  the  direction  of  the
spinal  column,  and  consists  of  numerous  divisions  or  cells,
formed  by  replications  of  the  extended  uterus,  similar  to  those
of  the  colon  in  quadrupeds  and  man.  The  inferior  portion  of
the  uterus,  as  the  largest  and  thickest,  and  most  fleshy  of  all,
is  strengthened  by  many  plicae  of  large  size.  Its  configuration
internally  is  oval,  as  if  it  were  the  mould  of  the  egg.  The
ascending  or  produced  portion  of  the  uterus  I designate  the
processus  uteri ; this  part  Fabricius  calls  the  “ uterus  secundus,”
and  says  that  it  consists  of  three  spiral  turns  or  flexures ;
Ulyssus  Aldrovandus,  again,  names  it  the  “ stomachum  uteri.'’^
I must  admit  that  in  this  part  there  are  usually  three  turns  to
be  observed ; they  are  not,  however,  by  any  means  so  regular
but  that,  as  in  the  case  of  the  cells  of  the  colon,  nature  some-
times departs  from  her  usual  procedure  here.

The  uterus  as  it  ascends  higher,  so  does  it  become  ever  the
thinner  and  more  delicate,  containing  fewer  and  smaller  plicae,
until  at  length  going  off  into  a mere  membrane,  and  that  of
the  most  flimsy  description,  it  constitutes  the  infundibulum ;
which,  reaching  as  high  as  the  waist  or  cincture  of  the  body,
embraces  the  entire  ovary.

On  this  account,  therefore,  Fabricius  describes  the  uterus  as
consisting  of  three  portions ; viz.,  the  commencement,  the
middle,  and  the  end.  “ The  commencement,”  says  he,  “ de-
generating into  a thin  and  most  delicate  membrane,  forms  an
ample  orifice,  and  bears  a resemblance  to  an  open-mouthed
tube  or  funnel.  The  next  portion  (which  I call  the  processus
uteri),  consisting  of  three  transverse  spiral  turns,  serves  for  the


200


ON  GENERATION.


supply  of  tlie  albumen,  and  extends  do'wnwards  to  tbe  most
inferior  and  capacious  portion — tbe  termination  of  tbe  uterus —
in  wbicb  tbe  cbalazse,  tbe  two  membranes,  and  tbe  shell  are
formedd”

Tbe  whole  substance  of  tbe  utenis,  particularly  tbe  parts
about  tbe  plicse,  both  in  its  body  and  in  its  process,  are  covered
with  numerous  ramifications  of  blood-vessels,  the  majority  of
wbicb  are  arterial  rather  than  venous  branches.

Tbe  folds  wbicb  appear  obbque  and  transverse  in  tbe  interior
of  tbe  uterus  are  fiesby  substances ; they  have  a fine  white  or
milky  colour,  and  a sluggish  fiuid  oozes  from  them,  so  that  tbe
whole  of  tbe  interior  of  tbe  uterus,  as  well  tbe  body  as  the
process,  is  moistened  with  an  abundance  of  thin  albumen,
whereby  tbe  viteUus  as  it  descends  is  increased,  and  the  albumen
that  is  deposited  around  it  is  gradually  perfected.

Tbe  uterus  of  tbe  fowl  is  rarely  found  otherwise  than  con-
taining an  egg,  either  sticking  in  tbe  spiral  process  or  an’ived
in  tbe  body  of  tbe  organ.  If  you  infiate  this  process  when  it  is
empty  it  then  presents  itself  as  an  obbque  and  contorted  tube,
and  rises  like  a turbinated  shell  or  cone  into  a point.  Tbe
general  arrangement  of  tbe  spirals  and  folds  composing  tbe
uterus,  is  such  as  we  have  already  observed  it  in  tbe  vulva :
there  is  a ready  enough  passage  for  tbe  descending  egg,  but
scarce  any  return  even  for  an  blown  in  towards  tbe  superior
parts.

Tbe  processus  uteri  with  its  spirals,  veiy  small  in  tbe  young
pullet,  is  so  much  diminished  in  tbe  ben  wbicb  has  ceased  la\-ing,
that  it  shrinks  into  tbe  most  debcate  description  of  membrane,
and  then  entirely  disappears,  so  that  no  trace  of  it  remains,  any
more  than  of  tbe  ovary  or  infundibidum  : nothing  but  a certain
glandular-looking  and  spongy  mass  appears  in  tbe  place  these
bodies  occupied,  Avbicb  in  a boiled  fowl  tastes  sweet,  and  beai*s
some  affinity  to  tbe  pancreas  and  thymus  of  young  mammiferous
animals,  wbicb,  in  tbe  vernacular  tongue,  ai’e  cabed  tbe  sweet-
bread.

Tbe  uterus  and  tbe  processus  uteri  are  connected  with  tbe
back  by  means  of  a membranous  attachment,  wbicb  Fabiicius
designates  by  tbe  name  of  “ mesometrium  ; because  tbe  second
uterus,  together  with  this  vascular  and  membranous  body,  may

' Fab.  1.  c.  p.  17.


ON  GENERATION.


201


very  faiiTy  be  compared  with  the  intestines  and  the  mesentery.”
For,  as  the  intestine  is  bound  down  by  the  mesentery,  so  is  this
portion  of  the  uterus  attached  to  the  spinal  column  by  an  ob-
long membranous  process ; lest  by  being  too  loose,  and  getting
twisted,  the  passage  of  the  yelks  should  be  interfered  with,  in-
stead of  hanng  a free  and  open  transit  afforded  them  as  at
present.  The  mesometrium  also  transmits  numerous  blood-
vessels surcharged  with  blood,  to  each  of  the  folds  of  the  uterus.
In  its  origin,  substance,  structure,  use,  and  office,  this  part  is
therefore  analogous  to  the  mesentery.  Moreover,  from  the
fundus  of  the  uterus  lengthwise,  and  extending  even  to  the
infundibulum,  there  is  a ligament  bearing  some  resemblance
to  a tape-worm,  similar  to  that  which  we  notice  in  the  upper
part  of  the  colon.  It  is  as  if  a certain  portion  or  stripe  of
the  external  tunic  had  been  condensed  and  shortened  in  such
a manner  that  the  rest  of  the  process  is  thrown  into  folds  and
cells : were  you  to  draw  a thread  through  a piece  of  intestine
taken  out  of  the  body,  and  to  tie  this  thread  firmly  on  one  side,
you  would  cause  the  other  side  of  the  bowel  to  pucker  up  into
wrinkles  and  cells ; [even  so  is  it  with  the  utei’us  of  the  fowl.]
This  then,  in  brief,  is  the  structure  of  the  uterus  in  the  fowl
that  is  laying  eggs : fleshy,  large,  extensible  both  longitudinally
and  transversely,  tortuous  or  winding  in  spirals  and  convolu-
tions from  the  cloaca  upwards,  in  the  line  of  the  vertebral
column,  and  continued  into  the  infundibulum.


EXERCISE  THE  NINTH.

Of  the  extrusion  of  the  egg,  or  parturition  of  the  fowl,  in  general.

The  yelk,  although  only  a minute  speck  in  the  ovary,  gaining
by  degrees  in  depth  of  colour  and  increasing  in  size,  gradually
acquires  the  dimensions  and  characters  that  distinguish  it  at
last.  Cast  loose  from  the  cluster,  it  descends  by  the  infun-
dibulum, and,  transmitted  through  the  spirals  and  cells  of  the
processus  uteri,  it  becomes  surrounded  with  albumen  •,  and  this,
without  in  any  place  adhering  to  the  uterus  (as  was  rightly
observed  by  Fabricius  in  opposition  to  Aristotle),  or  growing  by
means  of  any  system  of  umbilical  vessels ; but  as  the  eggs  of


202


ON  GENERATION.


fishes  and  frogs,  when  extruded  and  laid  in  the  water  pro^■ide
and  surround  themselves  with  albumen,  or  as  beans,  vetches,
and  other  seeds  and  grains  swell  when  moistened,  and  thence
supply  nourishment  to  the  germs  that  spring  from  them,  so,
from  the  folds  of  the  uterus  that  have  been  described,  as  from
an  udder,  or  uterine  placenta,  an  albuminous  fluid  exudes,
which  the  vitellus,  in  ^^rtue  of  its  inherent  vegetative  heat  and
faculty,  attracts  and  digests  into  the  surrounding  white.  There
is,  indeed,  an  abundance  of  fluid  having  the  taste  of  albumen,
contained  in  the  ca\dty  of  the  uterus  and  entangled  between  the
folds  that  cover  its  interior.  In  this  way  does  the  yelk,
descending  by  degrees,  become  smTounded  with  albumen,  until
at  last,  having  in  the  extreme  part  of  the  utenis  acquired  a
covering  of  flrmer  membranes  and  a harder  shell,  it  is  perfected
and  rendered  flt  for  extrusion.


EXERCISE  THE  TENTH.

Of  the  increase  and  nutrition  of  the  eyy.

Let  us  hear  Fabricius  on  these  topics.  He  says  : “ As  the
action  of  the  stomach  is  to  prepai’e  the  chyle,  and  that  of
the  testes  to  secrete  the  seminal  fluid,  (because  in  the  stomach
chyle  is  discovered,  and  in  the  testes  semen,)  so  we  declare
the  act  of  the  utems  in  bii’ds  to  be  the  production  of  eggs,
because  eggs  are  found  there.  But  this,  as  it  appears,  is  not
the  only  action  of  uteii;  to  it  must  be  added  the  increase  of  the
egg,  which  succeeds  immediately  upon  its  production,  and  which
proceeds  until  it  is  perfected  and  attains  its  due  size.  For  a
fowl  does  not  naturally  lay  an  egg  until  it  is  perfect  and  has
attained  to  its  proper  dimensions.  The  olfice  of  the  utenis  is,
therefore,  the  growth  as  weU  as  the  generation  of  the  egg;  hut
growth  imphes  and  includes  the  idea  of  nutrition ; and,  as
all  generation  is  the  act  of  two  piinciples,  one  the  agent,
another  the  matter,  the  agent  in  the  production  of  eggs  is
nothing  else  than  the  organs  or  instruments  indicated,  liz.,  the
compound  uterus;  and  the  matter  nothing  but  the  blood.”

AA^e,  studious  of  breiity,  and  shunning  all  controversy,  as  in


ON  GENERATION.


203


duty  bound,  as  we  readily  admit  that  tbe  office  and  use  of  the
uterus  is  the  procreation  of  the  egg,  so  do  we  maintain  the
“ adequate  efficient,”  as  it  has  been  called,  the  immediate  agent
to  inhere  in  the  egg  itself;  and  we  assert  farther,  that  the  egg
is  both  engendered  and  made  to  increase,  not  by  the  uterus,
but  by  a certain  natural  principle  peculiar  to  itself;  and  that
this  principle  flows  from  the  whole  fowl  into  the  rudiments  of
the  vitellus,  and  whilst  it  was  yet  but  a speck,  and  under  the
influence  either  of  the  calidum  innatum  or  of  nature,  causes  it
to  be  nourished  and  to  grow ; just  as  there  is  a certain  faculty
in  every  particle  of  the  body  which  secures  its  nutrition  and
growth.

As  regards  the  manner  in  which  the  yelk  is  surrounded  by
the  albumen,  Aristotle  appears  to  have  believed  ’ that  in  the
sharp  end  of  the  egg  (where  he  placed  the  commencement  of
the  egg),  whilst  it  was  yet  surrounded  by  soft  membranes,  there
existed  an  umbilical  canal,  by  which  it  was  nourished ; a view
which  Fabricius^  challenges,  denjdng  that  there  is  any  such
canal,  or  that  the  vitellus  has  any  kind  of  connexion  with  the
uterus.  He  farther  lessens  the  doubt  in  regard  to  the  albumen
of  the  extruded  egg,  observing,  that  the  egg  increases  in  a two-
fold manner,  inasmuch  as  the  uterus  consists  of  two  portions,
one  superior,  another  inferior;  and  the  egg  itself  consists  of
tv/o  matters — the  yelk  and  the  white.  The  yelk  increases  with
a true  growth,  to  wit,  by  means  of  the  blood,  which  is  sent  to
it  through  the  veins  whilst  it  is  yet  connected  with  the  Autella-
rium.  The  albumen,  however,  increases  and  grows  otherwise
than  the  yelk ; viz.,  not  by  means  of  the  veins,  nor  by  proper
nutrition  like  the  yelk,  but,  by  juxtaposition,  adhering  to  the
Htellus  as  it  is  passing  through  the  second  uterus.”

But  my  opinion  is,  that  the  egg  increases  everywhere  in  the
same  manner  as  the  yelk  does  in  the  cluster;  viz.  by  an  inherent
concocting  principle ; with  this  single  difference,  that  in  the
ovary  the  nomishment  is  brought  to  it  by  means  of  vessels,
whilst  in  the  uterus  it  finds  that  which  it  imbibes  already
prepared  for  it.  Juxtaposition  of  parts  is  equally  necessary  in
every  kind  of  nutrition  and  growth,  and  so  also  are  concoc-
tion and  distribution  of  the  applied  nutriment.  Nor  is  one  of
these  to  be  less  accounted  true  nutrition  than  the  other,  inas-
‘ De  General.  Animal,  lib.  iii,  cap.  2.  ^ Op  cit.  p.  11.


204


ON  GENERATION.


much  as  in  both  there  is  accession  of  new  aliment^  apposition,
agglutination,  and  transmutation  of  partieles.  Nor  can  vetches
or  beans,  when  they  attract  moisture  from  the  earth  through
their  skins,  imbibing  it  like  sponges,  be  said  with  less  propriety
to  be  nourished  than  if  they  had  obtained  the  needful  moisture
through  the  mouths  of  veins ; and  trees,  when  they  absorb  the
dew  and  the  rain  tlirough  their  bark,  are  as  truly  nourished  as
when  they  pump  them  in  by  their  roots.  With  reference  to
the  mode  in  which  nutrition  is  effected,  we  have  set  down  much
in  another  place.  It  is  another  difficulty  that  occupies  us  at
this  time,  viz.,  whether  the  yelk,  whilst  it  is  acquiring  the
white,  does  not  make  a certain  separation  and  distinction  in  it ;
whether,  in  the  course  of  the  increase,  a more  earthy  portion  does
not  subside  into  the  yelk  or  middle  of  the  egg  as  towards  the
centre,  which  Aristotle  believed,  and  another  lighter  portion  sur-
rounds this.  For  between  the  yelk  which  is  stiU  in  the  cluster,
and  the  yelk  which  is  found  in  the  middle  of  a perfect  egg,
there  is  this  principal  difference,  that  although  the  former  be  of
a yeUow  colour,  still,  in  point  of  consistence,  it  rather  resembles
the  white ; and  by  boiling,  it  is,  like  the  latter,  thickened,  com-
pacted, inspissated,  and  becomes  di^dsible  into  layers ; whilst
the  yelk  of  the  perfect  egg  is  rendered  friable  by  boiling,  and  is
rather  of  an  earthy  consistency,  not  thick  and  gelatinous  like
albumen.


EXERCISE  THE  ELEVENTH.

Of  the  covering  or  shell  of  the  egg.

It  will  now  be  proper,  ha-ving  spoken  of  the  production  of
eggs,  to  treat  of  their  parts  and  diversities.  “ An  egg,”  says
Fabricius,  “ consists  of  a yelk,  the  albumen,  two  chalazae,  three
membranes,  viz.  one  proper  to  the  ^itellus,  two  common  to  the
entire  egg,  and  a shell.  To  these  two  others  ai’e  to  be  added,
which,  however,  cannot  be  coiTectly  reckoned  among  the  parts
of  an  egg ; one  of  these  is  a small  cavity  in  the  blunt  end  of
the  egg,  under  the  shell  •,  the  other  is  a very  small  white  spot,
a kind  of  round  cicatricula  connected  with  the  sui’face  of  the
yelk.  The  history  of  each  of  these  pai’ts  and  accidents  must


ON  GENERATION.


205


now  be  given  more  particularly,  and  we  shall  begin  from  without
and  proceed  inwards.

“ The  external  covering  of  the  egg,  called  by  Pliny  the  cortex
and  putamen,  by  Quintus  Serenus  the  testa  ovi,  is  a hard  but
thin,  friable  and  porous  covering,  of  different  colours  in  different
cases — white,  light  green,  speckled,  &c.  All  eggs  are  not  fur-
nished with  a shell  on  their  extmsion : the  eggs  of  serpents  have
none;  and  some  fowls  occasionally,  though  rarely,  lay  eggs  that
are  without  shells.  The  shell,  though  everywhere  hard,  is  not
of  uniform  hardness;  it  is  hardest  towards  the  upper  end.”
From  this  Fabricius^  opines  that  we  are  to  doubt  as  to  the
matter  of  which,  and  the  season  at  which  the  shells  of  eggs  are
produced.  Aristotle^  and  Pbny^  aflS.nn  that  the  shell  is  not
formed  within  the  body  of  the  fowl,  but  when  the  egg  is  laid ;
and  that  as  it  issues  it  sets  by  coming  in  contact  with  the  air,
the  internal  heat  driving  off  moisture.  And  this,  says  Aristotle,"*^
is  so  arranged  to  spare  the  animal  pain,  and  to  render  the  pro-
cess of  parturition  more  easy.  An  egg  softened  in  vinegar  is
said  to  be  easily  pushed  into  a vessel  with  a narrow  mouth.

Fabricius  was  long  indisposed  to  this  opinion,  because  he
had  found  an  egg  within  the  body  of  the  fowl  covered  with  a
hard  shell;  and  housewives  are  in  the  daily  practice  of  trying  the
bellies  of  their  hens  with  their  fingers  in  order  that  they  may
know  by  the  hardness  whether  the  creatures  are  likely  to  lay
that  day  or  not.”  But  by-and-by,  when  “ he  had  been  assured
by  women  worthy  of  confidence,  that  the  shells  of  eggs  became
hardened  in  their  passage  into  the  aii’,  which  dissipates  a cer-
tain moisture  diffused  over  the  egg  on  its  exit,  fixing  it  in  the
shell  not  yet  completely  hardened;”  and  having  afterwards

confirmed  this  by  his  own  experience,”  he  altered  his  opinion,
and  came  to  the  conclusion,  “ that  the  egg  surrounded  with  a
shell,  and  having  a consistency  betwixt  hard  and  soft,  hardened
notably  at  the  moment  of  its  extrusion,  in  consequence,  ac-
cording to  Aristotle^s  views,  of  the  concretion  and  dissipation  of
the  thinner  part  of  a certain  viscid  and  tenacious  humour,
bedewed  with  which  the  egg  is  extruded;  sticking  to  the  recent
shell  this  humour  is  dried  up  and  hardened,  the  cold  of  the


‘ Loc.  cit.  p.  13.  ^ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  c.  2,  et  de  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  i,  c.  8.

“ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  x,  c.  52.  * De  Gener.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  c.  2.


206


ON  GENERATION.


ambient  air  contributing  somewhat  to  the  effect.  Of  all  this,”
he  says,  you  Avill  readily  be  satisfied  if  you  have  a fowl  in  the
house,  and  dexterously  catch  the  egg  in  your  hand  as  it  is
dropping.”

I was  myself  long  fettered  by  this  statement  of  Aristotle,  in-
deed until  certain  experience  had  assured  me  of  its  erroneousness;
for  I found  the  egg  still  contained  in  the  uterus,  almost  always
covered  with  a hard  shell ; and  I once  saw  an  egg  taken  from
the  body  of  a Imng  fowl,  and  still  waim,  without  a shell  but
covered  with  a tenacious  moisture;  this  egg,  however,  did  not  ac-
quire any  hardness  through  the  concretion  or  evaporation  of  the
moisture  in  question,  as  Fabricius  Avould  have  us  believe,  neither
was  it  in  any  way  changed  by  the  cold  of  the  suiTOunding  ah’ ;
but  it  retained  the  same  degree  of  softness  Avhich  it  had  had  in
the  uterus.

I have  also  seen  an  egg  just  laid  by  a fowl,  sun’ounded  by  a
complete  shell,  and  this  shell  covered  externally  with  a soft  and
membranous  skin,  wliich  howcA'cr  did  not  become  hard.  I
have  farther  seen  another  hen’s  egg  covered  Avith  a shell  every-
Avhere  except  at  the  extremity  of  the  shai’p  end,  where  a certain
small  and  soft  projection  remained,  vei’y  hkely  such  as  was  taken
by  Aristotle  for  the  remains  of  an  umbihcus.

Fabricius,  tberefore,  appears  to  me  to  haA’e  wandered  from
the  truth ; nor  Avas  I ever  so  dexterous  as  to  catch  an  egg  in
its  exit,  and  discover  it  in  the  state  between  soft  and  bal’d.
And  this  I confidently  assert,  that  the  shell  is  formed  internally,
or  in  the  uterus,  and  not  otherwise  than  all  the  other  parts  of
the  egg,  xiz.  by  the  pecuhar  plastic  power.  A statement  which
I make  all  the  more  confidently  because  I have  seen  a vei’y
small  egg  coA'ered  with  a shell,  contained  within  another  larger
egg,  perfect  in  all  respects,  and  completely  surrounded  Avith  a
shell.  An  egg  of  this  kind  Fabricius  calls  an  ovum  ceuteninum ;
and  our  housewives  ascribe  it  to  the  cock.  This  egg  I showed  to
his  serene  INIajesty  King  Charles,  my  most  gracious  master,  in
the  presence  of  many  persons.  And  the  same  year,  in  cutting
up  a large  lemon,  I found  another  perfect  but  very  small  lemou
included  Arithin  it,  having  a yellow  rind  like  the  other ; aud  I
hear  that  the  same  thing  has  frequently  been  seen  in  Italy.

It  is  a common  mistake  with  those  who  piu’sue  philosophical
studies  in  these  times,  to  seek  for  the  cause  of  diversity  of


ON  GENERATION.


207


parts  in  diversity  of  the  matter  whence  they  arise.  Thus  me-
dical men  assert  that  the  several  parts  of  the  body  are  both
engendered  and  nourished  by  diverse  matters^  either  the  hl'ood
or  the  seminal  fluid;  viz.  the  softer  parts,  such  as  the  flesh,
by  the  thinner  matter,  the  harder  and  more  earthy  parts,
such  as  the  bones,  &c.  by  the  firmer  and  thicker  matter.
But  we  have  elsewhere  refuted  this  too  prevalent  error.  Nor
do  they  err  less  who,  with  Democritus,  compose  all  things  of
atoms;  or  with  Empedocles,  of  elements.  As  if  generation  Yf eve
nothing  more  than  a separation,  or  aggregation,  or  disposition
of  things.  It  is  not  indeed  to  be  denied,  that  when  one  thing
is  to  be  produced  from  another,  all  these  are  necessary,  hut
generation  itself  is  different  from  them  all.  I find  Aristotle  to
be  of  this  opinion;  and  it  is  my  intention,  by-and-hy,  to  teach
that  out  of  the  same  albumen  (which  all  allow  to  be  uniform,
not  composed  of  diverse  parts,)  all  the  parts  of  the  chick,  bones,
nails,  feathers,  flesh,  &c.  are  produced  and  nomished.  More-
over, they  who  philosophize  in  this  way,  assign  a material  cause
[for  generation] , and  deduce  the  causes  of  natural  things  either
from  the  elements  concurring  spontaneously  or  accidentally,  or
from  atoms  variously  arranged;  they  do  not  attain  to  that  which
is  first  in  the  operations  of  nature  and  in  the  generation  and
nutrition  of  animals ; viz.  they  do  not  recognize  that  efficient
cause  and  dirinity  of  nature  which  works  at  all  times  with  con-
summate art,  and  proridence,  and  wisdom,  and  ever  for  a certain
purpose,  and  to  some  good  end;  they  derogate  from  the  honour
of  the  Divine  Architect,  who  has  not  contrived  the  shell  for  the
defence  of  the  egg  with  less  of  skill  and  of  foresight  than  he  has
composed  all  the  other  parts  of  the  egg  of  the  same  matter,  and
produced  it  under  the  influence  of  the  same  formative  faculty.

Although  what  has  already  been  said  be  the  fact,  namely,
that  the  egg,  even  whilst  contained  in  the  uterus,  is  prorided
with  a hard  shell,  stiU  the  authority  of  Aristotle  has  always
such  weight  with  me  that  I never  think  of  differing  from  him
inconsiderately;  and  I therefore  believe,  and  my  observations
bear  me  out  in  so  much,  that  the  shell  does  gain  somewhat  in
solidity  from  the  ambient  air  upon  its  extrusion ; that  the  slug-
gish and  shppery  fluid  with  which  it  is  moistened  when  laid,
immediately  becomes  hardened  on  its  exposme  to  the  air.  For
the  shell,  whilst  the  egg  is  in  the  uterus,  is  much  thinner  and


208


ON  GENERATION.


more  transparent^  and  smoother  on  the  surface;  when  laid,
however,  the  shell  is  thicker,  less  translucid,  and  the  surface  is
rough — it  appears  as  if  it  were  powdered  over  with  a fine  white
dust  which  had  but  just  adhered  to  it.

Let  us,  as  we  are  upon  this  subject,  expatiate  a little  : —

In  the  desert  islands  of  the  east  coast  of  Scotland,  such
flights  of  almost  every  kind  of  sea-fowl  congregate,  that  were  I
to  state  what  I have  heard  from  parties  very  worthy  of  credit,
I fear  I should  be  held  guilty  of  telling  greater  stories  than
they  who  have  committed  themselves  in  regard  to  the  Scottish
geese  produced,  as  they  say,  from  the  fruits  of  certain  trees  that
had  fallen  into  the  sea.  These  geese  the  naiTators  themselves
had  never  seen  so  produced ; but  I will  here  relate  that  which  I
have  myself  witnessed.

There  is  a small  island  which  the  Scots  call  the  Bass  Island
(and  speaking  of  this  one  will  suffice  for  all),  situated  in  the
open  ocean,  not  far  from  the  shore,  of  the  most  ahmpt  and  pre-
cipitous character,  so  that  it  rather  resembles  one  huge  rock  or
stone  than  an  island,  and  indeed  it  is  not  more  than  a mile  in
circumference.  The  surface  of  this  island  in  the  months  of  May
and  June  is  almost  completely  covered  with  nests,  eggs,  and
young  hii'ds,  so  that  you  can  scarce  find  free  footing  anywhere;
and  then  such  is  the  densirt  of  the  flight  of  the  old  hhds
above,  that  like  a cloud  they  darken  the  sun  and  the  sky;  and
such  the  screaming  and  din  that  you  can  scarce  hear  the  voice
of  one  who  addresses  you.  If  you  turn  your  eyes  below,  and
from  your  lofty  stance  and  precipice  regard  the  sea,  there  you
perceive  on  all  sides  around  an  infinite  variety  of  different  kinds
of  sea-fowl  swimming  about  in  pursuit  of  theii’  prey ; the  face
of  the  ocean  is  very  hke  that  of  a pool  in  the  spring  season,
when  it  appears  swarming  with  frogs;  or  to  those  sunny  hills  and
cliffry^  mountains  looked  at  from  below,  that  are  covered  with
numerous  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats.  If  you  sail  round  the  island
and  look  up,  you  see  on  every  ledge  and  shelf,  and  recess,  in-
numerable flocks  of  bii’ds  of  almost  every  size  and  order;  more
numerous  than  the  stars  that  appear  in  the  unclouded  moonless
sky;  and  if  you  regard  the  flights  that  incessantly  come  and  go
you  may  imagine  that  it  is  a mighty  swarm  of  bees  you  have  be-
fore you.  I should  scai’cely  he  credited  did  I name  the  revenue
which  was  annually  derived  from  the  feathers,  the  eggs,  and  the


ON  GENERATION.


209


old  nests,  wliich,  as  useful  for  firing,  are  all  made  objects  of
traffic  by  the  proprietor ; the  sum  be  mentioned  to  me  exceeds
credibility.  There  was  this  particular  feature  which,  as  it  refers
to  oiu’  subject,  I shall  mention,  and  also  as  it  bears  me  out  in  my
report  of  the  multitudes  of  sea-fowl : the  whole  island  appears
of  a brilliant  white  colour  to  those  who  approach  it, — all  the
cliffs  look  as  if  they  consisted  of  the  whitest  chalk ; the  true
colour  of  the  rock,  however,  is  dusky  and  black.  It  is  a friable
white  crust  that  is  spread  OA'er  all,  which  gives  the  island  its
whiteness  and  splendour,  a crust,  having  the  same  consistency,
colour,  and  nature  as  an  egg-shell,  which  plasters  everything
with  a hard,  though  friable  and  testaceous  kind  of  covering.
The  lower  part  of  the  rock,  laved  by  the  ebbing  and  flowing
tide,  preserves  its  native  colour,  and  clearly  shows  that  the
whiteness  of  the  superior  parts  is  due  to  the  liquid  excrements
of  the  birds,  which  are  voided  along  with  the  alvine  faeces ;
which  liquid  excrements,  white,  hard,  and  brittle  like  the  shell
of  the  egg,  cover  the  rock,  and,  under  the  influence  of  the  cold
of  the  air,  incrast  it.  Now  this  is  precisely  the  way  in  which
Aristotle  and  Pliny  will  have  it  that  the  shell  of  the  egg  is
formed.  None  of  the  birds  are  permanent  occupants  of  the
island,  but  visitors  for  pm-poses  of  procreation  only,  staying
there  for  a few  weeks,  in  lodgings,  as  it  were,  and  until  their
young  ones  can  take  wing  along  with  them.  The  white  crust
is  so  hard  and  solid,  and  adheres  so  intimately  to  the  rock,  that
it  might  readily  be  mistaken  for  the  natural  soil  of  the  place.

The  liquid,  white,  and  shining  excrement  is  conveyed  from
the  kidneys  of  birds  by  the  ureters,  into  the  common  receptacle
or  cloaca;  where  it  covers  over  the  alvine  faeces,  and  with
them  is  discharged.  It  constitutes,  in  fact,  the  thicker  por-
tion of  the  urine  of  these  creatm’es,  and  corresponds  with  that
which,  in  our  urine,  we  call  the  hypostase  or  sediment.  We
have  already  said  something  above  on  this  topic,  and  have
entered  into  it  still  more  fully  elsewhere.  We  always  find  an
abundance  of  this  white  excrement  in  mews ; where  hawks  be-
smear walls  beside  their  perches,  they  cover  them  with  a kind
of  gypseous  crust,  or  make  them  look  as  if  they  were  painted
with  white  lead.

In  the  cloaca  of  a dead  ostrich  I found  as  much  of  this  gyp-
seous cement  as  would  have  filled  the  hand.  And  in  like

14


210


ON  GENERATION.


maimer  the  same  substance  abounds  in  tortoises  and  other
oviparous  animals;  discharged  from  the  body  it  soon  concretes
either  into  a friable  crust,  or  into  a powder  which  greatly  re-
sembles pulverized  egg-shells,  in  consequence  of  the  evaporation
of  its  thinner  part.

Among  the  many  different  kinds  of  birds  which  seek  the  Bass
island  for  the  sake  of  laying  and  incubating  their  eggs,  and  which
have  such  variety  of  nests,  one  bird  was  pointed  out  to  me
which  lays  but  one  egg,  and  this  it  places  upon  the  point  of  a
rock,  with  nothing  like  a nest  or  bed  beneath  it,  yet  so  fii-mly
that  the  mother  can  go  and  return  without  injury  to  it ; but
if  any  one  move  it  from  its  place,  by  no  art  can  it  be
fixed  or  balanced  again ; left  at  libertj',  it  straightway  rolls  off
and  falls  into  the  sea.  The  place,  as  I have  said,  is  crusted
over  Avith  a white  cement,  and  the  egg,  when  laid,  is  bedewed
with  a thick  and  viscid  moistm’e,  which  setting  speedily,  the
egg  is  soldered  as  it  Avere,  or  agglutinated  to  the  subjacent  rock.

An  instance  of  like  rapid  concretion  may  be  seen  any  day  at
a statuary^s,  when  he  uses  his  cement  of  burnt  alabaster  or  gyp-
sum tempered  Avith  water ; by  means  of  which  the  likeness  of
one  dead,  or  the  cast  of  anything  else  may  be  speedily  taken,
and  used  as  a mould.

There  is  also  in  like  manner  a certain  earthy  or  solid  some-
thing in  almost  all  hquids,  as,  for  example,  tartar  in  Aviue,  mud
or  sand  in  Avater,  salt  in  lixiAuum,  Avhich,  when  the  greater  por-
tion of  the  water  has  been  dissipated,  concretes  and  subsides ;
and  so  do  I conceive  the  white  sediment  of  buds  to  descend
along  with  the  luine  from  the  kidneys  into  the  cloaca,  and
there  to  cover  over  and  incrust  the  egg,  much  as  the  paA  emeut
of  a mews  is  plastered  over  by  falcons,  and  eveiy  cliff  of  the
aforementioned  island  by  the  birds  that  fi’equent  it;  much  also
as  chamber  utensils,  and  places  where  many  persons  make  Avater,
become  covered  Avith  a yellow  iucrastation ; that  substance,  in
fact,  concreting  externally,  of  which  calculi  in  the  kidneys,
bladder,  and  other  parts  ai’e  formed.  I did  formerly  belicA  e
then,  as  I have  said,  persuaded  especially  by  the  authority  of
Aristotle  and  Pliny,  that  the  shell  of  the  hen^s  egg  was  formed
of  this  white  sediment,  which  abounds  in  aU  the  OAuparous  ani-
mals AA^hose  eggs  are  laid  with  a hard  shell,  the  matter  concreting
through  contact  with  the  air  when  the  egg  was  laid.  And  so  many


ON  GENERATION.


211


additional  observations  have  since  strengthened  this  conclusion,
that  I can  scarcely  keep  from  believing  that  some  part  at  least
of  the  shell  is  thus  produced.

Nevertheless,  I would  say  with  Fabricius  : “ Let  all  reasoning
be  silent  when  experience  gainsays  its  conclusions.”  The  too
familiar  vice  of  the  present  age  is  to  obtrude  as  manifest  truths,
mere  fancies,  born  of  conjecture  and  superficial  reasoning,  alto-
gether unsupported  by  the  testimony  of  sense.

For  I have  very  certainly  discovered  that  the  egg  still  con-
tained in  the  uterus,  in  these  countries  at  least,  is  covered  with
its  shell ; although  Aristotle  and  Pliny  assert  the  contrary,  and
Fabricius  thinks  that  “ it  is  not  to  be  too  obstinately  gainsaid.”
In  warmer  places,  perhaps,  and  where  the  fowls  are  stronger,
the  eggs  may  be  extruded  soft,  and  for  the  most  part  without
shells.  With  us  this  very  rarely  happens.  When  I was  at  Venice
in  former  years,  Aromatarius,  a learned  physician,  showed  me
a small  leaf  which  had  grown  between  the  two  valves  of  a peas-
cod,  whilst  with  us  there  is  nothing  more  apparent  in  these  pods
than  a small  point  where  the  germ  is  about  to  be  produced.
So  much  do  a milder  climate,  a brighter  sky,  and  a softer  air,
conduce  to  increase  and  rapidity  of  growth.


EXERCISE  THE  TWELFTH.

Of  the  remaining  parts  of  the  egg.

We  have  already  spoken  partially  of  the  place  where,  the  time
when,  and  the  manner  how  the  remaining  parts  of  the  egg  are
engendered,  and  we  shall  have  something  more  to  add  when  we
come  to  speak  of  their  several  uses.

“ The  albumen,”  says  Fabricius,^  “ is  the  ovi  albus  liquor  of
Pliny,  the  ovi  candidwn  of  Celsus,  the  ovi  albor  of  Palladius,
the  ovi  album  et  albumentum  of  Apicius,  the  Xed/cov  of  the
Greeks,  the  wow  XevKWfia  of  Aristotle,  the  opviOog  yd\a,  or  bird’s
milk  of  Anaxagoras.  This  is  the  cold,  sluggish,  white  fluid  of
the  egg,  of  different  thickness  at  different  places  (thinner  at  the
blunt  and  sharp  ends,  thicker  in  other  situations,)  and  also  in


' Loc.  cit.  p.  22.


212


ON  GENERATION.


variable  quantity  (for  it  is  more  abundant  at  tbe  blunt  end,
less  so  at  tbe  sharp  end,  and  still  less  so  in  the  other  parts  of
« the  egg),  covering  and  surrounding  the  yelk  on  every  side.'’"’

In  the  hen’s  egg,  however,  I have  observed  that  there  are
not  only  difierences  in  the  albumen,  but  two  albumens,  each
surrounded  with  its  proper  membrane.  One  of  these  is  thinner,
more  hquid,  and  almost  of  the  same  consistence  as  that  humour
which,  remaining  among  the  folds  of  the  uterus,  we  have  called
the  matter  and  nourishment  of  the  albumen ; the  other  is
thicker,  more  \iscid,  and  rather  whiter  in  its  colour,  and  in  old
and  stale  eggs,  and  those  that  have  been  sat  upon  for  some
days,  it  is  of  a yellowish  cast.  As  this  second  albumen  every-
where sm’rounds  the  yelk,  so  is  it,  in  like  manner’,  itself  sur-
rounded by  the  more  external  fluid.  That  these  two  albumens
are  distinct  appears  from  this,  that  if  after  haring  removed  the
shell  you  pierce  the  two  outermost  membranes,  you  will  per-
ceive the  external  albuminous  liquid  to  make  its  escape,  and  the
membranes  to  become  collapsed  and  to  sink  down  in  the  dish ;
the  internal  and  thicker  albumen,  however,  all  the  while  retains
its  place  and  globular’  flgure,  inasmuch  as  it  is  bormded  by  its
proper  membrane,  although  this  is  of  such  tenrrity  that  it
entirely  escapes  detection  by  the  eye ; but  if  you  then  prick  it,
the  second  albumen  will  for’thwith  begin  to  flow  out,  arrd  the
mass  will  lose  its  globular  shape;  just  as  the  water  contained  in
a bladder  escapes  when  it  is  punctm’ed;  in  like  manner  the
proper  investirrg  membrane  of  the  r itellus  being  punctured,  the
yellow  fluid  of  which  it  consists  escapes,  and  the  original  globular
form  is  destr’oyed.

“ The  vitellus,”  says  Fabricius,^  “ is  so  called  from  the  word
rita,  because  the  chick  hves  upon  it ; from  its  colour  it  is  also
spoken  of  as  the  yellow  of  the  egg,  having  been  called  by  the
Greeks  generally,  y^pvaov,  by  Hippocrates  ^Xwpdi’,  and  by
Aristotle  w and  XtKvOov ; the  ancients,  such  as  Snidas  in
Menander,  called  it  veorrov,  i.  e.  the  chick,  because  they  beheved
the  chick  to  be  engendered  from  this  par’t.  It  is  the  smoothest
portion  of  the  egg,  and  is  eontained  within  a most  delicate
membrane,  immediately  escapirrg  if  this  be  torn,  and  losing  all
figure ; it  is  sustained  in  the  middle  of  the  egg;  and  in  one  egg


Op.  cit.  p.  23.


ON  GENERATION.


213


is  of  a yellow  colour,  in  another  of  a tint  between  white  and
yellow  j it  is  qiiite  round,  of  variable  size,  according  to  the  size  of
the  bird  that  lays  the  egg,  and,  according  to  Aristotle,  of  a
deeper  yellow  in  water  birds,  of  a paler  hue  in  land  birds.
The  same  author^  also  maintains  that  “the  yeUow  and  the  white
of  an  egg  are  of  opposite  natures,  not  only  in  colour  but  in
qualities;  for  the  yellow  is  inspissated  by  cold,  which  the  white
is  not,  but  is  rather  rendered  more  liquid ; and  the  white,  on
the  contrary,  is  thickened  by  heat,  which  the  yellow  is  not,
unless  it  be  burned  or  over-done,  and  it  is  more  hardened  and
dried  by  boiling  than  by  roasting.”  As  in  the  macrocosm  the
earth  is  placed  in  the  centre,  and  is  surrounded  by  the  water
and  the  air,  so  is  the  yelk,  the  more  earthy  part  of  the  egg,
surrounded  by  two  albuminous  layers,  one  thicker,  another
thinner.  And,  indeed,  Aristotle^  says  that,  “if  we  put  a
number  of  yelks  and  whites  together,  and  mix  them  in  a pan,
and  then  boil  them  with  a slow  and  gentle  fire,  that  the  whole
of  the  yelks  will  set  into  a globular  mass  in  the  middle,  and
appear  surrounded  by  the  whites.”  But  many  physicians  have
been  of  opinion  that  the  white  was  the  colder  portion  of  the
egg.  Of  these  matters,  however,  more  by  and  by.

The  chalazse,  the  treads  or  treadles  (gralladura  Ital.)  are  two
in  number  in  each  egg,  one  in  the  blunt,  another  in  the  sharp
end.  The  larger  portion  of  them  is  contained  in  the  white ;
but  they  are  most  intimately  connected  with  the  yelk,  and  with
its  membrane.  They  are  two  long-shaped  bodies,  firmer  than
the  albumen  and  whiter ; knotty,  not  without  a certain  trans-
parency like  hail,  whence  their  name ; each  chalaza,  in  fact,  is
made  up  of  several  hailstones,  as  it  seems,  connected  by  means
of  albumen.  One  of  them  is  larger  than  the  other,  and  this
extends  from  the  yelk  towards  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg;  the
other  and  smaller  chalaza  stretches  from  the  yelk  towards  the
sharp  end  of  the  egg.  The  larger  is  made  up  of  two  or  three
knots  or  seeming  hailstones,  at  a trifling  distance  from  one
another,  and  of  successively  smaller  size.

The  chalazse  are  found  in  the  eggs  of  all  birds,  and  in
wind  and  unprohfic  as  weU  as  in  perfect  or  prolific  eggs,  duly
disposed  in  both  their  extremities.  Whence  the  supposition


‘ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  2.


^ Hist.  Anim.  et  De  Geu.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  c.  1.


214


ON  GENERATION.


among  housewives  that  the  chalazse  are  the  tread  or  spermatic
fluid  of  the  cock,  and  that  the  chick  is  generated  from  them  is
discovered  to  be  a vulgar  error.  But  Fabricius  himself,  al-
though he  denies  that  they  consist  of  the  semen  of  the  cock,
still  gives  various  reasons  for  maintaining  that  “ they  are
the  immediate  matter  which  the  cock  fecundates,  and  from
which  the  chick  is  produced a notion  which  he  seeks  to  prop
by  this  feeble  statement : “ because  in  a boiled  egg,  the  cha-
lazse  are  so  contracted  on  themselves  that  they  present  the
figure  of  a chick  already  formed  and  hatched.”  But  it  is  not
likely  that  several  rudiments  of  a single  foetus  should  be  wanted
in  one  egg,  neither  has  any  one  ever  discovered  the  rudiments
of  the  future  chick  save  in  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg.  jNIore-
over  the  chalazae  present  no  sensible  difference  in  eggs  that  are
fecundated  by  the  intercourse  of  the  two  sexes,  fi’om  those  of
eggs  that  are  barren.  Our  distinguished  author  is  therefore
mistaken  in  regard  to  the  use  of  the  chalazae  in  the  egg,  as
shall  farther  be  made  to  appear  by  and  by.

In  the  eggs  of  even  the  smallest  bii’ds  there  is  a slender  fila-
ment, the  rudiments  of  the  chalazae,  to  be  discovered;  and  in
those  of  the  ostrich  and  cassowary  I have  found,  in  either  end  of
the  eggverythick  chalazae,  of  great  length,  and  very  white  colour,
made  up  of  several  globules  gradually  diminishing  in  size.

A small  ca’vdty  is  observed  in  the  inside  of  an  egg  under  the
shell,  at  the  blunt  end;  sometimes  exactly  in  the  middle,  at
other  times  more  to  one  side,  almost  exactly  corresponding  to
the  chalaza  that  lies  below  it.  The  figui’e  of  this  cavity  is
generally  circulai’,  though  in  the  goose  and  duck  it  is  not  exactly
so.  It  is  seen  as  a dai’k  spot  if  you  hold  an  egg  opposite  a
candle  in  a dark  place,  and  apply  yom’  hand  edgeways  over  the
blunt  end.  In  the  egg  just  laid  it  is  of  small  size, — about  the
size  of  the  pupil  of  the  human  eye ; but  it  grows  lai’ger  daily
as  the  egg  is  older,  and  the  aii’  is  warmer ; it  is  much  increased
after  the  fii’st  day  of  incubation ; as  if  by  the  exhalation  of  some
of  the  more  external  and  liquid  albumen  the  remainder  con-
tracted, and  left  a larger  ca’^ity ; for  the  cavity  in  question  is
produced  between  the  shell  and  the  membrane  which  smTOxmds
the  whole  of  the  fluids  of  the  egg.  It  is  met  with  in  all  eggs ;
I have  discovered  it,  even  in  those  that  ai’e  still  contained  in
the  uterus,  as  soon  as  they  had  become  invested  with  the  shell.


ON  GENERATION.


215


They  who  are  curious  in  such  matters  say  that  if  this  cavity  be
in  the  point  or  end  of  the  egg  it  will  produce  a male^  if  towards
the  side^  a female.  This  much  is  certain  : if  the  cavity  be  small
it  indicates  that  the  egg  is  fresh-laid ; if  large,,  that  it  is  stale.
But  we  shall  have  occasion  anon  to  say  more  on  this  head.

There  is  a white  and  very  small  circle  apparent  in  the  in-
vesting membrane  of  the  vitellus,  which  looks  like  an  inhranded
cicatrice,  which  Fahricius  therefore  calls  cicatricula;  but  he
makes  little  of  this  spot,  and  looks  on  it  rather  as  an  accident
or  blemish  than  as  any  essential  part  of  the  egg.  The  cica-
tricula in  question  is  extremely  small ; not  larger  than  a tiny
lentil,  or  the  pupil  of  a small  bird’s  eye ; white,  flat,  and  cir-
cular. This  part  is  also  found  in  every  egg,  and  even  from  its
commencement  in  the  vitellarium.  Fahricius,  therefore,  is  mis-
taken when  he  thinks  that  this  spot  is  nothing  more  than  the
trace  or  cicatrice  of  the  severed  peduncle,  by  which  the  egg  was
in  the  first  instance  connected  with  the  ovary.  For  the  pe-
duncle, as  he  himself  admits,  is  hollow,  and  as  it  approaches
the  vitellus  expands,  so  as  to  suiTound  or  embrace,  and  inclose
the  yelk  in  a kind  of  pouch  : it  is  not  connected  with  the  yelk
in  the  same  way  as  the  stalks  of  apples  and  other  fruits  are
infixed,  and  so  as  to  leave  any  cicatrice  when  the  yelk  is  cast
loose.  And  if  you  sometimes  find  two  cicatriculse  in  a large
yelk,  as  Fahricius  states,  this  might,  perhaps,  lead  to  the  pro-
duction of  a monster  and  double  foetus,  (as  shall  be  afterwards
shown),  but  would  be  no  indication  of  the  preexistence  of  a
double  peduncle.  He  is,  however,  immensely  mistaken  when
he  imagines  that  the  cicatricula  serves  no  purpose ; for  it  is,  in
fact,  the  most  important  part  of  the  whole  egg,  and  that  for
whose  sake  all  the  others  exist;  it  is  that,  in  a word,  from  which
the  chick  takes  its  rise.  Parisanus,  too,  is  in  error,  when  he
contends  that  this  is  the  semen  of  the  cock.


21G


ON  GENERATION.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTEENTH.

Of  the  diversities  of  eggs.

“ The  word  ovum,  or  egg,  is  taken  in  a twofold  sense,  proper
and  improper.  An  ovum,  properly  so  designated,  I call  that
body  to  which  the  definition  given  by  Aristotle^  applies ; An
egg,  says  he,  is  that  from  part  of  which  an  animal  is  engen-
dered, and  the  remainder  of  which  is  food  for  the  animal  so
produced.  But  I hold  that  body  to  he  improperly  styled  an
egg  which  is  defined  by  Aristotle^  in  the  same  place,  to  be  that
from  the  whole  of  which  an  animal  is  engendered;  such  as  the
eggs  of  ants,  flies,  spiders,  some  butterflies,  and  others  of  the
tribe  of  extremely  small  eggs ; which  Aristotle  almost  always
fears  to  commit  himself  by  calHng  eggs,  hut  which  he  rather
styles  vermicuh.^^  What  precedes  is  from  Fahricius;^  but  we,
whose  pui’pose  it  is  to  treat  especially  of  the  generation  of  the
hen’s  egg,  have  no  intention  to  speak  of  the  difterences  of  all
kinds  of  eggs ; we  shall  limit  ourselves  to  the  diversities  among
hen’s  eggs.

The  more  recently  laid  are  whiter  than  the  staler,  because
by  age,  and  especially  by  incubation,  they  become  darker ; the
cavity  in  the  blunt  end  of  a stale  egg  is  also  larger  than  in  a
recent  egg ; eggs  just  laid  are  also  somewhat  rough  to  the  feel
from  a quantity  of  white  powder  which  covers  the  shell,  hut
which  is  soon  rubbed  off,  when  the  egg  becomes  smoother  as
well  as  darker.  Neiv-laid  eggs,  unbroken,  if  placed  near  a fire
will  sweat,  and  are  much  more  palatable  than  those  that  have
been  kept  for  some  time — they  are,  indeed,  accounted  a delicacy
by  some.  [Fruitful]  eggs,  after  two  or  thi’ee  days’  ineuhation,
are  still  better  flavoui’ed  than  stale  eggs ; revived  by  the  gentle
warmth  of  the  hen,  they  seem  to  retmm  to  the  quality  and
entireness  of  the  egg  just  laid.  Farther,  I have  boiled  an  egg
to  hardness,  after  the  foiu’teenth  day  of  incubation,  when  the
chick  had  already  begun  to  get  its  feathers,  when  it  occupied
the  middle  of  the  egg,  and  neaidy  the  whole  of  the  yelk  re-


' Hist.  Aiiim.  lib.  i,  cap.  5.


= Ibid.  cap.  2.


® Op.  cit.  p.  19.


ON  GENERATION.


217


inaiiiedj  in  order  that  I might  better  distinguish  the  position  of
the  chick ; I found  it  lying,  as  it  were,  within  a mould  of  the
albumen,  and  the  yelk  possessed  the  same  agreeable  flavour
and  sweetness  as  that  of  the  new-laid  egg,  boiled  to  the  same
degree  of  hardness.  The  yelk  taken  from  the  ovarium  of  a
hve  fowl,  and  eaten  immediately,  tastes  much  sweeter  raAV  than
boiled.

Eggs  also  differ  from  one  another  in  shape ; some  are  longer
and  more  pointed,  others  rounder  and  blunter.  According  to
Aristotle,!  the  long-shaped  and  pointed  eggs  produce  females  ;
the  blunt,  on  the  contrary,  yield  males.  Pliny,2  however,
maintains  the  opposite.  “ The  rounder  eggs,'’^  he  says,  “ pro-
duce females,  the  others  males and  with  him  Columella^
agrees  : “ He  who  desires  to  have  the  greater  number  of  his
brood  cocks,  let  him  select  the  longest  and  sharpest  eggs  for
incubation;  and  on  the  contrary,  when  he  would  have  the
greater  number  females,  let  liim  choose  the  roundest  eggs.’^
The  ground  of  Aristotle’s  opinion  was  this  : because  the  rounder
eggs  are  the  hotter,  and  it  is  the  property  of  heat  to  concentrate
and  determine,  and  that  heat  can  do  most  which  is  most
powerful.  From  the  stronger  and  more  perfect  principle,  there-
fore, proceeds  the  stronger  and  more  perfect  animal.  Such  is
the  male  compared  with  the  female,  especially  in  the  case  of
the  common  fowl.  On  the  contrary,  again,  the  smaller  eggs
are  reckoned  among  the  imperfect  ones,  and  the  smallest  of  aU
are  regarded  as  entirely  unproductive.  It  was  on  this  account
too  that  Aristotle,  to  secure  the  highest  quahty  of  eggs,  recom-
mends that  the  hens  be  frequently  trodden.  Barren  and  ad-
ventitious eggs,  he  asserts,  are  smaller  and  less  savoury,  because
they  are  humid  and  imperfect.  The  differences  indicated  are
to  he  understood  as  referring  to  the  eggs  of  the  same  fowl;  for
when  a certain  hen  goes  on  lajung  eggs  of  a certain  character,
they  will  all  produce  either  males  or  females.  If  you  understand
this  point  otherwise,  the  guess  as  to  males  or  females,  from  the
indications  given,  would  be  extremely  imcertain.  Because  dif-
ferent hens  lay  eggs  that  difter  much  in  respect  of  size  and  figure :
some  habitually  lay  more  oblong,  others,  rounder  eggs,  that  do

' Hist.  Aiiim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  2.  = Lib.  x,  cap.  52  ; lib.  ix.

^ De  Re  Rust.  cap.  5,  Scalig.  iu  loc.


218


ON  GENERATION.


not  differ  greatly  one  from  another ; and  although  I sometimes
found  diversities  in  the  eggs  of  the  same  fowl^  these  were  still
so  trifling  in  amount  that  they  would  have  escaped  any  other
than  the  practised  eye.  For  as  all  the  eggs  of  the  same  fowl
acquire  nearly  the  same  figure,  in  the  same  womb  or  mould  in
which  the  shell  is  deposited,  (much  as  the  excrements  are
moulded  into  scybala  in  the  cells  of  the  colon,)  it  necessarily
falls  out  that  they  greatly  resemble  one  another ; so  that  I
myself,  without  much  experience,  could  readily  tell  which  hen
in  a small  flock  had  laid  a given  egg,  and  they  who  have  given
much  attention  to  the  point,  of  course  succeed  much  better.
But  that  which  we  note  every  day  among  huntsmen  is  far  more
remarkable  ; for  the  more  careful  keepers  who  have  large  herds
of  stags  or  fallow  deer  under  their  charge,  wdl  very  certainly  tell
to  which  herd  the  horns  which  they  find  in  the  woods  or  thickets
belonged.  A stupid  and  uneducated  shepherd,  ha^ing  the  charge
of  a numerous  flock  of  sheep,  has  been  known  to  become  so
familiar  with  the  physiognomy  of  each,  that  if  any  one  had
strayed  from  the  flock,  though  he  could  not  count  them,  he
could  still  say  which  one  it  was,  give  the  particulars  as  to  where
it  had  been  bought,  or  whence  it  had  come.  The  master  of
this  man,  for  the  sake  of  trying  him,  once  selected  a particidar
lamb  from  among  forty  others  in  the  same  pen,  and  desired
him  to  carry  it  to  the  ewe  which  was  its  dam,  which  he  did
forthwith.  AVe  have  known  huntsmen  who,  having  only  once
seen  a particular  stag,  or  his  horns,  or  even  his  print  in  the
mud,  (as  a lion  is  known  by  his  claws,)  have  afterwards  beexi
able  to  distinguish  him  by  the  same  marks  from  every  other;
some,  too,  from  the  foot-prints  of  deer,  seen  for  the  first  time,
will  draw  inferences  as  to  the  size,  and  grease,  and  poAver  of
the  stag  which  has  left  them;  saying  whether  he  were  full  of
strength,  or  weary  from  having  been  hunted ; and  farther,  Avhe-
ther  the  prints  are  those  of  a buck  or  a doe.  I shall  say  thus
much  more  : there  are  some  who,  in  hunting,  when  there  are
some  forty  hounds  upon  the  trace  of  the  game,  and  all  are
gmng  tongue  together,  will  nevertheless,  and  from  a distance,
tell  Avhich  dog  is  at  the  head  of  the  pack,  which  at  the  tail,
which  chases  on  the  hot  scent,  wliich  is  rrmning  off  at  faidt ;
Avh ether  the  game  is  still  running,  or  is  at  bay;  whether  the  stag
have  run  far,  or  have  but  just  been  raised  from  his  lair.  And


ON  GENERATION.


219


all  this  amid  the  din  of  dogs,  and  men,  and  horns,  and  sur-
rounded by  an  unknown  and  gloomy  wood.  We  should  not,
therefore,  be  greatly  surprised  when  we  see  those  who  have
experience  telling  by  what  hen  each  particular  egg  in  a number
has  been  laid.  I wish  there  were  some  equally  ready  way  from
the  child  of  knowing  the  true  father.

The  principal  difference  between  eggs,  however,  is  their
fecundity  or  barrenness — the  distinction  of  fruitful  eggs  from
hypenemic,  adventitious,  or  wind  eggs.  Those  eggs  are  called
hypenemic,  (as  if  the  progeny  of  the  wind,)  that  are  produced
without  the  concourse  of  the  male,  and  are  unfit  for  setting ;
although  Varro^  declares  that  the  mares,  in  Lusitania,  conceive
by  the  wind.  For  zephyrus  was  held  a fertilizing  wind,  whence
its  name,  as  if  it  were  or  life  bringing.  So  that

Virgil  says  :

And  Zejjhyrus,  with  w'arming  breath  resolves
The  bosom  of  the  ground,  and  melting  rains
Are  pom'ed  o’er  all,  and  every  field  brings  forth.


Hence  the  ancients,  when  with  this  -wind  blowing  in  the  spring
season,  they  saw  their  hens  begin  laying,  without  the  concur-
rence of  the  cock,  conceived  that  zephjuus,  or  the  west  wind,
was  the  author  of  their  fecundity.  There  are  also  what  are
called  addle,  and  dog-day  eggs,  produced  by  interrupted  incu-
bation, and  so  called  because  eggs  often  rot  in  the  dog-days,
being  deserted  by  the  hens  in  consequence  of  the  excessive
heat ; and  also  because  at  this  season  of  the  year  thunder  is
frequent ; and  Aristotle^  asserts  that  eggs  die  if  it  thunders
whilst  the  hen  is  sitting.

Those  eggs  are  regarded  as  prolific,  which,  no  unfavorable
circumstances  intervening,  under  the  infiuence  of  a gentle  heat,
produce  chicks.  And  this  they  will  do,  not  merely  through  the
incubation  of  the  mother,  but  of  any  other  bird,  if  it  be  but  of
sufficient  size  to  cherish  and  cover  them,  or  by  a gentle  tem-
perature obtained  in  any  way  whatever.  “ Eggs  are  hatched
with  the  same  celerity,^^  says  Aristotle,^  “ spontaneously  in  the
ground,  as  by  incubation.  Wherefore  in  Egypt,  it  is  the  custom

' De  Re  Rust.  lib.  ii,  cap.  1.

^ Hist.  Anim.  hb.  vi,  cap.  2;  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  hb.  x,  cap.  54.  ^ Ibid.


220


ON  GENEKATION.


to  bury  them  in  dung,  covered  with  earth.  And  there  was  a
tale  in  Syracuse,  of  a drunken  fellow,  who  was  accustomed  to
continue  his  potations  until  a number  of  eggs,  placed  under  a
mat  bestrewed  with  earth,  were  hatched.^’  The  empress  Livia,
is  also  said  to  have  earned  an  egg  in  her  bosom  until  a chick
was  produced  from  it.  And  in  Egypt,  and  other  countries,  at
the  present  time,  chickens  are  reared  from  eggs  placed  in  ovens.
“ The  egg,  therefore,”  as  Pahricius^  truly  says,  “ is  not  only
the  uterus,  and  place  where  the  generation  of  the  chick  pro-
ceeds, but  it  is  that  upon  which  its  whole  fonnation  depends;
and  this  the  egg  accomplishes  as  agent,  as  matter,  as  instru-
ment, as  place,  and  as  all  else  that  concm’s.”

For  it  is  certain  that  the  chick  is  formed  hy  a principle  in-
herent in  the  egg,  and  that  nothing  accrues  to  a perfect  egg
from  incubation,  beyond  the  warmth  and  protection ; in  the
same  way  as  to  the  chick  when  disclosed,  the  hen  gives  nothing
more  than  her  warmth  and  her  care,  by  which  she  defends  it
from  the  cold  and  from  injury,  and  directs  it  to  its  proper  food.
The  grand  desideratum,  therefore,  once  the  chickens  are
hatched,  is  that  the  hen  lead  them  about,  seek  for  and  sup-
ply them  Avith  proper  food,  and  cherish  them  under  her  Avings.
And  this  you  w'dl  not  easily  supply  by  any  kind  of  artifice.

Capons,  and  hybrids  betAveen  the  common  fowl  and  the
pheasant,  produced  in  our  aviaries,  will  incubate  and  hatch  a
set  of  eggs ; but  they  neA’er  know  how  to  take  care  of  the
brood — to  lead  them  about  properly,  and  to  provide  Avith  ade-
quate care  for  their  u'urture.

And  here  I aa  ouM  pause  for  a moment,  (for  I mean  to  treat
of  the  matter  more  fully  by  and  by,)  to  express  my  admiration
of  the  pel-severance  and  patience  Avith  which  the  females  of
almost  every  species  of  bird,  sit  upon  the  nest  for  so  many  days
and  nights  incessantly,  macerating  their  bodies,  and  almost
destroying  themselves  from  want  of  food ; Ai’hat  dangers  they
Avill  face  in  defence  of  their  eggs,  and  when  compelled  to  quit
them  for  eA^er  so  short  a time,  through  necessity,  Avith  A\hat
eagerness  and  haste  they  return  to  them  again,  and  brood  over
them  ! Ducks  and  geese,  Ai  heu  they  quit  the  nest  for  a feA\*
minutes,  cover  and  conceal  it  A\ith  straw.  With  what  true


Op.  cit.  p.  19.


ON  GENERATION.


221


magnanimity  do  these  ill-furnished  mothers  defend  their  eggs !
which,  after  all,  perhaps,  are  mere  wind  or  addle  eggs,  or  not
their  own,  or  artificial  eggs  of  chalk  or  ivoiy ; — it  is  still
the  same,  they  defend  all  Avith  equal  courage.  It  is  truly  a
remarkable  love  which  birds  display  for  inert  and  lifeless  eggs ;
and  their  solicitude  is  repaid  by  no  kind  of  advantage  or  enjoy-
ment. Who  does  not  w'onder  at  the  affection,  or  passion  rather,
of  the  clucking  hen,  which  can  only  he  extinguished  by  a
drenching  with  cold  water.  In  this  state  of  her  feehng  she
neglects  everything, — her  wings  droop,  her  feathers  are  un-
pruned and  ruffled,  she  wanders  about  restless  and  dissatisfied,
disturbing  other  hens  on  their  nests,  seeking  eggs  everywhere,
which  she  commences  forthwith  to  incubate;  nor  will  she  be  at
peace  until  her  desii’e  has  been  gratified,  until  she  has  a brood
to  lead  about  with  her,  upon  which  she  may  expend  her  fer-
vour, which  she  may  cherish,  feed,  and  defend.  How  pleasantly
are  we  moved  to  laughter  when  we  see  the  poor  hen  following
to  the  water  the  supposititious  brood  of  ducklings  she  has  hatched,
wandering  restlessly  round  the  pool,  attempting  to  wade  after
them  to  her  own  imminent  peril,  and  by  her  noises  and  various
artifices  striving  to  entice  them  back  to  the  shore  !

According  to  Aristotle,^  barren  eggs  do  not  produce  chicks
because  their  fluids  do  not  thicken  under  incubation,  nor  is  the
yelk  or  the  white  altered  from  its  original  constitution.  But
we  shall  revert  to  this  subject  in  our  general  survey  of  gene-
ration.

Our  housewives,  that  they  may  distinguish  the  eggs  that  are
addled  from  those  that  will  produce  chicks,  take  them  from  the
fourteenth  to  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  incubation,  and  drop
them  softly  into  tepid  water,  when  the  spoilt  ones  sink,  whilst
the  fruitful  ones  swim.  If  the  included  chick  be  well  forward,
and  moves  about  with  alacrity,  the  egg  not  only  rolls  over  but
even  dances  in  the  water.  And  if  you  apply  the  egg  to  your
ear  for  several  days  before  the  hatching,  you  may  hear  the
chick  within  kicking,  scratching,  and  even  chirping.  When
the  hen  that  is  sitting  hears  these  noises,  she  turns  the  eggs
and  lays  them  otherwise  than  they  Avere,  until  the  chicks,  get-
ting into  a comfortable  position,  become  quiet;  even  as  watchful


' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  2,


222


ON  GENERATION.


mothers  are  wont  to  treat  their  infants  when  they  are  restless
and  cry  in  their  cradles.

Hens  lay  eggs  in  variable  numbers  : “ Some  hens/’  says  the
philosopher/  “ except  the  two  winter  months^  lay  through  the
whole  year;  some  of  the  better  breeds  will  lay  as  many  as  sixty
eggs  before  they  show  a disposition  to  sit ; though  these  eggs
are  not  so  prolific  as  those  of  the  commoner  kinds.  The
Adrianic  hens  are  small,  and  lay  every  day,  but  they  are  ill-
tempered,  and  often  kill  their  young  ones;  they  are  particoloured
in  their  plumage.  Some  domestic  fowls  will  even  lay  twice  a
day;  and  some,  by  reason  of  their  great  fecundity,  die  young.”

In  England  some  of  the  hens  lay  every  day;  but  the  more
prolific  commonly  lay  two  days  continuously  and  then  miss  a
day ; the  first  day  the  egg  is  laid  in  the  morning,  next  day  in
the  afternoon,  and  the  third  day  there  is  a pause.  Some  hens
have  a habit  of  breaking  then’  eggs  and  deseiding  then.’  nests ;
whether  this  be  from  disease  or  vice  is  not  known.

Certain  differences  may  also  be  observed  in  the  incubation :
some  fowls  only  sit  once,  others  tAvice,  or  thiice,  or  repeatedly.
Florentius  says,  that  in  Alexandria,  in  Egypt,  there  are  fowls
called  monosires,  from  which  the  fighting  cocks  are  descended,
which  go  on  sitting  for  two  or  three  periods,  each  successir  e
brood  being  removed  as  it  is  hatched,  and  brought  up  apart.
In  this  way  the  same  hen  will  hatch  forty,  sixty,  and  even  a
greater  number  of  chickens,  at  a single  sitting.

Some  eggs  too,  are  lai’ger,  others  smaller ; a few  extremely
small ; these,  in  Italy,  are  commonly  called  centeuina ; and
our  country  folks  still  beheve  that  such  eggs  ai’e  laid  by  the
cock,  and  that  were  they  set  they  would  produce  basilisks.
“ The  ATilgar,”  says  Fabiicius,^  “ think  that  this  small  egg  is
the  last  that  will  be  laid,  and  that  it  comes  as  the  hundredth
in  number,  whence  the  name ; that  it  has  no  yelk,  though  all
the  other  parts  are  present — the  chalazte,  the  albumen,  the
membranes,  and  the  shell.  And  it  seems  probable  that  it  is
produced  when  all  the  other  yelks  have  been  fashioned  into
eggs,  and  no  more  remain  in  the  vitellaiy ; on  the  other  hand,
howeA^er,  a modicum  of  albumen  remains,  and  out  of  this,  it
may  be  inferred,  is  the  small  egg  in  question  produced.”  To


Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  1.


“ Op.  eit.  p.  10.


ON  GENERATION.


223


me,  nevertheless,  this  does  not  appear  likely ; because  it  is  cer-
tain that  the  whole  ovary  being  removed,  the  uterus  secundus
also  diminishes  in  size  in  the  same  proportion,  and  shrinks  into
a mere  membrane,  which  contains  neither  any  fluid  nor  any
albumen.  Fabricius  proceeds;  “The  ova  centenina  are  met  with
of  two  kinds  : one  of  them  being  without  a yelk,  and  this  is  the
true  centenine  egg,  because  it  is  the  last  which  the  hen  will
lay  at  that  particular  season — she  will  now  cease  from  lajdng
for  a time.  The  other  is  also  a small  egg,  but  it  has  a yelk,
and  will  not  prove  the  last  which  the  hen  will  then  lay,  but  is
intermediate  between  those  of  the  usual  size  that  have  preceded,
and  others  that  will  follow.  It  is  of  small  size  because  there
has  been  a failure  of  the  vegetative  function,  as  happens  to  the
peach,  and  other  fruit,  of  which  we  see  many  of  adequate  size,
but  a few  that  are  very  diminutive.^'’  This  may  be  in  conse-
quence of  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  or  the  want  of  sun,  or
from  defective  nutriment  in  point  either  of  quantity  or  quality.
I should  not  readily  allow,  however,  that  the  eggs  last  laid  are
always  small.

Monstrous  eggs  are  not  wanting;  “for  the  augurs,^^  says
Aristotle,^  “ held  it  portentous  w'hen  eggs  were  laid  that  were
all  yellow ; or  when,  on  a fowl  being  laid  open,  eggs  were  found
under  the  septum  transversum,  where  the  rudimentary  eggs  of
the  female  usually  appear,  of  the  magnitude  of  perfect  eggs.

To  this  head  may  be  referred  those  eggs  that  produce  twins,
that  have  two  yelks.  Such  an  egg  I lately  found  in  the  uterus
of  a fowl,  perfect  in  all  respects,  and  covered  with  a shell ; the
yelks,  cicatriculse,  and  thicker  albuminous  portions  being  all
double,  and  the  chalazse  present  in  two  pau’s  : a single  thinner
albumen,  however,  surrounded  all  these,  and  this  in  its  turn
Avas  included  within  the  usual  double  common  membrane,  and
single  shell.  For,  indeed,  although  Aristotle  says  that  fowls
alw'ays  lay  some  eggs  of  this  kind,  I shall  hardly  be  induced
to  believe  that  this  does  not  occur  against  the  ordinary  course
of  nature.  And  although  twin  chicks  are  produced  from
such  eggs  as  I have  ascertained  in  opposition  to  the  opinion
of  Fabricius,  who  says  that  they  produce  chicks  having  four
legs,  or  four  wings  and  two  heads,  which,  however,  are  not


‘ Aldrovand.  Ornithol.  lib.  xiv,  p.  260.


224


ON  GENERATION.


capable  of  living,  but  for  the  most  part  speedily  die,  either  by
reason  of  want  of  room  or  of  air  in  the  shell,  or  because  the
one  proves  a hinderance  to  the  other  and  blights  it;  nor  can  it
happen  that  both  should  be  equally  prepai’ed  for  exclusion — ^that
one  should  not  prove  an  abortion.

Briefly  and  summarily  the  differences  among  eggs  are  prin-
cipally of  three  kinds : some  are  prolific,  some  unprohfic;  some
will  produce  males  and  some  females;  some  are  the  produce
of  the  two  sexes  of  the  same  species,  others  of  allied  species  and
will  produce  hybrids,  such  as  we  see  between  the  common  hen
and  the  pheasant,  the  progeny  being  referrible  either  to  the  first
or  to  the  last  male  that  had  connexion  with  the  hen.  Because,
according  to  Aristotle,^  “ the  egg,  which  receives  its  consti-
tution by  intercom’se,  passes  from  its  own  into  another  genus,
if  the  hen  be  trodden  when  she  carries  either  an  adventitious
egg  or  one  that  was  conceived  under  the  influence  of  another
male,  and  this  renewed  intercom’se  take  place  before  the  yellow
is  changed  into  the  white.  So  that  In'penemic  or  wind  eggs
are  made  fruitfid,  and  fruitful  eggs  receive  the  form  of  the  male
which  has  connexion  last.  But  if  the  change  has  taken  place
into  the  white,  it  cannot  happen  either  that  the  wind  egg  is
turned  into  a fertile  one,  or  that  the  egg  which  is  contained
in  the  uterus  in  rirtue  of  a previous  intercom’se,  shall  be  altered
into  the  genus  of  the  male  which  has  the  second  communi-
cation.” For  the  seminal  fluid  of  the  cock,  as  Scaliger  wittily
remarks,  is  like  a testament,  the  last  will  or  disposition  in
which  is  that  which  stands  in  force.

To  these  particulars  it  might  perhaps  be  added,  that  some
eggs  are  more  strong  and  lusty  than  others,  more  full  of  life,  if
the  expression  may  be  used ; though  as  there  is  a vital  principle
in  the  egg,  so  must  there  inhere  the  con’espondiug  'V'irtue  that
flows  from  it.  For,  as  in  other  kinds  of  animals,  some  of  the
females  are  so  replete  uith  desire,  so  full  of  Venus,  that  they
conceive  from  any  and  every  intercourse,  even  once  submitted
to,  and  from  a weakly  male,  and  produce  several  young  from  the
same  embrace;  others,  on  the  contrary,  are  so  torpid  and  sluggish,
that  unless  they  are  assailed  by  a ’rigorous  male,  under  the  in-
fluence of  strong  desire,  and  that  not  once,  but  repeatedly,  and  for


' Hist.  Anini.  lib.  vi,  cap.  21.


ON  GENEEATION.


225


a certain  time,  they  continue  barren.  This  is  also  the  case  with
eggs,  some  of  which,  though  they  may  have  been  conceived
in  consequence  of  intercourse,  still  remain  unprolific  unless  per-
fected by  repeated  and  continued  connections.  Whence  it  happens
that  some  eggs  are  more  speedily  changed  by  incubation  than
others,  exhibiting  traces  of  the  foetus  from  the  third  day;  others
again,  either  become  spoiled,  or  suffer  transformation  into  the
foetus  more  slowly,  exhibiting  no  indications  of  the  future  chick
even  up  to  the  seventh  day,  as  shall  be  made  to  appear  by  and
by,  in  speaking  of  the  generation  of  the  chick  from  the  egg.

Thus  far  have  we  discoursed  of  the  uterus  of  the  fowl,  and
its  function ; of  the  production  of  the  hen’s  egg,  and  of  its  dif-
ferences and  peculiarities,  from  immediate  observation ; and
from  the  instances  quoted,  conclusions  may  be  drawn  with
reference  to  other  oviparous  animals.

We  have  now  to  pursue  the  history  of  the  generation  and
formation  of  the  foetus  from  the  egg.  For  indeed,  as  I have
said  above,  the  entire  contemplation  of  the  family  of  birds  is
comprehended  in  these  two  propositions : how  is  an  egg  engen-
dered of  a male  and  female  ; and  by  what  process  do  males  and
females  proceed  from  eggs  ? — the  circle  by  which,  imder  favour
of  nature,  their  kinds  are  continued  to  eternity.


EXERCISE  THE  FOURTEENTH.

Of  the  production  of  the  chick  from  the  egg  of  the  hen.

Of  the  growth  and  generation  of  the  hen’s  egg  enough  has
already  been  said;  and  we  have  now  to  lay  before  the  reader  our
obsen^ations  on  the  procreation  of  the  chick  from  the  egg, — a
duty  which  is  equally  difficult,  and  profitable,  and  pleasant.
For  in  general  the  first  processes  of  nature  lie  hid,  as  it  were,
in  the  depths  of  night,  and  by  reason  of  their  subtlety  escape
the  keenest  reason  no  less  than  the  most  piercing  eye.

Nor  in  truth  is  it  a much  less  arduous  business  to  investigate
the  intimate  mysteries  and  obscure  beginnings  of  generation
than  to  seek  to  discover  the  frame  of  the  world  at  large,  and
the  manner  of  its  creation.  The  eternity  of  things  is  connected

15


226


ON  GENERATION.


with  the  reciprocal  interchange  of  generation  and  decay;  and  as
the  sun,  now  in  the  east  and  then  in  the  west,  completes  the
measure  of  time  by  his  ceaseless  revolutions,  so  are  the  fleeting
things  of  mortal  existence  made  eternal  through  incessant
change,  and  kinds  and  species  are  perpetuated  though  indhi-
duals  die.

The  writers  who  have  treated  of  this  subject  have  almost  all
taken  different  paths;  hut  having  their  minds  preoccupied,  they
have  hitherto  gone  to  work  to  frame  conclusions  in  consonance
with  the  particular  views  they  had  adopted.

Aristotle,^  among  the  ancients,  and  Hieron.  Fahricius  of
Aquapendente,  among  the  moderns,  have  written  with  so  much
accuracy  on  the  generation  and  formation  of  the  chick  from
the  egg  that  little  seems  left  for  others  to  do.  Ulyssus  Aldro-
vandus,^  nevertheless,  described  the  formation  of  the  cliick  in
ovo;  hut  he  appears  rather  to  have  gone  by  the  guidance  of  Aris-
totle than  to  have  relied  on  his  own  experience.  For  Yolchenis
Goiter,  living  at  this  time  in  Bologna,  and  encouraged,  as  he
tells  us,  by  Aldrovandus,  his  master,  opened  incubated  eggs
every  day,  and  illustrated  many  points  besides  those  noted  by
Aldrovandus  these  discoveries,  however,  could  scarcely  have
remained  unknown  to  Aldrovandus.  .dEmilius  Parisanus,  a
Venetian  physician,  haring  discarded  the  opinions  of  others,
has  also  given  a new  account  of  the  formation  of  the  chick
from  the  egg.

But  since  our  observations  lead  us  to  conclude  that  many
things  of  great  consequence  are  very  different  from  what  they
have  hitherto  been  held  to  be,  I shall  myself  give  an  account
of  what  goes  on  in  the  egg  fr’om  day  to  day,  and  what  parts  are
there  transmuted,  dii’ectiug  my  attention  to  the  first  days  espe-
cially, when  all  is  most  obscure  and  confused,  and  difficult  of
observation,  and  in  reference  to  which  writers  have  more  par-
ticularly drawn  the  sword  against  one  another  in  defence  of
their  several  discordant  observations,  which,  in  sooth,  they
accommodate  rather  to  their  preconceived  opinions  respecting
the  material  and  efficient  cause  of  animal  generation  than  to
simple  truth.

What  Aristotle  says  on  the  subject  of  the  reproduction  of

* Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  2,  3.  * Ornithol.  lib.  siv.

’ Nobil.  Exercit.  lib.  \i.


ON  GENERATION.


227


the  chick  in  ovo  is  perfectly  correct.  Nevertheless,  as  if  he
had  not  himself  seen  the  things  he  describes,  but  received  them
at  second  hand  from  another  expert  observer,  he  does  not  give
the  periods  rightly ; and  then  he  is  grievously  mistaken  in  re-
spect of  the  place  in  which  the  first  rudiments  of  the  egg  are
fashioned,  stating  this  to  be  the  sharp  end,  for  which  he  is  faiidy
challenged  by  Fabricius.  Neither  does  he  appear  to  have  ob-
served the  commencement  of  the  chick  in  the  egg;  nor  could
he  have  found  the  things  which  he  says  are  necessary  to  all
generation  in  the  place  which  he  assigns  them.  He  will,  for
instance,  have  it  that  the  white  is  the  constituent  matter  (since
nothing  naturally  can  by  possibility  be  produced  from  nothing.)
And  he  did  not  sufficiently  understand  how  the  efficient  cause
(the  seminal  fluid  of  the  cock,)  acted  without  contact ; nor  how
the  egg  could,  of  its  own  accord,  without  any  inherent  generative
matter  of  the  male,  produce  a cliick.

Aldrovandus,  adopting  an  error  akin  to  that  of  Aristotle,  says
besides,  that  the  yelk  rises  during  the  first  days  of  the  incubation
into  the  sharp  end  of  the  egg,  a proposition  which  no  eyes  but
those  of  the  blind  would  assent  to ; he  thinks  also  that  the  cha-
lazee  are  the  semen  of  the  cock,  and  that  the  chick  arises  from
them,  though  it  is  nourished  both  by  the  yelk  and  the  white.
In  this  he  is  obviously  in  opposition  to  Aristotle,  who  held  that
the  chalazse  contributed  nothing  to  the  reproductive  powers  of
the  egg.

Volcherus  Goiter  is,  on  the  whole,  much  more  correct;  and  his
statements  are  far  more  consonant  with  what  the  eye  perceives.
But  his  tale  of  the  three  globules  is  a fable.  Neither  did  he
rightly  perceive  the  true  commencement  of  the  chick  in  ovo.

Hieronymus  Fabricius  contends  that  the  chalazse  are  not  the
sperma  of  the  cock ; but  then  he  will  have  it  that  “ from  thes^
fecundated  by  the  seminal  fluid  of  the  cock,  as  from  the  appro-
priate matter,  the  chick  is  incorporated.”  Fabricius  observed
the  point  of  origin  of  the  chick,  the  spot  or  cicatricula,  namely,
which  presents  itseK  upon  the  tunica  propria  of  the  yelk  ; but  he
regarded  it  as  a cicatrice  or  scar  left  on  the  place  where  the
peduncle  had  been  attached ; he  viewed  it  as  a blemish  in  the
egg,  not  as  any  important  part.

Parisanus  completely  refutes  Fabricius’s  ideas  of  the  cha-
lazse ; but  he  himself  obviously  raves  when  he  speaks  of  certain


228


ON  GENERATION.


cii’cles,  and  principal  parts  of  the  fcetus^  viz.,  the  liver  and
heart.  He  appears  to  have  observed  the  commencement  of  the
fcetus  in  ovo;  hut  what  it  was  he  obviously  did  not  know,  when
he  says,  “ that  the  white  point  in  the  middle  of  the  circles  is
the  semen  of  the  cock,  from  which  the  chick  is  produced.”
Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  every  one,  in  adducing  reasons  for
the  formation  of  the  chick  in  ovo,  in  accordance  with  precon-
ceived opinions,  has  wandered  from  the  truth.  Some  wiU  have
it  that  the  semen  or  the  blood  is  the  matter  whence  the  chick
is  engendered ; others,  that  the  semen  is  the  agent  or  efficient
cause  of  its  formation.  Yet  to  him  who  dispassionately  views
the  question  is  it  quite  certain  that  there  is  no  prepared  matter
present,  nor  any  menstraous  blood  to  be  coagulated  at  the
time  of  intercourse  by  the  semen  masculinum,  as  Ai’istotle  will
have  it ; neither  does  the  chick  originate  in  the  egg  from  the
seed  of  the  male,  nor  from  that  of  the  female,  nor  from  the
two  commingled.


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTEENTH.

The  first  examination  of  the  egg;  or  of  the  effect  of  the  first
day’s  incubation  upon  the  egg.

That  Ave  may  be  the  more  clearly  informed  of  the  effect
which  the  first  day^s  incubation  produces  upon  the  egg,  we  must
set  out  by  ascertaining  what  changes  take  place  in  an  egg  spon-
taneously, changes  that  distinguish  a stale  egg  fr’om  one  that
is  new-laid,  when  what  is  due  to  the  incubation  per  se  will  first
he  clearly  apprehended.

The  space  or  cavity  in  the  hlimt  end  is  present,  as  we  have
said,  in  every  egg ; but  the  staler  the  egg  the  larger  does  this
holloAV  continually  grow ; and  this  is  more  especially  the  case
when  eggs  are  kept  in  a Avarm  place,  or  when  the  weather  is
hot ; the  effect  being  due  to  the  exhalation  of  a certain  portion
of  the  thinner  albnmen,  as  has  been  stated  in  the  histoiy  of
the  egg.  This  caAuty,  as  it  increases,  extends  rather  in  the  line
of  the  length  than  of  the  breadth  of  the  egg,  and  comes  finally
to  be  no  longer  orbicular.


ON  GENERATION.


229


The  shellj  already  less  transparent,  becomes  dingy.

The  albumen  grows  thicker  and  more  viscid,  and  acquires  a
straw  or  yellow  colour.

The  tunica  propria  of  the  vitellus  becomes  more  lax,  and
appears  wrinkled,  for  it  seems  that  some  even  of  this  fluid  is
dissipated  in  the  course  of  time.

The  chalazse  are  found  in  either  end  of  every  egg,  in  the  same
situation,  and  having  the  same  consistence — whether  the  egg  he
recent  or  stale,  fruitful  or  barren,  it  does  not  signify ; by  their
means  a Arm  connexion  is  established  between  the  yelk  and  the
white,  and  the  two  fluids  preserve  their  relative  positions.  The
chalazse,  indeed,  are  two  mutually  opposed  supports  or  poles,
and  hinges  of  this  microcosm ; and  are  constructed  as  if  made
up  of  numerous  coats  of  the  albumen,  twisted  together  at  either
end  into  a knotted  rope,  by  which  they  are  attached  to  the
vitellus.  And  hence  it  happens  that  the  yelk  is  separated  from
the  white  with  ditficulty,  unless  the  chalazje  are  either  first  di-
vided with  a knife  or  torn  with  the  Angers ; this  done,  the  white
immediately  falls  aw^ay  from  the  yelk.  It  is  by  means  of  these
hinges  that  the  vitellus  is  both  retained  in  the  centre  of  the
egg  and  preserved  of  its  proper  consistence.  And  they  are
so  connected  that  the  principal  part,  the  cicatricula,  to  wit,
always  regards  the  same  region  of  the  egg,  or  its  upper  part,
and  is  preserved  equidistant  from  either  end.  For  this  spot  or
cicatricula  is  observed  to  be  of  the  same  consistence,  dimensions,
and  colom’,  and  in  the  same  situation  in  the  stale  as  in  the  new-
laid  egg.  But  as  soon  as  the  egg,  under  the  influence  of  the
gentle  warmth  of  the  incubating  hen,  or  of  warmth  derived  from
another  source,  begins  to  pullulate,  this  spot  forthwith  dilates,
and  expands  hke  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  and  from  thence,  as  the
grand  centre  of  the  egg,  the  latent  plastic  force  breaks  forth  and
germinates.  This  first  commencement  of  the  chick,  however,  so
far  as  I am  aware,  has  not  yet  been  observed  by  any  one.

On  the  second  day  of  the  incubation,  after  the  egg  has  been
exposed  to  warmth  for  twenty-four  hours,  under  the  hen,  as
the  cavity  in  the  blunt  end  has  enlarged  greatly  and  descended,
so  has  the  internal  constitution  of  the  egg  also  begun  to  be
changed.  The  yelk,  which  had  hitherto  lain  in  the  middle  of
the  albumen,  rises  towards  the  blunt  end,  and  its  middle,  where
the  cicatricula  is  situated,  is  lifted  up  and  applied  to  the  mem-


230


ON  GENERATION.


brane  that  bounds  the  empty  space,  so  that  the  yelk  now  appears
to  be  connected  with  the  cavity  by  means  of  the  cicatricula;  and
in  the  same  measure  as  the  yelk  rises  does  the  thicker  portion
of  the  albumen  sink  into  the  sharp  or  lower  end  of  the  egg.
Whence  it  appears,  as  Fabricius  lightly  remarks,  that  Aristotle^
was  either  in  error,  or  that  there  is  a mistake  in  the  codex,
when  it  is  said,  “ In  this  time”  (viz.,  between  three  and  four
days,  and  as  many  nights,)  the  yelk  is  brought  to  the  summit,
Avhere  the  commencement  of  the  egg  is,  and  the  egg  is  exposed
in  this  part,”  i.  e.  under  the  enlarged  empty  space.  Now  Aris-
totle^ calls  the  piincipium  mi,  or  commencement  of  the  egg,  its
smaller  end,  which  is  last  extruded.  But  it  is  certain  that  the
yelk  ascends  towards  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg,  and  that  the
cavity  there  enlarges.  And  Aldrovandus  is  undoubtedly  in
error  ivlien  he  speaks  as  if  he  had  experience  of  the  fact,  and
says  that  the  yelk  rises  to  the  sharp  end.  I Avill  confess,  never-
theless, that  on  the  second  or  third  day  I have  occasionally
observed  the  cicatricula  expanded  and  the  beginning  of  the
chick  already  laid,  the  yelk  not  having  yet  risen ; this,  how-
ever, happens  rarely,  and  I am  inchned  to  ascribe  it  to  some
Aveakness  in  the  egg.

On  the  second  day  of  the  incubation,  or  first  day  of  inspec-
tion, the  cicatricula  in  question  is  found  to  haA'e  enlarged  to
the  dimensions  of  a pea  or  lentil,  and  is  diAlded  into  cii’cles,
such  as  might  be  di’awn  Avith  a pair  of  compasses,  having  an
extremely  minute  point  for  their  centre.  It  is  very  probable
that  Aldrovandus  observed  this  spot,  for  he  says  : In  the

midst  of  the  yellow  a certain  whitish  something  makes  its  ap-
pearance, AAdiich  was  not  noticed  by  Aristotle ;”  and  also  by
Goiter,  aa  hen  he  expresses  himself  thus  : “ On  the  second  day
there  is  in  the  middle  of  the  yelk  a part  whiter  than  the  rest;”
Parisanus,  too,  may  have  seen  it ; he  observes  : “ In  the  com-se
of  the  second  day  I observe  a white  body  of  the  size  and  form
of  a middling  lentil ; and  this  is  the  semen  of  the  cock  covered
over  Avith  a Avhite  and  most  delicate  tunic,  which  underlies  the
tAvo  common  membranes  of  the  entire  egg,  but  overlies  the
tunica  propria  of  the  yelk.”  I belieA'e,  however,  that  no  one
has  yet  said  that  this  cicatricula  occurs  in  every  egg,  or  has
acknowledged  it  to  be  the  origin  of  the  chick.

' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  3.  ° Ibid.  lib.  iii,  cap.  2.


ON  GENERATION.


231


Meantime  the  chalazse  or  treadles  will  be  seen  to  decline
from  either  end  of  the  egg  towards  its  sides,  this  being  occa-
sioned by  that  alteration  which  we  have  noticed  in  the  relative
situations  of  the  two  fluids.  The  treadle  from  the  blunt  end
descends  somewhat ; the  one  from  the  sharp  end  rises  in  the
same  proportion:  as  in  a globe  whose  axis  is  set  obliquely,  one
pole  is  as  much  depressed  below  the  horizon  as  the  other  is
raised  above  it.

The  vitellus,  too,  particularly  in  the  situation  of  the  cica-
tricula,  begins  to  grow  a little  more  diffluent  than  it  was,  and
raises  its  tunica  propria,  (which  we  have  found  in  stale  eggs
before  incubation  to  be  somewhat  lax  and  wrinkled,)  into  a
tumour  j and  it  now  appears  to  have  recovered  the  same  colour,
consistency,  and  sweetness  of  taste  that  it  had  in  the  egg  just
laid.

Such  is  the  proeess  in  the  course  of  the  first  day  that  leads
to  the  production  of  a new  being,  such  the  earliest  trace  of  the
future  chick.  Aldrovandus  adds:  “the  albumen  suffers  no
change,’^  which  is  correct;  but  when  he  asserts  that  “ the  semen
of  the  cock  can  be  seen  in  it,^^  he  as  manifestly  errs.  Resting
on  a most  insufficient  reason,  he  thought  that  the  chalazse  were
the  semen  of  the  eock,  “ because,”  forsooth,  “ the  eggs  that  are
without  chalazEe  are  unfruitful.”  This  I can  very  well  believe  ;
for  these  were  then  no  proper  eggs ; for  all  eggs,  wind  eggs  as
well  as  those  that  are  prolific,  have  chalazse.  But  he,  misled
perhaps  by  the  country  women,  who  in  Italian  call  the  chalazse
yalladura,  fell  into  the  vulgar  error.  Nor  is  Hieronymus
Fabrieius  guilty  of  a less  grave  mistake  when  he  exhibits  the
formation  of  the  chick  in  a series  of  engravings,  and  contends
that  it  is  produced  from  the  chalazse ; overlooking  the  fact  that
the  chalazse  are  present  the  whole  of  the  time,  and  unchanged,
though  they  have  shifted  their  places;  and  that  the  commence-
ment of  the  chick  is  to  be  sought  for  at  a distance  from  them.


232


ON  GENERATION.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTEENTH.

Second  inspection  of  the  egg.

The  second  day  gone  by,  the  circles  of  the  cicatricnla  that
have  been  mentioned,  have  become  larger  and  more  conspicuous,
and  may  now  be  of  the  size  of  the  nail  of  the  ring-finger,
sometimes  even  of  that  of  the  middle  finger.  By  these  rings
the  whole  cicatricnla  is  indistinctly  divided  into  two,  occa-
sionally into  three  regions,  which  are  frequently  of  different
colours,  and  bear  a strong  resemblance  to  the  cornea  of  the  eye,
both  as  respects  dimensions,  a certain  degree  of  prominence,
and  the  presence  of  a transparent  and  limpid  fluid  included
within  it.  The  centre  of  the  cicatricnla  here  stands  for  the
pupil ; but  it  is  occupied  with  a certain  white  speck,  and  ap-
pears like  the  pupil  of  some  small  bu’d’s  eye  obscm’ed  by  a
suffusion  or  cataract,  as  it  is  called.  On  this  account  we  have
called  the  entire  object  the  oculum  ovi,  the  eye  of  the  egg.

Within  the  circles  of  the  cicatricnla,  I say,  there  is  contained
a quantity  of  perfectly  bright  and  transparent  fluid,  even  purer
than  any  crystalline  humour ; which,  if  it  be  riewed  transversely
and  against  the  light,  the  whole  spot  will  rather  appear  to  be
situated  in  the  albumen  than  sunk  into  the  membrane  of  the
yelk,  as  before  : it  presents  itself  as  a portion  of  the  albumen
dissolved  and  clarified,  and  included  within  a most  delicate
tunica  propria.  Hence  I entitle  this  fluid  the  oculum  seu  colli-
quamentum  album ; it  is  as  if  a portion  of  the  albumen,  Hque-
fied  by  the  heat,  shone  apart,  (which  it  does,  unless  distmbed
by  being  shaken,)  and  formed  a more  spirituous  and  better
digested  fluid,  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  albumen  by  a
tunica  propria,  and  situated  between  the  two  masses  of  liquid,
the  yelk  and  the  albumen.  It  differs  from  the  rest  of  the
albumen  by  its  clearness  and  transparency,  as  the  water  of  a
pellucid  spring  differs  from  that  of  a stagnant  pool.  The  tunic
which  surrounds  this  fluid  is  so  fi’agile  and  dehcate  that,  unless
the  egg  be  handled  with  great  care,  it  is  apt  to  give  way,  when
the  pm-e  spring  is  rendered  turbid  by  a mixtm'e  of  fluids.

I was  long  in  doubt  what  I should  conclude  as  to  this


ON  GENERATION.


233


clear  diffluent  fluids  Avlietlier  I should  regard  it  as  the  innate
heatj  or  radical  moisture  j as  a matter  prepared  for  the  futm*e
foetus,  or  a perfectly-concocted  nourishment,  sueh  as  dew  is
held  to  he  among  the  secondary  humours.  For  it  is  certain,
as  shall  be  afterwards  shown,  that  the  earliest  rudiments  of  the
foetus  are  cast  in  its  middle,  that  from  this  the  ehick  derwes
its  first  nutriment,  and  even  when  of  larger  size  eontinues  to
live  amidst  it.

This  solution  therefore  inereases  rapidly  in  quantity,  par-
ticularly in  its  internal  region,  Avhich,  as  it  expands,  forees  out
and  obhterates  the  external  regions.  This  change  is  effected
in  the  course  of  a single  day,  as  is  shown  in  the  second  figure
of  Fabricius.  It  is  very  much  as  it  is  with  the  eyes  of  those
animals  which  have  a very  ample  pupil,  and  see  better  by  night
than  by  day,  sueh  as  owls,  cats,  and  others,  whose  pupils  expand
very  much  in  the  dusk  and  dark,  and,  on  the  contrary,  contract
excessively  in  a brilliant  light : one  of  these  animals  being  taken
quickly  from  a light  into  a shady  place,  the  pupil  is  seen  to
enlarge  in  such  wise  that  the  coloured  ring,  ealled  the  iris,  is
very  mueh  diminished  in  size,  and  indeed  almost  entirely  dis-
appears.

Farisanus,  falhng  upon  these  regions,  is  grossly  mistaken
when  he  speaks  of  “ a honey-coloured,  a Avhite,  a gray,  and  an-
other white  circle and  says  that  the  foetus  is  formed  from
the  white  middle  point”  (which,  indeed,  appears  in  these
regions),  and  that  “ this  is  the  semen  of  the  coek.”  That  he
may  exalt  himself  on  a more  notable  subtlety  he  continues  :
“ Before  any  redness  is  apparent  in  the  body  of  the  foetus,  two
minute  vesieles  present  themselves  in  it ; in  the  beginning,
however,  neither  of  them  is  tinged  with  red one  of  these  he
would  haA-e  us  receive  as  the  heart,  the  other  as  the  liver.  But
in  truth  there  is  neither  any  vesiele  present  sooner  than  the
redness  of  the  blood  is  disclosed;  nor  does  the  embryo  ever  sud-
denly beeome  red  in  the  course  of  the  first  days  of  its  existenee;
nor  yet  does  any  of  these  vesicles  present  us  with  a trace  of  the
liver.  Both  of  them  belong,  in  fact,  to  the  heart,  prefiguring
its  ventrieles  and  auricles,  and  palpitating,  as  we  shall  after-
Avards  shoAV,  they  respond  reciprocally  by  their  systoles  and
diastoles.


234


ON  GENERATION.


Aristotle^  appears  to  have  knovrn  this  dissolved  fluid,  when
he  says  ; “ A membrane,  too,  marked  with  sanguineous  flbres,
surrounds  the  white  fluid  at  this  time  (the  third  day),  arising
from  those  orifices  of  the  veins. Now  the  philosopher  can
neither  he  supposed  by  the  words  “ white  fluid,^^  to  refer  to
the  albumen  at  large,  because  at  this  period  the  membrane  of
the  white  is  not  yet  covered  -with  veins ; it  is  only  the  membrane
of  the  dissolved  fluid  Avhich  appears  with  a few  branches  of
veins  distributed  over  it  here  and  there.  And  because  he  says:
“ this  membrane,  too,”  as  if  he  understood  another  than  those
which  he  had  spoken  of  as  investing  the  albumen  and  the  yelk
before  incubation,  and  designated  this  one  as  fii’st  arising  after
the  third  day,  and  from  the  orifices  of  the  veins.

Goiter  seems  also  to  have  known  of  this  dissolved  fluid  ; he
says : “ A certain  poi’tion  of  the  albumen  acquiring  a white
colour,  another  becoming  thicker.”  The  fluid  in  question  is
surrounded  with  its  proper  membrane,  and  is  distinct  and
separate  from  the  rest  of  the  albumen  before  there  is  any
appearance  of  blood.  We  shall  have  occasion,  by  and  by,  to
speak  of  the  singular  importance  of  this  fluid  to  the  foetuses  of
every  animal.  Whilst  they  float  in  it  they  are  safe  from  suc-
cussion  and  contusion,  and  other  external  injury  of  every  kind;
and  thejr  moreover  are  nomfished  by  it.  I once  showed  to
their  serene  majesties  the  king  and  queen,  an  embryo,  the  size
of  a French-bean,  which  had  been  taken  from  the  uterus  of
a doe ; all  its  membranes  were  entu’e,  and  from  its  genital
organs  we  could  readily  tell  that  it  was  a male.  It  was,  in
truth,  a most  agreeable  natural  spectacle ; the  embryo  perfect
and  elegant,  floating  in  this  pure,  transparent,  and  crystalhne
fluid,  invested  with  its  pellucid  tunica  propria,  as  if  in  a glass
vessel  of  the  greatest  puritj',  of  the  size  of  a pigeon’s  egg.


EXERCISE  THE  SEVENTEENTH.

The  third  inspection  of  the  egg.

Haring  seen  the  second  process  or  preparation  of  the  egg,
towards  the  production  of  the  embryo  which  presents  itself  in
' Hist.  Auim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  3.


ON  GENERATION.


235


the  course  of  the  third  day,  we  proceed  to  the  Third  Stage,
which  falls  to  be  considered  after  the  lapse  of  three  days  and  as
many  nights.  Aristotle^  says  : “ Traces  of  generation  commence
in  the  egg  of  the  hen  after  three  days  and  three  nights  [of  in-
cubation] for  example,  on  Monday  morning,  if  in  the  morning
of  the  preceding  Friday  the  egg  has  been  put  under  the  hen.
This  stage  forms  the  subject  of  the  third  figure  in  Fabricius.

If  the  inspection  of  the  egg  be  made  on  the  fourth  day,  the
metamorphosis  is  still  greater,  and  the  change  likewise  more
wonderful  and  manifest  with  every  hour  in  the  course  of  the
day.  It  is  in  this  interval  that  the  transition  is  made  in  the
egg  from  the  life  of  the  plant  to  the  life  of  the  animal.  For
now  the  margin  of  the  diffluent  fluid  looks  red,  and  is  pur-
purescent  with  a sanguineous  line,  and  nearly  in  its  centre  there
appears  a leaping  point,  of  the  colour  of  blood,  so  small  that  at
one  moment,  when  it  contracts,  it  almost  entirely  escapes  the
eye,  and  again,  when  it  dilates,  it  shows  like  the  smallest
spark  of  fire.  Such  at  the  outset  is  animal  life,  which  the
plastic  force  of  nature  puts  in  motion  from  the  most  insig-
nificant beginnings  !

The  above  particulars  you  may  perceive  towards  the  close  of
the  third  day,  with  very  great  attention,  and  under  favour  of  a
bright  light  (as  of  the  sun),  or  with  the  assistance  of  a magni-
fying glass.  "Without  these  aids  you  would  strain  yom’  eyes  in
vain,  so  slender  is  the  purple  line,  so  slight  is  the  motion  of  the
palpitating  point.  But  at  the  beginniug  of  the  fourth  day  you
may  readily, 'and  at  its  close  most  readily,  perceive  the  '^palpi-
tating bloody  point,  which  already  moves,”  says  Aristotle,  “ like
an  animal,  in  the  transparent  liquid  (which  I call  colliqua-
mentum);  and  from  this  point  two  vascular  branches  proceed,
full  of  blood,  in  a winding  course”  into  the  purpurescent  circle
and  the  investing  membrane  of  the  resolved  liquid ; distributing
in  their  progress  numerous  fibrous  offshoots,  which  all  proceed
from  one  original,  like  the  branches  and  twigs  of  a tree  from
the  same  stem.  Within  the  entering  angle  of  this  root,  and  in
the  middle  of  the  resolved  liquid,  is  placed  the  red  palpitating
point,  which  keeps  order  and  rhythm  in  its  prdsations,  composed
of  [alternate]  systoles  and  diastoles.  In  the  diastole,  when  it  has


‘ Hist.  .\nim.  lib.  w,  cap.  3.


236


ON  GENERATION.


imbibed  a larger  quantity  of  blood,  it  becomes  enlarged,  and
starts  into  view;  in  the  systole,  however,  subsiding  instan-
taneously as  if  commlsed  by  the  stroke,  and  expelling  the  blood,
it  vanishes  from  view.

Fabricius  depicts  this  palpitating  point  in  his  third  figure ;
and  mistakes  it — a thing  which  is  extraordinary — for  the  bodv
of  the  embryo ; as  if  he  had  never  seen  it  leaping  or  pidsating,
or  had  not  understood,  or  had  entirely  forgotten  the  passage  in
Aristotle.  A still  greater  subject  of  amazement,  however,  is
his  total  want  of  solicitude  about  his  chalazae  all  this  while,
although  he  had  declared  the  rudiments  of  the  embryo  to  be
derived  from  them.

Ulyssus  Aldrovandus,*  Avriting  from  Bologna  nearly  at  the
same  time,  says : “ There  appears  in  the  albumen,  as  it  were,  a
miniite  palpitating  point,  which  The  Philosopher  declares  to  be
the  heart.  And  I have  unquestionably  seen  a venous  trunk  arising
from  this,  from  Avhich  two  other  branches  proceeded;  these  ai-e
the  blood-vessels,  which  he  says  extend  to  either  investing  mem-
brane of  the  yelk  and  white.  And  I am  myself  entirely  of  his
opinion,  and  believe  these  to  be  veins,  and  pidsatile,  and  to
contain  a purer  kind  of  blood,  adapted  to  the  production  of  the
principal  parts  of  the  body,  the  liver,  to  wit,  the  lungs,  and
others  of  the  same  description.^^  Both  of  the  vessels  in  ques-
tion, however,  are  not  veins,  neither  do  they  both  pulsate ; hut
one  of  them  is  an  ai’tery,  another  a vein,  as  we  shall  see  by  and
bjq  when  we  shall  farther  show  that  these  passages  constitute
the  umbilical  vessels  of  the  embryo.

Volcher  Goiter  has  these  words  : “ The  sanguineous  point  or
globule,  which  was  formerly  found  in  the  yelk,  is  now  observed
more  in  the  albumen,  and  pulsates  distinctly.”  He  says,  erro-
neously, “ formerly  found  in  the  yelk ;”  for  the  point  discovered
in  the  vitellus  is  white,  and  does  not  pulsate;  nor  does  the  san-
guineous point  or  globe  appear  to  pulsate  at  the  end  of  the
second  day  of  incubation.  But  the  point  which  we  have  indi-
cated in  the  middle  of  the  circle,  and  as  constituting  its  centre
in  connexion  with  the  vitellus,  disappears  before  that  point  wliich
is  characterized  by  Aristotle  as  palpitating,  can  be  discerued ;
or,  as  I conceive,  liaHng  turned  red,  begins  to  pidsate.  For


‘ Ornithologia,  lib.  xiv,  p.  217.


ON  GENERATION.


237


both  points  are  situated  in  the  centre  of  the  resolved  fluid,  and
near  the  root  of  the  veins  which  thence  arise;  but  they  are  never
seen  simultaneously:  in  the  place  of  the  w'hite  point  there  appears
a red  and  palpitating  point.

That  portion  of  Coiter^s  sentence,  however,  where  he  says  :
^'the  punctus  saliens  is  now  seen  in  the  albumen  rather  than
in  the  yelk,^^  is  perfectly  accurate.  And,  indeed,  moved  by  these
words,  I have  inquired  whether  the  white  point  in  question  is
turned  into  the  blood-red  point,  inasmuch  as  both  are  nearly  of
the  same  size,  and  both  make  their  appearance  in  the  same
situation.  And  I have,  indeed,  occasionally  found  an  extremely
delicate  bright  purple  circle  ending  near  the  ruddy  horizon
surrounding  the  resolved  liquid,  in  the  centre  of  which  there
was  the  white  point,  but  not  the  red  and  pulsating  point  ap-
parent ; for  I have  never  observed  these  two  points  at  one  and
the  same  time.  It  were  certainly  of  great  moment  to  deter-
mine : Whether  or  not  the  blood  was  extant  before  the  pulse  ?
and  whether  the  pulsating  point  arose  from  the  veins,  or  the
veins  from  the  pulsating  point  ?

So  far  as  my  observations  enable  me  to  conclude,  the  blood
has  seemed  to  go  before  the  pulse.  This  conclusion  is  supported
by  the  following  instance : on  W ednesday  evening  I set  three
hen’s  eggs,  and  on  Saturday  evening,  somewhat  before  the  same
hour,  I found  these  eggs  cold,  as  if  forsaken  by  the  hen:  having
opened  one  of  them,  notwithstanding,  I found  the  rudiments  of
an  embryo,  viz.,  a red  and  sanguinolent  hne  in  the  circum-
ference ; and  in  the  centre,  instead  of  a pulsating  point,  a white
and  bloodless  point.  By  this  indication  I saw  that  the  hen  had
left  her  nest  no  long  time  before;  wherefore,  catching  her,  and
shutting  her  up  in  a box,  1 kept  her  upon  the  two  remaining
eggs,  and  several  others,  through  the  ensuing  night.  Next  morn-
ing, very  early,  both  of  the  eggs  with  which  the  experiment  was
begun,  had  revived,  and  in  the  centre  there  was  the  pulsating
point,  much  smaller  than  the  white  point,  from  which,  hke  a
spark  darting  from  a cloud,  it  made  its  appearance  in  the
diastole;  it  seemed  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  red  point  emanated
from  the  white  point;  that  the  punctum  saliens  was  in  some  way
engendered  in  that  white  point;  that  the  punctum  saliens,  the
blood  being  ah’eady  extant,  was  either  originally  there  produced,
or  there  began  to  move.  I have,  indeed,  repeatedly  seen  the


238


ON  GENERATION.


punctum  saliens  wlieu  all  but  dead,  and  no  longer  giving  any
signs  of  motion,  recover  its  pulsatile  movements  under  the  in-
fluence of  renewed  warmth.  In  the  order  of  generation,  then,
I conceive  that  the  punctum  and  the  blood  first  exist,  and  that
pulsation  only  occurs  subsequently.

This  at  all  events  is  certain,  that  nothing  whatever  of  the
future  foetus  is  apparent  on  this  day,  save  and  except  certain
sanguineous  lines,  the  punctum  saliens,  and  those  veins  that  all
present  themselves  as  emanating  fi’om  a single  trunk,  (as  this
itself  proceeds  from  the  punctum  saliens,)  and  are  distributed  in
numerous  branches  over  the  whole  of  the  colliquament  or  dis-
solved fluid.  These  vessels  afterwards  constitute  the  umbilical
vessels,  by  means  of  which,  distributed  far  and  wide,  the  foetus
as  it  grows  obtains  its  nourishment  from  the  albumen  and  vi-
tellus.  You  have  a striking  example  of  similar  vessels  and  their
branchings  in  the  leaves  of  trees,  the  whole  of  the  veins  of  which
arise  from  the  peduncle  or  foot-stalk,  and  from  a single  trunk
are  distributed  to  the  rest  of  the  leaf.

The  entire  including  membrane  of  the  colliquament  traversed
by  blood-vessels,  corresponds  in  form  and  dimensions  with  the
two  wings  of  a moth;  and  this,  in  fact,  is  the  membrane  which
Aristotle^  describes  as  “possessing  sanguineous  fibres,  and  at
the  same  time  containing  a hmpid  fluid,  proceeding  from  those
mouths  of  the  veins.

Towards  the  end  of  the  fom’th  day,  and  the  beginning  of  the
fifth,  the  blood-red  point,  increased  into  a small  and  most  deli-
cate vesicle,  is  perceived  to  contain  blood  in  its  interior,  which
it  propels  by  its  contractions,  and  receives  anew  during  its
diastoles.

Up  to  this  point  I have  not  been  able  to  perceive  any  difler-
ence  in  the  vessels  : the  arteries  are  not  distinguished  from  the
veins,  either  by  their  coats  or  their  pulsations.  I am  therefore
of  opinion,  that  all  the  vessels  may  be  spoken  of  indifferently
under  the  name  of  veins,  or,  adopting  Aristotle’s*  term,  of  venous
canals.

“ The  punctum  saliens,”  says  Aristotle,  “ is  already  possessed
of  spontaneous  motion,  like  an  animal.”  Because  an  animal
is  distinguished  from  that  which  is  none,  by  the  possession  of


‘ Loe.  supra  cit.


’ Ib.


ON  GENERATION.


239


sense  and  motion.  When  this  point  begins  to  move  for  the  first
time,  consequently,  we  say  well  that  it  has  assumed  an  animal
nature ; the  egg,  originally  imbued  with  a vegetative  soul,  now
becomes  endowed  in  addition  with  a motive  and  sensitive  force;
from  the  vegetable  it  passes  into  the  animal;  and  at  the  same
time  the  living  principle,  which  fashions  the  chick  from  the  egg,
and  afterwards  gives  it  the  measure  of  intelligence  it  manifests,
enters  into  the  embryo.  For,  from  the  actions  or  manifestations.
The  Philosopher^  concludes  demonstratively,  that  the  faculties
or  powers  of  acting  are  inherent,  and  through  these  the  cause
and  principle  of  life,  the  soul,  to  wit,  and  the  actions,  inasmuch
as  manifestation  is  action.

I am  myself  farther  satisfied  from  numerous  experiments,
that  not  only  is  motion  inherent  in  the  punctum  saliens,  which
indeed  no  one  denies,  but  sensation  also.  For  on  any  the  slightest
touch,  you  may  see  the  point  variously  commoved,  and,  as  it
were,  irritated;  just  as  sensitive  bodies  generally  give  indications
of  their  proper  sensations  by  their  motions ; and,  the  injury
being  repeated,  the  punctum  becomes  excited  and  disturbed  in
the  rhythm  and  order  of  its  pulsations.  Thus  do  we  conclude
that  in  the  sensitive-plant,  and  in  zoophytes,  there  is  inherent
sensibility,  because  when  touched  they  contract,  as  if  they  felt
uncomfortable.

I have  seen,  I repeat,  very  frequently,  and  those  who  have  been
with  me  have  seen  this  punctum,  when  touched  with  a needle,
a probe,  or  a finger,  and  even  when  exposed  to  a higher  tem-
perature, or  a severer  cold,  or  subjected  to  any  other  molesting
circumstance  or  thing,  give  various  indications  of  sensibility,  in
the  variety,  force,  and  frequency  of  its  pulsations.  It  is  not  to
be  questioned,  therefore,  that  this  punctum  lives,  moves,  and
feels  like  an  animal.

An  egg,  moreover,  too  long  exposed  to  the  colder  air,  the
punctum  saliens  beats  more  slowly  and  languidly;  but  the  finger,
or  some  other  warmth  being  applied,  it  forthwith  recovers  its
powers.  And  farther,  after  the  punctum  has  gradually  lan-
guished, and,  replete  with  blood,  has  even  ceased  from  all  kind
of  motion,  or  other  indication  of  life,  stiU,  on  applying  my  warm
finger,  in  no  longer  a time  than  is  measured  by  twenty  beats

’ Liber  de  Anima.


240


ON  GENERATION.


of  my  pulsOj  lo  ! the  little  heart  is  re\i\*ified,  erects  itself  anew,
and,  retui’ning  from  Hades  as  it  were,  is  restored  to  its  former
pulsations.  The  same  thing  happens  through  heat  applied  in  any
other  way — that  of  the  fire,  or  of  hot  water — as  has  been  proved
by  myself  and  others  again  and  again ; so  that  it  seemed  as  if
it  lay  in  our  power  to  deliver  the  poor  heart  over  to  death,  or
to  recall  it  to  life  at  our  will  and  pleasui’e.

"What  has  now  been  stated,  for  the  most  part  comes  to  pass
on  the  fourth  day  from  the  commencement  of  the  incubation —
I say,  for  the  most  part, — because  it  is  not  invariably  so,  inas-
much as  there  is  great  diversity  in  the  maturity  of  eggs,  and
some  are  more  speedily  perfected  than  others.  As  in  trees  laden
with  fruit,  some,  more  forward  and  precocious,  falls  from  the
branches,  and  some,  more  crude  and  immature,  still  hangs
firmly  on  the  bough ; so  are  some  eggs  less  forward  on  the  fifth
day  than  others  in  the  course  of  the  third.  This,  that  I might
give  it  forth  as  a thing  attested  and  certain,  I have  repeatedly
ascertained  in  numerous  eggs,  incubated  for  the  same  length  of
time,  and  opened  on  the  same  day.  Nor  can  I ascnbe  it  to
any  difference  of  sex,  or  inclemency  of  weather,  or  neglect  of
incubation,  or  to  any  other  cause  but  an  inherent  weakness  of
the  egg  itself,  or  some  deficiency  of  the  native  heat,

Hypenemic  or  unfruitful  eggs,  begin  to  change  at  this  time,
as  the  critical  day  when  they  must  show  their  disposition.  As
fertile  eggs  are  changed  by  the  inherent  plastic  force  into  col-
liquament  (which  afterwards  passes  into  blood),  so  do  wind-eggs
now  begin  to  change  and  to  putrefy.  I have,  nevertheless,
occasionally  observed  the  spot  or  cicahicula  to  expand  consi-
derably even  in  hypenemic  eggs,  but  never  to  rise  into  a cumulus,
nor  to  become  cii’cnmscribed  by  regularly  disposed  concentric
circles.  Sometimes  I have  even  observed  the  Htellus  to  get
somewhat  clearer,  and  to  become  liquefied;  but  this  was  un-
equally; there  were  flocks,  as  if  formed  by  sudden  coagulation,
swimming  dispersed  through  it  hke  clouds.  And  although  such
eggs  could  not  yet  be  called  putrid,  nor  were  they  offensive,
still  were  they  disposed  to  putrefaction ; and,  if  continued  under
the  hen,  they  soon  arrived  at  this  state,  the  rottenness  com-
mencing at  the  very  spot  where  in  fruitful  eggs  the  reproductive
germ  appears.


ON  GENERATION.


241


The  more  perfect  or  forward  eggs  then,  about  the  end  of
the  fourth  day,  contain  a double  or  bipartite  pulsating  vesicle,
each  portion  reciprocating  the  other’s  motion,  in  such  order  and
manner  that  whilst  one  is  contracting,  the  other  is  distended
with  blood  and  ruddy  in  colour ; but  this  last  contracting  anon
forces  out  its  charge  of  blood,  and,  an  instant  being  interposed,
the  former  rises  again  and  repeats  its  pulse.  And  it  is  easy  to
perceive  that  the  action  of  these  vesicles  is  contraction,  by  which,
the  blood  is  moved  and  propelled  into  the  vessels.

“ On  the  fourth  day,”  says  Aldrovandus,^  “ two  puncta  are
perceived,  both  of  which  are  in  motion  ; these,  undoubtedly,  are
the  heart  and  the  liver,  viscera  which  Aristotle  allowed  to  eggs
incubated  for  three  days.”

The  Philosopher,  2 however,  nowhere  says  anything  of  the
kind;  neither,  for  the  most  part,  are  the  viscera  mentioned  con-
spicuous before  the  tenth  day.  And  I am  indeed  sui’prised  that
Aldrovandus  should  have  taken  one  of  these  pulsating  points
for  the  liver,  as  if  this  viscus  were  ever  moved  in  any  such
manner  ! It  seems  much  better  to  believe  that  with  the  growth
of  the  embryo  one  of  the  pulsating  points  is  changed  into  the
am-icles,  the  other  into  the  ventricles  of  the  heart.  For  in  the
adult,  the  ventricles  are  filled  in  the  same  manner  by  the  au-
ricles, and  by  their  contraction  they  are  straightway  emptied
again,  as  we  have  shown  in  our  treatise  on  the  Motion  of  the
Heart  and  Blood.

In  more  forward  eggs,  towards  the  end  of  the  fourth  day,
I have  occasionally  found  I know  not  what  cause  of  obscurity
inteiwening  and  preventing  me  from  seeing  these  pulsating
vesicles  with  the  same  distinctness  as  before;  it  was  as  if
there  had  been  a haze  interposed  between  them  and  the  eye.
In  a clearer  light,  nevertheless,  and  with  the  use  of  magni-
fying glasses,  the  observations  of  one  day  being  further  col-
lated with  those  of  the  next  succeeding  day,  it  was  discovered
that  the  indistinctness  was  caused  by  the  rudiments  of  the  body,
— a nebula  concocted  from  part  of  the  colliquament,  or  an
effluvium  concreting  around  the  commencements  of  the  veins.

Aldrovandus  appears  to  have  observed  this  : “ On  the  fifth
day,”  says  he,  “ the  punctum,  which  we  have  stated  to  be  the


De  Geneiat.  Animal,  lib.  iii,  cap.  4.

16


Op  cit.  p.  217.


242


ON  GENERATION.


heart,  is  no  longer  seen  to  move  externally,  bnt  to  be  covered
over  and  concealed ; still  its  two  meatus  venosi  are  perceived
more  distinctly  than  before,  one  of  them  being,  further,  larger
than  the  other.”  But  our  learned  author  was  mistaken  here;  for
this  familiar  divinity,  the  heart,  enters  into  his  mansion  and  shuts
himself  up  in  its  inmost  recesses  a long  time  afterwai’ds,  and  when
the  house  is  almost  completely  built.  Aldrovandus  also  errs  when
he  says,  “ by  the  ^ds  insita  of  the  veins,  the  remaining  portion
of  the  albumen  acquires  a straw  colour,”  for  this  colour  is  ob-
served in  the  thicker  albumen  of  every  spoilt  egg,  and  it  goes
on  increasing  in  depth  from  day  to  day  as  the  egg  grows  staler,
and  this  without  any  influenee  of  the  veins,  the  thinner  portion
only  being  dissipated.

But  the  embryo  enlarging,  as  we  say  below,  and  the  ramifi-
cations of  the  meatus  venosi  extending  far  and  wide  to  the  al-
bumen and  vitellus,  portions  of  both  of  these  fluids  become
liquefied,  not  indeed  in  the  way  Aldrovandus  will  have  it,  from
some  vis  insita  in  the  vessels,  but  from  the  heat  of  the  blood
which  they  contain.  For  into  whatsoever  part  of  either  fluid
the  vessels  in  question  extend,  straightway  liquefaction  ap-
pears in  their  vicinity;  and  it  is  on  this  accormt  that  the
yelk  about  this  epoch  appears  double : its  superior  portion,
which  is  in  juxtaposition  with  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg,  has
already  become  more  diffluent  than  the  rest,  and  appears  like
melted  yellow  wax  in  contrast  with  the  other  colder  firmer  por-
tion; like  bodies  in  general  in  a state  of  fusion,  it  also  occupies
a larger  space.  Now  this  superior  portion,  liquefied  by  the
genial  heat,  is  separated  from  the  other  liquids  of  the  egg,  but
particularly  the  albumen,  by  a tunica  propria  of  extreme  tenuity .
It  therefore  happens  that  if  this  most  dehcate,  fragile,  and  in-
visible membrane  be  torn,  immediately  there  ensues  an  admix-
ture and  confusion  of  the  albumen  and  vitellus,  by  which  every-
thing is  obscured.  And  such  an  accident  is  a frequent  cause
of  failure  in  the  reproductive  power,  (for  the  different  fluids  in
question  are  possessed  of  opposite  natures,)  according  to
Aristotle,*  in  the  place  already  so  frequently  referred  to  : “ Eggs
are  spoiled  and  become  addled  in  wai’m  weather  especially,  and
with  good  reason;  for  as  wine  grows  sour  in  hot  weather,  the  lees


' De  Gener.  .\nim.  lih.  iii,  e.  2.


ON  GENERATION.


243


becoming  diffused  through  it^  (which  is  the  cause  of  its  spoiling,)
so  do  eggs  perish  when  the  yelk  spoils,  for  the  lees  and  the  yelk
are  the  more  earthy  portion  in  each.  Wherefore  wine  is  destroyed
hy  an  admixture  with  its  dregs,  and  an  egg  by  the  diffusion  of  its
yelk.^’i  And  here,  too,  we  may  not  improperly  refer  to  that
passage^  where  he  says  : “ When  it  thunders,  the  eggs  that  are
under  incubation  are  spoiled  •”  for  it  must  be  a likely  matter
that  a membrane  so  delicate  should  give  way  amidst  a conflict
of  the  elements.  And  perhaps  it  is  because  thunder  is  frequent
about  the  dog  days  that  eggs  which  are  rotten  have  been  called
cynosura ; so  that  Columella  rightly  informs  us  that  “ the
summer  solstice,  in  the  opinion  of  many,  is  not  a good  season
for  breeding  chickens.”

This  at  all  events  is  certain,  that  eggs  are  very  readily  shaken
and  injm’ed  when  the  fowls  are  disturbed  during  incubation,  at
which  time  the  fluids  are  liquefied  and  expanded,  and  their  con-
taining membranes  are  distended  and  extremely  tender.


EXERCISE  THE  EIGHTEENTH.

The  fourth  inspection  of  the  egg.

“ In  the  course  of  the  fifth  day  of  incubation,”  says  Aristotle,^
“ the  body  of  the  chick  is  first  distinguished,  of  very  small  di-
mensions indeed,  and  white  ; hut  the  head  conspicuous  and  the
eyes  extremely  prominent,  a state  in  which  they  afterwards
continue  long  ; for  they  only  grow  smaller  and  shrink  at  a later
period.  In  the  lower  portion  of  the  body  there  is  no  rudimen-
tary member  corresponding  with  what  is  seen  in  the  upper  part.
But  of  the  channels  which  proceed  from  the  heart,  one  now
tends  to  the  investing  membrane,  the  other  to  the  yelk;  together
they  supply  the  office  of  an  umbilical  cord.  The  chick,  therefore,
derives  its  origin  from  the  albumen,  hut  it  is  afterwards  nourished
by  the  yelk,  through  the  umhihcus.”

These  words  of  Aristotle  appear  to  subdivide  the  entire  gene-
ration of  the  chick  into  three  stages  or  periods,  viz. : from  the


' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  c.  2.


^ Ib.  lib.  viii,  c.


^ Ib.  lib.  vi,  c.  3.


244


ON  GENERATION.


first  day  of  the  incubation  to  the  fifth  ; from  thence  on  to  the
tenth  or  fourteenth ; and  from  this  or  that  to  the  twentieth.
It  seems  as  if  he  had  only  given  an  account  in  his  history  of
the  circumstances  he  ohseiwed  at  these  three  epochs  ; and  it  is
then  indeed  that  the  greatest  changes  take  place  in  the  egg ;
as  if  these  three  critical  seasons,  or  these  tlu’ee  degrees  in  the
process  which  leads  from  the  perfect  egg  to  the  evolution  of  the
chicken,  were  especially  to  be  distinguished.  On  the  fourth
day  the  first  particle  of  the  embryo  appears,  rfiz.  : the  punctum
saliens  and  the  blood;  and  then  the  new  being  is  incorporated.
On  the  seventh  day  the  chick  is  distinguished  by  its  extremities,
and  begins  to  move.  On  the  tenth  it  is  feathered.  About  the
twentieth  it  breathes,  chirps,  and  endeavours  to  escape.  The
life  of  the  egg,  up  to  the  fourth  day,  seems  identical  with  that
of  plants,  and  can  only  be  accounted  as  of  a vegetative  natm’e.
From  this  onwards  to  the  tenth  day,  however,  like  an  airimal,
it  is  possessed  by  a sensitive  and  motive  principle,  ■with  which
it  continues  to  iircrease,  and  is  afterwards  gradually  peiTected,
becoming  covered  with  feathers,  furnished  -with  a beak,  nads,
and  all  else  that  is  necessary  to  its  escape  fi’om  the  shell;
emancipated  from  which,  it  enters  at  length  on  its  own  inde-
pendent existence.

Of  the  incidents  that  happen  after  the  fouilh  day,  Aristotle
enumerates  three  particularly,  -^-iz. : the  construction  of  the
body  ; the  distribution  of  the  veins,  which  have  already  the
office  and  nature  of  the  umbilicus  ; and  the  matter  whence  the
embryo  first  arises,  and  is  constituted  and  noruished.

In  reference  to  the  structui’e  of  the  body,  he  speaks  of  its
size  and  colour,  of  the  pai’ts  which  are  most  conspicuous  in  it,
(the  head  and  eyes,)  and  of  the  distinction  of  its  extremities.

The  body  is  indeed  extremely  minute,  and  of  the  form  of  the
common  maggot  that  gives  birth  to  the  fly ; it  is  of  a white
colour,  too,  like  the  maggot  of  the  flesh-fly  which  we  see  che-
rished and  nourished  in  putrid  meat.  He  happily  adds,  “ it  is
most  remarkable  for  its  head  and  eyes.”  For  what  fii’st  appears
is  homogeneous  and  indistinct,  a kind  of  concretion  or  coagu-
lation of  the  colhquament,  like  the  jelly  prepared  from  harts-
horn ; it  is  a mere  transparent  cloud,  and  scarcely  recognizable,
save  as  it  appears,  divided,  seemingly,  into  two  parts,  one  of
Avhich  is  globular  and  much  larger  than  the  other;  this  is  the


ON  GENERATION.


245


rudiment  of  the  head,  which  first  becomes  visible  on  the  fifth
day,  very  soon  after  which  the  eyes  are  distinguishable,  being
from  the  first  of  large  size  and  prominent,  and  marked  off  from
the  rest  of  the  head  and  body  by  a certain  circumfusion  of  black
matter.  Either  of  the  eyes  is  larger  than  the  whole  of  the  rest
of  the  head,  in  the  same  way  as  the  head  surpasses  the  remainder
of  the  body  in  dimensions.  The  whiteness  of  the  body,  and
prominence  of  the  eyes,  (which,  as  well  as  the  brain,  are  filled
internally  with  j)erfectly  pellucid  water,  but  externally  are  of
a dark  colour),  continue  for  some  time — up  to  the  tenth  day,
and  even  longer;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  Aristotle  says  that  “ the
eyes  decrease  at  a late  period,  and  contract  to  the  proper  pro-
portion.'’^ But  for  my  own  paid,  I do  not  think  that  the  eyes
of  birds  ever  contract  in  the  same  ratio  which  we  observe  be-
tween the  head  and  eyes  of  a viviparous  animal.  For  if  you
strip  off  the  integuments  from  the  head  and  eyes  of  a fowl  or  an-
other bird,  you  will  perceive  one  of  the  eyes  to  equal  the  en-
tire brain  in  dimensions ; in  the  woodcock  and  others,  one  of
the  eyes  indeed  is  as  large  as  the  whole  head,  if  you  make  ab-
straction of  tbe  bill.  But  this  is  common  to  all  birds  that  the
orbit  or  cavity  which  surrounds  the  eye  is  larger  than  the  brain,
a fact  that  is  apparent  in  the  cranium  of  every  bii'd.  Their
eyes,  however,  are  made  to  look  smaller,  because  every  paid,
except  the  pupil,  is  covered  with  skin  and  feathers ; neither  are
they  possessed  of  such  a globular  form  as  would  cause  them  to
project ; thej^  are  of  a flatter  configuration,  as  in  fishes.

“ In  the  lower  part  of  the  body,^^  says  the  philosopher,  “ we
perceive  the  rudiments  of  no  member  corresponding  with  the
superior  members.'”  And  the  thing  is  so  in  fact;  for  as  the  body
at  first  appears  to  consist  of  little  but  head  and  eyes,  so  iuferiorly
there  is  neither  any  extremity, — wings,  legs,  sternum,  rump, —
nor  any  viscus  apparent;  the  bodyindeed  is  still  without  any  kind
of  proper  form;  in  so  far  as  I am  able  to  perceive,  it  consists
of  a small  mass  adjacent  to  the  vein,  like  the  bent  keel  of  a
boat,  like  a maggot  or  an  ant,  without  a vestige  of  ribs,  wings,
or  feet,  to  which  a globular  and  much  more  conspicuous  mass  is
appended,  the  rudiment  of  the  head,  to  wit,  divided,  as  it  seems,
into  three  vesicles  when  regarded  from  either  side,  but  in  fact
consisting  of  four  cells,  two  of  which,  of  great  size  and  a black
colour,  are  the  rudiments  of  the  eyes ; of  the  remaining  two


246


ON  GENERATION.


one  being  tbe  brain,  tbe  other  the  cerebellum.  All  of  these
are  full  of  perfectly  limpid  water.  In  the  middle  of  tbe
blackness  of  the  eye,  tbe  pupil  is  perceived  shining  bke  a trans-
parent central  spark  or  crystal.  I imagine  that  three  of  these
vesicles  being  particularly  conspicuous,  has  been  the  cause  of
indifferent  observers  falling  into  error.  For  as  they  had  learned
from  the  schoolmen  that  there  was  a triple  dominion  in  the
animal  body,  and  they  believed  that  these  principal  parts,  the
brain,  the  heart,  and  the  liver,  performed  the  highest  functions
in  the  economy,  they  easily  persuaded  themselves  that  these
three  vesicles  were  the  rudiments  and  commencements  of  these
parts.  Goiter,  however,  as  becomes  an  experienced  anatomist,
affirms  more  truly  that  whilst  he  had'obseiwed  the  beak  and
eyes  from  the  seventh  day  of  incubation,  he  could  yet  discover
nothing  of  the  viscera.

But  let  us  hear  the  philosopher  further : “ Of  the  conduits
which  lead  from  the  heart,  one  tends  to  the  investing  membrane,
another  to  the  yelk,  in  order  to  perform  the  office  of  umbilicus.’^
The  embryo  having  now  taken  shape,  these  veins  do  indeed
perform  the  function  of  the  umbilical  cord,  the  ramifications  of
one  of  them  proceeding  to  be  distributed  to  the  outer  tunic
which  invests  the  albumen,  those  of  the  other  running  for  dis-
tribution to  the  viteUary  membrane  and  its  included  fluid.
Whence  it  clearly  appears  that  both  of  these  fluids  ai’e  ahke
intended  for  the  noui’ishment  of  the  embryo.  And  although
Aristotle  says  that  “the  chick  has  its  commencement  in  the
albumen,  and  is  nourished  through  the  umbihcus  by  the  yelk,”
he  still  does  not  say  that  the  chick  is  formed  from  the  albumen.
The  embryo,  in  fact,  is  fonned  from  that  clear’  hquid  which  we
have  spoken  of  under  the  name  of  the  colhquament,  and  the
whole  of  what  we  have  called  the  eye  of  the  egg  is  contained
or  included  within  the  albumen.  Keither  does  om’  author  say
that  the  whole  and  sole  nutriment  of  the  embryo  reaches  it
thi’ough  the  umbilicus.  My  own  observations  lead  me  to  in-
terpret his  M'ords  in  this  way  : although  the  embryo  of  the  fowl
begins  to  be  formed  in  the  albumen,  nevertheless  it  is  not  nou-
rished solely  by  that,  but  also  by  the  yelk,  to  which  one  of  the
two  umbihcal  conduits  pertains,  and  from  whence  it  derives
noiu’ishment  in  a more  especial  manner;  for  the  albumen,
according  to  Aristotle^s  opinion,  is  the  more  coircoct  and  purer


ON  GENERATION.


247


liquid^  the  yelk  the  more  earthy  and  solid  one,  and,  therefore,
more  apt  to  sustain  the  chick  when  it  has  once  attained  to
gi’eater  consistency  and  strength ; and  further  because,  as  shall
be  explained  below,  the  yelk  supplies  the  place  of  milk,  and  is
the  last  part  that  is  consumed,  a residuary  portion,  even  after
the  chick  is  born,  and  when  it  is  following  its  mother,  being
still  contained  in  its  abdomen.

What  has  now  been  stated  takes  place  from  the  fourth  to
the  tenth  day.  I have  yet  to  speak  of  the  order  and  manner
in  which  each  of  the  particulars  indicated  transpires.

In  the  inspection  made  on  the  fifth  day,  we  observed  around
the  short  vein  which  proceeds  from  the  angle  where  the  two
alternately  pulsating  points  are  situated,  something  whiter  and
thicker,  like  a cloud,  although  still  transparent,  through  u^hich
the  vein  just  mentioned  is  seen  obscurely,  and  as  it  were  tlirough
a haze.  The  same  thing  I have  occasionally  seen  in  the  more
forward  eggs  in  the  course  of  the  fourth  day.  Now  this  is  the
rudiment  of  the  body,  and  from  hoiu’  to  hour  it  goes  on  in-
creasing in  compactness  and  solidity;  both  surrounding  the
afore-named  vein,  and  being  appended  to  it  in  the  guise  of  a
kind  of  globule.  This  globular  rudiment  far  exceeds  the  coronal
portion,  as  I shall  call  it,  of  the  vermicular  body ; it  is  triangular
in  figure,  being  obscurely  divided  into  three  parts,  like  so  many
swelling  buds  of  a tree.  One  of  these  is  orbicular  and  larger
than  either  of  the  other  two ; and  it  is  darkened  by  most  deli-
cate filaments  proceeding  from  the  circumference  to  the  centre  ;
this  appears  to  be  the  commencement  of  the  ciliary  body,  and
therefore  proclaims  that  this  is  the  part  which  is  to  undergo
transformation  into  the  eye.  In  its  middle  the  minute  pupil,
shining  like  a bright  point,  as  already  stated,  is  conspicuous  ;
and  it  was  from  this  indication  especially  that  I ventured  to
conjecture  that  the  whole  of  the  globular  mass  was  the  rudiment
of  the  futm’e  head,  and  this  black  circle  one  of  the  eyes,  having
the  other  over  against  it ; for  the  two  are  so  situated  that  they
can  by  no  means  be  seen  at  once  and  together,  one  always  lying
over  and  concealing  the  other.

The  first  rudiment  of  the  future  body,  which  we  have  stated
to  sprout  around  the  vein,  acquires  an  oblong  and  somewhat
bent  figure,  like  the  keel  of  a boat.  It  is  of  a mucaginous  con-
sistence, like  the  white  moiild  that  grows  iipon  damp  things


248


ON  GENERATION.


excluded  from  tlie  air.  The  vein  to  which  this  mucor  attaches,
as  I have  said,  is  the  vena  cava,  descending  along  the  spinal
column,  as  my  subsequent  observations  have  satisfied  me.  And
if  you  carefully  note  the  order  of  contraction  in  the  pulsating
vesicles,  you  may  see  the  one  which  contracts  last  impelling  its
blood  into  the  root  of  this  vein  and  distending  it.

Thus  there  are  two  manifest  contractions  and  two  similar
dilatations  in  the  two  vesicles  which  are  seen  mo'ving  and  prd-
sating  alternately;  and  the  contraction  of  the  one  which  precedes
causes  the  distension  or  dilatation  of  the  other ; for  the  blood
esca])es  from  the  cavity  of  the  former  vesicle,  when  it  contracts,
into  that  of  the  latter,  which  it  fills,  distends,  and  causes  to
pulsate  ; hut  this  second  vesicle,  contracting  in  its  turn,  throws
the  blood,  which  it  had  received  from  the  former  vesicle,  into
the  root  of  the  vein  aforesaid,  and  at  the  same  time  distends
it. — I go  on  speaking  of  this  vessel  as  a vein,  though  from  its
pulsation  I hold  it  to  he  the  aorta,  because  the  veins  are  not
yet  distinguished  from  the  arteries  by  any  difference  in  the
thickness  of  their  respective  coats.

After  ha^-ing  contemplated  these  points  Avith  great  care,  and
in  many  eggs,  I remained  for  some  time  in  suspense  as  to  the
opinion  I should  adopt ; whether  I should  conclude  that  the
concrete  appended  globular’  mass  proceeded  from  the  colhqua-
ment  in  which  it  swam,  becoming  a compacted  and  coagulated
matter  in  the  way  that  clouds  are  formed  from  imdsible  vapour
condensed  in  the  upper  regions  of  the  air ; or  heheve  that  it
took  its  rise  from  a certain  eflQuvium  exhaled  from  the  san-
guiireous  conduit  mentioned,  oi’iginatiug  by  diapedesis  or  ti’ans-
udation,  and  by  deriving  nourishment  from  thence,  was  enabled
to  increase?  For  the  beginnings  of  even  the  greatest  things
are  often  extremely  small,  and,  by  reason  of  this  minuteness,
sufficiently  obscure.

This  much  I think  I have  sufficiently  determined  at  aU
events,  viz.  that  the  puncta  salientia  and  meatus  venosi,  and
the  vena  cava  itself,  are  the  pai’ts  that  first  exist ; and  that  the
globular  mass  mentioned  afterwards  grows  to  them.  I am
further  certain  that  the  blood  is  thrown  from  the  punctum
saliens  into  the  vein,  and  that  fr’om  this  does  the  corpuscle  in
question  gi’ow,  and  by  this  is  it  nourished.  The  frmgus  or
mucor  first  originates  from  an  effluvium  of  the  A ein  on  which


ON  GENERATION.


249


it  appears^  and  it  is  tReuce  nourished  and  made  to  increase ; in
the  same  way  as  mouldiness  grows  in  moist  places,  in  the  dark
corners  of  houses  which  long  escape  cleansing ; or,  like  camphor
upon  cedar  wood  tables,  and  moss  upon  rocks  and  the  bark  of
trees ; lastly,  as  a kind  of  delicate  down  grows  upon  certain  grubs.

Upon  the  same  occasion  I also  debated  with  myself  whether
or  not  I should  conclude,  that  with  the  coagulation  of  the  col-
liquament  accomplished,  the  rudiments  of  the  head  and  body
existed  simultaneously  with  the  punctum  saliens  and  the  blood,
but  in  a pellucid  state,  and  so  delicate  that  they  almost  escaped
the  eye,  until  becoming  inspissated  into  a fungus  or  mucor,
they  acquired  a more  opaque  white  colour,  and  then  came  into
Uew  ; the  blood  meantime  from  its  greater  spissitude  and  purple
colour  being  readily  perceptible  in  the  diaphanous  colli qua-
ment.  But  now  when  I look  at  the  tiling  more  narrowly,  I am
of  opinion  that  the  blood  exists  before  any  particle  of  the  body
appears ; that  it  is  the  first-born  of  all  the  parts  of  the  embr}^ ;
that  from  it  both  the  matter  out  of  which  the  foetus  is  embo-
died, and  the  nutriment  by  which  it  grows  are  derived  j that  it
is  in  fine,  if  such  thing  there  be,  the  primary  generative  par-
ticle. But  wherefore  I am  led  to  adopt  this  idea  shall  after-
wards be  shown  more  at  length  when  I come  to  treat  of  the
primary  genital  part,  of  the  innate  heat,  and  the  radical  mois-
ture ; and,  at  the  same  time,  conclude  as  to  what  we  are  to
think  of  the  Utal  principle  (anima),  from  a great  number  of
observations  compared  with  one  another.

About  this  period  almost  every  hour  makes  a difference ; every
thing  grows  larger,  more  definite  and  distinct;  the  rate  of  change
in  the  egg  is  rapid,  and  one  change  succeeds  immediately  upon
the  back  of  another.  The  cavity  in  the  egg  is  now  much  larger,
and  the  whole  of  its  upper  portion  is  empty ; it  is  as  if  a fifth
part  of  the  egg  had  been  removed.

The  ramifications  of  the  veins  extend  more  widely,  and  are
more  numerous,  not  only  in  the  colliquament  as  before,  but
they  spread  on  one  hand  into  the  abumen,  and  on  the  other
into  the  yelk,  so  that  both  of  these  fluids  are  everywhere  co-
vered over  with  blood-vessels.  The  upper  portion  of  the  yelk
has  now  become  much  dissolved,  so  that  it  very  obviously  differs
from  the  lower  portion;  there  are  now,  as  it  were,  two  yelks,
or  two  kinds  of  yelk ; whilst  the  superior,  like  melted  wax,  is


250


ON  GENERATION.


expanded  and  looks  pellucid^  the  inferior  has  become  more
dense,  and  with  the  thicker  portion  of  the  albumen  has  sub-
sided to  the  sharp  end  of  the  egg.  The  tunica  propria  of  the
upper  portion  of  the  yelk  is  so  thin  that  it  gives  way  on  the
slightest  succussion,  when  there  ensues  admixtui-e  of  the  fluids,
and,  as  we  have  said,  interruption  to  the  further  progress  of
the  process  of  generation.

And  now  it  is  that  the  rudiments  of  the  embryo  first  become
conspicuous,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  figure  of
Fabricius;  the  egg  being  put  into  fail’  water  it  will  be  easy  to
perceive  what  parts  of  the  body  are  formed,  what  are  stdl
wanting.  The  embryo  now  presents  itseK  in  the  form  of  a
small  worm  or  maggot,  such  as  Ave  encounter  on  the  leaves  of
trees,  in  spots  of  their  hark,  in  fruit,  floAvers,  and  elsewhere ;
hut  especially  in  the  apples  of  the  oak,  in  the  centre  of  Avhich,
siuTounded  Avith  a case,  a limpid  flmd  is  contained,  which,  gra-
dually inspissated  and  congealed,  acquii’es  a most  delicate  out-
line, and  finally  assumes  the  form  of  a maggot ; for  some  time,
however,  it  remains  motionless ; but  by  and  by,  endoAved  with
motion  and  sensation  it  becomes  an  animal,  and  subsequently
it  breaks  forth  and  takes  its  flight  as  a fly.

Aristotle  ascribes  a similar  mode  of  production  to  those  crea-
tures that  are  spontaneously  engendered.^  “Some  are  engen-
dered of  the  dew,”  he  says,  “ which  falls  upon  the  leaves.”
And  by  and  by  he  adds,  “ butterflies  are  engendered  from  ca-
terpillars, but  these,  in  their  turn,  spring  from  green  leaves,
particularly  that  species  of  raphanus  Avliich  is  called  cabbage.
They  are  smaller  than  millet  seeds  at  first,  and  then  they  grow
into  little  worms ; next,  in  the  com’se  of  tlu’ee  days  into  cater-
pillars ; after  which  they  cease  from  motion,  change  their  shape,
and  pass  into  chrysalides,  when  they  ai’e  inclosed  in  a hard
shell;  although,  if  touched,  they  will  still  move.  The  shell
after  a long  time  cracks  and  gAes  way,  and  the  AAunged  animal,
Avhich  Ave  call  a butterfly,  emerges.”

But  our  doctrine — and  Ave  shall  prove  it  by  and  by — is,  that
all  animal  generation  is  effected  in  the  same  Avay ; that  all  ani-
mals, even  the  most  perfect,  ai’e  produced  from  worms ; a fiict
AA-hich  Aristotle  himself  seems  to  have  noted  Avheu  he  says :


‘ Hist.  Aiiim.  lit.  v,  c.  19.


ON  GENERATION.


251


“ In  all,  nevertheless,  even  those  that  lay  perfect  eggs,  the  fii’st
conception  grows  whilst  it  is  yet  invisible ; and  this,  too,  is  the
nature  of  the  worm.^^'  For  there  is  this  difference  between  the
generation  of  worms  and  of  other  animals,  that  the  former  ac-
quire dimensions  before  they  have  any  definite  form  or  are  dis.
tinguished  into  parts,  in  conformity  with  what  the  philosopher^
says  in  the  following  sentence  : “ An  animal  is  fashioned  from  an
entire  worm,  not  from  any  one  particular  part,  as  in  the  case  of
an  egg,  but  the  whole  increases  and  becomes  an  articulated
animal,^’  i.  e.  in  its  growth  it  separates  into  parts.

It  is  indeed  matter  worthy  of  admiration,  that  the  rudiments

I .

of  all  animals,  particularly  those  possessed  of  red  blood,  such  as
the  dog,  horse,  deer,  ox,  common  fowl,  snake,  and  even  man
himself,  should  so  signally  resemble  a maggot  in  figure  and
consistence,  that  with  the  eye  you  can  perceive  no  difterence
between  them.

Towards  the  end  of  the  fifth  day  or  the  beginning  of  the
sixth,  the  head  is  divided  into  three  vesicles  : the  first  of  these,
which  is  also  the  largest,  is  rounded  and  black;  this  is  the  eye,
in  the  centre  of  which  the  pupil  can  be  distinguished  like  a
crystalline  point.  Under  this  there  lies  a smaller  vesicle,  con-
cealed in  part,  which  represents  the  brain ; and  over  this  lies
the  third  vesicle,  like  an  added  crest  or  rounded  summit  crown-
ing the  whole,  from  which  the  cerebellum  is  at  length  produced.
In  the  whole  of  these  there  is  nothing  to  be  discovered  but  a
little  perfectly  limpid  water.

And  now  the  rudiment  of  the  body,  which  we  have  called
the  Carina,  distinctly  proclaims  itself  to  be  the  spinal  column,
to  which  sides  soon  begin  to  be  added,  and  the  wings  and  the
lower  extremities  present  themselves,  projecting  slightly  from
the  body  of  the  maggot.  The  venous  conduits  are,  further,
now  clearly  referrible  to  the  umbilical  vessels.


' De  Gener.  Animal,  lib.  iii,  c.  9.


^ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  v,  c.  19.


252


ON  GENERATION.


EXEKCISE  THE  NINETEENTH.

The  fifth  inspection  of  the  egg.

Ou  the  sixth  day  the  three  cells  of  the  head  present  them-
selves more  distinctly,  and  the  coats  of  the  eyes  are  now  ap-
parent ; the  legs  and  the  wings  also  bud  forth,  much  in  the  way
in  which,  towards  the  end  of  June,  we  see  tadpoles  getting
their  extremities,  when  they  quit  the  water,  and  losing  their
tails  assume  the  form  of  frogs.

In  the  chick,  the  rump  has  still  no  other  form  than  is  con-
spicuous in  animals  at  large,  even  in  serpents ; it  is  a round  and
slender  tail.  The  substance  of  the  heart  now  grows  upon  the
pulsating  vesicle ; and  shortly  afterwards  the  rudiments  of  the
liver  and  lungs  are  distinguished;  the  bill,  too,  makes  its  ap-
pearance at  the  same  time.  Everything  is  of  a pm’e  white  co-
lour, especially  the  bill.  About  the  same  epoch  all  the  viscera
and  the  intestines  are  conspicuous.  But  the  heart  takes
precedence  of  all  the  parts  ; and  the  lungs  are  visible  before  the
liver  or  brain.  The  eyes,  however,  are  seen  first  of  aU,  by
reason  of  their  large  size  and  black  colour.

And  now,  too,  the  embryo  has  a power  of  motion,  and  raises
its  head  and  slightly  twists  itself,  although  there  is  stiU  nothing
of  the  brain  to  be  seen,  but  only  a little  limpid  fluid  inclosed
in  a vesicle.  It  is  at  length  a perfect  maggot,  only  dilFeiing
from  a caterpillar  in  this,  that  when  worms  are  set  free  from
their  cells  they  creep  about  hither  and  thither  and  seek  their
food,  whilst  the  worm  in  the  egg  is  stationary,  and,  surrounded
with  its  proper  food,  is  furnished  with  aliment  through  the
umbilicus.

The  ^dscera  and  intestines  being  now  formed,  and  the  foetus
able  to  execute  motions,  the  anterior  portion  of  the  body,  with-
out either  thorax  or  abdomen,  is  perceived  to  be  completely
open;  so  that  the  heart  itself,  the  liver  and  the  intestines,  are
seen  to  hang  pendidous  externally.

Towards  the  end  of  this  day  and  the  beginning  of  the  seventh,
the  toes  are  distinguished,  and  the  embryo  ah’eady  presents  the
outlines  of  the  chick,  and  opens  its  beak,  and  kicks  with  its


ON  GENERATION.


2o3


feetj  in  short;  all  the  parts  are  sketched  out,  but  the  eyes,
above  all,  are  conspicuous.  The  viscera,  on  the  contrary,  are
so  indistinct,  that  Goiter  affirms,  that  whilst  he  plainly  saw  the
eyes  and  beak  he  could  discover  no  viscus,  even  obscurely  and
confusedly  shadowed  forth.

The  changes  that  take  place  from  the  beginning  of  the  sixth
to  the  end  of  the  seventh  day,  occur  for  the  major  part  in  some
eggs  more  quickly,  in  others  a little  more  tardily.  The  coats
of  the  eyes  are  now  visible,  but  they  only  include  a colourless
and  limpid  fluid  in  their  interior.  The  eyes  themselves  project
somewhat  beyond  their  orbits,  and  each  of  them  does  not  less
exceed  the  brain  in  size,  than  the  head  with  which  they  are
connected  exceeds  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  body.

The  vesicle,  which  like  a ridge  or  crest  expands  beyond  the
confines  of  the  brain,  occupies  the  place  of  the  cerebellum ; and,
like  the  other  vesicles,  is  filled  with  a transparent  fluid.

The  brain  is  perceived  to  be  obscm’ely  bipartite,  and  refracts
the  light  less  than  the  cerebellum,  though  it  is  of  a whiter  colour.
And  as  the  heart  is  seen  lying  without  the  confines  of  the  thorax,
so  likewise  does  the  cerebellum  protrude  beyond  the  hmits  of
the  head.

If  the  head  be  removed,  the  vessels  ascending  to  the  brain
may  be  observed  as  bloody  points,  with  the  use  of  a magni-
fying glass.  And  now,  too,  the  rudiments  of  the  spine  begin
to  be  first  perceived  distinct  from  the  rest  of  the  pulp,  of  a
milky  colour,  but  firmer  consistence.  So  in  the  same  way,  and
like  flimsy  threads  of  a spider^s  web,  the  ribs  and  other  bones
make  their  appearance  in  the  guise  of  milky  lines,  amidst  the
pulp  of  the  body  j and  the  same  thing  appears  more  clearly  in
the  formation  of  the  larger  oviparous  animals.  The  heart,  lungs,
liver,  and  by  way  of  intestines  certain  most  delicate  filaments,
all  present  themselves  of  a white  colour.  The  parenchyma  of
the  liver  is  developed  upon  delicate  fibrous  stamens  over  the
umbilical  vein  at  the  part  where  it  enters,  almost  in  the  same
manner  as  we  have  said  that  the  rudiments  of  the  body  grow
to  the  vein  descending  from  the  heart,  or  the  vesicula  pulsans.
For  in  the  same  way  as  grapes  grow  upon  the  stalk  of  the
bunch,  buds  upon  twigs,  and  the  ear  upon  the  straw,  does  the
liver  adhere  to  the  umbilical  vein,  and  arise  from  it,  even  as
fungi  do  from  trees  and  excessive  granulations  from  ulcers,  or  as


254


ON  GENERATION.


sarcoses  or  morbid  growths  spring  around  the  minute  branches
of  conterminous  arteries  by  wbicb  they  are  nourished,  and  oc-
casionally attain  to  an  excessive  size.

Looking  back  upon  this  office  of  the  arteries,  or  the  circu-
lation of  the  blood,  I have  occasionally  and  against  all  expec-
tation completely  ciu’ed  enormous  sarcoceles,  by  the  simple
means  of  dividing  or  tjdng  the  little  artery  that  supplied  them,
and  so  preventing  all  access  of  nom’isbment  or  spirit  to  the
part  affected ; by  wbicb  it  came  to  pass  that  the  tumour,  on
the  verge  of  mortification,  was  afterwards  easily  extu’pated  with
the  knife,  or  the  searing  iron.  One  man  in  particular  (and
this  case  I can  confirm  by  the  testimony  of  many  respectable
persons)  had  an  enormous  hernia  cai’nosa,  or  sarcocosis  of  the
scrotum,  larger  than  a human  head,  and  hanging  as  low  as
the  knee ; from  its  upper  part  a fleshy  mass,  of  the  thickness
of  the  wrist,  or  such  a rope  as  is  used  on  ship-board,  extended
into  the  abdomen ; and  the  eril  had  attained  to  such  a height,
that  no  one  durst  attempt  the  cure,  either  with  the  knife  or
any  other  means.  Nevertheless,  by  the  procedure  above  in-
dicated, I succeeded  in  completely  removing  this  huge  excres-
cence which  distended  the  scrotum,  and  involved  the  testicle  in
its  middle;  this  latter  organ,  with  itsvas  prsepai’ans  andvas  de-
ferens, and  other  parts  which  descend  in  the  tunica  vaginalis,
being  left  all  the  while  safe  and  nninjured.  But  this  cure,  as
well  as  various  others,  accomplished  in  opposition  to  vulgar
opinion  and  by  unusual  procedures,  1 shall  relate  at  greater
length  in  my  JMedical  Observations,  if  God  grant  me  longer  life.

I mention  such  cases  with  a view  of  more  clearly  shelving
that  the  liver  groAvs  upon  the  vessels,  and  is  only  developed
some  time  after  the  appearance  of  the  blood ; that  its  paren-
chyma is  derived  from  the  arteries  whence  the  matter  is  effused,
and  that  for  a while  it  remains  white  and  bloodless,  like  various
other  parts  of  the  body.  Noav  in  the  same  manner  and  order
precisely  as  the  chick  is  developed  from  the  egg,  is  the  genera-
tion of  man  and  other  animals  accomplished.

Whence  it  appears  that  the  doctrine  which  makes  the  liver
the  author  and  fashioner  of  the  blood,  is  altogether  groundless,
although  both  formerly  and  at  the  present  time  this  AueAV  ob-
tained universal  assent ; this  was  the  reason  Avherefore  the  liver
was  reckoned  as  among  the  principal  and  first-formed  organs  of


ON  GENERATION.


255


the  body.  This  viscus  indeed  was  so  highly  dignified  that  it
was  thought  to  be  produced  in  the  very  beginnings  and  simul-
taneously with  the  heart,  from  the  seminal  fluid  of  the  mother  j
and  the  medical  fable  of  the  three  vesicles  or  three  kids,  as  they
were  called,  was  eagerly  defended.  Among  the  number  of  modern
abettors  of  such  ■\dews,  Parisanus  has  of  late  with  confidence
enough,  hut  little  skill,  been  singing  to  the  old  measure.  These
good  people  do  not  consider  that  the  vesicles  are  in  motion  in
the  egg,  that  the  heart  is  palpitating  and  the  blood  present  and
perfectly  concocted,  before  any  sign  or  vestige  of  the  liver  ap-
pears. The  blood  is  much  rather  to  be  accounted  the  efficient
cause  of  the  liver,  than  this  the  author  of  the  blood  : for  the
liver  is  engendered  after  the  blood,  and  from  it,  being  adnate
to  the  vessels  that  contain  it.

But  neither  can  I agree  with  the  Aristotehans,  who  maintain
that  the  heart  is  the  author  of  the  blood  j for  its  parenchyma
or  proper  substance  arises  some  little  time  after  the  blood,  and
is  superadded  to  the  pulsating  vesicles.  I am,  however,  in  much
doubt  as  to  whether  the  pulsating  vesicle  or  point,  or  the  blood
itself  be  the  older ; whether  it  be  the  fluid  contained,  or  the
containing  sacs.  It  is  obvious,  nevertheless,  that  that  which
contains  is  formed  for  the  sake  of  that  which  is  contained,  and
is,  therefore,  made  later.  And  this  much,  upon  the  faithful
testimony  of  our  eyes,  is  certain,  that  the  first  particle  and
prime  basis  of  the  body  are  the  veins,  to  which  all  the  other
parts  are  posthumous  and  superadded.  But  upon  this  point
we  shall  say  more  by  and  by.

Meantime  we  may  be  permitted  to  smile  at  that  factitious
division  of  the  parts  into  spermatic  and  sanguineous ; as  if  any
part  were  produced  immediately  from  the  seminal  fluid,  and  all
did  not  spring  from  the  same  source  !

I return  to  our  subject.  The  colliquament  now  extends  over
more  than  half  the  egg.  The  heart,  hanging  outwards,  is  at
some  short  distance  from  the  body.  And  if  you  look  attentively
you  may  perceive  some  of  the  umbilical  vessels  pulsating.


256


ON  GENERATION.


EXERCISE  THE  TWENTIETH.

The  sixth  inspection.

Eveiything  is  still  more  distinct  upon  tRe  seventh  day,  and
the  rudiments  of  several  of  the  particular  parts  are  now  conspi-
cuous, -viz.,  the  wings,  legs,  genital  organs,  divisions  for  the  toes,
thighs,  ilia.  See.  The  embryo  now  moves  and  kicks,  and  the
form  of  the  perfect  chick  is  recognizable ; from  this  time  for-
ward, indeed,  nothing  is  superadded;  the  very  delicate  parts
only  increase  in  size.  The  more  the  parts  grow  the  more  is
the  albumen  consumed,  and  the  external  membranes  united
come  to  be  of  the  nature  of  the  secundines,  and  ever  more  and
more  closely  represent  the  umbilical  cord.  Wherefore  I con-
ceive that,  from  the  seventh,  we  may  at  once  pass  on  to  the
tenth  day,  nothing  of  any  moment  occurring  in  this  inteiwal
which  is  not  particularly  noted  by  other  writers,  especially  by
Aristotle.

It  happens,  nevertheless,  that  when  a number  of  eggs  are
examined  together,  some  are  found  more  precocious  and  forward,
having  everything  more  distinct ; others,  again,  are  more  slug-
gish, and  these  have  the  parts  less  apparent.  The  season  of
the  year,  the  place  where  the  incubation  is  carried  on,  the  sedu-
lousness with  which  it  is  performed,  and  other  accidents,  have
undoubtedly  great  influence  on  this  diversity  of  result.  I re-
member on  one  occasion,  on  the  seventh  day  to  have  seen  the
cavity  in  the  blunt  end  enlarged  in  a sluggish  egg,  the  coUi-
quament  covered  with  veins,  the  vermiculai’  embryo  in  its  mid-
dle, the  rudiments  of  the  eyes,  and  all  the  rest  as  it  is  met  with
in  the  generahty  of  eggs  on  the  flfth  day ; but  the  pulsatory
vesicles  were  not  yet  apparent,  nor  was  the  trimk  or  root  of  the
veins  from  which  we  have  said  that  they  originate,  yet  to  be
discovered.  I therefore  regarded  this  egg  as  of  a feeble  nature
and  left  behind,  as  possessed  of  an  inadequate  I'eproductive
faculty,  and  near  to  its  death ; all  the  more  when  I observed
its  colhquament  less  pellucid  and  refractive  than  usual,  and  the
vessels  not  of  such  a bright  red  colour  as  wont.  "^Tien  the  vital
spirit  is  about  to  escape,  that  part  which  is  first  influenced  in


ON  GENERATION.


257


generation  and  earliest  attracts  attention  is  also  the  first  that
fails  and  disappears.


EXERCISE  THE  TWENTY-FIRST.

The  inspection  after  the  tenth  day.

All  that  presents  itself  on  the  tenth  day  is  so  accurately  de-
scribed by  Aristotle  that  scarcely  anything  remains  for  us  to
add.  Now  his  opinion,  according  to  my  interpretation  of  it,  is
this, viz.,  that  “on  the  tenth  daythe  entire  chick  is  conspicuous,^^ i
being  pellucid  and  white  in  every  part  except  the  eyes  and  the
venous  ramifications.  “ The  head  at  this  time  is  larger  than
the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  body;  and  eyes  larger  than  the  head
are  connected  with  it,^^  (adhering,  and  being  in  some  sort  ap-
pended to  the  head,)  “ but  having  as  yet  no  pupils,”  (perfectly
formed  pupils  must  here  be  understood,  for  it  is  not  difficult  to
make  out  the  distinct  tunics  of  the  eye  at  this  epoch;)  “ the  eyes,
if  removed  at  this  time,  will  be  found  as  large  as  beans  and  black,
and  if  they  be  incised,  a clear  humour  flows  out,  cold,  and  re-
fracting the  light  powerfully,  but  nothing  else,”  i.  e.,  in  the  whole
head  there  is  nothing  but  the  limpid  water  which  has  been
mentioned.  Such  is  the  state  of  matters  from  the  seventh  to  the
tenth  day,  as  we  have  said  above.  “At  the  same  time,”  he
continues,  “ the  viscera  also  appear,  and  all  that  appertains  to
the  abdomen  and  intestines,”  viz.,  the  substance  of  the  heart,
the  lungs,  liver,  &c.,  all  of  a white  colour,  mucilaginous,  pulpy,
without  any  kind  of  consistency.  “ The  veins,  too,  that  issue
from  the  heart  are  already  in  connexion  with  the  umbilicus,
from  which  one  vein  extends  to  the  membrane  that  includes
the  vitellus,  which  has  now  become  more  liquid  and  diffluent
than  it  was  originally ; another  to  the  membrane  which  sur-
rounds everything,”  (i.  e.,  the  tunica  colliquamenti,)  “ and  em-
braces the  foetus,  the  vitellus  and  the  interjacent  fluid.  For
the  embryo  increasing  somewhat,  one  portion  of  the  vitellus  is


Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  3.


17


258


ON  GENERATION.


superior,  another  inferior ; but  the  albumen  in  the  middle  is
liquid,  and  stiU  extends  under  the  inferior  portion  of  the  Aitellus,
as  it  did  previously Thus  far  Aristotle.

And  now  the  arteries  are  seen  distinctly  accompanying  the
veins,  both  those  that  proceed  to  the  albumen  and  those  that
are  distributed  to  the  vitellus.  The  vitellus  also  at  this  time
liquefies  still  more  and  becomes  more  diffluent,  not  entirely,  in-
deed, but,  as  ah’eady  said,  that  portion  of  it  which  is  uppermost ;
neither  do  the  branches  of  the  veins  proceed  to  every  part  of
the  vitellus  alike,  but  only  to  that  part  which  we  have  spoken
of  as  resembling  melted  wax.  The  veins  that  are  distributed  to
the  albumen  have,  in  like  manner,  arteries  accompanying
them.  The  larger  portion  of  the  albumen  now  dissolves  into  a
clear  fluid,  the  colliquament,  which  surrounds  the  embryo  that
swims  in  its  middle,  and  comes  between  the  two  portions  of
the  vitellus,  viz.,  the  superior  and  the  inferior ; underneath
all  (in  the  sharp  end  of  the  egg),  the  thicker  and  more  viscid
portion  of  the  albumen  is  contained.  The  superior  portion  of
the  yelk  already  appears  more  liquid  and  diffluent  than  the  in-
ferior; and  wherever  the  branches  of  the  veins  extend,  there  the
matter  seems  suddenly  to  swell  and  become  more  diffluent.

“ On  the  tenth  day,”  continues  our  author,  “ the  albumen
subsides,  having  now  become  a small  tenacious,  viscid,  and
yellowish  mass” — so  much  of  it,  that  is  to  say,  as  has  not  passed
into  the  state  of  coUiquament.

For  ah’eady  the  larger  portion  of  the  white  has  become
dissolved,  and  has  even  passed  into  the  body  of  the  embryo,
viz.,  the  whole  of  the  thinner  albumen,  and  the  greater  portion
of  the  thicker.  The  yelk,  on  the  contrai’y,  rather  looks  larger
than  it  did  in  the  beginning.  WTience  it  clearly  appears  that
the  yelk  has  not  as  yet  served  for  the  nutrition  of  the  embryo,
but  is  reserved  to  perform  this  office  by  and  by.  In  so  far  as
we  can  conjecture  from  the  coiu’se  and  distribution  of  the  veins,
the  embryo  from  the  commencement  is  nourished  by  the  coUi-
quament ; upon  this  blood-vessels  are  first  distributed,  and  then
they  spread  over  the  membrane  of  the  thinner  albumen,  next
over  the  thicker  albumen,  and  finaUy  over  the  viteUus.  The
thicker  albumen  serves  for  nutriment  after  the  thinner;  the
vitellus  is  di’awn  upon  last  of  aU.


ON  GENERATION.


259


The  delicate  embryo,  consequently,  whilst  it  is  yet  in  the
vermicular  state,  is  nmu'ished  with  the  thinnest  and  best  con-
cocted aliment,  the  colliquament  and  thinner  albumen ; but
when  it  is  older  it  has  food  supplied  to  it  more  in  harmony  with
its  age  and  strength.

Aristotle  describes  the  relative  situation  of  the  several  parts
in  the  following  words  : In  the  anterior  and  posterior  part,  the

membrane  of  the  egg  lies  under  the  shell, — I do  not  mean  the
membrane  of  the  shell  itself,  but  one  under  this,  in  which
there  is  contained  a clear  fluid” — the  colbquament ; “ then  the
chick  and  the  membrane  including  it,  which  keeps  it  distinct
from  the  fluid  around  it.”  But  here  I suspect  that  there  is  an
error  in  the  text ; for  as  the  author  himself  indicates  the  thing,  it
ought  rather  to  stand  thus:  ^^then  the  chick,  enveloped  in  a
membrane,  continues  or  swims  in  the  clear  fluid  which  mem-
brane is  not  exterior  to  the  one  that  immediately  lines  the  shell,
but  another  lying  under  this;  which,  when  the  first  or  external
albumen  is  consumed,  and  the  remainder  of  the  thicker  albumen
is  depressed  into  the  sharp  end  of  the  egg,  of  two  membranes
forms  a single  tunic  that  now  begins  to  present  itself  like  the  se-
cundine  called  the  chorion.  And  Aristotle  says  well,  “ there  is
a clear  fluid  contained  in  it,”  by  which  words  he  does  not  mean
the  albumen,  but  the  colliquament  derived  from  the  albumen,
and  in  which  the  embryo  swims ; for  the  albumen  that  remains
subsides  into  the  small  end  of  the  egg.


EXERCISE  THE  TWENTY-SECOND.

The  inspection  after  the  fourteenth  day.

From  the  seventh  to  the  fourteenth  day  everything  has  grown
and  become  more  conspicuous.  The  heart  and  all  the  other
viscera  have  now  become  concealed  within  the  abdomen  of  the
embryo,  and  the  parts  that  formerly  were  seen  naked  and  pro-
jecting externally,  can  now  only  be  perceived  when  the  thorax
and  abdomen  are  laid  open.  The  chick  too  now  begins  to  be
covered  with  feathers,  the  roots  of  which  are  first  perceived  as


2G0


ON  GENERATION.


black  points.  The  pupils  of  the  eyes  are  distinguished;  the
eyelids  appear^  as  does  also  the  membrana  nictitans  in  the
greater  canthus  of  the  eye^  a memhane  which  is  proper  to  birds,
and  which  they  use  for  cleansing  the  eyeball.  The  convolutions
of  the  brain  farther  make  their  appearance ; the  cerebellum  is
included  within  the  skull;  and  the  tad.  acquires  the  charac-
teristic shape  of  the  bird^s  rump.

After  the  fourteenth  day  the  viscera,  which  up  to  this  time
have  been  white,  gradually  begin  to  assume  a flesh  or  reddish
colour.  The  heart,  haAong  now  entered  the  penetraha  of  the
thorax  and  been  covered  with  the  sternum,  inhabits  the  dwelhng
place  wliich  itself  had  formed.  The  cerebrum  and  cerebeUum
acquire  solidity  under  the  dome  of  the  skidl ; the  stomach  and
intestines,  however,  are  not  yet  included  within  the  abdomen,
but,  connected  with  the  parts  within,  hang  pendulous  externally.

Of  the  two  vessels  that  proceed  from  the  abdomen  to  the
umbdicus,  near  the  anus,  one  is  an  artery,  as  its  pulse  proclaims,
and  arises  from  the  arteria  magna  or  aorta,  the  other  is  a vein,
and  extends  from  the  rttellus  by  the  side  of  the  intestines  to
the  vena  portte,  situated  in  the  concave  part  of  the  liver.  The
other  trunk  of  the  umbihcal  vessels,  codecting  its  branches
from  the  albumen,  passes  the  convexity  of  the  Hvex’,  and  enters
the  vena  cava  near  the  base  of  the  heart.

As  ad  these  things  go  on  becoming  clearer  from  day  to  day,
so  the  greater  portion  of  the  albumen  is  also  gradually  consumed;
this,  however,  is  nowise  the  case  with  the  rttedus,  which  remains
almost  entire  up  to  this  time,  and  indeed  is  seen  of  the  same  size
as  it  was  the  first  day.

In  the  coru’se  of  the  fodowing  days  five  umbdical  vessels
are  conspicuous ; one  of  these  is  the  great  vein,  aiising  from
the  cava  above  the  Hver,  and  distributing  its  branches  to  the
albumen ; two  other  veins  proceed  from  the  porta,  both  haring
the  same  origin,  and  run  to  the  two  portions  of  the  ritedus,
which  we  have  but  just  described ; and  these  ai’e  accompanied
by  two  arteries  arising  one  on  either  side  from  the  lumbars.

The  chick  now  occupies  a larger  space  in  the  egg  than  ad
the  rest  of  the  matter  included  in  it,  and  begins  to  be  covered
with  feathers  ; the  lai’ger  the  embiyo  grows,  the  smader  is  the
quantity  of  albumen  that  is  present.  It  is  also  worthy  of  oh-


ON  GENERATION.


2G1


servation^  that  the  membrane  of  the  coUiquament  which  we  have
said  unites  with  the  external  investing  membrane,  and  consti-
tutes the  secundine  or  chorion,  now  includes  the  whole  of  the
vitellus  in  one,  and  becoming  contracted,  draws  the  vitellus  along
with  the  intestines  towards  the  chick,  conjoins  them  with  its
body,  and  incloses  them  as  it  were  in  a thick  sac.  Everything
that  was  previously  extremely  dehcate  and  transparent,  becomes
more  opaque  and  fleshy  as  the  sac  contracts,  which  at  length,  like
a hernial  tumour  of  the  scrotum,  includes  and  supports  both  the
intestines  and  the  yelk ; contracting  every  day  in  a greater  and
greater  degree,  it  comes  finally  to  constitute  the  abdomen  of  the
chick.  You  will  find  the  yelk,  about  the  eighteenth  day,  lying
[in  its  bag]  among  the  intestines,  the  belly  at  large  being  lax;
yet  are  the  parts  not  so  firmly  fixed  but  that  the  intestines  (as  in
the  case  of  a scrotal  hernia),  along  with  the  vitellus,  can  be
pushed  up  into  the  belly,  or  forced  out  of  it  as  it  were  into  a
pouch.  I have  occasionally  seen  the  vitellus  prolapsed  in  this
way  from  the  abdominal  cavity  of  a pigeon,  which  had  been
prematurely  excluded  from  the  shell  in  the  summer  season.

The  chick  at  this  epoch  looks  big-bellied  and  as  if  it  were
affected  with  a hernia,  as  I have  said.  And  now  the  colliqua-
ment,  which  was  at  first  in  large  quantity,  gradually  grows
turbid,  suffers  change,  and  is  consumed,  so  that  the  chick  comes
to  lie  bent  over  the  vitellus.  At  the  same  period,  before  the  liver
assumes  its  sanguineous  colour,  and  performs  the  business  of
what  is  called  the  second  concoction,  the  bile,  which  is  com-
monly believed  to  be  separated  as  an  excretion  by  the  power  of
the  Liver,  is  seen  of  a green  colour  between  the  lobes  of  that
organ.  In  the  cavity  of  the  stomach  there  is  a limpid  fluid
contained,  obviously  of  the  same  appearance  and  taste  as  the
coUiquament  in  which  the  foetus  swims ; this  passing  on  by  the
intestines,  gradually  changes  its  colour,  and  is  converted  into
chyle ; and  finally  in  the  lower  portion  of  the  bowels  an  excre-
mentitious  matter  is  encountered,  of  the  same  character  as  that
which  is  met  with  in  the  lower  intestines  of  chicks  already  ex-
cluded from  the  egg.  When  the  chick  is  further  advanced  you
may  even  see  this  fluid  concocted  and  coagulated;  just  as  in  those
animals  that  feed  on  milk,  a coagulum  is  formed,  which  after-
wards separates  into  serum  and  firmer  curd.


262


ON  GENERATION.


Wlien  the  albumen  is  almost  all  removed,  and  only  a very
small  quantity  of  the  coUiquament  is  left,  for  several  days  before
the  exclusion,  the  chick  no  longer  swims,  hut,  as  I have  said,
bends  over  the  vitellus  ; and  rolled  up  into  a round  ball,  with
the  head  for  the  most  part  placed  between  the  right  thigh  and
wing,  it  is  seen  with  its  beak,  nails,  feathers,  and  aU  other  parts
complete.  Sometimes  it  sleeps,  and  sometimes  it  wakes,  and
moving  about  it  breathes  and  chirps.  If  you  apply  the  egg  to
your  ear,  you  will  hear  the  chick  within  making  a noise,  kicking,
and  unquestionably  chirping;  according  to  Aristotle,  he  now  also
uses  his  eyes.  If  you  cautiously  drop  the  egg  into  warm  water,
it  will  swim,  and  the  cliick  within,  aroused  by  the  warmth,  will
leap,  and,  as  I have  ah’eady  said,  cause  the  egg  to  tumble  about.
And  it  is  by  this  means  that  our  country  folks  distinguish
prolific  from  unproductive  eggs  which  sink  when  put  into  water.

I^lien  the  albumen  is  entirely  gone,  just  before  the  exclusion,
the  umbilical  vessel,  which  we  have  described  as  distributed  to
the  albumen,  is  obhterated;  or  as  Aristotle  says,’^  “that  um-
bilicus which  proceeds  to  the  external  secundines  is  detached
from  the  animal  and  dies;  hut  the  one  w'hich  leads  to  the
vitellus  becomes  connected  with  the  small  intestine  of  the  chick.'’

The  excrement  that  is  first  formed  in  the  intestines  is  white
and  turbid,  like  softened  egg-shell;  and  some  of  the  same
matter  may  be  found  contained  in  the  secundines.  The  philo-
sopher admits  this  when  he  says  : “At  the  same  time,  too,  the
chick  discharges  a large  quantity  of  excrement  into  the  outer
membrane ; and  there  are  white  excrements  within  the  abdo-
men, as  well  as  those  that  have  been  evacuated.”

Time  running  on,  very  shortly  before  the  exclusion,  light
green  faeces  are  formed,  similar  to  those  which  the  chick  dis-
charges when  excluded  from  the  egg.  In  the  crop,  too,  we  can
discover  a portion  of  the  coUiquament  which  has  been  swal-
lowed ; and  in  the  stomach  some  curd  or  coagulum.

Up  to  this  time  the  liver  has  not  yet  acquired  its  pm’ple  or
blood-red  colour,  hut  has  a tint  vergmg  from  white  into  yeUow,
such  as  the  liver  of  fishes  presents.  The  lungs,  however,  are
of  a florid  red.


' Hist.  Aiiim.  lib.  \"i,  cap.  3.


ON  GENERATION.


263


The  yelk  is  now  contained  in  the  abdomen  among  the  in-
testines : and  this  is  the  case  not  merely  whilst  the  chick  is  in
the  egg,  but  even  after  its  exclusion,  and  when  it  is  running
about  following  its  mother  in  search  of  food.  So  that  what
Aristotle  frequently  asserts  appears  to  he  absolutely  true,  viz.,
that  the  yelk  is  destined  for  the  food  of  the  chick ; and  the
chick  does  certainly  use  it  for  food,  included  in  his  interior  as
it  is,  during  the  few  first  days  after  his  exclusion,  and  until
such  time  as  his  bill  gains  the  hardness  requisite  to  break  and
prepare  his  food,  and  his  stomach  the  strength  necessary  to
digest  it.  And,  indeed,  the  yelk  of  the  egg  is  very  analogous
to  milk.  Aristotle  gives  us  his  support  in  this  opinion  in  the
place  already  so  frequently  referred  to  d “ The  chick  now  bes
over  much  of  the  yellow,  which  at  last  diminishes,  and,  in  pro-
cess of  time,  disappears  entirely,  being  all  taken  into  the  body
of  the  bird,  where  it  is  stored,  so  that  on  the  tenth  day  after  the
exclusion  of  the  chick,  if  the  belly  be  laid  open,  you  will  stiU  find
a little  of  the  yelk  upon  the  intestines. I have  myself  found
certain  remains  of  the  yelk  even  upon  the  thirteenth  day ; and
if  the  argument  derivable  from  the  duct  of  the  umbilical  veins
which  we  have  described  as  terminating  in  the  porta  of  the  liver
by  one  or  another  trunk,  be  of  any  avail,  the  chick  is  already
noui’ished  almost  in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  subsequently,
the  sustenance  being  attracted  from  the  yelk  by  the  umbilical
vessels,  in  the  same  way  as  chyle  is  by  and  by  transmitted  by
the  mesenteric  veins  from  the  intestines.  For  the  vessels  ter-
minate in  either  case  in  the  porta  of  the  liver,  to  which  the
nourishment  attracted  in  the  same  way  is  in  like  manner  trans-
mitted. It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  have  recourse  to  any
lacteal  vessels  of  the  mesentery,  which,  in  the  feathered  tribes,
are  nowhere  to  be  distinguished.

Let  me  be  permitted  here  to  add  what  I have  frequently
found  : With  a \dew  to  discovering  more  distinctly  the  relative
situations  of  the  embryo  and  the  fluids,  I have  boiled  an  egg
hard,  from  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  incubation  up  to  the  day
when  the  exclusion  would  have  taken  place,  the  major  part  of
the  albumen  being  already  consumed,  and  the  vitellus  divided.


Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  3.


264


ON  GENERATION,


Breaking  the  shell,  and  regarding  the  position  of  the  chick,  I
found  both  the  remains  of  the  albumen  and  the  two  portions
of  the  vitellus  (which  we  have  said  are  divided  by  the  colli-
quation  induced  by  the  gentle  heat),  possessing  the  consis-
tency, colour,  taste,  and  other  quahties  which  distinguish  the
yelks  of  unincubated  eggs  similarly  boded.  I have,  therefore,
frequently  asked  myself  how  it  came  to  pass  that  unprohfic  eggs
set  under  a hen  are  made  to  putrefy  and  become  offensive  by
the  same  extraneous  heat  which  produces  no  such  effect  upon
prohfic  eggs,  both  of  the  fluids  of  which  remain  sweet  and  un-
changed, although  they  have  an  embrjm  in  the  midst  of  them,
(and  this  even  containing  some  small  quantity  of  excrementitious
matter  within,  it,)  so  that  did  any  one  eat  the  yelk  of  such  an
egg  in  the  dark,  he  would  not  distinguish  it  from  that  of  a fresh
egg  which  had  never  been  sat  upon.


EXERCISE  THE  TWENTY-THIRD.

Of  the  exclusion  of  the  chick,  or  the  birth  from  the  egg.

The  egg  is,  as  we  have  said,  a kind  of  exposed  uterus,  and
place  in  which  the  embryo  is  fashioned : for  it  performs  the
office  of  the  uterus  and  enfolds  the  chick  untd  the  due  time  of  its
exclusion  arrives,  w hen  the  creature  is  bom  perfect.  Oidparous
animals  consequently  are  not  distinguished  from  viviparous  by
the  circumstance  of  the  one  bringing  forth  their  yoimg  ahve,
and  the  other  not  doing  so ; for  the  chick  not  only  hves  and
moves  wdthin  the  egg,  but  even  breathes  and  chirps  whilst  there ;
and,  when  it  escapes  from  the  shell,  enjoys  a more  perfect  ex-
istence than  the  foetus  of  animals  in  general.  Oviparous  and
viviparous  animals  rather  differ  in  theii’  modes  of  bringing
forth  ; the  uterus  or  place  in  which  the  embryo  is  formed  being
within  the  animal  in  rtrtparous  tribes,  where  it  is  cherished
and  brought  to  maturity,  whilst  in  oviparous  tribes  the  utenis,
or  egg,  is  exposed  or  without  the  animal,  which,  nevertheless,
by  sitting  on  it  does  not  cherish  it  less  truly  than  if  it  were  still
contained  within  the  body.


ON  GENERATION.


265


For  thougR  the  mother  occasionally  quits  her  eggs  on  va-
rious errands,  it  is  only  for  a short  season;  she  stiU  has  such
affection  for  them  that  she  speedily  retmuis,  covers  them  over,
cherishes  them  beneath  her  breast  and  carefully  defends  them ;
and  tliis  on  to  the  twenty-first  or  twenty-second  day,  when  the
chicks,  in  search  of  freer  air,  break  the  shell  and  emerge  into
the  light.

Now  we  must  not  overlook  a mistake  of  Fahricius,  and  al-
most every  one  else  in  regard  to  this  exclusion  or  birth  of  the
chick.  Let  us  hear  Fahricius. i

“ The  chick  wants  air  sooner  than  food,  for  it  has  still  some
store  of  nourishment  within  it ; in  which  case  the  chick,  by  his
chirping,  gives  a sign  to  his  mother  of  the  necessity  of  breaking
the  shell,  which  he  himself  cannot  accomplish  by  reason  of  the
hardness  of  the  shell  and  the  softness  of  his  beak,  to  say  nothing
of  the  distance  of  the  shell  from  the  beak,  and  of  the  position
of  the  head  under  the  wing.  The  chick,  nevertheless,  is  al-
ready so  strong,  and  the  cavity  in  the  egg  is  so  ample,  and  the
air  contained  within  it  so  abundant,  that  the  breathing  becomes
free  and  the  creature  can  emit  the  sounds  that  are  proper  to
it;  these  can  be  readily  heard  by  a bystander,  and  were  recog-
nized both  by  Pliny  and  Aristotle,^  and  perchance  have  some-
thing of  the  nature  of  a petition  in  their  tone.  For  the  hen
hearing  the  chirping  of  the  chick  within,  and  knowing  thereby
the  necessity  of  now  breaking  the  shell  in  order  that  the  chick
may  enjoy  the  air  which  has  become  needful  to  it,  or  if  you  will,
you  may  say,  that  desiring  to  see  her  dear  offspring,  she  breaks
the  shell  with  her  beak,  which  is  not  hard  to  do,  for  the  part
over  the  hollow,  long  deprived  of  moisture,  and  exposed  to  the
heat  of  incubation,  has  become  dry  and  brittle.  The  chirping
of  the  chick  is  consequently  the  first  and  principal  indication
of  the  creature  desiring  to  make  its  escape,  and  of  its  requiring
air.  This  the  hen  perceives  so  nicely,  that  if  she  hears  the
chirping  to  be  low  and  internal,  she  straightway  turns  the  egg
over  with  her  feet,  that  she  may  break  the  shell  at  the  place
whence  the  voice  proceeds  without  detriment  to  the  chick.

' Op.  cit.  p.  59.

“ Plin.  lib.  cap.  53.  xVrist.  Hist.  Auim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  3.


266


ON  GENERATION.


Hippocrates  adds/  “Another  indication  or  reason  of  the  chick^s
desiring  to  escape  from  the  shell,  is  that  when  it  wants  food
it  moves  vigorously,  in  search  of  a larger  supply,  by  which  the
membrane  around  it  is  torn,  and  the  mother  breaking  the  shell
at  the  place  where  she  hears  the  chick  mo'sdng  most  lustily,
permits  it  to  eseape.”

All  this  is  stated  pleasantly  and  well  by  Fahricius ; but  there
is  nothing  of  solid  reason  in  the  tale.  For  I have  found  by
experience  that  it  is  the  chick  himself  and  not  the  hen  that
breaks  open  the  shell,  and  this  fact  is  eveiy  way  in  conformity
with  reason.  For  how  else  should  the  eggs  that  are  hatched  in
dunghills  and  ovens,  as  in  Egypt  and  other  countries,  he  broken
in  due  season,  where  there  is  no  mother  present  to  attend  to
the  voice  of  the  supplicating  chick,  and  to  bring  assistance  to
the  petitioner?  And  how  again  are  the  eggs  of  sea  and  land
tortoises,  of  fishes,  silkworms,  serpents,  and  even  ostriches  to
he  chipped  ? The  embryos  in  these  have  either  no  voice  with
which  they  can  notify  their  desire  for  dehverance,  or  the  eggs
are  buried  in  the  sand  or  shme  where  no  chirping  or  noise
could  he  heard.  The  chick  therefore  is  born  spontaneously,
and  makes  its  escape  from  the  eggshell  thi’ough  its  own  efforts.
That  this  is  the  case  appears  from  unquestionable  arguments :
when  the  shell  is  first  chipped,  the  opening  is  much  smaller
than  accords  with  the  beak  of  the  mother ; but  it  corresponds
exactly  to  the  size  of  the  hdl  of  the  chick,  and  you  may  always
see  the  shell  chipped  at  the  same  distance  from  the  extremity
of  the  egg,  and  the  broken  j)ieces,  especially  those  that  yield  to
the  first  blows,  projecting  regularly  outwai’ds  in  the  form  of  .1
cu’clet.  But  as  any  one  on  looking  at  a broken  pane  of  glass
can  readily  determine  whether  the  force  came  from  without  or
from  within,  by  the  direction  of  the  fragments  that  still  adhere,
so  in  the  chipped  egg  it  is  easy  to  perceive,  by  the  projection
of  the  pieces  around  the  entire  cii’clet,  that  the  breaking  force
comes  from  within.  And  I myself  and  many  others  with  me
besides,  hearing  the  chick  scraping  against  the  shell  with  its
feet,  have  actually  seen  it  perforate  this  part  with  its  beak,  and
extend  the  fracture  in  a circle  like  a coronet.  I have  further


‘ In  lib.  de  nat.  pueri.


ON  GENERATION.


267


seen  the  chick  raise  up  the  top  of  the  shell  upon  its  head  and
remove  it.

We  have  gone  at  length  into  some  of  these  matters^  as  think-
ing that  they  were  not  without  all  speculative  interest,  as  we
shall  show  hy  and  by.  The  arguments  of  Fabricius  are  easily
answered.  For  I admit  that  the  chick  in  ovo  produces  sounds,
and  these  perchance  may  even  have  something  of  the  implora-
tive  in  their  nature ; but  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  the
shell  is  broken  by  the  mother.  Neither  is  the  bill  of  the  chick
so  soft,  nor  yet  so  far  from  the  shell,  that  it  cannot  pierce
through  its  prison  walls,  particularly  when  we  see  that  the  shell,
for  the  reasons  assigned,  is  extremely  brittle.  Neither  does
the  chick  always  keep  its  head  under  its  wing,  so  as  to  be
thereby  prevented  from  breaking  the  shell,  but  only  when  it
sleeps  or  has  died.  For  the  creature  wakes  at  intervals  and
scrapes  and  kicks,  and  struggles,  pressing  against  the  shell,
tearing  the  investing  membranes,  and  chirps,  (and  that  this  is
done  whilst  petitioning  for  assistance  I willingly  concede,)
all  of  which  things  may  readily  be  heard  by  any  one  who  will
use  his  ears.  And  the  hen  listening  attentively  when  she  hears
the  chirping  deep  within  the  egg  does  not  break  the  shell,  but
she  turns  the  egg  with  her  feet  and  gives  the  chick  within  an-
other and  a more  commodious  position.  But  there  is  no  oc-
casion to  suppose  that  the  chick  by  his  chirping  informs  his
mother  of  the  propriety  of  breaking  the  shell,  or  seeks  deli-
verance from  it.  For  very  frequently  for  two  days  before  the
exclusion  you  may  hear  the  chick  chirping  within  the  shell.
Neither  is  the  mother,  when  she  turns  the  egg,  looking  for  the
proper  place  to  break  it ; but  as  the  child  when  uncomfortably
laid  in  his  cradle  is  restless  and  whimpers  and  cries,  and  his
fond  mother  turns  him  this  way  and  that,  and  rocks  him  till  he
is  composed  again,  so  does  the  hen  when  she  hears  the  chick
restless  and  chirping  within  the  egg,  and  feels  it,  when  hatched,
mo-ving  uneasily  about  in  the  nest,  immediately  raise  herself  and
observe  that  she  is  not  pressing  on  it  with  her  weight,  or  keeping
it  too  warm,  or  the  like,  and  then  with  her  bill  and  her  feet
she  moves  and  turns  the  egg  until  the  chick  within  is  again  at
its  ease  and  quiet.


268


ON  GENERATION.


EXEKCISE  THE  TWENTY-FOURTH.

Of  twin-bearing  eggs.

Twin-bearing  eggs  are  sucb  as  produce  twin  chickens,  and
according  to  Aristotle/  ^'are  possessed  of  two  yelks,  which,  in
some  are  separated  by  a layer  of  thin  albumen,  that  they
may  less  encroach  on  one  another ; in  others,  however,  there  is
nothing  of  the  sort,  and  then  the  two  yelks  are  in  contact.”

I have  frequently  seen  tudn  eggs,  each  of  the  yelks  in  which
was  surrounded  by  an  albumen,  with  common  and  proper  mem-
branes surrounding  them.  I have  also  met  with  eggs  having
two  yelks  connate,  as  it  were,  both  of  which  were  embraced  by
a single  and  common  albumen.

“ Some  fowls”  says  Aristotle,^  “ always  produce  twins,  in
which  the  particulars  relating  to  the  yelk  that  have  been  stated
are  clearly  perceived.  A certain  fowl  laid  within  two  of  twenty
eggs,  all  of  which,  except  those  that  were  unprolific,  produced
twins.  Of  the  t^vins,  however,  one  was  always  larger,  the
other  smaller,  and  the  smaller  chick  was  frequently  deformed
in  addition.”

With  us  twin  eggs  are  occasionally  produced,  and  twin  chicks
too,  although  very  rarely,  are  engendered.  I have  never  myself,
however,  seen  both  of  these  chicks  hve  and  thrive;  one  of  them
either  died  within  the  egg  or  at  the  time  of  the  exclusion.  And
this  the  words  of  Aristotle  prepare  us  to  expect,  when  he  sa^s
“ one  of  the  two  is  larger,  the  other  smaller ;”  this  is  as  much
as  to  say  that  one  of  them  is  stronger  and  of  greater  age,  the
other  weaker  and  less  prepared  for  quitting  the  shell : my  OAvn
opinion  therefore  is,  that  the  two  yelks  ai’e  of  different  origins
and  maturity.  It  is  therefore  scai’cely  possible  but  that  tke
stronger  and  more  advanced  chick,  if  the  egg  be  broken  aiid
it  emerge  into  the  light,  Avill  cause  the  blight  and  abortion  of
the  other.  But  if  the  stronger  bird  do  not  chip  the  shell,  he
himself  is  threatened  with  a present  danger,  viz.  want  of  ah.


' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  3.


" Ibid.


ON  GENERATION.


269


At  the  exclusion  from  the  shell,  consequently,  certain  death
hangs  over  one  or  other,  if  not  over  both.

Eabricius  either  not  observing  the  above  words  of  Aristotle,
or  neglecting  them,  says : “ If  an  egg  have  now  and  then  two
yelks,  it  engenders  a chick  having  four  legs  or  wings,  and  two
heads — a monster,  in  short ; never  two  chicks  distinct  from  one
another,  and  that  can  he  spoken  of  as  a pair ; there  is  but  one
trunk,  to  which  are  appended  two  heads,  &c.^^

Whence  we  may  infer  that  he  himself  had  never  seen  nor
heard  from  credible  persons  that  such  eggs  produce  two  pullets,
and  therefore  that  he  agrees  with  me  in  regarding  such  eggs  as
rare,  and  in  holding  that  they  never  produce  two  chicks  both
ahke  capable  of  living.

I am  surprised  nevertheless  that,  with  the  authority  of  Aris-
totle before  him,  he  should  have  said  that  “ two  chicks,  distinct
and  separate,  are  never  produced  from  such  eggs,”  but  always  a
monster;  the  rather  as  he  thinks  that  the  embryo  is  engen-
dered from  the  chalazse  as  from  the  appropriate  matter,  and  he
could  not  but  see  that  there  are  four  chalazse  in  every  twin-
egg.

I should  rather  imagine  that  when  two  vitelh  are  included
by  the  same  albumeu  in  a twin-egg,  and  are  so  intimately  asso-
ciated that  their  cicatriculse,  when  they  are  resolved  together,  con-
stitute a single  eye  or  colliquament,  may  engender  a monstrous
embryo  with  four  feet,  two  heads,  &c.,  because  I see  nothing  to
hinder  this ; and  such  a production  do  I conceive  to  have  been
engendered  by  the  egg  of  which  Eabricius  speaks.

But  where  two  yelks  have  existed  separately,  parted  by  their
several  membranes,  and  furnished  with  chalazse,  albumens,  and
all  else  requisite  to  the  generation  of  the  chick,  I hold  that  we
must  conclude,  with  Aristotle,  that  such  an  egg,  as  it  has  all
the  parts  of  two  eggs  except  the  shell,  so  does  it  also  possess  the
faculty  or  faculties  of  as  many ; and  unless  it  be  a wind  or
barren  egg,  that  it  wdl  for  the  most  part  produce  two  embryos,
and  but  rarely  a single  monstrous  individual.


270


ON  GENERATION.


EXERCISE  THE  TWENTY-FIFTH.

Certain  Deductions  from  the  preceding  History  of  the  Egg.

Such,  is  the  history  of  the  hen’s  egg;  in  which  we  have  spoken
of  its  production,  and  of  its  action  or  faculty  to  engender  a
chick,  at  too  great  length,  it  may  appear  to  those  who  do  not
see  the  end  and  object  of  such  painstaking,  of  such  careful  oli-
servation.  Wherefore  I think  it  adiisable  here  to  state  what
fi’uits  may  follow  our  industry,  and  in  the  words  of  the  learned
Lord  Verulam,  to  “enter  upon  our  second  Auntage.”  Certain
theorems,  therefore,  will  have  to  be  gathered  from  the  history
given;  some  of  which  will  be  quite  certain,  some  questionable
and  requu’ing  further  sifting,  and  some  paradoxical  and  opposed
to  popular  persuasion.  Some  of  these,  moreover,  will  have  re-
ference to  the  male,  some  to  the  female,  several  to  the  egg,  and
finally,  a few  to  the  formation  of  the  chick.  When  these  have
been  carefully  discussed  seriatim,  we  shall  be  in  a condition  to
judge  with  greater  certainty  and  facdity  of  the  generation  of
all  other  animals.


EXERCISE  THE  TWENTY-SIXTH.

Of  the  nature  of  the  egg.

Of  the  theorems  that  refer  to  the  egg,  some  teach  us  what  it
is,  some  show  its  mode  of  formation,  and  others  tell  of  the  parts
which  compose  it.

It  is  ceidain,  in  the  first  place,  that  one  egg  produces  one
chick  only.  Although  the  egg  be  in  a certain  sense  an  external
uterus,  still  it  most  rarely  engenders  several  embryos,  but  by
far  the  most  frequently  produces  no  more  than  a single  pullet.
And  when  an  egg  produces  two  chicks,  which  it  does  sometimes,
still  is  this  egg  to  be  reputed  not  single  but  double,  and  as
possessed  of  the  nature  and  parts  of  two  eggs.

For  an  egg  is  to  be  xiewed  as  a conception  proceeding  fr'oiu


ON  GENERATION.


271


the  male  and  the  female,  equally  endued  \vith  the  virtue  of
either,  and  constituting  an  unity  from  which  a single  animal  is
engendered.

Nor  is  it  the  beginning  only,  but  the  fruit  and  conclusion  like-
wise. It  is  the  beginning  as  regards  the  being  to  be  engendered;
the  fruit  in  respect  of  the  two  parents  : at  once  the  end  proposed
in  their  engendering,  and  the  origin  of  the  chick  that  is  to  be.
'^But  the  seed  and  the  fruit,”  according  to  Aristotle, i “differ
from  one  another  in  the  relations  of  prior  and  posterior;  for  the
fruit  is  that  which  comes  of  another,  the  seed  is  that  from  which
this  other  comes : were  it  otherwise,  both  would  be  the  same.”

The  egg  also  seems  to  be  a certain  mean;  not  merely  in  so  far
as  it  is  beginning  and  end,  but  as  it  is  the  common  work  of  the
two  sexes  and  is  compounded  by  both;  containing  within  itself
the  matter  and  the  plastic  power,  it  has  the  virtue  of  both,  by
which  it  produces  a fetus  that  resembles  the  one  as  well  as  the
other.  It  is  farther  a mean  between  the  animate  and  the  in-
animate world;  for  neither  is  it  wholly  endowed  with  life,  nor  is
it  entirely  without  vitality.  It  is  still  farther  the  mid-passage  or
transition  stage  between  parents  and  offspring,  between  those
who  are,  or  were,  and  those  who  are  about  to  be;  it  is  the  hinge
and  pivot  upon  which  the  whole  generation  of  the  bird  revolves.
The  egg  is  the  terminus  from  which  all  fowls,  male  and  female,
have  sprung,  and  to  which  all  their  lives  tend,  — it  is  the  result
which  nature  has  proposed  to  herself  in  their  being.  And  thus
it  comes  that  indmduals  in  procreating  their  like  for  the  sake  of
their  species,  endure  for  ever.  The  egg,  I say,  is  a period  or
portion  of  this  eternity;  for  it  were  hard  to  say  whether  an  egg
exists  for  the  sake  of  the  chick  that  it  engenders,  or  the  pullet
exists  for  the  sake  of  the  egg  which  it  is  to  engender.  Which  of
these  was  the  prior,  whether  with  reference  to  time  or  nature, —
the  egg  or  the  pullet?  This  question,  when  we  come  to  speak  of
the  generation  of  animals  in  general,  we  shall  discuss  at  length.

The  egg,  moreover, — and  this  is  especially  to  be  noted, —
corresponds  in  its  proportions  with  the  seeds  of  plants,  and  has
all  the  same  conditions  as  these,  so  that  it  is  to  be  regarded,  not
without  reason,  as  the  seed  or  sperma  of  the  common  fowl.


De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  13.


272


ON  GENERATION.


in  the  same  way  as  the  seeds  of  plants  are  justly  entitled  their
eggs,  not  only  as  being  the  matter  or  that  from  which,  but  the
ejficient  or  that  by  which  the  pullet  is  engendered.  In  which
finally  no  part  of  the  future  offspring  exists  de  facto,  but  in
which  all  parts  inhere  in  potentia.

The  seed,  properly  so  called,  differs  however  from  the  geni-
ture,  which  by  Aristotle  is  defined  to  be  “ that  which,  proceeding
from  the  generator,  is  the  canse,  that  which  first  obtains  the
principle  of  generation;  in  those,  to  wit,  whom  nature  destined
to  copnlate.  But  the  seed  is  that  which  proceeds  from  these
two  in  their  connection  : and  snch  is  the  seed  of  all  vegetables,
and  of  some  animals,  in  which  the  sexes  are  not  distinct;  like
that  which  is  first  produced  by  male  and  female  commingled,
a kind  of  promiscuous  conception,  or  animal;  for  this  aheady
possesses  what  is  required  of  both.”

The  egg  consequently  is  a natm’al  body  endowed  with  animal
virtues,  viz.  principles  of  motion  and  rest,  of  transmutation  and
conservation ; it  is,  moreover,  a body  which,  under  favorable
circumstances,  has  the  capacity  to  pass  into  an  animal  foira;
heavy  bodies  indeed  do  not  sink  more  naturally,  nor  fight  ones
float,  when  they  are  nnimpeded,  than  do  seeds  and  eggs  in  virtue
of  their  inherent  capacity  become  changed  into  vegetables  and
animals.  So  that  the  seed  and  the  egg  are  alike  the  fruit  and
final  result  of  the  things  of  which  they  are  the  beginning  and
efficient  cause.

Bor  a single  pullet  there  is  a single  egg ; and  so  Ai’istotle^
says  : “ from  one  seed  one  body  is  engendered ; for  example,
from  a single  grain  of  wheat  one  plant ; from  a single  egg  one
animal ; for  a twin-egg  is,  in  fact,  two  eggs.-*^

And  Fabricius^  with  trnth  observes  : “■  The  egg  is  not  only
an  exposed  uterus,  and  place  of  generation,  but  that  also  on
w hich  the  wdiole  reproduction  of  the  pullet  depends,  and  which
the  egg  achieves  as  agent,  as  matter,  as  insti’ument,  as  seat,  and
all  else,  if  more  there  be,  that  is  needfid  to  generation.”  lie
shows  it  to  be  an  organ  because  it  consists  of  several  pai’ts,  and
this,  from  the  statement  of  Galen,  who  ■\vill  have  the  very  es-
sence of  an  organ  to  be  that  “ it  consist  of  several  pai’ts,  aU  of


' Gen.  Anini.  lib.  i,  cap.  20.


* Loc.  cit.  p.  17.


ON  GENERATION.


273


which  conspire  to  one  and  the  same  action  though  diverse  in
faculty  and  use;  for  some  are  principal  instruments  in  the  action ;
some  are  indispensable  to  it, — without  them  it  could  not  take
place;  some  secure  its  better  performance;  and  some,  in  fine,
are  extant  for  the  safety  and  preservation  of  everything  else.”
He  also  shows  it  to  be  an  agent,  when  from  Aristotle  and  Galen
he  lays  down  the  two  actions  of  the  egg,  viz.:  “the  generation  of
the  chick,  and  the  growth  and  nutrition  of  the  pullet.”  At  the
conclusion  he  expresses  himself  clearly  in  these  words  : “ In  the
works  of  nature  we  see  conjunct  and  one,  the  artificer,  the  in-
strument, and  the  matter;  the  liver,  for  instance,  is  both  the
agent  and  the  instrument  for  the  production  of  the  blood;  and
so  every  part  of  the  body ; Aristotle,^  therefore,  said  well  that
the  moving  powers  w^ere  not  easily  distinguished  from  the  in-
struments. In  artificial  things,  indeed,  the  artificer  and  the
instrument  are  distinct,  as  much  so  as  the  workman  and  his
hammer,  the  painter  and  his  pencil.  And  the  reason  adduced
by  Galen2  is  this  : that  in  things  made  by  art  the  artificer  is
without  the  work;  in  natural  things,  again,  the  artificer  is  within
it,  conjunct  with  the  instruments,  and  pervading  the  whole
organization.”

To  this  I add  these  perspicuous  words  of  Aristotle.^  “ Of
extant  things  some  are  consistent  with  nature,  others  with  other
causes.  Animals  and  their  parts,  and  plants,  and  simple  bodies,
as  earth,  fire,  air,  and  water,  consist  with  nature,  and  are  allowed
universally  to  do  so;  but  these  bodies  differ  entirely  from  those
that  do  not  consist  with  nature.  For  whatsoever  consists  with
nature  is  seen  to  have  within  itself  a principle  of  motion  and  of
rest,  now  according  to  place,  now  according  to  increment  and
decrement,  and  again  according  to  change.  A couch  or  litter,
a garment,  and  other  things  of  the  same  description,  however
designated,  inasmuch  as  they  are  made  by  art,  have  no  inherent
faculty  of  change;  but  inasmuch  as  they  are  made  of  [wood,  or]
earth,  or  stone,  [or  of  wool,  silk,  or  linen,]  or  of  mixtui’es  of
these,  they  have  such  a faculty.  As  if  nature  were  a certain
principle  and  cause  wherefore  that  should  move  and  be  at  rest
in  which  she  inheres  originally,  independently,  and  not  by  acci-
dent. I say,  particularly,  not  by  accident,  because  it  might
happen  that  one  being  a physician  should  himself  be  the  cause


' De  Gener.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  4.


^ Phys.  lib.  i,  cap.  1.
18


’ De  form.  feet.


274


ON  GENERATION.


of  his  own  good  health ; but  he  is  not  familiar  with  medicine  in
the  same  respect  as  he  has  worked  his  own  cine ; it  happens
simply  that  the  man  who  here  recovers  his  health  is  a physi-
cian. It  therefore  occasionally  happens,  that  these  t^  o things
are  distinct  and  separate.  But  it  is  not  otherwise  with  every-
thing besides  that  is  of  art : none  of  these  has  in  itself  a principle
of  performance  or  action,  though  some  of  them  have  such  a
principle  in  other  tilings  and  beyond  themselves,  such  as  a
house,  and  aught  else  that  is  made  with  hands ; and  some  have
even  such  a principle  inherent,  but  not  per  se  and  independently;
everything,  for  example,  may  by  accident  become  a cause  to  it-
self. Nature  is  therefore,  as  stated  [that  which  has  an  inhe-
rent principle  of  motion] ; and  those  things  have  nature  vithiu
them  which  possess  this  principle.  Now  all  such  ai’e  substances;
for  nature  is  always  some  subject,  and  inheres  in  the  subject.”

These  things  I have  spoken  of  at  length,  and  even  quoted
the  words  of  the  writers  appealed  to,  that  it  might  thence  appear
first,  that  all  I attribute  to  the  egg  is  actually  there,  liz. :
matter,  organ,  efficient  cause,  place,  and  everything  else  requi-
site to  the  generation  of  the  cliick;  and  next  and  more  especially,
that  the  truth  in  regard  to  the  following  very  difficult  ques-
tions might  be  made  clearly  to  appear,  liz.:  T^'hich  and  what
principle  is  it  whence  motion  and  generation  proceed?  By
what  virtue  does  the  semen  act,  according  to  Aristotle  ? TThat
is  it  that  renders  the  semen  itself  fi’uitful  ? (for  the  philosopher
will  have  it  that  nature  in  all  natural  bodies  is  the  innate  prin-
ciple of  motion  and  of  rest,  and  not  any  second  accident.)
"Whether  is  that  which  in  the  egg  is  cause,  artificer,  and  principle
of  generation  and  of  all  the  vital  and  vegetative  operations —
conservation,  nutrition,  growth — innate  or  superadded  ? and
whether  does  it  inhere  primarily,  of  itself,  and  as  a kind  of
nature,  or  intervene  by  accident,  as  the  physician  in  em’ing  dis-
eases ? AYhether  is  that  which  transforms  the  egg  into  a puUct
iuherent  or  acquired,  or  is  it  ah’eady  conceived  in  the  ovaiy,  aud
does  it  nourish,  augment,  and  perfect  the  egg  there  ?

AYhat  is  it  besides  that  preserves  the  egg  sweet  after  it  is  laid?
"^liat  is  it  that  renders  an  egg  fraitful — is  it  to  be  called  soid,  or
a portion  of  the  soul,  or  something  belougiug  to  the  soul,  or  some-
thing having  a soul,  or  is  it  intelligence,  or,  finally,  is  it  Dirinity?
seeing  that  it  acts  to  a definite  end,  and  orders  all  with  in-


ON  GENERATION.


275


imitable  providence  and  art,  and  yet  in  an  incomprebensible
manner,  always  obtaining  what  is  best  both  for  simple  being
and  for  well-being,  for  protection  also  and  for  ornament.  And  all
this  not  only  in  the  fruitful  egg  which  it  fecundates,  but  in  the
hypenemic  egg  which  it  nourishes,  causes  to  increase,  and  pre-
serves. Nay,  it  is  not  merely  the  vitellus  in  the  vitellarium
or  egg-bed,  but  the  smallest  speck  whence  the  yelk  is  produced,
of  no  greater  size  than  a miUet  or  a mustard-seed,  that  it
nourishes  and  makes  to  grow,  and  finally  envelopes  with  al-
bumen, and  furnishes  with  chalazse,  and  surrounds  "with  mem-
branes and  a shell.  For  it  is  probable  that  even  the  barren
egg,  whilst  it  is  included  within  the  fowl  and  is  connected  with
her,  is  nourished  and  preserved  by  its  internal  and  inherent  prin-
ciple, and  made  to  increase  (not  otherwise  than  the  eggs  of
fishes  and  frogs,  exposed  externally,  increase  and  are  perfected),
and  to  be  tranformed  from  a small  speck  into  a yelk,  and
transferred  from  the  ovary  to  the  uterus  (though  it  have  no
connexion  with  the  uterus),  there  to  be  endued  with  albumen,
and  at  length  to  be  completed  \vith  its  chalazae,  membranes,  and
sheU.

But  what  that  may  be  in  the  hypenemic  egg  as  Avell  as  in
the  fruitful  one,  which  in  a similar  manner  and  from  the  same
causes  or  principles  produces  the  same  effects;  whether  it  be  the
same  soul,  or  the  same  part  of  the  soul,  or  something  else  inherent
in  both,  must  be  worthy  of  inquiiy  : it  seems  probable,  however,
that  the  same  things  should  proceed  from  similar  causes.

Although  the  egg  whdst  it  is  being  produced  is  contained
within  the  fowl,  and  is  connected  with  the  ovary  of  the  mother
by  a pedicle,  and  is  nourished  by  blood-vessels,  it  is  not  there-
fore to  be  spoken  of  as  a part  of  the  mother ; nor  is  it  to  be
held  as  living  and  vegetating  through  her  vital  principle,  but
by  a virtue  peculiar  to  itself  and  an  internal  principle ; just  as
fungi,  and  mosses,  and  the  misletoe,  which  although  they  ad-
here to  vegetables  and  are  nourished  by  the  same  sap  as  their
leaves  and  germs,  still  form  no  part  of  these  vegetables,  nor  are
they  ever  so  esteemed.  Aristotle,  with  a view  to  meeting  these
difiiculties,  concedes  a vegetative  soul  to  the  egg,  even  to  the
hypenemic  one.  He  says  d “ Females,  too,  and  all  things  that
live  are  endowed  with  the  vegetative  virtue  of  the  soul,  as  has
' Gener.  Auim.  lib.  iii,  caj).  7.


276


ON  GENERATION.


been  often  said ; and  therefore  this  [hypenemic]  egg  is  perfect
as  the  conception  of  a plant,  but  imperfect  as  that  of  an  animal.”
And  he  inculcates  the  same  doetrine  elsewhere,^  -when  he  asks;
“ In  what  manner  or  sense  are  hypenemic  eggs  said  to  live  ?
For  they  cannot  do  so  in  the  same  sense  as  fruitful  eggs,  other-
wise a living  thing  might  be  engendered  by  their  agency.  Nor
do  they  comport  themselves  like  wood  or  stone ; because  these
perish  by  a kind  of  corruption,  as  having  formerly  had  life
in  a certain  manner.  It  is  positive,  therefore,  that  hype-
nemic eggs  have  a certain  kind  of  soul  potentially ; but  what  ?
of  necessity  that  ultimate  soul,  which  is  the  appanage  of  vege-
tables; for  this  equally  inheres  in  aU  things,  in  animals  as  well
as  vegetables.”

But  it  is  not  the  same  soul  that  is  found  in  hypenemic  as  in
fruitful  eggs ; otherwise  would  a pullet  be  indifferently  produced
from  both ; but  how  and  in  what  respects  the  soul  attached  to
each  is  different  from  the  other,  Aristotle  does  not  sufficiently
explain,  when  he  inquii’es  ;2  “ AVherefore  are  all  the  parts  of  an
egg  present  in  the  hypenemic  egg,  and  it  still  incapable  of
producing  a chick  ? because,”  he  repHes,  “ it  is  requisite  that
it  have  a sensitive  soul.”  As  if  in  fraitful  eggs,  besides  the
vegetative  soul,  there  were  a sensitive  soul  present.  Unless
you  understand  the  vegetative  soul  as  inhering  actually  in  the
fruitful  egg,  which  contains  the  sensitiv  e soul  within  it  poten-
tially; whence  the  animal,  and  the  sensible  pai’ts  of  the  animal
are  subsequentlj"  produced.  But  neither  do  uu’iters  satisfactorily
untie  this  knot,  nor  set  the  mind  of  the  inquher  free  from  the
difficulties  that  entangle  him.  For  he  sees  that  the  egg  is  a
true  animal  seed,  according  to  this  sentence  of  the  Stagyi’ite
“ In  those  things  endowed  with  life,  in  which  the  male  and  fe-
male sexes  are  not  distinct,  the  seed  is  ah’eady  present  as  a
conception.  I entitle  conception  the  first  mixtui’e  from  the
male  and  female  (the  analogue  of  the  vegetable  seed  therefore).
Wherefore  from  one  seed  there  is  engendered  one  body,  as  from
one  egg  one  animal.”

It  appears,  consequent^,  that  for  one  egg  there  is  one  soul
or  vital  principle.'*  But  whether  is  this  that  of  the  mother,  or  that

' Gener.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  4.  - Ibid.  lib.  ii,  cap.  4.  ^ Ibid.  lib.  i,  cap.  20.

■*  [The  word  anima  of  the  original,  wliich  is  translated  soul  above,  I shall  in  what
follows  generally  render  vital  principle.  Ed.]


ON  GENERATION.


277


of  the  father^  or  a mixture  of  the  two  ? And  here  the  greatest
difficulties  are  occasioned  by  those  eggs  that  are  produced  by
the  concurrence  of  animals  of  different  species,  as,  for  example,
of  the  common  fowl  and  pheasant.  In  such  an  egg,  I ask,  is
it  the  Autal  principle  of  the  father  or  that  of  the  mother,  which
inheres  ? or  is  it  a mixture  of  the  two  ? But  how  can  \ital
principles  be  mingled,  if  the  vital  principle  (as  form)  be  act
and  substance,  which  it  is,  according  to  Aristotle?  For  no  one
will  deny,  whatever  it  be  idtimately  which  in  the  fruitful  egg
is  the  beginning  and  cause  of  the  effects  we  witness,  that  it  is
a substance  suscejitible  of  divers  powers,  forces,  or  faculties,  and
even  conditions, — virtues,  vices,  health  and  sickness.  For
some  eggs  are  esteemed  to  be  longer,  others  shorter  lived ; some
engender  chickens  endowed  with  the  qualities  and  health  of
body  that  distinguislied  their  parents,  others  produce  young  that
are  predisposed  to  disease.  Nor  is  it  to  be  said  that  this  is
from  any  fault  of  the  mother,  seeing  that  the  diseases  of  the
father  or  male  parent  are  transferred  to  the  progeny,  although
he  contributes  nothing  to  the  matter  of  the  egg;  the  procreative
or  plastic  force  which  renders  the  egg  fmitful  alone  proceeding
from  the  male;  none  of  its  parts  being  contributed  by  him.
For  the  semen  which  is  emitted  by  the  male  during  inter-
course does  by  no  means  enter  the  uterus  of  the  female,  in
which  the  egg  is  perfected ; nor  can  it,  indeed,  (as  I first  an-
nounced, and  Fabricius  agrees  with  me,)  by  any  manner  or  way
get  into  the  inner  recesses  of  that  organ,  much  less  ascend  as
high  as  the  ovary,  near  the  waist  or  middle  of  the  body,  so  that
besides  its  pecubar  virtue  it  might  impart  a portion  of  matter
to  the  numerous  ova  whose  rudiments  are  there  contained.  For
we  know,  and  are  assured  by  unquestionable  experience,  that
several  ova  are  fecundated  by  one  and  the  same  connexion, —
not  those  only  that  are  met  with  in  the  uterus  and  ovary,  but
those  bkewise  that  are  in  some  sort  not  yet  begun,  as  we  shall
state  by  and  by,  and  indeed,  as  we  have  akeady  had  occasion
to  assert  in  our  history.

If,  therefore,  an  egg  be  rendered  fruitful  by  its  proper  vital
principle,  or  be  endowed  with  its  own  inherent  fecundating  force,
whence  or  whereby  either  a common  fowl,  or  a hybrid  betwixt
the  fowl  and  the  pheasant  is  produced,  and  that  either  male  or
female,  like  the  father  or  the  mother,  healthy  or  diseased  ; we


278


ON  GENERATION.


must  infallibly  conclude  that  the  egg,  even  when  contained  in
the  ovary,  does  not  live  by  the  vital  principle  of  the  mother,  but
is,  like  the  youth  who  comes  of  age,  made  independent  even
from  its  fii’st  appearance;  as  the  acorn  taken  from  the  oak,  and
the  seeds  of  plants  in  general,  are  no  longer  to  be  considered
parts  of  the  tree  or  herb  that  has  supported  them,  but  things
made  in  their  own  right,  and  whieh  already  enjoy  life  in  virtue
of  a proper  and  inherent  vegetative  poAver.

But  if  Ave  now  admit  that  there  is  a living  principle  in  a fertile
egg,  it  may  become  matter  of  discussion  Avhether  it  is  the  same
liAung  principle  Avhich  already  inheres  in  the  egg  that  Avill  in-
here in  the  future  chick,  or  whether  it  is  a different  one  that
actuates  each  ? For  it  is  matter  of  necessity  that  we  admit  the
inherence  of  a certain  principle  Avhieh  constitutes  and  causes
the  egg  to  grow,  and  which  farther  engenders  and  makes  the
chick  to  increase.  We  have  to  inquire,  therefore,  whether  the
animating  pu’ineiple  of  the  egg  and  of  the  chick  be  one  and  the
same,  or  several  and  different  ? And  then,  were  several  vital
principles  recognized,  some  appertaining  to  the  egg,  others  to
the  chick,  we  should  next  have  to  inquire  : Avhence  and  at  Avliat
epoch  the  animating  principle  of  the  chick  entered  it?  and  what
is  it  in  the  egg  which  causes  the  cicatricula  to  dilate  before  the
advent  of  the  hAing  principle;  Avhich  draAA  S the  eye  of  the  Antellus
upAvards,  as  stated,  and  produces  the  colliquament,  changes  the
constitution  of  the  fluids  of  the  egg,  and  preordains  everything
for  the  construction  of  the  future  chiek  before  there  is  even  a
vestige  of  it  to  be  seen?  Or  whence  shall  we  say  the  aliment  fit
for  the  embryo  is  derived,  and  by  Avhich  it  is  nourished  and
made  to  grow,  before  it  is  yet  in  being?  For  these  acts  arc
seen  to  be  the  Avork  of  the  vegetative  soul  of  the  embryo,  and
have  reference  to  the  coming  pidlet,  ensming  its  nutrition  and
growth.  And  again,  when  the  embryo  is  begim,  or  the  chick
is  half  formed,  what  is  it  which  constitutes  that  embiyo  or  that
chick  one  and  continuous  and  connex  AAdth  the  liquids  of  the
egg  ? What  nom’ishes  and  makes  the  chick  to  grow,  and  pre-
serves the  fluids  that  are  fit  for  its  nuti’ition  from  putrefaction,
and  prepares,  and  hquefies,  and  concocts  them  ?

If  the  vital  principle  be  the  act  of  the  organic  body  possessing
life  in  pot entia,  it  seems  incredible  that  this  principle  can  inhere
in  the  chick  before  something  in  the  shape  of  an  organized  body


ON  GENERATION.


279


is  extant.  Nor  is  it  more  credible  that  the  vital  principle  of
the  egg  and  chick  can  be  identical,  if  the  vital  principle  be  con-
servative of  that  only  to  which  it  belongs ; but  the  egg  and  the
chick  are  different  things,  and  manifest  dissimilar  and  even
opposite  vital  acts,  in  so  much  so  that  one  appears  to  be  pro-
duced by  the  destruction  of  the  other.  Or  should  we  perchance
maintain  that  the  same  principle  and  cause  of  life  inheres  in
both,  in  the  pullet  half  fashioned,  to  wit,  and  the  egg  half  con-
sumed, as  if  it  were  one  and  a simple  act  of  the  same  body;  or
as  if  from  parts  producing  one  natural  body,  one  soul  or  ^dtal
principle  also  arose,  which  was  all  in  all,  as  is  commonly  said,
and  all  in  each  particular  part  ? Just  as  with  leaves  and  fruit
conspicuous  on  the  stem  of  a tree,  wherever  a dmsion  is  made
we  still  say  that  the  principle  or  first  cause  of  the  sHp  and  of
the  whole  tree  is  the  same ; the  leaves  and  the  fruit  are,  as  it
were,  the  form  and  end,  the  trunk  of  the  tree  the  beginning.
So  too  in  a line,  wherever  a division  is  made,  this  will  become
the  end  or  boundary  of  the  part  behind  it,  the  commencement
of  the  part  before  it.  And  the  same  thing  is  seen  to  obtain  in
respect  of  quality  and  motion,  that  is  to  say,  in  every  kind  of
transmutation  and  generation.

So  much  at  this  time  upon  these  topics,  which  will  by  and
by  engage  us  at  greater  length,  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the
nature  of  the  lining  principle  of  the  embryos  of  animals  in
general;  of  its  being;  of  its  accession  in  respect  of  the  how  and
the  when;  and  how  it  is  all  in  all,  and  all  in  each  particular
part,  the  same  and  yet  different.  Points  which  we  shall  deter-
mine from  numerous  observations.


EXERCISE  THE  TWENTY-SEVENTH.

The  egg  is  not  the  product  of  the  uterus,  hut  of  the  vital
principle.

“ As  we  have  said,^^  says  Pabricius,i  “ that  the  action  of  the
stomach  was  to  convert  the  food  into  chyle,  and  the  action  of  the

‘ Op.  cit.  p.  8.


280


ON  GENERATION.


testicles  to  produce  semen,  because  in  tbe  stomach  we  find
ch}de,  in  the  testes  semen,  so  do  we  definitely  assert  that  the
egg  is  the  product  of  the  uterus  of  birds,  because  it  is  found  in
this  part.  The  organ  and  seat  of  the  generation  of  eggs  is,
therefore,  intimately  known  and  obvious  to  us.  And  farther,
inasmuch  as  there  are  two  uteri  in  birds,  one  superior  and  the
other  inferior,  and  these  are  considerably  different  from  one
another,  and  consequently  perform  different  offices,  it  is  in  hke
manner  clear  what  particular  action  is  to  be  ascribed  to  each.
The  superior  is  devoted  to  the  production  of  the  yelk,  the  infe-
rior to  that  of  the  albumen  and  remaining  parts,  or  of  the  per-
fect egg,  as  lies  obvious  to  sense ; for  in  the  superior  uterus
we  never  find  aught  beyond  a multitude  of  yelks,  nor  in  the
inferior  uterus,  other  than  entire  and  perfect  eggs.  But  these
are  not  all  the  functions  of  the  uteri  as  it  appears,  but  the
following  are  farther  to  be  noted  and  enumerated,  riz. : the  in-
crease of  the  egg,  which  succeeds  immediately  upon  its  pro-
duction, and  proceeds  until  it  is  perfected  and  acquires  its
proper  dimensions.  For  the  fowl  does  not  naturally  lay  an  egg
uutil  it  has  become  complete  and  has  acquired  its  due  dimen-
sions. The  actions  of  the  uteri  are  consequently  the  increase  as
well  as  the  engenderment  of  the  egg;  but  increase  supposes  and
includes  nutrition,  as  is  obvious.  And  since  all  generation  is  the
effect  of  the  concm’rence  of  two,  xiz.,  the  agent  and  the  matter,
the  agent  in  the  generation  of  an  egg  is  nothing  else  than  the
instruments  or  organs  aforesaid,  to  wit,  the  double  uterus ; and
the  matter  is  nothing  but  the  blood.^^

Now  whilst  I admit  the  action  of  the  uterus  to  be  in  a
manner  the  generation  of  the  egg,  I by  no  means  allow  that  the
egg  is  nom’ished  and  increased  by  this  organ.  And  this,  both
for  the  reasons  already  alleged  by  us  when  we  treated  of  the
vital  principle  of  the  egg,  which  is  that  which  nourishes  it,  and
also  because  it  appeal’s  httle  likely  (according  to  Ai’istotle,^  it  is
impossible,)  that  all  the  internal  parts  of  the  egg,  in  all  their
dimensions,  should  be  fashioned  and  made  to  increase  by  an
external  agent,  such  as  the  uterus  is  with  reference  to  the
egg;  for  how,  I beseech  you,  can  that  Avhich  is  extrinsic  ai’-


‘ Geiier.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  caj).  1.


ON  GENERATION.


281


range  the  natural  matter  in  things  that  are  internal,  and  supply-
fresh  matter  according  to  the  several  dimensions  in  the  place
of  that  -which  has  been  lost  ? Ho-w  can  anything  be  affected
or  moved  by  that  -n^hich  does  not  touch  it  ? Wherefore,  -with-
out question,  the  same  things  happen  in  the  engenderment  of
eggs  whicli  take  place  in  the  beginning  of  all  living  things
whatsoever,  viz. : they  are  primarily  constituted  by  external  and
preexisting  beings ; but  so  soon  as  they  are  endowed  with  life,
they  suffice  for  their  own  nourishment  and  increase,  and  this
in  virtue  of  peculiar  inherent  forces,  innate,  implanted  from  the
beginning.

What  has  already  been  said  of  the  vital  principle  appears
clearly  to  proclaim  that  the  egg  is  neither  the  work  of  the
uterus,  nor  governed  by  tliat  organ ; for  it  is  manifest  that  the
vegetative  principle  inheres  even  in  the  hypenemic  egg,  inas-
much as  we  have  seen  that  this  egg  is  nourished  and  is  pre-
served, increases  and  vegetates,  all  of  which  acts  are  indications  of
the  presence  of  the  principle  mentioned.  But  neither  from  the
mother  nor  the  uterus  can  this  principle  proceed,  seeing  that
the  egg  has  no  connexion  or  union  with  them,  but  is  free  and
unconnected,  like  a son  emancipated  from  pupillage,  rolling
round  within  the  cavity  of  the  uterus  and  perfecting  itself,  even
as  the  seeds  of  plants  are  perfected  in  the  bosom  of  the  earth,
viz.,  by  an  internal  vegetative  principle,  which  can  be  nothing
else  than  the  vegetative  soul.

And  it  will  appear  all  the  more  certain  that  it  is  possessed
of  a soul  or  \ital  principle,  if  we  consider  by  what  compact,
what  mo-\dng  power,  the  round  and  ample  yelk,  detached  from
the  cluster  of  the  ovary,  descends  thi’ough  the  infundibulum —
a most  slender  tube  composed  of  a singularly  delicate  membrane,
and  possessed  of  no  motory  fibres — and  opening  a path  for  itself,
approaches  the  uterus  tluough  such  a number  of  straits,  arrived
in  which  it  continues  to  be  nourished,  and  grows  and  is  sur-
rounded with  albumen.  Now  as  there  is  no  motory  organ  dis-
coverable either  in  the  ovary  which  expels  the  vitellus,  or  in  the
infundibulum  which  transmits,  or  in  the  uterus  which  attracts
it,  and  as  the  egg  is  not  connected  with  the  uterus,  nor  yet
with  the  ovary  by  means  of  vessels,  nor  hangs  from  either  by
an  umbilical  cord,  as  Fabricius  truly  states,  and  demonstrates


282


ON  GENERATION.


most  satisfactorily,  wliat  remains  for  us  contemplating  such  great
and  important  processes  but  that  we  exclaim  with  the  poet : ^

’Tis  innate  soul  sustains ; and  mind  infused

Through  every  part,  that  actuates  the  mass.

And  although  the  rudiments  of  eggs,  which  we  have  said  are
mere  specks,  and  have  compared  to  millet  seeds  in  size,  are
connected  with  the  ovary  by  means  of  veins  and  arteries,  in  the
same  manner  as  seeds  are  attached  to  plants,  and  consequently
seem  to  be  part  and  parcel  of  the  fowl,  and  to  live  and  be
nourished  after  the  manner  of  her  other  parts,  it  is  nevertheless
manifest,  that  seeds  once  separated  from  the  plants  which  have
produced  them,  are  no  longer  regarded  as  parks  of  these,  but
like  children  come  of  age  and  freed  from  leading-strings,  they
are  maintained  and  governed  by  their  oum  inherent  capacities.

But  of  this  matter  we  shall  speak  more  fully,  when  we  come
to  treat  of  the  soul  or  living  principle  of  the  embryo  in  general,
and  of  the  excellence  and  divine  nature  of  the  A*egetative  sord
from  a survey  of  its  operations,  all  of  which  are  canded  on  with
such  foresight,  art,  and  dirine  intelligence ; which,  indeed,  sur-
pass our  pouters  of  understanding  not  less  than  Deity  surpasses
man,  and  are  allowed,  by  common  consent,  to  be  so  wonderful
that  their  ineffable  lustre  is  in  no  way  to  be  penetrated  by  the
dull  edge  of  our  apprehension.

What  shall  we  say  of  the  animalcrdes  which  are  engendered
in  our  bodies,  and  which  no  one  doubts  are  ruled  and  made  to
vegetate  by  a peculiar  vital  principle  (anima)  ? of  this  kind  are
lumbrici,  ascarides,  lice,  nits,  syrones,  acaii,  &c. ; or  what  of
the  worms  which  are  produced  from  plants  and  them  fruits,  as
from  gall-nuts,  the  dog-rose,  and  various  others  ? “ For  in

almost  all  dry  things  growing  moist,  or  moist  things  becoming
dry,  an  animal  may  be  engendered.^’  ^ certainly  cannot  be
that  the  Imng  principles  of  the  animals  which  arise  in  gall-nuts
existed  in  the  oak,  although  these  animals  live  attached  to  tlie
oak,  and  derive  their  sustenance  from  its  juices.  In  like  manner
it  is  credible  that  the  rudiments  of  eggs  exist  in  the  ovaiaan
cluster  bj^  their  proper  vital  principle,  not  by  that  of  the  mother,
although  they  ai’e  connected  mth  her  body  by  means  of  arteries


.Eueid.  vi.


^ Ai'ist.  Hist.  Aiiim.  lib.  v.  cap.  32.


ON  GENERATION.


283


and  veins,  and  are  nourished  by  the  same  food  as  herself.
Because,  as  we  have  stated  in  our  history,  all  the  viteUary
specks  do  not  increase  together,  like  the  grapes  of  a bunch,  or
the  corns  of  an  ear  of  wheat,  as  if  they  were  pervaded  by  one
common  actuating  force  or  concocting  and  forming  cause ;
they  come  on  one  after  another,  as  if  they  grew  by  their  own
peculiar  energy,  each  that  is  most  in  advance  severing  itself
from  the  rest,  changing  its  colour  and  consistence,  and  fr’om
a white  speck  becoming  a yelk,  in  regidar  and  determinate  se-
quence. And  what  is  more  particularly  astonishing  is  that
which  we  witness  among  pigeons  and  certain  other  birds,  where
two  yelks  only  come  to  maturity  upon  the  ovarian  cluster  to-
gether, one  of  wdiich,  for  the  major  part,  produces  a male,  the
other  a female,  an  abundance  of  other  vitellary  specks  remaining
stationary  in  the  ovary,  until  the  term  comes  round  for  two
more  to  increase  and  make  ready  for  a new  birth.  It  is  as  if
each  successive  pair  received  fertility  fr’om  the  repeated  addresses
of  the  male ; as  if  the  two  became  possessed  of  the  ^dtal  prin-
ciple together ; which,  once  infused,  they  forthwith  increase
spontaneously,  and  govern  themselves,  living  of  their  own  not
through  their  mother^s  right.  And,  in  sooth,  what  else  can
you  conceive  working,  disposing,  selecting,  and  perfecting,  as
respects  this  pair  of  vitellary  paprdse  and  none  others,  but  a pe-
culiar vital  principle  ? And  although  they  attract  nourishment
from  the  mother,  they  still  do  so  no  otherwise  than  as  plants
draw  food  from  the  ground,  or  as  the  embryo  obtains  it  from
the  albumen  and  vitellus.

Lastly,  since  the  papula  existing  in  the  ovary  receives  fecundity
from  the  access  of  the  male,  and  this  of  such  a kind  that  it  passes
into  the  form  and  likeness  of  the  concurring  male,  whether  he
were  a common  cock  or  a pheasant,  and  there  is  as  great  diversity
in  the  papulae  as  there  are  males  of  different  kinds;  what  shall  we
hold  as  inherent  in  the  papulae  themselves,  by  whose  virtue  they
are  distinguished  from  one  another  and  from  the  mother?
Undoubtedly  it  must  be  the  Utal  principle  by  which  they  are
distinguished  both  from  each  other  and  fr’om  the  mother.

It  is  in  a similar  manner  that  fungi  and  parasitic  plants  live
upon  trees.  And  besides,  we  in  our  own  bodies  frequently  suffer
from  cancers,  sarcoses,  mehcerides,  and  other  tumours  of  the


284


ON  GENERATION.


same  description,  wliich  are  nourislied  and  grow  as  it  seems  by
their  own  inherent  vegetative  principle,  the  true  or  natural  parts
of  the  body  meantime  shrinliing  and  perishing.  And  this  ap-
parently because  these  tumours  attract  all  the  nourishment  to
themselves,  and  defraud  the  other  parts  of  the  body  of  their  nu-
tritious juices  or  proper  genius.  Whence  the  famihar  names
of  phagedeena  and  lupus;  and  Hippocrates,  by  the  words  ro  9em',
perhaps  understood  those  diseases  which  arise  from  poison  or
contagion ; as  if  in  these  there  was  a certain  ritaliW  and  dirine
principle  inherent,  by  which  they  increase  and  through  conta-
gion generate  similar  diseases  even  in  other  bodies.  Aristotle'
therefore  says  : “ all  things  are  fidl  of  soul and  elsewhere  he
seems  to  think  that  “ even  the  winds  have  a kind  of  life,  and
a bii’th  and  a death.”  2 there  is  no  doubt  that  the  vi-

tellus,  when  it  is  once  cast  loose  and  freed  from  all  connexiou
with  the  fowl,  during  its  passage  through  the  infundibulum  and
its  stay  in  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  attracts  a sluggish  moisture
to  itself,  which  it  absorbs,  and  by  which  it  is  nourished ; there
too  it  surrounds  itself  with  albumen,  furnishes  itself  with  mem-
branes and  a shell,  and  finally  perfects  itself.  All  of  which
things,  rightly  weighed,  we  must  needs  conclude  that  it  is  pos-
sessed by  a proper  \dtal  principle  (anima).


EXERCISE  THE  TW'ENTY-EIGHTH.

T/ie  egg  is  not  produced  loithout  the  hen.

Leaving  points  that  ai'e  doubtful,  and  disquisitions  beaiing
upon  the  general  question,  we  now  approach  more  definite  and
obvious  matters.

And  first,  it  is  manifest  that  a fi’uitful  egg  cannot  be  pro-
duced Avithout  the  concim’ence  of  a cock  and  hen : ivithout
the  hen  no  egg  can  be  formed  ; without  the  cock  it  cannot  be-
come fruitful.  But  this  view  is  opposed  to  the  opinion  of  those
Avho  derive  the  origin  of  animals  from  the  shme  of  the  ground.
And  truly  when  we  see  that  the  numerous  parts  concurring  m


De  Gen.  Auim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  2.


’ Ibid.  lib.  iv,  cap.  10.


ON  GENERATION.


285


the  act  of  generation, — the  testes  and  vasa  deferentia  in  the  male,
the  ovarium  and  uterus  and  blood-vessels  supplying  them  in  the
female — are  all  contrived  with  such  signal  art  and  forethought,
and  everything  requisite  to  reproduction  in  a determinate  direc-
tion— situation,  form,  temperature, — arranged  so  admirably,  it
seems  certain,  as  nature  does  nothing  in  vain,  nor  works  in  any
round-about  way  when  a shorter  path  lies  open  to  her,  that  an
egg  can  be  produced  in  no  other  manner  than  that  in  which  we
now  see  it  engendered,  viz.,  by  the  concurring  act  of  the  cock  and
hen.  Neither,  in  like  manner,  in  the  present  constitution  of
things,  can  a cock  or  hen  ever  be  produced  other\vise  than  from
an  egg.  Thus  the  cock  and  the  hen  exist  for  the  sake  of  the
egg,  and  the  egg,  in  the  same  way,  is  their  antecedent  cause ;
it  were  therefore  reasonable  to  ask,  with  Plutarch,  which  of
these  was  the  prior,  the  egg  or  the  fowl  ? Now  the  fowl  is  prior
by  nature,  but  the  egg  is  prior  in  time;  for  that  which  is  the
more  excellent  is  naturally  first ; but  that  from  which  a certain
thing  is  produced  must  be  reputed  first  in  respect  of  time.  Or
we  may  say : this  egg  is  older  than  that  fowl  (the  fowl  having
been  produced  from  it) ; and,  on  the  contrary,  this  fowl  existed
before  that  egg  (which  she  has  laid).  And  this  is  the  round
that  makes  the  race  of  the  common  fowl  eternal;  now  pullet,
now  egg,  the  series  is  continued  in  perpetuity ; from  frail  and
perishing  individuals  an  immortal  species  is  engendered.  By
these,  and  means  like  to  these,  do  we  see  many  inferior  or  ter-
restrial things  brought  to  emulate  the  perpetuity  of  superior  or
celestial  things.

And  whether  we  say,  or  do  not  say,  that  the  vital  principle
(anima)  inheres  in  the  egg,  it  still  plainly  appears,  from  the
circuit  indicated,  that  there  must  be  some  principle  influencing
this  revolution  from  the  fowl  to  the  egg  and  from  the  egg  back
to  the  fowl,  which  gives  them  perpetuity.  Now  this,  according
to  Aristotle’s  Aews,^  is  analogous  to  the  element  of  the  stars ;
and  is  that  which  makes  parents  engender,  and  gives  fertility  to
their  ova ; and  the  same  principle,  Proteus  like,  is  present
under  a different  form,  in  the  parents  as  in  the  eggs.  For,  as
the  same  intelligence  or  spirit  which  incessantly  actuates  the
mighty  mass  of  the  universe,  and  compels  the  same  sun  from


' De  Gener.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  3.


286


ON  GENERATION.


tlie  rising  to  tlie  setting,  in  liis  passage  over  the  various  regions
of  the  earth,  so  also  is  there  a aus  enthea,  a dhane  principle  in-
herent in  our  common  poultry,  showing  itself  now  as  the  plastic,
now  as  the  nutritive,  and  now  as  the  augmentative  force,  though
it  is  always  and  at  all  times  present  as  the  conseiwative  and
vegetative  force,  and  now  assumes  the  form  of  the  fowl,  now  that
of  the  egg;  but  the  same  vu’tue  continues  to  inhere  in  either  to
eternity.  And  although  some  animals  arise  spontaneously,  or
as  is  commonly  said  from  putrefaction,  and  some  are  produced
from  the  female  alone,  for  Pliny^  says : “ in  some  genera,  as  in
certain  fishes,  there  are  no  males,  every  one  taken  being  found
full  of  roe still  whatever  is  produced  from  a perfect  egg  is  so
in  virtue  of  the  indispensable  concurrence  of  male  and  female.
Aristotle^  consequently  says:  “ the  grand  principles  of  generation
mrxst  be  held  to  he  the  male  and  the  female  the  first  two  prin-
ciples of  the  egg  are  therefore  the  male  and  the  female  ; and  the
common  point  or  conception  of  these  is  the  egg,  which  combines
the  virtues  of  both  parents.  We  cannot,  in  fact,  conceive  an  egg
without  the  concru’rence  of  a male  and  female  fowl,  any  more
than  we  can  conceive  fruit  to  he  produced  ■without  a tree.  We
therefore  see  individuals,  males  as  well  as  females,  existing  for
the  sake  of  preparing  eggs,  that  the  species  may  be  perennial,
though  their  authors  pass  away.  And  it  is  indeed  obvious,  that
the  parents  are  no  longer  youthful,  or  beautiful,  or  lusty,  and
fitted  to  enjoy  life,  than  whilst  they  possess  the  power  of  pro-
ducing and  fecundating  eggs,  and,  by  the  medium  of  these,  of
engendering  their  hke.  But  when  they  have  accomplished  this
grand  purpose  of  nature,  they  have  ah’eady  attained  to  the
height,  the  oKytJ?  of  their  being, — ^the  final  end  of  their  existence
has  been  accomplished ; after  this,  effete  and  useless,  they  begin
to  wither,  and,  as  if  cast  off  and  forsaken  of  nature  and  the
Deity,  they  grow  old,  and,  a-weary  of  their  hves,  they  hasten
to  their  end.  How  different  the  males  when  they  make  them-
selves up  for  intercoiu'se,  and  swelling  -with  desii’e  are  excited  by
the  venereal  imprdse ! It  is  surprising  to  see  with  what  passion
they  are  inflamed;  and  then  how  trimly  they  are  feathered,  how
vainglorious  they  show  themselves,  how  proud  of  their  streugtli,
and  how  pugnacious  they  prove  ! But,  the  grand  business  of  life
accomphshed,  how  suddenly,  with  failing  strength  and  pristine
‘ Hist.  Natur.  lib.  ix,  cap.  16.  - De  Gen.  Aniiu.  lib.  i,  cap.  2.


ON  GENERATION.


287


fervour  quenched^  do  they  take  in  their  swelling  sailsj  and^  from
late  pugnacity,  grow  timid  and  desponding  ! Even  during  the
season  of  jocund  masking  in  Venus’s  domains,  male  animals  in
general  are  depressed  by  intercourse,  and  become  submissive  and
pusillanimous,  as  if  reminded  that  in  imparting  life  to  others,
they  were  contributing  to  their  own  destruction.  The  cock  alone,
replete  with  spirit  and  fecundity,  still  shows  himself  alert  and
gay;  clapping  his  wings,  and  crowing  triumphantly,  he  sings  the
nuptial  song  at  each  of  his  new  espousals  ! yet  even  he,  after
some  length  of  time  in  Venus’s  service,  begins  to  fail ; like  the
veteran  soldier,  he  by  and  by  craves  discharge  from  active  duty.
And  the  hen,  too,  like  the  tree  that  is  past  bearing,  becomes
effete,  and  is  finally  exhausted.


EXERCISE  THE  TWENTY-NINTH.

Of  the  manner,  according  to  Aristotle,  in  which  a 'perfect  and
fruitful  egg  is  produced  hy  the  male  and  female  fowl.

Shortly  before  we  said  that  a fruitful  egg  is  not  engendered
spontaneously,  that  it  is  not  produced  save  by  a hen,  and  by
her  only  through  the  concm’rence  of  the  cock.  This  agrees
with  the  matter  of  the  following  sentence  of  Aristotle  “ The
principles  of  generation  have  particular  reference  to  male
and  female ; the  male  as  supplying  the  original  of  motion  and
reproduction ; the  female  as  furnishing  the  matter.”

In  om’  view,  however,  an  egg  is  a true  generative  seed,  ana-
logous to  the  seed  of  a plant ; the  original  conception  arising
between  the  two  parents,  and  being  the  mixed  fruit  or  product
of  both.  Eor  as  the  egg  is  not  formed  without  the  hen,  so  is  it
not  made  fruitful  without  the  concurrence  of  the  cock.

We  have  therefore  to  inquire  how  the  egg  is  produced  by  the
hen  and  is  fertilized  by  the  cock ; for  we  have  seen  that  hypenemic
eggs,  and  these  animated  too,  are  engendered  by  the  hen,  but
that  they  are  not  prolific  without  the  intercourse  of  the  cock.
The  male  and  the  female  consequently,  both  set  their  mark


De  Gen.  Aiiim.  lib.  i,  cap.  2.


288


ON  GENERATION.


upon  a fruitful  egg ; but  not^  I believe,  in  tbe  vay  in  whicb
Aristotle  imagines,  viz. ; that  tbe  male  concurs  in  tbe  motion  and
commencement  of  generation  only,  tbe  female  supplying  nothing
but  tbe  matter,  because  tbe  contrary  of  tbis  is  obvious  in  b^s-pe-
nemic  eggs.  And  altbougb  it  be  true  as  be  says : “ Tbat  male  and
female  differ  in  respect  of  reason,  because  tbe  faculty  of  eacb  is
different,  and,  in  respect  of  sense,  because  certain  parts  differ
likewise.  Tbe  difference  according  to  reason  boasts  tbis  dis-
tinction, tbat  tbe  male  bas  tbe  power  of  engendering  in
another;  tbe  female  bas  only  the  power  of  engendering  in  her-
self ; whereby  it  comes  that  tbat  which  is  engendered  is  pro-
duced, tbis  being  contained  in  tbat  which  engenders.  But  as
males  and  females  are  distinguished  by  certain  faculties  and
functions,  and  as  an  instrument  is  indispensable  to  every  office,
and  tbe  parts  of  the  body  are  adapted  as  instruments  of  tbe
functions,  it  was  necessary  tbat  ceiffain  parts  should  be  set  aside
for  purposes  of  procreation  and  coition,  and  these  differing  from
one  another,  whereby  tbe  male  differs  from  tbe  female.^’

It  does  not,  however,  follow  from  thence,  tbat  what  be  ap-
pears inclmed  to  infer  is  correct,  where  be  says ; “ Tbe  male  is
tbe  efficient  agent,  and  by  the  motion  of  bis  generative  r-irtue
(genitura),  creates  what  is  intended  from  tbe  matter  contained
in  the  female ; for  tbe  female  always  supplies  tbe  matter,  tbe
male  tbe  power  of  creation,  and  this  it  is  which  constitutes  one
male,  another  female.  Tbe  body  and  tbe  bulk,  therefore,  are
necessarily  supplied  by  tbe  female ; nothing  of  the  kind  is  re-
quired from  tbe  male;  for  it  is  not  even  requisite  tbat  tbe  instru-
ment, nor  tbe  efficient  agent  itself,  be  present  in  tbe  thing
tbat  is  produced.  Tbe  body,  then,  proceeds  from  tbe  female,
tbe  vital  principle  (anima)  fr’om  tbe  male ; for  tbe  essence  of
every  body  is  its  vital  priucqffe  (anima).”  But  an  egg,  and
tbat  animated,  is  engendered  by  the  pullet  without  tbe  concur-
rence of  tbe  male ; whence  it  appeal’s  tbat  tbe  ben  too,  or  tbe
female,  may  be  tbe  efficient  agent,  and  tbat  all  creative  force  or
rttal  power  (anima)  is  not  derived  exclusively  fr’om  tbe  male.
Tins  Anew  indeed  appears  to  be  supported  by  the  instance
quoted  by  Aristotle  himself,  for  be  says  “ Those  animals  not
of  tbe  same  species,  which  copulate,  (which  those  animals  do


Op.  cit.  lib.  ii,  cap.  4.


ON  GENERATION.


289


that  correspond  in  their  seasons  of  heat  and  times  of  uterogesta-
tion^  and  do  not  differ  greatly  in  their  size^)  produce  their  first
young  like  themselves,  hut  partaking  of  the  speciesof  both  parents;
of  this  description  is  the  progeny  of  the  fox  and  dog,  of  the  par-
tridge and  common  fowl,  &c.;  but  in  the  course  of  time  from
diversity  results  diversity,  and  the  progeny  of  these  different
parents  at  length  acquires  the  form  of  the  female ; in  the  same
way  as  foreign  seed  is  changed  at  last  in  conformity  with  the
nature  of  the  soil,  which  supplies  matter  and  body  to  the  seed.”

From  this  it  appears,  that  in  the  generation  of  the  partridge
with  the  common  fowl  it  is  not  the  male  alone  that  is  efficient,
but  the  female  also ; inasmuch  as  it  is  not  the  male  form  only,
but  one  common  or  subordinate  that  appears  in  the  hybrid,  as
like  the  female  as  it  is  like  the  male  in  vital  endowment  (anima),
and  bodily  form.  But  the  vital  endowment  (anima)  is  that
which  is  the  true  form  and  species  of  an  animal.

Farther,  the  female  seems  even  to  have  a superior  claim  to
be  considered  the  efficient  cause:  “In  the  com’se  of  time,”  says  the
philosopher,  “ the  progeny  of  different  species  assumes  the  form
of  the  female  ;”  as  if  the  semen  or  influence  of  the  male  were
the  less  powerful;  as  if  the  species  impressed  by  him  disappeared
with  the  lapse  of  time,  and  were  expelled  by  a more  powerful
efficient  cause.  And  the  instance  from  the  soil  confirms  this
still  farther  : “ for  foreign  seeds  are  changed  at  length  according
to  the  nature  of  the  soil.”  Whence  it  seems  probable  that  the
female  is  actually  of  more  moment  in  generation  than  the  male;
for,  “in  the  world  at  large  it  is  admitted  that  the  earth  is  to
nature  as  the  female  or  mother,  whilst  climate,  the  sun,  and
other  things  of  the  same  description,  are  spoken  of  by  the  names
of  generator  and  father.”^  The  earth,  too,  spontaneously  en-
genders many  things  without  seed  ; and  among  animals,  certain
females,  but  females  only,  procreate  of  themselves  and  without
the  concurrence  of  the  male : hens,  for  example,  lay  hypenemic
eggs ; but  males,  without  the  intervention  of  females,  engender
nothing.

By  the  same  arguments,  indeed,  by  which  the  male  is  main-
tained to  be  the  principle  and  prime  ‘ efficient  ’ in  generation,  it
would  seem  that  the  female  might  be  confirmed  in  the  preroga-


Op.  cit.  lib.  i,  cap.  2.


19


290


ON  GENERATION.


live  of  h’spjtla  or  efficiency.  E'er  is  not  that  to  be  accounted
efficient  in  which  the  reason  of  the  embiyo  and  the  fonn  of  the
work  appear ; rvhose  oh\dous  resemblance  is  perceived  in  the  em-
bryOj  and  which,  as  first  existing,  calls  forth  the  other  ? Since,
therefore,  the  form,  cause,  and  similitude  inhere  in  the  female
not  less — and  it  might  even  be  said  that  they  inhere  more —
than  in  the  male,  and  as  she  also  exists  preAnously  as  prime
mover,  let  us  conclude  for  certain  that  the  female  is  equally
efficient  in  the  work  of  generation  as  the  male.

And  although  Aristotlei  says  well  and  truly,  “^^that  the  concep-
tion or  egg  receives  no  part  of  its  body  from  the  male,  but  only
its  form,  species,  and  vital  endowment  (anima),  and  from  the
female  its  body  solely,  and  its  dimensions,”  it  is  not  yet  made
sufficiently  to  appear  that  the  female,  besides  the  matter,  does
not  in  some  measure  contribute  form,  species,  and  vital  endow-
ment (anima).  This  indeed  is  obvdous  in  the  hen  which  en-
genders eggs  without  the  concurrence  of  a male ; in  the  same
way  as  trees  and  herbs,  in  wliich  there  is  no  distinction  of  sexes,
produce  their  seeds.  For  Aristotle  himself  admits,^  that  even
the  hypenemic  egg  is  endowed  with  a vital  principle  (anima).
The  female  must  therefore  be  esteemed  the  efficient  cause  of  the
egg-

Admitting  that  the  hvyenemic  egg  is  possessed  of  a certain
vital  principle,  still  it  is  not  prolific ; so  that  it  must  further
be  confessed  that  the  hen  of  herself  is  not  the  efficient  cause  of
a perfect  egg,  but  that  she  is  made  so  in  vdi’tue  of  an  authority,
if  I may  use  the  word,  or  power  required  of  the  cock.  For  the
egg,  unless  prolific,  can  with  no  kind  of  propriety  be  accounted
perfect ; it  only  obtains  perfection  from  the  male,  or  rather
from  the  female,  as  it  were  upon  precept  from  the  male ; as  if
the  hen  received  the  art  and  reason,  the  form  and  laws  of  the
future  embryo  from  his  address.  And  so  in  like  manner  the
female  fowl,  hke  to  a fruitful  tree,  is  made  fertile  by  coition ; by
this  is  she  empowered  not  only  to  lay  eggs,  but  these  perfect  and
prolific  eggs.  For  although  the  hen  have  as  yet  no  rudiments  of
eggs  prepared  in  her  ovary,  nevertheless,  made  fertile  by  the
intercourse  of  the  male,  she  by  and  by  not  only  produces  them
there,  but  lays  them,  teeming  with  life,  and  apt  to  produce


Op.  cit.  lib.  ii,  cap.  -1.


= Ibid.


ON  GENERATION.


291


embryos.  And  here  that  practice  of  the  poor  folks  finds  its
application  : “ Having  hens  at  home,  but  no  cock,  they  commit
their  females  to  a neighbour’s  male  for  a day  or  two ; and  from
this  short  sojourn  the  fecundity  of  the  whole  of  the  eggs  that
will  be  laid  during  the  current  season  is  secured.”^  Not  only
are  those  eggs  which  are  still  nothing  more  than  yelk  and  have
no  albumen,  or  which  exist  only  as  most  minute  specks  in  the
ovary,  but  eggs  not  yet  extant,  that  will  be  conceived  long  after-
wards, rendered  fertile  by  the  same  property.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTIETH.

Of  the  uses  of  this  disquisition  on  fecundity.

This  disquisition  on  the  inherent  qualities  of  the  egg  and  the
cause  of  its  fecundity,  is  ahke  in  point  of  difficulty  and  subtlety,
but  of  the  highest  importance.  For  it  was  imperative  on  us  to
inquire  what  there  was  in  the  conception,  what  in  the  semen
masculinum,  and  what  in  the  female  fowl,  which  render  these
fertile  3 and  what  there  is  in  the  fruitful  cock  which  makes  him
diflFer  from  a bird  that  is  barren.  Is  the  cause  identical  with  that
which  we  have  called  the  vital  principle  (anima)  in  the  embryo,  or
it  is  a certain  portion  of  the  vegetative  principle  ? Because,
in  order  to  apprehend  the  entire  cause  of  generation,  it  is  of
much  moment  that  the  first  cause  be  understood ; for  science  is
based  upon  causes,  especially  first  causes,  known.  Nor  is  this
inquiry  less  important  in  enabling  us  to  understand  the  nature
of  the  vital  principle  (anima) . These  questions,  indeed,  rightly
apprehended,  not  only  are  Aristotle’s  opinions  of  the  causes  of
generation  refuted  or  corrected,  but  all  that  has  been  written
against  him  is  easily  understood.

We  ask,  therefore,  whether  it  is  the  same  thing  or  something
different,  which  in  the  rudimentary  ovum,  yelk,  egg,  cock  and
hen,  or  her  uterus,  confers  fruitfulness  ? In  like  manner  in  what
respect  does  this  something  agree  or  differ  in  each  ? Still  far-
ther, is  it  a substance  whence  the  fecundating  virtue  flows  ? —


Fabricius,  op.  cit.  p.  37.


292


ON  GENERATION.


it  appears  susceptible  of  powers^  faculties,  and  accidents.
Likewise,  is  it  corporeal  also  ? for  that  whicb  engenders  mix-
ture appears  to  be  mixed  : — tbe  progen bas  a common  re-
semblance to  the  mother  and  father,  and  exhibits  a doubtful
nature  when  animals  of  dissimilar  species,  such  as  the  pheasant
and  common  fowl,  engender  ; that,  too,  appears  to  be  corporeal
which  sutlers  from  without,  and  to  such  an  extent  that  not  only
are  weakly  embryos  procreated,  but  even  deformed  and  diseased
ones,  obnoxious  to  the  vices  as  w'ell  as  to  the  \irtues  of  their
progenitors.

With  respect  to  these  several  particulars  we  may  farther  be
permitted  to  doubt  whether  that  which  confers  fecundity  is  en-
gendered or  accrues  from  without?  Whether,  to  wit,  it  is
transfused  from  the  egg  to  the  embiyo  and  chick,  from  the  hen
to  the  egg,  from  the  cock  to  the  hen?  For  there  appears  to  be
something  that  is  transferred  or  transfused,  something,  namely,
which  from  the  cock  is  transfused  into  the  hen,  and  from  her  is
given  to  the  uterus,  to  the  ovaiy,  to  the  egg ; something  Avhich
passing  from  the  seed  to  the  plant,  is  rendered  again  by  the  plant
to  the  seed,  and  imparts  fecundity.  Because  there  is  this  common
to  all  things  which  are  perpetuated  by  generation,  that  they  derive
theii’  origin  from  seed.  But  the  semen,  the  conception,  and  the
egg,  are  all  of  the  same  essential  kind,  and  that  which  confers
fertility  on  these  is  one  and  the  same,  or  of  like  nature ; and  this
indeed  is  di\ine,  the  analogue  of  heaven,  possessed  of  art,  intel-
ligence, foresight.  This  is  plainly  to  be  seen  from  its  admha-
ble  operations,  artifices,  and  wisdom,  where  nothing  is  vain,  or
inconsiderate,  or  accidental,  but  all  conduces  to  some  good  end.

Of  the  general  principles  and  science  of  tliis  subject  we  shall
treat  more  at  length  in  the  proper  place ; we  have  now  said  as
much  incidentally  as  seems  necessary,  the  occasion  having  pre-
sented itself  along  with  om-  consideration  of  the  hen’s  egg,
namely,  how  many  things  inhere  -which  induce  fertihty,  and  how
this  is  induced,  and  whether  it  is  an  affection,  a habit,  a power,
or  a faculty;  whether  it  is  to  be  regai’ded  as  a form  and  sub-
stance, as  a something  contained  generally,  or  only  in  some
particular  part — since  it  is  quite  certain  that  a hypeuemic  egg
is  a perfect  egg  in  so  far  as  each  sensible  particular  is  concerned,
and  yet  is  barren ; the  uterus  in  like  manner,  and  the  hen  and
the  cock  are  all  perfect ; yet  ai’e  they  severally  sterile,  as  being


ON  GENERATION.


293


without  that  which  confers  fecundity.  All  of  these  matters  we
shall  advert  to  after  we  have  shown  what  and  how  two  principles,
male  and  female,  concur  in  the  production  of  the  egg  and  the
process  of  generation,  and  in  what  way  both  may  be  regarded
as  efficient  causes  and  parents  of  the  egg.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTY-FIRST.

The  egg  is  not  produced  by  the  cock  and  hen  in  the  way
Aristotle  would  have  it.

It  is  certain,  as  we  have  said,  that  a fruitful  egg  is  not  pro-
duced ivithout  the  concurrence  of  the  cock  and  hen ; but  this
is  not  done  in  the  way  that  Aristotle  thought,  viz.  by  the
cock  as  prime  and  sole  ‘ agent,’  the  hen  only  furnishing  the
‘ matter.’  Neither  do  I agree  with  him  when  he  says  d “ When
the  semen  masculinum  enters  the  female  uterus,  it  coagulates
the  purest  portion  of  the  catamenia and  shortly  afterwards  :
“ but  when  the  catamenia  of  the  female  has  set  in  the  uterus,
it  forms,  with  the  semen  masculinum,  a coagulum  like  that  of
milk ; for  curd  is  milk  containing  vital  heat,  which  attracts  like
particles  around  it,  and  combines  and  coagulates  them  ; and  the
semen  of  the  male  (genitura)  bears  the  same  affinity  to  the
nature  of  the  catamenia.  For  milk  and  the  menstrual  dis-
charge are  of  the  same  nature.  NVHien  coagulation  has  taken
place,  then  an  earthy  humour  is  excreted  and  is  drawn  around,
and  the  earthy  portion  drying  up,  the  membranes  are  produced
both  as  matter  of  necessity,  and  also  for  a certain  purpose.
And  these  things  take  place  in  the  same  manner  in  all  creatures,
both  oviparous  and  viviparous.”

But  the  business  in  the  generation  of  an  egg  is  very  different
from  this;  for  neither  does  the  semen,  or  rather  the  ‘ geniture,’
proceeding  from  the  male  in  the  act  of  intercourse,  enter  the
uterns  in  any  way,  nor  has  the  hen,  after  she  conceives,  any
particle  of  excrementitious  matter,  even  of  the  purest  kind,  or
any  blood  in  her  uterus  which  might  be  fashioned  or  perfected
by  the  discharge  of  the  male.  Neither  are  the  parts  of  the  egg.


‘ De  Geii.  Anini.  lib.  ii,  cap.  4.


294


ON  GENERATION.


the  membranes,  to  wit,  and  the  fluids,  produced  by  any  kind  of
coagulation ; neither  is  there  any  thing  like  curdled  milk:  to  be
discovered  in  the  uterus,  as  must  be  obvious  from  the  foregoing
exercises.  It  follows,  therefore,  and  from  thence,  that  neither
does  the  conception,  whence  the  animal  springs,  as  the  herb  arises
from  a fruitful  seed,  comport  itself  in  the  manner  Aristotle
imagined,  since  this  takes  place  in  viviparous  animals  in  the
same  way  as  the  egg  is  formed  in  oviparous  animals,  as  he  him-
self avows,  and  as  shall  be  demonstrated  by  and  by  in  our  ob-
servations. Because  it  is  certain  that  eggs  of  every  descrip-
tion-— prolific  and  barren — are  engendered  and  formed  by  the
hen  singly,  but  that  fecundity  accrues  from  the  male  alone; —
the  cock,  I say,  contributes  neither  form  nor  matter  to  the  egg,
but  that  only  by  which  it  becomes  fertile  and  fit  to  engender  a
chick.  And  this  faculty  the  cock  confers  by  his  semen  (geni-
tura),  emitted  in  the  act  of  intercourse,  not  only  on  the  egg
that  is  already  begun,  or  is  already  formed,  but  on  the  uterus
and  ovary,  and  even  on  the  body  of  the  fowl  herself,  in  such
wise  that  eggs  which  have  yet  to  be  produced,  eggs,  none  of  the
matter  of  which  yet  exists  either  in  the  ovary  or  in  any  other
part  of  the  body,  are  thence  produced  possessed  of  fecundity.


EXEKCISE  THE  THIRTY-SECOND.

Nor  in  the  manner  imagined  by  physicians.

Conception,  according  to  the  opinion  of  medical  men,  takes
place  in  the  following  way : dmiug  intercourse  the  male  and
female  dissolve  in  one  voluptuous  sensation,  and  eject  their
seminal  fluids  (genitui’se)  into  the  carfity  of  the  uterus,  where
that  which  each  contributes  is  mingled  with  that  which  the
other  supphes,  the  mixtine  hardug  from  both  equally  the  faculty
of  action  and  the  force  of  matter;  and  according  to  the  predomi-
nance of  this  or  of  that  geniture  does  the  progeny  tinn  out  male
or  female.  It  is  farther  imagined  that  immediately  after  the
intercoru’se,  the  active  and  passive  principles  cooperating,  some-
thing of  the  conception  is  formed  in  the  uterus.  For  contrary
to  the  Aristotelians,  tliey  maintain  that  the  male  is  no  more  the


ON  GENERATION.


295


efficient  cause  of  generation  than  the  female^  but  some  mixture
of  the  two;  and  that  neither  the  menstrual  blood  nor  its  purest
part  is  the  prime  matter  of  the  conception^  but  the  spermatic
fluid;  whence  the  first  particles  or  their  rudiments  are  spoken
of  as  spermatic^  these  at  an  after  period  being  nourished  and
made  to  increase  through  the  blood.

But  it  is  obvious  that  neither  is  the  egg  engendered  by  the
cock  and  hen  in  this  way;  for  the  hen  in  the  act  of  intercourse
emits  no  semen  from  which  an  egg  might  be  formed ; nor  can
aught  like  a seminal  fluid  of  the  hen  be  demonstrated  at  any
time ; and  indeed  the  animal  is  destitute  of  the  organs  essential
to  its  preparation^  the  testes  and  vasa  spermatica.  And  though
the  hen  have  an  effective  force  in  common  with  the  cock  (as
must  be  manifest  from  what  precedes),  and  it  is  a mixture  of
some  sort  that  renders  an  egg  fruitful,  still  this  does  not  happen
according  to  the  predominance  of  the  genitures,  or  the  manner
of  their  mixture,  for  it  is  certain,  and  Fabricius  admits  it,  that
the  semen  of  the  cock  does  not  reach  the  cavity  of  the  uterus ;
neither  is  there  any  trace  of  the  egg  to  be  discovered  in  the
uterus  immediately  after  intercourse,  and  as  its  consequence,
although  Aristotle  himself  repeatedly  avers  that  there  is,  as-
serting that  “ something  of  the  conception  forthwith  ensues.”
But  I shall  by  and  by  demonstrate  that  neither  does  any  such
imaginary  mixture  of  seminal  fluids  take  place  in  any  animal,
nor  that  immediately  upon  intercourse,  even  of  a fruitful  kind,
is  there  anything  in  the  shape  of  semen  or  blood,  or  of  the
rudiments  of  an  embryo  present  or  demonstrable  in  the  cavity
of  the  uterus.  Nothing  is  found  in  the  egg  or  embryo  which
leads  us  to  suppose  that  the  semen  mascuhuum  is  either  there
contained  or  mingled.  The  vulgar  notion  of  the  chalazse  being
the  tread  of  the  cock  is  a sheer  mistake ; and  I am  surprised,
since  there  are  two  of  them,  one  in  either  end  of  the  egg,  that
no  one  has  yet  been  found  to  maintain  that  this  was  the  cock’s
seed,  that  the  hen’s.  But  this  popular  error  is  at  once  answered
by  the  fact  that  the  chalazse  are  present  with  the  same  characters
in  every  egg,  whether  it  be  fertile  or  barren.


296


ON  GENERATION.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTY-THIRD.

The  male  and  the  female  are  alike  efficient  in  the  business  of
generation.

The  medical  writers  with  propriety  maintain,  in  opposition
to  the  Aristotelians,  that  both  sexes  have  the  power  of  acting
as  efficient  causes  in  the  business  of  generation ; inasmuch  as
the  being  engendered  is  a mixture  of  the  two  which  engender:
both  form  and  likeness  of  body,  and  species  ai-e  mixed,  as  we
see  in  the  hybrid  between  the  partridge  and  common  fowl.
And  it  does  indeed  seem  consonant  with  reason  to  hold  that
they  are  the  efficient  causes  of  conception  whose  mixture  appears
in  the  thing  produced.

Aristotle  entertaining  this  opinion  says  “ In  some  animals  it
is  manifest  that  such  as  the  generator  is,  such  is  the  engendered;
not,  however,  the  same  and  identical,  not  one  numerically,  but
one  specifically,  as  in  natural  things.  A man  engenders  a man,  if
there  be  nothing  preternatural  in  the  way,  as  a horse  [upon  an
ass]  engenders  a mule,  and  other  similar  instances.  For  the  mule
is  common  to  the  horse  and  the  ass ; it  is  not  spoken  of  as  an
allied  kind ; yet  may  horse  and  ass  both  be  there  conjoined  in
a hybrid  state.’’  He  says  farther  in  the  same  place : “ It  is
enough  that  the  generator  generate,  and  prove  the  cause  that
the  species  be  found  in  the  matter:  for  such  and  such  an  entire
species  is  still  found  associated  with  such  and  such  flesh  and
bones — here  it  is  GaUias,  there  it  is  Socrates.”

Wherefore  if  such  an  entire  form,  as  a mule,  be  a mixtxue
of  two,  viz. : a horse  and  an  ass,  the  horse  does  not  sufiice  to
produce  this  form  of  a mule  in  the  matter;’  but,  as  the  entire
form  is  mixed,  so  another  efficient  cause  is  contributed  by  the
ass  and  added  to  that  supphed  by  the  horse.  That,  therefore,
which  produces  a mule  compounded  of  two,  must  itself  be  an
adequate  efficient,’  and  mixed,  if  only  riinivocal.’  For  ex-
ample, this  woman  and  that  man  engender  this  Socrates ; not
in  so  far  as  they  ai’e  both  human  beings,  and  of  one  and  the  same


Metaphys.  lit.  vii,  cap.  8.


ON  GENERATION.


297


species,  but  in  so  far  as  this  man  and  that  woman  in  these  bones
and  muscles  constitute  human  forms,  of  both  of  which,  if  So-
crates he  a certain  mixture,  a compound  of  both,  that  by  which
he  is  made  must  needs  be  a mixed  univocal  compound  of  the
two ; i.  e.  a mixed  efficient  of  a mixed  effect.  And  therefore  it
is  that  the  male  and  female  by  themselves,  and  separately,  are
not  genetic,  but  become  so  united  in  coitu,  and  made  one  animal
as  it  were ; whence,  from  the  two  as  one,  is  produced  and  educed
that  which  is  the  true  efficient  proximate  cause  of  conception.

The  medical  writers  also,  in  directing  their  attention  to  the
particulars  of  human  generation  alone,  come  to  conclusions  on
generation  at  large ; and  the  spermatic  fluid  proceeding  from
the  parents  in  coitu  has  in  all  probability  been  taken  by  them
for  true  seed,  analogous  to  the  seeds  of  plants.  It  is  not  without
reason,  therefore,  that  they  imagine  the  mixed  efficient  cause  of
the  future  offspring  to  be  constituted  by  a mixture  of  the
seminal  matters  of  each  parent.  And  then  they  go  on  to  assert
that  the  mixture  proceeding  immediately  from  intercourse  is  de-
posited in  the  uterus  and  forms  the  rudiments  of  the  conception.
That  things  are  very  different,  however,  is  made  manifest  by
our  preceding  history  of  the  egg,  which  is  a true  conception.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTY-FOURTH.

Of  the  matter  of  the  egg,  in  opposition  to  the  Aristotelians  and
the  medical  writers.

The  position  taken  up  by  the  medical  writers  against  the
Aristotelians,  viz.,  that  the  blood  is  not  tbe  first  element  in  a con-
ception, is  clearly  shown  from  the  generation  of  the  egg  to  be
well  chosen  ; neither  during  intercourse,  nor  before  nor  after  it,
is  there  a drop  of  blood  contained  in  the  uterus  of  the  fowl;  nei-
ther are  the  rudiments  of  eggs  red,  but  white.  Many  animals
also  conceive  in  whose  uteri,  if  they  be  suddenly  laid  open  after
intercourse,  no  blood  can  be  demonstrated.

But  when  they  contend  that  the  maternal  blood  is  the  food
of  the  fcetus  in  utero,  especially  of  its  more  sangnineous  parts.


298


ON  GENERATION.


as  they  style  them,  and  that  the  foetus  from  the  outset  is  as  it
were  a portion  of  the  mother,  being  nourished  and  growing
through  her  blood,  and  vegetating  through  her  spirit;  so  that
neither  does  the  heart  pulsate,  nor  the  liver  compose  blood,  nor
any  part  of  the  foetus  perform  any  kind  of  independent  office,
hut  everything  is  carried  on  through  the  mother’s  means,  they  in
their  turn  are  as  certainly  mistaken,  and  argue  from  erroneous
observations.  For  the  embryo  in  the  egg  boasts  of  its  own
blood,  formed  from  the  fluids  contained  within  the  egg ; and  its
heart  is  seen  to  pulsate  from  the  very  beginning  : it  borrows  no-
thing in  the  shape  either  of  blood  or  spirits  from  the  hen,  for
the  purpose  of  forming  its  so  called  sanguineous  parts  and  its
feathers ; as  most  clearly  appears  to  any  one  who  looks  on  with
an  unbiassed  mind.  From  observations  afterwards  to  be  com-
municated, I believe  indeed  that  it  will  be  held  as  sufficiently
proven  that  even  the  foetus  of  viviparous  animals  still  contained
in  the  uterus  is  not  nourished  by  the  blood  of  the  mother  and
does  not  vegetate  through  her  spirit;  hut  boasts  of  its  own  pecu-
liar vital  principle  and  powers,  and  its  own  blood,  like  the  chick
in  ovo.

With  reference  to  the  matter  which  the  embryo  obtains  from
its  male  and  female  parent,  however,  and  the  way  and  manner
of  generation  as  commonly  discoivrsed  of  in  the  schools,  viz. : that
conception  is  produced  or  becomes  prolific  from  mixture  of  the
genitures  and  their  mutual  action  and  passion,  as  also  of  the
seminal  fluid  of  the  female,  and  the  parts  wliich  are  spoken  of
as  sanguineous  and  spermatic,  numerous  and  striking  observa-
tions afterwards  to  he  related  have  compelled  me  to  adopt
opinions  at  variance  with  all  such  views.  At  this  time  I shall  only
say  that  I am  greatly  siuprised  how  physicians,  particulaidy  those
among  them  who  are  conversant  with  anatomy,  should  pretend
to  support  their  opinions  by  means  of  two  arguments  especially,
which  rightly  understood,  seem  rather  to  prove  the  opposite ;
viz.,  from  the  shock  and  resolution  of  the  forces  and  the  effusion
of  fluid  which  women  at  the  moment  of  the  sexual  orgasm
frequently  experience,  they  argue  that  all  women  pour  out  a
seminal  flmd,  and  that  this  is  necessary  to  generation.

But  passing  over  the  fact  that  the  females  of  all  the  lower
animals,  and  all  women,  do  not  experience  any  such  emission
of  fluid,  and  that  conception  is  nowise  impossible  in  cases  where


ON  GENERATION.


299


it  does  not  take  place,  for  I have  known  several,  who  without
anything  of  the  kind  were  sufficiently  prolific,  and  even  some
who  after  experiencing  such  an  emission  and  having  had  great
enjoyment,  nevertheless  appeared  to  have  lost  somewhat  of  their
wonted  fecundity ; and  then  an  infinite  number  of  instances
might  be  quoted  of  women  who,  although  they  have  great  satis-
faction in  intercourse,  still  emit  nothing,  and  yet  conceive ;
passing  over  these  facts,  I say,  I cannot  but  express  surprise  at
those  especially,  who,  conceiving  such  an  emission  on  the  part
of  the  female  necessary  to  conception,  have  not  adverted  to  the
fact  that  the  fluid  emitted  is  discharged,  cast  out,  and  is  parti-
cularly abundant  about  the  clitoris  and  orifice  of  the  vulva;
that  it  is  seldom  poured  out  within  the  vulva,  never  within
the  uterus,  and  so  as  to  he  mingled  with  the  semen  of  the
male ; moreover,  it  is  of  a mere  serous  or  ichorous  consistency,
like  urine,  by  no  means  thick  and  apparently  unctuous,  like
the  spermatic  matter  of  the  male.  But  how  shall  we  suppose
that  to  be  of  use  internally  which  is  discharged  externally  ? Or
shall  we  say  that  this  humour,  as  if  bidding  the  uterus  farewell,
is  taken  to  the  verge  of  the  vulva,  that  it  may  be  then  recalled
with  greater  favour  by  the  uterus  ?

The  other  argument  is  drawn  from  the  genital  organs  of
women,  the  testes,  to  wit,  and  vasa  spermatica,  prseparantia  et
deferentia,  which  are  held  to  serve  for  the  preparation  of  the
spermatic  fluid.  I,  for  my  part,  greatly  wonder  how  any  one
can  believe  that  from  parts  so  imperfect  and  obscure,  a fluid
like  the  semen,  so  elaborate,  concoct  and  vivifying,  can  ever  be
produced,  endowed  with  force  and  spirit  and  generative  influ-
ence adequate  to  overcome  that  of  the  male;  for  this  is  implied
in  the  discussion  concerning  the  predominance  of  the  male  or
the  female,  as  to  which  of  them  is  to  become  the  agent  and  effi-
cient cause,  which  the  matter  and  pathic  principle.  How  should
such  a fluid  get  the  better  of  another  concocted  under  the  in-
fluence of  a heat  so  fostering,  of  vessels  so  elaborate,  and  en-
dowed with  such  vital  energy? — how  should  such  a fluid  as  the
male  semen  be  made  to  play  the  part  of  mere  matter  ? — But  of
these  things  more  hereafter.

Meantime  it  is  certain  that  the  egg  of  the  hen  is  not  en-
gendered from  any  such  discharge  of  fluid  during  sexual  inter-
course, although  after  connexion,  and  brimful  of  satisfaction.


300


ON  GENERATION.


slie  shakes  herself  for  joy,  and,  as  if  already  possessed  of  the
richest  treasure,  as  if  gifted  by  supreme  Jove  the  preserver  u-ith
the  blessing  of  fecundity,  she  sets  to  work  to  prune  and  orna-
ment herself.  The  pigeon,  particularly  that  kind  which  comes
to  us  from  Africa,  expresses  the  satisfaction  she  feels  from  in-
tercourse in  a remarkable  manner ; she  leaps,  spreads  her  tail,
and  sweeps  the  ground  with  its  extremity,  she  pecks  and  prunes
her  feathers — all  her  actions  are  as  if  she  felt  raised  to  the
summit  of  felicity  by  the  gift  of  fruitfulness.

We  have  said  that  the  primary  matter  of  the  egg  does  not
consist  of  blood  as  Aristotle  would  have  it,  neither  does  it  pro-
ceed from  any  mixtime  of  the  male  and  female  seminal  fluids.
Whence  it  truly  originates  we  have  already  stated  in  part  in
oui-  history ; and  we  shall  by  and  by  have  occasion  to  speak
of  the  subject  more  at  length  when  we  come  to  treat  generally
of  the  matter  fi’om  which  every  conception  is  originally  produced.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTY-FIFTH.

In  hoio  far  is  the  fowl  efficient  in  the  generation  of  the  egg,  ac-
cording to  Aristotle  ? And  wherefore  is  the  concurrence  of  the
male  required  ?

It  has  been  already  stated  that  the  cock  and  hen  are  the
two  principles  in  the  generation  of  the  egg,  although  of  the
manner  in  which  they  are  so  I am  of  a ditferent  opinion  from
Aristotle  and  medical  authorities.  From  the  production  of  the
egg  we  have  clearly  shown  that  the  female  as  well  as  the  male
was  efficient,  and  that  she  had  within  her  a principle  whence
motion  and  the  faculty  of  foi’ming  flowed  j although  in  the
sexual  act  the  male  neither  confers  the  matter,  nor  does  the
female  eject  any  semen  ivheuce  the  egg  is  constituted.  It  is
consequently  manifest,  in  some  animals  at  least,  that  nature
has  not,  on  account  of  the  distinction  into  male  and  female,
established  it  as  a law  that  the  one,  as  agent,  should  confer
form,  the  other,  as  passive,  supply  matter,  as  Aristotle  appre-
hended ; nor  yet  that  during  intercourse  each  should  contribute


ON  GENERATION.


301


a seminal  fluid,  by  the  mixtiu’e  of  which  a conception  or  ovum
should  be  produced,  as  physicians  commonly  suppose.

Now  since  everything  that  has  been  dehvered  by  the  ancients
on  generation  is  comprehended  in  these  two  opinions,  it  appears
to  have  escaped  every  one  up  to  this  time,  first,  why  the  hen
by  herself  does  not  generate,  like  vegetables,  but  requu’es  a male
to  be  associated  with  her  in  the  work ; and  then  how  the  con-
ception or  oTOm  is  procreated  by  the  male  and  the  female  to-
gether, or  what  either  of  them  contributes  to  the  process,  and
for  what  end  intercourse  was  established.

Aristotle,  in  opposition  to  the  entire  tenor  of  his  hypothesis,
viz.  that  the  male  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  agent,  the  female
as  snpplying  the  matter  only,  when  he  sees  that  eggs  are  actually
produced  by  hens  without  the  concurrence  of  the  male,  is
compelled  to  admit  that  the  female  is  likewise  efficient ; he
was  farther  not  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  an  egg  even  when  ex-
truded could  preserve  itself,  nourish  itself,  increase  in  size  and
prodnce  an  embryo,  as  happens  with  the  eggs  of  fishes ; and  he
has  besides  accorded  a vital  principle  to  an  egg,  even  to  a hy-
penemic  one.  But  he  endeavovu’s  to  explain  to  what  extent  a
female  is  efficient,  and  how  a hypenemic  egg  is  endowed  with
a vital  principle,  in  the  passage  where  he  says'  : “ Hjq)enemic
eggs  admit  of  generation  to  a certain  point ; for  that  they  can
ever  go  the  length  of  producing  an  animal  is  impossible,  this
being  the  work  of  the  senses  [the  sensible  sonl] . Bnt  females
and  all  things  that  live,  as  already  repeatedly  stated,  possess
the  vegetative  soul.  Wherefore  the  hypenemic  egg  as  a vege-
table is  perfect,  bnt  as  an  animal  it  is  imperfect.^^  By  this  he
seems  to  insinuate  that  the  hj^penemic  egg  is  possessed  of  a
vegetative  soul,  inasmuch  as  this  is  inherent  in  aU  things  that
live,  and  an  egg  is  alive.  In  like  manner  he  ascribes  to  the
hen  the  power  of  creating  and  of  conferring  the  vegetative  soul ;
because  aU  females  acquire  this  virtue,  so  that  a hypenemic  egg
in  so  far  as  it  lives  as  a vegetable  is  perfect,  in  so  far  as  it  is  an
animal  however  it  is  imperfect.  As  if  a male  were  not  re-
quired that  a conception  or  ovum  should  be  produced,  and
produced  perfect ; but  that  from  this  ovum  an  animal  should
be  engendered.  Not,  I say,  that  an  egg  be  produced  as  per-
fect in  all  respects  as  is  the  conception  of  a vegetable ; but
' De  Gener.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  c.  7.


302


ON  GENERATION.


that  it  should  be  imbued  with  the  animal  principle.  The  egg,
consequently,  is  fonned  by  the  hen,  but  it  is  made  prolific  by
the  cock.

Aristotle  adds  in  the  same  place : “ There  is  a distinction
of  sexes  through  the  whole  class  of  birds.  And  therefore  it
happens  that  the  hen  perfects  her  egg,  not  yet  influenced  by
the  intercourse  of  the  male,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a plant ; but  as
it  is  not  a plant,  there  she  does  not  perfect  it : nor  does  any-
thing come  of  it  which  engenders.  For  neither  has  it  arisen
simply,  like  the  seed  of  a plant,  nor  like  an  animal  conception,
by  intercourse.’^  He  is  here  speaking  of  the  wind  egg;  by  and
by  he  adds  : “ But  those  eggs  that  are  conceived  through  in-
tercourse are  already  characterized  in  a portion  of  the  albumen  :
such  eggs  become  fruitful  thi’ough  the  male  which  first  copu-
lated, for  they  are  then  supplied  with  both  principles.”

By  this  he  seems  to  confess  that  the  female  is  also  effective
in  the  work  of  generation,  or  is  possessed  of  the  faculty  of  en-
gendering ; because  in  every  female  there  inheres  a vegetative
soul,  whose  faculty  it  is  to  engender.  And,  therefore,  when
he  is  speaking  of  the  differences  between  the  male  and  female,
he  still  acknowledges  both  as  generative ; for  he  says ; “ "We
call  that  animal  male  which  engenders  in  another,  female  that
which  engenders  in  itself.”  From  his  own  showing,  therefore,
both  engender ; and  as  there  is  a vegetative  soul  inherent  in
both,  so  is  there  also  its  faculty  of  generation.  But  how  they
differ  has  already  been  shown  in  the  History  of  the  Egg  : the
hen  generates  of  herself  without  the  concurrence  of  the  cock,
as  a plant  out  of  itself  produces  fruit ; but  it  is  a wind  egg
that  is  thus  produced  : it  is  not  made  fruitful  without  the  con-
currence of  the  cock  either  preceding  or  succeeding.  The  female
generates,  then,  but  it  is  only  up  to  a certain  mark,  and  the
concurrence  of  the  male  is  requisite  that  this  facidty  of  engen-
dering be  made  complete,  that  she  may  not  only  lay  an  egg,
but  such  an  egg  as  will,  under  favorable  cii’cumstances,  produce
a pullet.  The  male  appears  to  be  ordained  by  nariu’e  to  supply
this  deficiency  in  the  generative  powers  of  the  female,  as  will
be  clearly  shown  by  and  by,  and  that  that  which  the  female  of
herself  cannot  accomplish,  viz.  the  production  of  a fniitful
egg,  may  be  supplied  and  made  good  by  the  act  of  the  male,
who  imparts  this  rirtue  to  the  fowl  or  the  egg.


ON  GENERATION.


303


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTY-SIXTH.

The  perfect  hen’s  egg  is  of  two  colours.

Every  egg^  then,  is  not  perfect  •,  but  some  are  to  be  held  im-
perfect because  they  have  not  yet  attained  their  true  dimen-
sions, which  they  only  receive  when  extruded;  others  are  im-
perfect because  they  are  yet  unprolific,  and  only  acquire  a
fertilizing  faculty  from  without,  such  are  the  eggs  of  fishes.
Other  eggs  again  are  held  imperfect  by  Aristotle,  because  they
are  of  one  colour  only,  inasmuch  as  perfect  eggs  consist  of  yelk
and  albumen,  and  are  of  two  colours,  as  if  better  concocted,
more  distinct  in  their  parts,  endowed  with  higher  heat.  The
eggs  that  are  called  centenine  or  hundredth  eggs,  and  which
Fabricius^  will  have  it  are  engendered  of  certain  remainders  of
albumen,  are  of  one  colour  only,  and  by  reason  of  their  de-
ficiency of  heat  and  their  weakness,  are  regarded  as  imperfect.
Of  all  eggs,  there  are  none  more  perfect  than  those  of  the  hen,
which  are  produced  complete  in  all  their  fluids  and  appendages,
of  proper  size  and  fruitful.

Aristotle  assigns  the  following  reason  wherefore  some  eggs
are  of  two  colours,  others  of  one  hue  only  “ In  the  hotter
animals  those  things  from  which  the  principles  of  their  origin
are  derived,  are  distinct  and  separate  from  those  which  furnish
their  nutrition;  now  the  one  of  these  is  white,  the  other  is
yellow.^^  As  if  the  chick  derived  its  origin  from  the  albumen
and  was  nourished  by  the  viteUus  alone.  In  the  same  place
he  proceeds  thus  : “ That  part  which  is  hot  contributes  properly
to  the  form  in  the  constitution  of  the  extremities ; but  the  part
that  is  more  earthy,  and  is  further  removed,  supplies  material
for  the  trunk.  Whence  in  eggs  of  two  colours  the  animal
derives  its  origin  from  the  white,  for  the  commencement  of
animal  existence  is  in  the  white ; but  the  nourishment  is  ob-
tained from  the  yeUow.”  He  consequently  thinks  that  this  is
the  reason  why  these  fluids  are  distinct,  and  why  eggs  are
produced  of  two  colours.


Op  cit.  p.  10.


^ De  General.  Animal,  lib.  iii,  cap.  1.


304


ON  GENERATION.


Now  these  ideas  are  partly  true,  partly  false.  It  is  not  true,
for  instance,  that  the  embryo  of  the  common  fowl  is  fu’st  formed
from  the  albumen  and  then  nourished  by  the  viteUus;  for,
from  the  history  of  the  formation  of  the  chick  in  ovo,  from  the
course  of  the  umbilical  vessels  and  the  distribution  of  their
branches,  which  undoubtedly  serve  for  obtaining  nomashment,
it  obviously  appears  that  the  constituent  matter,  and  the  nu-
triment are  supplied  to  the  chick  from  its  first  formation  by
the  yelk,  as  well  as  the  white ; the  fluid  which  we  have  called
the  colliquament  seems  farther  to  be  supplied,  not  less  by  the
vfitellns  than  the  albumen;  a certain  portion  of  both  the  fluids
seems,  in  fact,  to  be  resolved.  And  then  the  spot,  by  the  ex-
pansion of  which  the  colliquament  is  formed  in  the  first  in-
stance, and  which  we  have  called  the  eye,  aj>pears  to  be  im-
pressed upon  the  membrane  of  the  Autellus.

The  distinction  into  yellow  and  white,  however,  seems  to  be
a thing  necessary ; these  matters,  as  they  are  undoubtedly  of
different  natures,  appear  also  to  serve  different  offices ; they
are  therefore  completely  separate  in  the  perfect  egg,  one  of
them  being  more  the  other  less  immediately  akin  to  proper
ahmentary  matter ; by  the  one  the  foetus  is  noui’ished  from  the
very  beginning,  by  the  other  it  is  nonrished  at  a later  period.
For  it  is  certain,  as  Fabricius  asserts,  and  as  we  afterwards
maintain,  that  both  of  them  are  truly  nutritious,  the  albumen
as  well  as  the  Autellus,  the  albumen  being  the  first  that  is  con-
snmed.  I therefore  agree  with  Aristotle  against  the  physicians,
that  the  albumen  is  the  purer  portion  of  the  egg,  the  better
concocted,  the  more  highly  elaborated ; and,  therefore,  whilst
the  egg  is  getting  perfected  in  the  utems,  is  the  albumen  as
the  hotter  portion  ponred  around  in  the  cii'cumference,  the
yelk  or  more  earthy  portion  subsiding  to  the  centre.  For  the
albumen  appears  to  contain  the  lai’ger  quantity  of  animal  heat,
and  so  to  he  nutriment  of  a more  immediate  kind.  For  hke
reasons  it  is  probable  that  the  albmnen  is  purer  and  better
concocted  externally  than  it  is  internally.

When  medical  writers  affii’m  that  the  yelk  is  the  hotter  and
more  nntritious  portion  of  the  egg,  this  I imagine  is  meant  as
it  affords  food  to  ns,  not  as  it  is  found  to  supply  the  wants  of
the  chick  in  ovo.  This,  indeed,  is  obvious  fr’om  the  history  of
the  formatiou  of  the  chick,  by  which  the  thin  albmnen  is  ah-


ON  GENERATION.


305


sorbed  and  used  up  sooner  than  the  thick^  as  if  it  formed  the
more  appropriate  aliment^  and  were  more  readily  transmuted  into
the  substance  of  the  embryo,  of  the  chick  that  is  to  be.  The
yelk,  therefore,  appears  to  be  a more  distant  or  ultimate  aliment
than  the  albumen,  the  whole  of  which  has  been  used  up  before
any  notable  portion  of  the  vitellus  is  consumed.  The  yelk,
indeed,  is  still  found  inclosed  within  the  abdomen  of  the  chick
after  its  exclusion  from  the  shell,  as  if  it  were  destined  to  serve
the  new  being  in  lieu  of  milk  for  its  sustenance.

Eggs,  consisting  of  white  and  yellow,  are  therefore  more
perfect,  as  more  distinct  in  constitution,  and  elaborated  by  a
higher  temperature.  For  in  the  egg  there  must  be  included,
not  only  the  matter  of  the  chick  but  also  its  first  nutriment ;
and  what  is  provided  for  a perfect  animal,  must,  itself,  be  per-
fect and  highly  elaborated ; as  that  is,  in  fact,  which  consists
of  different  parts,  some  of  which,  as  already  stated,  are  prior
and  purer,  and  so  more  easy  of  digestion ; others  posterior,  and
therefore  more  difficult  of  transmutation  into  the  substance  of
the  chick.  Now  the  yelk  and  albumen  differ  from  one  another
by  such  kinds  of  distinction.  Perfect  eggs  are,  consequently,
of  two  colours : they  consist  of  albumen  and  yelk,  as  if  these
constituted  fluids  of  easier  or  more  difficult  digestion,  adapted
to  the  different  ages  and  vigour  of  the  chick.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTY-SEVENTH.

Of  the  manner  in  which  the  egg  is  increased  by  the  albumen.

From  the  history  it  appears  that  the  rudiments  of  the  eggs
in  the  ovary  are  of  very  small  size,  mere  specks,  smaller  than
millet  seeds,  white  and  replete  with  watery  fluid : these  specks,
however,  by  and  by,  become  yelks,  and  then  surround  them-
selves with  albumen.

Aristotle  seems  to  think  that  the  albumen  is  generated  in
the  way  of  secretion  from  the  vitellus.  It  may  be  well  to  add
his  words  “ The  sex,’^  he  says,  “ is  not  the  cause  of  the  double


De  Gener.  Animal,  lib.  ni,  cap.  1.


20


ON  GENERATION.


30  G

coloiii’,  as  if  tlie  wliite  were  derived  from  tlie  male,  the  yellow
from  the  female ; both  are  furnished  by  the  female.  But  one
of  them  is  hot,  the  other  is  cold.  Now  these  two  portions  are
distinct  in  animals,  fraught  with  much  heat ; in  those  that  are
not  so  fraught  the  eggs  are  not  thus  distinct.  And  this  is  the
reason  why  the  concej)tions  of  these  are  of  one  colour.  But
the  semen  of  the  male  alone  sets  the  conception;  therefore  is
the  conception  of  the  bird  small  and  white  in  the  first  instance ;
but  in  the  course  of  time,  and  when  there  is  a larger  infusion
of  blood,  it  becomes  entirely  yellow ; and,  last  of  all,  when  the
heat  declines,  the  white  portion,  as  a humour  of  equal  tem-
perature siuTOunds  it  on  every  side.  For  the  white  por-
tion of  the  egg  is,  by  its  nature,  moist,  and  includes  animal
heat  in  itself;  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  it  is  seen  in  the
circumference,  the  yellow  and  earthy  portion  remaining  in  the
interior.’^

Fabricius,!  however,  thinks  that  “ the  albumen  only  adheres
to  the  rttellus  by  juxtaposition.  For  while  the  yelk  is  rolled
through  the  second  uterus  and  gradually  descends,  it  also  gi’a-
dually  assumes  to  itself  the  albumen  which  is  there  produced,
and  made  ready,  that  it  may  be  applied  to  the  yelk ; until  the
yelk  having  passed  the  middle  spirals  and  reached  the  last  of
them,  already  siuTOunded  with  the  albumen,  it  now  surrounds
itself  Avith  the  membranes  and  shell.”  Fabricius  will  there-
fore have  it  that  the  egg  increases  in  a two-fold  manner  : “ pai’tly
by  means  of  the  veins,  as  concerns  the  vitellus,  and  partly  by
an  appositive  increase,  as  regards  the  albumen.”  And,  among
other  reasons,  this  was  perchance  one  for  the  above  opinion :
that  when  an  egg  is  boiled  hard  the  albumen  is  readily  spht
into  layers  Mng  one  over  another.  But  this  also  occurs  to
the  yelk  still  connected  with  the  ovaiy,  when  boiled  bal’d.

^Yherefore,  taught  by  experience,  I rather  inchne  to  the
opinion  of  Aristotle ; for  the  albumen  is  not  merely  perceived
as  added  in  the  way  Fabricius  will  have  it,  but  fashioned  also,
distinguished  by  chalazge  and  membranes,  and  divided  into
two  different  portions ; and  all  this  in  virtue  of  the  inherence
of  the  same  vegetative  rttal  principle  by  which  the  egg  is  more
conspicuously  divided  into  two  distinct  substances — a yelk  and


Op.  cit.  p.  12.


ON  GENERATION.


307


a white.  For  the  same  faculty  that  presides  over  the  formation
of  the  egg  in  general,  presides  over  the  constitution  of  each  of
its  parts  in  particular.  Neither  is  it  altogether  true  that  the
yelk  is  first  formed  and  the  albumen  added  to  it  afterwards;  for
what  is  seen  in  the  ovary  is  not  the  vitellus  of  the  egg,  but  rather
a compound  containing  the  two  liquids  mingled  together.  It
has  the  colour  of  the  vitellus,  indeed,  but  in  point  of  consistence
it  is  more  like  the  albumen ; and  when  boiled  hard  it  is  not
friable  like  the  proper  yelk,  but,  like  the  white,  is  concreted,
jelly-like,  and  seen  to  be  composed  of  thin  lamellae ; and  it
has  a kind  of  white  papula,  or  spot,  in  the  middle.

Aristotle  seems  to  derive  this  separation  from  the  dissimilar
nature  of  the  yelk  and  white;  for  he  says,^  as  we  have  already
stated,  that  if  a number  of  eggs  be  thrown  into  a pan  and
boiled,  in  such  wise  that  the  heat  shall  not  be  quicker  than  the
separation  of  the  eggs,  (citatior  quam  ovorum  distinctio,)  the
same  thing  will  take  place  in  the  mass  of  eggs  which  occurs  in
the  individual  egg  : the  whole  of  the  yelks  will  set  in  the  middle,
the  whites  round  about  them.

This  I have  myself  frequently  found  to  be  true  on  making
the  trial,  and  it  is  open  to  any  one  to  repeat  the  experiment ;
let  him  only  beat  yelks  and  whites  together,  put  the  mixture
into  a dutch  oven,  or  between  two  plates  over  the  fire,  and
having  added  some  butter,  cause  it  to  set  slowly  into  a cake,
he  will  find  the  albumen  covering  over  the  yelks  situated  at
the  bottom.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTY-EIGHTH.

Of  what  the  cock  and  hen  severally  contribute  to  the  production

of  the  egg.

Both  cock  and  hen  are  to  be  reputed  parents  of  the  chick ;
for  both  are  necessary  principles  of  an  egg,  and  we  have
proved  both  to  be  alike  its  efficient : the  hen  fashions  the  egg,
the  cock  makes  it  fertile.  Both,  consequently,  are  instruments


Fabricius,  op.  cit.  p.  12.


308


ON  GENERATION.


of  the  plastic  virtue  by  which  this  species  of  animal  is  per-
petuated.

But  as  in  some  species  there  appears  to  be  no  occasion  for
males,  females  sufficing  of  themselves  to  continue  the  kind;
so  do  we  discover  no  males  among  these,  but  females  only,  con-
taining the  fertile  rudiments  of  eggs  in  their  interior ; in  other
species,  again,  none  but  males  are  discovered  which  procreate
and  preserve  their  kinds  by  emitting  something  into  the  mud,
or  earth,  or  water.  In  such  instances  nature  appears  to  have
been  content  with  a single  sex,  which  she  has  used  as  an  in-
strument adequate  to  procreation.

Another  class  of  animals  has  a generative  fluid  fortuitously,
as  it  were,  and  without  any  distinction  of  sex ; the  origin  of
such  animals  is  spontaneous.  But  “ as  some  things  are  made
by  art,  and  some  depend  on  accident,  health  for  example,”^  so
also  some  semen  of  animals  is  not  produced  by  the  act  of  an
individual  agent,  as  in  the  case  of  a man  engendered  by  a man  ;
but  in  some  sort  univocally,  as  in  those  instances  where  the
rudiments  and  matter,  produced  by  accident,  are  susceptible  of
taking  on  the  same  motions  as  seminal  matter,  as  in  “ animals
which  do  not  proceed  from  coitus,  but  arise  spontaneously,  and
have  such  an  origin  as  insects  which  engender  wonns.”2  Por
as  mechanics  perform  some  operations  with  their  unaided  hands,
and  others  not  without  the  assistance  of  particular  tools ; and
as  the  more  excellent  and  varied  and  ciu’ious  works  of  art  re-
quire a greater  variety  in  the  form  and  size  of  the  tools  to  bring
them  to  perfection,  inasmuch  as  a greater  number  of  motions
and  a larger  amount  of  subordinate  means  are  required  to  bring
more  worthy  labour’s  to  a successful  issue — art  imitating  nature
here  as  everywhere  else,  so  also  does  natru’e  make  use  of  a
larger  number  and  variety  of  forces  and  instruments  as  necessary
to  the  procreation  of  the  more  perfect  animals.  For  the  sun,
or  Heaven,  or  whatever  name  is  used  to  designate  that  which
is  understood  as  the  common  generator  or  parent  of  all  animated
things,  engenders  some  of  themselves,  by  accident,  without  an
instrument,  as  it  were,  and  equivocally;  and  others  thi’ough  the
concurrence  of  a single  indiridual,  as  in  those  instances  where
an  animal  is  produced  from  another  animal  of  the  same  genus


'■*  Ib.  lib.  ii,  cap.  3.


' Arist.  Phys.  lib.  i,  cap.  1.


ON  GENERATION.


309


which  supplies  both  matter  and  form  to  the  being  engendered ;
so  in  like  manner  in  the  generation  of  the  most  perfect  animals
where  principles  are  distinguished,  and  the  seminal  elements
of  animated  beings  are  divided,  a new  creation  is  not  effected
save  by  the  concurrence  of  male  and  female,  or  by  two  neces-
sary instruments.  Our  hen’s  egg  is  of  this  kind;  to  its  pro-
duction in  the  perfect  state  the  cock  and  the  hen  are  necessary.
The  hen  engenders  in  herself,  and  therefore  does  she  supply
place  and  matter,  nutriment  and  warmth ; bnt  the  cock  confers
fecundity;  for  the  male,  as  Aristotle  says,^  always  perfects  ge-
neration, secures  the  presence  of  a sensitive  vital  principle,  and
from  such  an  egg  an  animal  is  engendered.

To  the  cock,  therefore,  as  well  as  to  the  hen,  are  given  the
organs  requisite  to  the  function  with  which  he  is  intrusted ; in
the  hen  all  the  genital  parts  are  adapted  to  receive  and  contain,
as  in  the  cock  they  are  calculated  to  give  and  immit,  or  prepare
that  which  transfers  fecundity  to  the  female,  he  engendering,
as  it  were,  in  another,  not  in  himself.

When  we  anatomize  the  organs  appropriated  to  generation,
therefore,  we  readily  distinguish  what  each  sex  contributes  in
the  process ; for  a knowledge  of  the  instruments  here  leads  us
by  a direct  path  to  a knowledge  of  their  functions.


EXERCISE  THE  THIRTY-NINTH.

Of  the  cock  and  the  particulars  most  remarkable  in  his
constitution.

The  cock,  as  stated,  is  the  prime  efficient  of  the  perfect  or
fruitful  hen’s  egg,  and  the  chief  cause  of  generation : without
the  male  no  chick  would  ever  be  produced  from  an  egg,  and
in  many  ovipara  not  even  would  any  egg  be  produced.  It  is,
therefore,  imperative  on  us  that  we  look  narrowly  into  his
offices  and  uses,  and  inquire  particularly  what  he  contributes
to  the  egg  and  chick,  both  in  the  act  of  intercourse  and  at
other  times.


Op.  cit.


310


ON  GENERATION.


It  is  certain  that  the  cock  in  coition  emits  his  ‘ geniture/
commonly  called  semen^  from  his  sexual  parts^  although  he  has
no  penisj  as  I maintain  ; because  his  testes  and  long  and  ample
vasa  deferentia  are  full  of  this  fluid.  But  whether  it  issues  in
jets,  with  a kind  of  spirituous  briskness  and  repeatedly  as  in
the  hotter  viviparous  animals,  or  not,  I have  not  been  able  to
ascertain.  But  as  I do  not  find  any  vesiculae  containing  semen,
from  which,  made  brisk  and  raised  into  a froth  by  the  spirits,  it
might  be  emitted ; nor  any  penis  through  whose  naiTower  orifice
it  might  be  forcibly  ejaculated,  and  so  strike  upon  the  interior
of  the  hen;  and  particularly  when  I see  the  act  of  intercourse
so  rapidly  performed  between  them;  I am  disposed  to  believe
that  the  parts  of  the  hen  are  merely  moistened  with  a very
small  quantity  of  seminal  fluid,  only  as  much  as  wdl  adhere  to
the  orifice  of  the  pudenda,  and  that  the  prohfic  fluid  is  not
emitted  by  any  sudden  ejaculation ; so  that  whilst  among  animals
repeated  ejaculations  take  place  during  the  same  connection,
among  birds,  which  are  not  delayed  with  any  complexity  of
venereal  apparatus,  the  same  object  is  effected  by  repeated  con-
nections. Animals  that  are  long  in  connection,  copulate  rai’ely ;
and  this  is  the  case  with  the  swan  and  ostrich  among  hfrds.
The  cock,  therefore,  as  he  cannot  stay  long  in  his  connections,
supplies  by  dint  of  repeated  treadings  the  reiterated  ejaculations
of  the  single  intercourse  in  other  animals ; and  as  he  has  neither
penis  nor  glans,  still  the  extremities  of  the  vasa  deferentia,
inflated  with  spirits  when  he  treads,  become  tui’gid  in  the
manner  of  a glans  penis,  and  the  orifice  of  the  uterus  of  the
hen,  compressed  by  them,  her  cloaca  being  exposed  for  the  oc-
casion, is  anointed  with  genital  fluid,  Avhich  consequently  does
not  I’equfre  a penis  for  its  intromission.

We  have  said,  however,  that  such  was  the  ■v'ii’tue  of  the  semen
of  the  cock,  that  not  only  did  it  render  the  uterus,  the  egg  in
utero,  and  the  vitelhne  germ  in  the  ovary,  but  the  whole  hen
prolific,  so  that  even  the  germs  of  viteUi,  yet  to  he  produced,
were  impregnated.

Fabricius  has  well  observed,  that  the  quantity  of  spermatic
fluid  contained  in  the  testes  and  vasa  deferentia  of  the  cock
was  large ; not  that  the  hen  requires  much  to  fecundate  each
of  her  eggs,  hut  that  the  cock  may  have  a supply  for  the  large
number  of  hens  he  serves  and  for  his  repeated  addi'esses  to  them.


ON  GENERATION.


311


The  shortness  and  straight  course  of  the  spermatic  vessels
in  the  cock  also  assist  the  rapid  emission  of  the  spermatic
fluid : anything  that  must  pass  through  lengthened  and  tor-
tuous conduits  of  course  escapes  more  slowly  and  requires  a
greater  exercise  of  the  impelling  pow'er  or  spirit  to  force  it  away.

Among  male  animals  there  is  none  that  is  more  active  or
more  haughty  and  erects  or  that  has  stronger  powers  of  di-
gestion than  the  cock^  which  turns  the  larger  portion  of  his
food  into  semen ; hence  it  is  that  he  requires  so  many  wives^ —
ten  or  even  a dozen.  For  there  are  some  animals,  single  males
of  which  suffice  for  several  females,  as  we  see  among  deer,
cattle,  &c. ; and  there  are  others,  of  which  the  females  are  so
prurient  that  they  are  scarcely  satisfied  with  several  males,
such  as  the  bitch  and  the  wolf;  whence  prostitutes  were  called
lupce  or  wolves,  as  making  their  persons  common ; and  stews
were  entitled  lupanaria.  Whilst  some  animals,  of  a more
chaste  disposition,  live,  as  it  were,  in  the  conjugal  estate,  so
that  the  male  is  married  to  a single  female  only,  and  both  take
part  in  providing  for  the  wants  of  the  family ; for  since  nature
requires  that  the  male  supply  the  deficiencies  of  the  female  in
the  work  of  generation,  and  as  she  alone  in  many  cases  does
not  suffice  to  cherish  and  feed  and  protect  the  young,  the  male
is  added  to  the  wife  that  he  may  take  part  in  the  burthen  of
bringing  up  the  offspring.  Partridges  lead  a wedded  life,  be-
cause the  females  alone  cannot  incubate  such  a number  of  eggs
as  they  lay,  (so  that  they  are  said,  by  some,  to  make  two  nests,)
nor  to  bring  up  such  a family  as  by  and  by  appears  without
assistance.  The  male  pigeon  also  assists  in  building  the  nest,
takes  his  turn  in  incubating  the  eggs,  and  is  active  in  feeding
the  young.  In  the  same  way  many  other  instances  of  conjugal
life  among  the  lower  animals  might  be  quoted,  and  indeed  we
shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  several  in  what  yet  remains  to
be  said.

Those  males,  among  animals,  which  serve  several  females,
such  as  the  cock,  have  an  abundant  secretion  of  seminal  fluid,
and  are  provided  with  long  and  ample  vasa  deferentia.  And
at  whatever  time  or  season  the  clustered  rudimentary  papulae
in  the  ovary  come  to  maturity  and  require  fecundation,  that  they
may  go  on  to  be  turned  into  perfect  eggs,  the  males  will  then
be  found  to  have  an  abundance  of  seminal  fluid,  and  the  testicles


312


ON  GENERATION.


to  enlarge  and  become  conspicuous  in  the  very  situation  to
which  they  transfer  their  fecundating  influence,  viz.  the  prse-
cordia.  This  is  remarkable  in  fishes,  birds,  and  the  whole  race
of  oviparous  animals ; the  males  of  which  teem  with  fecundating
seminal  fluid  at  the  same  precise  seasons  as  the  females  become
full  of  eggs.

Whatever  parts  of  the  hen,  therefore,  are  destined  by  nature
for  purposes  of  generation,  viz.  the  ovary,  the  infundibulum,
the  processus  uteri,  the  uterus  itself,  and  the  pudenda;  as  also
the  situation  of  these  parts,  their  stracture,  dimensions,  tem-
perature, and  all  that  follows  this ; all  these,  I say,  ai’e  either
suborcbnate  to  the  production  and  gi’owth  of  the  egg,  or  to  in-
tercourse and  the  reception  of  fecundity  from  the  male ; or,  for
the  sake  of  parturition,  to  which  they  conduce  either  as  prin-
cipal and  convenient  means,  or  as  means  necessary,  and  -.vith-
out  which  what  is  done  could  not  be  accomphshed ; for  nothing
in  natm-e’s  works  is  fashioned  either  carelessly  or  in  vain.  In
the  same  way  all  the  parts  in  the  cock  are  fashioned  subordinate
to  the  prepai’ation  or  concoction  of  the  spermatic  fluid,  and  its
transference  to  the  hen.

Now  those  males  that  are  so  vigorously  constituted  as  to
serve  several  females  are  larger  and  handsomer,  and  in  the
matter  of  spnit  and  arms  excel  their  females  in  a far  greater
degree  than  the  males  of  those  that  live  attached  to  a single
female.  Neither  the  male  partridge,  nor  the  crow,  nor  the
pigeon,  is  distinguished  from  the  female  bird  in  the  same  de-
cided way  as  the  cock  from  his  hens,  the  stag  from  his  does,  &c.

The  cock,  therefore,  as  he  is  gayer  in  his  plumage,  better
armed,  more  courageous  and  pugnacious,  so  is  he  replete  Avith
semen,  and  so  apt  for  repeated  intercoui’se,  that  unless  he  have
a number  of  AAUves  he  distresses  them  by  his  fr’equent  assaults ;
he  not  only  invites  but  compels  them  to  his  pleasme,  and  leaping
upon  them  at  inconvenient  and  improper  seasons,  (even  when
they  are  engaged  in  the  business  of  incubation)  and  wearing
olf  the  feathers  from  their  backs,  he  ti’uly  does  them  an  injury.
I have  occasionally  seen  hens  so  torn  and  Avorn  by  the  ferocious
addresses  of  the  cock,  that  with  their  backs  stript  of  feathers
and  laid  bare  in  places,  even  to  the  bone,  they  languished
miserably  for  a time  and  then  died.  The  same  thing  also
occurs  among  pheasants,  tiukeys,  and  other  species.


ON  GENERATION.


313


EXERCISE  THE  FORTIETH.

Of  the  hen.

There  are  two  instruments  and  two  first  causes  of  generation,
the  male  and  the  female — for  to  the  hen  seems  to  belong  the
formation  of  the  egg,  as  to  the  cock  the  fertilizing  principle.
In  the  act  of  intercourse,  then,  of  these  two,  that  which  renders
the  egg  fruitful  is  either  transmitted  from  the  male  to  the  female,
or  by  means  of  coition  is  generated  in  the  hen.  The  nature  of
this  principle,  however,  is  no  less  difficult  to  ascertain  than  are  the
particulars  of  its  communication,  whether,  for  instance,  we  sup-
pose such  communication  to  take  place  with  the  whole  system
of  the  hen,  or  simply  with  her  womb,  or  with  the  egg  already
formed,  or  further,  with  all  the  eggs  now  commencing  and
hereafter  about  td  commence  their  existence  in  the  ovary.  For
it  is  probable,  from  what  I have  formerly  mentioned,  and  also
from  the  experiment  of  Fabricius,^  that  but  a few  acts  of  inter-
course, and  the  consorting  of  the  hen  with  the  cock  for  some
days,  are  sufficient  to  fecundate  her,  or  at  least  her  womb,
dm’ing  the  whole  year.  And  so  far  I can  myself  affirm,  from
my  own  observation,  to  wit,  that  the  twentieth  egg  laid  by  a
hen,  after  separation  from  the  cock,  has  proved  prolific.  So
that,  in  like  manner  as  it  is  well  known  that,  from  the  seed  of
male  fishes  shed  into  the  water,  a large  mass  of  ova  is  impreg-
nated, and  that  in  dogs,  pigs,  and  other  animals,  a small  number
of  acts  of  intercourse  suffice  for  the  procreation  of  many  young
ones,  (some  even  think  it  well  established,  that  if  a bitch  have
connexion  more  than  three  or  four  times,  her  fruitfulness  is
impaired,  and  that  more  females  than  males  are  then  engen-
dered), so  may  the  cock,  by  a few  treadings,  render  prolific  not
only  the  egg  in  the  womb,  but  also  the  whole  ovarium,  and,  as
has  been  often  said,  the  hen  herself.  Nay,  what  is  more  re-
markable, and  indeed  wonderful,  it  is  said  that  in  Persia,^  on
cutting  open  the  female  mouse,  the  young  ones  still  contained
in  the  belly  are  already  pregnant ; in  other  words,  they  are


Op.  cit.  p.  31.


“ Arist.  Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  c.  37.


314


ON  GENERATION.


motliers  before  they  are  born  ! as  if  tbe  male  rendered  not  only
the  female  fruitful^  but  also  impregnated  tbe  young  ■vvliich  slic
had  coneeived;  in  the  same  way  as  om’  cock  fertihzes  not
merely  the  hen^  but  also  the  eggs  which  are  about  to  be  pro-
duced by  her.

But  this  is  confidently  denied  by  those  physicians  who  assert
that  conception  is  produced  from  a mixture  of  the  seed  of  each
sex.  And  hence  Fabricius/  although  he  affirms  that  the  seed  of
the  cock  ejected  in  coition  never  does,  nor  can,  enter  the  cavity
of  the  womb,  where  the  egg  is  formed,  or  takes  its  increase,  and
though  he  plainly  sees  that  the  eggs  when  first  commencing  in
the  ovarium  are,  no  less  than  those  which  exist  in  the  womb,
fecundated  by  the  same  act  of  coition,  and  that  of  these  no  part
could  arise  from  the  semen  of  the  cock,  yet  has  he  supposed
that  this  semen,  as  if  it  must  needs  be  present  and  permanent,
is  contained  during  the  entire  year  in  the  bursa”  of  the
fruitful  hen,  and  reserved  in  a ‘‘  foramen  csecum.”  This  ojn-
nion  we  have  already  rejected,  as  well  because  that  carity  is
found  in  the  male  and  female  equally,  as  because  neither
there,  nor  anywhere  else  in  the  hen,  have  we  been  able  to  dis-
cover this  stagnant  semen  of  the  cock ; as  soon  as  it  has  per-
formed its  office,  and  impressed  a prolific  power  on  the  female,
it  either  escapes  out  of  the  body,  or  is  dissolved,  or  is  turned
into  vapour  and  vanishes.  And  although  Galen,^  aud  all
phj^sicians  with  him,  oppose  by  various  reasonings  this  dissolriug
of  the  semen,  yet,  if  they  carefully  trace  the  anatomical  arrange-
ment of  the  genital  parts,  and  at  the  same  time  weigh  other
proofs  of  the  strongest  kind,  they  must  confess  that  the  semen
of  the  male,  as  it  is  derived  from  the  testicles  thi’ough  the  vasa
deferentia,  and  as  it  is  contained  in  the  vesiculse  seminales,
is  not  prolific  unless  it  be  rendered  spnitual  and  effervesce  into
a frothy  natui’e  by  the  incitement  of  intercourse  or  deshe.
For  it  is  not,  as  Aristotle^  bears  witness,  its  bodily  form,  or
fire,  or  any  such  faculty,  that  renders  the  semen  prolific,  but
the  spu’it  which  is  contained  in  it,  and  the  nature  which  inheres
in  it,  bearing  a proportion  to  the  element  of  the  stars.  here-
fore,  though  we  should  allow  with  Fabricius  that  the  semen  is
retained  in  the  “bursa,”  yet,  when  that  prolific  eftervesceuce  or


Op.  cit.  pp.  38,  39.


^ Avist.  de  Geii.  .ADim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  3.


3 Ibid.


ON  GENERATION.


315


spirit  had  been  spent^  it  would  forthwith  be  useless  and  sterile.
Hence,  too,  physicians  may  learn  that  the  semen  of  the  male  is
the  architect  of  the  progeny,  not  because  the  first  conception
is  embodied  out  of  it,  but  because  it  is  spiritual  and  effervescent,
as  if  swelling  with  a fertilising  spirit,  and  a preternatural  in-
fluence. For  otherwise  the  story  of  Averrhoes,  of  the  woman
who  conceived  in  a bath,  might  bear  an  appearance  of  truth.
But  of  these  things  more  in  their  proper  place.

In  the  same  manner  then  as  the  egg  is  formed  from  the
hen,  so  is  it  probable,  that  from  the  females  of  other  animals,
as  will  hereafter  be  shown,  the  first  conceptions  take  both  ma-
terial and  form ; and  that,  too,  some  little  time  after  the  semen
of  the  male  has  been  introduced,  and  has  disappeared  again.
For  the  cock  does  not  confer  any  fecundity  on  the  hen,  or  her
eggs,  by  the  simple  emission  of  his  semen,  but  only  in  so  far  as
that  fluid  has  a prolific  quality,  and  is  imbued  with  a plastic
power ; that  is  to  say,  is  spiritual,  operative,  and  analogous  to
the  essence  of  the  stars.  The  male,  therefore,  is  no  more  to
be  considered  the  first  principle,  from  which  conceptions  and
the  embryo  arise,  because  he  is  capable  of  secreting  and  emit-
ting semen,  than  is  the  female,  which  creates  an  egg  without
his  assistance.  But  it  is  on  this  consideration  rather  that  he
is  entitled  to  his  prerogative,  that  he  introduces  his  semen,  im-
bued as  it  is  with  the  spirit  and  the  virtue  of  a divine  agent,
such  as,  in  a moment  of  time,  performs  its  functions,  and  con-
veys fertility.  For,  as  we  see  things  suddenly  set  on  fire  and
blasted  by  a spark  struck  from  a flint,  or  the  lightning  flashing
from  a cloud,  so  equally  does  the  seed  of  the  male  instantly
affect  the  female  which  it  has  touched  with  a kind  of  contagion,
and  transfer  to  her  its  prolific  quality,  by  which  it  renders
fruitful  in  a moment,  not  only  the  eggs,  but  the  uterus  also,
and  the  hen  herself.  For  an  inflammable  material  is  not  set
on  fire  by  the  eontact  of  flame  more  quickly,  than  is  the  hen
made  pregnant  by  intercourse  with  the  cock.  But  what  it  is
that  is  transferred  from  him  to  her,  we  shall  afterwards  find
occasion  to  speak  of,  when  we  treat  this  matter  specially  and
at  greater  length.

In  the  meantime  we  must  remark,  that,  if  it  be  derived
from  the  soul,  (for  whatever  is  fruitful  is  probably  endowed
also  Avith  a soul ; and  we  have  said  before,  that  the  egg,  in


316


ON  GENERATION.


Aristotle’s  opinion,  as  well  as  the  seeds  of  plants,  has  a vegeta-
tive soul,)  that  soul,  or  at  aU  events  the  vegetative  one,  must  be
communicated  as  a graft,  and  transferred  from  the  male  to  the
female,  from  the  female  to  the  egg,  from  the  egg  to  the  foetus ;
or  else  be  generated  in  each  of  these  successively  by  the  con-
tagion of  coition.

The  subject,  nevertheless,  seems  full  of  ambiguity ; and  so
Aristotle,  although  he  allows  that  the  semen  of  the  male  has
such  great  virtue,  that  a single  emission  of  it  suffices  for  fecun-
dating very  many  eggs  at  the  same  time,  yet,  lest  this  admis-
sion shoidd  seem  to  gainsay  the  efficacy  of  frequent  repetitions
of  intercourse,  he  further  says,^  “ In  bfrds,  not  even  those  eggs
which  arise  through  intercourse  can  greatly  increase  in  size,
unless  the  intercourse  be  continued ; and  the  reason  of  this  is,
that,  as  in  women,  the  menstrual  excretion  is  drawn  downwards
by  sexual  intercourse,  (for  the  uterus,  becoming  warm,  attracts
moisture,  and  its  pores  are  opened,)  so  also  does  it  happen  with
birds,  in  which  the  menstrual  excrement,  because  it  accumu-
lates gradually,  and  is  retained  above  the  cincture,  and  cannot
escape,  from  being  in  small  quantity,  only  passes  off  when  it  has
reached  the  uterus  itself.  For  by  this  is  the  egg  increased,  as
is  the  foetus  of  the  viviparous  animal  by  that  wliich  flows  through
the  umbilicus.  For  almost  all  birds,  after  but  a single  act  of
intercom’se,  continue  to  produce  eggs,  but  they  ai’e  small.”

Now,  so  far  perhaps  w'ould  the  opinion  of  Aiistotle  be  cor-
rect, that  more  and  larger  eggs  are  procured  by  frequently-
repeated  intercourse ; because,  as  he  says,  there  may  be  a flow
of  more  fruitful  material  to  the  womb,  when  wai’med  by  the
heat  of  coition  not  however  that  frequent  coition  must  neces-
sarily take  place  in  order  to  render  the  eggs  that  are  laid  prohfic.
For  experience,  as  we  have  said,  teaches  the  contrary,  and  the
reason  which  he  alleges  does  not  seem  convincing;  since  the
rudiments  of  eggs  are  not  formed  in  the  uterus  from  menstrual
blood,  which  is  found  in  no  part  of  the  hen,  but  in  the  ovary,
where  no  blood  pre-exists,  and  originate  as  well  without,  as
along  with  the  intercourse  of  the  cock.

Tlie  hen,  as  w^ell  as  aU  other  females,  supplies  matter,  nuti'i-
tion,  and  place  to  the  conception.  The  matter,  whence  the


* De  Gen.  Auim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  1.


ON  GENERATION.


317


rudiments  of  all  eggs  are  produced  in  tlie  ovary  and  take  their
increase,  seems  to  be  the  very  same  from  which  all  the  other
parts  of  the  hen,  namely,  the  fleshy,  nervous,  and  bony  struc-
tures, as  well  as  the  head  and  the  rest  of  the  members,  are
nourished  and  grow.  Nourishment  is  in  fact  conveyed  to  each
single  papula  and  yelk  contained  in  the  ovary  by  means  of
vessels,  in  the  same  way  precisely  as  to  all  the  other  parts  of
the  hen.  But  the  place  where  the  egg  is  provided  with  mem-
branes, and  perfected  by  the  addition  of  the  chalazse  and  shell,
is  the  uterus.

But  that  the  hen  neither  emits  any  semen  during  inter-
course, nor  sheds  any  blood  into  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  and
that  the  egg  is  not  formed  in  the  mode  in  which  Aristotle  sup-
posed a conception  to  arise,  noi’,  as  physicians  imagine,  from
a mixture  of  the  seminal  fluids;  as  also  that  the  semen  of  the
cock  does  not  penetrate  into,  nor  is  attracted  towards,  the  cavity
of  the  uterus  of  the  hen,  is  all  made  manifestly  clear  by  this
one  observation,  namely,  that  after  intercourse  there  is  nothing
more  to  be  found  in  the  uterus,  than  there  was  before  the  act.
And  when  this  shall  have  been  afterwards  clearly  established
and  demonstrated  to  be  true  of  all  kinds  of  animals,  which
conceive  in  a uterus,  it  will  at  the  same  time  be  equally  evi-
dent, that  what  has  hitherto  been  handed  down  to  us  from  all
antiquity  on  the  generation  of  animals,  is  erroneous ; that  the
foetus  is  not  constituted  of  the  semen  either  of  the  male  or
female,  nor  of  a mixture  of  the  two,  nor  of  the  menstrual  blood,
but  that  in  all  animals,  as  well  in  the  prolific  conception  as
after  it,  the  same  series  of  phenomena  occur  as  in  the  genera-
tion of  the  chick  from  the  egg,  and  as  in  the  production  of
plants  from  the  seeds  of  their  several  kinds.  For,  besides
that,  it  appears  the  male  is  not  required  as  being  in  himself
agent,  workman,  and  efficient  cause ; nor  the  female,  as  if  she
supplied  the  matter ; but  that  each,  male  as  well  as  female,  may
be  said  to  be  in  some  sort  the  operative  and  parent ; and  the
foetus,  as  a mixture  of  both,  is  created  a mixed  resemblance
and  kind.  Nor  is  that  true  which  Aristotle  often  affirms,  and
physicians  take  for  granted,  namely,  that  immediately  after
intercourse,  something  either  of  the  foetus  or  the  conception
may  be  found  in  the  uterus,  (for  instance,  the  heart,  the  “ three
bullse,”  or  some  other  principal  part,)  at  any  rate  something —


318


ON  GENERATION.


a coagulum,  some  mixture  of  tlie  spermatic  substances,  or  other
things  of  the  like  kind.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  not  till  long
after  intercourse  that  the  eggs  and  conception  first  commence
their  existence,  among  the  greater  number  of  animals,  and  these
the  most  perfect  ones ; I mean  in  the  cases  where  the  females
have  been  fruitful  and  have  become  pregnant.  And  that  the
female  is  prolific,  before  any  conception  is  contained  in  the
uterus,  there  are  many  indications,  as  will  be  hereafter  set  forth
in  the  history  of  viviparous  animals  : the  breasts  enlarge,  the
uterus  begins  to  swell,  and  by  other  symptoms  a change  of  the
whole  system  is  discerned.

But  the  hen,  though  she  have  for  the  most  part  the  rudi-
ments of  eggs  in  her  before  intercourse,  which  are  afterwards
by  this  act  rendered  fruitful,  aud  there  be,  therefore,  something
in  her  immediately  after  coition,  yet  even  when  she,  as  in  the
case  of  other  animals,  has  as  yet  no  eggs  ready  prepared  in  the
ovary,  or  has  at  the  time  of  the  intercourse  got  rid  of  all  she
had,  yet  does  she  by  and  by,  even  after  some  lapse  of  time,  as  if
in  possession  of  both  principles  or  the  powers  of  both  sexes,  ge-
nerate eggs  by  herself  after  the  manner  of  plants ; and  these
(I  speak  from  experience)  not  barren,  but  prolific.

Nay,  what  is  more,  if  you  remove  all  the  eggs  from  beneath
a hen  that  has  been  fecundated  and  is  now  sitting,  (after  hav-
ing akeady  laid  all  her  eggs,  and  no  more  remain  in  the
ovary,)  she  null  begin  to  lay  again ; and  the  eggs  thus  laid  will
be  prolific,  and  have  both  principles  inherent  in  them.


EXERCISE  THE  FORTY-FIRST.

Of  the  sense  in  which  the  hen  may  be  called  the  “prime
efficient and  of  her  parturition.

It  has  already  been  said,  that  the  hen  is  the  efl&cient  cause
of  generation,  or  an  instrument  of  Natm’e  in  this  work,  not
indeed  immediately,  or  of  herself ; but  when  rendered  prolific
by  commission  from,  and  in  vudue  of  the  male.  But  as  the
male  is  considered  by  Aristotle  to  be  the  first  principle  of


ON  GENERATION.


319


generation  on  his  own  merits,  because  the  first  impulse  toward
generation  proceeds  from  him,  so  may  the  hen  in  some  mea-
sure be  put  down  as  the  fu’st  cause  of  generation  ; inasmuch
as  the  male  is  undoubtedly  inflamed  to  venery  by  the  presence
of  the  female.  “ The  female  fish,^^  says  Pliny, ^ “ will  follow  the
male  at  the  season  of  intercourse,  and  strike  his  belly  with  her
nose  j at  the  spawning  time  the  male  will  do  the  like  to  the
female.^^  I have  myself  at  times  seen  male  fishes  in  shoals
following  a female  that  was  on  the  point  of  spawning,  in  the
same  way  as  dogs  pursue  a bitch,  that  they  might  sprinkle  the
ova  just  laid  wdth  their  milk  or  seed.  But  this  is  particularly
to  be  remarked  in  the  more  wanton  and  lascivious  females,
who  stir  up  the  dormant  fires  of  Cupid,  and  inspire  a silent
love ; hence  it  is  that  the  common  cock,  so  soon  as  he  sees  one
of  his  own  hens  that  has  been  absent  for  ever  so  short  time,
or  any  other  stranger-hen,  forthwith  feels  the  sting  of  desire,
and  treads  her.  Moreover,  victorious  in  a battle,  although
wounded  and  tired  from  the  fight,  he  straightway  sets  about
treading  the  wives  of  his  vanquished  foe  one  after  another.
And  that  he  may  further  feed  the  flame  of  love  thus  kindled
in  his  breast,  by  various  gesticulations,  incitements,  and  caresses,
often  crowing  the  while,  calling  his  hens  to  him,  approaching
and  walking  round  them,  and  tripping  himself  with  his  wings,
he  entices  his  females  to  intercom’se  as  by  a kind  of  fascina-
tion. Such  are  the  arts  of  the  male ; but  sometimes  a certain
sullenness  of  the  female,  and  an  apparent  disinclination  on  her
part,  contribute  not  a little  to  arouse  the  ardour  of  the  male
and  stimulate  his  languishing  desire,  so  that  he  fills  her  more
quickly  and  more  copiously  with  prolific  spirit.  But  of  allure-
ments of  this  kind,  and  in  what  degree  they  promote  concep-
tion, we  shall  speak  more  hereafter.  For,  if  you  carefully
weigh  the  works  of  nature,  you  will  find  that  nothing  in  them
was  made  in  vain,  but  that  all  things  were  ordered  with  a pur-
pose and  for  the  sake  of  some  good  end.

Almost  all  females,  though  they  have  pleasure  in  the  act  of
intercom’se  and  impregnation,  suffer  pain  in  parturition.  But
the  reverse  is  the  case  with  the  hen,  who  loudly  complains  dm’-
ing  intercom’se  and  struggles  against  itj  but  in  parturition.


‘ Hist.  Nat.  lib.  is,  cap.  50.


320


ON  GENERATION.


although  the  egg  he  very  large  in  comparison  with  the  body
and  the  orifice  of  the  uterus,  and  it  does  nothing  to  further  its
exit,  (as  is  customary  with  the  young  of  viviparous  animals,)  yet
she  brings  forth  easily  and  without  pain,  and  immediately  after-
wards commences  her  exultations ; and  with  her  loud  cackhng
calls  the  cock  as  it  seems  to  share  in  her  triumph.

But,  although  many  rudiments  of  eggs  are  found  in  the  hen’s
ovary,  of  various  sizes  and  in  different  stages,  so  that  some
are  larger  and  nearer  to  maturity  than  others,  yet  all  of  them
appear  to  be  fecundated,  or  to  receive  the  prolific  faculty  from
the  tread  of  the  cock  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  degree.
And  though  a considerable  time  elapse  (namely,  thirty  or  more
days)  before  the  common  hen  or  hen-partridge  lay  all  the  eggs
which  she  has  conceived,  yet  in  a stated  time  after  the  mother
has  begun  to  sit  upon  them  (say  twenty  or  two  and  twenty
days)  all  the  young  are  hatched  nearly  at  the  same  time ; nor
are  they  less  perfect  than  if  they  had  commenced  their  origin
simultaneously,  from  the  period  of  one  and  the  same  concep-
tion, as  the  whelps  of  bitches  do.

And  while  we  are  here,  and  while  I think  how  small  are  the
prolific  germs  of  eggs,  mere  papulae  and  exudations  less  than
millet-seeds,  and  contemplate  the  full  proportions  of  the  cock
that  springs  from  thence,  his  fine  spiidt,  and  his  handsome
plumage,  I cannot  but  express  my  admiration  that  such  strength
should  be  reposed  in  the  natm’e  of  things  in  such  insignificant
elements,  and  that  it  has  pleased  the  omnipotent  Creator  out
of  the  smallest  beginnings  to  exhibit  some  of  his  greatest  works.
From  a minute  and  scarce  perceptible  papula  springs  the  hen,
or  the  cock,  a proud  and  magnificent  creature.  From  a small
seed  springs  a mighty  tree;  from  the  minute  gemmule  or  apex
of  the  acorn,  how  wide  does  the  gnarled  oak  at  length  extend
his  arms,  how  loftily  does  he  lift  his  branches  to  the  sky,  how
deeply  do  his  roots  strike  doAvn  into  the  gi’ound  ! " It  is  iu

truth  a great  mii’acle  of  nature,”  says  Pliny,^  " that  from  so
small  an  origin  is  produced  a material  that  resists  the  axe,
and  that  supplies  beams,  masts,  and  battering-rams.  Such  is
the  strength,  such  the  power  of  nature ! ” But  in  the  seeds
of  all  plants  there  is  a gemmule  or  bud  of  such  a kind,  so


' Lib.  xvii,  cap.  10.


ON  GENERATION.


321


small  that  if  the  top  only,  a veiy  point,  be  lost,  all  hope  of  pro-
pagation is  immediately  destroyed ; in  so  small  a particle  does
all  the  plastic  power  of  the  future  tree  seem  lodged  ! The
pro\ddent  ant  by  gnawing  off  this  little  particle  stores  safely  in
her  subterraneous  hoard  the  grain  and  other  seeds  she  gathers,
and  ingeniously  guards  against  their  growing : “ The  cypress,'^
adds  Pliny,  in  the  same  place,  hears  a seed  that  is  greatly
sought  after  by  the  ant ; which  makes  us  still  further  wonder,
that  the  birth  of  mighty  trees  should  be  consumed  in  the  food
of  so  small  an  animal.’’  But  on  these  points  we  shall  say
more  when  we  show  that  many  animals,  especially  insects,  arise
and  are  propagated  from  elements  and  seeds  so  small  as  to  he
invisible,  (like  atoms  fljdng  in  the  air,)  scattered  and  dispersed
here  and  there  by  the  winds;  and  yet  these  animals  are  supposed
to  have  arisen  spontaneously,  or  from  decomposition,  because
their  ova  are  nowhere  to  be  found.  These  considerations,  how-
ever, may  furnish  arguments  to  that  school  of  philosophy  which
teaches  that  all  things  are  produced  from  nothing ; and  indeed
there  is  hardly  any  ascertainable  proportion  betAveen  the  rudi-
ment and  the  full  growth  of  any  animal.

Nor  should  we  so  much  wonder  what  it  is  in  the  cock  that
preserves  and  governs  so  perfect  and  beautiful  an  animal,  and
is  the  first  cause  of  that  entity  which  we  call  the  soul ; but
much  more,  \rhat  it  is  in  the  egg,  aye,  in  the  germ  of  the  egg,
of  so  great  Adrtue  as  to  produce  such  an  animal,  and  raise  him
to  the  very  summit  of  excellence.  Nor  are  we  only  to  admire
the  greatness  of  the  artificer  that  aids  in  the  production  of  so
noble  a work,  but  chiefly  the  “ contagion  ” of  intercourse,  an  act
which  is  so  momentary  ! What  is  it,  for  instance,  that  passes
from  the  male  into  the  female,  from  the  female  into  the  egg,
from  the  egg  into  the  chick  ? What  is  this  transitory  thing,
which  is  neither  to  be  found  remaining,  nor  touching,  nor  con-
tained, as  far  as  the  senses  inform  us,  and  yet  works  with  the
highest  intelligence  and  foresight,  beyond  all  art ; and  which,
even  after  it  has  vanished,  renders  the  egg  prolific,  not  because
it  now  touches,  but  because  it  formerly  did  so,  and  that  not
merely  in  the  case  of  the  perfect  and  completed  egg,  but  of
the  imperfect  and  commencing  one  when  it  was  yet  but  a
speck ; aye,  and  makes  the  hen  herself  fruitful  before  she  has
yet  produced  any  germs  of  eggs,  and  this  too  so  suddenly,  as

.21


322


ON  GENERATION.


if  it  were  said  by  tlie  Almighty,  “ Let  there  be  progeny,^’  and
straight  it  is  so  ?

Let  physicians,  therefore,  cease  to  wonder  at  what  always
excites  their  astonishment,  namely,  the  manner  in  which  epi-
demic, contagions,  and  pestilential  diseases  scatter  their  seeds,
and  are  propagated  to  a distance  through  the  air,  or  by  some
‘ fomes  ’ producing  diseases  like  themselves,  in  bodies  of  a
different  nature,  and  in  a hidden  fashion  silently  multiplying
themselves  by  a kind  of  generation,  until  they  become  so  fatal,
and  with  the  permission  of  the  Deity  spread  destruction  far
and  wide  among  man  and  beast ; since  they  Avill  find  far  greater
wonders  than  these  taking  place  daily  in  the  generation  of
animals.  For  agents  in  greater  number  and  of  more  efficieucy
are  required  in  the  construction  and  preservation  of  an  animal,
than  for  its  destruction ; since  the  things  that  are  difficult  and
slow  of  growth,  decay  with  ease  and  rapidity.  Seneca  ^ ob-
serves, with  his  usual  elegance,  “ How  long  a time  is  needed
for  conception  to  be  carried  out  to  parturition  ! with  what  la-
bour and  tenderness  is  an  iufant  reai’ed  ! to  what  diligent  and
continued  nutrition  must  the  body  be  subject,  to  arrive  at
adolescence  ! but  by  what  a nothing  is  it  destroyed  ! It  takes
an  age  to  establish  cities,  an  hour  to  destroy  them.  By  great
watching  are  all  things  established  and  made  to  flourish,  quickly
and  of  a sudden  do  they  fall  in  pieces.  That  which  becomes
by  long  growth  a forest,  quickly,  in  the  smallest  interval  of
time,  and  by  a spark,  is  reduced  to  ashes.”  Kor  is  even  a
spark  necessary,  since  by  the  solar  rays  transmitted  tlu’ough  a
small  piece  of  glass  and  concentrated  to  a focus,  fire  may  be
immediately  produced,  and  the  largest  things  be  set  in  flames.
So  easy  is  every  thing  to  nature’s  majesty,  who  uses  her  strength
sparingly,  and  dispenses  it  with  caution  and  foresight  for  the
commencement  of  her  works  by  imperceptible  additions,  but
hastens  to  decay  with  suddenness  and  in  full  career.  In  the
generation  of  things  is  seen  the  most  excellent,  the  eternal
and  almighty  God,  the  dirinity  of  nature,  worthy  to  be  looked
up  to  with  reverence ; but  aU  mortal  things  run  to  destruction
of  their  own  accord  in  a thousand  ways.


' Nat.  Qusest.  lib.  iii,  cap.  27.


ON  GENERATION.


323


EXERCISE  THE  FORTY-SECOND.

Of  the  manner  in  tvhich  the  generation  of  the  chick  takes
place  from  the  egg.

Hitlierto  we  have  considered  the  egg  as  the  fruit  and  end ;
it  still  remains  for  us  to  treat  of  it  as  the  seed  and  beginning.
“We  must  now  inquire/’  says  Fahricius'j  “how  the  generation
of  the  chick  results  from  the  egg,  setting  out  from  that  prin-
ciple of  Aristotle  and  Galen,  which  is,  even  conceded  by  all,
to  wit,  that  all  things  which  are  made  in  this  hfe,  are  mani-
festly made  by  these  three  : workers,  instruments,  and  matter.

But  since  in  natural  phenomena,  the  work  is  not  extrinsic,
but  is  included  in  the  matter,  or  the  instruments,  he  concludes
that  we  must  take  cognizance  only  of  the  agent  and  the
matter.

As  we  are  here  about  to  shew  in  what  manner  the  chick
arises  from  the  egg,  however,  I think  it  may  be  of  advantage
for  me  to  preface  this,  by  showing  the  number  of  modes  in
which  one  thing  may  be  said  to  be  made  from  another.

For  so  it  will  appear,  more  clearly  and  distinctly,  after  which
of  these  generation  takes  place  in  the  egg,  and  what  are  the
right  conclusions  in  regard  to  its  matter,  its  instruments,  and
efficient  cause.

Aristotle^  has  laid  down  that  there  are  four  modes  in  which
one  thing  is  made  from  another : first,  when  we  say  that

from  day  night  is  made,  or  from  a boy  a man,  since  one  is
after  the  other;  secondly,  when  we  say  that  a statue  is  made
fi’om  brass,  or  a bed  from  wood,  or  any  thing  else  from  a cer-
tain material,  so  that  the  whole  consists  of  something,  which
is  inherent  and  made  into  a form ; thirdly,  as  when  from  a
musical  man  is  made  an  unmusical  one,  or  from  a healthy,  a sick
one,  or  contraries  in  any  way  ; fourthly,  as  Epicharmus  exagge-
rates it,  as  of  calumnies,  cursing ; of  cursing,  fighting.  But  all
these  are  to  be  referred  to  that  from  whence  the  movement
took  its  rise;  for  the  calumny  is  a certain  portion  of  the  whole


0)).  cit.  p.  28.


^ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  18.


324


ON  GENERATION.


quarrel.  Since  then  these  are  the  methods  in  which  one  thing
is  made  from  another,  it  is  clear  that  the  seed  is  in  one  of  two
of  these.  For  that  which  is  honi  aiises  out  of  it,  either  as  from
matter,  or  as  from  the  prime  mover.  For  it  is  not,  ‘ as  this  is
after  that,’  in  the  same  way  as  after  the  Panathenoea  naAn-
gation  ; nor  as  one  contrarA^  from  another for  in  such  case,
a thing  would  he  born  out  of  its  contrary,  because  it  is  in  a
state  of  decay,  and  there  must  he  something  else  as  subject
matter.”

By  these  words,  Aristotle  rightly  infers,  that  the  semen  pro-
ceeding from  the  male,  is  the  efficient  or  instrumental  cause
of  the  embryo ; since  it  is  no  part  of  Avhat  is  bora,  either  in
the  first  or  third  manner;  (namely,  as  one  thing  is  after  another,
or  as  it  is  out  of  its  contrary ;)  nor  does  it  arise  from  the  sub-
ject matter.

But  then,  as  he  adds,  in  the  same  place,  “ that  which
comes  out  of  the  male  in  coition,  is  not  with  truth  and  pro-
priety called  semen,  hut  rather  geniture ; and  it  is  different
from  the  seed  properly  so  called.  For  that  is  called  the  geni-
tm’e  Avhich,  proceeding  from  the  generant,  is  the  cause  Avhich
first  promotes  the  beginning  of  generation.  I mean  in  those
creatures,  which  natm’e  designed  to  have  connection  ; hnt  the
seed  is  that  which  derives  its  origin  from  the  intercourse  of  the
two  (i.  e.  of  the  male  and  female);  such  is  the  seed  of  all  plants;
and  of  some  animals  in  which  the  sex  is  not  distinct ; it  is  the
produce,  as  it  were,  of  the  male  and  female  mixed  together
originally,  like  a kind  of  promiscuous  conception;”  and  such
as  we  have  formerly  in  oui’  history  declai’ed  the  egg  to  be,
which  is  called  both  frnit  and  seed.  For  the  seed  and  the
fruit  are  distinct  from  each  other,  and  in  the  relation  of  ante-
cedent and  consequent ; the  fruit  is  that  which  is  out  of  some-
thing else,  the  seed  is  that  out  of  wliich  something  else  comes;
otherwise  both  were  the  same.

It  remains  then,  to  inquire,  in  how  many  of  the  aforesaid
Avays  the  foetus  may  arise,  not  indeed  from  the  geniture  of  the
male,  hut  out  of  the  true  seed,  or  out  of  the  egg  or  conception,
Avhich  is  in  reality  the  seed  of  animals.


ON  GENERATION.


325


EXEKCISE  THE  FORTY-THIRD.

In  how  many  ways  the  chick  may  be  said  to  be  formed
from  the  egg.

It  is  admitted,  then,  that  the  foetus  is  formed  from  a pro-
lific egg,  as  out  of  the  proper  matter,  and  as  it  were  by  the
requisite  agency,  and  that  the  same  egg  stands  for  both  causes
of  the  chick.  For  inasmuch  as  it  derives  its  origin  from  the
hen,  and  is  considered  as  a fruit,  it  is  the  matter : but,  in  so  far
as  it  contains  in  its  whole  structure  the  prolific  and  plastic
faculty  infused  by  the  male,  it  is  called  the  efficient  cause
of  the  chick.

Moreover,  not  only  as  Fabricius  supposed,  are  these,  namely,
the  agent  and  the  instrument,  inseparably  joined  in  one  and
the  same  egg,  but  it  is  also  necessary,  that  the  aliment  by  which
the  chick  is  nourished,  be  present  in  the  same  place.  Indeed,  in
the  prolific  egg,  these  four  are  found  together,  to  wit,  the  agent,
the  instrument,  the  matter,  and  the  aliment,  as  we  have  shown
in  our  history.  ^

Wherefore,  we  say,  that  the  chick  is  formed  from  the  x^ro-
lific  egg  in  all  the  aforesaid  ways,  namely,  as  from  matter,  by
an  efficient,  and  by  an  instrument ; and  moreover,  as  a man
grows  out  of  a boy,  as  the  whole  is  made  up  of  its  parts,  and  as
a thing  grows  from  its  nutriment;  a contrary  thing  springs  from
a contrary.

For  after  incubation  is  begun,  as  soon  as  by  the  internal
motive  principle  a certain  clear  liquid  which  we  have  called
the  eye  of  the  egg  is  produced,  we  say  that  that  liquid
is  made  as  it  were  out  of  a contrary ; in  the  same  way  as  we
suppose  the  chyle  through  concoction  to  be  formed  out  of  its
contraries,  (namely,  crude  articles  of  food,)  and  in  the  same
way  as  we  are  said  to  be  nourished  by  contraries ; so,  from  the
albumen  is  formed  and  augmented  that  to  which  we  have
given  the  names  of  the  eye  and  the  coUiquament ; and  in
the  same  manner,  from  that  clear  fluid  do  the  blood  and
pulsating  vesicle,  the  first  particles  of  the  chick,  receive  tlieir
being,  nutrition,  and  growth.  The  nutriment,  I say,  is  by


32G


ON  GENERATION.


the  powers  of  an  inherent  and  innate  heat,  assimilated  by
means  of  concoction,  as  it  were  out  of  a contrary.  For  the
crude  and  unconcocted  are  contraiy  to  the  concocted  and  as-
similated, as  the  unmusical  man  is  to  the  musical,  and  the
sick  to  the  sound  man.

And  when  the  blood  is  engendered  from  the  clear  colliqua-
ment,  or  a clear  fluid  is  produced  from  the  white  or  the  yelk,
there  is  generation  as  regards  the  former,  comiption  as  regards
the  latter;  a transmutation,  namely,  is  made  from  the  extremes
of  contraries,  the  subject-matter  all  the  while  remaining  the
same.  To  explain:  by  the  breaking  up  of  the  first  form  of  the
white,  the  colliquament  is  produced;  and  from  the  consumption
of  this  colliquament,  follows  the  form  of  the  blood,  in  the  same
way  precisely  as  food  is  converted  into  the  substance  of  the
thing  fed.

It  is  thus,  then,  that  the  chick  is  said  to  be  made  out  of
the  egg,  as  it  were  by  a contrary;  for  in  the  nutrition  and
growth  of  the  chick  in  the  egg,  white  and  yelk  are  equally
broken  up  and  consumed,  and  finally  the  whole  substance  of
the  egg.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  chick  is  formed  from
the  egg,  as  it  were  by  a contrary,  namely  the  aliment,  and  as
if  by  an  abstraction,  and  from  a non-entity.  For  the  first
particle  of  the  chick,  ^dz.  : the  blood  or  punctum  sahens,  is
constituted  out  of  something  which  is  not  blood,  and  alto-
gether its  contrary,  the  same  subject-matter  always  remaining.

The  chick  too  is  made  from  the  egg,  as  a man  is  made
from  a boy.  For  in  the  same  way,  as  out  of  plants  seeds
arise,  and  out  of  seeds,  buds,  sprouts,  stems,  flowers,  and
fruits  ; so  also  out  of  the  egg,  the  seed  of  the  hen  is  produced,
the  dilatation  of  the  cicatricula  and  the  colliquament,  the
blood  and  the  heart,  as  the  first  particle  of  the  foetus  or  fruit ;
and  all  this,  in  the  same  way  as  the  day  from  the  night,  the  sum-
mer from  the  spring,  a man  from  a boy — one  follows  or  comes
after  the  other.  So  that,  in  the  same  way  as  fruits  arise
after  flowers  on  the  same  stem,  so  likewise  is  the  colliqua-
ment formed  after  the  egg,  the  blood  after  this,  as  from  the
primogeneous  humour,  the  chick  after  the  blood,  and  out  of
it,  as  the  whole  out  of  a part ; in  the  same  u ay,  as  by
Epicharmus’s  exaggeration,  out  of  calumnies  comes  cursing,
and  out  of  cursing  fighting.  For  the  blood  first  begins  its


ON  GENERATION.


327


existence  with  the  punctum  saliens^  and  at  the  same  time,  seems
to  be  as  well  a part  of  the  chick,  and  a kind  of  efficient  or
instrument  of  its  generation,  inseparable,  as  Fabricius  thinks,
from  the  agent.  But  how  the  egg  may  be  called  the  efficient
and  instrument  of  generation,  has  partly  been  explained  already,
and  will  be  illustrated  more  copiously  by  what  we  shall  presently
say.

So  much  has  been  fully  established  in  our  history,  that
the  punctum  pulsans  and  the  blood,  in  the  course  of  their
growth,  attach  round  themselves  the  rest  of  the  body,  and  all
the  other  members  of  the  chick,  just  as  the  yelk  in  the  uterus,
after  being  evolved  from  the  ovary,  surrounds  itself  with  the
white;  and  this  not  without  concoction  and  nutrition.  Now
the  common  instrument  of  all  vegetative  operations,  is,  in  the
opinion  of  all  men,  an  internal  heat  or  calidum  innatum,  or
a spirit  diffused  through  the  whole,  and  in  that  spirit  a soul
or  faculty  of  a soul.  The  egg,  therefore,  beyond  all  doubt,
has  its  own  operative  soul,  which  is  all  in  the  w'hole,  and  all
in  each  individual  part,  and  contains  within  itself  a spirit  or
animal  heat,  the  immediate  instrument  of  that  soul.  To  one
who  should  ask  then,  how  the  chick  is  made  from  the  egg,  we
answer : after  all  the  ways  recited  by  Aristotle,  and  devised
by  others,  in  which  it  is  possible  for  one  thing  to  be  made
from  another*


EXERCISE  THE  FORTY-FOURTH.

Fabricius  is  mistaken  ivith  regard  to  the  matter  of  the  generation
of  the  chick  in  ovo.

As  I proposed  to  myself  at  the  outset,  I continue  to  follow
Fabricius  as  pointing  out  the  way;  and  we  shall,  therefore,
consider  the  three  things  which  he  says  are  to  be  particularly
regarded  in  the  generation  of  the  chick,  viz. : the  agent,  the
matter,  and  the  nourishment  of  the  embryo.  These  must
needs  be  all  contained  in  the  egg ; he  proposes  various
doubts  or  questions,  and  quotes  the  opinions  of  the  most
weighty  authorities  in  regard  to  them,  these  opinions  being


328


ON  GENERATION.


frequently  discordant.  The  first  difficulty  is  in  reference  to  the
matter  and  nourishment  of  the  chick.  Hippocrates,^  Anaxa-
goras, Alcmaeon,  Menander,  and  the  ancient  philosophers,  all
thought  that  the  chick  was  engendered  from  the  Htellus,  and
was  nourished  hy  the  albumen.  Aristotle,^  however,  and
after  him,  Pliny,^  maintained,  on  the  contraiy,  that  the  chick
was  incorporated  from  the  albumen,  and  nourished  by  tbe
vitellus.  But  Fabricius  himself,  will  have  it  that  neither  the
white  nor  yelk  forms  the  matter  of  the  chick ; he  strives  to  com-
bat both  of  the  preceding  opinions,  and  teaches  that  the  white
and  the  yellow  alike  do  no  more  than  nourish  the  chick.
One  of  his  arguments,  amongst  a great  number  of  others  which
I think  are  less  to  be  acquiesced  in,  appears  to  me  to  have
some  force.  The  branches  of  the  umbilical  vessels,  he  says,
through  which  the  embryo  undoubtedly  imbibes  its  nourish-
ment, are  distributed  to  the  albumen  and  the  Htellus  abke,  and
both  of  these  fluids  diminish  as  the  chick  grows.  And  it  is
on  this  ground,  that  Fabricius  in  confirmation  of  his  opinion,
says^  : “ Of  the  bodies  constituting  the  egg,  and  adapted  to
forward  the  generation  of  the  chick,  there  are  only  three,  the
albumen,  tbe  vitellus,  and  the  chalazte;  now  the  albumen  and
vitellus  are  the  nourishment  of  the  chick  ; so  that  the  chalazse
alone  remain  as  matter  from  which  it  can  be  produced.”

Nevertheless,  that  the  excellent  Fabricius  is  in  error  here,
we  have  demonstrated  above  in  our  histoiy.  For  after  the
chick  is  already  almost  perfected,  and  its  head  and  its  eyes  are
distinctly  risible,  the  chalazse  can  readily  be  found  entire,  far
from  tbe  embiyo,  and  pushed  from  the  apices  towards  the  sides:
the  office  of  these  bodies,  as  Fabricius  himself  admits,  is  that
of  hgaments,  and  to  preserve  the  viteUus  in  its  proper  position
within  the  albumen.  Nor  is  that  true,  which  Fabricius  adds
in  confirmation  of  bis  opinion,  namely,  that  the  chalazse  are
situated  in  the  direction  of  the  blunt  part  of  the  egg.  For  after
even  a single  day^s  incubation,  the  relative  positions  of  the  fluids
of  the  egg  are  changed,  the  yelk  being  drawn  upwards,  and  the
chalazse  on  either  hand  removed,  as  we  have  already  had  occa-
sion to  say,

' Lib.  de  Nat.  Pueri.

^ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  3,  et  de  Geu.  Auim.  lib.  iii,  caji.  1 N 2.

^ Lib.  .X,  cap.  53.  ■*  Op.  cit.  p.  34.


ON  GENERATION.


329


He  is  also  mistaken  when  he  speaks  of  the  ehalazse,  as  pro-
per parts  of  the  egg.  The  egg  consists  in  fact  but  of  white
and  yelk ; the  chalazse  as  well  as  the  membranes^  are  mere
appendages  of  the  albumen  and  vitellus.  The  chalazse,  in
particular,  are  the  extremities  of  certain  membranes,  twisted
and  knotted ; they  are  produced  in  the  same  way  as  a rope  is
formed  by  the  contortion  of  its  component  filaments,  and  exist
for  the  purpose  of  more  certainly  securiug  the  several  elements
of  the  egg  in  their  respective  places.

Fabricius,  therefore,  reasons  ill  when  he  says,  that  " the
chalazse  are  found  in  the  part  of  the  egg  where  the  embryo  is
produced,  wherefore  it  is  engendered  from  them  ■/’  for  even  on
his  own  showing,  this  could  never  take  place,  he  admitting
that  the  chalazse  are  extant  in  either  extremity  of  the  egg,
whilst  the  chick  never  makes  its  appearance  save  at  the  blunt
end;  in  which,  moreover,  at  the  first  commencement  of  gene-
ration, no  chalaza  can  be  seen.  Farther,  if  you  examine
the  matter  in  a fresh  egg,  you  will  find  the  superior  chalaza
not  immediately  under  the  blunt  end  or  its  cavity,  but  declined
somewhat  to  the  side ; not  to  that  side,  however,  where  the
cavity  is  extending,  but  rather  to  the  opposite  side.  StiU  far-
ther, from  w'hat  has  preceded,  it  is  ob\ious  that  the  relative
positions  of  the  fluids  of  the  egg  are  altered  immediately  that
iiicubation  is  begun  : the  eye  increased  by  the  colliquament  is
drawn  up  towards  the  cavity  in  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg,
whence  the  white  and  the  chalaza  are  on  either  hand  with-
drawn to  the  side.  For  the  macula  or  cicatricula  which  before
incubation  was  situated  midway  between  the  two  ends,  now  in-
creased into  the  eye  of  the  egg,  adjoins  the  cavity  in  the  blunt
end,  and  w'hilst  one  of  the  chalazae  is  depressed  from  the  blunt
end,  the  other  is  raised  from  the  sharp  end,  in  the  same  way
as  the  poles  of  a globe  are  situated  when  the  axis  is  set  ob-
hqirely;  the  greater  portion  of  the  albumen,  particularly  that
Avhich  is  thicker,  subsides  at  the  same  time,  into  the  sharp  end.

Neither  is  it  correct  to  say,  that  the  chalazse  bear  a resem-
blance in  length  and  configuration  to  the  chick  on  its  first
formation,  and  that  the  number  of  their  nodules  corresponds
with  the  number  of  the  principal  parts  of  the  embryo ; a
statement  which  gives  Fabricius  an  opportunity  of  adducing
an  argument  connected  with  the  matter  of  the  chick,  based  on


330


ON  GENERATION.


the  similarity  of  its  consistency  to  that  of  the  chalazse.  But
the  red  mass  (which  Fabricius  regarded  as  the  hver)  is  neither
situated  in  nor  near  the  chalaza^  but  in  the  middle  of  the
clear  colliquament ; and  it  is  not  any  rudiment  of  the  liver  but
of  the  heart  alone.  Neither  does  his  -^dew  square  with  the
example  he  quotes  of  the  tAdpole,  “ of  which/’  he  says,  “ there
is  nothing  to  he  seen  hut  the  head  and  the  tail,  that  is  to  say,
the  head  and  spine,  without  a trace  of  upper  or  lower  extremi-
ties.” And  he  adds,  “ he  who  has  seen  a chalaza,  and  this
kind  of  conception,  in  so  far  as  the  body  is  concerned,  will
believe  that  in  the  former,  he  has  already  seen  the  latter.”  I,
however,  have  frequently  dissected  the  tadpole,  and  have  found
the  belly  of  large  size,  and  containing  intestines  and  liver
and  heart  pulsating ; I have  also  distinguished  the  head  and
the  eyes.  The  part  which  Fabricius  takes  for  the  head,  is  the
rounded  mass  [or  entire  body]  of  the  tadpole,  whence  the
creature  is  called  ' gyrinus,’  from  its  circular  form.  It  has  a
tail  with  which  it  swims,  but  is  without  legs.  About  the
epoch  of  the  summer  solstice,  it  loses  the  tail,  when  the  ex-
tremities begin  to  sprout.  Nothing  however  occius  in  the
nature  of  a division  of  the  embryo  pullet  into  the  head  and
spine,  which  should  induce  us  to  regard  it  as  produced  from
the  chalazm,  and  in  the  same  manner  as  the  tadpole.

The  position  and  fame  of  Fabricius,  however,  a man  exceed-
ingly well  skilled  in  anatomy,  do  not  allow  me  to  push  this
refutation  farther.  Nor  indeed,  is  there  any  necessity  so  to
do,  seeing  that  the  thing  is  so  clearly  exhibited  in  our  history.

Our  author  concludes,  by  stating  that  his  opinion  is  of
great  antiquity,  and  was  in  vogue  even  in  the  times  of  Aristotle.

For  my  own  part,  nevertheless,  I regard  the  riew  of  Ulysses
Aldrovandus  as  the  older,  he  maintaining,  that  the  chalazae  are
the  spermatic  fluid  of  the  cock,  from  which  and  through  which
alike  the  chick  is  engendered.

Neither  notioir,  however,  is  founded  oir  fact,  but  is  the
popular  error  of  all  times  : the  chalazfe,  treads,  or  treadles,  as
our  English  name  implies,  are  still  regarded  by  the  country  folks
as  the  semen  of  the  cock.

“ The  treadles  (graudirres),”  says  Aldrovandus;  “ ai’e  the
spermatic  fluid  of  the  cock,  because  no  fertile  egg  is  without
them.”  But  neither  is  any  unprolific  egg  without  these  parts.


ON  GENERATION.


331


a fact  which  Aldrovandus  Avas  either  ignorant  of  or  concealed.
Fahricius  admits  this  fact ; hut  though  he  has  denied  that  the
semen  of  the  male  penetrates  to  the  uterus  or  is  ever  found  in
the  egg,  he  nevertheless,  contends,  that  the  chalazse  alone  of
all  the  parts  of  the  egg  are  impregnated  Avith  the  prolific
power  of  the  egg,  and  are  the  repositories  of  the  fecundating
infiuence ; and  this,  Avith  the  fact  staring  him  in  the  face  all
the  while,  that  there  is  no  perceptible  difference  between  the
chalazse  of  a prolific  and  an  unprolific  egg.  And  Avhen  he  admits,
that  the  mere  rudiments  of  eggs  in  the  ovary,  as  well  as  the
vitelli  that  are  surrounded  with  albumen,  become  fecundated
through  the  intercourse  of  the  cock,  I conceive  that  this  must
have  been  the  cause  of  the  error  committed  by  so  distinguished
an  individual.  It  was  the  current  opinion,  as  I have  said
oftener  than  once,  both  among  philosophers  and  physicians,
that  the  matter  of  the  embrjm  in  animal  generation,  was
the  geniture,  either  of  the  male,  or  of  the  female,  or  resulted
from  a mixture  of  the  tAvo,  and  that  from  this,  deposited  in
the  uterus,  like  a seed  in  the  ground,  which  produces  a plant,
the  animal  Avas  engendered.  Aristotle,  himself,  is  not  very  far
from  the  same  view,  when  he  maintains  the  menstrual  blood
of  the  female  to  be  the  seed,  which  the  semen  of  the  male
coagulates,  and  so  composes  the  conception.

The  error  which  we  have  announced,  having  been  admitted
by  all  in  former  times,  as  a matter  of  certainty,  it  it  not  to  be
wondered  at,  that  Amrious  erroneous  opinions  based  on  each
man’s  conjecture,  should  have  emanated  from  it.  They,  hoAV-
ever,  are  Avholly  mistaken,  Avho  fancy  that  anything  in  the
shape  of  a prepared  or  fit  matter  ’ must  necessarily  remain
in  the  uterus  after  intercourse,  from  which  the  foetus  is  pro-
duced, or  the  first  conception  is  formed,  or' that  anything  is
immediateh^  fashioned  in  the  uterine  cavity  that  corresponds
to  the  seed  of  a plant  deposited  in  the  bosom  of  the  ground.
For  it  is  quite  certain,  that  in  the  uterus  of  the  fowl,  and  the
same  thing  is  true  of  the  uterus  of  every  other  female  animal,
there  is  nothing  discoverable  after  intercourse  more  than  there
Avas  before  it.

It  appears,  consequently,  that  Fabricius  erred  when  he
said : ’ “In  the  same  Avay  as  a viviparous  animal  is  incorpo-
’ Op.  sup.  cit.  p.  35.


332


ON  GENERATION.


rated  from  a small  quantity  of  seminal  matter,  whilst  the  mat-
ter which  is  taken  up  as  food  and  nourishment  is  very  large ;
so  a small  chalaza  suffices  for  the  generation  of  a chick,  and
the  rest  of  the  matter  contained  in  the  egg  goes  to  it  in  the
shape  of  nutriment.”  From  which  it  is  obvious,  that  he  sought
for  some  such  ‘ prepai’ed  matter  ’ in  the  egg,  whence  the  chick
should  be  incoi’porated ; mainly,  as  it  seems,  that  he  might
not  be  found  in  contradiction  with  Aristotle^s  definition  of  an
egg,^  viz.  : as  “ that  from  part  of  which  an  animal  is  engen-
dered ; and  the  remainder  of  which  is  food  for  the  thing
engendered.”  This  of  Fabricius,  therefore,  has  the  look  of  a
valid  argument,  namely,  “ Since  there  are  only  three  parts  in
the  egg, — the  albumen,  the  vitellus,  and  the  chalazae  / and  the
two  former  alone  supply  aliment ; it  necessarily  follows,  that
the  chalazae  alone  are  the  matter  from  which  the  chick  is  con-
stituted.”

Thus,  our  learned  anatomist,  blinded  by  a popular  eiTor,
seeking  in  the  egg  for  some  particular  matter  fitted  to  engender
the  chick  distinct  from  the  rest  of  the  contents  of  the  egg,  has
gone  astray.  And  so  it  happens  to  all,  who  forsaking  the
light,  which  the  frequent  dissection  of  bodies,  and  familiar
converse  Avith  nature  supplies,  expect  that  they  are  to  under-
stand from  conjecture,  and  arguments  founded  on  probabihties,
or  the  authority  of  writers,  the  things  or  the  facts  which  they
ought  themselves  to  behold  with  their  OAvn  eyes,  to  perceive
Avith  their  proper  senses.  It  is  not  wonderful,  therefore,  when
we  see  that  we  have  so  many  errors  accredited  by  genenJ
consent,  handed  down  to  us  from  remote  antiquity,  that  men
othei’Avise  of  great  ingenuity,  should  be  egregiously  deceived^
Avhich  they  may  very  Avell  be,  when  they  ai’e  satisfied  Arith
taking  their  knowledge  fi’om  books,  and  keeping  their  memory
stored  with  the  notions  of  learned  men.  They  who  philoso-
phise in  this  way,  by  tradition,  if  I may  so  say,  knoAv  no
better  than  the  books  they  keep  by  them.

In  the  egg  then,  as  Ave  have  said,  there  is  no  distinct  part
or  prepared  matter  present,  from  which  the  foetus  is  formed ;
but  in  the  same  Avay  as  the  apex  or  gemmide  protmdes  in  a
seed ; so  in  the  egg,  there  is  a macula  or  cicatricula,  AA'hicli


Hist.  Anini.  lib.  iii,  cap.  S.


ON  GENERATION.


333


endowed  with  plastic  power,  grows  into  the  eye  of  the  egg  and
the  colliquament,  from  which  and  in  which  the  primordial  or
rudimentary  parts  of  the  chick,  the  blood,  to  udt,  and  the
punctum  sahens  are  engendered,  nourished,  and  augmented,
until  the  perfect  chick  is  developed.  Neither  is  Aristotle’s
definition  of  an  egg  correct,  as  a body  from  part  of  which  an
embryo  is  formed,  and  by  part  of  which  it  is  nomfished,  unless
the  philosopher  is  to  be  understood  in  the  following  manner  :
The  egg  is  a body,  from  part  of  which  the  chick  arises,  not  as
from  a special  matter,  but  as  a man  grows  out  of  a boy ; or  an
egg  is  a perfect  conception  front  which  the  chick  is  said  to  be
partly  constituted,  partly  nourished  ; or  to  conclude,  an  egg  is
a body,  the  fluids  of  which  serve  both  for  the  matter  and  the
nourishment  of  the  parts  of  the  foetus.  In  this  sense,  indeed,
Aristotle^  teaches  us  that  the  matter  of  the  human  foetus  is
the  menstrual  blood;  which  (when  poured  into  the  uterus
by  the  veins)  nature  employs  to  a new  purpose ; viz.,  that  of
generation,  and  that  a future  being  may  arise,  such  as  the  one
from  which  it  springs ; for  potentially  it  is  ah’eady  such  as  is
the  body  whose  secretion  it  is,  namely,  the  mother.”


EXERCISE  THE  FORTY-FIFTH.

PF/iai  is  the  material  of  the  chick,  and  how  it  is  formed
in  the  egg  ?

Since,  then,  we  are  of  opinion,  that  for  the  acquisition  of
truth,  we  cannot  rely  on  the  theories  of  others,  whether  these  rest
on  mere  assertions,  or  even  may  have  been  confirmed  by  plau-
sible arguments,  except  there  be  added  thereto  a diligent  course
of  observation;  we  propose  to  show,  by  elearly-arranged  re-
marks derived  from  the  book  of  nature,  what  is  the  material
of  the  foetus,  and  in  what  manner  it  thence  takes  its  origin.
We  have  seen  that  one  thing  is  made  out  of  another  (tan-
quam  ex  materia)  in  two  Avays,  and  this  as  well  in  works  of
art,  as  in  those  of  nature,  and  more  particularly  in  the  gene-
ration of  animals.


' De  Gen.  Anim.  lil).  ii,  cap.  4.


334


ON  GENERATION.


One  of  these  ways,  when  the  object  is  made  out  of
something  pre-existing,  is  exemplified  by  the  formation  of  a
bed  out  of  wood,  or  a statue  from  stone ; in  Avhich  case,  the
whole  material  of  the  future  piece  of  work  has  already  been  in
existence,  before  it  is  finished  into  form,  or  any  part  of  the
work  is  yet  begun;  the  second  method  is,  when  the  material  is
both  made  and  brought  into  form  at  the  same  time.  Just
then  as  the  works  of  art  are  accomplished  in  two  manners,
one,  in  which  the  workman  cuts  the  material  abeady  prepared,
divides  it,  and  rejects  what  is  superfluous,  till  he  leaves  it  in  the
desired  shape  (as  is  the  custom  of  the  statuary) ; the  other,  as
when  the  potter  educes  a form  out  of  clay  by  the  addition
of  parts,  or  increasing  its  mass,  and  gmng  it  a figure,
at  the  same  time  that  he  provides  the  material,  which  he
prepares,  adapts,  and  applies  to  Ids  work ; (and  in  this  point
of  view,  the  form  may  be  said  rather  to  have  been  made  than
educed;)  so  exactly  is  it  with  regard  to  the  generation  of
animals.

Some,  out  of  a material  previously  concocted,  and  that  has
already  attained  its  bulk,  receive  their  fonns  and  transfigura-
tions ; and  all  their  parts  are  fashioned  simultaneously,  eacli
with  its  distinctive  characteristic,  by  the  process  called  meta-
morphosis, and  in  this  way  a perfect  animal  is  at  once  born ; on
the  other  hand,  there  are  some  in  which  one  part  is  made  before
another,  and  then  from  the  same  material,  afterwards  receive
at  once  nutrition,  bulk,  and  form  : that  is  to  say,  they  have
some  parts  made  before,  some  after  others,  and  these  are  at  the
same  time  increased  in  size  and  altered  in  form.  The  sti'uc-
ture  of  these  animals  commences  from  some  one  part  as  its
nucleus  and  origin,  by  the  instrumentality  of  which  the  rest
of  the  limbs  are  joined  on,  and  this  we  say  takes  place  by  the
method  of  epigenesis,  namely,  by  degrees,  part  after  paid ; and
this  is,  in  preference  to  the  other  mode,  generation  properly
so  called.

In  the  former  of  the  ways  mentioned,  the  generation  of
insects  is  effected  where  by  metamorphosis  a worm  is  born
from  an  egg ; or  out  of  a putrescent  material,  the  drying  of
a moist  substance  or  the  moistening  of  a dry  one,  rudiments
are  created,  from  which,  as  from  a caterpillar  grown  to  its  full
size,  or  from  an  aurelia,  springs  a butterfly  or  fly  ah'eady  of  a


ON  GENERATION.


33.5


proper  size,  which  never  a,ttains  to  any  larger  growth  after  it  is
first  born ; this  is  called  metamorphosis.  But  the  more  perfect
animals  with  red  blood  are  made  by  epigenesis,  or  the  su-
peraddition of  parts.  In  the  former,  chance  or  hazard  seems
the  principal  promoter  of  generation,  and  there,  the  form  is
due  to  the  potency  of  a preexisting  material;  and  the  first
cause  of  generation  is  ‘ matter,’  rather  than  ‘ an  external
efficient whence  it  happens  too  that  these  animals  are  less
perfect,  less  preservative  of  their  own  races,  and  less  abiding,
than  the  red-blooded  terrestrial  or  aquatic  animals,  which  owe
their  immortality  to  one  constant  source,  viz.  the  perpetuation
of  the  same  species  ; of  this  circumstance  we  assign  the  first
cause  to  nature  and  the  vegetative  faculty.

Some  animals  then  are  born  of  their  own  accord,  concocted
out  of  matter  spontaneously,  or  by  chance,  as  Aristotle  seems
to  assert,  when  he  speaks  of  animals  whose  matter  is  capable  of
receiving  an  impulse  from  itself,  viz.  the  same  impulse  given
by  hazard,  as  is  attributable  to  the  seed,  in  the  generation  of
other  animals.  And  the  same  thing  happens  in  art,  as  in  the
generation  of  animals.  Some  things,  which  are  the  result  of
art,  are  so  likewise  of  chance,  as  good  health  ; others  always
owe  their  existence  to  art;  for  instance,  a house.  Bees,  wasps,
butterflies,  and  whatever  is  generated  from  caterpillars  by
metamorphosis,  are  said  to  have  sprung  from  chance,  and
therefore  to  be  not  preservative  of  their  own  race ; the  con-
trary is  the  case  with  the  lion  and  the  cock ; they  owe  their
existence  as  it  were  to  nature  or  an  operative  faculty  of  a
divine  quality,  and  require  for  their  propagation  an  identity  of
species,  rather  than  any  supply  of  fitting  material.

In  the  generation  by  metamorphosis  forms  are  created  as  if
by  the  impression  of  a seal,  or,  as  if  they  were  adjusted  in  a
mould ; in  truth  the  whole  material  is  transformed.  But  an
animal  which  is  created  by  epigenesis  attracts,  prepares,  ela-
borates, and  makes  use  of  the  material,  all  at  the  same  time ;
the  processes  of  formation  and  growth  are  simultaneous.  In
the  former  the  plastic  force  cuts  up,  and  distributes,  and  re-
duces into  limbs  the  same  homogeneous  material ; and  makes
out  of  a homogeneous  material  organs  which  are  dissimilar.
But  in  the  latter,  while  it  creates  in  succession  parts  which  are
differently  and  variously  distributed,  it  requires  and  makes  a


336


ON  GENERATION.


material  wliich  is  also  various  in  its  nature,  and  variously  dis-
tributed, and  sucb  as  is  now  adapted  to  the  formation  of  one
part,  now  of  another ; on  which  account  we  believe  the  perfect
hen’s-egg  to  he  constituted  of  various  parts.

Now  it  appears  clear  from  my  history,  that  the  generation
of  the  chick  from  the  egg  is  the  result  of  epigenesis,  rather
than  of  metamorphosis,  and  that  all  its  parts  are  not  fashioned
simultaneously,  but  emerge  in  their  due  succession  and  order;
it  appears,  too,  that  its  form  proceeds  simultaneously  with  its
growth,  and  its  growth  vdth  its  form ; also  that  the  generation
of  some  parts  supervenes  on  others  previously  existing,  from
whicli  they  become  distinct ; lastly,  that  its  origin,  growth,  and
consummation  are  brought  about  by  the  method  of  nutrition ;
and  that  at  length  the  foetus  is  thus  produced.  For  the  for-
mative faculty  of  the  chick  rather  acquii’es  and  prepares  its  own
material  for  itself  than  only  finds  it  when  prepared,  and  the
chick  seems  to  he  formed  and  to  receive  its  growth  from  no
other  than  itself.  And,  as  all  things  receive  theii’  groAvth  from
the  same  power  by  which  they  are  created,  so  likewise  should
we  believe,  that  by  the  same  power  by  which  the  cluck  is  pre-
served, and  caused  to  grow  from  the  commencement,  (whether
that  may  have  been  the  soul  or  a faculty  of  the  soul,)  by  that
power,  I say,  is  it  also  created.  For  the  same  efiicieut  and
conservative  faculty  is  found  in  the  egg  as  in  the  chick ; and
of  the  same  material  of  which  it  constitutes  the  first  particle
of  the  cluck,  out  of  the  very  same  does  it  nourish,  increase,  and
superadd  all  the  other  parts.  Lastly,  in  generation  by  meta-
morphosis the  whole  is  distributed  and  sepai’ated  into  parts ;
but  in  that  by  epigenesis  the  whole  is  put  together  out  of  parts
in  a certain  order,  and  constituted  them.

Wherefore  Fabricius  was  in  error  when  he  looked  for  the
material  of  the  chick,  (as  a distinct  part  of  the  egg,  from  which
its  body  was  formed,)  as  if  the  chick  were  created  by  meta-
morphosis, or  a transformation  of  the  material  in  mass ; and
as  if  all,  or  at  least  the  principal  parts  of  the  body  sprang  from
the  same  material,  and,  to  use  his  own  words,  were  incorporated
simultaneously.  [He  is,  therefore,  of  com’se  opposed  to  tlu^
notion]  of  the  chick  being  formed  by  epigenesis,  in  whicli  a
certain  order  is  obsen^ed  according  to  the  dignity  and  the  use
of  parts,  Avhere  at  first  a small  foundation  is,  as  it  were,  laid,


ON  GENERATION.


337


which,  in  the  course  of  growth,  has  at  one  and  the  same  time  dis-
tinct structures  formed  and  its  figure  established,  and  acquires  an
additional  birth  of  parts  afterwards,  each  in  its  own  order ; in
the  same  way,  for  instance,  as  the  bud  bursting  from  the  top  of
the  acorn,  in  the  course  of  its  growth,  has  its  parts  separately
taking  the  form  of  root,  wood,  pith,  hark,  boughs,  branches,
leaves,  flowers,  and  fruit,  until  at  length  out  cornes  a perfect
tree  ; just  so  is  it  with  the  creation  of  the  chick  in  the  egg :
the  little  cicatrix,  or  small  spot,  the  foundation  of  the  future
stimcture,  grows  into  the  eye  and  is  at  the  same  time  sepa-
rated into  the  colliquament ; in  the  centre  of  which  the
punctum  sanguineum  pulsans  commences  its  being,  together
with  the  ramification  of  the  veins  ; to  these  is  presently  added
the  nebula,  and  the  first  concretion  of  the  future  body ; this
also,  in  proportion  as  its  hulk  increases,  is  gradually  divided
and  distinguished  into  parts,  which  however  do  not  all  emerge
at  the  same  time,  hut  one  after  the  other,  and  each  in  its
proper  order.  To  conclude,  then  : in  the  generation  of  those
animals  which  are  created  by  epigenesis,  and  are  formed  in
parts,  (as  the  chick  in  the  egg,)  w^e  need  not  seek  one  material
for  the  incorporation  of  the  foetus,  another  for  its  commencing
nutrition  and  growth ; for  it  receives  such  nutrition  and  growth
from  the  same  material  out  of  which  it  is  made ; and,  vice  versa,
the  chick  in  the  egg  is  constituted  out  of  the  materials  of  its
nutrition  and  growth.  And  an  animal  which  is  capable  of
nutrition  is  of  the  same  potency  as  one  which  is  augmenta-
tive, as  we  shall  afterwards  show ; and  they  differ  only,  as
Aristotle  says,  in  their  distinctness  of  being;  in  all  other  respects
they  are  alike.  For,  in  so  far  as  anything  is  convertible  into  a sub-
stance, it  is  nutritious,  and  under  certain  conditions  it  is  augmen-
tative : in  virtue  of  its  repairing  a loss  of  substance,  it  is  called
nutriment,  in  virtue  of  its  being  added,  where  there  is  no  such
loss  of  substance,  it  is  called  increment.  Now  the  material  of
the  chick,  in  the  processes  of  generation,  nutrition,  and  aug-
mentation is  equally  to  be  considered  as  aliment  and  incre-
ment. We  say  simply  that  anything  is  generated,  when  no
part  of  it  has  pre-existed;  we  speak  of  its  being  nourished  and
growing  when  it  has  already  existed.  The  part  of  the  foetus
wliich  is  first  formed  is  said  to  be  begotten  or  born ; all  sub-
stitutions or  additions  are  called  adnascent,  or  aggenerate.

22


338


ON  GENERATION.


In  all  tliere  is  the  same  transmutation  or  generation  from  the
same  to  the  same  ; as  concerns  a part,  this  is  perfoiTned  hy  the
process  of  nuti’ition  and  augmentation,  hut  as  I'egards  the
whole,  hy  simple  generation;  in  other  respects  the  same  pro-
cesses occur  equally.  For  from  the  same  source  from  which
the  material  first  takes  its  existence,  from  that  source  also  does
it  gain  nutriment  and  increase.  Moreover,  from  what  we  shall
presently  say,  it  will  be  made  clear  that  all  the  parts  of  the
body  are  nourished  by  a common  nutritious  juice ; foi’,  as  all
plants  arise  from  one  and  the  same  common  nutriment,  (whe-
ther it  be  dew  or  a moisture  from  the  earth,)  altered  and  con-
cocted in  a diversity  of  manners,  by  which  they  are  also  nom’ished
and  grow ; so  hkewise  to  identical  fluids  of  the  egg,  namely,
the  albumen  and  the  j'elk,  do  the  whole  chick  and  each  of
its  parts  owe  theu  birth  and  growth.

We  will  explain,  also,  what  are  the  animals  whose  generation
takes  place  by  metamorphosis,  and  of  what  kind  is  the  pre-
existent material  of  insects  which  take  their  origin  from  a worm
or  a caterpillar ; a material  from  which,  by  transmutation  alone,
all  their  parts  are  simrdtaneously  constituted  and  embodied,
and  a perfect  animal  is  born  ; like^vise,  to  what  animals  any
constant  order  in  the-  successive  generation  of  their  parts
attaches,  as  is  the  case  with  such  as  are  at  first  horn  in  an
imperfect  condition,  and  afterwards  grow  to  maturity  and  per-
fection ; and  this  happens  to  all  those  that  are  born  from  an
egg.  As  in  these  the  processes  of  growth  and  formation  are
carried  on  at  the  same  time,  and  a separation  and  distinction
of  parts  takes  place  in  a regularly  observed  order,  so  in  their
case  is  there  no  immediate  pre-existing  material  present,  for
the  incorporation  of  the  foetus,  (such  as  the  mixtm’e  of  tlie
semina  of  the  male  and  female  is  generally  thought  to  be,  or
the  menstrual  blood,  or  some  very  small  portion  of  the  egg,)
but  as  soon  as  ever  the  material  is  created  and  prepared,
so  soon  are  growth  and  form  commenced;  the  nutiimeni'
is  immediately  accompanied  by  the  jn'esence  of  that  which
it  has  to  feed.  And  this  kind  of  generation  is  the  result
of  epigenesis  as  the  man  proceeds  from  the  boy;  the  edifice
of  the  body,  to  wit,  is  raised  on  the  punctnm  salieus  as  a founda-
tion; as  a ship  is  made  from  a keel,  and  as  a potter  makes  a
vessel,  as  the  cai’penter  forms  a footstool  out  of  a piece  of


ON  GENERATION.


339


■wood;  or  a statuary  his  statue  from  a block  of  marble.  For  out
of  the  same  material  from  which  the  first  part  of  the  chick  or
its  smallest  particle  springs,  from  the  very  same  is  the  whole
chick  born ; whence  the  first  little  drop  of  blood,  thence
also  proceeds  its  whole  mass  by  means  of  generation  in  the
egg ; nor  is  there  any  difference  between  the  elements  which
constitute  and  form  the  limbs  or  organs  of  the  body,  and  those
out  of  which  all  their  similar  parts,  to  wit,  the  skin,  the  flesh,
veins,  membranes,  nerves,  cartilages,  and  bones,  derive  their
origin.  For  the  part  which  was  at  first  soft  and  fleshy,  after-
wards, in  the  course  of  its  growth,  and  mthout  any  change  in
the  matter  of  nutrition,  becomes  a nerve,  a ligament,  a tendon ;
what  was  a simple  membrane  becomes  an  investing  tunic ; what
had  been  cartilage  is  afterwards  found  to  be  a spinous  process
of  bone,  all  variously  diversified  out  of  the  same  similar  mate-
rial. For  a similar  organic  body  (which  the  vulgar  believe  to
consist  of  the  elements)  is  not  created  out  of  elements  at  first
existing  separately,  and  then  put  together,  united,  and  altered  ;
nor  is  it  put  together  out  of  constituent  parts ; but,  from  a trans-
mutation of  it  when  in  a mixed  state,  another  compound  is
created : to  take  an  instance,  from  the  colliquament  the  blood
is  formed,  from  the  blood  the  structure  of  the  body  arises,
which  appears  to  be  homogeneous  in  the  beginning,  and  re-
sembles the  spermatic  jelly ; hut  from  this  the  parts  are
at  first  delineated  by  an  obscure  division,  and  afterwards  be-
come separate  and  distinct  organs.

Those  parts,  I say,  are  not  made  similar  by  any  successive
union  of  dissimilar  and  heterogeneous  elements,  but  spring  out
of  a similar  material  through  the  process  of  generation,  have
their  different  elements  assigned  to  them  by  the  same  process,
and  are  made  dissimilar.  Just  as  if  the  whole  chick  was  cre-
ated by  a command  to  this  effect,  of  the  Divine  Architect : “ let
there  be  a similar  colourless  mass,  and  let  it  be  divided  into
parts  and  made  to  increase,  and  in  the  meantime,  while  it  is
growing,  let  there  be  a separation  and  delineation  of  parts ;
and  let  this  part  be  harder,  and  denser,  and  more  glistening,
that  be  softer  and  more  coloured,”  and  it  was  so.  Now  it  is  in
this  very  manner  that  the  structure  of  the  chick  in  the  egg
goes  on  day  by  day ; all  its  parts  are  formed,  nourished,  and
augmented  out  of  the  same  material.  First,  from  the  spine


340


ON  GENERATION.


arise  the  sides,  and  the  bones  are  distinguishable  from  the  flesh
by  minute  lines  of  extreme  whiteness  j in  the  head  three
bullae  are  perceived,  full  of  ciystalline  fluid,  which  corre-
spond to  the  brain,  the  cerebellum,  and  one  eye,  easily  obseiw-
ahle  by  a black  speck ; the  substance  which  at  first  appears  a
milky  coagulum,  afterwards  gradually  becomes  cartilaginous,  ,
has  spinous  processes  attached  to  it,  and  ends  in  being  com-
pletely osseous  ; what  was  at  first  of  a mucous  nature  and  co-
lourless, is  converted  at  length  into  red  flesh  and  parenchyma ;
what  was  at  one  time  hmpid  and  perfectly  pure  water,  presently
assumes  the  form  of  brain,  cerebellum,  and  eyes.  For  there  is
a greater  and  more  divine  mystery  in  the  generation  of  ani-
mals, than  the  simple  collecting  together,  alteration,  and  com-
position of  a whole  out  of  parts  would  seem  to  imply ; inasmuch
as  here  the  whole  has  a separate  constitution  and  existence
before  its  parts,  the  mixture  before  the  elements.  But  of  this
more  at  another  time,  when  we  come  to  specify  the  causes  of
these  things.


EXERCISE  THE  FORTY-SIXTH.

O f the  efficient  cause  of  the  generation  of  the  chick  and  foetus.

We  have  thus  far  spoken  of  the  matter  from  which  the  chick
in  ovo  is  generated.  We  have  still  with  Fabricius  to  say  a few
words  on  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick.  As  this  subject  is
sm-rounded  with  difficulties,  however ; as  winters  nowhere  else
dispute  more  virulently  or  more  wordily,  and  Aristotle  himself
in  explaining  the  matter  is  singularly  intricate  and  perplexed,
and  as  various  questions  that  can  by  no  means  he  lightly  treated
do  in  fact  present  themselves  for  consideration,  I conceive  that
I shall  be  undertaking  a task  worthy  of  the  toil  if,  as  I have
done  in  the  disquisition  on  the  “ matter,”  I set  out  here  bv
stating  in  how  many  ways  anything  can  he  said  to  be  “ effi-
cient ” or  effective.”  We  shall  thus  obtain  a clearer  idea  of
what  it  is  which  we  are  to  inquire  after  under  the  name  of
“ efficient,”  and  further,  what  estimate  we  ai’e  to  form  of  the
ideas  of  writers  upon  this  subject ; it  will  at  the  same  time  ap-


ON  GENERATION.


341


pear  from  our  observations  what  is  truly  and  properly  to  be
called  “ an  efficient.’’

Aristotle  ' defines  an  efficient  cause  to  be  that  whence  is
derived  the  first  principle  of  change  or  quiescence ; as  a coun-
selj  a father;  and  simply  as  doing  that  which  is  done;  the
transmute  of  the  thing  transmuted.”  In  the  generation  of
animals  accordingly  many  and  various  kinds  of  cause  inducing
motion  are  brought  forward ; sometimes  an  accident  or  quality
is  assigned;  and  so  animal  heat  and  the  formative  faculty  are
called  efficient  causes.  Sometimes  it  is  an  external  substance^
previously  existing^  in  which  inheres  the  plastic  force  or  forma-
tive faculty  that  is  designated  in  the  same  way ; as  the  cock  or
his  seminal  fluids  by  the  influence  of  which  the  chick  is
created  from  the  egg.  Occasionally  it  is  some  internal  sub-
stance, self-existent,  such  as  spirit,  or  innate  heat.  And  again,
it  is  some  other  substance,  such  as  form,  or  nature,  or  soul,
or  some  portion  of  the  vegetative  soul,  that  is  regarded  as  the
efficient,  such  a principle  as  we  have  already  declared  to  inhere
in  the  egg.

Besides,  since  one  thing  whence  motion  proceeds  is  nearer
and  another  more  remote,  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  media
between  the  prime  efficient  and  the  thing  last  effected,  and  in-
struments are  regarded  as  efficient  causes ; subordinate  conclu-
sions, likewise,  or  the  principles  of  subsequents,  are  reckoned
among  the  number  of  efficient  causes ; in  this  way  some  parts
are  themselves  spoken  of  as  genital  parts,  such  as  the  heart,
whence  Aristotle  affirms  that  all  the  rest  of  the  body  is  pro-
duced ; a statement  which  we  have  found  borne  out  by  our
history.  The  heart,  I repeat,  or  at  all  events  its  rudimentary
parts,  namely,  the  vesicle  and  pulsating  point,  construct  the  rest
of  the  body  as  their  future  dwelling-place ; when  erected  it  enters
and  conceals  itself  within  its  habitation,  which  it  vivifies  and  go-
verns, and  appljdng  the  ribs  and  sternum  as  a defence,  it  walls
itself  about.  And  there  it  abides,  the  household  divinity,  first
seat  of  the  soul,  prime  receptacle  of  the  innate  heat,  perennial
centre  of  animal  action;  source  and  origin  of  aU  the  faculties.;
only  solace  in  adversity  !

Moreover,  since  the  “ efficient  ” is  so  styled  with  reference


Metaph.  lib.  v,  cap.  2 ; et  Pliys.  lib.  ii,  tit.  28.


342


ON  GENERATION.


to  the  efl'ect,  as  some  parts  produced  by  epigenesis  are  poste-
rior in  order  to  other  parts,  and  are  different  from  antecedent
parts, — as  effects  differ,  so  does  it  seem  probable  that  efficients
also  vary  : from  things  that  produce  different  operations,  dif-
ferent motions  likewise  proceed.  Thus  physicians  in  their
physiologies  assign  certain  organs  as  the  agents  of  chyhfication,
others  of  sanguification,  others  of  generation,  &c. ; and  anato-
mists speak  of  the  ossific,  canrific,  and  neiu’ific  faculties,  which
they  conceive  produce  bones,  flesh,  and  neiwes.

But  in  the  generation  of  the  chick,  of  several  actions  differ-
ing not  a httle  from  one  another,  it  is  certain  that  the  efficient
causes  must  also  differ;  those  that  present  themselves  to  us  as
accidental  efficients  of  generation  must  nevertheless  he  neces-
sary, seeing,  that  unless  they  are  associated  or  intervene,  no-
thing is  effected ; those,  to  wit,  are  rightly  held  “ efficients  ”
which,  whilst  they  remove  external  hinderances,  either  cherish
the  conception,  or  stimulate  and  turn  mere  potentiality  into
positive  action.  Under  this  head  we  should  arrange  incuba-
tion, the  proper  temperatm’e  of  the  air  and  the  place,  the  spring
season,  the  approach  of  the  sun  in  the  circle  of  the  zodiac  ; in
like  manner  the  preparing  causes  which  lead  the  ritellus  to
rise,  make  the  macula  to  dilate,  and  the  fluids  in  the  egg  to
liquefy,  are  all  properly  held  “ efficients.”

Further,  to  the  number  of  efficient  causes  are  to  he  i*ec-
koned  the  generative  and  architectonic  faculties,  styled  pai’ts  by
Fabricius,  riz.,  the  immutative,  the  concoctive,  the  formative,
the  augmentative,  as  also  the  effective  causes  of  certain  acci-
dentals, viz.,  that  which  constitutes  the  pullet  male  or  female,
like  the  father  or  the  mother,  taking  after  the  form  of  the  first
or  last  male  having  connection  with  the  mother;  that  too
whence  the  offspring  is  an  animal;  whether  perfect  or  defective;
robust  and  healthy,  or  diseased ; longer  or  shorter  lived ; keep-
ing up  the  characters  of  the  race  or  degenerating  from  them ;
a monster,  an  hybrid,  &c.

Lastly,  when  we  were  discussing  the  efficient  causes  of  the
foetus,  we  were  not  inattentive  to  its  admirable  structure,  to
the  functions  and  uses  of  all  its  parts  and  members ; neither
did  we  overlook  the  foresight,  the  ai’t,  the  intelligence,  the
divine  inspiration  with  which  all  things  were  ordained  and
skilfully  continued  for  the  ends  of  life.  It  is  not  enough  that


ON  GENERATION.


343


we  inquire  what  is  the  " efficient,”  the  architect,  the  adviser,
hut  that  we  likewise  venerate  and  adore  the  omnipotent  Crea-
tor and  preserver  of  a work,  which  has  been  well  entitled  a
microcosm.  We  also  ask  whence  this  divine  something  comes,
when  it  arrives,  and  where  it  resides  in  the  egg ; this  something
which  is  analogous  to  the  essence  of  the  stars,  and  is  near  akin
to  art  and  intelligence,  and  the  vicar  of  the  Almighty  Creator  ?

From  what  precedes  it  will  be  apparent  how  difficult  it  were
to  enumerate  all  the  efficient  causes  of  the  chick ; it  is  indis-
pensable, indeed,  in  the  complete  investigation  of  this  subject
to  refer  to  a general  disquisition ; we  could  not  from  the  single
generation  of  the  chick  in  ovo,  and  without  clearer  light  de-
rived from  investigations  extended  to  other  animals,  venture
on  conclusions  that  should  be  applicable  to  the  whole  animal
creation.  And  this  all  the  more,  since  Aristotle  himself  has
enumerated  such  a variety  of  efficient  principles  of  animals ;
for  he  at  one  time  adduces  the  male^  ^ as  the  principal  efficient
cause,  as  that,  to  wit,  in  which  the  reason  of  the  engendered
chick  resides,  according  to  the  axiom  •p‘  all  things  are  made
by  the  same  ‘ univocal  ” at  another  time  he  takes  ^ the  male
semen  or,  ^ the  nature  of  the  male  emitting  semen  some-
times it  is  ' that  which  inheres  in  the  semen,’^  ‘ which  causes
seeds  to  be  prolific,  spirit,  to  wit,  and  nature  in  that  spirit  cor-
responding in  its  qualities  to  the  essence  of  the  stars  else-
where he  says  it  is  ‘ heat  ^ moderate  heat  -p  ‘ a certain  and
proportionate  degree  of  heat ' the  heat  in  the  blood ‘ the
heat  of  the  ambient  air ^the  winds;””  ‘the  sun;^  ‘the heavens;^
‘ Jupiter ‘ the  soul and,  somewhere,  nature  is  spoken  of
by  him  as  ‘ the  principle  of  motion  and  rest.’

Aristotle”  concludes  the  discussion  on  the  efficient  cause  by
declaring  it  “ extremely  doubtful”  whether  it  be  “ anything  ex-
trinsic ; or  something  inherent  in  the  geniture  or  semen ; and
whether  it  be  any  part  of  the  soul,  or  the  soul  itself,  or  some-
thing having  a soul?”


' Metaphys.  lib.  i,  c.  2 ; lib.  iv,  c.  1.
^ Ib.  lib.  vii,  cap.  x.

^ De  Part.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  1.

■'  De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  i,  20.

^ Ibid.  lib.  ii,  cap.  3.

® Ibid.  lib.  V,  cap.  3.


~ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iv,  cap.  2.

® Ibid.  lib.  iv,  cap.  4.

” De  Part.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  2.

” De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iv,  cap.  2 ; et  De
Gen.  et  cor.  lib.  ii,  tit.  30.

" De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  ii.  cap.  1.


344


ON  GENERATION.


To  escape  from  such  a labyrinth  of  “ efficient  causes^’^  it  \vere
necessary  to  be  furnished  -vTith  Ariadne’s  thread,  composed
from  observations  on  almost  every  animal  that  lives ; on  this
account  the  subject  is  deferred  till  um  come  to  our  more  general
disquisition.  INIeantime  we  shall  recount  the  particulars  which
either  manifestly  appear  in  the  special  history  of  the  chick
from  the  egg,  or  which  differ  from  the  ideas  usually  enter-
tained, or  that  seem  to  demand  further  inquiry.


EXERCISE  THE  FORTY-SEVENTH.

Of  the  manner  in  which  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick  acts,
according  to  Aristotle.

It  is  universally  allowed,  that  the  male  is  the  primary  effi-
cient cause  in  generation,  on  the  ground  that  in  him  the
species  or  form  resides ; and  it  is  further  affirmed,  that  the
emission  of  his  ‘ geniture’  dining  coition,  is  the  cause  both  of
the  existence  and  the  fertility  of  the  egg.  But  none  of  the
philosophers  nor  physicians,  ancient  or  modern,  have  suffi-
ciently explained  in  what  manner  the  seed  of  the  cock  pro-
duced a chick  from  the  egg  •,  nor  have  they  solved  the  question
proposed  by  Aristotle.  Nor,  indeed,  is  Aristotle  himself  much
more  explanatory,  when  he  says,  “that  the  male  contributes
not  in  respect  of  quantity,  but  of  quality,  and  is  the  origin  of
action ; but  that  it  is  the  female  which  brings  the  material.”
And  a little  after,  “ It  is  not  every  male  that  emits  seed,  and
in  those  which  do  so,  this  is  no  part  of  the  foetus;  just  as  in
the  case  of  a carpenter,  nothing  is  translated  from  him  to  the
substance  of  the  wood  which  he  uses,  nor  does  any  part  of  the
artist’s  skill  reside  in  the  worli:  when  completed ; but  a form
and  appearance  are  given  by  his  operation  to  the  matter;  and
the  soul,  which  originates  the  idea  of  forms,  and  the  skill  to
imitate  them,  moves  the  hands,  or  other  hmb,  whatever  it  may
be,  by  a motion  of  a certain  quality ; or  from  diversity  pro-
ceeds difference ; or  from  similai’ity  proceeds  resemblance.
But  the  hands  and  instruments  move  the  material.  So  the
natme  of  a male,  which  emits  semen,  uses  that  semen  as  an


ON  GENERATION.


345


instrument,  and  an  act  having  motion ; as  in  works  of  art  the
instruments  are  moved,  for  in  them,  in  some  sort,  the  motion
of  the  art  exists.'”

By  these  Avords  he  seems  to  imply,  that  generation  is  owing
to  the  motion  of  a certain  quality.  Just  as  in  art,  though  the
first  cause  (the  “ ratio  operis  ”)  be  in  the  mind  of  the  artist,
yet  afterwards,  the  work  is  effected  hy  the  movement  of  the
hands  or  other  instruments;  and  although  the  first  cause  be
removed  (as  in  automatons,)  yet  is  it  in  some  sort  said  to
move  what  it  noAV  does  not  touch,  hut  once  has  touched,  so
long  as  motion  continues  in  the  instrument.

Also  in  the  next  book,  he  says  : When  the  semen  of  the

male  has  arrived  as  far  as  the  uterus  of  the  female,  it  arranges
and  coagulates  the  purest  part  of  the  excrement  (meaning  the
menstrual  blood  existing  in  the  uterus) ; and,  by  a motion  of
this  kind,  changes  the  material,  which  has  been  prepared  in
the  uterus,  till  it  forms  part  of  the  chick ; and  this,  hereafter,
although  the  semen  after  the  performance  of  this  motion  dis-
appears, exists  as  part  of  the  foetus,  and  becomes  animate  (as  the
heart,)  and  regulates  its  own  powers  and  growth,  as  a son
emancipated  from  his  father,  and  having  his  own  establish-
ment. And  so  it  is  necessary  that  there  he  some  commencing
principle,  from  which  afterwards  the  order  of  the  limbs  may  be
dehneated,  and  a proper  disposition  made  of  those  things  that
concern  the  absolution  of  the  animal ; a principle,  which  may
he  the  source  of  growth  and  motion  to  all  the  other  parts ; the
origin  of  all,  both  similar  and  dissimilar  parts,  and  the  source
of  their  ultimate  aliment.  For  that  which  is  ah-eady  an
animal  grows,  but  the  ultimate  aliment  of  an  animal  is  the
blood,  or  something  corresponding  to  the  blood,  whose  A^essels
and  receptacles  are  the  veins ; wherefore,  the  heart  is  the
origin  of  the  veins.  But  veins,  like  roots,  spread  to  the  uterus,
and  through  these  the  foetus  derives  its  nomdshment.  The
heart  too,  being  the  beginning  of  all  uatm’e  and  the  containing
end,  ought  to  be  made  first ; as  if  it  were  a genital  part  by  its
own  nature,  which,  as  the  original  of  all  the  other  parts,  and
of  the  whole  animal,  and  of  sense,  must  needs  be  the  first  ;
and  by  its  heat,  (since  all  the  parts  are  in  the  material  poten-
tially^ when  once  the  beginning  of  the  motion  has  taken
place,  all  that  follows  is  excited,  just  as  in  spontaneous


346


ON  GENERATION.


miracles ; and  the  parts  are  commenced,  not  by  change  of
place,  hut  by  alteration  in  softness,  hardness,  temperature,  and
the  other  differences  observed  in  similar  parts,  these  being  now
actually  made,  which  had  before  existed  only  potentially.”

This  is,  in  neai’ly  so  many  words,  the  oj)inion  of  Aristotle,
which  supposes  that  the  foetus  is  formed  from  the  seed  by  mo-
tion, although  it  is  not  at  present  in  communication  with  the
foetus,  but  simply  has  been  so  at  a former  time  : his  reasonings
are,  indeed,  ingenious,  and  carefully  put  together,  and  from
what  we  see  in  the  order  of  the  generation  of  parts,  net  im-
probable. For  the  heart,  with  the  channel  of  the  veins,  is
first  noticed  as  an  animate  principle,  in  which  motion  and
sense  reside ; or,  as  it  were,  an  emancij)ated  son,  and  a genital
part,  whence  the  order  of  the  members  is  delineated,  whence
all  things  pertaining  to  the  completion  of  the  animal  are  dis-
posed, and  which  has  all  the  attributes  bestowed  upon  it  by
Aristotle.

But  it  seems  impossible,  that  the  heart  should  be  formed  iu
the  egg  by  the  seed  of  the  male,  when  that  seed  neither  exists
in  the  egg,  nor  touches  it,  nor  ever  has  touched  it ; because  the
seed  does  not  enter  the  uterus  where  the  egg  is,  (as  is  allowed  by
Fabricius,)  nor  is  iu  any  way  attracted  by  it ; nay,  even  the
maternal  blood  is  not  in  the  egg,  nor  any  other  prepared  mat-
ter, out  of  which  the  seed  of  the  male  may  form  this  genital
part,  the  author  of  all  the  others.  For  it  is  not  immediately
after  coition,  while  the  seed  still  remains  within  the  body,  and  is
in  communication,  that  any  part  of  the  chick  exists  iu  the  egg.
but  after  many  days,  when  incubation  has  taken  place.  [More-
over, iu  fishes,  when  the  genitiu’e  of  the  male  does  nothing
but  touch  the  eggs  externally,  and  does  not  enter  into  them,
it  is  not  likely  that  it  performs  any  more  ample  functions
’when  the  agency  is  external,  than  does  the  seed  of  the  cock  in
the  already  formed  eggs  of  the  hen.  Besides,  since  immedi-
ately after  coition  no  trace  of  the  egg  as  yet  exists,  but  it  is
afterwards  generated  by  the  hen  herself  (I  am  speaking  of  the
prolific  egg)  ; w^heu  now  the  seed  of  the  cock  is  departed  and
vanished,  there  is  no  probability^  that  the  foetus  is  formed  m
that  egg  by^  the  aforesaid  seed,  through  means  of  one  or  any
number  of  successive  motions.

Nor  indeed  does  the  diftercncc  between  prolific  and  unpro-


ON  GENERATION.


347


lific  or  wind  eggs  consist  herein^  tliat  tlie  former  contained  the
seed  of  the  male^  as  Aldrovandus  supposed ; nor  has  it  been
noticed  that  anything  has  been  formed  and  coagulated  in  the
egg  by  the  seed  of  the  male^  nor  has  any  sensible  transmuta-
tion been  discovered  (for  indeed,  there  is  no  sensible  diiference
between  the  fertile  and  the  wind  egg) ; and  yet  a prolific  egg,
conceived  long  after  coition,  Ras  in  itself  the  faculties  of  both
sexes ; viz.,  the  capability  of  being  both  formed  itself,  and  of
forming  a chick ; as  if,  according  to  the  idea  of  Aristotle,  it
had  derived  its  origin  from  the  coition  of  the  two,  and  their
mutual  endeavours  towards  the  same  end ; and  compelled  by  the
force  of  this  argument,  as  mentioned  above,  when  speaking  of  the,
generation  of  the  o\mm,  he  has  endowed  the  egg  with  a vital
principle  (anima.)  If  such  really  exist,  then,  without  doubt  it
would  be  the  origin  and  efficient  of  all  the  natural  phenomena
which  take  place  in  the  egg.  For  if  w^e  consider  the  struc-
ture of  the  chick,  displaying,  as  it  does,  so  much  art,  so  divine
an  intelligence  and  foresight ; when  we  see  the  eyes  adapted
for  vision,  the  bill  for  taking  food,  the  feet  for  walking,  the
wings  for  flying,  and  similarly  the  rest  of  its  parts,  each  to  its
own  end,  we  must  conclude,  whatever  the  power  be  which
creates  such  an  animal  out  of  an  egg,  that  it  is  either  the
soul,  or  part  of  the  soul,  or  something  ha^ung  a soul,  or  some-
thing existing  previous  to,  and  more  excellent  than  the  soul,
operating  with  intelbgence  and  foresight.

F'rom  the  generation  of  the  chick,  it  is  also  manifest  that,
whatever  may  have  been  its  principle  of  life  or  first  vegetative
cause,  this  cause  itself  first  existed  in  the  heart.  Now,
if  this  be  the  soul  of  the  chicken,  it  is  equally  clear,  that  that
soul  must  have  existed  in  the  punctum  saliens  and  the  blood ;
since  we  there  discover  motion  and  sense ; for  the  heai’t  moves
and  leaps  like  an  animal.  But  if  a soul  exists  in  the  punctum
saliens,  forming,  nourishing,  and  augmenting  the  rest  of  the
body,  in  the  manner  which  we  have  pointed  out  in  our  history,
then  it,  without  doubt,  flows  from  the  heart,  as  from  a foun-
tain-head, into  the  whole  body.  Liliewise,  if  the  existence
of  the  vital  principle  (anima)  in  the  egg,  or,  as  Aristotle
supposes,  if  the  vegetative  part  of  the  soul  be  the  cause  of
its  fertility,  it  must  follow  that  the  punctum  saliens,  or  ani-
mate genital  part,  proceeds  from  the  vital  principle  (anima)  of


348


ON  GENERATION.


the  egg,  (for  nothing  is  its  own  author,)  and  that  the  said
vital  principle  (anima)  passes  from  the  egg  into  the  punctum
saliens,  presently  into  the  heart,  and  thence  into  the  chick.

Moreover,  if  the  egg  have  a prolific  virtue,  and  a vegetative
soul,  by  which  the  chick  is  constructed,  and  if  it  owe  them,
as  is  allow'ed  on  all  hands,  to  the  semen  of  the  cock ; it  is
clear  that  this  semen  is  also  endowed  with  an  active  princi-
ple (anima.)  For  such  is  Aristotle’s  opinion,  when  he  ex-
presses himself  as  follows  : “ As  to  whether  the  semen  has  a
vital  principle  (anima)  or  not,  the  same  reasoning  must  be
adduced  which  we  have  employed  in  the  consideration  of  other
parts.  For  no  active  principle  (anima)  can  exist,  except  in
that  thing  whose  vital  principle  it  is  ; nor  can  there  be  any
part  which  is  not  partaker  of  the  "sital  principle,  except  it  he
equivocally,  as  the  eye  of  a dead  man.  We  must,  therefore,
allow",  both  that  the  semen  has  an  active  principle  (anima)  and
is  potential.”

Now  from  these  premises,  it  follows  that  the  male  is  the
primary  efficient  in  wdiich  the  ratio  and  forma  reside,  which
produces  a seed  or  rather  a prolific  geniture,  and  impaits  it,
imbued  as  it  is  w'ith  an  anima  vegetativa  (with  which  also  the
rest  of  its  parts  are  endowed)  to  the  female.  The  introduction
of  this  geniture  begets  such  a movement  in  the  material  of  the
hen,  that  the  production  of  an  animate  egg  is  the  result,  and
from  thence  too  the  first  particle  of  the  chick  is  animated,
and  afterw"ards  the  whole  chick.  And  so,  according  to  Aris-
totle, either  the  same  soul  passes,  by  means  of  some  metem-
psychosis, from  the  cock  into  his  geniture,  from  the  geuitiu’e
into  the  material  of  the  female,  thence  into  the  egg,  and  from
the  egg  into  the  chick ; or  else,  it  is  raised  up  in  each  of  the
subsequent  things  by  its  respective  antecedent ; namely,  in
the  seed  of  the  male  by  the  male  himself,  in  the  egg  by  the
seed,  last  in  the  chick  by  the  egg,  as  light  is  derived  fr’om  hght.

The  efficient,  therefore,  which  we  look  for  in  the  egg,  to  explain
the  bii’th  of  the  chick,  is  the  rital  principle  (anima) ; and  there-
fore, the  rital  principle  of  the  egg ; for,  according  to  Aristotle,
a soul  does  not  exist  except  in  that  thing  whose  soul  it  is.

But  it  is  manifest,  that  the  seed  of  the  male  is  not  the
efficient  of  the  chick ; neither  as  an  instrument  capable  of
forming  the  chick  by  its  motion,  as  Aristotle  would  ha\  e it.


ON  GENERATION.


349


nor  as  an  animate  substance  transferring  its  vitality  (anima)
to  the  chick.  For  in  the  egg  there  is  no  semen,  neither  does
any  touch  it,  nor  has  ever  done  so ; (“  and  it  is  impossible
that  that  which  does  not  touch  should  move,  or  that  anything
should  be  aflFected  by  that  which  does  not  move  it,”)  and  there-
fore the  \dtality  of  the  semen  ought  not  to  be  said  to  exist  in
it ; and  although  the  vital  principle  may  be  tbe  efficient  in^  the
egg,  yet  it  would  not  appear  to  result  more  from  the  cock  or
his  semen,  than  from  the  hen.

Nor,  indeed,  is  it  transferred  by  any  metempsychosis  or
translation  from  the  cock  and  his  semen  into  the  egg,  and
thence  into  the  chick.  For  how  can  tliis  translation  be  carried
on  into  the  eggs  that  are  yet  to  exist,  and  to  be  conceived
after  intercourse  ? unless  either  some  animate  semen  be  in  the
mean  time  working  in  some  part  of  the  hen  ; or  the  vital
principle  only  have  been  translated  Avithout  the  seed,  in  order
to  be  infused  into  any  egg  which  might  thereafter  be  produced  ;
but  neither  of  these  alternatives  is  true.  For  in  no  part  of
the  hen  is  the  semen  to  be  found ; nor  is  it  possible  that  the  hen
after  coition  should  be  possessed  of  a double  vital  principle,
to  wit,  her  own,  and  that  of  the  future  eggs  and  chicks ; since
“ the  hving  principle  or  sord  is  said  to  be  nowhere  but  in  that
thing  whose  soul  it  is,”  much  less  can  one  or  more  \dtal  prin-
ciples lie  hidden  in  the  hen,  to  be  afterwards  subservient  to  the
future  eggs  and  chicks  in  their  order,  as  they  are  produced.

We  have  adduced  these  passages  out  of  Aristotle  in  order
to  set  forth  his  opinion  of  the  manner  in  which  the  seed  of  the
cock  produces  the  chick  from  the  egg ; and  thereby  throw  at
least  some  light  on  this  difficult  question.  But  whereas  the
said  passages  do  not  explain  the  mode  in  which  this  is  ac-
complished, nor  even  solve  the  doubts  proposed  by  himself,  it
appears  that  Ave  are  still  sticking  in  the  same  mud,  and  caught
in  the  same  perplexities  (concerning  the  efficient  cause  of  the
foetus  in  the  generation  of  animals ;)  indeed,  so  far  from  Aris-
totle’s arguments  rendering  this  question  more  clear,  they  ap-
pear on  the  contrary  to  involve  it  in  more  and  greater  doubts.

"Wherefore  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  most  excellent  philoso-
pher was  in  perplexity  on  this  head,  and  that  he  has  admitted
so  great  a variety  of  efficient  causes,  and  at  one  time  has  been
compelled  to  resort  to  automatons,  coagulation,  art,  instruments.


350


ON  GENERATION.


and  motions,  for  illustrations  ; at  another  time  to  an  ‘ anima  ’
in  the  egg,  and  in  the  seed  of  the  male.  Moreover,  when  he
seems  positively  and  definitively  to  determine  what  it  is  in  each
seed,  whether  of  plants  or  animals,  which  render  the  same  fer-
tile, he  repudiates  heat  and  fire  as  improper  agents;  nor  does
he  admit  any  faculty  of  a similar  quahty ; nor  can  he  find  any-
thing in  the  seed  which  should  be  fit  for  that  office ; hut  he
is  driven  to  acknowledge  something  incorporeal,  and  coming
from  foreign  sources,  which  he  supposes  (like  art,  or  the  mind)
to  form  the  foetus  with  intelligence  and  foresight,  and  to  in-
stitute and  ordain  all  its  parks  for  its  welfare.  He  takes
refuge,  I say,  in  a thing  which  is  obscure  and  not  recognizable
by  us ; namely,  in  a spirit  corrtairred  in  the  seed,  and  in  a
frothy  body,  and  iir  the  nature  iir  that  spirit,  corresponding
in  proportiorr  to  the  elernerrts  of  the  stars.  But  what  that  is,
he  has  rrowhere  irrformed  us.


EXERCISE  THE  FORTY-EIGHTH.

The  opinion  of  Fabricius  on  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick
is  refuted.

As  I have  chosen  Aristotle,  the  most  eminent  among  the  an-
cient philosophers,  and  Fahiicius  of  Aquapendente,  one  of  the
foremost  anatomists  of  modern  times,  as  my  especial  guides  and
sources  of  information  on  the  subject  of  animal  generation,  when
I find  that  I can  make  nothing  of  Aristotle  upon  a particular
topic,  I straightway  turn  to  Fahiicius ; and  now  I desire  to
know  what  he  thought  of  the  efficient  cause  of  generation.

I find  that  he  endeavours  to  satisfy  three  doubts  or  diffi-
culties involved  in  this  subject : First,  TMiat  is  the  ^ efficient '
of  the  chick  ? This  he  answers,  by  saying,  the  semen  of  the
male.  Secondly,  How  does  this  appear  in  the  egg,  and  in
what  way  does  the  semen  of  the  cock  fecrmdate  the  egg?
Thirdly  and  lastly.  In  what  order  are  the  pai’ts  of  the  chick
engendered  ?

As  to  the  first  query,  it  appears  from  our  ohsenations,  that
the  cock  and  his  seminal  fluid  are  verily  the  ‘ efficient,’  but


ON  GENERATION.


351


not  tlie  ‘ adequate  ’ cause  of  generation  ■,  that  the  lien  comes
in  here  as  something.  In  this  place,  therefore,  we  are  princi-
pally to  inquire  how  the  semen  of  the  cock  fecundates  the  egg
otherwise  unprolific,  and  secures  the  engenderment  of  a chick
from  it  ?

But  let  us  hear  Fabricius  “Those  things  dilFer,^^  he  ob-
serves, “that  are  produced  from  eggs,  from  those  that  origi-
nate from  semen,  in  this,  that  oviparous  animals  have  the
matter  from  which  the  embryo  is  incorporated  distinct  and  sepa-
rate from  the  agent ; whilst  viviparous  animals  have  the  effi-
cient cause  and  the  matter  associate  and  concorporate.  For
the  ‘ agent  ^ in  the  oidparous  animal  is  the  semen  of  the  male,
in  the  fowl  the  semen  of  the  cock,  which  neither  is  nor  can  be
in  the  egg ; the  ‘ matter,^  again,  is  the  chalazse  from  which
the  foetus  is  incorporated.  These  two  differ  widely  from  one
another ; for  the  chalazse  are  added  after  the  vitellus  is  formed,
whilst  it  is  passing  through  the  second  uterus,  and  are  an  ac-
cession to  the  internal  egg  j the  semen  galli,  on  the  contrary,
is  stored  near  the  fundament,  is  separated  from  the  chalazse  by
a great  interval,  and  nevertheless  by  its  irradiating  faculty,
fecundates  both  the  whole  egg  and  the  uterus.  Now  in  the
viviparous  animal,  the  semen  is  both  ‘ matter  ’ and  ‘ agent,^
the  two  consisting  and  being  conjoined  in  the  same  body.’’

Our  author  appears  to  have  introduced  this  distinction  be-
tween oviparous  and  viviparous  animals,  that  he  might  spare,
or  at  all  events,  that  he  might  not  directly  shock  or  upset  the
notions  of  medical  writers  on  the  generation  of  man,  they
teaching  that  the  seminal  fluids  of  either  sex,  projected  to-
gether in  intercourse,  are  mingled;  that  as  one  or  other  pre-
ponderates, this  becomes  the  ‘ efficient,’  that  stands  in  lieu  of
the  ‘ matter ; ’ and  that  the  two  together,  tending  to  the
same  end,  amalgamate  into  the  ‘ conception’  of  the  viviparous
animal.

But  when  he  finds  that  neither  in  the  egg  nor  uterus  of  the
fowl  is  there  any  semen  or  blood,  and  avows  his  belief  that
nothing  is  emitted  by  the  male  in  intercourse,  that  can  by
possibility  reach  the  uterus  of  the  female,  nor  in  the  egg  dis-
covers a trace  of  aught  supplied  by  the  male,  he  is  compelled


Op.  cit.  p.  38.


352


ON  GENERATION.


to  doubt  how  the  semen,  which  is  nowhere  to  be  detected,
which  is  neither  mixed  udth  the  ‘ geniture  ’ of  the  female,
nor  yet  is  added  to  it,  nor  touches  it,  can  fecundate  the  egg,
or  constitute  the  chick.  And  this  all  the  more  urgently,  when
he  has  stated  that  a few  connections  in  the  beginning  of  the
season  suffice  to  secure  the  fecundity  of  all  the  eggs  that  will
he  laid  in  its  course.  For  how  should  it  seem  otherudse  than
impossible  that  from  the  semen  galli  communicated  in  the
spring,  hut  now  long  vanished,  lost  or  consumed,  the  eggs  that
continue  to  be  laid  through  the  summer  and  autumn,  should
still  be  rendered  fruitful  and  fit  to  produce  prdlets  ?

It  is  that  he  may  meet  such  a difficulty  half  way,  that  he
coins  the  difference  which  has  been  noticed.  By  way  of  bol-
stering up  his  views,  he  farther  adduces  three  additional  con-
siderations ; — First,  since  the  semen  galli  is  neither  extant  in
the  egg,  nor  was  ever  present  in  the  uterus,  nor  is  added  as
‘ material  cause  ’ as  in  ^Biparous  animals,  he  has  chosen  to
make  it  resident  for  a whole  year  in  the  body  of  the  hen.
And  then  that  he  may  have  a fit  receptacle  or  storehouse  for
the  fecundating  fluid,  he  finds  a blind  sac  neai’  the  inlet  to
the  uterus,  in  which  he  says  the  cock  deposits  his  semen,
wherein,  as  in  a treasury,  it  is  stored,  and  from  which  all
the  eggs  are  fecundated.  Lastly,  although  the  semen  in
that  bursa  comes  into  contact  neither  with  the  uterus,  nor
the  egg,  nor  the  ovaiy,  whereby  it  might  fecundate  the  egg,
or  secure  the  generation  of  a chick,  he  says,  nevertheless,
that  from  thence,  a certain  spiritual  substance  or  UTadiation
penetrates  to  the  egg,  fecundates  its  chalazje,  and  from  these
produces  a chick.  By  this  affirmation,  however,  he  appears  to
support  the  opinion  of  Aj’istotle,  namely,  that  the  female
supplies  the  matter'  ’ in  generation,  the  male  the  ‘ efficient
force and  to  oppose  the  postulate  of  medical  writers  about
the  mixture  of  semirral  fluids,  for  the  sake  of  which,  never-
theless, as  I have  said,  he  seems  to  have  laid  down  his  dis-
tinction between  oriparorrs  and  viviparous  animals.  To  give
arr  air  of  greater  hkelihood  to  this  notion  of  his,  he  goes  on  to
errrrmerate  the  changes  which  the  semen,  not  yet  emitted,  birt
laid  up  in  the  testes  and  vesiculse  seminales  of  animals,  oc-
casiorrs.

Brrt  besides  the  fact  that  all  this  does  not  bear  upon  the


ON  GENERATION.


353


question^  for  the  principal  element  under  discussion  is,  not  how
the  semen  galli  renders  the  egg  prolific,  but  rather,  how  does
the  semen  galli  fashion  and  construct  the  chick  from  the  egg  ?
Almost  everything  he  adduces  in  support  of  his  view  appears
either  false  or  open  to  suspicion,  as  is  obvious,  from  the  facts
stated  in  our  history ; for  neither  is  the  blind  ca\dty  situated
at  the  root  of  the  uropygium  or  coccyx  of  the  fowl,  which  he
entitles  “bursa,’^  destined  as  a receptacle  for  the  semen  of
the  cock,  nor  can  any  semen  be  discovered  there,  as  we  have
said ; but  the  cavity  is  encountered  in  the  male  as  well  as  in
the  female  fowl.

Our  authority  nowhere  explains  what  he  understands  by  a
“ spiritual  substance,^^  and  an  “ irradiation  nor  what  he
means  by  “ a substance  through  whose  virtue  the  egg  is  vivi-
fied he  does  not  say  whether  it  is  any  “ coi’poreal  ” or  “ for-
mal ” substance,  which  by  “ irradiation  ” proceeds  from  the
semen  laid  up  in  the  bursa,  and,  (what  is  especially  required,)
constructs  a pullet  from  the  egg.

In  my  opinion,  Eabricius  does  no  more  here  than  say ; “ It
produces  the  chick  because  it  irradiates  the  egg ; and  forms
because  it  vivifies  ■”  he  attempts  to  explain  or  illustrate  the
exceedingly  obscure  subject  of  the  formation  of  a living  being
by  means  stiU  more  obscure.  Eor  the  same  doubt  remains
untouched,  how,  to  wit,  the  semen  of  the  cock  without  contact,
an  “ external  efficient  ” at  best,  separate  in  point  of  place,  and
existing  in  the  bursa,  can  form  the  internal  parts  of  the  foetus
in  ovOj — the  heart,  liver,  lungs,  intestines,  &c.,  out  of  the
chalazm  by  “irradiation.’^  Unless,  indeed,  our  author  will
have  it  that  all  takes  place  at  the  dictum  as  it  were  of  a crea-
tor seated  on  his  throne,  and  speaking  the  words  : Let  such
things  be ! namely,  bones  for  support,  muscles  for  motion,
special  organs  for  sense,  members  for  action,  viscera  for  con-
coction and  the  like,  and  all  ordered  for  an  end  and  purpose
with  foresight,  and  understanding  and  art.  But  Eabricius  no-
where demonstrates  that  the  semen  has  any  such  vu’tue,  no-
where explains  the  manner  in  which  without  so  much  as  con-
tact the  semen  can  effect  such  things ; particularly  when  we
see  that  the  egg  incubated  by  a bird  of  another  kind  than
that  which  laid  it,  or  cherished  in  any  other  way,  or  in  dung,

23


354


ON  GENERATION.


or  in  an  oven,  far  from  tlie  bursa  of  the  parent  hen,  is  still
quickened  and  made  to  produce  an  embryo.

The  same  difficulty  still  remains,  I say  : how  or  in  what  way
is  the  semen  of  the  cock  the  “ efficient^’  of  the  chick  ? It  is  in
no  wise  removed  by  invoking  the  irradiation  of  a spiritual  sub-
stance. For  did  we  even  admit  that  the  semen  Avas  stored  in
the  bursa,  and  that  it  incorijorated  the  embryo  from  the  cha-
lazse  by  metamorphosis  and  irradiation,  we  should  not  be  the
less  deeply  immersed  in  the  difficulty  of  accounting  for  the
formation  of  all  the  internal  parts  of  the  chick.  But  these
notions  have  already  been  sufficiently  refuted  by  us.

Wherefore,  in  investigating  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick,
we  must  look  for  it  as  inhering  in  the  egg,  not  as  concealed
in  the  bursa;  and  it  must  be  such,  that  although  the  egg
have  long  been  laid,  be  miles  removed  from  the  hen  that  pro-
duced it,  and  be  set  under  another  hen  than  its  parent,  even
under  a bu’d  of  a different  kind,  such  as  a turkey  or  guinea-
fowl,  or  merely  among  hot  sand  or  dung,  or  in  an  OA^en  con-
structed for  the  pm’pose,  as  is  done  in  Egypt,  it  will  still  cause
the  egg  to  produce  a creature  of  the  same  species  as  its  parents,
like  them,  both  male  and  female,  and  if  the  parents  were  of
different  kinds,  of  a hybrid  species,  and  having  a mixed  re-
semblance.

The  knot  therefore  remains  untied,  neither  Aristotle  nor
Fabricius  haA’ing  succeeded  even  in  loosening  it,  namely:  how  the
semen  of  the  male  or  of  the  cock  forms  a pullet  fi’om  an  egg,
or  is  to  be  termed  the  “ efficient”  of  the  chick,  especially  when
it  is  neither  present  in,  nor  in  contact  Avith,  nor  added  to  the
egg.  And  although  almost  all  assert  that  the  male  and  his
semen  are  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick,  stiU  it  must  be  ad-
mitted, that  no  one  has  yet  sufficiently  explained  how  it  is  so,
particularly  in  our  common  hen’s  egg.


ON  GENERATION.


355


EXERCISE  THE  FORTY-NINTH.


The  inquiry  into  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick  is  one  of  great

difficulty.

The  discussion  of  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick  is,  as  we
have  said,  sufficiently  difficult,  and  all  the  more  in  consequence
of  the  various  titles  by  which  it  has  been  designated.  Aris-
totle, indeed,  recites  several  efficient  causes  of  animals,  and
numerous  controversies  have  arisen  on  the  subject  among
writers,  (these  having  been  particularly  hot  between  medical
authors  and  Aristotelians,)  who  have  come  into  the  arena  with
various  explanations,  both  of  the  nature  of  the  efficient  cause
and  of  the  mode  of  its  operation.

And  indeed  the  Omnipotent  Creator  is  nowhere  more  con-
spicuous in  his  works,  nowhere  is  his  divinity  more  loudly
proclaimed,  than  in  the  structure  of  animals.  And  though  all
know  and  admit  that  the  offspring  derives  its  origin  from  male
and  female,  that  an  egg  is  engendered  by  a cock  and  a hen,  and
that  a pullet  proceeds  from  an  egg,  still  we  are  not  informed
either  by  the  medical  schools  or  the  sagacious  Aristotle,  as  to
the  manner  in  which  the  cock  or  his  semen  fashions  the  chick
from  the  egg.  For  from  what  we  have  had  occasion  to  say  of
the  generation  of  oviparous  and  other  animals,  it  is  sufficiently
obvious  that  neither  is  the  opinion  of  the  medical  authorities
admissible,  who  derive  generation  from  the  admixture  of  the
seminal  fluids  of  the  two  sexes,  nor  that  of  Aristotle,  who  holds
the  semen  masculinum  for  the  efficient,  and  the  menstrual
blood  for  the  material  cause  of  procreation.  For  neither  in
the  act  of  intercourse  nor  shortly  after  it,  is  aught  transferred
to  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  from  which  as  matter  any  part
of  the  foetus  is  immediately  constituted.  Neither  does  the
“ geniture^^  proceeding  from  the  male  in  the  act  of  union
(whether  it  be  animated  or  an  inanimate  instrument)  enter  the
uterus ; neither  is  it  attracted  into  this  organ ; neither  is  it
stored  up  within  the  fowl ; but  it  is  either  dissipated  or  escapes.


356


ON  GENERATION.


Neither  is  there  anything  contained  in  the  uterus  imme-
diately after  intercourse,  which,  proceeding  from  the  male,  or
from  the  female,  or  from  both,  can  be  regarded  as  the  matter
or  rudiment  of  the  futnre  fetus.  Neither  is  the  semen  galli
stored  and  retained  in  the  bursa  Fabricii  of  the  hen  or  else-
where, that  from  thence,  as  by  the  irradiation  of  some  spiri-
tual substance,  or  by  contact,  the  egg  may  be  fashioned  or
the  chick  constituted  from  the  egg.  Neither  has  the  hen
any  other  semen  save  papulae,  yelks,  and  eggs.  These  obser-
vations of  ours,  therefore,  render  the  subject  of  generation
one  of  greater  difficulty  than  evei’,  inasmuch  as  all  the  pre-
sumptions upon  which  the  two  old  opinions  repose  are  totally
overthrown.  The  fact  is  especial,  as  we  shall  afterwards
demonstrate,  that  all  animals  are  alike  engendered  from  eggs ;
and  in  the  act  of  intercoui’se,  whether  of  man  or  the  lower
quafeupeds,  there  is  no  seminal  fluid,  proceeding  from  the
male  or  the  female,  thrown  into  the  uterus  or  attracted  by
this  organ ; there  is  nothing  to  be  discovered  within  its  canty,
either  before  intercourse,  during  the  act,  or  immediately  after
it,  which  can  be  regarded  as  the  matter  of  the  future  fetus,
or  as  its  eflicient  cause,  or  as  its  commencement.

Daniel  Sennert,  a man  of  learning  and  a close  observer  of
nature,  having  first  passed  the  reasonings  of  a host  of  others
under  review,  approaches  the  subject  himself;  and  concludes
that  the  vital  principle  inheres  in  the  semen  and  is  almost
identical  with  that  which  resides  in  the  future  offspring.  So
that  Sennert  does  not  hesitate  to  aver  that  the  rational  soul
of  man  is  present  in  his  seminal  fluid,  and  by  a parity  of
reasoning  that  the  egg  possesses  the  animating  principle  of  the
pullet ; that  the  'V'ital  principle  is  transported  to  the  uterus  of
the  female  with  the  semen  of  the  male,  and  that  ft’om  the
seminal  fluids  of  either  conjoined,  not  mixed  (for  mixtm’e,  he
says,  is  applied  to  things  of  different  species),  and  endowed
with  soul  or  the  ■vdtal  principle  a perfect  animal  emerges.  And
therefore,  he  says,  the  semen  of  either  parent  is  required,
whether  to  the  constitution  of  the  ovum  or  of  the  embryo.
And  having  said  so  much,  he  seems  to  think  that  he  has  over-
come all  difficulties,  and  has  delivered  a certain  and  perspicuous
truth.

13ut  in  order  that  we  should  concede  a soul  or  vital  principle


ON  GENERATION.


357


(auima)  to  the  egg,  and  that  combined  from  the  souls  of  the
parents,  these  being  occasionally  of  different  species,  the  horse
and  the  ass,  the  common  fowl  and  the  pheasant,  for  example,
this  vital  principle  not  being  a mixture  but  only  an  union ; and
allow  the  pullet  to  he  produced  in  the  manner  of  the  seeds  of
plants,  by  the  same  efficient  principle  by  which  the  perfect
animal  is  afterwards  preserved  through  the  rest  of  its  life,  so
that  it  would  he  absurd  to  say  that  the  foetus  grew  by  one
vital  principle  without  the  uterus  or  ovum,  and  by  another
within  the  uterus  or  ovum — did  we  grant  all  this,  I say
(although  it  is  invalid  and  undeserving  faith),  our  history  of
generation  from  the  egg,  nevertheless,  upsets  the  foundations
of  the  doctrine,  and  shows  it  to  be  entirely  false  3 namely,  that
the  egg  is  produced  from  the  semen  of  the  cock  and  hen,  or
that  any  seminal  fluid  from  either  one  or  other  is  carried  to
the  uterus,  or  that  the  embryo  or  any  particle  of  it  is  fashioned
from  any  seminal  fluid  transported  to  the  uterus,  or  that  the
semen  galli,  as  efficient  cause  and  plastic  agent,  is  anywhere
stored  up  or  reserved  within  the  body  of  the  hen  to  serve  when
attracted  into  the  uterus,  as  the  matter  and  nourishment
whence  the  foetus  which  it  has  produced  should  continue  to
grow.  The  conditions  are  wanting  which  he  himself  admits,
after  Aristotle,  to  be  necessary,  viz.,  that  the  embryo  be  consti-
tuted by  that  which  is  actual  and  preexists,  and  the  chick  by
that  which  is  present  and  exists  in  the  place  where  the  chick
is  first  formed  and  increases ; further,  that  it  be  produced  by
that  which  is  accomplished  immediately  and  conjunctly,  and  is
the  same  by  which  the  chick  is  preserved  and  grows  through
the  whole  of  its  life.  For  the  semen  galli  (and  whether  it  is
viewed  as  animate  or  inanimate  is  of  no  moment)  is  nowise
present  and  conjunct  either  in  the  egg  or  in  the  uterus;  neither
in  the  matter  from  which  the  chick  is  fashioned,  nor  yet  in  the
chick  itself  already  begun,  and  as  contributing  either  to  its
formation  or  perfection.

He  dreams,  too,  when  he  seeks  illustrations  of  his  opinions
on  an  animated  semen  from  such  instances  as  the  seeds  of
plants  and  acorns ; because  he  does  not  perceive  the  differ-
ence alleged  by  Aristotle^  between  the  “ geniture”  admitted  in


’ De  Gener.  Aniin.  lib.  ii,  cap.  1.


358


ON  GENERATION,


intercourse  and  the  first  conception  engendered  by  both  pa-
rents ; neither  does  he  observe  on  the  egg  produced  originally
in  the  cluster  of  the  vitellarinm,  and  without  any  geniture^  whe-
ther proceeding  from  the  male  or  the  female,  translated  to  the
uterus.  Neither  does  he  understand  that  the  uterus  is,  even
after  intercourse,  completely  empty  of  matter  of  every  kind,
whether  transmitted  by  the  parents,  or  produced  by  the  inter-
course, or  transmuted  in  any  way  whatever.  Neither  had  he
read,  or  at  all  events  he  does  not  refer  to  the  experiment  of
Fabricius,  namely,  that  a hen  is  rendered  so  prolific  by  a few
treads  of  the  cock,  that  she  will  continue  to  lay  fruitful  eggs
for  the  rest  of  the  year,  although  in  the  interval  she  receives
no  new  accessions  of  semen  for  the  fecundation  of  each  egg  as
it  is  laid,  neither  does  she  retain  any  of  the  seminal  fiuid  which
she  received  so  long  ago.

So  much  is  certain,  and  disputed  by  no  one,  that  animals,
all  those  at  least  that  proceed  from  the  intercourse  of  male  and
female,  are  the  offspring  of  this  intercourse,  and  that  they  are
procreated  as  it  seems  by  a kind  of  contagion,  much  in  the
same  way  as  medical  men  observe  contagious  diseases,  such  as
leprosy,  lues  veuera,  plague,  phthisis,  to  creep  through  the
ranks  of  mortal  men,  and  by  mere  extrinsic  contact  to  excite
diseases  similar  to  themselves  in  other  bodies ; nay,  contact  is
not  necessary ; a mere  halitus  or  miasm  suffices,  and  that  at  a
distance  and  by  an  inanimate  medium,  and  with  nothing  sensibly
altered  : that  is  to  say,  where  the  contagion  first  touches,  there
it  generates  an  “ univocak'’  like  itself,  neither  touching  nor  ex-
isting in  fact,  neither  being  present  nor  conjunct,  but  solely
because  it  formerly  touched.  Such  virtue  and  efficacy  is  found
in  contagions.  And  the  same  thing  perchance  occurs  in  the
generation  of  animals.  For  the  eggs  of  fishes,  which  come
spontaneously  to  their  full  size  extriusically,  and  ■without  any
addition  of  male  seminal  fluid,  and  are  therefore  indubitably
possessed  of  vitality  without  it,  mereN  sprinkled  and  touched
with  the  milt  of  the  male,  produce  young  fishes.  The  semen
of  the  male,  I say,  is  not  intromitted  in  such  -wise  as  to  per-
form the  part  of  “ ageut’^  in  each  paidicidar  egg,  or  to  fashion
the  body,  or  to  introduce  vitality  (anima)  ; the  ova  are  only
fecundated  by  a kind  of  contagion.  'Whence  Aristotle  calls  the
milt  of  the  male  fish,  or  the  genital  fiuid  difiiised  in  water,  at


ON  GENERATION.


359


one  time  " the  genital  and  fcetific  fluid/’  at  another,  “ the  vital
virus.”  For  he  says^ : “ The  male  flsh  sprinkles  the  ova  with
his  genital  semen,  and  from  the  ova  that  are  touched  by  this
vital  virus  young  fishes  are  engendered.”

Let  it  then  be  admitted  as  matter  of  certainty  that  the  em-
bryo is  produced  by  contagion.  But  a great  difficulty  imme-
diately arises,  when  we  ask  ; how,  in  what  way  is  this  contagion
the  author  of  so  great  a work  ? By  what  condition  do  parents
through  it  engender  offspring  like  themselves,  or  how  does  the
semen  masculinum  produce  an  “ univocal”  like  the  male  whence
it  flowed  ? When  it  disappears  after  the  contact,  and  is  n?ught
in  act  ulteriorly,  either  by  virtue  of  contact  or  presence,  hut  is
corrupt  and  has  become  a nonentity,  how,  I ask,  does  a non-
entity act  ? How  does  a thing  which  is  not  in  contact  fashion
another  thing  like  itself?  How  does  a thing  wliich  is  dead  it-
self impart  life  to  something  else,  and  that  only  because  at  a
former  period  it  was  in  contact  ?

For  the  reasoning,  of  Aristotle^  appears  to  be  false,  or  at  all
events  defective,  where  he  contends  “ That  generation  cannot
take  place  without  an  active  and  a passive  principle;  and  that  those
things  can  neither  act  nor  prove  passive  which  do  not  touch ;
but  that  those  things  come  into  mutual  contact  which,  whilst
they  are  of  different  sizes,  and  are  in  different  places,  have
their  extremes  together.”

But  when  it  clearly  appears  that  contagion  from  noncontin-
gents, and  things  not  ha\dng  their  extremities  together,  pro-
duce ill  effects  on  animals,  wherefore  should  not  the  same  law
avail  in  respect  of  their  life  and  generation?  There  is  an
“ efficient”  in  the  egg  which,  by  its  plastic  virtue  (for  the  male
has  only  touched  though  he  no  longer  touches,  nor  are  there
any  extremes  together),  produces,  and  fashions  the  foetus  in  its
kind  and  likeness.  And  through  so  many  media  or  instru-
ments is  this  power,  the  agent  of  fecundity,  transmitted  or
required  that  neither  by  any  movement  of  instruments  as  in
works  of  art,  nor  by  the  instance  of  the  automaton  quoted  by
Aristotle,  nor  of  our  clocks,  nor  of  the  kingdom  in  which  the
mandate  of  the  sovereign  is  everywhere  of  avail,  nor  yet  by  the


' Hist.  Animal,  lib.  vi,  cap.  13.


® De  Gen.  et  cor.  lib.  i,  cap.  6.


360


ON  GENERATION.


introduction  of  a vital  principle  or  soul  into  the  semen  or
“ geniture/^  can  the  aforementioned  doctrine  be  defended.

And  hence  have  arisen  all  the  controversies  and  problems
concerning  the  attraction  of  the  magnet  and  of  amber;  on
sympathy  and  antipathy ; on  poisons  and  the  contagion  of
pestilential  diseases  ; on  alexipharmics  and  medicines  which
prove  curative  or  injurious  tlu’ough  some  hidden  or  rather  un-
known property,  all  of  which  seem  to  come  into  play  indepen-
dently of  contact.  And  above  all  on  what  it  is  in  generation
which,  in  virtue  of  a momentary  contact — nay,  not  even  of
contact,  save  through  several  media — forms  the  parts  of  the
chick  from  the  egg  by  epigenesis  in  a certain  order,  and  pro-
duces an  “ univocal”  and  like  itseK,  and  that  entirely  because  it
was  in  contact  at  a former  period.  How,  I ask  again,  does
that  which  is  not  present,  and  which  only  enjoyed  extiinsic
contact,  come  to  constitute  and  order  all  the  members  of  the
chick  in  the  egg  exposed  without  the  body  of  the  parent,  and
often  at  a long  interval  after  it  is  laid  ? how  does  it  confer  life
or  soul,  and  a species  compounded  of  those  of  the  concuiTing
generants?  Inasmuch  as  nothing,  it  seems,  can  reproduce
itself  in  another's  hkeness.


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTIETH.

Of  the  efficient  cause  of  animals,  and  its  conditions.

That  we  may  proceed  in  om-  subject,  therefore,  and  pene-
trate so  far  into  the  knowledge  of  the  eflSicient  cause  of  animal
generation  as  seems  needful  in  this  place,  we  must  begin  by
observing  what  instruments  or  media  are  devoted  to  it.  .lAud
here  we  come  at  once  to  the  distinction  into  male  and  female ;
seminal  fluid  and  ovum,  and  its  primordium.  For  some  males,
as  well  as  some  females,  ai’e  bai’ren,  or  but  httle  prolific;  and
the  seed  of  the  male  is  at  one  time  more,  at  another  time  less
prolific ; because  the  semen  masculinum  stored  up  in  the
vesiculcc  seminales  is  esteemed  unfruitful,  unless  it  is  raised


ON  GENERATION.


361


into  froth  by  the  spirits  and  ejected  with  force.  And  even
then  perchance  it  is  not  endowed  vrith  equal  fecundating  force
at  all  times.  Neither  are  all  the  germs  of  yelks  in  the  ovary,
nor  aU  the  eggs  in  the  uterus  made  fertile  at  the  same  instant.

Now  I call  that  fruitful  which,  unless  impeded  hy  some  ex-
trinsic cause,  attains  by  its  inherent  force  to  its  destined  end,
and  brings  about  the  consequence  for  the  sake  of  which  it  is
ordained.  Thus  the  cock  is  called  fruitful  which  has  his  hens
more  frequently  and  surely  pregnant,  the  eggs  they  lay  being
at  the  same  time  perfect  and  proper  for  incubation.

The  hen  in  like  manner  is  esteemed  fruitful  which  has  the
faculty  of  producing  eggs,  or  of  receiving  and  long  retaining
the  virtue  of  prolific  conception  from  the  cock.  The  cluster  of
germs  and  the  ovary  itself  are  regarded  as  prolific  when  the
germs  are  numerous  and  of  good  size.

The  egg  in  the  same  way  is  fruitful  which  differs  from  a
subventaneous  or  hypenemic  egg,  and  which,  cherished  by
incubation,  or  in  any  other  way,  does  not  fail  to  produce  a
chick.

Such  an  efficient  cause  consequently  is  required  for  the
chick,  as  shall  impart  the  virtue  of  fecundity  to  it,  and  secure
it  the  power  of  acting  as  an  efficient  cause  in  its  turn.  Be-
cause that,  or  its  analogue  at  least,  by  means  of  which  they
become  prolific,  is  present  in  all  animals.  And  the  inquiry
is  the  same  in  each  case,  when  we  ask  what  it  is  in  the  egg
which  renders  it  prolific,  and  distinguishes  it  from  a Avind
egg;  what  in  the  vitellary  germ  and  ovary;  what  in  the
female;  what,  finally,  in  the  semen  and  the  cock  himself?
What,  moreover,  it  is  in  the  blood  and  punctum  sabens,  or
first  formed  particle  of  the  chick,  whence  aU  the  other  parts
arise  Avith  their  appropriate  structures  and  arrangements  ; what
in  the  embryo  or  chick  itself  whereby  it  becomes  more  or  less
robust  and  agile,  attains  to  maturity  AAuth  greater  or  less  ra-
pidity, and  lives  with  various  degrees  of  health,  for  a longer  or
shorter  period?

Nor  is  the  inquiry  very  diflterent  which  goes  to  ascertain
what  sex  the  male  and  the  female,  or  the  cock  and  the
. hen,  confer  upon  the  prolific  egg ; and  Avhat  proceeds  from
each  that  contributes  to  the  perfection  or  resemblance  of
the  chick,  viz.,  whether  the  egg,  the  conception,  the  matter.


362


ON  GENERATION.


and  tlie  nutriment  proceed  from  the  mother,  and  the  plastic
virtue  from  the  father ; or  rather  a certain  contagion  im-
mitted  during  intercourse,  or  produced  and  received  from  him,
which  in  the  body  of  the  hen,  or  in  the  eggs,  either  perma-
nently excites  the  matter  of  the  eggs,  or  attracts  nourishment
from  the  female,  and  concocts  and  distributes  it  first  for  the
growth  of  the  eggs,  and  then  for  the  production  of  the  chicks ;
finally,  whether  from  the  male  proceeds  all  that  has  reference
to  form  and  life  and  fecundity,  from  the  female,  again,  all  that
is  of  matter,  constitution,  place,  and  nourishment  ? For  among
animals  where  the  sexes  are  distinct,  matters  are  so  aiTanged,
that  since  the  female  alone  is  inadequate  to  engender  an  em-
bryo and  to  nourish  and  protect  the  young,  a male  is  associated
with  her  by  nature,  as  the  superior  and  more  worthy  progenitor,
as  the  consort  of  her  labour,  and  the  means  of  snpplving  her
deficiencies;  in  the  case  of  the  hen,  of  correcting  by  his  contagion
the  inferiority  of  the  hypenemic  eggs  which  she  produces,  and
so  rendering  them  prolific.  For  as  the  pullet,  engendered  of  an
egg,  is  indebted  to  that  egg  for  his  body,  ritality,  and  principal
or  generative  part,  so  and  in  like  manner  does  the  egg  receive
all  that  is  in  it  from  the  female,  the  female  in  her  turn  being
dependent  orr  the  male  for  her  fecurrdity  which  is  conferred
in  coition.

Arrd  here  we  have  an  opportunity  of  inqrririrrg,  whether  the
male  be  the  first  and  principal  cause  of  the  generation  of  the
offspring ; or  whether  the  male  along  with  the  female  are  the
mediate  and  instrumental  causes  of  nature  itself,  or  of  the  fir’st
and  supreme  generator  ? And  such  an  inquuy  is  both  be-
coming and  necessary,  for  perfect  science  of  every  kind  de-
pends on  a knowledge  of  causes.  To  the  full  understanding
of  generation,  therefore,  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  mount  from
the  final  to  the  fii’st  and  supreme  efficient  cause,  and  to  hold
each  and  every  cause  in  especial  regard.

We  shall  have  occasion  to  define  that  which  is  the  first  and
supreme  efficient  cause  of  the  chick  in  ovo  by  and  by,  when
we  treat  of  that  which  constitutes  the  efficient  cause  [of  gene-
ration] among  animals  in  general.  Here,  meantime,  we  shall
see  what  its  nature  may  be.

The  first  condition,  then,  of  the  primary  efficient  cause  of
generation,  properly  so  called,  is,  as  we  have  said,  that  it  be


ON  GENERATION.


363


the  prime  and  principal  fertilizer,  whence  all  mediate  causes
receive  the  fecundity  imparted.  For  example,  the  chick  is
derived  from  the  punctum  saliens  in  the  egg,  not  only  as  re-
gards the  body,  but  also,  and  this  especially,  as  respects  the
life  (anima)  : the  punctum  saliens,  or  heart,  is  derived  from
the  egg,  the  egg  from  the  hen,  and  the  hen  has  her  fecundity
from  the  cock.  *

Another  condition  of  the  prime  efficient  is  discovered  from
the  work  achieved,  viz.,  the  chick,  because  that  is  the  prime
efficient  in  which  the  reason  of  the  effect  is  principally  dis-
played. But  since  every  generative  efficient  engenders  ano-
ther like  itself,  and  the  offspring  is  of  a mixed  nature,  the
prime  efficient  must  also  be  a certain  mixed  something.

Now,  I maintain  that  the  offspring  is  of  a mixed  nature,  in-
asmuch as  a mixture  of  both  parents  appears  plainly  in  it,  in
the  form  and  lineaments,  and  each  particular  part  of  its  body,
in  its  colour,  mother-marks,  disposition  to  diseases,  and  other
accidents.  In  mental  constitution,  also,  and  its  manifesta-
tions, such  as  manners,  docility,  voice,  and  gait,  a similar  tem-
perament is  discoverable.  For  as  we  say  of  a certain  mixture,
that  it  is  composed  of  elements,  because  their  qualities  or  vir-
tues, such  as  heat,  cold,  dryness,  and  moisture,  are  there  dis-
covered associated  in  a certain  similar  compound  body,  so,  in
like  manner,  the  work  of  the  father  and  mother  is  to  be  discerned
both  in  the  body  and  mental  character  of  the  offspring,  and  in
all  else  that  follows  or  accompanies  temperament.  In  the  mule,
for  instance,  the  body  and  disposition,  the  temper  and  voice,
of  both  parents  (of  the  horse  and  the  ass,  e.  g.)  are  mingled ;
and  so,  also,  in  the  hybrid  between  the  pheasant  and  the  fowl,
in  that  between  the  wolf  and  the  dog,  &c.,  corresponding  traits
are  conspicuous.

When,  therefore,  the  chick  shows  his  resemblance  to  both
parents,  and  is  a mixed  effect,  the  primary  genital  cause  (which
it  resembles)  must  needs  be  mixed.  Wherefore  that  which
fashions  the  chick  in  the  egg  is  of  a mixed  nature,  a certain
something  mixed  or  compounded,  and  the  work  of  both  pa-
rents. And  if  any  kind  of  contagion,  engendered  under  the  in-
fluence of  sexual  intercourse,  in  which  the  male  and  female  min-
gle and  form  but  one  body,  either  originates  or  remains  in  the
body  of  the  female,  that,  too,  must  be  of  a mixed  nature  or


364


ON  GENERATION.


power,  whence,  subsequently,  a fertile  egg  will  be  produced,
endowed  witb  plastic  powers,  tbe  consequence  of  a mixed  na-
ture, or  of  a mixed  efficient  instrument,  from  wbicb  a cbick,
also  of  a mixed  nature,  Avill  be  produced.

I bave  used  tbe  word  contagion  above,  because  Aristotle’s
view  is  contradicted  by  all  experience,  viz.,  tbat  a certain  part
of  tbe  embryo  is  immediately  made  by  intercourse.  Neither
is  it  true,  as  some  of  the  moderns  assert,  that  tbe  Antal  princi-
ple (anima)  of  tbe  future  cbick  is  present  in  tbe  egg ; for  tbat
cannot  be  the  vital  principle  of  the  cbick  wbicb  inheres  in  no
pai't  of  its  body.  Neither  can  tbe  Imng  principle  be  said
either  to  be  left  or  to  be  originated  by  intercourse ; otherwise
in  every  pregnant  woman  there  would  be  two  Antal  principles
(animaj)  present.  Wherefore,  until  it  shall  bave  been  deter-
mined Avbat  tbe  efficient  cause  of  tbe  egg  is,  what  it  is  of  mixed
nature  tbat  must  remain  immediately  upon  intercom'se,  we  may
be  permitted  to  speak  of  it  under  tbe  title  of  a Contagion.

But  where  this  contagion  lies  bid  in  tbe  female  after  inter-
course, and  bow  it  is  communicated  and  giA*en  to  the  egg,  de-
mands quite  a special  inquiry,  and  we  shall  bave  occasion  to
treat  of  tbe  matter  when  we  come  to  discuss  tbe  conception  of
females  in  general.  It  will  suffice,  meantune,  if  we  say  tbat
tbe  same  law  appbes  to  tbe  prime  efficient — in  Avbicb  inheres
the  reason  of  tbe  futiu’e  offspring — as  to  tbe  offspring ; as  this
is  of  a mixed  natm’e,  tbe  natiu’e  of  its  cause  must  also  be  mixed;
and  it  must  either  proceed  equally  fi  om  both  parents,  or  from
something  else  wbicb  is  employed  by  both  concuiTently  as  in-
struments, animated,  co-operating,  mixed,  and  in  the  sexual
act  coalescing  unto  one.  And  this  is  tbe  third  condition  of
tbe  prime  efficient,  tbat  it  either  imparts  motion  to  all  tbe  in-
termediate instruments  in  succession,  or  uses  them  in  some
other  way,  but  comes  not  itself  into  play.  IITience  tbe  origin
of  tbe  doubt  tbat  has  ai’isen,  whether,  in  tbe  geuei'ation  of  the
cbick,  tbe  cock  Avere  tbe  tme  prime  efficient,  or  whether  there
Avere  not  another  prior,  superior  to  him?  For,  indeed,  aU
things  seem  to  derive  their  origin  from  a celestial  influence,
and  to  follow  the  movements  of  tbe  sun  and  moon.  But  A^■e
shall  be  able  to  speak  more  positively  of  this  matter  after  Ave
bave  sboAvn  Avbat  Ave  understand  by  tbe  “ instrument,”  or  “ in-
strumental efficient  cause,”  and  boAV  it  is  subdmded.


ON  GENERATION.


365


Instramental  efficients^  then,  are  of  different  kinds  : some,
according  to  Aristotle,  are  factive,  others  active ; some  have
no  capacity  any  way  unless  conjoined  with  another  prior  effi-
cient, as  the  hand,  foot,  genital  organs,  &c.  with  the  rest  of  the
body;  others  have  an  influence  even  when  separate  and  distinct,
as  the  seminal  fluid  and  the  ovum.  Some  instruments,  again,
have  neither  motion  nor  action  beyond  those  that  are  imparted
to  them  by  the  prime  efficient ; and  others  have  peculiar  in-
herent principles  of  action,  to  which  nature  indeed  allows  no
motion  in  the  business  of  generation,  though  she  still  uses  their
faculties,  and  prescribes  them  laws  or  limits  in  their  operations,
not  otherwise  than  the  cook  makes  use  of  fire  in  cooking,  and
the  physician  of  herbs  and  drugs  in  curing  diseases.

Sennert,  that  he  may  uphold  the  opinion  he  had  espoused
of  the  vital  principle  (anima)  being  present  in  the  semen,  and
the  formative  faculty  of  the  chick  being  extant  in  the  egg,  as-
serts, that  not  only  is  the  egg,  but  the  semen  of  the  cock,  en-
dowed with  the  living  principle  of  the  future  chick.  Moreover,
he  distinctly  denies  that  there  is  any  separate  instrumental
efficient ; and  says,  that  that  only  ought  to  be  entitled  “ instru-
ment^^ which  is  conjoined  with  the  prime  efficient ; and  that
only  “ instrumental  efficient,^^  which  has  no  motion  or  action  save
that  which  is  imparted  to  it  by  the  prime  efficient,  or  which  is
continuously  and  successively  received,  and  in  virtue  of  which
it  acts.  And  on  this  ground  he  rejects  the  example  of  projec-
tiles, which  have  received  force  from  the  projecting  agent,  and,
separated  from  it,  act  nevertheless ; as  if  swords  and  spears  were
properly  to  be  called  warlike  weapons,  but  arrows  and  bullets
to  be  refused  this  title.  He  also  rejects  the  argument  derived
from  the  repubhc,  denying  thereby  that  magistrates,  counsel-
lors, or  ministers,  are  instruments  of  government;  although
Aristotle  regards  a counsel  as  an  efficient,  and  in  express  terms
calls  a minister  an  instrument.^  Sennert  hkewise  denies  the
example  of  automata ; and  says  and  gainsays  much  besides,
with  a view  to  confirming  himself  in  his  position,  that  the
semen  and  the  egg  are  possessed  of  a living  principle  (anima),
and  are  not  mediate  or  instrumental,  but  principal  agents.
Sennert,  nevertheless,  as  it  were  compelled  by  the  force  of


Polit.  lib.  i,  cap.  4.


366


ON  GENERATION.


truths  lays  down  such  conditions  for  a principal  agent,  as  fully
and  effectually  contradict  all  that  he  had  said  before.  He
tells  us,  for  instance,  that  “ whatever  produces  a work  or  an
effect  more  noble  than  itself,  or  an  effect  unhke  itself,  is  not  a
principal  efficient,  but  an  instrumental  cause granting  which,
who  would  not  infer  that  the  semen  and  the  egg  were  instru-
ments ? seeing  that  the  pullet  is  an  effect  more  noble  than
the  egg,  and  every  way  unlike  either  this  or  the  spermatic  fluid.
Wherefore,  when  the  learned  Sennert  denies  the  semen  and  the
egg  to  be  instruments  or  organs,  because  they  are  distinct  from
the  prime  agents,  he  takes  his  position  upon  a false  basis ; be-
cause, as  the  prime  generator  procreates  offspring  by  various
means  or  media,  the  medium  being  here  conjunct,  as  the  hand
of  the  workman  is  with  his  body,  there  separate  and  distinct,  as
is  the  arrow  let  loose  from  the  bow,  it  is  stdl  to  be  regarded
as  an  instrument.

From  the  conditions  now  enumerated  of  an  instnimental
cause,  it  seems  to  follow  that  the  prime  efficient  in  the  gene-
ration of  the  chick  is  the  cock,  or,  at  all  events,  the  cock  and
hen,  because  the  resulting  pullet  resembles  these ; nor  can  it
be  held  more  noble  than  they,  which  are  its  prime  efficients
or  parents.  I shall,  therefore,  add  another  condition  of  the
prime  efficient,  whence  it  may,  perhaps,  appear  that  the  male  is
not  the  prime,  but  only  the  instrumental,  cause  of  the  chick ;
viz.,  that  the  prime  efficient  in  the  formation  of  the  chick
makes  use  of  artifice,  and  foresight,  and  wisdom,  and  goodness,
and  intelhgence,  which  far  surpass  the  powers  of  our  rational
soul  to  comprehend,  inasmuch  as  all  things  are  disposed  and
perfected  in  harmony  with  the  purpose  of  the  futiu’e  work,  and
that  there  be  action  to  a determinate  end  ; so  that  every,  even
the  smallest,  part  of  the  chick  is  fashioned  for  the  sake  of  a
special  use  and  end,  and  with  respect  not  merely  to  the  rearing
of  the  fabric,  but  also  to  its  well-being,  and  elegance  and  pre-
servation, But  the  male  or  his  semen  is  not  such  either  in  the
act  of  kind  or  after  it,  that  art,  intelhgence,  and  foresight  can
be  ascribed  to  him  or  it.

The  proper  inference  from  these  premises  appears  to  be  that
the  male,  as  well  as  his  seminal  fluid,  is  the  efficient  instru-
ment ; and  the  female  not  less  than  the  egg  she  lays  the  same.
Wherefore,  we  have  to  seek  refuge  in  a prior,  superior,  and


ON  GENERATION.


367


more  excellent  cause,  to  which,  with  all  propriety,  are  ascribed
foresight,  intelligence,  goodness,  and  skiU,  and  which  is  hy  so
much  more  excellent  than  its  effect  or  work,  as  the  architect  is
more  worthy  than  the  pile  he  rears,  as  the  king  is  more  exalted
than  his  minister,  as  the  workman  is  better  than  his  hands  or
tools.

The  male  and  female,  therefore,  will  come  to  be  regarded
as  merely  the  efficient  instruments,  subservient  in  all  respects
to  the  Supreme  Creator,  or  father  of  all  things.  In  this  sense,
consequently,  it  is  well  said  that  the  sun  and  moon  engender
man ; because,  with  the  advent  and  secession  of  the  sun,  come
spring  and  autumn,  seasons  which  mostly  correspond  with
the  generation  and  decay  of  animated  beings.  So  that  the
great  leader  in  philosophy  says  : ^ “ The  first  motion  [of  the

sphere  ?]  is  not  the  cause  of  generation  and  destruction ; it  is
the  motion  of  the  ecliptic  that  is  so,  this  being  both  continuous
and  having  two  movements ; for,  if  future  generation  and  cor-
ruption are  to  be  eternal,  it  is  necessary  that  something  like-
wise move  eternally,  that  interchanges  do  not  fail,  that  of  the
two  actions  one  only  do  not  occur.  The  cause  of  the  perpetuity
[of  animal  species  ?]  is,  therefore,  the  law  of  the  universe ; and
the  obliquity  [of  the  ecliptic?]  is  the  cause  of  the  approach  and
accession,  [of  the  sun?]  and  of  his  being  now  nearer,  now  more
remote  : when  he  quits  us,  and  removes  to  a distance,  it  is  then
that  decay  and  corruption  intervene;  and,  in  like  manner,
when  he  approaches,  it  is  then  that  he  engenders ; and  if,  as
he  frequently  approaches,  he  engenders ; so,  because  he  fre-
quently recedes,  does  he  cause  corruption ; for  the  causes  of
contraries  are  contrary.”

All  things,  therefore,  grow  and  flourish  in  spring,  (on  the
approach  of  the  sun,  that  is  to  say,  he  being  the  common
parent  and  producer,  or  at  all  events  the  immediate  and  uni-
versal instrument  of  the  Creator  in  the  work  of  reproduction) ;
and  this  is  true  not  of  plants  only  but  of  animals  also ; nor  less
of  those  that  come  spontaneously,  than  of  those  that  are  propa-
gated by  the  consentient  act  of  male  and  female.  It  is  as  if,
with  the  advent  of  this  glorious  luminary,  Venus  the  bountiful
descended  from  heaven,  waited  on  by  Cupid  and  a cohort  of
graces,  and  prompted  all  living  things  by  the  bland  incitement
‘ De  Generat.  et  corr.  lib.  ii,  cap.  10.


3C8


ON  GENERATION.


of  love  to  secure  the  perpetuity  of  their  kinds.  Or  (and  it  is
thus  that  we  have  it  in  the  mythology)  it  is  as  if  the  genital
organs  of  Saturn,  cast  into  the  sea  at  tliis  season,  raised  a foam,
whence  sprung  Aphrodite.  For,  in  the  generation  of  animals,
as  the  poet  says,  ■“  snperat  tener  omnibus  humor,'” — a gentle
moisture  all  pervades, — and  the  genitals  fi’oth  and  are  replete
with  semen.

The  cock  and  the  hen  are  especially  fertile  in  the  spring ; as
if  the  sun,  or  heaven,  or  nature,  or  the  soul  of  the  world,  or  the
omnipotent  God — for  all  these  names  signify  the  same  thing —
were  a cause  in  generation  superior  and  more  divine  than  they ;
and  thus  it  is  that  the  sun  and  man,  i.e.  the  sun  through  man
as  the  instrument,  engender  man.  In  the  same  way  the  pre-
server of  all  things,  and  the  male  among  birds,  give  birth  to  the
egg,  from  whence  the  chick,  the  perfect  bii’d,  is  made  eternal
in  its  kind  by  the  approach  and  recession  of  the  god  of  day,
who,  by  the  divine  will  and  pleasure,  or  by  fate,  serves  for  the
generation  of  all  that  hves.

Let  us  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  male,  although  a prior
and  more  excellent  efficient  than  the  female,  is  still  no  more
than  an  instrumental  efficient,  and  that  he,  not  less  than  the
female,  must  refer  his  fecundity  or  facultj^  of  engendering  as
received  from  the  approaching  sun;  and,  consequently,  that
the  skill  and  foresight,  which  are  a]3parent  in  his  work,  are
not  to  he  held  as  proceeding  from  him  but  fi’om  God ; inas-
much as  the  male  in  the  act  of  kind  neither  uses  counsel  nor
understanding;  neither  does  man  engender  the  rational  part
of  his  soul,  but  only  the  vegetative  faculty ; which  is  not  re-
garded as  any  principal  or  more  divine  faculty  of  the  soul,  but
one  only  of  a lower  order.

Since,  then,  there  is  not  less  of  skill  and  prescience  mani-
fested in  the  structure  of  the  chick  than  in  the  creation  of  man
and  the  universe  at  large,  it  is  imperative  even  in  the  genera-
tion of  man  to  admit  an  efficient  cause,  superior  to,  and  more
excellent  than  man  himself : otherwise  the  vegetative  faculty,
or  that  part  of  the  soul  or  bring  principle  which  fashions  and
preserves  a man,  would  have  to  be  accounted  far  more  exceUeut
and  divine,  and  held  to  bear’  a closer  resemblance  to  God  than
the  rational  portion  of  the  soul,  whose  excellence,  nevertheless,
we  extol  over  all  the  faculties  of  all  animals,  and  esteem  as


ON  GENERATION.


369


that  which  has  right  and  empire  in  them,  and  to  whieh  all  created
things  are  made  subservient.  Or  we  should  else  have  to  own
that  in  the  works  of  nature  there  was  neither  prudence^  nor  art,
nor  understanding ; but  that  these  appeared  to  us,  who  are
wont  to  judge  of  the  divine  things  of  nature  after  our  own  poor
arts  and  faculties,  or  to  contrast  them  with  examples  due  to
ourselves ; as  if  the  active  principles  of  nature  produced  their
effects  in  the  same  way  as  we  are  used  to  produce  our  artificial
works,  by  counsel,  to  wit,  or  discipline  acquired  through  the
mind  or  understanding.

But  nature,  the  principle  of  motion  and  rest  in  all  things  in
which  it  inheres,  and  the  vegetative  soul,  the  prime  efficient
cause  of  all  generation,  move  by  no  acquired  faculty  which
might  be  designated  by  the  title  of  skill  or  foresight,  as  in
our  undertakings ; but  operate  in  conformity  with  determinate
laws  like  fate  or  special  commandments — in  the  same  way  and
manner  as  light  things  rise  and  heavy  things  descend.  The
vegetative  faculty  of  parents,  to  wit,  engenders  in  the  same
way,  and  the  semen  finally  arrives  at  the  form  of  the  foetus,  as
the  spider  weaves  her  web,  as  birds  build  nests,  incubate  their
eggs,  and  cherish  them  young,  or  as  bees  and  ants  construct
dweUings,  and  lay  up  stores  for  their  futm’e  wants ; all  of  which
is  done  naturally  and  from  a connate  genius  or  disposition ; by
no  means  from  forecast,  instruction,  or  reason.  That  which  in
us  is  the  principle  or  cause  of  artificial  operations,  and  is  called
art,  intellect,  or  foresight,  in  the  natural  operations  of  the  lower
animals  is  nature,  which  is  avToSlSaKToc,  self-taught,  instilled
by  no  one  ; what  in  them  is  innate  or  connate,  is  with  us
acquired.  On  this  account  it  is,  that  they  who  refer  all  to  art
and  artifice  are  to  be  held  indifferent  judges  of  nature  or  natural
things ; and,  indeed,  it  is  wiser  to  act  in  the  opposite  way,  and
selecting  standards  in  nature  to  judge  of  things  made  by  art
according  to  them.  For  all  the  arts  are  but  imitations  of  nature
in  one  way  or  another;  as  our  reason  or  understanding  is  a
derivative  from  the  Divine  intelligence,  manifested  in  his  works;
and  when  perfected  by  habit,  like  another  adventitious  and  ac-
quired soul,  gaining  some  semblance  of  the  Supreme  and  Divine
agent,  it  produces  somewhat  similar  effects.

Wherefore,  according  to  my  opinion,  he  takes  the  right  and
pious  view  of  the  matter,  who  derives  all  generation  from  the

24


370


ON  GENERATION.


same  eternal  and  omnipotent  Deity,  on  whose  nod  the  universe
itself  depends.  Nor  do  I think  that  we  are  gi’eatly  to  dispute
about  the  name  by  which  this  first  agent  is  to  be  called  or
worshipped ; whether  it  be  God,  Nature,  or  the  Soul  of  the  uni-
verse,— whatever  the  name  employed, — all  still  intend  by  it
that  which  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  all  things ; which
exists  from  eternity  and  is  almighty ; which  is  author  or  crea-
tor, and,  by  means  of  changing  generations,  the  preserver  and
perpetuator  of  the  fleeting  things  of  mortal  life  •,  which  is  om-
nipresent, not  less  in  the  single  and  several  operations  of  na-
tural things,  than  in  the  infinite  universe ; which,  by  his  deity
or  providence,  his  art  and  mind  dinne,  engenders  all  things,
whether  they  arise  spontaneously  without  any  adequate  efiicient,
or  are  the  work  of  male  and  female  associated  together,  or  of  a
single  sex,  or  of  other  intermediate  instruments,  here  more  nu-
merous, there  fewer,  whether  they  be  univocal,  or  are  equivocally
or  accidentally  produced : all  natural  bodies  are  both  the  work
and  the  instruments  of  that  Supreme  Good,  some  of  them  being
mere  natural  bodies,  such  as  heat,  sphit,  air,  the  temperature
of  the  air,  matters  in  putrefaction,  &c.,  or  they  are  at  once
natural  and  animated  bodies ; for  he  also  makes  use  of  the
motions,  or  forces,  or  \dtal  principles  of  animals  in  some  certain
way,  to  the  perfection  of  the  universe  and  the  procreation  of
the  several  kinds  of  animated  beings.

From  what  has  now  been  said,  we  are  apprized  to  a certain
extent  of  the  share  which  the  male  has  in  the  business  of
generation.  The  cock  confers  that  upon  the  egg,  which,  from
unprolific,  makes  it  prolific,  this  being  identical  with  that  which
the  fruit  of  vegetables  receives  from  the  fervour  of  the  summer
sun,  which  seciu’es  to  them  maturity,  and  to  their  seeds  fer-
tility ; and  not  different  from  that  which  fertilizes  things  spon-
taneously engendered,  and  brings  caterpillars  from  worms,
aurelias  from  caterpillars,  from  am’elias  moths,  butterflies,
bees,  &c.

In  this  way  is  the  sun,  by  Iris  approach,  both  the  beginning
of  motion  and  transmutation  in  the  coming  fruit,  and  the  end,
also,  inasmuch  as  he  is  the  author  of  the  fertility  of  its  included
seed ; and,  as  early  spring  is  the  prime  efficient  of  leaves  and
flowers  and  fruits,  so  is  summer,  iu  its  strength,  the  cause  of
final  perfection  in  the  ripeness  and  fecundity  of  the  seed.  With  a


ON  GENERATION.


371


view  to  strengthen  this  position,  I shall  add  this  one  from
among  a large  number  of  observations.  Some  persons  in  these
countries  cultivate  orange  trees  with  singular  care  and  economy,
and  the  fruit  of  these  trees,  which,  in  the  course  of  the  first
year,  will  grow  to  the  size  of  the  point  of  the  thumb,  comes  to
maturity  the  following  summer.  This  fruit  is  perfect  in  all
respects,  save  and  except  that  it  is  without  pips  or  seeds.

Pondering  upon  this  with  myself,  I thought  that  I had  here
an  example  of  the  barren  egg,  which  is  produced  by  the  hen
without  the  concurrence  of  the  cock,  and  which  comprises  every-
thing that  is  visible  in  a fruitful  egg,  but  is  still  destitute  of
germinant  seed ; as  if  it  were  the  same  thing  that  was  imparted
by  the  cock,  in  virtue  of  which  a wind-egg  becomes  a fruitful  egg,
which  in  warmer  countries  is  dispensed  by  the  sun,  and  causes
the  fruit  of  the  orange  tree  to  be  produced  replete  with  prolific
seed.  It  is  as  if  the  summer  in  England  sufficed  for  the  pro-
duction of  the  fruit  only,  as  the  hen  for  the  production  of  the
egg,  but  like  the  female  fowl  was  impotent  as  a pro-genetrix ;
whilst  in  other  countries  enjoying  the  sun’s  light  in  larger
proportion,  the  summer  acquired  the  characters  of  the  male,
and  perfected  the  work  of  generation.

Thus  far  have  we  treated  this  subject  by  the  way,  that,  from
the  instance  of  the  egg,  we  might  learn  what  conditions  were
required  in  the  prime  efficient  in  the  generation  of  animals ; —
for  it  is  certain,  that  in  the  egg  there  is  an  agent, — as  there  is
also  in  every  conception  and  germ, — which  is  not  merely  in-
fused by  the  mother,  but  is  first  communicated  in  coitu  by  the
father,  by  means  of  his  spermatic  fluid ; and  which  is  itself  pri-
marily endowed  with  such  virtue  by  heaven  and  the  sun,  or
the  Supreme  Creator.  It  is  equally  manifest,  that  this  agent,
existing  in  every  egg  and  seed,  is  so  imbued  with  the  qualities
of  the  parents,  that  it  builds  up  the  offspring  in  their  likeness,
not  in  its  own ; and  this  mingled  also  as  proceeding  from  both
united  in  copulation.  Now,  as  all  this  proceeds  with  the  most
consummate  foresight  and  intelligence,  the  presence  of  the
Deity  therein  is  clearly  proclaimed.

But  we  shall  have  to  speak  at  greater  length  upon  this  sub-
ject, when  we  strive  to  show  what  it  is  that  remains  with  the
female  immediately  after  intercourse,  and  where  it  is  stored ;
at  the  same  time  that  we  explain — since  there  is  nothing  visi-


372


ON  GENERATION.


ble  in  the  cavity  of  tlie  uterus  after  intercourse — what  that
prolific  contagion  or  prime  conception  is ; whether  it  is  cor-
poreal and  laid  up  within  the  female,  or  is  incorporeal ; whether
the  conception  of  the  uterus  be  of  the  same  nature  or  not  with
the  conceptions  of  the  brain,  and  fecundity  be  acquii’ed  in  the
same  way  as  knowledge — a conclusion,  in  favour  of  which  there
is  no  lack  of  arguments ; or,  as  motion  and  the  animal  opera-
tions, which  we  call  appetites,  derive  their  origin  from  the
conceptions  of  the  brain,  may  not  the  natm’al  motions  and  the
operations  of  the  vegetative  principle,  and  particularly  genera-
tion, depend  on  the  conception  of  the  uterus?  And  then
we  have  to  inquire  how  this  prolific  contagion  is  of  a mixed
nature,  and  is  imparted  by  the  male  to  the  female,  and  by  her
is  transferred  to  the  oTOm  ? Finally,  how  the  contagious  prin-
ciple of  all  diseases  and  preternatui’al  affections  spreads  insen-
sibly, and  is  propagated?


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTY-FIRST.

0/  the  order  of  generation ; and,  first,  of  the  primary  genital

particle.

It  will  be  our  business,  by  and  by,  when  we  come  to  treat
of  the  matter  in  especial,  to  show  what  happens  to  the  female
from  a fruitful  embrace  ; what  it  is  that  remains  with  her  after
this,  and  which  we  have  still  spoken  of  under  the  name  of  con-
tagion, by  which,  as  by  a kind  of  infection,  she  conceives,  and  an
embryo  subsequently  begins  to  grow  of  its  own  accord.  Alean-
time,  we  shall  discourse  of  those  things  that  manifestly  appear
in  connexion  with  the  organs  of  generation  which  seem  most
worthy  of  particular  comment.

And  first,  since  it  appears  certain  that  the  chick  is  produced
by  epigenesis,  or  addition  of  the  pai’ts  that  successively  arise,
we  shall  inquire  what  part  is  formed  first,  before  any  of  the
rest  appear,  and  what  may  be  observed  of  this  and  its  particular
mode  of  generation.

What  Aristotle  i says  of  the  generation  of  the  more  perfect


' De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  1.


ON  GENERATION.


373


animals,  is  confirmed  and  made  manifest  by  all  that  passes  in
the  egg,  viz.  : that  all  the  parts  are  not  formed  at  once  and
together,  but  in  succession,  one  after  another ; and  that  there
first  exists  a particular  genital  particle,  in  virtue  of  which,  as
from  a beginning,  all  the  other  parts  proceed.  As  in  the  seeds
of  plants,  in  beans  and  acorns,  to  quote  particular  instances,
we  see  the  gemmula  or  apex,  protruding,  the  commencement
of  the  entire  prospective  herb  or  tree.  “ And  this  particle  is
like  a child  emancipated,  placed  independently,  a principle  ex-
isting of  itself,  from  whence  the  series  of  members  is  subse-
quently thrown  out,  and  to  which  belongs  all  that  is  to  con-
duce to  the  perfection  of  the  future  animal.”  i Since,  there-
fore, '“^No  part  engenders  itself,  but,  after  it  is  engendered,
concurs  in  its  own  groAvth,  it  is  indispensable  that  the  part  first
firise  which  contains  within  itself  the  principle  of  increase  •,  for
whether  it  be  a plant  or  an  animal,  still  has  it  within  itself  the
power  of  vegetation  or  nutrition  •”  ^ and  at  the  same  time
distinguishes  and  fashions  each  particular  part  in  its  several
order;  and  hence,  in  this  same  primogenate  particle,  there  is
a primary  vital  principle  inherent,  which  is  the  author  and
original  of  sense  and  motion,  and  every  manifestation  of  life.

That,  therefore,  is  the  principal  particle  whence  vital
spirit  and  native  heat  accrue  to  all  other  parts,  in  which  the
calidum  innatum  sive  implantatum  of  physicians  first  shows  it-
self, and  the  household  deity  or  perennial  fire  is  maintained;
Avhence  life  proceeds  to  the  body  in  general,  and  to  each  of  its
parts  in  particular;  whence  nourishment,  growth,  aid,  and
solace  flow ; lastly,  where  life  first  begins  in  the  being  that  is
(born,  and  last  fails  in  that  which  dies.

All  this  is  certainly  true  as  regards  the  first  engendered  part,
and  appears  manifestly  in  the  formation  of  the  chick  from  the
egg.  I am  therefore  of  opinion  that  we  are  to  reject  the  views
of  certain  physicians,  indifferent  philosophers,  who  Avill  have  it
that  three  principal  and  primogenate  parts  arise  together,  viz.  :
the  brain,  the  heart,  and  the  liver;  neither  can  I agree  with
Aristotle  himself,  who  maintains  that  the  heart  is  the  first
engendered  and  animated  part ; for  I think  that  the  privilege
of  priority  belongs  to  the  blood  alone ; the  blood  being  that

.!  De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  i.


’ Ibid.  cap.  4.


374


ON  GENERATION.


which  is  first  seen  of  the  newly  engendered  being,  not  only  in
the  chick  in  ovo,  but  in  the  embryo  of  every  animal  whatso-
ever, as  shall  plainly  be  made  to  appear  at  a later  stage  of
our  inquiry.

There  appears  at  first,  I say,  a red-coloured  pulsating  point
or  vesicle,  with  lines  or  canals  extending  from  it,  containing
blood  in  their  interior,  and,  in  so  far  as  we  are  enabled  to  per-
ceive from  the  most  careful  examination,  the  blood  is  produced
before  the  punctum  sahens  is  formed,  and  is  farther  endowed
with  vital  heat  before  it  is  put  in  motion  by  a pulse ; so  that
as  pulsation  commences  in  it  and  from  it,  so,  in  the  last  struggle
of  mortal  agony,  does  motion  also  end  there.  I have  indeed  ascer-
tained by  numerous  experiments  instituted  upon  the  egg,  as  well
as  upon  other  subjects,  that  the  blood  is  the  element  of  the  body
in  which,  so  long  as  the  vital  heat  has  not  entirely  departed,
the  power  of  returning  to  life  is  continued.

And  since  the  pulsating  vesicle  and  the  sanguineous  tubes
extending  thence  are  visible  before  anything  else,  I hold  it  as
consonant  with  reason  to  believe  that  the  blood  is  prior  to  its
receptacles,  the  thing  contained,  to  wit,  to  its  container,  inas-
much as  this  is  made  subservient  to  that.  The  vascular  rami-
fications and  the  veins,  therefore,  after  these  the  pulsating  vesicle,
and,  finally,  the  heart,  as  being  every  one  of  them  organs  des-
tined to  receive  and  contain  the  blood,  are,  in  all  likelihood,
constructed  for  the  express  purpose  of  impelling  and  distributing
it,  and  the  blood  is,  consequently,  the  principal  portion  of  the
body.

This  conclusion  is  favoured  by  numerous  observations ; par-
ticularly by  the  fact  that  some  animals,  and  these  red-blooded,
too,  live  for  long  periods  without  any  pulse ; some  even  lie  con-
cealed through  the  whole  winter,  and  yet  escape  alive,  though
their  heart  had  ceased  from  motion  of  every  kind,  and  their
lungs  no  longer  played ; they  had  lain  in  fact  hke  those  who
lie  half  dead  in  a state  of  asphj'xia  from  syncope,  leipothymia,
or  the  hysterical  passion.

Emboldened  by  what  I have  observed  both  in  studying  the
egg,  and  whilst  engaged  in  the  dissection  of  bring  animals,  I
maintain,  against  Aristotle,  that  the  blood  is  the  prime  part
that  is  engendered,  and  the  heart  the  mere  organ  destined
for  its  circulation.  The  function  of  the  heart  is  the  pro-


ON  GENERATION.


375


pulsion  of  the  blood,  as  clearly  appears  in  all  animals  furnished
with  red  blood ; and  the  office  of  the  pulsating  vesicle  in  the
generation  of  the  chick  ah  ovo,  as  well  as  in  the  embryos  of
mammiferous  animals,  is  not  different,  a fact  which  I have  re-
peatedly demonstrated  to  others,  showing  the  vesicula  pulsans
as  a feeble  glancing  spark,  contracting  in  its  action,  now  forc-
ing out  the  blood  which  was  contained  in  it,  and  again  relaxing
and  receiving  a fresh  supply.

The  supremacy  of  the  blood  farther  appears  from  this,  that
the  piJse  is  derived  from  it ; for,  as  there  are  two  parts  in  a
pulsation,  viz. : distension  or  relaxation,  and  contraction,  or
diastole  and  systole,  and,  as  distension  is  the  prior  of  these  two
motions,  it  is  manifest  that  this  motion  proceeds  from  the  blood;
the  contraction,  again,  from  the  vesicula  pulsans  of  the  embryo
in  ovo,  from  the  heart  in  the  pullet,  in  virtue  of  its  own  fibres,
as  an  instrument  destined  for  this  particular  end.  Certain  it
is,  that  the  vesicle  in  question,  as  also  the  auricle  of  the  heart
at  a later  period,  whence  the  pulsation  begins,  is  excited  to  the
motion  of  contraction  by  the  distending  blood.  The  diastole,
I say,  takes  place  from  the  blood  swelling,  as  it  were,  in  con-
sequence of  containing  an  inherent  spirit,  so  that  the  opinion
of  Aristotle  in  regard  to  the  pulsation  oT  the  heart, — name,ly,
that  it  takes  place  by  a kind  of  ebullition, — is  not  without  some
mixture  of  truth ; for  what  we  witness  every  day  in  milk  heated
over  the  fire,  and  in  beer  that  is  brisk  with  fermentation,
comes  into  play  in  the  pulse  of  the  heart ; in  which  the  blood,
swelling  with  a sort  of  fermentation,  is  alternately  distended
and  repressed ; the  same  thing  that  takes  place  in  the  liquids
mentioned  through  an  external  agent,  namely  adventitious
heat,  is  eff*ected  in  the  blood  by  an  intimate  heat,  or  an  innate
spirit ; and  this,  too,  is  regulated  in  conformity  with  nature
by  the  vital  principle  (anima),  and  is  continued  to  the  benefit
of  animated  beings.

The  pulse,  then,  is  produced  by  a double  agent : first,  the
blood  undergoes  distension  or  dilatation,  and  secondly,  the
vesicular  membrane  of  the  embryo  in  the  egg,  the  auricles  and
ventricles  in  the  extruded  chick,  effect  the  constriction.  By  these
alternating  motions  associated,  is  the  blood  impelled  through
the  whole  body,  and  the  life  of  animals  is  thereby  continued.

Nor  is  the  blood  to  be  styled  the  primigenial  and  principal


376


ON  GENERATION.


portion  of  the  body,  because  tbe  pulse  has  its  commencement
in  and  through  it ; but  also  because  animal  heat  originates  in
it,  and  the  vital  spirit  is  associated  with  it,  and  it  constitutes
the  vital  principle  itself,  (ipsa  anima) ; for  wheresoever  the  im-
mediate and  principal  instrument  of  the  vegetative  faculty  is
first  discovered,  there  also  does  it  seem  likely  will  the  liviug
principle  be  found  to  reside,  and  thence  take  its  rise;  seeing
that  the  life  is  inseparable  from  spirit  and  innate  heat.

For  “however  distinct  are  the  artist  and  the  instrument
in  things  made  by  art,^’’  as  Fabricius  ^ well  reminds  us,  “ in  the
works  of  nature  they  are  still  conjoined  and  one.  Thus  the
stomach  is  the  author  and  the  organ  of  chylopoesis.^’  In  like
manner  are  the  \dtal  principle  and  its  instrument  immediately
conjoined ; and  so,  in  whatever  part  of  the  body  heat  and  motion
have  their  origin,  in  this  also  must  life  take  its  rise,  in  this  be
last  extinguished ; and  no  one,  I presume,  will  doubt  that  there
are  the  lares  and  penates  of  hfe  enshrined,  that  there  the  Altai
principle  (anima)  itself  has  its  seat.

The  life,  therefore,  resides  in  the  blood,  (as  vre  are  also  in-
formed in  our  sacred  writings,)  2 because  in  it  life  and  the  soul
first  show  themselves,  and  last  become  extinct.  For  I have
frequently  found,  from  the  dissection  of  firing  animals,  as  I
have  said,  that  the  heart  of  an  animal  that  was  dying,  that
was  dead,  and  had  ceased  to  breathe,  still  continued  to  pidsate
for  a time,  and  retained  its  Autality,  The  ventricles  failing  and
coming  to  a stand,  the  motion  still  goes  on  in  the  auricles,  and
finally  in  the  right  auricle  alone ; and  even  when  all  motion
has  ceased,  there  the  blood  may  still  be  seen  affected  with  a
kind  of  undnlation  and  obscure  palpitation  or  tremor,  the  last
evidence  of  life.  Every  one,  indeed,  may  perceive  that  the
blood — this  author  of  pulsation  and  fife, — longest  retains  its
heat  ; for  when  this  is  gone,  and  it  is  no  longer  blood,  but
gore,  so  is  there,  then,  no  hope  of  a return  to  fife.  But,  truly,
as  has  been  stated,  both  in  the  chick  in  ovo  and  in  the  mori-
bund animal,  if  you  but  apply  some  gentle  stimnlus  either  to
the  pnnctum  saliens  or  to  the  right  auricle  of  the  heail  after
the  failure  of  all  pulsation,  fortliAvith  you  will  see  motion,  pul-
sation, and  fife  restored  to  the  blood — provided  always,  be  it


' Op.  Eup.  cit.  p.  28.


“ Leviticus  xvii,  11,  11-


ON  generation;


377


understood,  that  the  innate  heat  and  vital  spirit  have  not  been
wholly  lost.

From  this  it  clearly  appears  that  the  blood  is  the  generative
part,  the  fountain  of  life,  the  first  to  live,  the  last  to  die,  and
the  primary  seat  of  the  soul;  the  element  in  which,  as  in  a
fountain  head,  the  heat  first  and  most  abounds  and  flourishes ;
from  whose  influxive  heat  all  the  other  parts  of  the  body  are
cherished,  and  obtain  their  life ; for  the  heat,  the  companion
of  the  blood,  flows  through  and  cherishes  and  presences  the
whole  body,  as  I formerly  demonstrated  in  my  work  on  the
motion  of  the  blood.

And  since  blood  is  found  in  every  particle  of  the  body,  so
that  you  can  nowhere  prick  with  a needle,  nor  make  the  slight-
est scratch,  but  blood  wiU  instantly  appear,  it  seems  as  if,  with-
out this  fluid,  the  parts  could  neither  have  heat  nor  life.  So
that  the  blood,  being  in  ever  so  trifling  a degree  concentrated
and  fixed, — Hippocrates  called  the  state  aTr6Xr)\pig  rwv  ^Xtf5<Zv
— stasis  of  the  veins, — as  in  lipothymia,  alarm,  exposure  to
severe  cold,  and  on  the  accession  of  a febrile  paroxysm,  the
whole  body  is  observed  to  become  cold  and  torpid,  and,  over-
spread with  pallor  and  livor,  to  languish.  But  the  blood,  re-
called by  stimulants,  by  exercise,  by  certain  emotions  of  the
mind,  such  as  joy  or  anger,  suddenly  all  is  hot,  and  flushed,
and  vigorous,  and  beautiful  again.

Therefore  it  is  that  the  red  and  sanguine  parts,  such  as  the
flesh,  are  alone  spoken  of  as  hot,  and  the  white  and  bloodless  parts,
on  the  contrary,  such  as  the  tendons  and  ligaments,  are  designated
as  cold.  And  as  red-blooded  animals  excel  exsanguine  crea-
tures, so  also,  in  our  estimate  of  the  parts,  are  those  which  are
more  liberally  furnished  with  native  heat  and  blood,  held  more
excellent  than  all  the  others.  The  liver,  spleen,  kidneys,  lungs,
and  heart  itself, — parts  which  are  especially  entitled  viscera, —
if  you  will  but  squeeze  out  all  the  blood  they  contain,  become
pale  and  fall  within  the  category  of  cold  parts.  The  heart  it-
self, I say,  receives  influxive  heat  and  life  along  with  the  blood
that  reaches  it,  through  the  coronary  arteries  ; and  only  so
long  as  the  blood  has  access  to  it.  Neither  can  the  liver  per-
form its  office  without  the  influence  of  the  blood  and  heat  it  re-
ceives through  the  coeliac  artery ; for  there  is  no  influx  of  heat
without  an  afflux  of  blood  by  the  arteries,  and  this  is  the


378


ON  GENERATION.


reason  wherefore,  when  parts  are  first  produced,  and  before
they  have  taken  upon  them  the  performance  of  their  respective
duties,  they  all  look  bloodless  and  pale,  in  consequence  of  which
they  were  formerly  regarded  as  spermatic  by  physicians  and
anatomists,  and  in  generation  it  was  usual  to  say  that  several
days  were  passed  in  the  milk.  The  liver,  lungs,  and  substance
of  the  heart  itself,  when  they  first  appear,  are  extremely  white ;
and,  indeed,  the  cone  of  the  heart  and  the  walls  of  the  ven-
tricles are  still  seen  to  be  white,  when  the  auricles,  replete  with
crimson  blood,  are  red,  and  the  coronary  vein  is  pnrple  with
its  stream.  In  like  manner,  the  parenchyma  of  the  liver  is
white,  when  its  veins  and  their  branches  are  red  with  blood  j
nor  does  it  perform  any  duty  until  it  is  penetrated  with  blood.

The  blood,  in  a word,  so  fiows  around  and  penetrates  the
whole  body,  and  imparts  heat  and  life  conjoined  to  all  its  parts,
that  the  vital  principle,  having  its  first  and  chief  seat  there,  may
truly  be  held  as  resident  in  tlie  blood ; in  this  way,  in  common
parlance,  it  comes  to  be  all  in  all,  and  all  in  each  particular  part.

But  so  little  is  it  true,  as  Aristotle  and  the  medical  Avritei’s
assert,  that  the  liver  and  the  heart  are  the  authors  and  com-
pounders of  the  blood,  that  the  contrary  even  appears  most
obviously  from  the  formation  of  the  chick  in  ovo,  'viz. : that  the
blood  is  much  rather  the  fashioner  of  the  heart  and  liver ; a
fact,  which  physicians  themselves  appear  unintentionally  to
confirm,  when  they  speak  of  the  parenchyma  of  the  liver  as  a
kind  of  effusion  of  blood,  as  if  it  were  nothing  more  thau  so
much  blood  coagulated  there.  But  the  blood  must  exist  before
it  can  either  be  shed  or  coagulated;  and  experience  palpably
demonstrates  that  the  thing  is  so,  seeing  that  the  blood  is  al-
ready present  before  there  is  a vestige  either  of  the  body  or  of
any  viscus ; and  that  in  circumstances  where  none  of  the
mother’s  blood  can  by  possibility  reach  the  emhiyo,  an  event
Avhich  is  vulgarly  held  to  occur  among  vi^iparous  animals.

The  liver  of  fishes  is  always  perceived  of  a white  colour,
though  their  veins  are  of  a deep  pm’ple  or  black;  and  our
fowls,  the  fatter  they  become,  the  smaller  and  paler  grows  the
liver.  Cachectic  maidens,  and  those  who  labour  under  chlo-
rosis, are  not  only  pale  and  blanched  in  their  bodies  generally,
but  in  their  livers  as  well,  a manifest  indication  of  a want  of
blood  ill  their  system.  The  liver,  therefore,  receives  both  its


ON  GENERATION.


379


heat  and  colour  from  the  blood ; the  blood  is  in  no  wise  derived
from  the  hver.

From  what  has  now  been  said,  then,  it  appears  that  the
blood  is  the  first  engendered  part,  whence  the  living  principle
in  the  first  instance  gleams  forth,  and  from  which  the  first  ani-
mated particle  of  the  embryo  is  formed ; that  it  is  the  source  and
origin  of  all  other  parts,  both  similar  and  dissimilar,  which
thence  obtain  their  vital  heat  and  become  subservient  to  it  in  its
duties.  But  the  heart  is  contrived  for  the  sole  purpose  of
ministering  between  the  veins  and  the  arteries — of  receiving
blood  from  the  veins,  and,  by  its  ceaseless  contractions,  of  pro-
pelhng  it  to  all  parts  of  the  body  through  the  arteries.

This  fact  is  made  particularly  striking,  when  we  find  that
neither  is  there  a heart  found  in  every  animal,  neither  does  it
necessarily  and  in  every  instance  pulsate  at  all  times  where
it  is  encountered ; the  blood,  however,  or  a fluid  which  stands
in  heu  of  it,  is  never  wanting.


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTY-SECOND.

Oy  the  blood  as  prime  element  in  the  body.

It  is  unquestionable,  then,  and  obvious  to  sense,  that  the
blood  is  the  first  formed,  and  therefore  the  genital  part  of  the
embryo,  and  that  it  has  all  the  attributes  which  have  been
ascribed  to  it  in  the  preceding  exercise.  It  is  both  the  author
and  preserver  of  the  body ; it  is  the  principal  element  more-
over, and  that  in  which  the  vital  principle  (anima)  has  its
dwelling-place.  Because,  as  already  said,  before  there  is  any
particle  of  the  body  obvious  to  sight,  the  blood  is  already  ex-
tant, has  ah’eady  increased  in  quantity,  “ and  palpitates  within
the  veins,”  as  Aristotle  expresses  it,^  “ being  moved  hither  and
thither,  and  being  the  only  humour  that  is  distributed  to  every
part  of  the  animal  body.  The  blood,  moreover,  is  that  alone
which  lives  and  is  possessed  of  heat  whilst  life  continues.”

And  further,  from  its  various  motions  in  acceleration  or  re-


' Hist.  Auim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  19.


380


ON  GENERATION.


tardation,  in  turbulence  and  strength,  or  debility,  it  is  manifest
that  the  blood  perceives  things  that  tend  to  injure  by  irritating,
or  to  benefit  by  cherishing  it.  We  therefore  conclude  that
the  blood  lives  of  itself,  and  supplies  its  own  noiuishment ; and
that  it  depends  in  nowise  upon  any  other  part  of  the  body,
which  is  either  prior  to  itself  or  of  greater  excellence  and  worth.
On  the  contrary,  the  whole  body,  as  posthumous  to  it,  as  added
and  appended  as  it  were  to  it,  depends  on  the  blood,  though
this  is  not  the  place  to  prove  the  fact ; I shall  only  say,  with
Aristotle,  ^ that  “ The  nature  of  the  blood  is  the  undoubted
cause  wherefore  many  things  happen  among  animals,  both  as
regards  their  tempers  and  their  capacities.”  To  the  blood,
therefore,  we  may  refer  as  the  cause  not  only  of  life  in  general,
— inasmuch  as  there  is  no  other  inherent  or  influxive  heat  that
may  be  the  immediate  instrument  of  the  living  piinciple  except
the  blood, — but  also  of  longer  or  shorter  life,  of  sleep  and
watching,  of  genius  or  aptitude,  strength,  &c.  “ For  tlirough

its  tenuity  and  purity,”  says  Aristotle  in  the  same  place,  “ ani-
mals are  made  ndser  and  have  more  noble  senses ; and  in  hkc
manner  they  are  more  timid  and  courageous,  or  passionate  and
furious,  as  their  blood  is  more  dilute,  or  replete  with  dense
fibres.”

Nor  is  the  blood  the  author  of  life  only,  but,  according  to
its  diversities,  the  cause  of  health  and  disease  likewise  : so  that
poisons,  which  come  from  without,  such  as  poisoned  wounds,
unless  they  infect  the  blood,  occasion  no  mischief.  Life  aud
death,  therefore,  flow  for  us  from  the  same  spring.  “ If  the
blood  becomes  too  diffluent,”  says  Aristotle, 2 ‘^we  fall  sick;
for  it  sometimes  resolves  itself  into  such  a sanguinoleut  serum,
that  the  body  is  covered  with  a bloody  sweat ; and  if  there  be
too  great  a loss  of  blood,  life  is  gone.”  iAud,  indeed,  not  only
do  the  parts  of  the  body  at  all  times  become  torpid  when  hlood
is  lost,  but  if  the  loss  be  excessive,  the  animal  necessai’ily  dies.
I do  not  think  it  requisite  to  quote  any  particulai'  experiment
in  confirmation  of  these  views  : the  whole  subject  woidd  require
to  be  treated  specially.

The  admirable  circulation  of  the  blood  originally  discovered
hy  me,  I have  lived  to  see  admitted  by  almost  all ; nor  has


‘ De  Part.  Aiiim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  4.


^ Hist.  .\uim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  19.


ON  GENERATION.


381


aught  as  yet  been  urged  against  it  by  any  one  wbicb  bas  seemed
greatly  to  require  an  answer.  Wherefore  I imagine  that  I
shall  perform  a task  not  less  new  and  useful  than  agreeable  to
philosophers  and  medical  men,  if  I here  briefly  discourse  of  the
causes  and  uses  of  the  circulation,  and  expose  other  obscure
matters  respecting  the  blood ; if  I show,  for  instance,  how  much
it  concerns  our  welfare  that  by  a wholesome  and  regulated
diet  we  keep  our  blood  pure  and  sweet.  When  I have  accom-
plished this  it  will  no  longer,  I trust,  seem  so  improbable  and
absurd  to  any  one  as  it  did  to  Aristotle^  in  former  times,  that
the  blood  should  be  viewed  as  the  familiar  divinity,  as  the  soul
itself  of  the  body,  which  was  the  opinion  of  Critias  and  others,
who  maintained  that  the  prime  faculty  of  the  hving  principle
(anima)  was  to  feel,  and  that  this  faculty  inhered  in  the  body
in  virtue  of  the  nature  of  the  blood.  Thales,  Diogenes,  Hera-
clitus, Alcmseon,  and  others,  held  the  blood  to  be  the  soul,
because,  by  its  nature,  it  had  a faculty  of  motion.

Now  that  both  sense  and  motion  are  in  the  blood  is  ob-
vious from  many  indications,  although  Aristotle  ^ denies  the
fact.  And,  indeed,  when  we  see  him,  yielding  to  the  force  of
truth,  brought  to  admit  that  there  is  a Adtal  principle  even
in  the  hjqienemic  egg ; and  in  the  spermatic  fluid  and  blood
a “ certain  divine  something  corresponding  with  the  element  of
the  stars,’’^  and  that  it  is  vicarious  of  the  Almighty  Creator ; and
if  the  moderns  be  correct  in  their  \dews  when  they  say  that  the
seminal  fluid  of  animals  emitted  in  coitu  is  ahve,  wherefore
should  we  not,  with  hke  reason,  afiBrm  that  there  is  a vital  prin-
ciple in  the  blood,  and  that  when  this  is  first  ingested  and
nourished  and  moved,  the  vital  spark  is  first  struck  and  en-
kindled ? Unquestionably  the  blood  is  that  in  which  the  vege-
tative and  sensitive  operations  first  proclaim  themselves  ; that
in  which  heat,  the  primary  and  immediate  instrument  of  life,
is  innate ; that  which  is  the  common  bond  between  soul  and
body,  and  the  vehicle  by  which  life  is  conveyed  into  every
particle  of  the  organized  being.

Besides,  if  it  be  matter  of  such  difficulty  to  understand  the
spermatic  fluid  as  we  have  found  it,  to  fathom  how  through  it
the  formation  of  the  body  is  made  to  begin  and  proceed  with

' De  Anima,  lib.  i,  cap.  2.

“ De  Hist.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  19 ; et  de  Part.  Anim,  Ub.  ii,  cap.  3.


382


ON  GENERATION.


such  foresight,  art,  and  divine  intelligence,  wherefore  should  wc
not,  with  equal  propriety,  admit  an  exalted  nature  in  the  blood,
and  think  at  least  as  highly  of  it  as  we  have  been  led  to  do  of
the  semen  ? — the  rather,  as  this  fluid  is  itself  produced  from
the  blood,  as  appears  from  the  history  of  the  egg;  and  the  whole
organized  body  not  only  derives  its  origin,  as  from  a genital
part,  but  even  appears  to  owe  its  preservation  to  the  blood.

We  have,  indeed,  already  said  so  much  incidentally  above,
intending  to  speak  on  the  subject  more  particularly  at  another
time.  Nor  do  I think  that  we  are  here  to  dispute  whether  it  is
strictly  correct  to  speak  of  the  blood  as  a part ; some  deny
the  propriety  of  such  language,  moved  especially  by  the  con-
sideration that  it  is  not  sensible,  and  that  it  flows  into  all  paids
of  the  body  to  supply  them  with  nourishment.  For  myself,
however,  I have  discovered  not  a few  things  connected  with  the
manner  of  generation  which  differ  essentially  from  those  mo-
tions which  philosophers  and  medical  writers  generally  either
admit  or  reject.  At  this  time  I say  no  more  on  this  point ;
but  though  I admit  the  blood  to  be  without  sensation,  it  does
not  follow  that  it  should  not  form  a portion,  and  even  a very
principal  portion,  of  a body  which  is  endowed  with  sensibihty.
For  neither  does  the  brain  nor  the  spinal  marrow,  nor  the  crys-
talline or  the  vitreous  humour  of  the  eye,  feel  anything,
though,  by  the  common  consent  of  all,  philosophers  and  physi-
cians alike,  these  are  pai’ts  of  the  body.  Ai’istotle  placed  the
blood  among  the  partes  similares ; Hippoerates,  as  the  animal
body  according  to  him  is  made  up  of  containing,  contained,
and  impelling  parts,  of  course  reckoned  the  blood  among  the
number  of  parts  eontained.

But  we  shall  have  more  to  say  on  this  topic  when  we  treat  of
that  wherein  a part  consists,  and  how  many  kinds  of  parts  there
are.  Meantime,  I cannot  be  silent  on  the  remarkable  fact,
that  the  heart  itself,  this  most  distinguished  member  in  the
body,  appears  to  be  insensible.

A young  nobleman,  eldest  son  of  the  Viscount  Alontgomery,
when  a child,  had  a severe  fall,  attended  ^vith  fractm’e  of  the
ribs  of  the  left  side.  The  consequence  of  this  was  a suppiuat-
ing  abscess,  which  went  on  discharging  abundantly  for  a long
time,  from  an  immense  gap  in  his  side ; this  I had  from  him-
self and  other  credible  persons  who  were  witnesses.  Between


ON  GENERATION.


383


the  18th  and  19th  years  of  his  age,  this  young  nohleman,  ha\dng
travelled  through  France  and  Italy,  came  to  London,  having  at
this  time  a very  large  open  cavity  in  his  side,  through  ■which
the  lungs,  as  it  was  believed,  could  both  he  seen  and  touched.
When  this  circumstance  was  told  as  something  miraeidous  to
his  Serene  Majesty  King  Charles,  he  straight'way  sent  me  to
wait  on  the  young  man,  that  I might  ascertain  the  true  state
of  the  case.  And  what  did  I find  ? A young  man,  well  grown,
of  good  complexion,  and  apparently  possessed  of  an  excellent
constitution,  so  that  I thought  the  whole  story  must  be  a fable.
Having  saluted  him  according  to  custom,  however,  and  informed
him  of  the  king^s  expressed  desire  that  I should  wait  upon  him,
he  immediately  showed  me  everything,  and  laid  open  his  left
side  for  my  inspection,  by  removing  a plate  which  he  wore
there  by  way  of  defence  against  accidental  blows  and  other
external  injuries.  I found  a large  open  space  in  the  chest,
into  which  I could  readily  introduce  three  of  my  fingers  and
my  thumb ; which  done,  I straightway  perceived  a certain
protuberant  fleshy  part,  affected  with  an  alternating  extrusive
and  intrusive  movement ; this  part  I touched  gently.  Amazed
with  the  novelty  of  such  a state,  I examined  everything  again
and  again,  and  when  I had  satisfied  myself,  I saw  that  it  was
a case  of  old  and  extensive  ulcer,  beyond  the  reach  of  art,  but
brought  by  a miracle  to  a kind  of  cure,  the  interior  being  in-
vested with  a membrane,  and  the  edges  protected  with  a tongh
skin.  But  the  fleshy  part,  (which  I at  first  sight  took  for  a mass
of  granulations,  and  others  had  always  regarded  as  a portion
of  the  lung,)  from  its  pulsating  motions  and  the  rhythm  they
observed  with  the  pulse, — when  the  fingers  of  one  of  my  hands
were  applied  to  it,  those  of  the  other  to  the  artery  at  the  wrist — as
well  as  from  their  discordance  with  the  respiratory  movements,
I saw  was  no  portion  of  the  lung  that  I was  handling,  but  the
apex  of  the  heart ! covered  over  with  a layer  of  fungous  flesh
by  way  of  external  defence,  as  commonly  happens  in  old  fold
ulcers.  The  servant  of  this  yonng  man  was  in  the  habit  daily
of  cleansing  the  cavity  from  its  accumulated  sordes  by  means
of  injections  of  tepid  water ; after  which  the  plate  was  applied,
and,  with  this  in  its  place,  the  young  man  felt  adequate  to  any
exercise  or  expedition,  and,  in  short,  he  led  a pleasant  life  in
perfect  safety.


384


ON  GENERATION.


Instead  of  a verbal  answer,  therefore,  I carried  the  young
man  himself  to  the  king,  that  his  majesty  might  with  his  own
eyes  behold  this  wonderful  case  : that,  in  a man  alive  and  well,
he  might,  without  detriment  to  the  individual,  observe  the
movement  of  the  heart,  and,  with  his  proper  hand  even  touch
the  ventricles  as  they  contracted.  And  his  most  excellent
majesty,  as  well  as  myself,  acknowledged  that  the  heart  was
without  the  sense  of  touch ; for  the  youth  never  knew  when
we  touched  his  heart,  except  by  the  sight  or  the  sensation  he
had  through  the  external  integument.

We  also  particularly  observed  the  movements  of  the  heart,
■\dz. : that  in  the  diastole  it  was  retracted  and  withdrawn ;
whilst  in  the  systole  it  emerged  and  protruded ; and  the  systole
of  the  heart  took  place  at  the  moment  the  diastole  or  pulse  iu
the  wrist  was  perceived ; to  conclude,  the  heart  struck  the  walls
of  the  chest,  and  became  prominent  at  the  time  it  bounded
upwards  and  underwent  contraction  on  itself.

Neither  is  this  the  place  for  taking  up  that  other  controversy;
to  wit,  whether  the  blood  alone  serves  for  the  nutrition  of  the
body?  Aristotle  in  several  places  contends  that  the  blood  is
the  ultimate  aliment  of  the  body,  and  in  this  view  he  is  sup-
ported by  the  whole  body  of  physicians.  But  many  things  of
difficult  interpretation,  and  that  hang  but  indifferently  together,
follow  from  this  opinion  of  theu’S.  For  when  the  medical  wiiters
speak  of  the  blood  in  their  physiological  disquisitions,  and  teach
that  the  above  is  its  sole  use  and  end,  viz.  : to  supply  nourish-
ment to  the  body,  they  proceed  to  compose  it  of  four  humoius,
or  juices,  adducing  arguments  for  such  a view  from  the  com-
binations of  the  four  primary  qualities ; and  then  they  assert
that  the  mass  of  the  blood  is  made  up  of  the  two  kinds  of  bile,
the  yellow  and  the  black,  of  pituita,  and  the  blood  properly  so
called.  And  thus  they  arrive  at  their  four  humours,  of  whicli
the  pituita  is  held  to  be  cold  and  moist ; the  black  bile  cold
and  dry ; the  yellow  bile  hot  and  dry ; and  the  blood  hot  and
moist.  Fm’ther,  of  each  of  these  several  kinds,  they  maintain
that  some  are  nutritious,  and  compose  the  whole  of  the  body ;
others,  again,  they  say  are  excrementitious.  Still  further,  they
suppose  that  the  blood  proper  is  composed  of  the  nutritious  or
heterogeneous  portions;  but  the  constitution  of  the  mass  is  such,
that  the  pituita  is  a cruder  matter,  which  the  more  powerful


ON  GENERATION.


385


native  heat  can  convert  into  perfect  blood.  They  deny,
however,  that  the  hile  can  by  any  means  be  thus  trans-
formed into  blood ; although  the  blood,  they  say,  is  readily
changed  into  bile,  an  event  which  they  conceive  takes  place
in  melancholic  diseases,  through  an  excess  of  the  concocting
heat.

Now,  if  all  this  were  true,  and  there  be  no  reti’ogressive  move-
ment, viz.  from  black  bile  to  bile,  from  bile  to  blood,  they
would  be  brought  to  the  dilemma  of  having  to  admit  that  all
the  juices  were  present  for  the  production  of  black  bile,  and
that  this  was  a principal  and  most  highly  concocted  nutriment.
It  would  further  be  imperative  on  them  to  recognize  a kind  of
twofold  blood,  viz.  one  consisting  of  the  entire  mass  of  fluid
contained  in  the  veins,  and  composed  of  the  four  humours
aforesaid ; and  another  consisting  of  the  purer,  more  fluid
and  spirituous  portion,  the  fluid,  which  in  the  stricter  sense
they  call  blood,  which  some  of  them  contend  is  contained  in
the  arteries  apart  from  the  rest,  and  which  they  then  depute
upon  sundry  special  offices.  On  their  own  showing,  therefore,
the  pure  blood  is  no  aliment  for  the  body,  but  a certain  mixed
fluid,  or  rather  black  bile,  to  which  the  rest  of  the  humours
tend.

Aristotle,^  too,  although  he  thought  that  the  blood  existed
as  a means  of  nourishing  the  body,  still  believed  that  it  was
composed  as  it  were  of  several  portions,  viz.  of  a thicker  and
black  portion  which  subsides  to  the  bottom  of  the  basin  when
the  blood  coagulates,  and  this  portion  he  held  to  be  of  an  in-
ferior nature ; ^ “ for  the  blood,”  he  says,  “ if  it  be  entire,  is  of
a red  colour  and  sweet  taste  •,  but  if  vitiated  either  by  nature
or  disease,  it  is  blacker.”  He  also  wiU.  have  it  fibrous  in  part
or  partly  composed  of  fibres,  which  being  removed,  he  con-
tinues,-'’ the  blood  neither  sets  nor  becomes  any  thicker.  He
farther  admitted  a sanies  in  the  blood  : “ Sanies  is  unconcocted
blood,  or  blood  not  yet  completely  concocted,  or  which  is  as
yet  dilute  like  serum.”  And  this  part,  he  says,  is  of  a
colder  nature.  The  fibrous  he  believed  to  be  the  earthy  por-
tion of  the  blood.

According  to  the  view  of  the  Stagirite,  therefore,  the  blood
De  Part.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  3.  “ De  Hist.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  19.  ’ Ibid.

25


386


ON  GENERATION.


of  different  animals  differs  in  several  ways ; in  one  it  is  more
serous  and  thinner,  a kind  of  ichor  or  sanies,  as  in  insects,  and
the  colder  and  less  perfect  animals ; in  another  it  is  thicker,
more  fibrous,  and  earthy,  as  in  the  wild  hoar,  hull,  ass,  &c.
In  some  where  the  constitution  is  distempered,  the  blood  is  of
a blacker  line ; in  others  it  is  bright,  pure,  and  floiid,  as  in
birds,  and  the  human  subject  especially.

Whence,  it  appears,  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  physicians,  as
well  as  of  Aristotle,  the  blood  consists  of  seyeral  parts,  in  some
sort  of  the  same  description,  according  to  the  views  of  each.
Medical  men,  indeed,  only  pay  attention  to  human  blood,
taken  in  phlebotomy  and  contained  in  cups  and  coagulated.
But  Aristotle  took  a view  of  the  blood  of  animals  generally,  or
of  the  fluid  which  is  analogous  to  it.  And  I,  omitting  all  points
of  controyersy,  and  passing  by  any  discussion  of  the  incon-
veniences that  wait  upon  the  opinions  of  writers  in  general,
shall  h.ere  touch  lightly  upon  the  points  that  all  aj’e  agreed  in,
that  can  be  apprehended  by  the  senses,  and  that  peiiain  more
especially  to  onr  subject ; intending,  however,  to  treat  of  everv'-
thing  at  length  elsewhere.

Although  the  blood  be,  as  I have  said,  a portion  of  the
body, — the  primogenial  and  principal  part,  indeed, — still,  if
it  he  considered  in  its  mass,  and  as  it  presents  itself  in  the
veins,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  believing  that  it  con-
tains and  concocts  nourishment  within  itself,  which  it  applies
to  all  the  other  parts  of  the  body.  Mltli  the  matter  so  con-
sidered, we  can  understand  how  it  should  both  nourish  and  he
nourished,  and  how  it  should  be  both  the  matter  and  the  effi-
cient cause  of  the  body,  and  have  tlie  natural  constitution  which
Aristotle  held  necessary  in  a primogenial  part,  viz.  thafr  it
should  he  partly  of  similar,  partly  of  dissimilar  constitution ;
for  he  says,  “ As  it  was  requisite  for  the  sake  of  sensation  that
there  should  be  similar  members  in  animal  bodies,  and  as  the
faculty  of  perceivfing,  the  faculty  of  moving,  and  the  faculty  of
nourishing,  are  all  contained  in  the  same  member  (viz.  the
primogenate  particle),  it  follows  necessarily  that  this  member,
which  originally  contains  inherent  principles  of  the  above  kind,
be  extant  both  simply,  that  it  may  he  capable  of  sensation  of
every  description,  and  dissimilarly,  that  it  may  move  and  act.
Wherefore,  in  the  tribes  that  have  blood,  the  heart  is  held  to


ON  GENERATION.


387


be  such  a member ; in  the  bloodless  tribes,  however,  it  is  pro-
portional to  their  state.”

Now,  if  Aristotle  understands  by  the  heart  that  which  first
appears  in  the  embryo  of  the  chick  in  ovo,  the  blood,  to  wit,
with  its  containing  parts — the  pulsating  vesicles  and  veins,  as
one  and  the  same  organ,  I conceive  that  he  has  expressed  himself
most  accurately ; for  the  blood,  as  it  is  seen  in  the  egg  and  the
vesicles,  is  partly  similar  and  partly  dissimilar.  But  if  he  under-
stands the  matter  otherwise,  what  is  seen  in  the  egg  sutficiently
refutes  him,  inasmiich  as  the  substance  of  the  heart,  considered
independently  of  the  blood — the  ventricular  cone — is  engen-
dered long  afterwards,  and  continues  white  without  any  infusion
of  blood,  until  the  heart  has  been  fashioned  into  that  form  of
organ  by  which  the  blood  is  distributed  through  the  whole  body,
Nor  indeed  does  the  heart  even  then  present  itself  with  the
structure  of  a similar  and  simple  part,  such  as  might  become  a
primogenial  part,  but  is  seen  to  be  fibrous,  fieshy,  or  muscular,
and  indeed  is  obviously  what  Hippocrates  styled  it, — a muscle
or  instniment  of  motion.  But  the  blood,  as  it  is  first  per-
ceived, and  as  it  pulsates,  included  within  its  vesicle,  has  as
manifestly  the  constitution  which  Aristotle  held  necessary  in
a principal  part.  For  the  blood,  whilst  it  is  naturally  in  the
body,  has  everywhere  apparently  the  same  constitution ; when
extravasated,  however,  and  deprived  of  its  native  heat,  imme-
diately, like  any  dissimilar  compound,  it  separates  into  several
parts.

Were  the  blood  destined  by  nature,  however,  for  the  nourish-
ment of  the  body  only,  it  would  have  a more  similar  constitution,
like  the  chyle  or  the  albumen  of  the  egg ; or  at  all  events  it
would  be  truly  one  and  a single  body  composed  of  the  parts
or  juices  indicated,  like  the  other  humom’s,  such  as  bile  of
either  kind,  and  pituita  or  phlegm,  which  retain  the  same  form
and  character  without  the  body,  which  they  showed  within  their
appropriate  receptacles ; — they  undergo  no  such  sudden  change
as  the  blood.

Wherefore,  the  qualities  which  Aristotle  ascribed  to  a prin-
cipal part  are  found  associated  in  tke  blood ; which  as  a na-
tural body,  existing  heterogeneously  or  dissimilarly,  is  composed
of  these  juices  or  parts ; but  as  it  lives  and  is  a very  principal
animal  part,  consisting  of  these  juices  mingled  together,  it  is


388


ON  GENERATION.


an  animated  similar  part,  composed  of  a body  and  a vital  prin-
ciple. When  this  living  principle  of  the  blood  escapes,  how-
ever, in  consequence  of  the  extinction  of  the  native  heat,  the
primary  substance  is  forthwith  corrupted  and  resolved  into  the
parts  of  which  it  was  formerly  composed ; first  into  cruor,  after-
wards with  red  and  white  parts,  those  of  the  red  parts  that
are  uppermost  being  more  fiorid,  those  that  are  lowest  being
black.  Of  these  parts,  moreover,  some  are  fibrous  and  tough,
(and  these  are  the  uniting  medium  of  the  rest,)  others  icho-
rous and  serous,  in  which  the  mass  of  coagulum  is  wont  to
swim.  Into  such  a serum  does  the  blood  almost  wholly
resolve  itself  at  last.  But  these  parts  have  no  existence
severally  in  living  blood;  it  is  in  that  only  which  has  be-
come coiTupted  and  is  resolved  by  death  that  they  are  en-
countered.

Besides  the  constituents  of  the  blood  now  indicated,  there  is
yet  another  which  is  seen  in  the  blood  of  the  hotter  and  stronger
animals,  such  as  horses,  oxen,  and  men  also  of  ardent  constitu-
tion. This  is  seen  in  blood  drawn  from  the  body  as  it  coagu-
lates, in  the  upper  part  of  the  red  mass,  and  bears  a perfect
resemblance  to  hartshorn-jelly,  or  mucilage,  or  thick,  white  of
egg.  The  \Tilgar  believe  this  matter  to  be  the  pituita ; Aristotle
designated  it  the  crude  and  unconcocted  portion  of  the  blood.

I have  observed  that  this  part  of  the  blood  diflfers  both  from
the  others  and  from  the  mere  serous  portion  in  which  the  co-
agulated clot  is  wont  to  swim  in  the  basin,  and  also  from  the
urine  which  percolates  through  the  kidneys  from  the  blood.
Neither  is  it  to  be  regarded  as  any  more  crude  or  colder  por-
tion of  the  blood,  but  rather,  as  I conceive,  as  a more  spiritual
part ; a conclusion  to  which  I am  moved  by  two  motives  : first,
because  it  swims  above  the  bright  and  florid  portion — commonly
thought  to  be  the  arterial  blood — as  if  it  were  hotter  and  more
highly  charged  with  spirits,  and  takes  possession  of  the  highest
place  in  the  disintegration  of  the  blood.

Secondhq  in  venesection,  blood  of  this  kind,  which  is  mostly
met  with  among  men  of  warm  temperament,  strong  and  mus-
cular, escapes  in  a longer  stream  and  with  greater  force,  as  if
pushed  from  a syringe,  in  the  same  way  as  we  say  that  the
spermatic  fluid  which  is  ejected  vigorously  and  to  a distance
is  both  more  fruitful  and  full  of  spirits.


ON  GENERATION.


389


That  this  mucaginous  matter  differs  greatly  from  the  ichorous
or  watery  part  of  the  blood,  which,  as  if  colder  than  the  rest,
subsides  to  the  bottom  of  the  basin,  appears  on  two  distinct
grounds : for  the  watery  and  sanious  portion  is  too  crude  and
unconcocted  ever  to  pass  into  purer  and  more  perfect  blood ;
and  the  thicker  and  more  fibrous  mucus  swimming  above  the
clot  of  the  blood  itself  appears  more  concoct  and  better  elabo-
rated than  this ; and  so  in  the  resolution  or  separation  of  the
blood  it  comes  that  the  mucus  occupies  the  upper  place,  the  sanies
the  lower ; the  clot  and  red  parts,  however, — both  those  of  a
brighter  and  those  of  a darker  colour, — occupy  the  middle  space.

For  it  is  certain  that  not  only  this  part,  but  the  whole
blood,  and  indeed  the  flesh  itself — as  may  be  seen  in  crimi-
nals hung  in  chains — may  be  reduced  to  an  ichorous  sanies ;
that  is  to  say,  become  resolved  into  the  matters  of  which  they
were  composed,  like  salt  into  the  lixivium  from  which  it  had
been  obtained.  In  like  manner,  the  blood  taken  away  in
any  cachexy  abounds  in  serum,  and  this  to  such  an  extent  that
occasionally  scarce  any  clot  is  seen — the  whole  mass  of  blood
forms  one  sanies.  This  is  observed  in  leucophlegmatia,  and  is
natural  in  bloodless  animals.

Further,  if  you  take  away  some  blood  shortly  after  a meal,
before  the  seeond  digestion  has  been  completed  and  the
serum  has  had  time  to  descend  by  the  kidneys,  or  at  the  com-
mencement of  an  attack  of  intermittent  fever,  you  will  find  it
sanions,  inconcoct,  and  abounding  in  serum.  On  the  contrary,
if  you  open  a vein  after  fasting,  or  a copious  discharge  of  urine
or  sweat,  you  will  find  the  blood  thick,  as  if  without  serum,
and  almost  wholly  condensed  into  clot.

And  in  the  same  way  as  in  coagulating  blood  you  find  a
little  of  the  afore-mentioned  supernatant  mucus,  so  if  you  ex-
pose the  sanies  in  question,  separated  from  the  clot,  to  a gentle
heat  over  the  fire,  you  will  find  it  to  be  speedily  changed  into
the  mucus ; an  obvious  indication  that  the  water  or  sanies  which
separates  from  the  blood  in  the  basin,  is  perchance  a certain
element  in  the  urine,  but  not  the  urine  itself,  although  in  co-
lour and  consistence  it  seems  so  in  fact.  The  urine  is  not  co-
agulated or  condensed  into  a fibrous  mucus,  but  rather  into  a
lixivium ; the  watery  or  sanious  portion  of  the  urine,  however,
when  lightly  boiled,  does  occasionally  run  into  a mucus  that  swims


390


ON  GENERATION.


thi’ougli  the  fluid ; in  the  same  way,  as  the  mucus  iu  question
rendered  recrudescent  by  corruption,  liquefies  and  returns  to
the  state  of  sanies.

So  far  at  this  time  have  I thought  fit  to  produce  these  my
own  observations  on  tliis  constituent  of  the  blood,  intending  to
speak  more  fully  of  it  as  well  as  of  the  other  constituents  cog-
nizable by  the  senses,  and  admitted  by  Aristotle  and  the  medical
writers.

That  I may  not  seem  to  wander  too  widely  from  my  puiqmse,
I would  here  have  it  understood  that  with  Aristotle  I receive
the  blood  as  a part  of  the  Ihing  animal  body,  and  not  as  it  is
commonly  regarded  in  the  light  of  mere  gore.  The  Stagnate
says  ; ^ “ The  blood  is  warm,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  should
understand  warm  wmter,  did  we  designate  that  fluid  by  a simple
name,  not  viewing  it  as  heated.  For  heat  belongs  to  its
nature ; just  as  whiteness  is  in  the  nature  of  a white  man.  But
when  the  blood  becomes  hot  through  any  affection  or  passion,
it  is  not  then  hot  of  itself.  The  same  thing  must  be  said  in
regard  to  the  qualities  of  cirATiess  and  moistness.  "NATierefore,
in  the  nature  of  such  things  they  are  partly  hot  and  partly
moist ; brrt  separated,  they  congeal  and  become  cold ; and  such
is  the  blood.

The  blood  corrsequently,  as  it  is  a Imug  element  of  the  body,
is  of  a doubtful  natrue,  and  falls  to  be  considered  urrder  two
poirrts  of  view.  Materially  and  pei'  se  it  is  called  nourislmrent ;
but  formal  A and  hr  so  far  as  it  is  endowed  with  heat  and  spuits,
the  immediate  instruments  of  the  vital  principle,  and  even  with
vitality  (arrima),  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  familiar’  diriuity
atrd  preserver  of  the  body,  as  the  generative  first  engendered
and  very  principal  part.  And  as  the  prohfic  egg  contaius
withirr  it  the  matter,  instrrrment,  and  framer  of  the  futiue
pullet,  and  all  physicians  adnrit  a mixture  of  the  seirriual  fluids
of  the  two  sexes  hr  the  uterus  dur’iug  or  immediately  after  in-
tercourse as  corrstitrrtiug  the  mixed  cause,  both  material  and
efficient,  of  the  foetus ; so  might  one  with  more  propriety  main-
tairr  that  the  blood  was  both  the  matter  arrd  preserver  of  the
body,  though  not  the  sole  ahment ; because  it  is  observed  that
irr  animals  rvhich  die  of  hrrnger,  and  in  men  who  perish  of


De  Part.  Auini.  lib.  ii,  cap.  3.


ON  GENERATION.


391


marasmus,  a considerable  quantity  of  blood  is  still  found  after
deatli  in  the  veins.  And  farther,  in  youthful  subjects  still
growing,  and  in  aged  individuals  declining  and  falling  away,
the  relative  quantity  of  blood  continues  the  same,  and  is  in  the
ratio  of  the  flesh  that  is  present,  as  if  the  blood  were  a part  of
the  body,  but  not  destined  solely  for  its  nourishment;  for  if  it
were  so,  no  one  would  die  of  hunger  so  long  as  he  had
any  blood  left  in  his  veins,  just  as  the  lamp  is  not  ex-
tinguished whilst  there  is  a drop  of  inflammable  oil  left  in
the  cruise.

Now  when  I maintain  that  the  living  principle  resides  pri-
marily and  principally  in  the  blood,  I would  not  have  it  inferred
from  thence  that  I hold  all  bloodletting  in  discredit,  as  dan-
gerous and  injui’ious;  or  that  I believe  with  the  vulgar  that  in
the  same  measure  as  blood  is  lost,  is  life  abridged,  because  the
sacred  writings  tell  us  that  the  life  is  in  the  blood ; for  daily
experience  satisfies  us  that  bloodletting  has  a most  salutary
effect  in  many  diseases,  and  is  indeed  the  foremost  among  all
the  general  remedial  means  ; vitiated  states  and  plethora  of  the
blood,  are  causes  of  a whole  host  of  diseases ; and  the  timely
evacuation  of  a certain  quantity  of  the  fluid  frequently  delivers
patients  from  very  dangerous  diseases,  and  even  from  imminent
death.  In  the  same  measure  as  blood  is  detracted,  therefore,
under  certain  circumstances,  it  may  be  said  that  life  and  health
are  added.

This  indeed  nature  teaches,  and  physicians  at  all  events  pro-
pose to  themselves  to  imitate  nature  ; for  copious  critical  dis-
charges  of  blood  from  the  nostrils,  from  hemon’hoids,  and  in
the  shape  of  the  menstrual  flux,  often  deliver  us  from  very  serious
diseases.  Young  persons,  therefore,  who  live  fully  and  lead
indolent  lives,  unless  between  theii’  eighteenth  and  twentieth
year  they  have  a spontaneous  hemorrhage  from  the  nose  or
lower  parts  of  the  body,  or  have  a vein  opened,  by  which  they  are
relieved  of  the  load  of  blood  that  oppresses  them,  are  apt  to  be
seized  with  fever  or  smallpox,  or  they  suffer  from  headache  and
other  morbid  symptoms  of  various  degrees  of  severity  and  dan-
ger. Veterinary  surgeons  are  in  the  habit  of  beginning  the
ti'eatment  of  almost  all  the  diseases  of  cattle  with  blood-
letting.


392


ON  GENERATION.


EXEUCISE  THE  I'lFTY-TH  IllD.

Of  the  inferences  deducible  from  the  course  of  the  umbilical
vessels  in  the  egg.

We  find  the  Wood  formed  in  the  egg  and  embryo  before
any  other  part ; and  almost  at  the  same  moment  appear  its
receptacles,  the  veins  and  the  vesicula  pulsans.  Wherefore,  if
we  regard  the  punctum  saliens  as  the  heart,  and  this  along
with  the  blood  and  the  veins  as  constituting  one  and  the  same
organ,  conspicuous  in  the  very  commencement  of  the  embryo,
although  we  should  admit  that  the  proper  substance  of  the  heart
was  deposited  subsequently,  still  we  should  be  ready  to  admit
with  Aristotle  that  the  heart  (an  organ  made  up  of  ventricles,
auricles,  vessels,  and  blood)  was  in  truth  the  principal  and  pri-
mogenate  part  of  the  body,  its  own  prime  and  essential  element
having  been  the  blood,  both  in  the  order  of  natm-e  and  of  ge-
netic production.

The  parts  that  in  generation  succeed  the  blood  are  the  veins,
for  the  blood  is  necessarily  inclosed  and  contained  in  vessels ;
so  that,  as  Aristotle  obseiwes,  we  find  two  meatus  venales  even
from  the  very  first,  Avhich  canals,  as  we  have  shown  in  our  his-
tory, afterwards  constitute  the  umbilical  vessels.  It  seems  ne-
cessary, therefore,  to  say  something  here  of  the  situation  and
course  of  these  vessels.

In  the  first  place,  then,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  aU  the  ar-
teries and  veins  have  their  origin  from  the  heart,  and  are  as  it
were  appendices  or  parts  added  to  the  central  organ.  If  there-
fore you  carefully  examine  the  embryo  of  the  human  subject,
or  one  of  the  lower  animals,  and  having  divided  the  vena  cava
between  the  right  auricle  and  the  diaphragm,  look  into  it  up-
wards or  towards  the  heart,  you  will  perceive  three  foramina,
the  largest  and  most  posterior  of  which  tending  to  the  spine  is
the  vena  cava;  the  anterior  and  lesser  proceeds  to  the  root  and
trunk  of  the  umbilical  v^essels  ; the  third  and  least  of  all  enters
the  liver  and  is  the  origin  and  trunk  of  all  the  ramifications
distributed  to  the  convexity  of  that  organ.  Whence  it  cleaidy


ON  GENERATION.


393


appears  that  the  veins  do  by  no  means  all  proceed  from  the
liver  as  their  origin  and  commencement,  but  from  the  heart —
unless  indeed  any  one  would  be  hardy  enough  to  contend  that
a vessel  proceeded  from  its  branches,  not  the  branches  from  the
trunk  of  the  vessel.

Moreover,  as  the  vessels  in  question  are  distributed  equally
to  the  albumen  and  vitellus  of  the  egg,  not  otherwise  than  as
the  roots  of  trees  are  connected  with  the  ground,  it  is  obvious
that  both  of  these  substances  must  serve  for  the  nutriment  of
the  embryo,  and  that  they  are  taken  up  and  carried  to  it  by
these  vessels.  But  this  view  is  opposed  to  that  of  Aristotle,
who  everywhere  maintains  that  the  chick  is  formed  from  the
albumen,  and  receives  nourishment  through  the  umbilicus  alone.
The  albumen  indeed  is  first  consumed,  and  the  yelk  serves  subse-
quently for  food,  supplying  the  place  of  the  milk,  which  viviparous
animals  receive  after  their  birth  from  their  mothers.  The  food
whieh  nature  provides  for  the  young  of  viviparous  tribes  in  the
dug  of  the  mother,  she  supplies  in  the  yelk  of  the  egg  to  the
young  of  oviparous  animals.  Whence  it  happens,  that  when
the  albumen  is  almost  wholly  consumed,  the  vitellus  still  re-
mains nearly  entire  in  the  egg,  the  chick  being  afready  perfect
and  complete ; more  than  this,  the  yelk  is  still  found  in  the
abdomen  of  the  chick  long  after  its  exclusion.  Aristotle  dis-
covered some  on  the  eighteenth  day  after  the  hatching ; and  I
have  myself  seen  a small  quantity  connected  with  the  intestine
at  the  end  of  six  weeks  from  that  epoch.

Nevertheless,  fr’om  the  yelk  (which  certainly  does  not  de-
crease in  the  same  ratio  as  the  albumen  whilst  the  chick  is
forming)  that  is  taken  into  the  abdomen  of  the  chick,  and  from
the  distribution  of  vessels  tlirough  its  substance,  the  whole  of
these  collecting  into  a single  trunk  which  enters  the  porta  of
the  liver,  and  doubtless  carrvdng  that  portion  of  yelk  they  have
absorbed  for  more  perfect  elaboration  in  that  viscus — these  and
other  arguments  of  the  like  kind  force  me  to  say  that  I cannot
do  otherwise  than  admit  with  Aristotle  that  the  yelk  supplies
food  to  the  chick,  and  is  analogous  to  milk.

The  whole  of  the  yelk,  indeed,  does  not  remain  after  the
foetus  of  the  fowl  is  fully  formed ; for  a certain  portion  of  it  has
been  liquefied  on  the  very  first  appearance  of  the  embryo,  and
receives  branches  of  vessels  no  less  than  the  albumen,  by  which.


394


ON  GENERATION.


already  prepared^  it  is  cai’ried  as  uourisliment  for  tlie  chick ;
still  it  is  certain  that  the  greater  portion  of  the  yelk  remains
after  the  disappearance  of  the  albumen;  that  it  is  laid  up  in  the
abdomen  of  the  chick  when  excluded^  and,  attracted  or  absorbed
by  the  branches  of  the  vena  portae,  that  it  is  finally  carried  to
the  liver.

It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  the  chick  when  hatched,  is
nourished  by  the  yelk  in  the  first  period  of  its  independent
existence.  And  as  within  the  egg  the  embryo  was  nourished
partly  by  the  albumen,  partly  by  the  ritellus,  but  principally
by  the  albumen,  which  is  both  present  in  larger  quantity,  and
is  more  speedily  consumed,  so  when  the  chick  is  hatched,  and
when  all  the  nourishment  that  is  taken  must  pass  through  the
liver  to  undergo  ulterior  preparation,  is  it  nourished  partly  by
the  vitellus  and  partly  by  chyle  absorbed  from  the  intestines,
but  principally  by  chyle,  which  the  host  of  subdirisions  of  the
mesenteric  vessels  seize  upon,  whilst  there  is  but  a single  vessel
from  the  porta  distributed  to  the  ritellus,  arrd  by  and  by  but
little  of  it  remains.  Nature,  therefore,  acts  as  does  the  um’se,
who  gradually  habituates  her  infant  to  the  food  which  is  to
take  the  place  of  her  failing  supply  of  milk,  The  pullet  is
thus  gradually  brought  from  food  of  more  easy  to  food  of  more
difficult  digestion, — from  yelk  to  chyle.

Wherefore  there  is  every  reason  for  what  we  perceive  in
connexion  with  the  course  of  the  veins  in  the  egg.  When  the
embryo  first  begins  to  be  formed,  they  are  distributed  to  the
colliquameut  only,  where  the  blood  finds  suitable  nutiimeut
and  matter  for  the  formation  of  the  body ; but  by  and  by  they
extend  into  the  thinner  albumen,  whence  the  chick,  whilst  it  is
yet  in  the  state  of  gelatine  or  mucor,  and  resembles  a maggot  in
form,  derives  its  increase ; the  branches  next  extend  into  the
thicker  albumen,  and  then  into  the  vitellus,  that  they  may  also
contribute  to  the  support  of  the  foetus,  which,  having  at  length
arrived  at  maturity  and  been  extruded,  still  preserves  a portion
of  the  yelk  (or  milk)  within  its  abdomen,  whereby  it  is  main-
tained in  pai’t,  in  part  by  food  selected  and  prepai’ed  for  it  by
the  mother,  until  it  is  able  to  look  out  for  and  to  digest  its  own
aliment.  Thus  does  nature  most  wisely  provide  food  tlu'ough
the  whole  round  of  generation,  snited  to  the  vmious  strengtli
of  the  digestive  faculty  in  the  futiu’e  being.  In  the  first  period


ON  GENERATION.


oDo

of  the  foetal  chick's  existence  a more  delicate  food  is  prepared
for  it ; more  advanced^  firmer  and  firmer  food  is  snpplied ; and
this  is  the  reason^  I apprehend,  wherefore,  the  perfect  egg  con-
sists not  only  of  two  portions  of  different  colours,  hut  is  even
provided  with  two  kinds  of  albumen.

Now  all  this  that  we  discover  from  actual  experience  of  the
matter  accords  with  the  opinion  of  Ai’istotle,  where  he  says
“ The  part  which  is  hot  is  best  adapted  to  give  form  to  the
limbs ; that  which  is  more  earthy  rather  conduces  to  the  con-
stitution of  the  body  and  is  more  remote.  Wherefore  in  eggs
of  two  colom’s,  the  animal  begins  to  be  engendered  from  the
white  (for  the  beginning  of  animal  life  is  in  the  hot),  and  derives
its  nourishment  from  the  yellow.  In  the  warmer  animals,  con-
sequently, these  parts  are  kept  distinct  from  one  another,  viz.
that  from  which  the  beginning  is  derived,  and  that  whence  the
nourishment  is  obtained,  and  the  one  is  white,  the  other  yellow."

From  what  has  now  been  said  it  appears  that  the  chick —
and  we  shall  show  that  it  is  not  otherwise  in  all  other  animals
— arises  and  is  constituted  as  it  were  by  a principle  or  soul
inherent  in  the  egg,  and  that  in  the  same  way  the  proper  ali-
ment is  sought  for  and  is  supplied  Avithin  the  egg ; whereby  it
comes  that  the  chick  is  not  dependent  on  its  mother  in  the
same  way  as  plants  are  dependent  on  the  ground ; and  it  is
not  more  correct  to  say  that  the  chick  is  nourished  by  the
blood  of  its  mother,  or  that  its  heart  beats,  and  that  it  lives
through  the  spirits  of  its  parent,  than  it  would  be  to  assert  that
it  moved  and  felt  through  the  organs,  or  grew  and  attained  to
adult  age  through  the  ■vital  principle  of  its  pai’ent.  It  is  mani-
fest, on  the  contrary,  and  is  allowed  by  all  that  the  foetal  chick
is  nourished  through  its  umbilical  vessels;  and  that  the  vasculai’
ramifications  dispersed  over  the  albumen  and  yelk  imbibe  nou-
rishment from  them  and  convey  it  to  the  foetus.  It  is  also  ad-
mitted that  the  chick,  when  excluded  from  the  shell,  is  supplied
with  nourishment,  partly  from  yelk,  partly  from  chyle,  and
that  in  either  case  the  aliment  passes  by  the  same  route,  viz.
by  the  vena  portae  into  the  liver,  the  branches  of  this  vessel
effecting  the  transit.

It  is  therefore  obvious,  as  I now  say  by  the  way,  that  the


' Dc  Geu.  Anim.  lib.  ill,  caj).  1,


396


ON  GENERATION.


chjde  by  which  all  animals  are  nourished  is  brought  by  the
mesenteric  veins  from  the  intestines  j nor  is  there  occasion  to
look  for  any  new  passage — by  the  lacteal  vessels,  to  wit — or
any  route  in  adult  animals  other  than  that  which  we  discover  in
the  egg  and  chick.  But  we  shall  recur  more  fully  in  another
place  to  the  inconveniences  of  such  an  opinion  as  that  re-
ferred to.

Lastly,  from  the  structure  of  the  umbilical  vessels  of  the
chick  in  ovo,  some  of  which  as  stated  in  the  historj’  are  veins,
others  arteries,  it  is  legitimate  to  conclude  that  there  is  here  a
circular  motion  of  the  blood,  such  as  we  have  already  demon-
strated in  the  animal  body,  in  our  book  on  the  Motion  of  the
Blood,  and  this  for  the  sake  of  the  nutrition  and  growth  of  the
embryo,  and  because  the  umbilical  veins  are  distributed  to
either  fluid  of  the  egg,  that  they  may  thence  bring  nutriment
to  the  .chick,  and  the  arteries  accompany  the  veins,  that  by
their  affluxive  heat  the  alimentary  matter  may  be  duly  con-
cocted, liquefied,  and  made  fit  to  answer  the  ends  of  nutrition.

And  hence  it  happens  that  wherever  veins — and  here  I
Avould  have  it  understood  that  both  arteries  and  veins  are  in-
tended— make  their  way  into  the  albumen  or  vitellus,  there
these  fluids  look  liquefied  and  difllerent  from  the  rest.  For
as  soon  as  the  branches  of  the  veins  shoot  forth,  the  upper
portion  of  the  albumen  in  which  they  are  implanted  passing
into  colliquament,  becomes  transparent,  whilst  the  lower  por-
tion, continuing  tliick  and  compact,  is  pushed  into  the  inferior
angle  of  the  egg.  In  like  manner  a separation  of  the  ritellus,
as  it  seems  into  two  portions,  makes  its  appeai’ance,  the  one
being  superior,  and  the  other  inferior,  and  these  do  not  difirer
less  from  one  another  in  character  than  melted  difFers  from  solid
wax;  now  this  dirision  coiTesponds  to  the  two  parts  which  se-
verally receive  or  do  not  receive  blood-vessels.

Hence  are  we  farther  made  more  certain  as  to  the  com-
mencement of  animal  generation  and  the  prime  inherent  prin-
ciple of  the  egg.  For  it  is  assuredly  known  that  the  cicatricula
or  spot  on  the  yelk  is  the  chief  point  in  the  egg,  that  to  which
all  the  rest  are  subordinate,  and  to  which,  if  to  any  one  thing
more  than  another,  is  to  be  referred  the  cause,  whatever  it  be,
of  fecundity  in  the  egg  : — certain  it  is  that  the  generation  of
the  embryo  is  begun  within  its  precincts.  Wherefore,  as  we  have


ON  GENERATION.


397


said,  the  first  effect  of  incubation  is  to  cause  dilatation  of  the
cicatricula,  and  the  formation  of  the  colliquament,  in  which  the
blood  first  flushes  and  veins  are  distributed,  and  where  the  effects
of  the  native  heat  and  the  influence  of  the  plastic  power  first
show  themselves.  And  then,  the  more  widely  the  ramifications
of  these  veins  extend,  in  the  same  proportion  do  indications  of
the  presence  of  the  vital  power  and  vegetative  force  appear.
For  every  effect  is  a clear  evidence  of  its  efficient  cause.

In  a word  I say, — from  the  cicatricula  (in  which  the  first
trace  of  the  native  heat  appears)  proceeds  the  entire  process  of
generation ; from  the  heart  the  whole  chick,  and  from  the  um-
bilical vessels  the  whole  of  the  membranes  called  secundines
that  surround  it.  We  therefore  conclude  that  the  parts  of  the
embryo  are  severally  subordinate,  and  that  life  is  first  derived
from  the  heart.


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTY-FOURTH.

Of  the  order  of  the  parts  in  Generation  from  an  egg,  according

to  Fabricius.

Having  already  determined  what  part  is  to  be  esteemed  the
first,  the  blood,  to  wit,  with  its  receptacles,  the  heart,  veins,  and
arteries,  the  next  thing  we  have  to  do  is  to  speak  of  the  rest
of  the  parts  of  the  body  and  of  the  order  and  manner  of  their
generation.

Fabricius,  in  whose  footsteps  we  have  resolved  to  tread,  in
speaking  of  the  generation  of  the  chick  in  ovo,  passes  in  review
the  actions  which  take  place  in  the  egg,  and  by  the  effect  of
which  the  parts  are  produced,  discussing  them  seriatim,  as  if  a
clearer  view  were  thence  to  be  obtained  of  the  order  or  sequence
of  generation.  “ There  are  three  primary  actions,”  he  says,^
which  present  themselves  in  the  egg  of  the  bird : 1st,  the
generation  of  the  embryo  j 2d,  its  growth ; 3d,  its  nourish-
ment. The  first,  or  generation,  is  the  proper  action  of  the
egg;  the  second  and  third,  viz.  growth  and  nutrition,  go  on


Op.  supra  cit.  p.  41.


.398


ON  GENERATION.


for  the  major  part  without  the  egg,  though  they  are  begun  and
also  perfectly  performed  within  it.  Now  these  actions,  as  they
flow  from  three  faculties,  the  generative,  the  nutritive,  and
auctive,  so  do  three  operations  follow  them.  From  generation
all  the  parts  of  the  chick  result ; from  increase  and  nutrition,
the  growth  and  maintenance  of  its  body.  From  studying  the
formation  of  the  chick,  we  perceive  that,  under  the  influence  of
the  generative  faculty,  the  parts  of  the  creature  which  fonnerlv
had  no  existence  are  produced  : the  matter  of  the  egg  is  changed
into  the  organized  body  of  a chicken.  But  whilst  any  part  or
substance  undergoes  transmutation  into  anothei*,  it  must  needs
he  that  its  proper  essence  undergoes  change,  otherwise  would
it  still  remain  as  it  was  and  unaltered  ; it  must  at  the  same  time
receive  figure,  position,  and  dimensions  apt  and  convenient  to
its  new  nature ; and  indeed  it  is  into  these  two  states  or  circum-
stances that  procreation  of  matter  resolves  itself,  ■viz,  trans-
formation and  conformation.  The  transformative  and  the
formative  faculties  would  therefore  be  the  cause  of  these  func-
tions ; and  Avhilst  one  of  them  has  produced  every  individual
part  of  the  chick,  such  as  we  see  it,  from  the  chalaza  of  the
egg,  the  other  has  given  it  figure,  ai’ticulations,  and  position,
fitting  it  for  its  destined  uses.  The  first,  the  transformative  or
alterative  faculty,  is  entirely  natural,  and  acts  ■without  all  con-
sciousness ; and  taking  the  hot,  the  cold,  the  moist,  and  the
dry,  it  alters  all  through  the  substance  of  the  chalaza,  and  in
altering  this  substance  changes  it  into  the  component  parts  of
the  chick,  that  is  to  say,  into  flesh,  bones,  cartilages,  ligaments,
veins,  arteries,  nerves,  and  all  the  other  similar  and  simple  parts
of  the  animal,  and  these,  through  the  proper  and  innate  heat
and  spirit  of  the  semen  of  the  cock,  out  of  the  substance  of  the
egg,  that  is  to  say,  its  chalaza ; by  altering  and  commuting,  it
engenders,  creates,  produces  the  proper  substance  of  the  chick,
imparting  at  the  same  time  to  every  substance  its  appropriate
quality.  The  other,  which  is  called  the  formative  faculty,
and  which  out  of  similar  forms  dissimilar  pai’ts, — namely,
givdng  them  elegance  through  figure,  due  dimensions,  proper
position,  and  congruous  number — is  much  more  noble  than  the
former,  is  possessed  of  consummate  sapience,  and  acts  not  na-
turally [or  instinctively],  but  with  election,  and  consciousness,
and  intelligence.  For  the  formative  faculty  appears  to  have


ON  GENERATION.


300


exact  cognizance  and  foresight  both  of  the  future  action  and
use  of  every  part  and  organ.  So  much  of  the  primary  action
of  the  egg,  which  is  the  generation  of  the  chick,  and  to  accom-
plish which  both  the  semen  of  the  cock  as  agent  and  fecun-
dator,  and  the  chalaza  as  matter  are  required.  In  the  second
place  comes  accretion  or  growth,  which  is  accomplished  by  nu-
trition, whose  faculties  consist  in  attraction,  retention,  concoc-
tion, expidsion,  and,  finally,  apposition,  agglutination,  and  assi-
milation of  food.^^

But  for  my  part  I neither  regard  such  a distribution  of  actions
as  correct,  or  useful,  or  convenient  in  this  place.  It  is  incorrect,
because  those  actions  which  he  would  make  distinct  in  kind
and  in  time — for  instance,  that  parts  are  first  produced  similar
by  the  alterative  or  transformative  faculty,  to  be  afterwards
fashioned  and  organized  by  the  formative  faculty,  and  finally
made  to  grow  by  the  auctive  faculty — are  never  apparent  in  the
generation  of  the  chick;  for  the  several  parts  are  produced  and
distinguished  and  increased  simultaneously.  For  although  in  the
generation  of  those  animals  which  are  formed  by  metamorpho-
sis, where  from  matter  previously  existing,  and  already  adequate
in  quantity  and  duly  prepared,  all  the  parts  are  made  distinct
and  conformed  by  transformation,  as  when  a butterfly  is  formed
from  a caterpillar,  a silkworm  from  a grub,  still  in  generation
1)y  epigenesis  the  thing  is  very  different,  nor  do  the  same  pro-
cesses go  on  as  in  ordinary  nutrition,  which  is  effected  by  the
various  actions  of  different  parts  w'orking  together  to  a com-
mon end,  the  food  being  here  first  assumed  and  retained,  then
digested,  next  distributed,  and  finally  agglutinated.  Nor  is  the
similm'  constitution  the  result  of  the  transformative  faculty,  void
of  all  foresight,  as  Fabricius  imagined ; but  the  organic  comes
from  the  formative  faculty  which  proceeds  with  both  con-
sciousness and  foresight.  For  generation  and  growth  do  not
proceed  without  nutrition,  nor  nutrition  or  increase  without
generation;  to  nourish  being  in  other  terms  to  substitute  for
a certain  quantity  of  matter  lost  as  much  matter  of  the  same
ciuality,  flesh  or  nerve,  in  lieu  of  the  matter,  flesh  or  nerve,
that  has  become  effete.  But  what  is  this  but  to  make  or
engender  flesh  or  nerve  ? In  like  manner,  growth  cannot  go
on  without  generation,  for  all  natural  bodies  are  increased  by
the  accession  of  new  particles  similar  to  those  of  which  they


400


ON  GENERATION.


formerly  consisted,  and  this,  taking  place  according  to  aU  their
dimensions,  they  are  distinguished  as  regards  their  parts,  and
are  organized  at  the  same  time  that  they  grow.

But  to  engender  the  chick  is  in  truth  nothing  else  than  to
fashion  or  make  its  several  members  and  organs,  which,  although
they  are  produced  in  a certain  order,  and  some  are  postgenate
to  others, — the  less  important  to  the  more  principal  organs —
still,  whilst  the  organs  themselves  are  all  distinguished,  they  arc
not  engendered  in  such  wise  and  order  that  the  similar  parts
are  first  formed,  and  the  organic  parts  afterwards  compounded
from  them ; or  so  that  certain  composing  parts  existed  before
other  compounded  parts  which  must  he  fashioned  from  them.
For  although  the  head  of  the  chick  and  the  rest  of  the  body
exist  in  the  shape  of  a mucus  or  soft  jelly,  whence  each  of  the
parts  is  afterwards  formed  in  sequence,  and  all  are  of  similar  con-
stitution in  the  first  instance,  still  are  they  simultaneously  pro-
duced and  augmented  in  virtue  of  the  same  processes  directed
by  the  same  agent ; and  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  matter
resembling  jelly  increases,  in  like  measure  are  the  parts  distin-
guished; for  they  are  engendered,  transmuted,  and  formed
simultaneously;  similar  and  dissimilar  parts  exist  together,  and
from  a small  similar  organ  a larger  one  is  produced.  The  thing,
in  short,  is  not  otherwise  than  it  is  among  vegetables,  where
from  the  straw  proceeds  the  ear,  the  awns,  and  the  grain — dis-
tinctly, severally,  and  yet  together ; or  as  trees  put  forth  buds,
from  which  are  produced  leaves,  flowers,  fruit,  and  finally
seed.

All  this  we  learn  from  an  attentive  study  of  the  parts  and
processes  of  the  incubated  egg,  inasmuch,  as  from  things  done,
actions  or  operations  are  apprehended ; from  operations,  facul-
ties or  forces,  and  from  these  we  then  infer  the  artificer,  gene-
rator, or  cause.  In  the  generation  of  the  puUet,  consequently,
the  actions  or  faculties  of  the  engendeiing  cause  enumerated
by  Fabricius,  namely,  the  metamorphic  and  fonuative,  do  not
differ  in  kind,  or  even  in  the  relation  of  sequence,  as  that  one
is  first  and  the  other  second,  but,  as  Aristotle  is  wont  to  say,  are
one  and  the  same  in  reason ; not  as  happens  with  reference  to
the  actions  of  the  nutritive  faculty, — attraction,  concoction,  dis-
tribution and  apposition,  to  wit, — which  aU  come  into  play  in
several  places  at  several  times.  Were  this  not  so,  the  engen-


ON  GENERATION,


401


dering  cause  itself  would  be  forced  to  make  use  of  various  in-
struments in  order  to  accomplish  its  various  operations.

FabriciuSj  therefore,  asserts  erroneously  that  the  transmutative
force  works  with  the  properties  of  the  elements, — hot,  cold,  moist
and  dry — as  its  instruments ; whilst  the  formative  faculty  acts
independently  of  these  and  by  a more  divine  power,  performing
its  task  with  consciousness,  as  it  seems,  with  foresight  and  elec-
tion. But  if  he  had  looked  more  closely  at  the  matter  he
would  have  seen  that  the  formative  as  well  as  the  metamorphic
force  made  use  of  the  hot  and  the  cold,  the  moist  and  the  dry,  as
instruments;  nor  would  he  have  been  less  struck  with  indications
of  the  Supreme  Artificer’s  interference  in  the  processes  of  nutri-
tion and  transformation  than  in  that  of  formation  itfelf.  For
nature  ordained  each  and  all  of  these  faculties  to  some  definite
end,  and  everywhere  labours  with  forethought  and  intelhgence.
Whatever  it  is  in  the  seeds  of  plants  which  renders  them  fertile
and  exercises  a plastic  force  in  their  interior;  whatever  it  is
which  in  the  egg  performs  the  duty  of  a most  skilful  artificer,
producing  and  fashioning  the  parts  of  the  pullet,  warming,
cooling,  moistening,  drying,  concocting,  condensing,  hardening,
softening  and  liquefying  at  once,  impressing  distinctive  characters
on  each  of  them  by  means  of  configuration,  situation,  constitu-
tion, temperament,  number  and  order, — stiU  is  this  something
at  work,  disposing  and  ordering  all  with  no  less  of  foresight,
intelligence,  and  choice  in  the  business  of  transmuting,  than  in
the  processes  of  nutrition,  growth,  and  formation.

The  concoctive  and  metamorphic,  the  nutritive  and  augmentive
faeidties,  which  Fabricius  would  have  it  act  tlu’ough  the  quah-
ties  of  hot,  cold,  moist  and  dry,  without  all  consciousness,  I
maintain,  on  the  contrary,  work  no  less  to  a definite  end,  and
and  with  not  less  of  artifice  than  the  formative  faculty,  which
Fabricius  declares  has  knowledge  and  foresight  of  the  future
action  and  use  of  every  particular  part  and  organ.  In  the  same
way  as  the  arts  of  the  physician,  cook  and  baker,  in  Avbich  heat
and  cold,  moisture  and  dryness,  and  similar  natural  properties
are  employed,  require  the  use  of  reason  no  less  than  the  mecha-
nical arts  in  which  either  the  hands  or  various  instruments  ai’e
employed,  as  in  the  business  of  the  blacksmith,  statuary,  potter,
&c. ; in  the  same  way,  as  in  the  greater  world,  we  are  told
that  “ All  things  are  full  of  Jove,” — Jovis  omnia  plena — so

26


402


ON  GENERATION.


in  the  slender  hodj^  of  the  pidlet,  and  in  every  one  of  its  actions,
does  the  finger  of  God  or  nature  no  less  obviously  appear.

Wherefore,  if  from  mauifestations  it  be  legitimate  to  judge
of  faculties,  we  might  say  that  the  vegetative  acts  appear
rather  to  be  performed  with  art,  election,  and  foresight,  than
the  acts  of  the  rational  soul  and  mind ; and  this  even  in  the
most  perfect  man,  whose  highest  excellence  in  science  and  art,
if  we  may  take  the  God  for  oui'  guide,  is  that  he  know  him-
self.

A superior  and  more  divine  agent  than  man,  therefore,  appears
to  engender  and  preserve  mankind,  a higher  power  than  the
male  bird  to  produce  a young  one  from  the  egg.  We  acknow-
ledge God,  the  supreme  and  omnipotent  creator,  to  be  present
in  the  production  of  all  animals,  and  to  point,  as  it  were,  with
a finger  to  his  existence  in  his  works,  the  parents  being  in
every  case  but  as  instmments  in  his  hands.  In  the  generation
of  the  pullet  from  the  egg  all  things  are  indeed  contrived  and
ordered  u ith  singular  providence,  divine  wisdom,  and  most  ad-
mirable and  incomprehensible  skill.  And  to  none  can  these
attributes  be  referred  save  to  the  Almighty,  first  cause  of  all
things,  by  whatever  name  this  has  been  designated, — the  Divine
Mind  by  Aristotle ; the  Soul  of  the  Universe  by  Plato ; the
Natura  Naturans  by  others  ; Satmm  and  Jove  by  the  ancient
Greeks  and  Romans ; by  ourselves,  and  as  is  seeming  in  these
days,  the  Creator  and  Father  of  all  that  is  in  heaven  and  eai-th,
on  whom  animals  depend  for  then’  being,  and  at  whose  will  and
pleasure  all  things  are  and  were  engendered.

Moreover,  as  I have  said,  I neither  hold  this  aiTangement
of  the  faculties  of  the  Gtal  principle,  which  Fabricius  has  placed
at  the  head  of  his  account  of  the  organs  of  generation,  as  cor-
rect in  itself,  nor  as  useful  or  calculated  to  assist  us  in  the
matter  we  have  in  hand.  For  we  do  not  attain  to  a knowledge
of  effects  from  a discussion  of  actions  or  faculties ; the  contrary
is  rather  the  case  : from  actions  we  ascend  to  a knowledge  of
faculties,  inasmuch  as  mauifestations  are  more  cognizable  to  us
than  the  powers  whence  they  proceed,  and  the  parts  which  we
investigate  already  formed  are  more  readily  appreciated  than
the  actions  Avheuce  they  proceed.

Neither  is  it  well  from  the  generation  of  a single  chick  from
an  egg,  to  venture  upon  general  conclusions,  which  can  in  fact


ON  GENERATION.


403


only  be  correctly  arrived  at  after  extensive  observations  on  the
mode  of  generation  among  animals  at  large.  But  of  this  matter
I shall  have  more  to  say  immediately.

Meantime,  however,  that  we  may  come  to  the  parts  subser-
vient to  generation,  as  Fabricius  says,^  let  us  consider  and
perpend  in  what  order  the  organs  subserving  generation  are  pro-
duced— which  are  formed  first,  which  last.  In  this  investiga-
tion two  bases  are  to  be  laid,  one  having  reference  to  the  cor-
poreal, the  other  to  the  incorporeal;  that  is  to  say,  to  nature
and  the  vital  principle.  The  corporeal  base,”  he  continues,
“ I call  that  which  depends  on  and  proceeds  from  the  nature
of  the  body,  and  of  which  illustrations  are  readily  supplied  from
things  made  by  art;  as  for  example,  that  every  building  re-
quires a foundation  upon  which  it  may  be  established  and
reared ; from  whence  walls  are  raised,  by  which  both  floors  and
ceilings  are  supported;  then  are  all  the  supplementary  parts
added  and  ornaments  appended : — and  so,  in  fact,  does  nature
strive  in  the  construction  of  the  animal  body ; for  first  she  forms
the  bones  as  a foundation,  in  order  that  all  the  parts  of  the  body
may  grow  upon  and  be  appended  to  and  established  around
them.  These  are  the  parts,  in  other  words,  that  are  first  formed
and  solidified;  for  as  the  bones  derive  their  origin  from  a
very  soft  and  membranous  substance,  and  by  and  by  become
extremely  hard,  much  time  is  required  to  complete  the  forma-
tion of  a bone,  and  it  is  therefore  that  they  are  first  produced.
Hence  Galen  did  not  compare  the  formation  of  the  animal  body
to  every  kind  of  artificial  structure,  but  particularly  to  a ship ;
for  he  says,  as  the  commencement  and  foundation  of  a ship  is
the  keel,  from  which  the  ribs,  circularly  curved,  proceed  on  either
side  at  moderate  distances  from  each  other,  like  the  sticks  of  a
hurdle,  in  order  that  the  whole  fabric  of  the  vessel  may  after-
wards be  reared  upon  the  keel  as  a suitable  basis ; so  in  the
formation  of  the  animal  body  does  nature,  by  means  of  the
outstretched  spine  and  the  ribs  drawn  around  it,  secure  a keel
and  suitable  foundation  for  the  entire  superstructure,  which  she
then  raises  and  perfects.”

But  experience  teaches  us  that  all  this  is  very  different  in
fact,  and  that  the  bones  are  rather  among  the  last  parts  to  be


Op.  supra  cit.  p.  43.


404


ON  GENERATION.


formed.  The  bones  of  the  extremities  and  skull,  and  the  teeth,
do  not  arise  any  sooner  than  the  brain,  the  muscles,  and  the  other
fleshy  parts  : in  ne\r-born  fetuses,  perfect  in  other  respects,  the
place  of  the  bones  is  supplied  by  mere  membranes  or  cartilages,
which  are  only  subsequently  and  in  the  lapse  of  time  converted
into  bones;  a circumstance  which  sufficiently  appears  in  the
crania  of  new-born  infants,  and  in  the  state  of  their  ribs  and
articulations.

And  although  it  be  true  that  the  first  rudiments  of  the  body
are  seen  in  the  guise  of  a recurved  keel,  still  this  is  a soft
mucous  and  jelly-like  substance,  which  has  no  affinity  in  nature,
structure,  or  office  to  bone ; and  although  certain  globules
depend  from  thence,  the  destined  rudiments  of  the  head,  still
these  contain  no  solid  matter,  but  are  mere  vesicles  full  of
limpid  water,  which  are  afterwards  formed  into  the  brain,  cere-
bellum, and  eyes,  which  are  all  subsequently  sruTouuded  by  the
skull,  at  a period,  however,  when  the  beak  and  nails  have
ab’eady  acquired  consistency  and  hardness.

This  view  of  Fabricius  is  therefore  both  imperfect  and  in-
correct ; inasmuch  as  he  does  not  think  of  what  nature  per-
forms in  fact  in  the  work  of  generation,  so  much  as  of  what  in
his  opinion  she  ought  to  do,  betrayed  into  this  by  his  compa-
rison with  the  edifice  reared  by  art.  As  if  nature  had  imitated
art,  and  not  rather  art  nature  ! — mindful  of  which  he  himself
says  afterwards  It  were  better  to  say  that  art  learned  of
nature,  and  was  an  imitator  of  her  doings  ; for,  as  Galen  everv-
Avhere  reminds  us,  nature  is  both  older  and  displays  gi'eater
wisdom  in  her  works  than  art.”

And  then  when  we  admit  that  the  bones  are  the  foundation
of  the  whole  body,  Avithout  Avhich  it  could  neither  support  itself
nor  perform  any  movement,  it  is  stiU  sufficient  if  they  anse
simultaneously  with  the  parts  that  are  attached  to  them.  And
indeed  the  things  that  are  to  be  supported  not  yet  existing,  the
supports  would  be  established  in  vain.  Nature,  however,  does
nothing  in  vain  ; nor  does  she  form  parts  before  there  is  a use  for
them.  But  animals  receive  their  organs  as  soon’as  the  offices  of
these  are  required.  The  first  basis  of  Fabricius,  therefore,  is  dis-
tinctly overthrown  by  his  own  observations  on  the  egg,  and  the
comparison  draAvn  by  Galen.

' Op.  cit.  p.  44.


ON  GENERATION.


405


He  appears  to  have  come  nearer  the  truth  where  he  says  : ^
“ The  other  basis  of  the  parts  to  be  formed  first  or  last  is  obtained
from  nature,  that  is,  from  the  Htal  principle  by  which  the  animal
body  is  ruled  and  directed.  If  there  be  two  grades  of  this  prin-
ciple, the  vegetative  and  animal,  the  vegetative  must  be  held  prior
in  point  of  nature  and  time,  inasmuch  as  it  is  common  to  plants
and  animals  ; and  assuredly  the  organs  officiating  in  the  vegeta-
tive office  will  be  engendered  and  formed  before  those  that  belong
to  the  sensitive  and  motive  principle,  especially  to  the  chief  organs
which  are  in  immediate  relationship  with  the  governing  prin-
ciple. N ow  these  organs  are  two  in  especial — the  liver  and  the
heart : the  liver  as  seat  of  concupiscence,  of  the  vegetative  or  nu-
tritive faculty;  the  heart,  as  the  organ  whose  heat  maintains  and
perfects  the  vegetative  and  every  other  faculty,  and  in  this  way
has  most  intimate  connexions  and  relations  with  the  vegetative
force.  Whence,  if  after  the  third  day  you  see  the  heart  palpi-
tating in  the  point  where  the  chick  is  engendered,  as  Aristotle
bears  witness  to  the  fact  that  you  can,  you  will  not  be  surprized
but  rather  be  disposed  to  admit  that  the  heart  belongs  to  the
vegetative  degree  and  exists  for  its  sake.  It  is  also  consonant
with  reason  that  the  hver  shoffid  be  engendered  simultaneously
.with  the  heart,  hut  should  lie  perdue  or  hidden,  as  it  does  not
pulsate.  And  Aristotle  himself  admits  that  the  heart  and  liver
exist  in  the  animal  body  for  similar  reasons ; so  that  where
there  is  a heart  there  also  is  a liver  discovered.  If  the  heart
and  liver  be  the  parts  first  produced,  then,  it  is  also  fair  to  suppose
that  the  other  organs  subserving  these  two  should  be  engen-
dered in  the  same  manirer, — the  lungs  which  exist  for  the  sake
of  the  heart ; and,  for  the  sake  of  the  liver,  almost  all  the  vis-
cera which  present  themselves  in  the  abdomen

Still  is  all  this  very  different  from  the  sequence  we  witness  in
the  egg.  Nor  is  it  true  that  the  liver  is  engendered  simrdta-
neously  with  the  heart ; nor  does  the  salve  avail  with  which  he
would  cover  that  infirmity  where  he  says  that  the  liver  is  con-
cealed because  it  does  not  palpitate;  for  the  eyes  and  vena
cava  and  carina  are  all  conspicuous  enough  from  the  com-
mencement, although  none  of  them  palpitate.  How  come  the
liver  and  lungs,  if  they  be  then  extant,  to  he  visible  without
any  palpitation  ? And  then  Fabricius  himself  has  indicated  a

' Op.  cit.  lit.  sup.


406


ON  GENERATION.


minute  point  situated  in  the  centre  of  his  figure  of  the  chick
of  the  foru’th  day, -without  stating,  however,  that  it  had  any  pulsa-
tion ; and  this  he  did  not  perceive  to  be  the  heart,  but  rather
believed  it  to  be  the  rudiment  of  the  body.  It  is  certain,  there-
fore, that  Fabricius  spoke  only  from  conjecture  and  precon-
ceived opinion  of  the  origin  of  the  liver ; even  in  the  same  way
as  others  have  done,  Aldrovandus  and  Parisanus  among  the
number,  who,  lighting  upon  two  points,  and  perceiving  that
they  did  not  pulsate  simultaneously,  straightw'ay  held  that  one
was  the  heart,  the  other  the  liver.  As  if  the  liver  ever  pulsated,
and  these  tAvo  points  were  aught  but  the  two  pulsating  vesicles
repljdng  to  each  other  by  alternate  contractions,  in  the  way
and  manner  we  have  indicated  in  our  history  !

Fabricius,  therefore,  is  either  deceived  or  deceives,  Avhen  he
says,  “ In  the  first  stage  of  the  production  of  the  chick,  the
liver,  heart,  veins,  arteries,  lungs,  and  all  the  organs  contained
in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  are  engendered  together ; and  in
like  manner  are  the  carina,  in  other  Avords,  the  head  Avith  the
eyes  and  entire  vertebral  column  and  thorax  engendered.”  For
the  heart,  veins,  and  arteries  are  perfectly  distinguished  some
time  before  the  carina;  the  carina,  again,  is  seen  before  the
eyes ; the  eyes,  beak,  and  sides  before  the  organs  contained  in
the  caAuty  of  the  abdomen ; the  stomach  and  intestines  before
the  liver  or  lungs  ; and  there  are  still  other  particulars  connected
Avith  the  order  of  production  of  the  parts  in  generation,  of  which
we  shall  speak  by  and  by.

He  is  also  mistaken  when  he  would  have  the  vegetative  por-
tion of  the  Autal  principle  prior  in  nature  and  time  to  the  sen-
sitive and  motive  element.  For  that  which  is  prior  in  nature
is  mostly  posterior  in  the  order  of  generation.  In  point  of
time,  indeed,  the  vegetative  principle  is  prior ; because  without
it  the  sensitive  principle  cannot  exist : an  aet — if  the  act  of  an
organic  body — cannot  take  place  without  organs ; and  the
sensitive  and  motive  organs  are  the  work  of  the  vegetative
principle ; the  sensitive  soul  before  the  existence  of  action,  is
like  a triangle  within  a quacb’angle.  But  nature  intended  that
that  AA’hich  was  primary  and  most  noble  shoidd  also  be  primary ;
wherefore  the  vegetative  force  is  by  nature  posterior  in  point  of
order,  as  subordinate  and  miiiistrative  to  the  sensitive  and  mo-
tive faculties.


ON  GENERATION.


407


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTY-FIFTH.

Of  the  order  of  the  parts  according  to  Aristotle.

The  following  appear  to  be  Aristotle^s  views  of  the  order  of
generation  : ^ “ When  conception  takes  place,  the  germ  com-
ports itself  like  a seed  sown  in  the  gronnd.  For  seeds  likewise
contain  a first  principle,  which,  existing  in  the  beginning  in  po-
tentia,  by  and  by  when  it  manifests  itself,  sends  forth  a stem
and  a root,  by  which  aliment  is  taken  np ; for  increase  is  indis-
pensable. And  so  in  a conception,  in  Avhich  all  the  parts  of
the  body  inhere  in  potentia,  and  the  first  principle  exists  in  a
state  of  special  activity.”

This  principle  in  the  egg — the  body  analogous  to  the  seed
of  a vegetable — we  have  called  with  Fabricius  the  spot  or  cica-
tricula,  and  have  spoken  of  it  as  a very  primary  part  of  the  egg,
as  that  in  which  all  the  other  parts  inhere  in  potentia,  and  from
whence  each  in  its  order  afterwards  arises.  In  this  spot,  in
fact,  is  contained  that — whatever  it  may  be — by  which  the  egg
is  made  productive ; and  here  is  the  first  action  of  the  formative
faculty,  the  first  effect  of  the  vegetative  heat  revealed.

This  spot,  as  we  have  said,  dilates  from  the  very  commence-
ment of  the  incubation,  and  expands  in  circles,  in  the  centre  of
which  a minute  white  speck  is  displayed,  bke  the  shining  point
in  the  pupil  of  the  eye ; and  here  anon  is  discovered  the  punc-
tum  saliens  rubrum,  with  the  ramifications  of  the  sanguiferous
vessels,  and  this  as  soon  as  the  fluid,  which  we  have  called  the
colliquameut,  has  been  produced.

“Wherefore,”  adds  jAristotle,^  “the  heart  is  the  first  part
perceived  in  fact ; and  this  is  in  conformity  not  only  with  sense,
but  also  with  reason.  For  as  that  which  is  engendered  is  al-
ready disjunct  and  severed  from  both  parents,  and  ought  to
rule  and  regulate  itself  like  a son  who  comes  of  age  and  has  his
separate  establishment,  it  must  therefore  possess  a principle,
an  intrinsic  principle,  by  which  the  order  of  the  members  may


‘ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  4.


= Ibid.


408


ON  GENERATION.


be  subsequently  determined^  and  whatever  is  necessary  to  the
constitution  of  a perfect  animal  arranged.  For  if  this  principle
were  at  any  time  extrinsic,  and  entered  into  the  body  at  a sub-
sequent period,  you  would  not  only  be  in  doubt  as  to  the  time
at  which  it  entered,  but  as  every  part  is  distinct,  you  would
also  see  it  as  necessary  that  that  should  first  exist  from
which  the  other  parts  derive  both  increase  and  motion.’^  The
same  writer  elsewhere  ^ asserts  : “ This  principle  is  a portion  of
the  whole,  and  not  anything  added,  or  included  apart.  For,”
he  proceeds,  ‘^‘^the  generation  of  the  animal  completed,  does
this  principle  perish,  or  does  it  continue  ? But  nothing  can  be
shown  existing  intrinsically  which  is  not  a part  of  the  whole
organized  being,  whether  it  be  plant  or  animal;  wherefore  it
would  be  absurd  to  maintain  that  the  principle  in  question
perished  after  the  formation  either  of  any  one  or  of  any  number
of  parts;  for  what  should  form  those  that  were  not  yet  produced?
Wherefore,”  he  continues  further,  “ they  say  not  well  who  with
Democritus  assert  that  the  external  parts  of  animals  are  those
first  seen,  and  then  the  internal  parts,  as  if  they  were  rearing
an  animal  of  wood  and  stone,  for  such  a thing  would  include
no  principle  within  itself.  But  all  animals  have  and  hold  a
principle  in  their  interior.  AATierefore  the  heart  is  seen  as  the
first  distinct  part  in  animals  that  have  blood ; for  it  is  the  origin
of  all  the  parts,  whether  similar  or  dissimilar ; and  the  creature
that  begins  to  feel  the  necessity  of  nourishment,  must  already
be  possessed  by  the  principle  of  an  animal  and  a full-gi’own
foetus.”

From  the  above,  it  clearly  appears  that  Aristotle  recognizes
a certain  order  and  commencement  in  animal  generation,
namely,  the  heart,  which  he  regards  as  the  first  produced  and
first  virified  part  of  the  animal,  and,  like  a son  set  free  from
the  tutelage  of  his  parents,  as  self-sufiicing  and  independent,
whence  not  only  does  the  order  of  the^parts  proceed,  hut  as  that
by  which  the  animal  itself  is  maintained  and  preseiwed,  recenang
from  it  at  once  fife  and  sustenance,  and  eveiything  needful  to
the  perfection  of  its  being.  For  as  Seneca  says : ~ “In  the
semen  is  comprised  the  entfre  cause  of  the  future  man;  and  the
unborn  babe  has  Avritten  within  it  the  law  of  a beard  and  a


‘ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  1.


’ Nat.  Quaest.  lib.  iii,  cap.  29.


ON  GENERATION.


409


hoary  head.  For  the  whole  body  and  the  load  of  future  years
are  already  traced  in  delicate  and  obscure  outlines  in  its  con-
stitution.”

We  have  already  determined  whether  the  heart  were  this
primigenial  part  or  not;  in  other  words,  whether  Aristotle’s
words  refer  to  that  part  which,  in  the  dissection  of  animals,  is
seen  sooner  than  al!  the  rest,  the  punctum  saliens,  to  wit,  with
its  vessels  full  of  blood ; and  we  have  cordially  assented  to  an
answer  in  the  affirmative.  For  I believe  that  the  blood,  toge-
ther with  its  immediate  instruments,  the  umbilical  vessels,  by
which,  as  by  roots,  nutriment  is  attracted,  and  the  pulsating
vesicles,  by  vdiich  this  nutriment  is  distributed,  to  maintain  life
and  growth  in  every  other  part,  are  formed  first  and  foremost
of  all.  For  as  Aristotle  * has  said,  it  is  the  same  matter  by
which  a thing  grows,  and  by  which  it  is  primarily  constituted.

Many,  however,  err  in  supposing  that  different  parts  of  the
body  require  different  kinds  of  matter  for  their  nourishment.
As  if  nutrition  were  nothing  more  than  the  selection  and  at-
traction of  fit  aliment ; and  in  the  several  parts  of  the  body  to
be  nourished,  no  concoction,  assimilation,  apposition,  and  trans-
mutation were  required.  This  as  we  learn,  was  the  opinion  of
Anaxagoras  of  old :

Who  held  the  principles  of  things  to  be
Homoeomeric  : — bone  to  be  produced
Of  small  and  slender  bones  ; the  viscera
Of  small  and  slender  viscera ; the  blood
Of  numerous  associate  drops  of  blood.-

But  Aristotle,®  with  the  greatest  propriety,  observes  : “ Dis-
tinction of  parts  is  not  effected,  as  some  think,  by  like  being-
carried  by  its  nature  to  like;  for,  besides  innumerable  difficulties
belonging  to  this  opinion  in  itself,  it  happens  that  each  similar
part  is  severally  created ; for  example,  the  bones  by  themselves,
the  nerves,  the  flesh,  &c.”  But  the  nourishment  of  all  parts  is
common  and  homogeneous,  such  as  we  see  the  albumen  to  be
in  the  egg,  not  heterogeneous  and  composed  of  different  parts.
Wherefore  all  we  have  said  of  the  matter  from  which  parts  are
made,  is  to  be  stated  of  that  by  which  they  increase  : all  derive
nourishment  from  that  in  which  they  exist  in  potentia,  though

‘ De  Geu.  Auim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  1.  - Luciet.  lil).  i.  ^ 5^p

26  §


410


ON  GENERATION.


not  in  act.  Precisely  as  from  the  same  rain  plants  of  every  kind
increase  and  grow  ; because  the  moisture  which  was  a like  pou  er
in  reference  to  all,  becomes  actually  like  to  each  when  it  is
changed  into  their  substances  severally  : then  does  it  acquire
bitterness  in  rue,  sharpness  in  mustard,  sweetness  in  hquorice,
and  so  on.

He  explains,  moreover,  what  pai'ts  are  engendered  before
others,  and  assigns  a reason  which  does  not  differ  from  the
second  basis  of  Fabricius.  “ The  eause  by  which,  and  the  cause
of  this  cause,  are  different ; one  is  first  in  generation,  the  other
in  essence  by  which  we  are  to  understand  that  the  end  is
prior  in  nature  and  essence  to  that  which  happens  for  the  sake
of  the  end;  hut  that  which  happens  for  the  sake  of  the  end
must  he  prior  in  generation.  And  on  this  ground  Fabricius
rightly  infers  that  all  those  parts  which  minister  to  the  vegeta-
tive principle,  are  engendered  before  those  that  seiwe  the  sen-
sitive principle,  inasmuch  as  the  former  is  subordinate  to  the
latter.

Fie  subsequently  adds  the  differences  of  those  parts  which
are  made  for  some  special  purpose  : some  parts,  for  example,  are
instituted  for  a purpose  by  nature,  because  this  purpose  en-
sues ; and  others  because  they  are  instruments  which  the  pur-
pose employs.  The  former  he  designates  genitaha,  the  latter
instrumenta.  For  the  end  or  pm’pose,  he  says,  in  some  cases,
is  posterior,  in  others  prior  to  that  which  is  its  cause.  For
both  the  generator  and  the  instruments  it  uses  must  exist  an-
teriorly to  that  Avhich  is  engendered  by  or  from  them.  The
parts  serving  the  vegetative  principle,  therefore,  are  prior  to  tlie
parts  which  are  the  ministers  of  sense  and  motion.  But  the
parts  dedicated  to  motion  aird  sensation  are  posterior  to  the
motive  and  sensitive  faculties,  because  they  ai’e  the  instruments
which  the  motive  and  sensitive  faculties  employ.  For  it  is  a law
of  nature  that  no  parts  or  instruments  be  produced  before  there
he  some  use  for  them,  and  the  faculty  be  extant  which  employs
them.  Thus  there  is  neither  any  eye  nor  any  motive  organ
engendered  until  the  brain  is  produced,  and  the  faculties  pre-
exist which  are  to  see  and  to  govern  motion.

In  like  manner,  as  the  pulsating  vesicles  serve  as  instruments
for  the  motion  of  the  blood,  and  the  heard  in  its  entii’e  struc-
ture does  the  same,  (as  I have  shown  in  the  work  on  the  !Mo-


ON  GENERATION.


411


tion  of  the  blood,)  urging  the  blood  in  a ceaseless  round  through
every  part  of  the  body,  we  see  that  the  blood  must  exist  before
the  heart,  both  in  the  order  of  generation  and  of  natui’e  and
essence.  For  the  blood  uses  the  heart  as  an  instrument,  and
moreover,  when  engendered  it  continues  to  nourish  the  organ
by  means  of  the  coronary  arteries,  distributing  heat,  spirits,  and
life  to  it  through  their  ramifications.

We  shall  have  further  oecasion  to  show  from  an  entire  series
of  anatomical  observ^ations,  how  this  rule  of  Aristotle  in  respect
of  the  true  priority  of  the  parts  is  borne  out.  Meantime  we
shall  see  how  he  himself  succeeds  in  duly  inferring  the  causes
of  priority  in  conformity  with  his  rule.

“After  the  prime  part — viz.  the  heart — is  engendered,’^  he
says,  “ the  internal  parts  are  produced  before  the  external  ones,
the  superior  before  the  inferior;  for  the  lower  parts  exist  for  the
sake  of  the  superior,  and  that  they  may  serve  as  instruments,
after  the  manner  of  the  seeds  of  vegetables,  which  produce  roots
sooner  than  branches.”

Nature,  however,  follows  no  such  order  in  generation ; nor
is  the  instance  quoted  invariably  applicable ; for  in  beans,  peas,
and  other  leguminous  seeds,  in  acorns,  also,  and  in  gTain,  it  is
easy  to  see  that  the  stem  shoots  upwards  and  the  root  down-
wards from  the  same  germ ; and  onions  and  other  bulbous
plants  send  ofi*  stalks  before  they  strike  root.

He  then  subjoins  another  cause  of  this  order,  viz. : “ That
as  nature  does  nothing  in  vain  or  superfiuously,  it  follows  that
she  makes  nothing  either  sooner  or  later  than  the  use  she  has
for  it  requires.”  That  is  to  say,  those  parts  are  first  engen-
dered whose  use  or  function  is  first  required ; and  some  are
begun  at  an  earher  period  because  a longer  time  is  requisite  to
bring  them  to  perfection ; and  that  so  they  may  be  in  the  same
state  of  forwardness  at  birth  as  those  that  are  more  rapidly
produced.  Just  as  the  cook,  having  to  dress  certain  articles
for  supper,  which  by  reason  of  their  hardness  are  done  with
difficulty,  or  require  gentle  boiling  for  a great  length  of  time,
these  he  puts  on  the  first,  and  only  turns  subsequently  to  those
that  are  prepared  more  quickly  and  with  less  expenditure  of
heat ; and  further,  as  he  makes  ready  the  articles  that  are  to
come  on  in  the  first  course  first  of  all,  and  those  that  are  to  be
presented  in  the  second  course  afterwards ; so  also  does  nature


412


ON  GENERATION.


in  the  generation  of  animals  only  proceed  at  a later  period  to
the  construction  of  the  soft  and  moist  and  fleshy  parts,  as  re-
quiring but  a short  time  for  their  concoction  and  formation,
whilst  the  hard  parts,  such  as  the  bones,  as  requiring  ample
evaporation  and  abundant  drying,  and  their  matter  long  re-
maining inconcoct,  she  proceeds  to  fashion  almost  from  the
very  beginning.  “ And  the  same  thing  obtains  in  the  brain,”
he  adds,  “ which,  large  in  quantity  and  exceedingly  moist  at
first,  is  by  and  by  better  concocted  and  condensed,  so  that  the
brain  as  well  as  the  eye  diminishes  in  size.  The  head  is  there-
fore very  large  at  first,  in  comparison  uith  the  rest  of  the  body,
which  it  far  sirrpasses  because  of  the  brain  and  the  eyes,  and
the  large  quantity  of  moisture  contained  in  them.  These  parts,
nevertheless,  are  among  the  last  to  be  perfected,  for  the  brain
acquires  consistence  with  difficulty,  and  it  is  long  before  it  is
freed  from  cold  and  moisture  in  any  animal,  and  especially  in
man.  The  sinciput,  too,  is  consohdated  the  last,  the  bones
here  being  quite  soft  when  the  infant  sees  the  light.”

He  gives  another  reason,  Hz.  because  the  parts  are  formed
of  different  kinds  of  matter  : “ Every  more  excellent  part,  the
sharer  in  the  highest  principle  is,  farther,  engendered  from  the
most  highly  concocted,  the  pm’est  and  first  nutriment ; the
other  needfxd  parts,  produced  for  the  sake  of  the  former,  from
the  worse  and  excrementitious  remainder.  For  nature,  Hke  the
sage  head  of  a family,  is  wont  to  throw  away  nothing  that  may
be  tru'ued  to  any  useful  purpose.  But  he  still  regulates  his
household  so  that  the  best  food  shall  be  given  to  his  children,
the  more  indifierent  to  his  menials,  the  worst  to  the  animals.
As  then,  man’s  growth  being  complete  and  mind  hartng  been
superadded,  (in  other  words,  and,  as  I interpret  the  passage,  adult
man  having  acquired  sense  and  prudence,)  things  are  ordered
in  this  way,  so  does  nature  at  the  period  of  production  even
compose  the  flesh  and  the  other  more  sensitive  parts  of  the
purest  matter.  Of  the  excrementitious  remainder  she  makes
the  bones,  sinews,  hail’,  nails,  and  other  pai’ts  of  the  same  con-
stitution. And  this  is  the  reason  why  this  is  done  last  of  aU,
when  nature  has  an  abundant  supply  of  recrementitious  mate-
rial.” Our  author  then  goes  on  to  speak  of  “ a twofold  order
of  aliment :”  “^^one  for  nutrition,  another  for  growth  ;”  “ the
nutritive  is  the  one  which  supplies  existence  to  the  whole  and


ON  GENERATION.


413


to  the  parts ; the  augmentative,  that  which  causes  increase  to
the  bulk.”

This  is  in  accordance  with  what  we  find  in  the  egg,  where
the  albumen  supplies  a kind  of  purer  aliment  adapted  to  the  nu-
trition of  the  embryo  in  its  earlier  stages,  and  the  yelk  affords
the  material  for  the  growth  of  the  chick  and  pullet.  The
thinner  albumen,  moreover,  as  we  have  seen,  is  used  in  fashion-
ing the  first  and  more  noble  parts  ; the  thicker  albumen  and
the  yelk,  again,  are  employed  in  nourishing  and  making  these
to  grow,  and  further  in  forming  the  less  important  parts  of  the
body.  For,”  he  says,  “the  sinews,  too,  are  produced  in  the
same  way  as  the  bones,  and  from  the  same  material,  viz.  : the
seminal  and  nutritive  excrementitious  matter.  But  the  nails,
hair,  horns,  beak,  and  spurs  of  birds,  and  all  other  things  of  the
same  description,  are  engendered  of  the  adventitious  and  nutri-
tive aliment,  which  is  obtained  both  from  the  mother  and  from
without.”  And  then  he  gives  a reason  why  man,  whilst  other
animals  are  endowed  by  nature  with  defensive  and  offensive
arms,  is  born  naked  and  defenceless,  which  is  this  : that  whilst
in  the  lower  animals  these  parts  are  formed  of  remainders  or
excrements,  man  is  compounded  of  a purer  material,  “ which
contains  too  small  a quantity  of  inconcoct  and  earthy  matter.”

Thus  far  have  we  followed  Aristotle  on  the  subject  of  ^ The
Order  in  Generation,^  the  whole  of  which  seems  to  be  referrible  to
one  principle,  viz.  : the  perfection  of  nature,  which  in  her  works
does  nothing  in  vain  and  has  no  short- comings,  but  still  does  that
in  the  best  manner  which  was  best  to  be  done.  Hence  in  gene-
ration no  part  would  either  precede  or  follow,  did  she  prefer
producing  them  altogether,  viz. : in  circumstances  where  she
acts  freely  and  by  election;  for  sometimes  she  works  under
compulsion,  as  it  were,  and  beside  her  purpose,  as  when  through
deficiency  or  superabundance  of  material,  or  through  some  de-
fect in  her  instruments,  or  is  hindered  of  her  ends  by  external
injuries.  And  thus  it  occasionally  happens  that  the  final  parts
are  formed  before  the  instrumental  parts, — understanding  by
final  parts,  those  that  use  others  as  instruments.

And  as  some  of  the  parts  are  genital,  nature  making  use  of
them  in  the  generation  of  other  parts,  as  the  means  of  remov-
ing obstacles  the  presence  of  which  would  interfere  with  the
due  progress  of  the  work  of  reproduction,  and  others  exist  for


414


ON  GENERATION.


other  special  ends ; it  therefore  happens  that  for  the  disposition
of  material,  and  other  requisites,  some  parts  are  variously  en-
gendered before  others,  some  of  them  being  begun  earlier  but
completed  at  a later  period,  some  being  both  begun  and  perfect-
ed at  an  earlier  period,  and  others  being  begun  together  but  per-
fected at  different  times  subsequently.  And  then  the  same  order
is  not  observed  in  the  generation  of  all  animals,  but  this  is  va-
riously altered ; and  in  some  there  is  nothing  like  succession,
but  all  the  parts  are  begun  and  perfected  simultaneously,  by
metamorphosis,  to  wit,  as  has  been  already  stated.  Hence  it
follows,  in  fine,  that  the  primogenate  part  must  be  of  such  a
nature  as  to  contain  both  the  beginning  and  the  end,  and  be  that
for  whose  sake  all  the  rest  is  made,  namely,  the  living  principle,
or  soul,  and  that  which  is  the  potential  and  genital  cause  of
this,  the  heart,  or  in  our  view  the  blood,  which  we  regard  as
the  prime  seat  of  the  soul,  as  the  source  and  perennial  centre  of
life,  as  the  generative  heat,  and  indeed  as  the  inherent  heat ; in
a word,  the  heart  is  the  first  efficient  of  tlie  whole  of  the  instru-
mental parts  that  are  produced  for  the  ends  of  the  soul,  and  used
by  it  as  instruments.  The  heart,  according  to  Aristotle,  I say,  is
that  for  which  all  the  parts  of  animals  are  made,  and  it  is  at  the
same  time  that  which  is  at  once  the  origin  and  fashioner  of  them
all.


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTY-SIXTH.

Of  the  order  of  the  parts  in  generation  as  it  appears  from
observation.

That  we  may  now  pi’opose  our  own  riews  of  the  order  of  the
parts  in  generation  as  Ave  have  gathered  it  from  our  observa-
tions, it  appears  that  the  Avhole  business  of  generation  in  all
animals  may  be  divided  into  tAVO  periods,  or  connected  Avith
tAvo  structures  : the  OAum,  i.  e.  the  conception  and  seed,  or
that,  whatever  it  be,  Avhich  in  spontaneous  productions  corre-
sponds to  the  seed,  Avhether  with  Fernelius  it  be  called  “the
native  celestial  heat  in  the  primogenial  moisture,”  or  with
Aristotle,  “ the  vital  heat  included  in  moisture.”  For  the  con-
ception in  Auviparous  animals,  as  Ave  haA  C said,  is  analogous  to


ON  GENERATION.


41.3


the  seed  and  fruit  of  plants ; in  the  same  way  as  it  is  to  the
egg  of  oviparous  creatures ; to  worms  in  spontaneously  engen-
dered animals,  or  to  certain  vesicles  fruitful  by  the  vital  warmth
of  their  included  moisture.  In  each  and  all  of  these  the  same
things  inhere  which  might  with  propriety  lead  to  their  being
called  seeds ; they  are  all  bodies,  to  wit,  from  which  and  by
which,  as  previously  existing  matter,  artificer  and  organ,  the
whole  of  an  animal  body  is  primarily  engendered  and  pro-
duced.

The  other  structure  is  the  embryo  produced  from  the  seed
or  conception.  For  both  the  matter  and  the  moving  and  effi-
cient cause,  and  the  instmments  needful  to  the  operation,  must
necessarily  precede  operation  of  any  and  every  kind.

We  have  already  examined  the  structure  of  the  egg.  Now
the  embryo  to  which  it  gives  birth,  in  so  far  as  this  can  he
made  out  by  observation  and  dissection,  particularly  among  the
more  perfect  animals  with  [red]  blood,  appears  to  be  perfected  by
four  principal  degrees  or  processes,  which  we  reduce  to  as  many
orders,  in  harmony  with  the  various  epochs  in  generation ; and
we  shall  demonstrate  that  what  transpires  in  the  egg  also  takes
place  in  every  conception  or  seed.

The  first  process  is  that  of  the  primogenial  and  genital  part,
viz.  the  blood  with  its  receptacles,  in  other  words,  the  heart
and  its  vessels.

And  this  part  is  first  engendered  for  two  principal  reasons :
1st,  because  it  is  the  principal  part  which  uses  all  the  rest  as
instruments,  and  for  whose  sake  the  other  parts  are  formed ;
and,  2d,  because  it  is  the  prime  genital  part,  the  origin  and
author  of  the  rest.  The  part,  in  a word,  in  which  inhere  both
the  principle  whence  motion  is  derived,  and  the  end  of  that  mo-
tion, is  obviously  father  and  sovereign.

In  the  generation  of  this  first  part,  which  in  the  egg  is  ac-
complished in  the  course  of  the  fourth  day,  although  I have  not
been  able  to  observe  any  order  or  sequence,  inasmuch  as  the
whole  of  its  elements, — the  blood,  the  vessels,  and  the  pulsating
vesicles — appear  simultaneously,  I have  nevertheless  imagined,
as  I have  said,  that  the  blood  exists  before  the  pulse,  because,  ac-
cording to  nature’s  laws,  it  must  be  antecedent  to  its  receptacles.
For  the  substance  and  structure  of  the  heart,  namely,  the  conical
mass  with  its  auricles  and  ventricles,  as  they  are  produced  long


416


ON  GENERATION.


subsequently  along  with  tbe  other  viscera,  so  must  they  be  re-
ferred to  the  same  class  of  parts  as  these,  namely,  the  tliird.

In  the  production  of  the  circulating  system  the  veins  are
sooner  seen  than  the  arteries ; such  at  least  is  our  conclusion.

The  second  process,  which  begins  after  the  fourth  day,  is  indi-
cated by  a certain  concrescence,  which  I designate  vermiculum
— worm  or  maggot ; for  it  has  the  life  and  obscure  motions  of  a
maggot ; and  as  it  concretes  into  a mucous  matter,  it  divides
into  two  parts,  the  larger  and  superior  of  which  is  seen  to  be
conglobed,  and  divided,  as  it  were,  into  thin  vesicles, — the
brain,  the  cerebellum,  and  the  two  eyes ; the  less,  again,  con-
stituting the  Carina,  arises  over  the  vena  cava  and  extends  in
tlie  line  of  its  direction.

In  the  genesis  of  the  head,  the  eyes  are  first  perceived ; by
and  by  a white  point  makes  its  appearance  in  the  situation  of
the  beak,  and  the  slime  drying  around  it,  it  becomes  invested
with  a membrane.

The  outline  of  the  rest  of  the  body  follows  about  the  same
period.  First,  from  the  carina  something  like  the  sides  of  a
ship  are  seen  to  arise  ; the  parts  having  an  uniform  consistence
in  the  beginning,  but  the  ribs  being  afterwards  prefigured  by
means  of  extremely  fine  white  lines.  The  instmments  of  loco-
motion next  arise — the  legs  and  wings  ; and  the  carina  and  the
extremities  adnate  to  it  are  then  distinguished  into  muscles,
bones,  and  articulations.

These  two  rudiments  of  the  head  and  trunk  appear  simul-
taneously, but  as  they  grow  and  advance  to  perfection  subse-
quently, the  trunk  increases  and  acquii’es  its  shape  much  more
speedily  than  the  head ; so  that  this,  which  in  the  fii’st  instance
exceeded  the  whole  trunk  in  size,  is  now  relatively  much  smalirr.
And  the  same  thing  occurs  in  regai’d  to  the  human  embryo.

The  same  disparity  also  takes  place  between  the  trunk  and
the  extremities.  In  the  human  embryo,  from  the  time  when
it  is  not  longer  than  the  nail  of  the  httle  finger,  till  it  is  of  the
size  of  a frog  or  mouse,  the  arms  are  so  short  that  the  extre-
mities of  the  fingers  could  not  extend  across  the  breast,  and  the
legs  are  so  short  that  were  they  reflected  on  the  abdomen  they
would  not  reach  the  umbilicus.

The  proportion  of  the  body  to  the  extremities  in  children
after  their  bu’th  continues  excessive  until  they  begin  to  stand


ON  GENERATION.


417


and  run.  Infants,  therefore,  resemble  dwarfs  in  the  beginning,
and  they  creep  about  like  quadrupeds,  attempting  progres-
sive motion  with  the  assistance  of  all  their  extremities ; but
tiiey  cannot  stand  erect  until  the  length  of  the  leg  and  thigh
together  exceeds  the  length  of  the  rest  of  the  body.  And  so
it  happens,  that  when  they  first  attempt  to  walk,  they  move
with  the  body  prone,  like  the  quadruped,  and  can  scarcely  rise
so  erect  as  the  common  dunghill  fowl.

And  so  it  happens  that  among  adult  men  the  long-legged —
they  who  have  longer  legs,  and  especially  longer  thighs — are  bet-
ter walkers,  runners,  and  leapers  than  square-built,  compact  men.

In  this  second  process  many  actions  of  the  formative  faculty
are  observed  following  each  other  in  regular  order,  (in  the  same
way  as  we  see  one  wheel  moving  another  in  automata,  and
other  pieces  of  mechanism,)  and  all  arising  from  the  same  mu-
caginous  and  similar  matter.  Not  indeed  in  the  manner
that  some  natural  philosophers  would  have  it  when  they
say,  ^^that  like  is  carried  to  its  like.^^  We  are  rather  to
maintain  that  parts  are  moved,  not  changing  their  places^
but  remaining  and  undergoing  change  in  hardness,  softness^
colour,  &c.,  whence  the  diversities  between  similar  parts  •
those  things  appearing  in  act  which  were  before  in  power. ^
The  extremities,  spine,  and  rest  of  the  body,  namely,  are
formed,  grow,  and  acquire  outline  and  complexion  toge-
ther; the  extremities,  comprising  bones,  muscles,  tendons,
and  cartilages,  all  of  which  on  their  first  appearance  were  simi-
lar and  homogeneous,  become  distinguished  in  their  progress,
and,  connected  together,  compose  organs,  by  whose  mutual
continuity  the  whole  body  is  constituted.  In  like  manner,
the  membrane  growing  around  the  head,  the  brain  is  com-
posed, and  the  lustrous  eyes  receive  their  polish  out  of  a per-
fectly limpid  fluid.

That  is  to  say,  nature  sustains  and  augments  the  several
parts  by  the  same  nourishment  with  which  she  fashioned  them
at  first,  and  not,  as  many  opine,  with  any  diversity  of  aliment
and  particles  similar  to  each  particular  structure.  As  she  is
increasing  the  mucaginous  mass  or  maggot,  like  a potter  she
first  divides  her  material,  and  then  indicates  the  head  and  trunk


‘ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  4.


418


ON  GENERATION.


and  extremities ; like  a painter,  she  first  sketches  the  parts  in
outline,  and  then  fills  them  in  -ndth  colours ; or  hke  the  ship-
builder, who  first  lays  down  his  keel  by  way  of  foundation,  and
upon  this  raises  the  ribs  and  roof  or  deck : even  as  he  builds
his  vessel  does  nature  fashion  the  trank  of  the  body  and  add
the  extremities.  And  in  this  work  she  orders  all  the  variety  of
similar  parts — the  bones,  cartilages,  membranes,  muscles,  ten-
dons, nerves,  &c. — from  the  same  primary  jelly  or  mucus.
For  thick  filaments  are  produced  in  the  first  instance,  and  these
by  and  by  are  brought  to  resemble  cords ; then  they  are  ren-
dered cartilaginous  and  spinous  ; and,  lastly,  they  are  hardened
and  concocted  into  bones.  In  the  same  way  the  thicker  mem-
brane which  invests  the  brain  is  first  cartilaginous  and  then
bony,  whilst  the  thinner  membrane  merely  consolidates  into
the  pericranium  and  integument.  In  similar  order  flesh  and
nerve  from  soft  mucus  are  confirmed  into  muscle,  tendon,  and
ligament ; the  brain  and  cerebellum  are  condensed  out  of  a
perfectly  limpid  water  into  a firm  coagulum  j for  the  brain  of
infants,  before  the  hones  of  the  head  have  closed,  is  soft  and
diffluent,  and  has  no  greater  consistence  than  the  curd  of  milk.

The  third  process  is  that  of  the  rtscera,  the  formation  of
which  in  the  chick  takes  place  after  the  trank  is  cast  in  outhue,
or  about  the  sixth  or  seventh  day, — the  hver,  lungs,  kidneys,
cone  and  ventricles  of  the  heart,  and  intestines,  all  become
rtsible  nearly  at  the  same  moment ; they  appear  to  aidse  from
the  veins,  and  to  he  connected  with  them  in  the  same  way  as
fungi  grow  upon  the  bark  of  trees.  They  are,  as  I have  already
said,  gelatinous,  white,  and  bloodless,  until  they  take  on  their
proper  functions.  The  stomach  and  intestines  are  first  disco-
vered as  white  and  tortuous  filaments  extending  lengthwise
through  the  abdomen ; along  with  these  the  mouth  appeal's,
from  which  a continuous  canal  extends  to  the  anus,  and  con-
nects the  superior  with  the  inferior  parts.  The  organs  of
generation  likewise  appear  about  the  same  time.

Up  to  this  period  all  the  viscera,  the  intestines,  and  the  heart
itself  inclusive,  are  excluded  from  the  cavities  of  the  body  and
hang  pendulous  without,  attached  as  it  were  to  the  veins.  Tlie
trank  of  the  body  presents  itself,  in  fact,  hke  a boat  undecked
or  a house  without  a roof,  the  anterior  walls  of  the  thorax  and
abdomen  not  being  yet  extant  to  close  these  cavities.


ON  GENERATION.


419


But  as  soon  as  the  sternum  is  fashioned  the  heart  enters  into
the  chest  as  into  a dwelling  which  it  had  built  and  arranged
for  itself;  and  there^  like  the  tutelary  genius,  it  enters  on  the
government  of  the  surrounding  mansion,  which  it  inhabits  with
its  ministering  servants  the  lungs.  The  liver  and  stomach  are
by  and  by  included  within  the  hypochondiia,  and  the  intestines
are  finally  surrounded  by  the  abdominal  parietes.  And  this  is
the  reason  wherefore  without  dissection  the  heart  can  no  longer
be  seen  pulsating  in  the  heiBs  egg  after  the  tenth  day  of  incu-
bation.

About  this  epoch  the  point  of  the  beak  and  the  nails  appear  of
a fine  white  colour ; a quantity  of  chylous  matter  presents  itself
in  the  stomach ; a little  excrement  is  also  observed  in  the  in-
testine, and  the  liver  being  now  begun,  some  greenish  bile  is
perceived ; facts  from  which  it  clearly  appears  that*  there  is
another  digestion  and  preparation  of  nutriment  going  on  be-
sides that  which  takes  place  by  the  branches  of  the  umbilical
veins ; and  it  is  reasonable  matter  of  doubt  how  the  bile,  the
excrementitious  matter  of  the  second  digestion,  can  be  separated
by  the  instrumentality  of  the  liver  from  the  other  humours,
when  we  see  it  produced  at  the  same  time  as  this  organ.

In  the  order  now  indicated  are  the  internal  organs  generated
universally ; in  all  the  animals  which  I have  dissected,  particu-
larly the  more  perfect  ones,  and  man  himself,  I have  found
them  produced  in  the  same  manner : in  these,  in  the  com’se  of
the  second,  third,  and  fourth  month,  the  heart,  liver,  Inngs,
kidneys,  spleen,  and  intestines  present  themselves  inchoate  and
increasing,  and  all  alike  of  the  same  white  colour  which  belongs
to  the  body  at  large.  Wherefore  these  early  days  are  not  im-
properly spoken  of  as  the  days  when  the  embryo  is  in  the
milk ; for  with  the  exception  of  the  veins,  particularly  those  of
the  umbilicus,  everything  is  as  it  were  spermatic  in  appearance.

I am  of  opinion  that  the  umbilical  arteries  arise  after  the
veins  of  the  same  name,  because  the  arteries  are  scarcely  to  be
discovered  in  the  com’se  of  the  first  month,  and  take  their  rise
from  the  branches  that  descend  to  either  lower  extremity.  I do
not  believe,  therefore,  that  they  exist  until  that  part  of  the  body
whence  they  proceed  is  formed.  The  umbilical  veins,  on  the
contrary,  are  conspicuous  long  before  any  part  of  the  body  is
begun.


420


ON  GENERATION.


What  I have  now  said  I have  derived  from  numerous  dissec-
tions of  human  embryos  of  almost  every  size ; for  I have  had
them  for  inspection  from  the  time  they  were  hke  tadpoles,  till
they  were  seven  or  eight  fingers^  breadth  in  length,  and  from
thence  onwards  to  the  full  time.  I have  examined  them  more
particularly,  however,  through  the  second,  third,  and  foui’th
months,  in  the  com’se  of  which  the  greatest  number  of  changes
take  place,  and  the  order  of  development  is  seen  with  greatest
clearness.

In  the  human  embryo,  then,  of  the  age  of  two  months,  what
we  have  spoken  of  as  taking  place  in  the  “ second  process,”  is
observed  to  occur.  For  I rather  think  that  during  the  first
month  there  is  scarcely  anything  of  the  conception  in  the
uterus — at  all  events,  I have  never  been  able  to  discover  any-
thing. B"ut  the  first  month  past,  I have  repeatedly  seen  concep-
tions thrown  off,  and  similar  to  the  one  which  Hippocrates  men-
tions as  having  been  voided  by  the  female  pipe-player,  of  the
size  of  a pheasant’s  or  pigeon’s  egg.  Such  conceptions  resem-
ble an  egg  without  its  shell ; they  are,  namely,  of  an  oval  figure;
the  thicker  membrane  or  chorion  vfith  which  they  are  sur-
rounded, however,  is  seen  to  be  covered  with  a white  mucor
externally,  particidarly  towards  the  larger  end ; internally  it  is
smooth  and  shining,  and  is  filled  with  limpid  and  sluggish
water^ — it  contains  nothing  else.

In  the  course  of  the  second  month  I have  frequently  seen
an  ovum  of  this  description,  or  somewhat  larger,  thrown  off  Avith
the  symptoms  of  abortion,  riz.  ichorous  lochia;  the  OAum
being  sometimes  entii’e,  at  other  times  burst,  and  covered  with
bloody  coagula.  Within  it  was  smooth  and  slippery ; it  was
covered  with  adhering  blood  without.  Its  form  was  that  Avhich
I have  just  described.  In  some  of  these  aborted  ova,  I have
discovered  embryos,  in  others  I could  find  none.  The  embiyo,
Avhen  present,  Avas  of  the  length  of  the  little  finger-nail,  and
in  shape  like  a little  frog,  save  that  the  head  was  exceedingly
large  and  the  extremities  very  short,  like  a tadpole  in  the  month
of  June,  when  it  gets  its  extremities,  loses  its  tail,  and  assumes
the  form  of  a fr’og.  The  whole  substance  was  white,  and  so
soft  and  mucilaginous,  that  unless  immersed  in  clear  water,  it
was  impossible  to  handle  it.  The  face  was  the  same  as  that
of  the  embryo  of  one  of  the  lower  animals — the  dog  or  cat,  for


ON  GENERATION.


421


instance,  without  lips,  the  mouth  gaping,  and  extending  from
ear  to  ear.

Many  women,  whose  conceptions,  like  the  wind-eggs  of  fowls,
are  barren  and  without  an  embryo,  miscariy  in  the  third  month.

I have  occasionally  examined  aborted  ova  of  this  age,  of  the
size  of  a gooseys  egg,  which  contained  embryos  distinct  in  all
their  parts,  but  misshapen.  The  head,  eyes,  and  extremities
were  distinct,  but  the  muscles  were  indistinct ; there  were  no
bones,  but  certain  white  lines  in  their  situations,  and  as  it
seemed,  soft  cartilages.  The  substance  of  the  heart  was  ex-
tremely white,  and  consisted  of  two  ventricles  of  like  size  and
thickness  of  walls,  forming  a cone  with  a double  apex,  which
might  be  compared  to  a small  twin-kernel  nut.  The  liver  was
very  small  and  of  the  general  white  colour.  Through  the  whole
of  this  time,  i.  e.  during  the  first  three  months,  there  is  scarcely
any  appearance  of  a placenta  or  uterine  cake.

In  every  conception  of  this  description  I have  seen,  I have
always  found  a surrounding  membrane  containing  a large  quan-
tity of  watery  fluid,  between  which  and  the  body  of  the  embryo,
suspended  by  its  middle  by  means  of  a long  and  twisted  um-
bilical cord,  there  is  such  disproportion,  that  it  is  impossible  to
regard  this  liquid  as  either  sweat  or  urine ; it  seems  far  more
probable  that  like  the  colliquament  in  the  hen’s  egg,  it  is  a
fluid  destined  by  nature  for  the  nourishment  of  the  foetus.
Nor  was  there  any  indication  to  be  discovered  of  these  concep-
tions or  ova  having  been  connected  with  the  uterus  ; there  was
only  on  the  external  suiTace  of  their  larger  extremity  a greater
appearance  of  thickening  and  wrinkling,  as  if  the  rudiments  of
the  future  placenta  had  existed  there.

These  conceptions,  therefore,  appear  to  me  in  the  light  of
ova,  which  are  merely  cherished  within  the  uterus,  and,  hke
the  egg  in  the  uterus  of  the  fowl,  grow  by  their  own  inherent
powers.

In  the  fourth  month,  however,  it  is  wonderful  to  find  what
rapid  strides  the  foetus  has  made  : from  the  length  of  the  thumb
it  has  now  grown  to  be  a span  long.  All  the  members,  too,  are
distinct  and  are  tinged  with  blood ; the  bones  and  muscles  can
be  distingmshed ; there  are  vestiges  of  the  nails,  and  the  foetus
now  begins  to  move  lustily.  The  head,  however,  is  excessively
large ; the  face  without  lips,  cheeks,  and  nose ; the  gape  of  the


422


ON  GENERATION.


mouth  is  enormous^  and  the  tongue  lies  in  its  middle ; the  eyes
are  small^  without  lids  to  cover  them ; the  middle  integument  of
the  regions  of  the  forehead  and  sinciput  is  not  yet  cartilaginous,
far  less  bony;  but  the  occiput  is  somewhat  firm  and  in  some
sort  cartilaginous,  indicating  that  the  skull  already  begins  to
acquire  solidity.

The  organs  of  generation  have  now  made  their  appearance,
but  the  testes  are  contained  within  the  abdomen,  in  the  situation
of  the  female  uterus,  the  scrotum  still  remaining  empty.  The
female  organs  are  yet  imperfect,  and  the  uterus  with  its  tubes
resembles  the  two-horned  uterus  of  the  lamb.

The  placenta,  of  larger  size,  and  now  attached  to  the  uterus,
comprises  nearly  one  half  of  the  entire  conception,  and  pre-
sented itself  to  my  eye  as  a fleshy  or  fungous  excrescence  of
the  w'omb,  so  firmly  was  its  gibbous  portion  connected  all
around  with  the  uterine  walls,  which  had  now  grown  to  greater
thickness.  The  branches  of  the  umbilical  vessels  struck  into
the  placenta  like  the  roots  of  a tree  into  the  ground,  and  by
their  means  was  the  conception  now,  for  the  first  time,  con-
nected with  the  uterus.

The  brain  presented  itself  as  a large  and  soft  coagulum,  full
of  ample  vessels.  The  ventricles  of  the  heai’t  were  of  equal
capacity,  and  their  walls  of  the  same  tliickness.  In  the  thorax,
and  covered  by  the  ribs,  thi’ee  carities,  nearly  of  the  same  dimen-
sions, were  perceived ; of  these  the  lowest  was  occupied  by  the
lungs,  which  are  full  of  blood,  and  of  the  same  colour  as  the
liver  and  kidneys ; the  middle  cavity  was  filled  by  the  heart  and
pericardium ; the  superior  cavity,  again,  was  possessed  by  the
gland  called  the  thymus,  which  is  now  of  very  ample  size.

In  the  stomach  there  was  some  chyle  discovered,  not  very
ditferent  in  character  from  the  flnid  in  which  the  embryo  swam.
It  also  contained  some  white  curdled  matter,  not  unlike  the
mucous  sordes  which  the  nirrse  washes  pairicularly  from  between
the  folds  of  the  skin  of  new-born  infants.  In  the  upper  part
of  the  intestines  there  was  a small  quantity  of  excrementitious  or
chylous  matter ; the  lower  bowels  contained  meconium.  In  the
ui’inary  bladder  there  was  urine,  and  in  the  gall  bladder  bile.
The  intestinum  coecum,  that  appendix  of  the  colon,  was  empty
as  in  the  adult,  and  apparently  superfluous,  not  as  in  the  lower
animals — the  hog,  horse,  hare,  constituting  as  it  were  another


ON  GENERATION.


423


stomacli.  The  omentum,  or  apron,  floated  over  the  intestines
at  large  like  a thin  and  transparent  veil  or  cloud.

The  kidneys  at  this  epoch  are  not  yet  formed  into  a smooth
and  continuous  rounded  mass,  as  in  the  adult,  but  are  com-
pacted of  numerous  smaller  masses,  as  we  see  them  in  the  calf
and  sturgeon,  as  if  there  were  a renal  globule  or  nipple  placed
at  the  extremity  of  each  division  of  the  ureter,  from  the  orifice
of  which  the  urine  distilled.  Over  the  kidneys  two  bodies,  first
observed  by  Eustachius,  are  discovered,  very  abundantly  sup-
plied with  blood,  so  that  their  veins,  which  anatomists  designate
as  venae  adiposae,  are  not  much  smaller  than  the  emulgents
themselves.  The  liver  and  spleen,  according  to  their  several
proportions,  are  equally  full  of  blood.

I may  here  observe,  by  the  way,  that  in  every  strong  and
healthy  human  foetus  we  everywhere  discover  milk ; it  is  parti-
cularly abundant  in  the  thymus  gland,  though  it  is  also  found
in  the  pancreas,  through  the  whole  of  the  mesentery,  and  in
certain  lacteal  veins  and  glands,  as  it  seems,  situated  between
the  divisions  of  the  mesenteric  vessels.  Moreover,  it  can  be
pressed  and  indeed  sometimes  flows  spontaneously  from  the
breasts  of  newly-born  infants,  and  nurses  imagine  that  this  is
beneficial  to  the  infant.

And  it  clearly  appears  that  this  fluid,  which  abounds  in  the
ovum,  is  no  excrementitious  matter  thrown  off  by  the  embryo,
nothing  like  urine  or  sweat,  because  its  relative  quantity  is
diminished  as  the  period  of  parturition  approaches,  when  the
fcetus  is  of  course  larger,  and,  as  it  consumes  a greater  quantity
of  nutx’iment,  accumulates  excrementitious  matter  more  abun-
dantly than  it  did  in  the  first  months  of  pregnancy.  Let  it
be  added,  that  the  bladder  is  at  this  time  distended  with  urine.
For  my  own  part  I have  never  been  able  to  discover  that  con-
duit for  the  urine,  from  the  bladder  to  the  umbilicus,  which
anatomists  describe  under  the  name  of  urachus  ; I have,  on  the
contrary,  frequently  seen  urine  escaping  by  the  penis,  but  never

fiiiy  urachus,  when  the  bladder  was  pressed  upon  with  the
hand.

So  much  for  what  I have  observed  with  reference  to  the
order  of  the  parts  in  the  development  of  the  human  foetus.

In  the  fourth  and  last  process  the  parts  of  the  lowest  state
and  order  are  produced,  those,  namely,  that  do  not  exist  as


424


ON  GENERATION.


needful  to  the  being  or  to  the  maintenance  of  the  indi\ddual,
but  only  as  defences  against  external  injury^  as  ornamentSj  or  '
as  weapons  of  offence.

The  outermost  part  of  all^  the  shin,  with  its  several  append-
ages,— cuticle,  hair,  wool,  feathers,  scales,  shells,  claws,  hooves,
and  other  items  of  the  same  description,  may  be  regarded  as
the  principal  means  of  defence  or  protection.  And  it  is  well
devised  by  nature,  who,  indeed,  never  does  aught  amiss,  that
these  pai'ts  are  the  last  to  he  engendered,  inasmuch  as  they  could
never  be  of  use  or  avail  as  defences  until  the  animal  was  born.
The  common  domestic  pullet  is  therefore  bom  covered  with
down  only,  not  with  feathers,  like  certain  other  birds  which  have
to  be  speedily  prepared  for  flight,  because  it  has  to  seek  its  food
on  foot,  not  on  the  wing,  and  by  active  ranning  about  hither
and  thither.  In  like  manner  the  young  of  ducks  and  geese,
which  feed  swimming,  have  their  feathers  and  wings  perfected
at  a later  period  than  their  feet  and  legs.  It  is  otherwise  with
swallows,  however,  which  have  to  fly  sooner  than  to  walk,  be-
cause they  feed  on  the  wing.

The  down  of  the  pullet  begins  to  appear  after  the  fourteenth
day,  the  foetus  being  already  perfect  in  aU  its  parts.  When
the  feathers  flrst  show  themselves,  they  ai’e  in  the  guise  of  points
within  the  skin,  but  by  and  by  the  feathers  project,  like  plants
from  the  ground,  increase  in  length,  become  unfolded,  invest
the  whole  body,  and  protect  it  against  the  inclemencies  of  the
atmosphere.

Feathers  difler  from  quills  in  form,  use,  place  of  growth,
aiid  order  of  production.  The  pullet  is  feathered  before  it
has  any  quills,  for  the  quill-feathers  only  grow  in  the  wings
and  tail,  and  also  spring  more  deeply,  from  the  very  lowest
part  of  the  integument,  or  even  from  the  periosteum,  and  serve
essentially  as  instruments  of  motion ; the  feathers  again  arise
superficially  from  the  skin,  and  are  everywhere  present  as  meaus
of  protection.

Nails,  hair,  horn,  and  the  hke,”  says  Aristotle,^  “ are  en-
gendered from  the  skin  ; whence  it  happens  that  they  change
colour  with  the  skin  ; for  the  white  and  black  and  particoloured
are  so  in  consequence  of  the  colour  of  the  skin  whence  they


' De  Gencr.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  4.


ON  GENERATION.


425


arise.”  In  the  bird^  however,  this  is  not  so  ; for  whatever  the
colour  of  the  feathers,  the  skin  is  still  never  otherwise  than  of
one  tint,  vdz.,  white.  And  then  the  same  feather  or  quill  is  fre-
quently seen  of  different  and  often  brilliant  colours  in  different
parts  for  the  ornament  of  the  creature.

In  the  human  foetus  the  skin  and  all  the  parts  connected
with  it  are  in  like  manner  perfected  the  last  of  all.  In  the
earlier  periods,  consequently,  we  find  neither  lips,  cheeks,  ex-
ternal ears,  eyelids,  nor  nose ; and  the  last  part  to  grow  toge-
ther is  the  upper  lip  in  the  course  of  the  middle  line  of  the
body,

Man  comes  into  the  world  naked  and  unarmed,  as  if  nature
had  destined  him  for  a social  creature,  and  ordained  him  to  live
under  equitable  laws  and  in  peace ; as  if  she  had  desired  that  he
should  be  guided  by  reason  rather  than  be  driven  by  force ;
therefore  did  she  endow  him  vdth  understanding,  and  furnish
him  with  hands,  that  he  might  himself  contrive  what  was  neces-
sary to  his  clothing  and  protection.  To  those  animals  to  which
nature  has  given  vast  strength,  she  has  also  presented  weapons
in  harmony  with  their  powers ; to  those  that  are  not  thus  vigo-
rous, she  has  given  ingenuity,  cunning,  and  singular  dexterity
in  avoiding  injury.

Ornaments  of  all  kinds,  such  as.  tufts,  crests,  combs,  wattles,
brilliant  plumage,  and  the  like,  of  which  some  vain  creatures
seem  not  a little  proud,  to  say  nothing  of  such  offensive  wea-
pons as  teeth,  horns,  spurs,  and  other  implements  employed  in
combat,  are  more  frequently  and  remarkably  conferred  upon
the  male  than  the  female.  And  it  is  not  uninteresting  to
remark,  that  many  of  these  ornaments  or  weapons  are  most
conspicuous  in  the  male  at  that  epoch  when  the  females  come
into  season,  and  biun  with  desire  of  engendering.  And  whilst
in  the  young  they  are  stdl  absent,  in  the  aged  they  also  fail  as
being  no  longer  wanted.

Our  common  cock,  whose  pugnacious  qualities  are  well  known,
so  soon  as  he  comes  to  his  strength  and  is  possessed  of  the  fa-
culty of  engendering,  is  distinguished  by  his  spurs,  and  orna-
mented with  his  comb  and  beautiful  feathers,  by  which  he
charms  his  mates  to  the  rites  of  Venus,  and  is  furnished  for  the
combat  with  other  males,  the  subject  of  dispute  being  no  empty
or  vainglorious  matter,  but  the  perpetuation  of  the  stock  in


426


ON  GENERATION.


this  line  or  in  that ; as  if  nature  had  intended  that  he  who
could  best  defend  himself  and  his,  should  he  preferred  to  others
for  the  continuance  of  the  kind.  And  indeed  all  animals  which
are  better  furnished  with  weapons  of  offence,  and  more  warlike
than  others,  fall  out  and  tight,  either  in  defence  of  their  young,
of  their  nests  or  dens,  or  of  their  prey ; but  more  than  all  for
the  possession  of  their  females.  Once  vanquished,  they  yield
up  possession  of  these,  lay  aside  their  strut  and  haughty  de-
meanour, and,  crest-fallen  and  submissive,  they  seem  to  con-
sume with  grief;  the  victor,  on  the  contrary,  who  has  gained
possession  of  the  females  by  his  prowess,  exults  and  boastfully
proclaims  the  glory  of  his  conquest.

Nor  is  this  ornamenting  anything  adventitious  and  for  a
season  only ; it  is  a lasting  and  special  gift  of  nature,  who  has
not  been  studious  to  deck  out  animals,  and  especially  birds
only,  but  has  also  thrown  an  infinite  variety  of  beautiful  dyes
over  the  lowly  and  insensate  herbs  and  flowers.


EXERCISE  THE  EIFTY-SEVEXTH.

Of  certain  paradoxes  and  problems  to  be  considered  in  connexion
with  this  subject.

Thus  far  have  we  spoken  of  the  order  of  generation,  whereby
the  differences  between  those  creatures  that  ai’e  engendered  by
metamorphosis  and  those  that  are  developed  by  epigenesis,  as
well  as  between  those  that  are  said  to  proceed  from  a worm
and  those  that  arise  from  an  egg,  have  been  made  to  appear.
The  latter  are  partly  incorporated  from  a prepared  matter,
and  are  nourished  and  increased  from  a certain  remaining
matter;  the  former  are  incorporated  from  the  whole  of  the
matter  present;  the  latter  grow  and  ai’e  formed  simultaneously,
and  after  their  birth  continue  to  wax  in  size  and  finally  attain
maturity ; the  former  increase  at  once,  and  from  a grub  or
caterpillar  grow  into  an  aureha,  and  are  then  produced,  con-
summately formed,  as  butterflies,  moths,  and  the  like.  TMiere-
fore  Aristotle,  as  Fabricius^  observes  : “ As  he  assigns  a sort


Fabricius,  Op.  cit.  p.  46.


ON  GENERATION.


42"


of  twofold  nature  to  the  egg,  and  a twofold  egg  in  this  kind,
so  does  he  assert  a twofold  action  and  a twofold  animal  engen-
dered. For,”  he  jiroceeds,  “ from  the  first  eggs,  which  are  the
primordia  of  generation,  a worm  is  constantly  produced ; viz.  :
from  the  eggs  of  flies,  ants,  bees,  silkworms,  &c.,  in  which  some
fluid  is  contained,  and  from  the  whole  of  which  fluid  the
worm  is  engendered  ; but  from  the  second  eggs,  formed  by  the
worms  themselves,  butterflies  are  engendered  and  disclosed,  viz.  :
fljdng  animals  contained  in  a shell,  or  follicle,  or  egg,  which
shell  giving  way  the  winged  creature  escapes ; precisely  as
Aristotle*  has  it  where  he  speaks  of  the  egg  of  the  locust.”
Finally,  whilst  the  higher  animals  produced  from  eggs  are  per-
fected by  a succession  of  parts,  the  lower  creatures  that  ai’ise  in
this  way,  or  that  are  forjned  by  metamorphosis,  are  produced
at  one  ejffort,  as  it  were,  and  entire.  And  in  the  same  way
are  engendered  both  those  creatm-es  that  are  said  to  arise  spon-
taneously, by  chance  or  accident,  and  derive  their  first  matter
or  take  their  origin  from  putrefaction,  filth,  excrement,  dew,  or
the  parts  of  plants  and  animals,  as  well  as  those  that  arise  con-
generately  from  the  semen  of  animals.  Because  this  is  com-
mon to  all  living  creatures,  viz.  : that  they  derive  their  origin
either  from  semen  or  eggs,  whether  this  semen  have  proceeded
from  others  of  the  same  kind,  or  have  come  by  chance  or  some-
thing else.  For  what  sometimes  happens  in  art  occasionally
occurs  in  nature  also ; those  things,  namely,  take  place  by
chance  or  accident  which  otherwise  are  brought  about  by  art.  Of
this  Aristotle^  quotes  health  as  an  illustration.  And  the  thing
is  not  different  as  respects  the  generation,  in  so  far  as  it  is  from
seed,  of  certain  animals : their  sernina  are  either  present  by
accident,  or  they  proceed  from  an  univocal  agent  of  the  same
kind.  For  even  in  fortuitous  sernina  there  is  an  inherent  motive
principle  of  generation,  which  procreates  from  itself  and  of
i tself ; and  this  is  the  same  as  that  which  is  found  in  the  sernina
of  congenerative  animals, — a power,  to  wit,  of  forming  a living-
creature.  But  of  this  matter  we  shall  have  more  to  say  shortlJ^
From  what  has  just  been  said,  however,  several  paradoxes
present  themselves  for  consideration.  For  when  we  see  the
cicatricula  enlarging  in  the  egg,  the  colliquament  concocted


Hist.  Anim.  lib.  v,  cap.  28.


^ Metaph.  lib.  vii,  cap.  9.


428


ON  GENEEATION.


and  prepared^  and  a variety  of  other  particulars  all  tending,  not
without  foresight,  to  the  development  of  the  embiyo,  before  the
first  rudiment  or  the  merest  particle  of  this  is  conspicuous,
what  should  hinder  us  from  heliering  that  the  calidum  innatum
and  the  vegetative  soul  of  the  chick  are  in  existence  before  the
chick  itself?  For  what  is  competent  to  produce  the  effects  and
acts  of  life,  except  their  efficient  cause  and  principle,  heat,
namely,  and  the  faculty  of  the  vegetative  soul?  Therefore  it
would  seem  that  the  soul  was  not  the  act  of  the  organic  body
possessing  life  in  potentia;  for  we  regard  the  chick  with  its
appropi’iate  form  as  the  consequence  of  such  an  act.  But  where
can  we  suppose  the  form  and  rital  principle  of  the  chick  to  inhere
save  in  the  chick  itself?  unless  indeed  we  admitted  a separa-
tion of  forms  and  conceded  a certain  metamorphosis.

Now  this  appears  most  obviously  where  the  same  animal
lives,  as  Aristotle  has  it,  by  or  under  a succession  of  forms,  for
example,  a caterpillar,  a chrysalis,  a butterfly.  For  it  is  of
necessity  the  same  efficient,  nutrient,  and  conservative  principle
that  possesses  each  of  these,  although  under  different  forms ;
unless  we  allow  that  there  is  one  vital  principle  in  the  youth,
another  in  the  man,  a third  in  the  aged  individual,  or  maintain
that  the  forms  of  the  grub  and  caterpillar  are  the  same  as  those
of  the  silkworm  and  butterfly.  Aristotle  has  entered  very  fully
into  this  subject,  and  we  shall  ourselves  have  more  to  say  on
it  immediately.

It  appears  further  paradoxical  to  maintain  that  the  blood  is
produced,  and  moves  to  and  fro,  and  is  imbued  with  vital  spuits,
before  any  sanguiferous  or  locomotive  organs  are  in  existence.
Neither  is  it  less  new  and  unheard-of  to  assert,  that  sensation
and  motion  belong  to  the  fcetus  before  the  brain  is  formed ;
for  the  fcetus  moves,  contracting  and  unfolding  itself,  when
there  is  nothing  more  than  a httle  limpid  water  in  the  place
of  the  brain.

Moreover’,  the  body  is  nourished  and  increases  before  the
organs  appropriated  to  digestion,  viz.  the  stomach  and  abdo-
minal viscera,  are  formed.  Sanguification,  too,  which  is  en-
titled the  second  digestion,  is  perfect  before  the  first,  or  chyli-
fication,  which  takes  place  in  the  stomach,  is  begun.  The  ex-
creinentitious  products  of  the  fii’st  and  second  digestions,  namely,
excrement  in  the  intestines,  urine  and  bile  in  the  lu’iuai’y  and


ON  GENERATION.


429


gall  bladder,  are  contemporaneous  with  the  existence  of  the
concocting  organs  themselves.  Lastly,  not  only  is  there  a soul
or  ^dtal  principle  present  in  the  vegetative  part,  but  even  be-
fore this  there  is  inherent  mind,  foresight,  and  understanding,
which  from  the  very  commencement  to  the  being  and  perfect
formation  of  the  chick,  dispose  and  order  and  take  up  all  things
requisite,  moulding  them  in  the  new  being,  with  consummate
art,  into  the  form  and  likeness  of  its  parents.

In  reference  to  this  subject  of  family  likeness,  we  may  be
permitted  to  inquire  as  to  the  reason  why  the  offspring  should
at  one  time  bear  a stronger  resemblance  to  tlie  father,  at
another  to  the  mother,  and,  at  a third,  to  progenitors,  both
maternal  and  paternal,  further  removed  ? particularly  in  cases
where  at  one  bout,  and  at  the  same  moment,  several  ova  are
fecundated.  And  this  too  is  a remarkable  fact,  that  virtues
and  vices,  marks  and  moles,  and  even  particular  dispositions  to
disease  are  transmitted  by  parents  to  their  offspring ; and  that
while  some  inherit  in  this  way,  all  do  not.  Among  our  poul-
try some  are  courageous,  and  pugnaciously  inchned,  and  will
sooner  die  than  yield  and  flee  from  an  adversary  j their  de-
scendants, once  or  twice  removed,  however,  unless  they  have
come  of  equally  well-bred  parents,  gradually  lose  this  quality ;
according  to  the  adage,  “ the  brave  are  begotten  by  the  brave.^^
In  various  other  species  of  animals,  and  particularly  in  the
human  family,  a certain  nobility  of  race  is  observed ; numerous
qualities,  in  fact,  both  of  mind  and  body,  are  derived  by  here-
ditary descent.

I have  frequently  wondered  how  it  should  happen  that  the
offspring,  mixed  in  so  many  particulars  of  its  structure  or  con-
stitution, with  the  stamp  of  both  parents  so  obviously  upon  it,
in  so  many  parts,  should  still  escape  all  mixture  in  the  organs
of  generation  j that  it  should  so  uniformly  prove  either  male
or  female,  so  very  rarely  an  hermaphrodite.

Lastly,  many  things  are  present  before  they  appear,  and
some  are  begun  among  the  very  first  which  are  completed  among
the  very  last,  such  as  the  eyes,  the  organs  of  generation,  and
the  beak.

Several  doubts  and  difficulties  have  thence  arisen  as  to  the
principality  and  relative  dignity  of  the  several  members,  in
which  they  who  are  fond  of  such  things  have  displayed  their


430


ON  GENERATION.


ingenuity.  Among  the  number  : whether  the  heart  gives  life
and  virtue  to  the  blood ; or^  rather^  the  blood  to  the  heart.
Whether  the  blood  he  extant  for  the  sake  of  the  body  as  mat-
ter, nourishment,  and  instrument;  or,  on  the  contraiy,  the
body  and  its  parts  are  the  cause  of  the  blood,  and  constituted
for  the  sake  of  the  vital  principle  which  especially  inheres  in
it.  In  like  manner,  whether  the  auricles  or  the  ventricles  of
the  heart  are  the  chief,  the  auricles  being  the  first  to  live  and
pulsate,  the  last  to  die.  Further,  whether  the  left  ventricle,
which  in  man  is  of  greater  length,  and  is  also  surrounded  with
thicker  and  more  fleshy  walls,  and  is  regarded  as  the  source  of
the  spirits,  he  hotter,  more  spirituous,  excitable,  and  excellent,
than  the  right,  which  contains  a larger  quantity  of  blood,  and
is  the  last  to  become  unstrung  by  death  ; in  which  the  blood  of
the  dying  accumulates,  congeals,  and  is  deprived  of  life  and
spirit;  to  which,  moreover,  as  to  a fountain  head,  the  first  um-
bilical veins  bring  their  blood,  and  from  which  they  themselves
derive  their  origin.

So  mrrch  appears  from  careful  observation  of  the  order  ob-
served in  the  production  of  the  parts,  and  certain  other  poirrts
that  follow  as  deductions  from  these,  and  do  irot  a little  mili-
tate against  the  commonly  received  physiological  doctrines,
viz.  : since  it  is  manifest  that  sensation  and  motion  exist  be-
fore the  brain,  all  sensation  and  motiorr  do  not  proceed  from
the  brairr ; from  our  history  it  is  clearly  ascertained  that  sense
and  movement  inhere  in  the  very  first  drop  of  blood  produced
in  the  egg,  before  there  is  a vestige  of  the  body.  The  fir-st
scaffolding  or  rudiment  of  the  body,  too,  which  we  have  said
is  merely  mucilaginous,  before  any  of  the  extremities  are  visi-
ble, and  when  the  brain  is  nothing  more  than  a limpid  fluid,
if  lightly  pricked,  will  move  obscurely,  ^vill  contract  and  t'wist
itself  like  a worm  or  catei’pillar,  so  that  it  is  veiy  evidently
possessed  of  sensation.

There  are  yet  other  arguments  deduced  from  sense  and  mo-
tion whence  we  should  infer  that  the  brain  was  not  so  much
the  first  principle  of  the  body,  in  the  way  the  medical  winters
maintain,  as  the  heart,  agreeably  to  Ai'istotle’s  view.

The  motions  and  actions  which  physicians  style  natural,  be-
cause they  take  place  involuntarily,  and  we  can  neither  prevent
nor  moderate,  accelerate  nor  retard  them  by  our  will,  and  they


ON  GENERATION.


431


therefore  do  not  depend  on  the  brain,  still  do  not  occur  en-
tirely without  causing  sensation,  hut  proclaim  themselves  sub-
ject to  sense,  inasmuch  as  they  are  aroused,  called  forth,  and
changed  thereby.  When  the  heart,  for  example,  is  affected
Avith  palpitation,  tremor,  lipothymia,  syncope,  and  with  great
variety  in  the  extent,  rapidity,  and  order  or  rhythm  of  its  pul-
sations, we  do  not  hesitate  to  ascribe  these  to  morbific  causes  im-
plicating, deranging  its  sensation.  For  whatever  by  its  divers
movements  strives  against  irritations  and  troubles  must  neces-
sarily he  endowed  with  sensation.

The  stomach  and  bowels,  disturbed  by  the  presence  of  viti-
ated humours,  are  affected  with  ructus,  flatus,  vomiting,  and
diari’hoea ; and  as  it  lies  not  in  our  power  either  to  provoke  or
to  restrain  their  motions,  neither  are  we  aware  of  any  sensation
dependent  on  the  brain  which  should  arouse  the  parts  in  ques-
tion to  motions  of  the  kind.

It  is  truly  wonderful  to  observe  the  effect  of  taking  a solu-
tion of  antimony,  which  Ave  neither  distinguish  by  the  taste,
nor  find  any  inconvenience  from,  whether  in  the  swallowing  or
the  rejection.  Nevertheless  there  is  a certain  discriminating
sense  in  the  stomach  which  distinguishes  what  is  hurtful  from
what  is  useful,  and  by  which  vomiting  is  induced.

Nay,  the  flesh  itself  readily  distinguishes  a poisoned  wound
from  one  that  is  not  poisoned,  and  on  receipt  of  the  former
contracts  and  condenses  itself,  whereby  phlegmonous  tumours
are  produced,  as  we  find  in  connexion  with  the  stings  of  bees,
gnats,  and  spiders.

I have  myself,  for  experiment’s  sake,  occasionally  pricked
my  hand  Avith  a clean  needle,  and  then  haAung  rubbed  the
same  needle  on  the  teeth  of  a spider,  I have  pricked  my  hand
in  another  place.  I could  not  by  my  simple  sensation  per-
ceive any  difference  between  the  two  punctures ; nevertheless
there  was  a capacity  in  the  skin  to  distinguish  the  one  from
the  other ; for  the  part  pricked  with  the  envenomed  needle
immediately  contracted  into  a tubercle,  and  by  and  by  became
red,  and  hot,  and  inflamed,  as  if  it  collected  and  girded  itself
up  for  a contest  with  the  poison  for  its  overthrow.

The  sensations  which  accompany  affections  of  the  uterus,
such  as  twisting,  decubitus,  prolapse,  ascent,  suffocation,  &c.,
and  other  inconveniences  and  irritations,  do  not  depend  on


432


ON  GENERATION.


the  brain  or  on  common  sensation ; yet  neither  are  these  to
he  presumed  as  happening  without  all  consciousness.  For
that  which  is  wholly  without  sense  is  not  seen  to  be  irri-
tated by  any  means,  neither  can  it  be  stimulated  to  motion  or
action  of  any  kind.  Nor  have  we  any  other  means  of  distin-
guishing between  an  animate  and  sentient  thing  and  one  that
is  dead  and  senseless  than  the  motion  excited  by  some  other
irritating  cause  or  thing,  which  as  it  incessantly  follows,  so
does  it  also  argue  sensation.

But  we  shall  have  an  oj)portunity  of  speaking  farther  of  this
matter  when  we  discuss  the  actions  and  uses  of  the  brain.
Respect  for  our  predecessors  and  for  antiquity  at  large  inclines
us  to  defend  their  conclusions  to  the  extent  that  love  of  truth
will  allow.  Nor  do  I think  it  becoming  in  us  to  neglect  and
make  little  of  their  labours  and  conclusions  who  bore  the
torch  that  has  lighted  us  to  the  shrine  of  philosophy.  I am,
therefore,  of  opinion  that  we  should  conclude  in  this  way : we
have  consciousness  in  ourselves  of  five  principal  senses,  by
which  we  judge  of  external  objects;  but  we  do  not  feel  with
the  same  sense  by  means  of  which  we  are  conscious  that  we
feel — ^seeing  with  our  eyes,  we  still  do  not  know  by  them  that
we  see,  but  by  another  sense  or  sensitive  organ,  namely,  the
internal  common  sensation  or  common  sensorium,  by  which
we  examine  those  things  that  reach  us  thi’ough  each  of  the
external  sensoria,  and  distinguish  that  which  is  white  fi’om
that  which  is  sweet  or  hard.  Now  this  sensorium  commune
to  which  the  species  or  impressions  of  all  the  external  insti’u-
ments  of  sensation  are  referred,  is  obviously  the  brain,  which
along  with  its  neiwes  and  the  external  organs  annexed,  is  held
and  esteemed  to  be  the  adequate  instrument  of  sensation.
And  this  brain  is  like  a sensitive  root  to  which  a variety  of
fibres  tend,  one  of  which  sees,  another  hears,  a thii’d  touches,
and  a fomih  and  a fifth  smell  and  taste.

But  as  there  are  some  actions  and  motions  the  government
or  direction  of  which  is  not  dependent  on  the  brain,  and  which
are  therefore  called  natural,  so  also  is  it  to  be  concluded  that
there  is  a certain  sense  or  form  of  touch  which  is  not  referred
to  the  common  sensorium,  nor  in  any  way  communicated
to  the  brain,  so  that  we  do  not  perceive  by  this  sense  that  we
feel ; but,  as  happeirs  to  those  who  are  deranged  in  mind,  or


ON  GENERATION.


433


wlio  are  agitated  to  sucli  a degree  by  violent  passion  that  they
feel  no  pain^  and  pay  no  regard  to  the  impressions  made  on
their  senses,  so  must  we  believe  it  to  be  with  this  sense,  which
we  therefore  distinguish  from  the  proper  animal  sense.  Now
such  a sense  do  we  observe  in  zoophytes  or  plant-animals,  in
sponges,  the  sensitive  plant,  &c.

Wherefore,  as  many  animals  are  endowed  with  both  sense
and  motion  without  having  a common  sensorium  or  brain,  such
as  earthworms,  caterpillars  of  various  kinds,  chrysalides,  &c.,
so  also  do  certain  natural  actions  take  place  in  the  embryo
and  even  in  ourselves  without  the  agency  of  the  brain,  and  a
certain  sensation  takes  place  without  consciousness.  And  as
medical  writers  teach  that  the  natural  differ  from  the  animal
actions,  so  by  parity  of  reason  does  the  natm’al  sense  of  touch
differ  from  the  animal  sense  of  touch, — it  constitutes,  in  a word,
another  species  of  touch ; and  whilst  the  one  is  communicated
to  the  common  sensorium,  the  other  is  not  so  communicated.

Further,  it  is  one  thing  for  a muscle  to  be  contracted  and
moved,  and  another  for  it  by  regidated  contractions  and  relax-
ations to  perform  any  movement,  snch  as  progression  or  prehen-
sion. The  muscles  or  organs  of  motion,  when  affected  with
spasms  or  convulsions  from  an  irritating  cause,  are  assuredly
moved  no  otherwise  than  the  decapitated  cock  or  hen,  which  is
agitated  with  many  convulsive  movements  of  its  legs  and  wings,
but  all  confused  and  without  a purpose,  because  the  controlling
power  of  the  brain  has  been  taken  away: — common  sensation
has  disappeared,  under  the  controlling  influence  of  which  these
motions  were  formerly  coordinated  to  progression  by  walking
or  to  flight.

We  therefore  conceive  the  fact  to  be  that  all  the  natu-
ral motions  proceed  from  the  power  of  the  heart,  and  depend
on  it ; the  spontaneous  motions,  however,  and  those  that  com-
plete any  motion  which  physicians  entitle  an  animal  motion,
cannot  be  performed  without  the  controlling  influence  of  the
brain  and  common  sensation.  For  inasmuch  as  by  this  com-
mon sensation  we  are  conscious  of  our  perceptions,  so  also  are
we  conscious  that  we  move,  and  this  whether  the  motion  be
regular  or  otherwise.

We  have  an  excellent  example  of  both  of  these  kinds  of
motion  in  respiration.  For  the  lungs,  like  the  heart,  are  con-

28


434


ON  GENERATION.


tinually  carried  upwards  and  downwards  by  a natural  move-
ment, and  are  excited  by  any  u'ritation  to  coughing  and  more
frequent  action ; but  they  cannot  form  and  regulate  the  voice,
nor  can  singing  be  executed,  without  the  assistance,  and  in
some  sort  the  command,  of  the  sensorium  commune.

But  these  matters  will  be  more  fully  handled  when  we  come
to  speak  of  the  actions  and  uses  of  the  brain,  and  to  consider
the  vital  principle  or  soul.  So  much  we  have  thought  fit  to
say  by  the  way,  that  we  might  show  the  respect  in  which  we
hold  our  illustrious  teachers,  and  our  anxiety  to  cany  them
along  with  us  in  our  labom’s.


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTV-EIGHTH.

Of  the  nutrition  of  the  chick  in  ovo.

That  the  authority  of  the  ancients  is  not  to  be  rashly  thrown
off"  appears  in  this  : it  was  formerly  cunent  doctrine,  though
m.any  at  the  present  day,  Fabriciusi  among  the  number,  reject
it  as  a delusion  and  a foolish  idea,  that  the  embryo  sucked  in
its  mother’s  womb.  This  idea  nevertheless  had  Democritus,
Epicurus,  and  Hippocrates  for  its  supporters ; and  the  father
of  physic  contends  for  it  on  two  principal  grounds:  “Unless
the  foetus  sucked,”  he  says,^  “how  should  excrements  he
formed  ? or  how  should  it  know  how  to  suck  immediately  after
it  is  born  ?”

Now,  whilst  in  other  instances  it  is  customaiy  to  swear  by
the  bare  statement  of  this  ancient  and  most  distinguished
writer,  his  ipse  dixit  (awrdc  £^>?)  sufficing,  because  he  here
makes  an  assertion  contrary  to  the  commonly  received
opinion,  Eabricius  not  only  denies  the  statement,  but  spiums
the  arguments  in  support  of  his  conclusion.  We,  however,
leave  it  to  the  judgment  of  skilful  anatomists  and  learned
physicians  to  say  whether  our  observations  on  the  generation  of
animals  do  not  proclaim  this  opinion  of  Hippocrates  to  be  not
merely  probable,  but  even  necessary.

All  admit  that  the  foetus  in  utero  swims  in  the  midst  of  an
' De  Form.  Foetu,  pp.  19  et  134.


- Lib.  de  Corn,  et  de  Xat.  Pueri.


ON  GENERATION.


435


abundance  of  a watery  fluids  which  in  our  history  of  the  egg
we  have  spoken  of  as  the  colliquament,  this  fluid  modern
authorities  regard  as  the  sweat  and  excrement  of  the  foetus,  and
ascribe  as  its  principal  use  the  protection  of  the  uterus  against
injmy  from  the  foetus  dmdng  any  violent  motion  of  the  mother
in  running  or  leaping;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  defence  of
the  foetus  from  injury  through  contact  with  neighbouring
bones,  or  an  external  cause,  particularly  during  the  period
when  its  limbs  are  stfll  dehcate  and  weak.

Fabriciusi  ascribes  additional  uses  to  this  fluid,  viz.  ^^that  it
may  moisten  and  lubricate  all  the  parts  around,  and  dispose
the  neck  of  the  uterus  to  facile  and  speedy  dilatation  to  the
utmost  extent ; and  all  this  is  not  less  assisted  by  that  thick,
white,  exerementitious  matter  of  the  third  digestion,  neglected
by  the  ancients,  which  is  unctuous  and  oily,  and  farther  pre-
vents the  sweat,  which  may  occasionally  be  seereted  sharp
and  «alt  in  quality,  from  excoriating  the  tender  body  of  the
foetus.”

I readily  acknowledge  all  the  uses  indicated,  viz.  that  the
tender  foetus  may  be  secure  against  all  sudden  and  violent
movements  of  the  mother,  that  he  may  ride  safe  in  the  “ bat’s
wings,”  as  they  are  called,  and,  surrounded  with  an  abundance
of  water,  that  he  may  escape  coming  into  contact  with  his
mother’s  sides,  being  restrained  by  the  retinacular  fluid  on
either  hand : this  circumambient  fluid  must  certainly  pro-
tect the  body  which  floats  in  its  middle  from  all  external  in-
jury. But,  as  in  many  other  instances,  my  observations  com-
pel me  here  to  be  of  a different  opinion  from  Fabricius.  In
the  first  place,  I am  by  no  means  satisfied  that  this  fluid  is  the
sweat  of  the  foetus.  And  then  I do  not  believe  that  the  fluid
serves  those  important  pui’poses  in  parturition  which  he  indi-
cates ; and  much  less  that  it  is  ever  so  sharp  and  sahne  that
an  unctuous  covering  was  requisite  to  protect  the  foetus
from  its  erosive  effects,  particularly  in  those  cases  where  there
is  already  a thick  covering  of  wool,  or  hair,  or  feathers.  The
fluid,  in  fact,  has  a pleasant  taste,  like  that  of  watery  milk,  so
that  almost  all  viviparous  animals  lap  it  up,  and  cleanse  their
new-born  progeny  by  hcking  them  with  their  tongues,  greedily


Op.  cit.  p.  137.


436


ON  GENERATION.


swallowing  tlie  fluids  tliougli  none  of  them  was  ever  seen  to
touch  any  of  the  excrements  of  their  young.

Fahricius  spoke  of  this  fluid  as  saline  and  acrimonious,  be-
cause he  believed  it  to  be  sweat.  But  what  inconvenience,  I
beseech  you,  were  sweat  to  the  chick,  akeady  covered  with  its
feathers  ? — if  indeed  any  one  ever  saw  a chicken  sweat,  bior
do  I think  he  could  have  said  that  the  use  of  this  fluid  in
the  egg  was,  by  its  moistening  and  lubrifying  qualities,  to
facilitate  the  birth  of  the  chick ; for  the  drier  and  older  the
shell  of  the  egg,  the  more  friable  and  fragile  it  becomes.
Finally,  were  it  the  sweat  of  the  embryo,  or  foetus,  it  ought  to
be  most  abundant  nearest  the  period  of  parturition ; the  larger
the  foetus  and  the  more  food  it  consumes,  the  more  sweat  must
it  necessarily  secrete.  But  shorily  before  the  exclusion  of  the
chick  from  the  egg,  namely,  about  the  nineteenth  or  twen-
tieth day,  there  is  none  of  the  fluid  to  be  seen,  because  as
the  chick  gi’ows  it  is  gradrrally  taken  up ; so  that  if  the  thing
be  rightly  viewed,  the  fluid  in  question  ought  rather  to  he
regarded  as  nutriment  than  as  excrement,  particularly  as  he  has
said  that  the  chick  in  the  egg  breathes,  and  lets  its  chirping
be  heard,  which  it  certainly  would  not  do  were  it  suri’ounded
with  water.

But  all  experienced  obstetricians  know  that  the  wateiy
fluid  of  the  secundines  is  of  no  great  use  either  in  lubri-
cating the  parts  or  in  facilitating  the  progi’ess  of  partu-
rition in  the  way  Fabricius  would  have  it.  For  the  parts  sixr-
rounding  the  vulva  are  relaxed  of  themselves,  and  by  a kind  of
proper  maturity  at  the  full  time,  without  any  assistance  from
the  uterine  waters ; and  particularly  those  that  offer  the
greatest  obstacles  to  the  advance  of  the  foetus,  namely,  the  ossa
pubis  and  the  os  coccygis,  to  which  the  attention  of  the  mid-
wife is  especially  du’ected  in  assisting  the  woman  in  laboiu’.
For  midudves  are  much  less  studious  to  anoint  the  soft  pai’ts
with  any  emollient  salves,  lest  they  tear’,  than  cai’eful  to  pull
the  os  coccygis  outwards,  a business  in  which,  if  the  fingers
do  not  sufiice,  they  have  recoiu’se  to  the  uterine  speculum,  ap-
plied by  the  hand  of  the  experienced  surgeon,  an  instrument
having  three  sides  or  branches,  one  of  which  bearing  on  the  os
coccygis,  the  other  two  on  the  ossa  pubis,  the  business  of  disten-
sion is  effected  by  force.  For  the  head  of  the  child  that  is  about


ON  GENERATION.


437


to  be  born,  when  it  makes  tbe  turn,  and  is  forced  down-
wards, relaxes  and  opens  the  os  uteri ; but  coming  down
lie  will  stick  fast,  and  scarcely  be  brought  forth  if  he  chance
to  abut  upon  the  point  of  the  os  coccygis,  and  immediately  the
case  is  one  not  without  danger  both  to  the  child  and  mother.  But
nature’s  intention  was  obidously  to  relax  and  soften  all  the  parts
concerned;  and  the  attendant  knows  that  when  the  uterine
orifice  is  discovered  in  a soft  and  lax  condition,  by  the  finger
introduced,  it  is  an  infallible  sign  that  the  delivery  is  at  hand
even  though  the  waters  have  not  broken.  Indeed — and  I do
not  speak  without  experience — if  anything  remains  in  the
uterus  for  expulsion,  either  after  delivery  or  at  any  other  time,
and  the  uterus  make  efforts  to  get  rid  of  it,  the  orifice  both
descends  lower  and  is  found  soft  and  relaxed.  If  the  uterine
orifice  recedes,  and  is  found  somewhat  hard  after  delivery,  it  is
a sign  of  the  woman’s  restoration  to  health.

Taught  by  like  experience,  I assert  that  the  ossa  pubis  fre-
quently become  loosened  during  labour,  their  cartilaginous
connexion  being  softened,  and  the  whole  hypogastric  region
enlarged  in  the  most  miraculous  manner,  not,  however,  by  any
pouring  out  of  watery  fluids,  but  spontaneously,  as  ripe  fruit
gapes  that  the  included  seed  may  find  an  exit.  The  degree  in
Avhich  the  coccyx  may  impede  delivery,  however,  is  apparent
among  quadrupeds  having  tails,  which  can  neither  bring  forth,
nor  even  discharge  the  excrement  from  their  bowels,  unless  the
tail  be  raised ; if  you  but  depress  the  tail  with  your  hand,  you
prevent  the  exit  of  the  dung.

Moreover,  the  most  natural  labour  of  all  is  held  to  be  that
in  which  the  foetus  and  afterbirth,  the  waters  inclusive,  or  the
OATim,  is  expelled  entire.  Now  if  the  membranes  have  not
given  way,  and  the  waters  have  not  escaped,  it  comes  to  pass
that  the  surrounding  parts  are  more  than  usually  distended
and  dilated  by  the  labour  pains,  in  consequence,  to  wit,  of  the
entire  and  tense  state  of  the  membranes,  by  which  it  happens
that  the  foetus  is  produced  more  speedily,  and  with  a less
amount  of  effort,  although  with  more  suffering  to  the  mother.
In  cases  of  this  kind  we  have  known  women  avIio  Avere  sufferinor
much  in  their  travail  in  consequence  of  the  too  great  disten-
sion, immensely  relieved  by  the  rupture  of  the  membranes
and  the  sudden  escape  of  the  waters,  the  laceration  Ijeing


438


ON  GENERATION.


effected  eitlier  with  the  nails  of  the  midwife  or  the  use  of  a
pair  of  forceps.

Experienced  midwives  are  farther  aware  that  if  the  waters
come  away  before  the  orifice  of  the  uterus  is  duly  dilated,  the
woman  is  apt  to  have  a lingering  time  and  a more  difficult  de-
livery, contrary  to  Eabricius’s  notion  of  the  waters  having  such
paramount  infiuence  in  softening  and  lubricating  the  parts.

Aloreover,  that  the  fiuid  which  we  have  called  colliquament
is  not  the  sweat  of  the  foetus  is  made  obvious,  both  from  the
history  of  the  egg  and  of  the  uterogestation  of  other  animals  :
it  is  present  before  the  foetus  is  formed  in  any  way,  before
there  is  a trace  of  it  to  be  seen ; and  whilst  it  is  still  extremely
small  and  entirely  gelatinous,  the  quantity  of  water  jjresent  is
very  great,  so  that  it  seems  plainly  impossible  that  so  small  a
body  should  produce  such  a mass  of  excrementitious  fluid.

It  happens  besides  that  the  ramifications  of  the  umbilical
veins  are  distributed  over  and  terminate  upon  the  membrane
which  mcloses  this  fluid,  precisely  as  on  the  membranes  of
the  albumen  and  yelk  of  the  egg,  a circumstance  from  which,
and  the  thing  being  viewed  as  it  is  in  fact,  it  appears  to  be
clearly  proclaimed  that  tliis  fluid  is  rather  to  be  regarded  as
food  than  as  excrement.

To  me,  therefore,  the  opinion  of  Hippocrates  appears  more
probable  than  that  of  Fabricius  and  other  anatomists,  who  look
on  this  liquid  as  sweat,  and  beheve  that  it  must  prove  detri-
mental to  the  foetus.  I am  disposed,  I say,  to  beheve  that  the
fluid  with  which  the  foetus  is  surrounded  may  serve  it  for  nou-
rishment ; that  the  thinner  and  purer  portions  of  it,  taken  up
by  the  umbilical  veins,  may  serve  for  the  constitution  and  in-
crease of  the  first  formed  parts  of  the  embiyo ; and  that  from
the  remainder  or  the  milk,  taken  into  the  mouth  by  suction,
passed  on  to  the  stomach  by  the  act  of  deglutition,  and  there
digested  or  chylified,  and  finally  absorbed  by  the  mesenteric
veins,  the  new  being  continues  to  grow  and  be  noui’ished.  I
am  the  more  disposed  to  take  this  view  from  certain  not  im-
pertinent arguments,  which  I shall  proceed  to  state.

As  soon  as  the  embryo  acquii’es  a certain  degree  of  perfec-
tion it  moves  its  extremities,  and  begins  to  prove  the  actions
of  the  organs  destined  to  locomotion.  Now  I have  seen  the
chick  in  ovo,  siirrounded  with  liquid,  opening  its  mouth,  and


ON  GENERATION.


439


any  fluid  that  tlius  gained  access  to  the  fauces  must  needs
have  been  swallowed ; for  it  is  certain  that  whatever  passes  the
root  of  the  tongue  and  gains  the  top  of  the  cesophagus^  cannot  be
rejected  by  any  animal  with  a less  effort  than  that  of  vomiting.
This  fact  is  acted  upon  every  day  by  veterinary  practitioners,
who  in  administering  medicated  drinks  and  pills  or  boluses  to
cattle,  seize  the  tongue,  and  having  put  the  article  upon  its
root  beyond  the  protuberant  part,  the  animal  cannot  do  other-
wise than  swallow  it.  And  if  we  make  the  experiment  our-
selves, v/e  find  that  a pill  carried  between  the  finger  and  thumb
as  far  as  the  root  of  the  tongue  and  there  dropped,  immedi-
ately the  action  of  deglutition  is  excited,  and  unless  vomiting
be  produced  the  pill  is  taken  down.  If  the  embryo  swimming
in  the  fluid  in  question,  then,  do  but  open  his  mouth,  it  is  ab-
solutely necessary  that  the  fluid  must  reach  the  fauces ; and  if
the  creature  then  move  other  muscles,  wherefore  should  we
not  beheve  that  he  also  uses  his  throat  in  its  appropriate  ofiice
and  swallows  the  fluid?

It  is  further  quite  certain  that  in  the  crop  of  the  chick, —
and  the  same  thing  occurs  in  reference  to  the  stomach  of  other
embryos — there  is  a certain  matter  having  a colour,  taste,  and
consistence,  very  similar  to  that  of  the  liquid  mentioned,  and
some  of  it  in  the  stomach  digested  to  a certain  extent,  like  co-
agulated milk  ] and  further,  whilst  we  discover  a kind  of  chyle
in  the  upper  intestines,  we  find  the  lower  bowels  full  of  sterco-
raceous  excrements.  In  like  manner  we  perceive  the  large
intestines  of  the  foetuses  of  viviparous  animals  to  contain  excre-
ments of  the  same  description  as  those  that  distend  them  when
they  feed  on  milk.  In  the  sheep  and  other  bisulcated  animals
we  even  find  scybala.

Towards  the  seventeenth  day  we  find  dung  very  obviously  near
the  anus  of  the  chick;  and  shortly  before  the  extrusion  I have  seen
the  same  matter  expelled  and  contained  within  the  membranes.
Volcher  Goiter,  a eareful  and  experienced  dissector,  states  that
he  has  observed  the  same  thing.

Wherefore  should  we  doubt,  then,  that  the  foetus  in  utero
sucks,  and  that  chylopoiesis  goes  on  in  its  stomach,  when  we
find  present  both  the  principles  and  the  recrementitious  pro-
ducts of  digestion  ?

And  then,  when  we  find  the  bladder  both  of  the  bile  and  the


440


ON  GENERATION.


urine  full  of  those  excrements  of  tlie  second  digestion,  wherefore
should  we  not  conclude  that  the  first  digestion,  or  chylopoiesis,
has  preceded  ?

The  embryo,  therefore  seeks  for  and  sucks  in  nomdshment
by  the  month ; and  you  will  readily  beheve  that  he  does  so  if
you  rip  him  from  his  mother’s  womb  and  instantly  put  a finger
in  his  mouth ; which  Hippocrates  thinks  he  would  not  seize
had  he  not  preHously  sncked  Avhilst  in  the  womb.  For  we  are
accustomed  to  see  young  infants  tiying  various  motions,  making
experiments,  as  it  were,  approaching  everything,  moHng  their
limbs,  attempting  to  Avalk,  and  uttering  sotmds,  acts  all  of
Avhich  when  tanght  by  repeated  experience,  they  afterwards
come  to  execute  Avith  readiness  and  precision.  But  the  foetus
so  soon  as  it  is  horn,  aye,  before  it  is  born,  will  suck ; doubt-
less as  it  had  done  in  the  uterus  long  before.  For  I have  found
by  experience  that  the  child  delayed  in  the  birth,  and  before  it
has  cried  or  breathed,  will  seize  and  suck  a finger  put  into  its
mouth.  A new-born  infant,  indeed,  is  more  expert  at  sucking
than  an  adult,  or  than  he  is  himself  if  he  have  hut  lost  the
habit  for  a feAv  days.  For  the  infant  does  not  suck  by  squeez-
ing the  nipple  Avith  his  lips  as  Ave  should,  and  by  suction  in
the  common  acceptation ; he  rather  seems  as  if  he  wordd  swallow
the  nipple,  drawing  it  aaIioIH  into  his  throat,  and  AAnth  the  aid
of  his  tongue  and  palate,  and  chewing,  as  it  were,  he  milks  his
mother  Avith  more  art  and  dexterity  than  an  adult  could  prac-
tise. He  therefore  appears  to  have  leaimed  that  by  long  cus-
tom, and  before  he  saw  the  light,  Avhich  we  kuoAv  full  well  he
unlearns  by  a very  brief  discontinuance.

These  and  other  observations  of  the  same  kind  make  it  ex-
tremely probable  that  the  chick  in  ovo  is  nourished  in  a two-
fold manner,  namely,  by  the  umbilical  and  by  the  mesenteric
veins.  By  the  former  he  imbibes  a nourishment  that  is  Avell
nigh  perfectly  prepared,  whence  the  first-formed  parts  are  en-
gendered and  augmented ; by  the  latter  he  receives  chyle  for
the  structiu’e  and  growth  of  the  other  remaining  parts.

But  the  reason  is  perhaps  ohscui’e  why  the  same  agent  should
perform  the  Avork  of  nutrition  by  means  of  the  same  matter  in
a variety  of  Avays,  since  nature  does  nothing  in  vain.  AVe  shall
therefore  endeavour  to  explain  this.

'What  is  taken  iqi  by  the  umbilical  veins  is  the  pui'er  and


ON  GENERATION.


441


more  limpid  part ; and  the  rest  of  the  colhquament  in  which
the  foetus  swims  is  like  crude  milk,  or  milk  deprived  of  its  purer
portion.  The  purer  part  does  not  require  any  of  that  ulterior
concoction  of  which  the  remainder  stands  in  need;  and  to  un-
dergo which  it  is  taken  into  the  stomach,  where  it  is  trans-
muted into  chyle.  Similar  to  this  is  the  crude  and  watery  milk
which  is  found  in  the  breasts  immediately  after  parturition.
The  liquefied  albumen  of  the  egg,  and  the  crude  or  watery  milk
of  the  mammce  seem  to  have  in  all  respects  the  same  colour,
taste,  and  consistence.  For  the  first  flow  of  milk  is  serous  and
watery,  and  women  are  wont  to  express  water  from  their  breasts
before  the  milk  comes  white,  concocted,  and  perfect.

Just  as  the  colliquament  found  in  the  crop  of  the  chick  is  a
kind  of  crude  milk, whilst  the  same  fluid  discoveredin  the  stomach
is  concocted,  white,  and  cm’dled;  so  in  viviparous  animals,  before
the  milk  is  concocted  in  the  mammae,  a kind  of  dew  and  colli-
quament makes  its  appearance  there,  and  the  colliquament  only
puts  on  the  semblance  of  milk  after  it  has  undergone  concoc-
tion in  the  stomach.  And  so  it  happens,  in  Aristotle’s  opinion,
that  the  first  and  most  essential  parts  are  formed  out  of  the
purer  and  thinner  portion  of  the  colliquament,  and  are  increased
by  the  remaining  more  indifferent  portion  after  it  has  under-
gone elaboration  by  a new  digestion  in  the  stomach.  In  the
same  way  are  the  other  less  important  parts  developed  and
maintained.  Thus  has  nature,  like  a fond  and  indulgent
mother,  been  sedulous  rather  to  provide  superfluity,  than  to
suffer  any  scarcity  of  things  necessary.  Or  it  might  be  said  to
be  in  conformity  with  reason  to  suppose  that  the  foetus,  now
grown  more  perfect,  should  also  be  nourished  in  a more  per-
fect manner,  by  the  mouth,  to  Aidt,  and  by  a more  perfect  kind
of  aliment,  rendered  purer  by  having  undergone  the  two  ante-
cedent digestions  and  been  thereby  freed  from  the  two  kinds  of
excrementitious  matter.  In  the  beginning  and  early  stages,
nourished  by  the  ramifications  of  the  umbilical  veins,  it  leads
in  some  sort  the  life  of  a plant ; the  body  is  then  crude,  white,
and  imperfect ; like  plants,  too,  it  is  motionless  and  impas-
sive. As  soon,  however,  as  it  begins  by  the  mouth  to  par-
take of  the  same  ahment  farther  elaborated,  as  if  feeling  a
diviner  influence,  boasting  a higher  grade  of  vegetative  exist-
ence, the  gelatinous  mass  of  the  body  is  changed  into  flesh,  the


442


ON  GENERATION.


organs  of  motion  are  distinguisRecl,  the  spirits  are  perfected,
and  motion  begins ; nor  is  it  any  longer  nourished  like  a vege-
table, hy  the  roots,  hut,  living  the  life  of  an  animal,  it  is  sup-
ported by  the  mouth.


EXERCISE  THE  FIFTY-NINTH.

Of  the  uses  of  the  entire  egg.

Having  now  gone  through  the  several  changes  and  processes
which  must  take  place  in  the  hen’s  egg,  in  order  that  it  may
produce  a chick,  Fabricius  proceeds  to  consider  the  uses  of  the
egg  at  large,  and  of  its  various  parts;  nor  does  he  restrict  him-
self to  the  hen’s  egg,  but  condescends  upon  eggs  in  general.
Among  other  things  he  inquires  : wherefore  some  eggs  are
heterogeneous  and  composed  of  different  elements ; and  others
are  homogeneous  and  similar  ? such  as  the  eggs  of  insects,  and
those  creatures  that  are  engendered  from  the  whole  egg,  viz.
by  metamorphosis,  and  are  not  engendered  from  one  part  of  the
egg,  and  nourished  by  another  part.

I have  no  purpose  myself  of  entering  on  a general  consider-
ation of  eggs  of  all  kinds  and  descriptions ; I have  not  yet
given  the  history  of  all,  bnt  only  of  the  hen’s  egg;  so  that  I
shall  here  limit  myself  to  a sni'vey  of  the  uses  of  the  common
hen’s  egg,  keeping  in  view  the  end  of  all  its  actions,  which  is
nothing  less  than  the  production  and  completion  of  a new
being,  as  Fabricius  has  well  and  truly  said.^

Among  the  points  haidng  reference  to  the  whole  egg,  Fabii-
cius  speaks  of  the  form,  dimensions,  and  number  of  eggs.  “ The
figure  of  the  egg  is  round,”  he  says,^  “ in  order  that  the  mass  of
the  chick  may  be  stowed  in  the  smallest  possible  space ; for  the
same  cause  that  God  made  the  world  round,  namely,  that  it
might  embrace  all  things;  and  it  is  from  this,  as  Galen  con-
ceives, that  this  figure  is  always  felt  to  be  most  agreeable  and
consonant  to  nature.  Further,  as  it  has  no  angles  exposed
to  injury  from  without,  it  is,  therefore,  the  safest  figure,  and  the


Loc.  cit.  J1.  50.


- Lib.  X,  de  usu  part.


ON  GENERATION.


443


one  best  adapted  to  effeet  tbe  exelusion  of  the  ehiek.”  It  had  been
well  after  such  a preface  to  have  assigned  satisfactory  causes
why  hen’s  eggs  are  not  spherical,  like  the  eggs  of  fishes,  worms
and  frogs,  but  oblong  and  pointed ; to  have  shown  what  there
is  in  them  which  hinders  the  presumed  perfection  of  figure.  Now
to  me  the  form  of  the  egg  has  never  appeared  to  have  aught  to
do  with  the  engenderment  of  the  chick,  but  to  be  a mere  acci-
dent ; and  to  this  conclusion  I come  the  rather  when  I see
such  diversities  in  the  shape  of  the  eggs  of  diflPerent  hens.  They
vary,  in  short,  in  conformity  with  the  variety  that  obtains
among  the  uteri  of  different  fowls,  in  which,  as  in  moulds,
they  receive  their  form.

Aristotle,^  indeed,  says  that  the  longer-shaped  eggs  produce
females,  the  rounder  males.  I have  not  made  any  experiments
upon  this  point  myself.  But  Phny^  asserts,  in  opposition  to
Aristotle,  that  the  rounder  eggs  produce  females,  the  others
males.  Now  were  there  any  certainty  in  such  statements,
either  in  one  way  or  the  other,  some  hens  would  always  pro-
duce males,  others  always  females,  inasmuch  as  the  eggs  of  the
same  hen  are  in  many  instances  always  of  one  figure,  namely,
either  much  rounded  or  acutely  pointed.  Horace ^ thought
that  the  oblong  eggs,  as  being  the  more  perfect  and  better  con-
cocted, and  therefore  the  better  flavoured,  produced  males.

I willingly  pass  by  the  reasons  alleged  by  Fabricius  for  the
form  of  eggs,  as  being  all  irrelevant.

The  size  of  an  egg  appears  to  bear  a proportion  to  the  size
of  the  foetus  produced  from  it ; large  hens,  too,  certainly  lay
large  eggs.  The  crocodile,  however,  lays  eggs  the  size  of  those
of  the  goose ; nor  does  any  animal  attain  to  larger  dimensions
from  a smaller  beginning.  It  would  seem,  too,  that  the  size
of  the  egg  and  the  quantity  of  matter  it  contained  had  some
connexion  with  its  fecundity,  inasmuch  as  the  very  small  eggs
called  centenines  are  all  barren.

The  number  of  eggs  serves  the  same  end  as  abundance  of  con-
ceptions among  viviparous  animals — they  secure  the  perpetuity
of  the  species.  Nature  appears  to  have  been  particularly  care-
ful in  providing  a numerous  offspring  to  those  animals  which,
by  reason  of  their  pusillanimity  or  bodily  weakness,  hardly


Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  2.


^ Lib.  X,  cap.  52.


3 PUii.  ibid.


444


ON  GENERATION.


defend  themselves  against  the  attacks  of  others  ; she  has  coun-
terhalanced  the  shortness  of  their  own  lives  by  the  number  of
their  progeny.  “ Nature/^  says  Pliny/  “ has  made  the  timid
tribes  among  birds  more  fruitful  than  the  bold  ones.^’  All
generation  as  it  is  instituted  by  nature  for  the  sake  of  perpetu-
ating species,  so  does  it  occur  more  frequently  among  those
that  are  shorter-lived  and  more  obnoxious  to  external  injuiy
lest  their  race  should  fail.  Birds  that  are  of  sti’onger  make,
that  prey  upon  other  creatures,  and  therefore  live  more  securely
and  for  longer  terms  scarcely  lay  more  than  two  eggs  once  a
year.  Pigeons,  turtle  and  ring-doves,  that  lay  but  a couple  of
eggs,  make  up  for  the  smallness  of  the  number  by  the  fre-
quency of  laying,  for  they  will  produce  young  as  often  as  ten
times  in  the  course  of  a year.  They  therefore  engender  greatly
although  they  do  not  produce  many  at  a time.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTIETH.

Of  the  uses  of  the  yelk  and  albumen.

“ An  egg,”  says  Fabricius,^  “ properly  so  called,  is  composed
of  many  parts,  because  it  is  the  organ  of  the  eugenderer,  and
Galen  everjTidiere  insists  on  the  constitution  of  an  organ  as  im-
plying multiplicity  of  parts.”  But  this  Gew  leads  us  to  ask
whether  every  egg  must  not  he  heterogeneous,  seeing  that  every
egg  is  organic  ? And  every  egg,  indeed,  even  that  of  the  fish
and  insect,  appears  to  he  composed  of  several  diflferent  parts, —
membranes,  coverings,  defences ; nor  is  the  included  matter  by
any  means  without  diversity  of  constitution  in  different  parts.

Fabricius  agrees  farther,  and  correctly,  with  Galen,  when  he
says  Some  parts  of  the  egg  are  the  chief  instruments  of  the
actions  that  take  place  in  it,  others  may  be  sG'led  necessaiy, —
without  them  no  actions  could  take  place ; others  exist  that  the
action  which  takes  place  may  be  better  performed ; others,  in
fine,  are  destined  for  the  safety  and  preservation  of  all  of  these.”
But  he  is  mistaken  when  he  says  : “ If  we  speak  of  the  prime


Lib.  X,  cap.  52.


- Op.  supra,  id.  jr.  I" .


3 Ib.  p.  4S.


ON  GENERATION.


445


action,  which  is  the  generation  of  the  chick,  the  chief  cause  of
this  is  the  semen  and  the  chalazse,  these  two  being  the  prime
cause  of  the  generation  of  the  chick,  the  semen  being  the  effi-
cient cause,  the  chalaza  the  matter  only.”  Now  according  to
the  opinion  of  Aristotle,  it  must  he  allowed  that  that  which
generates  is  included  in  the  egg ; but  Fabricius  denies  that  the
semen  of  the  cock  is  contained  in  the  egg.

Nor  does  he  wander  less  wide  of  the  mark  when  he  speaks
of  the  chalazse  as  the  matter  from  which,  by  the  influence  of
the  semen  galli,  the  chick  is  incorporated.  For  the  chick  is
not  produced  either  from  one  or  the  other,  nor  yet  from  both
of  the  chalazse,  as  we  have  shown  in  our  history.  Neither  is
the  generation  of  the  chick  effected  by  metamorphosis,  nor  by
any  new  form  assumed  and  division  effected  in  the  chalazse,
hut  by  epigenesis,  in  the  manner  already  explained.  Nor  are
the  chalazse  especially  fecundated  by  the  semen  of  the  male
bird,  but  the  cicatricula  rather,  or  the  part  which  we  have
called  the  eye  of  the  egg,  from  which,  when  it  enlarges,  the
coUiquament  is  produced,  in  and  from  which,  subsequently,
the  blood,  the  veins,  and  the  pulsating  vesicles  proceed,  after
which  the  whole  body  is  gradually  formed.  Moreover,  on  his
own  admission,  the  semen  of  the  cock  never  enters  the  uterus
of  the  hen,  and  yet  it  fecundates  not  only  the  eggs  that  are
already  formed,  but  others  that  are  yet  to  be  produced.

Fabricius  refers  the  albumen  and  vitellus  to  the  second  ac-
tion of  the  egg,  which  is  the  nutrition  and  growth  of  the
chick.  “ The  vitellus  and  albumen,”  he  says,  i “ are  in  quan-
tity commensurate  with  the  perfect  performance  of  this  action,
and  with  the  due  development  and  growth  of  the  chick.  The
shell  and  membranes  are  therefore  the  safety  of  the  whole  of
the  egg  as  well  as  the  security  of  its  action.  But  the  veins
and  arteries  which  caiTy  nourishment  are  organs  without  which
the  action  of  the  egg,  in  other  words,  the  growth  and  nutrition
of  the  chick,  would  not  take  place.”  It  is  uncertain,  how-
ever, whether  the  umbilical  vessels  of  the  embryo  or  the  veins
and  arteries  of  the  mother,  whence  the  egg  is  increased,  are
here  to  be  understood.  For  a like  reason  the  uterus  and  in-
cubation ought  to  be  referred  to  this  last  class  of  actions.


Op.  cit.  p.  48.


446


ON  GENERATION.


We  have  to  do,  then,  -with  the  two  fluids  of  the  egg,  the
albumen  and  the  vitellus ; for  these,  before  all  the  other  parts,
are  formed  for  the  use  of  the  embryo,  and  in  them  is  the
second  action  of  the  egg  especially  conspicuous.

The  egg  of  the  common  hen  is  of  two  colours  internally,
and  consists  of  two  fluids,  severally  distinct,  separated  by  mem-
branes, and  in  all  probabihty  of  different  natures,  and  there-
fore ha\dng  different  ends  to  serve,  inasmuch  as  they  are
distinguished  by  difi'erent  extensions  of  the  nmbihcal  veins,  one
of  them  proceeding  to  the  white,  another  to  the  yelk.  “ The
yelk  and  white  of  the  egg  are  of  opposite  natures,^-’  says  Aris-
totle,* “not  only  in  colour,  but  also  in  power.  For  the  yelk
is  congealed  by  cold ; the  white  is  not  congealed,  but  is  rather
liquefied ; on  the  contrary,  the  white  is  coagulated  by  heat,  the
yelk  is  not  coagulated,  but  remains  soft,  imless  it  be  overdone,
and  is  more  condensed  and  dried  by  boihng  than  by  roasting.”
The  vitellus  getting  heated  dining  incubation,  is  rendered
more  moist ; for  it  becomes  like  melted  wax  or  tallow,  whereby
it  also  takes  up  more  room.  For  as  the  embryo  grows,  the
albumen  is  gradually  taken  up  and  becomes  inspissated ; but
the  yelk,  even  when  the  foetus  has  attained  perfection,  appears
scarcely  to  have  diminished  in  size ; it  is  only  more  diffluent
and  moist,  even  when  the  foetus  begins  to  have  its  abdomen
closed  in.

Aristotle^  gives  the  following  reason  for  the  diversity :
“ Since  the  bird  cannot  perfect  her  offspring  within  herself,
she  produces  it  along  with  the  aliment  needful  to  its  growth  in
the  egg.  Viviparous  animals  again  prepai’e  the  food  (milk)  in
another  part  of  their  body,  namely,  the  breasts.  Now  natm'e
has  done  the  same  thing  in  the  egg ; but  othenvise  than  as  is
generally  presumed,  and  as  Alcmseon  Crotoniates  states  it,  for
it  is  not  the  albumen  but  the  viteUus  which  is  the  milk  of  the
egg-''

For  as  the  foetus  of  a riviparous  animal  draws  its  nourish-
ment from  the  uterus  whilst  it  is  connected  with  its  mother,
like  a plant  by  its  roots  from  the  eai’th ; but  after  budh,  and
when  it  has  escaped  from  the  womb,  sucks  milk  from  the
breast,  and  thereby  continues  to  wax  iu  size  and  strength,  the


Hist.  Aiiim.  lib.  vii,  cap.  2.


- De  Gen.  Aiiim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  2.


ON  GENERATION.


447


cliick  finds  the  analogue  of  both  kinds  of  food  in  the  egg.
So  that  whilst  in  viviparous  animals  the  uterus  exists  within
the  parent,  in  oviparous  the  parent  may  rather  be  said  to  exist
within  the  uterus  (the  egg).  For  the  egg  is  a kind  of  exposed
and  detached  uterus,  and  in  it  are  included  in  some  sort  vicarious
mammae.  The  chick  in  the  egg,  I say,  is  first  nourished  by
albumen,  hut  afterwards,  when  this  is  consumed,  by  the  yelk
or  by  milk.  The  umbilical  vascular  connexion  with  the  albu-
men, therefore,  when  this  fiuid  is  used  up,  withers  and  is  in-
terrupted when  the  abdomen  comes  to  he  closed,  and  be-
fore the  period  of  exclusion  arrives,  so  that  it  leaves  no  trace
of  its  existence  behind  it : in  viviparous  animals,  on  the  con-
trary, the  umbilical  cord  is  permanent  in  all  its  parts  up  to  the
moment  of  birth.  The  other  canal  that  extends  to  the  vitellus,
however,  is  taken  up  along  with  this  matter  into  the  abdomen,
where  being  stored,  it  serves  for  the  support  of  the  dehcate
foetus  until  its  beak  has  acquired  firmness  enough  to  seize
and  bruise  its  food,  and  its  stomach  strength  sufficient  to  com-
minute and  digest  it ; just  as  the  yoiing  of  the  viviparous  ani-
mal lives  upon  milk  from  the  mammae  of  its  mother,  until  it  is
provided  with  teeth  by  which  it  can  masticate  harder  food.  For
the  vitellus  is  as  milk  to  the  chick,  as  has  been  already  said ;
and  the  bird^s  egg,  as  it  stands  in  lieu  both  of  uterus  and
mammae,  is  furnished  with  two  fluids  of  different  colours,  the
white  and  the  yelk.

All  admit  this  distinction  of  fluids.  But  I,  as  I have  already
said,  distinguish  two  albumens  in  the  egg,  kept  separate  by  an
interposed  membrane,  the  more  external  of  which  embraces  the
other  within  it,  in  the  same  way  as  the  yelk  is  sirrrounded  by
the  albumen  in  general.  I have  also  insisted  on  the  diverse
nature  of  these  albumens ; distinguished  both  by  situation  and
their  surrounding  membranes,  they  seem  in  like  manner  calcu-
lated for  different  uses.  Both,  however,  are  there  for  ends
of  nutrition,  the  outermost,  as  that  to  which  the  branches  of
the  umhihcal  veins  are  earliest  distributed,  being  first  con-
sumed, and  then  the  inner  and  thicker  portion ; last  of  all  the
vitellus  is  attacked,  and  by  it  is  the  chick  nourished,  not  only
till  it  escapes  from  the  shell  hut  for  some  time  afterwards.

But  upon  this  point  we  shall  have  more  to  say  below,  when
we  come  to  speak  of  the  manner  in  which  the  foetuses  of


448


ON  GENERATION.


viviparous  animals  are  developed,  and  at  the  same  time  de-
monstrate that  these  all  derive  their  origin  from  eggs,  and  live
by  a twofold  albuminous  food  in  the  womb.  One  of  these  is
thinner,  and  contained  within  the  o^•um  or  conception ; the
other  is  obtained  by  the  umbilical  vessels  from  the  placenta
and  uterine  cotyledons.  The  fluid  of  the  ovum  resembles
a dilute  albumen  in  colour  and  consistence ; it  is  a sluggish,
pellucid  liquid,  in  all  respects  similar  to  that  wliich  we  have
called  the  colliquament  of  the  egg,  in  which  the  embryo  swims,
and  on  which  it  feeds  by  the  mouth.  The  fluid  which  the
foetus  obtains  from  the  uterine  placenta  by  the  aid  of  the  um-
bilical vessels  is  more  dense  and  mucaginous,  like  the  inspis-
sated albumen.  TVTience  it  clearly  appears  that  the  foetus  in
utero  is  no  more  nourished  by  its  parent’s  blood  than  is  the
suckling  afterwards,  or  the  chick  in  ovo ; but  that  it  is  nou-
rished by  an  albuminous  matter  concocted  in  the  placenta,  and
not  unhke  white  of  egg.

Nor  is  the  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Providence  less
useful  than  delightful  when  we  see  nature,  in  her  work  of
evolving  the  foetus,  fm’uishing  it  with  sustenance  adapted  to
its  vaiying  ages  and  powers,  now  more  easy,  by  and  by  more
difficult  of  digestion.  For  as  the  foetus  acquires  greater  powers
of  digesting,  so  is  it  supplied  with  food  that  is  successively
thicker  and  harder.  And  the  same  thing  may  be  observed  in
the  milk  of  animals  generally : when  the  young  creature  first
sees  the  light  the  milk  is  thinner  and  more  easy  of  concoction  ;
but  in  the  course  of  time,  and  with  increased  strength  in  the
suckling,  it  becomes  thicker,  and  is  more  abundantly  stored
with  caseous  matter.  Those  flabby  and  delicate  women,  there-
fore, who  do  not  nurse  their  own  childi’en,  but  give  them  up
to  the  breast  of  another,  consult  their  health  iudiftereutly ; for
mercenary  nurses  being  for  the  major  part  of  more  robust  and
hardy  frames,  and  their  milk  consequently  thicker,  more
caseous,  and  difficidt  of  digestion,  it  fr’equently  happens  that
milk  of  this  kind  given  to  the  infants  of  such  pai’euts,  parti-
cularly diu'ing  the  time  of  teething,  is  not  well  borne,  but
gives  rise  to  crudities  and  diarrhoeas,  to  griping,  vomiting,
fever,  epilepsy,  and  other  formidable  diseases  of  the  like  natiu'C.

What  Fabricius  says,^  and  strives  to  bolster  up  by  certaiu
' Op.  cit.  p.  34.


ON  GENERATION.


449


reasonings^  of  the  chalazse  standing  for  the  matter  of  the  chick^
we  have  already  thrown  out  in  our  history,  and  at  the  same
time  have  made  it  manifest  that  the  substance  of  the  chick  and
its  first  rudiments  were  produced  whilst  the  chalazge  were  still
entu’e  and  unchanged,  and  in  a totally  different  situation.

Neither  is  it  true,  as  he  states,^  “that  the  chalazse,  ren-
dered fruitful  by  the  semen  of  the  cock,  stand  in  the  place  of
seed,  and  that  from  them  the  chick  is  produced.^^  Nor  are  the
chalazse,  as  he  will  have  it,^  “ in  colour,  substance,  and  bodily
properties  so  like  seed,  or  bear  so  strong  a resemblance  to  the
embryo  in  a boiled  egg,  that  we  may  rightly  conceive  all  the
parts  designated  spei’matic  to  be  thence  engendered.^^  I am
rather  of  opinion  that  the  fluid  which  we  have  called  colliqua-
ment,  or  the  thinner  portion  of  the  albumen  liquefied  and  con-
cocted, is  to  be  regarded  as  of  the  nature  of  seed,  and,  if  the
testimony  of  our  eyes  is  to  be  credited,  as  a substitute  for  it.

The  observation  of  this  venerable  old  man  is  therefore  un-
necessary when  he  says,s  “ As  the  whole  animal  body  is  made
up  of  two  substances  very  different  from  one  another,  and  even
of  opposite  natures,  viz.  hot  and  cold — among  the  hot  parts
being  included  all  those  that  are  full  of  blood  and  of  a red
colour;  among  the  cold  all  those  that  are  exsanguine  and
white — these  two  orders  of  parts  doubtless  require  a different
and  yet  a like  nourishment,  if  it  be  true  that  we  are  nou-
rished by  the  same  things  of  which  we  are  made.  The  sper-
matic, white,  and  cold  parts,  therefore,  require  white  and  cold
nourishment ; the  sanguineous,  red,  and  hot  parts,  again,  de-
mand nourishment  that  is  red  and  hot.  And  so  is  the  cold
white  of  the  egg  properly  held  to  nourish  the  cold  and  white
parts  of  the  chick,  and  the  hot  and  sanguine  yelk  regarded  as
a substitute  for  the  hot  and  purple  blood.  In  this  way  do  all
the  animal  parts  obtain  nourishment  suitable  and  convenient
for  them.”  Now  we  by  no  means  admit  that  the  two  fluids  or
matters  of  the  egg  are  there  as  appropriate  means  of  nourish-
ment for  different  orders  of  parts.  For  we  have  already  said
that  the  heart,  lungs,  kidneys,  liver,  spleen,  muscles,  bones,
ligaments,  &c.,  &c.,  were  all  alike  and  indiscriminately  white
and  bloodless  on  their  first  formation.

• Op.  cit.  p.  54.  “ Ib.  p.  57.  ^ lb.  p.  55.

29


450


ON  GENERATION.


Further,  on  the  preceding  view  of  Fabricius  it  would  fol-
low that  the  heart,  lungs,  liver,  spleen,  &c.,  were  not  spermatic
parts,  did  not  originate  from  the  seed  (which  he,  however,  will
by  no  means  allow),  inasmuch  as  they  too  are  by  and  by  nou-
rished by  the  blood  and  grow  out  of  it ; for  every  part  is  both
formed  and  nourished  by  the  same  means,  and  nutrition  is
nothing  more  than  the  substitution  of  a like  matter  in  the
room  of  that  which  is  lost.

Nor  would  he  find  less  difficulty  in  answering  the  question
how  it  happens  that  when  the  albumen  in  the  egg  is  all  con-
sumed, the  cold  and  white  parts,  such  as  the  bones,  ligaments,
brain,  spinal  marrow,  &c.,  continue  to  be  nourished  and  to
grow  by  means  of  the  vitellus  ? which  to  these  must  be  nou-
rishment as  inappropriate  as  albumen  to  the  hot,  red,  and  san-
guine parts.

Adopting  the  views  commented  on,  indeed,  we  should  be
compelled  to  admit  that  the  hot  and  sanguineous  parts  were
the  last  to  be  produced : the  flesh  after  the  bones ; the  liver,
spleen,  and  lungs  after  the  ligaments  and  intestinal  canal ; and
further,  that  the  cold  parts  of  the  chick  must  come  together
and  attain  matui’ity,  the  white  being  all  the  while  consumed,
and  the  hot  parts  be  engendered  subsequently,  when  the  vitel-
lus fails  and  ceases  from  nourishing  them ; and  then  it  would  be
certain  that  all  the  parts  could  not  take  their  rise  in  and  be
constituted  out  of  the  same  clear  liquid.  All  such  conclusions,
however,  are  refuted  by  simple  ocular  inspection.

I add  another  argument  to  those  already  supplied : the  eggs
of  cartilaginous  fishes — skates,  the  dog-fish,  &c., — are  of  two
colours — their  yelks  are  of  a good  deep  colour ; nevertheless  all
the  parts  of  these  fishes  are  white,  bloodless,  and  cold,  not
even  excepting  the  substance  of  their  liver.  On  the  contraiy,
I have  seen  a certain  breed  of  fowls  of  large  size,  their  feathers
black,  their  flesh  well  supphed  with  hlood,  their  liver  red ; yet
were  the  yelks  of  the  eggs  of  these  fowls — fruitful  eggs —
of  the  palest  shade  of  yellow,  not  deeper  than  the  tint  of  ripe
barley  straw.

Fabricius,  however,  seems  in  these  words^  to  reriact  all  he
has  but  just  said ; “ There  is  one  thing  to  be  particularly


Op.  cit.  p.  55.


ON  GENERATION.


451


wondered  at  both  in  the  yelk  and  the  white^  viz.  that  neither  of
them  being  blood,  they  are  still  so  near  to  the  nature  of  blood
that  they  in  fact  differ  but  very  slightly  from  it — there  is  but
little  wanting  to  constitute  either  of  them  blood ; so  that  little
labour  and  a very  slight  concoction  suffice  to  effect  the  change.
The  veins  and  arteries  distributed  to  the  membranes  of  both
the  white  and  yelk  are  consequently  seen  replete  with  blood  at
all  times ; the  white  and  yeUt  nevertheless  continuing  possessed
of  their  own  proper  nature,  though  either,  so  soon  as  it  is  im-
bibed by  the  vessels,  is  changed  into  blood,  so  closely  do  they
approach  in  constitution  to  this  fiuid.^^

But  if  it  be  matter  of  certainty  that  blood  exists  no  less  in
the  vessels  distributed  to  the  albumen  than  in  those  sent  to
the  vitellus,  and  that  both  of  these  fluids  are  so  closely  aUied
to  blood  in  their  nature,  and  turn  into  blood  so  readily;  who,

I beseech  you,  will  doubt  that  the  blood,  and  all  the  parts
which  are  styled  sanguineous,  are  nourished  and  increased
through  the  albumen  as  well  as  the  vitellus  ?

Our  author,  however,  soon  contrives  a subterfuge  from  this
conclusion  : “ Although  all  this  be  true,^^  he  says,^  “ still  must
we  conceive  that  the  matter  which  is  imbibed  by  the  veins
from  the  yelk  and  white  is  only  blood  in  the  same  sense  as  the
chyle  in  the  mesenteric  veins,  in  which  nothing  but  blood  is
ever  seen ; now  chyle  is  but  the  shadow  of  blood,  and  is
first  perfected  in  the  liver;  and  in  like  manner  the  matter  .
taken  up  by  the  veins  from  the  white  and  yellow  is  only  the
shadow  of  blood,”  &c.  Be  it  so ; but  hiding  under  this  sha-
dow, he  does  not  answer  the  question,  wherefore  the  blood  and
blood-hke  parts  should  not,  for  the  reasons  cited,  be  equally
well  nourished  by  the  albumen  as  by  the  vitellus  ?

Had  our  author,  in  like  manner,  asserted  that  the  hotter
parts  are  rather  nourished  by  that  blood  which  is  derived  from
the  vitellus  than  by  that  attracted  from  the  albumen,  and  the
colder  parts,  on  the  other  hand,  by  that  which  is  derived  from
the  albumen,  I should  not  myself  have  been  much  disposed  to  •
gainsay  him.

There  is  one  consideration  in  the  whole  question,  however,
which  is  sorely  against  him;  it  is  this — how  is  the  blood


Op.  cit.  p.  55.


452


ON  GENERATION.


formed  in  tlie  egg?  by  what  agent  is  either  white  or  yelk
turned  into  blood  whilst  the  liver  is  not  yet  in  existence?  For
in  the  egg,  at  all  events,  he  could  not  say  that  the  blood  was
transfused  from  the  mother.  He  says,  indeed,  “ This  blood
is  produced  and  concocted  in  the  veins  rather  than  in  the
liver ; but  it  becomes  bone,  cartilage,  flesh,  &c.  in  the  parts
themselves,  where  it  undergoes  exact  concoction  and  assimila-
tion.” In  this  he  adds  nothing;  he  neither  tells  us  how  or
by  what  means  perfect  blood  is  concocted  and  elaborated  in
the  minute  veins  both  of  the  albumen  and  vitellus,  the
liver,  as  I have  said,  not  having  yet  come  into  existence, —
not  a particle  of  any  part  of  the  body,  in  fact,  haHng  yet  been
produced  by  which  either  concoction  or  elaboration  might  be
effected.  And  then,  forgetful  of  what  he  has  previously  said,
Hz.  that  the  hot  and  haematous  parts  are  nourished  by  the
vitellus  and  the  cold  and  anaemic  parts  by  the  albumen,  he  is
plainly  in  contradiction  with  himself  when  he  admits  that  the
same  blood  is  turned  into  bone,  cartilage,  flesh,  and  all  other
parts.

IMore  than  this,  Fabricius  has  slipped  the  greatest  difficulty
of  all,  the  source  of  not  a little  doubt  and  debate  to  the
medical  mind,  viz.  how  the  liver  should  be  the  source  and
artificer  of  the  blood,  seeing  that  this  fluid  not  only  exists  in
the  egg  before  any  auscus  is  formed,  but  that  all  medical
writers  teach  that  the  parenchymata  of  the  viscera  are  but
effusions  of  blood?  Is  the  Avork  the  author  of  its  workman?
If  the  parenchyma  of  the  liver  come  from  the  blood,  how  can
it  be  the  cause  of  the  blood?

What  follows  is  of  the  same  likelihood : There  is  another

reason  wherefore  the  albumen  should  be  separated  from  the
yelk,  namely,  that  the  foetus  may  SAvim  in  it,  and  be  thus
supported,  lest  tending  downwai’ds  by  its  own  weight,  it
should  incline  to  one  particular  part,  and  dragging,  shoidd
break  the  vessels,  in  preventing  which  the  viscidity  and  purity
of  the  albumen  contribute  efi’ectually.  For  did  the  foetus  grow
amid  the  yelk,  it  might  readily  sink  to  the  bottom,  and  so
cause  laceration  of  that  body.-”  Sufficiently  jejune  ! For  what,
I entreat,  can  the  purity  of  the  albumen  contribute  to  the
support  of  the  embryo  ? Or  hoAV  should  the  thinner  albumen
sustain  it  better  than  the  thicker  and  more  earthy  yelk  ? Or


ON  GENERATION.


453


where  the  danger,  I ask,  of  its  sinking  down,  when  we  see
that  the  egg  in  incubation  is  always  laid  on  its  side,  and  there
is  nothing  to  fear  either  for  the  ascent  or  the  descent  of  the
embryo  ? It  is  indubitable,  indeed,  that  not  only  does  the
embryo  of  the  chick  float  in  the  egg,  but  that  the  embryo  of
every  animal  during  its  formation  floats  in  the  uterus ; this
however  takes  place  amidst  the  fluid  which  we  have  called  coUi-
quament,  and  neither  in  the  albumen  nor  vitellus,  and  we  have
elsewhere  given  the  reason  wherefore  this  is  so.

“'Aristotle  informs  us,”  says  Fabricius,  “that  the  viteUus
rises  to  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg  when  the  chick  is  conceived;
and  this  because  the  animal  is  incorporated  from  the  chalaza,
which  adheres  to  the  vitellus ; whence  the  '\dtellus  which  was
in  the  middle  is  drawn  towards  the  upper  wider  part  of  the  egg,
that  the  cliick  may  be  produced  where  the  natural  cavity  exists,
which  is  so  indispensable  to  its  well-being.”  The  chalaza,  how-
ever, is  certainly  connected  still  more  intimately  with  the  albu-
men than  with  the  yelk.

My  mode  of  interpreting  the  ascent  in  question  is  this  : the
spot  or  cicatricula  conspicuous  on  the  membrana  viteUi,  expands
under  the  influence  of  the  spirituous  coUiquament  engendered
within  it,  and  requiring  a larger  space,  it  tends  towards  the
blunt  end  of  the  egg.  The  liquefied  portion  of  the  vitellus  and
albumen,  diluted  in  hke  manner,  and  concocted  and  made  more
spirituous,  swims  above  the  remaining  crude  parts,  just  as  the
inferior  particles  of  water  in  a vessel,  when  heated,  rise  from  the
bottom  to  the  top,  a fact  which  every  medical  man  must  have
observed  when  he  had  chanced  to  put  a measure  of  tliick  and
tiu’bid  mine  into  a bath  of  boiling  water,  in  which  case  the
upper  part  first  becomes  clear  and  transparent.  Another  ex-
ample will  make  this  matter  still  more  plain.  There  is  an  in-
strument familiar  to  almost  everybody,  made  rather  for  amuse-
ment than  any  useful  pmpose,  nearly  full  of  water,  on  the
surface  of  which  float  a number  of  hollow  glass  heads  which
by  then’  lightness  and  swimming  together  support  a variety  of
figures,  Cupids  with  hows  and  quivers,  chariots  of  the  sun,  cen-
tam's  armed,  and  the  like,  which  would  else  all  sink  to  the
bottom.  So  also  does  the  eye  of  the  egg,  as  I have  called  it,
or  first  colhquament,  dilated  by  the  heat  of  the  incubating  fowl


454


ON  GENERATION.


and  genital  virtue  inherent  in  the  egg,  expand,  and  thereby
rendered  lighter,  rise  to  the  top,  when  the  vitellus,  with  which
it  is  connected  follows.  It  is  because  the  cicatricula,  formerly
situated  on  the  side  of  the  vitellus,  now  tends  to  rise  directly
upwards  that  the  thicker  albumen  is  made  to  give  place,  and
the  chalazae  are  carried  to  the  sides  of  the  egg.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTY-FIRST.

Of  the  uses  of  the  other  parts  of  the  egg.

The  shell  is  hard  and  thick  that  it  may  serve  as  a defence
against  external  injmy  to  the  fluids  and  the  chick  it  includes.
It  is  brittle,  nevertheless,  particularly  towards  the  bhmt  end,
and  as  the  time  of  the  chick’s  exclusion  di’aws  near,  doubtless
that  the  birth  may  sulfer  no  delay.  The  shell  is  porous  also ;
for  when  an  egg,  particularly  a veiy  recent  one,  is  dressed
before  the  Are,  it  sweats  through  its  pores.  Now  these  pores
are  useful  for  ventilation  3 they  permit  the  heat  of  the  incu-
bating hen  to  penetrate  more  readily,  and  the  chick  to  have
supplies  of  fresh  air ; for  that  it  both  breathes  and  chirps  in  the
egg  before  its  exclusion  is  most  certain.

The  membranes  serve  to  include  the  fluids,  and  therefore
are  they  present  in  the  same  number  as  these,  and  therefore
is  the  colliquament  also  invested^  as  soon  as  it  is  produced,  with
a tunica  propria,  which  Aristotlei  refers  to  in  these  words  : “ A
membrane  covered  with  ramifications  of  blood-vessels  already
surrounds  the  clear  liquid,”  &c.  But  the  exit  of  the  chick
being  at  hand,  and  the  albumen  and  colliquament  being  entirely
consumed,  all  the  membranes,  except  that  which  suiTOunds  the
vitellus,  are  dried  up  and  disappeai’ ; the  membrana  vitelli,  on
the  contrary,  along  with  the  yelk,  is  reti’acted  into  the  peri-
toneum of  the  chick  and  included  in  the  abdomen.  Of  the
membranes  two  are  common  to  the  whole  egg,  which  they  sur-
round immediately  under  the  shell ; the  rest  belong,  one  to  the
albumen,  one  to  the  yelk,  one  to  the  colliquament ; but  aU  stiU
conduce  to  the  preservation  and  separation  of  the  parts  they
' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vi,  cap.  3.


ON  GENERATION.


455


surround.  The  outer  of  the  two  common  membranes  which
adheres  to  the  shell  is  the  firmer,  that  it  may  take  no  injury
from  the  shell ; the  inner  one  again  is  smooth  and  soft,  that  it
may  not  hurt  the  fluids  • in  the  same  way,  therefore,  as  the
meninges  of  the  brain  protect  it  from  the  roughness  of  the
superincumbent  skull.  The  internal  membranes,  as  I have
said,  include  and  keep  separate  their  peculiar  fluids,  whence
they  are  extremely  thin,  pellucid,  and  easily  torn.

Fabricius  ascribes  great  eminence  and  dignity  to  the  chalazse,
regarding  them  as  the  parts  whence  the  chick  is  formed ; he,
however,  leaves  the  spot  or  cicatricula  connected  with  the  mem-
brana  vitelli  without  any  office  whatsoever,  looking  on  it  merely
as  the  remains  of  the  peduncle  whence  the  vitellus  was  detached
from  the  vitellarium  in  the  superior  uterus  of  the  hen.  In  his
view  the  vitellus  formerly  obtained  its  nourishment  either  by
this  peduncle  or  the  vessels  passing  through  it ; but  when  de-
tached, and  no  longer  nourished  by  the  hen,  a simple  trace  of
the  former  connexion  and  important  function  alone  remains.

I however  am  of  opinion  that  the  uses  of  the  chalazse  are  no
other  than  those  I have  assigned  them,  namely,  that  they  serve
as  poles  to  the  noicrocosm  of  the  egg,  and  are  the  association  of
all  the  membranes  convoluted  and  twisted  together,  by  wliich  not
only  are  the  several  fluids  kept  in  their  places,  but  also  in  their
distinct  relative  positions.  But  I have  absolute  assurance  that
the  spot  or  cicatricula  in  question  is  of  the  very  highest  im-
portance ; it  is  the  part  in  which  the  calor  insitus  nestles ;
where  the  first  spark  of  the  vital  principle  is  kindled ; for  the
sake  of  which,  in  a word,  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  fluids
and  all  the  membranes  of  the  egg  are  contrived.  But  this  has
been  already  insisted  on  above.

Formerly,  indeed,  I did  think  with  Fabricius  that  this  cica-
tricula was  the  remains  or  trace  of  the  detached  peduncle ; but
I afterwards  learned  by  more  accurate  obseiwation  that  this  was
not  the  case ; that  the  peduncle,  by  which  the  vitellus  hangs,
was  infixed  in  no  such  limited  space  as  we  find  it  in  apples  and
plums,  and  in  such  a way  as  would  have  given  rise  to  a scar
on  its  separation.  This  peduncle,  in  short,  expands  like  a
tube  from  the  ovary  on  towards  the  vitellus,  the  horizon  of
which  it  embraces  in  a bipai’tite  semicircle,  not  otherwise  than
the  tunica  conjunctiva  embraces  the  eye  ; and  this  in  suchwise


456


ON  GENERATION.


that  the  superior  part  of  the  vitellus,  or  the  hemisphere  which
regards  the  ovary,  is  almost  free  from  any  contact  or  cohesion
with  the  peduncle,  in  the  superior  part  of  the  cup  or  hollow  of
which  nevertheless,  but  somewhat  to  the  side,  the  spot  or  cica-
tricula  in  questioir  is  placed.  The  peduncles  becoming  detached
from  the  vitelli  can  therefore  in  no  way  he  said  to  leave
any  trace  of  their  attachments  behind  them.  Of  the  great
importance  of  this  spot  in  generation  I have  already  spoken
in  the  historical  portion  of  my  work.

But  I have  still,  always  following  my  old  teacher  Fahricius
as  my  guide  on  the  way,  to  treat  of  the  uses  of  the  cavity  in  the
blunt  end  of  the  egg.

Fahricius  enumerates  various  conveniences  arising  from  this
cavity,  according  to  its  dimensions.  I shall  he  brief  on  the
subject : it  contains  air,  and  is  therefore  useful  in  the  ventila-
tion of  the  egg,  assisting  the  perspiration,  refrigeration,  and
respiration,  and  finally  the  chirping  of  the  chick.  ^Thence  this
cavity,  small  at  first,  is  larger  by  and  by,  and  at  last  becomes
of  great  size,  as  the  several  offices  mentioned  come  into  play.

Thus  far  have  we  spoken  of  the  generation  of  the  egg  and
chick,  and  of  the  uses  of  the  several  parts  of  the  egg ; and  to
the  type  exhibited  we  have  referred  the  mode  of  generation  of
oviparous  animals  in  general.  "We  have  still  to  speak  of  the
generation  of  viriparous  animals,  in  doing  which  we  shall  as
before  refer  all  to  a single  familiaidy  known  species.

EXERCISE  THE  SIXTY-SECOXD.

An  egg  is  the  common  origin  of  all  animals.

“ Animals,’’  says  Aristotle,^  “ have  this  in  common  with
vegetables,  that  some  of  them  arise  from  seed,  others  arise  spon-
taneously ; for  as  plants  either  proceed  from  the  seed  of  other
plants,  or  spi’ing  up  spontaneously,  having  met  with  some  pri-
mary condition  fit  for  their  evolution,  some  of  them  deriving
their  noiu’ishment  from  the  ground,  others  aidsing  fr’om  and
firing  on  other  plants;  so  are  some  animals  engendered  from
cognate  forms,  and  others  ai'ise  spontaneously,  no  kind  of  cognate
‘ Hist.  Auiin.  lib.  5,  cap.  1.


ON  GENERATION.


457


seed  having  preceded  their  birth ; and  whilst  some  of  them  are
generated  from  the  earth,  or  putrefying  vegetable  matter,  hke
so  many  insects,  others  are  produced  iu  animals  themselves  and
from  the  excrementitious  matters  of  their  parts.”  Now  the  whole
of  these,  whether  they  arise  spontaneously,  or  from  others,  or  in
others,  or  from  the  parts  or  excrements  of  these,  have  this  in
common,  that  they  are  engendered  from  some  principle  adequate
to  this  effect,  and  from  an  efficient  cause  inherent  in  the  same
principle.  In  this  way,  therefore,  the  primordium  from  which
and  by  which  they  arise  is  inherent  in  every  animal.  Let  us
entitle  this  the  primordium  vegetale  or  vegetative  incipience,
understanding  by  this  a certain  corporeal  something  having  life
in  potentia  •,  or  a certain  something  existing  per  se,  which  is
capable  of  changing  into  a vegetative  form  under  the  agency  of
an  internal  principle.  Such  primordia  are  the  eggs  of  animals
and  the  seeds  of  plants ; such  also  are  the  conceptions  of  vivi-
parous animals,  and  the  worm,  as  Aristotle  calls  it,  whence  in-
sects proceed : the  primordia  of  different  living  things  conse-
quently differ  from  one  another ; and  according  to  their  diver-
sities are  the  modes  of  generation  of  animals,  which  nevertheless
all  agree  in  this  one  respect,  that  they  proceed  from  the  vegetal
primordium  as  from  matter  endowed  with  the  virtue  of  an
efficient  cause,  though  they  differ  in  respect  of  the  primordium
which  either  bursts  forth,  as  it  were,  spontaneously  and  by  chance,
or  shows  itself  as  fruit  or  seed  from  something  else  preceding  it.
Whence  some  animals  are  spoken  of  as  spontaneously  produced,
others  as  engendered  by  parents.  And  these  last  are  again  distin-
guished by  their  mode  of  birth,  for  some  are  oviparous,  others
viviparous,  to  which  Aristotle^  adds  a vermiparous  class.  But
if  we  take  the  thing  as  simple  sense  proclaims  it,  there  are
only  two  kinds  of  birth,  inasmuch  as  all  animals  engen-
der others  either  in  actu — virtually,  or  in  potentia — po-
tentially. Animals  which  bring  forth  in  fact  and  virtu-
ally are  called  viviparous,  those  that  bring  forth  potentially
are  oviparous.  For  every  primordium  that  lives  potentially,
we,  with  Fabricius,  think  ought  to  be  called  an  egg,  and  we
make  no  distinction  between  the  worm  of  Aristotle  and
an  egg,  both  because  to  the  eye  there  is  no  difference.


' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  5.


458


ON  GENERATION.


and  because  the  identity  is  in  conformity  with  reason.  For
the  vegetal  primordium  which  lives  potentially  is  also  an  ani.
mal  potentially.  Nor  can  the  distinction  which  Aristotle  i
made  between  the  egg  and  the  worm  be  admitted : for  he  de-
fines an  egg  to  be  that  “ from  part  of  which  an  animal  is  pro-
duced •,  whilst  that/^  he  says  elsewhere^^  “ which  is  totally
changed^  and  which  does  not  produce  an  animal  from  a part
only,  is  a worm.'*'’  These  bodies,  however,  agree  in  this,  that
they  are  both  inanimate  births,  and  only  animals  potentially ;
both  consequently  are  eggs.

And  then  Aristotle  himseK,  whilst  he  speaks  of  worms  in
one  place,  designates  them  by  the  name  of  eggs  in  another.®
Treating  of  the  locust,  he  says,'*  “ its  eggs  become  spoiled  in
autumn  when  the  season  is  wet and  again,  speaking  of  the
grasshopper,  he  has  these  words,  “ when  the  little  worm
has  grown  in  the  earth  it  becomes  a matiix  of  grasshoppers
(tettigometra) and  immediately  afterwards,  “ the  females  are
sweeter  after  coitus,  for  then  they  are  full  of  white  eggs.”

In  this  very  place,  indeed,  where  he  distinguishes  between
an  egg  and  a worm,  he  adds  : ^ “ but  the  whole  of  this  tribe
of  worms,  when  they  have  come  to  then’  full  size,  ai-e  changed
in  some  sort  into  eggs ; for  then  shell  or  covering  hardens,
and  they  become  motionless  for  a season,  a circmnstance  that
is  plainly  to  be  seen  in  the  vermiculi  of  bees  and  wasps,  and
also  in  caterpillars.”  Eveiy  one  indeed  may  obseiwe  that  the
primordia  of  spiders,  silkworms,  and  the  hke,  are  not  less  to
be  accounted  eggs  than  those  of  the  Crustacea  and  moUusca,
and  almost  all  fishes,  which  are  not  actually  animals,  but  are
potentially  possessed  of  the  faculty  of  producing  them.  Since,
then,  those  creatures  that  produce  actually  are  called  rivipa-
rous,  and  those  that  produce  potentiaDy  either  pass  without
any  general  distinguishing  title  or  are  called  oviparous  and  parti-
cularly as  such  productions  are  vegetal  primordia,  analogous  to
the  seeds  of  plants,  which  true  eggs  must  needs  be  held  to  be,
the  conclusion  is,  that  all  animals  ai’e  either  ririparous  or
oriparous.

But  as  there  are  many  species  of  oriparous  animals,  so  must


‘ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  9.
^ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  5.


^ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  v,  cap.  30.

® De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  9.


ON  GENERATION,


459


there  also  be  several  species  of  eggs  j for  every  primordium  is
not  alike  fit  to  receive  or  assume  every  variety  of  animal  form
indifi'erently.  Though  we  admit,  therefore,  that  eggs  in  a gene-
ral sense  do  not  differ,  yet  when  we  find  that  one  is  perfect,
another  imperfect,  it  is  obvious  that  they  differ  essentially  from
one  another.  Perfect  eggs  are  such  as  are  completed  in  the
uterus,  where  they  obtain  their  due  dimensions  before  being
extruded;  of  this  kind  are  the  eggs  of  birds.  Imperfect  eggs,
again,  are  such  as  are  prematurely  excluded  before  they  are  of
the  full  size,  but  increase  after  they  are  laid;  of  this  descrip-
tion are  the  eggs  of  fishes,  Crustacea  and  moUusca ; the  primor-
dia  of  insects,  which  Aristotle  entitles  worms,  are  farther  to  be
referred  to  this  class,  as  well  as  the  primordia  of  those  animals
that  arise  spontaneously.

Moreover,  although  perfect  eggs  are  of  two  colom’s,  in  other
words,  are  composed  of  albumen  and  vitellus,  some  are  stiU
only  of  one  hue,  and  consist  of  albumen  alone.  In  like
manner,  of  imperfect  eggs,  some  from  which  a perfect  animal
proceeds  are  properly  so  called ; such  are  the  eggs  of  fishes  ;
others  are  improperly  so  styled,  they  engendering  an  imperfect
animal,  namely,  a worm,  grub,  or  caterpillar,  a kind  of  mean
between  a perfect  and  an  imperfect  egg,  which,  in  respect  of
the  egg  or  the  primordium  itself,  is  an  animal  endowed  with
sense  and  motion,  and  nourishing  itself;  but  in  respect  of  a
fly,  moth  or  butterfly,  whose  primordium  it  is  potentially,  it  is
as  a creeping  egg,  and  to  be  reputed  as  adequate  to  its  own
growth;  of  this  description  is  the  caterpillar,  which  having  at
length  completed  its  growth  is  changed  into  a chrysalis  or
perfect  egg,  and  ceasing  from  motion,  it  is  like  an  egg,  an
animal  potentially.

In  the  same  way,  although  there  are  some  eggs  from  the
whole  of  which  a perfect  animal  is  produced  by  metamorphosis,
without  being  nourished  by  any  remains  of  the  substance  of
the  egg,  but  forthwith  finds  food  for  itself  abroad,  there  are
others  from  one  part  of  which  the  embryo  is  produced,  and  from
the  remainder  of  which  it  is  nourished: — although,!  repeat,  there
are  such  differences  among  eggs,  still,  if  we  be  permitted  to  con-
clude on  the  grounds  of  sense  and  analogy,  there  is  no  good
reason  wherefore  those  that  Aristotle  calls  worms  should  not
be  spoken  of  as  eggs ; inasmuch  as  all  vegetal  principles  are


460


ON  GENERATION.


not  indeed  animals  actually,  but  are  so  potentially,  are  true
animal  seeds,  analogous  to  tlie  seeds  of  vegetables,  as  we  bare
already  demonstrated  in  tbe  particular  instance  of  the  ben’s  egg.
All  animals  are,  therefore,  either  viviparous  or  o^dparous,
inasmuch  as  they  all  either  produce  a living  animal  in  fact,  or
an  egg,  rudiment,  or  primordium,  which  is  an  animal  potentially.

The  generation  of  all  o^dparous  animals  may  therefore  be
referred  to  that  of  the  hen’s  egg  as  a type,  or  at  all  events
deduced  from  thence  without  difficulty,  the  same  things  and
incidents  that  have  been  enumerated  in  connexion  with  the
common  fowl  being  also  encountered  in  all  other  ovipai’ous
animals  whatsoever.  The  various  particulars  in  which  they
differ  one  from  another,  or  in  which  they  agree,  either  gene-
rally, or  specifically,  or  analogically,  will  be  subsequently  treated
of  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  generation  of  insects  and
the  animals  that  arise  equivocally.  For  as  every  generation
is  a kind  of  way  leading  to  the  attainment  of  an  animal  form,
as  one  race  of  animal  is  more  or  less  hke  or  unlike  another,
their  constituent  pai’ts  either  agreeing  or  disagreeing,  so  does
it  happen  in  respect  of  then’  mode  of  genei’ation.  For  per-
fect nature,  always  harmonious  with  herself  in  her  works,  has
instituted  similar  parts  for  similar  ends  and  actions : to
arrive  at  the  same  results,  to  attain  the  same  fonns,  she  has
followed  the  same  path,  and  has  established  one  and  the  same
method  in  the  business  of  generation  universally.

Wherefore  as  we  stiU  find  the  same  parts  in  the  perfect  or
two-coloured  egg  of  every  bird,  so  do  we  also  observe  the  same
order  and  method  pursued  in  the  generation  and  development
of  their  embryos  as  we  have  seen  in  the  egg  of  the  common
fowl.  And  so  also  are  the  same  things  to  be  noted  in  the
eggs  of  serpents  and  of  reptiles,  or  ovipai’ous  quadmpeds,
such  as  tortoises,  frogs,  and  lizards,  from  aU  the  perfect  two-
colom’ed  eggs  of  which  embryos  are  produced  and  perfected  in
the  same  manner.  Nor  is  the  case  very  different  in  regard  to
fishes.  But  of  the  manner  in  which  spiders  and  the  Crustacea,
such  as  shrimps  and  crabs,  and  the  moUusca,  such  as  the
cuttlefish  and  calamary,  arise  from  their  eggs;  of  the  condi-
tions also  upon  which  Avorms  and  grubs  first  proceed  from  the
eggs  of  insects,  which  afterwards  change  into  chiysahdes  or
aurelias,  as  if  they  reverted  anerv  to  the  state  of  eggs,  from


ON  GENERATION.


4fil


whicli  at  length  emerge  flies  or  butterflies — of  the  several
respects  in  which  these  differ  in  their  mode  of  generation  from
an  eggj  from  what  we  have  found  in  the  hen’s  egg,  wiU  he
matter  for  remark  in  the  proper  place.

Although  all  eggs  consisting  of  yelk  and  white  are  not  pro-
duced and  fecundated  in  the  same  manner,  hut  some  are  made
prolific  through  the  intercourse  of  male  and  female,  and
others  in  some  other  way  (as  of  fishes) ; and  although  there  is
some  difference  even  in  the  mode  in  which  eggs  grow,  some
attaining  maturity  within  the  hody  of  the  parent,  others
continuing  to  he  nourished  and  to  grow  when  extruded,  there
is  still  no  reason  why  an  emhryo  should  not  he  developed  in
the  same  precise  manner  in  every  egg — always  understood  as
perfect — as  it  is  in  the  egg  of  the  hen.  Wherefore  the  his-
tory which  has  been  given  of  the  evolution  of  the  chick  from
the  hen’s  egg  may  he  regarded  as  applicable  to  the  generation
of  all  other  oviparous  animals  whatsoever,  as  well  as  to  the
inferences  or  conclusions  which  may  he  deduced  from  thence.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTY-THIRD.

Of  the  generation  of  viviparous  animals.

Thus  far  have  we  treated  mainly  of  the  generation  of  ovi-
parous animals  j we  have  still  to  speak  particularly  of  the
other  species  of  generation,  the  viviparous,  to  wit,  in  which
many  things  identical  with  those  we  have  noticed  in  oviparous
generation  will  come  to  he  observed.  These  we  have  reduced
into  order,  and  here  at  length  present  for  consideration.  Even
the  parts  that  appear  paradoxical  and  in  contradiction  with
the  current  views  of  generation  will,  I believe,  he  found  en-
tirely in  conformity  with  truth.

Among  viviparous  animals,  man,  the  most  perfect  of  all
creatures,  occupies  the  foremost  place;  after  him  come  our  ordi-
nary domestic  animals,  of  which  some  are  soliped,  such  as  the
horse  and  ass ; others  bisulcate,  as  the  ox,  goat,  sheep,  deer,
and  hog;  others  digitate,  such  as  the  dog,  cat,  rabbit,  mouse,
and  others  of  the  same  description;  from  the  modes  of  whose


462


ON  GENERATION.


generation  a judgment  may  be  formed  of  that  of  all  other
viviparous  animals.  Wherefore  I shall  propose  a single  genus,
by  way  of  general  example  or  type,  as  we  did  in  the  case  of  the
oviparous  class  j this  made  familiar  to  us,  will  sen'e  as  a light  or
standard,  by  means  of  which  all  the  others  may  be  judged
of  by  analogy.

The  reasons  that  led  me  to  select  the  hen’s  egg  as  the  mea-
sure of  eggs  in  general  have  been  already  given : eggs  are  of
little  price,  and  are  everywhere  to  be  obtained,  conditions  that
permit  repeated  study,  and  enable  us  cheaply  and  readily  to
test  the  truth  of  statements  made  by  others.

We  have  not  the  same  facilities  in  studying  the  generation
of  viviparous  animals : we  have  rarely,  if  ever,  an  opportunity
of  dissecting  the  human  uterus ; and  then  to  enter  on  the
subject  experimentally  in  the  horse,  ox,  sheep,  goat,  and  other
cattle,  would  be  attended  ndth  immense  labour  and  no  small
expense;  dogs,  cats  rabbits,  and  the  like,  however,  will  supply
those  with  subjects  who  are  desirous  of  putting  to  the  test  of
experiment  the  matters  that  are  to  be  delivered  by  us  in  this
place.

Fabricius  of  Aquapendente,  as  if  every  conception  of  a vivi-
parous animal  were  in  a certain  sense  an  egg,  begins  his  trea-
tise with  the  egg  as  the  universal  example  of  generation ; and
among  other  reasons  for  his  conclusions  assigns  this  in  parti-
cular : 1 “ Because  the  study  of  the  egg  has  the  most  exten-
sive appHcation,  the  greater  number  of  animals  being  engen-
dered from  eggs.”  Now  we,  at  the  veiy  outset  of  our  observa-
tions, asserted  that  all  animals  were  in  some  sort  produced
from  eggs.  For  even  on  the  same  grounds,  and  in  the  same
manner  and  order  in  which  a chick  is  engendered  and  deve-
loped from  an  egg,  is  the  embryo  of  viviparous  animals
engendered  from  a pre-existing  conception.  Generation
in  both  is  one  and  identical  in  kind : the  origin  of  either  is
from  an  egg,  or  at  least  from  something  that  by  analogy  is
held  to  be  so.  An  egg  is,  as  ab’eady  said,  a conception  ex-
posed beyond  the  body  of  the  parent,  whence  the  embryo  is
produced ; a conception  is  an  egg  remaining  within  the  body
of  the  parent  until  the  foetus  has  acqubed  the  requisite  perfec-


De  Form.  0\i  et  Pulli,  cap.  1.


ON  GENERATION.


463


tion ; in  everytMng  else  they  agree ; they  are  both  alike  pri-
mordially  vegetables,  potentially  they  are  animals.  Wherefore,
the  same  theorems  and  conclusions,  though  they  may  appear
paradoxical,  which  we  drew  from  the  history  of  the  egg,  turn  out
to  be  equally  true  with  regard  to  the  generation  of  animals
generally.  For  it  is  an  admitted  fact  that  all  embryos,  even
those  of  man,  are  procreated  from  some  conception  or  primor-
dium.  Let  us,  therefore,  say  that  that  which  is  called  pri-
mordium  among  things  arising  spontaneously,  and  seed  among
plants,  is  an  egg  among  oviparous  animals,  i.  e.  a certain  cor-
poreal substance,  from  which,  through  the  motions  and  effi-
cacy of  an  internal  pidnciple,  a plant  or  an  animal  of  one
description  or  another  is  produced;  but  the  prime  conception
in  viviparous  animals  is  of  the  same  precise  nature,  a fact
which  we  have  found  approved  both  by  sense  and  reason.

WTiat  we  have  already  affirmed  of  the  egg,  viz.  that  it  was
the  spermaorseed  of  animals  and  analogous  to  the  seeds  of  plants,
we  now  affirm  of  the  conception,  which  is  indeed  the  seed  of
an  animal,  and  therefore  also  properly  called  ovum  or  egg.
Because  ‘‘  a true  seed,’^  according  to  Aristotle,  i “ is  that  which
derives  its  origin  from  the  intercourse  of  male  and  female,  and
possesses  the  virtues  of  both ; such  as  is  the  seed  of  all  vege-
tables, and  of  some  animals,  in  which  the  sexes  are  not  distinct,
and  is,  as  that  which  is  first  mingled  from  male  and  female,  a
kind  of  promiscuous  conception  or  animal ; for  it  has  those
things  already  that  are  recognised  of  both ; ” i.  e.  matter  adapted
to  nourish  the  foetus,  and  a plastic  or  formative  and  effective
virtue.  And  so  in  like  manner  is  a conception  the  fruit  of
the  intercourse  of  male  and  female,  and  the  seed  of  the  future
embryo ; it  therefore  does  not  differ  from  an  egg.

“ But  that  which  proceeds  from  the  generant  is  the  cause
which  first  obtains  the  principle  of  generation,  (i.  e.  it  is  the
efficient  cause,)  and  ought  to  be  called  the  geniture,'’’’^  not  the
seed,  as  is  commonly  done  both  by  the  vulgar  and  philoso-
phers at  the  present  time ; because  it  has  not  that  which  is  re-
quired of  both  the  concurring  agents,  neither  is  it  analogous  to
the  seeds  of  plants.  But  whatever  possesses  this,  and  corre-
sponds to  the  seeds  of  vegetables,  that  too  is  rightly  >entitled
egg  and  conception.

* De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  1,  cap.  18.  ’ Ibid.


464


ON  GENEKATION.


Furtlier,  the  definition  of  an  egg,  as  given  by  Aristotle,^
is  perfectly  applicable  to  a conception : — An  egg,”  he  says,
“ is  that  the  principal  part  of  which  goes  to  constitute  an  animal,
the  remainder  to  nourish  the  animal  so  constituted.”  Now  the
same  thing  is  common  to  a conception,  as  shall  be  made  to
appear  visibly  from  the  dissection  of  ■\dviparous  animals.

Moreover,  as  the  chick  is  excluded  from  the  egg  under  the
influence  of  warmth  derived  from  the  incubating  hen  or  ob-
tained in  any  other  way,  even  so  is  the  foetus  produced  from
the  conception  in  the  uterus  under  the  genial  warmth  of  the
mother^s  body.  In  few  words,  I say,  that  what  o^•iparous
animals  supply  by  their  breast  and  incubation,  viviparous  ani-
mals afford  by  their  uterus  and  internal  embrace.  For  the  rest,
in  all  that  respects  the  development,  the  embryo  is  produced
from  the  conception  in  the  same  manner  and  order  as  the  chick
from  the  egg,  with  this  single  difference,  that  whatever  is  re-
quired for  the  formation  and  growth  of  the  chick  is  present  in
the  egg,  whilst  the  conception,  after  the  formation  of  the  em-
bryo, derives  from  the  uterus  of  the  mother  whatever  more  is
requisite  to  its  increase,  by  which  it  continues  to  grow  in  com-
mon with  the  foetus.  The  egg,  on  the  contrary,  becomes  more
and  more  empty  as  the  chick  increases;  the  nutriment  that
was  laid  up  in  it  is  diminished;  nor  does  the  chick  receive
aught  in  the  shape  of  new  aliment  from  the  mother ; whilst  the
foetus  of  viviparous  animals  has  a continued  supply,  and  when
born,  moreover,  continues  to  live  upon  its  motheris  milk.  The
eggs  of  fishes,  however,  increase  through  nourishment  obtained
from  without ; and  insects  and  crustaceous  and  molluscous
animals  have  eggs  that  enlarge  after  their  extrusion.  Yet  are
not  these  called  eggs  the  less  on  this  account,  nor,  indeed,  are
they  therefore  any  the  less  eggs.  In  like  manner  the  concep-
tion is  appropriately  designated  by  the  name  of  ovum  or  egg,
although  it  requires  and  procures  from  without  the  variety  of
aliment  that  is  needful  to  its  growth.

Fabricius  gives  this  reason  for  some  animals  being  oviparous,
for  all  not  producing  bring  offspring : “ It  is,”  he  says,  “ that
eggs  detained  in  the  uterus  tiU  they  had  produced  tliefr  chicks
would  interfere  ■with  the  flight  of  birds,  and  weigh  them


' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  v.


ON  GENERATION.


465


down  by  tbeir  weight.  Serpents  would  also  be  hindered  in
their  alternate  zig-zag  movements  by  a multitude  of  eggs  in
the  abdomen.  In  the  body  of  tortoises,  with  their  hard  and
girding  shell,  there  is  no  room  for  any  store  or  increase  of  eggs  ;
nor  would  the  abdomen  of  fishes  suffice  for  the  multitude  of
eggs  they  must  spawn  were  these  to  grow  to  any  size.  It  was,
therefore,  matter  of  necessity  that  those  creatures  shoidd  lay
their  eggs  imperfect.  It  seems  most  natural  that  an  animal
should  retain  and  cherish  its  conception  in  its  interior  until  the
foetus  it  produces  has  come  to  maturity;  but  nature  sees  her-
self compelled,  as  it  were,  occasionally  to  permit  the  premature
birth  of  various  eggs,  and  to  provide  them,  without  the  body
of  the  parent,  with  the  nourishment  they  require  for  their  com-
plete development.  As  to  everything  that  refers  to  the  evolu-
tion of  the  foetus,  all  animals  are  engendered  from  an  oviform
primordium ; I say  o'^dform,  not  as  meaning  that  it  has  the  pre-
cise configuration  of  an  egg,  but  the  nature  and  constitution  of
one ; this  being  common  in  generation,  that  the  vegetal  pri-
mordium whence  the  foetus  is  produced,  including  the  nature  of
an  egg,  corresponding  in  its  proportions  to  the  seed  of  a plant,
pre-exists.  In  all  vegetal  primordia,  consequently,  whether
eggs,  or  having  the  form  of  eggs,  there  are  inherent  the  natui'e
and  conditions  of  an  egg,  properties  which  the  seeds  of  plants
have  in  common  with  the  eggs  of  animals.  The  primordium  of
any  animal,  whatsoever,  is  therefore  called  seed  and  fruit ; and
in  like  manner  the  seed  of  every  plant  is  spoken  of  as  a kind
of  conception  or  egg.

And  this  is  the  reason  why  Aristotle  says : i “ Animals  that
engender  internally  have  something  formed  in  the  fashion  of  an
egg  after  their  first  conception  : there  is  a fiuid  contained  within
a delicate  membrane,  like  en  egg  without  the  shell.  And  this
is  the  cause  why  the  disorders  of  the  conception,  which  are  apt
to  occur  in  the  early  period,  are  called  discharges.”  Such  a
discharge  is  particularly  observed  among  women  when  they
miscarry  in  the  course  of  the  first  or  second  month.  I have
repeatedly  seen  such  ova  aborted  at  this  time;  and  such  was
the  one  which  Hippocrates  has  described  as  having  been  thrown
off  by  the  female  pipe-player  in  consequence  of  a fall.


De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  9.


30


466


ON  GENERATION.


In  the  uterus  of  all  animals  there  is  consequently  present  a
prime  conception  or  primordium,  which,  on  Aristotle’s  testi-
mony, * “ is  like  an  egg  surrounded  with  a membrane  from
which  the  shell  had  been  removed.”  This  fact  will  appear
still  more  plainly  from  what  is  about  to  he  said.  Meantime
let  us  conclude  with  the  philosopher,  “ that  all  living  creatures,
whether  they  swim,  or  walk,  or  fly,  and  whether  they  come
into  the  world  with  the  form  of  an  animal  or  of  an  egg,  are
engendered  in  the  same  manner.”


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTY-FOURTH.

The  generation  of  viviparous  animals  in  general  is  illustrated
from  the  history  of  that  of  the  hind  and  doe,  and  the  reason
of  this  selection.

It  was  customary  with  his  Serene  Alajesty,  King  Charles,
after  he  had  come  to  man’s  estate,  to  take  the  diversion  of
hunting  almost  every  week,  both  for  the  sake  of  finding  relax-
ation from  graver  cares,  and  for  his  health ; the  chase  was  prin-
cipally the  buck  and  doe,  and  no  prince  in  the  world  had  greater
herds  of  deer,  either  wandering  in  freedom  through  the  wilds
and  forests,  or  kept  in  parks  and  chases  for  this  purpose.  The
game  during  the  three  summer  months  was  the  buck,  then  fat
and  in  season ; and  in  the  autumn  and  ivinter,  for  the  same
length  of  time,  the  doe.  This  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  dis-
secting numbers  of  these  animals  almost  every  day  during  the
whole  of  the  season  when  they  were  rutting,  taking  the  male,
and  falling  with  young ; I had  occasion,  so  often  as  I desired
it,  to  examine  and  study  all  the  parts,  particularly  those  dedi-
cated to  the  offices  of  generation.

I shall  therefore  consider  the  generation  of  rivipai’ous  ani-
mals in  general,  from  the  particular  history  of  the  hind  and
doe,  as  the  instance  most  convenient  to  me ; and  as  I have  done
above,  in  speaking  of  oviparous  generation,  where  I have  re-
ferred everything  to  the  common  fowl,  so  shall  I here,  in  dis-


- Hist.  Aiiim.  lib.  %ii,  cap.  7.


ON  GENERATION.


467


cussing  viviparous  generation,  refer  all  to  the  fallow  deer  and  roe.
In  taking  this  course,  I am  not  moved  by  the  same  reasons  as
I was  in  reference  to  the  hen’s  egg;  hut  because  the  great
prince,  whose  physician  I was,  besides  taking  much  pleasure  in
such  inquiries,  and  not  disdaining  to  bear  witness  to  my  dis-
coveries, was  pleased  in  his  kindness  and  munificence  to  order
me  an  abundant  supply  of  these  animals  and  repeated  oppor-
tunities of  examining  their  bodies.

I therefore  propose  to  give  the  history  of  generation  in  the
hind  and  doe  as  I have  observed  it  during  a long  series  of  years,
and  as  most  familiar  to  me,  believing  that  from  thence  some-
thing certain  in  reference  to  the  generation  of  other  viviparous
animals  may  be  concluded.  In  giving  a faithful  narrative  of
this  history,  I shall  not  abstain  in  its  course  from  introducing
particulars  worthy  of  note  that  have  either  been  observed  acci-
dentally and  by  the  way,  or  that  are  the  result  of  particular
dissections  instituted  for  the  purpose  of  arriving  at  conclusions,
the  subjects  of  these  having  been  other  bisulcated,  hoofed,  or
multungulated  animals,  or,  finally,  man  himself.  W e shall  give
a simple  narrative  of  the  series  of  formations  of  the  foetus,  fol-
lowing the  footsteps  of  nature  in  the  process.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTY-FIFTH.

Of  the  uterus  of  the  hind  and  doe.

About  to  treat  of  the  generation  of  the  hind  and  doe,  our
first  business  will  be  to  speak  of  the  place  where  it  proceeds,  or
of  the  uterus,  as  we  have  done  above,  in  giving  the  history  of
the  common  fowl,  by  which  all  that  follows  will  be  more  easily
and  readily  understood.  And  history  has  this  great  pre-emi-
nence over  fable,  that  it  narrates  the  events  which  transpired
in  certain  places  at  certain  times,  and  therefore  leads  us  to
knowledge  by  a safe  and  assured  way.

Now  that  we  may  have  a clearer  idea  of  the  uterus  of  the
hind,  I shall  describe  both  its  external  and  internal  structure,
following  the  uterus  of  the  human  female  as  my  guide.  For
man  is  the  most  consummate  of  creatures,  and  has  therefore


468


ON  GENERATION.


the  genital  as  well  as  all  other  parts  in  higher  perfection  than
any  other  animal.  The  parts  of  the  female  uterus  conse-
quently present  themselves  with  great  distinctness,  and  by  rea-
son of  the  industry  of  anatomists  in  this  direction  are  believed
to  be  particularly  well  known  to  us.

We  meet  wdth  many  things  in  the  iitenis  of  deer  which  we
encounter  in  the  uterus  of  the  human  female ; and  we  also
observe  several  that  differ.  In  the  vulva  or  os  externum  we
find  neither  labia,  nor  clitoris,  nor  nymphse,  hut  only  two  open-
ings, one  for  the  urine,  adjacent  to  the  pecten,  or  os  pubis,
the  other  the  vagina,  lying  between  the  meatus  urinarius  and  the
anus.  A cuticular  or  membranous  fold,  such  as  we  have  noted
in  the  hen,  stretching  downwards  from  the  anus,  acts  as  a vela-
brum,  supplies  the  place  of  nymphm  and  labia  pudendi,  and
guards  against  injury  from  without.  This  velabram  must  be
somewhat  retracted  by  the  female  when  she  copiilates,  or  at  all
events  must  be  raised  by  the  penis  of  the  male  as  it  enters  the
vulva.

The  symphysis  pubis  being  dmded  in  deer,  and  the  legs
widely  separated,  the  urinary  bladder,  the  vagina  which  is  entered
by  the  penis  of  the  buck,  and  the  cervix  uteri,  are  all  seen  in
their  relative  situations,  not  otherwise  than  they  are  in  women  ;
the  ligamenta  suspensoria,  Avith  the  veins,  arteries,  and  testicles,
as  they  are  called,  also  come  into  sight ; the  cornua  of  the
uterus  in  these  creatures  ai’e  also  more  remai’kable  than  any
other  part  of  this  organ.

As  for  the  vessels  called  vasa  prEeparantia  and  vasa  deferentia
seu  ejaculantia,  you  Avill  discover  nothing  of  the  kind  here,  nor
indeed  in  any  other  female  animal  that  I am  aware  of.  The
anatomists  who  beheve  that  Avomeu  emit  a seminal  fluid  sub
coitu  have  been  too  eager  in  their  search  after  such  A essels;
for  in  some  they  are  not  met  with  at  all,  and  where  they  do
occur  they  never  present  themselves  Avith  anything  of  uniformity
of  character.  Wherefore  it  seems  most  hkely  that  women  do
not  emit  any  semen  sub  coitu,  which  is  in  conformity  as  I have
said  with  what  the  greater  number  of  Avomen  state.  And  al-
though some  of  Avarmer  temperament  shed  a fluid  in  the  sexual
embrace,  still  that  this  is  fruitful  semen,  or  is  a necessary  re-
quisite to  conception,  I do  not  belieA'e ; for  many  women  con-
ceive without  haAung  any  emission  of  the  kind,  and  some  CA'cn


ON  GENERATION.


469


without  any  kind  of  pleasurable  sensation  whatsoever.  But
of  these  things  more  in  another  place.

The  vulva,  or  vagina  uteri,  which  extends  from  the  os  exter-
num to  the  inner  orifice  of  the  uterus,  is  situated  in  the  hind,
as  well  as  in  the  human  female,  between  the  urinary  bladder
and  the  intestinum  rectum,  and  corresponds  in  length,  width,
and  general  dimensions,  with  the  penis  of  the  male.  When  this
part  is  laid  open  it  is  found  occupied  lengthwise  by  rugae  and
furrows,  admitting  of  ready  distension,  and  lubricated  with  a
sluggish  fluid.  At  its  bottom  we  observe  a very  narrow  and
small  orifice,  the  commencement  of  the  cervix  uteri,  by  which
whatever  is  propelled  outw'ards  from  the  cavity  of  the  uterus
must  pass.  This  is  the  corresponding  orifice  to  that  which
medical  men  assert  is  so  firmly  closed  and  sealed  up  in  the
pregnant  woman  and  virgin,  that  it  will  not  even  admit  the
point  of  a probe  or  fine  needle.

The  os  uteri  is  followed  by  the  cervix  or  process,  which  is
much  longer  and  rounder  than  in  woman,  and  also  more  fibrous,
thicker,  and  nervous ; it  extends  from  the  bottom  of  the  vagina
to  the  body  of  the  uterus.  If  this  cervix  uteri  be  divided  lon-
gitudinally, you  perceive  not  only  its  external  orifice  at  the
bottom  of  the  vagina,  its  surface  in  close  contact,  and  so  firmly
agglutinated  that  not  even  air  blo'wn  into  the  vagina  will  pe-
netrate the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  but  five  other  similar  con-
strictions placed  in  regular  order,  firmly  contracted  against  the
entrance  of  any  foreign  body  and  sealed  with  gelatinous  mucus ;
just  as  we  find  the  narrow  orifice  of  the  woman^s  uterus  plugged
with  a yellowish  glutinous  mass.  A like  constriction  of  parts,
all  firmly  closed,  and  precluding  all  possibility  of  entrance,
Fabricius  has  found  in  the  uterine  neck  of  the  sheep,  sow,  and
goat.  In  the  deer  there  are  very  distinctly  five  of  these  con-
strictions, or  so  many  orifices  of  the  uterus  constricted  and  con-
glutinated,  which  may  all  justly  be  looked  upon  as  so  many
barriers  against  the  entrance  of  anything  from  without.  Such
particular  care  has  nature  taken,  that  if  the  first  barrier  were
forced  by  any  cause  or  violence,  the  second  should  still  stand
good,  and  so  the  third,  and  the  fourth,  and  the  fifth,  deter-
mined apparently  that  nothing  should  enter.  A probe  pushed
from  within  outwards,  however,  from  the  cavity  of  the  uterus^
towards  the  vagina,  passes  through  readily.  A way  had  to  be


470


ON  GENERATION.


left  open  for  the  escape  of  flatus,  menstrual  blood,  and  other
excreted  fluids;  hut  even  the  smallest  and  most  subtile  things,
air,  for  instance,  and  the  seminal  fluid  are  precluded  all  access
from  without.

In  all  animals  this  uterine  orifice  is  found  obstructed  or
plugged  up  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  wont  to  be  in  women,
among  whom  we  have  sometimes  known  the  outlet  so  much  con-
stricted that  the  menses,  lochia,  and  other  humourswere  retained
in  the  womb,  and  became  the  exciting  cause  of  most  severe
hysterical  symptoms.  In  such  cases  it  became  necessaiy  to
contrive  a suitable  instrument  with  which  the  os  uteri  being
opened,  the  matters  that  stagnated  within  were  discharged,
when  all  the  aceidents  disappeared.  By  this  contrivance  in-
jections could  also  he  thrown  into  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  and
by  means  of  these  I have  cured  internal  ulcers  of  the  womb,
and  have  occasionally  even  found  a remedy  for  baiTenuess.

The  cavity  of  the  uterus  in  the  deer  is  extremely  small,  and
the  thickness  of  its  walls  not  great ; the  body  of  the  womb  in
these  animals  is,  in  fact,  hut  a kind  of  vestibule,  or  ante-room,
in  the  cavity  of  which  a passage  opens  to  the  right  and  left
into  either  cornu.

For  the  parts  are  different  in  almost  aU  animals  from  what  they
are  in  woman,  in  whom  the  principal  part  of  the  uterus  is  its  body,
and  the  cervix  and  cornua  are  mere  appendices,  that  scarcely
attract  attention.  The  neck  is  short ; the  cornua  are  slender
round  processes  extending  fi’om  the  fundus  uteri  hke  a couple  of
tubes,  which  anatomists  indeed  commonly  speak  of  as  the  vasa
ejaculatoria.  In  the  deer,  however,  as  in  all  other  quach’upeds,
except  the  ape  and  the  solipeds,  the  chief  organ  of  generation
is  not  the  body  but  the  horns  of  the  uterus.  In  the  human
female  and  the  solipedia,  the  uterus  is  the  ‘ place^  of  conception,
in  all  the  rest  the  conception  is  perfected  in  the  cornua ; and
this  is  the  reason  why  writers  so  commonly  speak  of  the  cornua
uteri  in  the  lower  animals  under  the  simple  name  of  the  utenis,
saying  that  the  uterus  in  certain  animals  is  bipartite,  whilst  in
others  it  is  not,  imderstanding  by  the  word  uteras  the  place  in
which  conception  takes  place,  this  in  the  majority  of  vivipa-
rous and  especially  of  mnltiparous  animals  being  the  cornua,  to
which  moreover  all  the  arteries  and  veins  distributed  to  the
organs  of  generation  are  sent.  We  shall  therefore,  in  treating


ON  GENERATION.


471


of  the  history  of  generation  in  the  deer  employ  the  words  uterus
and  horns  of  the  uterus  promiscuously.

In  the  human  female,  as  I have  said,  the  two  tubes  that  arise
near  the  cervix  uteri  and  there  perforate  its  ca\nty  have  no
analogy  to  the  parts  generally  called  cornua,  but,  on  the  con-
trary, in  the  mind  of  some  anatomists,  to  the  vasa  spermatica.
By  others  again  they  are  called  the  spirameuta  uteri — the
breathing  tubes  of  the  uterus  ; and  by  others  still  they  are  called
the  vasa  deferentia  sen  reservantia,  as  if  they  were  of  the  same
iiatm’e  as  the  canals  so  designated  in  the  male ; whilst  they  in
fact  correspond  to  the  cornua  of  the  uterus  in  other  animals,  as
most  clearly  appears  from  their  situation,  connexion,  length,
perforation,  general  resemblance,  and  also  office.  For  as  many
of  the  lower  animals  regularly  conceive  in  the  cornua  uteri,  so
do  women  occasionally  carry  their  conceptions  in  the  cornu,  or
this  tube,  as  the  learned  Riolanus^  has  shown  from  the  obser-
vations of  others,  and  as  we  ourselves  have  found  it  with  our
own  eyes.

These  cornua  terminate  in  a common  cavity  which,  as  stated,
forms  a kind  of  porch  or  vestibule  to  the  uterus,  and  corresponds
in  the  deer  to  the  neck  of  the  womb  in  women;  in  the  same
way  as  the  tubes  in  question  in  the  human  female  correspond
to  the  cornua  uteri  in  the  deer.  Now  this  name  of  cornua  has
been  derived  from  the  resemblance  of  the  parts  to  the  horns  of
an  animal ; and  in  the  same  way  as  the  horns  of  a goat  or  ram
are  ample  at  the  base,  arched  and  protuberant  in  front,  and
bent-in  behind,  so  are  these  horns  of  the  uterus  in  the  hind
and  doe  capacious  interiorly,  and  taper  gradually  off  superiorly,
as  they  are  reflected  towards  the  spine.  Further,  as  the
horns  of  the  animal  are  unequally  tuberculated  and  uneven  in
front,  but  smooth  behind,  so  are  the  horns  of  the  uterus  tuber-
culated, as  it  were,  and  uneven,  through  the  presence  of  cells,
something  like  those  of  the  colon,  inferiorly  and  anteriorly ;
but  superiorly,  and  on  the  aspect  towards  the  spine,  they  are
continuous  and  smooth,  and  present  themselves  secured  and
bound  down  by  a ligamentous  band  ; they  at  the  same  time
gradually  decrease  in  size  hke  horns.  Did  one  take  a piece  of
empty  intestine,  such  as  is  used  for  making  sausages,  and  draw-


Anthropologia,  lib.  ii,  cap.  34.


472


ON  GENERATION.


ing  a tape  tlirougli  it,  tied  this  on  one  side,  he  would  have  it
puckered  and  constricted  on  that  side,  and  thrown  into  cells
similar  to  those  of  the  colon  on  the  opposite  side.  Such  is  the
structure  of  the  cornua  of  the  uterus  in  the  hind  and  doe.  In
other  animals  it  is  different ; for  there  the  cells  are  either  much
larger,  or  they  are  entirely  wanting.  The  cells  of  the  cornua
uteri  of  the  hind  and  doe,  however,  are  not  all  of  the  same
size ; the  first  that  is  met  with  is  much  larger  than  any  of  the
others ; and  here  it  is  that  the  conception  is  generally  lodged.

As  the  uterus,  tubes,  or  cornua,  and  other  parts  appertain-
ing in  the  human  female  are  connected  with  the  pubes,  spine,
and  surrounding  structures  by  the  medium  of  broad  and  fleshy
membranes,  by  suspensory  bands,  as  it  were,  which  anatomists
have  designated  by  the  name  of  bats^  wings,  because  they  have
found  that  the  uterus  suspended  in  this  way  resembled  a bat
with  its  wings  expanded,  so  also  are  the  cornua  uteri,  together
with  the  testes  [ovaries],  on  either  side,  and  all  the  uterine
vessels,  connected  Avith  the  neighbouring  parts,  particularly
with  the  spine,  by  means  of  a firm  membrane,  within  the  folds
of  which  are  suspended  all  the  parts  that  have  been  men-
tioned, and  which  serves  the  same  office  with  reference  to  these
uterine  structures  as  the  mesentery  does  to  the  intestines,  and
the  mesometrium  to  the  uterus  of  the  fowl.  In  the  same  way,
too,  as  the  mesenteric  arteries  and  veins  are  distributed  to  the
intestines  through  the  mesentery,  are  the  uterine  vessels  dis-
tributed to  the  uterus  through  the  membrane  in  question ; in
Avhich  also  certain  vessels  and  glands  are  perceived  on  either
side,  which  by  anatomists  are  generally  designated  the  testicles
[the  ovaries.]

The  substance  of  the  horns  of  the  uterus  in  the  hind  and
doe  is  skinny  or  fleshy,  like  the  coats  of  the  intestines,  and
has  a few  very  minute  veins  ramified  over  it.  Tliis  substance
you  may  in  anatomical  fashion  dmde  into  several  layers,  and
note  difFerent  com’ses  of  its  component  fibres,  fitting  them  to
perform  the  seA^eral  motions  and  actions  required,  retention,
namely,  and  expulsion.  I have  myself  frequently  seen  these
cornua  moving  hke  earthwonns,  or  in  the  manner  in  which  the
intestines  may  at  any  time  be  obseiwed,  twisting  themselves
with  an  undulatory  motion,  on  laying  open  the  abdomen  of  a
recently  slaughtered  animal,  by  which  they  move  on  the  chyle


ON  GENERATION.


473


and  excrements  to  inferior  portions  of  the  gut,  as  if  they  were
surrounded  and  compressed  with  a ring  forced  over  them,  or
were  stripped  between  the  fingers.

The  uterine  veins,  as  in  woman,  all  arise  from  the  vena
cava,  near  the  emulgents;  the  arteries  (and  this  also  is  common
to  the  deer  and  the  human  subject)  arise  from  the  crural
branches  of  the  descending  aorta.  And  as  in  the  pregnant
Avoman  the  uterine  vessels  are  relatively  larger  and  more  nu-
merous than  in  any  other  part  of  the  body,  this  is  hkewise
the  case  in  the  pregnant  hind  and  doe.  The  arteries,  how-
ever, contrary  to  the  arrangement  in  other  parts  of  the  body,
are  much  more  numerous  than  the  veins ; and  air  blown  into
them  makes  its  way  into  the  neighbouring  veins,  although  the
arteries  cannot  be  inflated  in  their  turn  by  blowing  into  the
veins.  This  fact  I also  find  mentioned  by  Master  Riolanus  ; and
it  is  a cogent  argument  for  the  circulation  of  the  blood  disco-
vered by  me ; for  he  clearly  proves  that  whilst  there  is  a pas-
sage from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  there  is  none  backwards
from  the  veins  into  the  arteries.  The  arteries  are  more  nume-
rous than  the  veins,  because  a large  supply  of  nourishment
being  required  for  the  foetus,  it  is  only  what  is  left  unused  that
has  to  be  returned  by  the  latter  channels.

In  the  deer  as  well  as  in  the  sheep,  goat,  and  bisulcate  ani-
mals generally,  we  find  testicles ; but  these  are  mere  little
glands,  which  rather  correspond  in  their  proportions  to  the
prostate  or  mesenteric  glands,  the  use  of  which  is  to  estabhsh
divarications  for  the  veins,  and  to  store  up  a fluid  for  lubricat-
ing the  parts,  than  for  secreting  semen,  concocting  it  into
fecundity,  and  shedding  it  at  the  time  of  intercourse.  I am
myself  especially  moved  to  adopt  this  opinion,  as  well  by  nu-
merous reasons  which  will  be  adduced  elsewhere,  as  by  the  fact
that  in  the  rutting  season,  when  the  testes  of  the  buck  and
hart  enlarge  and  are  replete  with  semen,  and  the  cornua  of  the
uterus  of  the  hind  and  doe  are  greatly  changed,  the  female
testicles,  as  they  are  called,  whether  they  be  examined  before
or  after  intercourse,  neither  swell  nor  vary  from  their  usual
condition ; they  show  no  trace  of  being  of  the  slightest  use
either  in  the  business  of  intercourse  or  in  that  of  generation.

It  is  surprising  what  a quantity  of  seminal  fluid  is  found
in  the  vesiculse  seminales  and  testicles  of  moles  and  the  larger


474


ON  GENERATION.


kinds  of  mice  at  the  season  of  intercourse ; this  circumstance
corresponds  with  what  we  have  already  noticed  in  the  cock,  and
the  great  change  perceptible  in  the  organs  of  generation  of
both  sexes ; nevertheless,  the  glands,  which  are  regarded  as
the  female  testes,  continue  all  the  while  unchanged  and  with-
out departure  from  their  pristine  appearance.

All  that  has  now  been  said  of  the  uterus  and  its  horns  in
hinds  and  does  applies  in  major  part  to  vmparous  animals  in
general,  hut  not  to  the  human  female,  inasmuch  as  she  con-
ceives in  the  body  of  the  uterus,  but  all  these,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  horse  and  ass,  in  the  horns  of  the  organ ; and  even
the  horse  and  ass,  although  they  appear  to  carry  their  fruit  in
the  uterus,  still  is  the  place  of  the  conception  in  them  rather
of  the  nature  of  an  uterine  horn  than  the  uterine  body.  For
the  place  here  is  not  bipartite  indeed,  but  it  is  oblong,  and
different  from  the  human  uterus  both  in  its  situation,  con-
nexions, structure,  and  substance;  it  bears  a greater  affinity  to
the  superior  uterus  or  uterine  process  of  the  fowl,  where  the
egg  grows  and  becomes  surrounded  with  the  albumen,  than  to
the  uterus  of  the  woman.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTY-SIXTH.

Of  the  intercourse  of  the  hind  and  doe.

So  much  for  the  account  of  the  uterus  of  the  female  deer,
where  we  have  spoken  briefly  upon  all  that  seemed  necessary
to  the  history  of  generation,  \iz.  the  ‘ place^  of  conception,  and
the  parts  instituted  for  its  sake.  We  have  still  to  speak  of
the  action  and  office  of  this  ‘place,’  in  other  words,  of  inter-
course and  conception.

The  hind  and  doe  admit  the  male  at  one  and  only  one
particular  season  of  the  year,  namely,  iu  the  middle  of  Sep-
tember, after  the  Feast  of  the  Holy  Cross ; and  they  bring  forth
after  the  middle  of  June,  about  the  Feast  of  St.  John  the
Baptist  (24th  June).  They,  therefore,  go  'with  youug  about
nine  months,  not  eight,  as  Pliny  says ; ^ uith  us,  at  all  events.


' Lib.  viii,  caj).  32.


ON  GENERATION.


47.5


they  produce  in  the  ninth  month  after  they  have  taken  the
buck.

At  the  rutting  season  the  bucks  herd  with  the  does ; at
other  times  they  keep  severally  apart^  the  males^  particularly
the  older  ones,  associating  together,  and  the  females  and
younger  males  trooping  and  feeding  in  company.  The  rutting
season  lasts  for  a whole  month,  and  it  begins  later  if  the  wea-
ther have  been  dry,  earlier  if  it  have  been  wet.  In  Spain,  as
I am  informed,  the  deer  are  hardly  in  rut  before  the  begin-
ning of  October,  wet  weather  not  usually  setting  in  there  until
this  time;  but  with  us  the  rutting  season  rarely  continues  be-
yond the  middle  of  October.

At  this  time  deer  are  rendered  savage  by  desire,  so  that
they  will  attack  both  dogs  and  men,  although  at  other  seasons
they  are  so  timid  and  peaceable,  and  immediately  betake  them-
selves to  flight  on  the  barking  of  even  the  smallest  dog.

Every  male  knows  all  his  own  females,  nor  will  he  suffer
any  one  of  them  to  wander  from  his  herd  : with  a run  he  speedily
drives  back  any  straggler ; he  walks  jealously  from  time  to
time  among  his  wives ; looks  circumspectly  about  him,  and
the  careful  guardian  of  his  own,  he  shows  himself  the  watchful
sentinel.  If  a strange  doe  commit  any  otfence,  he  does  not
pursue  her  very  eagerly,  but  rather  suffers  her  to  get  away ;
but  if  another  buck  approach  he  instantly  runs  to  meet  him,
and  gives  him  battle  with  his  antlers.

The  hind  and  doe  are  held  among  the  number  of  the
chaster  animals ; they  suffer  the  addresses  of  the  male  reluct-
antly, who,  like  the  bull,  mounts  with  violence,  and  unless
forced  or  tired  out,  they  resist  him ; which  disinclination  of
the  females  appears  also  to  be  the  reason  of  their  herding
together,  and  confining  themselves  to  their  own  males,  who
are  always  the  older  and  better  armed ; for  when  any  strange
male  approaches  them  they  immediately  take  to  flight,  and
seek  refuge  in  their  own  herd,  and  protection  to  their  chastity,
as  it  seems,  from  their  proper  husband.

If  a younger  male  finds  a female  straying  alone,  he  imme-
diately pursues  her,  and  when  she  is  worn  out  and  unable  to
fly  farther  he  mounts  and  forces  her  to  his  pleasure.

The  male^  all  provide  themselves  what  are  called  rutting
places ; that  is  to  say,  they  dig  a trench,  or  they  take  their


476


ON  GENERATION.


stand  upon  an  acclivity,  whither  they  compel  their  females  to
come  in  turn.  The  female  that  is  to  be  leapt  stands  with  her
hind  feet  in  the  trench  prepared  for  the  purpose,  stooping  or
lowering  her  haunches  somewhat,  if  need  be ; by  which  the
male  is  enabled,  pressing  forw-ard  upon  her  in  the  same  way  as
a hull,  to  strike  her,  in  technical  language,  and  finish  the
business  of  copulation  at  one  assault.

Old  and  stm’dy  bucks  have  a considerable  number  of  does
in  their  herds,  as  many  as  ten,  and  even  fifteen ; younger  and
weaker  males  have  fewer.  Keepers  say  that  the  doe  is  sated
with  two,  or  at  most  vrith  tliree  leaps ; once  she  has  conceived
she  admits  the  male  no  more.

The  lust  of  the  male  cools  when  he  has  served  his  females ;
he  becomes  shyer,  and  much  leaner;  he  deserts  his  herd  and
roams  alone,  and  feeds  greedily  to  repair  his  wasted  strength,
nor  does  he  afterwards  approach  a female  for  a whole  year.

When  the  male  is  capable  of  intercourse  the  hair  on  his
throat  and  neck  grows  black,  and  the  extremity  of  the  prepuce
becomes  of  the  same  colour,  and  stinks  abominably.  The
females  take  the  male  but  rarely,  and  only  in  the  night  or  in
dusky  places,  which  are,  therefore,  always  chosen  by  the  males
for  their  connubial  pleasures.  When  two  stags  engage  in
battle,  as  frequently  happens,  the  vanquished  yields  possession
of  liis  females  to  the  victor.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTY-SEVENTH.

Of  the  constitution  or  change  that  takes  place  in  the  uterus  of
the  deer  in  the  course  of  the  month  of  September.

We  now  come  to  the  changes  that  take  place  in  the  genital
parts  of  the  female  after  intercourse,  and  to  the  conception  itself.
In  the  month  of  September,  then,  when  the  female  deer  first
comes  in  season,  her  cornua  uteri,  uterus,  or  place  of  concep-
tion, grows  somewhat  more  fleshy  and  thick,  softer  also,  and
more  tender.  In  the  interior  of  either  cornu,  at  that  paid,
namely,  which  looks  drawn  together  by  a baud,  and  is  turned
towards  the  spine,  we  observe,  protruding  in  regular  succes-


ON  GENERATION.


477


sion,  five  caruncles,  soft  warts,  or  papillae.  The  first  of  these
is  larger  than  any  of  the  others,  and  each  in  succession  is
smaller  than  the  one  before  it,  just  as  the  cornua  themselves
become  smaller  and  smaller  towards  their  termination.  Some
of  the  caruncles  grow  to  the  thickness  of  the  largest  finger,  and
look  like  proud  fiesh ; some  are  white,  others  of  a deeper  red.

From  the  26th  to  the  28th  of  September,  and  also  subse-
quently, in  the  month  of  October,  the  uterus  becomes  thicker,
and  the  carunculse  mentioned  come  to  resemble  the  nipples  of
the  woman’s  breast : you  might  fancy  them  ready  to  pour  out
milk.  Having  removed  their  apex  that  I might  examine
their  internal  structure,  I found  them  made  up  of  innume-
rable white  points  compacted  together,  like  so  many  bristles
erect,  and  connected  by  means  of  a certain  mucous  viscidity;
compressed  between  the  fore  finger  and  thumb,  from  the  base
upwards,  a minute  drop  of  blood  oozed  out  from  each  point,
a fact  which  led  me,  after  farther  investigation,  to  conclude
that  they  were  entirely  made  up  of  the  capillary  branches  of
arteries.

During  the  season  of  intercourse,  therefore,  the  uterine  ves-
sels, particularly  the  arteries,  are  observed  to  be  more  nume-
rous and  of  larger  size ; although  the  parts  called  the  female
testes,  as  I have  said  above,  are  neither  larger  nor  more  highly
gorged  with  blood  than  before,  and  do  not  appear  to  be  altered
in  any  way  from  their  former  state.

The  inner  aspect  of  the  uterus  or  cornua  uteri,  where  it  is
puckered  into  cells,  is  as  smooth  and  soft  as  the  ventricles
of  the  brain,  or  the  glans  penis  within  the  prepuce.  Nothing,
however,  can  be  discovered  there — neither  the  semen  of  the
male,  nor  aught  else  having  reference  to  the  conception —
during  the  whole  of  the  months  of  September  and  October,
although  I have  instituted  repeated  dissections  with  a view  of
examining  the  conception  at  this  period.  The  males  have  been
doing  their  duty  all  the  while ; nevertheless,  reiterated  dissec-
tion shows  nothing.  This  is  the  conclusion  to  which  I have
come,  after  many  years  of  observation.  I have  only  occasion-
ally found  the  five  caruncles  so  close  together  that  they  formed
a kind  of  continuous  protuberance  into  the  interior  of  the
uterus.  But  when,  after  repeated  inspections,  I still  found
nothing  more  in  the  uterus,  I began  to  doubt,  and  to  ask


478


ON  GENERATION.


myself  wlietlier  the  semen  of  the  male  could  by  any  possibility
make  its  way — by  attraction  or  injection — to  the  seat  of  the
conception  ? And  repeated  examination  led  me  to  the  con-
clusion that  none  of  the  semen  whatsoever  reached  this  seat.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTY-EIGHTH.

Of  what  takes  place  in  the  month  of  October.

Repeated  dissections  performed  in  the  course  of  the  month
of  October,  both  before  the  rutting  season  was  over  and  after
it  had  passed,  never  enabled  me  to  discover  any  blood  or
semen,  or  a trace  of  anything  else,  either  in  the  body  of  the
uterus  or  in  its  cornua.  The  uterus  was  only  a little  larger,
and  somewhat  thicker;  and  the  carmicles  were  more  tumid
and  florid,  and,  when  strongly  pressed  -ndth  the  Anger,  dis-
charged small  drops  of  blood,  much  in  the  manner  in  which  a
little  watery  milk  can  be  squeezed  from  the  nipples  of  a
woman  in  the  fourth  month  of  her  pregnancy.  In  one  or  two
does,  indeed,  I found  a green  and  ichorous  matter,  like  an
abscess,  filling  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  which  was  pretematu-
rally  extenuated ; in  other  respects  these  animals  were  healthy,
and  in  as  good  condition  as  others  which  I examined  at  the
same  time.

Towards  the  end  of  October  and  beginning  of  November,
the  rutting  season  being  now  ended,  and  the  females  separat-
ing themselves  from  the  males,  the  uterus  begins  (in  some
sooner,  in  others  later)  to  shrink  in  size,  and  the  walls  of  its
internal  cavity,  inflated  in  appearance,  to  bulge  out ; for  where
the  cells  existed  formerly  there  are  now  certain  globular  masses
projecting  internally,  which  nearly  fill  the  whole  cavity,  by
which  the  sides  are  brought  into  mutual  contact,  and  almost
agglutinated,  as  it  seems,  so  that  there  is  no  inteiwal  between
them.  Even  as  we  have  seen  the  lips  of  boys  who,  in  robbing  a
hive,  had  been  stung  in  the  mouth,  swollen  and  enlarged,  so
that  the  oral  aperture  was  much  couti’acted,  even  so  does  the  in-
ternal surface  of  the  uterus  in  the  doe  enlarge,  and  become  fiUed
with  a soft  and  pulpy  substance,  like  the  matter  of  the  brain,


ON  GENERATION.


479


that  fills  its  cavity  and  involves  the  caruncles,  which,  though
not  larger  than  before,  look  whiter,  and  as  if  they  had  been
steeped  in  hot  water,  much  as  the  nurse’s  nipple  appears  im-
mediately after  the  infant  has  quitted  it.  And  now  I have
not  found  it  possible  by  any  compression  to  force  blood  out  of
the  caruncles  as  before.

Nothing  can  be  softer,  smoother,  more  delicate,  than  the
inner  aspect  of  the  uterus  thus  raised  into  tubers.  It  rivals
the  ventricles  of  the  brain  in  softness,  so  that  without  the  in-
formation of  the  eye  we  should  scarcely  perceive  by  the  finger
that  we  were  touching  anything.  When  the  abdomen  is  laid
open  immediately  after  the  death  of  the  animal,  I have  fre-
quently seen  the  uterus  affected  with  a wavy  and  creeping
motion,  such  as  is  perceived  in  the  lower  part  of  a slug  or
snail  whilst  it  is  moving,  as  if  the  uterus  were  an  animal  mth-
in  an  animal,  and  possessed  a proper  and  independent  mo-
tion. I have  frequently  observed  a movement  of  the  same
kind  as  that  just  described  in  the  intestines,  whilst  engaged
in  vivisections ; and  indeed  such  a motion  can  both  be  seen
and  felt  in  the  bodies  of  dogs  and  rabbits  whilst  they  are  alive
and  uninjured.  I have  also  observed  a corresponding  motion
in  the  testes  and  scrotum  of  men ; and  I have  even  known
women  upon  whom,  in  their  eagerness  for  offspring,  such  pal-
pitations have  imposed.  But  whether  the  uterus  in  hysterical
females,  by  ascending,  descending,  and  twisting,  experiences
any  such  motion  or  not,  I cannot  take  upon  me  to  declare ;
and  whether  the  brain,  in  its  actions  and  conceptions,  moves  in
anything  of  a similar  manner  or  not,  though  a point  difficult  of
investigation,  I am  incbned  to  look  upon  as  one  by  no  means
unworthy  of  being  attempted.

Shortly  afterwards,  the  tubercular  elevations  of  the  inner
surface  of  the  uterus  that  have  been  mentioned  begin  to
shrink ; it  is  as  if,  losing  a quantity  of  moisture,  they  became
less  plump.  In  some  instances,  indeed,  though  rarely,  I have
observed  something  like  purulent  matter  adhering  to  them,
such  as  is  usually  seen  on  the  surface  of  wounds  and  ulcers
when  they  are  digested,  as  it  is  said,  they  pour  out  smooth
and  homogeneous  pus.  AYhen  I first  saw  this  matter,  I
doubted  whether  it  was  the  semen  of  the  male  or  not,  or
a substance  concocted  from  its  purer  portion.  But  as  it  was


480


ON  GENERATION.


only  in  exceedingly  rare  instances  that  I met  with  such  matter,
and  as  twenty  days  had  then  passed  since  the  doe  had  had  any
intercourse  with  the  buck,  and  farther,  as  the  matter  was  not
viscid  and  tenacious,  or  spumous,  such  as  the  seminal  fluid
presents  itself  to  us,  but  rather  friable,  purulent  looking,
and  inclining  to  yellow,  I came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was
the  effect  of  accident,  a sweat  or  exudation  in  consequence  of
violent  exercise  previous  to  death ; just  as  in  a catarrh  the
thinner  defluxion  of  the  nose  is  by  and  by  changed  into  a
thicker  mucus.

Having  frequently  shown  this  alteration  in  the  uterus  to  his
majesty  the  king  as  the  first  indication  of  pregnancy,  and  satis-
fied him  at  the  same  time  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  shape
of  semen  or  conception  to  be  found  in  the  cavity  of  the  organ,
and  he  had  spoken  of  this  as  an  extraordinary  fact  to  several
about  him,  a discussion  at  length  arose  : the  keepers  and  hunts-
men asserted  at  first  that  it  was  but  an  argument  of  a tardy
conception  occasioned  by  the  want  of  rain.  But  by  and  by,
when  they  saw  the  rutting  season  pass  away,  I still  con-
tinuing to  maintain  that  things  were  in  the  same  state,  they
began  to  say  that  I was  both  deceived  myself  and  had  misled
the  king,  and  that  there  must  of  necessity  be  something  of  the
conception  to  be  found  in  the  utenis.  These  men,  however,
when  I got  them  to  bring  theii’  own  eyes  to  the  inquiry,  soon
gave  up  the  point.  The  physicians,  nevertheless,  held  it  among
their  aSvvara — their  impossibihties — that  any  conception  should
ever  be  formed  without  the  presence  of  the  semen  mascuhnum,
or  some  trace  remaining  of  a fertile  intercourse  within  the  caHty
of  the  womb.

That  this  important  question  might  be  the  more  satisfac-
torily settled  in  all  time  to  come,  his  highness  the  king  ordered
about  a dozen  does  to  be  separated  fi’om  the  bucks  towai’ds  the
beginning  of  October,  and  secluded  in  the  inclosru’e,  which  is
called  the  course,  at  Hampton  Court,  because  the  animal  placed
there  has  no  means  of  escape  from  the  dogs  let  loose  upon
it.  Now  that  no  one  might  say  the  animals  thus  secluded
retained  any  of  the  semen  received  from  the  last  connexions
with  the  male,  I dissected  several  of  them  before  the  rutting
season  had  passed,  and  ascertained  that  no  seminal  flioid  re-
mained in  the  uterus,  although  the  others  were  found  to  be


ON  GENERATION.


481


pregnant  in  consequence  of  tRe  preceding  intercourse — impreg-
nated by  a kind  of  contagion  as  it  appears — and  duly  produced
their  fawns  at  the  proper  time.

In  the  dog,  rabbit,  and  several  other  animals,  I have  found
nothing  in  the  uterus  for  several  days  after  intercourse.  I
therefore  regard  it  as  demonstrated  that  after  fertile  intercourse
among  viviparous  as  well  as  oviparous  animals,  there  are  no  re-
mains in  the  uterus  either  of  the  semen  of  the  male  or  female
emitted  in  the  act,  nothing  produced  by  any  mixture  of  these
two  fluids,  as  medical  writers  maintain,  nothing  of  the  menstrual
blood  present  as  ^ matter^  in  the  way  Aristotle  will  have  it ; in
a word,  that  there  is  not  necessarily  even  a trace  of  the  con-
ception to  be  seen  immediately  after  a fruitful  union  of  the
sexes.  It  is  not  true,  consequently,  that  in  a prolific  connexion
there  must  be  any  prepared  matter  in  the  uterus  which  the
semen  masculinum,  acting  as  a coagulating  agent,  should  con-
geal, concoct,  and  fashion,  or  bring  into  a positive  generative
act,  or,  by  drying  its  outer  surface,  include  in  membranes.
Nothing  certainly  is  to  be  seen  within  the  uterus  of  the  doe
for  a great  number  of  days,  namely,  from  the  middle  of  Sep-
tember up  to  the  12th  of  November.

It  appears  moreover  that  all  females  do  not  shed  seminal
fluid  into  the  uterus  during  intercourse  ; that  there  is  no  trace
either  of  seminal  fluid  or  menstrual  blood  in  the  uterus  of  the
hind  or  doe,  and  many  other  viviparous  animals.  But  as  to
what  it  is  which  is  shed  by  women  of  warmer  temperament  no
less  than  by  men  during  intercourse,  accompanied  with  failure
of  the  powers  and  voluptuous  sensations ; whether  it  be  neces-
sary to  feeundation,  whether  it  come  from  the  testes  femi-
ninse,  and  whether  it  be  semen  and  prohfic,  is  discussed  by  us
elsewhere.

And  whilst  I speak  of  these  matters,  let  gentle  minds  forgive
me,  if,  recalling  the  irreparable  injuries  I have  suffered,  I here
give  vent  to  a sigh.  This  is  the  cause  of  my  sorrow : — whilst
in  attendance  on  his  majesty  the  king  during  our  late  troubles
and  more  than  civil  wars,  not  only  with  the  permission  but  by
command  of  the  Parliament,  certain  rapacious  hands  stripped
not  only  my  house  of  all  its  furniture,  but  what  is  subject  of
far  greater  regret  with  me,  my  enemies  abstracted  from  my
museum  the  fruits  of  many  years  of  toil.  Whence  it  has  come

31


482


ON  GENERATION.


to  pass  that  many  observations,  particularly  on  the  generation
of  insects,  have  perished,  with  detriment,  I venture  to  say,  to
the  republic  of  letters.


EXERCISE  THE  SIXTY-NINTH.

Of  what  tahes  place  in  the  uterus  of  the  doe  during  the  month
of  November.

Taught  hy  the  experience  of  many  years  I can  state  truly
that  it  is  from  the  12th  to  the  14th  of  November  that  I first
discover  anything  which  belongs  to  the  futui’e  offspring  in  the
uterus  of  the  hind.

I remember,  indeed,  that  in  the  year  of  grace  1633,  the
signs  of  conception,  or  the  commencements  of  the  embiyos,  made
their  appearance  somewhat  earlier;  because  the  weather  was
then  cloudy  and  wet.  In  does,  too,  which  have  rutted  six  or
seven  days  sooner  than  hinds,  I have  always  discovered  some-
thing of  the  future  foetus  about  the  8th  or  9th  of  November.
Wliat  this  is  and  how  it  is  begun  I shall  proceed  to  state.

A little  before  anything  is  perceptible,  the  substance  of  the
uterus  or  its  horns  appears  less  than  it  was  before  the  animals
began  to  rut,  the  white  caruncles  are  more  flaccid,  as  I have
said,  and  the  protuberances  of  the  internal  coat  subside  some-
what, and  are  cornigated  and  look  moist.  For  about  the  date
above  mentioned  certain  mucous  filaments  hke  spiders’  webs  are
observed  drawn  from  the  extremities,  or  superior  angles  of  the
cornua  through  the  middle  of  either,  and  also  through  the
body  of  the  uterus.  These  filaments  becoming  conjoined  pre-
sent themselves  as  a membranous  and  gelatinous  tunic  or  empty
sac.  Even  as  the  plexus  choroides  is  extended  through  the
ventricles  of  the  brain,  is  this  oblong  sac  produced  through  the
whole  of  either  horn  and  the  intervening  cavity  of  the  utenis,
insinuating  itself  between  the  wrinkles  of  the  flabby  internal
tunic,  and  sending  delicate  fibres  among  the  aforementioned
rounded  protuberances,  being  nearly  in  the  same  manner  as
the  pia  mater  dips  between  the  convolutions  of  the  brain.

Within  a day  or  two  this  sac  becomes  filled  with  a clear,


ON  GENERATION.


483


watery^  sluggisli  albuminous  matter,  and  now  presents  itself  as
a long-sbaped  pudding  full  of  fluid.  It  adheres  by  its  external
glutinous  matter  to  the  containing  walls  of  the  uterus,  but  so
that  it  is  still  easily  separated  from  these;  for  if  it  be  taken
hold  of  cautiously  in  the  strait  of  the  uterus,  where  it  is  con-
stricted in  its  course,  it  can  be  drawn  entire  out  of  either  horn.

The  conception  arrived  at  this  stage  removed  entire,  presents
itself  with  the  figure  of  a wallet  or  double  pudding ; externally,
it  is  covered  with  a pm’ulent-looking  matter ; internally,  it  is
smooth,  and  contains  in  its  cavity  a viscid  fluid  not  unlike  the
thinner  white  of  egg.

This  is  the  conception  of  the  hind  and  doe  in  its  first  stage.
And  since  it  has  now  the  nature  and  state  of  an  egg,  and  the
definition  given  by  Aristotle'  of  an  egg  is  appHcable  to  it,
namely : A body  from  one  part  of  which  an  animal  is  produced,

the  remainder  serving  as  noxirishment  to  that  which  is  engen-
dered ; ” and  farther,  as  it  is  the  primordium  of  the  future  foetus,
it  is  therefore  called  the  ovum,  or  egg  of  the  animal,  in  con-
formity with  that  passage  of  the  pliilosopher  where  he  says
“ Those  animals  which  engender  internally,  have  a certain  ovi-
form body  produced  after  the  first  conception.  For  a humour
is  included  within  a delicate  membrane,  such  as  that  which
you  find  under  the  shell  in  the  egg  of  the  hen ; wherefore  the
blightings  of  conceptions  that  are  apt  to  take  place  about  this
period  are  called  fluxes.^^  This  conception,  therefore,  as  we
have  already  said  of  the  egg,  is  the  true  sperma  or  seed,  com-
prising the  virtue  of  both  sexes  in  itself,  and  is  analogous  to  the
seed  of  the  vegetable.  So  that  Aristotle,  describing  the  first
conception  of  women,  says,®  that  it  is  ‘^covered  with  a mem-
brane like  an  egg  from  which  the  shell  has  been  removed;’^
such  as  Hippocrates  describes  as  having  been  passed  by  the
female  pipe-player.  And  I have  myself  frequently  seen  such
ova,  of  the  size  of  pigeons’  eggs,  and  containing  no  foetus,  dis-
charged by  women  about  the  second  month  after  conception ;
when  the  ovum  was  of  the  size  of  a pheasant’s  or  hen’s  egg,  the
embryo  could  be  made  out,  the  size  of  the  little  finger  nail,
floating  within  it.  But  the  membrane  surrounding  the  con-
ception has  not  yet  acquired  any  annexed  placenta ; neither  is

' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  5 ; et  De  Gen.  Anitn.  lib.  ii,  cap.  9.

- De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  9.  ^ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vii.  cap.  7.


484


ON  GENERATION.


it  connected  with  the  uterus;  there  is  only  at  its  upper  and
blunter  part  a kind  of  delicate  mossy  or  woolly  covering  which
stands  for  the  rudiments  of  the  future  placenta.  The  inner
aspect  is  smooth  and  polished,  and  covered  with  numerous  rami-
fications of  the  umbihcal  vessels.  In  the  third  month  this  o\*um
exceeds  a goose’s  egg  in  size,  and  includes  a perfect  embryo  of
the  length  of  two  fingers’  breadths.  In  the  fouith  month  it  is
larger  than  an  ostrich’s  egg.  All  these  things  I have  noted
in  the  numerous  cai’eful  dissections  of  aborted  ova  which  I have
made.

In  the  way  above  indicated  do  the  hind  and  doe,  affected  by
a kind  of  contagion,  finally  conceive  and  produce  primordia,
of  the  nature  of  eggs,  or  the  seeds  of  plants,  or  the  fruit  of
trees,  although  for  a whole  month  and  more  they  had  exhibited
nothing  in  the  uterus,  the  conception  being  perfected  about  the
I8th,  at  furthest,  the  21st  of  November,  and  having  its  seat
now  in  the  right,  now  in  the  left  horn,  occasionally  in  both  at
once.  The  ovum  at  this  time  is  full  of  a colliquate  matter,
transparent,  crystalline,  similar  to  that  fluid  which  in  the  hen’s
egg  we  have  called  the  colliquament  or  eye,  of  far  greater  purity
than  that  fluid  in  which  the  embryo  by  and  by  floats,  and  con-
tained within  a proper  tunic  of  extreme  tenuity,  and  orbicular
in  form.  In  the  middle  of  the  ovum,  vascular  ramifications  and
the  punctum  saliens — ^the  first  or  rudimentary  pai'ticle  of  the
foetus — and  nothing  else,  are  clearly  to  he  perceived.  This  is
the  first  genital  part,  which,  once  constituted,  is  not  only  already
possessed  by  the  vegetative,  hut  also  by  the  motive  soul ; and
from  this  are  all  the  other  parts  of  the  foetus,  each  in  its  order,
generated,  fashioned,  disposed,  and  endowed  with  life,  almost  in
the  same  manner  as  we  have  descnhed  the  chick  to  he  produced
from  the  colliquament  of  the  egg.

Both  of  the  humours  mentioned  are  present  in  the  concep-
tions of  all  viviparous  animals,  and  are  regarded  by  many  as  the
excrements  of  the  foetus, — one  the  ui’uie,  the  other  the  sweat,
although  neither  of  them  has  any  unpleasant  taste,  and  they  are
always  and  at  all  periods  present  in  conceptions,  even  before  a
particle  of  the  foetus  has  been  produced.

Of  the  membranes  investing  the  two  fluids,  of  which  there
are  only  two,  the  outer  is  called  the  chorion,  the  inner  the
amnion.  The  chorion  includes  the  whole  conception,  and  ex-


ON  GENERATION.


485


tends  into  either  cornu ; the  amnion  swimming  in  the  midst
of  the  liquid  of  the  former,  is  found  in  one  of  the  horns  only,
except  in  the  cases  where  there  is  a twin  conception,  when  there
is  an  amnion  present  in  each  of  them  ; just  as  in  a twin-fraught
egg  there  are  two  colliquaments.  Where  there  are  two  foetuses
consequently,  both  are  contained  in  one  common  conception,
in  one  egg,  as  it  were,  with  its  two  separate  collections  of  crys-
talline fluid  included.  If  you  incise  the  external  membrane
at  any  point,  the  more  tm’bid  fluid  which  it  contains  imme-
diately escapes  from  either  horn  of  the  uterus ; but  the  crys-
talline liquid  in  the  interior  of  the  amnion  does  not  escape  at
the  same  time  unless  the  membrane  have  been  simultaneously
implicated.

The  vein  which  is  first  discerned  in  the  crystalline  fluid  within
the  amnion  takes  its  rise  from  the  punctum  saliens,  and  assumes
the  nature  and  duty  of  an  umbilical  vessel ; increasing  by  de-
grees it  expands  into  various  ramifications  distributed  through
the  colliquament,  so  that  it  seems  certain  that  the  nourishment
is  in  the  first  instance  derived  from  the  colliquament  alone  in
which  the  foetus  swims.

I have  exhibited  this  point  to  his  serene  highness  the  king,
still  palpitating  in  the  uterus  laid  open ; it  was  extremely  minute
indeed,  and  without  the  advantage  of  the  sun’s  light  falhng
upon  it  from  the  side,  its  tremulous  motions  were  not  to  be
perceived.

When  the  ovum  with  the  colliquament  entire  was  placed  in
a silver  or  pewter  basin  filled  with  tepid  water,  the  punctum
saliens  became  beautifully  distinct  to  the  spectators.  In  the
coiirse  of  the  next  ensuing  days,  a mucilage  or  jelly,  like  a tiny
worm,  and  having  the  shape  of  a maggot,  is  found  to  be  added;
this  is  the  rudiment  of  the  future  body.  It  is  divided  into  two
parts,  one  of  which  is  the  head,  the  other  the  trunk,  precisely
in  the  same  way  as  we  have  already  seen  it  in  the  generation  of
the  chick  in  ovo.  The  spine,  like  a keel,  is  somewhat  bent ;
the  head  is  indifferently  made  up  of  three  small  vesicles  or
globules,  and  swimming  in  transparent  vi  ater  grows  amain,  and
by  degrees  assumes  its  proper  shape.  There  is  only  this  to  be
observed,  that  the  eye  in  embryos  of  oviparous  animals  is  much
larger  and  more  conspicuous  than  that  of  viviparous  animals.

After  the  26th  of  November  the  foetus  is  seen  with  its  body


48C


ON  GENEEATION.


nearly  perfect,  in  one  case  in  the  right  in  another  in  the  left
horn  of  the  uterus ; in  twin  cases  in  both  horns.

At  this  time,  too,  the  male  embryo  is  readily  distinguishable
from  the  female  by  means  of  the  organs  of  generation.  These
parts  are  also  very  conspicuous  in  the  human  embryo,  and
make  their  appearance  at  the  same  time  as  the  trachea.

Males  and  females  are  met  with  indifferently  in  the  right
and  left  horn  of  the  uterus.  I have,  however,  more  frequently
found  females  in  the  right,  males  in  the  left  horn ; and  I have
made  the  same  observation  in  does  that  caiTied  twins,  as  well
as  in  the  sheep.  It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  the  right  or  left
side  has  no  appropriate  vu’tue  in  confen’ing  sex  ; neither  is  the
uterus,  nor  yet  the  mother  herself,  the  fashioner  or  framer  of
the  foetus,  any  more  than  the  hen  is  of  the  pullet  in  the  egg
which  she  incubates.  In  the  same  way  as  the  pullet  is  formed
and  fashioned  in  the  egg  by  an  internal  and  inherent  agent,  is
the  foetal  form  produced  from  the  uterine  ovum  of  the  hind  and
doe.

It  is  indeed  matter  of  astonishment  to  find  a foetus  formed
and  perfected  within  the  amnion  in  so  short  a space  of  time
after  the  first  appearance  of  the  blood  and  punctum  saliens.
On  or  about  the  19th  or  20th  day  of  November  this  punctum
fii’st  becomes  visible;  on  the  21st  the  shapeless  vermiculus  or
maggot  that  is  to  form  the  body  of  the  future  animal  is  per-
ceived ; and  in  the  course  of  from  six  to  seven  days  afterwards
a foetus  so  perfect  in  all  its  pai’ts  is  seen,  that  a male  can  he
chstinguished  from  a female  by  the  organs  of  generation,  and
the  feet  are  formed,  the  hooves  being  cleft,  the  whole  having  a
mucous  consistency  and  a pale  yellowish  colour.

The  substance  of  the  uterus  begins  to  be  extenuated  imme-
diately after  the  appearance  of  the  embryo ; contrary  to  what
takes  place  in  the  human  female,  whose  uterus  grows  every  day
thicker  and  fleshier  with  the  ad^'ancing  growth  of  the  foetus.  In
the  hind  and  doe,  on  the  other  hand,  the  mor^the  embryo  aug-
ments the  more  do  the  cornua  of  the  uterus  assimilate  themselves
to  the  intestines ; that  horn  in  particular  in  which  the  foetus  is
contained  looks  like  a bag  or  pouch,  and  exceeds  the  opposite
one  in  dimensions.

The  OTOm  or  conception,  thus  far  advanced,  and  with  its  in-
cluded foetus  perfectly  distinct,  has  stiU  contracted  no  adhe-


ON  GENERATION.


487


sions  to  its  mother’s  sides : the  whole  can  most  readily  be
withdrawn  from  the  uterus^  as  I have  ascertained  with  an  ovum
which  contained  a foetus  nearly  the  length  of  the  thumb.  It
is  manifest,  therefore,  that  the  foetus  up  to  this  period  has  been
nourished  by  the  albumen  alone  that  is  contained  within  the  con-
ception ; in  the  same  way  as  we  have  ascertained  the  px’ocess  to
go  on  within  the  hen’s  egg.  The  mouths  of  the  umbilical  veins
are  lost  and  obliterated  between  the  albumen  and  neighbouring
humours  of  the  conception  and  their  containing  membranes ;
but  nowhere  is  there  as  yet  any  connexion  with  the  uterus,
although  by  these  veins  alone  is  nomishment  supphed  to  the
embryo.  And  as  in  the  egg  the  ramifications  of  the  veins  are
first  sent  to  the  colhquament,  (in  the  same  way  as  the  roots  of
trees  penetrate  the  ground,)  and  afterwards  take  their  course  to
the  external  tunic  called  the  chorion,  whereon,  for  the  sake  of
the  nourishment,  they  are  dispersed  in  an  infinity  of  ramifica-
tions through  the  albuminous  fluid  contained  within  the  outer
membrane,  so  have  I observed  veins  in  the  chorion  of  a human
abortion ; and  Aristotle  i also  states  “ that  membrane  to  be
crowded  with  veins.”

If  the  foetus  be  single  its  umbilical  vessels  are  distributed  to
both  horns,  and  a few  twigs  are  also  sent  to  the  intervening
body  of  the  uterus;  but  if  the  conception  be  double,  one  in
either  horn,  each  sends  its  umbilical  vessels  to  its  own  horn
alone ; the  embryo  in  the  right  horn  deriving  nourishment
from  the  right  part  of  the  conception,  that  in  the  left  from  the
left  portion  of  the  same.  In  other  respects  the  twin-concep-
tion here  is  precisely  similar  to  the  twin- conception  of  the  egg.

Towards  the  end  of  November,  then,  all  the  parts  are  clearly
and  distinctly  to  be  distinguished,  and  the  fmtus  is  now  of  the
size  of  a large  bean  or  nutmeg ; its  occiput  is  prominent,  as  in
the  chick,  but  its  eyes  are  smaller;  the  mouth  extends  from
ear  to  ear,  the  cheeks  and  lips,  as  consisting  of  membranous
parts,  being  perfected  at  a very  late  period.  In  the  foetuses  of
all  animals,  indeed,  that  of  man  inclusive,  the  oral  aperture
without  lips  or  cheeks  is  seen  stretching  from  ear  to  ear ; and
this  is  the  reason,  rmless  I much  mistake,  why  so  many  are  boi’n
wdth  the  upper  lip  divided  as  it  is  in  the  hare  and  camel,  whence


' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vii,  cap.  7.


488


ON  GENERATION.


tlie  common  name  of  hare-lip  for  the  deformity.  In  the  deve-
lopment of  the  human  foetus  the  upper  lip  only  coalesces  in
the  middle  line  at  a very  late  period.

I have  frequently  put  a foetus  the  size  of  a large  bean,  sAvim-
ming  in  its  extremely  pure  nutritive  fluid  within  the  transparent
amnion^  into  a silver  basin  fllled  with  the  clearest  water,  and
have  noted  these  particulars  as  most  worthy  of  observation  : —
The  brain  of  somewhat  greater  consistency  than  white  of  egg,
like  milk  moderately  coagulated,  and  of  an  irregular  shape,  and
without  any  coveiing  of  skull,  is  contained  within  a general  in-
vesting membrane.  The  cerebellum  projects  in  a peak,  as  in
the  chick.  The  conical  mass  of  the  heart  is  of  a white  colour,
and  all  the  other  viscera,  the  liver  inclusive,  are  white  and
spermatic-looking.  The  trunk  of  the  umbilical  veins  arises
from  the  heart,  and  passing  the  convexity  of  the  liver,  perfo-
rates the  trunk  of  the  vena  portse,  whence,  advancing  a httle
and  subdividing  into  a great  number  of  branches,  it  is  distri-
buted to  the  colliquament  and  tunica  choroidea  in  innumerable
fine  filaments.  The  sides  of  the  body  ascend  on  either  hand
from  the  spine,  so  that  the  thorax  presents  itself  in  the  guise  of
a boat  or  small  vessel,  up  to  the  period  at  which  the  heart  and
lungs  are  included  within  its  area,  precisely  and  in  all  respects
as  we  have  seen  it  in  the  development  of  the  chick.  The  heait,
intestines,  and  other  viscera,  are  very  conspicuous,  and  present
themselves  as  appendages  of  the  body,  until  the  thorax  and  ab-
domen being  di’awn  around  them,  and  the  roof,  as  it  were,  put
on  the  building,  they  are  concealed  within  the  compages  of  these
carities.  At  this  time  the  sides  both  of  the  thorax  and  abdo-
men are  white,  gelatinous,  and  apparently  identical  in  structmn,
save  that  a number  of  slender  white  lines  are  perceived  in  the
walls  of  the  thorax,  as  indications  of  the  future  ribs,  whereby  a
distinction  is  here  made  between  the  bony  and  fleshy  com-
pages of  the  cavity.

I have  also  occasionally  observed  in  conceptions  of  the  sheep,
which  were  sometimes  twin,  sometimes  single,  of  coiTCsponding
age  and  about  a finger’s  breadth  in  length,  that  the  form  of
the  embryo  resembled  a small  lizai’d  of  the  size  of  a wasp  or
caterpillar;  the  spine  being  cm’ved  into  a cii’cle,  and  the  head
almost  in  contact  with  tlie  tail.  In  the  double  conceptions
both  were  of  the  same  size,  as  if  produced  at  once  and  simul-


ON  GENERATION.


489


taneouslyj  each  floated  distinctly  witliin  tlie  fluid  of  its  own
amnion;  but  although  one  lay  in  the  right,  the  other  in  the
left  horn  of  the  uterus,  they  were  still  both  included  in  the
same  double  sac  or  wallet,  both  belonged  to  the  same  ovum,
and  were  surrounded  by  the  same  common  external  fluid.  The
mouth  was  large,  but  the  eyes  were  mere  points,  so  that  they
could  scarcely  be  seen,  very  different,  therefore,  from  what  occurs
among  birds.  The  viscera  in  these  embryos  were  also  pendu-
lous without  the  body, — not  yet  inclosed  within  the  appropriate
cavities.  The  outer  membrane  or  chorion  adhered  in  no  way
to  the  uterus,  so  that  the  entire  conception  was  readily  removed.
Within  the  substance  of  the  chorion  innumerable  branches  of
the  umbilical  vessels  were  conspicuous,  but  having  no  connexion
whatsoever  with  the  walls  of  the  uterus ; a circumstance  to  which
allusion  has  already  been  made  in  the  case  of  the  deer;  the
distribution  was  in  fact  very  much  as  we  have  found  it  on  the
external  tunic  of  the  hen’s  egg.  There  were  but  two  hu-
mours, and  the  same  number  of  containing  tunics,  of  which  the
chorion  extending  through  both  cornua,  and  full  of  a more
turbid  fluid,  gave  general  configuration  to  the  ovum  or  concep-
tion. The  tunica  amnios  again  is  almost  invisible,  like  the
tunica  arachnoides  of  the  eye,  and  embraces  the  crystalhne
humour  in  which  the  embryo  floats.

The  fluid  of  the  amnion  was,  in  proportion,  but  a hundredth,
or  shall  I say  a thousandth,  to  that  of  the  chorion ; although
the  crystalhne  humom’  of  the  amnion  was  still  in  such  quantity
that  no  one  could  reasonably  imagine  it  to  be  the  sweat  of  the
very  small  embryo  that  floated  within  it.  It  was,  further,  ex-
tremely limpid,  and  seemed  to  be  without  anything  like  bad  taste
or  smell.  It  was,  as  we  have  already  observed  of  the  deer,  in  all
respects  like  watery  milk,  and  had  none  of  the  obnoxious  qua-
lities of  an  excrement.  I add,  that  if  this  fluid  were  of  an
excrementitious  nature  it  ought  to  increase  in  quantity  with
the  growth  of  the  foetus.  But  I have  found  precisely  the
opposite  of  this  to  obtain  in  the  conception  of  the  ewe,  so  that
shortly  before  she  lambs  there  is  scarce  a drop  of  the  fluid  in
question  remaining.  I am,  therefore,  rather  inchned  to  regard
it  as  aliment  than  as  excrement.

The  internal  tunic  of  the  uterus  of  the  ewe  is  covered  with
caruncles  innumerable,  as  the  heavens  are  with  stars.  These


490


ON  GENERATION.


are  not  unlike  crabs’  eyes,  and  I have  called  them  by  this  name ;
but  they  are  smaller,  like  pendulous  warts,  glandular  and  white,
sticking  within  the  coats  of  the  uterus,  and  somewhat  excavated
towards  the  conception;  otherwise  than  in  the  deer,  conse-
quently, in  which  the  caruncles  corresponding  to  these  rather
project  towards  the  embryo.  These  caruncles  are  gorged  with
blood,  and  their  inner  surface,  where  they  regard  the  conception,
is  perceived  to  be  beset  with  black  sanguineous  points.  The
umbilical  vessels  of  the  embryo  were  not  yet  connected  with
these  caruncles,  nor  did  the  conception  itself  adhere  to  the
uterus.

I find  nothing  of  an  allantois,  of  which  something  has  been
said  as  a tunic  distinct  from  the  chorion,  in  the  conception  of
the  ewe.  At  a later  period,  indeed,  when  the  embryo  is  larger,
when  the  ovum  or  conception  has  contracted  adhesions  with
the  uterus,  and  the  umbilical  vessels  have  penetrated  the  carun-
cles, the  chorion  extends  further,  and  at  its  extremities  on
either  side,  and  as  it  were  in  a couple  of  appendices,  there  is  a
certain  fluid  of  a yellow  coloui',  which  you  might  call  excre-
mentitious,  kept  separate  and  distinct.

The  human  conception  scarcely  differs  in  any  respect  from
an  egg  during  the  first  months  of  pregnancy.  I have  observed
a clear  fluid,  like  the  more  liquid  white  of  an  egg,  to  be  in-
cluded within  an  extremely  delicate  membrane.  At  this  time
the  placenta  had  not  yet  appeared,  and  the  entire  conception
was  of  the  size  of  a pigeon’s,  or  perhaps  a pheasant’s  egg.
The  embryo  itself,  of  the  length  of  the  little  finger  nad,  and
having  the  form  of  a small  frog,  was  conspicuous  enough.  The
body  was  broad,  the  oral  apertme  -nddely  cleft,  the  legs  and  ai’ms
like  the  stalks  of  flowers  just  risen  above  the  ground,  the  occiput
prominent,  or  rather  forming  a vesicle  appended  to  the  rest  of
the  head,  such  as  we  have  described  the  rudiments  of  the  future
cerebellum  in  the  chick.

In  another  human  conception  of  about  the  fiftieth  day,  the
ovum  was  as  large  as  a hen’s  or  a turkey’s  egg.  The  embryo
was  as  long  as  a large  bean,  the  head  of  very  lai’ge  relative
dimensions,  and  dominated  by  the  cerebellum  as  by  a kind  of
crest.  The  bi’ain  itself  was  of  the  consistence  of  ciu’dled  milk,
lustead  of  a cranium  there  was  a coriaceous  membrane,  in
some  places  cartilaginous,  and  divided  down  the  forehead  to


ON  GENERATION.


491


the  roots  of  the  nostrils ; the  face  looked  like  the  muzzle  of  a
dog.  There  were  no  external  ears,  nor  any  nose,  yet  could  the
rudiments  of  the  trachea  passing  down  to  the  lungs,  and  those
of  the  penis,  be  detected.  The  two  auricles  of  the  heart  pre-
sented themselves  like  eyes,  of  a black  colour.

In  the  body  of  a woman  who  died  of  fever  I found  an  her-
maphrodite embryo  nearly  of  the  same  size.  The  pudendum
was  like  that  of  the  rabbit,  the  labia  standing  for  prepuce,  the
nymphse  for  glans.  In  the  upper  part  the  root  of  the  penis  was
also  apparent,  and  on  either  side  for  the  testicle  there  was  the
lax  skin  of  the  scrotum.  The  uterus  was  extremely  diminu-
tive, and  in  figure  like  that  of  the  ewe  or  mole,  with  two  horns.
And  as  the  prostate  glands  are  situated  near  the  penis  of  the
boy,  so  were  the  testicles  (ovaries)  of  visible  dimensions,  seen  ad-
jacent to  these  cornua.  Externally  considered,  the  sex  seemed
that  of  the  male ; internally,  however,  it  was  rather  that  of  the
female.  The  uterus  of  the  mother  was  of  great  size,  having
the  urinary  bladder  connected  with  it  as  an  appendage.  In
the  embryo,  on  the  contrary,  the  bladder  was  large  with  the
uterus  of  very  small  dimensions  attached  to  it.

All  the  human  ova  that  have  been  described  above  were,  like
those  of  the  ewe,  shaggy  externally,  and  besmeared  with  a kind
of  gelatine,  or  glutinous  matter.  At  this  epoch,  too,  there  was
neither  any  placenta  apparent,  nor  any  visible  connexion  with
the  uterus^  neither  was  there  any  implantation  into  the  sub-
stance of  the  uterus  of  the  umbilical  vessels  scattered  over  the
surface  of  the  conception  itself.

As  in  the  deer,  so  in  the  sheep,  goat,  and  other  bisulcated
animals,  do  we  find  more  than  one  foetus  in  the  same  concep-
tion, just  as  in  twin-fraught  eggs  we  find  two  chicks  surrounded
by  the  same  albumen.  But  in  the  dog,  rabbit,  hog,  and  other
viviparous  animals  that  produce  a considerable  number  at  a
litter,  the  thing  is  otherwise.  In  these  each  foetus  has  two
humours,  these  being  severally  simrounded  with  their  proper
membranes.

In  the  bitch  there  are  a number  of  knots  or  constrictions
along  the  whole  course  of  either  cornu  of  the  uterus,  between
each  of  which  the  appropriate  humours  and  a single  embryo
are  contained.  In  the  hare  and  rabbit  we  observe  a number  of
balls,  hke  the  eggs  of  serpents,  so  that  the  horns  of  the  uterus


492


ON  GENERATION.


look  like  a pair  of  bracelets  composed  of  so  many  amber  beads
strung  upon  a thread.  The  conception  of  tbe  bare  bears  a
strong  resemblance  to  an  acorn,  the  placenta  embracing  the
embryo  like  a cup,  and  the  humours  inclosed  in  their  mem-
branes depending  hke  the  gland  or  nut.


EXERCISE  THE  SEVENTIETH.

Of  the  conception  of  the  deer  in  the  course  of  the  month  of
December.

In  the  beginning  of  December  the  foetus  is  seen  larger,  eveiy
way  more  perfect,  and  tbe  length  of  the  finger.  Tbe  heart
and  other  viscera  which  formerly  hung  externally  are  now
concealed  wdthin  the  caidties  of  the  body,  so  that  they  can  no
longer  be  seen  without  dissection.

The  conception,  or  ovum,  by  the  medium  of  the  five  carun-
cles which  we  haie  aheady  spoken  of  as  present  in  either
cornu,  is  now  in  connexion  ivith  the  uterus  at  an  equal  number
of  points  ; still  the  union  is  not  so  strong  but  that  a very  slight
rather  than  a great  effort  suflices  to  break  it.  "When  the
conception  is  detached,  we  perceive  points  or  depressions  on
the  sm’face  of  the  chorion  at  the  places  where  the  adhesions  to
the  uterus  had  existed,  these  spots  being  further  covered  with
a certain  viscid  and  wrinkled  matter,  as  if  this  had  been  the
bond  of  union  between  the  mother  and  the  ovum.  Thus  have
we  the  nature  and  use  of  these  caruncles  made  knmvn  to  us  :
seen  in  the  first  instance  as  fungi  or  excrescences  growing  from
the  sides  of  the  uterus,  they  are  now  recognized  in  connexion
with  the  conception,  as  standing  instead  of  the  placenta  or  ute-
rine cake  in  the  human  subject,  and  performing  the  same  office.
These  caruncles  are  in  fact  but  as  so  many  nipples,  whence  the
embryo  by  means  of  its  umbilical  vessels  receives  the  nomdsh-
ment  that  is  supphed  by  the  mother,  as  shall  be  clearly  shown
by  what  is  to  follow.

The  size  and  capacity  of  the  uterus,  by  which  name  we
understand  the  cornua,  or  place  occupied  by  the  conception,  is
increased  in  proportion  to  the  growth  of  the  embryo ; in  such-


ON  GENERATION.


493


wise,  however,  that  the  horn  in  which  the  foetus  is  lodged  is
larger  than  the  other.

The  conception  or  o\TirQ  is  single,  Avhether  one  or  several
embryos  are  evolved  from  it  j and  it  extends,  as  already  said,
into  both  of  the  horns,  so  that  it  presents  itself  with  the  shape
of  a double  pudding,  or  rather  of  a single  pudding  having  a
constriction  in  its  middle.  Proceeding  rounded  and  slender
from  the  upper  extremity  of  one  of  the  horns,  the  conception
gradually  enlarges,  and  is  produced  into  that  common  cavity
which  in  the  human  female  is  called  the  uterus  or  matrix  ;
(because,  by  conceiving  and  cherishing  her  offspring  in  this
place  the  woman  is  made  a mother;)  the  conception  of  the
deer,  passing  through  a kind  of  isthmus  in  the  body  of  the
uterus,  is  narrowed ; but  by  and  by,  escaping  into  the  other
cornu,  it  there  expands  at  first,  but  anon  contracts  again,  and
finally  ends  as  it  began  in  a tapering  extremity.  The  whole
conception,  therefore,  taken  out  entire,  resembles  a wallet  filled
with  water  on  either  side ; and  hence  the  chorion  is  also  called
allantois,  because  the  conception  in  the  lower  animals,  such  as
the  deer,  looks  like  an  intestine  inflated,  or  stuffed  and  tied  in
the  middle.

In  the  embryo  anatomized  at  this  period  every  internal  part
is  seen  distinct  and  perfect;  particularly  the  stomach,  intes-
tines, heart,  kidneys,  and  lungs,  which,  di\dded  into  lobes,  but
having  the  proper  form  of  the  organs,  look  bloody.  The  colour
of  the  lungs  is  deeper  than  it  is  in  those  foetuses  that  have
breathed,  because  the  lungs,  dilated  by  the  act  of  respiration,
assume  a whiter  tint.  And  by  this  indication  is  it  known
whether  a mother  has  brought  forth  a living  or  dead  child;  in
the  former  case  the  colour  of  the  lungs  is  changed,  and  the
change  remains  though  the  infant  have  died  immediately  after-
wards.

In  the  female  foetus  the  testes — improperly  so  called — are
seen  situated  near  the  kidneys  at  the  extremities  of  the  cornua
uteri  on  either  side  ; they  are  relatively  of  larger  size  than  in
the  adult,  and,  like  the  caruncles  of  the  uterus,  look  white.

In  the  stomach  of  the  foetus  there  is  a watery  fluid  contained,
not  unlike  that  in  which  it  swims,  but  somewhat  more  turbid
or  less  transparent.  It  resembles  the  milk  that  begins  to  be
secreted  in  the  breasts  of  pregnant  women  about  the  fourth  or


494


ON  GENERATION.


fifth  montli  of  pregnancy,  and  may  be  pressed  out  of  the
nipples,  or  it  is  like  tbe  drink  -wbicb  we  call  white  posset.

In  the  small  intestines  there  is  an  abundance  of  chyle  con-
cocted from  the  same  matter ; in  the  colon  greenish  faeces  and
scybala  begin  to  appear.

I do  not  find  the  urachus  perforate;  neither  do  I perceive
any  difference  between  the  tunica  allantoides  or  allantois,  which
is  said  to  contain  urine,  and  the  chorion.  Neither  do  I detect
any  urine  in  the  secundines,  but  only  in  the  bladder,  where
indeed  it  is  present  in  large  quantity.  The  bladder,  of  an  ob-
long form,  is  situated  between  the  umbilical  arteries  as  they
proceed  from  the  bifurcation  of  the  descending  aorta.

The  liver  is  rudely  sketched  and  almost  shapeless,  as  if  it
were  a mere  accidental  part ; it  looks  like  a red  coloured  mass
of  extravasated  blood.  The  brain,  with  some  pretensions  to
regularity  of  outline,  is  contained  within  the  dura  mater.  The
eyes  are  concealed  under  the  eyelids,  which  are  as  firnaly  glued
together  as  we  find  them  in  puppies  for  some  short  time  after
birth,  so  that  I found  it  scarcely  possible  to  separate  them  and
open  the  eyes.  The  breast-hones  and  ribs  have  a certain  de-
gree of  firmness,  and  the  colour  of  the  muscles  changes  from
white  to  blood  red.

By  the  great  number  of  dissections  which  I performed  in  the
course  of  this  month,  I was  every  day  confirmed  in  my  opinion
that  the  carunculse  of  the  uterus  perform  the  office  of  the  pla-
centa ; they  are  at  this  time  found  of  a reddish  colour,  turgid,
and  of  the  size  of  walnuts.  The  conception,  which  had  pre-
Auously  adhered  to  the  caruncles  by  the  medium  of  mucor  or
glutinous  matter  only,  now  sends  the  branches  of  its  umbi-
lical vessels  into  them,  as  plants  send  their  roots  into  the
ground,  by  which  it  is  fastened  and  may  he  said  to  groAV  to  the
uterus.

About  the  end  of  December  the  foetus  is  a span  long,  and  I
have  seen  it  moving  lustily  and  kicking ; opening  and  shutting
its  mouth;  the  heart,  inclosed  in  the  pericai’dium,  when  ex-
posed, was  found  pulsating  strongly  and  Ausibly;  its  ventidcles,
however,  were  still  uniform,  of  equal  amphtude  of  carity  and
thickness  of  parietes ; and  each  ending  in  a separate  apex,
they  form  together  a double-pointed  cone.  Occasionally  I have
seen  the  ffuid  contained  in  the  amides  of  the  heart,  wliich  at


ON  GENERATION.


495


this  time  present  themselves  as  ample  sacs  filled  with  bloody
continuing  to  pulsate  for  some  short  time  after  the  ventricles
themselves  had  left  off  contracting.

The  internal  organs^  all  of  which  had  lately  become  perfect,
were  now  larger  and  more  conspicuous.  The  skull  was  partly
cartilaginous,  partly  osseous.  The  hooves  were  yellowish,  flex-
ible, and  soft,  resembling  those  of  the  adult  animal  softened  in
hot  water.  The  uterine  caruncles,  of  great  magnitude  and  like
immense  fungi,  extended  over  the  whole  cavity  of  the  uterus,
and  plainly  performed  the  office  of  placentae,  for  numerous  and
ample  branches  of  the  umhihcal  vessels  penetrated  their  sub-
stance there  to  imbibe  nutritive  matter  for  the  growth  of  the
embryo.  As  in  the  foetus  after  birth,  the  chyle  is  now  carried
by  the  mesenteric  veins  to  the  porta  of  the  liver.

Where  there  is  a single  foetus  the  umbilical  vessels  are  dis-
tributed to  the  whole  of  the  carunculae,  both  those  of  the  horn
where  the  foetus  is  lodged  and  those  of  the  opposite  horn;  where
there  is  a pair  of  embryos  formed,  the  umbilical  vessels  of  each
only  extend  to  the  caruncles  of  the  horn  appropriated  to  it.

The  smaller  umbilical  veins  in  tending  towards  the  foetus,
form  larger  and  larger  trunks  by  coalescing,  until  at  length
two  great  canals  are  formed,  which  in  conjunction  pour  their
blood  into  the  vena  cava  and  vena  portae.  But  the  umbilical
arteries,  which  arise  from  the  division  of  the  descending  aorta,
form  two  trunks  of  small  size,  not  remarkable  save  for  their
pulse : proceeding  to  the  boundary  of  the  conception,  in  other
words,  to  the  conjunction  of  the  placenta  or  carunculae  with
the  ramifications  of  the  umbilical  veins,  they  first  divide  into
numerous  capillary  twigs,  and  then  are  lost  in  others  that  are
invisible.

As  the  extremities  of  the  umbilical  veins  within  the  uterus
terminate  in  the  caruncles,  so  the  uterine  vessels  on  the  out-
side, which  are  large  and  numerous,  and  bring  the  blood  from  the
mother  towards  the  uterus,  by  meaus  of  the  vessels  of  the  sus-
pensory Hgaments,  terminate  externally  on  the  caruncles.  It
is  to  be  noted,  also,  that  the  internal  vessels  are  almost  all  veins ;
the  external  vessels,  again,  are  in  many  instances  branches  of
arteries.  In  the  placenta  of  the  woman,  if  it  be  carefully  ex-
amined immediately  after  delivery,  a much  larger  number  of
arteries  than  of  veins,  and  these  of  larger  size,  will  be  found


496


ON  GENERATION.


dispersed  on  every  side  in  innumerable  subdivisions  to  tbe  very
edge  of  tbe  mass.  In  the  same  kind  of  spongy  parenchyma  of
the  spleen,  the  number  of  the  arteries  is  also  greater  than  that
of  the  veins.

The  exterior  uterine  vessels  run  to  the  uterus,  as  I have
said,  not  to  the  ovaries  (testiculi)  situated  in  the  suspensory
ligament,  as  some  suppose.

I have  remarked  an  admirable  instance  of  the  skiU  of  nature,
in  the  bulge  or  convexity  of  the  caruncles  turned  towards  the
conception  : a quantity  of  white  and  mucilaginous  matter  is  dis-
covered in  a number  of  cavities,  cotyledons,  or  Httle  cups ; these
are  all  as  full  of  this  matter  as  we  ever  see  waxen  cells  full  of
honey;  now  this  matter,  in  colour,  consistency,  and  taste,  is
extremely  like  white  of  egg.  On  tearing  the  conception  away
from  the  caruncles,  you  will  perceive  numbers  of  suckers  or
capillary  branches  of  the  umbilical  veins,  looking  like  length-
ened filaments,  extracted  at  the  same  time  from  every  one  of
the  eotyledons  and  pits,  and  from  amidst  their  mucdaginons
contents ; very  much  as  we  see  the  delicate  filaments  of  the
roots  of  herbs  folloufing  the  stem  when  it  is  pulled  out  of  the
ground.

It  is  elearly  aseertained  from  this  that  the  extremities  of  the
umbilical  vessels  are  not  conjoined  by  any  anastomosis  -with  the
extremities  of  the  uterine  vessels ; that  they  do  not  imbibe  any
blood  from  them,  but  that  they  end  and  are  obliterated  in  that
mucilaginous  matter,  and  from  it  take  up  their  nourishment,
nearly  in  the  same  way  as  at  an  earlier  period  they  had  sought
for  aliment  from  the  albuminous  humour  contaiued  within  the
membranes  of  the  conception.  In  the  same  manner,  conse-
quently, as  the  chick  in  ovo  is  nourished  by  the  white  of  the
egg  through  its  umbilical  vessels,  is  the  foetus  of  the  hind  and
doe  nourished  by  a similar  albuminous  matter  laid  up  in  these
cells,  and  not  dueetly  from  the  blood  of  the  mother.

These  canmculse  might  therefore  with  propriety  be  called
the  uterine  liver,  or  the  uterine  mammae,  seeing  that  they  are
organs  adapted  for  the  prepai’ation  and  concoction  of  that  albu-
minous aliment,  and  fitting  it  for  absoi’ption  by  the  veins.  In
those  viviparous  animals  consequently  that  have  neither  carun-
cles nor  placentae,  as  the  horse  and  the  hog,  the  foetus  is  nou-
rished up  to  the  moment  of  its  bii’th  by  fluids  contained  within


ON  GENERATION.


497


the  conception  or  ovum  ; nor  has  the  ovum  in  these  animals
at  any  time  a connexion  with  the  uterus.

From  all  of  what  precedes  it  is  manifest  that  in  both  the
classes  of  \dviparous  animals  alluded  to^  those,  namely,  that  are
provided  with  carunculae  or  cotyledons,  and  those  that  want
them,  and  perhaps  in  vmparous  animals  generally,  the  foetus
in  utero  is  not  nourished  otherwise  than  the  chick  in  ovo ; the
nutritive  matter,  the  albumen,  being  of  the  same  identical  kind
in  all.  As  in  the  egg  the  terminations  of  the  umbilical  vessels
are  in  the  white  and  yelk,  so  in  the  hind  and  doe,  and  other
animals  furnished  with  uterine  cotyledons  like  them,  the  final
distributions  of  the  umbilical  vessels  are  sent  to  the  humours
that  are  included  within  the  conception  or  ovum,  and  to  the
albumen  that  is  stored  in  the  cotyledons,  or  cup -like  ca^dties  of
the  carunculse,  where  they  open  and  end.  And  this  is  further
obvious  from  the  fact  of  the  extremities  of  the  umbilical  vessels,
when  they  are  drawn  out  of  the  afore-mentioned  miicor,  looking
completely  white ; a certain  proof  that  they  absorb  this  mu-
cilage liquefied  only,  and  not  blood.  The  same  arrangement
may  very  readily  be  observed  to  obtain  in  the  egg.

The  human  placenta  is  rendered  uneven  on  its  convex  surface,
and  where  it  adheres  to  the  uterus,  by  a munber  of  tuberous
projections,  and  it  seems  indeed  to  adhere  to  the  uterus  by
means  of  these ; it  is  not  consequently  attached  at  every  point,
but  at  those  places  only  where  the  vessels  pierce  it  in  search  of
nourishment,  and  at  those  where,  in  consequence  of  this  ar-
rangement, an  appearance  as  if  of  vessels  broken  short  olf  is
perceived.  But  whether  the  extremities  of  these  vessels  suck
up  blood  from  the  uterus,  or  rather  a certain  concocted  matter
of  the  nature  of  albumen,  as  I have  described  the  thing  in  the
hind  and  doe,  I have  not  yet  ascertained.

Finally,  that  the  truth  just  announced  may  be  still  more
fully  confirmed,  it  is  found  that  by  compressing  the  uterme
caruncles  between  the  fingers,  about  a spoonful  of  the  nutritive
fluid  in  question  may  be  obtained  from  each  of  them,  as  from  a
nipple,  unmixed  with  blood,  which  is  not  obtained  even  with
forcible  pressure.  Moreover,  the  caruncle  thus  milked  and
emptied,  like  a compressed  sponge,  contracts  and  becomes
flaccid,  and  is  seen  to  be  pierced  with  a great  number  of  holes.
From  everything,  therefore,  it  appears  that  these  caruncles  are

32


498


ON  GENERATION.


uterine  mammfe,  or  fountains  and  receptacles  of  nutritive
albumen.

The  month  of  December  at  an  end,  the  caruncles  adhere  less
firmly  to  the  uterus  than  before,  and  a small  matter  suffices  to
detach  them.  The  larger  the  foetus  grows,  indeed,  the  nearer
it  is  to  its  term,  the  more  readily  are  the  caruncles  detached
from  the  uterus,  so  that,  like  ripe  fruit  from  the  tree,  they  shp
at  length  from  the  uterus  of  themselves,  and  as  if  they  had
formed  an  original  element  in  the  conception.

Separated  from  the  uterus  you  may  perceive  in  the  prints
which  they  leave  points  pouring  out  blood ; these  are  the  arte-
ries that  entered  them.  But  if  you  now  detach  the  conception
from  the  caruncles,  no  blood  is  effused ; none  escapes,  save  from
the  ends  of  the  vessels  proceeding  from  the  conception,  although
it  does  seem  more  consonant  udth  reason  to  suppose  that  hlood
should  be  shed  from  the  caruncles  than  from  the  conception
when  they  are  forcibly  separated.  For,  as  the  caruncles  or
cotyledons  have  an  abundance  of  uterine  branches  distributed
to  them,  and  they  are  generally  believed  to  receive  blood  for
the  nourishment  of  the  foetus,  we  should  expect  that  they  would
appear  replete  ■with  blood.  Nevertheless,  as  I have  said,  they
yield  no  blood  either  under  milking  or  compression,  and  the
reason  of  this  is  that  they  contain  albumen  rather  than  blood,
and  rather  store  up  than  prepare  this  matter.  It  seems  mani-
fest, therefore,  that  the  foetus  in  utero  is  not  nomished  by  its
mother^s  blood,  but  by  this  albuminous  fluid  duly  elaborated.
It  may  even  be  perhaps  that  the  adult  animal  is  not  nourished
immediately  by  the  blood,  but  rather  by  something  mixed  with
the  blood,  which  serves  as  the  ultimate  aliment ; as  may  per-
haps be  more  particidarly  shown  in  oiu’  Physiology  and  parti-
cular treatise  on  the  Blood.

The  truth  of  that  passage  of  Hippocrates  ^ where  it  said  that
“ those  whose  acetabula  or  cotyledons  are  full  of  mucor,  abort,^’
has  always  been  suspected  by  me ; for  this  is  no  excremen-
titious  matter  or  cause  of  miscaiaiage,  but  nourishment  and  a
source  of  life.  But  Hippocrates,  by  the  word  acetabula,  per-
haps, understood  something  else  than  the  parts  so  called  in  the
uterus  of  the  lower  animals,  for  they  are  wanting  in  women  j


' Lib.  de  Nat.  Mul.,  de  morb.  vidg.  et  s.  r,  Aph.  45.


ON  GENERATION.


499


nor  does  the  placenta  in  the  human  subject  contain  any  collec-
tions of  albuminous  matter  in  distinct  cavities.

Modern  medical  wiaters,  following  the  Arabians,  speak  of
three  nutritious  humours — dew,  gluten,  and  cambium ; these
Fernelius  designates  nutritious  juices ; as  if  he  had  wished  to
imply  that  the  parts  of  our  bodies  were  not  immediately  nou-
rished by  the  blood  as  ultimate  nutriment,  hut  by  these  second-
ary juices.  The  first  of  them,  like  dew,  bathes  all  the  minutest
particles  of  the  body  on  every  side : this  fluid,  become  thicker
by  an  ulterior  concoction,  and  adhering  to  the  parts,  is  called
gluten ; finally,  altered  and  assimilated  by  the  proper  virtue  of
the  part,  it  is  called  cambium.

He  who  espoused  such  views  might  designate  the  matter
which  is  contained  in  the  cotyledonous  cavities  of  the  deer  as
gluten  or  nutritious  albumen,  and  maintain  that  as  the  ulti-
mate nourishment  destined  for  each  of  the  particular  pai’ts  of
the  foetus  it  was  analogous  to  the  albumen  or  vitellus  of  the
egg.  For  as  we  but  lately  stated,  with  Aristotle,  that  the  yelk
of  the  egg  was  analogous  to  milk,  so  do  we  think  it  not  un-
reasonable to  assert,  that  the  matter  lodged  in  the  cotyledons,
or  acetahula  of  the  uterine  placenta,  stands  instead  of  milk  to
the  foetus  so  long  as  it  remains  in  the  uterus ; in  this  way  the
caruncles  approve  themselves  a kind  of  internal  mammse,  the
nutritive  matter  of  which,  transferred  at  the  period  of  partimi-
tion  to  the  proper  mammse,  there  assumes  the  nature  of  milk,
an  arrangement  by  which  the  foetus  is  seen  to  he  nourished
with  the  same  food  after  it  has  begun  its  independent  exist-
ence, as  it  was  whilst  it  lodged  in  the  uterus.  Between  the
two-coloured  eggs  of  oviparous  animals,  consequently,  or  the
eggs  that  consist  of  a white  and  a yelk,  and  the  ova  or  con-
ceptions of  viviparous  animals,  there  is  only  this  difference,  that
in  the  former  the  vitellus  (which  is  a secondary  nutritive  matter)
is  prepared  within  the  egg,  and  at  the  period  of  birth,  being
stored  within  the  abdomen  of  the  young  creature,  serves  it  as
food ; whilst  in  the  latter,  the  nutritive  juice  is  laid  up  witliin
acetahula,  and  after  birth  is  transferred  to  the  mammse;  so
that  the  chick  is  nourished  with  milk  inclosed  in  its  interior,
whilst  the  foetus  of  the  viviparous  animal  draws  its  nourish-
ment from  the  breasts  of  its  mother.

In  the  months  of  .January,  February,  &c.,  as  nothing  new  or


500


ON  GENERATION.


worthy  of  note  occurs  which  has  not  been  already  mentioned^
(more  than  the  growth  of  the  hair,  teeth,  horns,  &c.)  but  the
parts  only  grow  larger  without  reference  to  the  process  of  gene-
ration, it  seems  unnecessary  to  say  more  upon  such  points  at
present.

I have  frequently  examined  the  conceptions  of  sheep  during
the  same  intervals.  These  I find,  as  in  the  deer,  extending
into  both  horns  of  the  uterus,  and  presenting  the  figure  of  a
wallet  or  double  sausage.  In  several  of  them  I found  two
fcEtuses ; in  others  only  one : they  were  without  a ti’ace  of
wool  on  the  surface,  and  the  eyelids  were  so  closely  glued  to-
gether that  they  could  not  be  opened;  the  hooves,  however,
were  present.  Where  there  were  two  embryos  they  were  con-
tained in  the  opposite  horns  of  the  uterus,  and  without  any
regard  to  sex  with  reference  to  the  right  or  left  horn,  the  male
being  sometimes  in  the  right,  sometimes  in  the  left,  and  the
female  the  same ; both,  however,  were,  in  every  instance,  in-
cluded Avithin  one  and  the  same  common  external  membrane
or  chorion.  The  extreme  ends  of  this  membrane  were  stained
on  either  hand  with  a yellow  or  bilious  excrement,  and  appeared
to  contain  something  turbid  or  excrementitious  in  their  interior.

Many  caruncles,  or  miniature  placentas  of  dilferent  sizes,
were  discovered,  and  otherwise  disposed  than  in  the  hind
and  doe.  In  the  sheep  they  look  like  rounded  fungi  VAuth
the  foot-stalks  broken  off,  and  are  contained  in  the  coats
of  the  uterus;  their  rounded  or  convex  aspects  are  turned
to  the  uterus,  (a  cii’cumstance,  by  the  Avay,  common  to  the  cow
and  sheep,)  their  concave  aspects,  which  are  the  smooth  ones,
being  turned  towards  the  foetus.  The  larger  branches  of  the
vessels  are  also  distributed  to  the  concave  portion,  as  in  the
human  placenta.  The  branches  in  extension  of  the  umbilical
vessels  connected  Avith  the  caruncles,  grow  pretty  firmly  into
them,  so  that  when  I attempted  to  separate  them  the  rounded
portion  was  rather  torn  from  the  interior  of  the  uterus  than
from  the  ovum  or  conception  ; different,  consequently,  from
what  Ave  observed  in  the  deer,  where  the  chorion  was  readily
detached  from  the  cotyledons  of  the  carimcules,  and  where  the
convexity  of  the  caruncule,  connected  with  the  conception,  is
separable,  Avhilst  the  concaAoty,  or  rather  the  pedicle  or  root,  is
firmly  adherent  to  the  uterus.  In  other  respects  the  function


ON  GENERATION.


501


seems  to  be  tbe  same  in  both  cases  ; in  both  the  same  aceta-
bula  are  discovered,  and  the  same  viscid  and  albuminous  mucus
can  be  pressed  out  in  both,  as  it  can  also  in  the  cow.

In  the  conception  that  contains  a single  foetus,  the  umbi-
lical vessels  are  distributed  to  the  whole  of  the  caruncules  of
either  horn ; but  the  one  in  which  the  foetus  itself  is  contained,
swimming  in  its  crystalline  fluid  within  the  amnion,  is  larger
than  the  other.  In  the  cases  where  there  are  two  foetuses
present,  each  has  its  own  separate  or  appropriate  caruncles,  and
does  not  send  its  umbilical  vessels  in  quest  of  nomdshment  be-
yond the  cornu  in  which  it  is  lodged.

In  male  foetuses,  the  testes  contained  in  the  scrotum,  of
large  size  for  the  age,  hang  externally.  Female  foetuses,  again,
have  their  dugs  in  the  same  situation,  furnished  with  nipples
like  the  breasts  of  women.

In  the  compound  stomach  of  the  foetus,  namely  the  omasus
and  abomasus,  a clear  fluid  is  discovered,  similar  to  that  in
which  it  floats ; the  two  liquids  agreeing  obviously  in  smell,
taste,  and  consistency.  There  is  also  a quantity  of  chyle  in
the  upper  part  of  the  intestinal  tube ; in  the  inferior  portion  a
greenish-coloured  excrement  and  scybala,  such  as  we  find  when
the  animal  is  feeding  on  grass.  The  liver  is  discovered  of  con-
siderable size,  the  gall-bladder  of  an  oblong  shape,  and  in  some
cases  empty.

In  so  far  as  the  order  in  which  the  several  parts  are  pro-
duced is  concerned,  we  have  still  found  the  same  rule  to  be
observed  in  the  hind  and  doe  as  in  the  egg,  and  we  believe
that  the  same  law  obtains  among  vi\dparous  animals  generally.


EXERCISE  THE  SEVENTY-FIRST.

Of  the  innate  heat.

As  frequent  mention  is  made  in  the  preceding  pages  of  the
calidum  innatum,  or  innate  heat,  I have  determined  to  say  a
few  words  here,  by  way  of  dessert,  both  on  that  subject  and  on
the  humidum  prhnigenmm,  or  radical  moisture,  to  which  I am
all  the  more  inclined  because  I observe  that  many  pride  them-


502


ON  GENERATION.


selves  upon  the  use  of  these  terms  without,  as  I apprehend,
rightly  understanding  their  meaning.  There  is,  in  fact,  no
occasion  for  searching  after  spirits  foreign  to,  or  distinct  from,
the  blood ; to  evoke  heat  from  another  source ; to  bring
gods  upon  the  scene,  and  to  encumber  philosophy  with  any
fanciful  conceits ; what  we  are  wont  to  derive  from  the  stars  is
in  truth  produced  at  home : the  blood  is  the  only  calidum  in-
natum,  or  first  engendered  animal  heat ; a fact  which  so  clearly
appears  from  oui'  observations  on  animal  reproduction,  particu-
larly of  the  chick  from  the  egg,  that  it  seems  superfluous  to
multiply  illustrations.

There  is,  indeed,  nothing  in  the  animal  body  older  or  more
excellent  than  the  blood;  nor  are  the  spirits  which  are  dis-
tinguished from  the  blood  at  any  time  found  distinct  from  it;
for  the  blood  without  heat  or  spirit  is  no  longer  blood,  hut
cruor  or  gore.  The  hlood,^^  says  Aristotle,^  “is  hot  in  a
certain  manner,  in  that,  namely,  in  virtue  of  which  it  exists  as
blood, — ^just  as  we  speak  of  hot-Avater  under  a single  term;  as
subject,  however,  and  in  itself  finally,  blood  is  blood,  it  is  not
hot : so  that  as  blood  is  in  a certain  way  hot  per  se,  so  is  it
also  in  a certain  way  not  hot  ])er  se : heat  is  in  its  essence  or
nature,  in  the  same  way  as  whiteness  is  in  the  essence  of  a
white  man;  hut  where  blood  is  by  affection  or  passion,  it  is
not  hot  per  se.”

We  physicians  at  this  time  designate  that  as  sphit  which
Hippocrates  called  impetum  faciens,  or  moving  power ; im-
plying by  this  Avhatever  attempts  aught  by  its  own  proper
effort,  and  causes  motion  A^ith  rapidity  and  force,  or  induces
action  of  any  kind ; in  this  sense  we  are  accustomed  to  speak
of  spirit  of  Avine,  spirit  of  vitriol,  &c.  And  therefore  it  is  that
physicians  admit  as  many  spii’its  as  there  are  principal  parts  or
operations  of  the  body,  Adz.  animal,  Aital,  natui’al,  Adsual,  audi-
tory, concoctive,  generative,  implanted,  influent,  &c.  &c.  But
the  blood  is  the  fii’st  produced  and  most  principal  part  of  the
body,  endowed  with  each  and  all  of  these  Adrtues,  possessed  of
powers  of  action  beyond  all  the  rest,  and  therefore,  kot  e^o-
yjji' — in  Aurtue  of  its  pre-eminence,  meriting  the  title  of  spirit.

Scaliger,  Fernehus,  and  others,  giving  less  regard  to  the


De  Part.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  3.


ON  GENERATION.


503


admirable  qualities  of  the  blood,  have  imagined  other  spirits
of  an  aerial  or  ethereal  nature,  or  composed  of  an  ethereal  or
elementary  matter,  a something  more  excellent  and  divine  than
the  innate  heat,  the  immediate  instrument  of  the  soul,  fitted
for  all  the  highest  duties.  Now  their  principal  motive  for  this
was  the  consideration  that  the  blood,  as  composed  of  elements,
could  have  no  powerof  action  beyond  these  elements  or  the  bodies
compounded  of  them.  They  have,  therefore,  feigned  or  imagined
a spirit,  different  from  the  ingenerate  heat,  of  celestial  origin
and  nature ; a body  of  perfect  simplicity,  most  subtile,  attenvi-
ated,  mobile,  rapid,  lucid,  ethereal,  participant  in  the  qualities
of  the  quintessence.  They  have  not,  however,  anywhere  de-
monstrated the  actual  existence  of  such  a spirit,  or  that  it  was
superior  to  the  elements  in  its  powers  of  action,  or  indeed  that
it  could  accomplish  more  than  the  blood  by  itself.  We,  for
our  own  parts,  who  use  our  simple  senses  in  studying  natural
things,  have  been  unable  anywhere  to  find  anything  of  the
sort.  Neither  are  there  any  cavities  for  the  production  and
preservation  of  such  spirits,  either  in  fact  or  presumed  by  their
authors.  Fernelius,  indeed,  has  these  words  : * “ He  who  has
not  yet  completely  mastered  the  matter  and  state  of  the  inge-
nerate heat,  let  him  cast  an  eye  upon  the  structure  of  the
body,  and  tm“n  to  the  arteries,  and  contemplate  the  sinuses  of
the  heart  and  the  ventricles  of  the  brain.  When  he  observes
them  empty,  containing  next  to  no  fluid,  and  yet  feels  that  he
must  own  such  parts  not  made  in  vain,  or  without  a design,  he
will  soon,  I conceive,  be  brought  to  conclude  that  an  extremely
subtile  aura  or  vapour  fills  them  during  the  life  of  the  animal,
and  which,  as  being  of  extreme  lightness,  vanished  insensibly
when  the  creature  died.  It  is  for  the  sake  of  cherishing  this  aura
that  by  inspiration  we  take  in  air,  which  not  only  serves  for  the
refrigeration  of  the  body,  by  a business  that  might  be  other-
wise accomplished,  but  further  supphes  a kind  of  nourishment.”
But  we  maintain  that  so  long  as  an  animal  lives,  the  cavities
of  the  heart  and  the  arteries  are  filled  with  blood.  We  fur-
ther believe  the  ventricles  of  the  brain  to  be  indifferently  fitted
for  any  so  excellent  office,  and  that  they  are  rather  formed  for
secreting  some  excrementitious  matter.  What  shall  we  saj^.


Physiologia,  lib.  iv,  cap.  2.


604


ON  GENERATION.


too,  when  we  find  the  brain  of  many  animals  unfurnished  with
ventricles?  And  supposing  it  were  true  that  any  kind  of  air
or  vapour  was  found  there,  seeing  that  all  nature  abhors  a
vacuum,  still  it  does  not  seem  over  probable  that  it  should  be
of  heavenly  origin  and  possessed  of  such  superlative  virtues.
But  what  we  admire  most  of  all  is  that  a spirit,  the  native  of
the  skies,  and  endowed  with  such  admirable  qualities,  should
be  nourished  by  our  common  and  elementary  air ; especially
when  we  see  it  maintained  that  the  elements  can  do  nothing
that  is  beyond  their  natural  powers.

It  is  admitted,  moreover,  that  the  spirits  are  in  a perpetual
state  of  flux,  and  most  readily  dissipated  and  coiTupted ; nor  in-
deed can  they  endure  for  an  instant  unless  renovated  by  due
supplies  of  their  appropriate  nutriment, — they  as  much  require
incessant  nourishing  as  the  primum  vivens,  or  first  animate  atom
of  the  body.  What  occasion  is  there,  then,  I ask,  for  this  ex-
traneous inmate,  for  this  ethereal  heat  ? when  the  blood  is  com-
petent to  perform  all  the  offices  ascribed  to  it,  and  the  spirits
cannot  separate  from  the  blood  even  by  a haii’^s  breadth  without
destruction;  without  the  blood,  indeed,  the  spirits  can  neither
move  nor  penetrate  anywhere  as  distinct  and  independent
matters.  And  whether  they  are  engendered  and  are  fed  and
increased,  as  some  suppose,  from  the  thinner  part  of  the  blood,
or  from  the  primigenial  moistm’e,  as  others  imagine,  all  still
confess  that  they  are  nowhere  to  be  found  apart  from  the
blood,  but  are  inseparably  connected  with  it  as  the  aliment
that  sustains  them,  even  as  the  flame  of  a lamp  or  candle  is
inseparably  connected  with  the  oil  or  tallow  that  feeds  it.
The  tenuity,  subtilty,  mobihty,  &c.  of  the  spirits,  therefore,
bring  no  kind  of  advantage  more  than  the  blood,  which  it
seems  they  constantly  accompany,  already  possesses.  The  blood
consequently  suffices,  and  is  adequate  to  be  the  immediate  in-
strument of  the  soul,  inasmuch  as  it  is  everywhere  present,
and  moves  hither  and  thither  with  the  greatest  rapidity.  Kor
can  it  be  admitted  that  there  are  any  other  bodies  or  qualities
of  a spiritual  and  incorporeal  nature,  or  any  more  divine  kinds
of  heat,  such  as  fight,  as  Cassar  Cremoninus,^  a great  adept  in
the  Aristotelian  philosophy,  strenuously  contends  against
Albertus  that  there  are.


' Dictate  vii.


ON  GENERATION.


505


If  it  be  said  that  these  spirits  reside  in  the  primigenial
moisture  as  in  their  ultimate  aliment,  and  flow  from  thence
through  the  whole  body  to  nourish  its  several  parts,  they
propound  a simple  impossibility,  viz.  that  the  ingenerate
heat,  that  primigenial  element  of  the  body,  nourished  itself,
j^et  serves  for  the  nourishment  of  the  body  at  large.  Upon
such  grounds  the  thing  nourished  and  the  thing  that  nomdshes
would  be  one  and  the  same,  and  itself  would  both  nourish  and
be  nourished ; which  could  in  no  way  be  effected;  inasmuch  as
it  is  by  no  means  probable  that  the  nourishment  should  ever
be  mixed  with  the  thing  nourished,  for  things  mixed  must  have
equal  powers  and  mutually  act  on  one  another ; and,  according
to  Aristotle’s  dictum,  "where  there  is  nutrition,  there  there
is  no  mixtui’e.”  But  as  nutrition  takes  place  everywhere,  the
nutriment  is  one  thing,  and  that  which  is  nourished  by  it  is
another,  and  it  is  altogether  indispensable  that  the  one  pass
into  the  other.

But  as  it  is  thought  that  the  spirits,  and  the  ultimate  or
primigenial  aliment,  or  something  else,  is  contained  in  animals
which  acts  in  a greater  degree  than  the  blood  above  the  forces
of  the  elements,  we  are  not  sufliciently  informed  what  is  un-
derstood by  the  expression,  " acting  above  the  forces  of  the  ele-
ments neither  are  Aristotle’s  words  rightly  interpreted  where
he  says,^  " every  virtue  or  faculty  of  the  soul  appears  to  par-
take of  another  body  more  divine  than  those  which  are  called

elements For  there  is  in  every  seed  a certain  something

which  causes  it  to  be  fruitful,  viz.  what  is  called  heat,  and  that
not  fire  or  any  faculty  of  the  kind,  but  a spirit  such  as  is  con-
tained in  -semen  and  frothy  bodies ; and  the  nature  inherent
in  that  spirit  is  responsive  in  its  proportions*to  the  element  of
the  stars.  Wherefore  Are  engenders  no  animal;  neither  is  any-
thing seen  to  be  constituted  of  the  dense,  or  moist,  or  dry.  But
the  heat  of  the  sun  and  of  animals,  and  not  only  that  which  is
stored  up  in  semen,  but  even  that  of  any  excrementitious
matter,  although  diverse  in  natui-e,  still  contains  a vital  prin-
ciple. For  the  rest,  it  is  obvious  from  this  that  the  heat  con-
tained in  animals  is  not  fire,  neither  does  it  derive  its  origin  from
fire.”  Now  I maintain  the  same  things  of  the  innate  heat  and


‘ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  ii,  cap.  3.


506


ON  GENERATION.


the  blood ; I say  that  they  are  not  fire,  and  neither  do  they
derive  their  origin  from  fire.  They  rather  share  the  nature  of
some  other,  and  that  a more  di\ine  body  or  substance.  They  act
by  no  faculty  or  property  of  the  elements ; but  as  there  is  a
something  inherent  in  the  semen  which  makes  it  prolific,  and  as,
in  producing  an  animal,  it  surpasses  the  power  of  the  elements,
— as  it  is  a spirit,  namely,  and  the  inherent  nature  of  that  spirit
corresponds  to  the  essence  of  the  stars, — so  is  there  a spirit,  or
certain  force,  inherent  in  the  blood,  acting  superiorly  to  the
powers  of  the  elements,  very  conspicuously  displayed  in  the
nutrition  and  preservation  of  the  several  parts  of  the  animal
body ; and  the  nature,  yea,  the  soul  in  this  spirit  and  blood,  is
identical  with  the  essence  of  the  stars.  That  the  heat  of  the
blood  of  animals  during  their  lifetime,  therefore,  is  neither  fire,
nor  derived  from  fire,  is  manifest,  and  indeed  is  clearly  demon-
strated by  our  observations.

But  that  this  may  be  made  still  more  certain  let  me  be  per-
mitted to  digress  a little  from  my  subject,  and,  in  a few  words,
to  show  what  is  meant  by  the  word  “ spirit,”  and  what  by  the
phrases  “ superior  in  action  to  the  forces  of  the  elements,”  to
have  the  properties  of  another  body,  and  that  more  divine  than
those  bodies  which  are  called  elements,”  and  “ the  nature  in-
herent in  this  spirit  which  answers  to  the  essence  of  the  stars.”

We  have  already  had  occasion  to  say  something  both  of  the
natru’e  of  “ spirit”  and  “ the  vital  principle,”  and  we  shall  here
enter  into  the  subject  at  greater  length.  There  are  three
bodies — simple  bodies — which  seem  especially  entitled  to  receive
the  name,  at  all  events,  to  perform  the  oflice  of  “ spirit,”  viz.
fire,  air,  and  water,  each  of  which,  by  reason  of  its  ceaseless
flux  and  motion,  expressed  by  the  words  flame,  wind,  and  flood,
appears  to  have  the  properties  of  life,  or  of  some  other  body.
I'lame  is  the  flow  of  fire,  wind  the  flow  of  air,  stream  or  flood
the  flow  of  water.  Flame,  like  an  animal,  is  self-motive,  self-
nutrient,  self- augmentative,  and  is  the  symbol  of  om’  fife.  It  is
therefore  that  it  is  so  universally  brought  into  requisition  in  re-
ligious ceremonies  : it  was  guarded  by  priestesses  and  virgins  in
the  temples  of  Apollo  and  Vesta  as  a sacred  thing,  and  from  the
remotest  antiquity  has  been  held  worthy  of  dirine  worship  by
the  Persians  and  other  ancient  nations  ; as  if  God  were  most
conspicuous  in  flame,  and  spoke  to  iis  fi'om  fire  as  he  did  to


ON  GENERATION.


507


Moses  of  old.  Air  is  also  appropriately  spoken  of  as  spirit/^
having  received  the  title  from  the  act  of  respiration.  Aristotle  ^
himself  admits,  that  there  is  a kind  of  life,  and  birth,  and
death  of  the  winds. Finally,  we  speak  of  a running  stream
as  “ living  water.^’

These  three,  therefore,  inasmuch  as  they  have  a kind  of  life,
appear  to  act  superiorly  to  the  forces  of  the  element,  and  to
share  in  a more  divine  nature  ; they  were,  therefore,  placed
among  the  number  of  the  divinities  by  the  heathen.  When
any  excellent  work  or  process  appeared,  surpassing  the  powers
of  the  naked  elements,  it  was  held  as  proceeding  from  some  more
divine  agent.  "To  act  with  power  superior  to  the  powers  of
the  elements,^^  therefore,  and,  on  that  account,  “ to  share  in  the
properties  of  some  more  divine  thing,  which  does  not  derive  its
origin  from  the  elements,”  appear  to  have  the  same  signification.

The  blood,  in  like  manner,  " acts  with  powers  superior  to  the
powers  of  the  elements”  in  the  fact  of  its  existence,  in  the  forms
of  primordial  and  innate  heat,  in  semen  and  spirit,  and  its  pro-
ducing all  the  other  parts  of  the  body  in  succession  j proceed-
ing at  all  times  with  such  foresight  and  understanding,  and
with  definite  ends  in  view,  as  if  it  employed  reasoning  in  its  acts.
Now  this  it  does  not,  in  so  far  as  it  is  elementary,  and  as  de-
riving its  origin  from  fire,  but  in  so  far  as  it  is  possessed  of
plastic  powers  and  endowed  with  the  gift  of  the  vegetative  soul,
as  it  is  the  primordial  and  innate  heat,  and  the  immediate  and
competent  instrument  of  life.  Psl/xa,  to  ^wtikov  tov  avOpwirov  :
The  blood  is  the  living  principle  of  man,  says  Suidas ; and  the
same  thing  is  true  of  all  animals ; an  opinion  which  Virgil
seems  to  have  wished  to  express  when  he  says  :

“ Una  eademque  via  sanguisque  animusque  sequuntur.”

And  by  one  path  the  blood  and  life  flowed  out.

The  blood,  therefore,  by  reason  of  its  admirable  properties
and  powers,  is  " spirit.”  It  is  also  celestial;  for  nature,  the  soul,
that  which  answers  to  the  essence  of  the  stars,  is  the  inmate  of
the  spirit,  in  other  words,  it  is  something  analogous  to  heaven,
the  instrument  of  heaven,  vicarious  of  heaven.

In  this  way  all  natural  bodies  fall  to  be  considered  under  a


De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iv,  cap.  ultimum.


508


ON  GENERATION.


twofold  point  of  view,  viz.  either  as  they  are  specially  re-
garded, and  are  comprehended  within  the  limits  of  their  own
proper  nature,  or  are  viewed  as  the  instruments  of  some  more
noble  agent  and  superior  power.  For  as  regards  their  peculiar
powers,  there  is,  perhaps,  no  doubt  hut  that  all  things  subject
to  generation  by  birth,  and  to  death  and  decay,  derive  their
origin  from  the  elements,  and  perform  their  offices  agreeably  to
their  proper  standard ; but  in  so  far  as  they  are  the  instruments
of  a more  excellent  agent,  and  are  governed  by  that,  not  acting
of  their  own  proper  nature,  hut  by  the  regimen  of  another ;
therefore  is  it,  therein  is  it,  that  they  seem  to  participate  with
another  and  more  divine  body,  and  to  surpass  the  powers  of
the  ordinary  elements.

In  the  same  way,  too,  is  the  blood  the  animal  heat,  in  so
far,  namely,  as  it  is  governed  in  its  actions  by  the  soul;  for  it
is  celestial  as  subservient  to  heaven ; and  divine,  because  it  is
the  instrument  of  God  the  great  and  good.  But  this  we  have
already  spoken  of  above,  where  we  have  shown  that  male  and
female  were  the  instruments  of  the  sun,  heaven,  and  Supreme
Preserver,  when  they  served  for  the  generation  of  the  more
perfect  animals.

The  inferior  world,  according  to  Aristotle,  is  so  continuous
and  connected  with  the  superior  orbits,  that  aU  its  motions  and
changes  appear  to  take  their  rise  and  to  receive  direction  from
thence.  In  that  world,  indeed,  which  the  Greeks  called  Koa/uoc
from  its  order  and  beauty,  inferior  and  corruptible  things  wait
upon  superior  and  incorruptible  things ; but  all  are  still  sub-
servient to  the  will  of  the  supreme,  omnipotent,  and  etermal
Creator.

They,  therefore,  who  think  that  nothing  composed  of  the
elements  can  show  powers  of  action  superior  to  the  forces  exer-
cised by  these,  unless  they  at  the  same  time  partake  of  some
other  and  more  divine  body,  and  on  this  ground  conceive  the
spirits  they  evoke  as  corrstituted  partly  of  the  elements,  partly
of  a certain  ethereal  and  celestial  substance — these  persons,  I
say,  appear  to  me  to  reason  indifferently.  In  the  fir’st  place
you  will  scarcely  find  any  elemeirtary  body  which  in  acting
does  not  exceed  its  proper  powers : afr  and  water,  the  winds
and  the  ocean,  wherr  they  waft  naries  to  either  India  and  rorrud
this  globe,  and  often  by  opposite  courses,  when  they  grind,


ON  GENERATION.


509


bake,  dig,  pump,  saw  timber,  sustain  fire,  support  some  things,
overwhelm  others,  and  suffice  for  an  infinite  variety  of  other
and  most  admirable  offices — ’who  shall  say  that  they  do  not  sur-
pass the  powers  of  the  elements  ? In  like  manner  what  does
not  fire  accomplish  ? in  the  kitchen,  in  the  furnace,  in  the
laboratory,  [in  the  steam-engine],  softening,  hardening,  melt-
ing, subliming,  changing,  [and  setting  in  motion],  in  an  infi-
nite variety  of  ways  ! What  shall  we  say  of  it  when  we  see
iron  itself  produced  by  its  agency? — iron  “ that  breaks  the  stub-
born soil,  and  shakes  the  earth  with  war  ! — iron  that  in  the
magnet  (to  which  Thales  therefore  ascribed  a soul)  attracts
other  iron,  “ subdues  all  other  things,  and  seeks  besides  I know
not  what  inane,^^  as  Phny  ^ says ; for  the  steel  needle  only
rubbed  with  the  loadstone  still  steadily  points  to  the  great  car-
dinal points ; and  when  our  clocks  constantly  indicate  the  hours
of  the  day  and  night, — shall  we  not  admit  that  all  of  these
partake  of  something  else,  and  that  of  a more  divine  nature,
than  the  elements  ? And  if  in  the  domain  and  rule  of  nature
so  many  excellent  operations  are  daily  effected  surpassing  the
powers  of  the  things  themselves,  what  shall  we  not  think  pos-
sible within  the  pale  and  regimen  of  nature,  of  which  all  art  is
but  imitation  ? And  if,  as  ministers  of  man,  they  effect  such
admirable  ends,  what,  I ask,  may  we  not  expect  of  them,  when
they  are  instruments  in  the  hand  of  God  ?

We  must,  therefore,  make  the  distinction  and  say,  that
whilst  no  primary  agent  or  prime  efficient  produces  effects  be-
yond its  powers,  every  instrumental  agent  may  exceed  its  own
proper  powers  in  action ; for  it  acts  not  merely  by  its  own  vir-
tue, but  by  the  virtue  of  a superior  efficient.

They,  consequently,  who  refuse  such  remarkable  faculties  to
the  blood,  and  go  to  heaven  to  fetch  down  I know  not  what
spirits,  to  which  they  ascribe  these  divine  vii'tues,  cannot  know,
or  at  all  events,  cannot  consider  that  the  process  of  generation,
and  even  of  nutrition,  which  indeed  is  a kind  of  generation,
for  the  sake  of  which  they  are  so  lavish  of  admirable  proper-
ties, surpasses  the  powers  of  those  very  spirits  themselves,  nor
of  the  spirits  only,  but  of  the  vegetative,  aye,  even  the  sensi-
tive, and  I will  venture  to  add,  the  rational  soul.  Powers,  did


' Lib.  xxxvi,  cap.  16.


510


ON  GENERATION.


I say  ? It  far  exceeds  even  any  estimate  we  can  form  of  tlie
rational  soul;  for  the  nature  of  generation,  and  the  order  that
prevails  in  it,  are  truly  admirable  and  divine,  beyond  all  that
thought  can  conceive  or  understanding  comprehend.

That  it  may,  however,  more  clearly  appear  that  the  remark-
able virtues  which  the  learned  attribute  to  the  spirits  and  the
innate  heat  belong  to  the  blood  alone,  besides  what  has
already  been  spoken  of  as  conspicuous  in  the  egg  before  any
trace  of  the  embryo  appears,  as  well  as  in  the  perfect  and  adidt
foetus,  the  few  follo\ring  observations  are  made  by  way  of  further
illustration,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  diligent  inquirer.  The
blood  considered  absolutely  and  by  itself,  without  the  veins,  in
so  far  as  it  is  an  elementary  fluid,  and  composed  of  several
parts — of  thin  and  serous  particles,  and  of  thick  and  concrete
particles  called  cruor — possesses  but  few,  and  these  not  very
obvious  virtues.  Contained  within  the  veins,  however,  inas-
much as  it  is  an  integral  part  of  the  body,  and  is  animated,
regenerative,  and  the  immediate  instrument  and  principal  seat
of  the  soul,  inasmuch,  moreover,  as  it  seems  to  partake  of  the
nature  of  another  more  divine  body,  and  is  transfused  by  dirine
animal  heat,  it  obtains  remarkable  and  most  excellent  powers,
and  is  analogous  to  the  essence  of  the  stars.  In  so  far  as  it  is
spirit,  it  is  the  hearth,  the  Vesta,  the  household  divinity,  the
innate  heat,  the  sun  of  the  microcosm,  the  fire  of  Plato ; not
because  like  common  fire  it  lightens,  burns,  and  destroys,  but
because  by  a vag-ue  and  incessant  motion  it  preserves,  nou-
rishes, and  aggrandizes  itself.  It  farther  deserves  the  name  of
spirit,  inasmuch  as  it  is  radical  moistm’e,  at  once  the  ultimate
and  the  proximate  and  the  primary  ahment,  more  abundant
than  aU  the  other  parts;  preparing  for  and  administering  to
these  the  same  nutriment  with  which  itself  is  fed,  ceaselessly
permeating  the  whole  body,  cherishing  and  keeping  ahve  the
pai’ts  which  it  has  fashioned  and  added  to  itself,  not  otherwise
assuredly  than  the  superior  stars,  the  sun  and  moon  especially,
in  maintaining  their  own  proper  orbits,  continually  vivify  the
stars  that  are  beneath  them.

Since  the  blood  acts,  then,  with  forces  superior  to  the  forces
of  tlie  elements,  and  exerts  its  influence  through  these  forces
or  virtues,  and  is  the  instrument  of  the  Great  Workman,  no
one  can  ever  sufficiently  extol  its  admirable,  its  divine  faculties.


ON  GENERATION.


511


In  the  first  place,  and  especially,  it  is  possessed  by  a soul
Avhich  is  not  only  vegetative,  but  sensitive  and  motive  also ; it
penetrates  everywhere  and  is  ubiquitous ; abstracted,  the  soul
or  the  life  too  is  gone,  so  that  the  blood  does  not  seem  to  dif-
fer in  any  respect  from  the  soul  or  the  life  itself  (anima) ; at
all  events,  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  substance  Avhose  act  is  the
soul  or  the  life.  Such,  I say,  is  the  soul,  which  is  neither
wholly  corporeal  nor  yet  wholly  incorporeal;  which  is  derived
in  part  from  abroad,  and  is  partly  produced  at  home ; which
in  one  way  is  part  of  the  body,  but  in  another  way  is  the  be-
ginning and  cause  of  all  that  is  contained  in  the  animal  body,
viz.  nutrition,  sense,  and  motion,  and  consequently  of  life  and
of  death  alike ; for  whatever  is  nourished,  is  itself  vivified,
and  vice  versa.  In  like  manner,  that  which  is  abundantly
nourished  increases ; what  is  not  sufficiently  supplied  shrinks ;
Avhat  is  perfectly  nourished  preserves  its  health;  what  is  not
perfectly  nourished  falls  into  disease.  The  blood,  therefore,
even  as  the  soul,  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  cause  and  author
of  youth  and  old  age,  of  sleep  and  waking,  and  also  of  respi-
ration; all  the  more  and  especially  as  the  first  instrument  in
natural  things  contains  the  internal  moving  cause  within  itself.
It  therefore  comes  to  the  same  thing,  whether  we  say  that  the
soul  and  the  blood,  or  the  blood  with  the  soul,  or  the  soul
with  the  blood,  performs  all  the  acts  in  the  animal  organism.

We  are  too  much  in  the  habit,  neglecting  things,  of  wor-
shipping specious  names.  The  Avord  blood,  signifying  a sub-
stance, Avhich  we  have  before  our  eyes,  and  can  touch,  has
nothing  of  grandiloquence  about  it ; but  before  such  titles  as
spirits,  and  calidum  innatum  or  innate  heat,  we  stand  agape.
But  the  mask  removed,  as  the  error  disappears,  so  does  the
idle  admiration.  The  celebrated  stone,  so  much  varmted  for
its  virtues  by  Pipinus  to  Migaldus,  seems  to  have  filled  not
only  him  but  also  Thuanus,  an  excellent  historian,  AAoth  wonder
and  admiration.  Let  me  he  allowed  to  append  the  riddle :
“ Lately,”  says  he,  “ there  was  brought  from  the  East  Indies
to  our  king  a stone,  which  we  have  seen,  wonderfully  radiant
AAdth  light  and  effulgence,  the  whole  of  w'hich,  as  if  burning
and  in  flames,  was  resplendent  Avith  an  incredible  brilliancy  of
light.  Tossed  hither  and  thither,  it  filled  the  ambient  air
Avith  beams  that  were  scarcely  bearable  by  any  eyes.  It  was


512


ON  GENERATION.


also  extremely  impatient  of  the  earth ; if  you  essayed  to  cover
it,  it  forthwith  and  of  itself  burst  forth  with  violence,  and
mounted  on  high.  No  man  could  by  any  art  contain  or  in-
close it  in  any  confined  place ; on  the  contrary,  it  appears  to
delight  in  free  and  spacious  places.  It  is  of  the  highest  purity,
of  the  greatest  brightness,  and  is  without  stain  or  blemish.  It
has  no  certain  shape,  hut  a shape  uncertaiu  and  changing
eveiy  moment.  Of  the  most  consummate  beauty,  it  suffers
no  one  to  touch  it ; and  if  you  persist  too  long  or  obstinately,
it  will  do  you  injury,  as  I have  observed  it  repeatedly  to  do
in  no  trifling  measure.  If  anjdhing  he  by  chance  taken  from
it  by  persevering  etfoi'ts,  it  is  (strange  to  say)  made  nothing
less  thereby.  Its  custodier  adds  farther,  that  its  virtues  and
powers  are  useful  in  a great  variety  of  ways,  and  even — espe-
cially to  kings — indispensably  necessary;  but  these  he  declines
to  reveal  without  being  first  paid  a large  reward.”  The  author
might  have  added  of  this  stone  that  it  was  neither  hard  nor
soft,  and  exhibited  a variety  of  forms  and  colours,  and  had  a
singular  trick  of  trembling  and  palpitating,  and  like  an  ani-
mal— although  itself  inanimate — consumed  a large  quantity  of
food  every  day  for  its  nutrition  or  sustenance.  Farthei’,  that
he  had  heard  from  men  worthy  of  credit,  that  this  stone  had
formerly  fallen  fr’om  heaven  to  earth ; that  it  was  the  frequent
cause  of  thunder  and  lightning,  and  was  still  occasionally  en-
gendered from  the  solar  beams  refr’acted  through  water.

Who  would  not  admire  so  remarkable  a stone,  or  believe  that
it  acted  with  a force  superior  to  the  forces  of  the  elements,  that
it  participated  in  the  natm’e  of  another  body,  and  possessed  an
ethereal  spirit  ? especially  when  he  found  that  it  responded  in
its  proportions  to  the  essence  of  the  sun.  But  with  Fernehus^  for
CEdipus,  we  find  the  whole  enigma  resolving  itself  into  “Flame.”

In  the  same  Avay,  did  I paint  the  blood  under  the  garb  of  a
fable,  and  gave  it  the  title  of  the  pliilosopher’s  stone,  and
propose  all  its  wonderful  faculties  and  operations  in  enigma-
tical language,  many  would  doubtless  think  a great  deal  of  it ;
they  would  readily  believe  that  it  could  act  with  powers  supe-
rior to  those  of  the  elements,  and  they  would  not  unwillingly
allow  it  to  be  possessed  of  another  and  more  divine  body.

‘ De  Abdit.  rer.  cans.  lib.  ii,  cap.  27.


ON  GENERATION.


513


EXERCISE  THE  SEVENTY-SECOND.

Of  the  pj'imigenial  moisture.

We  have  now  dignified  the  blood  with  the  title  of  the  in-
nate heat ; with  like  propriety,  we  believe,  that  the  fluid  which
we  have  called  the  crystalline  colliquament,  from  which  the
foetus  and  its  parts  primarily  and  immediately  arise,  may  be
designated  the  radical  and  primigenial  moisture.  There  is
certainly  nothing  in  the  generation  of  animals  to  which  this
title  can  with  better  right  he  given.

We  call  this  the  radical  moisture,  because  from  it  arises
the  first  particle  of  the  embryo,  the  blood,  to  wit ; and  all  the
other  posthumous  parts  arise  from  it  as  from  a root ; and  they
are  procreated  and  nourished,  and  grow  and  are  preserved  by
the  same  matter.

We  also  call  it  primigenial,  because  it  is  first  engendered
in  every  animal  organism,  and  is,  as  it  were,  the  foundation  of
the  rest ; as  may  be  seen  in  the  egg,  in  which  it  presents
itself  after  a brief  period  of  incubation,  as  the  first  work  of
the  inherent  fecundity  and  reproductive  power.

This  fluid  is  also  the  most  simple,  pure,  and  unadulterated
bodj'',  in  which  all  the  parts  of  the  pullet  are  present  poten-
tially, though  none  of  them  are  there  actually.  It  appears
that  nature  has  conceded  to  it  the  same  qualities  which  are
usually  ascribed  to  first  matter  common  to  all  things,  \uz.  that
potentially  it  be  capable  of  assmning  all  forms,  but  have  itself
no  form  in  fact.  So  the  crystalline  humoiu’  of  the  eye,  in
order  that  it  might  be  susceptible  of  all  colours,  is  itself
colourless ; and  in  like  manner  are  the  media  or  organs  of
each  of  the  senses  destitute  of  all  the  other  qualities  of  sen-
sible things : the  organs  of  smelhng  and  hearing,  and  the  air
which  ministers  to  them,  are  without  smell  and  sound;  the
sahva  of  the  tongue  and  mouth  is  also  tasteless.

And  it  is  upon  this  argument  that  they  mainly  rely  who
maintain  the  possibility  of  an  incorporeal  intellect,  viz.  because
it  is  susceptible  of  all  forms  without  matter ; and  as  the  hand
is  called  the  “ instrument  of  instruments,'’^  so  is  the  intellect

33


514


ON  GENERATION.


called  “ tlie  form  of  forms,”  being  itself  immaterial  and  wholly
without  form ; it  is,  therefore,  said  to  be  possible  or  potential,
but  not  passible.

This  fluid,  or  one  analogous  to  it,  appears  also  to  be  the
ultimate  aliment  from  which  Aristotle  taught  that  the  semen,
or  geniture,  as  he  calls  it,  is  produced.'  I say  the  ulti-
mate aliment,  called  dew  by  the  Arabians,  with  which  all  the
parts  of  the  body  are  bathed  and  moistened.  For  in  the
same  way  as  this  dew,  by  ulterior  condensation  and  adhesion,
becomes  ahble  gluten  and  cambium,  whence  the  parts  of  the
body  are  constituted,  so,  mutatis  mutandis,  in  the  commence-
ment of  generation  and  nutrition,  from  gluten  liquefied  and  ren-
dered thinner  is  formed  the  nutritious  dew;  from  the  white  of  the
egg  is  produced  the  colliquament  under  discussion,  the  radical
moistru’e  and  primigenial  dew.  The  thing  indeed  is  identical  in
either  instance,  if  any  credit  be  accorded  to  our  observations ;
and  in  fact  neither  philosophers  nor  physicians  deny  that  an
animal  is  nourished  by  the  same  matter  out  of  which  it  is
formed,  and  is  increased  by  that  from  which  it  was  engen-
dered. The  nutritious  dew,  therefore,  differs  from  the  col-
liquament or  primigenial  moisture  only  in  the  relation  of  prior
and  posterior ; the  one  is  concocted  and  prepared  by  the
parents,  the  other  by  the  embryo  itseK,  both  juices,  however,
being  the  proximate  and  immediate  ahment  of  animals ; not
indeed  “ first  and  second,”  according  to  that  dictum,  “ con-
traria  ex  contrariis,”  but  ultimate,  as  I have  said,  and  as  Aris-
totle himself  admonishes  us,  according  to  that  other  dictum,
“ similia  ex  similibus  augeri,”  “ like  is  necessai'ily  increased  by
its  like.”  There  is  in  either  fluid  a proximate  force,  in  rirtue
of  which,  no  obstacles  intervening,  it  will  pass  spontaneously,
or  by  the  law  of  nature,  into  every  part  of  the  animal  body.

Such  being  the  state  of  the  question,  it  is  obvious  that  all
controversy  about  the  matter  of  animals  and  theh  noui’ish-
ment  may  be  settled  without  difficidty.  For  as  some  believe
that  the  semen  or  matter  emitted  in  intereourse  is  taken  up
from  every  part  of  the  body,  so  do  they  derive  from  this  the
resemblance  of  the  offsprmg  to  the  parents.  Aristotle  has
these  words  : “ Against  the  opinion  of  the  ancients,  it  may


‘ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  18,  et  lib.  iv,  cap.  1.


ON  GENERATION.


515


be  said  that  as  they  avow  the  semen  to  be  a derivative
from  all  parts  else,  we  believe  the  semen  to  be  disposed
of  itself  to  form  every  part ; and  whilst  they  call  it  a colliqua-
ment,  we  are  rather  inclined  to  regard  it  as  an  excrement”
(he  had,  however,  said  shortly  before  that  he  entitled  excrement
the  remains  of  the  noui’ishment,  and  colliquament  that  which
is  secreted  from  the  growth  by  a preternatural  resolution)  ; “ for
that  which  arrives  last,  and  is  the  excrement  of  what  is  final,
is  in  all  probabihty  of  the  same  nature ; in  the  same  way  as
painters  have  very  commonly  some  remains  of  coloms,  which
are  identical  with  those  they  have  applied  upon  their  canvass ;
but  anjdhing  that  is  consuming  and  melting  away  is  corrupt
and  degenerate.  Another  argument  that  the  seminal  fluid  is
not  a colliquament,  but  an  excrement,  is  this  : that  animals  of
larger  growth  are  less  prolific,  smaller  creatures  more  fruitful.
Now  there  must  be  a larger  quantity  of  colliquament  in  larger
than  in  smaller  animals,  but  less  excrement ; for  as  there  must
be  a large  consumption  of  nourishment  in  a large  body,  so
miTst  there  be  a small  production  of  excrement.  Farther,
there  is  no  place  provided  by  natiire  for  receiving  and  storing
colliquament ; it  flows  off  by  the  way  that  is  most  open  to  it ;
but  there  are  receptacles  for  all  the  natural  excrements — the
bowels  for  the  dry  excrements,  the  bladder  for  the  moist ; tlie
stomach  for  matters  useful ; the  genital  organs,  the  uterus,  the
mammae  for  seminal  matter — in  which  several  places  they  col-
lect and  run  together.”  After  this  he  goes  on  by  a variety  of
arguments  to  prove  that  the  seminal  matter  from  which  the
foetus  is  formed  is  the  same  as  that  which  is  prepared  for  the
nutrition  of  the  parts  at  large.  As  if,  should  one  require
some  pigment  from  a painter,  he  certainly  would  not  go  to
scrape  off  what  he  had  already  laid  on  his  canvass,  but  would  sup-
ply the  demand  from  his  store,  or  from  what  he  had  over  from
his  work,  which  was  stHl  of  the  same  nature  as  that  which  he
might  have  taken  away  from  his  picture.  So  and  in  like
manner  the  excrement  of  the  ultimate  nutriment,  or  the  re-
mainder of  the  gluten  and  dew,  is  carried  to  the  genital  organs
and  there  deposited ; and  this  xfiew  is  most  accordant  with  the
production  of  eggs  by  the  hen.

The  medical  writers,  too,  who  hold  all  the  parts  to  be  origi-
nally formed  from  the  spermatic  fluid,  and  consequently  speak


.•>16


ON  GENERATION.


of  these  under  the  name  of  spermatic  parts,  say  that  the  semen
is  formed  from  the  ultimate  nourishment,  which  with  Aristotle
they  believe  to  be  the  blood,  being  produced  by  the  -virtue  of
the  genital  organs,  and  constituting  the  “ matter”  of  the  foetus.
Now  it  is  obvious  enough  that  the  egg  is  produced  by  the
mother  and  her  ultimate  nutriment,  the  nutritious  dew,  to  wit.
That  clear  part  of  the  egg,  therefore,  that  primigenial,  or
rather  antegenial  colliquament,  is  more  truly  to  be  reputed
the  semen  of  the  cock,  although  it  is  not  projected  in  the  act
of  intercourse,  but  is  prepared  before  intercourse,  or  is  gathered
together  after  this,  as  happens  in  many  animals,  and  as  Avill
perhaps  be  stated  more  at  length  by  and  by,  because  the  geni-
ture  of  the  male,  according  to  Aristotle,  coagulates.

When  I see,  therefore,  all  the  parts  formed  and  increasing
from  this  one  moistm’e,  as  “ matter,”  and  from  a primitive  root,
and  the  reasons  already  given  combine  in  persuading  us  that  this
ought  to  be  so,  I can  scarcely  refrain  from  taunting  and  push-
ing to  extremity  the  followers  of  Empedocles  and  Hippocrates,
who  believed  all  similar  bodies  to  be  engendered  as  mixtures
by  association  of  the  four  contrary  elements,  and  to  become
corrupted  by  then’  disjunction ; nor  should  I less  spare  Demo-
critus and  the  Epicurean  school  that  succeeded  him,  who  com-
pose all  things  of  congregations  of  atoms  of  diverse  figure.
Because  it  was  an  eiTor  of  theirs'  in  former  times,  as  it  is  a
vulgar  error  at  the  present  day,  to  believe  that  all  similar
bodies  are  engendered  from  diverse  or  heterogeneous  matters.
For  on  this  footing,  nothing  even  to  the  lynx’s  eye  would  be
similar,  one,  the  same,  and  continuous ; the  unity  would  be  ap-
parent only,  a kind  of  congerie,s  or  heap — a congregation  or
collection  of  extremely  small  bodies ; nor  would  generation  dif-
fer in  any  respect  from  a [mechanical]  aggregation  and  arrange-
ment of  particles.

But  neither  in  the  production  of  animals,  nor  in  the  gene-
ration of  any  other  “similar”  body  (whether  it  were  of  animal
parts,  or  of  plants,  stones,  minerals,  &c.),  have  I ever  been  able
to  observe  any  congregation  of  such  a kind,  or  any  divers  mis-
cibles  pre-existing  fov  union  in  the  work  of  reproduction.  For
neither,  in  so  far  at  least  as  I have  had  power  to  perceive,  or  as
reason  will  carry  me,  have  I ever  been  able  to  trace  any  “ simi-
lar” parts,  such  as  membranes,  flesh,  fibres,  cai’tilage,  bone,  &c..


ON  GENERATION.


517


produced  in  sucli  order,  or  as  coexistent)  that  from  these,  as
the  elements  of  animal  bodies,  eonjoined  organs  or  limbs,  and
finally,  the  entire  animal,  should  be  compounded.  But,  as  has
been  ah’eady  said,  the  first  rudiment  of  the  body  is  a mere
homogeneous  and  pulpy  jelly,  not  unlike  a conerete  mass  of
spermatic  fluid ; and  from  this,  under  the  law  of  generation,
altered,  and  at  the  same  time  split  or  multifariously  divided,
as  by  a divine  flat,  from  an  inorganic  an  organic  mass  results ;
this  is  made  bone,  this  musele  or  nerve,  this  a receptaele  for
exerementitious  matter,  &c. ; from  a similar  a dissimilar  is  pro-
duced'; out  of  one  thing  of  the  same  nature  several  of  diverse
and  contrary  natures ; and  all  this  by  no  transposition  or  local
movement,  as  a eongregation  of  similar  partieles,  or  a separa-
tion of  heterogeneous  partieles  is  effected  under  the  influence
of  heat,  but  rather  by  the  segregation  of  homogeneous  than
the  union  of  heterogeneous  pai’tieles.

And  I believe  that  the  same  thing  takes  plaee  in  all  genera-
tion, so  that  similar  bodies  have  no  mixed  elements  prior  to
themselves,  but  rather  exist  befoi’e  their  elements  (these,  ac-
eording  to  Empedoeles  and  Aristotle,  being  fire,  air,  earth,  and
water ; according  to  chemists,  salt,  sulphur,  and  mercury ;
according  to  Democritus,  certain  atoms),  as  being  naturally
more  perfect  than  these.  There  are,  I say,  both  mixed  and
compound  bodies  prior  to  any  of  the  so  called  elements,  into
which  they  are  resolved,  or  in  which  they  end.  They  are
resolved,  namely,  into  these  elements  according  to  reason
rather  than  in  fact.  The  so-called  elements,  therefore,  are  not
prior  to  those  things  that  are  engendered,  or  that  oinginate,  but
are  posterior  rather — they  are  relics  or  remainders  rather  than
principles.  Neither  Aristotle  himself  nor  any  one  else  has  ever  de-
monstrated the  separate  existence  of  the  elements  in  the  nature
of  things,  or  that  they  were  the  principles  of  “ similar”  bodies.

The  philosopher,  1 indeed,  'ndien  he  proceeds  to  prove  that
there  are  elements,  still  seems  uncertain  whether  the  conclu-
sion ought  to  be  that  they  exist  in  esse,  or  only  in  posse;
he  is  of  opinion  that  in  natural  things  they  are  present  in
power  rather  than  in  action ; and  therefore  does  he  assert,
from  the  division,  separation,  and  solution  of  things,  that  there


‘ Lib.  iii,  de  Ccelo,  cap.  31.


518


ON  GENERATION.


are  elements.  It  is^  liowever^  an  argument  of  no  great  cogency
to  say  that  natural  bodies  are  primarily  produced  or  com-
posed of  those  things  into  which  they  are  ultimately  resolved ;
for  upon  this  principle  some  things  would  come  out  composed
of  glass,  ashes,  and  smoke,  into  which  we  see  them  finally
reduced  by  fire ; and  as  artificial  distillation  cleaidy  shows  that
a great  variety  of  vapours  and  waters  of  different  species  can
be  drawn  from  so  many  different  bodies,  the  number  of  ele-
ments would  have  to  be  increased  to  infinity.  Nor  has  any
one  among  the  philosophers  said  that  the  bodies  which,  dis-
solved by  art,  are  held  pure  and  indivisible  in  their  species,
are  elements  of  greater  simphcity  than  the  air,  water,  and
earth,  which  we  perceive  by  our  senses,  which  Ave  ai’e  familiar
with  through  our  eyes.

Nor,  to  conclude,  do  we  see  aught  in  the  shape  of  miscible
matter  natmally  engendered  from  fire ; and  it  is  perhaps  im-
possil)le  that  it  should  be  so,  since  fire,  like  that  which  is  alive,
is  in  a perpetual  state  of  fiuxiou,  and  seeks  for  food  by  which
it  may  be  nourished  and  kept  in  being ; in  conformity  with
the  Avords  of  Aristotle,’  that  “Eire  is  only  nourished,  and  is
especially  remarkable  in  this.^’’  But  what  is  nourished  cannot
itself  be  mingled  Avith  its  nutriment.  'Whence  it  folloAvs  that
it  is  impossible  fire  should  be  miscible.  For  mixture,  accord-
ing to  Aristotle,  is  the  union  of  altered  miscibles,  in  Avliich
one  thing  is  not  transformed  into  another,  but  tAvo  things,
severally  active  and  passNe,  into  a thii’d  thing.  Generation,
hoAvever,  especially  generation  by  metamorphosis,  is  the  distri-
bution of  one  similar  thing  haAdng  undergone  change  into
scA^eral  others.  Nor  are  mixed  similar  bodies  said  to  be  gene-
rated from  the  elements,  but  to  be  constituted  by  them  in
some  certain  way,  solvent  forces  residing  in  them  at  the  same
time.

These  considerations,  however,  properly  belong  to  the  sec-
tion of  Physiology,  which  treats  of  the  elements  and  tempera-
ments, Avhere  it  Avill  be  our  business  to  speak  of  them  more
at  large.


' De  Gen.  ct  Comu).  lib.  ii,  cap.  50.


ON  PARTURITION.


ON  PARTURITION.


On  generation  follows  parturition,  that  process,  viz.  by  wliich
the  foetus  comes  into  the  world  and  breathes  the  external  air.
I have,  therefore,  thought  it  well  worth  while,  and  within  the
scope  of  my  design,  to  treat  briefly  of  this  subject.  With
Fabricius,  then,  I shall  consider  the  causes,  the  manner,  and
the  seasons  of  this  process,  as  well  as  the  circumstances  which
both  precede  and  follow  it.  The  circumstances  which  occur
immediately  pre'sdous  to  birth,  and  which,  in  women  especially,
indicate  that  the  act  of  parturition  is  not  far  distant,  are,  on
the  one  hand,  such  a preparation  and  arrangement  on  the  part
of  the  mother  as  may  enable  her  to  get  rid  of  her  offspring ;
and  on  the  other,  such  a disposition  of  the  foetus  as  may  best
facilitate  its  expulsion.

With  respect  to  the  latter,  viz.  the  position  of  the  foetus,
Fabricius  says,^  “that  it  is  disposed  in  a globular  form  and
bent  upon  itself,  in  order  that  its  extremities  and  prominent
points  generally  may  not  injure  the  uterus  and  the  containing
membranes ; another  reason  being  that  it  may  be  packed  in  as
small  a space  as  possible.”  For  my  own  part,  I cannot  think
that  these  are  the  reasons  why  the  limbs  of  the  foetus  are
always  kept  in  the  same  position.  Swimming  and  moving
about,  as  it  does,  in  water,  it  extends  itself  in  every  direction,
and  so  turns  and  twists  itself  that  occasionally  it  becomes
entangled  in  a marvellous  manner  in  its  own  navel-string.
The  truth  is,  that  all  animals,  whilst  they  are  at  rest  or  asleep.


De  Form.  Feet.  cap.  i.x,  p.  40.


522


ON  PARTURITION.


fold  up  their  limbs  in  such  a way  as  to  form  an  oval  or  globu-
lar figure  : so  in  like  manner  embryos,  passing  as  they  do  the
greater  part  of  their  time  in  sleep,  dispose  their  limbs  in  the
position  in  which  they  are  formed,  as  being  most  natural  and
best  adapted  for  their  state  of  rest.  So  too  the  infant  in  utero
is  generally  found  disposed  after  this  manner : the  knees  are
drawn  up  towards  the  abdomeu,  the  legs  flexed,  the  feet  crossed,
and  the  hands  directed  to  the  head,  one  of  them  usually
resting  on  the  temples  or  ears,  the  other  on  the  chin,  in  which
situation  white  spots  are  discernible  on  the  skin  as  the  result
of  friction ; the  spine,  moreover,  is  cm'ved  into  a circle,,  and
the  neck  being  bowed,  the  head  falls  upon  the  knees.  In
such  a position  is  the  embryo  usually  found,  as  that  which
we  naturally  take  in  sleep ; the  head  being  situated  sujje-
riorly,  and  the  face  usually  turned  towards  the  back  of
the  mother.  A short  time,  however,  before  birth  the  head
is  bent  downwards  towards  the  orifice  of  the  utems,  and
the  foetus,  as  it  were,  in  search  of  an  outlet,  dives  to  the  bot-
tom. Thus  Aristotle:^  “All  animals  naturally  come  forth
with  the  head  foremost ; but  cross  and  foot  presentations  are
unnatural.’^  This,  however,  does  not  hold  universally]  but  as
the  position  in  utero  varies,  so  too  does  the  mode  of  exit ; this
may  be  observed  in  the  case  of  dogs,  swine,  and  other  multi-
parous animals.  The  human  foetus  even  has  not  always  the
same  position  ] and  this  is  well  known  to  pregnant  women,
who  feel  its  movements  in  very  different  parts  of  the  uterus,
sometimes  in  the  upper  part,  sometimes  in  the  lower,  or  on
either  side.

In  like  manner  the  uterus,  when  the  term  of  gestation  is
completed,  descends  lower  (in  the  pelvis),  the  whole  organ
becomes  softer,  and  its  orifice  patent.  The  “ waters”  also,  as
they  are  vulgarly  called,  “gather;”  that  is,  a portion  of  the
chorion,  in  which  the  watery  matter  is  contained,  gets  in  front
of  the  foetus,  and  falls  from  the  uterus  into  the  vagina ; at  the
same  time  the  neighbouring  parts  become  relaxed  and  dilat-
able ; in  addition  to  which  the  cartilaginous  attachments  of
the  pelvic  bones  so  lose  their  rigidity  that  the  bones  themseh  es
yield  readily  to  the  passage  of  the  foetus,  and  thus  greatly  in-


Hist.  .\nim.  lib.  ra,  cap.  7.


ON  PARTURITION.


523


crease  tlie  area  of  the  hypogastric  region.  When  all  these
circumstances  concur^  it  is  quite  clear  that  delivery  is  not  far
distant.  Nature,  in  her  provident  care,  contrives  this  dilata-
tion of  the  parts  in  order  that  the  foetus  may  come  into
the  world  like  the  ripe  fruit  of  a tree ; just  as  she  fills  the
breasts  of  the  mother  with  milk  that  the  being  who  is  soon  to
enjoy  an  independent  existence  may  have  whereon  to  subsist.
These,  then,  are  the  circumstances  which  immediately  precede
birth ; aud  thus  it  happens  that  the  presence  of  milk  has  espe-
cially been  regarded  as  a sign  of  approaching  delivery — milk,
I mean,  of  a character  suitable  for  the  sustenance  of  the  off-
spring ; and  this,  according  to  Aristotle,^  is  only  visible  at  the
period  of  birth ; it  is  therefore  never  observed  before  the
seventh  month  of  pregnancy.

Fabricius^  maintains  that  on  the  subject  of  parturition  there
were  two  special  heads  of  inquiry,  viz.  the  time  at  which  and
the  manner  in  which  the  process  took  place.  Under  the  first
of  these  heads  he  considers  the  term  of  utero-gestation ; under
the  second,  the  way  in  which  the  foetus  comes  into  the  world.

Aristotle®  thought  that  the  term  of  utero-gestation  varied
much.  “ There  is,”  he  says,  ‘‘  a certain  definite  term  to  each
animal,  determined  in  the  majority  of  cases  by  the  animal’s
duration  of  life ; for  it  follows  of  necessitj^  that  a longer  pe-
riod is  requu'ed  for  the  production  of  the  longer-lived  ani-
mals.” He  attributes,  however,  the  chief  cause  to  the  size  of
the  animal ; for  it  is  scarcely  possible,”  he  continues,  “ that
the  vast  frames  of  animals  or  of  aught  else  can  he  brought  to
perfection  in  a short  period  of  time.  Hence  it  is  that  in  the
case  of  mares  and  animals  of  cognate  species,  though  their  du-
ration of  life  is  small,  their  term  of  utero-gestation  is  con-
siderable; and  thus  the  elephant  carries  its  young  for  the  space
of  two  years,  the  reason  being  its  enormous  size,  for  each
animal  has  a definite  magnitude,  beyond  which  it  cannot
pass.”  I wordd  add,  that  the  material  of  which  each  is  formed
has  also  its  fixed  limit  in  point  of  quantity.  He  says,  more-
over, “ There  is  good  reason  why  animals  should  have  the
periods  of  gestation,  generation,  and  duration  of  fife  in  certain
cycles — I mean  by  cycle,  a day,  night,  month,  and  year,  and

' Dc  Gcii.  Aiiim.  lib.  iv,  cap.  8,  et  lib.  vii,  cap.  5.  ^ Page  141.

^ De  Gen.  Aniin.  lib.  iv,  cap.  4 et  ult.


524


ON  PARTURITION.


tlie  time  which  is  described  by  these ; also  the  motions  of  the
moon — for  these  are  the  common  origin  of  generation  to  all.
For  it  is  in  accordance  with  reason  that  the  cycles  of  inferior
things  should  follow  those  of  the  higher.’^  Nature,  then,  has
decreed  that  the  birth  and  death  of  animals  should  have  their
period  and  limit  after  this  manner.

Just  as  the  birth  of  animals  depends  on  the  course  of  the
sun  and  moon,  so  have  they  various  seasons  for  copulation  and
different  terms  of  utero-gestation,  these  last  being  longer  or
shorter  according  to  circumstances.  “ In  the  human  species
alone, says  the  philosopher  in  the  same  part  of  his  works,
“ is  the  period  of  utero-gestation  subject  to  great  irregidarity.
In  other  animals  there  is  one  fixed  time,  but  in  man  several ;
for  the  human  foetus  is  expelled  both  in  the  seventh  and  tenth
months,  and  at  any  period  of  pregnancy  between  these;  more-
over, when  the  birth  takes  place  in  the  eighth  month,  it  is  pos-
sible for  the  infant  to  live.^'’  In  the  majority  of  animals  there
is  a distinct  season  for  bringing  forth  their  young;  this  is
generally  found  to  be  in  the  spring,  when  the  sun  returns,  but
in  many  species  it  is  in  the  summer,  and  in  some  in  the
autumn,  as  is  the  case  with  the  cartilaginous  fishes.  Hence  it
is  that  animals,  as  the  time  of  labom'  approaches,  seek  their
accustomed  haunts,  and  proride  a safe  and  comfortable  shelter
where  they  may  bring  forth  and  rear  theii’  young.  Hence,  too,
the  title  “bird-winds,^^  applied  to  those  gales  which  prevail  toward
the  beginning  of  spring,  the  word  owing  its  origin  to  the  fact
of  certain  birds  at  that  period  of  the  year  availing  themselves
of  these  udnds  to  accomplish  their  migrations.  In  hke  man-
ner stated  seasons  are  observed  by  those  fishes  which  congre-
gate in  myriads  in  certain  places  for  the  piirpose  of  rearing
their  young.  Moreover,  in  the  spring,  as  soon  as  caterpillars
fall  under  our  notice  (theii’  ova,  as  may  be  observed  by  the
way,  like  to  invisible  atoms,  being  for  the  most  part  cai’ried  by
the  winds,  and  not  ovring  their  origin,  as  commonly  supposed,
to  spontaneous  generation,  or  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  result
of  putrefaction),  straightway  the  trees  put  forth  their  buds,
soon  to  be  devoured  by  these  creatures ; and  these  in  their
tm'u  fall  victims  to  birds  innumerable,  and  are  earned  to  the
nest  as  food  for  the  young  brood.  So  constantly  does  this
hold,  that  whenever  strange  species  of  caterpillars  fall  imder


ON  PARTURITION.


525


notice,  at  the  same  time  we  are  sure  to  see  some  rare  and
foreign  birds,  as  if  the  latter  bad  cbased  tbe  former  from  some
remote  corner  of  tbe  eartb.  Now  in  botb  of  these  classes  of
creatures  tbe  time  for  bringing  forth  their  young  is  the  same.
Physicians,  too,  when  these  phenomena  occur,  are  enabled
to  predict  the  approach  of  sundry  strange  diseases.  Bees
bring  forth  in  the  month  of  May,  when  honey  abounds ; wasps
in  the  summer,  when  the  fruit  is  ripe ; and  this  is  analogous
to  what  takes  place  in  viviparous  animals,  who  produce  their
young  at  the  period  when  their  milk  is  best  adapted  for  their
offspring.  But  other  animals  of  the  non-migratory  classes,  in
the  same  way,  at  stated  seasons  seek  a place  to  deposit  their
young  as  they  do  a store  of  food.  And  thus  it  results  that  the
countryman  is  able  to  decide  what  are  the  proper  seasons  for
ploughing,  sowing,  and  getting  in  his  harvest,  forming  his
opinion  chiefly  from  the  approach  of  flocks  of  birds,  and  espe-
cially of  the  seminivora.  There  are,  however,  some  animals
in  whom  there  is  no  fixed  time  for  production,  and  this  is
chiefly  the  case  with  those  which  are  called  domestic,  and  live
with  the  human  species.  These  both  copulate  and  produce
their  young  at  uncertain  seasons,  and  the  reason  probably  is  to
be  sought  for  in  the  larger  quantity  of  food  they  consume,  and
the  consequent  inordinate  salacity.  But  in  these,  as  in  the
human  species,  the  process  of  parturition  is  often  difficult  and
dangerous.

There  are  other  animals  also  on  whom  the  course  of  the
moon  has  influence,  and  which  consequently  copulate  and  bring
forth  their  young  at  certain  periods  of  the  year — rabbits,  mice,
and  the  human  female  may  be  instanced.  “ For  the  moon,”  ob-
serves Plutarch,^  “ when  half  full,  is  represented  as  greatly  effica-
cious in  shortening  the  pains  of  labour,  and  this  she  effects  by
moderating  and  relaxing  the  humours — hence,  I think,  those
surnames  of  Diana  are  derived,  Locheia,  i.  e.  the  tutelar  deity  of
childbirth,  and  Eilytheia,  otherwise  Lucinaj  for  Diana  and  the
moon  are  synonymous.”

“ In  all  other  animals,”  says  Pliny,^  “there  ai’e  stated  seasons
and  periods  for  production  and  utero-gestation ; in  man  alone
are  they  undetermined.”  And  this  is,  to  a great  extent,  true ;


' Sympos.  lib.  iii.  qu,  10.


^ Lib.  vii,  cap.  5.


526


ON  PARTURITION.


for  in  his  case,  although  nature  has  laid  down  for  the  most
part  certain  boundaries,  yet  there  is  sometimes  a vast  differ-
ence in  individuals,  and  instances  are  recorded  of  women  bring-
ing forth  viable  children,  some  in  the  seventh,  and  others  in
the  fourteenth  month.  Further,  although  Aristotle^  asserts
that  the  majority  of  eight  months’  children  in  Greece  die,”
he  still  admits  “that  they  survive  in  Egypt  and  in  some  other
countries,  where  the  women  have  easy  labours;”  and  although
he  says  “ that  children  born  before  the  seventh  month  can
under  no  circumstances  survive,  and  that  the  seventh  month
is  the  first  in  which  anything  like  matui-ity  exists,  and  that
the  feebleness  of  children  born  even  then  is  such  as  to  make
it  necessary  to  wrap  them  in  wool,”  he  still  allows  “ that  these
are  viable.”  Franciscus  Valesius  tells  us  of  a girl  in  his  time,
who,  although  a five  months’  child,  had  arrived  at  the  age  of
twelve  years.  Adrianus  Spigelius^  also  records  the  case  of  a
certain  courier,  “ who  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  all,  on  tlic
public  testimony  of  the  city  of  Middleburgh,  that  he  was  born
at  the  commencement  of  the  sixth  month,  and  that  his  frame
was  so  slight  and  fragile  that  his  mother  found  it  necessary  to
wrap  him  up  in  cotton  until  such  times  as  he  was  able  to  bear
the  ordinary  dress  of  infants.”  Avicenna®  also  states  that  a
sixth  months’  child  is  very  capable  of  surviving.  In  hke  manner
it  is  proved,  both  by  ancient  and  modern  authorities,  that  chil-
dren may  live  who  are  born  after  the  completion  of  the  eleventh
month.  “AVe  are  told,”  saj'^s  Pliny,^  “ by  Alassurius,  thatwhenhis
inheritance  was  claimed  by  the  next  heir,  Lucius  Papyrius  the
praetor  gave  the  decision  against  the  claimant,  although,  by  his
mother’s  account,  Alassurius  was  a thirteen  mouths’  child —
the  ground  of  the  judgment  being  that  the  term  of  utero-ges-
tation  had  not  been  as  yet  accurately  determined.  There  was
indeed,  not  so  long  since,  a woman  in  our  own  country  who
carried  her  child  more  than  sixteen  months,  during  ten  of
which  she  distinctly  felt  the  movements  of  the  foetus,  as  indeed
did  others,  and  at  last  brought  forth  a living  infant.  These
are  rare  contingencies,  I will  allow ; and  therefore  it  is  hardly
fair  of  Spigelius  to  blame  Ulpianus  the  lawyer  because  he  re-
garded as  legitimate  no  child  born  after  the  completion  of  the

' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vii.  cap.  4.  ^ Lib.  ix,  De  Nat.  Anim.  c.  ult.

^ In  Epist.  de  incerto  tempore  partus.  ■*  Loco  procitato.


ON  PARTURITION.


52/


teuth  montli.  Both  laws  and  precepts  of  art,  we  must  I’eraem-
ber,  have  reference  to  the  general  rules  of  vital  processes.
Besides,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  many  women,  either  for
purposes  of  gain  or  from  fear  of  punishment,  have  simulated
pregnancy,  and  not  hesitated  to  swear  to  the  truth  of  their
assertion : — others  again  have  frequently  been  deceived,  and
fancied  themselves  pregnant,  whilst  the  uterus  has  contained  no
product  of  conception.  On  this  point  Aristotle’s^  words  may
be  quoted  : “ The  exact  period  at  which  conception  takes  place
in  the  case  of  those  horn  after  the  eleventh  month  can  scarcely
be  ascertained.  Women  themselves  do  not  know  the  time  at
which  they  conceive ; for  the  uterus  is  often  affected  by  flatu-
lent disorders,  and  if  under  these  circumstances  conception
takes  place,  women  imagine  this  flatulency  to  mark  the  period
of  conception,  because  they  have  recognized  certain  symptoms
which  accompany  actual  conception.”

In  the  case  of  other  women  in  whom  the  foetus  has  died  in
the  third  or  fourth  month,  then  putrefied,  and  come  away  in
the  form  of  fetid  lochial  discharges,  we  have  known  superfceta-
tion  to  take  place ; and  yet  these  same  women  have  persisted
that  they  have  brought  forth  their  children  after  the  comple-
tion of  the  fourteenth  month.  “ It  happens  sometimes,”  says
Aristotle,^  “^'that  an  abortion  takes  place,  and  ten  or  twelve
products  of  superfoetation  come  away.  But  if  the  (second)
conception  takes  place  soon  after  (the  first),  the  woman  goes  to
the  full  time  with  the  second,  and  brings  forth  both  as  twins.
This  was  said  to  have  been  the  case  in  the  fable  of  Iphicles  and
Hercules.  And  it  is  a subject  which  admits  of  proof ; for  it
is  known  of  a woman  that  she  brought  forth  one  child  resem-
bling her  husband,  and  another  like  a man  with  whom  she  had
had  adulterous  intercourse.  Another  woman  became  pregnant
of  twins,  and  conceived  another  by  superfoetation . Her  labour
came  on,  and  she  brought  forth  the  twins  well  formed  and  at
their  proper  time,  whilst  the  third  child  was  at  the  fifth  month,
and  so  died  immediately.”

A certain  maid-servant  being  gotten  with  child  by  her  mas-
ter’, to  conceal  her  disgrace,  fled  to  London  in  the  month  of
September;  here  she  was  delivered,  and  returned  home  with  her


' Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vii,  cap.  4.


= Ibid.


528


ON  PARTURITION.


healtli  restored.  In  December,  however,  the  birth  of  another
child,  conceived  by  superfoetation,  proclaimed  to  the  world  the
fault  she  had  committed.  “ It  happened  to  another  woman,”
adds  the  philosopher,  “ to  be  dehvered  of  a seven  months’
child,  and  afterwards  of  tmns  at  the  full  term,  the  single  child
dying,  the  twins  surviving.  Other  women  also,  having  become
pregnant  of  twins,  have  miscarried  of  one,  and  borne  the  other
to  the  full  term.”  It  is  veiy  easy  to  understand  how,  if  the
earlier  or  later  product  of  superfoetation  come  away  after  three
or  four  months  have  elaj^sed,  that  mistakes  may  be  made  in
calculating  the  subsequent  months,  especially  by  ci’edulous
and  ignorant  women.  We  have  sometimes  observed,  both  in
women  and  other  animals,  the  product  of  conception  perish,
and  come  away  gradually  in  the  form  of  a thin  fluid,  somewhat
resembling  fluor  alb  us.  Not  long  since  a woman  in  London,
after  an  abortion  of  this  kind,  conceived  anew,  and  brought
forth  a child  at  the  proper  period.  Subsequently,  however,  after  a
lapse  of  some  mouths,  as  she  was  engaged  in  her  ordinary  du-
ties, without  any  pain  or  uneasiness,  there  came  away  piece-
meal some  dark  bones  belonging  to  the  foetus  of  which  she  had
formerly  miscarried.  I was  able  to  recognize  in  some  of  the
fragments  portions  of  the  spine,  femur,  and  other  bones.

I am  acquainted  with  a young  woman,  the  daughter  of  a
physician  with  whom  I am  very  intimate,  who  experienced  in
her  own  person  all  the  usual  symptoms  of  pregnancy ; after
the  fourteenth  week,  being  healthy  and  sprightly,  she  felt  the
movements  of  the  child  within  the  uterus,  calculated  the  time
at  which  she  expected  her  delivery,  and  when  she  thought,  fi’om
further  indications,  that  this  was  at  hand,  prepared  the  bed,
cradle,  and  all  other  matters  ready  for  the  event.  But  all  was
in  vain.  Lucina  refused  to  answer  her  prayers;  the  motions
of  the  foetus  ceased ; and  by  degrees,  without  inconvenience,
as  the  abdomen  had  increased  so  it  diminished ; she  remained,
however,  barren  ever  after.  I am  acquainted  also  with  a noble
lady  who  had  borne  more  thati  ten  children,  and  in  whom  the
catamenia  never  disappeared  except  as  the  result  of  impregna-
tion. Afterwards,  however,  being  married  to  a second  hus-
band, she  considered  herself  pregnant,  forming  her  judgment
not  only  from  the  symptoms  on  which  she  usually  relied,  but
also  from  the  movements  of  the  child,  which  were  frequently


ON  PARTURITION.


529


felt  both  by  herself  and  her  sister,  who  occupied  the  same  bed
with  her.  No  arguments  of  mine  could  divest  her  of  this  be-
lief. The  symptoms  depended  on  flatulence  and  fat.  Hence
the  best  ascertained  signs  of  pregnancy  have  sometimes  de-
ceived not  only  ignorant  women,  but  experienced  midwives,
and  even  skilful  and  accm’ate  physicians — so  that  as  mistakes
are  liable  to  arise,  not  only  from  deception  on  the  part  of  the
women  themselves,  but  also  from  the  erroneous  tokens  of  preg-
nancj'^,  I should  say  that  no  rule  is  to  be  rashly  laid  down
with  respect  to  births  taking  place  before  the  seventh  or  after
the  fourteenth  month.

Unquestionably  the  ordinary  term  of  utero-gestation  is  that
which  we  believe  was  kept  in  the  womb  of  his  mother  by  our
Saviour  Christ,  of  men  the  most  perfect ; counting,  viz.  from
the  festival  of  the  Annunciation,  in  the  month  of  March,  to
the  day  of  the  blessed  Nativity,  which  we  celebrate  in  Decem-
ber. Prudent  matrons,  calculating  after  this  rule,  as  long  as  they
note  the  day  of  the  month  in  which  the  catamenia  usually  ap-
pear, are  rarely  out  of  their  reckoning ; but  after  ten  lunar
months  have  elapsed,  fall  in  labour,  and  reap  the  fruit  of  their
womb  the  very  day  on  which  the  catamenia  would  have  ap-
peared, had  impregnation  not  taken  place.

As  regards  the  causes  of  labour,  Fabricius,  besides  that  of
Galen^  (who  held  “ that  the  foetus  was  retained  in  utero  until
it  was  sufficiently  grown  and  nourished  to  take  food  by  the
mouth,^-’  according  to  which  theory  weakly  children  ought  to
remain  in  utero  longer  than  others,  which  they  do  not),  gives
another  and  a better  reason,  viz.  “ the  necessity  the  foetus  feels
for  more  perfectly  cooling  itself  by  respiration,  since  the  child
breathes  immediately  on  birth,  but  does  not  take  food  by  the
mouth.  This  is  not  only  the  case,”  he  continues,  " in  man
and  quadrupeds,  but  has  been  particularly  observed  in  birds :
these,  small  as  they  are,  and  furnished  as  yet  with  hut  tender
bills,  peck  through  the  egg-shell  at  the  point  where  they  have
need  of  respiration ; and  they  do  this  rather  through  want  of
breath  than  of  food,  since  the  instant  they  quit  the  shell  the
function  of  respiration  begins,  whilst  they  remain  without  eat-
ing for  two  days,  or  longer.”  This  point,  however,  whether


' De  Non  Part.  lib.  xv,  cap.  7.


34


530


ON  PARTURITION.


the  object  of  respiration  be  really  to  “ cool”  the  animal^  shall
be  discussed  elsewhere  at  greater  length.

In  the  mean  time  I would  propose  this  question  to  the
learned — How  does  it  happen  that  the  foetus  continues  in
its  mother’s  womb  after  the  seventh  month?  seeing  that
when  expelled  after  this  epoch,  not  only  does  it  breathe,  but
without  respiration  cannot  surHve  one  little  hour;  Avhilst,  as  I
before  stated,  if  it  remain  in  utero,  it  lives  in  health  and
vigour  more  than  two  months  longer  without  the  aid  of  respi-
ration at  all.  To  state  my  meaning  more  plainly — how  is  it
that  if  the  foetus  is  expelled  with  the  membranes  unbroken,  it
can  survive  some  hours  without  risk  of  suffocation ; whilst  the
same  foetus,  removed  from  its  membranes,  if  air  has  once  en-
tered the  lungs,  cannot  afterwards  live  a moment  without  it,
but  dies  instantly  ? Sru’ely  this  cannot  be  from  want  of  “cool-
ing,” for  in  difficult  labours  it  often  happens  that  the  foetus  is
retained  in  the  passages  many  hours  without  the  possibility  of
breathing,  yet  is  found  to  be  alive;  when,  however,  it  is  once
born  aird  has  breathed,  if  you  deprive  it  of  air  it  dies  at  once.
In  like  manner  children  have  been  removed  alive  from  the
uterus  by  the*  Caesarean  section  many  hours  after  the  death  of
the  mother ; buried  as  they  are  within  the  membranes,  they
have  no  need  of  air ; but  as  soon  as  they  have  once  breathed,
although  they  be  returned  immediately  within  the  mem-
branes, they  perish  if  deprived  of  it.  If  any  one  will  care-
fully attend  to  these  circumstances,  and  consider  a little  more
closely  the  nature  of  air,  he  will,  I think,  allow  that  aii’  is
given  neither  for  the  “ cooling”  nor  the  nutrition  of  animals  ;
for  it  is  an  established  fact,  that  if  the  foetus  has  once  respired,
it  may  be  more  quickly  suffocated  than  if  it  had  been  entirely
excluded  from  the  air : it  is  as  if  heat  were  rather  enkindled
within  the  foetus  than  repressed  by  the  influence  of  the  air.

Thus  much,  by  the  way,  on  the  subject  of  respiration ; here-
after, perhaps,  I may  treat  of  it  at  greater  length.  As  the
arguments  on  either  side  are  veiy  equally  balanced,  it  is  a ques-
tion of  the  greatest  difficulty.

To  return  to  parturition.  Besides  the  reasons  alluded  to
above,  viz.  “ the  necessity  for  respiration  and  the  want  of  nou-
rishment,” Fabricius  gives  another ; he  says,  “ that  the  weight
of  the  foetus  becomes  so  great  as  to  exert  considerable  pressure.


ON  PARTURITION.


531


and  the  hulk  such  that  the  uterus  is  unable  to  retain  it,  added
to  which  the  quantity  of  excrementitious  matter  is  so  much  in-
creased that  it  cannot  be  contained  by  the  membranes.^’ i

Now  it  has  been  shown  above  that  the  uterine  humours  are
not  excrementitious.  Nor  do  the  weight  and  bulk  of  the
foetus  help  us  to  a more  probable  explanation ; for  the  foetus
suspended  in  water  weighs  but  slightly  on  the  placenta  or
uterus ; besides  which  some  nine  months’  children  are  very
small,  much  less  in  fact  than  many  foetuses  of  eight  months,
nevertheless  they  do  not  abide  longer  in  the  womb.  And  as  to
weight,  any  twins  of  eight  months  are  far  heavier  than  a single
nine  months’  child ; yet  they  are  not  expelled  before  nine
months  are  completed.  Nor  do  we  find  a better  reason  in
“want  of  nutriment;”  twins,  and  even  more  children,  are
abundantly  supplied  with  support  up  to  the  full  term ; and  the
milk  which  after  delivery  is  sufficient  for  the  nourishment  of  the
child,  could  equally  well,  if  transferred  to  the  uterus,  nourish
the  foetus  there.

I should  rather  attribute  the  birth  of  the  child  to  the  follow-
ing reason — that  the  juices  within  the  amnion,  hitherto  admi-
rably adapted  for  nutriment,  at  that  particular  period  either
fail  or  become  contaminated  by  excrementitious  matter.  I
have  touched  on  this  subject  before.  The  variation  in  the  term
of  utero-gestation,  occurring  as  it  does  chiefly  in  the  human
species,  I believe  to  depend  on  the  habits  of  life,  feebleness  of
body,  and  on  the  various  affections  of  the  mind.  And  thus  in
the  case  of  domesticated  animals,  owing  to  their  indolence  and
overfeeding,  the  seasons  both  of  copulation  and  production  are
less  fixed  and  certain  than  in  the  wilder  tribes.  So  women  in
robust  health  usually  experience  easy  and  rapid  labours ; the
contrary  holding  good  in  those  whose  constitutions  are  shat-
tered by  disease.  For  the  same  thing  befalls  them  that  happens
to  plants,  the  seeds  and  fruits  of  which  come  later  and  less
frequently  to  perfection  in  cold  climates  than  in  those  where  the
soil  is  good  and  the  sun  powerful.  Thus  oranges  in  this  country
usually  remain  on  the  tree  two  years  before  they  arrive  at
maturity ; and  figs,  which  in  Italy  ripen  two  or  three  times
annually,  scarcely  come  to  perfection  in  our  climate : — the


‘ P.  142.


532


ON  PARTURITION.


same  thing  hajjpens  to  the  fruit  of  the  womb ; it  depends
on  the  abundance  or  deficiency  of  nutriment,  on  the  strength
or  weakness  of  body,  and  on  the  right  or  wrong  ordering  of
life  with  reference  to  what  physicians  call  the  “ non-naturals,^’
whether  the  child  arrives  sooner  or  later  at  maturity,  i.  e.
is  born.

Fabricins  describes  the  manner  of  parturition  as  follows:  “The
uterus  having  been  so  enlarged  by  the  bulk  of  the  foetus  that
it  will  admit  of  no  further  distension  without  risk,  and  thus
excited  to  expulsion,  is  drawn  into  itself  by  the  action  of  the
transverse  fibres,  and  diminishes  its  cavity.  Thus  whilst  pre-
viously neither  the  excrementitious  matters  from  their  quan-
tity, nor  the  foetus  from  its  bulk,  could  be  contained  within  it,
the  uterus,  contracted  and  compressed  as  it  is  now,  becomes
still  less  able  to  retain  them.  Wherefore,  first  of  all,  the  mem-
branes, as  being  the  weaker  parts,  and  suffering  most  pressure,
are  ruptured,  and  give  exit  to  the  waters,  which  are  of  a
very  fluid  consistence,  for  the  purpose  of  lubricating  the  pas-
sages. Then  follows  the  foetus,  which  tends  towards,  and,  as
it  were,  assaults  the  uterine  aperture,  not  only  by  the  force  of
its  own  gravity  as  no  longer  floating  in  water,  but  compressed
and  propelled  by  the  action  of  the  uterus : the  abdominal
muscles  and  the  diaphragm  also  assist  mightily  in  the  entire
process.”

Now  in  these  words  Fabricius  rather  describes  the  process
of  defgecation  or  an  abortion  than  a genuine  and  natural  birth.
For  although  in  women,  as  a general  rule,  the  membranes  ai’e
ruptured  before  the  escape  of  the  foetus,  it  is  not  universally
so ; nor  does  it  hold  in  the  case  of  other  animals  which  bring
forth  their  young  enveloped  in  theii’  membranes.  This  can  be
observed  in  the  bitch,  ewe,  mare,  and  others,  and  more  parti-
culai’ly  in  the  viper,  which  conceives  an  ovum  of  an  uniform
colour  and  soft  shell  (resembling  in  fact  the  product  of  con-
ception in  the  woman) ; this  is  retained  until  the  foetus  is  com-
pletely formed;  it  is  then  expelled  entire,  and,  according  to
Aristotle,^  is  broken  through  by  the  young  animal  on  the  third
day.  It  sometimes  happens,  however,  that  kittens,  whilst  yet
in  utero,  gnaw  through  the  membranes,  and  so  come  into  the
world  uninvolved.


Hist.  Aiiim.  lib.  v,  cap.  34.


ON  PARTURITION.


533


And  so  alsOj  according  to  tlie  observation  of  experienced
midwivesj  women  have  occasionally  expelled  the  child  with  the
membranes  unbroken.  And  this  kind  of  birth,  in  which  the
foetus  is  born  enveloped  in  its  coverings,  appears  to  me  by  far
the  most  natural;  it  is  like  the  ripe  fruit  which  drops  from  the
tree  without  scattering  its  seed  before  the  appointed  time.  But
where  it  is  otherwise,  and  the  placenta,  subsequently  to  birth,
adheres  to  the  uterus,  there  is  great  difficulty  in  detaching  it,
grave  symptoms  arise,  fetid  discharges,  and  sometimes  gangrene
occur,  and  the  mother  is  brought  into  imminent  peril.

Since  then  the  process  of  parturition,  as  described  by  Fabricius,
does  not  apply  to  all  animals,  but  to  women  alone,  and  this
not  imiversally,  but  only  where  the  labour  is  premature,  and,
as  it  were,  forced,  we  must  regard  it  not  so  much  as  a descrip-
tion of  a natural  as  of  a preternatural  and  hurried  delivery,  in
fact,  of  an  abortion.

In  natural  and  genuine  labour  two  things  are  required,  which
mutually  bear  upon  and  assist  each  other : these  are,  the  mother
which  produces,  and  the  child  to  be  produced;  and  unless  both
are  ready  to  play  their  part,  the  labour  will  hardly  terminate
favorably,  requiring  as  it  does  the  proper  maturity  of  both.
For  if,  on  the  one  hand,  the  foetus,  from  restlessness  and  over-
desire to  make  its  way  out,  does  ^dolence  to  the  uterus,  and
thus  anticipates  the  mother;  or  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  mother,
owing  to  feebleness  of  the  uterus,  or  auy  other  circumstance  ne-
cessitating expulsion,  is  beforehand  with  the  foetus,  this  is  to  be
looked  upon  rather  as  the  result  of  disease  than  as  a natural
and  critical  birth.  The  same  may  be  said  of  those  cases  where
parts  only  of  the  product  of  conception  escape,  whilst  others
remain ; for  instance,  if  the  foetus  itself  is  disposed  to  come
away  when  the  placenta  is  not  yet  separated  from  the  uterus,  or,
on  the  other  hand,  if  the  placenta  is  sepai’ated  when  the  foetus
is  not  rightly  placed,  or  the  uterus  is  not  sufficiently  relaxed  to
allow  of  its  passage.  Hence  it  is  that  midwives  are  so  much
to  blame,  especially  the  younger  and  more  meddlesome  ones,
who  make  a marvellous  pother  when  they  hear  the  woman
cry  out  with  her  pains  and  implore  assistance,  daubing  their
hands  with  oil,  and  distending  the  passages,  so  as  not  to  appear
ignorant  in  their  art — giving  besides  medicines  to  excite  the
expulsive  powers,  and  when  tliey  would  hurry  the  labour,  re-


534


ON  PARTURITION.


tarding  it  and  making  it  unnatural^  by  leaving  behind  portions
of  the  membranes,  or  even  of  the  placenta  itself,  besides  ex-
posing the  wretched  woman  to  the  air,  wearying  her  out  on
the  labour-stool,  and  making  her,  in  fact,  run  great  risks  of
her  life.  In  truth,  it  is  far  better  with  the  poor,  and  those
who  become  pregnant  by  mischance,  and  are  secretly  delivered
without  the  aid  of  a midwife;  for  the  longer  the  birth  is  re-
tarded the  more  safely  and  easily  is  the  process  completed.

Of  unnatm’al  labours,  therefore,  there  are  chiefly  two  kinds:
either  the  foetus  is  born  before  the  proper  time  (and  this  consti-
tutes an  abortion),  or  else  subsequently  to  it,  when  a difficult
or  tedious  labom-  is  the  result,  either  from  the  due  time  and
order  not  being  preserved,  or  from  the  presence  of  dangerous
symptoms;  these  arise  either  from  failure  of  the  expelling
powers  on  the  part  of  the  mother,  or  from  sluggishness  on  the
part  of  the  foetus  in  making  its  way  out ; it  is  when  both  per-
form their  proper  parts  that  a safe  and  genuine  labour  results.

Fabricius  ascribes  the  business  of  expelling  the  ofl^spring  to
the  uterus ; and  he  adds,  “ the  abdominal  muscles  and  the
diaphragm  assist  in  the  business.”  It  seems  to  me,  how-
ever, on  deep  investigation,  that  the  throes  of  childbirth,  just
as  sneezing,  proceed  from  the  motion  and  agitation  of  the
whole  body.  I am  acquainted  with  a young  woman  who
during  labour  fell  into  so  profound  a state  of  coma  that  no
remedies  had  power  to  rouse  her,  nor  was  she  in  fact  able  to
swallow.  When  called  to  her,  finding  that  injections  and  other
ordinaiy  remedies  had  been  employed  in  vain,  I dipped  a fea-
ther in  a powerful  sternutatoiy,  and  passed  it  up  the  nostrils.
Although  the  stupor  was  so  profound  that  she  could  not  sneeze,
or  be  roused  in  any  Avay,  the  effect  was  to  excite  convulsions
throughout  the  body,  beginning  at  the  shoulders,  and  gradu-
ally descending  to  the  lower  extremities.  As  often  as  I em-
ployed the  stimulus  the  labour  advanced,  until  at  last  a strong
and  healthy  child  was  born,  without  the  consciousness  of  the
mother,  who  still  remained  in  a state  of  coma.

We  can  observe  the  manner  of  labour-pains  in  other  ani-
mals, as  the  bitch,  sheep,  and  larger  cattle,  and  ascertain  that
they  do  not  depend  on  the  action  of  the  uterus  and  abdomen
only,  but  on  the  eff“orts  of  the  whole  body.

The  degree  in  which  the  offspring  contributes  to  accelerate  and


ON  PARTURITION,


535


facilitate  birth  is  made  clear  from  observations  on  oviparous  ani-
mals; in  these  it  is  ascertained  that  the  shell  is  broken  through  by
the  foetus  and  not  by  the  mother.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  in
viviparous  animals  also  the  greater  part  of  dehvery  is  due  to
the  foetus — to  its  efforts,  I mean,  not  to  its  gravity,  as  Fabricius
Avould  have  it.  For  what  can  gravity  do  in  the  case  of  quadru-
peds standing  or  sitting,  or  in  the  woman  when  lying  down?
Nor  are  the  effoi’ts  of  the  foetus  to  get  out,  the  result,  as  he
believes,  of  its  own  bulk  or  of  that  of  the  waters;  the  waters,  it
is  true,  when  the  foetus  is  dead  and  decomposed,  by  their  putrid
and  acrimonious  nature,  stimulate  the  uterus  to  expel  its  con-
tents ; but  it  is  the  foetus  itself  udiich,  with  its  head  down-
wards, attacks  the  portals  of  the  womb,  opens  them  by  its  own
energies,  and  thus  struggles  into  day.  Ai^herefore  a birth  of
this  kind  is  held  the  more  speedy  and  fortunate ; “ it  is  con-
trary to  nature,'^  says  Pliny, i “for  a child  to  be  born  with  the
feet  foremost ; hence  those  so  born  were  called  Agrippse,  i.  e.
born  with  difficulty’' — (segre  parti),  for  in  such  the  labour  is
tedious  and  painful.  Notwithstanding  this,  in  cases  of  abor-
tion, or  where  the  foetus  is  dead,  or,  in  fact,  when  any  difficulty
arises  in  the  delivery  so  as  to  require  manual  aid,  it  is  better
that  the  feet  should  come  first ; they  act  as  a wedge  on  the
narrow  uterine  passages.  Hence,  when  we  chiefly  depend  upon
the  foetus,  as  being  lively  and  active,  to  accomplish  delivery,  we
must  do  our  best  that  the  head  escape  first;  but  if  the  business
is  to  be  done  by  the  uterus,  it  is  advisable  that  the  feet  come
foremost.

We  are  able  to  observe  in  how  great  a degree  the  foetus  con-
tributes to  delivery,  not  only  in  birds,  which,  as  I have  said
above,  break  through  the  shell  by  their  own  powers,  but  also
in  many  other  animals.  AU  kinds  of  flies  and  butterflies  pierce
the  little  membrane  in  which  they  lie  concealed  as  “aurelise;”
the  silkworm  also,  at  its  appointed  time,  softens  by  moistening,
and  then  eats  through  the  silken  bag  which  it  had  spun  round
itself  for  protection,  and  makes  its  way  out  without  any  foreign
aid.  In  the  same  manner  wasps,  hornets,  all  insects  in  fact,
and  fishes  of  every  kind,  are  born  by  their  own  will  and  pov'ers.
This  can  be  best  seen  in  the  skate,  fork-fish,  lamprey,  and  the


Lib.  vii,  cap.  8.


536


ON  PARTURITION.


cartilaginous  fishes  generally.  These,  conceive  a perfect  Ovo-
coloured  egg,  made  up,  that  is,  of  albumen  and  yelk,  and  con-
tained in  a strong  quadrangular  shell ; from  this,  still  retained
Avithin  the  uterus,  the  young  fish  is  formed : it  then  breaks
through  the  shell,  and  makes  its  Avay  out.  In  an  exactly  simi-
lar manner  the  young  Auper  eats  through  the  egg-shell,  some-
times whilst  it  remains  in  utero,  sometimes  when  within  the
passages,  at  others  two  or  tlmee  days  after  birth.  Hence  arose
the  fable  of  the  young  viper  eating  through  the  womb  of  its
mother,  and  so  avenging  its  father^s  death ; it  does,  in  fact,
nothing  but  what  the  young  of  every  animal  does,  breaking
though  the  membranes  Avhich  envelope  it,  either  in  the  dehver}'
itself,  or  a short  time  subsequently  to  that  event.

We  learn  moreover  from  positive  obseiwations  how  much  the
foetus  contributes  to  its  own  birth.  A woman  in  my  own
neighbourhood,  and  I speak  as  haA'iug  knowledge  of  the  circum-
stance, died  one  evening,  and  the  body  was  left  by  itself  in  a
room ; the  next  morning  an  infant  Avas  found  between  the
thighs  of  the  mother,  having  evidently  forced  its  Avay  out  by  its
own  efforts.  Gregorius  Nymmanus  has  collected  seA’eral  in-
stances of  a similar  kind  from  trustworthy  authors.

I am  further  acquainted  with  a woman  who  had  the  whole
length  of  the  vagina  so  torn  and  injured  in  a difficult  labour,
that  subsequentljq  after  she  had  again  become  pregnant,  not
only  did  the  parts  in  the  neighbom’hood  of  the  nymphae,  but
the  Avhole  cavity  of  the  vagina  as  far  as  the  orifice  of  the  uterus,
become  adherent ; this  went  to  such  an  extent  that  coition
became  impossible,  nor  could  a probe  be  passed  up,  nor  was
there  any  passage  left  for  the  ordinary  discharges.  H hen  her
labour  came  on  her  suflerings  were  so  di’eadful  that  all  hope  of
delivery  was  abandoned.  She  therefore  gave  up  the  keys  to
her  husband,  arranged  her  affairs,  and  took  leave  of  her  friends
Avho  Avere  present.  On  a sudden,  hoAvever,  by  the  Aiolent  eflbrts
of  the  foetus  the  whole  space  Avas  burst  through,  and  a Augorous
infant  born;  thus  Avas  the  foetus  the  sah’ation  both  of  itself  and
its  mother,  besides  opening  the  way  for  subsequent  children.
By  the  exhibition  of  proper  remedies  the  mother  recovered  her
former  good  state  of  health.

The  following  instance  is  even  more  remarkable.  A white
mare  of  great  beauty  had  been  presented  to  her  Serene  High-


ON  PARTURITION,


537


iiess  tlie  Queen,  and  in  order  that  its  symmetry  and  useful-
ness might  not  he  impaired  by  foal-bearing,  the  grooms,  as  is
the  custom,  had  infibulated  the  animal  with  iron  rings.  This
mare  (by  what  chance  I know  not,  nor  could  the  grooms  in-
form me)  was  got  with  foal;  and  at  length,  when  no  one  sus-
pected anything  of  the  kind,  she  foaled  in  the  night,  and  a
living  foal  was  found  the  next  morning  by  the  mother’s  side.
When  I heard  of  the  circumstance  I went  immediately  to  the
place,  and  found  the  sides  of  the  vulva  still  fastened  together
by  the  rings,  but  the  whole  pudendum  on  the  left  side  so
thrust  and  torn  away  from  the  pelvis  by  the  almost  incredible
efforts  of  the  foetus,  that  a gap  sufficiently  wide  was  made  to
admit  of  its  escape.  Such  is  the  force  and  vigour  of  a full-
grown  and  healthy  foetus.

But,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  foetus  is  diseased  or  feeble,  or  is
born  before  the  full  term,  it  must  be  considered  more  an  abor-
tion than  a regular  birth,  the  foetus  being  expelled  rather  than
born ; and  thus  for  some  days  after  birth  it  neither  properly
takes  the  breast  nor  gets  rid  of  its  excretions.

And  yet  the  following  example  will  show  that  the  uterus
also  contributes  towards  delivery.  A poor  washerwoman  had
long  suffered  from  procidentia  uteri  to  such  an  extent  that  a
tumour  hung  between  the  thighs  as  large  as  the  fist.  As  no
remedies  had  been  applied,  the  prolapsed  part  became  so  rough
and  wrinkled  as  to  take  on  the  appeararance  of  the  scrotum,
and  in  this  state  she  suffered  less  than  at  the  commencement
of  her  illness.  When  consulted  on  her  case,  I ordered  her  to
keep  her  bed  for  several  days,  to  employ  fomentations  and  oint-
ments, and  after  the  uterus  was  returned,  to  keep  it  in  its
place  by  means  of  pessaries  and  bandages,  until  by  the  use  of
strengthening  applications  it  should  be  fixed  firmly  in  its  place.
This  plan  was  followed  by  some  success  ; but  she  soon  suffered
a relapse,  when  compelled  by  her  circumstances  to  follow  her
usual  occupations,  and  continue  long  in  the  erect  position.  She
bore,  however,  her  inconvenience  with  patience,  the  uterus  at
times  protruding,  at  others  not  doing  so.  At  night  she  could
usually  reduce  it,  and  it  remained  for  some  time  in  its  proper
place.  After  the  lapse  of  a few  days  she  returned,  and  com-
plained that  the  uterus  was  so  swelled  from  the  use,  as  she
thought,  of  the  remedies,  and  especially  of  the  fomentations,  that


538


ON  PARTURITION.


it  could  not  any  longer  be  retained.  By  using  some  applications
she  was  enabled  to  accomplish  the  reduction  j but  the  cure  was
only  temporary,  for  as  soon  as  she  stood  up,  and  followed  her
ordinary  occupations,  the  uterus  immediately  gave  her  much  in-
convenience by  its  weight,  and  at  length  entirely  prolapsed.  And
now  it  hung  down  to  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  like  the  scrotum  of
a hull,  to  such  an  extent  that  I suspected  not  only  the  vagina
but  also  the  uterus  to  be  inverted,  or  that  there  Avas  some  kind
of  uterine  heimia.  At  length  the  tumour  exceeded  in  magnitude
a man’s  head,  acquired  a resisting  character,  and  hung  down  as
low  as  the  knees  ; it  also  gave  her  much  pain,  and  prevented  her
Avalking  except  in  the  prone  position ; added  to  which  it  dis-
charged a sanious  fluid  from  its  inferior  part,  as  if  some  portion
had  ulcerated.  On  ocular  inspection  (for  I did  not  employ  the
touch)  I feared  that  cancer  or  carcinoma  might  result,  and  so
thought  of  the  ligature  or  excision ; in  the  mean  time  I advised
the  employment  of  soothing  fomentations  to  ease  the  pain.  The
following  night,  however,  a foetus  of  a span  long,  perfectly
formed,  but  dead,  was  expelled  from  the  tumour,  and  was
brought  to  me  the  next  day.  I took  out  the  intestines,  and
kept  it  in  cold  water  without  decomposition  for  many  months,
showing  it  to  my  friends  as  an  extraordinary  object  of  curiosity.
The  proper  skin  in  this  foetus  was  not  yet  formed,  but  in  its  place
there  was  a pellicle,  which  could  be  stripped  off  entire,  like
that  on  a baked  apple ; underneath  all  the  muscles  of  the  body
could  be  distinctly  seen,  the  foetus  being  very  lean.  I shall  de-
scribe at  anotlier  opportunity  AA’hat  I discovered  in  this  foetus
on  dissection.  I have  mentioned  the  case  on  this  occasion  to
show  that  it  was  the  uterus  alone  Avhich  excited  the  aboi’tion,
and  expelled  the  foetus  by  its  own  efforts.

Fabricius^  suggests  two  circumstances  as  especially  worthy
of  admii’ation  in  and  after  birth : first,  the  dilatation  of  the
uterus  at  the  time  of  birth ; secondly,  the  way  in  which  after
birth  it  is  restored  to  its  usual  small  size.  He  wouders  how
the  uterus  can  be  so  distended  as  to  allow  the  foetus  to  escape,
and  afterwards  in  so  short  a period  return  to  its  pristine  state.

He  says,  that  Avith  Galen”  we  can  only  wonder,  but  not
understand,”  how  the  neck  of  the  uterus,  a part  so  thick,  hard,


' De  Form.  Feet.  p.  142.


• De  Usu  Part.  lib.  xv,  cap.


539


ON  PARTURITION.

and  closely  sealed^  as  noc  to  admit  a probe,  can  suflPer  such
distension  at  the  time  of  delivery.  He  gives,  ^ however,  the
following  reason : “ that  the  nnimpregnated  uterus  is  of  a
thick  and  hard  consistence,  and  so  is  its  orifice,  but  when  im-
pregnated is  yielding  and  soft,  and  in  proportion  as  the  term
of  delivery  approaches,  both  the  body  of  the  uterus  and  its
orifice  become  more  and  more  yielding.”  He  believes  this  to
arise  “ from  the  distension  which  the  uterus  undergoes,  and  that
when  this  distension  takes  place,  the  compact  and  plaited,  so
to  speak,  body  of  the  uterus  is  expanded  and  unfolded ; thus
what  was  before  thick  and  hard  becomes  soft  and  yielding,  and
ready  to  admit  of  the  passage  of  the  foetus.”  He  adds  subse-
quently, “ Some  one  may  ask — if  all  this  is  correct,  how  is  it
that  in  pregnant  animals  the  uterine  aperture  is  so  closed  that
it  will  not  admit  a probe  ? , I answer,  that  this  is  so  because
the  uterus,  whilst  it  is  being  distended  and  undone,  like  a
closely-folded  piece  of  linen,  begins  to  undergo  these  changes
at  its  superior  part  j the  lower  portions  then  gradually  widen,
until  the  power  of  distension  ai’rives  at  the  aperture ; this
generally  takes  place  at  the  period  of  birth.  With  reason  then
is  the  uterine  orifice  closely  shut  in  the  first  months  of  preg-
nancy, whilst  it  is  still  hard  and  thick,  but  inclined  to  dilate
in  the  latter  ones.  Thus  much  may  be  said  about  the  un-
known cause  of  Galen.  Other  circumstances  may  be  mentioned
as  conducing  to  the  dilatation  of  the  orifice;  for  instance,  the
excretions  of  the  foetus,  such  as  the  sweat  and  urine;  for  although
these  are  contained  in  their  proper  receptacles  and  membranes,
yet  some  degree  of  moisture  may  be  communicated  to  the  ute-
rine aperture,  especially  as  it  hes  low,  and  always  in  the  im-
mediate neighbourhod  of  these  humours ; added  to  which,
mucous  and  shmy  matters  are  always  found  about  the  orifice.”
But  in  my  opinion  this  great  man  is  wrong ; for  the  neck  of
the  uterus  is  not  hard  from  being  folded  on  itself,  but  in  con-
sequence of  its  own  proper  substance  and  cartilaginous  nature;
and  the  accidental  causes  which  he  gives  can  have  but  little
weight  towards  furthering  the  dilatation.  This,  doubtless,  like
every  other  contrivance  in  the  human  body,  is  owing  to  the
divine  providence  of  Nature,  which  directs  her  workmanship  to


' P.  143.


540


ON  PARTURITION.


certain  ends^  actions,  and  uses.  The  structure,  then,  of  the
uterus  is  such,  that  immediately  on  conception  it  shuts  up
closely  its  cartilaginous  aperture,  for  the  purpose  of  retaining
the  seed ; this  part  subsequently,  at  birth,  and  that  the  foetus
may  escape,  like  fruit  on  the  tree,  comes  to  maturity  and  sof-
tens, and  this  not  by  any  unfolding  of  its  tissue,  but  by  a change
in  its  natural  character.  For  a loosening  and  softening  takes
place  even  in  the  commissural  attachments  of  hones,  as  in  those
between  the  haunches  and  the  sacrum,  the  pubes,  and  the  pieces
of  the  coccyx.  It  is  a truly  wonderful  thing  that  the  little
point  of  a sprouting  germ,  say  of  the  almond  or  another
fruit,  should  break  the  shell  which  a hammer  can  scarcely
crush ; or  that  the  tender  fibres  of  the  hy-root  should  pene-
trate the  narrow  chinks  of  the  stone,  and  at  length  cause  rents
in  mighty  walls.  But  it  does  not  appear  so  marvellous  that
the  parts  of  the  woman,  when  distended  by  lahoui’,  should  reco-
ver their  natural  firmness,  if  we  consider  the  state  of  the  male
organ  in  coition,  and  how  soon  it  subsequently  becomes  soft
and  flaccid.  A greater  matter  for  wonder  is  it,  and  surpassing
all  these  “ foldings,”  that  the  substance  of  the  uterus,  as  the
foetus  increases,  not  only  is  day  by  day  enlarged  and  distended
or  unfolded,  as  it  were,  to  take  Fahricius’s  notion,  hut  that  it
should  become  more  thick,  fleshy,  and  strong.  We  may  even,
Avith  Fabricius,  maiwel  still  more  at  the  means  by  which  the
mass  of  the  uterus,  by  the  intervention  of  the  ordinary  lochial
discharges,  returns  to  its  original  size  in  so  few  days  •,  for  this
is  not  the  case  with  other  tumours  or  abscesses ; these  require
a longer  period  for  dispersion,  being  made  up  of  unnatural
matters,  and  such  as  require  digestion,  a process  opposed  to
the  power  of  expulsion.  Yet  this  is  not  more  worthy  of  admi-
ration than  the  other  works  of  nature,  for  “ all  things  are  full
of  God,”  and  the  Deity  of  nature  is  ever  Ausibly  present.

In  the  last  place,  it  is  object  of  great  Avonder  to  Fabricius
hoAV  those  vessels  of  the  foetus  (meaning  the  oval  opening
out  of  the  vena  cava  into  the  pulmonary  vein,  and  the  duct
from  the  pulmonary  artery  into  the  aorta,  on  which  subjects  1
have  entered  fully  in  my  Essay  on  the  Circulation  of  the
Blood)  immediately  after  birth  begin  to  shrivel  up  aud  be-
come obliterated.  He  is  driven  to  that  reason  given  by


ON  PARTURITION.


541


Aristotle,^  and  already  cited  by  me,  which  is,  that  all  parts
are  made  for  a certain  function,  and  if  the  function  ceases  to  be
required  that  they  themselves  disappear.  The  eye  sees,
the  ear  hears,  the  brain  perceives,  the  stomach  digests,  not
because  such  characters  and  structures  (naturally)  belong
to  these  organs ; but  they  are  endowed  with  such  characters
and  structures  to  accomplish  the  functions  appointed  them  by
nature.

On  grounds  like  these  it  would  appear  that  the  uterus  holds
the  first  place  among  the  organs  destined  for  generation ; for
the  testicles  are  made  to  produce  semen,  the  semen  is  for  the
purposes  of  intercourse,  and  coition  itself,  or  the  emission  of
the  semen,  is  instituted  by  nature  that  the  uterus  may  be
fecundated  and  generation  result.

I have  said  before  that  an  egg  is,  as  it  were,  the  fruit  of
an  animal,  and  a kind  of  external  uterus.  Now,  on  the  other
hand,  we  may  regard  the  uterus  as  an  egg  remaining  within.
For  as  trees  are  gay  with  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruit  at  stated
periods,  and  oviparous  animals  at  one  time  conceive  and  produce
eggs,  at  another  become  effete,  so  that  neither  the  place”
or  the  part  that  contained  them  can  be  found,  so  have
viviparous  animals  their  spring  and  autumn  allotted  them.
At  the  season  of  fecundation  the  genital  organs,  especially  in
the  female,  undergo  great  changes,  so  much  so  that  in  birds,
the  ovary,  which  at  other  times  is  scarcely  visible,  now  becomes
turgid;  and  the  belly  of  the  fish,  near  about  the  time  of  spawn-
ing, far  exceeds  in  bulk  the  rest  of  the  body,  owing  to  the
enormous  number  of  ova  and  the  quantity  of  semen  contained
within  it.  In  very  many  viviparous  animals  the  genital  organs,
that  is,  the  uterus  and  spermatic  vessels,  are  not  always  found
presenting  the  same  mode  and  course  of  action  and  structure ;
but  as  they  are  capable  or  not  of  conception,  so  changes  take
place,  and  to  such  an  extent  that  the  organs  can  hardly  be
recognized  as  the  same.  In  nature,  just  as  there  is  nothing
lackins:,  so  is  there  nothing  superfluous ; and  thus  it  happens
that  the  organs  of  generation  wither  away  and  are  lost  when
there  is  no  longer  any  use  for  them.

At  the  period  of  coitus  in  the  hare  and  mole,  the  testicles


‘ De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  5.


542


ON  PARTURITION.


of  the  male  become  visible,  and  in  tbe  female  tbe  horns  of  the
uterus  appear.  In  truth,  it  is  most  marvellous  to  see  u-hat  an
enormous  quantity  of  semen  is  contained  in  full-grown  moles
and  mice  at  those  times,  whilst  at  others  no  semen  can  be  seen,
and  the  testicles  are  shrunk  and  retracted.  So  also  when
the  reproductive  faculty  ceases  in  the  female,  the  uterus  is  found
with  difficulty,  and  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  distinguish  the  sexes.

The  uterus,  especially  in  the  woman,  varies  extraordinarily
as  it  is  fecundated  or  not,  both  in  constitution  and  in  the
results  of  that  constitution — I mean  in  position,  size,  form,
colour,  thickness,  hardness,  and  density.  In  the  girl,  before
the  age  of  puhertjq  the  breasts  are  no  larger  than  those  of  the
boy,  and  the  uterus  is  a small,  white,  membranous  organ,  des-
titute of  vessels,  and  not  larger  than  the  top  of  the  thumb,  or
a large  bean.  In  like  manner  in  old  women,  as  the  breasts
are  collapsed,  so  is  the  uterus  shrunken,  flaccid,  ^vithered,  pale,
and  void  of  vessels  and  blood.  I attribute  the  suppression  of
the  catamenia  in  elderly  women  to  this  cause;  in  them  the
menstruous  fliiid  either  escapes  as  hemorrhoidal  flux,  or  is  pre-
maturely stopped,  to  the  injury  of  the  health.  Tor  when  the
uterus  becomes  cold  and  almost  hfeless,  and  all  its  vessels  are
obliterated,  the  superfluous  blood  boils  up,  and  either  falls  back
and  stagnates,  or  else  is  diverted  into  the  neighbomung  veins.
On  the  contrary,  in  those  pale  virgins  who  laboiu  under  chronic
maladies,  and  in  whom  the  uterus  is  small  and  the  catamenia
stagnate,  “ by  coition,”  says  Aristotle,^  “ the  excrementitious
menstrual  fluid  is  drawn  downwards,  for  the  heated  uterus
attracts  the  humours,  and  the  passages  are  opened.”  In  this
Avay  their  maladies  are  greatly  lessened,  seeing  that  want  of
action  on  the  part  of  the  uterus  exposes  the  body  to  various
ills.  For  the  uterus  is  a most  important  organ,  and  brings  the
whole  body  to  sympathize  with  it.  FTo  one  of  the  least  expe-
rience can  be  ignorant  w'hat  grievous  symptoms  arise  when  the
uterus  either  rises  up  or  falls  down,  or  is  in  any  way  put  out  of
place,  or  is  seized  with  spasm — how  di’eadful,  then,  are  the  mental
aberrations,  the  delirium,  the  melancholy,  the  pai’oxysms  of
frenzy,  as  if  the  affected  person  were  under  the  dominion  of
spells,  and  all  arising  from  unnatural  states  of  the  uterus.  How


‘ De  Gen.  Aniiu.  lili.  iii,  cap.  1.


ON  PARTURITION.


543


many  incui’able  diseases  also  are  brought  on  by  unhealthy  men-
strual discharges,  or  from  over-abstinence  from  sexual  inter-
course where  the  passions  are  strong  !

Nor  are  the  changes  which  take  place  in  the  virgin  less  ob-
servable when  the  uterus  first  begins  to  enlarge  and  receive
warmth ; the  complexion  is  improved,  the  breasts  enlarge,  the
countenance  glows  with  beauty,  the  eyes  lighten,  the  voice  be-
comes harmonious;  the  gait,  gestures,  discourse,  all  are  graceful.
Serious  maladies,  too,  are  cured  either  at  this  period  or  never.

I am  acquainted  with  a noble  lady  who  for  more  than
ten  years  laboured  under  furor  uterinus  and  melancholy.  After
all  remedies  had  been  employed  without  success,  she  became
affected  with  prolapsus  uteri.  Contrary  to  the  opinion  of  others,
I predicted  that  this  last  accident  would  prove  salutary,  and  I
recommended  her  not  to  replace  the  uterus  until  its  over-heat
had  been  moderated  by  the  contact  of  the  external  air.  Cir-
cumstances turned  out  as  I anticipated,  and  in  a short  time
she  became  quite  well;  the  uterus  was  returned  to  its  proper
situation,  and  she  lives  in  good  health  to  the  present  day.

I also  saw  another  woman  who  suffered  long  with  hysterical
symptoms,  which  would  yield  to  no  remedies.  After  many
years  her  health  was  restored  on  the  uterus  becoming  pro-
lapsed. In  both  cases,  when  the  violence  of  the  symptoms
was  abated,  I returned  the  uterus,  and  the  event  proved  favor-
able. For  the  uterus,  when  stimulated  by  any  acrid  matter,
not  only  falls  down,  but  like  the  rectum  irritated  by  a tenes-
mus, thrusts  itself  outwards.

Various,  then,  is  the  constitution  of  the  uterus,  and  not  only
in  its  diseased,  but  also  in  its  natural  state,  that  is,  at  the  pe-
riods of  fecundity  and  barrenness.  In  young  girls,  as  I said,
and  in  women  past  childbearing,  it  is  without  blood,  and  about
the  size  of  a bean.  In  the  marriageable  virgin  it  has  the  mag-
nitude and  form  of  a pear.  In  women  who  have  borne  chil-
dren, and  are  still  fruitful,  it  equals  in  bulk  a small  gourd  or  a
gooseys  egg ; at  the  same  time,  together  with  the  breasts,  it
swells  and  softens,  becomes  more  fleshy,  and  its  heat  is  in-
creased ; whilst,  to  use  Virgil’s  expression  with  reference  to
the  fields,

" Superat  tener  omnibus  humor,

Et  genitalia  semina  poscunt.’’


544


ON  PARTURITION.


Wherefore  women  are  most  prone  to  conceive  either  just  be-
fore or  just  subsequent  to  the  menstrual  flux^  for  at  these
periods  there  is  a greater  degree  of  heat  and  moistui’e^  two
conditions  necessary  to  generation.  In  the  same  manner  when
other  animals  are  in  heat,  the  genital  organs  are  moist  and
turgid.

Such  is  the  state  of  the  uterus  as  I have  found  it  before
birth.  In  pregnant  women,  as  I have  before  stated,  the  uterus
increases  in  proportion  to  the  foetus,  and  attains  a great  size.
Immediately  after  birth,  I have  seen  it  as  large  as  a man’s  head,
more  than  a thumb’s  breadth  in  thickness,  and  loaded  with
vessels  full  of  blood.  It  is,  indeed,  most  wonderful,  and,  as
Fabricius  remarks,  quite  beyond  human  reason,  how  such  a
mass  can  diminish  to  so  vast  an  extent  in  the  space  of  fifteen
or  twenty  days.  It  happens  as  follows  : immediately  on  the
expulsion  of  the  foetus  and  its  membranes,  the  uterus  gradually
contracts,  narrows  its  neck,  and  shrinks  inwardly  into  itself;
partly  by  a process  of  diaphoresis,  partly  by  means  of  the  lochia,
its  bulk  insensibly  lessens  ; and  the  neighbouring  parts,  bones,
abdomen,  and  all  the  hypogastric  region,  at  the  same  time  di-
minish and  recover  their  firmness.  The  lochial  discharge  at  first
resembles  pm’e  blood;  it  then  becomes  of  a sanious  character,  like
the  washings  of  flesh,  and  is  otherwise  pale  and  serous.  At  this
last  stage,  when  no  longer  tinged  with  blood,  the  women  call
it  “ the  coming  of  the  milk,”  for  the  reason  probably  that  at
that  time  the  breasts  are  loaded  with  milk,  and  the  lochia  sen-
sibly diminish ; as  if  the  nutritive  matter  was  then  transferred
to  the  breasts  from  the  uterus.

In  other  animals  the  process  is  shorter  and  simpler ; in  them
the  parts  concerned  recover  then’  ordinary  bxilk  and  consistence
in  one  or  two  days.  In  fact,  some,  as  the  hare  and  rabbit,
admit  the  buck,  and  again  become  fecundated,  an  horn'  after
kindling.  In  like  manner,  I have  stated  that  the  hen  admits
the  cock  immediately  on  laying.  Women,  as  they  alone  have
a menstruous,  so  have  they  alone  a lochial  discharge ; added  to
which  they  are  exposed  to  disorders  and  perils  immediately
after  birth,  either  from  the  uterus,  through  feebleness,  con-
tracting too  soon,  or  from  the  lochia  becoming  vitiated  or  sup-
pressed. For  it  often  happens,  especially  in  delicate  women,
that  foul  and  putrid  lochia  set  up  fevers  and  otlicr  violent


ON  PARTURITION.


545


symptoms.  Because  the  uterus,  torn  and  injured  by  the  sepa-
ration of  the  placenta,  especially  if  any  violence  has  been  used,
resembles  a vast  internal  ulcer,  and  is  cleansed  and  pinified  by
the  free  discharge  of  the  lochia.  Therefore  do  we  conclude  as  to
the  favorable  or  unfavorable  state  of  the  puerperal  woman  from
the  character  of  these  excretions.  For  if  any  part  of  the  placenta
adhere  to  the  uterus,  the  lochial  discharges  become  fetid,  green,
and  putrid ; and  sometimes  the  powers  of  the  uterus  are  so
reduced  that  gangrene  is  the  result,  and  the  woman  is  de-
stroyed.

If  clots  of  blood,  or  any  other  foreign  matter,  remain  in  the
uterine  cavity  after  delivery,  the  uterus  does  not  retract  nor
close  its  orifice;  but  the  cervix  is  found  soft  and  open.  This
I ascertained  in  a woman,  who,  when  laboring  under  a malignant
fever,  with  great  prostration  of  strength,  miscarried  of  a foetus
exhibiting  no  marks  of  decomposition,  and  who  afterwards  lay  in
an  apparently  dying  state,  with  a pulse  scarcely  to  be  counted,
and  cold  sweats.  Finding  the  uterine  orifice  soft  and  open,  and
the  lochia  very  oflPensive,  I suspected  that  something  was  under-
going decomposition  within ; whereupon  I introduced  the  fin-
gers and  bi’ought  away  a “mole”  of  the  size  of  a goose’s  egg,
of  a hard,  fleshy,  and  almost  cartilaginous  consistence,  and
pierced  with  holes,  which  discharged  a thick  and  fetid  matter.
The  woman  was  immediately  freed  from  her  symptoms,  and  in
a short  time  recovered.

When  the  neck  of  the  uterus  contracts  in  a moderate  degree
after  birth,  and  certain  pains,  called  by  the  mid  wives  “ after
pains,”  ensue,  in  consequence  of  the  difficulty  with  which  the
clots  are  expelled,  the  case  is  considered  a favorable  one,  and
is  so  in  fact ; for  it  indicates  vigour  on  the  part  of  the  uterus,
and  that  it  is  inelined  readily  to  contract  to  its  usual  bulk  ; the
result  of  which  is  that  the  lochia  are  duly  expelled,  and
health  restored  to  the  woman.

But  I have  observed  in  some  women  the  uterine  orifice  so
closed  immediately  after  parturition,  that  the  blood  has  been
retained  in  the  uterus,  and  then,  becoming  putrid,  has  induced
the  most  dangerous  symptoms ; and  when  art  did  not  avail  to
promote  its  exit,  the  woman  has  presently  died.

A noble  lady  in  childbed  being  attacked  with  fever  for  want
of  the  ordinarjr  lochial  discharge,  had  the  pudenda  swollen  and

35


546


ON  PARTURITION.


Rot ; finding  tRe  uterine  orifice  Rard  and  firmly  closed^  J
forciRly  dilated  tRe  part  Ry  means  of  an  iron  instrument  suffi-
ciently to  admit  of  my  introducing  a syringe  and  tRrowing  up
an  injection ; tRe  effect  of  wRicR  was  tRat  grumous  and  fetid
Rlood,  to  tRe  amount  of  several  pounds,  flowed  away,  witR  pre-
sent relief  of  tRe  symptoms.

TRe  wife  of  a doctor  of  divinity  was  RrougRt  to  me;  a lady
of  a very  toleraRle  constitution,  but  who  was  barren,  and  Raving
an  extreme  desire  for  progeny,  had  tried  all  kinds  of  prescrip-
tions in  vain.  In  her  the  catamenia  appeared  at  their  proper
period ; but  at  times,  especially  after  horse  exercise,  a bloody
and  purulent  discharge  came  from  the  utenis,  and  then,  in  a
short  time,  ceased  suddenly.  Some  considered  the  case  as  one
of  leucorrhoea  ; others,  led  chiefly  by  the  fact  that  the  discharge
was  not  continually  present,  and  in  small  quantities,  but  ap-
peared by  intervals  and  in  abundance,  suspected  a fistulous
ulcer ; whereupon  they  examined  the  whole  vagina  by  means
of  a speculum  uteri,  and  appied  various  remedies,  but  in  vain  ;
when  I was  at  length  called  to  her.  I opened  the  uterine
orifice,  and  immediately  two  spoonfuls  of  pus  came  away  of  a
sanious  character  and  tinged  with  streaks  of  blood.  On  seeing
this  I said  that  there  was  a hidden  ulcer  in  the  uterine  cavity,  and
by  applying  suitable  remedies  I restored  her  to  her  former  state
of  health.  But  dm’ing  the  time  when  I was  engaged  in  her
cure,  when  the  ordinary  remedies  did  not  appear  to  be  doing
much  good,  I apphed  stronger  ones,  suspecting  as  I did  that  the
ulcer  was  of  long  standing,  and  perhaps  covered  by  exuberant
granulations.  I therefore  added  a little  Roman  ritriol  to  the
injection  employed  previously,  the  effect  of  Avhich  was  to  make
the  uterus  contract  suddenly  and  become  as  hard  as  a stone;  at
the  same  time  various  hysterical  symptoms  showed  themselves,
such,  I mean,  as  are  generally  supposed  by  physicians  to  arise
from  constriction  of  the  uterus,  and  the  rising  of  “ foul  vapom’s”
therefrom.  The  symptoms  continued  some  time,  until  by  the
application  of  soothing  and  anodyne  remedies  the  utenis  re-
laxed its  orifice ; upon  which  the  acrid  injection,  together  with
a puti'id  sanies,  was  expelled,  and  in  a short  time  the  patient
recovered.

I have  introduced  this  account  from  my  “ medical  observa-
tions^^ for  the  purpose  of  showing  how  acutely  sensible  the


ON  PARTURITION.


547


uterus  is,  and  liow  readily  it  closes  on  tRe  approach  of  danger,
especially  when  urgent  sjanptoms  accompany  the  puerperal
state.  Women  are  peculiarly  subject  to  these  accidents, especially
those  among  them  who  lead  a luxurious  life,  or  whose  health  is
naturally  weak,  and  who  easily  fall  into  disorders.  Country
women,  and  those  accustomed  to  a life  of  labour,  do  not  become
dangerously  ill  on  such  small  grounds.  Some  of  them  may  be
found  pregnant  a month  after  delivery;  whilst  two  mouths  fre-
quently elapse  before  others  are  able  to  set  about  the  ordinary
occupations  of  life.

It  is  laid  down  by  Hippocrates, that  as  many  days  are  re-
quired for  the  “ after-purgings”  as  there  are  for  the  formation
of  the  foetus  ; therefore  there  are  more  for  a female  than  a male
child.  “But  this,”  saj^s  Scaliger,^  *^^is  false;  for  in  none  of
oru-  women  do  ‘^‘the  cleansings”  last  more  than  a month;  in
very  many  they  cease  on  the  fifteenth  day ; in  some  even  on
the  seventh  day : and  I have  seen  a case  where  they  lasted
only  until  the  third  day,  although  the  woman  had  borne
twins.”  Galen  has  many  observations  on  this  subject  in  his
work  7T£f)t  Kvov/uevtov,  (On  the  Formation  of  the  Foetus.)  In
the  New  World,  it  is  said  that  the  woman  keeps  apart  the  day
only  on  which  she  is  delivered,  and  then  returns  to  her  ordi-
nary occupations.

I will  add,  in  conclusion,  an  extraordinary  instance  told  me
by  the  noble  Lord  George  Carew,Earl  of  Totness,  and  long  Lord-
Lieutenant  of  Munster  in  Ireland — he  who  wrote  the  history
of  these  times.  A woman,  great  with  child,  was  following  her
husband,  who  served  as  a soldier,  and  it  happened  that  the
army,  when  on  the  march,  was  compelled  to  halt  for  the  space
of  an  hour  near  a small  river  which  impeded  their  passage ;
whereupon  the  woman,  who  felt  her  labour  at  hand,  retired  to
a neighbouring  thicket,  and  there,  w'ithout  the  aid  of  a mid-
Avife  or  any  other  preparation,  gave  birth  to  twins;  after  she
had  washed  both  herself  and  them  in  the  running  stream,  she_
wrapped  the  infants  in  a coarse  covering,  tied  them  on  her  back,
and  the  same  day  marched  barefoot  twelve  miles  with  the  army,
without  the  slightest  harm  ensuing.  The  following  day  the
Viceroy,  Earl  Mouiitjoy,  who  at  that  time  was  leading  an


‘ Lib.  de  Fcetu.


^ Com.  in  Arist.  Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vii,  cap.  3.


548


ON  PARTURITION.


army  against  Kinsale,  then  occupied  by  the  Spaniards,  and  the
Earl  of  Totness,  were  so  affected  by  the  strange  incident,  that
they  appeared  at  the  font,  and  had  the  infants  called  by  their
own  names.


ON

THE  UTERINE  MEMBRANES  AND
HUMOURS.


OF  THE


UTERINE  MEMBRANES  AND  HUMOURS.


“ Four  kinds  of  bodies”  are  enumerated  by  Hieronymus
Fabricius  ^ “ as  existing  externally  to  the  foetus ; these  are  the
umbilical  vessels,  the  membranes,  the  humours,  and  a fleshy
substance.”  On  these  subjects,  guided  by  my  observations,  I
shall  briefly  state  wherein  I differ  from  him ; first,  however,
giving  his  statement  in  his  own  words.

There  are,”  he  says,  “'three  membranes,  two  of  which  en-
velope the  whole  foetus,  but  the  third  does  not  do  so.  Of  those
which  envelope  the  whole  foetus,  the  innermost,  immediately
investing  one,  is  called  a/nviov,  i.  e.  the  mantle.  That  which  fol-
lows next  is  entitled  by  the  Greeks  y^opiov ; the  Latins,  how-
ever, have  not  given  it  a name,  although  some  interpreters
have  thought  proper  erroneously  to  call  it  “ secundse”  or  “ se-
cundina,”  the  secundines ; this  also  envelopes  the  entii’e  foetus.
The  thii’d  is  called  aAXavroEiSrjCj  i-  e.  gut-hke,  from  its  resem-
blance to  a stuffed  intestine ; it  does  not  entirely  encompass
the  foetus,  but  is  applied  upon  the  thorax  and  part  of  the  ab-
domen, and  extends  to  either  horn  of  the  uterus.”  He  allows
that  this  last  membrane  is  only  found  in  the  foetus  of  the  sheep
and  cowj  he  asserts  also  that  it  is  continuous  with  the  urachus,
and  by  means  of  this  receives  the  urine  from  the  bladder.  Hence,
he  goes  on,  “ horned  animals,  in  whom  this  allantois  is  found,
have  the  uraohus  so  wide  and  straight,  that  it  resembles  a
small  intestine  j it  gradually  decreases  in  size  until  it  reaches
the  fundus  of  the  bladder ; whence  it  would  appear  to  owe  its


' Lib.  de  Form.  Feet.  cap.  1.


552


THE  MEMBRANES


origin  rather  to  the  intestine  than  to  the  bladder  itself.  But  in
man  and  other  animals  furnished  with  incisors  in  both  jaws,
and  in  whom  the  allantois  is  wanting,  the  size  of  the  urachus
is  so  diminished,  that  although  it  rises  from  the  fundus  of  the
bladder  as  a single  tube,  it  afterwards  splits  into  innumerable
fibres,  Avhich  pass  beyond  the  umbilicus  together  with  the  a'Cs-
sels,  and  carry  the  urine  into  the  chorion,  although  the  exact
mode  in  AAdiich  it  does  so  cannot  be  demonsti’ated.^’  On  this
ground  he  accuses  Arantius  of  a double  error — first,  his  de-
nial of  the  existence  of  the  urachus  in  man ; and,  secondly,
his  assertion  that  the  foetus  passes  its  mine  through  the  geni-
tal organs.

For  my  own  part,  I must  confess  I am  a willing  party  to
the  errors  of  Ai'antius,  if  errors  they  are  to  be  called.  For  I
am  quite  sure,  if  pressure  be  made  on  the  bladder  of  a full-
grown  foetus,  whether  of  man  or  of  any  other  animal,  that
urine  will  floiv  by  the  genitals.  But  I haAC  never  seen  an
urachus,  nor  observed  that  the  urine  is  propelled  into  the  mem-
branes by  making  pressui’e  on  the  bladder.  I have  indeed
seen  in  the  sheep  and  deer  what  appeared  to  be  a process  of  blad-
der betAveen  the  umbilical  arteries,  and  which  contained  urine;
but  it  in  no  way  resembled  the  urachus  as  described  by
Fabricius.  Not  that  I Avould  obstinately  deny  the  existence
of  an  allantois ; for  the  minor  membranes  are  so  delicate  and
transparent  (those,  for  example,  which  we  haA'e  described  as
e.xisting  between  the  two  “ Avhites”  of  the  egg)  that  they  may
easily  escape  observation.  Moreover,  in  the  hen’s  egg  a white
excrementitious  matter,  and  even  faeces  are  found  between  the
colliquament  and  albumen,  i.  e.  between  the  amnion  and
chorion ; this  I haA’e  mentioned  before,  and  Coiterus  has  also
observed  it.  Added  to  which,  the  membrane  of  the  colh-
quament  itself,  in  Avhich  the  foetus  swims,  although  it  is  so
exceedingly  transparent  and  dehcate  that  Fabricius  himself
alloAvs  nothing  can  be  imagined  more  so,neA’ertheless  (for  accord-
ing to  him  all  membranes,  hoAvever  thin,  are  double)  may  nature
sometimes  find  herself  compelled  to  deposit  m’ine  or  some  other
matter  betAveen  its  duphcatm’es.  An  allantois  of  this  kind  I
am  ready  to  alloAV  Fabricius;  but  that  other  intestine-hke  body
produced  into  either  horn  of  the  uterus,  I do  not  discover  among
the  membranes  in  cloAcn-footed  animals,  nor  aught  else,  iu


AND  HUMOURS.


553


factj  except  tlie  csnception  itself.  I can  only  findj  as  I before
said^  a process  of  tbe  bladder,  situated  between  tbe  umbib-
cal  arteries,  which  contains  an  excrementitious  matter,  and
varies  in  length  in  different  animals.  Wherefore,  in  my  opinion,
the  tunic  w'hich  Fabricius  calls  the  allantois  is,  in  fact,  the
chorion ; and  the  ancients  applied  the  name  of  allantois  to  it
on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  a double  intestine.  For  that
external  membrane,  constricted  in  the  middle,  and  resembling
a saddle-bag  in  form,  which  is  stretched  upwards  to  each  horn
of  the  uterus,  and  in  its  passage  is  pinched  in  by  that  part
of  the  uterus  which  connects  the  horns,  is  in  truth  the  cho-
rion ; and  in  the  sheep,  goat,  roe,  fallow-deer,  and  other
cloven-footed  animals,  it  can  be  raised  by  the  hand  in  the  mid-
dle of  its  course,  and  easily  extracted  whole ; this  is  the  same
as  what  is  called  the  “ conception”  or  ovum.  Like  an  egg,  it
contains  within  itself  two  fluids,  and  the  foetus  with  its  appen-
dages ; it  is  possessed  besides  of  those  characters  which  Aristotle
attributes  to  the  egg;  these  are,  that  out  of  part  of  it  the  embryo
is  originally  formed,  and  that  the  remainder  constitutes  the  sus-
tenance of  the  new  animal,  as  has  been  frequently  explained.  I
believe,  then,  the  tunic  which  Fabricius  called  the  allantois  to  be
either  the  ehorion  or  else  some  unnatm-al  structiu’e  formed
out  of  the  reduplication  of  the  membranes.  It  is  accordingly
only  found  to  exist  in  some  animals,  and  not  always  in  these;  it
cannot  be  traced  from  the  commencement  of  conception,  and  in
some  animals  it  is  more  apparent  than  in  others : whilst  in  others
nothing  can  be  seen  except  a mere  process  of  the  bladder.
Besides,  Fabricius  himself  allows  that  its  purpose  is  not  to  en-
velope the  fcetus,  but  to  contain  its  urine.  In  truth,  I must
think  that  he  has  described  it  rather  to  defend  the  doctrine  of
the  ancients,  than  because  he  really  believed  he  had  discovered
such  a membrane,  or  that  it  served  any  good  purpose.  For
he  allows,  with  the  ancients,  and  every  medical  school,  that
the  chorion  contains  urine,  when  he  says  ^ that  there  are
two  humours  encircling  the  foetus,  one,  riz.  in  the  amnion,
consisting  of  sweat;  the  other  in  the  chorion,  consisting  of
urine.  It  is,  therefore,  clear  that  the  ancients  under  the  two
names  understood  one  and  the  same  membrane ; and  that  in


Cap.  i.


554


THE  MEMBRANES


the  cloven-footed  animals  they  called  it  allantois,”  on  account
of  its  form ; but  in  others  “ chorion,”  because  they  thought
its  object  was  to  receive  the  urine.  Wherefore  they  allow  that
this  tunic  is  neither  found  in  man  nor  any  of  the  other  animals.
For  what  need  can  there  be  of  another  tunic  to  retain  the  urine,
when  they  themselves  admit  that  the  office  of  doing  so  belongs
especially  to  the  chorion  ? There  can  be  no  probable  reason  as-
signed why  this  tunic  should  exist  in  the  sheep,  goat,  and  the
other  cloven-footed  animals,  and  not  also  in  the  dog,  cat,  mouse,
and  others.  For  in  truth,  if  the  object  of  this  membrane  were  to
contain  the  urine,  the  foetus  of  the  sheep  and  cow  must  secrete
a much  larger  quantity  than  those  of  animals  fui'nished  with  in-
cisors in  both  jaws  ; there  must  then  either  be  three  different
humours,  or  at  least  two  receptacles  for  the  urine.  For  myself,
I am  sure  that  the  chorion  from  the  first  is  full  of  water.  I
will  not,  however,  enter  into  controversies ; I would  rather
record  what  I have  found  by  my  own  observations.

To  do  as  Fabricius  has  done,  and  give  the  structure  of  the
full-grown  and  perfect  embryo,  is  one  thing,  but  it  is  another  to
enter  fully  on  the  subject  of  its  generation  and  first  formation  :
just  as  they  are  very  different  things  to  describe  the  ripe  fruit
of  an  apple  or  any  other  tree,  and  to  explain  the  manner  in
which  it  is  produced  from  the  germ.  I will,  therefore,  briefly  go
through  the  stages  by  which  the  “ conception”  is  brought  to
maturity^  in  which  way  the  true  doctrines  in  the  matter  of  the
membranes  and  other  foetal  appendages  will  be  better  ascer-
tained.

In  the  production  of  all  living  creatm’es,  as  I have  before
said,  this  invariably  holds,  that  they  derive  their  origin  from  a
certain  primary  something  or  primordium  which  contains  within
itself  both  the  “ matter”  and  the  “effieient  cause;”  and  so  is,  in
fact,  the  matter  out  of  which,  and  that  by  which,  whatsoever  is
produced  is  made.  Such  a primary  something  in  animals  (whe-
ther they  spring  from  parents,  or  arise  spontaneously,  or  from
putrefaction)  is  a moistui’e  inclosed  in  some  membrane  or  shell;
a similar  body,  in  fact,  having  life  within  itself  either  actually  or
potentially ; and  this,  if  it  is  generated  within  an  animal  and
remain  there,  until  it  produce  an  univocal”  (not  equivocal)
animal,  is  commonly  called  a “conception;”  but  if  it  is  ex-
posed to  the  air  by  birth,  or  assumes  its  beginning  under  other


AND  HUMOURS.


.555


circumstances,  (than  within  an  animal),  it  is  then  denominated
an  “ egg,’^  or  ‘'worm.”  I think,  however,  that  in  either  case
the  word  “'primordium”  should  be  used  to  express  that  from
whence  the  animal  is  formed;  just  as  plants  owe  their  origin
to  seeds  : all  these  “ primordia”  have  one  common  property —
that  of  vitality.

I find  a “ primordium”  of  this  kind  in  the  uterus  of  all
viviparous  animals  before  any  trace  of  a foetus  appears  : there
is  a clear,  thiek,  white  fiuid  (like  the  albumen  of  the  egg)
inclosed  in  a membrane,  and  this  I call  the  ovum.  In  the
roe,  fallow-deer,  sheep,  and  other  cloven-footed  animals,  it  fills
the  whole  uterus  and  both  its  horns.

In  process  of  time  an  extremely  limpid  and  pure  watery  fluid
(similar  to  that  which  in  the  hen’s  egg  I have  called  the  col-
liquament)  is  secreted  by  this  “ primordium”  or  “ovum;”
in  clearness  and  brilliancy  far  exceeding  the  remaining  fluid  of
the  ovum  in  which  it  is  contained.  It  is  of  a circular  form,
and  inclosed  in  a very  delicate  and  transparent  membrane  of
its  own  called  the  “ amnion.”  The  other  fluid,  of  a denser  and
thicker  character,  is  contained  in  the  outer  envelope,  or  chorion,
which  is  in  immediate  contact  with  the  concave  surface  of  the
uterus,  and  which  also  encompasses  the  entire  ovum  : the  shape
of  this  second  membrane  varies  according  to  that  of  the  uterus  :
in  some  animals  it  is  oval,  in  others  oblong,  but  in  those  with
cloven  feet  it  resembles  a saddle-bag.  After  a short  time
a red  pulsating  point  shows  itself  within  the  transparent
substance,  and  from  this  point  exceedingly  fine  twigs,  or  rather
rays  of  vessels,  start  forth.  By  and  by  the  first  aggregated
portion  of  the  body  makes  its  appearance,  folded  upon  it-
self orbicularly,  and  somewhat  resembling  a grub  : the  re-
maining parts  follow  in  the  order  described  in  our  history.
For  I have  ascertained  that  the  production  of  the  foetus  from
their  ova  or  “ conceptions”  in  viviparous  animals,  takes  place
exactly  in  the  same  way  as  the  growth  of  the  chick  within
the  egg.

As  I before  observed,  “ conceptions”  in  viviparous  animals
vary  in  form,  number,  and  in  their  modes  of  attachment  to
the  uterus.  At  first,  especially  in  the  cloven-footed  animals,
the  “conception”  does  not  adhere  to  the  uterus,  but  is  only  in
contact  with,  and  fills  and  distends  the  organ,  and  can  be  easily


556


THE  MEMBRANES.


extracted  entire.  In  cloven-footed  animals^  wMcli  conceive
within  the  horns  of  tlie  uterus,  and  also  in  the  solidungula,  one
ovum  only  of  this  kind  is  found,  and  that  stretching  up  into
either  horn  of  the  uterus  : and  although  these  animals  some-
times produce  one,  sometimes  two  young  at  a birth,  and  so
sometimes  one,  sometimes  two  colliquaments  are  found,  one
in  the  right,  the  other  in  the  left  horn  of  the  uterus,  yet  the
two  are  always  contained  in  one  and  the  same  oram.

In  other  animals,  however,  the  number  of  ova  answers  to  the
number  of  foetuses,  and  within  them  are  as  many  colhqua-
meuts  : this  is  the  case  in  the  dog,  cat,  mouse,  and  other
animals  of  this  kind  with  teeth  in  either  jaw.  In  cloven-
footed  animals  the  ovum  is  shaped  like  a saddle-bag  : the  fonn,
in  fact,  under  which  Fabricius  represented  the  allantois.  In
the  mare,  the  figiu’e  of  the  uterus  internally  resembles  an  ob-
long hag ; in  the  woman  it  is  of  a globidar  form.

In  animals  in  whom  the  “ conception’^  adheres  to  the  uterus,
(and  in  very  many  it  does  not  do  so  until  the  foetus  is  fully
formed),  this  takes  place  in  various  modes.  In  some  it  is  ad-
herent in  one  place  by  the  intervention  of  a fleshy  substance,
which  in  the  woman  is  called  the  “ placenta,”  from  its  resem-
blance to  a round  cake  (placenta)  : in  others  it  is  attached  at
many  points  by  certain  fleshy  bodies,  or  “ carunculse  these
are  flve  in  number  in  the  hind  and  doe ; more  numerous,
ljut  of  smaller  size,  in  the  cow;  and  in  the  sheep  they  are
in  great  numbers  and  of  various  sizes.  In  dogs  and  cats  these
fleshy  bodies  entirely  sm’round  each  o\Tim  like  a girdle.  A
similar  substance,  in  the  hare  and  mole,  grows  to  the  side  of
the  uterus  ; like  the  human  placenta,  which  embraces  about
half  the  “ conception,”  (just  as  the  cup  does  the  acorn  at  the
commencement  of  its  growth),  it  is  attached  by  its  convex
aspect  to  the  uterus,  and  by  its  concave  surface  to  the  chorion.

With  these  observations  premised,  I shall  now  state  my
opinions  on  the  humours,  membranes,  fleshy  substance  of  the
rrterus,  and  the  distribution  of  the  umbilical  vessels,  in  the
order  described  by  Fabricius.

Tlie  words  Sevrepa  and  varepa  are  correctly  understood  by
Fabricms^  to  answer  to  “ secundae”  and  secundina”  (the


Cap.  V.


THE  HUMOURS.


no7

secundines)  : and  by  these  are  implied  not  only  the  membranes,
but  everjThing  which  comes  away  from  the  utems  at  the  last
stage  of  parturition,  or  at  least  not  long  after  it,  viz.  the
humours,  membranes,  fleshy  substance,  and  umbilical  vessels.


Of  the  Humours.

The  doctrines  inculcated  on  the  subject  of  the  humours,  and
which,  as  being  entertained  by  the  ancients,  Fabricius  regards  as
certain  truths  requiring  no  further  proof,  are  altogether  incon-
sistent and  false ; the  doctrines,  I mean,  that  the  fluid  within
the  amnion,  wherein  the  fetus  swims,  consists  of  sweat ; and
that  within  the  chorion  of  urine.  For  both  these  humours
are  found  in  the  “ conception”  before  any  trace  of  the  fetus  is
visible ; added  to  which,  the  fluid  they  call  urine  can  be  seen
before  that  which  they  regard  as  sweat.  In  truth,  these  hu-
mours, especially  the  outer  one,  may  be  observed  in  unfruitful
conceptions  where  nothing  hke  a fetus  is  discoverable.

Women  sometimes  expel  conceptions  of  this  kind,  ana-
logous to  the  subventaneous  or  wind  egg.  Ai’istotle  ^ says
they  are  called  fluxes  j”  among  ourselves  they  are  termed
“ false  conceptions,”  or  “ slips.”  An  o%Tim  of  this  kind  was
aborted  in  the  case  of  Hippocrates’s  pipe-player.  “ In  all
creatures,”  we  are  informed  on  the  authority  of  Aristotle,^
“ which  breed  another  within  themselves,  immediately  on  con-
ception an  egg-like  body  is  formed;  that  is  to  say,  a body  in
which  a fluid  is  contained  within  a delicate  membrane  just  hke
an  egg  with  the  shell  removed.”  The  humour  in  the  chorion,
which  Fabricius  and  other  physicians  consider  to  be  mine,
Aristotle  seems  to  have  regarded  as  the  seminal  fluid  (sper-
matis  sive  geniturse  liquor) . He  says,®  “ when  the  semen  is
received  into  the  uterus,  after  a certain  time  it  becomes  sur-
rounded by  a membrane,  and  if  expulsion  takes  place  before
the  fetus  is  formed,  it  has  the  appearance  of  an  egg  with
the  shell  removed  and  covered  by  its  membrane  : this  mem-

' De  Gen.  Anim.  lib.  iii,  cap.  9.  ° Ibid.

^ Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vii,  cap.  7.


558


THE  HUMOURS.


brane,  moreover,  is  loaded  with  vessels.’^  It  is,  in  fact,
the  chorion ; so  called  from  the  conflux  or  multitude  of
veins.  I have  often  observed  ova  of  this  kind  escape  in  the
second  and  third  month ; they  are  frequently  decomposed  in-
ternally, and  come  away  gradually  in  the  form  of  a leucorrhoeal
discharge,  and  thus  the  hopes  of  the  parent  are  lost.

Another  reason  why  these  humours  cannot  be  sweat  and
urine,  is,  that  they  exist  in  such  abundance  at  the  very  be-
ginning ; — for  the  purpose,  no  doubt,  of  preventing  the  body
of  the  foetus  from  coming  in  contact  vith  the  adjacent  parts
when  the  mother  runs,  jumps,  or  uses  violent  exertion  of  any
kind.

Added  to  which,  many  animals  never  sweat  at  all,  (and  we
must  remember  what  is  said  by  Aristotle,  ^ “ that  all  creatures
which  swim,  walk,  or  I will  add  serpents  and  insects,

whether  viviparous  or  oriparous,  or  generated  spontaneously,
''are  produced  after  the  same  mannei’,’^)  as  is  the  case  with
birds,  serpents,  and  fishes,  which  neither  sweat  nor  pass  urine.
The  dog  and  cat  also  never  sweat ; neither  in  fact  does  any
animal  in  which  the  urinary  secretion  is  very  abundant.  Be-
sides, it  is  impossible  that  urine  can  be  passed  before  the  kidneys
and  bladder  are  formed.

JMoreover,  and  this  is  the  strongest  argument  that  can  be
brought  forward,  those  humours  can  never  be  excrementitious
into  which  so  many  branches  of  the  umbibcal  vessels  are  dis-
tributed by  means  of  the  chorion  j these  vessels,  in  fact,  in  this
manner  taking  up  nourishment,  (as  it  were  from  a large  reser-
voir,) and  then  conducting  it  to  the  foetus.

Besides  what  need  is  there  of  an  allantois,  if  the  fluid  within
the  chorion  is  urine  ? And  if  that  in  the  amnion  is  sweat,  why
does  Nature,  who  contrives  all  things  well,  ordain  that  the
foetus  should  float  about  in  its  own  excrement  ? And  why,  too,
should  the  mother  (as  is  the  case  with  some  animals)  imme-
diately after  birth,  so  greedily  devom  the  excretions  of  its  own
offspring,  together  with  the  containing  membranes  ? Some
have  even  observed  that  if  the  animal  fails  to  eat  uji  these
matters  it  does  not  give  its  milk  freely.

Notwithstanding  these  arguments,  it  may  possibly  be  ima-


Hist.  Anim.  lib.  vii,  cap.  7.


THE  HUMOURS.


559


gined  by  some  tbat  tlie  humours  which  I beheve  serve  for  the
nutrition  of  the  foetus  are  excrementitious,  led  chiefly  by  the
fact  that  they  increase  as  the  foetus  grows  larger,  and  in  some
animals  are  observed  to  exist  in  immense  quantities  at  the  pe-
riod of  birth  (at  which  time  it  might  be  supposed  that  all
alimentary  matters  would  have  been  absorbed),  and  serve  be-
sides other  uses  hardly  compatible  with  their  supposed  function
of  nutrition.  I nevertheless  most  confidently  assert  my  belief
that  these  humours  are  at  the  commencement  destined  for
the  nourishment  of  the  foetus,  just  as  the  colliquament
and  albumen  are  in  the  case  of  the  chick ; but  that,  in  course
of  time,  when  the  thinner  and  purer  portions  are  absorbed,
the  remainder  takes  on  the  character  of  excrementitious  mat-
ter, hut  stiU  has  its  uses,  and  in  some  animals  especially  con-
duces to  the  safety  of  the  foetus,  and  also  greatly  facihtates
birth.  For  just  as  wine  becomes  poor  and  tasteless  when  the
spirit  has  evaporated;  and  as  all  excreted  matters  owe  their
origin  for  the  most  part  to  what  has  been  pre\dously  food ; so,
after  all  the  nutrient  portions  of  the  fluid  contained  in  the
chorion  have  been  taken  up  by  the  foetus,  the  remainder  become
excrementitious,  and  is  applied  to  the  above-mentioned  uses.
But  all  the  fluid  of  the  amnion  is  usually  consumed  by  the
time  of  birth ; so  that  it  is  probable  the  foetus  seeks  its  exit  on
account  of  deficiency  of  nutriment.

Lastly,  if  any  other  fluid  is  ever  contained  within  the  allan-
tois, and  this  is  sometimes  the  case,  I believe  it  to  be  unnatural.
For  sometimes  we  see  women  at  their  delivery  have  an  enor-
mous flow  of  water,  sometimes  a distinctly  double  flow;  and
this  the  midwives  call  the  by-waters.”  And  so  some  women
are  seen  with  the  abdomen  immensely  distended,  and  yet  they
bring  forth  a little  shrivelled  foetus  accompanied  by  a vast  flow
of  water.  Some  imagine  that  a larger  quantity  of  water  is
found  with  weakly  and  female  childi’en,  whilst  stronger  and
male  foetuses  have  a smaller  share.  I have  often  seen  the
waters  come  away  in  the  middle  of  pregnancy,  and  abortion  not
take  place,  the  child  remaining  strong  and  vigorous  until
birth.  Since,  then,  there  are  naturally  two  collections  of  fluid,
one  in  the  chorion,  the  other  in  the  amnion,  so  it  sometimes
happens  that  unnatural  accumulations  take  place  either  in  mem-
branes of  their  own,  or  between  the  duphcatures  of  the  chorion.


THE  MEMBRANES.


.060


Of  the  Membranes.

With  respect  to  the  membranes  or  tunics  of  the  uterus ; as
their  special  office  is  to  contain  the  waters/^  and  as  these
waters  are  two  only,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  the  membranes
themselves  do  not  necessarily  or  usually  exceed  that  number.

Those  who  enumerate  three  tunics  are,  I believe,  in  error,
owing  to  the  ancients  having  described  the  same  membrane  at
one  time  under  the  title  of  chorion,^’  from  the  concourse  of
veins,  at  another  under  the  name  of  “ allantois^^  fi’om  its  fonn.

Unquestionably,  every  “conception”  is  inclosed  in  two  en-
velopes, just  as  the  brain  is  surrounded  by  its  two  membranes;
every  tree  and  fruit,  moi’eover,  has  it  double  bark ; and  lastly,
seeds  and  fruits  are  protected  by  a double  covering,  the  outer-
most of  which  is  hai’der  and  stronger  than  the  inner  one.

Of  the  above-mentioned  membranes,  the  innei’most  (that
Avhich  contains  the  colliquament  or  purer  fluid,)  is  exceed-
ingly delicate ; it  is  called  the  “ amnion,”  i.  e.  the  mantle,
from  the  way  in  which  it  is  disposed  round  the  fmtus.  The
outer  tunic,  however,  is  much  thicker  and  stronger,  and  has
received  the  name  of  “ chorion,”  “ because,”  says  Fabricius,
“ a multitude  of  ai’teries  and  veins  are  aggregated  together  and
arranged  in  it,  as  it  were,  after  the  manner  of  a chorus.  Hence
one  of  the  tunics  of  the  eye  has  been  denominated  ^opo£t?))c
(choroid)  from  its  vessels  haring  a similar  arrangement  to  those
in  the  chorion ; the  plexus  of  arteries  aud  veins  in  the  ven-
tricles of  the  brain  has  also  gained  its  name  from  the  same
circumstance.”

The  chorion  fills  the  whole  uterus,  and  contains  a viscid  aud
rather  turbid  fluid;  whilst  the  placenta,  or  carunculae,  adhere
to  its  outer  sui’face,  aud  thus  attach  the  “ conception”  to  the
uterus.

In  the  woman  it  is  usually  adherent  to  the  amnion  at  its
lower  portion ; nor  can  it  be  separated  there  without  diffi-
culty. In  cloven-footed  animals  the  chorion  is  of  very  large
size,  and  contains  a hundred  times  more  fluid  than  the  amnion :
this  last  membrane  at  first  is  scarcely  as  large  as  a nutmeg,  or
broad  bean,  and  is  generally  found  in  one  or  other  horn  of  the
uterus ; that,  namely,  in  which  the  embryo  lies.


THE  MEMBRANES.


561


In  the  woman,  more  particularly,  the  chorion  is  externally
rough  and  viscous,  but  internally  it  is  smooth,  slippery,  and  in-
terwoven with  abundance  of  vessels.  In  the  woman,  also,  the
upper  part  is  thick  and  soft,  but  the  lower  is  thinner  and  more
membranous  in  character.

The  placenta  in  the  woman  grows  to  the  upper  part  of  this
membrane.  In  the  sheep,  numerous  carunculse  adhere  to  it
at  various  points.  In  the  fallow  and  red-  deer  the  ovum  is
united  to  the  uterus  in  five  places  only  ; w^hilst  in  the  mare  it
is  in  contact  with  the  inner  surface  of  the  uterus  by  an  almost
infinite  number  of  points  of  attachment.  Hence  Fabricius^
states  that  in  almost  aU  viviparous  animals  there  is  a soft,  loose,
porous,  and  thick  fleshy  body  of  a dark  colour,  in  intimate
union  with  the  terminations  of  the  umbilical  vessels ; he  com-
pares it  to  a sponge,  or  to  the  loose  parenchyma  of  the  liver  or
spleen;  hence,  too,  it  was  called  by  Galen^  “ glandular  flesh
and  it  is  now  commonly  known  by  the  name  of  the  uterine
liver,  in  which  the  extremities  of  the  umbilical  vessels  ramify
to  bring  nutriment  from  the  uterus  to  the  foetus.

But  this  fleshy  substance  is  not  found  in  all  animals,  nor  at
all  periods  of  utero-gestation ; but  in  those  alone  in  which  the
conception  adheres  to  the  uterus ; and  then  only  when  it
becomes  attached  for  the  purpose  of  taking  up  nutriment.
At  the  commencement  the  “ conception”  (like  an  egg  placed
within  the  uterus)  is  found  in  contact  with  every  part  of  the
uterus,  yet  at  no  point  is  it  adherent ; but  produces  and
nourishes  the  embryo  out  of  the  humours  contained  within  it,
as  I have  explained  in  the  instance  of  the  heAs  egg.  This  adhe-
sion, or  growing  together,  first  takes  place,  and  the  fleshy  mass
(constituting  the  bond  of  union  between  the  “ conception”  and
the  uterus)  is  first  produced,  when  the  foetus  becomes  perfectly
formed,  and,  through  want  either  of  diflFerent  or  more  abundant
nourishment,  dispatches  the  extremities  of  the  umbilical  vessels
to  the  uterus,  that  from  hence,  (as  plants  do  from  the  earth  by
their  radicles)  it  may  absorb  the  nutrient  juices.  For  in  the
beginning,  as  I have  said,  when  the  “ punctum  saliens^’  and
the  blood  can  alone  be  seen,  the  ramifications  of  the  umbilical
vessels  are  only  visible  in  the  coUiquament  and  amnion.  When,

2 5 Ajilior.  xlv.

36


Cap.  iii.


562


THE  MEMBRANES.


however,  the  fabric  of  the  body  is  completely  formed,  the  rami-
fications extend  further,  and  are  distributed  in  vast  numbers
throughout  the  chorion,  that  from  the  albuminous  fluid  which
there  exists,  they  may  obtain  nourishment  for  the  foetus.

Hence  it  is  manifest  that  the  young  of  viviparous  animals
are  at  the  beginning  nourished  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as
the  chick  in  the  egg ; and  that  they  are  detained  within  the
uterus  in  order  that  (when  they  can  no  longer  supply  them-
selves with  nutriment  from  theii’  own  stores)  they  may  form
adhesions  to  it  by  means  of  this  fleshy  substance,  and  receiving
more  abundant  supplies  of  food  from  the  mother,  may  be  nou-
rished and  made  to  grow.

Wherefore  Eabricius  has  rightly  observed,  that  in  some
animals  the  “ conceptions^  is  scarcely  attached  to  the  uterus  at
all.  Thus  the  sow  and  the  mare  have  no  such  fleshy  mode  of
union, — but  in  them  the  ovum  or  conception, s’  as  in  the  be-
ginning it  is  formed  out  of  the  humoiu’s  of  the  uterus,  so  it  is
nom'ished  subsequently  by  the  same  means ; just  as  the  ovum
of  the  hen  is  supplied  with  aliment  at  the  expense  of  the  albu-
minous matter  without  any  connexion  whatever  with  the  uterus  :
and  thus  the  foetus  is  furnished  with  abment  by  the  concep-
tion’^ in  Avhich  it  is  contained,  and  is  nomished  as  the  chick  is
from  the  fluids  of  the  egg.  This  is  a strong  argument  that  the
foetus  of  Hvipai’ous  animals  is  no  more  nourished  by  the  blood
of  the  mother  than  the  chick  in  the  egg ; and  moreover,  that
the  fluid  within  the  chorion  is  neither  urine  nor  any  other  ex-
crementitious  matter ; but  serves  for  the  support  of  the  foetus.
Although,  as  I have  before  remarked,  it  is  possible  when  all  the
nutrient  portions  have  been  taken  up,  the  remainder  may  de-
generate into  excrementitious  matter  resembling  urine.  This
is  also  clear  from  what  I formerly  observed  of  the  cotyledons
in  the  deer,  riz.,  that  in  these  animals  the  fleshy  mass  was  of
a spongy  character,  and  constituted,  like  a honeycomb,  of  in-
numerable shallow  pits  filled  with  a muco-albuminous  fluid,  (a
circumstance  akeady  observed  by  Galen^) ; and  that  from  this
source  the  ramifications  of  the  umbilical  vessels  absorbed  the
nutriment  and  carried  it  to  the  foetus  ; just  as,  in  animals
alter  their  birth,  the  extremities  of  the  mesenteric  vessels  ai’e
spread  over  the  coats  of  the  intestines  and  thence  take  up  chyle.

' Lib.  de  Dissect.  Uteri,  cap.  ult.


THE  PLACENTA.


563


Of  the  Placenta.

In  myopinioiij  then,  the  placenta  and  canincnlfe  have  an  office
analogous  to  that  of  the  liver  and  mamma.  The  liver  elaborates
for  the  nourishment  of  the  body,  the  chyle  previously  taken
up  from  the  intestines  : the  placenta,  in  like  manner,  prepares
for  the  foetus  alimentary  matters  which  have  come  from  the
mother.  The  mammae  also,  which  are  of  a glandular  structure,
swell  with  milk,  and  although  in  some  animals  they  are  not
even  -visible  at  other  times,  they  become  full  and  tumid  at  the
period  of  pregnancy;  so,  too,  the  placenta,  a loose  and  fungus-
like  body,  abounds  in  an  albuminous  fluid,  and  is  only  to  be
found  at  the  period  of  pregnancy.  The  liver,  I say,  then,  is  the
nutrient  organ  of  the  body  in  which  it  is  found;  the  mamma
is  the  same  of  the  infant,  and  the  placenta  of  the  embryo.  And
just  as  the  mother  forms  more  milk  from  her  food  than  is  requi-
site to  sustain  her  own  flesh  and  blood,  which  milk  is  digested
and  elaborated  in  the  mamma;  so  do  those  animals,  furnished
with  a placenta,  supply  to  the  foetus  nourishment  which  is  puri-
fied in  that  organ.  Hence  it  happens  that  the  embryo  is  furnished
with  good  or  bad  nutriment  just  as  the  mother  takes  wholesome
or  unwholesome  food,  and  in  proportion  as  it  is  elaborately  pre-
pared or  not  in  these  uterine  structures.  For  some  embryos
have  a more  perfect  structure  provided  for  them,  such  as  that
fleshy  substance  mentioned  above,  which  in  some  is  altogether
wanting.  In  some,  also,  the  placenta  is  observed  to  be  thicker,
larger,  and  more  loaded  with  blood ; whilst  in  others  it  is  more
spongy  and  white,  like  the  thymus  or  pancreas.  But  there  is
not  more  variety  found  in  the  placenta  than  in  the  mamma  or
viscera  generally  : for  instance,  the  liver  in  some  animals  is  red
and  filled  with  blood,  in  others,  as  is  the  case  with  fishes  and
some  cachectic  persons  in  the  human  species,  it  is  of  much  paler
hue.  The  mare  feeds  on  crude  grass,  and  does  not  ruminate  ;
the  sow  gorges  itself  with  any  unclean  food ; and  in  both  the
placenta,  or  organ  for  perfecting  the  aliment,  is  wanting.

Rightly  then  is  it  observed  by  Fabricius,^  that  this  fleshy


Cap.  iii.


564


THE  PLACENTA.


structure,  differs  mucli  in  shape,  size,  position,  and  nnmber  in
different  kinds  of  animals.  The  human  female  has  one  placenta
only;  as  is  the  case  with  the  mouse,  rabbit,  guinea-pig,  dog,
and  cat  so  also  with  many  animals  which  have  the  toes  dis-
tinct, and  incisor  teeth  in  both  jaws.  “ All  those  which  have  the
hoof  cloven  and  incisors  in  one  jaw  onh^,  have  several  placentae,
whether  they  be  domesticated  animals,  like  the  sheep,  cow,  and
goat,  or  wild,  as  the  red-deer,  roe,  fallow-deer,  and  others  of  the
same  kind.  Again,  where  there  is  only  one  of  these  fleshy  struc-
tures it  either  resembles  a cake,  (whence  its  name  placenta),  as  in
the  human  female,  rabbit,  hare,  mole,  monse,  and  guinea-pig ; or
else  it  is  like  a girdle  or  bandage  encircling  the  trunk  of  the
body,  as  in  the  dog,  cat,  ferret,  and  the  hke.”  In  some  it
resembles  the  cnp  or  chalice  of  the  acorn,  and  surrounds  the
greater  part  of  the  “ conception,”  as  in  the  hare  and  rabbit,
its  convex  part  adhering  to  the  uterus,  the  concave  looking  to-
wards the  foetus.  “ Again,  in  animals  which  have  this  struc-
ture in  the  form  of  a cake,  although  the  shape  is  similar,  the
situation  in  which  it  is  found  is  very  different.  In  the  human
female  it  adheres  to  the  fundus  of  the  utei’us,  and  is  as  far  re-
moved from  the  foetus  as  possible,  their  connexion  being  effected
by  means  of  long  vessels.  In  the  mouse,  guinea-pig,  and  rabbit,
it  is  attached  partly  in  the  region  of  the  loins,  partly  at  the
sides  of  the  thorax.  Those  animals  which  have  nnmerous  pla-
centce  are  all  furnished  with  incisors  in  one  jaw  only,  as  the
sheep,  cow,  goat,  red-deer,  roe,  and  the  like.  Yet  in  these
some  variety  is  observable.”

For  in  the  sheep  the  carunculse  are  many  in  nnmber,  and  of
different  magnitudes,  the  largest  being  of  the  size  of  a nntmeg,
the  smallest  of  that  of  a pea  or  vetch : they  are  also  of  a
rounded  form  and  reddish  hue,  with  their  convex  portion  turned
towards  the  uterus,  something  in  the  semblance  of  soft  warts  or
nipples.  “ In  the  cow  they  are  larger,  wider,  and  whiter,
more  like  a spongy  or  fungoid  body,”  and  they  appear  to  take
their  origin  from  the  chorion.  In  the  red  or  fallow-deer  they
are  five  only  in  number;  these  spring  from  the  walls  of  the
uterus,  and  thrust  themselves  inwai’ds,  exhibiting  their  depres-
sions or  acetabula  on  the  side  of  the  foetus.  But  in  all  animals
it  is  observed  that  the  carunculae  adhere  firmly  to  the  uterus,
and  cannot  be  separated  fi’om  it  without  considerable  difficultyj


THE  PLACENTA.


565


except  at  the  period  of  birth;  at  which  time  they  become
loosened  from  their  attachments  and  fall  like  ripe  fruit.  If
they  are  forcibly  torn  from  the  uterus,  I have  observed  the
greater  part  of  the  blood  that  escapes  to  flow,  not  from  the
conception,’^  but  from  the  uterus  itself.

Fabricius,^  when  discussing  the  mode  of  union  between  the
“ fleshy  substance”  and  the  uterus,  uses  many  arguments,  but  in
my  opinion  weak  ones,  to  prove  that  the  umbilical  vessels  anas-
tomose mth  those  of  the  uterus:  yet  he  seems  chiefly  to  have
done  so  to  countenance  the  old  opinion  once  held  almost  by  all ;
for  he  confesses  that  he  can  make  no  positive  assertion  on  the
subject,  “ because  the  fleshy  mass  itself  stands  in  the  way  of
any  accurate  investigation.”  Yet  neither  reason  nor  observa-
tion would  lead  us  to  believe  that  more  anastomoses  exist  in
the  uterus,  than  in  the  liver  between  the  branches  of  the  vena
portae  and  the  cava ; or  in  the  mamma,  between  the  vessels  which
transmit  blood  and  those  which  carry  milk.  There  may  be,
indeed,  at  places  a juxtaposition  of  vessels,  and  sometimes  the
insertion  of  one  into  the  coats  of  another ; but  the  perfect  coa-
lition and  union,  described  by  Fabricius,  never  exist.  Were
it  so,  the  veins  and  arteries  oiight  to  be  continuous ; for  the
vessels  which  bring  the  blood  from  the  mother  into  the  uterus
and  carunculae  are  arteries,  whilst  those  which  pass  from  the
uterus  to  the  foetus  are  veins,  as  is  readily  apparent ; for  they
cany  blood  from  the  placenta  into  the  vena  cava.

Hence  the  opinion  of  Arantius  seems  to  me  to  be  the  true  one,
viz.  that  the  oriflces  of  the  umbilical  veins  are  in  no  way  con-
tinuous with  the  uterine  vessels.  For  there  is  a smaller  num-
ber of  vessels  carrying  blood  to  the  uterus  than  there  is  of
veins  returning  it  to  the  foetus ; and  the  greater  part  of  the
roots  of  those  terminate  in  the  chorion.  Yet  Fabricius,  either
from  respect  to  the  ancients,  or  through  an  envious  feeling
towards  Arantius,  most  pertinaciously  holds  to  the  old  opinion.


' De  Foim.  Fo3t.  p.  122.


566


THE  ACETABULA.


Of  the  Acetabulu.

Fabricius^  has  ascertained  nothing  on  the  subject  of  the
“cotyledons”  or  “acetabula;”  he  gives  only  the  various  opi-
nions of  the  ancients.  In  the  former  part  of  my  u'ork,  how-
ever, in  the  history  of  the  foetus  in  the  deer,  I have  mentioned
the  animals  in  which  acetabula  are  found ; at  the  same  time  I
described  them  as  constituting  numerous  cells  of  a small  size
scattered  throughout  the  carunculse,  or  “ fleshy  substance,’^  and
filled  with  an  albuminous  or  mucilaginous  fluid,  hke  a honey-
comb full  of  honey.

In  the  deer  they  greatly  resemble  in  shape  the  cavity  of  the
haunch-hone  which  receives  the  head  of  the  thigh ; hence  their
name  in  Greek,  KorvXt]Soi’sc  (little  measures) ; and  in  Latin,
acetabula,  because  they  resemble  the  little  cups  formerly  brought
to  table  filled  with  vinegar  for  sauce.

These  cavities  do  not  exceed  in  size  the  holes  in  a large
sponge,  and  a delicate  ramification  of  the  umbilical  vessels  pe-
netrates deeply  into  each  of  them ; for  in  them  ahment  is  laid
up  for  the  foetus,  not  indeed  constituted  of  blood,  as  Fabricius
would  have  it,  but  matter  of  a mucous  character,  and  greatly  re-
sembling the  thicker  part  of  the  albumen  in  the  egg.  Hence  it
is  clear,  as  I have  before  observed,  that  the  foetus  in  cloven-
footed animals  (as  indeed  in  all  others)  is  not  nourished  by  the
blood  of  the  mother.

Aristotle’s"  statement,  “ that  the  acetabula  gradually  dimi-
nish with  the  growth  of  the  foetus,  and  at  last  disappear,”  is
not  borne  out  by  experiment ; for  as  the  foetus  increases  so  do
the  caruuculaj ; the  acetabula  at  the  same  time  become  more
capacious  and  numerous,  and  more  full  of  the  albuminous
matter.

If  the  carunculse  are  pressed  no  blood  escapes,  but  just  as
water  or  honey  can  be  squeezed  from  a sponge  or  honey-
comb, so  if  pressure  is  made  a whitish  fluid  oozes  from  out  of
the  acetabula,  which  then  become  shrunk,  white,  and  flaccid,
and  at  last  come  to  resemble  a nipple,  or  a large  flabby  wart.


Cap  iv.


- Hist.  Aiiim.  lib.  vii.  cap.  8.


THE  UMBILICAL  CORD.


56;


Aristotle  asserts,  -witli  truth,  that  acetabula  are  not  found  in
all  animals  ; for  they  do  not  exist  in  the  woman,  nor  (as  far  as
I know)  in  any  animal  which  possesses  a single  fleshy  substance
or  placenta.  As  to  the  uses  of  the  carunculse,  I believe  that,  like
the  mamma,  they  elaborate  not  blood  but  a fluid  resembling
albumen,  and  that  this  serves  for  the  nourishment  of  the  foetus.


Of  the  Umbilical  Cord.

Fabricius  gives  an  elegant  description,  as  well  as  most  beau-
tiful figm’es,  of  the  umbilical  vessels.  “ The  veins,”  he  says,^
“which  pass  from  the  uterus  in  the  direction  of  the  foetus
are  always  closely  united  and  become  larger  and  larger  as  they
proceed ; nor  does  this  mutual  interlacement  cease  until  all
end  in  two  large  trunks;  these  penetrate  the  foetus  at  the
umbilicus,  and  become  one  vein  of  great  size,  which  is  inserted
into  the  liver  of  the  foetus,  and  has  a communication  both
with  the  vena  cava  and  vena  portae.  In  like  manner  the  arte-
ries which  accompany  the  veins,  being  many  in  number  and
exceedingly  minute,  pass  from  the  uterus  towards  the  foetus,
and,  gradually  uniting  and  increasing  in  size,  terminate  in  two
large  trunks ; these,  after  penetrating  the  umbilicus,  separate
from  the  veins,  and  attaching  themselves  to  the  lateral  surface
of  the  bladder  by  the  intervention  of  a membrane,  proceed
downwards  on  either  side  and  become  continuous  with  the
branches  of  the  aorta  descending  to  the  thigh.^'’  It  must  be
observed,  however,  that  this  description  of  Fabricius  applies
only  to  the  umbilical  vessels  of  the  human  foetus,  and  not  to  the
young  of  every  animal.  Nor  even  does  it  hold  in  the  case  of
the  human  fetus  except  when  it  is  full  gi’own ; for  at  the  be-
ginning the  arteries  make  httle  show,  and  are  so  small  as  to
require  the  eyes  of  a lynx  to  see  them ; nor  afterwards  indeed
are  they  distinguishable  except  by  theii’  pulsation : in  other
particulars  they  resemble  veins.  Since  then,  as  I have  else-
where shown,  the  very  small  branches  of  arteries  do  not  pulsate,in
so  far  as  the  eye  is  concerned,  there  can  be  no  difference  between
them  and  venis.  The  arteries,  I say,  at  this  time  are  so  fine  and

‘ Op.  cit.  cap.  2.


568


THE  UMBILICAL  CORD.


minute,  that  they  are  woven,  as  it  were,  like  the  most  delicate
threads,  into  the  tissues  of  the  veins,  or  rather  in  some  obscm’e
manner  insinuate  themselves  into  them ; hence  they  almost
entirely  elude  the  sight.  But  all  the  veins,  by  a retrograde
movement,  unite  their  twigs  and  terminate  in  one  trmik  like
the  branches  of  a tree,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  mesenteric
veins,  all  of  which  terminate  in  the  vena  portse.

Near  the  embryo  [the  umbilical  veins]  are  divided  into  two
trunks,  but  when  entered  within  it  they  constitute  one  um-
bilical vein,  which  ends  in  the  vena  cava,  near  the  right  auricle
of  the  heart,  and  passes  through  the  liver,  entering  the  vena
portJEj  giving  off  no  branches  besides  until  it  leaves  the  con-
vex portion  of  the  liver  by  a very  large  orifice.  So  that  if  the
vena  cava  is  opened  from  the  right  am’icle  downwards  and
emptied  of  blood,  three  apertures  may  be  seen  close  to  each
other;  one  is  the  eutrance  of  the  vena  cava  descendens,  the
second  that  of  the  hepatic  vein,  which  ramifies  throughout  the
convex  portion  of  the  liver,  and  the  third  is  the  origin  of  the
umbilical  vein.  Hence  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  origin  of  the
veins  is  by  no  means  to  be  looked  for  in  the  liver ; inasmuch
as  the  orifice  of  the  vena  cava  descendens  is  much  larger  than
the  hepatic  branch,  which  is  indeed  equalled  in  size  by  the  um-
bilical vein.  For  the  branches  are  not  said  to  be  the  origin  of
their  trunk ; but  Arhere  the  trunk  is  greatest  there  the  origin
of  the  veins  is  to  be  looked  for,  and  this  is  the  case  at  the
entrance  of  the  right  ventricle  : here,  then,  the  origin  of  all
veins,  and  the  storehouse  of  the  blood  must  be  placed.

To  return  to  the  umbilical  vessels,  which  are  not  subdirided
in  the  same  way  in  all  animals ; for  in  some  two  or  more
branches  of  veins  are  found  within  the  body  of  the  foetus, —
some  of  which  pass  through  the  liver,  whilst  others  join  the
portal  and  mesenteric  veins.  In  the  human  foetus,  at  a dis-
tance of  three  or  fom’  fingers’  breadth  from  the  umbilicus,  the
trunks  of  the  arteries  and  veins  are  involved  together  in  a
complicated  manner,  (as  if  one  were  to  twist  several  waxen
tapers  in  the  form  of  a stick,)  and  are  besides  coA'ered  and  held
together  b}^  a thick  gelatinous  membrane.  This  cord  passes
on  towards  the  chorion,  and  when  arrived  at  the  concave  por-
tion of  the  placenta  and  the  inner  surface  of  the  chorion,  splits
into  innumerable  branches ; these  dmde  again,  and  constitute


THE  UMBILICAL  CORD.


569


the  means  by  which  the  nutrient  matter  is  taken  up^  as  by
rootlets,  and  distributed  to  the  foetus.  The  veins  of  the
cord  are  marked  at  various  places  by  knots  or  varices,  resem-
bling vesicles  filled  with  blood ; this  is  a contrivance  of  nature
to  prevent  the  blood  rushing  too  violently  to  the  foetus.  From
the  number  of  these  knots  superstitious  midwives  are  accus-
tomed to  predict  the  number  of  the  future  offspring;  and  if
none  can  be  seen  at  all  they  pronounce  that  the  woman  will  be
ever  after  barren  : they  also  absurdly  prophesy  by  the  distance
between  the  knots  about  the  interval  to  take  place  between  the
birth  of  each  child,  and  also  of  its  sex  from  their  colour.

A like  arrangement  of  the  umbilical  vessels  is  found  in
almost  all  foetuses  furnished  with  a single  placenta,  as  in  the
dog,  mouse,  and  others ; but  in  these  the  cord  is  shorter  and
less  convoluted.  In  the  ox,  sheep,  red-deer,  fallow-deer,  hog,
and  others,  in  which  the  nutrient  material  is  not  supplied  from
one  fleshy  mass  or  placenta,  but  from  several,  the  umbilical
vessels  are  distributed  in  a different  manner.  The  branches  and
extremities  of  these  vessels  are  not  only  disseminated  through
the  fleshy  substance,  but  still  more  and  chiefly  through  the
membrane  of  the  chorion  itself  by  means  of  the  most  delicate
fibres ; exactly  in  the  same  way  as  the  vessels  are  distributed
in  the  human  foetus,  without  the  aid  of  the  cord,  before  the
“conception”  adheres  to  the  uterus.  Hence  it  is  plain  that
the  embiyo  does  not  derive  all  its  nourishment  from  the  pla-
centa, but  receives  a considerable  portion  of  it  from  the  fluid
contained  in  the  chorion.

As  to  the  uses  of  the  umbilical  vessels,  I cannot  agree  with
Fabricius,  for  he  imagines  that  all  the  blood  is  supplied  to  the
foetus  from  the  uterus  by  means  of  the  veins,  and  that  the
vital  spirits  are  transmitted  from  the  mother  by  the  arteries.
He  also  asserts  that  no  part  of  the  foetus  performs  any  common
function,  but  that  each  individual  portion  looks  only  to  itself,  how
it  may  be  nourished,  grow,  and  be  preserved.  In  like  manner,
because  he  has  found  no  nerve  in  the  umbilical  cord,  he  refuses
to  allow  sensation  or  voluntary  motion  to  the  foetus.  Just  as
if  the  uterus  or  placenta  of  the  mother  were  the  heart  or  first
source  whence  these  functions  are  derived  to  the  foetus,  and
whence  heat  flows  in  and  is  distributed  through  all  its  parts.
All  these  are  manifest  errors.  For  the  human  foetus,  even


570


THE  UMBILICAL  CORD.


before  the  completion  of  the  fourth  month,  (in  some  animals
sooner,)  in  no  obscure  manner  moves,  rolls  about,  and  kicks,
especially  if  it  suffer  from  cold,  heat,  or  any  external  source  of
inconvenience.  Moreover,  the  “punctum  saliens”  (whilst  yet
the  heart  is  not)  moves  to  and  fro,  with  an  evident  pulsation,  and
distributes  blood  and  spirits  ; and  this  part,  as  I have  before
stated,  if  languid  and  nearly  extinct  through  cold,  will,  if  warmth
be  aj)plied,  again  be  restored  and  live.  In  the  Caesarean  section,
also,  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  life  of  the  embryo  does  not  im-
mediately depend  upon  the  mother,  and  that  the  spirits  do  not
proceed  from  her;  for  I have  often  seen  the  foetus  extracted
alive  from  the  uterus  when  the  mother  has  been  dead  some
hours.  I have  also  known  the  rabbit  and  hare  suiudve  when  ex-
tracted from  the  uterus  of  the  dead  mother.  Besides,  in  a
tedious  labour  we  learn  whether  the  infant  is  alive  or  not  by
the  pulsation  of  the  umbilical  arteries ; and  it  is  certain  that
these  arteries  receive  their  impulse  from  the  heart  of  the  foetus
and  not  of  the  mother,  for  the  rhythm  of  the  two  differs : this
can  be  easily  ascertained  if  one  hand  is  applied  to  the  wrist  of
the  mother  and  the  other  to  the  umbilical  cord.  Nay,  in  the
Csesarean  section,  when  the  embryo  is  still  enveloped  in  the
chorion,  I have  often  found  the  umbilical  arteries  pulsating,  and
the  foetus  lively,  even  when  the  mother  was  dead  and  her  limbs
stiffened.  It  is  not,  therefore,  true  that  the  “ spirits  ’’  pass
from  the  mother  to  the  foetus  through  the  arteries ; nor  is  it
more  so  that  the  umbilical  or  foetal  vessels  anastomose  with
those  of  the  uterus.  The  foetus  has  a proper  life  of  its  o’wn,
and  possesses  pulsating  arteries  filled  with  blood  and  “ spirits,”
long  before  the  “ conception,”  in  which  it  is  formed  and  dwells,
is  attached  to  the  uterus ; just  as  it  is  with  the  chick  in
the  egg.

In  my  treatise  on  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood  I have  shown
the  uses  of  the  arteries,  both  in  the  foetus  and  in  the  adult,  to
be  very  different  from  what  is  generally  supposed,  and  my
views  receive  confirmation  from  the  subject  now  under  con-
sideration.

In  truth,  the  secundines”  are  part  of  the  “conception,”
and  depend  upon  it,  borrowing  thence  their  life  and  faculty  of
growth.  For,  just  as  in  the  mesentery,  the  blood  is  propelled
to  the  intestines  by  the  branches  of  the  coeliac  and  mesenteric


THE  UMBILICAL  CORD.


571


arteries,  and  returns  thence  by  means  of  the  veins  to  the  liver
and  heart,  together  with  the  chyle,  so  in  like  manner  do  the
umbilical  arteries  carry  the  blood  to  the  secundines ; which
blood,  together  with  the  nutrient  fluid,  is  brought  back  by  the
veins  to  the  foetus.  Hence  it  is  that  these  arteries  do  not  pro-
ceed immediately  from  the  heart,  as  if  they  were  the  principal
vessels,  but  take  their  origin  from  the  arteries  of  the  lower
limbs,  as  being  of  inferior  rank,  use,  and  magnitude.

Adrian  Spigehus  lately  published  a book  entitled  ‘ On  the
Formation  of  the  Foetus’  (de  Formato  Foetu) ; in  which  he
treats  of  the  uses  of  the  umbilical  arteries,  and  proves,  by
powerful  arguments,  that  the  foetus  does  not  receive  vital
“ spirits”  from  the  mother  through  the  arteries  ; he  also  an-
swers fully  the  arguments  on  the  other  side.  He  could  also
have  shown  by  the  same  arguments  that  neither  is  the  blood
transferred  to  the  foetus  from  the  vessels  of  the  mother  by
means  of  the  branches  of  the  umbilical  veins  ; this  is  espeeially
clear  from  the  case  of  the  hen’s  egg,  and  also  of  the  Caesarean
section.  In  truth,  if  heat  and  life  flow  to  the  blood  from  the
mother,  should  she  die  the  child  must  straightway  be  destroyed
also,  for  the  same  fatahty  must  attach  to  both ; nay,  the  child
must  be  the  first  to  perish;  for  as  dissolution  approaches,
the  subordinate  parts  languish  and  grow  chill  before  the  prin-
cipal ones,  and  so  the  heart  fails  last  of  all.  The  blood,  I
mean  of  the  foetus,  would  be  the  first  to  lose  its  heat  and  be-
come unfit  to  perform  its  functions  were  it  derived  from  the
uterus,  since  the  uterus  would  be  deprived  of  all  vital  heat
before  the  heart.


ON  CONCEPTION.


ON  CONCEPTION.


Fabbicius  has  indeed  recounted  many  wonderful  things  on
the  subject  of  parturition ; for  iny  own  part,  I think  there  is  more
to  admire  and  marvel  at  in  conception.  It  is  a matter,  in  truth,
full  of  obscurity;  yet  will  I venture  to  put  forth  a few  things —
rather  though  as  questions  proposed  for  solution — that  I may  not
appear  to  subvert  other  men^s  opinions  only,  without  bringing
forward  anything  of  my  own.  Yet  what  I shall  state  I wish
not  to  he  taken  as  if  I thought  it  a voice  from  an  oracle,  or
desired  to  gain  the  assent  of  others  by  violence ; I claim,  how-
ever, that  liberty  which  I willingly  yield  to  others,  the  permis-
sion, viz.  in  subjects  of  difficulty  to  put  forward  as  true  such
things  as  appear  to  be  probable  until  proved  to  he  manifestly
false.

It  is  to  the  uterus  that  the  business  of  conception  is  chiefly
intrusted : without  this  structui’e  and  its  functions  conception
would  be  looked  for  in  vain.  But  since  it  is  certain  that  the
semen  of  the  male  does  not  so  much  as  reach  the  cavity  of  the
uterus,  much  less  continue  long  there,  and  that  it  carries  with
it  a fecundating  power  by  a kind  of  contagious  property,  (not
because  it  is  then  and  there  in  actual  contact,  or  operates,  but
because  it  previously  has  been  in  contact) ; the  woman,  after
contact  with  the  spermatic  fluid  in  coitu,  seems  to  receive  in-
fluence, and  to  become  fecundated  without  the  co-operation  of
any  sensible  corporeal  agent,  in  the  same  way  as  iron  touched
by  the  magnet  is  endowed  with  its  powers  and  can  attract  other
iron  to  itself.  When  this  virtue  is  once  received  the  woman
exercises  a plastic  power  of  generation,  and  produces  a being
after  her  own  image ; not  otherwise  than  the  plant,  whicli  we
see  endowed  with  the  forces  of  both  sexes.


576


ON  CONCEPTION.


Yet  it  is  a matter  of  wonder  where  this  faculty  abides  after  in-
tercourse is  completed,  and  before  the  formation  of  the  maim  or
“ conception. To  what  is  this  active  power  of  the  male  com-
mitted ? is  it  to  the  uterus  solely,  or  to  the  whole  woman  ? or
is  it  to  the  uterus  primarily  and  to  the  woman  secondarily  ? or,
lastly,  does  the  woman  conceive  in  the  womb,  as  we  see  by  the
eye  and  think  by  the  brain  ?

For  although  the  woman  concemng  after  intercourse  some-
times produces  no  foetus,  yet  we  know  that  phenomena  occur
which  clearly  indicate  that  conception  has  really  taken  place,  al-
though without  result.  Over-fed  bitches,  which  admit  the  dogwith-
out  fecundation  following,  are  nevertheless  observed  to  be  slug-
gish about  the  time  they  should  have  whelped,  and  to  bark  as  they
do  when  their  time  is  at  hand,  also  to  steal  away  the  whelps  from
another  bitch,  to  tend  and  lick  them,  and  also  to  fight  fiercely
for  them.  Others  have  milk  or  colostrum,  as  it  is  called,  in
their  teats,  and  are,  moreover,  subject  to  the  diseases  of  those
which  have  actually  whelped  j the  same  thing  is  seen  in  hens
which  cluck  at  certain  times,  although  they  have  no  eggs  on
which  to  sit.  Some  birds  also,  as  pigeons,  if  they  have  ad-
mitted the  male,  although  they  lay  no  eggs  at  all,  or  only
barren  ones,  are  found  equally  sedidous  in  building  their  nests.

The  virtue  which  proceeds  from  the  male  in  coitu  has
such  prodigious  power  of  fecundation,  that  the  whole  woman,
both  in  mind  and  body,  undergoes  a change.  And  although
it  is  the  uterus  made  ready  for  this,  on  which  the  first  influ-
ences are  impressed,  and  from  which  virtue  and  strength  are
diffused  throughout  the  body,  the  question  still  remains,  how
it  is  that  the  power  thus  communicated  remains  attached  to
the  uterus  ? is  it  to  the  whole  uterus  or  only  to  a paid  of  it  ?
nothing  is  to  be  found  within  it  after  coitus,  for  the  semen  in
a short  time  either  falls  out  or  evaporates,  and  the  blood,  its
cii’cle  completed,  returns  from  the  uterus  by  the  vessels.

Again,  what  is  this  preparation  or  maturity  of  the  uterus
which  eagerly  demands  the  fecundating  seed  ? whence  does  it
proceed  ? Certain  it  is,  unless  the  uterus  be  ready  for  coition
every  attempt  at  fecundation  is  vain ; nay,  in  some  animals,  at
no  other  time  is  the  male  admitted.  It  happens  occasionally,

I allow,  that  this  maturity  arrives  eai’lier  in  some  fi’om  the


ON  CONCEPTION.


577


solicitations  of  the  male  animal ; it  is  itself^  however^  a purely
natm’al  result^  just  as  is  the  ripening  of  the  fruit  in  trees.  What
these  changes  are  I rrill  now  recount^  as  I have  found  them  by
observation.

The  uterus  first  appears  more  thick  and  fleshy;  then  its
inner  surface^  the  future  residence,  that  is,  of  the  concep-
tion,” becomes  softer,  and  resembles  in  smoothness  and  deli-
cacy the  ventricles  of  the  brain ; this  I have  already  described
in  the  deer  and  other  cloven-footed  tribes.  But  in  the  dog,
cat,  and  other  multiparous  and  digitated  animals,  the  horns  of
the  uterus — clearly  corresponding  to  the  round  tubes  of  the
woman  [Fallopian  tubes],  the  appendices  of  the  intestines  in
birds,  or  the  ureters  in  man — exhibit  little  protuberances  at  cer-
tain intervals,  which  swell  up  and  become  extremely  soft;  these,
after  intercom’se,  appear  to  open  themselves,  (as  I have  ob-
served in  deer ;)  from  them  the  first  white  fluid  transudes  into
the  uterus,  and  out  of  this  the  “ conception,”  or  o\Tim,  is
formed.  In  this  way  the  uterus,  by  means  of  the  male,  (like
fruit  by  the  summer’s  heat,)  is  brought  to  the  highest  pitch  of
maturity,  and  becomes  impregnated.

But  since  there  are  no  manifest  signs  of  conception  before
the  uterus  begins  to  relax,  and  the  white  fluid  or  slender  threads
(like  the  spider’s  web)  constituting  the  ^^primordmm”  of  the
future  “ conception,”  or  ovum,  shows  itself ; and  since  the
substance  of  the  uterus,  when  ready  to  conceive,  is  very  hke
the  structure  of  the  brain,  why  should  we  not  suppose  that  the
function  of  both  is  similar,  and  that  there  is  excited  by  coitus
within  the  uterus  a something  identical  with,  or  at  least  analo-
gous to,  an  ^rimagination”  (phantasma)  or  a ^^desire”  (appetitus)
in  the  brain,  whence  comes  the  generation  or  procreation  of  the
ovum  ? For  the  functions  of  both  are  termed  conceptions,”
and  both,  although  the  primary  sources  of  every  action  through-
out the  body,  are  immaterial,  the  one  of  natural  or  organic,  the
other  of  animal  actions ; the  one  (riz.  the  uterus)  the  first
cause  and  beginning  of  every  action  which  conduces  to  the
generation  of  the  animal,  the  other  (riz.  the  brain)  of  every
action  done  for  its  preservation.  And  just  as  a “ desire”  arises
from  a conception  of  the  brain,  and  this  conception  springs
from  some  external  object  of  desire,  so  also  from  the  male,
as  being  the  more  perfect  animal,  and,  as  it  were,  the  most

37


578


ON  CONCEPTION.


natural  object  of  desire,  does  the  natural  (organic)  conception
arise  in  the  uterus,  even  as  tbe  animal  conception  does  in  tbe
brain.

From  this  desire,  or  conception,  it  results  tbat  tbe  female
produces  an  offspring  like  tbe  father.  For  just  as  we,  from
tbe  conception  of  tbe  “form’^  or  “idea”  in  tbe  brain,  fashion
in  our  works  a form  resembling  it,  so,  in  like  manner,  tbe  “idea,”
or  “ form,”  of  tbe  father  existing  in  tbe  uterus  generates  an
offspring  like  himself  with  the  help  of  tbe  formative  faculty,
impressing,  however,  on  its  work  its  own  immaterial  “ form.”
In  tbe  same  way  art,  which  in  tbe  brain  is  tbe  eISoc  or
“form”  of  tbe  future  work,  produces,  when  in  operation,  its
bke,  and  begets  it  out  of  “ matter.”  So  too  tbe  painter,  by
means  of  conception,  pictures  to  himself  a face,  and  by  imitating
this  internal  conception  of  tbe  brain  carries  it  out  into  act ; so
also  tbe  builder  constructs  bis  bouse  according  to  previous  con-
ception. Tbe  same  thing  takes  place  in  every  other  action  and
artificial  production.  Thus,  what  education  effects  in  tbe  brain,
\dz.  art,  with  its  analogue  does  tbe  coitus  of  tbe  male  endow
tbe  uterus,  y\z.  tbe  plastic  art ; hence  many  similar  or  dissi-
milar foetuses  are  produced  at  tbe  same  coitus.  For  if  tbe  pro-
ductions and  first  conceptions  of  art  (tbe  mere  imitations  of
nature)  are  in  this  way  formed  in  tbe  brain,  bow  much  more
probable  is  it  tbat  copies  (exemplaria)  of  animal  generation
and  conception  should  in  bke  manner  be  produced  in  tbe
uterus  ?

And  since  Nature,  all  of  whose  works  ai’e  wonderful  and
divine,  has  devised  an  organ  of  this  kind,  viz.  tbe  brain,  by  tbe
virtue  and  sensitive  faculty  of  which  tbe  conceptions  of  tbe
rational  soul  exist,  such  as  tbe  desires  and  tbe  arts,  tbe  first
principles  and  causes  of  so  many  and  such  various  works,  of
w'bicb  man,  by  means  of  tbe  impulsive  faculty  of  tbe  brain,  is
by  imitation  tbe  author ; why  should  we  not  suppose  tbat  tbe
same  Natru’e,  who  in  tbe  uterus  has  constructed  an  organ  no
less  wonderful,  and  adapted  it  by  means  of  a similar’  sti’uctm’e
to  perform  all  tbat  appertains  to  conception,  has  destined  it  for
a similar  or  at  least  an  analogous  function,  and  intended  an
organ  altogether  similar  for  a similar’  use  ? For  as  tbe  skilful
artificer  accomplishes  bis  works  by  ingeniously  adapting  bis  in-
struments to  each,  so  tbat  from  tbe  substance  and  shape  of  these


ON  CONCEPTION.


5/9


instruments  it  is  easy  to  judge  of  tlieir  use  and  appHcation^
vrith  no  less  certainty  than  we  have  been  taught  by  Ai’istotle  ^
to  recognize  the  nature  of  animals  from  the  structure  and
arrangement  of  their  bodily  organs ; and  as  physiognomy  in-
structs us  to  judge  of  a man’s  disposition  and  character  from
the  shape  of  his  face  and  features,  what  should  prevent  us  from
supposing  that  where  the  same  structure  exists  there  is  the
same  function  implanted  ?

But  it  is  so  unfairly  ordered  that,  when  customary  and  fami-
liar matters  come  to  be  debated,  this  very  familiarity  lessens
their  importance  and  our  wonder  ; whilst  things  of  much  less
moment,  because  they  are  novel  and  rare,  appear  to  us  far
greater  objects  of  marvel.  Whoever  has  pondered  with  him-
self how  the  brain  of  the  artist,  or  rather  the  artist  by  means
of  his  brain,  pictures  to  the  life  things  which  are  not  present
to  him,  but  which  he  has  once  seen ; also  in  what  manner
birds  immured  in  cages  recall  to  mind  the  spring,  and  chant
exactly  the  songs  they  had  learned  the  preceding  summer,
although  meanwhile  they  had  never  practised  them ; again,
and  this  is  more  strange,  how  the  bird  artistically  builds  its
nest,  the  copy  of  which  it  had  never  seen,  and  this  not  from
memory  or  habit,  but  by  means  of  an.  imaginative  faculty
(phantasia),  and  how  the  spider  weaves  its  web,  without  either
copy  or  brain,  solely  by  the  help  of  this  imaginative  power ;
whosoever,  I say,  ponders  these  things,  will  not,  I think,  regard
it  as  absurd  or  monstrous,  that  the  woman  should  be  impreg-
nated by  the  conception  of  a general  immaterial  “ idea,”  and
become  the  artificer  of  generation.

I know  well  that  some  censorious  persons  will  laugh  at  this,
— men  who  believe  nothing  true  but  what  they  think  so  them-
selves. Yet  this  that  I do  is  the  practice  of  philosophers,  who,
when  they  cannot  clearly  comprehend  howathing  really  is  brought
to  pass,  devise  some  mode  for  it  in  accordance  with  the  other
works  of  nature,  and  as  near  as  possible  to  what  is  true.  And
indeed  all  those  opinions  which  we  now  regard  as  of  the  greatest
weight,  were  at  the  beginning  mere  figments  and  imaginations,
until  confirmed  by  experiments  addressed  to  the  senses,  and
made  credible  by  a knowledge  of  their  positive  causes.  Aris-


Analyt.  lib.  ii,  cap.  .^5.


580


ON  CONCEPTION.


totle  ^ says  “ that  philosophers  are  in  some  sort  lovers  of  fables,
seeing  that  fable  is  made  up  of  marvels.”  And  indeed  men  were
first  led  to  cultivate  philosophy  from  wondering  at  what  they
saw.  For  my  own  part,  then,  when  I see  nothing  left  in  the
uterus  after  intercourse  to  which  I can  ascribe  the  principle  of
generation,  any  more  than  there  is  in  the  brain  anything  dis-
coverable after  sensation  and  experience,  which  are  the  prime
sources  of  art,  and  when  I find  the  stmcture  of  both  alike,  I
have  devised  this  fable.  Let  learned  and  ingenious  men  con-
sider of  it,  let  the  supercihous  reject  it,  and  those  who  are
peevish  and  scoffing  laugh  if  they  please.

Since,  then,  nothing  can  be  apprehended  by  the  senses  in
the  uterus  after  coition,  and  since  it  is  necessary  that  there  be
something  to  render  the  female  fruitfid,  and  as  this  is  probably
not  material,  it  remains  for  us  to  take  refuge  in  the  notion  of
a mere  conception  and  of  “ species  without  matter”  (species
sine  materia),  and  imagine  that  the  same  thing  happens  here
as  every  one  allows  takes  place  in  the  brain,  unless  indeed
there  be  some  one  “ whom  the  gods  have  moulded  of  better
clay,”  and  made  fit  to  discover  some  other  efficient  cause  be-
sides any  of  those  enumerated.

Some  philosophers  of  onr  time  have  retm’ued  to  the  old  opinion
about  atoms,  and  so  imagine  that  this  generative  contagion,  as
indeed  all  others,  proceeds  from  the  subtile  emanations  of  the
semen  of  the  male,  which  rise  like  odorous  particles,  and
gain  an  entrance  into  the  uterus  at  the  period  of  intercoui’se.
Others  invoke  to  their  aid  incorporeal  spiiits,  such  as  demiurgi,
angels,  and  demons.  Others  regard  it  as  a process  of  fermenta-
tion. Others  devise  other  theories.  I pray,  therefore,  a place
for  this  conjecture  of  mine  until  something  certain  is  esta-
blished in  the  matter.

Many  observations  have  been  made  by  me  which  woidd  easily
overthrow  the  opinions  I have  mentioned,  so  easy  is  it  to  say
what  a thing  is  not  rather  than  what  it  is ; this  is  uot,  how-
ever, the  place  to  introduce  them,  although  elsewhere  it  is  my
intention  to  do  so.  On  the  present  occasion  I shall  only  ob-
serve, if  that  which  is  called  bj"  the  common  name  of  “con-
tagion,” as  arising  from  the  contact  of  the  spermatic  fliiid  in


Metaphys.  lib.  i,  cap.  2.


ON  CONCEPTION.


581


intercoui’se,  and  which  remains  in  the  woman  (without  the  actual
presence  of  the  semen)  as  the  efficient  of  the  future  offspring —
if,  I say,  this  contagion  (whether  it  be  atoms,  odorous  par-
ticles, fermentation,  or  anything  else)  is  not  of  the  nature  of  any
corporeal  substance,  it  follows  of  necessity  that  it  is  incorporeal.
And  if  on  further  inqrdry  it  should  appear  that  it  is  neither  spirit
nor  demon,  nor  soul,  nor  any  part  of  the  soul,  nor  anything
having  a soul,  as  I believe  can  be  proved  by  various  arguments
and  experiments,  what  remains,  since  I am  unable  myself  to
conjecture  anything  besides,  nor  has  any  one  imagined  aught
else  even  in  his  dreams,  but  to  confess  myself  at  a stand-stiU  ?

For  whoever,^^  says  Aristotle,^  “doubts  and  wonders,  con-
fesses his  ignorance ; therefore  if  to  escape  the  imputation  of
ignorance,  ingenious  men  have  turned  to  philosophy,  it  is  clear
they  follow  their  pursuit  for  the  sake  of  knowledge,  and  not
from  any  other  motive.^'’

It  must  not,  then,  be  imputed  to  me  for  blame,  if,  eager  for
knowledge,  and  approaching  untrodden  ground,  I have  pre-
sented aught  which  at  first  sight  may  Appear  made  up  or  fabu-
lous. For  as  everything  is  not  to  be  received  at  once  with  an
unthinking  credulity,  so  that  which  has  been  long  and  pain-
fully considered  must  not  be  straightway  rejected,  even  although
it  fail  to  catch  the  eye  of  the  quick-sighted.  Aristotle  him-
self wrote  a book,  ‘ De  Mii’abilibus  auditis,-’  on  hearsay  won-
ders; and  elsewhere  he  says,^  “We  must  not  only  thank  those
in  whose  opinions  we  acquiesce,  but  those  also  who  have  said
aught  (to  the  purpose)  although  superficially.  For  these  bring  in
something  to  the  common  stock,  in  this,  that  they  exercise  and
train  our  habits.  For  if  Timotheus  had  not  existed,  we  should
have  lost  much  music.  Yet  if  Phrynis  had  not  been  we  should
have  had  no  Timotheus.  So  is  it  with  those  who  have  laid  down
any  truth.  For  we  have  received  some  opinions  from  certain
philosophers,  yet  were  there  others  to  whom  these  ow'ed  their
existence.^^

Influenced,  then,  by  the  example  and  authority  of  so  great
a man,  and  not  to  appear  resolute  only  to  subvert  the  doc-
trines of  others,  I have  preferred  proposing  a fanciful  opinion
rather  than  none  at  all,  playing  in  this  the  part  of  Pluynis  to


Metaphys.  lib.  i,  cap.  2.


= Ibid.  lib.  ii,  cap.  1.


582


ON  CONCEPTION.


Timotheus,  my  object  being  to  shake  oflf  the  sloth  of  the  age
we  live  in,  to  rouse  the  intellects  of  the  studious,  and,  rather
than  that  the  diligent  investigator  of  nature  should  accuse  me
of  indolence,  to  bid  him  laugh  at  my  ill-formed  and  crude
notions.

In  truth,  there  is  no  proposition  more  magnificent  to  investi-
gate or  more  useful  to  ascertain  than  this:  How  are  all  things
formed  by  an  “univocal”  agent?  How  does  the  like  ever  generate
the  like  ? And  this  not  only  in  productions  of  art  (for  so  house
builds  house,  face  designs  face,  and  image  forms  image),  but  also
in  things  relating  to  the  mind,  for  mind  begets  mind,  opinion  is
the  source  of  opinion.  Democritus  with  his  atoms,  and  Eudoxus
with  his  chief  good  which  he  placed  in  pleasure,  impregnated
Epicurus;  the  foru’  elements  of  Empedocles, /Aristotle;  the  doc-
trines of  the  ancient  Thebans,  Pythagoras  and  Plato;  geometry,
Euclid.  By  this  same  law  the  son  is  born  like  his  parents,
and  ■virtues  which  ennoble  and  vices  which  degrade  a race  ai'e
sometimes  passed  on  to  descendants  through  along  series  of  years.
Some  diseases  propagate'  their  kind,  as  lepra,  gout,  syphilis,  and
others.  But  why  do  I speak  of  diseases,  when  the  moles,  warts,
and  cicatrices  of  the  progenitor  are  sometimes  repeated  in  the
desceirdant  after  many  generations?  ^ “ Every  fourth  birth,”  says
PHny,®  “ the  mark  of  the  origin  of  the  Dacian  family  is  repeated
on  the  arm.”  Why  may  not  the  thoughts,  opinions,  and  manners
now  prevalent,  many  years  hence  retui-n  again,  after  an  inter-
mediate period  of  neglect  ? For  the  dnine  mind  of  the  Eter-
nal Creator,  which  is  impressed  on  all  things,  creates  the  image
of  itself  in  human  conceptions.

Ha’ving,  therefore,  overcome  some  difficulties  relating  to  the
subject,  I feel  a greater  desire  to  enter  into  it  a little  more
closely,  and  this  with  two  objects  in  Hew — first,  that  what
I have  hitherto  treated  cursorily  may  seem  to  carry  ■with  it
a greater  weight  of  probability;  and  secondly,  to  stir  up  the
intellects  of  the  studious  to  search  more  deeply  into  so  obscure
a subject.

To  illustrate  the  matter,  let  A stand  for  the  fecundated  egg
(the  “ matter”  that  is  of  the  future  chick),  which  is  alterable  or


' Arist.  Hist.  Animal,  lib.  vii,  cap.  6 ; et  De  Gen.  Auim.  lib.  i,  cap.  1 7.
* Lib.  vii,  cap.  1 1 .


ON  CONCEPTION.


583


convertible  into  the  chick,  and  is  in  fact  the  chicken  in  posse.
Let  B he  that  which  fecundates  the  egg,  and  thus  distinguishes
it  from  an  unfruitful  egg,  i.  e.  the  “ efficient  cause”  of  the
chick,  or  that  which  puts  the  egg  in  motion,  and  converts  it
into  a chick.  And  let  C be  the  chick,  or  “ final  cause,”  for
the  sake  of  which  both  the  egg  and  that  which  fecundates  the
egg  exist,  the  actual  chick,  namely,  or  “reason”  why  the
chiek  is.

Now  we  take  for  granted,  as  demonstrated  by  Aristotle,^
that  every  prime  mover  is  “ combined  with”  that  which  is
moved  by  it.  And  these  things  are  more  particularly  said
by  him  to  be  “ together”  which  are  generated  or  produced  at
the  same  moment  of  time : thus  that  which  moves  and  that
which  is  moved  are  actually  together,  and  where  one  is  there
the  other  is  also ; for  it  is  evident  that  when  the  effect  is  present
the  cause  must  be  so  too.

Whenever,  then,  A (i.  e.  the  fecundated  egg)  is  actually  in
being,  B (i.  e.  the  internal  moving  and  “efficient”  or  fecundating
cause)  is  also  aetnally  in  being.  But  when  B is  actually  in
being,  C also  (i.  e.  the  immaterial  “ form”  of  the  chick)  must,
at  least  in  some  sort,  be  existing  too.  For  B is  the  internal
efficient  cause  of  the  chick,  that,  namely,  which  alters  A (the
egg)  into  C (the  “reason”  why  the  chick  is).  Since,  then,
everything  which  moves  coexists  with  that  which  is  moved  by
it,  and  every  cause  with  its  effect,  it  follows  that  C coexists
with  B ; for  the  “ final  cause,”  both  in  nature  and  art,  is  pri-
mary to  all  other  causes,  since  it  moves,  and  is  not  itself  moved ;
but  the  “ efficient”  moves,  because  it  is  impelled  by  the  “ final
cause.”  There  inheres,  in  some  way  or  other,  in  every  “ effi-
cient cause”  a ratio  finis  (a  final  cause),  and  by  this  the  efficient,
co-operating  with  Providence,  is  moved.

The  authority  of  Aristotle  is  clearly  on  my  side  ; “ That,”
he  says,2  appears  to  hold  the  chief  place  among  natural  causes
which  we  signify  under  this  expression,  ' cujus  gratia’ — for
whose  sake.  For  this  is  the  Aeasou;’  but  the  A’eason’  is  the
chief  thing,  as  well  in  artificial  as  in  natural  subjects.  For
when  a physician  explains  what  health  is,  either  by  definition
or  description,  or  a workman  a house,  he  is  accustomed  to  give


Physiologia,  lib.  vii,  cap.  3.


- Ue  Part.  Anim.  lib.  i,  cap.  1.


584


ON  CONCEPTION.


tlie  reasons  and  causes  of  what  he  does,  and  adds  why  he  does
it ; although  that  cause,  ‘ cujus  gratia,^  and  the  reason  ‘ for  the
sake  of  the  good  and  fair,^  are  joined  rather  to  the  works  of
nature  than  to  those  of  art.’^

“ The  end,”  he  elsewhere  says,^  is  this  ^ cujus  gratia’  (for
whose  sake),  as  health  is  the  thing  for  the  sake  of  which  we
walk.  For  wdiy  does  a man  walk  ? We  answer,  for  the  sake  of
his  health ; and  when  we  have  thus  said,  we  think  we  have
given  a ^ cause and  whatever  else  is  further  interposed,  by
means  of  another  agent,  is  done  for  the  sake  of  this  end,  as
dieting,  or  pm’giug,  or  drugs,  or  instruments,  are  all  for  the
sake  of  health ; for  all  these  are  for  the  sake  of  the  end.”
Again,  “ It  is  our  business  always  to  seek  the  primary  cause  of
everything,  For  instance,  a man  builds  a house  because  he  is
a builder,  hut  he  is  a builder  by  reason  of  the  art  of  building ;
this  then  (the  art)  is  a prior  cause ; and  so  in  all  things.”
Flence  it  is  that  he  asserts^  “ that  the  cause  which  fu’st  moves,
and  in  which  the  ‘ reason’  and  ‘ form’  lie,  is  greater  and  more
divine  than  the  ‘ material  cause.’  ”

In  all  natural  generation,  therefore,  both  the  “matter”  out
of  which  and  the  “ efficient  cause”  by  which  (namely.  A,  the
thing  which  is  moA^ed,  and  B,  the  thing  moving)  are  alike  for
the  sake  of  the  animal  begotten  or  to  he  begotten ; for  that
which  moves  and  is  not  itself  moved,  \iz.  C,  is  in  (inest)  both.
For  both  those  (viz.  A and  B)  are  at  the  same  time  capable  of
motion,  and  are  moreover  moved,  viz.  the  thing  fecundating,  B,
(which  both  moves  and  is  moA^ed)  and  the  thing  fecundated.  A,
the  “ matter,”  viz.  or  ovum,  which  is  moved  and  changed  onlv.
Wherefore  if  no  moveable  thing  is  actually  moA  ed,  unless  the
thing  wdiich  moves  is  present,  so  neither  will  “ matter”  he
moved,  nor  the  “efficient”  effect  anything,  unless  the  first  mov-
ing cause  he  in  some  way  present ; and  this  is  the  “ form”  or
“ species”  which  is  without  matter,  and  is  the  prime  cause.
“For  the  efficient  and  generating,”  according  to  Ai’istotle,^
“ in  so  far  as  they  are  so,  belong  to  that  which  is  eftected
and  generated.”  The  following  syllogism,  therefore,  may  he
framed  out  of  these  first  and  necessary  predicates  :


' Physiologia,  lib.  ii,  tract.  3.
^ Ibid.  cap.  4.


- De  Gen.  Auiui.  lib.  ii,  cap.  1.


ON  CONCEPTION.


585


Whenever  B is  actually  in  existence,  C also  is  actually  in
existence  (i.  e.  moving  in  some  way).

Whenever  A is  actually  in  existence,  B is  also  in  actual  ex-
istence.

Therefore  whenever  A is  in  actual  existence,  C is  also  in
actual  existence.

Natural  and  artificial  generation  take  place  after  the  same
manner.’  Both  are  instituted  for  the  sake  of  something  fur-
ther, and  by  a kind  of  providence  both  direct  themselves  to  a
proposed  end; — both  too  are  first  moved  by  some  “ form”  con-
ceived without  matter,  and  are  the  products  of  this  conception.
The  brain  is  the  organ  of  one  kind  of  conception  (for  in  the
soul,  the  organ  of  which  is  the  brain,  art,  without  the  inter-
vention of  matter,  is  the  ^'reason”  or  first  cause  of  the  work),
the  uterus  or  ovum  of  the  other.

The  “conception,”  therefore,  of  the  uterus  or  the  ovum  resem-
bles, at  least  in  some  sort,  the  conception  of  the  brain  itself,  and
in  a similar  way  does  the  “ end”  inhere  in  both.  For  the
“ species”  or  “ form”  of  the  chick  is  in  the  uterus  or  ovum
without  the  intervention  of  matter,  just  as  the  “ reason”  of  his
work  is  in  the  artist,  e.  g.  the  “reason”  of  the  house  in  the
brain  of  the  builder.

But  since  the  phrase  “to  be  in”  is  perhaps  equivocal,  and
things  are  said  to  be  coexistent  in  various  senses,  I affirm,
further,  and  say,  that  the  “species”  and  immaterial  “form”  of
the  future  chick  are,  in  some  sort,  the  cause  of  the  impregna-
tion or  fecundation  of  the  uterus,  because  after  intercourse  no
corporeal  substance  can  be  found  within  that  organ.

But  how  this  immaterial  cause,  this  first  principle,  exists
alike  in  the  uterus  and  brain,  or  how  the  conceptions  of  the
brain  and  uterus,  answering  to  art  and  nature,  resemble  or  dif-
fer from  each  other,  and  in  what  way  the  thing  which  fecundates
(viz.  the  internal  efficient  cause  whereby  the  animal  is  gene-
rated) exists  alike  in  the  male  and  his  semen  and  in  the  woman
and  her  uterus — in  the  egg  also,  the  mixed  work  of  both  sexes —
andwherein  their  differences  consist,  I shall  subsequently  attempt
to  explain  when  I treat  generally  of  the  generation  of  animals
(as  well  of  those  creatures  which  are  produced  by  metamor-


^ Arist.  cle  Part.  Aiiim.  lib.  i,  cap.  1.


586


ON  CONCEPTION.


phosis,  viz.  insects,  as  of  spontaneously  generated  beings,  in
whose  ova  or  ” primordia,”  as  in  all  other  seeds,  the  “ species”
or  immaterial  “ form”  plainly  dwells,  the  moving  principle,  as
it  were,  of  those  things  which  are  to  be  generated),  and  when
I speak  of  the  soul  and  its  alfections,  and  how  art,  memory,
and  experience  are  to  he  regarded  as  the  conceptions  of  the
brain  alone.


V


THE  ANATOMICAL  EXAMINATION

OF  THE  BODY  OF

THOMAS  PAER,

■\VHO  DIED  AT  THE  AGE  OF  ONE  HUNDRED  AND  FIFTY-TWO  YEARS  ;
MADE  BY

WILLIAM  HARVEY,

OTHERS  OF  THE  KINg’s  PHY’SICIANS  BEING  PRESENT,

ON  THE  16th  of  NOATIMBEH,  THE  ANNIVERSARY  OF  THE  BIRTHDAY
OF  HER  SERENE  HIGHNESS


HENRIETTA  MARIA,  QUEEN  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN,  FRANCE  AND  IRELAND.


[This  account  first  appeared  in  the  ■woi’k  of  Dr.  Bett,  entitled :
“ De  Ortu  et  Natura  Sanguinis,”  8vo.  London,  1669,  the  IMS.  having
been  presented  to  Bett  by  Mr.  Michael  Harvey,  nephew  of  the  author,
with  whom  Bett  informs  us  he  was  on  terms  of  intimacy.  — Ed.]


ANATOMICAL  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  BODY
OF  THOMAS  PABK.


Thomas  Pare^  a poor  countryman^  born  near  Winnington^
in  the  county  of  Salop,  died  on  the  14th  of  November,  in  the
year  of  grace  1635,  after  having  lived  one  hundred  and  fifty-
two  years  and  nine  months,  and  survived  nine  princes.  This
poor  man,  having  been  visited  by  the  illustrious  Earl  of
Arundel  when  he  chanced  to  have  business  in  these  parts,
(his  lordship  being  moved  to  the  visit  by  the  fame  of  a thing
so  incredible,)  was  brought  by  him  from  the  country  to
London  j and,  having  been  most  kindly  treated  by  the  earl
both  on  the  journey  and  during  a residence  in  his  unm.  house,
was  presented  as  a remarkable  sight  to  his  Majesty  the  King.

Having  made  an  examination  of  the  body  of  this  aged  in-
dmdual,  by  command  of  his  Majesty,  several  of  whose  prin-
cipal physicians  were  present,  the  following  particulars  were
noted  :

The  body  was  muscular,  the  chest  hairy,  and  the  hair  on  the
fore-arms  stni  black ; the  legs,  however,  were  without  hair,  and
smooth.

The  organs  of  generation  were  healthy,  the  penis  neither
retracted  nor  extenuated,  nor  the  scrotum  filled  with  any  se-
rous infiltration,  as  happens  so  commonly  among  the  decrepid;
the  testes,  too,  were  sound  and  large ; so  that  it  seemed  not
improbable  that  the  common  repoil;  was  true,  viz.  that  he  did
public  penance  under  a conviction  for  incontinence,  after  he
had  passed  his  hundredth  year ; and  his  wife,  whom  he  had


590


ANATOMICAL  EXAMINATION


married  as  a widow  in  his  hundred-and-twentieth  year,  did
not  deny  that  he  had  intercourse  with  her  after  the  manner  of
other  husbands  with  their  wives,  nor  until  about  twelve  years
back  had  he  ceased  to  embrace  her  frequently.

The  chest  was  broad  and  ample ; the  lungs,  nowise  fungous,
adhered,  especially  on  the  right  side,  by  fibrous  bands  to  the
ribs.  They  were  much  loaded  with  blood,  as  Ave  find  them  in
cases  of  peripneumony,  so  that  until  the  blood  was  squeezed
out  they  looked  rather  blackish.  Shortly  before  his  death  I
had  observed  that  the  face  was  livid,  and  he  suffered  from  dif-
ficult breathing  and  orthopnoea.  This  was  the  reason  why  the
axillae  and  chest  continued  to  retain  then’  heat  long  after  his
death  : this  amd  other  signs  that  present  themselves  in  cases
of  death  from  suffocation  were  observed  in  the  body.

We  judged,  indeed,  that  he  had  died  suffocated,  through  in-
ability to  breathe,  and  this  view  was  confirmed  by  all  the  phy-
sicians present,  and  reported  to  the  King.  When  the  blood
was  expressed,  and  the  lungs  were  wiped,  their  substance  was
beheld  of  a white  and  almost  milky  hue.

The  heart  was  large,  and  thick,  and  fibrous,  and  contained
a considerable  quantity  of  adhering  fat,  both  in  its  circum-
ference and  OA^er  its  septum.  The  blood  in  the  heart,  of  a
black  colour,  was  dilute,  and  scarcely  coagulated ; in  the  right
ventricle  alone  some  small  clots  Avere  discovered.

In  raising  the  sternum,  the  cartilages  of  the  ribs  were  not
found  harder  or  converted  into  bone  in  any  greater  degree  than
they  are  in  ordinary  men ; on  the  contrary,  they  Avere  soft  and
flexible.

The  intestines  were  perfectly  sound,  fleshy,  and  sti’oug,  and
so  was  the  stomach : the  small  intestines  presented  seA’eral
constrictions,  like  rings,  and  were  muscular.  Whence  it
came  that,  by  day  or  night,  observing  no  rules  or  regrdar
times  for  eating,  he  was  ready  to  discuss  any  kind  of  eatable
that  was  at  hand ; his  ordinary  diet  consisting  of  sub-rancid
cheese,  and  milk  in  every  foi’m,  coarse  and  hard  bread,  and
small  drink,  generally  sour  whey.  On  this  sorry  fai’e,  but
living  in  his  home,  free  from  care,  did  this  poor  man  attain  to
such  length  of  days.  He  eA'en  ate  something  about  midnight
shortly  before  his  death.

The  kidneys  were  bedded  in  fat,  and  in  themseKes  suffi-


OF  THOMAS  PARR.


.591


ciently  healthy ; on  their  anterior  aspects,  however,  they  con-
tained several  small  watery  abscesses  or  serous  collections,  one
of  which,  tlie  size  of  a heii^s  egg,  containing  a yellow  fluid  in
a proper  cyst,  had  made  a rounded  depression  in  the  substance
of  the  kidney.  To  this  some  were  disposed  to  ascribe  the
suppression  of  urine  under  which  the  old  man  had  laboured
shortly  before  his  death ; whilst  others,  and  with  greater  show
of  likelihood,  ascribed  it  to  the  great  regiurgitatiou  of  serum
upon  the  lungs.

There  was  no  appearance  of  stone  either  in  the  kidneys  or
bladder.

The  mesentery  was  loaded  with  fat,  and  the  colon,  with  the
omentum,  which  was  likewise  fat,  was  attached  to  the  liver,  near
the  fundus  of  the  gall-bladder;  in  like  manner  the  colon  urns
adherent  from  this  point  posteriorly  with  the  peritoneum.

The  viscera  were  healthy ; they  only  looked  somewhat  white
externally,  as  they  would  have  done  had  they  been  parboiled ;
internally  they  were  (like  the  blood,)  of  the  colour  of  dark  gore.

The  spleen  was  v'ery  small,  scarcely  equalhng  one  of  the  kid-
neys in  size.

All  the  internal  parts,  in  a word,  appeared  so  healthy,  that
had  nothing  happened  to  interfere  with  the  old  man’s  habits
of  life,  he  might  perhaps  have  escaped  paying  the  debt  due  to
nature  for  some  little  time  longer.

The  cause  of  death  seemed  fairly  referrible  to  a sudden
change  in  the  non-naturals,  the  chief  mischief  being  connected
wdth  the  change  of  air,  which  through  the  whole  course  of  life
had  been  inhaled  of  perfect  purity, — light,  cool,  and  mobile,
whereby  the  prsecordia  and  lungs  were  more  freely  ventilated
and  cooled ; but  in  this  great  advantage,  in  this  grand  cherisher
of  life  this  city  is  especially  destitute;  a city  whose  grand  charac-
teristic is  an  immense  concourse  of  men  and  animals,  and  where
ditches  abound,  and  filth  and  oftal  lie  scattered  about,  to  say
nothing  of  the  smoke  engendered  by  the  general  use  of  sul-
phureous coal  as  fuel,  whereby  the  air  is  at  all  times  rendered
heaiy,  but  much  more  so  in  the  autumn  than  at  any  other
season.  Such  an  atmosphere  could  not  have  been  found  other-
wise than  insalubrious  to  one  coming  from  the  open,  sunny
and  healthy  region  of  Salop ; it  must  have  been  especially  so
to  one  already  aged  and  infii’m.


592


ANATOMICAL  EXAMINATION  OF  PARR.


And  then  for  one  hitherto  used  to  live  on  food  unvaried  in
kind,  and  very  simple  in  its  nature,  to  be  set  at  a table  loaded
■with  variety  of  ■viands,  and  tempted  not  only  to  eat  more
than  wont,  but  to  partake  of  strong  drink,  it  must  needs  fall
out  that  the  functions  of  all  the  natural  organs  would  become
deranged.  Whence  the  stomach  at  length  failing,  and  the
excretions  long  retained,  the  work  of  concoction  proceeding
languidly,  the  liver  getting  loaded,  the  blood  stagnating  in  the
veins,  the  spirits  frozen,  the  heart,  the  source  of  Hfe,  oppressed,
the  lungs  infarcted,  and  made  impervious  to  the  ambient  air,
the  general  habit  rendered  more  compact,  so  that  it  could  no
longer  exhale  or  perspire — no  wonder  that  the  soul,  httle  con-
tent ■with  such  a prison,  took  its  flight.

The  brain  was  healthy,  very  Arm  and  hard  to  the  touch ;
hence,  shortly  before  his  death,  although  he  had  been  blind
for  twenty  years,  he  heard  extremely  well,  understood  all  that
was  said  to  him,  answered  immediately  to  questions,  and  had
perfect  apprehension  of  any  matter  in  hand ; he  was  also
accustomed  to  walk  about,  slightly  supported  between  two  per-
sons. His  memory,  however,  was  greatly  impaired,  so  that  he
scarcely  recollected  anything  of  what  had  happened  to  him
when  he  was  a young  man,  nothing  of  public  incidents,  or  of
the  kings  or  nobles  who  had  made  a figure,  or  of  the  wars
or  troubles  of  his  earlier  life,  or  of  the  manners  of  society,
or  of  the  prices  of  things — in  a word,  of  any  of  the  ordinary
incidents  which  men  are  wont  to  retain  in  their  memories.
He  only  recollected  the  events  of  the  last  few  years.  Never-
theless, he  was  accustomed,  even  in  his  hundred  and  thii’tieth
year,  to  engage  lustily  in  every  kind  of  agricultural  labour,
whereby  he  earned  his  bread,  and  he  had  even  then  the
strength  required  to  thrash  the  corn.


LETTERS.


LETTERS.


LETTER  I.

To  Caspar  Hofmann,  M.D.  Published  at  Nurenberg,  in  the
‘ Spicilegium  Illustrium  Epistolarum  ad  Casp.  Hofmannum’

Your  opinion  of  me^  my  most  learned  Hofmann^  so  candidly
given,  and  of  the  motion  and  circulation  of  the  blood,  is  ex-
tremely gratifying  to  me;  and  I rejoice  that  I have  been
permitted  to  see  and  to  converse  with  a man  so  learned  as
youi’self,  whose  friendship  I as  readily  embrace  as  I cordially
return  it.  But  I find  that  you  have  been  pleased  first  ela-
borately to  inculpate  me,  and  then  to  make  me  pay  the
penalty,  as  having  seemed  to  you  “ to  have  impeached  and
condemned  Nature  of  folly  and  error  ; and  to  have  imputed
to  her  the  character  of  a most  clumsy  and  inefficient  artificer,
in  suffering  the  blood  to  become  recrudescent,  and  making  it
return  again  and  again  to  the  heart  in  order  to  be  recon-
cocted, to  grow  effete  as  often  in  the  general  system ; thus
uselessly  spoiling  the  perfectly -made  blood,  merely  to  find  her
in  something  to  do/^  But  where  or  when  anything  of  the
kind  was  ever  said,  or  even  imagined  by  me — by  me,  who,  on
the  contrary,  have  never  lost  an  opportunity  of  expressing
my  admiration  of  the  wisdom  and  aptness  and  industry  of
Nature, — as  you  do  not  say,  I am  not  a little  disturbed  to
find  such  things  charged  upon  me  by  a man  of  sober  judg-
ment like  yourself.  In  my  printed  hook,  I do,  indeed,
assert  that  the  blood  is  incessantly  moving  out  from  the  heart
by  the  arteries  to  the  general  system,  and  returning  from  this


596


LETTERS.


by  tbe  veins  back  to  the  heart,  and  with  such  an  ebb  and  flow,
in  sueh  mass  and  quantity  that  it  must  necessarily  move
in  some  way  in  a circuit.  But  if  you  will  be  kind  enough  to
refer  to  my  eighth  and  ninth  chapters  you  will  find  it  stated
in  so  many  words  that  I have  purposely  omitted  to  speak  of
the  concoction  of  the  blood,  and  of  the  causes  of  this  motion
and  circulation,  especially  of  the  final  cause.  So  much  I
have  been  anxious  to  say,  that  I might  purge  myself  in  the
eyes  of  a learned  and  much  respected  man, — that  I might  feel
absolved  of  the  infamy  of  meriting  such  censure.  And  I beg
you  to  observe,  my  learned,  my  impartial  friend,  if  you  would
see  with  your  own  eyes  the  things  I affirm  in  respect  of  the
circulation, — and  this  is  the  course  which  most  beseems  an
anatomist, — that  I engage  to  comply  with  your  wishes,  when-
ever a fit  opportunity  is  afforded ; but  if  you  either  decline
this,  or  care  not  by  dissection  to  investigate  the  subject  for
yourself,  let  me  beseech  you,  I say,  not  to  vilipend  the  in-
dustry of  others,  nor  charge  it  to  them  as  a crime;  do  not
derogate  from  the  faith  of  an  honest  man,  not  altogether  foolish
nor  insane,  who  has  had  experience  in  such  matters  for  a long
series  of  years.

Farewell,  and  beware  ! and  act  by  me,  as  I have  done  by
you ; for  what  you  have  written  I receive  as  uttered  in  all
candour  and  kindness.  Be  sure,  in  writing  to  me  in  return,
that  you  are  animated  by  the  same  sentiments.

Niirnberg,  May  20th,  1636.


LETTER  II.

To  Paul  Marquard  Siegel,  of  Hamburg.

I congratulate  you  much,  most  leai’ned  sir,  on  your  excellent
commentary,  in  which  you  have  replied  in  a very  admirable
manner  to  Riolanus,  the  distinguished  anatomist,  and,  as  you
say,  formerly  your  teacher  : invincible  truth  has,  indeed,  taught
the  scholar  to  vanquish  the  master.  I was  myself  preparing
a sponge  for  his  most  recent  arguments ; but  intent  upon
my  work  ‘ On  the  Generation  of  Animals’  (which,  but  just


LETTERS.


597


come  forth,  I send  to  you),  I have  not  had  leisure  to  produce  it.
And  now  I rather  rejoice  in  the  silence,  as  from  your  supple-
ment I perceive  that  it  has  led  you  to  come  forward  with  your
excellent  reflections,  to  the  common  advantage  of  the  world  of
letters.  For  I see  that  in  your  most  ornate  book  (I  speak
without  flattery),  you  have  skilfully  and  nervously  confuted
all  his  machinations  against  the  circulation,  and  successfully
thrown  down  the  scaffolding  of  his  more  recent  opinions.  I
am,  therefore,  hut  little  solicitous  about  labouring  at  any
ulterior  answer.  Many  things  might,  indeed,  be  adduced  in
confirmation  of  the  truth,  and  several  calculated  to  shed  clearer
light  on  the  art  of  medicine ; but  of  these  we  shall  perhaps
see  further  by  and  by.

Meantime,  as  E/iolanus  uses  his  utmost  efforts  to  oppose  the
passage  of  the  blood  into  the  left  ventricle  through  the  lungs,
and  brings  it  all  hither  through  the  septum,  and  so  vaunts
himself  on  having  upset  the  very  foundations  of  the  Harveian
circulation  (althoiigh  I have  nowhere  assumed  such  a basis
for  my  doctrine;  for  there  is  a circulation  in  many  red-blooded
animals  that  have  no  lungs),  it  may  be  well  here  to  relate  an
experiment  which  I lately  tried  in  the  presence  of  several  of
my  colleagues,  and  from  the  cogency  of  which  there  is  no
means  of  escape  for  him.  Having  tied  the  pulmonary  artery,
the  pulmonary  veins,  and  the  aorta,  in  the  body  of  a man
who  had  been  hanged,  and  then  opened  the  left  ventricle  of
the  heart,  we  passed  a tube  through  the  vena  cava  into  the
right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  having,  at  the  same  time,
attached  an  ox^s  bladder  to  the  tube,  in  the  same  way  as  a
clyster-bag  is  usually  made,  we  filled  it  nearly  full  of  warm
water,  and  forcibly  injected  the  fluid  into  the  heart,  so  that
the  greater  part  of  a pound  of  water  was  thrown  into  the
right  auricle  and  ventricle.  The  result  was,  that  the  right
ventricle  and  auricle  were  enormously  distended,  but  not  a
drop  of  water  or  of  blood  made  its  escape  through  the  orifice
in  the  left  ventricle.  The  ligatures  having  been  undone,  the
same  tube  was  passed  into  the  pulmonary  artery,  and  a tight
ligature  having  been  put  round  it  to  prevent  any  reflux  into
the  right  ventricle,  the  water  in  the  bladder  was  now  pushed
towards  the  lungs,  upon  which  a torrent  of  the  fluid,  mixed
with  a quantity  of  blood,  immediately  gushed  forth  from  the


598


LETTERS.


perforation  in  tlie  left  ventricle ; so  tliat  a quantity  of  water,
equal  to  that  wliicli  was  pressed  from  the  bladder  into  the
lungs  at  each  effort,  instantly  escaped  by  the  perforation  men-
tioned. You  may  try  this  experiment  as  often  as  you  please ;
the  result  you  will  still  find  to  be  as  I have  stated  it.

With  this  one  experiment  you  may  easily  put  an  end  to  all
Riolanus’s  altercations  on  the  matter,  to  which  he,  nevertheless,
so  entirely  trusts,  that,  without  adducing  so  much  as  a single
experiment  in  support  of  his  A'iews,  he  has  been  led  to  invent
a new  circulation,  and  even  so  far  to  commit  himself  as  to  say
that,  unless  the  old  doctrine  of  the  circulation^  be  overtumed,
his  own  is  inadmissible.  We  may  pardon  this  distinguished
individual  for  not  having  sooner  discovered  a hidden  truth ;
but  that  he,  so  well  skilled  in  anatomy  as  he  is,  should  obsti-
nately contend  against  a truth  illustrated  by  the  clearest  light
of  reason,  this  surelj^  is  argument  of  his  envy — let  me  not
call  it  by  any  worse  name.  But,  perhaps,  we  are  still  to  find
an  excuse  for  Biolanus,  and  to  say,  that  what  he  has  wj’itten
is  not  so  much  of  his  own  motion,  as  in  discharge  of  the  duties
of  his  office,  and  with  a view  to  stand  well  with  his  colleagues.
As  Dean  of  the  College  of  Paris,  he  was  bound  to  see  the
physic  of  Galen  kept  in  good  repair,  and  to  admit  no  novelty
into  the  school,  without  the  most  careful  winnowing,  lest,  as
he  says,  the  precepts  and  dogmata  of  physic  should  be  dis-
turbed, and  the  pathology  which  has  for  so  many  years  ob-
tained the  sanction  of  all  the  leanied  in  assigning  the  causes
of  disease,  be  overthrown.  He  has  been  playing  the  part  of
the  advocate,  therefore,  rather  than  of  the  practised  anatomist.
But,  as  Aristotle  tells  us,  it  is  not  less  absurd  to  expect
demonstrative  arguments  from  the  advocate,  than  it  is  to  look
for  persuasive  arguments  from  the  demonstrator  or  teacher.
For  the  sake  of  the  old  friendship  subsisting  between  us,
moreover,  and  the  high  praise  which  he  has  laHshed  on  the
doctrine  of  the  circulation,  I cannot  find  it  in  my  heart  to
say  anything  severe  of  Biolanus.

I therefore  return  to  jmu,  most  learned  Siegel,  and  say,  that
I wish  greatly  I had  been  so  firll  and  explicit  in  what  I have
said  on  the  subject  of  anastomosis  in  my  disquisition  to
Biolanus,  as  would  have  left  you  with  no  doubts  or  scruples
‘ Harvey's  Doctrine. — Ed.


LETTERS.


599


on  the  matter.  I could  wish,  also,  that  you  had  taken  into
account  not  only  what  I have  there  denied,  but  likewise  what  I
have  asserted  on  the  transference  of  the  blood  from  the  arteries
into  the  veins;  especially  as  I there  seem  to  have  pointed  out
some  cause  both  for  my  inquiry  and  for  my  negation,  to  hint  at
a certain  cause.  I confess,  I say,  nay,  I even  pointedly  assert,
that  I have  never  found  any  Ndsible  anastomoses.  But  this  was
particularly  said  against  Biolanus,  who  limited  the  cii’culation
of  the  blood  to  the  larger  vessels  only,  with  which,  there-
fore, these  anastomoses,  if  any  such  there  were,  must  have  been
made  conformable,  viz.  of  ample  size,  and  distinctly  visible.
Although  it  be  true,  therefore,  that  I totally  deny  all  anas-
tomoses of  this  description — anastomoses  in  the  way  the  word
is  commonly  understood,  and  as  the  meaning  has  come  down
to  us  from  Galen,  viz.  a direct  conjunction  between  the  ori-
fices of  the  [Gsible]  arteries  and  veins — I still  admit,  in  the
same  disquisition,  that  I have  found  what  is  equivalent  to  this
in  three  places,  namely,  in  the  plexus  of  the  brain,  in  the
spermatic  or  preparing  arteries  and  veins,  and  in  the  umbilical
arteries  and  veins.  I shall  now,  therefore,  for  your  sake,  my
learned  friend,  enter  somewhat  more  at  large  into  my  reasons
for  rejecting  the  vulgar  notion  of  the  anastomoses,  and  explain
my  own  conjectures  concerning  the  mode  of  transition  of  the
blood  from  the  minute  ai’teries  into  the  finest  veins.

All  reasonable  medical  men,  both  of  ancient  and  modern
times,  have  believed  in  a mutual  tranfusion,  or  accession  and
recession  of  the  blood  between  the  arteries  and  the  veins;  and
for  the  sake  of  permitting  this,  they  have  imagined  certain  in-
conspicuous openings,  or  obscure  foramina,  through  which  the
blood  flowed  hither  and  thither,  moving  out  of  one  vessel  and
returning  to  it  again.  "Wherefore  it  is  not  wonderful  that
Biolanus  should  in  various  places  find  that  in  the  ancients
which  is  in  harmony  with  the  doctrine  of  a circulation.  For  a
circulation  in  such  sort  teaches  nothing  more  than  that  the
blood  flow's  incessantly  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries,  and
from  the  arteries  back  again  into  the  veins.  But  as  the  ancients
thought  that  this  movement  took  place  indeterminately,  by  a
kind  of  accident,  in  one  and  the  same  place,  and  through  the
same  chaunels,  I imagine  that  they  therefore  fouud  themselves
compelled  to  adopt  a system  of  anastomoses,  or  fine  mouths


600


LETTERS.


mutually  conjoined^  and  serving  both  systems  of  vessels  indiffer-
ently. But  the  circulation  which  I discovered  teaches  clearly
that  there  is  a necessary  outward  and  backward  flow  of  the  blood,
and  this  at  different  times  and  places,  and  through  other  and
yet  other  channels  and  passages ; that  this  flow  is  determinate
also,  and  for  the  sake  of  a certain  end,  and  is  accompHshed  in
virtue  of  parts  contrived  for  the  purpose  with  consummate
forecast  and  most  admirable  art.  So  that  the  doctrine  of  the
motion  of  the  blood  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries,  which
antiquity  only  understood  in  the  way  of  conjecture,  and  which
it  also  spoke  of  in  confused  and  indeflnite  terms,  was  laid  down
by  me  with  its  assured  and  necessary  causes,  and  presents  itself
to  the  understanding  as  a thing  extremely  clear,  perfectly  well
arranged,  and  of  approved  verity.  And  then,  when  I perceived
that  the  blood  was  transferred  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries
through  the  medium  of  the  heart  with  singular  art,  and  with
the  aid  of  an  admirable  apparatus  of  valves,  I imagined  that
the  transference  from  the  extremities  of  the  arteries  into  those
of  the  veins  could  not  be  effected  without  some  other  admirable
artiflce,  at  least  wherever  there  was  no  transudation  through
the  pores  of  the  flesh.  I therefore  held  the  anastomoses  of
the  ancients  as  fairly  open  to  suspicion,  both  as  they  nowhere
presented  themselves  to  our  eyes,  and  as  no  sufficient  reason
was  alleged  for  anything  of  the  kind.

Since,  then,  I And  a transit  from  the  arteires  into  the  veins
in  the  three  places  which  I have  above  mentioned,  equivalent
to  the  anastomoses  of  the  ancients,  and  even  affording  the
farther  security  against  any  regurgitation  into  the  arteries  of
the  blood  once  delivered  to  the  veins,  and  as  a mechanism
of  such  a kind  is  more  elaborate  and  better  suited  to  the
circulation  of  the  blood,  I have  therefore  thought  that  the
anastomoses  imagined  by  the  ancients  were  to  be  rejected.
But  you  will  ask,  what  is  this  artiflce?  what  these  ducts?
viz.  the  small  arteries,  which  are  always  much  smaller  —
twice,  even  three  times  smaller — than  the  veins  which  they
accompany,  which  they  approach  continually  more  and  more,
and  within  the  tunics  of  which  they  are  finally  lost.  I
have  been  therefore  led  to  conceive  that  the  blood  brought
thus  between  the  coats  of  the  veins  advanced  for  a certain
way  along  them,  and  that  the  same  thing  took  place  here


LETTERS.


601


wMch  we  observe  in  tbe  conjunction  between  tbe  ureters  and
tbe  bladder,  and  of  tbe  biliary  duct  with  tbe  duodenum.
Tbe  ureters  insinuate  tbemselves  obbquely  and  tortuously  be-
tAveen  tbe  coats  of  tbe  bladder,  without  anything  in  tbe  nature
of  an  anastomosis,  yet  in  such  a manner  as  occasionally  affords
a passage  to  blood,  to  pus,  and  to  calculi ; it  is  easy,  moreover,
to  fill  tbe  bladder  through  them  with  air  or  water ; but  by  no
effort  can  you  force  anything  from  tbe  bladder  into  them.  I
care  not,  however,  to  make  any  question  here  of  tbe  etymo-
logy of  words ; for  I am  not  of  opinion  that  it  is  tbe  province
of  philosophy  to  infer  aught  as  to  tbe  works  of  natm’e  from
tbe  signification  of  words,  or  to  cite  anatomical  disquisitions
before  tbe  grammatical  tribunal.  Our  business  is  not  so  much
to  inquire  what  a word  properly  signifies,  as  bow  it  is  com-
monly understood  j for  use  and  wont,  as  in  so  many  other
matters,  are  greatly  to  be  considered  in  tbe  interpretation  of
words.  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  we  are  to  take  especial
care  not  to  employ  any  unusual  words,  or  auy  common  ones
already  familiarly  used,  in  a sense  which  is  not  in  accordance
with  tbe  meaning  we  purpose  to  attach  to  them.  You  indeed
counsel  well  when  you  say,  “ only  make  sure  of  tbe  thing,  call
it  what  you  will.^^  But  when  we  discover  that  a thing  has
hitherto  been  indifferently  or  incorrectly  explained  (as  the
sequel  will  show  it  to  have  been  in  the  present  case),  I do  not
think  that  the  old  appellation  can  ever  be  well  applied  to  the
new  fact ; by  using  the  old  term  you  are  apt  to  mislead  where
you  desire  to  instruct.  I acknowledge,  then,  a transit  of  the
blood  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  and  that  occasionally
immediate,  without  any  intervention  of  soft  parts ; but  it  does
not  take  place  in  the  manner  hitherto  believed,  and  as  you
yourself  would  have  it,  Avhere  you  say  that  anastomoses,  cor-
rectly speaking,  rather  than  an  anastomosis,  were  required,
namely,  that  the  vessels  may  be  open  on  either  hand,  and  give
free  passage  to  the  blood  hither  and  thither.  And  hence  it  comes
that  you  fail  in  the  right  solution  of  the  question,  when  you
ask  how  it  happens  that  Avith  the  arteries  as  patent  or  per-
vious as  the  veins,  the  blood  nevertheless  flows  only  from  the
former  into  the  latter,  never  from  the  latter  into  the  former  ?
For  what  you  say  of  the  impulse  of  the  blood  tlu'ough  the
arteries  does  not  fully  solve  the  difficulty  in  the  present  in-


602


LETTEES.


stance.  For  if  the  aorta  be  tied  near  the  left  ventricle  of  the
heart  in  a living  animal^  and  all  the  blood  removed  from  the
arteries,  the  veins  are  still  seen  full  of  blood ; so  that  it  neither
moves  back  spontaneously  into  the  arteries,  nor  can  it  be
repelled  into  these  by  any  force,  Avhilst  even  in  a dead  animal
it  nevertheless  falls  of  its  own  accord  through  the  finest  pores
of  the  flesh  and  skin  from  superior  into  inferior  parts.  The
passage  of  the  blood  into  the  veins  is,  indeed,  effected  by  the
impulse  in  question,  and  not  by  any  dilatation  of  these  in  the
manner  of  bellows,  by  which  the  blood  is  drawn  towards  them ;
but  there  are  no  anastomoses  of  the  vessels  by  conjunction  (per
copulam),  in  the  way  you  mention,  none  Avhere  two  vessels
meeting  are  conjoined  by  equal  mouths.  There  is  only  an
opening  of  the  artery  iuto  the  vein,  exactly  in  the  same  man-
ner as  the  ureter  opens  iuto  the  bladder  (and  the  biliary  duct
opens  into  the  jejunum),  by  which,  whilst  the  flow  of  uriue  is
perfectly  free  towards  the  bladder,  all  reflux  into  the  smaller
conduits  is  effectually  prevented ; the  fuller  the  bladder  is,  in-
deed, the  more  are  the  sides  of  the  ui’eters  compressed,  and
the  more  effectual  is  all  ascent  of  urine  in  them  prevented.
Now,  on  this  hypothesis,  it  is  easy  to  render  a reason  for  the
experiment  which  I have  already  mentioned.  I add  further,
that  I can  in  nowise  admit  such  anastomoses  as  are  commonly
imagined,  inasmuch  as  the  arteries  being  always  much  smaller
than  the  veins,  it  is  impossible  that  their  sides  can  mutu-
ally conjoin  in  such  a way  as  will  allow  of  their  forming  a
common  meatus ; it  seems  matter  of  necessity  that  tilings
which  join  in  this  way  should  be  of  equal  size.  Lastly,  these
vessels  having  made  a certain  circuit,  must,  at  their  termina-
tions, encounter  one  another ; they  would  not,  as  it  happens,
proceed  straight  to  the  extremities  of  the  body.  And  the
■veins,  on  their  part,  if  they  were  conjoined  with  the  arteries
by  mutual  iuosculations,  would  necessarily,  and  by  reason  of
the  continuity  of  parts,  pulsate  like  the  arteries.

And  now,  that  I may  make  an  end  of  my  wiiting,  I say,
that  whilst  I think  the  industry  of  every  one  deserving  of
commendation,  I do  not  remember  that  I have  anywhere  be-
praised  mine  own.  You,  however,  most  excellent  sir,  I conceive
have  deserved  high  commendation,  both  for  the  care  you  have
bestowed  on  your  disquisition  on  the  liver  of  the  ox,  and  for  the


LETTERS.


603


judgment  you  display  in  your  observations.  Go  on,  therefore,
as  you  are  doing,  and  grace  the  republic  of  letters  Avith  the
fruits  of  your  genius,  for  thus  will  you  render  a grateful  ser-
vice to  all  the  learned,  and  especially  to

Your  loAung

William  Harvey.

Written  in  London,  tins  26tli  of  March,  1G51.


LETTER  III.

To  the  very  excellent  John  Nardi,  of  Florence.

I should  have  sent  letters  to  you  sooner,  but  our  public
troubles  in  part,  and  in  part  the  labour  of  putting  to  press  my
work  ‘ On  the  Generation  of  Animals,’  have  hindered  me  from
writing.  And  indeed  I,  Atdio  receive  your  Avorks — on  the  sig-
nal success  of  Avhich  I congratulate  you  from  my  heart — and
along  Avith  them  most  kind  letters,  do  but  very  little  to  one  so
distinguished  as  yourself  in  replying  by  a very  short  epistle.  I only
write  at  this  time  that  I may  tell  you  hoAV  constantly  I think
of  you,  and  Iioav  truly  I store  up  in  my  memory  the  grateful
remembrance  of  all  your  kindnesses  and  good  offices  to  my-
self and  to  my  nephcAV,  Avhen  Ave  were  each  of  us  severally  in
Florence.  I Avould  Avish,  illustrious  sir,  to  have  your  news  as
soon  as  convenient : — Avhat  you  are  about  yourself,  and  Avhat  you
think  of  this  Avork  of  mine;  for  I make  no  case  of  the  opinions  and
criticisms  of  our  pretenders  to  scholarship,  who  have  nothing  but
levity  in  their  judgments,  and  indeed  are  wont  to  praise  none
but  their  own  productions.  As  soon  as  I knoAV  that  you  are
well,  hoAvever,  and  that  you  live  not  unmindful  of  us  here,  I
propose  to  mj^self  frequently  to  enjoy  this  intercourse  by  letter,
and  I shall  take  care  to  transmit  other  books  to  you.  I pray
for  many  and  prosperous  years  to  your  Duke ; and  for  yourself
a long  evriiuepia.  Farewell,  most  learned  sir,  and  love  in  return.

Yours,  most  truly,

William  Harvey.


The  15th  of  July,  1651.


604


LETTERS.


LETTER  IV.

In  reply  to  R.  Morison,  M.D.,  of  Paris.

Illustrious  Sir, — The  reason  why  your  most  kind  letter
has  remained  up  to  this  time  unanswered  is  simply  this,  that
the  book  of  M.  Pecquet,  upon  which  you  ask  my  opinion,  did
not  come  into  my  hands  until  towards  the  end  of  the  past
month.  It  stuck  by  the  way,  I imagine,  with  some  one,
who,  either  through  negligence,  or  desiring  himself  to  see
what  was  newest,  has  for  so  long  a time  hindered  me  of  the
pleasure  I have  had  in  the  perusal.  That  you  may,  therefore,
at  once  and  clearly  know  my  opinion  of  this  work,  I say  that
I greatly  commend  the  author  for  his  assiduity  in  dissection,
for  his  dexterity  in  contriving  new  experiments,  and  for  the
shrewdness  which  he  still  evinces  in  his  remarks  upon  them.
"With  what  labour  do  we  attain  to  the  hidden  things  of  trath
when  we  take  the  averments  of  our  senses  as  the  guide  which
God  has  given  ns  for  attaining  to  a knowledge  of  his  works  ;
avoiding  that  specious  path  on  which  the  eyesight  is  dazzled
with  the  brilliancy  of  mere  reasoning,  and  so  many  are  led
to  wrong  conclusions,  to  probabibties  only,  and  too  frequently
to  sophistical  conjectures  on  things  !

I further  congratulate  myself  on  his  confirmation  of  my
views  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  by  such  lucid  experi-
ments and  clear  reasons.  I only  wish  he  had  obseiwed  that
the  heart  has  thi’ee  kinds  of  motion,  namely,  the  systole,  in
which  the  organ  contracts  and  expels  the  blood  contained  in
its  cavities,  and  next,  a movement,  the  opposite  of  the  former
one,  in  which  the  fibres  of  the  heart  appropriated  to  motion
are  relaxed.  Now  these  two  motions  inhere  in  the  substance
of  the  heart  itself,  just  as  they  do  in  all  other  muscles.  The
remaining  motion  is  the  diastole,  in  which  the  heart  is  dis-
tended by  the  blood  impelled  from  the  aiu’icles  into  the  ven-
tricles; and  the  ventricles,  thus  replete  and  distended,  are
stimulated  to  contraction,  and  this  motion  always  precedes  the
systole,  which  follows  immediately  afterwards.

With  regard  to  the  lacteal  veins  discovered  by  Aselli,  and


LETTERS.


605


by  the  further  diligence  of  Pecquet^  who  discovered  the  recep-
tacle or  reservoir  of  the  chyle^  and  traced  the  canals  thence  to
the  subclavian  veins,  I shall  tell  you  freely,  since  you  ask  me
what  I think  of  them.  I had  already,  in  the  course  of  my
dissections,  I venture  to  say  even  before  Aselli  had  published
his  book,^  observed  these  white  canals,  and  plenty  of  milk  in
various  parts  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  glands  of  younger
animals,  as  in  the  mesentery,  where  glands  abound;  and  thence
I thought  came  the  pleasant  taste  of  the  thymus  in  the  calf
and  lamb,  which,  as  you  know,  is  called  the  sweetbread  in  our
vernacular  tongue.  But  for  various  reasons,  and  led  by  several
experiments,  I could  never  be  brought  to  believe  that  that  milky
fluid  was  chyle  conducted  hither  from  the  intestines,  and  dis-
tributed to  all  parts  of  the  body  for  their  nourishment ; but  that
it  was  rather  met  with  occasionally  and  by  accident,  and  pro-
ceeded from  too  ample  a supply  of  nourishment  and  a peculiar
vigour  of  concoction ; in  virtue  of  the  same  law  of  nature,  in
short,  as  that  by  which  fat,  marrow,  semen,  hair,  &c.,  are  pro-
duced; even  as  in  the  due  digestion  of  ulcers  pus  is  formed,
which  the  nearer  it  approaches  to  the  consistency  of  milk,  viz.
as  it  is  whiter,  smoother,  and  more  homogeneous,  is  held  more
laudable,  so  that  some  of  the  ancients  thought  pus  and  milk
were  of  the  same  nature,  or  nearly  allied.  Wherefore,  although
there  can  be  no  question  of  the  existence  of  the  vessels  them-
selves, still  I can  by  no  means  agree  with  Aselli  in  considering
them  as  chyliferous  vessels,  and  this  especially  for  the  reasons
about  to  be  given,  which  lead  me  to  a different  conclusion.
For  the  fluid  contained  in  the  lacteal  veins  appears  to  me  to  be
pure  milk,  such  as  is  found  in  the  lacteal  veins  [the  milk  ducts]
of  the  mammse.  Now  it  does  not  seem  to  me  very  probable
(any  more  than  it  does  to  Auzotius  in  his  letter  to  Pecquet)
that  the  milk  is  chyle,  and  thus  that  the  whole  body  is  nou-
rished by  means  of  milk.  The  reasons  which  lead  to  a contrary
conclusion,  viz.  that  it  is  chyle,  are  not  of  such  force  as  to
compel  my  assent.  I should  first  desire  to  have  it  demon-
strated to  me  by  the  clearest  reasonings,  and  the  guarantee  of
experiments,  that  the  fluid  contained  in  these  vessels  was  chyle,
which,  brought  hither  from  the  intestines,  supplies  nourish-


‘ Published  at  Milan  in  1622. — ^En.


606


LETTERS.


ment  to  the  whole  body.  Por  unless  we  are  agreed  upon  the
first  point,  any  ulterior,  any  more  operose,  discussion  of  their
natm’e,  is  in  vain.  But  how  can  these  vessels  serve  as  con-
duits for  the  whole  of  the  chyle,  or  the  nomdshment  of  the
body,  when  we  see  that  they  are  different  in  different  animals?
In  some  they  proceed  to  the  liver,  in  others  to  the  porta  only,
and  in  others  still  to  neither  of  these.  In  some  creatures
they  are  seen  to  he  extremely  numerous  in  the  pancreas ; in
others  the  thymus  is  crowded  with  them ; in  a third  class,
again,  nothing  can  he  seen  of  them  in  either  of  these  organs.
In  some  animals,  indeed,  such  chyliferous  canals  are  nowhere
to  be  discovered  (vide  Liceti  Epist.  xiii,  tit.  ii,  p.  83,  et  Sen-
nerti  Praxeos,  lib.  v,  tit.  2,  par.  3,  cap.  1)  ; neither  do  they
exist  in  any  at  all  times.  But  the  vessels  which  serve  for  nutri-
tion must  necessarily  both  exist  in  all  animals,  and  present
themselves  at  all  times ; inasmuch  as  the  waste  incurred  by
the  ceaseless  efflux  of  the  spirits,  and  the  wear  and  tear  of
the  parts  of  the  body,  can  only  be  supplied  by  as  ceaseless  a
restoration  or  nutrition.  And  then,  their  A'ery  slender  calibre
seems  to  render  them  not  less  inadequate  to  this  duty  than
their  structure  seems  to  unfit  them  for  its  performance : the
smaller  channels  ought  plainly  to  end  in  larger  ones,  these  in
their  turn  in  channels  larger  still,  and  the  whole  to  concentrate
in  one  great  trunk,  which  should  correspond  in  its  dimensions
to  the  aggregate  capacity  of  all  the  branches ; just  such  an
arrangement  as  may  be  seen  to  exist  in  the  vena  portse  and  its
tributaries,  and  farther  in  the  trunk  of  the  tree,  which  is  equal
to  its  roots.  Wherefore,  if  the  efferent  canals  of  a fluid  must
be  equal  in  dimensions  to  the  afferent  canals  of  the  same  fluid,
the  chyliferous  ducts  which  Pecquet  discovers  in  the  thorax,
ought  at  least  to  equal  the  two  ureters  in  dimensions;  othei'wise
they  who  driulc  a gallon  or  more  of  one  of  the  acidulous  waters
could  not  pass  off  all  this  fluid  in  so  short  a space  of  time  by
these  vessels  into  the  bladder.  And  truly,  when  we  see  the
matter  of  the  urine  passing  thus  copiously  through  the  appro-
priate channels,  I do  not  see  how  these  veins  could  preserve
their  milky  colour,  and  the  uiine  all  the  while  remain  without
a tinge  of  whiteness.

I add,  too,  that  the  chyle  is  neither  in  all  animals,  nor  at
all  times,  of  the  consistency  and  colour  of  milk ; and  therefore


LETTERS.


607


did  these  vessels  carry  chyle,  they  could  not  always  (which
nevertheless  they  do)  contain  a white  fluid  in  their  interior,
but  would  sometimes  be  coloured  yellow,  green,  or  of  some
other  hue  (in  the  same  way  as  the  urine  is  affected,  and
acquires  different  colours  from  eating  rhubarb,  asparagus,  figs,
&c.)  ; or  otherwise,  when  large  quantities  of  mineral  water  were
drunk,  they  would  be  deprived  of  almost  all  colour.  Besides,
did  that  white  matter  pass  from  the  intestines  into  those
canals,  or  were  it  attracted  from  the  intestines,  the  same  fluid
ought  certainly  to  be  discovered  somewhere  within  the  intes-
tines themselves,  or  in  their  spongy  tunics ; for  it  does  not
seem  probable  that  any  fluid  by  bare  and  rapid  percolation  of
the  intestines  could  assume  a new  nature,  and  be  changed  into
milk.  Moreover,  were  the  chyle  only  Altered  through  the
tunics  of  the  intestines,  it  ought  surely  to  retain  some  traces
of  its  original  nature,  and  resemble  in  colour  and  smell  the
fluid  contained  in  the  intestines ; it  ought  to  smell  offen-
sively at  least ; for  whatever  is  contained  in  the  intestines  is
tinged  with  bile,  and  smells  unpleasantly.  Some  have  conse-
quently thought  that  the  body  was  nourished  by  means  of
chyle  raised  into  attenuated  vapour,  because  vapours  exhaling
in  the  alembic,  even  from  foetid  matters,  often  do  not  smell
amiss.

The  learned  Pecquet  ascribes  the  motion  of  this  milky  fluid
to  respiration.  For  my  own  part,  though  strongly  tempted  to
do  otherwise,  I shall  say  nothing  upon  this  topic  until  we  are
agreed  as  to  what  the  fluid  is.  But  were  we  to  concede
the  point  (which  Pecquet  takes  for  granted  without  any  suf-
ficient reason  in  the  shape  of  argument),  that  chyle  was  con-
tinually transported  by  the  canals  in  question  from  the  intes-
tines to  the  subclavian  veins,  in  which  the  vessels  he  has  lately
discovered  terminate,  we  should  have  to  say  that  the  chyle  be-
fore reaching  the  heart  was  mixed  with  the  blood  which  is  about
to  enter  the  right  side  of  the  organ,  and  that  it  there  obtains
a further  concoction.  But  what,  some  one  might  with  as  good
reason  ask,  should  hinder  it  from  passing  into  the  porta,  then
into  the  liver,  and  thence  into  the  cava,  in  conformity  with
the . arrangement  which  Aselli  and  others  are  said  to  have
found  ? Why,  indeed,  should  we  not  as  well  believe  that  the
chyle  enters  the  mouths  of  the  mesenteric  veins,  and  in  this


608


LETTERS.


way  becomes  immediately  mingled  with  the  bloody  where  it
might  receive  digestion  and  perfection  from  the  heat,  and
serve  for  the  nutrition  of  all  the  parts  ? For  the  heart  itself
can  be  accounted  of  higher  importance  than  other  parts ; can
be  termed  the  source  of  heat  and  of  life,  upon  no  other
grounds  than  as  it  contains  a larger  quantity  of  blood  in  its
cavities,  where,  as  Aristotle  says,  the  blood  is  not  contained  in
veins  as  it  is  in  other  parts,  but  in  an  ample  sinus  and  cistern,
as  it  were.  And  that  the  thing  is  so  in  fact,  I find  an  argu-
ment in  the  distribution  of  innumerable  arteries  and  veins  to
the  intestines,  more  than  to  any  other  part  of  the  body,  in
the  same  way  as  the  utems  abounds  with  blood-vessels  during
the  period  of  pregnancy.  For  nature  never  acts  inconsiderately.
In  all  the  red-blooded  animals,  consequently,  which  require
[abundant]  nourishment,  we  find  a copious  distribution  of
mesentei’ic  vessels  •,  but  lacteal  veins  we  discover  in  but  a few,
and  even  in  these  not  constantly.  Wherefore,  if  we  are  to
judge  of  the  uses  of  parts  as  Ave  meet  Avith  them  in  general
and  in  the  greater  number  of  animals,  beyond  all  doubt  those
filaments  of  a white  colour,  and  very  like  the  fibres  of  a
spider’s  web,  are  not  instituted  for  the  purpose  of  transport-
ing nourishment,  neither  is  the  fluid  they  contain  to  be  desig-
nated by  the  name  of  chyle ; the  mesenteric  vessels  are  rather
destined  to  the  duty  in  question.  Because,  of  that  whence  an
animal  is  constituted,  by  that  must  it  necessarily  grow,  and  by
that  consequently  be  nourished;  for  the  nutritive  and  augmenta-
tive faculties,  or  nutrition  and  growth,  are  essentially  the  same.
An  animal,  therefore,  naturally  grows  in  the  same  manner  as
it  receives  immediate  nutriment  from  the  first.  Now  it  is  a
most  certain  fact  (as  I have  shown  elsewhere)  that  the  embryos
of  all  red-blooded  animals  are  nom’ished  by  means  of  the  um-
bilical vessels  from  the  mother,  and  this  in  Aurtue  of  the  circula-
tion of  the  blood.  They  are  not  nourished,  however,  immediately
by  the  blood,  as  many  have  imagined,  but  after  the  manner  of
the  chick  in  ovo,  which  is  first  nourished  by  the  albumen,  and
then  by  the  vitellus,  Avhich  is  finally  di’awn  into  and  included
within  the  abdomen  of  the  chick.  All  the  umbilical  vessels,
however,  are  inserted  into  the  liver,  or  at  all  events  pass
through  it,  even  in  those  animals  whose  umbilical  A cssels  enter
the  vena  portae,  as  in  the  chick,  in  which  the  vessels  proceeding


LETTERS.


609


from  the  yelk  always  so  terminate.  In  the  selfsame  way,
therefore,  as  the  chick  is  nourished  from  a nutriment,  (\dz.
the  albumen  and  vitellus,)  previously  prepared,  even  so  does
it  continue  to  be  nourished  through  the  whole  course  of
its  independent  existence.  And  the  same  thing,  as  I have
elsewhere  shown,  is  common  to  all  embryos  whatsoever : the
nourishment  mingled  with  the  blood,  is  transmitted  through
their  veins  to  the  heart,  whence  moving  on  by  the  arteries,  it
is  carried  to  every  part  of  the  body.  The  fcetus  when  born,
when  thrown  upon  its  own  resom’ces,  and  no  longer  imme-
diately nourished  by  the  mother,  makes  use  of  its  stomach
and  intestines  just  as  the  chick  makes  use  of  the  contents  of
the  egg,  and  vegetables  make  use  of  the  ground  whence  they
derive  concocted  nutriment.  For  even  as  the  chick  at  the
commencement  obtained  its  nourishment  from  the  egg,  by
means  of  the  umbilical  vessels  (arteries  and  veins)  and  the
circulation  of  the  blood,  so  does  it  subsequently,  and  when  it
has  escaped  from  the  shell,  receive  nourishment  by  the  mesen-
teric veins ; so  that  in  either  way  the  chyle  passes  through  the
same  channels,  and  takes  its  route  by  the  same  path  through
the  liver.  Nor  do  I see  any  reason  why  the  route  by  which
the  chyle  is  carried  in  one  animal  should  not  be  that  by  which
it  is  carried  in  all  animals  whatsoever;  nor  indeed,  if  a cir-
culation of  the  blood  be  necessary  in  this  matter,  as  it  really
is,  that  there  is  any  need  for  inventing  another  way.

I must  say  that  I greatly  prize  the  industry  of  the  learned
Pecquet,  and  make  much  of  the  receptacle  which  he  has  dis-
covered ; still  it  does  not  present  itself  to  me  as  of  such  im-
portance as  to  force  me  from  the  opinion  I have  already  given  ;
for  I have  myself  found  several  receptacles  of  milk  in  young-
animals  ; and  in  the  human  embryo  I have  found  the  thymus
so  distended  with  milk,  that  suspicions  of  an  imposthume
were  at  first  sight  excited,  and  I was  disposed  to  believe  that
the  lungs  were  in  a state  of  suppuration,  for  the  mass  of
the  thymus  looked  actually  larger  than  the  lungs  themselves.
Frequently,  too,  I have  found  a quantity  of  milk  in  the  nipples
of  new-born  infants,  as  also  in  the  breasts  of  young  men
who  were  very  lusty.  I have  also  met  with  a receptacle  full
of  milk  in  the  body  of  a fat  and  large  deer,  in  the  situation

39


6i0


LETTERS.


■where  Pecq'uet  indicates  liis  receptacle,  of  such  a size  that  it
might  readily  have  heen  compared  to  the  abomasus,  or  read
of  the  animal.

These  observations,  learned  sir,  have  I made  at  this  time
in  answer  to  your  letter,  that  I might  show  my  readiness  to
comply  with  your  wishes.

Pray  present  my  most  kind  wishes  to  Dr.  Pecquet  and  to
Dr.  Gayant.  Farewell,  and  believe  me  to  be,  very  affectionately
and  respectfully.  Yours,

William  Harvev.

London,  the  28th  April,  1652.


LETTER  V.

To  the  most  excellent  and  learned  John  Nardi,  of  Florence.

Distingtjisheu  and  accomplished  Sir, — The  arrival  of
your  letter  lately  gave  me  the  hveliest  pleasure,  and  the  re-
ceipt at  the  same  time  of  your  learned  comments  upon  Lucretius
satisfied  me  that  j’ou  are  not  only  hving  and  well,  hut  that
you  are  at  work  among  the  sacred  things  of  Apollo.  I do
indeed  rejoice  to  see  truly  learned  men  everywhere  illustrating
the  republic  of  letters,  even  in  the  present  age,  in  Avhich  the
crowd  of  foolish  scribblers  is  scarcely  less  than  the  swarms  of
flies  in  the  height  of  summer,  and  threatens  with  their  crude
and  flimsy  productions  to  stifle  us  as  with  smoke.  Among
other  things  that  delighted  me  greatly  in  your  book  was  that
part  where  I see  you  ascribe  plague  almost  to  the  same  efficient
cause  as  I do  animal  generation.  Still  it  must  he  confessed
that  it  is  difficult  to  explain  how  the  idea,  or  form,  or  ■^fital
principle  should  lie  transfused  from  the  genitor  to  the  gene-
trix,  and  from  her  transmitted  to  the  conception  or  ovum,  and
thence  to  the  foetus,  and  in  this  produce  not  only  an  image  of
the  genitor,  or  an  external  species,  hut  also  Avarious  peculiai’ities
or  accidents,  such  as  disposition,  rices,  hereditary  diseases,  meri
or  mother-marks,  &c.  All  of  these  accidents  must  inhere  in  the
geniture  and  semen,  and  accompany  that  specific  thing,  hywhat-


LETTERS.


61]


ever  name  you  call  it^from  whicli  an  animal  is  not  only  produced,
but  by  which  it  is  afterwards  governed,  and  to  the  end  of  its
life  preserved.  As  all  this,  I say,  is  not  readily  accounted  for,
so  do  I hold  it  scarcely  less  difficult  to  conceive  how  pestilence
or  leprosy  should  be  communicated  to  a distance  by  contagion,
by  a zymotic  element  contained  in  woollen  or  linen  things,
household  furniture,  even  the  walls  of  a house,  cement,  rub-
bish, &c.,  as  we  find  it  stated  in  the  fourteenth  chapter  of
Leviticus.  How,  I ask,  can  contagion,  long  lurking  in  such
things,  leave  them  in  fine,  and  after  a long  lapse  of  time  pro-
duce its  like  in  another  body?  Nor  in  one  or  two  only,
but  in  many,  without  respect  of  strength,  sex,  age,  tempera-
ment, or  mode  of  life,  and  with  such  violence  that  the  evil
can  by  no  art  be  stayed  or  mitigated.  Truly  it  does  not  seem
less  likely  that  form,  or  soul,  or  idea,  whether  this  be  held
substantive  or  accidental,  should  be  transferred  to  something
else,  whence  an  animal  at  length  emerges,  all  as  if  it  had
been  produced  on  purpose,  and  to  a certain  end,  with  foresight,
intelhgence,  and  divine  art.

These  are  among  the  number  of  more  abstruse  matters,  and
demand  your  ingenuity,  most  learned  Nardi.  Nor  need  you
plead  in  excuse  your  advanced  life ; I myself,  although  verging
on  my  eightieth  year,  and  sorely  failed  in  bodily  strength,
nevertheless  feel  my  mind  still  ^dgorous,  so  that  I continue  to
giv^myself  up  with  the  greatest  pleasure  to  studies  of  this  kind.
I send  you  along  with  these,  three  books  upon  the  subject  you
name.^  If  you  will  mention  my  name  to  his  Serene  High-
ness the  Duke  of  Tuscany,  with  thankfulness  for  the  distin-
guished honour  he  did  me  when  I was  formerly  in  Florence,
and  add  my  wishes  for  his  safety  and  prosperity,  you  will  do  a
very  kind  thing  to

Your  devoted  and  very  attached  friend,

William  Harvey.

30th  Nov.  1653.

' [Nardi  had  written  to  Harvey  requesting  him  to  select  a few  of  the  publications
which  should  give  a faithful  narrative  of  the  distractions  that  had  but  lately  agitated
England. — Ed.]


612


LETTERS.


LETTER  VI.

To  John  Daniel  Horst,  principal  Physician  of  Hesse-Darrnstadt .

Excellent  Sir^ — I am  much  pleased  to  find,  that  in  spite
of  the  long  time  that  has  passed,  and  the  distance  that  sepa-
rates ns,  yon  have  not  yet  lost  me  from  yoiu’  memoiy,  and  I
conld  wish  that  it  lay  in  my  power  to  answer  all  your  in-
quiries. But,  indeed,  my  age  does  not  permit  me  to  have  this
pleasure,  for  I am  not  only  far  stricken  in  years,  hut  am  afflicted
with  more  and  more  indifferent  health.  With  regard  to  the
opinions  of  Riolanus,  and  his  decision  as  to  the  circnlation  of
the  blood,  it  is  very  obvious  that  he  makes  vast  throes  in  the
production  of  vast  trifles ; nor  do  I see  that  he  has  as  yet
satisfied  a single  individual  with  his  figments.  Siegel  wrote
well  and  modestly,  and,  had  the  fates  allowed,  would  undoubt-
edly have  answered  his  arguments  and  reproaches  also.  But
Siegel  as  I leaim,  and  grieve  to  learn,  died  -some  months  ago.
As  to  what  you  ask  of  me,  in  reference  to  the  so-called  lacteal
I'eins  and  thoracic  ducts,  I reply,  that  it  requires  good  eyes,
and  a mind  free  from  other  anxieties,  to  come  to  any  definite
conclusion  in  regard  to  these  extremely  minute  vessels  ■,  to.rne,
however,  as  I have  just  said,  neither  of  these  requisites  is
given.  About  two  years  ago,  when  asked  my  opinion  on  the
same  subject,  I replied  at  length,  and  to  the  effect  that  it  was
not  sufficiently  determined  Avhether  it  was  chyle  or  one  of  the
thicker  constituents  of  milk,  destined  speedil}^  to  pass  into  fat,
which  flowed  in  these  white  vessels ; and  fru’ther  that  the  vessels
themselves  are  wanting  in  several  animals,  namely,  birds  and
fishes,  though  it  seems  most  probable  that  these  creatui'es  are
nourished  upon  the  same  principles  as  quadrupeds ; nor  can  any
sufficient  reason  be  rendered  why  in  the  embryo  all  nuti’iment,
carried  by  the  umbilical  vein,  should  pass  through  the  liver,
but  that  this  should  not  happen  when  the  foetus  is  freed  from
the  prison  of  the  womb,  and  made  independent.  Besides,  the
thoracic  duct  itself,  and  the  orifice  by  which  it  communicates
with  the  subclavian  vein,  appear  too  small  and  naiTow  to  snflice


LETTERS.


613


for  the  transmission  of  all  the  supplies  required  by  the  body.
And  I have  asked  myself  farther^  why  such  numbers  of  blood-
vessels, arteries,  and  veins  should  be  sent  to  the  intestines  if
there  were  nothing  to  he  brought  back  from  thence  ? especially
as  these  are  mere  membraneous  parts,  and  on  this  account  re-
quire a smaller  supply  of  blood.

These  and  other  observations  of  the  same  tenor  I have
ab'eady  made, — not  as  being  obstinately  wedded  to  my  own
opinion,  but  that  I might  find  out  what  could  reasonably  be
urged  to  the  contrary  by  the  advocates  of  the  new  views.
I am  ready  to  award  the  highest  praise  to  Pecquet  and  others
for  their  singular  industry  in  searching  out  the  truth  ; nor  do
I doubt  but  that  many  things  still  lie  hidden  in  Democrituses
well  that  are  destined  to  be  drawn  up  into  the  light  by  the
indefatigable  diligence  of  coming  ages.  So  much  do  I say  at
this  time,  which,  I trust,  with  your  known  kindness,  you
will  take  in  good  part.  Farewell,  learned  friend  ; live
happily,  and  hold  me  always

Yours,  most  affectionately,

William  Harvey.

Loudon,  1st  February,  1654-5.


LETTER  VII.

To  the  distinguished  and  learned  John  Dan.  Horst,  principal
Physician  at  the  Court  of  Hesse-Darmstadt.

Most  excellent  Sir, — Advanced  age,  which  unfits  us  for
the  investigation  of  novel  subtleties,  and  the  mind  which
inclines  to  repose  after  the  fatigues  of  lengthened  labours,
prevent  me  from  mixing  myself  up  with  the  investigation  of
these  new  and  difficult  questions : so  far  am  I from  court-
ing the  ofl&ce  of  umpire  in  this  dispute  ! I was  anxious  to
do  you  a pleasure  lately,  when,  in  reply  to  your  request,  I
sent  you  the  substance  of  what  I had  formerly  written  to  a
Parisian  physician  as  my  ideas  on  the  lacteal  veins  and


614


LETTEES.


thoracic  ducts.^  Not,  indeed^  that  I was  certain  of  the  opinion
then  delivered,  hut  that  I might  place  these  objections  such
as  they  were  before  those  who  fancy  that  when  they  have  made
a certain  progress  in  discovery  all  is  revealed  by  them.

With  reference  to  your  letters  in  reply,  however,  and  in  so
far  as  the  collection  of  milky  fluid  in  the  vessels  of  Aselli  is
concerned,  I have  not  ascribed  it  to  accident,  and  as  if  there
were  not  certain  assignable  causes  for  its  existence  ; but  I have
denied  that  it  was  foimd  at  all  times  in  all  animals,  as.  the
constant  tenor  of  nutrition  would  seem  to  require.  Nor  is  it
requisite  that  a matter,  already  thin  and  much  diluted,  and
which  is  to  become  fat  after  the  ulterior  concoction,  should
concrete  in  the  dead  animal.  The  instance  of  pus,  I have
adduced  only  incidentally  and  collaterally.  The  hinge  upon
which  our  whole  discussion  timns  is  the  assumption  that  the
fluid  contained  in  the  lacteal  vessels  of  Aselli  is  chyle.  This
position  I certainly  do  not  think  you  demonstrate  satisfactorily,
when  you  say  that  chyle  must  be  educed  fi’om  the  intestines,
and  that  it  can  by  no  means  be  carried  off  by  the  arteries,
veins,  or  nerves ; and  thence  conchide  that  this  function  must
be  performed  by  the  lacteals.  I,  however,  can  see  no  reason
wherefore  the  innumerable  veins  which  traverse  the  intestines
at  every  point,  and  return  to  the  heart  the  blood  which  they
have  received  from  the  arteries,  should  not,  at  the  same  time,
also  suck  up  the  chyle  which  penetrates  the  parts,  and  so
transmit  it  to  the  heart  3 and  this  the  rather,  as  it  seems  pro-
bable that  some  chyle  passes  immediately  from  the  stomach
before  its  contents  have  escaped  into  the  intestines,  (or  how
account  for  the  rapid  recovery  of  the  spirits  and  strength  in  cases
of  fainting  ?)  although  no  lacteals  ai’e  distidbuted  to  the  stomach.

With  regard  to  the  letter  which  you  inform  me  you  have
addressed  to  Bartholin,  I do  not  doubt  of  his  replying  to  you
as  you  desii’e  3 nor  is  there  any  occasion  wherefore  I should
trouble  you  farther  on  that  topic.  I only  say  (keeping  silence
as  to  any  other  channels),  that  the  nutritive  juice  might  be
as  readily  transported  by  the  uterine  arteries,  and  distilled
into  the  uterus,  as  watery  fluid  is  carried  by  the  emidgent  ai’teries


‘ [Pecquet  described  the  duct  as  dividing  into  two  branches,  one  for  each  sub-
clavian vein. — Ed.]


LETTERS.


615


to  the  kidneys.  Nor  can  this  juice  be  spoken  of  as  preter-
natural ; neither  ought  it  to  be  compared  to  the  vagitus
uterinus,  seeing  that  in  pregnant  -women  the  fluid  is  always
present,  the  vagitus  an  incident  of  very  rare  occmuence.  What
you  say  of  the  excrements  of  new-born  infants  differing  from
those  of  the  child  that  has  once  tasted  milk  I do  not  admit ;
for,  except  in  the  particular  of  colour,  I scarcely  perceive  any
difference  between  them,  and  conceive  that  the  black  hue  may
fairly  be  ascribed  to  the  long  stay  of  the  fseces  in  the  bowels.

Your  proposal  that  I should  attempt  a solution  of  the  true
use  of  these  newly- discovered  ducts,  is  an  undertaking  of
greater  difficulty  than  comports  with  the  old  man  far  advanced
in  years,  and  occupied  with  other  cares  : nor  can  such  a task
be  well  entrusted  to  several  hands,  were  even  such  assistance
as  you  indicate  at  my  command;^  but  it  is  not;  Highmore
does  not  live  in  our  neighboui’hood,  and  I have  not  seen  him
for  a period  of  some  seven  years.  So  much  I write  at  present,
most  learned  sir,  trusting  it  will  be  taken  in  good  part  as
coming  from  yours.

Very  sincerely  and  respectfully,

William  Harvey.

London,  13th  July  1655  (old  style).


LETTER  VIII.

To  the  very  learned  John  Nardi,  of  Florence,  a man  distinguished
alike  for  his  virtues,  life,  and  erudition.

•

Most  excellent  Sir, — I lately  received  your  most  agree-
able letter,  from  which  I am  equally  delighted  to  learn  that
you  are  well,  that  you  go  on  prosperously,  and  labour
strenuously  in  our  chosen  studies.  But  I am  not  in-
formed whether  my  letter  in  reply  to  yours,  along  with  a few

' [Horst,  in  the  letter  to  which  the  above  is  an  answer,  had  said,  “ Nohihssime
Harveie,  &c.  Most  noble  Harvey,  I only  wish  you  could  snatch  the  leisure  to  ex-
plain to  the  world  the  true  use  of  these  lymphatic  and  thoracic  ducts.  You  have
many  illustrious  scholars,  particularly  Highmore,  with  whose  assistance  it  were  each
to  solve  all  doubts.” — Ed.]


616


LETTERS.


books  forwarded  at  the  same  time^  have  come  to  hand  or  not.
I should  be  happy  to  have  news  on  this  head  at  your  e arhest
convenience,  and  also  to  be  made  acquainted  with  the  progress
you  make  in  your  ‘Noctes  Geniales,-’  and  other  contemplated
works.  For  I am  used  to  solace  my  declining  years,  and  to
refresh  my  understanding,  jaded  with  the  trifles  of  every-day
life,  by  reading  the  best  works  of  this  description.  I have
again  to  return  you  my  best  thanks  for  your  friendly  offices  to
my  nephew  when  at  Florence  in  former  years ; and  on  the
arrival  in  Italy  of  another  of  my  nephews  (who  is  the  bearer
of  this  letter),  I entreat  you  very  earnestly  that  you  wiU  be
pleased  most  kindly  to  favour  him  with  any  assistance  or
advice  of  which  he  may  stand  in  need.  For  thus  will  you
indeed  do  that  which  wiU  be  very  gratifying  to  me.  Farewell,
most  accomplished  sii’,  and  deign  to  cherish  the  memory  of
om’  friendship,  as  does  most  truly  the  admirer  of  all  your
virtues,

William  Harvey.

London,  Oct.  25th,  in  the  year  of  the  Christian  era  1655.


LETTER  IX.

To  the  distinguished  and  accomplished  John  Vlackveld,
Physician  at  Harlem.

Learned  Sir, — Your  much  esteemed  letter  reached  me  safely,
in  which  you  not  only  exhibit  your  kind  consideration  of  me,
but  display  a singular  zeal  in  the  cultivation  of  oiu’  art.

It  is  even  so.  Natiu’e  is  nowhere  accustomed  more  openly
to  display  her  secret  mysteries  than  in  cases  where  she  shows
traces  of  her  workings  apart  from  the  beaten  path ; nor  is
there  any  better  way  to  advance  the  proper  practice  of  medi-
cine than  to  give  our  minds  to  the  discovery  of  the  usual  law
of  nature,  by  the  careful  investigation  of  cases  of  rai'er  forms
of  disease.  For  it  has  been  found  in  almost  all  things,  that
what  they  contain  of  useful  or  of  applicable,  is  hardly  per-
ceived unless  we  are  deprived  of  them,  or  they  become  de-


LETTERS.


617


ranged  in  some  way.  The  case  of  the  plasterer^  to  which  you
refer  is  indeed  a ciu’ious  one,  and  might  supply  a text  for  a
lengthened  commentary  by  way  of  illustration.  But  it  is  in
vain  that  you  apply  the  spur  to  urge  me,  at  my  present  age,
not  matui’e  merely  but  declining,  to  gird  myself  for  any  new
investigation.  For  I now  consider  myself  entitled  to  my
discharge  from  duty.  It  null,  however,  always  be  a pleasant
sight  for  me  to  see  distinguished  men  like  yourself  engaged
in  this  honorable  arena.  Farewell,  most  learned  sir,  and
whatever  you  do,  stUl  love

Yours,  most  respectfully,

William  Harvey.

London,  24th  April  1657.

‘ [Vlackveld  had  sent  to  Haivey  the  particulars  of  a case  of  diseased  bladder,  in
which  that  viscus  was  found  after  death  not  larger  than  “ a walnut  with  the  husk,”
its  walls  as  thick  as  the  thickness  of  the  little  finger,  and  its  inner  surface  ulcerated.
—Ed.]


GENERAL  INDEX.


Abdomen  of  the  fowl,  its  anatomy,  195.

Acetabula  of  the  uterus,  566.

Air-cells  of  birds  described,  174.

.\ir-cavity  of  the  egg,  214.

Albumen  ovi,  211  ; two  albumens,  212.
is  the  fluid  first  consumed,  393.
and  vitellus,  both  serve  for  the
nourishment  of  the  embryo,  393.
uses  of  the,  444.

Aldrovandus,  on  the  chick,  227.

Allantois,  of  the,  551.

Amnion,  of  the,  551.

of  the  fluid  of  the,  555.

Anastomosis,  102,  103.

Harvey  has  not  succeeded  in  trac-
ing any  between  vessels  of  dif-
ferent orders,  e.vcept  in  the  cho-
roid plexus,  the  vasa  praeparautia,
and  the  umbilical  chord,  103.
Harvey  gives  his  \news  of  the
way  in  which  it  is  effected,  599.

Anaxagoras,  his  doctrine  of  Homoeo-
merism,  409.

Aneurism,  observations  on  an  axillary^  as
illustrating  the  pulsations  of  the
arteries,  25.

Argent,  Dr.,  dedication  of  work  on
heart  and  blood  to,  5.

Aristotle,  his  ideas  of  the  manner
and  order  of  acquiring  knowledge,
158.

%vrites  on  the  formation  of  the  chick,
226.

on  the  production  of  a fruitful
egg,  287.

confuted  by  Harvey,  293.
on  the  manner  in  which  the  efScient
cause  of  the  generation  of  the
chick  acts,  344.

on  the  order  of  the  parts  in  gene-
ration, 407.

his  distinction  of  parts  into  geni-
talia and  instrumenta,  410.

Arteries,  contain  blood  only,  11.

contain  the  same  blood  as  the  veins,

11.

dilate,because  filled  as  bladders,  they
do  not  expand  like  bellows,  12.
motions  and  pulses  of  the,  24.


Arteries,  (continued.)

their  pulses  due  to  the  blood  thrown
into  them  by  the  left  ventricle,  25.
their  coats  have  no  inherent  power
of  pulsation.  111.
cause  of  them  emptiness,  115.
and  veins,  all  have  their  origin  in
the  heart,  392.

Artery  and  accompanying  vein,  division
of,  to  prove  the  course  of  the
ciurent  in  each  vessel,  120.

Asthma,  use  of  dry  cupping  and  cold  af-
fusion in,  119.

Auricles  of  the  heard,  observations  on,
26  et  seq.

Bass  Island,  notice  of,  208.

Bauhin,  C.,  quoted  on  the  motions  of
the  heart,  26.

Birds,  their  patience  and  perseverance  in
incubation,  220.

Blood,  its  course  from  the  veins  into  the
arteries,  35.

in  the  lower  animals,  35.
in  the  foetus,  36.

in  the  adult  it  permeates  the  sub-
stance of  the  lungs  from  the  right
to  the  left  ventricle,  40.
quantity  of,  that  passes  from  the
veins  to  the  arteries  through  the
heart,  45,  48,  49,  52.
circular  motion  of  the,  46,  52  ; de-
monstrated from  the  impossibility
of  the  whole  current  being  sup-
plied by  the  iugesta,  48.
why  so  much  found  in  the  veins,  so
little  in  the  arteries,  51.
enters  a limb  by  the  arteries,  and
retiu'ns  from  it  by  the  veins,  54.
its  circular  and  ceaseless  motion
through  the  heart  demonstrated
from  the  effects  of  hgatm-es  on
the  veins,  60.

its  circular  and  ceaseless  motion
proved  by  the  structm-e  of  the
valves  in  the  veins,  62.
of  the  arteries  and  veins  of  the  same
nature  or  kind,  113.
bright  colour  of  the  arterial  blood


G20


GENERAL  INDEX.


Blood,  {continued.)

ascribed  to  its  flowing  from  a
small  orifice,  114.

does  not  flow  with  equal  ease  and
velocity  in  all  places  and  through
all  the  tissues,  128.
gives  heat  to  the  heart,  137.
cooled  in  the  veins  of  an  extremity,
can  be  felt  floviTing  towards  and
reaching  the  heart,  138.
the  presence  of,  in  the  incubated
egg,  detected  before  the  pulsation
of  the  punctum  sahens,  237.
the  primary  genital  particle,  373.
life  resides  in  the,  376.
is  the  generative  part,  377.
the  prime  element  in  the  body,
379

the  part  first  formed,  392.
constituents  of,  387 ; serum,  clot,
and  mucilaginous  matter  (tibrine),
388.

thin  after  a meal,  389.
thick  after  fasting,  389.
coagulation  of  the  serum  by  heat,  389.
a circular  motion  of  the,  in  the  em-
bryo chick  inferred,  396.

Bursa  Fabricii,  183,  192.

Calidum  innatum,  on  the,  119.

not  distinct  from  the  blood,  120.
the  innate  heat  of  the,  501.

Cassowary,  described,  188.

Chalazac,  213.

Charles  I,  dedication  of  work  on  the
heart  and  blood  to,  1.

Chorion,  the,  551.

Chyle,  and  chyliferous  vessels  of  the,  604.

Chick,  production  of,  from  the  egg,  225.
Aristotle  on,  226.

Fabricius  on,  226.

CoiTERus  on,  226.

Pagismus  on,  226.
of  the  exclusion  of  the,  264.
how  engendered  from  the  egg,  323,
325.

of  the  matter  of  the,  and  how  it  is
produced,  333.

is  produced  by  epigenesis,  336.
arises  or  is  constituted  by  a prin-
ciple or  soul  inherent  in  the  egg,
395.

Cicatricula  of  the  egg,  215.

the  most  important  part  of  the  egg,
215,  396.

thereproductive  point  in  the  egg,  332.
the  generation  of  the  embryo  there
begun,  396.

Circulation,  Harvey’s  first  ideaof  the,  46.
summary  view  of  the,  68.


Circulation,  {continued.)

confirmed  by  certain  probable  rea-
sons and  considerations,  68.
proved  by  certain  consequences,  71.
confirmed  from  the  structure  of  the
heart  in  various  tribes  of  animals,  75.
on  the,  to  J.  Riolax,  1st  Disquis.

89  ; 2d  Disquis.  109.
those  who  ask  to  what  end an-
swered, 122.

recapitulation  of  the  facts  and  argu-
ments contained  in  the  work  on
the  heart  and  blood,  132.
further  illustrated  in  letter  to  Sle-
GEL,  596.

Cloaca,  of  the,  including  the  orifice  of
the  hen’s  uterus,  180.

Cock,  of  the,  and  the  particulars  most
remarkable  in,  309.
is  the  prime  efficient  of  the  fruitful
egg,  309.

CoiTER,  on  the  chick,  227.

Colliquamentum  ovi,  232.

Columbus,  Harvey  refers  to  him  on
the  pulmonary  circulation,  15, 41.

Conception,  the  opinions  of  physicians
on,  shown  to  be  erroneous,  294.
first  appearance  of,  in  the  deer,  482.
is  perfected  about  the  middle  of
November,  484.

apt  to  happen  just  before  or  imme-
diately after  the  catamenia,  544.
on,  575.

Conceptions,  observations  on,  486  et  seq.

Conviction,  means  of  acquiring,  of  phy-
sical truths,  130.

Contagion,  Harvey  ascribes  impreg-
nation to  a kind  of,  321.
nature  of,  610.

Deer,  taken  as  illustrating  rtviparous
generation  in  general,  466.
of  the  uterus  of  the  female,  467.
intercourse  of  the  hart  and  hind,
buck  and  doe,  474.

Descartes,  Harvey  mentions  him  with
thanks,  139.

Diuretic  drinks,  their  rapid  effects  quoted
in  illustration  of  the  rapid  course
of  the  blood,  40.

Efficient  causes  of  the  generation  of  the
chick,  340.
enumeration  of,  343.
manner  in  which  the  efficient  cause
acts,  accordingto  Aristotle,  344.
F.xbricius’s  opinion  of  the,  refuted,
350.

of  the  chick,  the  inquiry  ver>‘  diffi-
cidt,  355.


GENERAL  INDEX.


621


Efficient  cause,  {continued.)

of  animals,  and  its  conditions,  360.
Harvey  again  refers  it  to  a conta-
gion, 363  et  seq. ; employed  by  a
cause  prior  and  superior  to,  and
more  excellent  than,  either  male
or  female,  366.

Egg  of  the  hen,  chosen  as  the  subject
for  studying  generation,  169.
history  of  the,  169.
its  growth  in  the  ovary,  17.5.
air-cavity  of,  214.
extension  of,  201.
increase  and  nutrition  of,  202.
manner  in  which  the  yelk  is  sur-
rounded by  the  white,  203.
shell  of  the,  204  ; is  formed  inter-
nally, 206.

case  of  double,  or  one  egg  including
another,  206.
albumen  of,  211.

examination  of,  after  the  1st  day’s
incubation,  228.

effect  of  the  2d  day’s  incubation  on
the,  232.

3d  inspection  of  the,  234.

4th  inspection  of  the,  243.

5th  inspection  of  the,  252.

6th  inspection  of  the,  256.
inspection  of  the,  after  the  10th  dav,
257.

inspection  of  the,  after  the  14th  day,
259.

of  the  nature  of  the,  270.
is  a conception  proceeding  from  male
and  female,  271,  284.
is  a beginning  and  an  end,  271.
corresponds  with  the  seed  of  a
plant,  271.

is  an  exposed  uterus,  272
includes  all  that  is  requisite  to  re-
production, 274.

differences  between  the  fruitful  and
the  unfruitful,  275.

“ vital  principle  or  soul  of  the,  275.
the  product  of  the  vital  principle,
not  of  the  uterus,  279.
of  the  manner  in  which  a fruitful
egg  is  produced,  according  to
Aristotle,  287 ; disputed  by
Harvf.y,  293.

tbe  perfect  hen’s,  is  of  two  colours,
303.

manner  in  which  it  is  increased  by
the  albumen,  305.
of  what  the  cock  and  hen  severally
contribute  to  the,  307.
manner  in  which  the  generation  of
the  chick  takes  place  from  the,
323.


Egg  of  the  hen,  {continued?)

the  barren,  compared  to  fruit  with-
out pips  or  seeds,  371.
umbilical  vessels  of  the,  392.
uses  of  the,  entire,  442.
uses  of  the  several  parts  of  the,  other
than  the  yelk  and  w'hite,  454.
an,  is  the  common  origin  of  all  ani-
mals, 456.

Eggs,  all  animals  proceed  from,  170, 456.
of  animals  and  seeds  of  plants  iden-
tical, 170,  271.
diversities  of,  216.
of  prolihc  and  unproli6c,  219.
how  often  laid,  222.
centenine,  222.
monstrous,  223.
of  tw’in  bearing,  268.

Egypt,  hatching  eggs  in,  220.

Embryo  of  deer,  first  visible  about  the
26th  of  November,  485.

Ent,  Dr.,  his  letter  to  the  President  and
Fellows  of  the  College  of  Physi-
cians, 145.

he  obtains  Harvey’s  sanction  to
publish  the  wmrk  on  Generation,  148 .
corrects  the  press  of  thisw’ork,  149.

Epigenesis,  the  chick  is  produced  by,  336.

Experience,  value  of,  131.

Fabricius,  Hieron.,  his  ideas  of  the  uses
of  the  pulse  and  of  respiration,  9,
Harvey  selects  him  as  his  inform-
ant of  the  way  in  studying  genera-
tion, 169.
on  the  chick,  227.
criticised  in  respect  of  his  notion
of  the  generation  of  the  chick,  327.
holds  the  albumen  and  vitellus  to  be
for  the  nourishment  of  the  chick,
the  chalazae  for  its  formation,  328.
his  opinion  of  the  efficient  cause  of
the  chick  refuted,  350.
on  the  order  of  the  parts  in  genera-
tion from  the  egg,  397.

Fishes,  have  only  one  ventricle  to  their
heart,  35.

Fruitfulness,  the  cause  of,  291.

Galen,  on  the  uses  of  the  pulse,  9.

his  experiment  to  prove  that  the
arteries  contain  blood,  11.
his  experiment  to  prove  that  the
arteries  expand  and  are  filled  like
bellow's,  13.

on  the  semilunar  valves,  and  the
passage  of  the  blood  tbrough  tbe
lungs  from  the  right  to  the  left
side  of  the  heart,  42.
his  experiment  performed  by  Har-
vey, 110.


622


GENERAL  INDEX.


Generation,  anatomical  exercises  on,  143.
ideas  of  physiologists  on,  151.
inode  of  procedure  in  studying,  163.
seat  or  place  where  it  occurs,  171.
the  male  and  female  of  like  efficiency
in,  296.

how  it  takes  place  from  the  egg,  323 ;

the  same  subject  continued,  323.
of  the  cliick,  efficient  cause  of  the,
340.

all  derived  from  the  Creator,  369.
of  the  order  of,  and  of  the  primary
genital  particle,  372.
this  is  the  blood,  373.
on  the  order  in  which  the  parts  are
produced  according  to  Fabri-
cius,  397  ; to  Aristotle,  407  ;
as  they  appear  from  observation,
414.

of  certain  paradoxes  connected  with,
426.

of  viviparous  animals,  461.
Aristotle’s  definition  of,  272.

Harvey,  life  of,  xvii.
his  will,  Ixx-xix.

his  treatment  of  his  opponents,  109.
injunctions  on  the  subject  of  prose-
cuting inquiries  in  natural  science,
152  et  seq.

speaks  of  the  loss  of  his  furniture
and  papers,  481.

Heart,  its  systole  and  diastole  always
associated  with  the  respiratory
movements  by  preceding  physio-
logists, 9.

motions  of  the,  21.
is  diminished  in  all  its  diameters
when  it  contracts,  21.
has  no  power  of  drawing  or  sucking
in  the  blood,  23.

and  its  auricles,  motions  of  the,  26.
the  priinum  vivens,  ultimum  mo-
riens,  29.

its  action,  compared  to  the  process
of  deglutition,  32.
always  has  am-icles  or  some  part
analogous  to,  30.

and  lungs,  their  intimate  connexion,
the  cause  of  much  difficulty  and
error  to  the  old  physiologists,  33.
acts  like  a muscle,  contracting  and
putting  in  motion  its  charge  of
blood,  70.

is  the  sole  propeller  of  the  blood,  70.
structure  of  the,  in  different  tribes
of  animals,  confii'ms  the  occur-
rence of  a circulation  of  the  blood,
75.


Heart,  {continued.')

has  only  one  ventricle  in  some  ani-
mals, 77.

is  a muscle,  and  moves  its  charge  of
blood,  82.

is  styled  a muscle  by  Hippocrates,
82.

enlarged,  case  of,  127.
of  the,  as  the  source  of  the  heat,
perfection,  motion,  &c.,  of  the
blood,  136.

is  the  fountain  and  origin  of  all
things  in  the  body,  137.
dilatation  of  the,  due  to  the  innate
heat,  137.

does  not  give  heat  to  the  blood  like
a chauffer,  137.

observations  on  the  motion  of  the
fish’s,  139.

its  office  stated  to  be  the  propulsion
of  the  blood,  374.
is  insensible,  382.
case  In  which  it  could  be  touched,
382.

the  primigenial  part,  409.

Heat,  innate,  of  the,  as  cause  of  the
heart’s  pulsations,  137,  138.
innate,  of  the,  501.
innate,  identical  with  the  blood,  508,
510.

Hen,  of  the,  in  particular,  313.

discussion  on  the  manner  in  which
she  is  impregnated,  313 ; Har-
v'EY  ascribes  this  to  a conta-
gion, 315.

sense  in  wliich  she  may  be  called
the  prime  efficient,  318.
parturition  of  the,  319.
in  how  far  is  she  efficient  in  the
production  of  the  egg,  and  why
is  the  male  required,  300.

Hermaphrodite,  case  of  alleged,  185.

IIoFiiAxx,  Caspar,  letter  to,  595.

Homoeomerism,  doctrine  of,  409.

Horst,  J.  D.,  letters  to,  612,  613.

Impregnation,  Harvey’s  idea  of,  190  et
seq.

of  the  whole  of  the  more  mature
yelks  in  the  ovary  by  one  contact
of  the  cock,  191.
experiment  on,  194.

Incubation,  effect  of  the  1st  day  of,  on
the  egg,  228  ; 2d  day,  232 ;
3d  day,  234 ; 4th  day,  &c.

lufundibulum,  or  second  portion  of  the
uterus  of  the  hen,  179.

Intercourse,  sexual,  of  the  common  fowl,
Ac.,  186.


GENERAL  INDEX.


623


Jugular  vein  of  fallow  deer,  division  of,
to  show  the  course  of  the  con-
tained blood,  126.

Knowledge,  manner  and  order  of  acquir-
ing, 154;  according  to  Aris-
totle, 158.

Lacteals,  Harvey  refers  to  the,  604.
and  lymphatics,  Harvey  refers  to,
and  finds  various  objections
against  the,  613  ; excuses  himself
from  standing  umpire  in  the  con-
troversy concerning,  in  his  letter
to  Horst,  613 ; and  from  at-
tempting to  solve  the  problem  of
the  use  of  the  newly-discovered
vessels,  615.

Laurentius  quoted,  18.

Jjetters  of  Harvey,  593  et  seq.

Life,  resides  in  the  blood,  376.

Ligature  of  spermatic  artery  in  a case  of
sarcocele,  254.

Ligatures  on  limbs  cause  the  veins  to
rise,  by  preventing  the  return  of
the  blood  impelled  into  them  by
the  arteries,  55.

Liquor  amnii,  observations  on  the,  434.
may  he  swallowed  and  serve  the
foetus  for  nourishment,  438.

Liver,  its  ready  permeability  by  the
blood,  41.

shown  to  be  produced  from  the
blood,  254.

Loves,  &c.,  of  animals,  Harvey  pro-
mises a treatise  on  the,  195.

Lymphatics.  See  Lacteals.

Magnifying  glass,  Harvey  uses  one  to
discover  the  punctum  saliens,  235.

Medical  observations,  Harvey  refers  to
his,  129.

Membranes  and  humours  of  the  uterus
generally,  551  ; of  the  humours,
557 ; of  the  membranes,  560 ;
of  the  placenta,  563.

Mesentery,  Riolan’s  denial  of  a circula-
tion in  the  vessels  of  the,  92  et  seq.
experiment  on  the  vessels  of,  pro-
posed, 141.

a circulation  in  the  vessels  of  the,
proved  by  experiment,  141.

Mesometrium  of  the  fowl,  200.

Metamorphosis,  of  generation  by,  338.

Moisture,  of  the  primigenial,  513.

Morison,  R.,  Letter  to,  604.

Montgomery,  Viscount,  case  of,  382.

Nardi,  John,  letters  to,  603,  610,  615.

Nutrition,  remarks  on,  96.


Nutrition,  {continued.)

on  the,  of  the  chick  in  ovo,  and  also
of  the  embryo  generally,  434.

Ossa  pubis,  frequently  loosened  in  la-
bour, 437.

Ova,  reflections  on  the  small  size  of,  320.
abortedhuman, observations  on, 420.

Ovary,  of  the  hen’s,  172.

of  frogs,  crustaceans.  Ashes,  &c.,  175.

Ovum,  diversities  of  ova,  216.

all  animals  arise  from  eggs,  456.

Parisanus,  on  the  chick,  227.

Parr,  Thomas,  examination  of  the  body
of,  587.

Parrot,  Harvey  refers  to  a pet,  belong-
ing to  his  wife,  186.

Parturition,  on,  521.

Harvey’s  view  of  the  immediate
cause  of,  531.

Fabricius’s  account  of  the  manner
of,  532 ; Harvey’s,  533.
case  of,  where  twins  were  produced,
and  the  mother  walked  12  miles
afterwards,  547.

Pecquet,  Harvey  speaks  of  the  dis-
covery by,  of  the  receptaciilum
chyli,  604.  See  Lacteals.

Penis  of  some  birds,  185.

Placenta,  of  the,  563.

Poisons,  morbid,  how  they  affect  the
system,  71.

Primordium,  of  the,  whence  all  animals
are  derived,  554.

Punctum  saliens  in  the  egg,  first  seen
after  3 days  of  incubation,  235.
of  the  embryo  deer,  Harvey  shows
to  the  King,  485.

first  visible  about  the  19th  or  20th
November ; the  embryo  becomes
visible  on  the  21st,  486.

Pulmonary  veins,  were  held  to  convey  air
from  the  lungs  to  the  heart,  16.

Pulse,  transmitted  through  vessels  whose
walls  are  converted  into  bone,  112.

Pulsific  power  does  not  reside  in  the
coats  of  the  artery,  but  in  the
wave  of  blood  impelled  by  the
heart.  111.

Respiration,  some  observations  on  the,
of  the  foetus,  530.

Riolan,  J.,  quoted  on  the  motions  of
the  heart,  26.

his  idea  of  the  motion  of  the
blood,  90.

the  first  anatomical  disquisition  on
the  circulation  addressed  to,  89  ;
the  second  disquisition,  109.

Rutting  of  deer,  474.


G24


GENERAL  INDEX.


Salaciousness  of  the  cock,  duck,  phea-
sant, 192  et  seq.

Sarcocele,  treatment  of  by  tying  the  nu-
trient artery,  254.
particular  case  of,  254.

Secundines,  of  the,  556.

Seminal  fluid,  uot  to  be  found  in  the
uterus,  295.
discussion  on,  297.

Sennert,  his  opinion  quoted  as  to  the
nature  of  the  efficient  cause,  356.

Senses,  their  supremacy  in  matters  of
fact,  131.

examples  of  acuteness  of  the,  218.

Sensation  and  consciousness,  observa-
tions on,  432.

Shrimp,  action  of  the  heart  in  the,  30.

Slegel,  P.  M.,  letter  to,  596.

Spirits,  on  the,  of  physiologists,  115.
not  distinct  from  the  blood,  117.

Superfoetation,  527.

Systole  and  diastole  of  the  heart,  obser-
vations on,  139.

Tread  or  treadle  of  the  egg,  213 ; not
the  spermatic  fluid,  213;  not  the
reproductive  element,  328,  330.

Twin-bearing  eggs,  268.

Umbilical  cord,  of  the,  587.

Umbilical  vessels  of  the  egg,  392.

Uterine  membranes  and  humours,  551.

Utero-gestation,  term  of,  521  et  seq.

Uterus  of  the  hen,  upper  portion  of,  or
ovaiy,  172;  2d  portion  of,  179 ;
3d  portion  of,  180.
of  the  fowl,  of  the  access  of  the
seminal  fluid  of  the  male  to  the,
190.

of  the  fowl,  other  particulars  in  the
anatomy  of,  198.

contains  neither  blood  nor  semen
when  conception  takes  place,  297.
of  the  deer,  of  the  change  that  takes
place  in  the,  during  the  month  of
September,  476  ; of  October,  478  ;
nothing  contained  in,  immediately
after  the  rutting  season  is  over,
nor  during  the  mouth  of  October,
478  ; nor  till  about  the  middle  of
November,  481;  its  state  during
the  month  of  November,  482  ; its


Uterus,  {continued.')

state  in  December,  492  ; January
and  Februar}',  499.
observations  on  the,  538  et  seq.
danger  of  clots  or  other  foreign
matters  retained  in  the,  545.
closure  of  the  orifice  of  the,  545.

Valves,  semilunar,  of  the  pulmonary  ar-
tery, Galen  quoted  on  their  use,
42.

in  the  veins,  their  structure  proves
the  necessity  of  a ceaseless  and
regular  motion  of  the  blood,  62.
their  sole  action  is  to  prevent  the
blood  from  passing  out  of  the
greater  into  the  lesser  vessels,  64.
experiments  on  the,  64,  65.

Veins  of  the  arm,  experiment  on,  64.
65  ; with  the  application  of  cold,
138.

and  vesicula  pulsans,  formed  after
the  blood,  392.

Velabrum  covering  the  uterine  orifice  in
the  hen,  deer,  &c.,  179.

Ventricle  of  the  heart,  all  the  other  parts
made  for  that,  the  right  minister-
ing to  the  left,  77.
left,  case  of  rupture  of,  127.

Ventricles,  motion,  action,  and  office  of
the,  31.

Vesalius,  mistaken  in  his  ideas  of  the
action  of  the  heart,  23.

Vital  principle  of  the  egg,  275,  285.
on  a,  in  the  egg,  356.

Vitellus,  supplies  food  to  the  chick,  and
is  analogous  to  milk,  393.

Viviparous  animals,  on  the  generation  of,
461 ; illustrated  from  the  hind
and  doe,  466.

Vlackveld,  letter  to,  616.

Varmth,  restored  to  parts  chilled,  by  the
influx  of  fresh  blood,  97.

Yelk,  or  vitellus  of  the  egg,  175,  212.
of  the  egg,  not  altered  in  taste  by
incubation,  217.
and  albumen,  uses  of  the,  444.

Zephyrus,  the  wind,  219.


THE  END.


C.  AND  J.  ADLARD,  PRINTERS,


13ARTHOLOMKW  CLOSE.


%


}


i
