Eu


| to Gn dean a e hilecoptifeal view, one WE the i ae
finest examples of deductive reasoning. te


PRICE: NINETY CENTS A wekas Ta


Orders or, ler than twenty- fve. Bea are not DEE
Wi br the publisher, Discounts on 25 r more vomer te
Postage and por nn EN j


( For Medical Students


SELECTED READINGS IN PATHOLOGY. From Hip-
pocrates to Virchow. By Esmond R. Long, Professor of
Pathology, University of Chicago.


XVIII+307 pages 25 plate illustrations
$4.00 postpaid


Collected works from thirty-five masters of pathology
whose contributions to medicine were of unusual influence.


“Epoch-making contributions.” JOURNAL OF AMERI-
CAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION.


“Veritable milestones in the progress of medical
sciences.” BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL.


SELECTED READINGS IN THE HISTORY OF
PHYSIOLOGY. By John F. Fulton, M.D., formerly
Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford; Sterling Professor
of Physiology, Yale University School of Medicine.


XX+309 pages Sixty-one illustrations
$5.00 postpaid


Selected passages from the works of seventy-nine authors
who have exerted: great influence upon the development
of physiological thought.


“Every factor unites to make an unusually pleasing
book.” CANADIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION JOURNAL.


“An exact, comprehensive, and splendid contribution
to the history of medicine. ... . So important is this
contribution to American medicine that it seems a
worthy subject for editorial comment.’ NEw ENG-
LAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE.


€


PUBLISHER’S NOTE


These books conduct medical students to the front line
trenches of pathological and physiological discovery. They
give the student access to original sources. They furnish
that fascinating, and in many instances, that dramatic
background that is lacking in ordinary texts and histories,
and of which so often the student is but vaguely aware.
These are vivid books. Either or both will be sent ON
APPROVAL so that you may determine if you wish to
add these volumes to your library.


EXERCITATIO ANATOMICA
DE MOTU CORDIS ET SANGUINIS


IN ANIMALIBUS


Oil portrait of William Harvey in 1628 when he was fifty years of age. In that year
his de Motu Cordis was published. This picture was acquired by the Royal College of
Physicians in 1909, but the artist is unknown. Note the “anatomical table” of the
arterial circulation, similar to the preparation by Harvey still in the possession of the


Royal College of Physicians.


— Courtesy Oxford University Press,


EXERCITATIO ANATOMICA


TE C MOTU CORDIS
ET SANGUINIS IN ANIMALIBUS
ByWILLIAM HARVEY, M.D.


An English Translation
with Annotations by


CHAUNCEY D. LEAKE


Professor of Pharmacology, University of California


CHARLES C THOMAS . PUBLISHER


SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS BALTIMORE, MARYLAND


M. CM. XXXI


This Modern English Translation
is reproduced
from the 1928 Tercentennial Edition
of
EXERCITATIO ANATOMICA
DE MOTU CORDIS
ET SANGUINIS IN ANIMALIBUS


By WiLLiamM Harvey, M.D.


as presented by


Cuauncey D. LEAKE
Professor of Pharmacology
University of California


The Tercentennial Edition, 1928. In cloth.
Presenting a facsimile of the original Latin edition and an’English
Translation.


Second Edition, 1930. In paper.
Presenting an English Translation.


COPYRIGHT, 1930, BY CHARLES C THOMAS
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES


CONTENTS


PREFACE .


FACSIMILE OF THE TITLE PAGE OF THE ORIGINAL
(1628) Ebrriow or Harvey’s Exercitatio Ana-
tomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animali-
bus


Rosert WiLLis' TRANSLATION OF
The Dedication to King Charles
The Dedication to Doctor Argent and le
Learned Physicians


INTRODUCTION


Chapter I. The Author’s Reasons for Writing ;
II. The Motion of the Heart as Observed
in Animal Experiments. ;
III. The Movements of the Arteries as Er
in Animal Experimentation
IV. The Motion of the Heart and its O
as Noted in Animal Experimentation.
V. The Actions and Functions of the Heart


VI. The Way by which the Blood Passes
from the Vena Cava to the Arteries, or
from the Right Ventricle of the Heart
to the Left

VII. The Passage of Blood Through e Sub-
stance of the Lungs from the Right
Ventricle of the Heart to the Pul-
monary Vein and Left Ventricle


IX


47


53


61


VIII.


XIII.


XIV.


XV.


XVI,


XVII.


Amount of Blood Passing Through the
Heart from the Veins to the Arteries,
and the Circular Motion of the Blood.


. The Circulation of the Blood is Proved


by a Prime Consideration


. The First Proposition, Concerning whe


Amount of Blood Passing from Veins
to Arteries, During the Circulation of
the Blood, is Freed from Objections,
and Confirmed by Experiments .


. The Second Proposition is Proven
. That There is a Circulation of the Blood


Follows from the Proof of the Second
Proposition

The Third Proposition is fore a
the Circulation of the Blood is Demon-
strated from it.

Conclusion of the senden of the
Circulation of the Blood 3

The Circulation of the Blood is Con-
firmed by Plausible Methods .

The Circulation of the Blood is Sup-
ported by its Implications . .

The Motion and Circulation of the Blood
is Established by What is Displayed in
the Heart and Elsewhere r Ana-
tomical Investigation z


CHRONOLOGY OF THE LIFE or WILLIAM HARVEY


INDEX .


69


73


82
85


94


97
104
105


109


116
137
145


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


WırLıam Harvey at Firry Years or Ace,
When His De Motu Cordis was Pus-


LISHED IN 1628 : : : . Frontispiece
Courtesy Oxford University Press


CoAT-OF-ARMS ON Harvey MEMORIAL, HEMP-


STEAD CHURCH . ; ; : . Title-page


Janssen’s PortTrair or Harvey AT THE
RoyaL CoLLeGE oF PHYSICIANS OF


Lonpon . $ ; a .  . Facing page IX


Courtesy Oxford University Press


Harvey DEMONSTRATING THE HEART TO


CHARLES I
Facing page XIV


FACSIMILE or Harvey’s First NOTATION ON


THE CIRCULATION (1616) . Facing page XV


EXPERIMENTS ON A BANDAGED ARM .


Facing pages 102 and 103


“THe Most PLEASING Picture or Dr.


WiLLiam Harvey” J NS gerne Opareı 773


Courtesy Oxford University Press


THe Bopy or Wırrıam Harvey “LAPT IN


Despere : . Facing page 142


Gulielmus ‘Harvey "MD


WILLIAM HARVEY (1578-1657)


From the painting in the Royal College of Physicians of London by C. Janssen (1590-1664)
who lived in England from 1618 to 1648.


—Courtesy Oxford University Press.


PREFACE


Veritas nos liberabit


As far as 1 can find, this is the fourth attempt to render Har-
vey’s classic into current English idiom. The first was appar-
ently an anonymous effort prefaced by a Zachariah Wood of |
Rotterdam, and printed by Francis Leach for Richard Lowndes
of London, in 1653. This octavo was reprinted in 1673, and
again in beautiful format by the Nonesuch Press in 1928, under
the editorial direction of Mr. Geoffrey Keynes. The second by
Michael Ryan, appeared in Volumes I and II of the London
Medical and Surgical Journal, 1832-33. The third was the well
known translation made for the Sydenham Society by Robert
Willis and published in 1847. Reprinted in London in 1889, in
Canterbury in 1894, and in Everyman’s Library in 1907, this
has become the standard English version. Although an excellent
translation, its stilted and involved phraseology makes it rather
difficult reading for those more accustomed to modern diction.
As Mencken has intimated in connection with similar classics,
this greatly interferes with their proper appreciation. From
my rather limited experience with medical students and physi-
cians, I am confident that they would welcome the chance to
study the works of the great contributors to their profession
were these to be offered to them in an attractive and easily
readable form.

This prompted Mr. Thomas to suggest, when we discussed a
tercentennial edition of Harvey’s great book, that a new trans-
lation in the language and spirit of our times be attempted.
Using Willis as a guide, this has been an easy and delightful task.
In his more scientific passages, Harvey is remarkably terse
and “snappy,” in the current style. In his philosophical dis-
cussions he becomes vague and his sentences grow beyond
control, but whose do not?


[ix]


PREFACE


Not possessing a copy of the first edition, the basis of my
translation was the miserably printed Longhine edition of 1697,
which omits the dedication. Willis’s translation of the dedi-
cation has been included here: from it one may get some idea
of the Cavalierian grace of his style. After my friend, Dr. John
Fulton, kindly sent me a copy of Moreton’s privately printed
facsimile of the original edition, I found several errors in the
text I had used. This fortunately necessitated careful collation,
resulting in some corrections in the English version.

The translation is admittedly free, in the deliberate attempt
to present Harvey’s thought in the current physiological
manner. Thus, while Harvey nowhere actually uses a word
which may be literally rendered “pump,” it is our habit to
refer to cardiac action in some such term.

The differences in Harvey’s style through the book imply its
composition at different times. The introduction is far more
vigorous, and in its critical attitude, more characteristically
youthful than any of the remaining seventeen chapters. The
first chapter, on the other hand, apologizing for the effort,
has the grace and dignity of careful deliberation, and closes
with a classical quotation reflecting the meditative calm of
middle age. The last three chapters add little to the significance
of the demonstration. They illustrate the futility of theoretical
speculation attempting to reconcile opposing points of view
with inadequate data. With microscopical technique un-
developed, Harvey could not see the communications between
arteries and veins. He tried later to study the problem by a
sort of corrosion method, but failed to find anything resembling
an anastomosis except in three obscure places. At the time, he
tried to complete his demonstrations by metaphysical arguments
based on the traditional teleology. This was the antithesis of
the method by which he had achieved such brilliant success
in the preceding chapters.

The last of the book seems to have been written some time
after the main part of it, when long reflection on the subject


[x]


PREFACE


had crystalized his opinion. The eighth chapter is similar in
style and context to the fifteenth and sixteenth, and was, I
think, written at about the same time.

The argument in the other chapters from two to fourteen
proceeds with certain characteristics that introduced an entirely
new method of approach in physiological problems. These are
(1) the careful analysis of phenomena observed (chapters two
to five); (2) the devising of experimental procedures to test a
proposed hypothesis (chapters ten, eleven, and thirteen), and
(3) the startling innovation of quantitative reasoning to prove
a proposed theory (chapters nine, ten, and thirteen). Harvey
was among the first to use the practical methods of science as
we do now: observation, hypothesis, deduction, and experi-
ment. This is neither scholastic Aristotelianism nor Bacon’s
laborious accumulation of data and its manipulation by the
cumbersome tables of the Novum Organum. The sixth and
seventh chapters, on the pulmonary circulation, are puzzling.
There is a good discussion of the comparative and embryological
aspects of the subject, and then a peculiar use of the traditional
authority of Galen as evidence. One may find almost all kinds
of logic in Harvey.

In order to bring out the significance of Harvey’s work in
regard to our modern knowledge of cardiac function, and to
relate it to the slow development of this knowledge, footnotes
have been added to the translation. I hope they will appeal to
medical students and interested laymen. For specialists in the
history of medicine, they may seem superfluous, in spite of my
effort to make them as brief and inconspicuous as possible.
Most of the information in them has been culled from the
standard authorities in physiology and its history. A running
account of the development of Harvey’s demonstration and its
influence was to have been appended, but will have to wait
till later. A chronology of his life has been added. For my
information and point of view I am indebted to a host of
Harvey enthusiasts, Haeser, Willis, Munk, Foster, Dalton,


[ xi ]


PREFACE


Curtis, Osler, D’Arcy Power, Hemmeter, Garrison, and Singer.
For scholarly inspiration I am grateful to Dr. George Sarton,
Dr. Percy Dawson, and Dr. William Snow Miller. For cheerful
support in this and similar fancies I owe much to my wife’s
interest, and to that of the genial members of the Dick Marshall
Dining Club. I am especially thankful to the Oxford University
Press for kind permission to reproduce several of the splendid
illustrations from Portraits of Dr. William Harvey (1913).

Many efforts were made in 1928 to celebrate appropriately
the tercentennial of the appearance of Harvey's great book.
The Royal Society of Physicians of London and the Harvey
Society of New York held special festivals. R. Lier and Co. of
Florence issued a facsimile of the original work. The Nonesuch
Press reprinted the first English translation, and Mr.
Geoffrey Keynes published an authoritative bibliography of
Harvey's writings. While these challenge the attention of
connoiseurs, this volume has been prepared chiefly in the hope
that it may interest medical and advanced zoological students,
by offering in a dignified but inexpensive way an opportunity to
become acquainted, intellectually, with one of the greatest
contributors to their subjects. To that end the publisher and
printers have done more than their share to make my little part
easy.

It has been a delight to work with Mr. Thomas in the prepa-
ration of this volume, and 1 appreciate his continued courtesy
and enthusiasm.

CADIZ
Madison, Wisconsin
June 13, 1928.


NOTE TO THE SECOND EDITION


Thanks to the kind interest of Dr. John F. Fulton, Sterling
Professor of Physiology at Yale University, this second edition
was made possible and especially prepared by the publisher for


[xii]


PREFACE


medical students at an exceptionally low price. Dr. Fulton gen-
erously provided me with material for notes on the “Thebesian
Vessels”, and otherwise suggested valuable improvements. A
number of additions and corrections have been made, chiefly to
the notes, in the attempt to correlate Harvey’s work as closely
as possible with present physiological conceptions of the circula-
tion of the blood.

It was hoped originally to append a brief running account of
the historical development of ideas regarding the circulation.
This has been rendered superfluous by the appearance of many
interesting essays on Harvey and his work, which were issued in
connection with the Tercentenary Celebration of the publication
of his De Motu Cordis. Among these should be mentioned Doc-
tor Archibald Malloch's book (New York, Paul Hoeber, Inc.,
1929) and papers by Doctors Alfred E. Cohn (Ann. Med. Hist.,
fis. 1, 16, 1929), E. B. Krumbhaar (i2id.,_p. 57), J. J. R:
MacLeod (ibid., 10, 338, 1928), F. R. Packard (ib3d., p. 498),
and Sir Humphrey Rolleston (i2id., p. 323).

Experience with medical students has justified the conviction
that one of the best ways by which to gain an introduction to
the physiological knowledge of the heart and circulation is
through the study of Harvey’s brief and brilliant classic. It is a
significant exercise in general culture as well. The foot-notes
have been planned to support the interest of such a reading by
provocative reference to present physiological research bearing
on Harvey's work and to such historical factors as may contrib-
ute to a better appreciation of his intellectual courage and
achievement.

Once more it is a pleasure to acknowledge the kind efficiency
and generous cooperation of Mr. Thomas in making this pub-
lication possible. 1 am also most grateful indeed to Dr. Fulton
not only for this cordial interest in this venture, but particu-
larly for his friendly understanding in connection with certain
phases of it.

CS DALE
San Francisco,
December 12, 1930.


¡ezidsop7 [e19u9£) ursuossiq JO 9395 aya ur Adoo e wong —
uopuo “op 29 ‘sorg poq Aq “1581 ‘Se yore paysiiqnd uewoT “py Aq poavisua “yeuuey “y Aq pazureg


GOOTd AHL 40 NOILVTNOUIO AHL JO ANOYHL SIH I SHTAVHO OL ONLLVALSNOWUYA AHAYVH


Tue First NOTATION OF THE DISCOVERY OF THE CIRCULATION OF THE
Boop, ın Harvey’s HANDWRITING


Harvey’s First NOTE ON THE CIRCULATION


This is the right hand page 80 of Harvey’s Prelectiones Anatomiae
Universalis, his 1616 Lecture Notes, discovered in the British Museum
and published in 1886. It reads as follows:


WH constat per fabricam cordis sanguinem
per pulmones in Aortam perpetuo
transferri, as by two clacks of a
water bellows to rayse water
constat per ligaturam transitum sanguinis
ab arterijs ad venas
vnde A perpetuum sanguinis motum
in circulo fieri pulsu cordis
An? hoc gratia Nutritionis
an magis Conservationis sanguinis
et Membrorum per Infusionem calidam
vicissimque sanguis Calefaciens
membra frigifactum a Corde
Calefit


One may freely translate these rough notes:


WH demonstrates by the structure of the heart that blood is continually passed
through the lungs into the aorta, as by two clacks of a water bellows to raise water. The
passage of blood from arteries to veins is shown by means of a ligature. So it is proved
that a continual movement of the blood in a circle is caused by the beat of the heart.
Is this for the sake of nourishing or the better preservation of the blood and parts of the
body by infusion of heat, the blood alternately being cooled, by heating these parts, and
warmed, by the heart?


EXERCITATIO,


ANATOMICA DE


MOTV CORDIS ET SAN.


GVINIS IN ANIMALL
BVS,


"VILIELMI HARVEI ANGLI,


Medici Regis,ES Profefforis Anatomia in Cole
legio Medicorum Londinenfi.


FRANCOFPRTI,
Sumptibus GVILIELMI FITZERI.
ANNO M. DC. XXVII.


u e Se 2 Ta apn
ENTE HE


To The Moft IMuftrious and Indomitable
Prince CHARLES, KING of GREAT BRIT-


AIN, FRANCE and IREL4ND, DEFENDER of
the FAITH


Most ILLustrI0US Prince!

The heart of animals is the foundation of their life, the
sovereign of everything within them, the sun of their micro-
cosm, that upon which all growth depends, from which all
power proceeds. The King, in like manner, is the foundation
of his kingdom, the sun of the world around him, the heart of the
republic, the fountain whence all power, all grace doth flow.
What I have here written of the motions of the heart I am the
more emboldened to present to your Majesty, according to the
custom of the present age, because almost all things human are
done after human examples, and many things in a King are
after the pattern of the heart. The knowledge of his heart,
therefore, will not be useless to a Prince, as embracing a kind
of Divine example of his functions,—and it has still been usual
with men to compare small things with great. Here, at all
events, best of Princes, placed as you are on the pinnacle of
human affairs, you may at once contemplate the prime mover
in the body of man, and the emblem of your own sovereign
power. Accept, therefore, with your wonted clemency, I most
humbly beseech you, illustrious Prince, this, my new Treatise
on the Heart; you, who are yourself the new light of this age,
and, indeed, its very heart; a Prince abounding in virtue and in
grace, and to whom we gladly refer all the blessings which
England enjoys, all the pleasure we have in our lives.

Your Majesty’s most devoted servant,
WiLLIam Harvey
(London... . 1628.)


(TRANSLATION BY Rosert Wirus, M.D., 1847.)


[3]


To His Very Dear Friend
DOCTOR ARGENT


the excellent
and accomplished PRESIDENT of THE ROYAL
COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS, and to other learned
Puysicians, his esteemed COLLEAGUES.


I have already and repeatedly presented you, my learned
friends, with my new views of the motion and function of the
heart, in my anatomical lectures; but having now for nine
years and more confirmed these views by multiplied demonstra-
tions in your presence, illustrated them by arguments, and
freed them from the objections of the most learned and skilful
anatomists, I at length yield to the requests, I might say en-
treaties, of many, and here present them for general considera-
tion in this treatise.

Were not the work indeed presented through you, my learned
friends, I should scarce hope that it could come out scatheless
and complete; for you have in general been the faithful witnesses
of almost all the instances from which I have either collected
the truth or confuted error; you have seen my dissections, and
at my demonstrations of all that I maintain to be objects of
sense, you have been accustomed to stand by and bear me out
with your testimony. And as this book alone declares the blood
to course and revolve by a new route, very different from the
ancient and beaten pathway trodden for so many ages, and
illustrated by such a host of learned and distinguished men, I
was greatly afraid lest I might be charged with presumption did


[4]


I lay my work before the public at home, or send it beyond seas
for impression, unless 1 had first proposed its subject to you,
had confirmed its conclusions by ocular demonstrations in your
presence, had replied to your doubts and objections, and secured
the assent and support of our distinguished President. For 1
was most intimately persuaded, that if 1 could make good my
proposition before you and our College, illustrious by its numer-
ous body of learned individuals, I had less to fear from others;
I even ventured to hope that I should have the comfort of
finding all that you had granted me in your sheer love of truth,
conceded by others who were philosophers like yourselves. For
true philosophers, who are only eager for truth and knowledge,
never regard themselves as already so thoroughly informed, but
that they welcome further information from whomsoever and
from whencesoever it may come; nor are they so narrow-minded
as to imagine any of the arts or sciences transmitted to us by
the ancients, in such a state of forwardness or completeness,
that nothing is left for the ingenuity and industry of others;
very many, on the contrary, maintain that all we know is still
infinitely less than all that still remains unknown; nor do
philosophers pin their faith to others’ precepts in such wise that
they lose their liberty, and cease to give credence to the con-
clusions of their proper senses. Neither do they swear such
fealty to their mistress Antiquity, that they openly, and in
sight of all, deny and desert their friend Truth. But even as
they see that the credulous and vain are disposed at the first
blush to accept and to believe everything that is proposed to
them, so do they observe that the dull and unintellectual are
indisposed to see what lies before their eyes, and even to deny
the light of the noonday sun. They teach us in our course of
philosophy as sedulously to avoid the fables of the poets and
the fancies of the vulgar, as the false conclusions of the sceptics.
And then the studious, and good, and true, never suffer their
minds to be warped by the passions of hatred and envy, which
unfit men duly to weigh the arguments that are advanced in
behalf of truth, or to appreciate the proposition that is even


[5]


fairly demonstrated; neither do they think it unworthy of them
to change their opinion if truth and undoubted demonstration
require them so to do; nor do they esteem it discreditable to
desert error, though sanctioned by the highest antiquity; for
they know full well that to err, to be deceived, is human; that
many things are discovered by accident, and that many may be
learned indifferently from any quarter, by an old man from a
youth, by a person of understanding from one of inferior
capacity.

My dear colleagues, I had no purpose to swell this treatise
into a large volume by quoting the names and writings of anato-
mists, or to make a parade of the strength of my memory, the
extent of my reading, and the amount of my pains; because I
profess both to learn and to teach anatomy, not from books
but from dissections; not from the positions of philosophers but
from the fabricof nature;and then because 1 do not think it right
or proper to strive to take from the ancients any honour that
is their due, nor yet to dispute with the moderns, and enter
into controversy with those who have excelled in anatomy and
been my teachers, I would not charge with wilful falsehood
any one who was sincerely anxious for truth, nor lay it to any
one's door as a crime that he had fallen into error. I avow myself
the partisan of truth alone; and 1 can indeed say that 1 have
used all my endeavours, bestowed all my pains on an attempt
to produce something that should be agreeable to the good,
profitable to the learned, and useful to letters.

Farewell, most worthy Doctors,
And think kindly of your Anatomist,
WiLLIam Harvey.


(TRANSLATION By RoBerT WiLLis, M.D., 1847.)


[6]


ES pote SE = Cas


CS SS COIS COS US Sse


Introduction


“> — >< GR <>


N DISCUSSING the movements and functions
of the heart and arteries, we should first con-
sider what others have said on these matters, and
what the common and traditional viewpoint is.
Then by anatomical study, repeated experiment,
and careful observation, we may confirm what is
correctly stated, but what is false make right.
Nearly all anatomists, physicians, and philos-
ophers up to now have thought with Galen that the
pulse has the same function as respiration, differing
only in one respect, the former arising from an
animal, the latter a vital faculty, but from the
standpoint of function or movement behaving alike.
Thus one finds, as in the recent book on Respiration
by Hieronymus Fabricius of Aquapendente, that
since the pulsation of the heart and arteries is not
sufficient for the aeration and cooling of the blood,
Nature has placed the lungs around the heart.
So it seems that whatever has been said prior to
this about the systole and diastole of the heart and
arteries has been proposed with special reference
to the lungs.


[7]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


Since the movements and structure of the heart
differ from those of the lungs, as those of the arteries
from those of the chest, separate functions or pur-
poses are likely. The pulsings and uses of the heart
as well as of the arteries are distinct from those
of the chest and lungs. If the pulse and respiration
have the same purpose, if the arteries in diastole
draw air into their cavities (as commonly said)
and in systole give off waste vapors by the same
pores in flesh and skin, and if also in the time be-
tween systole and diastole they contain air,! in fact
containing at all times either air, spirits, or sooty
vapors, what may be answered to Galen? He de-
clared that the arteries by nature contain blood
and blood alone, neither air nor spirits, as may
easily be determined by experiments and explana-
tions found in his report.

If in diastole the arteries are filled by air drawn
in, the greater the pulse the greater being the amount
drawn in, then when the whole body is immersed
in a bath of oil or water, a previously strong pulse
should either become much weaker or slower, for
the bath surrounding the body will make it difficult
if not impossible for the air to enter the arteries.
Likewise, when all the arteries, the deep as well as

l The word fuligines is translated waste-vapors. The idea of this
supposed sooty material may have developed from the duskier hue of
venous blood. The intake and output of air to and from the arteries
through pores in flesh and skin goes right back to Empedocles (sth
Cent. B.C.). Interesting that this should be involved in the first aspect


of current opinion about the heart and blood-vessels to be refuted by
Harvey.
[8]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


superficial, are distended at the same time and with
equal speed, how is it possible for the air to pene-
trate as easily and quickly through the skin, flesh,
and bulk of the body to the deeper parts as through
the skin alone? How may the arteries of the
fetus draw air into their cavities through the mother’s
abdomen and the uterine mass? How may seals,
whales, dolphins, other species of cetaceans, and
all kinds of fish in the depths of the sea draw in and
give off air through the great mass of water by the
pulsing systole and diastole of their arteries? To
say that they absorb air fixed in the water and give
off their waste vapors to the water is pure fiction.?

If the arteries during systole exhale waste vapors
from their cavities through the pores of the flesh and
skin, why not at the same time the spirits said to
be contained within them, for spirits are much more
volatile than sooty wastes. Again, if the arteries
receive and pour out air in diastole and systole, as
the lungs in respiration, why not the same if cut
open as in arteriotomy? In cutting open the trachea
it 1s clear that the air goes in and comes out of the


2 Of course this is just what they do. The fundamental facts about
respiration were established by A-L. Lavoisier (Hist. Acad. roy. d.
Sci., Paris, 1784, p. 355) and, for internal respiration, by G. Magnus
(Ann. Phys. u. Chem., 1837, 41: 583). The fundamental laws about
gaseous behavior were being developed about 1660 by Robert Boyle
(1627-1691), but I have not been able to find who first showed the
solubility of air in water. The laws governing these phenomena were
studied by Henry in 1803 and by Dalton in 1807. Humboldt and
Provencal first studied the respiration of fishes (Mem. Soc. phys. chim.
d'Arcueil, Paris, 1807, 2: 359).


[9]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


wound in two opposite directions. In cutting open
an artery it is equally clear that the blood escapes in
one continuous direction and that no air either goes
in or comes out.

If the pulsations of the arteries cool and purify
the various portions of the body as the lungs do the
heart, how, as is commonly said, do the arteries
carry from the heart to the separate parts the vital
blood stuffed with vital spirits, which keep up the
heat of these parts, nourish them in sleep, and re-
store them in exhaustion? How, if the arteries be
tied off, do the parts at once become not only torpid,
cold, and pale, but even cease to be nourished,
unless it be as Galen says that they have been de-
prived of that heat which flowed through them from
the heart? So it would seem that the arteries carry
heat to the parts instead of cooling them.

Now, how may the diastole draw spirits from the
heart to warm the parts at the same time from the
outside to cool them? Further, although some
state that the lungs, arteries, and heart have the
same function, they also say that the heart is the
factory of the spirits and that the arteries contain
and transmit them, denying, contrary to the opinion
of Columbus,’ that the lungs either make or contain


8 Not Christopher but Matheus Realdus (1516-1559). A vain,
unscholarly, and unscrupulous man, pupil of Vesalius, and Professor
of Anatomy at Rome. In his De Re Anatomica (1559), he correctly
described the pulmonary circulation, but failed to realize the signifi-
cance of what he did. He made a distinct advance over the Galenists,
however, in thinking that blood was rendered “spiritous” by air in


[10]


‘MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


spirits. Then they declare with Galen that blood
is contained in the arteries, and not spirits, contrary
to Erasistratus.

It is clear that these opinions are so contradictory
and irreconcilable that all are doubtful. Blood is
to be found in arteries, and blood alone, as is plain
from the experiment of Galen, from arteriotomy,
and from wounds. By cutting open a single artery,
as Galen states more than once, all the blood may
easily be drained from the whole body in a half
hour’s time. The experiment of Galen referred to
is this: “If you will place two ligatures around an
artery and make a longitudinal incision in the
portion of the artery between them, nothing but
blood will be found.” Thus does he prove the ar-
teries contain blood alone. We may reason similarly.
Finding the same blood in veins, tied off in a similar
manner, that is found in arteries (as I have fre-
quently noted in dead and living anımals), we may


the lungs instead of in the heart. Foster thinks (Hist. of Physiol.,
1901, p. 30) he cribbed the description from the unfortunate religious
fanatic, Michael Servetus (1510-1553), who was burned under Calvin
at Geneva. The latter’s Restitutio Christianismi (1553) contains a
remarkable passage discussing the pulmonary circulation, but since
only 3 copies escaped the flames, it obviously could have little influence.
Servetus had studied anatomy in Paris with Vesalius. Galen (131-201
A.D.) showed that arteries contained blood, contrary to the opinion of
the earlier Greeks, as exemplified by Erasistratus of Alexandria
(3rd Century B.C.) who found the arteries empty in dissections of dead
bodies. Harvey discusses all these points later.

I have broken into shorter paragraphs, for greater ease in reading,
a couple of very long paragraphs through here in the original.


[11]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


likewise conclude that arteries contain the same
blood as veins and nothing but the same blood.*

Some authors, while trying to explain this difh-
culty in saying that blood is spiritous in the arteries,
tacitly allow that the function of the arteries is to
distribute the blood from the heart to the whole
body, and that the arteries are filled with blood.
Spiritous blood is none the less blood, as no-one
denies that the blood, even that which flows in the
veins, is filled with spirits. Even if the blood in the
arteries is very gorged with spirits, it is still believ-
able that these spirits are as inseparable from the
blood as those in the veins. The blood and spirits
comprise a single fluid (as whey and cream in milk,
or heat in hot water) with which the arteries are
filled, and for the distributing of which from the
heart the arteries exist. This is nothing else than
blood.

If this blood is drawn from the heart into the
arteries by their diastole it follows that the arteries
in their distention are filled with blood, and not
with air, as previously discussed. If they are said
also to be filled from the surrounding atmosphere,

“Harvey was philosophically interested in the ideas about the
origin and “perfection” of blood. Not being able to find “spirits”
anywhere, he is apparently trying to show that arteries as well as veins
contain the same fundamental fluid, blood,—and that there is no
“vital” difference between arterial or venous blood. See next para-
graph. The chemical difference between arterial and venous blood was
demonstrated in 1668 by John Mayow (1643-1679), but due to Stahl’s


phlogiston theory, his ideas were neglected until they developed
through Lavoisier and Magnus, note 2.


[12]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


how and when do they take in blood from the heart?
During systole is impossible: the arteries would
have to fill while contracted, or to fill and not be-
come distended. During diastole is improbable:
they would then receive for two contrary purposes
both blood and air, and heat and cold.

Further, when it is stated that the diastole of
the heart and arteries is simultaneous, and the
systole likewise, there is another inconsistency.
How can two bodies being connected together and
being distended at the same time draw anything
one from the other? Or being contracted simul-
taneously receive anything one from the other?
Moreover, it seems impossible that one body may
thus draw another body to itself in order to become
distended, since distention is passive, unless return
is made to a natural state, like a sponge previously
compressed by external force. It is hard to imagine
anything like this in the arteries.

The arteries distend because they are filled like
bladders or pouches and they are not filled because
they expand like a bellows, as I have easily and
clearly shown, and proved, I think, ere this. How-
ever, in Galen’s book, Quod sang. cont. in Arter.,
there is an experiment to show the opposite: an
artery is exposed and cut longitudinally, and a reed
or hollow tube is inserted through the opening, so
the wound is closed and the blood not driven out.
“As long as it stays thus,” he says, “the whole
artery will pulsate, but if you tie a thread around


[13]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


the artery firmly pressing its tunics against the
tube you will see the artery does not beat as fully
beyond the noose.” I have neither made this experi-
ment of Galen’s, nor do I believe it can be done
easily in the living body because of the excessive
loss of blood from the artery. I doubt that the
tube would close up the wound without a ligature,
and that blood would not burst out between the
tube and the vessel. Yet Galen seems to prove’ by
this experiment both that the pulsating power
passes from the heart through the walls of the ar-
teries, and that the arteries while dilating are filled
by this pulsating power since they dilate like a
bellows and do not distend because they are filled
like a leather bottle.

The contrary, however, is apparent in arteriotomy
and wounds, the blood leaping from the artery
rushes out with force, first farther, then nearer,
alternately in spurts, the spurt being always during
the distention of the artery, never during its con-
tracture. From this it is obvious that the artery
is distended by the impulse of blood, for it is im-
possible for it per se to throw the blood with such
force while dilating,—1t should rather be drawing
air into itself through the wound, according to the
common ideas on the functions of the arteries.


5 A little unfair to Galen (131-201 A.D.). Not only was the experi-
ment not tried, but unwarranted conclusions are unjustly ascribed to
him. This simile of the bellows and leather bottle is frequently used by
Harvey.


[14]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


We should not let the thickness of the arterial
walls mislead us into believing that the pulsating
power moves along them from the heart.° In some
animals the arteries do not differ from the veins,
and in the distant parts of the body where the ar-
teries are finely divided, as in the brain and hand,
no-one can tell arteries from veins by their walls,
for the tunics are the same in both. In an aneurysm
arising from an injured or eroded artery, the pulse
is just the same as in the other arteries, but it has no
arterial tunic. The renowned Riolan supports me
in this in his 7th Book.

It is not to be supposed that ehe function of the
pulse is the same as that of respiration because the
respiration is made more frequent and powerful,
as Galen says, by the same causes as running, bath-
ing or any other heating agent. Not only is ex-
perience opposed to this (though Galen strives to
get around it), when by immoderate gorging the
pulse becomes great and the respiration less, but in
children the pulse is rapid when respiration is slow.
Likewise in fear, trouble, or worry, in many fevers,
of course, the pulse is very fast, the respiration
slower than usual.

6 As in a peristaltic wave. The elasticity of blood-vessel walls,
depending on their elastic fibers and smooth muscle tunics, is now
recognized as a factor in maintaining blood pressure. Harvey demon-
strated that the pulsation in the arteries is due to their sudden disten-
tion by blood forced out of the heart during its contraction. Andreas
Caesalpinus (1519-1603) argued this point in his Quaestiones Peri-


pateticae (Lib. V, Quaest. 4) in 1571, but without apparently impressing
any of the anatomical or medical i investigators of his or the next century,


[15]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


These and other similar inconveniences beset the
traditional opinions about the pulse and the func-
tions of the arteries. Those maintained on the func-
tion and beat of the heart are perhaps no less in-
volved in many tangled difficulties. The heart is
commonly said to be the source and factory of the
vital spirits, from which life is given to the different
portions of the body, yet that the right ventricle
makes spirits is denied, —it merely gives nourishment
to the lungs. So it is said that the right ventricle of
the heart is lacking in fishes (indeed in all animals
in which there are no lungs), and that the right
ventricle exists for the sake of the lungs.

1. The structure of both ventricles is practically
the same. There is the same fabric of fibers, braces,
valves, vessels, auricles, and both on section are
filled with similar dark colored and coagulated
blood. Why, then, should we imagine their func-
tions to be so different when the action, movement,
and beat of both are the same? The three tricuspid
valves at the entrance to the right ventricle are a
hindrance to the return of blood into the vena cava.
The three semilunar valves at the opening of the
pulmonary artery are placed to prevent back flow
of blood. Why, then, when there are similar struc-
tures in the left ventricle, should we deny them a
similar purpose, of hindering at one place the
escape, at the other the reflux of the blood?

2. When the size, shape, and position of these
structures are almost the same in the left ventricle


[16]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


as in the right, why say they are for the purpose of
impeding the escape and reflux of spirits in the left
ventricle but of blood in the right? The same ar-
rangement cannot be suited to hinder in a similar
way blood as well as spirits.

3. When the openings and vessels mutually cor-
respond in size, as is clear in the pulmonary artery
and pulmonary vein,’ why should one have a par-
ticular function, viz., of nourishing the lungs, but
the other a general function?

4. How is it possible (as Realdus Columbus
notes) that so much blood is needed for the nourish-
ment of the lungs, with the pulmonary artery lead-
ing to them exceeding in size both iliac veins?

5. Again I ask, when the lungs are so near, the
blood vessel to them of such size, and themselves in
continual motion, what is the object of the beat
of the right ventricle? And why did Nature have
to add this other ventricle to the heart for the sake
of nourishing the lungs?

It is said that the left ventricle draws material
for forming spirits, namely air and blood, from


7 These terms in the Latin are confusing. The pulmonary artery
was called vena arteriosa, “the vein similar to an artery.” A “vein,”
because it carried “natural spirits” to nourish the lung, but its structure |
was recognized to be like that of the aorta, or great artery. The
pulmonary vein was called arteria venosa, “the artery similar to a
vein.” An “artery” because it carried “vital spirits” (and many other
things, as Harvey shows, in opposite directions!), but its structure was
admittedly venous. It is not always easy to keep these terms straight.
Even Dr. Robert Willis, whose splendid translation of Harvey for the
Sydenham Society (1847) is the standard English version, slipped.


[17]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


the lungs and right cavity of the heart. Likewise it
sends spiritous blood into the aorta. From this it
separates waste-vapors which are released to the
lung by the pulmonary artery. From the lung
spirits are obtained for the aorta. How is this separa-
tion made? How do spirits and waste-vapors pass
here and there without mixture or confusion? If
the mitral valves® do not stop the passage of waste
vapor to the lungs, how do they stop the escape of
air? How do the semilunars prevent the return of
spirits from the aorta following cardiac diastole?
Above all, how can it be said that the pulmonary
vein distributes the spiritous blood from the left
ventricle to the lungs without hindrance from the
mitral valves, having asserted that air enters the
left ventricle from the lungs by this same vessel
and is prevented from going back to the lungs by
these same mitrals? Good God! How do the mitral
valves prevent escape of air and not of blood?


8 These are referred to as tricuspides mitrales, and later in this same
paragraph simply as tricuspides. The tricuspids and mitral valves are
described in Chapter XVII, but not specifically differentiated by name.
The specific terminology became established within the next century.
Thus William Cheselden (1688-1752), in his Anatomy of the Human.
Body, 1713, says, “Over the entrance of the auricles in each ventricle,
are placed valves to hinder a return of blood when the heart contracts.
Those in the right ventricle are named Tricuspides, those in the left
Mitrales.” Harvey was not the first to use the term “mitral.” Ve-
salius (1514-1564) was apparently the first to compare the left auriculo-
ventricular valves to an episcopal miter. The best publication on
the heart after Harvey’s is Richard Lower's (1631-1690) Tractatus de


Corde (1669). In this he specifically and consistently refers to the
“mitral valves.”


[18]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


Further, if the pulmonary artery, a large vessel,
with heavy arterial walls, be destined for only the
single particular purpose of nourishing the lungs,
why should the pulmonary vein, scarcely of the
same size, with soft flabby venous walls, be supposed
to have three or four different uses? It is desired
that air pass through this vessel from the lungs to
the left ventricle, likewise that waste vapors escape
by the same vessel from the heart to the lungs, and
that some of the spiritous blood from the heart be
distributed by it to keep the lungs alive.

To desire that waste vapors from the heart and
air to the heart be transmitted by this same conduit
is opposed to Nature which nowhere has made but
a single vessel or way for such contrary movements
and purposes.

If waste vapors and air come and go by this pas-
sage, as they do in the pulmonary bronchi, why do
we find neither air nor sooty vapors when we cut
open the pulmonary vein? Why do we always find
the pulmonary vein full of thick blood, never of air,
while in the lungs we note plenty of air?

If one repeats Galen’s experiment of opening the
trachea of a living dog, forcing air into the lungs by
a bellows, and then firmly tying off the trachea, a
great abundance of air even out to the pleurae will
be found in the lungs on opening the chest. No air,
however, will be found in the pulmonary vein or in
the left ventricle of the heart. It certainly should
be if the heart drew in air from the lungs, or if the


[19]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


lungs transmitted air to the heart, in the living dog.
On inflating the lungs of a cadaver in an anatomical
demonstration, who doubts the air could be seen
going this way if such a passage exists? This func-
tion of the pulmonary vein, the transmission of air
from the lungs to the heart, is considered so signifi-
cant that Hieronymus Fabricius of Aquapendente
insists the lungs were made for the sake of this
vessel? and that it is their most important structure.

I would like to know why the pulmonary vein is
built like a vein if it is destined for the transmission
of air.

It would be more natural for it to be made of
ringed tubes such as those of the bronchi, in order
always to be open and not liable to collapse. Thus
it might remain free from blood with no liquid to
hinder the passage of air, as may sometimes be
noted in the lungs when they labor under more or
less phlegm in the bronchi, when breathing is sibi-
lant or strepitous.

Even less tolerable is the opinion which supposes
two materials, air and blood, necessary for the forma-
tion of vital spirits. The blood is supposed to ooze
through tiny pores in the septum of the heart! from


°? Not quite as respectful of Fabricius (1537-1619) as one would
expect in a devoted pupil. For a translation of the passage referred
to (De Respiratione, 1603), see M. Foster's famous History of Physiology
Cambridge, 1901, p. 38.

10 Could these famous “pores in the septum” of Galenical physi-
ology, imperfectly pictured by Leonardo, conservatively discussed by
Vesalius, and scorned by Harvey, really have been what we now call


[20]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


the right to the left ventricle, while the air is drawn
from the lungs by the large pulmonary vein. Accord-
ing to this many little openings exist in the septum
of the heart suited to the passage of blood. But,
damn it, no such pores exist, nor can they be demon-
strated! |

The septum of the heart is of denser and more
compact material than any part of the body except
bones and tendons. Even so, supposing the pores
are there, how could the left ventricle draw blood
from the right when both ventricles contract and
dilate at the same time? Why not rather believe
that the right ventricle draws spirits through these
pores from the left instead of the left ventricle
drawing blood from the right? It is surely miracu-
lous and incongruous that plenty of blood should
be drawn through obscure invisible openings in the
same time as air through wide open ones. Why
require invisible pores and obscure uncertain chan-
nels to get the blood to the left ventricle when there
is such a wide open passage through the pulmonary
vein? It is certainly remarkable that a way had to
be made, or rather invented, through the dense,
the “Thebesian vessels,” noted by R. Vieussens (Nouvelle decouvertes
sur le coeur, Toulouse, 1706) and properly described by A. C. Thebesius
(Dissertatio medica de circulo sanguinis in corde, Lug. Bat., 1708)?
Anatomically, the orifices of the Thebesian canals with portions of the
vessels arising from them may be seen with the unaided eye in the
endocardium, along with the openings of intertrabecular spaces with
which they may be confused (Grant, R. T. and Viko, L. E., Heart,


15: 103, 1929). The Galenical error may indeed have been one of
interpretation and not of observation.


[ 21]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


tough, and compact septum of the heart, instead
of through the open pulmonary vein, and the soft
spongy mass of the lungs. If the blood can per-
meate the material of the septum, or be imbibed
from the ventricles, what is the use of the coronary
arteries and veins, branches of which go to the sep-
tum itself, for its nourishment?" Specially noteworthy
is this: if in the fetus, where everything is softer
and more lax, Nature had to bring the blood to the
left ventricle by the foramen ovale, from the vena
cava through the pulmonary vein, how is it likely
in the adult to pass so plentiously and with no effort
through the cardiac septum, now denser with age?

On the authority of Galen (de loc. affect. lib. 6,
cap. 7), and the experience of Hollerius, Andreas
Laurentius (lid. 9, cap. II, questione I2) asserts
that the serum and pus in empyema, absorbed
from the thoracic cavity into the pulmonary vein,
can be eliminated through the left ventricle of the
heart and the arteries in the urine and feces. As
evidence he cites a certain case of melancholy, who
suffering from fainting spells, was relieved from
the seizures by voiding some turbid and fetid urine.
Worn out by the disease he finally died. On opening


4 Were these “branches” Harvey’s interpretation of the Thebesian
vessels? See note 10 for references. The Thebesian vessels communi-
cate with the coronary veins and arteries. F.H. Pratt (Amer. J.
Physiol., 1: 86, 1898) showed that these vessels may adequately nourish
a perfused heart for a long time, and J. T. Wearn (J. Exper. Med.,


47:293, 1928) confirmed this even in the event of gradual closure of
the coronary orifices.


[22]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


the body none of the material he excreted was found
in the bladder or kidneys. In the left heart, how-
ever, and in the thoracic cavity, there was much of
it, and Laurentius boasts he predicted the cause of
the symptoms. I wonder, since he predicted that
such conglomerate material was evacuated as in-
dicated,!'? why he could not, or would not discern
that the blood is naturally carried from the lungs
to the left ventricle in the same way.

From these and many other considerations it is
clear that what has so far been said on the movement
and function of the heart and arteries must seem
obscure, inconsistent, or impossible to the thought-
ful student. It will therefore be proper to investigate
the matter more closely, to study the movement of
the heart and arteries not only in man but in all
animals possessing a heart, and to search out and
find the truth by frequent experiments in living
animals, and by constant observation.


12 How much of this is sarcasm against the pathology? Jacob
Hollerius lived between 1498 and 1562. Andreas Laurentius (1550-
1609) migrated from Montpellier to Paris, and although physician to
Henry IV, was considered an ignorant man.


[23]


CHAPTER I


The Author's Reasons for Writing


> O< Gate


HEN I first tried animal experimentation for
the purpose of discovering the motions and
functions of the heart by actual inspection and not
by other people’s books, I found it so truly difficult
that I almost believed with Fracastorius,! that the
motion of the heart was to be understood by God
alone. I could not really tell when systole or diastole
took place, or when and where dilatation or constric-
tion occurred, because of the quickness of the move-
ment. In many animals this takes place in the
twinkling of an eye, like a flash of lightning. Systole
seemed at one time here, diastole there, then all
reversed, varied and confused. So I could reach no
decision, neither about what I might conclude myself
nor believe from others. I did not marvel that
Andreas Laurentius wrote that the motion of the
heart was as perplexing as the flux and reflux of
Euripus? was to Aristotle.
1 De sympathia et antipathia, Cap. 15, Opera Omnia, Venice, 1555
p. 95. H. Fracastorius (1484-1553) was the author of the famous
poem which gave the name to the disease syphilis, Lid. Tres Syphilidis,
sive Morbi Gallici (1530).
2 A narrow channel 113 miles long, between Euboea and Boeotia,


opposite Chalcis, renowned in antiquity for the violent flow and reflow
of its tide.


[25]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


Finally, using greater care every day, with very
frequent experimentation, observing a variety of
animals, and comparing many observations, I felt
my way out of this labyrinth, and gained accurate
information, which I desired, of the motions and
functions of the heart and arteries. From that time
I have not hesitated to declare my thoughts on this
matter, not only in private to friends, but even publicly
in my anatomical lectures, as in the ancient Academy.

As usual, these views pleased some, not others.
Some blamed me of wrong in daring to depart from
the precepts and faith of all anatomists. Others
wanted more information on these new ideas which
were thought worthy of interest and of possible value.
Finally I have consented to the requests of friends,
that anyone may be made acquainted with my work.
I have also been moved by the envy of some who, re-
ceiving my words blindly and with no understanding,
have tried to ridicule me in public. So I have decided
to publish my findings so all may form an opinion of
me and of the work itself. I am pleased to do this
since Hieronymus Fabricius of Aquapendente, al.
though he has correctly and in a scholarly manner
described almost all the parts of animals, has not
discussed the heart.

Finally, if my work may be helpful to this phase of
literature, it may perhaps be granted that I have not
lived idly. As the old man in the comedy says:


£ Terrence, in Adelphi, Act V, Sc. IV, 1 (Demea). Harvey quotes
the Latin quite correctly. My unsatisfactory translation of the four


[26]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


None age so perfectly that subtle change

With time or custom seems not new nor strange;
What’s once believed is now denied, and what
Was honored once now suffers in exchange.


So may it now be regarding the motion of the heart.
The path is open for others, starting here, to progress
more fortunately and more correctly under a more
propitious genius.


lines may be excused on the plea that it places the context in the ap-
propriately tolerant and resigned verse-form made famous by Edward
FitzGerald. Dr. Willis, in his 1847 Harvey, translates the lines in the
classical tradition:

For never yet hath any one attained

To such perfection, but that time, and place,

And use, have brought addition to his knowledge;

Or made correction, or admonished him

That he was ignorant of much which he

Had thought he knew; or led him to reject

What he had once esteemed of highest price.
George Colman’s translation is quoted by T. B. Harbottle, Dictionary
of Quotations (Classical), London and New York, 1897.


[27]


CHAPTER Il


The Motions of the Heart as Observed
in Animal Experiments


"D> 0E


N THE first place, when the chest of a living

animal is opened, and the capsule surrounding
the heart is cut away,! one may see that the heart
alternates in movement and rest. There is a time
when it moves, and a time when it is quiet.

This is more easily seen in the hearts of cold-
blooded animals, as toads, snakes, frogs, snails,
shell-fish, crustaceans, and fish. It is also more
apparent in other animals as the dog and pig, if one
carefully observes the heart as it moves more slowly
when about to die. The movements then become
slower and weaker and the pauses longer, so that it
is easy to see what the motion really is and how made.
During a pause, the heart is soft, flaccid, exhausted,
as in death.

Three significant features are to be noted in the
motion and in the period of movement:


1 The only reference to the pericardium made by Harvey. The idea
that it prevents overdistention of the heart probably never occurred
to him. For current ideas on the function of the pericardium see


J. A. Wilson and W. J. Meek, Amer. J. Physiol., 82: 34 (Sept.) 1927.
[28]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


1. The heart is lifted, and rises up to the apex,
so that it strikes the chest at that moment, and the
beat may be felt on the outside.?

2. It contracts all over, but particularly to the
sides, so that it looks narrower and longer. An
isolated eel’s heart placed on a table or in the hand
shows this well, but it may also be seen in the hearts
of fishes and of cold-blooded animals in which the
heart is conical or lengthened.

3. Grasping the heart in the hand, it feels harder
when it moves. This hardness is due to tension,
as when one grasps the fore-arm and feels its tendons
become knotty when the fingers are moved.

4. An additional point may be noted in fishes and
cold-blooded animals, as serpents and frogs. When
the heart moves it is paler in color, but when it
pauses it is of a deeper blood color. |

2 The first clear statement of the significance of the apex beat.
In the physiological analysis of the events of the cardiac cycle in an
intact subject, this is an important reference point, marking, as Harvey
noted, the moment of ventricular systole and emptying. The graphic
analysis of the cardiac cycle was especially developed by E. J. Marey
(1830-1904), La Circulation du Sang, Paris, 1881, and was made
possible by the methods of recording by kymograph initiated by Carl
Ludwig (1816-1895).

This is the first of that remarkable series of extraordinarily acute
observations on the motion of the heart and blood so simply and clearly
reported by Harvey in this book. Compare the number and quality of
these observations and the clear interpretation of their significance
as made by him, with the stumbling, vague, and incomplete ideas
on the matter as given by Servetus (1510-1553), Columbus (1516-
1559), Ruini (died before 1598), Caesalpinus (1524-1603), and others
for whom credit is claimed for discovering the circulation, and you will


agree that to Harvey alone should be given the honor of first realizing
the full truth, and of demonstrating it to the world.


[29]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


From these facts it seems Dear to me that the
motion of the heart consists of a tightening all over,
both contraction along the fibers, and constriction
everywhere. In its movement it becomes erect,
hard, and smaller. The motion is just the same as
that of muscles when contracting along their ten-
dons and fibers. The muscles in action become tense
and tough, and lose their softness in becoming hard,
while they thicken and stand out.’ The heart acts
similarly.

From these points it is reasonable to conclude that
the heart at the moment it acts, becomes constricted
all over, thicker in its walls and smaller in its ven-
tricles, in order to expel its content of blood. This
is clear from the fourth observation above in which
it was noted that the heart becomes pale when it
squeezes the blood out during contraction, but
when quiet in relaxation the deep blood red color
returns as the ventricle fills again with blood. But


3 Niels Stensen (1638-1686), the Danish anatomist who later became
a bishop of the Roman church, is usually credited with recognizing
the muscular character of the heart (De Musculis et Glandulis Observa-
tionum Specimen, 1664). This is a little unfair to Harvey, and, for that
matter, to the unknown author of the Hippocratic tract on the heart
to which Harvey refers in Chapter XVII. Stensen, as far as I can de-
termine, did little more than these in comparing the heart’s contraction
to that of a muscle, and then saying that it is nothing more than muscle.
The structural (histological) similarity between the heart and muscle
was shown in A. Leeuwenhoek’s (1632-1723) Arcana Naturae (Delft,
1695), in which Epistola 82 (page 445) gives the first clear account of
the peculiar structure of cardiac muscle, with excellent illustrations.
For an interesting account of Stensen, see Dr. W. S. Miller’s paper,
Johns Hopkins Hosp. Bull., 25: 44 (Feb.) 1914.


[30]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


no one need doubt further, for if the cavity of the
ventricle be cut into, the blood contained therein
will be forcibly squirted out when the heart is tense
with each movement or beat.

The following things take place, then, simul-
taneously: the contraction of the heart; the beat
at the apex against the chest, which may be felt
outside; the thickening of the walls; and the forcible
ejection of the blood it contains by the constriction
of the ventricles.

So the opposite of the commonly received opinion
seems true. Instead of the heart opening its ven-
. tricles and filling with blood at the moment it strikes
the chest and its beat ıs felt on the outside, the
contrary takes place so that the heart while con-
tracting empties. Therefore the motion commonly
thought the diastole of the heart is really the systole,
and the significant movement of the heart is not the
diastole but the systole. The heart does not act
in diastole but in systole for only when it contracts
is it active.

It is not to be admitted that the heart moves only
in the direction of its straight fibers. The great
Vesalius, in support of this idea, speaks of a bundle
of willow-twigs bound in a pyramid.* It is implied
that as the apex is drawn to the base, the sides


4 Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564), De Humani Corporis Fabrica,
Basle, 1543, Lib. 6, Cap. 10, p. 587. It is interesting to note how
Vesalius described fairly well the gross structures of the heart, and then
fitted them as best he could into the Galenical system.


[31]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


bulge outward, the cavities dilate, the ventricles
take the: shape of cupping glasses, and suck the
blood into them. But all the fibers constrict the
heart at the same time that they make it tense, thus
thickening the walls and substance rather than
enlarging the ventricles. As the fibers stretch from
the apex to the base of the heart, drawing the apex
toward the base, they do not tend to make the walls
bulge outwards, but rather the reverse, for all fibers
spirally arranged become straight on contraction.
This is true of all muscular fibers. When they con-
tract they shorten longitudinally and distend side-
wise as they thicken, as noted in the bellies of
muscles generally. To this may be added that the
ventricles are not constricted only by virtue of the
direction and thickening of their walls. The walls
contain solely circular fibers, but there are also
bands containing only straight fibers, which are
noted in the ventricles of larger animals and which
are called nerves by Aristotle.6 When they contract
together an excellent system is present to pull the
internal surfaces closely together, as with cords, in
order to eject the blood with greater force.

$ The inside walls of the ventricles are ridged with many projecting
bands of muscle tissue, arranged as (1) separate threads stretched
across the cavity, the moderator bands especially noted in the right
ventricle; (2) columns on the walls, the columnae carneae, which are
probably referred to here, and (3) small elevations on the walls,
papillary muscles, which are prolonged in the chordae tendineae extend-
ing to the valves. The latter probably aid in closing more exactly the


valve flaps. See R. Burton-Opitz’s Physiology, Phila. and London,
Er p. 267-270. Harvey discusses these “bands” again in Chapter


[32]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD'


Likewise, it is not true, as commonly believed,
that the heart by its own action or distention draws
blood into its ventricles. When it moves and con-
tracts it expels blood, when it relaxes and is quiet it
receives blood in the manner soon to be described.


[33 ]


CHAPTER III


The Movements of the Arteries as Seen
in Animal Experimentation


>


N CONNECTION with the movements of the

heart one may observe these facts regarding
the movements and pulses of the arteries:

1. At the instant the heart contracts, in systole,
and strikes the breast, the arteries dilate, give a
pulsation, and are distended. Also, when the right
ventricle contracts and expels its content of blood,
the pulmonary artery beats and is dilated along with
the other arteries of the body.

2. When the left ventricle stops beating or con-
tracting, the pulsations in the arteries cease, or the
contractions being weak, the pulse in the arteries is
scarcely perceptible. A similar cessation of the
pulse in the pulmonary artery occurs when the right
ventricle stops.

3. If any artery be cut or punctured, the blood
spurts forcibly from the wound when the left ven-
tricle contracts. Likewise, if the pulmonary artery
is cut, blood vigorously squirts out when the right
ventricle contracts.

In fishes, also, if the blood vessel leading from
the heart to the gills is cut open, the blood will be
seen to spurt out when the heart contracts.


[34]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


Finally, in arteriotomy, the blood is seen squirted
alternately far and near, the greater spurt coming
with the distention of the artery, at the time the
heart strikes the ribs. This is the moment the
heart contracts and is in systole, and it is by this
motion that the blood is ejected.

Contrary to the usual teaching, it is clear from
the facts, that the diastole of the arteries corresponds
to the systole of the heart, and that the arteries
are filled and distended by the blood forced into
them by the contraction of the ventricles. The
arteries are distended because they are” filled like
sacs, not because they expand like bellows. All
the arteries of the body pulsate because of the same
cause, the contraction of the left ventricle. Likewise
the pulmonary artery pulsates because of the con-
traction of the right ventricle.

To illustrate how the beat in the arteries is due to
the impulse of blood from the left ventricle, one may
blow into a glove, distending all the fingers at one
and the same time, like the pulse. The pulse cor-
responds to the tension of the heart in frequency,
rhythm, volume, and regularity. Because of the
motion of the blood it is reasonable to expect the
heart beat and the dilatation of the arteries, even the
more distant ones, to go together.! It is like inflating

1 Rather interesting that Harvey should have avoided the idea of a
transmission of the pulse-wave, especially since in Chapter 5 he dis-
cusses the transmission of the wave of contraction over the heart itself.


Did he attempt to time with the inadequate instruments of his day the
apex beat and say the pulse at the wrist? It is rather a broad conclusion


[35]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


a glove or bladder, or like in a drum or long beam,
when the stroke and beat occur together, even at
the extremities. Aristotle says (De Animal. 3, Cap.
9), “The blood of all animals throbs in the veins (ar-
teries are meant), and by the pulse is sent everywhere
at once.’ And again (De Respirat. Cap. 15), “All
veins pulsate together intermittently, because they all
depend on the heart. As it is always in intermittent
movement, so they move together, intermittently.”
It is to be noted, according to Galen (De Plac.
Hippocr. & Plat., Cap. 9), that the ancient philos-
ophers referred to the arteries as veins.

I once had a case in charge which convinced me of
this truth. This person had a large pulsating tumor,
called an aneurysm, on the right neck where the
subclavian artery descends toward the axilla. Caused


to reach, that the pulse corresponds in all particulars to the heart
beat, and it is reasonable to believe Harvey studied and pondered over
the problem for a long time.

Erasistratus noted that the pulse progresses as a wave, but this
was denied by Galen. Both Albrecht von Haller (1708-1777), Elementa
Physiologiae 1757, tom. 1, p. 447, and M.-F.-Xavier Bichat (1771
1802), agreed with Harvey that the pulse is synchronous in all the
arteries. Ernst Heinrich Weber (1795-1878) in 1827 first showed a delay
in transmission. From his observations, first printed in his Pulsum
arteriarum, Leipzig, 1827, one may calculate the velocity of the pulse-
wave to be 9.2 meters per second, and its length 3 meters. More re-
cent determinations of the velocity show it to be somewhat slower (see
W. H. Howell’s splendid Physiology, ıoth Ed., Phila., 1927, p. 527).
For an authoritative appreciation of E. H. Weber, consult P. M..
Dawson's delightful account in the William Snow Miller Festschrift,
the May 1928 issue, Vol. 25, of the Quarterly of the Phi Beta Pi Medical
Fraternity. The velocity of blood-flow, in a given vessel, an entirely
different proposition, was carefully investigated by Carl Ludwig
(1816-1895).

[36]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


by the erosion of the artery itself, it was daily getting
larger, and was distended with each pulsation by
the rush of blood from the artery. Post mortem
examination showed the relation of the parts. The
pulse in this same arm was small because the greater
part of the blood to it was intercepted by the tumor.

Wherever the motion of the blood in the arteries
is impeded, by compression, by infarction, or by
interception, there is less pulsation distally,? since
the beat of the arteries is nothing else than the
impulse of blood in these vessels.


2 It is remarkable that the clinical applications of Harvey’s work
were so long neglected. Here and later he clearly indicates how his
views may aid in diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. The practicing
physicians, however, would have none of it. Even some manuscript
notes of Wm. Cullen's (1712-1790) lectures on the Practice of Physic,
over a century later, only refer casually to the use of Dr. Harvey’s
observations on the control of hemorrhage. It may be that the practi-
cal success of Thomas Sydenham (1624-1689) as a physician focused
attention on the neat pigeon-holing scheme of his classification of
disease by symptoms (nosology), so that the applications of the new
work in anatomy and physiology to medicine were overlooked.


CHAPTER IV


The Motion of the Heart and its Auricles as
Noted in Animal Experimentation


>


N ADDITION to the motions of the heart already

considered, those of the auricles are also to be
discussed.

It has been reported by two skilled anatomists,
Caspar Bauhin (lid. 2, cap. 27) and John Riolan!
(lib. 8, cap. T), that if the motions of the heart of
a living animal are carefully watched, four move-
ments distinct in time and place are to be seen, of
which two belong to the auricles and two to the
ventricles. In spite of these authorities, there are


1 Caspar Bauhin (1560-1624) was Professor of Botany and Anatomy
in Basle. His Theatrum Anatomicum (1605) is an unoriginal but re-
liable text. John Riolan (1577-1657) was generally regarded as the
leading anatomist of his day. As Professor of Anatomy and Pharmacy,
and Dean of the Medical Faculty of the University of Paris, he was
an extremely influential conservative. On the basis of fairly reasonable
arguments, he opposed Harvey’s views on the circulation in his
Encheiridium Anatomicum (1648), and Opuscula Anatomica Nova
(1649). This was the only criticism against which Harvey deigned to
reply, in his Exercitationes duae anatomicae de circulatione sanguinis ad
Fo. Riolanum (1649). These are available in the beautiful English of
Robert Willis” 1847 translations of Harvey's works for the Sydenham
Society. For an admirable account of Riolan's views, see J. C. Dalton's
scholarly Doctrines of the Circulation, Phila., 1884. Riolan's book, to
which Harvey probably refers here, is his Anthropographia (1618).


[38 ]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


not four movements distinct in time, but only in
space. The two auricles beat together and so do the
two ventricles, so that there are four distinct move-
ments in space, but only two in time. This happens
as follows.

Two sets of movements occur together, one of the
auricles, another of the ventricles. These are not
simultaneous, but that of auricles precedes that
of the rest of the heart. The movement seems to
start in the auricles and to spread to the ventricles.?
When the heart slows in approaching death, or in
fishes and cold-blooded animals, there is a pause
between the two movements, and the heart seems
to respond to the motion as if aroused, sometimes
quickly, sometimes slowly. At length, nearly dead,
it fails to respond to the motion, and it stirs so ob-
scurely that the only signs of motion are pulsations
of the auricle, as if just lightly nodding the head.
The heart thus stops beating before the auricles,
and the latter may be said to outlive it. The left
ventricle stops beating first of all, then its auricle,
then the right ventricle, and, finally, as indeed
Galen noted, when all the rest is quiet and dead, the
right auricle still pulsates. Life, therefore, seems
to remain longest in the right auricle. While the
heart gradually dies, it sometimes responds with a


2 The first clear statement on the problem of the origin and conduc-
tion of the heart beat. For a recent comprehensive discussion of this
question see Eyster, J. A. E. and Meek, W. J., Physiological Reviews,
1: 1 (1921).


[391


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


single weak and feeble beat to two or three pulsa-
tions of the auricles.?

With the auricles still pulsating after the heart
has stopped, it is noteworthy that a finger placed
on the ventricles perceives the separate pulsations
of the auricles for the same reason as the beat of the


3 The first observation of heart-block. The great Haller (1708-
1777) later postulated a peristaltic muscular wave from the vena cava
to the aorta over the heart, but Moritz Schiff (1823-1896), by noting
again what Harvey had observed in the dying heart, showed this con-
cept untenable. The term “heart-block” was introduced by W. H.
Gaskell (1847-1914), in his masterful analysis of the heart beat (Phil.
Tr., Lond., 173: 933, 1882) which soundly established the “myogenic”
theory of the movement. In this treatise “it is shown that the motor
influences from the nerve ganglia in the sinus venosus influence the
rhythm (rate and force) of the heart, but do not originate its move-
ments or beat, which are due to the automatic rhythmic contractile
power of the heart muscle itself and to the peristaltic contraction wave
which proceeds from sinus venosus to bulbus arteriosus and from
muscle fiber to muscle fiber” (Garrison). Much of this may be deduced
from Harvey’s observations in this Chapter. Gaskell’s studies were
extended by T. W. Engelmann (1843-1909). They gave a new inter-
pretation to the classical experiments of H. Stannius (1808-1883) who
showed (Müller’s Arch., 1852, 163) that a ligature around the sino-
auricular junction would stop the heart, while a second ligature around
the auricular-ventricular groove would be followed by slow ventricular
beats. W. His, Jr., in 1893, found a thin strip of muscle between the
auricles and ventricles, which according to Gaskell’s ideas, serves
as the conducting medium for the contractile impulses between auricles
and ventricles. The clinical significance of heart-block or Stokes-Adams
disease was first emphasized by R. Adams (1791-1875) in the Dublin
Hospital Reports 4: 396, 1827, and by W. Stokes (1804-1878) in the
Dublin Quarterly Journal of Medical Science, 2: 73, 1846. The clinical
study of these phenomena has been greatly facilitated by electrocardio-
graphic methods developed chiefly by W. Einthoven (K. Acad. Amster.
Proc. Sect. Sc., 6: 107, 1903). For clinical discussion see Sir Thomas
Lewis’ The Mechanism and Graphic Registration of the Heart Beat, 3rd
Ed., London, 1925.


[40]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


ventricles in the arteries is felt, because, as was
said before, of the distention from the impact of
blood. At this same time when the auricles alone
are beating, if you cut off the tip of the heart with a
scissors, you will see blood gush out at each beat of
the auricles. This shows how blood enters the
ventricles, not by the suction or dilatation of the
ventricles, but by the beat of the auricles.

Note that when I speak of the pulsations of the
auricles or of the heart, I mean contractions. First
the auricles contract, then afterwards the heart
itself, When the auricles contract they become
pale, especially when they hold little blood (for they
are filled as reservoirs, the blood freely pressing
toward them through the veins).4 This whiteness
is most apparent near their edges when they con-
tract.

In fishes, frogs and other animals having a

4 The first intimation of the existence of venous pressure. A more
literal translation would read “freely tending by the compressing
motion of the veins.” While the veins are not now considered to exert
much elastic pressure, it is taught that muscular activity exerts pres-
sure on the veins. Harvey discusses the functions of the venous valves
in Chapter 13. There is little emphasis in current physiological texts
on auricular contraction filling the ventricles, although careful investi-
gators estimate that between 18 and 60 per cent of the blood content
of the ventricles is forced in by auricular contraction (Wiggers, C. J.,
The Circulation in Health and Disease, Phila., 2nd Ed., 1923.) The
current opinion is that venous pressure largely determines the diastolic
filling. But W. Hamilton gives evidence that little or no blood flows
to the heart in diastole, while an amount nearly equal to the systolic
discharge enters the auricles during ventricular systole (Amer. J.


Physiol., 91: 712, 1930). For a review of venous pressure see J. Eyster,
Physiol. Rev., 6: 281, 1926.


[41]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


single ventricle in the heart, at the base of which
the auricle is swollen like a bladder with blood,
you may see this bladder contract first, plainly
followed afterwards by the contraction of the rest
of the heart.

It is only fair to report what I have observed
to the contrary. The heart of an eel, of certain
fishes, and even of other animals, may beat without
the auricles. Even if it is cut in pieces, the separate
parts may be seen to contract and relax.’ So even
after auricular movement has stopped, the body
of the heart may beat and pulsate. But may not this
be characteristic of those animals more tenacious
of life, whose basic humor is more glutinous or
sluggish, and not easily dissipated? The same thing
is noted in the flesh of eels, which continues to
wriggle even after skinning and slicing in pieces.

In an experiment one time on a pigeon, after
the heart had stopped, and even after the auricles
were motionless for some time, I placed my finger,
warm and kept wet with saliva, upon the heart.
By this warm application it recovered life and
strength, the auricles and ventricles beat, alter-
nately contracting and relaxing, apparently recalled
from death.®


$ An astonishingly brief significant observation from which may
be deduced the three fundamental and characteristic properties of
cardiac muscle: automaticity, contractility, and rhythmicity.

ê The first recorded “perfusion” of an isolated heart, again demon-
strating the basic properties of cardiac muscle. Only an Englishman
could append at that time the last phrase of this paragraph without


[42]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


Besides this I have sometimes noticed, after the
heart and even the right auricle had completely
stopped beating, that a slight motion or palpitation
remained in the blood in the right auricle, as long
as it seemed imbued with heat and spirit.

Something similar is very apparent in embryology,
as may be seen during the first seven days of the
hatching of a hen’s egg. First, before anything else,
a drop of blood appears, which throbs, as Aristotle
had noted. From this, with increasing growth and
formation of the chick, the auricles of the heart are
made, in the pulsations of which there is continual
evidence of life. After a few more days, when the
body is outlined, the rest of the heart is made, but for
some time it remains pale and bloodless like the rest
of the body, and does not throb. I have seen a
similar condition in a human embryo about the
beginning of the third month, the ventricles being
pale and bloodless, but the auricles containing some
purple blood. In the egg, when the fetus forms and
develops, the heart grows also and acquires ventricles,
with which blood is received and transmitted.

Whoever examines this matter closely will not
say that the heart entirely is the first to live and the
last to die, but rather the auricles (or that part
corresponding to the auricles in serpents, fishes,
and such animals) which live before the rest of the
heart, and die after it.
thought of its theological consequences. Galileo was forced to renounce


his scientific ideas before a Papal tribunal in 1632, and in Germany
the horrible Thirty Years War was in full swing.


[43]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


I should say rather that the blood itself or spirit
has in it an obscure throbbing which it seems to hold
after death, and whether we may say that life begins
with a cardiac palpitation is doubtful.’ The seminal
fluids or prolific spirit, of all animals, as Aristotle
noted, goes forth with a bound, as if alive. Nature
in death turns back, retracing her steps, as Aristotle
says (De Motu Animal., Cap. 8), and comes again
to the place from which she started. In the genera-
tion of life, what is not animal develops to animal,
a non-entity to an entity, and by retrogression in
corruption returns from an entity to a non-entity.
So in animals what is made last dies first, what first
dies last.

I have observed that there is a heart in almost
all animals, not only in the larger ones with blood,
as Aristotle claims, but in the smaller bloodless
ones also, as snails, slugs, crabs, shrimps, and many


7 One must admire the intellectual courage of Harvey in this sort
of speculation. Aristotelian in the philosophical aspects of his work,
Harvey is not here specifically attempting to locate the anatomical
seat of the soul, although that is implied. His demonstration really
stopped this vain search (H. M. Brown, Annals of Medical History,
EA

Note through here not only the remarkable embryological observa-
tions (later developed in his Exercitationes de generatione animalium,
1651), but also the extraordinary remarks on invertebrate anatomy and
physiology. These are the first of any significance. since Aristotle, of
whom surely Harvey was the first real disciple. Both P. Belon (1517-
1564) and G. Rondelet (1509-1566) —Rabelais” “Rondibilis,” wrote
valuable texts on fishes, 1551 and 1554, but they did not discuss lower
forms. In the last paragraph of this Chapter, one may sense the wonder
and awe Harvey must have felt as he pondered on what he saw.


[44]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


others. Even in wasps, hornets, and flies, have I
seen with a lens a beating heart at the upper part of
what is called a tail, and I have shown it living to
others.

In these bloodless animals the heart beats slowly,
contracting sluggishly as in moribund higher animals.
This is easily seen in the snail, where the heart lies
at the bottom of that opening on the right side
which seems to open and close as saliva is expelled.
The incision should be made on the top of the body
near the part corresponding to the liver.

It is to be noted that in winter and cold seasons,
the bloodless animals, as the snail, show no pulsa-
tion. They seem to live like vegetables or those
things called plant-animals.

It is also to be noted that an auricle or its analogue
is present in all animals possessing a heart, and
where there is a double ventricle, there are always
two auricles, but not the reverse. But turning
to the development of the chick in the egg, there
is, as 1 said, only a vesicle or auricle, at first, or a
throbbing drop of blood, which, as growth pro-
gresses, becomes the heart. So in some animals,
not reaching the highest organization, as bees,
wasps, snails, shrimps, and craw-fish, there is a
throbbing vesicle or an alternately red and white
point, as the mainstay of life.

There is a small squid, called a shrimp in English,
een gerneel in Flemish, which is caught at sea and
in the Thames, whose entire body is transparent.


[45]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


Placing this creature in water, I have often shown
some of my friends the movements of its heart with
great clearness. Since the outside of the body did
not block our view, we could observe the least
tremor of the heart, as through a window.

I have seen the first rudiments of the chick as a
little cloud in the hen’s egg about the fourth or fifth
day of incubation, with the shell removed and the
egg placed in clear warm water. In the center of
the cloud there was a throbbing point of blood, so
trifling that it disappeared on contraction and was
lost to sight, while on relaxation it appeared again
like a red pin-point. Throbbing between existence
and non-existence, now visible, now invisible, it was
the beginning of life.


[46]


CHAPTER V


The Actions and Functions of the Heart


>


ROM these and other observations I am con-

vinced that the motion of the heart is as follows:

First, the auricle contracts, and this forces the
abundant blood it contains as the cistern and reser-
voir of the veins, into the ventricle. This being
filled, the heart raises itself, makes its fibers tense,
contracts, and beats. By this beat it at once ejects
into the arteries the blood received from the auricle;
the right ventricle sending its blood to the lungs
through the vessel called the vena arteriosa, but
which in structure and function is an artery; the
left ventricle sending its blood to the aorta, and to
the rest of the body through the arteries.

These two motions, one of the auricles, the other
of the ventricles, are consecutive, with a rhythm
between them,! so that only one movement may


1 The auricular-ventricular rhythm has become an important sub-
ject for investigation and discussion since the introduction of electro-
cardiographic studies by means of W. Einthoven’s (1860-1927) string
galvanometer. See F. H. Garrison's History of Medicine, 4th Ed.,
Phila., 1929, p. 687.

Note the excellent description of the chain of events in the act of
swallowing. Here is an example of that straight-forward mechanistic
description of functional activity in which Harvey so closely approxi-


[471


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


be apparent, especially in warm-blooded animals
where it happens rapidly. This is like a piece of
machinery in which one wheel moves another,
though all seem to move simultaneously, or like
the mechanism in fire-arms, where touching the
trigger brings down the flint, lights a spark, which
falls in the powder and explodes it, firing the ball,
which reaches the mark. All these events because
of their quickness seem to occur simultaneously
in the twinking of an eye. Likewise in swallowing:
lifting the tongue and pressing the mouth forces the
food to the throat, the larynx and the epiglottis
are closed by their own muscles, the gullet rises and
opens its mouth like a sac, and receiving the bolus
forces it down by its transverse and longitudinal
muscles. All these diverse movements, carried out
by different organs, are done so smoothly and
regularly that they seem to be a single movement
` and action, which we call swallowing.

So it happens in the movement and action of the
heart, which is sort of a deglutition or transference
of blood from the veins to the arteries. If anyone
with these points in mind will carefully watch the
cardiac action in a living animal, he will see, not only
what I have said, that the heart contracts in a con-
tinuous movement with the auricles, but also a


mates the current attitude. The classical descriptions of deglutition
are by F. Magendie (1783-1855), Précis élément. de Physiol., 2: 58,
1817, and by H. Kronecker (1839-1914) and S. J. Meltzer (1851-1921),
Arch. f. Physiol., 1880, 299 and 446.


[48 ]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


peculiar side-wise turning toward the right ventricle
as if it twists slightly on itself in performing its work.
It is easy to see when a horse drinks that water is
drawn inand passed to the stomach with each gulp,
the movement making a sound, and the pulsation
may be heard and felt. So it is with each move-
ment of the heart when a portion of the blood
is transferred from the veins to the arteries, that a
pulse is made which may be heard in the chest.?

The motion of the heart, then, is of this general
type. The chief function of the heart is the trans-
mission and pumping of the blood through the arteries
to the extremities of the body. Thus the pulse which
we feel in the arteries is nothing else than the impact
of blood from the heart.

Whether or not the heart, besides transferring,
distributing and giving motion to the blood, adds
anything else to it, as heat, spirits, or perfection, may
be discussed later and determined on other grounds.
It is enough now to have shown that during the heart
beat the blood is transferred through the ventricles
from the veins to the arteries, and distributed to
the whole body.

This much may be generally admitted on the basis
of the structure of the heart and the position and


2 One of the first observations of heart-sounds. An interpretation
of their significance together with clinical application was made by
R.-T.-H. Laënnec (1781-1826) in his epochal Traité de l'auscultation
médiate (1819). See W. H. Howell's Physiology, 11th Ed., Phila.,
1930, p. 561. For a history of knowledge of heart sounds, Garrison
refers to G. Joseph, Janus, 2: 1, 345, 565, 1853.


[ 49 ]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


action ofits valves. But contradictory and incoherent
statements are made about the matter by some who
stumble around in the dark, saying much on con-
jecture only, as has been pointed out before.

The chief cause of perplexity and error in this
matter seems to me to be the close connection be-
tween the heart and lungs in man. When the so-
called venous artery, and arterial vein, were both
seen to disappear into the lungs, it was very puzzling
to determine how the right ventricle might distribute
blood to the body or the left draw blood from the
vena cava. This was implied by Galen in contro-
verting Erasistratus on the origin and function of
the veins, and the formation of blood (De Placit.
Hippocrat. ES Plat., cap. 6), “You will reply that this
is true, that the blood is made in the liver, and then
carried to the heart to receive its correct form and full
perfection. This is not unreasonable, no great or perfect
work is finished at one effort, nor can it get its whole
polish from one tool. But if this is really so, show us
another vessel which takes the perfect blood from the
heart, and distributes it, as the arteries do the spirits, to
the whole body.” ‘Thus Galen would not consent to a
reasonable opinion, because not seeing a way of
transit, he could not discover a vessel to spread the
blood from the heart to the whole body!

I wonder what that great and ingenious man would
have replied, had someone appeared for Erasistratus,
or for that opinion now held by us and admitted to
be reasonable by Galen himself, and had then pointed


[ 50]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


to the aorta as the vessel for distributing blood from
the heart to the rest of the body? Had he said this
transmits spirits and not blood, he would have
sufficiently answered Erasistratus, who thought the
arteries contained spirits alone. But he would have
thus contradicted himself, and basely denied. what
he had strongly argued in his writings against this
same Erasistratus, in showing by many potent reasons
and by experiment that the arteries contain blood
and not spirits.

The great man often agrees in this connection that
“all arteries arise from the aorta, and this from the heart,
all normally containing and carrying blood.” He says
further, “The three semilunar valves, placed at the
opening of the aorta, prevent the reflux of blood into the
heart. Nature would never have connected them with
such an important organ unless for some great purpose.”
If the “Prince of Physicians” admits all this, as
quoted in his very words from the book cited, I do
not see how he can deny that the aorta is the very
vessel to carry the blood, properly perfected, from
the heart to the whole body. Does he hesitate, as
all after him to the present, because he could not see
on account of the close connection between heart and
lungs, a way by which blood might go from veins to
arteries?

This matter greatly bothered the anatomists.
Always finding in dissection the pulmonary vein’


3 This is one of the few places where a slip was made by Robert
Willis, the great Sydenham Society translator of Harvey (1847). He


[51]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


and the left ventricle filled with thick clotted blood,
they were forced to say that blood oozed through the
septum of the heart from the right ventricle to the
left. Ihave already refuted this notion. A new path
is to be found and described. This done, I believe
there will be no more difficulty in agreeing with what
I suggest about the beat of the heart and arteries,
the transfer of blood from veins to arteries and its
distribution to the body through the arteries.


calls the vessel the “pulmonary artery,” and every editor of the trans-
lation has passed it by, when the context alone should raise a doubt.
The text reads arteriam venosam, the artery like unto a vein, or the
pulmonary vein.


[52]


CHAPTER VI


The Way by which the Blood Passes from
the Vena Cava to the Arteries, or from
the Right Ventricle of the Heart

to the Left


rt


INCE the close contact of the heart and lungs

in man has probably been a source of error, as I
have said, the common practice of anatomists, in
dogmatizing on the general make-up of the animal
body, from the dissections of dead human subjects
alone, is objectionable. It is like devising a general
system of politics, from the study of a single state,
or deigning to know all agriculture from an examina-
tion of a single field. It is fallacious to attempt to
draw general conclusions from one particular proposi-
tion.

If only anatomists were as familiar with the dis-
section of lower animals as with that of the human
body, all these perplexing difficulties would, in my
opinion, be cleared up.

The situation is first of all clear enough in fishes,
where there is a single ventricle in the heart, and no
lungs. The sac at the base of the heart, doubtless
corresponding to the auricle, pushes the blood into


[53]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


the heart, which plainly transmits it by a tube
analogous to an artery. This may be confirmed by
inspection, or section of the artery, the blood spurting
with each beat of the heart.

It is not hard to see the same thing in other animals
with but a single ventricle, as toads, frogs, serpents
and lizzards. They have lungs of a sort, as a voice.
I have made notes on the excellent structure of their
lungs, but they are not appropriate here. It is
obvious in opening these animals that the blood is
transferred from the veins to the arteries by the
heart beat. The way is wide open; there is no dif-
ficulty or hesitancy about it; it is the same as it would
be in man were the septum of the heart perforated or
removed, making one ventricle of the two. Were this
so, no one would doubt, I think, how blood passes
from veins to arteries.

Since there really are more animals without lungs
than with them, and also more with a single ventricle
in the heart than with two, it may be concluded that
for the majority of animals, an open way exists for
blood to pass through the cavity of the heart from
the veins to the arteries.

I have perceived further that the same thing is
very apparent in the embryos of animals possessing
lungs.

It is well known by all anatomists that the four
blood vessels belonging to the heart, the vena cava,
pulmonary artery, pulmonary vein, and aorta, are
connected differently in the fetus than in the adult.


[54]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


In the fetus a lateral anastomosis joins the vena
cava to the pulmonary vein. This is located before
the vena cava opens into the right ventricle of the
heart, or gives off the coronary vein, just above its
exit from the liver. This is a good-sized oval-shaped
hole opening a passage from the vena cava to the
pulmonary vein, so that blood may freely flow from
the one to the other, then into the left auricle of the
heart, and then to the left ventricle. In this foramen
ovale, there is a thin tough membrane, larger than
the opening, hanging like a cover from the pulmonary
vein side. In the adult this blocks the foramen, and
adhering on all sides, finally closes and obliterates it.
In the fetus, however, this membrane hangs loosely,
opening an easy way to the lungs and heart for the
blood flowing from the vena cava, but at the same
time blocking any passage back into that vein. In
the embryo, one may conclude then that blood con-
tinually passes through this foramen from the vena
cava to the pulmonary vein, and then into the left
ventricle of the heart. After making this passage,
it can not regurgitate.

Another junction is by the pulmonary artery where
it divides into two branches after leaving the right
ventricle. It is like a third trunk added to these two,
a sort of arterial canal passing obliquely toward
and perforating the aorta. Thus in dissecting a
human embryo it appears as though there were two
aortae or roots of the great artery rising from the
heart.


[55]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


This canal gradually shrinks after birth and is
finally obliterated like the umbilical vessels.

There is no membrane in this arterial canal to
impede the movement of the blood in either direction.
At the entrance of the pulmonary artery, from which
this canal extends, there are three sigmoid valves
opening outwards, so the blood flows easily from the
right ventricle into this vessel and the aorta, but
by closing tightly they prevent any back flow from
the arteries or lungs into the right ventricle. Thus
when the heart contracts in the embryo, there is
reason to believe the blood is continually propelled
through this way from the right ventricle to the aorta.

It is commonly said that these two great junctions
are for the nourishing of the lungs. This is improbable
and inconsistent, since they are closed up and
obliterated in the adult, although the lungs then,
because of their heat and motion, must be thought to
require more nourishment. It is also false to claım
that Nature had to make these passages to nourish the
lungs because the heart does not beat nor move in the
embryo. Nature feels no such need, for in the hatch-
ing egg, and in the human embryo, removed quickly
from the uterus at an autopsy, the heart beats just
as in an adult. I am not alone in often seeing these
movements, for Aristotle testifies (Lib. de Spir., cap.
3), “Being part of the constitution of the heart, the
pulse appears at its very beginning, as may be seen in
animal experiments, and in the formation of the chick.”
These passages are not only open to the time of


[56]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


birth in man, and in certain animals, but even for
many months in others, as anatomists have noted,
and for years or life in still others, as in the goose,
snipe, and many birds and small animals. This per-
haps persuaded Botallus! that he had found a new
passage for blood from the vena cava to the left
ventricle. I confess I almost thought so myself when
I first saw the condition in larger adult mice.

From this it appears that the same thing happens
in human and other embryos in which these junctions
are not closed: the heart, in its beat, forces the blood
through the wide open passages from the vena cava
to the aorta through the two ventricles. The right
ventricle, receiving blood from its auricle, propels it
through the pulmonary artery and its continuation,
. called the ductus arteriosus, to the aorta. At the
same time the left ventricle contracts and sends into
the aorta the blood, which, received from the beat of
its auricle, has come through the foramen ovale from
the vena cava.

In embryos, then, while the lungs are as inert and
motionless as though not present, Nature uses for
transmitting blood the two ventricles of the heart as
if they were one. The situation is the same in embryos


1 L. Bottallus, a French anatomist of little ability, was born about
1530. “His very imperfect description of the ductus arteriosus, which
we know now to be due to the persistence of the fifth cephalic aortic
arch on the left side, appeared in 1565. To call the structure ductus
Botalli is an anachronism, as it was in fact well known to Galen.”
(C. Singer, The Evolutuon of Anatomy, New York, 1925.) With what
skill and precision Harvey describes the fetal circulation!


[57]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


of animals with lungs, while the lungs are not used,
as in those animals themselves without lungs.

So it seems obviously true in the fetus that the
heart by its beat transfers blood from the vena cava
to the aorta by as open a passage as if in the adult,
as I have said, the two ventricles were united by
removing the septum. Since these ways for the pas-
sage of blood are so conspicuous in the majority of
animals, —indeed in all at certain times, —we must
examine another matter. Why may we not conclude
that this passage is made through the substance of
the lungs in warm-blooded adult animals as man?
Nature made these ways in the embryo at a time when
the lungs were not used, apparently because of the
lack of a passage through them. Why is it better, for
Nature always does what is best, to close completely
to the passage of blood in adolescence those open
ways which are used in the embryos of so many
animals, without opening any others for this transfer
of blood?

The situation is such that those who seek the ways
in man by which blood reaches the pulmonary vein
and left ventricle from the vena cava, will do best to
proceed by animal experimentation.? Here'the reason


_ ? Most of Harvey’s doctrine was developed from studies in compara-
tive anatomy and physiology. He was acutely aware of the value of
animal experimentation, which had already been specifically recom-
mended by Vesalius (1514-1564) and Realdus Columbus (1516-1559).
There is evidence that Harvey deplored the suffering involved in ani-
mal experimentation, and that he spoke feelingly on it. (S. Weir
Mitchell, Some Recently Discovered Letters of William Harvey, Phila.,


[58]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


may be found why Nature, in larger adult animals,
filters the blood through the lungs instead of choosing
a direct path. No other way seems possible. It may
be the larger, more perfect animals are warmer and
when full grown their greater heat is thus more
easily damped. For this reason the blood may go
through the lungs, to be cooled by the inspired air
and saved from boiling and extinction.® There may
be other reasons. To discuss and argue these points
would be to speculate on the function of the lungs.
I have made many observations on this matter, on
ventilation, and on the necessity and use of air, as
well,as on the various organs in animals concerned
in these matters. Nevertheless I shall leave these
things to be more conveniently discussed in a separate
tract lest I seem to wander too far from the propo-
sition of the motion and function of the heart, and
to confuse the question. Returning to our present
concern, I shall go on with my demonstration.


1912, p. 50.) He may have used opium preparations to give analgesia,
but there is no evidence favoring this view. It is not likely that he
performed many experiments on higher animals, except such as were
caught wounded in the King’s hunts. R. Hannah has painted such a
scene, where Harvey is demonstrating to Charles the heart of a deer
slain in the chase.

3 The innate heat was supposed to reside in the blood, and the older
theories on the heart beat and movement of the blood included the
idea that the blood boiled up in the heart, and “boiled over” into the
vessels, thus causing the heart beat and pulse. The function of respira-
tion was thus to cool the heart. It is peculiar that Harvey should have
permitted himself to utter this speculation when he so sarcastically
attacked the current ideas on respiration and the cooling of the blood
in the introduction.


[59]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


In the more perfect warm-blooded adult animals,
as man, the blood passes from the right ventricle of
the heart through the pulmonary artery to the lungs,
from there through the pulmonary vein into the left
auricle, and then into the left ventricle. First I
shall show how this may be so, and then that it is so.


[60]


CHAPTER VII


The Passage of Blood Through the Substance
of the Lungs from the Right Ventricle
of the Heart to the Pulmonary
Vein and Left Ventricle


— > O RR


HAT this may be so, and that there is nothing
to keep 1t from being so, is evident when we con-
sider how water filtering through the earth forms
springs and rivers, or when we speculate on how sweat
goes through the skin, or urine through the kidneys.
It is well known that those who use Spa waters, or
those of La Madonna near Padua, or other acid
waters which are drunk by the gallon, pass them all
off in an hour or so by the bladder. So much fluid
must tarry a while in the digestive tract, 1t must pass
through the liver (everyone agrees that the alimentary
succus goes through this organ at least twice daily),!
through the veins, the substance of the kidneys, and
through the ureters into the bladder.
I know there are those who deny that the whole
mass of blood may pass through the lungs as the
alimentary juices filter through the liver, saying 1t 1s


11 can't trace the origin of this quaint notion. Perhaps it refers
to the two chief meals of the day.


[61]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


impossible and unbelievable. They are of that class
of men, as I reply with the poet, who promptly agree
or disagree, according to their whim, fearful when
wanted, bold when there is no need.

The substance of the liver and also of the kidney
is very dense, but that of the lung is much looser, and
in comparison with the liver and kidney is spongy.*

There is no propulsive force in the liver, but in the
lung the blood is pushed along by the beat of the
right ventricle of the heart, which must distend the
vessels and pores of the lung. Again, as Galen in-
dicates (De Usu Part., cap. 10), the continual rising
and falling of the lungs in respiration must open and
close the vessels and porosities, as in a sponge or
thing of similar structure when it is compressed and
allowed to expand.’ The liver, however, is quiet,
it never seems to expand or contract.


2 This later developed into the question of an “open” or a “closed”
circulation through an organ. The microscopic structure of the in-
ternal organs, which gives the clue to their architecture and functional
mechanism, was first investigated by Marcello Malpighi (1628-1694),
the brilliant Italian scientist. In his De pulmonibus (1661) he gave
the first clear conception of the structure of the lung, and completed
Harvey’s demonstration (announced the year of his birth) by proving
the capillary anastomoses between arteries and veins. In his De
Viscerum structura (1666) he outlined the structure of the liver,
spleen, and kidney. The best modern work on the architecture of
the kidney has been done by J. Henle (1809-1885), of the liver by
F. P. Mall (1862-1917), and of the lung by W. S. Miller (1858 Je
The question of an open versus a closed circulation through an organ
seems to be settled in favor of the latter.

$ Respiration does considerably influence blood-pressure. It is
generally agreed that blood-pressure rises during inspiration and falls
during expiration. For a discussion of the factors involved, see: R.


[62]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


No one denies that all the ingested nourishment
may pass through the liver to the vena cava in man
and all large animals. If nutrition is to proceed,
nutriment must reach the veins, and there appears to
be no other way. Why not hold the same reasoning
for the passage of blood through the lungs of adults,
and believe it to be true, with Columbus, that great
anatomist, from the size and structure of the pul-
monary vessels, and because the pulmonary vein
and corresponding ventricle are always filled with
blood, which must come from the veins and by no
other route except through the lungs? He and I
consider it evident from dissections and other reasons
given previously.

Those who will agree to nothing unless supported
by authority, may learn that this truth may be con-
firmed by the words of Galen himself, that not only
may blood be transmitted from the pulmonary artery
to the pulmonary vein, then into the left ventricle,
and from there to the arteries, but that this is ac-
complished by the continual beat of the heart and
the motion of the lungs in breathing.

There are three sigmoid or semilunar valves at
the opening of the pulmonary artery, which prevent
blood forced into this pulmonary artery from flowing
back into the heart. Galen clearly explains the func-
tions of these valves in these words (De Usu Part.,
Lib. 6, cap. 10): “There is generally a mutual anastomo-


Burton-Opitz' Physiology, Phila., 1920, p. 390-393, and W.H.Howell’s
Physiology, Phila., 1930, 11th Ed., p. 666-670.


[63]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


sis or joining of the arteries and veins, and they transfer
blood and spirit equally from each other by invisible and
very small passages. If the mouth of the pulmonary
artery always stayed open and Nature had no way of
closing it when necessary or of opening it again, the
blood could not transfuse through these invisible and
delicate pores in the arteries during the contraction of
the thorax. All things are not equally attracted or ex-
pelled. Something light is more easily drawn in by the
distention of the part, and pushed out in contraction
than something heavy. Likewise anythingis more quickly
passed through a wide tube than through a narrow one.
When the thorax contracts, the pulmonary veins, strongly
compressed on all sides, quickly expel some of the sptrits
in them, and take some blood from these tiny mouths.
This could never happen if blood could flow back into
the heart through the large opening of the pulmonary
artery. Thus, its return through this great hole being
blocked, and being compressed on every side, some of it
filters into the arteries through these small pores.”
Shortly after, in the next chapter: “The more
powerfully the thorax contracts, squeezing the blood, the
more tightly do these membranes, the sigmoid valves,
close the opening, so that nothing flows back.” A little
before in the roth chapter: “Unless the valves be
present, much difficulty would follow. The blood would
follow this long course in vain, flowing in during the
distention of the lungs and filling all the vessels in it,
oulwards during the constrictions, and tide-like, as
Euripus, flow back and forth in a way not suited to the


[64]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


blood. This may not seem of much importance. Respira-
tory function, however, would suffer, and this would be
of no little significance.” Again, a little later: “Another
sertous inconvenience would follow if our Maker had
not provided these valves, the blood would move back-
wards during expirations.” So, in the 11th chapter,
he concludes: “It seems that all these valves have a
common function in preventing regurgitation, ap-
propriate to both directions, one set leading away from
the heart and preventing return by that route, the other
leading into the heart and preventing escape from it.
Nature never wished to fatigue the heart with useless
work, neither bringing anything unnecessarily to it, nor
taking anything unnecessarily from it. Thus there are
four openings, two in each ventricle, one of which leads
into the heart, the other out of it.’ A bit farther on:
“One of the blood-vessels fastened on the heart has a
simple tunic, the other leading from it has a double
tunic. (Galen is referring to the right ventricle, but
the same things apply to the left.) The same cavity
being provided for both of these, blood enters through the
former and leaves through the latter.”

Galen proposes this argument to explain the
passage of blood from the vena cava through the
right ventricle to the lungs. By merely changing
the terms, we may apply it more properly to the
transfer of blood from the veins through the heart
to the arteries. From the words of that great Prince
of Physicians, Galen, it seems clear that blood filters
through the lung from the pulmonary artery to the


[65 ]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


pulmonary vein as a result of the heart beat and
the movement of the lungs and thorax. (Consult
Hofmann’s excellent Commentary on Galen’s 6th
Book, De Usu Part., which I saw after writing this.)*
The heart, further, continually receives blood in its
ventricles, as into a cistern, and expels it. For this
reason, it has four kinds of valves, two regulating
inflow, and two outflow, so blood will not be in-
conveniently shifted back and forth like Euripus,
neither flowing back into the part from which it
should come, nor quitting that to which it should
pass, lest the heart be wearied by vain labor and
respiration be impeded. Finally, our assertion is
clearly apparent, that the blood continually flows
from the right to the left ventricle, from the vena
cava to the aorta, through the porosities of the
lung.

Since blood is constantly sent from the right
ventricle into the lungs through the pulmonary

4 Caspar Hofmann (1572-1648) was Professor of Medicine at Alt-
dorf, and well recognized as one of the leading authorities on Galen.
The book to which Harvey refers, Comment. in Galen. de usu part.,
was published at Frankfort in 1625 (H. Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin,
Jena, 1881, Vol. 2, p. 264). In 1636, Lord Arundel took his friend
Harvey with him on a diplomatic mission to Vienna regarding a
peace during the Thirty Years’ War. Harvey wrote to Hofmann, offer-
ing in a very manly way to demonstrate his doctrines, which he had
heard Hofmann opposed. See R. Willis’ translation for the Sydenham
Society, 1847, p. 595. “Tradition says that Harvey actually gave this
demonstration in public, and that it proved satisfactory to everyone


except Hofmann himself. The old man—then past the grand cli-
macteric—remained unconvinced, and as he continued to urge ob-


jections, Harvey at length threw down his knife and walked out of
the theatre” (D’Arcy Power’s William Harvey. Lond., 1897, p. 114).


[56]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


artery, and likewise constantly is drawn into the
left ventricle from the lungs, as is obvious from
what has been said and the position of the valves,
it cannot do otherwise than flow through contin-
uously. Then, as blood constantly pours into the
right ventricle of the heart, and constantly moves
out of the left, it is impossible, for the same reasons
as above, obviously reasonable, for it to do otherwise
than pass continually from the vena cava to the
aorta.

It is evident from dissection that this occurs
through wide open channels in all animals before
birth, and from Galen’s words and what has been
said previously it is equally manifest that it occurs
in adults by tiny pores and vascular openings through
the lungs. So it appears that, whereas one ventricle


5 It is interesting to note how much Harvey relies on the tradi-
tional authorities to prove his points. The only contemporary au-
thority referred to is R. Columbus (1516-1559), although M. Ser-
vetus (1509-1553), and A. Caesalpinus (1524-1603) had also described
the pulmonary circulation. The latter, indeed, had discussed the
general circulation, so naming the phenomenon, and had postulated
vasa in capillamenta resoluta, or anastomoses between arteries and
veins. Dr. J. C. Hemmeter (Johns Hopkins Hosp. Bull., 16: 165,
1905) suggests, in his excellent essay, that since both Servetus and
Caesalpinus had offended the theologians, Harvey was afraid to men-
tion them. It has been observed (Chap. IV, Note 6) that Harvey
apparently had little fear of theological consequences. In view of
Harvey’s honesty it is hard to believe that he really knew of the work
of these men. The “vascular openings” between arteries and veins
were first demonstrated in the frog’s lung by Marcello Malpighi
(1628-1694), first great histologist: De Pulmonibus Observationes Ana-
tomicae, Bologna, 1661, English translation by J. Young, Proc. Roy.
Soc. Med., 23 (Sect. Hist. Med.) 1, 1929.


[67]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


of the heart, the left, suffices for distributing blood
to the body, and drawing it from the vena cava, as
is the case in all animals lacking lungs, Nature was
compelled, when she wished to filter blood through
the lungs, to add the right ventricle, whose beat
should force blood from the vena cava through
the lungs into the left ventricle. Thus the right
ventricle may be said to be made for the sake of
transmitting blood through the lungs, not for
nourishing them. It is entirely unreasonable to
assume that the lungs need so much more abundant
nutriment, and coming directly from the heart, so
much purer and more spiritous blood than either
the very refined substance of the brain, or the very
brilliant and perfect structure of the eyes, or the
flesh of the heart itself which is adequately nourished
by the coronary artery.


[68 ]


CHAPTER VIII


Amount of Blood Passing Through the Heart
from the Veins to the Arteries, and the
Circular Motion of the Blood


AD > OX Ga


O FAR we have considered the transfer of blood

from the veins to the arteries, and the ways by
which it is transmitted and distributed by the
heart beat. There may be some who will agree with
me on these points because of the authority of Galen
or Columbus or the reasons of others. What re-
mains to be said on the quantity and source of this
transferred blood, is, even if carefully reflected
upon, so strange and undreamed of, that not only
do I fear danger to myself from the malice of a few,
but I dread lest I have all men as enemies, so much
does habit or doctrine once absorbed, driving deeply
its roots, become second nature, and so much does
reverence for antiquity influence all men. But now
the die is cast; my hope is in the love of truth and
in the integrity of intelligence.

First I seriously considered in many investiga-
tions how much blood might be lost from cutting
the arteries in animal experiments. Then I re-
flected on the symmetry and size of the vessels
entering and leaving the ventricles of the heart, for


[ 69 ]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


Nature, making nothing in vain, would not have
given these vessels such relative greatness uselessly.
Then I thought of the arrangement and structure of
the valves and the rest of the heart. On these and
other such matters I pondered often and deeply.
For a long time I turned over in my mind such
questions as, how much blood is transmitted, and
how short a time does its passage take. Not deeming
it possible for the digested food mass to furnish such
an abundance of blood, without totally draining
the veins or rupturing the arteries, unless it some-
how got back to the veins from the arteries and re-
turned to the right ventricle of the heart, I began
to think there was a sort of motion as in a circle.
This I afterwards found true, that blood is pushed
by the beat of the left ventricle and distributed
through the arteries to the whole body, and back
through the veins to the vena cava, and then re-
turned to the right auricle, just as it is sent to the lungs
through the pulmonary artery from the right ventricle
and returned from the lungs through the pulmonary
vein to the left ventricle, as previously described.
This motion may be called circular in the way
that Aristotle says air and rain follow the circular
motion of the stars." The moist earth warmed by


1 In spite of his own extraordinary discoveries, Harvey was re-
markably conservative. N. Copernicus (1473-1543), J. Kepler (1571-
1630), and G. Galilei (1564-1642) had overthrown the Ptolemical
theory of the circular motion of the stars in the heavenly spheres,
but Harvey seems never to have heard of their studies.


[70]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


the sun gives off vapors, which, rising, are condensed
to fall again moistening the earth. By this means
things grow. So also tempests and meteors originate
by a circular approach and recession of the sun.

Thus it happens in the body by the movement of
the blood, all parts are fed and warmed by the more
perfect, more spiritous, hotter, and, I might say,
more nutritive blood. But in these parts this blood
is cooled, thickened, and loses its power, so that it
returns to its source, the heart, the inner temple
of the body, to recover its virtue.

Here it regains its natural heat and fluidity, its
power and vitality, and filled with spirits, is dis-
tributed again. All this depends on the motion and
beat of the heart.

So the heart is the center of life, the sun of the
Microcosm, as the sun itself might be called the
heart of the world. The blood is moved, invigorated,
and kept from decaying by the power and pulse
of the heart. It is that intimate shrine whose func-
tion is the nourishing and warming of the whole
body, the basis and source of all life. But of these
matters we may speculate more appropriately in
considering the final causes of this motion.

The vessels for the conduction of blood are of two
sorts, the vena cava type and the aortic type. These
are to be classified, not on the basis of structure or
make-up, as commonly thought with Aristotle,
for in many animals, as I have said, the veins do
not differ from the arteries in thickness of tunics,


[71]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


but on the basis of difference in function or use.
Both veins and arteries were called veins by the
ancients, and not unjustly, as Galen notes. The
arteries are the vessels carrying blood from the
heart to the body, the veins returning blood from
the body to the heart, the one the way from the
heart, the other toward the heart,? the latter carry-
ing imperfect blood unfit for nourishment, the
former perfected, nutritious blood.


2 In so clearly differentiating the functions of arteries and veins,
why didn’t Harvey go on and point out the confusion resulting from
the terminology in use at the time with regard to the pulmonary
vessels?


[72]


CHAPTER IX


The Circulation of the Blood is Proved by


a Prime Consideration


“> — > O <64


F ANYONE says these are empty words, broad

assertions without basis, or innovations without
just cause, there are three points coming for proof,
from which I believe the truth will necessarily
follow, and be clearly evident.

First, blood is constantly being transmitted from
the vena cava to the arteries by the heart beat in
such amounts that it cannot be furnished by the food
consumed, and in such a way that the total quantity
must pass through the heart in a short tme.

Second, blood is forced by the pulse in the arteries
continually and steadily to every part of the body
in a much greater amount than is needed for nutri-
tion or than the whole mass of food could supply.

And likewise third, the veins continually return
this blood from every part of the body to the heart.

These proved, I think it will be clear that the blood
circulates, passing away from the heart to the ex-
tremities and then returning back to the heart,
thus moving in a circle.

Let us consider, arbitrarily or by experiment,
that the left ventricle of the heart when filled in


[73]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


diastole, contains two or three ounces, or only an
ounce and a half. In a cadaver I have found it
holding more than three ounces. Likewise let us
consider how much less the ventricle contains when
the heart contracts or how much blood it forces
into the aorta with each contraction, for, during
systole, everyone will admit something is always
forced out, as shown in Chapter III, and apparent
from the structure of the valves. As a reasonable
conjecture suppose a fourth, fifth, sixth, or even
an eighth part is passed into the arteries. Then
we may suppose in man that a single heart beat
would force out either a half ounce, three drams,
or even one dram of blood, which because of the
valvular block could not flow back that way into
the heart.

The heart makes more than a thousand beats in
a half hour, in some two, three, or even four thou-
sand. Multiplying by the drams, there will be in
half an hour either 3,000 drams, 2,000 drams, five
hundred ounces, or some other such proportionate
amount of blood forced into the arteries by the
heart, but always a greater quantity than is pres-
ent in the whole body. Likewise in a sheep or dog,
suppose one scruple goes out with each stroke of
the heart, then in half an hour 1,000 scruples or
about three and a half pounds of blood! would be


1 The Apothecaries or Troy weight is used: 3 scruples equal 1
dram; 8 drams equal 1 ounce; 12 ounces equal 1 pound. This was in
general use in Europe. This chapter is the crucial point in Harvey’s


[74]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


pumped out. But as I have determined in the sheep,
the whole body does not contain more than four
pounds of blood.

On this assumption of the passage of blood, made
as a basis for argument, and from the estimation
of the pulse rate, it is apparent that the entire
quantity of blood passes from the veins to the ar-
teries through the heart, and likewise through
the lungs.

But suppose this would not occur in half an hour,
but rather in an hour, or even in a day, it is still
clear that more blood continually flows through
the heart than can be supplied by the digested food
or be held in the veins at any one time.

It cannot be said that the heart in contracting
sometimes pumps and sometimes doesn’t, or that it
propels a mere nothing or something. imaginary.
This point has been settled previously, and besides,
it is contrary to common sense. If the ventricles
must be filled with blood in cardiac dilatation, some-
thing must always be pushed out in contraction,
and not a little amount either, since the passages
are not small nor the contractions few. This quantity
expelled is some proportion of the contents of the
ventricle, a third, a sixth, or an eighth, and an
equivalent amount of blood must fill it up in diastole,
so that there is a relation between the ventricular


argument, and the first instance of the quantitative method in physi-
ology. It introduced the most important method of reasoning in the
science and demonstrated its,most significant truth.


[75]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


capacity in contraction and in dilatation. Since the
ventricles in dilating do not become filled with
nothing, or with something imaginary, so in con-
tracting they never expel nothing or something
imaginary, but always blood in an amount pro-
portionate to the contraction.

So it may be inferred that if the heart in a single
beat in man, sheep, or ox, pumps one dram, and
there are 1,000 beats in half an hour, the total
amount pumped in that time would be ten pounds
five ounces; if two drams at a single stroke, then
twenty pounds ten ounces; if half an ounce, then
forty-one pounds eight ounces; and if one ounce,
then a total of eighty-three pounds four ounces, all
of which would be transferred from the veins to
the arteries in half an hour.

The amount pumped at a single beat, and the
factors involved in increasing or diminishing it,
may perhaps be more carefully studied later from
many observations of mine.?


2 Harvey says nothing more about this most important proposition,
and his “observations,” probably on animals, have been lost. The
subject is of great current interest and is reviewed in Y. Henderson’s
Volume Changes of the Heart, Physiol. Rev., 3: 165, 1923. Discussions
of experimental methods and findings are given in R. Tigerstedt's
Physiologie des Kreislaufes, 2nd Ed., Berlin, 1921, Vol. 1, pp. 179-208,
and by B. Kisch, Handbuch der Normalen und Pathologischen Physiologie,
Berlin, 1927, Vol. 7 (2nd part) (Blutzirkulation), 1161-1204. For
estimating cardiac output in man four methods have been proposed:
I. roentgenographic comparison of cardiac volume at systole and
diastole (W. Meek and J. Eyster, Amer. J. Roentgenol., 7: 471, 1920;
Amer. J. Physiol., 63: 400, 1923; P. Hodges and J. Eyster, Amer. J.
Roentgenol., 12: 252, 1924); 2. an application of the Fick principle


[76]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


Meanwhile I know and state to all that the blood
is transmitted sometimes in a larger amount, other
times in a smaller, and that the blood circulates
sometimes rapidly, sometimes slowly, according
to temperament, age, external or internal causes,
normal or abnormal factors, sleep, rest, food, ex-
ercise, mental condition, and such like.?


(A. Fick, Sitz.-ber. d. phys.-med. Ges. Wurzburg, 1: 16, 1870), involving
an indirect determination of the oxygen or carbon-dioxide tensions in
mixed venous blood (S. Burwell and G. Robinson, J. Clin. Invest.,
1: 47, 1924; H. Field, A. Bock, et al., ibid., 1: 65, 1924); 3. measuring
the rate with which either a normally present gas (nitrogen, A. Born-
stein, Arch. f. d. ges. Physiol., 132: 307, 1910), or a foreign gas is ex-
changed during the passage of the blood through the lungs (nitrous-
oxide, A. Krogh and J. Lindhard, Skand. Arch. f. Physiol., 27: 100,
1912; ethyl iodide, Y. Henderson and H. Haggard, Amer. J. Physiol.,
73: 193, 1925; ethylene, E. Marshall and A. Grollman, idid., 86: 117,
1928; acetylene, A. Grollman, ¿bid., 88: 432, 1929; 93: 116, 1930),
and 4. an application of Stewart's principle (G. Stewart, J. Physiol.,
22: 159, 1897) of the intravenous injection of an easily detectable for-
eign substance and the calculation of cardiac output from its concen-
tration in arterial blood (W. Hamilton, J. Moore, et al., Amer. J.
Physiol., 84: 338, 1928; 89: 322 and 331, 1929). Of fundamental im-
portance is Grollman's observation that the basal cardiac output of
normal humans is, like basal oxygen consumption, a function of body
surface area and hence quite accurately predictable (Amer. J. Physiol.,
go: 210, 1929). Under standard conditions it is 2.2+0.3 liters of blood
per square meter per minute, with an average deviation from the mean
of 5 per cent. Contrary to the common view a compensatory mech-
anism exists in man which maintains a relatively constant cardiac
output despite postural changes (Amer. J. Physiol., 86: 285, 1928).
A total variation of less than 10 per cent was found during very
frequent observations on two individuals for one year (Amer. J.
Physiol., 93: 536, 1930).

3 This amazing statement by Harvey, based on we know not what
evidence, has been quantitatively confirmed in the course of A. Groll-
man's brilliant studies (Amer. J. Physiol., 88: 432, 1929; 89: 157, 366,
and 584, 1929; go: 210, 1929; 93: 19, 1930; 94: 287, 1930). “Thein-


[77]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


But suppose even the smallest amount of blood
be transmitted through the lungs and heart at a
single beat, a greater quantity would eventually be
pumped into the arteries and the body than could be
furnished by the food consumed,’ unless by constantly
making a circuit and returning.

The matter is obvious in animal experimentation.
If an opening be cut not only in the aorta, but even
in a small artery, as Galen claims, in man, the whole
blood content may be drained from the entire body,
from veins as well as arteries, in almost half an
hour’s time.

Butchers can also well enough confirm this point.
In killing an ox by cutting the arteries of the neck,
the whole mass of blood may be drained off and
all the vessels emptied in less than a quarter of an


gestion of large amounts of fluid causes a moderate rise in the cardiac
output which is greater after the ingestion of isotonic saline than after
the ingestion of water. The splanchnic dilatation which follows the
ingestion of food is accompanied by a large increase in the cardiac
output for several hours. Psychic disturbances were found to cause an
elevation in the cardiac output.” Grollman’s work should be carefully
read.

* This was the crux of the argument to Harvey, since the Galenists
insisted that blood was formed in the liver (“natural spirits”) from
the food consumed, and distributed by the veins to nourish the parts
of the body according to their needs. Hence the emphasis placed by
Harvey in proving, by most conservative estimates, that the heart
pumps in a relatively short time more blood than is needed for nutri-
tion or than food can supply, more in fact than the whole weight of
the man or animal. Obviously it must be the same blood going around
and around. The introduction of quantitative evidence into phy-
siological problems was Harvey’s great philosophical contribution,
and he apparently realized it, for he uses it again and again with
telling effect.


[78]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


hour. We know how quickly an excessive hemor-
rhage may occur in removing a tumor or in an
amputation.

The force of this argument would not be lost by
saying that blood flows equally if not more from
veins than from arteries, in butchering or amputa-
ting. The contrary of this really holds. Because they
collapse, and have no power to propel blood, and
because there is a block where the valves are placed,
as shall be shown later, the veins really pour out
little blood. The arteries, however, squirt it out in
quantities, with force, as if ejected from a syringe.
The matter may be tested by cutting the artery
in the neck of a sheep or dog, but leaving the vein
alone, and it will easily be seen with how much
force, in what amounts, and how quickly all the
blood in the body is drained, from veins as well
as arteries. The arteries receive blood from the
veins in no other way than by transmission through
the heart, as previously said. So by ligating the
aorta close to the heart, there need be no uncer-
tainty about finding the arteries empty if they be
opened in the neck or elsewhere, and the veins
filled.

The reason is now apparent why so much blood is
found in the veins in anatomical dissection, and
so little in the arteries, so much in the right side
of the heart, so little in the left. This fact prob-
ably led the ancients to believe that arteries con-
tained only spirits during an animal’s life. The


[79]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


reason for the difference is probably as follows.’
There is no other passage from the veins to the
arteries except through the heart and lungs, so
when an animal expires and the lungs stop moving,
the blood is prevented from passing from the pul-
monary artery to the pulmonary vein and then
into the left ventricle of the heart. This is like
what was noted previously in the embryo, where
the transit is prevented by the lack of motion in the
lungs and the opening and closing of its tiny pores.
The heart, however, does not stop at the same time
as the lungs, but outlives them and continues to
beat. The left ventricle and the arteries continue
to send blood to the rest of the body and into the
veins, but, receiving none from the lungs, they soon
become empty.

This fact awakens not a little belief in our posi-
tion, since it can be ascribed to no other reason
than what we have proposed.

It further appears that the greater or more vehe-
mently the arteries pulsate, the quicker will the
body be exhausted of its blood in a hemorrhage.
Hence in fainting or alarm, when the heart beats


5 One reason has already been given. Is this an interpolation,
or addition to the original draft? There is much evidence that the
book was not composed as a whole, but that it is a combination of
many scattered notes written at different times. Respiration is
quite a factor in maintaining circulation. Dr. R. M. Waters, well-
known anesthetist, has told me of several instances where artificial _
respiration has maintained a circulation when the heart has failed.


[ 80]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


slowly and feebly, a hemorrhage is reduced or
stopped.

This is also why one cannot draw forth by any
effort more than half the blood by cutting the jugu-
lar or femoral veins or arteries in a dead body after
the heart stops beating. Nor may a butcher succeed
in bleeding an ox after hitting it on the head and
stunning it, if he does not cut its throat before
the heart stops beating.

Finally, it may now be suspected why no one so
far has said anything to the point on the place,
manner, or purpose of the anastomosis of veins
and arteries. I shall now discuss this point.®


6 But he doesn’t. This point is quite forgotten. Further evidence
of assembling the treatise from notes written at different times. The
subject of capillary physiology is well reviewed in original extracts in
J. F. Fulton’s Selected Readings in the History of Physiology, Spring-
field, Ill., 1930, pp. 61-105.


[81]


CHAPTER X


The First Proposition, Concerningthe Amount
of Blood Passing from Veins to Arteries,
During the Circulation of the Blood,
is Freed from Objections, and
Confirmed by Experiments


bi >< G+


HETHER the matter be referred to cal-

culation or to experiment and dissection,
the important proposition has been established that
blood is continually poured into the arteries in a
greater amount than can be supplied by the food.
Since it all flows past in so short a time, it must be
made to flow in a circle.

Someone may say here that a great amount may
flow out without any necessity for a circulation
and that it all may come from the food. An ex-
ample might be given in the rich milk supply of the
mammae. A cow may give three or four, or even
seven and more gallons of milk daily, and a mother
two or three pints when nursing a baby or twins,
all of which must obviously come from the food.
It may be replied that the heart, by computation,
does more in an hour or less.

Not yet persuaded, one may still insist that cut-
ting an artery opens a very abnormal passage through


[82]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


which blood may forcibly pour, but that nothing
like this happens in the intact body, with no out-
let made. With the arteries filled, in their natural
state, so large an amount cannot pass in so short
a time as to make a return necessary. It may be
replied that from the computation and reasons
already given, the excess contained in the dilated
heart in comparison with the constricted must
be in general pumped out with each beat and this
amount must be transmitted, as long as the body
is intact and in a natural state.

In serpents and certain fishes by ligating the
veins a little below the heart, you will see the space
between the ligature and the heart quickly become
empty. So, unless you deny what you see, you must
admit the blood returns to the heart. This will
be clear later in discussing the second proposition.

We may close here with a single conclusive ex-
ample, by which anyone may be convinced by his
own eyes. |

If a live snake be cut open, the heart may be
seen quietly and distinctly beating for more than
an hour, moving like a worm and propelling blood
when it contracts longitudinally, for it is oblong.
It becomes pale in systole, the reverse in diastole,
and almost all the other things we have mentioned
as proving the truth may be clearly observed, for
here all happens slower and more distinctly. This
especially may be seen more clearly than the midday
sun. The vena cava enters at the lower part of the


[83]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


heart, the artery leaves at the upper. Now, pinch-
ing off the vena cava with a forceps or between
finger and thumb, the course of blood being inter-
cepted some distance below the heart, you will
see that the space between the finger and the heart
is drained at once, the blood being emptied by the
heart beat. At the same time, the heart becomes
much paler even in distention, smaller from lack
of blood, and beats more slowly, so that it seems
to be dying. Immediately on releasing the vein,
the color and size of the heart returns to normal.!

On the other hand, leaving the vein alone, if you
ligate or compress the artery a little distance above
the heart, you will see the space between the com-
pression and the heart, and the latter also, become
greatly distended and very turgid, of a purple or
livid color, and, choked by the blood, it will seem to
suffocate. On removing the block, the normal
color, size, and pulse returns.

This is evidence of two kinds of death, failure
from a lack, and suffocation from excess. In these
examples of both, one may find proof before his
eyes of the truth spoken about the heart.


1 These experiments have been beautifully reproduced in moving-
pictures under the skillful direction of Sir Thomas Lewis and Professor
H. H. Dale of London (“The Harvey Film”).


[ 84 ]


CHAPTER X]


The Second Proposition is Proven


> O rms


O second proposition may appear more clearly
by considering certain experiments from which
it is obvious that blood enters a limb through the
arteries and returns through the veins, that the
arteries are the vessels carrying blood from the
heart and the veins the channels returning it to
the heart, and that, in the extremities, blood passes
from arteries to veins directly by anastomosis or
indirectly through pores in the flesh, as discussed
before in regard to its transfer from veins to arteries
in the heart and thorax. From this it may be clear
that it moves in a circle from the center to the extremi-
ties and back from the extremities to the center.

Then, making certain calculations, it will also
be clear that the quantity may neither be supplied
from the food taken in nor necessarily be required
for nutrition.

These experiments will also clear up some points
regarding ligatures: why they may cause swelling,
which is neither by heat nor suction nor any reason
yet known; what uses and advantages may be
obtained from them in practice; how they may
either suppress or provoke hemorrhage; how they


[85]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


may cause gangrene in the limbs, and what their
function may be in castrating animals or removing
fleshy tumors.

Because no one has understood the rationale
of these matters, it has happened that almost every-
one recommends ligatures in treating disease on the
authority of the ancients, and very few use them
properly or get any benefit from them.

Some ligatures are tight, others middling. I
call a ligature tight when it is pulled so firmly about
a limb that the beat of the artery cannot be felt
beyond it. We use this kind in amputations to
control bleeding. This kind is also used in castrating
animals and removing tumors, where we see the tes-
ticles and tumors dying and dropping off because
the ligature keeps out heat and nourishment.

I call a ligature middling which compresses a
limb on all sides, but without pain, so that the
artery may still pulsate somewhat beyond the
ligature. This type is used for “drawing,” in blood-
letting. The proper ligature for phlebotomy is applied
above the elbow in such a manner that the artery at
the wrist may still be felt beating slightly.

Now, let an experiment be made on a man's
arm, using a bandage as in blood-letting, or grasp-
ing tightly with the hand.! The best subject is one


! These interesting experiments, discussed in a quantitative way
in Chapter XIII, imply some of the factors involved in arterial and
venous blood pressure. Attention was sharply drawn to the mechanical


relations of blood-pressure by the Rev. Stephen Hales (1677-1761) and
[ 86]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


who is lean, with large veins, warm after exercise
when more blood is going to the extremities and the
pulse is stronger, for then all will be more apparent.

Under these conditions, place on a ligature as
tightly as the subject can stand. Then it may be
observed that the artery does not pulsate beyond
the bandage, in the wrist or elsewhere. Next, just
above the ligature the artery is higher in diastole
and beats more strongly, swelling near the ligature
as if trying to break through and flood past the
barrier. The artery at this place seems abnormally
full. The hand, however, retains its natural color
and appearance. In a little time it begins to cool
a bit, but nothing is “drawn” into it.

After this bandage has been on for some time,
loosen it to the medium tightness used, as I said,
in blood-letting. You will see the whole hand at
once become suffused and distended, and its veins
become swollen and varicosed. After ten or fifteen


experimental measurements reported in his Statistical Essays: Haemo-
dynamics, 1733. A valuable account of Hales has been given by
P. M. Dawson (Johns Hopkins Hosp. Bull., 15: 185, 232, 1904).
Further advance was made by J.-L.-M. Poiseuille (1799-1869), whose
haemodynamometer was introduced in 1828, and whose studies on
capillary flow appeared in 1840 (Compt. rend. Acad. sc., 11: 961.1041).
In 1847 Carl Ludwig (1816-1895) invented the graphic method of
recording blood-pressure, and thus greatly facilitated all phases of
physiological analysis (Müller’s Arch. Anat. Physiol., 1847, p. 242).
A method for determining venous pressure in man was devised by
J. A. E. Eyster and D. Hooker (Johns Hopkins Hosp. Bull., 19: 274,
1908). For a general disussion, see W. H. Howells’ Physiology, 10th
Ed., Phila., 1927, p. 475. Also Journ. Am. Med. Asso., 91: 31 (July 7)
1928.


[87]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


beats of the artery you will see the hand become
impacted and gorged with a great amount of blood
“drawn” by this medium tight ligature, but with-
out pain, heat, horror of a vacuum or any other
cause so far proposed.

If one will place a finger on the artery as it beats
at the edge of the bandage, the blood may be felt
to flow under it at the moment of loosening. The
subject, also, on whose arm the experiment is made,
clearly feels, as the ligature is slackened, warmth
and blood pulsing through, as though an obstacle
has been removed. And he is conscious of it follow-
ing the artery and diffusing through the hand, as
it warms and swells.

In the case of the tight bandage, the artery is
distended and pulsates above it, not below; in the
mediumly tight one, however, the veins become
turgid and the arteries shrink below the ligature,
never above it. Indeed, in this case, unless you
compress these swollen veins very strongly, you
will scarcely be able to force any blood above the
ligature or cause the veins there to be filled.

From these facts any careful observer may easily
understand that blood enters a limb through the
arteries. A tight bandage about them “draws”
nothing, the hand keeps its color, nothing flows
into it, neither is it distended. With a little slacken-
ing, as in a mediumly tight ligature, it is clear that
the blood is instantly and strongly forced in, and
the hand made to swell. When they pulsate, blood


[88 ]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


flows through them into the hand, as when a medium
bandage is used, but otherwise not, with a tight
ligature, except above it. Meanwhile, the veins
being compressed, nothing can flow through them.
This is indicated by the fact that they are much
more swollen below the bandage than above it,
or than is usual with it removed, and that while
compressed they carry nothing under the ligature
to the parts above. So it is clear that the bandage
prevents the return of blood through the veins to
the parts above it and keeps those below it engorged.

The arteries, however, for the simple reason
that they are not blocked by the moderate ligature,
carry blood beyond it from the inside of the body
by the power and impulse of the heart. This is
the difference between a tight and medium bandage,
the former not only blocks the flow of blood in the
veins but also in the arteries, the latter does not
impede the pulsating force from spreading beyond
the ligature and carrying blood to the extremities of
the body.

One may reason as follows. Below a medium
bandage we see the veins become swollen and gorged
and the hand filled with blood. This must be caused
by blood passing under the ligature either in veins,
arteries or tiny pores. It cannot come through
the veins, certainly not through invisible ducts, so
it must flow through the arteries, according to what
has been said. It obviously cannot flow through
the veins since the blood cannot be squeezed back


[89]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


above the ligature unless it is completely loosened.
Then we see the veins suddenly collapse, discharg-
ing themselves to the part above, the hand loses
its Aush, and the stagnant blood and swelling quickly
fade away.

Further, he whose arm has been bound for some
time with a medium bandage, and whose hand has
been rendered somewhat swollen and cold, feels,
as the ligature is loosened, something cold creeping
up with the returning blood to the elbow or arm-
pit. I think this cold blood returning to the heart,
after removing the bandage in blood-letting, is a
cause of fainting, which we sometimes see even in
robust persons, usually when the ligature is removed,
or, as is commonly said, when the blood turns.

Moreover, ımmediately on loosening a tight
bandage to a medium one, we see the veins below
it, but not the arteries, swollen with blood contin-
ually carried in by the arteries. This indicates that
blood passes from arteries to veins, not the reverse,
and that there is either an anastomosis of these
vessels or pores in the flesh and solid parts per-
meable to blood. It also indicates that the veins
inter-communicate, since, with a medium ligature
above the elbow, they all swell up at the same time,
and, if even a single venule be cut with a lancet,
they all quickly shrink, giving up their blood to
this one, and subside almost together.

Anyone may understood from this the reasons
for the “drawing” power existing in ligatures, and


[90]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


perhaps in all fluxes. It is clear how the blood can-
not escape from the hand when the veins are com-
pressed with what I call a medium bandage, but
being driven in by the heart beat through the ar-
teries, and not being able to escape anywhere,
the part must necessarily become gorged and
swollen.

How can it be otherwise? Heat, pain, and the suc-
tion of a vacuum have a certain “drawing” power
to fill a part, but not to distend or swell it abnor-
mally, nor to overcome it so suddenly and power-
fully by impact of blood that the flesh and vessels
are in danger of being torn or ruptured. It is neither
believable nor demonstrable that heat, pain, or the
vis vacui can do this.

Furthermore, this “drawing” power occurs in a
ligature without pain, heat, or the suction of a
vacuum. If pain happens to “draw” any blood,
with the arm tied above the elbow, how may the
hand and fingers and their veins become swollen
below the ligature, since because of its pressure,
blood cannot get there through the veins? And
why is neither swelling, nor sign of venous filling
or engorgement, nor any vestige of “drawing”
apparent above the ligature?

The obvious cause of the “drawing” or abnormal
swelling in the hand and fingers below the bandage
is the forceful and copious influx of blood which
cannot escape. Indeed, is not the cause of all tumors
and oppressive swellings, what Avicenna says, that


[91]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


the way in is open but the way out closed, so there
must be an engorgement or tumor?

May not this happen in boils? As long as the swell-
ing is increasing and has not come to a final state,
a full pulse may be felt in the area, especially in
more acute tumors in which the swelling is sudden.
But these are for later investigation. However,
this happened in an accident I experienced. 1 was
thrown once from a carriage and struck my head
at a place where an arterial branch crosses the
temporal region. Immediately I felt, in the space
of about twenty pulsations, a tumor the size of an
egg but without either heat or great pain. It seems
the blood was pushed out with an unusual amount
and speed because of the nearness of the artery to
the place of injury.

Now it also appears why, in phlebotomy, if we
wish the blood to flow longer and with greater
force, we ligate above the cut, not below. If such
a flow would come through the veins above, the
ligature would not only be of no aid, but would
positively hinder it, for if blood flowed downwards
from the upper part of an extremity through the
veins, it would more properly be tied below the
cut so the impeded blood would escape through
the cut more abundantly. But since it is forced
elsewhere through arteries into the veins lower
down, from which return is prevented by the liga-
ture, the veins swell, and being under tension can
eject their contents through the opening to some


[92]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


distance with unusual force. When the bandage is
loosened, and the returning channels opened, the flow
sinks to not more than a drop at a time. Everyone
knows in performing phlebotomy that if you either
loosen the bandage, tie below the cut, or bind the
limb too tightly, the blood will escape without
force, because in the latter the influx of blood through
the arteries is blocked by the tightness of the liga-
ture, while in the former the venous return is not
properly checked because of its looseness.


[931


CHAPTER XII


That There is a Circulation of the Blood
Follows from the Proof of the Second
Proposition


rt


INCE these things are so, it establishes the

proof of what I said previously, that blood
continually passes through the heart. For we have
seen that blood spreads from the arteries to the
veins, not from veins to arteries; we have seen
further that almost the total amount of blood can
be taken from an arm if a single cutaneous vein
be opened with a lancet and a bandage properly
applied, and we have seen still further, that there
is so much force behind it, and so sufficient a flow
that the blood may easily and quickly be with-
drawn not only in the amount present in the arm
below the ligature before the cut was made, but
in the whole arm, and in the entire body, arteries
as well as veins.

So it must be admitted, first, that blood is supplied
with force and impetus to push it beneath the liga-
ture, for it escapes with vigor, which is derived
from the pumping action of the heart and from this
alone. Likewise, it must be further admitted that
this flow comes from the heart, and by way of the


[94]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


heart, by a transfer accomplished from the great
veins, since it passes through the arteries beneath
the ligature, not through veins, and arteries never
receive blood from veins except by way of the left
ventricle of the heart. Nor could any such an amount
be drawn from a single vein anywhere, a bandage
being applied above it, especially with such force,
such an amount, or so easily and quickly, except
by the beating power of the heart in the manner
described.

If these things are so, we may very readily compute
the amount of blood and come to some conclusion
on its circular motion. If, for instance, in phle-
botomy, one were to let the blood flow with its usual
force and rate for a half hour, there is no doubt but
that the greater part of it would be drained off,
practically emptying not only arteries but also the
great veins, and that fainting and syncope would
follow. It is reasonable to assume that as great an
amount of blood as is lost in this half hour’s time,
passed from the great veins through the heart to
the aorta. Further, if you figure how many ounces
of blood flow through a single arm, or pass under
a medium bandage in twenty or thirty heart-beats,
you will have a basis for estimating how much
flows through the other arm in the same time,
or through both sides of the neck, or through
both legs, and through all the other arteries and
veins of the body. Since all these are continually
supplied with fresh blood, which must flow through


[95]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


the lungs and ventricles of the heart, from the veins,
it must be accomplished in a circuit, since the
amount involved is much more than can be fur-
nished from the food consumed, or than is needed for
the nourishment of the parts.

It is further to be observed that this truth is often
demonstrated in blood-letting. Though you prop-
erly bandage the arm, and puncture the vein
correctly with a lancet, if a fainting state of mind
comes on through fear or any other cause, and the
heart beats more sluggishly, blood will escape only
a drop at a time, especially if the ligature be made
a little more tight. The reason is that the feeble
beat in the compressed artery, with the weaker
propelling power, cannot force the blood under
the bandage.! For the same reason the feeble and
languid heart cannot force the normal amount
of blood through the lungs or transfer it from the
veins to the arteries. In the same way and for the
same reasons, it happens that the menses of women
and all types of hemorrhages are checked. If the
opposite occurs, the patient recovering his mind,
and losing his fear, you will see the arteries at once
beat more powerfully, even in the bound-off part,
so the blood gushes from the opening and flows
steadily.


3 A characteristic example of Harvey’s clear reasoning. It is
easily inferred that the obvious factor in maintaining blood pressure
is the pumping action of the heart.


[96]


CHAPTER XIII


The Third Proposition is Proven, and the
Circulation of the Blood is Demonstrated
from it


PA — > RÁ


O FAR we have considered the amount of blood

flowing through the heart and lungs in the
body cavity, and similarly from the arteries to the
veins in the periphery. It remains for us to discuss.
how blood from the extremities gets back to the
heart through the veins, and whether or not these
are the only vessels serving this purpose. This done
we may consider the three basic propositions proving
the circulation of the blood so well established,
so plain and obvious, as to force belief.

This proposition will be perfectly clear from a
consideration of the valves found in the venous
cavities, from their functions, and from experiments
demonstrable with them.

The celebrated anatomist, Hieronymus Fabricius
of Aquapendente, or, instead of him, Jacobus Syl-
vius, as Doctor Riolan wishes it, first described
membranous valves in the veins, of sigmoid or
semilunar shape,! and being very delicate eminences
A Hieronymus Fabricius of Aquapendente (1537-1619) was a


pupil of G. Fallopius (1523-1562) who was in turn the pupil of Ve-
salius (1514-1564). It was their establishment of modern anatomy


[97]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


on the inner lining of these vessels. They are placed
differently in different individuals, but are attached
to the sides of the veins, and they are directed
upwards toward the main venous trunks. As there
are usually two together, they face and touch each
other, and their edges are so apt to join or close
that they prevent anything from passing from the
main trunks or larger veins to the smaller branches.
They are so arranged that the horns of one set are
opposite the hollow part of the preceding set, and
so on alternately.

The discoverer of these valves and his followers
did not rightly appreciate their function. It is
not to prevent blood from falling by its weight into
areas lower down, for there are some in the jugular
vein which are directed downwards,and which prevent
blood from being carried upwards. They are thus
not always looking upwards, but more correctly,
always towards the main venous trunks and the
which gave such glory to Padua where they taught. Harvey studied
under Fabricius from 1598 to 1602. Vesalius was a pupil of J. Sylvius
(1478-1555) at Paris.

It is likely that G. Canano (1515-1578) first described the valves
in the veins. C. Estienne (d. 1564) had observed valves in the portal
veins (not present in man) in 1538, and J. Sylvius commented on
them posthumously. The first published drawings of venous valves
were by S. Alberti, De Valvulis, 1585, who acknowledged indebted-
ness to Fabricius. The latter demonstrated them publicly in 1579
and published his De venarum osteolis in 1603. Harvey employed to
make his two plates the same Frankfort craftsman who had made
the copper-plates for the 1624 edition of Fabricius (H. Cushing and
E. C. Streeter, Monumenta Medica, IV, Canano, Florence, 1925).


For a comprehensive historical survey of valves in veins, see Franklin,
K. J., Proc. Roy. Soc. Med. (Sect. Hist. Med.) 21: 1, 1927.


[98]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


heart. Others as well as myself have sometimes
found them in the milky veins? and in the venous
branches of the mesentery directed towards the
vena cava and portal vein. To this may be added
that there are none in the arteries, and that one
may note that dogs, oxen, and all such animals
have valves at the branches of the crural veins
at the top of the sacrum, and in branches from the
haunches, in which no such weight effect of an erect
stature is to be feared.

Nor, as some say, are the valves in the jugular
veins to prevent apoplexy, since the head is more
likely to be influenced by what flows into it through
the carotid arteries.? Nor are they present to keep
blood in the smaller branches, not permitting it to
flow entirely into the larger more open trunks,


2 Does Harvey mean the lacteals? The Galenical error, to which
Harvey subscribed, that the veins of the mesentery carried chyle to
the liver, was cleared up by G. Aselli (1581-1626) who discovered
the lacteals (De lactibus, Milan, 1627), by J. Pecquet (1622-1674)
who showed their passage to the thoracic duct and then to the sub-
clavian vein (Experimenta nova, Paris, 1651), and by O. Rudbeck
(1639-1702) and T. Bartholin (1616-1680) who discovered the in-
testinal lymphatics and their connection with the thoracic duct.
Pecquet's work contained a carefully devised proof of Harvey's
doctrine. On April 28, 1652, Harvey wrote a letter to Dr. R. Morison
of Paris (see Willis’s translation of Harvey’s works, Sydenham
Society, 1847, p. 604) in which he discussed Pecquet’s contribution.
His characteristic conservatism prevented him from accepting the
discovery, although it offered a demonstrable explanation of an un-
satisfactory portion of his own.

3 An idea partially expressed in their very name, “the arteries
of sleep.” This name may have developed from the early observation
(used for anesthetic purposes by the Assyrians) that pressure on these
vessels might be followed by fainting.


[99]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


for they are placed where there are no branches
at all, although I confess they are more frequently
seen where there are branchings. Nor are they
present for slowing the flow of blood from the center
of the body, for it seems likely it would flow slowly
enough anyway, as it would then be passed from
larger to smaller branches, become separated from
the source and mass, and be moved from warmer
to cooler places.

The valves are present solely that blood may
not move from the larger veins into the smaller ones
lest it rupture or varicose them, and that it may
not advance from the center of the body into the
periphery through them, but rather from the
extremities to the center. This latter movement
is facilitated by these delicate valves, the contrary
completely prevented. They are so situated that
what may pass the horns of a set above is checked
by those below, for whatever may slip past the
edges of one set is caught on the convexity of those
beyond, so it may not pass farther.

I have often noticed in dissecting veins, that no
matter how much care I take, it is impossible to
pass a probe from the main venous trunks very
far into the smaller branches on account of the
valvular obstructions. On the contrary it is very
easy to push it in the opposite direction, from the
branches toward the larger trunks. In many places
a pair of valves are so placed that when raised they
join in the middle of the vein, and their edges are


[ 100 ]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


so nicely united that one cannot perceive any
crack along their junction. On the other hand,
they yield to a probe introduced from without
inwards and are easily released in the manner of
flood-gates opposing a river flow. So they inter-
cept, and when tightly closed, completely prevent
in many places a flow of blood back from the heart
and vena cava. They are so constituted that they
can never permit blood to move in the veins from
the heart upwards to the head, downwards toward
the feet, or sidewise to the arms. They oppose any
movement of blood from the larger veins toward
the smaller ones, but they favor and facilitate
a free and open route starting from the small veins
and ending in the larger ones.

This fact may be more clearly shown by tying off
an arm of a subject as if for blood-letting (4, 4,
fig. 1). There will appear at intervals (especially
in rustics) knots, or swellings, like nodules (B, C,
D, E, F), not only where there is branching (E, F),
but also where none occurs (C, D). These are caused
by the valves, appearing thus on the surface of the
hand and arm. If you will clear the blood away from
a nodule or valve by pressing a thumb or finger
below it (H, fig. 2), you will see that nothing can
flow back, being entirely prevented by the valve,
and that the part of the vein between the swelling
and the finger (H, O, fig. 2), disappears, while
above the swelling or valve it is well distended
(O, G). Keeping the vein thus empty of blood, if


[ 101]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


you will press downwards against the valve, (O,
fig. 3) by a finger of the other hand on the distended
upper portion (K, fig. 3), you will note that nothing
can be forced through the valve. The greater effort
you make the more the vein is distended toward
the valve, but you will observe that it stays empty
below it (H, O, fig. 3).

From many such experiments it is evident that the
function of the valves in the veins is the same as
that of the three sigmoid valves placed at the
opening of the aorta and pulmonary artery, to
prevent, when they are tightly closed, the reflux
of blood passing over them.

Further, with the arm bound as before and the
veins swollen, if you will press on a vein a little
below a swelling or valve (Z, fig. 4) and then squeeze
the blood upwards beyond the valve (N) with
another finger (M), you will see that this part of
the vein stays empty, and that no back flow can
occur through the valve (as in H, O, fig. 2). But
as soon as the finger (H) is removed, the vein is
filled from below (as in D, C, fig. 1). Thus it is
clearly evident that blood moves through the veins
toward the heart, from the periphery inwards, and
not in the opposite direction. The valves in some
places, either because they do not completely close,
or because they occur singly, do not seem adequate
to block a flow of blood from the center, but the
majority certainly do. At any rate, wherever they
seem poorly made, they appear to be compensated


[ 102]


u


‚m


m


Lu:


ae


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


for in some way, by the greater frequency or better
action of the succeeding valves. So, as the veins
are the wide open passages for returning blood to
the heart, they are adequately prevented from
distributing it from the heart.

Above all, note this. With the arm of your sub-
ject bound, the veins distended, and the nodes or
valves prominent, apply your thumb to a vein a
little below a valve so as to stop the blood coming
up from the hand, and then with your finger press
the blood from that part of the vein up past the
valve (L, N, fig. 4), as was said before. Remove
your thumb (Z), and the vein at once fills up from
below (as in D, C, fig. 1). Again compress with
your thumb, and squeeze the blood out in the same
way as before (L, N, and H, O), and do this a thou-
sand times as quickly as possible. By careful reckon-
ing, of course, the quantity of blood forced up beyond
the valve by a single compression may be estimated,
and this multiplied by a thousand gives so much blood
transmitted in this way through a single portion of
the veins in a relatively short time, that without
doubt you will be very easily convinced by the quick-
ness of its passage of the circulation of the blood.

But you may say this experiment of mine violates
natural conditions. Then if you will take as long
a distance from the valve as possible, observing
how quickly, on releasing your thumb, the blood
wells up and fills the vein from below, I do not
doubt but that you will be thoroughly convinced.


[ 103]


CHAPTER XIV


Conclusion of the Demonstration of the Circu-


lation of the Blood


>


RIEFLY let me now sum up and propose
generally my idea of the circulation of the
blood.

It has been shown by reason and experiment that
blood by the beat of the ventricles flows through
the lungs and heart and is pumped to the whole
body. There it passes through pores in the flesh
into the veins through which it returns from the
periphery everywhere to the center, from the smaller
veins into the larger ones, finally coming to the
vena cava and right auricle. This occurs in such
an amount, with such an outflow through the
arteries, and such a reflux through the veins,
that it cannot be supplied by the food consumed.
It is also much more than is needed for nutrition.
It must therefore be concluded that the blood in
the animal body moves around in a circle continu-
ously, and that the action or function of the heart
is to accomplish this by pumping. This is the only
reason for the motion and beat of the heart.


[ 104]


CHAPTER XV


The Circulation of the Blood is Confirmed
by Plausible Methods: |


“> ——@) > <>


I WILL not be irrelevant here to point out
further that even according to common ideas,
the circulation is both convenient and necessary.
In the first place, since death is a dissolution re-
sulting from lack of heat, all living things being
warm, all dying things cold (Aristotle, De Respir.,
lib. 2 & 3, De Part. Animal., etc.), there must be a
place of origin for this heat. On this hearth, as it
were, the original native fire, the warming power
of nature, is preserved. From this heat and life may
flow everywhere in the body, nourishment may come
from it, and on it all vegetative energy may depend.

That the heart is this place and source of life, in
the manner just described, I hope no one will deny.

The blood, then, must move, and in such a way
that it is brought back to the heart, for otherwise
it would become thick and immobile, as Aristotle
says (De Part. Animal., lib. 2), in the periphery
of the body, far from its source. We note that
motion always generates and preserves heat and
spirit, while in quietness they disappear. So the
blood, in the extremities, thickens from the cold


[ 105]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


and loses its spirit, as in death. Thus it must come
back to its source and origin to take up heat or
spirit or whatever else it needs to be refreshened.

We often see the extremities so chilled by a cold
atmosphere that the hands, nose, and cheeks seem
deathly blue. The blood in them, stagnating as in
the lower parts of a corpse, become livid. The
limbs are sluggish and are moved with difficulty,
so that they seem almost deprived of life. In no
other way can they recover heat, color, and life
so completely and especially so quickly as by a
freshly driven flow of heat from the source. But
how can they, when heat and life are almost gone,
draw anything into them? How can they, filled
with congealed stagnant blood, admit fresh blood
and nourishment, unless they give up their old con-
tents? Thus the heart really is the center where
this exhausted blood recovers life and heat, as
Aristotle says (De Respirat., lib. 2). New blood
imbued with heat and spirit by it and sent out
through the arteries, forces onwards the chilled
and stagnant stuff, and the failing warmth and
vitality is restored in all parts of the body.

Hence as long as the heart is uninjured, life and
health can be restored to the body generally, but if
it is exhausted or harmed by any severe affliction,
the whole body must suffer and be injured.. When-


1 This sentence is the one clear note in a chapter badly fogged
by speculations based on the traditional natural philosophy. Note
the rather weak illustration from a field in which the footing is still


[ 106]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


ever the source is damaged, nothing, as Aristotle
says (De Part. Animal., lib. 3), can help it or any-
thing depending on it. Perhaps, by the way, this
is the reason why anguish, love, jealousy, worry,
and similar mental states are accompanied by emacia-
tion, wasting away, and other bodily changes pre-
disposing to disease and consumption in men. A
mental disturbance provoking pain, excessive joy,
hope or anxiety extends to the heart, where it
affects its temper,? and rate, impairing general
nutrition and vigor. It is no wonder many serious
diseases thus gain access to the body, when it is
suffering from faulty nourishment and lack of
normal warmth.

Further, since all animals live by food digested
internally, the distribution of this concoction must
be achieved, and hence there must be a place where
the aliment is perfected and from which it is ap-
portioned the to separate members. This place is
the heart. It is the only organ containing blood
very uncertain. Harvey was apparently quite interested in the mind-
body problem as may also be noted in his De generatione, 1651. How
was it that he failed to pick up valvular lesions of the heart in his
many autopsies? Certainly to so keen an observer the effects of an
insufficient or stenotic valve would have been obvious, in the light
of his discovery. Mitral stenosis and aortic insufficiency were appar-
ently first described in detail by R. Vieussens (Traité nouveau de la
structure et des causes de mouvement natural de coeur, Toulouse, 1715).

2 The ancient Greeks commented: upon the obvious effects of strong
emotion on cardiac action. This may have been one reason why
Empedocles and Aristotle made the heart the abiding place of thought.


Even the ancient Jewish scribe wrote that “every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil” (Genesis 6:5).


[ 107 ]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


for general use, referring not to that specifically
used in the coronary arteries and veins, but to the
general reserve in the cavities of its auricles and
ventricles, since all the others have a blood supply
for their own particular use. The heart alone is
so situated and constructed as a reservoir and
fountain that blood may be apportioned from it
and distributed by its beat to all regions according
to the size of the artery serving them.

Moreover, force and effort, such as given by the
heart, is needed to distribute and move the blood
this way. Blood easily concentrates toward the
interior, as drops of water spilled on a table tend to
run together, from such slight causes as cold, fear,
or horror. It also tends to move from the tiny veins
to the intermediate branches and then to the larger
veins because of the movements of the extremities
and the compression of muscles. So it is more in-
clined to move from the periphery toward the in-
terior, even though valves offered no opposition
to the contrary. Therefore, blood requires force
and impulse to be moved from its origin against
its inclination into more narrow and cooler channels.
Only the heart can furnish this, and in the manner
already described.


[108]


CHAPTER XVI
The Circulation of the Blood is Rene“ by


its Implications


— ><


A NG the truth of this proposition there
are certain consequences which are useful
in coaxing belief a posteriori. Although some of
them may seem to be clouded in considerable doubt,
a reasonable case may easily be made for them.

How does it happen that in contagious condi-
tions like poisoned wounds, bites of serpents or
mad dogs, or lues, the whole body may become
diseased while the place of contact is often un-
harmed or healed? Lues commonly appears at
first with pain in the shoulders and head, or by
other symptoms, the genitals meanwhile being
uninjured. We know that the wound made by a
mad dog may have healed when fever and the rest
of the unpleasant symptoms supervene. Without
doubt it happens that the contagion, first being
deposited in a certain spot, is carried by the re-
turning blood to the heart, from which later it is
spread to the whole body.!


1 The usual drainage from the tissues is now considered to be
through the lympathics. These pass through nodules of lymphoid
tissue in which “the contagion, ’—bacteria or other foreign bodies,—


[ 109 ]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY OF THE


In tertian fever, the cause of the sickness first
seeking the heart, lingers about the heart and lungs
and causes shortness of breath, sighing and languor.
This happens because the vital energy is depressed,
and because the blood, driven into the lungs, thick-
ens and cannot pass through, as I have noted ın
autopsies on those dying during the beginning of
the disease. Then the pulse is rapid, feeble, and
somewhat irregular. When the heat increases, the
blood thins out, and an open passage is made, then
the whole body warms, the pulse becomes strong
and full during the febrile state, while the abnormal
heat kindled in the heart is scattered from there
to the body, through the arteries, along with the
morbific matter, which is thus naturally dissolved
and overpowered.?

This may also explain why some medical agents
applied to the skin have almost as much effect as if
taken by mouth. Colocynth and aloes applied
externally move the bowels, cantharides excites
may be filtered out before the lymph passes into the veins. Harvey’s
reasoning here gave a new turn to the old humoral pathology, again
unfortunately neglected by physicians until long after.

2 It is interesting, in view of our present conceptions of immune
reactions to infectious processes, that Harvey should have implied
that fever is a beneficial response in the infected individual. The
success of Peruvian or Jesuits’ bark,—called cinchona from the
Spanish Countess Chinchona, one of the first Europeans to benefit
from it (1638),—in relieving malarial fevers, obscured the signi-
ficance of Harvey's implication until recently. The general feeling


developed that the fever should be reduced at any cost. Hence the


extraordinary interest with the rise of synthetic organic chemistry
in the “antipyretics.”


[ 110]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


the urine, garlic placed on the feet promotes ex-
pectoration, cordials invigorate, and so on? It is
not unreasonable to say that the veins take up
through their openings some of the things applied
externally and carry them in with the blood, not
unlike the way in which those in the mesentery
absorb chyle from the intestines, and carry it along
with blood to the liver.

Blood enters the mesentery through the coeliac,
and the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries,
and passes to the intestines. From these, along
with chyle drawn in by the veins, it is returned by
their many ramifications to the portal vein and
the liver, and from this to the vena cava.‘ The
blood in these veins is the same color and consis-
tency as in other veins, contrary to general opinion.

It is not true that there are two opposite move-
ments in these capillaries, chyle inward and blood
outward. To be so must be considered incongru-
ous and improbable rather than constituted by the
great wisdom of Nature. If chyle were mixed with
blood, the raw with the concocted, in equal parts,
no coction, or blood formation would follow. Rather
there would be a mixture of the two as in the ming-
ling of wine in water or syrup. But when a very
small amount of chyle is added to a lot of blood,


3 The factors concerned in skin absorption have attracted much
attention since the development of chemical warfare. No studies
have been made, that I know of, on the materials mentioned here.


4 See Note 2, Chapter XIII.


[111]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


it is more comparable, as Aristotle says, to adding
a single drop of water to a cask of wine, or the
reverse. Then the total is not a mixture, but re-
mains either wine or water. So in dissecting the
mesenteric veins, chyme and blood are not found
either separately or mixed, but only the same blood
in color and consistency as appears in the other
veins. Still, since there is some chyle or uncon-
cocted material, however small, in this, Nature has
interposed the liver, in whose winding passages it
delays and undergoes more change, lest coming too
quickly in the rough to the heart, it suppress vitality.

Hence there is almost no use for the liver in the
embryo. The umbilical vein clearly passes right
through the liver, with an opening or anastomosis
to the portal vein, so that fetal blood returning
from the intestines does not flow through the liver,
but mixed with maternal blood from the placenta
goes to the heart through this umbilical vein. So
in the development of the fetus, the liver is among
the last parts formed. In the human fetus we often
see all the organs fully marked out, even the genitals,
while there is still almost no trace of the liver. At
the time when all the organs, even the heart, appear
white, and there is no sign of redness anywhere ex-
cept in the veins, you will see nothing where the
liver should be except an irregular spot like blood
spilled out of a ruptured vein.

In the developing egg there are two umbilical
veins, one passing through the liver directly to the


[112]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


heart from the white of the egg, the other from the
yolk ending in the portal vein. The chick is de-
veloped and nourished first by the white, then
after it is formed and leaves the shell, from the
yolk. One may find the yolk in the stomach of a
chick many days after hatching, for it serves in-
stead of the milk in other animals.

These matters, however, may be more appro-
priate to notes on the formation of the fetus, where
many problems of the following sort can. be dis-
cussed. Why is one part formed first, another
later? Concerning the origin of organs, whether
one may be a cause of another, and much about
the heart. Why, as Aristotle points out (De Part.
Animal, Lib. 3), is it the first to take shape, and
seem to have life, motion, and sensation before
any other part of the body? Likewise, why does
blood appear before anything else, and how does
it possess the vital animal principle? How does
it desire to be moved here and there, for which
reason the heart seems to be provided?

In the same way, speculating on the pulse, why
does one kind indicate death, another recovery?
In considering all varieties of pulse, what do they
signify and why? Likewise, in discussing crises,
natural discharges, nutrition, the distribution of
nutriment, and fluxes.

Finally, in considering all phases of medicine,
physiology, pathology, and therapeutics, I realize
how many problems may be answered, how many


[113]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


doubts removed, and how much obscurity cleared
up by the truth and light here given.® It opens
up a field so vast that were I to scan it further or
investigate it more fully this little effort would
swell to a huge volume which perhaps would take
more than my ability or span of life to finish.

In the following chapter, therefore, reference
will only be made to the functions and causes de-
rived from an anatomical study of the heart and
arteries. Even here I shall find much which may
be explained by my theory, and which in turn will
make it more clear. Above all, I wish to confirm and
illustrate it by anatomical reasoning.

There is one point, however, which might be
noted here, although it belongs more properly in
my discussion of the function of the spleen.? From


$ Did Harvey mean this treatise to be a “preliminary communica-
tion?” It seems doubtful that there would be much to add to what
is here written or to what may be inferred from it. Harvey probably
was honest in the remark here made,—he realized what still could
be done but was willing to let others take up the burden, while he
himself was anxious to let it drop.

6 This paragraph seems to have been another after-thought. If
Harvey ever wrote a discussion of the function of the spleen, it was
apparently lost with his other papers during the plunderings of the
Civil War. If this note is an example of the many observations Har-
vey felt could be made in the light of his doctrine, it would better
have been omitted. A typical Galenical argument, straining to find
the “design” in nature, this is the antithesis of most of the clear-cut
observations and explanations in this book. The majority of these
are directly in the modern spirit of simple description with an at-
tempted explanation of the mechanism involved. Harvey was in
fact among the first to emphasize the Aow in physiology, rather than
the more conceited and arrogant why. For a discussion of the func-
tions [of the spleen including Barcroft’s work see E. B. Krumbhaar,
Physiol. Rev., 6:160, 1926.


[114]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


the upper part of the splenic branch leading to the
pancreas arise the posterior coronary, gastric, and
gastroepiploic veins, all of which are spread in many
branches on the stomach, like the mesenterics on
the intestines. Likewise, into the lower part of this
splenic vessel empty the hemorrhoidal veins from
the colon and rectum. Through both these venous
systems returning blood is poured into the splenic
branch, carrying with it from the stomach a crude
watery juice not completely chylified, and from
the feces a thick earthy material. Both these are
appropriately tempered by natural mixture, al-
though difficultly concocted alone, because of op-
posite defects. Then, diluted by a large amount
of warm blood flowing through the spleen from
its large artery, the mixture enters the portal of
the liver in a better state of preparation. The de-
fects of either extreme are made up and compensated
by this arrangement of the veins.


[115]


CHAPTER XVII


The Motion and Circulation of the Blood ts
Established by What is Displayed in
the Heart and Elsewhere by
Anatomical Investigation


"pD >00


DO not find the heart a separate and distinct

organ in all animals. Some, called plant-animals,
have no heart at all. These animals are colder, have
little bulk, are softer, and of uniform structure,
such as grubs, worms, and many which come from
decayed material and do not preserve their species.!
These need no heart to impel nourishment to their
extremities, for their bodies are uniform and they
have no separate members. By the contraction and
relaxation of the whole body they take up and move,
expel and remove aliment. Oysters, mussels, sponges


1 Harvey really says “generated from decayed material.” This
idea of spontaneous generation, current from the beginning of philoso-
phical speculation, received its first serious blow from Francesco
Redi (1626-1694) in his Experientia circa generationem insectorum,
Amsterdam, 1671. Another attack, covering microscopic forms of
life, was given by L. Pasteur (1822-1895). In his De generatione
animalium, 1651, Harvey maintained the theory that the organism
is.not preformed i in the ovum, but that it gradually evolves by growth
and union of its parts. This, as Garrison says, “subverted the ancient
concept that life is engendered out of corruption (or putrefaction).”
The question of spontaneous generation has arisen again in connection
with filterable viruses.


[116]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


and the whole genus of zoophytes or plant-animals
have no heart, for the whole body functions as a
heart, and the animal itself is a heart.

In almost the entire family of insects we cannot
clearly discern a heart because of the smallness of
the body. In bees, flies, hornets, and the like, one
can see with a magnifying glass something pulsate.
Likewise in lice, in which, since they are translucent,
you can easily watch, with a magnifying glass? for
enlarging, the passage of food like a black spot
through the intestines.

In bloodless and colder animals as snails, shrimps,
and shell-fish there is a pulsating place like a vesicle
or auricle without a heart. This may be seen beating
and contracting, slowly indeed, and only in the sum-
mer or warmer seasons.

In these this part is fashioned because there
is need for some impulse to distribute nutriment
on account of the variety of separate organs or the
denseness of their substance. But the beats are
seldom and sometimes entirely fail through cold. This
is appropriate to their doubtful nature as they
sometimes seem living, sometimes dying, some-
times showing the vitality of animals, sometimes of


2 In the miserable little Longhine edition, Bologna, 1697, with the
Archbishop’s imprimatur, the word microscopia is inserted. I was
using this edition for translating, and was greatly puzzled that Har-
vey should have employed such a term. When I received the facsimile
of the original edition, my difficulties were not over, but just begin-
ning, for 1 then had to check over my whole translation, to avoid any
other such errors!


[117]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


plants. This seems also to occur in insects which
hide away in winter and appear dead or show a
vegetative vitality. But that it happens in red-
blooded animals? as frogs, turtles, or serpents may
justly be doubted.

In larger, warmer, red-blooded animals there is
need for something with greater power to distribute
nourishment. So, to fishes, serpents, lizards, turtles,
frogs and such like, a heart is granted with both
an auricle and ventricle. Thus it is very true, as
Aristotle contended (De Part. Animal., Lib. 3),
that no red-blooded animal lacks a heart, by whose
beat the nourishing liquid is not only stirred up
more vigorously than by an auricle, but is propelled
farther and more quickly.

In still bigger, warmer, and more perfect animals
with more fervent and spiritous blood, a more
robust and fleshy heart is needed to pump the nutri-
tive fluid with greater force and speed, on account
of the size and density of their bodies. Further,
because the more perfect animals need more per-
fect nourishment and more native heat, that the
aliment may be better concocted* and delivered,

® Harvey just says “blooded animals.” The oxygen carrying
pigment in invertebrates is not the iron containing hemoglobin but
a copper containing hemocyanin, which is not red colored.

“It is interesting to watch the valiant groping towards the facts
regarding the oxygenation of blood in the lungs. The idea expressed
is that in order better to “perfect” blood from the food, more heat
is needed for the process in the liver, and, as was generally recog-


nized, a draft of air promoted burning and heating. But the tradi-
tional doctrines, which Harvey follows in his teleological speculations


[118]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


it is convenient for these animals to have lungs
and another ventricle to send nouishment through
these lungs.

Wherever there are lungs there are two ventricles
in the heart, a right and left, and wherever there
is a right there is also a left, but not the reverse.
I call that the left ventricle which is distinguished
by function, not position, the one namely that sends
blood to the whole body, not merely to the lungs.
This left ventricle seems to comprise the real heart.
It is medianly placed, marked with deeper furrows,
and made with greater care, so that the heart seems
to have been formed for the sake of the left ventricle.
The right ventricle is a sort of servant to the left,
it does not reach to the apex, its walls are three-
fold thinner, and it is somehow joined on to the
left, as Aristotle says. Its capacity indeed is greater
since it not only furnishes material to the left but
also nourishment to the lungs.

It is noteworthy that this is otherwise in the
embryo, where there is no such difference between
the ventricles. As in the double kernels of a nut,
they about equal each other, and the tip of the
right reaches the apex of the left, so that the heart
appears as a double-pointed cone. Here, as I have
said, blood does not pass through the lungs from
through some of the chapters of this book, are full of the many con-
tradictions against which he is so bitter in the Introduction. In the
present instance, for example, it was also taught that respiration


existed for cooling the heart, to keep the blood from boiling and ex-
tinction (Note 3, Chapter VI).


[119]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


the right side of the heart to the left. Both ventri-
cles equally have the same function of transferring
blood from the vena cava to the aorta through the
foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus, and of
pumping it to the whole body, whence their struc-
tural equality.

However, when the lungs are used and it is time
for the passages spoken of to be closed, then these
differences in the ventricles begin to appear, since
the right pumps only through the lungs, but the
left through the whole body.

There are also so-called braces in the heart, many
fleshy and fibrous bands, which Aristotle calls
nerves (De. Respirat. & De Part. Animal., Lib. 3).
They are stretched partly from place to place, and
partly in the walls and septum, where they form
little pits. Little muscles are concealed in these
furrows which are added to assist in a more power-
ful contraction of the heart and a more vigorous
expulsion of blood.’ Like the clever and elaborate
arrangement of ropes on a ship, they help the heart
to contract in every direction, driving blood more
fully and forcibly from the ventricles.

It may be shown, however, that some animals
have less than others, that in all animals with them,
they are more numerous and stronger in the left
than in the right ventricle, and in some animals where


5 These papillary muscles, elongated into the chordae tendinae which
extend to the valves, seem to aid in closing the valves more exactly.
See Note 5, Chapter II.


[120]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


they are present in the left, none are found in the
right chamber. In man there are more in the left
than in the right ventricle, and more in the ventricles
than in the auricles, and in some subjects it seems
there are none in the auricles. In large, muscular,
peasant-type individuals there are many, in more
slender frames, and in women, few.

In some animals the ventricles of the heart are
smooth inside, entirely without fibers or bands.
In almost all small birds, serpents, frogs, turtles,
and such like, and in most all fishes, neither fibers,
or so-called nerves, nor tricuspid valves are found
in the ventricles.

In some animals the right ventricle is smooth
inside while the left has these fibrous bands, as in
the goose, swan, and heavier birds. The reason is
the same here as elsewhere. Since the lungs are
spongy, loose, and soft, not so great a force is needed
to pump blood through them. Therefore the right
ventricle either has none of these fibers or they are
few and weak, not fleshy or muscular. Those of the
left ventricle, however, are stronger, more numerous,
and more muscular because this chamber needs
to be more powerful since it must propel blood
farther through the whole body. This is also why
the left ventricle is placed in the middle of the
heart, and has walls three times as thick and strong
as the right.

So all animals, man included, that have a stronger
and more sturdy frame, with large, brawny limbs


[121]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


some distance from the heart, have a more thick,
powerful, and muscular heart, as is obvious and
necessary. On the contrary, those whose structure
is more slender and soft have a more flaccid, less
massive, and weaker heart, with few or no fibers
internally.

Consider likewise the function of the sigmoid
valves. These are so made that blood once received
into the ventricles of the heart, or sent into the
pulmonary artery or aorta, can not regurgitate.
When they are raised and tightly joined, they form
a three pointed line, like the bite of a leech, and the
more tightly they are forced shut, the more do they
block the reflux of blood.

The tricuspids are like gate-keepers at the point
of inflow from the vena cava and pulmonary vein,
so that the blood, when strongly propelled, may
not escape back into them. They are not present
in all animals, for the reason stated, nor do they
seem to have been made with the same efficiency in
thosein which they are found.’ In some they are made


6 This again raises the question as to whether or not Harvey ever
noted insufficiency or stenosis of the valves in humans. He is speak-
ing as an comparative anatomist here.

According to Galen (J. C. Dalton, Doctrines of the Circulation,
Phila., 1884, p. 250), Erasistratus named the right auriculo-ventri-
cular valves “tricuspids” (rpıyAwxırvas), and also called the valves
at the openings of the pulmonary artery and aorta “sigmoid” in
shape. Since the old Greek sigma had the form of the letter C, this
gave a correct impression of their semilunar form. Vesalius, in his
immortal De Humani Corporis Fabrica, Basle, 1543, p. $92, first likens
the left auriculo-ventricular valves to a bishop's miter.


[122]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


to fit exactly, in others poorly and negligently, so that
they may be closed according to the greater or lesser
impulse from the contraction of the ventricles. In
the left ventricle, therefore, that the closure may be
made more complete against the stronger impulse,
there are only two, placed like a miter, and length-
ened in a conical form so they may come together
medianly and close very exactly. This probably led
Aristotle to consider this ventricle double, divided
transversely. Likewise, that blood may not escape
back into the pulmonary vein and thus reduce the
power of the left ventricle to pump blood through the
whole body, these mitral valves surpass in size,
strength, and exactness of closure those placed in the
right ventricle. Hence, necessarily, no heart can be
found without a ventricle since there must be a source
and store-house for blood.

The same does not always hold for the brain.”
Almost no kind of bird has a ventricle in the brain, as
is clear in the goose and swan, whose brains nearly
equal in size that of the rabbit. But the rabbit has
ventricles in the brain while the goose does not.

Wherever there is a single ventricle in the heart, a
flaccid, membranous, hollow, blood-filled auricle is
appended. Where two ventricles exist, there are like-

7 This paragraph and the last sentence of the preceding seem to
be unnecessary appendages to the argument. They appear in the
middle of a long paragraph which has been broken up for greater
ease in reading. Was Harvey implying that there is no necessary


store-house for “animal spirits”? in the brain as there is for “vital-
spirits” (or blood) in the heart?


[ 123]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


wise two auricles. On the other hand, in some animals
there is an auricle without a ventricle, or anyway a
sac like an auricle, or the vein itself, dilated in one
place, pulsates. This is seen in hornets, bees, and
other insects, in experiments on which I think I can
show not only a pulse but also a respiration in that
part called a tail. This can be seen to lengthen and
contract, sometimes quickly, sometimes slowly, as
the insect seems to be blown up and to need more air.
But more of this in the Treatise on Respiration.®
Likewise it is clear that the auricles beat, contract,
and, as I said before, push blood into the ventricles.
So wherever there is a ventricle, an auricle is needed.
Not alone, as commonly believed, to be a receptacle
and store-house for blood. For what use is a pulsation
in retaining? The auricles exist as the initial motive
power of the blood. Especially the right auricle, the
first to live and the last to die, as said before. They
are necessary in order to cast the blood conveniently
into the ventricles. These, continually contracting,
throw out more fully and forcibly the blood already
in motion, just as a ball-player can send a ball harder
and farther by striking it on a rebound than if he
simply throws it. Moreover, contrary to common
opinion, neither the heart nor anything else can draw
anything into itself by dilating or distending, unless
like a sponge previously compressed, while it is return-


8 If the Treatise on Respiration was written, it was probably
destroyed by the Parliamentary soldiers who sacked Harvey’s rooms
in Whitehall in 1642, when Harvey was with Charles 1 at Edgehill.


[124]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


ing to its real condition.* All local motion in an
animal first takes place from the contraction of some
particular part. Thus blood is cast into the ventricles
by auricular contraction, as shown before, and then
passed on and distributed by the ventricular con-
traction. :

I have been interested in getting at the truth of
this matter of local motion. How the initial moti-
vating organ in all animals having a prime motive
spirit is, as Aristotle says in his book De Spiritu,
contractile; how vevpov is derived from vevw (nuto,
contraho), and how Aristotle had more than a super-
ficial acquaintance with muscles, and on that account
referred all motion in animals to nerves and a con-
tractile part, and hence called those bands in the
heart nerves,—all this I hope to make clear soon, if
I am permitted to demonstrate my observations on
the organic motion of animals and the structure of
muscles.?°


® According to present physiological conceptions, venous pressure
is great enough to open the auriculo-ventricular valves during dias-
tole, so that considerable blood flows into the ventricles while they are
relaxed and before the auricles start to contract. It is generally
agreed with Harvey that the ventricles have no suction power, but
it is felt that the contractions of the auricles force in only a portion
of the ventricular contents. See Note 4, Chapter IV.

10 This treatise also disappeared. The derivation of terms is
apparently offered in apology for Aristotle’s calling the muscular
bands in the heart “nerves.” G. A. Borelli (1608-1679), in develop-
ing a mechanical analysis of muscular motion carried over a theory
of contraction caused by a liquid discharge from nerves (De motu
animalium, 1680). For a helpful discussion of the physiology of muscle
consult J. F. Fulton’s monograph, Baltimore, 1927.


[125]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


But to go on with our subject, on the function of
the auricles in filling the ventricles with blood, it may
be observed that the thicker and denser the walls of
the heart itself, the more fibrous and muscular are
the auricles, and the reverse. In some animals the
auricle appears to be a bloody membranous sac, as in
fishes, where it is so delicate and ample that it seems
to float above the heart. In other fishes as the carp,
and barbel, in which this vesicle is a little more
fleshy, it bears a striking resemblance to lungs.

In some men of heavier and huskier build, the
right auricle is so robust and so well braced inside by
bands and various connecting fibers that it approxi-
mates in strength the ventricle of other subjects. I
marvel that there is such variation in this in different
men.

It is noteworthy that the auricles are dispropor-
tionately large in the fetus, because they are present
before the rest of the heart is made or can take up its
function, so that, as shown before, they assume the
duty of the whole heart.

My observations previously referred to on the
development of the fetus, and which Aristotle con-
firms in regard to the egg, throw great light on this
matter. While the fetus is till soft like a worm, or,
as is said, in the milk," there is a single bloody spot,
or pulsating sac, as if a part of the umbilical vein


1 I can't trace the origin or significance of this expression. My
wretched Longhine edition, Bologna, 1697, rendered vermicules as ven-
tricules, and lacte as lucte!


[126]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


were dilated at its base or origin. After awhile when
the fetus is outlined and the body begins to be more
substantial, this vesicle becomes more fleshy and
stronger, and its constitution changing, it turns into
the auricles. From these the bulk of the heart begins
to sprout, although as yet it has no function. When
the fetus is really developed, with bones separated
from flesh, when the body is perfected and has
motion, then the heart actually beats and, as I said,
pumps blood by both ventricles from the vena cava
to the arteries.

Thus divine Nature making nothing in vain, neither
gives a heart to an animal where it is not needed, nor
makes one before it can be used. By the same steps -
in the development of every animal, passing through
the structural stages, I might say, of egg, worm, and
fetus, it obtains perfection in each. These points are
confirmed elsewhere by many observations on the
formation of the fetus.”

Hippocrates, in the book De Corde, did not call the
heart a muscle without good reason.” Its action or

12 Another paragraph stressing the “Bridgewater treatise” idea.
Harvey was probably engaged, while this was published, on his other
great treatise, De generatione animalium, which appeared at the
solicitation and under the direction of Dr. George Ent, in London
in 1651. This is a remarkable volume, not yet properly annotated
or appreciated, a mine of observation and interpretation, and a com-
plete commentary on the ideas of Aristotle and Fabricius on fetal
development. As a sustained intellectual effort it surpasses the pres-
ent volume, and with the development of sexual physiology may be
recognized as a very significant contribution.


13 This little tract of about 800 words (mept Kapdıns) is the best
anatomical work of the Hippocratic Collection. Written about


[ 127]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


function is that of a muscle, to contract and to move
something, namely its content of blood.

Asin the muscles themselves, the actions and uses
ofthe heart may be understood from the arrangement
of its fibers and the structure of its movable parts.
Anatomists generally agree with Galen that the heart
is composed of a variety of fibers arranged straight,
transversely, and obliquely. But in the boiled heart
the fibers are seen to be arranged otherwise. All
those in the walls and septum are circular as in a
sphincter whereas those in the bands are longitudi-
nally oblique.* So when all these muscles contract
simultaneously the apex is pulled toward the base by
the bands and the walls are drawn together in a
sphere. The heart is contracted on all sides and the
ventricles are compressed. Hence it must be recog-
nized that since it acts by contraction, its function is
to pump blood into the arteries.


400 B. C., it describes the auriculo-ventricular and semilunar valves,
and the chordae tendinae. Air is said to enter the heart and change
the blood. The conception of the heart as a muscle is not usually
credited either to Harvey or the Hippocratic writer. It is charac-
teristic of Harvey to attempt to fortify his ideas by references to the
classical authorities. See Note 3, Chapter II.

14 Interesting that Harvey boiled the heart to get a clear picture
of its fibrous make-up. The best recent analysis of this subject was
made by F. P. Mall (Amer. J. Anat., 2: 211, 1911). Mall describes
a deep and superficial “bulbospiral” and “sinospiral” system of
fibers which curve around from the base to the apex of the heart.
These form a sling-like support for the circular fibers which are especi-
ally thick on the left side. Harvey’s description is essentially correct.
See W. H. Howell's Physiology, roth Ed., Phila., 1927.


[128]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


No less should it be agreed with Aristotle in such
questions on the significance of the heart as whether
it receives motion and sensation from the brain, or
blood from the liver, or whether it is the source of the
veins and blood, and so on. Those who try to refute
him here overlook or do not understand the signifi-
cance of his argument. This is, that 1t is the first to
exist, and contains in itself blood, vitality, sensation
and motion before the brain or liver are formed, or
can be clearly distinguished, or at least before they
can assume any function. The heart is fashioned with
appropriate structures for motion, as an internal
organism, before the body. Being finished first,
Nature wished the rest of the body to be made,
nourished, preserved, and perfected by it, as its work
and home. The heart is like the head of a state, hold-
ing supreme power, ruling everywhere. So in the
animal body power is entirely dependent on and de-
rived from this source and foundation.

Many points about the arteries further illustrate
and confirm this truth. Why doesn’t the arteria
venosa pulsate, since it is considered an artery? Why
may a pulse be felt in the vena arteriosa? Because


15 This is the general Aristotelian position.

16 The arteria venosa is the pulmonary vein, the vena arteriosa the
pulmonary artery.

In the last sentence of this paragraph my Latin lexicon (E. A.
Andrews, New York, 1852) permits me to translate impetum literally
as pressure, but not impellentis as pumping! Harvey does not any-
where in the treatise use a word which may literally be translated
to give the conception of the heart as a pump. Retaining the tradi-


[ 129]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


the pulse in an artery is due to an impact of blood.
Why do the arteries differ so much from veins in the
thickness and strength of their walls? Because they
must withstand the pressure of the pumping heart
and rushing blood.

Hence, since Nature makes nothing in vain, and
does the best everywhere, the nearer arteries are to
the heart the more do they differ from veins in struc-
ture. Here they are stronger and more ligamentous,”
but in their terminal branchings, as in the hands,
feet, brain, mesentery, and testicles, they are so simi-
lar to veins in make up that it is hard to tell one from
another by ocular examination of their tunics. This
occurs from the following good reason: the farther an
artery is away from the heart the less it is reached by
the cardiac pressure dissipated by the long space.
Since all the arterial trunks and branches must be
filled with blood, the cardiac impulse is further dimin-
ished, divided in a way by each branching.

So the terminal arteries appear like veins, not only
in structure, but also in function, for they rarely show
a perceptible pulse unless the heart beats more vio-
lently, or the arteriole dilates or is more open at the
particular point. Thus it happens that we may


tional semi-technical language of the subject, he perhaps never
thought of using a word which conveys the meaning he so clearly
implies.

17 This is the nearest Harvey comes to grasping the idea of the
elasticity of blood-vessel walls, a factor of considerable importance
in determining blood pressure.

18 A remarkable explanation, implying vaso-constriction and


[130]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


sometimes be aware of a pulsation in the teeth,
fingers or inflammatory tumors, other times not. By
this symptom 1 have diagnosed fever in children,
whose pulse is naturally rapid anyway. By holding
tightly the fingers of a young and delicate person I
can easily perceive pulsation there when the fever is
high.

On the other hand, when the heart beats more
feebly, as in fainting, hysteria, asphyxia, and in the
very weak and moribund, it is impossible to feel a
pulse not merely in the fingers, but even at the wrist
or temple.

Here, lest they be deceived, surgeons should be
advised that when blood flows with force from a
wound, in amputations, or in removing a fleshy tumor,
it always comes from an artery. Not always in spurts,
however, since the small arteries may not pulsate,
especially if compressed by a bandage.

Further, here is the same reason why the vena
arteriosa not only has the structure and walls of an
artery but also why it does not differ so much from
the veins in the thickness of its walls as the aorta.
The latter sustains a greater impulse from the left
ventricle, than the former from the right. The walls
of the pulmonary artery are softer in structure than
those of the aorta to the same extent as the walls and
flesh of the right ventricle are weaker than those of


dilatation, another important factor in determining blood pressure.
Harvey correctly notes vascular dilatation in local inflammatory
reactions, and cutaneous vascular dilatations in fever.


[131]


AN ANATOMICAL STUDY ON THE


the left. The lungs are relatively softer in texture
than the flesh and bulk of the body in the same degree
that the walls of the pulmonary artery differ from
those of the aorta. This general proportion holds
quite universally. The stronger, more muscular, and
more substantial the build of men, the thicker,
heavier, more powerful and fibrous the heart, and the
auricles and arteries are proportionally increased in
thickness, strength, and all other respects.

On the other hand, in fish, birds, serpents, and
other such families of animals, the ventricles of the
heart are smooth inside, without villi or valves. The
walls are thinner and the arteries scarcely differ from
the veins in thickness of tunics.

Further, why do the lungs have such large vessels,
veins as well as arteries, for the trunk of the pul-
monary veins exceeds both crurals and jugulars, and
why are they filled with so much blood? We know by
experience in autopsies and the advice of Aristotle,
not to be deceived by the appearance of such animals
as we encounter in dissection which have been bled
to death. The reason is that the source and store-
house of the blood, and the place for its perfecting, is
in the lungs and heart.

Similarly, why do we find the pulmonary vein and
left ventricle in dissections so full of the same black
clotted blood which fills the right ventricle and pul-
monary artery? Because blood continually traverses
the lungs from the right side of the heart to the left.

Finally, why has the so-called vena arteriosa the


[132]


MOTION OF THE HEART AND BLOOD


structure of an artery, while the arteria venosa has
that of a vein? Because really, in build, in function
and everything, the former is an artery, the latter a
vein, contrary to what is commonly believed.!® Why
has the pulmonary artery so large an opening? Be-
cause it carries much more blood than is needed for
the nourishment of the lungs.

All these phenomena and many others noted in
dissecting, if correctly judged, seem clearly to illu-
strate and to confirm the truth announced in this
tract, and at the same time to refute popular opinion.
Certainly it would be hard to explain in any other
way why all these matters are so made and constituted
except in a manner conforming to my theory and to
what I have expounded.

19 Since he so clearly points out the inconsistencies of the current


names, why did not Harvey rename these vessels? One may some-
times be too deferential to traditional authority.


[ 133]


i


k had i


u


A en A E nn en ter ee ae
Bee: R, A cP eee ot ES


“THE MOST PLEASING PICTURE OF DR. WILLIAM HARVEY”
Usually attributed to Sir Anthony Van Dyck'(1599-1641),
in the possession of the heirs of Richard Bright (1789-1858),


to Guy’s Hospital. Note the crest similar to the “stemma” to Harvey at Padua, and
the motto, not found elsewhere.


this dignified painting is
the celebrated physician


— Courtesy of the Oxford University Press.


APPENDIX I


puua


CHRONOLOGY OF THE LIFE OF
WILLIAM HARVEY


PAI zu VLD LD RD) GREED) RQ) LE ED


Chronology of William Harvey
RED)


1578. Born (April 1) at Folkestone, Kent, of Thomas
(a town official) and Joane Hawke Harvey, eldest of
“a week of sons, whereof this William was bred to
learning, his other brethren being bound apprentices
in London, and all at last ended in effect in mer-
chants.” (Fuller).


1588. Excitement over and defeat of the Spanish Ar-
mada. How thrilled was Harvey entering Canterbury
Grammar School this year?


1593. Entered Caius College, Cambridge, implying
choice of medical career. Caesalpinus (1524-1603)
publishes Questiones Medicae, incidentally discussing
pulmonary and systemic circulation.


1597. Receives Bachelor’s degree from Cambridge.
Expedition of Earl of Essex and Sir Walter Raleigh
against the Spaniards.


1598. Began medical studies at Padua (in the elite
Universitas juristarum), scene of the triumphs of
Vesalius (1514-1564), R. Columbus (1516-1559),
Fallopius (1523-1562), and now of H. Fabricius of
Aquapendente (1537-1619), Casserius (1561-1616),
Galilei (1564-1642), and Sanctorius (1561-1636). Hav-
ing just erected a new anatomical theater, Fabricius
was loved and respected for his charity, skill, and learn-
ing. Harvey apparently became one of his favorite
pupils, and even helped in experiments (De generatione,
6th exercise).


1600. Elected conciliarius of “English nation” at
Padua. Fabricius publishes his De formato fetu. Giro-
dano Bruno burned at Rome. Founding of East India
Company. Gilbert's De magnete.


II II IA IT IA IO TI 3 |
[137]


ED RD HI LD DU AQ VAD IMA LED)


1601. Re-elected conciliarius. Treason and execution


of Earl of Essex.


1602. Awarded diploma (April 25) of Doctor of Physic
at Padua, with special notations regarding his skill.
Returned to England and received doctorate in medi-
cine from Cambridge. Shakespeare's Hamlet.


1603. Publication of Fabricius’ De venarum ostiolis.
Death of Queen Elizabeth, accession of James 1.


1604. Admitted a Candidate of the Royal College of
Physicians (October 5). Married (November 24)
Elizabeth Browne (1580-1645?), daughter of Dr.
Lancelot Browne, physician to James I. Lived at
St. Martin's, Ludgate. Plague in London.


1605. Death of Mother (November 18) at Folkestone,
in her fiftieth year. Death of Father-in-law. Harvey
seems to have been well fixed financially. His brothers
were wealthy merchants, trading in the Levant. Gun
Powder Conspiracy.


1607. Elected Fellow of the Royal College of Physi-
cians (June 5). Settlement of Jamestown, Virginia.


1609. With King's support, sued for the reversion of
Physician to St. Bartholomew's Hospital (February
25). Charged as Physician to “Old Bart's” (October
14). Hendrick Hudson anchors the Half-Moon in
Hudson River.


a 1. King James’ Authorized Version of the English
Bible.


1613. Elected Censor of the Royal College of Physi
cians. High cost of living; increasing friction between
King and Parliament; religious squabbles. Rise of
Puritanism.


1615. Appointed (August 4) Lumleian lecturer, Royal
College of Physicians. Detailed duties and salary
equivalent to Regius Professorship of Physic at Oxford


II AI AED) EI LD) GR~LD YG
[138]


CTI TI Rz RD RD REDEN GE


or Cambridge (see D’Arcy Power’s biography, London,
1897, P. 39).


1616. Delivered (April) first “visceral lecture” at
Royal College of Physicians, in manuscript notes in
which is his first account of the circulation of the blood.
Death of Shakespeare and Cervantes.


1618. Appointed (February 3) Physician Extraor-
dinary to James I, and promised post of Physician in
Ordinary as soon as it became vacant. The Lord Chan-
cellor, Francis Bacon, his patient, but no sympathy be-
tween them. Start of Thirty Years’ War. Pharmaco-
poeia Londinensis.


1620. Publication of Bacon’s Novum Organum. Puri-
tans settle in New England.


1625. Death of King James I, accession of Charles I.


1627. Appointed (December 3) Elect of Royal College
of Physicians, one of eight “directors.”


1628. Publication of Exercitatio anatomica de motu
cordis et sanguinis in animalibus, at Frankfort. Elected
Treasurer of Royal College of Physicians. Birth of
Marcello Malpighi (March 10). Parliament's Pezition
of Right.


1630. Journeys through France and Spain with James
Stuart, Duke of Lennox, at King's order. Plagues, wars,
and famines. King struggling with Parliament. Ap-
pointed Physician in Ordinary to Charles I. Jacob
Primrose, licensed to practice with Harvey's consent,
publishes first attack on his doctrine of the circulation.


1632. Petitions King to restrict sale of poisons.


1633. Travels with Charles and Court to Scotland.
Tactless aggravation of religious animosities. Drew up
rules governing St. Bartholomew's Hospital, in which he
subordinates surgeons to physicians. Reflection of op-
pressive court tactics? Recantation of Galilei.


II IED ID IS RI ID OLD) REDS 3
[139]


PAEZ ATL RD) RD RED RD I< VE


1634. Lancashire witches. Harvey examined and
exonerated several suspects.


1635. Accused (November 17) of malpractice by
Barber-Surgeons. Revenge? Autopsy report (Nov-
ember 16) on Thomas Parr, reputed to have lived 152
years. Richelieu founded Academie Francaise.


1636. Accompanied Lord Arundel on diplomatic
mission to Vienna. Tried to convince Caspar Hoffman
at Nuremberg of truth of circulation. Visited Italy.
Harvard College founded.


1637. Religious riots in Scotland. Covenanters.


1639. Went with Charles and Lord Arundel against
the Scotch.


1640. Sued heirs of Lord Lumley to recover salary.
Meeting of Long Parliament. “Grand Remonstrance”
against Charles.


1641. Trial and execution of Strafford.


1642. Charles and Court fled London (August) Civil
War. Harvey’s quarters looted, and valuable papers
lost. Death of Galilei. Birth of Newton. Harvey in
charge of the Princes (Charles II and James II) at
Battle of Edgehill (October), and tends wounded.
Browne’s Religio Medici. Made Doctor of Physic at
Oxford (December 7).


1643. Retired from service at St. Bartholomew’s.
Death of Brothers Matthew and Michael. Taught


Charles Scarborough, his successor. Accession of Louis
XIV.


1645. Elected Warden of Merton College, Oxford.
Did he influence Willis, Highmore, Lower, or Wren?
Death of Brother John. Death of wife?


LED LBP) PE LEDO, GE DV N O Pca Pa ELD Y
[140]


BLD VAD ~~ LI LD IA LD, IIED, MA GENE ED


1646. Fled from Oxford with King (April 27). Re-
turned to London.


1648. Retired to live with Brothers Eliab and Daniel.
Afflicted with gout. The younger Riolan publishes
critique of Harvey’s doctrine of the circulation.
War of the Fronde. Peace of Westphalia, ending .
terrible Thirty Years’ War, and acknowledging inde-
pendence of the Netherlands. Sydenham (1624-1689)
made bachelor of medicine at Oxford.


1649. Harvey from Cambridge writes two letters to
Riolan answering the attack on his demonstration.
Execution of Charles I. Cromwell subdues Great
Britain and Ireland.


1650. Visited at Christmas time by his friend Dr.
George Ent, who obtained manuscript of essay on
generation.


1651. Publication of Exercitationes de generatione
animalium. Offered anonymously to build library for
Royal College of Physicians. Pecquet publishes account
of thoracic duct. Harvey writes to Dr. Paul M.
Slegel, of Hamburg, thanking him for defending his
work against Riolan. Meets John Aubrey, his first
biographer.


1652. Letter to Dr. R. Morison of Paris criticizing
Pecquet's conclusions. Royal College of Physicians
placed bust of Harvey in new library.


1653. First English edition of the De motu cordis.
Parliament disbanded.


1654. Refuses to accept Presidency of Royal College
of Physicians.


1657. Died on June 3. Buried in Hempstead Church.


~~) GRD) BRD) RD) ED) RD AMA ED IVD
[141]


i?


7 T y =
d 4 y aa
er ee


THE BODY OF WILLIAM HARVEY “LAPT IN LEAD”


Deposited in a marble sarcophagus
in the Hempstead Church
by the Royal College of Physicians of London
St. Luke’s Day, 1883.


BLD VEL VEL YELLED) REED) GREED) N


Index
Norte: The English translations and footnotes have both been indexed.
LIE DD
A one RON AI la AO
Alberti, S. A E E de eke, 98
Aneurysm, case report ; TE eA pee
Animal experimentation, Harvey’ s use Ate Aue 58
AA nee mer ih Tag
Apex beat Be: ¿ 29


Aristotle . . 32, 70, 105, 118, 119, 120, 123, 125, 129, 132


Aristotle on generation . Set RR LE: 44
Aristotle on the pulse See REES: 36, 56
ee a Ea RE 129, 133
A A ea ee YG eh
EEN structure OF En. ae. 130
AE AS A ke ne A ug
Marele IRCHON Oley! fis ehe ne e AT 124
AACO a pe ae A RIRS 0 OT
A IN a E A > 99
AA a A a AR
Belon, P. : eh deta gio) ee ee 44
Bichat, M. F. x, RE N STE rn ee
Blood in veins at death . EB E 79
Blood pressure . .. TR EN HELL 86-87
Blood vessels, clessitfention um 3. en ee 71
Borc TA A AS ne ed e, 6 Y
Bottalus, | iE arte EEE OO GE PR 57
A en AA RN Bs 9
Caesalpinus, A. a EEE TE 15
IA a ta ge E O
Wapelary anastomases aa a a 62; 07,01
Gardiae muscle, properties Of ne n e 04
Cardiac muscle, stmetureof . =. ft kk 30
Cardiac valves, Galens views on . . . . . 63


PA TI RD) RD RD IVD I ROD YD»
[145]


EED EED D LRAD MED AD YD LR LD IL LED >


Cardiac valves ; ee
Chapter I, Reasons for Writing a y EL S
Chapter IL, Motions of Heart Analyzed A iE 28
Chapter III, Analysis of Pulse. . 34
Chapter IV, Analysis of Auricular and Ventricular
Movement . z 38
Chapter V, Actions and Functions of the Hear 47
Chapter VI, On the Pulmonary Circulation and Fetal
Circulation : re 53
Chapter VII, On the Pulmonary Circulation . . 61
Chapter VIII, Philosophical Consideration of Circula:
tion . 69
Chapter IX, Quantitative Estimation hot the Pumping
Action of the Heart . 73
Chapter X, Demonstration of Blood Flow. Through
Heart from Veins to Arteries on Snakes. 82
Chapter XI, Demonstration of Circulation in Man by
Bandage Experiments. . 85
Chapter XII, Demonstration of the Circulation it in the
Phenomena of Blood-Letting . 94


Chapter XIII, Explanation of the Function of the
Valves in the Veins on the Basis of the


Circulation . . 97
Chapter XIV, Summary of Demonstration of Circula-
tion . 104


Chapter XV, Speculations, in the Traditional a
totelian manner, on the Significance of
the Circulation . 105
Chapter XVI, Clinical and Physiological Applications
of the Demonstration of the Circulation Iog


Chapter XVII, Summary of Work . . . . . 116
Chordae tendinae aa <0.) 2 Oi, EN
Circulation, fetal N nr
Girculation, pulmonary. „>=. {eee 67
Circulation through tissues <n) Puch ge AE 62
Columbus, MAR. 1307 u een 10
Comparative Anatomy of heart HE A
Copernicus, N. Mr ; ß : Wey ce : 70


PLD VOD VED VLD) RD) RD) GRY SDD,
[146]


Dedication to Charles
Dedication to College of Physicians.


Demonstrations before College of Physicians


Diastole of heart
Ductus arteriosus .


Einthoven, W. k
Emotion, effects on heart of
Empedocles

Engelman, T. W.
Erasistratus

Erasistratus on air in arteries
Estienne, C.

Euripus .


Fabricius of Aquapendente .
Fetal Circulation y
Fever :

Fracastorius .


Galen’s arteriotomy experiment

Galen’s experiment on arterial distention
Galen’s experiment on trachea

Galen’s refutation of Erasistratus

Galen on the functions of cardiac valves
Galilei, G. .

Gaskell W. H. : ,
Generation, Harvey's book on .
Generation, spontaneous

Grollman, A.


Hales, the Rev. S.

Haller, A. V.

Hamilton, W.

Harvey, life of

Harvey’s conservatism

Harvey’s demonstrations ;
Harvey’s opinions on his teachings.
Harvey’s scientific method.


[147]


CI AI AI AI AI IA IA AGN


40


+ 7, 20, 26, 97


109
25


ls


ETD Gm Gm DRED LRD, VLD) GED) - )


BD) LD) GRD RD) AD) AD) REG RE LD >


Heart beat, blood pumped in single . . . . 76
Heart beat, origin and conduction of . . . . 39
Heart block ae Ta eo Pegs / 40
Heart, comparative anatomy of ee a 53, 116, 123
Heart, embryology of O er 43
Heart, fibers of . . PS EN Ti
Heart, functions of, traditional theoriese One 16
Heart in insects . . EA IO in,
Heart muscle, properties N Sb RER ; 42
Heart muscle, structure of a dt 30, 32, 127, 128
Heartkperfusioh. onr “Se SEE a RR 42
Eeartisounds e Aan aaa IATA T O O
Heart, structure of . a 2 56% 17220)
Heart, systole and dinstoletofae) a: 31
Heart: Waves Cf a te. SEE 18, 63, 122
Henle, ok Lik Sale ee RE
Hippocrates . . 3 i : as ab 127
Hofmann, C. MO IME rin, Sot u:
AS A ee E 22
Humboldt Cea en ee ea cee ee ee 9
Innate Neath ose ote ee oe Be N, 59
Introduction o Oe en 7
Kepler: Ja ad A A RR 70
Kroneckers H Ams un Mi ee FE hee RER
Lacteals . Sr. ee ome, Nee? 99
Laénnec, R.-T. aH ee o ye 49
Laurentius, Andreas ne > nr, © "22, 25
Lavoisier AN La E 9
Leeuwenhoek A (ca 4; oS eee 30
Lewis, T. . : i AO ISA
Ligatures, effects and types of. Lie Aa ETE

Ludwig, C. easy, cee GA lyk, eee bre eee ee
Bunge) function ol... o OA BE 7
LEymphatics Wo u Sek Se N ON 109
Magendie, F. le Pas OA Bu ie


FED VD VED) RZD) LR) RD DE QD
[148]


EAS E E De O 9
hamile A a Rt
A A O IN EAS a 62
Marey, E. J. ET Oe Ue IO
ae gn ltt th Ka A TS 12
Meltzer, S. J. Biers scan te fetes gc lamin, Meter ag Mi ER
BEN ARNE RS Ae cele a TAN ANA SO 262
ae ee ee a PES BOD:
Deiusenlar motion. {4 0 Geers : 125
A hearts. 2. ara rk o, 32, 42, 127
A ee), u. ne EA 78
Papillary muscles es IDO
Pasteur, L. E A O ee ld Aker tee Le 116
A A O AO OO
EOL a Lan lat A 28
EDO EQUINA TA eae ar La Ve ge
Poiseuille, J.-L.-M. 3 E E 87
Pulmonary artery, structure of SER, MIO TBS
Pulmonary artery and vein, Latin names for 17
Pulmonary vein, structure and function.ohy A LOS 135
Pulse, function RS NA ‘ 7
Eolsasmarteriesn. a uva War, 35, 87
Redi, F. . O Ar 116
Bon and blood-pressure FF IA IG, RR
Respiration, function of Da) ER 4 7
Respiration Of fishess n oae L eis 0. 2. NR 9
A AR E A A eee. asm, EEN 38
Rondelet, G. De IA E RUC:
ES IIA o, ER 99
A ET AR
Semilumaryvalves* 0 a fide je fan? 18
AI ef tie henrt: A A A eel ae at
A a a ca e SU EA he eg 11
A NR A A NS AI AR
Skin absorption RN ARS ESA SI TAS 110


PEL, MA IS IMA IS MT DY I MR Ye DY ee OD
[149]


Spirits, animal

Spirits in blood

Spirits, natural

Spirits, vital

Spleen

Stannius, H.

Stensen, N.

Stokes ;
Stroke-volume of heart
Swallowing, Harvey’s description oF
Sydenham, T. N
Sylvius, J. 3

Systole of heart


Terrence
Thebesius, A.
Thebesian vessels
Translator’s preface
Tricuspid valves


Umbilical vein


Valves in veins

Valves in veins, experiments ¢ on
Valves in veins, function of .

Valves of the heart :

Valves of the heart, Galen’s view on
Vena arteriosa

Venous pressure

Vesalius, Andreas

Vieussens, R.

Vital spirits .


Waste-vapors (fuligines).


Weber, E. H.
Willis, R. .


[150]


o 131


PAEZ ATL ED) RD) AD YD AR ED AR LD D


123
12


A TIO TI AI RZD.) GED) EI GD) GS


This book, the Leake translation of William Harvey’s
DE MOTU CORDIS, was set, printed and bound by The
Collegiate Press, Menasha, Wisconsin. The type pages
were designed by the Golden Hind Press of Madison, New
Jersey.

The type face is the very beautiful and clear Caslon Old
Style No. 337. Its characteristic is that of simple, honest
design and perfect craftsmanship.

The type page is set 12 point on 14 point. The text paper
is 38x 50— 100 Warren’s No. 66 Bulking Book. The
cover stock is 26 x 4o—195 Worthy’s Georgian Aztec. The
end sheets are 20 x 26—65 Strathmore Munsell, Green Home-
spun Finish. The inserts are 25 x 38—70 White Polychrome
Enamel. The jacket is 25 x 38—80 Ivory Emissary Text.


With THOMAS BOOKS careful attention is given to all
details of manufacturing and design. It is the Publisher's
desire to present books that are satisfactory as to their physical
qualities and artistic possibilities and appropriate for their
particular use. THOMAS BOOKS will be true to those laws

of quality that assure a good name and good will.


(NEW BOOKS


THE EXCHANGE OF ENERGY BETWEEN MAN
AND THE ENVIRONMENT. By L. H. Newburgh,
M.D., Professor of Clinical Investigation, University of
Michigan Medical School; and Margaret Woodwell John-
ston, Ph.D., Instructor in Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan Medical School.


The field of nutrition that deals with the sources and
transformations of energy is discussed quantitatively in
this book. The object is to enlarge the student's concep-
tion of the life process.


XIV+-104 pages $2.00 postpaid


TUBERCULOSIS AMONG CHILDREN. By J. Arthur
Myers, Ph.D., M.D., F.A.C.P., Chief of Medical Staff,
Lymanhurst School for Tuberculous Children, Associate
Professor of Preventive Medicine, University of Minne-
sota. With Chapters by C. A. Stewart, Ph.D., M.D., As-
sistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota,
and Paul W. Giessler, M.D., Assistant Professor of
Orthopedic Surgery, University of Minnesota. An In-
troduction by Allen K. Krause, Director, The Desert
Sanatorium and Institute of Research; Editor, The Ameri-
can Review of Tuberculosis.


XVI+-206 pages 43 illustrations $3.50 postpaid


DISEASES TRANSMITTED FROM ANIMALS TO
MAN. By Thomas G. Hull, formerly Chief Bacteriolo-
gist, Illinois Department of Public Health; Assistant
Professor of Pathology and Bacteriology, University of
Illinois College of Medicine. Introduction by Veranus
A. Moore, M.D., D.V.M., formerly Director, New York
State Veterinary College, Cornell University.
XXIV+353 pages 29 illustrations 43 tables
$5.50 postpaid


MORPHOLOGIC VARIATION AND THE RATE OF

GROWTH OF BACTERIA. By Arthur T. Henrici, Pro-

fessor of Bacteriology, University of Minnesota School of

Medicine.

XIV+194 pages 36 figures 27 tables Cloth, $3.00
Paper, $2.50


THE REGULATION OF SIZE AS ILLUSTRATED IN
UNICELLULAR ORGANISMS. By Edward F. Adolph,
Associate Professor of Physiology, University of Rochester.
X-+238 pages 66 figures 15 tables $4.50 postpaid


Sent ON APPROVAL in the
United States and Canada


u Hellmann ine bon? Er Hace q N
ing, Professor of Surgery, Harvard Medical School and Surgeon-in-Chief, _
_ The Peter Bent Brigham Hospital and Percival Bailey, formerly Associate
‘in Surgery, the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital and Associate Professor of
Surgery, University of Chicago. |


219 pages 159 illustrations $7.50 postpaid


E FEMALE SEX HORMONE. By Robert T. Frank, AM, M.D,
.S., Gynecologist to Mount Sinai Hospital, New York. Part I:
ù Biology, Pharmacology and Chemistry. Part II: Clinical Investigations. ds
XIV 1324 pager 86 illustrations 36 graphs 528 references
$5.50 postpaid


14 THE BACTERIOPHAGE AND ITS CLINICAL APPLICATIONS. B ~~
A E d'Herelle, Professor of Bacteriology, Yale University School of Medi-
y a cine. Translated by George H. Smith, Professor of SE =
ah | University School. of Medicine.
an X+1258 pages 8 tables 9 charts $4. postpaid a
` LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS IN ola
_ TUBERCULOSIS. By Henry Stuart Willis, formerly Associate in Medi-
cine of the Kenneth Dows Laboratory, The Johns Hopkins University and
Hospital. With a chapter on Tuberculo-Complement Fixation by J. Stan-
ley Woolley, M.D., Loomis Sanitorium. Introduction by Allen K. Krause,
Editor, The American Review of Tuberculosis. A

XV 318 pages: 25 gillustrations Cloth, $3.50 Keratol, $4.25


WHAT IS LIFE? By Are Gaskell. With Introductions by Karl Tay-
- lor Compton, formerly Professor of Physics, Princeton University; Presi-
_ dent, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Raymond Pearl, Director,

. Institute of Biological Research, The Johns Hopkins University.


326 pages $3.50 postpaid


Special courtesies are extended by the publisher to medical students who -
I wish to build up private medical libraries.


Our books sent ON APPROVAL with pleasure hi : ite
CHARLES C THOMAS: PUBLISHER
SPRINGFIELD ' ILLINOIS ` BALTIMORE * MARYLAND ;


Home Office: 220 East Monroe Street, Springfield, Illinois
