Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion of the Parsis
Martin Haug (edited and enlarged by E. W. West), 1878
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Haug's foundational essays on the Zoroastrian scriptures — the work that established Pahlavi studies and the scholarly study of the Avesta in the West (2nd edition, edited by E. W. West, with Haug's outline of Pahlavi-Pazand glossary). The single most-cited 19th-century work on the Parsi religion. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/essaysonsacredla00haug). This 1878 second edition (London: Trübner, 1878) is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

ESSAYS 


ON 


THE  SACRED  LANGUAGE,  WRITINGS,  AND 
RELIGION  OF  THE  PARSIS. 


Br 

MAETIN   HAUG,   Ph.D. 

LATE    PROFESSOR  OF  SANSKRIT  AND  COMPARATIVE  PHILOLOGY  AT  THE 
UNIVERSITY  OF  MUNICH. 


EDITED  BY 

E.    W.    WEST,    Ph.D. 


LONDON: 

TEUBNER    &    CO.,    LUDGATE    HILL. 

1878. 

[AH  riglits  reservul.'\ 


TO 

THE  P ARSIS  OF  WESTERN  INDIA 

THIS   REVISION  OF    THE 

FIRST  ATTEMPT,    IN   THE   ENGLISH  LANGUAGE, 

TO   GIVE   A    CORRECT  ACCOUNT  OF    THEIR 

ANCIENT  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION  AND    LITERATURE, 

1%   3Inscri&cti 

IN  MEMORY  OF    THE   OLD    TIMES 

OF   FRIENDLY  INTERCOURSE   ENJOYED 

BOTH  BY   THE   AUTHOR    AND   BY 

THE   EDITOR. 


PREFACE. 


The  author  of  these  Essays  intended,  after  his  return  from 
India,  to  expand  them  into  a  comprehensive  work  on  the 
Zoroastrian  Eeligion  ;  hut  this  design,  postponed  from 
time  to  time,  was  finally  frustrated  hy  his  untimely 
death.  That  he  was  not  spared  to  publish  all  his  varied 
knowledge  on  this  subject,  must  remain  for  ever  a  matter 
of  regret  to  the  student  of  Iranian  antiquities.  In  other 
hands,  the  changes  that  could  be  introduced  into  this 
second  edition  were  obviously  limited  to  such  additions 
and  alterations  as  the  lapse  of  time  and  the  progress  of 
Zoroastrian  studies  have  rendered  necessary. 

In  the  first  Essay,  the  history  of  the  European  re- 
searches has  been  extended  to  the  present  time ;  but,  for 
the  sake  of  brevity,  several  writings  have  been  passed 
over  unnoticed,  among  the  more  valuable  of  which  those 
of  Professor  Hlibschmann  may  l)e  specially  mentioned. 
Some  account  has  also  been  given  of  tlie  progress  of 
Zoroastrian  studies  among  the  Parsis  themselves. 

In  the  second  Essay  additional  information  has  been 


viii  PREFACE. 

given  about  the  Pahlavi  language  and  literature ;  but  the 
technical  portion  of  the  Avesta  Grammar  has  been  re- 
served for  separate  publication,  being  better  adapted  for 
students  than  for  the  general  reader. 

Some  additions  have  been  made  to  the  third  Essay, 
with  the  view  of  bringing  together,  from  other  sources, 
all  the  author's  translations  from  the  Avesta,  except  those 
portions  of  the  Gathas  which  he  did  not  include  in  the 
first  edition,  and  which  it  would  be  hazardous  for  an 
editor  to  revise.  Further  details  have  also  been  given 
resardiniT  the  contents  of  the  Nasks. 

Several  additional  translations,  having  been  found 
among  the  author's  papers  too  late  for  insertion  in  the 
third  Essay,  have  been  added  in  an  Appendix  after  care- 
ful revision,  together  with  his  notes  descriptive  of  the 
mode  of  performing  a  few  of  the  Zoroastrian  ceremonies. 

Some  apology  is  due  to  Sanskrit  scholars  for  the 
liberties  taken  with  their  usual  systems  of  representing 
Sanskrit  and  Avesta  sounds.  These  deviations  from 
present  systems  have  been  made  for  the  sake  of  the 
general  reader,  whether  English  or  Indian,  who  can 
hardly  be  expected  to  pronounce  words  correctly  unless 
they  are  spelt  in  accordance  with  the  usual  sounds  of  the 
letters  in  English.  Probably  no  European  language  can 
represent  Indian  consonants  so  easily  as  English;  but 
as  every  English  vowel  has  more  than  one  characteristic 
sound,  it  is  necessary  to  look  to  some  other  European 


PREFACE.  ix 

language  for  the  best  representation  of  Indian  vowels. 
The  system  now  generally  adopted  by  Englishmen  in 
India,  and  followed  in  these  Essays,  is  to  use  the  con- 
sonants to  represent  their  usual  English  sounds,  the 
vowels  to  represent  their  usual  Italian  sounds,  and  to 
avoid  diacritical  marks  as  much  as  possible,  because  they 
are  always  liable  to  omission.  In  applying  such  a  sys- 
tem to  the  Aryan  languages  of  India,  Englishmen  require 
very  few  arbitrary  rules.  They  have  merely  to  observe 
that  g  is  always  hard  and  ch  always  soft,  that  th  and  i)h 
are  merely  aspirates  of  t  and  i^  (not  the  EngKsh  and  Greek 
th  and  'pli),  and  that  a  represents  the  short  vowel  sound  in 
the  English  words  uiUr,  motlier,  come,  and  Uood.  As  this 
use  of  a  is  often  repugnant  to  Englishmen,  it  may  be 
remarked  that  all  the  other  vowels  have  to  be  appro- 
priated for  other  sounds,  and  that  it  is  also  strictly  in 
accordance  with  the  Sanskrit  rule  that  when  one  a 
coalesces  with  another  the  resulting  sound  is  d,  which 
could  not  be  the  case  unless  there  were  a  close  relation- 
ship between  the  two  sounds. 

Some  unfortunate  representations  of  Indian  sounds 
have  become  too  inveterate  to  be  lightly  tampered  with ; 
so  it  is  still  necessary  to  warn  the  general  reader  that 
every  w  in  the  Avesta  ought  to  be  pronounced  like  an 
English  V,  and  that  every  v  in  Sanskrit  or  the  Avesta 
closely  resembles  an  English  w,  unless  it  be  followed  by 
i,  i,  e,  ri,  or  a  consonant,  in  w^hich  case  it  has  a  sound 


X  PREFACE. 

somewhere  between  v  and  li.     Again,  Sanskrit  lias  two 
sets  of  letters  represented  by  t,  th,  d,  dh,  n,  sh;  one  set 
is   extremely   dental    (pronounced  with   the   tip   of   the 
tono-ue  touching^  the  extremities  of  the  teeth,  or  as  close 
to  them  as  possible  in  the  case  of  sh),  the  other  set  is 
lingual  (pronounced  with  the  tip  of  the  tongue  far  back 
upon  or  near  the  palate).     The  English  t,  d,  n,  sh  are 
pronounced  between  these  two  extremes,  but  all  natives 
of  India  consider  the  sounds  of  these  English  letters  as 
decidedly  lingual,  so  that   they  always   represent  them 
by  Indian  Unguals  when   transliterating  English  words. 
Unfortunately,  European  scholars  have  been  of  the  op- 
posite opinion,  and  have  rei)resented  the  dental  t,  th,  d, 
dh,  n  as  unmodified,  and  the  Unguals  as  modified,  either 
by  a  diacritical  dot  (as  in  this  work)  or  by  using  italics. 
For  the  sake  of  uniformity,  this  practice  has  been  here 
extended  to  sh;   but    there  can   be  no  doubt  that  the 
dentals  ought  to  be  modified  and  the  linguals  unmodified, 
though  neither  group  can  be  exactly  represented  by  Euro- 
pean sounds.     Further,  the  letters  ri  do  not  adequately 
represent  that  peculiar  Sanskrit  vowel  as  pronounced  in 
IfahdrdsJifra,  where  the  Brahmans  have  been  least  dis- 
turbed by  foreign  influences.     They  say  there  that  the 
correct    sound   is   ru,   and    the    tendency   in   colloquial 
Marathi  is  to  corrupt  it  into  u.     The  nearest  European 
approach  to  this  sound  appears  to  be  the  English  re  in 
pretty,  which  word  is  never  pronounced  petty  when  the 


PREFACE.  xi 

r  is  indistinctly  sounded,  but  has  a  tendency  to  become 
'pootty. 

In  Avesta  words  tli  has  the  same  lisping  sound  as  in 
English  and  Greek,  n  and  n  have  the  sound  of  wj,  q  ought 
to  be  sounded  like  hhiu,  zh  bears  the  same  relation  to 
sh  as  s  to  s  (that  is,  it  has  the  sound  of  s  in  pleasure),  and 
shk  is  pronounced  sh  by  the  Parsis.  They  also  pronounce 
the  other  sibilants  s  and  sh  as  written  in  this  work,  and 
there  seems  no  sufficient  reason  for  departing  from  their 
traditional  pronunciation,  which  is  corroborated,  to  a 
great  extent,  by  Pahlavi  and  Persian  words  derived  from 
the  Avesta,  such  as  Zaratusht,  dtash,  &c. 

The  author's  principal  object  in  publishing  these  Essays 
originally  was  to  present,  in  a  readable  form,  all  the 
materials  for  judging  impartially  of  the  scriptures  and 
religion  of  the  Parsis.  The  same  object  has  been  kept 
in  view  while  preparing  this  second  edition,  giving  a 
larger  quantity  of  such  materials  collected  from  a  variety 
of  sources,  which  I  may  now  leave  to  the  reader's  im- 
partial judgment. 

E.  W.  WEST. 

MuNCHEN,  February  1878. 


CONTENTS. 


ESSAY  I. 

PAGE 

History  op  the  Eesearchbs  into  the  Sacred  Writings 

AND  KeLIGION  op  THE  PaRSIS         ....  3 

I. — The  Reports  op  the  Greeks,  Romans,  Armenians, 

AND  Mohammedans  ....  .3 

II. — The  European  Researches  .  .  .  .16 

III. — Zoroastrian  Studies  among  the  Parsis   .  .        54 

ESSAY  11. 

Languages  of  the  Parsi  Scriptures  .  .  .65 

I. — The    Language    of    the    Avesta,  erroneously 

called  Zend  .....        67 

II. — The  Pahlavi  Language  and  Pazand  .  .        78 

III. — The  Pahlavi  Literature  Extant  .  .  -93 

ESSAY  III. 

The  Zend-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  op  the  Pars^is  .      119 

I. — The  Name  OF  THE  Parsi  Scriptures  .  .119 

II. — The  Original  Extent  of  the  Zend-Avesta. — The 

Nasks  .  .  .  .  .  -123 

III. — The  Books  now  Extant  and  the  supposed  Zoroa- 
strian Authorship  .....      134 

IV.— Yasna  .  .  .  .  .  .  .139 

v.— Gathas  .  .  .  ,  .  •      142 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 


VI. — Gatha  Ahunavaiti    ..... 

VII. — Gatha  Ushtavaiti     ..... 

VIII. — The  last  three  Gathas         .... 

IX. — Yasna  Haptanhaiti  and  the  Minor  Texts  of  the 
Old  Yasna     ..... 

X. — The  later  Yasna       .... 

1.  Hcima  yasht     .... 

2.  Yasna  xix.        .... 

3.  Ivii.        .... 

XL — ViSPARAD  ..... 

XII. — Yashts  ..... 

1.  Hormazd  yasht 

2.  Haptan,  Ardibabislit,  and  Khord^d  yashts 

3.  Aban  yasht      .... 

4.  Khurshed  and  Mah  yashts 

5.  Tir  and  Gosh  yashts   . 

6.  Mihir  yasht    .  .  .'  . 

7.  Srosh  Hadokht  and  Rashnu  yashts    . 

8.  Fravardln  yasht 

9.  Behrani  and  Ram  yashts 
10.  Din  and  Ashi  yashts  . 
I !.  Ashtad,  Zamyad,  and  Vanant  yashts 
12.  Two  fragments  of  the  Hadokht  nask  ;    the 

Afrln-i  Paighamhar  Zaratusht,  and  Vish- 
tS,sp  yasht     .... 

XIII.— Shorter  Texts  (Nyatish,  Afringans,  Gahs,  Sir6 
zah)    . 

XIV. — Vendidad 
I 

2.  The  second  fargard 

3.  The  third  fargard 

4.  The  fourth  fargard 

5.  The  fargards  v.-xvii. 


The  first  farcjard 

o 


PAGE 
146 

167 


170 

185 
189 
191 

194 

197 
199 
200 
202 
205 
206 
213 
215 
215 


217 

224 

22  c 
227 
230 

237 

24.0 


CONTENTS.  XV 

PAGE 

6.  The  eighteenth  fai-gard            .  .  .       243 

7.  The  nineteenth  fargard           .  .  .  .       252 

8.  The  fargards  xx.-xxii.              .  .  .257 
XV. — Brief  Survey  of  Avesta  Literature  .  .      257 


ESSAY  IV. 

The  Zoroastrian    Religion  as  to  its  Origin  and 

Development  .....      267 

I. — The  relationship  between  the  Brahmanical  and 

Zoroastrian  religions    ....      267 

1.  Names  of  divine  beings  .  .  .       267 

2.  Names  and  legends  of  heroes  .  .276 

3.  Sacrificial  rites  .  .  .  .279 

4.  Eeligious   observances,   domestic  rites,  and 

cosniographical  opinions      .  ,  .       285 

II.— Origin  op  the  Zoroastrian  religion. — Spitama 

Zarathushtra  and  his  probable  age    .  .      286 

1.  Traces  of  the  origin  to  be  found  both  in  the 

Vedas  and  Zend-Avesta       .  .  .  287 

2.  Causes  of  the  schism  ....  292 

3.  Spitama  Zarathushtra  .  .  .  294 

4.  The  age  when  Spitama  Zarathushtra  lived   .  298 
III. — Spitama  Zarathushtra's  theology  and  philoso- 


phy, AND  their  influence  ON  THE  DEVELOPMENT 

OF  THE  PaRSI  religion        ....         300 

1.  Zarathushtra's  monotheism    .  .  ,301 

2.  Zarathushtra's  two  primeval  principles  .       303 

3.  Development  of  Zarathushtra's  doctrines  of 

the   Supreme  Being. — The  two  supreme 
councils  ;  Srosh  and  Boundless  Time  .       305 

4.  The  two  intellects,  two  lives,   heaven   and 

hell,  resurrection,  and  palingenesis    .        .       310 


XVI 


CONTENTS. 


APPENDIX. 

I. — Translations  prom  the  Avesta 

1.  Vendiclad,  fargard  iii.  1-23  and  34,  35 

2.  „  „         iv.  44-55      • 


» 


3- 

4.  „  „        xix.  10-26  and  40-47 

II. — Translations  from  the  Pahlavi  Versions 

1.  PaMavi  Yasna  xxviii.     . 

2.  „  „      xxix. 

XXX. 

xxxi. 

„  „      xxxii.  I  . 

Pahlavi  Vendidad  i.        . 

xviii. 

xix.    . 

XX.     . 


3- 
4- 

5- 
6. 

7- 
8. 


JJ  J5 

9-        j»  » 

III. — Notes  Descriptive  of  some  Parsi  Ceremonies 

1.  The  ceremony  preparatory  to  Ijashne   . 

2.  The  Ijashne  ceremony   . 

3.  The  Darun  ceremony     . 

4.  The  Afringan  ceremony 
Index  .  .    •        . 


PAOB 
315 
315 

319 

322 

333 

338 

338 

341 

345 

348 

354 

355 

364 

379 

391 

393 

394 

403 

407 

408 

411 


L 

HIS  TOR  Y  OF  THE  RESEARCHES  INTO  THE 

SACRED  WRITINGS  AND  RELIGION 

OF  THE  PARSIS. 

FROM  THE  EARLIEST  TIMES  DOWN  TO  THE  PRESENT. 


A 


I, 


HISTORY  OF  THE  RESEARCHES  INTO  THE 

SACRED  WRITINGS  AND  RELIGION 

OF  THE  PARSIS. 


I. — THE  KEPOETS  OF  THE  GREEKS,  ROMANS,  ARMENIANS,  AND 

MOHAMMEDANS. 

In  this  Essay  it  is  intended  to  give  a  brief  outline  of  the 
gradual  acquaintance  of  the  Western  nations  with  the 
Zoroastrian  religion  (now  professed  only  by  the  small 
Parsi  community  in  India,  and  by  a  very  insignificant 
number  which  remain  in  their  ancient  fatherland  in 
Persia);  and  to  trace  the  history  of  the  scientific  researches 
of  Europeans  into  the  original  records  of  this  ancient 
creed,  where  the  true  doctrine  of  the  great  Zoroaster  and 
his  successors,  buried  for  thousands  of  years,  is  to  be 
found. 

To  the  whole  ancient  world  Zoroaster's  lore  was  best 
known  by  the  name  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Magi,  which 
denomination  was  commonly  applied  to  the  priests  of 
India,  Persia,  and  Babylonia. 

The  earliest  mention  of  them  is  made  by  the  Prophet 
Jeremiah  (xxxix.  3),  who  enumerated  among  the  retinue 
of  King  Nebuchadnezzar  at  his  entry  into  Jerusalem,  the 


4  THE  REPORTS  OF 

"  Chief  of  the  Magi "  {rah  mag  in  Hebrew),  from  which 
statement  we  may  distinctly  gather,  that  the  Magi  exer- 
cised a  great  influence  at  the  court  of  Babylonia  600 
years  B.C.  They  were,  however,  foreigners,  and  are  not  to 
be  confounded  with  the  indigenous  priests.  In  the  Old 
Testament  no  account  of  their  religion  is  given,  and  only 
once  (Ezekiel  viii.  16,  17)  it  is  hinted  at.i  The  Persians, 
however,  whose  priests  the  Magi  appear  to  have  been,  are 
never  spoken  of  as  adherents  to  idolatry;  and  the  Persian 
kings,  especially  Cyrus  (called  Koresh  in  Hebrew,  Kuruslv 
in  the  cuneiform  inscriptions),  favoured  the  Jews.  In 
Isaiah  this  great  king  is  called  "  the  anointed  (mashiakh 
in  Hebrew)  of  the  Lord"  (xlv.  i),  "the  shepherd  who 
carries  out  the  Lord's  decrees"  (xliv.  28);  he  is  the 
"  eagle  2  called  from  the  orient,  the  man  appointed  by  the 
Lord's  counsel"  (xlvi.  11);  he  is  "strengthened  by  the 
Lord  to  subdue  the  heathens  "  (xlv.  i).^  From  these  high 
terms,  in  which  King  Cyrus,  who  professed  the  religion  of 
the  Magi,  is  spoken  of,  we  are  entitled  to  infer  that  this 
religion  was  not  so  diametrically  opposed  to  the  Mosaic  as 
the  other  ancient  religions  were ;  that  Cyrus,  at  all  events, 
was  no  idol- worshipper ;  a  supposition  we  shall  find  con- 
firmed by  Herodotus,  and  by  the  sacred  books  of  the 
Parsis  themselves.  Xhe_Zoroastrian  religion_exMbits  .even 
a  very  close  affinity  to^^r  rather  identity  with,  several 
J/  important  doctrmesTof  the  Mosaic  religion  "andTniris- 
tianity,''sucTi'as  the  personality  and  attributes  of  the  devil, 

1  The  religious  custom  alluded  to  ^  In  JSsehyJus's  celebrated  play 
in  Ezekiel  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  "  The  Persians  "  the  eagle  is  the  sym- 
religion  of  the  Magi.  The  prophet  bol  of  the  Persian  empire  (verses 
complains  that  some  of  the  Jews  205-10).  The  eagle  was,  as  Xeno- 
worship  the  sun,  holding  towards  phon  reports  (Cyropoedia,  vii.  i,  2), 
their  face  certain  twigs.  Exactly  the  the  ensign  of  the  ancient  Persians, 
same  custom  of  holding  a  bundle  of  ^  The  Hebrew  word  fjoyim  (liter- 
twigs  in  the  hands  is  reported  by  ally  "  people "),  used  in  the  plural, 
Strabo  (xv.  3,  14),  as  being  oliserved  as  it  is  here,  denotes  the  heathenish 
by  the  Magi  when  engaged  in  prayer,  nations,  the  idol  -  worshippers,  in 
It  is  the  so-called  Barsom  (Bcresma  their  strictest  opposition  to  the  Is- 
iu  the  Avesta),  still  used  by  the  Parsi  raelites. 
priests  when  engaged  in  worship. 


THE  GREEKS  AND  ROMANS.  5 

and  the  resurrection^qf  tlie^dead,  whicli  are  both  ascribed 
to^the  religion  of  the  IMagi,  and  are  really  to  be  found  in 
the  present  scriptures  of  the  Parsis.  It  is  not  ascertained 
whether  these  doctrines  were  borrowed  liy  the  I'avsis  from 
the  Jews,  or  by  the  Jews  from  the  I'arsis ;  very  likely 
neither  is  the  case,  and  in  both  these  religions  they  seem 
to  have  sprung  up  independently.  In  the  Zend-Avesta  we 
meet  with  only  two  words  1  which  can  be  traced  to  the 
Semitic  languages,  neither  of  them  referring  to  religious 
subjects.  In  the  later  books  of  the  Old  Testament  we  find 
several  Persian  words  and  many  names,  but  they  have 
nothing  to  do  with  religion.  The  most  famous  of  these 
Persian  words  in  the  Old  Testament,  now  spread  over  the 
whole  civilised  world,  is  the  word  "  paradise,"  which  means 
originally  a  park,  a  beautiful  garden  fenced  in.^ 

TliQ_name  Magi_jQ£Giiis  even  in.  the  liew.  Testament.  In 
th^  Gospel  according  to  St.  Matthew  (ii.  i),  the  Magi 
(Greek  ?/;rt^oi,  translated  in  the  English  Bible  by  "  wise 
men ")  came  from  the  East  to  Jerusalem,  to  worshi])  the 
new-born  child  Jesus  at  Bethlehem.  That  these  Magi 
were  priests  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  we  know  from 
Greek  writers. 

The  earliest  account  of  the  religion  of  the  Macfi  among 
the  Greeks  is  to  be  found  in  Heeodotus,  the  father  of 
history  (B.C.  450).  In  his  first  book  (chap,  cxxxi.,  cxxxii.) 
we  read  the  following  report  on  the  Persian  religion : — 

'  I  know  that  the  Persians  observe  these  customs.  It 
'  is  not  customary  among  them  to  have  idols  made,  temples 

1  These  are  tanHra,  "an  oven;"  pairi-daeza  (in  the  Zend-Avesta), 
and  Aa?'a,  "a  mountain,"  found  only  "  circumvallation  or  enclosure;"  in 
in  the  name  Haro  berezaiti,  "high  Hebrew  we  find  it  in  the  form  ^«r- 
mountain,"  considered  to  be  the  chief  des  ;  in  Greek  as  paradcisos.  Pairi 
of  all  mountains ;  preserved  now-a-  is  peri  in  Greek ;  daeza  corresponds 
days  in  the  name  Alborz.  Tanilra  is  to  deha  in  Sanskrit — i.e.,  enclosure, 
evidently  the  same  with  the  Hebrew  generally  applied  to  the  body.  Of 
iamir  (Gen.  xv.  17 ;  Isa.  xxxi.  9),  the  same  root  is  the  English  thick 
' '  an  oven  or  fmuiace  ; "  hara  is  iden-  (very  likely  identical  with  S.  digdka, 
tical  with /lar  in  Hebrew,  "a  moun-  past  participle  of  the  root  dih,  "to 
tain."  besmear,  pollute,"  in  a  more  compre- 

2  The  original  form  of  the  word  is  hensive  sense  "to  surround." 


6  THE  REPORTS  OF 

'  built,  and  altars  erected ;  tliey  even  upbraid  with  folly 
•  those  who  do  so.  I  can  account  for  that,  only  from  their 
'  not  believing  that  the  gods  are  like  men,  as  the  Hellenes 
'  do.  They  are  accustomed  to  offer  sacrifices  to  Zeus  on  the 
'  summits  of  mountains ;  they  call  the  whole  celestial  circle 
'  Zeus.  They  offer  sacrifices  to  the  sun,  moon,  earth,  fire, 
'  w\ater,  and  winds,  these  elements  originally  being  the  only 
'  objects  of  worship ;  but  they  accepted  from  the  Assp-ians 
'  and  Arabs  the  worship  of  Aphrodite,  the  Queen  of 
'  Heaven,  whom  the  Assyrians  call  Mylitta,  the  Arabs 
'  Alitta,  the  Persians  Mitra.'  l 

'  The  Persians  offer  sacrifices  to  the  aforesaid  gods  in 
'  the  following  manner.  They  neither  erect  altars  nor 
'  hindle  fires  when  they  are  about  to  offer  a  sacrifice ;  they 
'  neither  use  libations,  nor  flutes,  nor  wreaths,  nor  barley ; 
'  but  when  any  one  is  willing  to  offer  a  sacrifice,  he  then 
'carries  the  sacrificiah  beast  to  a  pure  spot,  and  after 
'  having  twined  round  his  turban  a  great  many  wreaths  of 
'  myrtle,  in  preference  to  any  other  leaf,  he  invokes  the 
'  deity.  The  sacrificer  ought  not  to  pray  only  for  his  own 
'  prosperity ;  he  must  also  pray  for  the  welfare  of  all  the 
'  Persians,  and  for  the  king,  because  he  is  included  among 
'  them.  When  he  has  cut  the  animal  into  pieces,  he  then 
'  boils  its  flesh,  spreads  the  softest  grass  he  can  get,  espe- 
'  cially  preferring  clover,  and  places  the  pieces  of  flesh  on 
'  it.  After  having  made  this  arrangement,  one  of  the  Magi 
'  who  is  present  sings  a  theogony,^  as  they  call  the  incan- 

1  Here  Herodotus  has  committed  a  Mitra  is  the  well-known  sun-god  of 
mistake  ;  not  as  to  the  matter,  but  the  Persians  and  a  male  deity, 
as  to  the  name.  The  Persians,  in  ^  Herodotus,  who  exhibits  through- 
later  times,  worshipped  a  great  fe-  out  the  whole  report  an  intimate 
male  deity,  who  might  be  compared  knowledge  of  the  Persian  sacrifices, 
with  the  Mylitta  of  the  Babylonians  means  by  theogony  here,  those  sec- 
(the  Ashtaroth  or  Astarte  of  the  Old  tions  of  the  sacred  books  which  are 
Testament),  but  she  was  called  Ana-  called  Yashts  or  invocations,  con- 
HITA  (in  the  Zend-Avesta  and  cunei-  taining  the  praises  of  all  the  feats 
form  inscriptions),  and  was  known  to  achieved  by  the  deity  in  whose  honor 
the  Arab  and  Greek  writers  by  the  the  sacrifice  is  to  be  oflered.  See  the 
name  of  Anaitis.  She  represented  third  Essay, 
the    beneficial    influence    of    water. 


THE  GREEKS  AND  ROMANS.  7 

'  tation  (which  is  used);  without  one  of  the  Magi  no 
'  sacrifice  can  be  offered.  After  waiting  a  short  time,  the 
'  sacrificer  takes  off  the  pieces  of  flesh,  and  uses  them  as 
'  he  likes.'  1 

In  the  138th  chapter  of  the  same  book,  the  father  of 
history  says  :  '  Lying  is  regarded  as  the  most  discreditable 
'  thing  by  tliem ;  next  to  it  is  the  incurring  of  debt, 
'  chiefly  for  this  reason,  that  the  debtor  is  often  compelled 
'  to  tell  lies.  If  any  one  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  town  be 
'  affected  with  leprosy,  or  white  spots  (another  kind  of 
'  leprosy),  he  cannot  enter  the  town,  nor  have  any  inter- 

*  course  with  the  other  Persians ;  they  believe  him  to  have 

*  that  disease  in  consequence  of  having  sinned  in  one  way 
'  or  other  against  the  sun.2  All  foreigners  affected  with 
'  these  diseases  are  driven  out  of  the  country;  for  the  same 
'  reason  many  expel  even  white  pigeons.  They  neither 
'  make  water,  nor  spit,  nor  wash  their  hands,  in  a  river ; 
'  nor  will  they  allow  any  one  else  to  do  so ;  for  they  pay  a 
'  high  reverence  to  rivers.' 

In  another  passage  (iii.  16)  Herodotus  reports  that  the 
Persians  believe  Fire  to  be  a  god ;  wherefore  Cambyses 
committed  a  great  sin,  as  he  says,  in  burning  the  corpse 
of  King  Amasis. 

The  chief  Greek  writers  on  the  manners  and  religion 
of  the  Persians  were  Ktesias  (b.c,  400),  the  well-known 
physician  to  King  Artaxerxes  II.,  Deinon  (b.c.  350),  who 
is  looked  upon  as  a  great  authority  in  Persian  matters  by 
Cornelius  Nepos  (in  the  life  of  Konon),  Theopompos  of 
Chios  (B.C.  300),  and  Heemippos,  the  philosopher  of 
Smyrna  (b.c.  250).  The  books  of  all  these  writers  being 
lost,  save  some  fragments  preserved  by  later  authors,  such 

1  This  custom  is  still  maintained  be   used  by  him  ;   but  it    is    never 

by  the   Parsis.      The   flesh  (or  any  thrown  into  the  fire, 

other  sacrifice)  to  be  offered  is  first  "  The  name  given  to  sinners  against 

consecrated  by  the  priest,  then  for  a  the  sun  is  niithro-drukhsh,  i.e.,  one 

short  time  left   near  the   fire,   and  who   has  belied   Mithra   (the    sun), 

finally  taken  off  by  the  sacrificer,  to  Such  diseases  were  believed  to  be  the 

consequence  of  lying. 


8  THE  REPORTS  OF 

as  Plutarch,  Diogenes  of  Laerte,  and  Pliny,  we  cannot 
judge  how  far  they  were  acquainted  with  the  religion  of 
the  Masi.  The  two  chief  sources  whence  the  Greeks  and 
Eomans  derived  information  about  the  religion  of  the 
Magi  were  Tiieopompos's  eighth  book  of  the  history  of 
King  Philip  of  Macedonia,  which  was  entitled  "  On  Mira- 
culous Things,"  and  specially  treated  of  the  doctrine  of 
the  Magi;  and  Hermippos,  who  wrote  a  separate  book 
"  On  the  Magi."  We  are  left  without  information  whether 
or  not  Theopompos  derived  his  statements  on  the  lore  of 
the  Magi  from  his  intercourse  with  the  Persian  priests 
themselves ;  but  Hermippos,  who  composed,  besides  his 
work  on  the  Zoroastrian  doctrine,  biographies  of  lawgivers, 
the  seven  sages  of  Greece,  &c.,  is  reported  by  Pliny  (His- 
toria  Naturalis,  xxx.  2)  to  have  made  very  laborious 
investigations  in  all  the  Zoroastrian  books,  which  were 
said  to  comprise  two  millions  of  verses,  and  to  have  stated 
the  contents  of  each  book  separately.  He  therefore  really 
seems  to  have  had  some  knowledge  of  the  sacred  language 
and  texts  of  the  Magi,  for  which  reason  the  loss  of  his 
work  is  greatly  to  be  regretted. 

It  is  not  intended  to  produce  all  the  reports  on  the 
Zoroastrian  religion  and  customs  to  be  met  with  in  the 
ancient  writers,  but  only  to  point  out  some  of  the  most 
important. 

According  to  Diogenes  of  Laerte  (Pro-oemium,  chap,  vi.), 
EuDOXOS  and  Aristotle  stated  that  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
Magi  there  were  two  powers  opposed  to  each  other,  one 
representing  the  good  god,  called  Zeus  and  Oromasdes 
(Ahuramazda,  Hormazd),  and  the  other  representing  the 
devil,  whose  name  was  Hades  and  Areimanios  (Angro- 
mainyush,  Ahriman).  Of  this  chief  doctrine  of  the  Magi 
Theopompos  had  given  a  further  illustration.  According 
to  Plutarch  (De  Iside  et  Osiride)  and  Diogenes  of  Laerte 
(Pro-cemium,  chap,  ix.),  he  reported  that  Oromasdes  ruled 
for  three  thousand  years  alone,  and  Areimanios  for  three 
thousand  more.     After  this  period  of  six  thousand  years 


THE  GREEKS  AND  ROMANS.  g 

had  elapsed  they  began  to  wage  war  against  each  other, 
one  attempting  to  destroy  the  other ;  but  finally  (he  says) 
Areimanios  is  to  perish,  mankind  is  to  enjoy  a  blessed 
state  of  life ;  men  will  neither  be  any  more  in  need  of  food, 
nor  will  they  cast  shadows ;  the  dead  are  to  rise  again, 
men  will  be  immortal,  and  everything  is  to  exist  in  conse- 
quence of  their  prayers. 

A  brief  but  full  account  of  Zoroaster's  doctrine  is  to  be 
found  in  Plutarch's  book  "  On  Isis  and  Osiris  (chap,  xlvi., 
xlvii.),  which  being  in  detail,  seems  to  have  been  borrowed 
from  a  writer  who  was  actually  acquainted  with  the  origi- 
nal texts.  The  philosopher  Hermippos,  abovementioned, 
being  the  only  scholar  of  antiquity  who.  can  be  supposed, 
with  sufficient  reason,  to  have  had  a  real  knowledge  of  the 
sacred  language  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  we  may  regard  him 
as  the  author  of  Plutarch's  statements.  These  are  as 
follows : — 

'  Oromasdes  sprang  out  of  the  purest  light ;  among  all 
'  things  perceived  by  the  senses  that  element  most  re- 
'  sembles  him ;  Areimanios  sprang  out  of  darkness,  and  is 
'  therefore  of  the  same  nature  with  it.  Oromasdes,  who 
'  resides  as  far  beyond  the  sun  as  the  sun  is  far  from  the 
'  earth,  created  six  gods  (the  six  AmeshasjJentas,  now 
'  Amshaspends,  "  the  archangels  ") ;  the  god  of  benevo- 
'  lence  {Vohu-mano,  "good-mind,"  now  called  Bahman); 
'  the  god  of  truth  [Asha  vahishta,  or  Ardibahisht) ;  the 
'  god  of  order  {Khshathra  vairya,  or  Sliahrivar) ;  the  god 
'  of  wisdom  {Armaiti,  or  Isfendarmad) ;  and  the  god  of 
'  wealth  and  delight  in  beauty  {Haurvatdt  and  Amerddt, 
'  or  KJiorddd  and  Amcrddd).  But  to  counterbalance  him, 
'  Areimanios  created  an  equal  number  of  gods  counteract- 
'  ing  those  of  Oromasdes.  Then  Oromasdes  decorated 
'  heaven  with  stars,  and  placed  the  star  Sirius  {Tisldrya, 
'  or  Tishtar)  at  their  head  as  a  guardian.  Afterwards  he 
'  created  twenty-four  other  gods,i  and  set  them  in  an  egg ; 

1  -This  statement  seems  at  the  first     may  easily  explain  it  from  the  Avesta 
glance  to  be  very  strange.     But  oue     texts.     This  writer  had  evidently  in 


10  THE  REPORTS  OF 

'  but  Areimanios  fortliwitli  created  an  equal  number  of 
'  gods,  who  opened  tlie  egg ;  in  consequence  of  this,  evil  is 
*  always  mingled  with  good.  Thus  the  good  god  and  the 
'  demon  are  engaged  in  a  constant  war.  Of  plants  and 
'  animals,  some  belong  to  the  good,  some  to  the  evil  spirit ; 
'  to  the  good  one  belong  dogs,  birds,  and  crabs ;  to  the  evil 
'  one,  water-rats.  At  the  end,  the  time  is  to  come  when 
'  Areimanios  will  perish  and  disappear,  in  consequence  of 
'  disease  and  famine,  caused  by  himself.  Then  the  earth 
'  will  become  even  and  equal,  and  there  will  be  only  one 
'  state  and  one  language,  and  one  and  the  same  manner 
'  of  living  to  the  happy  men  who  then  speak  only  one 
'  language.' 

Steabo  the  geographer  (b.c.  6o)  has  given  in  the  15th 
book  of  his  celebrated  Geography  an  account  of  the  religion 
and  customs  of  the  Magi,  of  which  some  passages  may  be 
thus  translated : — '  To  whatever  deity  the  Persians  may 
'  offer  sacrifice,  they  first  invoke  fire,  which  is  fed  at  their 
'  sacred  places  with  dried  barkless  pieces  of  wood,  and  is 
'  never  to  be  extinguished ;  they  put  fat  over  it,  and  pour 
'  oil  into  it ;  if  anybody  happens  to  throw  or  blow  into  it 
'  anything  dirty  or  dead,  he  is  to  die ;  the  fire  is  to  be 
'  kindled  by  blowing.' 

In  another  passage  (xi.  8,  4)  he  enumerates  as  Per- 
sian deities  Anaitis,  Omanes,  and  Anadates  or  Anandates} 

PArsANius,  the  celebrated  Greek  traveller  (a.d.  180),  has 
the  following  report  on  the  fire-worship  of  the  Magi  (v. 
27,  3).  'In  the  temples  of  the  Persians  there  is  a  room 
'  where  ashes  of  another  colour  than  those  being  burnt  on 
'  the  altar  are  to  be  found.2     To  this  room  he  first  repairs, 

view  the  thirty  spirits  presiding  over  in  these.     In  the  Parsi  calendar  (Siro- 

the  particular  days  of  the  month  ;  he  zah,  thirty  days)  Hormazd  is  included 

was  informed,  or  he  gathered  it  from  in  the  number. 

his  own  reading  of  the   texts,  that         ^  Anaitis  is   Andhitu,   &  goddess, 

there  are  two  distinct  classes  of  divine  representing     the     celestial    waters. 

l)eiugs  to  be  worshipped,  six  forming  Omanes  is   Vohu-mano  or   Bahman  ; 

the  higher    order,    twenty-four    the  Anandates  is  Amcrddt,  spirit  ot  the 

lower  ;  the  Supreme  Being,  the  crea-  trees. 

tor  Ahuramazda,  was  not  comprised        ^  xhe  two    kinds    of    ashes    men- 


THE  GREEKS  AND  ROMANS.  n 

'  puts  dry  wood  upon  the  altar,  puts  on  the  tiara,  and  then 
'  smgs  the  invocation  of  the  god,  reading  it  from  a  book, 
'  in  a  language  utterly  unintelligible  to  the  Greeks.  The 
'  wood  is  to  be  ignited  on  the  ashes,  without  fire,  and  to 
'  flame  up  into  a  bright  blaze.' 

Passing  over  Dio  Chrysostomos  (a.d.  130),  who  has  left 
to  us,  in  his  sermons,  some  remarks  on  the  theological 
ideas  of  the  Magi,  as  to  their  comparing  the  universe  to 
a  chariot  in  continual  motion,  drawn  by  four  horses ;  we 
may  notice  an  important  passage  of  the  historian  Aga- 
THIAS  (a.d.  500)  respecting  Zoroaster.  He  says  (ii.  24) : 
'  The  present  Persians  almost  entirely  neglect  their  former 
'  customs,  and  have  even  changed  them,  and  observe  some 

*  strange  and  spurious  usages,  professing  the  doctrines  of 
'  Zoroaster,  the  son  of  Ormasdes.l  The  time  when  this 
'  Zoroaster  or  Zarades  (he  is  called  by  both  these  names) 
'  flourished  and  gave  his  laws,  is  not  to  be  ascertained. 
'  The  Persians  now-a-days  simply  say  that  he  lived  at 
'  the  time  of  Hystaspes ;  but  it  is  very  doubtful,  and  the 
'  doubt  cannot  be  solved  whether  this  Hystaspes  was  the 
'  father  of  Darius,  or  another  Hystaspes.  At  whatever 
'  time  he  may  have  lived,  he  was  at  all  events  their  pro- 

*  phet,  and  the  master  of  the  Magic  rites.  After  having 
'  changed  the  ancient  form  of  worship,  he  introduced 
'  manifold  and  strange  doctrines.  Por  they  (the  Per- 
'  sians)  formerly  worshipped  Zeus  and  Kronos,  and  all 
'  other  gods  celebrated  by  the  Greeks,  only  imder  other 
'  names,  as  for  example  they  call  Zeus,  B^l,  Heracles, 
<■  Sandes,  Aphrodite,  Anaitis,'^  and  the  others  otherwise, 

tioned  here  are  those  of  the  D&d-gah  performed    before    tlie    sacred   fiie. 

(Ddityo-gdtush),  or  common  hearth  of  The  observance  is  still  maintained, 

the  temple  (or  any  house),  and  of  the  ^  Plato  (Alcibiades,  i.  37)  says  the 

Atash-gah,  or  place  for  the  sacred  fire,  same,  calling  Zoroaster  a  son  of  Or- 

which  is  fed  with  the  greatest  care,  mazdes,  i.e.,  Ahuramazda,  Hormazd. 

By 'tiara'(aturban)tliePenom(23aiii-  ''In    this    report    true    and    false 

ddna)  is  meant,  a  cloth  used  to  cover  statements  are  mixed  together.      It 

the  lips  to  prevent  the   sacred  fire  is  true  that  the  religion  of  the  Parsis 

from  being  polluted.    Pausanius  well  anterior     to    Zoroaster    was    much 

describes  here  the  divine  service  as  nearer  to  that  of  the  Greeks  than 


i 


12  THE  REPORTS  OF  THE 

'  as  is  reported  by  Berosos  the  Babylonian,  and  Athe- 
'  NOKLES  and  Simakos,  who  wrote  on  the  most  ancient 
'  history  of  tlie  Assyrians  and  Medes.' 

Before  concluding  this  notice  of  the  Greek  records,  and 
proceeding  to  those  of  the  Armenians  and  Mohammedans, 
we  may  notice  some  passages  of  later  Greek  writers,  who 
lived  after  Christ  at  the  time  of  the  Sasanians,  on  the 
supposed  primitive  principle  of  Zoroastrian  theology, 
which  will  be  treated  of  fully  in  the  last  Essay  in  this 
book. 

The  first  Greek  writer  who  alludes  to  it  is  Damascius. 
In  his  book  "On  Primitive  Principles"  (125th  p.  384,  ed. 
Kppp)  he  says,  '  The  Magi  and  the  whole  Aryan  nation  1 
'  consider,  as  Eudemos  writes,  some  Space,  and  others 
'  Time,  as  the  universal  cause,  out  of  which  the  good 
'  god  as  well  as  the  evD.  spirit  were  separated,  or,  as 
'  others  assert,  light  and  darkness,  before  these  two  spirits 
'  arose' 

On  the  same  matter  Theodoeos  of  Mopsuestia  writes 
as  follows,  according  to  the  fragment  preserved  by  the 
polyhistor  Photios  (Biblioth.  81):  'In  the -first  book  of 
'  his  work '  (on  the  doctrines  of  the  Magi),  says  Photios,2 
<  he  propounds  the  nefarious  doctrine  of  the  Persians 
'  which  Zarastrades  introduced,  viz.,  that  about  Zarouam,3 
'  whom  he  makes  the  ruler  of  the  whole  universe,  and 
'  calls  him  Destiny ;  and  who  when  offering  sacrifices  in 
'  order  to  generate  Hormisdas,  produced  both  Hormisdas 
'  and  Satan.' 

This  opinion  on  the  primitive  principle  of  the  Zoroas- 
trian theology  seems  to  have  been  current  among  the 
Christians  at  the  time  of  the  Sasanians,  as  we  may  learn 
more  fuUy  from  Armenian  writers  of  the  fifth  century,  from 

after  liis  time  ;  but  it  is  not  true  that  be  understood.     According  to  Hero- 

the  Persians  at  that  time  worshipped  dotus  their  original  name  was  Arioi. 
Bel,  who  was  the  chief  god  of  the         "  He  was  a  Christian. 
Babylonians,   and  entirely  unknown         s  jjg     means      Zarvan     akarana, 

to  the  Zend-Avesta.  '  boundless  time.' 
1  By  this  name  the  Medes  are  to 


ARMENIANS  AND  MOHAMMEDANS.  13 

EzNiK,  who  wrote  a  book  against  lieretical  opinions,  and 
from  ELiSiEUS,  who  compiled  a  history  of  Vartan,  and  the 
wars  waged  by  the  Armenians  against  the  Persians.  Eznik 
says,  in  his  refutation  of  heresies  (in  the  second  book),  con- 
taining a  ''  refutation  of  the  false  doctrine  of  the  Persians : " 
'  Before  anything,  heaven  or  earth,  or  creature  of  any 
kind  whatever  therein,  was  existing,  Zeruaii  existed,  whose 
name  means  fortune  or  glory.l  He  offered  sacrifices  for 
a  thousand  years  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a  son,  Oemizt 
by  name,  who  was  to  create  heaven,  earth,  and  every- 
thing therein.  After  having  spent  a  thousand  years  in 
sacrificing,  he  began  to  deliberate :  Are  these  sacrifices 
of  mine  to  produce  any  effect,  and  will  a  son,  Ormizt  by 
name,  be  born  to  me  ?  While  he  was  thus  deliberating, 
Ormizt  and  Arhmen  were  conceived  in  the  womb  of  their 
mother,  Ormizt  as  the  fruit  of  his  sacrifices,  Arhmen  as 
that  of  his  doubts.  When  Zeruan  was  aware  of  this 
event  he  said  :  Two  sons  are  in  the  womb ;  he  who  will 
first  come  to  me  is  to  be  made  king.  Ormizt,  having 
perceived  his  father's  thoughts,  revealed  them  to  Arhmen, 
saying :  Zeruan,  our  father,  intends  to  make  him  king 
who  shall  be  born  first.  Having  heard  these  words, 
Arhmen  perforated  the  womb,  and  appeared  before  his 
father.  But  Zeruan,  when  he  saw  him,  did  not  know 
who  he  was,  and  asked  him :  Who  art  thou  ?  He  told 
him :  I  am  thy  son.  Zeruan  answered  him :  My  son  is 
well-scented  and  shining,  but  thou  art  dark  and  ill- 
scented.  While  they  were  thus  talking,  Ormizt,  shining 
and  well-scented,  appeared  before  Zeruan,  who,  seeing 
him,  perceived  him  at  once  to  be  his  son  Ormizt  on  account 
of  whom  he  was  sacrificing.  He  took  the  rod  2  which  he 
had  used  in  sacrificing,  and  gave  it  to  Ormizt,  saying : 
Hitherto  this  has  been  used  by  myself  in  offering  sacri- 


^  This  interpretation  is  wrong.    The  ^  This  is  the  so-called  Barsom  (Be- 

word  zarvan  means  simply  "time  "  in  resma,  a  bundle  of  twigs),  always  used 

the  Zend-Avesta,  and  is  preserved  in  by  the  Parsi  i^riests  when  engaged  in 

the  modern  Persian  zamdn.  worship. 


14  THE  REPORTS  OF  THE 

'  fices  for  thy  sake ;  henceforth  thou  mayst  sacrifice  for  my 
'  sake.  When  Zeruan  lianded  over  his  rod  to  Ormizt,  and 
'  blessed  him,  Arlimen  approached  him,  saying :  Hast  thou 
'  not  vowed  to  make  that  one  of  tliy  two  sons  king  who 
'  should  first  come  to  thee  ?  Zeruan,  in  order  to  avoid 
'  breaking  his  vow,  replied  to  Arhmen :  Oh  thou  liar  and 
'  evil-doer !  the  empire  is  to  be  ceded  to  thee  for  nine 
'  thousand  years ;  but  I  place  Ormizt  over  thee  as  chief, 
'  and  after  nine  thousand  years,  he  will  reign  and  do  what 
'  he  likes.  Then  Ormizt  and  Arhmen  began  the  work  of 
'  creation ;  everything  produced  by  Ormizt  was  good  and 
'  right,  and  everything  wrought  by  Arhmen  was  bad  and 
'  perverse.' 

From  both  these  Armenian  writers,  Eznik  and  Elisaeus, 
we  further  learn  that  the  Zoroastrians  in  their  times  (5  th 
century  a.d.)  were  split  into  two  parties,  inimically  opposed 
to  each  other ;  the  one  was  called  MoG  (Magi,  Maghava), 
the  other,  Zendik.1 

Passing  on  to  Mohammedan  writers,  who  lived  after  the 
conquest  of  Persia  by  the  Mohammedans  a.d.  650,  we  may 
notice  some  interesting  passages. 

Masudi,  the  celebrated  Arabian  historian  and  traveller 
(a.d.  950),  has  preserved  to  us  the  following  notice  of  the 
sacred  books  of  the  Parsis.2  '  The  first  book,  made  by 
'  Zeeadusht,  was  Avesta.  The  Persians,  not  being  able 
'  to  understand  it,  Zeradusht  made  a  commentary,  which 
'  they  called  Zend  ;  further  he  made  a  commentary  to  this 
'  commentary,  and  called  it  Pazend.  After  Zeradusht's 
'  death,  the  Persians  made  a  commentary  of  the  commen- 
'  tary,  and  an  explanation  of  all  the  books  just  mentioned, 
'  and  called  it  Yazdah.'  3 

1  The  Magi  were  chiefly  spread  over  2  gee  Chwolsohn  in  the  Zeitschrif t 

the  West,  in  Media  and  Persia  ;  the  der  DeutschenMorgenlandischen  Ge- 

Zendiks  over  the  East,   in  Bactria.  sellschaft,  vol.  vi.  pp.  408,  409. 

The  former  seem   to  have  acknow-  ^  He  understands  by  it  those  piece 

ledged  only  the  Avesta  or  original  which  are  called  Yashts,  and  are  un- 

texts  of  the  sacred  writings  ;thelatter  doubtedly  the  latest  productions  in 

followed  the  traditional  explanation,  the  Zend-Avesta, 
called  Zend. 


ARMENIANS  AND  MOHAMMEDANS.  15 

In  another  passage,  he  has  the  following  remark  on  the 
origin  of  the  word  Zendik,  i.e.,  heretic  in  Persian  :  '  The 
'  Zend  being  only  a  commentary  on  what  was  formerly 
'  revealed  from  heaven  (viz.,  the  Avesta),  the  Persians 
*  called  any  one  who  put  forward  religious  opinions  opposed 
'  to  the  Avesta  a  Zendik,  because  he  held  his  own  inter- 
'  pretation  (Zend)  against  that  of  the  Avesta.' 

On  Zoroaster's  age  he  remarks,  that  according  to  the 
Magi  he  lived  280  years  before  Alexander  the  Great  (or 
about  B.C.  610),  that  is,  at  the  time  of  the  Median  Idng 
Cyaxares. 

Shaheastani,  a  celebrated  Mohammedan  writer,  who 
died  at  Bagdad,  a.d.  i  153,  has  given  in  his  highly  valuable 
work  "  On  Eeligious  Sects  and  Creeds  "  Qdtdhu-l-milal  iva 
nalial)  an  account  of  the  religion  of  the  Magi,  of  which  he 
had  a  better  opinion  than  many  other  Mohammedan 
writers.  Whilst  Dimishqi  (who  died  a.d.  1327),  Ibn  Poz- 
LAN,  and  others,!  identify  the  Magi  with  idolaters  and 
pagans,  Shahrastani  brings  them  under  the  same  head  as 
Jews,  Christians,  and  Musalmans,  or  those  whose  creed 
is  founded  on  revealed  books ;  and  makes  them  diametri- 
cally opposed  to  those  who  follow  their  own  imaginations 
and  inventions  (as  many  philosophers  did),  the  Brahmans 
and  Sabeans  (star-worshippers).  Prom  his  reports  we 
further  learn  that  the  Magi  were  split  into  several  sects, 
which  very  likely  arose  at  the  time  of  the  Sasanians,  such 
as  the  Mazdakyahs,  who  believed  in  the  transmigration  of 
souls,  like  the  Brahmans  and  Buddhists  (a  doctrine  which 
is  altogether  strange  to  the  Zend-Avesta) ;  the  Kayomae- 
THIYAH,  who  believed  in  a  revelation  made  by  God  to  the 
iirst  man,  called  Gayomaed  by  the  Parsis,  corresponding  to 
Adam  of  the  Bible ;  the  Zeevanits  who  believed  in  Zae- 
VAN  AKAEANA,  i.e.,  boundless  time,  as  the  supreme  deity, 
which  doctrines  being  altogether  strange  to  the  ancient 
books,  were  derived  from  other  creeds. 

Before  taking  final  leave  of  these  Mohammedan  writers, 

^  See  Chwolsolin,  Die  Sabier,  i.  p.  281 ;  ii.  p.  690. 


i6  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

we  may  notice  a  peculiar  circumstance  which  deserves  atten- 
tion. In  several  Mohammedan  writings,  especially  in  ver- 
nacular Persian  dictionaries,  we  find  Zoroaster,  or,  as  he 
is  there  called,  Zaradusht,  identified  with  Abraham,  the 
patriarch.  The  Magi  are  said  to  have  called  their  religion 
Kesh-i-IhrdMm,  i.e.,  creed  of  Abraham,  whom  they  con- 
sidered as  their  prophet  and  the  reformer  of  their  religion. 
They  traced  their  religious  books  to  Abraham,  who  was 
believed  to  have  brought  them  from  heaven.  This  was 
altogether  untrue,  but  the  Magi,  or  Parsi  priests,  invented 
it  for  the  purpose  of  escaping  the  persecutions  of  the 
Mohammedans,  and  that  they  might  be  tolerated  to  a 
certain  extent ;  for  only  those  creeds  were  tolerated  by  the 
Mohammedans,  the  followers  of  which  were  able  to  con- 
vince them  of  their  possession  of  sacred  books,  connected 
LQ  any  way  with  the  Jewish  religion,  whose  prophets  had 
been  acknowledged  by  Mohammed. 

II. — THE  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

The  nations  of  modern  Europe  came  into  contact  with 
the  adherents  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion  in  the  western 
part  of  India,  where  they  had  settled  when  they  left  their 
)(~  fatherland,  Persia,  to  escape  the  persecutions  of  the  Mo- 
hammedans. Already,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  manu- 
scripts of  the  sacred  books  of  the  Parsis  were  brought  to 
England  as  mere  articles  of  curiosity,  but  were  sealed 
books  to  every  one.  The  first  who  attempted  to  give  a 
complete  description  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Magi  was  the 
celebrated  Oxford  scholar,  Hyde.  In  his  very  learned 
work,  "  Historia  religionis  veterum  Persarum  eorumque 
Magorum,"  the  first  edition  of  which  was  published  in 
the  year  1 700,  he  displays  a  vast  deal  of  information  on 
the  Parsi  religion,  derived  from  all  the  sources  which  were 
accessible  to  him ;  from  Greek  and  Eoman,  as  weU  as  from 
Arabian  and  Persian  writers ;  and  tries  his  utmost  to  throw 
light  on  the  religion  of  the  Magi,  so  famous  in  antio[uity ; 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  17 

but  being  utterly  unable  to  read  the  original  texts  of  the 
Zend-Avesta,  though  he  himself  was  in  possession  of  several 
manuscripts  of  them,  he  could  not  succeed  in  furnishing 
his  readers  with  a  real  insight  into  that  ancient  creed.  His 
work  acted,  however,  as  a  stimulus  to  others  to  take  more 
interest  in  the  matter. 

The  first  scholar  who  made  Europeans  acquainted  with 
the  contents  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  Parsis  was  the  cele- 
brated Frenchman,  Anquetil  Duperkon.  His  ardour  and 
zeal  are  almost  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  scholarship. 
He  happened  once  to  see  a  facsimile  of  some  pages  written 
in  Avesta  characters,  which  was  circulated  as  a  mere  curio- 
sity. Actuated  by  the  liveliest  desire  of  earning  the  glory  of 
first  opening  the  Zend-Avesta  to  Europeans,  he  suddenly 
resolved  upon  setting  out  for  Western  India  in  order  to  pur- 
chase manuscripts  of  all  the  sacred  books  of  the  Zoroastrian 
religion,  and  to  obtain  a  thorough  knowledge  of  their  con- 
tents, and  of  the  religious  customs  of  the  Parsis  from  their 
priests.  Being  himself  unable  to  afford  the  means  required 
for  carrying  out  his  plan,  he  entered  himself  as  a  sailor  in 
a  ship  of  the  Erench  Indian  Company,  bound  for  Bombay, 
in  the  year  1754,  where  he  safely  arrived  after  a  very  pro- 
tracted and  dangerous  voyage.  All  the  hardships  he  had 
to  suffer  during  his  passage  would  have  been  endured  in 
vain,  and  he  would  have  ultimately  failed  in  obtaining 
what  he  was  aiming  at,  if  the  French  Government  had  not 
granted  him  support.  The  Parsi  priests,  being  fuU  of  dis- 
trust towards  him,  were  not  willing  to  sell  him  valuable 
manuscripts,  and  far  less  to  teach  him  the  language  of 
their  sacred  books.i  Finally,  the  only  means  of  obtaining 
the  object  wished  for  was  money.  He  bribed  one  of  the 
most  learned  Dasturs,  Dastur  Darab,  at  Surat,  to  procure 

1  Since  the 'Parsis  and  their  priests  a  benevolent  interest  in  these  mat- 
have  come  more  into  contact  with  ters  ;  and  are  always  willing  to  give 
Europeans,  this  distrust  has  subsided  him  full  explanations  of  rites  and 
to  a  great  extent.  The  Dasturs  will  ceremonies,  and  even  to  lend  him 
now  readily  converse  about  their  valuable  and  unique  manuscripts, 
sacred  books  and  their  religion,  with  provided  they  are  satisfied  that  he  will 
any  European  scholar  who  really  takes  not  misuse  the  information  he  obtains. 

B 


1 8  E UROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

him  manuscripts,  and  to  instruct  him  in  the  Avesta  and 
Pahlavi  lansiuages.  But  to  ascertain  that  he  was  not  de- 
ceived  by  the  Dastur,  he  opened  an  intercourse  with  some 
other  priests  (Kaus  and  Manjerj),  and  was  very  well  satis- 
fied at  finding  that  the  manuscripts  he  purchased '  first 
were  genuine.  When  he  thought  himseK  proficient  enough 
in  the  Avesta  and  Pahlavi,  he  set  about  making  a  French 
translation  of  the  whole  Zend-Avesta.  He  commenced 
that  work  in  March  1759,  and  was  engaged  in  it  up  to  the 
time  of  his  departure.  He  left  for  Europe  in  1761,  after 
six  years'  stay  in  different  places  in  Western  India.  He 
had  purchased  about  180  manuscripts  in  different  Oriental 
languages,  among  which  were  copies  of  the  sacred  books  of 
the  Parsis.  When,  after  a  long  and  painful  passage,  he 
arrived  in  Europe,  he  did  not  proceed  at  once  to  his  father- 
land, France,  but  went  first  to  England  to  ascertain  whether 
or  not  the  Avesta  manuscripts  to  be  found  there  agreed  with 
those  in  his  own  possession.  Finding  that  they  did  not 
differ,  he  returned  quite  satisfied  to  Fi-ance.  All  his  manu- 
scripts, together  with  the  dictations  of  the  Dasturs,  were 
deposited  in  the  National  Library  at  Paris,  where  they  may 
be  still  inspected  and  used  by  the  student.  Ten  years 
after  his  departure  from  India  he  published  (in  1771),  as 
the  fruit  of  his  indefatigable  zeal  and  industry,  the  follow- 
ing lughly  important  work  in  French,  Zejid-Avesta,  the 
luork  of  Zoroaster,  containing  the  theological,  j^hysical,  and 
moral  ideas  of  this  laivgivcr,  the  ceremonies  of  the  divine 
service  which  lie  established,  and  several  important  traits 
respecting  the  ancient  history  of  the  Persians,  translated  into 
French  from  the  Zend  original,  ivith  Notes  and  several 
Treatises  for  illustrating  the  matters  contained  in  it.  By 
Anquetil  Duperron.     2  vols.  4to. 

This  groundwork  for  Avesta  studies  in  Europe  created 
an  immense  sensation  when  it  was  published.  A  new 
world  of  ideas  seemed  to  have  been  disclosed  to  European 
scliolars;  the  veil  which  covered  the  mysteries  of  the 
famous  founder  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Magi  seemed  to  be 
lifted.    But  the  x^hilosophers  found  themselves  soon  greatly 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  19 

disappointed.  Ivant,  the  great  German  pliilosoplier,  said, 
after  a  careful  perusal  of  the  whole  work,  that  throughout 
the  whole  Zend-Avesta  not  the  slightest  trace  of  philo- 
sophical ideas  could  be  discovered. 

The  chief  question,  however,  was  the  authenticity  of 
these  hooks.  Some  contested,  others  advocated  it.  In 
England  the  opinion  prevailed  that  the  books  were  forged, 
and  Anquetil  imposed  upon  by  the  priests.  The  celebrated 
Oriental  scholar.  Sir  William  Jones,  published  in  1771  a 
letter  in  French  addressed  to  Anquetil  Duperron  (W.Jones's 
Works,  vol.  X.  pp.  403-99),  where  he  tried  to  prove  that  the 
works  translated  by  that  scholar  could  not  be  considered 
as  the  composition  of  the  celebrated  Zoroaster.  The  chief 
reason  alleged  by  him  was,  that  their  contents  grossly 
contradicted  common  sense  and  all  sound  reasoning ;  the 
authority  of  these  books  as  the  chief  source  of  information 
on  the  doctrines  of  Zoroaster  was  thus  denied,  and  they 
were  represented  as  the  fictions  of  priestcraft  brought 
forward  as  the  works  of  Zoroaster.  PacHARDSON,  the  cele- 
brated Persian  lexicographer,  tried  to  prove  the  spurious- 
ness  of  the  Parsi  books  translated  by  Anquetil,  mainly 
from  philological  reasons.  He  held  the  opinion  (in  the 
preface  to  his  "  Persian  Dictionary")  that  the  two  languages 
Zmd  and  Palilavi,  from  which  the  learned  Frenchman  had 
translated  them,  w^ere  mere  inventions,  which  had  never 
existed  in  the  provinces  of  the  Persian  Empire.  His 
opinion  was  founded  upon  four  reasons:  (i)  there  is  too 
great  a  number  of  Arabic  words  in  both  of  them,  which  is 
a  strong  proof  against  their  genuineness;  (2)  the  harsh 
combinations  of  consonants  are  contrary  to  the  genius  of 
the  Persian  language ;  (3)  there  is  no  connection  between 
them  and  modern  Persian ;  (4)  the  contents  of  the  books, 
besides,  are  so  childish  that  they  canno-t  be  ascribed  to  the 
ancient  Persians.  All  these  reasons  can  be  easily  refuted 
in  the  present  state  of  research  into  the  Zend-Avesta; 
but  it  would  be  a  mere  waste  of  space  and  time  to  enter 
into  a  real  discussion  about  the  authenticity  of  the  Avesta 


20  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 


and  Palilavi.  In  these  languages  there  are  no  Arabic 
words  whatever  ;  the  Avesta  is  written  in  a  purely  Aryan 
dialect,  the  elder  sister  of  Sanskrit,  as  can  be  easily  seen 
on  comparing  it  with  the  language  of  the  Veda ;  in  Pahlavi 
there  are  many  Chaldee,  but  no  Arabic  words,  and  the 
greater  part  of  the  language  has  a  close  connection  with 
modern  Persian. 

In  France  the  authenticity  of  these  books  was  not 
doubted,  and  the  gTcat  merits  of  Anquetil  were  at  once 
acknowledged.  In  Germany  the  opinions  of  scholars  were 
at  issue.  Some,  as  Meinees  and  Tychsex,  acceded  to  the 
proofs  alleged  against  the  genuineness  of  these  books ;  but 
another  renowned  German  scholar,  Kleuker,  not  only 
admitted  the  authenticity  of  Anquetil's  work,  but  trans- 
lated the  whole  of  it  into  German,  and  added  several 
appendices,  containing  passages  from  ancient  writers  on 
the  religion  of  the  Magi.  In  advocating  the  authenticity 
of  Anquetil's  Zend-Avesta,  he  relied  chiefly  on  the  accord- 
ance of  the  reports  of  classical  writers  with  those  contained 
in  these  books. 

For  a  long  time  the  correctness  of  Anquetil's  translation 
was  not  doubted  by  any  one,  for  he  had  learned  the  lan- 
guages from  the  most  competent  Parsi  priests  themselves, 
who  were  supposed  to  possess  necessarily  a  thorough  and 
profound  knowledge  of  their  sacred  books.  In  Germany 
the  work  was  thenceforth  the  standard  authority  for  all 
researches  into  the  ancient  Persian  religion,  and  the  divines 
used  it  even  for  the  interpretation  of  the  Old  Testament. 
In  England  it  was  laid  aside  as  spurious,  and  not  deserv- 
ing any  attention.  The  most  comprehensive  and  best 
description  of  the  Persian  religion,  chiefly  according  to 
the  work  of  Anquetil,  was  compiled  by  PtiiODE,  "The 
Holy  Tradition  of  the  Zend  People"  (1820). 

Inquiries  into  the  real  nature  of  the  Avesta  and  Pahlavi 
languages  were  not  made  until  more  than  fifty  years  after 
Anquetil's  work  had  appeared.  The  first  who  attempted 
to  study  this  difficult  subject  was  the  great  Danish  scholar 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  21 

Eask,  who  had  himself  been  in  Bombay,  and  had  pur- 
chased many  valuable  Avesta  and  Pahlavi  manuscripts, 
which  are  now  deposited  in  the  University  Library  at 
Copenhagen.  He  wrote  in  1826  a  pamphlet  "  On  the  Age 
and  Genuineness  of  the  Zend  Lanmian-e."     In  this  little 

o         o 

book  he  proved  the  close  affinity  of  the  language  of  the 
Zend-Avesta  to  Sanskrit.  This  proof  was  sufficient  to 
remove  whatever  doubts  might  have  been  entertained  as 
to  the  genuineness  of  the  Avesta  language.  If  this  lan- 
guage was  a  true  and  genuine  sister  to  Sanskrit,  then  of 
course  it  could  not  be  a  mere  invention  of  priests,  who, 
moreover,  would  have  been  utterly  unable  to  invent  such 
a  well- organised  language  as  that  of  the  Avesta  really  is. 
Although  Anquetil  had  deposited  all  the  rough  copies  of 
his  work,  together  with  the  dictations  of  his  Parsi  teachers 
(they  go  by  the  name  of  "  les  brouillons  d' Anquetil "),  in 
the  National  Library  at  Paris,  for  the  purpose  of  subject- 
ing his  translation  to  public  examination,  for  a  long  time 
no  examiner  came  forward.  As  Anquetil  possessed  neither 
grammar  nor  dictionary  of  the  Avesta  language  (because 
they  did  not  exist),  there  were,  in  fact,  no  means  of  sub- 
jecting his  work  to  a  rigid  examination.  First,  the  gram- 
matical structure  of  this  ancient  language,  and  the  ety- 
mology of  its  words,  had  to  be  discovered ;  but  the  only 
means  of  accomplishing  this  were  by  comparing  it  with 
Sanskrit,  with  which  highly-finished  language  Europeans 
have  become  acquainted  since  the  end  of  last  century. 
Anquetil  himself  was  thinking  of  acquiring  a  knowledge 
of  this  language  from  the  Brahmans,  and  translating  the 
Vedas,  but  he  did  not  succeed.  The  study  of  Sanskrit 
spread  rapidly  from  England  to  France  and  Germany ; 
everywhere  the  high  importance  of  this  classical  language 
was  at  once  acknowledged.  Scholars  early  discovered  its 
close  affinity  to  Greek  and  Latin,  and  as  soon  as  attention 
was  directed  to  the  Zend-Avesta,  the  relationship  of  its 
language  to  Sanskrit  could  not  but  strike  the  inquirer  as 
stni  closer,  even  at  the  first  glance.    As  already  mentioned, 


22  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

Puask  first  proved  this  close  affinity,  but  he  gave  only  a  few 
hints,  tending  to  lead  men  of  high  talents  to  discoveries ; 
so  that  Eask  himself  cannot  be  considered  as  one  of  the 
founders  of  Avesta  philology.  This  honour  was  also  re- 
served for  a  Frenchman. 

The  first  who  laid  the  foundation  of  a  real  Avesta  philo- 
logy was  Eugene  Buenouf,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  the 
College  de  Trance  at  Paris,  one  of  the  most  gifted  and 
talented  scholars  of  his  time,  a  man  of  whom,  as  their 
countryman,  Frenchmen  have  just  reason  to  be  proud. 
Being  himself  exceedingly  well  versed  in  the  classical 
Sanskrit  (not  in  that  of  the  Vedas) — of  his  mastery  over 
which  language  he  has  left  us  more  than  sufficient  speci- 
mens in  his  translation  of  the  Bhdgavata  Purdna,  and  his 
classical  works  on  Buddhism — he  applied  his  sound  and 
critical  knowledge  of  it  to  the  discovery  of  the  rudiments 
of  Avesta  grammar  and  etymology ;  and  his  laborious  re- 
searches were  crowned  with  success.  He  then  first  dis- 
covered the  great  incorrectness  of  Anquetil's  translation, 
the  necessary  result  of  a  total  want  of  acquaintance  with 
anything  like  the  grammar  of  the  Avesta  language.  In 
makino;  his  researches  he  availed  himself  of  ISTeeyosangh's 
Sanskrit  translation  of  the  greater  part  of  the  Yasna,  or 
liturgy,  but  criticised  it  by  means  of  comparative  philo- 
logy, chiefly  with  Sanskrit.  Most  of  his  researches  he 
published  in  his  excellent  work  entitled  "  Commentary  on 
the  Yasna"  (1833-35),  in  which,  starting  from  Neryo- 
sangh's  Sanskrit  translation,  he  gave  the  translation,  with 
too  copious  an  explanation,  of  only  the^rs^  chapter  out  of 
the  seventy-two  which  make  up  the  present  Yasna,  or 
liturgy.  In  several  numbers  of  the  "  Journal  Asiatique  " 
(1844-46)  he  published  a  revised  text,  translation,  and 
explanation  of  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  Yasna,  containing 
the  praise  of  Homa  (corresponding  to  the  Soma  of  the 
Brahmans).  He  published,  besides,  lithographed,  the  fairest 
copy  of  a  Vendiddd  Sddali  (comprising  the  Vendiddd, 
Yasna,    and   Visparad,  without  the  Pahlavi  translation) 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  23 

whicli  he  found  among  the  manuscripts  brought  to  Europe 
by  Anquetil.  This  was  the  first  edition  of  Avesta  texts 
which  appeared  in  Europe  (1829-43).  After  that  publi- 
cation he  relinquished  his  Avesta  studies,  and  engaged 
himself  chiefly  in  researches  into  Buddhism.  In  1852  a 
premature  death  put  an  end  to  his  important  discoveries 
in  several  branches  of  Oriental  antiquities. 

Before  proceeding  to  trace  the  further  course  of  Avesta 
studies,  especially  in  Germany,  we  may  briefly  review  the 
merits  of  the  two  Frenchmen  who  have  just  claims  to  be 
regarded  as  the  founders  of  our  investigations  into  the 
Zend-Avesta. 

Anquetil  Dupekeon  furnished  Europe  with  the  mate- 
rials for  these  researches,  and  by  his  translation  introduced 
the  literary  world  to  the  chief  contents  of  the  sacred  books 
of  the  Zoroastrians.  His  work,  although  utterly  incorrect 
and  inaccurate,  nevertheless  gives  a  notion  of  the  whole  of 
the  Zoroastrian  ideas.  One  could  learn  from  his  books  the 
different  names  of  the  divine  beings,  the  evil  spirits,  cere- 
monies, observances,  doctrines,  and  the  contents  in  general. 
The  reader  could  see,  for  instance,  that  in  the  first  chapter 
of  the  Vejididdd  the  names  of  sixteen  countries  were  enu- 
merated, which  being  originally  good,  were  spoiled  by  the 
bad  creations  of  the  devil ;  that  in  its  second  chapter,  the 
story  of  Yima  (Jamshed)  was  treated;  that  the  Yasncc 
contains  prayers  of  different  kinds,  addressed  to  different 
objects  of  worship ;  &c.  But  it  is  in  the  easier  parts  only 
that  he  could  gain  even  an  approximate  knowledge  of  the 
contents;  in  the  more  difficult  ones,  such  as  the  Gathas, 
he  could  not  attain  even  so  much,  because  in  them  nearly 
all  was  translated  by  Anquetil  Duperron  according  to  his 
own  fancy  and  imagination.  Being  utterly  unable  to  dis- 
tinguish cases,  tenses,  moods,  personal  terminations,  &c., 
he  was  liable  to  the  gravest  errors  and  mistakes,  which 
gave  rise  to  wrong  conceptions,  not  only  of  subordinate 
points,  but  of  such  as  were  of  the  highest  importance  to 
those  interested  in  the  Zoroastrian  religion. 


24  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

To  enable  tlie  reader  to  judge  of  Anquetil's  way  of 
translating,  we  may  take  his  translation  of  one  of  the  most 
celebrated  passages  of  the  Vendidad  (xix,  9,  edition  of 
Westergaard),  which  was  supposed  to  prove  Zarvan 
akarana,  "  boundless  time,"  to  be  the  primitive  being,  and 
creator  of  the  good  and  the  bad  spirits. 

'  Ahriman,^  master  of  the  bad  law !  the  being  absorbed 
'  in  glory  has  given  (created)  thee,  the  boundless  Time  has 
'  given  thee,  it  has  given  also,  with  magnificence,  the 
'  Amshaspends,'  &c.  According  to  this  translation 
Hormazd  and  Ahriman  are  not  the  two  primitive  spirits, 
but  they  themselves  were  created  by  a  supreme  being 
called  Zarvan  akarana,  "  boundless  time."  This  doctrine 
being  altogether  strange  to  the  Zend-Avesta,  as  we  shall 
see  hereafter,  was  merely  interpreted  into  this  passage  by 
Anquetil  according  to  the  teaching  of  his  masters,  the 
Dasturs,  in  consequence  of  his  ignorance  of  Avesta  gram- 
mar. He  translates  the  words  zriini  aharane  as  a  nomi- 
native case,  whilst  a  very  superficial  knowledge  of  Avesta 
and  Sanskrit  grammars  suffices  to  recognise  both  the  forms 
as  locatives ;  they  are  therefore  to  be  translated  only,  "  in 
boundless  time,"  the  subject  of  the  sentence  being  spento 
mainyush,  "  the  bountiful  spirit "  (a  name  of  Hormazd) ; 
were  it  the  nominative  case,  and  the  subject  of  the  sen- 
tence, then  we  should  expect  to  find  zarva  akara'iurn. 
The  right  translation  is  as  follows : — 

'  0  evil-knowing  Angromainyiish  (Ahriman)  !  The 
'  bountiful  spirit  made  (these  weapons  required  to  defeat 
'  the  influences  of  the  evil  spirit)  in  boundless  time,-  the 
'  immortal  benefactors  assisted  him  in  making  them! 

Although  we  may  gather  from  this  specimen  that 
Anquetil's  translation  is  nowhere  to  be  relied  upon,  always 
lacking  accuracy,  yet  we  must  thankfully  acknowledge  how 

^  This  verse  concludes  an  old  song,  will     find    a     translation     of     tho 

describing  the   devil's   attacks  upon  wliole. 

Zarathushtra,  and  the  conversation  ^  That  means  only,  at  a  time  un- 
earned on  between  them.  In  the  known,  at  a  time  immemorial,  or  in 
third  Essay  of  this  work  the  reader  the  beginning. 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  "  25 

miicli  we  owe  to  him  as  the  founder  of  all  researches  suhse- 
qiiently  made  iuto  the  Zend-Avesta.  Whilst  the  translation 
itself  is  utterly  inaccurate  and  erroneous,  his  descriptions 
of  ceremonies  and  rites  are  quite  correct,  as  the  author  can 
assure  the  reader  from  his  intercourse  with  Parsi  priests.^ 
He  was  a  trustworthy  man  in  every  respect,  and  wrote 
only  wliat  he  was  taught  by  the  Parsi  Dasturs.^  These 
high-priests  of  the  Parsi  community,  who  are  the  only 
preservers  of  the  religious  traditions,  and  their  interpreters, 
derive  all  their  information  about  their  religion  not  from 
the  original  Avesta  texts  themselves,  but  from  the  Pahlavi 
translation  made  of  them  at  the  time  of  the  Sasanians. 
Considering  that  even  this  translation  is  not  quite  correct, 
and,  moreover,  that  it  is  not  understood  by  the  Dasturs  in 
a  critical  and  philological  way,  how  can  Anquetil  be  ex- 
pected to  have  furnished  us  with  an  accurate  translation  ? 
In  many  instances  also  Anquetil  misunderstood  the  Das- 
turs ;  so  that  his  translation  was  tinged  with  errors  of  three 
Tiinds,  viz.,  those  of  the  Pahlavi  translations,  those  of  the 
Dasturs,  and  those  of  his  own  misunderstandings.  His 
work,  therefore,  cannot  stand  the  test  of  close  examination, 
and  from  a  critical  point  of  view  it  can  hardly  be  styled  a 
translation ;  it  is  only  a  summary  report,  in  an  extended 
form,  of  the  contents  of  the  Zend-Avesta.  But  he  cannot 
be  blamed  for  that ;  at  liis  time  it  was  impossible  for  the 
most  learned  and  sagacious  scholars  to  do  more  than  he 


1  Anquetil  was  evidently  a  correct  passed  for  the  most  learned  priest  of 

observer  and  an  accurate  describer  of  his  time  in  India,  quotes  in  his  Guj- 

what  he  saw.     His  descrijition  of  the  rati  work  "  Mujizat-i-Zartosht  "  (the 

cave-temples  in  Salsette  could  be  read  Miracles  of  Zoroaster),  p.  10,  Anquetil 

on  the  sjjot  a  century  after  his  visit,  as  an  authority  in  order  to  counte- 

as  the  only  accurate  account  of  them  nance  his  strange  and  quite  erroneous 

that  had  ever  been  published.  explanation  of  the  word  stehrpaesan- 

"  The  European  reader  will  not  be  Acm  (decorated  with  stars),  as  meaning 
a  little  astonished  to  learn  that  An-  sadarah,  "  the  shirt  "  worn  by  the 
quetil's  work  was  regarded  afterwards  Parsis,  an  interpretation  which  con- 
as  a  kind  of  authority  by  the  Dasturs  tradicts  the  tradition  as  well  as  the 
themselves.  As,  for  instance,  the  contexts  of  the  passages,  and  was  con- 
late  high-priest  of  the  Parsis  in  Bom-  sequently  not  acknowledged  by  other 
bay,   Edalji   Darabji  Rustamji,  who  Dasturs. 


26  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

actually  did.  From  tlie  Dasturs  he  learned  the  approxi- 
mate meanings  of  the  words,  and  starting  from  this  very- 
rudimentary  knowledge,  he  then  simply  guessed  the  sense 
of  each  sentence. 

BuENOUF,  who  first  investigated,  in  a  scientific  way,  the- 
language  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  would  never  have  succeeded 
in  laying  the  foundation  of  Avesta  philology  without  the 
aid  of  Anquetil's  labours.  Anquetil  had  left  ample  mate- 
rials for  future  researches,  and  had  furnished  scholars  with 
a  summary  of  the  contents  of  the  Zend-Avesta.  Burnouf, 
in  making  his  researches,  availed  himself  chiefly  of  a  San- 
skrit translation  of  the  Yasna,  or  liturgy  of  the  Parsis,  and 
found  on  closer  inquiry  that  this  work  was  more  reliable 
than  Anquetil's  translation.  The  Pahlavi  translation, 
upon  which  this  Sanskrit  one  is  founded,  would  have  better 
answered  his  purposes ;  but  as  he  did  not  take  the  trouble 
to  study  this  very  peculiar  language,  it  was  of  no  use  to 
him.  Neryosangh's  Sanskrit  translation  was  then,  as  to 
grammatical  forms  and  etymologies,  rectified  byBurnouf  by 
means  of  comparative  philology,  chiefly  Sanskrit.  But  these 
aids  did  not  prevent  him  from  committing  many  errors.  On 
the  one  side  he  relied  too  much  on  Neryosangh's  imperfect 
work ;  on  the  other,  he  applied  too  often  to  Sanskrit  ety- 
mologies. It  is  true  he  had  made  extensive  preparations 
before  he  commenced  his  researches,  for  he  compiled  for 
his  private  use  a  vocabulary  of  the  Avesta  words  with 
quotations  from  the  Zend-Avesta,  where  each  particular 
word  occurs.  In  making  his  laborious  inquiries  into  the 
meaning  of  any  particular  word,  he  quoted  parallel  passages, 
the  broad  ground  on  which  the  whole  of  modern  philology, 
now  so  highly  developed,  rests.  But  there  beiug  at  his 
disposal  no  printed  editions  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  based  on 
different  manuscripts,  and  pointing  out  the  various  read- 
ings, he  could  not  peruse  the  whole  of  it  so  carefully  as 
would  have  been  requisite  to  guard  himself  against  mis- 
takes, which  he  was  otherwise  unable  to  avoid  ;  he  w\as, 
therefore,  often  obliged  to  forego  and  overlook  important 


EUROPEAN  Researches.  27 

passages  which  wouhl  have  guided  him,  in  many  instances, 
in  ascertaining  the  exact  meaning. 

In  his  etymological  proofs  he  was  not  always  fortunate.! 
He  lacked,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  skill  requisite  for  form- 
ing sound  etymologies  (which  is  really  a  very  difficult  task), 
and  besides,  his  acquaintance  with  the  most  ancient  forms 
and  words  in  Sanskrit,  as  they  are  to  be  met  with  only  in 
the  Vedas,  was  too  superficial.  The  Iranian  languages, 
such  as  Persian  (the  application  of  which  requires  even 
greater  skill  and  knowledge  than  in  the  case  of  Sanskrit), 
were  but  little  attended  to  by  him.  Wliilst  Burnouf  often 
failed  in  his  etymologies,  he  was  almost  always  successful 
in  determining  the  grammatical  terminations,  their  affinity 
to  those  in  Sanskrit  being  too  close  not  to  be  recocfnised  at 
once  by  a  good  Sanskrit  scholar.  And  notwithstanding 
some  undeniable  defects  in  his  researches,  he  was  the  first 
who  gave,  not  a  mere  paraphrase  or  approximate  statement 
of  the  contents,  but  a  real  translation  of  two  chapters  of 
the  Yasna  (ist  and  9th).  That  was  a  great  step  taken 
towards  a  sound  philological  interpretation  of  the  whole 
Zend-Avesta.  But  this  great  scholar  seems  to  have  be- 
come, in  the  course  of  his  studies,  weary  of  spending  many 
years  in  the  explanation  of  only  a  few  chapters,  and  did 
not  pursue  his  inquiries  further.  After  having  simply 
pointed  out  the  way,  and  partially  paved  it,  he  left  it  for 
others  to  follow  in  his  tracks.     His  results  refer  chiefly  to 

1  Thus  lie  says  dkhtHirya  (Yas.  ix.  nised  the  word  as  a  numeral,  meaning 

14,  Vend.  X.  ii)  is  derived  from  the  "four    times"    (literally,   "till   the 

Vedic  root  anj  (to  which  he  ascribes  fourth  time"),  and  being  composed  of 

the  meaning  "  to  sing"),  and  may  be  the  preposition  d  (up  to,  till,  as  far 

taken  in  the  sense  of  "  made  for  being  as),  &nd  k-ktilirpa,  "fourth"  (comp.  • 

sung."     This  is  utterly  wrong.     The  qnatuor  in  Ln.tin,  keturimLithnn.man, 

root  anj,  to  which  he  traces  the  word  "  four").     To  the  word  karafan  (he 

in  question,  never  means  in  the  Vedas  writes  the  crude  form  wrongly  Act r- 

"to  sing,"  but   "to  smear,  anoint"  afna,  guessing  it  from  the  very  fre- 

(being  identical  with  the  Latin  M77.7MO,  quent  genitive  plural,  karafndm),hQ 

"to  smear").    The  context  of  the  pas-  ascribes  the  meaning  "deaf,"  while  it 

sage,  where  the  word  in  qiiestion  oc-  means,   according  to  the  Vedic  lan- 

curs,  besides,  requires  another  mean-  guage,  a  "performer  of  sacrifices,"  as 

ing.    Had  he  cast  a  glance  only  at  we  shall  see  in  the  fourth  Essay. 
Vend.  X.  3,  7,  he  would  have  recog- 


28  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

gmmmatical  points  and  the  meanings  of  words,  but  very 
little  to  the  general  contents  of  the*  sacred  books  of  the 
Zoroastrian  religion,  or  to  its  origin  and  development. 
About  these  matters  his  knowledge  went  but  little  beyond 
that  of  Anquetil.  He  had  no  idea  of  the  importance  of  the 
Gathas ;  he  neither  knew  tliat  their  language  differs  from 
the  usual  Avesta  language  of  the  other  books,  nor  that  they 
are  metrical  compositions,  their  metres  agreeing  with  those 
of  the  Vedic  hymns ;  so  that  he  was  unable  to  trace  even 
an  outline  of  the  history  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion  and  its 
sacred  writings.  Tliis  task  was,  however,  at  his  time,  too 
difficult  to  be  carried  out ;  but  he  discharged  his  duties  as 
the  founder  of  the  first  outlines  of  Avesta  philology  with  an 
accuracy,  faithfulness,  conscientiousness,  and  sagacity  which 
endear  him  to  every  sincere  reader,  and  make  his  prema- 
ture death  a  matter  of  deep  regret.  He  was  really  a  master 
in  scholarship  and  scientific  investigations,  and  every  page 
he  wrote,  even  where  he  erred,  bears  witness  to  the  truth 
of  this  statement. 

Wliilst  the  honor  of  having  first  opened  the  venerable 
documents  of  the  Zoroastrian  doctrines  to  the  civilised 
world  belongs  to  France,  Germany  and  Denmark  have  to 
claim  the  merit  of  having  further  advanced  this  entirely 
new  branch  of  philological  and  antiquarian  studies. 

The  first  German  scholar  who  took  up  the  study  of  the 
Zend-Avesta  was  Justus  Olshausen,  Professor  of  Oriental 
Languages  at  Kiel.  He  intended  to  publish  an  edition  of 
the  Zend-Avesta  according  to  the  manuscripts  extant  in 
Europe,  chiefly  at  Paris  and  Copenhagen,  and  to  furnish 
the  learned  public  with  a  grammar  and  dictionary.  He 
commenced  his  edition  by  publishing  the  first  four  chapters 
of  the  Vendidad,  or  religious  code  of  the  Parsis,  in  the  year 
1 829 ;  but  after  this  first  number  had  appeared  he  stopped 
his  edition,  and  relinquished  this  extremely  difficult,  and 
in  many  respects  thankless,  branch  of  studies. 

This  fragment,  published  by  Olshausen,  and  the  edition 
of  a  copy  of  the  Vendidad  Sadah  belonging  to  the  National 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  29 

Library  at  Paris,  by  Burnouf,  were  the  only  means  avail- 
able for  German  scholars  who  had  a  desire  to  decipher  the 
language  and  teaching  of  the  great  Zoroaster.  The  utter 
insufficiency  of  these,  in  order  to  make  any  progress  in 
these  studies,  was  felt  by  all  Oriental  scholars  in  Germany. 
They  were,  therefore,  driven  to  content  themselves  with 
the  results  arrived  at  by  Burnouf. 

The  first  who  made  an  extensive  and  useful  application 
of  them,  now  and  then  adding  some  remarks  of  his  own, 
was  Feancis  Bopp,  the  celebrated  compiler  of  the  first 
comparative  grammar  of  some  of  the  chief  languages  ot 
the  Aryan  stock.  He  tried  to  give  an  outline  of  Avesta 
grammar,  chiefly  according  to  the  results  arrived  at  by 
Burnouf,  but  nowhere  made  discoveries  of  so  much  im- 
portance in  the  Avesta  language  as  that  famous  French- 
man had  done.  His  sketch  of  Avesta  grammar,  scattered 
throughout  his  comparative  grammar,  although  imperfect 
and  incomi^lete  as  a  first  outline,  was  a  valuable  assistance 
to  that  increasing  number  of  Oriental  scholars  who  were 
desirous  of  acquiring  some  knowledge  of  the  Avesta  lan- 
"uarre,  without  taking  the  immense  trouble  of  investigating 
the  original  texts  themselves. 

The  first  step  to  be  taken  by  German  scholars  towards 
an  advance  in  unravelling  the  mysteries  of  the  Zend- 
Avesta,  was  to  put  themselves  in  possession  of  larger  and 
better  materials  for  their  researches.  There  being  no 
Avesta  manuscripts  of  importance  in  any  German  library, 
students  were  obliged  to  go  to  Paris,  Copenhagen,  London, 
and  Oxford,  the  only  places  where  Avesta  manuscripts  of 
value  were  to  be  found  in  Europe.  Among  the  German 
States  the  honor  of  having  provided  scholars  with  the 
necessary  means  to  stay  at  these  places  in  order  to  collect 
more  ample  materials  belongs  to  Bavaeia. 

The  Bavarian  Government  granted  considerable  sums 
for  these  purposes  to  two  scholars  of  its  country,  to  Maec 
Joseph  Mullee,  afterwards  Professor  of  Oriental  Lan- 
guages at  Munich,  and  to  Feedeeic  Spiegel,  now  Professor 


30  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

of  Oriental  Languages  at  the  Bavarian  University  of 
Erlangen.  ]\Iiiller  went  to  Paris  to  copy  the  most  impor- 
tant Avesta  and  Pahlavi  manuscripts,  and  seems  to  have 
been  very  busy  during  his  stay  at  Paris ;  he  himself,  how- 
ever, made  but  little  use  of  the  materials  collected  by  him. 
He  published  only  two  small  treatises,  one  on  the  Paldavi 
language  (in  the  French  Asiatic  Journal  1839),  treating 
solely  of  the  alphabet ;  and  one  on  the  commencement  of 
the  Bundahish  (in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bavarian  Aca- 
demy of  Sciences).  Both  are  valuable,  but  chiefly  based 
on  Anquetil's  papers,  wliich  the  author  thankfully  acknow- 
ledged. Miiller,  very  likely  deterred  by  the  enormous 
difficulties,  like  many  others,  then  gave  up  this  branch 
of  study,  and  handed  most  of  his  materials  over  to 
his  younger  and  more  energetic  countryman,  Feedekic 
Spiegel. 

This  scholar  intended  to  give  the  learned  world  the  first 
critical  edition  of  all  writimrs  in  the  Avesta  lancjuace, 
commonly  called  the  Zend-Avesta,  to  be  based  on  a  care- 
ful comparison  of  all  manuscripts  then  extant  in  Europe. 
The  materials  left  to  liim  by  Miiller  and  Olshausen  not 
being  sufficient  to  achieve  this  task,  he  went,. munificently 
supported  by  the  Bavarian  Government,  to  Copenhagen, 
Paris,  London,  and  Oxford,  and  copied  all  the  manuscripts 
wliich  he  required  for  his  purpose.  His  intention  was  not 
only  to  publish  all  the  original  texts,  together  with  the 
ancient  Pahlavi  translation,  but  also  to  prepare  a  German 
translation  of  them  with  notes,  and  to  issue  both  at  the 
same  time.  But  before  he  was  so  far  advanced  as  to  be 
able  to  publish  a  part  of  his  large  work,  an  edition  of  the 
Vendiddcl  Sdclah  (comprising  the  Vendiddd,  Yasna,  and 
Visparad),  in  Eoman  characters,  with  an  index  and  glos-  ■ 
sary,  appeared  in  1850  at  Leipsic. 

The  author  of  this  really  very  useful  work,  which  made 
the  original  texts  of  tlie  Zend-Avesta  known  to  the  learned 
public  at  large,  was  Hermann  Brockiiaus,  Professor  of 
Sanskrit  at  the  University  of  Leipsic.    Not  being  in  pos- 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 


31 


session  of  sucli  extensive  materials  as  Spiegel,  he  con- 
tented himself  with  a  transcription,  in  Eoman  characters, 
of  Burnouf's  edition  of  the  Avesta,  and  pointed  out  in 
footnotes  the  various  readings  of  Framji  Aspendiarji's 
edition  published  at  Bombay  in  the  years  1842-43  in 
Gujrati  characters.  To  facilitate  the  researches  of  stu- 
dents, he  added  an  index,  indicating  in  alphabetical  order 
the  passages  where  each  particular  word  occurs.  In  a 
glossary  (distinct  from  the  index)  he  collected  the  explana- 
tions of  the  Avesta  words,  so  far  as  they  had  been  given 
by  Burnouf,  Bopp,  Spiegel,  &c.  It  was  a  rudimentary 
Avesta  dictionary,  but  of  course  very  incomplete,  the 
author  confining  himself  only  to  those  words  which  were 
already  explained  by  other  scholars.  Now  and  then  he 
corrected  errors. 

This  useful  book  contributed  largely  towards  encourag- 
ing Avesta  studies  in  Germany.  Burnouf's  edition  and  his 
commentary  on  the  first  chapter  of  the  Yasna  were  too 
costly  and  comprehensive  to  become  generally  used  among 
the  students  of  German  universities.  But  the  work  of 
Brockhaus  formed  a  manual  for  those  Sanskrit  students 
who  had  a  desire  of  making  themselves  acquainted  with 
the  sacred  language  of  the  Zend-Avesta.  The  German 
Sanskrit  Professors  began,  now  and  then,  to  teach  the 
Avesta,  but  their  knowledge  of  this  language  being  very 
limited,  they  could  not  succeed  in  training  young  men  for 
this  branch  of  study  so  successfully  as  they  did  in  San- 
skrit. The  subject  is  really  so  extremely  difficult,  that 
any  one  who  is  desirous  of  acquiring  a  complete  know- 
ledge of  it,  is  compelled  to  lay  aside  for  many  years  nearly 
all  other  studies,  and  devote  his  time  solely  to  the  Avesta. 
The  language  could  not  be  learned  like  Sanskrit,  Arabic, 
Persian,  Hebrew,  Chaldee,  Syriac,  ^thiopic,  Turkish, 
Chinese,  &c.  (all  which  languages  are  taught  in  German 
universities,  but  of  course  not  always  at  the  same  place), 
from  grammars  and  dictionaries ;  in  fact,  the  Avesta  lan- 
guage, before  it  could  be  learned,  had  first  to  be  discovered. 


32  E  U ROPE  A  N  RESEA  RCHES. 

But  even  to  begin  this  task,  a  very  compreliensive  and 
accurate  knowledge  of  several  Oriental  languages,  as  the 
starting-point  for  further  inquiries,  was  indispensable. 

In  the  meantime,  the  importance  of  the  Avesta  lan- 
guage for  antiquarian  and  philological  researches  became 
more  generally  known,  chiefly  in  consequence  of  the 
attempts  made  to  read  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  found  in 
Persia.  The  first  language  of  these  inscriptions  (which 
are  engraved  at  Persepolis  and  on  the  rock  of  Bisutiin  in 
three  languages)  is  an  Aryan  one,  and  decidedly  the 
mother  of  the  modern  Persian.  Its  very  close  affinity  to 
the  Avesta  language  struck  every  one  at  the  first  glance ; 
hence  the  great  importance  of  this  language  for  decipher- 
ing these  inscriptions  was  at  once  acknowledged.  That 
circumstance  removed  many  doubts  which  were  still  enter- 
tained, especially  in  England,  about  the  genuineness  of 
the  Avesta  language.  The  first  work  written  in  English 
wdiich  shows  any  acquaintance  with  the  original  Avesta 
texts  w^as  the  Ptev.  Dr.  Wilson's  book  on  the  Parsi  reli- 
gion, published  at  Bombay  in  1843,  which,  although  it 
relies  chiefly  upon  the  results  of  Burnouf's  researches, 
also  contains  frequent  indications  of  independent  inves- 
tigation. 

Whilst  Spiegel  was  preparing  his  critical  edition  of  the 
Zend-Avesta,  Westekgaaed,  Professor  at  Copenhagen, 
announced  another  one  also,  prepared  from  the  same 
materials  as  were  at  the  former's  disposal.  This  great 
Danish  scholar  had  the  first  claims  to  the  publication  of 
an  edition  of  the  Avesta  texts,  on  account  of  the  great 
trouble  he  had  taken  to  collect  additional  materials  for 
such  a  work.  Not  satisfied  with  the  materials  extant  in 
Europe,  he  left  for  India  and  Persia  in  order  to  search 
after  new  ones.  During  his  stay  in  India  and  Persia 
(1841-43)  he  unfortunately  did  not  succeed  in  obtaining 
manuscripts  of  much  value.  There  were,  indeed,  some 
old  copies  of  the  Avesta  books  extant  in  Gujrat,  and  even 
in  Bombay,  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  purchase  them.     In 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  33 

Persia,  no  books,  hitherto  unknown,  coukl  be  discovered 
by  Westergaard,  and  even  of  those  known  to  the  Parsis  in 
India,  he  found  only  very  few  copies.  "VVe  must  there- 
fore consider  AVestern  India,  but  more  particularly  Gujrat, 
as  the  only  place  Avhere  any  books,  hitherto  unknown, 
may  be  discovered.  In  the  advertisement  of  his  edition 
of  the  Zend-Avesta,  Westergaard  announced  the  addition 
of  a  complete  dictionary,  with  a  grammar  of  both  the 
Avesta  dialects,  an  English  translation  of  the  whole,  and 
'  an  account  of  Iranian  antiquities  according  to  the  Zend- 
Avesta. 

The  first  fruit  of  Westergaard's  Iranian  studies  was, 
however,  not  an  edition  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  but  one  of  the 
Bundahisli,  or  "  original  creation,"  still  extant  in  Pahlavi, 
but  not  in  the  Avesta,  It  is  a  compendious  descrip- 
tion of  much  of  the  Parsi  religion,  but  is  not  acknowledged 
by  the  Dasturs  as  a  canonical  book,  like  those  styled 
Zend-Avesta ;  its  contents  agreeing  so  exceedingly  well 
with  the  reports  of  Theopompos  and  Hermippos,  men- 
tioned above,  that  we  are  driven  to  assign  to  the  oriccinal, 
or  its  sources,  a  date  not  later  than  the  fourth  century 
before  the  Christian  era.  Westergaard's  edition  (Copen- 
hagen, 185 1 )  contains,  however,  only  a  lithographed  ver- 
sion of  one  very  old  codex  of  the  BundaMsh,  extant  in  the 
University  Library  at  Copenhagen.  He  added  neither 
translation  nor  notes ;  the  only  addition  he  made  was  a 
transcript  of  two  inscriptions  of  the  Sasanians,  found  in  a 
cave  at  HajiaLad,  which  were  copied  by  him  during  his 
stay  in  Persia.  This  edition  was  reviewed  by  the  writer 
of  these  Essays,  and  the  review  was  accompanied  by  a 
short  sketch  of  Pahlavi  Grammar.^ 

Before  Spiegel  issued  the  first  number  of  his  edition  of 
the  Avesta  texts,  he  published  a  "  Grammar  of  the  Parsi 
Language"  (Leipzig,  185 1).  He  means  by  Parsi  language 
that  which  is  now  called   Pazand   by  the   Dasturs.     It 

^  See  '  Ueber  die  Pehlewi-Spraclie  und  den  Bundehesb,'  in  the  '  Gottinger 
gelelirten  Anzeigen,'  1854. 

C 


34  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

differs  very  little  from  modern  Persian,  except  in  the  want 
of  Arabic  words,  and  is  nearly  identical  with  the  language 
written  by  the  great  Persian  poet  Pirdausi,  a.d.  iooo. 
We  are,  therefore,  fully  entitled  to  call  it  a  somewhat 
obsolete  form  of  modern  Persian.  Spiegel  added  some 
specimens  of  religious  literature  extant  in  Parsi,  with  a 
German  translation.  This  book  was, also  reviewed  (in 
1853)  by  the  writer  of  these  Essays,  who  found  himself 
compelled  to  take  an  unfavorable  view  of  the  scholarship 
displayed  by  its  author. 

A  short  time  after  this  grammar,  the  first  number  of  his 
edition  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  comprising  the  Avesta  text  of 
about  ten  chapters  of  the  Vendidad,  appeared.  It  was 
printed  with  beautiful  new  type  at  the  Imperial  printing- 
ofiice  at  Vienna  (185 1),  and  is  really  a  masterpiece  of 
typography.  This  number,  containing  the  mere  text,  with- 
out either  various  readings  or  the  Pahlavi  translation,  did 
not  suf&ce  to  enable  the  reader  to  form  a  judgment  of  the 
way  in  which  th*e  text  was  edited ;  and  the  publication  of 
the  remaining  portion  of  the  Vendidad,  together  with  the 
Pahlavi  translation  of  the  whole,  was  delayed  till  1853. 
In  the  same  year  the  first  number  of  Westergaard's  edi- 
tion, printed  at  Copenhagen,  appeared.  It  comprised  the 
text  of  the  Yasna  only,  chiefly  based  on  a  very  old  codex 
(written  a.d.  1323),!  but  with  footnotes  indicating  some 
of  the  more  important  various  readings  of  other  codices. 
Tliis  edition,  although  not  printed  with  such  beautiful 
type  as  that  used  by  Spiegel,  was  very  accurate,  and  made 
a  much  better  impression  upon  the  student  than  that  of 
his  rival.  In  this  first  number  one  could  see  that  he  had 
recognised  the  five  Gathas  as  metrical  pieces.  These  first 
numbers  of  Spiegel's  and  Westergaard's  editions,  together 
with  Spiegel's  translation  of  the  whole  Vendidad,  were 

1  This  codex  is  probably  the  oldest  writer,   but   dated  twenty-two  days 

Avesta  manuscript  in  the  world,  and  later,    is   in   the    library   of    Dastur 

contains  the  Yasna  alternating  with  Jamaspji  Minochiharji  Jamaspasaua 

its     Pahlavi    translation.      Another  in  Bombay. 
copy  of  the  same  texts  by  the  same 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  35 

reviewed  (1852-53)  by  one  of  the  most  distinguished  and 
Sagacious  Sanskrit  scholars  in  Europe,  Theodor  Benfey, 
Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  the  University  of  Gofctingeu,  in 
Hanover.  He  showed  that,  by  a  comparison  with  San- 
skrit, wliich  corresponds  very  closely  with  the  Avesta 
language,  one  might  arrive  at  a  much  better  understand- 
ing of  the  Zend-Avesta  than  had  been  attained  by  Spiegel, 
who  appeared  to  have  relied  chiefly  upon  the  I'ahlavi 
translation  and  the  information  supplied  by  Anquetil. 
This  Pahlavi  translation,  made  at  least  thirteen  hundred 
or  fourteen  hundred  years  ago,  would  be  a  great  assistance 
to  any  modern  translator  who  understands  it  thoroughly, 

1  That  Spiegel  did  not  understand  take  the  first  sentences  of  the  Ven- 
how  to  avail  himself  of  the  Pahlavi  didad  as  an  illustration.  The  ori- 
translation  much  better  than  Anque-  ginal  Avesta  text,  with  a  literal  in- 
til,  seems  probable  from  many  pas-  terlinear  translation,  is  as  follows  : — 
sages  in  his  translation  ;  but  we  may 
Mraod  Ahuro  Mazddo  Spitamdi  Zarathushtrdi :  Azcm  dadham,  Spitama 
Spake  Ahuramazda  to  Spitama  Zarathushtra :  I  created,  O  Spitama 
Zaralhusldra !    aso  rdmo-dditim        noid     kudad      shditim ;     yeidhi 

Zarathushtra  !  a  place  of  pleasant  formation  not  anywhere  habitable  ;       if 

zi  azem  noid         daidhydm,  Spitama   Zarathushtra !    aso       rdmC- 

then    I    not   should  have  created,  O  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  a  place  of  plea- 

dditlm         noid       kudad       shditim,      vtspo  arihtish    astvdo   Airyanem 

sant  formation    not    anywhere    habitable,       all       life     existing    into  Iran 

vaej6  frdshnvdd. 

the  pure  would  have  poured  forth. 

This  passage  is  rendered  in  the  '  for  it  is  not  possible  to  go  so  far  as 
Pahlavi  translation,  with  explanatory  'from  region  (keshvar)  to  region, 
phrases  (here  included  in  brackets),  '  except  with  the  permission  of  the 
as  follows: — '  Auharmazd  said  to  '  yazads  (angels) ;  some  say  that  it  is 
Spitaman  ZaratCishtar  :  I  created,  O  '  possible  .to  go  also  with  that  of  the 
Spitaman  Zaratdshtar  !  a  delightful     'demons].' 

creation  of  a  place  where  no  com-  Spiegel's  translation  of  the  samo 
fort  was  created  [this  is  where  man  passage  is  as  follows  : — '  Ahura  Maz- 
is,  the  place  where  he  is  born  and  *  da  said  to  the  holy  Zarathushtra  : 
they  bring  him  up,  seems  good  to  *  I  created,  holy  Zarathushtra  !  a 
him,  that  is,  very  excellent  and  '  place,  a  creation  of  pleasantness, 
comfortable  ;  this  I  created] ;  for  if  '  where  nowhere  was  created  a  possi- 
I  should  not  liave  created,  O  Spita-  '  bility  (for  drawing  near).  For  if, 
man  Zaratiishtar  !  a  delightful  crea-  '  holy  Zarathushtra  !  I  had  not  created 
tion  of  a  place  where  no  comfort  '  a  place,  a  creation  of  pleasantness, 
was  created,  there  would  have  been  '  where  nowhere  was  created  a  i)ossi- 
an  emigration  of  the  whole  material  '  bility,  the  whole  world  endowed 
world  to  Airan-vej  (the  earthly  '  with  bodies  would  have  gone  to 
paradise),  [that  is,  they  would  have  '  Airy  ana- vac  j  a.' 
remained  in  the  act,  while  their  In  this  translation  Spiegel  differs 
going  would  have  been  impossible  ;    from  the  Pahlavi  in  two  notable  in- 


36  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

as  it  contains  much  traditional  information  wliicli  -would 
be  vainly  sought  for  elsewhere;  but  this  information  is 
given  in  a  character  and  idiom  not  only  very  difficult  to 
understand,  but  also  particularly  liable  to  be  misunder- 
stood. In  many  cases  the  Pahlavi  translation  fails  to 
explain  the  original  text,  or  evidently  misinterprets  it. 
Under  these  circumstances  it  can  be  safely  used  only  as  a 
supplementary  authority,  in  confirmation  or  modification 
of  results  already  obtained  (after  the  manner  of  Bm-nouf), 
by  a  careful  comparison  of  parallel  passages,  and  search 
for  Sanskrit  equivalents ;  or,  when  these  means  fail,  the 
Pahlavi  translation  may  often  afford  valuable  assistance, 
if  used  judiciously. 

Before  Spiegel  published  the  second  volume  of  his 
edition  of  the  Zend-Avesta  (1858),  containing  the  Yasna 
and  Visparad,  with  their  Pahlavi  translations,  AYestergaard 
succeeded  in  editing  all  the  Avesta  texts  which  are  known 
as  yet ;  and  to  him  we  owe,  therefore,  the  first  complete 
edition  of  the  Zend-Avesta.  The  work  is  entitled  Zend- 
Avesta,  or  the  Religious  Boohs  of  the:  Zoroastrians,  edited  and 
translated,  tvith  a  Dictionary,  Grajnmar,  &c.,  hj  K  L. 
Westerrjaard.  Vol.  I.  The  Zend  Texts  (Copenh.,  1852-54); 
but  of  the  two  remaining  volumes  nothing  has  yet 
appeared.  Westergaard  knows  too  well  the  enormous 
difficulties  with  whicli  the  study  of  the  Zend-Avesta  is 
beset  to  come  forward  with  a  hasty  translation,  grammar, 

stances,  and,  unfortunately,  without  connection    with    the    meaning    of 

sufficient  reason.     The  first  deviation  "  hol3^"     The  other  deviation  is  with 

is  with  retjard  to  the  word  Spitama,  regard  to  the    word   shdittm,  which 

which  he  translates  "  holy,"  in   ac-  Spiegel  translates  "  possihility,"  but 

cordance  with  Burnouf's  explanation,  the  Pahlavi  translates  more  correctly 

which  was  assented  to  by  all  Euro-  by  dsdnth,  "comfort."    It  is  derived 

pean  scholars  for  a  long  time.     But  from  the  root  khshi,  '  to  reside,'  and 

in   Pahlavi   it   is   translated   by   the  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  in  which 

patronymical     adjective     SpUdmun,  it  occurs,  is  that  a  place  was  made 

"  the  Spitaman,  or  descended  from  delightful  which  had  previously  been 

Spitama "  who  was  the   ancestor  of  nowhere  habitable.     Spiegel  now  ap- 

Zarathushtra   in   the    ninth   genera-  pears   to   prefer   comparing    shditim 

tion,    as    recorded    in    the    Pahlavi  with  the  Persian  shddt,   "  pleasure, 

books.      The  Dasturs'  tradition  con-  joy,"   which  is  more  in   accordance 

firms  this  explanation,  and  the  word  with  the  Pahlavi. 
spitama  never  occurs  in  .iny  other 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  37 

and  dictionary ;  lie  knows  that  none  but  lie  who  spends 
many  years  in  mere  preparatory  studies  is  able  to  give 
anything  like  a  correct  translation  of  even  a  portion  of  the 
Zend-Avesta.  As  a  first  edition  of  all  the  Avesta  texts, 
Westergaard's  work  deserves  much  praise ;  he  follows,  in 
most  cases,  the  best  manuscripts ;  but  if  he  finds  their 
readings  decidedly  incorrect,  he  amends  them  according  to 
sound  philological  principles.  Compound  words,  so  far  as 
he  could  discover  them,  are  always  marked.  From  a  care- 
ful perusal  of  his  work,  one  may  gather  that  Westergaard 
understood  already  a  good  deal  of  the  texts,  and  had 
extensive  collections  of  words,  forms,  various  readings,  &c., 
at  his  disposal.  In  every  respect  except  typography, 
Westergaard's  edition  of  the  Avesta  texts  is  far  prefer- 
able to  that  of  Spiegel,  but  he  did  not  add  the  Pahlavi 
translations. 

Passing  over  some  small  treatises  by  Spiegel,  published  oc- 
casionally in  the  Journal  of  the  German  Oriental  Society  and 
the  Transactions  of  the  Bavarian  Academy,  of  which  the  best 
was  his  essay  on  the  19th  Fargard  of  the  Vendidad,  we  may 
now  proceed  to  speak  of  the  researches  in  the  sacred  writ- 
ings of  the  Parsis  made  by  the  author  of  these  Essays. 

He  commenced  the  study  of  the  Avesta  language  in  the 
autumn  of  1852,  shortly  after  the  publication  of  the  first 
number  of  Westergaard's  edition  of  the  Zend-Avesta  con- 
tainino-  the  Avesta  text  of  the  Yasna.  He  was  already 
acquainted  with  the  results  arrived  at  by  Burnouf,  which 
knowledge  was  chiefly  due  to  Brockhaus's  valuable  com- 
pilation already  noticed.  But  he  was  quite  convinced,  at 
the  very  outset  of  his  studies,  that,  from  all  that  had  been 
hitherto  written  on  the  Avesta  language  and  the  Zend- 
Avesta,  one  could  obtain  little  but  merely  elementary  in- 
formation on  the  subject.  Actuated  by  mere  love  of  these 
ancient  records,  and  cherishing  the  hope  of  making  some 
discoveries  in  this  terra  incognita,  he  set  about  the  task  of 
instituting  inquiries  into  these  sacred  texts.  He  possessed 
no  other  aids  than  those  which  were  accessible  to  all  other 


38  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

scliolars,  while  Spiegel  and  AVestergaard  had  all  the  manu-' 
scripts,  or  copies  thereof,  and  the  Pahlavi  and  Sanskrit 
translations,  at  their  disposal.     Westergaard's  edition  oi 
the  Yasna  enabled  the  author  to  commence  this  study,  but 
it  was  soon  apparent  that  unusual  difficulties  attended 
every  step  in  this  branch  of  philological  study.     He  first 
directed  his  attention  to  the  metrical  portions  of  the  Yasna, 
called  the  five  Gathas,  or  hymns,  the  explanation  of  which 
had  never  been  attempted  before  IJy  any  Oriental  scholar. 
It  is  true  Spiegel  first  observed  that  their  language  is  dif- 
ferent from  the  usual  Avesta  language  to  be  found  in  the 
Yendidad,  Yashts,  Yisparad,  and  the  other  parts  of  the 
Yasna ;  but  he  rested  satisfied  with  pointing  out  some  of 
the  most  striking  differences,  such  as  the  constant  length- 
enino-  of  final  vowels,  and  had  never  undertaken  to  trans- 
late  these  hymns.     The  author  fii-st  tried  to  make  out  the 
meaning  of  a  few  lines  by  means  of  Anquetil's  translation, 
but  was  soon  convinced  of  its  utter  insufficiency  even  as  a 
guide  for  ascertaining  the  general  meaning.     In  the  Ven- 
didad  and  the  other  books  Anquetil  may  guide  one  in  this 
respect,  but  not  in  the  Gathas.     The  chief  reason  is  the 
peculiarity  of  these  hymns  as  to  language  and  ideas ;  they 
contain  no  descriptions  of  ceremonies  and  observances,  like 
the  Vendidad,  nor  any  enumeration  of  the  glorious  feats 
of  angels,  like  the  Yashts,  but  philosophical  and  abstract 
thoughts,  and  they  differ  widely  from  all  other  pieces  con- 
tained in  the  Zend-Avesta.     As  they  have  been  unintelli- 
gible to  the  Parsi  priests  for  more  than  two  thousand  years, 
we  could  not  expect  Anquetil  to  give  even  an  approximate 
account  of  their  general  contents.     As  Anquetil's  work 
afforded  no  assistance,  it  became  necessary  to  take  the 
trouble  of  collecting  aU  the  parallel  passages  throughout 
the  Zend-Avesta,  and  arranging  them  alphabetically.    The 
index  of  Brockhaus  to  the  Yendidad,  Yasna,  and  Yisparad 
was  a  considerable  aid ;  but  it  was  necessary  to  make  an 
index  to  the  Yashts,  which  form  about  one-half  of  all  the 
Avesta  texts  extant,  and  were  for  the  first  time  published 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  39 

in  Westergaard's  edition.  Being  convinced,  like  Burnouf, 
that  the  language  of  the  Vedas  stands  nearest  of  all  Aryan 
dialects  to  the  Avesta  language,  the  author  betook  himself 
to  the  study  of  the  sacred  writings  of  the  Brahmans,  espe- 
cially that  section  which  is  called  the  Bigveda  Samliitd, 
being  a  collection  of  rather  more  than  a  thousand  very 
ancient  hymns.  Only  one-eightli  part  of  this  large  work 
being  published  at  that  time,  it  was  necessary  to  copy  out 
from  a  manuscript,  kindly  lent  by  Professor  Benfey  at 
Gottingen,  the  remaining  seven  parts.  After  that  was 
done,  an  alphabetical  index,  at  least  to  some  portions  of 
this  extensive  collection  of  hymns,  had  also  to  be  made ; 
but  in  this  tedious  work  assistance  was  given  by  a  friend, 
GoTTLOB  WiLiiELM  Heemann  (a  young  clergyman  in  Wiir- 
temberg),  who  possesses  a  remarkable  knowledge  of  San- 
skrit. Not  content  with  these  aids,  the  author  commenced 
the  study  of  Armenian  (which  is  affiliated  to  the  Iranian 
languages),  and  also  that  of  Pahlavi  (being  already  ac- 
quainted with  modern  Persian).  The  study  of  Pahlavi, 
which  language  resembles  a  mixture  of  Persian  and  dial- 
dee,  was  much  facilitated  by  his  being  acquainted,  to  a 
certain  extent,  with  all  Semitic  tongues,  which  knowledge 
he  owed  chiefly  to  his  great  teacher,  Professor  Ewald,  at 
Gottingen.  After  these  preparations,  the  philological 
operations  were  commenced  in  the  following  manner : — 
First,  all  the  other  passages  were  examined  where  the  word 
or  form  to  be  investigated  occurred,  in  order  to  ascertain 
its  approximate  meaning.  But  the  parallels  referred  to 
being  often  as  obscure  as  the  passage  upon  which  they 
had  to  throw  light,  it  was  frequently  necessary  first  to  make 
out  their  meaning  also  by  a  reference  to  other  parallels. 
The  approximate  meaning  of  the  word  being  thus  arrived 
at,  in  most  cases  after  much  trouble,  it  was  confirmed  or 
modified  by  means  of  a  sound  etymology ;  first  applying  to 
those  words  and  forms  of  the  Avesta  language  itself  which 
there  was  reason  to  suppose  to  be  cognate  to  the  word  in 
question,  and  then  consulting  the  Vedas,  especially  the 


40  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

hymns  of  tlie  Eigveda.  There  being  neither  index  nor 
glossary  to  these  hymns,  the  same  trouble  had  to  be  taken 
with  them  as  with  the  Zend-Avesta,  in  order  to  ascertain 
from  parallels  the  meaning  of  the  Vedic  word  referred  to. 
When  no  satisfactory  result  was  obtained  by  these  means, 
further  search  was  made  in  modern  Persian  and  Armenian, 
and  now  and  then  in  Latin  and  Greek  also.  ]\IocIern  Per- 
sian, especially  in  its  older  form,  commonly  styled  Parsi, 
was  of  the  highest  value  for  such  etymological  researches. 
But  an  appeal  to  this  genuine  niece  of  the  sacred  language 
of  the  Zend-Avesta  is  in  general  more  difficult,  and  sub- 
ject to  greater  liability  of  error,  than  that  to  Yedic  San- 
skrit, which  is  an  elder  sister  of  the  Avesta  language.  In 
modern  Persian  a  good  many  Avesta  words  are  preserved, 
but  they  have  undergone  such  great  changes  as  to  make 
them  hardly  discernible  by  a  somewhat  inexperienced  ety- 
mologist. Such  corruptions  of  the  ancient  words  are, 
however,  reducible  to  certain  rules,  which,  being  only  par- 
tially known  as  yet,  had  first  to  be  discovered.  To  illus- 
trate these  remarks  on  the  corruption  of  ancient  words  in 
modern  Persian  by  some  examples,  we  may  take  the  Avesta 
zaredaya,  "  heart,"  which  has  become  clil  in  modern  Per- 
sian ;  sareda,  "  year,"  is  sal ;  Jcerenaoiti,  "  he  makes,"  is 
kunad;  dtarsh,  "  five"  is  dtash;  &c.  In  Sanskrit,  as  the 
elder  sister,  the  corresponding  words  are  much  easier  to 
recognise :  thus,  zaredaya  is  hridaya,  saredha  is  sharad  i 
(in  the  Vedas),  kerenaoiti  is  krinoti  (the  Vedic  form,  altered 
in  classical  Sanskrit  into  karoti),  dtar-sh  is  athar  (pre- 
served only  in  its  derivative  atharvan,  "  fireman,  •  priest "), 
&c.  Of  the  ancient  grammatical  forms,  such  as  the  dis- 
tinctive terminations  of  cases,  tenses,  &c.,  nothing  remains 
in  modern  Persian,  but  all  are  extant  in  Vedic  Sanskrit. 

1  Spelt  as  pronounced ;  the  letter  f ,  by  no  means  an  imaginary  evil)  more 

generally  used  by  European  Oriental-  tbau  counterbalances  any  etymologi- 

ists,  misrepresents  the  sound  of  the  cal  advantage  that  can  be  gained  by 

palatal  sibilant,  which  is  that  of  sh  using  k,  [/,  and  f  to  represent  palatal 

in  sheet,  or  ss  in  assure.     The  risk  of  sounds, 
leading  to  mispronunciation  (which  is 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  41 

From  these  remarks,  it  will  be  readily  perceived  that  San- 
skrit must  be  of  much  more  use  than  modern  Persian  in 
deciphering  the  Avesta  language. 

The  first  fruit  of  these  laborious  researches  was  an 
attempt  to  explain  the  forty-fourth  chapter  of  the  Yasna 
(forming  a  part  of  the  second  Gatha),  which  appeared  in 
the  Journal  of  the  German  Oriental  Society  (1853-54). 
On  account  of  the'  great  difiiculty  of  the  subject,  and  the 
incompleteness  of  the  intended  preparations,  at  that  early 
date  it  was  impossible  to  be  certain  of  many  of  the  inter- 
pretations proposed.  But  being  convinced,  from  this  first 
attempt,  that  the  Gatlias  contained  the  undoubted  teaching 
of  Zarathushtra  himself,  as  he  imparted  it  to  his  disciples, 
the  author  thought  it  worth  the  trouble  to  pursue  these 
studies  six  years  longer,  and  published  the  results  of  his 
laborious  investigations  in  a  work  entitled,  "The  Five 
Gathas,  or  Collections  of  Songs  and  Sayings  of  Zarathush- 
tra, his  Disciples  and  Successors,"  edited,  translated,  and 
explained  (2  vols.,  Leipzig,  1858-60).  It  contains  the 
text,  revised  according  to  philological  principles,  and  trans- 
scribed  into  Eoman  characters,  a  literal  Latin  translation, 
a  free  translation  into  German,  and  a  complete  critical  and 
philological  commentary,  with  introductions  to  each  of  the 
seventeen  chapters,  and  concludes  with  an  introduction  to 
the  whole.  The  basis  of  the  whole  work  is  the  commen- 
tary, which  gives,  at  full  length,  the  results  of  a  comparison 
of  all  parallel  passages  in  the  Zend-Avesta  and  the  Veda, 
and  the  etymological  researches  in  the  Avesta  and  cognate 
languages,  together  with  a  partial  review  of  the  traditional 
explanations,  so  far  as  they  were  accessible  in  a  bad  trans- 
cript of  Neryosangh's  Sanskrit  translation  of  the  Gathas. 
Some  portions  of  this  work,  much  revised,  will  be  hereafter 
submitted  to  the  reader  in  the  third  Essay, 

About  six  months  after  the  publication  of  the  first  part 
of  this  work,  Spiegel  published  a  translation  of  the  whole 
Yasna  (including  the  Gathas),  together  with  the  Visparad. 
In  this  translation  of  the  Yasna  he  appears  to  have  relied 


42  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

chiefly  upon  ISTeryosangli's  Sanskrit  version,  which,  in  its 
turn,  is  a  mere  echo  of  the  Pahlavi  transLation.  Tliis  is,  no 
doubt,  the  traditional  interpretation;  but,  unfortunately, 
the  tradition  goes  but  a  short  way  back  in  the  history  of 
such  ancient  writings  as  the  Gathas,  which  had  evidently 
become  as  unintelligible  (from  age  or  difference  of  dialect) 
in  the  time  of  the  Pahlavi  translators  as  they  are  to  the 
Dasturs  of  the  present  day.  Any  translation  Imsed  upon 
such  imperfect  tradition  can  claim  little  attention  as  a 
work  to  be  rehed  on. 

Spiegel  had  previously  (in  1856)  published  his  "  Gram- 
mar of  the  Huzvaresh  Language,"  a  term  applied  to  Pah- 
lavi, and  usually  written  zvdrish  by  Persian  writers ;  it 
appears,  however,  to  mean  the  peculiar  mode  of  writing 
adopted  in  Pahlavi,  in  which  Semitic  words  (or  other  obso- 
lete forms)  could  be  substituted  by  the  writer  for  their 
Iranian  equivalents,  and  would  be  read  by  the  reader  just 
as  if  the  Iranian  words  had  been  written.  This  mode  of 
writing  is  by  no  means  peculiar  to  Pahlavi,  for  even  in 
English  we  often  write  forms  which  are  strictly  analogous 
to  Huzvarish,  such  as  viz.,  i.e.,  e.g.,  lb.,  %,  £  s.  d.,  Xmas, 
&c.,  which  we  generally  read  as  if  they  were  written 
"  namely,"  "  that  is,"  "  for  example,"  "  pound,"  "  per  cent.," 
"  pounds,  shillings,  and  pence,"  "  Christmas,"  "  et  cetera." 
Spiegel's  grammar  was  based  upon  the  forms  he  found  in 
the  Pahlavi  translations  of  the  Avesta,  and  in  the  Bunda- 
hish ;  and  so  far  as  the  collection  and  arrangement  of  these 
forms  was  concerned,  it  was  very  complete  and  useful ;  but 
he  was  unfortunate  in  his  explanations  of  the  Huzvarish 
forms,  and  so  many  of  these  explanations  have  since  been 
disproved,  that  his  grammar  is  practically  obsolete,  and 
likely  to  mislead. 

In  i860  Spiegel  published,  as  a  second  part  of  his 
Huzvarish  grammar,  a  work  on  the  traditional  literature'of 
the  Parsis,  illustrated  by  quotations  from  the  original  texts^ 
with  translations,  and  a  glossary.  Tliis  work  contains 
many  valuable  notices  of  such  Pahlavi  texts  as  were  acces- 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  43 

sible  to  him,  especially  the  Bundahish,  Bahman  Yasht, 
Minokhird,  and  the  Pahlavi  translations  of  the  Vendidad, 
Yasna,  and  Visparad ;  together  with  some  allusions  to  the 
Vajarkard-i-dini,  Arda-Viraf-namah,  Sad-dar  Bundahish, 
Zaratusht-namah,  Chaughraghach-namah,  '  Ulama-i-Islam, 
Jamasp-namah,  the  Eivayats,  and  a  few  minor  writings. 
With  some  of  the  longest  of  the  Pahlavi  writings  Spiegel 
was  then  unacquainted,  and  he  was  inclined  to  identify 
the  Shayast-nashayast  with  the  Sad-dar  Bundahish,  not 
being  aware  that  it  is  the  name  applied  to  the  Pahlavi 
Eivayat  by  the  Dasturs,  and  that  there  is  also  a  Persian 
book  of  the  same  name  extant. 

Before  proceeding  to  later  researches,  some  other  publi- 
cations relating  to  the  Zend-Avesta  have  to  be  mentioned. 
Lassen,  the  well-known  Sanskrit  scholar,  published  an 
edition  of  the  Avesta  text  of  the  first  five  chapters  of  the 
Vendidad  (Bonm,  185 1);  but  he  added  neither  translation 
nor  explanatory  notes. 

Max  Dunckek,  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  Antiquity  " 
which  is  highly  valued  in  Germany,  treated  of  the  ancient 
Persian  religion,  its  sacred  books  and  prophets,  in  the 
second  volume  of  his  work.  Although  himself  a  mere 
historian,  and  no  Oriental  scholar,  he  succeeded  in  drawing 
a  fine  and  correct  general  picture  of  ancient  Iranian  life, 
according  to  the  reports  of  the  Greeks  and  the  modern 
researches  in  the  Zend-Avesta. 

WiNDiscHMANN,  a  Ptoman  Catholic  clergyman  of  high 
position  at  Munich,  published  two  valuable  essays,  one  on 
the  deity  Anaitis  worsliipped  by  the  ancient  Persians, 
and  mentioned,  under  the  name  Anahita,  in  the  Yashts 
(Munich,  1856) ;  the  other  was  a  translation  of  the  Mihir 
Yasht,  with  notes  (Leipzig,  1857).  His  latest  researches 
were  published,  after  his  premature  death,  under  the  title 
of  "  Zoroastrian  Studies,"  edited  by  Spiegel  (Berlin,  1863). 
This  work  contains  a  very  useful  translation  of  the  Bunda- 
hish, with  extensive  explanatory  notes  and  essays  upon 
several  of  its  subjects,  including  a  translation  of  the  first 


44  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

half  of  the  Fravardin  Yasht.  His  transhations  were  a  OTeat 
improvement  on  those  of  Anquetil,  being  made  on  scien- 
tific principles.  In  the  case  of  the  Bimdahish,  he  had 
really  to  rely  upon  the  single  text  published  by  Wester- 
gaard,  as  previously  mentioned  ;  for  Anquetil's  manuscript 
of  the  text  was  originally  copied  from  the  same  codex,  now 
at  Copenhagen. 

In  1864,  Bleeck  published  an  English  translation  of  the 
Avesta,  at  the  request  of  Seth  Munclierjee  Hormusjee  Cama. 
This  was  merely  a  translation  from  the  German  of  Spiegel, 
but  the  translator  referred  to  the  original  text  as  a  ccuide  to 
his  choice  of  words  in  many  places,  and  in  some  instances 
he  complains  of  the  German  version  being  quite  as  unin- 
telligible as  the  Avesta  text  itself.  This  translation  was 
intended  for  the  information  of  the  .  Parsis,  but  it  has  also 
been  useful  to  that  portion  of  the  English  public  which 
takes  an  interest  in  Zoroastrianisra,  though  unprepared  to 
face  the  difficulty  of  foreign  languages.  It  contains,  of 
course,  all  the  imperfections  of  Spiegel's  translations. 

The  further  researches  of  the  author  of  these  Essays  were 
greatly  facihtated  by  his  being  appointed,  in  1859,  super- 
intendent of  Sanskrit  studies  in  Poena  College,  near  Bom- 
bay. He  was  thus  brought  into  contact  both  with  Brah- 
mans  and  Parsi  priests,  the  present  possessors  of  all  the 
traditional  Vedic  and  Zoroastrian  lore  that  has  not  been 
lost.  After  a  short  interval,  employed  in  learning  Marathi, 
the  vernacular  language  of  that  part  of  Western  India,  and 
in  the  further  study  of  English,  he  began  his  observations 
of  the  native  modes  of  study,  and  followed  them  up  by 
close  inquiries  regarding  their  rites  and  ceremonies.  He 
had,  in  the  first  place,  to  unlearn  much  that  he  had  learnt 
in  Europe ;  and  to  his  readiness  in  accepting  the  fact  that 
European  scholarship  must  often  stand  corrected  before 
Indian  tradition  was  probably  due  his  ever-increasing 
influence  over  the  natives,  which  enabled  him,  in  the 
end,  to  obtain  fuller  information  regarding  their  ceremonies 
than  had  ever  previously  been  given  to  a  European. 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  45 

The  Parsis  had  gradually  lost  much  of  their  reluctance 
to  discuss  religious  matters  with  Europeans,  which  had 
been  engendered  or  aggravated  by  their  bitter  controversy 
with  the  missionaries,  some  twenty  years  before,  and  which 
had  been  brought  to  a  climax  by  the  publication  of  the 
Eev.  Dr.  Wilson's  book  before  mentioned.  They  felt  that 
this  book  was  so  far  one-sided  as  to  give  a  false  idea  of 
their  religion,  and  they  were  naturally  indignant  at  the 
sarcasms  it  contained.^  But  the  progress  of  time  and 
education  had  dissipated  this  ill-feeling,  and  they  were 
delighted  to  find  a  European  scholar  who  understood  so 
much  of  their  religion  as  to  appreciate  its  good  points 
without  dwelling  too  severely  upon  those  which  are  doubt- 
ful or  objectionable.  With  a  feeling  of  growing  confidence, 
the  priests  discussed  their  ceremonies  and  sacred  books, 
and  the  laity  were  glad  to  receive,  from  a  European  scholar, 
explanations  of  their  older  scriptures  which  had  hitherto 
been  nearly  sealed  books  to  all.  To  meet  this  increasing 
demand  for  information,  a  public  lecture,  "  On  the  Origin 
of  the  Parsi  Eeligion,"  was  delivered  on  the  ist  March 
1861 ;  and  the  first  edition  of  these  Essays  was  published 
in  1862. 

In  the  cold  season  of  1863-64  the  author  undertook  a 
tour  in  Gujrat,  under  Government  patronage,  to  search  for 
Avesta,  Pahlavi,  and  Sanskrit  manuscripts.  During  this 
tour  he  examined  most  of  the  Parsi  libraries  in  Surat,2 
Nawsari,  Bhroch,  and  Balsar,  and  succeeded  in  purchasing 
several  manuscripts  for  the  Bombay  Government,  including 


^  Any  personal  ill-feeling  which  Dr.  that  in  his  controversy  with  them  he 

Wilson  may  have  occasioned  by  his  had  only  acted  as  his  duty  comiielled 

book   soon   disappeared  ;   but  it  was  him. 

many  years  before  his  habitual  kind-  ^  The  only  Parsi  priest   in  Surat 

liness,  and  conscientious  efforts  for  who  knew  anything  of  Anquetil  Du- 

the  improvement  of  the  natives  of  iseiTonwasDastur  Kai-KhusroDarab, 

India,  regained  the  confidence  of  the  who  recollected  hearing  that  Dastur 

Parsis.      On  liis  death,  however,  in  Darab  had  taught  Anquetil  the  Avesta, 

1875,  no  one  felt  more  deeply  than  and  shown  him  the  sacred  fire,  when 

the  Dasturs  themselves  that  they  bad  disguised  as  a  Parsi. 
lost   one  of   their  best  friends,  and 


46  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

a  very  old  copy  of  tlie  Avesta  text  of  the  Yasna,  an  old 
copy  of  the  Vendidad  with  Pahlavi,  and  a  Vendidad-sadah 
written  in  1626.  Some  other  manuscrij^ts  were  presented 
to  him  as  tokens  of  personal  respect  on  the  part  of  their 
owners.  Among  these  was  a  very  old  manuscript  contain- 
ing the  Visparad  with  Pahlavi,  Hadokht  Nask,  Pahlavi 
Eivayat,  Arda-Viraf-namah,  Bundahish,  and  several  minor 
texts,  written  in  1397;  also  copies  of  the  Mrangistan, 
Shikand-gumani,  &c.  With  regard  to  Sanskrit  trausla- 
tions,  he  could  find  none  of  the  Yasna  extending  beyond 
the  Srosh  Yasht ;  and  of  the  Vendidad,  only  Fargards  viii. 
79,  80,  and  ix.  1-4  (Westerg.),  appear  to  have  been  ever 
translated  into  Sanskrit.  He  also  saw  a  Sanskrit  Sirozah 
and  an  incomplete  Avesta- Sanskrit  glossary.  At  Naw- 
sari  he  found  two  copies  (one  in  Avesta  and  the  other  in 
Avesta  with  Pahlavi)  of  a  book  called  the  Vaetha  Nask, 
from  its  beginning  with  the  word  vaetha  ;  and  other  copies 
of  it  were  seen  elsewhere.  Both  its  Avesta  and  Pahlavi 
were  full  of  grammatical  errors,  and  there  is  reason  to 
believe  that  this  work  was  fabricated  by  some  Pastur  more 
than  a  century  ago,  for  the  purpose  of  settling  the  inheri- 
tance of  the  children  of  a  non-Zoroastrian  wife,  which  it 
fixes  at  one-half  the  property,  while  the  widow  is  to 
receive  the  other  half.  This  is  contrary  to  the  opinion  of 
most  Parsi  priests,  who  would  consider  such  children  not 
entitled  to  any  share  of  the  paternal  property,  although 
there  appears  to  be  nowhere,  in  the  Avesta  texts  extant, 
any  direct  prohibition  of  intermarriages  between  Zoroas- 
trians  and  non-Zoroastrians, 

After  his  return  to  Poona,  in  1864,  the  author  recom- 
mended the  Government  of  Bombay  to  employ  Dastur 
Hoshangji  Jamaspji,  a  younger  brother  of  the  high-priest 
of  the  Parsis  at  Poona,  to  prepare  editions  of  several  Pah- 
lavi works  for  publication ;  and  he  subsequently  under- 
took to  revise  these  works,  and  see  them  through  the 
press,  on  his  return  to  Germany  in  1866.  He  also  de- 
livered a  lecture,  "  On  an  Original  Speech  of  Zoroaster " 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  47 

(Yasna  xlv.),  "before  an  almost  exclusively  Parsi  audience, 
at  Bombay,  on  the  8th  October  1864,  at  their  special  re- 
quest. And  in  pursuance  of  his  schemes  for  encouraging 
Parsis  in  the  study  of  their  religious  literature,  the  pro- 
ceeds of  this  lecture  were  appropriated  as  prizes  for  the 
best  translations,  by  Parsis,  of  two  Pahlavi  works,  one  of 
which,  the  Pandnamah  of  Adarpad  Maraspend,  was  pub- 
lished in  1 869. 

Turning  back  to  Europe,  we  find  a  young  and  indus- 
trious scholar,  JusTi,  of  Marburg,  publishing  a  "  Handbook 
of  the  Zend  Language  "  (Leipzig,  1 864),  containing  a  dic- 
tionary (Avesta  and  German)  of  all  words  in  the  texts 
published  by  Westergaard,  a  grammar,  and  selections  for 
reading,  all  printed  in  Eoman  type.  This  dictionary  is  a 
very  useful  compilation  in  a  handy  form,  and,  so  far  as 
arrangement  is  concerned,  it  leaves  little  to  be  desired ; 
but  having  been  prepared  with  too  little  study  of  the 
texts,  it  is  often  incorrect  in  its  definitions,  and  is  there- 
fore likely  to  perplex  the  careful  student,  and  mislead  the 
unwary,  unless  it  be  used  rather  as  a  handy  index  than  a 
complete  dictionary.  Many  of  these  defects  will  probably 
disappear  in  a  second  edition,  which  ought  also  to  include 
the  Avesta  words  peculiar  to  the  Zend-Palilavi  glossary 
and  Mrangistan;  but  the  Avesta  dictionary  long  ago 
promised  by  Westergaard  would  be  more  welcome,  and 
be  used  with  more  confidence. 

In  1 868  Justi  also  published  a  translation  of  the  Bun- 
dahish,  with  the  Pahlavi  text  lithographed  and  trans- 
literated into  Persian  characters,  and  a  glossary,  in  which 
the  Pahlavi  words  are  printed  in  Persian  type.  From 
some  misconception,  he  claims,  on  the  title-page,  to  have 
published  the  Bundahish  for  the  first  time,  whereas  the 
lithographed  text  had  been  already  published  by  Wester- 
gaard in  185 1,  and  translations  had  been  published  by 
Anquetil  in  1771,  and  by  Windischmann  in  1S63.  Justi 
had  the  advantage  of  collating  another  recension  of  the 
text,  contained  in  a  Pahlavi  MS.  at  Oxford  and  a  Pazand 


48  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

MS.  in  London,  both  of  wliicli  have  evidently  been  derived 
from  the  very  old  MS.  written  in  1 397,  and  presented  to 
the  author  of  these  Essays  at  Surat,  as  mentioned  above. 
The  translation  is,  therefore,  more  correct  than  its  prede- 
cessors, though  blunders  are  not  unfrequent.  Justi  argues 
that  the  Bundahish  is  not  older  than  the  time  of  Fir- 
dausi,  and  its  statement  about  the  accession  of  the  Arabs 
cannot,  of  course,  be  more  than  three  centuries  older ;  but 
many  of  the  other  signs  of  late  date  which  he  relies  on 
are  fallacious.  It  seems  plausible  enough  to  argue  that 
the  more  old  forms  of  words  a  MS.  contains,  the  older  it 
must  be ;  but  when  one  finds  old  forms  substituted  in  a 
modern  MS.  for  later  forms  in  a  MS.  five  hundred  years 
old  (as  often  happens  in  Pahlavi),  this  argument  evidently 
fails,  and  we  have  to  suspend  our  judgment  until  the  period 
when  the  later  forms  first  arose  has  been  historically 
ascertained.  With  regard  to  the  Bundahish,  it  has  pro- 
bably been  too  hastily  assumed  that  it  is  a  single  con- 
tinuous work  ;  it  may  be  half-a-dozen  fragments,  either  of 
the  same  or  various  works,  thrown  together  in  different 
orders  by  different  writers,  as  the  MSS.  vary  in  arrange- 
ment, and  the  fragments  constituting  Anquetil's  Chapters 
xxviii.,  xxLx.,  XXX.,  and  xxxii.,  have  been  hitherto  found 
only  in  the  MS.  at  Copenhagen,  and  its  two  modern 
copies.  This  fragmentary  condition  of  the;  book  is  more 
consistent  with  the  supposition  of  its  antiquity  than  of  its 
later  origin ;  it  also  explains  how  some  fragments  may  be 
much  older  than  others.  However  this  inay  be,  the  ar- 
rangement of  the  fragments  in  the  Copenhagen  MS.  is 
probably  that  adopted  in  tlie  latest  edition,  as  it  is  most 
consistent  with  the  idea  of  a  continuous  text. 

The  author  of  these  Essays,  after  his  return  to  Germany 
in  1866,  revised  and  published,  for  the  Government  of 
Bombay,  some  of  the  Pahlavi  works  prepared  by  Dastur 
Hoshangji,  as  mentioned  above.  The  first  of  these  was 
the  "  Old  Zend-Pahlavi  Glossary,"  which  is  found  in  two 
of  the  oldest  Pahlavi  MSS.  extant.     The  text  was  printed 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  49 

ill  the  original  character,  with  an  interlinear  transliteration 
in  italics,  and  accompanied  with  an  introduction,  English 
translation,  and  alphabetical  index  to  the  Avesta  words, 
arranged  as  an  Avesta  glossary.     The  introduction  treated, 
first,  of  the  age  and  origin  of  Pahlavi ;  and,  secondly,  of 
the  age  and  value  of  the  glossary ;  and  it  contained  the 
first  systematic  attempt  to  connect  the  Palilavi  of  the 
Sasanian  inscriptions  with  that  of  the  Parsi  books.     This 
glossary  was  published  in  1867,  and  was  followed  in  1870 
by  the  "  Old  Pahlavi-Pazand  Glossary,"  of  which  the  text 
and  index  had  likewise  been  prepared  by  Dastur  Hosh- 
angji.     The   index,  which  was   arranged  as   a   Pahlavi- 
English  glossary,  was  considerably  enlarged  by  the  addi- 
tion  of    all    the   Pahlavi  words   in   the   "  Zend-Pahlavi 
Glossary."     And  the  work  was  preceded  by  a  long  and 
important  introductory  essay  on  the  Pahlavi  language,  in 
which  the  nature  of  that  language  was,  for  the  first  time, 
fully  and  critically  examined,  and  a  sound  basis  laid  for 
future  investigations.     This  essay  began  with  a  history 
of  the  researches  in  Pahlavi  literature,  inscriptions,  and 
numismatics  which  had  been  made  in  Europe.     It  then 
proceeded  to  discuss  the  meaning  of  the  terms  Pahlavi 
and   Huzvarish,   identifying    Pahlavi   with   Parthian   or 
ancient  Persian,  and  explaining  Huzvarish  as  the  mode 
of  writing  Pahlavi  with  a  large  intermixture  of  foreign* 
or  obsolete  words.     It  next  deciphered  several  Sasanian 
inscriptions,  and  compared  their  language  with  that  of  the 
Parsi  books,  with  the  view  of  determining  the  character 
of  Pahlavi,  which  it  defined  as  a  Semitic  language,  with 
an  admixture  of  Iranian  words,  and  a  prevailing  Iranian 
construction,  if  we  look  only  to  the  way  it  is  written  (all 
the  pronouns  and  particles,  and.  most   of   the  common 
words,  being  usually  Semitic) ;  or  as  a  purely  Iranian  lan- 
guage if  we  consider  only  the  way  in  which  it  is  read; 
and  to  this  practice,  of  reading  the  Iranian  equivalents  of 
the  written  Semitic  words,  it  attributed  the  total  disappear- 
ance of  these  Semitic  words  in  modern  Persian  as  soon  as 

D 


50  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

the  writers  began  to  write  as  they  spoke.  The  essay  con- 
chided  by  discussing  the  origin  and  age  of  Pahlavi,  and 
showed  that  traces  of  that  language  can  be  discovered  in 
some  short  inscriptions  of  the  fourth  and  seventh  centu- 
ries B.C.  Although  this  glossary  was  originally  published 
by  Auquetil  in  his  Zend-Avesta  in  1 771,  it  was  in  such  a 
modified  form  that  it  remained  for  a  century  practically 
useless. 

Shortly  after  the  publication  of  the  first  of  these  glos- 
saries, the  author  of  these  Essays  was  appointed  Professor 
of  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Philology  at  the  University  of 
Munich,  where  he  continued  to  publish,  from  time  to  time, 
short  essays  on  subjects  connected  with  Parsi  literature  ; 
among  them  an  essay  "  On  the  Present  State  of  Zend  Phi- 
lology" (1868),  in  which  he  sought  to  correct  the  mis- 
apprehensions of  other  scholars  with  regard  to  the  mean- 
ings of  certain  Avesta  w^ords.  Also  a  translation  of  the 
eighteenth  Fargard  of  the  Vendidad,  with  a  commentary 
(1869) ;  and  an  essay  on  the  Yatha-ahii-vau-yo,  one  of  the 
most  sacred  formulas  of  the  Parsis,  with  a  translation  of 
its  commentary  in  Yasna  xix.  (1872), 

The  last  of  his  works  connected  with  the  Parsi  religion 
was  the  revision  and  publication  of  Dastiu'  Hoshangji's 
edition  of  "  The  Book  of  Arda-Viraf "  (1872),  and  its  glos- 
sary (1874).  In  the  preparation  of  these  works,  and  also 
in  the  Palilavi-Pazand  glossary,  he  was  assisted  by  an 
English  friend,  E.  W.  West,  whose  attention  had  been  first 
directed  to  Pahlavi  by  the  discovery  of  inscriptions  in  that 
language  at  the  old  Buddhist  caves  of  Kanheri,  about 
twenty  miles  north  of  Bombay.  To  the  Pahlavi  text  and 
transliteration  of  the  book  of  Arda-Viraf  were  added  the 
texts  and  transliterations  of  the  tale  of  G6sht-i  Fryano 
and  the  Hadokht  Nask,  with  English  translations  of  all 
three  texts,  and  introductory  essays  describing  the  manu- 
scripts used,  the  system  of  transliteration  adopted,  and  the 
contents  of  the  texts.  The  glossary,  which  was  prepared 
by  West  from  the  original  texts  and  from  materials  sup- 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  51 

plied  by  Dastiir  Hoshangji,  was  arranged  in  the  alpha- 
betical order  of  the  Pahlavi  characters,  as  compared  with 
their  modern  Persian  equivalents.  It  forms  a  complete 
index  to  the  three  texts,  and  to  some  Pahlavi  fragments 
which  had  been  published,  but  not  glossarised,  in  the 
introductions  and  notes  to  the  previous  glossaries.  It 
would  be  a  great  assistance  to  scholars  if  other  Pahlavi 
texts  were  published  in  a  similarly  complete  manner,  but 
the  labour  of  doing  so,  with  sufficient  accuracy,  is  alarm- 
ingly great.  To  the  glossary  was  added  an  outline  of 
Palilavi  grammar. 

Besides  assisting  in  the  publication  of  Dastur  Hos- 
hangji's  works,  West  had  also  published  "  The  Book  of  the 
Mainyo-i-khard"  (1871)  which  professes  to  give  the  utter- 
ances of  the  Spirit  of  Wisdom  on  many  of  the  doctrines 
and  details  of  the  Parsi  religion.  In  this  work  the  Pazand 
text  and  Neryosangh's  Sanskrit  translation  were  printed  in 
Eomau  type,  and  accompanied  by  a  glossary  of  all  the 
Pazand  words,  with  an  outline  of  P4zand  grammar. 

Passing  over  some  short  essays,  such  as  Sacliau's  "  Con- 
tributions to  the  Knowledge  of  Parsi  Literature,"  and  also 
larger  works  of  more  pretension,  such  as  Spiegel's  "  Iranian 
Antiquities,"  this  account  of  European  researches  may  be 
concluded  by  a  shorj;  notice  of  some  French  works. 

A  new  French  translation  of  the  Avesta  is  in  the  course 
of  publication  by  C.  de  Haelez,  Professor  at  the  University 
of  Louvain,  in  Belgium.  The  first  volume  (1875)  contains  a 
translation  of  the  Vendidad,  with  an  introductory  historical 
account  of  Zoroaster  and  the  Avesta,  and  some  details  re- 
garding Zoroastrian  doctrines  and  ceremonies.  The  second 
volume  (1876)  contains  translations  of  the  Visparad,  Yasna, 
liadokht  Nask,  and  the  first  ten  Yashts  of  Westergaard's 
edition  of  the  texts.  These  translations  are  based  not  only 
upon  Spiegel's  translations,  but  also  upon  the  works  of  all 
other  scholars  hitherto  published,  which  have  been  care- 
fully compared  with  the  original  text  by  M.  de  Harlez,  who 
has  selected  the  most  satisfactory  explanations,  or  modified 


52  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES. 

them  in  accordance  with  his  own  researches.  He  has 
endeavoured  to  give  the  meaning  of  the  text  without  being 
slavishly  literal  in  his  translation,  because  the  French 
language,  in  his  opinion,  does  not  tolerate  strictly  literal 
translation  where  the  meaning  is  obscure.  This  is  unfor- 
tunate, as  there  are  many  obscure  passages  into  which  it 
would  be  very  hazardous  to  import  more  meaning  than  the 
original  text  implies.  Perhaps  it  would  be  more  correct  to 
say  that  French  writers,  like  Orientals,  cannot  tolerate  that 
strict  accuracy  of  translation  which  seems  so  desirable  to 
Teutonic  scholars. 

With  regard  to  the  Vendidad,  it  may  -be  noticed  that  all 
translators  have  been  misled  into  admitting  Avesta  quota- 
tions, made  by  the  Pahlavi  commentator,  as  integral  por- 
tions of  the  Avesta  text.  This  mistake  has  arisen  from 
the  Avesta  text  being  printed  separate  from  the  Pahlavi, 
instead  of  alternating  with  it  as  in  the  original  manu- 
scripts. Neither  the  writers  of  the  Vendidad  Sadah,  nor 
the  European  editors  of  the  texts,  have  been  always  able  to 
distinguish  these  quotations  from  the  original  text ;  nor  is 
it  sometimes  easy  to  do  so ;  but  Vend.  i.  4  (i.  2,  Westerg.) 
consists  of  four  such  quotations  which  form  part  of  the 
Pahlavi  commentary. 

A  young  French  scholar,  Jaimes  Dakmestetee,  has 
recently  engaged  in  the  study  of  the  Avesta  texts  in  a 
strictly  scientific  manner,  and  has  published  several  essays 
of  considerable  importance.  Among  these  may  be  men- 
tioned his  "  Zend  Notes,"  and  "  Notes  on  the  Avesta,"  in 
which  he  traces  the  philological  relations  of  many  Avesta 
words,  for  the  purpose  of  fixing  their  meanings.  His  essay 
on  "Haurvatad  and  Ameretad"  (i§75)  traces  the  history 
of  these  two  ideas,  health  and  immortality,  as  they  first 
became  personified  as  archangels  who  oppose  Tauru  and 
Zairicha,  the  demons  of  sickness  and  death ;  secondly,  as 
these  archangels  acquired  the  attributes  of  protectors  of 
water  and  vegetation,  and  their  opponents  became  the 
demons  of  hunger  and  thirst ;  and  finally,  as  their  names 


EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES.  53 

became  corrupted  into  Kliurdad  and  Murdad,  wlien  there 
appeared  a  tendency  to  treat  them  as  titles  of  iire  and  the 
angel  of  death.  Tliis  account  of  these  two  Ameshaspeutas 
is  ably  supported,  and  to  a  great  extent  substantiated,  by 
quotations  from  the  Avesta  and  Veda. 

His  latest  work  is  an  exhaustive  essay  "  On  Ormazd  and 
Ahriman"  (1877),  i^  which  he  has  applied  the  method  of 
comparative  mythology  to  explain  the  myths,  equally  with 
that  of  comparative  philology  to  explain  the  texts.  The 
conclusion  he  arrives  at  is,  that  Mazdayasnianism  was 
originally  a  dualism  which  taught  that  the  universe  was 
created  by  two  beings,  Ahuramazda,  who  is  luminous  and 
good,  and  Angra-mainyu,  who  is  gloomy  and  bad ;  and  the 
history  of  the  universe  is  a  history  of  their  struggles  for 
supremacy.  Ahuramazda  can  be  traced  back  to  Asura,  the 
supreme  god  of  Indo-Iranian  times,  and  is  the  representa- 
tive of  Varuna,  Zeus,  or  Jupiter.  But  Angra-mainyu  is  a 
later  idea  of  the  Iranians  only,  although  he  takes  the  place 
of  the  Indo-Iranian  serpent-demon  who  fought  with  the 
fire-god  in  storms.  This  dualism  satisfied  the  popular 
mind,  but  philosophers  found  it  necessary,  in  the  end,  to 
set  up  a  First  Cause,  whom  they  called  Boundless  Time,  or 
Destiny,  and  from  whom  they  imagined  that  both  the  crea- 
tive beings  proceeded.  These  conclusions,  so  far  as  the 
primary  dualism  is  concerned,  will  hardly  be  accepted  by 
the  Dasturs  as  a  correct  view  of  Zarathushtra's  teachinsrs. 
The  Parsis  are  now  strict  monotheists,  and  whatever  may 
have  been  the  views  of  former  philosophical  writings,  their 
one  supreme  deity  is  Ahuramazda.  Their  views  of  Angra- 
mainyu  seem  to  differ  in  no  respect  from  what  is  supposed 
to  be  the  orthodox  Clmstian  view  of  the  devil.  Whether 
Darmesteter's  conclusions  regarding  the  dualism  can  be 
fully  maintained  is  rather  doubtful ;  the  question  depends 
ratlier  upon  the  exact  meaning  of  a  few  difficult  passages 
in  old  writings,  which  are  confessedly  mere  fragments,  than 
upon  the  wide  generalisations  of  comparative  mythology, 
which  may  easily  mislead. 


54.  ZOROASTRIAN  WRITINGS. 


III.T-ZOEOASTEIAN  STUDIES  AMONG  THE  PAESIS. 

Before  concluding  this  Essay,  we  may  briefly  notice  the 
efforts  of  the  Zoroastrians  themselves  to  preserve  and 
elucidate  their  ancient  religion  and  literature. 

The  Persian  cuneiform  inscriptions  inform  us  that  the 
Achtemenian  kings  believed  in  Ahuramazda,  and  that  their 
language  was  closely  allied  to  that  of  the  Avesta ;  in  fact, 
the  period  of  their  rule  appears  to  have'  been  the  Augustan 
age  of  Zoroastrian  literature,  when  it  was  completed  and 
arranged  in  twenty-one  books,  called  Nasks,  each  indexed 
by  one  of  the  twenty-one  words  composing  the  sacred 
Yatlia-aliu-vairyo  formula.  This  period  is  approximately 
mentioned  in  the  book  of  Arda-Viiaf,  Avhen  it  states  that 
for  "  three  hundred  years  the  religion  was  in  purity,  and 
men  were  without  doubts." 

We  know  from  classical  writers  that  Alexander,  in  a 
drunken  frolic,  burnt  the  citadel  and  palace  of  the  Achse- 
menian  kings  at  Persepolis,  in  which  one  of  the  two 
com]3lete  copies  of  the  Zoroastrian  literature  had  been 
deposited ;  thus  one  copy  was  burnt,  and  the  otlier  is  said 
to  have  been  plundered  by  the  Greeks.  Any  other  copies, 
more  or  less  partial,  must  have  suffered  greatly  during  the 
next  550  years,  while  the  Zoroastrian  religion  received 
little  support  from  either  Greeks  or  Parthians,  although 
the  fourth  book  of  the  Dinkard  mentions  that  Valkhash 
(Vologeses)  the  Ashkanian  ordered  all  extant  writings  to 
be  collected  and  preserved. 

The  earlier  kings  of  the  Sasanian  dynasty  collected  and 
rearranged  the  scattered  writings,  and  the  more  peaceable 
of  the  later  kings  encouraged  literary  pursuits ;  but  the 
Mohammedan  conquest  of  Persia,  and  the  troubled  times 
which  followed,  swept  away  nearly  all  these  writings,  not- 
withstanding two  or  three  attempts  of  leading  Zoroastrians 
to  preserve  what  was  still  extant.  Of  these  attempts  it  is 
'  recorded,  at  the  end  of  the  third  book  of  the  Dinkard,  that 


ZOROASTRIAN  WRITINGS.  55 

Adai-pad-i  Adarfrobag-i  Famklizadan  collected  all  the  old 
"smtings  lie  could  find;  and  this  collection  falling  into 
decay,  was  again  copied  by  Adarpad-i  Admitan,  and 
arranged  in  the  form  of  the  Dinkard,  the  fourth  and  fifth 
books  of  which  appear  to  contain  the  sayings  of  Adarfro- 
bag-i Farukhzadan,  and  those  he  selected  from  the  reli- 
gious books.  Of  the  subsequent  fate  of  the  Dinkard  more 
will  be  said  in  the  next  Essay. 

The  Zoroastrian  fugitives  who  settled  on  the  western 
shores  of  India  found  it  difficult  to  preserve  all  their  reli- 
gious ceremonies  and  literature,  and  frequently  applied  to 
their  persecuted  brethren  in  Persia  for  information  during 
the  first  ten  centuries  after  the  Mohammedan  conquest. 
Parsi  writers  may  probably  exaggCTate  the  ignorance  of 
their  forefathers  in  India,  as  it  was  during  these  dark  ages 
that  one  of  their  priests,  the  famous  Neryosangh  Dhaval, 
was  able  to  translate  several  of  their  religious  books  from 
Pahlavi  into  Sanskrit.  Among  these  books  are  the 
Shikand-gumaui,  Mainyo-i-khard,  and  the  greater  part  of 
the  Yasna,  the  translations  of  which  exhibit  a  knowledge 
of  the  original  Pahlavi  that  is  hardly  yet  surpassed  by 
modern  Dasturs.  Neryosangh  appears  to  have  aimed  at 
popularising  the  obscure  Pahlavi  texts  by  transliterating 
them  into  Pazand ;  but  why  he  should  have  added  a  San- 
skrit translation  is  not  so  apparent,  unless  it  were  for  the 
information  of  strangers,  or  as  a  somewhat  unnecessary 
stepping-stone  to  a  Gujrati  version.  As  manuscripts  of 
the  early  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  are  still  extant, 
which  have  descended  from  Neryosangh's  writings,  it  is 
evident  that  he  must  have  lived  as  early  as  the  fifteenth 
century ;  and  judging  from  their  genealogies,  the  present 
Dasturs  are  inclined  to  think  that  he  flourished  about  that 
time. 

The  Parsis  are  also  indebted,  to  some  priests  of  these 
dark  ages,  for  the  successive  copies  of  their  sacred  books 
which  have  preserved  their  religious  writings  from  total 
destruction.     The  oldest  of  these  copyists  whose  manu- 


S6  PARSI  WRITINGS. 

scripts  still  survive  was  ]\Iihrapan-i  Kai-Khusro-i  Mihra- 
pau-i  Spendyacl-i^  Mihrapan-i  Marjpan-i  Baliram,  who 
appears  to  have  been  a  voluminous  though  rather  careless 
copyist,  as  we  find  his  name  in  many  colophons  dated 
about  550  years  ago.  He  seems  to  have  completed  the  book 
of  ArJa-Viiaf  and  G6sht-i  Fryano  (copied  in  Koq  now  at 
Copenhagen)  on  the  i8th  of  the  tenth  month  a.y.  690;  the 
first  part  of  the  so-called  Pahlavi  Shahnamah  (now  in  the 
library  of  Dastur  Jamaspji  at  Bombay)  on  the  nth  of  the 
sixth  month  a.y.  691,  and  the  latter  part  on  the  19th  day  of 
another  month  in  the  same  year ;  the  Yasna  witli  Pahlavi 
(now  at  Copenhagen)  on  the  27th  of  the  tenth  month 
A.Y.  692  ;  another  copy  of  the  same  (now  in  the  library  of 
Dastur.  Jamaspji  at  Bombay)  on  the  19th  day  of  the 
eleventh  month  a.y.  692 ;  the  Vendidad  with  Pahlavi  (now 
at  Copenhagen)  on  the  24th  day  of  the  fourth  month 
A.Y.  693 ;  the  Shayast-la-shayast  (copied  in  K20  '^^^  ^t 
Coj)enhagen)  on  the  9th  day  of  the  seventh  month  a.y.  700; 
and  the  Haclokht  Nask  (copied  in  the  same)  on  the  i8th 
day  of  the  ninth  month  a.y.  720 ;  also  the  Vendidad  with 
Pahlavi  (now  in  the  India  Office  Library  at  London) 
seems  to  be  in  his  handwriting,  but  the  colophon  is  lost. 
Of  these  eight  manuscripts,  four  are  still  extant  in  Mihra- 
pan's  handwriting ;  three  we  know  only  from  copies  taken 
about  five  hundred  years  ago,  and  now  contained  in  the 
manuscript  K20  at  Copenhagen ;  and  the  handwriting  of  the 
Pahlavi  Shahnamah  is  so  like  that  of  K20,  that  it  may  be  a 
similar  copy  from  Mihrapan's  manuscript.  Three  of  his 
books  were  copied  at  Kambayat  from  manuscripts  {yadman 
nipik)  written  by  Eustam-i  Mihrapan-i  Marjpan-i  Dahishn- 
yar,  who  may  have  been  his  great-grand-uncle. 

Passing  on  to  later  times,  we  find  the  arrival  of  the 
Iranian  Dastur  Jamasp  (surnamed  Wilayati,  "  foreign ") 
giving  a  considerable  impulse  to  the  study  of  religious 
literature  among  the  Indian  Parsis.  He  is  reported  to 
have  left  Persia  on  the  27th  November  1720,  and  to  have 

1  Once  written  Speudyar. 


PARSl  WRITINGS.  57 

given  the  Dasturs  at  Nawsari,  .Surat,  and  Bhroch  much 
information  regarding  the  customs  and  learning  of  the 
Zoroastrians  in  Persia.  The  chief  Dastur  at  Nawsari, 
Jamasp  Asa,  became  celebrated  for  his  learning,  and  at  his 
death,  about  125  years  ago,  left  a  large  library  of  manu- 
scripts, which  has  become  much  scattered  among  his  pos- 
terity, now  in  the  iifth  generation.  The  visit  of  Dastur 
Jamasp  Wilayati  appears  to  have  first  called  the  attention 
of  the  Indian  Parsis  to  the  fact  that  their  calendar  was 
exactly  one  month  behind  that  of  their  Persian  brethren. 
This  was  a  matter  of  some  importance,  as  it  would,  in  their 
opinion,  destroy  the  efficacy  of  their  prayers  if  the  wrong 
month  were  mentioned,  and  it  altered  the  date  of  all  their 
festivals.  It  was  not,  however,  till  after  further  inquiries 
in  Persia,  and  the  arrival  of  another  priest  therefrom,  that 
several  Indian  Parsis  determined  to  adopt  the  Persian 
calendar,  Avhicli  they  did  on  the  17th  June  1745,  corre- 
sponding to  the  29th  day  of  the  ninth  month  a.y.  i  i  14  of 
the  Persian  reckoning,  which  they  styled  qadim,  "  ancient," 
while  the  old  Indian  reckoning,  which  has  been  retained 
by  the  majority  of  the  Parsis,  is  styled  rasmi,  "  customary," 
or  slidhanshdM,  "imperial;"  the  term  qadwi,  however, 
when  found  in  older  documents,  is  said  to  mean  tlie  old 
reckoning  of  the  Indian  Parsis. 

This  alteration  in  the  calendar,  and  several  small  altera- 
tions in  ritual  in  accordance  with  Persian  usage,  such  as 
pronouncing  voM  for  vohu,  constituted  a  complete  schism 
requiring  a  distinct  priesthood,  and  occasioned  much 
controversy.  The  old-calendar  party  accounted  for  the 
difference  in  reckoning  by  supposing  that  the  people  in 
Persia  had  forgotten  to  insert  an  intercalary  month  which 
their  fugitive  brethren  had  remembered  to  do  shortly  after 
their  flight  from  the  Mohammedans  :  if  this  were  the  case, 
it  is  difficult  to  understand  why  the  intercalary  month 
was  not  again  inserted  every  120  years,  according  to  the 
supposed  practice.  To  support  this  theory  it  became 
necessary  to  prove,  from  the  religious  books,  that  such  an 


58  PA  RSI  WRITINGS. 

intercalary  (kaUsah)  month  was  therein  enjoined,  and  this 
led  to  the  haUsali  controversy,  in  which  the  chief  advo- 
cates for  the  intercalation  were  Dastur  Aspendiarji  Kam- 
dinji  of  Bhroch,  who  published  a  book  on  the  subject  in 
1826,  and  Dastur  Edalji  Darabji  of  Bombay,  who  published 
the  book  of  the  Khorehe-Vehijak  in  182 8.  Their  chief 
opponent  was  MuUa  Firuz,  wlio  published  the  Avijeh-Din, 
in  1830,  to  refute  Dastur  Edalji's  views.  Much  of  the 
controversy  turns  upon  the  meaning  of  one  or  more  Pah- 
lavi  words,  generally  read  vehyakik,  which  Dastur  Edalji 
translates  as  "intercalary,"  and  'Mulla  Firuz  ex]3lains  as 
referring  to  new-year's  day,  or  the  beginning.  In  some 
cases  the  word  cited  means  evidently  "  additional,"  but 
none  of  the  passages  quoted  seem  to  bear  much  on  the 
question  of  an  intercalary  month,  either  one  way  or  the 
other,  although  Dastur  Edalji  has  mistranslated  one  obscure 
passage  so  as  to  prove  his  case.  That  there  must  have 
been  some  mode  of  keeping  the  calendar  in  accordance 
with  the  sun  in  former  times  appears  evident  from  the 
Bundahish  (p.  59,  Westerg.),  where  two  of  the  gahanbdr 
festivals  are  made  coincident  with  the  longest  and  shortest 
days  respectively;  but  there  seems  to  be  no  account  in 
the  Parsi  books  of  the  mode  adopted  for  the  rectification 
of  the  calendar. 

The  growing  demand  among  Parsis  for  further  informa- 
tion regarding  the  contents  of  their  sacred  books  was  met, 
to  some  extent,  by  the  publication  (in  1843)  of  the  Yasna 
text  in  Gujrati  characters,  with  a  Gujrati  translation,  by 
ASPANDIAEJI  Eeamji;  and  a  similar  translation  of  the 
Vendidad  was  made  about  the  same  time.  These  transla- 
tions are  noteworthy  as  being  the  latest  Parsi  works  of 
this  nature  which  are  free  from  European  influence,  and 
can  therefore  be  consulted  by  European  scholars  as  the 
last  embodiment  of  pure  traditional  information. 

The  foremost  of  the  Parsi  writers  who  represent  the 
period  of  transition  from  confidence  in  old  traditions  to 
reliance    on    European    scholars,    is   Dastur  Peshotanji 


PARSI  WRITINGS.  59 

Behramji  Sanjana,  the  present  higli-piiest  of  the  Bombay 
Parsis  of  the  predominant  sect.     In  1 848  he  published  the 
Pahlavi  text  of  the  Vajarkard-i-dini,  from  a  modern  copy 
of  an  old  manuscript  at  Surat :  this  is  probably  the  first 
book  printed  with  Pahlavi  type.     In  1853  he  published  a 
Gujrati  translation  of  the  Pahlavi  Karnamak-i  Ardashir-i 
Papakaii,  which  is  a  fairly  good  specimen  of  correct  trans- 
lation.    Before  the  publication  of  his  "  Grammar  of  the 
Pahlavi  Language "  (in  Gujrati,  1871),  Dastur  Peshotanji 
had  ample  opportunity  to  study  the  views  of  European 
scholars  ;    and   his    grammar,   which   is   very  complete, 
though   rather   too  voluminous,  is  a  great  improvement 
upon  the  one  or  two  Pahlavi  grammars  previously  pub- 
lished by  Parsi  writers.     He  thinks  that  the  pronunciation 
of  the  Semitic  portion  of  the  Pahlavi  in  Sasanian  times 
has  been  correctly  handed  down  by  tradition,  and  that  its 
variations  from  Chaldee  are  due  to  corrupt  pronunciation 
when  the  words  were  first  adopted,  and  not  to  mere  mis- 
reading of  the  characters  after  the  correct  pronunciation 
was  lost.      This  opinion,  however,  is  not   confirmed  by 
reference  to  the  inscriptions  of  Sasanian  times  ;  thus,  the 
word  traditionally  pronounced  jdnun,  "become,"  is  found 
inscribed    yahvun  in   unambiguous   Sasanian   characters, 
exactly  as   had   been  anticipated  by  European  scholars, 
whose  proposed  readings  of  several  other  Huzvarish  words 
are  fully  confirmed  by  the  Sasanian  inscriptions.     In  some 
cases    the    inscriptions    have    contradicted  the   views   of 
European  scholars,  so  Parsi  writers  exercise  a  wise  diS' 
cretion  in  not  departing  from  their  traditional  readings  too 
hastily. 

The  latest  work  of  Dastur  Peshotanji,  of  which  the  first 
volume  appeared  in  1874,  is  the  Dinkard,  in  which  he  gives 
the  Pahlavi  text  with  a  transliteration  in  Avesta  letters, 
a  Gujrati  and  English  translation,  and  a  glossary  of  some 
selected  words.  This  first  volume  contains  about  one- 
eighteenth  part  of  the  extant  portion  of  the  Dinkard,  or 
about  one-eighth  of   the  third  book,  which  is  the  least 


6o  PA  RSI  WRITINGS. 

interesting  part  of  the  work,  and  perhaps  the  most  difficult 
to  translate.  Many  improvements  in  the  translation 
might  be  suggested,  but  it  gives  the  nieaning  of  the  original 
as  nearly  as  can  be  expected  in  a  first  translation  of  a 
difficult  text.  The  second  volume,  published  in  1876, 
completes  the  first  tenth  part  of  the  extant  text,  and  fully 
maintains  the  character  of  this  edition  of  the  Dinkard 
for  accuracy. 

The  works  of  Dastur  Hoshangji  Jamaspji  have  already 
been  mentioned  (p.  48-5 1 )  as  having  been  revised  by  the 
author  of  these  Essays,  and  published  under  his  super- 
vision. In  their  original  state  they  displayed  a  very  con- 
siderable knowledge  of  Pahlavi  on  the  part  of  Dastur 
Hoshangji,  who  had  disposed  of  many  of  the  chief  diffi- 
culties which  might  otherwise  have  troubled  the  reviser ; 
most  of  the  corrections  required  were  due  to  additions,  and 
to  the  progress  of  knowledge  in  the  interval  between  the 
first  preparation  and  the  publication  of  the  works.  Dastur 
Hoshangji  has  also  prepared  an  edition  of  the  Pahlavi  and 
Pazand  texts  of  the  Shikand-gumani,  with  a  glossary  of 
the  Pahlavi  words ;  and  also  an  edition  of  the  Avesta  and 
Pahlavi  texts  of  the  Vendidad,  with  a  glossary  of  the 
Pahlavi  words ;  but  neither  of  these  works  are  yet  pub- 
lished. 

In  1866  a  prize  was  offered  by  Seth  Khurshedji 
Ptustamji  Kama  for  a  new  Gujrati  translation  of  the 
Vendidad,  with  a  complete  glossary  of  the  words  in  the 
Avesta  text.  This  translation  was  supplied,  three  years 
afterwards,  by  Kavasji  Edalji  Kanga,  but  was  not  pub- 
lished till  1874.  It  is  based  upon  Westergaard's  text  and 
the  best  European  translations  which  had  appeared,  and 
the  writer  has  added,  in  many  places,  a  good  deal  of  ex- 
planatory commentary.  This  is  likely  to  remain  the 
standard  translation  for  the  use  of  the  Parsi  community, 
and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  its  author  has  not  avoided 
the  mistake  of  translating  Avesta  quotations,  made  by  the 
Pahlavi  commentator,  as  part  of  the  Avesta  text,  which 


PARSI  WRITINGS.  6r 

has  been  already  noticed  (p.  52)  as  a  general  error  of 
translators.  In  addition  to  the  quotations  admitted  into 
the  text  by  M.  de  Harlez,  he  has  translated  the  five  quota- 
tions which  constitute  Vend.  ii.  6  (Westerg.),  and  finds 
considerable  difficulty  in  adapting  them  to  the  text,  as 
miglit  be  expected.  If  he  had  consulted  a  manuscript  of 
the  Vendidad  with  Pahlavi  he  would  have  seen  at  once 
that  these  five  sentences  are  merely  quoted  by  the  Pahlavi 
commentator  to  prove  the  correctness  of  his  assertions. 
The  fact  that  these  Avesta  quotations  form  no  part  of  the 
text  is  noticed  by  Dastur  Hoshangji  in  his  manuscript 
edition  of  the  texts  of  the  Vendidad. 

In  concluding  these  remarks  upon  the  progress  of  Zo- 
roastrian  studies  among  the  Parsis,  it  may  be  mentioned 
that  Dastur  Jamaspji  Minochihaeji  Jamaspasana  of 
Bombay  has  been  engaged  for  many  years  in  collecting 
materials  for  a  Palilavi  dictionary,  the  first  part  of  which 
is  now  in  the  press.  This  dictionary  is  likely  to  be  ex- 
ceedingly useful,  being  by  far  the  largest  collection  of 
Pahlavi  words  hitherto  made ;  and  these  are  arranged  in 
the  order  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet,  which  is  convenient  for 
a  people  speaking  Gujrati.  It  wiU  adhere  strictly  to 
traditional  readings  and  interpretations,  of  which  it  ought 
to  form  a  permanent  record,  valuable  to  all  parties  in 
these  times  of  progressive  transition. 

Thus  much  had  to  be  noticed  regarding  the  general 
course  of  researches  into  the  sacred  WTitincrs  of  the  Parsis. 

O 

Slowly  the  ideas  of  past  ages,  buried  for  thousands  of 
years  in  documents  written  in  a  language  more  or  less 
unintelligible,  begin  to  be  unfolded ;  but  many  years  and 
many  laborers  will  be  required  to  make  this  new  field 
for  antiquarian  and  philological  research  yield  much  fruit. 
The  Dasturs,  who  are  most  concerned,  and  other  younger, 
talented,  and  well-to-do  members  of  the  Parsi  community, 
ought  to  consider  it  their  duty  to  collect  and  multiply 
correct  and  unimproved  copies  of  all  the  oldest  manu- 
scripts  extant,  and  to  supply  themselves  with  all   the 


62  PARS/  WRITINGS. 

means  (sncli  as  a  knowledge  of  Sanskrit,  Persian,  Chaldee, 
&c.)  now  required  for  a  successful  investigation  of  the 
Avesta  and  Pablavi  languages,  in  order  that  they  may 
study  the  contents  of  their  manuscripts,  and  learn  the 
foundations  on  which  their  religion  rests.  Let  them  not 
be  discouraged  if  the  results  be  not  so  flattering  to  their 
self-love  as  they  anticij)ated.  So  far  as  their  researches 
disclose  what  is  good  and  proper  in  their  religion,  they 
must  strengthen  the  belief  in  its  divine  origin ;  and  so  far 
as  they  disclose  what  is  bad  and  improper,  they  merely 
indicate  the  corruptions  introduced  by.  human  tradition. 
Such  corruptions  can  be  neither  concealed  nor  defended 
with  safety ;  but  when  discovered,  they  must  be  rejected 
as  mere  human  inventions  and  superstitious  errors.  All 
religions  have  passed  through  human  minds'  and  human 
hands,  and  are  therefore  likely  to  abound  with  human 
errors ;  so  that  the  man  who  believes  in  the  infallibility 
of  a  book  is  but  one  step  removed  from  the  superstition 
of  him  who  believes  in  the  infallibility  of  a  high-priest ; 
he  merely  removes  the  idea  of  verbal  inspiration  from  the 
broad  daylight  of  the  present,  where  its  improbability 
would  be  too  obvious,  into  the  dim  obscurity  of  the  past, 
where  difficulties  become  lost  in  the  misty  shadows  of 
antiquity.  Whatever  is  true  in  religion  will  bear  the 
fullest  investigation  and  most  searching  criticism;  it  is 
only  error  that  fears  discussion. 


II. 

LANGUAGES  OF  THE  PA  RSI  SCRIPTURES. 


II. 

LANGUAGES   OF  THE   PARS!   SCRIPTURES. 

The  languages  of  Persia,  commonly  called  Iranian,  form 
a  separate  family  of  the  great  Aryan  stock  of  languages 
which  comprises,  besides  the  Iranian  idioms,  Sanskrit 
(with  its  daughters),  Greek,  Latin,  Teutonic  (with  Eng- 
lish), Slavonian,  Letto-Lithuanian,  Celtic,  and  all  allied 
dialects.  The  Iranian  idioms  arrange  themselves  under 
two  heads : — 

1.  Iranian  languages  properly  so  called. 

2.  Affiliated  tongues. 

The  first  division  comprises  the  ancient,  mediseval,  and 
modern  languages  of  Iran,  which  includes  Persia,  Media, 
and  Bactria,  those  lands  which  are  styled  in  the  Zend- 
Avesta  airydo  dahhctvo,  "Aryan  countries."  We  may 
class  them  as  follows  : — 

(ft.)  The  East  Iranian  or  Bactrian  branch,  extant  only 
in  the  two  dialects  in  which  the  scanty  fragments  of  the 
Parsi  scriptures  are  written.  The  more  ancient  of  them 
may  be  called  the  "  Gatha  dialect,"  because  the  most 
extensive  and  important  writings  preserved  in  this  pecu- 
liar idiom  are  the  so-called  Gathas  or  hymns ;  the  later 
idiom,  in  which  most  of  the  books  of  the  Zend-Avesta  are 
written,  may  be  called  "  ancient  Bactrian,"  or  "  the  classi- 
cal Avesta  language,"  which  was  for  many  centuries  the 
spoken  and  written  language  of  Bactria.  The  Bactrian 
languages  seem  to  have  been  dying  out  in  the  third  cen- 
tury B.C.,  and  they  have  left  no  daughters. 

(&.)  The  West  Iranian  languages,  or  those  of  Media  and 

E 


65  IRANIAN  LANGUAGES. 

Persia.  These  are  known  to  us  during  the  three  periods 
of  antiquity,  middle  ages,  and  modern  times,  but  only  in 
the  one  dialect,  which  has,  at  every  period,  served  as  the 
^^Titten  language  throughout  the  Iranian  provinces  of  the 
Persian  empire.  Several  dialects  are  mentioned  by  lexi- 
cographers, but  we  know  very  little  about  them.^  Of  the 
ancient  Persian  a  few  documents  are  still  extant  in  the 
cuneiform  inscriptions  of  the  kings  of  the  Achsemenian 
dynasty,  found  in  the  ruins  of  Persepolis,  on  the  rock  of 
Behistun,  near  Hamadan,  and  some  other  places  in  Persia. 
This  language  stands  nearest  to  the  two  Bactrian  dialects 
of  the  Zend-Avesta,  but  exhibits  some  peculiarities ;  for 
instance,  we  find  d  used  instead  of  z,  as  adam,  "  I,"  in  the 
Avesta  azem  ;  dasta,  "  hand,"  in  the  Avesta  zasta.  It  is 
undoubtedly  the  mother  of  modern  Persian,  but  the  differ- 
ences between  them  are  nevertheless  great,  and  in  reading 
and  interpreting  the  ancient  Persian  cuneiform  inscrip- 
tions, Sanskrit  and  the  Avesta,  although  they  be  only  sister 
languages,  have  proved  more  useful  than  its  daughter, 
the  modern  Persian.  The  chief  cause  of  this  difference 
between  ancient  and  modern  Persian  is  the  loss  of  nearly 
all  the  grammatical  inflexions  of  nouns  and  verbs,  and  the 
total  disregard  of  gender,  in  modern  Persian ;  while  in  the 
ancient  Persian,  as  written  and  spoken  at  the  time  of  the 

^  In  Sayyid  Husain  Sh9,h  Hakikat's  or  language  of  the  court,  according 

Persian  grammar,  entitled  Tulifatu-  to  this  writer,  spoken  at  Balkh,  Bok- 

l-'Ajam,  there  are  seven  Iranian  Ian-  hara,  Marv,  and  in  Badakhshan ;  and 

guages  enumerated,  which  are  classed  Pahlavi,  ov  Pahlavdni,  the  language 

under  two  heads,  viz.  (a)  the  obso-  of  the  so-called  Pahlav,  comprising 

lete    or   dead,  and  (b)   such  dialects  the  districts  of  Kai  (Eaghu  in  the 

as  are  still  used.     Of  the  obsolete  he  Zend-Avesta),  Ispahan,   and  Dipilr. 

knows    four :    Sughdi,  the  language  Dart  he  calls  the  language  of  Fir- 

of  ancient  Sogdiana  {Swjhdha  in  the  dausi,  but  the  trifling  deviations  he 

Zend-Avesta);    Zdult   (for    ZuhuJi),  mentions  to  prove  the  difference  be- 

the   dialect    of    Zabulist4n  ;     Sakzt,  tween  Dart  and  Pdrsi  (for  instance, 

spoken  in  Sajastan  (called  Sakastene  ashkam,  "belly,"  used  in   Dart  for 

by  the  Greeks) ;  and  Hirmt,  spoken  shikani,  and   aba,   "  with,"   for   hd), 

in    Herat    {Hardyu    in    the    Zend-  refer  only  to  slight  changes  in  spell- 

Avesta).      As  languages    in   use    he  ing,    and  are  utterly  insufficient  to 

mentions  Pdrst,  which,  he  says,  was  induce  a  philologist  to  consider  Dari 

si)oken  in  Istakhar  (Persepolis),  the  an  idiom  different  from  Parsi. 
ancient  capital  of  Persia ;  then  Dart, 


IRANIAN  LANGUAGES.  67 

Acliffimenians  (b.c.  500-300),  we  still  find  a  great  many 
inflexions  agreeing  with  those  of  the  Sanskrit,  Avesta, 
and  other  ancient  Aryan  tongues.  At  what  time  the 
Persian  language,  like  the  English,  became  simplified,  and 
adapted  for  amalgamating  with  foreign  words,  by  the  loss 
of  its  terminations,  we  cannot  ascertain.  But  there  is 
every  reason  to  suppose  that  this  dissolution  and  absorp- 
tion of  terminations,  on  account  of  their  having  become 
more  or  less  unintelligible,  began  before  the  Christian  era, 
because  in  the  later  inscriptions  of  the  Achamenians 
(B.C.  400),  we  find  already  some  of  the  grammatical  forms 
confounded,  which  confusion  we  discover  also  in  many 
parts  of  the  Zend-Avesta.  IsTo  inscription  in  the  verna- 
cular Persian  of  the  Arsacidans,  the  successors  of  the 
Achsemenians,  being  extant,  we  cannot  trace  the  gradual 
dissolution  of  the  terminations ;  and  when  we  next  meet 
with  the  vernacular,  in  the  inscriptions  of  the  first  two 
Sasanian  monarchs,  it  appears  in  the  curiously  mixed 
form  of  Pahlavi,  which  gradually  changes  till  about  a.d. 
300,  when  it  differs  but  little  from  the  Pahlavi  of  the 
Parsi  books,  as  we  shall  shortly  see. 

The  second  chief  division  of  the  Iranian  tongues  com- 
prises the  affiliated  languages,  that  is  to  say,  such  as  share 
in  the  chief  peculiarities  of  this  family,  but  differ  from  it 
in  many  essential  particulars.  To  this  division  we  must 
refer  Ossctic,  spoken  by  some  small  tribes  in  the  Caucasus, 
but  difiering  completely  from  the  other  Caucasian  lan- 
guages ;  also  Armenian  and  Afglianic  {Paslitu). 

After  this  brief  notice  of  the  Iranian  languages  in 
general,  we  shall  proceed  to  the  more  particular  considera- 
tion of  the  lanszua^es  of  the  Zend-Avesta  and  other  religious 
literature  of  the  Parsis. 

I . — THE  LANGUAGE  OF  THE  AVESTA  EKKONEOUSLY  CALLED    • 

ZEND. 

The  orio-inal  lancruao-e  of  the  Parsi  scriptures  has  usually 
been  called  Zend  by  European  scholars,  but  this  name  has 


68  THE  A  VES  TA  LAA'G  UA  GE. 

never  been  genertiUy  admitted  by  Parsi  scliolars,  although 
it  may  have  been  accepted  by  a  few  on  European  autho- 
rity, which  is  apt  to  be  treated  with  too  much  deference 
by  Oriental  minds.  We  shall  see,  hereafter,  that  this 
application  of  the  term  Zend  is  quite  inconsistent  with  its 
general  use  in  the  Parsi  books,  and  ought,  therefore,  to  be 
discarded  by  scholars  who  wish  to  prevent  the  propagation 
of  error.  At  present  we  need  only  observe  that  no  name 
for  the  language  of  the  Parsi  scriptures  has  yet  been  found  ' 
in  the  Parsi  books ;  but  whenever  the  word  Zend  {zand)  is 
used  alone,  it  is  applied  to  some  Pahlavi  translation,  com- 
mentary, or  gloss ;  and  whenever  the  word  Avesta  {avistdh) 
is  used  alone,  it  is  applied  to  the  Parsi  scriptures  in  their 
original  language.  The  language  of  the  Zend,  therefore, 
is  Pahlavi,  and  this  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  not  applying 
that  term  to  another  language,  with  which  its  connection 
is  iDrobably  slight.  For  want  of  a  better  term,  we  may 
follow  the  example  of  most  Parsi  scholars  in  using  the 
term  Avesta  for  the  language  of  the  Avesta ;  and  to  avoid 
confusion,  we  must  discard  the  word  Zend  altogether  when 
speaking  of  languages;  although,  for  reasons  given  here- 
after, we  may  still  use  Zend-Avesta  as  a  general  term  for 
the  Parsi  scriptures. 

The  general  character  of  the  Avesta  language,  in  both 
its  dialects,  is  that  of  a  highly  developed  idiom.  It  is  rich 
in  inflexions,  both  of  the  verbs  and  nouns.  In  the  latter, 
where  three  numbers  and  eight  cases  can  be  distinguished, 
it  agrees  almost  completely  with  Vedic  Sanskrit,  and  in 
the  former  it  exhibits  a  greater  variety  of  forms  than  the 
classical  Sanskrit.  We  find,  besides,  a  multitude  of  com- 
pound words  of  various  kinds,  and  the  sentences  are  joined 
together  in  an  easy  way,  which  contributes  largely  to  a 
ready  understanding  of  tlie  general  sense  of  passages.  It 
is  a  o-enuine  sister  of  Sanskrit,  Greek,  Latm,  and  Gothic ; 
but  we  find  her  no  longer  in  the  prime  of  life,  as  she 
appears  rather  in  her  declining  age.  The  forms  are  not 
always  kept  strictly  distinct  from  each  other,  as  is  the 


THE  A  VESTA  LANG  [/AGE.  69 

case  in  Sanskrit,  Greek,  and  Latin ;  but  are  now  and  tlien 
confounded,  mucli  less,  however,  in  tlie  verbs  than  in  the 
nouns,  where  the  dissolution  first  began.  The  crude  form, 
or  original  uninflected  state  of  the  word,  is  often  used 
instead  of  the  original  inflected  forms ;  thus,  we  find  daeva, 
"  demon,  evil  spirit,"  which  is  really  the  crude  form  of  the 
word,  employed  as  the  instrumental  singular,  which  ought  to 
be  claeceiia,  or  at  least  daevd,  and  as  the  nominative  plural, 
which  ought  to  be  daevdonho  or  daecd.  The  lon^^  vowels 
d  and  i  are  out  of  use  in  the  nominative  feminine,  so  tliat 
the  gender  is  not  so  easily  recognised  from  the  termina- 
tion alone  as  in  Sanskrit;  thus  we  have  daena,  "creed, 
belief,"  instead  of  daend ;  moreover,  the  forms  of  the  dative 
and  instrumental  are  often  confounded,  especially  in  the 
plural.  These  deviations  from  the  regular  forms,  and  the 
confusion  of  terminations,  are  far  more  frequent  in  the 
classical  Avesta  than  in  the  Gatha  dialect,  where  the  gram- 
matical forms  are,  in  most  cases,  quite  regular. 

ISTotwithstanding  these  symptoms  of  decay,  the  relation- 
ship of  the  Avesta  language  to  the  most  ancient  Sanskrit, 
the  so-called  Vedic  dialect,!  is  as  close  as  that  of  the  dif- 
ferent dialects  of  the  Greek  language  (^olic,  Ionic,  Doric, 
or  Attic)  to  each  other.  The  languages  of  the  sacred 
hymns  of  the  Brahmans,  and  of  those  of  the  Parsis,  are 
only  the  two  dialects  of  two  separate  tribes  of  one  and  the 
same  nation.  As  the  lonians,  Dorians,  ^tolians,  &c.,  were 
different  tribes  of  the  Greek  nation,  whose  general  name 
was  Hellenes,  so  the  ancient  Brahmans  and  Parsis  were 
two  tribes  of  the  nation  which  is  called  Aryas  both  in  the 

1  This  is  distinct   ft-om   the   usual  ing  of  ceremonies,  their  effects,  &c. 

Sanskrit,  wliich  alone  is  studied  now-  They  learn  them  parrot-like  by  heart, 

adays  by  the  Brahmans.      The  most  but  care  nothing  about  understand- 

leamed  Pandits  of  the  present  Brah-  ing  their  prayers.     If  they  are  asked 

manic  community,  wlio  are  perfectly  to  explain  the  meaning,  they  refer  to 

acquainted  with  the  classical  Sanskrit  a  commentar}'  made  several  hundred 

language,  are  utterly  unable   to   ex-  years  ago  by  a  highly  celebrated  Brah- 

plaiu  the  more   ancient  portions  of  man  (Sayana),  which   often   fails  to 

the  Vedas,  which   consist   chiefly  of  give  a   complete  insight   into   Vedic 

hymns,  and  speculations  on  the  mean-  antiquity. 


70  THE  A  VESTA  LANGUAGE. 

Veda  and  Zend-Avesta ;  the  former  may  be  compared  "with 
the  lonians,  and  the  latter  with  the  Dorians.  The  most 
striking  feature  perceptible  when  comparing  both  Avesta 
dialects  with  Sanskrit  is,  that  they  are  related  closely  to 
the  Vedic  form  of  Sanskrit,  but  not  to  the  classical.  In 
verbal  forms,  especially  moods  and  tenses,  the  classical 
Sanskrit,  though  very  rich  in  comparison  with  modern 
languages,  is  much  poorer  than  the  more  primitive  dialect 
preserved  in  the  Vedas ;  thus  it  has  lost  various  forms  of 
the  subjunctive  mood,  most  tenses  of  all  moods  except  the 
indicative  (the  imperative  and  potential  moods  preserving 
only  the  present  tense),  the  manifold  forms  expressing  the 
infinitive  mood.l  &c. ;  whereas  all  these  forms  are  to  be 
found  in  the  Yedas,  Zend-Avesta,  and  Homeric  Greek,  in 
the  greatest  completeness.  The  syntactical  structure  in 
Vedic  Sanskrit  and  the  Avesta  is  simple  enough,  an-d 
verbal  forms  are  much  more  frequently  used  than  in 
classical  Sanskrit.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  classical 
Sanskrit  was  formed  long  after  the  separation  of  tlie  Ira- 
nians from  the  Hindus. 

The  differences  between  Vedic  Sanskrit  and  the  Avesta 
lang-uage  are  very  little  in  grammar,  but  are  cliiefly  of 
a  phonetical  and  lexicographical  nature,  like  the  differ- 
ences between  German  and  Dutch.  There  are  certain 
regular  changes  of  sounds,  and  other  phonetic  peculiarities 
perceptible,  a  knowledge  of  which  enables  tlie  philologist 
to  convert  any  Avesta  word  easily  into  a  pure  Sanskrit 
one.     The  most  remarkable  changes  are  as  follows  : — 

Initial  s  in  Sanskrit  is  changed  in  the  Avesta  into  h ; 
thus  soma  (the  sacred  juice  used  by  the  Brahmans)  = 
haoma ;  sama,  "together,  the  same,"  =  hama;  set,  "that, 
he,"  =  ha;  sack,  "to  follow,"  (Lat.  sequi)  =  hack.  In  the 
middle  of  a  word  the  same  change  takes  place,  as  in  asti, 
"  Hfe,"  =  anlm ;  except  now  and  then  in  the  last  syllable, 
as  in  Av.  yazaeslia,  "thou  shalt  worship,"  where  sh  is  pre- 

1  In  the  Vedic  dialect  eleven  such  forms  can  be  found,  which  ara  re- 
duced to  one  in  classical  Sanskrit. 


THE  AVESTA  LANGUAGE.  /       71 

served.  At  the  end  of  a  word  sli  remains  unless  preceded 
by  a,  in  which  case  the  termination  ash  is  changed  into  d, 
except  when  followed  by  the  enclitic  conjunction  clia, 
when  the  sibilant  is  preserved;  thus  asura-s,  "living," 
becomes  ahuro,  instead  of  ahurash,  but  we  find  ahurashclia, 
"  and  the  living." 

The  Sanskrit  h,  when  not  original,  but  only  a  derived 
sound,  never  remains  in  the  Avesta.  It  is  generally 
changed  into  z,  as  in  zt,  "  then,  therefore,"  =  S.  hi ;  zima 
"winter,"  =  S.  hima ;  zbe  (root),  "to  invoke,"  =  S.  hve. 
The  Avesta  z  is  also  sometimes  equivalent  to  a  Sanskrit/, 
as  in  zan,  "  to  produce,"  (Pers.  zddan)  =  S.  jan  (Lat. 
gigno) ;  hizva,  "  tongue,"  =  S.  jihva. 

In  comparing  Avesta  with  Sanskrit  words,  we  often 
observe  a  nasal  in  the  former  which  is  wantincj  in  the 
latter;  this  nasal  is  usually  followed  by  h,  as  in  anhu, 
"  life,"  =  S.  asu. 

Instead  of  Sanskrit  shv  we  find  sp  in  the  Avesta,  as  in 
aspa,  "horse,"  =  S.  ashva  (Lat.  cquus,  Gr.  hippos);  iispa, 
"  all,"  =  S.  vishva ;  spa,  "  dog,"  =  S.  shvd. 

In  place  of  Sanskrit  rit,  besides  the  regular  change  into 
ard}  we  find  ash  as  an  equivalent  in  the  Avesta,  as  in 
viashya,  "man,"  =  S.  martya  (Lat.  mortalis,  Gr.  hrotos); 
asha,  "  right,  true,"  =  S.  rita. 

Instead  of  Sanskrit  sv  the  Avesta  has  a  peculiar  guttural 
aspirate  represented  by  q,  and  corresponding  in  sound 
probably  to  qu  in  Latin  and  hhw  in  Persian,  as  in  qafna, 
"  sleep,"  =  S.  svapna  (Lat.  somnus,  Gr,  hypnos,  Pers. 
hhwdb). 

These  are  the  most  remarkable  phonetic  differences 
between  Sanskrit  and  Avesta  words.  By  attending  to  them 
it  is  very  easy  to  find  the  Sanskrit  word  corresponding  to 
one  in  the  Avesta,  and  we  can  tlms  discover  a  large  number 
of  words  and  forms  similar  to  those  in  the  Vedas.  There 
are,  of  course,  now  and  then  (as  is  always  the  case  in  the 

^  The  Sanskrit  vowel  ri  is  always  represented  by  are  or  ere ;  rit  itself  if:  a 
corruption  of  art. 


7  2  THE  A  VES  TA  LA  NG  UA  GE. 

dialects  of  every  language)  peculiar  words  to  be  found  in 
the  Avesta,  but  these  are  always  traceable  to  Sanskrit 

roots. 

A  comparison  of  the  grammatical  forms  in  the  Avesta 
and  Sanskrit  can  be  dispensed  with.  They  are  so  very 
similar,  even  when  not  quite  identical,  that  they  are 
readily  recognised  by  any  one  who  has  a  slight  knowledge 
of  Sanskrit.  The  strongest  proof  of  the  original  identity 
of  Sanskrit  and  Avesta  grammatical  forms  is  their  harmony 
even  in  irregularities.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  deviations 
of  the  pronominal  declension  from  that  of  the  nouns  are 
the  same  in  both  languages,  as  ahmdi,  "to  him,"  =  S. 
asmdi;  Icalimdi,  "to  whom,"  =  S.  hasmdi ;  yaesham,  "of 
whom "  (pi.),  =  S.  yeshdm.  Also  in  the  declension  of 
irregular  nouns  we  find  span,  "dog,"  =  S.  slivan*  sing, 
uom.  spa  -  S.  sJwd,  ace.  spdnem  =  S.  shvdnam,  dat.  sune  = 
S.  shune,  gen.  suno  =  S.  shunas,  pi.  nom.  spdno  =  S.  shvdnas, 
gen.  sunam  =  S.  shundm  ;  likewise  pathan,  "path,"  =  S. 
2Jathi7i,  sing.  nom.  panta  =  ^.  panthds,  inst.  patJia  =^.p>athd, 
pi.  nom.  pantdno  =  S.  panthdnas,  ace.  p)ath6  =  S.  pathas, 
gen.  patham  =  S.  pathdm. 

The  extremely  close  affinity  of  the  Avesta  language  to 
Vedic  Sanskrit  can  be  best  seen  from  some  forms  of  the 
present  tense,  in  which  the  classical  Sanskrit  differs  from 
the  Vedic.  Compare,  for  instance,  Av.  herenaomi,  "  I  make," 
with  Ved.  krinomi  and  S.  haromi ;  Av.jamaiti,  "he  goes," 
with  Ved.  cjamati  and  S.  gachchhati ;  Av.  gereimidmi,  "  I 
take,"  with  Ved.  gribhndmi  and  S.  grihndmi. 

With  regard  to  the  differences  between  the  two  dialects 
of  the  Avesta,  the  language  of  the  Gathas  and  the  classical 
or  ordinary  Avesta,  we  can  here  only  discuss  their  relation- 
ship to  each  other  in  a  general  way.  The  chief  question 
is,  whether  they  represent  the  same  language  at  two 
difierent  periods  of  time,  or  whether  they  are  two  con- 
temporary dialects,  spoken  in  two  different  provinces  of 

*  Spelt  as  pronounced,  sh  representing  the  palatal  sibilant,  and  sh  the 
cerebral  sibilant. 


THE  AVESTA  LANGUAGE.  n 

tlie  ancient  Bactrian  empire.  Our  knowledge  of  tlie 
dialects  of  the  Iranian  languages  and  the  periods  of  their 
development,  previous  to  the  Christian  era,  is  so  limited, 
that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  decide  this  question  in  a 
satisfactory  manner. 

The  diflerences  between  these  two  dialects  are  both  of  a 
phonetical  and  grammatical  nature.  Were  the  deviations 
merely  of  the  former  kind,  we  should  be  fully  entitled  to 
ascribe  them  to  two  different  ways  of  pronouncing  certain 
vowels  and  consonants,  as  generally  happens  in  different 
districts  with  nations  speaking  the  same  language;  but 
should  we  discover  in  one  dialect  fuller  and  more  ancient 
forms,  and  in  the  other  evidently  later  and  more  con- 
tracted ones,  then  the  difference  between  the  Gatha 
language  and  the  ordinary  Avesta  must  be  ascribed  to 
their  being  written  at  different  periods. 

The  phonetical  differences  of  the  Gatha  language  from 
that  of  the  other  books  are,  at  a  first  glance,  so  considerable 
as  to  induce  one  to  trace  them  to  different  localities  of  the 
same  country,  and  not  to  different  ages.  But  on  closer 
inquiry  we  find  that  several  of  these  phonetical  peculiarities, 
such  as  the  constant  lengthening  of  final  vowels,  and  the 
severing  of  one  syllable  into  two  (as  of  the  nom.  pi.  n.  of 
the  relative  pronoun  yd  into  eeh),  are  attributable  to  the 
original  chanting  of  the  Gathas  and  other  shorter  pieces, 
constituting  the  older  Yasna,  and  are  not  to  be  traced  to 
dialectical  differences.  These  writings  are  the  most  im- 
portant and  holiest  prayers  used  in  the  Zoroastrian  divine 
service,  and  the  way  of  chanting  them  was,  very  likely, 
analogous  to  that  in  which  the  Brahmans  (originally  near 
relations  of  the  Parsis)  used  to  chant  the  verses  of  the 
Samaveda  at  the  time  of  solemn  sacrifices,  and  which  is 
kept  up  to  this  day  on  such  occasions.  On  hearing  a 
Samaveda  priest  chant  some  verses  of  this  Veda,  one 
notices  that  he  lengthens  the  final  vowels  of  the  words, 
even  when  they  are  short.  In  Sanskrit,  where  the 
grammar  was  fixed  by  rules,  the  texts  were  not  altered 


74  THE  A  VESTA  LANGUAGE. 

according  to  the  mode  of  chanting  them;    while  in  the 
Avesta,  wliere  nothing  regarding  the  grammar  and  pro- 
nunciation was  settled,  these  peculiarities  produced  by 
chanting  the  Gathas  and  some  other  pieces  crept  into  the 
manuscripts,  which  were  generally  written  from  memory 
only,  as  is  still  often  the  case.      Besides  these  phonetical 
changes  which  can  be  explained  as  the  result  of  chanting, 
there  are  a  few  other  changes  of  vowels,  such  as  that  of  a 
final  6  or  initial  a  into  e,  as   in   ke  =  ko,  "  who  ? "  and 
emavat  =  amavat,  "  strong ; "  also  some  changes  of  con- 
sonants, as  that  of  t  into  s  in  stavas  =  stavat,  "praising," 
and   the    softening  of   harsh  consonants,  as  in  ddreng  = 
dthras  (ace.  pi.  of  dtar,  "  fire  ").     These  deviations  are  sug- 
ciestive  of  dialectical  differences,  but  they  are  of  no  great 
importance,  and  no  great  weight  can  be  attached  to  them ; 
they  are  merely  such  differences  as  might  exist  between 
the  idioms  of  neighbouring  towns  in  the  same  district. 
That  these  peculiarities,  notwithstanding  their  insignifi- 
cance, have  been  preserved  so  well,  and  not  been  dissolved 
and  changed  into  the  current  Bactrian  language,  which  is 
preserved  in  the  largest  portion  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  in- 
dicates the  great  reverence  in  which  these  hymns  were 
held  by  the  Zoroastrians.     Considering  that  the  Gathas 
contain  the   undoubted  teaching  of  Zarathushtra  himself 
(without  adverting  to  other  reasons),  we  do  not  hesitate  to 
believe  that  the  peculiar  language  used  in  the  Gathas  was 
the  dialect  of  his  own  town  or  district. 

As  to  grammatical  forms,  the  Gatha  dialect  exhibits  not 
a  •  few  deviations  from  the  ordinary  Avesta  language. 
Most  of  these  differences  evidently  represent  a  more  pri- 
mitive state  of  the  Bactrian  language,  nearer  to  its  Aryan 
source ;  but  some  might  be  considered  as  merely  dialec- 
tical peculiarities.  The  genitive  singular  of  masculine 
nouns  in  a  ends,  nearly  throughout  the  Gathas,  in  ahyd, 
which  corresponds  exactly  with  the  Sanskrit  genitive  ter- 
mination asya,  while  in  the  ordinary  Avesta  we  always 
find  ahe,  apparently  a  contraction  of  aJvja,  thus   Gath. 


THE  AVESTA  LANGUAGE.  75 

daevaliya,  "  of    a  demon,"  =  Av.    daemlie  =  S.    devasya. 
Again,  the  first  pers.  sing,  imperative,  expressing  intention 
or  volition,  requires  only  the  termination  a  or  di  in  the 
Gathas,  whereas   in    the    ordinary    Avesta   the    derived 
termination  dni  prevails,  and  tliis  is  also  used  in  Sanskrit ; 
the  usual  infinitive  formation  in  the  Gathas  is  that  in  dydi 
which  is  also  extremely  frequent   in   the  Vedic   dialect, 
while    it   is   nearly   unknown   in   the   ordinary   Avesta, 
and  wholly  so  in  classical  Sanskrit.      In  the  pronouns, 
especially,   the   language   of  the  Gathas   exhibits   more 
ancient    forms  than  we  find  in   any  other   part   of  the 
Zend-Avesta,  as  for  example  maibyd,  "  to  me,"  which  an- 
cient form,  agreeing  so  well  with  Sans,  maliyam  and  Lat. 
mihi,  is  nowhere  to  be  found  in  the  ordinary  Avesta ;  ob- 
serve also  mahyd,  m.  maqydo,  f.  "  of  my,"  &c.     The  fre- 
quent use  of  the  enclitic  pronominal  particles  i,  im,  Mm, 
&c.  (which  is  a  peculiar  feature  of  the  Vedic  dialect,  distin- 
cfuishuiCT  it  from  classical  Sanskrit),  and  the  great  freedom 
A\ith  which  prepositions  are  separated  from  their  verbs  (a 
chief  characteristic  of  Vedic  Sanskrit  and  Homeric  Greek), 
indicate  a  more  ancient  stage  of  language  in  the  Gatha 
dialect  than  we  can  discover  in  the  ordinary  Avesta,  where 
these  traces  of  a  more  varied  and  not  quite  settled  form  of 
expression  are  much  fewer,  and  only  met  with,  occasion- 
ally, in  poetical  pieces. 

Judging  from  these  peculiarities,  there  seems  no  doubt 
that  the  dialect  of  the  Gathas  shows  some  traces  of  a  higher 
antiquity  than  can  be  claimed  for  the  ordinary  Avesta. 
But  the  differences  are  not  so  great  as  between  the  Vedic 
and  classical  Sanskrit,  or  between  the  Greek  of  Homer  and 
that  of  the  Attic  dialect,  the  two  dialects  of  the  Zend- 
Avesta  being  much  closer  to  each  other.  They  represent 
one  and  the  same  language,  with  such  changes  as  may 
have  been  brought  about  within  the  space  of  one  or  two 
centuries.  The  Gatha  dialect  is,  therefore,  only  one  or  two 
centuries  older  than  the  ordinary  Avesta  language,  which 
was  the  standard  language  of  the  ancient  Iranian  empire. 


76  THE  AVESTA  LANGUAGE. 

Miicli  of  the  difficulty  of  understanding  the  Zend-Avesta 
arises,  no  doubt,  from  grammatical  defects  in  the  texts 
extant,  owing  to  the  want  of  grammatical  studies  among 
the  ancient  Persians  and  Bactrians.  Had  the  study  of 
grammar,  as  a  separate  science,  flourished  among  the  an- 
cient Mobads  and  Dasturs,  as  was  the  case  with  Sanskrit 
grammar  among  the  ancient  Brahmans,  and  had  Iran  pro- 
duced men  like  Panini,  Katyayana,  and  Patanjali,  who 
became  lawgivers  of  the  classical  Sanskrit  language,  we 
should  have  less  ground  to  comjDlain  of  the  bad  condition 
of  the  texts,  and  have  found  fewer  difficulties  in  explain- 
ing them  than  we  have  now  to  encounter.  There  is  every 
reason  to  believe  that  the  grammar  of  the  Bactrian  lan- 
guage was  never  fixed  in  any  way  by  rules;  tlius  the 
corruptions  and  abbreviations  of  forms,  which  gradually 
crept  from  the  popular  and  colloquial  into  the  written 
language,  became  unavoidable.  In  Sanskrit  the  gramma- 
rians built,  by  means  of  numerous  rules,  under  which  every 
regular  or  irregular  form  in  that  language  was  brought,  a 
strong  bulwark  against  the  importation  of  forms  from  the 
popular  and  vulgar  language,  which  was  characterised  by 
them  as  Prakrit.l  Grammar  became  a  separate  branch  of 
study ;  manuscripts  were  then  either  copied  or  written  in 
strict  accordance  with  the  rules  of  grammar,  but  always 

1  Oue  must  not,  however,  lose  sight  mar  is  no  exception  to  the  general 
of  the  fact  that  a  language  is  not  made  rule  that  laws  are  hurtful  unless  sub- 
by  grammarians,  but  by  the  common  ject  to  constant  revision  ;  for  a  law 
people  whom  they  despise.  The  work  that  cannot  be  altered  becomes  a 
of  gramnKirians  is  merely  to  take  tlie  dogma,  an  impediment  to  discussion, 
language  as  they  find  it,  and  try  to  progress,  and  improvement,  whether 
ascertain  what  rules  tliey  can  manu-  it  be  grammatical,  medical,  legal, 
facture  to  account  for  tlie  various  scientific,  social,  or  religious.  Whe- 
forms  and  idioms  used  by  the  people  ther  the  stoppage  of  Hindu  progress 
around  them.  So  long  as  such  rules  in  knowledge  beyond  a  certain  point 
are  laid  down  merely  as  explanations  be  not  due  to  the  excessive  sj'stema- 
of  existing  facts,  they  will  be  useful  tising  adopted  by  their  writers  when 
to  the  scholar,  and  will  not  impede  they  approached  that  point,  is  a  mat- 
progress  ;  but  once  let  them  be  enun-  ter  worth  consideration.  Arrived  at 
ciated  as  inflexible  laws,  unalterable  a  certain  amount  of  progress,  they 
as  those  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,  ceased  to  look  forward,  but  contented 
inid  then  they  hinder  progress,  ossify  themselves  with  surveying  and  ar- 
thought,  and  stop  discovery.     Gram-  ranging  what  they  already  knew. 


THE  AVESTA  LANGUAGE.  -j-j 

•with  attention  to  plionetical  peculiarities,  especially  in 
Vedic  books,  if  tliey  had  any  real  foundation.  To  these 
grammatical  studies  of  the  Brahmans,  which  belong  to  an 
age  long  gone  by,  we  chiefly  owe  the  wonderfully  correct 
and  accurately  grammatical  state  of  the  texts  of  the  Vedas 
and  other  revered  books  of  antiquity.  In  Iran  almost  all 
knowledge  of  the  exact  meaning  of  the  terminations  di-ed 
out  at  the  time  when  the  ancient  Iranian  languages  under- 
went the  cliange  from  inflected  to  uninflected  idioms. 
Books  were  extant,  and  learnt  by  heart  for  religious  pur- 
poses, as  is  still  done  by  the  Parsi  priests.  But  when  the 
language  of  the  Zoroastrian  books  had  become  dead,  there 
were  no  means  for  the  priests,  who  cared  more  for  the  mere 
mechanical  recital  of  the  sacred  texts  than  for  a  real  know- 
ledge of  their  meaning,  to  prevent  corruptions  of  the  texts. 
Ignorant  of  anything  like  grammar,  they  copied  them  me- 
chanically, like  the  monks  of  Europe  in  the  middle  ages, 
or  wrote  them  from  memory,  and,  of  course,  full  of  blun- 
ders and  mistakes.  On  this  account  we  find  the  copies 
now  used  by  Mobads  and  Dasturs  in  a  most  deplorable 
condition  as  regards  grammar ;  the  terminations  are  often 
written  as  separate  words,  and  vowels  inserted  where  they 
ought  to  be  omitted,  in  accordance  with  the  wrong  pronun- 
ciation of  the  writer.  The  best  text,  comparatively  speak- 
ing, is  to  be  found  in  the  oldest  copies ;  while  in  Vedic 
manuscripts  (if  written  for  religious  purposes)  there  is  not 
the  slightest  difference,  whether  they  are  many  centuries 
old  or  copied  at  the  present  day.  Westergaard  has  taken 
great  trouble  to  give  a  correct  text,  according  to  the  oldest 
manuscripts  accessible  to  him,  and  his  edition  is,  in  most 
cases,  far  preferable  to  the  manuscripts  used  by  the  priests 
of  modern  times.  If  older  manuscripts  than  those  used 
by  Westergaard  be  known  to  the  Dasturs,  they  should  con- 
sider it  their  bounden  duty  to  procure  them  for  the  purpose 
of  collation  with  Westergaard's  valuable  edition,  so  that 
they  may  ascertain  all  preferable  readings  for  their  own 
information  and  that  of  other  scholars.     Why  will  they 


7S 


THE  PAH  LA  VI  LANGUAGE. 


remain  behind  the  Brahmans  and  the  Jews,  who  have 
preserved  their  sacred  writings  so  w.eir,  and  facilitated 
modern  researches  to  so  great  an  extent  ?  The  era  for  a 
sound  philological  explanation  of  the  time-hallowed  frag- 
ments of  the  Zoroastrian  writings  has  come,  and  the  Das- 
turs,  as  the  spiritual  guides  of  the  Parsi  community,  should 
take  a  chief  part  in  it.  The  darkness  in  which  much  of 
their  creed  is  enshrouded  should  be  dispelled ;  but  tlie  only- 
way  of  obtaining  so  desirable  a  result  is  by  the  diffusion  of 
a  sound  and  critical  knowledge  of  the  A  vesta  lansjuage. 

II. — THE   PAIILAVI   LANGUAGE   AND   PAZAND. 


It  has  been  already  noticed  (p.  6']^  that  after  the  five 
centuries  of  obscurity,  and  probable  anarchy,!  which  fol- 
lowed the  death  of  Alexander,  when  we  next  meet  with 
the  vernacular  language  of  Western  Iran,  it  has  assumed 
the  form  of  Pahlavi,  the  name  generally  applied  to  the 
language  of  the  inscriptions  of  the  Sasanian  dynasty, 
whether  on  rocks  or  coins. 

Various  interpretations  of  the  word  PaMavi  have  been 
proposed.  Anquetil  derives  it  from  the  Persian  paJilu, 
"  side,"  in  which  case  Pahlavi  would  mean  "  the  frontier 
language ; "  but  although  this  opinion  has  been  held  by 
some  scholars,  it  can  hardly  be  correct,  as  it  is  difficult  to 
imagine  that  a  frontier  language  could  have  spread  over  a 
vast  empire.  It  has  also  been  connected  with  j:7aA/ai',  "  a 
hero,"  but  "  the  hero  language "  is  a  very  improbable 
designation.  Native  lexicographers  have  traced  Pahlavi 
to  the  name  Pahlav  of  a  town  and  province ;  that  it  was 
not  the  language  of  a  town  only,  is  evident  from  Pirdausi's 
statements  that  the  Pahlavi  traditions  were  preserved  by 
the  clihgdn, "  village  chief; "  it  may  have  been  the  language 


1  '  In  the  K;'irnamali  of  Artaklisliir-i 
'  Pilpak&n  it  was  written  that  after 
'  the  death,  of  Alexander  of  Iliini, 
'  there  were  240  small  rulers  of  the 
'  country  of  Airan.     The  warriors  of 


Pars  and  the  borders  adjacent  to  it 
were  in  the  hands  of  a  chieftain  of 
Ardavan.  Papak  was  governor  and 
sovereign  of  Fars,  and  was  appointed 
by  Ardavan.' — Karnamak-i  A.  P. 


THE  PAHLAVI  LANGUAGE.  79 

of  a  province,  but  the  province  of  Pahlav  is  said  to  have 
included  Ispahan,  Eai,  Hamadan,  Nihavand,  and  Adar- 
baijan,  and  must  have  comprised  the  ancient  Media,  but 
that  country  is  never  called  Pahlav  by  Persian  and  Arab 
historians.  Quatremere  was  of  opinion  that  Pahlav  was 
identical  with  the  province  Parthia,  mentioned  by  the 
Greeks ;  he  shows,  by  reference  to  Armenian  authors,  that 
pahlav  w^as  a  royal  title  of  tlie  Arsacidans.  As  the 
Parthians  regarded  themselves  as  the  most  warlike  people 
of  the  Orient,  it  is  not  surprising  iYi'o.t  pahlav  and  pahlavd7i 
in  Persian,  and  palhav  or  pahlav,  and  jpahlavig  or  palhavig 
in  Armenian,  became  appellations  for  a  warrior ;  the  name 
thus  lost  its  national  meaning  altogether,  and  became  only 
a  title  for  bold  champions  of  old.  It  spread  beyond  the 
frontiers  of  Iran  eastwards  to  India,  for  we  find  the, 
Pahlavas  mentioned  as  a  mighty  foreign  nation  in  the 
Eamayana,  Mahabharata,  and  the  Laws  of  Manu,  and  we 
can  only  understand  them  to  have  been  the  Persians.  Ee- 
garding  the  origin  of  the  word,  we  may  compare  it  with 
pdhlum,  "  excellent,"  but  cannot  derive  it  therefrom. 

As  the  name  of  a  nation,  we  can  discover  it  only  in  the 
Parthva  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions,  which  is  the  Parthia 
of  the  Greeks  and  Eomans.  The  change  oi parthva  into 
pahlav  is  not  surprising,  as  I  is  not  discoverable  in  the 
ancient  Iranian  tongues,  where  r  is  used  instead,  and  th  in 
the  middle  of  an  ancient  Iranian  word  generally  becomes 
h  in  Persian,  as  in  Av.  mithra  =  Pers.  'mihi7\  It  may  be 
objected  that  the  Parthians  were  not  Persians  but  pro- 
bably a  Scythic  race,  and  that  Pahlavi  could  not  have  been 
the  language  of  the  Parthians.  This  objection,  however, 
will  not  hold  good  when  we  consider  that  the  Parthians 
were  the  actual  rulers  of  Persia  for  nearly  five  hundred 
years,  and  made  themselves  respected  and  famous  every- 
where by  their  fierce  and  successful  contests  with  the 
mightiest  nation  of  the  ancient  world,  the  Eomans.  It  is 
not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  name  which  once  struck 
such  terror  into  the  hearts  of  Eoman  generals  and  emperors 


Ho  THE  PA  HLA  VI  LANG UA  GE. 

was  remembered  in  Persia,  and  that  everything  connected 
with  antiquity,  whether  in  history,  religion,  letters,  writing, 
or  language,  was  called  falilavi,  or  belonging  to  the  ancient 
rulers  of  the  country,  the  Parthians.  Pahlavi  thus  means, 
in  fact,  nothing  but  "  ancient  Persian  "  in  general,  without 
restriction  to  any  particular  period  or  dialect.  This  we 
may  see  from  the  use  made  of  the  word  by  Mohammedan 
writers ;  thus,  Ibn  Hauqal,  an  Arab  geographer  of  the 
tenth  century,  when  describing  the  province  of  Pars,  the 
ancient  Persis,  states  that  three  languages  were  used  there, 
viz.  («)  the  Farsi  (Persian),  spoken  by  the  natives  when 
conversing  with  one  another,  which  was  spread  all  over 
Persia,  and  understood  everywhere ;  (5)  the  Pahlavi,  which 
was  the  language  of  the  ancient  Persians,  in  which  the 
Magi  wrote  their  historical  records,  but  which  in  the 
writer's  time  could  not  be  understood  by  the  inhabitants 
of  the  province  without  a  translation ;  (c)  the  Arabic,  which 
was  used  for  all  official  documents.  Of  other  lancjuases 
spoken  in  Persia  he  notices  the  Khuzi,  the  language  of 
Kliiizistan,  which  he  states  to  be  quite  different  from 
Hebrew,  Syriac,  or  Farsi.  In  the  Mujmilu-t-tawarikh  there 
is  an  account  of  "  Pahlavi "  inscriptions  at  Persepolis, 
but  the  writer  evidently  means  those  in  cuneiform  char- 
acters. 

From  all  this  we  may  clearly  see  that  the  name  Pahlavi 
was  not  limited  to  any  particular  period  or  district.  In 
the  time  of  Firdausi  (a.d.  iooo),  the  cuneiform  writing  as 
well  as  the  Sasanian  inscriptions  passed  for  Pahlavi  char- 
acters ;  and  the  ancient  Persian  and  Avesta  were  regarded 
as  Pahlavi,  equally  with  the  official  language  of  the 
Sasanian  period,  to  which  the  term  has  been  now  restricted, 
since  the  others  have  become  better  known.  The  term 
Pahlavi  was  thus,  in  fact,  never  used  by  the  Persians 
themselves  in  any  other  sense  than  that  of  "ancient 
Persian,"  whether  they  referred  to  the  Sasanian,  Arsacidan, 
Achffimenian,  Kayanian,  or  Peshdadian  times.  Any  reader 
of  the  Shrdmamah  will  arrive  at  this  conclusion.      This 


THE  PAHLAVI  LANGUAGE.  8l 

misapplication  of  a  more  recent  name  to  earlier  historical 
facts  is  analogous  to  the  misuse  of  the  appellation  Animdk, 
"  Eoman,"  which  the  Parsi  writers  aj)ply  to  Alexander,  the 
Macedonian  conqueror,  because  he  entered  the  Persian 
empire  from  the  quarter  where  the  Eoman  armies  appeared 
in  later  times. 

However  loosely  the  term  Pahlavi  may  have  been  for- 
merly applied,  it  has  long  been  practically  restricted  to  the 
written  language  of  Persia  during  the  Sasanian  dynasty, 
and  to  the  literature  of  that  period  and  a  short  time  after, 
of  which  some  fragments  have  been  preserved  by  the 
Parsis,  in  a  character  resembling  that  of  the  Avesta,  but 
very  deficient  in  distinct  letters.  These  Pahlavi  writings 
are  of  a  very  peculiar  character :  instead  of  presenting  us 
with  a  pure  Iranian  dialect  (as  might  be  expected  in  the 
language  of  a  period  commencing  with  the  purely  Iranian 
ancient  Persian,  and  ending  with  the  nearly  equally  pure 
Iranian  language  of  Firdausi),  it  exhibits  a  large  admixture 
of  Semitic  words,  which  increases  as  we  trace  it  further 
back,  so  that  the  earliest  inscriptions  of  the  Sasanian 
dynasty  may  be  described  as  being  written  in  a  Semitic 
language,  with  some  admixture  of  Iranian  words,  and  a 
prevailing  Iranian  construction.  Traces  of  the  Semitic 
portion  of  the  Palilavi  can  be  found  on  coins  of  the  third 
and  fourth  century  B.C.,  and  possibly  on  some  tablets  found 
at  Nineveh,  which  must  be  as  old  as  the  seventh  century 
B.C. ;  so  there  is  some  reason  to  suppose  that  it  may  be 
derived  from  one  of  the  dialects  of  the  Assyrian  language, 
although  it  differs  considerably  from  the  language  of  the 
Assyrian  cuneiform  inscriptions.  Practically,  however,  our 
acquaintance  with  Pahlavi  commences  with  the  inscrip- 
tions of  the  first  Sasanian  kings  on  rocks  and  coins. 

Since  the  Mohammedan  conquest  of  Persia,  the  language 
has  become  greatly  mixed  with  Semitic  words  from  the 
Arabic,  but  this  Semitic  admixture  is  of  a  totally  different 
character  to  that  we  find  in  Pahlavi.  The  Arabic  element 
in  modern  Persian   consists   chiefly  of  substantives  and 


82  THE  PAHLAVI  LANGUAGE. 

adjectives,  referring  to  religion,  literature,  or  science  ;  few 
particles  or  verbs  have  been  adopted,  except  when  whole 
phrases  have  been  borrowed;  in  fact,  the  Arabic  words, 
although  very  numerous,  are  evidently  borrowed  from  a 
foreign  language.     The  Semitic  element  in  Palilavi  writ- 
ings, on  the  contrary,  comprises  nearly  all  kinds  of  words 
which  are  not  Arabic  in  modern  Persian ;  almost  all  pro- 
nouns, prepositions,  conjunctions,  and  common  verbs,  many 
.  adverbs  and  substantives  in  frequent  use,  the  first  ten 
numerals,  but  very  few  adjectives,  are    Semitic ;   wliile 
nearly  every  Arabic  word  in  modern  Persian  would  be  re- 
presented by  an  Iranian  one  in  Pahlavi  writings.     It  is 
optional,  however,  to  use  Iranian  equivalents  for  any  of 
these  Semitic  words   when  WTiting   Pahlavi,  -but    these 
equivalents  are  rarely  used  for  some  of  the  pronouns,  pre- 
positions, and  conjunctions  ;  so  rarely,  indeed,  that  the 
orthography  of  a  few  of  them  is  uncertain,     Notwithstand- 
ing the  Semitic  appearance  of  the  written  Pahlavi,  we  find 
that  all  traces  of  Semitic  inflexions  have  disappeared,  except 
in  a  few  of  the  earliest  Sasanian  inscriptions,  written  in  a 
peculiar  character  and  dialect,  called  Chalda3o-Palilavi,  in 
which  the  Chaldee  plural  suiSx  in  is  still  often  used,  as  in 
malMn  malka  ,  "  king  of  kings,"  instead  of  malkdn  malkd 
in  the  ordinary  Sasanian  Pahlavi  inscriptions  of  the  same 
age,  where  the  Iranian  plural  suffix  an  is  used.     Besides 
this  Iranian  suffix  to  nouns,  we  find  the  verbs  appearing  in 
one  unchangeable  Semitic  form,  to  which  is  added  certain 
Iranian  suffixes,  except  in  the  earliest  inscriptions  in  Sasa- 
nian Pahlavi,  where  these  suffixes  are  wanting.    In  addition 
to  these  indications  of  Iranian  grammar,  we  also  find  a 
prevailing  Iranian'  construction  in  the  sentences,  as  much 
in  the  older  inscriptions  as  in  the  later  writings. 

The  explanation  of  this  extraordinary  compound  writ- 
ing, fundamentally  Semitic  in  its  words  and  Iranian  in  its 
construction,  is  that  it  never  literally  represented  the 
spoken  language  of  any  nation.  The  Iranians  must  have 
inherited  their  writing  from  a  Semitic  people,  and  although 


.      THE  PAHLAVI LANGUAGE.  83 

tliey  were  acquainted  with  the  separate  sounds  of  each  of 
the  letters,  they  preferred  transferring  the  Semitic  words 
bodily,  so  as  to  represent  the  same  ideas  in  their  own  Ira- 
nian language,  and  each  Semitic  word,  so  transferred,  was 
merely  an  ideogram,'  and  would  be  read  with  the  sound  of 
the  corresponding  Iranian  word,  without  reference  to  the 
sounds  of  the  letters  composing  it ;  thus  the  Persians  wrote 
the  old  Semitic  word  malkd,  "  king,"  but  they  pronounced 
it  shah.  When  the  Semitic  words  had  more  than  one 
grammatical  form,  they  would,  for  the  sake  of  uniformity 
be  usually  borrowed  in  one  particular  form,  and  probably 
in  the  form  which  occurred  most  frequently  in  the  Semitic 
writings.  As  these  ideograms  were  to  represent  an  Iranian 
language,  they  would  be  arranged,  of  course,  according  to 
Iranian  syntax.  For  certain  words  the  writer  could  find 
no  exact  Semitic  equivalent,  especially  for  Iranian  names 
and  religious  terms  ;  to  express  them  he  had  recourse  to 
the  alphabet,  and  wrote  these  words  as  they  were  pro- 
nounced ;  thus  laying  the  foundation  of  the  Iranian  element 
in  the  Pahlavi.  As  the  Semitic  ideos;rams  remained  un- 
changed,!  it  was  necessary  to  add  Iranian  suffixes  to  indicate 
the  few  grammatical  forms  which  survived  in  the  spoken 
language ;  these  additions  appear  to  have  been  .only  gra- 
dually made,  for  the  sake  of  greater  precision,  as  some  of 
them  are  not  found  in  the  older  inscriptions.  In  later 
writings  we  find  a  few  other  Iranian  additions  to  Semitic 
words,  used  generally  to  indicate  some  modification  of  the 
original  word ;  thus  alii  =  2)id,  "  father,"  is  altered  into 
ciMdar  =]pidar  ;.am  r=  mad,  "mother,"  into  amtdar  =  mddar; 
&c.  In  these  later  writings,  we  also  find  the  proportion  of 
the  Semitic  element  considerably  reduced,  being  confined 
to  the  representation  of  some  three  to  four  hundred  of  the 
commonest  words  in  the  language,  while  aU  other  words 
are  Iranian,  written  as  they  are  pronounced. 

1  The  only  exceptions  extant  seem  tions  before  mentioned  (p.  82)  ;  bnt 
to  be  a  few  Semitic  plurals  in  -hi  even  these  are  used  in  phrases  of  Ira- 
found  in  the  Chaldseo-Pahlavi  inscrip-    nian  construction. 


84  THE  PAHLAVI  LANGUAGE.       . 

As  a  proof  tliat  the  Persians  did  not  use  the  Semitic 
words  in  speaking,  we  may  quote  the  statement  of  Ammi- 
anus  Marcelliuus  (xix.  2,  11).  When  referring  to  the  war 
between  the  Eoman  Emperor  Constantius  and  Shahpiihar 
II.,  about  A.D.  350,  he  says  that  the  Persians  used  the 
terms  saansaan  ajid  pyrosen,  meaning  "  king  of  kings  "  and 
"  conqueror."  Both  these  terms  are  Iranian,  the  first  being 
shdlidn-shdh,  and  the  latter  piruz,  "  victorious,"  and  show 
conclusively  that  the  Persians  of  those  times  did  not  pro- 
nounce nialhdn  malkd,  although  they  wrote  those  words, 
but  they  both  wrote  and  pronounced  2nruz,  which  has  no 
Semitic  equivalent  in  Pahlavi.  More  than  four  centuries 
later,  Ibn  Muqaffa,  a  Mohammedan  \^T.'iter  of  the  latter  half 
of  the  eighth  century,  states  that  the  Persians  '  possess  a 
'  kind  of  spelling  which  they  call  zavdrish  ;  they  write  by 
'  it  the  characters  connected  as  well  as  separated,  and  it 
'  consists  of  about  a  thousand  words  (which  are  put  toge- 
'  ther),  in  order  to  distinguish  those  which  have  the  same 
'  meaning.  For  instance,  if  somebody  intends  to  write 
'  gosht,  that  is  lakJim  (meat)  in  Arabic,  he  writes  hisrd,  but 
'  reads  gosht ;  and  if  somebody  intends  to  write  oidn,  that 
'  is  khulz  (bread)  in  Arabic,  he  \mtes  laJimd,  but  reads 
'  nan.  And  in  this  manner  they  treat  aR  words  that  they 
'  intend  to  write.  Only  things  which  do  not  require  such 
'  a  change  are  -vratten  just  as  they  are  pronounced.'  It 
appears  from  this  that  the  Persians  of  the  eighth  century 
did  exactly  as  a  Parsi  priest  would  do  at  the  present 
time  ;  when  they  came  to  a  Semitic  Avord  while  reading 
Pahlavi,  they  pronounced  its  Persian  equivalent,  so  that 
their  reading  was  entirely  Persian,  although  the  writing 
was  an  odd  mixture  of  Semitic,  Persian,  and  hybrid  words. 
It  was  always  optional  to  write  the  Persian  word  instead 
of  its  Semitic  equivalent,  and  it  was  only  necessary  to  make 
this  the  rule,  instead  of  the  exception,  to  convert  the  old 
Pahlavi  into  pure  Persian.  This  final  step  became  com- 
pulsory when  the  Persians  adopted  a  new  alpliabet,  with 
which  the  old  Semitic  ideograms  would  not  amalgamate, 


THE  PAHLA  VI  LANGUA GE.  85 

Init  which  facilitated  the  adoption  of  Arabic  terms  intro- 
duced by  their  Mohammedan  conquerors.  Hence  the 
sudden  change  from  Pahlavi  to  modern  Persian  was  rather 
a  change  in  writing  than  an  alteration  in  speaking.  The 
spoken  language  changed  but  slowly,  by  the  gradual  adop- 
tion of  Arabic  words  and  phrases,  as  may  be  seen  from  a 
comparison  of  the  language  of  Firdausi  with  that  of  recent 
Persian  writers. 

Ibn  Muqaffa  uses  the  term  zavdrish  for  the  Semitic  ele- 
ment in  Pahlavi,  and  this  is  the  term  usually  employed  in 
Persian,  although  written  occasionally  azvdrish  ovuzvctrsh; 
in  Palilavi  it  is  written  Jmzvdrish  or  cmzvdrishn,  but  it  is 
doubtful  if  the  word  occurs  in  any  very  old  writings. 
Several  attempts  have  been  made  to  explain  its  etymology, 
but  as  its  correct  form  is  by  no  means  certain,  it  affords 
very  little  basis  for  trustworthy  etymology.  The  term 
Huzvarish  is  applied  not  only  to  the  Semitic  ideograms, 
but  also  to  a  smaller  number  of  Iranian  words  written  in 
an  obsolete  manner,  so  as  to  be  liable  to  incorrect  pronun- 
ciation ;  these  obsolete  Iranian  written  forms  are  used  as 
ideograms  in  the  same  manner  as  the  old  Semitic  words. 
The  habit  of  not  pronouncing  the  Huzvarish  as  it  is  written 
must  have  tended  to  produce  forgetfulness  of  the  original 
pronunciation  of  the  words ;  this  was  to  some  extent  ob- 
viated by  the  compilation  of  a  glossary  of  the  Huzvarish 
forms,  with  their  pronunciation  in  Avesta  characters,  as 
well  as  their  Iranian  equivalents.  When  this  glossary  was 
compiled  is  uncertain,  but  as  the  pronunciation  of  some  of 
the  Huzvfirish  words  is  evidently  merely  guessed  from  the 
appearance  of  the  letters,  we  may  conclude  that  the  true 
sounds  of  some  of  the  words  were  already  forgotten. 

It  has  been  already  noticed  (p.  68)  that  Pahlavi  trans- 
lations of  the  Avesta  are  called  Zand,  and  we  may  here 
further  observe  that  the  Iranian  equivalent  of  Huzvarish 
is  called  Pazand,  reserving  further  explanation  of  these 
terms  for  the  third  Essay.  This  Pazand  may  be  written  in 
Pahlavi  characters,  as  happens  when  single  Pazand  words 


S6  •  THE  PAH  LA  VI  LANGUAGE. 

are  substituted  for  their  Huzvarish  equivalents  in  a  Pali- 
lavi  text ;  or  it  iiiay  be  written  in  Avesta  characters^  which 
happens  when  the  whole  text  is  so  transliterated,  and  is 
then  called  a  Pazand  text ;  or  this  Pazand  text  may  be 
further  transliterated  into  the  modern  Persian  character, 
when  it  is  still  called  Pazand,  and  differs  from  the  Iranian 
element  of  modern  Persian  only  in  its  frequent  use  of  ob- 
solete words,  forms,  and  construction.  It  would  be  conve- 
nient to  call  this  Persian  form  of  Pazand  by  the  name 
Parsi,  but  it  is  not  so  caUed  by  the  Parsis  themselves,  nor 
in  their  books ;  with  them,  Parsi  or  Parsi  means  simply 
modern  Persian,  more  or  less  similar  to  Pirdausi's  lansuao-e 

It  has  been  mentioned  above  that  it  would  be  easy  to 
forget  the  pronunciation  of  the  Huzvarish  words,  and  it  is 
now  necessary  to  explain  how  this  could  be.  The  Pahlavi 
alphabets,  being  of  Semitic  origin,  have  not  only  aU  the 
usual  deficiencies  of  other  Semitic  alphabets,  but  also  some 
defects  peculiar  to  themselves,  so  that  several  sounds  are 
sometimes  represented  by  the  same  letter ;  this  ambiguity 
is  greatly  increased,  in  Pahlavi  books,  by  the  union  of  two 
or  more  of  these  ambiguous  letters  into  one  compound 
character,  which  is  sometimes  precisely  similar  to  one  of  the 
other  single  letters ;  the  uncertainty  of  reading  any  word, 
therefore,  which  is  not  readily  identified  is  very  great.  No 
short  vowels  are  expressed,  except  initial  a,  but  it  is  pre- 
sumed they  are  to  be  understand  where  necessary,  as  in  all 
Semitic  alphabets. 

Two  or  three  of  the  earliest  rock  mscriptious  of  the 
Sasanian  kings  record  the  names  and  titles  of  Ardashir-i 
Papakim  and  his  son  Shahpiihar  I.  (a.'d.  226-270)  in  three 
languages,  Greek  and  two  dialects  of  Pahlavi.  The  Pah- 
lavi versions  are  engraved  in  two  very  different  characters, 
one  called  Chald^o-Pahlavi,  from  some  resemblances  to 
Chaldee  in  letters  and  forms,  the  other  called  Sasanian 
Pahlavi,  as  being  more  generally  used  by  the  Sasanian 
kings  in  their  inscriptions,  both  on  rocks  and  coins.  This 
latter  character  changes  by  degrees,  on  the  coins  of  the 


THE  PAHLAVI  LANGUAGE.  S7 

later  Sasanian  kings,  till  it  becomes  nearly  identical  with 
the  Pahlavi  character  in  the  manuscripts  still  extant ;  while 
the  Chaldffio-Pahlavi  appears  to  have  gone  out  of  use  be- 
fore A.D.  300.  Two  more  inscriptions,  of  greater  length, 
are  engraved  in  both  these  Pahlavi  dialects,  but  without 
any  Greek  translation ;  of  one  of  these  inscriptions  only  a 
few  fragments  are  yet  known,  but  the  other  is  complete, 
and  we  may  take  it  as  a  specimen  of  the  Pahlavi  writings 
of  the  early  Sasanian  times,  as  it  refers  to  Iving  Shahpuhar 
I.  (a.d,  240-270). 

This  inscription  is  engraved  on  two  separate  tablets  (one 
for  each  dialect),  cut  on  the  rock- wall  at  the  entrance  of  a 
cave  near  the  village  of  Hajiabad,  not  far  from  the  ruins  of 
Persepolis.  Copies  of  the  two  versions  were  published  by 
Westergaard  at  tlie  end  (pp.  83,  84)  of  his  lithographed 
edition  of  the  text  of  the  Bundahish.  Plaster  casts  of  the 
whole  of  the  Chaldneo-Palilavi,  and  of  the  first  six  lines  of 
the  Sasanian  Pahlavi  version,  are  preserved  in  the  British 
Museum  and  elsewhere ;  and  a  photograph  from  one  set 
of  these  casts  was  published  by  Thomas  in  the  "  Journal 
of  the  Ptoyal  Asiatic  Society,"  new  series,  vol.  iii.  From  a 
comparison  of  these  copies  Avith  the  photograph  we  obtain 
the  following  texts,  the  words  of  one  version  being  placed 
immediately  below  those  of  the  other  for  the  sake  of  con- 
venient comparison,  and  short  vowels  being  introduced 
where  they  seem  necessary. 

TEXTS    OF   THE   PAHLAVI   INSCKIPTIONS  AT   HAJliBiD. 

[Sasanian  Pahlavi.]— yar/aW/zi  zenman'^  It  masdayasn  hagt  Shahpilhart, 
[CHALDiEO-PAHLAVl.]— Karzavanizenman  li  mazdayazn  alaha  Sbabipiihari, 

malkdn  malM  Airdn  va  Anirdn,   mind-chitrt  min  yaztdn,   barman  maz- 
malkin   malka  Aryan  va  Anaryan,  mino-sliihar  min   yAztan,      bari      maz- 


1  The  syllable  man  is  represented  man,  lanman,  and  yadman,  as  well  as 

by  a  single  letter  in  both  characters,  in  the  uncommon  forms  qadmatman, 

which  evidently  corresponds  with  the  atarman,  and  panman.     In  tamman 

common  Pahlavi  termination  man,  as  the  syllable  man  corresponds  to  mdn 

we  find  it  here  in  the  common  Pah-  in  Chaldee,  but  in  other  words  we 

lavi  words  zenman  (=  denman),  bar-  must  suppose  it  to  represent  an  origi- 

man,  ragcbnan,  valman,  tamman,  ho-  nal  vdn,  vain,  or  an.     Thomas  reads 


88  THE  PAHLA  VI  LANG UA GE. 

dayasn  iagt  ArtaMshatar,  malkdn  malkd  Atrdn,  mind-chitrt  min  yaztdn, 
dayazn  alahk  Artakhshatar,  malktn    malka  Aryan,  mino-slilhar  min  yfl-ztan, 

napt         bagt  Pdpakt  malkd ;  afan  amat      zenman         khitayd  shadt- 
piiliaii  i)<ihar  bag    Piipak  malka ;     va     amat  Ian  zenman  kliireraya  sha- 

iun,  adtnan  levhit  shatradardn  va  harhitdn  va  vacharkdn  va  dzdtan 
(lit,     qadmatman      khsliatradarin, .       barbitan,  rabd,n        va    azAtan 

shaditun,   afan  ragelman  pavan  zenman    dikt   hankhetiln,   afan    khitayd 
shadit,  nagarin     patan    zenman    vem    baqaimdt,     va     kbii-eraya. 

lechadH  zak  clutdk  hard  ramttun,  hard  valman  vaydk  atk  khitayd  ramt- 
lebad  ^  lebii   sbiti  lebar^    ramit,     bisb        tamman      an<l  kbireraya    naflat 

tun,  tamman  vaydk  zak  argHn  Id  yehvitn,  atk  hat  chttdk  chitt  human,  adtu 
■    lebavind,  atarman  la  yeh-ilt,   aik   ak    sbiti  banit  bavindd,    kal 

htrilni  patydk  yehvUn  human;    akhar   lannian    framdt :      Min6 

lebara  sbadedra  Jxkasi  yebut  bavinde ;  adin  Ian  adpadisbt  :  Mino 
chttdkt    ailrundart      chtti,  minu  yadman  ketab   human,  zak  ragelman 

sbiti    panman  satar  banit,  avat  mino    yada    kedab  bavint,  nagarin 

pavan  zenman  dikt  ayH  hankhetUn,  va  khitayd  val  zak  chttdkt  ayil 
patan  zenman  v6m  bip  baqaimCid,  va  kbireraya  kal  bil  sbiti  bip 
shaditun,   akhar  minu    khitayd     val  zak  cMtdk  ramttun ;  valman   yadman 

sbadyu,  mino  kbireraya  kal  bd    sbiti    yamzftd ;    lebdp         yada 

ketab. 
kedab  bavind. 

A  few  words  in  this  inscription  are  not  quite  intelligible, 
but  by  comparing  one  version  with  the  other,  which  corre- 
sponds closely  in  all  but  two  or  three  phrases,  we  can 
arrive  at  the  meaning  of  most  of  the  obscure  passages,  and 
translate  as  follows : — 

'This  is  an  edict  of  me,  the  Mazda-worshipping  divine 
'  being  Shahpuhar,  king  of  the  kings  of  Iran  and  non-Iran, 
'  of  spiritual  origin  from  God;  son  of  the  Mazda- worshipping 
'  divine  being  Ardashir,  king  of  the  kings  of  Iran,  of  spiritual 
'  origin  from  God ;  grandson  of  the  divine  being  Papak,  the 
'  king.  And  when  this  arrow  2  was  shot  by  us,  then  it  was 
'  shot  by  us  in  the  jiresence  of  the  satraps,  grandees,  mag- 

tbe  letter  t,  because  it  resembles  t  in  traditional  man  on  tbe  autbority  of 

some  old   alpbabets.     For  a  similar  tbe  Cbaldee  tammdn,  and  because  wo 

reason  Andreas  reads  it  d.     Tbomas  do  not  see    wliy  tbere  sbould  be   a 

points  to  the  correspondence  of  bar-  second  d  in  tbe  alphabet. 

man,  in  one  dialect  of  our  text,  witb        ^  Andreas  reads  tbis  word  lechad, 

hart  in  tbe  otber.     Andreas  points  to  as  tbe  h  is  peculiarly  formed,  and  may 

a  similar  correspondence  of  yadman  perhaps  represent  tbe  letter  tsade,  or 

with  yadd ;  he  also  shows  that  the  c/t  in  Pahlavi. 

reading  d  overcomes  many  etymolo-        "  Tbe  form  of  the  word  is  plural, 

gical  difficulties.    "We  adhere  to  tbe  but  used  probably  for  the  singular. 


THE  PA HLA  VI  LANG UA  GE.  89 

'  nates,  and  nobles ;  and  our  feet  were  set  in  this  cave,  and 
'  the  arrow  was  shot  out  by  us  towards  that  target ;  but 
'  there  where  the  arrow  would  have  dropped  was  no  place 
'  (for  it),  where  if  a  target  were  constructed,  then  it  (the 
'  arrow)  would  have  been  manifest  outside ;  then  we  or- 
'  dered :  A  spirit  target  is  constructed  in  front,  thus  a  spirit 
'  hand  has  written  :  Set  not  the  feet  in  this  cave,  and  shoot 
'  not  an  arrow  at  that  target,  after  the  spirit  arrow  shot  at 
'  that  target ;  the  hand  has  %vritten  that.' 

Comparing  the  two  versions  of  this  inscription  with  the 
Pahlavi  of  the  manuscripts,  it  will  be  noticed  that  though 
the  Chaldseo-Pahlavi  differs  most,  it  still  corresponds  with 
the  manuscripts  to  the  extent  of  about  one-third  of  the 
words,  amongst  which  the  preposition  Izal,  "  to,  at,"  explains 
the  manuscript  ghal,  which  has  been  often  read  gJian  or 
ghu,  and  is  used  for  either  val  or  valman.  The  construc- 
tion of  the  Chaldfeo-Pahlavi  resembles  generally  that  of 
the  manuscript  Pahlavi,  but  it  does  not  suffix  the  pronoun 
to  the  initial  conjunction  or  adverb  in  each  phrase,  which 
is  a  peculiarity  of  Pahlavi  as  compared  with  modern  Per- 
sian, Furthermore,  the  Chaldceo-Palilavi  has  begun  to  use 
Iranian  terminations  to  Semitic  verbs,  as  t  in  haqdtmut, 
ycliut,  havint ;  d  in  lehavznd,  haqdimud,  ycmizud ;  and  the 
conditional  de  in  havtndS.  The  Sasanian  version  has  not 
advanced  to  that  stage  in  which  it  adopted  Iranian  termi- 
nations to  Semitic  verbs,  although  they  are  freely  used  in 
other  inscriptions  some  twenty  or  thirty  years  later ;  but 
in  all  other  respects  the  Sasanian  approaches  much  closer 
than  the  Chaldseo-Pahlavi  to  the  language  of  the  manu- 
scripts, about  two-thijds  of  the  words  being  identical,  and 
the  construction  of  the  sentences  precisely  the  same.  Thus 
we  find  the  pronoun  suffixed  to  the  initial  conjunction  or 
adverb  in  some  phrases,  as  in  a/an  and  adman,  only  the 
pronominal  suffix  is  Semitic ;  but  in  later  Sasanian  inscrip- 
tions we  find  Iranian  suffixes,  as  in  a/am  and  afasJi.  This 
inscription  leaves  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  idJidfai, 
or  relative  particle,  very  uncertain.     This  particle  is  nearly 


90  THE  PAHLAVI  LANGUAGE. 

always  expressed  in  Pahlavi  writings,!  and  not  merely 
understood,  as  it  is  generally  in  modern  Persian.  In  this 
inscrijjtion  several  words,  in  both  versions,  end  in  i,  but  as 
this  vowel  termination  cannot  be  the  idhdfat  in  some  eases, 
it  may  not  be  so  in  any.  Thus  in  the  Sasanian  version  the 
final  i  may  be  an  idhafat  in  lagi,  Shahpuliari,  napi,  PdpaU, 
levini,  and  possibly  in  chitri,  but  it  cannot  be  so  in  dikt, 
liruni,  and  cIntdM,  and  an  idhafat  is  wanting  after  malkd, 
harman,  Artakhshatar,  and  lechadiX.  In  the  Chaldfeo-Pah- 
lavi  version  the  final  i  may  be  an  idhafat  in  ShaMpuhari, 
lari,  and  puliari,  but  it  cannot  be  so  in  shiti  and  dkast, 
and  an  idhafat  is  wanting  after  alahd,  malkd,  Artakhsha- 
tar, puhar,  hag,  Pdpak,  and  lehad,  and  perhaps  ddtox  sMhar 
and  qadmatman.  The  omission  of  an  idhafat  after  malkd 
is  most  significant,  as  it  is  a  position  in  which  it  would  be 
expressed  even  in  modern  Persian ;  it  is,  therefore,  very 
doubtful  whether  any  final  i  is  intended  as  an  idhdfat.  In 
inscriptions  a  few  years  later  we  find  the  idhafat  in  the 
form  of  the  Semitic  relative  zi. 

To  compare  with  the  early  Sasanian  Pahlavi  of  the  in- 
scriptions, we  may  take,  as  a  specimen  of  the  manuscript 
Pahlavi,  a  passage  from  the  Karnamak-i  Ardashir  Papakan, 
in  which  the  Semitic  ideograms  are  given  in  italics,  and  a 
complete  Pazand  version,  in  Neryosangh's  orthography,2  is 
interUned;  so  that  the  upper  line  gives  the  text  as  it  is 
%vritten,  and  the  lower  as  it  is  pronounced : — 

[Pahlavi]. — Papak  amata.%h.  namak  di<J  auddhkiln  yehevund,  a/asli  pavan 
[Pazand].  —  P^pak      kash       iiama    did  auduhgiu        bdgl,        vash      pa 

pasuklio  val  Ardaklishir  kard  nipislit  atgh :  Laic  Id  danakyish  kard,  amat 
pasukh     6      Ardashir    kard  uavaslit  ku :     Tho  ne    damiiha     kard,     ka 

pavan  mindavam-1  viiJ.ii  ziykn  Id  ajash   sMyast  bddano,  ?ej'a<?naw  vajurgan 
pa  this-e  ke       zia    ne  azhash  sh^yast  bCidan,       awd,      guzurgan 

stejak  yedrilntano  milayd  drusht-advajyish  adbasli  giift.     Kevaii  bujishn 
stezba      burdan      sakhun  durusbt-^wazbiha,  havasb  guft.      Nun   bozlieshn 


^  A  few  exceptions  to  this  general  -  Derived  from  other  works,  as  no 

rule,  besides  unintentional  omissions,  version  of  the  Kamamak  by  Neryo- 

may  be  discovered,  especially  in  ma-  sangh  is  known, 
nuscripts  from  Persia. 


THE  PAHLAVI  LANGUAGE.  91 

yemalelun,  pavan  pedik-mdndak  ^  angar ;  niaman  d&n&kan  guft  yekavtmQ.n^(l 
go,  pa         pashemani       ang3.r;      chi       danaga   guft        ested 

atgh :  DCishman  pavan  dfiahman  zak  Id  tub&n  vakhcMnt&no  mAn  ^  asho  mard 
ku :    Dushman     pa     dushman  a   ne    tua         griftan         ke       asho  mard 

min  kflnishn-i  nafshman  adbash  rased.     Denmanich  gilft  yckaiimUned  aigh  : 
ezh  kuneslui-i     qesh       havash  rase^.         lu-clia      guft        ested  ku : 

Min  zak  atsh  mustavarmand  al  yehcviinih.  m'dn  javid  min  valman  Id  vijared. 
Ezh    a,     kas   raustavarmad  ma      bash        ke     jad    ezh      6i       ne  guz^red. 

Va  lak  benafshman  daned^  atgh  Ardav4a  madam,  li  va  lak  va  kahed&n 
U    tho  qad,  danae       ku     Ardavan     awar  men  u  tho   u      vasS,n 

anshHtd-l    den  geh^n  pavan  tand  va  khaya  va  chahUn  va  khvastak  kamkartar 
mardum-i  aildar  geha     pa       tan    u    jan     u     khir     u     qdsta     kamkartar 

padakhshai  aito.     Va  kevanich  andarj-i     li    val  lak  denman  sakhttar,  atgh 
padishah    hast.     U    nuii-cha  andarzh-i  men  6    tho       in.       sakhttar,    ku 

khadHkhnakih  va  f arman-biir<,Mr  *  vddUn^  nafshman-t&nii  varz  val  a^ib^n- 
euganal         u     farma-burdar         kun  qesh-tan     varz    6       avin- 

bdclih  al  avaspS,r. 
bildi  ma  awasp&r. 

This  passage  may  be  translated  as  follows : — '  Papak, 
'  when  lie  saw  the  letter,  became  anxious,  and  he  wrote  in 
'  reply  to  Ardashir  thus :  Thou  didst  unwisely,  when,  to 
'  carry  on  a  quarrel  with  the  great,  in  a  matter  from  which 
'  there  need  be  no  harm,  thou  spakest  words  fierce  and 
'  loudly  about  it.  Now  call  for  release,  and  recount  with 
'  sorrow ;  for  the  wise  have  said  that  an  enemy  is  not  able 
'  to  take  that,  fis  an  enemy, .  to  which  a  righteous  man 
'  attains  by  his  own  actions.  This  also  is  said :  Be  not  an 
'  antagonist  of  that  person,  away  from  whom  you  depart 
'  not.  And  thou  thyself  knowest  that  Ardavan  is  a  very 
'  despotic  sovereign  over  me  and  thee  and  many  men  in 
'  the  world,  as  to  body  and  life,  property  and  wealth.  And 
'  now  also  my  advice  to  thee  is  most  strongly  this,  that 
'  thou  practise  conciliation  thyself,  and  act  obediently,  and 
'  yield  not  to  want  of  foresight.' 

It  will  be  noticed  that  many  of  the  words  in  this  Pahlavi 

^  A  doubtful  word,  and  pashemani  no  difference  between  these  words  in 

is  merely  a  guess.  Pahlavd  writing. 

-  All  MSS.  have  kar(}ano  min,  and  ^  Plural  used  for  the  singular, 

no  doubt  some  old  copyist  has  read  ^  So  in  all  MSS.,  but  the  text  is 

vdddntano    (=  kardan)    instead    of  either  corrupt,   or  the   construction 

vakhddiitano  ( =  griftan),  there  being  peculiar. 


92  THE  PAH  LA  VI  LANGUAGE. 

text,  such  as  dicl,  hard,  nipisht,  &c.j  are  PazancI,  altliougli 
they  have  Semitic  or  Huzvarish  equivalents,  such  as 
hhadttund,  vddund,  ycUihund,  &c.,  which  might  have  been 
used.  This  is  generally  the  case  in  Pahlavi  manuscripts, 
as  it  is  quite  optional  for  the  writer  to  use  either  the 
Huzvarish  word  or  its  Pazand  equivalent,  except  perhaps 
in  the  case  of  some  of  the  particles  and  detached  pro- 
nouns, which  are  hardly  ever  used  in  theh  Pazand  form 
in  Pahlavi  writings.  It  is  necessary  to  observe  that  the 
proportion  of  Huzvarish  words  in  a  manuscript  is  no 
criterion  of  its  age,  but  merely  an  indication  of  the  style 
of  its  writer,  for  it  is  not  unusual  for  a  manuscript  of 
yesterday  to  contain  more  Huzvarish  than  one  of  the 
same  text  written  five  hundred  years  ago ;  though 
sometimes  the  case  is  reversed.  The  reason  for  this  un- 
certain use  of  Huzvarish  is  obvious ;  the  copyist  either 
knows  the  text  by  heart,  or  reads  it  from  a  manuscript, 
but  in  either  case  he  repeats  it  to  himself  in  Pazand,  so 
that  he  has  nothing  but  frequent  reference  to  the  original 
to  guide  him  in  the  choice  between  Huzvarish  and  Pazand 
modes  of  writing,  and  for  want  of  frequent  reference  he 
will  often  substitute  one  for  the  other,  or  even  use  a  wrong 
equivalent  (if  he  does  not  quite  understand  his  text)  when 
there  are  two  Huzvarish  forms  with  nearly  the  same  Pazand, 
or  when  he  has  misread  a  Huzvarish  form  which  has  two 
meanings.  Thus  we  often  find  the  Huzvarish  amat, "  when," 
confounded  with  mun,  "which,"  because  the  Pazand  of 
both  is  ha  or  he;  and  sometimes  the  Huz.  aigh,  "that," 
is  similarly  confounded,  owing  to  its  having  been  read  hi 
instead  of  hu ;  on  the  other  hand,  as  the  Huz.  vahhdund, 
"taken,"  cannot  be  distinguished  from  rddimd,  "done," 
they  are  both  liable  to  be  read  and  written  either  hard 
or  grift,  according  to  the  knowledge  or  ignorance  of  the 
copyist. 


THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT.  93 


III. — THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATUKE  EXTANT.   ■ 

Pahlavi  ■writings  may  be  divided  into  two  classes  :  first, 
translations  from  the  Avesta;  and,  secondly,  writings  of 
which  no  Avesta  original  is  known.  The  translations  are 
always  written  in  sentences  of  moderate  length,  alternating 
with  those  of  the  Avesta  text ;  they  are  extremely  literal, 
but  are  interspersed  with  short  explanatory  sentences,  and 
sometimes  with  long  digressions,  serving  as  a  commentary 
on  the  text.  The  Pahlavi  writings  without  an  Avesta 
original  are  nearly  entirely  of  a  religious  character,  though 
a  few  are  devoted  to  historical  legends.  Pazand  versions 
of  some  of  these  writings,  as  well  as  of  the  translations,  exist 
both  in  the  Avesta  and  modern  Persian  characters.  Some- 
times the  Pazand,  when  written  in  the  Avesta  character, 
alternates  with  a  Sanskrit  or  Gujrati  translation;  and 
when  written  in  the  modern  Persian  character,  in  which 
case  we  may  call  it  a  Parsi  version,  it  is  usually  accom- 
panied by  a  Persian  translation,  either  alternating  with 
the  Parsi  sentences  or  interlined ;  in  the  latter  case,  it  is  a 
literal  translation,  and  in  the  former  it  is  more  of  a  para- 
phrase. Some  writings  are  found  only  in  Persian,  and 
this  is  more  especially  the  case  with  the  Eivayats  or 
collections  of  memoranda  and  decisions  regarding  cere- 
monial observances  and  miscellaneous,  religious  matters ; 
these  are  generally  very  free  from  Arabic  words,  but  some 
of  them  contain  nearly  as  much  Arabic  as  is  used  in 
Mohammedan  Persian  waitings.  These  Eivayats  also 
contain  metrical  Persian  versions  of  some  of  the  more 
popular  Pahlavi  and  Pazand  books;  these  distant  imita- 
tions of  the  Shahnamah  are  generally  from  two  hundred 
to  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  old. 

Having  thus  taken  a  brief  survey  of  the  Pahlavi  writings 
and  their  connection  with  Parsi  literature  generally,  we 
may  now  proceed  to  give  further  details  of  such  works  as 


94  THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT. 

are  known  to  be  still  extant,  beginning  with  the  translations 
from  the  Avesta. 

The  Pahlavi  Vencliddd  is  probably  the  most  important 
of  these  translations,  and  extends  to  about  48,600  words.^ 
Each  sentence  of  the  Avesta  text  is  continuously  followed 
by  a  literal  translation,  or  attempted  translation,  in  Pahlavi, 
interspersed  with  short  explanations  of  unusual  words,  and 
often  concluding  with  an  alternative  translation,  introduced 
by  the  phrase,  "  There  is  (some  one)  who  says."  In  many 
places  the  translation  of  a  sentence  winds  up  with  a  longer 
commentary,  containing  Avesta  quotations,  and  citing  the 
opinions  of  various  old  commentators  who  are  named,  but 
regarding  whom  very  little  is  known.  As  the  next  sentence 
in  the  Avesta  text  follows  without  break  of  line,  it  is  often 
difficult  to  distinguish  it  from  one  of  the  Avesta  quotations 
before  mentioned.  In  the  translation  there  are  probably 
fragments  of  various  ages,  as  some  of  the  commentaries 
bear  traces  of  translation  from  Avesta  originals,  while 
many  of  the  shorter  explanations  appear  more  modern, 
but  they  must  have  been  brought  together  in  their  present 
form  before  the  Mohammedan  conquest.  All  the  known 
extant  copies  of  the  Vendidad  with  Pahlavi  appear  to  have 
descended  from  a  manuscript  of  herbad  Homast,  from 
which  a  copy  w"as  made  in  SistS,n  in  a.y.  554  (a.d.  1185) 
by  Ardashir  Bahman,  and  taken  to  India  by  herbad 
Mahyar  Mah-mihir,  who  had  been  passing  six  years  with 
the  herbads  of  Sistan,  whither  he  had  come  from  the  town 
of  Khujak  on  the  Indus.  After  the  arrival  of  this  MS.  in 
India  it  was  re-copied  by  Eiistam  Mihirapan,  who  has  for- 
gotten to  mention  the  year,  2  and  from  his  copy  the  oldest 
manuscript  now  extant  was  copied  by  herbad  Mihirapan 
Kai-Khusro  (who  was  probably  his  great-grand-nephew)  in 

^  In  estimating  (more  or  less  accu-  counted  compounds  as  eitlier  one  or 

rately)tlie  number  of  words  in  each  two  words  according    to    tlie  usual 

of  the  works  he  has  examined,  as  the  mode  of  writing  them, 

best   standard   of    their  length,   the  -  He  copied  the  Arda-  Vtrdf  ndmak 

editor  has  not  included  the  conjunc-  in  A.T.  6i8  (a.d.  1249),  and  had  visited 

tion  va  and  idhafat  i;   and  he  has  Persia. 


THE  PAHL'AVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT.  95 

A.Y.  693  (a.d.  1324)  in  the  town  of  Kamliay.     This  manu- 
script is  now  in  the  University  Library  at  Copenhagen,  but 
is  very  defective;    the  first  portion   of  the   manuscript 
(Vend.  i.    i-v.  y^),  Sp.)  having  fallen  into   other  hands, 
probably  on  some  division  of  property  among  brothers ; 
and  nearly  half  the  remainder  is  so  much  damaged,  by 
the  ink  corroding  the  paper,  that  it  is  almost  useless. 
Another  manuscript,  which  appears  to  be  in  the   same 
handwriting,  but  the  colophon  of  which  is  missing,  is  in 
the  India  Office  Library  in  London ;  this  is  also  defective, 
as  the  folios  containing  Vend.  i.  i-iii.  48  and  iv.  82-viii.  310 
have  fallen  into  other  hands,  and  have  been  replaced  by 
modern  writing;  the  folios  containing  Vend.  iii.  49-iv.  81, 
and  a  few  others,  are  also  damaged  by  the  corrosive  action 
of  the  ink  used  by  Mihirapan  Kai-Kliusro.     From  a  com- 
23arison  of  these  two  manuscripts,  we  can  ascertain  the 
state  of  the  text  553  years  ago,  except  with  regard  to 
Vend.  i.  i-iii.  48  and  a  few  other  short  defective  passages, 
for  which  we  must  refer  to  other  old  manuscripts.    One  of 
these  was  formerly  in  the  library  of  Dastur  Jamasp  Asa  at 
Nawsari,  and  is  said  to  have  been  transferred  from  Bombay 
to  Teheran  in  Persia  some  twenty  years  ago.    It  was  copied, 
probably  from  the  Copenhagen  MS.,  in  A.Y.  963  (a.d.  1594), 
by  herbad  Ardashir  Ziva,  in  the  town  of  Bhroch  ;  it  is  rather 
carelessly  written,  and  many  of  the  later  copies  are  descended 
from  it.i     Another  old  manuscript,  now  in  the  University 
Library  at  Bombay,  was  obtained  at  Bhrocli ;  it  corresponds 
very  closely  to  the  one  last  mentioned,  and  is  probably  about 
the  same  age,  but  its  colophon  is  lost.   The  Pahlavi  Vendidad 
was  printed  at  Vienna  separate  from  the  Avesta  text,  and 
was  published  by  Spiegel  in  1853,  but  his  text  can  be  much 
improved  by  careful  collation  with  the  old  manuscripts 
above  mentioned.      None  of  these  MSS.  contain  the  twelfth 
fargard  of  the  Vendidad,  so  that  the  Pahlavi  translation  of 

^  The  descent  of  manuscripts  can  shaped  letters  ;  but  it  is  hazardous  to 

generally  be  traced  by  their  copying  argue  on  the  authority  of  only  one 

"rrors,  which  have  been  insufficiently  such  blunder, 
erased;    or  by  their  misreading   ill- 


96  THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT. 

this  fargard,  wliicli  occurs  in  a  few  modern  MSS.,  is  pro- 
bably the  work  of  some  Dastur  in  India.  It  is  difficult  to 
account  for  the  omission  of  the  tweKth  fargard  in  the  old 
MSS.,  as  the  fargards  are  all  numbered,  so  that  any  acci- 
dental leap  from  the  eleventh  to  the  thirteenth  ought  to 
have  been  soon  discovered;  and  it  is  unlikely  that  the 
twelfth  fargard  would  have  occupied  exactly  the  whole  of 
any  number  of  folios  which  may  have  been  lost  from  some 
original  manuscript  before  it  was  copied. 

The  PoMam  Tasna  contains  about  39,000  words,  ex- 
clusive of  the  hiriya  or  introductory  prayers.    It  is  written 
alternating  with  its  Avesta,in  the  same  manner  as  the  Vendi- 
dad,  but  the  long  interpolated  commentaries  are  much  less 
common,  and  fewer  commentators  are  quoted ;  so  it  may 
be  suspected  of  containing  less  old  matter  than  the  Pahlavi 
Vendidad.     For  the  oldest  manuscripts  of  this  text  we  are 
ao-ain   indebted   to   herbad  Mihirapan  Kai-Khusro,  who 
copied  at  Kambay  a  manuscript  of  the  Yasna  with  Pahlavi 
(now  in  the  University  Library  at  Copenhagen)  in  a.y.  692 
(a.d.  1323)  from  a  manuscript  written  by  Eustam  Mihir- 
apan ;  in  the  same  year  he  also  wrote  a  second  manuscript 
of  the  same,  which  is  now  in  the  library  of  Dastur  Jamaspji 
Minochiharji  in  Bombay,  and  is  dated  only  twenty-two 
days  later  than  the  first,  but  it  does  not  mention  whence 
it  was  copied.    Both  these  manuscripts  begin  with  a  series 
of  introductory  prayers  in  Avesta  and  Pahlavi,  of  which 
the  commencement  is  lost;   some  of  the  folios  are  also 
damaged  in  both  by  the  corrosive  action  of  the  ink  used 
by  the  writer ;  and  one  folio  in  the  middle  of  the  Bombay 
copy  is  lost,  and  many  others  are  worm-eaten.     Several 
more  modern  manuscripts  of  the  Yasna  with  Pahlavi  exist, 
but  they  are  less  common  than  those  of  the  Vendidad. 
The  Avesta  and  Pahlavi  texts  were  printed  separately  at 
Vienna,  and  published  by  Spiegel  in  1858,  but  his  text 
would  be  improved  by  collation  with  the  old  manuscript 
in  Bombay.  • 

The  Pahlavi  Visparad  contains  about  3300  words,  and 


THE  PAHLA  VI  LITERATURE  EXTANT.  97 

resembles  in  character  the  Pahlavi  translation  of  the 
Yasna.  Probably  the  oldest  copy  of  this  text  extant  is 
contained  in  a  manuscript  of  miscellaneous  texts  brought 
from  India  by  the  author  of  these  Essays ;  this  copy  was 
mitten  by  Peshyotan  Ptam  Kamdin  at  Bhroch  in  a.y.  "j^Q 
(a.d.  1 397).  The  Avesta  and  Pahlavi  texts  were  printed 
separately  at  Vienna,  and  published  by  Spiegel,  along  with 
the  Yasna  texts,  in  1858. 

The  Hddokht  nash  in  Pahlavi  is  a  mere  fragment,  con- 
taining about  1530  words,  and  consisting  of  three  fargards 
which  were  probably  not  consecutive  in  the  original  Nask. 
The  first  fargard  details  the  value  of  reciting  the  Asliem- 
voJm  formula  under  different  circumstances,  and  is  probably 
an  extract  from  the  first  division  of  the  Nask.  The  second 
and  third  fargards  describe  the  fate  of  the  souls  of  the 
righteous  and  wicked  respectively  during  the  first  three 
days  after  death;  but  their  contents  do  not  agree  very 
well  with  the  description  of  the  Nask  in  the  Dinkard, 
where  it  is  stated  to  have  consisted  of  three  divisions  con- 
taining 13,  102,  and  19  sections  respectively.!  Tlie  oldest 
copies  of  the  text  known  to  be  extant  are  contained  in  the 
manuscript  of  miscellaneous  texts  written  in  a.d.  1397, 
which  includes  the  Yisparad,  as  mentioned  above;  also 
in  a  very  similar  manuscript  in  the  University  Library 
at  Copenhagen,  which  must  be  about  the  same  age.  The 
Avesta  and  Pahlavi  texts,  alternating  as  in  the  manuscripts, 
were  printed  at  Stuttgart,  and  published  with  the  Arda- 
Yiraf  Namak  in  1872,  and  a  translation  of  the  Avesta  text 
will  be  found  in  the  third  Essay. 

The  Vishtdsp  yasU  is  found  with  a  Pahlavi  translation 
of  about  5200  words,  but  only  one  manuscript  has  been 
examined;  this  is  in  the  library  of  Dastur  Jamaspji  in 
Bombay,  and  is  said  to  have  been  written  some  thirty-five 
years  ago.  The  Avesta  text  is  probably  descended  from 
the  Kirman  manuscript  used  by  Westergaard,  and  now  at 

1  The  total  number  of  sections  is  error  of  one  in  some  one  of  these  four 
given  as  133 ;   so  there  must  be  an     numbers. 

G 


98  THE  PAHLA  VI  LITERA  TURE  EXTANT. 

Copenhagen,  and  the  Pahlavi  text  has  the  appearance  of  a 
modern  translation. 

Pahlavi  translations  of  other  Yaslits  also  exist ;  such  as 
those  of  the  Auharmazd  yaslit,  about  2000  words;  the 
Khurshed  yasht  and  Mdh  yaslit,  each  about  400  words ;  the 
Srosh  yasht  hdcWM,  about  700  words ;  the  Haptdn  yasht, 
Behrdm  yasht,  and  probably  others  which  have  not  been 
examined.  In  these,  as  in  all  the  other  translations,  the 
Pahlavi  alternates  with  the  Avesta ;  and  there  seems  little 
doubt  that  most  of  these  Yasht  translations  are  old. 

Amono-  the  remainino;  translations  are  the  Pahlavi  texts 
of  the  Atash  nydyish,  about  looo  words;  the  Khurshed 
nydyish,  about  500  words;  the  Alan  nydyish,  about  450 
words;  the  Afringdn  gdtha,  the  Afringdn  gahanbdr,  the 
Afringdn  dahnidn  (Yasna,  lix.  2-1 5  Sp.),  the  last  containing 
alDout  450  words ;  the  Afriii  myazd,  also  called  Afrin  Zara- 
tuslit;  the  Sirozah  in  both  its  forms,  containing  about  530 
and  650  words  respectively ;  and  many  short  extracts  from 
the  Yasna  which  are  much  used  in  the  Khurdah  Avesta, 
such  as  the  Ashem-vohu,  Yathd-ahu-vairyo,  and  Yeiihe- 
hdtarii  formulas;  Yasna,  v.  i,  2;  xxxv.4-6, 13-15;  i.  65-67, 

Sp. ;  &c. 

The  Chidah  avistdh-i  gdsdn,  or  selection  from  the  Gathas, 
is  an  old  miscellaneous  collection  of  short  passages,  some- 
times merely  single  lines,  from  various  parts  of  the  Gathas, 
alternating  with  the  usual  Pahlavi  translation.  Altogether 
y6  lines  are  quoted  from  the  Avesta,  and  the  Pahlavi 
translation  of  about  iioo  words  does  not  differ  materially 
from  that  given  in  manuscripts  of  tl^e  Yasna.  Several 
copies  of  this  selection  exist,  but  the  oldest  seems  to  be 
that  in  the  manuscript  of  miscellaneous  texts  written  in 
A.D.  1397,  as  mentioned  above. 

Intermediate  between  the  translations  and  the  purely 
Pahlavi  works,  there  are  those  which  contain  many  Avesta 
quotations,  which  are  often  translated,  but  do  not  in  them- 
selves form  any  connected  text,  as  the  bulk  of  the  work  is 
Pahlavi.     The  following  three  are  of  this  class : — 


THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT.  99 

The  Nirangistctn  contains  about  30,000  words,  including 
the  Avesta  quotations,  many  of  which  are  no  longer  extant 
in  the  Zend-Avesta.  It  consists  of  three  fargards,  and 
treats  of  a  great  number  of  minute  details  regarding  rites 
and  ceremonies,  and  precautions  to  be  adopted  while  per- 
forming them.  Its  contents  correspond  very  closely  with 
the  description  of  the  second  section  of  the  Husparam 
Nask  as  given  in  the  Dinkard:  and  the  name  of  that 
section  was  Mrangistan.  .  The  opinions  of  many  of  the 
old  commentators  mentioned  in  the  Pahlavi  Vendidad 
are  also  often  quoted  in  this  work.  A  manuscript  of  the 
Mrangistan  was  brought  from  Persia  to  India  by  Dastur 
Jamasp  Wilayati,  a.d.  1720;  this  was  copied  from  a  manu- 
script dated  a.y.  840  (a.d.  147 i),  but  whether  it  still  exists 
is  uncertain ;  it  was  re-copied  by  Dastur  Jamasp  Asa  of 
Nawsari  in  a.y.  1097  i'^-'^-  ^7V)'  ^iid  this  copy  is  now  in 
the  library  of  the  Khan  Bahadar  Dastur  Noshirvanji 
Jamaspji  at  Poona.  Several  later  copies  exist,  but  owing 
to  the  text  being  difficult  and  little  known  to  copyists, 
their  variations  from  the  original  are  unusually  numerous. 

The  Farhang-i  oim  khaduk,  or  vocabulary  of  Avesta  and 
Pahlavi,  so  called  from  its  first  words  being  oim  khaduk, 
consists  of  about  3300  words,  including  the  Avesta,  and 
contains  several  words  and  phrases  which  are  no  longer 
extant  in  the  Avesta  texts.  Very  old  copies  of  this  voca- 
bulary exist  in  two  manuscripts  of  miscellaneous  Pahlavi 
texts,  one  .brought  from  India  by  the  author  of  these 
Essays,  and  written  in  a.d.  i  397,  and  the  other  at  Copen- 
hagen, written  about  the  same  time.  Dastur  Hoshangji's 
edition  of  this  vocabulary,  printed  at  Stuttgart,  and  pub- 
lished in  1 867  with  the  title  of  "  An  Old  Zand-Pahlavi 
Glossary,"  could  probably  be  improved  by  collation  with 
these  old  copies  of  the  text. 

The  Afrtn-i  dalimdn,  including  the  aogemadakha  Avesta 
quotations,  contains  about  2000  words.  The  first  of  the 
quotations  is  Yasna,  vii.  60  Sp.,  but  most  of  the  others  are 
no  longer  extant  in  the  Avesta,     They  are  also  found  with 


loo         THE  PAHLA  VI  LITERA  TURE  EXTANT. 

alternating  Pazand  and  Sanskrit  translations,  and  without 
tL.e  introductory  sentences  of  the  Afrin. 

"We  may  now  proceed  to  notice  the  purely  Pahlavi  works, 
wdiich  contain  but  few  quotations  from  the  Avesta,  and 
those  are  generally  references  to  the  proper  texts  to  be 
recited  on  particular  occasions.  There  is  much  diversity 
in  the  style  of  these  compositions,  some  being  merely 
descriptive,  in  which  the  language  is  easy  and  the  con- 
struction simple ;  while  others  are  more  philosophical,  and 
their  lancfuage  difficult  and  obscure. 

The  Vajarharcl-i  dim,  containing  about  19,000  words, 
might  almost  be  classed  with  the  preceding,  as  the  latter 
part  of  it  contains  several  quotations  from  the  Avesta.  It 
is  a  very  miscellaneous  collection  of  injunctions  and  de- 
tails regarding  religious  matters,  resembling  a  Eivayat,  and 
divided  into  three  chapters,  professing  to  have  been  written 
by  Medyomah,  one  of  the  old  commentators  quoted  in  the 
Pahlavi  translations  and  other  works.  An  old  manuscript 
of  the  work,  written  in  Kirman,  A.Y.  609  (a.d.  1240),  is  said 
to  have  been  brought  to  India  and  deposited  in  the  library 
of  the  Mody  family  in  Surat,  where  it  was  copied  A.Y.  1 123 
(a.d.  1754)  by  an  uncle  of  the  late  high-priest  of  the  Parsis 
in  Bombay ;  from  this  copy  the  text  was  edited  by  Dastur 
Peshotanji,  and  printed  in  Bombay  in  1848,  as  already 
mentioned  (p.  59).  This  work  includes  three  or  four  of 
the  minor  texts  hereafter  mentioned,  as  will  be  noticed 
when  we  come  to  them. 

The  Dinkard  is  the  longest  Pahlavi  work  extant,  although 
the  first  portion  of  it,  containing  the  first  and  second  books, 
is  missing ;  the  latter  part  of  the  work,  consisting  of  books 
iii.-ix.,  contains  about  170,000  words.  The  third  book  con- 
sists of  a  series  of  explanations  of  religious  matters  and 
duties,  for  general  information  and  removal  of  doubt,  con- 
cluding with  a  description  of  the  solar  and  lunar  years, 
and  a  legendary  history  of  the  Dinkard  which  is  evidently 
identified  with  that  of  the  Nasks  generally;  this  book 
contains  73,000  words.     The  fourth  book  contains  various 


THE  PAHLA  VI  LITERATURE  EXTANT.         loi 

statements  selected  from  the  religious  books  by  Adarfro- 
bag-i  Farukhzadan,  the  original  editor  of  the  Dinkard  (see 
p.  55),  extending  to  about  4000  words;  these  statements 
commence  with  the  characteristics  of  the  Ameshaspends, 
and  in  discussing  those  of  Shatrovair,  the  third  Amesha- 
spend,  an  account  is  given  of  the  endeavours  of  various 
sovereigns,  from  Vishtasp  to  Khiisro-i  Kavadan  (Noshir- 
van),  to  collect  and  preserve  the  national  literature.  The 
fifth  book  contains  the  sayings  of  the  same  Adarfrobag 
from  a  book  called  Simra,i  and  his  replies  to  many  ques- 
tions on  obscure  and  difficult  matters  in  history,  astrology, 
and  religious  customs,  extending  to  about  6000  words. 
The  sixth  book  contains  the  opinions  of  the  ponjodlceslicvn 
(professors  of  the  primeval  religion  of  Zarathuslitra)  on  all 
matters  of  tradition,  customs,  and  duties,  with  many  say- 
ings of  Adarpad-i  Maraspendan ;  the  whole  extending  to 
about  23,000  words.  The  seventh  book  contains  an  ac- 
count of  the  wonders,  or  miracles,  of  the  Mazdayasnian 
religion  from  the  time  of  Gayomard,  the  first  man,  to  that 
of  Soshans,  the  last  of  the  future  prophets ;  including  many 
details  of  the  life  of  Zaratusht,  and  extending  to  about 
i6,oco  words.  The  eighth  book  contains  an  account  of 
the  twenty-one  Nasks, giving  a  short  description  of  each,but 
going  into  more  details  of  the  four  Nasks  xv.-xviii.  which 
constitute  the  majority  of  the  seven  "  legal "  Nasks ;  this 
book  consists  of  about  20,000  words.  The  ninth  book 
contains  a  much  more  detailed  account  of  the  contents  of 
each  fargard  of  the  first  three  ISTasks,  concluding  with  some 
remarks  upon  selections  from  the  whole  Yasna,  and  ex- 
tending to  about  27,000  words.  The  work  concludes  with 
colophons  to  the  extent  of  nearly  1000  words,  which  relate 
that  this  latter  part  of  the  Dinkard  was  copied  at  the  place 
where  it  was  found,  Khushkand  in  Asuristan,  from  an 
original  which  had  been  written  by  elders  of  the  family  of 
Adarpad-i  Maraspendan,  by  Mahvandad  NarimahanBehram 
Mihirapan,  and  finished  on  the  24th  day  of  the  4th  month 

^  There  are,  of  course,  many  otiier  ways  of  reading  this  name. 


I02         THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT. 

A.Y.  369  (/til  July  A.D.  1000)".  From  this  copy  otkers  dated 
A.Y.  865,  1009,"'  and  1038  1  have  descended,  and  the  last 
appears  to  have  been  brought  from  Persia  to  Surat  in  a.y. 
1 152  (a.d.  1783)  by  MuUa  Bahman,  and  about  four  years 
afterwards  some  copies  of  the  manuscript  of  a.y.  1038  (a.d. 
1669)  were  spread  among  the  Parsis;  but  before  any  of 
these  copies  were  made,  the  manuscript  from  Persia  had 
been  lent  to  various  parties,  and  more  than  one-sixth  of 
the  whole  had  been  abstracted,  so  that  all  the  manuscripts 
are  now  deficient  to  that  extent;  but  out  of  69  folios 
missing,  64  have  been  discovered,  though  they  still  remain 
in  various  hands.  The  manuscript  itself  is  in  the  library 
of  Dastur  Sohrabji  Ptustamji,  the  high-priest  of  the  Kadmi 
sect  of  Parsis  in  Bombay.  Dastur  Peshotanji  is  publish- 
ing an  edition  of  the  text,  with  Gujrati  and  English  trans- 
lations, as  has  been  already  mentioned  (p.  59),  but  it 
will  be  many  years  before  he  can  complete  his  task. 

The  name  Dddistdn-i-dini  is  usually  confined  to  a  work 
of  about  30,000  words,  written  by .  Dastur  Minochihar 
Yudan-daman,  who  was  high-priest  of  the  Mazdayasnians 
in  Pars  and  Kirman  about  a.y.  3502  (a.d.  981).  It  con- 
sists of  92  questions  and  answers  about  religious  duties, 
customs,  and  legends ;  the  last  of  these  answers  seems  to  be 
incomplete,  so  that  a  portion  of  the  original  work  may 
have  been  lost.  The  oldest  manuscript  of  this  text  that 
has  been  examined  was  written  in  Kirman  by  Marjpan 
Fredun  in  A.Y.  941  (a.d.  1572) ;  his  writing  was  to  supply 
the  deficiencies  in  a  still  older  manuscript,  of  which  only 
28  folios  now  remain ;  and  his  manuscript  has,  in  its  turn, 
had  its  deficiencies  supplied  from  later  copies.  In  this 
manuscript  the  text  of  the  Dadistan-i-dini  is  preceded  and 
followed  by  other  somewhat  similar  writings  by  the  same 
Dastur,  and  by  Zad-sparam-i  Yudan-daman,  who  appears 

1  Thesedatesnolonger  exist  in  the  ^  Altered  to  250  in  the  oldmanu- 

manuscript  brought  from  Persia,  but  script  written   by   MarjpiUi   Freddn, 

are  taken  from  the  copies  and  from  but  whether  the  alteration  was  made 

the  account  given  by  Mulh\  FirClz  in  by  the  original  writer  or  not   is  uu- 

hisAvijeh-Diu.  certain. 


THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT.  103 

to  have  been  liis  brother.  The  first  part  of  theso  extra 
writings  contains  about  23,000  words,  and  the  last  part 
about  30,000  words,  of  which  5000  are  lost ;  if  these  writ- 
ings be  taken  as  part  of  the  Dadistan-i-diDi,  the  whole 
work  contains  about  78,000  words  extant.  The  author  of 
these  Essays  recommended  the  Parsis,  twelve  years  ago,  to 
have  this  work  translated,  and  it  is  said  that  a  translation 
was  prepared,  but  has  not  been  published.  If  the  non- 
appearance of  this  translation  be  due  to  any  of  the  opinions 
of  the  old  Dastur  of  Kirman  differing  from  those  of  Parsis 
of  the  present  day,  it  is  to  be  regretted,  as  the  proper 
course  in  such  a  case  would  be  to  publish  a  correct  trans- 
lation, and  point  out  the  probable  cause  of  the  original 
writer's  errors  in  notes ;  this  is  all  the  more  necessary  as 
none  of  the  Palilavi  books  are  free  from  statements  which 
would  be  considered  heterodox  nowadays.  Thus,  whenever 
they  give  details  regarding  khvetuk-das,  or  next-of-kin  mar- 
riage, they  describe  it  as  applying  to  closer  relationships 
than  present  customs  tolerate;  but  whatever  may  have 
been  the  reasons  for  the  establishment  of  this  custom 
wlien  the  Zoroastrian  faith  was  in  power,l  it  is  evident 
that  when  the  faith  was  held  merely  by  a  persecuted 
remnant  of  the  Persian  people,  their  priests  advocated  the 
custom  as  a  specially  meritorious  act,  with  the  view  of 
discouraoins;  intermarriasres  with  their  Mohammedan 
neio'libours,  which  would  have  led  to  the  final  extinction 
of  Zoroastrianism.  That  the  present  customs  of  the  Parsis 
are  not  quite  the  same  as  those  of  eiglit  or  ten  centuries 
ago  is  not  surprising,  when  we  consider  that  it  was  the 
usual  practice  of  all  Christian  sects  who  had  sufficient 
power,  two  or  three  centuries  ago,  to  put.  heretics  and 
witches  to  death  by  burning  or  otherwise ;  such  practices 
were  tlien  not  only  legal,  but  were  considered  highly  meri- 
torious ;  novj  they  would  be  called  judicial  murders. 

^  They  had  proljably  something  to  the  Jews  to  adopt  stringent  excep- 

do  with  the  dislike  of  Eastern  nations  tional   marriage   laws,    in   case   of  a 

to  any  absolute  alienation  of  family  failure  in  direct  lieirs. 
property ;  a  feeling  which  led  even 


I04      THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT. 

The  SMkand-giimdni  vij'dr  is  a  controversial  work  of 
about  18,000  words,  written  by  Mardan-farukli-i  Aiihar- 
mazd-dad,  who  acknowledges  the  instruction  he  has  re- 
ceived from  the  Dinkard  •  of  Adarfrobag-i  Farukhzadan, 
which  contained  a  thousand  chapters  (dar),  as  well  as 
from  the  Dinkhard  l  of  Adarpadyavand,  a  work  no  longer . 
known,  unless  it  be  the  book  of  the  Mainyo-i-khard,  men- 
tioned hereafter.  The  writer  begins  by  answering  some 
questions  of  Mihiryar-i  Mahmadan  of  Ispahan  regarding 
the  existence  and  work  of  the  evil  spirit  being  permitted 
by  Auharmazd ;  he  then  proceeds  to  prove  the  existence 
of  God,  and  to  disprove  the  arguments  of  atheists,  and  of 
those  who  disbelieve  in  the  evil  spirit,  and  attribute  both 
good  and  evil  to  God ;  and  he  concludes  by  criticising  the 
doctrines  of  the  Jews,  Christians,  and  Manichseans.  Most 
of  the  manuscripts  of  this  work  are  incomplete,  and  only 
the  first  3600  words  are  found  in  the  Pahlavi  character; 
the  more  complete  manuscripts  are  in  Pazand  with  Neryo- 
sangh's  Sanskrit  translation,  but  there  are  evident  indica- 
tions of  the  Pazand  text  having  been  originally  transliter- 
ated from  Pahlavi.  An  edition  of  the  Pahlavi  and  Pazand 
texts  has  been  prepared  by  Dastur  Hoshangji,  but  is  not 
yet  printed. 

The  JBundahish  calls  itself  '  the  Zand-dJcds  2  (zand-know- 
'  ing,  or  tradition-informed),  which  is  first  about  Aiihar- 
'  mazd's  original  creation  and  the  antagonism  of  the  evil 
'  spirit,  and  afterwards  about  the  nature  of  the  creatures 
'  from  the  original  creation  tiU.  the  end,  which  is  the  future 
'  existence,  just  as  it  is  revealed  by  the  religion  of  the 

1  The  ISIulla  Firuz  library  in  Bom-  -  The  word  min,  "from,"  with 
bay  contains  two  modern  Persian  whicli  many  of  the  manusciipts  corn- 
manuscripts,  named  respectively  Din-  mence,  appears  to  be  a  later  addition, 
kard  and  Dinkhii-d  ;  these  were  writ-  as  it  is  not  found  in  the  Copenhagen 
ten  by  IMulld  Firda  to  describe  his  manuscript,  and  has  evidently  been 
voyage  toPersia  and  the  answers  he  ob-  added  by  a  later  hand  in  the  only 
tained  to  seventy-eiglit  questions  pro-  other  manuscript  of  equal  age  men- 
posed  by  the  Indian  Dasturs.  These  tioned  in  the  text, 
Persian  works  must  not  be  confound- 
ed with  their  namesakes  in  PahlavL 


THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT,  105 

'  Mazdayasnians.'  The  contents  of  this  book  are  too  well 
known  to  require  further  description ;  it  contains  about 
13,000  words,  but  the  manuscripts  do  not  agree  either  in 
extent  or  arrangement  The  most  complete  and  best-ar- 
ranged text,  but  not  the  most  accurately  copied,  is  that  in 
the  manuscript  of  miscellaneous  Pahlavi  texts  at  Copen- 
hagen, which  is  about  five  hundred  years  old,  and  has  lost 
one  or  more  folios  in  the  middle  of  the  text  of  the  Bunda- 
hish,  but  contains  more  sections  (chaps,  xxviii.,  xxix.,  xxx., 
and  xxxii.  of  Anquetil)  than  are  found  in  other  indejDendent 
copies.  The  text  is  found  differently  arranged,  without 
those  sections,  but  more  accurately  copied,  in  the  similar 
manuscript  of  miscellaneous  texts  brought  from  India  by 
the  author  of  these  Essays,  and  written  in  1397.  Most  of 
the  manuscripts  in  India  seem  to  have  been  copied  from 
the  latter  of  these  two  old  manuscripts,  but  they  some- 
times vary  further  in  their  arrangement.  The  Copenhagen 
text  was  lithographed  in  facsimile  and  published  by 
Westergaard  in  1851  ;  a  French  translation  was  published 
by  Anquetil  in  1771,  and  German  translations  by  Win- 
dischmann  in  1863,  and  by  Justi  in  1868. 

The  Minok-i  l  hhard,  called  in  Pazand  Mainyo-i  kharcl,  or 
Spirit  of  Wisdom,  consists  of  sixty-two  answers  given  by  the 
said  Spirit  to  the  inquiries  of  a  wise  man  regarding  the 
tenets,  legends,  and  morals  of  the  Mazdayasnian  religion. 
It  contains  about  12,000  words,  but  the  text  ends  abruptly, 
as  if  incomplete ;  and  its  introduction  bears  some  resem- 
blance to  that  of  the  Shikand-gumrmi,  so  as  to  lead  to  the 
suspicion  that  it  may  be  the  first  portion  of  the  Dinkhard 
consulted  by  the  author  of  that  work.  An  old  manuscript 
of  the  Pahlavi  text  was  brought  by  Westergaard  from 

1  This  woril,  which  is  traditionally  not  by  d.     On  the  other  hand,  the 

read  niadonad,  has  been  pronounced  Persian  mtnd  must  have  been  mtnoh 

mtnavad,  or  matnivad,  and  traced  to  in  Pahlavi ;  this  would  be  liable  to  be 

a  supposed  ancient  Persian  form,  9)!rti-  written  min6g,  and  the  addition  of 

nirat.     Whetlier  such  a  form  actually  circumflexes  (all  the  uses  of  which, 

existed  is  not  known,  and  if  it  did,  we  in  Pahlavi,  are  not  thoroughly  under- 

should  expect  to  find  its  final  letter  stood)  changes  this  word  into  the  tra- 

represented  hy  d  —  t  in  Pahlavi,  and  ditioual  maddnad. 


io6        THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT. 

Persia,  but  the  Palilavi  versions  in  India  are  probably 
merely  translations  from  the  better-known  Pazand  text 
Avliich  generally  alternates  with  Neryosangii's  Sanskrit 
translation ;  a  manuscript  of  this  Pazand-Sanskrit  text, 
written  in  a.p.  i  520,  is  preserved  in  the  India  Office  Library 
in  London.  A  few  fragments  of  the  Pazand  text  were 
published,  with  a  German  translation,  by  Spiegel  in  his 
"  Grammar  of  the  Parsi  Language  "  (185 1)  and  his  "  Tradi- 
tional Literature  of  the  Parsis"  (i860);  and  the  whole 
text,  both  Pazand  and  Sanskrit,  was  published  by  West, 
with  an  English  translation,  in  1871. 

Tlie  Slidyast  Id-slidyast,  or  Pahlavi  Eivayat,  contains 
about  10,000  words,  and  treats  of  sins  and  good  Avorks, 
the  proper  treatment  of  corpses  and  other  kinds  of  impu- 
rity, with  the  proper  modes  of  purification,  the  proper  use 
of  the  sacred  thread  and  shirt,  other  customs  and  rites, 
with  the  reasons  for  reciting  each  of  the  Gathas,  and  details 
of  the  extent  of  those  hymns  ;  all  subjects  wliich  are  gene- 
rally explained  in  the  Persian  Eivayats  ;  but  here  the 
statements  are  enforced  by  quotations  of  the  opinions  of 
several  of  the  old  commentators,  and  by  references  to  some 
of  the  ISTasks  no  longer  extant.  The  oldest  extant  copies 
of  this  work  are  contained  in  the  two  manuscripts  of  mis- 
cellaneous Pahlavi  texts,  written  about  five  hundred  years 
ago,  which  ho,ve  been  already  mentioned.  In  these  manu- 
scripts the  text  appears  in  two  detached  portions  of  about 
7500  and  2500  words  respectively. 

Tlie  Ardd'^  Virdf  ndmak,  or  book  of  Arda  Yiraf,  con- 
tains about  8800  words,  and  describes  what  was  seen  by  a 
chosen  high-priest  in  a  vision  of  the  other  world,  where 
he  was  shown  the  rewards  of  the  righteous,  the  punish- 
ments of  the  wicked,  and  the  neutral  state  of  stationary 
expectation  of  those  who  belong  to  neither  extreme.  It  is 
stated  in  this  work  tlmt  Arda  Viraf  was  called  Nikhsliapur 

1  Sometimes  written  Anjut,  which  douht  merely  a  title  meaning  "  right- 
should  pcrhnps  be  reail  Ardnk,  having  ecus  ;"  the  Parsis  say,  however,  that 
been  altered  into  arduij,  whicli  is  not  it  is  also  a  name, 
distinguisliable  from  arddl.     It  is  no 


THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT.        107 

• 

by  some ;  this  is  not  only  the  name  of  a  town,  but  is  also 
that  of  one  of  the  old  commentators,  sometimes  quoted  in 
the  Pahlavi  Vendidad,  and  very  often  in  the  Mrangistan ; 
it  is  possible,  therefore,  that  this  commentator  may  have 
written  the  book  of  Arda  Viraf.  Copies  of  this  text  are 
found  in  the  two  old  manuscripts  of  miscellaneous  texts 
written  about  five  hundred  years  ago,  which  have  been 
already  mentioned.  A  manuscript  of  a  Pazand  and  San- 
skrit version,  written  a.d.  141  o,  was  also  brought  from 
India  by  the  author  of  these  Essays ;  and  Persian  versions, 
both  in  prose  and  verse,  are  likewise  extant.  The  Pahlavi 
text  was  printed  at  Stuttgart,  and  published,  with  an  Eng- 
lish transhxtion,  in  1872. 

The  Mddtgdn-i  Gmld-i  Frydno,  of  about  3000  words,  is 
a  tale  of  the  evil  Akhtya  of  the  Aban  Yasht  (81-83),  pro- 
pounding thirty-three  enigmas  to  Yoishto-yo-Eryananam, 
to  be  solved  on  pain  of  death  ;  after  this  is  done  he  has  to 
solve  three  enigmas  in  his  turn,  but  fails  and  is  destroyed. 
The  enigmas  are  generally  of  a  very  trivial  character, 
and  nine  of  them  seem  to  be  omitted.  This  text  accom- 
panies that  of  the  book  of  Arda  Viraf  in  the  two  old  manu- 
scripts before  mentioned,  and  was  published  with  it  in 
1872. 

The  Baliman  yasht,  of  about  4200  words,  professes  to  be 
a  revelation  from  Auharmazd  to  Zaratiisht  of  the  sufferings 
and  triumphs  of  the  Mazdayasnian  religion,  from  his  time 
to  the  end  of  the  world,  apparently  in  imitation  of  part  of 
the  Siidkar  ISTask.  As  it  mentions  the  Musalmans,  and 
gives  many  details  of  the  sufferings  occasioned  by  them,  it 
must  have  been  written  a  considerable  time  after  the  IMo- 
hammedan  conquest.  It  details  how  the  power  of  the 
Mazdayasnian  religion  is  to  be  restored  by  the  victories  of 
Vahiram-i  Varjavand,  a  prince  (Jcat)  of  the  Kayan  race, 
who  at  the  age  of  thirty  is  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of 
Indian  and  Chinese  armies,  whose  power  will  be  felt  as  far 
as  the  banks  of  the  Indus,  which  is  called  the  country  of 
Pambo.     Foreigners  should  be  careful  not  to  confound  this 


io8       THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT. 

name  with  Bombay,  which  is  merely  a  European  corrup- 
tion, through  the  Portuguese,  of  IMumbai;  a  corruption 
w^hich  native  writers  still  avoid  when  writing  in  the  ver- 
nacular languages.  The  Pahlavi  text  of  this  work  is  found 
in  the  old  manuscript  of  miscellaneous  texts  at  Copenhagen, 
and  its  two  copies,  one  of  which  is  at  Paris,  but  no  other 
copies  have  been  met  with  ;  a  Pazand  version  is,  however, 
common  in  India.  Spiegel  has  given  a  German  transla- 
tion of  extracts  from  the  Bahman  Yasht  in  his  "  Traditional 
Literature  of  the  Pars  is." 

In  the  same  old  manuscript  at  Copenhagen  is  the 
A  ndarj-i  Huddvar-i  i  ddndh,  containing  about  1 8oo  words, 
of  which  one-third  have  been  lost,  as  two  folios  are  missing. 
This  admonition  {andarj)  is  given  in  reply  to  questions 
asked  by  his  disciple  (ashdkard).  No  other  copy  of  this 
work  has  been  met  with,  but  it  will  be  found,  of  course,  in 
the  two  copies  of  the  Copenhagen  manuscript. 

In  the  same  manuscript  is  also  a  copy  of  the  Mddtgdn-i 
gujastak  Ahdlish,  containing  about  1200  words.  The  ac- 
cursed Abalish  appears  to  have  been  a  zandik  or  heretic, 
who  relied  upon  later  corrupt  traditions  in  preference  to 
the  true  faith.  In  the  presence  of  Mtimun,  the  commander 
of  the  faithful  (amir-i  muminin)  at  Baghdad,  he  proposes 
seven  questions  to  a  Mobad,  who  replies  to  the  satisfaction 
of  Mamun  and. the  confusion  of  Abillish  himself.  The 
writer  concludes  by  blessing  Adarfrobag-i  Farukhzadan 
(the  author  of  an  old  edition  of  the  Dinkard)  for  having 
destroyed  Abalish;  and  he  could  not  have  written  this  work 
before  A.D.  830,  as  Mamun  was  living  at  that  time.  Many 
copies  of  it  exist  in  Pahlavi,  Pazand,  and  Persian. 

The  Jdnidsp  ndmah  consists  of  Jamasp's  replies  to  King 
Gushtasp's  questions  regarding  creation,  history,  customs 
of  various  nations,  and  the  future  fate  of  the  religion.  The 
most  complete  manuscript  examined  contains  about  5000 
words,  but  seems  unfinished.  The  Pahlavi  text  is  rare.  A 
very   old   manuscript   in  Dastur  Peshotanji's   library  in 

1  This  name  may  also  be  read  KkHskvar-i,  or  otherwise. 


THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT.         109 

Bombay  contains  about  one-fourth  of  the  text,  but  no  other 
copy  has  been  met  with.  The  Pazand  and  Persian  ver- 
sions are  found  in  many  manuscripts. 

A  very  okl  manuscript  in  the  library  of  Dastur  Jamaspji 
in  Bombay  has  been  called  the  Fahlavi  Shdhndmak,  as  it 
contains  several  short  tales  connected  with  the  kings  of 
Persia.  Its  colophon  states  that  it  was  finished  in  India, 
in  the  town  of  Tanak,i  on  the  19th  day  of  some  month 
A.Y.  691  (a.d.  1322),  by  Mihirapan  Kai-Kbusro,  the  copyist 
who  wrote  the  oldest  manuscripts  of  the  Yasna  and  Ven- 
didad  that  are  still  extant.  The  handwriting,  however, 
more  nearly  resembles  that  of  the  old  manuscript  of  mis- 
cellaneous texts  at  Copenhagen,  which  contains  several 
■  copies  of  Mihirapan's  writings,  with  his  colophons  attached  ; 
so  that  the  Pahlavi  Shahnamak  may  also  be  a  copy  of  his 
manuscript,  but,  like  that  at  Copenhagen,  it  is  certainly 
about  five  hundred  years  old.  This  manuscript  is  much 
wormeaten,  but  a  copy  of  it  exists  at  Teheran,  made  one 
hundred  and  ten  years  ago,  before  the  original  was  much 
damaged,  which  will  probably  supply  most  of  the  defi- 
ciencies in  those  texts  of  which  no  other  copies  are  known 
to  exist. 

Of  the  texts  contained  in  this  old  manuscript  and  its 
single  complete  copy,  the  following  are  not  known  to  exist 
elsewhere  in  Pahlavi: — (i.)  Yddkdr-i  Zarirdn,  of  about 
3000  words,  containing  an  account  of  the  war  between 
King  Vishtasp  and  Arjasp.  (2.)  Cities  of  the  Land  of  Iran, 
about  880  words,  giving  their  names  and  a  very  brief 
account  of  each.  (3.)  Wonders  and  Prodigies  of  the  Land 
of  S'lstdn,  in  about  290  words.  (4.)  Khusro-i  Kavdddn 
(Noshirvan)  and  the  Slave-hoy,  who  replies  to  the  king's 
thirteen  inquiries  as  to  what  things  are  the  most  pleasant, 
about  1770  words.  (5.)  ^rfmo?itYions  to  Mazdayasnians  in 
six  separate  paragraphs,  about  940  words.     (6.)  Andarj-i 

1  In  another  colophon,  in  the  mid-     zilah,  the  date  being  the  6th  day  of 
die  of  the  manuscript,  this  place  is     the  sixth  mouth  A.  Y.  691. 
called  TamCik  in  Jazirak  (or  Gujirak) 


no        THE  PAHLAVI  LITERATURE  EXTANT. 

Khusro-i  Kavdddn  (Nosliirvan),  about  380  words,  said  to 
contain  the  dying  injunctions  of  that  monarch.  (7.) 
Sayings  of  Adarfrobag-i  Farulchzadan  and  Bakht-afrid, 
about  320  words. 

The  following  texts,  contained  in  this  old  manuscript, 
are   also   found  in  Dastur  Peshotanji's   old   manuscript, 
which  has  been  already  mentioned    as   containing   part 
of  the  Jamasp-namak ;  but  they  are  not  known  to  exist 
elsewhere  in  Pahlavi: — (i.)  Mddtjdn-i  si  rd^,  about  460 
Avords,  is  a  statement  of  what  ought  to  be  done  on  each  of 
the  thirty  days  of  the  month ;  at  the  end  it  is  called  an 
admonition  (cmdarj)  of  Adarpad-i  Maraspendan  to  his  son, 
which  leads  one  to  suspect  that  it  may  be  a  detached  por 
tion  of  his  Pandnamak.     (2.)  DirahU-i  Asurik,  about  800 
words,  is  a  debate  between  a  tree  and  a  goat  as  to  which 
of  them  is  the  more  worthy.     (3.)  Chatrang  ndmaJc,  about 
820  words,  relates  how  a  chessboard  and  chessmen  were 
sent  by  Devasarm,  a   great  king  of  India,  to  Khusro-i 
Anoshak-riiban   (Noshirvan),  with  a  request  for  an  ex- 
planation of  the  game,  which  was  given  by  Vajurg-mihir-i 
Biikhtakan,  who  afterwards  takes  the  game  of  Mv-Ardashir 
to  India,  as  an  effectual  puzzle  for  the  Indian  sages.     (4.) 
Injunctions  given  to  men  of  the  good  religion,  about  800 
•  words.      (5.)    The  Five  Dispositions  of  priests,  and  Ten 
Admonitions,  about  250  words,  which  also  occur  in  the 
Vajarkard-i-dini  (pp.  13-16  of  Dastur  Peshotanji's  edition). 
(6.)  Ddruk-i  hhursandi,  about  120  words.     (7.)  Anecdote 
of  King  Vahiriun-i  Varjavand,  about  190  words.    (8.)  Advice 
of  a  certain  man  {fiddn  gahrci),  about  740  words.     Of  the 
following  texts  contained  in  the  two  old  manuscripts  of 
Dastur   Peshotanji   and   Dastur  Jamaspji,  a   third   copy 
exists  in  the  library  of  the  latter  Dastur: — (i.)  Forms  of 
Letters  to  kings  and  great  men,  about  990  words,  found 
also    in    the    Vajarkard-i-dini    (pp.    102-113   pf    Dastur 
Peshotanji's  edition).      (2,)   Form  of  Marriage  Contract, 
dated  a.y.  627  (a.d..  1258),  about  400  words.     (3.)  Vdchah 
aechand  (some  sayings)  of  Adarpad-i  Maraspendan,  about 


THE  PAHLA  VI  LITERA  TURE  EXTANT.        1 1 1 

1 270  M^ords.    (4.)  Stdyishn-i  dron  va  sipdscldri-i  myazdpdn, 
about  5  60  words. 

Of  the  following  texts  contained  in  Dastur  Jamaspji's 
old  manuscript  many  copies  exist:— (i.)  Pandndmak-i 
ZaratusM,  about  1430  words,  contains  admonitions  as  to 
man's  duties.  A  copy  of  tbree-fourtlis  of  tins  text  exists 
in  tlie  University  Library  at  Copenhagen.  (2.)  Aiidarj-i 
Adarjjdd-i  Mdras]je7iddn,  about  1700  words,  is  sometimes 
called  his  Pandnamak,  and  contains  his  advice  to  his  son 
Zaratusht ;  but  the  last  quarter  of  the  text  is  missmg  in 
the  old  manuscript,  and  the  end  is  very  abrupt  in  other 
manuscripts,  Avhich  makes  it  probable  that  the  next  text 
in  the  old  manuscript,  the  Mddigdn-i  si  roz,  may  have 
been  originally  the  conclusion  of  this,  as  has  been  already 
noticed.  This  Pahlavi  text  was  printed  in  Bombay,  and 
published,  with  a  Gujrati  translation,  by  Shahryarji 
Dadabhai  in  1869;  and  an  English  version  of  this  Guj- 
rati translation,  by  the  Eev.  Shapurji  Edalji,  was  published 
in  1870,  but  being  a  translation  of  a  translation,  it  differs 
considerably  from  the  meaning  of  the  original.  (3.)  Kdr- 
ndmak-i  ArtakhsUr-i  Pdpakdn,  about  5600  words,  records 
many  of  the  actions  of  KingArdashir  and  his  son  Slmlipiihar, 
beginning  with  the  discovery  of  Sasan,  the  father  of  the 
former,  among  the  shepherds  of  Papak,  and  ending  with 
Aiiharmazd,  the  son  of  the  latter,  ascending  the  throne ; 
but  this  is  not  the  original  work,  as  it  begins  with  the 
phrase,  '  In  the  Karnamak  of  Artakhshir-i  Papakan  it  was 
'  thus  written.'  A  Gujrati  translation  of  this  text  was 
published  by  Dastur  Peshotanji  in  1853.  (4.)  Pand- 
ndmak-i Vajurg-mihir-i  Buklitakdn,  the  prime  minister  of 
King  Kliusro  Noshirvan,  contains  about  1690  words,  but 
seems  to  be  merely  a  fragment  of  the  work,  as  it  ends  very 
abruptly.  This  text  is  also  called  the  Ganj-i  shdigdn,  be- 
cause it  states  that  it  was  placed  in  the  royal  treasury 
{ganj-i  shaJiakdn  in  the  old  manuscript). 

The  other  old  manuscript  in  Dastur  Peshotanji's  library, 
which  includes  some  of  the  above-mentioned  texts,  likewiso 


1 1 2        THE  PAHLA  VI  LITERA  TURE  EXTANT. 

contains  the  following: — (i.)  Madigdn-i  si  yazaddn,  about 
80  words,  stating  the  one  special  quality  of  each  of  the 
thirty  Yazads  who  give  their  names  to  the  days  of  the 
month.  Another  similar  statement,  in  the  old  manuscript 
of  miscellaneous  texts  brought  from  India  by  the  author  of 
these  Essays,  specifies  different  qualities  in  most  cases.  (2.) 
Mddigdn-i  mdh  Fravardm  roj-i  Horvadad,  about  760 
words,  which  details  all  the  remarkable  occurrences  said 
to  have  taken  place,  at  different  periods,  on  the  sixth  day 
of  the  first  month  of  the  Parsi  year.  A  Persian  version  of 
this  text  is  found  in  the  Ptivayats.  (3.)  Another  Mddigdn-i 
SI  roz,  about  1 150  words,  detailing  the  proper  business  and 
duties  for  each  of  the  thirty  days  in  the  Parsi  month  and 
the  five  Gatha  days  at  the  end  of  the  Parsi  year.  This 
text  is  also  contained  in  the  Vajarkard-i  Dini  (pp.  1 13-125 
of  Dastur  Peshotanji's  edition). 

Copies  of  the  remaining  texts  are  numerous  both  in 
Pahlavi  and  Pazand.  The  3Iddigdn-i  haft  amcsMspcnd, 
about  990  words,  contains  a  detail  of  the  various  duties  of 
the  seven  Ameshaspends,  as  revealed  by  Auharmazd  to 
Zaratusht.  The  Andarj-i  ddndk  mard,  about  520  words, 
details  the  advice  of  a  wise  man  to  his  son. 

The  Fahlavi-Fdzand  farhang,  about  1300  words,  is  the 
glossary  of  Huzvarish  and  Pazand  edited  by  Dastur 
Hoshangji  and  published  in  1870.  It  is  called  the 
Mdrihidmah-i  AsAHJc,  or  Assyrian  vocabulary,  by  Dastur 
Peshotanji  in  the  list  of  Pahlavi  works  given  in  the  intro- 
duction to  his  Pahlavi  Grammar;  but  the  origin  of  this 
name  requires  explanation,  as  it  appears  to  be  unknown 
to  the  Dasturs  generally. 

The  PatU-i .Adarpdd-i  Mdraspcnd,  ohowt  1490  words,  is 
a  form  of  renunciation  of  every  possible  heinous  sin,  to  be 
recited  by  the  sinner.  The  Patit-i  khud,  about  1000 
words,  is  a  similar  form  of  renunciation,  but  somewhat 
abbreviated.  Avar  chim-i  dron,  about  380  words,  regard- 
ing the  symbolism  of  the  ceremonial  wafer-cakes,  and  the 
use  of  them  in  the  viydzd,  or  sacred  feast.     The  Pahlavi 


THE  PAHLA  VI  LITER  A  TURE  EXTANT.        1 1 3 

dshiTvdd,  or  marriage  blessing,  about  460  words.  The 
Ndm-stdyislmi,  or  praise  of  Auharmazd,  about  260  words. 
The  Afrin-i  "  tiX peshgdh-i  hliUdd"  so  called  from  its  first 
words,  about  190  words.  And  other  benedictions  and 
prayers  which  have  not  been  examined. 

A  Pahlavi  version  of  the  Sadclar  Bundahish  is  also  said 
to  exist,  but  must  be  a  modern  translation,  for  the  Sad-dar 
itself,  although  often  written  in  Avesta  characters,  seems 
to  be  rather  Persian  than  Pazand,  as  it  contains  many- 
Arabic  words.     Dastur  Peshotanji  mentions  a  few  more 
Pahlavi  texts,  some  of  which  may  be  included  among 
those  described  above,  but  under  different  names.     There 
are  also  several  Persian  texts,  such  as  the  book  of  Dadar 
bin  Dad-dukht,  &c.,  which  may  have  originated  in  Pahlavi. 
Prom  the  above  details  we  may  form  some  idea  of  the 
probable  extent  of  the  scanty  remnants  of  Pahlavi  litera- 
ture.    Without  making  any  allowance  for  works  which 
remain  unexamined  or  have  escaped  observation,  it  appears 
that  the  extant  Pahlavi  translations  from  the  Avesta  ex- 
ceed 104,000  words,  and  the  other  Pahlavi  works  exceed 
413,000  words,  making  a  total  of  upwards  of  517,000 
words  in  aU  the  extant  Pahlavi  writings  which  have  been 
examined.     This  total  is  nearly  eleven  times  the  extent  of 
the  Pahlavi  Vendidad,  or  forty  times  that  of  the  Bundahish. 
The  Parsi  community  has  been  doing  a  good  deal,  of  late 
years,  for  the  preservation  of  the  last  remnants  of  their 
national  literature,  but  it  would  be  better  if  their  efforts 
were  of  a  more  systematic  character.     Before  much  more 
is  done  for  encouraging  the  publication  of  isolated  texts,  a 
systematic  inquiry  for  manuscripts  should  be  set  on  foot, 
for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  which  are  the  oldest  and 
best  manuscripts,  so  as  to  avoid  the  error  of  editing  texts 
without  reference  to  the  best  materials.     Influential  mem- 
bers of  the  Parsi  community,  assisted  by  the  Dasturs, 
ought  to  have  but  little  difficulty  in  inducing  all  possessors 
of  manuscripts  to  supply  a  properly  organised  committee 
with  complete  catalogues  of  their  collections.     Such  cata- 


114       THE  PAHLAVT  LITERATURE  EXTANT. 

logues  need  only  be  lists  of  the  names  of  tlie  works,  with 
the  names  and  dates  of  the  copyists  when  these  are  re- 
corded ;  but  all  undated  manuscripts  supposed  to  be  more 
than  a  century  old  should  be  specially  noted.  From  such 
lists  the  committee  could  easily  prepare  a  statement  of  all 
extant  texts  and  of  the  owners  of  several  of  the  more  valu- 
able manuscripts  of  each  text.  Possessed  of  this  informa- 
tion, the  next  step  would  be  to  obtain  a  copy  of  the  oldest 
manuscript  of  each  text,  beginning  with  the  rarest  works, 
and  have  it  collated  with  one  or  two  of  the  next  oldest 
manuscripts  (not  being  copies  of  the  first).  These  collated 
copies,  if  correctly  made  witJiout  any  attempt  at  emendation, 
would  form  standard  editions  of  the  texts,  and  should  be 
carefully  preserved  in  some  public  institution  accessible  to 
all  members  of  the  Parsi  community,  such  as  the  Mulla 
Piruz  Library. 

It  can  hardly  be  expected  that  Westergaard's  edition  of 
the  Avesta  texts  can  be  much  improved  from  any  manu- 
scripts to  be  found  in  India ;  although  copies  from  Yazd 
or  Kirman,  in  Persia,  might  afford  valuable  emendations 
coming  from  an  independent  source,  but  it  is  "generally 
understood  in  India  that  there  are  very  few  such  manu- 
scripts still  existing  in  Persia.  Justi's  Old-Bactrian  Dic- 
tionary is  a  tolerably  complete  collection  of  the  Avesta 
words,  but  requires  to  be  supplemented  by  the  addition  of 
many  words  contained  in  the  Ntrangistan,  Parhang-i  oim 
khaduk,  and  Aogemadaecha ;  and  the  meanings  attached 
to  the  words  want  careful  revision. 

With  regard  to  Pahlavi  texts,  it  would  be  important  to 
discover  any  Pahlavi  Vendidad  or  Yasna  descended  from 
any  other  source  than  the  manuscripts  of  Mihirapan  Kai- 
Khiisro,  also  to  find  the  first  three  fargards,  missing  from 
his  manuscripts  in  Europe,  in  his  own  handwriting.  The 
first  two  books  of  the  Dinkard,  the  Pahlavi  text  of  the 
latter  part  of  the  Shikand-gumani,  chaps,  xxviii.-xxx.  of 
the  Bundahish,  and  a  complete  Pahlavi  version  of  the 
Jamasp-namak,  are  all  desiderata  regarding  which  some 


THE  PAHLA  VI  LITERATURE  EXTANT.        1 1  5 

information  might  be  obtained  by  a  systematic  inquiry  for 
manuscripts.  Hitherto  the  Parsis  have  had  to  rely  upon 
Europeans  for  all  explanations  of  their  literature,  beyond 
the  merely  traditional  learning  of  their  priesthood ;  they 
may  always  rely  upon  some  European  being  ready  to  carry 
on  such  investigations,  provided  the  materials  be  forth- 
coming; and  Europeans,  in  their  turn,  ought  to  be  able  to 
rely  on  the  Parsis  for  the  discovery  of  all  existing  materials, 
and  for  rendering  them  accessible. 


III. 

THE  ZEND- A  VESTA  ; 

OR, 

THE  SCRIPTURE  OF  THE  PARSIS. 


in. 


THE   ZEND-AVESTA;   OR,  THE   SCRIPTURE 
OF  THE   PARSIS. 

In  this  Essay  it  is  intended  to  give  a  brief  statement  of  the 
contents  of  the  whole  Zend-Avesta,  together  with  transla- 
tions of  some  important  or  interesting  passages  contained 
therein,  which  will  enable  the  reader  to  form  some  judg- 
ment of  the  true  character  of  the  sacred  books  of  the 
Parsis.  After  some  preliminary  remarks  about  the  name, 
extent,  and  preservation  of  the  sacred  books,  the  separate 
parts  of  the  present  Parsi  scriptures  will  be  described  in 
detail,  and  finally,  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  give  a 
short,  critical,  and  historical  sketch  of  this  religious 
literature. 

I. — THE  NAME   OF  THE   PARSI   SCRIPTURES. 

The  sacred  writings  of  the  Parsis  have  usually  been 
called  Zend-Avesta  by  Europeans,  but  this  is,  without 
doubt,  an  inversion  of  the  proper  order  of  the  words,  as 
the  Pahlavi  books  always  style  them^  avistdk  va  zancl 
(Avesta  and  Zend),  and  this  order  is  confirmed  by  the 
traditional,  as  well  as  the  critical  and  historical,  explana- 
tion of  both  terms.  In  the  opinion  of  the  present  Parsi 
priests,  Avesta  means  the  original  text  of  the  sacred  books, 
and  Zend  denotes  the  Pahlavi  translation.  This  view  is 
correct  to  a  great  extent,  as  many  passages  may  be  quoted 

^  Only  one  exception  has  been  noticed  in  many  hundred  occurrences  of  the 
phrase. 


I20     THE  NAME  OF  THE  PARSI  SCRIPTURES. 

from  tlie  Pahlavi  books  in  which  Zend  means  simply 
"translation,"  or  "commentary;"  thus  the  old  i^rt?'/;a?i;^-i 
oim  hhacluh  commences  (in  the  old  manuscripts)  with  the 
words :  Madam  hard-sliindkhtano-i  vdj  va  mdriJcdno-i 
AvistdJc,  aighash  Zand  maman  va  cMgiXn,  '  on  fully  under- 
'  standing  the  words  and  phrases  of  the  Avesta,  that  is, 
'  the  nature  and  quality  (lit.  the  what  and  the  how)  of  its 
'  Zend.'  But  it  is  probable  that  the  term  Zend  was  ori- 
ginally applied  to  commentaries  written  in  the  same  lan- 
guage as  the  Avesta,  for  in  the  Pahlavi  translation  of  the 
Yasna,  when  the  scriptures  are  mentioned,  both  terms, 
Avistdk  va  Zand,  are  used,i  as  if  of  equal  authority,  which 
would  have  been  an  instance  of  gross  self-conceit  on  the 
part  of  the  translator,  if  he  meant  his  own  translation  by 
the  term  Zend.  From  this  use  of  the  denomination 
Avesta  and  Zend  by  the  Pahlavi  translators,  we  are  fully 
entitled  to  conclude  that  the  Zend  they  mentioned  was  a 
commentary  on  the  Avesta  already  existing  before  they 
undertook  their  translation;  and  as  they  considered  it 
sacred,  this  Zend  was  probably  in  the- same  language  as 
the  original  Avesta.  There  are  many  traces,  in  the  Avesta 
quotations  and  other  phrases  of  the  Pahlavi  translations, 
of  much  of  this  old  Zend  having  been  replaced  by  the  new 
Zend  of  the  Pahlavi  translators ;  but  there  are  also  traces 
of  a  good  deal  of  it  remaining  incorporated  in  the  present 
Avesta  text,  as  will  be  pointed  out  from  time  to  time  in 
the  translations  which  follow.  The  term  Avesta  and 
Zend,  or  Zend-Avesta,  cannot  be  considered,  therefore,  as 
wholly  inappropriate  when  applied  to  the  Parsi  scrij)tures 
in  their  original  language,  although  the  word  Zend  is  im- 
properly used  when  applied  to  that  language  itself,  as  it 
is  much  more  commonly  employed  as  a  name  for  Pahlavi 
commentaries. 

Prom  the  above  remarks,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  term 

^  See  Yasna,  xxx.  i,  xxxi.  i,  where  generally  renders  the  word  Zend  by 

the  Avesta  and  Zend  of  both  sayings,  artha,    "meaning,"  in  his  Sanskrit 

or   both    blessings,  are  specified   in  translation  of  the  Yasna. 
the  Pahlavi  translation.     Neryosangh 


THE  NAME  OF  THE  PARSI  SCRIPTURES.      121 

Avesta  was  originally  confined  to  the  sacred  texts  ascribed 
to  Zarathuslitra  and  his  imniediate  disciples ;  but  in  the 
course  of  time  this  term  has  been  gradually  extended  to 
all  later  explanations  of  those  texts  written  in  the  same 
language,  till  at  the  present  time  it  includes  all  writings 
in  that  language,  whatever  their  age.  All  these  writings, 
having  become  unintelligible  to  the  majority  of  the  Zoro- 
astrians,  came  to  be  regarded  as  equally  sacred. 

The  word  Avesta  does  not  occur  in  the  sacred  texts 
themselves  with  the  meaning  now  attached  to  it,  and  it 
must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Sasanian  apistdn,  en- 
graved on  gems  in  the  phrase  apistdn  val  yazddn,  as  this 
phrase  is  also  found  in  the  Pahlavi  texts,  with  the  mean- 
ing of  "  prayers  to  God,"  whereas  the  Pahlavi  apistdh,  or 
avistdk  (Avesta),  is  a  distinct  word,  never  used  in  that 
sense,  which,  indeed,  would  be  inapplicable  to  nine-tenths 
of  the  Avesta.  So  far  as  the  form  of  the  Pahlavi  avistdk 
is  concerned,  it  might  be  best  traced  to  ava  -\-  std,  in  the 
sense  of  "  what  is  established,"  or  "  text,"  as  was  proposed 
by  M.  J.  Miiller  in  1839;  but  such  a  meaning,  though  it 
might  be  fairly  applicable  to  most  of  the  Avesta  now 
extant,  would  hardly  describe  the  very  miscellaneous  con- 
tents of  the  Nasks  which  have  been  lost,  and  which  are 
all  said  to  have  had  both  Avesta  and  Zend.  A  more 
satisfactory  meaning  can  be  obtained  by  tracing  avistdk  to 
a  +  vista  (p.  p.  of  vid,  "  to  know "),  with  the  meaning 
"  what  is  known,"  or  "  knowledge,"  1  corresponding  nearly 
with  vcda,  the  name  of  the  sacred  scriptures  of  the  Brah- 
mans.  It  may  be  objected  to  this  etymology  that  the  first 
syllable  of  avistdk  is  written  like  ap,  and  an  Avesta  v  does 
not  usually  change  into  a  Pahlavi  p;  this  is  only  true, 
however,  when  the  p  would  be  inititil ;  in  other  cases,  such 
as  vi  =  Pahl.  api,  the  change  is  common. 

With  regard  to  the  term  Zend,  we  see  that  its  applica- 
tion varied  at  different  times.     Originally  it  meant  the 

1  More  literally,  "what  is  announced,"  or  "declaration;"   approaching 
the  meaning  of  "  revelation." 


122      THE  NAME  OF  THE  PARS  I  SCRIPTURES. 

commentaries  made  by  the  successors  of  Zaratliushtra 
upon  the  sacred  writings  of  the  prophet  and  his  imme- 
diate disciples.  These  commentaries  must  have  been 
written  in  nearly  the  same  language  as  the  original  text, 
and  as  that  language  gradually  became  imintelligible  to 
all  but  the  priests,  the  commentaries  were  regarded  as  a 
part  of  the  text,  and  a  new  explanation,  or  Zend,  was 
required.  This  new  Zend  was  furnished  by  the  most 
learned  priests  of  the  Sasanian  period,  in  the  shape  of  a 
translation  into  Pahlavi,  the  vernacular  language  of  Persia 
in  those  days ;  and  in  later  times  the  term  Zend  has  been 
confined  to  this  translation. 

The  word  Zend  may  be  traced  in  dzaintish  (Yas.  Ivi. 
3,  3  Sp.)  and  is  to  be  referred  to  the  root  zan,  "  to  know," 
Sans,  jnd,  Gr.  71/&),  Lat.  gno  (in  agnosco  and  cognosce),  so 
that  it  has  the  meaning  of  "  knowledge,  science."  What 
passages  in  the  present  Avesta  may  be  supposed  to  be 
remnants  of  the  old  Zend  will  be  pointed  out  when- 
ever they  occur  in  the  translations  we  propose  to  give 
further  on. 

The  term  Pazand,  which  is  met  with, frequently  in  con- 
nection with  Avesta  and  Zend,  denotes  a  further  explana- 
tion of  the  Zend,  and  is  probably  a  corruption  of  j^ciiii- 
zanti,  which  must  have  meant  "re-explanation;"  this 
word  does  actually  occur  (Yas.  lix.  2  Sp.),  but  with  a 
more  general  meaning.  Some  passages  in  the  present 
Avesta  will  be  pointed  out,  in  the  translations  further  on, 
which  may  be  supposed  to  represent  an  old  Pazand  in  the 
Avesta  language  ;  but  at  present  the  term  Pazand  (as  has 
been  already  shown  in  the  second  Essay)  is  apj)lied  only 
to  purely  Iranian  versions  of  Pahlavi  texts,  whether 
written  in  the  Avesta  or  Persian  characters,  and  to  such 
parts  of  Pahlavi  texts  as  are  not  Huzvarish. 


ORIGINAL  EXTENT  OF  THE  ZEND- A  VESTA.  123 


II. — THE  OEIGINAL  EXTENT  OF  THE  ZEND-AVESTA. 
THE  NASKS. 

From  the  ancient  classical  writers,  as  well  as  from  the 
tradition  of  the  Parsis,  we  learn  that  the  religious  litera- 
ture of  the  ancient  Persians  was  of  considerable  extent, 
though  the  Zend-Avesta,  in  its  present  state,  is  a  compara- 
tively small  book.  This  circumstance  necessarily  leads  us 
to  the  conclusion,  that  the  sacred  literature  of  the  Zoroas- 
trians  has  suffered  very  heavy  losses.  Thus  Pliny  reports, 
on  the  authority  of  Hermippos,  the  Greek  philosopher 
(see  page  8),  that  Zoroaster  composed  two  ciillions  of 
verses  ;  and  an  Arab  historian,  Abu  Jafir  Attavari,! 
assures  us  that  Zoroaster's  writings  covered  twelve  hun- 
dred cowhides  (parchments).  These  reports  might  appear, 
at  the  first  glance,  to  be  exaggerations,  but  for  the  enor- 
mous extent  of  the  sacred  books  of  other  Oriental  nations,2 
which  affords  us  suJBficient  reason  for  believing  that  the 
number  and  extent  of  the  books  ascribed  to  Zoroaster  by 
his  followers  may  have  been  very  considerable. 

The  loss  of  most  of  these  writings,  known  to  the  ancient 
Greeks,  is  ascribed  by  the  Parsis  mainly  to  the  ravages 
attendant  upon  the  conquest  of  the  Persian  Empire  by  \ 
Alexander  the  Great.  Thus  it  appears  from  the  third  I 
book  of  the  Dinkard,  that  at  the  time  of  Alexander's 
inroad  there  were  only  two  complete  copies  of  the  sacred 
books  (a  term  which  the  Dinkard  seems  to  identify  with 
itself) ;  one  of  these  was  deposited  in  the  royal  archives  at 

^  Hyde,  De  Religione  Vetenim  Per-  words,  we  may  conclude  that  each 

sarum,  p.  318.  line  must  contain  as  much  as  ten  lines 

2  Thus,  for  instance,  the  text  of  the  of    any   ordinary  poetical    measure, 

sacred  books  of  the  southern  Bud-  Thus,45oox2X9X  10  =  8io,ooolines 

dhists  of  Ceylon,  Birma,  &c.,  accord-  of  ordinary    measure.      Again,    the 

ing  to  Tumour's  computation,  com-  commentary    extends    to    a    greater 

prises  4500  leaves,  each  page  being  length  than  the  text,  so  that  there 

fibout  two  feet  long  and  containing  must  be  nearly  2,000,000  lines  in  the 

nine  lines.     The  text  being  written  whole  of  these  sacred  books, 
without    any    spaces    between    the 


124  THE  ORIGINAL  EXTENT  OF  THE 

Persepolis,  which  were   burned   by  Alexander,  and   the 
other,  which  was  deposited  in  another  treasury,  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  Greeks,  and  was  translated  into  their 
language.     The  Arda-Viraf-namak  mentions  only  the  one 
copy  of  the  Avesta  and  Zend  of  the  religion,  which  was 
deposited  in  the  archives  at  Persepolis,  and  burned  by 
Alexander;  but  it  also  mentions  that  he  killed  many  of 
the  priests  and  nobles.     Both  these  accounts  were  written 
ages  after  the  events  they  describe,  so  they  merely  repre- 
sent the  tradition  that  had  been  handed  down,  probably 
in  writing,  or  otherwise  it  would  have  been  more  exag- 
gerated;  but  as  these  accounts  appear  to  have  been  written 
before  the  Mohammedan  conquest,  they  cannot  have  con- 
founded Alexander's  ravages  with  those  of  the  Mohamme- 
dans, for  details  of  which  we  may  refer  to  the  Bahman 
Yasht.     But  although  these  accounts  must  be  founded 
upon  tradition,  they  are  singularly  confirmed  by  the  ac- 
counts given  by  classical  writers.      Thus  we  find  from 
Diodorus  (xvii.  72)  and  Curtius   (v.  7),  that  Alexander 
really  did  burn  the  citadel  and  royal  palace  at  Persepolis, 
in  a  drunken  frolic,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Athenian 
courtesan  Thais,  and  in  revenge  for  the  destruction  of 
Greek  temples  by  Xerxes.     Arrian  (Exped.  Alex.,  iii.  18) 
also  speaks  of  his  burning  the  royal  palace  of  the  Persians. 
This  act  of  barbarous  folly  was  evidently  the  result  of 
hasty  impulse,  and   was   probably  committed   at  night, 
when  the  palace  was  full  of  attendants,  courtiers,  and 
priests ;  the  last,  who  had  special  charge  of  the  archives, 
would  naturally  attempt  to  save  their  treasures,  and  would 
certainly  be  opposed  by  the  intoxicated  Greeks,  at  the 
cost  of  many  lives.     The  sacred  books  would  be  burned 
with  the  archives,  in  which  they  were  deposited,  and  many 
Persians,  priests  and  others,  would  lose  their  lives  in  the 
confusion.     Such  would  be  the  natural  consequences  of 
the  facts  mentioned  by  the  Western  writers,  and  such  are 
the  traditional  statements  of  the  Parsis. 

But  besides  the  official  copies  of  the  sacred  books,  there 


ZEND-AVESTA.— THE  NASKS.  125 

must  have  been  other  copies  of  many  portions  of  them, 
which  would  "be  indispensably  necessary  in  all  cities  where 
priests  and  judges  had  to  perform  their  duties ;  and  the 
copies  of  the  sacred  books,  which  the  first  Sasanian 
monarchs  collected,  were  no  doubt  derived  from  these 
scattered  copies.  Notwithstanding  the  long  interval  of 
550  years  of  foreign  domination  and  domestic  anarchy, 
which  had  intervened  between  Alexander  and  Ardashir 
Papakan,  the  Sasanian  kings  were  able  to  collect  a  large 
proportion  of  the  old  writings,  if  we  may  believe  the 
details  given  of  the  contents  of  the  books  in  their  days ; 
and  it  is,  therefore,  to  the  later  ravages  and  persecutions, 
occasioned  by  the  Mohammedans,  that  we  must  attribute 
the  final  loss  of  most  of  the  writings.  No  doubt  the 
books,  as  restored  by  the  Sasanians,  were  chiefly  collec- 
tions of  fragments ;  but  some  portion  of  nearly  every 
book  seems  to  have  been  recovered  by  them,  and  the 
total  disappearance  of  most  of  the  books  must  be  traced 
to  recent  times. 

The  names  of  all  the  books  are,  however,  extant,  to- 
gether with  short  summaries  of  their  contents.  Accord- 
ing  to  these  reports,  the  whole  scripture  consisted  of 
twenty-one  books,  called  Nasks,i  each  containing  Avesta 
and  Zend,  i.e.,  an  original  text  with  a  commentary  on  it. 
The  number  21  was  evidently  an  artificial  arrangement, 
in  order  to  have  one  Nask  to  each  of  the  21  words  of 
the  most  sacred  formula  of  the  Zoroastrians,  which  are 
as  follows : — 

Yatha  ahU  vairyd,  atkd  ratush,  ashdd  rM<}  hachd, 
Vanheush  dazdd  mananho,  shhyaothnanam  anheush  mazddi, 
Khshathremchd  ahurai  a,  yim  dregubyo  dadha<}  vdstdrem. 

Each  of  the  Nasks  was,  as  it  were,  indexed  under  one 
particular  word  of  this  formula ;  and  in  the  same  manner 

^  This  word  occurs  in  the   Zend-  seems  to  be  of  foreign  origin,  and  is 

Avesta  itself  (Yas.  ix.  73  Sp.)  in  the  probably  identicnl  with  the  Assyrian 

compound  nasko-frasuonhn,  "study-  nvsku,  and  the  Arabic  nuskhah,  pi. 

ing  the  Nasks,"  that  is  to  say,  the  nusakh. 
different  parts  of  the  scripture.     It 


126  THE  ORIGINAL  EXTENT  OF  THE 

as  this  formula  consists  of  three  lines  or  verses  (^as), 
so  also  the  ISTasks  were  divided  into  three  classes,  ac- 
cording to  their  subjects  to  some  extent,  but  not  very 
strictly  so. 

Several  descriptions  of  the  contents  of  these  Nasks  are 
extant.  The  longest  of  these  accounts  forms  the  eighth  and 
ninth  books  of  the  Dinkard,  as  has  been  already  noticed  (p. 
lOi),  and  goes  into  many  details  with  regard  to  about  one- 
third  of  the  Nasks,  though  noticing  the  others  much  more 
superficially.  Another  Pahlavi  description  of  the  Nasks 
is  found  in  the  Dini-vajarkard,  and  this  does  not  differ 
much  from  those  given  in  the  Eivayats.  Persian  descrip- 
tions of  the  same  are  found  in  the  Eivayats  i  of  Kamah 
Bahrah,  Barzu  Qiyamu-d-din,  and  Nariman  Hoshang; 
these  differ  but  little,  except  in  small  details.  The  fol- 
lowing statement  of  the  contents  of  the  Nasks  is  taken 
from  the  Dini-vajarkard,2  except  where  otherwise  noted, 
but  their  names  and  the  order  in  which  they  stand  are 
corrected  from  the  Dinkard. 

I.  Sudkar,  "  conferring  benefits,"  corresponding  to  the 
Avesta  word  yathd  in  the  YatJid  ahijb  vairyd  formula, 
and  called  Studgar,  or  Istudgar,  in  the  Eivayats  and 
Dini-vajarkard,  consisted  of  22  sections.  It  contained 
advice  to  mankind  as  to  prayer  and  virtue,  the  perform- 
ance of  good  actions  and  meditation,  producing  harmony 
among  relations,  and  such-like  matters.  In  the  Eivayats 
and  Dini-vajarkard  this  Nask  is  the  second,  as  their  lists 
begin  with  the  twenty- first  Nask,  which  removes  all  the 
others  one  step  lower  down ;  this  error  appears  to  have 
been  occasioned  by  the  Dinkard  giving  two  lists,  one 
dividing   the  Nasks   into  three  classes,  gdsdnik,  liddcik- 

1  The  Rivayats  are  miscellaneous  from  the  Vajarkard-i-dini  described 
collections  of  information  and  deci-  in  P-  loo,  but  it  has  not  been  exa- 
sions  regarding  the  religion,  made  by  mined.  The  passage  referring  to 
various  old  Dasturs,  chiefly  in  Per-  the  Nasks  was  extracted  from  a 
sian,  but  also  containing  translations  manuscript  in  the  library  of  the 
of  passages  from  religious  books,  both  Khin  Bahadar  Dastur  Noshirviinji 
in  Persian  verse  and  Pazand.  Jamaspji,  at  Poona. 

2  This  must  be  a  different  -work 


ZEND-AVESTA.— THE  NASKS.  127 

mdnsarik  (or  yashtak-mdnsarik),  and  dddih ;  1  the  other 
recapitulating  the  names  in  their  proper  order,  which  is 
preserved  in  the  after  descriptions  of  their  contents.  The 
first  or  classified  list  begins  with  the  twenty-first  Nask 
on  the  general  list,  and  this  may  have  led  the  writers 
of  the  Eivayats  to  consider  it  the  first  Nask.  That 
the  second  list  in  the  Dinkard  is  correct,  appears  from 
its  placing  the  Vendiclad  nineteenth  on  the  list,  which 
is  confirmed  by  Eustam-i  Mihirapan's  colophon  in  the 
old  Vendidad  with  Pahlavi  at  Copenhagen ;  whereas  the 
Eivayats  and  Dini-vajarkard  make  it  the  twentieth. 

2.  Varshtamdnsar,  corresponding  to  Av.  ahlX  in  Y.  a.  v., 
and  called  Vahisht-mansrah  (or  mantar)  in  the  Eiv.  and 
D.V.,  consisted  of  22  sections.  It  contained  reasons  for 
being  trustful  and  heedful  of  the  Mazdayasnian  religion, 
for  attending  to  religion,  and  using  the  benedictions  and 
praises  of  the  blessed  Zaratusht;  also  all  events  before 
Zaratusht  which  were  manifestly  good,  and  all  events 
which  are  to  be  after  Zaratusht  until  the  future  exist- 
ence ;  the  benefits  of  this  world,  and  such-like  matters. 

3.  Bako,  corresponding  to  Av.  vairyo  in  Y.  a.  v.,  and 
called  Bagh  in  the  Eiv.  and  D.v.,  consisted  of  2 1  sections. 
It  contained  an  explanation  of  the  Mazdayasnian  religion 
and  the  ideas  which  Auharmazd  taught  to  men ;  the  exer- 
cise of  reverence,  heedfulness,  law,  and  judgment;  the 
performance  of  the  proper  duty  and  good  actions  of  a 
magistrate ;  stopping  the  admission  of  the  evil  spirit  into 
one's  self,  attaining  spiritual  existence  for  one's  self,  and 
such-like. 

4.  Ddmddd,  corresponding  to  Av.  athd  in  Y.  a.  v.,  and 
called  Dvazdah-hamast  (or  homast)  in  the  Eiv.  and  D.v., 
consisted  of  32  sections.  It  contained  an  explanation  of 
the  spiritual  existence  and  heaven,  good  and  evil,  the 
material  existence  of  this  world,  the  sky  and  the  earth, 
and   everything   which  Auharmazd   produced    in   water, 

1  The  seven  gdsdntk  are  Nasks  21,     mdnsartk  are  Nasks  4-10 ;   and  the 
I,  2,  3,  II,  20,  13  ;  the  seven  liddak-     seven  dddik  are  Nasks  15-19,  12,  14. 


128  THE  ORIGINAL  EXTENT  OF  THE 

fire,  and  vegetation,  men  and  quadrupeds,  reptiles  and 
birds,  and  everything  which  is  produced  from  the  waters, 
and  the  characteristics  of  all  things.  Secondly,  the  pro- 
duction of  the  resurrection  and  future  existence ;  the  con- 
course and  separation  at  the  Chinvad  bridge ;  on  the  re- 
ward of  the  meritorious  and  the  punishment  of  sinners 
in  the  future  existence,!  and  such-like  explanations. 

5.  Nddar,  corresponding  to  Av.  ratush  in  Y.  a.  v.,  and 
called  Nadur  in  D.v.,  consisted  of  35  sections.  It  con- 
tained explanations  of  the  stars,  both  fixed  and  planetary, 
the  good  and  evil  (influence)  of  each  star,  the  course  of 
all  the  planets  in  the  signs  of  the  zodiac  and  lunar 
mansions.  It  is  translated  into  Arabic  and  Persian,  and 
they  named  the  book  Biital;  in  Persian  it  is  named 
Kapamajan.2 

6.  Pdjak,  or  Pdji,  corresponding  to  Av.  asJidcl  in 
Y.  a.  v.,  and  called  Pajam  in  the  Eiv.  and  D.v.,  con- 
sisted of  22  sections.  It  contained  explanations  of  the 
slaughter  of  quadrupeds  and  sheep,  and  how  they  are 
to  be  slaughtered ;  which  quadrupeds  it  is  lawful  to  eat, 
and  which  kinds  are  not  lawful ;  how  he  who  slauohters 
should  strike  at  the  time  the  sheep  is  expiring.^  The 
more  that  is  spent  upon  a  Gahanbar,^  so  much  the  more 

1  The  text  appears  to  be  va  madam  3  The  slaughtering  is  performed  by 

vindskdrdn  padafrds-i  yeherilned  pa-  cutting  {pesMn(ano),  but  the  animal 

van  tanil-i  pasin  in  the  Dini-vajar-  must  be  finally  killed  by  a  blow,  as 

kard.     If  the  meaning  be  that  the  explained  by  Dastur  Hoshangji. 

punishment  is  to  endure  duriyig  the  ■*  One  of  the  six   season  festivals 

future  existence,  which  is  not  quite  which  are  held  on  the  45th,  105th, 

certain,   the  D.v.    differs    from    the  i8oth,  210th,  290th,  and  365th  days 

orthodox  view;  it  is  not,   however,  of  the  Parsi  year,  which  commences 

a  book  of  any  authority,  as  the  text  now  on  the  20th   of  September  ac- 

is   evidently  a  mere   translation    of  cording  to  Indian  Parsi  reckoning, 

modern  Persian.  or  on  the  21st  of  August  according 

*  The  Eivdyats  are  quite  uncertain  to  Persian  reckoning,  but  retrogrades 

how  to  read  these  names,  but  they  one    day    every    leaj)-year.       These 

prefer  Bawaftfil  and  Fawamsubhhan,  periods,    which    seem    originally    to 

but  Faw^mjasan,  FawamikhsS,n,  and  have  been    the  six    seasons   of    the 

even  Khawagahhan,  occur  in  different  year,    came    to    represent,    in    later 

copies.     Tiie  Dinkard  knows  nothing  times,   the   six  periods  of   creation, 

about   the  contents    of   the    Nadar  See  section  xi.  of  this  Essay. 
Nask,  so  that  the  Rivayats  must  have 
Lad  other  sources  of  information. 


ZEND-AVESTA.— THE  MASKS.  129 

is  the  reward ;  how  much  it  is  needful  to  bestow  upon 
Dasturs,  Mobads,  and  Herbads,  and  upon  the  unwavering 
doers  of  good  works  in  the  good  religion ;  to  every  one 
who  celebrates  a  Gahanbar,  and  consecrates  a  dress  ^  for 
a  (departed)  soul,  what  happens  in  the  last  times  and 
in  heaven,  and  what  merit  accrues  to  him;  the  giving 
of  a  dress  in  charity  for  righteous  relatives,  using  media- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  righteous,  the  five  greater  and 
lesser  Fravardigan^  days;  and  the  performance  of  good 
works  on  these  ten  days  is  enjoined  in  this  ISTask;  all 
men  should  read  this  book,  with  good  and  wise  under- 
standing, who  would  become  fully  aware  of  its  explana- 
tions. 

7.  Batoslitditi,  corresponding  to  Av.  cliirl  in  Y.  a.  v., 
and  called  Eatushtai  in  the  Eiv.  and  D.v.,  consisted  of 
50  sections  until  the  accursed  Alexander  burnt  the  ISTasks, 
but  after  that  only  a  fragment  containing  13  sections 
came  to  hand,  as  the  rest  no  longer  existed.  It  con- 
tained explanations  of  performing  service,  giving  orders, 
and  remaining  at  the  command  of  kings,  high-priests,  and 
judges;  the  means  of  preserving  cities  is  declared;  the 
commands  of  religion,  and  means  of  taking  reptiles,  birds, 
cattle,  and  fish ;  everything  which  is  a  creation  of  Auhar- 
mazd  and  Ahriman ;  accounts  of  all  seas,  mountains,  and 
lands ;  and  matters  similar  to  those  mentioned. 

8.  Barish,  corresponding  to  Av.  hachd  in  Y.  a.  v.,  con- 
sisted of  60  sections  at  first,  but  after  the  accursed  Alex- 
ander's (time  only)  12  remained.  It  contained  informa- 
tion as  to  how  kings  should  rule,  and  what  should  be 
the  orders  and  decrees  of  the  judges  of  the  religion ;  the 
preservation  and  protection  of  the  world;  making  every 
new  city  flourish ;  accounts  of  false-speaking  men,  sinners, 
and  such-like  are  given  in  this  IsTask. 

1  Or  "a  cup,"  the  text  being  ^a  {fravashi,  fravarti),  or  spiritual  re- 
jdm-i  joavan  r'Midn  yezhekhilncd.  presentatives,    of    the    deceased    are 

-  The  last  five  days  of  the  old  year  believed  to  come  to  the  houses  ;  and 
and  the  first  five  of  the  new  one.  the  days  are,  therefore,  called  Fra- 
During  these  ten    days  the  frdhars    vardigan. 

I 


I30  THE  ORIGINAL  EXTENT  OF  THE 

g.  Kashldsrobo,  corresponding  to  Av.  vanJmish  in  Y. 
a.  v.,  and  called  Kashkasirali  or  Kasbsrob  in  tbe  Eiv. 
and  D.v.,  consisted  of  60  sections  formerly,  but  after  tbe 
accursed  Alexander's  (time  only)  15  remained.  It  con- 
tained accounts  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  tbe  cause  of 
cbildbirtbjl  teacbing  guides  to  wisdom,  performance  of 
purification,  speaking  trutb,  bringing  mankind  from  evil 
to  good,  bringing  tbem  from  impurity  and  filtb  to  purity ; 
greatness  and  promotion  are  for  men  near  kings ;  and  in 
wbat  manner  men  become  tellers  of  falsebood  to  relatives 
and  kings,  and  sucb-like, 

10.  Vishtdsp-sdstd,  corresponding  to  Av.  dazdd  in  Y. 
a.  v.,  and  called  Visbtasp-sbab  or  Visbtasp  in  tbe  Eivayats, 
and  Visbtaspad  in  D.v.,  consisted  of  60  sections,  but  after 
tbe  accursed  Alexander's  (time  only)  10  remained.2  It 
contained  an  account  of  tbe  reign  of  Gusbtasp;  tbat 
Zaratiisbt-i  Spitaman  brougbt  tbe  religion  from  Aiibar- 
mazd,  and  King  Visbtasp  accepted  it  and  made  it  current 
in  tbe  world ;  and  sucb-like. 

11.  Vashti  or  Dddak,^  corresponding  to  Av.  mananJiS 
in  Y.  a.  v.,  and  called  Kbasbt  in  tbe  Eivayats,  and  Khustd 
in  D.V.,  consisted  of  22  sections  originally,  but  after  tbe 
accursed  Alexander's  (time  only)  6  remained  (called  juziva, 
"  portion,  bundle  of  folios,"  in  tbe  Eivayats).  Tbe  first 
portion  was  about  understanding  tbe  attributes  of  Aubar- 
mazd,  being  witbout  doubts  about  tbe  religion  of  Zara- 
tusbt,  all  tlie  duties  and  good  works  wbicb  are  enjoined 
in  tbe  religion,  and  sucb-like.  Tbe  second  portion  was 
about  accepting  service,  tbe  trutb  of  religion,  and  all 
commands,  from  kings ;  and  witbbolding  one's  band  from 
evil  doings,  so  tbat  it  may  be  far  from  vice.  Tbe  tbird 
portion  was  about  debt  to  virtuous  disputants,  tbe  ad- 
vantage and  merit  of  tbe  last  deliverance  from  bell,  and 
sucb-like.      Tbe   fourtb  was   about   tbe   creation   of  tbe 

1  Chtm-i    peduk-yehcvUntano    inin  ^  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  first 

amtdar  in  the  original  text.  letter  in  one  of  the  lists  be  part  of 

-  The  Rivayat  of  Barzvl  Qiyamu-d-  the  name,  or  merely  the  coujuuction 

din  says  "  eight."  i«. 


ZEND-AVESTA.— THE  NASKS.  131 

world,  the  practice  of  agriculture,  the  cultivation  of  trees, 
the  date-tree  and  all  fruit-trees;  whence  is  the  chief 
strength  of  men  and  cattle;  on  the  obedience  of  the 
doers  of  good  works  and  the  virtuous,  on  obedience  to 
Dasturs,  and  such-like.  The  fifth  portion  was  on  the 
ranks  of  men;  all  are  mentioned  whose  knowledge  is 
great,  as  kings,  judges,  and  the  learned  in  religion;  in 
the  second  rank  are  all  who  take  care  of  the  country 
and  attack  the  enemy ;  in  the  third  rank  are  those  who 
are  called  vdstrydshdn,  "  agriculturists  ; "  the  fourth  rank 
is  said  to  be  those  of  great  skill,  market  dealers  of  dili- 
gence and  volubility  to  avoid  loss,  giving  one-tenth  to 
the  Dastur  and  king,  offering  praise  on  their  hardened 
knees,  and  whose  last  reward  is  that  they  obtain  in 
heaven.  The  contents  of  the  sixth  portion  are  not 
stated. 

12.  Chidraslito,  corresponding  to  Av.  slihjaothnandm  in 
Y.  a.  v.,  and  called  Jirasht  in  the  Riv.  and  D.v.,  consisted 
of  22  sections.  This  Nask  was  sent  by  Auharmazd  to 
manifest  to  men  what  are  the  details  of  that  science 
through  which  mankind  is  born ;  1  how  many  individuals 
are  still-born,  and  how  many  will  live ;  then,  how  many 
men  become  kings,  and  how  many  perform  the  mission 
of  prophesy  and  high-priesthood,  how  many  men  are 
very  great,  and  how  many  are  very  small  men,  and 
how  this  happens;  from  first  to  last  the  time  men  are 
born,  and  all  those  details  are  in  this  Nask.  The 
numbers  of  all  the  preceding  Nasks,  as  given  in  the 
Eivayats  and  Dini-vajarkard,  have  been  one  in  excess 
of  those  given  in  the  Dinkard,  their  order  being  in  both 
cases  the  same;  but  this  Nask  and  the  next  one  have 
changed  places  (and  so  have  the  i6th  and  17th  ISTasks) 
in  the  Eiv.  and  D.v.,  which  make  this  the  14th  Nask. 

13.  Spend,  corresponding  to  Av.   anheush  in   Y.  a.  v., 
and  called  Sfend  in  the  Eivayats,  consisted  of  60  sections, 

1  Maman  chim  zak  ddnishn-i  miin    zcrlcMned  in  the  original  text,  mean- 
mardUm  min  askkomio-i  mcido  hard    ing  "  midwifery." 


132  THE  ORIGINAL  EXTENT  OF  THE 

wliicli  are  valuable  to  great  men,  productive  of  virtuous 
actions,  and  cause  attention  to  the  great  and  religious.  It 
contained  accounts  of  Zaratusht  from  his  being  brought 
forth  by  Dughda  till  his  tenth  year.  Every  Dastur  and 
Mobad,  who  shall  reverentially  recite  this  Nask  for  several 
days  in  purity  and  by  heart,  shall  obtain  every  wish  for 
himself,  or  any  favour  he  may  request  for  others.  This  is 
the  1 3th  ISTask  according  to  all  authorities. 

14.  Bakdn-yast6,  "worship  of  divinities,"  corresponding 
to  Av.  mazddi  in  Y.  a.  v.,  and  called  Baghan-yasht  in  the 
Eiv.  and  D.v.,  consisted  of  17  sections.i  It  contained 
accounts  of  Aiiharmazd  the  lord,  the  knowledge  of  his 
attributes,  the  service  and  sublimity  of  Auharmazd,  when 
is  the  time  of  every  Gah  (time  of  prayer)  till  the  future 
existence,  what  duty  is  to  be  performed,  the  offering  praise 
for  every  benefit  from  Auharmazd,  obtaining  benefits  from 
him ;  the  appearance  {chitar)  of  the  Ameshaspends,  and 
knowing  in  the  future  existence  what  is  such-and-such  an 
appearance  of  such-and-such  an  Ameshaspend.  This  Nask, 
made  in  homage  of  Aiiharmazd  and  the  Ameshaspends,  is 
very  fine. 

15.  Nikcicliim,  corresponding  to  Av.  khshaihremclid  in 
Y.  a.  v.,  and  called  Ni varum  2  in  the  Eiv.  and  D.v.,  con- 
sisted of  54  sections.  It  contained  details  about  preserv- 
ing wealth  and  placing  it  out,  bargaining  and  measuring 
by  the  cubit  and  handful ;  everything  the  creator  Auhar- 
mazd has  ordained  as  innocent;  deliverance  from  hell, 
and  how  to  walk  in  tlie  path  of  reverence  and  worship ; 
what  is  in  the  mind  of  man,  and  everything  which  is  in 
the  body  of  man,  and  similar  matters  to  those  mentioned. 

16.  Dubdsrujd^  or  Bubdsr'dd,  corresponding  to  Av. 
ahurdi  in    Y.   a.  v.,  and  called  Dvasrujad,  Dvasrunjad, 

^  D.v.  says  i8,  but  this  is  probably  this   form  of  the  name,  but  this  is 

a  copyist's  error.  probably   a    copyist's    blunder;    the 

^  Evidently  a  modern  Persian  blun-  second  form  is  evidently  reproduced 

der,  as  r  and  d  are  very  similar  in  in  the  last  Rivayat  form,  which  would 

that  alphabet.  he ' dixisrilt  if  it   were  not   wrongly 

2  The  Dinkard  prefixes  d'G,hdrS<^  to  pointed. 


ZEND-AVESTA.— THE  NASKS.  133 

Dvasrub  in  different  Eivayats,  and  Dvasriizd  in  D.v.,  con- 
sisted of  65  sections.  It  contained  accounts  of  khvit'Akdas 
(next-of-kin  marriage),  forming  connections  among  rela- 
tives, and  such-like.  In  the  Eiv.  and  D.v.  this  is  the 
1 8th  ISTask,  having  changed  places  with  the  next  one, 
as  has  been  already  noticed  in  the  remarks  on  the  I2tli 
Nask. 

17.  Huspdram,  corresponding  to  Av.  a  in  Y.  a.  v.,  and 
called  Aspfiram  in  the  Eivayats,  and  Asparum  in  D.v., 
consisted  of  64  sections  according  to  the  Eivayats  (one  of 
them  says  60),  or  65  according  to  D.v.  It  contained 
religious  matters  which  all  people  know  well,  the  punish- 
ment suffered  by  sinners  which  they  receive  in  their  last 
career;  everything  which  is  innocent  is  allowable,  and 
what  is  not  innocent  is  not  allowal)le;  the  stars  which 
preside  over  the  destiny  of  men,  and  such-like.  This  is 
the  17th  Nask  according  to  all  authorities. 

18.  Sahadilm,  corresponding  to  Av.  yim  in  T.  a.  v.,  and 
called  Askaram  in  the  Eivayats,  and  Askririim  in  D.v., 
consisted  of  52  sections.  About  giving  orders  and  exer- 
cising authority,  practising  wisdom  in  everything ;  causing 
the  resurrection,  by  which  every  man  who  has  passed 
away  is  made  living  again,  and  the  malformations  of 
Ahriman  and  the  demons  are  destroyed ;  and  the  like. 

19.  ViJc-dSv-ddd,  Vik-shSdd-ddd,  or  Javid-shedd-ddd, 
corresponding  to  Av.  dreguhyo  in  Y.  a.  v.,  and  called  Van- 
didad,  or  Jud-dev-dad,  in  the  Eivayats  and  D.v.,  consists 
of  22  sections.  About  what  preserves  men  from  evil  and 
impurity,  and  will  restrain  them  from  all  kinds  of  pollu- 
tion. Of  all  the  21  Nasks,  the  Javid-dev-dad  has  re- 
mained complete ;  while  several  remained  scattered  by 
the  wretched  accursed  Alexander,  this  Vendidad  remained 
in  hand,  and  from  its  elucidation  the  Mazdayasnian  reli- 
gion exists  now. 

20.  Hddokhto,  corresponding  to  Av.  dadad  in  Y.  a.  v., 
and  called  Hadukht  in  the  Eivayats,  consisted  of  30  sec- 
tions.    It  contained  much  goodness  and  much  gratifica- 


134  THE  BOOKS  NOW  EXTANT. 

tion.  Every  one  who  recites  this  Hadoldat,  drives  the  evil 
Ahriman  far  from  him,  and  approaches  and  comes  near 
to  Auharmazd.  This  is  the  21st  Nask  according  to  the 
Eivayats  and  D.v.,  which  remove  all  the  Nasks;  except 
the  1 2th,  13th,  1 6th,  17th,  and  21st,  one  step  lower  on 
the  list. 

21.  StiXd-yastd,  corresponding  to  Av.  vdstdrem  in  Y.  a.  v., 
and  called  Stiad-yasht  in  the  Eiv.  and  D.v.,  consisted  of 
33  sections.  It  contained  the  praise  and  reverence  of 
Auharmazd  and  the  Ameshaspends,  and  thanksgivings. 
Auharmazd  sent  this  Nask  into  the  world  that  every  one 
should  recite  it  from  memory;  and  to  every  Dastur  who 
recites  both  the  Avesta  and  Zend  of  this  ISTask  three 
times  accurately  the  Ameshaspends  will  come  near;  he 
knows  this  without  doubt.  This  is  the  ist  Nask  in  the 
Eivayats  and  D.v.,  as  has  been  previously  mentioned. 

III. — THE  BOOKS  NOW  EXTANT,  AND  THE  SUPPOSED 
ZOROASTRIAN  AUTHORSHIP. 

Of  these  twenty-one  IsTasks,  wliich  have  been  enume- 
rated, only  the  nineteenth,  the  Vendidad,  is  preserved 
complete ;  of  a  few  of  the  others,  such  as  the  Vishtdsp- 
sdsto  and  HddokhtS,  and  perhaps  the  Baho,^  some  frag- 
ments only  are  extant;  but  by  far  the  larger  number  of 
these  ancient  sacred  books  have  been  lost  for  ever.  There 
are,  however,  in  the  Zend-Avesta,  as  used  by  the  Parsi 
priests  nowadays,  other  books  extant  besides  the  Vendi- 
dad, which  are  either  not  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  list, 
as  the  Yasna  and  Visparad,  or  not  clearly  indicated,  as 
the  Yaslits.  These  last,  as  well  as  the  shorter  prayers 
{JSfydyisli,  Afringdn,  Gdhs,  Sirozali),  were  very  probably 
contained  in  the  14th  and  21st  ISTasks. 


*  In  the  library  of  the  Khdn  BahA-  the  treatment  of  a  dead  body    and 

dar  Dastur   Nosliirvanji,    at   Poena,  the   fate    of    the   soul    immediately 

there  is  a  small  fragment  said  to  be-  after  death  ;  but  Dastur  Hoshaugji  is 

long  to  this  Nask,   and   referring  to  doubtful  about  its  authenticity. 


THE  BOOKS  NOW  EXTANT.  135 

As  to  the  Yasna  and  Visparacl,  they  are  not  to  be 
found  in  any  of  tlie  twenty-one  Nasks,  if  we  examine 
the  statements  of  their  contents.  They  were  probably 
separate  from  them  altogether,  occupying  in  regard  to  the 
Nasks  the  same  rank  as  the  Vedas,  in  the  Brahmanical 
literature,  do  in  reference  to  the  Shastras  and  Puranas. 
That  the  Yasna  is  the  most  sacred  book  of  the  whole 
Zend-Avesta  may  be  easily  ascertained  by  perusing  and 
comparing  it  with  the  other  books  contained  in  the  scripture 
of  the  Parsis  nowadays,  where  (as  in  the  Vendidad)  many 
verses  from  it  are  quoted  as  most  sacred  and  scriptural. 

The  difterence  between  the  Yasna  and  the  Avcsta-Zend 
said  to  have  been  contained  in  the  twenty-one  Nasks  is 
about  the  same  as  that  between  the  five  Mosaic  books 
(Pentateuch),  which  were  always  believed  by  the  Jews 
to  be  the  most  sacred  part  of  the  Old  Testament,i  and 
the  other  books  of  the  Old  Testament  together  with 
the  different  parts  of  the  extensive  Talmud."  There  is 
no  doubt,  and  the  present  state  of  the  only  Nask  now 
completely  extant,  viz.,  the  Vendidad,  seems  to  prove  it, 
that  by  far  the  larger  bulk  of  the  various  contents  of 
these  books  contained  Zend,  or  the  explanation  of  an 
ancient  sacred  text  called  Avesta.  A  good  deal  of  the 
contents  of  these  Zend  books  is  in  all  probability  extant 
in  the  Pahlavi  literature,  as  yet  very  imperfectly  known 
in  Europe. 

From  the  contents  of  the  Nasks,  as  given  above,  we 
clearly  see  that  they  must  represent  the  whole  religious 
and  scientific  literature  current  throughout  the  ancient 
Persian  Empire;  for  they  treated  not  only  of  religious 
topics,  but  of  medicine,  astronomy,  agriculture,  botany, 
philosophy,  &c.  Tliat  the  contents  of  those  Zoroastrian 
books  which  were  known  to  the   Greeks   and   Eomans, 

^  The    Samaritan    Jews    acknow-  to  surpass  the  original  extent  of  the 

ledge,  to  this  day,  only  the  five  books  twenty-one    Nasks,   especially  those 

of  Moses  as  scripture.  called     Halakah,     "rule,"    are    as 

2  Some  portions  of  this  enormoiisly  authoritative   for   the  Jews    as    the 

large  work,  which  may  be  said  even  Thorah  (Pentateuch)  itself. 


136  THE  BOOKS  NOW  EXTANT. 

were  of  such  a  various  character,  undoubtedly  follows 
from  the  reports  which  have  reached  our  time.  Indexes 
of  them,  like  the  catalogues  of  the  ancient  literature 
known  to  Parsi  priests  nowadays,  were  extant  at  the 
time  of  Alexander  the  Great;  because  Hermippos  (see 
p.  8)  is  said  to  have  read  and  perused  such  a  catalogue. 
This  extensive  ancient  literature,  which  in  all  probability 
was  already  complete  in  B.C.  4C0  (see  the  last  section  of 
this  Essay),  shows  the  great  activity  and  scientific  in- 
terest exhibited  by  the  priests  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion 
in  olden  times.  So  comprehensive  a  literature  was  of 
course  the  work  of  centuries,  especially  if  one  takes 
into  consideration  the  scarcity  and  expense  of  fit  writ- 
ing materials,!  the  clumsiness  of  the  ancient  characters 
used  (in  all  probability  a  kind  of  cuneiform),  and  the 
long  time  which  Orientals  require  for  original  composi- 
tion. The  composition  of  the  sacred  literature  of  the 
Jews,  from  the  time  of  Moses  (B.C.  1300  to  1500)  down 
to  the  close  of  the  Talmudic  literature  (a.d.  960),  occu- 
pied a  period  of  about  2400  years.  Were  we  to  apply 
the  same  calculation  to  the  Zoroastrian  literature,  its  be- 
ginning would  have  to  be  placed  as  early  as  B.C.  2800, 
which  would  not  in  the  least  contradict  the  statements 
made  by  the  Greeks,2  about  the  age  in  which  the  founder 
of  the  Parsi  religion  was  believed  by  them  to  have  lived. 
At  all  events,  this  much  seems  to  be  certain,  that  at  least 
a  thousand  years  must  have  elapsed  before  a  sacred  litera- 
ture so  various  and  extensive  could  have  grown  up  out  of 
the  seeds  sown  by  the  great  founder  of  the  Parsi  creed, 
Spitama  Zarathushtra. 

^  They  used  cowskins,  which  were  of  alphabetical  writiug,  as  practised 

prepared  for  the  purpose.      In   the  now  by  European  nations,  was  per- 

fragments  of  the  ancient  literature,  fectly  understood  by  the  Persians  in 

extant  in  the  Zend-Avesta,  no  word  the  sixth  century  before  the  Christian 

meaning  "to  write"  is  anywhere  to  era,  we  know  now  from  the  inscrip- 

be  found.     This  is  merely  fortuitous,  tions  of  the  kings  of  the  Achsenienian 

because  systematic  books  on  scientific  dynasty,  such  as  Cyrus  and  Darius, 

matters  can  never  be  composed  with-  -  See  the  fourth  Essay, 
out  the  aid  of  writing.     That  the  art 


^^  UP  POSED  ZOROASTRIA  N  A  UTHORSIHP.       1 37 

As  to  the  authorship  of  these  books,  they  were  ascribed 
by  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Eomans,  and  are  so  by  the 
present  Parsis,  to  Zoroaster  himself.  This  opinion  being 
so  okl  as  to  have  been  known  to  the  Greeks  several 
centuries  previous  to  the  commencement  of  the  Christian 
era,  we  may  presume  that  it  is  not  without  foundation ; 
though,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  impossible  for  a  modern 
critic  to  believe  that  so  extensive  a  literature  as  this, 
treating  of  such  various  topics,  was  the  work  of  a  single 
man.  The  Parsi  tradition,  it  is  true,  gets  over  this  diffi- 
culty by  asserting  that  all  the  twenty-one  Nasks  were 
written  by  God  Himself,  and  given  to  Zoroaster,  as  his 
prophet,  to  forward  them  to  mankind.  But  such  asser- 
tions being  inadmissible  in  modern  criticism,  which  tries 
to  solve  problems  by  appeal  to  reason,  not  to  miracles  of 
the  most  extraordinary  character,  we  must  dispense  with 
them  entirely,  the  more  so  as  such  claims  to  God's  im- 
mediate authorship  of  the  whole  Zend-Avesta  are  never 
made  in  any  of  the  books  which  are  now  extant.  They 
lay  claim  to  divine  revelation  (only  the  Yasna,  not  the 
Vendidad),  but  not  in  such  a  form  as  to  exclude  all 
activity  on  the  part  of  the  receiving  prophet.  As  to 
the  nature  of  this  revelation,  the  reader  may  best  learn 
it  from  the  second  Gatha,  of  which  a  translation  will 
be  given  in  the  7th  section  of  this  Essay.  He  will  see 
that  the  prophet  was  believed  to  have  held  conversa- 
tions with  God  Himself,  questioning  the  Supreme  Being 
about  all  matters  of  importance,  and  receiving  always  the 
right  answ^ers  to  his  questions.  The  prophet  accordingly, 
after  having  been  instructed,  communicated  these  accounts 
of  his  conversations  with  God  to  his  disciples  and  the 
public  at  large.  Who  wrote  them  down  is  quite  uncer- 
tain; for  in  the  old  books  no  mention  of  this  circum- 
stance is  made.  The  scanty  texts  which  can  be  traced 
to  the  founder  himself  were  very  likely  not  written 
down  by  him,  but  learned  by  heart  by  liis  disciples,  as 
was   the  case   with   the   numerous   Vedic  hymns  which 


TjS       SUPPOSED  ZOROASTRIAN  AUTHORSHIP. 

for  centuries  were  handed  down  orally  only.  To  tlie 
European  reader  it  may  be  somewhat  astonishing  to 
hear  that  such  large  works  as  the  Vedas  could  be  faith- 
fully and  accurately  retained  in  the  memory  for  cen- 
turies ;  but  considering  that  at  the  present  day  thousands 
of  Brahmans  exist  who  are  able  to  recite  parrot-like  with 
the  greatest  accuracy,  even  as  to  accents,  the  whole  of 
one  of  the  Vedas,  we  are  driven  to  admit  that  the  same 
might  have  been  the  case  in  those  early  times  to  which 
we  must  trace  the  origin  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion.  As 
long  as  the  language  of  the  hymns  or  prayers  repeated 
was  a  living  one  and  perfectly  intelligible,  there  was  no 
need  of  committing  them  to  writing;  but  as  soon  as  it 
had  become  dead,  the  aid  of  writing  was  required  in 
order  to  guard  the  sacred  prayers  against  corruption  and 
mutilation.  That  was,  in  all  probability,  the  case  already 
a  thousand  years  before  the  beginning  of  our  era. 

To  revert  to  the  supposed  Zoroastrian  authorship  of  the 
whole  Zend-Avesta,  believed  by  the  ancient  Greeks  as  well 
as  by  the  modern  Parsis,  the  solution  of  the  difficulty  is 
simple,  if  we  take  the  name  "  Zarathushtra "  (Zoroaster), 
not  as  the  proper  name  of  only  one  individual,  but  as 
the  general  title  of  the  spiritual  heads  of  the  religious 
community  of  the  ancient  Persians.  That  this  was  really 
the  case  the  reader  will  see  from  the  fourth  Essay.  The 
founder  is  distinguished  by  the  name  "  Spitama."  The 
high-priest  of  the  whole  Parsi  community  was  believed 
to  be  the  successor  of  the  great  founder,  Spitama  Zara- 
thuslitra,  and  to  have  inherited  his  spirit.  His  sayings 
and  decisions,  therefore,  were  listened  to  with  the  greatest 
reverence,  and  in  the  course  of  time  believed  to  be  as 
sacred  and  divine  as  those  which  are  with  reason  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  founder  alone.  The  meaning  of  the  sup- 
posed Zoroastrian  authorship  of  the  whole  Zend-Avesta 
is  that  the  scripture  is  the  joint  work  of  the  high-priests 
in  the  ancient  Persian  Empu'e  and  other  priests  nearest 
to  them   in  rank,  compiled   in  the  course  of  centuries. 


YASNA.  139 

Tliis  circumstance  throws  light  upon  the  fact,  that  only 
the  Dasturs,  or  present  high-priests,  are  required  to 
understand  the  meaning  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  and  no  one 
who  has  not  thoroughly  studied  it  can  be  acknowledged 
as  a  real  Dastiir. 

The  texts  extant  now,  and  collected  for  the  first  time 
in  Westergaard's  valuable  edition,  comprise  the  following 
books  : — Yasna,  Vispaead,  Vendidad,  and  twenty-four  sec- 
tions called  Yashts,  includiug  fragments  of  the  Hadokht 
ISTask  (No.  22  in  Westergaard's  edition)  and  Vishtasp  Nask 
(No.  24) ;  to  these  are  added  some  short  prayers  of  dif- 
ferent kinds,  called  Afeingan  (3),  Nyayish  (6),  Gah  (5), 
with  some  miscellaneous  fragments  (9),  and  the  Sirozah 
(thirty  days)  or  calendar.  We  shall  treat  of  each  of  them 
successively  in  detail. 

IV. — yasna. 

The  word  yasna  l  corresponds  exactly  to  the  S.  yajna, 
"  sacrifice,"  and  does  not  signify  only  mere  prayers,  like 
the  Nyayish,  but  prayers  referring  to  sacrificial  rites,  and 
includes  the  performance  of  the  latter.  The  solemn  recital 
of  the  Yasna  before  the  fire  is  always  connected  with  cere- 
monies, to  which  several  of  the  prayers  contained  in  the 
Yasna  allude.  Thus  they  require  consecrated  water 
(zaothra),  a  kind  of  bread  {(jarctcm,  "  food  "),  butter  [gciush 
htidhdo),  fresh  milk  (gdiish  jtvya),  meat  (myazda),^  the 
branches  of  the  Homa  plant  together  with  one  of  the  / 

pomegranate  {hadhdnaepdta),  the  juice  of  the  Homa  plant  / 

{para-haoma),  hair  of  an  ox  (varasa),  and  a  bundle  of 
twigs  {haresma,  nowadays  harsom)  which  are  tied  together 

*  Yajishn  (sometimes  aijishno)   in  stand  it  to  mean  "  fruit,"  which  they 

Fahlavi,    transliterated  into   Ijashnc  use    when    performing    the    Ijashne 

in  Gujrati ;  tlie  root  is  yas,  i/as,  "to  ceremony.      But  originally  it  meant 

worship  by  means   of   sacrifices   and  '"130811,"  as  may  be  clearly  seen  fi'om 

prayers;"   na  forms  abstract  nouns  the  cognate  Armenian  mis,  "meat," 

in  the  Avesta,  and  in  Pahlavi  iskn  {comp.  Sans,  mdnsa)  being  identical 

iuiswers  the  same  purpose.  with  "  meat." 

^  The    Dasturs    nowadays    under- 


\ 


140  VASNA. 

by  means  of  a  reed.  Without  tliese  implements,  wliicli 
are  evidently  the  remnants  of  sacrifices  agreeing  to  a 
certain  extent  with  those  of  the  Brahmans,  as  we  shall 
see  in  the  fourth  Essay,  no  Ijashne  can  be  performed  by 
the  priest.  All  these  things  must  be  in  readiness,  except 
the  prepared  Homa  juice,  and  placed  on  a  table  of  marble 
opposite  to  the  fire  of  the  Dcidgdh,  or  the  common  hearth 
of  the  temple  (not  before  the  sacred  fires  Adardn  or  Beh- 
rdm),  before  the  Ijashne  ceremony  can  be  commenced. 

The  Yasna  at  the  present  time  comprises  seventy-two 
chapters,  which  number  (6  times  12)  is  probably  to  repre- 
sent the  six  gaJianhdrs,  or  seasons,  during  which  Ahura- 
mazda  is  said  to  have  created  the  world.  At  all  events, 
the  extension  of  the  several  sections  of  the  Yasna,  called 
Md  (from  Av.  Jidta),  to  tlie  number  of  seventy-two,  is  not 
accidental,  but  was  purposely  made,  as  we  may  guess 
easily  from  the  fact  that  several  chapters  occur  twice 
within  the  compass  of  those  seventy-two.  For  instance, 
the  6ist  and  72d  chapters  are  the  same,  and  the  i8th  con- 
tains nothing  but  verses  from  the  Gatha  portion  of  the 
Yasna. 

On  closer  inquiry,  we  find  the  Yasna  really  consists  of 
at  least  two  different  parts,  distinguishable  by  consider- 
able differences  in  language  and  contents.  One  part  we 
may  call  "  tlie  old,"  the  other  "  the  later  Yasna."  The  old 
Yasna  is  written  in  a  peculiar  dialect,  styled  the  Gatha 
dialect  in  the  second  Essay,  where  its  chief  peculiarities 
have  been  pointed  out. 

All  parts  wi-itten  in  this  peculiar  dialect  1  formed  origi- 
nally a  separate  book,  which  was  believed  to  be  sacred 
even  at  the  time  of  the  composition  of  the  other  books  con- 
tained in  the  present  Zend-Avesta.  The  original  name  of 
this  collection  was,  in  all  probability,  mdthra  spenta,  "  bene- 

1  These  are  the  five  Oathas  : — "i'as.  g,  17,  18  ;  xii.  ;  xiii.  ;  xiv. ;  xv.  2,  3  ; 

Yxviii.-xxxiv.  ;  xliii.-xlvi.  ;  xlvii.-l.  ;  xxvii.   13,  14;  Ivi.  ;  Iviii.     All  refer- 

"i.  ;  liii.  ;  Yasna  haptanhaiti(Ya.sTi!ioi  ences  made  to   the  Avesta,    in   this 

se  veil  chapters),  xxxv.-xli.,  and  some  Essay,  are  to  Westergaard's   edition 

oth..o].  smaller  pieces,  as  Yas.  iv.  26;  xi.  of  the  texts,  unless  otherwise  noted. 

\ 


VASAA.  141 

ficent  ritual"  (called  Mdnsarspend  in  Persian  writings), 
which  is  several  times  mentioned  in  the  Vendidad  (iv.  44) 
with  the  meaning  of  "  Scripture."  Its  different  parts  were 
known  by  different  names,  as  GdtJias  or  hymns,  Yasna 
haj^tanhaiti  or  the  Yasna  of  seven  chapters,  which  are 
often  quoted  in  the  other  books,  as  in  Yas.  Ivii.  8  (where 
the  ano;el  Srosh  is  said  to  have  first  recited  the  five  Gathas 
of  Spitama  Zarathushtra),  Yas.  Ixxi.  11,  12,  18  (where  the 
Gathas,  the  sacrificial  prayers,  and  Yasna  haptanhaiti, 
are  distinguished,  and  a  collection  of  all  prayers  is  men- 
tioned besides).  In  the  Vendidad,  especially  in  its  tenth 
chapter,  many  sacred  prayers  are  quoted,  which  are  all  to 
be  found  in  the  old  Yasna,  written  in  the  peculiar  Gatha 
dialect. 

In  the  first  chapter  of  the  Visparad  we  find  a  series  of 
sacred  prayers  (or  rather  their  angels  i)  invoked.  This 
passage  being  of  the  greatest  importance  for  the  history  of 
the  Avesta  literature,  I  shall  point  out  here  all  that  refers 
therein  to  this  matter.  As  sacred  prayers  and  sacred 
literature  in  general,  the  following  writings  are  there 
enumerated: — i.  The  three  most  sacred  short  formulas, 
viz.,  Yathd  ahlX  vairyo  (Yas.  xxvii.  13),  ashcm  .vohil  (Yas, 
xxvii.  14),  and  yeiihe  hdtdm  ^  (Yas.  iv.  26) ;  2.  the  Gdtlia 

1  According  to  Zoroastrian  ideas,  '  for  the  sake  of  righteousness,  (to  be) 
everything  in  the  good  creation,  '  the  giver  of  the  good  thoughts,  of 
whether  animate  or  inanimate,  is  pre-  '  the  actions  of  life,  towards  Mazda  ; 
sided  over  by  an  angel,  as  the  reader  'and  the  dominion  is  for  the  lord 
will  learn  from  the  nth  section  of  '  (Ahura)  wliom  he  (Mazda)  has  given 
this  Essay.  '  as  a  protector  for  the  poor.'    The 

2  These  three  formulas  are  very  Ashem  vohil  formula,  which  is  even 
short;  it  is,  therefore,  somewhat  more  frequently  used  than  the  Ahuna- 
hazardous  to  venture  upon  a  transla-  vairya,  may  be  translated  as  follows  : 
tion  of  them.  The  words  themselves  — '  Righteousness  is  the  best  good,  a 
do  not  offer  much  difficulty,  but  the  '  blessing  it  is;  a  blessing  be  to  that 
context  does.  The  text  of  the  first  '  which  is  righteousness  towards  Asha- 
has  already  been  given  (p.  125);  it  is  '  vahishta  (perfect  righteousness).' 
usually  called  Ahuna-vairya,  and  It  is  to  be  understood  that  "righteous- 
hence  the  first  Giitha  is  called  Aim-  ness,"  here  and  elsewhere  where  it 
navaiti.  as  it  is  written  in  the  same  translates  ashem,  means  "  what  is 
metre  and  follows  this  formula,  which  right  or  meritorious  "  in  a  ritualis- 
may  be  translated  as  follows:  'Asa  tic  or  materialistic  sense,  and  does 
'  heavenly  lord  is  to  be  chosen,  so  is  not  necessarily  imply  holiness,  any 
'  an  earthly  master  (spiritual  guide),  more  than  the'Sans.  piinyam  does. 


142  GATHAS. 

ahunavaiti  (Yas.  xxviii.-xxxiv.) ;  3.  Yasna  haptanhaiti 
(Yas.  xxxv.-xli.) ;  4.  Gdtha  ushtavaiti  (Yas.  xliii.-xlvi.) ; 
5.  Gdtha  sioerdd-mainyil  (Yas.  xlvii.-l.) ;  6.  Gdtlia  vohu- 
hlishathra  (Yas.  li.) ;  7.  Gdtlia  vahishtoishti  (Yas.  liii.) ;  8. 
Dalimi  vanuhi  and  dfriti  (the  Dahmdn  Afringdn,  Yas.  Ix., 
the  principal  prayer  for  deceased  pious  Zoroastrians,  called 
dahmct) ;  9.  Airyama  ishyo  (Yas.  liv,,  a  short  prayer  now 
used  at  the  time  of  the  solemnisation  of  a  marriage) ;  10. 
Fshuslw-mdtlira  (Yas.  Iviii.,  a  prayer  for  prosperity) ;  11. 
JBerczu  hadaoJchdha  (perhaps  Yas.  xv.) ;  12.  the  conversa- 
tions with  and  teaching  of  Ahuramazda,  as  imparted  to 
the  ruler  and  chief  high-priest  {Zarathushtrdteriio,  "  the 
highest  Zarathushtra ")  of  a  whole  country,  by  which  a 
book  like  the  Vendidad  is  to  be  understood,  as  we  shall 
see  afterwards. 

In  Yendidad  xviii.  5 1,  tliree  classes  of  sacred  writings 
are  enumerated  in  the  following  order : — Gatlias,  Yasna  (by 
which  very  likely  the  Yasna  haptanhaiti  is  to  be  under- 
stood), and  a  sacred  tradition  in  a  conversational  form 
(called  paitiparshto-sravanhem),  which  appears  to  have 
been  a  work  like  the  present  Vendidad. 

From  these  passages  we  may  gather  with  certainty  that 
the  old  Yasna,  i.e.,  that  part  of  the  present  Yasna  which  is 
written  in  the  peculiar  Gatha  dialect,  is  the  most  ancient 
of  the  whole  Zend-Avesta,  being  known  as  scripture 
already  to  the  later  Yasna,  the  Visparad,  and  Yendidad. 
All  other  parts  of  the  Yasna,  written  in  the  ordinary 
Avesta  language,  are  evidently  of  a  later  date ;  they  may, 
therefore,  be  called  the  later  Yasna.  We  shall  first  exa- 
mine the  contents  of  the  cliief  parts  of  the  old  Yasna, 
the  Gathas. 

•  V. — GATIIAS. 

The  Gathas,  five  in  number,  are  comparatively  small 

collections   of    metrical    compositions,   containing    short 

V)rayers,  dongs,  and  hymns,  Avhich  generally  express  philo- 

sWhical  and  abstract  thoughts  about  metaphysical  sub- 


GAT  HAS.  143 

jects.  The  name  "  Gatlia,"  wliicli  is  also  well  known  in 
Sanskrit  and  Pali  literature,  means  "  song  "  (especially  a 
stanza  whicli  contains  allusions  to  historical  facts,  as  pre- 
served in  the  mouths  of  the  ancient  bards),  from  the  root 
gai,  "  to  sing."  That  they  were  sung  is  not  to  be  doubted, 
as  we  may  learn  from  Greek  reports  (see  p.  11),  and  from 
their  being  metrical  compositions,  the  recital  of  which  is 
always  designated  by  a  separate  word :  frasrdvayeiti.'^  At 
present,  the  priests  do  not  make  any  distinction  as  to  the 
way  of  repeating  the  different  parts  of  the  Zend-Avesta ; 
they  recite  them  equally  in  a  singing  tone.  That  is  not 
to  be  wondered  at,  the  different  constituents  of  the  Yasna 
being  unknown  to  the  present  priests,  which  was  not  the 
case  in  ancient  times. 

As  to  the  metres  used  in  the  Gathas,  we  find  them  of 
the  same  nature  as  those  which  are  to  be  found  in  the 
Vedic  hymns.  No  rhyme  is  observed,  only  the  syllables 
are  counted,  without  much  attention  being  paid  to  their 
quantity.  The  five  collections  into  which  the  Gathas 
have  been  brought  exhibit  each  a  different  metre.  Verses 
of  the  same  metre  were  put  together,  irrespective  of  their 
contents.  So  the  first  Gatha  contains  verses,  each  of 
which  consists  of  forty-eight  syllables ;  in  the  second,  the 
metre  is  of  fifty-five  syllables;  in  the  third,  of  forty-four, 
&c.  The  number  of  syllables  is  not  always  strictly 
observed ;  we  find,  now  and  then,  one  less  or  one  more. 
To  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  this  poetry,  some  specimens 

1  There  are  three  expressions  used  general.      Drenj  means  evidently  a 

for  the  recital  of  the  sacred  texts,  peculiar  kind  of  recital ;  it  is  chiefly 

viz.,   mar,     "  to    recite,"    drefij    (or  applied  to  spells,  and  may  be  com- 

framru),  "to  recite  in  a  low  tone,"  pared  to  the  recital  of  the  verses  ol 

and  srdraii,   frasrdvan,    "  to    recite  the  Yajnrveda,  which  is  done  with  a 

with  a  loud  voice  and  observing  musi-  low  voice,  and  monotonously.     Fra- 

cal  accents."     The    first   expression  srdvay  is  the  solemn  recital  in  the 

conveys  the   most  general  meaning,  form  of  a  very  simple  tune,  compar- 

viz.,  "  to  repeat  from  memory  "  (mar  able  to  the  way  of  singing  the  Sama- 

r=  S.   smnr,    "to  recollect"),   which  veda  by  the  Brahmans.     This  expres- 

was  very  likely  done  in  the  same  way  sion  is  pre-eminently  apiplied  to  the 

as  the  Brahmans  repeat  the  verses  of  G<\thas.    Compare  Yas.  xix.  6,  Vend, 

the  Rigveda,  observing  the  accents  in  iv.  45,  Yt.  xiii.  20 


144 


GATHAS. 


are  here  quoted.  In  the  first  Gatha  (called  ahunavaiti, 
from  the  Ahuna-vairya  formula  which  precedes  it),  each 
verse  consists  of  three  lines,  each  comprising  sixteen 
syllables,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  following  example 
(Yas.  xxxi.  8)  : — 

Ad  thwd  mehM  paourvtm  mazdd  yazHm  st6i  mananhd 
so     thee      I  thought  first  Mazda     great    in  creation    in  mind 

Vanhcush    jitarem  mananhd    hyad     thwd      hem      chashmaini  hcngrahem 
of  the  good   father       mind   therefore  thee  together  in  the  eye      I  seized 

Haithim  ashahyd  ddrrdm        aiiheush     ahurem    shkyaothanaishH.^ 

true      of  righteousness    creator  of  life         Ahura  in  actions. 

In  this  verse  the  cesura  is  after  the  seventh  syllable ; 
the  second  half  of  each  line  comprises,  therefore,  nine 
syllables.  Were  the  cesura  after  the  eighth  syllable,  and 
if  the  whole  verse  comprised  only  thirty-two  syllables, 
instead  of  forty-eight,  this  metre  would  correspond  to  the 
Sanskrit  shloka,  consisting  of  four  half-verses  (padas) 
each  comprising  eight  syllables,  which  metre  is  preserved 
in  some  fragments  of  epic  songs  in  the  Zend-Avesta,  as 
we  shall  see  hereafter.  It  stands  nearest  to  the  Gayatri 
metre,  which  consists  of  twenty-four  syllables,  divisible 
into  three  padas,  each  comprising  eight  syllables. 

In  the  second  Gatha  (called  ushtavaiti,  from  its  first 
words,  uslitd  aJimdi,  "  hail  to  him  ! ")  there  are  five  lines  in 
eacli  stanza,  each  consisting  of  eleven  syllables,  for  instance 
(Yas.  xliv.  3)  : — 


Tad 


thwd 


peresa 


eresh 


mSi 


vaochd 


ahurd I 


That          thee 

I  will  ask 

right 

me             tell 

Ahura ! 

Kasnd 

zdthd 

ptd 

ashahyd 

paovruyo ? 

What  man 

creator 

father        of 

righteousness 

first? 

Kasnd 

qeiig 

staremchd 

dad 

advdnem  ? 

What  man 

sun 

and  stars 

made 

path? 

Ke            yd 

mdo 

ukhshyelit 

nerefsaiti 

thwad?^ 

Who        that 

the  moon 

increases 

wanes 

besides  thee  ? 

Tdcht^ 

mazdd 

vasemt 

anydchd 

vtduyS. 

such  things 

Mazda ! 

I  wish 

and  other 

to  know. 

1  See  a  freer  translation  further  on.     dent  on  ke  (ko),  who?    The  meatiing 
^  I'/tji'aji  is  the  ablative  case,  depen-     "besides,  else,"  here  absolutely  re- 


GATHAS. 


145 


This  metre  is  very  near  to  the  Vedic  trislititbh,  which  is 
sacred  to  the  god  Indra,  and  consists  of  four  padas,  each 
comprising  eleven  syllables,  which  make  forty-four  in  all. 
The  Ushtavaiti  Gatha  only  exceeds  it  by  one  pada  of  eleven 
syllables.  In  the  third  Gatha,  called  spentd-mainyil,  how- 
ever, the  trishtubh  is  completely  represented,  as  each  verse 
there  comprises  four  padas,  each  of  eleven  syllables,  in  all 
forty-four,  just  as  many  as  the  trishtubh  is  composed  of.l 
To  obtain  the  number  of  syllables  which  is  required  for 
each  pada  or  foot,  in  the  specimen  quoted  above  {ta(i  thwci 
peresa),  as  w^ell  as  in  other  verses  of  the  Gathas,  the  sound 
ere,  corresponding  to  the  Sanskrit  vowel  ri,  makes  only  one 
syllable ;  and  the  short  e  (in  vasemi,  S.  vashmi,  "  I  want, 
wish  "),  being  a  mere  auxiliary  vowel,  and  u  in  viduye  (in- 
stead of  vidyS)  being  of  the  same  nature,  are  not  to  be 
counted.  The  syllables  va  and  ya,  yi,  are  often  made  liquid, 
as  is  the  case  in  the  Vedic  metres  also,  that  is  to  say,  they 
are  pronounced  as  two  syllables  like  ua,  ia,  iyS.  The  verse 
quoted  above  is,  therefore,  to  be  read  as  follows  : — • 

Tad  thivd  persd  ersh  mdi  vochd  ahurd  ! 
kasnd  zdthd  ptd  ashahyd  pouruyo  ? 
kasnd  qeiig  staremchd  dad,  adudnem  ? 
ke  yd  mdo  ukkshiyeitt  nerfsaitt  thioad  ? 
tdcli%<l  mazdd  vasmi  anydchd  ttdye. 

In  the  fourth  Gatha  each  stanza  comprises  three  verses. 


quired  for  a  translation  into  modern 
languages,  lies  implied  in  the  context ; 
Tiduyi  is  a  peculiar  infinitive  form  of 
the  root  vid,  "  to  know." 


1  To  illustrate  this  assertion,  I  sub- 
join a  specimen  of  this  metre  taken 
from  Kigveda,  i.  189,  i. 


Agne 
0  fire  god ! 

naya 
bring 

supathd  rdye 
on  the  good  way  to  wealth 

asmdn 
us, 

vishvdni 
all 

deva 
Ogod! 

vayundni 

arts 

vidvdn 
knowing ! 

yuyodhy 
remove 

asmaj 
from  U3 

juhurdnam 
wrath  kindled 

euo 
sin, 

hMyisJithdm 
utmost 

te 
on  thee 

nama-uktim 
worship-liymn 

lei 

vidhema 
;  us  bestow  ! 

(Agni !  provide  us  with  riches  through 
good  fortune,  O  thou  god,  who  know- 
est  all  arts  of  obtaining  wealtli !  Ee- 
move  from  us  all  faults  at  which  thou 


hast  felt  angry  with  us ;  let  us  pre- 
pare for  thee  a  most  excellent  hymn 
for  thy  worship.) 


K 


146  GAT  HA  AHUNAVAITI, 

or  six  padas  or  feet,  each  consisting  of  seven  syllables, 
which  make  in  all  forty-two.  In  the  fifth  Gatha,  various 
metres  are  used. 

The  five  Gathas  are  expressly  designated  as  the  "  five 
Gathas  of  Zarathushtra "  (Yas.  Ivii.  8),  in  order  to  distin- 
guish them  from  other  Gathas  or  hymns,  as,  for  instance, 
those  devoted  to  the  praise  of  Homa  (Yas.  x.)  That  they 
really  contain  the  sayings  and  teaching  of  the  great  founder 
of  the  Parsi  religion,  Spitama  Zarathushtra  himself,  cannot 
be  doubted,  as  the  reader  will  perceive  from  a  perusal  of 
the  larger  portion  of  them,  which  will  be  found  in  the  fol- 
lowing sections. 

VI. — GATHA  AHIJNAVAITI.l 

This  Gatha  is  divided  into  seven  chapters  2  (Yas.  xxviii.- 
xxxiv.,  Westerg.),  which  comprise  10 1  verses,  all  of  them 
being  composed  in  the  same  metre,  described  above  (p. 
144).  As  to  its  contents,  it  resembles  more  a  collection  of 
scattered  verses  than  one  continuous  whole.  It  is  even 
doubtful  whether  the  author  is  always  the  same,  the  style 
being  now  and  then  different.  But  in  consequence  of  one 
and  the  same  spirit  pervading  the  whole  Gatha,  we  must 
admit  that  it  all  belongs  to  the  same  age.  We  have  in  it, 
in  aU  probability,  the  sayings  and  songs  of  Zarathushtra 
himself,  mixed  with  those  of  his  disciples  Jdmdspa,  Vish- 
tdspa,  and  Frashaoshtra.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  following 
verse  (Yas.  xxviii.  7)  must  be  considered  as  the  composi- 
tion of  one  of  the  disciples  of  the  prophet : — 

'  Come  with  the  good  mind,  grant  prosperity  for  life 
'  long,  by  means  of  thy  mighty  words,  0  thou  Mazda !  give 
'  both  Zarathushtra  and  us  thy  powerful  assistance  to  put 
'  down  the  assaults  of  our  enemy.' 

Here  Zarathushtra  being  spoken  of  in  the  third,  and  the 

To  the  explanation  of  this  G^tha  ^  The  chapters  of  the  Yasna  are 

the  whole  of  the  first  volume  of  the  au-  called  Hds,  which  is  a  corruption  of 

thor's   German  work  on  the  Gathas  the  Avesta  word  hdta. 
(containing  246  pagea^  is  devoted. 


CATHA  AHUNAVAITL  147 

autlior  in  the  first  person,  we  are  fully  entitled  to  ascribe 
the  verse  to  one  of  his  followers,  not  to  himself. 

The  heading  of  this  Gatha,  '  The  revealed  thought,  the 
*  revealed  word,  the  revealed  deed  of  the  righteous  Zara- 
'  thushtra ;  the  archangels  first  sang  the  Gathas,'  ^  is  of 
high  interest,  because  it  does  not  refer  to  this  Gatha  alone, 
l)ut  to  all  five  indiscriminately.  These  introductory  re- 
marks are  written  not  in  the  peculiar  Gatha  dialect,  but  in 
the  common  Avesta  language,  which  circumstance  shows 
clearly  that  they  proceed  not  from  one  of  the  authors,  but 
from  a  subsequent  collector  of  these  sacred  verses.  We 
learn  from  them  that  the  Gathas  were  believed  to  contain 
all  that  has  been  revealed  2  to  Spitama  Zarathushtra ;  that 
he  learnt  them  from  the  choir  of  the  archangels,  who  sano- 
them  to  his  mental  ears  when,  in  a  state  of  ecstasy,  his 
mind  was  raised  to  heaven. 

Translations  of  some  parts  of  this  Gatha  will  be  pre- 
sented to  the  reader.  In  its  second  section  (Yas.  xxix.)  it 
is  related  that  the  Gmsli  urvd,^  "  the  soul  of  the  animated 

1  A  full  explanation  of  this  heading  the  name  is  corrupted  into  goshdrun, 

is  given  in  the  author's  German  work  which  is  very  likely  preserved  in  the 

on  the  Gathas,  vol.  i.  pp.  41-46.  modern   Persian  gawhar,  ' '  nature. " 

-  The  term  in  the  original  is  yunim.  According  to  the  tradition,  it  was  the 

which  does  not  signify  "good,  happy,"  lirst  animated  creature,  in  the  shape 

as  the  Dasturs  think,  but  anything  of  an  ox,  from  which,  after  havin" 

seen  when  in  a  state  of  ecstasy.    This  been  killed  and  cut  into  pieces    the 

meaning  is  even  preserved  in  the  mo-  whole  living  creation  is  said  to  have 

dern  Persian  word  ydn,  "  a  reverie  of  sprung.     The  slaughterer  of  this  pri- 

a  fanatic,  a  trance."  The  literal  mean-  mary  ox,  the  sujiposed  ancestor  of  the 

ing  is  "a  walk,"  as  may  be  seen  from  whole  animal  kingdom,  is  often  al- 

its  use  in  the  Vedic  Sanskrit  (root  yd,  luded  to  by  the  name  geusli  taskd, 

"  to  go "),  but  applied  to  the  gesticu-  "cutter  of  the  ox."    Who  was  the 

lations  of  a  prophet  or  seer  when  in  killer  of  this  ox  is  not  stated  in  the 

ecstasy,  it  means  what  he  perceives  Zend-Avesta,   but  tradition   charges 

with  his  mental  eye  in  such  an  extra-  this  murder,    of    course,    to  Angro- 

ordinary  frame  of  mind.     Tlie  word  mainyush,    the    devil.     This   legend 

"  to  see  "  is  really  used  in  reference  to  about  the  origin  of  the  animated  crea- 

revelation  in  the   Gathas   (see  Yas.  tion  apparently  refers  to  sacrificial 

xliii.  5,  xxxi.  8,  xxviii.  6).     This  ap-  rites,  the  creation  of  the  world  being 

plication  of  the  word  is  wholly  in  ■  considered  by  several  ancient  nations 

accordance  with  its  meaning  in  the  as  a  sacrifice;  by  the   Brahmans  as 

Vedas,   where  it  is  stated  that  the  that  of  Brahma  himself ;  by  the  an- 

sacred  songs  (mantra)  have  been  seen  cient  Scandinavians,  the  people  of  the 

by  the  Rishis.  Edda,  as  that  of  the  primary  gianis 

^  In  the  Parsi  or  PAzand  language,  B'or. 


148  GATHA  AHUNAVAITI. 

creation,"  was  crying  aloud  in  consequence  of  attacks  made 
upon  its  life,  and  imploring  the  assistance  of  the  arch- 
angels. The  murderer,  frightened  by  this  cry,  asked  one 
of  tke  archangels,  A^lm  (Ardibahisht),  as  to  who  had  been 
appointed  to  protect  this  soul  of  the  earth.  Asha  referred 
him  to  Mazda,  who  is  "  the  most  wise,  and  the  giver  of 
oracles."  Mazda  answered  that  Geush  urvd  was  being  cut 
into  pieces  for  the  benefit  of  the  agriculturist.  Mazda  now 
deliberated  with  Asha  as  to  who  mioht  be  fit  to  communi- 
cate  this  declaration  of  the  heavenly  ,council  to  mankind. 
Asha  answered  that  there  was  only  one  man  who  had 
heard  the  orders  issued  by  the  celestial  councillors,  viz., 
Zarathushtra  Spitama ;  he,  therefore,  was  to  be  endowed 
with  eloquence  to  bring  their  messages  to  the  world. 

Geush  urvd  means  the  universal  soul  of  earth,  the  cause 
of  all  life  and  growth.  The  literal  meaning  of  the  word, 
"  soul  of  the  cow,"  implies  a  simile ;  for  the  earth  is  com- 
pared to  a  cow.l  By  its  cutting  and  dividing,  ploughing 
is  to  be  understood.  The  meaning  of  that  decree,  issued 
by  Ahuramazda  and  the  heavenly  council,  is  that  the  soil 
is  to  be  tilled ;  it,  therefore,  enjoins  agriculture  as  a  reli- 
gious duty.  Zarathushtra,  when  encouraging  men  by  the 
order  of  Ahuramazda  to  cultivate  the  earth,  acts  as  a  pro- 
phet of  agriculture  and  civilisation.  In  this  capacity  we 
shall  also  find  him  afterwards. 

'  In  the  third  section  of  this  Gatha  (Yas.  xxx.)  one  of 
the  most  important  sections  of  the  Gatha  literature  is 
presented"  to  us.  It  is  a  metrical  speech,  delivered  by 
Spitama  Zarathushtra  himself,  when  standing  before  the 
sacred  fire,  to  a  numerously  attended  meeting  of  his  coun- 
trymen. The  chief  tendency  of  this  speech  is  to  induce 
his   countrymen  to  forsake  the  worship  of  the  devas  or 

^  Gdus  lias  in   Sanskrit    tlie  two  Teutonic  mythology),  who  represent 

meanings  "cow"  and  "earth."    In  the  creative  powers  in  nature,  are  said 

Greek  rje,  "  earth,"  is  to  be  traced  to  to  "  have  cut  the  cow  and  made  fertile 

this  word.     In  the  Vamadeva  hymns  the  earth."     The  term  evidently  re- 

(fourth  book   of    the   Rigveda),   the  fers  to  the  cultivation  of  the  soil. 
Rihlius  (comparable  to  the  elves  of  the 


GAT  HA  AHUNAVAITI.  149 

gods,  i.e.,  polytheism,  to  Low  only  before  Almramazda, 
and  to  separate  themselves  entirely  from  the  idolators. 
In  order  to  gain  the  object  wished  for,  he  propounds  the 
great  difference  which  exists  between  the  two  religions, 
Monotheism  and  Polytheism,  showing  that  whereas  the 
former  is  the  fountain  of  all  prosperity  both  in  this  and 
the  other  life,  the  latter  is  utterly  ruinous  to  mankind. 
He  attempts  further  to  explain  the  origin  of  both  these 
religions,  so  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other,  and  finds 
it  in  the  existence  of  two  primeval  causes,  called  "  exist- 
ence "  and  "  non-existence."  But  this  merely  philosophi- 
cal doctrine  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  his  theology, 
according  to  which  he  acknowledged  only  one  God,  as  will 
be  clearly  seen  from  the  second  Gatha.  The  following  is 
a  translation  of  the  whole  of  this  inaugural  speech  of 
Zarathushtra. 

Yas.  XXX.  I.  I  will  now  tell  you  who  are  assembled 
here  the  wise  sayings  of  Mazda,  the  praises  of  Ahura,  and 
the  hymns  of  the  good  S23irit,  the  sublime  truth  which  I 
see  arising  out  of  these  sacred  flames. 

2.  You  shall,  therefore,  hearken  to  the  soul  of  nature  1 
{i.e.,  to  plough  and  cultivate  the  earth) ;  contemjolate  the 
beams  of  fire  with  a  most  pious  mind!  Every  one,  both 
men  and  women,  ought  to-day  to  choose  his  creed  (be- 
tween the  Deva  and  the  Ahura  religion).  Ye  offspring 
of  renowned  ancestors,  awake  to  agree  with  us  {i.e.,  to 
approve  of  my  lore,  to  be  delivered  to  you  at  this 
moment) ! 

(The  prophet  begins  to  deliver  the  words  revealed  to 
him  through  the  sacred  flames.) 

3.  In  the  beginning  there  was  a  pair  of  twins,  two 
spirits,  each  of  a  peculiar  activity;  these  are  the  good 
and  the  base,  in  thought,  word,  and  deed.  Choose  one  of 
these  two  spirits  !     Be  good,  not  base ! 

4.  And  these  two  spirits  united  created  the  first  (the 

1  Geush  urvd,  see  p.  147-8.     It  is  here  evidently  an  allusion  made  to  the 
legend  mentioned  above. 


150  GATHA  AHUNAVAITI. 

material  things) ;  one,  the  reality,  the  other,  the  non- 
reality.  To  the  liars  (the  worshippers  of  the  devas,  i.e., 
gods)  existence  will  become  bad,  whilst  the  believer  in  the 
true  God  enjoys  prosperity. 

5.  Of  these  two  spirits  you  must  choose  one,  either  the 
evil,  the  originator  of  the  worst  actions,  or  the  true,  holy 
spirit.  Some  may  wish  to  have  the  hardest  lot  {i.e.,  those 
who  will  not  leave  the  polytheistic  deva-religion),  others 
adore  Ahuramazda  by  means  of  sincere  actions. 

6.  You  cannot  belong  to  both  of  them  {i.e.,  you  cannot 
be  worshippers  of  the  one  true  God,  and  of  many  gods  at 
the  same  time).  One  of  the  devas,  against  whom  we  are 
fighting,  might  overtake  you,  when  in  deliberation  (what 
faith  you  are  to  embrace),  whispering  you  to  choose  the 
worst  mind.l  Then  the  devas  flock  together  to  assault  the 
two  lives  (the  life  of  the  body  and  that  of  the  soul),  praised 
by  the  prophets. 

7.  And  to  succour  this  life  (to  increase  it),  Armaiti2 
came  with  wealth,  the  good  and  true  mind ;  she,  the 
everlasting  one,  created  the  material  world ;  but  the  soul, 
as  to  time,  the  first  cause  among  created  beings,  was  with 
Thee. 

8.  But  when  he  (the  evil  spirit)  comes  with  one  of 
these  evils  (to  sow  mistrust  among  the  believers),  then 
thou  hast  the  power  through  the  good  mind  of  punishing 
them  who  break  their  promises,  0  righteous  spirit !  3 

9.  Thus  let  us  be  such  as  help  the  life  of  the  future.^ 
The  wise  living  spirits  5  are  the  greatest  supporters  of  it. 


1  Aktm  mano  (superlat.    achishtem  low  tliat  preached  by  Zarathushtra, 

mano)  means  literally  "  evil  mind."  will  be  punished  by  God  should  they 

It  is  a  philosophical  term  applied  by  break  their  promise. 

Zarathushtra  to  designate  his  prin-  *  In  this  passage  we  have  the  germs 

ciple    of    non-existence,   non-reality,  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of 

which  is  the  cause  of  all  evils.  the  dead  ;  see  the  author's  German 

-  She  is  the  angel  of  earth,  and  the  work  on  the  G^thas,  vol.  i.  pp.  109- 

personification  of  prayers.  112. 

3  That  ia  to  say,    those  who  give  '  These   are  the    archangels   (Am- 

to-day  the  solemn  promise  to  leave  shaspends). 
the  polytheistic  religion  and  to  fol- 


GAT  HA  AHUNAVAITI.  151 

The  prudent  man  wishes  only  to  be  there  where. wisdom 
is  at  home. 

10.  Wisdom  is  the  shelter  from  lies,  the  annihilation  of 
the  destroyer  (the  evil  spirit).  All  perfect  things  are 
garnered  up  in  the  splendid  residence  of  the  Good  Mind 
(Vohu-mano),  the  Wise  (Mazda),  and  the  Eighteous 
(Asha),i  who  are  known  as  the  best  beings. 

11.  Therefore,  perform  ye  the  commandments  which, 
pronounced  by  Mazda  himself,  have  been  given  to  man- 
kind ;  for  they  are  a  nuisance  and  perdition  to  liars,  but 
prosperity  to  the  believer  in  the  truth ;  they  are  the  foun- 
tain of  happiness. 

In  the  fourth  section  of  the  first  Gatha  (Yas.  xxxi.)  we 
have  a  collection  of  urvdfas,  "  sayings,"  of  Ahuramazda, 
revealed  to  his  prophet  Zarathushtra,  for  the  purpose  of 
protecting  the  good  creation  from  the  attacks  of  wicked 
men  and  evil  spirits.  The  chief  means  of  checking  evil 
influences  is  the  cultivation  of  the  soil.  Some  of  these 
verses  are  here  translated. 

Yas.  xxxi.  7.  He  (Ahuramazda)  first  created,  through 
his  inborn  lustre,2  the  multitude  of  celestial  bodies,  and 
through  his  intellect  the  good  creatures,  governed  by  the 
inborn  good  mind.  Thou  Ahuramazda,  the  spirit  who  art 
everlasting,"  makest  them  (the  good  creatures)  grow. 

8.  When  my  eyes  beheld  Thee,  the  essence  of  truth, 
the  Creator  of  life,  who  manifests  his  life  in  his  works, 
then  I  knew  Thee  to  be  the  primeval  spirit,  Thou  Mazda, 
so  high  in  mind  as  to  create  the  world,  and  the  father  of 
the  good  mind.3 

9.  In  Thee  was  Armaiti  (spirit  of  earth),  in  Thee  the 
very  wise  fertiliser   of  the  soil,^  0  Ahuramazda,   Thou 

^  Three  names  of  archangels.  life  in  men  and  animals,  the  principle 

^  Qdthrd,    "by  means  of   his   own  of  vitality.     If  Ahiiramazrla  is  called 

fire."    Ahuramazda,  as  the  source  of  the  father  of   Vohu-maii6,  it  means 

light,  which  most  resembles  him,  and  that  all  vital  powers  in  the  animated 

where  he  appears  to  his  prophet,  is  beings  have  sprung  out  of  him,  as  the 

called  qdthr6,  "having  his  own  light "  supreme  being. 

(not  borrowed).  *  Literally,  "the  cutter  of  the  cow  " 

*  Vohu-mano.     He  represents  the  (geush-tashd),  see  p.  147. 


152  GATHA  AHUNAVAITI. 

spirit !  when  Thou  hast  made  her  paths  that  she  might 
go  from  the  tiller  of  the  soil  to  him  who  does  not  culti- 
vate it.l 

10.  Of  these  two  (the  agriculturist  and  the  herdsman), 
she  chose  the  pious  cultivator,  the  propagator  of  life, 
whom  she  blessed  with  the  riches  produced  by  the  good 
mind.  All  that  do  not  tiU  her,  but  worship  the  devas 
(false  gods),  have  no  share  in  her  good  tidings  (the  fruits 
produced  by  her,  and  the  blessings  of  civilisation). 

1 1 .  Wlien  Thou  madest  the  world  with  its  bodies,  and 
(gavest  them)  motions  and  speeches,  then  Thou  Mazda ! 
hast  created  at  first  through  Thy  mind  the  gaetlias  (enclo- 
sures), and  the  sacred  visions  (daendo),  and  intellects.^ 

1 8.  Do  not  listen  to  the  sayings  and  precepts  of  the 
wicked  (the  evil  spirit),  because  he  has  given  to  destruc- 
tion house,  village,  district,  and  province.  Therefore, 
kill  them  (the  wicked)  with  the  sword. 

The  fifth  section  (Ha)  of  this  Gatha  (Yas.  xxxii.)  is  one 
of  the  most  difficult  pieces  of  the  whole  Yasna.  It  depicts, 
in  glowing  colours,  idolatry  and  its  evil  consequences.  The 
prophet  directs  his  speech  against  the  devas,  or  gods,  in  the 
following  manner : — 

Yas.  xxxii.  3,  Ye  devas  have  sprung  out  of  the  evil 

1  The  meaning  is,  that  Armaiti,  the  phets  through  visions.  The  root  of 
spirit  of  earth,  is  wandering  from  the  word  is  di,  "to  see"  (preserved 
spot  to  spot  to  convert  deserts  and  in  the  modern  Persian  dtdan,  "to 
wildernesses  into  fruitful  fields.  She  see ; "  it  is  related  to  the  Sanskrit  root 
goes  from  the  agriculturist  to  the  dhyai,  "  to  think,"  thinking  being 
shejjherd,  who  still  adheres  to  the  considered  to  be  a  seeing  by  means 
ancestral  nomadic  life,  to  call  upon  of  the  mental  eyes).  Afterwiirds  it 
him  to  cultivate  the  soil  also.  passed  into  the  more  general  meaning 

2  By  f/aSthas,  frequently  mentioned  of  "religion,  creed,"  and  is  retained 
in  the  Zend-Avesta,  the  ancient  set-  in  the  form  din  down  to  this  day  in 
tlements  of  the  Iranian  agriculturists  Persian,  whence  it  was  incorporated 
are  to  be  understood.  Ahuramazda  into  Arabic,  like  many  other  Iranian 
is  constantly  called  their  creator,  words,  at  a  time  anterior  to  Moham- 
which  means,  that  these  settlements  med.  This  word  is  also  to  be  found 
belong  to  a  very  remote  antiquity,  in  the  Lithuanian  language  (a  link  of 
and  that  they  form  the  basis  of  the  the  Aryan  stock)  in  the  form  dainS, 
Ahura  religion,  or  the  religion  of  the  meaning  "a song"  (the mental  fiction 
agriculturists.      The   daenas  are  the  of  the  poet). 

revelations  communicated  to  the  pro- 


GATHA  AHUNAVAITI.  153 

spirit  wlio  takes  possession  of  you  by  intoxication  (Slioma), 
teaching  you  manifold  arts  to  deceive  and  destroy  man- 
kind, for  which  arts  you  are  notorious  everywhere. 

4.  Inspired  by  this  evil  spirit,  you  have  invented  spells, 
which  are  applied  by  the  most  wicked,  pleasing  the  devas 
only,  but  rejected  by  the  good  spirit ;  but  the  wicked 
perish  through  the  wisdom  and  righteousness  of  Ahura- 
mazda, 

5.  Ye  devas  and  thou  evil  spirit!  ye  by  means  of  your 
base  mind,  your  base  words,  your  base  actions,  rob  man- 
kind of  its  earthly  and  immortal  welfare  by  raising  the 
wicked  to  power. 

Of  the  sixth  and  seventh  Has  (Yas.  xxxiii.  xxxiv.)  a  few 
verses  are  here  translated. 

Yas.  xxxiii.  2.  Whoever  are  opposed,  in  their  thoughts, 
words,  and  actions,  to  the  wicked,  and  think  of  the  welfare 
of  the  creation,!  their  efforts  will  be  crowned  with  success 
through  the  mercy  of  Ahuramazda. 

3.  Whoever  of  two  lords,  of  two  yeomen,  of  two  bonds- 
men,2  behaves  himself  w^ell  towards  a  righteous  man  (an 
adherent  of  the  Zoroastrian .  religion),  and  furthers  the 
works  of  life  by  tilling  the  soil,  that  one  will  be  in  the 
fields  of  the  righteous  and  good  (■i.e.,  in  paradise). 

4.  But  by  means  of  prayer  I  will  remove  from  Thee 
(from  thy  community),  0  Mazda !  irreligiousness  and 
wickedness,  the  disobedience  of  the  lord,  and  the  false- 
hood of  the  servant  belonging  to  him  and  his  yeoman, 
and  frustrate  the  most  wicked  designs  plotted  for  destroy- 
ing the  fields. 

14.  Among  the  priests  Zarathushtra  maintains  the 
opinion  that  the  peculiar  nature  of  each  body  (living 
Cx?ature)  subsists  through  the  wisdom  of  the  good  mind, 

^  The  term  in  tlie  Avesta  is  asti,  tlias,  but  not  in  the  other  books  of  the 

"existence."    It  is  the  consequence  Zend-Avesta.     The  word  for  lord  is 

of  adherence  to  the  good  principle.  qaetu,   "owner;"   that  for  yeoman, 

2  These  three  names  of  the  mem-  airyama,  "associate,    friond;"   that 

bersof  the  ancient  Iranian  community  for  bondsman,  wresena,   "  workman, 

are  very  frequently  used  in  the  Ga-  labourei-." 


154  GATHA  USHTAVAITI. 

through  righteousness  of  action,  and  the  hearing  of,  and 
keeping  to,  the  revealed  word. 

Yas.  xxxiv.  i.  Immortality,  righteousness,  wealth,  health, 
all  these  gifts  to  be  granted  in  consequence  of  (pious) 
actions,  words,  and  worshipping,  to  these  (men  who  pray 
here),  are  plentiful  in  Thy  possession,  0  Ahuramazda ! 

VII. — GATHA   USHTAVAITI   (Yas.  xliii.-xlvi.)^ 

Whilst  the  first  Gatha  appears  to  he  a  mere  collection 
of  fragments  of  hymns  and  scattered  verses,  made  without 
any  other  plan  than  to  transmit  to  posterity  what  was 
heKeved  to  be  the  true  and  genuine  sayings  of  the  prophet, ' 
in  this  second  Gatha  we  may  observe  a  certain  scheme 
carried  out.  Although  its  contents,  with  the  excej)tion  of 
a  few  verses  only  (xlvi.  13-17),  are  all  sayings  of  Zara- 
thushtra  himself,  yet  they  have  not  been  put  together,  as 
is  the  case  in  many  other  instances,  irrespective  of  their 
contents,  but  in  a  certain  order,  with  the  view  of  present- 
ing the  followers  of  the  prophet  with  a  true  image  of  the 
mission,  activity,  and  teaching  of  their  great  master.  In 
the  first  section  of  this  Gatha  (Yas.  xliii.),  his  mission,  by 
order  of  Ahuramazda,  is  announced ;  in  the  second  (Yas. 
xliv.),  he  receives  instructions  from  the  Supreme  Being 
about  the  highest  matters  of  human  speculation;  in  the  third 
(Yas.  xlv.),  he  appears  as  a  prophet  before  a  large  assem- 
bly of  his  countrymen,  to  propound  to  them  his  new  doc- 
trines ;  and  in  the  fourth  or  last  section  (Yas.  xlvi.)  we 
find  different  verses  referring  to  the  fate  of  the  prophet, 
the  cons;regation  which  he  established,  and  his  most  emi- 
nent  friends  and  supporters. 

As  this  Gatha  is  the  most  important  portion  of  the 
whole  Zend-Avesta  for  giving  an  accurate  knowledge  of 
Zarathushtra's  teaching  and  activity,  a  translation  of  the 

^  See  the  text,  with  a  literal  Latin     and  the  commentary  on  it,  ibid.,  pp. 
translation,  in  the  author's  German     59-154. 
work  on  the  Gathas,  vol.  ii.  pp.  2-18, 


GAT  HA  USHTAVAITI.  155 

whole  of  it  is  submitted  to  the  reader  iu  the  following 
pages. 

I.  (Yas.  xliii.) 

1.  Blessed  is  he,  blessed  is  every  one,  to  whom  Ahura- 
mazda,  ruling  by  his  own  will,  shall  grant  the  two  ever- 
lasting powers  (health  and  immortality).  For  this  very 
good  I  beseech  Thee  (Ahuramazda).  May  est  Thou  through 
Thy  angel  of  piety,  Armaiti,  give  me  happiness,  the  good 
true  things,  and  the  possession  of  the  good  mind. 

2.  I  believe  Thee  to  be  the  best  being  of  all,  the  source 
of  light  for  the  world.  Every  one  shall  choose  Thee  (be- 
lieve in  Thee)  as  the  source  of  light.  Thee,  0  Mazda,  most 


beneficent  spirit !  Thou  cfeatedst  all  good  true  things  by 
means  of  the  power  of  Thy  good  mind  at  any  time,  and 
promisedst  us  (who  believe  in  Thee)  a  long  life. 

3.  This  very  man  (Sraosha)  may  go  (and  lead  us)  to 
Paradise,  he  who  used  to  show  us  the  right  paths  of  hap- 
piness both  in  the  earthly  life  and  in  that  of  the  soul,  in 
the  present  creations,  where  Thy  spirit  dwells,  the  living, 
the  faithful,  the  generous,  the  beneficent,  0  Mazda ! 

4.  I  will  believe  Thee  to  be  the  powerful  benefactor,  0 
Mazda !  For  Thou  givest  with  Thy  hand,  filled  with  helps, 
good  to  the  righteous  man,  as  well  as  to  the  wicked,  by 
means  of  the  warmth  of  the  fire  1  strenfitheninfj  the  good 
things.  For  this  reason  the  vigour  of  the  crood  mind  has 
fallen  to  my  lot. 

5.  Thus  I  believed  in  Thee,  0  Ahm-amazda !  as  the  fur- 
therer  (of  what  is  good) ;  because  I  beheld  Thee  to  be  the 
primeval  cause  of  life  in  the  creation,  for  Thou,  who  hast 
rewards  for  deeds  and  words,  hast  given  evil  to  the  bad  and 
good  to  the  good.  I  wall  believe  in  Thee,  0  Ahura !  in  the 
last  (future)  period  of  creation. 

6.  In  whatever  period  of  my  life  I  believed  in  Thee, 
0  Mazda,  munificent  spirit!  in  that  Thou  camest  with 

1  The  fire  is  supposed  in  the  Zend-Avesta  and  the  Vedas  to  be  spread 
everywhere  as  the  cause  of  all  life. 


150  GATHA  USHTAVAITL 

wealth,  and  with  the  good  mind  through  whose  actions  our 
settlements  thrive.  To  these  (men  who  are  present)  Ar- 
maiti  i  tells  the  everlasting  laws,  given  by  Thy  intellect, 
which  nobody  may  abolish. 

7.  Thus  I  believed  in  Thee,  0  Ahuramazda !  as  the  fur- 
therer  (of  what  is  good) ;  therefore  he  (Sraosha)  came  to 
me  and  asked :  Who  art  thou  ?  whose  son  art  thou  ?  How 
dost  thou  at  present  think  to  increase  and  improve  thy 
settlements  and  their  beings  (to  increase  the  power  of  the 
good  mind  in  all  thy  territories  where  thou  appearest)  ? 

8.  I  replied  to  him :  Firstly,  I  am  Zarathushtra.  I  will 
show  myself  as  a  destroyer  to  the  wicked,  as  well  as  be  a 
comforter  for  the  righteous-  man.  As  long  as  I  can  praise 
and  glorify  Thee,  0  Mazda !  I  shall  enlighten  and  awaken 
all  that  aspire  to  property  (who  wish  to  separate  them- 
selves from  the  nomadic  tribes  and  become  settlers  in  a 
certain  country). 

9.  Thus  I  believed  in  Thee,  0  Ahuramazda !  as  the  fur- 
therer  (of  what  is  good)  ;  therefore  he  came  to  me  with  the 
good  mind  (and  I  asked  him) :  To  whom  dost  thou  wish 
the  increase  of  this  life  should  be  communicated  ?  Stand- 
ing at  Thy  fire  amongst  Thy  worshippers  who  pray  to  Thee, 
I  will  be  mindful  of  righteousness  (to  improve  all  good 
things)  as  long  as  I  shall  be  able. 

10.  Thus  may  est  Thou  grant  me  righteousness.  Tlien  I 
shall  call  myself,  if  accompanied  by  the  angel  of  piety,  a 
pious  obedient  man.  And  I  will  ask  in  behalf  of  both  of 
us  2  whatever  Thou  mayest  be  asked.  For  the  king  will, 
as  it  is  only  allowed  to  mighty  men,  make  Thee  for  Thy 
answers  a  mighty  fire  (to  cause  Thy  glory  and  adoration  to 
be  spread  over  many  countries  like  the  splendour  of  a  large 
blazing  flame). 

1 1.  Thus  I  believed  in  Thee,  0  Ahuramazda !  as  the  fur- 
therer  (of  what  is  good) ;  therefore  he  (Sraosha)  came  to 

^  The  spirit  of  earth.  and  renown  the  prophet  is  here  pray- 

2  This  refers  to  Zarathushtra  and     m%. 
Ivava  Visht&spa,   for  whose  welfare 


GAT  HA  USHTAVAITI.  157 

me  with  the  good  mind.  Por  since  I,  who  am  your  most 
obedient  servant  amongst  men,  am  ready  to  destroy  the 
enemies  first  by  the  recital  of  your  l  words,  so  tell  me  the 
best  to  be  done. 

1 2.  And  when  Thou  earnest  to  instruct  me,  and  taughtest 
me  righteousness ;  then  Thou  gavest  me  Thy  command  not 
to  appear  (before  large  assemblies  as  a  prophet),  without 
having  received  a  (special)  revelation,  before  the  angel 
Sraosha,  endowed  with  the  sublime  righteousness  which 
may  impart  your  righteous  things  to  the  two  friction  woods 
(by  means  of  which  the  holiest  fire,  the  source  of  all  good 
in  the  creation,  is  produced)  for  the  benefit  (of  all  beings), 
shall  have  come  to  me. 

1 3.  Then  I  believed  in  Thee,  0  Ahuramazda !  as  the 
furtherer  (of  what  is  good) ;  therefore  he  came  to  me  with 
the  good  mind.  Let  me  obtain  the  things  which  I  wished 
for ;  grant  me  the  gift  of  a  long  life  :  none  of  you  may 
detain  it  from  me  for  the  benefit  of  the  good  creation  sub- 
ject to  Thy  dominion. 

14.  Therefore  (Sraosha),  the  powerful  proprietor  (of 
all  good),  communicated  to  me,  his  friend,  knowledge  of 
Thy  helps  (Thy  powers) ;  for  endowed  with  all  the  gifts 
granted  by  Thee,  as  to  the  various  kinds  of  speech,  like 
all  other  men  who  recite  Thy  prayers,  I  was  resolved  upon 
making  my  appearance  (in  public  as  a  prophet). 

15.  Thus  I  believed  in  Thee,  0  Ahuramazda!  as  the 
furtherer  (of  what  is  good) ;  therefore  he  came  to  me  with 
the  good  mind.  May  the  greatest  happiness  brightly  blaze 
out  of  these  flames  !  May  the  number  of  the  worshij^pers 
of  the  liar  (evil  spirit)  diminish!  may  all  those  (that  are 
here  present)  address  themselves  to  the  priests  of  the  holy 
fire! 

16.  Thus  prays,  0  Ahuramazda!  Zarathushtra  and  every 
holy  (pure)  man  for  aU  that  choose  (as  their  guide)  the 
most  beneficent  spirit.      May  vitality  and  righteousness 

^  This  refers  to  Ahuramazda  and  the  archangels  forming  the  celestial 
council. 


158  GAT  HA  USHTAVAITI. 

(the  foundations  of  the  good  creation)  Lecome  predomi- 
nant in  the  world !  In  every  being  which  beholds  the 
sun's  light  may  Armaiti  (the  spirit  of  piety)  reside !  She 
who  causes  all  growth  by  her  actions  through  the  good 
mind. 

2.  (Yas.  xliv.) 

1.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura ! 
_^ i\:hether  your  friend  (Sraosha)  be  willing  to  recite  his  own 

hymn  as  prayer  to  my  friend  (Frashaoshtra  or  Vishtaspa), 
0  Mazda  !  and  whether  he  would  come  to  us  with  the  good 
mind,  to  perform  for  us  true  actions  of  friendship.! 

2.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura ! 
How  arose  the  best  (present)  life  (this  world)  ?  By  what 
means  are  the  present  things  (the  world)  to  be  supported  ? 
That  spirit,  the  beneficent  (Vohu-mano)  0  righteous  Mazda! 
is  the  guardian  of  the  beings  to  ward  off  from  them  every 
evil ;  He  is  the  promoter  of  all  life. 

3.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
Who  was  in  the  beginning  the  father  and  creator  of  right- 
eousness ?  Who  created  the  path  of  the  sun  and  stars  ? 
Who  causes  the  moon  to  increase  and  wane  but  Thou  ? 
This  I  wish  (to  know),  0  Mazda !  besides  what  I  know 
(already). 

4.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
AVho  is  holding  the  earth  and  the  skies  above  it  ?  Who 
made  the  waters  and  the  trees  of  the  field  ?  Who  is  in 
the  winds  and  storms  that  they  so  quickly  run  ?  Who  is 
the  creator  of  the  good-minded  beings,  0  Mazda  ? 

5.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
Who  created  the  lights  of  good  effect  and  the  darkness  ? 
\Vlio  created  the  sleep  of  good  effect  and  the  activity  ? 
Who  (created)  morning,  noon,  and  night,  reminding  the 
priest  always  of  his  duties  ? 

^   The    meaning  is,    the    proi^hct     would  m.ake  communications  to  bis 
■wants  to  ascertain  from  Ahuramazda,     (the  proi^het's)  friend. 
Y/hether  or  not  the  angel    Sraosha 


GAT  HA   USHTAVAITI.  159 

6.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura ! 
Whether  these  (verses)  which  I  shall  recite,  are  really 
thus  ?i  (a)  Armaiti  doubles  righteousness  by  her  actions. 
(&)  He  collects  wealth  with  the  good  mind,  (c)  For  whom 
hast  thou  made  the  imperishable  cow  Eanyo-skereti  ?  2 

7.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
Who  has  prepared  the  Bactrian  (berekhdha)  home  with  its 
properties  ?  Who  fashioned,  by  a  weaving  motion,  the 
excellent  son  out  of  the  father  ?  ^  To  become  acquainted 
with  these  things,  I  approach  Thee,  0  Mazda,  beneficent 
spirit !  creator  of  all  beings  ! 

8.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
What  soul  (what  guardian  angel)  may  teU  me  good  things, 
to  perform  five  times  (a  day)  ^  the  duties  which  are  en- 
joined by  Thyself,  0  Mazda !  and  to  recite  those  prayers 
which  are  communicated  for  the  welfare  (of  aU  beings)  by 
the  good  mind.  Whatever  good,  intended  for  the  increase 
of  life,  is  to  be  had,  that  may  come  to  me. 

9.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura !  How 
shall  I  bless  that  creed  which  Thy  friend  (Sraosha),  who 
protects  it  with  a  true  and  good  mind  in  the  assembly  (of  the 
heavenly  spirits),  ought  to  promulgate  to  the  mighty  king  ? 

10.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  teU  it  me  right,  0  Ahura  !  The 
faith  which,  being  the  best  of  all,  may  protect  my  posses- 
sion, and  may  really  produce  the  good  things,  by  means  of 
the  words  and  actions  of  Armaiti  (the  spirit  of  earth).  My 
heart  wishes  (it  is  my  lively  desire)  that  I  may  know 
Thee,  0  Mazda ! 

^  Here  are  quoted  tlie  first  phrases  sticks,  which  was  in   ancient  times 

of  three  ancient  prayers  which  are  no  the  most  sacred  way  of  bringing  into 

longer  knswn.  existence  tlie  fire,  commonly  called 

^  This  is  a  mythological  name  of  'Ahuramazda's  son.'  See  the  author's 

the  earth,  to  be  found  in  the  GS,thas  work  on  the  Gathas,  vol.  ii.  j)p.  81,  82. 

only.     It  means  "producing  the  two  *  The  so-called  five  gahs  :  Havant, 

friction  woods   (two  wooden   sticks,  from6to  10  a.m.  ;  Rapithwina,  10  a.m. 

by  means  of  rubbing  which  fire  was  to  3  P.M.;  Uzayeirina,  from3to6p.M. 

produced)."     See  the  author's  work  (sunset) ;  AiwisrClthrema,  from  6toi2 

on  the  Gathas,  vol.  ii.  pp.  91,  92.  P.M. ;    Ushahina,   from  12  P.M.  to  6 

^  This  refers  to  the  production  of  a.m. 
fire   by  the  friction  of  two  wooden 


i6o  GATHA   USHTAVAITI. 

11.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura ! 
How  Armaiti  l  may  visit  those  men  to  whom  the  belief  in 
Thee,  0  Mazda  !  is  preached  ?  By  those  I  am  there 
acknowledged  (as  a  prophet);  but  all  dissenters  are  regarded 
as  my  enemies. 

12.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
Who  is  the  righteous  man  and  who  the  impious,  after 
whom  I  wish  to  inquire  ?  "With  which  of  the  two  is  the 
evil  (spuit),  and  with  which  the  good  one  ?  Is  it  not  right 
to  consider  the  impious  man  who  attacks  me  or  Thee  to 
be  an  evil  one  ? 

13.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
How  shall  we  drive  away  the  destruction  (destroyer)  from 
this  place  to  those  who,  full  of  disobedience,  do  not  respect 
righteousness  in  keeping  it,  nor  care  about  the  thriving 
of  the  good  mind  (that  it  may  be  diffused  all  over  the 
earth)  ? 

14.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura ! 
How  shall  I  deliver  the  destroyer  into  the  hands  of  truth, 
to  be  annihilated  by  means  of  the  hymns  for  Thy  praise  ? 
If  Thou,  0  Mazda!  communicatest  to  me  an  efficacious 
spell  to  be  applied  against  the  impious  man,  then  I  wiU 
destroy  every  difficulty  and  every  misfortune. 

15.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
When  or  to  whom  of  the  lords  givest  Thou  as  proprietor 
this  fat  flock  (of  sheep),  two  armies  being  gathered  for  a 
combat  in  silence,  by  means  of  those  sayings  which  Thou, 
0  Mazda !  art  desirous  of  pronouncing  ? 

16.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
Who  killed  the  hostile  demons  of  different  shapes,  to  enable 
me  to  become  acquainted  with  the  rules  established  for  the 
course  of  the  two  lives  (physical  and  spiritual)  ?  So  may 
the  angel  Sraosha,  assisted  by  the  good  mind,  shine  for 
every  one  towards  whom  Thou  art  propitious. 

1  This  refers  to  the  wanderings  of     agriculture   and  the  arts  of  a  more 
Armaiti,  the  spirit  of  earth,  by  which     civilised  life, 
is  to  be  understood  the  progress  of 


GATHA  USHTAVAITT.  i6i 

17.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura! 
How  may  I  come,  0  Mazda !  to  your  dwelling-place  (that 
of  God  and  the  angels)  to  hear  you  sing?  Aloud  I  ex- 
press my  wish  to  obtain  the  help  of  (the  angel  of)  health, 
and  that  of  immortality,  by  means  of  that  hymn  which  is 
a  treasure  of  truth. 

1 8.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura ! 
How  shall  T,  0  Eighteous  !  spend  this  gift,  ten  pregnant 
mares  and  a  camel,i  to  obtain  in  future  the  two  powers  of 
health  and  immortality,  in  the  same  way  as  Thou  hast 
granted  them  to  these  men  (to  others  known  to  the  pro- 
phets) ? 

1 9.  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me  right,  0  Ahura ! 
How  is  the  first  intellect  2  of  that  man,  who  does  not  return 
(what  he  has  received)  to  the  offerer  of  this  gift,3  of  him  who 
does  not  grant  anything  to  the  speaker  of  truth  ?  For  the 
last  intellect  of  this  man  (his  doing)  is  already  known  to 
me. 

20.  What,  0  good  ruler  Mazda !  are  the  Devas  (evil 
spirits)  ?  Thus  I  might  ask  Thee  for  those  who  attack 
the  good  existence  (the  good  beings),  by  whose  means  the 
priest  and  prophet  of  the  idols  expose  the  earth  (the 
cultivated  countries)  to  destruction ;  and  (I  wish  to  know 
beaides)  what  the  false  prophet  has  gained  by  doing  so. 
Do  not,  0  Eighteous  !  grant  him  a  field  to  fence  it  in  (to 
make  it  his  own  property). 

3.  (Yas.  xlv.) 

I.  All  ye,  who  have  come  from  near  and  far,  should 
now  listen  and  hearken  to  what  I  shall  proclaim.  Now 
the  wise  have  manifested  this  universe  as  a  duality.     Let 

1  This  refers  to  a  sacrifice.     Sacri-  first  intellect  is  that  which  is  innate 

fices  of  animals  were  customary  in  in  the  soul,  which  came  from  heaven ; 

Zarathushtra  s  time.  the  last  is  that  one  which  man  him- 

The  first  and  last  intellects  are  self  acquires  by  experience, 
notions    of    the    Zoroastrian    philo-         ^  xhat  is  to  say,  '  who  is  ungrateful 

sophy ;    see  the  fourth  Essay.     The  towards  God.' 

L 


i62  GATHA   USHTAVAITL. 

not  the  misdiief-maker  destroy  tlie  second  life,  since 
he,  the  wicked,  chose  with  his  tongue  the  pernicious 
doctrines. 

2.  I  will  proclaim  the  two  primeval  spirits  of  the  world, 
of  whom  the  inoreaser  thus  spoke  to  the  destroyer:  Do 
not  thoughts,  do  not  words,  do  not  wisdoms,  nor  doctrines, 
do  not  speeches,  nor  actions,  do  not  meditations,  do  not 
souls  follow  us  ? 

3.  I  will  proclaim  the  primeval  (thought)  of  this  life 
which  Ahuramazda,  who  knows  it,  spoke  unto  me ;  for 
those  of  you  who  do  not  carry  my  word  into  practice  so  as 
I  think  and  sj)eak  it,  the  end  of  the  life  will  come. 

4.  I  will  proclaim  the  Best  in  this  life.  Mazda  knows 
it  in  truth,  w^ho  created  it  as  the  father  of  the  Good  Mind 
wlio  is  working  (in  the  minds);  its  daughter  is  Devotion 
(Armaiti)  with  good  works.  The  Lord  (Ahura)  who  is 
giving  all  (good  things)  cannot  be  deceived. 

5.  I  will  proclaim  the  word  which  the  Most  Beneficent 
(the  source  of  all  prosperity)  spoke  to  me,  which  is  the 
best  for  men  to  hear.  All  those  who  give  a  hearing  to 
this  my  word,  will  be  free  from  all  defects  and  reach  im- 
mortality. Mazda  is  Lord  through  the  instrumentality  of 
the  Good  ]\Iind. 

6.  I  will  proclaim,  as  the  greatest  of  all  things,  that  one 
should  be  good,  praising  only  righteousness.  Ahura- 
mazda will  hear  those  who  are  bent  on  furthering  l  (all 
that  is  good).  May  He  whose  goodness  is  communicated 
by  the  Good  Mind,  instruct  me  in  his  best  wisdom. 

7.  All  that  have  been  living,  and  will  be  living,  subsist 
by  means  of  His  bounty  only.  The  soul  of  the  righteous 
attains  to  immortality,  but  that  of  the  wicked  man  has 
everlasting  punishment.  Such  is  the  rule  of  Ahuramazda, 
whose  the  creatures  are. 

8.  Him  whom  I  wish  to  extol  with  my  praises  I  now 
behold  with  (my)  eye,  knowing  him  to  be  Ahuramazda, 
the  reality  of  the  good  mind,  deed,  and  word.     Let  us  thus 

^  Literally,  "  who  are  good  with  the  increasing  (beneficent)  si)irit." 


GAT  HA  USHTAVAITI.  163 

set  down  our  gifts  of  praise  in  the  dwelling-place  of  the 
heavenly  singers  (angels).  1 

9.  Him  I  wish  to  adore  with  my  good  mind,  Him  who 
gives  ns  fortune  and  misfortune  according  to  His  will. 
May  Ahuramazda  make  our  progeny  (and)  cattle  thrive, 
that  of  the  master  as  well  as  that  of  the  servant,  by  pro- 
ducing in  them  the  good  qualities  of  the  Good  Mind. 

10.  Him  I  wish  to  extol  with  the  prayers  of  my  devo- 
tion, who  calls  himself  Ahuramazda,  that  is,-  He  knows 
with  his  true  and  good  mind,  and  gives  to  this  world  the 
freedom  from  defects  and  immortality,  which  are  in  His 
possession,  as  two  permanently  active  powers. 

1 1 .  Whoever  thinks  the  idols  and  all  those  men  besides, 
who  think  of  mischief  only,  to  be  base,  and  distinguishes 
such  people  from  those  who  think  of  the  right ;  his  friend, 
brother,  or  father  is  Ahuramazda.  This  is  the  beneficent 
revelation  of  the  supreme  fire-priest. 

4.  (Yas.  xlvi.) 

1.  To  what  land  shall  I  turn  ?  whither  shall  I  go  in 
turning  ?  owing  to  the  desertion  of  the  master  (Zara- 
thushtra)  and  his  companion  ?  None  of  the  servants  pay 
reverence  to  me,  nor  do  the  wicked  rulers  of  the  country. 
How  shall  I  worship  Thee  further,  0  Ahuramazda  ? 

2.  I  know  that  I  am  helpless.  Look  at  me  being 
amongst  few  men,  for  I  have  few  men  (I  have  lost  my 
followers  or  they  have  left  me);  I  implore  Thee  weeping, 
0  Ahura !  who  grantest  happiness  as  a  friend  gives  (a  pre- 
sent) to  his  friend.  The  good  of  the  good  mind  is  in  thy 
own  possession,  0  Eighteous !  ^ 

4.  The  wicked  man  enjoys  the  fields  of  the  angel  of 
truth  who  is  protecting  the  earth  in  the  district  as  well  as 

1  The  meaning  is  that  our  iDrayers,  dently  to  Zaratliushtra's  persecution. 
ofiFered  here,  may  go  u^)  to  heaven,  to  The  third  verse,  consisting  of  several 
be  heard  before  the  throne  of  God.  sentences  wliich  seem  not  to  be  con- 

2  What  follows  is  an  explanation  of  nected  with  each  other,  is  omitted. 
the  meaning  of  the  name  Ahuramazda.  See  the  author's  work  on  the  Gathas, 

'^  These  two  verses  (i,  2)  refer  evi-     vol.  ii.  pp.  130,  131. 


1 64  GAT  HA   USHTAVAITI. 

in  the  province ;  but  by  choosing  evil,  instead  of  good,  he 
cannot  succeed  in  his  deeds.  Whoever  drives  him  out  of 
his  dominion,  or  out  of  his  property,  0  ]\Iazda !  he  is  going 
further  on  the  paths  of  good  intellect.i 

5.  If  in  future  a  ruler  takes  hold  of  one  who  trespasses 
the  law,  or  if  a  nobleman  takes  hold  of  one  who  violates 
the  bonds  of  friendship,  or  if  a  righteous  man,  living 
righteously,  takes  hold  of  a  wicked  man :  he  shall  then, 
having  learned  it,  inform  the  master;  into  distress  and 
utter  want  he  shall  be  thrown  to  be  unhappy.2 

6.  But  whoever,  although  he  may  be  able,  does  not  go 
to  him  (the  chief  of  the  community),  he  may,  however, 
follow  the  customs  of  the  untruth  now  prevailing.^  For 
he  is  a  wicked  man  whom  another  wicked  one  considers 
to  be  the  best,  and  he  is  a  righteous  man  whose  friend  is 
a  righteous  one.  Such  sayings  of  old  hast  Thou  revealed, 
0  Ahura ! 

7.  Who  4  is  appointed  protector  of  my  property,  0 
Mazda!  when  the  wdcked  endeavour  to  hurt  me?  who 
else,  if  not  Thy  fire,  and  Thy  mind,  through  whose  opera- 
tion Thou  hast  created  rightful  existence  (good  beings), 
0  Ahura!  Tell  me  the  power  necessary  for  upholding 
the  religion. 

8.  Whoever  spoils  my  estates,  and  does  not  choose  me 
by  bowing  before  my  fire  (the  symbol  of  the  deity),  retri- 
bution may  be  made  to  him  for  his  person  in  the  same 
way.  He  shall  be  excluded  from  every  good  possession, 
but  not  from  a  bad  one  filled  up  with  evils,  0  Mazda ! 

9.  Who  is  that  man,  who  whilst  supporting  me,  made 

1  It  is  considered  to  be  a  good  work  does  not   assist    in    punishing   such 

to  destroy  the  enemies  of  agriculture,  crimes  as  apostasy  and  promise-break- 

because    by  laying   waste   the   culti-  iiig,  is  himself  an  infidel  and  no  more 

vated  soil  they  cause  gi-eat  damage  to  to  be  recognised  as  a  member  of  the 

the  good  creation.  Zoroastrian  community. 

'■'■  This  and  the  following  verses  re-  ■*  This  verse  is  one  of  the  most  cele- 

fer  to  the  breaking   of   solemn   pro-  brated   prayers   used   by   the    Parsis 

mises  (called  mithra,  see  Vend,  iv.)  now-a-days.    It  is  the  so-called  Sros/i 

and  apostasy.  tcy. 

3  The  meaning  is  that  a  man,  who 


GATHA   USHTAVAITI.  165 

me  first  acquainted  with  thee  as  the  most  venerable  being, 
as  the  beneficent  rigiiteous  Lord  ?  1  Tlie  true  sayings 
revealed  by  the  maker  of  the  earth  2  come  to  my  hands  by 
means  of  thy  good  mind. 

10.  Whatever  man,  or  woman,  0  Ahuramazda!  per- 
forms the  best  actions,  known  to  thee,  for  the  benefit  of  this 
(earthly)  life,  promoting  thus  the  truth  for  the  angel  of  truth, 
and  spreading  thy  rule  through  the  good  mind,  as  well  as 
gratifying  all  those  men,  who  are  gathered  round  me,  to 
adore  (the  heavenly  spirits) :  all  these  I  will  lead  over  the 
bridge  of  the  gatherer  (heavenly  bridge  ^  to  Paradise). 

1 1.  The  sway  is  given  into  the  hands  of  the  priests  and 
prophets  of  idols,  who  by  their  (atrocious)  actions,  endea- 
vour to  destroy  human  life.  Actuated  by  their  own 
spirit  and  mind,  they  ought'  to  avoid  the  bridge  of  the 
gatherer,  to  remain  for  ever  in  the  dwelling-place  of  de- 
struction (hell). 

12.  "When  after  the  defeat  of  the  enemy  Fry  ana  the 
true  rites  (fire-worship  and  agriculture)  arose  amongst  the 
(Iranian)  tribes,  and  their  allies,  thou  fencedst  with  stakes 
the  earth's  settlements.  Thus  Ahuramazda,  having  fenced 
them  all,  assigned  them  to  those  men  (his  worshippers)  as 
property.4 

13.  Whoever  amongst  men  pays  reverence  zealously 
to  Spitama  Zarathushtra,  such  a  one  is  fit  to  deliver  in 
public  his  lore.  To  him  (Zarathushtra)  Ahuramazda 
entrusted  life  (the  existence  of  all  good  beings  to  protect 
them);  for  him  he  established  through  the  good  mind  the 
settlements  ;  him  we  think  to  be  your  good  friend  (that  is, 
of  thyself  and  thy  angels),  0  Eighteous  ! 

^  Tliis    refers    very  likely  to    the  which  can  be  facilitated  to  the  de- 

geiish  urvd,  "  the  soul  of  earth,"  to  ceased  by  prayers  recited  for  him. 

whose  oracles  the  prophet  was  coii-  •*  Here  the   origin  of   the  gaethas, 

stantly  listening.  "  possessions,  estates,"  so  frequently 

2  Lit.    "the    cutter  of  the   cow,"  alluded  to  in  the  Zendavesta,  is  de- 
see  p.  147.  scribed.      AVe   must   understand    by 

2  None  can  enter  Paradise  without  them  the  original  settlements  of  the 

having  first  passed  the '' bridge  of  the  Iranians  exposed  to  constant  attacks 

gatherer"    [Chinvat],  the   passing  of  on  the  part  of  nomadic  tribes. 


1 66  GAT  HA    USHTAVAITT. 

14.  Zarathuslitra :  Who  is  tliy  sincere  friend  (to  assist 
in  performing)  tlie  great  work  ?  Or,  who  will  deliver  it  in 
pnblic  ?  The  very  man  to  do  it,  is  Kava  Vishtaspa.  I 
will  worship  through  the  words  of  the  good  mind  all  those 
whom  thou  hast  elected  at  the  (heavenly)  meeting. 

15.  Ye  sons  of  Hechad-aspa  Spitama !  to  you  I  will 
speak;  because  you  distinguish  right  from  wrong.  By 
means  of  your  actions,  the  truth,  (contained)  in  the  ancient 
commandments  of  Ahura,  has  been  founded. 

16.  Venerable  Frashoshtra  !  Go  thou  with  those  helpers 
whom  we  both  have  elected  for  the  benefit  of  the  world 
(the  good  beings),  to  that  iield  wliere  Devotion  resides, 
attended  by  Eighteousness,  where  the  stores  of  the  Good 
Mind  may  be  acquired,  where  is  the  dwelling-place  of 
Ahuramazda'  {i.e.,  Paradise).  • 

17.  Where  from  you  only  blessings,  not  curses,^  vener- 
able wise  Jamaspas  !  are  to  be  heard,  always  (protecting) 
the  goods  of  the  leader  and  performer  of  the  sacred  rites, 
namely  of  Ahuramazda  himself,  endowed  with  great  intel- 
lectual power. 

18.  For  him,  who  bestowed  most  favours  on  me,  I 
collect  all  the  best  of  my  goods  (acquired)  through  the 
Good  Mind.  But  to  their  last  shifts  I  will  put  all  those, 
Mazda,  0  righteous !  who  have  put  us  to  tliem.  I  will 
beseech  you  to  assist  me.  Such  is  my  decision  conceived 
according  to  my  intellect  and  understanding. 

19.  Whoever  makes  this  very  life  increase  by  means  of 
ri-^hteousness,  to  the  utmost  for  me,  who  am  Zarathushtra 
myself,  to  him  the  first  (earthly)  and  the  other  (spiritual) 
life  will  be  granted  as  a  reward,  together  with  all  goods  to 
be  had  on  tlie  imperishable  earth.  Thou  art  the  very 
owner  of  all  these  things  to  the  gTeatest  extent,  thou  who 
art  my  friend,  0  Mazda  ! 

1  AYlien  on  earth,  tliey  used  to  pro-     -words  can  be  heard  from  them.  They 
nounce   curses  as  well   as   blessings,     uere  celebrated  Magi  (mayavas). 
Hut  iu  Paradise  onlj-  good,  no  bad, 


THE  LAST  THREE  GA  THAS.  167 

VIII. — THE     LAST     THREE     GATHAS     (SPENTA-MAINYU,      Yas. 
xlvii.-l.  ;   VOHU-KHSHATHEEM,    Yas.    li. ;   VAHISHTOISHTI, 

Yas.  liii.)  1 

These  three  collections  of  ancient  hymns  are  mucii 
smaller  than  the  first  two ;  the  fourth  and  fifth  consist 
only  of  one  Ha  (chapter)  each.  Merely  a  short  account 
of  them  will  be  given,  with  a  translation  of  a  few  verses. 
The  several  chapters,  except  the  last  of  the  third  Gatha 
(Yas.  1.),  form  nowhere  a  whole  as  regards  composition, 
but  are  generally  mere  collections  of  detached  verses, 
which  were  pronounced  on  different  occasions,  either  by 
Zarathushtra  himself,  or  by  his  disciples.  While  in  the 
first  two  Gathas  the  majority  of  the  verses  can  be  traced 
to  Zarathushtra  himself,  in  these  last  three  Gathas  most 
of  the  verses  appear  to  be  the  work  of  the  master's  dis- 
ciples, such  as  Jamaspa,  Frashoshtra,  and  Vishtaspa,  and 
some  verses  are  perhaps  the  work  of  their  pupils,  as  they 
themselves  are  therein  spoken  of  (especially  in  Yas.  li.) 
with  great  reverence. 

Yas.  xlvii.  i.  Ahuramazda  gives  through  the  beneficent 
S]3irit,  appearing  in  the  best  thought,  and  in  recti- 
tude of  action  and  speech,  to  this  world  (universe), 
perfection  (Haurvatat)  and  immortality  (Ameretat), 
wealth  (Khshathra)  and  devotion  (Armaiti).^ 
2.  From  his  (Ahuramazda's)  most  beneficent  spirit 
all  good  has  sprung  in  the  words  which  are  pro- 
nounced by  the  tongue  of  the  Good  Mind  {Yo1i4j 
mano),  and  the  works  wrought  by  tlie  hands  of 
Armaiti  (spirit  of  earth).  By  means  of  such  know- 
ledge Mazda  himself  is  the  father  of  all  rectitude 
(in  thought,  w^ord,  and  deed). 
Yas.  xlviii.  4.  He  who  created,  by  means  of  his  wisdom, 


^  See  the   author's   German   work,  only  God  and  Spirit,  in  whom  good 

vol.  ii.  pp.  20-38  and  155-217.  and  evil  both    originate.      All    the 

^  Ahuramazda  is  in   this,  and  the  Ameshaspentas    (arcliangels)   of    the 

following  two  verses,  described  as  the  later  Parsiism  are  only  his  gifts. 


l68  THE  LAS  J  THREE  CATHAS. 

the  good  and  evil  mind  in  thinking,  words,  and 
deeds,  rewards  his  obedient  followers  with  pro- 
sperity. Art  Thou  (Mazda!)  not  he,  in  whom  the 
final  cause  of  both  intellects  (good  and  evil)  exists  ? 

10.  When  will  appear,  0  Mazda!  the  men  of  vigour 
and  courage  to  pollute  that  intoxicating  liquor  (the 
Soma)  ?  This  diabolical  art  makes  the  idol-priests 
so  overbearing,  and  the  evil  spirit,  reigning  in  the 
countries,  increases  (this  pride).i 

Yas.  xlix.  4.  Those  poor  (wretches)  who,  instigated  by 
their  base  minds,  cause  mischief  and  ruin  to  the 
wealthy  (settlers)  tlirough  the  spells  uttered  by 
their  tongues,  who  are  devoid  of  all  good  works  and 
find  delight  in  evil  doings  only ;  such  men  produce 
the  demons  (devas)  by  means  of  their  pernicious 
thoughts. 
5.  Mazda  himself,  and  the  prayers  (offered  by  men), 
and  every  one  who  is  a  truly  noble  son  of  Armaiti, 
(the  earth),  as  well  as  all  that  are  in  Thy  dominions, 
0  Ahura !  will  protect  this  faith  (Zoroastrian  reli- 
gion) by  means  of  the  good  (inborn)  mind. 

11.  The  spirits  (of  the  deceased)  2  are  fighting  against 
the  wicked,  evil-minded,  evil-speaking,  evil-doing, 
evil-thinking,  disbelievers  (in  the  true  god,  Ahura- 
mazda).     Such  men  will  go  to  hell ! 

Yas.  1.  6.  Zarathushtra  is  the  prophet  who,  through  his 
wisdom  3  and  truth,  utters  in  words  the  sacred 
thoughts  (mantras).  Through  his  tongue  he  makes 
known  to  the  world,  the  laws  given  by  my  ^  intel- 
lect, the  mysteries  hidden  in  my  mind. 

^  This  verse  refers  to  the  Brahmanic  pire  upon  the  kingdom  of  light  and 

Soma  worship,  which,  as  the  cause  of  goodness,     is   fravashi,      "guardian 

so  much  evil,   was  cursed  by  Zara-  spirit,"    which    name    is,    however, 

thushtra.     See  the  second  section  of  never  to  be  met  with  in  the  Gathas. 

the  fourth  Essay.  •*  Lit.    "  through    mazda  "  which 

2  In  the  original  urvdnd,  "souls.''  word  is,  now  and  then,  used  in  the 

In  the  other  books  the  common  name  appellative  sense  "wisdom." 

of  the  spirits  of  the  deceased  pious  *  The  speaker  in  this  verse,  as  well 

Zoroastrians,  who  are  figliting  against  as  in  the  whole  50th  chapter,  is  the 

the  attacks  made  by  the  hellish  em-  (jeush  urvd. 


THE  LAST  THREE  GATHAS.  169 

10.  All  tlie  luminaries  witli  their  bright  appearances, 
all  that  is  endowed  with  a  radiant  eye  by  the  good 
mind,  stars  and  the  sun,  the  day's  foreteller,  wander 
(in  their  spheres)  to  Thy  praise,  0  righteous  Ahura- 
mazda ! 
Yas.  li.  6.  Ahuramazda  bestows,  through  His  power,  the 
best  of  all  upon  him  who  brings  offerings  to  please 
Him ;  but  the  worst  of  all  will  fall  to  the  lot  of  him 
who  does  not  worship  God  in  the  last  time  of  the 
world  (when  the  good  is  engaged  in  a  hard  struggle 
against  the  bad). 
7.  Thou  who  hast  created  earth,  water,  and  trees, 
give  me  immortality  (Ameretat)  and  prosperity 
(Haurvatat),  0  Mazda,  most  beneficent  spirit !  Those 
everlasting  powers  I  will  praise  with  a  good  mind. 

15.  Zarathushtra  assigned  in  times  of  yore,  as  a  re- 
w\ard  to  the  Magavas  1  the  Paradise  where  first  of 
all  Mazda  Himself  had  gone!  You  (0  Amesha- 
spentas !)  have  in  your  hands  through  your  good  and 
true  mind  those  two  powers  -  (to  obtain  everlasting 
life). 

16.  KavS,  Vishtaspa  obtained,  through  the  possession 
of  the  spiritual  power  {maga),  and  through  the 
verses  which  the  good  mind  had  revealed,  that 
knowledge  which  Ahuramazda  Himself,  as  the  cause 
of  truth,  has  invented. 

17.  Frashoshtra,  the  noble,  wished  to  see  my  High- 
lands (hcrcJchdha  kehrpa,  i.e.,  Bactria),  to  propagate 
there  the  good  religion.  May  Ahuramazda  bless 
this  undertaking !  cry  aloud  that  they  may  aspire 
after  truth ! 

18.  The  wise  Jamaspas,  the  noble,  the  illustrious,  who 
have  the  good  mind  w4th  truth,  prefer  the  settled 

1  This  word  is  the  original  form  of  it  seems  to  have  denoted  the  earliest 
"Magi,"  which   name  was  given  in  followers  of  Zarathushtra. 
later  times  to  all  the  Persian  priests.  ^  Tliese  are  Ameretdt,ix-aA  Haurva- 
Its  form  in  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  t&t,  the  last  two  of  the  seven  arch- 
is  magush.     According  to  this  verse  angels  in  the  Parsiism  of  later  times. 


170  VASNA  HAPTANHAITI. 

life,l  saying :  Let  me  have  it,  because  I  cling  to  Tliee, 
0  Almramazda ! 
Yas.  liii.  i.  It  is  reported  that  Zarathushtra  Spitama  pos- 
sessed the  best  good  ;  for  Ahuramazda  granted  him 
all  that  may  be  obtained  by  means  of  a  sincere 
worship,  for  ever,  all  that  promotes  the  good  life, 
and  he  is  giving  the  same  to  all  those  who  keep 
the  words,  and  perform  the  actions,  enjoined  by  the 
good  religion. 

IX. — YASXA  HAPTANHAITI,  AND  THE  MINOR  TEXTS  OF  THE 

OLD  YASNA. 

The  Yasna  haptaiihaiti,  or  as  its  name  indicates,  the 
Yasna  of  seven  Has  (comprising  the  sections  from  Yas. 
XXXV.  to  xli.),  though  written  in  the  Gatha  dialect,  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  Gathas.  It  is  undoubtedly  very 
old,  but  there  is  no  sufficient  evidence  to  trace  it  to  Zara- 
thushtra himself.  Its  contents  are  simple  prayers,  in 
prose,  which  are  to  be  offered  to  Ahuramazda,  the  Amesha- 
spentas,  and  the  Fravashis ;  to  the  fire,  as  the  symbol  of 
Ahuramazda  who  appears  in  its  blazing  flame  (Yas.  xxxvi. 
i) ;  to  the  earth  and  other  female  spirits  (called  gend, 
"wife,"  Greek,  gynS,  see  Yas.  xxxviii.  i),  such  as  the  angel 
presiding  over  food  (^,~/^a,  corresponding  to  ild,  a  name 
of  the  earth  in  the  Yeda),  devotion,  speech,  &c.  ;  to  the 
waters,  to  the  animating  spirit  of  creation,  and  to  all  beings 
of  the  good  creation.  Compared  with  the  Gathas,  they 
represent  the  Zoroastrian  religion  not  in  its  original  un- 
altered, but  in  a  somewhat  developed  and  altered  state. 
The  high  philos'opbical  ideas  which  are  laid  down  in  Zara- 
thushtra's  own  hymns,  are  partially  abandoned,  and  par- 
tially personified ;  and  the  philosophical,  tlieological,  and 

^  This  can  be  understood  only,  if  tribes,  who  were  inimical  to  this  new 
one  bears  in  mind,  that  the  Zoro-  mode  of  life,  continued  to  lead  the 
fistrian  religion  arose  at  the  time  of  jiastorallife  of  their  ancestors.  Agri- 
transition  from  pastoral  life  to  agri-  cnlture  was  considered  as  a  religious 
cultui-e.       The  kindred  Lrahmauical  duty  by  the  ancient  Zoroastriaus. 


YASNA  HJPTAiXHAiri:  171 

moral  doctrines  have  given  way  to  tlie  custom,  wlxicli  has 
lasted  to  the  present  time,  of  addressing  prayers  to  all 
beings  of  a  good  nature,  irrespective  of  their  being  mere 
abstract  nouns  (such  as  Aslia,  "  rightfulness,  truth,"  or 
Voh'amand,  "good  thought"),  or  real  objects  (such  as 
waters,  trees,  or  fire).  The  formula,  with  which  here  and  in 
tlie  later  Yasna  (for  whicli  the  Yasna  hajjtayhaiti  has  un- 
doubtedly furnished  the  model)  the  prayers  begin,  viz., 
yazamaicU,  "  we  worship,"  is  entirely  strange  to  the  Gathas, 
as  well  as  the  invocation  of  waters,  female  spirits,  &c. ; 
even  the  name  Amcshaspenta  (except  in  the  heading  of  Yas. 
xxviii.  I,  see  p.  147)  as  the  general  term  for  the  highest 
angels,  and  the  term  FravasJii,  which  is  so  extremely  fre- 
quent in  the  later  Avesta  literature,  are  never  to  be  met 
with  in  those  metrical  compositions. 

Although  the  Yasna  haptanhaiti  is  more  recent  than  the 
Gfithas,  still  it  has  just  claims  to  be  considered  as  more 
ancient  and  original  than  the  sections  of  the  later  Yasna. 
A  very  striking  proof,  besides  the  difference  of  dialect,  is 
that  the  objects  of  worship  are  much  fewer  than  in  the 
later  prayers;  thus,  for  instance,  the  six  seasons,  tlie  five 
divisions  of  the  day,  the  five  Gathas,  Zoroaster,  the  sacred 
twigs  (Barsom),  the  sacred  drink  (Homa),  &c.,  are  never 
mentioned  in  the  Yasna  of  seven  cliapters.  It  formed 
originally  a  separate  book,  and  was  very  likely  composed 
by  one  of  the  earliest  successors  of  Zoroaster,  as  it  stands 
intermediate  between  the  Gathas  and  the  later  Yasna,  in 
point  of  style. 

The  following  are  some  extracts  from  it : — 
Yas.  XXXV.  I.  We  worship  Ahuramazda  the  righteous 
master  of  righteousness.  We  worship  the  Amesha- 
spentas  (the  archangels),  the  possessors  of  good,  the 
givers  of  good.  We  worship  the  whole  creation  of 
the  righteous  spirit,  both  the  spiritual  and  earthly, 
all  that  supports  (raises)  the  welfare  of  the  good 
creation,  and  the  spread  of  the  good  Mazdayasnian 
religion. 


172  YASNA  HAPTANHAITI. 

2.  We  praise  all  good  thoughts,  all  good  words,  all 
good  deeds,  which  are  and  will  be  (which  are  being 
done  and  which  have  been  done),i  and  we  likewise 
keep  clean  and  pnre  all  that  is  good. 

3.  0  Ahuramazda,  thou  righteous  happy  being !  ^ye 
strive  to  think,  to  speak,  and  to  do,  only  what  of 
all  actions  may  be  best  fitted  to  promote  the  two 
lives  (that  of  the  body  and  that  of  the  soul). 

4.  We  beseech  the  spirit  of  earth  by  means  of  these 
best  works  (agriculture)  to  grant  us  beautiful  and 
fertile  fields,  to  the  believer  as  w^ell  as  to  the  un- 
believer, to  him  who  has  riches  as  well  as  to  him 
who  has  no  possession. 

Yas.  xxxvii.  i.  Thus  we  worship  Ahuramazda,  who 
created  the  spirit  of  earth  and  righteousness,  and 
who  created  the  good  waters  and  trees,  and  the 
luminaries,  and  the  earth,  and  all  good  things. 

2.  Him  w^e  worship  by  the  first  prayers  which  were 
made  by  the  spirit  of  earth,  because  of  his  power 
and  greatness  and  good  works. 

3.  We  worship  him  in  calling  him  by  the  Ahura 
names  which  were  chosen  by  Mazda  himself,  and 
which  are.  the  most  beneficent.  We  worship  him 
with  our  bodies  and  souls.  We  worship  him  as 
(being  united  with)  the  spirits  (Fravashis)  of  righte- 
ous men  and  women. 

4.  We  worsliip  righteousness,  the  all-good  (Ashem 
vahishtem),  all  that  is  very  excellent,  beneficent, 
immortal,  illustrious,  every  thing  that  is  good. 

Yasna  xii.  is  written  in  tlie  Gatha  dialect,  and  contains 
a  formula,  by  which  the  ancient  Iranians,  who  were  weary 
of  worsliipping  the  Devas  (Brahmanical  gods)  and  of  the 
nomadic  life,  were  received  into  the  new  reliuious  com- 
munity  established  by  Zarathushtra  Spitama. 

^  The  words  verezyamnandmclid  words,  yadachd  "  (yet)  now,"  and 
rarcrczyamnandmchd  are  evidently  awjadachd,  "not  now,"  i.e.,  either  iu 
only  an  explanatory  note  on  the  rare     the  future,  or  in  the  past. 


VASNA  XI I.  173 

1.  I  cease  to  be  a  Deva  (worshipper).  I  profess  to  be  a 
Zoroastrian  Mazdayasuian  (worshipper  of  Ahuramazda),  an 
euemy  of  the  Devas,  and  a  devotee  of  Aliura,  a  praiser  of 
the  immortal  benefactors  (Ameshaspentas),  a  worshipper 
of  the  immortal  benefactors.  I  ascribe  all  good  things  to 
Ahuramazda,  who  is  good,  and  has  good,  who  is  righteous, 
brilliant,  glorious,  who  is  the  originator  of  all  the  best 
things,  of  the  spirit  of  nature  {gdusli),  of  righteousness,  of 
the  luminaries,  and  the  self-shining  brightness  which  is  in 
the  luminaries. 

2.  I  choose  (follow,  profess)  the  beneficent  Armaiti,  the 
good ;  may  she  be  mine !  I  abominate  all  fraud  and  in- 
jury committed  on  the  spirit  of  earth,  and  all  damage  and 
destruction  of  the  quarters  of  the  Mazdayasnians. 

3.  I  allow  the  good  spirits,  who  reside  on  this  earth  in 
the  good  animals  (as  cows,  sheej),  &c.),  to  go  and  roam 
about  free  according  to  their  pleasure.  I  praise,  besides, 
all  that  is  offered  with  prayer  to  promote  the  growth  of 
life.  I  will  cause  neither  damage  nor  destruction  to  the 
quarters  of  the  Mazdayasnians,  neither  with  my  body  nor 
my  soul. 

4.  I  forsake  the  Devas,  the  wicked,  bad,  wrongful  origi- 
nators of  mischief,  the  most  baneful,  destructive,  and  basest 
of  beings.  I  forsake  the  Devas  and  those  like  Devas,  the 
sorcerers  and  those  like  sorcerers,  and  any  beings  whatever 
of  such  kinds.  I  forsake  them  with  thoughts,  words,  and 
deeds ;  I  forsake  them  hereby  publicly,  and  declare  that 
all  lie  and  falsehood  is  to  be  done  away  with. 

5.  6.  In  the  same  way  as  Zarathushtra,  at  the  time 
when  Ahuramazda  was  holding  conversations  and  meet- 
ings with  him,  and  both  were  conversing  with  each  other, 
forsook  the  Devas,  so  do  I  forsake  the  Devas,  as  the  righteous 
Zarathushtra  did. 

7.  Of  what  party  the  waters  are,  of  what  party  the  trees, 
and  the  animating  spirit  of  nature  ;  of  what  party  Ahura- 
mazda is,  who  has  created  this  spirit  and  the  righteous 
man;  of  what  party  Zarathushtra,  and  Kava  Vishtaspa, 


174  THE  LATER  YASNA. 

and  Frashoslitra,  and  Jamaspa  were ;  of  %\hat  party  all  tlie 
ancient  fire-priests  (Soshyafito),  the  rigliteous  spreaders  of 
truth,  were — of  the  same  party^  and  creed  (am  I). 

8.  I  am  a  ]\Iazdayasuian,  a  Zoroastrian  Mazdayasnian. 
I  profess  this  religion  by  praising  and  preferring  it  to 
others  (the  Deva  religion).  I  praise  the  thought  which 
is  good,  I  praise  the  word  which  is  good,  I  praise  the  work 
which  is  good. 

9.  I  praise  the  Mazdayasnian  religion,  and  the  righteous 
brotherhood  which  it  establishes  and  defends  aoainst  ene- 
mies,  the  Zoroastrian  Ahuryan  religion,  which  is  the 
greatest,  best,  and  most  prosperous  of  all  that  are,  and 
that  will  be.  I  ascribe  all  good  to  Ahuramazda.  This 
shall  be  the  praise  (profession)  of  the  Mazdayasnian 
religion. 

X. — THE  LATEK  YASNA. 

This  part  of  the  Yasna,  which  is  written  in  the  common 
Avesta  language,  is  of  much  less  importance,  as  regards 
the  history  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  than  the  older 
Yasna.  Its  contents  are,  however,  of  various  natures,  and 
consist  evidently  either  of  fragments  of  other  books,  or  of 
short  independent  writings.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  chap- 
ters i.-viii.  contain  the  preliminary  prayers  to  the  Ijashne 
ceremony  (see  p.  139) ;  chapters  ix.-xi.  refer  to  the  pre- 
paration and  drinking  of  the  Homa  juice ;  chapter  Ivii.  is 
a  Yasht,  or  sacrificial  prayer,  addressed  to  the  angel  Srosh ; 
chapters  xix.— xxi.  are  commentaries  (Zend)  on  the  most 
sacred  prayers,  Yathd  ah'A  vairyd,  AsJiern  vohu,  and  YehhS 
hdtdm. 

Eefraining  from  fdvin<::r  a  full  account  of  it,  v;e  shall 
notice  here  only  some  remarkable  passages,  and  translate 
a  few  extracts. 

In  Yas.  viii.  5-8  there  is  a  short  prayer,  concluding 
with  a  benediction  by  the  high-priest,  the  two  last  verses 

^  The  word  used  is  varana,  varena,  lit.    "  clioice"  (var,  "to  choose");  it 
is,  then,  applied  to  religiou. 


HO  MA   YASHT.  \i 


I  3 


of  wliich  are  of  particular  interest.  The  Liigh-priest,  ^vliu 
calls  himself  Zaratliushtra  (see  p.  i88),  addresses  all  the 
heads  of  the  .various  divisions  of  the  Iranian  empire  as 

follows : — 

7.  I,  who  am  Zarathushtra,  exhort  the  heads  ^  of  houses, 
villages,  towns,  and  countries  to  think  and  speak  and  act 
according  to  the  good  Zoroastrian  Ahuryan  religion. 

8.  I  bless  the  splendour  and  vigour  of  the  wliole  rightful 
creation,  and  I  curse^  the  distress  and  wretchedness  of  the 
whole  wrongful  creation. 


I. — HojiA  Yasht.  ' 

Chapters  ix.  and  x.,  which  compose  the  so-called  Homa 
Yasht,  are,  strictly  speaking,  no  part  of  the  Yasna,  but 
belong  to  that  extensive  class  of  Avesta  literature  which 
is  known  by  the  name  of  Yashts,  or  sacrificial  invocations 
of  a  special  spiritual  being,  and  which  we  shall  describe 
hereafter.  As  to  style,  these  two  chapters  contain  no 
prose,  but  on  close  inquiry  we  find  they  consist  of  verses, 
and  at  the  end  (Yas.  x.  19)  they  are  even  called  gdtlido, 
"  hymns."  The  metre  itself  is  near  the  Sanskrit  Anush- 
tubh.  (four  times  eight  syllables,  with  the  cesura  in  the 
middle  of  every  half  verse),  which  has  given  origin  to  the 
common  Shlokas,  but  it  is  apparently  often  irregular. 
Each  half  verse  consists  of  seven  to  nine  syllables,  the 
normal  measure  being  limited  to  eight. 

To  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  this  ancient  metre,  the 
commencement  of  this  Yasht  is  here  subjoined: 3 — 


1  The  word  used  is  fratevia  (S.  pra-  ^  For  blessing  and  cursing  one  and 

thama)  "  i.Tst."    It  is  one  of  the  Per-  the    same   word  is    used,    dfrtndmi. 

sian  words  which  are  to  be  found  in  The  same  peculiarity  is  to  be  observed 

the  Old  Testament.     Its  form  there  in  the  old  Hebrew  word  berck,  to  give 

is  pnrtemtin  [ini  is  the  Hebrew  plural  a  blessing,  and  to  curse. 

sufiBx),  by  which  the  grandees  of  the  *  ere  is  to  be  read  as  a  single  sylla- 

Persian  empire   are  meant.     lu  the  ble,  and  the  short  e  does  not  generally 

sense  of  •'  head,  chief,"  the  word  ratu,  constitute  a  separate  syllable. 
is  more  usual  in  the  Avesta. 


175 


HO  MA   YASHT. 


a 

at 


Hdvanim  d      raMm 

morning  prayer        at        time 

dtarem  pairi         yaozhdatheiitem 
(who  was)  fire  everywhere       cleaning 

d  dim        peresad      Zarathushtrd  : 
Him  asked        Zarathushtra : 

rtspahS        anheush         astvatd 
of  the  whole        life        having  bodies 

gayehe      qanvato 
body,      brilliant, 

Haomo      ashava 
Haoma    righteous 

Haomd       ashava 


Zarathuslitrcm 
to  Zarathushtra 

srdvayantem. 
singing. 


ameshahe  ? 
immortal  ? 

duraoshd  : 
death-removing : 

dUraosho ; 


Homa      righteous    death-removing ; 
frd  mam    himvanuha  qaretee  ; 

me        squeeze  out        to  taste  (me) ; 

yatha         md         aparachid 
as  me       the  other  all 


Haomd    updid 
Homa      came 

gdthdoscha 
and  hymns 

Kd      nave        alii  yim    azem 

Who,     man,  art  thou?   whom       I 

sraeshtem         dddaresa  qaM 

the  best        I  have  seen       of  his  own 

dad       me  aem      paiti-aokhta 

Then    to  me    that  one    answered 

Azem       ahmi       Zarathushtra/ 
I  am      O  Zarathuslitra ! 

d  mam        ydsanuha  Spitama  / 

to  me     bring  worship,     O  Spitama  ! 

avi        mdm       staomaini       stUidhi, 
on  me         in  praising       praise, 

saoshyantS  stavan. 

fire-priests  praised. 


The  word  Homa,  which  is  identical  with  the  Vedic  word 
Soina,  is  used  in  two  senses  in  the  Zend-Avesta.  First  it 
means  the  twigs  of  a  particular  tree,i  the  juice  of  which  is 
extracted  and  drunk  before  the  fire ;  secondly,  they  un- 
derstand by  it  a  spirit  who  has  poured  his  life  and  vigour 
into  that  particular  plant.  There  were  many  stories  cur- 
Tent  in  ancient  times  about  the  miraculous  effects  of  the 
drinking  of  the  Homa  juice  (a  panacea  for  all  diseases), 
wnich  led  to  the  belief,  that  the  performance  of  this  cere- 
mony (which  is  only  the  Soma  worship  of  the  Brahmans, 
very  much  reformed  and  refined)  proves  highly  beneficial 
to  body  and  soul.  These  stories  were  embodied  in  a  hymn 
(preserved  in  Yas.  ix.),  which  contains  an  enumeration  of 
the  miracles  effected  by  Homa,  composed  in  his  honour. 

The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  first  part  of  this 
Yasht  :— 

Yas.  ix.  I.  In  the  forenoon  (Havan  Gah)  Homa  came 
to  Zarathushtra,  while  he  was  cleaning  around  the  fire,2 

1  The   Dasturs   obtain   them   from         -  Meaning,  pi-obably,  that  he  was 

Persia  in   a  dried   state.     For  their  averting  evil  from  the  fire  by  feeding 

preparation,  see  section  I.  3,   of  the  it  around  with  fuel, 
fourth  Essay. 


HO  MA   YASHT.  177 

and  chanting  the  Gathas.  Zarathushtra  asked  him :  "Who 
art  thou,  0  man  ?  1  who  appearest  to  me  the  finest  in  the 
wliole  material  creation,  having  such  a  brilliant,  immortal 
form  of  your  own.2 

2.  Thereupon  answered  me  Homa  the  righteous,  who 
expels  death :  I  am,  0  Zarathushtra  !  Homa  the  righteous, 
who  expels  death.  Address  prayers  to  me,  0  Spitama ! 
and  prepare  me  (the  Horn  juice)  for  tasting.  Eepeat 
about  me  the  two  praise  hymns,^  as  all  the  other  Sosh- 
yants  repeated  them. 

3.  Then  spake  Zarathushtra :  Eeverence  to  Homa ! 
Who  was  the  first  who  prepared  thee,  0  Homa !  for  the 
material  world  ?  What  blessing  was  bestowed  upon  him  ? 
What  reward  did  he  obtain  ? 

4.  Thereupon  answered  me  Homa  the  righteous,  who 
expels  death :  Vivanhao  was  the  first  man  who  prepared 
me  for  the  material  world;  this  blessing  was  bestowed 
upon  him,  this  reward  he  obtained,  that  a  son  was  born 
to  him,  Yima-khshaeta  (Jamshed)  who  had  abundance  of 
flocks,  the  most  glorious  of  those  born,  the  most  sun-like 
of  men;  that  he  made,  during  his  reign  over  her  (the 
earth),  men  and  cattle  free  from  death,  water  and  trees 
free  from  drought,  and  they  were  eating  inexhaustible  food 

5.  During  the  happy  reign  of  Yima  there  was  neither 
cold  nor  heat,  neither  decay  nor  death,  nor  malice  pro- 
duced by  the  demons ;  father  and  son  walked  forth,  each 
fifteen  years  old  in  ajDpearance. 

^  Some  MSS.   of  the  Yasna  with-  has    been    translated    into    Pahlavi, 

out  Pahlavi  insert  here  the  phrase  :  the   usual   language  of   the   present 

Miihrd  zaydd  Zarathushtreni,  "  may  Zend. 

Mithra  favour  Zarathushtra. ''     This        2  The  ■phra.%e  amereza  gayehe  stUna, 

is   evidently   an   Avesta   phrase   for-  "O  imperishable  pillar  of  life,"coa- 

merly  existing  in   the  Pahlavi  com-  eludes  the  commentary  on  this  sen- 

mentary,    but    now   translated    into  tence,  and  is  another  fragment  of  the 

Mitrok  khilpo  atto  ZaratAshtar,  and  original  Zend. 

the  commentary  implies  that  this  was         =*  Heading    staomaini,    instead    of 

a    friendly    salutation    i^roffered    by  staomaini.     The  two  hymns  may  be 

Homa  on  his  arrival.     Here  we  have  the  two  chapters  of  this  Yasht  (Yas. 

a  distinct  trace  of  a  commentary,  or  ix.  and  x.),  or  the  two  Homa  rituals 

Zend,  in  the  Avesta  language,  which  (Yas.  i.to  xi.  and  xii.  to  xxvii.). 

M 


178  HOMA   YASHT. 

6.  Who  was  the  second  man  who  prepared  thee,  0 
Homa !  for  the  material  world  ?  What  blessino;  was  be- 
stowed  npon  him  ?    What  reward  did  he  obtain  ? 

7.  Thereupon  answered  me  Homa  the  righteous,  who 
expels  death :  Athwya  was  the  second  man  who  prepared 
me  for  the  material  world;  this  blessing  was  bestowed 
upon  him,  this  reward  he  obtained,  that  a  son  was  born 
to  him,  Thraetona  (Fredun)  of  the  hero  tribe,l  (8.)  who 
smote  the  Serpent  (Azhi)  Dahaka  which  had  three  mouths, 
three  heads,  six  eyes,  a  thousand  spies,^  which  was  of 
enormous  strength,  a  fiendish  destroyer,  an  evil,  a  devas- 
tator of  the  Gaethas  3  (settlements),  a  nuisance  which  was 
a  destroyer  of  most  enormous  strength,  and  (which)  Angro- 
mainyush  produced  in  the  material  world  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  settlements  of  righteousness.^ 

9.  Who  was  the  third  man  who  prepared  thee,  0  Homa! 
for  the  material  world  ?  What  blessing  was  bestowed  upon 
him  ?    What  reward  did  he  obtain  ? 

10.  Thereupon  answered  me  Homa  the  righteous,  who 
expels  death:  Thrita  the  most  useful  (of  the  family)  of 
the  Samas  was  the  third  man  who  prepared  me  for  the 
material  world;  this  blessing  was  bestowed  upon  him, 
this  reward  he  obtained,  that  two  sons  were  born  to  him, 
Urvakhshaya  and  Keresaspa;  the  one  was  a  judge  ad- 
ministering justice,  the  other  a  youthful  hero  who  wore 
a  sidelocks  and  carried  a  club,  (11.)  who  slew  the  serpent 
Srvara^   which    devoured    horses    and    men,   which   was 

1  This  is  the  literal  translation  of  '  Reading  gaithd-vai/o,  in  accord- 
vtsd  s-drai/do  which  niay,  however,  be  ance  with  several  old  MSS. 
the  name  of  a  locality.  The  Pahlavi  *  The  Palilavi  commentary  contains 
translation  is  a/2«r-vis,  "  of  a  village  the  imperfect  Avesta  phrase:  k6 
of  resources;"  and  it  explains  a/zdr-  thivdm  yim  Ahurem  mazddm,  "who 
visth  by  "  his  house  became  numer-  (worshipped)  thee  who  art  Ahura- 
ous  from  the  continued  residence  of  mazda?"  probably, 
his  forefathers,  and  was  retained  by  ^  The  Pahlavi  translates  gaesush 
the  oj^pression  of  Dahak ;  and  his  by  (jesvar  =  Pers.  ges-har,  "  ringlet- 
authority  was  that  he  preserved  the  wearing."  Compare  the  epithet 
relatives  who  had  disappeared."  kapardin,    "wearing  braided   hair," 

-  In  Pahlavi  hazdr  rajustdr  addd-  applied  to  the  Vasislithas,  lligveda, 

ako  2}<^ivan  goharako,    "  a  thousand  vii.  83,  8. 

inquirers  unjust  iu  disposition."  ^  Pronounced  Sviiara. 


HOMA    YASHT.  179 

poisonous  and  yellow,  over  which  yellow  poison  flowed 
a  hand's-breadth  high.l  On  which  Keresaspa  cooked 
a  beverage  in  a  caldron  at  the  mid-day  hour,  and  the 
serpent  scorched,  hissed,  sprang  forth,  away  from  the 
caldron,  and  upset  the  boiling  water;  Keresaspa  Narema- 
nao  fled  aside  frightened. 

12.  Who  was  the  fourth  man  who  prepared  thee,  0 
Homa !  for  the  material  world  ?  What  blessing  was  be- 
stowed upon  him  ?    What  reward  did  he  obtain  ? 

13.  Thereupon  answered  me  Homa  the  righteous,  who 
expels  death :  Pourushaspa  was  the  fourth  man  who  pre- 
pared me  for  the  material  world;  this  blessing  was  be- 
stowed upon  him,  this  reward  he  obtained,  that  thou  wast 
born  to  him,  thou  0  righteous  Zarathushtra !  of  the  house 
of  Pourushaspa,  (who  art)  opposed  to  the  demons,  and  of 
the  Ahura  religion.  (14.)  Famous  in  Airyana-vaejo  thou, 
O  Zarathushtra!  first  recitedst  the  Ahuna-vairya  four 
times,  with  pauses  between  the  verses,^  each  successive 
time  with  a  louder  recitation.3  (15.)  Thou  madest  all  the 
demons  hide  themselves  beneath  the  earth,  who  formerly 
flew  about  the  earth  in  human  shape,  0  Zarathushtra! 
who  wert  the  strongest,  firmest,  most  active,  swiftest,  and 
most  triumphant  of  the  creatures  of  the  two  spirits  (Spento- 
mainyush  and  Angio-mainyush). 

16.  Then  spake  Zarathushtra:  Eeverence  to  Homa! 
good  is  Homa,  well-created  is  Homa,  rightly  created,  of  a 
good  nature,  healing,  well-shaped,  well-performing,  suc- 
cessful, golden-coloured,   with  hanging   tendrils,-^   as   the 


1  The  PaMavi  says,  "as  high  as  a  literally  taking  asunder  the  verses, 

horse ; "  it  also  quotes  the  following  The   Ahuna-vaiiya  formula  consists 

Avesta  phrase  :  khshvaepaija  rainaiti  of  three  such  padas,  lines,  or  verses. 

barenusk,  "the  angry  one(?)  strikes  »  This  practice  of  gradually  raising 

by  darting."  the  voice  witli  each  successive  recita- 

"  The  epithet  ti-herethwantem  is  tion,  is  also  observed  ia  the  Hotri 
from  the  root  bar  -  Sans,  bliri  =  hri,  ritual  of  the  Brahmans. 
"to  take."  In  the  Brahmanical  *  The  Pahlavi  translation  has  worm- 
ritual  viharati  (originally  vibkarati)  tdk,  "  with  soft  tendrils  ;"  but  www- 
is  a  technical  term  for  pausing  after  ydsush  must  be  traced  to  the  ruuC 
each    vada,    while    reciting    verses,  na?w,  "to  bend  downwards." 


i8o  HOMA   YASHT. 

best  for  eating  and  tlie  most  lasting  provision  for  the 
soul.i 

17.  0  yellow  (Homa)!  I  keep  in  thee  by  my  word  2 
(thy  power  of  giving)  knowledge,  strength,  victory,  health, 
healing,  advancement,  growth,  vigour  to  the  whole  body, 
understanding  of  subjects  of  every  kind.  I  keej)  in  (thee 
by  my  word)  that  (power)  that  I  might  wander  freely  in 
the  world,  putting  an  end  to  troubles  (and)  annihilating 
the  destructive  powers  (of  the  enemies  of  the  good 
creation).  (18.)  I  keep  in  (thee  by  my  word)  that  (power) 
that  I  might  put  down  the  troubles  caused  by  those  whose 
very  nature  is  to  give  troubles,  such  as  the  demons  and 
(bad)  men,  the  sorcerers  and  witches,  the  oppressors, 
wizards,  and  idol-priests,  the  criminals  with  two  legs,  the 
apostates  with  two  legs,  the  wolves  with  four  legs,  of  the 
army  with  a  wide  front,  shouting  and  flying  (in  the  air)  .3 

19.  On  this  first  walk^  I  ask  from  thee,  0  Homa!  who 
expellest  death,  the  best  life  (paradise)  of  the  righteous, 
the  splendid,  the  all-radiant  with  its  own  brilliancy.  On 
this  second  walk  I  ask  from  thee,  0  Homa !  who  expellest 
death,  the  health  of  this  body.  On  this  third  walk  I  ask 
from  thee,  0  Homa !  who  expellest  death,  the  long  life  of 
the  soul. 

1  The  term  pdtlimainya  means  "re-  the  Veda,  sweeping  through  the  air, 

maining  on  the  way,"  hence  provi-  who  are  all  represented  as  shouting 

sions  for  a  journey.  and  making  a  noise. 

^  The    words   ni    mru)/i,    "I    call  ^  That  the  word  ydnem  has  here 

down,"  are  here  used  technically  in  its    primitive    meaning    of    "walk" 

the  sense  of  binding  by  calling  to-  (from  ?/a,  "to  go")  is  clear  from  the 

gether,   so  that  none  of  the  powers  practice   of    the    Tarsi    priests   who, 

may  be  dissipated.    In  the  Brahmaui-  during    the    Homa    ceremony,    walk 

cal  Soma  ritual  this  is  done  by  recit-  about  six  times  round  the  sacred  fire 

ing  eight  mantras  before  the  juice  is  with  the  Horn,  and  each  time  a  dis- 

extracted  from  the  Soma  twigs.  tinct  blessing  seems  to  be  asked  for. 

3  The    term   davdithydo    must    be  Nearly   the   same   ceremony  is    per- 

traced  to  the  root  du,   "to  talk  (as  formed  by  the  Brahmans,  when  they 

an  evil   being),"  and  is  very  appro-  put  the  Soma  twigs  on  a  cart,  and 

priate   to   this    flying   host   of   evils  carry  them  round  the  sacrificial  area 

which   is    analogous   to  the  band  of  ia    the    six    directions :    east,    west, 

Odhin  among  the  Scandinavians,  the  south,  north,  up,  and  down  (accord- 

"Wodan's    heer  of   the    ancient   Ger-  ing  to  an  ancient  Aryan  division), 
mans,  and   the  host   of   IMarutas   of 


HO  MA   YASHT.  i8i 

20.  On  this  fourth  walk  I  ask  from  thee,  0  Homa !  wlio 
expellest  death,  that  I  may  stand  forth  at  will,  powerful 
(and)  successful  upon  the  earth,  putting  down  troubles 
(and)  annihilating  the  destructive  powers.  On  this  fifth 
walk  I  ask  from  thee,  0  Homa !  who  expellest  death,  that 
I  may  stand  forth  as  victor  (and)  conqueror  in  battle  upon 
the  earth,  putting  down  troubles  (and)  annihilating  the 
destructive  powers. 

21.  On  this  sixth  walk  I  ask  from  thee,  0  Homa!  who 
expellest  death,  that  we  may  first  become  aw^are  of  a 
thief,  murderer,  (or)  wolf;  may  no  one  else  become  aware 
(of  him)  sooner !  may  we  become  aware  of  everything 
first ! 

22.  Homa  grants  strength  and  vigour  to  those  who^ 
mounted  on  white  horses,  wish  to  run  over  a  race-course. ^ 
Homa  gives  splendid  sons  and  righteous  progeny  to  those 
who  have  not  borne  children. 2  Homa  grants  fame  and 
learning  to  all  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  study  of 
books.3 

23.  Homa  grants  a  good  and  rich  husband  to  those  who 
have  long  been  maidens,  as  soon  as  he  (Homa),  the  wise, 
is  entreated. 

^  The  verb  takhshenti  is  a  desidera-  ing.     It  h<as  been  probably  borrowed 

tive  form  of  the  root  tach,  "  to  run  ;"  by  Arabic,  in  the  forms  nuslchat,  "  a 

crendum  is   explained   as  "a  horse"  copy"  (pi.  numkh),  and  naskld,  the 

by  the  Pahlavi  transl.ator,   but  this  name   of  Arabic   writing ;    for   these 

can  be  merely  a  guess  ;  it  must  be  words  can   have  no  real  connection 

traced  to  the  root  ar  —  Sans,  ri,  "  to  with  the  Arabic  root  nasakha,  "  he 

move,    go,    instigate,"   and    is    here  obliterated,  abrogated."     The  appli- 

taken  as  "  a  race-course."  cation  of  a  general  term  for  "  book  " 

-  So  the  Pahlavi  translator  under-  to   sacred   writings   in    particular,   is 

stands  the  woi'd  dzizanditihish,  but  common  to  many  religions  ;  thus  the 

in  that  case  the  prefix  d  must  be  mis-  Brahmans    use    the    word    grarttha, 

written  for  the  privative  a.  which  denotes  any  literary  composi- 

•*  This   is   the  only  occurrence,   in  tion,  for  the  Vedic  writings,  and  in 

the  extant  Avesta,  of  the  word  nasko  Maharashtra    the   compound    das/ia- 

which  is   applied,  in  later  writings,  grantM,   "one    who    knows   the    ten 

to  the  twenty-one  books,  or  divisions,  Granthas  by  heart,"  refers  solely  to 

of    the   Zoroastrian   writings  ;    here,  the  Vedic  writings,  for  the  ten  Gran- 

however,  it  is  probably  used  in  the  thas   are   the   Sanhita,    Pada,    Brah- 

general  sense   of   "book,"  and  even  manam,    Arana    (always    used    there 

nowadays    Parsi    writers    sometimes  for  Aranyaka  by  the 'Brahmans),  and 

apply  the  term  to  any  Avesta  writ-  the  six  Vedangap. 


l82 


HOMA   YASHT. 


24.  Homa  deposed  Keresanil  from  liis  sovereignty,  whose 
lust  of  power  had  so  increased  that  he  said :  No  athrava' s 
(fire-priest's)  repetition  of  the  a'pam  aiicislitish  2  ("  approach 
of  the  waters  ")  shall  be  tolerated  in  my  empire,  to  make 
it  prosper ;  (and)  he  would  annihilate  all  that  are  prosperous, 
(and)  put  down  all  that  are  prosperous  by  destroying  them. 

25.  Hail  to  thee  who  art  of  absolute  authority  through 
thy  own  strength,  0  Homa !  hail  to  thee !  thou  knowest 
many  sayings  rightly  spoken.  Hail  to  thee !  thou  askest 
for  no  saying  but  one  rightly  spoken. 

26.  Mazda  brought  to  thee  the  star-studded,  spirit- 
fashioned  girdle  (the  belt  of  Orion)  leadmg  the  Paurvas^ 
[(Pazand)  the  good  Mazdayasnian  religion] ;  then  thou 
art  begirt  with  it,  (when  growing)  on  the  summit  of  the 
mountains,  to  make  lasting  the  words  and  long  accents ^  of 
the  sacred  text  (mdthra). 


1  It  is  evident,  from  the  context, 
that  Keresani  is  the  name  of  some 
enemy  of  the  Athrava  religion,  and 
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  he  is 
the  Krishanu  of  the  Vedic  books, 
■who  appears  as  the  guardian  of  the 
Soma  in  heaven  (Aitareya  Br^hm.  iii. 
26) ;  he  is  represented  as  an  archer 
(Rigveda  ix.  77,  2  ;  x.  64,  8  ;  iv.  27,  3), 
and  identified  with  fire  (V&jasaneyi 
saf5hita  v.  32,  Shankhfl,yana  shrauta- 
sutras  vi.  12,  E-aghuvansha  ii.  49). 
As  a  personage  Kiisliauu  appears  to 
represent  "  lightning,"  and  perhaps  a 
particular  kind  of  it. 

2  These  words  are  evidently  a 
technical  name  for  the  Atharva-veda 
Sanhita  which  commences,  in  some 
manuscripts,  with  the  mantra :  shaii 
no devlrhhish iaiia  upo  hhavantu  ntaye, 
in  which  both  words  occur;  this 
mantra  is  omitted  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  printed  edition,  but  is 
given  in  i.  6,  t,  where  it  also  occurs 
again  in  the  manuscripts  alluded  to. 
That  the  Atharva-veda  actually  com- 
menced with  these  words  about  2000 
years  ago,  is  clearly  shown  by  Patan- 
jali's  quotation  of  the  initial  words  of 


the  four  Vedas,  in  his  introduction 
to  the  Mahabhashya,  where  the 
words :  shaft  no  devtrbhishtaye  re- 
present the  Atharva-veda. 

^  In  the  word  Paurva  we  readily 
recognise  the  Persian  name  of  the 
Pleiades,  which  is  variously  written 
pard,  parvah,  parvin,  and  parrtz ; 
this  parviz  is  given  as  the  name  of 
the  third  and  fourth  lunar  mansions 
in  the  Bnndahish  (p.  6,  Westerg.), 
corresponding  to  the  Indian  Naksha- 
tras  krittikd  (Pleiades)  and  rohint 
(Aldebaran  and  Hyades) ;  the  fiftli 
Nakshatra  is  vifiyashiras  (in  the 
head  of  Orion),  over  which  Soma 
(—  Homa)  is  presiding  deity  (Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmanam  iii.  i,  2,  3) ;  hence 
the  constellation  Orion  is  in  advance 
of  the  Paurvas  on  the  moon's  path, 
and  the  epithet  "  leading  the  Paur- 
vas" is  appropriate  for  Orion's  belt. 
The  idea  of  Homa  being  begirt  with 
Orion's  belt,  implies  that  the  Homa 
idant  was  supposed  to  be  specially 
under  the  sideral  influence  of  the  con- 
t;tellation  Orion. 

^  The  term  aividhditi  must  be 
equivalent      to      Sans.      ahhidlMua, 


HO  MA    YASHT.  183 

27.  0  Homa !  (thou)  lord  of  the  house,  lord  of  the  clan, 
lord  of  the  tribe,  lord  of  the  country,  (thou)  successful 
physician  !i  I  further  invoke  thee  for  strength  and  pro- 
sperity for  my  body,  and  for  the  attainment  of  much 
pleasure.2  (28.)  Keep  far  from  us  the  vexations  of  (our) 
enemies !  divert  the  mind  of  (our)  abusers !  Whatsoever 
man  in  this  house,  in  this  clan,  in  this  tribe,  in  this 
country,  may  injure  (us),  take  strength  from  his  feet ! 
darken  his  intellect !  disorder  his  mind  ! 

29.  May  he  be  paralysed  in  the  feet!  may  he  be 
palsied  in  the  hands! 3  may  he  not  see  the  earth  with 
(his)  eyes !  may  he  not  see  nature  with  (his)  eyes !  who 
injures  our  mind,  or  injures  our  body. 

30.  Strike  a  deadly  blow,  0  yellow  Homa!  at  the 
yellow  blackish  4  serpent,  emitting  poison  for  destroying 
the  body  of  the  righteous  man. 5  Strike  a  deadly  blow, 
0  yellow  Homa !  at  the  murderer  who  has  wrought  mis- 
chief, who  angrily  inflicts  wounds  for  destroying  the  body 
of  the  righteous  man. 

3 1 .  Strike  a  deadly  blow,  0  yellow  Homa !  at  the  im- 
pious tyrant  in  human  form,  who  has  a  darting  at  the 
heads  for  destroying  the  body  of  the  righteous  man.  Strike 

"name,    appellation,    word;"    and  he  not    be   able   to   work   with  the 

the    reading    garUshcha    (preferable  hands!" 

to  graHshcha)  gives  garu,  which  re-  ^  !Sima  is  here  taken  as  equivalent 

presents  Sans,  guru,  "  a  long  vowel,"  to  Sans,    shydma,    "  dark-coloured," 

a    very    noticeable    feature    of    the  from  the  root  shyai,  some  derivatives 

Gixthas.  of  which  change  shyd  into  sM. 

1  Literally,  "master  of  physicians  ^  The  construction ^cA?-pe?»w«6-/iewi- 
(or  doctor  of  medicine)  through  ndi  ashaoni  is  literally  "for  the 
beneficence ; "  vaedhyd  here  must  righteous  being  made  to  lose  (his) 
be  equivalent  to  Sans,  vaidya,  "a  body ;"  compare  rfrisAc  CTsAwij/a  sJir- 
physician,'' or  raf'rfva,  "  a  drug."  yam,  "that  all  should  see  the  sun" 

2  Thrima  must  be  traced  to  the  (Rigveda,  i.  50,  i) ;  kehrpem  is  not 
root  tar  =  Sans,  irt,  "to  pass  over,  governed  hy paiti,  hixthj ndshemndi, 
attain;"  and  haokhshnahi  is  to  be  and  is  to  be  regarded  as  tlie  accusa- 
taken  in  the  same  sense  as  baosh-  tive  of  the  object  which  retains  its 
■ndoscha  in  Yt.  iv.  i,  i.e.,  "pleasure,  original  case  when  the  active  con- 
enjoyment,"  compare  Sans,  hhitj,  "  to  struction  is  changed  to  a  passive  one. 
enjoy."  ''  This  appears  to  be  an  allusion  to 

*  More   literally,   "May  he  not  be     Zohak  and  his  troublesome  serpents, 
able  to  progress  with  the  feet !  may 


1 84  HO  MA   YASHT. 

a  deadly  blow,  0  yellow  Homa !  at  the  body  of  the  dis- 
turber of  rigliteousness,  the  impious,  who  destroys  the  life 
of  this  (Zoroastrian)  religion,  by  proposing  thoughts  and 
words,  but  not  carrying  them  into  action,  for  destroying 
the  body  of  the  righteous  man. 

32.  Strike  a  deadly  blow,  0  yellow  Homa  !  at  the  body 
of  the  bewitching  courtezan  who  causes  madness,  who 
acts  as  procuress,  whose  mind  is  unstable  as  a  cloud 
driven  by  the  wind,  for  destroying  the  body  of  the  right- 
eons  man.  Strike  a  deadly  blow,  0  yellow  Homa!  at 
whatever  serves  for  destroying  the  body  of  the  righteous 
man. 

Yas.  X.  I.  Let  the  water-drops  fall  here  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Devas  and  Devis.  May  the  good  Sraosha  slay 
(them) !  ]\Iay  Ashi-vanuhi  (the  spirit  of  fortune)  take  up 
her  abode  here  !  May  Ashi-vanuhi  grant  hap23iness  here, 
in  this  sacred  abode  of  Homa,  the  transmitter  of  right- 
eousness. 

2.  I  accompany  thy  preparation,  at  the  beginning  each 
time,  with  words  of  praise,  0  intelligent !  when  he  (the 
managing  priest)  takes  thy  twigs.  I  accompany  thy  pre- 
paration, in  each  successive  act  by  which  thou  art  killed 
through  the  strength  of  a  man,  with  words  of  praise,  0 
intelligent ! 

3.  I  praise  the  cloud  and  the  rain  which  make  thy 
body  grow  on  the  summit  of  the  mountains.  I  praise  the 
high  mountains  where  thou  hast  grown,  0  Homa ! 

4.  I  praise  the  earth,  the  wide-stretched,  the  passable, 
the  large,  the  imbounded,  thy  mother,  0  righteous  Homa ! 
I  praise  the  earth  that  thou  mayest  grow,  spreading  fast 
(thy)  fragrance,  as  thou  growest  on  the  mountain,  0 
Homa !  with  the  good  Mazdian  growth ;  and  that  thou 
mayest  thrive  on  the  path  of  the  birds  {i.e.,  on  high),  and 
be,  in  fact,  the  source  of  righteousness. 

5.  Grow  !  through  my  word,  in  all  stems,  in  all  branches, 
and  in  all  twigs. 

6.  Homa  grows  when  being  praised.     So  the  man  who 


YASNA  XIX.  185 

praises  Iiim  Toecomes  more  triumpliant.  The  least  extrac- 
tion of  Hom-juice,  the  least  praise,  the  least  tasting  (of 
it),  0  Homa !  is  (sufiicient)  for  destroying  a  thousand  of 
the  Devas. 

7.  The  defects  produced  (by  the  evil  spirit)  vanish  from 
that  house,  as  soon  as  one  brings,  as  soon  as  one  praises, 
the  healing  Homa's  evident  wholesomeness,  healing  power, 
and  residence  in  that  village. 

8.  For  all  other  liquors  are  followed  by  evil  effects,l  but 
this  which  is  the  liquor  of  Homa  is  followed  by  elevating 
righteousness,^  (when)  the  liquor  of  Homa  (is  in  him  who) 
is  grieved.3  Whatever  man  shall  flatter  Homa,  as  a  young 
son,  Homa  comes  to  the  aid  of  him  and  his  children,  to  be 
(their)  medicine. 

9.  Homa  !  give  me  (some)  of  the  healing  powers  where- 
by thou  art  a  physician.  Homa !  give  me  (some)  of  the 
victorious  powers  whereby  thou  art  a  victor.     &c. 

From  the  contents  of  this  Homa  Yasht  one  may  clearly 
see,  that  the  Homa  worship  was  not  instituted  by  Zara- 
thushtra,  but  was  known  at  a  much  earlier  period.  Zara- 
thushtra  is  only  said  to  have  adopted  it.  But  in  the 
second  division  of  the  fourth  Essay,  we  shall  see  that  he 
was  fighting  against  the  Brahmanical  Soma  worship  and 
trying  to  overthow  it. 

2. — Yasna  xix. 

This  chapter,  written  in  prose,  is  a  kind  of  theological 
commentary  on  the  most  sacred  formula,  Ahuna-vairya 
(Honovar).  The  following  is  a  translation  of  this 
chapter : — 

1,2.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda  :  0  Ahuramazda! 
most  munificent  spirit,  creator  of  the  settlements  supplied 
with  creatures,  righteous  one !  Which  w^as  the  word,  0 
Ahuramazda  !  that  thou  spakest  unto  me,  (which  was)  before 

1  Literally,  "  by  the    cruel   Aesh-         ^  Or  perhaps,  "the  liquor  of  Homa 
ma  "  (Wrath,  one  of  the  demons).  exhilarates." 

2  Literally,  "  by  Asha  who  is  carry- 
ing up." 


1 86  VASNA  XIX. 

the  heavens,  before  the  water,  before  the  earth,  before  the 
animals,  before  the  trees,  before  the  fire,  son  of  Ahura- 
mazda,  before  the  righteous  man,  before  the  demons  and 
savage  men  (cannibals),  before  the  whole  material  world, 
before  all  good  things  created  by  Mazda,  that  are  of  right- 
ful origin  ? 

3,  4.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  This  was  the  parts  of  the 
Ahuna-vairya,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  which  I  spake 
unto  thee,  (which  was)  before  the  heavens,  before  the 
water,  &c.  (as  before). 

5.  These  my  parts  of  the  Ahuna-vairya,  when  recited 
without  mistake  (and)  without  mispronunciation,  are 
equal,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  to  a  hundred  of  the  other 
principal  stanzas  (Gathas),  recited  without  mistake  (and) 
witliout  mispronunciation.  Even  recited  with  mistakes 
(and)  mispronunciation  (they  are)  equal  to  ten  other 
principals. 

6.  And  whoever,  in  this  my  world  supplied  with  crea- 
tures, 0  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  shall  recall  (mentally) 
one  part  of  the  Ahuna-vairya,  or  in  the  course  of  recalling 
shall  mutter  it,  or  in  the  course  of  muttering  shall  chant 
it,  or  in  the  course  of  chanting  prays  to  it,i  his  soul  will 
I,  who  am  Ahuramazda,  carry  all  three  times  over  the 
bridge  to  paradise  ( Vahishtem  ahlXm, "  the  best  life,"  Baliisht 
in  Pers.),  [(Pazand),  to  the  best  life,  to  the  best  righteous- 
ness, to  the  best  luminaries.] 

7.  And  whoever  in  this  my  world  supplied  with  crea- 
tures, 0  Spitama  Zarathushtra!  takes  off  in  muttering  a 
part  of  the  Ahuna-vairya,  either  a  half,  or  a  third,  or  a 
fourth,  or  a  fifth  of  it,  his  soul  will  I,  who  am  Ahura- 
mazda, separate  from  paradise,  to  such  a  distance  in  width 
and  breadth  as  the  earth  is,  [(Pazand)  and  the  earth  has 
the  same  width  as  breadth]. 

8.  And  I  spake  for  myself  this  saying,  about  the  heavenly 

1  Here  the  different  ways  of  recital  hymn,  being  considered  a  being)  with 

are    mentioned  ;   see   p.  143.    After  tlie  formuLi :    Yazaniaide   (we  wor- 

chantiug,  or  reciting,  sacred  verses  ship,   pray  to)  Ahanem  vairim  (tlie 

one  prays  to   them    (the   verse,    or  Ahuna-vairya  formula). 


YASNA  XIX.  ■  187 

lord  [ahu),  and  earthly  master  (ratii),  before  the  creation 
of  the  heavens,  before  the  water,  before  the  earth,  before 
the  trees,  before  the  creation  of  the  four-footed  animals, 
before  the  birth  of  the  righteous  biped  man,  before  the 
sun-composed  matter  for  the  creation  of  the  archangels 
(Ameshaspentas) . 

9.  The  more  beneficent  of  my  two  Spirits  1  has  produced, 
by  speaking  it,  the  whole  rightful  creation,  whicli  is,  and 
was,  and  will  be,  through  the  operation  of  the  actions  of 
life  towards  Mazda.2 

10.  And  this  is  the  highest  saying  of  those  sayings 
which  I  liave  spoken,  and  do  speak,  and  (which)  are  to  be 
spoken ;  for  the  nature  of  this  saying  is  such  that  if  the 
whole  material  world  had  learned  it,  being  preserved  by 
reciting  it,  it  would  escape  liability  to  destruction. 

11.  And  this  our  saying  I  proclaimed,  and  repeated,  and' 
counted  (the  repetitions),  as  it  is  for  every  being  for  the 
sake  of  the  righteousness  which  is  best. 

12.  As  he  (who  recites  it)  has  here  said  that  he  has 
appointed  it  as  heavenly  lord  (ahu)  and  earthly  master 
(ratn),  so  he  recognises  him  who  is  Ahuramazda  as  prior 
to  the  creatures,  the  first  being  the  Mind.  As  he  acknow- 
ledges  it  as  the  greatest  of  all  things,  so  he  acknowledges 
the  creatures  are  (due)  to  it. 

13.  That  the  good  beings  are  (works)  of  Mazda  he 
shows  by  reciting  the  third  phrase  (beginning  with)  vaoi- 
heush  ("  of  the  good").  (With  the  words)  dazdd  mananho 
("  the  giver  of  mind ")  he  acknowledges  it  (the  Ahuna- 
vairya)  from  the  first  as  the  Mind.  As  (the  word)  man- 
anho thus  makes  it  the  producer  for  the  Mind,  he  then 
makes  it  the  heavenly  lord  of  actions  {shhjaotlinandm 
akuni). 

14.  As  he  acknowledges  it  for  the  creatures  through 

^  The  two  spirits  united  in  Aluira-  ^  These  words  (shkyaothnanam  an- 

mazda,  as  the  one  God,    are   speiito  heush  Mazddi)  are  quoted  from  the 

mainyush,   "  the  beneficent    sinrit,"  second  line  of  the  Ahuna-vairya  for- 

f.nd  atirQ    mainyush,    "the    hurtful  niula,  and  are  agaiu  referred  to  in 

spirit."  verses  13,  14. 


1 88  VASNA  XIX. 

]\Iazda,  so  (lie  does)  this,  tliat  tlie  creatures  are  his.  (Tho 
phrase)  Jchshathrem  Ahurdi  {"  the  dominion  is  for  Ahura  ") 
acknowledges  it  as  thy  dominion,  0  Mazda  !  (The  phrase) 
dreguhyo  vdstdrem  ("  protector  for  the  poor ")  acknow- 
ledges, as  a  friend  to  Spitama,  the  five  phrases,  the 
whole  recital  of  the  saying,  the  complete  saying  of 
Ahuramazda. 

15.  The  most  excellent  Ahnramazda  proclaimed  the 
Ahuna-vairya ;  the  Most-excellent,  the  Eternal,  caused  it  to 
be  repeated  (after  him).  Owing  to  a  pause  Evil  originated, 
but  he  restrained  the  Wicked  One  with  this  interdict: 
iSTeither  our  thoughts,  nor  sayings,  nor  intellects,  nor  creeds, 
nor  words,  nor  deeds,  nor  creative  ideas,  nor  souls,  agree. 

16.  And  this  saying,  uttered  by  Mazda,  has  three  verses 
(lines),  the  four  classes,  the  five  chiefs,  (and)  a  conclusion 
with  liberality.l  How  (arose)  its  verses  ?  (Through  the 
words)  well-thought,  well-spoken,  well-done.2 

1 7.  Through  what  classes  ?  The  priest,  warrior,  agri- 
culturist, (and)  artizan,  through  the  whole  duty  pertaining 
to  the  righteous  man,  to  think  rightly,  to  speak  rightly,  to 
act  rightly,  to  appoint  a  spiritual  guide,  (and)  to  fulfil 
religious  duties,  through  which  works  the  earthly  settle- 
ments advance  in  righteousness. 

18.  Which  are  the  chiefs  ?  (Those)  of  the  house,  of  the 
village,  of  the  tribe,  of  the  province,  (and)  Zarathushtra  as 
the  fifth  in  those  countries  which  are  distinct  from  the 
Zarathushtrian  Eagha.^     The  Zarathushtrian  Eagha  has 

^  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  words  seems  to  have  been  used,  as  we  find 

dreguhyo  vdstdrem,  "  protector  for  the  traces  of  more  than  one  form  of  the 

poor,"   in    the    last   phrase    of    the  name  in  Greek  writings.     That  one 

Ahuna-vairya,  which  evidently  imply  form  should  be  used  here,  and  the 

liberality.  other  in  the  next  phrase,  is  owing,  no 

-  These   words,    humatem  h-dkhtem  doubt,  to  the   next  phrase  being  a 

hvarshtem,  contain  the  fundamental  later  addition  to  the  text.     It  is  also 

principles    of  Zoroastrian    morality,  possible  that  the  regular  ablative  of 

and  are  repeated  habitually  on  many  Eagha,  which  would  be  Ranliaydd  or 

occasions.  Rdglwyad,  might  become  Eaj6id  by 

2  The  word  Rajoid,  is  the  ablative  the  change  of  aya'wiioae,  e,  6i,  which 

of  a  crude  form  Raji,  a  softer  form  change  would  probably  occasion  the 

of   Raghi,    which   variant  of  Ragha  softening  of  (/A  into  y. 


VASNA  LVII.  189 

four  chiefs.  Whicli  are  its  chiefs  ?  (Those)  of  the  house, 
of  the  village,  of  the  tribe,  (and)  Zarathushtra  as  the 
fourth. 

19.  What  is  "  well- thought "  ?  The  righteous  original 
Mind.  What  is  "  well-spoken  "  ?  The  munificent  Word. 
What  is  "  well-done  "  ?  (That  done)  by  the  praising  crea- 
tures, first  in  righteousness. 

20.  Mazda  proclaimed.  What  did  he  proclaim  ?  The 
righteous  (Ahuna-vairya)  both  spiritual  and  earthly.  What 
was  he  who  proclaimed  the  recital  (of  the  Ahuna-vairya)  ? 
The  best  ruler.  As  what  (did  he  proclaim  it)  ?  As  true 
perfection,  but  not  despotic  authority  (ie.,  subject  to  the 
ruler). 

3. — Yasna  Ivii. 

This  chapter  is  devoted  to  the  praise  of  the  angel 
Sraosha  (Srosh),  and  is,  therefore,  called  the  Srosh  Yasht. 
He  is  the  personification  of  the  whole  divine  worship  of 
the  Parsis.  This  Yasht  is  to  be  recited  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  night-time. 

2.  We  worship  (the  angel)  Srosh,  the  righteous,  the  beau- 
tiful, the  victorious,  who  protects  our  territories,  the  true, 
the  master  of  truth,  who  of  Ahuramazda's  creatures  first 
worshipped  Ahuramazda  by  means  of  arranging  the 
sacred  twigs  (Barsom),  who  worshipped  the  Ameshaspen- 
tas  (the  archangels),  who  worshipped  the  two  masters,  the 
two  creators  i  {thivorcshtdra)  who  create  all  things. 

3.  For  his  splendour  and  glory,  for  his  power  and 
victory,  for  his  praying  to  the  angels  (in  our  behalf),  I  will 
worship  him  with  an  audible  prayer  and  with  the  offering 
of  consecrated  water  (zaothra).  May  he  come  to  help  us, 
he,  the  victorious,  righteous  Srosh ! 

6.  He  who  first  arranged  the  bundle  of  sacred  twigs 
(Barsom),  that  with  three,  that  with  five,  that  with  seven, 
and  that  with  nine  stalks,  those  which  were  as  long  as  to 

1  These  are  the  two  spirits  spentd-mainyush  and  angro-maiuyush,  men- 
tioned in  the  note  to  Yas.  xix.  9. 


I90  YASNA  LVII. 

go  up  to  the  knees,  and  those  which  went  as  far  as  tho 
middle  of  the  breast,  (he  arranged  them)  to  worship,  to 
praise,  to  satisfy,  and  to  extol  the  archangels. 

8.  He  who  first  sang  the  five  Gathas  of  the  righteous 
Spitama  Zarathushtra  according  to  their  stanzas  and 
their  sentences,  distinguishing  their  high  and  low  tones. 

10.  He  who  wounds  after  sunset  with  his  drawn  sword 
the  cruel  demon  Aeshemo  {i.e.,  attack,  rapine). 

15-18.  He  who  slays  the  demon  of  destruction  {dcvi- 
drukhsh),  who  prevents  the  growth  of  nature,  and  murders 
its  life.  He  who  is  the  guardian  and  protector  of  the  whole 
world  here  below.^  He  who,  never  slumbering,  preserves 
by  vigilance  the  creatures  of  Mazda.  He  who,  never  slum- 
bering, protects  by  vigilance  the  creatures  of  IMazda.  He 
who  guards,  with  his  sword  drawn,  the  whole  world  sup- 
plied with  creatures  after  sunset.  He  who  never  enjoyed 
sleep  since  the  two  spirits,  the  beneficent  and  the 
hurtful,  created  (the  world) ;  he  is  watching  the  territories 
of  the  good  creation  and  fighting,  day  and  night,  against 
the  Devas  (demons)  of  Mazenderan.2  He  is  never 
frightened  nor  runs  away  when  struggling  with  the 
demons ;  but  all  the  demons  must  flee  from  him  and  hide 
themselves  in  darkness. 

21.  He  who  has  a  palace  with  a  thousand  pillars  erected 
on  the  highest  summit  of  the  mountain  Alborz.3  It  has 
its  own  lio-ht  from  inside,  and  from  outside  it  is  decorated 
with  stars.  He  whose  victorious  sword  is  the  Ahuna- 
vairya  formula,  the  Yasna  of  seven  chapters  (see  p.  170), 
the  victorious  Fshiisha-prayer  (Yas.  Iviii.),  and  all  the 
sections  of  the  Yasna. 

24.  He  who  walks,  teaching  the  religion,  round  about 

1  la  the  original /?'aro/s/i  (see  tlie  JVIazanian  Devas,  several  times  alluded 

same  in  Yt.  x.  103),  which  has  the  to  in  the  Zend-Avesta,  are  evidently 

same  origin  as  the  modern   Persian  the   Divs    of    Mazenderan,    so    well 

far-A,  fartld,    "down,    downwards."  known  to  the  readers  of  the  ShS.h- 

The  Pahlavi  translators    (wlio   have  namah. 

frdj,   "forth,   forwards")   misunder-  '^  In  the  Avesia,  hard  berezaiti  " tho 

stood  this  rare  word.  high  mountain." 

'^  lu  the  original  mdzaiiT/a.    These 


VI SPAR  AD.  19 1 

the  world.  Aliiiramazda,  Yohu-mano,  Ashem-valiishtem, 
Khshathra-vairya,  Spenta-armaiti,  Haurvatat,  Ameretat,^ 
the  Aburyau  question,  and  the  Ahuryau  creed  {i.e.,  their 
respective  angels)  believed  in  this  religion. 

25.  Protect  our  two  lives,  that  of  the  body  and  that 
of  the  soul,  0  Srosh !  against  death,  against  the  attacks 
of  evil  spirits.    &c. 

XI. — VISPAEAD. 

The  name  Visparad  (A v.  xis])e  ratavo)  means  "  all 
chiefs,  or  heads."  By  this  name  a  collection  of  prayers, 
composed  of  twenty-three  chapters,  is  understood.  They 
are  written  in  the  usual  Avesta  language,  and  bear  a  great 
resemblance,  as  regards  their  contents,  to  the  first  part  of 
the  later  Yasna  (chap,  i.-xxvii.).  They  refer  to  the  same 
ceremony,  as  does  that  part  of  the  Yasna,  viz.,  to  the  pre- 
paration of  the  sacred  water,  and  the  consecration  of  cer- 
tain offerings,  such  as  the  sacred  bread,  the  twigs  of  Homa, 
with  a  twig  of  the  pomegranate  -  tree,  and  the  juice 
obtained  from  them  (called  Parahoma),  fruits,  butter, 
hair,  fresh  milk,  and  flesh,  which  are  carried  round  about 
the  sacred  fire,  and  after  having  been  shown  to  it,  are 
eaten  by  the  priest,  or  by  the  man,  in  whose  favour  the 
ceremony  is  performed.  These  offerings,  which  are 
nothing  but  a  remnant  of  the  ancient  Aryan  sacrifices, 
so  carefully  preserved  to  this  day  by  the  Brahmans  (see 
the  fourth  Essay),  represent  a  meal,  given  to  all  the  heads 
or  chiefs  (called  ratus)  of  both  the  visible  and  ijivisible 
world,  who  are  all  severally  invoked.  In  the  first  chapter 
of  the  Yasna,  there  are  a  good  many  more  enumerated 
than  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Visparad.  In  the  Yasna 
the  enumeration  of  "  the  heads  "  begins  with  Ahuramazda 
and  the  archangels,  while  in  the  Yisparad  the  invitation  - 

1  The  six  names  after  that  of  Ahu-  (I  prepare  a  meal  and  invite  to  it), 

ramazda  are  those  of  the  archangels.  With  nlvaedhaiiemi  compare  the  nai- 

-  The  formula  is  riivaedhaijcini haii-  vedya  of  the  Bralimans,  i.e.,  the  food 

A.ara«/e/fti,  "I  invite  and  prepare  for"  given  to   the  gods.     The   Brahmans 


192  VISPARAD. 

commences  with  the  heads  of  the  spiritual  {mainyava) 
and  terrestrial  {gaethya)  world,  the  chiefs  of  all  that  is  in' 
the  water,  in  the  sky,  born  out  of  eggs,  of  what  is  walking 
on  its  face  (quadrupeds),  and  of  water  crahs.i  In  this 
rough  division  of  created  living  beings  (of  the  good  crea- 
tion only)  the  whole  animal  kingdom  is  comprised.  The 
primary  type  of  each  class  is  its  respective  ratu  or  chief. 
After  the  chiefs  of  the  animals,  the  six  chiefs  of  the  year, 
or  the  six  seasons,^  are  enumerated,  which  are  now  called 
Gahanbars.  These  are  believed  to  have  been  instituted 
by  Ahuramazda  in  commemoration  of  the  six  periods, 
during  which,  according  to  the  Zoroastrian  doctrine,  the 
world  was  created,  and  they  are  strictly  observed  by  the 
Parsis  to  this  day.  The  names  of  these  six  seasons  are : — 
I,  Maidhyo-zaremya  (now  3d  JSTovember);  2,  Maidhyo- 
shema  (now  2d  January);  3,  Paitish-hahya  (now  i8th 
March);  4,  Aydtlircma  (now  17th  April);  5,  Mcddhydirya 
(now  6th  July);  6,  Hamasjpatlimaedaya  (now  19th  Sep- 
tember), the  season  at  which  great  expiatory  sacrifices 
were  offered  for  the  growth  of  the  whole  creation  3  in  the 
two  last  months  of  the  year.^ 

After  the  six  seasons,  the  chiefs  of  all  the  sacred  prayers 

begin  all  their  ceremonies  with  the  epithetrtre<5-Z.Y)r<7(aria,  "killerof  ene- 

words,  aham  karishye,  "I  shall  per-  mies,"  by  which  animals  of  the  bad 

form  a  ceremony."  creation,  as  frogs,   lizards,  serpents, 

^  Chanrarthdch,  "  who  follow  (the  are  to  be  understood.  In  the  Bun- 
species)  chanra,"  Pers.  changra,  "  a  dahish  tliis  season  is  said  to  be  about 
crab."  That  crabs  are  creatures  of  the  vernal  equinox,  while  Maidhy- 
Ahuramazda,  is  reported  by  Plu-  airya  is  made  to  correspond  with  mid- 
tarch ;  see  p.  lo.  winter,    and     Maidhyo-shema    with 

-  The  ancient  name  for  "season"  midsummer;  but  since  the  disuse  of 

was  the  word   ratu   itself,  which   is  inteixalary  months,  the  season-festi- 

preserved  in  the  corresponding  San-  vals  have  receded  to  the  dates  given 

skrit  ritii  (the  six  seasons,  as  rej^re-  in  the  text  according  to  the  Indian 

sentatives  of  the  Creator  Praj^pati  or  Parsi  reckoning,  or  thirty  days  further 

Brahma,  are  often  mentioned  in  the  back  according  to  the  Persian  Parsis. 
Vedic  writings).     But  after  the  em-         *  In  the  first   period    heaven   was 

ployment   of  this   word  in    a    more  created,  in  the  second  the  waters,  in 

general    sense,    ydre    was    used    for  the  third  the  earth,  in  the  fourth  the 

"  season,"  being,  evidently  identical  trees,  in  the  fifth  the  animals,  and  in 

with  "year."  the  sixth  man. 

*  This  the  name  implies,  and  also  its 


VIS  PAR  AD.  193 

(wliicli  are  believed  to  be  angels),  including  more  especially 
the  Gathas,  are  invited,  together  with  the  female  spirits 
(cjlicna),  "  v/ho  give  abundance  of  all  things,  and  especially 
posterity ; "  also  Ardvi  Sura  Anahita  (the  heavenly  water, 
see  the  Aban  Yasht),  the  mountains,  the  angels  Behram, 
Mithra,  Ivama-qastar  (presiding  over  food),  the  ruler  of  the 
country,  the  Zarathushtrotema  (suj)reme  highpriest  or 
Dastur-i-Dasturan),  &c. 

After  this  general  invitation  of  the  spirits  of  all  orders 
to  come  to  the  meal  prepared  for  them,  the  water  and  Bar- 
som  (sacred  twigs)  are  presented  to  them  as  a  welcome 
(chap.  ii.).  Several  other  invocations  follow  (chap.  iii.).  The 
chief  priest,  who  superintends  the  whole  ceremony,  the 
Zaota  (called  Hota  in  the  Vedas),  orders  his  subordinate 
priest  Eathwi  (now  Haspi,  Adhvaryu  in  the  Vedas)  to  sum- 
mon the  different  orders  of  priests,  the  representatives  of 
the  three  castes  (priests,  warriors,  cultivators),  the  heads  of 
houses,  villages,  towns,  and  districts,  the  ladies  of  houses, 
other  respectable  women,  &c.  Very  likely  all  chiefs  of  the 
Iranian  society  of  a  w^hole  district  were,  if  possible,  obliged 
to  be  present  at  the  time  of  the  celebration  of  the  Gahan- 
bars,  for  which  the  Visparad  seems  to  be  particularly  in- 
tended, and  on  which  occasions  it  must  be  used  even  now. 

This  whole  assembly  then  praises  all  good  things  (chap, 
iv.),  after  which  the  chief  priest  (Zaota)  says,  that  he 
is  the  praiser  and  worshipper  of  Ahuramazda  and  the 
archangels,  and  that  he  is  worshipping  them  with  words 
and  ceremonies  (chap,  v.,  vi.).  Then  the  members  of  the 
congregation  invoke  several  spirits,  as  Sraosha,  Mithra,  &c. 
(chap.  vii.). 

After  these  introductory  prayers,  the  principal  parts  of 
the  meal,  Homa  with  a  branch  of  a  pomegTanate  tree,  but- 
ter, fresh  milk,  bread,  fruits,  and  flesh,  are  consecrated  and 
presented  to  the  chiefs  of  the  whole  creation  (chaps,  ix.-xii.). 
After  the  whole  meal  has  been  offered  in  a  solemn  way, 
the  ritual  concludes  with  a  series  of  prayers  and  invoca- 
tions, in  which,  however,  nothing  remarkable  occurs. 


:94  YASHTS. 


XII. — YASHTS. 


The  name  Yasht  {yeshti,  "worship  by  prayers  and  sacri- 
fices") is  applied  to  certain  collections  of  prayer  and 
praise,  of  which  there  are  twenty  extant,  which  have  been 
collected  and  published  for  the  first  time  in  Westergaard's 
edition  of  the  Zend-Avesta  (pp.  143-293).  Their  chief 
difference  from  the  prayers  of  the  Yasna  and  Visparad  is, 
that  each  of  them  is  devoted  to  the  praise  and  worship  of 
one  divine  being  only,  or  of  a  certain  limited  class  of  divine 
beings,  as  Ahuramazda,  the  archangels  (Amshaspends),  the 
heavenly  water  Ardvi  Sura  Anahita,  the  sun  (Mitlira),  the 
star  Tishtrya,  the  Fravashis,  &c.,  whereas  in  the  Yasna 
and  Visparad  all  these  beings  are  invoked  promiscuously. 
The  majority  of  these  beings  are  called  Yazatas'^  (now 
Izads)  or  angels. 

The  devotee  endeavours,  by  an  enumeration  of  all  the 
glorious  feats  achieved  by  the  particular  angel,  and  the 
miracles  wrought  by  him,  to  induce  him  to  come  and  enjoy 
the  meal  which  is  prepared  for  him,  and  then  to  bestow 
such  a  blessing  upon  the  present  worshijDper,  as  had  been 
bestowed  by  the  angel  upon  his  devotees  in  ancient  times. 

These  praises  are  often  highly  jDoetical,  and  on  close  in- 
quiry we  find  they  really  contain,  in  several  cases,  metrical 
verses.  They  are  to  be  traced  to  the  songs  of  the  Median 
bards,  who  are  mentioned  •  by  Greek  historians,  and  were 
the  primary  sources  of  the  legends  contained  in  the  Shah- 
namah.  For  the  legendary  history  of  the  ancient  Iranians, 
and  especially  for  a  critical  inquiry  into  the  celebrated 
Shahnamah,  the  Yashts  are  the  most  important  part  of 
the  Zend-Avesta. 

In  the  following  pages  a  brief  summary  of  them  is  given, 
and  occasionally  some  extracts  are  translated  from  the 
more  interesting  parts. 

1  Corresponding  to  tlie  Vedic  Ya-     "God,"  is  tte  plural  of  this  word 
jaffi,  "a  being  which  deserves  wor-     Yazata. 
shi^)."    The  modern  Persian  Yazddn, 


I-IAPTAN,  ETC.,  YASHTS.  195 

I.    HORMAZD   YaSHT. 

Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda  for  tlie  most  effectual 
spell  {maihra)  to  guard  against  the  influence  of  evil  spirits. 
He  was  answered  by  the  Supreme  Spirit,  that  the  utter- 
ance of  the  different  names  of  Ahuramazda  protects  best 
from  evil.  Thereupon  Zarathushtra  begged  Ahuramazda 
to  communicate  to  him  these  names.  Ahuramazda  then 
enumerates  twenty  names.  The  first,  for  instance,  is  alimi, 
"  I  am ; "  the  fourth,  asha-vahishta,  "  the  best  righteous- 
ness "  (the  name  of  the  archangel  Ardibahisht) ;  the  sixth, 
"  I  am  the  wisdom ; "  the  eighth,  "  I  am  the  knowledge ; " 
the  twelfth,  ahura,  "living;"  the  twentieth,  "I  am  who  I 
am,i  Mazda  "  {ahmi  yad  alnni  mazddo).  Ahuramazda  says 
then  further :  "  If  you  call  me  by  day  or  at  night  by  these 
names,  I  will  come  to  assist  and  help  you,  the  angel  Srosh 
will  then  come  to  assist  and  help  you,  the  spirits  of  the 
waters  and  the  trees,  and  the  spirits  of  deceased  righteous 
men  will  come  to  assist  you."  For  the  utter  defeat  of  the 
evil  spirits,  bad  men,  sorcerers,  Paris  2  (pairika),  &c.,  a 
series  of  other  names  of  Ahuramazda  are  suggested  to  Zara- 
thushtra, such  as  protector,  guardian,  spirit,  the  holiest,  the 
best  fire-priest,  &c. 

2.  HaptxVN,  Akdibahisht,  and  Khokdad  Yashts. 

In  the  Haptdn  YasJit  (i.e.,  the  praise  of  the  seven  su- 
preme spirits)  Ahuramazda  and  the  six  archangels,  who 
constitute  the  celestial  council,  are  invoked.  The  greater 
part  of  it  is  of  no  particular  interest.  At  the  end  (Yt.  ii.  11) 
there  is  a  short  spell,  such  as  we  find  now  and  then  in  the 
Zend-Avesta.  It  is  composed  of  short  verses,  each  consist- 
ing of  six  or  seven  syllables,  in  the  following  manner : — 

1  Compare  the  explanation  of  the  kuoivn  to  the  readers  of  modern  Per- 

name  Jehovah,  as  given  in  Exod.  iii.  sian  poetry,   are   evil   spirits  in  the 

14 ;  ehyeh  asher  ehyeh,  "  I  am  who  I  Zend-Avesta,    because    they    seduce 

a^™'"  men  by  their  beauty. 

-  The  Paris,   i.e.,   fairies,   so  well 


may  he  come    then        Zarathushtra, 

Kdi,  vmdnahU,         bddha 

who  (are)  iii  the  house,       soon 

Vtspa  drukhsh          jandite, 

every  evil  spirit        is  slain, 

Yalha  liaovaoiti 

"when  he  hears 


196  HAPTAN,  ETC.,  YASHTS. 

Ydtu  zt  Zarathushtra,  ,  vanad  daivd        viashi/d 

may  he  destroy  the  devils  and  bad  men 

Spitama        Zarathushtra! 

Sjjitama        Zarathushtra ! 
vtspa  drukhsh  ndshdite, 

every        evil  spirit        goes  away, 

aSsham  vachdm. 

these  words. 

In  the  ArdihaJiisht  YasJit,  Ahuramazda  requests  Zara- 
thuslitra  to  protect  and  promote  tlie  aslia  vaJdshta  (now 
Ardibahisht),  "the  best  righteousness,"  by  praising,  in- 
voking, inviting  (to  sacrificial  meals),  worshipping,  sing- 
ing, &c.,  in  order  to  keep  up  the  splendour  and  light  of  the 
luminaries,  which  is  indispensable  for  the  growth  of  the 
good  creation. 

Zarathushtra  is  ready  to  obey  the  divine  command,  but 
he  first  wants  to  know  the  appropriate  words  which  would 
have  the  effect  proposed  by  Ahuramazda.  The  chief 
matlira  for  this  purpose  is  the  Airyemd  ishyo  prayer  (Yas. 
liv.).i  Some  spells  follow,  which  are  intended  to  remove 
diseases  and  evils  of  every  kind,  like  the  spells  found  in 
the  Atharvaveda,  and  those  used  down  to  the  present  time 
by  wizards  in  Europe,  as,  for  instance,  "  Go  away,  diseases ! 
Go  away,  death  !     Go  away,  ye  devils !  "  &c. 

Then  the  killing  of  the  "  serpent  seed "  {azhi-cliithra), 
i.e.,  all  noxious  creatures,  such  as  wolves,  frogs,  mice,  ants, 
snakes,  &c.,  which  are  believed  to  be  the  mere  disguises  of 
evil  spirits,  is  enjoined  as  meritorious,  and  contributing 
largely  towards  the  growth  of  nature  and  preservation  of 
light,  which  are  both  represented  by  the  archangel  Ardi- 
bahisht. The  last  sentences  of  this  Yasht  occur  also  in 
Vend.  viii.  21. 

The  Khorddd  Yasht  is  devoted  to  the  archangel  Khorddd 
(Raurvatdd  in  the  Avesta),  which  name  signifies  "  com- 
pleteness, wholesomeness,  health."  Ahuramazda  says  to 
Zarathushtra :  "  I  created  the  Haurvatads  for  the  rio-hteous 
men,  and  aids  so  that  the  archangels  come  to  help  them." 

*  Addressed  to  Airyama,  an  angel     men,  and  in  possession  of  numerous 
v.ho  is  a  friend  and  assistant  of  pious     resources. 


ABAN  YASHT.  197 

As  a  chief  means  of  preserving  the  Haurvatad,  or  the  same 
good  condition  in  which  every  being  of  the  good  creation 
has  been  created  by  Ahuramazda,  the  recital  of  mdthras  is 
recommended,  together  with  the  Barashnom  ceremony  (de- 
scribed in  Vend.  ix. ;  see  section  xiv.  5).  The  mdthra, 
which  is  intended  to  drive  away  the  evil  spirits,  is  hardly 
intelligible  in  a  grammatical  point  of  view ;  the  grammar 
of  this  and  the  two  preceding  Yashts  being  extremely  bad. 
At  the  end  Zaratliushtra  is  strictly  ordered  by  Ahuramazda 
not  to  communicate  this  effective  spell  to  any  other  man 
than  to  a  son,  or  brother,  or  relative,  or  to  a  priest  of  one 
of  the  three  orders  {thrdyava,  i.e.,  Herbads,  Mobads,  and 
Dasturs).  Such  interdictions  of  divulging  mdthras,  or 
spells,  are  not  unfrequent  in  the  Yashts. 

3.  Aban  Yasht. 

This  Yasht,  which  is  of  considerable  length  (thirty  sec- 
tions containing  132  verses  in  all),  is  devoted  to  Ardvi 
SiXra  Andhita  (now  called  Arduisur),  the  mighty  goddess 
Anaitis  of  the  ancient  Persians,  corresponding  to  the  My- 
litta  of  the  Babylonians,  and  the  Aphrodite  (Venus)  of  the 
Greeks.  Her  name  Andhid  is  even  still  preserved  in 
modern  Persian,  and  well  known  to  the  readers  of  Hafiz. 
In  this  Yasht  she  is  always  called  by  the  three  names  just 
mentioned,  which  are  only  epithets.  Ardvi  means  "  high, 
sublime,"  s-^xra  "  strong,  excellent,"  and  andhita  "  spot- 
less, pure,  clean,"  which  terms  refer  to  the  celestial  waters 
represented  by  her.     The  contents  are  as  follows : — 

i.  Ahuramazda  calls  upon  Zaratliushtra  to  worship  Ana- 
hita,  who  rolls  under  bridges,  who  gives  salubrity,  who 
defeats  the  devils,  who  professes  the  Ahura  religion,  who 
is  to  be  worshipped  and  praised  in  this  living  world.  She, 
as  the  giver  of  fertility,  purifies  the  seed  of  all  males,  and 
the  wombs  of  all  females,  and  provides  the  latter  at  the 
right  time  with  milk.  Coming  from  one  of  the  summits 
of  the  mountain  Alborz,  she  is  as  large  as  all  other  waters 
taken  together,  which  spring  out  of  this  heavenly  source. 
When  she  discharsies  herself  into  the  sea   Vouru-kasha, 


198  ABAN  YASHT. 

then  all  its  shores  are  widened.  This  heavenly  fountain 
has  a  thousand  springs  and  a  thousand  canals,  each  of  them 
forty  days'  journey  long.  Thence  a  channel  goes  through 
all  the  seven  Mshvars,  or  regions  of  the  earth,  conveying 
everywhere  pure  celestial  water.  She  was  created  by 
Ahuramazda  himself  for  the  benefit  of  the  house,  village, 
town,  and  country. 

iii.  Her  chariot  is  drawn  by  four  white  horses,  which 
defeat  all  the  devils. 

Trom  the  fifth  section,  nearly  to  the  end,  all  the  praises 
which  Anahita  has  received,  and  the  rewards  which  she 
has  granted  to  her  devotees,  are  enumerated. 

V.  Ahuramazda  himself  is  said  to  have  worshipped  her, 
in  order  to  secure  her  assistance  in  inducing  Zarathushtra 
to  become  his  prophet.     She  readil}^  granted  his  request. 

vi.  Haoshyanha  (Hushang  in  the  Shahnamah)  sacrificed 
to  her  a  hundred  horses,  a  thousand  cows,  and  ten  thou- 
sand young  animals.  She  gave  him  strength  to  conquer 
all  the  demons  and  men,  and  to  establish  an  empire, 

vii.  Yima  Khshaeta  (Jamshed)  asked  the  same  blessing 
from  her  which  she  readily  granted,  while  she  refused 
(viii.)  to  grant  Azhi  dahdJcas  (Zohak,  an  incarnation  of  the 
devil)  prayer  for  strength  to  kill  all  the  men  on  the  sur- 
face of  the  earth,  (ix.)  But  she  assisted  ThraStaona 
(Fredim),  who  had  worshipped  her  also,  to  destroy  this 
tyrant.  Besides  these  heroes,  a  good  many  others  are 
mentioned  as  worshippers  of  Anahita,  such  as  Kava  Us  (Kai 
Kavus  in  the  Shahnamah),  Kava  Husrava  (Kai  lOiusro), 
&c.  The  example  set  by  Ahuramazda  himself  and  the 
great  heroes  and  sages  of  Iranian  antiquity,  of  worsliipping 
Anahita  in  order  to  obtain  blessings  from  her,  was  followed, 
of.  course,  by  Zarathushtra  and  his  royal  disciple  Kava 
Vishtdspa  {Kai  GusMdsiJ  in  Sh.),  who  are  always  repre- 
sented as  having  respected  the  ancient  forms  of  worship. 

In  sections  xxi.  and  xxx.  two  short  hymns  are  pre- 
served, on  the  recital  of  which  Anahita  Avas  expected  to 
appear.  The  first  is  ascribed  to  Ahuramazda  himself  It 
commences  as  follows : — 


KHURSHED  AND  MAH  YASHTS.  199 

didlii  paiti  ava-jasa, 

come  before  (me)  come  down, 

Ardvi-sHra  Andhite! 

Arduisur  Andhita ! 

hacha  avadhyd  starehyd 

from  j'onder  stars 

avi  zdm  Ahuradhdtdm. 

on  to  the  earth  created  by  Ahuramazda. 

Thivdm  yazdonte  aurrdonhd 

Thee  shall  worship  •       the  handy 

ahwdonlid^  danhupatayS, 

lords  the  rulers  of  countries, 

puthrdonhd  danhupaitinam. 

sons  of  the  rulers  of  countries. 

4.  Khurshed  and  Mah  Yashts. 

The  first  of  these  Yashts  is  devoted  to  the  sun,  which  is 
called  in  the  Avesta  hvare  hhshaSta,  "  sun  the  king  "  (pre- 
served in  the  modern  Persian Mitrs/i^tZ,  "  sun');  the  second 
is  devoted  to  the  moon,  called  mdonh  (in.  modern  Persian 
mdh). 

The  prayer  addressed  to  the  sun  commences  as  follows : — 
"We  worship  the  king  sun,  the  immortal,  brilliant. 
When  he  burns  with  his  rays,  then  all  the  heavenly  spirits 
rise  by  hundreds  and  by  thousands  to  spread  his  splendour, 
to  send  it  down  to  the  earth,  created  by  Ahuramazda,  for 
protecting  the  cultivated  fields  QjaSthdo)  and  their  bodies.2 
When  the  sun  rises,  then  he  purifies  the  earth,  created  by 
Ahuramazda,  he  purifies  the  flowing  water,  as  well  as  that 
of  springs  and  lakes,  he  purifies  all  the  creatures  of  the 
beneficent  spirit.  As  long  as  the  sun  has  not  risen,  all  the 
demons  are  endeavouring  to  spread  havoc  throughout  the 

1  It  is  nom.  pi.     From  this  passage         -  In  tliis  passage,  as  well  as  in  many 

one  may  clenrly  see  that  ahura  is  not  otliers  in  the  Yashts  and  the  Veudi- 

a  title  confined  to  the  Supreme  Being,  dad,  some  interpolations   have  been 

but  can  be  applied  to  men  also.     The  made    in    later    times    to    illustrate 

same  is  the   case   with  the   Hebrew  jihrases  whicli  were  considered  hardly 

■word  e?oAtw,  "God,"  which  is  now  and  intelligible.        Thus,    for     instance, 

then  useil  in  the  sense  of  "judges,"  hdin-bdrayeiiiti  (anbdshtan,  "  to  fill " 

Exod.  xxi.  6  (accordingto  the  ancient  in  Pers.),  "  they  carry  everywhere," 

Chaldaic  translator  Onkelos),  and  in  is  exjiluined  by  nipdrayeiTiti,  "they 

that  of  "  kings"  (see  Ps.  Ixxxii.  i,  6).  make  pass  down  (everywhere)." 


200  TIR  AND  GOSH  YASHTS. 

seven  regions  of  the  earth,  and  none  l  of  the  heavenly 
spirits  withstands  and  slays  them,  whilst  all  the  living 
creation  is  drowned  in  sleep." 

At  the  end  the  conjunction  of  sun  and  moon  is  par- 
ticularly mentioned  as  the  luckiest  of  all  conjunctions. 
The  word  for  "  conjunction,"  hakhedhrem,  is  of  particular 
interest,  because  it  is  preserved  in  the  modern  Persian 
aklitar,  "star,"  whose  original  meaning  "conjunction" 
may  still  be  found  in  some  phrases,  such  as  aklitar-i- 
ddnisJh,  "  Jupiter  and  Mercury"  (literally,  the  conjunction 
foreboding  wisdom). 

In  the  Mali  Yaslit  the  moon  is  invoked  by  the  epithet 
gaochithra,  which  means  "  cow-faced."  All  "  the  immortal 
benefactors  (archangels)  rise  and  spread  the  moonlight 
over  the  surface  of  the  earth  created  by  Ahuramazda,  then 
the  light  of  the  moon  shines  through  the  tops  of  the  golden- 
coloured  trees ;  and  gold-like  it  rises  from  the  earth  {i.e., 
it  is  reflected  by  her)."  2  The  new  moon  and  the  full  moon 
are  especially  alluded  to. 

5.  TiR  AND  Gosh  Yashts. 
The  Tir  Yasht  is  devoted  to  the  praise  of  the  star  Tish- 
trya,  "  Mercury "  {tashtar  in  Parsi,  tir  in  modern  Pers.). 
He  is  called  the  giver  of  wealth  (baJchta  shoithrahe) ;  his 
lustre  is  red,  and  of  great  beauty.  His  most  significant 
epithet  is  afsh-chithra,  "  waterfaced  "  (of  one  and  the  same 
nature  with  the  water),  because  he  brings  the  waters  from 
the  celestial  ocean,  Vouru-kasha,  down  on  the  earth  to 
fertilise  the  soil.  He  discharges  this  duty,  which  is  assigned 
to  him,  with  the  utmost  quickness,  being  "  as  swift  as  the 
river  Tighrish,  which  has  the  swiftness  of  an  arrow,  and  is 
the  swiftest  of  all  Aryan  (rivers)  when  it  falls  from  the 

1  Tliis  seems  to  be  in  contradiction  ortler ;  he  is  tlie  representative  of  the 

to  the  Srosh  Yasht,  where  Srosh  is  religion  itself ;  if  it  were  not  for  him 

said  to  fight  at  night-time  against  tlie  the  world  would  fall  a  prey  to  the 

evil  spirits.     But  one  has  to  bear  in  demons  during  the  night-time, 

mind   that   Srosh  is   not  one  of  the  -  The    reflection    of    moonlight   is 

Yazaias,  or  angels,  but  of  a  higher  called  ^jaiit'c/iii,  "what  looks  ngainst.'' 


TIR  AND  GOSH  YASHTS.  201 

KhsJiaotha  mountain  down  to  tlie  Qanvat  mountain."  (Yt. 
viii.  6.) 

He  defeats  and  expels  the  fairies  (jjciiriJca  =  2Jccri  in 
Pers.),  who  "  fall  as  star-worms  (i.e.,  glow-worms)  between 
earth  and  heaven  into  the  sea  Vouru-kasha  (to  prevent  the 
waters  from  coming  out)."  But  Tishtrya  enters  this  sea 
in  the  shape  of  a  horse,  and  by  swelling  it,  makes  it  over- 
flow its  shores,  and  so  carries  its  waters,  as  showers,  over 
the  "  seven  regions  of  the  earth." 

His  worsliip  was  compulsory  at  the  time  of  a  drought ; 
for  unless  the  prayers  of  men  were  addressed  to  him,  he 
was  powerless  to  defeat  the  evil  spirits,  who  kept  back  the 
waters  in  the  sea.  If  men  invoke  him,  says  he,  as  they 
invoke  other  angels,  then  he  proceeds  from  his  magnificent 
palace  to  the  Vouru-kasha.  He  steps  into  the  sea  in  the 
shape  of  a  red  horse  witli  yellow  ears.  There  the  Deva 
ApaoshS,  in  the  shape  of  a  black  horse  with  black  ears  and 
tail,  encounters  him.  Both  fight  for  three  days  and  nights; 
at  length  he  is  defeated  by  the  Deva,  Tishtrya  then  leaves 
the  sea,  crying  aloud :  "  I  am  lost,  the  waters  are  lost,  the 
trees  are  lost,  the  Mazdayasnian  religion  is  destroyed.  Men 
do  not  worship  me  as  they  worship  other  angels.  If  they 
would  worship  me,  I  would  gain  the  strength  of  ten  horses, 
ten  camels,  ten  oxen,  ten  mountains,  ten  navigable  rivers." 
When  men  then  come  to  aid  him  by  their  prayers,  and 
consequently  his  strength  increases,  he  descends  for  a 
second  time  into  the  sea,  attacks  the  Deva  again,  and  defeats 
him.  After  having  conquered  him,  he  proclaims  the  vic- 
tory, gained  by  him,  to  the  whole  good  creation.  He  makes 
the  waters  of  the  sea  then  flow  over  its  borders,  and  fertilises 
the  soil.  In  the  midst  of  the  sea  there  is  a  mountain 
called  Hendva  (very  likely  the  Hindu-kush  range  of  moun- 
tains is  to  be  understood),  over  which  the  clouds  gather 
together.  The  winds  carry  them  rapidly  off,  and  they  then 
discharge  their  watery  load  upon  the  thirsty  and  parched 
soil. 

The  Gosh  Yasht  is  devoted  to  a  female  spirit  who  is 


202  MIHIR  YASHT. 

called  here  Drvdspa,  i.e.,  one  who  keeps  liorses  in  health. 
The  name  Gosh,  "  cow,"  which  was  given  her  in  after  times, 
refers  to  geush  urvd,  the  universal  soul  by  which  all  living 
beings  of  the  good  creation  are  animated.  From  the  terms 
in  w^hich  Drvaspa  is  spoken  of  in  this  Yasht,  she  w^as 
believed  to  preserve  the  life  of  the  good  animals.  In 
heaven  she  represents  the  Milky- way,  and  in  this  respect 
is  described  as  having  many  spies  (eyes),  having  light  of 
her  own,  having  a  far  way,  and  a  long  constellation 
(daregho-hahhcdhrayan  a) . 

She  was  worshipped  by  the  heroes  of  antiquity,  such  as 
Haoshyanha  Faradhdta  (Hoshang  the  Peshdadian  in  the 
Shahnamah),  Yima  (Jamshed),  Thraetaona  (Fredun),  Kava 
Vishtdsjoa,  Zarathuslitra  himself,  &c.,  and  different  favours 
were  asked  of  her,  such  as,  to  give  strength  for  defeating 
enemies,  to  rid  the  creation  from  the  evils  of  heat  and  cold, 
to  propagate  the  good  religion,  &c. 

6.  MiHiR  Yasht. 

In  this  long  Yasht,  which  comprises  thirty-five  sections 
(146  verses  in  Wester.),  the  angel  presiding  over,  and 
directing  the  course  of  the  sun,  who  was  called  Mithra, 
"  friend  "  (inihir  in  Persian),  is  invoked  and  praised.  His 
Avorship  was  widely  spread,  not  only  in  ancient  Persia 
itself,  but  far  beyond  its  frontiers  in  Asia  Llinor,  and  even 
in  Greece  and  Eome. 

In  the  first  section  of  this  Yasht,  Ahuramazda  says  to 
Spitama  Zarathushtra :  "  I  created  Mithra,  who  rules  over 
large  fields  {youm-gaoyaoitish),  to  be  of  the  same  rank  and 
dignity  (as  far  as  worship  is  concerned)  as  I  myself  am. 
The  \vretch  who  belies  Mithra,!  spoils  the  whole  country. 
Therefore,  never  break  a  promise,  neither  that  contracted 
with  a  fellow-religionist,  nor  that  with  an  infidel.  ]\lithra 
gives  those  who  do  not  belie  him,  swift  horses ;  the  fire, 

^  Mtf/ira  has  several  meanings,  viz.,  ing,  or  lying,  or  not  paying  debts 
"angel  of  the  sun,  sun,  friend,"  and  whicli  have  been  contracted,  is  called 
"promise,  contract."  Promise-break-     MithrC-drukhuh,  "  belying  Mithra." 


MIHIR  YASHT.  203 

Aliuramazda's  son,  leads  sncli  men  on  tlie  straiglitest  way, 
the  Frohars  (Fravashis)  give  them  children  of  superior 
qualities." 

Near  the  end  of  the  first  section  there  is  a  short  hymn 
by  which  Ahuramazda  is  said  to  call  him.  It  consists  of 
verses,  each  of  about  eight  syllables,  and  commences  as 
follows : — 


Aclia,          116        jamydd        avanhS, 
Hither      to  us    may  come     to  help, 

dcha        v6       jamydd       ravanhL 
hither    to  us    n;;iy  come       to  face 

(before  us). 

dcha                  118                         jamydd                    rafnanhS,  dc. 
hither                to  us                       may  come                    to  joy,  &c. 

ughrC       aiwithitrd          yasnyd,                rahmyd,        _       anaiwidrukhi6, 
the  strong    conqueror        deserving       deserving  praise,        not  to  be  belied, 

worship, 

vtspem            d            anuhe                                         astraiti, 
all              in         the  life     supplied  with  bodies  {i.e.,  in  the  creation), 

Miihrd                               yd 
Mithra                               who 

vouru-gaoyaoitish. 
rulss  over  large  fields. 

"  Mithra,  who  always  speaks  the  truth,  has  a  thousand 
ears,  ten  thousand  eyes,  and  is  always  watching,  without 
falling  asleep,  over  the  welfare  of  the  creation  "  (ver.  7). 

"  He,  first  of  the  celestial  spirits,  crosses  the  mountain 
Haro-bcrezaiti  (Alborz,  the  supposed  centre  of  the  world) 
on  its  eastern  side,  where  the  immortal  sun  with  his  swift 
horses  is  stationed;  he  first,  covered  with  gold,  reaches 
the  summits  of  that  mountain,  and  thence  overlooks  the 
whole  of  Iran.  Through  him  the  rulers  build  their  high 
fortresses,  through  him  the  high  mountains,  with  their 
many  pasturages,  produce  food  for  the  animals,  through 
him  the  deep  wells  have  abundance  of  waters,  through 
him  the  large  navigable  rivers  run  swiftly  througli  Aish- 
kata^  PoiLTuta  (Parthia,  Farthava  in  the  cuneiform  in- 
scriptions), Mouru  (j\Iarv),  Haroydb  (Herat),  Gau  Sugkdha 
{Sogdiana,  Samarkand),  and  ^arn^ern  (Khowaresmia).  He 
brings  light  to  all  the  seven  regions  (the  whole  earth) ; 
victory  resounds  in  the  eais  of  those  who,  by  their  know- 

1  A  locality  not  yet  identified. 


204  MIHIR  YASHT. 

ledge  of  the  appropriate  prayers  and  rites,  continuously 
worship  him  with  sacrifices."     (Yt.  x.  13-16). 

He  protects  those  who  do  not  break  their  promises 
when  in  distress  and  misery;  but  inflicts  severe  punish- 
ments upon  those  who  sin  against  him  by  lying  and  pro- 
mise-breaking;  he  makes  their  arms  and  feet  lame,  their 
eyes  blind,  their  ears  deaf  (ver.  23).  The  same  idea  is 
embodied  in  the  short  hymn  which  forms  the  nth  section 
(vers.  47-49).  The  verses  consist  of  eight  syllables,  as  in 
the  following  specimen  : — 

avi         hainaydo  khrttshi/eittsh, 

in    the  two  armies   ready  for  battle, 

antare      danhu-pdpcretdni. 


in  order      for  the  country 


dad        yad        Mithrd      fravazaiti 
Then      when      Mithra  drives 

avi  hdm-yanta  rasmaoyd 

against    they  encounter  in  two  battle  lines 
(each  other)  to  fight, 

athra        nardm         mithrd-drujdm    j  apdsh  gavd         darezayeiti, 

then    of  the  men  who  break        |  away        the  hand        he  binds, 

promise  | 

pairi  daema  vdrayeiti,  &c. 

round  the  face  he  covers,  &c. 

i.e.,  at  the  time  of  a  battle  taking  place  between  two  hos- 
tile armies,  and  both  being  arraved  in  battle  lines  against 
each  other,  in  order  to  fight  for  a  country,  Mithra  drives 
in  his  chariot  to  the  battlefield,  and  punishes  all  those 
who  were  formerly  sinning  against  him  by  breaking  pro- 
mises ;  he  causes  some  to  bo  made  prisoners,  and  dooms 
others  to  lose  their  eyes,  or  their  feet,  or  their  ears. 

The  residence  of  this  mighty  angel,  the  punisher  of 
rascals  and  scoundrels,  is  on  the  mountain  Haro-herezaiti 
(Alborz),  where  Ahuramazda  himself  has  built  a  palace  for 
him,  where  is  "  no  night,  no  darkness,  no  cold  wind,  nor 
hot,  no  smoke,  no  putrifaction,  no  fogs,"  which  is  the 
model  of  an  Iranian  paradise  (ver.  50). 

All  the  demons  (devas)  flee  from  him  when  he,  as  the 
ruler  of  the  whole  earth,  drives  in  his  chariot  on  her  right 
side.  On  his  riglit  side  he  is  followed  by  Sraosha,  the 
angel  ruling  over  the  whole  of  the  divine  service,  and  by 
JRashnv,  razishta  (Rashnu  rast),  the  angel  of  justice,  and 
the  spirits  of  the  waters,  trees,  &c.  (vers.  100,  loi). 


SROSH  HADOKHT  AND  RASHNU  YASHTS.     205 

In  verse  104  mention  is  made  of  the  eastern  and 
western  Hindus  (Jiindvo  =  sindhavas,  i.e.,  the  (seven)  rivers 
in  the  Vedas,  the  ancient  name  of  India). 

Ahuramazda  paid  his  respects  to  him.  He  drives  out 
from  paradise  (garodemdna)  in  a  splendid  chariot,  drawn 
by  four  white  horses.  He  carries  with  him  weapons  of 
all  kinds  for  the  destruction  of  the  Devas ;  among  them 
is  the  vazra,'^  the  most  powerful. 

7.  Seosh  Hadokht  and  Rashnu  Yashts. 

The  former  Yasht,  which  is  now  particuku-ly  used  at 
the  time  of  initiating  priests  (chiefly  of  the  lower  grade, 
the  Herbads)  into  their  office,  is  dedicated  to  the  angel 
Sraoslia,  of  whom  we  have  already  given  an  account  (see 
p.  189).  An  analysis  of  this  Yasht  would,  therefore, 
afford  no  particular  interest. 

In  the  Eashnu  Yasht  the  angel  Baslinu  razisJita,  "  the 
rightest  righteousness,"  who  is  believed  to  preside  over 
the  eternal  laws  of  nature,  as  v/ell  as  morality  (corres- 
ponding to  the  idea  of  Themis  among  the  ancient  Greeks), 
is  invoked  and  worshipped.  He  is  everywhere,  and  re- 
presents, to  a  certain  extent,  the  omnipresence  of  the 
divine  being.  He  is  particularly  distinguished  by  firm- 
ness and  the  greatest  hatred  of  disorder  and  immorality 
of  every  kind.  His  devotee,  in  paying  reverence  to  him, 
by  placing  various  sweet  fruits  and  oil  before  the  sacred 
fire,  invokes  and  praises  him  wherever  he  may  be,  whether 
in  one  of  the  seven  regions  (harshvare),  or  in  different 
parts  of  the  sea  Vouni-Tcasha  (the  ocean  surrounding  the 
earth),  either  on  the  large  tree,  bearing  all  kinds  of  fruits 
at  the  same  time,  which  is  planted  in  its  middle,  or  on  its 
shores,  or  in  its  depths.  He  is  further  praised  whether  he 
be  on  the  ends  of  the  earth,  or  on  the  celestial  mountain 
Hard-herezaiti  (Alborz),  or  in  one  of  the  stars,  such  as 

1  Gixrz,    "  a    club,    battleaxe,"  ia     "  thunderbolt,"  in  the  Vedas,  where 
Persian     is     identical     with     vajra,     it  is  Indra's  weaxion. 


2o6  FRAVARDIN  YASHT. 

Churl's  "Wain  (Ursa  major)  called  Haptoiriag}  or  iu  the 
water  stars,  or  vegetation  stars,  or  in  the  moon,  or  sun, 
or  in  the  luminaries  which  were  from  the  beginning 
{anaglira  raochdo),  or  in  paradise. 

8.  Fravardin  Yasht. 
This  Yasht,  comprising  thirty-one  chapters,  which  are 
divided  into  1 5  8  verses,  is  the  longest  of  all.  It  is  dedi- 
cated to  the  praise  of  the  Frohars,  Fravashi  in  the  Avesta 
(preserved  in  the  name  Fhraortes,  which  is  Fravartish 
in  the  ancient  Persian  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions), 
which  means  "  protector."  These  Frohars  or  protectors, 
who  are  numberless,  are  believed  to  be  angels,  stationed 
everywhere  by  Ahuramazda  for  keeping  the  good  creation 
in  order,  preserving  it,  and  guarding  it  against  the  con- 
stant attacks  of  fiendish  powers.  Every  being  of  the  good 
creation,  whether  living,  or  deceased,  or  still  unborn,  has 
its  own  Fravashi  or  guardian  angel  who  has  existed  from 
the  beginning.  Hence  they  are  a  kind  of  prototypes,  and 
may  be  best  compared  to  the  "  ideas  "  of  Plato  who  sup- 
posed everything  to  have  a  double  existence,  first  in  idea, 
secondly  in  reality.^     Originally  the  Fravashis  represented 

^  In  modern  Persian  haftwarang.  commenced  to  deify  those  great 
This  word  is  highly  interesting  from  founders  of  Brahmanism,  nothing 
its  identity  with  the  ancient  Vedic  was  more  natural  than  to  assign  to 
and  Greek  names  of  the  same  con-  them  a  place  in  the  sky,  and  make 
stellation.  The  original  form  in  the  them  one  of  the  brightest  and  most 
Vedas  is  riksha,  "a  bear"  (which  is  beautiful  constellations.  In  the  Iran- 
found  only  once  in  the  hymns  of  the  ian  languages,  however,  the  old  name 
Kigveda,  i.  24,  10)  =  Greek  ai'ktos.  "the  seven  bears"  was  faithfully 
According  to  an  account  in  the  Sha-  preserved. 

tapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  i,  2,  4  (second  ^  The  ideas  are  the  models  (para- 
part  of  the  white  Yajurveda)  this  deigmata)  of  everything  existuig; 
name  was  changed  afterwards  into  the  realities  (or,  according  to  Plato, 
that  of  Sapta  i-ishayah,  "the  seven  non-realities,  because  only  the  ideas 
Rishis,"  by  which  name  the  stars  of  have  a  real  existence  according  to  his 
Ursa  major  are  called  in  the  later  doctrine)  being  only  imitations  there- 
Vedic  hymns  (see  Rigveda  x.  82,  2,  of.  The  ideas  are  unborn,  eternal, 
Atharvaveda  vi.  40,  i)  and  in  the  invisible,  imperishable,  but  their  imi- 
classical  Sanskrit  writings.  The  tations,  the  substances,  are  subject  to 
sounds  of  riksha,  "bear,"  and  rishi,  all  changes.  See  Parmenides,  p.  132, 
"seer,  prophet,"  were  so  near  to  one  d.  Steph.  Timoeus.,  48,  c.  52  a.  Ac- 
another,  that  at  the  time  when  they  cording  to  Aristotle  (JMetaphysics,  L 


FRAVARDIN  YASHT.  207 

only  tlie  departed  souls  of  ancestors,  comparable  to  the 
piiaras,  "  fathers,"  of  the  Brahmans,  and  the  Manes  of  the 
Eomans.  The  following  extracts  are  translated  from  the 
Eravardin  Yasht : — 

1-7.  Ahuramazda  spoke  to  Spitama  Zarathushtra :  To 
thee  alone  I  shall  tell  the  power  and  strength,  glory,  use- 
fulness, and  happiness  of  the  holy  guardian-angels,  the 
strong  and  victorious,  0  righteous  Spitama  Zarathushtra  ! 
how  they  come  to  help  me,  [(Zend)  how  they  give  me 
assistance].  By  means  of  their  splendour  and  glory  I  up- 
hold the  sky  which  is  shining  so  beautifully,  and  wdiich 
touches  and  surrounds  this  earth  ;i  it  resembles  a  bird 
which  is  ordered  by  God  to  stand  still  there ;  it  is  high  as 
a  tree,  wide- stretched,  iron-bodied,  having  its  own  light  in 
the  three  worlds  (thrishva) ;  on  which  (the  sky)  Ahura- 
mazda, together  with  Mithra,  Eashnu,  and  Spenta  Armaiti, 
puts  a  garment  decked  with  stars,  and  made  by  God  in 
such  a  way  that  nobody  can  see  the  ends  of  its  parts. 

By  means  of  their  splendour  and  glory,  I  uphold  the 
high,  strong  Anahita  (the  celestial  water)  with  bridges,  the 
salutary,  w^ho  drives  away  the  demons,  who  has  the  true 
faith,  and  is  to  be  worshipped  in  the  world,  and  to  be 
praised  in  the  world ;  the  righteous  who  furthers  life,  the 
righteous  who  increases  wealth,  the  righteous  who  increases 
property,  the  righteous  who  makes  the  fields  thrive,  the 
righteous  who  makes  the  countries  thrive ;  who  purifies 
the  seed  of  all  males,  who  purifies  the  wombs  of  all  females 
to  make  them  fit  for  conception,  who  makes  all  pregnant 
females  bear  fine  offspring,  who  provides  females  at  the 
right  time  with  milk  ;  the  praised,  the  far-renowned,  who 
is  as  large  as  all  the  waters  which  flow  over  the  earth,  who 
runs  with  might  from  the  celestial  heights  into  the  sea 

9,  2),  Plato  imagined  as  many  "ideas"  '^  Bavdva  would  be   according   to 

as   there   are  things   really  existing.  Sanskrit  the  first  person  dual,  but  this 

Such  celestial,  or  invisible,  prototypes  meaning  does  not  agree  witli  the  struc- 

of  terrestrial  things   are   mentioned  ture  of  the  sentence ;  it  is  evidently 

also  in  the  Bible;   see  Heb.  ix.  23;  put  for  6a raiii  ra,  "it  is  for  both." 
Exod.  XXV.  9,  40. 


2oS  FRAVARDIN  YASHT. 

Voiiru-kaslia.  All  its  sliores  are  then  overflowing  from  its 
very  centre,  when  those  waters  fall  into  it,  when  the  high, 
strong  Anahita  pours  them  forth  into  their  channels.  She 
has  a  thousand  springs,  a  thousand  channels ;  each  of 
these  springs  and  each  of  these  channels  is  of  the  circuit 
of  a  forty  days'  journey  for  a  well-mounted  messenger. 

11.  By  means  of  their  splendour  and  glory,  I  keep,  0 
Zarathushtra !  the  embryos  alive  in  the  pregnant  females, 
to  be  formed  out  of  a  formless  inanimate  mass,  to  obtain 
a  living  soul,  bones,  form,  consistency,  growth  of  the 
faculty  of  walking,  and  speaking. 

12.  If  the  strong  guardian-angels  of  the  righteous  would 
not  give  me  assistance,  then  cattle  and  men,  the  two  best 
of  the  hundred  classes  of  beings,  would  no  longer  exist  for 
me ;  then  would  commence  the  devil's  power,  the  devil's 
reign,  the  whole  living  creation  would  belong  to  the  devil. 

1 3.  Between  earth  and  heaven  may  the  devilish  spirit 
take  up  his  residence  !  [(Zend)  between  earth  and  heaven 
may  the  devil  reside !] ;  but  he  (the  devil)  will  not  be 
able  to  destroy  entirely  (the  influence)  of  the  beneficent 
spirit  (Ahuramazda). 

14.  By  means  of  their  splendour  and  glory,  the  waters 
flow  straight  forward  in  inexhaustible  sources ;  by  means 
of  their  splendour  and  glory,  trees  grow  out  of  the  earth ; 
by  means  of  their  splendour  and  glory,  the  winds  blow, 
carrying  with  them  vapours  from  inexhaustible  sources. 

15.  By  means  of  their  splendour  and  glory,  the  females 
are  getting  with  children ;  by  means  of  their  splendour  and 
glory,  they  produce  good  offspring;  by  means  of  their 
splendour  and  glory,  there  will  be  descendants. 

16.  By  means  of  their  splendour  and  glory,  that  ingen- 
uous man  (Zarathushtra),  who  spoke  such  good  words, 
who  was  the  source  of  wisdom,  who  was  born  before 
Gotama  ^  had  such  intercourse  (with  God,  obtained  revela- 

^  Gaotema  (in  the  original)  is  the     Gautama.    That  Buddhism  existed  at 
proper  iiiuiie  of  Buddha,  the  founder     Ealkh  is  well  known, 
of  Buddhism.      Its  Sanskrit  form  is 


FRAVARDIN  YASHT.  209 

* 

tion).  By  means  of  tlieir  splendour  and  glory,  tlie  sun 
goes  on  his  path ;  by  means  of  their  splendour  and  glory, 
the  moon  goes  on  her  path ;  by  means  of  their  splendour 
and  glory,  the  stars  go  on  their  path. 

17.  These  guardian-angeis  of  the  righteous  give  great 
assistance  in  great  battles  (to  be  fought  against  the  devil- 
ish empire).  The  guardian- angels  of  the  righteous  among 
the  believers  in  the  old  religion,  or  those  of  the  prophets 
{Saoshyafdo)  to  come,  for  making  perpetuation  of  life,  are 
the  strongest  of  all ;  then  the  guardian- angels  of  the  living 
righteous  men  are  strontier  than  those  of  the  dead. 

o  o 

18.  When  a  man  living,  who  is  the  ruler  over  all  the 
estates  of  a  country,  supports  well  the  guardian-angels  of 
the  righteous,  then  each  of  his  dominions  will  be  well 
populated  [(Zend)  who  supports  well  your  good  friend  (the 
sun,  mitlira)  with  his  far-extended  dominions,  and  the  pro- 
bity which  is  protecting  and  sheltering  estates]. 

19.  Thus  I  tell  thee,  holy  Spitama!  the  power,  strength, 
glory,  support,  and  delight  of  the  strong,  victorious  guardian- 
angels  of  the  righteous,  as  they  come  to  assist  me,  [(Zend) 
as  the  strong  guardian- angels  of  the  righteous  bring  me 
assistance]. 

20.  Ahuramazda  said  to  Spitama  Zarathushtra :  "When 
in  this  world,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  thou  hast  to  pass 
mischief-bringing,  bad,  baneful  ways,  and  thy  life  is  threat- 
ened, then  shalt  thou  recite  these  words,  [(Zend)  then  shalt 
thou  speak  these  victorious  words,  0  Zarathushtra  !] : 

21.  I  praise,  invoke,  and  extol  the  good,  strong,  bene- 
ficent, guardian- angels  of  the  righteous.  We  praise  those 
who  are  in  the  houses,  those  who  are  in  the  villages,  those 
who  are  in  the  towns,  those  who  are  in  the  countries,  those 
who  are  in  the  Zoroastrian  communities,  those  of  the  pre- 
sent, those  of  the  past,  those  of  the  future  righteous,  all 
those  invoked  in  countries  where  invocation  is  practised. 

22.  Who  uphold  heaven,  who  uphold  water,  who  uphold 
earth,  who  uphold  nature,  &c. 

49,  50.  We  worship  the  good,  strong,  beneficent,  guardian- 

0 


210  ■  FRAVARDIN  YASHT. 

angels  of  tlie  righteous,  who  come  to  the  village  in  the 
season  called  Hamaspathmaeda.  .  Then  they  roam  about 
there  during  ten  nights,  wishing  to  learn  what  assistance 
they  might  obtain,  saying  :  Who  will  praise  us  ?  who  will 
worship  (us)  ?  who  will  adore  ^us)  ?  who  will  pray  (to  us)  ? 
who  will  satisfy  (us)  with  milk  and  clothes  in  his  hand, 
with  a  prayer  for  righteousness  ?  whom  of  us  will  he  call 
here  ?  whose  soul  is  to  worship  you  ?  To  whom  of  us  will 
he  give  that  offering  in  order  to  enjoy  imperishable  food 
for  ever  and  ever  ? 

51,  52.  Then  the  man  who  worships  them  with  milk  in 
his  hand,  and  with  clothes,  and  the  prayer  for  righteous- 
ness, upon  him  the  pleased  (with  this  sacrifice),  favourable, 
not-hurting,  strong  guardian-angels  of  the  righteous  bestow 
blessings.  In  this  house  (where  they  are  worshipped  in 
such  a  way)  there  will  be  abundance  of  cows  and  of  men 
(posterity) ;  there  will  be  a  swift  horse  and  a  well-fastened 
carriage ;  there  will  be  found  a  prudent  man  who  will 
worship  us  (in  future)  with  milk  and  clothes  in  his  hand 
and  with  the  prayer  for  righteousness. 

82-84.  We  worship  the  good,  strong,  beneficent  guardian- 
ano-els  of  the  righteous,  those  of  the  immortal  benefactors 
(Ameshaspentas),  the  rulers  with  their  watchful  eyes,  the 
high,  powerful,  swift,  living  ones  of  everlasting  truth.  All 
seven  are  of  the  same  mind,  speak  the  same  words,  per- 
form the  same  actions  ;  [(Zend)  they  have  the  same  mind, 
the  same  words,  the  same  action,  and  the  same  master  and 
ruler,  the  Creator  Ahuramazda].  One  looks  into  the  soul 
of  the  other,  considering  about  good  thoughts,  considering 
about  good  words,  considering  about  good  deeds,  consider- 
ing about  the  best  life,  that  the  prayer  may  go  up  to  their 
brightly  shining  paths. 

85.  We  worship  the  good,  strong,  beneficent  guardian- 
angels,  that  of  the  blazing,  beneficent,  penetrating  fire,  and 
that  of  Sraosha,  the  righteous,  swift,  self-speaking,  swiftly- 
running,  the  living,  and  that  of  Nairyosanha  (the  angel). 

86.  That  of  the  rightest  righteousness  {Fuishnu  ixizishta), 


FRAVARDIN  YASHT.  21  r 

that  of  Mitlira  with  his  far-extended  dominions,  that  of 
the  holy  word  {Mathra  spenta),  that  of  the  day,  that  of 
water,  that  of  earth,  that  of  the  trees,  that  of  nature,  that 
of  existence,  that  of  the  two  righteous  worlds  (visible  and 
invisible,  earthly  and  spiritual). 

8-y.  We  worship  the  guardian-angel  of  Gayo-marathan 
(Gayomard,  Kayomars,  the  Adam  or  Manu  of  the  Iranians), 
the  righteous,  who  first  listened  to  Ahuramazda's  thoughts 
and  sayings ;  out  of  whose  body  he  (Ahuramazda)  formed 
the  central  mass  (ndfo,  "  navel ")  1  of  the  Aryan  countries, 
the  surface  of  the  Aryan  countries. 

88-94.  We  worship  the  rule  and  the  guardian-angel  of 
Zarathushtra  Spitama,  who  first  thought  good  thoughts, 
who  first  spoke  good  w^ords,  who  first  performed  good 
actions,  who  was  the  first  priest,  the  first  warrior,  the  first 
cultivator  of  the  soil,  the  first  prophet,  the  first  who  was 
inspired,  the  first  who  has  given  (to  mankind)  nature  and 
truth  and  words,  and  hearing  of  words,  and  wealth  and  all 
good,  created  by  Mazda,  of  rightful  appearance.  Who  first 
made  turning  the  wheel  among  gods  and  men,2  who  first 
was  praising  the  rightfulness  of  the  living  creation,  and 
destroying  idolatry,  who  confessed  the  Zarathushtrian 
worship  of  Mazda,  the  religion  of  Ahura  opposed  to  the 
demons.  Who  first  spoke  the  word  opposed  to  the  demons,3 
being  the  religion  of  Ahura  in  the  animated  creation,  who 
first  promulgated  the  word  opposed  to  the  demons,  being 
the  religion  of  Ahura  in  the  animated  creation.  Who  first 
spoke  the  whole  of  what  is  given  by  the  demons  in  the 
animated  creation,  and  what  is  neither  to  be  worshipped 
nor  invoked  (it  is  profane),  that  is  the  strong,  blessed,  old 
religion  of  the  countries  (the  ante-Zoroastrian,  Deva  reli- 
gion).4     Through  whom  the  whole  true  and  revealed  word 

•  ^  Compare  the  Greek  appellation  of  ^  That  is  to  say,  the  Vendirlad. 

Delphi:   Omphale  (lis,  "navel  of  the  ^  This  means  that  Zarathushtra  ig 

earth,"  i.e.,  its  centre.                         '  the  originatorof  all  religious  thouglits, 

"  This  is  a  Buddhistic  expression,  both  those  current  after,  and  thoco 

meaning  "  established  and  propagated  current  before  his  time, 
the  good  religion. " 


212  FR  A  YARD  IN  YASHT. 

was  heard,  wliicli  is  the  life  and  guidance  of  the  world,  the 
praises  of  the  righteousness  l  which  is  the  greatest,  best, 
and  most  excellent,  and  the  promulgation  of  the  best  reli- 
gion of  those  existing.  Whom  all  Ameshaspentas,  together 
with  the  Sun,  worship  with  believing  inquiry  in  the  mind, 
for  the  duration  of  life,  as  the  patron  spirit  and  religious 
preceptor  of  the  world,  as  praiser  of  the  righteousness 
which  is  the  greatest,  best,  and  most  excellent,  and  the 
promulgator  of  the  best  religion  of  those  existing.  Through 
his  knowledge  and  speech  the  waters  and  trees  become  de- 
sirous of  growing ;  through  his  knowledge  and  speech  all 
beings,  created  by  the  beneficent  Spirit,  are  uttering  words 
of  happiness.  For  our  welfare  the  fire-priest  {dthrava), 
Spitama  Zarathushtra,  was  born,  he  offered  sacrifice  for  us, 
and  arranged  the  holy  twigs.  Thus  comes  forth  from  the 
waters  {i.e.,  from  its  source)  the  good  religion  of  the  Maz- 
dayasnians,  spreading  over  all  the  seven  regions  of  the 
earth, 

95 .  There  the  friend  of  the  waters  (the  sun),  ruling  over 
far-extended  dominions,  produced  all  virtues  of  the  coun- 
tries by  their  means,  and  makes  them  play  when  overflow- 
ing ;  there  the  son  of  waters,  the  strong  fire,  produced  all 
virtues  of  countries,  and  appeases  them  when  overflowing. 

We  w^orship  the  virtue  and  the  guardian  angel  of 
Maidhyo-mfionha,  the  disposer  (of  the  good  faith),  who  first 
heard  Zarathushtra's  speech  and  sayings. 

99.  We  worship  the  guardian-angel  of  Kavi  Vishtaspa, 
the  bold,  who  speaks  his  own  verses,  the  attacker  of  the 
demons,  the  believer  in  Ahura,  who  defiled,2  for  the  benefit 
of  the  good  creation,  the  face  of  the  devil  and  the  witches, 
[(Zend)  who  cleft  the  face  of  the  devil  and  the  witches, 
that  is  to  say,  who  was  the  arm  and  support  of  the  Zoro- 
astrian  belief  in  Ahura] ;  (100.)  who  carried  away  from  the 

1  The  "  praise  of  righteousness"  is  traMcha,  contain  fragments  of  an  old 

the   Pahhivi   technical   name   of  the  epic  poem  in  honour  of  Kavi  Vish- 

Ashem-vohu  formula.  taspa,  with  some  interpolations.    The 

^  The  words  from  y6  driija,  to  vds-  metre  is  the  Shloka. 


BEHRAM  AND  RAM  YASHTS.  213 

Hunus  ^  the  standard  [(Zend)  wbicli  was  tied],  and  depo- 
sited it  in  the  impregnable  fortress  Maidhyoishadha,  shiekl- 
ing  cattle  and  fields,  [(Zend)  favourable  to  cattle  and  fields]. 

104.  We  worship  the  guardian-angel  of  Hushkyaothna, 
son  of  Frashaoshtra,  that  of  Qadaena,  son  of  Frashaosbtra, 
that  of  Hanhaurvat,  son  of  Jamaspa,  that  of  Vareshan,  son 
of  Hanhaurvat,  that  of  Vobu-nemanb,  son  of  Avaraosbtra, 
to  ward  off  the  mischief  done  by  nightmares,  by  ghosts 
disguised  as  black-coloured  animals,  by  demons,  and  by 
witches. 

105.  "We  worship  the  guardian-angel  of  Simaezhi,  the 
reciter  of  spells,  the  Herbad,  who  slew  most  of  the  Usa- 
ghanas,  who  polluted  the  bodies  and  disturbed  righteous- 
ness, who  were  irreligious,  acknowledging  neither  patron 
spirit  nor  religious  preceptor,  who  were  charmers,  frustrat- 
ing the  help  of  the  guardian-angels  to  resist  the  hostilities 
which  were  crushing  the  righteous. 

129.  AVe  worship  the  guardian-angel  of  Astvad-ereta 
who  is  called  the  victorious  Saoshyans.  He  is  called 
Saoshyans,  as  he  will  conduce  (sdvaydd)  to  the  welfare  of 
the  whole  animated  creation.  He  is  called  Astvad-ereta, 
as  he  is  keeping  up  the  animated  creation,  guarding  it 
against  destruction,  especially  against  tlie  destruction 
caused  by  the  two-legged  Drukhsh  (the  personification  of 
destruction),  caused  by  the  hatred  of  (the  demons)  who 
annihilate  rightful  things. 

9.  Behram  and  Ram  Yashts. 

The  Behram  Yasht  is  devoted  to  the  angel  Behram. 
The  original  form  of  this  name  is  Vercthraghna,  which 
means  "  killer  of  enemies,"  i.e.,  conqueror,  and  is  to  be  iden- 
tified with  Indra's  name  Vritrahd  to  be  found  in  the  Yedas. 
He  is  the  giver  of  victory,  and  appears  personally  before  his 

1  This  nation  is  mentioned  by  the  to  have  often  been  engaged  in  war 

name   of  Hilnds  in   Indian  writings  with  them.      They   were  the  white 

also.    See  Vishnu  Purdiia,tra,nalAted  Huns  who   were   once   the  terror  of 

by  H.  H.  Wilson,  pp.  177,  194.    They  Europe, 
were  hostile  to  the  Iranians,  who  seem 


214  BEHRAM  AND  RAM  YASHTS. 

devotee  in  such  different  forms  as  lie  may  choose  to  assume. 
He  appears  in  the  form  of  a  wind,  in  that  of  a  cow,  in 
that  of  a  horse,  in  that  of  a  camel,  in  that  of  a  boar  (vardsa, 
Sans,  vardha),  in  that  of  a  boy  aged  fifteen,  in  that  of  a 
warrior,  &c.  Zarathushtra  worshipped  him,  and  was  re- 
warded by  the  angel  with  strength  in  his  arms  and  vigour 
in  his  whole  body. 

Zarathushtra  once  asking  Ahuramazda  in  what  way  the 
angel  Behram  should  be  worshipped,  is  answered  in  tlie 
following  manner :  The  Aryan  countries  (i.e.,  their  inha- 
bitants, the  Iranians,  ancestors  of  the  Parsis)  shall  conse- 
crate water  (called  zaothra),  arrange  the  sacred  twigs  called 
Barsom,  and  kill  an  animal  of  a  reddish  or  yellowish  colour, 
the  flesh  of  which  is  to  be  cooked.  Of  this  meal  of  Beh- 
rS,m,  which  is  prepared  occasionally  to  this  day,  neither  a 
criminal,  nor  a  courtezan,  nor  an  infidel  who  is  an  enemy 
of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  is  allowed  to  eat.  Should  that 
happen  then  the  Aryan  countries  will  be  visited  by  plagues, 
and  devastated  by  incursions  of  hostile  armies. 

The  Eam  Yasht  is  devoted  to  the  angel  Eam,  who  is, 
however,  never  mentioned  in  it  by  this  name,  but  is  called 
vayusli  1  iirparo-Jiairyd,  i.e.,  the  wind  whose  business  is  above 
(in  the  sky),  tbe  celestial  breath ;  or  he  is  simply  invoked 
by  the  names  of  ^^^a,  "  who  is  far,  remote,"  and  Bagha,^ 
"  destiny."  He  is  described  as  being  everywhere  (on  all 
sides),  and  as  the  primary  cause  (dkhshti)  of  the  whole 
universe.  From  these  remarks  we  may  gather  that  he  re- 
presents that  very  fine  and  subtle  substance  which  is  called 
ether,  and  known  to  the  Indian  philosophers  as  dJcdsJia. 

He  was  worshipped  by  Ahuramazda  and  the  great  heroes 
and  sages  of  antiquity,  such  as  Haoshyanha,  Tahhma-itmpa 
(TaJimuras),  Yima,  &c.  Old  maids  beg  him  to  grant  them 
husbands. 

In  tlie  last  (eleventh)  section  his  manifold  names  are 

1  This  name  seems  to  be  connected        ^  ggg  t|jg  gj-st  section  of  the  fourth 
with   the    Vedic    god    Vdiiu,    "  the     Essay. 
wind,"  the  original   long    d    having 
been  shortened  to  a. 


DIN,  ETC.,   YASHTS.  215 

explained.  Vayush  is  there  traced  to  the  root  vi,  "  to  go, 
penetrate,"  and  to  i-a,  "  both,"  and  explained  by  "  I  go  to 
both  creatures,  those  of  the  beneficent,  and  those  of  the 
malevolent  spirit."  By  this  and  other  names  he  is  to  be 
invoked  at  the  time  of  worship.  He  has  then  the  power 
of  defeating  hostile  armies. 

10.  Din  and  Ashi  Yashts. 
In  the  Din  Yasht  the  daSna  mdzdayasnish,  or  the  Zoroas- 
trian  religion,  is  invoked  as  an  angel.  .She  was,  of  course, 
pre-eminently  worshipped  by  Zarathushtra.  The  way  in 
which  he  invoked  her  is  described  in  a  short  hymn  com- 
mencing as  follows : — 

Yt.    xvi.  2.    Kise  from    thy   place !    go'  out  from  thy 
house  !  thou  wisdom,  created  by  Mazda !  which  is  the 
lightest ;  if  thou  art  in  the  front  (of  the  house),  put  up 
with  me ;  if  thou  art  behind  it,  return  to  me. 
Ashi  is  a  female  angel  whom  the  Dasturs  at  present 
compare  with  Lahshmi,  the  Hindu  goddess  of  wealth.    But 
the  Yasht  devoted  to  her  does  not  countenance  this  opi- 
nion.    Her  full  name  is  Ashish  vanuhi  (now  corrupted  to 
Ashishang),  which  means  "  the  good  truth."     She  is  called 
a  daughter  of  Ahuramazda,  and  a  sister  of  the  Amesha- 
spentas  or  archangels.     She  makes  the  wisdom  of  all  pro- 
phets continue,  and  inspires  them  in  their  turn  with  the 
heavenly  (lit.  original)  wisdom.     She  comes  to  help  all 
that  invoke  her  from  far  and  near.     The  ancient  heroes  and 
sages,  Yima,  Thraetaona,  Zarathushtra,  Kav^  Vishtaspa, 
&c.,  worshipped  her,  and  to  all  she  granted  what  they  were 
praying  for,  such  as  wealth,  victory,  or  children. 

II.    ASHTAD,    ZaMYAD,    AND    VaNANT    YaSHTS. 

The  name  Ashtdd,  which  is  to  be  traced  to  the  Avesta 
word  Arslitdd,  "  height,"  does  not  occur  in  the  Yasht  bear- 
ing this  name.  The  glory  of  the  Aryan  countries  (i.e., 
their  riches  and  wealth  in  trees,  cows,  sheep,  and  all  other 
things  of  the  good  creation,  which  are  the  most  effective 
means  for  destroving  the  works  of  the  demons,  and  for  pre- 


2i6    ASHTAD,  Z AMY  AD,  AND  VAN  A  NT  YASHTS. 

serving  everytliing  in  its  original  rectitude),  and  tlie  Aslti 
vaimhi  Icrczaiti  (the  good,  high  truth)  are  invoked  in  this 
Yasht.  The  glory  {qareno)  being  chiefly  the  subject  of  the 
Zaniyad  Yasht,  and  the  Ashi  Vanuhi  that  of  the  preceding 
Ashi  Yasht,  we  cannot  ascribe  any  independent  value  to 
this  Ashtad  Yasht,  which  is  only  an  appendage  to  those 
two  others.  The  name  Ashtad,  by  which  the  Dasturs  un- 
derstand the  height  of  mountains,  was  given  to  this  short 
chapter  only  to  distinguish  it  by  a  separate  name  from  the 
two  other  Yashts. 

The  name  Zamijdd  refers  to  the  earth.  She  is  not 
directly  invoked  in  this  Yasht,  which  is  chiefly  devoted  to 
the  praise  of  the  "  glory  "  [qarend)  above  mentioned.  Its 
first  section,  which  describes  the  origin  of  all  mountains 
out  of  the  heart  of  the  central  and  primeval  mountain 
Alborz  (Hard  Icrczaiti)}  stands  separate.  Several  names 
of  mountains  are  particularly  mentioned,^  sucli  as  UshicUido 
(creator  of  light),  Ushi-darcncm  (district  of  light),  &c. 
The  number  of  all  the  mountains  is  said  to  be  2244. 

In  the  following  sections  of  this  Yasht  we  find  always 
invoked  "  the  mighty  glory  which  was  peculiar  to  the 
Kavis "  (the  chiefs  of  the  Iranian  community  in  ancient 
times,  mostly  before  Zoroaster).  Ahuramazda  produced  it 
at  the  time  of  creating  all  that  is  good,  bright,  shining,  and 
propagating  life.  It  attached  itself  generally  to  one  of  the 
great  heroes  of  antiquity,  such  as  Thraetaona,  Yima,  &c., 
and  enabled  him  to  achieve  great  feats.  This  heavenly 
glory  is  essential  for  causing  the  dead  to  rise  at  the  end  of 
the  world.  About  this  resurrection  of  the  dead,  which  is  a 
genuine  Zoroastrian  doctrine,  we  find  in  this  Yasht  two  very 
interesting  passages,  which  are  almost  identical  (Yt.  xix. 
II,  12  and  89,  90).  The  following  is  a  translation  of  the 
second  passage : — 

^  Here  we  find  the  peculiar  form  rate  mountain,  surrounded  by  its  vast 

haraili  haresh,  in  ■which  haraiti  is  an  mountain  ranges, 
abstract  noun,   meaning  "mountain         ^  To  express  the  word  "  mountain  " 

range,"  and  haresh,  harez  (in  the  Vedas  Ave  find  here  two  words  used :  gairl  and 

hrihas)  "elevated,  high."     Its  heart  paurvata,  which  are  botli  to  be  found 

{zaredhC)  is  here  regarded  as  a  sepa-  also  in  Sanskrit  [girl  and  parvata). 


THE  HADOKHT  MASK.  217 

'  This  splendour  attaches  itself  to  the  hero  (who  is  to  rise 
'  out  of  the  number)  of  prophets  (called  Saoshyanto)  and  to 
'  his  companions,  in  order  to  make  life  everlasting,  unde- 
'  caying,  imperishable,  imputrescible,  incorruptible,  for  ever 
'  existing,  for  ever  vigorous,  full  of  power  (at  the  time) 
'  when  the  dead  shall  rise  again,  and  imperishableness  of 
'  life  shall  commence,  making  life  lasting  by  itself  (without 
'  further  support).  All  the  world  will  remain  for  eternity 
'  in  a  state  of  righteousness  ;  the  devil  will  disappear  from 
'  all  those  places  whence  lie  used  to  attack  the  righteous 
'  man  in  order  to  kill  (him) ;  and  all  his  brood  and  crea- 
'  tures  will  be  doomed  to  destruction.' 

The  Vanant  Yaslit  is  a  very  short  prayer  addressed  to 
the  star  Vanant  (by  wdiich  the  Dasturs  understand  the 
Milky-way,  or  Kdh-i-kaslidn  in  Persian),  to  kill  all  dis- 
turbers of  the  good  creation.  This  constellation  is  said  to 
stand  directly  over  hell  in  order  to  frighten  the  demons.i 

12.  Two  Fkagments  of  the  Hadokht  Nask  ;  the  Afrin-i 
Paighambar  Zaratusht  and  Vishtasp  Yasht. 

These  four  texts  conclude  the  collection  of  all  the  Yashts 
extant,  in  Westergaard's  edition. 

In  the  first  fragment  of  the  Hddohlit  Nask,  the  praise  of 
Ashem  or  righteousness  is  recommended  by  Ahuramazda 
to  Zarathushtra  as  one  of  the  most  meritorious  works.  By 
this  praise  we  can  understand  only  the  recital  of  the  sacred 
formula,  ^ s/iC7M  vohu,  which  is  called,  in  Pahlavi,  "the  praise 
of  righteousness."  The  larger  or  smaller  amount  of  merit, 
resulting  from  repeating  this  prayer,  depends  on  the  time 
and  occasion  when  it  is  done.  Thus,  for  instance,  the 
merit  is  far  greater  if  the  praise  is  uttered  at  night  than  if 
uttered  in  the  day-time. 

The  second  fragment  treats  of  the  fate  of  the  soul  imme- 
diately  after  death,  till  it  reaches  either  heaven  or  hell  on 

^  The  Dasturs  are  of  opinion,  that     Mithra  at  the  head  of  the  Devas,  as 
this     constellation    is    the     weapon     stated  in  the  Khurshed  Yasht. 
{vazra)  which  is  constantly  aimed  by 


2i8  TIFO  FRAGMENTS  OF 

the  fourth  morning  (inclusive  of  the  day  of  death),  accord- 
ing as  its  good  words,  or  its  sins,  have  preponderated  during 
life.  The  following  is  a  translation  of  these  fragments  : — 
Yt.  xxi.  I.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda:  0  Ahura- 
mazda  !  most  munificent  spirit,  creator  of  the  settlements 
supplied  with  creatures,  righteous  one  !  in  whom  ^  alone  is 
thy  word,  the  enunciation  of  all  good,  of  all  that  is  of 
rightful  origin ! 

2.  Ahuramazda  answered  him  :  In  the  Ashem-reciter^^ 
0  Zarothushtra! 

3.  Whoever  recites  the  Ashem,  with  believing  inquiry 
(rememhrance)  in  his  mind  for  the  continuance  of  life,  he 
praises  me  who  am  Ahuramazda,  he  praises  the  water,  he 
praises  the  earth,  he  praises  the  cattle,  he  praises  the  trees, 
he  praises  all  good,  created  by  Mazda,  that  is  of  rightful 
origin. 

4.  For  this  saying,  0  Zarathushtra!  being  recited  cor- 
rectly (in  addition)  to  the  saying  Ahuna-vairya  if  out- 
spoken, is  for  strength  and  victory  in  the  soul  and  religion 
so  benefited. 

5.  For  one  recital  of  the  Ashem,  or  one  eulogy  of  a 
righteous  man,  is  worth,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  a  hun- 
dred sleep- (prayers),  a  thousand  (prayers)  when  eating 
meat,  a  myriad  (of  prayers)  for  the  conception  of  bodies 
occurring  in  the  primary  existence. 

6.  What  is  the  one  recital  of  the  Ashem  which  is  worth 
ten  of  the  other  recitals  of  the  Ashem  in  greatness  and 
goodness  and  excellence  ? 

7.  Ahuramazda  answered  him:  That,  indeed,  0  right- 
eous Zarathushtra !  which  a  man  recites  as  the  Ashem  for 
Haurvatad  and  Amereta^  when  eating,  praising  good 
thoughts  and  good  words  and  good  dgeds,  renouncing  evil 
tliouQ-hts  and  evil  words  and  evil  deeds, 

8.  What  is  the  one  recital  of  the  Ashem  which  is  worth 

1  Eeading  kahmya,   -which   in  the         2  ^j^gjjj.g^^;^^  taken  here  as  a  loca- 
Avesta  cliaVacter  is  very  like  Icahmui    tive,  seems  to  be  a  genitive, 
the  form  given  in  all  the  manuscripts. 


THE  HADOKHT  NASK.  219 

a  hundred  of  the  other  recitals  of  the  Ashem  in  greatness 
and  goodness  and  excellence  ? 

9.  Almramazda  answered  him:  That,  indeed,  0  right- 
eous Zarathushtra  !  which  a  man  recites  as  the  Ashem 
after  swallowdng  of  the  out-squeezed  Homa,  praising  good 
thoughts,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  7]. 

10.  What  is  the  one  recital  of  the  Ashem  which  is  worth 
a  thousand  of  the  other  recitals  of  the  Ashem  in  greatness 
and  goodness  and  excellence  ? 

11.  Ahuramazda  answered  him:  That,  indeed,  0  right- 
eous Zarathushtra  !  which  a  man  recites  as  the  Ashem, 
starting  np  from  sleep  and  going  to  sleep  again,  praising 
good  thoughts,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  7]. 

12.  What  is  the  one  recital  of  the  Ashem  which  is  worth 
a  myriad  of  the  other  recitals  of  the  Ashem  in  greatness 
and  goodness  and  excellence  ? 

13.  Ahuramazda  answered  him:  That,  indeed,  0  right- 
eous Zarathushtra!  which  a  man  recites  as  the  Ashem, 
awaking  and  rising  from  sleep,  praising  good  thoughts,  &c. 
[as  in  ver.  7]. 

14.  What  is  the  one  recital  of  the  Ashem  which  is  worth 
the  w^hole  region  of  Qaniratha,  with  cattle  and  with  wealth 
in  humankind,!  in  greatness  and  goodness  and  excellence  ? 

15.  Ahuramazda  answered  him:  That,  indeed,  0  right- 
eous Zarathushtra !  which  a  man  recites  as  the  Ashem  at 
the  extreme  end  of  life,  praising  good  thoughts  and  good 
words  and  good  deeds,  renouncing  all  evil  thoughts  and 
evil  words  and  evil  deeds. 

16.  What  is  the  one  recital  of  the  Ashem  which  is  worth 
all  this  which  is  in  the  earth  and  in  the  sky,  and  this  earth, 
and  those  luminaries,  and  all  good  things  created  by  Mazda 
(and)  of  rightful  origin  ? 

17.  Ahuramazda  answered  him:  That,  indeed,  0  right- 
eous Zarathushtra !  when  one  forsakes  evil  thoughts  and 
evil  words  and  evil  deeds. 

Yt.  xxii.  I.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda :  0  Ahura- 

1  Or  ijerhaps  "  witli  chiefs  among  men." 


220  TIVO  FRAGMENTS  OF 

mazda !  most  munificent  spirit,  creator  of  tlie  settlements 
supplied  with  creatures,  righteous  one !  when  a  righteous 
man  passes  away,  where  dwells  his  soul  that  night  ? 

2.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  It  sits  down  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  head,  chanting  the  Gatha  Ushtavaiti,  imploring 
blessedness  (thus) :  Blessed  is  he,  blessed  is  every  one  to 
whom  Ahuramazda,  ruling  by  his  own  will,  shall  grant  "I 
(the  two  everlasting  powers).  That'  night  the  soul  experi- 
ences as  much  of  pleasure  as  all  that  which  (it  had)  as  a 
living  existence  {i.e.,  when  living  in  this  world). 

3.  Where  dwells  his  soul  the  second  night  ? 

4.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  &c.  [as  in  ver.  2].  That 
night,  too,  (the  soul  perceives)  as  much  of  j)leasure,  &c.  [as 
in  ver.  2]. 

5.  Where  dwells  his  soul  also  the  third  night? 

6.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  &c.  [as  in  ver.  2].  And  that 
night,  too,  (the  soul  perceives)  as  much  of  pleasure,  &c.  [as 
in  ver.  2]. 

7.  On  the  passing  away  of  the  third  night,  as  the  dawn 
appears,  the  soul  of  the  righteous  man  appears,  passing 
through  plants  and  perfumes.  To  him  there  seems  a  wind 
blowing  forth  from  the  more  southern  side,  from  the  more 
southern  quarters,  a  sweet  scent  more  sweet-scented  than 
other  winds. 

8.  Then,  inhaling  that  wind  with  the  nose,  the  soul  of 
the  righteous  man  considers  :  Whence  blows  the  wind,  the 
most  sweet-scented  wind  which  I  have  ever  inhaled  with 
the  nostrils  ? 

9.  Advancing  with  this  wind  there  appears  to  him  what 
is  his  own  religion  {i.e.,  religious  merit),  in  the  shape  of  a 
beautiful  maiden,  brilliant,  white -armed,  strong,  well- 
grown,  erect,  tall,  high-bosomed,  graceful,  noble,  with  a 
dazzling  face,2  of  fifteen  years,  with  a  body  as  beautiful  in 
(its)  limbs  (lit.  growths)  as  the  most  beautiful  of  creatures. 

1  These  phrases  constitute  the  first  two  lines  of  the  Gatha  Ushtavaiti. 
See  p.  155. 
-  Or  "  of  brilliant  origin." 


THE  HADOKHT  NASK.  221 

10.  Then  the  soul  of  the  righteous  man  spoke  to  her, 
aslcinc^ :  AYhat  maiden  art  thou  whom  I  have  thus  seen  as 
yet  the  most  beautiful  of  maidens  in  form  ? 

11.  Then  answered  him  his  own  religion:  I  am,  0 
youth  !  thy  good  thoughts,  good  words,  good  deeds,  (and) 
good  religion,  who  (am)  thy  own  religion  in  thy  own  self. 
Every  one  has  loved  thee  for  such  greatness  and  goodness 
and  beauty  and  perfulne  and  triumph  and  resistance  to 
foes,  as  thou  appearest  to  me. 

12.  Thou  hast  loved  me,  0  youth!  the  good  thoughts, 
good  words,  good  deeds,  (and)  good  religion,  with  such 
greatness,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  11]  as  I  appear  to  thee. 

13.  When  thou  chancedst  to  see  another  performing 
burning  (of  the  dead)  and  idol-worship,  and  causing  op- 
pression, and  cutting  down  trees,  then  thou  wouldst  sit 
down,  chanting  the  Gathas,  and  consecrating  the  good 
waters  and  the  fire  of  Ahuramazda,  and  extolling  the 
righteous  man  coming  from  near  and  far. 

14.  Then  (thou  madest)  me  being  beloved,  more  beloved, 
(me)  being  beautiful,  more  beautiful,  (me)  being  desirable, 
more  desirable,  (me)  sitting  in  a  high  place  thou  wouldst 
seat  in  a  still  higher  place,  through  this  good  thought, 
through  this  good  word,  through  this  good  deed.  Then 
men  afterwards  worship  me,  Ahuramazda,  the  long-wor- 
shipped and  conversed-with. 

15.  The  soul  of  the  righteous  man  first  advanced  with  a 
step  he  placed  upon  Humata  (good  thought) ;  the  soul  of 
the  righteous  man  secondly  advanced  with  a  step  he  placed 
upon  Hiikhta  (good  word) ;  the  soul  of  the  righteous  man 
thirdly  advanced  with  a  step  he  placed  upon  Huvarshta 
(good  action) ;  the  soul  of  the  righteous  man  fourthly  ad- 
vanced with  a  step  he  placed  on  the  eternal  luminaries.^ 

16.  To  him  spake  a  righteous  one,  previously  deceased, 
asking :  How,  0  righteous  one !  didst  thou  pass  away  ? 
how,  0  righteous  one!  didst  thou  come  away  from  the 
dwellings  supplied  with  cattle,  and  from  the  procreative 

i  These  four  stages  are  the  four  grades  in  heaven. 


2C2  THE  HADOK^T  NASK. 

birds  ?  from  tlie  material  life  to  the  spiritual  life  ?  from  tlie 
perishable  life  to  the  imperishable  life  ?  how  long  was  it 
for  thee  in  the  blessing  ?  l 

17.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Ask  not  him  whom  thou 
askest,  who  has  come  along  the  frightful,  deadly,  destruc- 
tive path  which  is  the  separation  of  the  body  and  soul. 

18.  Of  the  nourishments  brought  to  him  (is  some)  of  the 
Zaremaya  oil ;  2  that  is  the  food,  after  decease,  of  a  youth 
of  good  thoughts,  of  good  words,  of  good  deeds,  of  good 
religion ;  that  is  the  food,  after  decease,  for  a  woman  of 
very  good  thoughts,  of  very  good  words,  of  very  good  deeds, 
well-instructed,  ruled  by  a  master,  (and)  righteous. 

19.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda:  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i] 
when  a  wicked  man  dies  where  dwells  his  soul  that  niuht  ?• 

20.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  There,  indeed,  0  righteous 
Zarathushtra !  in  the  vicinity  of  the  head  it  runs  about, 
chanting  the  Gatha  Kam-nemoi-zam,  the  saying :  To 
what  laud  shall  I  turn  ?  whither  shall  I  00  in  turning  ?  3 
That  night  the  soul  experiences  as  much  of  discomfort  as 
all  that  which  (it  had)  as  a  living  existence  {i.e.,  when 
living  in  the  world). 

21.  22.  Where  dwells  his  soul  the  second  night  ?  &c.  [as 
in  ver.  20]. 

23,  24.  Where  dwells  his  soul  the  third  night  ?  &c.  [as 
in  ver.  20]. 

25.  On  the  passing  away  of  the  third  night,  0  righteous 
Zarathushtra !  as  the  dawn  appears,  the  soul  of  the  wicked 
man  appears,  passing  through  terrors  and  stenches.  To  him 
there  seems  a  wind  blowing  forth  from  the  more  northern 
side,  from  the  more  northern  quarters,  a  stench  more  foul- 
smelling  than  other  winds. 

26.  Then,  inhaling  that  wind  witli  the  nose,  the  soul  of 

1  That  is,  "how  long  wast  thou  re-  ing  it  the  soul  is  supposed  to  become 
citing  the  Giltha  Ushtavaiti?  "  See  oblivious  of  all  worldly  cares  and  con- 
ver.  2.  cerns,  and  is  thus  prepared  for  eternal 

2  A  cupful  of  this  beverage  is  said  happiness. 

to  be  given,  by  the  archangel  Vohu-  ^  Tliese  phrases  constitute  the  first 
man,  to  the  soul  of  a  righteous  person  line  of  the  fourth  section  (Yas.  xlvi.) 
before  it  euters  paradise.     By  drink-     of  the  Gatha  Ushtavaiti.    See  p.  163. 


AFRIX-I-ZARATUSHT.  223 

tlie  wielded  man  considers :  Whence  blows  the  wind,  the 
most  foul-smelling  wind  which  I  have  ever  inhaled  with 
the  nostrils  ? 

27—33.  [This  passage,  which  must  have  been  the  con- 
verse of  ver.  9-15,  is  omitted  in  all  known  manuscripts  as 
far  as]  the  soul  of  the  wicked  man  fourthly  advanced  with 
a  step  he  placed  on  the  eternal  glooms,^ 

34.  To  him  spake  a  wicked  one,  previously  dead,  asking: 
How,  0  wicked  one !  didst  thou  die  ?  how,  0  wicked  one  ! 
didst  thou  come  away  from  the  dwellings  supplied  with 
cattle,  and  from  the  procreative  birds  ?  from  the  material 
life  to  the  spiritual  life  ?  from  the  perishable  life  to  the 
imperishable  life  ?  how  long  was  thy  distress  ? 

35.  Angro-mainyush  shouted  :  Ask  not  him  whom  thou 
askest,  who  has  come  along  the  frightful,  deadly,  destruc- 
tive path  which  is  the  separation  of  the  body  and  soul. 

36.  Of  the  nourishments  brought  to  him  (are  some)  from 
poison  and  poisonous  stench ;  that  is  the  food,  after  death, 
of  a  youth  of  evil  thoughts,  of  evil  words,  of  evil  deeds,  of 
evil  religion;  that  is' the  food,  after  death,  for  a  harlot  of 
very  evil  thoughts,  of  very  evil  words,  of  very  evil  deeds, 
ill-instructed,  not  ruled  by  a  master,  (and)  wicked.2 

The  Afrin-i  Paigliavibar-Zaratusht  contains  the  blessing, 
by  which  the  high  priest  (Zarathushtra)  of  the  Iranians 
used  to  bless  a  governor  or  king.  It  is  said  to  have  been 
bestowed  by  Spitama  Zarathushtra  on  his  royal  friend 
Kavi  Vishtaspa.  The  high  priest  wishes  the  king  to  have 
children,  to  be  as  victorious  as  the  hero  Fredun,  as  brilliant 
as  Kai  Kaus,  as  radiant  as  the  sun,  as  shining  as  the  moon, 
as  just  as  the  angel  of  justice  himself,  as  free  from  disease 
and  death  as  Kai  Khusro ;  and  that,  hereafter,  he  (the 
blessed)  may  enjoy  the  happy  life  of  the  blessed  in  the 


1  This  is  the    fourth    and  lowest        2  The  remaiuing  sentences,  append- 
grade  in  hell ;  the  first  three  grades     ed  in  "Westergaard's  edition,  do  not 
being  dushmata,  "  evil  thought,"  duz-     belong  to  the  Hadokht  Nask. 
JiUkhta,     "evil    word,"     and    duzh- 
varshta,  "  evil  deed." 


224  NYAYISH,  AFRINGANS,  ETC. 

land  of  light  and  splendour.     The  blessing  concludes  by 
the  words  "  so  it  shall  happen  i  as  I  bless  you." 

The  Vishtdsp  Yasht,  the  first  chapter  of  which  is  partly 
identical  with  the  preceding  text,  is  so  corrupt  in  its 
grammatical  forms  that  we  may  refrain  from  examining 
its  contents,  which,  besides,  do  not  appear  to  be  particu- 
larly interesting.  It  is  divided  into  eight  chapters,  of 
which  the  last  is  nearly  identical  with  part  of  the  second 
fragment  of  the  Hadokht  ISTask  (Yt.  xxii.  1-18) ;  but  the 
whole  composition  seems  to  be  of  comparatively  late  date. 

XIII. — SHORTER  TEXTS  (NYAYISH,  AFRINGANS, 
GAHS,  SIROZAH). 

These  writings,  which  are  comparatively  very  short, 
contain  the  prayers  most  commonly  used  by  the  Parsis 
nowadays ;  but  their  contents,  which  are  all  taken  from 
other  parts  of  the  Zend-Avesta  (chiefly  from  the  Yasna 
and  Yashts),  are  of  no  particular  interest  either  for  the 
history  of  Avesta  literature,  or  for  that  of  the  Parsi 
relicrion. 

The  five  Nydyishes  or  praises  are  devoted  to  the  Sun 
(khurshed),  the  Angel  of  the  sun  {Mithra,  ]\Iihir),  the 
Moon  (mah).  Waters  (aban),  and  Eire  (atash).  The  prayers 
addressed  to  the  Sun  and  Mithra,  are  to  be  repeated  thrice 
every  day  by  every  pious  Parsi.  Habitual  neglect  of  this 
prevents  the  soul  from  passing  the  bridge  Cliinvad  after 
death.  Thrice  every  month  the  praise  addressed  to  the 
moon  is  absolutely  necessary.  The  repetition  of  the  praise 
of  the  waters  and  fire  is  meritorious,  but  not  so  indis- 
pensable as  that  of  the  three  other  ISTyayishes. 

Afringdns  are  blessings  which  are  to  be  recited  over  a 
meal  consisting  of  wine,  milk,  bread,  and  fruits,  to  which 
an  angel  or  the  spirit  of  a  deceased  person  is  invited, 
and  in  whose  honour  the  meal  is  prepared.     After  the 


^  Atha  jamyud  in  the  Avesta  ;  this  phrase  corresponds  to  our  amen  at  the 
end  of  prayers  and  blessings. 


VENDIDAD. 


225 


consecration  (which  only  a  priest  can  perform)  is  over,  the 
meal  is  eaten  by  those  who  are  present. 

The  performance  of  these  Afringans  is  required  of  every 
pious  Parsi  at  certain  fixed  times  during  the  year.  These 
are  the  six  Gahanbars,  each  lasting  for  five  days  (at  the 
six  original  seasons  of  the  year),  for  which  the  Afringdn- 
Gahanbdr  is  intended ;  the  five  Gatha  days  (the  five  last 
days  of  the  year),  during  which  the  Afringdn  Gdtlia  must 
he  used ;  and  lastly,  the  third  day  (Ardibahisht)  of  the 
first  month  (Fravardin)  in  the  year,  at  wliich  the  perform- 
ance oi  Afringdn  Ptapithioiri,  devoted  to  the  s^^irit  presiding 
over  the  southern  quarter  (who  is  the  guardian  of  the  path 
to  paradise),  is  enjoined  to  every  Parsi  whose  soul  wants 
to  pass  the  great  bridge  Chinvad  after  death. 

The  five  Gdhs  are  the  prayers  which  are  devoted  to  the 
several  angels  who  preside  over  the  five  watches,  into 
which  the  day  and  night  are  divided  (as  detailed  above  in 
the  note  on  p.  159).  These  prayers  must  be  recited  every 
day  at  their  respective  times. 

The  Sirozah,  referring  to  the  thirty  days,  is  extant  in 
two  forms.  It  is  nothing  but  a  calendar  enumeratincr  tlie 
names  and  attributes  of  the  thirty  spiritual  beings,  each  of 
whom  is  supposed  to  preside  over  one  of  the  thirty  days 
of  the  month,  and  by  whose  names  the  days  are  called. 
It  is  chiefly  recited  on  the  thirtieth  day  after  a  man's 
death. 

XI¥. — VENDIDAD. 

The  Yendidad,!  which  is  the  code  of  the  religious,  civil, 
and  criminal  laws  of  the  ancient  Iranians,  consists,  in  its 
present  state,  of  tw^enty-two  chapters,  commonly  called 
far  gar  ds  (exactly  corresponding  to  the  word  pericape),  i.e., 
sections.  The  style  of  its  constituent  parts  is  too  varied 
to  admit  of  ascribing  it  to  a  single  author.     Some  parts  are 

1  This  name  is  a  corruption  of  vt-     their  influence.       In    Pahlavi    it  is 

daevo-ddtevi,  "  what  is  given  against     usually  translated  literally  by  javU- 
the  demons,"  i.e.,   to  guard  against     shMd-ddd. 

P 


226  VENDIDAD. 

evidently  very  old,  and  might  be  traced  to  the  first  cen- 
turies subsequent  to  the  prophet ;  but  the  greater  bulk  of 
the  work  contains  (like  the  Talmud)  too  minute  a  descrip- 
tion of  certain  ceremonies  and  observances  to  allow  a 
modern  critic  to  trace  it  to  the  prophet,  or  even  to  one  of 
his  disciples.  The  Vendidad  as  a  whole  (some  of  its  parts 
seem  to  be  lost,  especially  those  containing  the  original 
texts,  or  the  Avesta,  of  the  old  laws)  is  apparently  the 
joint  work  of  the  Zarathushtras,  or  high-priests,  of  the 
ancient  Iranians  during  the  period  of  several  centuries. 
They  started  with  old  sayings  and  laws  (Avesta),  which 
must  partially  have  descended  from  the  prophet  himself,^ 
and  interpreted  them  in  various  ways,  often  contradicting 
each  other.  These  interpretations,  the  so-called  Zend, 
became  in  the  course  of  time  as  authoritative  as  the  Avesta, 
or  the  original  text,  of  the  scripture  itself,  and  in  many 
cases,  seem  to  have  superseded  it.  This  Zend  was  then 
capable  of  further  explanation,  which  was  less  authori- 
tative and  went  by  the  name  "  Pazand."  That  we  can 
actually  discover  these  three  different  stages  in  the  present 
Vendiclad,  the  attentive  reader  will  learn  from  a  perusal  of 
the  following  pages,  where  they  will  be  separated  from 
each  other  as  much  as  possible. 

The  Vendidad  may,  as  to  its  contents,  be  divided  into 
three  parts.  The  first  (fargard  i.-iii.)  is  only  introductory, 
and  formed  very  likely  part  of  a  very  ancient  historical  or 
legendary  work  of  a  similar  kind  to  the  Shahnamah.  It 
contains  an  enumeration  of  sixteen  Aryan  countries,  over 
which  the  Zoroastrian  religion  was  spread  (farg.  i.),  the 
legends  of  Iving  Yima  (farg.  ii.),  and  strong  recommenda- 
tions of  agriculture  as  the  most  useful  and  meritorious 
work  (farg.  iii.).  The  second  part  (farg.  iv.-xvii),  forming 
the  oToundwork  of  the  Vendidad,  treats  of  laws,  ceremonies, 
and  observances,  witliout  keeping  to  any  strict  order.  The 
third  part  (farg.  xviii.-xxii.)  is  apparently  an  appendix 
treating  of  various  subjects.     Several  extracts  from  this 

1  Compare  for  instance  Vend.  iv.  with  Yas.  xlvi.  5  (see  p.  164). 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  I.  227 

text  are  here  translated,  and  a  summary  is  given  of  the 
contents  of  the  remainder. 

I.  The  First  Fargard  op  the  Vendidad. 
Tlu  First  Sixteen  Settlements  of  the  Iranians. 


A  vesta. 
I.  Ahuramazda  said  to  Spitama  Zarathushtra  :  I  created, 
0  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  a  delightful  spot  (which  had 
been  previously)  nowhere  habitable;  for  if  I  had  not 
created,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  a  delightful  spot  (which 
had  been  previously)  nowhere  habitable,  all  earthly  life 
would  have  poured  forth  towards  Airyana-vaejo  (the 
earthly  paradise).! 

3.  As  the  first  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I,  who  am 
Ahuramazda,  produced  Airyana-vaejo  of  good  capability. 
Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro-mainyush,  the 
deadly,  formed  a  mighty  serpent  and  frost  caused  by  the 
Devas. 

Zend. 

4.  Ten  months  of  winter  are  there,  two  of  summer; 2 
and  these  (the  latter)  are  cold  as  to  water,  cold  as  to  earth, 
cold  as  to  plants ;  3  then,  as  the  snow  falls  around,  then 
is  the  direst  disaster. 

A  vesta. 

5.  As  the  second  best  of  regions*  and  countries,  I,  who 
am   Ahuramazda,   produced    Gau,   in  which    Sughdha  is 

1  The  disconnected  phrases  which  "and  .afterwards  also  hapta  henti 
constitute  ver.  2  are  evidently  frag-  kdmin6muonhd,2}a7lckazai/ana {seven 
ments  of  an  old  Avesta  commentary,  are  the  summer  months,  five  the  win- 
either  quoted  by  the  Pahlavi  trans-  ter)  is  declared." 

lator,  or  left  untranslated  by  him,  ^  The  iJilimae  adhazimahe  maidhtm, 
and  must  be  read  as  portions  of  the  adha  zimahe  zaredhaem  (then  is  mid- 
commentary,  not  as  part  of  the  text,  winter,  then  is  the  heart  of  winter), 
The  Pahlavi  commentary,  which  con-  not  being  translated  by  the  Pahlavi 
tains  these  Avesta  phrases,  is  rather  commentator,  appears  to  he  merely 
obscure,  but  evidently  refers  to  the  quoted  by  him  from  some  older 
general  arrangement  of  the  after  part  Avesta  commentary, 
of  the  fargard,  as  well  as  to  the  *  That  is,  "second  of  the  best 
details  of  the  first  sentence.  regions." 

2  The    Pahlavi    translator    adds : 


228  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  I. 

situated.  Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro- 
mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  a  pestilence  ^  which  is  fatal 
to  cattle  frreat  and  small. 

6.  As  the  third  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I,  who 
am  Ahuramazda,  produced  Mourn  (Marv),  the  strong,  the 
righteous.  Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro- 
mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  war  and  pillage. 

7.  As  the  fourth  best  of  regions  and  coimtries,  I,  who 
am  Ahuramazda,  produced  fortunate  Bakhdhi  (Bactria), 
with  the  lofty  banner.  Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it, 
Angro-mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  buzzing  insects  and 
poisonous  plants. 

8.  As  the  fifth  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I,  who  am 
Ahuramazda,  produced  Nisai  (Mssea),  [(Zend)  which  is 
between  Mouru  and  Bakhdhi].  Thereupon,  as  an  opposi- 
tion to  it,  Angro-mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  the  curse 
of  unbelief. 

9.  As  the  sixth  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I,  who 
am  Ahuramazda,  produced  Haroyu  (Herat),  the  water- 
diffusing.  2  Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro- 
mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  hail  and  poverty. 

I  o.  As  the  seventh  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I,  who 
am  Ahuramazda,  produced  Vaekereta,3  in  which  Duzhaka 
is  situated.  Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro- 
mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  the  witch  [i^airika,  "  malevo- 
lent fairy  ")  Khnathaiti,  who  attached  herself  to  Keresaspa. 

II.  As  the  eighth  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I,  who 
am  Ahuramazda,  produced  Urva,*  abounding  in  pasture. 
Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro-mainyush,  the 
deadly,  formed  the  curse  of  devastation.^ 

1  The     Pahlavi     translation     has  believe   in   their    becoming    purified 

A;iir«l-o  ?)zcr/,  "  a  swarm  of  locusts."  ■  af ter  a  cctain  lapse  of  time.     Herat 

-  The   Pahlavi   translator  calls   it  is   called  Hariva  in    the    cuneiforui 

"  the  village-deserting ;  and  its  village-  inscriptions. 

desertion  is  this,  where  we  keep  the  ^  Probably  Sajasta.n  ;    though  the 

periods  of  nine  nights  and  a  month,  Pahlavi  translator  identifies  it  with 

they  desert  the  house  as  evil,  and  go  Kabul, 

away :"   that  is,  they  deserted  pol-  *  Perhaps  Kabul, 

luted  houses  altogether,  and  did  not  ^  Perhajw  "evil  invasions." 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  I.  229 

12.  As  the  uintli  best  of  regions  and  conntries,  I,  wlio 
am  Alinramazda,  produced  Khnenta/  in  which  Vehrkana 
is  situated.  Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro- 
mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  the  evil,  inexpiable  deeds  of 
p^derastism. 

13.  As  the  tenth  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I,  who 
am  Ahuramazda,  produced  the  fortunate  Haraqaiti.2  Tliere- 
upon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro-mainyush,  the  deadly, 
formed  the  evil,  inexpiable  deeds  of  burying  the  dead. 

14.  As  the  eleventh  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I, 
who  am  Ahuramazda,  produced  Haetumat,^  the  brilliant, 
the  glorious.  Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro- 
mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  evil  sorceries. 

Zend. 

15.  And  this  was  its  essential  token,  this  (its)  essential 
appearance ;  as  wherever  they  attained  the  sorcery  of 
incantation,  then  are  the  worst  sorceries,  then  those  even 
arise  which  are  for  murder  and  wounding  the  heart ;  they 
are  capable  of  any  blights  and  potions.^ 

Avesta. 

16.  As  the  twelfth  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I,  who 
am  Ahuramazda,  produced  Eagha  with  the  three  races.5 
Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro-mainyush,  the 
deadly,  formed  the  curse  of  over-scepticism. 

17.  As  the  thirteenth  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I, 

^  Possibly  Kandahar.  into  Pahlavi,  states  that  'sorcery  is 

-  The  Harauvati  of  the  cuneiform  '  this,  that   although  they  desire  it 

inscriptions,    and   Arachosia    of    the  '  not,  yet  it  happens,  and  then  it  is 

classics.  '  said  that  it  is  in  a  way  not  allow- 

^  The  modern  Hilmand,  and  Ety-  '  able  ;'   &c.    [as    iu   ver.    15   in   the 

mander  of  the  classics.  text]. 

■*  These  phrases  are  evidently  the  5  'j^jjg  Pahlavi  explains   the    three 

remains  of  an  old  Zend  in  the  Avesta  racesasthe  three  original  clisses  of  the 

language,  the  first  portion  of  which  community  :    the    priests,     warriors, 

is   given    by   the   Pahlavi   translator  and  husbandmen.     The  extra  phrase 

only  in  Pahlavi,  while  he  gives  these  vaedhanho  noid  uzoish  is  to  be  taken 

phrases  in  both  languages.     This  old  probably  in  connection  with  the  end 

Zend,  or  commentary,  as  translated  of  the  Pahlavi  commentary. 


230  VENDWAD,  FARGARD  I. 

who  am  Ahuramazcla,  produced  Chakhra,  the  strong,  the 
righteous.  Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro- 
mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  the  evil,  inexpiable  deeds  of 
burning  the  dead. 

1 8.  As  the  fourteenth  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I, 
who  am  Ahuramazda,  produced  Varena,  which  is  four- 
cornered  ;  1  at  which  was  born  Thraetaona  (Fredun),  the 
slayer  of  the  destructive  serpent  (Azlii-Dahak).  There- 
upon, as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro-mainyush,  the  deadly, 
formed  untimely  menstruations,  and  non- Aryan  plagues  of 
the  country. 2 

19.  As  the  fifteenth  best  of  regions  and  countries,  I, 
who  am  Ahuramazda,  produced  (the  land)  of  the  seven 
rivers  (India).3  Thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it,  Angro- 
mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  untimely  menstruations,  and 
irregular  fever. 

20.  As  the  sixteenth  best  of  regions  and  countries, 
I,  who  am  Ahuramazda,  produced  those  who  dwell 
without  ramparts  on  the  sea-coast.  Thereupon,  as  an 
opposition  to  it,  Angro-mainyush,  the  deadly,  formed  frost 
caused  by  the  Devas,  and  hoar-frost  as  a  covering  of  the 
land. 

Zend. 

21.  There  are  also  other  fortunate  regions  and  countries, 
valleys  and  hills,  and  extensive  plains. 

2.  The  Second  Fargaud. 
{Yima.)  or  Jamshed,  the  King  of  the  Golden  Age.) 

Avcsta. 
1.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda:    0   Ahuramazda! 

''  Varena  is  probably  Ghilan  ;  bat  Indus  country,  or  India.      Tlie  ad- 

tbePalilavi  translator  states  that  some  ditional    phrase:     hacha     vskastara 

say  it  is  Kirman,    and  that  it   was  Hindva  avi    daoshatarem    Hindum, 

called  four-cornered  because   it   had  "from  the  eastern  (lit.  more  morn- 

either  four  roads,  or  four  gates.  ing)  Hindu  to  the  western  (lit.  more 

"  Perhaps  "  non- Aryan  invasions  of  evening)  Hindu,"  is  merely  an  Avesta 

the  country."  phrase  quoted  by  the  Pahlavi  traus- 

3  Hapta  Hindu  is  the  sapta-sind-  lator. 
Lavas  of  the  Vedas,  a  name  of  the 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  II.  231 

most  munificent  Spirit,  creator  of  tlie  settlements  supplied 
with  creatures,  righteous  one !  with  what  man  didst  thou, 
who  art  Ahuramazda,  first  converse,  besides  me,  who  am 
Zarathushtra  {i.e.,  before  me)  ?  [(Pazand)  to  whom  didst 
thou  teach  the  Ahuryan,  Zoroastrian  faith  ?] 

2.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  With  Yima,  the  fortunate, 
the  rich  in  flocks,  0  righteous  Zarathushtra !  with  him  I, 
who  am  Ahuramazda,  conversed  first  among  men,  besides 
thee  {i.e.,  before  thee),  who  art  Zarathushtra.  [(Pazand) 
to  him  I  taught  the  Ahuryan,  Zoroastrian  faith.] 

3.  Tlien  I  said  to  him,  0  Zarathushtra !  I,  who  am 
Ahuramazda:  Become,  0  fortunate  Yima  .Vivangh ana! 
my  promulgator  and  bearer  of  the  faith  (the  Zoroastrian 
religion).  Then  he,  the  fortunate  Yima,  answered  me,  0 
Zarathushtra  !  Neither  am  I  fit,  nor  known,  as  promul- 
gator and  bearer  of  the  faith. 

4.  Then  I  said  to  him,  0  Zarathushtra !  I,  who  am 
Ahuramazda  :  If  thou,  0  Yima !  wilt  not  become  my  pro- 
mulgator and  bearer  of  the  faith,  then  enclose  my  settle- 
ments ;  then  thou  shalt  become  the  conservator  and  the 
herdsman  and  the  protector  of  my  settlements. 

5.  Then  he,  the  fortunate  Yima,  answered  me,  0  Zara- 
thushtra !  I  will  enclose  l  thy  settlements  ;  I  will  become 
the  conservator  and  the  herdsman  and  the  protector  of 
thy  settlements ;  in  my  empire  there  shall  be  no  cold 
wind  nor  hot,  no  fog,  no  death.2 

7.  Then  I,  who  am  Ahuramazda,  brought  forth  his  im- 
plements, a  golden  sword  3  and  a  goad  decorated  with 
gold.     Yima  is  to  bear  the  royal  dignity. 

8.  Then  the  sway  was  given  to  Yima  for  three  hundred 
winters  {i.e.,  years).     Then  his  earth  was  to  be  filled  with 

1  Or  "enlarge,  extend."  ^  In  Palilavi  s?2Wi--7;d ;««?)£?,  "  Lav- 

2  The  phrases  which  constitute  ver.  ing  holes,  a  sieve,"  which  supports 
6  are  merely  Avesta  jiassages  quoted  the  view  that  SM/?'a=Sans.  shitrpa, 
by  the  Pahlavi  commentator  in  sup-  "winnowing  tray."  A  ploughshare 
port  of  his  statements,  and  form  no  would  be  sulak  (not  sUluk)  in  Pahlavi. 
part  of  the  text. 


232  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  II. 

cattle,  oxen,  men,  dogs,  birds,  and  red  blazing  fires.     They 
found  no  room  therein,  tlie  cattle,  oxen,  and  men. 

9.  Then  I  made  known  to  Yima:  0  fortunate  Yima 
Vtvanghana  !  the  earth  is  to  be  filled  with  the  assemblage 
of  cattle,  oxen,  men,  dogs,  birds,  and  red  blazing  fires. 
They  find  no  room  therein,  the  cattle,  oxen,  and  men. 

10.  Then  Yima  w^ent  forth  towards  the  stars  on  the 
sun's  noonday  path;i  he  touched  this  earth  with  the 
golden  sword,  he  pierced  into  it  with  the  goad,  speaking 
thus  :  Extend,  0  bounteous  Armaiti !  enlarge  and  spread, 
0  bearer  of  cattle  and  oxen  and  men  ! 

11.  Then  Yima  made  the  earth  expand  herself  by  one- 
third  larger  than  she  was  before;  there  the  cattle  and 
oxen  and  men  walk  according  to  their  own  will  and 
pleasure,  [(Pazand)  just  as  it  is  their  pleasure]. 

Zend. 

12-15.  Then  the  sway  was  given  to  Yima  for  six 
hundred  winters,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  8-1 1,  but  substituting 
"  two-thirds"  for  "  one-third  "]. 

16-19,  Then  the  sway  was  given  to  Yima  for  nine 
hundred  winters,  &c,  [as  in  ver.  8-1 1,  but  substituting  "  to 
three-thirds  "  for  "  by  one-third  "],2 

Avcsta. 

21.  An  assembly  w^as  held  with  the  heavenly  angels  by 
Ahuramazda,  the  creator,  the  renowned  in  Airyana-vaejo 
of  good  qualities. 

Zend. 

An  assembly  was  held,  with  the  best  men,  by  Yima,  the 
king,  rich  in  flocks,  the  renowned  in  Airyana-vaejo  of  good 
qualities.  To  this  assembly,  with  .the  heavenly  angels, 
came  Ahuramazda,  the  creator,  the  renowned  in  Airyana- 
vaejo  of  good  qualities. 

^  That    is,    towards    the    south  ;  ^  The  phrases  constituting  ver.  20 

rapitJwa  means  the  time  called  gdli,  are  merely  Avesta  passages  quoted  by 

rapithican,  lasting  from  10  a.m.  to  tlie  Pahlavi  commentator,  and  form 

3  P.M.  no  part  of  the  text. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  II.  233 

Avesta. 
To  this  assembly,  with  the  best  men,  came  Yima,  the 
king,  rich  in  flocks,  the  renowned  in  Airyana-vaejo  of  good 
c[ualities. 

22.  Then  spake  Ahuramazda  to  Yima :  0  fortunate 
Yima  Vivanghana!  unto  the  material  world  the  evil  of 
winter  will  come,  and  consequently  a  strong,  deadly  frost. 

Zend. 
Unto  the  material  world  the  evil  of  winter  will  come ; 
consequently  much  driving  snow  will  fall  on  the  highest 
mountains,  on  the  summits  of  the  heights. 

23.  From  three  places,  0  Yima !  the  cows  should  go 
away,  when  they  are  in  the  most  baneful  of  places  (deserts), 
and  when  they  are  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  and  when 
in  the  gorges  of  the  valleys,  into  the  well-fastened  cottages. 

Avesta. 

24.  Before  the  winter  the  produce  of  this  country  was 
pasturage  ;  the  water  used  before  to  overflow  it,  and  after- 
wards the  melting  of  the  snow,  and  pools  would  occur 
there,  0  Yima  !  in  the  material  world,  where  the  footprints 
of  cattle  and  their  young  would  appear. 

25.  Then  make  that  enclosure  the  length  of  a  riding- 
ground  on  each  of  the  four  sides ;  bring  thither  the  seeds 
of  cattle,  oxen,  men,  dogs,  birds,  and  red  blazing  fires. 

Zend. 

Then  make  that  enclosure  the  length  of  a  riding-ground 
on  each  of  the  four  sides,  for  a  dwelling-place  of  men ;  the 
length  of  a  riding-ground  on  each  of  the  four  sides,  as  a 
field  for  cows  (a  cattle-run). 

Avesta. 

26.  There  collect  the  water  into  a  channel  the  size  of  a 
Hathra;!  there   fix  land-marks  on  a  gold- coloured  spot 

1  A  measure  equivalent  to  a  Farsang  of  one  thousand  footsteps  of  two 
feet ;  see  Bund.  p.  63. 


234  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  11. 

(provided)  with,   imperishable   food ;   there   erect   house? 
(composed  of)  mats  and  poles  and  roofs  and  walls. 

Zend. 

27.  Thither  bring  the  seeds  of  all  men  and  women  who 
are  the  greatest  and  best  and  finest  on  this  earth.  Thither 
bring  the  seeds  of  all  kinds  of  cattle  which  are  the  greatest 
and  best  and  finest  on  this  earth. 

28.  Thither  bring  the  seeds  of  all  plants  which  are  the 
tallest  and  most  odoriferous  on  this  earth.  Thither  brins? 
the  seeds  of  all  foods  which  are  the  most  eatable  and  most 
odoriferous  on  this  earth.  Make  pairs  of  them  unceasingly, 
in  order  that  these  men  may  exist  in  the  enclosures. 

Avesta. 

29.  There  shall  be  no  overbearing,  no  low-spiritedness, 
no  stupidity,  no  violence,  no  poverty,  no  deceit,  no  dwarf- 
ishness,  no  deformity,  no  monstrous  teeth,  no  leprosy 
overspreading  the  body,  nor  any  of  the  other  signs  which 
are  the  badge  of  Angro-mainyush,  and  are  laid  upon  men. 

30.  In  the  uppermost  part  of  the  country  make  nine 
bridges,  in  the  middle  six,  in  the  lowermost  three.  To  the 
bridges  in  the  uppermost  part  bring  the  seeds  of  a  thousand 
men  and  women,  to  those  of  the  middle  part  six  hundred, 
to  those  of  the  lowermost  part  three  hundred ;  and  com- 
pass them  in  the  enclosures  with  the  golden  sword,^  and 
furnish  a  door  to  the  enclosure,  (and)  a  self-lighting  wmdow 
from  the  inside. 

31.  Then  Yima  considered:  How  shall  I  make  the 
enclosure  as  Ahuramazda  told  me  ?  Then  Ahuramazda 
spoke  to  Yima :  0  fortunate'  Yima  Yivanghana !  distend 
this  earth  with  the  heels,  rend  it  with  the  hands,  like  as 
men  now  separate  the  earth  in  cultivating. 

32.  Then  Yima  did  so  as  Ahuramazda  desired;  he  dis- 

^  If  this  implement  be  a  plough  it  enclosure.  If  the  implement  be  a 
^vould  surround  them  with  a  furrow,  winnowing-tray,  they  are  to  be 
but  this  would  not  be  a  very  effectual     covered  over  with  it. 


VENDJDAD,  FARGARD  II.  235 

tended  this  earth  with  the  heels,  he  rent  it  with  the  hands, 
like  as  men  now  separate  the  earth  in  cultivating.! 

33-38.  Then  Yima  made  the  enclosure,  &c.  [correspond- 
ing to  ver.  25-30]. 

Zend. 

39.  Creator  of  the  settlements  supplied  with  creatures, 
righteous  one  !  Which  then  are  those  lights,  0  righteous 
Ahuramazda !  which  shine  there  in  those  enclosures  which 
Yima  made  ? 

40.  Then  spake  Ahuramazda:  Self-created  lights  and 
created  ones.  [(Pazand)  All  the  eternal  lights  shine  up 
above,  all  created  lights  shine  below  from  inside.]  Once 
(a  year)  one  sees  there  the  stars  and  moon  and  sun  rising 
and  setting. 

41.  And  they  think  that  a  day  which  is  a  year.  Every 
forty  years  two  human  beings  are  born  from  two  human 
beings,  [(Pazand)  a  pair,  female  and  male].  So  also  with 
those  which  are  of  the  cattle  species.  Those-  men  enjoy 
the  greatest  happiness  in  these  enclosures  which  Yima 
made. 

42.  Creator  of  the  settlements  supplied  with  creatures, 
righteous  one !  Who  propagated  there  the  Mazdayasnian 
religion  in  these  enclosures  which  Yima  made?  Then 
spake  Ahuramazda :  The  bird  Karshipta,  0  Spitama 
Zarathushtra ! 

43.  Creator  of  the  settlements  supplied  with  creatures, 
righteous  one!  Who  is  their  heavenly  lord  and  earthly 
master  ?  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Urvatad-naro,  0  Zara- 
thushtra !  and  thou  who  art  Zarathushtra. 

3.  The  Third  Fargard, 
(T'/ie  Holiness  of  Agriculture,  Vend,  iii,  24-33.) 


Avcsta. 
24.  For  this  earth  is  not  a  place  which  is  to  lie  long  un- 

1  This  verse  is  found  only  in  the  Vendidad  Sadah,  and  is  probably  an 
addition  made  by  the  Zendist. 


236  VEND  ID  AD,  FARGARD  III. 

cultivated.  She  is  to  be  ploughed  by  the  ploughman,  that 
she  may  be  for  them  (men)  a  habitation  of  a  good  (kind). 
Then  the  beautiful  woman  (the  earth),  who  long  goes 
childless,  so  (produces)  for  them  male  progeny  (bulls)  of  a 
good  (kind). 

Zend. 

25.  Whoever  cultivates  this  earth,  0  Spitama  Zara- 
thushtra !  with  the  left  arm  and  the  right,  with  the  right 
arm  and  the  left,  unto  him  she  bears  fruit ;  in  like  manner 
as  a  loving  man  does  to  (his)  beloved,  she  stretched  on  the 
connubial  couch  [(Pazand)  lying  on  a  place  ^]  brings  forth 
to  him  a  son  [(Pazand)  or  fruit]. 

26.  Whoever  cultivates  this  earth,  0  Spitama  Zara- 
thushtra !  with  the  left  arm  and  the  right,  with  the  right 
arm  and  the  left,  then  speaks  the  earth  to  him :  0  man ! 
who  cultivatest  me  with  the  left  arm  and  the  right,  witli 
the  right  arm  and  the  left,  (27)  I  will,  indeed,  prosper  the 
countries  here,  I  will,  indeed,  come  to  bear  all  nourish- 
ments here ;  [(Pazand)  may  they  (the  fields)  yield  a  full 
crop  besides  barley]. 

28.  Whoever  does  not  cultivate  this  earth,  0  Spitama 
Zarathustra !  with  the  left  arm  and  the  right,  with  the 
right  arm  and  the  left,  then  speaks  the  earth  to  him :  0 
man !  who  dost  not  cultivate  me  with  the  left  arm  and 
the  right,  with  the  right  arm  and  the  left,  (29)  here  thou 
standest,  indeed,  at  another's  door  obtaining  victuals 
[(Pazand)  among  the  beggars],  and  victuals  are  brought  to 
thee,  sitting  outside,  indeed,  in  driblets.  [(Pazand)  They 
are  brought  to  thee  by  those  who  have  abundance  of  goods.] 

30.  Creator,  &c.,  [as  in  ii.  39] :  What  causes  the  growth 
of  the  Mazdayasnian  religion  ?  Then  said  Ahuramazda  : 
Whatever  is  efficacious  in  the  cultivation  of  barley,  0 
Spitama  Zarathushtra ! 

1  The   words  galush   sayamn6  are  amnd.       Vaiitu  evidently  appertains 

an  explanation   of  the  older  phrase  to  tiajT^a,  which  is  defined  as  "a  virtu- 

vantave    slanta  ;   gdtush,     "place,"  ous  woman"  in  the  Farhang-i  Oim- 

explaining     vaiitave,      and     starcia,  kliadfik, 
"stretched,"  corresponding  to  sai/- 


VEND  ID  AD,  FARGARD  III.  237 

31.  Whoever  cultivates  barley,  lie  cultivates  righteous- 
ness, [(Pazand)  he  promotes  the  Mazclayasnian  religion],  he 
extends  this  Mazdayasnian  religion  as  by  a  hundred  resist- 
ances (against  the  demons),  a  thousand  offerings,  ten  thou- 
sand prayer-readings.i 

Axesta. 

32.  When  barley  occurs,^  then  the  demons  hiss ; 
When  thrashing  occurs,  then  the  demons  whine ; 
When  cfriudino;  occurs,  then  the  demons  roar ; 
When  Hour  occurs,  then  the  demons  flee. 

Zend. 

So  the  demons  are  driven  out  from  the  place  [(Pazand] 
in  the  house  for  this  flour] ;  they  shall  burn  their  jaws, 
whereby  it  happens  that  the  greater  number  are  fellow- 
fugitives  when  barley  becomes  plentiful. 

33.  Then  may  he  (the  cultivator),  therefore,  recite  the 
text: 

Avesta. 
There  is  no  strength  in  those  who  do  not  eat, 
Neither  for  vigorous  righteousness, 
Nor  for  vigorous  husbandry, 
Nor  for  vigorous  begetting  of  sons. 
[(Pazand)  For  by  eating  all  living  beings  exist ;  with- 
out eating  they  must  die.] 

4.  The  Foxtrth  Farqard. 
(Civil  and  Criminal  Laws.) 


Avesta. 

I.  Whoever  does  not  retin^n  property  to  the  owner  of 
the  property,  becomes  a  thief  of  the  property,  taking  it  by 

1  Cultivation  of  barley,  or  wheat,  is  1000,    and   10,000  otlier  meritorious 

equivalent,  so  far  as  tlie  destruction  works. 

of  the  bad  creation  (the  duty  of  every  ^  The  original  is  in  metrical  verses, 

Zoroastiiau)    is    concerned,    to   100,  which  contain  even  rhymes. 


238  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  IV. 

force,^  if  lie  seize  for  his  own  out  of  anytliing  of  theirs 
agreed  upon,  whether  by  day  or  by  night. 

Zend. 

2.  Creator  of  the  settlements  supplied  with  creatures, 
righteous  one !  how  many  such  agreements  {mithra)  are 
thine,  who  art  Ahuramazda  ?  Then  said  Ahuramazda  : 
Six,  0  righteous  Zarathushtra !  The  first  by  words,  the 
second  by  offering  the  hand,  the  third  by  (depositing)  the 
value  of  a  sheep,  the  fourth  by  (depositing)  the  value  of 
an  ox,  the  fifth  by  (depositing)  the  value  of  a  man  (slave), 
the  sixth  by  (depositing)  the  value  of  a  district  [(Pazand) 
of  a  well -thriving,  fenced-in,  walled -in,  well- arranged, 
prosperous  district]. 

3,  4.  The  word  makes  the  first  agreement  (promise). 
After  that,  the  offering  of  the  hand  is  marked,  [(Pazand)  the 
offering  of  the  hand  takes  place  after  that  among  friends] ; 
after  that,  that  of  a  sheep's  value  is  marked,  [(Pazand)  that 
of  a  sheep's  value  takes  place  among  friends] ;  after  that, 
that  of  an  ox's  value  is  marked,  [(Pazand)  that  of  an  ox's 
value  takes  place  among  friends] ;  after  that,  that  of  a 
man's  value  is  marked,  [(Pazand)  that  of  a  man's  value 
takes  place  among  friends] ;  after  that,  that  of  a  district's 
value  is  marked,  [(Pazand)  that  of  a  district's  value  takes 
place  among  friends]. 

5.  Creator  of  the  settlements  supplied  with  creatures, 
righteous  one !  What  punishment  has  the  breaker  of  an 
agreement,  made  by  words,  to  undergo  ?  Then  said  Ahu- 
ramazda :  He  has  to  pay  a  fine  of  300  pieces  to  the  next 
kinsmen  (of  the  defrauded  one). 

(The  fine  varies  from  300  to  1000  pieces  ;  the  breaking 
of  the  second  class  of  agreement  is  fined  by  600,  that  of 
the  third  by  700,  that  of  the  fourth  by  800,  that  of  the 
fifth  by  900,  and  that  of  the  sixth  by  1000  pieces  of  atone- 
ment money.) 

^  The  plirasewrt^  net  i'asrtM?)!c7;n»a     translator^  and  forms  no  part  of  tlic 
is    merely    quoted    by    the    Pahlavi     text. 


VENDWAD,  FARGARD  IV.  239 

Fazand. 

II.  Creator  of  tlie  settlements  supplied  with  creatures, 
righteous  one !  Whoever  violates  an  agreement  made  by 
words,  what  is  his  punishment  ?  Then  said  Ahuramazda : 
One  may  give  him  three  hundred  blows  with  a  horse-goad 
[(later  Pazand)  three  hundred  with  a  whip]. 

(According  to  this  Pazand  the  number  of  blows  varies 
from  three  hundred  to  one  thousand,  exactly  in  the  same 
order  as  in  the  Zend  above.) 

Avcsta. 

17.  "When  a  man's  weapon  rises,  that  is  his  attempt  [age- 
repteTn) ;  when  it  assails,  that  is  his  assault  {avaoirishtem) ; 
when  it  penetrates  any  one  with  evil  intention,  that  is  his 
perpetration  (of  manslaughter,  aredush) ;  at  the  fifth  per- 
petration the  man  forfeits  himself  (his  life). 

What  follows  (ver.  18-42)  is  Pazand,  which,  as  to  its 
character,  is  completely  in  accordance  with  the  Pazand  in 
ver.  II- 1 6.  The  Zend  or  old  explanation  of  this  criminal 
law  is  lost,  but  from  this  Pazand  it  may  be  seen  that  the 
distinctions  regarding  the  degree  of  guilt  in  attempted  or 
accomplished  murder,  have  become  in  course  of  time  much 
more  numerous.  In  the  old  text  or  Avesta,  as  quoted 
above  (ver.  17),  there  are  only  three  degrees  distinguished, 
namely,  dgcreptem.,  or  attempt;  avaoirisJdem,  or  assault; 
and  aredush,  or  perpetration.  In  its  Zend  or  commentary 
there  were  probably  more  distinctions  made,  and  different 
degrees  of  punishment  mentioned,  as  we  may  infer  from 
the  Zend  following  ver.  i.  In  this  Avesta  capital  punish- 
ment is  ordered  only  when  aredush  has  been  committed 
five  times.  In  the  Pazand  or  sub-commentary  there  is  a 
detailed  list  of  punishments,  consisting  of  blows  with  a 
horse-goad  or  whip,  varying  from  five  to  two  hundred  in 
number. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  fourth  Pargard  (ver.  44-54),  we 
have  only  Avesta  without  Zend  or  commentary.     This 


240  VENDIDAD,  FARGARDS  V.—XVII. 

Avesta,  wldcli  is  certainly  very  old,  and  refers  apparently 
to  various  subjects,  is  so  very  obscure  in  style  as  to  be  the 
most  difficult  passage  of  the  whole  Vendidad.  In  its  be- 
ginning there  is  an  ancient  law,  enjoining  the  greatest 
friendship  and  equality  among  the  members  of  the  Zoro- 
astrian  community.  It  runs  as  follows  :  '  And  when  men 
'  of  the  same  (Mazdayasnian)  religion  should  come  here, 
'  either  brothers  or  friends,  seeking  a  field,  or  seekinu;  a 
'  wife,  or  seeking  wisdom,  if  they  should  come  seeking  a 
'  field,  they  may  acquire  their  field  here,  if  they  should  come 
'  seeking  a  wife,  you  may  make  some  of  the  women  marry ; 
'  if  they  should  come  seeking  wisdom,  you  may  recite  the 
*  beneficent  texts.' 

5.  The  Fargards  V.-XVIL 

From  the  fifth  to  the  eighth  Fargard,  we  find  very  minute 
and  detailed  precepts  for  the  treatment  of  a  dead  body,  the 
construction  of  Dakhmas  or  "  towers  of  silence,"  and  the 
purification  of  men  or  things  brought  into  contact  with  a 
corpse.  The  idea  pervading  the  whole  is  the  utter  impu- 
rity of  a  dead  body,  and  the  extreme  purity  and  sacred- 
ness  of  earth,  fire,  and  water.  N"o  impure  thing  can, 
therefore,  be  thrown  upon  any  one  of  these  elements,  be- 
cause it  would  spoil  the  good  creation  by  increasing  the 
power  and  influence  of  the  daivas  or  demons,  wlio  take 
possession  of  the  body  as  soon  as  a  man  is  dead.  The 
corpse  is,  therefore,  to  be  carried  on  to  the  barren  top  of  a 
mountain  or  hill,  and  to  be  placed  on  stones  (or  iron  plates), 
and  exposed  to  dogs  and  vultures,  so  as  to  benefit  in  this 
way  the  animals  of  the  good  creation.  A  man  who  touches 
a  dead  body,  the  contagious  impurity  of  which  has  not 
been  previously  checked  by  holding  towards  the  corpse  a 
peculiar  kind  of  dog,^  is  said  to  be  at  once  visited  by  a 

1  Which  is  called  "the   four-eyed  colour  of  the  rest  of  his  body  varies 

dog,"  a  yellow  spot  on  each  of  its  eye-  from  yellow  to  white.    To  his  eyes 

lids  being  considered   an  additional  a  kind  of  magnetic  influence  is   as- 

eye.     He   has   yellow  ears,    and  the  ci-ibed. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARDS  VIII.-IX.  241 

spectre,  representing  death  itself.  This  is  called  druhhsh 
nasush,  "  the  destructive  corruption."  To  get  rid  of  this 
annoyance  he  is  to  be  sprinkled  with  water  on  the  different 
parts  of  his  body,  as  described  with  the  greatest  minute- 
ness in  the  eighth  Farjiard. 

In  the  same  Fargard  (vers.  73-96)  the  preparation  of  the 
sacred  fire  is  described.  Fires  from  sixteen  different  places 
are  required,  which,  -after  having  been  purified  by  praying 
over  them,  must  be  brought  to  one  and  the  same  hearth 
(called  ddityo-gdtush,  now  Dddgdh).  The  fire  "in  which  a 
dead  body  is  being  burnt  is  indispensable ;  although  it  be 
the  most  impure  of  all,i  it  is  believed  to  have  absorbed  the 
fire  (heat  or  electricity)  which  was  in  the  animal  body.  It 
is  called  nasupdka,  and  its  obtainment  and  purification  by 
putting  it  into  a  certain  number  of  holes  called  handareza 
(Persian  anddzah,  "  a  measure "),  which  requires  much 
trouble,  are  more  minutely  described  than  the  acquisition 
of  the  other  fires  (those  of  dyers,  potters,  glassworkers, 
blacksmiths,  bricklayers,  &c.).  The  collective  fire  obtained 
in  this  way  represents  the  essence  of  nature,  the  fluid  per- 
vading the  whole  earth,  the  cause  of  all  growth,  vigour, 
and  splendour,  and  it  is,  therefore,  regarded  with  great 
reverence  by  the  Parsis. 

In  the  ninth  Fargard  there  is  a  very  detailed  description 
of  the  great  purification  ceremony,  called  the  "  Barashnom 
of  nine  nights,"  which  lasts  for  nine  days  (or  rather  nights). 
It  is  intended  for  the  removal  of  any  impurity  whatever, 
and  is  practised  chiefly  by  priests.  The  person  who  has  to 
undergo  the  ceremony  must  drink  the  urine  of  a  cow,  sit 
on  stones  within  the  compass  of  certain  magic  circles,  and 
while  moving  from  one  heap  of  stones  to  another  he  must 
rub  his  body  with  cow's  urine,  then  with  sand,  and  lastly 
wash.it  with  water.  This  custom  has  descended  from  the 
most  ancient  times,  when  a  purifying  and  healing  influence 

1  To  bum  a  dead  body  is,  according  to  the  spirit  of  the  Zoroastrian  law, 
one  of  the  greatest  crimes. 

Q 


242  VENDIDAD,  FARGARDS  X.-XVI. 

was  ascribed  to  the  urine  proceeding  from  so  sacred  an 
animal  as  the  cow  was  to  the  ancient  Aryans.^ 

In  the  tenth  and  eleventh  Fargards  prayers  are  enume- 
rated, which  were  believed  to  have  the  power  of  removing 
the  impurity  caused  by  contact  with  a  dead  body.  All 
these  prayers  are  to  be  found  in  the  older  part  of  the 
Yasna. 

The  twelfth  Fargard  treats  of  the  duration  of  mourning 
for  the  death  of  the  head  of  a  family,  and  of  relations  in 
different  degrees.  For  those  who  die  as  righteous  men  by 
the  law  of  nature  (who  are  called  dahmas)  only  half  as 
much  time  of  mourning  is  required  as  for  those  who  die 
by  their  own  hands,  or  are  executed  (who  are  called  tanu- 
perethas). 

The  thhteenth  and  fourteenth  Fargards  treat  of  dogs  and 
water-dogs  (udra,  "otter"),  which  are  not  to  be  badly 
treated,  wounded,  mutilated,  starved,  or  killed.  Should 
a  man  be  found  guilty  of  such  charges,  he  is  to  be  severely 
punished.  The  killing  of  an  otter  is  especially  regarded  as 
a  horrible  crime,  since  this  animal  is  believed  to  contain 
the  souls  of  a  thousand  male  and  a  thousand  female  dogs. 
A  man  who  commits  this  crime  has  to  receive  ten  thou- 
sand lashes  with  a  horsewhip,  according  to  the  later  inter- 
pretation ;  or  he  must  kill  ten  thousand  animals  of  the  bad 
creation,  such  as  snakes,  mice,  lizards,  frogs,  &c.,  and  carry 
ten  thousand  loads  of  wood  to  the  fire,  &c. 

In  the  fifteenth  Fargard  various  topics  are  treated,  such 
as  the  sins  called  pesho-tanu  (i.e.,  such  actions  as  are  not 
of  themselves  considered  specially  hurtful  or  injurious, 
but  which  may  under  certain  circumstances  cause  damage 
or  injury),  the  crime  of  procuring  abortion  in  the  case  of 
an  illegitimate  child,^  and  the  treatment  of  pregnant  dogs. 
The  whole  sixteenth  Fargard  is  devoted  to  the  treatment 
of  women  at  the  time  of  their  menstruation. 

1  Cow's  urine  was  probably  a  meta-  -  This  is  strictly  probibited,  and  if 

pborical  name  for  "  rain-water"  ori-  it  be  committed,  the  seducer,  the  girl, 

ginally— the  clouds  being  cows  meta-  and  the  nurse,  are  equally  guilty  of 

phorically.  the  murder. 


VENDWAD,  FARGARDS  XVII.-XVIII.  243 

In  the  seventeenth  Fargard  precepts  are  given  how  to 
treat  hair  and  nails  which  have  been  cut.  The  demons 
must  be  prevented  from  using  the  cuttings  for  doing  injury 
to  the  good  creation. 

6. — THE  EIGHTEENTH   FARGARD. 

The  commencement  of  this  Fargard  is  probably  lost,  as 
it  appears  to  begin  now  in  the  middle  of  a  subject ;  and 
its  contents  are  of  a  very  miscellaneous  character,  as  may 
be  seen  from  the  following  translation  :• — 

1.  For  many  a  man — so  said  Ahuramazda:  0  righteous 
Zarathushtra !  wears  another  mouth- veil  1  {penom,  though) 
unclothed  with  religion ;  falsely  he  is  termed  a  fire-priest ; 
thou  shouldst  not  call  him  a  fire-priest, — so  said  Ahura- 
mazda :  0  righteous  Zarathushtra  !  2 

2.  He  carries  another  vermin-killer  3  {khrafstraghna, 
though)  unclothed  with  religion;  falsely  he  is  termed  a 
fire-priest;  thou  shouldst  not  call  him  a  fire-priest, — so 
said  Ahuramazda :  0  righteous  Zarathushtra !  * 

3.  He  carries  another  plant  ^  (as  harsom,  though)  un- 
clothed with  religion;  falsely  he  is  termed  a  fire-priest; 
thou  shouldst  not  call  him  a  fire-priest, — so  said  Ahura- 
mazda :  0  righteous  Zarathushtra  ! 

4.  He  wields  the  deadly  poniard  (for  sacrificing,  though) 
unclothed  with  religion ;  falsely  he  is  termed  a  fire-priest ; 

1  That  is,  not  the  kind  of  mouth-  2  xj^g  g^tra  words  hai-erezu-frath- 

veil  used  by  priests.     The paitiddna,  anhem,  "two  fingers'  breadth,"  are 

"a  putting-on,  a  mouth-veil"  (Pahl.  merely  an  Avesta  quotation,  ma'de  by 

paddin,  Paz.  penCm),  consists  of  two  the  Pahlavi  translator,  with  reference 

pieces  of  white  cotton  cloth,  hanging  to  the  extent  of  the  Penom. 

loosely  from  the  bridge  of  the  nose  to  3  That  is,  not  the  kind   used  by 

at  least  two  inches  below  the  mouth,  priests.     The  krafstraghna  was  some 

and  tied  with  two  strings  at  the  back  implement  that  has  now  gone  out  of 

of  the  head.     It  must  be  worn  by  a  use. 

priest   whenever  he  approaches  the  *  The  two  additional  phrases  are 

sacred  fix-e,  so  as  to  pi-event  his  breath  quoted  by  the  Pahlavi  translator. 

from  contaminating  the  fire.    On  cer-  ^  This  seems  to  refer  to  the  use  of 

tain  occasions  a  layman  has  to  use  a  twigs  of  any  improper  plant  for  the 

sulistitutefor  the  penom  by  screening  sacred  bavsom^ 
his  mouth  and  nose  with  a  portion  of 
his  muslin  shirt. 


244  VENDWAD,  FARGARD  XVIII. 

thou  shouMst  not  call  liim  a  fire-priest, — so  said  Ahura- 
mazda :  0  righteous  Zarathushtra  ! 

5.  Whoever  lies  the  whole  night  through  without  pray- 
ing, without  reciting  (the  Gathas),  without  repeating  (the 
short  prayers),  without  performing  (any  ceremony),  with- 
out studying,  without  teaching,^  in  order  to  acquire  a  soul 
fit  for  the  Chinvad  (bridge),-  falsely  he  is  termed  a  fire- 
priest;  thou  shouldst  not  call  him  a  fire-priest, — so  said 
Ahuramazda :  0  righteous  Zarathushtra  ! 

6.  Thou  shouldst  call  him  the  fire-priest — so  said  Ahura- 
mazda :  0  righteous  Zarathushtra  ! — who,  the  whole  night 
through,  would  interrogate  a  righteous  understanding,  free 
from  anxiety  (or  defect),  fit  for  the  widening  (and)  gratify- 
ing 3  Chinvad  bridge,  (and)  obtaining  the  life,  righteous- 
ness, and  perfection  of  the  best  life  (paradise). 

7.  Inquire,  0  just  one !  of  me  who  am  the  Creator,  the 
most  munificent,  the  wisest,  and  the  readiest  replier  to 
questions ;  so  will  it  be  better  for  thee,  so  wilt  thou  be 
more  beneficent,  if  thou  wilt  inquire  of  me. 

8.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda :  0  Ahuramazda ! 
most  munificent  spirit,  creator  of  the  settlements  supplied 
with  creatures,  righteous  one !  through  what  is  one  a 
criminal  worthy  of  death  ? 

9.  10.  Then  said  Ahuramazda:  By  teaching  an  evil  reli- 
gion, 0  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  Whoever,  during  three 
spring  seasons,  does  not  put  on  the  sacred  thread-girdle 
(kusti),*  does  not  recite  the  Gathas,  does  not  reverence  the 
good  waters,  and  whoever  sets  this  man,^  delivered  into 
my  custody,  again  at  large,  thereby  performs  no  better 


^  Or,  perhaps,  "without  studying  ^  Or,   perhaps,   "assisting,"  "  ser- 

the   accents,    and    without    intoning  viceable." 

them  : "  comp.  Sans,  shikshd.  *  The  Parsis  wear  the  kustt  as  an 

2  That  is,   a  soul  so  good  that  it  indispensable  symbol  of  their  religion ; 

will   find   tlie   Chinvad   bridge   wide  itisformedof  seventy-two  fine  woollen 

enough  to  allow  it  to  pass  over  it  to  threads  twisted  together. 

heaven.     If  the  soul  be  wicked  it  is  *  Who  neglects  his  duties  as  before 

said  to  find  the  bridge  too  narrow  for  stated,  and  so  iucurs  punishment  or 

it  to  pass  over.  tribulation. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XVUL  245 

work  than  if  he  should  cut  the  extent  of  the  skin  off  his 
head.i 

11.  For  the  prayer  of  one  heretical,  evil,  unrighteous 
(man)  lengthens  the  chin ;  (that)  of  two  lengthens  the 
tongue ;  of  three  there  is  no  (such  prayer)  whatever ;  four 
invoke  themselves.^ 

12.  Whoever  gives  of  the  out-squeezed  Hom-juice,  or  of 
the  consecrated  meats,  to  one  heretical,  evil,  unrighteous 
(man),  thereby  performs  no  better  work  than  if  he  should 
lead  a  troop  of  a  thousand  horse  into  the  Mazdayasnian 
villages,  should  slay  the  men,  and  should  drive  away  the 
cattle  as  booty. 

13.  Inquire,  0  just  one!  &c.  [as  in  ver.  7]. 

14.  Zarathushtra  asked,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  8,  to]  righteous 
one !  who  is  the  dutiful  attendant  (sraoshdvareza)  of  Srosh 
the  righteous,  the  mighty,  the  embodiment  of  the  sacred 
word,  the  impetuous  runner  ? 

15-17.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  The  bird  named  Paro- 
darsh,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  which  evil-speaking  men 
call  by  the  name  Kahrkatas.^  Moreover,  this  bird  raises 
(its)  voice  at  the  approach  of  dawn  *  (thus) :  Arise  ye  men  ! 
praise  the  righteousness  which  is  most  perfect;  repulsed 
are  the  demons ;  this  one  oppresses  you,  Bushyasta  ^  the 
long-handed,  she  lulls  to  sleep  the  whole  living  creation 
after  it  is  awakened  by  the  light  (saying) :  Sleep  long, 
0  man !  it  befits  thee  not  (to  rise) ;  trouble  not  about  the 
three  best  things,  the  well-considered  thought,  the  well- 
spoken  word,  and  the  well-done  action;  (but)  trouble 
about  the  three  worst  things,  the  ill-considered  thought, 
the  ill-spoken  word,  and  the  ill-done  action. 

18,  19.  Moreover,  for  the  first  third  of  the  night,  my  fire 


1  That  is,  should  scalp  him.  *  The  term  ushdm  sHrdm  is  given 

2  The  meaning  of  this  verse  is  very  as  a  name  for  the  third  quarter  of  the 
obscure,  and  the  text  may  be  defec-  night  in  the  Farhang-i  Oim-khaduk. 
tive.  ^  The   demoness   personifying    un- 

^  A    nickname    of    the    domestic  seasonable  sleep  and  lethargy. 
cock. 


245  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XVIII. 

of  Ahuramazda  l  entreats  the  master  of  the  house  (saying) : 
Arise  to  help,  0  master  of  the  house !  put  on  thy  clothes, 
wash  thy  hands,  fetch  firewood,  bring  it  to  me,  with  washed 
hands  make  me  blaze  again  by  means  of  purified  firewood ; 
the  demon-formed  Azi  (covetousness)  may  get  at  me,  he 
seems  clinging  around  (my)  life. 

20,  21.  Then  for  the  second  third  of  the  night,  my  fire 
of  Ahuramazda  entreats  the  husbandman  (saying) :  Arise 
to  help,  0  husbandman  !  put  on  thy  clothes,  &c.  [as  in  ver. 
19]. 

22.  Then  for  the  third  third  of  the  night,  my  fire  of 
Ahuramazda  entreats  Srosh  the  righteous  (saying) :  Arise 
to  help,  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh !  does  one  bring  to 
me  any  of  the  purified  firewoods  of  the  material  world  with 
washed  hands  ?  the  demon- formed  Azi  may  get  at  me,  he 
seems  clinging  around  (my)  life. 

23-25.  Then  he,  Srosh  the  righteous,  wakes  the  bird 
named  Paro-darsh,  &c.  [as  in  vers.  15-17]. 

26.  Then  speaks  each  of  two  companions  lying  on  a  bed : 
Do  thou  arise !  he  (the  cock)  drives  me  away ;  whichever 
of  the  two  rises  first  will  attain  to  the  best  life  (paradise) ; 
whichever  of  the  two  brings  to  the  fire  of  Ahuramazda 
(some)  of  the  purified  firewoods  with  washed  hands,  him 
will  the  fire,  pleased  (and)  unharmed,  bless  in  the  follow- 
ing manner : 

27.  May  a  herd  of  cattle  accompany  thee  !  (and  so)  may 
a  multitude  of  men  (sons) !  may  an  active  mind  and  an 
active  life  attend  thee !  mayst  thou  subsist  with  an  exist- 
ence of  the  nature  of  (this)  blessing,  so  many  nights  as  thou 
shalt  live !  This  is  the  blessing  of  the  fire  for  him  who 
brings  dry  firewood,  selected  for  burning,  (and)  purified  by 
the  utterance  of  the  Ashem  (-vohu  formula). 

28.  And  whoever  had  given  away,  with  perfect  recti- 
tude, these  my  birds,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  in  a  pair, 
male  and  female,  to  a  righteous  man,  may  consider  his 

1  That  is,  my  sacred    fire,  often  called  tlie  son,  or  offsi^ring,  of  Ahura- 
mazda. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XVIII.  247 

gift  a  mansion  witli  a  hundred  columns,  a  thousand  girders, 
ten  thousand  rooms,!  (and)  ten  thousand  windows. 

29.  And  whoever  had  given  a  morsel  2  of  flesh  to  this 
my  bird  Paro-darsh,  1  who  am  Ahuramazda  shall  never  be 
asking  him  a  second  word,  forth  I  will  depart  to  the  best 
life  (paradise). 

30.  The  righteous  Srosh,  with  lowered  club,  asked  the 
Drukhsh :  0  Drukhsh,  inglorious  (and)  inactive !  dost  thou 
then  alone  of  all  the  living  creation  engender  without 
cohabitation  ? 

31.  32.  Thereupon,  she  who  is  the  fiendish  Drukhsh 
answered  him  :  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh !  I  do  not 
alone  of  all  the  living  creation  engender  without  cohabita- 
tion :  indeed  I  have  even  four  paramours ;  they  cohabit 
with  me  just  as  any  other  males  cohabit  with  females  for 
progeny. 

33.  The  righteous  Srosh,  with  lowered  club,  asked  the 
Drukhsh  :  0  Drukhsh,  inglorious  (and)  inactive  !  who  is 
the  first  of  these  thy  paramours  ? 

34,  35.  Thereupon,  she  who  is  the  fiendish  Drukhsh 
answered  him :  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh  !  that,  indeed, 
is  the  first  of  these  my  paramours,  when  a  man  gives  not 
the  merest  trifle  of  unused  clothes  to  a  righteous  man 
(when  they  are)  begged  for  with  perfect  rectitude,  he 
cohabits  with  me  just  as,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  32]. 

36.  The  righteous  Srosh,  with  lowered  club,  asked  the 
Drukhsh :  0  Drukhsh,  inglorious  (and)  inactive !  what  is 
the  extermination  of  (the  result  of)  this  ? 
■  37,  38.  Thereupon,  she  who  is  the  fiendish  Drukhsh 
answered  him :  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh !  tliis  is  the 
extermination  of  it,  when  the  man  gives  even  a  trifle  of 
unused  clothes  to  a  righteous  man  (when  they)  are  not 
begged  for  with  perfect  rectitude,  he  destroys  my  concep- 


i  The  exact  meaning  of  the  words  otherwise  translated,  but  hardly  so 

translated  "rooms"  and  "windows"  as  to  make  sense  out  of  all  parts  of 

is  very  uncertain.  the  sentence.     The   flesh  would  pol- 

2  The   words  tanu    mazo  may  be  lute  the  cock  if  he  ate  it. 


248  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XVIIL 

tions  just  as  a  four-legged  wolf  would  utterly  tear  a  child 
out  of  the  womb. 

39.  The  righteous  Srosh,  with  lowered  club,  asked  the 
Drukhsh  :  0  Drukhsh,  inglorious  (and)  inactive!  who  is 
the  second  of  these  thy  paramours  ? 

40,  41.  Thereupon,  she  who  is  the  fiendish  Drukhsh 
answered  him :  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh  !  that,  indeed, 
is  the  second  of  these  my  paramours,  when  a  man  makes 
water  an  instep's  length  beyond  the  toes;l  he  cohabits 
with  me  just  as,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  32]. 

42.  The  righteous  Srosh,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  36]. 

43,  44.  Thereupon,  she  who  is  the  fiendish  Drukhsh 
answered  him :  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh !  this  is  the 
extermination  of  it,  when  the  man,  after  he  shall  stand 
up,2  shall  repeat,  three  steps  off,  the  Ashem  (-vohu  formula) 
thrice,  the  Humatanam  (Yas.  xxxv.  2)  twice,  the  Hukh- 
shathrotemai  (Yas.  xxxv.  5)  thrice,  shall  then  recite  the 
Ahuna-vairya  (Yas.  xxvii,  1 3)  four  times,  (and)  shall  pray 
Yenhe-hatam  (Yas.  vii.  27) ;  he  destroys  my  conceptions, 
&c.  [as  in  ver.  38]. 

45.  The  righteous  Srosh,  with  lowered  club,  asked  the 
Drukhsh :  0  Drukhsh,  inglorious  (and)  inactive !  who  is 
the  third  of  these  thy  paramours  ? 

46,  47.  Thereupon,  she  w^ho  is  the  fiendish  Drukhsh 
answered  him :  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh !  that, 
indeed,  is  the  third  of  these  my  paramours,  when  a  man 
asleep  emits  semen ;  he  cohabits  with  me  just  as,  &c.  [as 
in  ver.  32]. 

48.  The  righteous  Srosh,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  ■i,6\. 

49-52.  Thereupon,  she  who  is  the  fiendish  Drukhsh 
answered  him :  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh !  this  is  the 
extermination  of  it,  when  the  man,  after  waking  from 
sleep,  sliall  repeat  the  Ashem  (-vohu  formula)  thrice,  &c. 

1  Literally :    '  tlie    length    of    the  measure    equivalent    to     a    hand's- 

'  fore-part   of  the   foot   beyond    the  breadth. 

*  fore-part    of     the    foot  ;  '    frahda  -  From  the  squatting  position  (rest- 

(Sans.     prapada),     "  the     fore-part  ing  merely  on  the  soles  of  the  feet) 

of  the  foot,"  is  understood  to  be  a  which  is  customary  in  such  cases. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XVIIL  249 

[as  in  vers.  43,  44].  Then  he  speaks  to  the  bountiful 
Armaiti  (spirit  of  the  earth) :  0  bountiful  Armaiti !  I 
commit  to  thee  this  progeny  (lit.  man),  mayst  thou  restore 
this  progeny  to  me  at  the  triumphant  renovation  (of 
creation,  at  the  resurrection) !  as  one  knowing  tlie  Gathas, 
knowing  the  Yasna,  attending  to  the  discourses,^  intellec- 
tual, experienced,  embodying  the  sacred  word.  Then  thou 
shouldst  announce  his  name  as  Fire-produced  {dtare-ddta), 
or  Fire- offspring  {dtare-chithra),  or  Fire-race  {dtare-zantu), 
or  Fire-land  (atarc-daqyu),  or  any  other  name  of  (those) 
formed  with  (the  word)  Fire.^ 

53.  The  righteous  Srosh,  with  lowered  club,  asked  the 
Drukhsh:  0  Drukhsh,  inglorious  (and)  inactive!  who  is 
the  fourth  of  these  thy  paramours  ? 

54,  55.  Thereupon,  she  who  is  the  fiendish  Drukhsh 
answered  him  :  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh  !  that,  indeed, 
is  the  fourth  of  these  my  paramours,  when  a  man,  after 
(his)  fifteenth  year,  frequents  a  courtezan,  ungirdled  or 
uncovered,^  then  at  the  fourth  departing  step,  immediately 
afterwards,  we  who  are  demons,  at  once  we  occupy  (his) 
tongue  and  marrow ;  afterwards  the  possessed  ones  destroy 
the  settlements  of  righteousness  (which  are)  supplied  with 
creatures,  as  the  speUs  of  sorcerers  destroy  the  settlements 
of  righteousness. 

56.  The  righteous  Srosh,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  36]. 

57-59.  Thereupon,  she  who  is  the  fiendish  Drukhsh 
answered  him :  0  righteous,  handsome  Srosh !  there  is 
no  extermination  whatever  of  it ;  when  a  man,  after  (his) 
fifteenth  year,  &c.  [as  in  vers.  54,  55]. 

60.  Inquire,  0  just  one  !  &c.  [as  in  ver,  7]. 

61.  Zarathushtra  asked,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  8,  to]  righteous 
one !  who  offends  thee,  who  art  Ahuramazda,  with  the 

1  Or     "conversations,"     referring     used    for    still-born    children,    who 
probably  to   such   conversations   be-     must  all  be  named. 

tween  Ahuramazda  and  Zarathushtra  ^  That  is,  without  sacred  thread- 
as  are  common  in  the  Vendidad.  girdle  (kusll')  or  sacred  shirt  (mdarah); 

2  The  same  kind  of  names,  accord-  anabddto  is  a  contraction  of  anaiwi- 
iug  to  Dastur  Hoshangii,  ought  to  be  ddto. 


250  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XVIII. 

greatest  offence  ?  [(Zend)  who  annoys  (thee)  with  the 
greatest  annoyance  ?] 

62.  Then  said  Ahuramazda:  Truly  the  courtezan,  0 
righteous  Zarathushtra !  who  commingles  the  seed  of  the 
pious  and  impious,  of  idolaters  and  non-idolaters,  of  self- 
destroying  sinners  and  non- self-destroying  sinners  {i.e., 
those  whose  sins  are  heinous  and  mortal  and  the  reverse). 

^-i^.  With  a  look,  0  Zarathushtra !  she  stagnates  one- 
third  of  the  mighty  waters  flowing  in  streams.  With  a 
look,  0  Zarathushtra !  she  destroys  one-third  the  growth 
of  the  up- shooting,  flourishing,  golden-coloured  1  trees. 

64.  With  a  look,  0  Zarathushtra !  she  destroys  one- 
third  the  coverings  (crops)  of  the  bountiful  Armaiti  (spirit 
of  the  earth).  With  a  leer,  0  Zarathushtra  !  she  destroys 
one-third  of  the  strength,  and  success,  and  righteousness 
of  a  rigliteous  man  of  very  good  thoughts,  of  very  good 
words,  of  very  good  deeds. 

65.  I  tell  thee,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra!  these  females 
are  also  more  destructive  than  darting  serpents,  or  than 
howling  wolves,  or  than  a  she-wolf  suckling  her  young  ^ 
(who)  rushes  into  a  (sheep-)  fold,  or  than  a  frog  spawning 
thousands  (who)  dives  into  the  water. 

66.  Inquire,  0  just  one !  &c.  [as  in  ver.  7]. 

6^,  68.  Zarathushtra  asked,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  8,  to]  righte- 
ous one  !  whoever,  knowingly  (and)  intentionally  cohabits 
with  a  menstruous  woman  (who  is)  conscious,  knowino-, 
and  informed  (of  it),  what  is  his  punishment  ?  what  is  his 
atonement  ?  what  works  performed  in  compensation  for 
this  may  the  culprit  execute  ? 

69,  70.  Then  said  Ahuramazda:  Whoever,  knowingly 
&c.  [as  in  ver.  6"],  to]  informed  (of  it),  he  shall  furnish  a 
thousand  young  cattle,  and  he  should  offer,  with  perfect 
rectitude,  the  fat  of  the  kidneys  ^  of  all  these  cattle  to  the 

^  Perhaps     "green-coloured,    ver-  suggested,  but   the  meaning  is  very 

dant."  uncertain. 

2  This   translation  of   the   epithet  ^  All  the  old  MSS.  read  asmaniivdo 

az)-6-daidldm  is   only  a  guess ;   per-  (not  afsmanivdo),    and    the  Pahlavi 

baps  "seeing  a  goat  "  might  also  be  translation  quotes,  as  an  explanation, 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XVIII.  251 

priest  for  the  fire ;  he  should  offer  (it)  to  the  good  waters 
with  (his)  arm. 

71.  He  should  offer  with  perfect  rectitude  a  thousand 
loads  ^  of  hard  firewoods,  well-hewn,  (and)  selected  (as 
dry),  for  the  fire ;  he  should  offer,  with  perfect  rectitude,  a 
thousand  loads  of  soft  firewoods  of  the  sandal-wood 
(urvds7ia),  or  benzoin  (vohu-gaona),  or  aloe-wood  (vohiX- 
kereti),  or  pomegranate  (JiadhdnaS-pata)^  or  any  other  of 
the  most  odoriferous  trees,  for  the  fire. 

72.  He  should  lop  off  a  thousand  loppings  ^  for  the 
sacred  twigs  (Barsom).  He  should  offer,  with  perfect  recti- 
tude, to  the  good  waters,  fallen  twigs  of  the  shrub  which 
is  called  pomegranate,  for  a  thousand  consecrated  waters 
(zaothra)  with  Homa  and  milk,  (which  are)  purified, 
examined  (as  to  purity),  purified  by  a  pious  man  (a  priest, 
and)  examined  by  a  pious  man. 

yT,.  He  should  kill  a  thousand  serpents  gliding  on  their 
bellies,  (and)  two  thousand  others.  He  should  kill  a  thou- 
sand land-frogs,  (and)  two  thousand  water- (frogs).  He 
should  kill  a  thousand  ants  carrying  away  corn,  (and)  two 
thousand  others. 

74.  He  should  erect  thirty  bridges  across  navigable 
waters.*  One  should  strike  (him)  a  thousand  blows  with 
a  horse -goad,  two  thousand  with  a  scourge  (sraosJw- 
cMrana). 

75,  y6.  That  is  his  punishment,  that  is  his  atonement, 
such  are  the  works,  performed  in  compensation  for  this,  the 
culprit  may  execute.  If  he  shall  execute  (them)  he  shall 
attain  that  life  which  is  for  the  righteous,  (but)  if  he  shall 

the  AYestAi^iinxse  :  pad  aiitai-everedh-  frastairydd  cannot  refer  to  the  pre- 

ka  asma  reja,  from  which  it  appears  paration  or  final  arrangement  of  the 

that  asman  is  connected  with  veredh-  Barsom,  wliich  can  be  performed  only 

ka,  "a  kidney."  by  a  priest.     The   same   remark  ap- 

^  That  is,  loads  for  a  man's  back.  plies  to  all  the  other  offerings  here 

2  Such  are  the  traditional  explana-  mentioned,   which  must  be  brought 

tions  of  these  terms  for  odoriferous  to  a  priest  for  him  to  offer. 

woods.  *  That    is,   he   should   form   foot- 

•^  That  is,    he   should   supply   the  bridges  across  streams  which  are  not 

material  for  the  Barsom.     The  verb  fordable  with  safety. 


2  52  VENDIDAD,  FARCARD  XIX. 

not  execute  (them)  lie  sliall  attain  that  life  wliicli  is  for  the 
wicked  (and  is)  gloomy,  originating  in  darkness,  (and)  dark,^ 

7. — THE   NINETEENTH  FARGARD. 
FRAGMENT   OJ"   AN   OLD    EPIC   SONG,  VerS.   4,   6-9. 

(  The  devil's  attempts  to  frustrate  Zarathusthra's  doings. ) 

The  verses  1-3  are  introductory  to  the  ancient  song,  and 
evidently  intended  as  some  explanation  of  the  contents  of 
this  ancient  text.  In  this  introduction  is  described  how 
Drukhsh,  one  of  the  evil  spirits  in  Ahriman's  service,  came 
forth  from  the  northern  regions  at  her  master's  command, 
to  destroy  Zarathushtra.  The  prophet  frustrated  all  such 
attempts  to  ruin  him  by  simply  repeating  the  sacred 
formula  Yat1id-ahlX-vairy6.  Drukhsh,  having  been  thus 
defeal^giJ,  told  the  chief  of  the  evil  spirits,  Angro-mainyush, 
that  it  was  impossible  to  do  any  mischief  to  the  prophet. 

Zarathushtra  perceived  the  snares  laid  for  him,  and 
thought  about  escaping  them.  Tliis  is  described  in  the 
verses  of  the  old  song,  which  were  undoubtedly  current  in 
the  mouths  of  the  Iranian  people.  The  song  is  composed 
in  the  heroic  metre  of  the  ancient  Aryans,  the  Anushtubh, 
which  has  given  rise  to  the  common  Shloka.^ 

^  It  is  probable  that  this  sentence  in  tliis  world,  as  well  as  in  the  futuro 
refers   to   rewards   and  punishments     existence. 

2  The  original  ballad  is  here  subjoined  in  its  metrical  form,  its  translatioD 
being  given  in  the  text. 

(4) 

Usehishtad  Zarathushtrd 

khruzhdya  dbaeshd  parshtandm. 

Defective. 
(6) 
Paiti        ahmdi        adavata         |  duzhddmd  Anrd  mainyush : 

Md  mi  ddma       merenchanuha,       \  ashdum  Zarathushtra  / 

Tdm        ahi  Pourushaspaki        |         puthrd  harethryd^  hacha 

Zdvishi ;  apa-stavanuha  \        vanuhtm      daendm  mdzdayasntm, 

Vinddi  ydnem    yatha       vindad       \         Vadhaghan6       danhupaitish. 

(7) 


asaretd  aka  mananha 

asdn6  zasta       drazhimnd. 


Paiti      ahmdi      avashata 
NCid  he  apastavdnS 

Moid     asta     n6id     tishtdnem 


yd         Spitdm6         Zarathiishtr6 : 
vajiuhtin      daendm      mdzdayasntm. 
ndid       haodhascha  urvisyd<f. 


VENDIDAD,  FARCARD  XIX.  2 S3 

1.  From  the  northern  quarter  [(Paz.)  from  the  northern 
quarters],  Angro-mainyush,  the  deadly,  the  demon  of 
demons,  rushed  forth.  Thus  spoke  the  evil-doing  Angro- 
mainyush,  the  deadly :  Druldish  (demon  of  destruction) ! 
rush  forth  and  kill  the  righteous  Zarathushtra.  Then  the 
Drukhsh  rushed  about  him,  the  demon  Buiti,  the  destroyer 
intend]  ni^  to  kill. 

2.  Zarathushtra  recited  the  Ahuna-vairya  (formula) ;  he 
invoked  the  good  waters  of  good  qualities,  he  confessed 
the  Masdayasnian  rehgion.  Drukhsh  was  overthrown  by 
it ;  the  demon  Buiti,  the  destroyer  intending  to  kill,  ran 
away. 

3.  Drukhsh  then  replied :  Impostor  Angro-mainyush ! 
I  do  not  think  about  doing  any  harm  to  Spitama  Zara- 
thushtra [(Paz.)  the  all-glorious,  righteous  Zarathushtra]. 
Zarathushtra  perceived  in  his  mind  that  the  wicked,  evil- 
doing  demons  were  laying  snares  for  him. 

So7ig. 

4.  Zarathushtra  arose  [(Paz.)  Zarathushtra  went  forward] 
uninjured  by  the  hostile  intentions  of  the  evil  spirits,  hold- 
ing a  stone  (?)  in  his  hand,  [(Zend)  as  large  as  a  cottage]. 
The  righteous  Zarathushtra  was  praying  to  Ahuramazda 
the  creator :  Wherever  thou  touchest  this  wide,  round,  far- 
extended  earth,  incline  to  support  Pourushaspa's  house. 

5.  Zarathushtra  informed  Angro-mainyush:  Evil-doing 
Angro-mainyush !     I  will  destroy  the  creatures  produced 


(8) 


Paiti  ahmdi  adavata 

Kahi  vacha  vandhi  ? 


duzhddmd         Anrd         mainyush : 
kahe  vacha  apayasdhi  ? 

Kana    zaya         hukeretdonko         [  mana        ddvia    Anrd  mainyush  ? 

(9) 
Paiti  ahmdi         avashata         |        yd  Spitdmo  Zarathushtra : 

Hdvanacha        tashtacha  haomacha         vacha  mazdo-fra^khta 


Mana  zaya  asti  vahishtem ; 

Ana  vacha        apa       yasdni, 

di  duzhda       Anra  mainyd ! 

Dathad  zruni  akarane, 

Hukhshathrd  hudhdorihd. 


ana  vacha        vandni, 

ana       zaya        hukeretdonhd, 

dathad      spefitd     mainyush, 

Jradathen      ameshdo    spenta 


254  VEND  ID  AD,  FARGARD  XIX. 

by  the  demons,  I  will  destroy  death  produced  hy  the 
demons,  I  will  destroy  the  witch  Khnathaiti  ^  for  whose 
(destruction)  the  triumphant  Soshyans  will  be  born  out  of 
the  water  Kasoya  from  the  eastern  quarter  [(Paz.)  from 
the  eastern  quarters], 

6.  To  liim  spoke  Angro-mainyush  the  creator  of  evils : 
Do  not  destroy  my  creations,  0  righteous  Zarathushtra ! 
Thou  art  Pourushaspa's  son,  from  birth  thou  invokest. 
Curse  the  good  Mazdayasnian  religion,  (then)  thou  shalt 
obtain  fortune  such  as  King  Vadhaghana  obtained. 

7.  To  him  replied  Spitama  Zarathushtra:  I  will  not 
curse  the  good  Mazdayasnian  religion,  not  (if  my)  body, 
not  (if  my)  soul,  not  (if  my)  life  should  part  asunder. 

8.  To  him  spoke  Angro-mainyush  the  creator  of  evils : 
With  whose  words  wilt  thou  smite  ?  with  whose  words 
wilt  thou  suppress  my  creatures  (who  am)  Angro- 
mainyush  ?  (and)  with  what  well-made  weapons  ? 

9.  To  him  replied  Spitama  Zarathushtra:  The  mortar 
and  dish  and  Homa,  and  the  words  pronounced  by  Mazda 
are  my  best  weapons ;  with  these  words  will  I  smite,  with 
these  words  will  I  suppress,  with  these  well-made  weapons, 
0  evil-doing  Angro-mainyush !  The  beneficent  spirit 
made  (them),  he  made  (them)  in  boundless  time,  the 
immortal  benefactors  (Ameshaspentas),  the  good  rulers 
and  good  arrangers,  co-operated. 

{The  fate  of  the  soul  after  death,  vers.  27-32.) 

27.  Creator  of  the  settlements  supplied  with  creatures, 
righteous  one !  What  are  the  events  [(Paz.)  what  events 
happen  ?  what  events  take  place  ?  what  events  are  met 
with  ?]  (when)  a  man  shall  give  up  his  soul  in  this  world 
of  existence  ? 

28.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  After  a  man  is  dead  [(Paz.) 
after  a  man  has  departed,  when  the  running  evil-doing 
demons  make  destruction  (of  liis  life)],  at  daybreak  after 
the  third  night,  [(Paz.)  when  aurora  is  shining],  he  reaches 

^  Probably  an  idol-worshipper  in  Kandahar,  or  thereabouts. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XIX.  255 

Mitlira,  rising  above  the  mountains  resplendent  with  their 
own  rightful  lustre  [(Paz.)  when  the  sun  rises]. 

29.  The  demon  Vizaresho  by  name,  0  Spitama  Zara- 
thushtra !  carries  the  soul  bound  towards  the  country  of 
the  wicked  Deva-worshipping  men.^  It  goes  on  the  time- 
worn  paths,  which  are  for  the  wicked  and  which  are  for  the 
righteous,  to  the  Chinvad  bridge,  created  by  Mazda,  and 
right,  where  they  ask  the  consciousness  and  soul  their 
conduct  in  the  settlements  {i.e..,  world)  [(Paz.)  what  was 
achieved  in  the  world  of  existence]. 

30.  She,  the  beautiful,  well-formed,  strong,  (and)  well- 
grown,  comes  with  the  dog,  with  the  register,  with  chil- 
dren, with  resources,  with  skilfulness.^  She  dismisses 
the  sinful  soul  of  the  wicked  into  the  glooms  (hell).  She 
meets  the  souls  of  the  righteous  when  crossing  the  (celestial 
mountain)  Haro-berezaiti  (Alborz),  and  guides  them  over  the 
Chinvad  bridge  [(Paz.)  the  bridge  of  the  heavenly  spirits]. 

31.  Vohu-mano  (the  archangel  Bahman)  rises  from  a 
golden  throne  ;  Vohu-mano  exclaims  :  How  hast  thou  come 
hither  to  us,  0  righteous  one !  from  the  perishable  life  to 
the  imperishable  life  ? 

32.  The  souls  of  the  righteous  proceed  joyfully  to 
Ahuramazda,  to  the  Ameshaspentas,  to  the  golden  throne, 
to  paradise  (Garo-nemana)  [(Paz.)  the  residence  of  Ahura- 
mazda, the  residence  of  the  Ameshaspentas,  and  the  resi- 
dence of  the  other  righteous  ones.] 

{Fragment  not  connected  with  the  preceding.) 

33.  The  righteous  man  being  purified,  the  demons,  the 
wicked  evil-doers,  are  so  frightened  at  (his)  scent,  after 
death,  as  a  sheep  encompassed  by  wolves  is  frightened  by 
a  wolf. 

^  The    country   of    the   deva-wor-  dently  refers  to  the  maiden  who  is  a 

shippers  is  India.  personification  of  one's  actions  during 

2  The  dog  is  requisite  to  be  looked  life,  and  is  said  to  meet  the  soul  after 

at  by  a  man  at  the  last  gasp,  but  the  its  third  night's  separation  from  the 

meaniDg  of  the  two  following  epithets  body.     Comj)are  the  Hadokht  Nask 

is  very  uncertain.     This  passage  evi-  (Yt.  xxii.  9,  p.  220). 


256  VEND  I  DAD,  FARGARD  XIX. 

34.  The  righteous  men  assemble,  Nairyo-sanha  assem- 
bles. Say:  Ahuramazda's  friend  is  Nairyo-sanha;  thy- 
self invoke,  0  Zarathushtra !  this  creation  of  Ahuramazda. 

35.  Zarathushtra  said  unto  me  the  words:  I  praise  the 
rightful  creation,  formed  by  Ahuramazda;  I  praise  the 
earth  created  by  Ahura,  the  water  created  by  Mazda,  the 
rightful  vegetation;  I  praise  the  sea  Vouru-kasha  {i.e., 
■having  distant  shores) ;  I  praise  the  brightly-shining  sky ; 
I  praise  the  eternal  luminaries  (the  fixed  stars),  the  self- 
created.i 

36.  I  praise  tlie  best  life  (paradise)  of  the  righteous, 
(which  is)  ^^esplendent  (and)  all-glorious ;  I  praise  the 
house  of  song  (fjard-nemdna,  equivalent  to  "  paradise  "),  the 
residence  of  Ahuramazda,  the  residence  of  the  Ameshas- 
pentas,  the  residence  of  the  other  righteous  ones ;  I  praise 
the  bridge  Chinvad  (bridge  of  the  gatherer),  created  by 
Mazda,  in  the  self-created  intermediate  region  (between 
heaven  and  hell). 

37.  I  praise  good  fortune,  the  wide-eyed ;  I  praise  the 
strong  guardian-angels  (Fravashis)  of  the  righteous,  bene- 
fiting all  creatures;  I  praise  Behram  created  by  Ahura, 
the  bearer  of  splendour  created  by  Mazda ;  I  praise  the 
shining,  glorious  star  Tishtar  (Tir,  Mercury),  with  the  body 
of  a  golden-horned  ox. 

38.  I  praise  the  beneficent  hymns  (the  five  Gathas), 
ruling  over  the  (five)  periods  (of  the  day),  the  righteous 
ones.  I  praise  the  Ahunavaiti  Gatha ;  I  praise  the  Ushta- 
vaiti  Gatha ;  I  praise  the  Spenta-mainyu  Gatha ;  I  praise 
the  Vohu-khshathra  Gatha ;  I  praise  the  Vahishtoishti 
Gatha. 

39.  I  praise  the  region  {Karslivare,  or  Keshvar)  Arezahi 
(and)  Savahi;  I  praise  the  region  Fradadhafshu  (and) 
Vidadhafshu;  I  praise  the  region  Vouru-bareshti  (and) 
Vouru-jareshti ;  I  praise  the  region  Qaniratha;  I  praise 
the  splendid  Hetumat  (Hilmand),  the  shining,  the  glorious. 
I  praise  the  good  wealth  (Ashi) ;  I  praise  the  good  science, 

1  Throughout  these  verses  'I  invoke'  would  be  more  correct  than  'I  praise.' 


BRIEF  SURVEY  OF  A  VESTA  LITERATURE.     257 

I  praise  the  riglitest  science.  I  praise  the  glory  of  the 
Aryan  countries;  I  praise  the  glory  of  Yima  the  king,  rich 
in  flocks. 

8.  The  Fargards  xx.-sxii. 

These  last  three  Fargards  of  the  Vendidad  seem  to  have 
belonged  originally  to  some '  medical  book.  They  contain 
spells  for  curing  diseases,  which  resemble  very  much  the 
mantras  which  are  intended  for  the  same  purpose  in  the 
Atharvaveda.  Thrita  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  phy- 
sician who  relieved  mankind  from  the  distress  and  misery 
caused  by  diseases.  The  angel,  presiding  over  the  medical 
art,  is  called  Airyaman,  to  whom  even  Ahuramazda  des- 
patches his  messenger  Nairyo-sanha  (Neryosangh). 

XV. — BRIEF   SURVEY   OF   AVESTA   LITERATURE. 

Having  described,  and  illustrated  by  selected  specimens, 
the  various  branches  of  the  sacred  literature  of  the  Parsis, 
we  may  conclude,  this  Essay  with  a  brief  summary  and 
survey  of  the  whole. 

At  the  head  of  this  literature  undoubtedly  stand  the 
FIVE  GATHAS,  which  we  must  regard  as  the  work  of  Spitama 
Zarathushtra  himseK  and  his  disciples,  as  any  one  can 
easily  convince  himself  by  a  careful  perusal  of  the  nume- 
rous passages,  translated  above  from  these  hymns,  and  by 
comparing  them  with  those  extracted  from  other  parts  of 
the  Zend-Avesta.  Besides  the  internal  evidence,  which  is 
strong  and  convincing  enough,  some  external  reasons  may 
'be  alleged  to  corroborate  the  opinion  that  these  Gathas 
contain  the  undoubted  teachings  and  sayings  of  the  cele- 
brated Zoroaster  himself.  While  the  other  parts  are  no- 
where said  to  be  the  work  of  Spitama  Zarathushtra  himself, 
he  is  distinctly  and  expressly  mentioned,  in  the  Srosh 
Yasht,  as  .the  author  of  these  ancient  and  sacred  songs  (see 
p.  141).  Whereas  in  the  other  parts  of  the  Zend-Avesta 
Zarathushtra  is  spoken  of  in  the  third  person,  and  even 
occasionally  invoked  as  a  divine  being — in  the  Gathas  he 

R 


258    BRIEF  SURVEY  OF  A  VESTA  LITERATURE. 

speaks  of  himself  in  tlie  first  person,  and  acts  throughout 
as  a  man  who  is  commissioned  Ly  God  to  perform  a  great 
task.  We  find  him  placed  among  men,  surrounded  by  his 
friends,  Kava  Vishtaspa,  Jamaspa,and  Frashaoshtra,  preach- 
ing to  his  countrymen  a  new  and  purer  religion,  exhorting 
them  to  forsake  idolatry  and  to  worship  only  the  living 
God. 

The  Gatha  literature  was,  in  ancient  times,  certainly 
not  confined  to  the  scanty  fragments  which. are  now  extant. 
There  existed,  no  doubt,  a  much  larger  collection  of  the 
hymns  and  sayings  of  Spitama  Zarathushtra  and  his  dis- 
ciples, including  those  of  the  ancient  prophets  called 
Saoshi/afito,  which  are  now  and  then  alluded  to  in  the 
Yasna.  Out  of  -this  larger  collection  those  verses  were 
selected,  which  were  believed  to  be  most  efficacious  for 
putting  down  the  evil  influences  of  the  hostile  Devas  and 
their  priests  (the  Brahmans),  and  for  increasing  the  welfare 
of  the  Zoroastrians ;  and  these  only  have  been  preserved. 
The  collection  of  the  Gathas,  extant  now-a-days,  may  be" 
well  compared  to  the  Samaveda,  which  contains  detached 
verses,  selected  from  the  Kigveda,  intended  only  for 
being  sung  at  the  celebration  of  the  great  Soma  sacrifices. 
While  the  Brahmans  preserved  their  complete  Eigveda, 
or  entire  collection  of  hymns,  irrespective  of  their  litur- 
gical application,  the  ancestors  of  the  Parsis,  who  were 
apparently  more  careless  of  their  sacred  literature  than 
their  Brahmanical  brethren,  lost  it  almost  entirely. 

Next  to  the  Gathas  in  rank  stands  the  Yasna  of  Seven 
Chaptees  (see  p.  170).  For  reasons  pointed  out  above,- 
we  cannot  regard  it  as  a  genuine  work  of  Spitama  Zara- 
thushtra himself.  It  appears  to  be  the  work  of  one  of  the 
earliest  successors  of  the  prophet,  called  in  ancient  times 
Zarathushtra  or  Zarathushtrotema  (see  sect.  ii.  3,  of  the 
fourth  Essay),  w^ho,  deviating  somewhat  from  the  high  and 
pure  monotheistic  principle  of  Spitama,  made  some  con- 
cessions to  the  adherents  of  the  ante-Zoroastrian  religion 
by  addressing  prayers  to  other  beings  than  Ahuramazda. 


BRIEF  SURVEY  OF  AVESTA  LITERATURE.     259 

The  first  part  of  the  Yasna,  styled  above  the  Later 
Yasna,  is  certainly  of  a  far  later  date  than  even  the 
"Yasna  of  Seven  Chapters."  The  high-priests  seem  to 
have  tried  to  conciliate  the  men  of  the  old  party  (called 
IMoiryo-tkaesM,  "  of  the  old  creed "),  who  were  unwilling 
to  forsake  the  ancient  polytheistic  religion,  and  its  time- 
hallowed  rites  and  ceremonies.  The  old  sacrifices  were 
reformed,  and  adapted  to  the  more  civilised  mode  of  life 
of  the  Iranians.  The  intoxicating  Soma  beverage  was 
replaced  by  a  more  wholesome  and  invigorating  drink, 
prepared  from  another  plant  than  the  original  Soma  plant, 
together  with  twigs  of  the  pomegranate  tree,  and  without 
any  process  of  fermentation  (water  being  merely  poured 
over  them) ;  but  its  name  in  the  Iranian  form,  Haoma, 
remained,  and  some  of  the  ceremonies  also,  as  we  shall  see 
in  the  fourth  Essay ;  the  solemn  sacrificial  cakes  of  the 
Brahmans  {puroddslia)  were  superseded  by  the  sacred 
bread  called  draond  (Darun).  New  invocations,  addressed 
to  those  divine  beings  who  occupied  the  places  of  the 
ancient  Devas  or  gods  (branded  by  Spitama  Zarathushtra 
as  the  originators  of  all  evil  and  sin),  were  composed  and 
adapted  for  the  reformed  Soma  sacrifice  (Homa  ceremony). 
These  new  prayers  form  the  substance  of  the  later  Yasna 
wliich  was  to  represent  the  formulas  of  the  Brahmanical 
Yajurveda. 

If  we  compare  this  later  Yasna  with  the  Gathas,  we  find 
(irrespective  of  the  difference  of  dialect)  such  a  vast  differ^ 
ence  in  their  contents,  that  it  is  quite  impossible  for  a 
conscientious  critic  to  assign  them  to  one  author.  While 
in  the  Gathas  we  never  find  mentioned  either  Homa, 
Barsom,  or  gods  like  ]\Iithra  and  Anahita,  or  even  Amesha- 
spenta,  the  general  name  for  the  heavenly  councillors,  we 
meet  with  their  names  in  nearly  every  page  of  the  later 
Yasna.  Here  naturally  arises  the  question  why  the  author 
of  the  Gathas,  in  propounding  his  new  religious  doctrines, 
entirely  overlooked  the  things  which  were  considered  in 
after  times  as  the  most  indispensable  implements  of  divine 


26o    BRIEF  SURVEY  OF  AVE  ST  A  LITERATURE. 

service,  and  why  he  disregarded  those  gods  and  divine 
beings  whom  it  was  afterwards  held  very  sinful  to  neglect? 
The  only  answer  is,  that  he  neither  believed  in  them,  nor 
thought  them  to  be  an  essential  part  of  religion. 

In  the  same  rank  as  the  later  Yasna  may  be  classed  the 
ViSPARAD  (see  p.  191).  It  was  composed  by  one  of  the 
later  high-priests  for  the  celebration  of  the  Gahanbars. 

While  the  Yasna  and  Visparad  represent  the  Vedas 
among  the  Parsis,  their  Vendidad  corresponds  exactly  to 
the  Smritis,  or  collections  of  customs,  observances,  laws, 
penalties,  and  fines,  w^hich  form  the  groundwork  of  the 
so-called  Dharma-Shastra.  Its  different  constituent  parts 
have  been  noticed  above  (p.  225),  and  every  thinking  man 
can  convince  lumself  of  the  impossibility  of  ascribing  the 
whole  to  Spitama  Zarathushtra  himself.  The  book  only 
professes  to  give  the  conversations,  which  Zarathushtra  is 
unanimously  said  (even  in  the  Gathas)  to  have  held  with 
God  himself ;  and  that  there  was,  in  very  ancient  times,  a 
work  in  existence  purporting  to  contain  such  conversations, 
follows  undoubtedly  from  the  notice  of  such  a  work 
to  be  found  in  the  Visparad  and  Vendidad  itself  (see  p. 
142). 

If  we  compare  Zarathushtra's  conversations  with  Ahura- 
mazda,  as  contained  in  the  Gathas,  with  those  which  are 
reported  in  the  Vendidad,  we  find  a  considerable  difference 
between  the  two.  In  the  Gathas  there  is  never  any  allu- 
sion made  to  the  numerous  ceremonies  and  observances 
which  were  deemed  absolutely  necessary  for  a  pious 
Hormazd- worshipper.  Thus,  for  instance,  among  the  ques- 
tions put  by  Spitama  Zarathushtra  to  Ahuramazda  in 
Yasna  xliv.  (see  p.  158),  about  the  true  religion  and  its 
observance,  there  is  not  a  single  one  wliich  refers  to  the 
treatment  of  the  dead  body,  one  of  the  most  important 
things  in  the  time  of  the  Vendidad,  or  to  tlie  great  purifi- 
cation ceremony  (see  p.  241),  deemed  so  essential  for  the 
welfare  of  the  Iranian  community.  Very  likely  Spitama 
Zarathushtra  liimself  never  gave  any  direct  precepts  about 


BRIEF  SURVEY  OF  A  VESTA  LITERATURE.  '  261 

the  customs  and  usages  which  already  existed  in  his  time. 
Had  he  done  so  we  should  expect  him  to  allude  to  them, 
especially  in  .those  verses  where  he  mentions  the  means 
of  checking  the  evil  influences  exercised  by  the  Devas 
(demons) ;  but  all  he  mentions  are  the  splendour  of  fire,  the 
mighty  words  revealed  to  him  by  Ahuramazda,  the  cultiva- 
tion of  the  soil,  and  'purity  in  thought,  word,  and  deed. 
From  his  never  mentioning  the  ceremonies  enjoined  in 
the  Vendidad,  it  undoubtedly  follows  that,  though  he 
might  know  them,  he  did  not  attach  much  weight  to  their 
observance. 

Only  on  one  point  we  find  the  laws  given  in  the  Ven- 
didad corroborated  by  the  Gathas.  These  are  those  which 
refer  to  the  sacredness  of  a  promise  or  contract,  called 
Mithra,  as  one  may  learn  from  comparing  Vend.  iv.  (see  p. 
238)  with  Yas.  xlvi.  5  (see  p.  164).  These  seem  to  have 
originated  from  Spitama  Zarathushtra  himself,  when  he 
called  into  existence  a  new  religious  community,  to  be 
founded  on  the  principle  of  inviolable  faith  and  truth. 

From  a  careful  consideration  of  these  and  other  circum- 
stances which  are  pointed  out  above  (p.  226),  we  cannot 
regard  the  Vendidad  as  a  work  of  Spitama  Zarathushtra 
himself,  but  as  the  joint  work  of  his  successors,  the  s\ipreme 
high-priests  of  the  Iranian  community.  That  the  chief 
high-priests,  together  with  the  kings,  were  believed  to 
stand  in  direct  communication  Avith  Ahuramazda  himself, 
and  to  receive  from  him  answers  to  their  questions,  we 
may  see  distinctly  from  Visp.  i.  9  (quoted  above,  p.  193). 
The  chief  high-priest  is  there  called  Zarathushtrotcmo, 
which  w^ord  literally  means  "  the  greatest  Zarathushtra,  or 
high-priest "  {tenia  being  the  superlative  suffix).  His  com- 
munications are  held  sacred  in  this  passage,  and  placed  on 
a  level  with  the  Gathas.  From  this  circumstance  we  may 
distinctly  gather  that  the  works  of  the  Zarathushtrotemas 
were  held  in  ancient  times  to  be  about  equally  sacred 
with  those  of  Spitama  Zarathushtra  himself  If  we  then 
consider  the  Vendidad  as  their  joint  work,  compiled  during 


262    BRIEF  SURVEY  OF  A  VESTA  LITERATURE. 

.several  successive  centuries,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  that 
we  find  it  so  highly  revered  by  the  Zoroastrians  even  to 
the  present  day. 

Of  the  three  stage's  which  we  can  discover  in  the  present 
Vendidad,  the  Avesta,  no  doubt,  is  very  old,  and  perhaps 
partially  traceable  to  oral  sayings  descended  from  the 
prophet  himself.  Even  the  Zend,  which  makes  up  by  far 
the  larger  portion  of  the  present  Vendidad,  belongs  to  a 
very  early  age,  and  seems  to  be  at  least  as  old  as  the  later 
Yasna.  The  Pazand  is  comparatively  recent,  and  seems 
to  be  more  of  a  literary  and  learned  character  than  of 
practical  consequence. 

In  the  Yashts  (see  p.  194),  which  correspond  partially  to 
the  Purunic  literature  of  the  Brahmans,  one  may  distinguish 
generally  two  classes  of  works,  firstly,  hymns,  and  secondly, 
conversations  with  Ahuramazda. 

The  metrical  pieces  or  hymns  represent  the  fragments  of 
the  ancient  epic  poetry  of  the  Iranians,  as  living  in  the 
mouths  of  their  bards,  and  are  not  only  to  be  found  in  the 
properly  so-called  Yashts,  but  are  scattered  throughout  the 
whole  Zend-Avesta  (see  Yas.  ix.,  x. ;  Vend.  xix.).  In  their 
present  form  the  Yashts,  together  with  the  shorter  prayers, 
such  as  Afringans,  Gahs,  &c.  (see  p.  224),  are  evidently 
the  most  modern  pieces  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  and  have  not 
the  sKghtest  claim  to  have  been  composed  by  Zarathushtra, 
or  even  by  his  earlier  successors.  This  kind  of  literature 
grew  up  at  a  time  when  the  Zoroastrian  religion  had 
already  very  much  degenerated,  and  its  original  monotheism 
had  partially  given  way  to  the  old  gods,  who  had  been 
stigmatised  and  banished  by  Spitama  Zarathushtra,  but 
were  afterwards  transformed  into  angels.  The  songs  of 
the  bards,  which  we  find  introduced  into  the  Yashts,  may 
be  old  and  genuine,-  but,  strictly  speaking,  they  have  very 
little  concern  with  the  Zoroastrian  religion.  The  Zoroas- 
trian conversations  with  Ahuramazda,  which  we  often  find 
in  the  Yashts,  may  be  the  work  of  the  later  high-priests. 


BRIEF  SURVEY  OF  A  VESTA  LITER  A  TURE.     263 

but  they  seem  to  be  entirely  foreign  to  all  that  we  know 
of  Spitama. 

The  tendency  of  the  authors  of  these  Yashts  was  to 
raise  the  dignity  of  the  angels,  such  as  Mithra,  Tishtrya 
Anahita,  &c.,  to  that  of  Ahuramazda,  with  whom  they  are 
said  even  to  have  equal  rank  (see  p.  202).  Therefore 
Ahuramazda  himself  is  called,  now  and  then,  their  wor- 
shipper. Zarathushtra  is  also  reported  to  have  paid  them 
great  reverence,  but  not  the  slightest  trace  of  this  can  be 
discovered  in  his  own  Gathas. 

This  kind  of  literature  has,  no  doubt,  largely  contributed 
towards  the  deterioration  of  the  religion  founded  by  Spitama 
Zarathushtra,  and  has  partially  re-estabhshed  what  the 
prophet  endeavoured  to  destroy.  As  to  its  age,  there  is 
happily  a  certain  historical  hint  to  be  found  in  the  Fra- 
vardin  Yasht,  where  mention  is  made  of  Gaotema  (Gautama 
Buddha),  the  founder  of  Buddhism  (see  p.  208).  That 
Buddhism  was  spread  over  Bactria,  at  a  very  early  time, 
we  know  from  other  sources.  Buddha  entered  Nirvana 
(died)  in  B.C.  543;  and  before  his  lore  could  spread  in 
Bactria,  at  least  one  or  two  centuries  must  have  elapsed 
after  the  master's  death.  Thus  we  arrive  at  a  date, 
between  B.C.  450  and  B.C.  350,  for  the  Fravardin  Yasht: 
and  there  is  no  difference,  in  language  and  ideas,  between 
it  and  the  others.  A  later  date  than  this  cannot  be  reason- 
ably assigned  to  the  majority  of  the  Yashts,  because  their 
language  had  already  begun  to  die  out  before  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Christian  era,  and  most  of  the  Yashts 
are  written  in  comparatively  correct  language,  without 
more  grammatical  errors  than  abound  in  some  parts  of  the 
Vendidad.  There  is,  besides,  another  reason  for  attribut- 
ing the  principal  Yashts  to  the  fifth  century  before  the 
Christian  era.  At  that  time,  as  we  learn  from  two  inscrip- 
tions of  King  Artaxerxes  Mnemon,^  the  worship  of  Mithra 
and  AnCdiita  was  spreading  through  all  the  dominions  of 

1  See  Benfey,   "Persische   Keilin-     on  the  Scythic  version  of  the  Beliis- 
schriften,"  p.  67;  Norris,   "Memoir     tun  Inscription,"  p.  159. 


264    BRIEF  SURVEY  OF  A  VEST  A  LITERATURE. 

the  Persian  Empire,  whicli  was  not  the  case  at  the  time  of 
Darius  Hystaspes,  who  never  mentions  these  deities  in  his 
numerous  inscriptions.  This  new  form  of  worship  called 
into  existence  a  new  appropriate  sacred  literature,  which 
is  partially  preserved  in  the  Yashts. 

The  question  as  to  the  age  of  the  other  and  older  parts  of 
the  Zend-Avesta  is  closely  connected  with  the  determina- 
tion of  the  period  at  which  Spitama  Zarathushtra  himself 
lived.  As  we  shall  see  in  the  fourth  Essay,  we  cannot 
place  his  era  at  a  much  later  date  than  B.C.  1200;  and  if 
we  assign  this  date  to  the  Gathas,  as  the  work  of,  Spitama 
Zarathushtra  and  his  disciples,  then  we  must  fix  the  age 
of  the  larger  portion  of  the  Vendidad  at  about  B.C.  1000- 
900,  and  that  of  the  later  Yasna  at  ahout  B.C.  800-700. 
The  Pazand  portion  of  the  Vendidad  is  very  likely  not 
older  than  B.C.  500,  and  at  the  same  time  the  collection  of 
its  different  parts  may  have  taken  place. 

If  we  date  the  commencement  of  the  sacred  literature  of 
the  Parsis  from  B.C.  1200,  and  place  its  close  at  B.C.  400, 
we  allow  a  period  of  about  800  years,  which  is,  in  compari- 
son with  other  sacred  literatures,  such  as  those  of  the  Jews 
and  BrahmanSj  rather  too  short  than  too  long.    • 


IV. 

THE   ZOROA'STRIAN  RELIGION 


AS   TO   ITS 


ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT. 


(267) 


IV. 


THE  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION  AS  TO  ITS 
ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT. 

In  this  Essay  it  is  intended  to  give  a  summary  view  of  tlie 
origin  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,!  its  general  character  and 
development,  so  far  as  they  can  be  ascertained  from  the 
original  Avesta  texts.  The  reader  being  furnished,  m  the 
preceding  Essay,  with  translations  of  a  good  many  passages 
referring  particularly  to  this  subject,  the  conclusions  to  be 
drawn  from  them  can  be  here  condensed  into  compara- 
tively 

I. — THE   EELATIONSHIP   BETWEEN   THE   BKAHINIANICAL 
AND   ZOEOASTKIAN   RELIGIONS. 

.  Before  we  can  properly  discuss  the  question  of  th§ 
origin  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  and  the  time  when  its 
founder  flourished,  certain  traces  of  an  originally  close 
connection  (which  the  attentive  reader  of  both  the  Vedas 
and  Zend-Avesta  wiU  readily  perceive  to  exist)  must  be 
pointed  out  between  the  Brahmanical  and  Zoroastrian 
religions,  customs,  and  observances. 

I. — Names  of  Divine  Beings. 

The  most  striking  feature,  in  this  respect,  is  the  use 
which  we  find  made,  in  both  the  Vedas  and  Zend-Avesta, 
of  the  names,  deva  and  asura  (almra  in  the  Avesta).    Beva 

1   This   subject  has    been  already  1861,  at  Poona;    and  more  fully  in 

briefly  treated  in  the  authors  "  Lee-  the  Essay  appended  to   his  German 

ture  on  the  origin  of  the  Parsi  reli-  work  on    the   GS.thas,    voL    ii.    pp. 

gion,"  delivered  on  the  ist  of  March  231-259. 


268     RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  BRAHMANICAL 

is  in  all  the  Vedas,  and  in  the  whole  Brahmanical  litera- 
ture, the  name  of  the  divine  beings,  the  gods  who  are  the 
objects  of  worship  on  the  part  of  the  Hindus  to  the  pre- 
sent day.  In  the  Zend-Avesta,  from  its  earliest  to  its 
latest  texts,  and  even  in  modern  Persian  literature,  deva 
(Pers.  dio)  is  the  general  name  of  an  evil  spirit,  a  fiend, 
demon,  or  devil,  who  is  inimical  to  all  that  comes  from 
God  and  is  good.  In  the  confession  of  faith,  as  recited  by 
Parsis  to  this  day,  the  Zoroastrian  religion  is  distinctly 
said  to  be  vi-daevd,  "  against  the  Devas,"  or  opposed  to 
them  (see  Yasna  xii.  i,  p.  173),  and  one  of  their  most  sacred 
books  is  called  vi-daevo-ddta  (now  corrupted  into  Ven- 
diddd),  i.e.,  what  is  given  against,  or  for  the  removal  of, 
the  Devas.  The  Devas  are  the  oricfinators  of  all  that  is 
bad,  of  every  impurity,  of  death  ;  and  are  constantly 
thinking  of  causing  the  destruction  of  the  fields  and  trees, 
and  of  the  houses  of  religious  men.  The  spots  most  liked 
by  them,  according  to  Zoroastrian  notions,  are  those  most 
filled  with  dirt  and  filth,  especially  cemeteries,  which  places 
are,  therefore,  objects  of  the  greatest  abomination  to  a  true 
Hormazd-worshipper. 

Asura  is,  in  the  form  Aliura,  the  first  part  of  Ahqea- 
MAZDA  (Hormazd),  the  name  of  God  among  the  Parsis ; 
and  the  Zoroastrian  religion  is  distinctly  called  the  Ahura 
religion  (see  Yasna  xii.  9,  p.  1 74),  in  strict  opposition  to  the 
Deva  religion.  But  among  the  Hindus  Asura  has  assumed 
a  bad  meaning,  and  is  applied  to  the  bitterest  enemies  of 
their  Devas  (gods),  with  whom  the  Asuras  are  constantly 
waging  war,  and  not  always  without  success,  as  even  Hindu 
legends  acknowledge.  This  is  the  case  throughout  the 
whole  Puranic  literature,  and  as  far  back  as  the  later  parts 
of  the  Vedas ;  but  in  the  older  parts  of  the  Eigveda  San- 
hita  we  find  the  word  Asiira  used  in  as  good  and  elevated 
a  sense  as  in  the  Zend-Avesta.  The  chief  gods,  such  as 
Indra  (Eigveda  i.   54,  3),!  Varuna  (Ev.  i.   24,  14),  Agni 

^  In  the  quotations  from  tlie  Rig-     ten),  the  second  to  the  hymn,  and  the 
veda,  the  first  number  refers  to  the     third  to  the  verse. 
Mandahx  ("  book,"  of  which  there  are  < 


AND  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIONS.  269 

(Ev.  iv.  2,  5;  vii.  2,  3),  Savitri  (Ev.  i.  35,  7),  Eudra  or 
Shiva  (Ev.  v.  42,  11),  &c.,  are  honoured  with  the  epithet 
"Asura,"  which  means  "living,  spiritual,"  signifying  the 
divine,  in  its  opposition  to  human  nature.  In  the  plural, 
it  is  even  used,  now  and  then,  as  a  name  for  all  the  gods, 
as  for  instance  in  Ev.  i.  108,  6:  "This  Soma  is  to  be  dis- 
tributed as  an  offering  amoug  the  Asuras,"  by  which  word 
the  Rishi  means  his  own  gods  whom  he  was  worshipping. 
We  often  find  one  Asura  particularly  mentioned,  who  is 
called  "Asura  of  heaVen"  (Ev.  v.  41,  3 ;  heaven  itself  is 
called  by  this  name,  Ev.  i.  131,  i),  "our  father,  who  pours 
down  the  waters  "  (Ev.  v.  83,  6) ;  Agui,  the  fire  god,  is 
born  out  of  his  womb  (Ev.  iii.  29,  14) ;  his  sons  support 
heaven. 

In  a  bad  sense  we  find  Asura  only  twice  in  the  older 
parts  of  the  Eigveda  (ii.  32,  4;  vii.  99,  5),  in  which  pas- 
sages the  defeat  of  the  "  sons  or  men  of  the  Asura "  is 
ordered,  or  spoken  of;  but  we  find  the  word  more  fre- 
quently in  this  sense  in  the  last  book  of  the  Eigveda, 
(which  is  only  an  appendix  to  the  whole,  made  in  later 
times),  and  in  the  Atharvaveda,  where  the  Rishis  are  said 
to  have  frustrated  the  tricks  of  the  Asuras  (iv.  23,  5),  and 
to  have  the  power  of  putting  them  down  (vi.  7,  2). 

In  the  Brahmanas,  or  sacrificial  books,  belonging  to  each 
of  the  Vedas,  we  find  the  Devas  always  fighting  with  the 
Asuras.^  The  latter  are  the  constant  enemies  of  the 
Hindu  gods,  and  always  make  attacks  upon  the  sacrifices 
offered  by  devotees.  To  defeat  them  all  the  craft  and 
cunning  of  the  Devas  were  required ;  and  the  means  of 
checking  them  was  generally  found  in  a  new  sacrificial 
rite.  Thus  the  Asuras  are  said  to  have  given  rise  to  a 
good  many  sacrificial  customs,  and  in  this  way  they  largely 

^  In  the  Puranas  the  Asuras  are  into  existence.  The  bad  sense  at- 
fighting  not  with  the  Devas,  but  with  tached  to  Asura  was  thouglit  to  lie 
the  Suras.  The  latter  word  is  a  mere  in  the  negative  prefix  a,  and  there- 
fiction  of  later  times,  and  not  to  be  fore  their  opponents  should  appear 
found  in  the  Vedas.  A  false  etymo-  without  it,  in  the  form  Sura. 
logy  has  called  this  new  class  of  gods 


270    RELA  TIONSHIP  BETWEEN  BRAHMANICAL 

contributed  towards  making  the  Bralimanical  sacrifices  so 
complicated  and  full  of  particular  rites  and  ceremonies. 
To  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  the  way  in  which  the  battles 
between  the  Devas  and  Asuras  are  said  to  have  been 
fought,  a  translation  of  a  passage,  taken  from  the  Aitareya 
Brdhmana  (i.  23)  i  of  the  Eigveda,  is  here  given: — 

'The  Devas  and  Asuras  waged  war  in  these  worlds. 
'  The  Asuras  made  these  worlds  fortified  places  {pur,  i.e., 
'jpoZt's,  town),  and  made  them  as  strong  and  impregnable 
'  as  possible ;  they  made  the  earth  of  iron,  the  air  of  silver, 
'  and  the  sky  of  gold.  Thus  they  transformed  these  worlds 
'  into  fortified  places  (castles).  The  Devas  said :  These 
'  Asuras  have  made  these  worlds  fortified  places ;  let  us 
'  thus  build  other  worlds  in  opposition  to  these  (now  occu- 
'  pied  solely  by  them).  They  then  made  out  of  her  (the 
'  earth)  a  seat,  out  of  the  air  a  fire-hearth,  and  out  of  the 
'  sky  two  repositories  for  sacrificial  food  (these  are  called 

*  ffavirdhdncc).  The  Devas  said :  Let  us  bring  the  Upa- 
'  sads;"^  by  means  of  a  siege  {upasada)  one  may  conquer 
'  a  large  town.     When  they  performed  the  first  Upasad, 

*  then  they  drove  them  (the  Asuras)  out  from  this  world 
'  (the  earth) ;  when  they  performed  the  second,  then  they 
'  drove  them  out  from  the  air ;  and  when  they  performeil 
'  the  third,  then  they  drove  them  out  from  the  sky.     Thus 


1  An  edition  and  translation  of  the  after  the  great  Pravargya  ceremony, 
whole  work  (in  two  volumes)  was  during  which  the  jiriesta  produce  for 
published  by  the  author  in  1863,  the  sacrificer  {yajamdna)  a  golden 
giving  full  information  regarding  the  celestial  body,  with  which  alone  he 
Brahmanical  sacrifices,  which  were  is  permitted  by  the  gods  to  enter 
previously  little  known  to  Eurajjean  heaven.  When  in  this  way  the  sacri- 
Sanskrit  scholars,  as  it  is  scarcely  ficer  is  born  anew,  he  is  to  receive 
possibleto  obtain  aknowledge  of  them  the  nourishment  appropriate  for  an 
without  oral  information  from  pro-  infant's  body,  and  this  is  milk.  The 
fessional  sacrificial  priests.  Uut  they  chief  part  of  the  Upasad  ceremony  is, 
are  too  essential  a  part  of  the  Vedic  that  one  of  the  priests  (the  Adhvaryu) 
religion  (now  chiefly  preserved  by  the  presents  milk  to  him  in  a  large 
BO-caWed.  Agnihotr is)  to  be  overlooked  wooden  spoon,  which  he  must  drink, 
by  those  who  are  inquiring  into  the  Formerly  it  had  to  be  drunlc  from 
Brahmanical  religion  and  its  history,  the  cow  which  was  to  be  milked  by 

2  This  is  a  particular  ceremony  the  Adhvaryu.  But  tliis  custom  has 
which  is  to  take  place  immediately  now  fallen  into  disuse. 


AND  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIONS.  271 

'they  drove  them  out  from  these  worlds.  The  Asuras, 
'  thus  driven  out  of  these  worlds,  repaired  to  the  Ritus 
'  (seasons).  The  Devas  said :  Let  us  perform  tlpasad. 
'  The  Upasads   being  three,   they  performed   each   twice 

<  (that  makes  six  in  all,  corresponding  with  the  six  seasons). 
'  Then  they  drove  them  (the  Asuras)  out  from  the  Ritus. 
'  The  Asuras  repaired  now  to  the  months.  The  Devas 
'  made  twelve  Upasads,  and  drove  them  out  from  the 
'  months.  After  having  been  defeated  here  also,  they  re- 
'  paned  to  the  haK-months.  The  Devas  performed  twenty- 
'  four  Upasads  and  drove  the  Asuras  out  of  the  half- 
'  months.  After  having  been  defeated  again,  the  Asuras 
'  repanetl  to  the  day  and  night ;  the  Devas  performed  the 
'  Upasads  and  drove  them  out.  Therefore,  the  first  Upasad 
'  ceremony  is  to  be  performed  in  the  first  part  of  the  day 

<  and  the  other  in  the  second  part  of  the  day.  He  (the 
'  sacrificer)  leaves  thus  only  so  much  space  to  the  enemy 
'  as  exists  between  the  conjunction  of  day  and  night  (that 
'  is,  the  time  of  twilight  in  the  morning. and  evening).' 

That  the  Asuras  of  the  Brahmanical  literatm-e  are  the 
supreme  beings  of  the  Parsis  (Ahuramazda  with  his  arch- 
angels) is,  according  to  these  statements,  hardly  to  be 
doubted.  But  there  exists,  perhaps,  a  still  more  convincing 
proof.  Among  the  metres,  used  in  the  Yajurveda,  we  find 
seven  which  are  marked  by  the  epithet  dsuri,  such  as 
Gayatri  dsitrt,  Ushmh  dsuri,  Pankti  dsuri}  These  Asura 
metres,  which  are  foreign  to  the  whole  Rigveda,  are  actu- 
ally to  be  found  in  the  Gatha  literature  of  the  Zend- 
Avesta,  which  professedly  exhibits  the  doctrines  of  the 
Ahura  (Asura)  religion.  The  Gdyatri  dsuri  consists  of 
■fifteen  syllables,  which  metre  we  discover  in  the  Gatha 
Ahunavaiti  (see  p.  144),  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  number 
of  sixteen  syllables,  of  which  it  generally  consists,  is  often 
reduced  to  fifteen  (compare,  for  instance,  Yas.  xxxi.  6,  and 
the  first  two  Hues  of  xxxi.  4). .  The  UsJmiJi  dsuri,  consist- 
ing of  fourteen  syllables,  is  completely  extant  in  the  Gatha 

1  See  the  "White  Yajurveda,"  edited  by  A.  Weber,  vol.  i.  p.  Ix. 


272     RELA  TIONSHIP  BE TWEEN  BRA HMANICAL 

Voliu-klisliatlira  (Yas.  li.),  each  verse  of  which  comprises 
fourteep  syllables.  The  Panhti  dsurt  consists  of  eleven 
syllables,  just  as  many  as  we  found  (p.  144)  in  the  Gathas 
Ushtavaiti  and  Spenta-mainyu.  This  coincidence  can 
certainly  not  be  merely  accidental,  but  shows  clearly,  that 
the  old  Gatha  literature  of  the  Zend-Avesta  was  well 
known  to  the  Risliis  who  compiled  the  Yajurveda. 

Of  great  importance,  for  showing  the  original  close  re- 
lationship between  the  Brahmanical  and  Parsi  religions,  is 
the  fact  that  several  of  the  Indian  gods  are  actually  men- 
tioned by  name  in  the  Zend-Avesta,  some  as  demons,  others 
as  angels. 

Indra,  the  chief  god  of  the  Brahmans  in  the  Vedic  times, 
the  thunderer,  the  god  of  light  and  god  of  war,  for  whom 
pre-eminently  the  Rishis,  the  ancient  founders  of  Brah- 
manism,  squeezed  and  drank  the  intoxicating  Soma  bever- 
age, is  expressly  mentioned  in  the  list  of  the  Devas  or 
demons  which  we  find  in  Vend.  xix.  43.^  He  is  there 
second  only  to  Angro-mainyush  (Ahriman),  the  arch-fiend 
who  is  sometimes  designated  daevandm  daivo,  "  demon  of 
demons  "  in  the  Avesta,  but  "  god  of  the  gods  "  in  Sanskrit, 

Next  to  Indra  stands  Sdurva  daeva,  whom  we  discover 
in  one  of  Shiva's  names  Sharva  (see  the  AVhite  Yajurveda, 
xvi.  28).  In  Ndonhaithya  daeva  we  readily  recognise 
the  Ndsatyas  of  the  Vedic  hymns,  which  name  is  there 
ffiven  to  the  two  Ashvins,  the  Dioskuri  of  the  Indian 
mythology. 

Some  names  of  the  Vedic  Devas  are,  however,  used  in  a 
good  sense,  and  are  transformed  into  Yazatas  or  angels  in 
the  Zend-Avesta.  The  most  noticeable  is  3fithra,  the 
Sanskrit  form  being  Mitra.  In  the  Vedic  hymns  he  is 
generally  invoked  together  with  Varuim  (identical  with 
the  god  Uranos  of  the  Greeks),  the  ruler  of  heaven  and 
master  of  the  universe ;  ^  but  in  the  Zend-Avesta  he  was 

1  This  passage  is  omitted  in  two  of  the  Vedic  hjmns  he  occupied  a  much 
the  oklcst  manuscripts.  higher  position.     The  whole  universe 

2  In  Later  times  he  was  believed  to  is  subject  to  his  laws, 
preside  over  tlie  waters  only  ;  but  in 


AND  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIONS.  273 

everywhere  separated  from  his  ancient  companion.  How- 
ever, there  is  one  hymn  in  the  Eigveda  (hi.  59,  mitr6  jandn 
ydtagati)  in  which  Mitra  alone  (as  the  sun)  is  addressed 
in  the  following  way : — 

'  Mitra  calls  men  to  their  work ;  Mitra  is  preserving 

*  earth  and  heaven ;  Mitra  looks  vipon  the  nations  always 
'  without  shutting  his  eyes.  To  Mitra  bring  the  offering 
'  with  ghl ! 

'  0  Mitra !  that  man  who  troubles  himself  to  keep  thy 
'  order  (rule),  0  son  of  eternity  (dditya)  I  shall  have  abun- 

*  dance ;  he,  protected  by  thee,  shall  neither  be  slain  nor 
'  defeated ;  no  distress  befalls  him,  neither  from  near,  nor 

*  from  far.' 

In  comparing  these  verses  with  the  extracts  given  above 
from  the  Mihir  Yasht,  one  may  easily  be  convinced  of  the 
complete  identity  of  the  Vedic  Mitra  and  the  Persian  Mithra. 

Another  Vedic  deity,  Aryaman,  who  is  generally  asso- 
ciated with  Mitra  and  Varuna  (Ev.  i.  136,  2),  is  at  once 
recognised  in  the  angel  Airyaman  of  the  Zend-Avesta. 
Aryaman  has  in  both  scriptures  a  double  meaning,  (a)  "  a 
friend,  associate "  (in  the  Gathas  it  chiefly  means  "  a 
chent");  (h)  the  name  of  a  deity  or  spirit  who  seems 
particularly  to  preside  over  marriages,  on  which  occasions 
he  is  invoked  both  by  Brahmans  and  Parsis  (see  p.  142). 
He  seems  to  be  either  another  name  of  the  sun,  like  Mitra, 
Savitri,  Pushan,  &c.,  or  his  constant  associate  and  repre- 
sentative. In  the  Bhagavad  Gita  (x.  29)  he  is  mentioned 
as  the  head  of  the  pitaras,  "  manes,  or  ancestral  spirits." 

Bhaga,  another  deity  of  the  Vedas,  belonging  to  the 
same  class  as  Mitra  and  Aryaman  (to  the  so-called 
Adityas),  is  to  be  recognised  in  the  word  bagha  of  the 
Zend-Avesta,  which  word  is,  however,  net  employed 
there  as  a  name  of  any  particid.ar  divine  being,  but  con- 
veys the  general  sense  of  "  god,  destiny"!  (ht.  "portion"). 

^  This  word  is  to  be  found  in  the     onic  mythology  knew  a   hiel  bog  or 
Slavonic  languages  (Russian,  Polish,     white  god,  and  a  czerny  bog  or  black 
&c.)  in  tlie  form  bog  as  the  common     god. 
name  for  "  God."    The  ancient  Slav- 

S 


274    RELA  TIONSHIP  BETWEEN  BRAHMANICAL 

That  the  Vedic  god  Bliaga  (compare  the  adjective  lagM- 
hakhta,  "  ordained  by  fate,"  which  is  to  be  found  in  both 
the  Veda  and  the  Zend-Avesta)  was  believed  to  be  a  deity, 
presiding  over  the  destiny  and  fortune  of  men,  may  be 
clearly  seen  from  some  passages  in  the  Pdgveda,  of  which 
Rv.  vii.  41,  2,  is  here  quoted:  'Let  us  invoke  the  victor 
'  in  the  morning  (i.e.,  the  sunlight  which  has  defeated  the 
'  darkness  of  night),  the  strong  Bhaga,  the  son  of  Aditi 
'  (imperishableness,  eternity),  who  disposes  all  things  (for 
'  during  the  night  all  seemed  to  be  lost).  The  poor  and 
'  the  sick,  as  well  as  the  king,  pray  to  him,  full  of  trust, 
'  saying :  Give  us  our  portion.' 

Aramati,  a  female  spirit  in  the  Vedas,  meaning:  (a) 
"devotion,  obedience"  (Ev.  vii.  i,  6;  34,  21),  (&)  "earth" 
(x.  92,  4,  5),  is  apparently  identical  with  the  archangel 
Armcdti,  which  name  has,  as  the  reader  will  have  learned 
from  the  third  Essay,  exactly  the  same  two  meanings  in 
the  Zend-Avesta.  In  the  Vedas,  however,  her  nam'e  is  of 
rare  occurrence,  being  found  in  some  hymns  of  the  Eigveda 
only.^  She  is  called  a  virgin  who  comes  with  butter  offer- 
ings in  the  morning  and  evening  to  Agni  (Ev.  vii.  i,  6),  a 
celestial  woman  {gna,  see  p.  1 70)  who  is  brought  by  Agni 
(Ev.  V.  43,  6). 

Nardshansa  (see  Yaska's  Nirukta,  viii.  6),  an  epithet  of 
several  Vedic  gods,  such  as  Agni,  Pushan,  and  Brahman- 
aspati  (but  especially  of  Agni),  is  identical  with  Ncdryo- 
sanha  (Neryosangh),  the  name  of  an  angel  in  the  Zend- 
Avesta,  who  serves  Ahuramazda  as  a  messenger  (see 
Vend,  xxii.),  in  which  capacity  we  find  Agni  and  Fiishan 
in  the  Vedic  hymns  also.  The  word  means  "  one  praised 
by  men,"  i.e.,  renowned. 

The  Vedic  god  Vciyu  (wind,  especially  the  morning 
wand),  "  who  first  drinks  the  Soma  at  the  morning  sacri- 
fice," is  to  be  recognised  in  the  spirit  Vayu  of  the  Zend- 
Avesta,  who  is  supposed  to  be  roaming  everywhere  (see 

1  See,  about  Aramati  and  Armaiti,     the  German    Oriental  Society,,  vol. 
the  author's  article  in  the  journal  of     viii.  (1854)  p.  769-771. 


AND  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIONS.  275 

tlie  Earn  Yasht  above,  p.  214).  He  is  the  only  Vedic  deity 
who  is  mentioned  by  name  {vaijti)  in  the  Gathas  (Yas.  liii. 
6),  but,  of  course,  not  called  a  dcva,  which  word  has  always 
a  bad  meaning  in  the  Zend-Avesta. 

Vritralia,  "  killer  of  Vritra  (a  demon),"  one  of  the  most 
frequent  epithets  of  Indra  in  the  Vedic  books,  is  to  be 
recognised  in  the  angel  Verethraghna  (Behram,  see  the 
Behram  Yasht  above,  p.  213).  It  looks  rather  strange  at 
the  first  glance,  that  we  should  find  one  and  the  same 
Vedic  god,  Indra,  with  his  proper  name  "  Indra  "  entered 
in  the  list  of  demons,  and  with  his  epithet  "  Vritraha " 
worshipped  as  a  very  high  angel.  But  the  problem  is  very 
easily  solved  if  one  bears  in  mind  that  Vritraha  is  applied 
in  the  hymns  of  the  Eigveda  not  exclusively  to  Indra,  but 
also  to  another  deity,  Trita,  who  occupied  in  the  most 
ancient  times  the  place  of  Indra  as  thunderer  and  killer  of 
the  demons  of  the  air  (Ev.  i.  18,  71).  That  this  Trita  is 
identical  with  Thraet'aona  (Fredun)  in  the  Iranian  legends, 
we  shall  soon  see. 

A  very  remarkable  coincidence,  as  to  the  number  of 
divine  beings  worshipped,  is  to  be  found  between  the 
statements  of  the  Vedas  and  the  Zend-Avesta.  In  the 
Vedas,  especially  in  the  Atharvaveda  and  the  Brahmanas, 
the  gods  number  thirty-three  {trayas-trinshad  dcvdh)  in 
aU.  Although  the  passages  do  not  vary  as  to  the  number, 
they  do  not  throughout  agree  as  to  the  names  of  the  indi- 
vidual gods  by  which  the  number  is  made  up.  In  the 
Aitareya  Brahmanam  (iii.  22,  p.  67,  of  the  author's  edition) 
they  are  enumerated  in  the  following  order  :  eight  Vasavas, 
eleven  Budras,  twelve  Adiiyas,  one  PrajdiKtti,  and  one 
Vashatkdra}  Instead  of  the  last  two  we  find  Dydvd- 
Prithivi  (heaven  and  earth)  enumerated  in  the  Shatapatha 
Bralimanam  (forming  part  of  the  white  Yajurveda),  iv.  5, 
y,  2.     In  another  passage  (xi.  6,  3,  5)   of  the  same  work, 

1  This  is  a  personification  of  the  by  the  sacrificial  priest,  when  throw- 
formula  Vaushat,  "may  he  (Agni)  ing  the  offering  into  the  fire.  Whea 
carry  it  up  1"  which  is  pronounced  personified,  the  efficacy  of  the  sacri- 
with  a  very  much  lengthened  sound  fice  is  to  be  understood. 


276    RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  BRAHMANICAL 

we  jSud  Indra  and  Prajapati  mentioned  as  the  last  two. 
In  the  Eamayana  (iii.  2,  15)  the  two  Ashvins  are  men- 
tioned instead  of  them.i  In  the  Atharvaveda  (x.  7,  13, 
22,  27),  all  the  thirty-three  gods  are  said  to  be  included  in 
Prajapati  (Brahma)  as  his  limbs.2 

With  these  thirty-three  Devas  of  the  Vedas  we  may 
compare  the  thirty-three  ratus,  or  chiefs,  for  maintaining 
the  best  truths,  as  they  are  instituted  by  Mazda,  and  pro- 
mulgated by  Zarathushtra  (Yas.  i.  10).  From  their  not 
being  expressly  enumerated  according  to  their  several 
classes,  as  the  thirty-three  Devas  are  in  the  Vedas,  we  may 
gather,  with  some  certainty,  that  the  "  thirty-three  ratiLs  " 
was  only  a  time-hallowed  formula  for  enumerating  the 
divine  existences,  the  bearing  and  import  of  which  was  no 
longer  imderstood  by  the  Iranians  after  their  separation 
from  the  Brahmans. 

2. — Names  and  Legends  op  Heroes. 

There  is  not  only  a  great  similarity  between,  and  even 
identity  of,  names  of  divine  beings  in  both  the  Veda  and 
Zend-Avesta,  but  a  similar  close  resemblance  extends  also 
to  the  legends  of  heroic  feats  related  in  both  scriptures. 
But,  at  the  very  outset,  we  can  discover,  notwithstanding 
this  similarity,  a  striking  difference  between  the  Iranian 
and  Brahmanical  notions  regarding  these  legends.  The 
Brahmans  attribute  them  generally  to  gods,  the  Iranians 
partly  to  great  heroes  and  partly  to  angels.  The  following 
are  some  of  the  most  striking  resemblances : — 

Yima  khslia6ta  (JwnisMd)  and  Yama  rcijd.     The  names 


1  The  later  tradition,  as  laid  down  deplorable  state  in  which  we  find  it 

in  the  Puranas,    has  increased    the  now. 

Vedic  number  of  thirty-three  deities  "  This  tendency  towards  establish- 
to  thirty- three  ko^is,  or  330  millions,  ing  a  kind  of  monotheism  is,  now 
This  fact  is  a  striking  instance  how  and  then,  to  be  discovered  in  the 
unscrupulously  and  ridiculously  the  ancient  Vedic  hymns.  Compare,  for 
statements  of  the  Vedas  have  been  instance,  the  celebrated  passage.  Rig- 
expanded  and  exaggerated  in  later  veda  i.  164,  46,  where  it  is  said  that 
times,  which  has  contributed  to-  "the  wise  men  understand  by  the 
wards   bringing   Hinduism    into  the  different  gods  only  one  being." 


AND  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIONS.  277 

and  epithets  are  the  same ;  Yima  is  identical  with  Tama, 
and  hhshaeta  means  "  king,"  the  same  as  rdjci.  The  family 
name  of  both  is  the  same  :  Vivanhdo  or  son  of  Vivanglivat 
in  the  Zend-Avesta  (see  the  second  fargard  of  the  Vendidad 
above,  p.  231),  and  Vaivasvata  or  son  of  Vivasvat  in  the 
Veda.  In  the  Zend-Avesta  Yima  gathers  round  him  men 
and  animals  in  flocks,  and  fills  the  earth  with  them ;  and 
after  the  evils  of  winter  had  come  over  his  territories,  he 
leads  a  select  number  of  the  beings  of  the  good  creation  to 
a  secluded  spot,  where  they  enjoy  uninterrupted  happiness. 
According  to  the  hymns  of  the  Eigveda,  '  Yama,  the  king, 

*  the  gatherer  of  the  peo]3le,  has  descried  a  path  for  many, 
'  which  leads  from  the  depths  to  the  heights ;    he  first 

*  found  out  a  resting-place  from  which  nobody  can  turn 

*  out  the  occupants ;  on  the  way  the  forefathers  have  gone, 
'  the  sons  will  follow  them'  (Eigveda  x.  14,  i,  2).  Yama 
is  here  described  as  the  progenitor  of  mankind;  as  the 
first  mortal  man  he  first  experienced  death,  and  first  went 
up  from  the  low  valley  of  this  earth  to  the  heights  of 
heaven,  where  he  gathers  round  him  all  his  descendants, 
who  must  follow  in  his  track  by  the  law  of  nature,  and 
rules  over  all  who  have  entered  his  dominions,  which  are 
full  of  bliss  and  happiness.  This  happy  ruler  of  the 
blessed  in  paradise  has  been  transformed,  in  the  modern 
Hindu  mythology,  into  the  fearful  god  of  death,  the 
inexorable  judge  of  men's  doings,  and  the  punisher  of  the 
wicked.  In  the  legends  of  the  Iranians,  as  extant  in  the 
Zend-Avesta  and  Shahn^mah,  he  was  the  king  of  the 
golden  age  and  the  happy  ruler  of  the  Iranian  tribes, 

Thrita,  Tlwaetaona  (Fredun)  and  Trita,  Traitana. 
Thrita,  one  of  the  Sama  family  (from  which  the  great  hero 
Eustam  sprang),  is  in  the  Zend-Avesta  (see  p.  257)  the 
first  physician,  the  curer  of  the  diseases  created  by  Ahri- 
man  ;  an  idea  which  we  find  also  attached  to  Trita  in  the 
Vedas.  He  is  said,  in  the  Atharvaveda  (vi.  113,  i),  to 
extinguish  illness  in  men,  as  the  gods  have  extinguished  it 
in  him;    he  must  sleep  for  the  gods   (xix.  56,  4).     He 


278    RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  BRAHMANICAL 

grants  a  long  life  (Taittiriya  Sanhita,  Black  Yajurveda, 
i.  8,  10,  2),  Any  evil  thing  is  to  be  sent  to  him  to  be 
appeased  (Eigveda  viii.  47,  13).  This  circumstance  is 
hinted  at  in  the  Zend-Avesta  by  the  surname  8ama,  which 
means  "  appeaser."  He  is  further  said  to  have  been  once 
thrown  into  a  well,  whence  Brihaspati  rescued  him  (Ev.  i. 
105,  17).  The  Indian  tradition  makes  hiTn  a  RisM,  and 
ascribes  several  hymns  of  the  Eigveda  to  him  (as  for 
instance  Ev.  i.  105).  There  are  some  traits  discoverable 
in  the  ancient  hymns  which  make  him  appear  rather  like 
a  god  than  a  mortal  man.  He  drinks  Soma,  like  Indra, 
for  obtaining  strength  to  kill  the  demon  Vritra  (i.  187,  i), 
and,  like  him,  he  cleaves  with  his  iron  club  the  rocky  cave 
where    the    cows    (the    celestial  waters)   are    concealed 

(i-  52,  5)- 

Thraetaona  {FrMHn)  is  easily  recognised  in  the  Vedic 
Traitana,  who  is  said  to  have  severed  the  head  of  a  giant 
from  his  shoulders  (Ev.  i.  158,  3).  His  father  is  called 
Athivyo,  which  cori'esponds  exactly  with  the  frequent  sur- 
name of  Trita  in  the  Vedas,  viz.,  Apti/a.  Trita  and 
Traitana  seem  to  have  been  confounded  together  in  the 
Veda,  whereas  originally  they  were  quite  distinct  from 
one  another.  Trita  was  the  name  of  a  celebrated  physician, 
and  Traitana  that  of  the  conqueror  of  a  giant  or  tyrant ; 
the  first  belonged  to  the  family  of  the  Sdmas,  the  latter  to 
the  Aptyas.  In  the  Zend-Avesta  the  original  form  of  the 
legend  is  better  preserved  (see  about  Tliraitaoim,,  p.  178). 

Kava  Us  (Kaikdus  in  the  Shahnamah)  and  Kdvya 
TJsImnas.  He  is  one  of  the  great  heroes  of  the  Iranians, 
and  believed  to  have  been  a  ruler  over  Iran.  In  the  later 
Indian  literature,  he  is  identified  with  Shuh-a,  the  planet 
Venus,  and  said  to  have  been  during  his  lifetime  the  Guru 
(prophet  or  teacher)  of  the  Daityas  or  Asuras,  the  enemies 
of  the  gods.  But  he  is  not  viewed  in  this  light  in  the 
ancient  Vedic  hymns.  There  he  is  associated  with  the  god 
Indra,  who  calls  himself  Kdvya  Ushand  (Ev.  iv.  26,  i), 
and  is  invoked  by  the  name  Kavi  U&lmnd  (Ev.  i.  130,  9). 


AND  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIONS.  279 

TMs  Kavya  Ushana  (meaning  "  Ushand,  son  of  Kavi ") 
installed  Agni  as  a  high- priest  for  mankind  (Rv.  viii.  23, 
17);  he  led  the  heavenly  cows  (the  clouds)  to  pasturage 
(Ev.  i.  83,  5),  and  made  Indra's  iron  club,  by  which  the  god 
killed  his  enemy  Vritra.  In  the  Bhagavad  Gita  (x.  27)  he 
is  considered  as  the  first  of  the  poets,  wherefore  Krishna, 
who  calls  himself  the  first  in  every  particular  branch, 
identifies  himself  with  Ushanas.  According  to  the  Maha- 
bharata  (i.  2544)  he  has  four  sons,  who  ofier  sacrifice  to  the 
Asuras.  In  the  Iranian  legend  he  does  not  appear  as 
blameless;  he  is  said  to  have  been  so  proud  and  seK- 
conceited  as  to  endeavour  to  fly  up  to  heaven,  for  which 
arrogance  he  was  then  severely  punished. 

The  name  Ddnava  is  given,  both  in  the  Vedas  and 
Zend-Avesta,  to  enemies  with  whom  wars  are  to  be  waged. 
Compare  Yt.  v.  73,  and  Atharvaveda  iv.  24,  2.  In  the 
Eigveda  it  is  often  a  name  of  the  archdemon  Vritra,  with 
whom  Indra  is  fiolitingf. 

In  the  legend  of  Tishtrya  (see  p.  200)  some  of  the  par- 
ticulars relating  to  Indra  and  Bri]ias]jati  in  the  Vedas  may 
be  recognised.  Tishtrya  cannot  bring  the  rain  from  the 
sea  Vouru-kasha  over  the  earth,  if  not  assisted  by  the 
prayers  of  men.  In  the  same  way  Indra  cannot  release 
the  celestial  cows  (the  clouds)  from  the  rocky  cave,  whither 
they  have  been  carried  by  demons,  without  the  assistance 
of  Brihaspati,  who  is  the  representative  of  the  prayers  sent 
up  by  men  to  the  gods,  and  the  personification  of  their 
devotion  and  meditation. 

3. — Sacrificial  Rites. 

Although  sacrifices  are  reduced  to  a  few  rites  in  the 
Parsi  religion  now-a-days,  we  may  discover,  on  comparing 
them  with  the  sacrificial  customs  of  the  Brahmans,^  a  great 

^  Most  of  the  Vedic  sacrifices  are  Their  number  was  very  large  at  the 

still  in  use.     Those  Brahmans,  who  time  of  the  Pesh was,  and  is  even  now 

perform  all  the  sacrifices  required  for  considerable  in  some  of  the   native 

going   to   heaven,    according    to   the  states,    as   for  instance,   in    the   do- 

Vedic  system,  are  called  AgnihotYis.  minions  of  the   Gaikwar  at  Baroda. 


28o    RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  BRAHMANICAL 

similarity  in  the  rites  of  the  two  religions.  Some  of  the 
most  striking  of  these  resemblances  will  be  here  jDointed 
out. 

At  the  very  outset  the  attentive  reader  of  the  Vedas 
and  the  Zend-Avesta  will  observe  the  identity  of  a  good 
many  terms  referring  to  priestly  functions.  The  very 
name  for  "  priest "  in  the  Zend-Avesta,  dthrava,  is  to  be 
recognised  in  the  atharvan  of  the  Vedas,  by  which  term  a 
priest  of  Fire  and  Soma  is  meant.  The  Vedic  words  ishti 
(a  series  of  invocations  of  several  deities,  accompanied  by 
the  offering  of  the  sacrificial  cakes,  the  so-called  Purodasha) 
and  dhuti  (the  invocation  of  one  deity  with  the  offering, 
within  the  limits  of  the  ishti)  are  to  be  recognised  in  the 
ishti  and  dzuiti  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  where  the  oriiiinal 
peculiar  significations  are  lost,  and  only  the  general  mean- 
ings "  gift "  and  "  invocation  or  praise "  have  survived. 
The  particular  names  of  several  officiating  priests,  at  the 
time  of  performing  a  solemn  ceremony,  are  the  same  in 
both  religions.  The  Hotd,  or  reciter  of  the  mantras  of  the 
Eigveda,  is  identical  with  the  Zaota  priest,  while  the 
Adhvaryu  or  managing  priest,  who  has  to  prepare  every- 
thing for  the  Hota,  is  the  same  with  the  Batlnoi  (now 
called  Easpi),  who  is  only  the  servant  of  the  Zaota  or 
chief  priest.  In  the  Sraoshdvareza,  who  represents  the 
angel  Srosh,  the  Pratiprasthdtd  of  the  Brahmanical  sacri- 
fices may  be  recognised,  because  this  priest  holds  in  his 
hand  a  wooden  sword,  during  the  time  of  sacrifice,  to  drive 
away  the  evil  spirits,  wliich  weapon  is  constantly  ascribed 
to  Srosh  for  the  same  purpose  (see  p.  190).  In  the 
AtarevaJchsho,  who  has  charge  of  the  vessel  in  which  the 

The    performance    of    the   manifold  selves   at  the   Daksbina  meeting  at 

sacrifices  enjoined  to  the  Agnihotpis,  Poona,  between  the   15th  November 

or  the  strict  followers  of  the  Vedic  and  15th  December   1861,  only   one 

religion,    entails   too   much   expense  could  be   found    (and  he   was  from 

upon  an  individual  to  be  performed  Sat&ra)  who  had  performed   all  the 

by    many    without    public    suppoit.  numerous  sacrifices,  some   of  which 

The  Peshwas  used  to  support  them,  require  from  six  to  twelve  days  for 

Among    all     the    Agnihotris    (about  their  performance  and  an  outlay  of 

twelve  or  fifteen)  who  presented  them-  many  thousands  of  rupis. 


AND  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIONS.  281 

fire  is,  we  find  the  Agnidhra  (who  holds  the  fire)  of  the 
Brahmans. 

The  Yajishn  or  Ijashne  ceremony,  as  performed  by  the 
Parsi  priests  now-a-days  (see  p.  139),  contains  all  the  ele- 
ments which  constitute  the  different  parts  (four  or  seven)  of 
the  Ji/otishtoma  cycle  of  sacrifices,  the  prototype  of  all  the 
Soma  sacrifices.     The  Agnishtoma  (i.e.,  praise  of  Agni,  the 
fire),  which  is  the  opening  sacrifice  of  this  cycle  and  indis- 
pensable for  every  Aguihotri  to  gain  the  object  wished  for, 
viz.,  heaven,  bears  a  particular  resemblance  to  the  perform- 
ance of  Ijashne.     Of  course,  the  whole  ceremony  is  much 
shortened,  and  the  rites  changed  in  accordance  with  the 
more  enlightened  and  humane  spirit  of  the  Zoroastrian 
religion.     In  the  Agnishtoma  four  goats  must  be  killed 
and  their  flesh  is  partly  offered  to  the  gods  by  throwing  it 
into  Agni,  the  fire,  who  is  the  mediator  between  gods  and 
men,  and  partly  eaten  by  the  sacrificer  and  the  priests. 
During  the  Ijashne  ceremony  no  animal  is  killed;   only 
some  hair  of  an  ox  is  placed  in  a  smaU  vessel  and  shown, 
together  with  the  other  things,  to  the  fire.     This  is  now-a- 
days  the  only  remnant  of  animal  sacrifice  on  this  occasion, 
but  formerly  they  used   a  piece  of  meat  besides.     The 
Puroddsha  of  the  Brahmans,  or  the  sacrificial  cakes,  which 
must   be  oifered  to  different  deities  in  a  certain   order, 
during  the  recital  of  two  mantras  for  each  deity,  is  changed 
into  a  flat  kind  of  bread  (similar  to  a  very  small  pancake), 
called  DariXn.     The  fresh  milk,  required  at  the  time  of 
performing  the  Upasad  ceremony  (see  p.  270),  is  to  be 
recognised  in  the  gdush  jivya  (see  p.  139).     Ghl,  butter, 
&c.,  required  for  less  important  ceremonies  at  the  time  of 
the  Agnishtoma  (when  making  the  so-called  Praydjas  for 
the  six  seasons)  are  represented  by  the  gdush  hudhdo  (see 
p.  139).     The  Zaothra  or  consecrated  water  is  required  at 
the  commencement   of  the   Brahmanical   sacrifices   also, 
where  it  is  called  udaka  shdnta. 

The  most  important  part  of  the  offerings  in  both  the 
Jyotishtoma  sacrifices  and  the  Ijashne  ceremony,  is  the 


282    RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  BRAHMANICAL 

juice  of  the  Soma  plant.  In  both  the  twigs  of  the  plant 
itself  (the  Brahmans  use  the  stalks  of  the  Putika,  which  is 
a  substitute  for  the  original  Soma,  tind  the  Parsis  use  the 
branches  of  a  particular  shrub  which  grows  in  Persia)  in 
their  natural  state  are  brought  to  the  sacred  spot,  where 
the  ceremony  is  to  take  place,  and  the  juice  is  there  ex- 
tracted during  the  recital  of  prayers.  The  contrivances 
used  for  obtaining  the  juice,  as  well  as  the  vessels  em- 
ployed, are  somewhat  different,  but,  on  closer  inquiry,  an 
original  identity  may  be  recognised.  The  Brahmans  beat 
the  stalks  of  the  plant,  which  are  placed  on  a  large  flat 
stone,  with  another  smaller  stone  till  they  form  a  single 
mass ;  this  is  then  put  into  a  vessel  and  water  is  poured 
over  it.  After  some  time  this  water,  which  has  extracted 
the  greenish  juice,  is  poured  through  a  cloth,  which  serves 
as  a  strainer,  into  another  vessel.  The  Parsi  priests  use, 
instead  of  stones,  a  metal  mortar  with  a  pestle  whereby 
the  twigs  of  the  Homa  plant,  together  with  one  of  the 
pomegranate  tree,  are  bruised,  and  they  then  pour  water 
over  them  to  obtain  the  juice,  which  is  strained  through  a 
metal  saucer  with  nine  holes.  This  juice  (Parahaoma)  has 
a  yellow  colour,  and  only  very  little  of  it  is  drunk  by  one 
of  the  two  priests  (the  Zaota)  who  must  be  present,  whereas 
all  the  Brahmanical  priests  (sixteen  in  number),  whose 
services  are  required  at  the  Jyotishtoma,  must  drink  the 
Soma  juice,  and  some  of  the  chief  priests  (such  as  the 
Adhvaryii  and  Hota)  must  even  take  a  very  large  quantity. 
The  Parsi  priests  never  throw  any  of  the  juice  into  the 
fire,  but  the  Brahmans  must  first  offer  a  certain  quantity 
of  the  intoxicating  juice  to  different  deities,  by  throwing 
it  from  variously-shaped  wooden  vessels  into  the  fire,  before 
they  are  allowed  to  taste  "  the  sweet  liquor."  The  Parsi 
priests  only  show  it  to  the  fire,  and  then  drink  it.  After- 
wards the  juice  is  prepared  a  second  time  by  the  chief 
priest  (Zaota)  and  then  thrown  into  a  well.  These  two 
preparations  of  the  Homa  juice  correspond  to  the  morning 
libation  (jirdtah  savana)  and  mid-day  libation  (jnadhyandina 


AND  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIONS.  2S3 

savana)  of  the  Bralimans;  for  the  third,  or  evening  liba- 
tion, there  was  no  opportunity  in  the  Parsi  ritual,  because 
no  sacrificial  rites  are  allowed  to  be  performed  in  the 
evening  or  night  time. 

The  Barsom  (Baresvia),  or  the  bundle  of  twigs  which  is 
indispensable  at  the  time  of  reciting  Ijashne,  is  to  be  traced 
to  one  of  the  sacrificial  rites  at  the  great  Soma  sacrifices. 
It  has  hitherto  been  erroneously  identified  with  the  Barkis 
or  sacred  grass  (Kusha  grass  is  used)  of  the  Brahmans, 
which  they  spread  at  their  sacrifices  as  a  seat  for  the  gods 
who  are  expected  to  come.  But  the  close  connection  of 
the  Barsom  with  the  Ijashne  ceremony,  and  the  circum- 
stances that  wood  (branches  of  a  particular  tree)  and  not 
grass  is  taken,  and  that  these  branches  are  laid  on  a  stand, 
not  spread  on  the  floor,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  it  does 
not  represent  the  seat  for  the  divine  beings,  as  the  Kusha 
grass  does.  It  refers,  in  all  likelihood,  to  a  peculiar  rite 
at  the  great  Soma  sacrifices,  which  is  as  yet  little  known, 
but  about  which  the  author  had  an  opportunity  of  obtain- 
ing oral  information.  At  the  time  of  the  Soma  libation 
(called  Savana),  which  is  to  be  performed  three  times  on 
the  same  day,  from  8-12  a.m.  (morning  Kbation),  1-5  p.m. 
(mid-day  libation),  6-1 1  p.m.  (evening  libation),  the  three 
Samaveda  priests,  the  Udgata,  the  Prastota,  and  the  Prati- 
harta,  require  a  certain  number  of  wooden  sticks  to  be  placed 
in  a  certain  order  when  chanting  the  sacred  Samans  (verses 
of  the  Samaveda).  They  use  for  this  purpose  the  wood  of 
the  Udumbara  tree,  and  call  them  kusha,  which  name  is 
generally  given  to  the  sacred  grass.  In  the  Agnisttoma 
fifteen  such  sticks  are  required  at  the  morning  libation, 
seventeen  at  noon,  and  twenty-one  in  the  evening;  in 
other  sacrifices,  such  as  the  Aptoryama,  even  a  much 
larger  number  of  such  sticks  is  required.  The  three 
singers  must  then  chant  successively,  one  by  one,  in  a 
very  solemn  manner,  the  five  parts,^  into  which  every 

1  Such  Sdmans  are  called  pancha-     viz. :     Prastdva    (prelude),    UdgWia 
bhaktika,  i.e.,  divided  into  five  parts,     (the  principal  part,  to  be  chanted  by 


284    RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  BRAHMANICAL 

Saman  or  verse  adapted  for  singing  is  divided  at  certain 
sacrifices,  wliile  putting  some  of  the  sticks  into  a  certain 
proper  order.  This  ceremony  is  considered  to  be  most 
essential,  and  unless  observed  and  properly  performed,  all 
the  effect  of  the  Samans  (which  are  believed  to  carry  the 
sacrificer  up  to  heaven,  the  most  important  of  all  being 
called  Eathantaram,  "  carriage  ")  is  lost. 

At  the  same  time  there  is  another  peculiar  custom  to  be 
observed,  which  may  be  traced  in  the  Yasna  also.  As  soon 
as  the  singers  have  chanted  their  verse,  one  of  the  Hotas 
must  repeat  a  series  of  mantras  from  the  Eigveda  (not  in 
the  usual  way  of  repetition,  but  in  one  approaching  the 
recital  of  the  Yajurveda),  in  order  to  praise  and  extol  the 
Saman,  which  ceremony  is  called  Shastram.  At  the  end 
of  the  different  Has  of  the  Yasna,  especially  its  Gatha 
portion,  verses  of  these  hymns  are  often  invoked  as  divine 
beings,  and  in  Yas.  xix.  6  (p.  i  S6)  we  have  seen  that  it  is 
considered  very  meritorious  to  worship  the  Ahuna-vairya 
formula  after  having  repeated  it. 

With  regard  to  the  division  of  the  Samans  into  five 
parts,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  Ahuna-vairya  formula, 
which  is  as  important  for  the  Parsis  as  the  Eathantaram 
Saman  was  for  the  Vedic  Brahmans,  was  also  divided  into 
five  parts  (see  p.  i88). 

In  the  Afringan  ceremony  of  the  Parsis  (see  p.  224) 
there  may  be  discovered  a  trace  of  the  Brahmanical  Apri 
ceremony  (see  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  p.  28,  of  the 
author's  edition),  which  is  preparatory  to  the  killing  and 
offering  of  the  sacrificial  goats.  The  name  is  the  same : 
d-prt  in  Sanskrit,  a-/r*  in  the  Avesta  (the  formula  used 
being  dfrindmi),  which  literally  means  to  "  invite ;  "  with 
which  invitation  the  name  of  the  being  or  beings,  in  whose 
honour  the  ceremony  is  being  performed,  must  always  be 
mentioned.  The  Parsis  mention  the  name  of  a  deceased 
person,  or  of  an  angel ;  the  Brahmans  insert  the  names  of 

the  Udg^ta),  Pratihdra  (response),  (great  finale),  to  be  chanted  by  all 
Upadrava  (little  fiuale),  and  Nidhana    three. 


AND  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIONS.  285 

different  deities  l  (there  are  eleven  invocations),  who  are 
expected  to  come  and  enjoy  the  meal  prepared  for  them. 
These  solemn  invitations  being  accompanied  with  a  bless- 
ing, the  Parsis  understand  by  this  ceremony  a  benediction, 
which  form  it  seems  to  have  assumed  at  a  very  early 
time. 

The  Darsha  'p'Arnama  isliti  (new  and  full  moon  sacrifice) 
seems  to  correspond  with  the  Damn  ceremony  of  the  Parsis. 
Both  are  very  simple ;  the  Brahmans  use  chiefly  the  Puro- 
dasha,  or  sacrificial  cakes,  the  Parsis  the  sacred  bread 
(Dariin),  which  corresponds  to  the  Purodasha. 

The  Chdturmdsya  ishti,  or  the  sacrifice  offered  every  four 
months  or  two  seasons,  corresponds  to  the  Gahanbar  cere- 
mony of  the  Parsis,  which  is  celebrated  six  times  a  year. 
Sacrificing  animals  was  essential  for  the  proper  performance 
of  these  ceremonies  among  the  Parsis  until  recent  times;  so  it 
is  with  the  Brahmans  also.  But  as  to  animal  sacrifice,  there 
is  always  a  great  difference  between  the  Brahmanical 
and  Zoroastrian  rites.  The  Brahmans  must  throw  some 
parts  of  the  slaughtered  animal,  such  as  the  vcqm  (peri- 
toneum), into  the  fire ;  while  the  Parsis  simply  consecrate 
the  flesh  and  eat  it  as  a  solemn  meal,  without  throwing 
anything  into  the  fire.  On  such  occasions  even  the  Brah- 
mans now-a-days  also  eat  some  of  the  flesh. 

4. — Religious  Observances,  Domestic  Eites,  and 
cosmographical  opinions. 

Although  there  are  a  good  many  similarities  to  be  dis- 
covered in  respect  to  observances,  domestic  rites,  &c.,  we 
must  confine  our  remarks  to  a  few  of  the  most  striking 
points  of  coincidence. 

The  great  purification  ceremony  (see  p.  241),  by  means 
of  cow's  urine  (called  gomez),  as  practised  by  the  Parsis  to 
this  day,  may  be  compared  with  a  similar  observance  ot 
the  Brahmans.      The  latter  use,  in  order  to  remove  all 

1  See  Yaska's  Nirukta,  viii.  4-21,  and  Max  MlUler's  "  History  of  Ancient 
Sanskrit  Literature,"  pp.  463-467. 


286  TRACES  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF 

inward  impurity  from  the  body,  the  so-called  Panclia- 
gavyam,  or  five  products  of  the  most  sacred  animal,  the  cow, 
one  of  which  is  her  urine.  This  custom  comes  from  the 
most  ancient  times,  when  this  liquid  was  regarded  as  a 
very  effective  remedy  against  any  disorder  of  the  bodily 
organs.  Such  remedies  as  cow-dung  and  cow's  urine  have 
been  used  even  on  the  continent  of  Europe  by  peasant 
physicians  down  to  our  times. 

To  the  Parsis,  as  well  as  to  the  Brahmans,  the  investi- 
ture with  the  sacred  thread  (called  kusti  by  the  Parsis, 
aiwydonhancm  in  the  Zend-Avesta)  is  enjoined  as  a  reli- 
gious duty.  As  long  as  tliis  ceremony  has  not  been  per- 
formed, one  is  no  real  member  of  either  the  Brahmanical 
or  Zoroastrian  community.  The  time  for  performing  it 
lasts  among  the  Brahmans  from  the  eighth  to  the  sixteenth 
year  (see  Yajnavalkya,  i.  14,  37) ;  the  Parsis  are  invested 
with  the  Kustt  in  their  seventh  year. 

With  regard  to  the  funeral  rites  of  both  religions  some 
similarities  may  be  pointed  out.  After  the  death  of  a 
man,  Brahmans  as  well  as  Parsis  must  pray  to  raise  the 
soul  of  the  deceased  up  to  heaven,  which  is  the  so-called 
third-day's  ceremony  of  the  Parsis.  On  the  tenth  day 
after  the  death,  the  Parsis  perform  a  certain  ceremony 
(Ijashne  is  read),  and  the  Brahmans  use  the  important 
ceremony  of  Kdkasparsha,  that  is,  they  expose  a  ball  of 
rice  to  be  taken  by  a  crow. 

As  to  cosmographical  opinions  the  Brahmans  divide  the 
whole  world  into  seven  dvipas,  the  Parsis  into  seven  kesh- 
vars  {karshvare  in  the  Avesta),  i.e.,  zones  or  regions.  Both 
acknowledge  a  central  mountain,  which  is  called  by  the 
former  Mcru,  by  the  latter  Alborz  {Hard  herezaiti  in  the 
Avesta). 

II. — ORIGIN   OF  THE   ZOEOASTRIAN   RELIGION. — SPITAMA 
ZARATHUSHTRA  AND   HIS   PROBABLE   AGE. 

After  having  established,  in  the  preceding  section,  the 
fact  that  a  close  and  intimate  connection  once  existed 


THE  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  287 

between  the  religion  of  the  Parsis  and  that  of  the  Brah- 
mans,  we  may  now  proceed  to  trace  the  origin  of  the 
Zoroastrian  religion,  and  characterise  the  period  at  which 
it  must  have  arisen. 

I. — Traces  of  the  Origin  to  be  Found  both  in  the  Vedas 
AND  Zend-Avesta. 

In  the  Vedas,  as  well  as  in  the  older  portions  of  the 
Zend-Avesta  (see  the  Gathas),  there  are  sufficient  traces  to 
be  discovered  that  the  Zoroastrian  religion  arose  out  of  a 
vital  struggle  against  the  form  which  the  Brahmanical 
religion  had  assumed  at  a  certain  early  period.  Both 
creeds  are  known  as  diametrically  opposed  to  one  another 
in  both  their  scriptures.  One  is  called  the  belief  of  the 
Asuras  {Ahura  in  the  Avesta),  the  other  that  of  the  Devas. 
This  circumstance  cannot  be  merely  accidental,  the  less  so, 
as  we  find  the  word  Asura  used  in  the  older  Vedic  hymns 
(see  p.  268)  in  a  perfectly  good  sense,  and  as  a  name  of 
several  Devas  themselves,  which  fact  clearly  shows  that 
there  must  have  been  once  a  vital  struggle  between  the 
professors  of  the  Deva  and  those  of  the  Ahura  religion,  in 
consequence  of  which  the  originally  good  meaning  of  Asura 
was  changed  to  a  bad  one. 

Although  it  is,  therefore,  impossible  to  deny  the  exist- 
ence of  the  original  close  connection  between  the  Deva 
and  Asura  religions,  some  might  still  be  inclined  to  doubt 
whether  the  adherents  of  the  Deva  religion  were  actually 
the  direct  ancestors  of  the  present  Brahmans.  It  is  true 
the  word  deva  ^  and  the  cognate  word  dyaus  are  found  in 
most  of  the  Aryan  languages  with  the  meaning  of  "  heaven," 
or  "divine  being,"  and  the  Deva- worshippers,  combated 
by  the  Zoroastrians,  might  be  another  kindred  tribe  of  the 
Aryan  stock,  different  from  the  Brahmans.  But  the  fact 
that  several  of  the  Brahmanical  Devas  are  mentioned  by 

^  Best  preserved  in  the  Lithuanian  and  the  name  of  an  ancient  Teutonic 

diewas,    "god,"  and  in   Latin  deus.  god    Tins,    preserved  in   the    -word 

The  cognate  dyaus,  "heaven,"  is  ex-  "Tuesday"  (in  Anglo-Saxon:  Tives 

tant  in  the  Greek  Zeus,  gen.  Dios,  dceg). 


288  TRACES  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF 

name  in  the  Zend-Avesta,  leaves  no  doubt  whatever  that 
the  opponents  of  the  Ahura  religion  actually  were  the 
ancient  Brahmans ;  for  the  names  of  the  Devas,  mentioned 
in  the  Zend-Avesta,  such  as  Indra,  Sharva,  ISTasatya,  are 
purely  Brahmanical,  and  unknown  to  any  other  nation  of 
the  Aryan  stock. 

We  have  seen  above  that  the  names  of  the  Indian  Devas 
or  gods  were  not  all  entered  in  the  list  of  the  Zoroastrian 
Devas  or  demons,  but  some  of  them  retained  their  old 
dignity  by  being  transformed,  in  accordance  with  the 
new  spirit  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  from  gods  into 
angels  (Yazatas).  The  names  of  these  are  also  identical 
with  those  of  some  Vedic  deities,  such  as  Aryaman,  Mitra, 
Aramati,  &c. 

Some  of  the  ancient  gods  occur  with  one  name  in  the 
list  of  angels,  and  with  another  in  that  of  the  demons. 
Thus,  for  instance,  the  Zoroastrian  demon,  Indra,  has 
become,  under  his  other  name,  Verethraghna  (Vritraha), 
one  of  the  mightiest  angels,  as  has  been  shown  above 
(p.  275). 

These  facts  throw  some  light  upon  the  age  in  which  that 
great  religious  struggle  took  place,  the  consequence  of 
which  was  the  entire  separation  of  the  ancient  Iranians 
from  the  Brahmans,  and  the  foundation  of  the  Zoroastrian 
religion.  It  must  have  occurred  at  the  time  when  Indra 
was  the  chief  god  of  the  Brahm.ans.  This  was  the  case  at 
that  early  period  to  which  we  must  assign  the  composition 
of  the  majority  of  the  Vedic  hymns,  before  the  Brahmans 
had  immigrated  into  Hindustan  Proper.  In  the  post- Vedic 
period,  whose  events  called  into  existence  the  great  epic 
poems  Mahabharata  and  Eamayana,  we  find  Indra's  place 
at  the  head  of  the  gods  occupied  by  the  Trimurti  of  Brahma, 
Vishnu,  and  Shiva,  which  idea  is  utterly  foreign  to  the 
Vedic  hymns.  The  Trimurti  never  being  alluded  to  in  the 
Zend-Avesta,  we  must  assign  to  the  religious  struggle  a 
much  earlier  date. 

Before  proceeding  to  fix  the  probable  age  of  the  origin 


THE  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  289 

of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  some  facts  derived  from  pas- 
sages in  tlie  Vedas  and  Gatlias  may  be  adduced,  whicli 
throw  mucli  liglit  upon  this  difficult  subject. 

The  priests  and  prophets  of  the  Devas  are  mentioned  by 
the  names  Icavi,  karapan,  and  lisihhsh  in  tlie  Gathas  (see 
Yas,  xxxii.  14;  xliv.  20;  xlvi.  11  ;  xlviii.  10;  li.  14).  The 
first  is  of  very  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Vedic  hymns, 
the  third  is  also  occasionally  met  with  there,  and  the  verb 
Qcalpayati)  i  and  noun  {kalpa)  connected  with  the  second 
name  are  very  frequently  employed.  Kavi,  which  means 
"  poet "  in  the  classical  Sanskrit,  is  the  name  of  seers  and 
priests  in  the  Vedic  hymns  (Rv.  i.  128, 8  ;  142,  8  ;  188,  i)  ; 
by  drinking  the  "  delicious,"  but  intoxicating,  Soma  juice, 
the  power  of  Kavi  is  attainable  (Ev.  i.  91,  14) ;  the  term  is, 
therefore,  applied  to  the  Soma  priest  (Rv.  ix.  37, 6 ;  72,  6) ; 
these  Kavis  or  seers,  being  believed  to  be  in  possession  of 
divine  revelation  and  secret  wisdom,  were  consulted  as 
prophets  (Ev.  i.  164,  6;  vii.  86,  3).  The  gods  themselves, 
especially  Agni,  are  called  by  this  name  (Ev.  ii.  23,  i  ;  iii. 
14,  i),  which  circumstance  clearly  shows  that  it  was  a  high 
title,  which  could  be  given  only  to  the  heads  and  spiritual 
guides  of  the  ancient  Brahmanical  community. 

Synonymous  with  this  name  is  usliij,  which  exactly  cor- 
responds to  usihhsh  (nom.)  in  the  Gathas  (Yas.  xliv.  20). 
It  means  "  a  wise,  intelligent  man,"  as  one  may  see  from 
such  passages  as  Ev.  ii.  21,  5  ;  x.  46,  2,  and  Shankhay ana's 
Grihya  Sutra  vi.  12,  19,  where  it  changes  places  with  kavi, 
as  is  the  case  in  Yas.  xliv.  20,  also. 

By  the  karapano,  who  are  mentioned  together  with  the 
kdvayas  in  the  Gathas,  we  must  understand  specially  the 
sacrificial  priests,  the  performers  of  the  sacrifices,  those 
men  who  are  known  nowadays  to  the  Brahmans  by  the 
name  of  Shrotriyas.  As  to  its  grammatical  formation,  this 
word  is  derived  from  a  root  karap,  which  corresponds 
exactly  with  the  Sanskrit  root  kalp,  "  to  perform  a  cere- 

1  The  sound  I,  being  comijletely  unknown  in  the  Avesta  language,  is  there 
always  represented  by  7: 

T 


290  TRACES  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF 

mony,"  -whence  the  word  lidpa,  "  the  ritual,  or  the  doctrine 
of  the  ceremonies,"  is  derived.  Karapano,  therefore,  means 
really  "  performers  of  sacrificial  rites." 

These  two  names,  Jcavi  and  karapan,  designate  in  the 
fullest  sense  all  the  spiritual  guides  of  the  professors  of 
the  Deva  religion,  who  tried  to  put  down  the  adherents  of 
the  Ahuramazda  religion,  and  we  necessarily  find,  there- 
fore, a  bad  meaning  attached  to  them  in  the  Gathas.  This 
appears  the  more  strange,  as  the  word  havi  itself  forms 
part  of  the  names  of  highly  celebrated  personages  of 
Iranian  antiquity,  such  as  Kavi  Husrava  (Kai  Khusro), 
Kavi  Kavata  (Kai  Kabad),  Kavi  Vishtaspa  (Kai  Gushtasp), 
&c.,  and  has  become,  in  its  derived  adjectival  form  "  Kaya- 
nian,"  the  designation  of  a  whole  dynasty  of  the  ancient 
Bactrian  rulers. 

Here  the  question  naturally  arises,  how  could  a  desig- 
nation, which  distinguished  the  bitterest  enemies  of  the 
Zoroastrian  religion,  be  applied  to  kings  who  were,  like 
Kavi  Vishtaspa,  believed  to  be  its  staunchest  friends  and 
protectors?  Tlie  only  reasonable  answer  is,  that  before 
the  outbreak  of  the  schism,  when  the  Iranians  and  Brah- 
mans  lived  peacefully  together,  the  Kavis  were  at  the 
head  of  both  communities ;  and  that,  on  account  of  their 
violent  opposition  to  the  religious  and  social  reforms  which 
were  adopted  by  some  of  the  Aryan  tribes,  such  as  the 
Iranians,  their  very  name  was  branded,  and  became  a 
word  of  abomination  with  the  Zoroastrians.  But  the 
designation  having  been  already  closely  connected  with 
their  ancient  history,  and  having  become  the  constant 
epithet  of  some  of  their  greatest  heroes  and  kings,  it  was 
difficult,  nay,  impossible,  to  expunge  it  entirely  in  its  good 
and  high  sense  from  the  language.  The  adversaries  of  the 
Kavis,  therefore,  had  to  rest  satisfied  with  a  slight  change 
of  the  hateful  word  when  they  wished  to  use  it  with  a 
o-ood  meaning.  Thus  we  actually  find  this  word  in  the  old 
texts,  when  forming  part  of  the  names  of  the  great  Iranian 
heroes  and  kings,  changed  from  its  only  true  and  original 


THE  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  291 

form  Kavi  into  Kavd,  as,  for  instance,  Kavd  Vishtdspa, 
instead  of  Kavi  Vishtdspa} 

Now  this  word  Kavd  became  a  party  name,  denoting  the 
opponents  of  the  Deva  religion.  And  in  this  sense  we  find 
it  unmistakeably  employed  in  the  ancient  Vedic  hymns. 
Kavdsahlui  or  Kavdri  or  Kavatnu,  which  all  mean  "  fol- 
lowers of  Kava  or  adherents  of  Kava,"  are  names,  given  to 
the  enemies  of  Indra  and  the  despisers  of  his  sacred  drink 
(Soma).  In  one  passage  (Ev.  v.  34,  3)  Kavdsahha  is  even 
called  a  magJiavd,  by  which  name  the  disciples  and  earliest 
followers  of  Zarathushtra  are  denoted  in  the  Gathas  (see 
p.  169).  Indra  is  there  said  to  turn  out  the  Maghava,  who 
follows  the  Kava  party,  from  his  possession,  which  refers 
to  the  settlements  (gaethas)  of  the  Iranians. 

That  Zarathushtra's  attacks  were  really  directed  against 
the  Soma  sacrifices  of  the  Brahmans,  undeniably  follows 
from  several  passages  of  the  Gathas  (see  Yas.  xxxii.  3 ; 
xlviii.  10).  This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  if  we  bear  in 
mind  that  the  Indian  tribes,  as  described  in  the  ancient 
hymns  of  the  Vedas,  never  engaged  tliemselves  in  their 
.frequent  predatory  excursions  for  stealing  cows,  horses, 
sheep,  &c.,  without  having  previously  secured  the  assist- 
ance of  Indra  by  preparing  for  him  a  solemn  Soma  feast. 
The  Karapans  dressed  it  in  due  manner,  and  the  Kavis 
composed  or  applied  those  verses  which  were  best  calcu- 
lated to  induce  Indra  to  accept  the  invitation.  The  Kavis 
were  believed  to  recognise  by  certain  signs  the  arrival  of 
the  god.  After  he  had  enjoyed  the  sweet  beverage,  the 
delicious  honey,  and  was  supposed  to  be  totally  inebriated, 
then  the  Kavis  promised  victory.  The  inroads  were  under- 
taken, headed  by  those  Kavis  who  had  previously  intoxi- 
cated themselves,  and  they  appear  to  have  been  in  most 
cases  successful.  The  Iranian  settlers,  who  had  to  suffer 
so  much  from  these  attacks  (see  p.  173),  ascribed  the 
success  to  those  Soma  sacrifices,  which,  therefore,  must 

^  See  further  particulars  in  the  author's  work  on  the  Gathas,  i.  p.  179,  iSo, 
and  ii.  p.  238-41. 


292  TRACES  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF 

liave  been  objects  of  abomination  and  horror  to  tliem. 
But  the  belief  in  the  great  efficacy  of  such  a  ceremony,  as 
the  solemn  squeezing  and  preparing  of  the  Soma  juice, 
being  too  deeply  rooted  in  the  minds  of  the  Iranians,  as 
well  as  in  those  of  the  ancient  Indians,  the  Iranians  for- 
sook only  the  old  Aryan  fashion  of  preparing  the  sacred 
drink,  and  invented  one  of  their  own,  which  was  more  in 
accordance  with  the  spirit  of  their  new  religion  (see  p.  282). 
As  we  have  seen,  Spitama  Zarathushtra  himself  never 
mentions  this  reformed  Homa  (Soma)  ceremony  in  the 
Gathas;  it  is  doubtful,  therefore,  whether  it  existed  in 
his  time,  or,  if  so,  whether  he  approved  of  it.  It  is  true, 
lecrends  were  afterwards  circulated,  to  the  effect  that  he 
himself  had  given  his  sanction  to  this  ceremony,  as  the 
reader  will  have  learned  from  the  Homa  Yasht  (see  p.  176). 
Having  established  now,  beyond  any  reasonable  doubt, 
the  fact  that  the  Zoroastrian  religion  arose  in  consequence 
of  a  serious  conflict  of  the  Iranians  with  those  other  Aryan 
tribes  which  emigrated  into  Hindustan  Proper,  and  whose 
leadei'S  became  in  later  times  the  founders  of  Brahmanism, 
the  questions  as  to  the  cause  of  this  religious  schism,  the 
leader  of  the  seceding  party,  and  the  time  at  which  this 
great  event  happened,  have  to  be  decided. 

2. — Causes  of  the  Schism. 

The  causes,  which  led  to  the  schism,  may  be  readily 
learned  from  the  more  ancient  parts  of  the  Zend-Avesta, 
especially  from  the  Gathas.  They  were  of  a  social  and 
political  as  well  as  of  a  religious  nature.  The  Aryan 
tribes,  after  they  had  left  their  original  home,  which  was 
in  all  likelihood  a  cold  country  (see  the  allusions  to  it  in 
the  first  and  second  Fargards  of  the  Vendidad),  led  mainly 
a  pastoral  life,  and  cultivated  only  occasionally  some 
patches  of  land  for  their  o'wn  support.  In  this  state  we 
find  the  ancient  Aryan  community  throughout  the  earlier 
Vedic  period,  and  the  Brahmanical  tribes  were  given  to 
this  nomadic  life  as  long  as  they  occupied  the  upper  part 


THE  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  293 

of  the  Panjab,  whence  they  afterwards  emigrated  into 
Hindustan  Proper.  Some  of  these  tribes,  whom  we  may 
style  the  Iranians  proper,  became  soon  weary  of  these 
constant  wanderings,  and  after  having  reached  such  places 
between  the  Oxus  and  Yaxartes  rivers  and  the  highland  of 
Bactria  as  were  deemed  fit  for  permanent  settlements,  they 
forsook  the  pastoral  life  of  their  ancestors  and  their  brother 
tribes,  and  became  agriculturists.  In  consequence  of  this 
change  the  Iranians  estranged  themselves  from  the  other 
Aryan  tribes,  which  still  clung  to  the  ancestoral  occupa- 
tion, and  allured  by  the  hope  of  obtaining  booty,  regarded 
those  settlements  as  the  most  suitable  objects  for  their  in- 
cursions and  skirmishes.  How  frequent  these  attacks  of 
the  Deva-worshippers  upon  the  property  of  the  Mazda- 
yasnians  must  have  been,  the  reader  can  learn  from  the 
formula,  by  which  the  Deva-worshippers  abjured  their 
religion,  and  entered  the  community  of  the  Iranians  (see 
p.  173),  and  from  some  verses  of  the  Gathas  (especially 
Yas.  xxxii.  and  xlvi.). 

The  success  of  the  attacking  Deva-worshippers  was,  as 
we  have  seen,  mainly  ascribed  to  spells  (mantras)  and 
sacrificial  skill.  Their  religion,  therefore,  must  have  be- 
come an  object  of  hatred  in  the  eyes  of  the  Iranians, 
although  the  latter  were  well  aware  that  it  was  closelv 
related  to  their  own,  or  even  to  a  certain  extent  identical 
with  it.  Their  own  religion,  therefore,  had  to  be  totally 
changed,  in  order  to  break  up  all  communication  whatever 
with  the  devastators  of  their  settlements.  The  Deva  reli- 
gion was  branded  as  the  source  of  all  mischief  and  wicked- 
ness, and  instead  of  it,  the  Ahura  religion  of  agriculture 
was  instituted,  which  separated  them  thenceforth  for  ever, 
from  their  Brahmanical  brethren. 

If  we  ask  who  instituted  this  Ahura  relic-ion,  we  can 
hardly  believe  that  it  was  the  work  of  a  single  man  only, 
though  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  peculiar  form  which 
it  assumed  was  mainly  due  to  one  great  personage,  Spitama 
Zarathushtra. 


294  TRACES  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF 

3. — Spitama  Zarathushtra. 

In  the  Gatlias  we  find  Zarathuslitra  alluding^  to  old 
revelations  (Yas.  xlvi.  6),  and  praising  the  wisdom  of  the 
Saosliyafdo,  "  fire-priests  "  (Yas.  xlvi.  3  ;  xlviii.  1 2).  He 
exhorts  his  party  to  respect  and  revere  the  Angra  (Yas. 
xliii.  15),  i.e.,  the  Angiras  of  the  Vedic  hymns,  who  formed 
one  of  the  most  ancient  and  celebrated  priestly  families  of 
the  ancient  Aryans,  and  who  seem  to  have  been  more 
closely  connected  with  the  ante-Zoroastrian  form  of  the 
Parsi  rehgion  than  any  other  of  the  later  Brahmanical 
families.  These  Angiras  are  often  mentioned  together 
with  the  Atliarvans  or  fire-priests  (which  word,  in  the 
form  dthrava,  is  the  general  name  given  to  the  priest  caste 
in  the  Zend-Avesta),  and  both  are  regarded  in  the  Vedic 
literature  as  the  authors  of  the  Atharvaveda  which  is 
called  the  Veda  of  the  Atharvangiras,  or  the  Atharvana, 
or  Angirasa  veda,  i.e.,  the  Veda  of  the  Atharvans  or  Augiras.l 
This  work  was  for  a  long  time  not  acknowledged  as  a  proper 
Veda  by  the  Brahmans,  because  its  contents,  which  consisD 
chiefly  of  spells,  charms,  curses,  mantras  for  killing  ene- 
Diies,  &c.,  were  mostly  foreign  to  the  three  other  Vedas, 
which  alone  were  originally  required  for  sacrifices.  On 
comparing  its  contents  with  some  passages  in  the  Yashts 
and  Vendidad,  we  discover  a  great  similarity. 

Although  a  close  connection  between  the  ante-Zoroas- 
trian and  the  Atharvana  and  Angirasa  religion  can  hardly 
be  doubted,  yet  this  relationsliip  refers  only  to  the  magical 
part,  which  was  believed  by  the  ancient  Greeks  to  be  the 
very  substance  and  nature  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion. 

In  all  likelihood,  as  the  names  Atharvana  and  Angirasa, 
or  fire-priests,  indicate,  the  worship  of  fire  was  a  charac- 
teristic feature  of  this  ancient  relioion. 

The  Saoshyanto,  or  fire-priests,  who  seem  to  be  identical 
with  the  Atharvans,  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  real  prede- 
cessors of  Spitama  Zarathushtra,  who  paved  the  way  for 

^  See  Max  Miiller's  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  448. 


THE  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  295 

the  great  religious  reform  carried  out  Ly  the  latter.  It  is 
distinctly  said  (Yas.  liii.  2)  that  the  good  Ahura  religion 
was  revealed  to  them,  and  that  they  professed  it  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  Deva  religion,  like  Zarathushtra  himself  and 
his  disciples  (Yas.  xii.  7  ;  see  p.  173).  We  must,  therefore, 
resrard  these  ancient  sao-es  as  the  founders  of  the  Ahura 
religion,  who  first  introduced  agriculture  and  made  it  a 
religious  duty,  and  commenced  war  against  the  Deva  reli- 
gion. 

The  struggle  may  have  lasted  for  several  centuries  before 
Spitama  Zarathushtra  appeared  in  Iran,  professedly  by 
divine  command,  to  strike  a  death-blow  at  idolatry,  and 
to  banish  it  for  ever  from  his  native  soil.  But  however 
this  may  have  been,  the  decisive  step  of  completely  sepa- 
rating the  contending  parties  from  one  another,  and  estab- 
lishing a  new  community  governed  by  new  laws,  was  taken 
by  Spitama  Zarathushtra.  He  has,  therefore,  many  claims 
to  be  regarded  as  the  founder  of  the  true  Mazdayasnian  or 
Parsi  religion,  which  absorbed  the  old  Ahura  religion  of 
the  ancient  fire-priests.  He  himself  was  one  of  the 
Saoshyanto  or  fire-priests,  because  we  find  him,  when 
standing  before  the  sacred  fire,  delivering  his  speeches  and 
receiving  answers  from  Ahuramazda  out  of  the  sacred 
flames. 

The  events  of  his  life  are  almost  all  enshrouded  in  dark- 
ness, to  dispel  which  will  be  for  ever  impossible,  should  no 
authentic  historical  records  be  discovered  in  Bactria,  his 
home.  The  reports  regarding  him,  given  by  the  Greeks 
and  Piomans  (see  the  first  Essay),  are  as  unhistorical  and 
legendary  as  those  found  in  the  majority  of  the  Avesta 
books  themselves.  In  the  Vendidad  and  the  Yashts  (see 
p.  212)  he  is  represented  to  us  not  as  a  historical,  but  as 
a  dogmatical  personalty,  stripped  of  nearly  everything  that 
is  peculiar  to  human  nature,  and  vested  with  a  super- 
natural and  wholly  divine  power,  standing  next  to  God 
himself  and  beinGj  even  elevated  above  the  archangels. 
The  temptations  of  the  devil,  whose  whole  empire  was 


296  TRACES  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF 

tlireatened  by  the  great  prophet,  form  a  favourite  subject 
of  the  traditional  reports  and  legends.  He  was  the  con- 
centration of  all  wisdom  and  truth,  and  the  master  and 
head  of  the  whole  living  creation  (see  p.  211). 

The  only  source  whence  we  may  derive  some  very  scanty 
historical  facts  is  the  older  Yasua.  In  this  part  of  the 
scriptures  only,  he  appears  before  our  eyes  as  a  real  man, 
acting  a  great  and  prominent  part  in  the  history  of  his 
country,  and  even  in  the  history  of  the  whole  human  race 
ill  general.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Spitama  family, 
which  name  is  given  to  the  Haechadaspas  also  (Yas.  xlvi. 
15),  who  seem,  therefore,  to  have  been  his  nearest  relations. 
His  father's  name  was  Pourushasjia,  according  to  the  later 
Yasna  and  Veudidad.  Of  his  children  only  his  daughter 
Faouruchista  (Yas.  liii.  3)  is  mentioned  by  the  two  names 
Haechadaspdnd  Spitdmi,  which  can  be  interpreted  only  as 
"belonging  to  the  Spitama  family  of  the  Haechadaspa 
lineage."  He  was  distinguished  by  the  surname  Zara- 
thusTitra,  which  the  Greeks  corrupted  to  Zarastrades  or 
Zoroastres,  and  the  Eomans  to  Zoroaster,  by  which  name 
alone  he  is  known  to  Europeans,  while  the  Persians  and 
Parsis  changed  it  to  Zardosht.  Althou<:;h  the  orio-inal 
meaning  of  this  name  is  uncertain,^  yet  it  can  hardly  be 
doubted  that  it  was  not  merely  the  proper  name  of  the 
founder  of  the  Parsi  religion,  but  denoted  a  certain  high 
dignity,  that  of  the  high-priest  of  the  country.  This  fol- 
lows clearly  from  Yas.  xix.  (see  p.  188),  where  the  Zara- 
thushtra  is  mentioned  as  the  fifth  chief,  in  those  countries 
where  there  are  four  others  of  an  inferior  order,  and  as  the 
fourth,  where  there  are  only  three  others  below  him ;  and 
it  is  also  evident  from  the  title  ZarathusJdrdtcmd.     This 


^  See   the   author's   work    on    the  author     siiggested      formerly,     l)ut 

G^thas,  ii.  p.  245-46,  note  i,  where  "senior,  chief "  (in  a  spiritiwl  sense), 

the    different     explanations    of    the  and  the  word  may  he  traced  to  the 

name  liitiierto  given  are   mentioned  Sanskrit  jarat,  which  means  in  com- 

and     refuted.      The    most    prohable  pounds  "old;"'  ushtra  is  then  equi- 

meaning  of   " Zarathushtra "  is   not  valent  to  uitara,   "superior,   excel- 

"the  most   excellent  poet,"   as   the  lent." 


THE  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  297 

title  must  mean,  according  to  grammar  {tmia  being  tlie 
superlative  suffix),  "  tlie  greatest  or  highest  Zarathushtra," 
which  denomination  can  be  understood  only  if  we  assume 
the  existence  of  several  contemporaneous  Zarathushtras, 
at  whose  head  he  was  placed.  The  name  "  Zarathushtra '' 
must,  therefore,  have  conveyed  in  ancient  times  nearly  the 
same  meaning  as  the  word  "  Dastur "  does  nowadays :  it 
must  have  meant  the  spiritual  guide  and  head  of  a  whole 
district,  or  even  province.  The  Zaratlmshtrdtemo  is,  there- 
fore, to  be  compared  with  the  Dastur-i-Dasturan  or  chief 
high-priest.  Even  according  to  the  notions  of  the  modern 
Parsis,  a  Dastur  occupies  a  very  high  rank  among  them ; 
he  is  a  ratii  or  chief  in  the  living  creation,  and  in  his  praise 
and  honour  even  ceremonies  may  be  performed. 

A  clear  proof  that  the  word  "  Zarathushtra "  itself  was 
not  alone  deemed  sufficient  to  distinguish  the  prophet 
from  other  men,  is  that  his  family  name  "  Spitama "  is 
generally  prefixed  ^  when  he  is  spoken  of.  This  circum- 
stance implies  distinctly  that  there  were  other  Zarathush- 
tras besides  the  one  who  was  distinguished  by  the  name 
"  Spitama,"  and  who  alone  was  regarded  as  the  real  founder 
of  the  Mazdayasnian  religion. 

His  home  seems  to  have  been  in  Bactria,  which  is  called 
Berckhdha  drmaiti  in  the  Gathas,  and  BdklulM  (a  corrup- 
tion of  the  former)  in  the  Vendidad.  In  his  own  works  he 
calls  himself  a  mdthran,  "reciter  of  mantras,"  a  duta, 
"messenger,"  sent  by  Ahuramazda,  a  speaker  (inaretan); 
he  listens  to  the  oracles  given  by  the  spirit  of  nature 
(geusli  itrvd),  and  sacred  words  are  revealed  to  him  by 
Ahuramazda  through  the  flames. 

His  doings  are  best  learned  from  the  Gathas,  extracts 
from  which  have  been  given  above  (see  pp.  149-170),  so  we 


^  In  a  similar  manner  eacli  of  the  instance,  Peshotan  Dastur  Behramji 
present  Dasturs  introduces  the  title,  Sanjana  (see  the   title-page    of    that 
Dastur,  between  his  own  name  and  learned  Dastur's  edition  of  the  Din- 
that  of  his  father,  so  that  his  own  kard). 
name  is  prefixed  to  the  title,  as,  for 


4- 


s 


298  TRACES  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF 

may  here  confine  ourselves  to  a  few  remarks  as  to  the 
probable  age  in  wliicli  be  lived, 

4. — The  Age  when  Spitama  Zarathcshtra  Lived. 

The  accounts  given  of  the  time  when  he  is  said  to  have 
flourished,  differ  so  widely  from  one  another,  that  it  is  impos- 
sible to  fix  exactly  the  era  when  he  was  living.  The  Greeks 
and  Eomans  make  him  very  ancient.  Xanthos  of  Lydia 
(B.C.  470),  the  earliest  Greek  writer  who  mentions  Zoroaster, 
says  that  he  lived  about  600  years  before  the  Trojan  war 
(about  B.C.  1800).  Aristotle  and  Eudoxus  place  his  era 
as  much  as  6000  years  before  Plato,  others  say  5000  years 
before  the  Trojan  war  (see  Pliny,  Historia  Naturalis,  xxx. 
1-3).  Berosos,  the  Babylonian  historian,  makes  him  a 
King  of  the  Babylonians,  and  the  founder  of  a  dynasty, 
which  reigned  over  Babylon  between  B.C.  2200  and  B.C. 
2000. 

The  Parsis  believe  that  their  prophet  lived  at  the  time 
of  Darius's  father,  Hystaspes,  whom  they  identify  with  the 
Kava,  Vislitdspa  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  or  Kai  Gushtasp  of 
the  Shahnaraah,  and  place  his  era  accordingly  about  B.C. 
550.  But  the  groundlessness  of  this  supposition  may  be 
seen  on  comparing  the  names  of  the  predecessors  of  Hys- 
taspes with  those  of  tlie  ancestors  of  Vishtaspa.  The 
lineage  of  Vishtaspa  or  Hystaspes,  according  to  the  JBisutun 
cuneiform  inscription  of  Darius,  and  the  statements  of 
Herodotus,  is  as  follows : — Hakhdmanish  (Achremenes), 
Ghaishpish  (Teispes),  Ariydrdmna  (Ariaramnes),  Arshdma 
(Arsames),  Vishtaspa  (Hystaspes),  Ddrayavush  (Dareios). 
But  the  lineage  of  Vishtaspa  or  Gushtasp,  according  to 
the  Avesta  and  Shahnamah,  is  as  follows  : — Kavi  Kavdta 
(Kal-Kabad),  Kava  Usa  (Kai-Kaus),  Kava  Husrava  (Kai 
Khusro),  Aurvadaspa  (Lahurasp),  Kava  Vishtdspa  (Kai 
'Gushtasp).  From  these  genealogies  it  will  be  seen  that 
the  names  of  the  ancestors  of  the  Vishtaspa  mentioned  in 
the  cuneiform  inscriptions  (called  Hystaspes  by  the  Greeks), 
are  totally  different  from  tliose  of  the  ancestors  of  the 


THE  ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  299 

Vislitaspa  celebrated  in  Zoroastrian  tradition  (the  Gusbtasp 
of  the  Sbabnamah).  We  must,  tberefore,  conclude  tbat 
the  Visbtaspa  of  Iranian  tradition  was  a  totally  distinct 
person  from  the  Hystaspes  of  the  Greeks,  tbe  fatber  of 
Darius.  Tbat  tbe  Persians  tbemselves,  in  the  time  of  tbe 
Sasanians,  were  quite  uncertain  as  to  when  tbe.  former 
Visbtaspa  lived,  appears  clearly  from  the  testimony  of  the 
historian  Agathias,  quoted  in  p.  11. 

On  comparing  tbe  accounts  of  the  Greeks  aoout  the 
early  era  of  Zoroaster,  with  the  researches  into  tbe  original 
texts  of  the  Parsi  scriptures,  we  must  believe  their  con- 
current testimony  to  be  much  more  trustworthy  and  reli- 
able than  the  opinions  held  by  tbe  modern  Parsis.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that  Spitama  Zaratbushtra, 
the  founder  of  the  Parsi  religion,  lived  at  a  very  early 
period,  because  the  great  religious  movement,  of  which  he  "X 
was  tbe  chief  leader,  is  even  alluded  to  in  the  earlier 
portions  of  the  Vedas.  Of  his  high  antiquity  at  least  two 
significant  traces  may  be  discovered  in  the  present  Zend- 
Avesta.  Firstly,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  fifteenth  section 
of  the  third  Essay,  bis  writings  stand  at  the  bead  of  tbe 
extensive  Avesta  literature,  which  required  centuries  for 
its  growth,  and  which  was  already  complete  about  B.C. 
400.  Secondly,  be  is  expressly  called  "the  famous  in 
Airyana  vaejo"  (Yas.  ix.  14),  which  means,  "tbe  famous 
in  tbe  .Aryan  home,"  whence  tbe  Iranians  and  Indians 
emigrated  in  times  immemorial.  This  title  would  cer- 
tainly  not  have  been  given  to  him  had  liis  followers  not 
believed  him  to  have  been  living  at  tliat  early  time. 
Under  no  circumstances  can  we  assign  him  a  later  date 
than  B.C.  1000,  and  one  may  even  find  reasons  for  placing 
his  era  much  earlier  and  making  him  a  contemporary  of 
Moses.  Pliny,  who  compares  both  Moses  and  Zoroaster,  i^ 
whom  be  calls  inventors  of  two  different  kinds  of  magic 
rites,  goes  much  further  in  stating  that  Zoroaster  lived 
several  thousand  years  before  Moses  (Historia  Natm-alis, 
xxx.  2).     The  confusion  of  opinions  regarding  his  age  was, 


^ 


300  ZARATHUSHTRA'S  THEOLOGY. 

no  doubt,  mainly  caused  "by  his  appellation  "  Zaratlmslitra  " 
or  high-priest,  wliicli  was  afterwards  taken  as  the  proper 
name  of  the  prophet.  The  assertion  that  he  was  born  at 
Barjha  {Eai  near  Telieran)  is  owing  to  the  circumstance 
that,  according  to  Yasna  xix.  (see  p.  188),  this  large  town 
seems  to  have  been  governed  by  the  Zarathushtras  them- 
selves ;  it  was,  therefore,  pre-eminently  the  Zoroastrian 
country. 

in. — ^^spiTAMA  zarathushtra's  theology  and  philosophy, 

AND  THEIR  INFLUENCE  ON  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE 
PARSI  RELIGION. 

Having  shown  in  the  preceding  section  the  historical 
origin  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  we  may  proceed  next 
to  consider  the  new  ideas,  theological  and  philosophical, 
which  Spitama  Zarathushtra  introduced  into  the  world, 
and  in  consequence  of  which  he  may  be  said  to  have 
become  the  founder  of  a  new  religion,  and  to  have  exer- 
cised a  lasting  influence  on  the  history  of  the  human 
mind. 

His  real  doctrines,  untouched  by  the  speculations  of 
later  ages,  can  be  learned  only  from  tlie  older  Yasna,  chiefly 
from  the  Gathas.  The  leading  idea  of  his  theology  was 
Monotheism,  i.e.,  that  there  are  not  many  gods,  but  only 
one;  and  the  principle  of  his  speculative  philosophy 
/  was  Dualism,  i.e.,  the  supposition  of  two  primeval  causes 
of  the  real  world  and  of  the  intellectual ;  while  his  moral 
philosophy  was  moving  in  the  Triad  of  thought,  word,  and 
deed.  Having  regard  to  the  early  period  at  which  he 
must  have  lived,  long  before  the  Greeks  were  acquainted 
with  anything  like  philosophical  speculation,  we  cannot 
expect  him  to  have  established  a  complete  and  developed 
system  of  philosophical  thoughts,  which  cannot  even  be 
said  of  Plato ;  but  the  few  philosophical  ideas  which  may 
be  discovered  in  his  sayings,  show  that  he  was  a  great  and 
deep  thinker,  who  stood  far  above  his  contemporaries,  and 
even  above  the  most  enlightened  men  of  many  subsequent 


ZARATHUSHTRA S  THEOLOGY.  301 

centuries.  The  great  fame  he  enjoyed,  even  with  the 
ancient  Greeks  and  Eomans  who  were  so  proud  of  their 
own  learning  and  wisdom,  is  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  high 
and  pre-eminent  position  he  must  once  have  occupied  in 
the  history  of  the  progress  of  the  human  mind. 

I. — Zarathushtra's  Monotheism. 

That  his  theology  was  mainly  based  on  monotheism, 
one  may  easily  ascertain  from  the  Gathas,  especially  from 
the  second  (see  pp.  1 5  5-166).  His  predecessors,  the  Saosh- 
yanto,  seem  to  have  w^orshipped  a  plurality  of  good  spirits, 
whom  they  called  AJmras,  "  the  living  ones,"  who  were 
opposed  to  the  Devas.  Spitama,  not  satisfied  with  this 
indistinct  expression  of  the  Divine  Being,  reduced  this 
plurality  to  unity.  The  new  name,  by  which  he  called 
the  Supreme  Being,  was  Ahurd  mazddo,  which  means, "  the 
Ahura  who  is  called  Mazdao."  Mazddo,  which  has  been 
compared  with  the  Vedic  medhds,  "  wise  "  (or  when  applied 
to  priests,  "  skilful,  able  to  make  everything "),  means 
either  "joint  creator,"  or  "creator  of  all."  ^  Those  Aliuras 
who  were  regarded  as  creative  powers  might  have  been 
already  called  by  the  name  mazddo  (we  find  the  plural, 
mazddo nho,  in  Y as.  xlv.  i)  by  the  Saoshyanto;  but  these 
old  fire-priests  had  no  clear  conception  of  the  nature  and 
working  of  this  creative  power.  Although  Spitama  com- 
bined the  two  names  (which  were  formerly  used  sepa- 
rately, and  not  intimately  connected  with  one  another) 
into  one  appellation,  AJmrS-mazddo,  yet  they  were  still 
not  considered  as  a  compound,  because  we  find  both  con- 

1  That  mazddo  is  phonetically  iden-  is  very  frequently  prefixed  to  other 

tical  with  Sans,  medhds,  is  not  to  be  words  ;     and    if     prefixed   to    dhdo, 

denied,  but  its  original   meaning  is  "creating,"  the  compound  must  be 

not  "wise."     Were  this  the  case,  we  changed,  according  to  phonetical  laws, 

ought  to  suppose  it  to  be  a  contrac-  into  mazddo.     The  general  meaning 

tiou  of  maili-dhdo,   "producing  wis-  of  mad  being  "together  with,  all" 

dom;"but7)iai7i, "thought,  wisdom,"  (see  Visp.   xiv.   i),  the  word  mazddo 

(Sans,  mati)  is  generally  affixed,  not  must  mean  either  "joint  creator,"  or 

prefixed,  to  another  word,  usintard-  "creator  of  all,"  as  may  be  clearly 

maiti,  "  perverse  thought,  disobedi-  seen  from  Yas.  xlv.  i. 
ence."    But  the  word  ?/iad,  "with," 


I 


302  ZARATHUSHTRA'S  THEOLOGY. 

stituent  parts  subject  to  inflection  {e.g.,  ahurdi  mazddi  in 
the  dative,  not  Aliura-mazddi) ;  one  part,  Mazddo,  was  the 
chief  name;  the  other,  ahura,  was  an  adjectival  epithet. 
But  in  consequence  of  their  being  jointly  employed  to 
express  the  name  of  the  Supreme  Being,  they  were  after- 
wards considered  a  compound;  as  we  may  distinctly  see 
from  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  of  the  Achaemenian  kings, 
where  the  Supreme  Being  is  generally  called  AiXramazdd, 
and  only  the  latter  part  of  the  word  is  subject  to  inflection, 
except  in  a  few  instances  where  both  words  are  inflected. 
In  the  Sasanian  times  the  name  was  chan[red  to  AHhar- 
mazdi,  and  in  modern  Persian  to  Hormazd  or  Ormazd, 
which  forms  are  used  by  the  Parsis  nowadays.  In  the 
Gathas  we  find  the  two  words  frequently  separated,  and 
indiscriminately  employed  to  express  the  name  "  God,"  as 
no  difference  of  meaning  is  attached  to  either.  In  trans- 
lating them,  Ahura  may  best  be  rendered  by  "  living " 
or  "  lord,"  and  Mazddo  by  "  wise "  or  "  creator  of  the 
universe." 

Spitama  Zarathushtra's  conception  of  Ahuramazda  as 
the  Supreme  Being  is  perfectly  identical  with  the  notion 
of  Elohim  (God)  or  Jehovah,  which  we  find  in  the  books 
of  the  Old  Testament.  Ahuramazda  is  called  by  him 
"  the  Creator  of  the  earthly  and  spiritual  life,  the  Lord  of 
the  whole  universe,  in  whose  hands  are  all  the  creatures." 
He  is  the  light  and  source  of  light ;  he  is  the  wisdom  and 
intellect.  He  is  in  possession  of  all  good  things,  spiritual 
and  worldly,  such  as  the  good  mind  (yohu-mand),  immor- 
tality {ameretdcl),  health  (Jiaurvatdd),  the  best  truth  {asha 
vahishta),  devotion  and  piety  (drmaiti),  and  abundance  of 
every  earthly  good  ^  [hhshathra  vairya).  All  these  gifts 
he  grants  to  the  righteous  man,  who  is  upright  in  thoughts, 
words,  and  deeds.  As  the  ruler  of  the  whole  universe,  he 
not  only  rewards  the  good,  but  he  is  a  punisher  of  the 
wicked  at  the  same  time  (see  Yas.  xliii.  5).  All  that  is 
created,  good  or  evil,  fortune  or  misfortune,  is  his  work 

*  See  especially  Yas.  xlvii.  i  (p.  167). 


ZARATHUSHTRAS  THEOLOGY.  303 

(Yas.  xlviii.  4.  p.  167,  and  li.  6,  p.  169).  A  separate  evil 
spirit  of  equal  power  with  Ahuramazda,  and  always 
opposed  to  him,  is  entirely  foreign  to  Zarathushtra's 
theology  ;  though  the  existence  of  such  an  opinion  among 
the  ancient  Zoroastrians  can  be  gathered  from  some  of  the 
later  writings,  such  as  the  Vendidad. 

2. — Zarathushtra's  two  Primeval  Principles. 

The  opinion,  so  generally  entertained  now,  that  Zarathush- 
tra  was  preaching  a  Dualism,  that  is  to  say,  the  idea  of 
two  original  independent  spirits,  one  good  and  the  other 
bad,  utterly  distinct  from  each  other,  and  one  counter- 
acting the  creation  of  the  other,  is  owing  to  a  confusion  of 
his  philosophy  with  his  theology.  Having  arrived  at  the 
grand  idea  of  the  unity  and  indivisibihty  of  the  Supreme 
Being,  he  undertook  to  solve  the  great  problem  which  has 
engaged  the  attention  of  so  many  wise  men  of  antiquity, 
and  even  of  modern  times,  viz.,  how  are  the  imperfections 
discoverable  in  the  world,  the  various  kinds  of  evils, 
wickedness,  and  baseness,  compatible  with  the  goodness, 
holiness,  and  justice  of  God  ?  This  great  thinker  of  remote 
antiquity  solved  this  difficult  question  philosophically  by 
the  supposition  of  two  primeval  causes,  which,  though 
different,  were  united,  and  produced  the  world  of  material 
things,  as  well  as  that  of  the  spirit ;  which  doctrine  may 
best  be  learned  from  Yas.  xxx.  (see  pp.  149-151) 


X- 


The  one,  who  produced  the  "  reality "  {gaija),  is  called 
vohu-mand,  "  the  good  mind,"  the  other,  through  whom  the 
"  non-reality "  {ajyditi)  originated,  bears  the  namQ  akem 
mano,  "  the  evil  mind."  All  good,  true,  and  perfect  things, 
which  fall  under  the  category  of  "  reality,"  are  the  produc- 
tions of  the  "good  mind;"  while  all  that  is  bad  and 
delusive,  belongs  to  the  sphere  of  "  non-reality,"  and  is 
traced  to  the  "evil  mind."  Tlie2__ar^_the^Jwo^jnoving 
causes  ia Jhejniverse, jimte^^  and 

therefore^-^aUedJltwdns  "  {y&md,  Sans,  yamau).     They  are 
present  everywhere  ;  in  Ahuramazda^  a^w_ell_asjn_men. 


304  ZARATHUSHTRAS  THEOLOGY. 

These  two  primeval  principles,  if  supposed  to  be  united 
in  Almramazda  himself,  are  not  called  vohu-mano  and 
aketii  mano,  but  spefito  viaimjush,  "  the  beneficent  spirit," 
and  angrS  mainyush,  "the  hurtful  spirit."  That  Angro- 
mainyush  is  no  separate  being,  opposed  to  Ahuramazda,  is 
to  be  gathered  unmistakeably  from  Yas.  xix.  9  (see  p.  187), 
where  Ahuramazda  is  mentioning  his  "  two  spirits,"  who 
are  inherent  in  his  own  nature,  and  are  in  other  passages 
(Yas.  Ivii.  2,  see  p.  189)  distinctly  called  the  "two  creators" 
and  "  the  two  masters "  {imyii).  And,  indeed,  we  never 
find  Angro-mainyush  mentioned  as  a  constant  opponent  of 
Ahuramazda  in  the  Gathas,  as  is  the  case  in  later  writings. 
The  evil  against  which  Ahuramazda  and  all  good  men  are 
fighting  is  called  drukhsh,  "  destruction,  or  lie,"  which  is 
nothing  but  a  personification  of  the  Devas.  The  same 
expression  for  the  "  evil "  spread  in  the  world,  we  find  in 
the  Persian  cuneiform  inscriptions,  where,  moreover,  no 
opponent  of  Ahuramazda,  like  Angro-mainyusli  is  ever 
mentioned.  God  [Auramazda),  in  the  rock  records  of 
King  Darius,  is  only  one,  as  Jehovah  is  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, having  no  adversary  whatsoever. 

Spento-mainyush  was  regarded  as  the  author  of  all  that 
is  bright  and  '  shining,  of  all  that  is  good  and  useful  in 
nature;  while  Angro-mainyush  called  into  existence  all 
that  is  dark  and  apparently  noxious.  Both  are  as  insepar- 
able as  day  and  night,  and  though  opposed  to  each  other, 
are  indispensable  for  the  preservation  of  creation.  The 
beneficent  spirit  appears  in  the  blazing  flame,  the  presence 
of  the  hurtful  one  is  marked  by  the  wood  converted 
into  charcoal.  Spento-mainyush  has  created  the  light  of 
day,  and  Angro-mainyush  the  darkness  of  night;  the 
former  awakens  men  to  their  duties,  the  latter  lulls  them 
to  sleep.  Life  is  produced  by  Spento-mainyush,  but  ex- 
tinguished by  Angro-mainyush,  whose  hands,  by  releasing 
tlie  soul  from  the  fetters  of  the  body,  enables  her  to  rise 
into  immortality  and  everlasting  life. 


ZARATHUSHTRA'S  THEOLOGY.  305 

3. — Development  of  Zarathushtra's  Doctrines  of  the  Supreme 
Being.  The  Two  Supreme  Councils  ;  Srosh  and  Bound- 
less Time. 

Such  is  the  original  Zoroastrian  notion  of  the  two  crea- 
tive spirits,  who  form  only  two  parts  of  the  Divine  Being. 
But  in  the  course  of  time,  this  doctrine  of  the  great 
founder  was  changed  and  corrupted,  in  consequence  of 
misunderstandings  and  false  interpretations.  Spento- 
mainyush  was  taken  as  a  name  of  Ahuramazda  himself, 
and  then,  of  course,  Angro-mainyush,  by  becoming  entirely 
separated  from  Ahuramazda,  was  regarded  as  the  constant 
adversary  of  Ahuramazda ;  thus  the  Dualism  of  God  and 
Devil  arose.  Each  of  the  two  spirits  was  considered  an 
independent  ruler  endeavouring  to  destroy  the  creation  of 
the  other,  and  thus  both  waged  constant  war.  This 
Dualism  is  best  perceived  in  the  first  fargard  of  the 
Vendidad.  After  the  sovereignty  and  independence  of 
these  two  spiritual  rulers  was  once  acknowledged  by  some 
of  the  most  influential  leaders  of  the  congregation  founded 
by  Spitama  Zarathushtra,  each  of  them  was  then  supposed 
to  have,  like  terrestrial  rulers,  his  own  council  and  court. 
The  number  of  councillors  was  fixed  at  six,  who  were 
regarded  as  the  actual  governors  of  the  whole  universe, 
each  ruling  over  a  separate  province  assigned  to  him  by 
his  spiritual  ruler.  To  Ahuramazda,  or  Spento-mainyush, 
no  other  power  was  left  but  to  preside  over  the  celestial 
council.  We  often  find  him  even  included  in  the  number 
of  the  celestial  councillors,  who  are  then  called  "  the  seven 
Ameshaspentas "  (now  corrupted  to  Amshaspends),  i.e., 
immortal  benefactors. 

The  several  names,  by  which  we  find  the  Ameshaspentas 
called,  viz.,  Vohu-mano,  Asha-vahishta,  Khshathra-vairya, 
Spenta-Armaiti,  Haurvatad,  and  Ameretad,  are  frequently 
mentioned  in  the  Gathas,  but  they  are,  as  the  reader  may 
clearly  see  from  the  passages  (see  Yas.  xlvii.  i)  as  well  as 
from  etymology,  nothing  but  abstract  nouns  and  ideas, 

u 


3o6  ZARATHUSHTRA'S  THEOLOGY. 

representing  all  the  gifts  which  Ahuramazda,  as  the  only 
Lord,  grants  to  those  who  worship  him  with  a  sincere 
heart,  by  always  speaking  truth,  and  performing  good 
actions.  In  the  eyes  of  the  prophet  they  were  no  person- 
ages ;  that  idea  being  imported  into  the  sayings  of  the 
great  master  by  some  of  his  successors. 

VoHU-MANo  (Bahman)  is  regarded  as  the  vital  faculty 
in  all  living  beings  of  the  good  creation.  Originally,  his 
name  was  nothing  but  a  term  for  the  good  princiT)le,  as 
emanating  from  Ahuramazda,  who  is,  therefore,  called  the 
father  of  Vohu-mano.  He  pervades  the  whole  living  good 
creation,  and  all  the  good  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds  of 
men  are  wrought  by  him. 

AsHA-VAHiSHTA  (Ardibahisht)  represents  the  blazing 
flame  of  fire,  the  light  in  Imninaries,  and  brightness  and 
splendour  of  any  kind  whatever,  wherever  it  may  exist. 
The  first  part  of  the  name,  asha  (plural  of  asJicm),  has 
various  meanings,  such  as  "  rectitude,  righteousness,  truth," 
and  its  epithet  vaJiishta  means  originally  "  most  splendid, 
beautiful,"  but  was  afterwards  used  in  the  more  general 
sense  of  "  best."  Light  being  of  the  nature  of  Ahuramazda, 
and  being  believed  to  pervade  the  whole  good  creation, 
Asha-vahishta  represents  the  omnipresence  of  the  Divine 
Being.  Light  maintaining  the  vitality  of  the  whole  crea- 
tion, animate  and  inanimate,  and  being  the  cause  of  all 
growth,  Asha-vahishta  is  the  preserver  of  all  life  and  all 
that  is  good.  He  rex^resents,  in  this  respect,  God's  Pro- 
vidence. 

KsiiATHKA-VAiEYA  (Shahrivar)  presides  over  metals  and 
is  the  giver  of  wealth.  His  name  means  simply  "  posses- 
sion, wealth,"  afterwards  it  was  applied  to  metal  and 
money.     Wealth  is  considered  as  a  gift  from  Ahuramazda. 

Spenta-Armaiti  (Spendarmad  or  Isfendarmad),  "the 
bountiful  Armaiti,"  represents  the  earth.  The  original 
meaning  of  Armaiti,  as  we  have  seen  above  (see  p.  274), 
however,  is  "devotion,  obedience."  She  represents  the 
pious  and  obedient  heart  of  the  true  worshipper  of  Ahura- 


ZARATHUSHTRA'S  THEOLOGY.  307 

mazda,  who  serves  God  alone  with  body  and  soul.  When 
the  name  is  applied  to  the  earth,  it  means  that  s^e  is  the 
servant  of  men,  who,  if  well  treated  {i.e.,  cultivated),  will 
yield  abundance  of  food. 

Haukvatad  and  Ameeetad  (Khordad  and  Amardad) 
preside  over  vegetation,  and  produce  all  kinds  of  fruits ; 
but  this  is  very  likely  not  their  original  meaning.  As  the 
names  indicate  {Haurvatdcl  means  "  completeness,  health," 
and  Amerdcid,  "  immortality  "),  they  represent  the  i)reser- 
vation  of  the  original  uncorrupted  state  of  the  good  crea- 
tion, and  its  remaining  in  the  same  condition  as  that  in 
which  it  waS'  created  by  God.  They  are  generally  both 
mentioned  together,  and  express, 'therefore,  a  single  com- 
pound idea. 

Quite  separate  from  the  celestial  council  stands  Sraosha 
(Srosh),  who  is,  however,  regarded  as  an  archangel  vested 
with  very  high  powers.  While  the  Ameshaspentas  in 
Zarathushtra's  eyes  represented  nothing  but  the  qualities 
and  gifts  of  Ahuramazda,  Sraosha  seems  to  have  been  con- 
sidered by  him  as  a  personahty.  He  is  the  angel  who 
stands  between  God  and  man,  the  great  teacher  of  the 
good  religion  who  instructed  the  prophet  in  it.  He  shows 
the  way  to  heaven  and  pronounces  judgment  on  human 
actions  after  death  (for  fm-ther  information  see  the  Srosh 
Yasht,  p.  1 89).  Originally  his  name  meant  "  hearing  "  (from 
the  root  sru  to  hear),  which,  taken  in  a  religious  sense, 
means  the  sacred  tradition.  In  this  respect  we  may  best 
compare  the  word  with  the  Sanskrit  Shruti,  by  which 
name  the  Brahmans  understand  the  sacred  tradition,  as 
laid  down  in  the  various  parts  of  the  Vedas,  especially  in 
that  which  treats  of  sacrificial  rites.  All  that  is  said  of 
Srosh,  in  the  Srosh  Yasht,  fully  agrees  with  this  meaning 
of  his  name.  We  must,  therefore,  regard  him  only  as  the 
personification  of  the  whole  divine  service,  including  the 
prayers  as  well  as  the  sacrificial  rites.  When  he  is  said 
to  be  the  guardian  of  the  whole  creation,  and  that  without 
his  protection  the  world  would  fall  a  prey  to  the  demons, 


3o8  ZARATHUSHTRA'S  THEOLOGY. 

it  is  meant  that  men  must  offer  up  prayers  to  God  and 
worship*him ;  and  should  they  fail  to  do  so,  the  good  mind 
{Vo]iu-ma7i6)  ^Vlthm  them  becomes  powerless,  and  the  bad 
mind  (Akcm-onand)  takes  entire  possession  of  them,  insti- 
gating them  to  commit  sins  and  crimes,  in  consequence  of 
which  they  will  become  utterly  cast  away,  both  in  this 
life  and  in  that  to  come.  Srosh  fights  chiefly  against  the 
Devas.  This  means,  that  the  Zoroastrian  divine  service  is 
destined  to  counterbalance  the  mischief  which  the  Indian 
Devas  were  supposed  to  be  doing  to  the  good  creation. 

Like  Ahuramazda,  his  adversary  Angro-mainyush  was, 
in  later  times,  supposed  to  be  also  surrounded  by  a  council. 
This  idea  is  completely  foreign  to  the  older  texts,  and  is 
evidently  only  an  imitation  of  the  celestial  council.  The 
number  of  councillors  of  the  infernal  kincrdom  was  like- 
wise  fixed  at  six  (not  in  the  Avesta  texts,  but  only  in  the 
Bundahish),  who  were  called  pre-eminently  Devas  and 
headed  by  Angro-mainyush,  who,  for  this  reason,  was 
called  DaSvandm  Daevo,  or  archdemon.  The  first  in  rank 
after  Angro-mainyush  was  Akem-mano,  which  means  the 
"  evil  mind,"  and  is  nothing  but  Zarathushtra's  philoso- 
phical term  of  the  second  principle,  the  "  non-reality." 
He  produces  all  bad  thoughts  in  men,  and  makes  them 
utter  bad  words  and  commit  sins.  His  influence  is 
checked  by  Vohu-mano,  the  good  mind.  The  second  seat 
in  the  infernal  council  is  occupied  by  the  King  of  the 
Vedic  gods,  Indka  ;  the  third  place  is  assigned  to  Saurva, 
the  Shiva  of  the  Hindus.  Fourth  in  rank  is  Naonhaithya, 
the  collective  name  of  the  Indian  Ashvins  (Dioskuri) ;  the 
fifth  and  sixth  places  are  occupied  by  two  personifications, 
Darkness  and  Poison  (see  the  Bundahish,  edited  by 
Westergaard,  p.  5). 

There  are  a  good  many  other  names  of  Devas  to  be 
found  in  the  Zend-Avesta;  but  almost  all  are  nothing  but 
personifications  of  vices  and  evils.  Thus,  for  instance, 
Aeshema  means  "rapine,  attack,"  Drnvish  is  "poverty," 
Dahvish,  "deceit,"  &c.      While   the  celestial   council   is 


ZARATHUSHTRA'S  THEOLOGY.  309 

always  taking  measures  for  promoting  life  and  spreading 
truth,  tlie  infernal  councillors  are  constantly  plotting  de- 
signs for  the  destruction  of  life,  and  endeavouring  to  spread 
lies  and  falsehood  everywhere.  The  Zoroastrian  idea  of 
the  Devil  and  the  infernal  kingdom  coincides  entirely  with 
the  Christian  doctrine.  The  Devil  is  a  murderer  and  father 
of  lies  according  to  both  the  Bible  and  the  Zend-Avesta. 

In  conseqiience  of  this  entire  separation  of  the  two  parts 
of  Ahuramazda,  and  the  substitution  of  two  independent 
rulers  governing  the  universe,  the  unity  of  the  Supreme 
Being  was  lost,  and  Monotheism  was  superseded  by  Dual- 
ism.    But  this  deviation  from,  and  entire  change  of,  the 
prophet's  doctrine  could  not  satisfy  the  minds  of  all  the 
divines  and  philosophers  in  ancient  Persia.     It  was  very 
likely  only  the  innovation  of  an  influential  party  or  sect, 
probably  that  which  was  called  ZendiJc,  i.e.,  following  the 
interpretation  (Zend),  and  which  was  opposed  to  that  of 
the  3Iagi  (see  p.  14).     That  Dualism  was  actually  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Zendiks,  we  best  learn  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  Bundahish,  which  book  purports  to  expound 
the  lore  of  this  party.     The  Llagi  seem  still  to  have  clung 
to  the  prophet's  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  the  Supreme 
Being.     But  to  refute  the  heretical  opinions  of  the  Zendiks, 
which  were  founded  on  interpretations  of  passages  from 
the  sacred  texts,  a  new  and  fresh  proof  of  the  unity  of  the 
Supreme  Being  was  required.     This  was  found  in  the  term 
Zarvan  aharana,  "  boundless  time,"  which  we  meet  with 
occasionally  in  the  Zend-Avesta.     The  chief  passage,  no 
doubt,  was  Vend.  xix.  9  (see  pp.  24  and  254) ;  but  the  in- 
terpretation for  proving  that  Za7'van  akarana  means  the 
Supreme  Being,  out  of  wdiom  Ahuramazda  and  Angro- 
mainyush  are  said  to  have  sprung,  rests  on  a  grammatical 
misunderstanding,  as  we  have  seen  above  (p.  24).     This 
interpretation,  however,  must  be  very  old ;  for  all  the  pre- 
sent Dasturs  believe  in  it  as  an  incontrovertible  fact. 

That  this  doctrine  of  Zarvm',  aharana  was  commonly 
believed  in  Persia,  during  the  times  of  the  Sasanians,  may 


3IO  ZARATHUSHTRAS  THEOLOGY. 

be  distinctly  seen  from  the  reports  quoted  above  (pp. 
12-14).  The  true  meaning  of  the  expression,  that  "the 
beneficent  Spirit  made  (them)  in  boundless  time,"  is  that 
God  (Ahuramazda)  is  from  eternity,  self-existing,  neither 
born  nor  created.  Only  an  eternal  being  can  be  indepen- 
dent of  the  bounds  of  time  to  which  all  mortals  are  subject. 

4. — The  Two  Intellects  ;  Two  Lives  ;  Heaven  and  Hell  ; 
Eesurrection  ;  and  Palingenesis. 

In  the  Gathas  we  frequently  find  "  two  intellects " 
{hhratii)  and  "  two  lives  "  {ahu)  spoken  of  These  notions, 
therefore,  formed  undoubtedly  part  of  Spitama  Zarathush- 
tra's  speculation.  The  two  intellects  are  distinguished  as 
the  "  first "  and  "  last."  From  the  passages  where  they  are 
mentioned  (Yas.  xliv.  19,  xlviii.  4),  their  meaning  cannot 
be  ascertained  with  certainty.  But  happily  we  find  them 
mentioned  in  later  Avesta  writings  (see  Yt.  ii.  i)  by  more 
expressive  names;  one  of  the  intellects  is  called  dsnd 
hhratu,  "  the  original  intellect  or  wisdom,"  which  we  can 
best  identify  with  the  "  first  "  in  the  Gathas ;  the  other  is 
styled  gaosho-srlXtd  khratu,  "  the  wisdom  heard  by  the  ear," 
which  corresponds  to  the  "last."  Another  name  of  the 
"  first "  is  mainyu  khratu  {mind  khird),  "  spiritual  or  hea- 
venly wisdom."  Now  we  cannot  be  mistaken  as  to  the 
meaning  of  these  two  intellects.  The  "  first  intellect "  is 
not  from  earth,  but  from  heaven ;  not  human,  but  divine. 
The  "  last  intellect "  represents  what  man  has  heard  and 
learned  by  experience.  The  wisdom  gained  in  this  way  is, 
of  course,  inferior  to  the  heavenly  wisdom.  Only  the  latter 
can  instruct  man  in  the  higher  matters  of  life,  as  we  see 
from  a  later  book  called  "  Minokhird,"  which  is  written  in 
Pazand  (see  p.  105). 

The  "two  lives"  are  distinguished  as  astvat,  "bodily," 
or  2^'^i^oilmi,  "prior  life,"  and  as  manahya,  "mental,"  or 
daibitya,  "  the  second"  (sec^  Yas.  xxviii.  3  ;  xliii.  3  ;  xlv.  i ; 
xlvi.  19).  Their  meaning  :'s  clear  enough,  and  requires  no 
further  comment ;  they  express  our  idea  "  body  and  soul." 


ZARATHUSHTRAS  THEOLOGY.  311 

To  be  distinguislied  from  these  "two  lives,"  are  the  "  first" 
and  the  "  last  lives,"  which  mean  this  life  and  that  here- 
after. 

The  idea  of  a  future  life,  and  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  is  expressed  very  distinctly  already  in  the  Gathas, 
and  pervades  the  whole  of  the  later  Avesta  literature. 
The  belief  in  a  life  to  come  is  one  of  the  chief  dogmas  of 
the  Zend-Avesta.  See  the  passages  about  the  fate  of  the 
soul  after  death,  translated  in  the  third  Essay  (pp.  220,  254). 

Closely  connected  with  this  idea  is  the  belief  in  Heaven 
and  Hell,  which  Spitama  Zarathushtra  himself  clearly 
pronounced  in  his  Gathas.  The  name  for  Heaven  is  Garo- 
demdna  {Garotmdn  in  Persian),  "  house  of  hymns,"  be- 
cause the  angels  are  believed  to  sing  hymns  there  (see 
Yas.  xxviii.  10 ;  xxxiv.  2),  which  description  agrees  en- 
tirely with  the  Christian  idea  as  founded  on  Isaiah  vi.  and 
the  Eevelation  of  St.  John.  Garo-demana  is  the  residence 
of  Ahuramazda  and  the  most  blessed  men  (Yas.  li.  15). 
Another  more  general  name  for  Heaven  is  ahu  vahisMa, 
"the  best  life,"  afterwards  shortened  to  valiislita  only, 
which  is  still  extant  in  the  modern  Persian  hahisht,  "  para- 
dise." 

Hell  is  called  DriXjo  demdna,  "  house  of  destruction,"  in 
the  Gathas.  It  is  chiefly  the  residence  of  the  poets  and 
priests  of  the  Deva  religion,  the  Rishis  of  the  Brahmans 
(Yas.  xlvi.  11).  The  later  name  is  Duzhanha  (Yasht  xix. 
44),  which  is  preserved  in  the  modern  Persian  DuzaMi, 
"  hell." 

Between  Heaven  and  Hell  is  Chinvat  Peeetu  {Chin- 
vad  pul),  "  the  bridge  of  the  gatherer,"  or  "  the  bridge  of 
the  judge"  {Chinvat  can  have  both  meanings),  which  the 
soul  of  the  pious  alone  can  pass,  while  the  wicked  fall 
from  it  down  into  Hell.  It  is  mentioned,  as  we  have  seen, 
already  in  the  Gathas  (Yas.  xlvi.  10,  11). 

The  belief  in  the  Eesuekection  of  the  body  at  the  time 
of  the  last  judgment  also  forms  one  of  the  Zoroastrian 
dogmas,  as  the  reader  will  have  learned  from  the  passage 


312  ZARATHUSHTRA'S  THEOLOGY. 

quoted  above  (p.  217).  In  consequence  of  Burnoufs  in- 
quiries into  the  phrase  yavaiclia  yavatdtaecha  (which  had 
been  translated  by  Anquetil  "  till  the  resurrection,"  but 
which  means  nothing  but  "  for  ever  and  ever"),  the  exist- 
ence of  such  a  doctrine  in  the  Zend-Avesta  was  lately 
doubted.  But  there  is  not  the  slightest  reason  for  doubt- 
ing  it,  as  any  one  may  convince  himself  from  the  passage 
quoted  in  p.  217,  w^here  it  is  clearly  stated  tliat  the  dead 
shall  rise  again.  That  the  resurrection^  of  tlie_dead  -waa.  a 
t     common  belief  of  the  Magi,  long  before  the  commencement 

%  of  our  era,  may  be  learned  from  tlie  statement  of  Theopom- 
pos  (see  jpp.  8,  9).  Now  the  question  arises,  had  Spitama 
Zarathushtra  already  pronounced  this  doctrine,  which  is 
one  of  the  chief  dogmas  of  Christianity,  and  of  the  Jewish 
and  Mohammedan  religions,  pr  is  it  of  later,  perhaps 
foreign,  origin  ?  . 

Though  in  the  Gathas  there  is  no  particular  statement 
made  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  yet  we  find  a  phrase 
used  which  was  afterwards  always  applied  to  signify  the 
time  of  resurrection,  and  the  restoration  of  all  life  that  has 
been  lost  during  the  duration  of  creation.  This  is  the 
expression  frashem  hercnaon  aliiXm  (Yas.  xxx.  9,^  see  p. 
150),  "they  make  the  life  lasting,"  i.e.,  they  perpetuate 
the  life.  Out  of  this  phrase  the  substantive  frasho-kereti, 
"  perpetuation"  of  life,  was  formed,  by  which,  in  all  the 
later  Avesta  books,  the  whole  period  of  resurrection  and 
palingenesis  at  the  end  of  time  is  to  be  understood.  The 
resurrection  forms  only  a  part  of  it.  That  this  event  was 
really  included  in  the  term  of  frasho-kercti  one  may  dis- 
tinctly infer  from  Vend,  xviii.  51,  where  Spenta-Armaiti 
(the  earth)  is  invoked  to  restore  "  at  the  triumphant  reno- 
vation" of  creation,  the  lost  progeny,  in  the  form  of  one 
"  knowing  the  Gathas,  knowing  the  Yasna,  and  attending 
to  the  discourses  "  (see  p.  249). 

/       According_to  these  statements,  there  can  be  no  doubt 

^  A  full  explanation  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  author's  work  on  the 
Gathas,  vol.  i.  pp.  109-112. 


ZARATHUSHTRA'S  THEOLOGY.  313 

that  this  important  doctrine  is  a  genuine  Zoroastriau 
dogma,  which  developed  itself  naturally  from^pitama 
Zarathushtra's  sayings.  There  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of 
its  jDeing  Ijorrowed  from  a  foreign  source.  Besides  these 
direct  jproofs  of  its  forming  a  genuine  and  original  j)art  of 
Zoroastrian  tliO(:)k)yy,  it  agrees  completely  with  the  spirit 
and  tendency  of  the  Tarsi  religiohr  All  life  of  the  good 
creation,  especially  that  of  man,  Ijodily  as  well  as  spiritual, 
is  a  sacred  pawn  intrusted  by  God  to  man  who  must  keep 
his  body  free  from  impurity,  and  his  soul  from  sin.  If 
death  destroy  the  body  (in  the  natural  course),i  it  is  not 
the  fault  of  man  who  falls  to  an  inexorable  fate ;  but  it  is 
considered  as  the  duty  of  God,  who  is  the  preserver  of  all 
life,  to  restore  all  life  that  has  fallen  a  prey  to  death,  to 
destroy  this  arch-enemy  of  human  life,  and  so  make  life 
everlasting.  This  is  to  be  done  at  the  time  of  the  resur- 
rection. 

A  detailed  description  of  the  resurrection  and  the  last 
judgment  is  contained  in  the  31st  chapter  of  the  Bun- 
dahish  (see  pp.  70-77  Westerg.),  which  is,  no  doubt, 
founded  on  original  Avesta  sources  which  are  now  lost.  In 
it  an  old  song  is  embodied,  the  purport  of  which  is  to  show 
that,  though  it  appears  to  short-sighted  mortals  impossible 
for  the  body  (when  once  dissolved  into  its  elements,  and 
those  elements  scattered  in  every  direction)  to  be  restored 
again,  yet  nothing  is  impossible  for  the  hand  of  the 
Almighty,  who  created  heaven  and  earth,  endows  the  trees 
with  sap,  gives  life  to  embryos  in  the  womb,  &c. 

For  awakening  the  dead  bodies,  restoring  all  life  de- 
stroyed by  death,  and  holding  the  last  judgment,  the  great 
prophet  Sosyosh  (Saoshyds  in  the  Avesta)  will  appear  by 
order  of  Ahuramazda.  This  idea  is  already  to  be  found  in 
the  Avesta  texts,  only  with  the  difference,  that  sometimes 
several  (see  p.  2 1 7),  sometimes  only  one  Soshyans  is  men- 

^  Suicide  is,  according  to  the  Zoro-  same   class  belongs    adultery.      The 

astrian  religion,  one  of  the  most  lior-  committal  of  such  sins  leads  straight 

rible  crimes,  belonging  to  the  class  of  down  to  hell,  whence  no  Ijashne  can 

marg-arzdn,  or  "  deadly  "  sins.  To  the  release  the  soul. 


314  ZARATHUSHTRAS  THEOLOGY. 

tioned  (see  p.  254).  The  later  Parsi  legends  distinguish 
three  great  prophets  who  will  appear  before  the  end  of  the 
world.  These  are  the  men  who  will  perpetuate  life  (who 
will  produce  frashu-hereti),  men  of  the  same  stamp  as  the 
ancient  prophets  and  lire-priests,  and  bearing  the  same 
name,  viz.,  Saoshyanto.  They  will  be  commissioned  to 
check  the  influence  of  the  devil,  which  increases  at  the 
time  when  this  world  is  verging  towards  its  end,  by  restor- 
ing truth  and  faith  and  the  good  Zoroastrian  religion. 
Their  names  are  poetical  and  imply  a  simile;  the  dark 
period  of  wretchedness  and  sin,  in  which  they  appear, 
being  compared  to  night,  and  the  era  of  eternal  bliss,  they 
are  endeavouring  to  bring  about,  being  likened  to  the  bril- 
liant day.  The  first  of  these  prophets  is  called  Iluhhsha- 
tlira  Mao  (Hushedar-mah),  "  the  moon  of  happy  rule ; " 
the  second  is  Hukhshathra  Bdmya  (Hushedar-bami),  "  the 
aurora  of  happy  rule ; "  and  the  third  and  greatest  is  called 
Saoshyds  (Sosyosh).  He  is  believed  to  be  a  son  of  Spi- 
tama  Zarathushtra,  begotten  in  a  supernatural  way.  This 
means,  that  just  as  Spitama  Zarathushtra  was  the  greatest 
prophet  and  priest  in  ancient  times,  so  will  Sosyosh  be  the 
greatest  of  those  to  come.  Therefore,  he  alone  brings  with 
him  a  new  Nask  of  the  Zend-Avesta,  which  was  hitherto 
unknown,  and  reveals  it  to  mankind. 


(315) 


APPENDIX. 


Some  further  translations  from  the  Zend-Avesta,  prepared  at 
various  times  by  the  author,  but  not  hitherto  publislied,  together 
with  his  notes  descriptive  of  the  mode  of  performing  some  of  the 
Parsi  ceremonies,  are  here  added  in  the  form  of  an  Appendix  to 
the  foregoing  Essays. 

I. — Translations  from  the  Avesta, 

These  transLations,  which  were  written  by  the  author  in  Ger 
man,  supply  the  following  additions  to  the  passages  already  given 
in  the  third  Essay  : — 

I. — Yendidad,  Fargard  III.  1-23,  and  34,  35. 

I.  Creator  of  the  settlements  supplied  with  creatures,  righte- 
ous one  !  Where  is  the  first  most  pleasing  (spot)  of  this  earth  %  ^ 
Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Wherein,  indeed,  a  righteous  man  shall 
pray,2  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  holding  tlie  firewood,  holding 
the  Barsom,  holding  the  milk-offering  [gdush  jivya),  holding  the 
Homa-mortar.     [(Pazand)  Recite  the  words  containing  dkhshti  ^ 

1  Or  "  Where  is  the  first  (spot)  most  *  This  appears  to  refer  to  the  word 
pleasing  to  this  earth,"  according  to  dkhshti  in  the  AfringAn  Dahman  (see 
the  Pahlavi  translator.  Yas.  Ix.  5).     The  passage  containing 

2  So  understood  by  the  Pahlavi  this  word  is  the  most  sacred  part  of 
translator,  who  uses  the  word  fraud-  the  Afringan,  during  the  recital  of 
mesi/  compare  also  Yas.  Ixii.  I.  This  which  some  sandal- wood  is  thrown 
Pahlavi  word  can,  however,  also  be  into  the  fire,  and  it  must  occur  in  all 
rea.d fravdmed,  "goes  forth."  Afriuguns, 


3i6  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  III. 

with  religion  ;  they  may  invoice  both  Mithra,  ruling  over  wide 
fields,  and  Rama-qjistra].^ 

2,  3.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver,  i].  Where  is  the  second  most 
pleasing  (spot)  of  this  earth  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Wherein, 
indeed,  a  righteous  man  has  built  a  house  provided  with  fire, 
with  cattle,  with  a  wife,  with  a  son,  with  plenty.  Thencefor- 
ward the  cattle  of  this  house  are  in  abundance,  the  righteousness 
in  abundance,  the  pasture  ^  in  abundance,  the  dog  in  abundance, 
the  wife  in  abundance,  the  child  in  abundance,  the  fire  in  abund- 
ance, the  whole  good  creation  in  abundance. 

4.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Where  is  the  third  most  pleas- 
ing (spot)  of  this  earth?  Then  said  Ahuramazda:  Wherein, 
indeed,  one  cultivates,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  the  most  corn, 
and  pasture,  and  fruit-bearing  trees ;  either  where  one  provides 
water  for  unwatered  (land),  or  where  one  provides  drainage  for 
watery  (land). 

5.  Creator,  «fec.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Where  is  the  fourth  most 
pleasing  (spot)  of  this  earth  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Wherein, 
indeed,  cattle  and  draught  beasts  are  born  most. 

6.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Where  is  the  fifth  most  pleasing 
(spot)  of  this  earth  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Wherein,  indeed, 
cattle  and  draught  beasts  void  most  urine.  ^ 

7.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Where  is  the  first  most  un- 
pleasing  (spot)  of  this  earth  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  What  is 
on  the  ridge  of  Arezlira,*  O  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  on  which  the 
demons  congregate  out  of  the  pit  of  destruction  (hell). 

8.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Where  is  the  second  most  un- 
pleasing  (spot)  of  this  earth  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Wherein, 
indeed,  both  dead  dogs  and  dead  men  are  most  lying  buried. 

9.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].     Where  is  the  third  most  un- 

^  This  passage  is  liere  taken  either  -  Some  MSS.  and  the  Pahlavi  tran- 

as  a  Pazand  interpolation,  or  as  an  slation  have  "clothing." 

Avesta  quotation  in  the  Palilavi  tran-  ^  The  five  most  pleasing  spots  on 

slation.     It  has  reference  to  the  Dir-  the   earth  (or  most  pleasing  to  the 

Mihir  or  Agiari,  where  Mithra  and  spirit  of  the  earth,  if  we  accept  the 

R^nia-qastra  (the  angel  Ram,  see  p.  Pahlavi  interpretation)  are,  therefore, 

214)  are  supposed  to  dwell,  and  where  the  fire-temple,  the  house  of  a  pious 

they  must  be  invoked.     Some  MSS.  Zoroastrian,  cultivated  lands,  stables, 

have  "7  will  invoke,"  in  which  case  and  pastures. 

the  passage  may  perhaps  be  taken  as  ■*  A  mountain  said  to  be  situated  ai 

an  exclamation  of  the  righteous  man.  the  gate  of  hell. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  III.  317 

pleasing  (spot)  of  this  earth  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Wherein, 
indeed,  vaulted  tombs  ^  are  most  constructed,  in  which  dead  men 
are  deposited. 

10.  Creator,  (fee.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Where  is  the  fourth  most  un- 
pleasing  (spot)  of  this  earth  ?  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Wherein, 
indeed,  there  are  the  most  holes  (of  the  creatures)  of  Angru- 
mainyush. 

11.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Where  is  the  fifth  most  un- 
pleasing  (spot)  of  this  earth  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Wherein, 
indeed,  O  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  the  wife  or  child  of  a  righte- 
ous man  shall  travel  the  devious  ^  path,  (and)  he  brings  forth 
Availing  words  coupled  with  dust  and  with  sand. 

12.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Who  first  rejoices  this  earth 
with  the  greatest  joy  ?  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  When,  indeed, 
he  most  digs  up  where  both  dead  dogs  and  dead  men  are  lying 
buried, 

13.  Creator,  (fee.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Who  secondly  rejoices  this 
earth  with  the  gi-eatest  joy?  Then  said  Ahuramazda:  When, 
indeed,  he  most  demolishes  the  vaulted  tombs  in  which  dead 
men  are  deposited. 

14.  No  one  is  carrying  alone  what  is  dead.^  For  if  he  should 
carry  alone  that  which  is  dead,  the  Nasush  would  indeed  defile 
(him)  from  the  nose,  from  the  eye,  from  the  tongue,  from  the 
chin,  from  the  sexual  part,  from  the  anus.*  This  Drukhsh 
Nasush  falls  upon  them  (on  such  carriers),  on  their  speech,^ 
(and)  afterwards  they  are  impure  for  ever  and  ever. 

1  Covered  tombs  are  forbidden  to  tban  two  men,  according  to  the  reli- 
the  Zoroastrians,  as  the  corpse  must  gious  laws  of  the  Zoroastrians. 
remain  exi^osed  to  the  light  of  the         ■*  The  drukhsh  yd  nasush,  or  demon 
sun,  and  not  be  laid  in  any  closed  of  corruption,  issues  from  the  corpse 
sepulchre.  and   settles  upon  the    man   who    is 

2  The  Dasturs  understand  by  vara-  carrying  it  improperly.  It  seems 
ithtm  paiitdm  the  forbidden  or  peril-  likely  that  the  text  means  to  state 
ous  path  of  death,  arid  consider  this  that  the  Nasush  issues  from  all  the 
passage  as  a  direct  prohibition  of  all  jiine  openings  of  the  body,  but  in  that 
lamentations  and  outward  signs  of  case  ilie  douhtinl  word  2Mit)sh-qarena 
mourning  for  the  dead.  The  Pahlavi  must  be  "ear"  (not  "chin" or  "jaw"); 
commentary  is  obscure,  but  appears  it  is  equivalent  to  a  Sanskrit  form 
to  describe  the  path  as  grievous,  but  pratisvarava,  which  would  not  be  an 
to  return  upon  it  as  still  more  gloomy  impossible  term  for  an  "  ear." 

or  impracticable.  ^  This  is   the  traditional  explana- 

^  No  corpse  can  be  carried  by  less     tion,  which  seems  probable  enough. 


3i8  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  III. 

15.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Where  sliould  be  the  place  of 
this  man  who  is  mi  iristo-kasha  ^  (single  carrier  of  the  dead)  1 
Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Where  there  may  be  the  most  waterless 
and  treeless  (spot)  of  this  earth,  with  the  most  ground  fit  for  the 
purification  ceremony  and  the  most  dry  land  ;  and  the  cattle 
and  draught  beasts  shall  go  least  forth  on  the  paths,  and  (there 
are  least)  fire  of  Ahuramazda,  and  Barsom  rightly  arranged,  and 
men  who  are  righteous. 

16.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  How  far  from  fire,  how  far 
from  water,  how  far  from  the  Barsom  to  be  arranged,  how  far  from 
risfhteous  men  1 

17.  Then  said  Ahuramazda:  Thirty  steps  from  fire,  thirty 
steps  from  water,  thirty  steps  from  the  Barsom  to  be  arranged, 
three  steps  from  righteous  men. 

18.  19.  There  the  Mazdayasnians  should  enclose  for  him  an 
enclosure  of  this  earth.  Then  for  victuals  they  who  are  Mazda- 
yasnians shall  provide — then  for  clothes  they  who  are  Mazdayas- 
nians shall  provide — (some)  among  the  very  hardest  and  foulest. 
These  victuals  let  him  eat,  these  clothes  let  him  wear,  always 
till  when  he  shall  become  an  aged  man,  elderly  or  impotent.- 

20,  21.  Then  when  he  shall  become  an  aged  man,  elderly  or 
impotent,  the  Mazdayasnians  should  afterwards,  in  the  most 
effectual,  most  rapid,  and  most  skilful  manner,  strij)  the  extent 
of  the  skin,  the  support  of  the  hair,^  oflf  his  head.  To  the  most 
voracious  of  the  beneficent  spirit's  carnivorous  creatures,  the  birds 
(and)  vultures,  one  should  deliver  over  the  body,  speaking  thus : 
These  depart  with  him,  all  (his)  evil  thoughts,  and  evil  words, 
and  evil  deeds.  And  if  other  wicked  deeds  were  perpetrated  by 
him,  his  atonement  is  through  patita  (renunciation  of  sin) ; 
moreover,  if  other  wicked  deeds  were  not  perpetrated  by  him, 
the  patita  of  that  man  is  (completed)  for  ever  and  ever. 

22.   Creator,  &c.   [as  in  ver.    i].     Who  thirdly  rejoices  this 

^  The  iristo-kasha  is  one  wlio  car-  zawurd,    "elderly  man,"  is   one  of 

ries  the  dead  in  an  improper  manner,  fifty  ;    and    the    pairishtd-khshudrd, 

and  must  be  carefully  distinguished  "imjiotent  or  decrepit  man,"  is  one 

from  the  nasu-kasha  (Vend.  viii.  ir,  of  ninety  years. 

13),  who  is  the  lawful  carrier.  '  The  Pahlavi  ranslator  says :  "  He 

-  According  to  the  Pahlavi  transla-  is  detained  on  a  summit,  on  the  top 

tion,  and  the  Farhang-i  Oim-khadilk  of  a  hill,"  till  they  scalp  or  behead 

(p.  5,  ed.  Hoshangji),  the  hayiS,  "  aged  him. 
man,"  is  one  seventy  years  old;  the 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  IV.  319 

earth  witli  the  greatest  joy?  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  When, 
indeed,  he  most  destroys  the  holes  of  (the  creatures)  of  Angro- 
ruaiiiyush. 

23.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Who  fourthly  rejoices  this 
earth  with  the  greatest  joy  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  When, 
indeed,  he  cultivates,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  the  most  corn, 
and  pasture,  and  fruit-bearing  trees ;  either  where  he  provides 
water  for  unwatered  (land),  or  where  he  provides  drainage  for 
watery  (land). 

24-33.   [See  the  translation  in  pp.  235-237.] 

34,  35.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  i].  Who  fifthly  rejoices  this 
earth  with  the  greatest  joy  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  When, 
indeed,  O  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  he  shall  labour  on  this  earth, 
(and)  gives  with  righteousness  and  goodness  to  a  righteous  man. 
When,  indeed,  O  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  he  shall  labour  on  this 
earth,  (and)  gives  not  with  righteousness  and  goodness  to  a 
righteous  man,  one  should  thrust  him  out  of  the  bountiful  earth 
(Armaiti)  into  darkness,  and  distress,  and  the  worst  existence, 
and  he  must  submit  to  all  thorns. 

36-42.   [Not  translated.] 

2. —  Vendidad,  Fargard  IV.  44-55. 

44-46.  And  ^  when  men  of  the  same  (Mazdayasnian)  religion 
should  come  here,  either  brothers  or  friends,  seeking  property, 
or  seeking  a  wife,  or  seeking  wisdom ;  if  they  should  come  seek- 
ing property,  they  may  acquire  their  property  here ;  if  they 
should  come  seeking  a  wife,  you  may  let  a  woman  marry ;  if 
they  should  come  seeking  wisdom,  you  may  recite  the  beneficent 
text  2  both  early  in  the  daytime  and  late,  both  early  in  the  night- 
time and  late,  for  the  increase  in  wisdom  of  the  learner^  for  the 

^  Ver.  44  has  been  already  trail-  peated  (?)  it  through  righteousness 
slated  in  p.  240,  but  it  is  so  closely  (that  is,  he  may  have  quite  under- 
connected  with  the  following  verses  stood  what  is  declared  by  it)."  The 
that  it  is  necessary  to  repeat  it  here.  Avesta    word   vtdrvdnahe    ("of    the 

^  The  Pahlavi  translation  adds:  learner")  occurs  nowhere  else,  and  is 
"  That  is,  its  words  are  to  be  here  explained  by  hard  dardd  in  Pah- 
taught."  lavi,  which  is  equally  obscure,  but 

^  The  Pahlavi  version  is:  "When  the   general  sense   indicated  by  the 

it  mnj'   have   increased    his   wisdom  Pahlavi  is  that  of  "  learner  or  pupil. " 

(that  is,  when  it  may  be  made  quite  It  may,  however,  be  remarked  that  if 

easy  to  him)  and  he  may  have  re-  vtdrvdnaM  be  traced  to  vi-dru  we  ob- 


320 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  IV. 


sake  of  righteousness ;  and  with  righteousness  and  reverence  he 
sits  at  home  for  increase  in  wisdom,^  In  the  middle  of  both  day 
and  night  he  may  sleep,  by  day  and  by  night,  always  till  when 
they  should  recite  those  sayings  which  the  Herbads  had  previ- 
ously recited. 2  They  (the  sayings)  are  adapted  for  men  (who 
are)  like  boiling  water  (through  zeal).  Not  for  meat,  not  for 
clothes,  (but)  unrewarded,  must  he  (the  teacher)  utter  the  chap- 
ters (Has). 3 

47.  And,  moreover,  I  tell  thee  thus,  0  Spitama  Zarathush- 
tra !  verily  the  priest  [magava)  ^  must  recite  from  it  sooner  for 
the  married  man  than  for  thee,  for  him  with  a  house  than 
for  him  without  a  house,  for  him  with  a  son  than  for  him 
without  a  son,  for  him  with  property  than  for  him  without 
property. 

48.  And  of  these  two  men  he  shall  be  more  possessed  of  the 
good  mind  (Vohu-mano)  who  shall  promote  the  growth  of  meat 
(or  cattle)  than  he  who  does  not.  So  he  being  dead,  he  is  as 
much  as  an  asperena,^  he  is  as  much  as  a  young  animal,  he  is 
as  much  as  a  draught  beast,  he  is  as  much  as  a  man  (in 
weight).*^ 


taiu  a  meaning  ("of  the  fugitive  or 
refugee ")  which  would  also  suit  the 
passage,  as  the  men  seem  to  have 
come  as  exiles  from  their  own  homes. 
The  anomalous  Pahlavi  word  dardd 
can  also  be  read  (jirikht,  which  sug- 
gests girtkht,  "fled"  (although  this 
is  generally  written  virtkht) ;  and  the 
Pahlavi  phrase  Avould  then  mean : 
"and  he  may  have  fled  on  account  of 
righteousness."  The  explanatory 
phrases  of  the  Pahlavi  translation, 
given  above  in  parentheses,  are  pro- 
bably later  interpolations.  The 
phrase  "  to  make  easy  "  is  a  Pahlavi 
and  Persian  idiom  for  "to  learn  by 
heart." 

^  The  Pahlavi  version  is  :  "In  awe 
of  God  and  thankfulness  towards  God 
that  wisdom  increases  which  is  made 
easy  to  him,  (and)  he  is  constant  in 
exertion  that  he  may  retain  it  by 
labour  and  the  grace  of  God."  That 
yaonem  (which  is  here  rendered  by 
Pahl.   ay&jishn,   "exertion")  means 


"  home,  place,"  is  plain  from  the  pas- 
sage, Vend.  xxi.  4 :  ham  yaetdonho 
yaonemcha  avi  zdmcha,  zdmcha  avi 
yaonemcha,  "  (the  waters)  striving  to- 
wards home  and  the  earth,  towards 
the  earth  and  home  (in  the  sea  Vouru- 
kasha)." 

-  The  Pahlavi  version  adds  the 
name  of  Adarpfl,d  Maraspenddn. 

2  The  Pahlavi  version  is  :  "  Thou 
shouldst  not  .speak  of  the  non-giving 
of  meat  nor  of  clothes  which  should 
be  thine  ;  always  say :  No !  and  after- 
wards even,  at  the  time,  say :  A 
little !  " 

■*  The  Pahlavi  version  renders  yatha 
magavu  fravu/chshuid  by  :  "  as  (one) 
who  has  progressed  in  the  Maght  (the 
Barashnom  ceremony),  that  is,  has  no 
wife ;  "  alluding  to  the  fact  that  a 
man  undergoing  that  ceremony  must 
live  separate  from  his  wife. 

*  A  weight  equivalent  to  a  dirham. 

6  Probably  referring  to  the  weight 
of  his  good  works. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  IV.  321 

49.  For  this  man,  on  meeting,  fights  with  Asto-vtdhotu.^ 
Whoever  fights  an  arrow  shot  by  himself,  whoever  fights  Zemaka 
(the  Winter  demon,  and)  Avears  scanty  clothing,  whoever  fights 
a  wicked  man,  a  tyrant,  and  (strikes  him)  on  the  head,^  whoever 
fights  an  unrighteous  apostate  (and)  starvation ;  ^  (any)  of  these 
deeds  being  performed  a  first  time,  is  not  (to  be  done)  a  second 
time. 

50.  That  such  as  are  in  this  material  world  may  here  under- 
stand (the  agony)  of  this  exploit  there,^  one  should  cut  away  to 
the  bones  with  iron  knives ;  verily,  it  is  greater  than  any  such 
(agony)  of  his  mortal  body.^ 

51.  That  such  as  are  in  this  material  world  may  here  under- 
stand (the  agony)  of  this  exploit  there,  one  should  tear  away  to 
the  bones  with  iron  pincers ;  verily,  it  is  greater  than  any  such 
(agony)  of  his  mortal  body. 

52.  That  such  as  are  in  this  material  world  may  here  under- 
stand (the  agony)  of  this  exploit  there,  one  should  fall  involun- 
tarily into  a  pit  (deep  as)  a  hundred  men ;  verily,  it  is  greater 
than  any  such  (agony)  of  his  mortal  body. 

53.  That  such  as  are  in  this  material  world  may  here  UTider- 
stand  (the  agony)  of  this  exploit  there,  one  should  stand  iuvulun- 
'tarily  on  an  extreme  verge  (of  a  precipice).^ 

1  The  demon  of  death,  who  is  said,  thesis  is  not  found  in  the  oldest  MSS. 
in  later  writings,  to  cast  a  halter  In  the  Pahlavi  each  clause  of  the  sen- 
around  the  necks  of  the  dead  to  drag  tence  is  also  wound  up  by  stating  that 
them  to  liell,  but  if  their  good  works  "  his  fight  is  with  Asto-vidhotu,"  that 
have  exceeded  tlieir  sins  they  throw  is,  at  the  risk  of  death. 

off  the  noose  and  go  to  heaven.     Per-  ■*  That  is,  of  the  conflict  of  the  soul 

haps  the  grammatical  difficulties  of  with  Asto-vidhutu  in  the  other  world, 

this  sentence  may  be  best  overcome  Possibly    aetadha    (here    translated 

by  the'following  translation  :—  "  For  "here  ")  may  be  taken  as  the  missing 

this   one,  Asto-vidhotu,   on   meeting  noun  "  agonies  ;  "  compare  aeithdhu, 

men,  fights."  "through  terrors,"  Yt.  xxii.  25,  see 

2  The  Pahlavi   version   says  :    "  A  p.  222. 

beheader  like  Zarhundid."  ^  The  translation  of  this   difficult 

*  If  asha  be  taken  in  its  primitive  passage  has  been  much  i-evised,  so  as 

sense   of   "right,"   this   phrase  may  to  correspond  more  closely  with  the 

merely  mean:  "whoever  fights  mis-  text  without   introducing  additional 

chievous  and  unusual  hunger."    The  words,  which  are  always  hazardous 

Pahlavi  version,  instead  of  "starva-  suggestions. 


•*oo'- 


tion,"  has  :   "a  tyrant  like  Mazdak(-i  ^  The  Pahlavi  translator  misunder- 

Bamdadan  wlio  ate  his  own  liver,  and  stands  this  verse  as  referring  to  sexual 

it  was  given  to  him  in  anguish  and  enjoyment, 
death) ; "  but  the  passage  in   paren- 


2,22  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V. 

54.  That  sucli  as  are  in  this  material  world  may  here  under- 
stand (the  agony)  of  this  exploit  there,  one  knowing  a  lie  should 
drink  up  the  beneficial,  golden,  intelligent  water  with  denial  of 
the  truth  {Rashm)  and  breach  of  promise  {MUhra)} 

55.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  Whoever  knowing  a  lie  should 
drink  up,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  54];  what  is  his  punishment?  Then 
said  Ahuramazda  :*  One  may  strike  seven  hundred  blows  with  a 
horse-goad,  seven  hundred  with  a  scourge.^ 

3,  —  Vendidad,  Fargard  V. 

1.  A  man  dies  there  in  the  depths  of  the  valleys  ;  thereupon 
a  bird  flies  aloft  from  the  summits  of  the  hills  into  the  depths 
of  the  valleys ;  it  feeds  upon  the  body  of  the  dead  man.  Then 
the  bird  flies  aloft  from  the  depths  of  the  valleys  to  the  summits 
of  the  hills ;  it  flies  on  to  a  tree,  either  of  the  hard  or  of  the  soft 
(kinds).  It  (the  nasush,  "dead  matter")  is  vomited  on  it,  is 
voided  on  it,  is  dropped  on  it. 

2.  A  man  goes  forth  there  from  the  depths  of  the  valleys  to 
the  summits  of  the  hills ;  he  goes  up  to  the  tree  where  that  bird 
Avas ;  he  wants  faggots  for  the  Are ;  he  fells  it,  he  hews  it,  he 
splits  it,3  he  kindles  it  in  the  fire,  the  ollspring  of  Ahuramazda. 
What  is  the  punishment  for  this  1 

3.  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  No  dead  matter  (nasush)  brought 
by  a  dog,  none  brought  by  a  bird,  none  brought  by  a  wolf,  none 
brought  by  the  wind,  none  brought  by  a  fly,  pollutes  a  man. 

1  This  refers  to  an  ordeal  in  which  ^  The  additional  words,  ddyata 
a  cup  of  water  is  drunk  after  solemnly  ddityd-pairishta,  "it  was  kept  law- 
invoking  curses  upon  one's  head  if  fully  inspected,"  appear  to  be  merely 
one  has  not  told  the  truth.  The  an  Avesta  quotation  in  the  Pahlavi 
water  is  prepared  with  great  solem-  translation.  This  inspection  is  after- 
nity,  and  contains  various  sacred  sub-  wards  more  fully  noticed  in  the  long 
stances,  among  them  some  Homa  Pahlavi  commentary  to  ver.  4,  where 
juice,  which  is  referred  to  in  the  it  is  stated  that  firewood  must  be  re- 
Pahlavi  version  by  the  epithet  gfdfairci-  jected  if  contaminated  with  dead 
homand  for  saokeiitavaittm,  "  bene-  matter,  or  if  decayed,  or  from  a  gal- 
ficial ; "  and  a  little  gold  is  added,  lows,  or  mixed  with  grease,  or  pol- 
which  accounts  for  the  second  epithet  luted  by  a  menstruouswoman,  except 
in  the  text.  See  the  Saugand-  in  case  of  death  or  distress;  the  burn- 
namali.  ing  of  such  firewood  is  a  tandpHhar 

^  The  Pahlavi  version  adds:  "Who-  sin,  but  burning  greasy  wood  is  a 

ever    performs    an   ordeal  (car)    his  mortal  sin. 
punishment — says  a  voice — is  this." 


VENDIDAD,  'FARGARD  V.  323 

4.  If,  indeed,  the  dead  matters  -wbicli  are  brought  by  a  dog, 
and  brought  by  a  bird,  and  brought  h^  a  wolf,  and  brought  by 
the  wind,  and  brought  by  a  fly,  are  the  dead  matter  (which) 
would  be  polluthig  a  man,  speedily  my  whole  material  world 
would  overthrow  (its)  essential  righteousness  (or  regularity,  and 
be)  distressing  the  soul  (and)  ruining  the  body,  through  the  mul- 
titude of  these  dead  matters  which  have  perished  upon  this 
earth. 

5.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  A  man  pours  water  on  to  a 
corn-field  ;  he  shall  go  into  the  water-channel  {yaidluin)  ^  through 
it,  into  (it)  a  second  time,  into  (it)  a  third  time,  and  after  the 
fourth  time  they  drag  dead  matter  in,  (be  they)  dog,  or  fox,  or 
wolf.     What  is  the  punishment  for  this  % 

6.  Then  said  Ahuramazda,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  3], 

7.  If,  indeed,  the  dead  matters,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  4].^ 

8.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  Does  the  water  destroy  a  manl 
Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  The  water  docs  not  destroy  a  man. 
Asto-vidhotu  binds  him  ;  the  flying  demon  ( Vayo)  ^  conveys  him 
bound ;  the  water  carries  (him)  up,  the  water  carries  (him) 
down,  the  water  casts  (him)  away  •  the  birds  iyayo)  then  de- 
vour him.  There  *  he  then  proceeds,  through  fate  he  then 
departs. 

9.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  Does  the  fire  destroy  a  man  1 
Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  The  fire  does  not  destroy  a  man.     Asto- 

^  In  Pahlavi^dJ,  "a  rivulet."  from  any  impurity  in  its  "way.     Most 

^  The  Palilavi  commentary  on  tliis  of    this  commentary  is    omitted    in 

passage  states:    "It  is  declared  by  Spiegel's  edition  of  the  Pahlavi  text, 

the  Avesta,   the   dry  channel   of    a  but  will  be  found  in  the  old  MS.  at 

rivulet  (JoZ  kh4shk  vuril,  Pers.  bunt)  the  India  OfEce  Library  in  London, 

is  to  be  inspected  for  dead  matter,  mentioned  in  p.  95. 

Yezi  vasen  Mazdayasna  zdm  raodh-  ^  Vye-i  sarttar,  "the  evil  VyS,"  in 

ay  en    ('If  the   Mazdayasnians    wish  the  Pahlavi  version ;  this  is  the  Vae 

they  may   irrigate   the   land')."      It  i-vatar  of  the  Mainy6-i-khard(ii.  115), 

then  proceeds  to  say  that  a  man  be-  where  he  is  one  of  the  demons  who 

fore  admitting  the  water  must   de-  oppose   the  soul's   progress  towards 

scend  three  times  into  the  channel  heaven. 

and  inspect  it  carefully,  to  see  that  *  That  is,  to  the  other  world.     The 

it  is  free  from  imjiurity,  and  after  a  Pahlavi  version  has':  "When  he  sets 

fourth  inspection  he  may  allow  the  out  back  from  thence  (that  is,  shall 

water  to  enter.     Further  provisions  come)  fate  will  convey  him  back  (that 

are  made  in  case  of  the  inspection  is,  she  is  in  the  leading  path  when  he 

being  impracticable,    and   as  to   the  shall  come)." 
merit  acquired  by  diverting  the  water 


324 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V. 


vldhotu  binds  him ;  the  flying  demon  ( Vayo)  ^  conveys  him 
bound ;  the  fire  consumes  the  bones  and  vitality.  There  he 
then  proceeds,  through  fate  he  then  departs.- 

TO.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  They  pass  out  of  summer,  then 
in  winter  how  should  they  act,  they  who  are  Mazdayasnians  % 
Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  In  eveiy  dwelling,  in  every  neighbour- 
hood,2  they  shall  erect  three  Katas  for  any  one  when  dead. 

II.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  How  large  are  these  Katas  for 
any  one  when  dead  %  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  So  that  he  may 
not  strike  his  head  against  the  upper  part,^  nor  the  further  end 
with  the  feet,  nor  across  with  the  hands ;  verily,  this  is  a  lawful 
Kata  for  any  one  when  dead. 


1  The  Pallia vi  version  adds  :  ' '  That 
is  when,  as  some  say,  the  good  VS,ya. 
will  ever  receive  him."  Tliis  refers 
to  the  Vae-i-veh  of  the  Maiuyo-i- 
khaid  (ii.  115),  where  he  is  one  of  the 
angels  who  assist  the  soul's  progress 
to  heaven.  He  is  identical  with  the 
angel  Earn,  the  Yayu  of  the  Ram 
Yasht,  see  p.  214. 

-  The  Pahlavi  commentary  on  this 
passage  is:  "Worldly  (benefits  are 
acquired)  through  fate,  spiritual 
through  action  ;  some  say  that  wife, 
child,  wealth,  authority,  and  life  are 
through  fate,  the  rest  through  action. 
The  happiness  which  is  not  destined 
for  a  man  he  never  attains  to  ;  (this) 
is  evident  from  the  passage  (begin- 
ning) :  gairi-maso  anhu  aetake  ("thou 
mightest  be  mountain-sized  of  this"); 
that  which  is  destined  for  him,  and 
which  will  come  before  him  through 
exertion,  is  aiiyo  arcdvo  zeiigo  qareno 
("the  other  persistent  glorj^"),  and 
it  was  through  his  sinfulness  when 
trouble  happens  to  him.  Add  qa- 
reno frapairifiiti  ("then  glory  de- 
livers ")  and  the  misfortune  destined 
for  him  he  is  able  to  avert  by  proper 
exertion  ;  jiouru-qarenanlid  ashava 
Zaratlmshtra  ("full  of  glory  (he  is) 
O  righteous  Zarathushtra  !"');  and  his 
sinfulness  ever  anew  destines  it  (mis- 
fortune) for  him.  Aeshdmcha  nardm 
("  and  of  these  men  ")  one  man,  when 
through  the  destiny  of  another  man  it 


was  necessary  for  him,  had  died  when 
through  the  destiny  of  that  dead  one 
it  was  still  improper,  but  he  (the  first 
one)  was  able  to  do  it  so  that,  through 
the  slaying  of  that  innocent  one,  jus- 
tice {radih)  should  well  deal  with 
this  quarrel.''  This  commentary  is  a 
fair  specimen  of  the  mode  in  which 
Avesta  quotations  are  used  in  the 
Pahlavi  version  of  the  Vendidad.  In 
the  above  quotations  the  word  qarena, 
"glory,  brilliance,"  is  probably  used 
for  hakhta,  "fate,  destiny,"  which 
would  obviously  be  more  appro^jriate 
in  meaning.  Both  these  words  would 
be  equivalent  to  the  same  Huzvarish 
logogram,  gadman;  and  this  fact 
might  lead  to  the  one  word  being 
substituted  for  the  other,  provided 
we  assume  that  the  Avesta  quotations 
had  been,  at  one  time,  wi-itten  in 
Pahlavi. 

3  The  oldest  Pahlavi  MSS.  have 
merely,  Man  vis  khdnak  khadiik  d'tst 
ka^o,  explaining  man  by  khdnak,  "  a 
house,"  and  vis  by  dast-i  kado,  "group 
of  huts." 

■*  The  Pahlavi  MS.  version  has  : 
"So  much  as,  when  standing  (that 
is,  living)  the  head  strikes  not  against 
the  limits  (dhdii),  nor  when  the  foot 
.is  forth  (that  i.s,  when  the  foot  is  ex- 
tended), nor  when  the  hand  is  un- 
moved (that  is,  his  hand  is  held 
back)." 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V.  '  325 

12.  There  shall  they  deposit  his  lifeless  body  for  two  nights, 
or  three  nights,  or  a  month  long,  until  the  (time)  when  the  birds 
shall  fly  forth,  the  plants  shall  shoot  out,  the  descending  (floods)  ^ 
shall  run  off',  (and)  the  wind  shall  dry  up  the  ground, 

13.  Then  when  thus  the  birds  shall  fly  forth,  the  plants  shall 
shoot  out,  the  descending  (floods)  shall  run  otf,  (and)  the  wind 
shall  dry  up  the  ground,  the  Mazdayasnians  should  now  set  his 
body  viewing  the  sun. 

14.  If  the  Mazdayasnians  should  not  set  this  body  viewing 
the  sun  for  the  length  of  a  year,  thou  shalt  order  as  much  punish- 
ment as  for  murdering  a  righteous  man  (a  Zoroastrian),  in  order 
that  the  corpses  (be)  attended  to,  the  Dakhmas  attended  to,  the 
impurities^  attended  to,  and  the  birds  gorged. 

15.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  Wilt  thou,  who  art  Ahura- 
mazda,  release  the  water  from  the  sea  Vouru-kasha,  together  with 
the  wind  and  clouds  ? 

16.  Wilt  thou  convey  (it)  to  a  corpse,  thou  who  art  Ahura- 
mazda  1  Wilt  thou  convey  (it)  on  to  a  Dakhma,  thou  who  art 
Ahuramazda  1  Wilt  thou  convey  (it)  on  to  impurity,  thou  who 
art  Ahuramazda?  Wilt  thou  pour  (it)  forth  on  a  bone,  thou  who 
art  Ahuramazda  ?  Wilt  thou  conduct  (it)  forth  unnoticed,  thou 
w^ho  art  Ahuramazda  1  With  those  (impurities)  wilt  thou  con- 
duct (it)  forth  to  the  sea  Puitika? 

17.  Then  said  Ahuramazda:  Verily  it  is  so,  0  Zarathushtra ! 
as  thou  sayest,  0  upright  one  !  I  who  am  Ahuramazda  will  re- 
lease the  water  from  the  sea  Vouru-kasha,  together  with  the  wind 
and  clouds. 

1 8.  I  will  convey  (it)  to  a  corpse,  I  who  am  Ahuramazda ;  I 
will  convey  (it)  on  to  a  Dakhma,  I  who  am  Ahuramazda ;  I  will 
convey  (it)  on  to  impurity,  I  who  am  Ahuramazda ;  I  will  pour 

1  "What  are  "lying  low"  or  "di-  as  the  Pahlavi  translator  adds,  "the 
rected  downwards,"  as  implied  by  the  adversity  of  winter  shall  depart ;  "  but 
word  nydoncho,  must  be  guessed  from  these  readings  are  too  irregular  in 
the  context,  and  floods,  streams,  form  to  be  relied  on. 
icicles,  and  snow  might  be  suggested.  -  The  term  hikhra,  "impurity,"  is 
The  Pahlavi  equivalent  of,  nydoncho  applied  to  any  bodily  refuse  or  ex- 
is  ambiguous,  even  in  the  old  MSS.,  cretion  from  mankind  or  dogs,  in- 
and  may  be  read  either  vashdyingunth,  eluding  saliva,  skin,  hair,  nail-parings, 
"a  clearing  off,  an  open  sky,"' or  jiJsA-  &;c.  In  this  passage  it  apjiears  to 
dyingunth,  "solidification,  congela-  refer  to  exudations  from  a  corpse, 
tion ; "  the  latter  might  be  preferred, 


326 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V. 


(it)  forth  on  a  bone,  I  who  am  Ahuramazda;  I  will  conduct  (it) 
forth  unnoticed,  I  who  am  Ahuramazda ;  with  those  (impurities) 
I  will  conduct  (it)  forth  to  the  sea  Puitika. 

19.  There  exist  streaming  currents'^  in  the  inner  part  of  the 
sea  for  purifying,  (and)  the  waters  flow  from  the  sea  Puitika  to 
the  sea  Vouru-kasha,^  to  the  tree  Hvapa  ;  ^  here  grow  all  my 
trees  of  every  kind."^ 

20.  I  rain  these  down  together,^  I  who  am  Ahuramazda,  both 
as  food  for  the  riirhteous  man  and  fodder  for  the  well-yieldins 
ox.  Man  shall  eat  my  corn,  and  fodder  is  for  the  well-yield- 
ing ox. 

21.  Tbis  is  better,  this  is  more  excellent,  than  thou,  upright 
one  !  sayest.  By  this  speech  the  righteous  Ahuramazda  rejoiced 
him,  the  righteous  Zarathushtra  :  Mayst  thou  purify  for  man  the 
best  (things)  for  procreation.*'  This  which  is  the  Mazdayasnian 
religion  is  pure,  0  Zarathushtra  !  He  who  purifies  himself  by 
good  thoughts  and  good  words  and  good  deedsj 

22.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  How  much  greater,  better,  and 
more    excellent    is    this   Zarathushtrian    Provision    asrainst  the 


1  Or  perhaps  "splashing  waves;" 
the  Pahlavi  ti'anslation  is  obscure, 
but  seems  to  say  :  "they  remain  in  a 
water-skin  (av  khdik,  Pers.  khik)  and 
bucket  {dilhi)  kept  full." 

^  The  Pahlavi  version  adds  :  "  To- 
vrards  the  southernmost  side,  and  it 
(the  water)  stays  behind  in  mist 
{pavan  ha;  or  khir),  and  the  blue 
(kavud)  body  of  (the  sea)  Satavacsa 
stays  behind  around  it.  Puitika 
stands  away  from  the  shore  of  Sata- 
vaesa,  this  is  a  fact,  but  from  which 
shore  it  stands  away  is  not  clear  to 
me.  The  water  comes  to  Satavaesa 
through  the  bottom  {pekh) ;  some  say 
that  it  traverses  a  fissure  (kufak)." 

3  ThePahlavi  version  adds:  "Afarg 
says  the  root  of  a  tree ;  Mcduk-muh 
(says)  a  forest." 

4  Some  MSS.  add  the  Avesta  :  "by 
hundreds,  by  thousands,  by  myriads 
of  myriads ; "  and  the  Pahlavi  version 
adds  :  "  among  species,  chaiti  henti 
nrraranum  saredha  ("how  many  are 
the  kinds  of  trees  ?  ")  that  is  the  prin- 


cipal species."  Either  a  list  of  spe- 
cies is  omitted,  or  chaiti  here  merely 
means  "many," as  the  Pahlavi  chand 
often  does. 

5  That  is,  both  waters  and  plants. 
The  Pahlavi  commentary  ascribes  this 
to  Tishtar,  according  to  the  later  tra- 
dition, thus :  "  he  who  is  Tishtar 
takes  the  water  (that)  they  may  take 
it  in  the  wells  of  waters  it  comes 
to." 

^  This  is  a  quotation  from  the 
Speiita-mainyu  Gatha  (Yas.  xlviii.  5) 
which  continues  as  follows  : — "  for  the 
ox  mayst  thou  nourish  that  of  those 
labouring  for  our  food."  It  forms 
part  of  an  address  to  Armaiti,  the 
spirit  of  the  earth.  The  disconnected 
phrases  which  follow  are  probably 
also  texts  quoted  from  the  Scrip- 
tures. 

''  The  Pahlavi  version  adds  the  note 
that,  "  anhvdm  (life,  self)  nnddtiendin 
(intuition,  religion,  self)  are  both  the 
same. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V.  327 

Devas^  above  the  other  traditions  in  greatness  and   goodness 
and  excellence. 

23.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Verily,  one  may  consider,  0 
Spitama  Zarathushtra !  this  Zarathushtrian  Provision  against 
the  Devas  above  the  other  ti'nditions  in  greatness  and  goodness 
and  excellence,  as  the  sea  Vouru-kasha  is  above  the  other 
waters. 

24.  Verily,  one  may  consider,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  23],  as  the  greater 
water  overpowers  the  lesser  waters.^  Verily,  one  may  consider, 
oic.  [as  in  ver.  23],  as  the  greater  tree  overshadows  the  lesser 
trees.^ 

25.  Verily,  one  may  consider,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  23],  as  it  has  been 
both  on  and  around  this  earth.* 

Let  the  judge  {i-atii)  be  nominated,  let  the  executor  of  the 
sentence  [sraoshdvareza)  be  nominated,  on  a  Draona  (consecrated 
cake)  being  uplifted  or  not  uplifted,  on  a  Draona  being  offered 
or  not  offered,  on  a  Draona  being  delivered  or  not  delivered.^ 

26.  Afterwards  this  judge  is  able  to  remit  for  him  a  third  of 
this  punishment.  And  if  other  wicked  deeds  were  perpetrated 
by  him,  his  atonement  is  through  pa^ito '(renunciation  of  sin); 
moreover,  if  other  wicked  deeds  were  not  perpetrated  by  him, 
the  patita  of  that  man  is  (completed)  for  ever  and  ever.*^ 

1  The  Vendidad,  which  is  a  corrup-  (ntranr/)  of  worship."    There  is  evi- 

tion  of  Ttdnevd-dutcm,  see  p.  225.  dently  a  change  of  subject  here. 

^  The  Pa  hlavi  version  has  :  "  as  the        ^  The  Pahlavi  commentaries  on  this 

great  water  when  it  advances  upon  the  passage  are  :  "The  Dastur  considers, 

little  water,  bears  (it)  away  when  it  (the  Sraoshavareza)  accuses  of  sin." 

falls  into  tlie  t7(ii/ia  "  (perhaps  equiva-  And  with  i-eference  probablv  to  the 

lent  to  cAa/i,  "a  pit").  offender,  the  Dastur  considers:  "what 

^  The    Pahlavi    adds    an    obscure  was  in   his  thoughts  but  not  com- 

phrase  which   may   perhaps,  in  the  mitted,  and  not  in  his  thoughts  but 

oldMSS.,  be:  sarvdii  malka  dh-akhe-  committed;  wliat  was  pr-oniised  him 

zak-ai,  "the  king  of  cypresses  is  one  was  not  brought,  and  not  jiromised 

(growing)  in  a  marsh."  was  brought ;  what  was  his  intention 

*  The  Pahlavi  version  in  old  MSS.  but  not  performed,  and  unintended 

has  :  "as  it  will  travel  (6ara.6«7KW)ef/)  but    performed."      This,     however, 

to  this  earth  and  over  the  sky ,  that  throws  little  light  into  the  obscurity 

is,  ever  in  all  (places)."    Then  follows  of  the  Avesta  text. 
a  commentary  which  seems  to  refer        ^  This  passage  has  occurred  also  iji 

to    the    succeeding    sentence,   thus:  iii.  21,  and  perhaps  "his  iiunishment 

"some   say  this   about   Nasush,  and  is  abandoned"  might  be  substituted 

that  in  the  eighth  (fargard)  about  de-  for   "his   atonement  is  through  ^m- 

cision  and  judgment,  is  that  in  the  tita,"  and  "acquittal"  be   read  in- 

Husparam  (Nask)  about  the  formula  stead  of  the  second  "patita."    The 


328  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V. 

27.  Creator,  ttc.  [as  in  iii.  i].  "When  men  happen  to  be  in 
the  same  place,  on  a  rug  together,  or  on  a  mat  together,  and 
others  are  on  it ;  there  may  be  two  men,  or  five,  or  fifty,  or  a  hun- 
dred ;  (and)  the  same  of  women ;  ^  (and)  then  one  of  these  men 
shall  die ;  how  many  among  the  men  does  this  Drukhsh  Nasush 
(the  destroyer,  Corruption)  reach  with  impurity  and  rottenness 
and  filth  ] 

28.  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  If  he  be  a  priest  (who  dies), 
verily,  O  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  this  Drukhsh  Nasush  rushes 
forth ;  if  she  reaches  the  eleventh  she  pollutes  indirectly  to  the 
tenth.  If,  however,  he  be  a  warrior,  verily,  O  Spitama  Zara- 
thushtra !  this  Drukhsh  Nasush  rushes  forth  ;  if  she  reaches  the 
tenth  she  pollutes  indirectly  to  the  ninth.  If,  however,  he  be  a 
husbandman,  verily,  O  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  this  Drukhsh 
Nasush  rushes  forth  ;  if  she  reaches  the  ninth  she  pollutes  in- 
directly to  the  eighth. 

29.  Moreover,  if  it  be  a  shepherd's  dog  {pasush-haxirva),  verily, 
&c.  [as  in  ver.  28] ;  if  she  reaches  the  eighth  she  pollutes  in- 
directly to  the  seventh.  If,  however,  it  be  a  house-dog  (yisk- 
haurva),  verily,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  28];  if  she  reaches  the  seventh 
she  pollutes  indirectly  to  the  sixth. 

30.  If,  however,  it  be  a  bloodhound  (yohunazga),  verily,  &c. 
[as  in  ver.  28] ;  if  she  reaches  the  sixth  she  pollutes  indirectly 
to  the  fifth.  If,  however,  it  be  a  young  {tauruna)  dog,  verily, 
tfec.  [as  in  ver.  28]  ;  if  she  reaches  the  fifth  she  pollutes  indirectly 
to  the  fourth. 

31.  If,  however,  it  be  a  siiJcurima^  dog,  verily,  <fec.  [as  in 
ver.   28] ;   if  she  reaches  the  fourth  she  pollutes  indirectly  to 

drift  of  the  sentence  being  that  no  the  judges' own  ;  when  it  shall  be  the 

offender  can  be  tried  or  punished  for  judges'  own  it  will  be  allowable  to  re- 

•  an  older  offence  than   the   one  for  mit  the  whole  of  it." 

which  he  has  been  already  condemned.  ^  The  Pahlavi  version  misinterprets 

The  Pahlavi  version  adds  :  "that  is,  hihn    ndirindm    by    "in    fellowship 

when  the  Dastur  considers  and  de-  (and)  iu  contact." 

plores  the  sin,  and  they  shall  perform  '  What  description  of  dog  or  animal 

good  works  nncomplainingly,  it  will  is  meant  by  this  epithet,  or  any  of  the 

be  allowable  for  the  judge  (ratu,  i.e.,  three  succeeding,  is  quite  uncertain. 

Dastur)   to   remit    one-third  of    the  The    Pahlavi    version    merely    tran- 

soul's  sin  ;  this  is  declared  where  the  scribes  the  Avesta  words,  and  owns 

decision  is  among  the  judges  [as  in  that  the   last  three  are   not  intelli- 

cases  of  appeal  or  joint  decisions],  not  gible. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V.  '    329 

the  third.  If,  however,  it  be  a  jazhu  dog,  verily,  &c.  [as  in 
ver.  28];  if  she  reaches  the  third  she  pollutes  indirectly  to  the 
second. 

32.  If,  however,  it  be  an  aiivizu  dog,  verily,  &c.  [as  in 
ver.  28] ;  .  if  she  reaches  the  second  she  pollutes  indirectly 
the  first.  If,  however,  it  be  a  vizu  dog,  verily,  &c.  [as  in 
ver.  28];  if  she  reaches  the  first  she  pollutes  indirectly  the 
first. 

33.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  If,  however,  the  dog  be  a  fox 
(u7'upi),  how  many  of  the  creatures  of  the  beneficent  spirit  does 
the  dog  which  is  a  fox  pollute  directly  1  how  many  does  it  pol- 
lute indirectly  1  ^ 

34.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  This  dog,  which  is  a  fox, 
does  not  pollute  directly  (any)  of  the  creatures  of  the  bene- 
ficent spirit,  nor  does  it  pollute  indirectly,  any  other  than 
he  that  smites  and  kills  (it).  To  him  it  adheres  for  ever  and 
ever. 

35.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  Moreover,  if  he  (who  dies)  be 
a  miscreant,  a  two-legged  unbeliever  (drvdo),^  as  an  unrighteous 
apostate  is,  how  many  of  the  creatures  of  the  beneficent  spirit 
does  he  pollute  directly  ?  how  many  does  he  pollute  in- 
directly ■? 

36.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Like  any  toad  ^  dried  up  (and) 
over  a  year  dead ;  for  living,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra !  a  mis- 
creant, a  two-legged  unbeliever,  as  an  unrighteous  apostate  is, 
pollutes  directly  (any)  of  the  creatures  of  the  beneficent  spirit ; 
living  he  pollutes  (them)  indirectly. 

37.  Living  it  (the  toad)  spoils  the  water,  living  it  quenches 
the  fire,  living  it  drives  the  cattle  mad,  living  it  strikes  the  righte- 
ous man  a  blow  depriving  of  consciousness  (and)  cutting  off  life ; 
not  so  (when)  dead, 

38.  So,  living,  0  Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  a  miscreant,  a  two- 
legged  unbeliever,  as  an  unrighteous  apostate  is,  plunders  the 

1  Ham  raSthwaySiti  means  that  it  2  Qr   "a    two-legged,    unbelieving 

contaminates   or  communicates   con-  serpent." 

tagion  by  direct  contact,  and  paiti-  *  Strictly  speaking,   vazagha   is  a 

raethxcayeiti  means  that  it  infects  or  poisonous  lizard, 
spreads  infection  through  an  inter- 
mediate person  or  thing. 


330  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V. 

righteous  man  of  a  profusion  ^  of  food  and  clothing  and  wood  and 
carpet "  and  iron  ;  not  so  (when)  dead. 

39.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  When  we  bring  together,  0 
righteous  AhuramazJa  !  in  the  dwellings  in  this  material  world, 
the  fire  and  Barsom  and  cups  and  Homa  and  mortar,  (and)  after- 
wards either  a  dog  or  a  man  of  this  dwelling  shall  die,  how  should 
they  act,  they  who  are  Mazdayasnians  ? 

40.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Off  from  these  dwellings,  O 
Spitama  Zarathushtra  !  they  should  carry  the  fire  and  Barsom 
and  cups  and  Homa  and  mortar,  ofi"  from  (them)  the  dead  one. 
They  may  think  of  it  as  the  lawful  man  (that)  is  both  brought 
to  the  lawful  (place)  and  devoured.^ 

41.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  How  should  these  Mazdayas- 
nians bring  the  fire  back  again  to  this  dwelling  where  the  man 
had  died  1 

42.  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Nine  nights  should  they  who  are 
Mazdayasnians  hesitate  in  winter,  but  in  summer  a  month  long ; 
afterwards  these  Mazdayasnians  may  bring  the  fire  back  again  to 
this  dwellina;  where  the  man  had  died. 

43.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  And  if  these  Mazdayasnians 
should  bring  the  fire  back  again  to  this  dwelling  where  the  man 
had  died  within  the  space  of  the  nine  nights,  (or)  within  the 
space  of  the  month  long,  what  is  the  punishment  for  this  1 

44.  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  One  may  inflict  on  the  vitiated 
body  of  such  a  one  two  hundred  blows  with  a  horse-goad,  two 
hundred  with  a  scourge. 

45.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  When  in  this  Mazdayasnian 
dwelling  a  woman  shall  go  with  child  for  one  month,  or  two 
months,  or  tl)ree  months,  or  four  months,  or  five  months,  or  six 
months,  or  seven  months,  or  eight  months,  or  nine  months,  or 

^  The  word  an^eitsA,  "of  the  world,"  translated  in  Pahlavi  by  sertJi,  "re- 

although  it  would  sviit  the  sense  well  pletion,"  which  is  an  apiiroximation 

enough,  appears   to  be  a  corruption  to    the    meaning    of    asarth,    wliile 

since  the  time  of  the  Palilavi  tran-  neither  word  can  be  used  for  "world." 

slation.     Some   MSS.  have  hanhusk,  -  In  Pahlavi  namad,  Pers.  namad. 

others    haiiheush,    and    the    Pahlavi  3  Alluding  both  to  the  dead  body 

version  translates  the  word  l)y  asarth,  being  taken  to  the  Dakhma  to  be  de- 

"  endlessness  "(sar,  "head,"  is  always  voured   by   birds,    and    also   to    the 

applied  to  the  "  end  "  in  Pahlavi,  hUn,  Homa  juice,  considered  as  a  creature 

"root,    origin,"    being    the    "begin-  to  be  consumed  by  a  righteous  man 

ning").     In  Yas.    liii.  4,  hanhush  is  in  the  consecrated  place. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V.  331 

ten  months,  and  then  this  woman  shall  be  delivered  in  child- 
birth of  something  lifeless,  how  should  they  act,  they  who  are 
Mazdayasnians  % 

46-48.  Then  said  Ahuraniazda  :  Where  there  is  in  this  Maz- 
dayasnian  dwelling  especially  the  most  ground  fit  for  the  puri- 
fication   ceremony,    and   the    most    dry    land,    <fc;c.    [as   in    iii. 

15-17]-      • 

49.  There  the  Mazdayasnians  should  enclose  for  her  an  en- 
closure of  this  earth.  Then  for  victuals  they  who  are  Mazdayas- 
nians shall  provide,  then  for  clothes  they  who  are  Mazdayasnians 
shall  provide. 

50.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  What  food  should  this  woman 
first  eat? 

51.  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Ashes  with  bull's  urine,  three 
draughts,  or  else  six,  or  else  nine ;  these  she  should  pour  (by 
drinking)  ^  on  the  receptacle  of  the  dead  within  the  effusing 
womb. 

52.  Then,  afterwards,  (she  may  swallow  some)  of  the  warm 
milk  of  mares  and  cows  and  sheep  and  goats,  of  (the  fruits)  with 
rind  (and)  without  rind,  and  cooked  meat  undiluted,  and  true 
corn  undiluted,  and  honey  undiluted. 

53.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  i].  How  long  should  they  hesi- 
tate %  how  long  does  she  remain  in  seclusion,  eating  meat  and 
corn  and  honey  % 

54.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Three  nights  they  should  hesi- 
tate ;  three  .nights  does  she  remain  in  seclusion,  eating  meat  and 
corn  and  honey.  Then,  moreover,  after  the  three  nights  she 
should  wash  over  (her)  body,  freed  from  clothing,  with  bull's 
urine  and  water,  on  the  nine  stones  {magha) ;  so  they  should 
purify  (her). 

55.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii.  ij.  How  long  should  they  hesi- 
tate 1  how  long  does  she  remain  in  seclusion  after  the  three 
nights,  in  a  separate  place,  with  separate  food,  with  separate 
clothing,  apart  from  the  other  Mazdayasnians  1 

56.  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Nine  nights  they  should  hesi- 
tate ;  nine  nights  does  she  remain  in  seclusion  after  the  three 

^  So  vtnderstoocl  hj  the  Palilavi  rather  to  outward  purification,  pre- 
translator  and  modern  Parsis,  but  paratory  to  drinking  the  milk,  than 
the   Avesta  may  perhai^s  refer  here     to  dripking  itself. 


332  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  V. 

nights,  in  a  separate  place,  with  separate  food,  with  separate 
clothing,  apart  from  the  other  Mazdayasnians.  Then,  moreover, 
after  the  nine  nights  she  should  wash,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  54]. 

57.  Creator,  &c.  [as  in  iii,  i],  Are  those  clothes,  set  apart 
after  purifying  (and)  washing,  for  the  Zaota,  or  for  the  Havanan, 
or  for  the  Atarevakhsha,  or  for  the  Frabaretar,  or  for  the  Aber- 
eta,  or  for  the  Asnatar,  or  for  the  Raethwishkara,  or  for  the 
Sraosbavareza,!  or  for  the  priest  (who  is)  a  man,  or  for  the  war- 
rior, or  for  the  husbandman  ? 

58.  Then  said  Ahuramazda :  Those  clothes,  set  apart  after 
purifying  (and)  washing,  are  not  for  the  Zaota,  ikc.  [as  in  ver. 
57,  but  substituting  everywhere  "  not"  for  "or"].- 

59.  When  in  this  Mazdayasnian  dwelling  there  shall  be  a  men- 
struous  Avoman,  or  when  there  is  a  place  marked  by  defloration 
(and)  stained  by  intercourse,  here  she  remains  in  it,  and  a  rug 
and  mat  should  cover  (her)  up,  always  so  that  she  may  frequently 
put  out  (her)  hands  together. 

60.  For  I,  (who  am)  Ahuramazda,  allow  no  defiling  of  unused 
clothes,  not  the  size  of  an  asperena,  not  even  so  much  as  the  in- 
finitesimal quantity  ^  this  damsel  would  defile. 

1  These  appear  to  be  names  of  eight  nin,  at  the  north-west  corner  ;  3, 
officiating  priests  in  the  ceremonies  of  Atarevakhsha,  at  the  soutli-west 
ancient  times,  of  whom  only  two  are  corner ;  4,  Frabaretar,  at  the  north- 
now  employed,  the  Zaota,  who  is  the  east  corner ;  5,  Abereta,  at  the  south- 
chief  officiating  priest,  and  his  assis-  east  corner ;  6,  Asnatar,  on  the  west 
tant,  the  Hath  wi,  who  takes  the  place  side;  7,  Raethwishkara,  on  the  east 
of  the  remaining  seven.  These  seven  side  ;  8,  Sraoshavareza,  on  the  south 
are  now  considered  as  spirits  who  are  side.  From  the  word  mas// ^/a?',  "mor- 
Bummoned  by  the  Zaota  when  begin-  tal,  man,"  being  put  in  apposition 
ning  to  recite  Visp.  iii.  (after  finish-  with  athaurune,  the  general  term  for 
ing  Yas.  xi.),  and  the  Rathwi  answers  "priest  "  which  follows  the  enumera- 
in  the  name  of  each  as  he  stands  sue-  tion  of  the  officiating  individuals  in 
cessively  in  their  proper  places.  Ac-  the  text,  it  may  be  suspected  that 
cording  to  a  diagram,  given  in  some  these  latter  were  not  considered  as 
MSS. ,  the  Zaota's  station  being  near  mortals  even  at  the  time  this  text  was 
the  northern  end  of  the  Arvis-gdh,  or  written. 

ceremonial  space,  as  he  looks  south-  -  The  meaning  is  that  such  clothes 

wards  towards  the  fire  he  has  one  of  cannot   be   used   by  any   respectable 

the  spiritual  priests  facing  him  from  person,  but  only  by  the  very  lowest 

beyond  the  fire,  and  a  line  of  three  of  classes. 

tliem  stationed  along  each  side  of  the  ^  What  is  immeasurably  small,  an 

Arvis-gdh.     The  stations  of  the  eight  indivisible  atom;  the  word  is  a-v/wuhtt, 

priests,  real  and  ideal,  are  as  follows  :  not  avi-mdm.     An  asperena  is  a  dir- 

I,  Zaota,  on  the  north  side  ;  2,  Hava-  ham. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XIX.  333 

61.  And  if  tliese  Mazdcayasnians  should  cast  over  the  dead  one 
an  infinitesimal  quantity,  such  as  the  infinitesimal  quantity  this 
damsel  would  defile,  none  (of  them)  living  shall  be  righteous, 
none  (of  them)  dead  has  a  share  of  the  best  existence  (paradise). 

62.  He  shall  have  that  life  of  the  vpicked  which  is  gloomy, 
originating  in  darkness,  and  dark.  Verily,  the  wicked,  through 
their  own  deeds,  through  their  own  tradition,  shall  depart  that 
life  for  the  worst  existence  (hell). 

4. —  Vendidad,  Fargard  XIX.  10-26,  and  40-47. 

10.^  Zarathushtra  recited  the  Ahuna-vairya  (formula,  thus) : 
As  a  (heavenly)  lord  is  to  be  choseii,  ikc-  The  righteous  Zara- 
thushtra uttered  (the  hymn)  :  That  I  shall  ask  Thee,  tell  it  me 
riajht,  0  Ahura  !  ^ 

II,  12.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda :  0  Ahuramazda ! 
most  munificent  spirit,  creator  of  the  settlements  supplied  with 
creatures,  righteous  one  !  (I  am)  waiting  for  (what  are)  to  be 
fixed  on  the  roof  ■*  (as  protection)  for  ^  Ahuramazda,  for  the  good 
well-thought  (Vohumano),  for  perfect  rectitude  (Asha-vahishta), 
for  suitable  wealth  (Khshathra-vairya),  for  bountiful  devotion 
(Spenta-lrmaiti).  How  shall  I  defend  them  from  that  Drukhsh, 
from  the  evil-doing  Angro-mainyush  1  How  shall  I  exorcise  the 
direct  pollution,  how  the  indirect  pollution,  how  the  corruption 
[nasush),  from  that  Mazdayasnian  home  %  How  shall  I  purify 
the  righteous  man  ?  How  shall  I  bring  the  righteous  woman 
ourification  1 

^  For  verses  1-9,  see  pp.  253,  254.  language;  and  in  Sanskrit  pra^t-/tr«?'a 

-  See  p.  141,  note  2.  (Rv.  vii.  66,  14)   is   a  term   for  the 

2  Yas.  xliv. ,  see  pp.  158-161.  vault  01  the  sky.     Dareji/a  has  been 

*  This  refers  to  what  is  mentioned  mistaken  for  the  river  JJaraja  men- 

in  Zarathushtra's  address  to  Ahura-  tioned  in  the  Bundahish  {pp.  53,  58, 

niazda  in  ver.  4  (see  p.  253),  which  W.)  as  having  the   house  of  Pouru- 

would   lie   better    translated   as   fol-  sbaspa  on  its  bank  ;  but  it  is  evidently 

lows: — "  Where  dost  thou  keep  (any)  only  a   gerund   of  the    verb   darej^ 

of  this  (asajid .?)  on  this  wide,  round,  darcz,     "to    fix."       Some    Dasturs 

far-compassed  earth,  to  be  fixed  on  understand  by  asdno  (in  ver.  4)  the 

the  roof   of  the  dwelling  of  Pouru-  -naufjirah,    or    "nine-jointed"    staff 

shaspa?"       The    word    paiti-zbarahi  used   by  Zarathushtra  as   a   defence 

can   only   be   the    locative   of   paiti-  against  the  demons  ;  they  also  under- 

zharanh,   equivalent   to   Sans,  pratl-  stand  s6a/'a/ii  as  the  same  "weapon  " 

/(,i'a?'as,  which  would  mean  "a  curving  (comp.  Pers.  zibar,  a  "shield  "). 

towards,  a  lean-to,"  a  significant  term  ^  Or    "Resting-places  (are)   to   be 

for  a  roof  which  is  actually  used,  in  fixed  on  the  roof  for,"  &c. 
the  latter  form,  in  English  techuical 


334  VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XIX. 

13.  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Do  thou  invoke,  0  Zarathushtra  ! 
the  good  Mazdayasnian  religion.  Do  thou  invoke,  0  Zara- 
thushtra !  that  the  Ameshaspentas  may  keep  guard  over  the 
seven-regioned  earth.  Do  thou  invoke,  0  Zarathushtra  !  (the 
spirits)  of  the  self-sustained  universe,  of  boundless  time,  of  the 
upper-working  air  {vai/u).  Do  thou  invoke,  0  Zarathushtra  ! 
the  mighty  wind  created  by  Mazda,  (and)  the  bountiful  one 
(Armaiti),  the  lovely  daughter  of  Ahuramazda. 

14.  Do  thou  invoke,  0  Zarathushtra  !  the  Spirit  (fravashi) 
of  me  who  am  Ahuramazda,  that  which  is  the  greatest  and  best 
and  most  excellent,  and  strongest  and  wisest  and  most  beautiful, 
and  most  pervaded  by  righteo.usness,  whose  soul  is  the  beneficent 
text.     Do  thou  thyself  invoke  this  creation  of  Ahuramazda. 

15.  Zarathushtra  proclaimed  my  word  (thus)  :  I  invoke  the 
rightful  creation,  created  by  Ahuramazda.  I  invoke  Mithra  of 
the  wide  cattle-pastures,  the  well-armed,  with  most  glorious  mis- 
siles (rays),  with  most  victorious  missiles.  I  invoke  Srosh  the 
righteous,  the  handsome,  holding  a  sword  in  both  hands  against 
the  head  of  the  demons. 

16.  I  invoke  the  beneficent  test  {mathro  spento)  which  is  very 
glorious.  I  invoke  (the  spirits)  of  the  self-sustained  universe, 
of  boundless  time,  of  the  npper-working  air.  I  invoke  the 
mighty  wind  created  by  Mazda,  (and)  the  bountiful  one  (Armaiti), 
the  lovely  daughter  of  Ahuramazda.  I  invoke  the  good  Mazda- 
yasnian religion,  the  Zarathushtrian  Provision  against  the  Devas 
(Vendidad). 

17.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda  :  O  giver  of  good,i 
Ahuramazda  !  with  what  ceremony  shall  I  reverence,  with  what 
ceremony  shall  I  propitiate,  this  creation  of  Ahuramazda  1 

18.  Then  said  Ahuramazda  :  Thou  shalt  go,  0  Spitama  Zara- 
thushtra !  to  (one)  of  the  growing  trees,  a  handsome,  full-grown, 
strong  (one,  and)  recite  this  saying  :  Eeverence  (to  thee)  0  good 
tree,  created  by  Mazda  (and)  right !  righteousness  is  the  best 
good,  &c.  [as  in  p.  141,  note  2]. 

19.  One  may  carry  off  the  Barsom  (twigs)  from  it,  a  span 
long,  a  barley-corn  thick.     Thou  mayst  not  clip  its  clipped  Bar- 

1  The  reading  cZtt<o-r«?!/jc«  is  doubt-  the  Pahlavi  version  by  dddur  avdJ, 
ful;  it  has  been  altered  to  rf«<d  an^e/i  hdmande,  "Creator,  mayst  thou  be 
in  the  old  MSS.,  and  is  rendered  in     (or  may  they  be)  prosperous  !  " 


VENDIDAD,  FARCARD  XIX.  335 

som,  tliey  should  be  righteous  men  (priests  who  do  that).  (One 
should  be)  holding  (it)  in  the  left  hand,  reverencing  Ahuramazda, 
reverencing  the  Ameshaspentas,  and  the  golden-hued  Homa,  the 
exalted,^  and  the  handsome  (spirits),  and  the  gifts  of  Yohumano 
(saying  to  the  Barsom) :  0  good  one,  created  by  Mazda  (and) 
right !  (thou  art)  the  best. 

20.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda :  Omniscient  Ahura- 
mazda !  thou  art  sleepless,  unstupefied,  thou  who  art  Ahura- 
mazda !  a  good-minded  man  pollutes  himself  directly,  a  good- 
minded  man  pollutes  himself  indirectly,  from  a  person  who  is 
stricken  by  a  demon,  he  pollutes  himself  directly  with  a  demon  ; 
may  the  good-minded  man  become  purified  ? 

21.  Then  said  Ahuramazda:  Thou  shouldst  procure,  0  Zara- 
thushtra !  bull's  urine  lawfully  formed  by  a  young  entire  bull. 
Thou  shouldst  bring  out  the  purified  things  ^  on  the  ground 
created  by  Ahura.  The  man  who  is  a  purifier  (priest)  should 
score  around  (it)  a  surrounding  furrow. 

22.  He  should  mutter  a  hundred  praises  of  righteousness 
(thus)  :  Kighteousness  is  the  best  good,  «fec.  [as  in  p.  141,  note  2]. 
Twice  (as  often)  he  should  recite  aloud  the  Ahuua-vairya  (thus)  . 
As  a  (heavenly)  lord  is  to  be  chosen,  &c.  [as  in  p.  141,  note  2]. 
With  four  washings  he  should  wash  with  bull's  urine  of  (that) 
supplied  by  the  bull,  twice  with  water  of  (that)  created  by 
Mazda. 

23.  Purified  shall  they  be,  the  good-minded  man ;  purified 
shall  they  be,  the  man  (who  polluted  him).  The  good-minded 
man  shall  draw  on  (his  clothes)  with  the  left  arm  and  the  right, 
with  the  right  arm  and  the  left.  Then  thou  shouldst  expose  the 
good-minded  man  to  the  power-formed  luminaries,  that  (some) 
of  the  stars  appointed  by  destiny  may  shine  upon  him,  always 
till  when  his  nine  nights  shall  elapse. 

24.  Then  after  the  nine  nights  thou  shouldst  bring  consecrated 
waters  (zaothra)  to  the  fire,  thou  shouldst  bring  (some)  of  the 
hard  firewoods  to  the  fire,  thou  shouldst  bring  (some)  of  the 
benzoin  incense  to  the  fire,  (and)  the  good-minded  man  should 
have  himself  fumigated. 


*o' 


^  Perhaps  tlie  grammatical  irregu-         -  Or,  perhaps,  ' '  the  purifier,"  if  we 

larities  would  be  diminished  b}'  taking  suppose  tlie  nominative  to  have  been 

this  as  a  verb,  and  assuming  that  the  substituted  for  the  accusative,  which 

priest's  speech   is   addressed  to   the  is  not  an  unusual  iiTegularity  in  this 

Homa,  and  not  to  the  Barsom.  fargard. 


336  VENDID4D,  FARGARD  XIX. 

25.  Purified  shall  tliey  be,  &c.  [as  in  ver.  23,  to]  and  the  left. 
The  good-minded  man  shall  exclaim  :  Reverence  to  Ahuramazda  ! 
reverence  to  the  Ameshaspentas  !  reverence  to  the  other  righteous 
ones  ! 

26.  Zarathushtra  asked  Ahuramazda  :  0  omniscient  Ahura- 
mazda !  shall  I  arouse  the  righteous  man  %  shall  I  arouse  the 
righteous  woman  ?  shall  I  arouse  the  frontier  of  the  turbulent 
Deva-worshipping  men  %  (that)  they  may  consume  the  land 
created  by  Ahura,  (that)  they  may  consume  the  flowing  water, 
the  crops  of  corn,  (and)  other  of  its  superfluities  %  Then  said 
Ahuramazda :  Thou  mayst  arouse  them,  0  righteous  Zara- 
thushtra ! 

27-39.   [See  the  translation  in  pp.  254-257.] 

40.  Srosh  the  righteous,  prayed  to  (and)  invoked,  is  pleased 
(and)  attentive,  the  handsome,  triumphant  Srosh,  the  righteous ! 
Thou  shouldst  bring  consecrated  waters  (zaothra)  to  the  fire,  thou 
shouldst  bring  (some)  of  the  hard  firewoods  to  the  fire,  thou 
shouldst  bring  (some)  of  the  benzoin  incense  to  the  fire.  Thou 
shouldst  propitiate  the  fire  Vazishta,  the  smiter  of  the  demon 
Spenjaglira.  Thou  shouldst  bring  cooked  victuals  (and)  plenty 
of  sweetmeats.^ 

41.  Thou  shouldst  propitiate  Srosh  the  righteous,  (that)  Srosh 
the  righteous  may  destroy  the  demons  Kunda  (stupidity  V),  Banga 
(drunkenness,  and)  Vibanga  ^  (dead-drunkenness).  He  attacks 
the  frontier  of  the  wizards,  the  turbulent  Deva-worshij^ping  men, 
from  the  nearest  ^  country  having  the  purification  ceremony. 
One  should  persevere  in  the  practice,  •  (and)  should  cultivate 
sheep's  food  (and)  food  for  cattle  in  the  pastures. 

42.  I  invoke   the  Kara^  fish  (which   is)  in  the  water  at  the 

1  Very    probably    "  gravy  ; "    the  peem  to  liave  been  amended  from  the 

idea  of  sweetness  is  based  upon  the  Vendidad   Sadah.     The  word  daevo, 

Pahlavi  version,  which  is  not,  how-  wliich    occurs    in    the    MSS.    before 

ever,  altogetlier  unambiguous.  nazdishtud,    belongs   to   the   Pahlavi 

'^  The     Pahlavi     version     explains  version  of  the  preceding  clause. 
vibanga   as  "drunk   without   wiue,"         *  Tlie  chief  of  the  water  creatures. 

or  inherently  drunk ;  vt  must  be  used  Ten  of  these  fish,   according  to  tlie 

here  as  an  intensive  prefix.  Bundahish,  are  constantly  employed 

3  From   this    point    to    the    name  in   guarding   the   Horn   tree,  in   the 

Angro-mainyush  in  ver.  44,  both  text  midst  of  tlie  sea  Vouru-kasha,  from 

and  Pahlavi  translation  are  omitted  the   assaults   of    a   poisonous    lizard 

in  all  MSS.  of  the  Vendidad   with  sent  by   Angro-mainyush    to   injure 

Pahlavi,   except    one    or  two   which  it. 


VENDIDAD,  FARGARD  XIX.  337 

bottom  of  deep  lakes.  I  invoke  the  primeval  self- sustained 
boundary,  most  resisting  the  creatures  of  the  two  spirits.  I 
invoke  the  seven  illustrious  in  fame,  they  are  aged  men,  sons, 
(and)  descendants. 

43.  He  shouted  (and)  countershouted,  he  considered  (and)  re- 
considered, (did)  the  deadly  Angr6-mainyush,i  the  demon  of 
demons,  (with)  Indra"  the  demon,  Saurva^  the  demon,  Naon- 
haithya  ^  the  demon,  Tauru,  Zairicha,^  Aeshma  *  the  impetuous 
rusher,  Akatasha  the  demon  [(Pazand)  he  causes  frost  produced 
by  the  demons,  deadly  decay,  (and)  old  age  ill-treating  the 
fathers],  Buiti^  the  demon,  Driwi*^  the  demon,  Daiwi*^  the 
demon,  Kasvi^  the  demon,  Paitisha  the  demon,  the  most  de- 
moniacal demon  of  the  demons. '^ 

44.  Thus  shouted  he  who  is  the  evil-causing  Angro- 
mainyush,^  the  deadly :  Why  do  the  demons,  the  turbulent 
evil-originators,  assemble  in  an  assembly  on  the  summit  of 
Arezura  %  ^ 

45.  The  demons  rushed,  they  shouted,  the  turbulent  evil- 
originators;  the  demons  howled,  they  shouted,  the  turbulent 
evil-originators ;  the  demons  displayed  an  evil  eye,  the  turbulent 
evil-originators :  We  must  assemble  in  our  assembly  on  the  sum- 
mit of  Arezura. 

46.  Born,  indeed,  is  he  who  is  the  righteous  Zarathushtra,  at 
the  dwelling  of  Pourushaspa.  How  shall  we  procure  his  death  % 
he  is  the  smiter  of  the  demons,  he  is  the  opponent?  of  the  demons, 
he  is  the  destroyer  of  destruction  (or  falsehood) ;  dow^ncast  is 

1  This  appears  to  be  a  fragment  of  (khashm  in   Persian).     This  AeshmC 

an  old  hymn  in   octosyllabic  metre,  daevo  appears  to  be  the  Asmodeus 

which,  -with  some  irregularities,  can  of    the   Apocryphal    book   of    Tobit 

be  traced  through  the  greater  part  iii.  8. 

of    verses  43-45  ;    it  begins   as    fol-  ^  Compare  Sans.  bhUla  and  the  ver- 

lows  : —  nacular  bh4t,  the   general  name   for 

Fradavata  vidavata  g'^^li"^  «.''  ^^^^  'P'^}^^  ^"^  I"^'^' 

Framanyata  vtmanyata  ^.  '  ^bese  three  demons   are  respec- 

,      ^        .  ,  j.„7.j!  tively  Poverty,  Deceit,  and  Uwarnsh- 

Anro  mamyush  pouru-mahrko.  ^        ,^  •''    ..        ' 

ness ;  see  Vend.  11.  29,  p.  234. 

*  See  pp.  272  and  308.  7  The  veord  daevo  is  taken  as  the 

3  The  demons  of  disease  and  decay,  last  of  this  verse,  and  not  as  the  first 

'compare    Sans,    tura  =  dtura,    "dis-  of  the  next  one. 

eased,"    and  jaras,    "decay."     (See  »  Here   ends   the  omitted  passage 

Darmesteter's  Haurvatat   et  Amere-  mentioned  in  p.  336,  note  3. 

tilt,  pp.33,  34.)  ^  The  mountain  said  to  be  situated 

■*  The  demon  of  Anger  or  "Wrath  at  the  gate  of  hell. 

Y 


338  PAHLA  VI  YASNA  XXVIII. 

the  Deva-worsliipper,  (with)  the  impurity  {nasusli)  produced  by 
the  demons,  lying,  (and)  falsehood. 

47.  The  demons  shouted,  they  rushed,  the  turbulent  evil- 
originators,  to  the  bottom  of  the  world  of  darkness  which  is  the 
raging  hell, 

II. — Translations  from  the  Pahlavi  Versions. 

Excepting  the  first  fargard  of  the  Yendidad,  these  translations 
were  written  by  the  author  in  English.  In  revising  them  use 
has  been  made  of  collations  of  Spiegel's  edition  of  the  texts 
with  Dastur  Jamaspji's  old  MS.  of  the  Pahlavi  Yasna  (see  p.  96), 
with  the  London  and  Teheran  MSS.  of  the  Pahlavi  Vendidad 
(see  p.  95),  and  with  Dastur  Hoshangji's  unpublished  edition  of 
the  same. 

The  Pahlavi  versions  of  the  Avesta  throw  but  little  light  upon 
the  obscure  passages  in  the  original  text,  which  are  generally 
rendered  by  a  slavishly  literal  translation,  or  even  transliteration, 
with  some  faint  attempt  at  explanation,  more  or  less  unfortunate 
in  its  result.  The  chief  value  of  these  versions  consists  in  the 
longer  commentaries  which  are  often  interpolated,  especially  in 
the  Vendidad,  They  also  indicate  how  the  original  Avesta  was 
understood  in  the  later  Sasanian  times,i  and  how  it  is  under- 
stood by  the  present  Dasturs,  who  rely  almost  entirely  upon  the 
Pahlavi  version. 

I. — Pahlavi  Yasna  XXVIII. 

Happy  was  the  thought,  happy  the  word,  and  happy  the  deed, 
of  the  righteous  Zarathushtra.  [On  account  of  proper  thought 
and  word  and  deed  he  was  estimable  in  virtue.]  ^  The  Amesh- 
aspends  held  forth  the  Gathas,  [that  is,  they  were  kept  forth  in 
the  world  by  them].     Devotion  to  you,  0  righteous  Gathas  ! 

I.  (a)  I  beg  the  reward  of  him  who  is  Aiiharmazd  himself, 
through  devotion,  when  I  make  intercession  (with)  God  (for)  the 


1  To  which  the  last  thorough  re-  Pahlavi  translators  are  enclosed  in 
vision  of  the  Pahlavi  texts  may  pro-  brackets,  to  distinguish  them  from 
bably  be  referred,  whatever  date  we  the  words  inserted  by  the  present 
may  assume  for  their  original  compo-  translator,  which  are  given  in  paxeu- 
sitioh.  theses. 

2  Explanations  interpolated  by  the 


PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXVIII.  339 

good,  ujjlifting  the  hand  (and)  the  mind  also  with  its  own  joy. 
(6)  In  spirituality  Atlharmazd  is  first,  in  the  Gatha-lore  ^  is  the 
increase  of  righteousness  which  (should)  be  in  every  action,  [that 
is,  actions  are  all  to  be  performed  through  the  Gatha-lore].  (c) 
In  that  which  is  His  wisdom,  in  the  original  wisdom,  is  the 
satisfaction  of  Goshi'lrun,^  [that  is,  the  care  of  cattle  is  to  be 
undertaken  with  judgment]. 

2.  (a)  When  I  shall  attain  unto  you,^  O  Auharmazd  !  through 
good  thought  (Vohuman),  [that  is,  perfect  in  rectitude  I  shall 
have  come  unto  your  own  possession]  ;  (6)  give  ye  to  me  in  both 
lives,  (that)  which  is  material  and  (that)  which  is  spiritual,  the 
happiness  which  is  here  (in  this  world)  and  that  also  which  is 
there  (in  the  other  world),  (c)  Prosperity  is  owing  to  the  assist- 
ance of  righteousness,  [that  is,  you  give  me  through  rectitude 
the  abundance*  which  you  give  to  that  gladdener],  and  it  is 
necessary  to  cause  glory  through  joy. 

3.  (a)  When  I  shall  be  your  own,  O  Ashavahisht  (and) 
Vohuman,  who  is  first !  [that  is,  I  shall  remain  in  your  posses- 
sion] ;  (6)  and  I  shall  be  also  Auharmazd's  own,  through  whose 
unweakened  acquisition  is  their  dominion,  [that  is,  his  sovereignty 
over  the  Ameshaspends  is  strict] ;  (c)  and  of  her  also  who  is  the 
giver  of  increase,  Spendarmad,  I  shall  be  her  own,  she  comes  to 
me  with  joy  through  calling ;  when  I  shall  call  unto  you,  come 
on  towards  me  with  joy. 

4.  (rt)  Whoever  gives  (his)  so^il  into  paradise  {garodmdno,  it 
is)  through  the  assistance  of  good  thought  (Vohuman),  [that  is, 
every  one  who  gives  has  given  it  through  the  assistance  of  Vohu- 
man]. (6)  And  his  respect  for  the  doers  of  deeds  who  do  for 
him  what  is  proper,  is  evidenced  by  that  of  Auharmazd  and  the 
religion  of  Allharmazd.  (c)  As  long  as  I  am  a  supplicant  and 
wealthy,  so  long  I  have  learned  ^  the  requirements  of  righteous- 
ness, duty  and  good  works. 

5.  {a)  0  Ashavahisht !  When  do  I  see  thee  through  the  in- 

1  Or  "psalmody"  or  "bymnology,"  Gathas  ;  "ye"  or  "jj'ou"  always  refers 
but  gdsdntkth  cau  hardly  mean  Gatha-  to  tlie  whole  celestial  council  of  the 
chanting  here.  Ameshaspends,      including      Atlhar- 

2  The  Pazand  term  for  geush  urvd,  mazd. 

"the  soul  of  the  ox  or  earth."  *  Reading  padtkhvih=Taz.  padiqt, 

^  Observe  that  "  you"  and  "  thou"     see  Mainyu-i-khard  ii.  2,  xlix.  6. 
are  not  used  indiscriminately  in  the        ^  Or  "taught,"  or  "am  taught." 


340  PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXVIII. 

struction  of  good  thought  (Vohuman)  %  this  I  (would)  know, 
[that  is.  I  see  thee  at  the  time  when  every  one  is  intelligent 
through  rectitude,  when  will  it  be  ?]  (6)  When  do  I  see  also 
the  place  of  Aliharmazd,  who  is  a  seeker  of  worth  ?  that  place 
is  known  through  Srosh,  [that  is,  when  they  have  a  Dastur  he 
ought  to  know  what  happiness  is  from  that  place],  (c)  That  is 
the  greatest  text ;  he  whose  understanding  is  confounded  by  its 
belief  and  maintenance,  he  also  whose  understanding  "is  con- 
founded by  the  tongue,  for  him  this  one  thing  is  excellent,  when 
they  shall  form  a  priestly  assembly  {aerpatistdn). 

6.  (a)  Grant  the  coming  of  good  thought  (Vohuman)  to  the 
body  of  others  (and)  the  giving  of  long  life  to  me,  O  Ashava- 
hisht !  [that  is,  may  he  not  grant  that  thing  which,  in  the  future 
existence,  they  would  require  again  to  destroy]  !  (6)  Through 
the  true  word  he  has  shown  thee,  0  Aftharmazd  !  to  Zaratusht ; 
it  is  owing  to  him  who  is  Thy  powerful  Vishtasp  that  I  am  Thy 
delight,  [that  is,  I  am  carrying  Thee  forth  in  goodness  to  the 
rulers],  (c)  And  my  people  {maniMn)  also,  0  Auharmazd  !  my 
disciples,  are  also  carrying  Thee  forth  in  goodness.  The  distress 
of  the  distressers  is  when  they  shall  thus  take  injury,  [that  is,  the 
distress  owing  to  them  becomes  inoperative]. 

7.  (a)  Grant  me,  O  Ashavahisht  !  the  reverence  which  is  in 
plenteousness  of  good  thought  (Vohuman),  [that  is,  may  he  so 
grant  me  reverence  which,  in  the  future  existence,  they  shall  not 
require  again  to  destroy]  !  (6)  And  do  thou  grant  me,  0  Spend- 
armad  !  that  which  is  to  be  requested  from  Vishtasp,  the  mobad- 
ship  of  the  mobads  (the  high-priesthood) ;  and  my  people  also, 
my  disciples,  grant  them  the  mobadship  of  the  mobads.  (c)  And 
grant  me  a  sovereign  praiser,  0  Auharmazd  !  Vishtasp  who  when 
they  chant  this  your  text,  [that  is,  they  shall  speak  your  tradi- 
tion {dtn)],  furnishes  the  arrangements  so  that  they  may  make 
(it)  continuous  (they  may  propagate  it). 

8.  (a)  When  thy  excellence  and  thy  religion,  which  is  the 
bast  of  other  things,  are  in  the  best  righteousness  (Ashavahisht), 
let  me  enjoy  it^  through  rectitude,  {b)  Let  me  obtain  by 
prayer,  0  Auharmazd  !  the  man  who  is  Frashoshtar,  [that  is, 
give  up  Frashoshtar  into  my  discipleship]  ;  give  Frashoshtar  my 
people  also  in  his  discipleship.     {c)  To  them  also  then  be  liberal 

1  Reading  ghal  ham-doshdni. 


PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXIX.  341 

as  long  as  all  are  in  good  thought  (Vohuman),  [that  is,  ever 
cause  thereby  the  happiness  of  Frashoshtar  and  the  disciples  of 
Frashoshtar  till  the  future  existence]. 

9.  (a)  Because  of  not  coming  to  you,  O  Auliarmazd !  I  may 
not  do  this,  [that  is,  I  shall  not  come  to  you] ;  and  Ashavahisht 
too  I  trouble  not  about  happiness,  I  ask  not  even  a  single  haj^pi- 
ness  which  Ashavahisht  deems  undesirable.  (V)  Vohuman  also, 
the  excellent,  I  trouble  not  him,  who  is  he  who  gives  you  this 
your  infinitude,  the  praisers,  [that  is,  he  will  bring  "Hushedar, 
Hllshedar-mah,  and  Soshans  to  your  conference],  (c)  You  are 
propitious  through  the  prayer  of  a  beneficial  sovereignty,  [that 
is,  you  will  be  pleased  with  a  beneficial  sovereignty,  and  will 
give]. 

10.  (a)  When  thus  I  shall  be  acquainted  with  ^  righteousness, 
'  and  that  also  which  is  the  gift  of  good  thought  (Vohuman),  [that 

is,  I  shall  have  become  fully  acquainted  with  truth  and  recti- 
tude], (6)  which  is  proper,  0  Auharmazd  !  may  ye  fulfil  my 
desire  with  them  !  [that  is,  cause  my  happiness  thereby],  (c) 
When  thus,  by  what  is  useless  to  you,  food  and  clothing  are 
obtainable,^  by  that  chanting,  when  it  is  not  useful  in  your 
worship,  let  him  obtain  food  and  clothing. 

11.  (<x)  When  I  shall  guard  righteousness  by  observance,  and 
good  thought  (Vohuman)  also  unto  everlasting,  [that  is,  I  shall 
cause  the  protection  of  truth  and  rectitude],  (6)  teach  Thou  forth 
to  me  what  is  Auharmazd,  that  is  Thyself,  in  words,  (c)  Spirit- 
uality is  the  Gatha-lore  which  is  declared  from  this  by  Thy 
mouth,  and  till  it  is  declared  by  that  Thou  wilt  speak  by  Thy 
mouth,  which  was  the  first  in  the  world,  [that  is,  He  who  was 
first,  His  law  became  the  Gatha-lore]. 

2. — Pdlilavi  Yasna  XXIX. 

I.  {a)  To  you,  O  Ameshaspends  !  Gosliurun  complained, 
[some  say  ^  the  lord  Bull  spoke  towards  the  direction  of  Auhar- 
mazd],^ thus  :  To  whom  am  I  allotted  as  to  feeding  (and)  keep- 

^  Eeading  dkds  JidmandnL  the    Palilavi    version    is    literally : 

2  Reading  vindinidak,  "caused  to  "there  is  (one)  who  thus  says." 

obtain."  ^  The  oldest  reading  is  khU'idi-gdsh 

^  This   frequent  phrase   for  intro-  gUft  val  Auharmazd  rdno. 

ducing  alternative  interpretations  in 


342  PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXIX. 

ing  ?  For  wliora  am  I  formed  %  [that  is,  for  whom  am  I  created  '?] 
(6)  This  is  he  I  (have)  :  Wrath  who  smites  me  with  anger  and  is 
oppressive,  [that  is,  he  harasses  me  utterly],  who  is  torturing, 
[that  is,  my  immoderate  beating  disfigures  me  perpetually],  and 
also  a  tearer  away,  [that  is,  he  accomplishes  the  destruction  of 
my  life],^  and  a  plunderer  too,  [that  is,  he  utterly  robs  me], 
(c)  There  is  no  well-wisher  (^vdsnuhlr)  for  me  besides  you,  [that 
is,  I  know  not  any  one  from  whom  my  welfare  so  (proceeds)  as 
from  you],  so  let  one  prepare  for  me  what  is  good  pasture. 

2.  (a)  So  he  who  is  the  former  of  cattle,  Aiibarmazd,  asked 
thus  :  0  Ashavahisht !  who  is  the  master  of  thy  cattle  1  [that  is, 
how  is  thy  opinion  of  this  as  to  who  is  the  master  of  cattle  f\ 
(b)  Who  is  given  this  authority  to  feed  (and)  to  keep  ]  who  is  it 
gives  them  pasture,  and  is  also  diligently  promoting  the  cattle 
creation  ?  [that  is,  gives  it  pasture,  and  thereby  indicates  its 
one  cattle-guardian  who  will  increase  cattle],  (c)  What  is  that 
lordship  with  goodness  which,  when  they  provide  no  nourish- 
ment, feeds  it  with  authority  1  Who  gives  this  reply  to  the  non- 
Iranian  2  devastation  of  wicked  Wrath,  that  they  may  make  him 
stupefied  1 

3.  (a)  To  him  who  (has)  the  guardianship  of  the  bodies  of 
cattle  Ashavahisht  spoke  the  reply  :  (He  is)  not  without  distress, 
for  (he  is)  in  distress,  [that  is,  they  shall  effect  his  punishment]. 
(6)  They  are  not  aware  of  the  peace  of  E,ashn  the  just,  and  may 
they  not  know  what  (and)  how  much  punishment  they  shall  in- 
flict upon  the  soul  of  a  wicked  one  !  (c)  Of  beings  he  is  the 
more  powerful,  [that  is,  the  strength  of  him  is  that  which  is 
more  effectual],  who  comes  into  action  on  calling  to  him,  [that 
is,  when  they  call  him  thus  :  Perform  duties  and  good  works  !  he 
does  (them)]. 

4.  (a)  Auharmazd  is  a  computer  of  .words,  that  he  may  form 
an  account  as  to  the  sin  and  good  works  (b)  which  were  done  by 
them,  demons  and  men,  both  formerly  and  also  what  tbey  prac- 
tise hereafter,  (c)  He  is  the  deciding  Lord,  [that  is,  he  deter- 
mines action  and  law],  so  we  are  as  is  His  will,  [that  is,  even 
(what)  is  wanted  by  us  is  what  He  (wants)]. 

1  This  is  the  sin  of  hd'Jok-zed,  which  also  the  sin  of  spoiling  good  clothes  or 

is  defined  in  modern  times  as  that  of  food, 
selling  men  or  cattle,  whether  stolen         -  Or  "unmanly." 
or  one's  own  j  roperty,  into  misery- ; 


PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXIX.  343 

5.  (a)  So  (rather)  than  you,  0  Ameshaspends  !  I  diligently 
reverence,  with  uplifted  soul  (and)  mental  uplifting  of  hands, 
Him  (who  is)  AHharmazd,  [that  is,  I  reverence  one  thing  more 
than  the  Ameshaspends,  I  reverence  the  things  of  Auharmazd 
more,  and  I  do  (them)]  ;  ^  (6)  that  my  soul  may  be  with  the  bull 
Az,  [that  is,  may  I  give  my  soul  a  reward  ^  ],  (and)  may  I  con- 
sult him  who  is  Aliharraazd  (about)  that  which  is  in  doubt !  [that 
is,  (about)  that  of  which  I  may  be  doubtful  may  it  be  possible 
for  me  to  inquire  of  Auharmazd]  !  (c)  For  the  upright  liver  is 
no  utter  ruin,  [that  is,  whoever  lives  with  uprightness,  in  his 
soul  is  no  ruin],  nor  for  the  increaser,^  [that  is,  for  the  increaser 
who  possesses  anything  through  rectitude  it  is  not  so  as  (afore- 
said], except  him  who  is  wicked,  for  to  the  wicked  one  it  hap- 
pens. 

6.  (a)  Thus  with  his  mouth  said  Auharmazd  intelligently  : 
Destruction  is  to  be  avoided,  [that  is,  wisely  was  it  said  by  him 
that  there  is  a  remedy  for  the  mischief  from  the  evil  spirit]. 
(6)  No  such  lordship  is  to  be  admitted,  [that  is,  in  that  place  it 
is  not  possible  to  effect  a  remedy  because  they  do  not  even  con- 
sider the  Lord  as  lord],  no  mastership  whatsoever,  for  the  sake 
of  righteousness,  is  to  be  given,  [that  is,  a  Dastur  even,  such  as 
it  is  necessary  to  introduce,  they  do  not  possess],  (c)  So  for 
him  who  is  an  increaser,  who  is  a  tiller,  thou  art  destined  and 
art  formed,  [that  is,  for  him  who  is  diligent  (and)  moderate  thou 
art  given]. 

7.  (a)  That  which  is  copiousness  in  the  text  Auharmazd 
(gives)  to  that  worker  who  is  in  friendliness  with  righteousness, 
[that  is,  they  give  the  reward  revealed  by  the  text  to  him  who 
shall  perform  duties  and  good  works].  (6)  Atiharmazd  makes 
the  cattle  grow,  [that  is,  he  will  increase  them],  for  the  eaters, 
that  one  may  eat  in  moderation ;  that  which  is  plentiful  Ailhar- 
mazd  taught  (one  to  eat)  by  the  lapful  and  armful.'^  (c)  Who 
is  this  good  thought  (Vohuman)  of  thine  ?  [that  is,  this  one  who 
leads  to  thee],  who  gives  the  reciters  (and)  priests  a  mouth  with 
all  the  Avesta  and  Zand  ? 

1  This  explanatory  clause  appears  wliich  resembles  a  Pahlavi  word  for 

to  be  in  great  confusion  in  all  MSS.  "goat." 

^  As  the  Persian  muzd  is  both  "a  ^  Or  "cultivator." 

reward"  and  "a  he-goat,"  this  may  •*  Literally  :    "by   the  bosom  size 

possibly  be  an  attemi)t  to  explain  Az,  and  arm  size. " 


344  PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXIX. 

8.  (a)  This  my  ^  gift  he  obtained,  [that  is,  that  (which  is)  so, 
this  one  obtained],  to  that  teaching  of  ours  this  one  is  he  who  was 
listening  :  (6)  Zaratusht  the  Spitanian,  for  him  is  our  will  of 
Auharmazd  and  righteousness  also,  [that  is,  a  desire  for  complete 
duty  and  good  works],  (c)  He  chanted  also  a  counterspell,^ 
[that  is,  he  uttered  a  remedy  for  the  destroyer  (drxLj)  in  the 
world],  through  which  saying  one  gives  unto  him  a  good  place, 
[that  is,  on  account  of  the  excellence  of  the  saying  he  utters 
they  give  him  there,  in  heaven,  a,  good  place  which  is  excel- 
lent]. 

9.  (a)  So  too  Goshiirun  comjjlained  thus  :  It  is  owing  to  the 
non-applicant  I  am  powerless,  0  Zarattlsht !  unseemly  thinking 
(comes)  through  what  is  illiberal  giving,  when  they  will  not 
bestow  on  it  copiously,  (6)  owing  to  the  insufficiency  of  the 
words  even  of  those  men,  when  the  religion  is  not  fully  current, 
whose  desire  is  a  demand  for  our  ^  sovereignty,  [that  is,  owing 
to  them  a  mobadship  of  the  mobads  is  necessary  for  me],  (c) 
How  does  that  gift  ever  exist  %  [that  is,  does  that  time  ever 
come  1]  when  it  is  given  to  him  through  the  aid  of  powerful  sup- 
plication, to  him  who  is  Zaratusht. 

10.  (a)  And  ye  give  assistance  to  them,  O  Auharmazd,  and 
Ashavahisht,  and  Khshatver  !  that  Zaratusht  and  the  disciples 
of  Zaratusht  may  thereby  practise  virtue.  (6)  So  also  Vohuman, 
the  good  mind  which  gives  him  a  place  of  pleasant  dwelling 
there  (in  the  other  world)  and  likewise  joy.  (c)  I  too  am  he, 
0  Aliharmazd  !  that  Zaratusht,  by  him  something  is  first  to  be 
obtained  from  Thee,  [that  is,  his  virtue  is  first  from  Thee]. 

11.  (a)  Where  is  the  gift,  0  Ashavahisht,  and  Vohuman,  and 
Khshatver !  which  thus  ye  send  to  me,  the  speech  of  Zaratusht  % 
[that  is,  (in)  what  place  remains  that  reward  ?]  (5)  Ye  reward 
me  much,  O  Auharmazd  !  by  this  arch-Magianship,  [that  is,  they 
would  effect  my  reward  by  this  pure  goodness].^  (c)  0  Ailhar- 
mazd  !  now  our  desire  is  (that)  what  is  liberality  towards  us 
(shall  be)  from  you ;  now  when  I  know  more  of  your  wondrous- 
ness,  benefits  from  you  are  more  desired  by  me  ;  [some  said  that 

^  The  word  "my"  is  accidentally  ■*  The  mas-magth  or  arch-Magian- 

omitted  in  the  old  MSS.  ship  is  here  explained  as  "  pure  good- 

-  Literally:   "a  remedy-making."  ness,"  and  in  the  Farhang-i  Oim-kha- 

2  So    apparently    in  Dastur   Jam-  dtik  (p.  25)  magha  is  also  explained 

aspji's  MS.  hy  avejak,  ''pure." 


PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXX.  345 

now  wlien  the  religion  (has)  become  quite  current,  I  and  the  dis- 
ciples (have)  a  desire  for  benefits  and  reward  from  Thee]. 

3. — Tahlavi  Yasna  XXX' 

1.  (a)  So  both  those  sayings  are  to  be  desired,  which  are  the 
Avesta  and  Zand  given  by  Auharmazd,  (by)  whomsoever  is  in- 
telligent, [that  is,  the  priestly  studies  are  to  be  performed  ^  by 
him  (who  is)  wise].  (6)  Which  (sayings)  are  the  praise  of 
Auharmazd  and  the  reverence  of  good  thought  (Vohuman)  re- 
vealed by  those  which  are  the  Avesta  and  Zand,  (c)  Whoever 
is  a  virtuous  thinker  through  righteousness,  even  he  who  thinks 
of  virtuous  things,  his  good  work  is  as  great  as  a  religious  cere- 
monial [yazishn),  (he  it  is)  whose  happiness  (consists)  in  looking 
into  their  light,^  [that  is,  when  they  see  their  spiritual  worship 
it  becomes  their  joy]. 

2.  (a)  The  listening  to  what  is  heard  by  the  ears,  [that  is,  the 
ear  listened  to  it  (and)  became  glad],  they  will  call  the  extension 
of  the  best,  [that  is,  his  performance  of  priestly  study],  and 
whatever  is  not  affording  him  vision  (becomes)  what  is  light 
through  the  mind,  [that  is,  the  light  of  the  priests  is  dark  to 
him].  (6)  Desires  are  to  be  discriminated  by  us  who  are  men 
(and)  women,  for  our  own  selves,  [that  is,  proper  things  are  to 
be  discriminated  from  those  which  are  improper,  and  those  which 
are  improper  are  not^  to  be  accomplished  by  us],  (c)  As,  be- 
sides, in  that  great  performance  through  the  consummation  in 
the  future  existence  they  announce  a  reward  for  what  is  our 
teaching,  [that  is,  on  account  of  our  teaching  proper  things  they 
will  provide  a  reward]. 

3.  (a)  So  both  those  spirits,  Aiiharmazd  and  the  Evil  one, 
first  proclaimed  themselves  (as)  those  who  are  a  pair,  [that  is, 
they  declared  themselves  (as)  sin  and  good  Avorks].  (h)  Of 
what  is  good,  and  also  of  what  is  bad*  of  the  thought,. speech, 
and  deed  of  both,  one  thinks,  speaks,  and  does  that  which  is 
good,  and  one  that  which  is  bad.'*     (c)  From  them  choose  ye 

■'■  Or  perhaps  "a  priestly  assembly  plication  of  the  pronouns  in  many 

is  to  be  formed."  places. 

2  Or  possibly  "  into  the  light  of  the  ^  This  negative  is  omitted  by  mis- 

Yazads  (angels)."    There  is  consider-  take  in  most  MSS. 

able    doubt    about    the    proper    aj)-  *  Literally  "  worse  "  or  "very  bad." 


346  PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXX. 

out  rightly  bim  who  is  wise  in  good,  Auharmazd,  not  him  who 
is  wise  in  evil,  the  Evil  spirit, 

4.  («)  So  also  both  those  spirits  have  approached  together  to 
that  which  was  the  first  creation,  [that  is,  both  spirits  have  come 
to  Gayomard].  (6)  Whatever  is  in  life  is  through  this  purpose 
of  Auharmazd,  that  is  :  So  that  I  may  keep  it  alive ;  and  what- 
ever is  in  lifelessness  is  through  this  purpose  of  the  Evil  spirit, 
that  is  :  So  that  I  may  utterly  destroy  it ;  whatever  is  thus,  is 
so  until  the  last  in  the  world,  so  that  it  may  occur  even  to  men 
of  another  (race),  (c)  The  utter  depravity  of  the  wicked  ^  and 
the  devastation  owing  to  Ahriman  and  the  wicked  are  fully  seen, 
and  so  is  the  righteous  perfect  thoughtf ulness  which  accompanies 
Auharmazd  everlastingly. 

5.  {a)  Of  the  two  spirits  that  (one)  is  liked,  by  him  who  is 
wicked,  who  is  the  evil-doing  Ahriman,  he  who  was  desirous  of 
evil-doing,  (b)  Righteousness  likes  the  spirit  of  righteousness, 
the  fostering  Auharmazd  ;  by  whom  ^  also  the  hard-pot-covered  ^ 
sky  likewise  is  completed  around  the  earth  through  this  purpose, 
that  is,  so  that  righteousness  may  become  current,  (c)  Whoever 
also  satisfies  Auharmazd,  and  his  desire  is  that  of  Auharmazd, 
is  for  Aliharmazd  through  public  action,  [that  is,  he  should  come 
to  Auharmazd  with  that  desire  and  action]. 

6.  (a)  They  who  are  demons  do  not  allow  (one)  to  discrimi- 
nate rightly  in  any  way,  [that  is,  the  demons  would  not  do  any- 
thing i^roper],  even  (one)  whom  they  deceived  ;  they  whom  the 
demons  have  deceived  can  form  no  right  desire,  {h)  For  inquiry 
they  have  come  on,  [that  is,  there  is  a  consultation  of  them  with 
the  demons],  (they)  by  whom  the  worse  in  thought  is  liked, 
(c)  So  they  (the  demons)  have  run  in  together  with  Wrath,  and 
the  lives  of  men  are  weakened  by  them,  [that  is,  with  Wrath 
they  disfigure  men]. 

^  Of  course  "the  wicked "  include  This  epithet  is  evidently  based  upon 

all  unbelievers  in  Zoroastriauism  as  a  rather  eccentric  etymology  of  the 

well  as  the  mere  transgressors.  Avesta  word  khraozhdishteng,  wbicli 

2  As  the  Avesta  word  is  ye  it  is  the   Pahlavi  translator  divides   into 

probable  that  amat,  "when,"  ought  three  parts,  namely,  khrauzh,  which 

to  be  Miztn,  "whom,"  the  substitution  he    represents    by    sakht,    "hard;" 

of  one  of  these  words  for  the  other  dish  by  dig,  "a  pot"   and   teilg  by 

being  a  common    blunder  of    tran-  nili4ft,  "  covered ; "  reminding  one  of 

scribers.  some  European  attempts  at  etymolo- 

^  Orjierhaps  "hard-shell-covered."  gisiug  the  name  of  Zarathushtra. 


PAH  LAV  I  YASNA  XXX.  347 

7.  (a)  To  him  ^  comes  Klishatver,  and  Voliuman  and  AsLa- 
valiisht  also  come  up  to  him  to  work.  (6)  And  so  Spendarmad 
gives  him  a  powerful  body  without  lethargy,  [that  is,  whilst  it 
is  his  he  is  not  stupefied],  (c)  They  are  thine,  [that  is,  they 
come  thus  to  that  person],  whose  coming  is  such  as  the  first 
creation,  [that  is,  his  desire  and  action  are  those  of  Gayomard], 

8.  (rt)  So  also  hatred  conies  into  the  creation,  in  the  future 
existence,  to  those  haters  and  sinners,  [that  is,  they  shall  execute 
their  punishment],  (h)  So,  O  Auharmazd  !  whoever  is  for  thy 
sovereignty  Vohuman  will  give  him  the  reward,  (c)  Through 
their  teaching  of  Aiiharniazd,  in  the  religion  of  Auharmazd,  when 
(given)  to  him  who  (has)  righteousness,  [that  is,  he  is  instructed 
in  proper  things],  the  destroyer  is  given  into  his  hand,  and  the 
mischief  {druj)  of  infidelity, 

9.  (a)  So  also  we  who  are  thine,  [that  is,  we  are  thine  own], 
by  us  this  perpetuation  [frashakard)  is  to  be  made  in  the  world. 
(b)  Also  the  whole  congregation  of  Afiharmazd  and  likewise  the 
bringing  of  Ashavahisht,  [that  is,  an  assembly  about  the  future 
existence  is  always  to  be  formed  by  them],  (f)  Whosever 
thought  is  endless,  [that  is,  thought  in  priestly  authority  (dastu- 
harih)  is  the  life  (or  guardian  angel)  which  he  possesses],  his 
knowledge  is  there  (in  the  other  world),  [that  is,  he  will  know 
the  end  of  things  through  rectitude],  in  (his)  place. 

10.  {a)  So  in  the  creation  in  the  future  existence  he  who  is  a 
destroyer,  the  evil  spirit,  is  in  discomfiture,  when  his  things  shall 
stand  still  for  weakness,  and  (his)  army  is  shattered.  (6)  So 
they  swiftly  spring  to  seize  the  reward,  that  which  is  in  the 
good  dwelling  of  Vohuman,  when  they  have  continued  in  recti- 
tude, (c)  To  Auharmazd  and  Ashavahisht  too  they  spring  who 
establish  what  is  good  renown,  [that  is,  that  person  goes  to  seize 
the  reward  who  is  well-famed]. 

11.  (a)  Both  those  benedictions  are  to  be  taught  which 
Ailharmazd  gave  to  men,  (6)  and  whose  heedless  ^  teaching  is 

^  The  other,  who  prefers  righteous-  which  runs  as  follows:  milnich  qin 

iiess.  dmUkhtishno zak  mindavam,  &c.,  with 

2  This  is  merely  a  guess.  The  text  ahinh  written  over  qm  either  as  a 
in  the  Copenhagen  MS.  (as  published  gloss  or  as  an  addition  to  that  doubt- 
by  Spiegel)  is  here  unintelligible,  and  ful  word.  It  is  possible  that  instead 
the  obscurity  is  only  partially  re-  of  P^zand  qin  we  should  read  the 
moved   by   Dastur  Jamaspji's    MS.,  similarly  written  Pahlavi  aren,  "  uu- 


348  PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXX L 

the  thing  that  should  not  be  during  my  celebration  of  worship ; 
whose  lasting  injury  also  (arises)  from  such  celebration  by  the 
wicked,  (c)  And  (they  are)  also  an  advantage  of  the  righteous, 
[that  is,  as  it  is  necessary  to  perform  (them)  so  afterwards  they 
are  beneficial],  when  that  advantage  (has)  become  complete. 


4. — Pahlavi  Yasna  XXXI. 

1.  (a)  Both  those  benedictions  which  I  recite  unto  you,  the 
Avesta  and  Zand,^  we  teach  him  who  is  no  hearer  of  the  infidel, ^ 
by  speaking  ;  in  a  doubtful  matter  {varhoviandiJi)  he  is  to  be 
told  three  times,  and  one  time  when  (one)  knows  without  doubt 
(atvar)  that  he  learns.  (6)  They  who,  by  benediction  ^  of  the 
destroyer  of  righteousness,  utterly  devastate  the  world,  when 
they  maintain  the  destroyer  by  benediction,  (c)  then  even  they 
may  be  excellent  when  they  shall  be  causing  progress  in  what  is 
A^iharm■azd's,  [that  is,  of  even  those  infidels  this  one  thing  may 
be  excellent,  when  they  shall  make  current  the  religion  of 
Auharmazd]. 

2.  (a)  Whoever  does  not  believe  through  observation  is  in 
what  is  to  him  no  doubtfulness  when  he  is  not  even  doubtful  01 
God  in  anything,  [that  is,  assertion*  about  existence  is  good 
when  they  exhibit  it  by  an  estimate  of  the  world],  (b)  So  all 
come  to  you,  [that  is,  every  one  will  come  into  your  possession], 
when  thus  they  become  aware  of  the  mastership  of  Allharmazd, 
[that  is,  they  shall  know  the  miraculousness  of  Auharmazd]. 
(c)  From  Atlharmazd,  from  them  (the  Ameshaspends)  it  is  to 
come  when  I  live  with  the  aid  of  righteousness  ;  from  the 
Ameshaspends  is  this  benefit  for  me,  from  Auharmazd,  when  I 
live  on  with  the  duties  and  crood  works  which  are  mine. 


&" 


seeing,   heedless,"   wliicli    suits    the  MSS.  it  ought  to  be  translated  :  "we 

.sense  very  well;    the   Pdzand   gloss  teach  him  who  is  no  hearer,  the  in- 

ahinh  must    then    he    read    awina,  fidel,"  &c. 

■which  would  be  very  similar  in  form,  ^  Referring  probably  to  the  incan- 

and    would     confirm     the     meaning  tations  of  sorcerers. 

"  heedless  "  here  adopted.  *  Dastur   Jamaspji's   MS.    has   Id- 

1  It  is  not  certain  from  his  language  yazishnth,  "irreverence,  non-wor- 
that  the  Pahlavi  translator  did  not  ship,"  instead  of  nikizishnth.  It 
mean  the  Avesta  and  Zand  of  both  cannot  be  said  that  this  exxilanatory 
benedictions.  clause   throws   much    light    on    the 

2  As  the  sentence  stands  in  the  old  subject. 


PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXXI.  349 

3.  (rt)  What  ^  the  fire  and  AsliavaLislit  gave  by  spirituality, 
and  was  explained  by  Thee  to  the  disputants,  (was)  understand- 
ing, [that  is,  the  purified  and  the  defiled  were  made  known  by 
Thee],  (6)  And  by  Thee,  who  gave  a  desire  of  benediction  to 
the  interpreters  of  numbers  (arithmancists),  was  given  the  rite 
of  ordeal  {iiirang-i  var)  ;  tell  it  to  us  intelligibly,  0  Auharmazd  ! 
wisely,  that  rite  of  ordeal,  (c)  Through  Thy  tongue,  in  (my) 
mouth  all  kinds  of  living  creatures  believe,  and  afterw-ards  it  is 
said  of  it  that  I  speak. 

4.  (a)  When  in  the  creation  in  the  future  existence  I  shall  be 
an  invoker  of  Ashavahisht  and  Ailharmazd  also,  [that  is,  let  me 
have  such  a  virtue  that  it  may  be  possible  for  me  to  invoke 
Auharmazd  and  Ashavahisht] ;  (b)  and  I  shall  be  an  invoker  of 
her  also  who  is  the  submissive  Spendarmad,  I  pray  for  excellence, 
the  gift  of  good  thought  (Vohuman).  (c)  (May)  the  authority  of 
my  people  also,  my  disciples,  be  from  him  who  is  powerful, 
[that  is,  give  them  sovereignty  from  Soshans],  through  whose 
bravery,  [that  is,  through  his  own  resources  he  is  able  to  do  it], 
the  destroyer  (drilj)  is  beaten,  [that  is,  I  know  this,  that  at  that 
time  it  is  possible  to  make  the  destroyer  confounded]. 

5.  (a)  Speak  decided  to  me,  speak  clear,  where  is  that  reward  1 
how  ought  one  to  make  (it)  one's  own  1  which  (comes)  to  me 
through  righteousness  when  duty  and  good  works  are  performed 
by  me,  the  good  gift,  [that  is,  the  giving  of  that  good  reward  to 
me],  (5)  Grant  me  the  gift  of  understanding  through  good 
thought  (Vohuman),  [that  is,  talk  wisdom  through  excellence], 
which  is  mine  through  the  good  judgment  {liil-vdrth)  which  is 
his,  [that  is,  through  the  excellence  of  that  wisdom  it  is  possible 
for  me  to  give  a  reply  of  good  judgment],  (c)  Afiharmazd 
speaks  that  also  which  does  not  exist  by  means  of  that  which 
exists,  [that  is,  by  means  of  the  Gatha-lore  which  exists  he  says 
where  it  does  not  exist]. 

6.  (a)  He  is  the  best  who  would  speak  intelligently  to  me 
(what  is)  manifest  and  clear,  [that  is,  the  jDriest  is  better  than 
the  disciple],  (h)  the  text  which  is  all-progressive,  [that  is,  all 
creatures  by  way  of  the  text  come  back  into  the  possession  of 
Auharmazd],  which  when  they  preserve  it  with  righteousness  is 
working  well,  (and)  one's  immortal  progress  arises  therefrom  in 

^  Assuming  tliat  amat  has  been  substituted  for  mUn,  see  p.  346,  note  2. 


330  PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXXL 

the  fiftj'-seven  years.^  (c)  The  dominion  of  AAharmazd  is  so  long 
as  good  thought  (Vohuman)  grows  in  one,  [that  is,  his  sove- 
reignty in  the  body  of  a  man  is  so  long  as  good  thought  (Vohu- 
man) is  a  guest  in  his  body]. 

7.  (a)  His  promise  came  first  who  mingled  His  glory  with  the 
light,  who  is  the  ACiharmazd  who  did  this,  [that  is,  the  goodness 
which  is  His  here  (in  this  world)  is  with  Him  there  (in  the  other 
world)  ;  this  thing  has  happened  to  Him  so  that  his  Gatha-lore 
may  return  to  Him].  (6)  His  are  the  creatures,  [that  is,  the 
proper  creatures  are  His  own],  who  possesses  righteousness 
through  wisdom  and  perfect  tliinkiiig,  [that  is,  he  considers  with 
uprightness  and  propriety],  (c)  Both  those  (creations)  Auhar- 
mazd  causes  to  grow  through  spirituality,  [that  is,  he  will 
increase  spiritual  and  worldly  things],  (He)  who  is  also  now  the 
Lord  for  ever.^ 

8.  («)  Thus  I  thought,  O  AHharmazd !  regarding  Thee,  that 
Vohuman  might  be  the  first  among  Thy  offspring,  and  when  I 
saw  Vohuman  I  thought  thus,  that  (he)  was  Thy  child.  (6)  Art 
Thou  Vohuman's  father  ?  Thou  art  the  father  of  Vohuman 
when  thou  art  taken  in  altogether  by  my- whole  eyesight,  [that 
is,  Thou  art  seen  by  both  my  eyes],  so  I  thought  that  Thou  art 
the  father  of  Vohuman.  (c)  Manifest  are  the  creatures  of  right- 
eousness, (and)  clear,  [that  is.  Thy  proper  creatures  are  created]  ; 
through  deeds  in  the  world  Thou  art  Lord,  [that  is,  they  shall 
form  an  account  with  sin  and  good  works]. 

9.  (a)  Thine  is  Spendarmad,  [that  is,  Thine  own],  with  Thee 
is  that  which  is  the  fashioner  of  cattle,  wisdom.  (6)  Through 
spirituality,  O  Ailharmazd  !  a  path  is  given  to  her  by  Thee,  [that 
is,  the  path  of  that  place  (the  other  world)  is  given  to  her  by 
Thee],  (c)  Whoever  is  in  activity  comes,  [that  is,  his  duty  and 
good  works  are  performed],  whoever  is  no  worker  is  not  allowed 
by  Thee. 

10.  (a)  So  both  the  origin  and  produce  are  assigned  by  Thee 

to  that  (one)  of  those  men  who  is  a  worker  (and)  acquirer  of 

wealth,^  [that  is,  the  source  and  produce  of  cattle  are  given  by 

^  In  the  Bundaliisli  (p.  72)  it  is  also  ^  Reading    mxULn    kcvanich    hamdt 

stated  :  "  In  fifty-seven  years  Soshans  khiifjut. 

(and  his  companions)  prepare  all  the  ^  The  terms  used  seem  to  imply 

dead  ;  all  men  arise,  both  (those)  who  "  an  agriculturist  and  cattle-breeder." 
are  righteous  and   (those)  who    are 
■wicked." 


PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXXI.  351 

Thee  to  liim  who  is  diligent  (and)  moderate],  {h)  The  lord  is 
righteous  whose  wealth  1  (comes)  through  good  thought  (Vohu- 
man),  [that  is,  they  should  exercise  the  ownership  of  cattle  with 
propriety],  (c)  Auharmazd  does  not  allot  to  him  who  is  au 
idler,  the  infidel  who  is  any  hypocrite  in  the  sacred  recitations. 
In  the  good  religion  it  is  asserted  that  even  as  much  re- 
ward as  they  give  to  the  hypocrite  they  do  not  give  to  the 
infidel. 2 

11.  (a)  When  for  us,  O  Auharmazd!  the  world  was  first 
formed  by  Thee,  and  religion,  (they  were)  given  by  Thee  through 
this  wisdom  of  Thy  mind.  (6)  When  life  was  given  by  Thee 
to  the  possessors  of  bodies,  [that  is,  life  was  given  by  Thee  to 
the  body  of  Gayomard],  it,  too,  was  given  through  this  wisdom 
of  Thy  mind,  (c)  When  work  (and)  instruction  were  given  by 
Thee,  [that  is,  work  (and)  proper  instruction  were  given  by 
Thee],  (they),  too,  were  given  through  this  wisdom  of  Thy  mind. 
And  when  (there  is  one)  whose  desire  is  for  that  place  (the  other 
world),  by  Thee  his  desire  was  granted,  [that  is,  that  which  he 
requires  when  he  shall  come  to  that  place,  this  which  is  so 
required  by  him  is  given  by  Thee,  in  that  way  he  will  come  to 
that  place],  it,  too,  was  granted  through  this  wisdom  of  Thy 
mind. 

12.  (a)  There  the  voices  are  high,  that  of  the  teller  of  lies, 
the  Evil  spirit,  and  that  of  the  teller  of  truth,  Auharmazd, 
{b)  that  of  the  intellectual  Allbarmazd  and  that  of  the  unintel- 
lectual  Evil  spirit,  in  the  solicitation  for  the  heart  and  mind  of 
Zaratusht,  [that  is,  while  we  shall  solicit  them  2],  (c)  who, 
through  complete  mindfulness  as  to  what  the  spirit  communi- 
cated by  the  religion  of  the  spirit,  (has)  his  abode  there  (in  the 

1  That  is,  wealth  in  cattle.  time  when    he    conveyed  fodder  to 

2  This  aj^pears  to  refer  to  a  passage  cattle  with  that  one  foot."  In  the 
in  tlie  Spend  Nask,  which  the  Sh4-  Arda-Virdf-n&mak  (ch.  xxxii. )  a  simi- 
yast-lS.-sh4yast  quotes  thus:  "  As  in  lar  tale  is  told  of  "a  lazy  man  whom 
the  Spend  Nask  it  was  shown  to  Zara-  they  called  Davanos,"  whose  right 
tusht,  concerning  a  man,  that  the  foot  is  treated  with  the  same  excep- 
whole  body  was  in  torment  and  one  tional  mercy,  which  is  not  granted  to 
foot  was  outside.  Zarattisht  asked  the  infidel  or  apostate  in  ch.  xlvii. 
Aflharmazd  about  the  matter.  Au-  There  seems  little  doubt  that  this 
harmazd  said  that  he  was  a  man  Davans  is  a  representation  of  the 
Davans  by  name  ;  he  was  ruler  over  davds  translated  "hypocrite"  in  the 
thirty-three  provinces,  and  he  never  text. 

practised  any  good  work,  except  one         ^  Literally  "it"  or  "him." 


352  PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXXI. 

other  world),  [whoever  shall  quite  mindfully  perform  priestly 
studies/  his  place  is  there  (in  the  other  world)]. 

13.  (rt)  Whoever  converses  with  what  is  public  must  perforui 
public  good  works,  0  Auharmazd  !  whoever  converses  with  what 
is  secret  sin  may  commit  much  secret  sin.  (6)  Whoever  in 
what  is  a  small  quarrel  tries  [aAzmdyed)  that  which  is  great,  for 
the  sake  of  deliverance,  [that  is,  they  would  commit  a  small  sin 
and,  afterwards,  they  would  commit  a  large  one,  so  that  it  may 
not  be  apparent],  (c)  it  is  he  who  would  be  in  both  (Thy)  eyes, 
[that  is.  Thou  seest],  in  that  combination  Thou  art  Lord,  [in 
sin  which  is  mingled  with  good  works],  over  righteousness  Thou 
art  also  Lord,^  and  Thou  seest  over  everything. 

14.  («)  Both  those  I  ask  of  Thee,  0  Auharmazd  !  what  has 
come  ]  (and)  what  yet  comes  ?  (Jj)  Whoever  gives  a  loan  of 
what  is  from  lenders  to  him  who  is  righteous,  (gives)  of  that 
which  is  such  as  is  necessary  to  give,  O  AHharmazd !  (c)  And 
whoever  (gives)  to  the  wicked  is  as  they  are,  so  the  settlement  is 
this,  that  is ;  What  is  the  decree  ?  tell  me  what  is  the  decree  ? 

15.  (a)  Thus  it  should  be  asked  him  :  Would  his  punishment 
in  that  perdition  be  well  inflicted  who  would  provide  a  dominion 
for  him  who  is  wicked,  (6)  who  is  evil-doing,^  0  Aliharmazd  ! 
who  does  not  announce  life  even  through  a  reward  1  [that  is, 
when  they  give  him  a  bribe  he  would  not  release  a  man  who  is 
yet  alive],  (c)  He  also  persecutes  the  agriculturist  who  is  avert- 
ing destruction  among  cattle  and  men,  [that  is,  even  a  good  man 
who  well  preserves  mankind  and  cattle,  him  he  regards  with 
malice]. 

16.  (a)  Thus  it  should  be  asked  him  :*  Would  his  reward  be 

1  Or    perhaps    "form    a    priestly  this  and  the  preceding  verse  are  rarely 

assembly."  used,  such  as  pHrst-ydd,  pitrst  had, 

-  This  part  of  the  verse  is  omitted  "there   should  be  an  asking,   or  it 

in  Spiegel's  edition.  should    be    asked  ; "    yehabunt-hd'J, 

^  Evidently  referring  to  Ahriman,  "  there  would  be  a  giving,  or  it  would 

who  is  here  represented  as  incorrup-  be  given  ;  "  and  the  form  which  can 

tible  in  his  adherence  to  evil.     The  be  only  doubtfully  read  vddHnyen-tt, 

idea  of  a  being  wicked  enough  to  be  "it  would  be  done  or  inflicted."   This 

bribed    to   betray   an   evil   cause    to  last  form  looks  like  the  phrase  "there 

which  he  still   remains  devoted,  ap-  is  a  vddiXnyen,  or  there  is  a  they- 

pears  to  be  a  refinement  in  evil  of  would-do,"  a  clumsy  way  of  saying 

later  date  than  either  Ahriman  or  the  "it  would  be  done,"  if  that  be  the 

devil.  origin  of  the  form. 

4  The  forms  of  some  of  the  verbs  in 


PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXXI.  353 

well  given  in  whose  dwelling  (clemiln)  He  who  is  wise  in  good- 
ness is  Lord  ?  [that  is,  Auharmazd  through  spirituality  is  made 
lord  within  his  body],  (h)  And  in  the  town  which  is  in  His 
country  he  who  is  (engaged)  in  the  propagation  of  righteousness 
is  no  chastiser,  [that  is,  in  His  world  that  one  is  lord  who,  when 
they  would  perform  duty  and  good  works,  does  not  chastise], 
(c)  Such  are  Thine,  0  Auharmazd !  in  whose  actions  it  is 
even  so. 

1 7.  (a)  Which  convinces  more,  the  righteous  or  the  wicked  1 
[that  is,  does  he  who  is  righteous  (among)  people  convince  more 
thoroughly,  or  he  who  is  wicked  ?].  (6)  Speak  information  for 
him  who  is  intelligent,  and  become  not  him  who  is  ignorant 
thereafter  while  I  shall  speak  to  thee,  (c)  Apprize  us,  0  Auhar- 
mazd !  [that  is,  fully  inform  us],  and  mark  us  out  by  good 
thought  (Vohuman),  [that  is,  furnish  us  with  a  badge  through 
rectitude]. 

18.  (a)  So  no  one  of  you  should  hear  the  teaching  of  the  text 
from  that  wicked  one,  [that  is,  hear  not  the  Avesta  and  Zand 
from  the  infidels]  ;  {h)  for  in  the  dwelling,  village,  town,  and 
country  he  produces  evil  proceedings  and  death,  he  who  is  an 
infidel ;  (c)  so  prepare  ye  the  sword  for  those  infidels. 

19.  {a)  The  listening  in  which  is  discretion  (and)  righteous- 
ness is  thus  acquainted  with  both  worlds,  0  Auharmazd  !  [that 
is,  he  in  whom  is  discretion  (and)  righteousness  understands  the 
working  of  spiritual  and  worldly  affairs],  (b)  Rightly  spoken 
speech  is  that  which  is  authorised,  which  is  fearless  in  tongue 
persuasion,  [that  is,  for  his  speech  which  is  true  and  proper 
(one's)  wishes  are  to  be  renounced],  (c)  This  Thy  red  fire,  O 
Auharmazd !  will  give  a  decision  to  disputants,  that  they 
may  fully  make  manifest  the  certain  and  the  undecided  {agi- 
rdid)} 

20.  (a)  Whoever  comes  to  the  righteous  with  deceit  his  lamen- 
tation is  behind  him,  [that  is,  it  becomes  lamentation  in  his  soul], 
(&)  and  long  is  his  coming  into  darkness,  [that  is,  he  must  be 
there  a  long  time],  and  bad  feeding,  [that  is,  they  give  him  even 
poison],  and  he  says  (it  is)  an  unjust  proceeding,  [that  is,  it  has 
happened  to  him  unjustly],     (c)  To  the  world  of  darkness,  ye 

^  This  evidently  refers  to  the  orJeal  by  fire,  one  form  of  the  n'i,ran<j-i 
var. 


354  PAHLAVI  YASNA  XXXIL 

who  are  wicked !  the  deeds  which  are  your  own  religion  ^  lead 
you,  (and)  must  do  (so). 

21.  (a)  Atlharmazd  gave  Horvadad  and  Amerodad  the  perfect 
to  him  who  is  righteous,  [him  by  whom  duty  and  good  works 
are  performed].  (6)  And  His  own  authority  {j)ai%li)  is  in  the 
domination  {sarddrth)  of  him  who  is  lord,  [that  is,  the  sove- 
reignty which  is  His  He  maintains  in  the  Dastur],  (c)  whose 
munificence  is  of  the  good  thought  (Vohuman),  [that  is,  the  re- 
ward which  Vohuman  gives  he  also  gives],  which  is  for  him  who 
is  a  friend  of  his  own  spirit  through  deeds. 

2  2.  (a)  Manifestly  he  is  well-informed  when  he  gives  (and) 
thinks  according  to  his  knowledge,  [that  is,  in  thought  he  minds 
him  who  is  spiritual  lord  {ahU)  of  his  Dastur].  ^  (6)  Good  is  the 
lord  who  would  practise  righteousness  in  word  and  in  deed; 
(c)  he  whose  body  is  a  conveyer  of  Thee,  0  AAharmazd !  [that 
is,  Thy  lodging  in  the  world  is  in  his  body]. 

5. — Palilavi  Yasna  XX XII. 

I.  (a)  He  who  is  in  possession  of  his  life  begged  what  is  its 
productiveness  together  with  submissiveness,  [that  which  is  a 
reward  the  demons  (begged  of)  Auharmazd  himself  in  these 
(words) :  That  we  may  be  productive  and  submissive  to  Thee ! 
By  them  it  was  begged],  {h)  They  who  are  his  ^  demons  are  of 
my  (way  of)  thinking,  [that  is,  our  thinking  is  as  excellent  as 
Zaratllsht],  he  who  is  AHharmazd's  delight.  [By  them  it  was 
begged] :  (c)  That  we  may  be  testifying  !  [that  is  :  May  we 
become  Thy  promoters  !]  we  hold  those  who  harass  you,  [that 
is,  we  hold  them  back  from  you]. 

2-16.  [Not  translated.] 

1  Probably  referring  to  the  tradi-  ^  go    jn    Dastur  Jamaspji's    MS., 

tional  hag  who  is  said  to  meet  the  otherwise  "  he  minds  those  who  are 

souls  of   the   wicked   ou  the    fourth  his  guardian  angel  and  Dastur  "  would 

morning  after  death,   and  is  a  per-  be  a  preferable  reading, 

sonification  of  their  evil  religion  and  3  Probably  meaning  those  who  are 

deeds    (see    Arc]a-Viraf-namak,   xvii.  called  demons  by  Zaratusht ;  but  this 

12).     The  original  description  of  this  verse  is  by  no  means  free  from  ob- 

being  in  the  Hadokht  Nask  (Yusht  scurity. 
xxii.  27-33)  is  lost  (see  p.  223). 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  I. 


355 


6. — Pahlavi  Vendidad  I  A 

1.  (i)^  Auharmazd  said  to  Spitiimau  Zarati\sht :  (2)  I  created, 
O  Spitamaii  Zaratusht !  the  creation  of  deliglit  ^  of  a  place  where 
no  comfort  was  *  created ;  (a)  this  is  where  man  is,  the  place 
where  he  is  born  (and)  they  bring  him  up  seems  good  to  him, 
[that  is,  very  excellent  and  comfortable] ;  this  I  created.  (3) 
For  if  I  should  not  have  created,  0  Spitaman  Zaratusht  !  the 
creation  of  delight  of  a  place  where  no  comfort  w^as  created,  (4) 
there  would  have  been  an  emigration  of  the  whole  material  world 
to  Airan-vej,  (0)  that  is,  it  would  have  remained  in  the  act,  while 
their  going  would  have  been  impossible,  for  it  is  not  possible  to 
go  so  far  as  from  region  {Iceshvar)  to  region,  except  with  the  per- 
mission of  the  angels  {yazaddti)  ;^  some  say  that  it  is  possible  to 
go  also  with  that  of  the  demons. 

2.  (4)  (6)  A&t  rdmo-ddittm  (''a  pleasure-creative  place"), 
Ki'zrf  ("  not ")  aojo-rdmishiam  ("most  pleasing  in  strength");'' 


1  For  th  Pahlavi  text  of  the  first 
part  of  the  Vendidad  we  have  to  rely 
upon  MSS.  which  are  only  second- 
rate  in  point  of  age,  as  has  been  al- 
ready noticed  in  p.  95.  This  is  all  the 
more  to  be  regretted  as  the  first  far. 
gard  contains  many  rare  words  and 
obscure  phrases  which  one  would  wish 
to  have,  as  nearly  as  possible,  in  their 
original  form.  Fortunately  these  se- 
cond-rate MSS.  are  still  283  years  old, 
and  were  therefore  written  before  the 
mania  for  "  improving  "  old  texts  set 
in  (some  time  last  century),  which  has 
induced  some  copyists  to  adapt  the 
text  to  their  own  limited  knowledge, 
in  preference  to  raising  their  know- 
I'dge  to  some  comprehension  of  the 
text  as  they  found  it. 

-  The  paragraphs  are  numbered  to 
correspo)  id  with  Westergaard  s  edi- 
tion of  the  Avesta  text  and  its  trans- 
lation in  pp.  227-230  of  these  Essays; 
but  the  subdivisions  of  Spiegel's  edi- 
tion, which  correspond  with  those  of 
the  Pahlavi  ]\ISS.,  are  also  numbered, 
in  parentheses.  F'or  the  further  indi- 
cation of  the  Pahlavi  commentaries 
and  their  subdivision  by  the   letters 


(a),  (6),  (c),  &c.,  the  i^resent  editor  is 
responsible. 

*  The  meaning  appears  to  be,  that 
whatever  creates  delight  in  a  place 
was  created  by  Auharmazd,  as  more 
fullj'  detailed  in  the  sequel. 

*  The  writer  seems  to  use  the  usual 
present  form  of  this  vei'b  for  the  past. 
See  "  remained  "  in  (4  a). 

^  It  is  doubtful  whether  yazaddn  is 
to  be  taken  in  its  original  sense  of 
"angels,"  or  in  its  later  meaning 
"  God."  In  the  Bundahish  (p.  21  W.) 
we  are  told,  "It  is  not  possible  for 
one  to  go  from  region  to  region  ;  "  and 
the  Mainyo-i-khard  (ix.  6)  says,  "  It 
is  not  possible  to  go  from  region  to 
region  otherwise  than  with  the  per- 
mission of  the  yazads  or  the  permis- 
sion of  the  demons,"  which  corre- 
sponds closely  with  the  statement  in 
the  text. 

s  This  seems  to  be  a  crioical  remark 
on  the  foregoing  Avesta  text,  and  im- 
plies that  there  had  been  some  doubt 
whether  aso  rdmo-ddittm  (the  read- 
ing adopted)  should  not  have  been 
acjo-rdmisktum.  It  may  be  noted  tliat 
the  two  phrases  are  more  alike  when 


356  PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  I. 

the  effect  would  be  one  (tlie  same),  the  effect  would  be  "  tlie 
delight  of  a  place ; "  ^  some  say  it  is  also  (zahotch)  "  the  delight 
which  (arises)  from  industry."  (c)  Paoirtni  ("  the  first ")  is 
hittm  ("  the  second  ") ;  this  enumeration  is  that  first  the  work  of 
the  law  was  produced  at  a  place,  and  the  second  at  that  place, 
till  the  spirit  of  the  earth  arranged  the  whole  in  connection,"  is 
the  work  of  opposition.  The  place  where  he  mentions  two — 
one,  that  in  the  original  creation,  and  one,  that  which  is  after — 
is  dad  ahe  paitydrem  ("thereupon,  as  an  opposition  to  it").^ 
(d)  Every  one  of  the  following  places  and  districts  is  the  joint 
production  of  both  ;  some  say  that  a  "  place"  (jindk)  is  that 
place  whereon  mankind  do  not  dwell,  and  a  "  district "  (rilstdlc) 
is  that  place  whereon  mankind  dwell,  (e)  Mashamdrava  shatJidui 
haiitm  ("  he  has  proclaimed  the  existing  destruction  ") ;  *  this  is 
revealed  in  this  fargard,  (and)  every  place  is  mentioned.  Some 
say  Att-homand  {"  material  ")  is  also  a  river.^ 

3.  (5)  The  first  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect  by 
me,  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  was  (6)  Airan-vej,  where  the  good 
Daitih  ("  organisation")  is;  (a)  and  its  good  Daitih  is  this,  that 
the  place  sends  out  even  our  Dait  while  they  perform  work 
(agriculture  1)  with  the  avaepaem  ("  stream")  ;  some  say  that  it 
comes  out  in  a  stream  unless  they   perform  the  work  of  the 

written  in   Pahlavi  characters   than  *  il/rts^a?n«rara  is  here  supposed  to 

they    are    in    sound.      The    i-emarks  he  for  mashmruva,  which  is  taken  as 

■which  follow,  if    their  meaning  has  the  perf.  third  sing,  of  a  root  shmru 

been    correctly    caught,    imply    that  =mru,  "  to  speak  ;"  compare  ?nar  = 

either  phrase  would  be  suitable.  Sans.  smri.    The  reading  ash  mdrava, 

1  Two  other  readings  of  this  ob-  "very  deadly,"  has  also  been  pro- 
scure  phrase  may  be  suggested  :  first,  posed,  which  would  be  synonymous 
"  one  thing  is  '  an  army  '  {hiiiak),  one  with  ■p6uru-77iahrk6,  the  usual  epithet 
thing  is  '  the  delight  of  a  place  ; '  "  of  the  evil  spirit. 

secondly,  "the  work  is  of  two  kinds  *  This  is  evidently  a  later  supple- 

{do  atnak),  one  work  is  'the  delight  mentary  comment,  and  refers  to  the 

of  a  place.'  "     The  reading  kola  do  for  word  ast-homaud,  "  material,"  in  (4) ; 

Mr  ue  is  a  modern  guess.  this  would  be  att-homand  in  Huzva- 

2  Or  "  gave  up  the  whole  into  one  rish,  and  has  reminded  some  commen- 
hierarchy,"  according  as  we  read  tator  of  the  river  thus  described  in  the 
khadu-kardakth,  or  khaduk  radakth.  Bundahish  (p.  52  W.) :  "The  Aito- 
Most  of  this  latter  part  of  the  commen-  mand  (Hetumend)  river  is  in  Sistan, 
tary  refers  to  what  follows  in  the  text,  and  its  sources  are  from  Mount  Apar- 

3"  These  are  the  words  which  intro-  «in  ;  this  is  distinct  from  that  which 

duce  each  Avesta  account  of  the  evils  restrained    Frasiyav."      See    also  p. 

produced  by  the  evil  spirit,  as  detailed  229,  note  3. 
in  the  followiug  verses. 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  I. 


357 


place.^  (7)  And  in  opposition  to  that  were  formed  by  the  evil 
spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (8)  both  the  RMik  ("river"?)  serpent 
(which)  becomes  numerous,  and  the  winter,  produced  by  the 
demons,  (which)  becomes  more  severe. 

4.  (9)  Ten  months  are  winter  there,  and  two  months  summer  ; 
(a)  and  afterwards  also  hapta  hefiti  liamino  rndonha,  pcmc/ia 
zayana  ("  seven  are  the  summer  months,  five  the  winter  ")  is 
declared.2  ^jq)  Those,  too,  have  cold  water,  culd  earth,  (and) 
cold  vegetation,  those  ten  months  ;  some  say  the  two  months  ; 
(11)  adlia  zimahe  maidhtm,  adha  ziviaM  zaredhaem  ("  then  is 
midwinter,  tlien  is  the  heart  of  winter  "),  (a)  in  that  manner  the 
month  Vohuman  is  the  month  Shatvero,  which  is  the  heart  of 
winter,  [that  is,  it  would  be  more  severe  (compared)  even  with 
this  that  is  ever  severe  ;  and  afterwards  also,  at  that  time,  it 


1  This  is  the  traditional  interpreta- 
tion which  describes  D&itih  as  a  river; 
thus  the  Bundahish  (p.  51  W.)  says, 
"The  Daitik  (Daiti)  river  is  the  river 
■which  comes  out  from  Airan-vej,  and 
goes  on  by  the  mountain  of  Panjasta  ; 
of  all  rivers  the  noxious  creatures  in 
it  are  most,  as  it  is  said,  the  Daiti 
river  is  full  of  noxious  creatures."  It 
may  be  guessed  from  the  text  that 
the  river  came  from  snowy  mountains, 
and  therefore  flowed  most  freely  in 
the  spring  and  summer ;  hence  the 
idea  that  its  flowing  was  dependent 
ujion  the  tillage  of  Airan-vej,  which 
produced  either  more  than  the  natural 
drainage  or  less,  according  to  the  view 
taken  by  the  commentator.  Tradi- 
tionally, avaepaem  is  a  "subterranean 
channel  or  drain,"  and  it  can  be  easily 
explained  as  "  a  stream."  Its  identi- 
fication witli  the  Piizand  avelAm, 
"fearless,"  is  merely  a  guess  of  later 
times,  ingenious  but  hazardous.  If  it 
were  adopted,  and  the  material  river 
were  idealised  into  "  organisation  or 
law,"  we  should  have  to  translate 
somewhat  as  follows  :  "And  its  good 
organisation  is  tliis,  that  the  place 
sends  out  even  our  organisation  (or 
splendour)  while  they  perform  work 
(or  duty),  as  it  were,  fearlessly  (stead- 
fastly) ;  some  say  that  it  comes  out, 


as  it  were,  fearlessly,  unless  they  per- 
form the  duty  of  the  place."  It  is, 
however,  far  safer  to  assume  that  the 
Pahlavi  commentator  takes  the  most 
material  view  of  every  passage.  Many 
MSS.  have  rztd,  "the  river/'  instead 
of  lanman,  "our;"  and  it  may  be 
noticed  that  the  latter  Pahlavi  word, 
when  badly  written,  can  be  easily 
read  as  the  former,  but  the  converse 
mistake  is  not  so  easy. 

-  The  word  ashkare  is  merely  the 
Pahlavi  ushkdrak,  "  declared,  mani- 
fest," wiitten  with  the  Pazand  termi- 
nation -c  instead  of  the  Pahlavi  -ak. 
This  commentary  on  the  alteration  in 
the  relative  lengths  of  summer  and 
winter  agrees  with  the  Bundahish  (p. 
60  W.),  which  states  that  the  months 
from  Fravardin  to  Mifcro  (the  first 
seven  months  of  the  year)  are  summer, 
and  from  Avan  to  Spendarniagl  (the 
last  five  months  of  the  A'ear)  are  win- 
ter. It  must  be  observed  that  the 
Persian  Parsi  calendar  has  not  corre- 
sponded with  that  described  in  the 
Bundahish  since  the  eleventh  century 
(say  A.Y.  400);  but  as  that  book  de- 
scribes the  year  as  always  correspond- 
ing with  the  sun,  it  implies  that  some 
mode  of  intercalation  was  employed, 
so  that  it  may  have  been  written  at 
any  earlier  date. 


358  PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  I. 

becomes  more  severe]. ^  (12)  Then  when  the  winter  falls  off,  [that, 
is,  goes],  then  is  \\\q  frdhto  voghne  ("  cliief  disaster  "),2  [that  is, 
tlae  opposition  winter  ever  goes  off  with  it ;  some  say  that  anni- 
hilation enters  thereby]. 

5.  (13)  The  second  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect 
by  me,  me  who  am  Allharraazd,  was  (14)  Gava,  which  is  the 
SHiik  dwelling,  [that  is,  the  plain  of  the  Surik  dwelling-place  ; 
the  characteristic  thereof  is  no  disturbance].  (15)  And  in  oppo- 
sition to  that  was  formed  by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (16) 
a  swarm  of  locusts  (kilmko  meg)  which  even  destroys  (yahed-ich) 
the  cattle,  and  is  deadly ;  (</)  this  locust  comes  forth,  (and)  corn 
that  is  without  blade  comes  up ;  to  tie  up  the  ox  is  not  neces- 
sary, (and)  it  becomes  the  death  even  of  the  sheep. 

6.  (17)  The  third  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect  by 
me,  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  was  (18)  Marilv,  of  resources  com- 
bined with  the  work  of  the  law,  and  active,  [that  is,  they  do 
much  in  it].  (19)  And  in  opposition  to  that  were  formed  by 
the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (20)  inquisition  (and)  privacy 
(goshal-)  ;^  [inquisition,  that  is,  they  would  make  an  inquisition 
of  friends  there  ;  and  privacy,  that  is,  solitary  incontinence  is 
there]. 

*  The  meaning  is,  that  the  summer  of  the  two  months  in  the  text,  as 
was  as  cohl  as  winter,  and  the  winter  Vohuman  is  a  winter  month,  and 
still  colder.  As  the  months  stand  in  Shatvero  a  summer  one,  in  the  Bun- 
the  text,  they  would  answer  very  well  dahish  (p.  62  W. ). 
for  the  present  time,  when,  the  qadtm  ^  There  seems  here  to  be  some  per- 
month  Bahman  occurs  in  June-July,  cei)tion  of  the  disastrous  consequences 
and  Shahrivar  in  January-February  ;  of  a  sudden  thaw  in  snowy  regions. 
but  we  find  the  same  months  given  in  But  one  of  the  commentators  seems  to 
MSS.  written  283  years  ago,  when  the  understand  fruistd  voghne  as  "gone 
Parsi  months  were  seventy  days  later  forth  to  destroy,"  misled  perhaps  by 
in  the  year,  and  we  have  every  reason  the  Persian  firistdd,  "  sent." 
to  believe  that  they  were  also  given  '  Modern  tradition  suggests  rfiis/ia^-, 
in  MSS.  written  553  years  ago,  when  "i;vil;"  but  as  dAsh,  "evil,"  is  al- 
the  months  were  138  d^jys  later  in  our  ready  an  adjective,  the  form  dUshak  is 
year  than  they  are  at  present.  It  doubtful.  If  it  were  adopted  the  sen- 
seems  hazardous  to  assume  that  the  tence  might  be  tlius  translated  : 
Parsi  months  were  allowed  to  retro-  "Commerce  (lit.  reckoning)  and  evil 
grade  continuously  during  Sasanian  commerce,"  [that  is,  the  commerce 
times,  otherwise  we  might  suppose  which  friends  would  practise  there  is 
that  this  commentary  was  written  evil,  that  is,  unnatural  intercourse  is 
about  1460  years  ago,  when  the  months  there]."  Tliis,  however,  would  be 
would  have  been  in  their  present  posi-  taking  advantage  of  an  ambiguity  in 
tion.  But  it  is  more  probable  that  the  English  word  "commerce,"  which 
fjome  copyist  has  reversed  the  position  the  Pahlavi  dinar  does  not  possess. 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  I. 


359 


7.  {21)  The  fourth  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect 
by  me,  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  was  (22)  Bukhar^  the  handsome 
in  appearance,  with  uplifted  banner,  [that  is,  they  keep  ^  a  ban- 
ner elevated ;  some  say  that  they  domineer  over  a  multitude, 
that  is,  they  overwhelm  it^].  (23)  And  in  opposition  to  that 
was  formed  by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (24)  an  ant-hill 
(which)  becomes  numerous  ;  [some  say  that  a  place  furrowed  by 
a  plough  till  it  springs  up  will  become  an  ant-hill].* 

8.  (25)  The  fifth  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect  by 
me,  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  was  (26)  Nisai,  which  would  be 
between  Maruv  and  Bukhar  ;  [I  mention  that  since  there  is  also 
the  other  5].  (27)  And  in  opposition  to  that  was  formed  by  the 
evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (28)  scepticism;  [in  the  concerns  of 
the  angels  (or  God)  they  are  doubtful  whether  they  exist  \  ^  some 


1  Or  it  may  be  Bukhar  or  Bahl. 

2  Some  MSS.  have  "come  with," 
others  "bring." 

3  Some  modern  MSS.  have  "  they 
shxiighter  the  enemy." 

*  This  dause  presents  several  diffi- 
culties to  the  ti-anslator,  aud  the  text 
is  probably  corrupted.  In  all  proba- 
bility the  word  nurtu  or  nurutn  (Das- 
tur  Hoshaugji  mentions  nuli),  which 
ends  the  Avesta  version  in  the  printed 
editions,  is  really  a  Fazand  word  be- 
ginning the  Pahlavi  version,  and  tlie 
missing  equivalent  of  the  Avesta  hra- 
varem.  It  might  be  taken  for  the  Per- 
sian navard,  "combat,"  but  this  is 
uaparto  in  Pahlavi.  Possibly  the  t  is 
a  corruption  of  7nA  (see  p.  357,  note 
i),  and  the  whole  word  a  blunder  for 
a  Pahlavi  form,  vurmHn  or  harnvAr, 
"a  bee;"  but  this  is  a  mere  guess. 
The  word  gzVchakdd  (oTie  old  MS. 
gives  dilvchakdt  as  a  gloss)  is  tradi- 
tionally understood  as  "an  ant  which 
carries  oiT  corn,"  the  mor-i  ddn-kash 
of  Vend.  xiv.  14  and  xviii.  146  Sp.  ; 
but  how  tradition  arrived  at  this  con- 
clusion is  not  obvious.  Here  chalcdd 
is  taken  in  its  usual  sense  of  "  summit, 
hill,"  and  gill  is  assumed  to  be  a  cor- 
ruption of  mor,  "ant"  [m.  inverted 
being  k,  an  error  wliich  sometimes 
occur  -,  and  kor  being  jn-actically  equi- 


valent to  (j-Al  in  writing).  The  Tehe- 
ran MS.  has  gulak-chakad  in  one  in- 
stance, which  would  lead  up  to  the 
translation  "  porcupine  mound  "  were 
it  not  that  the  porcupine  or  hedgehog 
is  specially  an  animal  of  the  good 
creation  (because  it  destroys  ants), 
and  could  not  have  been  produced  by 
the  evil  spirit.  Darmesteter's  sug- 
gestion (Kevue  Critique,  No.  33  of 
1877,  p.  90)  of  jdrdk-kdd  for  jArddk- 
kdd,  "greedy  of  corn,"  is  hardly  ad- 
missible, as  no  old  Pazand  writer 
would  be  likely  to  use  dh  for  a  final 
(/.  If  we  were  to  tlirow  aside  the 
tradition  altogether,  and  assume  that 
the  Pahlavi  translator  was  better  ac- 
quainted with  tlie  meaning  of  the  ori- 
ginal Avesta  word  usadhas  than  the 
traditionalists  were,  we  might  take 
g'M-chakwj,  as  the  name  of  some  noxi- 
ous weed  which  sprang  up  all  over 
the  country  ;  gM  or  gUlak,  "  flower," 
being  frequently  used  as  the  first 
member  of  the  name  of  a  plant.  The 
reading  adopted  for  the  phrase,  "  a 
place  furrowed  by  a  plough  till  it 
springs  up,"  is  jtndk  sillak-ddij^  (or 
stil-kisht)  vad  hard  khUmbcd. 
^  Or  "since  it  still  exists." 
6  More  literally,  "  tliat  is,  if  they 
should  not  be." 


36o  PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  I. 

say  that  they  are  (so)  also  in  those  of  the  demons  whether  they 
exist]. 

9.  (29)  The  sixth  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect  by 
nie,  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  was  (30)  Harib  (or  Harav)  the 
village-deserting ;  (a)  and  its  village  desertion  is  this,  where  we 
keep  the  periods  of  nine  nights  and  a  month,i  they  desert  the 
house  as  evil  (klidnah  pavan  vadak)  and  go  away.  (31)  And  in 
opposition  to  that  was  formed  by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly, 
(32)  the  mosquito  2  whose  cry  of  long-continued  annoyance  (der- 
seJaJdh)  would  be  this  :  I  am  hungry  !  ^  [some  say  that  they  may 
perform  with  a  drum]. 

10.  (t,;^)  The  seventh  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect 
by  me,  me  who  am  Allharmazd,  was  (34)  K^vul  the  evil-shadow- 
ing,* (rt)  and  its  (evil)  shadowing  is  this,  that  the  shadow  of  the 
trees  on  the  body  is  bad;  some  say  that  of  the  mountains. 
(35)  And  in  opposition  to  that  was  formed  by  the  evil  spirit, 
who  is  deadly,  (36)  a  longing  for  witches,  the  adoration  of  idols, 
with  whom  Kereshaspo  associated,  [that  is,  he  practised  it,  and 
they  also  would  practise  not  according  to  the  law]. 

11.  (37)  The  eighth  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect 
by  me,  me  who  am  Ailharmazd,  was  (;^8)  Ure  full  of  pasture 
(and)  grandees,^  (a)  and  its  full  pasturage  is  this,  that  there  is 

1  Dastur  Hoshangji  observes  that  3  Or  "a  dagger,"  according  as  we 

these  periods  refer  to  the  time  which  read  r/usknak  or  dashnak. 

]ilaces  once  defiled   remain  imclean,  *  It   seems   singular   that   a   place 

which  varies  according  to  the  season  when  made  perfect  should  still  have 

of  the  year.  an  evil  shadow,  and  no  doubt  we  can 

"  The  word  sarchd  or  sarchakh  is  read  KdvAl-i  veh-sdyako  instead  of 
here  assumed  to  mean  "a  gnat  or  KdvUJ-i  dHnh-sdi/ako,  and  can  tran- 
mosquito,"  in  accordance  with  the  slate  as  follows:  "Kavul  the  well- 
traditional  meaning  of  the  phrase,  shadowing,  and  its  shadowing  is  this, 
It  may,  however,  be  only  the  Pazand  that  the  shadow  of  the  trees  is  on  a 
form  sardha,  "sort,  kind,"  in  which  bad  body  which  is  called  that  of  the 
case  we  should  have  to  read  a  "  kind  mountains."  But  as  tlie  Pahlavi 
of  long-continued  annoyance  whose  translator  found  dvzhaku  in  the 
cry  would  be  this,"  &c.,  referring  per-  Avesta  text,  he  could  hardly  avoid 
haps  to  beggars.  It  is  singular  that  translating  it  by  dAsh,  "evil."  As 
the  Pahlavi  translator  should  have  the  Pahlavi  version  differs  here,  in  its 
missed  using  tlie  Persian  word s«r«s/iZ;,  translation  of  Av.  shayanem,  from 
''a  gnat,"  for  the  Avesta  sraskem  ;  (14)  and  (42)  Dastur  Hoshangji  sug- 
and  Dastur  Hoshangji  observes,  very  gests  sayancm  as  the  correct  reading, 
justly,  that  sarchd-i  may  be  merely  a  ^  Qr  we  may  read  mSadn,  "  fogs," 
miswriting  of  sarchask,  which  might  (Pers.  ?ner//t);orperliaps-y«s<«?'-»iff«m. 
well  be  a  coi)yist's  transposition  of  "  forage-gatherers "  (comijare  Pers. 
sarask-ich.  mantdan,  "  to  gather  "). 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  I.  361 

plenty  of  corn  and  pasturage  in  it.  (39)  And  in  opposition  to 
that  was  formed  by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (40)  the  worst 
of  residences  when  its  grandees  dwell  on  it. 

12.  (41)  The  ninth  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect 
by  me,  me  who  am  Atiharmazd,  was  (42)  Khnan,  tlie  abode  of 
wolves,  [that  is,  the  Khnan  river  is  the  habitation  of  wolves  ; 
the  characteristic^  thereof  is  disturbance].  (43)  And  in  opposi- 
tion to  that  was  formed  by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (44) 
the  vile  sin  of  those  who  cannot  pass  the  bridge,^  which  is  inter- 
course with  men,  [that  is,  sodomy] ;  («)  this  they  should  not 
perpetrate  according  to  the  law  of  the  angels  (or  God). 

13.  (45)  The  tenth  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect 
by  me,  me  who  am  ACiharmazd,  was  (46)  Harakhmond  the 
handsome  in  appearance.  (47)  And  in  opposition  to  that  was 
formed  by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (48)  the  vile  sin  which 
cannot  pass  the  bridge,  which  is  burying  the  dead ;  (a)  this  is 
heathenish  {ak-dxn-hdmand) ,  and  according  to  their  law. 

14.  {49)  The  eleventh  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect 
by  me,  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  was  (50)  Het-homand  the  illus- 
trious (and)  glorious ;  (a)  busy  and  diligent  is  the  spirit  which 
it  subdued,^  some  say  that  of  the  Veh  river.*  (51)  And  in  op- 
position to  that  was  formed  by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly, 
(52)  that  which  is  vile,  [that  is,  sorcery],  which  is  ever  evil ;  (a) 
some  say  that  of  the  Frasayavan ;  ^  they  were  able  to  perform 
that,  and  were  not  able  to  abandon  it.     (6)  Some  say  that  sor- 

1  The  old  MSS.  have  dashak,  but  rivers  flow  forth  from  the  north  part 

compare  the  end  of  (14).  of  the  eastern  Alburz,   one  towards 

For  whom   the  bridge  Chinvad,  the  west,  that  is  the  Arang,  (and)  one 

which  leads   to  paradise,   is   impas-  towards  the   east,   that   is   the   Veh 

sable;  this  is  neatly  expressed  by  the  river."    The  spirits  of  the  two  rivers 

single  Pahlavi   word  andpHhalakdn,  are  also  mentioned  (Bund.  p.  50),  and 

"  those  not  for  the  bridge,"  or  those  further  particulars    are   given,   thus 

•^•hose  sins  are  inexpiable.  (Bund.    p.    51) :      "  The    Veh    river 

3  Eeading  i  sikast  (for  i  shilcast)  ;  or  passes  by  on  the  east,  goes  through 

it  may  be  t  kasist,   "the  smallest."  the  land  of  Sind,   (and)  flows  to  the 

Some  modern   MSS.   alter  the  word  sea  in   Hindustan,    and   they  call  it 

into   Sistan   because   the   Hetumand  tliere  the  Mehra  river  ;  "  and  in  p.  53 

river  is  in  Sistan,  see  p.  356,  note  5.  it  is  stated  that  the  Veh  river  is  also 

The  whole  clause  seems  doubtful.  called  the  Kasak  in  Sind. 

*  The  Veil  (or  good)  river  is  one  of  ^  The  descendants  of  Frasiyilv  the 

the  two  chief  rivers  of  the  world  ac-  Turanian,     the     Afrasiyab     of     the 

cording    to    the    Bundahish,    which  Shahnamah. 
states  (p.   49  W.)  that   "these   two 


362  PAH  LA  VI  VENDIDAD  I. 

eery  is  this  which  although  they  desire  (it)  not,  yet  it  happens 
easily  (narm),  then  it  is  said  that  (it  is)  in  a  way  not  allow- 
ible.i 

15.  (53)  This  also  is  the  token  of  its  manifestation,  which  I 
call  the  pructice  of  the  thing;  (54)  and  this  also,  its  manifes- 
tation, is  through  examination  ;  when  they  observe  it  becomes 
manifest.  (55)  As  wherever  they  come  (there)  is  evidently  an 
outburst  (jasto)  of  sorcery,  (56)  so  also  they  are  most  addicted 
to  extreme  sorcery;  (57)  so  also  they  bring  up  snow  and  hail, 
[that  is,  they  would  occasion  even  them]  ;  (a)  some  say  that  the 
snow  and  hail  will  so  arise  from  them  where  sinfulness,  through 
them,  becomes  excessive.  (58)  Whosoever  is  sick  (mudak)  and 
whosoever  is  again  impotent  (are  so  through  the  deeds  of  such 
sorcerers). 2 

16.  (59)  The  twelfth  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect 
by  me,  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  was  (60)  Rak  of  the  three  races 
of  Ataropatakan  ;  (a)  some  say  Eai ;  and  its  triple  race  is  this, 
that  its  priest,  warrior,  and  husbandman  are  virtuous  and  belong 
to  it.  (6)  Some  say  Zaratilsht  belonged  to  that  place,  and  it 
was  his  government  (jmWi)  of  all  these  three  which  was  called 
B,ai  •  ^  its  triple  race  is  this,  that  his  union  of  these  three  arose 
and  issued  from  that  place  :  vaedhanho  noid  uzoish  ("  of  know- 
ledge, not  of  conjecture"  f).  (61)  And  in  opposition  to  that  was 
formed  by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (62)  the  vilest  over- 
scepticism,^  [that  is,  they  are  doubtful  themselves,  and  will  also 
make  others  doubtful], 

17.  (63)  The  thirteenth  of  places  and  districts  produced  per- 
fect by  me,  me  who  am  Ailharmazd,  was  (64)  Chakhar  of  re- 
sources, the  grand  doer.^     (65)  And  in  opposition  to  that  was 

i  The  author's  translafion  of  this  ^  This  seems  to  be  a  pun  on  the 

fur^ard  ends  here.  name  Rtii,  which  can  be  divided,  iu 

2  As  already  noticed  (p.  229,  note  4),  Pahlavi,  into  the  two  words  U  3,  "  my 

the  whole  of  this  paragraph  seems  to  tliree." 

be  translated  from  an  old  commeu-  *  Perhaps  "active  scepticism"  or 

tary  in   the  Avesta   language.     The  "rampant  unbelief"   would  express 

last  sentence  is  translated  here  as  it  the  meaning  better,  though  not  the 

stands  in  the  printed  text,  but  it  will  words. 

probably  be  discovered  hereafter  that  *  Perhaps    maziln,  taken    here  as 

the  word  tim  in  the  Avesta  text  is  "grand,"  may  be  for  maziind,    "a 

part  of  the  Pahlavi  translation;  and  balance,"  or  mazdun,    "selling,"   or 

that  the  final  words  lakhvdr  atii  are  viazdur,  "a  labourer." 
altogether  corrupt. 


PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  T.  363 

formed  by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (66)  the  vile  sin  of  those 
who  dannot  pass  the  bridge,  by  whom  dead  matter  was  cooked  ; 
(a)  this  is  not  according  to  the  law  of  the  angels  (or  God),  yet 
they  cook  many  (things),  such  as  the  fox  and  weasel. ^ 

18.  (67)  The  fourteenth  of  places  and  districts  produced 
perfect  by  me,  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  w;is  {(i%)  Varen  the  four- 
cornered,  subduing  ^  Mount  PadashklivS,r,3  some  say  Kirman  ; 
(a)  and  its  quadrangularity  is  this,  that  it  stands  upon  four 
roads ;  some  say  that  its  city  has  four  gates.  (69)  At  which 
(place)  Frediln  was  born  for  the  destruction  of  Azhi  Dahak. 
(70)  And  in  opposition  to  that  were  formed  by  the  evil  spirit, 
who  is  deadly,  (71)  both  the  unnatural  menstruation  (which)  be- 
comes more  violent,  and  dwelling  on  non-Aryan  territories, 
(during)  the  winter  of  (him)  who  says  Blount  Padashkhvar  (and) 
the  autumn  of  (him)  who  says  Kirman.^ 

19.  (72)  The  fifteenth  of  places  and  districts  produced  perfect 
by  me,  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  was  (73)  (that  of  those)  who  are 
the  seven  Hindus  (^Hinduhdn)  ;  (a)  and  its  seven-Hinduism  is 
this,  that  the  chief  rulers  are  seven ;  yet  I  do  not  say  this,  that 
there  are  not  seven,  since  (it  is)  from  the  Avesta  hacha  tishastara 
Hendva  avi  daoshastarevi  I/endum  ("  from  the  eastern  Hindu  to 
the  western  Hindu  ").^  Some  say  that  there  is  one  to  each 
region  (Jcesltvar).^  (74)  And  in  opposition  to  that  were  formed 
by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (75)  the  unnatural  menstruation 
which  becomes  more  violent,  (and)  the  unnatural  heat  which  is 
beyond  measure. 

20.  (76)  The  sixteenth  of  places  and  districts  produced  per- 
fect by  me,  me  who  am  Aiiharmazd,  was  (77)  on  the  waters  of 

1  Probably  the  ichneumon  or  Indian  Kirman  chiefly  a  hot  one,  it  woukl  be 

mangus.  natural  for  the  inhabitants   to  quit 

■■'  The   old   JISS.    have    Tdr  =  gir,  the   forrr.er   in   the   winter  and   the 

"seizing;"  otherwise  we  might  read  latter    in    the    autumn    or    hottest 

sar,  "  the  chief,"  meaning  the  metro-  season.       Perhaps    we    should    read 

polls  or  seat  of  government  of  Mount  amat,  "when,"  for  mUn,  "who,"  and 

■  Padashkhvar.  translate  ".when  it  is  the  winter  of 

^  According  to  the  Bundahish  (p.  the  said  Padashklivargar,  when  it  is 

23  W.),  "the  Padashklivargar  moun-  the  autumn  of  the  said  Kirman." 

tain  (or  range  of  Mount  Padashkhvar)  ^  The  commentator  probably  means 

is  that  in  Tapristan  and  that  side  of  to  say  that   tlie  doubt  about   there 

Gilun."  being  seven  Hindus  is  not  his  own, 

*  Such  appears  to  be  the  meaning  but  is  occasioned  by  an  Avesta  text 

of  the  commentator,  as  Padashkhvar-  which  mentions  only  two. 

gar  being  chiefly  a  cold  country,  and  ^  Of  which  there  are  seven. 


364  PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XVIIl 

Arangi^^taiiji  which  is  Arum, 2  (78)  whose  residences  are  unwalled 
(adtvd)-),  so  that  the)'  soon  retreat ;  (a)  some  say  they  have  no 
ruler  in  authority.  (79)  And  in  opposition  to  that  was  formed 
by  the  evil  spirit,  who  is  deadly,  (So)  even  the  winter,  produced 
by  the  demons,  (which)  becomes  very  severe.^ 

21.  (81)  There  are  also  those  famous  places  and  districts 
which  remain  unmentioned,  which  are  handsome  in  appearance, 
profound  in  the  work  of  the  law,  desirable,  [that  is,  suitable], 
...  *  [that  is,  they  would  appoint  many  as  chiefs],  splendid, 
[tliat  is,  having  fame,*  some  say  flourishing  ^  as  Fars  the  pure  is 
splendid], 

7, — Paldavi  Vendidad  XV III. 

I.  (i)  Many  are  the  men — this  way  spoke  Auharmazd — 0 
righteous  Zaratflsht !  [that  is,  the  men  in  the  world  are  many ; 
some  say  that  they  who  are  like  these  are  many]  (2)  (who)  wear 
the  other  mouth-veil '''  (though)  unversed  in  religion,  [that 
is,  he  has  not  performed  its  ceremonial ;  some  say  that  he  does 
not  mentally  abide  by  the  religion].  (3)  Owing  to  the  deceit 
which  he  utters  to  others,  the  priesthood  is  his  own,  [that  is,  he 
says  :  O  man  !  I  am  a  good  man].     (4)  Don't  say  of  that  that 

1  That  is,  the  country  of  the  Arang  exphxnation.  Some  modern  MSS. 
river,  one  of  the  two  chief  rivers  of  have,  tlierefore,  altered  the  text  to 
the  Iranian  worhl,  see  p.  361,  note  4.  the  following:  "inquisitive,  [that  is, 
It  is  likewise  said  in  the  Bundahish  they  make  much  inquiry],"  which  is 
(p.  51  W.) :  "The  Arag  (or  Arang)  simply  absurd  as  an  epithet  of  a 
river  is  that  of  which  it  is  said  that  it  place. 

comes  out  from  Alborz  in  the  land  of  ^  Reading  shem-h6mand.     The  Te- 

Surak,  which   they  also   call   (or  in  heran  MS.  has  cZa,??i-/id»ia)?f/,  probably 

which  they  also   call  it)  Ami,  (and)  for  bdm-homand ;  and  modern  MSS. 

it    passes   on   through    the    land   of  improve   this   into  gadman-homand, 

Spetos  which  they  also  call  Mesr,  and  "glorious." 

they  call  it  there  the  Niv."  6  xhis    word    is    doubtfully    read 

2  The  eastern  empire  of  the  Eo-  vakhsdk,  for  vakhshdk,  "growiug." 
mans.  In  the  Farhang-i  Oim-khadiik  (p.  6, 

3  The  second  clause  of  the  Avesta  ed.  Hosh.)  we  probably  have  the  same 
sentence  is  not  translated  by  the  word  in  the  phrase  hdmik  chtgua 
I'ahlavi  commentator,  but  that  it  vSsdk,  where  it  may  perhaps  be  com- 
forms  a  part  of  the  Avesta  text  is  pared  with  Pers.  res/<Wa/«,  "exalted." 
shown  by  the  enclitic  conjunction  ''  See  p.  243,  note  r.  A  layman  has 
cha  occurring  in  both  clauses.  to  veil  his  mouth  and  nose  when  per- 

*  The    equivalent    of    the    Avesta     forming  the  Aban  and  Atash  Nyii- 
•n-ord  ffdshdnscha  seems  to  be  omitted    yishes,  Patit,  or  any  Namaz. 
in  all  old  MSS.,  which  give  only  its 


PAHLAVI  VRNDIDAD  XVIII.  '  365 

(it)  is  priesthood — this  way  spoke  Aubarraazd — 0  righteous 
ZaratAsht !  {a)  The  mouth-veil  (paldm)  may  be  of  any  stuff, 
(and)  while  it  keeps  back  on  the  mouth  it  must  be  two  fingers 
beyond,  (as)  is  clear  from  the  passage,  bae  erezu  frathanhem 
("  two  fingers'  breadth ").  (6)  The  two  ties  (do-vand)  of  a 
nioutli-veil  project  as  ringlets  (pai'c  juis) ;  it  should  be  double 
(do-bdt)  and  it  should  be  perfect ;  some  say  that  one  fastening 
(ddshtdf)  is  behind,  [it  is  said  that  all  there  are  should  be  (so)], 
(and)  it  should  be  stronger  ^  than  that  which  even  the  hdsit  re- 
quires, (c)  With  a  mouth-veil  once  (tied)  which  is  single  -  (and) 
strong,^  while  it  is  not  allowable  to  pray  for  the  Daruu  yet  un- 
presented  for  tasting,^  it  is  allowable  to  perform  the  ceremony 
(i/azishn). 

2.  (5)  He  carries  the  other  vermin-killer  [snake-killer]  (though) 
unversed  in  religion.  (6)  Owing  to  the  deceit  which  he  utters 
to  others  is  (his)  priesthood.^  Don't  say  of  him  that  (he)  is  a 
priest — this  way  spoke  Auharmazd  —  O  righteous  Zaratusht ! 
(rt)  A  mouth-veil  may  be  of  any  stufi",  (and)  while  it  comes  back 
on  the  mouth  it  must  be  two  fingers  beyond,  (as)  is  declared  by 
the  passage,  bae  erezu  di  aslidum  Zarathusldra  ("  two  fingers,  0 
righteous  Zarathushtra  !  ").^  (6)  The  snake-killer  ^  may  be  of 
anything ;  a  leathern  (one)  is  good,  (as)  is  declared  by  the  pas- 
sage "^  (beginning  with)  VohH  mananha  janaiti  apemchid  Anro 

^  Reading  tushkHk  ;  compare  Pers.  ®  The  priests  used  to  recite  the  f ul- 

tAsh,  "strength."  lowing  formula  as  often  as  they  per- 

-  Reading paddm  1-v'in-i khadii-vdk.  formed  the  meritorious  work  of  kill- 

The  whole  clause  is  difficult  to  tran-  ing  any  creature  of  the  bad  creation  : 

slate.  Shkanom,  vdnom,  nizdr  kunom  kdl- 

2  The  word  atafddd  (compare  Pers.  hudL-i  skumd,  devdn  va  dnljdn  va 
tavt,  "feast ")  is  probably  the  same  as  jddiidn  rckfarydn,  pa  horn  va  barcsom 
occurs  in  the  following  sentence  from  ra  dtti-i  rdst  va  durust  ke  man  cJidshtd 
the  Farhaug-i  Oim-khaddk  (p.  38,  ed.  ("I  break,  smite,  and  make  withered 
Hosh.):  "  Ataft-ddd  is  that  when  the  bodies  of  you  demons  and  demon- 
one  keeps  food  and  drink  away  (from  esses  and  sorcerers  and  witches, 
him)  in  whom  is  hunger  and  thirst."  through    the   hom   and   barsom   and 

*  This  sentence  is  omitted  in  the  tlie  true  and  correct  religion  which 

Pahlavi  version  of  the  old  MS.  in  Lon.  is  tauLcht   me");   compare   Maiuy6-i 

don,  which  abbreviates  many  repeti-  Khargl  Ivii.  28. 

tions  in  the  text.  7  ThisAvesta  quotation  is  evidently 

5  This  is  evidently  clause  (4a)  re-  incomplete,    and  prob.ably   only  the 

peated  by  mistake,  owing  to  the  pre-  first  few  words  are  given,  which  is 

ceding   sentence   being  the   same  in  the  usual  Eastern  mode  of   quoting 

both   places.     It   contains,   however,  passages, 
some  variations  from  that  clause. 


366  PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XVIII. 

mainyusli  ("  wliatever  water    Angro-maiiiyush    shall   smite,   by 
Yohumano,"  &c.). 

3.  (7)  He  carries  the  other  plant  [Barsom,  some  say  kUtino  ^] 
(though)  unversed  in  religion.  (8)  Owing  to  the  deceit,  &c.  (as 
in  (3)  and  (4),  which  are  not  repeated  here  in  Pahlavi  by  the  old 
MS.  in  London). 

4.  (9)  He  uses  the  goad  and  the  miscreant  -  so  that  he  groans 
[and  some  say  that  he  passes  away],  (though)  unversed  in  reli- 
gion. (10)  Owing  to  the  deceit,  &c.  (as  in  (3)  and  (4),  which  are 
not  repeated  here  in  Pahlavi  by  the  old  MS.  in  London). 

5.  (11)  Whoever  lies  ^  ever  throughout  the  night  a  non-prayer 
and  a  non-chanter,  [that  is,  he  does  not  utter  the  Avesta  residing 
in  the  chanting  of  the  service],  (12)  a  non-reciter,  a  non-per- 
former, speechless,  and  wishing  for  his  mourning  in  life  ;■*  (13) 
owing  to  the  deceit,  &c.  (as  in  (3)  and  (4),  which  are  not  repeated 
here  in  Pahlavi  by  the  old  MS.  in  London). 

6.  (14)  Say  of  him  that  (he  is  of)  the  priesthood — this  way 
spoke  Ailharmazd — 0  righteous  Zaratusht !  (15)  who  all  through 
the  night  consults  the  wisdom  of  the  righteous,  [that  is,  forms  a 
priestly  assembly  ^  so  that  he  may  learn  (or  teach)  rightful 
things],  (16)  which  is  preservation  from  difficulty,'^  the  expander 
of  the  intellect,  the  giver  of  good  existence  on  the  Chinvad 
bridge  [stout-heartedness  on  the  Chinvad  bridge],  (17)  deservino- 
i^piritual  lords  {ahildn),  deserving  the  place  of  righteousness,  and 

1  Probably  the  name  of  some  plant  be   correctly   explained   by  khUftan, 

improperly  used  for  the  Barsom.     It  '"to  lie  down,  to  sleep." 

may  be  an  adjectival  form  meaning  ■•  According  to  the  old  MS.  in  Lon- 

''' made  oi  kilt  or  kard.''  don,   which   has   asakhUa  a/ask  val 

^  The   reading  of  the   old  MS.  in  shtvan    kdmak   pavau    khayd.      The 

"London  h  aiktar  va  mar  killed.    The  writer  of  a  modern  MS.,   not  under- 

ashtar,    "goad,"  is  the  usual  imple-  standing  that  the  Panlavi  translator 

ment  mentioned  in  the  Vendidad  for  meaut  to  express  the  Av.  chinvad'  by 

the    punishment    of    criminals     (see  kdmak,  has  added  the  words  makht- 

p.  239),  and  seems  to  have  been  spe-  tihiedradukth-i  Chinvad  pnhal,  "d-a- 

ciaily  used  by  the   priests  and  tlieir  stroys   the  benefit   of    the   Chinvad 

assistants.  bridge." 

^  This  is  the  correct  meaning  of  the  ^  Or  perhaps    "performs  priestly 

'H.nzva.rish  verb  shck'ihihiastan,  whicli  studies." 

is  variously  given  by  different  autho-  ^  Beading  t  ruin  tangth.     The  ol '. 

rities.    In  Dastur  Hosliangji's  edition  MS.  in  London  has  amiVJayiii,  "  f r-ze- 

of  the  Pahlavi-Pazatid  Glossary   (p.  dom  from  ailment,"  which  would  suit 

15,   line    11),   the   I'&zand  vindddan  the  sense  well  enough,   but  is  not  a 

should   be   omitted,    and   then    botli  good  equivalent  of  tlie  Av.  ((-o,  which 

shckohdnastan  and  khdmuntan  would  is  usually  translated  by  tanylh. 


PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XVIII.  367 

deserving  the  paradise  of  duty  and  good  works,  the  reward  (and) 
recompense  in  the  better  world. 

7,  (18)  Ask  ^  again  of  me,  0  pure  one  !  [that  is,  the  question 
was  the  last,  and  He  hereupon  considered  whether  something 
might  not  yet  remain]  (19)  of  me  who  am  the  Creator,  [that  is,  I 
created  the  creatures],  tlie  most  developing,  [that  is,  from  one 
thing  I  know  ^  many  things],  the  most  intelligent,  [that  is,  by 
calculation  I  know  much],  the  best  replier  to  questions,  [that  is, 
of  those  from  whom  they  would  make  inquiry  I  give  the  best 
reply].  (20)  For  so  it  is  good  (for)  thee,  so  mayst  thou  become 
prosperous,  if  thou  askest  again  of  me. 

8,  (21)  Zarattisht  inquired  of  Auharmazd  thus:  O  Auhar- 
mazd,  favouring  spirit !  creator  of  the  material  world,  righteous 
(one)  !  3  in  whom  is  the  secretly-progressing  destruction  %  [that 
is,  in  whom  is  its  lodging  1  and  owing  to  whom  is  its  progress 
most  %\ 

9,  10.  (22)  And  Auharmazd  said  to  him  thus  :  In  him  (who 
is)  the  guide  of  a  vile  religion,  0  SpitamS,n  Zaratusht !  the  in- 
fidel who  is  a  deceiver.  (23)  Whoever  does  not  put  on  the  sacred 
string-girdle  (for)  three  spring  seasons,  [that  is,  dees  not  have  a 
sadarah  (and)  kustt  *  (for)  three  years],  (a)  some  say  that  who- 

1  Here  begin   a   series   of   disloca-  first  two  words  (which  Si:)iegel  omits) 

tions   in  the  text  of  the  old   MSS.,  here,   namely,  lakhvdr  min,  but  for 

which  is  fully  described  and  accounted  the  next  words  we  have  to  turn  over 

for  in  the  introduction  (p.  4)  to  Wes-  several  pages  (equivalent  to  the  eight 

tergaard's  edition  of  the  Avesta  texts,  folios  (3-8,  2,  9)  to  p.  206,  line  6,  of 

Some  MS.  from  which  the  oldest  now  Spiegel's  text,  where  we  iiud  the  rest 

existing  (and  through  them  all  later  of  the   sentence,    namely,    li  avezak 

ones)  have  descended,  must  have  con-  pArs,  &c.     We  must  then  turn  back 

sisted  of  bundles  of  ten  folios  each;  again  to  find  sentence  (19)  in  its  right 

but  the  bundle  containing  most  of  the  place. 

remainder  of  this  fai-gard  had  its  folios  -  So  all  MSS.,  but  a  slight  altera- 

displaced,  so  that  they  stood  in  the  tion  in  the  form  of  one  letter  would 

following  order :  3-8,  2,  9,  I,  and  folio  give  us  kankhdilnam,    "I    place   or 

10  was  lost.     In  Spiegel's  edition  this  dispose." 

displacement  has  only  so  far  been  •*  This  opening  sentence  is  not  given 
rectified  as  to  put  the  complete  sen-  in  Pahlavi  by  the  old  MSS.  here,  as  it 
tences  right,  while  any  fragment  of  a  has  so  often  occurred  in  previous  far- 
sentence  with  which  one  folio  ended  gards. 

is  left  (as  in  the  old  MSS. )  in  connec-  •*  The  muslin  shirt  and  string  girdle 

tion  with   the  fragment  of  another  worn  by  Parsis  of  both  sexes,  excejit 

sentence  with   which  the  next   mis-  young  children,  as  enjoined  by  their 

placed  folio  began.      Thus,   in  this  religion, 
sentence  (18)  the  old  MSS.  give  the 


568  PAHLAVI  VEND  ID  AD  XVI IL 

ever  does  not  put  on  the  sacred  string-girdle  (for)  those  three 
spring  seasons  is  the  third  ^  year  an  outcast,  forsaken  below  and 
forsaken  above  ;  ^  (it  is)  according  to  the  law  of  such  that  it  is 
not  necessary  to  have  z.\sadarah  (and)  IcHsti.  (24)  (And  whoever) 
does  not  chant  the  Gathas  (and)  does  not  consecrate  the  good 
water.^  (25)  Whoever  also  has  taken  him,  who  is  my  man,  into 
confinement,  [that  is,  has  taken  him  (as  above)  described  (iiip- 
isJitak)  into  it],^  (and)  delivers  him  up  to  liberty,  [that  is,  makes 
him  an  exile],  (26)  does  no  better  by  that  act  than  though  he 
had  forced  ^  the  extent  of  the  skin  (off)  his  head,  [that  is,  had 
cut  the  head  and  had  made  it  alive  again]. 

11.  (27)  For  the  blessing  of  one  unrighteous,  vile  infidel  is  a 
curse  the  length  of  his  jaw;  (28)  of  a  second,  the  length  of  a 
tongue  ;  of  a  third, '^  nothing  ;  a  fourth  progresses  himself,  [that 
is,  becomes  himself]. 

12.  (29)  Whoever  gives  an  unrighteous,  vile  infidel  the  out- 
squeezed  Hom-juice,  and  the  priesthood  (zoWi),  (30)  (and)  then 
the  consecrated  feast  (inydzd)  [this  is  said  because  with-  him  are 
the  good  and  worthy  of  the  feast],"  (31)  does  no  better  by  that 
act  than  though  the  enemy's  army,  having  a  thousand  horse  [five 
hundred  men  with  two  horses  (each)  from  the  professed  warriors], 
should  be  conveyed  by  him  on  to  a  village  of  the  Mazdayasnians, 
(and)  he  *  should  slay  the  people  (and)  they  *  should  drive  away 


1  Dastur  Hoshangji  suggests  that  that  the  word  can  be  taken  in  its 
the  first  two  letters  of  this  word  have  literal  meaning. 

changed  places,  and  that  we  should  ^  The  old  MS.  in  London  has  karf^ 

read  tasilm,  "fourth,"  instead  of  the  homanue  atgh  roeshman,  &c. 

unusual  sitihn,  "third."  ^  Here  we  have  the  second  disloca- 

2  Reading  arajdstu  frohujo  avar-  tion  of  the  text,  as  described  in  p.  367, 
hHjo,  and  taking  arajdsto  as  a  variant  note  i  ;  and  for  the  remainder  of  sen- 
of  arajisto,  "most  wrong,  most  err-  teace  (28)  we  have  to  turn  to  the  end 
ing."  The  literal  meaning  is  probably  of  (98)  on  p.  205,  line  10,  of  Spiegel's 
"  most  wrongful,  escai>ing  from  what  edition.  The  additional  words  in  the 
is  below,  and  escaping  from  what  is  old  MS.  in  London  are  Id  mindavam, 
above,"  that  is,  from  both  the  world  tasilm  nafshman  sdtaned,  algh  nafsh- 
and  heaven.  man  yehevuned.     The  incoherence  in 

^  The   old   MSS.    add    the   Avesta  this  sentence   is  due  to   the  Avesta 

quotation  ?/((is/i  yasai^i  ("with  which  original.     See  p.  245. 

he  performs  ceremonies").  "^  Or  "he  would  say  the  good  and 

*  That  is,  has  taken  such  a  one  as  worthy  are  in  his  feast." 

just   described   into    custody.     Most  ^  So  in  the  old  MS.  in  London,  but 

modern  MSS.  attempt  to  alter  ni2nsh-  the  persons  are  reversed  in  Spiegel's 

taJc,  as  their  wiiters  have  failed  to  see  edition. 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XVIIL  369 

tlie  cattle  as  plunder. ^  (c?)  That  is,  when  ^  one  gives  him  the 
priesthood  {zotth)  (it  is)  a  tandpuhar  ^  (sin),  and  when  ^  they 
shall  do  it  frequently  (it  is)  a  mortal  sin  (margarjdn). 

13.  (32)  Ask  again  of  me,  &c.  (as  in  ver.  7  (18-20)  above). 

14.  (33)  Zaratusht  inquired,  &c.  (as  in  ver.  8  (21)  to)  right- 
eous (one) !  who  is  he  (belonging  to)  Srosh  the  righteous,  the 
mighty,  the  self-subduing,  [that  is,  he  keeps  (his)  body  in  God's 
control],  the  admirably-armed,^  the  lord  (Ichudd)  of  the  hroilhro- 
ia&/je?/i^  ("  sharp  ha.ii\e-^-s.e") fi'cishusaiti  Sraosho  ashyd  ("the 
righteous  Srosh  goes  forth "),  (who  is  he)  the  Sroshavarezo  ? 
[that  is,  who  is  his  stimulator  of  the  world]  ? 

15-17.  (34)  And  Auharmazd  said  to  him  thus  :  The  bird 
whose  name  is  Parodarsh,  0  Spitaman  Zaratusht  !  (a)  This 
Parodarsli  would  be  "  prior  indication  "  (pesh-dakhshaHh),  and  its 
prior  indication  is  this,  that  first  it  flaps  (its)  pinions,  [that  is, 
wings],  (and)  then  utters  a  cry.*^  (35)  On  whom  men,  in  dis- 
paragement, bestow  the  name  of  fowl,  some  would  say  the  cock ; 
(a)  though  (if)  they  did  not  say  (so)  it  would  be  possible  for  him 
to  do  better.  (36)  That  bird  raises  an  outcry  during  the  pre- 
paration of  dawn,'''  which  arises  at  midnight,^  (37)  thus:  Rise 
up  !  be  men  !  praise  the  righteousness  which  is  perfect !  and 
overthrown  are  the  demons,  [that  is,  when  righteousness  is 
praised  by  them  the  demons  are  overthrown  by  them] ;  (;^8)  for 
this  (one)  who  has  run  to  you  is  Bushasp  the  long-talking, ^  [some 
say  thus :  This  (one)  has  run  to  you,  Bilshasp  the  long-pawed],^ 
(39)  who  by  prosy  chatting  [frdj-gop-ldyishnth)  with  the  whole 

^  Or  perhaps  "in  a  drove."  Parokdarshth     ae,     av/hash  fratHm 

2  Perhaps TOifJi,  "whoever," should  pardn  shikdxer},  va  akhar  vdng  vd- 

be  read  for  a??ia(,  "when."  dAndd. 

^  A  sin  which  prevents   the   soul  ''  This  aitsh  afzdr  is  defined  in  the 

from  passing  over  the  Chinvad  bridge  Farhang-i  Oim-khadCik  (ji.  42)  as  the 

to  paradise.  third  quarter  of  the  night,  in  which 

*  The  author  adds  here  "  the  ruler  the  Ushahina  Gah  begins. 

in  the  Arezahi  and  Savahi (keshvars),"  ^  The  third  dislocation  of  the  text, 

a  gloss  taken  from  a  modern   MS,  as  described  in  p.  367,  note  i,  occurs 

Such   modern  glosses   are,  however,  after  the  first  Avesta  word  in  clause 

mere  guesses,  of  no  authority.  (37) ;  but  being  in  the  Avesta  text,  it 

^  Mentioned  in  the    Srosh   Yasht  has  been  properly  corrected  in  Spie- 

(Tas.  Ivii.  31).  gel's  edition. 

^  The   same  explanation   of  par6-  "  It  is  doubtful  whether  these  two 

darsh  is  given  in  the  Pahlavi  transla-  epithets,  dcrang-gubo  and  dirang-yilk, 

tion  of  the  fragment  in  AVestergaard's  are  not  both  intended  to  mean  "  long- 

Yasht  xxii.    41,    as    follows:    ajash  handed"  or  "long-pawed." 

2  A 


370  PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XVIII. 

material  world,  wlieii  every  one  ought  to  be  free  from  sloth 
ihHshdsp),  lulls  it  off  to  sleep,  {40)  This  she  says :  Sleep  a 
long  time  [daregviih)  !  be  men  !  for  there  is  nothing  which  re- 
quires you/  [that  is,  your  work  of  the  law  "  will  not  stop].  (41) 
And  let  not  the  three  perfections  be  over  yourselves,  good 
thought  in  the  mind,  good  words  in  speech,  (and)  good  deeds  in 
action ;  [(a)  some  say  that  the  religion  asserts  that  Bushslsp 
speaks  for  this  reason,  lest  the  three  perfections  should  be  over 
yourselves,  good  thought  in  the  mind,  good  words  in  speech, 
(and)  good  deeds  in  action],  (42)  But  let  the  three  turpitudes 
{vadtHmih)  be  over  yourselves,  bad  thought  in  the  mind,  and 
bad  words  in  speech,  and  bad  deeds  in  action, 

18,  19.  (43)  Then  the  first  third  of  the  night  my  fire,  (who 
am)  Aliharmazd,  begs  the  householder  of  the  house  ^  for  assist- 
ance, thus  :  O  householder  of  the  house,^  rise  up  !  (44)  put  on 
(your)  clothes  !  wash  (your)  hands  thoroughly !  request  that  they 
may  bring  me  firewood  !  illumine  my  molester  {pattydralc)  ^  with 
firewood  purified  (by)  thoroughly-washed  hands,  (45)  For  it 
seemed  to  me  (it  was)  Az,  produced  by  the  demons,  with  forward- 
gliding  coils,  who  tore  out  (my)  life,^ 

20,  21.  (46)  Then  in  the  second  third  of  the  night  my  fire, 
who  am  Auharmazd,  begs  the  husbandman  for  assistance,  always 
(with)  the  same  phrase  (Jiamishalc  kdr-i),  thus  :  0  husbandman, 
rise  up  !  (47)  (as  in  (44)  and  (45),  which  are  nob  repeated  here, 
in  Pahlavi,  by  the  old  MS.  in  London). 

22.  (48)  Then  the  third  third  of  the  night  the  fire  of  AHhar- 
mazd  begs  Srosh  the  righteous  for  assistance,  thus  :  O  Srosh  the 
righteous,  the  handsome !  (49)  then  let  any  firewood  of  the 
material  world  be  brought  ^  unto  me,  purified  (by)  thoroughly- 

1  Literally  "for  (there  is)  not  that  ^  The  old  MS.  in  London  has  here 
which  suits  you."  maman  hard  li-t  uz-t  shedddti-dd(,l-t 

2  The  old  IMS.  in  London  has  kdr  khamih  pish-tajishno-i  alvH  hard  sed- 
va  dtnd,  "  work  and  religious  duty,''  Mnd  medammitnast,  but  in  (50)  it  has 
that  is,  secular  and  religious  duties,  the  following  variations :  U  dz-t  sM- 
This  phrase  is  generally  written  A-'ar  dddn-ddd  mai/d ;  ahi14;  and  medani- 
dtnd,  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  muned. 

the  conjunction  va  or  the  relative  t\s  •'  The  old  MS.  in  London  has  ded- 

to  be  understood  as  eouuecting  the  ritnyeii-ydd,    but    modern   MSS.    of 

two  words.  course  alter  the  termination  to  a  form 

^  The  old  MS.  in  London  has  mdn6  better  understood  by  their  writers, 

mdiipat  in  both  places.  without  much  attention  to  the  mean 

*  So  in  the  old  MSS.,  and  jMfjltrak  ing. 
seems  no  improvement, 

i 


FAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XVIII.  371 

washed  bands.  (50)  For  there  seems  the  water  of  Az,  produced 
by  the  demons,  flowing  forward  on  me,  which  is  a  tearing  away 
of  life.i 

23-25.  (51)  Then  Srosh  the  righteous  upbraided  {frdj-gop- 
Idyid)  the  bird  whose  name  is  Parodarsh,  O  Spitaman  Zaratilsht! 
(52)  (as  in  (35)  to  (42),  which  are  not  repeated  here,  in  Pahlavi, 
by  the  old  MS.  in  London). 

26,  27.  {53)  Then  speaks  a  friend  to  his  friend,  they  who 
shall  lie  on  a  bed,  (54)  thus  :  Do  thou  rise  up  !  for  I  am  driven 
away.  (55)  Either  one  who  shall  rise  up  beforehand,  his  pro- 
gress is  towards  the  best  existence  (paradise),  (a)  so  that  they 
proclaim  that  even  with  a  good  work  of  three  srosho-charandm  ^ 
it  is  possible  to  attain  to  the  best  existence.  (56)  Either  one  who 
(shall  have)  brought  beforehand,  up  to  the  fire  of  Auharmazd, 
firewood  purified  (by)  thoroughly-washed  hands,  (57)  him  the 
tire  blesses,  when  pleased,  uninjured,  (and)  satisfied,  (58)  thus: 
May  the  herd  of  cattle  attain  (dklddd)  unto  thee  !  [that  is,  may 
it  be  thine!]  (59)  besides  the  full  continuance  of  men  [much 
progeny]  !  (60)  May  a  desire  in  the  mind  for  the  will  of  thy 
(heavenly)  lord  («M)  attain  unto  thee  !  [that  is,  may  that  some- 
thing be  in  thy  mind  which  should  be  thy  (heavenly)  lord  and 
high  priest!]  (61)  and  may  the  well-pleased  lord  (ahd)  live  in 
(thy)  life  !  ^  so  that  the  nights  when  thou  shalt  live  thou  mayst 
live  in  joy.  (62)  This  is  the  blessing  which  the  fire  always  offers 
him,  [that  is,  (it  is)  ever  (for)  him],  who  (has)  brought  to  it  fire- 
wood which  is  dry  (and)  inspected  according  to  rule  (roshanih), 
(63)  on  account  of  a  wish  for  rectitude  [on  account  of  a  desire 
for  duty  and  good  works],  (and)  which  is  purified,  [that  is,  pure]. 

28.  (64)  Whoever  gives  that  bird  of  mine,  which  is  Parodarsh, 
O  Spitauian  Zaratusht !  female  and  male  together,  to  a  right- 
eous man  with  perfect  rectitude,  (65)  thinks  of  it  thus  :  It  will 
produce  me  a  dwelling  ;  (a)  when  they  give  him  the  reward  (and) 
recompense,  he  considers  about  it  thus  :  When  a  dwelling  like  a 

1  Translated  here  differently  from  small  weight  of  the  same  name,  by 
(45),  in  accordance  with  the  variations  which  the  value  of  the  most  trivial 
in  the  old  MS.  in  London,  but  the     actions  is  estimated. 

reading  mayd,  "  water,"  for  khamth,  ^  The  old  MS.  in  London  has  va 

"  coiling,"  is  very  improbable.  aUrvakhsht  (or  hil-ravakh-ddi^)  ahv6 

2  This  is  not  the  scourge  or  com-  pavan  kJiaijd  zivdd. 
pJler  of  attention,  but  some  very 


372  PAHLAVI  VEND  ID  AD  XVIII. 

palace  ^  sliall  be  given  to  me  it  may  even  be  large  ;  (66)  (with) 
a  hundred  columns,  a  thousand  corridors,^  a  myriad  large  (and) 
a  myriad  small  (rooms). 

29.  (67)  (Of  him)  who  gives  that  bird  of  mine,  which  is  Paro- 
darsh,  small  morsels  of  meat  ^  along  with  pildv,'^  some  say  cumin 
seed,^  [(a)  some  say  that  he  gives  out  meat  in  that  quantity  to 
a  righteous  man],  (68)  of  him,  the  ever-bringing,^  I  who  am 
Aiiharmazd  would  not  be  an  inquirer  for  his  second  statement, 
[(a)  once  I  shall  ask  ^  everybody],  (69)  for  he  proceeds  onwards 
to  the  best  existence  (paradise). 

30.  (70)  Srosh  the  righteous  asked  of  the  DrAj,  of  Disgrace,^ 
[(a)  some  say  that  (it  is)  of  Wrath ;  some,  of  the  evil  spirit], 
(71)  without  the  accompaniment  of  a  club,  [that  is,  he  put  down 
his  club,  (a)  so  that  he  might  intimate  that  confession  (Iclntstuldh) 
through  fear  is  not  to  be  considered  as  confession],  (72)  thus  : 
■0  Druj,  who  art  inglorious,  [that  is,  thou  hast  no  benefit  what- 
ever from  it  ^],  (and)  inactive  !  [that  is,  thou  doest  nothing  which 
is  proper]!  (73)  art  thou  thus  conceiving  without  cohabitation  of 
the  whole  living  creation  1  [that  is,  when  they  do  not  cohabit 
with  thee  dost  thou  become  pregnant  1]. 

31.  32.  (74)  And  she  who  is  the  demon  Drllj  exclaimed  (in) 
reply  to  him,  thus  :  O  Srosh  the  righteous,  the  handsome  !  (75) 
I  do  not  conceive  without  cohabitation  of  the  whole  living  crea- 


'O 


1  It  is  assumed  hei'e  that  gr^n  hard  dish  in  which  boiled  mutton  or  fowl 
is  a  corruption  of  gilnbad,  "a  dome,"  is  smothered  in  rice,  and  garnished 
which  is  usually  written  gitmbad.  with  hard-boiled  eggs,  onions  boiled 
The  reviding  gilr,  "  a  tomb,"  is  hardly  and  fried,  raisins,  almonds,  and  spices^, 
probable-  *  Assuming  that  zi/raA;  means  ztraA-. 

2  This  is  a  guess  at  the  meaning  of  ®  Perhaps  akaraz-var  should  be  cor- 
fras,  compare  fras}'),  fi'astp,  "  a  beam  rected  into  akaraz. 

or  lintel."  ^  Or  "they  have  inquiry  made  of." 

^  This  is  translated  in  accordance  ^  B,ea.dmgkhi1duk iorFeis.  khuddk.- 

with  the  view  taken  of  the  Avesta  a  similar  Pahlavi  form  occurs  in  Vend, 

text  in  p.    247,   but   a  more  literal  v.  153,  where  it  must  be  read  khiifjak 

translation  of  the  Pahlavi  would  be:  =Pers.  khftdah,  "truth,"  as  it  is  the 

"  (Of  him)  who  gives  (away)  meat  the  equivalent" of  Av.  ashem. 

size  of  the  body  of  that  bird  of  mine,"  ^  Meaning  probably  from  the  divine 

&c.    The  Pahlavi  translator  evidently  glory.     But  the   word  ajash  ought 

considered  the  whole  passage  as  re-  perhaps  to  be  omitted,  as  it  is  an  addi- 

f erring  to  the   meritorious  work   of  tion  to  the  text  in   the  old   MS.  in 

charity.  London,    and   we   should  then  read 

*  The  old  MS.  in  London  has pihn,  "thou  hast  no  goodness  whatever," 
a  way  of  writing  pildv,  an  Eastern 


PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XVIII.  373 

tion.  (76)  There  are  even  (for)  me  too  ^  four  males.  (77)  They 
impregnate  me  just  as  any  other  male,  when  the  semen  is  in  the 
females  it  impregnates,  [that  is,  I  become  pregnant]. 

33.  (78)  Srosh  the  righteous,  &c.  (as  in  (70)  to  (72),  which 
are  not  repeated  here  in  Pahlavi  by  the  old  MSS.)  :  Which  is 
the  first  of  those  thy  males  ? 

34,  35.  (79)  And  she  who  is  the  demon  Druj  exclaimed  (in) 
reply  to  him,  thus  :  O  Srosh  the  righteous,  the  handsome  !  (80) 
even  that  {zaMch)  is  the  first  of  those  my  males,  (81)  when  a 
man  gives  not  even  a  trifle  of  his  hoard  of  wealth,  when  he 
lived  [ztst),  [that  is,  exists],  to  a  righteous  man  with  perfect  rec- 
titude.     (82)  He  impregnates  me,  &c.  (as  in  (77)  above). 

36.  (83)  Srosh  the  righteous,  &c.  (as  in  (70)  to  (72),  which 
are  not  repeated,  in  Pahlavi,  by  the  old  MSS.)  :  What  is  a  coun- 
teraction of  the  effect  of  that  1 

37,  38.  (84)  And  she  who  is  the  demon  Druj  exclaimed  (in) 
reply  to  him,  thus  :  O  Srosh  the  righteous,  the  handsome  !  (85) 
it  is  a  counteraction  of  the  effect  of  that,  (86)  when  the  man 
gives  even  a  trifle  of  his  hoard  of  wealth,  when  not  alive  '^  (Id 
zist),  to  a  righteous  man  with  perfect  rectitude.  (87)  He  will 
so  destroy  my  pregnancy  as  a  four-legged  wolf  when  it  tears  out 
a  son  from  the  womb  by  tearing,  (a)  This  is  evident  from  the 
Avesta  :  it  happens  so  when  the  former  (^vabnan)  is  (one)  who  is 
impure  {Twdn  2^(t,iisht),  and  the  latter  (va  le-denman)  is  in  want 
through  dissemination  of  good  ;  when  he  gives  up  such  wealth 
to  such  a  man  he  will  destroy  the  Druj  ;  even  when  he  gives  up 
the  wealth  to  that  man  the  Druj  is  destroyed,  although  that  man 
also  should  give  up  the  same  wealth  lest  (al  hat)  it  should  like- 
wise be  contaminated ;  some  say  that  she  is  destroyed  after- 
wards.3 

39.  (88)  Srosh  the  righteous,  &c.  (as  in  (70)  to  (72),  which 
are  not  repeated,  in  Pahlavi,  by  the  old  MSS.)  :  Which  is  the 
second  of  those  thy  males  1 

1  The    most    probable    reading    is        ^  This  commentary  would  be  hardly 

Mmand-lch  It-ch  4  gilshan.  intelligible   without   the    corrections 

-  Meaning  probably    that    he    ar-  supplied  by  the  old  MS.  in  London. 

ranges  by  will  for  a  charitable  distri-  The  form   le-denman  is   occasionally 

bution  of  his  property  after   death,  used  for  c/cHmaJi,  of  which  it  was  pro- 

which  appears  to  be  a  misunderstand-  bably  an  almost  obsolete  form  at  the 

in<'  of  the  language  of  the  Avesta.  time  when  the  commentator  wrote. 


374  PAH  LA  VI  VENDIDAD  XVIII. 

40,  41.  (89)  (She)  who  is  the  demon  Drilj  exclaimed  (in) 
reply  to  him,  thus  :  O  Srosh  the  righteous,  the  handsome  !  (90) 
even  that  is  the  second  of  those  my  males,  (91)  when  a  man, 
through  sinfulness,  makes  water  an  instej/s  length  beyond  the 
front  of  the  instep.  (92)  He  impregnates  me,  &c.  (as  in  (77), 
which  is  not  repeated  here,  in  Pahlavi,  by  the  old  MSS.). 

42-44.  (93-95)  (As  in  (83-S5),  which  are  not  repeated,  in 
Pahlavi,  by  the  old  MSS.),  (96)  when  the  man,  after  standing 
up  three  steps  (off),  [some  say  beyond  ^  the  three  steps],  (97) 
having  repeated  three  (praises  of)  righteousness,^  and  two  Hu- 
matanams  (Yas.  xxxv.  2),  and  three  Hukhshathrotemais  (Yas. 
XXXV.  5),  recites  aloud  four  Ahunavars  (Yas.  xxvii.  13,  and) 
prays  aloud  the  Yenhe-hatam  (Yas.  vii.  27),  (98)  he  will  so  de- 
stroy, &c.  (as  in  (87)  above),  (a)  This  is  evident  from  the 
Avesta :  it  happens  so  when  a  man,  through  sinfulness,  makes 
water  an  instep's  length  beyond  the  front  of  the  instep  ;  for  him 
(it)  is  the  beginning  of  a  tanapuhar  (sin),  and  he  atones  for  it 
by  the  Avesta.^  When  he  makes  water  standing  up  it  is  the 
beginning  of  a  tanapuhar  (sin)  for  him,  and  he  does  not  atone 
for  it  by  the  Avesta.  It  is  in  frontj^*  it  is  not  backwards.  It  is 
as  to  that  which  proceeds  from  the  body  ^  (that)  chvad  yad  he 
kasishtahe  eresvd  fratemem  dbaesMsh  ("as  much  as  the  extremity 
of  his  smallest  finger  is  an  offence  ") ;  that  amount  of  distance, 
(when)  bent  together,  is  suitable  for  every  foul  action.^  Gogo- 
shasp  ^  said  that  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  clothes  it  is  allow- 
able to  make  water  far  off.  (6)  When  (one)  accomplishes  the 
action  lawfully  (and)  well,  when  he  squats  down,  one  Yatha-ahu. 
vairyo  is  to  be  uttered  by  him.     Soshans  ^  said  that,  in  case  of 

1  It  appears  in  the  sequel  that  6ara  MS.  in  London,  but  is  omitted  by 
mill  must  mean  "  beyond,"  that  is,  Spiegel  and  most  later  MSS. 
"more  than"  the  three  steps  off;  ®  Reading  zak-t  dtlrak  dmdr  ham- 
hut  according  to  its  usual  meaning  Jchill  visp  khUrak  glial  kdnishn  vurdz. 
it  would  be  "  without"  taking  three  There  are  many  difficulties  in  the 
steps  backwards.  sentence,  and  the  traditional  expla- 

-  That  is,  three  Ashem-vohu  for-  nation    is  'different,    but    decidedly 

mulas.     See  p.  141,  note  2.  erroneous. 

'^  By  reciting  the  Avesta  passages  ^  The  name  of  one  of  the  old  corn- 
above  prescribed.  mentators  who  is  often  quoted  in  the 

■*  Probably  "in  front  of  the  toes"  Pahlavi  version  of  the  Veudidad  and 

is  meant.    The  whole  of  this  commen-  other  works. 

tary  is  difficult  to  divide   correctly  ^  The   name  of  another  old  com- 

into  separate  sentences.  mentator. 

^  The  word  tanil  is  given  by  the  old 


PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XVIII.  375 

haste  {aUsJddp),  when  he  utters  (it)  on  a  road  it  is  also  allowable, 
(c)  And  when  he  stands  up  the  Avesta  is  all  to  be  uttered  by  him 
within  the  three  steps ;  some  say  beyond  the  three  steps,  and  on 
his  walking  ^  apart,  the  Avesta  is  ever  to  be  uttered,  [this  walk- 
ing is  that  when  he  goes  on  from  the  three  steps],  or  the  Avesta 
is  taken  inwardly  by  him.^  (d)  When  he  accomplishes  the 
action  lawfully  (and)  well,  (but)  through  sinfulness  does  not 
utter  the  Avesta,  it  is  not  clear  to  me  (whether  it  is)  one  (or) 
two^  srOsho-charandms  of  a  tandp'Ahar  (sin).  Gogoshasp  said 
that  when  he  accomplishes  the  action  lawfully  (and)  well,  he  also 
(utters)  three  Ashem-vohus.*  • 

45.  (99)  Srosh  the  righteous,  &c.  (as  in  (70)  to  (72),  which 
are  not  repeated,  in  Pahlavi,  by  the  old  MSS.) :  Which  is  the 
third  of  those  thy  males  % 

46,  47.  (100)  And  she,  &c.  (as  in  (89)  above)  !  even  that  is 
the  third  of  those  my  males,  (10 1)  when  a  man  asleep  has  an 
emission  of  semen,  [that  is,  his  semen  comes  out].  (102)  He 
impregnates  me,  &c.  (as  in  (77),  which  is  not  repeated,  in  Pah- 
lavi, by  the  old  MSS.). 

48-50.  (103-105)  (As  in  (83-85),  which  are  not  repeated,  in 
Pahlavi,  by  the  old  MSS.),  (106)  when  the  man,  after  arising 
from  sleep,  extols  righteousness,  [that  is,  recites  three  Ashem- 
vohus],  (107)  two  Humatanams,  (and)  three  Hukhshathrotemais, 
and  prays  aloud  four  Yatha-ahvi-vairyos  (and)  Yenhe-hatam,^  he 
will  so  destroy,  &c.  (as  in  (87)  above). 

51.  (108)  Then  this  (man)  speaks  to  Spendarmad  thus:  0 
Spendarmad !  (109)  I  deliver  up  to  thee  this  man,  and  do  thou 
deliver  this  man  back  to  me,  (no)  on  the  production,  by  skill, 


^  Traditionally,  chamiskn  is  "mak-  as  described  in  p.  367,  note  i,  occiirs 

ing  water  "  (compare   Pers.   chamin,  after  the  words  ashem  voint  (the  last 

"urine"),  but  here  it  is  otherwise  having  been  the    catchword   at  the 

explained  by  the  commentary  itself.  end  of  a  folio  in  the  original  MS. ) ; 

2  That  is,  it  is  muttered  in  a  low  the  remaining    words,   vokil  vahish- 

tone  of  voice.  tern  3,  are  found  attached  to  the  first 

^  So  in  the  old  MS.    in   London,  word  {usehishta)  of  the  Avesta  of  (37) 

This  mode  of  translation  is  in  accord-  in  MSS.,  and  have  been  omitted  by 

ance  with  the  idea  of  "  the  beginning  Spiegel.    The  last  eight  Pahlavi  words 

of  a  tanapuhar"  mentioned  in  (a),  as  added  to  (98)  really  belong  to  (28),  as 

a  tandpiViar  is  equivalent  to  a  great  noticed  in  p.  368,  note  6. 

number  of  srosho-charandms.  ^  The   same  prayers  as  those   en- 

*  The  fourth  dislocation  of  the  text,  joined  in  (97). 


376  PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XVIIL 

of  the  reorganisation  in  the  future  existence,  (m)  knowing  the 
Gathas  and  knowing  i       *       *       * 

55.  (115)*  *  taking  (the  fourth  step),  quickly  afterwards, 
we  who  are  demons,  at  once  we  injure  him  by  disease  of  the 
tongue.  (ii6)'-^  Khshayamna  pasclmeta  mereghente  gaethdo 
astvaitish  ashahe  yatha  zanda  ydtimienta  merenchante  gaethdo 
ashahe  ("  afterwards  the  possessed  ones  destroy  the  settlements 
of  righteousness,  supplied  with  creatures,  as  the  spells  of  sor- 
cerers destroy  the  settlements  of  righteousness  ").  (a)  So  that  up 
to  the  fourth  step  it  is  not  more  (than)  ^  three  srosho-charandms , 
and  at  his  fourth  step  it  amounts  to  the  beginning  of  a  tandjM- 
har,  [some  say  that  (he  is)  within  what  is  permitted  him  in  going 
the  three  (steps)].  When  he  walks  on  very  many  (steps)  it  is 
also  not  more  than  a  tanapilhar,  all  that  *  remains  over  from  the 
beginning. 

56-59.  (117,  118)  (As  in  (83-85),  which  are  not  repeated,  in 
Pahlavi,  by  the  old  MSS.),  (119)  (not  given,  in  Pahlavi,  by  the 
old  MSS.).  (120,  121)  (As  in  (115,  116),  which  are  not  repeated, 
in  Pahlavi,  by  the  old  MSS.). 

60,  61.  (122)  (As  in  (18-21),  which  are  not  repeated,  in  Pah- 
lavi, by  the  old  MSS.  to)  righteous  one  !  (123)  Who  persecutes 
thee,  thee  who  art  Aliharmazd,  with  the  greatest  persecution, 
and  annoys  with  the  greatest  annoyance  ?  [that  is,  (does)  all  this 
another  time].^ 

62.   (124)  And  Auharmazd  said  to  him  thus  :  The  courtezan, 

^  The  fifth  dislocation  of  the  text,  has    been   accepted   as    part  of    the 

as  described  in  p.  367,  note  i,  occurs  Avesta  text  both  here  and  in  (121), 

after  tlie  words  va  dkds,  where  there  see  p.  249.     It  is  not  transLited  into 

is  a  break  in  the  text  owing  to  the  Pahlavi,  and  the  commentary  wliich 

loss  of  a  folio  in   the  original  MS.  follows  it  belongs  to  the  preceding 

This  is  all  the  more  to  be  regretted  sentence  in  the  Avesta  text. 

as  it  is  evident,  from  the  small  quan-  ^  It  is  doubtful  whether  we  should 

tity  of   missing  text,    that  tlie  lost  not  read  "  not  more  than  (at)  a  srosAd- 

folio  must  have  contained  a  long  com-  charandm." 

mentary.      The    remaining   eighteen  *  Assuming  that  we  may  read  mUn 

Pahlavi  words  attached  to  (ill)  really  instead  of  amat,  seep.  346,  note  2. 

belong  to  (18),  as  noticed  in  p.  367,  This  phrase  seems  to  mean  tliat  he 

note  I  ;  the  word  min  being  repeated  only  completes  the  tandpilhar,  already 

because  it  was  the  catchword  at  the  begun,  by  walking  beyond  the  fourth 

end  of  a  folio.  step  ;  but  the  jjhrase  is  obscure. 

"  There  seems  little  doubt  of  this  ^  Or  perha^js  "does  all  this  at  one 

being  merely  an  Avesta  quotation  be-  time." 
longing   to    the   commentary,   which 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XVIII.  Z77 

0  righteous  Zaratuslit !  who  mingles  together  the  seed  of  the 
pious  and  impious,  the  idolaters  and  non-idolaters,  the  tanapit- 
Aar-sinners  and  also  the  noi\-tandpuhar-?,xnxiQis,  (a)  and  it  is  not 
her  business  ;  for  when  cohabitation  is  three  times  conceded  by 
her  (she  is)  worthy  of  death  (marg-arjdn).  Gogoshasp  said  that 
this  is  a  courtezan  who  is  within  bounds  (vimand)?- 

63.  (125)  Of  one-third  the  waters  flowing  from  the  mountains 
the  power  is  exhausted  by  her  gazing  on  (them),  0  Zaratiisht ! 
(126)  Of  one- third  the  trees  which  are  growing,  graceful,  and 
golden-hued,  the  growth  is  exhausted  by  her  gazing  on  (them), 
O  Zaratiisht ! 

64.  (127)  Of  one-third  of  Spendarmad  (the  earth)  the  freedom 
from  scarcity  {atangiJi)  is  carried  off  by  her  walking  on  (it),  O 
Zaratiisht!  (128)  Of  one-third  the  excellent  thoughts,  the  ex- 
cellent words,  the  excellent  deeds  of  a  righteous  man  she 
abstracts  the  strength  and  dignity  (shuktthth),  the  success, 
fame  {khantdili),  and  even  righteousness,  through  agitation 
{levatman  nafdmishn),  O  Zaratiisht ! 

65.  (129)  Concerning  such  (females)  also  I  say  unto  thee,  O 
Spitaman  Zaratiisht !  that  they  are  more  destructive  than  a  dart- 
ing serpent  {az),  [some  say  a  darting  snake  (mdr)],  (130)  than  a 
raving  (shit)^  wolf,  (131)  than  a  jungle-bred  ^  wolf  when  it  rushes 
into  enclosures  upon  the  sheep,  (132)  than  a  frog  spawning 
thousands  when  it  plunges  into  the  water,'*  [that  is,  it  drops  at 
once  into  the  water ;  some  say  from  the  male  to  the  female]. 

66-68.  (133)  (As  in  18-21)  which  are  not  repeated,  in  Pah- 
lavi,  by  the  old  MSS.  to)  righteous  one!  (134)  whoever  obser- 
vantly, [that  is,  he  sees  that  (she)  is  menstruous],  knowingly, 
[that  is,  he  knows  that  (it)  is  a  sin],  (and)  risking  penalty,  [that 
is,  he  would  say  thus  :  I  will  incur  the  penalty],  cohabits  with  a 
woman  suffering  from  any  kind  of  menstruation,^  with  that  ob- 
servation and  knowledge  and  risk  of  penalty,  (135)  what  is  (his) 

1  Meaning  perhaps  "in  bondage,"  ^  This    epithet   is   very  doubtful; 

but  the   sense    is  rather  uncertain,  and  "jungle  "is  to  be  understood  in 

The    word    dhid,   which    follows    in  its  wide  Indian  meaning  of  "wilder- 

the   old  MSS.,  is  probably  only  the  ness,"   not  in   its  limited  European 

Pahlavi  a'd,   "is,"  or  held,    "would  sense  of  "forest." 

be,"  in  a  Pazand  form,  and  ought  to  *  Thereby  polluting  it. 

end  this  sentence.  ^  This    is    merely   a  free  transla- 

^  Or    perhaps    yahed,     "  who    de-  tion. 
s  troys," 


373  PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XVIIl. 

penalty  in  cash  {khvAstak)  %  and  what  is  it  (at)  the  bridge  ^  with 
the  goad  (and)  scourge  [sroslid-charandm)  ]  How  does  he  remove 
the  ^lenalty  for  the  perpetration  of  that  action  %  [that  is,  how 
should  he  atone  ?]. 

69,  70.  (136)  And  Aubarmazd  said  to  him  thus  :  Whoever 
observantly,  &c.  (as  in  (134)  above),  (137)  he  should  2  search 
out  a  thousand  young  (cattle),  (138)  and  of  all  those  cattle,  of 
those  which  are  suitably  decorated,^  and  (consecrated)  with  holy- 
water,  yad  anfare  veredhka  asma  reja,  ("what  is  in  the  kidneys, 
the  kidney  fat"),^  he  should  carry  forth  for  the  fire  with  perfect 
rectitude;  (139)  (his)  arm  should  carry  (it)  forth  for  the  good 
water. 

71.  (140)  A  thousand  back-loads  of  hard  firewood,  dry  and 
inspected,^  he  should  carry  forth  for  the  fire  with  perfect  recti- 
tude. (141)  A  thousand  back-loads  of  soft  firewood  emitting 
fragrance,  or  benzoin,  or  aloe-wood,  or  pomegranate,*^  or  any 
other  of  the  most  sweet-scented  of  trees,  he  should  carry  forth 
for  the  fire  with  perfect  rectitude. 

72.  (142)  He  should  (have)  a  thousand  Barsoms  arranged  in 
(their)  arrangement.  (143)  A  thousand  consecrated  waters, 
•with  Horn  (and)  with  flesh,  which  are  purified,  [that  is,  pure], 
watched,  [that  is,  they  are  kept  by  a  chief  (priest)],'^  purified  by 
a  holy  man,s  [that  is,  prepared  by  a  holy  man],  and  watched 
by  a  holy  man,  [that  is,  a  holy  man  kept  (it)  as  chief  (priest)], 
in  connection^  with  which  are  those  plants  which  are   called 

1  At  the  Chinva^  bridge  where  the  fire  along  with  pieces  of  sandal-wood 

soul  has  to  account  for  its  actions  in  and  pomegranate  twigs, 

this  life.  ®  To  ascertain  that  it  is  free  from 

'^  Grammarians,  should  notice  that  impurity, 

the    conditional    in  these    sentences  "^  The  hadhdnaepata,  being  classed 

(137-149)  is  formed  by  prefixing  (in-  here   among  odoriferous  substances, 

stead  of  affixing)  the  auxiliaries  de,  e,  can  hardly  have  been  the  pomegranate 

or  harm,  to  the  indicative  present.  shrub,  as  assumed  by  tradition. 

3  B,eii(Vmg  vurdzvantz  =  Vers,  burdz  ''The  zaota,  or  chief  officiating 
laruz ;  this  is,  however,  doubtful,  as  priest  at  all  important  ceremonies, 
the  oldest  reading  is  (/vd  rdz  nrdz,  all  must  be  intended  by  sarddr  here. 

in  Pazand,  and  may  perhaps  be  some  ^  That  is,  by  a  priest,  which  must 

part  of  an  animal.  be  tlie  meaning  of  ddhmdn  here. 

4  The  words  asma  rcja  look  more  "  Assuming  that  ham-gihnth  stands 
like  "stone  and  gravel,"  but  the  for  ham-gihnejih.  The  oldest  reading 
phrase  is  traditionally  understood  as  is  ham-gHnamth,  which  might  be  a 
referring  to  fat  smeared  on  splinters  miswriting  of  ham-gHnakth,  "  the 
of  wood  which  are  thrown  into  the  same  manner"  (an  inverted  A  being  ni 

in  Pahlavi). 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XIX.  379 

pomegranate,  he  should  carry  (all  these)  forth  for  the  good  water 
with  perfect  rectitude, 

73.  (144)  A  thousand  serpents  who  are  created  erect  {161A- 
daMshno)  ^  he  should  destroy,  two  thousand  of  those  other  female 
snakes  (mdr-bdnilk).  (145)  A  thousand  land-frogs  he  should 
destroy,  and  two  thousand  of  those  of  the  water.  (146)  A  thou- 
sand ants  carrying  off  corn  {ddn-Jcash)  he  should  destroy,  two 
thousand  of  those  other  venomous  ones  {dahtrak).^ 

74.  (147)  He  should  throw  thirty  over-bridges  across  navigable 
water  (and)  streams  containing  water,  with  arches  {dahan).^ 
(148)  He  is  to  be  beaten  with  a  thousand  blows  of  a  horse- 
goad,  (or)  two  thousand  srosku-charandms. 

75.  (149)  That  is  his  penalty  at  the  bridge;^  that  is  his 
penalty  in  cash  (khvdstak),  that  is  his  (penalty  at)  the  bridge, 
with  the  goad  (and)  scourge  (sr6sh6-cha7-andm) ;  and  so  he  should 
remove  the  penalty  for  the  perpetration  of  that  action,  [that  is,  he 
should  atone]. 

76.  (150)  If  he  removes  (it)  he  gathers ^  for  the  better  world 
of  the  righteous,  [that  is,  his  gathering  is  made  for  that  place]. 
(151)  If  he  does  not  remove  (it)  he  gathers^  for  the  world  of 
the  wicked,  [that  is,  his  gathering  is  made  for  that  place],  (152) 
of  those  deserving  gloom,  [that  is,  their  desert  is  for  that  place], 
of  gloomy  origin,  [that  is,  the  Druj  who  makes  a  man  wicked 
originates  from  that  place],  (and)  gloomy,  [that  is,  a  dark  place]. 

8. — Pahlavi  Vendidad  XIX. 
I.  (i)  From  the  northern  direction  of  the  directions,  from  the 
northern  direction  of  the  place,  from  the  direction  of  the  demons, 
the  evil  spirit  rushed  forth,  the  deadly  demon  of  the  demons ; 
(2)  and  thus  exclaimed  he,  the  evil  spirit,  the  deadly  :  (3)  Rush 
on,  O  Druj  !  and  destroy  him,  the  righteous  Zaratllsht.  (4)  On 
to  him  they  rushed,  the  Drtij,  the  demon  But,  and  secret-moving 
Destruction,  the  deceiver. 

1  That  is,  who  stand  partly  erect  clause  appears  to  be  superfluous,  but 
■when  prepared  to  strike  their  prey  or     occurs  in  the  oldest  MSS. 

enemy,  like  the  cobra  and  many  other  ^  That  is,  he  accumulates  a  store  of 

snakes.  good  works,  or  sin,  as  the  case  may 

2  Assuming  that  dahirak  (the  oldest  be.  The  meaning  can  hardly  be  "  he 
reading)  stands  tor  zdhirak,  "poison-  is  gathered  to,"  although  the  phrase 
ous."  might  perhaps  be  so  transhited  witli- 

2  This  is  merely  a  guess.  out  doing  much  violence  to  grammar. 

*  See  p.  378,   note  i.     This  first 


3So  PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XIX. 

2.  (5)  Zaratilsht  chanted  aloud  the  Ahuna-vairya  (formula), 
[those  two  YathS,-ahvi-vairy6s  which  stand  before  hushiti  (Yas. 
Ixviii.  14)],  and  he  consecrated  the  good  water  which  is  of  good 
creation,!  and  the  Mazdayasnian  religion  was  professed  by  him, 
[that  is,  he  uttered  the  fravardne,  (Yas.  i.  23)].  (6)  The  Drllj 
was  confounded  by  that ;  away  they  rushed,  the  demon  BUt  and 
secret-moving  Destruction,  the  deceiver. 

3.  (7)  The  Drrlj  exclaimed  (in)  reply  to  him  thus  :  Thou  art 
a  misleader,  0  evil  spirit !  this  thou  art,  [that  is,  anything  un- 
looked  for,  which  it  is  not  possible  for  thee  to  do  thyself,  thou 
orderest  us  (to  do)].  (8)  The  ruin  of  him,  who  is  Spitaman 
Zaratusht,  is  not  contemplated  by  us,  (9)  owing  to  the  full  glory 
[owing  to  the  great  diligence]  of  the  righteous  Zaratusht ;  (a)  so 
that  they  announce  that  whoever  remains  in  activity,  on  him  less 
affliction  comes.  (10)  Zaratusht  perceived  in  (his)  mind  thus  : 
The  wicked  demons,  astute  in  evil,  consult  together  about  my 
ruin, 

4.  (11)  Up  rose  Zaratusht,  forth  went  ZaratAsht,  (12)  from 
the  extinction  of  evil  thought  [AMmand)  [when  the  evil  thought 
in  his  body  is  extinguished]  by  severely  distressing  questions, 
[by  those  questions,  so  severe,  which  are  proposed  to  it]  ;  (a) 
some  say  that  evil  thought  is  extinguished  by  him  when  it  asks 
what  is  severely  distressing. ^  (13)  And  he  held  a  stone  (sag)  in 
his  hand,  which  was  the  size  of  a  hut,  the  righteous  Zaratusht ! 
[the  rocky  stone,^  some  say,  is  the  spirit  of  the  Yathaahil-vairyo], 
(14)  who  thus  besought  the  creator  AHharmazd  :  (15)  Where  is 
that  kept  on  this  wide,  round,  far-traversed  (earth,  which)  is  to 
be  fixed  on  the  roof"*  in  the  dwelling  of  Porilshasp  ?  (a)  Some 
say  it  is  kept  on  this  earth,  so  wide,  round,  (and)  far-traversed, 
and  the  place  which  is  kept  for  it  is  fixed  on  the  roof  in  the 
dwelling  of  Porfishasp. 

1  The    "good  Daiti "  would    ijro-  word  for   "stone"  in  the    Pahlavi 

bably  be  identified,  by  the  Pahlavi  Vendidad,  there  seems  little  doubt 

translator,   with    the    river  of    that  that  a  stone  is  meant,  though  tradi- 

name,  see  p.  357,  note  i.  tion  prefers  to  imderstand  the  phrase 

^  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  Pah-  as  "the  thrice  three,"  applicable  to 

lavi  translator    means   to    personify  the  Mawi^ij-a/i,  or  "  nine-jointed "  staff 

Akomano  as  a  demon  existing  inde-  of  Zaratusht,  see  p.  333,  note  4. 
pendent  of  the  mind  or  not.  •*  The    words    darjlk    zbur,    being 

^  Or  "the  stone  of  three  kinds,"  if  merely  a  transcription  of  the  Avesta, 

we  read  sag-i  'S-gHno  instead  of  sag-i  are  translated  iu  accordance  with  the 

sagind.   As  sag  (not  sang)  is  the  usual  meaning  adopted  in  p.  333,  note  4. 


PAHLAVI  VEND  ID  AD  XIX.  381 

5.  (16)  Zaratusht  proclaimed  aloud,  [that  is,  he  openly  {jpatdtd) 
conveyed],  to  the  evil  spirit,  thus  :  0  evil  spirit,  astute  in  evil ! 
(17)  I  destroy  the  creatures  produced  by  the  demons,  I  destroy 
the  corruption  (nasush)  produced  by  the  demons,  (18)  I  destroy 
the  desire  for  witches,  [the  worship  of  idols],  until  the  triumphant 
Sitd-homand  ("  beneficial  one  ")  is  brought  forth  by  the  water  of 
Kashosai,  [(a)  both  I  destroy  and  my  disciples  destroy  thee  ;  and 
after  he  arrives  he  will  annihilate  thee  by  his  own  deeds],  (19) 
from  the  eastern  direction  of  the  directions,  (a)  (From)  the  place 
where  the  sun  comes  up  on  the  longest  day  to  the  place  where  it 
comes  up  on  the  shortest  day  is  the  east ;  from  the  place  where 
it  comes  up  on  the  shortest  day  to  the  place  where  it  goes  down 
on  the  shortest  day  is  the  south ;  from  the  place  where  it  goes 
down  on  the  shortest  day  to  the  place  where  it  goes  down  on  the 
longest  day  is  the  west ;  and  the  remainder  is  the  north.  Some 
say  that  the  north  is  an  abyss.  1 

6.  (20)  (In)  reply  to  him  exclaimed  the  evil  spirit,  astute  in 
evil,  (21)  thus  :  Destroy  not  these  my  creatures,  O  righteous 
Zaratusht !  (22)  Thou  art  the  son  of  Poriishasp,  and  thou  art 
from  the  conception  of  thy  mother's  womb,  I  know  thee,  [(a)  some 
say  that  I  had  the  worship  of  thy  ancestors,  and  do  thou  also 
worship  me].  (23)  Curse  the  good  religion  of  the  Mazdayas- 
nians,  (and)  obtain  happiness  as  Voghno,  the  king,  obtained  it. 

7.  (24)  (In)  reply  to  him  spoke  he  who  is  Spitaman  Zara- 
tiisht,  (25)  thus:  I  curse  not  that  which  is  Auharmazd's  own, 
the  good  religion  of  the  Mazdayasnians ;  (26)  not  for  love  of 
body  nor  life,  not  for  much  result  and  not  for  good  result,  not 
on  account  of  the  parting  of  body  and  soul,  [that  is,  although 
they  cut  off  my  head  yet  I  curse  not]. 

8.  (27)  (In)  reply  to  him  exclaimed  the  evil  spirit,  astute  in 
evil:  (28)  With  what  words  dost  thou  smite  me?  [that  is, 
wouldst  thou  make  me  confounded  1]  and  with  what  words  wilt 
thou  molest  me  1  [that  is,  wouldst  thou  force  me  apart  from  the 
creatures  ?]  with  (what)  well-formed  implement,  (from)  these 
creatures  of  me  who  am  the  evil  spirit  % 

9.  (29)  (In)  reply  to  him  spoke  he  who  is  Spitaman  Zara- 

1  Reading   tih-i,    "  a    bottom,"  as  the  mountain  Arezura  at  the  gate  of 

hell  is  supposed  to  be  iu  the  north,  hell,  see  p.  316,  note  4,  and  p.  337, 

But  the  word  may  be  also  rend  td-i,  note  9. 
"a  summit,''  which  might  refer  to 


3S2  PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XIX. 

tftsbt,  (30)  tlius  :  With  the  Homa-mortar  and  dish  aud  Honia,  even 
the  words  Ailharmazd  pronounced,  the  Avesta,  (31)  are  my  best 
implements.  (32)  With  those  words  I  smite  thee,  [that  is,  I 
would  make  thee  confounded],  with  those  words  I  molest  thee, 
[that  is,  I  would  force  thee  apart  from  the  creatures],  with  those 
well-formed  implements,  O  evil  spirit,  astute  in  evil !  (33)  which 
were  given  to  me  by  him,  the  beneficent  spirit,  and  were  given 
to  him  in  boundless  time,  [some  say  thus  :  which  were  given  to 
me  by  him,  the  beneficent  spirit,  and  were  given  to  me  by  him 
in  boundless  time],  (34)  and  were  given  over  to  me  by  them,  the 
Ameshaspends,  the  good  rulers  and  good  arrangers,  [that  is,  they 
have  been  assisting  in  the  giving  by  them].^ 

10.  (35)  Zaratusht  chanted  aloud  the  Ahuna-vairya,  [that  is, 
the  Yatha-ahil-vairyo] ;  (36)  the  righteous  Zaratusht  spoke  out 
thus :  That  which  I  ask  of  thee  Thou  tellest  to  me  right,  O 
Auharmazd  !  -  I  am  firmly  of  opinion,  [some  say  thus  :  Right  is 
what  Thou  tellest  to  me]. 

n-  (37)^  Through  what  is  to  be  fixed  on  the  roof*  where 
Auharmazd  (and)  the  good  one  [Vohuman]  of  good  estimation 
are  stationed  {dhist),  [this  "  estimation  "  (stands)  for  Vohuman 
again],  (38)  (with)  Ashavahisht,  Shatver,  (and)  Spendarmad. 

12.  (39)  How  should  I  act  with  them  (to  defend)  from  that 
Driij  who  is  from  the  evil  spirit,  astute  in  evil  ?  [that  is,  how 
should  I  make  her  quite  confounded  ^.  (40)  How  when  it  has 
become  polluted  directly,  how  when  it  has  become  polluted  in- 
directly, how  shall  I  dispossess  the  corruption  (nasush)  from  the 
residence  (vis)  of  Mazdayasnians  ?  (41)  How  do  I  purify  a 
righteous  man  ]  How  do  I  bring  purification  on  a  righteous 
woman  1 

13.  (42)  And  Aiiharmazd  said  to  him  thus  :  Thou  mayst  call, 
0  Zaratusht !    upon   the  good  religion  of  the   Mazdayasnians, 

1  These   words,    "  by  them,"  lead  terest  to  grammarians,  as  they  show- 
one  to  suspect  that  the  Pahlavi  trans-  that  two  pronominal  suffixes  can  be 
lator    considered   "boundless  time"  added  to  one  particle, 
as  much  an  individual  as  "the  bene-  ^  Yas.  xliv.,  see  pp.  158-161. 
ficent  spirit,"  and  that  we  ought  to  ^  The  Pablavi  translator  omits  the 
read  "by  boundless  time  "(the  Pah-  usual     opening     invocation    of    the 
lavi    pavan    being    both    "by"   and  Creator,  see   the   translation  of  the 
"in").     The  rare  iorms  rminamash,  Avesta  text,  p.  333. 
afamask,   and  afamshdn   (for  afam-  *  See  p.  380,  note  4. 
shdn),  in  these  sentences,  are  of  in- 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XIX.  3S3 

[that  is,  celebrate  a  Vendidad].  (43)  Thou  mayst  call,  O  Zara- 
tusht !  upon  the  Ameshaspends  in  invisible  concealment  on  the 
seven  regions  of  the  earth,  [that  is,  although  thou  seest  them 
not  they  are  to  be  propitiated],  (44)  Thou  mayst  call,  0  Zara- 
tusht  !  upon  the  self-sustained  universe,  [its  self-sustainment  is 
this,  that  through  the  energy  which  is  within  it  nothing  from 
without  is  wanted  within  it],  and  boundless  time,  (and)  the 
upper-working  air  {ydi).  (45)  Thou  mayst  call,  O  Zaratusht ! 
upon  the  swift  wind  created  by  Auharmazd,  and  also  call  Spen- 
darmad,  the  graceful  daughter  of  Ailharmazd. 

14.  (46)  Thou  mayst  call,  O  Zarattlsht  !  upon  the  spirit 
{fravashi)  of  me  who  am  Auharmazd,  (47)  which  is  (of  the 
creations)  of  Auharmazd  the  greatest  in  i)ody,  the  best  in  worth, 
the  most  excellent  in  appearance,  the  most  formidable  [strongest], 
the  most  sagacious  [wisest],  the  best-shaped,  [that  is,  the  limbs 
most  adapted  one  for  the  other],  the  highest  in  righteousness, 
(48)  the  soul  of  which  is  the  beneficent  text.  (49)  Thou 
shouldst  thyself,  0  Zaratusht  !  call  these  creatures  of  Auhar- 
mazd, [that  is,  do  not  surrender  (it)  from  (thy)  hand]. 

15.  (50)  Zaratusht  considered  ^  ray  words,  [that  is,  he  heark- 
ened to  them] ;  (a)  some  say  that  Zarattisht  considered  my 
words,  [that  is,  he  believed  about  them  that  it  would  be  neces- 
sary to  keep  (and)  hear  (them)];  (51)  (and  said)  :  I  call  upon 
the  righteous  Ailharmazd,  the  creator  of  creatures.  (52)  I  call 
upon  Mitro  of  the  wide  cattle-pastures,  the  well-armed,  glorious 
with  missiles, 2  the  most  victorious  of  missiles,  [that  is,  these  are 
good  (and)  more  (than)  those  of  the  angel  V^hram].  (53)  I  call 
upon  Srosh  the  righteous,  the  handsome,  when  he  holds  a  sword 
in  (his)  hand  over  the  head  of  the  demons,  at  that  time  I  call 
him  most. 

16.  (54)  I  call  upon  the  beneficent  text  which  is  very  glori- 
ous. (55)  I  call  upon  the  self -sustained  universe,  boundless 
time,  and  the  upper-working  air.  (56)  I  call  upon  the  swift 
wind  created  by  Ailharmazd ;  Spendarmad,  the  graceful  daughter 
of  Auharmazd,  I  also  call.     (57)  I  call  upon  the  good  religion 

^  This  sentence  is  corrected  by  com-     siles,"  but  the  word  is  ambiguous, 
paring  it  with  (114)  further  on.  and  might  be  read  zahiskno,  "emana- 

2  Reading    zdydno,    "  arms,    mis-    tion,  radiation." 


384  PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XIX. 

of  tbe  Mazdayasnians ;  the  law  against  tlie  demons,^  the  law  of 
Zaratusht,  I  also  call. 

17.  (58)  Zaratilsht  inquired  of  Ailharmazd  thus  :  Thou  art  a 
generous  creator,^  0  Ailbarmazd  !  [that  is,  the  benefit  from  him 
is  much]  ;  (59)  with  what  words  do  I  reverence,  with  what  words 
do  I  worship  Thee  %  (and  do)  my  disciples  and  these  creatures  of 
Auharmazd? 

18.  (60)  And  Ailharmazd  said  to  him  thus  :  When  thou 
comest  up  to  a  growing  tree,  O  Spitam9,n  Zaratusht !  {61)  which 
is  fine,  well-grown,  (and)  strong,  recite  these  words  :  (62)  Salu- 
tation to  the  good  tree  created  by  Auharmazd  (and)  righteous  !  ^ 
(a)  Righteousness  is  the  best  prosperity,  [a  store  of  these  is 
good,  duty  and  good  w§rks]  ;  (6)  virtuous  is  righteousness,  vir- 
tuous is  he  who  is  a  right-doer  through  perfect  righteousness, 
[that  is,  he  performs  duty  and  good  works].^ 

ig.  {d'^  Thou  mayst  carry  off  Barsom  for  that  ceremony  a 
span  long,  a  barley-corn  thick.  (64)  Thou  shouldst  not  cut  up 
the  Barsom  with  over-attention,^  [that  is,  thou  shouldst  leave 
(it)  to]  ^  men  become  righteous,'''  and  it  is  held  by  them  in  the 
left  hand;  (65)  and  Auharmazd  is  prayed  to  by  them,  and  the 
Ameshaspends  are  prayed  to  by  them.  (66)  Homa,  too,  the 
golden-hued,  the  exalted,  and  they  also  who  are  excellent, 
Vohuman  and  good  liberality  created  by  Ailharmazd,  the  right- 
eous (and)  best,  are  prayed  to  likewise  by  them. 

20.  (67)  Zaratilsht  inquired  of  Auharmazd  thus  :  Thou  art 
omniscient,  0  Ailharmazd!  (68)  Thou  art  sleepless,  0  Auhar- 
mazd !  and  unintoxicated,  thou  who  art  Ailharmazd  !     (69)  A 

1  The  Vendidad.  text,  however,  refer  to  the  cutting  of 

2  Or  it  may  be  translated  as  in  p.     the  Barsom  itself,  which  is  now  hardly 
334,  note  I.  ever  done,  as  they  generally  use  metal 

**  Dastur  Hoshangji  observes  that  wires  instead  of  twigs. 

when   a  Parsi  priest  goes  nowadays  *  This  Pahlavi  translation   of  the 

up  to  a  pomegranate  tree  to  cut  the  Ashem-vohu  formula  is  omitted  by 

urvardm  he  does  not  use  these  words,  Spiegel,  but  is  given  by  the  old  MSS. 

but  washes  his  hands  and  the  knife  ^  The  word  arar-niklrlshnVc  is  not 

with  consecrated  water,  thrice  recit-  a  correct   equivalent  of  the    Avesta 

ing    khsluiaothra    Ahurahe    Mazddo,  pairi-keretem,  but  it  is  hazardous  to 

ashem  voliU,  and  cuts  a  twig  from  the  alter  it  into  avar-karhiishnth. 

pomegranate  tree  for  the  urvardm,  ^  Or  "  thou  shouldst  break  (it)  off 

and  a  leaflet  from  the  date  tree  for  for,"  if  shtkan-de  be  read  instead  of 

the   aiwydonJiana,   or  girdle  of    the  shedkihi-de. 

Barsom.      The    instructions   in    the  ^  That  is,  priests. 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XIX.  385 

good-minded  man  is  mingled  in  direct  pollution  with  liim  {vaV)^ 
a  good-minded  man  is  mingled  in  indirect  pollution  with  him 
{vaV)  whose  body  is  stricken  by  the  demons  and  defiled,  and  the 
demons  mingle  him  with  it,  [that  is,  they  would  make  (him) 
completely  defiled]  ;  did  the  good-minded  (one)  become  purified  % 

21.  (70)  And  Aiiharmazd  said  to  him  thus:  Seek  for  bull's 
urine,  0  Zaratiisht  !  of  a  young,  entire  bull,  lawfv;lly  inaugur- 
ated.i  (71)  Thou  mayst  carry  on  the  purification  on  the  land 
created  by  Aiiharmazd,  [that  is,  they  may  perform  (it)  in  a  wild 
spot  of  nava  vthdzva  drdjo  ("  nine  fathoms  length  ")].  (72)  With 
a  surrounding  furrow  he  should  score  (it)  around,  the  man  who 
is  purifying. 

22.  (73)  One  hundred  praises  of  righteousness  are  to  be 
recited  (thus)  :  Ashem  vohil,  (&c.,  and)  (74)  two  hundred 
(Yatha-ahil-vairy6s).2  (75)  With  four  times  thorough  washing 
he  is  washed  over,  (by)  the  man  who  is  purifying,  with  bull's 
urine  produced  by  bulls,  twice  with  water  which  should  be 
created  by  Aiiharmazd,^  which  should  be  well-formed. 

23.  (76)  Purified  becomes  the  good-minded  man,  purified 
becomes  the  man  who  shall  come  with  him."^  (77)  The  cloth- 
ing of  the  good-minded  (one)  is  to  be  taken  up  by  the  left  arm 
with  the  right,  and  by  the  right  arm  with  the  left,  with  the 
assistance  of  one  another.  (78)  Then  the  good-minded  (one)  is 
to  be  called  out  ^  in  the  light  produced  by  skill,  that  we  may 
brighten  his  star  given  by  destiny,  (79)  always  till  those  nhie 
nights  shall  elapse  over  the  man. 

24.  (80)  After  the  nine  nights  thou  mayst  carry  forth  conse- 
crated water  to  the  fire,  thou  mayst  carry  forth  the  hard 
firewood  to  the  fire,  thou  mayst  carry  forth  sweet-scented 
incense  to  the  fire,  (81)  (and  he)  who  is  good-minded  should 
fumicrate  his  clothes. 

O 

1  The  bull  whose  urine  is  employed  ^  Probably  meaning   pure  water, 

for  such  purposes  has  to  be  once  pro-  In  the  old  MSS.  the  conditional  d6 

perly  consecrated  by  a  certain  cere-  occurs  twice,  as  here  translated, 

mony,  when  he  becomes  o?ai<!/o-A-creio,  *  Or  "who  shall  come  in  contact 

and  can  then  supply  lawful  urine  for  with  him." 

the  rest  of  his  life.  ^  So  all  unaltered  MSS.,  but  Das- 

■■^  The  words  yathd  aJnt  vairyd  rad  tur   Hoshangji   suggests   that   sharl- 

vdstdrem,  which  have  been  taken  into  tiuvshn,  "is  to  be  opened  or  exposed," 

the  Avesta  text  (see  p.  335),  belong,  should  be  read  instead  of  kar'Mnishn. 
no  doubt,  to  the  Pahlavi  translation. 

2  B 


386  PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XIX. 

25.  (82)  Purified  becomes  the  clothing  of  the  good-minded 
(one),  purified  becomes  the  man  who  holds  the  clothing. 
(83)  The  clothing,  &c.  (as  in  (77)  above).  (84)  The  good- 
minded  (one)  exclaims  thus  :  Salutation  to  Aiiharmazd  !  saluta- 
tion to  the  Ameshaspends !  salutation  to  those  other  righteous 
ones  !  (rt)  Afarg  ^  showed  from  this  passage  that  he  whose 
hands  are  not  washed  should  not  reverence  the  sun,  and  should 
not  engage  in  silent  prayer  {vAj). 

26.  (85)  Zaratusht  inquired  of  Auharmazd  thus  :  Thou  art 
omniscient,  0  Ailharraazd  !  (86)  Shall  I  raise  the  righteous 
man  1  shall  I  raise  the  righteous  woman  %  shall  I  raise  the 
wicked  and  the  idolaters,  the  men  who  are  polluters?-  (87) 
The  giving  up  -^  removes  away  the  earth  created  by  Auharmazd  ; 
the  giving  up  removes  away  the  flowing  water,  the  grown  corn, 
and  the  other  wealth.  (88)  And  Auharmazd  said  to  him  thus  : 
Thou  mayst  raise  (them),  O  righteous  Zaratiisht  ! 

27.  (89)  Creator  of  the  material  world,  righteous  one  !  ^ 
Where  are  those  events  ^  in  lodsrnient  %  where  do  those  events 
proceed  %  [that  is,  where  is  the  place  of  their  coming  and 
going  X\  wherewith  are  those  events  in  connection  ?  where  do 
those  events  come  back  to  the  same  place  for  a  man  whom  they 
give  up  to  his  own  soul  in  the  material  life  of  mankind  %  ^ 

28.  (90)  And  Auharmazd  said  to  him  thus  :  After  the  pass- 
ing away  of  men,  after  the  proceeding  forth  of  men,  [that  is, 
when  their  proceedings  in  the  world  are  completed],  after  the 
tearing  away  of  the  life  from  the  former  body  by  the  demons, 
the  wicked  ones  astute  in  evil,  [that  is,  of  everyone  they  most 
tear  away  that  from  which  unseparated  {I  ahara)  he  does  not 
die]  ;  (91)  on  the  complete  up-lifting  of  the  third  night,  when 
the  dawn  glows,  the  beaming,   (92)    on  the  mountain  of  the 


1  The  name  of  one  of  the  old  com-  resurrection,  or  to  the  soul's  entrance 
nieiitators.  into  its  separate  spiritual  life,  as  de- 

2  The  reading  of  the  old  MSS.  is  tailed  in  the  following  verses, 
certainly  gushno-zahishndn,  a  misiu-  '*  This  opening  sentence  is  abbrevi- 
terpretation  of  the  Av.  merezujtttvi.  ated  in  the  old  MSS. 

3  Taking  bard  yehabilntano  (which  ^  The  traditional  meaning  of  ddsar 
the  old  BISS.  append  to  both  clauses  is  "destiny." 

of  the  sentence)  as  the  nominative.  *"  As  the  meaning  is  not  very  clear 

It  might  be  translated   "result,"  but  it  is  safest  to  give  the  literal  traus- 

the   iJussage   seems   to    refer  to  the  lation. 


PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XIX.       .  387 

glory  of  righteousness  where  it  ^  arouses  Mitro  the  well-armed, 
(93)  and  the  sun  rises  up  there  in  (its)  ascent. 

29.  (94)  The  demon  Yizarsh  by  name,  O  Spitaman  Zara- 
tusht !  carries  off  the  soul  bound,  the  wicked  (and)  the  idolaters, 
the  men  who  are  polluters,  (a)  That  is,  with  a  halter  {haiid) 
which  falls  upon  the  neck  of  every  one  when  he  dies ;  when 
righteous  it  falls  off  from  his  neck  (cish  min  chavarvian),  when 
wicked  they  will  drag  him  with  that  same  halter  to  hell. 
(95)  He  comes  to  the  time-worn  path,  whoever  is  wicked  (and) 
whoever  is  righteous,  [(a)  Every  one  will  come  to  that  place 
to  behold  Aiiharmazd  (and)  Ahriman ;  he  who  is  righteous  to 
offer  prayer,  (but)  he  who  is  wicked  is  unable  to  offer  prayer 
and  becomes  repentant,  and  by  his  repentance  they  restore  the 
dead  again].  (96)  (To)  the  Chinvad  bridge  created  by  Aiihar- 
mazd, where  they  clear  away  {bard  zadend)  the  worldly  portion 
of  the  consciousness  (and)  soul,  (97)  which  was  given  to  them 
in  the  material  world. 

30.  (98)  She  who  is  graceful  in  appearance,  well-formed, 
[that  is,  it  is  not  necessary  to  do  anything  to  her],-  strong,  [that 
is,  powerful], 3  well- developed,  [that  is,  she  has  grown  in  excel- 
lence], comes  (99)  with  a  dog,  [that  is,  protection  is  with  her], 
with  discrimination,  [that  is,  it  is  evident  who  is  who  and  which 
is  which],  with  replies,-*  [that  is,  with  goodness  and  crime], ^ 
Avilling,  [that  is,  as  a  man  requires],  (and)  provided  with  skill. 
(100)''  .  .  .  She  supports  the  soul  of  the  righteous  across 
Alborz.  (loi)  They  pass  across  by  the  Chinvad  bridge  whose 
two  extremities  {2-sarth)  are  their  own  heavenly  angels;  (a)  one 
stands  at  Chakad-i  Daitih,'^  and  one  at  Alborz. 

1  Probably  tlie  dawn.  Dastur  Hoshangji   suggests  reading 

2  Literally  :  "  it  is  not  necessary  to  vCsh  hachak,  "  many  children." 
perform  an  operation  upon  lier."  ^  The  old  MSS.  omit  the  Pahlavi 

3  Assuming  that  ktk  auih  tuban^  translation  of  the  first  clause  of  tliij 
the  readiug  of  the  old  MSS.  in  Lon-  sentence  in  the  Avesta :  "  She  dis- 
don,  stands  for  takik  aigh  tiWun.  misses  the  sinful  soul  of  the  wicked 

*  The   oldest  reading  is   pasukho-  into  the  glooms"  (see  p.  255).     This 

liomand,  but  Dastur  Hoshangji  sug-  is,  no  doubt,  a  blunder,  as  there  is  no 

gests  reading  pMsan-/ioma?i(/,  "having  reason  to  suppose  that  this  clause  is 

sons."  an   Avesta   quotation  introduced  by 

5  Probably  meaning   that  she   has  the  Pahlavi  translator, 

the  replies  both  of  the  good  and  the  "^  The  Bundahish  (p.  22,  W.)  states 

bad.     The  oldest  reading  is  vasth  va  that  the  mountain  "  Chakad-i  Daitih 

hajak,  aud  vaslh  is  very  like  tehth  ;  is  that  of  the  middle  of  the  world, 


388  .     PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XIX. 

31.  (102)  Vohuman  shall  rise  up  from  a  throne  made  of 
gold,  (rt)  where  he  transacts  the  affairs  of  the  dominion  of  the 
eternal  ones.i  (103)  Vohuman  exclaims  thus:  How  hast  thou 
come  up  here?  O  righteous  one!  tasting  immortality  {anosh- 
vashtamilx),  (104)  from  that  perishable  world  which  is  afflicted, 
unto  this  imperishable  world  which  is  unafflicted  1 

32.  (105)  Contented  the  soul  of  the  righteous  goes  on  from 
Vohuman  (106)  up  to  Auharmazd  and  up  to  the  Ameshaspends 
and  up  to  the  throne  made  of  gold,  (107)  up  to  Garodman,  the 
abode  of  Atiharmazd,  the  abode  of  the  Ameshaspends,  the  abode 
of  those  others  who  are  also  alike  (hamich)  righteous  ones. 

33.  (108)  Owing  to  the  purified  state  of  that  righteous 
(one),  [owing  to  the  protection  -  of  purity  in  the  soul],  after 
passing  away,  the  wicked  demons,  astute  in  evil,  are  frightened 
away  by  its  scent,  (109)  as  a  sheep  molested  by  wolves  when  it 
is  frightened  off  by  the  scent  of  a  wolf. 

34.  (no)  The  righteous  men  come  together^  every  one; 
(a)  some  say  Hushedar,  Hushedar-mah,  and  Soshyans  ;  (m) 
and  Neryosang  brings  them  together.  (112)  The  messenger* 
of  Auliarmazd  call  Neryosang;  (113)  thou  shouldst  thyself, 
0  Zaratilsht !  call  upon  these  creatures  of  Atiharmazd,  [that  is, 
do  not  surrender  (it)  from  (thy)  hand].^ 

35.  (114)  Zaratiisht  considered  my  words,  &c.  (as  in  (50) 
above)  ;  (115)  (and  said)  :  I  call  upon  Auharmazd  the  righteous, 
the  wise.*^  (116)  I  call  upon  the  earth  created  by  Auharmazd, 
the  water  created  by  Auharmazd,  and  the  rightful  vegetation. 
(117)  I  call  upon  the  sea  which  is  made  wide."  (118)  I  call 
upon  the  sky,  the  handsome-formed,  [that  is,  it  is  formed  well- 
vaulted].^  (119)  I  c^^^  upon  the  endless  light,  the  self-sustained, 
the  height  of  a  hundred  men,  on  ^  The  old  IMSS.  are  here,  for  once, 
which  the  Ohinvad  bridge  stands,  and  more  corrupt  than  the  modern  ones, 
they  take  account  of  the  soul  at  that  *  Traditionally,  "  the  friend." 
place."  ^  This  is  a  repetition  of  (49),  and 

1  Reading  avidamdnkardvo," those  the  subject  now  returns  to  the  point 
acting  without  time,"  but  this  is  it  left  when  interrupted  by  the  in- 
liable  to  the  objection  that  avt  ought     quiries  in  (58). 

to  be  otherwise  written.  ^  This  is  a  misinterpretation  of  the 

2  The  word  jKinakth  seems  to  have     Avesta,  see  p.  256. 

been  written  by  mistake  in  the  old  ^  A    free    translation    of    Youru- 

MS.  in   London,  and   to  have   been  kasha,  which  is  always  Far&khu-kartJ 

corrected   by  a   marginal   gloss   into  in  Pahlavi. 

pdklh  ;  later  copyists  give  both  words  8  go  in  the  old  MSS. ,  but  "  vaulted 

in  the  text,  as  here  translated.  together  "  in  later  ones. 


PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XIX.  389 

[that  is,  its  self-sustainmeiit  is  this,  that  they  ^  make  every  one 
its  own  for  itself]. 

36.  (120)  I  call  upon  the  better  world  of  the  righteous,  of 
all-glorious  light.  (121)  1  call  upon  Garodiiian,  the  abode  of 
Auharmazd,  and  the  abode  of  the  Ameshaspends,  and  the  abode 
of  those  other  righteous  ones.  (122)  I  call  upon  the  constantly 
advantageous  place,^  the  self-sustained,  [its  constant  advantage- 
ousness  is  this,  that  when  it  once  became  (so)  all  of  it  became 
thereby  ever-advantageous] ;  the  Chinvad  bridge,  created  by 
Auharmazd,  I  also  call. 

37.  (123)  I  call  upon  good-fortune  the  wishful-eyed,  the 
favouring,  the  spirit  of  favour  [M-chashnVi).  (124)  I  call  upon 
the  valiant  guardian-angels  of  the  righteous,  who  benefit  all 
creatures.  (125)  I  call  upon  the  victorious  angel  Verehrfui 
(Behrixm),  created  by  Auharmazd,  who  bears  the  standard  of  the 
glory  created  by  Auharmazd.  (126)  I  call  upon  the  star 
Tishtar,  the  brilliant,  the  glorious ;  at  the  time  when  (it  is)  in 
the  form  of  a  bull  with  golden  horns  I  call  it  most. 

2^^.  (127)  I  call  upon  the  propitious  Gathas,  ruling  the  chiefs 
(of  the  creation,  and)  righteous  ;  [their  rulersbip  of  the  chiefs 
is  this,  that  it  is  proper  to  pray  to  any  of  the  others  through 
them].  (128)  I  call  upon  the  Ahunavaiti  Gatha  ;  I  call  upon 
the  Ushtavaiti  Gatha  ;  I  call  upon  the  Spenta-mainyu  Gatha ; 
I  call  upon  the  Vohu-khshathra  Gatha ;  I  call  upon  the  VahL-^h- 
toishti  Gatha. 

39.  (129)  I  call  upon  the  region  {keshvar)  of  Arezahi  and  of 
Savahi ;  I  call  upon  the  region  of  Fradadafshu  (and  of)  Vida- 
dafshu  ;  I  call  upon  the  region  of  Vouru-bareshti  and  of  Vouru- 
jareshti ;  I  call  upon  the  region  of  Qaniratha  the  splendid  ; 
(rt)  this  they  assert  as  they  are  stationed  {dhlst)  in  this  (one). 

(130)  I   call  upon  Het-homand  2  the  illustrious,  the   glorious. 

(131)  I  call  upon  the  good  Ashishang.^     I  call  upon  the  most 
rightful  {rajistal),  the  learned,  the  good.     (132)  I  call  upon  the 

1  The  fixed  stars,  which  produce  works  exactly  counterbalance  their 
their  own  light.  sins,    and   where   they   remain   in   a 

2  T\\i&  Haimshah-sMak  gds^i^e^rs  stationary  state  till  the  final  resur- 
to  be  the  place  of  the  HamtstiiMn  of  rection. 

the    later    books,    the    intermediate         =*  See  Vend.  i.  (50),  p.  361. 
place,  between  heaven  and  hell,  re-         *  See  p.  215. 
served  for   those   souls    whose  good 


390  PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XIX. 

glory  of  the  Iranian  countries.     I  call  upon  the  glory  of  Jam- 
sbed  the  rich  in  flocks. 

40.  (133)  When  Srosh  is  satisfied  with  the  three  nights'^ 
worship,  and  (has)  recognised,  [that  is,  completed  (its)  con- 
sideration], and  accepted  (it),  Srosh  the  righteous  !  the  bandsome, 
triumphant  Srosh,  the  righteous  !  (134)  consecrated  water  is  to 
be  carried  forth  to  the  fire;  thou  shouldst  carry  forth  hard 
firewood  to  the  fire,  (and)  thou  shouldst  carry  forth  sweet- 
scented  incense  to  the  fire.  (135)  The  fire  Vazisht  is  to  be 
propitiated,  which  smites  the  demon  Spenjagar.  (136)  Cooked 
food  is  to  be  carried  forth,  full  of  dried  sugar-plums.^ 

41.  (137)  Thou  shouldst  propitiate  Srosh  the  righteous  ;  (138) 
Srosh  the  righteous  who  destroys  the  demons,  who  are  stupid, 
drunk,  and  causelessly  drunk,  [that  is,  drunk  without  wine]. 
(139)  He  hurls  them  down  to  the  Druj  of  Askan,^  the  wicked 
(and)  the  idolaters,  the  men  who  are  polluters,  back  to  Yizarsh 
the  demon.^ 

44.  (140)  (The  evil  spirit  exclaimed)  thus  :  Why  do  we 
assemble  in  an  assembly,  O  wicked  demons  astute  in  evil  !  on 
the  summit  of  Arezurl^  [that  is,  when  we  go  back  what  report 
(ySrdhdl:)  do  we  carry  back  ?] 

45.  (141)  They  rushed  and  they  shouted  the  cries  of  demons, 
they  became  worse  about  the  matter,  the  demons,  the  wicked 
ones  astute  in  evil.*''  .  .  .  (142)  (For)  this  we  assemble  in  an 
assembly  on  the  summit  of  Arezur. 

^  Meaning  the  three  nights  after  a  ^  The  oldest  reading  is  dri1j-i  as- 

death,  during  wliich  ceremonies   in  hino,  but  the  meaning  is  uncertain, 

honour  of  Srosh  are  to  be  performed.  It  seems  to  be  mei-ely  a  transcript  of 

After  the  third  day  and  night  cere-  tlie  Avesta  drvjaskandm. 

monies  commence  in  honour  of  the  "*  The  word  daevo  (which  although 

Ardai  Fravard  or  righteous  guardian  in  Avesta  letters  seems  to  belong  to 

angels.      The   word    meaning    "the  the  Palilavi  text)  is  omitted  by  Spie- 

three   nights  "  is   traditionally  pro-  gel.     A  long  passage  (see  pp.  336,  337) 

nounced  sedosh  or  sadis  (see  Mainyo-  is  here  omitted  in  the  old  MSS.  with 

i-khard    xxi.    10 ;     Ixiii.    7),    and   is  the  Pahlavi  translation.     Tliis  omis- 

sometimes   confounded  with    Srosh  ;  sion  has  evidently  been  caused  by  the 

but  it  seems  to  be  nothing  but  srt<(t(/i,  loss  of  a  folio  in  some  original  MS., 

"  a  triplet,"  (compare  Pers.  satil).  whence  they  have  all  descended. 

2  The  oldest  reading  looks  like  &«)•«  ^  Seep.  337,  note  9. 

khashdr}  s/(a/t-arpa/i',  but  should  pro-  ^  Two  clauses  of  this  sentence  (see 

bably  be  read  bard  khushkt'J  shakar-  p.  337)  are  omitted  in  the  old  Pahlavi 

rejdk,  translation. 


PAHLAVI  VENDIDAD  XX.  391 

46.  (143)  Because"  the  rigliteous  ZaratAsht  is  born  in  the 
dwelling  of  Porushasp.  (144)  Where  (can)  we  procure  his 
death  %  for  he  is  the  smiter  of  the  demons,  and  he  is  the  adver- 
sary of  the  demons.  (145)  He  restrains  the  destroyer  from  de- 
stroying, [that  is,  he  takes  away  his  oppressiveness],  he  puts 
down  idoLatry,  [that  is,  he  makes  (it)  powerless].  (146)  He 
proclaims  avoidance  of  the  corruption  {iiasusli)  produced  by  the 
demons ;  the  falsehoods  of  MUokht  (the  liar)  he  also  makes 
powerless. 

47.  (147)  The  demons  shouted,  the  demons  fled,  the  wicked 
ones  astute  in  evil,  to  the  bottom  of  the  world  of  darkness  which 
is  the  grievous  ^  hell,  and  back  to  constant  smoke. 

9. — Paldavi  Vendidad  XX. 

I.  (i)  Zarattisht  inquired  of  Auharmazd,  &c.  (as  in  Vend., 
xviii.  (21),  p.  367,  to)  righteous  one  !  Who  was  the  first  of  the 
men  who  are  careful  ones,-  [who  know  well  how  to  take  care  of 
the  body,  such  as  Spendyad ;  -^  some  say  that  a  sword  *  made  no 
effect  upon  (him)],  (2)  (who  are)  accomplished  ones,  [sages,  such 
as  Kai-Us],  (3)  (who  are)  willing  ones,  [such  as  Jamshed],  (4) 
(who  s^re)  fortunate  ones,  [and  powerful  ones,  such  as  Patsrob],^ 

(5)  (who  are)  brilliant  ones,  [and  skilful  ones,  such  as  Zarattisht], 

(6)  (who  are)  valiant  ones,  [such  as  Keresaspa],  (7)  (who  are) 
those  of  the  early  law  [peshddddii),  [sttch  as  Hoshang ;  this  early 
law  was  this,  that  he  first  set  gonig  the  law  of  sovereignty],  (8) 
(and)  by  whom  disease  was  kept  •"  to  disease,  and  death  was  kept 
to  death  by  him,  [that  is,  they  could  not  escape  from  his  con- 
trol (band)] ;  (9)  he  kept  (back)  the  drawn  dagger,"  [that  is,  it 
was  stopped  by  him  on  the  way],  (10)  and  the  scorching  of  fire 
was  kept  by  him  away  from  the  bodies  of  men  1 

1  Reading  atrang  ,■  compare   Pers.  ^  Traditionally  identified  with  Kai- 

(trang.     The  Dasturs  prefer  reading  Khusro,  but  this  seema  only  a  guess. 

atrdg,  which  they  translate   "stink-  It  is  more  probable  that  Pat-khusro 

lug."  is  meant,  who  is  said  to  have  been  a 

-  Said  to  mean  those  rendered  se-  brother  of  Vishtasi)  in  the   Pahlavi 

cure   or    invulnerable    by   means  of  Shahnamah. 

sjjells.  ^  Reading  ddsht  in  all  the  phrases 

^  The  Pahlavi  form  of  Isfendy^r,  a  (as  suggested   by  Dastur  Hoshangji) 

son  of  Vishtasp,  who  conquered  Ar-  instead  of  the  ash  dad  of  the  MSS.  ; 

jasp.                                              ■  the  Pahlavi  letters  being  the  same  in 

■*  Or  a  battle-axe,  according  as  we  both  cases. 

compare  tishwith.  Pers.  tish,  or  tishah.  ^  This  is  merely  a  guess. 


392  PAHLAVI  VEND  ID  AD  XX. 

2.  (i  i)  And  Aiiliarmazd  said  to  him  thus  :  Srit  ^  was  the  first, 
O  Spitamdn  Zaratllsht !  of  the  men  who  are  careful  ones,  ko,.  (as 
in  (i-io)  above),  (a)  That  is,  Srit  of  the  Samans,  not  Srit  of 
the  Serjans,^  (at)  the  place  where  he  had  come  he  was  able  to 
act.  (h)  Some  say  that  he  was  Yim,  and  his  Sritship  was  this, 
that  he  was  the  third  ruler.^ 

3.  (12)  He  begged  (and)  obtained  a  weapon  (rishcluhar)  from 
Shahrivar,  [(«)  some  say  that  it  was  obtained  through  Shahrivar, 
so  that  its  top  (and)  bottom  might  be  bound  with  gold],  ^  (13) 
for  withstanding  disease,  for  withstanding  death,  for  withstand- 
ing pain,  for  withstanding  fever,  (14)^  ...  for  withstanding 
aglnsh  ''  the  putrid,  the  disfigurer,  the  malignant  eye  which  the 
evil  spirit  formed  in  the  bodies  of  men ;  [every  one  is  good  as  to 
his  own  (and)  evil  as  to  others]. 

4.  (15)  Then  I  who  am  Auharmazd  brought  forth  healing 
plants  j  (16)  many  and  many  hundreds,  and  many  and  many 
thousands,  and  many  and  many  myriads;  (17)  and  therewith 
one  Gokereno,  the  Homa  which  is  white.'' 

5.  (18)  The  inviter  to  work  of  every  kind,  the  commander 
(and)  Dastur  of  every  kind,  the  possessor  of  every  kind  of  bless- 
ing, [that  is,  it  provides  healthiness  of  life],  for  the  bodies  of 
men.^ 

7.  (19)  Disease  !  I  say  unto  thee  :  Flee  away  !     Pain  !  I  say 


1  The  Avesta  Thrita,  see  pp.  178,  angel  who  has   special  charge  of  all 

277.  metals. 

-  So  spelt  in  the  old  MS.  in  Lon-  s  The  names  of  eight  diseases  are 

don ;   later   MSS.  alter  it  into    Ser-  here  left  untranslated  by  the  Pahlavi 

zan.      The    nearest    Avesta   equiva-  version. 

lent  appears  to  be  the  sarejd  of  Yas.  ^  The  name  of  this  disease  or  evil  is 

xxix.  3;  but  perhaps  the  allusion  is  written,  in  Avesta  characters,  a^-Auw/i 

to  Thriio  aev6-sarcdh6  in  Yasht  xiii.  here  and  in  (24),  and  dghish  in  (20),  in 

125,  as  Serjdn  can  also  be  read  esarjdn,  the  old  MS.  in  London. 

and  the  Pahlavi  ch=j  is  a  letter  of  ''  This  is  the  tree  of  life  which  is 

l^ractically  the  same  form  as  the  Av.  said  to  grow  in  the  sea  Youru-kasha, 

dh.  where  it  is  carefully  preserved  from 

•*  This  is  an  attempt  to  connect  the  the  evil  sjiirit,  in  order  that  it  may 

nameThritawithAv.  thritya,  "third,"  furnish  immortality  at  tlie  end  of  the 

As  Hoshang  has  already  been  men-  world.     See  Bundahish  (p.  42,  W.). 

tioned  as  the  first  sovereign  (see  (7)  ^  Verse  6,  which  is  a  repetition  of 

above)  Yima  would  be,  of  course,  the  (13)  and  (14),  is  not  translated  in  the 

third.  Pahlavi  version. 

•*  Because  Shahrivar  is   the   arch- 


PAHLA  VI  VENDIDAD  XX.  393 

nnto  thee  :  Flee  away  !  and  Fever  !  I  say  unto  thee  :  Flee  away  ! 
(20)^  .   .   .   Agliish/  I  say  unto  thee  :  Flee  away  ! 

8.  (21)  What  is  vanquished  by  the  vigour  of  that  Homa  is  the 
Drilj,  and  the  vigour  of  that  Druj  is  vanquislied  (by)  its  re- 
sources. (22)  What  is  the  strength  of  its  dominion  is  I  who  am 
Auharmazd.^. 

9.  (23)-'^  ...  I  counteract  disease,  I  counteract  death,  I  coun- 
teract pain,  I  counteract  fever,  (24)'*  ...  I  counteract  aghisli 
the  putrid,  the  disHgurer,  the  malignant  eye,  which  the  evil 
spirit  formed  in  the  bodies  of  men,  [every  one  is  good  as  to  his 
own  (and)  evil  as  to  others]. 

10.  (25)  I  counteract  every  disease  and  death,  every  sorcerer 
and  witch,  and  every  wicked  courtezan. 

11.  (26)  The  longing  for  Airman^  is  for  me  the  arrival  of 
joy,  [that  is,  it  is  necessary  for  thee  to  come  with  joy],  (and), 
they  compel  (him)  to  act  for  the  men  and  women  of  Zaratiisht. 
(27)  Vohuman  is  joyful,  [that  is,  it  is  necessary  for  thee  also  to 
come,  that  they  may  compel  thee  to  act  with  joy].  He  who  is 
desirous  of  religion  becomes  worthy,  with  the  reward  here  (in 
this  world)  and  that  also  there  (in  the  other  world).  (28)  The 
reverent  supplication  for  righteousness  is  Ashavahisht,  [that  is, 
my  reverence  is  through  him]  ;  may  he  become  the  dignity  of 
Auharmazd,  [the  mobadship  of  the  mobads]. 

12.  (29)  The  longing  for  Airman  destroys  every  disease  and 
death,  every  sorcerer  and  witch,  and  every  wicked  courtezan. 

III. — Notes  Descriptive  of  some  Parsi  Ceremonies. 

These  notes  were  written  by  the  author  in  German,  merely  as 
memoranda  of  what  he  noticed  during  the  performance  of  the 
ceremonies,  and  of  such  information  as  the  priests  communi- 
cated. It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  author  confined  his  notes 
almost  entirely  to  the  ceremonies  connected  with  the  celebration 

^  The  exorcism  of  the  eight  other  verses  (9-12,  "\V.)  of  this  fargard  occur 

diseases  is  here  left  untranslated  by  again  as  the  conclusion  of  each  of  the 

the  Pahlavi  version,  as  in  (14).  fargards  xxi.  and  xxii. 

-  The  Avesta  of  the  latter  part  of         ■*  The  names  of  the  eight  diseases, 

this  verse   is   a   paraphrase   of   Yas.  omitted  in  (14)  and  (20)  are  hei'e  again 

sxxi.  4'".  left  untranslated  by  the  Pahlavi  ver- 

3  The  names  of  four  other  diseases  sion. 
or  evils  are  here  left  untranslated  by         ^  The  angel  Airyaman,  see  p.  273. 
the  Pahlavi  version.     The  concluding 


394  NOTES  DESCRIPTIVE  OF 

of  the  Yasna  or  Ijashne ;  but  lie  probably  relied  upon  Anquetil's 
description  of  the  commoner  ceremonies  being  a  sufficient  me- 
morandum, as  be  had  found  his  statements  quite  correct  on  such 
matters  (see  p.  25). 

The  editor's  revision  of  these  notes  has  been  confined  to  such 
farther  explanation  as  seemed  necessary  for  making  the  rough 
iiiemoranda  intelligible  to  the  reader.  If  any  Parsi  priest  should 
notice  errors  in  these  notes,  he  will  confer  a  favour  by  pointing 
them  out  in  a  letter  to  the  editor  through  the  publishers. 

I. — The  Ceremony  preparatory  to  Ijashne. 

This  preparatory  ceremony  is  coWedi  pargannah  ov  paragnah, 
and  commences  with  the  arrangement  of  the  various  ceremonial 
vessels  and  materials  in  the  arvis-gdh  or  ceremonial  area.  This 
arrangement  is  shown  upon  p.  395. 

The  ceremonial  vessels  and  apparatus  are  made  of  metal, 
generally  brass  or  copper,  but  more  valuable  metals  can  be  used. 
They  consist  of  several  round-bottomed  cups  (about  the  size  of 
tea-cups)  and  saucer-like  dishes,  besides  other  vessels  of  a  more 
special  character. 

The  fire  burns  on  a  bed  of  ashes  in  a  vase-like  vessel  placed 
on  a  stone  near  the  southern  end  of  the  Arvis-gah  where  the 
Rathwi  (Raspi)  or  assistant  priest  is  stationed,  facing  the  Zota 
or  chief  officiating  priest,  who  sits  cross-legged  on  a  low  stone 
platform  near  the  northern  end  of  the  Arvis-gah,  but  facing 
the  fire.  Both  priests  wear  close-fitting  trousers  instead  of  the 
usual  loose  pyjamas,  so  as  to  avoid  touching  any  of  the  appara- 
tus with  their  clothes  ;  they  also  wear  the  penbm  or  mouth-veil 
(see  p.  243,  note  i). 

Some  spare  aesma  or  firewood  (in  the  form  of  chips  of  sandal- 
wood) and  hot  or  incense  (benzoin)  are  laid  alongside  the  fire  to 
the  Raspi's  left ;  and  small  fire  tongs  and  an  incense  ladle  are 
similarly  laid  to  his  right. 

The  Zota  has  a  supply  of  water  in  a  large  metal  water-vessel 
to  his  right,  which  also  contains  the  pestle  and  strainer  for  the 
Homa  ;  and  before  him  the  remaining  apparatus  is  arranged  on 
a  low  stone  platform  called  the  takht-i  dldt.  Besides  the  cups 
and  saucers  mentioned  above,  the  following  apparatus  (p.  396) 
stands  on  this  platform. 


SOME  PARS  I  CEREMONIES. 


395 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  ARVIS-GAH. 


Tongs. 


SOUTH. 

Rdspfs  station. 

Incense 

Fire  in  a  vase 

Spare  firewood 

ladle. 

on  a  stone. 

and  incense. 

EAST. 


AYEST. 


Spare 

Darftn 

Barsom 

Homa 

Homa-juice 

and  butter 

knife. 

mortar. 

in  CU13  with 

saucer. 

saucer  cover 

Homa  and 
pomegranate 
twig  saucer. 

Horn  a 

juice  cup. 

Varas  cup 
witli  cover. 

Large 
water 
vessel 

,  Barsom 

Zor  cup. 

containing 

laid  on 

Milk 

strainer 

its  stands. 

saucer. 

Zor  cup. 

and  pestle. 

Zotds  seat. 


NOETH. 


396  NOTES  DESCRIPTIVE  OF 

The  harsom-ddn  or  stand  for  the  Barsom,  consisting  of  two 
separate  stands  with  upright  stems  and  crescent-shaped  tops, 
hence  called  mdh-rit,  "moon-faced."  The  Barsom,  when  arranged, 
is  laid  resting  on  the  two  crescents.  The  Icdrd-i  barsom-chm,  or 
knife  for  cutting  the  Barsom,  &c.,  is  also  laid  on  the  takht. 

The  hdvauim  or  Homa  mortar  is  generally  shaped  like  a  wine- 
glass, with  foot  and  stem,  but  much  larger ;  and  the  pestle  or 
dastah,  chisel-shaped  at  one  end,  is  kept  till  wanted  on  one  side 
in  the  large  water-vessel.  The  Homa  strainer  or  tashta  hd- 
surdlch  is  one  of  the  saucers  with  nine  small  holes,  arrano-ed 
diamond- fashion  about  half  an  inch  apart,  in  its  bottom ;  this 
also  lies  on  one  side  in  the  water-vessel. 

The  damn  {<lraona)  or  ceremonial  wafer-bread  is  a  small, 
tough,  flexible  pancake  (about  the  size  of  the  palm  of  the  hand), 
made  of  wheaten  flour  and  water,  with  a  little  melted  butter  {ght), 
and  fried.  Kfrasast  is  a  similar  pancake  marked  on  one  side, 
before  frying,  with  nine  superficial  cuts  (in  three  rows  of  three 
each)  made  with  the  finger-nail  while  repeating  the  words  humat 
huldit  huvarsht  thrice,  one  word  to  each  of  the  nine  cuts.  .Any 
Darun  or  Frasast  that  is  torn  must  not  be  used  in  any  ceremony. 
A  small  piece  of  butter,  called  gdush-hudhdo,  generally  accom- 
panies the  Darun.  Other  ceremonial  apparatus  is  suflScieutly 
explained  in  the  following  notes. 

The  auvyaonhanem  is  the  girdle  or  tie  with  which  the  Barsom 
is  to  be  tied  together.  It  is  prepared  from  a  leaflet  of  the  date- 
palm,  which  is  cut  from  the  tree  by  the  priest  after  he  has  poured 
consecrated  water  over  his  hand,  the  knife,  and  the  leaflet.  ^ 
When  brought  to  the  Arvis-gah  in  the  water-goblet  the  leaflet  is 
split  longitudinally  into  thread-like  ribbons.  Six  of  these  leafy 
threads  are  then  laid  together,  three  one  way  and  three  the 
other,2  and  are  all  tied  together  in  a  knot  at  one  end.  One  tri- 
plet is  then  twisted  tightly  together  with  a  right-handed  twist, 
and  the  other  triplet  with  a  left-handed  twist,  so  that  when  laid 
together  the  two  triplets  twist  together  into  a  single  string,  by 
partially  untwisting,  and  they  are  then  secured  together  by  a 

^  A  twig  is  cut  in  the  same  manner  -  That  is,  the  ends  belonging  to  the 

from  a  pomegranate  bush  to  form  the  base  of  the  leaflet  are  at  one  end  of 

urvardm.      And  the    Barsom  twigs  one  triplet,  and  at  the  other  end  of 

were  also   similarly   cut    in    former  the  other  trijilet. 
times,  before  metal  wires  were  used. 


SOME  PARSI  CEREMONIES.  397 

knot  at  tLe  other  end.  The  Aiwj'aonhanem  is  now  ready  for 
use,  and  is  laid  upon  the  Barsom-dan, 

The  varasa  consists  of  three,  five,  or  seven  hairs  from  the  tail 
of  a  white  bull,  which  are  tied  to  a  gold  ^  ring,  as  large  as  a 
thumb-ring.  The  ring  has  a  gap  in  its  circumference,  as  the 
metal  wire  of  which  it  is  formed  does  not  quite  meet.  This 
Varasa,  when  once  prepared,  can  be  used  as  long  as  the  bull 
lives,  whose  hair  has  been  taken.  But  as  often  as  it  is  used  it 
must  be  consecrated  by  the  recital  of  the  looi  names  of  God, 
that  is,  by  ten  repetitions  of  the  loi  names,  which  are  all  that 
are  now  known. 

The  zaothra  or  Zor  is  water  consecrated  in  the  following  man- 
ner : — The  priest  takes  two  metal  cups  in  his  hands,  and  recites 
ashem-vohu  thrice,  fravardne  (Yas.  iii.  24,  to)  frasastayaeclia, 
ahvyo  vaimMhyo  (as  in  Frag.  vii.  i,  p.  t^^iZi  ^ •  ^^)  fi'cisastai/aecha, 
and  yatlici  aim  vairyo  (Yas.  iii.  25,  omitting  W.'s  second  line). 
Then  reciting  the  words  frd  te  staomaide  he  fills  both  cups  with 
water,  and  continues  reciting  yathd'  ah-A  vairyo  twice,  yasnemcha 
vahmemcha  aojascha  zavarecha  dfrindvii  (Yasht  i.  23),  and 
aiwyo  varmhibyo  (as  before,  to)  tava  ahurdne  aJmrahe.  These 
last  three  words  must  be  recited  twice,  once  aloud  and  once  mut- 
tered as  a  hdj.  The  water  is  now  Zor,  and  the  cups  are  placed 
on  the  taliht,  one  over  the  other,  with  a  saucer  between  them. 

The  Barsom  consists  of  a  number  of  slender  rods  or  tdi,  for- 
merly twigs  of  some  particular  trees,  but  now  thin  metal  wires 
are  generally  used.  The  number  of  these  tdt  depends  upon 
the  nature  of  the  ceremony  to  be  celebrated.  For  Ijashne 
(yazifikn)  alone  21  tdt  are  required,  for  Ijashne  with  Vendidad 
and  Visparad  2i3  ''<^  fo^  Yasht-i  Ilapithwin  13  tdi,  for  Darun 
Baj  five  tdt,  or  seven  when  a  priest  becomes  a  herbad.^  Besides 
these  tdt,  which  form  the  actual  Barsom,  two  other  tdi  are  re- 
quired, one  to  lie  across  the  saucer  which  contains  the  milk  or 
gdush  jivya,  and  the  other  to  lie  on  the  projecting  feet  of  the 

1  Or  silver,  copper,  or  brass.  from  any  tree  whose  trunk  is  sound, 

2  According  to  other  information  and  that  the}-  should  be  from  one  to 
the  Darun  Biij  requires  seven  tut  of  three  spans  in  length  and  a  barley- 
double  thickness,  or  nine  if  performed  corn  in  thickness,  and  their  number 
in  the  house  of  a  king  or  chief  high-  either  3,  5,  7,  9,  12,  15,  21,  33,  69,  or 
priest.  In  the  Nirangistan  it  is  stated  551,  according  to  the  circumstancns  of 
that  the  Barsom  twigs  may  be  cut  the  ceremony. 


398  NOTES  DESCRIPTIVE  OF 

two  vidh-rA  wbicL  form  the  Barsom-dan  ;  the  first  of  these  tdi  is 
called  the  jivdm,  the  other  the  frdjdm.     At  first  the  Fragam  is 
laid  at  one  end  of  the  bundle  of  tdl  forming  the  Barsom,  so  that 
it  projects  beyond  the  rest,  as  the  priest  takes  the  bundle  in  his 
left  hand  and  the  Jivam  in  his  right ;  the  Aiwyaonhem  being 
laid  upon  the  two  mdh-ru.     The  priest  then  recites  ashem  vohu 
thrice,  fravardne  (Yas.  iii.  24,  to)  frasastayaecha,  Ichshathrahe, 
&c.    (Siroz.   i.    4),^   hhshnaothra  yasndicha  vahmdicha  khshnao- 
thrdicka  frasastayaecha,  y.   a.   v.^  (Yas.  iii.    25,   omitting  W.'s 
second  line,  to)  mraotd,  ashem  a.  v.,^  y.  a.  v.  twice,  yasiiemeha 
(Yt.   i.   23,  to)  dfrtndmi,   Ichshathrahe,  &c.   (Siroz.  i.  4),  a.   v. 
thrice,  and  fravardne  (Yas.  iii.   24,  to)  frasastayaecha.     Then 
while  reciting  the  words  Ahurahe  viazddo  raevato  qarenanhato 
the  priest  proceeds  to  tie  the  Barsom  together  with  the  Aiwyaon- 
hanem  in  the  following  manner  : — The  Jivam  being  held  in  his 
right  hand,  and  the  Fragam  projecting  from  the  Barsom  held  in  his 
left  hand,  he  prepares  to  pass  the  Aiwyaonhanem  thrice  round 
the  middle  of  the  Barsom  and  to  tie  it  with  knots,  in  the  same 
way  as  the  kusti  or  sacred  thread-girdle  is  secured  round  the 
waist  of  a  Parsi  man  or  woman.*     But,  first,  the  above  formulas, 
from  hhshnaothra  to  mraot'd,  must  be  again  recited,  and  then 
ashem  a.  v.  thrice.^     Each  time  the  words  ashem  ashem  vohu  are 
uttered  the  Barsom  must  be  dipped  in  water  and  again  taken 
out.     This  water,  which  is  not  Zor,  and  will  be  used  in  the  Homa 
ceremony,  is  called  apem  haoviymi.     The  Barsom  is  now  tied 
together  with  two  double  knots  in  the  Aiwyaonhem,  one  above 
and  the  other  below,  while  reciting  y.  a.  v.  twice ;  and  the  two 


1  Formerly,  before  wires  were  used,  and  tlie  ends  passed  round  tlie  wiiist 

only  the  words  Ahurahe  mazddo  rae-  by  the  hands  meeting  behind,  chang- 

vaio  qarenanhato  were  used.  ing  ends  there,    and  bringing  them 

-  Henceforth  yathd  ah  A  vairyQ  will  round  again  to  the  front,  so  that  the 

be  contracted  into  y.  a.  v.,  and  ashem  string  has   then  twice  encircled  the 

vohu  into  a.  v.    In  all  cases  the  whole  waist.     The   loug  hanging  ends  are 

formula  is  to  be  understood,  when  it  is  then  tied  loosely  together   in  front, 

not  otherwise  stated.  first  with   a  right-handed  knot  and 

3  Wherever  ashem  a.  v.  is  used  it  then  with   a  left-handed  knot ;   and 

indicates  that  the  first  word  {ashem)  the  long  loose  ends  are  finally  passed 

of  the  formula  is  spoken  twice.  backwards,  tlie  third  time  round  the 

'    4  This    is   done    as   follows  :— The  waist,  and  tied  again  behind  with  a 

middleof  thestring,beingtakeninthe  similar  double  knot, 

hands,  is  applied  to  the  waist  (outside  ^  Formerly,  four  times, 
the  sadarah  or  muslin  shirt)  in  front, 


SOME  PARSI  CEREMONIES.  399 

projecting  ends  are  cut  to  an  equal  length  with  the  knife,  each 
time  reciting  y.  a.  v.,  and  a  single  knot  is  tied  in  each  end  ;  after 
these  two  y.  a.  v.  must  follow  yasnemcha,  &c.  (as  before).  The 
priest  then  says  Ahurahe  mazddo  raevato  aloud,  and  lays  the 
properly-arranged  Barsom  on  the  two  Mah-rfi  while  muttering 
the  same  words  as  a  Baj.  After  the  Barsom  is  thus  laid  on  the 
Barsom-dan  he  takes  out  the  Frdgam,  and  lays  it  upon  the  pro- 
jecting feet  of  the  two  Mah-rli. 

The  Homa  twigs  must  next  be  purified.  These  twigs  are 
brought  from  Iran  by  traders,  and  are,  therefore,  considered 
impure  until  they  have  been  purified,  laid  aside  for  a  year,  and 
again  purified.  The  purification  is  accomplished  by  water  and 
formulas.  The  priest  takes  the  Homa  twig  (one  is  sufiicient)  in 
his  right  hand,  holding  a  copper  goblet  of  water  in  his  left,  from 
which  he  pours  water,  at  intervals,  over  the  twig  as  he  thrice 
recites  khshnaothra  Ahurahe  mazddo,  &c.,  and  a.  v.  He  then 
takes  the  Jivam  in  his  left  hand  and  recites  a.  v.  thrice,  frava- 
rdne  (Yas.  iii.  24,  to)  frasastayaecha,  haoynahe  ashavazanho 
(Yas.  X.  I,  but  only  these  two  words),  Ichshnaothra,  &c.  (as  in 
p.  398,  lines  8-10  above,  to)  mraottl,  and  ashem  a.  v.  thrice,  each 
time  dipping  the  Jivam  and  Homa,  which  he  holds  one  in  each 
hand,  into  the  water.  Then  follow  y.  a.  v.  twice,  yasnemcha 
(Yt.  i.  23,  to)  dfrindmi,  and  haomahe  ashavazanho ;  these  last 
two  words  must  be  first  spoken  aloud,  and  then  repeated  in  a 
low  voice  as  a  Baj.  The  Homa  twig  is  now  laid  in  its  place,  in 
a  metal  saucer  on  the  takht. 

The  priest  takes  three  small  pieces  of  the  Homa  and  one  of 
the  Urvaram  (the  hadhdna^patam  or  pomegranate  twig),  and 
lays  them  on  the  Havanim  or  Homa  mortar  which  is  placed, 
upside  down,  upon  the  tahht.  When  the  Varasa  is  to  be  laid  in 
its  place,  in  a  cup  on  the  ta'klii,  after  being  consecrated,  it  must 
be  held  below  between  the  fingers. 

The  Homa  juice  is  now  to  be  prepared.  The  priest  takes  the 
Varasa  and  Jiv^m  ^  in  his  hands,  and  recites  a.  v.  thrice,  frava- 
rdne  (to)  frasastayaecha,  and  Zarathushtrahe  Spitdmahe  (to) 
mraotxl.  He  then  dips  the  Varasa  into  a  cup  full  of  water, 
utters  the  word  ashem  twice  (once  aloud  and  once  in  a  low  voice 
as  a  Baj),  and  then  lays  the  Varasa  in  its  proper  place. 

1  Sume  call  this  the  Zor  tdi. 


400  NOTES  DESCRIPTIVE  OF 

The  priest  then  recites  Yas.  xxiv.  1-9  as  far  as  the  words 
mananho  shicyanti,  but  he  must  omit  the  clause  containing  the 
Avords  gam  jtvyam  (in  vers,  i  and  6),  because  the  milk  is  not  yet 
in  its  place  on  the  takht.  He  must  then  recite  ydosclia  iiiti 
(Yas.  iv.  4-8,  to)  rdmano  qdstraJie,  and  next  invoke  the  angels 
of  the  day  and  the  month  in  which  the  ceremony  is  being  cele- 
brated ;  for  instance,  if  the  ceremony  be  performed  on  the  day 
of  Spendarmad  in  the  month  of  Ardibahisht,  he  must  recite 
spentaydo  vanhuydo  drmatoishy.  v.  kh.f.  dad  dtsh  dvaedhai/amahi, 
and  then  ashahe  vahishtaM  sraeshtahe  y.  v.  kh.  f.  dad  dtsh 
dvaedhayamahi.  Then  follow  tava  dtliro  (Yas.  iv.  17-22,  to) 
dad  dtsh  dvaedhayamahi,  ZarathusMrahe  (Yas.  iv.  23,  to)  dad 
d.  d.,  ashaondni  (Yas.  iv.  24,  to)  dad  d.  d.,  vtspaelbyo  vanhu- 
dhdhyo  (Yas.  iv.  25,  to)  vahishtdd,  and  Yas.  xxv.  1-3  (omitting 
the  clause  containing  the  words  gam  jivyavi  in  ver.  i,  as  before). 
While  reciting  the  words  ameshd  spentd  (Yas.  xxv.  i),  the  priest 
knocks  the  Havanim  thrice  upon  the  taliht ;  at  the  words  imem 
haomem  ashaya  xizddtem  yazamaide  he  puts  the  small  pieces  of 
the  Homa  twig  into  the  Havanim,  and  at  the  words  imdmchd 
urvardm  hadhdnaepatam  he  puts  in  the  small  piece  of  the 
Urvaram  (the  dirakhf-i  and?-  or  pomegranate  twig).  He  pours 
a  little  of  the  consecrated  water  from  the  upper  Zor  cup  into  the 
Havanim  while  uttering  the  words  aiivyo  vamihihyo  imdo 
zaotlirdo  (&c.,  to)  yaz.;  and  also  more  water  {apem  haomydm) 
from  the  large  vessel  to  his  right  (which  contains  the  pestle  and 
strainer)  while  uttering  the  words  aiwyo  vamihihyo  apemcha 
haomydm  yaz.  After  Yas.  xxv.  3,  there  follows  Zarathushtrahe 
(Yas.  xxvi.  5,  to)  yaz.,  on  the  recitation  of  which  the  priest  bows 
to  the  Varasa.  He  then  takes  the  strainer  out  of  the  water  in 
the  large  vessel  to  his  right,  and  places  it  upon  a  cup  (the  Homa- 
juice  cup)  before  him  while  reciting  ii'istandm  urvdno  (Yas. 
xxvi.  II,  to)  fravashayo,  followed  by  yciilie  Jidldm  (ikc,  to) 
tdoschd  yaz?-  Then,  while  reciting  atlid  ratush  ashddchtd  hachd 
frd  ashava  vidhvdo  mraotd,  he  takes  the  pestle  out  of  the  water, 
holding  it  so  as  to  touch,  with  the  lower  part  of  its  side,  the 
north-eastern    part  of   the  rim   of   the   large  water-vessel,   and 

1  "When  Nirang-din  ((75mfe)  or  Var-  incense   lyiEg  near  the   fire   is  now 

asa  is  to  be  prepared  (each  of  wliich  thrown  into  it.     This  is   not  done, 

requires  a  formal  Tjashne  with  Homa),  however,  in  the  ordinary  Ijashne. 
a  small  jjiece  of  the  sandal-wood  and 


SOME  PARSI  CEREMONIES.  401 

passes  it  all  round  in  contact  with  the  rim  (N.  W.  S.  E.)  to  the 
same  point  again.     With  the  pestle  in  his  hand  he  recites  aetad 
(Yas.  xxvii.  i,  to)  dazdydi  ahiimcha  (he  knocks  the  lower  end  of 
the    pestle    on    the    tahht)    7'atdtncha    (he  :  knocks    its   upper 
end  on  the  talcht)  yim  AJmt^em  mazclam  (he  bows  to  the  fire). 
Continuing   the   recitation    of    Yas.    xxvii.    i,   the    Devas    are 
beaten  by  striking  sonorous  blows  with  the  pestle  on  the  outside 
of  the  mortar  in  the  following  manner  : — With  a  blow  on  the 
eastern  side  he  recites  snathAi  Anrahe  mainyeush  drvato,  with  a 
blow  on  the  southern  side  he  recites  snathdi  Aeshmahe  khrvt- 
draosh,   with    a   blow   on   the  western  side  he  recites   snathdi 
Mdzainyandm  daevanani,  with  a  blow  on  the  northern  side  he 
recites  snathdi  vtspandm  daevandm,  with  three  more  blows  on  the 
northern  side  he  recites  daevanmn  varenyandmcha  drvatdm.   The 
priest  then  recites  in  a  low  voice,  as  a  Baj,  the  Pazand  formula 
shikasta  Gand-viainyd,  &c./  and  fradathdi  ahurahe  (Yas.  xxvii. 
2,  to)  ashaondm  aloud,  and  then  begins  to  pound  the  Homa  and 
Urvaram  in  the  mortar  while  reciting  y.  a.  v.  four  times ;  dur- 
ing the  first  three  he  pounds  with  the  pestle  on  the  bottom  of 
the  mortar,  but  during  the  fourth  he  strikes  it  against  the  sides, 
so  as  to  produce  a  ringing  sound.     He  continues  the  same  prac- 
tice during  four  recitations  of  mazdd  ad  moi  (Yas.  xxxiv.  15,  to) 
ahvijn,  and  four  recitations  of  d  Ah^yemd  ishyo  (Yas.  liv,  i,  to) 
mazddo,  pounding  on   the   bottom   during  the  first  three,  and 
against  the  sides,  with  a  ringing  sound,  during  the  fourth.     He 
next  takes  the  upper  Zor  cup  in  his  hand,  recites  a.  v.  thrice, 
and  pours  a  little  Zor  into  the  mortar  each  time  he  utters  the 
word  ashevi.     Then,  he  recites  haoma  pairi-hareshyaMe  (Yas. 
xxvii,  6,  7,  to)  vachdm  in  eleven  portions  ;  during  the  recital  of 
each  portion  he  passes  the  pestle  once  round  (N.  W,  S.  E.)  in 
contact  with  the  inside  of  the  mortar  rim.     He  then  takes  the 
fragments  of  Homa  and  Urvaram  out  of  the  mortar,  and,  holding 
them  between  his  fingers  and  thumb,  he  touches  with  them  the 
Barsom  at  the  word  athd  (Yas.  xxvii.  7),  the  saucer  for  the  milk 
at  the  words  zi  ne,  the   Homa   cup  at  the  word  hiimdyd,  the 
Arvis-gah  at  the  word   tara,  and  throws   them  back  into  the 
mortar  at  the  word  anhen.     He  next  takes  the  upper  Zor  cup  in 

^  SomeMohadsrepeat  the  formulas  the  mortar;  but  they  strike  them 
for  beating  Angro-mainyush  aud  the  while  reciting  the  formula /rac^a^Aai, 
Devas  without  striking  blows  upon     &c.  (Yas.  xxvii.  2), 

2  C 


402  NOTES  DESCRIPTIVE  OF 

his  left  band,  and  continues  to  pound  the  Homa  with  his  right 
hand,  while  reciting  four  y.a.v.in  the  following  manner: — During 
the  first  y.  a.  v.  at  the  word  athd  he  pours  a  little  Zor  into  the 
mortar  with  his  left   hand,  and  continues  to  pound  with  his 
richt ;  at  the  word  yivi  he  passes  the  pestle  once  round  (as 
before)  in  contact  with  the  inside  of  the  mortar  rim;  and  at 
the  last  word,  vdstdrem,  he  pours  the  whole  contents  of   the 
mortar  (Homa,  Urvaram,  and  water)  into  the  strainer,  whence 
all  the  liquid   portion  of  the  contents  runs  through  into  the 
Homa-juice  cup  below  it  (see  p.  400,  line  30).     The  solid  por- 
tion remaining  in  the  strainer  is  then  thrown  back  into  the 
mortar,  and  the  pounding  is  resumed  while  the  second  7/.  a.  v.  is 
recited  to  the  word  ashdd,  when  more  Zor  is  poured  into  the 
mortar  and  the  after  proceedings  are  similar  to  those  connected 
with  the  first  y.  a.  v.    A  similar  routine  is  adopted  in  connection 
with  the  third  and  fourth  y.  a.  v.,  the  Zor  being  poured  into  the 
mortar  at  the  word  hachd  in  the  third,  and  at  the  word  dazdd  in 
the  fourth.    By  means  of  these  four  successive  dilutions,  pound- 
ings, and  strainings,  all  the  properties  of  the  Homa  juice  are 
supposed  to  be  extracted.     The  solid  remains  of  the  twigs,  out 
of  which  the  liquid  has  been  well  squeezed  by  the  fingers  in  the 
strainer,  are  laid  aside  to  dry  thoroughly,^  and  the  pestle  is 
washed  and  returned  to  its  place. 

The  priest  then  takes  the  strainer  off  the  Homa-juice  cup 
while  reciting  ye  sevishto  (Yas.  xxxiii.  11,  to)  ^^ai^i  thrice,  and  at 
the  final  repetition  the  last  words,  dddi  hihydichtd  jMiti,  must  be 
recited  thrice.  The  strainer  is  now  washed  and  laid  upon  the 
mortar  ;  the  Varasa  is  put  into  the  strainer  so  that  the  knots  in 
the  hairs  are  upwards,  and  the  priest  recites  «s  7n6i  uzdreshvd 
(Yas.  xxxiii.  12-14,  to)  hhshathremchd,  followed  by  a.  v.  twice, 
once  aloud  and  once  in  a  low  voice  as  a  Baj.  He  then  pours 
all  the  Zor  which  remains  in  the  upper  Zor  cup  into  the  strainer, 
through  which  it  runs  into  the  mortar  ;  and  the  upper  Zor  cup 
is  then  placed  near  the  lower  one,  instead  of  over  it  as  hereto- 
fore. He  next  takes  the  strainer,  containing  the  Varasa,  in  his 
rifht  hand,  and  the  Homa-juice  cup  in  his  left,  and  proceeds  to 
recite  humata  Mlchta  hvarshta  in  a  low  voice,  as  a  Baj.     When 

1  "When  thorouglily  dry,  tliey  are  put  into  the  fire  at  the  time  of  Atasli 
Ny^yish. 


SOME  PA  RSI  CEREMONIES.  403 

he  mutters  the  word  humata  he  pours  a  few  drops  of  the  Homa 
juice  through  the  strainer  on  to  the  Arvis-gah ;  when  he  mutters 
the  word  huhhta  he  pours  a  few  drops,  in  a  similar  manner,  into 
the  upper  Zor  cup,  which  has  just  been  emptied  ;  when  he 
mutters  the  word  hvarshta  he  pours  a  few  drops,  in  a  similar 
manner,  into  the  mortar ;  and  he  does  this  thrice.  The  Homa- 
juice  cup  is  now  put  in  its  proper  place,  the  strainer  containing 
the  Varasa  is  placed  upon  it,  all  the  liquid  in  the  mortar  is 
poured  into  the  strainer,  through  which  it  flows  into  the  Homa- 
juice  cup,  and  the  mortar  is  put  into  its  proper  place.  The 
gCmsh-jivya  or  milk-saucer  is  also  put  into  its  proper  place  near 
the  two  Mah-ril.  The  priest  then  takes  the  Varasa  in  his  left 
hand  and  recites  y.  a.  v.  twice,  yasnemcha  (Yt.  i.  23,  to)  dfrt- 
nami,  and  Zarathushirahe  Spifdmake  ashaono  fravasJiee  twice, 
once  aloud  and  once  in  a  low  voice.  He  then  dips  the  Varasa 
into  the  Zor,  and  puts  it  into  its  proper  place.  The  strainer  is 
also  put  back  into  the  large  water-vessel,  and  the  Jiv^m  is  laid 
upon  the  milk  saucer.  1  The  priest  must  now  leave  the  Arvis-gdh 
and  go  outside,  reciting  a.  v.  once,  ahmdi  raeshcha  (Yt.  i.  t^'t,), 
hazanrem,  jam  me,  and  Tcerfe  mozda  (Paz.),  He  must  then  per- 
form the  Kusti  ceremony,  and  the  preparatory  ceremonial  is 
complete, 

2. — The,  Ijashne  Ceremony. 

After  the  Paragnah  is  completed,  the  Zota  and  Easpi  go  to  the 
taklit  on  which  all  the  necessary  things  (Homa  juice,  &c.)  have 
been  placed,  and  each  of  them  repeats  a.  v.  once ;  that  is,  they 
take  the  Baj  inwardly  in  this  manner.  They  then  recite  y.  a.  v. 
several  times,  the  number  depending  upon  the  nature  of  the 
Ijashne,  If  it  be  celebrated  for  Ptapithwin,  twelve  are  necessary; 
if  for  Hormazd,  ten;  if  for  the  Frohars,  eight;  if  for  Srosh, 
five  ;  and  if  for  all  the  Yazads,  seven. 

The  Zota  then  takes  the  consecrated  water  in  his  hand,  and 
goes  to  the  stone  on  which  the  fire-vase  stands,  where  he  recites 
nemase  te  dtarsh  (Atash  Nyayish  4,  to)  yazata,  a.  v.,  and  washes 
the  stone,  walking  round  it ;  he  then  washes  his  hands  (by  pour- 
ing the  water  over  them)  and  returns  to  his  place. 

He  then  mutters  humata  hdkhta  hvarshta  in  a  low  voice,  as  a 
Baj,  and  announces  for  whom  the  Ijashne  is  being  celebrated  by 

^  If  any  incense  happens  to  be  at  band,  it  may  now  be  thrown  into  the  fire. 


404  NOTES  DESCRIPTIVE  OF 

reciting  iii  hhshnilman  (of  so-and-so)  he  rasdd  (ifec,  to)  patit  hom. 
Then  ioWow  frastuye  (Yas.  xi.  17,  18),  or.  v.  thrice,  and /mm?'drte, 
&c. ;  then  the  Uishnuman  (according  to  the  Sirozah)  of  each  of 
the  angels  in  whose  honour  the  Ijashne  is  being  celebrated  ;  then 
2/.  a.  V.  (&c.,  as  in  Yas.  iii.  25,  omitting  W.'s  second  line)  ;  and 
then  a.  v.  thrice,  and  y.  a.  v.  four  times ;  the  last  time  the  final 
words,  dadad  vdstdrem,  must  be  uttered  thrice. 

The  Zota  now  takes  the  Barsom  in  his  hand,  and  both  priests 
begin  to  recite  nivaedhayemi  (Yas.  i.  i,  2,  to)  ameshanam  spen- 
tanam.     The  Zota  then  continues  to  recite  alone  Yas.  i.  3-23. 

Continuing  to  recite  Yas.  ii.,  at  the  words  zaothra  dyese,  &c. 
(ver.  i),  the  Zota  takes  the  Barsom  in  both  hands  and  holds  it 
upon  the  two  Mah-rtl;  at  the  words  ahmya  zaothre,  (fee.  (ver.  2), 
he  lays  his  hand  upon  the  Mah-ril,  and  continues  to  recite  as  far 
as  Yas.  vii.  25  without  further  action;  but  while  reciting  y.  a.  v. 
twice  (in  ver.  25)  a  little  sandal-wood  and  incense  are  thrown 
into  the  fire  by  the  Raspi. 

The  Zota  continues  to  recite  as  far  as  Yas.  viii.  i,  and  at  the 
word  paiti-jamydd  more  sandal-wood  and  incense  are  thrown  on 
the  fire  by  the  Easpi,  who  then  advances  towards  the  Zota  and 
says  qarata  naro  (Yas.  viii.  2,  to)  frereticha.  The  Zota  then 
continues  reciting  amesha  spenta  (Yas.  viii.  3,  4,  to)  jasaiti,  and 
a.  V.  thrice.  He  then  takes  a  very  small  piece  of  the  Darun  and 
eats  it,  afterwards  washing  his  mouth  with  water. 

The  Zota  then  recites  Yas.  viii.  5-7,  and  both  priests  continue 
the  recitation  of  Yas.  viii.  8 — ix.  i,  as  far  as  the  word  Zarathush- 
trem.  The  Zota  then  recites  the  Homa  Yasht  to  the  words  vish 
apdm  (Yas.  x.  i),  when  he  pours  water  over  the  Barsom,  and 
continues  reciting  to  Yas.  x.  20. 

Yas.  X.  21 — xi.  8  is  recited  by  both  priests.  The  Easpi  then 
pours  water  over  his  hand,  takes  the  Homa-juice  cup  in  his  hand, 
and  goes  to  the  fire,  into  which  he  throws  some  sandal-wood  and 
incense.  He  then  returns  to  the  Zota  and  says  yd  no  aevo  (Yas. 
xi.  9,  to)  yaetJima,  handing  the  Homa-juice  cup  over  to  the  Zota, 
who  recites  pairi-te  (Yas.  xi.  10,  11,  to)  vahishtem  asti,  and  then 
drinks  the  Homa  juice,  continuing  to  recite  alone  as  far  as 
ravascha  (compare  Yas.  viii.  8),  whenceforward  both  priests 
recite  to  the  end  of  Yas.  xi.  18. 

The  recitation  is  then  continued  by  the  Zota  alone.     From 


SOME  PARSI  CEREMONIES.  405 

y.  a.  V.  (four  times  recited)  in  Yas.  xiii.  7,  to  the  end  of  yehhe 
hdtdm  (ver.  8)  he  sprinkles  the  Barsom  with  some  of  the  milk 
{gdush  jivya).  At  the  words  sasticha  vaiitdcha  (Yas.  xv.  i)  he 
pours  half  the  milk  into  the  cup  which  he  emptied  when  drink- 
ing the  Homa  juice.  And  at  the  words  Ahuixm  mazddvi  (Yas. 
xvi.  i)  he  puts  the  mortar  into  the  large  water-vessel  standing  to 
his  right. 

Both  priests  recite  Yas.  xviii.  2,  3  twice,  and  each  time  the 
Zota  sprinkles  the  Barsom  with  the  milk.  He  then  continues 
the  recitation  alone,  and  at  the  words  akunem  vaii'hn  yaz.  (Yas. 
xviii.  9)  he  stretches  out  his  legs  (hitherto  crossed),  lays  the 
right  toes  upon  the  left,  and  sprinkles  the  Barsom  with  the  milk. 
While  reciting  Yas.  xxii.  1-3,  and  20-27,  ^^  again  sprinkles  the 
Barsom  with  the  milk. 

When  the  Zota  commences  Yas.  xxiv.  he  takes  the  mortar  out 
of  the  large  water-vessel,  sets  it  again  upon  the  tahht  upside 
down,  and  at  the  beginning  of  Yas.  xxv.  he  knocks  it  thrice 
upon  the  tahht  and  turns  it  right  side  upwards.  At  the  words 
imem  haomem  (Yas.  xxv.  i)  he  puts  a  small  piece  of  the  Homa 
twig  into  the  mortar,  and  proceeds  exactly  in  the  same  manner 
as  in  the  Paragnah  ceremony  (see  p.  400,  lines  17-29),  except 
that  while  reciting  the  clause  containing  the  words  gam  jlvydrn 
(which  is  omitted  in  the  Paragnah)  he  pours  a  little  of  the  milk 
into  the  mortar.  When  he  recites  Yas.  xxvi.  7,  he  takes  the 
strainer  out  of  the  large  water-vessel  and  places  it  upon  the 
Homa-juice  cup  on  the  taMit.  Just  before  Yas.  xxvii.  comes 
atlid  ratush  ashddchtd  hackd  frd  ashava  vtdhvdo  mraotd  (see  Yas. 
vii.  28),  when  the  Zota  takes  the  pestle  into  his  hand,  and  pro- 
ceeds with  the  pounding  of  the  Homa  and  the  recitation  of  Yas. 
xxvii.  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  Paragnah  ceremony 
(see  pp.  400,  401). 

The  recitation  of  the  Gathas  is  now  commenced.  The  first 
verse  ahyd  ydsd,  tfec.  (Yas.  xxviii.  i,  Sp.),  is  recited  twice  by 
both  priests  while  the  Zota  sprinkles  the  Barsom  with  the  milk. 
And  at  the  end  of  each  Ha  of  the  Ahunavaiti  Gatha  (Yas. 
xxviii. — xxxiv.)  the  same  verse  (aliyd  yarn,  &c.)  is  again  twice 
recited  while  the  Zota  sprinkles  the  Barsom  with  the  milk. 
When  Yas.  xxxi.  5  and  22  are  recited  the  Zota  pounds  the 
Homa,  also  at  the  words  hdmydo  haptaithe  (Yas.  xxxii.  3)  and 


4o6  NOTES  DESCRIPTIVE  OF 

ye  ishpdd  (Yas.  xxxii.  13),  and  at  the  words  nazdlshtdm  clrujem 
(Yas.  xxxiii.  4)  and  d  md  (Yas.  xxsiii.  7) ;  this  pounding  is  of 
two  kinds,  the  first  time  in  each  Ha  the  pestle  strikes  upon  the 
bottom  of  the  mortar,  but  the  second  time  it  strikes  against  the 
sides  so  as  to  produce  a  ringing  sound.  When  Yas.  xxxiii.  10 
is  recited,  the  contents  of  the  mortar  are  poured  into  the  strainer, 
and  the  liquid  runs  through  it  into  the  Homa-juice  cup  below. 
The  mortar  is  then  set  down,  upside  down,  and  the  cup  with  the 
Homa  juice  (pardhom)  is  placed  upon  it. 

In  the  other  four  Gathas  the  first  verse  of  each  Gatha  is  re- 
cited twice,  and  again  repeated  twice  at  the  end  of  each  Ha  the 
Gatha  contains.  And  each  time  these  first  verses  are  recited,  the 
Zota  sprinkles  the  Barsom  with  the  milk,  as  in  the  first  Gatha. 

When  Yas.  lix.  3 1  is  recited  by  the  Zota,  he  pours  some  Zor 
and  milk  {gdush  jivya)  into  the  milk  saucer  standing  near  the 
two  Mah-rii.  After  the  words  stavas  ashd,  &c.  (Yas.  Ixi.  5),  he 
takes  the  Barsom  from  the  two  Mah-ru,  and,  standing  up  and 
looking  at  the  fire,  he  recites  Yas,  Ixii.  (the  dtash  nydyish).  At 
the  word  yaozhcldtcim  (Yas.  Ixii.  10)  he  sits  down  again;  and  at 
the  beginning  of  each  of  the  three  a.  v.  which  follow,  he  pours 
a  little  more  Zor  into  the  milk  saucer.  While  reciting  Yas. 
Ixiii.  I,  he  sprinkles  the  Barsom  with  Zor.  After  the  word 
avanhe  (Yas.  Ixiv.  3  =  1.  7)  he  lays  down  the  Barsom,  and  after 
the  words  vasnd  frashdtemem  (Yas.  Ixiv.  7)  he  turns  the  mortar 
right  side  upwards. 

At  the  beginning  of  Yas.  Ixv.  the  Zota  pours  some  Zor  into 
the  mortar,  at  the  word  perethd-frdkdm  he  pours  in  the  Homa 
juice,  and  at  the  word  haeshazydm  he  pours  in  some  of  the  milk. 
He  then  stands  up,  turns  towards  the  large  water-vessel,  and  re- 
cites the  remainder  of  Yas.  Ixv.  1-15  (the  dhdn  nydyish).  At  the 
words  yeiihe  me  asMd  (ver.  16)  he  sits  down  again,  aud  sprinkles 
the  Barsom  with  Zor,  and  continues  to  do  so  while  reciting  Yas. 
Ixvi.  and  Ixvii. 

The  Zota  then  takes  the  Zor  cup  in  his  hand  and  waves  it 
around  the  mortar  during  the  recitation  of  Yas.  Ixviii.  1-19. 
While  reciting  ver.  20,  he  mixes  the  water  in  both  Zor  cups.  The 
words  vanuhtm  idhdd  (ver.  21,  to)  apaschd  vdo  are  recited  thrice, 
and  each  time  he  says  apaschd  vdo  he  pours  some  Zor  into  the 
mortar.     At  the  word  jaidhimndo  he  pours  the  whole  of  the 


SOME  PARS  I  CEREMONIES.  407 

milk  {gdush  jivya)  into  the  mortar.  At  the  words  nemo  Almrdi 
mazddi  (ver.  22)  he  stands  up  and  turns  towards  the  east*  and 
the  three  phrases,  vohu  ulchshyd  (ver.  23,  to)  ushid-tawAm,  imd 
raochdo  harezislitem  harezemandm,  and  yahmi  (to)  jaso,  are  all 
recited  thrice.  At  the  words  nemo  ve  gdtlido  (ver,  24)  the  Zota 
sits  down  again  and  sprinkles  the  Barsom  with  Zor. 

The  recitation  is  then  continued  to  Yas.  Ixxi,  25,  where,  at  the 
words  gave  addish,  the  Zota  takes  the  Barsom  in  his  hand  and 
touches  the  tal-ht  twice  with  each  end  of  it.  At  the  words  ye 
Imddo  yo'i  heflti  (Yas.  Ixxii.)  he  gives  the  Barsom  to  the  Baspt, 
recites  two  y.  a.  v.,  yasnemcha,  tfcc,  and  so  gives  vip  the  Baj, 
The  Kaspi  lays  the  Barsom  on  the  two  Mah-ru,  and  both  priests 
go  out  of  the  Arvis-gah.  They  perform  the  liamdzor}  and  both 
give  up  the  Baj  again  by  reciting  yasnemcha  valimemcha  (to) 
dfrindmi.  They  both  perform  the  Kusti  ceremony,  and  the 
Ijashne  is  ended. 

The  Zota  goes  with  the  Kaspi  to  a  well  and  pours  the  Homa 
juice  and  milk  out  of  the  mortar  into  the  welL  When  he  does 
this  he  recites  one  y.  a.  v.  and  one  a.  v. 

3. — The  Darvin  Ceremony. 

Any  priest  who  wishes  to  perform  this  ceremony  must  either 
undergo  the  nine  nights'  purification  of  the  Barashnom  ceremony, 
or  must  still  retain  some  of  its  purifying  influence. 

The  small  flat  cakes,  called  Dariin  (draona)  and  Frasast  (see 
p,  396)  are  the  chief  materials  for  the  ceremony,  and  are  arranged 
as  shown  on  p.  408, 

The  two  Daruns  are  placed  by  the  priest  upon  the  left  side  of 
the  low  table  before  him,  the  nearer  one  having  a  small  piece  of 
butter  {gdush  hudhdo)  upon  it.  The  two  Frasasts  are  placed 
upon  the  right-hand  side  of  the  table,  the  further  one  having  a 
pomegranate  twig  (iirvardm)  upon  it,  and  between  this  and  the 
further  Darun  is  placed  an  egg. 

The  formulas  used  in  consecrating  the  Darllns  are  to  be  found 
in  the  Darun-yashtan,  First,  a  dthdja  is  recited  in  Pazand : 
humata  hulchta  hvarshta,  <fec. ;  then  comes  haresmana paiti-hareta 

1  This  is  a  formula  for  solemn  Md !  (the  greeted  answers) :  Der-ztvd 
greetings  at  festivals,  &:e. ,  as  follows :  sliiid  hud  J  (both  say):  Hamd  zur 
the  greater   (says)  :    Yazddn  iMndh    hamd  asho  bed. 


4o8 


NOTES  DESCRIPTIVE  OF 


SOUTH. 

Fire 

in  a  vase 

Sandal-wood 

on  a  stone. 

and  incense. 

Darfin. 

Egg. 

Frasast 

with 

urvardm. 

Darftn 

Water 

with 

Frasast 

vessel. 

butter. 

Priest  sitting 
with  Barsom. 

(Yas.  iii.  i — viii.  4).  Variations  are  introduced  according  to  the 
particular  object  of  the  ceremony  ;  and  the  name  of  him  in  whose 
honour  the  ceremony  is  performed  must  be  mentioned  after  the 
Ichshntmaine,  whether  he  be  an  angel  or  a  deceased  person.  After 
the  consecration,  pieces  are  broken  off  the  Daruns  by  the  officiat- 
ing priest,  and  eaten  by  himself  and  those  present,  beginning 
with  the  priests. 


4. — The  Afrtngdn  Ceremony. 

At  all  the  great  festivals,  and  on  solemn  occasions,  the  Darlln 
ceremony  is  followed  by  the  Afringan,  but  on  other  occasions  the 
Afriufran  can  be  celebrated  alone.  Like  the  Darun  ceremony,  it 
is  performed  in  honour  of  some  angel  or  deceased  person. 

A  tray  containing  wine  and  fruits  is  placed  before  the  fire,  and 
flowers  are  laid  to  the  left  of  the  tray.  The  ceremony  begins 
with  a  dibdja  spoken  by  the  Zota :  pa-ndm-i  Izad-i  bakhshd- 
yandah,  &c.,  followed  by  y.  a.  v.  several  times  repeated;  if 
the  ceremony  be  in  honour  of  Hormazd/  the  y.  a.  v.  must  be 
recited  ten  times ;  if  in  honour  of  Srosh,  five  times  ;  and 
en  other   occasions    in  proportion.     Then    follow  a.    v.  thrice, 

1  In  which  case  the  Afringan  is  recited  by  both  the  Zota  and  E^spi. 


SOME  PARSI  CEREMONIES.  409 

find  the  actual  Afringan  (see  Westergaard's  Zend-Avesta,  pp. 
318-324).  And  the  Zota  concludes  the  consecration  with  the 
Afrin :  Imma  zor  ham  asho  bed,  &c.  Afterwards  the  fruit  is  eaten 
and  the  wine  drunk  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Daruu  is  eaten. 

When  a  person  eats  or  drinks  the  consecrated  objects,  he  recites 
Yas.  xxxvii.  i,  followed  by  a.  v.  thrice.  After  all  is  eaten  and 
drunk  there  are  recited  a.  v.  four  times,  y.  a.  v.  twice,  a.  v.  once, 
and  then  ahmdi  raeshcha  (Yas.  Ixviii.  11). 


INDEX 


IN  DE  X. 


AbIlish,  io8 

Aban  Dytiyish,  98,  224,  364,  406 

yasht,  107,  197 

Abereta,  332 

Abraham,  16 

Abu  Jafir  Attavari,  123 

Achsemenes,  298 

AchEemenian,  54, 66,  80,  136,  302 

Achsemenians,  67 

Adam,  15,  211 

Adarbaijiln,  79 

Adarfrobag-i  Farukhzadan,  55,   loi, 

104,  no 
Adarx3ad-i  Adarfrobag-i  Farukhzadan, 

55       ■        ■ 

Admitan,  55 

Maraspendan,  loi,  119,  in,  320 

Adarpadyavand,  104 

Acihvaryu,  193,  270,  280,  282 

Aditi,  274 

Adityas,  273,  275 

Advice  of  a  certain  man,  no 

jEschylus,  4 

Aeshma,  185,  190,  308,  337 

Aesma,  394 

^thiopic,  31 

^tolians,  69 

Afarg,  386 

Afghanic,  67 

Afrasiyab,  361 

Afringan,  134,  139,  284,  408,  409 

dahman,  98,  142,  315 

gahanbar,  98,  225 

gS,tha,  98,  225 

rapithwin,  225 

Afringans,  224,  225,  262,  315 
Afrin-i  dahman,  99 

myazd,  98 

tu  peshgah-i  khuda,  113 

Zai-atusht,  98,  223 

Afsh-chithra,  200 

Agathias,  11,  299 

Agereptem,  239 

Aghish,  392,  393 

Agiari,  316 

Agni,  14s,  268,  269,  274,  27s,  279,  281 


Agnidhra,  281 

Agnihotri,  281 

Agnihotris,  270,  279,  280 

Agnishtoma,  281,  283 

Ahrinian,  8,  24,  53,  129,  133, 134,  252, 

277,  346,  352,  387 

Ahu,  187,  354,  371 

Ahuna-vairya,  141,  144,  179,  185-190, 
218,  248,  253,  333,  335,  374,  380, 
382 

Ahunavaiti.     See  Gdtha 

Ahura,  71,  141,  144,  149,  152,  i5S> 
158-164,  166,  168,  172,  173,  179, 
188,  197,  199,  211,  212,  256,  267, 
268,   271,   287,  288,  293,  295,  302, 

333.  335.  336 

Ahuramazda,  8,  10,  n,  35,  53,  54, 
140,  142,  148-159,  162,  163,  165- 
174,  185-189,  191-200,  202-211,214- 
222,  227-236,  238, 239, 243-247,  249, 
250,  253-258,  268,  271,  274,  290, 
295, 297, 302-311,  313, 315-319,322- 
336 

Ahuras,  301 

Ahuro  mazdao,  301 

Ahuryan,  174,  175,  191,  231 

Ahuti,  280 

Airan,  78.     See  Iran 

Airan-vej,  355-357 

Airman,  393 

Airyaman,  153,  196,  257,  273,  393 

Airyana-vaejO,  179,  227,  232,  233, 
299 

Airyema  ishyo,  142,  196 

Aishkata,  203 

Aitareya-brahmanam  (quoted),  270, 
271,  (referred  to)  182,  275,  284 

Ait-homand,  356 

Aiwisruthrema  gab,  159 

Aiwizu,  329 

Aiwyaonhanem,  286,  384,  396-398 

Akatasha,  337 

Akera  mano,  150,  303,  304,  308, 
380 

Akhtar,  200 

Akhtya,  107 


414 


INDEX. 


Alborz,    5,    190,    197,    203-205,    216, 

25s,  286,  361,  364,  387 
Aldebaran,  182 
Alexander  the  Great,  15,  54,  78,  81, 

123-125,  129,  130,  133,  136 
Amasis,  7 
Amerdail,  9,  307 
Ameretiid,  9,  10,  52,   167,  169,   191, 

218,  302,  305,  307 
Amerodad,  354 
Ameshaspend,  loi,  132 
Ameshaspends,    loi,   112,    132,    134, 

338,  339,    341,  343>  348,   382-384, 
3S6,  388,  389 
Amesliaspenta,  259 
Ameshaspentas,  9,  53,   167,  169-171, 
173,  187,   189,  210,  212,  215,  254- 
256,  305,  307,  334-336 
Ami,  364 

Amraianus  Marcellinus,  84 
Amsbaspends,  9,  24,  150,  194,  305 
Anahid,  197 
Anabita,  6,  10,  43,  197-199,  207,  208, 

259,  263.     See  Ard^vi 
Anaitis,  6,  10,  11,  43,  197 
Anandates,  10 

Andarj-i    Adarpad-i    Maraspendan, 
III 

dan^k  mard,  112 

Hudavar-i  danak,  108 

Kbusro-i  Kavadan,  no 

Andreas,  88 
ADgiras,  294 
Anglo-Saxon,  2B7 
Angra-mainyu,  53 

Angro-mainyusb,  8,  24, 147, 178,  179, 
187,   189,  223,  227-230,  234,  252- 
254,  272,   304,  305,  308,  309,  317, 
319,  333^  336,  337,  366,  401 
Anquetil  Duperron,  17-26,  28,  35,  38, 
44,  45,  47,  48,  50,  78,  105,  312,  394 
AnteZoroastrian,  258,  294 
Anushtubb,  175,  252 
Aogemadaecha,  99,  114 
Apa,  214 
Apaosho,  20  r 
Aparsin,  356 

Apem  baomyam,  398,  400 
Aphrodite,  6,  11,  197 
Apistan  val  yazdan,  121 
Apri,  284 
iiptoryama,  283 
Aptya,  278 
Arab,  6,  80,  123 
Arabian.  14,  16 
Arabic,  19,  20,  31,  34,  80-82,  84,  85, 

93,  "3,  125,  128,  152,  181 
Arabs,  6,  48 
Arachosia,  229 
Aramati,  274,  288 
Arana,  181 
Ararig,  361,  364 


Arangistan,  364 

Aranyaka,  181 

Ardai  fravard,  390 

Ardasbir-i  Papak^n,  86,  88,  90,  91, 

III,  125 
Ardavan,  78,  91 
Arda  Viraf,  106,  107 
'■ namah,  43,  46,  50,  54,  56, 

94,  97,  106,  124,  351,  354 
Ardibahisht,  9,   148,   195,   196,  225, 

306,  400 

yasht,  196 

Ai'dvi-sura  Andhita,    193,    194,   197, 

199.     See  Andhita. 
Aredush,  239 
Areimanios,  8-10 
Arezahi,  256,  369,  389 
Arezura,  316,  337,  381,  390 
Arhmen,  13,  14 
Ariaramnes,  298 
Aristotle,  8,  206,  298 
Ariyaramna,  298 
Arjasp,  109,  391 
Arktos,  206 
Armaiti,   9,  150-152,  155,  156,  158- 

160,  162,  167,  168,  173,    191,  207, 

232,  249,  250,  274,    297,  302,  306, 

319,  334 
Armenian,  39,  40,  67,  79,  139 

writers,  12-14 

Arrian,  124 

Arsacidans,  67,  79,  80 

Arsames,  298 

Arshama,  298 

Arshtad,  215 

Artaxerxes,  7,  263 

Arum,  364 

Arvis-gah,  332,  394-396,  401,  403,  407 

Aryaman,  273,  288 

Aryan,  180,  191,  200,  211,  214,  215, 

226,  230,  257,  288,  290,  292,  293 
Aryans,  242,  252,  294 
Aryas,  69 

Asha,  148,  151,  171,  185 
Asba-vabisbta,  9,  141,  302,  305,  306, 

333,  339-342,  344,   347,   349,   382, 

393 
Ashem,  217-219 
Asbem  vahishtem,  172,  191 
Ashem-vobu    formula,   97,   98,    174, 

212,  217,   246,  248,  374,  375,  384, 

385.    397-399.    401-404,    406-409; 

(translated)  141 
Ashi,  215,  256 
Asbirvad,  113 
Ashishang,  215,  389 
Asbi-vanubi,  184,  215,  216 
Ashi  yasht,  215,  216 
Ashkfmian,  54 
Asbtiid  yasht,  215,  216 
Ashvins,  272,  276,  308 
Asia  Minor,  202 


INDEX. 


415 


AskS.rum,  133 

Asmodeua,  337 

Asnatar,  332 

Aspandiarji  Friimji,  58 

Asparum,  133 

Asperena,  320,  332 

Assyrian,  81,  112,  125 

Assyrians,  6,  12 

Astarte,  6 

Asti,  153 

Asto-vidhotu,  321,  323 

Astvad-ereta,  213 

Asura,'  53,  71,  267-269,  271,  287 

Asuras,  268-271,  278,  279,  287 

Asuristan,  101 

Atarevakhsho,  280,  332 

Atariip&takan,  362 

Atash-gah,  11 

Atash-i  adaran,  140 

Behram,  140 

Atasli  nyayish,  98,  224,  364,  402, 403, 

406 
Atha  j  amy  ad,  224 
Atharvan,  280,  294 
Atharvaveda,  182,  196,  206,  257,  269, 

275-277,  279,  294 
Athenokles,  12 
Athrava,  182,  212,  280,  294 
Athwya,  178,  278 
Attic  dialect,  75 
Aiiharmazd,  104,  107,  111-113,  127, 

129-132,    134,     338-356.    358-367, 

369-372,   376,   378,    380-389,    391- 

393 

yasht,  9S 

Auharmazdi,  302 

Auramazda,  302,  304 

Aurvad-aspa,  298 

Avaoirishtem,  239 

Avan,  357 

Avaraoslitra,  213 

Avar  chim-i  dron,  112 

Avesta,  passim;  (defined)  14,  15,  67, 
68,  119-121,  226,  239,  262;  dic- 
tionary, 31,  47,  114;  glossary,  49, 
99;  language,  67-78,  177,  289; 
manuscripts,  18,  21,  29,  30,  45 ; 
(ordinary),  65,  72-75,  142,  147,  174, 
191 ;  (passages  noted),  227-240 ; 
quotations  in  Pahl.  trans.,  52,  60, 
61,  94,  98-100,  120,  177-179,  227, 
229-232,  235,  238,  243,  251,  316, 
322,  324,  355-358,  362,  363,  365, 
368,  369,  374,  376, 378,  385 ;  studies, 
18-42 ;  translations  (English)  44, 
(French)  18,  51,  52,  (German)  20, 
34,  41,  42,  (Gujrati)  58,  60 

Avesta  and  Zend,  1 19-122,  124,  125, 
134.  13s,  343,  345,  348,  353 

Avesta-.Sanskrit  glossary,  46 

Avijeh-din,  58,  102 

Ayathrema,  192 


Az,  343,  370,  371 
Azhi-chithra,  196 
Azhi-Dahaka,- 178,  198,  230,  363 
Azi,  246 
AzCuti,  280 

Babylon,  298 
Babylonia,  3,  4 
Babylonians,  6,  12,  197,  298 
Bactria,   14,  65,  169,  228,    263,   293, 

295,  297 
Bactrian,    65,    66,    73,   74,    76,    159,. 

290 
Badakhshan,  66 
Bagdad,  15,  108 
Bagha,  214,  273 
Baghan  yasht,  132 
Bagh  nask,  127 
Bagho-bakhta,  274 
Bahisht,  311 
Bahl,  359 
Bahraan,9,  255,  306,  358 

yasht,  43,  107,  108,  124 

Baj,  397,  399,  401-403,  407 

Bakan-yasto  nask,  132 

Bakhar,  359 

Bakhdhi,  228,  297 

Bako  nask,  127,  134 

Bakht-afrid,  no 

Balkh,  66,  208 

Balsar,  45 

Bambo,  107 

Banga,  336 

Barashnom,  197,  241,  320,  407 

Barhis,  283 

Barish  nask,  129 

Baroda,  279 

Barsom,  4,  13, 139,  171, 189,  214,  243, 

251,  259,  283,  315,  318,    330,  334, 

335,  366,  378,  384,  395-399,  401, 

404-408 
Barsom-dan,  396-399 , 
Barzii  Qiyamu-d-din,  126,  130 
Bavaria,  29 

Behistun,  66,  263.     See  BisiitUn 
Behram,    193,    213,   214,    256,    275, 

389 

yasht,  98,  213,  214,  275 

Bel,  II,  12 

Benfey,  35,  39,  263 

Berekhdha  iirmaiti,  297 

Berezo-hadhaokhdha,  142 

Berosos,  12,  298 

Bethlehem,  5 

Bhaga,  273,  274 

Bhagavad-gita,  273,  279 

Bhroch,  45,  57,  58,  95,  97 

Bible,  5,  15,  207,  309 

Birma,  123 

Bisutuu,  32,  298.     See  Behistun 

Bleeck,  44 

Bodok-zed,  342 


4i6 


INDEX. 


Bog  (God),  273 

Boi,  394 

Bokhai-a,  66 

Bombay,  17,  21,  31,  32,  44,47,50,  56, 
58,  59,  61,  95-97,  100,  104,  108, 
109,  III ;  government,  45,  46,  48 

Bopp,  29,  31 

Bor,  147 

Boundless  time,  12,  15,  24,  53,  382 

Brahma,  147,  192,  276,  288 

Brahmanam,  181 

Bralimanas,  269,  275 

Bralimanaspati,  274 

Bralimanical,  135,  170,  172,  179,  180, 
185,  258,  259,  267,  268,  270-272, 
276,  281,  282,  284-289,  292-294 

Brahmanism,  206,  272,  292 

Brahnians,  15,  21,  22,  39,  44,  69,  73, 
76-78,  121,  138,  140,  143,  147,  176, 
179-181,  191,  207,  258,  259,  262, 
264,  272,  273,  276,  279,  281-291, 

294,  307 

Brihaspati,  278,  279 

British  Museum,  87 

Brockhaus,  30,  31,  37,  39 

Buddha,  208,  263 

Buddhism,  22,  23,  208,  263 

Buddhist  caves,  50 

Buddhistic,  211 

Buddhists,  15,  123 

Buiti,  253,  337 

Bukhiir,  359 

Bundahish,  30,  33,  42-44>  46-48.  58, 
104,  105,  113,  114,  182,  192,  233, 
308,  309,  313,  333,  336,  350,  355- 

358,  361,  363,  364.  387,  392 
Burnouf,  22,  26,  29,  31,  36,  ■^,7,  39, 

312 
Bushasp,  369,  370 
Bushyfista,  245 
But,  379,  380 
Butal,  128 

Calendar  (Parsi),  57 

Cambyses,  7 

Caucasus,  67 

Celtic,  65 

Ceylon,  123 

Chaishpish,  298 

Chakiid-i  daitih,  387 

Chakhra,  230,  362 

Chaldajo-Pahlavi,  82,  83,  86,  87,  89, 

90 
Chaldaic,  199    • 

Chaldee,  20,  31,  39,  59,  62,  82,  86-88 
Changhraghach-namah,  43 
Chanranhach,  192 
Chatrang-namak,  no 
Chaturmasya  isliti,  285 
Chiclak  avistak-i  gasan,  98 
Chidrashto  uask,  131 
Chinese,  31,  107 


Chinvad  bridge,  128,  165,  224,  225, 

244,  255,  256,  311,   361,  366,  369, 

378,  387-389 
Christian,  12,  53,  103,  309,  311 ;  era, 

67,  73.  537,  263  . 
Christianity,  4,  312 
Christians,  12,  15,  104 
Churl's  wain,  206 
Chwolsohn,  14,  15 
Cities  of  the  land  of  Iran,  109 
Constantius,  84 
Copenhagen,  21,   28-30,  33,  34,  44, 

48,  56,  95-99,  104,  105,   108,    109, 

in,  127 
Cornelius  Nepos,  7 
Cuneiform  inscriptions,  6,  32,  54,  66, 

79-81,  169,  206,  298,  302,  304 
Curtius,  124 
Cyaxares,  15 
Cyrus,  4,  136 

DlpAK  nask,  130 

Dadar  bin  Dad-dukht,  1 13 

Dad-gah,  11,  140,  241 

Dadistan-i  dini,  102,  103 

Daenao,  152 

Daevanam  daovo,  308 

Dahman  afringan,  98,  142,  315 

Dahmas,  242 

Dahmi  variuhi,  142 

Daitih,  356,  357,  380 

Daityas,  278 

Daiwish,  308,  337 

Dakhmas,  240,  325 

Dakshina,  280 

Daniascius,  12 

Damdad  nask,  127 

Danava,  279 

Danish  writers,  20,  21,  32-34,  36,  37 

Daraja,  333 

Dilrayavush,  298 

Dari,  66 

Darius,  11,  136,  264,  298,  304 

Darmesteter,  52,  53,  337,  359 

Darsha  purnama  isliti,  285 

Daruk-i  khiirs;mdi,  no 

Darun,  259,  281,  285,  365,  395,  396, 

404,  407-409.     See  Draono. 

baj,  397 

Dastah,  396 

Dastur,  18,  46,  96,  103,  131,  132,  134, 

139,  297,  327,  328,  340,  343,  354, 

392  .     . 

Aspendi^rji  Kamdinji,  58 

Darab,  17,  45 

Edalji  Darabji,  25,  58 

i  dasturan,  193,  297 

Hoshangji  Jamaspji,  46,  48-51, 

60,  61,  99,  104,  112,  128,  134,  249, 

338,  359,  360,  368,  384,    385,  387, 

391 
Jamasp  Asa,  57,  95,  99 


INDEX. 


417 


Dastur,  Jiiraaspji  Minochiharji,  34, 
56,  61,  96,  97,  109-111,  338,  347, 
348,  354 

Jamasp  Wilayati,  56,  57,  99 

Kai-Kliusro  Darab,  45 

Minocjiiliar  Yudan-damfm,  102 

Noshirvanji  Jamaspji,  99,  126, 

134 

Peshotanji  Behramji,  58,  59, 100, 

102,  108,  110-113,  297 

Solirabji  Rustamji,  102 

Dasturs,  17,  18,  24-26,  33,  36,  42,  43, 
45.  S3,  55,  57,  61,  76-78,  104,  112, 
113,  126,  129,  131,  139,  147,  176, 
197,  215-217,  297,  333,  338,  391 

Davans,  351 

Deinon,  7 

Delplii,  211 

Denmark,  28 

Deva,  201,  267,  268,  275;  religion, 
149,  174,  211,  268,  287,  290,  291, 
293,  295 ;  worshipper,  173,  338 ; 
woi-sliippers,  287,  293 ;  worship- 
ping, 255,  336 

Devas,  150,  152,  153,  i6r,  168,  172, 
173,  184,  185,  190,  204,  205,  217, 
227,  230,  258,  259,  261,  268-272, 
276,   287-289,  301,   304,  308,  327, 

334,  401 
Devasarm,  no 
Devi-Jrukhsli,  190 
Devil,  4,  53 
Devis,  184 
Dharmashastra,  260 
Dibaja,  407,  40B 
Dimishqi,  15 
Dini  vajarkard,  126-134 
Dinkard,  54,  55,  59,  60,  97,  99-101, 

104,  114,  123,  126,  128,  131,  132 
Dinkhard,  104,  105 
Dinar,  66 
Din  yasht,  215 
Dio  Chrysostomos,  11 
Diodorus,  124 
Diogenes  of  Laerte,  8 
Diosknri,  272,  308 
Dirakht-i  Asurik,  no 
Dirham,  320,  332 
Dir  ]\Iiliir,  316 
Dorians,  69,  70 
Draono,    259,   327,    396,    407.      See 

DarUn 
Drenj,  143 
Driwish,  308,  337 
Druj,  349,  372-374,  379,  380,  382,  390, 

393 
Druju-demana,  311 
Drukhsh,  213,  247-249,  252,  253,  304, 

333 

nasTish,  241,  317,  328 

Drvaspa,  202 

Dualism,  53,  300,  303,  305,  309 


Dubasrild  or  Dubasrujd,  132 
Dughda,  132 
Duncker,  43 
Dushmata,  223 
Diita,  297 
Dutch,  70 
Duzhaka,  228 
Duzhanha,  311 
Duzhukhta,  223 
Duzhvarshta,  223 
Dvasrub  or  Dvfisruzd,  133 
Dvasrujad  or  Dvasrunjad,  132 
Dvazdah  hamast,  127 
Dvipas,  286 
Dyaus,  287 
Dyava-piithivi,  275 

Edda,  147 

Elispeus,  13,  14 

Elohim,  199,  302 

England,  16,  18-21,  32 

English,  s,  32,  44,  50,  65,  67  ;  trans 

lation,  33,  44,  49,  so,  59,  102,  106, 

107,  III,  338 
Erlaugen,  30 
Etymander,  229 
Eudemos,  12 
Eudoxos,  8,  298 
Europe,  16,  18,  23,  29,  30,  32,  44,  49, 

77,  114,  135,  196,  213,  286 
European,  17,  18,  25,  44,  45,  51,  52, 

58,  59,  67,  68,  io3,  IIS,  138,  270, 

346,  377  ;  researches,  16-33 
Europeans,  17,  21,  45,  115,  119 
Ewald.  39, 
Ezekiel,  4 
Eznik,  13,  14 

FARiKHO-KHARD,  388 
Fargard,  225,  227,  230,  235,  237,  239- 
243,  252,   257,  315,  319,  322,  327, 

333,  338,  355,  356 
Farhang-i  oini-khaduk,  99,  114,  120, 

236,  24s,  318,  344,  364,  36s,  369 
Fars,  78,  80,  102,  364 
Tarsang,  233 
Farsl,  80,  86 

Firdausi,  34,  48,  66,  78,  80,  81,  85,  86 
Five  dispositions  of  priests,  no 
Form  of  marriage  control ct,  no 
Forms  of  letters  to  kings,  no 
Formula  for  destroying  demons,  365 
Frabaretar,  332 
Fral)da,  248 
Fradadhafshu,  256,  389 
Fragam,  398,  399  __ 
Friiniji  Aspendiarji,  31 
Framru,  143 
France,  18,  20,  21,  28 
Fi  asast,  396,  407,  408 
Frasayavan,  361 
Frifshakard,  347 

2  D 


4i8 


INDEX. 


Frashaoshtra,  146,  158,  166,  167,  169, 

174,  213,  258 
Frasho-kereti,  312,  314 
Frashoslitar,  340,  341 
Frasiyiiv,  356,  361 
Frasravay,  143 
Fiavardigau  days,  129 
Fiavaidiii  (month),  225,  357 

yasht,  44,  206-213,  263 

Fravartish,  206 

Fravasbi,  168,  171,  206,  334,  383 

Fravashis,    170,    172,   194,    203,    206, 

256 
Fredun,  178,  198,  202,  223,  230,  275, 

277,  278,  363 
French,   17-19,   51,   52  ;  translation, 

18,  SI,  105 
Frohars,  129,  203,  206,  403 
Fryana,  165 
Fshusho-mathra,  142,  190 

Ga^thas,  152,  165,  178,  199,  291 

Gahanl)ar,  58,  128,  129,  285 

Gahanbars,  140,  192,  193,  225,  260 

Gahs,  134,  139,  159,  225,  262 

Gaikwar,  279 

Ganj-i  shaigan,  iii 

Gaochithra,  200 

Gaotema,  208,  263 

Garo-demana,  205,  311,  339,  388,  389 

Garo-nemana,  255,  256 

Gatha,  41,  137, 140,  141,  143-149,  151, 
152,  154,  167,  222,  258,  271,  272, 
406 ;  (defined)  143  ;  dialect,  65,  6g, 
72-75,  140-142,  147,  170,  172 ;  lore, 
339,  341,  349,  350;  metres,  143- 
146 

ahunavaiti,    142,   144,    146-154, 

256,  271,  338-354,  389,  405 

days,  112,  225 

Gathao,  175 

Gathas,  23,  28,  38,  41,  42,  65,  72-75, 
98,  106,  141, 167,  168, 170,  171, 177, 
183,  186,  221,  244,  249,  257-261, 
263,  264,  267,  273,  275,  287,  289- 
294,  296,  297,  300-302,  304,  305, 
310-312,  338,  368,  376,  389,  405, 
406  ;  described  and  translated,  140, 
142-170;  (the  five)  34,  41,  140,  141, 
171,  190,  256,  257  ^ 

Gatha  spenta-mainyu,  142,  145,  167- 
169,  256,  272,  389 

ushtavaiti,   142,   144,    145,   154- 

166,  220,  222.  256,  272,  389 

valiislitoishti,  142,  170,  256,  389 

volifi-khshathra,   142,  169,  170, 


256,  272,  389 
Giiu,  203,  227 
Gaush,  173 

Ijiulhao,  139,  281,  396,  407 

jivya,    139,   281,  315,  397,  405- 

407 


Gautama,  208,  263 
Gava,  358 
G&yatri,  144 

asuri,  271 

Gayo-niarathan,  211 

Gayomard,    15,    lor,    211,   346,    347, 

351 

Gena,  170 

German,  19,  20,  28,  29,  31,  47,  70, 
146,  147,  154,  167,  393  ;  translation, 
20,  30,  34,  41-44,  47,  105,  106,  108, 

315 
Germans  (ancient),  180 
Germany,  20,  21,  23,  28,  29,  31,  46, 

48 
Geush  tasha,  147,  151 
urva,    147-149,    165,    168,    202, 

297,  339 
Ghena,  193 

Ghilan  or  Gilan,  230,  363 
Gna,  274 

Gugoshasp,  374,  375,  377 
Gokereno,  392 
Gomez,  285,  400 
Gosh,  202  ;  yasht,  201,  202 
G6slit-i  Fryano,  50,  56,  107 
Gosburun,  147,  339,  341,  344 
Gotama,  208 
Gothic,  68 
Grautha,  181 
Greece,  8,  202 
Greek,  5,  12,  16,  21,  40,  65,  68,  69, 

86,  87,  123,  124,  143,  148,  188,  194, 

206,  211,   287,    298;    dialects,   69; 

(Homeric)  70,  75  ;  writers,  6-12 
Greeks,  5,  8,  11,  54,  66,  79,  123,  124, 

135-138-    197,   205,   272,  294,   295, 

298-301 
Gujrfit,  32,  33,  45 
Gujrati,    31,    55,    58,    59,    6r,    139; 

translation,  58-60,  93,  102,  in 
Guru,  278 
Gushtasp,  108,  130,  298,  299 

Ha,    140,    152,    167,    405,    406.     See 

Has 
Hades,  8 

Hadhanaepata,  139,  251,  378,  399 
Harlokht  nask,  46,  50,  51,  56,  97,  133, 

134,  139,  217-224,  354 
Haechadaspas,  296 
Ha.ctuniat,  229 
Hafiz,  197 
Hajiabad,  33,  87 

inscriptions,  87-89 

Hakbamanish,  298 
Hakhedbrem,  200 
Hamad&n,  66,  79 
Hamaspathmaedaya,  192,  210 
Hamazor,  407 
Hamistakan,  389 
llahdareza,  241 


INDEX. 


419 


Hanhaurvat,  213 

Haoma,  70,  259 

Haoshyanha,  198,  202,  214 

Haptan  .y'asht,  98,  195 

Haptuiriug,  206 

Harakhmond,  361 

Haraqaiti,  229 

Harauvati,  229 

Harib,  360 

Hariva,  228 

Harlez,  51,  61 

Haro  berezaiti,  5,  190,  203-205,  216, 
25s,  286 

Haroyu,  66,  203,  228 

Has,  146,  153,  170,  320 

Hathra,  233 

Haurvatiid,  9,  52,  167,  169,  191,  196, 
197,  218;  302,  305,  307 

Havanan,  332 

Havani  gab,  159,  176 

Havanim,  396,  399,  400 

Havirdhana,  270 

Hebrew,  4,  5,  31,  80,  175,  199 

Hecbadaspa  Spitama,  166 

Hellenes,  6,  69 

Hendva,  201 

Heracles,  11 

Herat,  66,  203,  228 

Herbad,  213,  397 

Herbads,  129,  197,  205,  320 

Hermann,  39 

Hermippos,  7-9,  33,  123,  136 

Herodotus,  4-7,  298 

Het-bomand,  361,  389 

Hetumand,  356,  361 

Hetumat,  256 

Hikhra,  325 

Hilmaud,  229,  256 

Hindu,  215,  230,  268,  269,  277,  363 

Hinduism,  276 

Hindu-kush,  201 

Hindus,  70,  205,  268,  363 

Hindustan,  288,  292,  293,  361 

Hiiidvo,  205 

Hiriwi,  66 

Homa,  22,  139,  146,  171,  176-185, 
193,  219,  251,  254,  259,  292,  330, 
335,  336,  378,  382,  384,  392-396, 
399-405  ;  juice,  139,  140,  174,  176, 
177,  185,  245,  282,  322,  368,  395, 
399,   400,   402-407  ;    mortar,    315, 

330,    382,  395,    396,  399,  401-403, 
405-407 ;  twigs,  191,  282,  399,  400, 
405  ;  yasbt,  175-185,  292,  404 
Homast  (berbad),  94 
Houovar,  185.     See  Ahuua-voirija 
Hormazd,  8,  10,  11,  24,  268,  302,  403, 
408;  worshipper,  260,  268;  yasbt, 

19s 
Hormisdas,  12 
Horvadad,  354 
Hoshang,'  198,  202,  391,  392 


Hota,  193,  280,  282 
Hotri  ritual,  179 
Hukhsbathrotemai,  248,  374,  375 
Hiikhta,  221 
Humata.  221 

Humatanam,  248,  374,  375 
Hunus,  213 
Husbedar,  341,  388 

bami,  314 

mab,  314,  341,  388 

Husbkyaotbna,  213 

Huspai'am  nask,  99,  133,  327 

Huvarsbta,  221 

Huzvarisb,  42,  49,  59,  85,  86,  92, 112, 

122,  324,  356 
Hvapa,  326 
Hvare  khsbaeta,  199 
Hyades,  182 
Hyde,  16,  123 
Hystaspes,  11,  264,  298 

Ibn  Fozlan,  15 

Hauqal,  80 

Muqaffa,  84,  85 

Idhiifat,  89,  90,  94 

Ijasbne,  139,  140,  174,  281,  283,  286, 

313,  394,  397,  400,  403-407     ■ 
Incense,  335,  336,  385,  394,  403,  404, 

408 
India,  3,  16-18,  32,  33,  45,  55,  79,  94, 

96,  97,  99,   100,  105-110,  112,  114, 

205,  230,  255 
Indian,  107,  no,  182,  192,  213,  214, 

272,  278,  288,  291,  377 
Indians,  292,  299 
Indo-Iranian,  53 
ludra,  145,  213,  268,  272,  275,   276, 

278,  279,  288,  291,  308,  337 
Indus,  107,  230 
Injunctions  to  babdins,  no 
louians,  69,  70 
Iran,  65,  76-79,   88,   203,  295,   399; 

(western)  78 
Iranian,    jjassiwi ;     antiquities,    51 ; 

construction,    49,    81-83  i    dastur, 

56  ;    equivalents,  42,   49,    82,    85  ; 

languages,    27,  39,  65-67,  73,    77, 

206 
Iranians,  53,  70,  82,  165,  &c. 
Iristo-kasha,  318 
Isaiah,  4,  311 
Isfeudarmad,  9,  306 
Isfendyar,  391 
Isbti,  280 

Ispahan,  66,  79,  104 
Istakhar,  66 
Istudgar  nask,  126 
Izads,  194.     See  Yazads 
Izba,  170 

Jam^spa,    108,    146,    167,    174,    213, 
258 


420 


INDEX. 


Jamaspas,  i66,  169 

Jamasp  namah,  43,  108,  no,  114 

Jamslied,  23,  177,  198,  202,  230,  276, 

391 
JaTiiI-dev-diVl,  133 
,Tavi(i-she(la-dad,  133,  225 
Jazhu,  329 
Jehovali,  302,  304 
Jeremiah,  3 
Jerusalem,  3,  5 
Jesus,  5 

Jewish  religion,  16,  312 
Jews,  4,  5,  IS,  78,  103,  104, 135,  136, 

264 
Jirasht  nask,  131 
Jivam,  398.  399,  403 
Jones  (Sir  W.),  19 
Jud-dev-dad,  133 
Jupiter,  53 
Justi,  47,  48,  105,  114 
Jyotislitoma,  281,  282 

Kabisah  controversy,  58 

Kabul,  228 

Kiulmi  sect,  102 

Kah-i  kashan,  217 

Kahrkatas,  245 

Kai  Gushtasp,  198,  290,  298 

Kabad,  290,  298 

Kaus,  223,  278,  298 

Kavus,  198 

Khusro,  198,  223,  290,  298,  391 

Us,  391 

Kakasparsha,  286 

Kamali  Bahrah,  126 

Kambay,  95,  96 

Kambayat,  56 

Kam  nemoi  zam,  222 

Kandahar,  229,  254 

Kanheri,  50 

Kant,  19 

Kapamajan,  128 

Kara  fish,  336 

Karapan,  289-291 

Karnamak-i  Ardashir-i  Papakan,  59, 

78,  90,  III 
Karsliipta,  235 
Karshvare,  205,  256,  286 
KS,sak,  361 
Kashkasirah,  130 
Kashkisrobo  nask,  130 
Kashosai,  381 
Kashsrob,  130 
Kasoya,  254 
Kasvi,  337 
Kata,  324 
Katyayaiia,  ^6 
Kaus,  18 
Kava,  Kava,  or  Kavi,  289-291 

Husrava,  198,  290,  298 

Kavatii,  290,  298 

Usa,  198,  278,  298 


Kava,  Kava,  or  Kavi,  Vishtaspa,  156, 
166,  169,  173,  198,  202,  212,  215, 
223,  258,  290,  298 

Kavari,  291 

Kaviisakha,  291 

Kavasji  Edalji  Kanga,  60 

Kavatuu,  291 

Kavis,  216,  290,  291 

KavCil,  360 

Kavya  Ushanas,  278,  279  ' 

Kayanian,  80,  290 

Kayau  race,  107 

Kayomars,  211 

Kayomarthiyah,  15 

Keresani,  182 

Keresaspa,  178,  179,  228,  391 

Kereshaspo,  360 

Kesh-i  Ibrahim,  16 

Keshvars,   198,    256,   286,   355,   363, 

369,  389 
Khasht  nask,  130 
Klnian,  361 
Khnilthaiti,  228,  254 
Khuenta,  229 
Khordad,  9,  53,  307 

yasht,  196 

Khorehe  vehijak,  58 

Khowaresmia,  203 

Khrafstraghna,  243 

Khshaotha,  201 

Khshathra,  167 

vairya,  9,    191,   302,   305,   306, 

333 
Khshatver,  344,  347 
Khshnuman,  404,  408 
Khurdah  Avesta,  98 
Khurshedji  Rustamji  Kama,  60 
Khurshed  nyayish,  98,  224 

yasht,  98,  199,  217 

Khftshkand,  loi 

Khusro-i  Anoshak-ruban,  no 

Kavadiln,  loi,  109,  no 

Noshirvan,  in 

Khdsto  nask,  130 
Khftzi,  Khuzistan,  80 
'Khvetuk-das,  103,  133 
Kirman,  97,   100,  102,  103,  114,  230, 

363 
Kleuker,  20 
Krishanu,  182 
Krishna,  279 
Krittika,  182 
Kronos,  n 
Ktesias,  7 
Kunda,  336 
Kuslia,  283 
Kusti,  244,  249,  2B6,  367,  368,  398, 

403.  407 

Lahurasp,  298 
Lakslnni,  215 
Lassen,  43 


INDEX. 


421 


Latin,  21,  40,  41,  65,  68,  69,  71,  154, 

287 
Leipzia;,  30 
Letto-Litliuanian,  65 
Litliuauian,  27,  152,  287 
London,    29,    30,   48,    56,    95,    106, 

338 
Lou  vain,  51 

Madigan-i  Gujastak  Abalish,  108 

• Gosht-i  Fryano,  107 

haft  araeshaspeud,  112 

mall  Fravardin  roj-i  Horvadad, 

112 

si  roj,  110-112 

si  yazadiln,  112 


Magavas,  166,  169 

Magha,  331,  344 

Maghava,  14,  291,  320 

Magi,  3-8,   10-12,   14-16,   18,  20,  80, 

166  169,  309,  312 
Magic  rites,  1 1,  299 
Magush,  169 

IMahabliarata,  79,  279,  288 
Mahabhashya,  182 
Maharashtra,  181 
Milh  nyayish,  224 
Mah-r£i,  396,  398,  399,  403,  404,  406, 

407 
Mahvandad  Narimahan,  loi 
Mah  yasht,'  98,  200 
Maidhyair3'a,  192 
Maidhyo  ishadha,  213 

nu\onha,  212 

• ■  sliema,  192 

zaremya,  192 

Mainyo-i  khard,  51.  55,  i04,  io5,  323, 

324,  339,  355,  365,  390 
Mamiin  (khalif),  108 
!Manes,  207 
]\Ianichffiaus,  104 
Manjerj,  18 
Mansarspend,  141 
IMantras,  293,  297 
Mann,  79,  211 

]\Lar  (to  recite),  143 
Mariitbi,  44 

INIarburg.  47 

Mardan-farukh-i     Aiiharmazd  -  d^d, 
104 

Jlarbtan,  297 

Marg-arjan,  313,  369,  377 

Miirik-namak-i  Asurik,  112 

IMarjpan  Fredim,  102 

Marutas,  180 

Maruv,  358,  359 

Marv,  66,  203,  228 

INIasudi,  14 

Mathra,  182,  195-197 

INLithran,  297 

Mathra-spenta,  140,  211,  334 

Matthew,  5 


Mazanian  dcvas,  190 

Mazda,  88,  141,  144,  146,  148,  149, 
T51-153,  15s,  156,  158-162,  104, 
166-169,  172,  182,  186-190,  195, 
21  r,   215,   218,   219,    254-256,   276, 

334,  335  ■ 
Mazdak-i  BamdMan,  321 
Mazdakyahs,  15 
Mazdao,  301,  302 
Mazdayasnian,    loi,    105,    107,     127, 

133,   171,   173,   174,   182,  201,  235- 

237,  240,  245,  253,  254,   295,   297, 

319,  332-334,  380 
Mazdaj'asnianism,  53 
Mazdayasnians,    105,    109,    173,    212, 

293,    318,    323-325,    330-333,    368, 

381,  382,  384 
Mazdian,  184 
Miizenderan,  190 
Medes,  12 
Jledhas,  301 
Media,  14,  65 
Meilian,  194 
Medyomali,  100 
Mehra,  361 
Meiiiers,  20 
Mercury,  200,  256 
Meru,  286 
Mesr,  364 
Metres,  144,   145,  176,   196,  199,  237, 

252,  253,  337 
Mihirapan-i  Kai-Khusro,  56,  94-96, 

109,  114 
Mihir  nyayish,  224 
Mibii'yar-i  Mahmadan,  104 
Mibir  yasht,  43,  202-205,  273 
Milky-way,  202,  217 
Minokhird,  43,  310 
Jlinok-i  khard,  105 
Mithra,   7,    177,    193,    194,   202-204,  • 

207,  209,  211,  217,  224,   25s,  259, 

263,  272,  273,  316,  334;  (promise) 
164,  202,  238,  261,  322 
Mithro-drukhsh,  7,  202 
Mitokht,  391 
Mitra,  6,  272,  273,  288 
IMitro,  357,  383,  387 
Blobad,  108,  132 
Mobads,  76,  77,  129,  197,  401 
Mog,  14 
IMohanimed,  16 

Mohammedan  conquest,  54,  55,    81, 
94,107,  124;  religion,  312;  writers, 
14-16,  84 
Mohammedans,  12,  14,   16,   57,   124, 

125 
Monotheism,  149 
Monotheists,  53 
Mosaic,  4,  135 
Moses,  135,  136,  299 
Moiiru,  203,  228 
Mrigashiras,  182 


422 


INDEX. 


!Mujizat-i  Zartosht,  25 
Mujmilu-t-tawarikh,  80 
Mulla  Baliman,  102 

Firuz,  58,  102,  104,  114 

Miiller  (Max),  285,  294 

(M.  J.),  29,  30,  121 

Mumbai,  108 

Bluncherjee  Hormusjee  Cama,  44 

Munich,  29,  43,  50 

Murdad,  53 

Musalmans,  15,  107 

Myazd,  112,  368 

Myazda,  139 

Mylitta,  6,  197 

Nadar  or  Nadur  nask,  128 

Naiiyo-sanha,  210,  256,  257,  274 

Naksliatras,  182 

Namaz,  364 

Naonhaithya,  272,  308,  337 

Nariishaiisa,  274 

Naremanao,  179 

Nariman  Hoshang,  126 

Nasatya,  272,  288 

Nask,  97,  125-135,  314,  351 

Nasko,  181 

Nasks,  54,   100,   loi,   106,    121,   125, 

i3S>  137  ;  (contents  of)  126-134 
Nasnpaka,  241 
Nasush,  241,  317,  322,  327,  333,  381, 

382 
Nawsari,  45,  46,  57,  95,  99 
Nebuchadnezzar,  3 
Neryusangh,  22,  26,  41,42,  51,  55,  90, 

104,  106,  120,  257,  274,  388 
New  Testament,  5 
Nidhana,  284 
Nihiivand,  79 
Nikadum  nask,  132 
Nikhshiipiir,  106 
Nineveh,  81 
Nirang,  327;   din,  400;  i  var,  349, 

353 
Nirangistan,  46,  47,  99,  107,  114,  397 
Nirukta,  274,  285 
Nirvana,  263 
NisEea,  228 
Nisai,  228,  359 
Niv(Nile?),  364 
Niv-Ardashir,  no 
Niyarum,  132 
Non-Aryan,  363 

Iran,  88 

Zoroastrian,  46 

Norris,  263 

Noshirvfin,  loi,  109-111 
Nyayish,  134,  139,  224 

Odhtn,  180 

Old  Testament,  4-6,  20, 135, 175, 302, 

304 
OlshaiTsen,  28,  30 


Omanes,  10 
Onkelos,  199 
Ordeal,  322,  349,  353 
Orion,  182 
Ormasdes,  11 
Ormazd,  53,  302 
Ormizt,  13,  14 
Oromasdes,  8,  9 
Ossetic,  67 

Oxford,  16,  29,  30,  47 
Oxus,  293 

Pada,  181 

Padam,  243,  365 

Padashkhvar,  363 

Pahlav,  66,  78,  79 

Pahlavani,  66 

Pahlav;ts,  79 

Pahlavi,  passim ;  (explained),  20,  49, 
78-86;  ashirvad,  112,  113;  charac- 
ters, 86,  87,  356 ;  commentaries, 
355;  dictionary,  61;  farhang  or 
glossary,  47-50,  59>  60,  112,  366; 
grammar,  33,  51,  59,  112  ;  inscrip- 
tions, 80  (see  Sasanian) ;  litera- 
ture, 93-113  ;  manuscripts,  21,  30, 
45.  46,  48,  56,  94-114;  rare  forms, 
352,  370,  378.  382  ;  rivayat,  43,  46, 
106 ;  shahnilmah,  56,  109,  391  ; 
suffix  -man,  87  ;  texts,  42,  43,  46, 
47.  50,  55)  59.  60,  97-114;  transla- 
tions, 25,  26,  30,  34-36,  42,  68,  85, 
94-98,  100,  113,  119.  120,  178,  179, 
318-328,  338-393;  Vendidad,  94- 
96,  99,  107,  113,  114,  338,  355-393  ; 
Visj)arad,  96,  97;  Yasna,  96,  114, 

338-354 
Pairika,  195,  201,  228 
Paitiparshto-sravanhem,  142 
Paitisha,  337 
Paitish-hahya,  192 
Pajak,  Pajau,  or  P^ji  nask,  128 
Pali,  143  ' 
Panchagavyam,  286 
Pandnamak-i   Adarpad    Maraspend, 

47,  no,  III 

Vajiirg-Mihir,  in 

■ Zaratusht,  in 

Panini,  76 

Panjab,  293 

Panjasta,  357 

Pankti  asuri,  271,  272 

Paoiryo-tkaesho,  259 

Paouruchista,  296 

Papak,  78,  88,  90,  91,  in 

Paradise  {pairi-daeza),  5 

Paragnah,  394,  403,  405 

Parahaoma,  139,  191,  282,  406 

Paris,  18,  21,  28-30,  108 

Paris,  195.     See  Pairika 

Parmenides,  206 

ParO-darsh,  245-247,  369,  371,  372 


INDEX. 


423 


Parsi,  passim;  calendar,  57,  58,  112, 
192,  357,  358  ;  libraries,  34,  45,  57, 
97,  99,  100,  102,  108,  109,  III,  126, 
134;  writers,  58-61,  181 

parsi  (language),  33,  34,  40,  66,  86, 
93,. 147;  (grammar  of ),  33,  106 
*    Parsiisni,  167,  169 

Parsis,  ■passim 

Parthava,  203 

Partliia,  79,  203 

Parthian,  49 

Partliians,  54,  79,  80 

Partliva,  79 

Paslitu,  67 

Pasusli-lianrva,  328 

Patanjali,  76,  182 

Patit,  364 

Patita,  318,  327 

Patit  i  Aflarpad  MarasiDend,  112 

:  kliud,  112 

Piit-kliftsro,  391 

Patsrob,  391 

Paurvas,  182 

Pausanias,  10,  11 

Pazaud,  47,  51,  55,  60,  90,  92,  93, 
100,    104-109,    112,    113,    147,   239, 

348,  357,  359,  360,  377,  401,  4°?; 
(defined)  14,  33,  34,  85,  86,  122, 
226,  262,  264;  grammar,  51  ;  pas- 
sages, 182,  186,  231,  232,  235-239, 
253-255, 316 

Peuom,  II,  243,  394 

Pentateuch,  135 

Persepohs,  32,  54,  66,  80,  87,  124 

Persia;  3,  14,  16,  32,  33,  54-57,  65, 
66,  79-81,  90,  94,  95,  99,  102,  104, 
106,   109,  114,  122,   176,   202,  282, 

309 

Persian,  passim ;  calendar,  57 ;  cus- 
toms, 5-16 ;  empire,  19,  66,  123, 
135,  138,  175,  264;  rivayats,  106; 
■words  ill  Bilile,  5 

(ancient)  49,  66,  80,  81,  105,  206 

Persians,  4-7,  10-15,  79,  80,  83,  84, 
124,  136,  296,  299;  (ancient)  19,  76, 
80,  123,  138,  197 

Persis,  80 

Peshdadian,  80 

Pesho.-tanu,  242 

Peshwas,  279,  280 

Pesliyotan  E.am  Kamdin,  97 

Photios,  12 

Phraortes,  206 

Pitaras,  207,  273 

Plato,  II,  206,  207,  298,  300 

Pleiades,  182 

Pliny,  8,  123,  298,  299 

Plutarch,  8,  g,  192 

Polish,  273 

Polytheism,  149 

Pomegranate,  139,  251,  282,  378,  379, 
384,  396,  399,  400,  407 


Poona,  44,  46,  99,  126,  134,  267,  280 

Portuguese,  108 

Pourushaspa,  179,  253,  254,  296,  333, 

337,  380,  381,  391 
Pouruta,  203 
P6i-y6(lkeshan,  loi 
Prajupati,  192,  275,  276 
Prakrit,  76 
Prastava,  283 
Prastota,  283 
Pratih^ra,  284 
Pratiharta,  283 
Pratiprasthata,  280 
Pravargya,  270 
Prayajas,  281 
PMtika,  325,  326 
Puranas,  135,  269,  276 
Punlnic,  262,  268 
Purodasha,  259,  281,  285 
Pushaii,  273,  274 
Putika,  282 

QMaena,  213 

Qadim  reckoning,  57,  358 

Qadmi.     Hee  Kudmt 

Qaetu,  153 

Qairizem,  203 

Qandahar.     See  Kandahar 

Qaniratha,  219,  256,  389 

Qanvat,  201 

Qareno,  216 

Qaretem,  139 

Quatremere,  79 

Raethwishkara,  332 

Ragha,  66,  188,  229,  300 

Raghuvafisha,  182 

Fv,ai,  66,  79,  300,  362 

Rak,  362 

Ram,  214,  316,  324 

Rama-qastar,  193,  316 

Ramayana,  276,  288 

Ram  y.-isht,  214,  275,  324 

Ranyo-skereti,  159 

Rapithwin,  397,  403 

Rapithwina  gab,  159,  232 

Rashnu,  204,  205,  207,  210,  322,  342 

yaslit,  205,  206 

Rask,  21,  22 

Rasmi  reckoning,  57 

Raspi,  193,  280,  394,  395,  403,  404, 

407,  408 
Rathantaram,  284 
Rathwi,  193,  280,  332,  394 
Ratoshtaiti  nask,  129 
Ratu,   175,   187,   191,    192,  297,  327, 

328 
Ratus,  276 
Ratuslitili  nask,  129 
Resurrection,  5,  162,  216,  311 
Revelations,  311 
Rhode,  20 


424 


INDEX. 


Riblius,  148 

Eichai-dsou,  19 

Kigveda,  39,  40,  143,  148,  258,  268- 
271,  274,  275,  278-280;  (quoted) 
145,  273,  274,  276,  277;  (referred 
to)  178,  182,  183,  206,  268,  269, 
273-275,  278,  279,  289,  291,  333 

Riksha,  206 

ilislii,  206,  269,  278 

Kishis,  269,  272 

Eitus,  271 

Rivayat,  100 ;  (Pahlavi)  43,  46,  106 

Rivayats  (Persian),  93,  106,  126-134 

Robini,  182 

Roman,  16,  79,  81;  characters,  31, 
41  ;  type,  47,  51 

Romans,   8,  79,   135,   137,  207,  295, 

298,  301,  364 
Rome,  202 
Rudra,  269,  275 
Rum,  78 
Russian,  273 
Rustam,  277 
Rustam-i  Mihirapan,  56,  94,  96,  127 

Sabeans,  15 

Sachau,  51 

Sadarah,  25,  249,  367,  368 

Sad-dar  Bundahish,  43,  113 

Sadis,  390 

Sajastan,  66,  228.     See  SlstCm. 

Sakaclum  nask,  133 

Sakzi,  66  '  . 

Salsette,  25 

Sama,  277,  278 

Saman,  284 

Samans,  283,  284 

Samaritan  Jews,  135 

Samarkand,  203 

Samas,  178,  278,  392 

Samaveda,  73,  143,  258,  283 

Sandal-wood,  378,  404,  408 

Sandes,  11 

Sanhita,  181 

Sanskrit,  passim;  (classical)  22,  68- 
70,  72,  75,  76,  206,  289  ;  manu- 
scripts, 45  ;  sirozah,  46 ;  transla- 
tion, 22,  26,  38,  41,  42,  46,  51,  55, 
93,  100,  106,  120.     See  Vedic 

Saosliyans,  213,  313,  314 

Saoshyanto,  258,  294,  295,  301,  314 

Sasan,  in 

Sasanian,  54,  59,  67,  78,  80,  81,  86, 
87,  89,  90,  121,  122,  125,  302,  338, 
358  ;  characters,  59  ;  inscriptions, 
49,  59,  80,  82,  86-89  ;  Pahlavi,  82, 
86-90 

Sasanians,  12,  15,   25,  33,  125,   299, 

309 
Satan,  12 
Satara,  280 
Saugand-namah,  322 


Saurva,  272,  308,  337 

Savahi,  256,  369,  389 

Savana,  282,  283 

Savitri,  269,  273 

Savana,  69 

Scandinavians,  147,  180 

Scythic,  79 

Sedosh,  390 

Semitic,  5,  42,  49,  59,  81-86,  89,  90, 

92  ;  ideograms,  83-85,  90 
Serjaus,  392 
Sfend  nask.  131 
Sliahanshahi  reckoning,  57 
Shahnamab,   80,   93,    190,    194,    202, 

226,  277,  278,  298,  299,  361 
Shahpiihar  I.,  86-88,  in 

II.,  84 

Shahrastani,  15 
Shahrivar,  9,  306,  358,  392 
Shahryarji  Dadabhiii,  in 
Shaukhayana  grihyasutra,  289 

shrautasutras,  182 

Shapurji  Edalji  (Revd.),  in 
Sharva,  272,  288 
Shastras,  135 

Shatapatha  brahmana,  206,  275 
Sliatrovair,  loi 
Shatver,  357,  358,  382 
Shayast-la-shiiyast,  56,  106,  351 
Shayast-nashayast,  43 
Shikand-gumani,  46,  55,  60,  104,  105, 

114 
Shiva,  269,  272,  288,  308 
Shloka,  144,  175,  212,  252 
Slirotriyas,  289 
Shruti,  307 
Shukra,  278 
Simaezlii,  213 
Simakos,  12 
Simra,  loi 
Siud,  361 

Sindhavas,  205,  230 
Sirius,  9 
Sirozah,   10,   46,    98,    134,    139,    225, 

404 
Sistan,  94,  356,  361.     See  Sajastan. 
Slavonian,  65 
Slavonic,  273 
Sniritis,  260 
Sogdiana,  66,  203 
Soma,  22,  70,  168,  176,  180,  182,  185, 

258,    259,   269,   272,   278,   280-283, 

289,  291,  292 
Soshans,  loi,  341,  349,  350,  374 
Sushyans,  254,  313,  588 
Soshyanto,  174,  177,  209,  217 
Spendarniad,    306,     339,    340,     347, 

349.   350,  357,  375,  377,  382,  383, 

400 
Spend  nask,  131,  351 
Speudyad,  391 
Spenjaghra,  336,  390 


INDEX. 


425 


Spenia  drmaiti,  191,  305,  306,  312, 

333  .      ^ 

Speuta-itiainyu.     See  Gatha 
Spento  mainyush,  24,  179,  187,   189, 

304,  305 
Spetos  (Gpetos  ?),  364 
Spiegel,  29-31,  33-38,  41-44,  51,  95- 

97,   106,    108,    323,    338,   347,  352, 

355,  367-369.  375.  384 

Spitama,  36,  138,  166,  176,  177,  188, 
209,  258,  263,  296,  297,  301 

Spitamaii,  355,  367,  369,  371,  377,  380, 
381,  384,  387,  392 

Spitama  Zarathiishtra,  35,  136,  138, 
141,  146-148,'  165,  186,  190,  207, 
209,  212,  218,  223,  227,  23s,  236, 
244-246,  250,  253-255,  257-264, 
292-295,  298-300,  302,  305,  310- 
317,  319,  320,  327-330,  334 

Sraosha,  155-160,  184,  189,  193,  204, 
205,  210,  307 

Sraoshavareza,    245,    280,    327,    332, 

369 

Sraosho-chararia,  251 

Sravay,  143 

Srit,  392 

Srosh,  141,  174,  189,  191,  195,  200, 
245-249,  255,  280,  307,  308,  334, 
336,  340,   369-375,  383.   390,  403, 


baj,  164 

yasht,  46, 189-191,  200,  257,  307, 


369 


hadoklit,  98,  205 


Srosho-charanaai,  371,  375,  376,  378, 

379 
Srvara,  178 
Sti\yishn-i  dron,  iii 
Strabo,  4,  10 
Studgar  uask,  126 
Stud-yasht  nask,  134 
Stuttgart,  97,  99,  107 
Sud-h6mand,  381 
Sudkar  nask,  107,  126 
Sughdha,  203,  228 
Sughdi,  66 
Suicide,  313 
Sukuruna,  328 
Sura,  269 
Surak,  364 

Surat,  17,  45,  48,  57,  59,  100,  102 
Surik,  358 
Syriac,  31,  80 

Taittiriya  br^hmana,  182 

sanhita,  278 

Taklima  urupa,  214 
Takht,  394,  397,  399-401,  405 
Talmud,  135,  226 
Talmudic  literature,  136 
Tamuk  or  Tanak,  109 
Tanapdhar,  322,  369,  374-377 


Tanuperetlias,  242 

Tanura,  5 

Tapristan,  363 

Tauru,  52,  337 

Tauruna,  328 

Teheran,  95,  109,  300,  338,  359,  364 

Teispes,  298 

Ten  admonitions,  no 

Teutonic,  52,  65,  148,  287 

Thais,  124 

Themis,  205 

Theodores,  12 

Theopompos,  7,  8,  33,  312 

Thomas,  87,  88 

Thorah,  135 

Thraetaona,   178,   198,  202,  215,  216, 

230,  275,  277,  278 
Thrita,  178,  257,  277,  392 
Tighrish,  200 
Tir,  256 

yasht,  200 

Tishtar,  9,  256,  389 

Tishtrya,  9,  194,  200,  201,  263,  279 

Traitana,  277,  278 

Trimurti,  288 

Trishtubh,  145 

T'riti,'  275,  277,  278 

Trojan  war,  298 

Turanian,  361 

Turkish,  31 

Tumour,  123 

Tychsen,  20 

Udaka  sh&nta,  281 
Udgata,  283,  284 
Udgitha,  283 
Udra,  242 
Udumbara,  283 
'Ulama-i  islam,  43 
Upadrava,  284 
Upasad,  270,  271,  281 
Uranos,  272 
Ure,  360 
Ursa  major,  206 
TTrupi,  329 
Urva,  228 
Urvilkhshaya,  178 
Urvaiio,  168 

Urvaram,  396,  399-402,  407 
XJrvS,sna,  251 
Urvatad-naro,  235  ' 
Urvatas,  151 
Usaghanas,  213 
Ushahina  gah,  159,  369 
Usham  suram,  245 
Ushanas,  278,  279 
Ushidareneni,  216 
Ushidhao,  216 
Ushnih  S,suri,  271 
Ushtavaiti.     See  Gdtha 
Usikhsh,  289 
Uzayeirina  gah,  159 


426 


INDEX. 


Vacliak  acchand,  no 
Vadhaghana,  254 
Vae-i  vatar,  323 

veh,  324 

Vaekereta,  228 

Vaetha  nask,  46 

Valiiram-i  varjavand,  107,  no 

Vahishta,  311 

Valiishtem  abilm,  i36 

Vahisht-mansrali  nask,  127 

Vahishtoisliti.     See  Gdtha 

Vihram,  383 

Vaivasvata,  277 

Vajarkard-i  diui,  43,  59,   100,    no, 

112,  126 
Vajasaneyi  saiihitS,,  182 
Yajurg-mihir,  no,  in 
Vaikhash,  54 
Vaniadeva  hymns,  148 
Vanant,  217  ;  yasht,  217 
Vandidad,  133.     See  Vendidad 
Vapa,  285 
Varasa,  139,  395,  397,  399,  400,  402, 

403 

Varaza,  214 

Varena,  230,  363 

Vareshan,  213 

Varshtamansar  nask,  127 

Varuna,  53,  268,  272,  273 

Vasavas,  275 

Vashatkara,  275 

Vashti  nask,  130 

Vasishthas,  178 

Vayu,'  274,  27s,  324,  334 

Vayu,  214,  274 

Vayush,  214,  215 

Vazagha,  329 

Vazishta,  336,  390 

"Vazra,  205,  217 

Veda,  20,  41,  53,  70,  73,  170,  180, 
274,  276-278,  294 

Vedangas,  181 

Vedas,  21,  22,  27,  39,  40,  69-71,  77, 
135,  138,  15s,  182,  193,  20s,  206, 
213,  2i'6,  230,  260,  267-269,  273- 
280,  287,  289,  291,  299,  307 

Vedic,  27,  40,  44,  69,  70,  77,  14s, 
176,  192,  194,  214,  270,  272-276, 
278-280,  284,  288,  292,  294,  308  ; 
hynius,  28,  137,  143,  206,  272,  274, 
276,  278,  287-289,  291,  294;  Sans- 
krit, 40,  68,  70,  72,  75,  147 

Vehijakik,  58 

Veil  river,  361 

Vehrkana,  229 

Vendidad,  22-24,  28,  30,  34,  35,  37, 
38,  43.  4<5,  50-52,  58,  60,  61,  94-96, 
99,  107.  109,  113,  n4,  127,  133-135, 
137,  139,  141,  142,  199,  2n,  225- 
257,  260-264,  268,   277,  292,   294- 

297,  303,  305,   315-338,   355,   374, 
383,  384,  397;   sadah,  22,   28,  30, 


46,  52,  23s,  336 ;  (Palilavi)  46,  56, 
61,  127,  336,  338.  355-393  ;  (Sans- 
krit), 46;  xii.  (modern  Pahl.),  95, 
96 

Venus,  197,  278 
Verebran,  389 
Verethraghna,  213,  275,  288 
Verezena,  153 
Vibanga,  336 
Vidadbafshu,  256,  389 
Vienna,  34,  95-97 
Vik-dev-dad  nask,  133 
Vik-sheda-dad,  133 
Visb-baurva,  328 
Vishnu,  288 

•  purana,  213 

Vishtasp,  loi,  109,  130,  340,  391 
Visbtaspa,  146, 156,  158,  167,  298,  299 
Visbtaspad,  130 
Vishtasp  nask,  139 

sasto,  130,  134 

shah,  130 

yasht,  97,  224 

Visparad,  22,  30,  36,  38,  41,  43,  51, 

96,  97,  134,  135,  139,  141,  142,  191- 
194,  260,  397  ;  with  PabLavi,  46 

Vivanghana,  231-234 

Vivanhao,  177,  277 

Vizaresbo,  255,  387,  390 

Vizu,  329 

Voghno,  381 

Vobii-gaona,  251 

kereti,  251 

khshatbra.     See  Gdtha 

Vohumano,  9,  10,  151,  158,  167,  171, 
190,  222,  255,  302-306,  308,  320, 
333,  335,  339-341,  344,  345,  347, 
349-351,  353,  354,  357,  358,  366, 
382,  384,  388.  393 

Vobunazga,  328 

Vobunemanb,  213 

Vologeses,  54 

Vouru-bareshti,  256,  389 

jareshti,  256,  389 

kasha,  197,  200,  201,   205,  208, 

256,  279,  320,  325-327,  336,  388, 
392 

Vritra,  275,  278,  279 

Vritraha,  213,  275,  288 

Weber,  271 

West,  50,  51,  io5 

Westergaard,   24,  32-34,    36-39,  44, 

47,  51,  60,  77,  87,  97,  105,  n4, 
139,   140,   194,  217,   223,   308,  355, 

367,  369,  409 
Western  India,  16-18,  33,  44,  55 
Wilson  (Rev.  Dr.),  32,  45 

(Prof.  H.  H.),  213 

Windiscbraann,  43,  47,  105 

Wodan's  beer,  180 

"Wonders  of  the  land  of  Slstan,  109 


INDEX. 


427 


Xanthos  of  Lydia,  298 
Xenophon,  4 
Xerxes,  124 

Yadkar-i  Zariian,  109 

Yajaniaua,  270 

Yajishn,  139,  281.     See  Yazishn 

Yiijuavalkya,  286 

Yajurveda,  143,  206,  259,  271,  272, 
275,  278 

Yama  raja,  276,  277 

Yasht,  174-177,  185,  189,  194 

Yashts,  6,  14,  38,  43,  51,  98,  134,  139, 
224,  262-264,  294,  295  ;  (translated) 
175-185,  189-191,  194-217;  (Fahl. 
translations)  98 

Yaska,  274,  285 

Yasna,  22,  23,  26,  27,  30,  31,  34,  36- 
38,  41,  43,  46,  47,  50,  51,  55,  58, 
97-99,  loi,  109,  134,  135,  137,  139- 
143,  146,  171,  174, 175,  177,  190,  191, 
249,  258-260,394;  (described)  139- 
142 ;  baptanCaiti,  140-142,  170- 
172,  190,  258;  259  ;  (later)  140,  142, 
171,  174-191,  259,  260,  262,  264, 
296  ;  (older)  73,  140-142,  174,  242, 
296,  300  ;  (Pahlavi)  56,  96,  114,  120, 

338-354 
Yatha  aim  vairyo,  50,  54,  98,  126- 

134,  174,  252,  374,  375,   380,   382, 

385,    397-399,    401-405.    407-409; 

text,  125  ;  translation,  141 
Yaxartes,  293 
Yazads,  112,  345,  403 
Yazamaide,  171,  186 
Yazatas,  194,  200,  272,  288 
Yazd,  114 
Yazdah,  14 
Yazdan,  194 

Yazishn,  345,  365.     See  Yajishn 
Yenhe hatam,  98, 141, 174, 248,  374, 375 
Yima,  23, 177,  202,  214-216,  226,  230- 

235,  257,  277,  392 ;  khshaeta,  177, 

198,  276,  277 
Yoishto  yo  Fryananam,  107 

Zabulistan,  66 

Zacl-sparam-i  Yudan-daman,  102 

Zairicha,  52,  337 

Zamyad  yasht,  216 

Zand,  85.     See  Zend 

Zand-akiis,  104 

Zandik,  108 

Zaota,  193,  280,  282,  332,  378 

Zaothra,  139,  189,  214,  251,  281,  335, 

336,  397 
Zarades,  11 
Zaradusht,  14,  16 
Z.irustrades,  12,  296 


Zarathushtra,  24,  35,  36,  41,  53,  74, 
loi,  121,  122,  138,  146-151,  153' 
154,  156,  157,  161,  163,  165-170, 
173,    175-177,   179,    185,   188,    189, 

195-198,     202,      207-209,     211,  212, 

214,    215,    218,    219,    222,    223,  230, 

231,     233,     238,     243-246,     249,  250, 

252-264,     276,      291,     294-297,  300, 

303,    307,     325,     326,     333-338,  346, 

365  ;  SiJitama,   148,   170,   172,  202, 

211 
Zarathushtras,  226 
Zarathushtrian,  188,  211,  326,  327,  334 
Zarathushtrotemo,  142,  193,  258,  261, 

296,  297 
Zaratusht,   loi,    107,    in,   112,    127, 

130,  132,  338,  344,  351,  354,  355, 
362,  364-367,  369,  371,  377,  379- 
388,  391-393 

namah,  43 

Zardosht,  296 
Zaremaya,  222 
Zarhundad,  321 
Zarouam,  12 
Zarvan,  13 

akarana,  12,  15,  24,  309 

ZaMi.  66 

Zavarish,  84,  85 

Zemaka,  321 

Zend,  19,  21,  47,  so,  52,  124,  125,  134, 
135, 177,  239  (see  Avesta) ;  (defined) 
14,  15,  67,  68,  119-122,  226,  262, 
309;  (original)  174,  177,  227,  229, 
235,  362  ;  (passages  noted)  207-210, 
212,  213,  227-230,  232-238,  250,  253 

Zend-Avesta,  18,  36,  68,  119,  120, 
123,  194,  195,  224,  257,  262,  264, 
267,  268,  271-280,  287,  288,  292, 
294,    298,   299,  308-310,   312,   314, 

315,  409 
Zendik,  14,  15,  309 
Zeudist,  235 

Zend-Pahlavi  glossary,  47-49,  99 
Zeruan,  13,  14 
Zervanits,  15 
Zeus,  6,  8,  II,  S3,  287 
Zohak,  183,  198 

Zor,  395,  397,  398,  400-403,  406,  407 
Zoroaster,   3,   9,   11,   19,  29,   46,   51, 

123,   137.  138,   171,  216,   296;  (his 

age)   15,   298,    299 ;    (his   writings) 

123,  257 
Zoroastrian,  passim  ;  studies,  43 
Zoroastrianism,  44,  103,  346 
Zoroastriaus,  14,  23,  46,   54,  57,   74, 

121,   123,   125,   168,    170,  258,   262, 

287,  290,  303 
Zota.  394,  395,  403-409 
Zvarish,  42 


I'RINTED  liV  HALLANTVNE,   HANSON  AND  CO. 
EDINBURGH  AND  LONDON 
