Source note (Tower of Babel staging): John Hawkesworth, An Account of the Voyages undertaken by the order of His present Majesty (London: W. Strahan & T. Cadell, 1773), Vol. III. Text from Internet Archive item accountofvoyages03hawk (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

IT'k


m


-m*A


UNIVERSITY  OF   PITTSBURGH


Darlington  Memorial  Library


[  A  N

ACCOUNT

OF     THE

VOYAGES

UNDERTAKEN    BY    THE

ORDER    OF    HIS    PRESENT   MAJESTY

FOR     MAKING

Difcoveries  in  the  Southern  Hemifphere,

And  fucceffively  performed  by

COMMODORE   BYRON,     CAPTAIN   CARTERET,
CAPTAIN   WALLIS,  And  CAPTAIN    COOK,

la  the  DOLPHIN,   the  S  WALLOW,   and  the  ENDE  AV  O  URr
DRAWN    UP

From  the  Journals  which  were  kept  by  the  feveral  Commanders,
And  from  the  Papers  of  JOSEPH    BANKS,   Efqj

By  JOHN    HAWKESWORTH,  LL.D.

IN    THREE    VOLUMES.

Illuftrated  with  CUTS,  and  a  great  Variety  of  CHARTS  and  MAPS  relative  oe
Countries  now  full  difcovered,  or  hitherto  but  impwfe&ly  known.

VOL.     III.


LONDON:

Printed  for  W.  STRAHAN;    and  T.  CADELL  in  the  Strand,
MDCCLXXIII.


CONTENTS

O  F    T  H  E

THIRD        VOLUME.

■  .

BOOK       II.

CHAP.    VII.

Range  from  Cape  Turnagain  fouthivard  along  the  eajlern  Coajl  of
Poenammoo,  round  Cape  South,  and  back  to  the  wefern  Entrance
of  Cook's  Streight,  which  completed  the  Circumnavigation  of  this
Country  ;  with  a  Defcription  of  the  Coaf,  and  of  Admiralty  Bay  :
The  Departure  from  New  Zealand,  and  various  Particulars.    41J

CHAP.     VIII.

A  general  Account  of  New  Zealand:  its  frjl  DiJ cover y,  Situation,
Extent,  Climate,  and  Productions.  43/

CHAP.     IX.

A  Defcription  of  the  Inhabitants,  their  Habitations,  Apparel,  Orna-
ments, Food,  Cookery,  and  Manner  of  Life.  446

CHAP.     X.

Of  the  Canoes  and  Navigation  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Neva  Zealand ;
their  Tillage,    Weapons,  and  Mufc ;    Government,  Religion,  and

A  2  Language:


CONTENT^

Language  i   With  fame  Reafons  againjl  the  Exijlence  of  a  Southern
Continent.  46

BOOK       III.

G  H  A  P.    I.

The  Run  from  New  Zealand  to  Botany  Bay,  on  the  Eafi  Coaji  of  New
Holland,  now  called  New  South  Wales-,  various  Incidents  that
happened  there  j  iv ith  fame  Account  of  the  Country  and  its  Inha-
bitants. 43j

CHAP.    IV  *

The  Range  from  Botany  Bay  to  Trinity  Bay;  with  a  farther  Account
of  the  Country,  its  Inhabitants,  and  Productions.  r0?

CHAP.    V.

dangerous  Situation  of  the  Ship  in  her  Courfe  from  Trinity  Bay  u
Endeavour  River.  $**

CHAP.     VI.

Tranf actions  while  the  Ship  was  refitting  in  Endeavour  River:  A
Defcription  of  the  adjacent  Country,  its  Inhabitants,  and  Pro-
ductions. 557

CHAP.    VII.

Departure  from  Endeavour  River  ;  a  particular  Defcription  of  the
Harbour  there,  in  which  the  Ship  was  refitted,  the  adjacent  Coun-
try, andfeveral  IJlands  near  the  Codfi  :  the  Range  from  Endeavour
River  to  the  Northern  Extremity  of  the  Country,  and  the  Dangers
tf  that  Navigation.  589

*  The  fecond  Chapter  in  this  Book,  is  by  miftake  numbered  IV.

CHAR


CONTENTS.


CHAP.    VIII.


Departure  from  Neiv  South  Wales ;  a  particular  Defcription  of  the
Country,  its  Produtls,  and  People  :  A  Specimen  of  the  Language,
andfome  Obfervations  upon  the  Currents  and  Tides.  622

CHAP.    IX.

The  Pajfagefrom  Neiv  South  Wales  to  Neiv  Guinea,  ivith  an  Ac-
count of -what  happened  upon  landing  there.  649

CHAP.     X.

The  Pajfagefrom  New  Guinea  to  the  Ifland  of  Savu,  and  the  Tranf-
aclions  there.  662

CHAP.    XI.

A  particular  Defcription  of  the  Ifland  of  Savu,  its  Produce  and  In-
habitants, ivith  a  Specimen  of  their  Language.  681

CHAP.    XII.

The  Run  from  the  Ifland  of  Savu  to  Batavia,  and  an  Account  of  the
Tranfaclions  there  ivhile  the  Ship  ivas  reftting.  jQi

CHAP.     XIII.

Some  Account  of  Batavia,  and  the  adjacent  Country,  ivith  their
Fruits,  Flowers,  and  other  Produclions.  724

CHAP.     XIV.

Some  Account  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Batavia,  and  the  adjacent  Coun-
try, their  Manners,  Cujloms,  and  Manner  of  Life.  jaq

CHAP.     XV.

The  Pajfagefrom  Batavia  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  :  Some  Account
of  Prince's  I/land  and  its  Inhabitant s,  and  a  comparative  View  of
their  Language  with  the  Malay  andjavamfg.  y6y

CHAP.


CONTENTS.

CHAP.    XVL

Our  Arrival  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;  fome  Remarks  on  the  Run
from  Java  Head  to  that  Place  ;  a  Defcription  of  the  Cape  and  of
Saint  Helena :  With  fome  Account  of  the  Hottentots,  and  the  Return
of  the  Ship  to  England.  781


A  N


A  N

ACCOUNT

O  F    A

VOYAGE  round  the  WORLD,
BOOK      II.

CHAP.     VII.

Range  from  Cape  Turnagain  fouthward  along  the  eaftern
Coajl  of  Poenammoo,  round  Cape  South,  and  back  to  the
weflern  Entrance  of  Cook's  Streight,  which  completed
the  Circumnavigation  of  this  Country  ;  with  a  Dejcription
of  the  Coafj  and  of  Admiralty  Bay  :  The  Departure
from  New  Zealand,  and  various  Particulars.


A


T  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  Friday  the  9th  of  Fe-       ,77Cj


Feb


ruary,


bruary,  having  tacked,  we  flood  S.  W.  and  continued
to  make  fail  to  the  fouthward  till  funfet  on  the  nth,  when  cFr'day  9
a  frefh  breeze  at  N.  E.  had  carried  us  back  again  the  length
of  Cape  Pallifer,  of  which  as  the  weather  was  clear  we  had
a  good  view.  Between  the  foot  of  the  high  land  and  the  fea
there  is  a  low  flat  border,  off  which  there  are  fome  rocks
that  appear  above  water.  Between  this  Cape  and  Cape
Turnagain,  the  land  near  the  ihore  is,  in  many  places,  low
and  flat,  and  has  a  green  and  pleafant  appearance  ;  but  far-
ther from  the  fea  it  rifes  into  hills.  The  land  between
1  Cape


4V2  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


1770.

1  ebruary.


Sunday  1 1,


Cape  Pallifer  and  Cape  Tierawitte  is  high  and  makes  in
table-points  ;  it  alfo  feemed  to  vis  to  form  two  bays,  but  we
were  at  too  great  a  diftance  from  this  part  of  the  coaft,  to
judge  accurately  from  appearances.  The  wind  having  been
variable,  with  calms,  we  had  advanced  no  farther  by  the
Monday  12.  1 2th  at  noon  than  latitude  4.1  °  52',  Cape  Pallifer  then  bearing
north,  diftant  about  five  leagues ;  and  the  fnowy  mountain
S.  83  W.

Tuefday  13.  At  noon  on  the  13th,  we  found  ourfelves  in  the  latitude  of
42°  2'S. ;  Cape  Pallifer  bearing  N.  20  E.  diftant  eight  leagues.
In  the  afternoon,  a  frelh  gale  fprung  up  at  N.  E.  and  we
fleered  S.  W.  by  W.  for  the  fouthermoft  land  in  fight,  which
at  funfct  bore  from  us  S.  74  W.  At  this  time  the  variation
was  1 50  4  E.

wednef.  i4.  At  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  14th,  having  run
one  and  twenty  leagues  S.  58  \V.  fince  the  preceding  noon,  it
fell  calm.  We  were  then  abreaft  of  the  fnowy  mountain
which  bore  from  us  N.  W.  and  in  this  direction  lay  behind
a  mountainous  ridge  of  nearly  the  fame  height,  which  rifes
directly  from  the  fea,  and  runs  parallel  with  the  fhore,  which
lies  N.  E.  i  N.  and  S.  W.  4  S.  The  north  weft  end  of  the  ridge
rifes  inland,  not  far  from  Cape  Campbell ;  and  both  the
mountain  and  the  ridge  are  diftinctly  feen  as  well  from  Cape
Koamaroo  as  Cape  Pallifer :  from  Koamaroo  they  are  diftant
two  and  twenty  leagues  S.  \V.  £  S.;  and  from  Cape  Pallifer
thirty  leagues  \V.  S.  W. ;  and  are  of  a  height  fufficient  to  be
feen  at  a  much  greater  diftancc.  At  noon  this  day,  we  were
in  latitude  42°34'S.  The  fouthermoft  land  in  fight  bore
S.  \V.  '  \V. ;  and  fome  low  land  that  appeared  like  an  ifland,
and  lay  clofe  tinder  the  foot  of  the  ridge,  bore  N.  W.  by  N.
about  five  or  fix  leagues.

8  '     In


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  4l3

In  the  afternoon,  when  Mr.  Banks  was  out  in  the  boat  a       *77°-

February.

mooting,  we  faw,  with  our  glaffes,  four  double  canoes,  hav-  < — ^ — #
ing  on  board  fifty-feven  men,  put  off  from  that  more,  and
make  towards  him :  we  immediately  made  fignals  for  him
to  come  on  board;  but  the  fhip,  with  refpect  to  him,  being
right  in  the  wake  of  the  fun,  he  did  not  fee  them.  We  were
at  a  confiderable  diilancc  from  the  more,  and  he  was  at  a
confiderable  diflance  from  the  fhip,  which  was  between  hira
and  the  more  ;  fo  that,  it  being  a  dead  calm,  I  began  to  be
in  fome  pain  for  him,  fearing  that  he  might  not  fee  the  ca-
noes time  enough  to  reach  the  fhip  before  they  mould  get  up
with  him:  foon  after,  however,  we  faw  his  boat  in  motion,
and  had  the  pleafure  to  take  him  on  board  before  the  Indians
came  up,  who  probably  had  not  feen  him,  as  their  attention
feemed  to  be  wholly  fixed  upon  the  fhip.  They  came  within
about  a  Hone's  caft,  and  then  flopped,  gazing  at  us  with  a
look  of  vacant  aftonifhment :  Tupia  exerted  all  his  eloquence
to  prevail  upon  them  to  come  nearer,  but  without  any  efFect.
After  furveying  us  for  fome  time,  they  left  us,  and  made
towards  the  fhore ;  but  had  not  meafured  more  than  half  the
diflance  between  that  and  the  fhip  before  it  was  dark.  We
imagined  that  thefe  people  had  heard  nothing  of  us,  and
could  not  but  remark  the  different  behaviour  and  difpofitions
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  different  parts  of  this  coaft  upon
their  firft  approaching  the  vefTeL  Thefe  kept  aloof  with  a
mixture  of  timidity  and  wonder  ;  others  had  immediately
commenced  hoflilities,  by  pelting  us  with  ftones:  the  gentle-
man whom  we  had  found  alone,  fifiiing  in  his  boat,  feemed
to  think  us  entirely  unworthy  of  his  notice  ;  and  fome,  al-
moll  without  invitation,  had  come  on  board  with  an  air  of
perfect  confidence  and  good-will.  From  the  behaviour  of
our  laft  vifitors,  I  gave  the  land  from  which  they  had  put
Vol.  III.  3  G  off,


February
Wcdnef.  14


4l4  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      off,  and  which,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  had  the  appear-
ance of  an  ifland,  the  name  of  Lookers-on.

At  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  a  breeze  fprung  up  at  S.S.W.
with  which  I  flretched  off  fouth  eaft,  becaufe  fome  on  board
thought  they  faw  land  in  that  quarter.     In  this  courfe  we

'lTmrfday  1 5.  continued  till  fix  o'clock  the  next  morning,  when  we  had
run  eleven  leagues,  but  faw  no  land,  except  that  which  we
had  left.  Having  flood  to  the  S.E.  with  a  light  breeze,  which
veered  from  the  weft  to  the  north,  till  noon,  our  latitude  by
obfervation  was  420  56'  S.  and  the  high  land  that  we  were
abreaft  of  the  preceding  noon  bore  N.  N.  W.  £  W.  In  the
afternoon  we  had  a  light  breeze  at  N.  E.  with  which  we
fleered  weft,  edging  in  for  the  land,  which  was  diftant  about
eight  leagues.  At  feven  in  the  evening,  we  were  about  fix
leagues  from  the  more,  and  the  fouthermoft  extremity  of
the  land  in  fight  bore  W.S.W.

Friday  16.  At  day-break  on  the   16th,   we  difcovered   land   bearing

S.  by  W.  and  feemingly  detached  from  the  coaft  we  were
upon.  About  eight,  a  breeze  fprung  up,  at  N.  by  E.  and  we
fleered  directly  for  it.  At  noon,  we  were  in  latitude  43  °  19S.
the  peak  on  the  fnowy  mountain  bore  N.  20  E.  diftant
twenty-feven  leagues  ;  the  fouthern  extremity  of  the  land
we  could  fee  bore  weft,  and  the  land  which  had  been  difco-
vered in  the  morning  appeared  like  an  ifland  extending  from
S.S.W.  to  S.W.  by  W.  7  W.  diftant  about  eight  leagues.  In
the  afternoon,  we  flood  to  the  fouthward  of  it,  with  a  frefh
breeze  at  north:  at  eight  in  the  evening,  we  had  run  eleven
leagues,  and  the  land  then  extended  from  S.  W.  by  \V.  to
N.  by  W.  We  were  then  diftant  about  three  or  four  leagues
from  the  neareft  fhore,  and  in  this  fituation  had  fifty  fathom
water,  with  a  fine  fandy  bottom.  The  variation  of  the  com-
pafs  by  this  morning's  amplitude  was  i4°3o'E.

At


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  AxS

At  fun-rife,  the  next  morning,  our  opinion  that  the  land     p1^0-
we  had  been  ftanding  for  was  an  ifland,  was  confirmed,  by   ^ — , — -*

„    ,       ,         ,       n  _  _j  ,         Saturday  i  y.

our  feeing  part  of  the  land  of  Tovy  Poenammoo  open  to  the
weftward  of  it,  extending  as  far  as  W.  by  S.  At  eight  in  the
morning,  the  extremes  of  the  ifland  bore  N.  76  \V.  and
N.  N.  E.  7  E. ;  and  an  opening  near  the  fouth  point,  which
had  the  appearance  of  a  bay  or  harbour,  N.  20  \V.  diflant  be-
tween three  and  four  leagues :  in  this  fituation  we  had  thirty-
eight  fathom  water  with  a  brown  fandy  bottom.

This  ifland,  which  I  named  after  Mr.  Banks,  lies  about  five  Banks's

Ifland.

leagues  from  the  coaft  of  Tovy  Poenammoo  ;  the  fouth
point  bears  S.  21  \V.  from  the  higheft  peak  on  the  fnowy
mountain,  and  lies  in  latitude  43 °  32'  S.  and  in  longitude
1 8  6°  30'  \V.  by  an  obfervation  of  the  fun  and  moon  which
was  made  this  morning :  it  is  of  a  circular  figure,  and  about
twenty-four  leagues  in  compafs:  it  is  fufficiently  high  to  be
fcen  at  the  diftance  of  twelve  or  fifteen  leagues,  and  the  land
has  a  broken  irregular  furface,  with  the  appearance  rather
of  barrenncfs  than  fertility  ;  yet  it  was  inhabited,  for  we
law  fmoke  in  one  place,  and  a  few  draggling  natives  in
another.

When  this  ifland  was  firft  difcovered  in  the  direction  of
S.  by  W.  fome  perfons  on  board  were  of  opinion  that  they
alfo  faw  land  bearing  S.  S.  E.  and  S.E.  by  E.  I  was  myfelf
upon  the  deck  at  the  time,  and  told  them,  that  in  my  opinion
it  was  no  more  than  a  cloud,  and  that  as  the  fun  rofe  it
would  diffipate  and  vanifh.  However,  as  I  was  determined
to  leave  no  fubjeet  for  difputation  which  experiment  could
remove,  I  ordered  the  fhip  to  be  wore,  and  fleered  E.  S.  E.  by
compafs,  in  the  direction  which  the  land  was  faid  to  bear
from  us  at  that  time.  At  noon  we  were  in  latitude  440  7'  S. ;
the  fouth  point  of  Banks's  Ifland  bearing  north,  diftant  five

2  leagues.


4;6  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      leagues.    By  feven  o'clock  at  night  we  had  run  eight  and
v_U3!Zj   twenty  miles,  when  feeing  no  land,  nor  any  figns  of  any,
Saturday  17.    ^  that  which  we  had  left,  we  bore  away  S.  by  \V.  and  con-
Sunday  is.     tinued  upon  that  courfe  till  the  next  day  at  noon,  when  we
were  in  latitude  450  16',  the  fouth  point  of  Banks's  Ifland
bearing  N.  6°  30'  W.  diilant  twenty-eight  leagues.     The  va-
riation by  the  azimuth  this  morning  was  150  30'  E.     As  no
figns  of  land  had  yet  appeared  to  the  fouthward,  and  as  I
thought  that  we  had  flood  far  enough  in  that  direction  to
weather  all  the  land  we  had  left,  judging  from  the  report  of
the   natives   in  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound,   I  hauled   to  the
weft  ward.

We  had  a  moderate  breeze  at  N.N.W.  and  N,  till  eight
in  the  evening,  when  it  became  unfettled  ;  and  at  ten  fixed
at  fouth :  during  the  night,  it  blew  with  fuch  violence  that  it
brought  us  under  our  clofe  reefed  topfails.     At  eight  the

Monday  19.  next  morning,  having  run  twenty-eight  leagues  upon  a
W.  by  N.  4  N.  courfe,  and  judging  ourfelves  to  be  to  the
weftward  of  the  land  of  Tovy  Poenammoo,  we  bore  away
N.  W.  with  a  frefh  gale  at  fouth.  At  ten,  having  run  eleven
miles  upon  this  courfe,  we  faw  land  extending  from  the
S.  W.  to  the  N.  W.  at  the  dillance  of  about  ten  leagues,  which
we  hauled  up  for.  At  noon,  our  latitude  by  obfervation  was
44°  38',  the  fouth  eafc  point  of  Bank's  Ifland  bore  N.  580  30'  E.
diftant  thirty  leagues,  and  the  main  body  of  the  land  in  fight
W.  by  N.  A  head  fea  prevented  us  from  making  much
way  to  the  fouthward ;  at  feven  in  the  evening  the  extremes
of  the  land  ftretched  from  S.W.  by  S.  to  N.  by  W.  ;  and
at  fix  leagues  from  the  fhore  we  had  thirty-two  fathom  wa-

Toefday  20.    ter.     At  four  o'clock  the  next  morning,  we  flood  in  for  the

fhore  W.  by  S.  and  during  a  courfe  of  four  leagues,   our

depth  of  water  was  from   thirty-two  to  thirteen   fathom.

9  When


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  4,7

When  it  was  thirteen  fathom  we  were  but  three  miles  diflant       *770-

Februa' .-.

from  the  fliore,  and  therefore  flood  off;  its  direction  is  here   < .—  v

nearly  N.  and  S.     The  furface,  to  the  diftance  of  about  five     ue  ay  2

miles  from  the  fea,  is  low  and  flat ;  but  it  then  rifes  into  hills

of  a  confiderable  height.     It  appeared  to  be  totally  barren,

and  we  faw  no  figns  of  its  being  inhabited.     Our  latitude,

at  noon,  was  44°  44  ;  and  the  longitude  which  we  made

from  Banks's  Ifland  to  this  place  was  20  22'  W.     During  the

laft  twenty-four  hours,  though  we  carried  as  much  fail  as

the  fhip  would  bear,  we  were  driven  three  leagues  to  the

leeward.

We  continued  to  ftand  off  and  on  all  this  day  and  the  next,  Wednef.  z».
keeping  at  the  diftance  of  between  four  and  twelve  leagues
from  the  fliore,  and  having  water  from  thirty-five  to  fifty-
three  fathom.  On  the  2  2d,  at  noon,  we  had  no  obfervation,  Thurfday2*.
but  by  the  land  judged  ourfelves  to  be  about  three  leagues
farther  north  than  we  had  been  the  day  before.  At  fun-fer,
the  weather,  which  had  been  hazey,  clearing  up,  we  faw  a
mountain  which  rofe  in  a  high  peak,  bearing  N.  W.  by  N. ;
and  at  the  fame  time,  we  faw  the  land  more  diftinctly  than
before,  extending  from  N.  to  S.  W.  by  S.  which,  at  fome  dif-
tance within  the  coaft,  had  a  lofty  and  mountainous  appear-
ance. We  foon  found  that  the  accounts  which  had  been
given  us  by  the  Indians  in  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound  of  the
land  to  the  fouthward  were  not  true  ;  for  they  had  told  us
that  it  might  be  circumnavigated  in  four  days.

On  the  23d,  having  a  hollow  fvvell  from  the  S.  E.  and  ex-  Friday^.
pecting  wind  from  the  fame  quarter,  we  kept  plying  be-
tween feven  and  fifteen  leagues  from  the  fliore,  having
from  feventy  to  forty-four  fathom.  At  noon,  our  latitude
by  obfervation  was  44°  40' S.  and  our  longitude  from  Banks's
ifland  i°  31'  W.     From  this  time  to  fix  in  the  evening  it  was

Vol.  II.  3  H  calm ;


418  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

177°-  calm  -,  but  a  light  breeze  then  fpringing  up  at  E.N.E.  we  fleered
i_L^Tj/  S.  S.  E.  all  night,  edging  off  from  the  land,  the  hollow  fwell
"  ay  Z3'  Hill  continuing ;  our  depth  of  water  was  from  fixty  to
feventy-five  fathom.  While  we  were  becalmed,  Mr.  Banks,
being  out  in  the  boat,  fhot  two  Port  Egmont  hens,  which
were  in  every  refpect  the  fame  as  thofe  that  are  found  in
great  numbers  upon  the  ifland  of  Faro,  and  were  the  firfl  of
the  kind  we  had  feen  upon  this  coafl,  though  we  fell  in  with
fome  a  few  days  before  we  made  land.

Saturday  24.  At  day-break,  the  wind  frefhened,  and  before  noon  we
had  a  flrong  gale  at  N.N.  E.  At  eight  in  the  morning  we  faw
the  land  extending  as  far  as  S.W.  by  S.  and  fleered  directly
for  it.  At  noon,  we  were  in  latitude  45  °  22'  S. ;  and  the  land,
which  now  flretched  from  S.W.  4  S.  to  N. N.W.  appeared  to
be  rudely  diverfified  by  hill  and  valley.  In  the  afternoon,
we  fleered  S.  W.  by  S.  and  S.  W.  edging  in  for  the  land  with
a  frefh  gale  at  north  ;  but  though  we  were  at  no  great  dif-
tance,  the  weather  was  fo  hazey  that  we  could  fee  nothing
diflinctly  upon  it,  except  a  ridge  of  high  hills  lying  not  far
from  the  fea,  and  parallel  to  the  coafl,  which  in  this  place
flretches  S.  by  W.  and  N.  by  E.  and  fcemed  to  end  in  a  high
bluff  point  to  the  fouthward.  By  eight  in  the  evening  we
were  abreafl  of  this  point ;  but  it  being  then  dark,  and  I  not
knowing  which  way  the  land  trended,  we  brought  to  for  the
night.  At  this  time,  the  point  bore  weft,  and  was  diflant
about  five  miles :  our  depth  of  water  was  thirty-feven  fa-
thom, and  the  bottom  confifled  of  fmall  pebbles.

Sunday  25.  At  day-break,  having  made  fail,  the  point  bore  north,  diflant
three  leagues,  and  we  now  found  that  the  land  trended  from
it  S.  W.  by  W.  as  far  as  we  could  fee.  This  point  I  named
Cape  Saunders,  in  honour  of  Sir  Charles.  Our  latitude  was
45 Q  35'  S.  and  longitude  1890  4'  W.     By  the  latitude,  and  the

angles


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


4'9


angles  that  are  made  by  the  coaft,  this  point  will  be  fum-       1770.
ciently  known;    there   is,    however,   about   three   or   four    1./- "-T
leagues  to  the  fouth  well  of  it,  and  very  near  the  more,  a  *m**7'*t*
remarkable  faddle-hill,  which  is  a  good  direction  to  it  on
that  quarter.    From  one  league  to  four  leagues  north  of  Cape
Saunders,  the  more  forms  two  or  three  bays,  in  which  there
appeared  to  be  good  anchorage,  and  effectual  flicker  from
the  S.  W.  wefterly,  and  N.  weflerly  winds  ;  but  my  defire  of
getting  to  the  fouthward,  in  order  to  afcertain  whether  this
country  was  an  ifland  or  a  continent,  prevented  my  putting
into  any  of  them.

We  kept  at  a  fmall  diftance  from  the  fhore  all  this  morn-
ing, with  the  wind  at  S.  W.  and  had  a  very  diftincl  view  of
it :  it  is  of  a  moderate  height,  and  the  furface  is  broken  by
many  hills,  which  are  green  and  woody;  but  we  faw  no  ap-
pearance of  inhabitants.  At  noon,  CapeSaunders  boreN-soW.
diftant  about  four  leagues.  We  had  variable  winds  and  calms
till  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  it  fixed  at  W.  S.  W.  and
foon  blew  fo  hard  that  it  put  us  paft  our  topfails,  and  fplit  the
forefail  all  to  pieces  :  after  getting  another  to  the  yard,  we
continued  to  ftand  to  the  fouthward  under  two  courfes ;  and
at  fix  the  next  morning,  the  fouthermoft  land  in  fight  bore
W.  by  N.  and  Cape  Saunders  N.by  W.  diftant  eight  leagues:  at
noon,  it  bore  N.  20  W.  fourteen  leagues  ;  and  our  latitude  by
obfervation  was  46 e  36'.  The  gale  continued,  with  heavy
fqualls  and  a  large  hollow  fea  all  the  afternoon ;  and  at
feven  in  the  evening,  we  lay  to  under  our  forefail,  with  the
fhip's  head  to  the  fouthward:  at  noon  on  the  27th,  our
latitude  was  46 °  54',  and  our  longitude  from  Cape  Saunders
1  °  24'  E.  At  feven  in  the  evening,  we  made  fail  under  our
courfes  ;  and  at  eight  the  next  morning  fet  the  topfails  clofe
reefed.  At  noon,  our  latitude  was  47*  43',  and  our  longi-
tude eaft  from  Cape  Saunders  s°  10.    At  this  time^  we  wore

3H:  and


Monday  2  5.


Tucfdav


Wednef,  z8.


4-zo


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


1770.

February.
.Vednei".  23.


March.
Thurfday  I.


Eriday  2.


Saturday  3.


S'snday  4.


;i-:aU'.


and  flood  to  the  northward :  in  the  afternoon,  we  found  the
variation  to  be  i6c  34'  E.  At  eight  in  the  evening,  we  tacked
and  flood  to  the  fouthward,  with  the  wind  at  weft.

At  noon  this  day,  our  latitude  by  account  was  47  °  52',
and  our  longitude  from  Cape  Saunders  1  °  8'  E.  We  flood
to  the  fouthward  till  half  an  hour  pafl  three  in  the  afternoon ;
and  then,  being  in  latitude  480  S.  and  longitude  1880  W.  and
feeing  no  appearance  of  land,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the
northward,  having  a  large  fwell  from  the  S.  \V.  by  W.  At
noon  fhe  next  day,  our  latitude  was  46  °  42'  S. ;  and  Cape
Saunders  bore  N.  46  W.  diflant  eighty-fix  miles.  The  fouth
weft  fwell  continuing  till  the  3d,  confirmed  our  opinion,  that
there  was  no  land  in  that  quarter.  At  four  in  the  afternoon,
we  flood  to  the  weflward  with  all  the  fail  we  could  make.
In  the  morning  of  the  4th,  we  found  the  variation  to  be
1 6°  16'  E.  This  day  we  faw  fome  whales  and  feals,  as  we  had
done  feveral  times  after  our  having  pafTed  the  flreight ;  but  we
faw  no  feal  while  we  were  upon  the  coafl  of  Eahienomauwe.
We  founded  both  in  the  night  and  this  morning,  but  had'no
ground  with  one  hundred  and  fifty  fathom.  At  noon,  we
faw  Cape  Saunders  bearing  N.  4-  Wi  ;  and  our  latitude  by  ob-
iervation  was  460  3i'S.  At  half  an  hour  pafl  one  o'clock,
we  faw  land  bearing  W.  by  S.  which  we  fleered  for,  and  be-
fore it  was  dark  were  within  three  or  four  miles  of  it :  du-
ring the  whole  night  we  faw  fires  upon  it,  and  at  feven  in
rhe  morning  were  within  about  three  leagues  of  the  more,
which  appeared  to  be  high,  but  level.  At  three  o'clock  in
the  afternoon,  we  faw  the  land  extending  from  N.  E.  by  N.
to  N.W.  t  N. ;  and  foon  after  we  difcovered  fome  low  land,
which  appeared  like  an  ifland,  bearing  S.  JL  W.  We  conti-
nued our  courfe  to  the  W.  by  S.  and  in  two  hours  we  faw
high  land  over  the  low  land,  extending  to  the  fouthward  a&
far  as  S..W<  by  S. ;  but  it  did  not  appear  to  be  joined  to  the
i  land;


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


421


land  to  the  northward,  fo  that  there  is  either  water,  a  deep       177°-
bay,  or  low  land  between  them.  >_    -  „    '_■

At  noon  on  the  6th,  wc  were  nearly  in  the  fame  fituation  Tuefday  6.
as  at  noon  on  the  day  before  :  in  the  afternoon  we  found  the
variation,  by  feveral  azimuths  and  the  amplitude,  to  be
150  10' E.  On  the  7th  at  noon,  we  were  in  latitude  470  6'S.  Wednef.  7.
and  had  made  twelve  miles  eafling  during  the  laft  twenty-
four  hours.  We  Hood  to  the  weftward  the  remainder  of  this
day,  and  all  the  next  till  fun-fet,  when  the  extreams  of  the  Thurfday8.
land  bore  from  N.  byE.  toW.  diftant  about  feven  or  eight
leagues :  in  this  fituation  our  depth  of  water  was  fifty-five
fathom,  and  the  variation  by  amplitude  160  29' E.  The  wind
now  veered  from  the  N.  to  the  W.  and  as  we  had  fine  wea-
ther, and  moonlight,  we  kept  Handing  clofe  upon  the  wind
to  the  S.  W.  all  night.  At  four  in  the  morning,  we  had  fixty  Friday  9,
fathom  water}  and  at  day-light,  we  difcovered  under  our
bow  a  ledge  of  rocks,  extending  from  S.  by  W.  to  W.  by  S.
upon  which  the  fea  broke  very  high:  they  were  not  more
than  three  quarters  of  a  mile  diftant,  yet  we  had  five  and
forty  fathom  water.  As  the  wind  was  at  N.  W.  we  could  not
now  weather  them,  and  as  I  was  unwilling  to  run  to  lee-
ward, I  tacked  and  made  a  trip  to  the  eaftward  ;  the  wind
however  foon  after  coming  to  the  northward,  enabled  us  to
get  clear  of  all.  Our  foundings,  while  we  were  pafling
within  the  ledge,  were  from  thirty-five  to  forty-feven  fathom
with  a  rocky  bottom.

This  ledge  lies  S.  E.  fix  leagues  from  the  fouthermoft  part
of  the  land,  and  S.  E.  by  E.  from,  fome  remarkable  hills
which  Hand  near  the  more:  about  three  leagues  to  the
northward  of  it,  there  is  another  ledge,  which  lies  full  three
leagues  from  the  more,  and  on  which  the  fea  broke  in  a
dreadful  furf.    As  we  palled  thefe  rocks  to  the  north  in  the

night,


4&  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°-       nieht,  and  difcovered  the  others  under  our  bow  at  break  of

March.  °

v_ — s — _/  day,  it  is  manifeft  that  our  danger  was  imminent,  and  our
efcape  critical  in  the  higheft  degree:  from  the  fituation  of
thefe  rocks,  fo  well  adapted  to  catch  unwary  ftrangers,  I
called  them  the  Traps.  Our  latitude  at  noon  was  470  26'  S.
The  land  in  fight,  which  had  the  appearance  of  an  ifland,
extended  from  N.  E.  by  N.  to  N.  W.  by  W.  and  feemed  to  be
about  five  leagues  diftant  from  the  main ;  the  eaftcrmoft
ledge  of  rocks  bore  S.  S.  E.  diftant  one  league  and  an  half,
and  the  northermoft  N.  E.  tE.  diftant  about  three  leagues.
This  land  is  high  and  barren,  with  nothing  upon  it  but  a
few  ftraggling  fhrubs,  for  not  a  fingle  tree  was  to  be  feen ;
it  was  however  remarkable  for  a  number  of  white  patches,
which  I  took  to  be  marble,  as  they  reflected  the  fun's  rays
very  ftrongly:  other  patches  of  the  fame  kind  we  had  ob-
ferved  in  different  parts  of  this  country,  particularly  in
Mercury  Bay:  we  continued  to  ftand  clofe  upon  a  wind  to  the
weftward,  and  at  fun-fet  the  fouthermoft  point  of  land  bore
N.  38  E.  diftant  four  leagues,  and  the  weftermoft  land  in
fight  bore  N.  2  E.  The  point  which  lies  in  latitude  470  19'  S.
longitude  1920  12' W.  I  named  South  Cape;  the  weftermoft
land  was  a  fmall  ifland,  lying  off  the  point  of  the  main.

Suppofing  South  Cape  to  be  the  fouthern  extremity  of  this
country,  as  indeed  it  proved  to  be,  I  hoped  to  get  round  it
by  the  weft,  for  a  large  hollow  fwell  from  the  fouth  weft,
ever  fince  our  laft  hard  gale,  had  convinced  me  that  there
was  no  land  in  that  direction.

Saturday  10.  In  the  night  we  had  a  hard  gale  at  N.  E.  by  N.  and  N.
which  brought  us  under  our  courfes,  but  about  eight  in  the
morning  it  became  moderate  ;  and  at  noon,  veering  to  the
weft,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  northward,  having  no  land
in  light.     Our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  470  33' S.  our

4  longitude,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  423

longitude,  weft  from  the  South  Cape,  59'.    We  flood  away       1770.
N.  N.  E.  clofe  upon  a  wind,  without  feeing  any  land,    till    u— ^— lj
two  the  next  morning,  when  we  difcoveredan  ifland  bearing  Sunday  u.
N.  W.  by  N.  diftant  about  five  leagues :    about  two  hours
afterwards  we  faw  land  a-head,  upon  which  we  tacked  and
flood  off  till  fix,  when  we  flood  in  to  take  a  nearer  view  of
it:   at  eleven  we  were  within  three  leagues  of  it,  but  the
wind  feeming  to  incline  upon  the  fhore,  I  tacked  and  flood
off  to  the  fouthward.     We  had  now  failed  round  the  land
which  we  had  discovered  on  the  5th,  and  which  then  did  not
appear  to  be  joined  to  the  main  which  lay  north  of  it  i  and
being  now  come  to  the  other  fide  of  what  we  fuppofed  to  be
water,  a  bay,  or  low  land,  it  had  the  fame  appearance,  but
when  I  came  to  lay  it  down  upon  paper  I  faw  no  rcafon  to
fuppofe  it  to  be  an  ifland ;  on  the  contrary,  I  was  clearly  of
opinion  that  it  made  part  of  the  main.     At  noon,  the  weftcrn
extremity  of  the  main  bore  N.  59  W.  and  the  ifland  which
we  had  feen  in  the  morning,  S.  59  W.  diftant  about  five
leagues.     It  lies  in  latitude  460  3,1'  3.  longitude  192°  49  W.
and  is  nothing  but  a  barren  rock  about  a  mile  in  circuit,  re-
markably high,  and  lies  full  five  leagues  diftant  from  the
main.     This  ifland  I  named  after  Dr.  Solander,  and  called  it
Solander's  Island.     The  fhore  of  the  main  lies  neareft  E.
by  S.  and  W.  by  N.  and  forms  a  large  open  bay,   in  which
there  is  no  appearance  of  any  harbour  or  flicker  for  flapping
againft  S.  W.  and  foutherly  winds:  the  furface  of  the  coun-
try is  broken  into  craggy  hills,  of  a  great  height,  on  the
fummits  of  which  are  feveral  patches   of  fnow;  it  is  not,
however,  wholly  barren,  for  we  could  fee  wood  not  only  in
the  vallies,  but  upon  the  higheft  ground,  yet  we  faw  no  ap-
pearance of  its  being  inhabited.

We  continued  to  fland  to  the  S.  W.  by  S.  till  eleven  o'clock  Monday  1:.
the  next  morning,  when  the  wind  fhifted  to  the  S.  W.  by  W.

upon


424


»77°-
March.


Tuefday  13.


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

upon  which  we  wore,  and  flood  to  the  N.  N.  W.  being  then
in  latitude  470  40'  S.  longitude  1930  50'  W.  and  having  a  hol-
low fea  from  the  S.  W.

During  the  night,  we  fleered  N.  N.  W.  till  fix  in  the  morn-
ing, when,  feeing  no  land,  we  fleered  N.  by  E.  till  eight,
when  we  fleered  N.  E.  by  E.  7  E.  to  make  the  land,  which  at
ten  we  faw  bearing  E.  N.  E.  but  it  being  hazy,  we  could  dif-
tinguifh  nothing  upon  it.  At  noon,  our  latitude,  by  obfer-
vation,  was  460  S.  About  two  it  cleared  up,  and  the  land
appeared  to  be  high,  rude,  and  mountainous :  about  half  an
hour  after  three  1  hauled  in  for  a  bay,  in  which  there  ap-
peared to  be  good  anchorage  ;  but  in  about  an  hour,  finding
the  diflance  too  great  to  run  before  it  would  be  dark,  and  the
wind  blowing  too  hard  to  make  the  attempt  fafe  in  the
night,  I  bore  away  along  the  fhore.

This  bay,  which  I  called  Dusky  Bay,  lies  in  latitude  450
47'  S. :  it  is  between  three  and  four  miles  broad  at  the  en-
trance, and  feems  to  be  full  as  deep  as  it  is  broad :  it  con-
tains feveral  iflands,  behind  which  there  mufl  be  fhelter
from  all  winds,  though  poflibly  there  may  not  be  fufficient
depth  of  water.  The  north  point  of  this  bay,  when  it  bears
S.  E.  by  S.  is  rendered  very  remarkable  by  five  high  peaked
rocks  which  lie  off  it,  and  have  the  appearance  of  the  four
fingers  and  thumb  of  a  man's  hand,  for  which  reafon  I
called  it  Point  Five  Fingers:  the  land  of  this  Point  is  far-
ther remarkable,  for  being  the  only  level  land  within  a  con-
fiderable  diflance.  It  extends  near  two  leagues  to  the  north-
ward, is  lofty,  and  covered  with  wood :  the  land  behind  it
is  very  different,  coniifling  wholly  of  mountains,  totally
barren  and  rocky  ;  and  this  difference  gives  the  Cape  the  ap-
pearance of  an  ifland.


At


HOUND    THE    WORLD,  435

At  fun-fet,  the  fouthermoft  land  in  fight  bore  due  fouth,       1770.
diftant  about  five  or  fix  leagues ;  and  as  this  is  the  weftermoft    v. — ^j
point  of  land  upon  the  whole  coaft,  I  called  it  West  Cape.     ue  ay'"
It  lies  about  three  leagues  to  the  fouthward  of  Dufky  Bay,  in.
the  latitude  of  450  54'  S.  and  in  the  longitude  of  193 °  17'  W.
The  land  of  this  Cape  is  of  a  moderate  height  next  the  fea,
and  has  nothing  remarkable  about  it,  except  a  very  white
cliff,  two  or  three  leagues  to  the  fouthward  of  it:  to  the
fouthward  of  it  alfo  the  land  trends  away  to  the  S.  E.  and  to
the  northward  it  trends  N.  N.  E.

Having  brought  to  for  the  night,  we  made  fail  along  the  Wednef- 14-
fhore  at  four  in  the  morning,  in  the  direction  of  N.  E.  i.  N.
with  a  moderate  breeze  at  S.  S.  E.  At  noon,  our  latitude,  by
observation,  was  450  13'S.  At  this  time,  being  about  a
league  and  an  half  from  the  fhore,  we  founded,  but  had  no
ground  with  feventy  fathom :  we  had  juft  puffed  a  fmall  nar-
row opening  in  land,  where  there  feemed  to  be  a  very  fafe
and  convenient  harbour,  formed  by  an  ifland,  which  lay  in
the  middle  of  the  opening  at  eafi.  The  opening  lies  in  lati-
tude 450  16' S.  and  on  the  land  behind  it  are  mountains,  the
fummits  of  which  were  covered  with  fnow,  that  appeared  to
have  been  recently  fallen ;  and  indeed  for  two  days  paft  we
had  found  the  weather  very  cold.  On  each  fide  the  entrance
of  the  opening,  the  land  rifes  almoft  perpendicularly  from
the  fea  to  a  ftupendous  height,  and  this  indeed  was  the  rea-
fon  why  I  did  not  carry  the  fliip  into  it,  for  no  wind  could
blow  there  but  right  in,  or  right  out,  in  the  direction  of
either  eaft  or  weft,  and  I  thought  it  by  no  means  advifable
to  put  into  a  place  whence  I  could  not  have  got  out  but  with
■a  wind  which  experience  had  taught  me  did  not  blow  more
than  one  day  in  a  month.  In  this,  however,  I  acted  con-
trary to  the  opinion  of  fome  perfons  on  board,  who  in  very

Vol.  IL  3  I  urong


426  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

»77°«      ftrong  terms  exprefled  their  defire  to  harbour  for  prefent  con^
« — v — ~ >   venience;  without  any  regard  to  future  difadvantages.

Wedcef.  14.

In  the  evening,  being  about  two  leagues  from  the  more*
we  founded,  and  had  no  ground  with  108  fathom:  the  va-
riation of  the  needle,  by  azimuth,  was  140  E.  and  by  ampli-
tude 1 50  2'.  We  made  the  bell  of  our  way  along  the  fliore
with  what  wind  we  had,  keeping  at  the  diflance  of  between
two  and  three  leagues.  At  noon,  we  were  in  latitude  44.0
47',  having  run  only  twelve  leagues  upon  a  N.  E.  ^  N.  courfe,
during  the  lafl  four  and,  twenty  hours.

We  continued  to  fleer  along  the  fliore,  in  the  direction  of
N.  E.i-  E.  till  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  we  brought  to

Thurfday  15.  for  thc  night.  At  four  in  the  morning,  we  flood  in  for  the
land,  and  when  the  day  broke  we  faw  what  appeared  to  be
an  inlet ;  but  upon  a  nearer  approach  proved  to  be  only  a
deep  valley  between  two  high  lands:  we  proceeded  there-
fore in  the  fame  courfe,  keeping  the  more  at  the  diflance  of

Friday  16.  between  four  and  five  miles,.  At  noon  on  the  16th,  the.
northermoft  point  of  land  in  fight  bore  N.  60  E.  at  the  dif-
tance  of  ten  miles  ;  and  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was
44°  5>  °ur  longitude  from  Cape  Welt  20  8'  E.  About  two,
we  pail  the  point  which-  at  noon  had  been  diftant  ten  miles,,
and  found  it  to  confifl  of  high  red  cliffs,  down  which  there
fell  a  cafcade  of  water  in  four  fmall  ftreams,  and  I  therefore:
gave  it  the  name  of  Cascade  Point.  From  this  Point  the
land  trends  firft  N.  y6  E.  and  afterwards  more  to  the  north-
ward* At  the  diflance  of  eight  leagues  from  Cafcade  Point,
in  the  direction  of  E.  N.  E.  and  at  a  little  diflance  from  the
fhore,  lies  a  fmall.  low  ifland,  which  bore  from  us  S.  by  E.  at
the  diflance  of  about  a  league  and  a  half..

6  At


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ±ly

At  feven  in  the  evening,  we  brought  to,  in  thirty-three       >7?o.
fathom  with  a  fine  fandy  bottom,  at  ten  we  had  fifty  fathom,   ■      a.rch"  -
and  at  twelve  wore  in  fixty-five  fathom,  having  driven  feveral
miles  N.  N.  W.  after  our  having  brought  to.     At  two  in  the  Saturday  17.
morning,  we  had  no  ground  with  140  fathom,  by  which  it
appears  that  the  foundings  extend  but  a  little  way  from  the
fhore.      About  this  time  it  fell  calm;   at  eight,   a  breeze
fprung  up  at  S.  W.  with  which  we  fleered  along  the  more,  in
the  direction  of  N.  E.  by  E.  f  E.  at  the  diflance  of  about  three
leagues.    At  fix  in  the  evening,  being  about  one  league  from
the  more,  we  had  feventeen  fathom ;  and  at  eight,  being
about  three  leagues  from  the  more,  we  had  forty-four :  we
now  fhortened  fail  and  brought  to,  having  run  ten  leagues
N.  E.  by  E.  fince  noon.

It  was  calm  moll  part  of  the  night ;  but  at  ten  in  the  Sunday  18.
morning  a  light  breeze  fprung  up  at  S.  W.  by  W.  when  we
made  fail  again  along  the  fhore,  N.  E.  by  N.  having  a  large
fwell  from  the  W.  S.  W.  which  had  rifen  in  the  night ;  at
noon,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  430  4S.  and  our
longitude  from  Cape  Weft  40 12'  E.  We  obferved,  that  the
vallies  as  well  as  the  mountains  were  this  morning  covered
with  fnow,  part  of  which  we  fuppofed  to  have  fallen  during
the  night,  when  we  had  rain.  At  fix  in  the  evening  we
fhortened  fail,  and  at  ten  brought  to,  at  the  diftance  of  about
five  leagues  from  the  fhore,  where  we  had  1 1  j  fathom.  At
midnight,  there  being  little  wind,  we  made  fail,  and  at
eight  in  the  morning  we  flood  to  the  N.  E.  clofe  upon  a  wind  Monday  ig.
till  noon,  when  we  tacked,  being  about  three  leagues  from
the  land,  and,  by  obfervation,  in  latitude  42°  8',  and  longi-
tude from  Cape  Weft  50  5'  E.

We  continued  to  fland  weftward  till  two  in  the  morning    Tuefday  2c;
when  we  made  a  trip  to  the  eaftward,  and  afterwards  flood
weftward  till  noon,  when,  by  our  reckoning,  we  were  in

3  I  2  the


428  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

*77°-       the  latitude  of  420  23',  and  longitude  from-  Cape  Weft  30  55-'  E..

i ., "  '  -■  We  now  tacked  and  flood  eaflward,  with  a  frefh  gale  at  N..
by  W.  till  fix  in  the  evening,  when  the  wind  fhifted  to  the  S.
and  S.  S.  W.  with  which  we  fleered  N.  E.  by  N*  till  fix  in  the

Wednef.  21.  morning5  -when  we  hauled  in  E.  by  N.  to  make  the  land,,
which  we  law  loon  afterwards;  at  noon,  our  latitude,  by
account,  was  41  °  37,  and  our  longitude  from  Cape  Weft  50
42'  E.  We  were  now  within  three  or  four  leagues  of  the
land,  but  it  being  foggy,  we  could  fee  nothing  upon  it
diftinc"tly,  and  as  we  had  much  wind,  and  a  vaft  fwell  rolling
in  upon  the  fhore,  from  the  W.  SvW..  I  did  not  think  it  fafe
to  go  nearer.

In  the  afternoon,  we  had  a  gentle  breeze  from  the  S.  S.W.
with  which  we  fleered  north  along  the  fhore  till  eight,  when,
being  within  between  two  and  three  leagues,  we  founded,
and  had  but  thirty-four  fathom ;  upon  which  we  hauled  off
N.  W.  by  N.  till  eleven  at  night,  and  then  brought  to,  having

Thwfday xz.  fixty-four  fathom.  At  four  in  the  morning,  we  made  fail  to
the  N.  E.  with  a  light  breeze  at  S.S.  W.  which  at  eight  veered
to  the  weft  ward,  and  foon  after  died  away:  at  this  time  we.
were  within  three  or  four  miles  of  the  land,  and  had  fifty-
four  fathom,  with  a  large  fwell  from  the  W.  S.  W.  rolling
obliquely  upon  the  fhore,  which  made  me  fear  that  I  mould
be  obliged  to  anchor ;  but  by  the  help  of  a  light  air  now
and  then  from  the  S.  W.  I  was  able  to  keep  the  fhip  from
driving.  At  noon,  the  northermoft  land  in  fight  bore  N.  E-
by  E.  t  E.  diftant  about  ten  leagues ;  our  latitude,  by  ac-
count, was  400  55'  S.  longitude  from  Cape  Weft  6°  35'  E.
From  this  time  we  had  light  airs  from  the  fouthward,  with

Friliys;.      intervals  of  calm,  till  noon  on  the  23d,  when  our  latitude,,

by  obfervation,   was  400  36'  30"  S.  and  our  longitude  from

Cape  Weft  6°  52  E.     The  eaftermoft  point  of  land  in  fight

bore  E.  1  o  N.  at  the  diftance  of  feven  leagues,  and  a  bluff

c  head


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  429


Friday  23.


Read  or  point,  of  which  we  had  been  abreaft  at  noon  the  day       1770-

r  March.

before,  and  off  which  lay  fome  rocks  above  water,  bore  S.
iSW.  at  the  diftance  of  fix  leagues..  This  point  I  called
Rock's  Point.  Our  latitude  was  now  400  55' S,  and  having
nearly  run  down  the  whole  of  the  north  weft  coaft  of  Tovy
Poenammooy  I  fhall  give  fome  account  of  the  face  of  the
country.

I  have  already  obferved,  that  on  the  nth,  when  we  were
off  the  fouthern  part,  the  land  then  feen  was  craggy  and
mountainous,  and  there  is  great  reafon  to  believe  that  the
fame  ridge  of  mountains  extends  nearly  the  whole  length  of
the  ifland.  Between  the  weftermoft  land  which  we  faw  that
day,,  and  the  eaftermoft  which  we  faw  on  the  1 3th,  there  is  a.
fpace  of  about  fix  or  eight  leagues,  of  which  we. did  not  fee
the  coaft,  though  we  plainly  difcovered  the  mountains  in-
land. The  fea  coaft  near  Cape  Weft  is  low,  rifing  with  an
eafy  and  gradual  afcent  to  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  and
being  in  moft  parts  covered  with  wood.  From  Point  Five
Fingers,  down  to  latitude  440  20'  there  is  a  narrow  ridge  of
hills  that  rifes  directly  from  the  fea,  and  is  covered  with
wood :  clofe  behind  thefe  hills  are  the  mountains,  extending
in  another  ridge  of  a  ftupendous  height,  and  confifting  of
rocks  that  are  totally  barren  and  naked,  except  where  they
are  covered  with  fnow,  which  is  to  be  feen  in  large  patches
upon  many  parts  of  them,  and  has  probably  lain  there  ever
fince  the  creation  of  the  world :  a  profpect  more  rude
craggy,  and  defolate  than  this  country  affords  from  the  fea,
cannot  poffibly  be  conceived,  for  as  far  inland  as  the  eye
can  reach,  nothing  appears  but  the  fummits  of  rocks,  which
ftand  fo  near  together,  that  inftead  of  vallies  there  is  only
fiffures  between  them.  From  the  latitude  of  440  20',  to  the
latitude  of  420  8',   thefe  mountains  lie  farther  inland,    and

the


4S°


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


1770.

March.
Friday  23.


Saturday  2;.


Sunday  25.


Monday  26.


Tucfday  27,


the  fea  coaft  confifls  of  woody  hills  and  vallies,  of  various
height  and  extent,  and  has  much  appearance  of  fertility:
many  of  the  vallies  form  plains  of  confiderable  extent,
wholly  covered  with  wood,  but  it  is  very  probable  that  the
ground,  in  many  places,  is  fwampy  and  interfperfed  with
pools  of  water.  From  latitude  420  8',  to  41°  30',  the  land  is
not  diflinguifhed  by  any  thing  remarkable:  it  rifes  into  hills
directly  from  the  fea,  and  is  covered  with  wood;  but  the
weather  being  foggy  while  we  were  upon  this  part  of  the
coaft,  we  could  fee  very  little  inland,  except  now  and  then
the  fummits  of  the  mountains,  towering  above  the  cloudy
mills  that  obfcured  them  below,  which  confirmed  my  opinion
that  a  chain  of  mountains  extended  from  one  end  of  the
ifland  to  the  other.

In  the  afternoon,  we  had  a  gentle  breeze  at  S.  W.  which,
before  it  was  quite  dark,  brought  us  abreaft  of  the  eaflern
point  which  we  had  feen  at  noon ;  but  not  knowing  what
courfe  the  land  took  on  the  other  fide  of  it,  we  brought  to  in
thirty-four  fathom,  at  the  diilance  of  about  one  league  from
the  fhore.  At  eight  in  the  evening,  there  being  little  wind,
we  filled  and  flood  011  till  midnight,  and  then  we  brought  to
till  four  in  the  morning,  when  we  again  made  fail,  and  at
break  of  day  we  faw  low  land  extending  from  the  point  to
the  S.  S.  E.  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  the  eaflern  extre-
mity of  which  appeared  in  round  hillocks:  by  this  time  the
gale  had  veered  to  the  eaftward,  which  obliged  us  to  ply  to
windward.  At  noon  next  day,  the  eaflern  point  bore  S.  W.
by  S.  diftant  fixteen  miles,  and  our  latitude  was  400  19':  the
wind  continuing  eafierly,  we  were  nearly  in  the  fame  fitu-
ation  at  noon  on  the  day  following.  About  three  o'clock  the
wind  came  to  the  weflward,  and  we  fleered  E.  S.  E.  with  all
the  fail  w.e  could  fet  till  it  was  dark,  and  then  fhortened  fail
.tilljhe  morning:  as  we  had  thick  hazey  weather  all  night,

wc


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  43I,

we  kept  founding  continually,  and  had  from  thirty-feven  to      1770.
forty-two  fathom.     When  the  day  broke  we  faw  land  bearing  ■     art"  '  •
S.  E.  by  E.  and  an  ifland  lying  near  it,  bearing  E.  S.  E.  diftant  Tuefday  27'
about  five  leagues :  this  ifland  I  knew  to  be  the  fame  that  I
had  feen  from  the  entrance  of  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound,
from  which  it  bears  N.  W.  by  N.  diftant  nine  leagues.     At
noon,  it  bore  fouth,  diftant  four  or  five  miles,  and  the  north
weft  head  of  the  Sound  S.  E.  by  S.  diftant  ten  leagues  and  an.
half.    Our  latitude,  by  observation,  was  40 °  33'S.

As  we  had  now  circumnavigated  the  whole  country,  it  be-
came necefTary  to  think  of  quitting  it,  but  as  I  had  thirty
tons  of  empty  water  cafks  on  board,  this  could  not  be  done
till  I  had  filled  them :  I  therefore  hauled  round  the  ifland,
and  entered  a  bay,  which  lies  between  that  and  Queen  Char-
lotte's Sound,  leaving  three  more  iflands,  which  lay  clofe
under  the  weftern  fhore,  between  three  or  four  miles  within
the  entrance,  on  our  ftarboard  hand :  while  we  were  run-
ning in,  wo  kept  the  lead  continually  going,  and  had  from
forty  to  twelve  fathom.  At  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  we
anchored  in  eleven  fathom  with  a.  muddy  bottom,  under  the
weft  fhore,  in  the  fecond.  cove,  that  lies  within  the  three
iflands ;  and  as  foon  as  it  was  light,  the  next  morning,  I  took.  Wednef.-zS;
a  boat,  and  went  on  fhore  to  look  for  a  watering-place,  and
a  proper  birth  for  the  fhip,  both  which  I  found,  much  to  my
fatisfacStion.  As  foon  as  the  fhip  was  moored,  I  fent:an  offi-
cer on  fhore  to  Superintend  the  watering,  and  the  carpenter,
with  his  crew,  to  cut  wood,  while  the  long-boat,  was  em-
ployed in  landing  the  empty  cafks.

In  this  employment  we  were  bufy  till  the  30th,  when  the-Frida  »^
wind  feeming  to  fettle  at  S.  E.  and  our  water  being  nearly
completed,   we  warped  the  fhip  out  of  the  cove,    that  we
might  have  room  to  get  under  fail :  and  at  noon  I  went  away

in.


March
Friday  30


432  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      in  the  pinnace  to  examine  as  much  of  the  bay  as  my  time
would  admit.

After  rowing  about  two  leagues  up  it,  I  went  afhore  upon
a  point  of  land  on  the  weftern  fide,  and  having  climbed  a
hill,  I  faw  the  weftern  arm  of  this  bay  run  in  S.  W.  by  W.
about  five  leagues  farther,  yet  I  could  not  difcover  the  end  of
it:  there  appeared  to  be  feveral  other  inlets,  or  at  leaft  fmall
bays,  between  this  and  the  north  weft  head  of  Queen  Char-
lotte's Sound,  in  each  of  which,  I  make  no  doubt,  there  is
anchorage  and  fhelter,  as  they  are  all  covered  from  the  fea
wind  by  the  iflands  which  lie  without  them.     The  land
about  this  bay,  as  far  as  I  could  fee  of  it,  is  of  a  hilly  fur-
face,   chiefly  covered  with  trees,  lhrubs,  and  fern,  which
render  travelling  difficult  and  fatiguing.     In  this  excurfion  I
was  accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  who  found  •
feveral  new  plants.   We  met  with  fome  hutts,  which  feemed
to  have  been  long  deferted,  but  faw  no  inhabitants.     Mr.
Banks  examined  feveral  of  the  ftones  that  lay  upon   the
beach,  which  were  full  of  veins,  and  had  a  mineral  appear-
ance ;  but  he  did  not  difcover  any  thing  in  them  which  he
knew  to  be  ore :  if  he  had  had  an  opportunity  to  examine
any  of  the  bare  rocks,  perhaps  he  might  have  been  more
fortunate.   He  was  alio  of  opinion  that  what  I  had  taken  for
marble  in  another  place,  was  a  mineral  fubftance ;  and  that,
coniidering  the  correfpondence  of  latitude  between  this  place
and  South  America,  it  was  not  improbable  but  that,  by  a
proper  examination,   fomething    very  valuable  might    be
found.

At  my  return  in  the  evening,  I  found  all  the  wood  and
water  on  board,  and  the  ihip  ready  for  the  fea  ;  I  refolved
therefore  to  quit  the  country,  and  return  home  by  fuch  a
route  as  might  be  of  moft  advantage  to  the  fervice  ;  and

upon


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


433


upon  this  fubject.  took  the  opinion  of  my  officers.     I  had       1770.

myfelf  a  ftrong  defire  to  return  by  Cape  Horn,  becaufe  that   < ,— Lj

would  have  enabled  me  finally  to  determine,  whether  there  "  ay  3"
is  or  is  not  a  fouthern  continent ;  but  againft  this  it  was  a
fufficient  objection  that  we  muft  have  kept  in  a  high  fouth-
ern latitude  in  the  very  depth  of  winter,  with  a  veflel  which
was  not  thought  fufficient  for  the  undertaking :  and  the
fame  reafon  was  urged  againft  our  proceeding  directly  for
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  with  ftill  more  force,  becaufe  no
difcovery  of  moment  could  be  hoped  for  in  that  rout ;  it  was
therefore  refolved  that  we  fhould  return  by  the  Eaft  Indies,
and  that  with  this  view  we  fhould,  upon  leaving  the  coaft,
fteer  weflward,  till  we  fhould  fall  in  with  the  eaft  coaft  of
New  Holland,  and  then  follow  the  direction  of  that  coaft  to
the  northward,  till  we  fhould  arrive  at  its  nefcthern  extre-
mity ;  but  if  that  fhould  be  found  impracticable,  it  was  fur-
ther refolved  that  we  fhould  endeavour  to  fall  in  with  the
land,  or  iflands,  faid  to  have  been  difcovered  by  Quiros.

With  this  view,  at  break  of  day  on  Saturday  the  31ft  of  Saturday  31.
March  1770,  we  got  under  fail,  and  put  to  fea,  with  the  ad-
vantage of  a  frefh  gale  at  S.  E.  and  clear  weather,  taking  our
departure  from  the  eaftern  point,  which  we  had  feen  at  noon
on  the  23d,  and  to  which,  on  this  occafion,  1  gave  the  name
of  Cape  Farewell.

The  bay  out  of  which  we  had  juft  failed  I  called  Admiralty
Bay,  giving  the  name  of  Cape  Stephens  to  the  north  weft
point,  and  of  Cape  Jackson  to  the  fouth  eaft,  after  the  two
gentlemen  who  at  this  time  were  Secretaries  to  the  Board.

Admiralty  Bay  may  cafily  be  known  by  the  ifland  that  has
been  juft  mentioned,  which  lies  two  miles  N.  E.  of  Cape  Ste-
phens, in  latitude  400  37' S.  longitude  18.50  6'W.  and  is  of  a
confiderable  height.     Between  this  illand  and  Cape  Farewell,

Vol.  II.  3  K  which


Saturday  it.


434  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

ij-o.      which  are  between  fourteen  and  fifteen  leagues  diftant  from

March.  •"»--".-

each  other,  in  the  direction  of  W.  by  N.  and  E.  by  S.  the
fhore  forms  a  large  deep  bay,  the  bottom  of  which  we  could
fcarcely  fee  while  we  were  failing  in  a  ftrait  line  from  one
Cape  to  the  other ;  it  is,  however,  probably  of  lefs  depth  than
it  appeared  to  be,  for  as  we  found  the  water  fhallower  here,
than  at  the  famediftance  from  anyother  part  of  the  coaft,  there
is  reafon  to  fuppofe,  that  the  land  at  the  bottom  which  lieo-
next  the  fea  is  low,  and  therefore  not  eafily  to  be  diilin-
guifhed  from  it.  I  have  for  this  reafon  called  it  Blind  13a  y,
and  am  of  opinion  that  it  is  the  fame  which  was  called  Mur-
derer's Bay  by  Tafman.

Such  particulars  of  this  country  and  its  inhabitants,  with
their  manners  and  cuftoms,  as  could  be  learnt  while  we  were
circumnavigajting  the  coaft,  mall  now  be  related.


C  H  A  P.


ROUND    THE    WORL  1>.


43-5


March.


CHAP.      VIIL

A  general  Account  of  New  Zealand:  its  firjl  Di/covery?
Situation,  Extent ',   Climate,  and  Productions.

EW  ZEALAND  was  firfl  difcovered  by  Abel  Janfcn       1770=
Tafman,    a  Dutch  navigator,  whofe  name  has  been
feveral  times  mentioned  in  this  narrative,   on  the  13th  of
December,  in  the  year  1642.     He  traverfed  the  eafiern  coaft
from  latitude  340  to  43,  and  entered  the  ftreight  which  di-
vides the  two   iflands,    and  in  the  chart  is  called  Cook's
Str eight  ;  but  being  attacked  by  the  natives  foon  after  he
came  to  an  anchor,  in  the  place  to  which  he  gave  the  name
of  Murderer's  Bay,  he  never  went  on  more.     He  gave  the
country  the  name  of  Staaten  Land,  or  the  land  of  the  States,
in  honour  of  the  States-General,    and  it  is  now  generally
diftinguifhed  in  our  maps  and  charts  by  the  name  of  New-
Zealand.     As  the  whole  of  this  country,  except  that  part  of
the  coaft  which  was  feen  by  Tafman  from  on  board  his  fliip,
has  from  his  time,  to  the  voyage  of  the  Endeavour,  remained
altogether  unknown,  it  has  by  many  been  fuppofed  to  be
part  of  a  fouthern  continent.     It  is  however  now  known  to
confifl  of  two  large  iflands,  divided  from  each  other  by  a
fti-eight  or   paflage,    which  is  about  four  or  five  leagues
broad.

Thefe  iflands  are  fituated  between  the  latitudes  cf  340  and
48"  S.  and  between  the  longitudes  of  1810  and  194°  \V.  which
is  now  determined  with  uncommon  exactnefs,  from  innu-
merable obfervations  of  the  fun  and  moon,  and  one  of  the

3  K.  z  tranfits


436  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770.       tranfits  of  Mercury,  by  Mr.  Green,  a  perfon  of  known  abi-

5_M "-.'.»   lities,  who,  as  has  been  obferved  before,  was  fent  out  by  the

Royal  Society,  to  obferve  the  tranfit  of  Venus  in  the  South

Seas.

The  northermoft  of  thefe  iflands  is  called  by  the  natives
Eaheinomauwe,    and  the  fouthermoft  Tovy,   or  Tavai  Poe-
nammoo ;  yet,  as  1  have  obferved  before,  we  are  not  Aire
whether   the    name   Tovy   Poenammoo   comprehends    the
whole  fouthern  ifland,  or  only  part  of  it.     The  figure  and
extent  of  thefe  iflands,   with  the  fituation  of  the  bays  and
harbours  they  contain,  and  the  fmaller  iflands  that  lie  about
them,  will  appear  from  the.  chart  that  I  have  drawn,  every
part  of  which,  however,  I  cannot  vouch  to  be  equally  accu-
rate.    The  coaft  of  Eaheinomauwe,  from  Cape  Pallifer  to
Eaft  Cape,  is  laid  down  with  great  exactnefs,  both  in  its
figure,  and  the  courfe  and  diflance  from  point  to  point;  for
the  opportunities  that  offered,  and  the  methods  that  I  ufed,
were  fuch  as  could  fcarcely  admit  of  an  error.     From  Eaft
Cape  to  St.  Maria  van  Diemen,    the  chart,   though  perhaps
not  equally  exact,  is  without  any  error  of  moment,  except
poilibly  in  fome  few  places  which  are  here,  and  in  other
parts  of  the  chart,  diilinguifhed  by  a  dotted  line,  and  which
I  had  no  opportunity  to  examine:  from  Cape  Maria  van  Di-
emen to  latitude  360  15',  we  were  feldom  nearer  the  more
than  between  five  and  eight  leagues  ;  and  therefore  the  line
that  marks  the  fea  coafl  may  poflibly  be  erroneous.    From
latitude  360  15' to  nearly  the  length  of  Entry  Ifland,    our
courfe  was  very  near  the  more,  and  in  this  part  of  the  chart
therefore  there  can  be  no  material  error,  except  perhaps  at
Cape  Tierawitte.     Between  Entry  Ifland  and  Cape  Pallifer
we  were  again  farther  from  the  more,  and  this  part  of  the
coaft  therefore  may  not  be  laid  down  with  minute  exaclnefs ;
vet,  upon  the  whole,  I  am  of  opinion  that  this  ifland  will  be

found


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  437

found  not  much  to  differ  from  the  figure  that  I  have  given  i77°-
it,  and  that  upon  the  coaft  there  are  few  or  no  harbours  v.  ,,-.-'.^
which  are  not  noticed  in  the  journal,  or  delineated  in  the
chart.  I  cannot  however  fay  as  much  of  Tovy  Poenammoo,
the  feafon  of  the  year,  and  the  circumftances  of  the  voyage,
would  not  permit  me  to  fpend  fo  much  time  about  this
ifland  as  I  had  employed  upon  the  other;  and  the  florms
that  we  met  with  made  it  both  difficult  and  dangerous  to
keep  near  the  fhore,  However,  from  Queen  Charlotte's
Sound  to  Cape  Campbel,  and  as  far  to  the  S.  W.  as  latitude
43°,  the  chart  will  be  found  pretty  accurate.  Between  lati-
tude 430  and  latitude. 440  2 a'  the  line  may  be  doubted,  for  of
fome  part  of  the  coaft  which  it  reprefents,  we  had  fcarcely  a
view.  From  latitude  440  20',  to  Cape  Saunders,  our  diftance
would  not  permit  me  to  be  particular,  and  the  weather  was
befides  extremely  unfavourable.  From  Cape  Saunders  to
Cape  South,  and  even  to  Cape  Weft,  there  is  alfo  reafon  to
fear  that,  the  chart  will  in  many  places  be  found  erroneous,
as  we  were  feldom  able  to  keep  the  more,  and  were  fomc-
times  blown  to  fuch  a  diftance  that  it  could  not  be  feen.
From  Cape  Weft  to  Cape  Farewell,  and  even  to  Charlotte's
Sound,  it  is  not  more  to  be  unified.

Tovy  Poenammoo  is  for  the  moft  part  a  mountainous,  and  Country,
to  all  appearance  a  barren,  country ;  and  the  people  whom
we  faw  in  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound,  thofe  that  came  off  to
us  under  the  fnowy  mountains,  and  the  fires  to  the  weft  of
Cape  Saunders,  were  all  the  inhabitants,  and  figns  of  in-
habitants, that  we  difcovered  upon  the  whole  ifland.

Eaheinomauwe  has  a  much  better  appearance  ;  it  is  indeed
not  only  hilly  but  mountainous,  yet  even  the  hills  and  moun-
tains are  covered  with  wood,  and  every  valley  has  a  rivulet

of


43S  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

177c-  of  water:  the  foil  in  thefe  vallies,  and  in  the  plains,  of
v— -v— _;  which  there  are  many  that  are  not  overgrown  with  wood,  is
in  general  light  but  fertile,  and  in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Banks
and  Dr.  Solander,  as  well  as  of  every  other  gentleman  on
board,  every  kind  of  European  grain,  plants,  and  fruit,
would  flourifh  here  in  the  utmofl  luxuriance :  from  the  ve-
getables that  we  found  here,  there  is  reafon  to  conclude,
that  the  winters  are  milder  than  thofe  in  England,  and  we
found  the  fummer  not  hotter,  though  it  was  more  equally
warm  ;  fo  that  if  this  country  mould  be  fettled  by  people
from  Europe,  they  would,  with  a  little  induftry,  be  very
foon  fupplied  not  only  with  the  neceflaries,  but  the  luxuries
of  life  in  great  abundance.

Quadruped?.  in  this  country  there  are  no  quadrupeds  but  dogs  and  rats,
at  lead  we  faw  no  other,  and  the  rats  are  fo  fcarce  that  many
of  us  never  faw  them.  The  dogs  live  with  the  people,  who
breed  them  for  no  other  purpofe  than  to  eat :  there  might
indeed  be  quadrupeds  that  we  did  not  fee,  but  this  is  not
probable,  becaufe  the  chief  pride  of  the  natives,  with  refpect
to  their  drefs,  is  in  the  fkins  and  hair  of  fuch  animals  as  they
have,  and  we  never  faw  the  fkin  of  any  animal  about  them
but  thofe  of  dogs  and  birds :  there  are  indeed  feals  upon  the
coaft,  and  we  once  faw  a  fea  lion,  but  we  imagine  they  are
feldom  caught,  for  though  we  faw  fomc  of  their  teeth
which  were  fafhioned  into  an  ornament  like  a  bodkin,  and
worn  by  the  natives  at  their  breaft,  and  highly  valued,  we
faw  none  of  their  fkins:  there  are  whales  alfo  upon  this
coaft,  and  though  the  people  did  not  appear  to  have  any  art
or  inftrument  by  which  fuch  an  animal  could  be  taken  and
killed,  we  faw  pattoo-pattoos  in  the  pofTeilion  of  fome  of
them,  which  were  made  of  the  bone  of  a  whale,  or  of  fome
other  animal  whofe  bone  had  exactly  the  fame  appearance.
7  Of


Birds.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  439

Of  birds  the  fpecies  are  not  many;  and  of  thefe  none,  1770.
except  perhaps  the  gannet,  is  the  fame  with  thofe  of  Eu-
rope :  here  are  ducks  indeed,  and  mags  of  fevcral  kinds,
fufliciently  refembling  thofe  of  Europe,  to  be  called  the
fame,  by  thofe  who  have  not  examined  them  very  nicely
Here  are  alfo  hawks,  owls,  and  quails,  which  differ  but
little  from  thofe  of  Europe  at  firft  fight ;  and  feveral  fmall
birds,  whofe  fong,  as  has  been  remarked  in  the  courfe  of
the  narrative,  is  much  more  melodious  than  any  that  we
had  ever  heard.

The  fea  coaft  is  alfo  vifited  by  many  oceanic  birds,  parti-
cularly albatroffes,  fheerwaters,  pintados,  and  a  few  of  the
birds  which  Sir  John  Narborough  has  called  Penguins,  and
which  indeed  are  what  the  French  call  Nuance,  and  feem
to  be  a  middle  fpecies  between  bird  and  fifli ;  for  their  fea-
thers, efpecially  thofe  upon  their  wings,  differ  very  little
from  fcales;  and  their  wings  themfelves,  which  they  ufe  only
in  diving,  and  not  to  accelerate  their  motion  even  upon  the
furface  of  the  water,  may,  perhaps  with  equa]  propriety,  be
called  fins.

Neither  are  infects  in  greater  plenty  than  birds :  a  few
butterflies  and  beetles,  flefh  flies,  very  like  thofe  in  Europe,
and  fome  mufquitos  and  fand  flies,  perhaps  exactly  the  fame:
with  thofe  of  North  America,  make  up  the  whole  catalogue.
Of  mufquitos  and  fand  flies,  however,  which  are  juflly  ac-
counted the  curfe  of  every  country  where  they  abound,  we
did  not  fee  many ;  there  were  indeed  a  few  in  almofl  every
place  where  we  went  on  more,  but  they  gave  us  fo  little
trouble,  that  we  did  not  make  ufe  of  the  fhacles  which  we
had  provided  for  the  fecurity  of  our  faces.

For  this  fcarcity  of  animals  upon  the  land,  the  fea,  how-
ever, makes  an  abundant  recompenfe  ;.  every  creek  fwarm-


440  LIEUTENANT   COOK's   VOYAGE


March


1770.      ing  with  fifli,  which  are  not  only  wholefome,  but  equally
delicious  with  thofe  of  Europe :  the  fhip  feldom  anchored  in
any  ftation,  or  with  a  light  gale  paffed  any  place,  that  did
not  afford  us  enough  with  hook  and  line  to  ferve  the  whole
fhip's  company,  efpecially  to  the  fouthward  ■  when  we  lay
at  anchor,  the  boats,  with  hook  and  line,  near  the  rocks,
could  take  fiih  in  any  quantity  ;  and  the  feine  feldom  failed
of  producing  a  flill  more  ample  fupply  ;  fo  that  both  times
when  we  anchored  in  Cook's  Streight,  every  mefs  in  the  fhip,
that  was  not  carelefs  and  improvident,  faked  as  much  as
lafted  many  weeks  after  they  went  to  fea.     Of  this  article,
the  variety  was  equal  to  the  plenty;  we  had  mackrel  of  many
kinds,  among  which,  one  was  exactly  the  fame  as  we  have  in
England:  thefe  came  in  immenfe  flioals,  and  were  taken  by
the  natives  in  their  feines,  who  fold  them  to  us  at  a  very  eafy
rate.     Befides  thefe,  there  were  fifh  of  many  fpecies  which
we  had  never  feen  before,  but  to  all  which  the  feamen  very
readily  gave  names ;  fo  that  we  talked  here  as  familiarly  of
hakes,  bream,  cole-fiih,  and  many  others,  as  we  do  in  Eng-
land ;  and  though  they  are  by  no  means  of  the  fame  family,
it  muft  be  confeffed  that  they  do  honour  to  the  name.    But
the  higheft  luxury  which  the  fea  afforded  us,  even  in  this
place,  was  the  lobfter  or  fea  cray-fifh,  which  are  probably
the  fame  that  in  the  Account  of  Lord  Anfon's  Voyage  are  faid
to  have  been  found  at  the  ifland  of  Juan  Fernandes,  except
that,  although  large,  they  are  not  quite  equal  in  fize:  they
differ  from  ours  in  England  in  feveral  particulars,  they  have
a  greater  number  of  prickles  on  their  backs,  and  they  are
red  when  firft  taken  out  of  the  water.  Thefe  we  alfo  bought
every  where  to  the  northward  in  great  quantities  of  the  na-
tives, who  catch  them  by  diving  near  the  more,  and  finding
out  where  they  lie  with  their  feet.     We  had  alfo  a  fiih  that
Frezier,   in  his  Voyage  to  the  Spanifh  Main  in  South  Ame-
2.  rica,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  44i

rica,  has  defcribed  by  the  names  of  Elefant,  Pejegallo,  or  i?7°-
Polfon  coq,  which  though  coarfe,  we  eat  very  heartily.  Seve-  i  —  - '_,
ral  fpecies  of  the  fkate,  or  fling-ray,  are  alfo  found  here,
which  were  flill  coarfer  than  the  Elefant ;  but  as  an  atone-
ment, we  had  among  many  kinds  of  dog-fifh  one,  fpotted
with  white,  which  was  in  flavour  exactly  fimilar  to  our  bed
fkate,  but  much  more  delicious.  We  had  alfo  flat  fifh  re-
fembling  both  foles  and  flounders,  befides  eels  and  congers
of  various  kinds,  with  many  others  of  which  thofe  who
mail  hereafter  vifit  this  coafl  will  not  fail  to  find  the  advan-
tage ;  and  fhell-fifh  in  great  variety,  particularly  clams,
cockles,  and  oyfters.

Among  the  vegetable  productions  of  this  country,  the  Trees. plants,
trees  claim  a  principal  place  ■  for  here  are  forefls  of  vafl  ex-  &c"
tent,  full  of  the  flraitefl,  the  cleanefl,  and  the  largefl  timber-
trees  that  we  had  ever  feen ;  their  fize,  their  grain,  and  ap-
parent durability,  render  them  fit  for  any  kind  of  building,
and  indeed  for  every  other  purpofe  except  mafls ;  for  which,
as  I  have  already  obferved,  they  are  too  hard,  and  too  hea-
vy: there  is  one  in  particular  which,  when  we  were  upon
the  coafl,  was  rendered  confpicuous  by  a  fcarlet  flower,  that
feemed  to  be  a  compendage  of  many  fibres  ;  it  is  about  as
large  as  an  oak,  and  the  wood  is  exceedingly  hard  and  hea-
vy, and  excellently  adapted  to  the  ufe  of  the  mill-wright.
There  is  another  which  grows  in  the  fwamps,  remarkably
tall  and  flrait,  thick  enough  to  make  mafls  for  veffels  of  any
iize,  and,  if  a  judgment  may  be  formed  by  the  direction  of
its  grain,  very  tough :  this,  which,  as  has  been  before  re-
marked, our  carpenter  thought  to  refemble  the  pitch-pine,
may  probably  be  lightened  by  tappingv and  it  will  then
make  the  finefl  mafls  in  the  world :  it  has  a  leaf  not  unlike
a  yew,  and  bears  berries  in  fmall  bunches.

Vol.  II.  3L  Great


445  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1770-  Great  part  of  the  country  is  covered  with  a  luxuriant  ver-

l  -w-  '_?  dure,  and  our  natural  hiftorians  were  gratified  by  the  no-
velty, if  not  the  variety  of  the  plants.  Sow-thiflle,  garden
night-fliade,  one  or  two  kinds  of  grafs,  the  fame  as  in  Eng-
land, and  two  or  three  kinds  of  fern,  like  thofe  of  the  Weft
Indies,  with  a  few  of  the  plants  that  are  to  be  found  in
almofl  every  part  of  the  world,  were  all,  out  of  about  four
hundred  fpecies,  that  have  hitherto  been  defcribed  by  any
botanifts,  or  had  been  feen  elfewhere  during  the  courfe  of
this  voyage,  except  about  five  or  fix  which  had  been  gathered
at  Terra  del  Fuego.

Of  eatable  vegetables  there  are  but  few ;  our  people,  in-
deed, who  had  been  long  at  fea,  eat,  with  equal  pleafure
and  advantage,  of  wild  celery,  and  a  kind  of  crefTes,  which
grew  in  great  abundance  upon  all  parts  of  the  fea-fhore.  We
alfo,  once  or  twice,  met  with  a  plant  like  what  the  country
people  in  England  call  Lamb's  quarters,  or  Fat-hen,  which  we
boiled  inftead  of  greens  ;  and  once  we  had  the  good  fortune
to  find  a  cabbage  tree,  which  afforded  us  a  delicious  meal ;
and,  except  the  fern-root,  and  one  other  vegetable,  totally
unknown  in  Europe,  and  which,  though  eaten  by  the  na-
tives, was  extremely  difagreeable  to  us,  we  found  no  other
vegetable  production  that  was  fit  for  food,  among  thofe  that
appeared  to  be  the  wild  produce  of  the  country ;  and  we
could  find  but  three  efculent  plants  among  thofe  which  are
raifed  by  cultivation,  yams,  fweet  potatoes,  and  coccos.  Of
the  yams  and  potatoes  there  are  plantations  confiding  of
many  acres,  and  I  believe  that  any  fhip  which  fhould  hap-
pen to  be  here  in  the  autumn,  when  they  are  dug  up,  might
purchafc  them  in  any  quantity.

Gourds  are  alfo  cultivated  by  the  natives  of  this  place,  the

fruit  of  which  furnifhes  them  with  vefTels  for  various  ufes.

8  We


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


443


We  alfo  found  here  the  Chinefe  paper  mulberry  tree,  the  1770.
fame  as  that  of  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  South  Sea  *
iflands  make  their  cloth ;  but  it  is  fo  fcaree,  that  though  the
New  Zealanders  alfo  make  cloth  of  it,  they  have  not  enough
for  any  other  purpofe  than  to  wear  as  an  ornament  in  the
holes  which  they  make  in  their  ears,  as  I  have  obferved
before.

But  among  all  the  trees,  fhrubs,  and  plants  of  this  coun-
try, there  is  not  one  that  produces  fruit,  except  a  berry
which  has  neither  fweetnefs  nor  flavour,  and  which  none
but  the  boys  took  pains  to  gather,  mould  be  honoured  with
that  appellation.  There  is,  however,  a  plant  that  ferves  the
inhabitants  inftead  of  hemp  and  flax,  which  excels  all  that
are  put  to  the  fame  purpofes  in  other  countries.  Of  this
plant  there  are  two  forts  ;  the  leaves  of  both  refemble  thofc
of  flags,  but  the  flowers  are  fmaller,  and  their  clutters  more
numerous  5  in  one  kind  they  are  yellow,  and  in  the  other  a
deep  red.  Of  the  leaves  of  thcfe  plants,  with  very  little  pre-
paration, they  make  all  their  common  apparel ;  and  of  thefc
they  make  alfo  their  firings,  lines,  and  cordage  for  every  pur-
pofe, which  are  fo  much  ftronger  than  any  thing  we  can
make  with  hemp,  that  they  will  not  bear  a  comparifon.
From  the  fame  plant,  by  another  preparation,  they  draw
long  flender  fibres  which  fhine  like  filk,  and  are  as  white
as  mow:  of  thefe,  which  are  alfo  furprifingly  ftrong,  the
finer  clothes  are  made  ;  and  of  the  leaves,  without  any  other
preparation  than  fplitting  them  into  proper  breadths,  and
tying  the  ftrips  together,  they  make  their  fifhing  nets ;  fome
of  which,  as  I  have  before  remarked,  are  of  an  enormous
fize.

A  plant,  which  with  fuch  advantage  might  be  applied  to
fo  many  ufeful  and  important  purpofes,  would  certainly  be

3  L  2  a  great


444  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i7"°-       a  great  acquifition  to  England,  where  it  would  probably

R.arcti.  .  *  J

v— v- — >  tlirive  with  very  little  trouble,  as  it  feems  to  be  hardy,  and
to  affect  no  particular  foil;  being  found  equally  in  hill  and
valley;  in  the  driefl:  mould,  and  the  deepefb  bogs:  the  bog,
however,  it  feems  rather  to  prefer,  as  near  fuch  places  we
obferved  it  to  be  larger  than  elfewhere.

I  have  already  obferved,  that  we  found  great  plenty  of
iron  fand  in  Mercury  Bay,  and  therefore  that  iron  ore  is
undoubtedly  to  be  found  at  no  great  diftance.  As  to  other
metals  we  had  fcarcely  knowlege  enough  of  the  country  for
conjecture.

If  the  fettling  of  this  country  fliould  ever  be  thought  an
object  worthy  the  attention  of  Great  Britain,  the  bell  place
for  eflablifhing  a  colony  would  be  either  on  the  banks  of
the  Thames,  or  in  the  country  bordering  upon  the  Bay  of
I/lands.  In  either  place  there  would  be  the  advantage  of  an
excellent  harbour;  and,  by  means  of  the  river,  fettlements
might  be  extended,  and  a  communication  eftablifhed  with
the  inland  parts  of  the  country :  veflels  might  be;  built
of  the  fine  timber  which  abounds  in  thefe  parts,  at  very  little
trouble  and  expence,  fit  for  fuch  a  navigation  as  would  an-
fwer  the  purpofe.  I  cannot  indeed  exactly  affign  the  depth
of  water  which  a  veffel  intended  to  navigate  this  river,  even
as  far  up  as  I  went  with  the  boat,  mould  draw,  becaufe
this  depends  upon  the  depth  of  water  that  is  upon  the  bar,
or  flats,  which  lie  before  the  narrow  part  of  the  river,  for  I
had  no  opportunity  to  make  myfelf  acquainted  with  them  ;
but  I  am  of  opinion,  that  a  vefTel  which  mould  draw  not
more  than  twelve  feet  would  perfectly  anfwer  the  purpofe.

People.  When  we  firft  arrived  upon  the  coaft  of  this  country,  we

imagined  it  to  be  much  better  peopled  than  we  afterwards

found


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  us

found  it,  concluding  that  the  inland  parts  were  populous  »f7°-
from  the  fmoke  that  we  favv  at  a  considerable  diftance  from
the  more ;  and  perhaps  that  may  really  be  the  cafe  with  re-
fpeet  to  the  country  behind  Poverty  Bay,  and  the  Bay  of
Plenty,  where  the  inhabitants  appeared  to  be  more  nume-
rous than  in  other  places.  But  we  had  reafon  to  believe,
that,  in  general,  no  part  of  the  country  but  the  fea  coaft  is
inhabited  ;  and  even  there  we  found  the  people  but  thinly
fcattered,  all  the  weftern  coaft  from  Cape  Maria  Van  Diemen
to  Mount  Egmont  being  totally  defolate  ;  fo  that  upon  the
whole  the  number  of  inhabitants  bears  no  proportion  to  the
extent  of  country.


CHAP.


March.


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


CHAP.     IX.

A  Defcription  of  the  Inhabitants,  their  Habitations,  Ap-
parel, Ornaments,  Food,   Cookery,   and  Manner
of  Life.

T770-  '  I  ^  H  E  flature  of  the  men  in  general  is  equal  to  the  largeft
JL  of  thofe  in  Europe :  they  are  flout,  well  limbed,  and
flefhy  ;  but  not  fat,  like  the  lazy  and  luxurious  inhabitants
of  the  iflands  in  the  South  Seas :  they  are  alfo  exceedingly
vigorous  and  active ;  and  have  an  adroitnefs,  and  manual
dexterity  in  an  uncommon  degree,  which  are  difcovered  in
whatever  they  do.  I  have  feen  the  ftrokes  of  fifteen  paddles
on  a  fide  in  one  of  their  canoes  made  with  incredible  quick-
nefs,  and  yet  with  fuch  minute  exa&nefs  of  time,  that
all  the  rowers  feemed  to  be  a&uated  by  one  common  foul.
Their  colour  in  general  is  brown ;  but  in  few  deeper  than
that  of  a  Spaniard,  who  has  been  expofed  to  the  fun  j  in  many
not  fo  deep.  The  women  have  not  a  feminine  delicacy  in
their  appearance,  but  their  voice  is  remarkably  foft ;  and  by
that,  the  drefs  of  both  fexes  being  the  fame,  they  are  prin-
cipally diftinguifhed:  they  have,  however,  like  the  women  of
other  countries,  more  airy  cheerfulnefs,  and  a  greater  flow
of  animal  fpirits,  than  the  other  fex.  Their  hair,  both  of  the
head  and  beard,  is  black  ;  and  their  teeth  extremely  regular,
and  as  white  as  ivory  :  the  features  of  both  fexes  are  good  ;
they  fecm  to  enjoy  high  health,  and  we  faw  many  who  ap-
peared to  be  of  a  great  age.  The  difpofitions  both  of  the
men  and  women  feemed  to  be  mild  and  gentle;  they  treat

each


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  4i7

each  other  with  the  tendereft  affeftion,  but  are  implacable       *77°-

towards  their  enemies,  to  whom,  as  I  have  before  obferved,    i ,—_/

they  never  give  quarter.  It  may  perhaps,  at  firft,  feem
ftrange,  that  where  there  is  fo  little  to  be  got  by  victory,  there
fhould  fo  often  be  war ;  and  that  every  little  diftridl  of  a
country  inhabited  by  people  fo  mild  and  placid,  fhould  be
at  enmity  with  all  the  reft.  But  poffibly  more  is  to  be  gained
by  victory  among  thefe  people  than  at  firft  appears,  and  they
may  be  prompted  to  mutual  hoftilities  by  motives  which  no
degree  of  friendfhip  or  affection  is  able  to  refift.  It  appears,
by  the  account  that  has  already  been  given  of  them,  that
their  principal  food  is  fifh,  which  can  only  be  procured  upon
the  fea  coaft;  and  there,  in  fufficient  quantities,  only  at  cer-
tain times  :  the  tribes,  therefore,  who  live  inland,  if  any
fuch  there  are,  and  even  thofe  upon  the  coaft,  mull  be  fre-
quently in  danger  of  perifhing  by  famine.  Their  country
produces  neither  flicep,  nor  goats,  nor  hogs,  nor  cattle  ;  tame
fowls  they  have  none,  nor  any  art  by  which  thofe  that  are
wild  can  be  caught  in  fufficient  plenty  to  ferve  as  provifion.
If  there  are  any  whofe  fituation  cuts  them  off  from  a  fupply
of  fifh,  the  only  fuccedaneum  of  all  other  animal  food,  ex-
cept dogs,  they  have  nothing  to  fupport  life,  but  the  vegetables
that  have  already  been  mentioned,  of  which  the  chief  are  fern
root,  yams,  clams,  and  potatoes :  when  by  any  accident  thefe
fail,  the  diftrefs  muft  be  dreadful ;  and  even  among  the  inha-
bitants of  the  coaft,  many  tribes  muft  frequently  be  reduced
to  nearly  the  fame  fituation,  either  by  the  failure  of  their
plantations,  or  the  deficiency  of  their  dry  flock,  during  the
feafon  when  but  few  fifh  are  to  be  caught.  Thefe  confide-
rations  will  enable  us  to  account,  not  only  for  the  perpetual
danger  in  which  the  people  who  inhabit  this  country  appear
to  live,  by  the  care  which  they  take  to  fortify  every  village,
but  for  the  horrid  practice  of  eating  thofe  who  are  killed  in

battle;


448  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

i77°-  battle  ;  for  the  hunger  of  him  who  is  preffed  by  famine  to
i_  -.-  _■  fight,  will  abforb  every  feeling,  and  every  fentiment  which
would  reftrain  him  from  allaying  it  with  the  body  of  his  ad-
verfary.  It  may  however  be  remarked,  that,  if  this  account
of  the  origin  of  fo  horrid  a  practice  is  true,  the  mifchief
does  by  no  means  end  with  the  neceflity  that  produced  it  :
after  the  practice  has  been  once  begun  on  one  fide  by  hun-
ger, it  will  naturally  be  adopted  on  the  other  by  revenge.
Nor  is  this  all,  for  though  it  may  be  pretended,  by  fome  who
with  to  appear  fpeculative  and  philofophical,  that  whether
the  dead  body  of  an  enemy  be  eaten  or  buried,  is  in  itfelf  a
a  matter  perfectly  indifferent ;  as  it  is,  whether  the  breafls
and  thighs  of  a  woman  fhould  be  covered  or  naked ;  and
that  prejudice  and  habit  only  make  us  fhudder  at  the  viola-
tion of  cuflom  in  one  inflance,  and  blufh  at  it  in  the  other:
yet,  leaving  this  as  a  point  of  doubtful  difputation,  to  be  dif-
cufled  at  leifure,  it  may  fafely  be  affirmed,  that  the  practice
of  eating  human  ilelh,  whatever  it  may  be  in  itfelf,  is  rela-
tively, and  in  its  confequences,  mofl  pernicious ;  tending
manifeflly  to  eradicate  a  principle  which  is  the  chief  fecu-
rity  of  human  life,  and  more  frequently  reftrains  the  hand
of  murder  than  the  fenfe  of  duty,  or  even  the  fear  of  pu-
nifhment.

Among  thofe  who  are  accuftomed  to  eat  the  dead,  death
rnufi  have  loft  much  of  its  horror  ;  and  where  there  is  little
horror  at  the  fight  of  death,  there  will  not  be  much  repug-
nance to  kill.  A  fenfe  of  duty,  and  fear  of  punifhment,  may
be  more  eafily  furmounted  than  the  feelings  of  Nature,  or
thofe  which  have  been  engrafted  upon  Nature  by  early  pre-
judice and  uninterrupted  cuftom.  The  horror  of  the  mur-
derer arifes  lefs  from  the  guilt  of  the  fact,  than  its  natural
effect ;  and  he  who  has  familiarifed  the  effect,  will  confe-
quently  lofe  much  of  the  horror.  By  our  laws,  and  our  re-
ligion,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


4!9


ligion,  murder  and  theft  incur  the  fame  punifhment,  both       >77o.

March

in  this  world  and  the  next ;  yet,  of  the  multitude  who  would   < -v-^

deliberately  ileal,  there  are  but  very  few  who  would  delibe-
rately kill,  even  to  procure  much  greater  advantage.  But
there  is  the  ftrongeft  reafon  to  believe,  that  thofe  who  have
been  fo  accuftomed  to  prepare  a  human  body  for  a  meal,
that  they  can  with  as  little  feeling  cut  up  a  dead  man,  as  our
cook-maids  divide  a  dead  rabbit  for  a  fricaflee,  would  feel
as  little  horror  in  committing  a  murder  as  in  picking  a
pocket,  and  consequently  would  take  away  life  with  as  little
compunction  as  property  ;  fo  that  men,  under  thefe  circum-
ftances,  would  be  made  murderers  by  the  flight  temptations
that  now  make  them  thieves.  If  any  man  doubts  whether
this  reafoning  is  conclulive,  let  him  afk  himfelf,  whether  in
his  own  opinion  he  fhould  not  be  fafer  with  a  man  in  whom
the  horror  of  deftroying  life  is  ftrong,  whether  in  confe-
quence  of  natural  inftinct  unfubdued,  or  of  early  prejudice,
which  has  nearly  an  equal  influence ;  than  in  the  power  of  a
man  who  under  any  temptation  to  murder  him  would  be
reftrained  only  by  confiderations  of  intereft;  for  to  thefe  all
motives  of  mere  duty  may  be  reduced,  as  they  muft  termi-
nate either  in  hope  of  good,  or  fear  of  evil.

The  fituation  and  circumftances,  however,  of  thefe  poor
people,  as  well  as  their  temper,  are  favourable  to  thofe  who
fhall  fettle  as  a  colony  among  them.  Their  fituation  fets
them  in  need  of  protection,  and  their  temper  renders  it  eafy
to  attach  them  by  kindnefs ;  and  whatever  may  be  faid  in
favour  of  a  favage  life,  among  people  who  live  in  luxurious
idlenefs  upon  the  bounty  of  Nature,  civilization  would  cer-
tainly be  a  blefling  to  thofe  whom  her  parfimony  fcarcely
furnifhes  with  the  bread  of  life,  and  who  are  perpetually
deftroying  each  other  by  violence,  as  the  only  alternative  of
perifhing  by  hunger.

Vol.  II.    '  3  M  But


450  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S   VOYAGE

1770.  But  thefe  people,  from  whatever  caufe,  being  inured  to

^  -I-'  j  war,  and  by  habit  confidering  every  ftranger  as  an  enemy,
were  always  difpofed  to  attack  us  when  they  were  not  inti-
midated by  our  manifeft  fuperiority.  At  firft,  they  had  no
notion  of  any  fuperiority  but  numbers ;  and  when  this  was
on  their  fide,  they  confxdered  all  our  expreffions  of  kindnefs
as  the  artifices  of  fear  and  cunning,  to  circumvent  them,
and  preferve  ourfelves:  but  when  they  were  once  convinced
of  our  power,  after  having  provoked  us  to  the  ufe  of  our
fire-arms,  though  loaded  only  with  fmall  fhot;  and  of  our
clemency,  by  our  forbearing  to  make  ufe  of  weapons  fo
dreadful  except  in  our  defence;  they  became  at  once  friend-
ly, and  even  affectionate,  placing  in  us  the  moil  unbounded
confidence,  and  doing  every  thing  which  could  incite  us  to
put  equal  confidence  in  them.  It  is  alfo  remarkable,  that
when  an  intercourfe  was  once  eftablifhed  between  us,  they
were  very  rarely  detected  in  any  act  of  dimonefly.  Before,
indeed,  and  while  they  confide:  ed  us  as  enemies,  who  came
upon  their  coaft  only  to  make  an  advantage  of  them,  they
did  not  fcruple  by  any  means  to  make  an  advantage  of  us ;
and  would,  therefore,  when  they  had  received  the  price  of
any  thing  they  had  offered  to  fell,  pack  up  both  the  pur-
chafe  and  the  purchafe-money  with  all  poffible  compofure,
as  fo  much  lawful  plunder  from  people  who  had  no  view
but  to  plunder  them.

I  have  obferved  that  our  friends  in  the  South  Seas  had  not
even  the  idea  of  indecency,  with  refpect  to  any  object  or  any
action  •,  but  this  was  by  no  means  the  cafe  with  the  inhabi-
tants of  New  Zealand,  in  whofe  carriage  and  converfation
there  was  as  much  modefl  referve  and  decorum  with  refpecT:
to  actions,  which  yet  in  their  opinion  were  not  criminal,  as
are  to  be  found  among  the  politeft  people  in  Europe.  The
women  were  not  impregnable ;  but  the  terms  and  manner

of


f
ROUND    THE    WORLD.  45I


of  compliance  were  as  decent  as  thofe  in  marriage  among  us,
and  according  to  their  notions,  the  agreement  was  as  inno-  <
cent.  When  any  of  our  people  made  an  overture  to  one  of
their  young  women,  he  was  given  to  underftand  that  the
confent  of  her  friends  was  neceflary,  and  by  the  influence  of
a  proper  prefent,  it  was  generally  obtained ;  but  when  thefe
preliminaries  were  fettled,  it  was  alfo  neceflary  to  treat  the
wife  for  a  night,  with  the  fame  delicacy  that  is  here  required
by  the  wife  for  life,  and  the  lover  who  prefumed  to  take  any
liberties  by  which  this  was  violated,  was  fure  to  be  difap-
pointed.

One  of  our  gentlemen  having  made  his  addrefles  to  a  fa-
mily of  the  better  fort,  received  an  anfwer,  which,  tranflated
into  our  language,  according  to  the  mode  and  fpirit  of  it,  as
well  as  the  letter,  would  have  been  exactly  in  thefe  terms :
"  Any  of  thefe  young  ladies  will  think  themfelves  honoured
by  your  addrefles,  but  you  mull  firft  make  me  a  fuitable  pre-
fent, and  you  muft  then  come  and  fleep  with  us  on  more,  for
daylight  muft  by  no  means  be  a  witnefs  of  what  pafles  be-
tween you."

I  have  already  obferved,  that  in  perfonal  cleanlinefs  they
are  not  quite  equal  to  our  friends  at  Otaheite ;  becaufe,  not
having  the  advantage  of  fo  warm  a  climate,  they  do  not  fo
often  go  into  the  water;  but  the  moll  difguftful  thing  about
them  is  the  oil,  with  which,  like  the  Wanders,  they  anoint
their  hair:  it  is  certainly  the  fat  either  of  fifh  or  of  birds,
melted  down,  and  though  the  better  fort  have  it  frefh,  their
inferiors  ufe  that  which  is  rancid,  and  confequently  are  al-
moft  as  difagreeable  to  the  fmell  as  a  Hottentot ;  neither  are
their  heads  free  from  vermin,  though  we  obferved  that  they
were  furnifhed  with  combs,  both  of  bone  and  wood :  thefe
combs  are  fometimes  worn  ftuck  upright  in  the  hair  as  an

3  M  2  ornament.


J770.

March.


452  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

xy?o.       ornament,  a  fafhion  which  at  prefent  prevails  amon?  the

! 1 '    ladies  of  England.     The  men  generally  wear-  their  beards

fhorr,  and  their  hair  tied  upon  the  crown  of  the  head  in  a
bunch,  in  which  they  ftick  the  feathers  of  various  birds,  in
different  manners,  according  to  their  fancies ;  fometimes
one  is  placed  on  each  fide  of  the  temples,  pointing  forwards,
which  we  thought  made  a  very  difagreeable  appearance.
The  women  wear  their  hair  fometimes  cropped  fhort,  and
fometimes  flowing  over  their  fhoulders.

The  bodies  of  both  fexes  are  marked  with  the  black  flains
called  Amoco,  by  the  fame  method  that  is  ufed  at  Otaheite,
and  called  Tattowing ;  but  the  men  are  more  marked,  and
the  women  lefs.  The  women  in  general  ftain  no  part  of
their  bodies  but  the  lips,  though  fometimes  they  are  marked
with  fmall  black  patches  on  other  parts  :  the  men,  on  the
contrary,  feem  to  add  fomething  every  year  to  the  orna-
ments of  the  laft,  fo  that  fome  of  them,  who  appeared  to  be
of  an  advanced  age,  were  almoft  covered  from  head  to  foot.
Befides  the  Amoco,  they  have  marks  impreffed  by  a  method
unknown  to  us,  of  a  very  extraordinary  kind :  they  are  fur-
rows of  about  a  line  deep,  and  a  line  broad,  fuch  as  appear
upon  the  bark  of  a  tree  which  has  been  cut  through,  after  a
year's  growth:  the  edges  of  thefe  furrows  are  afterwards  in-
dented by  the  fame  method,  and  being  perfectly  black,
they  make  a  moft  frightful  appearance.  The  faces  of  the
old  men  are  almoft  covered  with  thefe  marks ;  thofe  who
are  very  young,  black  only  their  lips  like  the  women ;  when
they  are  fomewhat  older,  they  have  generally  a  black  patch
upon  one  cheek,  and  over  one  eye,  and  fo  proceed  gra-
dually, that  they  may  grow  old  and  honourable  together:
but  though  we  could  not  but  be  difgufted  with  the  horrid
deformity  which  thefe  ftains  and  furrows  produced  in  the
"  human  face  divine,"  we  could  not  but  admire  the  dexte-
8  rity


X°i3.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  4J3

rity  and  art  with  which  they  were  imprefled.  The  marks  upon      *77°f

the  face  in  general  are  fpirals,  which  are  drawn  with  great   «—->, >

'nicety,  and  even  elegance,  thofe  on  one  fide  exactly  corre-
fponding  with  thofe  on  the  other:  the  marks  on  the  body
fomewhat  refemble  the  foliage  in  old  chafed  ornaments,  and
the  convolutions  of  fillagree  work ;  but  in  thefe  they  have
fuch  a  luxuriance  of  fancy,  that  of  an  hundred,  which  at
firft  fight  appeared  to  be  exactly  the  fame,  no  two  were,
upon  a  clofe  examination,  found  to  be  alike.  We  obferved,
that  the  quantity  and  form  of  thefe  marks  were  different  in
different  parts  of  the  coaft,  and  that  as  the  principal  feat  of
them  at  Otaheite  was  the  breech,  in  New  Zealand  it  was
fometimes  the  only  part  which  was  free,  and  in  general  was
lefs  dift inguiilied  than  any  other.

The  fkins  of  thefe  people,  however,  are  not  only  dyed,  but
painted,  for  as  I  have  before  obferved,  they  fmear  their  bo-
dies with  red  oker,  fome  rubbing  it  on  dry,  and  fome  apply-
ing it  in  large  patches  mixed  with  oil,  which  is  always  wet,
arid  which  the  leaft  touch  will  rub  off,  fo  that  the  tranfgref-
fions  of  fuch  of  our  people  as  were  guilty  of  ravifhing  a  kifs
from  thefe  blooming  beauties,  were  mofl  legibly  written
upon  their  faces.

The  drefs  of  a  New  Zealander  is  certainly,  to  a  ftranger
at  firft  fight,  the  moll  uncouth  that  can  be  imagined.  It  is
made  of  the  leaves  of  the  flag,  which  has  been  defcribed
among  the  vegetable  productions  of  this  country :  thefe
leaves  are  fplit  into  three  or  four  flips,  and  the  flips,  when
they  are  dry,  interwoven  with  each  other  into  a  kind  of  fluff
between  netting  and  cloth,  with  all  the  ends,  which  are
eight  or  nine  inches  long,  hanging  out  on  the  upper  fide,
like  the  fhag  or  thrumb  matts,  which  we  fometimes  fee
lying  in  a  paffage.     Of  this  cloth,  if  cloth  it  may  be  called,

two


454  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  two  pieces  ferve  for  a  complete  drefs;  one  of  them  is  tied
i_  '.tl.'  i  over  their  moulders  with  a  firing,  and  reaches  as  low  as
the  knees  ;  to  the  end  of  this  firing  is  fattened  a  bodkin  of
bone,  which  is  eafily  pafTed  through  any  two  parts  of  this
upper  garment,  fo  as  to  tack  them  together ;  the  other  piece
is  wrapped  round  the  waift,  and  reaches  nearly  to  the
ground :  the  lower  garment,  however,  is  worn  by  the  men
only  upon  particular  occafions ;  but  they  wear  a  belt,  to
which  a  firing  is  fattened,  for  a  very  Angular  ufe.  The  in-
habitants of  the  South  Sea  iflands  flit  up  the  prepuce  fo  as
to  prevent  it  from  covering  the  glans  of  the  penis,  but  thefe
people,  on  the  contrary,  bring  the  prepuce  over  the  glans,
and  to  prevent  it  from  being  drawn  back  by  the  contraction
of  the  part,  they  tie  the  firing  which  hangs  from  their  girdle,
round  the  end  of  it.  The  glans  indeed  feemed  to  be  the
only  part  of  their  body  which  they  were  folicitous  to  con-
ceal, for  they  frequently  threw  off  all  their  drefs  but  the  belt
and  firing,  with  the  moft  carelefs  indifference,  but  fhewed
manifeft  figns  of  confufion,  when,  to  gratify  our  curiofity,
they  were  requefled  to  untie  the  firing,  and  never  confented
but  with  the  utmofl  reluctance  and  fhame.  When  they  have
only  their  upper  garment  on,  and  fit  upon  their  hams,  they
bear  fome  refemblance  to  a  thatched  houfe  ;  but  this  cover-
ing, though  it  is  ugly,  is  well  adapted  to  the  ufe  of  thofe
who  frequently  fleep  in  the  open  air,  without  any  other
ftielter  from  the  rain.

But  befides  this  courfe  fhag  or  thatch,  they  have  two  forts
of  cloth,  which  have  an  even  furface,  and  are  very  ingeni-
oufly  made,  in  the  fame  manner  with  that  manufactured
by  the  inhabitants  of  South  America,  fome  of  which  we
procured  at  Rio  de  Janeiro.  One  fort  is  as  coarfe  as  our
coarfeft  canvas,  and  fomewhat  refembles  it  in  the  manner  of
laying  the  threads,  but  it  is  ten  times  as  flrong :  the  other  is

4  formed


March.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  4J5

formed  by  many  threads  lying  very  clofe  one  way,  and  a  '770.
few  croffing  them  the  other,  fo  as  to  bind  them  together;
but  thefe  are  about  half  an  inch  afunder,  fomewhat  like  the
round  pieces  of  cane  matting  which  are  fometimes  placed
under  the  diflies  upon  a  table.  This  is  frequently  ftriped,
and  always  had  a  pretty  appearance,  for  it  is  compofed  of
the  fibres  of  the  fame  plant,  which  are  prepared  fo  as  to
fhine  like  filk.  It  is  made  in  a  kind  of  frame  of  the  fize  of
the  cloth,  generally  about  five  feet  long,  and  four  broad,,
acrofs  which  the  long  threads,  which  lie  clofe  together,  or
warp,  are  ftrained,  and  the  crofs  threads,  or  woof,  are  worked
in  by  hand,  which  muft  be  a  very  tedious  operation.

To  both  thefe  kinds  of  cloth  they  work  borders  of  different
colours,  in  flitches,  fomewhat  like  carpeting,  or  rather  like
thofe  ufed  in  the  famplars  which  girls  work  at  fchool.  Thefe
borders  are  of  various-  patterns,  and  wrought  with  a  neat-
nefs,  and  even  an  elegance,  which,  confidering  they  have
no  needle,  is  furprizing :  but  the  great  pride  of  their  drefs
confifts  in  the  fur  of  their  dogs,  which  they  ufe  with  fuch
Geconomy  that  they  cut  it  into  ftripes,  and  few  them  upon
their  cloth  at  a  diftance  from  each  other,  which  is  a  ftrong
proof  that  dogs  are  not  plenty  among  them  ;  thefe  ftripes
are  alfo  of  different  colours,  and  difpofed  £0  as  to  produce  a
pleafing  effect.  We  faw  fome  drefies  that  were  adorned  with
feathers  inflead  of  fur,  but  thefe  were  not  common  ;  and
we  faw  one  that  was  intirely  covered  with  the  red  feathers-
of  the  parrot.

The  drefs  of  the  man  who  was  killed,  when  we  firft  went
afhore  in  Poverty  Bay,  has  been  defcribed  already ;  but  we
faw  the  fame  drefs  only  once  more  during  our  flay  upon  the
coaft,  and  that  was  in  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound.

The


45  b


March.


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

770.I  The  women,  contrary  to  the  cuftom  of  the  fex  in  general,
feemed  to  affect  drefs  rather  lefs  than  the  men :  their  hair,
which,  as  I  have  obferved  before,  is  generally  cropt  fhort,  is
never  tied  upon  the  top  of  the  head  when  it  is  fuffered  to  be
long,  nor  is  it  ever  adorned  with  feathers.  Their  garments
were  made  of  the  fame  materials,  and  in  the  fame  form,  as
thofe  of  the  other  fex,  but  the  lower  one  was  always  bound
fail  round  them,  except  when  they  went  into  the  water  to
catch  lobfters,  and  then  they  took  great  care  not  to  be  feen
by  the  men.  Some  of  us  happening  one  day  to  land  upon  a
fmall  iiland  in  Tolaga  Bay,  we  furprized  feveral  of  them  at
this  employment ;  and  the  chafle  Diana,  with  her  nymphs,
could  not  have  difcovered  more  confufion  and  diftrefs  at  the
fight  of  Aclseon,  than  thefe  women  exprefled  upon  our  ap-
proach. Some  of  them  hid  themfelves  among  the  rocks,
and  the  reft  crouched  down  in  the  fea  till  they  had  made
themfelves  a  girdle  and  apron  of  fuch  weeds  as  they  could
find,  and  when  they  came  out,  even  with  this  veil,  we  could
perceive  that  their  modefty  fufTered  much  pain  by  our  pre-
fence.  The  girdle  and  apron  which  they  wear  in  common,
have  been  mentioned  before.

Both  fexes  bore  their  ears,  and  by  ftretching  them  the
holes  become  large  enough  to  admit  a  finger  at  leaft.  In
thefe  holes  they  wear  ornaments  of  various  kinds,  cloth,
feathers,  bones  of  large  birds,  and  even  fometimes  a  flick  of
wood  ;  and  to  thefe  receptacles  of  finery  they  generally  ap-
plied the  nails  which  we  gave  them,  and  every  thing  which
it  was  poffible  they  could  contain.  The  women  fometimes
thruft  through  them  the  down  of  the  albatrofs,  which  is  as
white  as  mow,  and  which,  fpreading  before  and  behind  the
hole  in  a  bunch  almoft  as  big  as  the  fift,  makes  a  very  An-
gular, and  however  ftrange  it  may  be  thought,  not  a  dis-
agreeable


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  457

agreeable  appearance.  Befides  the  ornaments  that  are  thruft  ,77^
through  the  holes  of  the  ears,  many  others  are  fufpended  to  v— -v— j
them  by  firings ;  fuch  as  duffels  or  bodkins  made  of  green
talc,  upon  which  they  fet  a  high  value,  the  nails  and  teeth
of  their  deceafed  relations,  the  teeth  of  dogs,  and  every
thing  elfe  that  they  can  get,  which  they  think  either  curious
or  valuable.  The  women  alfo  wear  bracelets  and  anclets,
made  of  the  bones  of  birds,  fhells,  or  any  other  fubflances
which  they  can  perforate  and  firing  upon  a  thread.  1  he
men  had  fometimes  hanging  to  a  firing,  which  went  round
the  neck,  a  piece  of  green  talc,  or  whalebone,  fomewhat  in
the  fhape  of  a  tongue,  with  the  rude  figure  of  a  man  carved
upon  it ;  and  upon  this  ornament  they  fet  a  high  value.  In
one  inflance,  we  faw  the  griflle  that  divides  the  noflrils,  and
called  by  anatomifls,  the  feptum  nafi,  perforated,  and  a  fea-
ther thruft  through  the  whole,  which  projected  on  each  fide
over  the  cheeks :  it  is  probable  that  this  frightful  Angularity
was  intended  as  an  ornament,  but  of  the  many  people  we
faw,  we  never  obferved  it  in  any  other,  nor  even  a  perfora-
tion that  might  occafionally  ferve  for  fuch  a  purpofe.

Their  houfes  are  the  mofl  inartificially  made  of  any  thing  H°ufea-
among  them,  being  fcarcely  equal,  except  in  fize,  to  an
Englifli  dog-kennel:  they  are  feldom  more  than  eighteen
or  twenty  feet  long,  eight  or  ten  broad,  and  five  or  fix  high,
from  the  pole  that  runs  from  one  end  to  the  other,  and  forms
the  ridge,  to  the  ground :  the  framing  is  of  wood,  generally
flender  flicks,  and  both  walls  and  roof  confift  of  dry  grafs
and  hay,  which,  it  mufl  be  confeffed,  is  very  tightly  put  to-
gether; and  fome  are  alfo  lined  with  the  bark  of  trees,  fo
that  in  cold  weather  they  mufl  afford  a  very  comfortable  re-
treat. The  roof  is  floping,  like  thofe  of  our  barns,  and  the
door  is  at  one  end,  jufl  high  enough  to  admit  a  man,  creep-
ing upon  his  hands  and  knees:  near  the  door  is  a  fquare

Vol.  II.  3  N  hole,


458  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

i77°-       hole,  which  ferves  the  double  office  of  window  and  chim-

March.

<— v '  ney,  for  the  fire-place  is  at  that  end,  nearly  in  the  middle

between  the  two  fides :  in  fome  confpicuous  part,  and  gene-
rally near  the  door,  a  plank  is  fixed,  covered  with  carving
after  their  manner :  this  they  value  as  we  do  a  picture,  and
in  their  eflimation  it  is  not  an  inferior  ornament :  the  fide-
walls  and  roof  project  about  two  feet  beyond  the  walls  at
each  end,  fo  as  to  form  a  kind  of  porch,  in  which  there  are
benches  for  the  accommodation  of  the  family.  That  part
of  the  floor  which  is  allotted  for  the  fire-place,  is  enclofed  in
a  hollow  fquare,  by  partitions  either  of  wood  or  flone,  and
in  the  middle  of  it  the  fire  is  kindled.  The  floor,  along  the
infide  of  the  walls,  is  thickly  covered  with  draw,  and  upon,
this  the  family  fleep.

Furniture.  Their  furniture  and  implements  confift  of  but  few  articles,,
and  one  chefl:  commonly  contains  them  all,  except  their
provifion-bafkets,  the  gourds  that  hold  their  frefh  water,
and  the  hammers  that  are  ufed  to  beat  their  fern-root,  which
generally  Hand  without  the  door:  fome  rude  tools,  their
cloaths,  arms,  and  a  few  feathers  to  flick  in  their  hahv
make  the  reft  of  their  treafure.

Some  of  the  better  fort,  whofe  families  are  large,  have
three  or  four  houfes  enclofed  within  a  court-yard,  the  walls
of  which  are  conilrucled  of  poles  and  hay,  and  are  about
ten  or  twelve  feet  high.

When  we  were  on  fhore  in  the  diftrict  called  Tolaga,  we
faw  the  ruins,  or  rather  the  frame  of  a  houfe,  for  it  had
never  been  finifhed,  much  fuperior  in  fize  to  any  that  we
faw  elfewhere :  it  was  thirty  feet  in  length,  about  fifteen  in
breadth,  and  twelve  high :  the  fides  of  it  were  adorned  with
many  carved  planks,  of  a  workmanihip  much  fuperior  to
any  other  that  we  had  met  with  in  the  country ;  but  for

4  what


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  459


what  purpofe  it  was  built,  or  why  it  was  deferted,  we  could      wo-
never  learn.  ' — ■* — -

But  thefe  people,  though  in  their  houfes  they  are  fo  well
defended  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  feem  to  be
quite  indifferent  whether  they  have  any  fhelter  at  all  during
their  excurfions  in  fearch  of  fern  roots  and  fifh,  fometimes
fetting  up  a  fmall  made  to  windward,  and  fometimes  alto-
gether neglecting  even  that  precaution,  fieeping  with  their
women  and  children  under  bufhes,  with  their  weapons
ranged  round  them,  in  the  manner  that  has  already  been
defcribed.  The  party  confiding  of  forty  or  fifty,  whom  we
faw  at  Mercury  Bay,  in  a  diftridr.  which  the  natives  call
Opoorage,  never  erected  the  leaft  fhelter  while  we  ftaid  there,
though  it  fometimes  rained  inceiTantly  for  four  and  twenty
hours  together.

The  articles  of  their  food  have  been  enumerated  already ;  Food.
the  principal,  which  to  them  is  what  bread  is  to  the  inha-
bitants of  Europe,  is  the  roots  of  the  fern  which  grows  upon
the  hills,  and  is  nearly  the  fame  with  what  grows  upon  our
high  commons  in  England,  and  is  called  indifferently  fern,
bracken,  or  brakes.  The  birds  which  fometimes  ferve
them  for  a  feaft,  are  chiefly  penguins  and  albatroffes,  with  a
few  other  fpecies  that  have  been  occalibnally  mentioned  in
this  narrative.

Having  no  veffel  in  which  water  can  be  boiled,  their  Cookery.
cookery  confifts  wholly  of  baking  and  roafling.  They  bake
nearly  in  the  fame  manner  as  tiie  inhabitants  of  the  South
Seas,  and  to  the  account  that  has  been  already  given  of  their
roafling,  nothing  need  be  added,  but  that  the  long  fkewer
or  fpit  to  which  the  flefh  is  fattened,  is  placed  doping  towards
the  fire,  by  fetting  one  flone  agamft  the  bottom  of  it,  and
fupporting  it  near  the  middle  with  another,  by  the  moving

3  N  2  of


460  LIEUTENANT  COOK's   VOYAGE

l77°-      of  which  to  a  greater  or  lefs  diftance  from  the  end,  the  de-

March.  ■      .     .  -,  *■    ~  •    •  /i       i

«— v '  gree  of  obliquity  is  mcreafed  or  diminiflied  at  pleafure.

To  the  northward,  as  I  have  obferved,  there  are  planta~
tions  of  yams,  fweet  potatoes,  and  eoccos,  but  we  faw  no
fuch  to  the  fouthward ;  the  inhabitants  therefore  of  that
part  of  the  country  mult  fubfift  wholly  upon  fern  root  and
fifti,  except  the  fcanty  and  accidental  refource  which  they
may  find  in  fea  fowl  and  dogs ;  and  that  fern  and  fifti  are
not  to  be  procured  at  all  feafons  of  the  year,  even  at  the  fea
fide,  and  upon  the  neighbouring  hills,  is  manifeft  from  the
ltores  of  both  that  we  faw  laid  up  dry,  and  the  reluc-
tance which  fome  of  them  exprefled  at  felling  any  part  of
them  to  us  when  we  offered  to  purchafe  them,  at  leaft  the
filh,  for  fea  ftores :  and  this  particular  feems  to  confirm  my
opinion  that  this  country  fcarcely  fuftains  the  prefent  num-
ber of  its  inhabitants,  who  are  urged  to  perpetual  hoftilities
by  hunger,  which  naturally  prompted  them  to  eat  the  dead
bodies  of  thofe  who  were  fiain  in  the  conteft.

Water  is  their  univerfal  and  only  liquor,  as  far  as  we.
could  difcover,  and  if  they  have  really  no  means  of  intoxica-
tion, they  are,  in  this  particular,  happy  beyond  any  other
people  that  we  have  yet  feen  or  heard  of.

As  there  is  perhaps  no  fource  of  difeafe  either  critical  or
chronic,  but  intemperance  and  inactivity,  it  cannot  be
thought  flrange  that  thefe  people  enjoy  perfect  and  uninter-
rupted health:  in  all  our  vifits  to  their  towns,  where  young
and  old,  men  and  women,  crowded  about  us,  prompted  by
the  fame  curiofity  that  carried  us  to  look  at  them,  we  never
faw  a  fingle  perfon  who  appeared  to  have  any  bodily  com-
plaint, nor  among  the  numbers  that  we  have  feen  naked,
did  we  once  perceive  the  flighted  eruption  upon  the  fkin,  or
any  marks  that  an  eruption  had  left  behind:  at  firft,  indeed,
3  observing


HOUND   THE   WORLD.  461

cbferving  that  fome  of  them  when  they  came  oiF  to  us  were  117°-
marked  in  patches  with  a  white  flowery  appearance  upon  <— -v — j
different  parts  of  their  bodies,  we  thought  that  they  were
leperous,  or  highly  fcorbutic ;  but  upon  examination  we
found  that  thefe  marks  were  owing  to  their  having  been
wetted  by  the  fprey  of  the  fea  in  their  pafTage,  which,  when
it  was  dried  away,  left  the  falts  behind  it  in  a  fine  white
powder.

Another  proof  of  health,  which  we  have  mentioned  upon
a  former  occafion,  is  the  facility  with  which  the  wounds
healed  that  had  left  fears  behind  them,  and  that  we  faw
in  a  recent  ftate ;  when  we  faw  the  man  who  had  been
jhot  with  a  mufket  ball  through  the  flefhy  part  of  his  arm,
his  wound  feemed  to  be  fo  well  digefted,  and  in  fo  fair  a
way  of  being  perfectly  healed,  that  if  I  had  not  known  no
application  had  been  made  to  it,  I  fhould  certainly  have  en-
quired, with  a  very  interefted  curiofity,  after  the  vulnerary
herbs  and  furgical  art  of  the  country.

A  farther  proof  that  human  nature  is  here  untainted  with
difeafe,  is  the  great  number  of  old  men  that  we  faw,  many
of  whom,  by  the  lofs  of  their  hair  and  teeth,  appeared  to  be
very  ancient,  yet  none  of  them  were  decrepit,  and  though
not  equal  to  the  young  in  mufcular.  ftrength,-  were  not  a
whit  behind  them  in  cheerfulnefs  and  vivacity.


CHAP.


402  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE


CHAP.     X.

Of  the  Canoes  and  Navigation  of  the  Inhabitants  of  New
Zealand ;  their  Tillage,  Weapons ',  and  Mufic  :  Govern-
ment, Religion,  and  Language :  With  Jome  Reafons
againfl  the  Exiflence  of  a  Southern  Continent.

ij77°h"       /  |  \  h  E  ingenuity  of  thefe  people  appears  in  nothing  more


Canoes.   ^


than  in  their  canoes :  they  are  long  and  narrow,  and
in  fhape  very  much  refemble  a  New  England  whale  boat :
the  larger  fort  feem  to  be  built  chiefly  for  war,  and  will
carry  from  forty  to  eighty,  or  an  hundred  armed  men.  We
meafured  one  which  lay  afhore  at  Tolaga:  flie  was  fixty-
eight  feet  and  an  half  long,  five  feet  broadr  and  three  feet
and  an  half  deep;  the  bottom  was  fharp,  with  ftrait  fides
like  a  wedge,  and  confifled  of  three  lengths,  hollowed  out
to  about  two  inches,  or  an  inch  and  an  half  thick,  and  well
fattened  together  with  ftrong  plaiting:  each  fide  confifted
of  one  intire  plank,  fixty-three  feet  long,  ten  or  twelve
inches  broad,  and  about  an  inch  and  quarter  thick,  and
thefe  were  fitted  and  lafhed  to  the  bottom  part  with  great
dexterity  and  flrength.  A  confiderable  number  of  thwarts
were  laid  from  gunwale  to  gunwale,  to  which  they  were
fecurely  laflied  on  each  fide,  as  a  ftrengthening  to  the  boat.
The  ornament  at  the  head  projected  five  or  fix  feet  beyond
the  body,  and  was  about  four  feet  and  an  half  high ;  the
ornament  at  the  ftern  was  fixed  upon  that  end,  as  the  fiern-
poft  of  a  fliip  is  upon  her  keel,  and  wasj  about  fourteen  feet
hvgh,  two  feet  broad,  and  an  inch  and  an  half  thick.    They

both


:n?i5.


vPJ*


*:«sa


Bfc.Bfilttgij,


Hp^pBJrj^&T^^y  JgppBJ


W      *.*    H    V    V


/


ff  1


■..".':''.•/..■■'.-.':'..':;■'.-


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  463

both  confifted  of  boards  of  carved  work,  of  which  the  defign       1770-

March.

was  much  better  than  the  execution.     All  their  canoes,  ex-   1 ,— «a

cept  a  few  at  Opoorage  or  Mercury  Bay,  which  were  of  one
piece,  and  hollowed  by  fire,  are  built  after  this  plan,  and
few  are  lefs  than  twenty  feet  long  :  fome  of  the  fmaller  fort
have  outriggers,  and  fometimes  two  of  them  are  joined
together,  but  this  is  not  common.  The  carving  upon
the  {tern  and  head  ornaments  of  the  inferior  boats,  which
feem  to  be  intended  wholly  for  fifhing,  confifts  of  the
figure  of  a  man,  with  a  face  as  ugly  as  can  be  conceived,
and  a  monftrous  tongue  thruft  out  of  the  mouth,  with
the  white  fhells  of  fea-ears  ftuck  in  for  the  eyes.  But
the  canoes  of  the  fuperior  kind,  which  feem  to  be  their  men
of  war,  are  magnificently  adorned  with  open  work,  and  co-
vered with  loofe  fringes  of  black  feathers,  which  had  a  moll;
elegant  appearance :  the  gunwale  boards  were  alfo  fre-
quently carved  in  a  grotefque  tafte,  and  adorned  with  tufts
of  white  feathers  placed  upon  a  black  ground.  Of  vifible
objects  that  are  wholly  new,  no  verbal  defcription  can  con-
vey a  juft  idea,  but  in  proportion  as  they  refemble  fome  that
are  already  known,  to  which  the  mind  of  the  reader  rauft  be
referred :  the  carving  of  thefe  people  being  of  a  fingular
kind,  and  not  in  the  likenefs  of  any  thing  that  is  known  on
our  fide  of  the  ocean,  either  "  in  the  heaven  above,  or  in  the
"  earth  beneath,  or  m  the  waters  that  are  under  the  earth/'
I  mull  refer  wholly  to  the  reprefentations  which  will  be
found  of  it  in  Plate  XV.

The  paddles  are  fmall,  light,  and  neatly  made  ;  the  blade
is  of  an  oval  fhape,  or  rather  of  a  fhape  refembling  a  large
leaf,  pointed  at  the  bottom,  broadei!  in  the  middle,  and  gra-
dually lofing  itfelf  in  the  fhaft,  the  whole  length  being  about
fix  feet,  of  which  the  fhaft  or  loom  including  the  handle  is

four>


4^4  XIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770-       four,  and  the  blade  two.  T5y  the  help  of  thefe  oars  they  puili
v— . ^~— j   on  their  boats  with  amazing  velocity.

In  failing  they  are  not  expert,  having  no  art  of  going
otherwife  than  before  the  wind :  the  fail  is  of  netting  or
matt,  which  is  fet  up  between  two  poles  that  are  fixed  up-
right upon  each  gunwale,  and  ferve  both  for  malls  and
yards :  two  ropes  anfwered  the  purpofe  of  meets,  and  were
confequently  fattened  above  to  the  top  of  each  pole.  But
clumfy  and  inconvenient  as  this  apparatus  is,  they  make  good
way  before  the  wind,  and  are  fleered  by  two  men  who  lit  in
the  ftern,  with  each  a  paddle  in  his  hand  for  that  purpofe.

Tools>  Having  faid  thus  much  of  their  workmanfhip,  I  mall  now

give  fome  account  of  their  tools  j  they  have  adzes,  axes,  and
chiiTels,  which  ferve  them  alfo  as  augers  for  the  boring  of
holes  :  as  they  have  no  metal,  their  adzes  and  axes  are  made
of  a  hard  black  Hone,  or  of  a  green  talc,  which  is  not  only
hard  but  tough  ;  and  their  chiflels  of  human  bone,  or  fmall
fragments  of  jafpar,  which  they  chip  off  from  a  block  in
fharp  angular  pieces  like  a  gun-flint.  Their  axes  they  value
above  all  that  they  poiTefs,  and  never  would  part  with  one  of
them  for  any  thing  that  we  could  give :  I  once  offered  one
of  the  bed  axes  I  had  in  the  fliip,  befides  a  number  of  other
things  for  one  of  them,  but  the  owner  would  not  fell  it;
from  which  I  conclude  that  good  ones  are  fcarce  among
them.  Their  fmall  tools  of  jafpar,  which  are  ufed  in  finifh-
ing  their  niceft  work,  they  ufe  till  they  are  blunt,  and  then,
as  they  have  no  means  of  fharpening  them,  throw  them
away.  We  had  given  the  people  at  Tolaga  a  piece  of  glafs,
and  in  a  fhort  time  they  found  means  to  drill  a  hole  through
it,  in  order  to  hang  it  round  the  neck  as  an  ornament  by  a
thread  ;  and  we  imagine  the  tool  muft  have  been  a  piece  of
this  jafpar.     How  they  bring  their  large  tools  firft  to  an

edge,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  4^

edge,  and  fharpen  the  weapon  which  they  call  Patoo-Patoo,       1770.
we  could  not  certainly  learn  ;  but  probably  it  is  by  bruifing   1    ._/_  '__,
the  fame  fubftance  to  powder,  and,  with  this,  grinding  two
pieces  againft  each  other.

Their  nets,  particularly  their  feine,  which  is  of  an  enor-  Nets,
mous  fize,  have  been  mentioned  already  :  onei)f  thefe  feems
to  be  the  joint  work  of  a  whole  town,  and  I  fuppofe  it  to  be
the  joint  property  alfo  :  the  other  net,  which  is  circular,  and
extended  by  two  or  three  hoops,  has  been  particularly  de-
fcribed  as  well  as  the  manner  of  baiting  and  ufing  it.  Their
hooks  are  of  bone  or  fhell,  and  in  general  are  ill  made.  To
receive  the  fifh  when  it  is  caught,  and  to  hold  their  other
provifions,  they  have  baf&ets  of  various  kinds  and  dimen-
fions,  very  neatly  made  of  wicker  work.

They  excel  in  tillage,   as  might  naturally  be  expected  Tillage.
where  the  perfon  that  fows  is  to  eat  the  produce,  and  where
there  is  fo  little  befides  that  can  be  eaten :  when  we  firft
came  to  Tegadoo,  a  diflrift  between  Poverty  Bay  and  Eafl
Cape,  their  crops  were  juft  covered,  and  had  not  yet  begun
to  fprout ;   the  mould  was  as  fmooth  as  in  a  garden,  and
every  root  had  its  fmall  hillock,  ranged  in  a  regular  quin-
cunx by  lines,  which  with  the  pegs  were  Hill  remaining  in
the  field.     We  had  not  an  opportunity  to  fee  any  of  thefe
hufbandmen  work,  but  we  faw  what  ferves  them  at  once
for  fpade  and  plough  :  this  inftrument  is  nothing  more  than
a  long  narrow  flake  fharpened  to  an  edge  at  one  end,  with  a
fliort  piece  fattened  tranfverfely  at  a  little  diftance  above  it,
for  the  convenience  of  preffing  it  down  with  the  foot.    With
this  they  turn  up  pieces  of  ground  fix  or  feven  acres  in  ex-
tent, though  it  is  not  more  than  three  inches  broad ;  but  as
the  foil  is  light  and  fandy  it  makes  little  refinance.

Vol.  II.  3  O  Tillage,


466  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  Tillage,  weaving,  and  the  other  arts  of  peace,  feem  to  be

]y3"ircTit

i_  '-[-.  _«  bell  known  and  mofl  pradtifed  in  the  northern  part  of  this
country ;  for  there  is  little  appearance  of  any  of  them  in
the  South :  but  the  arts  of  war  flourilh  equally  through  the
whole  coaft.

Weapons.  Of  weapons  they  have  no  great  variety,  but  fuch  as  they

have  are  well  fitted  for  deftruclion  ;  they  have  fpears,  darts,
battle-axes,  and  the  Patoo-Patoo.  The  fpear  is  fourteen
or  fifteen  feet  long,  pointed  at  both  ends,  and  fometimes
headed  with  bone :  thefe  are  grafped  by  the  middle,  fo  that
the  part  behind  balancing  that  before,  makes  a  pufh  more
difficult  to  be  parried,  than  that  of  a  weapon  which  is  held
by  the  end.  The  dart  and  other  weapons  have  been  fufli-
ciently  defcribed  already ;  and  it  has  alfo  been  remarked,
that  thefe  people  have  neither  fling  nor  bow.  They  throw
the  dart  by  hand,  and  fo  they  do  flones ;  but  darts  and  Hones
are  feldom  ufed  except  in  defending  their  forts.  Their
battles,  whether  in  boats  or  on  more,  are  generally  hand  to
hand,  and  the  flaughter  mufl  confequently  be  great,  as  a
fecond  blow  with  any  of  their  weapons  is  unneceflTary,  if  the
nrft  takes  place :  their  truft,  however,  feems  to  be  princi-
pally placed  in  the  Patoo-Patoo,  which  is  faflened  to  their
wrifls  by  a  flrong  flrap,  left  it  mould  be  wrenched  from
them,  and  which  the  principal  people  generally  wear  flick-
ing in  their  girdles,  confldering  it  as  a  military  ornament,
and  part  of  their  drefs,  like  the  poinard  of  the  Afiatic,  and
the  fword  of  the  European.  They  have  no  defenfive  armour ;
but,  befides  their  weapons,  the  Chiefs  carried  a  ftafF  of  dis-
tinction, in  the  fame  manner  as  our  officers  do  the  fpontoon :
this  was  generally  the  rib  of  a  whale,  as  white  as  fnow,  with
many  ornaments  of  carved  work,  dog's  hair,  and  feathers;
but  fometimes  it  was  a  flick,  about  fix  feet  long,  adorned  in
2  the


X°l  i


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  467

the  fame  manner,  and  inlaid  with  a  fhell  like  mother-of-pearl.       1770.
Thofe  who  bore  this  mark  of  diftinction  were  generally  old,   ■_  -,—!__/
at  leaft  paft  the  middle  age,  and  were  alfo  more  marked  with
the  Amoco  than  the  reft.

One  or  more  perfons,  thus  diftinguifhed,  always  appeared
in  each  cauue,  when  they  came  to  attack  us,  according  to
the  fize  of  it.  When  they  came  within  about  a  cable's  length
of  the  fhip,  they  ufed  to  flop,  and  the  Chiefs  riling  from  their
feat,  put  on  a>drefs  which  feemed  appropriated  to  the  occa-
fion,  generally  of  dog's  fkin,  and  holding  out  their  decorated
ftaff,  or  a  weapon,  directed  the  reft  of  the  people  what  they
fhould  do.  When  they  were  at  too  great  a  diftance  to  reach
us  with  a  lance  or  a  ftone,  they  prefumed  that  we  had  no  wea-
pon with  which  we  could  reach  them ;  here  then  the  de-
fiance was  given,  and  the  words  were  almoft  univerfally  the
fame,  Haromai,  haro7iiai,  harre  uta  a  Patoo-Patoo  oge :  "  Come  to
"  us,  come  on  fliore,  and  we  will  kill  you  all  with  our
"  Patoo-Patoos."  While  they  were  uttering  thefe  menaces
they  came  gradually  nearer  and  nearer,  till  they  were  clofe
alongfide  ;  talking  at  intervals  in  a  peaceable  ftrain,  and  an-
fwering  any  queftions  that  we  afked  them;  and  at  intervals
renewing  their  defiance  and  threats,  till  being  encouraged
by  our  apparent  timidity,  they  began  their  war-fong  and
dance,  as  a  prelude  to  an  attack,  which  always  followed,
and  was  fometimes  continued  till  it  became  abfolutely  ne-
ceffary  to  reprefs  them  by  firing  fome  fmall-fhot ;  and  fome-
times ended  after  throwing  a  few  ftones  on  board,  as  if  con-
tent with  having  offered  us  an  infult  which  we  did  not  dare
to  revenge.

The  war-dance  confifts  of  a  great  variety  of  violent  mo-
tions, and  hideous  contortions  of  the  limbs,  during  which
the  countenance  alfo  performs  ks  part ;  the  tongue  is  fre-

3°  2  quently


468  XIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  quently  thruft  out  to  an  incredible  length,  and  the  eye-lid&
i_  "-  '_r  fo  forcibly  drawn  up  that  the  white  appears  both  above  and
below,  as  well  as  on  each  fide  of  the  iris,  fo  as  to  form  a
circle  round  it ;  nor  is  any  thing  neglected  that  can  render
the  human  fhape  frightful  and  deformed :  at  the  fame  time
they  brandifh  their  fpears,  make  their  darts,  and  cleave  the
air  with  their  Patoo-Patoos.  This  horrid  dance  is  always
accompanied  by  a  fong  ;  it  is  wild  indeed,  but  not  difagree-
able,  and  every  ftrain  ends  in  a  loud  and  deep  figh,  which
they  utter  in  concert.  In  the  motions  of  the  dance,  however
horrid,  there  is  a  ftrength,  firmnefs,  and  agility,  which  we
could  not  but  behold  with  admiration ;  and  in  their  fong
they  keep  time  with  fuch  exactnefs,  that  I  have  often  heard
above  an  hundred  paddles  ftruck  againft  the  fides  of  their
boats  at  once,  fo  as  to  produce  but  a  {ingle  found,  at  the
divifions  of  their  mufic

A  fong  not  altogether  unlike  this,  they  fometimes  fmg
without  the  dance,  and  as  a  peaceable  amufement :  they
have  alfo  other  fongs  which  are  fung  by  the  women,  whofe
voices  are  remarkably  mellow  and  foft,  and  have  a  plealing
and  tender  effect ;  the  time  is  flow,  and  the  cadence  mourn-
ful ;  but  it  is  conducted  with  more  tafle  than  could  be  ex-
pected among  the  poor  ignorant  favages  of  this  half  defolate
country  ;  efpecially  as  it  appeared  to  us,  who  were  none  of
us  much  acquainted  with  mufic  as  a  fcience,  to  be  fung  in
parts  }  it  was  at  leaft  fung  by  many  voices  at  the  fame  time.

They  have  fonorous  inftruments,  but  they  canfcarcely  be
called  inftruments  of  mufic;  one  is  the  fhell,  called  the  Tri-
ton's trumpet,  with  which  they  make  a  noife  not  unlike  that
which  our  boys  fometimes  make  with  a  cow's  horn :  the
other  is  a  fmall  wooden  pipe,  refembling  a  child's  nine-pin,
only  much  fmaller,  and  in  this  there  is  no  more  mufic  than

in


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  469

in  a  nea-whiftle.    They  feem  fenfible  indeed  that  thefe  in-      *77°-

r  '  March.

ftruments  are  not  mufical ;  for  we  never  heard  an  attempt  to   1 , *

fing  to  them,  or  to  produce  with  them  any  meafured  tones
that  bore  the  leaft  refemblance  to  a  tune.

To  what  has  been  already  faid  of  the  practice  of  eat-
ing human  flefli,  I  mall  only  add,  that  in  almofl  every
cove  where  we  landed,  we  found  flefli  bones  of  men  near  the
places  where  fires  had  been  made;  and  that  among  the  heads
that  were  brought  on  board  by  the  old  man,  fome  feemed
to  have  falfe  eyes,  and  ornaments  in  their  ears  as  if  alive.
That  which  Mr.  Banks  bought  was  fold  with  great  reluc-
tance by  the  poffeffor:  the  head  was  manifeftly  that  of  a
young  perfon  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  by
the  contufions  on  one  fide  appeared  to  have  received  many
violent  blows,  and  indeed  a  part  of  the  bone  near  the  eye
was  wanting.  Thefe  appearances  confirmed  us  in  the  opi-
nion that  the  natives  of  this  country  give  no  quarter,  nor
take  any  prifoners  to  be  killed  and  eaten  at  a  future  time,  as
is  faid  to  have  been  a  practice  among  the  Indians  of  Florida:
for  if  prifoners  had  been  taken,  this  poor  young  creature,
who  cannot  be  fuppofed  capable  of  making  much  refinance,
would  probably  have  been  one,  and  we  knew  that  he  was-
killed  with  the  reft,  for  the  fray  had  happened  but  a  few-
days  before.

The  towns  or  Hippahs  of  thefe  people,  which  are  all  for-
tified, have  been  fufficiently  defcribed  already,  and  from  the
Bay  of  Plenty  to  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound  they  feem  to  be
the  conftant  refidence  of  the  people  :  but  about  Poverty  Bay,
Hawk's  Bay,  Tegadoo,  and  Tolaga,  we  faw  no  Hippahs,  but
fmgle  houfes  fcattered  at  a  diftance  from  each  other;  yet
upon  the  fides  of  the  hills  there  were  ftages  of  a  great  length,
furnifhed  with  ftones  and  darts,  probably  as  retreats  for  the

people


47o  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770-  people  at  the  laft  extremity,  as  upon  thefe  flages  a  fight  may
,_  -~_>  be  carried  on  with  much  advantage  againft  thofe  below,  who
may  be  reached  with  great  effect  by  darts  and  ftones,  which
it  is  impofiible  for  them  to  throw  up  with  equal  force.  And
indeed  the  forts  themfelves  feem  to  be  no  farther  ferviceable
than  by  enabling  the  pofTeflbrs  to  reprcfs  a  fudden  attack  ;
for  as  there  is  no  fupply  of  water  within  the  lines,  it  would
be  impofiible  to  fuflain  a  fiege.  A  confiderable  flock  of
fern-root  and  dry  fifh  is  indeed  laid  up  in  them ;  but  they
may  be  referved  againfl  feafons  of  fcarcity,  and  that  fuch
feafons  there  are,  our  obfervations  left  us  no  room  to  doubt ;
befides,  while  an  enemy  fhould  be  prowling  in  the  neigh-
bourhood, it  would  be  eafy  to  fnatch  a  fupply  of  water  from
the  fide  of  the  hill,  though  it  would  be  impofiible  to  dig  up
fern  root  or  catch  fifli.

In  this  diftrict,  however,  the  people  feemed  to  live  in  a
flate  of  confcious  fecurity,  and  to  avail  themfelves  of  their
advantage  :  their  plantations  were  more  numerous,  their
canoes  were  more  decorated,  and  they  had  not  only  finer
carving,  but  finer  clothes.  This  part  of  the  coaft  alfo  was
much  the  mofl  populous,  and  poflibly  their  apparent  peace
and  plenty  might  arife  from  their  being  united  under  one
Chief,  or  King ;  for  the  inhabitants  of  all  this  part  of  the
country  told  us,  that  they  were  the  fubjeets  of  Teratu:  when
they  pointed  to  the  refidence  of  this  Prince,  it  was  in  a  direc-
tion which  we  thought  inland  ;  but  which,  when  we  knew
the  country  better,  we  found  to  be  the  Bay  of  Plenty.

Government.  U  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  were  obliged  to  leave
this  country  without  knowing  any  thing  of  Teratu  but  his
name.  As  an  Indian  monarch,  his  territory  is  certainly  ex-
tenfive :  he  was  acknowledged  from  Cape  Kidnappers  to  the
northward,  and  weftward  as  far  as  the  Bay  of  Plenty,  a  length

of


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  471

of  coaft  upwards  of  eighty  leagues ;  and  we  do  not  yet  know       »77°-

how  much   farther  weflward  his   dominions  may  extend.    < . »

Poffibly  the  fortified  towns  which  we  faw  in  the  Bay  of
Plenty  may  be  his  barrier;  efpecially  as  at  Mercury  Bay  he
was  not  acknowledged,  nor  indeed  any  other  fmgle  Chief:
for  wherever  we  landed,  or  fpoke  with  the  people  upon  that
coaft,  they  told  us  that  we  were  at  but  a  fmall  diftance  from
their  enemies.

In  the  dominions  of  Teratu  we  faw  feveral  fubordinate
Chiefs,  to  whom  great  refpect  was  paid,  and  by  whom  juf-
tice  was  probably  adminiftered  ;  for  upon  our  complaint  to
one  of  them,  of  a  theft  that  had  been  committed  on  board
the  fhip  by  a  man  that  came  with  him,  he  gave  him  feveral
blows  and  kicks,  which  the  other  received  as  the  chaftife-
ment  of  authority,  againft  which  no  refiftance  was  to  be
made,  and  which  he  had  no  right  to  refent.  Whether  this
authority  was  poflefTed  by  appointment  or  inheritance  we
could  not  learn  ;  but  we  obferved  that  the  Chiefs,  as  well
here  as  in  other  parts,  were  elderly  men.  In  other  parts,
however,  we  learnt  that  they  poflefTed  their  authority  by  in-
heritance.

The  little  focieties  which  we  found  in  the  fouthern  parts
feemed  to  have  feveral  things  in  common,  particularly  their
fine  clothes  and  fifhing  nets.  Their  fine  clothes,  which  pof-
fibly might  be  the  fpoils  of  war,  were  kept  in  a  fmall  hut,
which  was  erected  for  that  purpofe  in  the  middle  of  the  town :
the  nets  we  faw  making  in  almofl  every  houfe,  and  the  feveral
parts  being  afterwards  collected  were  joined  together.  Lefs
account  feems  to  be  made  of  the  women  here  than  in  the
South  Sea  iflands  ;  fuch  at  leafl  was  the  opinion  of  Tupia,
who  complained  of  it  as  an  indignity  to  the  fex.  We  ob-
ferved that  the  two  fexes  eat  together;  but  how  they  divide

their


472  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  their  labour  we  do  not  certainly  know.  I  am  inclined  to  be»
ti  —.—'.'_;  lieve  that  the  men  till  the  ground,  make  nets,  catch  birds,
and  go  out  in  their  boats  to  fiih ;  and  that  the  women  dig
up  fern  roots,  collect  lobfters  and  other  fhell  fiih  near  the
beach,  drefs  the  victuals,  and  weave  cloth:  fuch  at  leaft  were
their  employments  when  we  had  an  opportunity  of  obferv-
ing  them,  which  was  but  feldom  ;  for  in  general  our  ap-
pearance made  a  holiday  wherever  we  went,  men,  women
and  children,  flocking  round  us,  either  to  gratify  their  curio-
fity,  or  to  purchafe  fome  of  the  valuable  merchandize  which
we  carried  about  with  us,  confiding  principally  of  nails,
paper,  and  broken  glafs.

Religion.  Of  the  religion  of  thefe  people  it  cannot  be  fuppofed  that
we  could  learn  much ;  they  acknowledge  the  influence  of
fuperior  beings,  one  of  whom  is  fupreme,  and  the  reft  fub-
ordinate  ;  and  gave  nearly  the  fame  account  of  the  origin  of
the  world,  and  the  production  of  mankind,  as  our  friends
in  Otaheitc  :  Tupia,  however,  feemed  to  have  a  much  more
deep  and  extenfive  knowlege  of  thefe  fubjects  than  any  of
the  people  here ;  and  whenever  he  was  difpofed  to  inftruct
them,  which  he  fometimes  did  in  a  long  difcourfe,  he  was
fure  of  a  numerous  audience,  who  liitened  in  profound
filence,  with  fuch  reverence  and  attention,  that  we  could  not
but  wifh  them  a  better  teacher.

What  homage  they  pay  to  the  deities  they  acknowledge
we  could  not  learn  ;  but  we  faw  no  place  of  public  worfhip,
like  the  Mora  is  of  the  South  Sea  iflands:  yet  we  faw,  near  a
plantation  of  fweet  potatoes,  a  fmall  area,  of  a  fquare  figure,
furrounded  with  ftones,  in  the  middle  of  which  one  of  the
fharpcned  (lakes  which  they  ufc  as  a  fpade  was  fet  up,  and
upon  it  was  hung  a  bafket  of  fern  roots  :  upon  enquiry,  the
natives  told  us,  that  it  was  an  offering  to  the  gods,  by  which

6  the


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  473

the  owner  hoped  to  render  them  propitious,  and  obtain  a       J77o.

r  March.

plentiful  crop.  < „ >

As  to  their  manner  of  difpofmg  of  their  dead,  we  could  Dead.
form  no  certain  opinion  of  it,  for  the  accounts  that  we  re-
ceived by  no  means  agreed.  In  the  northern  parts,  they  told
-us  that  they  buried  them  in  the  ground  ;  and  in  the  fouth-
ern,  that  they  threw  them  into  the  fea :  it  is  however  certain
that  we  faw  no  grave  in  the  country,  and  that  they  affected
to  conceal  every  thing  relating  to  their  dead  with  a  kind  of
myfterious  fecrecy.  But  whatever  may  be  the  fepulchre,  the
living  are  themfelvcs  the  monuments  ;  for  we  faw  fcarcely
a  fingle  pcrfon  of  either  fex  whofe  body  was  not  marked  by
the  fears  of  wounds  which  they  had  inflicted  upon  them-
felves  as  a  teftimony  of  their  regret  for  the  lofs  of  a  relation
or  friend:  fome  of  thefe  wounds  we  faw  in  a  ftate  fo  recent
that  the  blood  was  fcarcely  {launched,  which  mows  that
death  had  been  among  them  while  we  were  upon  the  coaft ;
and  makes  it  more  extraordinary  that  no  funeral  ceremony
mould  have  fallen  under  our  notice :  fome  of  the  fears
were  very  large  and  deep,  and  in  many  inftances  had  greatly
disfigured  the  face.  One  monument  indeed  we  obferved  of
another  kind,  the  crofs  that  was  fet  up  near  Queen  Char-
lotte's Sound.

Having  now  given  the  beft  account  in  my  power  of  the
cuftoms  and  opinions  of  the  inhabitants  of  New  Zealand,
with  their  boats,  nets,  furniture,  and  drefs,  I  fhall  only  re-
mark, that  the  fimilitude  between  thefe  particulars  here  and
in  the  South  Sea  iilands  is  a  very  flrong  proof  that  the  inha-
bitants have  the  fame  origin  ;  and  that  the  common  ances-
tors of  both,  were  natives  of  the  fame  country.  They  have
both  a  tradition  that  their  anceltors,  at  a  very  remote  period
of  time,  came  from  another  country  -h  and,  according  to  the

Vol.  II.  .    3  p  tradition


474


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


1770.

March,


tradition  of  both,  that  the  name  of  that  country  was  He  a-
wije  ;  but  the  fimilitude  of  the  language  feems  to  put  the
matter  altogether  out  of  doubt.  I  have  already  obferved,  that
Tupia,  when  he  accofled  the  people  here  in  the  language  of
his  own  country,  was  perfectly  underftood ;  and  I  ihall  give
a  fpecimen  of  the  fimilitude  by  a  lift  of  words  in  both  lan-
guages, according  to  the  dialect  of  the  northern  and  fouth-
ern  iflands  of  which  New  Zealand  confifts,  by  which  it  will
appear  that  the  language  of  Otaheite  does  not  differ  more
from  that  of  New  Zealand,  than  the  language  of  the  two
iflands  from  each  other.


English.

New  Z

EALAND.

Otaheite.

Northern.

Southern.

A  Chief,

Eareete,

Eareete,

Earee.

A  man,

Taata,

Taata,

Taata.

A  woman,

"Whahine,

Whahine,

Ivahine.

The  head,

Eupo,

Heaowpoho,

Eupo.

The  hair,

Macauwe,

Heoo-oo,

Roourou,

The  ear,

Terringa,

Hetaheyei,

Terrea.

The  forehead,

Erai,

Heai,

Erai.

The  eyes.

Mata,

Hemata,

Mata.

The  cheeks,

Paparinga,

Hepapaeh,

Paparea.

The  nofe,

Ahewh,

Heeih,

Ahew.

The  mouth,

Hangoutou,

Hegaowai,

Outou.

The  chin,

Ecouwai,

Hakaoewai,

The  arm,

Haringaringu.

1

Rema.

The  finger,

Maticara,

Hermaigawh,

Maneow,

The  belly,

Ateraboo,

Oboo.

The  navel,

Apeto,

Heeapeto,

Peto.

Come  hither,

Haromai,

Heromai,

Harromai.

Fiflj,

Heica,

Heica,

Eyea.

Akbfier,

Kooura,

Kooura,

Toouxa.

/>

COCCQJ,

ROUND    THE    WORLD.


47*


Coccos,
Sweet  potatoes,

Taro,
Cumala,

Taro,
Cumala,

Taro.

Cumala.

March.

Yams,

Tuphwhe,

Tuphwhe,

Tuphwhe.

Birds,

Mannu,

Mannu,

Mannu.

No,

Kaoura,

Kaoura,

Oure.

One,

Tahai,

Tahai.

Tivo,

Rua,

Rua.

Three,

Torou,

Torou.

Four,

Ha,

Hea.

Five,

Rema,

Rema.

Six,

Ono,

Ono.

Seven,

Etu,

Hetu.

Eight,

Warou,

Warou.

Nine,

Iva,

Heva.

Ten,

Angahourou,

Ahourou.

The  teeth,

Hennihew,

Heneaho,

Nihio.

The  tuind,

Mehow,

Mattai.

A  thief,

Amootoo,

Teto.

To  examine,

Mataketake,

Mataitai.

Toftng,

Ehcara,

Heiva.

Bad,

Keno,

Keno,

Eno.

Trees,

Eratou,

Eratou,

Eraou.

Grandfather,

Toubouna,

Toubouna,

Toubouna.

What  do  you")

call  this  or  >
that,          J

Owy  Terra,

Owy  Terra.

By  this  fpecimen,  I  think  it  appears  to  demonftration  that
the  language  of  New  Zealand  and  Otaheite  is  radically  the
fame.  The  language  of  the  northern  and  fouthern  parts  of
New  Zealand  differs  chiefly  in  the  pronunciation,  as  the
fame  Englifh  word  is  pronounced  gate  in  Middlefex,  and
gedte  in  Yorkfhire  :  and  as  the  fouthern  and  northern  words
were  not  written  down  by  the  fame  perfon,  one  might  pof-

3  P  2  fibly


A16  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

177°-       fibly  ufe  more  letters  to  produce  the  fame  found  than  the

March.  ,  J

< „. — r    other.

I  muft  alfo  obferve,  that  it  is  the  genius  of  the  language,
efpecially  in  the  fouthern  parts,  to  put  fome  article  before  a
noun,  as  we  do  the  or  a  \  the  articles  ufed  here  were  generally
he  or  ko .•  it  is  alfo  common  here  to  add  the  word  oeia  after
another  word,  as  an  iteration,  efpecially  if  it  is  an  anfwer  to
a  queftion  ;  as  we  fay  yes  indeed,  to  be  Jure,  really,  certainly:  this
fometimes  led  our  gentlemen  into  the  formation  of  words  of
an  enormous  length,  judging  by  the  ear  only,  without  being
able  to  refer  each  found  into  its  fignification.  An  example
will  make  this  perfectly  underftood.

In  the  Bay  of  Iflands  there  is  a  remarkable  one,  called  by
the  natives  Matu  aro.  One  of  our  gentlemen  having  afked
a  native  the  name  of  it,  he  anfwered,  with  the  particle,  Ke-
matuaro ;  the  gentleman  hearing  the  found  imperfectly,  re-
peated his  queftion,  and  the  Indian  repeating  his  anfwer,
added  oeia,  which  made  the  word  Kematuarooeia  ;  and
thus  it  happened  that  in  the  log  book  I  found  Matuaro
transformed  into  Cumettiivarroiveia :  and  the  fame  trans-
formation, by  the  fame  means,  might  happen  to  an  Englifh
word.  Suppofe  a  native  of  New  Zealand  at  Hackney
church,  to  enquire  "  what  village  is  this :"  the  anfwer
would  be,  "  it  is  Hackney :"  fuppofe  the  queftion  to  be.  re-
peated with  an  air  of  doubt  and  uncertainty,  the  anfwer
might  be  "  it  is  Hackney  indeed,"  and  the  New  Zealander,
if  he  had  the  ufe  of  letters,  would  probably  record,  for  the
information  of  his  countrymen,  that  during  his  refidence
among  us  he  had  vifited  a  village  called  "  Ityfhakneeindede.''
The  article  ufed  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  South  Sea  iflands,
inftead  of  he  or  ko,  is  to  or  ta,  but  the  word  oeia  is  common
to  both  ;  and  when  we  began  to  learn  the  language,  it  led
us  into  many  ridiculous  miftakes.

But


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  477

But  fuppofmg  thefe  iflands,  and  thofe  in  the  South  Seas,  i77°-
to  have  been  peopled  originally  from  the  fame  country,  it
will  perhaps  for  ever  remain  a  doubt  what  country  that  is:
we  were,  however,  unanimouily  of  opinion,  that  the  people  did
not  come  from  America,  which  lies  to  the  eaftward  ;  and  ex-
cept there  mould  appear  to  be  a  continent  to  the  fouthward,
in  a  moderate  latitude,  it  will  follow  that  they  came  from
the  weflward.

Thus  far  our  navigation  has  certainly  been  unfavourable
to  the  notion  of  a  fouthern  continent,  for  it  has  fwept  away
at  leaft  three-fourths  of  the  pofitions  upon  which  it  has  been
founded.  The  principal  navigators,  whofe  authority  has
been  urged  on  this  occafion,  are  Tafman,  Juan  Fernandes,
Hermite,  the  commander  of  a  Dutch  fquadron,  Quiros,  and
Roggewein;  and  the  track  of  the  Endeavour  has  demonftrated.
that  the  land  feen  by  thefe  perfons,  and  fuppofed  to  be  part
of  a  continent,  is  not  fo;  it  has  alfo  totally  fubverted  the  the-
oretical arguments  which  have  been  brought  to  prove  that
the  exigence  of  a  fouthern  continent  is  ncceffary  to  preferve
an  equilibrium  between  the  two  hemifpheres  ;  for  upon  this
principle  what  we  have  already  proved  to  be  water,  would
render  the  fouthern  hemifphere  too  light.  In  our  rotit  to
the  northward,  after  doubling  Cape  Horn,  when  we  were
in  the  latitude  of  400,  our  longitude  was  110°;  and  in  our  re-
turn to  the  fouthward,  after  leaving  Ulietea,  when  we  were
again  in  latitude  40°,  our  longitude  was  1450  ;  the  difference
is  350.  When  we  were  in  latitude  30°  the  difference  of  lon-
gitude between  the  two  tracks  was2i°,  which  continued  till
we  were  as  low  as  200 ;  but  a  fingle  view  of  the  chart  will
convey  a  better  idea  of  this  than  the  mod  minute  descrip-
tion: yet  as  upon  a  view  of  the  chart  it  will  appear  that
there  is  a  large  fpace  extending  quite  to  the  Tropics,  which

neither


H7S  LIEUTENANT    COOR's    VOYAGE

1770-  neither  we,  nor  any  other  navigators  to  our  knowlege  have
te  "1'  .  explored,  and  as  there  will  appear  to  be  room  enough  for
the  Cape  of  a  fouthern  continent  to  extend  northward  into  a
low  fouthern  latitude,  I  mall  give  my  reafons  for  believing
there  is  no  Cape,  of  any  fouthern  continent,  to  the  north-
ward of  40°  fouth.

Notwithstanding  what  has  been  laid  down  by  fome  geo-
graphers in  their  maps,  and  alleged  by  Mr.  Dalrymple,  with
refpect  to  Quiros,  it  is  improbable  in  the  higheft  degree  that
he  faw  to  the  fouthward  of  two  iflands,  which  he  difcovered
in  latitude  55  or  26,  and  which  I  fuppofe  may  lie  between
the  longitude  of  1300  and  1400  W.  any  figns  of  a  continent,
much  lefs  any  thing  which,  in  his  opinion,  was  a  known
or  indubitable  fign  of  fuch  land ;  for  if  he  had,  he  would  cer-
tainly have  failed  fouthward  in  fearch  of  it,  and  if  he  had
fought,  fuppofing  the  figns  to  have  been  indubitable,  he
mull  have  found  :  the  difcovery  of  a  fouthern  continent  was
the  ultimate  object  of  Qiiiros's  voyage,  and  no  man  appears
to  have  had  it  more  at  heart ;  fo  that  if  he  was  in  latitude
260  S.  and  in  longitude  1460  W.  where  Mr.  Dalrymple  has
placed  the  iflands  he  difcovered,  it  may  fairly  be  inferred
that  no  part  of  a  fouthern  continent  extends  to  that  latitude.

It  will,  I  think,  appear  with  equal  evidence  from  the  ac-
counts of  Roggewein's  voyage,  that  between  the  longitudes
of  1300  and  1500  W.  there  is  no  main  land  to  the  northward
of  350  S.  Mr.  Pingre,  in  a  treatife  concerning  the  tranfit  of
Venus,  which  he  went  out  to  obferve,  has  inferted  an  extract
of  Roggewein's  voyage,  and  a  map  of  the  South  Seas ;  and
for  reafons  which  may  be  feen  at  large  in  his  work,  fuppofes
him,  after  leaving  Eafler  Ifland,  which  he  places  in  latitude
28  f  S.  longitude  123°  W.  to  have  fleered  S.  W.  as  high  as

34°  S.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  479

9£9  S.  and  afterwards  W.  N.  W. ;  and  if  this  was  indeed  his       W-

.  Marcfe.

rout,  the  proof  that  there  is  no  main  land  to  the  northward    1 , — j

of  350  S.  is  irrefragable.  Mr.  Dalrymple  indeed  fuppofes
his  rout  to  have  been  different,  and  that  from  Eafter  Ifle  he
fleered  N.  W.  taking  a  courfe  afterwards  very  little  different
from  that  of  La  Maire  ;  but  I  think  it  is  highly  improbable
that  a  man,  who  at  his  own  requeft  was  fent  to  difcover  a
fouthern  continent,  mould  take  a  courfe  in  which  La  Maire
had  already  proved  no  continent  could  be  found:  it  rauft
however  be  confeffed,  that  Roggewein's  track  cannot  certainly
be  afcertained,  becaufe  in  the  accounts  that  have  been  pub-
lilhed  of  his  voyage,  neither  longitudes  nor  latitudes  are
mentioned.  As  to  myfelf  I  faw  nothing  that  I  thought  a  fign
of  land,  in  my  rout  either  to  the  northward,  fouthward,  or
weftward,  till  a  few  days  before  I  made  the  eaft  coaft  of  New
Zealand:  I  did  indeed  frequently  fee  large  flocks  of  birds,
but  they  were  generally  fuch  as  are  found  at  a  very  remote
diftance  from  any  coaft ;  and  it  is  alfo  true  that  I  frequently
faw  pieces  of  rock-weed,  but  I  could  not  infer  the  vicinity  of
land  from  thefe,  becaufe  I  have  been  informed,  upon  indu-
bitable authority,  that  a  confiderable  quantity  of  the  beans
called  ox-eyes,  which  are  known  to  grow  no  where  but  in  the
Weft  Indies,  are  every  year  thrown  up  on  the  coaft  of  Ire-
land, which  is  not  lefs  than  twelve  hundred  leagues  diftant.

Thus  have  I  given  my  reafons  for  thinking  that  there  is
no  continent  to  the  northward  of  latitude  40°  S. ;  of  what  may
lie  farther  to  the  fouthward  than  400  I  can  give  no  opinion ;
but  I  am  fo  far  from  wilhing  to  difcourage  any  future
attempt,  finally  to  determine  a  queftion  which  has  long  been
an  object  of  attention  to  many  nations ;  that  now  this  voyage
has  reduced  the  only  poffible  fcite  of  a  continent  in  the
fouthern  hemifpherc,   north  of  latitude  40°,  to  fo  fmall  a

fpace,


4S0  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE,   6>c.

i77°-  fpace,  I  think  it  would  be  pity  to  leave  that  any  longer  tin-
v  ,-  >  examined,  efpecially  as  the  voyage  may  turn  to  good  ac-
count, belidcs  determining  the  principal  queftion,  if  no  con-
tinent ihould  be  found,  by  the  difcovery  of  new  iilands  in
the  Tropical  regions,  of  which  there  is  probably  a  great
number,  that  no  European  veffel  has  ever  yet  vifited.  Tupia
from  time  to  time  gave  us  an  account  of  about  one  hundred
and  thirty,  and  in  a  chart  drawn  by  his  own  hand,  he  actu-
ally laid  down  no  lefs  than  feventy-four.


AN


"    EN  Tils  ':jtf

*j8fe Endeavour  River ,  1


AS


C.Banks


T.Giisan  kT-Sowm  ScA  ■


AN

ACCOUNT

O  F     A

VOYAGE  round  the  WORLD.
BOOK      III.

CHAP.     I.

The  Run  from  New  Zealand  to  Botany  Bay1  on  the  Eajl
Coafi  of  New  Ho/land,  now  called  New  South  Wales ;
various  Incidents  that  happened  there  \  with  fome  Account
of  the  Country  and  its  Inhabitants,


H


AVING  failed  from  Cape  Farewell,  which  lies  in  la-       '/7°*

r  March.

titude  400  33  S.  longitude  18  6°  W.  on  Saturday  the  31ft


of  March  1770,  we  fleered  weftward,  with  a  frefh  gale  at

N.  N.  E.  and  at  noon  on  the  2d  of  April,  our  latitude,  by  ob-      April.

fervation,  was  40%  our  longitude  from  Cape  Farewell  2  °  31'W.

In  the  morning  of  the  9th,  being  in  latitude  38*  29'S.  we  faw  Monday  9.
a  tropic  bird,  which  in  fo  high  a  latitude  is  very  uncommon.

In  the  morning  of  the  Toth,   being  in  latitude  380  51'S.  TWday  i«,
longitude  202 °  43'  W.  we  found  the  variation,  by  the  ampli-
tude, to  be  ii°  25'  E.  and  by  the  azimuth  1 1  °  20'.

Vol.  II.  3  Ct  In


-^^'^^:^U^^^:^i$^^/^^,  A  Scale  of  one  3file .

^\V        UNtA^TSTC^          I. {ft  A. The  place  >«LE  we  lanjcj  our  Uteres.

;,!  of  im.t  » Refiau*U  the  J/up .

$jp| Endeavour  river,


»]■     '   Lath's*  "fll


3'fcf/ywtv  de/tofr  f//e  rfyif/i  it/  faf/io»/s  ar
"''"'"•„,    uvv~nraicf.


AN

ACCOUNT

O  F     A

VOYAGE  round  the  WORLD.
BOOK      III.

CHAP.     I.

The  Run  from  New  Zealand  to  Botany  Bayy  on  the  Eafl
Coafi  of  New  Holland,  now  called  New  South  Wales ;
various  Incidents  that  happened  there ;  with  fome  Account
of  the  Country  and  its  Inhabitants.


H


AVING  failed  from  Cape  Farewell,  which  lies  in  la-       *77°«

r  March.

titude  400  33  S.  longitude  i8<5°  W.  on  Saturday  the  3  ill  ' « '

of  March  1770,  we  fleered  weftward,  with  a  frefh  gale  at

N.  N.  E.  and  at  noon  on  the  2d  of  April,  our  latitude,  by  ob-      April.

fervation,  was  40%  our  longitude  from  Cape  Farewell  2  °  31'W.

In  the  morning  of  the  9th,  being  in  latitude  38*  29'S.  we  faw  Monday  9.
a  tropic  bird,  which  in  fo  high  a  latitude  is  very  uncommon.

In  the  morning  of  the   10th,   being  in  latitude  380  5-1' S.  Tuefday  i«,
longitude  202 °  43'  W.  we  found  the  variation,  by  the  ampli-
tude, to  be  ii°  25'  E.  and  by  the  azimuth  1 1  °  20'.

Vol.  II.  3  Q  In


4Ss  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770.  In  the  morning  of  the   nth,    the  variation  was   130  48',

^.f-*  ...  which  is  two  degrees  and  an  half  more  than  the  day  before,
wednef.  11.    though  !  expe<5ted  to  have  found  it  lefs.

Friday  ,j.  In  the  courfe  of  the  1 3th,  being  in  latitude  390  23'  S.  lon-
gitude 2040  2'W.  I  found  the  variation  to  be  iq°  27' E.  and

Saturday  i4.    in  the  morning  of  the  14th,  it  was  ii°  30';  this  day  we  alfo

Sunday  iS.  faw  fome  flying  fifh.  On  the  15th,  we  faw  an  Qgg  bird  and  a
gannet,  and  as  thefe  are  birds  that  never  go  far  from  the
land,  we  continued  to  found  all  night,  but  had  no  ground

Monday  16.  with  130  fathom.  At  noon  on  the  16th,  we  were  in  latitude
390  45' S.  longitude  208°  W.  At  about  two  o'clock  the  wind
came  about  to  the  W.  S.  W.  upon  which  we  tacked  and  flood
to  the  N.  W. ;  foon  after  a  fmall  land-bird  perched  upon  the
rigging,  but  we  had  no  ground  with  120  fathom.  At  eight
we  wore  and  flood  to  the  fouthward  till  twelve  at  night,  and

Tuefdayi7.  then  wore  and  flood  to  the  N.  W.  till  four  in  the  morning,
when  we  again  flood  to  the  fouthward,  having  a  frefli  gale
at  "W.  S.  W.  with  fqualls  and  dark  weather  till  nine,  when
the  weather  became  clear,  and  there  being  little  wind,  we
had  an  opportunity  to  take  feveral  obfervations  of  the  fun
and  moon,  the  mean  refult  of  which  gave  2070  56'  W.  longi-
tude :  our  latitude  at  noon  was  390  36'  S.  We  had  now  a  hard
gale  from  the  fouthward,  and  a  great  fea  from  the  fame
quarter,  which  obliged  us  to  run  under  our  fore-fail  and
mizen  all  night,  during  which  we  founded  every  two  hours,
but  had  no  ground  with  120  fathom.

Wednef.  18.  IQ  ^ie  morning  of  the  i8th,  we  faw  two  Port  Egmont
hens,  and  a  pintado  bird,  which  are  certain  ligns  of  ap-
proaching land,  and  indeed  by  our  reckoning  we  could  not
be  far  from  it,  for  our  longitude  was  now  one  degree  to  the
wcftward  of  the  call  fide  of  Van  Diemen's  land,  according  to
8  the


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  483

the  longitude  laid  down  by  Tafman,  whom  we  could  not

fuppofe  to  have  erred  much  in  fo  fliort  a  run  as  from  this

land  to  New  Zealand,  and  by  our  latitude  we  could  not  be

above  fifty  or  fifty-five  leagues  from  the  place  whence  he

took  his  departure.    All  this  day  we  had  frequent  fqualls

and  a  great  fwell.     Atone  in  the  morning  we  brought  to  and  Thurfday  19.

founded,  but  had  no  ground  with  1  30  fathom  ;  at  fix  we  law

land  extending  from  N.  E.  to  W.  at  the  diftance  of  five  or  fix

leagues,    having  eighty   fathom  water  with  a   fine  fandy

bottom.

We  continued  Handing  weft  ward,  with  the  wind  at  S.S.  W.
till  eight,  when  we  made  all  the  fail  we  could,  and  bore
away  along  the  fhore  N.  E.  for  the  eaftermoft  land  in  fight,
being  at  this  time  in  latitude  37°  58'  S.  and  longitude  2100
S9W.  The  fouthermoft  point  of  land  in  fight,  which  bore
from  us  W.  4  S.  I  judged  to  lie  in  latitude  38%  longitude  2 1 1°
7',  and  gave  it  the  name  of  Point  Hicks,  becaufe  Mr.  flicks,
the  Firfl  Lieutenant,  was  the  firft  who  difcovered  it.  To  the
fouthward  of  this  Point  no  land  was  to  be  feen,  though  it
was  very  clear  in  that  quarter,  and  by  our  longitude,  com-
pared with  that  of  Tafman,  not  as  it  is  laid  down  in  the
printed  charts,  but  in  the  extra&s  from  Tafman's  journal,
publilhed  by  Rembrantfe,  the  body  of  Van  Diemcn's  land
ought  to  have  borne  due  fouth ;  and  indeed,  from  the  fudden
falling  of  the  fea  after  the  wind  abated,  I  had  reafon  to
think  it  did  ;  yet  as  I  did  not  fee  it,  and  as  I  found  this  coaft
trend  N.  E.  and  S.  W.  or  rather  more  to  the  eaftward,  I  can-
not determine  whether  it  joins  to  Van  Diemen's  land  or
not.

At  noon,  we  were  in  latitude  37°  50',  longitude  21c0  29' W.
The  extreams  of  the  land  extended  from  N.  W.  to  E.  N.  E  and
a  remarkable  point  bore  N.  qo  E.  at  the  diilance  of  about  four

3  0^2  leagues.


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770*       leagues.     This  point  rifes  in  a  round  hillock,  very  much

« ^1— 1   refembling  the   Ram  Head  at  the   entrance  of  Plymouth

•hur  ayl9.  gount^  an(j  therefore  I  called  it  by  the  fame  name.  The  va-
riation by  an  azimuth,  taken  this  morning,  was  30  7'  E. ;  and
what  we  had  now  feen  of  the  land,  appeared  low  and  level:
the  fea  fhore  was  a  white  fand,  but  the  country  within  was
green  and  woody.  About  one  o'clock,  we  faw  three  water
fpouts  at  once ;  two  were  between  us  and  the  more,  and  the
third  at  fome  diftance,  upon  our  larboard  quarter  :  this  phe-
nomenon is  fo  well  known,  that  it  is  not  neceffary  to  give  a
particular  defcription  of  it  here.

At  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  we  fhortened  fail,  and
brought  to  for  the  night,  having  fifty-fix  fathom  water,  and
a  fine  fandy  bottom.  The  northermoft  land  in  fight  then
bore  N.  by  E.  7  E.  and  a  fmall  ifland  lying  clofe  to  a  point  on
the  main  bore  W.  diftant  two  leagues.  This  point,  which  I
called  Cape  Howe,  may  be  known  by  the  trending  of  the
coaft,  which  is  north  on  the  one  fide,  and  fouth  weft  on  the
other  j  it  may  alfo  be  known  by  fome  round  hills  upon  the
main,  juft  within  it.

iHday  20.  We  brought  to  for  the  night,  and  at  four  in  the  morning

made  fail  along  fhore  to  the  northward.  At  fix,  the  norther-
moft land  in  fight  bore  N.  N.  W.  and  we  were  at  this  time
about  four  leagues  from  the  fhore.  At  noon,  we  were  in
latitude  36°  51' S.  longitude  2090  53  W.  and  about  three
leagues  diftant  from  the  fliore.  The  weather  being  clear,
gave  us  a  good  view  of  the  country,  which  has  a  very
pleafing  appearance :  it  is  of  a  moderate  height,  diverfified
by  hills  and  vallies,  ridges  and  plains,  interfperfed  with  a
few  lawns  of  no  great  extent,  but  in  general  covered  with
wood :  the  afcent  of  the  hills  and  ridges  is  gentle,  and  the
fummits  are  not  high.    We  continued  to  fail  along  the  fhore

to


ROUND    THE    WORLD.

ro  the  northward,  with  a  foutherly  wind,  and  in  the  after-
noon we  faw  fmoke  in  feveral  places,  by  which  we  knew  the
country  to  be  inhabited.  At  fix  in  the  evening,  wre  fhortened
fail,  and  founded :  we  found  forty-four  fathom  water,  with  a
clear  fandy  bottom,  and  ilood  on  under  an  eafy  fail  till  twelve,
when  we  brought  to  for  the  night,  and  had  ninety  fathom
water.

At  four  in  the  morning,  we  made  fail  again,  at  the  dif-  Saturday  2Zi
tance  of  about  five  leagues  from  the  land,  and  at  fix,  we
were  abreaft  of  a  high  mountain,  lying  near  the  more,
which,  on  account  of  its  figure,  I  called  Mount  Drome-
dary: under  this  mountain  the  more  forms  a  point,  to
which  I  gave  the  name  of  Point  Dromedary,  and  over  it
there  is  a  peaked  hillock.  At  this  time,  being  in  latitude
360  18' S.  longitude  2090  55  W.  we  found  the  variation  to  be
io°  42' E.

Between  ten  and  eleven,  Mr.  Green  and  I  took  feveral  ob-
fervations  of  the  fun  and  moon,  the  mean  refult  of  which
gave  2090  17'  longitude  W.  By  an  obfervation  made  the  day
before,  our  longitude  was  2100  9'  \V.  from  which,  20'  being
fubtracted,  there  remains  209  °  49'  the  longitude  of  the  fliip
this  day  at  noon,  the  mean  of  which,  with  this  day's  obfer-
vation, gives  209°  33',  by  which  I  fax  the  longitude  of  this
coaft.  At  noon,  our  latitude  was  35°  49'  S.  Cape  Drome-
dary bore  S.  30  W.  at  the  diftance  of  twelve  leagues,  and  an
open  bay,  in  which  were  three  or  four  fmall  iflands,  bore
N.  W.  by  \V.  at  the  diftance  of  five  or  fix  leagues.  This  bay
feemed  to  afford  but  little  fhelter  from  the  fea  winds,  and
yet  it  is  the  only  place  where  there  appeared  a  probability  of
finding  anchorage  upon  the  whole  coaft.  We  continued  to
fteer  along  the  fliore  N.  by  E.  and  N.  N.  E.  at  the  diftance  of
about  three  leagues,  and  faw  fmoke  in  many  places  near
1  the


4S6  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

the  beach.    At  five  in  the  evening,  we  were  abreaft  of  a
point  of  land  which  rofe  in  a  perpendicular  cliff,  and  which,
for  that  reafon,  I  called  Point  Upright.     Our  latitude  was
35°  35  S.  when  this  Point  bore  from  us  due  weft,    diftant
about  two  leagues:  in  this  fituation,  we  had  about  thirty-
one  fathom  water  with  a  fandy  bottom.     At  fix  in  the  even-
ing, the  wind  falling,  we  hauled  off  E.  N.  E.  and  at  this  time
the  northermoft  land   in  fight  bore  N.  by  E.  f  E.     At  mid-j
night,  being  in  feventy  fathom  water,  we  brought  to  till
Sunday  22.     four  in  the  morning,  when  we  made  fail  in  for  the  land;
but  at  day-break,  found  our  fituation  nearly  the  fame  as  it
had  been  at  live  the  evening  before,  by  which  it  was  appa-
rent that  we  had  been  driven  about  three  leagues  to  the
fouthward,  by  a  tide  or  current,  during  the  night.     After
this  we  fleered  along  the  fhore  N.  N.  E.  with  a  gentle  breeze
at  S.  W.  and  were  fo  near  the  land  as  to  diftinguifh  feveral  of
the  natives  upon  the  beach,  who  appeared  to  be  of  a  black,
or  very  dark  colour.     At  noon,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,
was  350  27' S.  andlongitude  2090  23'W.  Cape  Dromedary  bore
S.  28  W.  diftant  nineteen  leagues,  a  remarkable  peaked  hill,
which  refembled  a  fquare  dove-houfe,  with  a  dome  at  the
top,  and  which  for  that  reafon  I  called  the  Pigeon  Housk,
bore  N.  32°  30' W.  and  a  fmall  low  ifland,  which  lay  clofe
under  the   more,    bore   N.  W.   diftant  about   two  or  three
leagues.     When  I  firft  difcovered  this  ifland,  in  the  morn-
ing, I  was  in  hopes,  from  its  appearance,  that  I  fhould  have
found  fhelter  for  the  (hip  behind  it,  but  when  we  came  near
it,  it  did  not  promifc  fecurity  even  for  the  landing  of  a  boat .
I  fhould  however  have  attempted  to  fend  a  boat  on  more,  if
the  wind  had  not  veered  to  that  direction,  with  a  large  hol-
low fea  rolling  in  upon  the  land  from  the  S.  E.  which  indeed
had  been  the  cafe  ever  fmce  we  had  been  upon  it.     The  coafl
£1111  continued  to  be  of  a  moderate  height,  forming  alter-
nately


ROUND    THE     WORLD.  487

nately  rocky  points  and  fandy  beaches  ;  but  within,  between       17-0.

Mount  Dromedary  and  the  Pigeon  Houfe,    we   faw    high   \ I'll^j

mountains,    which,    except  two,    are  covered  with  wood :
theie  two  lie  inland  behind  the  Pigeon  Houfe,  and  are  re-
markably flat  at  the  top,  with  fteep  rocky  cliffs  all  round
them,  as  far  as  we  could  fee.     The  trees  which  almoft  every
where  clothe   this,  country,   appear  to  be   large  and  loft  v.
This  day  the  variation  was  found  to  be  90  50'  E.  and  for  the
two  laft  days,  the  latitude,   by  obfervation,  was  twelve  or
fourteen  miles  to  the  fouthward  of  the  fh ip's  account,  which
could  have  been  the  effect  of  nothing  but  a  current  fetting
in  that  direction.     About  four  in  the  afternoon,  being  near
five  leagues  from  the  land,  we  tacked  and  flood  off  S.  E.  and
E.  and  the  wind  having  veered  in  the  night,  from  E.  to  N.  E.
and  N.  we  tacked  about  four  in  the  morning,  and  flood  in,  Monday  23.
being  then  about  nine  or  ten  leagues  from  the  more.    At
eight,  the  wind  began  to  die  away,  and  foon  after  it  was
calm.    At  noon,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,   was  350  38',
and  our  diftance  from  the  land  about  fix  leagues.     Cape  Dro-
medary bore  S.  37  W.  diftant  feventeen  leagues,    and   the
Pigeon  Houfe  N.  40  W. :  in  this  fituation  we  had  feventy-
four  fathom  water.    In  the  afternoon,  we  had  variable  light
airs  and  calms,  till  fix  in  the  evening,  when  a  breeze  fprung
up  at  N.  by  W. :  at  this  time,  being  about  four  or  five  leagues
from  the  fhore,  we  had  feventy  fathom  water.     The  Pigeon
Houfe  bore  N.  45  W.  Mount  Dromedary  S.  30  W.  and  the
northermoft  land  in  fight  N.  19  E.

We  flood  to  the  north  eaft  till  noon  the  next  day,  with  a  Tuefday  24.
gentle  breeze  at  N.  W.  and  then  we  tacked  and  flood  weft-
ward.  At  this  time,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  35 °
io'S.  and  longitude  2080  5 1'  W.  A  point  of  land  which  I  had
difcovered  on  St.  George's  day,  and  which  therefore  I  called
Cape  George,    bore  W.  diftant  nineteen  miles,    and  the

Pigeon


4S3  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

Tigeon  Houfe,  (the  latitude  and  longitude  of  which  I  found
to  be  35°  19' S.  and  2090  42' W.)  S.  75 W.  In  the  morning,
24'  we  had  found  the  variation,  by  amplitude,  to  be  70  50' E.
and  by  feveral  azimuths  70  54  E.  We  had  a  frefh  breeze  at
N.  W.  from  noon  till  three  ;  it  then  came  to  the  weft,  when
we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  northward.  At  five  in  the  even-
ing, being  about  five  or  fix  leagues  from  the  fhore,  with  the
Pigeon  Houfe  bearing  W.  S.  W.  diflant  about  nine  leagues,
we  had  eighty-fix  fathom  water  ;  and  at  eight,  having  thun-
der and  lightning,  with  heavy  fqualls,  we  brought  to  in
120  fathom,
wcdnef.  25.  At  three  in  the  morning,  we  made  fail  again  to  the  north-
ward, having  the  advantage  of  a  frefh  gale  atS.W.  At
noon,  we  were  about  three  or  four  leagues  from  the  fhore,
and  in  latitude  340  22'  S.  longitude  208  °  36' W.  In  the  courfe
of  this  day's  run  from  the  preceding  noon,  which  was
forty-five  miles  north  eaft,  we  faw  fmoke  in  feveral  places
near  the  beach.  About  two  leagues  to  the  northward  of
Cape  George,  the  fhore  feemed  to  form  a  bay,  which  pro-
mifed  fhelter  from  the  north  eaft  winds,  but  as  the  wind
was  with  us,  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  look  into  it  without
beating  up,  which  would  have  cofl  me  more  time  than  I  was
willing  to  fpare.  The  north  point  of  this  bay,  on  account  of
its  figure,  I  named  Long  Nose;  its  latitude  is  350  6',  and
about  eight  leagues  north  of  it  there  lies  a  point,  which,
from  the  colour  of  the  land  about  it,  I  called  Red  Point:  its
latitude  is  340  29',  and  longitude  208'  45'  W.  To  the  north  well
of  Red  Point,  and  a  little  way  inland,  Hands  a  round  hill,
the  top  of  which  looks  like  the  crown  of  a  hat.  In  the  after-
noon of  this  day,  we  had  a  light  breeze  at  N.  N.  W.  till  five
in  the  evening,  when  it  fell  calm:  at  this  time,  we  were  be-
tween three  and  four  leagues  from  the  fhore,  and  had  forty-
eight  fathom  water:  the  variation  by  azimuth  was  8°  48'  E.

and


ROUND    THE    WOR'L  D.  48?

and  the  extremities  of  this  land  were  from  N.  E.  by  N.  to       1770.

April.

S.  W.  by  S.     Before  it  was  dark,  we   faw  f  moke  111  leveral    <_ /

.  Wednef.  2y.

places  along  the  more,  and  a  lire  two  or  three  times  after-
wards. During  the  night  we  lay  becalmed,  driving  in  be-
fore the  fea  till  one  in  the  morning,  when  we  got  a  breeze  Thurfda/26.
from  the  land,  with  which  we  fleered  N.  E.  being  then  in
thirty-eight  fathom.  At  noon,  it  veered  to  N.  E.  by  N.  and
we  were  then  in  latitude  340  10'S.  longitude  20B0  27' W.:
the  land  was  diitant  about  live  leagues,  and  extended  from
S.  37  W.  to  N.  7  E.  In  this  latitude,  there  are  fome  white
cliffs,  which  rife  perpendicularly  from  the  fea  to  a  con-
fidcrable  height.  We  flood  off  the  fhore  till  two  o'clock,  and
then  tacked  and  ftood  in  till  fix,  when  we  were  within
four  or  live  miles  of  it,  and  at  that  diflance  had  fifty  fathom
water.  The  extremities  of  the  land  bore  from  S.  28  W.  to
N.  250  30  E.  We  now  tacked  and  ftood  off  till  twelve,  then
tacked  and  flood  in  again  till  four  in  the  morning,  when  we  Ffiday  *7«
made  a  trip  off  till  daylight ;  and  during  all  this  time  we  loft
ground,  owing  to  the  variablcnefs  of  the  winds.  We  con-
tinued at  the  diflance  of  between  four  and  five  miles  from
the  fhore,  till  the  afternoon,  when  we  came  within  two
miles,  and  I  then  hoifled  out  the  pinnace  and  yawl  to
attempta  landing,  but  the  pinnace_ proved  to  be  fo  leaky  that
I  was  obliged  to  hoifl  her  in  again.  At  this  time  we  faw
feveral  of  the  natives  walking  brifkly  along  the  fhore,  four
of  whom  carried  a  fmall  canoe  upon  their  moulders :  we
flattered  ourfelves  that  they  were  going  to  put  her  into  the
water,  and  come  off  to  the  fhip,  but  finding  ourfelves  dis-
appointed, I  determined  to  go  on  fhore  in  the  yawl,  with  as
many  as  it  would  carry:  I  embarked  therefore,  with  only
Mr.  Banks,  Dr.  Solander,  Tupia,  and  four  rowers  :  we  pulled
for  that  part  of  the  fhore  where  the  Indians  appeared,  near
which  four  fmall  canoes  were  lying  at  the  water's  edge.
Vol.  II.  3  R  The


4?o  LIEUTENANT   C00K!s    VOYAGE

i77°-  The  Indians  fat  down  upon  the  rocks,  and  feemed  to  wait
v_  JylL-j  for  our  landing ;  but  to  our  great  regret,  when  we  came  with-
F«day  27.  .^  a^out  a  qUarter  0f  a  mile,  they  ran  away  into  the  woods:
we  determined  however  to  go  afhore,  and  endeavour  to  pro-
cure an  interview,  but  in  this  we  were  again  difappointed,
for  we  found  fo  great  a  furf  beating  upon  every  part  of  the
beach,  that  landing  with  our  little  boat  was  altogether  im-
practicable :  we  were  therefore  obliged  to  be  content  with
gazing  at  fuch  objects,  as  prefented  themfelves  from  the
water:  the  canoes,  upon  a  near  view,  feemed  very  much  to
refemble  thofe  of  the  fmaller  fort  at  New  Zealand.  We  ob-
ferved,  that  among  the  trees  on  ihore,  which  were  not  very
large,  there  was  no  underwood ;  and  could  diftinguifh  that
many  of  them  were  of  the  palm  kind,  and  fome  of  them
cabbage  trees:  after  many  a  wifhful  look  we  were  obliged
to  return,  with  our  curiofity  rather  excited  than  fatisfied,  and
about  five  in  the  evening  got  on  board  the  fhip.  About  this
time  it  fell  calm,  and  our  fituation  was  by  no  means  agree-
able :  we  were  now  not  more  than  a  mile  and  a  half  from
the  Ihore,  and  within  fome  breakers,  which  lay  to  the  fouth-
ward ;  but  happily  a  light  breeze  came  off  the  land,  and  car-
ried us  out  of  danger:  with  this  breeze  we  flood  to  the
Saturday  28.  northward,  and  at  day-break  we  discovered  a  bay,  which
feemed  to  be  well  fheltered  from  all  winds,  and  into  which
therefore  I  determined  to  go  with  the  fhip.  The  pinnace
being  repaired,  I  fent  her,  with  the  Matter,  to  found  the
entrance,  while  I  kept  turning  up,  having  the  wind  right,
out.  At  noon,  the  mouth  of  the  bay  bore  N.  N.  W.  diftant
about  a  mile,  and  feeing  a  fmoke  on  the  more,  we  directed,
our  glafTes  to  the  fpot,  and  foon  difcovered  ten  people,  who,
upon  our  nearer  approach,  left  their  fire,  and  retired  to  a
little  eminence,  whence  they  could  conveniently  obferve  our
motions.    Soon  after  two  canoes,  each  having  two  men  on

board,


ROUND   THE    WORLD.

board,  came  to  the  more  jufl  under  the  eminence,  and  the
men  joined  the  reft  on  the  top  of  it.  The  pinnace,  which
had  been  fent  ahead  to  found,  now  approached  the  place,
upon  which  all  the  Indians  retired  farther  up  the  hill,  ex-
cept one,  who  hid  himfelf  among  fome  rocks  near  the
landing-place.  As  the  pinnace  proceeded  along  the  more,
moft  of  the  people  took  the  fame  route,  and  kept  abreaft  of
her  at  a  diflance  ;  when  fhe  came  back,  the  matter  told  us,
that  in  a  cove  a  little  within  the  harbour,  fome  of  them  had
come  down  to  the  beach,  and  invited  him  to  land  by  many
figns  and  words  of  which  he  knew  not  the  meaning ;  but
that  all  of  them  were  armed  with  long  pikes,  and  a  wooden
weapon  fhaped  fomewhat  like  a  cimeter.  The  Indians  who
had  not  followed  the  boat,  feeing  the  fhip  approach,  ufed
many  threatening  geflures,  and  brandifhed  their  weapons  ;
particularly  two,  who  made  a  very  fingular  appearance,  for
their  faces  feemed  to  have  been  dulled  with  a  white  powder,
and  their  bodies  painted  with  broad  ftreaks  of  the  fame  co-
lour, which  palling  obliquely  over  their  breads  and  backs,
looked  not  unlike  the  crofs-belts  worn  by  our  foldiers ;  the
fame  kind  of  ftreaks  were  alfo  drawn  round  their  legs  and
thighs  like  broad  garters  :  each  of  thefe  men  held  in  his
hand  the  weapon  that  had  been  defcribed  to  us  as  like  a
cimeter,  which  appeared  to  be  about  two  feet  and  a  half
long,  and  they  feemed  to  talk  to  each  other  with  great  ear-
nefmefs.

We  Continued  to  fland  into  the  bay,  and  early  in  the  after-
noon anchored  under  the  fouth  fhore,  about  two  miles  with-
in the  entrance,  in  fix  fathom  water,  the  fouth  point  bearing
3.  E.  and  the  north  point  Eaft.  As  we  came  in  we  faw,
on  both  points  of  the  bay,  a  few  huts,  and  feveral  of  the
natives,  men,  women,  and  children.    Under  the  fouth  head

3  R  2  we


49*


Saturday  28.


492  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      we  faw  four  fmall  canoes,  with  each  one  man  on  board,  who

< .^j   were  very  bufily  employed  in  ftriking  fifh  with  a  long  pike

or  fpear :  they  ventured  almofl  into  the  furf,  and  were  fo
intent  upon  what  they  were  doing,  that  although  the  fliip
pafled  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  them,  they  fcarcely
turned  their  eyes  towards  her;  poflibly  being  deafened  by
the  furf,  and  their  attention  wholly  fixed  upon  their  bufine&
or  fport,  they  neither  faw  nor  heard  her  go  paft  them.

The  place  where  the  fhip  had  anchored  was  abreaft  of  a
fmall  village,  confifting  of  about  fix  or  eight  houfes ;  and
while  we  were  preparing  to  hoift  out  the  boat,  we  faw  an  old
woman,  followed  by  three  children,  come  out  of  the  wood';
fhe  was  loaded  with  fire-wood,  and  each  of  the  children  had
alfo  its  little  burden:  when  fhe  came  to  the  houfes  three
more  children,  younger  than  the  others,  came  out  to  meet
her:  fhe  often  looked  at  the  fhip,  but  expreffed  neither  fear
nor  furprife :  in  a  fhort  time  fhe  kindled  a  fire,  and  the
four  canoes  came  in  from  fifhing.  The  men  landed,  and
having  hauled  up  their  boats,  began  to  drefs  their  dinner,
to  all  appearance  wholly  unconcernecf  about  us,  though  we
were  within  half  a  mile  of  them.  We  thought  it  remark-
able that  of  all  the  people  we  had  yet  feen,  not  one  had  the
Icaft  appearance  of  clothing,  the  old  woman  herfelf  being
deftitute  even  of  a  fig-leaf.

After  dinner  the  boats  were  manned,  and  we  fet  out  from
the  fhip,  having  Tupia  of  our  party.  We  intended  to  land
where  we  faw  the  people,  and  began  to  hope  that  as  they
had  fo  little  regarded  the  fhip's  coming  into  the  bay,  they
would  as  little  regard  our  coming  on  fhore  :  in  this,  how-
ever, we  were  difappointed  ;  for  as  foon  as  we  approached
the  rocks,  two  of  the  men  came  down  upon  them  to  dif-
pute  our  landing,  and  the  reft  ran  away.     Each  of  the  two

champions


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  493


Saturday  2S.


champions  was  armed  with  a  lance  about  ten  feet  long,  and  177°.
a  fhort  flick  which  he  feemed  to  handle  as  if  it  was  a  ma-
chine to  aflift  him  in  managing  or  throwing  the  lance  :  they
called  to  us  in  a  very  loud  tone,  and  in  a  harfh  diflbnant  lan-
guage, of  which  neither  we  nor  Tupia  underftood  a  fingle
word :  they  brandifhed  their  weapons,  and  feemed  refolved
to  defend  their  coaft  to  the  uttermoft,  though  they  were  but
two,  and  we  were  forty.  I  could  not  but  admire  their  cou*
rage,  and  being  very  unwilling  that  hoflilities  mould  com-
mence with  fuch  inequality  of  force  between  us,  I  ordered
the  boat  to  lie  upon  her  oars :  we  then  parlied  by  figns  for
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  to  befpeak  their  good-will,
I  threw  them  nails,  beads,  and  other  trifles,  which  they
took  up  and  feemed  to  be  well  pleafed  with.  I  then  made
figns  that  I  wanted  water,  and,  by  all  the  means  that  I  could
devife,  endeavoured  to  convince  them  that  we  would  do  them
no  harm:  they  now  waved  to  us,  and  I  was  willing  to  inter-
pret it  as  an  invitation ;  but  upon  our  putting  the  boat  in,
they  came  again  to  oppofe  us.  One  appeared  to  be  a  youth
about  nineteen  or  twenty,  and  the  other  a  man  of  middle
age :  as  I  had  now  no  other  refource  I  fired  a  mufquet  be-
tween them.  Upon  the  report,  the  youngeft  dropped  a
bundle  of  lances  upon  the  rock,  but  recollecting  himfelf  in
an  inflant  he  fnatched  them  up  again  with  great  hade :  a
flone  was  then  thrown  at  us,  upon  which  I  ordered  a  muf-
quet  to  be  fired  with  fmall  mot,  which  ftruck  the  eldeft  upon
the  legs,  and  he  immediately  ran  to  one  of  the  houfes,  which
was  diflant  about  an  hundred  yards :  I  now  hoped  that  our
conteft  was  over,  and  we  immediately  landed  ;  but  we  had
fcarcely  left  the  boat  when  he  returned,  and  we  then  per-
ceived that  he  had  left  the  rock  only  to  fetch  a  fhield  or  tar-
get for  his  defence.  As  foon  as  he  came  up,  he  threw  a
lance  at  us,  and  his  comrade  another  ;  they  fell  where  we

flood.


494


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


1770.      flood  thickeft,  but  happily  hurt  nobody.     A  third  mufquet
._Apn1'  ,   with  fmall  fhot  was  then  fired  at  them,  upon  which  one  of
Saturday  :8.    tiiem  threw  another  lance,  and  both  immediately  ran  away :
if  we  had  purfued,  we  might  probably  have  taken  one  of
them ;  but  Mr.  Banks  fuggefting  that  the  lances  might  be
poifoned,  I  thought  it  not  prudent  to  venture  into  the  woods.
We  repaired  immediately  to  the  huts,  m  one  of  which  we
found  the  children,  who  had  hidden  themfelves  behind  a
fhield  and  fome  bark;  we  peeped  at  them,  but  left  them  in
their  retreat,  without  their  knowing  that  they  had  been  dif-
covered,  and  we  threw  into  the  houfe  when  we  went  away
fome  beads,  ribbons,  pieces  of  cloth,   and  other  prefents,
which  we  hoped  would  procure  us  the  good-will  of  the  in-
habitants when  they  mould  return  ;  but  the  lances  which
we  found  lying  about,  we  took  away  with  us,  to  the  number
of  about  fifty :  they  were  from  fix  to  fifteen  feet  long,  and
all  of  them  had  four  prongs  in  the  manner  of  a  fifh-gig,  each
of  which  was  pointed  with  fifh-bone,  and  very  fliarp :  we
obferved  that  they  were  fmeared  with  a  vifcous  iubftance  of
a  green  colour,  which  favoured  the  opinion  of  their  being
poifoned,  though  we  afterwards  difcovered  that  it  was  a  mif-
take  :  they  appeared,  by  the  fea-weed  that  we  found  flicking
to  them,  to  have  been  ufed  in  ftriking  fiih.    Upon  examining
the  canoes  that  lay  upon  the  beach,  we  found  them  to  be  the
worft  we  had  ever  feen :   they  were  between  twelve  and
fourteen  feet  long,  and  made  of  the  bark  of  a  tree  in  one
piece,  which  was  drawn  together  and  tied  up  at  each  end,
the  middle  being  kept  open  by  flicks  which  were  placed
acrofs  them  from  gunwale  to  gunwale  as  thwarts.   We  then
fearched  for  frefh  water,  but  found  none,  except  in  a  fmall
hole  which  had  been  dug  in  the  fand.

Having  reimbarked  in  our  boat,  we  depofited  our  lances
on  board  the  fhip,  and  then  went  over  to  the  north  point  of

the


ROUND    THE    WORLD,  49j

the  bay,  where  we  had  fcen  feveral  of  the  inhabitants  when       1770.
we  were  entering  it,  but  which  we  now  found  totally  de-   »..  '-?-'_>
ferted.     Here  however  we  found  frefh  water,  which  trickled    atur  aya**
down  from  the  top  of  the  rocks,  and  flood  in  pools  among
the  hollows  at  the  bottom ;  but  it  was  fituated  fo  as  not  to
be  procured  for  our  ufe  without  difficulty.

In  the  morning,  therefore,  I  fent  a  party  of  men  to  that  Sunday  z9, .
part  of  the  fhore  where  we  firft  landed,  with  orders  to  dig
holes  in  the  fand  where  the  water  might  gather;  but  going
afhore  myfelf  with  the  Gentlemen  foon  afterwards,  we
found,  upon  a  more  diligent  fearch,  2.  fmall  ftream,  more
than  fufficient  for  our  purpofe.

Upon  vifiting  the  hut  where  we  had  fcen  the  children,  we
were  greatly  mortified  to  find  that  the  beads  and  ribbons
which  we  had  left  there  the  night  before,  had  not  been
moved  from  their  places,  and  that  not  an  Indian  was  to  be
feen.

Having  fent  fome  empty  water-cafks  on  more,  and  left  a
party  of  men  to  cut  wood,  I  went  myfelf  in  the  pinnace  to
found,  and  examine  the  bay  ;  during  my  excurfion  I  faw  fe-
veral of  the  natives,  but  they  all  fled  at  my  approach.  In:
one  of  the  places  where  I  landed  I  found  feveral  fmall  fires,
and  frefh  mufcles  broiling  upon  them  ;  here  alfo  I  found,
fome  of  the  largeft  oyfter-fhells  I  had  ever  feen.

As  foon  as  the  wooders  and  waterers  came  on  board  to  din-
ner, ten  or  twelve  of  the  natives  came  down  to  the  place,
and  looked  with  great  attention  and  curicfity  at  the  cafks,
but  did  not  touch  them :  they  took  away  however  the  canoes
which  lay  near  the  landing-place,  and  again  difappeared.
In  the  afternoon,  when  our  people  were  again  afhore,  fix-
teen  or  eighteen  Indians,  all  armed,  came  boldly  within
about  an  hundred  yards  of  them,  and  then  flopped  :  two  of
6  them;


49*  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      them  advanced  fomewhat  nearer;  and  Mr.  Hicks,  who  com-

1 v — >   mandcd  the  party  on  more,  with  another,  advanced  to  meet

u,n  y  29'  them,  holding  out  prefents  to  them  as  he  approached,  and
■exprefling  kindnefs  and  amity  by  every  fign  he  could  think
.of,  but  all  without  effect^  for  before  he  could  get  up  with
them  they  retired,  and  it  would  have  anfwered  no  purpofe
to  purfue.  In  the  evening,  I  went  with  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.
Solander  to  a  fandy  cove  on  the  north  fide  of  the  bay,  where,
in  three  or  four  hauls  with  the  feine,  we  took  above  three
hundred  weight  of  fifh,  which  was  equally  divided  among
the  fhip's  company.

Monday  30.  The  ncxt  morning,  before  day-break,  the  Indians  came
down  to  the  houfes  that  were  abreaft  of  the  fliip,  and  were
heard  frequently  to  fhout  very  loud.  As  foon  as  it  was  light,
they  were  feen  walking  along  the  beach ;  and  foon  after
they  retired  to  the  wroods,  where,  at  the  diftance  of  about  a
mile  from  the  fhore,  they  kindled  feveral  fires.

Our  people  went  afhore  as  ufual,  and  with  them  Mr.
Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  who,  in  fearch  of  plants,  repaired
to  the  woods.  Our  men,  who  were  employed  in  cutting
grafs,  being  the  fartheft  removed  from  the  main  body  of  the
people,  a  company  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  Indians  advanced
towards  them,  having  flicks  in  their  hands,  which,  according
to  the  report  of  the  Serjeant  of  the  marines,  flione  like  a
mufquet.  The  grafs-cutters,  upon  feeing  them  approach,
drew  together,  and  repaired  to  the  main  body.  The  Indians,
being  encouraged  by  this  appearance  of  a  flight,  purfued
them ;  they  flopped  however  when  they  were  within  about
a  furlong  of  them,  and  after  fhouting  feveral  times  went
back  into  the  woods.  In  the  evening  they  came  again  in
the  fame  manner,  flopped  at  the  fame  diftance,  fhouted  and
retired.    I  followed  them  myfelf,  alone  and  unarmed,  for  a

£  confiderable


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


497


confiderable  way  along  the  fhore,  but  I  could  not  prevail  upon       >77°-
them  to  flop.  < -j

Monday  30.

This  clay  Mr.  Green  took  the  fun's  meridian  altitude  a  little
within  the  fouth  entrance  of  the  bay,  which  gave  the  lati-
tude 340  S.  the  variation  of  the  needle  was  n°  3'E.

Early  the  next  morning,  the  bodv  of  Forby  Sutherland,       May.

.  Tuefday  i .

one  of  our  feamen,  who  died  the  evening  before,  was  buried
near  the  watering-place  ;  and  from  this  incident  I  called  the
fouth  point  of  this  bay  Sutherland  Point.  This  day  we
refolved  to  make  an  excurfion  into  the  country.  Mr.  Banks,
Dr.  Solander,  myfelf,  and  feven  others,  properly  accoutred
for  the  expedition,  fet  out,  and  repaired  firfl  to  the  huts,
near  the  watering-place,  whither  fome  of  the  natives  conti-
nued every  day  to  refort ;  and  though  the  little  prefents
which  we  had  left  there  before  had  not  yet  been  taken  away,
we  left  others  of  fomewhat  more  value,  confiding  of  cloth,
looking-glafTes,  combs,  and  beads,  and  then  went  up  into
the  country.  We  found  the  foil  to  be  either  fwamp  or  light
fand,  and  the  face  of  the  country  finely  diverfified  by  wood
and  lawn.  The  trees  are  tall,  {trait,  and  without  under-
wood, Handing  at  fuch  a  diftance  from  each  other  that  the
whole  country,  at  leaft  where  the  fwamps  do  not  render  it
incapable  of  cultivation,  might  be  cultivated  without  cut-
ting down  one  of  them :  between  the  trees  the  ground  is
covered  with  grafs,  of  which  there  is  great  abundance,
growing  in  tufts  about  as  big  as  can  well  be  grafped  in
the  hand,  which  fland  very  clofe  to  each  other.  We  faw
many  houfes  of  the  inhabitants,  and  places  where  they  had
flept  upon  the  grafs  without  any  fJielter ;  but  we  faw  only
one  of  the  people,  who  the  moment  he  difcovered  us  ran
away.  At  all  thefe  places  we  left  prefents,  hoping  that  at
length  they  might  produce  confidence  and  good-will.  We
Vol.  II.  3S  had


49§  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  had  a  tranfient  and  imperfefl  view  of  a  quadruped  about  as
*— JJ*Z— -j  big  as  a  rabbit :  Mr.  Banks's  greyhound,  which  was  with
Wo,  got  fight  of  it,  and  would  probably  have  caught  it,  but
the  moment  he  fet  off  he  lamed  himfelf,  againft  a  flump
which  lay  concealed  in  the  long  grafs.  We  afterwards  faw  the
dung  of  an  animal  which  fed  upon  grafs,  and  which  we
judged  could  not  be  lefs  than  a  deer  ;  and  the  footfteps  of
another,  which  was  clawed  like  a  dog,  and  feemed  to  be
about  as  big  as  a  wolf :  we  alfo  tracked  a  fmall  animal,
whofe  foot  refembled  that  of  a  polcat  or  weafel.  The  trees
over  our  head  abounded  with  birds  of  various  kinds,  among
which  were  many  of  exquifite  beauty,  particularly  loriquets
and  cockatoos,  which  flew  in  flocks  of  feveral  fcores  toge-
ther. We  found  fome  wood  which  had  been  felled  by  the
natives  with  a  blunt  initrument,  and  fome  that  had  been
barked.  The  trees  were  not  of  many  fpecies ;  among  others
there  was  a  large  one  which  yielded  a  gum  not  unlike  the
Sanguis  draconis  ;  and  in  fome  of  them  fteps  had  been  cut  at
about  three  feet  diflance  from  each  other,  for  the  conveni-
ence of  climbing  them.

From  this  excurfion  we  returned  between  three  and  four
o'clock,  and  having  dined  on  board,  we  went  afhore  again  at
the  watering-place,  where  a  party  of  men  were  filling  calks.
Mr.  Gore,  the  Second  Lieutenant,  had  been  fent  out  in  the
morning  with  a  boat  to  dredge  for  oyflers  at  the  head  of  the
bay ;  when  he  had  performed  this  fervice,  he  went  afhore,
and  having  taken  a  midfhipman  with  him,  and  fent  the  boat
away,  fet  out  to  join  the  waterers  by  land.  In  his  way  he
fell  in  with  a  body  of  two  and  twenty  Indians,  who  followed
him,  and  were  often  not  more  than  twenty  yards  diftant ;
when  Mr.  Gore  perceived  them  fo  near,  he  flopped,  and  faced
about,  upon  which  they  flopped  alfo;  and  when  he  went

4  on


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


499


on  a<*ain,  continued  their  purfuit :   they  did  not  however      '77°-

May.

attack  him,  though  they  were  all  armed  with  lances,  and    I „-  ^j

he  and  the  midfhipman  got  in  fafety  to  the  watering-place.  ue  iyu
The  Indians,  who  had  flackened  their  purfuit  when  they
came  in  fight  of  the  main  body  of  our  people,  halted  at
about  the  diflance  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  where  they  flood
ftill.  Mr.  Monkhoufe  and  two  or  three  of  the  waterers  took
it  in  their  head  to  march  up  to  themj  but  feeing  the  Indians
keep  their  ground  till  they  came  pretty  near  them,  they
were  feized  with  a  fudden  fear  very  common  to  the  rafh  and
fool-hardy,  and  made  a  hafty  retreat :  this  Hep,  which  in-
fured  the  danger  that  it  was  taken  to  avoid,  encouraged  the
Indians,  and  four  of  them  running  forward  difcharged  their
lances  at  the  fugitives,  with  fuch  force  that,  flying  no  lefs
than  forty  yards,  they  went  beyond  them.  As  the  Indians
did  not  purfue,  our  people,  recovering  their  fpirits,  flopped
to  collect  the  lances  when  they  came  up  to  the  place  where
they  lay ;  upon  which  the  Indians,  in  their  turn,  began  to
retire.  Juft  at  this  time  I  came  up,  with  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.  So-
lander,  and  Tupia  ;  and  being  defirous  to  convince  the  In-
dians that  we  were  neither  afraid  of  them,  nor  intended
them  any  mifchief,  we  advanced  towards  them,  making
figns  of  expoftulation  and  entreaty,  but  they  could  not  be
perfuaded  to  wait  till  we  could  come  up.  Mr.  Gore  told  us,
that  he  had  feen  fome  of  them  up  the  bay,  who  had  invited
him  by  figns  to  come  on  fhore,  which  he,  certainly  with
great  prudence,  declined.

The  morning  of  the  next  day  was  fo  rainy,  that  we  were  WedaeT.  2*
all  glad  to  flay  on  board.  In  the  afternoon,  however,  it
cleared  up,  and  we  made  another  excurfion  along  the  fea-
coafl  to  the  fouthward :  we  went  afhore,  and  Mr.  Banks  and
Dr.  Solander  gathered  many  plants ;  but  befides  thefe  wc
faw  nothing  worthy  of  notice.     At  our  firft  entering  the

3S  2  woods.


j-oo  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

177s-  woods,  we  met  with  three  of  the  natives,  who  inftantly  raa-
«.  -,-' w  away :  more  of  them  were  feen  by  fome  of  the  people,  but
they  all  difappeared,  with  great  precipitation,  as  foon  as  they
found  that  they  were  difcovered.  By  the  boldnefs  of  thefe
people  at  our  firfl  landing,  and  the  terror  that  feized  them  at
the  fight  of  us  afterwards,  it  appears  that  they  were  fuffrv
ciently  intimidated  by  our  fire-arms :  not  that  we  had  any
reafon  to  think  the  people  much  hurt  by  the  fmall-fhot
which  we  were  obliged  to  fire  at  them,  when  they  attacked
us  at  our  coming  out  of  the  boat  j  but  they  had  probably
feen  the  effects  of  them,  from  their  lurking  places,  upon
the  birds  that  we  had  fhot.  Tupia,  who  was  now  become  a
good  markfman,  frequently  ftrayed  from  us  to  moot  par-
rots ;  and  he  had  told  us,  that  while  he  was  thus  employed,
he  had  once  met  with  nine  Indians,  who,  as  foon  as  they
perceived  he  faw  them,  ran  from  him,  in  great  confufion  and
terror.

Tiiurfday  3.  The  next  day,  twelve  canoes,  in  each  of  which  was  a  fmgle
Indian,  came  towards  the  watering-place,  and  were  within
half  a  mile  of  it  a  confiderable  time :  they  were  employed  in
ftriking  fifh,  upon  which,  like  others  that  we  had  feen  be-
fore, they  were  fo  intent  that  they  feemed  to  regard  nothing
elfe.  It  happened,  however,  that  a  party  of  our  people  were
out  a  mooting  near  the  place,  and  one  of  the  men,  whofe
curiofity  might  at  length  perhaps  be  roufed  by  the  report  of
the  fowling-pieces,  was  obferved  by  Mr.  Banks  to  haul  up
his  canoe  upon  the  beach,  and  go  towards  the  mooting
party :  in  fomething  more  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  he  re-
turned, launched  his  canoe,  and  went  off  in  her  to  his  com-
panions. This  incident  makes  it  probable  that  the  natives
acquired  a  knowlege  of  the  deftruclive  power  of  our  fire-
arms, when  we  knew  nothing  of  the  matter  ;  for  this  man

was


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  5or

was  not  feen  by  any  of  the  party  whofe  operations  he  had      1770.

.  ,  May.

reconnoitred.  * , 1

Thurfday  3..

"While  Mr.  Banks  was  gathering  plants  near  the  watering-
place,  I  went  with  Dr.  Solander  and  Mr.  Monkhoufe  to  the
head  of  the  bay,  that  I  might  examine  that  part  of  the  coun-
try, and  make  farther  attempts  to  form  fome  connection
with  the  natives.  In  our  way  we  met  with  eleven  or  twelve
fmall  canoes,  with  each  a  man  in  it,  probably  the  fame  that
were  afterwards  abreaft  of  the  fhore,  who  all  made  into
fhoal  water  upon  our  approach.  We  met  other  Indians  on
fhore  the  firft  time  we  landed,  who  inftantly  took  to  their
canoes,  and  paddled  away.  We  went  up  the  country  to  fome
diflance,  and  found  the  face  of  it  nearly  the  fame  with  that
which  has  been  defcribed  already,  but  the  foil  was  much
richer;  for  inflead  of  fand,  I  found  a  deep  black  mould,
which  I  thought  very  fit  for  the  production  of  grain  of  any-
kind.  In  the  woods  we  found  a  tree  which  bore  fruit  that
in  colour  and  fhape  refembled  a  cherry ;  the  juice  had  an
agreeable  tartnefs,  though  but  little  flavour.  We  found  alfoin-
terfperfed  fome  of  the  finefl  meadows  in  the  world :  fome  places
however  were  rocky,  but  thefe  were  comparatively  few:  the
flone  is  fandy,  and  might  be  ufed  with  advantage  for  build-
ing. When  we  returned  to  the  boat,  we  faw  fome  fmoke
upon  another  part  of  the  coaft,  and  went  thither  in  hopes  of
meeting  with  the  people,  but  at  our  approach,  thefe  alfo  ran
away.  We  found  fix  fmall  canoes,  and  fix  fires  very  near
the  beach,  with  fome  mufcles  roafling  upon  them,  and  a
few  oyflers  lying  near :  by  this  we  judged  that  there  had
been  one  man  in  each  canoe,  who  having  picked  up  fome
fhell-fim  were  come  afhore  to  eat  it,  and  that  each  had  made
his  feparate  fire  for  that  purpofe  :  we  tailed  of  their  cheer,
and  left  them  in  return  fome  firings  of  beads,  and  other  things

which


So2  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770.  which  we  thought  would  pleafe  them.  At  the  foot  of  a  tree
,_  M_T  _,  in  this  place  we  found  a  fmall  well  of  frefli  water,  fupplied
Thurfday  3.  ^  a  f  ring .  anci  the  day  being  now  far  fpent,  we  returned
to  the  fhip.  In  the  evening,  Mr.  Banks  made  a  little  excur-
fion  with  his  gun,  and  found  fuch  a  number  of  quails,  re-
fembling  thofe  in  England,  that  he  might  have  fhot  as  many
as  he  pleafed;  but  his  object  was  variety,  and  not  number.

Fdday  4.  The  next  morning,  as  the  wind  would  not  permit  me  to

fail,  I  fent  out  feveral  parties  into  the  country  to  try  again
whether  fome  intercourfe  could  not  be  eftablifhed  with  the
natives.     A  midfhipman  who  belonged  to  one  of  thefe  par-
ties, having  ftraggled  a  long  way  from  his  companions,  met
with  a  very  old  man  and  woman,  and  fome  little  children  ;
they  were  fitting  under  a  tree  by  the  water  fide,  and  neither
party  faw  the  other  till  they  were  clofe  together:  the  Indians
fhowed  figns  of  fear,  but  did  not  attempt  to  run  away.   The
man  happened  to  have  nothing  to  give  them  but  a  parrot
that  he  had  fhot ;  this  he  offered,  but  they  refufed  to  accept
it,  withdrawing  themfelves  from  his  hand  either  through
fear  or  averfion.     His  flay  with  them  was  but  fhort,  for  he
faw  feveral  canoes  near  the  beach  fifliing,  and  being  alone,
he  feared  they  might  come  afliore  and  attack  him  :  he  faid,
that  thefe  people  were  very  dark  coloured,  but  not  black ;
that  the  man  and  woman  appeared  to  be  very  old,  being
both  grey-headed  ;    that  the  hair  of  the  man's  head  was
bufhy,  and  his  beard  long  and  rough  ;  that  the  woman's  hair
was  cropped  fhort,  and  both  of  them  were  flark  naked.    Mr.
Monkhoufe  the  Surgeon,  and  one  of  the  men,  who  were  with
another  party  near  the  watering-place,   alfo  ftrayed  from
their  companions,  and  as  they  were  coming  out  of  a  thicket
obferved  fix  Indians  Handing  together,   at  the  diftance  of
about  fifty  yards.     One  of  them  pronounced  a  word  very

loud,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  5o3

loud,  which  was  fuppofed  to  be  a  fignal,  for  a  lance  was       177°-
immediately  thrown  at  him  out  of  the  wood,  which  very    t_    .'-,_/
narrowly  miffed  him.     When  the  Indians  faw  that  the  wea-     nda>  4'
pon  had  not  taken  effect,  they  ran  away  with  the  greateft
precipitation  ;    but    on    turning   about   towards    the    place
whence  the  lance  had  been  thrown,  he  faw  a  young  Indian,
whom  he  judged  to  be  about  nineteen  or  twenty  years  old,
come  down  from  a  tree,  and  he  alfo  ran  away  with  fuch
fpeed  as  made  it  hopelefs  to  follow  him.     Mr.  Monkhoufe
was  of  opinion  that  he  had  been  watched  by  thefe  Indians
in  his  paffage  through  the  thicket,  and  that  the  youth  had
been  Rationed  in  the  tree,  to  difcharge  the  lance  at  him,
upon  a  fignal  as  he  mould  come  by ;  but  however  this  be,
there  could  be  no  doubt  but  that  he  was  the  perfon  who
threw  the  lance.

In  the  afternoon,  I  went  myfelf  with  a  party  over  to  the
north  fhore,  and  while  fome  of  our  people  were  hauling  the
feine,  we  made  an  excurfion  a  few  miles  into  the  country,
proceeding  afterwards  in  the  direction  of  the  coafl.  We
found  this  place  without  wood,  and  fomewhat  refembling
our  moors  in  England ;  the  furface  of  the  ground,  however,
was  covered  with  a  thin  bruffi  of  plants,  about  as  high  as
the  knees:  the  hills  near  the  coafl  are  low,  but  others  rife
behind  them,  increafmg  by  a  gradual  afcent  to  a  confiderable
diilance,  with  marfhes  and  moraffes  between.  When  we
returned  to  the  boat,  we  found  that  our  people  had  caught
with  the  feine  a  great  number  of  fmall  fifh,  which  are  well
known  in  the  Wefc  Indies,  and  which  our  failors  call  Leather
jackets,  becaufe  their  fkin  is  remarkably  thick.  I  had  fent
the  Second  Lieutenant  out  in  the  yawl  a  finking,  and  when
we  got  back  to  the  fhip,  we  found  that  he  alfo  had  been  very
fuccefsful.    He  had  obferved  that  the  large  fling-rays,  of

which


504  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.       which  there  is  great  plenty  in  the  bay,  followed  the  flowing
v. — —— /   tide  into  very  fhallow  water ;  he  therefore  took  the  opportu-
nity of  flood,  and  ttruck  feveral  in  not.  more  than  two  or
three  feet  water :  one  of  them  weighed  no  lefs  than  two
hundred  and  forty  pounds  after  his  entrails  were  taken  out.

Saturday  5.  The  next  morning,  as  the  wind  flill  continued  n  orthcrly
I  fent  out  the  yawl  again,  and  the  people  ftruck  one  flill
larger,  for  when  his  entrails  were  taken  out  he  weighed
three  hundred  and  thirty- fix  pounds.

The  great  quantity  of  plants  which  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  So-
lander  collected  in  this  place  induced  me  to  give  it  the  name
of  Botany  Bay.  It  is  fituated  in  the  latitude  of  34.  °  S.,  lon-
gitude 2080  37'  \V.  It  is  capacious,  fafe,  and  convenient,  and
may  be  known  by  the  land  on  the  fea-coaft,  which  is  nearly
level,  and  of  a  moderate  height ;  in  general  higher  than  it  is
farther  inland,  with  fteep  rocky  cliffs  next  the  fea,  which
have  the  appearance  of  a  long  ifland  lying  clofe  under  the
more.  The  harbour  lies  about  the  middle  of  this  land,  and
in  approaching  it  from  the  fouthward,  is  difcovered  before
the  fhip  comes  abreafl  of  it ;  but  from  the  northward  it  is
not  difcovered  fo  foon :  the  entrance  is  a  little  more  than  a
quarter  of  a  mile  broad,  and  lies  in  W.N.W.  To  fail  into  it
the  fouthern  more  ffiould  be  kept  on  board,  till  the  fhip  is
within  a  fmall  bare  ifland,  which  lies  clofe  under  the  north
fhore;  within  this  ifland  the  deepefl  water  on  that  fide  is
feven  fathom,  fhallowing  to  five  a  good  way  up.  At  a  con-
fiderable  diftance  from  the  fouth  fhore  there  is  a  fhoal,  reach-
ing from  the  inner  fouth  point  quite  to  the  head  of  the  har-
bour; but  over  towards  the  north  and  north  weft  fhore  there
is  a  channel  of  twelve  or  fourteen  feet  at  low  water,  for
three  or  four  leagues,  up  to  a  place  where  there  is  three  or
four  fathom,  but  here  I  found  very  little  frefh  water.     We

6  anchored


Satuidav


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  50 .

anchored  near  the  fouth  fhore,  about  a  mile  within  the  en-       J77o.

IV:  ay.

trance,  for  the  convenience  of  failing  with  a  foutherly  wind,
and  becaufe  I  thought  it  the  befl  fituation  for  watering;  but  I
afterwards  found  a  very  line  fire  am  on  the  north  fhore,  in  the
firfl  fandy  cove  within  the  ifland,  before  which  a  fhip  might
lie  almofl  land-locked,  and  procure  wood  as  well  as  water  in
great  abundance.  Wood  indeed  is  every  where  plenty,  but
I  faw  only  two  kinds  which  may  be  confidered  as  timber.
Thefe  trees  are  as  large,  or  larger  than  the  Englifh  oak,  and
one  of  them  has  not  a  very  different  appearance  :  this  is  the
fame  that  yields  the  reddifh  gum  like  /unguis  draconis,  and
the  wood  is  heavy,  hard,  and  dark-coloured,  like  lignum
<vit£ :  the  other  grows  tall  and  flrait,  fomething  like  the
pine  ;  and  the  wood  of  this,  which  has  fome  refemblance  to
the  live  oak  of  America,  is  alfo  hard  and  heavy.  There  are
a  few  fhrubs,  and  feveral  kinds  of  the  palm ;  mangroves
alfo  grow  in  great  plenty  near  the  head  of  the  bay.  The
country  in  general  is  level,  low,  and  woody,  as  far  as  we
could  fee.  The  woods,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  abound
with  birds  of  exquifite  beauty,  particularly  of  the  parrot
kind  ;  we  found  alfo  crows  here,  exactly  the  fame  with  thofe
in  England.  About  the  head  of  the  harbour,  where  there
are  large  flats  of  fand  and  mud,  there  is  great  plenty  of
water-fowl,  moil  of  which  were  altogether  unknown  to  us  :
one  of  the  mod  remarkable  was  black  and  white,  much
larger  than  a  fwan,  and  in  fhape  fomewhat  refembling  a  pe-
lican. On  thefe  banks  of  fand  and  mud  there  are  great  quan-
tities of  oyflers,  mufclcs,  cockles,  and  other  fhell-fifli,  which
feem  to  be  the  principal  fubiiflence  of  the  inhabitants,  who
go  into  fhoal  water  with  their  little  canoes,  and  pick  them
out  with  their  hands.  We  did  not  obferve  that  they  eat  any
of  them  raw,  nor  do  they  always  go  on  fhore  to  dre-fs  them,
for  they  have  frequently  fires  in  their  canoes  for  that  pur-
Vol.  II.  3  T  pofe.


506  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°-       pofe.     They  do  not  however  fubfrft  wholly  upon  this  food,

1 ri 1    for  they  catch  a  variety  of  other  fifh,  fome  of  which  they

r  ays*  ftrike  with  gigs,  and  fome  they  take  with  hook  and  line.
All  the  inhabitants  that  we  faw  were  flark  naked :  they  did
not  appear  to  be  numerous,  nor  to  live  in  focieties,  but  like
other  animals  were  fcattered  about  along  the  coaft,  and  in
the  woods.  Of  their  manner  of  life,  however,  we  could
know  but  little,  as  we  were  never  able  to  form  the  leaf!  con-
nection with  them  :  after  the  firft  contefl  at  our  landing,  they
would  never  come  near  enough  to  parley  ;  nor  did  they
touch  a  fingle  article  of  all  that  we  had  left  at  their  huts,  and
the  places  they  frequented,  on  purpofe  for  them  to  take
away.

During  my  flay  in  this  harbour,  I  caufed  the  Englifh  co-
lours to  be  difplayed  on  fhore  every  day,  and  the  fhip's  name,
and  the  date  of  the  year,  to  be  infcribed  upon  one  of  the
trees  near  the  watering-place.

It  is  high-water  here  at  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon
about  eight  o'clock,  and  the  tide  rifes  and  falls  perpendicu-
larly between  four  and  five  feet.


CHAP.


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  $o7


CHAP.     IV.

The  Range  from  Botany  Bay  to  Trinity  Bay,  with  a  farther
Account  of  the  Country,  its  Inhabitants,  and  Productions,

AT  day-break,  on  Sunday  the  6th  of  May  1770,  we  fet       1:70.
May
fail  from  Botany  Bay,  with  a  light  breeze  at  N.  W.  v___^-l.

which  foon  after  coming  to  the  fouthward,  wc  fleered  along  un  ay
the  more  N.  N  E. ;  and  at  noon,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,
was  33°  50'  S.  At  this  time  we  were  between  two  and  three
miles  diftant  from  the  land,  and  a-breaft  of  a  bay,  or  har-
bour, in  which  there  appeared  to  be  good  anchorage,  and
which  I  called  Port  Jackson.  This  harbour  lies  three
leagues  to  the  northward  of  Botany  Bay :  the  variation,  by
feveral  azimuths,  appeared  to  be  8°  E.  At  fun-iet,  the
northermoft  land  in  fight  bore  N.  26  E.  and  fome  broken
land,  that  feemed  to  form  a  bay,  bore  N.  40  \V.  diftant  four
leagues.  This  bay,  which  lies  in  latitude  330  42',  I  called
Broken  Bay.  We  fleered  along  the  more  N.  N.  E.  all  night,
at  the  diftance  of  about  three  leagues  from  the  land,  having
from  thirty-two  to  thirty-fix  fathom  water,  with  a  hard
fandy  bottom.

Soon  after  fun-rife  on  the  7th,  I  took  feveral  azimuths,  Monday  -
with  four  needles  belonging  to  the  azimuth  compafs,  the
mean  refult  of  which  gave  the  variation  f  56'  E.  At  noon,
our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  33*  22'  S. :  we  were  about
three  leagues  from  the  more  ;  the  northermoft  land  in  fight
bore  N.  19  E.  and  fome  lands  which  projected  in  three  bluff
points,    and  which,  for  that  reafon,  I  called  Cape  Three

3  T  2  Points,


i77°-
May.

Monday  ;


Tuefdav  3.


5o8  LIEUTENANT    COOKrs    VOYAGE

Points,  bore  S.  W.  diftant  five  leagues.  Our  longitude  from
Botany  Bay  was  19'E.  In  the  afternoon,  we  faw  fmoke  in
feveral  places  upon  the  fliore,  and  in  the  evening,  found  the
variation  to  be  8°  25'  E.  At  this  time  we  were  between  two
and  three  miles  from  the  more,  in  twenty-eight  fathom  j
and  at  noon  the  next  day,  we  had  not  advanced  one  Hep  to
the  northward.  We  flood  off  more,  with  the  winds  north-
erly, till  twelve  at  night,  and  at  the  diilance  of  about  five
leagues,  had  feventy  fathom  ;  at  the  diilance  of  fix  leagues
we  had  eighty  fathom,  which  is  the  extent  of  the  found-
ings; for  at  the  diflance  often  leagues,  we  had  no  ground
with  150  fathom.

Thurfday  10.       The  wind  continuing  northerly,  till  the  morning  of  the
10th,  we  continued  to  ftand  in  and  off  the  more,  with  very
little  change  of  fituation  in  other  refpecls  ;  but  a  gale  then
fpringing  up  at  S.  W.  we  made  the  beft  of  our  way  along  the
ihore  to  the  northward.     At  fun-rife,  our  latitude  was  33°  2'  S.
and  the  variation  8°  E.     At  nine  in  the  forenoon,  we  paffed
a  remarkable  hill,  which  Hood  a  little  way  inland,  and  fome-
what  refembled  the  crown  of  a  hat:  and  at  noon,  our  lati-
tude, by  obfervation,  was  320  53' S.  and  our  longitude  208°
W.     We  were  about  two  leagues   diflant   from   the  land,
which  extended  from  N.  41  E.  to  S.  41  W.,  and  a  fmall  round
rock,  or  ifland,  which  lay  clofe  under  the  land,  bore  S.  82
W.  diftant  between  three  and  four  leagues.     At  four  in  the
afternoon,  we  paffed,  at  the  diftance  of  about  a  mile,  alow
rocky  point,  which  I  called  Point  Stephens,  on  the  north
fide  of  which  is  an  inlet,  which  I  called  Port  Stephens:
this  inlet  appeared  to  me,  from  the  mail  head,  to  be  fhel-
tered  from  all  winds.     It  lies  in   latitude  320  40',  longitude
2070  51',  and  at  the  entrance  are  three  fmall  iflands,  two  of
which  are  high ;  and  on  the  main  near  the  fliore  are  fome
high  round  hills,  which  at  a  diilance  appear  like  iflands.    In

paifing


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  509

pafiing  this  bay,  at  the  diftance  of  two  or  three  miles  from
the  more,  our  foundings  were  from  thirty-three  to  twenty-
ieven  fathom,  from  which  I  conjectured  that  there  muft  be
a  fufficient  depth  of  water  within  it.  At  a  little  diftance
within  land,  we  faw  fmoke  in  feveral  places;  and  at  half  an
hour  pafl  five,  the  northermoft  land  in  fight  bore  N.  36  E.
and  Point  Stephens  S.  W.  diftant  four  leagues.  Our  found-
ings in  the  night,  were  from  forty-eight  to  fixty-two  fathom,
at  the  diftance  of  between  three  and  four  leagues  from  the
more,  which  made  in  two  hillocks.  This  Point  I  called
Cape  Hawke:  it  lies  in  the  latitude  of  320  14'S.,  longitude
2070  30'  W.  ;  and  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  bore  W.  ?r'ldzY  "■
diftant  about  eight  miles ;  at  the  fame  time  the  northermoft
land  in  fight  bore  N.  6  E.  and  appeared  like  an  ifland.  At
noon,  this  land  bore  N.  8  E.  the  northermoft  land  in  fight
N.  13  E.  and  Cape  Hawke  S.  37  W.  Our  latitude,  by  obfer-
vation,  was  320  2' S.  which  was  twelve  miles  to  the  fouth-
ward  of  that  given  by  the  log ;  fo  that  probably  we  had  a
current  fetting  that  way:  by  the  morning  amplitude  and
azimuth,  the  variation  was  9  °  io'E.  During  our  run  along
the  ihore,  in  the  afternoon,  we  faw  fmoke  in  feveral  places,
at  a  little  diftance  from  the  beach,  and  one  upon  the  top  of
a  hill,  which  was  the  firft  we  had  feen  upon  elevated  ground
fince  our  arrival  upon  the  coaft.  At  fun-fet,  we  had  twenty-
three  fathom,  at  the  diftance  of  a  league  and  an  half  from
the  more:  the  northermoft  land  then  bore  N.  13  E.  and  three
hills,  remarkably  large  and  high,  lying  contiguous  to  each
other,  and  not  far  from  the  beach,  N.  N.W.  As  thefc  hills
bore  fome  refemblance  to  each  other,  wc  called  them  the
Three  Brothers.  They  lie  in  latitude  31"'  40',  and  may  be
feen  fourteen  or  fixteen  leagues.  Wc  fleered  N.  E.  by  N.  all
night,  having  from  twenty-feven  to  fixty-feven  fathom,  at
the  diftance  of  between  two  and  fix  leagues  from  the  fliore.

7  Ac


5io  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

«77o.  At  day-break,  we  fleered  north,  for  the  northermoft  land

v___!L_y  in  fight.  At  noon,  we  were  four  leagues  from  the  fhore,
Saturday  ri  and  b^  0bferVation,  in  latitude  3  1  °  18' S.,  which  was  fifteen
miles  to  the  fouthward  of  that  given  by  the  log;  our  longi-
tude 2060  58'W.  In  the  afternoon,  we  flood  in  for  the  land,
where  we  faw  fmoke  in  feveral  places,  till  fix  in  the  even-
ing, when,  being  within  three  or  four  miles  of  it,  and  in
twenty-four  fathom  of  water,  we  flood  off  with  a  frefh
breeze  at  N.  and  N.  N.  W.  till  midnight,  when  we  had  118
fathom,  at  the  diflance  of  eight  leagues  from  the  land,  and
Sunday  13.  then  tacked.  At  three  in  the  morning,  the  wind  veered  to
the  weftward,  when  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  northward.
At  noon,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  30°  43' S.,  and
our  longitude  206 •  45'  W.  At  this  time  we  were  between
three  and  four  leagues  from  the  more,  the  northermoft  part
of  which  bore  from  us  N.  13  W.  and  a  point,  or  head  land,
on  which  we  faw  fires  that  produced  a  great  quantity  of
fmoke,  bore  W.  diftant  four  leagues.  To  this  Point  I  gave
the  name  of  Smokey  Cape:  it  is  of  a  condfierable  height,
and  over  the  pitch  of  the  Point  is  a  round  hillock;  within  it
are  two  others,  much  higher  and  larger,  and  within  them
the  land  is  very  low.  Our  latitude  was  300  31'S.,  longitude
2c6°54'"W.:  this  day  the  obferved  latitude  was  only  five
miles  fouth  of  the  log.  We  faw  fmoke  in  feveral  parts  along
the  coafl,  befides  that  fcen  upon  Smokey  Cape.

In  the  afternoon,  the  wind  being  at  N.  E.  we  flood  off  and
on,  and  at  three  or  four  miles  diflance  from  the  fhore  had
thirty  fathom  water:  the  wind  afterwards  coming  crofs  off
land,  we  flood  to  the  northward,  having  from  thirty  to
twenty-one  fathom,  at  the  diflance  of  four  or  five  miles  from
the  fhore.

At  five  in  the  morning,  the  wind  veered  to  the  north,  and

Monday  14.  °  .    ,        .     ,  ,

blew  frefh,  attended  with  fqualls :  at  eight,  it  began  to  thun-
der


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  511

der  and  rain,  and  in  about  an  hour  it  fell  calm,  which  gave       *71°'

0  May.

us  an  opportunity  to  found,  and  we  had  eighty-fix  fathom  at    « — v 1

rr  J  '  o      J  Monday  14.

between  four  and  five  leagues  from  the  fhore :  foon  after
this  we  had  a  gale  from  the  fouthward,  with  which  wc
fleered  N.  by  \V.  for  the  northermoft  land  in  fight.  At  noon,
we  were  about  four  leagues  from  the  fhore,  and  by  obfer-
vation,  in  latitude  30 °  22',  which  was  nine  miles  to  the
fouthward  of  our  reckoning,  longitude  206  °  39  W.  Some
lands  near  the  fhore,  of  a  confiderable  height,  bore  W.

As  we  advanced  to  the  northward,  from  Botany  Bay,  the
land  gradually  increafed  in  height,  fo  that  in  this  latitude  it
may  be  called  a  hilly  country.  Between  this  latitude  and
the  Bay,  it  exhibits  a  pleafing  variety  of  ridges,  hills,  vallies,
and  plains,  all  clothed  with  wood,  of  the  fame  appearance
with  that  which  has  been  particularly  defcribed :  the  land
near  the  fhore  is  in  general  low  and  fandy,  except  the  points,
which  are  rocky,  and  over  many  of  them  are  high  hills,
which,  at  their  firft  rifing  out  of  the  water,  have  the  appear-
ance of  iflands.  In  the  afternoon,  we  had  fome  fmall  rocky
iflands  between  us  and  the  land,  the  fouthermoft  of  which
lies  in  latitude  30*  10',  and  the  northermoft  in  29  °  58',  and
fomewhat  more  than  two  leagues  from  the  land:  about  two
miles  without  the  northermoft  ifland  we  had  thirty-three  fa-
thom water,  Having  the  advantage  of  a  moon,  we  fleered
along  the  more  all  night,  in  the  direction  of  N.  and  N.  by  E.
keeping  at  the  diftance  of  about  three  leagues  from  the  land,
and  having  from  twenty  to  twenty- five  fathom  water,  As
foon  as  it  was  light,  having  a  frefh  gale,  we  made  all  the
fail  we  could,  and  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  being  Tuaflayij.
about  a  league  from  the  fhore,  we  difcovered  fmoke  in
many  places,  and  having  recourfe  to  our  glafJes,  we  faw
about  twenty  of  the  natives,  who  had  each  a  large  bundle

\  upon


5i*  LIEUTENANT    COOR's    VOYAGE

i?r°.      upon  his  back,  -which  we  conjectured  to  be  palm  leaves  for

«. — „ 1   covering  their  houfes:  we  continued  to  obferve  them  above

''  iy  h'  an  hour,  during  which  they  walked  upon  the  beach,  and  up
a  path  that  led  over  a  hill  of  a  gentle  afcent,  behind  which
we  loft  fight  of  them  :  not  one  of  them  was  obferved  to  flop
and  look  towards  us,  but  they  trudged  along,  to  all  appear-
ance, without  the  leaft  emotion  either  of  curiofity  or  fur-
prize,  though  it  is  impoffible  they  mould  not  have  feen  the
fhip  by  a  cafual  glance  as  they  walked  along  the  fhore  ;  and
though  fhe  muft,  with  refpect  to  every  other  object  they  had
yet  feen,  have  been  little  lefs  ilupendous  and  unaccountable
than  a  floating  mountain  with  all  its  woods  would  have  been
to  us.  At  noon,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  280  39' S.,
and  longitude  2060  27'W.  Ahigh  point  of  land, which  I  named
Cape  Byron,  bore  N.  W.  by  W.  at  the  diftance  of  three  miles.
It  lies  in  latitude  28°  37'  30" S.,  longitude  206°  30'  W.  andmay
be  known  by  a  remarkable  fharp  peaked  mountain,  which
'  lies  inland,  and  bears  from  it  N.  W.  by  W.  From  this  point,
the  land  trends  N.  13  W. :  inland  it  is  high  and  hilly,  but
low  near  the  fhore  ;  to  the  fouthward  of  the  point  it  is  alfo
low  and  level.  We  continued  to  fleer  along  the'  more  with  a
frefh  gale,  till  fun-fet,  when  we  fuddenly  discovered
breakers  a-head,  directly  in  the  fhip's  courfe,  and  alfo  on
our  larboard  bow.  At  this  time  we  were  about  five  miles
from  the  land,  and  had  twenty  fathom  water:  we  hauled  up
eaft  till  eight,  when  we  had  run  eight  miles,  and  increafed
our  depth  of  water  to  forty-four  fathom:  we  then  brought
to,  with  the  fhip's  head  to  the  eaftvvard,  and  lay  upon  this
tack  till  ten,  when,  having  increafed  our  founding  to
feventy-eight  fathom,  we  wore,  and  lay  with  the  fhip's  head
Wednef.  16.  to  the  land  till  five  in  the  morning,  when  we  made  fail,  and
at  daylight,  were  greatly  furprized  to  find  ourfelves  farther
to  the  fouthward,  than  we  had  been  the  evening  before,

though


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  c r


though  the  wind  had  been  foutherly,  and  blown  frefh  all
night :  we  now  faw  the  breakers  again  within  us,  and  parled
them  at  the  diftance  of  one  league.  They  lie  in  latitude
280  8'S.  flretching  offeaft  two  leagues  from  a  point  of  land,
under  which  is  a  fmall  iiland.  Their  fituation  may  always
be  known  by  the  peaked  mountain  which  has  been  juft
mentioned,  and  which  bears  from  them  S.  W.  by  W.  for  this
reafon  I  have  named  it  Mount  Warning.  It  lies  feven  or
eight  leagues  inland,  in  latitude  280  22'  S.  The  land  about
it  is  high  and  hilly,  but  it  is  of  itfelf  fufficiently  confpicuous
to  be  at  once  diftinguifhed  from  every  other  object.  The
Point  off  which  thefe  fhoals  lie,  I  have  named  Point
Danger.  To  the  northward  of  this  Point  the  land  is  low»
and  trends  N.  W.  by  N. ;  but  it  foon  turns  again  more  to  the
northward.

At  noon,  we  were  about  two  leagues  from  the  land,  and
by  obfervation,  in  latitude  270  46' S.  which  was  feventeen
miles  to  the  fouthward  of  the  log  ;  our  longitude  was  206 °
26'  \V.  Mount  Warning  bore  S.  26  W.  diftant  fourteen  leagues,
and  the  northermoft  land  in  fight  bore  N.  We  purfued  our
courfe  along  the  more,  at  the  diftance  of  about  two  leagues,
in  the  direction  of  N.  1  E.  till  between  four  and  five  in  the
afternoon,  when  we  difcovered  breakers  on  our  larboard
bow.  Our  depth  of  water  was  thirty-feven  fathom,  and  at
fun-fet,  the  northermoft  land  bore  N.  byW.  the  breakers
N.  W.  by  W.  diftant  four  miles,  and  the  northermoft  land  fet
at  noon,  which  formed  a  point,  and  to  which  I  gave  the
name  of  Point  Look-out,  W.  diftant  five  or  iix  miles,  in
the  latitude  of  27  °  6'.  On  the  north  fide  of  this  Point,  the
fhore  forms  a  wide  open  bay,  which  I  called  Moreton's
Bay,  in  the  bottom  of  which  the  land  is  fo  low  that  I  could
but  juft  fee  it  from  the  top-maft  head.  The  breakers  lie  be-
tween three  and  four  miles  from  Point  Look-out ;  and  at  this

Vol.  II.  o  U  time


Wednef  16.


5I4  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770-       time  we  had  a  great  fea  from  the  fouthward,  which  broke
■    M^"'    .   upon   them  very  high.      We   Hood  on   N.N.E.   till   eight
Wednef.  16.    ^^^  w]ien  having  paffed  the  breakers,  and  deepened  our
water  to  fifty-two  fathom,  we  brought  to  till  midnight,  when
Thwfday  17.  we  made  fail  again  to  the  N.  N.  E.     At  four  in  the  morning,
we  had  135  fathom,  and  when  the  day  broke,  I  perceived
that  during  the  night  I  had  got  much  farther  northward,  and
from  the  fhore,  than  I  expected  from  the  courfe  we  fleered,
for  we  were  diftant  at  leaft  feven  leagues  ;  I  therefore  hauled
in  N.  W.  by  W.  with  a  frefh  gale  at  S.  S.  W.     The  land  that
was  farthefl  to  the  north  the  night  before,  now  bore  S,  S.  W.
diftant  fix  leagues,  and  I  gave  it  the  name  of  Cape  More-
tom,  it  being  the  north  point  of  Moreton's  Bay :  its  latitude  is
26  °  56',  and  its  longitude  is  206'  28'.     From  Cape  Moreton
the  land  trends  away  weft,  farther  than  can  be  feen,  for
there  is  a  fmall  fpace,  where  at  this  time  no  land  is  vifible,
and  fome  on  board  having  alfo  obferved  that  the  fea  looked
paler  than  ufual,  were  of  opinion  that  the  bottom  of  More-
ton's  Bay  opened  into  a  river :  we  had  here  thirty-four  fa-
thom water,  and  a  fine  fandy  bottom :  this  alone  would  have
produced  the  change  that  had  been  obferved  in  the  colour  of
the  water  ■■,  and  it  was  by  no  means  neceffary  to  fuppofe  a
river  to  account  for  the  land  at  the  bottom  of  the  Bay  not
being  vifible,  for  fuppofing  the  land  there  to  be  as  low  as  we.
knew  it  to  be  in  a  hundred  other  parts  of  the  coaft,  .it  would
have  been  impoflible  to  fee  it  from  the  ftation  of  the  fhip  y
however,  if  any  future  navigator  fhould  be  difpofed  to  de-
termine the  queftion,  whether  there  is  or  is  not  a  river  in
this  place,  which  the  wind  would  not  permit  us  to  do,  the
fituation  may  always  be  found  by  three  hills  which  lie  to  the
northward  of  it,  in  the  latitude  of  26 °  53".     Thefe  hills  lie
but  a  little  way  inland,  and  not  far  from  each  other:  they
are  remarkable  for  the   angular  form  of  their  elevation,

which.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  .;M

which  very  much  refembles  a  glafs-houfe,  and  for  which       1770.

reafon  I  called  them  the  Glass  Houses:  the  northermoft  of   1— ^ »

the  three  is  the  higheft  and  large  ft :  there  are  alfo  feveral
other  peaked  hills  inland  to  the  northward  of  thefe,  but  they
are  not  nearly  fo  remarkable.  At  noon,  our  latitude  was,  by
obfervation,  26°  28' S.  which  was  ten  miles  to  the  northward
of  the  log,  a  circumftance  which  had  never  before  happened
upon  this  coaft ;  our  longitude  was  206°  46'.  At  this  time
we  were  between  two  and  three  leagues  from  the  land,  and
had  twenty-four  fathom  ■  water.  A  low  bluff  point,  which
was  the  fouth  head  of  a  fandy  bay,  bore  N.  62  W.  diftant
three  leagues,  and  the  northermoft  point  of  land  in  fight
bore  N.  4.  E.  This  day  we  faw  fmoke  in  feveral  places,  and
fome  at  a  confiderable  diftance  inland.

In  fleering  along  the  more  at  the  diftance  of  two  leagues,
our  foundings  were  from  twenty-four  to  thirty-two  fathom,
with  a  fandy  bottom.  At  fix  in  the  evening,  the  norther-
moft point  of  land  bore  N.  ~  W.  diftant  four  leagues  ;  at  ten
it  bore  N.  W.  by  W.  t  W.  and  as  we  had  feen  no  land  to  the
northward  of  it,  we  brought  to,  not  well  knowing  which
way  to  fleer.

At  two  in  the  morning,  however,  we  made  fail  with  the  Friday  ts.
wind  at  S.  W.  and  at  daylight,  we  faw  the  land  extending  as
far  as  N.  4  E.  the  point  we  had  fet  the  night  before  bore  S.  W-
by  \V.  diftant  between  three  and  four  leagues.  It  lies  in  la-
titude 2j-°  58',  longitude  206 °  48'  W. :  the  land  within  it  is  of
a  moderate  and  equal  height,  but  the  point  itfelf  is  i~o  un-
equal, that  it  looks  like  two  fmall  iflands  lying  under  the
land,  for  which  reafon  I  gave  it  the  name  of  Double  Island
Point  -,  it  may  alfo  be  known  by  the  white  cliffs  on  the  north
fide  of  it.  Here  the  land  trends  to  the  N.  W.  and  forms  a
large  open  bay,  the  bottom  of  which  is  fo  low  a  flat  that

3  U  2  from


5i6  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770-      from  the  deck  it  could  fcarcely  be  feen.     In  crofling  this
« ^ — >   bay,  our  depth  of  water  was  from  thirty  to  twenty-two  fa-
thom, with  a  white  fandy  bottom.     At  noon,  we  were  about
three  leagues  from  the  more,  in  latitude  25 °  34'  S.  longitude
206°  45'  W. :  Double  Iiland  Point  bore  S.  ^W.  and  the  norther-
moft  land  in  fight  N.  \  E.     This  part  of  the  coafl,  which  is  of
a  moderate  height,  is  more  barren  than  any  we  had  feen,
and  the  foil  more  fandy.     With  our  glafles  we  could  difcover
that  the  fands,  which  lay  in  great  patches  of  many  acres,
were  moveable,  and  that  fome  of  them  had  not  been  long  in
the  place  they  pofiefTed  •■>  for  we  faw  in  feveral  parts,  trees
half  buried,    the  tops  of  which  were  Hill  green;    and  in
others,  the  naked  trunks  of  fuch  as  the  fand  had  furrounded
long  enough  to  deflroy.     In  other  places  the  woods  appeared
to  be  low  and  fhrubby,  and  we  faw  no  figns  of  inhabitants.
Two  water  makes  fwam  by  the  fhip :  they  were  beautifully
fpotced,  and  in  every  refpect  like  land  makes,  except  that
their  tails  were  broad  and  flat,  probably  to  ferve  them  inftead
of  fins  in  fwimming.     In  the  morning  of  this  day,  the  vari-
ation was  8°  20' E.  and  in  the  evening,  8°  36'.     During  the
night,  we  continued  our  courfe  to  the  northward,   with  a-
light  breeze  from  the  land,  being  diftant  from  it  between
two  and  three  leagues,    and  having  from  twenty-three  to
twenty- feven  fathom  with  a  fine  fandy  bottom.
Saturday  i9,       At  noon  on  the  19th,  we  were  about  four  miles  from  the
land,  with  only  thirteen  fathom.     Our  latitude  was  25 °  4',
and  the  northermoft  land  in  fight  bore  N.  21  W.  diflant  eight
miles.     At  one  o'clock,  being  flill  four  miles  diftant  from
the  fhorc,  but  having  fevcnteen  fathom  water,  we  pafTed  a<
black  bluff  head,  or  point  of  land,  upon  which  a  great  num*
bcr  of  the  natives  were  afTembled,  and  which  therefore  I
called  Indian  Head:  it  lies  in  latitude  250  3'.     About  four
miles  N.  by  W.  of  this  Head,  is  another  very  like  it,  from1

whence


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  517

whence  the  land  trends  away  fomewhat  more  to  the  weft-       1770.

May.

ward :  next  to  the  fea  it  is  low  and  fandy,  and  behind  it


nothing  was  to  be  feen,  even  from  the  maft-head.  Near  atur  y'9"
Indian  Head  we  faw  more  of  the  natives,  and  upon  the
neighbouring  fhore  fires  by  night,  and  imoke  by  day.  We
kept  to  the  northward  all  night,  at  the  diftance  of  from  four
miles  to  four  leagues  from  the  more,  and  with  a  depth  of
water  from  feventeen  to  thirty-four  fathom.  At  day-break,  Sunday  z<r.
the  northermoft  land  bore  from  us  W.  S.  W.  and  feemed  to
end  in  a  point,  from  which  we  discovered  a  reef  running
out  to  the  northward  as  far  as  we  could  fee.  We  had  hauled
our  wind  to  the  weftward  before  it  was  light,  and  contimied
the  courfe  till  we  faw  the  breakers  upon  our  lee  bow.  We
now  edged  away  N.  W.  and  N.  N.  W.  along  the  eaft  fide  of
the  fhoal,  from  two  to  one  mile  diftant,  having  regular
foundings  from  thirteen  to  feven  fathom,  with  a  fine  fandy
bottom.  At  noon,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  24  °  26',
which  was  thirteen  miles  to  the  northward  of  the  log:  we
judged  the  extream  point  of  the  fhoal  to  bear  from  us  about
N.W.  and  the  point  from  which  it  feemed  to  run  out,  bore
S.  i-W.  diftant  twenty  miles.  This  point  I  named  Sandy
Cape,  from  two  very  large  patches  of  white  fand  which  lay
upon  it.  It  is  fufficiently  high  to  be  feen  at  the  diftance  of
twelve  leagues,  in  clear  weather,  and  lies  in  latitude  24 °  45',
longitude  2c<5°  51":  the  land  trends  from  it  S.  W.  as  faras  can
be  feen.  We  kept  along  the  eaft  fide  of  the  fhoal  till  two  in
the  afternoon,  when,  judging  that  there  was  a  fufficient
depth  of  water  upon  it  to  allow  paffage  for  the  fliip,  I  fent<
the  boat  r-head  to  found,  and  upon  her  making  the  fignal
for  more  than  five  fathom,  we  hauled  our  wind,  and  ftood
over  the  tail  of  it  in  fix  fathom.  At  this  time  we  were  in  la-
titude 240  22',  and  Sandy  Cape  bore  S.  7  E.  diftant  eight
leagues ;  but  the  direction  of  the  fhoal  is  neareil  N.  N.  W.

and


SiB  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°-      and  S.  S.  E.     It  is  remarkable  that  when  on  board  the  fhip

' r—rf   we  had  fix  fathom,  the  boat,  which  was  fcarcely  a  quarter

of  a  mile  to  the  fouthward,  had  little  more  than  five,  and
that  immediately  after  fix  fathom  we  had  thirteen,  and  then
twenty,  as  fail  as  the  man  could  call  the  lead:  from  thefe
circumftances,  I  conjectured  that  the  weft  fide  of  the  fhoal
was  fteep.  This  fhoal  I  called  the  Break  Sea  Spit,  becaufe
we  had  now  fmooth  water,  and  to  the  fouthward  of  it  we
had  always  a  high  fea  from  the  S.  E.  At  fix  in  the  evening,
the  land  of  Sandy  Cape  extended  from  S.  17  E.  to  S.  27  E.  at
the  diftarfce  of  eight  leagues ;  our  depth  of  water  was  twenty-
three  fathom:  with  the  fame  foundings  we  flood  to  the  weft-
Monday  21.  Ward  all  night.  At  feven  in  the  morning,  we  faw,  from  the
maft-head,  the  land  of  Sandy  Cape  bearing  S.  E.  4  E.  diftant
about  thirteen  leagues:  at  nine,  we  difcovered  land  to  the
weft  ward,  and  foon  after  faw  fmoke  in  feveral  places.  Our
depth  of  water  was  now  decreafed  to  feventeen  fathom,  and
by  noon  we  had  no  more  than  thirteen,  though  we  were
feven  leagues  from  the  land,  which  extended  from  S.  by  W.
to  W.  N.  W.  Our  latitude  at  this  time  was  24°  28'S.  For  a
few  days  paft  we  had  feen  feveral  of  the  fea  birds  called  boo-
bies, not  having  met  with  any  of  them  before  ;  laft  night  a
fmall  flock  of  them  palled  the  fhip,  and  went  away  to  the
N.  W.  and  in  the  morning,  from  about  half  an  hour  before
fun- rife,  to  half  an  hour  after,  flights  of  them  were  con-
tinually coming  from  the  N.  N.  W.  and  flying  to  the  S.  S.  E.
nor  was  one  of  them  feen  to  fly  in  any  other  direction;
we  therefore  conjectured  that  there  was  a  lagoon,  river,  or
inlet  of  mallow  water,  in  the  bottom  of  the  deep  bay,  to  the
fouthward  of  us,  whither  thefe  birds  reforted  to  feed  in  the
day,  and  that  not  far  to  the  northward  there  were  fome
iflands  to  which  they  repaired  in  the  night.  To  this  bay  I
gave  the  name  of  He  rve  y's  B  a  y,  in  honour  of  Captain  Hervey.

In


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


519


In  the  afternoon,   we  flood  in  for  the  land,  fleering  S.  W.       177°-

May.

with  a  gentle  breeze  at  S  E.  till  four  o'clock,  when,  being    l, _,_'  _,

in  latitude  240  36',  about  two  leagues  from  the  more,  and  on  ay21,
having  nine  fathom  water,  we  bore  away  along  the  coaft
N.  W.  by  W.  and  at  the  fame  time  could  fee  land  extending
to  the  S.  S.  E.  about  eight  leagues.  Near  the  fea  the  land  is
very  low,  but  within  there  are  fome  lofty  hills,  all  thickly
clothed  with  wood.  While  we  were  running  along  the
fhore,  we  fhallowed  our  water  from  nine  to  feven  fathom,
and  at  one  time  we  had  but  fix,  which  determined  us  to  an-
chor for  the  night.

At  fix  in  the  morning  we  weighed,  with  a  gentle  breeze  Tucfday  22.
from  the  fouthward,  and  fleered  N.  W.  -  W.  edging  in  for
the  land  till  we  got  within  two  miles  of  it,  with  water  from
feven  to  eleven  fathom:  we  then  fleered  N.  N.  W.  as  the
land  lay,  and  at  noon,  our  latitude  was  240  19.  We  conti-
nued in  the  fame  courfe,  at  the  fame  diflance,  with  from
twelve  fathom  to  feven,  till  five  in  the  evening,  when  we
were  abreafl  of  the  fouth  point  of  a  large  open  bay,  in  which
I  intended  to  anchor.  During  this  courfe,  we  difcovered
with  our  glafles  that  the  land  was  covered  with  palm-nut-
trees,  which  we  had  not  feen  from  the  time  of  our  leaving
the  iflands  within  the  Tropick :  we  alfo  faw  two  men  walk-
ing along  the  fhore,  who  did  not  condefcend  to  take  the  leafl
notice  of  us.  In  the  evening,  having  hauled  clofe  upon  a
wind,  and  made  two  or  three  trips,  we  anchored  about  eight
©'clock  in  five  fathom,  with  a  fine  fandy  bottom.  The  fouth
point  of  the  bay  bore  E.  1  S.  diflant  two  miles,  the  north
point  N.  W.  ^  N.  and  about  the  fame  diflance  from  the  fhore.

Early  the  next  morning  I  went  afhore,    with  a  party  of  Wednef.  23,.
men,  in  order  to  examine  the  country,  accompanied  by  Mr.
Banks,  Dr.  Solander,.  the  other  gentlemen,  and  Tupia :  the

i  wind.


52©  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.       wind  blew  frefh,  and  we  found  it  fo  cold,  that  being  at  fome

May.  °

' , 1   diftance  from  the  more,  we  took  our  cloaks  as  a  neceffary

Wcdnef.  2%,

equipment  for  the  voyage.  We  landed  a  little  within  the
fouth  point  of  the  bay,  where  we  found  a  channel  leading
into  a  large  lagoon:  this  channel  I  proceeded  to  examine,
and  found  three  fathom  water  till  I  got  about  a  mile  up  it,
where  I  met  with  a  fhoal,  upon  which  there  was  little  more
than  one  fathom,  but  having  palled  over  it,  I  had  three  fa-
thom again.  The  entrance  of  this  channel  lies  clofe  to  the
fouth  point  of  the  bay,  being  formed  by  the  more  on  the
eaft,  and  on  the  weft  by  a  large  fpit  of  fand:  it  is  about  a
quarter  of  a  mile  broad,  and  lies  in  S.  by  W.  In  this
place  there  is  room  for  a  few  fhips  to  lie  in  great  fecurity,
and  a  fmall  dream  of  frefh  water  ;  I  would  have  rowed  into
the  lagoon,  but  was  prevented  by  mallows.  We  found
feveral  bogs,  and  fwamps  of  fait  water,  upon  which,  and
by  the  fides  of  the  lagoon,  grows  the  true  mangrove,  fuch
as  is  found  in  the  Well  Indies,  and  the  firft  of  the  kind  that
we  had  met  with.  In  the  branches  of  thefe  mangroves  there
were  many  nefts  of  a  remarkable  kind  of  ant,  that  was  as
green  as  grafs :  when  the  branches  were  difturbed  they  came
out  in  great  numbers,  and  puniflied  the  offender  by  a  much
fharper  bite  than  ever  we  had  felt  from  the  fame  kind  of
animal  before.  Upon  thefe  mangroves  alfo  we  faw  fmall
green  caterpillars  in  great  numbers  :  their  bodies  were  thick
fet  with  hairs,  and  they  were  ranged  upon  the  leaves  fide  by
fide  like  a  file  of  foldiers,  to  the  number  of  twenty  or  thirty
together:  when  we  touched  them,  we  found  that  the  hair
on  their  bodies  had  the  quality  of  a  nettle,  and  gave  us  a
much  more  acute,  though  lefs  durable  pain.  The  country
here  is  manifeftly  worfe  than  about  Botany  Bay :  the  foil  is
dry  and  fandy,  but  the  fides  of  the  hills  are  covered  with
trees,    which  grow  feparately,   without  underwood.      We

found


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  Szi


May.

Wednef.  2


found  here  the  tree  that  yields  a  gum  like  the  Sanguis  draco-  1770
nls  i  but  it  is  fomewhat  different  from  the  trees  of  the  fame
kind  which  we  had  feen  before,  for  the  leaves  are  longer,
and  hang  down  like  thofe  of  the  weeping  willow.  We  found
alfo  much  lefs  gum  upon  them,  which  is  contrary  to  the
eftablifhed'  opinion,  that  the  hotter  the  climate,  the  more
gums  exude.  Upon  a  plant  alfo,  which  yielded  a  yellow
gum,  there  was  lefs  than  upon  the  fame  kind  of  plant  in
Botany  Bay.  Among  the  fhoals  and  fand-banks  we  faw
many  large  birds,  fome  in  particular  of  the  fame  kind  that
we  had  feen  in  Botany  Bay,  much  bigger  than  fwans,  which
we  judged  to  be  pelicans ;  but  they  were  fo  my  that  we
could  not  get  within  gun-mot  of  them.  Upon  the  more  we
faw  a  fpecies  of  the  buflard,  one  of  which  we  fhot,  it  was
as  large  as  a  turkey,  and  weighed  feventeen  pounds  and  an
half.  We  all  agreed  that  this  was  the  bell  bird  we  had  eaten
fince  we  left  England  ;  and  in  honour  of  it  we  called  this
inlet  Bustard  Bay.  It  lies  in  latitude  240  4',  longitude
2080  18'.  The  fea  feemed  to  abound  with  filh  ;  but,  unhap-
pily, we  tore  our  feine  all  to  pieces  at  the  firft  haul :  upon
the  mud-banks,  under  the  mangroves,  we  found  innume-
rable oyfters  of  various  kinds  ;  among  others  the  hammer-
oyfler,  and  a  large  proportion  of  fmall  pearl-oyfters :  if  in
deeper  water  there  is  equal  plenty  of  fuch  oyflers  at  their
full  growth,  a  pearl  fifhery  might  certainly  be  eftablifhed
here  to  very  great  advantage.

The  people  who  were  left  on  board  the  mip  faid,  that  while
we  were  in  the  woods  about  twenty  of  the  natives  came
down  to  the  beach,  abreaft  of  her,  and  having  looked  at  her
fometime,  went  away  ;  but  we  that  were  afliore,  though  we
faw  fmoke  in  many  places,  faw  no  people  :  the  fmoke  was
at  places  too  diftant  for  us  to  get  to  them  by  land,  except  one,

Vol.  II.  3  X  to


Sl2  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      to  which  we  repaired  :  we  found  ten  fmall  fires  ftill  burnin  a*

May.  •  1  •

■  — .-  _f  within  a  few  paces  of  each  other ;  but  the  people  were
Wednef.  23.  g0ne  .  we  faw  near  them  feveral  veffels  of  bark,  which  we
fuppofed  to  have  contained  water,  and  fome  fhells  and  fifh-
bones,  the  remains  of  a  recent  meal.  We  faw  alfo,  lying
upon  the  ground,  feveral  pieces  of  foft  bark,  about  the
length  and  breadth  of  a  man,  which  we  imagined  might  be
their  beds ;  and,  on  the  windward  fide  of  the  fires,  a  fmall
fhade,  about  a  foot  and  a  half  high,  of  the  fame  fubftance.
The  whole  was  in  a  thicket  of  clofe  trees,  which  afforded
good  fhelter  from  the  wind.  The  place  feemed  to  be  much
trodden,  and  as  we  faw  no  houfe,  nor  any  remains  of  a  houfe,
we  were  inclined  to  believe  that  as  thefe  people  had  no
clothes,  they  had  no  dwelling;  but  fpent  their  nights,  among
the  other  commoners  of  Nature,  in  the  open  air :  and  Tupia
himfelf,  with  an  air  of  fuperiority  and  companion,  fhook
his  head,  and  faid  that  they  were  Taata  Enos,  c  poor  wretches*
I  meafured  the  perpendicular  height  of  the  laft  tide,  and
found  it  to  be  eight  feet  above  low-water  mark,  and  from
the  time  of  low-water  this  day,  I  found  that  it  mull  be  bight-
water  at  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon  at  eight  o'clock.

Thurfda^24.  At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  we  weighed,  and  with  a.
gentle  breeze  at  fouth  made  fail  out  of  the  bay.  In  Handing
out  our  foundings  were  from  five  to  fifteen  fathom  ;  and  at
day-light,  when  we  were  in  the  greateft  depth,  and  abreaft
of  the  north  head  of  the  bay,  we  difcovered  breakers  ftretcft-
ing  out  from  it  N.N.E.  between  two  and  three  miles,  with  a
rock  at  the  outermoft  point  of  them,  juft  above  water.  While
we  were  parting  thefe  rocks,  at  the  diftance  of  about  half  a
mile,  we  had  from  fifteen  to  twenty  fathom,  and  as  foon
as  we  had  pafTed  them,  we  hauled  along  more  W.N.  W.  for
the  farmed  land  we  had  in  fight.    At  noon,  our  latitude  by

observation


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  52J

obfervation  was  23  °  52'  S. ;  the  north  part  of  Buflard  Bay  bore       1770.

S.  62  E.  diflant  ten  miles  ;  and  the  northermofl  land  in  fight  ■      ay'_r

N.  60  W. ;  the  longitude  was  208 "  37',  and  our  diflancefrom  Thurfday2*'
the  nearefl  fhore  fix  miles,  with  fourteen  fathom  water.

Till  five  in  the  afternoon  it  was  calm,  but  afterwards  we
fleered  before  the  wind  N.W.  as  the  land  lay  till  ten  at  night,
and  then  brought  to,  having  had  all  along  fourteen  and  fif-
teen fathom.  At  five  in  the  morning  we  made  fail ;  and  at  Fn<*ay  2j.
day-light  the  northermofl  point  of  the  main  bore  N.  70  W.
Soon  after  we  faw  more  land,  making  like  iflands,  and  bear-
ing N.  W.  by  N.  At  nine,  we  were  abreafl  of  the  point,  at
the  diflance  of  one  mile,  with  fourteen  fathom  water.  This
point  I  found  to  lie  directly  under  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn ;
and  for  that  reafon  I  called  it  Cape  Capricorn  :  its  longitude
is  2c8*  58'W.:  it  is  of  a  confiderable  height,  looks  whiteand
barren,  and  may  be  known  by  fome  iflands  which  lie  to  the
N.  W.  of  it,  and  fome  fmall  rocks  at  the  diflance  of  about  a
league  S.  E.  On  the  weft  fide  of  the  Cape  there  appeared  to
be  a  lagoon,  and  on  the  two  fpits  which  formed  the  entrance
we  faw  an  incredible  number  of  the  large  birds  that  refemble
a  pelican.  The  northermofl  land  now  in  fight  bore  from
Cape  Capricorn  N.  24  W.  and  appeared  to  be  an  if] and  ;  but
the  main  land  trended  W.  by  N.-i  N.  which  courfe  we  fleered,
having  from  fifteen  to  fix  fathom,  and  from  fix  to  nine,  with  a
hard  fandy  bottom.  At  noon,  our  latitude  by  obfervation  was
230  24'  S. ;  Cape  Capricorn  bore  S.  60  E.  diflant  two  leagues  ;
and  a  fmall  ifland  N.  by  E.  two  miles  :  in  this  fituation  we
had  nine  fathom,  being  about  four  miles  from  the  main,
which,  next  the  fea,  is  low  and  fandy,  except  the  points
which  are  high  and  rocky.  The  country  inland  is  hilly,  but
by  no  means  of  a  pleafing  afpecl.  We  continued  to  ftand  to
the  N.W.  till  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  it  fell

3X2  calm ;


J24  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  calm ;  and  we  foon  after  anchored  in  twelve  fathom,  having
*y*  ■  the  main  land  and  iilands  in  a  manner  all  round  us,  and
Friday  25.  Cape  Capricorn  bearing  S.  54  E.  diftant  four  leagues.  In  the
night,  we  found  the  tide  rife  and  fall  near  feven  feet;  and
the  flood  to  fet  to  the  weflward,  and  the  ebb  to  the  eaflward,
which  is  jufl  contrary  to  what  we  found  when  we  were  at
anchor  to  the  eaftward  of  Buftard  Bay.

Saturday  z6.       At  fix  in  the  morning  we  weighed,  with  a  gentle  breeze
at  South,  and  flood  away  to  the  N.  W.  between  the  outer-
moll  range  of  iilands  and  the  main,  leaving  feveral  fmall
iilands  between  the  main  and  the  fhip,  which  we  palled  at
a  very  little  diflance :  our  foundings  being  irregular,  from
twelve  to  four  fathom,  I  fent  a  boat  ahead  to  found.    At
noon  we  were  about  three  miles  from  the  main,  and  about
the  fame  diftance  from  the  iflands  without  us :  our  latitude
by  obfervation  was  23°  7'S. :  the  main  land  here  is  high  and
mountainous  ;  the  iflands  which  lie  off  it  are  alfo  moft  of
them  high,  and  of  a  fmall  circuit,  having  an  appearance
rather  of  barrennefs  than  fertility.     At  this  time  we  faw
fmoke  in  many  places  at  a  confiderable  diflance  inland,  and
therefore  conjectured  that  there  might  be  a  lagoon,  river,  or
inlet  running  up  the  country,  the  rather  as  we  had  pafTed
two  places  which  had  the  appearance  of  being  fuch  ;  but  our
depth  of  water  was  too  little  to  encourage  me  to  venture
where  I  fnould  probably  have  lefs.     We  had  not  flood  to  the
northward  above  an  hour,  before  we  fuddenly  fell  into  three
fathom  ;  upon  which  I  anchored,  and  fent  away  the  Mafler
to  found  the  channel  which  lay  to  leeward  of  us,  between
the  northermoit  ifland  and  the  main  :   it   appeared  to  be
pretty  broad,  but  I  fufpec~ted  that  it  was  fhallow,  and  fo  in-
deed it  was  found  ;    for  the  mafler  reported  at  his  return
that   in  many   places   he  had  only    two  fathom    and   an
6  half,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  S2$

half,  and  where  we  lay  at  anchor  we  had  only  fixteen  feet,  1.770.
which  was  not  two  feet  more  than  the  fhip  drew.  While  the  <  -vay'_>
mafter  was  founding  the  channel,  Mr.  Banks  tried  to  fifh  from  Saturday  26*
the  cabbin  windows  with  hook  and  line  :  the  water  was  too
fhallow  for  fifh ;  but  the  ground  was  almoft  covered  with
crabs,  which  readily  took  the  bait,  and  fomctimes  held  it  fo
fall  in  their  claws,  that  they  did  not  quit  their  hold  till  they
were  confiderably  above  water.  Thefe  crabs  were  of  two
forts,  and  both  of  them  fuch  as  we  had  not  feen  before:  one
of  them  was  adorned  with  the  finefl  blue  that  can  be  ima-
gined, in  every  refpecl  equal  to  the  ultramarine,  with  which
all  his  claws,  and  every  joint  was  deeply  tinged:  the  under
part  of  him  was  white,  and  fo  exquifitely  polifhed  that  in
colour  and  brightnefs  it  exactly  refembled  the  white  of  old
china:  the  other  was  alfo  marked  with  the  ultramarine  upon
his  joints,  and  his  toes,  but  fomewhat  more  fparingly ;  and
his  back  was  marked  with  three  brown  fpots  which  had  a
fingular  appearance.  The  people  who  had  been  out  with
the  boat  to  found,  reported,  that  upon  an  ifland  where  we
had  obferved  two  fires,  they  had  feen  feveral  of  the  inhabi-
tants, who  called  to  them,  and  feemed  very  defirous  that
they  mould  land.  In  the  evening,  the  wind  veered  to  E.N.E.
which  gave  us  an  opportunity  to  flretch  three  or  four  miles
back  by  the  way  we  came  ;  after  which,  the  wind  fhifted  to
the  South,  and  obliged  us  again  to  anchor  in  fix  fathom.

At  five  in  the  morning,  I  fent  away  the  Mafter  to  fearch  SunJay  27,
for  a  pafTage  between  the  iflands,  while  we  got  the  fhip  un-
der fail ;  and  as  foon  as  it  was  light  we  followed  the  boat,
which  made  a  fignal  that  a  pafiage  had  been  found.  As  foon  as
we  got  again  into  deep  water,  we  made  fail  to  the  ndrthward,
as  the  land  lay,  with  foundings  from  nine  fathom  to  fifteen,
and  fome  fmall  iflands  ftill  without  us,    At  noon  we  were

about


526  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  about  two  leagues  diftant  from  the  main  ;  and  by  obferva-
»— -^~ 1  tion  in  latitude  22°  si  S.  The  northermofl  point  of  land  in
Sunday .27.  fight  nQw  bore  N-NiW.  diftant  ten  miles.  To  this  point  I
gave  the  name  of  Cape  Manifold,  from  the  number  of  high
hills  which  appeared  over  it :  it  lies  in  latitude  22  °  43' S.  and
diftant  about  feventeen  leagues  from  Cape  Capricorn,  in  the
direction  of  N.  26  W.  Between  thefe  Capes  the  more  forms
a  large  bay,  which  I  called  Keppel  Bay  ;  and  1  alfo  diftin-
guifhed  the  iflands  by  the  name  of  Keppel's  Islands.  In
this  bay  there  is  good  anchorage  ;  but  what  refrefhments  it
may  afford,  I  know  not :  we  caught  no  nth,  though  we  were
at  anchor ;  but  probably  there  is  f rem  water  in  feveral  places,
as  both  the  iflands  and  the  main  are  inhabited.  We  faw
fmoke  and  fires  upon  the  main;  and  upon  the  iflands  we
faw  people.  At  three  in  the  afternoon,  we  paffed  Cape  Ma-
nifold, from  which  the  lands  trends  N.N.W.  The  land  of
the  Cape  is  high,  rifing  in  hills  directly  from  the  fea ;  and
may  be  known  by  three  iflands  which  lie  off  it,  one  of  them
near  the  more,  and  the  other  two  eight  miles  out  at  fea.  One
of  thefe  iflands  is  low  and  flat,  and  the  other  high  and
round.  At  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening  we  brought  to,  when
the  northermofl  part  of  the  main  in  fight  bore  N.W.  and
fome  iflands  which  lie  off  it  N.  31  W.  Our  foundings  after*
twelve  o'clock  were  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  fathom,  and
in  the  night  from  thirty  to  thirty-four.

Monday  28.  At  day-break  we  made  fail,  Cape  Manifold  bearing  S.by  E.
diftant  eight  leagues,  and  the  iflands  which  I  had  fet  the
night  before  were  diftant  four  miles  in  the  fame  direction.
The  fartheft  vifible  point  of  the  main  bore  N.  67  W.  at  the
diftance  of  twenty-two  miles  ;  but  we  could  fee  feveral
iflands  to  the  northward  of  this  direction.  At  nine  o'clock
in  the  forenoon,  we  were  abrcaft  of  the  point  which  I  called

5  Cape


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  527

Gape  Townshend.     It  lies  in  latitude  220   15';  longitude       jjjo.
20Q0  4r< :  the  land  is  high  and  level,  and  rather  naked  than   1 ^Lj

,  1  1       r-  i        jt     Monday  *g.

woody.  Several  iflands  lie  to  the  northward  or  it,  at  the  dil-
tance  of  four  or  five  miles  out  at  fea  ;  three  or  four  leagues
to  the  S.  E.  the  more  forms  a  bay,  in  the  bottom  of  which
there  appeared  to  be  an  inlet  or  harbour.  To  the  weftward
of  'he  Cape  the  land  trends  S.W.  1 S.  and  there  forms  a
very  large  bay  which  turns  to  the  eafhvard,  and  probably
communicates  with  the  inlet,  and  makes  the  land  of  the
Cape  an  iiland.  As  foon  as  we  got  round  this  Cape,  we
hauled  our  wind  to  the  weftward,  in  order  to  get  within  the
iflands,  which  lie  fcattered  in  the  bay  in  great  numbers,  and
extend  out  to  fea  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  even  from  the
mart-head  :  thefe  iflands  vary  both  in  height  and  circuit  from
each  other ;  fo  that,  although  they  are  very  numerous,  no
two  of  them  are  alike.  We  had  not  flood  long  upon  a  wind
before  we  came  into  fhoal  water,  and  were  obliged  to  tack
at  once  to  avoid  it.  Having  fent  a  boat  ahead,  I  bore  away
W.  by  N.  many  fmall  iflands,  rocks,  and  fhoals,  lying  be-
tween us  and  the  main,  and  many  of  a  larger  extent  with-
out us :  our  foundings  till  near  noon  were  from  fourteen  to
feventeen  fathom,  when  the  boat  made  the  figual  for  meet-
ing with  fhoal  water :  upon  this  we  hauled  clofe  upon  a
wind  to  the  eaftward,  but  fuddenly  fell  into  three  fathom
and  a  quarter?  we  immediately  dropped  an  anchor,  which
brought  the  fhip  up  with  all  her  fails  Handing..  When  the
fhip  was  brought  up  we  had  four  fathom,  with  a  coarfe
fandy  bottom,  and  found  a  flrong  tide  fetting  to  the  N.  W.
by  W.  1.  W.  at  the  rate  of  near  three  miles  an  hour,  by
which  we  were  fo  fuddenly  carried  upon  the  fhoal.  Our
latitude  by  obfervation  was  220  8'  S. ;  Cape  Townfhend  bore
E.  16S.  diflant  thirteen  miles  j  and  the  weftermofl  part  of

the


5*8  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.       the  main  in  fight  W.  ±  N.    At  this  time  a  great  number  of
._  _a-  j    iflands  lay  all  round  us.

Monday  28.

In  the  afternoon,  having  founded  round  the  fhip,  and
found  that  there  was  water  fufficient  to  carry  her  over  the
fhoal,  we  weighed,  and  about  three  o'clock  made  fail  and
flood  to  the  weftward,  as  the  land  lay,  having  fent  a  boat
ahead  to  found.  At  fix  in  the  evening,  we  anchored  in  ten
fathom,  with  a  fandy  bottom,  at  about  two  miles  diftance
from  the  main  ;  the  weftermoft  part  of  which  bore  W.  N.W.
and  a  great  number  of  iflands,  lying  a  long  way  without  us,
were  Hill  in  fight.

Ti-efday  29.       At  five  o'clock  the  next  morning,  I  fent  away  the  Matter
with  two  boats  to  found  the  entrance  of  an  inlet  which  bore
from  us  weft,  at  about  the  diftance  of  a  league,  into  which
I  intended  to  go  with  the  fhip,  that  I  might  wait  a  few  days
till  the  moon  mould  encreafe,  and  in  the  mean  time  examine
the  country.   As  foon  as  the  fhip  could  be  got  under  fail,  the
boats  made  the  fignal  for  anchorage  ;  upon  which  we  flood
in,  and  anchored  in  five  fathom  water,  about  a  league  within
the  entrance  of  the  inlet ;  which,  as  I  obferved  a  tide  to  flow
and  ebb  confiderably,  I  judged  to  be  a  river  that  ran  up  the
country  to  a   confiderable  diftance.      In  this    place  I  had
thoughts  of  laying  the  fhip  afhore,  and  cleaning  her  bottom;
I  therefore  landed  with  the  Mafter  in  fearch  of  a  convenient
place  for  that  purpofe,  and  was  accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks
and  Dr.  Solander.  We  found  walking  here  exceedingly  trouble-
fome,  for  the  ground  was  covered  with  a  kind  of  grafs,  the  feeds
of  which  were  very  fharp  and  bearded  backwards  j  fo  that
whenever  they  ftuck  into  our  clothes,  which  indeed  was  at
every  ftep,  they  worked  forwards  by  means  of  the  beard,
till  they  got  at  the  flefli ;  and  at  the  fame  time  we  were  fur-
rounded  by  a  cloud  of  mufquitos,  which  incefTantly  tor-
mented


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  527

merited  us  with  their  flings.     We  foon  met  with  feveral      1770.
places  where  the  fhip  might  conveniently  be  laid  afhore ;   ■    -.-'_,
but  to  our  great  difappointment  we  could  find  no  frefli  wa-  Tuefday  *9'
tcr.     We  proceeded  however  up   the  country,  where  we
found  gum  trees  like  thofe  that  we  had  feen  before,  and
obferved  that  here  alfo  the  gum  was  in  very  fmall  quanti-
ties.  Upon  the  branches  of  thefe  trees,  and  fome  others,  we
found  ants  nefts,  made  of  clay,  as  big  as  a  bufhel,  fomething
like  thofe  defcribed  in  Sir  Hans  Sloan's  Natural  Hiftory  of
Jamaica,  vol.  ii.  p.  221,  tab.  258,  but  not  fo  fmooth:  the  ants
which   inhabited  thefe  nefts  were  fmall,  and  their  bodies
white.  But  upon  another  fpecies  of  the  tree  we  found  a  fmall
black  ant,  which  perforated  all  the  twigs,  and  having  worked
out  the  pith,  occupied  the  pipe  which  had  contained  it ;  yet
the  parts  in  which  thefe  infecls  had  thus  formed  a  lodg-
ment, and  in  which  they  fwarmed  in  amazing  numbers,
bore  leaves  and  flowers,  and  appeared  to  be  in  as  flourifhing
a  ftate  as  thofe  that  were  found.    We  found  alfo  an  incre-
dible number  of  butterflies,  fo  that  for  the  fpace  of  three  or
four  acres  the  air  was  fo  crowded  with  them  that  millions
were  to  be  feen  in  every  direction,  at  the  fame  time  that
every  branch  and  twig  was  covered  with  others  that  were
not  upon  the  wing.     We  found  here  alfo  a  fmall  fifh  of  a
fingular  kind ;  it  was  about  the  fize  of  a  minnow,  and  had
two  very  ftrong  breaft  fins :  we  found  it  in  places  that  were
quite  dry,  where  we  fuppofed  it  might  have  been  left  by  the
tide  ;  but  it  did  not  feem  to  have  become  languid  by  the
want  of  water ;  for  upon  our  approach  it  leaped  away,  by
the  help  of  the  breaft  fins,  as  nimbly  as  a  frog  :  neither  in-
deed did  it  feem  to  prefer  water  to  land  ;  for  when  we  found
it  in  the  water,  it  frequently  leaped  out,  and  purfued  its  way
upon  dry  ground :  we  alfo  obferved  that  when  it  was  in
places  where  fmall  ftones  were  flanding  above  the  furface
Vol.  II.  3  Y  of


S$o


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


1770.      of  the  water  at  a  little  diftance  from  each  other,  it  chofe  ra-
y    ay'  _■    ther  to  leap  from  ftone  to.  ftone,  than  to  pafs  through  the
ue  ay  29.    water  .  amj  we  faw  feveral  0f  them  pafs  entirely  over  pud-
dles in  this  manner,  till  they  came  to  dry  ground,  and  then-
leap  away.

In  the  afternoon  we  renewed  our  fearch  after  freffi  water,
but  without  fuccefs;  and  therefore  I  determined  to  make  my
flay  here  but  fhort:  however,  having  obferved  from  an  emi-
nence that  the  inlet  penetrated  a  confiderable  way  into  the
country,  I  determined  to  trace  it  in  the  morning:

Wednef  30.  At  fun-rife  I  went  afhore,  and  climbing  a  confiderable  hill,.
I  took  a  view  of  the  coaft  and  the  iflands  that  lie  off  it,  with,
their  bearings,  having  an  azimuth  compafs  with  me  for
that  purpofe ;  but  I  obferved  that  the  needle  differed  very
confiderably  in  its  pofition,  even  to  thirty  degrees,  in  fome
places  more,  in  others  lefs  ;  and  once  I  found  it  differ  from,
itfelf  no  lefs  than  two  points  in  the  diftance  of  fourteen  feet.
I  took  up  fome  oi  the  loofe  ftones  that  lay  upon  the  ground,
and  applied  them  to  die  needle,  but  they  produced  no  effect;
and  I  therefore  concluded  that  there  was  iron  ore  in  the  hills,
of  which  I  had  remarked  other  indications  both  here,  and  in
the  neighbouring  parts.  After  I  had  made  my  obfervations
upon  the  hill,  I  proceeded  with  Dr.  Solander  up  the  inlet ;  I
fet  out  with  the  firft  of  the  flood,  and  long  before  high-
water  I  had  advanced  above  eight  leagues.  Its  breadth  thus
far  was  from  two  to  five  miles,  upon  a  S.  \V.  by  S.  direction ;
but  here  it  opened  every  way,  and  formed  a  large  lake,
which  to  the  N.  \V.  communicated  with  the  fea  ;  and  I  not
only  faw  the  fea  in  this  direction,  but  found  the  tide  of
flood  coming  ftrongly  in  from  that  point :  I  alfo  obferved  an.
arm  of  this  lake  extending  to  the  eaftward,  and  it  is  not  im-
probable that  it  may  communicate  with  the  fea  in  the  bot-
tom


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


53*


torn  of  the  bay,  which  lies  to  the  weftward  of  Cape  Town-  1770.
ihcnd.  On  the  fouth  fide  of  the  lake  is  a  ridge  of  high  hills  ■  -."-'_/
which  I  was  very  defirous  to  climb;  but  it  being  high-water,  We  ne*  3°*
and  the  day  far  fpent,  I  was  afraid  of  being  bewildered
among  the  flioals  in  the  night,  efpecially  as  the  weather  was
dark  and  rainy  ;  and  therefore  I  made  the  bell  of  my  way  to
the  fliip.  In  this  excurfion  I  faw  only  two  people,  and  they
were  at  a  diftance ;  they  followed  the  boat  along  the  fhore  a
good  way,  but  the  tide  running  ftrongly  in  my  favour  I  could
not  prudently  wait  for  them :  I  faw  however  feveral  fires  in
one  direction,  and  fmoke  in  another,  but  they  alfo  were  at  a
diftance.  While  I  was  tracing  the  inlet  with  Dr.  Solander,
Mr.  Banks  was  endeavouring  to  penetrate  into  the  country,
where  feveral  of  the  people  who  had  leave  to  go  afhore  were
alfo  rambling  about.  Mr.  Banks  and  his  party  found  their
courfe  obilructed  by  a  fwamp,  covered  with  mangroves,
which  however  they  refolved  to  pafs ;  the  mud  was  almofl
knee  deep,  yet  they  refolutely  went  on ;  but  before  they  got
half  way,  they  repented  of  their  undertaking  :  the  bottom
was  covered  with  branches  of  trees  interwoven  with  each
other,  fometimcs  they  kept  their  footing  upon  them,  fome-
times  their  feet  flipt  through,  and  fometimes  they  were  {o
entangled  among  them,  that  they  were  forced  to  free  them-
felves  by  groping  in  the  mud  and  flime  with  their  hands.  In
about  an  hour  however  they  eroded  it,  and  judged  it  might
be  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  over.  After  a  fhort  walk  they
came  up  to  a  place  where  there  had  been  four  fmall  fires,
and  near  them  fome  fliells  and  bones  of  fifh,  that  had  been
roafted :  they  found  alfo  heaps  of  grafs  laid  together,  where
four  or  five  people  appeared  to  have  flept.  The  Second
Lieutenant,  Mr.  Gore,  who  was  at  another  place,  faw  a  little
water  lying  in  the  bottom  of  a  gully,  and  near  it  the  track
of  a  large  animal :  fome  buflards  were  alfo  feen,  but  none

3  Y  2  of


532  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

VH&t      of  them  mot,  nor  any  other  bird  except  a  few  of  the  beauti-

t.  — v >   ful  loriquets  which  we  had  feen  in  Botany  Bay.     Mr.  Gore,

and  one  of  the  midfhipmen,  who  were  in  different  places,
laid  that  they  had  heard  the  voices  of  Indians  near  them,
but  had  feen  none :  the  country  in  general  appeared  fandy
and  barren,  and  being  deflitute  of  frefli  water,  it  cannot  be
fuppofed  to  have  any  fettled  inhabitants.  The  deep  gullies,
which  were  worn  by  torrents  from  the  hills,  prove,  that  at
certains  feafons  the  rains  here  are  very  copious  and  heavy.

The  inlet  in  which  the  fhip  lay  I  called  Thirsty  Sound,
becaufe  it  afforded  us  no  frefli  water.  It  lies  in  latitude
220  io'S.  and  longitude  2100  18'W. ;  and  may  be  known  by
a  group  of  fmall  iflands  lying  under  the  fhore,  from  two  to
five  leagues  diftant,  in  the  direction  of  N.W.  and  by  another
group  of  iflands  that  lie  right  before  it,  between  three  and
four  leagues  out  at  fea.  Over  each  of  the  points  that  form
the  entrance  is  a  high  round  hill,  which  on  the  N.  W.  is  a
peninfula  that  at  high-water  is  furrounded  by  the  fea :  they
are  bold  to  both  the  mores,  and  the  diflance  between  them
is  about  two  miles.  In  this  inlet  is  good  anchorage  in  feven,
fix,  five,  and  four  fathom;  and  places  very  convenient  for
laying  a  fhip  down,  where,  at  fpring-tides,  the  water  does
not  rife  lefs  than  fixteen  or  eighteen  feet.  The  tide  flows  at
the  full  and  change  of  the  moon  about  eleven  o'clock.  I
3iave  already  obferved  that  here  is  no  frefli  water,  nor  could
/  we  procure  refrefhment  of  any  other  kind :  we  faw  two  turtles,
but  we  were  not  able  to  take  either  of  them:  neither  did  we
catch  either  fifh  or  wild-fowl,  except  a  few  fmall  land-birds  :
we  faw  indeed  the  fame  forts  of  water-fowl  as  in  Botany  Bay,
but  they  were  fo  fhy  that  we  could  not  get  a  fhot  at  them.

As  I  had  not  therefore  a  fingle  inducement  to  flay  longer
Thaifday3i.  in  this  place,  I  weighed  anchor  at  fix  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing


533


Thurfday  3  1,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.

ing  of  Thurfday  the  31ft  of  May,  and  put  to  fea.  We  flood
to  the  N.W.  with  a  frefh  breeze  at  S.S.  E.  and  kept  without
the  group  of  iflands  that  lie  in  more,  and  to  the  N.  W.  of
Thirfty  Sound,  as  there  appeared  to  be  no  fafe  pafTage  be-
tween them  and  the  main :  at  the  fame  time  we  had  a  number
of  iflands  without  us,  extending  as  far  as  we  could  fee :
during  our  run  in  this  direction  our  depth  of  water  was  ten,
eight,  and  nine  fathom.  At  noon,  the  well  point  of  Thirfty
Sound,  which  I  have  called  Pier  Head,  bore  S.  36  E.  diftant
live  leagues  ;  the  eaft  point  of  the  other  inlet,  which  com-
municates with  the  Sound,  bore  S.  by  W.  diftant  two  leagues ;
the  group  of  iflands  juft  mentioned  lay  between  us  and  the
point,  and  the  fartheft  part  of  the  main  in  fight,  on  the
other  fide  of  the  inlet,  bore  N.  W.  Our  latitude  by  obferva-
tion  was  2 1  °  53'.  At  half  an  hour  after  twelve,  the  boat,
which  was  founding  ahead,  made  the  fignal  for  fhoal  water,
and  we  immediately  hauled  our  wind  to  the  N.  E.  At  this
time  we  had  feven  fathom,  at  the  next  caft  five,  and  at  the
next  three,  upon  which  we  inftantly  dropped  an  anchor,  that
brought  the  fhip  up.  Pier  Head,  the  north  weft  point  of
Thirfty-found,  boreS.E.  diftant  fix  leagues,  being  half-way
between  the  iflands  which  lie  off  the  eaft  point  of  the  weft-
em  inlet,  and  three  fmall  iflands  which  lie  diredtly  without
them.  It  was  now  the  firft  of  the  flood,  which  we  found  to
fet  N.W.  by  W.  I  W.  ;  and  having  founded  about  the  fhoal,
upon  which  we  had  three  fathom,  and  found  deep  water  all
round  it,  we  got  under  fail,  and  having  hauled  round  the
three  iflands  that  have  been  juft  mentioned,  came  to  an  an-
chor under  the  lee  of  them,  in  fifteen  fathom  water;  and
the  weather  being  dark,  hazy,  and  rainy,  we  remained  there
till  feven  o'clock  in  the  morning.     At  this  time  we  got  again      ,  June.

Friday  I.

under  fail,  and  flood  to  the  N.W.  with  a  frefh  breeze  at
S.  S.E.j  having  the  main  land  in  fight,  and  a  number  of

iflands


534  LIEUTENANT   COOR's   VOYAGE

i77°-  iflands  all  round  us,  fome  of  which  lay  out  at  fea  as  far  as
i  u"_  _f  the  eye  could  reach.  The  weflern  inlet,  which  in  the  chart
Fndiy  i.  .g  diflinguifhed  by  the  name  of  Broad  Sound,  we  had  now
all  open  j  at  the  entrance,  it  is  at  leaft  nine  or  ten  leagues
wide  :  in  it,  and  before  it,  lie  feveral  iflands,  and  probably
ihoals  alfo  ;  for  our  foundings  were  very  irregular,  varying
fuddenly  from  ten  to  four  fathom.  At  noon,  our  latitude  by
obfervation  was  210  29'S. ;  a  point  of  land  which  forms  the
north  weft  entrance  into  Broad  Sound,  and  which  I  have
named  Cape  Palmerston,  lying  in  latitude  210  30',  longi-
tude 2100  54  W.  bore  W.  by  N.  diftant  three  leagues.  Our
latitude  was  21  °  27',  our  longitude  2100  57'.  Between  this
Cape  and  Cape  Townfhend  lies  the  bay  which  I  have  called
the  Bay  of  Inlets.  We  continued  to  fland  to  the  N.W.  and
N.  W.  by  N.  as  the  land  lay,  under  an  eafy  fail,  having  a
boat  ahead  to  found  :  at  firfl  the  foundings  were  very  irre-
gular, from  nine  to  four  fathom  ;  but  afterwards  they  were
regular,  from  nine  to  eleven.  At  eight  in  the  evening,  being
about  two  leagues  from  the  main  land,  we  anchored  in
eleven  fathom,  with  a  fandy  bottom ;  and  foon  after  we
found  the  tide  fetting  with  a  flow  motion  to  the  weflward.
At  one  o'clock  it  was  flack,  or  low-water;  and  at  half  an
hour  after  two  the  fhip  tended  to  the  eaflward,  and  rode  fo
Saturday  2".  till  fix  in  the  morning,  when  the  tide  had  rifen  eleven  feet.
We  now  got  under  fail,  and  flood  away  in  the  direction  of
the  coafl,  N.  N.  W.  From  what  we  had  obferved  of  the  tide
during  the  night,  it  is  plain,  that  the  flood  came  from  the
N.  W. ;  whereas  the  preceding  day,  and  feveral  days  before,
it  came  from  the  S.  E. ;  nor  was  this  the  firfl,  or  even  fecond
time  that  we  had  remarked  the  fame  thing.  At  fun- rife  this
morning,  we  found  the  variation  to  be  6°  45'  E. ;  and  in  fleer-
ing along  the  more,  between  the  ifland  and  the  main,  at  the
diflance  of  about  two  leagues  from  the  main,  and  three  or

four


HOUND    THE    WORLD.  S2$:

four  from  the  ifland,  our  foundings  were  regular  from  1770.
twelve  to  nine  fathom ;  but  about  eleven  o'clock  in  the  fore-  «  -"-'__?
noon  we  were  again  embarrafled  with  fhoal  water,  having
at  one  time  not  more  than  three  fathom ;  yet  we  got  clear,
without  cafting  anchor.  At  noon  we  were  about  two  leagues
from  the  main,  and  four  from  the  iflands  without  us.  Our
latitude  by  obfervation  was  200  56',  and  a  high  promontory,
which  I  named  Cape  Hillsborough,  bore  W.  4  N.  diftant
feven  miles.  The  land  here  is  divernfied  by  mountains*
hills,  plains,  and  valleys,  and  feems  to  be  well  clothed  with
herbage  and  wood  :  the  iflands  which  lie  parallel  to  the
eoaft,  and  from  five  to  eight  or  nine  miles  diftant,  are  of  va-
rious height  and  extent ;  fcarcely  any  of  them  are  more  than-
five  leagues  in  circumference,  and  many  are  not  four  miles :
befides  this  chain  of  iflands,  which  lies  at  a  diftance  from;
the  coaft,  there  are  others  much  lefs,  which  lie  under  the
land,  from  which  we  faw  fmoke  riling  in  different  places.
We  continued  to  fleer  along  the  more  at  the  diftance  of  about
two  leagues,  with  regular  foundings  from  nine  to  ten  fa-
thom. At  fun-fet,  the  fartheft  point  of  the  main  bore
N.  48  W.  and  to  the  northward  of  this  lay  fome  high  land*
which  I  took  to  be  an  ifland,  and  of  which  the  north  weft
point  bore  41  W. ;  but  not  being  fure  of  a  pafTage,  I  came
to  an  anchor  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  in  ten  fa-
thom water,  with  a  muddy  bottom.  About  ten  we  had  a
tide  fetting  to  the  northward,  and  at  two  it  had  fallen  nine
feet ;  after  this  it  began  to  rife,  and  the  flood  came  from  the
northward,  in  the  direction  of  the  iflands  which  lay  out  to
fea  ;  a  plain  indication  that  there  was  no  pafTage  to  the  N.W-*.
This  however  had  not  appeared  at  day-break,  when  we  got
under  fail  and  flood  to  the  N.W.  At  eight  o'clock  in  the
morning,  we  difcovered  low  land  quite  acrofs  what  we  took
for  an  opening,  which  proved  to  be  a  bay,  about  five  or  fix*

Leagues


Sunday  3  I


536  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

'770-      leagues  deep;  upon  this  we  hauled  our  wind  to  the  eaft-

'_-  -"-'-/   ward  round  the  north  point  of  the  bay,  which  at  this  time
Sunday  3.      bore  from  ug  N  E>  by  N>  diftant  four  ieagUes .   from  this

point  we  found  the  land  trend  way  N.  by  W.  i.  W.  and  a
ftreight  or  paflage  between  it  and  a  large  ifland,  or  iflands,
lying  parallel  to  it.  Having  the  tide  of  ebb  in  our  favour,  we
flood  for  this  paflage  ;  and  at  noon  were  juft  within  the  en-
trance: our  latitude  by  obfervation  was  200  26'  S. ;  CapeHillf-
borough  bore  S.  by  E.  diflant  ten  leagues ;  and  the  north
point  of  the  bay  S.  19  W.  diftant  four  miles.  This  point,
which  I  named  Cape  Conway,  lies  in  latitude  260  36'  S.  lon-
gitude 2110  28'  W. ;  and  the  bay  which  lies  between  this  Cape
and  Cape  Hillfborough  I  called  Repulse  Bay.  The  greateft
depth  of  water  which  we  found  in  it  was  thirteen  fathom,
and  the  leaft  eight.  In  all  parts  there  was  fafe  anchorage,
and  I  believe  that,  upon  proper  examination,  fome  good  har-
bours would  be  found  in  it ;  efpecially  at  the  north  fide
within  Cape  Conway ;  for  juft  Within  that  Cape  there  lie  two
or  three  fmall  iflands,  which  alone  would  fhelter  that  fide  of
the  bay  from  the  foutherly  and  fouth  eafterly  winds,  that  feem
to  prevail  here  as  a  Trade.  Among  the  many  iflands  that  lie
upon  this  coaft,  there  is  one  more  remarkable  than  the  reft  j
it  is  of  a  fmall  circuit,  very  high  and  peaked,  and  lies  E.  by  S.
ten  miles  from  Cape  Conway,  at  the  fouth  end  of  the  paf-
fage.  In  the  afternoon,  we  fleered  through  this  paflage,
which  we  found  to  be  from  three  to  feven  miles  broad,  and
eight  or  nine  leagues  in  length,  N.  by  W.  4  W.,  S.  by  E.  f  E.
It  is  formed  by  the  main  on  the  weft,  and  by  the  iflands  on
the  eaft,  one  of  which  is  at  leaft  five  leagues  in  length :  our
depth  of  water  in  running  through  was  from  twenty  to  five
and  twenty  fathom,  with  good  anchorage  every  where,  and
the  whole  paflage  may  be  confidered  as  one  fafe  harbour,  ex-
clufive  of  the  fmall  bays  and  coves  which  abound  on  each
6  fide,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  S2y

fide,  where  mips  might  lie  as  in  a  bafon.    The  land  both      1770.
upon  the  main  and  iflands  is  high,  and.  divcrfified  by  hill   ■     une'  _,
and  valley,    wood  and  lawn,    with  a  green  and  pleafant  £unday3,
appearance.    On  one  of  the  iflands  we  difcovered  with  our
glafTes  two  men  and  a  woman,  and  a  canoe  with  an  out-
rigger, which  appeared  to  be  larger,  and  of  a  conftruction
very  different  from  thofe  of  bark  tied  together  at  the  ends,
which  we  had  feen  upon  other  parts  of  the  coafl ;  we  hoped
therefore  that  the  people  here  had  made  fome  farther  ad-
vances beyond  mere  animal  life  than  thofe  that  we  haxl  feen
before.    At  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  we  were  nearly  the
length  of  the  north  end  of  the  pafTage ;  the  north  wcflermoft
point  of  the  main  in  fight  bore  N.  54  W.  and  the  north  end
of  the  ifland  N.  N.  E.  with  an  open  fea  between  the  two
points.     As  this  pafTage  was  difcovered  on  Whitfunday,  I
called  it  Whitsunday's  Passage,  and  I  called  the  iflands  that
form  it  Cumberland  Islands,  in  honour  of  his  Royal  High-
nefs  the  Duke.    We  kept  under  an  eafy  fail,  with  the  lead
going  all  night,  being  at  the  diftance  of  about  three  leagues
from  the  fhore,  and  having  from  twenty-one  to  twenty-three
fathom  water.     At  day-break,  we  were  abreaft  of  the  point  Monday  4.
which  had  been  the  fartheft  in  fight  to  the  north  weft  the
evening  before,  which  I  named  Cape  Gloucester.     It  is  a
lofty  promontory,  inlatitude  190  59' S.  longitude  211°  49'  W-
and  may  be  known  by  an  ifland  which  lies  out  at  fea  N.  by  W.
i-  W.  at  the  diflance  of  five  or  fix  leagues  from  it,  and  which
I  called  Holborne  Isle;  there  are  alfo  iflands  lying  under
the  land  between  Holborne  Iflc,  and  Whitfunday 's  PafTage.
On  the  weft  fide  of  Cape  Gloucefter  the  land  trends  away
S.  W.  and  S.  S.  W.  and  forms  a  deep  bay,  the  bottom  of  which
I  could  but  juft  fee  from  the  malt-head-:  it  is  very  low,  and
a  continuation  of  the  low  land  which  we  had  feen  at  the
bottom  of  Repulfe  Bay.     This  bay  I  called  Edccu.mbe  Bay,
Vol.  H.  q  Z  but


338  LIEUTENANT    CGOK's    VOYAGE

177c      but  without  flaying  to  look  into  it,  we  continued  our  courfe-
■  '    t   to  the  weitward,  for  the  fartheft  land  we  could  fee  in  that

Monday  4.     ^.^o^  which  bore  W.  by  N.  4  N.  and  appeared  very  high.
At  noon,  we  were  about  three  leagues  from  the  more,  by
obfervation  in  latitude  i9°47'S.  and  Cape  Gloucefter  bore
S.  6$  E.  diflant  feven  leagues  and  an  half.     At  fix  in   the
evening,  we  were  abreaft  of  the  weftermoil  point  juft  men-
tioned, at  about  three  miles  diflance,  and  becaufe  it  rifes  ab-
ruptly from  the  low  lands  which  furround  it,  I  called  it
Cape  Upstart.     It  lies  in  latitude  190  39' S.  longitude  2120
32' W.  fourteen  leagues  W.  N.W.  from  Cape  Gloucefter,  and
is  of  a  height  fufficient  to  be  feen  at  the  diflance  of  twelve
leagues :    inland  there  are  fome  high  hills  or  mountains,,
•which,  like  the  Cape,  afford  but  a  barren  profpect.     Having,
pailed  this  Cape,  we  continued  Handing  to  the  W.  N.  W.  as-
the  land  lay,  under  an  eafy  fail,  having  from  fixteen  to  ten
Tuefdjy  5.     fathom,  till  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  we  fell  into
feven  fathom  ;  upon  which  we  hauled  our  wind  to  the  north-
ward, judging  ourfelves  to  be  very  near  land:  at  day-break,.
we  found  our  conjecture  to  be  true,    being   within   little
more  than  two  leagues  of  it.     In  this  part  of  the  coafl  the
land,  being  very  low,  is  nearer  than  it  appears  to  be,  though
it  is  diverfified  with  here  and  there  a  hill.     At  noon,  we
were  about  four  leagues  from  the  land,  in  fifteen  fathom
water,  and  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  190  12  S.  Cape
Upilart  bearing  S.  32°  30'  E.  diilant  twelve  leagues.    About
this  time  fome  very  large  columns  of  fmoke  were  feen  riling
from  the  low  lands.     At  fun-fet,  the  preceding  night,  when
we  were  clofe  under  Cape  Upftart,  the  variation  was  nearly
90  E.  and  at  fun-rife  this  day,  it  was  no  more  than  50  35' ;  I
judged  therefore  that  it  had  been  influenced  by  iron  ore,  or
other  magnetical  matter,  contained  under  the  furface  of  the
earth.

fe  We


HO'UND    THE    WORLD.  ^

We  continued  to  fleer  W.  N.W.  as  the  land  lay,    with       1770.
twelve  or  fourteen  fathom  water,  till  noon  on  the  6th,  when    <__    T'^j
our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  190  i'S.  and  we  had  the  Wedn€f,<5'
mouth  of  a  bay  all  open,  extending  from  S.  4.  E.  to  S.  W.  J.S.
diftant  two  leagues.     This  bay,  which  I  named  Cleaveland
Bay,  appeared  to  be  about  five  or  fix  miles  in  extent  every
way:   the  eaft  point  I  named  Cape  Cleaveland,  and  the
weft,  which  had  the  appearance  of  an  ifland,  Magnetical
Isle,  as  we  perceived  that  the  compafs  did  not  traverfe  well
when  we  were  near  it:  they  are  both  high,    and  fo  is  the
main  land  within  them,  the  whole  forming  a  furface  the
moft  rugged,  rocky,  and  barren  of  any  we  had  feen  upon
the  coaft ;  it  was  not  however  without  inhabitants,  for  we
faw  fmoke  in  feveral  parts  of  the  bottom  of  the  bay.    The
northermoft  land  that  was  in  fight  at  this  time,  bore  N.  W.
and  it  had  the  appearance  of  an  ifland,  for  we  could  not
trace  the  main  land   farther   than  W.  by  N.      We  fleered
W.  N.  W.  keeping  the  main  land  on  board,   the  outermofl
part  of  which,  at  fun-fet,  bore  W.  by  N.  but  without  it  lay
high  land,  which  we  judged  not  to  be  part  of  it.     At  day-  jhurfday?.
break,    we  were  abreaft  of  the  eaftern  part  of  this  land,
which  we  found  to  be  a  group  of  iflands,  lying  about  five
leagues  from  the  main:  at  this  time,  being  between  the  two
mores,  we  advanced  flowly  to  the  N.  W.  till  noon,  when  oar
latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  iS°  49'  S.  and  our  diftance  from
the  main  about  five  leagues:  the  north  weft  part  of  it  bore
from  us  N.  by  \V.  f  W.  the  iflands  extending  from  N.  to  E.
and  the  neareft  being  diftant  about  two  miles :  Cape  Cleave-
land bore  S.  50  E.  diftant  eighteen  leagues.     Our  foundings,
in  the  courfe  that  we  had  failed  between  this  time  and  the
preceding  noon,  were  from  fourteen  to  eleven  fathom.

In  the  afternoon,  we  faw  feveral  large  columns  of  fmoke
upon  the  main ;  we  faw  alfo  fome  people  and  canoes,  and

32  3  upon


54d  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°-  upon  one  of  the  iflands  what  had  the  appearance  of  cocoa
t  !'  _i  nut-trees :  as  a  few  of  thefe  nuts  would  now  have  been  very
Thurfday  7.  acceptabiej  j  fent  Lieutenant  Hicks  afhore,  and  with  him
went  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  to  fee  what  refrefhment
could  be  procured,  while  I  kept  Handing  in  for  the  ifland
with  the  fhip.  About  feven  o'clock  in  the  evening  they  re-
turned, with  an  account  that  what  we  had  taken  for  cocoa
nut-trees,  were  a  fmall  kind  of  cabbage  palm,  and  that,  ex-
cept about  fourteen  or  fifteen  plants,  they  had  met  with  no-
thing worth  bringing  away.  While  they  were  afhore,  they
faw  none  of  the  people,  but  juft  as  they  had  put  off,  one  of
them  came  very  near  the  beach,  and  fhouted  with  a  loud
voice  ;  it  was  fo  dark  that  they  could  not  fee  him,  however
they  turned  towards  the  fhore,  but  when  he  heard  the  boat
putting  back,  he  ran  away  or  hid  himfelf,  for  they  could  not
get  a  glimpfe  of  him,  and  though  they  fhouted  he  made  no
reply.  After  the  return  of  the  boats,  we  flood  away  N.  by  W,
for  the  northermofl  land  in  fight,  of  which  we  were  abreaft
Fridays.  at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  having pafled all  the  iflands
three  or  four  hours  before.  This  land,  on  account  of  its
figure,  I  named  Point  Hillock:  it  is  of  a  confiderable
height,  and  may  be  known  by  a  round  hillock,  or  rockr
which  joins  to  the  Point,  but  appears  to  be  detached  from
it.  Between  this  Cape  and  Magnetical  Ifle  the  fhore  forms  a
large  bay,  which  I  called  Halifax  Bay:  before  it  lay  the
group  of  iflands  which  has  been  jufl  mentioned,  and  fome
others,  at  a  lefs  diflance  from  the  fhore.  By  thefe  iflands
the  Bay  is  flickered  from  all  winds,  and  it  affords  good  an-
chorage. The  land  near  the  beach,  in  the  bottom  of  the
Bay,  is  low  and  woody,  but  farther  back  it  is  one  continued
ridge  of  high  land,  which  appeared  to  be  barren  and  rocky.
Having  paffed  Point  Hillock,  we  continued  ftanding  to  the
N.  N.  W.  as  the  land  trended,  having  the  advantage  of  a  light

moon.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  54I

moon.  At  fix,  we  were  abreaft  of  a  point  of  land  which  lies  1770.
N.  by  W.  f  W.  diftant  eleven  miles  from  Point  Hillock,  which  «  .Ju,"e'_r
I  named  Cape  Sandwich.  Between  thefe  two  points  the  InJa>  s-
land  is  very  high,  and  the  furf'ace  is  craggy  and  barren.
Cape  Sandwich  may  be  known  not  only  by  the  high  craggy
land  over  it,  but  by  a  fmall  ifl'and  which  lies  eafl  of  it,  at  the
diftance  of  a  mile,  and  fome  others  that  lie  about  two  leagues
to  the  northward.  From  Cape  Sandwich  the  land  trends
W.  and  afterwards  N.  forming  a  fine  large  bay,  which  I
called  Rockingham  Bay,  where  there  appears  to  be  good
fhelter,  and  good  anchorage,  but  I  did  not  flay  to  examine
it:  I  kept  ranging  along  the  more  to  the  northward,  for  £
clufter  of  fmall  iflands,  which  lie  off  the  northern  point  of
the  Bay.  Between  the  three  outermoft  of  thefe  iflands,  and
thofe  near  the  fhore,  I  found  a  channel  of  about  a  mile
broad,  through  which  I  paffed,  and  upon  one  of  the  nearcfl
iflands  we  faw  with  our  glaffes  about  thirty  of  the  natives,
men,  women,  and  children,  ail  Handing  together,  and  look-
ing with  great  attention  at  the  lhip ;  the  fir  ft  inftance  of  cu-
riofity  that  we  had  feen  among  them :  they  were  all  ftark
naked,  with  fhort  hair,  and  of  the  fame  complexion  with
thofe  that  we  had  feen  before.  At  noon,  our  latitude,  by
obfervation,  was  170  59',  and  we  were  abreaft  of  the  north
point  of  Rockingham  Bay,  which  bore  from  us  W.  at'  the
diftance  of  about  two  miles.  This  boundary  of  the  Bay  is
formed  by  an  ifland  of  confiderable  height,  which  in  the
chart  is  diftinguifhed  by  the  name  of  Dunk  Isle,  and  which
lies  fo  near  the  fhore  as  not  to  be  eafily  diftinguifhed  from  it.
Our  longitude  was  2 1 30  57'  W.  Cape  Sandwich  bore  S.  by  E.  f  E,
diftant  nineteen  miles,  and  the  northermoft  land  in  light
N.  fW. :  our  depth  of  water  for  the  laft  ten  hours  had  not
been  more  than  lixteen,  nor  lefs  than  feven  fathom.  At  fun-
let,  the  northern  extremity  of  the  land  bore  N.  25  W.  and  we

kept


542  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770-      kept  our  courfe  N.  by  W.  along  the  coaft,  at  the  diftance  of
■  between  three  and  four  leagues,  with  an  eafy  fail  all  night,


Fnday  8.     ^ving  from  twelve  to  fifteen  fathom  water.

Saturday  9.  At  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  were  abreaft  of  fome
fmall  iflands,  which  we  called  Frankland's  Isles,  and
which  lie  about  two  leagues  diftant  from  the  main  land.
The  moil  diftant  point  in  light  to  the  northward  bore  N.  by
W.  7  W.  and  we  thought  it  was  part  of  the  main,  but  after-
wards found  it  to  be  an  ifland  of  confiderable  height,  and
about  four  miles  in  circuit.  Between  this  ifland  and  a  point
on  the  main,  from  which  it  is  diftant  about  two  miles,  I
paffed  with  the  fhip.  At  noon,  we  were  in  the  middle  of
the  channel,  and  by  obfervation  in  the  latitude  of  160  57' S.
with  twenty  fathom  water.  The  point  on  the  main,  of
which  we  were  now  abreaft,  I  called  Cape  Grafton  :  its  la-
titude is  160  57'  S.  and  longitude  214°  6'  W.  and  the  land  here,
as  well  as  the  whole  coaft  for  about  twenty  leagues  to  the
fouthward,  is  high,  has  a  rocky  furface,  and  is  thinly
covered  with  wood:  during  the  night  we  had  feen  feveral
fires,  and  about  noon  fome  people.  Having  hauled  round
Cape  Grafton,  we  found  the  land  trend  away  N.  W.  by\V.
and  three  miles  to  the  weftward  of  the  Cape  we  found  a  bay,
in  which  we  anchored  about  two  miles  from  the  more,  in
four  fathom  water  with  an  ouzey  bottom.  The  eaft  point
of  the  bay  bore  S.  74  E.  the  weft  point  S.  83  W.  and  a  low,
green,  woody  ifland,  which  lies  in  the  offing,  N.  35  E.  This
ifland,  which  iies  N.  by  E.  7  E.  diftant  three  or  four  leagues
from  Cape  Grafton,  is  called  in  the  chart  Green  Island.

As  foon  as  the  fhip  was  brought  to  an  anchor,  I  went
afhore,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander.  As
my  principal  view  was  to  procure  fome  frefh  water,  and  as
the  bottom  of  the  bay  was  low  land  covered  with  mangroves,

where


ROUND    THE    WORLD,  543

where  it  was  not  probable  frefh.  water  was  to  be  found,  I  177°*
went  out  towards  the  Cape,  and  found  two  fmall  ftreams,  i_— ^_L_>
which  however  were  rendered  very  difficult  of  acccfs  by  the  atur  ay  9'
furf  and  rocks  upon  the  fhore:  1  faw  alfo,  as  I  came  round
the  Cape,  a  fmall  flream  of  water  run  over  the  beach,  in  a
fandy  cove,  but  I  did  not  go  in  with  the  boat,  becaufe  I  faw
that  it  would  not  be  eafy  to  land.  When  we  got  afliore,  we
found  the  country  every  where  rifing  into  fteep  rocky  hills,
and  as  no  frefh  water  could  conveniently  be  procured,  I  was
unwilling  to  lofe  time  by  going  in  fearch  of  lower  land  elfe-
where:  we  therefore  made  the  belt  of  our  way  back  to  the  fhip,
and  about  midnight  we  weighed  and  flood  to  the  N.  W.  hav-
ing but  little  wind,  with  fome  fhowers  of  rain.  At  four  in  the  Sunday  ic*
morning,  the  breeze  frefhened  at  S.  by  E.  and  the  weather
became  fair :  we  continued  fleering  N.  N.  W.  7  W.  as  the  land-
lay,  at  about  three  leagues  diftance,  with  ten,  twelve,  and
fourteen  fathom  water.  At  ten,  we  hauled  off  north,  in  order
to  get  without  a  fmall  low  ifland,  which  lay  at  about  two
leagues  diftance  from  the  main,  and  great  part  of  which  at
this  time,  it  being  high  water,  was  overflowed :  about  three
leagues  to  the  north  weft  of  this  iiland,  clofe  under  the  main
land,  is  another  ifland,  the  land  of  which  rifes  to  a  greater
height,  and  which  at  noon  bore  from  us  N.  55  W.  diftant
feven  or  eight  miles.  At  this  time,  our  latitude  was  160  20' S,
Cape  Grafton  bore  S.  29  E.  diftant  forty  miles,  and  the  north-
ermoft  point  of  land  in  fight  N.  20  W.  ;  our  depth  of  water
was  fifteen  fathom.  Between  this  point  and  Cape  Grafton,
the  fhore  forms  a  large,  but  not  a  very  deep  bay,  which
being  difcovered  on  Trinity  Sunday,  I  called  Trinity  Bay.


CHAP.


Su  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE


CHAP.     V.

Dangerous  Situation  of  the  Ship  in  her  Courfe  from  'Trinity
Bay  to  Endeavour  River.


I77°'      T  T  ITHERTO  we  had  fafely  navigated  this  dangerous


Sunday  10.


coaft,  where  the  fea  in  all  parts  conceals  fhoals  that
fuddenly  project  from  the  more,  and  rocks  that  rife  abruptly-
like  a  pyramid  from  the  bottom,  for  an  extent  of  two  and
twenty  degrees  of  latitude,  more  than  one  thoufand  three
hundred  miles  ;  and  therefore  hitherto  none  of  the  names
which  diflinguifh  the  feveral  parts  of  the  country  that  we
faw,  are  memorials  of  difbrefs ;  but  here  we  became  ac-
quainted with  misfortune,  and  we  therefore  called  the  point
which  we  had  jufl  feen  fartheft  to  the  northward,  Cape  Tri-
bulation..

This  Cape  lies  in  latitude  i6°  6'S.  and  longitude  2140  39' W.
We  fleered  along  the  more  N.  by  W.  at  the  diftance  of  be-
tween three  and  four  leagues,  having  from  fourteen  to
twelve,  and  ten  fathom  water :  in  the  offing  we  faw  two
iflands,  which  lie  in  latitude  160  S.  and  about  fix  or  feven
leagues  from  the  main.  At  fix  in  the  evening,  the  northermofl
land  in  fight  bore  N.  by  W.  f'W.  and  two  low  woody  iflands,
which  fome  of  us  took  to  be  rocks  above  water,  bore  N.  7  W.
At  this  time  we  fhortened  fail,  and  hauled  off  more  E.N.  E.
and  N.  E.  by  E.  clofe  upon  a  wind,  for  it  was  my  defign  to
flretch  off  all  night,  as  well  to  avoid  the  danger  we  faw
ahead,  as  to  fee  whether  any  iflands  lay  in  the  offing,  efpeeially

as


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  545

as  we  were  now  near  the  latitude  affigned  to  the  iflands       !77Q«

June.

which  were  difcovered  by  Quiros,  and  which  fome  geogra-    v- — »

phers,  for  what  reafon  I  know  not,  have  thought  fit  to  join
to  this  land.  We  had  the  advantage  of  a  fine  breeze,  and  «t
clear  moonlight  night,  and  in  flanding  off  from  fix  till  near
nine  o'clock,  we  deepened  our  water  from  fourteen  to
twenty-one  fathom,  but  while  we  were  at  fupper  it  fuddenly
fhoaled,  and  we  fell  into  twelve,  ten,  and  eight  fathom,
within  the  fpace  of  a  few  minutes  j  I  immediately  ordered
every  body  to  their  ftation,  and  all  was  ready  to  put  about
and  come  to  an  anchor,  but  meeting  at  the  next  cad  of  the
lead  with  deep  water  again,  we  concluded  that  we  uad  gone
over  the  tail  of  the  fhoals  which  we  had  fcen  at  fun-fet,  and
that  all  danger  was  paft:  before  ten,  we  had  twenty  and
one  and  twenty  fathom,  and  this  depth  continuing,  the  gen-
tlemen left  the  deck  in  great  tranquility,  and  went  to  bed ;
but  a  few  minutes  before  eleven,  the  water  fhallowed  at
once  from  twenty  to  feventeen  fathom,  and  before  the  lead
could  be  caft  again,  the  fhip  ftruck,  and  remained  immove-
able, except  by  the  heaving  of  the  furge,  that  beat  her
againft  the  craggs  of  the  rock  upon  which  fhe  lay.  In  a
few  moments  every  body  was  upon  the  deck,  with  counte-
nances which  fufficiently  exprefTed  the  horrors  of  our  fitu-
ation.  We  had  flood  off  the  fiiore  three  hours  and  a  half,
with  a  pleafant  breeze,  and  therefore  knew  that  we  could  not
be  very  near  it,  and  we  had  too  much  reafon  to  conclude
that  we  were  upon  a  rock  of  coral,  which  is  more  fatal  than
any  other,  becaufe  the  points  of  it  are  fharp,  and  every  part
of  the  furface  fo  rough  as  to  grind  away  whatever  is  rubbed
againft  it,  even  with  the  gentleft  motion.  In  this  fituation
all  the  fails  were  immediately  taken  in,  and  the  boats  hoifted
out  to  examine  the  depth  of  water  round  the  fliip:  we  foon
difcovered  that  our  fears  had  not  aggravated  our  misfor-
Vol.  II.  4  A  tune,


546  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

I77°-       tune,  and  that  the  veffel  had  been  lifted  over  a  ledge  of  the

June.  °

< , >   rock,  and  lay  in  a  hollow  within  it:  in  fome  places  there  was

from  three  to  four  fathom,  and  in  others  not  fo  many  feet.
The  fhip  lay  with  her  head  to  the  N.  E. ;  and  at  the  diftance  of
about  thirty  yards  on  the  ftarboard  fide,  the  water  deepened
to  eight,  ten,  and  twelve  fathom.  As  foon  as  the  long-boat
was  out,  we  ftruck  our  yards  and  top-mafts,  and  carried  out
the  ftream  anchor  on  the  ftarboard  bow,  got  the  coafting  an-
chor and  cable  into  the  boat,  and  were  going  to  carry  it  out
the  fame  way;  but  upon  founding  a  fecond  time  round  the
fhip,  the  water  was  found  to  be  deepeft  aftern :  the  anchor
therefore  was  carried  out  from  the  ftarboard  quarter  inftead
of  the  ftarboard  bow,  that  is,  from  the  ftern  inftead  of  the
head,  and  having  taken  ground,  our  utmoft  force  was  ap-
plied to  the  capftern,  hoping  that  if  the  anchor  did  not  come
home,  the  fhip  would  be  got  off,  but  to  our  great  misfortune
and  difappointment  we  could  not  move  her  :  during  all  this
time  fhe  continued  to  beat  with  great  violence  againft  the
rock,  fo  that  it  was  with  the  utmoft  difficulty  that  we  kept
upon  our  legs ;  and  to  complete  the  fcene  of  diftrefs,.  we
faw  by  the  light  of  the  moon  the  fheathing  boards  from  the
bottom  of  the  veffel  floating  away  all  round  her,  and  at  laft
her  falfe  keel,  fo  that  every  moment  was  making  way  for
the  fea  to  rulli  in  which  was  to  fwallow  us  up.  We  had  now
no  chance  but  to  lighten  her,  and  we  had  loft  the  opportu-
nity of  doing  that  to  the  greateft  advantage,  for  unhappily
we  went  on  more  juft  at  high  water,  and  by  this  time  it  had
confiderably  fallen,  fo  that  after  {he  mould  be  lightened  fo
as  to  draw  as  much  lefs  water  as  the  water  had  funk,  we
fliould  be  but  in  the  fame  fituation  as  at  firft ;  and  the  only
alleviation  of  this  circumftance  was,  that  as  the  tide  ebbed
the  fhip  fettled  to  the  rocks,  and  was  not  beaten  againft  them
with  fo  much  violence.    We  had  indeed  fome  hope  from  the

next


rxOUND    THE    WORLD.  547

next  tide,  but  it  was  doubtful  whether  flie  would  hold  toge-       >77°-

June.

ther  fo  long,  efpecially  as  the  rock  kept  grating  her  bottom    ' , — ->

.  .  Sunday  10.

under  the  ftarboard  bow  with  fuch  force  as  to  be  heard  in  the
fore  flore-room.  This  however  was  no  time  to  indulge  con-
jecture, nor  was  any  effort  remitted  in  defpair  of  fuccefs:
that  no  time  might  be  loft,  the  water  was  immediately
flarted  in  the  hold,  and  pumped  up ;  fix  of  our  guns,  being
all  we  had  upon  the  deck,  our  iron  and  ftone  ballaft,  calks,
hoop  flaves,  oil  jars,  decayed  flores,  and  many  other  things
that  lay  in  the  way  of  heavier  materials,  were  thrown  over-
board with  the  utmoft  expedition,  every  one  exerting  him-
felf  with  an  alacrity  almoft  approaching  to  chcerfulnefs,
without  the  leaft  repining  or  difcontent ;  yet  the  men  were
fo  far  imprefl  with  a  fenfe  of  their  fituation,  that  not  an  oath
was  heard  among  them,  the  habit  of  profanenefs,  however
ffrong,  being  inftantly  fubdued,  by  the  dread  of  incurring
guilt  when  death  feemed  to  be  fo  near.

While  we  were  thus  employed,  day  broke  upon  us,  and  Monday  u.
we  faw  the  land  at  about  eight  leagues  diftance,  without
any  ifland  in  the  intermediate  fpace,  upon  which,  if  the
fhip  mould  have  gone  to  pieces,  we  might  have  been  fet
afhore  by  the  boats,  and  from  which  they  might  have  taken
us  by  different  turns  to  the  main :  the  wind  however  gra-
dually died  away,  and  early  in  the  forenoon  it  was  a  dead
calm ;  if  it  had  blown  hard,  the  fhip  mull  inevitably  have
been  deflroyed.  At  eleven  in  the  forenoon  we  expected  high
water,  and  anchors  were  got  out,  and  every  thing  made
ready  for  another  effort  to  heave  her  off  if  flie  fhould  float,
but  to  our  inexpreffible  furprize  and  concern  fhe  did  not
float  by  a  foot  and  a  half,  though  we  had  lightened  her  near
fifty  ton,  fo  much  did  the  day-tide  fall  fhort  of  that  in  the
night.  We  now  proceeded  to  lighten  her  flill  more,  and
threw  overboard  every  thing  that  it  was  poffible  for  us  to

4  A  z  fpare :


548  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

'77°-       fpare :  hitherto  me  had  not  admitted  much  water,  but  as  the

June.

< : 1   tide  fell,  it  rufhed  in  fo  fall,  that  two  pumps,  incefTantly

worked,  could  fcarcely  keep  her  free.  At  two  o'clock,  Hie
lay  heeling  two  or  three  flreaks  to  flarboard,  and  the  pin-
nace, which  lay  under  her  bows,  touched  the  ground :  we
had  now  no  hope  but  from  the  tide  at  midnight,  and  to  pre-
pare for  it  we  carried  out  our  two  bower  anchors,  one  on  the
(larboard  quarter,  and  the  other  right  a-ftern,  got  the  blocks
and  tackle  which  were  to  give  us  a  purchafe  upon  the  cables
in  order,  and  brought  the  falls,  or  ends  of  them,  in  abaft,
draining  them  tight,  that  the  next  effort  might  operate  upon
the  fhip,  and  by  fhortening  the  length  of  the  cable  between
that  and  the  anchors,  draw  her  off  the  ledge  upon  which  fhe
relied,  towards  the  deep  water.  About  five  o'clock  in  the
afternoon,  we  obferved  the  tide  begin  to  rife,  but  we  ob-
ferved  at  the  fame  time  that  the  leak  increafed  to  a  moll
alarming  degree,  fo  that  two  more  pumps  were  manned,
but  unhappily  only  one  of  them  would  work :  three  of  the
pumps  however  were  kept  going,  and  at  nine  o'clock  the
fhip  righted,  but  the  leak  had  gained  upon  us  fo  confide-
rably,  that  it  was  imagined  fhe  mufl  go  to  the  bottom  as
foon  as  flie  ceafed  to  be  fupported  by  the  rock:  this  was  a
dreadful  circumflance,  fo  that  we  anticipated  the  floating  of
the  fhip  not  as  an  earned  of  deliverance,  but  as  an  event  that
would  probably  precipitate  our  detraction.  We  well  knew
that  our  boats  were  not  capable  of  carrying  us  all  on  more,
and  that  when  the  dreadful  crifis  fhould  arrive,  as  all  com-
mand and  fubordination  would  be  at  an  end,  a  contefl  for
preference  would  probably  enfue,  that  would  increafe  the
horrors  even  of  fhipwreck,  and  terminate  in  the  deflruction
of  us  all  by  the  hands  of  each  other ;  yet  we  knew  that  if
any  fhould  be  left  on  board  to  perifh  in  the  waves,  they
would  probably  fuller  lefs  upon  the  whole  than  thofe  who

fhould


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


549


mould  get  on  more,  without  any  lafting  or  effectual  defence       1770.

againfl  the  natives,  in  a  country,  where  even  nets  and  fire-  < ,—'■-.

arms  would  fcarcely  furnifli  them  with  food;  and  where,  if  °n  ay  "'
they  mould  find  the  means  of  fubfillence,  they  mud  be  con-
demned to  languifh  out  the  remainder  of  life  in  a  defolate
wildernefs,  without  the  poilemon,  or  even  hope,  of  any  do-
meftic  comfort,  and  cut  off  from  all  commerce  with  man-
kind, except  the  naked  favages  who  prowled  the  defert,  and
who  perhaps  were  fomc  of  the  mod  rude  and  uncivilized
upon  the  earth.

To  thofe  only  who  have  waited  in  a  flate  of  fuch  fufpenfe,
death  has  approached  in  all  his  terrors  ;  and  as  the  dreadful
moment  that  was  to  determine  our  fate  came  on,  every  one
Taw  his  own  fenfations  pictured  in  the  countenances  of  his
companions  :  however,  the  capllan  and  windlace  were  man-
ned with  as  many  hands  as  could  be  fparcd  from  the  pumps,
and  the  fhip  floating  about  twenty  minutes  after  ten  o'clock,
the  effort  was  made,  and  fhe  was  heaved  into  deep  water.
It  was  fome  comfort  to  find  that  me  did  not  now  admit  more
water  than  fhehad  done  upon  the  rock;  and  though,  by  the
gaining  of  the  leak  upon  the  pumps,  there  was  no  lefs  than
three  feet  nine  inches  water  in  the  hold,  yet  the  men  did  not
relinquifh  their  labour,  and  we  held  the  water  as  it  were  at
bay  ;  but  having  now  endured  exceflive  fatigue  of  body  and
agitation  of  mind  for  more  than  four  and  twenty  hours,  and
having  but  little  hope  of  fucceeding  at  laft,  they  began  to
flag:  none  of  them  could  work  at  the  pump  more  than  five
or  fix  minutes  together,  and  then,  being  totally  exhaufted,
they  threw  themfelves  down  upon  the  deck,  though  a  ftream
of  water  was  running  over  it  from  the  pumps  between  three
and  four  inches  deep  ;  when  thofe  who  fucceeded  them  had
worked  their  fpell,  and  were  exhaufted  in  their  turn,  they
threw  themielves  down  in  the  fame  manner,  and  the  others

flarted


550  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      ftarted  up  again,  and  renewed  their  labour;  thus  relieving
L    June'    _,  each  other  till  an  accident  was  very  near  putting  an  end  to
Monday  n.   fa^j.  efforts  at  once.   The  planking  which  lines  the  infide  of
-the  fhip's  bottom  is  called  the  cieling,  and  between  this,  and
the  outfide   planking,   there  is   a  fpace  of  about  eighteen
inches :  the  man  who  till  this  time  had  attended  the  well  to
take  the  depth  of  water,  had  taken  it  only  to  the  cieling,  and
gave  the  meafure  accordingly  ;  but  he  being  now  relieved,
the  perlbn  who  came  in  his  (lead,  reckoned  the  depth  to  the
outfide  planking,  by  which  it  appeared  in  a  few  minutes  to
have  gained  upon  the  pumps  eighteen  inches,  the  difference
between  the  planking  without  and  within.     Upon  this,  even
the  braveft  was  upon  the  point  of  giving  up  his  labour  with
his  hope,  and  in  a  few  minutes  every  thing  would  have  been
involved  in  all  the  confufion  of  defpair.     But  this  accident,
however  dreadful  in  its  firft  confequences,  was  eventually
the  caufe  of  our  prefervation :  the  miflake  was  foon  detected,
and  the  fudden  joy  which  every  man  felt  upon  finding  his
fituation  better  than  his  fears  had  fuggefted,  operated  like  a
charm,  and  feemed  to  poffefs  him  with  a  ftrong  belief  that
fcarcely  any  real  danger  remained.     New  confidence  and
new  hope,    however  founded,  infpired   new  vigour ;    and
though  our  ftate  was  the  fame  as  when  the  men  firft  began
to  flacken  in  their  labour,  through  wearinefs  and  defpon-
dency,  they  now  renewed  their  efforts  with  fuch  alacrity  and
fpirit,  that  before  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  leak  was
fo  far  from  having  gained  upon  the  pumps,  that  the  pumps
had  gained  confiderably  upon  the  leak.     Every  body  now
talked  of  getting  the  Chip  into  fome  harbour,  as  a  thing  not
to  be  doubted,  and  as  hands  could  be  fpared  from  the  pumps,
they  were  employed  in  getting  up  the  anchors  :  the  ftream
anchor  and  beft  bower  we  had  taken  on  board ;  but  it  was
found  impoffible  to  fave  the  little  bower,  and  therefore  it

was


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  5Si

was  cut  away  at  a  whole  cable:  we  loft  alfo  the  cable  of  the      ln°-

ftream  anchor  among  the  rocks  ;  but  in  our  fituation  thefe    >. .u>

were  trifles  which  fcarcely  attracted  our  notice.  Our  next
bufinefs  was  to  get  up  the  fore-topmaft  and  fore-yard,  and
warp  the  fhip  to  the  foutheaft,  and  at  eleven,  having  now  a
breeze  from  the  fea,  we  once  more  got  under  fail  and  ftood
for  the  land.

It  was  however  impoffible  long  to  continue  the  labour  by
which  the  pumps  had  been  made  to  gain  upon  the  leak,  and
as  the  exact  fituation  of  it  could  not  be  discovered,  we  had  no
hope  of  flopping  it  within.  In  this  fituation,  Mr.  Monkhoufe,  Tuefday  is.
one  of  my  midfhipmen,  came  to  me  and  propofed  an  expe-
dient that  he  had  once  feen  ufed  on  board  a  merchant  ffiip,
which  fprung  a  leak  that  admitted  above  four  feet  water  an
hour,  and  which  by  this  expedient  was  brought  fafely  from
Virginia  to  London ;  the  mafter  having  fuch  confidence  in
it,  that  he  took  her  out  of  harbour,  knowing  her  condition,
and  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  wait  till  the  leak  could
be  otherwife  flopped.  To  this  man,  therefore,  the  care
of  the  expedient,  which  is  called  fothering  the  fhip,  was  im_
mediately  committed,  four  or  five  of  the  people  being  ap-
pointed to  affift  him,  and  he  performedit  in  this  manner:
He  took  a  lower  ftudding  fail,  and  having  mixed  together  a
large  quantity  of  oakham  and  wool,  chopped  pretty  fmall,
he  ftitched  it  down  in  handfuls  upon  the  fail,  as  lightly  as
poffible,  and  over  this  he  fpread  the  dung  of  our  fheep  and
other  filth ;  but  horfe  dung,  if  we  had  had  it,  would  have
been  better.  When  the  fail  was  thus  prepared,  it  was  hauled
under  the  fhip's  bottom  by  ropes,  which  kept  it  extended,
and  when  it  came  under  the  leak,  the  fudlion  which  carried
in  the  water,  carried  in  with  it  the  oakham  and  wool  from,
the  furface  of  the  fail,  which  in  other  parts  the  water  was

not
5


555  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770-  not  fufficiently  agitated  to  wafli  off.  By  the  fuccefs  of  this
i___l^Il_j  expedient  our  leak  was  fo  far  reduced,  that  inflead  of  gain-
Tuefday  12.  .  upon  three  pumps,  it  was  eafdy  kept  under  with  one.
This  was  a  new  fource  of  confidence  and  comfort ;  the  peo-
ple could  fcarcely  have  exprefled  more  joy  if  they  had  been
already  in  port ;  and  their  views  were  fo  far  from  being
limited  to  running  the  fhip  afhore  in  fome  harbour,  either
of  an  ifland  or  the  main,  and  building  a  vefTel  out  of  her
materials,  to  carry  us  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  which  had  fo  lately
been  the  utmoft  object  of  our  hope,  that  nothing  was  now
thought  of  but  ranging  along  the  more  in  fearch  of  a  con-
venient place  to  repair  the  damage  fhe  had  fuftained,  and
then  profecuting  the  voyage  upon  the  fame  plan  as  if  no-
thing had  happened.  Upon  this  occafion  I  mufl  obferve,
both  in  juftice  and  gratitude  to  the  fhip's  company,  and  the
Gentlemen  on  board,  that  although  in  the  midft  of  our  dif-
trefs  every  one  feemed  to  have  a  jufl  fenfe  of  his  danger,  yet
no  paflionate  exclamations,  or  frantic  geflures,  were  to  be
heard  or  fcen  ;  every  one  appeared  to  have  the  perfect  pof-
feffion  of  his  mind,  and  every  one  exerted  himfelf  to  the  ut-
termoft,  with  a  quiet  and  patient  perfeverance,  equally  dif-
tant  from  the  tumultuous  violence  of  terror,  and  the  gloomy
inactivity  of  defpair.

In  the  mean  time,  having  light  airs  at  E.S.E.  we  got  up
the  main-topmaft,  and  main-yard,  and  kept  edging  in  for
the  land,  till  about  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  we  came
to  an  anchor  in  feventeen  fathom  water,  at  the  diftance  of
feven  leagues  from  the  more,  and  one  from  the  ledge  of
rocks  upon  which  we  had  {truck.

This  ledge  or  ihoal  lies  in  latitude  150  45'  S.  and  between
fix  and  feven  leagues  from  the  main.  It  is  not  however  the
only  fnoal  on  this  part  of  the  coaft,  efpecially  to  the  north-

4  ward ;


ROUND    THE    WORLD,  553

ward;  and  at  this  time  we  faw  one  to  the  fouthward,  the       J77°-

June.

tail  of  which  we  patted  over,  when  we  had  uneven  iound-    c — ,—_ 1

ings  about  two  hours  before  we  (truck.     A  part  of  this  ihoai

is  always  above  water,    and  has  the  appearance  of  white

fand  :  a  part  alfo  of  that  upon  which  we  had  lain  is  dry  at

low  water,  and  in  that  place  confiits  of  fand  ftones ;  but  all

the  reft  of  it  is  a  coral  rock.

While  we  lay  at  anchor  for  the  night,  we  found  that  the
fhip  made  about  fifteen  inches  water  an  hour,  from  which
no  immediate  danger  was  to  be  apprehended ;  and  at  fix
o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  and  flood  to  the  N.  W.  wednef.  13.
Hill  edging  in  for  the  land  with  a  gentle  breeze  at  S.  S.  E.
At  nine  we  paffed  clofe  without  two  fmall  iflands  that  lie  in
latitude  150  41' S.  and  about  four  leagues  from  the  main  :  to
reach  thefe  iflands  had,  in  the  height  of  our  diftrefs,  been  the
object  of  our  hope,  or  perhaps  rather  of  our  wifhes,  and
therefore  I  called  them  Hope  Islands.  At  noon  we  were
about  three  leagues  from  the  land,  and  in  latitude  150  37'  S. ;
the  northermolt  part  of  the  main  in  fight  bore  N.  30  W„;  and
Hope  Iflands  extended  from  S.  50  E.  to  S.  40  E.  In  this  fitua-
tion  we  had  twelve  fathom  water,  and  feveral  fand-banks
without  us.  At  this  time  the  leak  had  not  increafed ;  but
that  we  might  be'  prepared  for  all  events,  we  got  the  fail
ready  for  another  fothcring.  In  the  afternoon,  having  a
gentle  breeze  at  S.  E.  by  E.  I  fent  out  the  Mafler  with  two
boats,  as  well  to  found  ahead  of  the  fhip,  as  to  look  out  for
a  harbour  where  we  might  repair  our  defects,  and  put  the
fhip  in  a  proper  trim.  At  three  o'clock,  we  fav;  an  opening
that  had  the  appearance  of  an  harbour,  and  flood  off  and  on
while  the  boats  examined  it ;  but  they  foon  found  that  there
was  not  depth  of  water  in  it  fufficient  for  the  fhip.  When
it  was  near  funfet,  there  being  many  flioals  about  us,  wc

Vol.  II.  4  B  anchored


554  LIEUTENANT    COO^s    VOYAGE

1770.   "   anchored  in  four  fathom,  at  the  diftance  of  about  two  miles.

.   J""!:    ,   from  the  more,  the  land  extending  from  N.  jl  E.  to  S,  by  E.  i-E.

Wednef.  13,  rj.jie  pinnace  was  ftill  out  with  one  of  the  mates ;  but  at  nine
o'clock  fhe  returned,  and  reported,  that  about  two  leagues  to-
leeward  fhe  had  difcovered  juft  fuch  a  harbour  as  we  wanted*
in  which  there  was  a  fufficient  rife  of  water,  and  every  other
convenience  that  could  be  defired,  either  for  laying  the  lhip
afhore,  or  heaving  her  down.

In  confequence  of  this  information,  I  weighed  at  fix  o'clock
Thurfdayii.  in  the  morning,  and  having  fent  two  boats  ahead,  to  lie
upon  the  fhoals  that  we  faw  in  our  way,  we  ran  down  to  the
place  ;  but  notwithstanding  our  precaution,  we  were  once  in
three  fathom  water.  As  foon  as  thefe  fhoals  were  pafTed,  I
fent  the  boats  to  lie  in  the  channel  that  led  to  the  harbour,
and  by  this  time  it  began  to  blow.  It  was  happy  for  us  that
a  place  of  refuge  was  at  hand  j  for  we  foon  found  that  the
fhip  would  not  work,  having  twice  miffed  flays  :  our  Situa-
tion, however,  though  it  might  have  been  much  worfe,  was
not  without  danger  ;  we  were  entangled  among  fhoals,  and
I  had  great  reafon  to  fear  being  driven  to  leeward,  before
the  boats  could  place  themfelves  fo  as  to  prefcribe  our  courfe.
I  therefore  anchored  in  four  fathom,  about  a  mile  from  the
ihore,  and  then  made  the  fignal  for  the  boats  to  come  on
board.  When  thi3  was  done  I  went  myfelf  and  buoyed  the
channel,  which  I  found  very  narrow ;  the  harbour  alfo  I
found  fmaller  than  I  expected,  but  mod  excellently  adapted
to  our  purpofe ;  and  it  is  remarkable,  that  in  the  whole
courfe  of  our  voyage  we  had  feen  no  place  which,  in  our
prefent  circumftances,  could  have  afforded  us  the  fame  re-
lief. At  noon,  our  latitude  was-  150  26'  S.  During  all  the  reft
of  this  day,  and  the  whole  night,  it  blew  too  frefh  for  us  to
venture  from  our  anchor  and  run  into  the  harbour ;  and  for

our


HOUND    THE    WORLD,


SSS


our  farther  fecurity,  we  got  down  the  toprgallant  yards,  un-      1770.
bent  the  mainfail  and  fome  of  the  fmall  fails  ;  got  down  the    ■     u"e'  _j
fore-top-gallant  malt,  and  the  gibb  boom,  and  fprit-fail,  with      u    aj  li'
a  view  to  lighten  the  fliip  forwards  as  much  as  poflible,  in
order  to  come  at  her  leak,  which  we  fuppofed  to  be  fome-
where  in  that  part ;  for  in  all  the  joy  of  our  unexpected  de-
liverance, we  had  not  forgot  that  at  this  time  there  was  no-
thing but  a  lock  of  wool  between  us  and  deftruction.     The
gale  continuing,  we  kept  our  ftation  all  the  15th.    On  the  Friday  ij.
16th,  it  was  fomewhat  more  moderate  ;  and  about  fix  o'clock  Saturday  16,
in  the  morning,  we  hove  the  cable  fliort,  with  a  defign  to
get  under  fail,  but  were  obliged  to  defift,  and  veer  it  out
again.    It  is  remarkable  that  the  fea  breeze,  which  blew
freih  when  we  anchored,  continued  to  do  fo  almoft  every  day
while  we  Hayed  here ;  it  was  calm  only  while  we  were  upon
the  rock,  except  once ;  and  even  the  gale  that  afterwards
wafted  us  to  the  fhore,  would  then  certainly  have  beaten  us
to  pieces.     In  the  evening  of  the  preceding  day,  we  had  ob-
ferved  a  fire  near  the  beach  over  againft  us  ;  and  as  it  would
be  neceffary  for  us  to  flay  fometime  in  this  place,  we  were
not  without  hope  of  making  an  acquaintance  with  the  peo-
ple.   We  faw  more  fires  upon  the  hills  to-day,  and  with  our
glafTes  difcovered  four  Indians  going  along  the  more,  who
Hopped,  and  made  two  fires ;  but  for  what  purpofe  it  was
impoflible  we  mould  guefs.

The  fcurvy  now  began  to  make  its  appearance  among  us,
with  many  formidable  fymptoms.  Our  poor  Indian,  Tupia,
who  had  fome  time  before  complained  that  his  gums  were
fore  and  fwelled,  and  who  had  taken  plentifully  of  our  le-
mon juice  by  the  Surgeon's  direction,  had  now  livid  fpots
upon  his  legs,  and  other  indubitable  teflimonies  that  the
diieafe  had  made  a  rapid  progrefs,  notwithftanding  all  our
remedies,  among  which  the  bark  had  been  liberally  admi-

4  B  2,  niflered.


5^6  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

l7~0'       niflered.    Mr.  Green,  our  ailronomer,  was  alfo  declining*;

June.

' — . — r   and  thefe,  among  other  circumflances,  imbittcred  the  delay

Saturday  16.         ,  .    ,  .  .  n

which  prevented  our  going  aihore.

Sanday  i7.  In  the  morning  of  the  17th,  though  the  wind  was  flill
frefh,  we  ventured  to  weigh,  and  pufli  in  for  the  harbour  j
but  in  doing  this  we  twice  run  the  fhip  aground :  the  firil
time  flie  went  off  without  any  trouble,  but  the  fecond  time
me  (luck  fall.  We  now  got  down  the  fore  yard,  fore  top-
malls,  and  booms,  and  taking  them  overboard,  made  a  raft
of  them  alonglide  of  the  fhip.  The  tide  was  happily  rifing,
and  about  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  fhe  floated.  We  foon
warped  her  into  the  harbour,  and  having  moored  her  along-
fide  of  a  lleep  beach  to  the  fouth,  we  got  the  anchors,  ca-
bles, and  all  the  hawfers  on  lliore  before  night.


CH  APi


■  ■■  HI  9


M


N°19.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  C5;


CHAP.     VI.

TranfaSiions   while  the  Ship  was   refitting   in   Endeavour

River  :   A  Defcription  of  the  adjace?it  Country  >  its

Inhabitants,  a7id  Productions.

IN  the  morning  of  Monday  the  18th,  a  ftage  was  made  1770*
from  the  fhip  to  the  more,  which  was  fo  bold  that  £he  ,_  ^ncJ  __,
floated  at  twenty  feet  diftance :  two  tents  were  alfo  fet  up,.  Monday  l8"'
one  for  the  fick,  and  the  other  for  flores  and  provifions,
which  were  landed  in  the  courfe  of  the  day.  We  alfo  landed
all  the  empty  water  calks,  and  part  of  the  flores.  As  foon
as  the  tent  for  the  lick  was  got  ready  for  their  reception,  they
were  font  afhore  to  the  number  of  eight  or  nine,  and  the
boat  was  difpatched  to  haul  the  feine,  in  hopes  of  procuring
fome  fifh  for  their  refrefhment ;  but  fhe  returned  without
fuccefs.  In  the  mean  time,  I  climbed  one  of  the  highefl  hills
among  thofe  that  overlooked  the  harbour,  which  afforded
by  no  means  a  comfortable  profpecl :  the  low  land  near  the
river  is  wholly  over-run  with  mangroves,  among  which  the
fait- water  flows  every  tide  ;  and  the  high  land  appeared  to
be  every  where  floney  and  barren.  In  the  mean  time  Mr.
Banks  had  alfo  taken  a  walk  up  the  country,  and  met  with
the  frames  of  feveral  old  Indian  houfes,  and  places  where
they  had  drefled  fhell-fifh;  but  they  feemed  not  to  have  been
frequented  for  fome  months.  Tupia,  who  had  employed
himfelf  in  angling,  and  lived  intirely  upon  what  he  "caught,
recovered  in  a  furprifing  degree;  but  Mr.  Green  Mill  conti-
nued to  be  extremely  ill.

The


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  s-j


CHAP.     VI.

TranfaSiions   while  the   Ship  was   refitting   in   Endeavour

River :   A  Description  of  the  adjacent  Country,  its

Inhabitants,  a?td  Produclions.

IN  the  morning  of  Monday  the  iSth,  a  ftage  was  made  1770*
from  the  fhip  to  the  more,  which  was  fo  bold  that  me  ,  ^"c"  __,
floated  at  twenty  feet  diflance :  two  tents  were  alfo  fet  up,-  Monday  l8i
one  for  the  nek,  and  the  other  for  ftores  and  provifions,
which  were  landed  in  the  courfe  of  the  day.  We  alfo  landed
all  the  empty  water  cafks,  and  part  of  the  ftores.  As  foon
as  the  tent  for  the  fick  was  got  ready  for  their  reception,  they
were  fent  amore  to  the  number  of  eight  or  nine,  and  the
boat  was  difpatched  to  haul  the  feine,  in  hopes  of  procuring
fome  fifli  for  their  refrefhment;  but  Ihe  returned  without
fuccefs.  In  the  mean  time,  I  climbed  one  of  the  highefl  hills
among  thofe  that  overlooked  the  harbour,  which  afforded
by  no  means  a  comfortable  profpect :  the  low  land  near  the
river  is  wholly  over-run  with  mangroves,  among  which  the
falt-water  flows  every  tide  ;  and  the  high  land  appeared  to
be  every  where  floney  and  barren.  In  the  mean  time  Mr.
Banks  had  alfo  taken  a  walk  up  the  country,  and  met  with
the  frames  of  feveral  old  Indian  houfes,  and  places  where
they  had  drefTed  mell-fiih ;  but  they  feemed  not  to  have  been
frequented  for  fome  months.  Tupia,  who  had  employed
himfelf  in  angling,  and  lived  intirely  upon  what  he'eaughr,
recovered  in  a  furprifing  degree ;  but  Mr.  Green  flill  conti-
nued to  be  extremely  ill.

The


55g  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  The  next  morning  I  got  the  four  remaining  guns  out  of

v_i!^L^   the  hold,  and  mounted  them  upon  the  quarter-deck;  I  alfo
i  uefday  19.  a  fpare  anchor,  and  anchor-flock  afhore,  and  the  remain-

ing part  of  the  flores  and  ballafl  that  were  in  the  hold  :  fet
up  the  fmith's  forge,  and  employed  the  armourer  and  his
mate  to  make  nails  and  other  neceHaries  for  the  repair  of  the
fhip.  In  the  afternoon,  all  the  officers'  flores  and  the  ground
tier  of  water  were  got  out ;  fo  that  nothing  remained  in  the
fore  and  main  hold,  but  the  coals,  and  a  fmall  quantity  of
ilone  ballaft.    This  day  Mr.  Banks  crofled  the  river  to  take  a
view  of  the  country  on  the  other  fide  :  he  found  it  cOnfift
principally  of  fand-hills,  where  he  faw  fome  Indian  houfes,
which  appeared  to  have  been  very  lately  inhabited.    In  his
walk,  he  met  with  vafl  flocks  of  pigeons  and  crows :  of  the
pigeons,  which  were  exceedingly  beautiful,  he  mot  feveral;
but  the  crows,  which  were  exactly  like  thofe  in  England,
were  fo  fhy  that  he  could  not  get  within  reach  of  them.
Wednef.  20.        On  the  20th,  we  landed  the  powder,  and  got  out  the  flone
ballafl  and  wood,  which  brought  the  fhip's  draught  of  wa-
ter to  eight  feet  ten  inches  forward,  and  thirteen  feet  abaft;
and  this  1  thought,  with  the  difference  that  would  be  made
by  trimming  the  coals  aft,  would  be  fufficient ;  for  I  found
that  the  water  rofe  and  fell  perpendicularly  eight  feet  at  the
fpring-tides :  but  as  foon  as  the  coals  were  trimmed  from
over  the  leak,  we  could  hear  the  water  rufh  in  a  little  abaft
the  foremaft,  about  three  feet  from  the  keel :  this  deter-
mined me  to  clear  the  hold  intirely.     This  evening,  Mr.
Banks  obferved  that  in  many  parts  of  the  inlet  there  were
large  quantities  of  pumice  ftones,  which  lay  at  a  confide-
rable  diilance  above  high-water  mark  ;  whither  they  might
have  been  carried  either  by  the  frefhesor  extraordinary  high
tides,  for  there  could  be  no  doubt  but  that  they  came  from

the  fea.  6

The


ROUND   THE   WORLD.


5S9


The  next  morning  we  went  early  to  work,  and  by  four      J77°-

0  June.

o'clock  in  the  afternoon  had  got  out  all  the  coals,  caft  the   < ;

moorings  loofe,  and  warped  the  fhip  a  little  higher  up  the
harbour  to  a  place  which  I  thought  mod  convenient  for  lay-
ing her  afhore  in  order  to  flop  the  leak.  Her  draught  of
water  forward  was  now  feven  feet  nine  inches,  and  abaft
thirteen  feet  fix  inches.  At  eight  o'clock,  it  being  high-
water,  I  hauled  her  bow  clofe  afhore  ;  but  kept  her  flern
afloat,  becaufe  I  was  afraid  of  neiping  her  ;  it  was  however
necefTary  to  lay  the  whole  of  her  as  near  the  ground  as
poflible.

At  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  22d,  the  tide  left  her,  Friday  zz.
and  gave  us  an  opportunity  to  examine  the  leak,  which  we
found  to  be  at  her  floor  heads,  a  little  before  the  (larboard
fore-chains.  In  this  place  the  rocks  had  made  their  way
through  four  planks,  and  even  into  the  timbers ;  three  more
planks  were  much  damaged,  and  the  appearance  of  thefe
breaches  was  very  extraordinary  :  there  was  not  a  fplinter  to
be  feen,  but  all  was  as  fmooth,  as  if  the  whole  had  been
cut  away  by  an  inftrument :  the  timbers  in  this  place  were
happily  very  clofe,  and  if  they  had  not,  it  would  have  been
abfolutely  impoflible  to  have  faved  the  fhip.  But  after  all,
her  prefervation  depended  upon  a  circumftance  flill  more
remarkable  :  in  one  of  the  holes,  which  was  big  enough  to
have  funk  us,  if  we  had  had  eight  pumps  inftead  of  four,
and  been  able  to  keep  them  inceflantly  going,  was  in  great
meafure  plugged  up  by  a  fragment  of  the  rock,  which,  after
having  made  the  wound,  was  left  (ticking  in  it  ;  fo  that  the
water  which  at  firfl  had  gained  upon  our  pumps,  was  what
came  in  at  the  interftices,  between  the  ftcne  and  the  edges
©f  the  hole  that  received  it.  We  found  alfo  feveral  pieces
of  the  fothering,  which,  had  made  their  way  between  the

timbers*


s4o  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1.770.       timbers,  and  in  a  great  meafure  flopped  thofe  parts  of  the

\ ^X^j   leak-  which  the  flone  had  left  open.     Upon  further  examina-

jfnday  22.  j^q^  we  found  that,  befides  the  leak,  confiderable  damage
had  been  done  to  the  bottom ;  great  part  of  the  fheathing  was
gone  from  under  the  larboard  bow;  a  confiderable  part  of
the  falfe  keel  was  alfo  wanting,  and  thefe  indeed  we  had
feen  fwim  away  in  fragments  from  the  veffel,  while  flie  lay
beating  againft  the  rock :  the  remainder  of  it  was  in  fo  mat-
tered a  condition  that  it  had  better  have  been  gone,  and  the
fore  foot  and  main  keel  were  alfo  damaged,  but  not  fo  as
to  produce  any  immediate  danger :  what  damage  me  might
have  received  abaft  could  not  yet  be  exaclly  known,  but  we
had  reafon  to  think  it  was  not  much,  as  but  little  water
made  its  way  into  her  bottom,  while  the  tide  kept  below  the
leak  which  has  already  been  defcribed.  By  nine  o'clock  in
the  morning  the  carpenters  got  to  work  upon  her,  while  the
fmiths  were  bufy  in  making  bolts  and  nails.  In  the  mean  time,
fome  of  the  people  were  fent  on  the  other  fide  of  the  water
to  moot  pigeons  for  the  fick,  who  at  their  return  reported  that
they  had  feen  an  animal  as  large  as  a  greyhound,  of  a  flender
make,  a  moufe  colour,  and  extremely  fwift ;  they  difcovered
alfo  many  Indian  houfes,  and  a  fine  ftream  of  frefh  water.

Saturday  23.  The  next  morning,  I  fent  a  boat  to  haul  the  feine;  but  at
noon  it  returned  with  only  three  fifli,  and  yet  we  faw  them
in  plenty  leaping  about  the  harbour.  This  day  the  carpen-
ter finifhed  the  repairs  that  were  necefTary  on  the  ftarboard
fide  ;  and  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  we  heeled  the  fhip
the  other  way,  and  hauled  her  off  about  two  feet  for  fear  of
neioing.  '1  his  day  almoft  every  body  had  feen  the  animal
which  the  pigeon-fhooters  had  brought  an  account  of  the
day  before  ;  and  one  of  the  feamen,  who  had  been  rambling
in  the  woods,  told  us  at  his  return,  that  he  verily  believed.

n  he


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  561

he  had  feen  the  devil :  we  naturally  enquired  in  what  form       in°-

n  June.

he  had  appeared,  and  his  anfwer  was  in  fo  fingular  a  llile    1 , »

that  I  mall  fet  down  his  own  words ;  "  He  was,  fays  John,  as
"  large  as  a  one  gallon  keg,  and  very  like  it ;  he  had  horns
u  and  wings,  yet  he  crept  fo  flowly  through  the  grafs,  that
«  if  I  had  not  been  aftard  I  might  have  touched  him."  This
formidable  apparition  we  afterwards  difcovered  to  have  been
a  batt;  and  the  batts  here  mull  be  acknowledged  to  have  a
frightful  appearance,  for  they  are  nearly  black,  and  full  as
large  as  a  partridge  ;  they  have  indeed  no  horns,  but  the
fancy  of  a  man  who  thought  he  faw  the  devil  might  eafily
fupply  that  defect

Early  on  the  24th,  the  carpenters  began  to  repair  the  Sunday  24.
fheathing  under  the  larboard  bow,  where  we  found  two
planks  cut  about  half  through;  and  in  the  mean  time  I  fent
a  party  of  men,  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Gore,  in  fearch
of  refrefhments  for  the  fick :  this  party  returned  about  noon
with  a  few  palm  cabbages,  and  a  bunch  or  two  of  wild  plan-
tains ;  the  plantains  were  the  fmalleft  I  had  ever  feen,  and
the  pulp,  though  it  was  well  tailed,  was  full  of  fmall  Hones.
As  I  was  walking  this  morning  at  a  little  diftance  from  the
fhip,  I  faw  myfelf  one  of  the  animals  which  had  been  fo
often  defcribed  :  it  was  of  a  light  moufe  colour,  and  in  fize
and  ihape  very  much  refembling  a  greyhound ;  it  had  a  long
tail  alfo,  which  it  carried  like  a  greyhound ;  and  I  mould
have  taken  it  for  a  wild  dog,  if  infkad  of  running,  it  had  not
leapt  like  a  hare  or  deer :  its  legs  were  faid  to  be  very  flender,
and  the  print  of  its  foot  to  be  like  that  of  a  goat ;  but  where
I  faw  it  the  grafs  was  fo  high  that  the  legs  were  concealed,
and  the  ground  was  too  hard  to  receive  the  track.  Mr.  Banks
alfo  had  an  imperfect  view  of  this  animal,  and  was  of  opi-
nion that  its  fpecies  was  hitherto  unknown.

Vol.H.  4G  After


WilillS!


iilSiiiM^-V-  v^


•;.-.  A5


I  m


%


'J    %


3&   J


fsSW


ill      |g§     I    gl  1EL^  h      n   J


mmm


mSKM


.■...■-


;;;;:;/


...  1  ml        .  ..


if//,


IPIilill-"       A  .  >'   v    ,


N?20


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  56*1

he  had  feen  the  devil :  we  naturally  enquired  in  what  form       f77°-

June.

he  had  appeared,  and  his  anfwer  was  in  fo  lingular  a  ftile    i , »

that  I  mall  fet  down  his  own  words ;  "  He  was,  fays  John,  as
"  large  as  a  one  gallon  keg,  and  very  like  it ;  he  had  horns
"  and  wings,  yet  he  crept  fo  flowly  through  the  grafs,  that
"  if  I  had  not  been  afeard  I  might  have  touched  him."  This
formidable  apparition  we  afterwards  difcovered  to  have  been
a  batt;  and  the  batts  here  mull  be  acknowledged  to  have  a
frightful  appearance,  for  they  are  nearly  black,  and  full  as
large  as  a  partridge  ;  they  have  indeed  no  horns,  but  the
fancy  of  a  man  who  thought  he  faw  the  devil  might  eafily
fupply  that  defect,

Early  on  the  24th,  the  carpenters  began  to  repair  the  Sunday  24.
fheathing  under  the  larboard  bow,  where  we  found  two
planks  cut  about  half  through;  and  in  the  mean  time  I  fent
a  party  of  men,  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Gore,  in  fearch
of  refrefhments  for  the  fick :  this  party  returned  about  noon
with  a  few  palm  cabbages,  and  a  bunch  or  two  of  wild  plan-
tains ;  the  plantains  were  the  fmalleft  I  had  ever  feen,  and
the  pulp,  though  it  was  well  tailed,  was  full  of  fmall  Hones.
As  I  was  walking  this  morning  at  a  little  diflance  from  the
fhip,  I  faw  myfelf  one  of  the  animals  which  had  been  fo
often  defcribed  :  it  was  of  a  light  moufe  colour,  and  in  fize
and  fhape  very  much  refembling  a  greyhound ;  it  had  a  long
tail  alfo,  which  it  carried  like  a  greyhound ;  and  I  mould
have  taken  it  for  a  wild  dog,  if  inftead  of  running,  it  had  not
leapt  like  a  hare  or  deer :  its  legs  were  faid  to  be  very  nender,
and  the  print  of  its  foot  to  be  like  that  of  a  goat;  but  where
1  faw  it  the  grafs  was  fo  high  that  the  legs  were  concealed,
and  the  ground  was  too  hard  to  receive  the  track.  Mr.  Banks
alfo  had  an  imperfect  view  of  this  animal,  and  was  of  opi-
nion that  its  fpecies  was  hitherto  imknown.

Vol.  II.  4G  After


562  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  After  the  fhip  was  hauled  afhore,  all  the  water  that  came

t  -.-',_/  into  her  of  courfe  went  backwards ;  fo  that  although  fhe  was
7Q'y  24'  dry  forward,  fhe  had  nine  feet  water  abaft:  as  in  this  part
therefore  her  bottom  could  not  be  examined  on  the  infide,  I
took  the  advantage  of  the  tide  being  out  this  evening  to  get
the  mafter  and  two  of  the  men  to  go  under  her,  and  exa-
mine her  whole  larboard  fide  without.  They  found  the
fheathing  gone  about  the  floor  heads  abreall  of  the  main-
mall,  and  part  of  a  plank  a  little  damaged ;  but  all  agreed
that  fhe  had  received  no  other  material  injury.  The  lofs  of
her  fheathing  alone  was  a  great  misfortune,  as  the  worm
would  now  be  let  into  her  bottom,  which  might  expofe  us  to
great  inconvenience  and  danger ;  but  as  I  knew  no  remedy
for  the  mifchief  but  heaving  her  down,  which  would  be  a
work  of  immenfe  labour  and  long  time,  if  practicable  at
all  in  our  prefent  flotation,  I  was  obliged  to  be  content.  The
carpenters  however  continued  to  work  under  her  bottom  in
the  evening  till  they  were  prevented  by  the  tide ;  the  morn-
ing tide  did  not  ebb  out  far  enough  to  permit  them  to  work
at  all,  for  we  had  only  one  tolerable  high  and  low  tide  in
four  and  twenty  hours,  as  indeed  we  had  experienced  when
we  lay  upon  the  rock.  The  polition  of  the  fhip,  which
threw  the  water  in  her  abaft,  was  very  near  depriving  the
world  of  all  the  knowlege  which  Mr.  Banks  had  endured  fo
much  labour,  and  fo  many  rifks,  to  procure;  for  he  had  re-
moved the  curious  collection  of  plants  which  he  made  du-
ring the  whole  voyage,  into  the  bread  room,  which  lies  in
the  after  part  of  the  fhip,  as  a  place  of  the  greateft  fecu-
rity ;  and  nobody  having  thought  of  the  danger  to  which
laying  her  head  fo  much  higher  than  the  ilern  would  ex-
pofe them,  they  were  this  day  found  under  water.  Moft
of  them  however  were,  by  indefatigable  care  and  attention,
?,  reftored


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  563

reftored  to  a  ftate  of  prefervation,  but  fome  were  entirely      1770.
fpoilt  and  deftroyed.  ^_  -"_'_.

The  25th  was  employed  in  filling  water  and  over-hauling  Monday «;.
the  rigging,  and  at  low  water  the  carpenters  finifhed  the
repairs  under  the  larboard  bow,  and  every  other  place  which
the  tide  would  permit  them  to  come  at ;  fome  caiks  were
then  lamed  under  her  bows  to  facilitate  her  floating,  and  at
night,  when  it  was  high  water,  we  endeavoured  to  heave
her  off,  but  without  fuccefs,  for  fome  of  the  caiks  that  were
lafhed  to  her  gave  way.

The  morning  of  the  26th  was  employed  in  getting  more
cafks  ready  for  the  fame  purpofe,  and  in  the  afternoon  we
lafhed  no  lefs  than  eight  and  thirty  under  the  fhip's  bottom,
but  to  our  great  mortification  thefe  alfo  proved  ineffectual,
and  we  found  ourfelves  reduced  to  the  neceflity  of  waiting
till  the  next  fpring-tide.

This  day,  fome  of  our  gentlemen  who  had  made  an  excur-
fion  into  the  woods,  brought  home  the  leaves  of  a  plant,
which  was  thought  to  be  the  fame  that  in  the  Weft  Indies  is
called  coccos,  but  upon  trial,  the  roots  proved  too  acrid  to
be  eaten  ;  the  leaves  however  were  little  inferior  to  fpinnage.
In  the  place  where  thefe  plants  were  gathered,  grew  plenty
of  the  cabbage  trees  which  have  occafionally  been  men-
tioned before,  a  kind  of  wild  plantain,  the  fruit  of  which
was  fo  full  of  ftones  as  fcarcely  to  be  eatable;  another  fruit
was  alfo  found  about  the  fize  of  a  fmall  golden  pippin,  but
flatter,  and  of  a  deep  purple  colour :  when  fir  ft  gathered
from  the  tree  it  was  very  hard  and  difagreeable,  but  after
being  kept  a  few  days  became  foft,  and  taftcd  very  much
like  an  indifferent  damafcene.

The  next  morning  we  began  to  move  fome  of  the  weight  wednef.  27.
from  the  after-part  of  the  fhip  forward,  to  eafe  her;  in  the
mean  time  the  armourer  continued  to  work  at  the  forge,  the

4  C  2  carpentei


1770.
June.

Wednef.  27,


564  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

carpenter  was  bufy  in  caulking  the  fhip,  and  the  men  em-
ployed in  filling  water  and  over-hauling  the  rigging:  in  the
forenoon,  I  went  niyfelf  in  the  pinnace  up  the  harbour,  and
made  feveral  hauls  with  the  feine,  but  caught  only  between
twenty  and  thirty  fim,  which  were  given  to  the  fick  and
convalefccnt.

Thurfday2S.       On  the  28th,  Mr.  Banks  went  with  fome  of  the  feamen  up
the  country,  to  fhew  them  the  plant  which  in  the  Well  Indies
is  called  Indian  kale,  and  which  ferved  us  for  greens.    Tu-
pia  had  much  meliorated  the  root  of  the  coccos,  by  giving
them  a  long  dreffing  in  his  country  oven,  but  they  were  fo
fmall  that  we  did  not  think  them  an  object  for  the  fhip.     In
their  walk  they  found  one  tree  which  had  been  notched  for
the  convenience  of  climbing  it,  in  the  fame  manner  with
thofe  we  had  feen  in  Botany  Bay :  they  faw  alfo  many  nefls
of  white  ants,  which  refemble  thofe  of  the  Eafl  Indies,  the
moll  pernicious  infects  in  the  world.    The  nefls  were  of  a
pyramidical  figure,  from  a  few  inches  to  fix  feet  high,  and
very  much  refembled  the  flones  in  England,  which  are  faid
to  be  monuments  of  the  Druids.    Mr.  Gore,  who  was  alfo
this  day  four  or  five  miles  up  the  country,  reported  that  he
had  feen  the  footfleps  of  men,  and  tracked  animals  of  three
or  four  different  forts,  but  had  not  been  fortunate  enough  to
fee  either  man  or  beafl.
Friday  29.  At  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  29th,  I  obferved,  in

conjunction  with  Mr.  Green,  an  emerfion  of  Jupiter's  firfl
fatellite  ;  the  time  here  was  2k  18'  53",  which  gave  the  lon-
gitude of  this  place  2140  42'  30"  W.:  its  latitude  is  150  26'  S.
At  break  of  day,  I  fent  the  boat  out  again  with  the  feine,  and
in  the  afternoon,  it  returned  with  as  much  fifh  as  enabled
me  to  give  every  man  a  pound  and  an  half.  One  of  my
midfliipmen,  an  American,  who  was  this  day  abroad  with
his  gun,  reported  that  he  had  feen  a  wolf,  exactly  like  thofe

which


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  56j

which  he  had  been  ufed  to  fee  in  his  own  country,  and  that      *77Q.
he  had  mot  at  it,  but  did  not  kill  it.  '_  -y-— i

The  next  morning,  encouraged  by  the  fuccefs  of  the  day  Saturday  30,
before,  I  fent  the  boat  again  to  haul  the  fcine,  and  another
party  to  gather  greens:  I  fent  alfo  fome  of  the  young  gen-
tlemen to  take  a  plan  of  the  harbour,  and  went  myfelf  upon
a  hill,  which  lies  over  the  fouth  point,  to  take  a  view  of  the
fea.  At  this  time  it  was  low  water,  and  I  faw,  with  great
concern,  innumerable  fand  banks  and  moals  lying  all  along
the  coaft  in  every  direction.  The  innermoft  lay  about  three
or  four  miles  from  the  more,  the  outermofl  extended  as  far
as  I  could  lee  with  my  glafs,  and  many  of  them  did  but  juft
rife  above  water.  There  was  fome  appearance  of  a  paflage
to  the  northward,  and  I  had  no  hope  of  getting  clear  but  in
that  direction,  for  as  the  wind  blows  constantly  from  tb.2
S.  E.  it  would  have  been  difficult,,  if  not  impoffible,  to  return
back  to  the  fouthward.

Mr.  Gore  reported,  that  he  had  this  day  feen  two  animals
like  dogs,  of  a  firaw  colour,  that  they  ran  like  a  hare,  and
were  about  the  fame  fize.  In  the  afternoon,  the  people  re-
turned from  hauling  the  feine,  with  Hill  better  fuccefs  than
before,  for  I  was  now  able  to  diftribute  two  pounds  and  an
half  to  each  man :  the  greens  that  had  been  gathered  I  or-
dered to  be  boiled  among  the  peas,  and  they  made  an  excel-
lent mefs,  which,  with  two  copious  fupplies  of  fiih,  afforded
us  unfpeakable  refrefhment.

The  next  day,  July  the  ill,  being  Sunday,  every  body  had       July.

r  i  Sunday  i,.

liberty  to  go  afhore,  except  one  from  each  meis,  who  were
again  fent  out  with  the  feine.  The  feine  was  again  equally
fuccefsful,  and  the  people  who  went  up  the  country  gave
an  account  of  having  feen  feveral  animals,  though  none  cf
them  were  to  be  caught.    They  faw  a  fire  alfo  about  a  mile

up


S66  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

'77°-  up  the  river,  and  Mr.  Gore,  the  Second  Lieutenant,  picked
\_  -Jl,_t  up  the  huik  of  a  cocoa  nut,  which  had  been  call  upon  the
Sunday  i.  |)eac]lj  an(j  was  full  of  barnacles :  this  probably  might  come
from  fome  ifland  to  windward,  perhaps  from  the  Terra  del
Efpirito  Santo  of  Quiros,  as  we  were  now  in  the  latitude
where  it  is  faid  to  lie.  This  day  the  thermometer  in  the  made
rofe  to  87,  which  was  higher  than  it  had  been  on  any  day
fince  we  came  upon  this  coaft.

Monday  2.  Early  the  next  morning,  I  fent  the  Matter  in  the  pinnace,
out  of  the  harbour,  to  found  about  the  fhoals  in  the  offing,
and  look  for  a  channel  to  the  northward :  at  this  time  we
had  a  breeze  from  the  land,  which  continued  till  about  nine
o'clock,  and  was  the  firftwe  had  had  fince  our  coming  into
the  river.  At  low  water  we  lamed  fome  empty  calks  under
the  fhip's  bows,  having  fome  hope  that  as  the  tides  were
rifing  me  would  float  the  next  high  water.  We  ftill  conti-
nued to  fifh  with  great  fuccefs,  and  at  high  water  we  again
attempted  to  heave  the  fhip  off,  but  our  utmoft  efforts  were
flill  ineffectual.

Tu«rday  3.  xhe  next  day  at  noon,  the  Mafter  returned,  and  reported,
that  he  had  found  a  paffage  out  to  fea  between  the  fhoals,
and  defcribed  its  fituation.  The  fhoals,  he  faid,  confided  of
coral  rocks,  many  of  which  were  dry  at  low  water,  and  upon
one  of  which  he  had  been  afliore.  He  found  here  fome
cockles  of  fo  enormous  a  fize  that  one  of  them  was  more
than  two  men  could  eat,  and  a  great  variety  of  other  fhell-
fifh,  of  which  he  brought  us  a  plentiful  fupply :  in  the  even-
ing, he  had  alfo  landed  in  a  bay  about  three  leagues  to  the
northward  of  our  ftation,  where  he  diflurbed  fome  of  the  na-
tives who  were  at  fupper :  they  all  fled  with  the  great-eft  pre-
cipitation at  his  approach,  leaving  fome  frefh  fea  eggs,  and
a  fire  ready  kindled  behind  them,  but  there  was  neither

houfe


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  s67

houfe  nor  hovel  near  the  place.,  We  obfcrved,  that  although  *77P«
the  fhoals  that  lie  juft  within  fight  of  the  coaft,  abound  with  <— .,-L^
fhell-fifh,  which  may  be  eafily  caught  at  low  water;  yet  we
faw  no  fuch  fhells  about  the  fire  places  on  more.  This  day
an  allegator  was  fecn  to  fwim  about  the  fhip  for  fome  time,
and  at  high  water  we  made  another  effort  to  float  her,
which  happily  fucceeded :  we  found  however  that  by  lying  fo
long  with  her  head  a-ground,  and  her  Hern  a-float,  flie  had
fprung  a  plank  between  decks,  a-breaft  of  the  main  chains,
fo  that  it  was  become  neceffary  to  lay  her  afhore  again.

The  next  morningrwas  employed  in  trimming  her  upon  Wed.nef.  lo-
an even  keel,  and  in  the  afternoon,  having  warped  her  over,
and  waited  for  high  water,  we  laid  her  afhore  on  the  fand
bank  on  the  fouth  fide  of  the  river,  for  the  damage  flie  had
received  already  from  the  great  defcent  of  the  ground,  made
me  afraid  to  lay  her  broad-fide  to  the  ihore  in  the  fame  place
from  which  we  had  juft  floated  her.  I  was  now  very  defirous
to  make  another  trial  to  come  at  her  bottom,  where  the
flieathing  had  been  rubbed  off,  but  though  fhe  had  fcarcely
four  feet  water  under  her,  when  the  tide  was  out,  yet  that
part  was  not  dry.

On  the  5th,  I  got  one  of  the  carpenter's  crew,  a  man  in  Thurfdays.
whom  I  could  confide,  to  go  down  again  to  the  fhip's  bot-
tom, and  examine  the  place.  He  reported,  that  three  ftrcaks
of  the  flieathing,  about  eight  feet  long,  were  wanting,
and  that  the  main  plank  had  been  a  little  rubbed ;  this  ac-
count perfectly  agreed  with  the  report  of  the  Matter,  and
others,  who  had  been  under  her  bottom  before :  I  had  the
comfort  however  to  find  the  carpenter  of  opinion  that  this
would  be  of  little  confequence,  and  therefore  the  other  da-
mage being  repaired,  flie  was  again  floated  at  high  water,
and  moored  along-fide  the  beach,  where  the  flores  had  been

depofited;


563


LIEUTENANT   COOK's   VOYAGE


T770-
July.

Thurfday  5.


Friday  6.


Saturday  7.


Sunday  8.


deposited ;  we  then  went  to  work  to  take  the  ftores  on  board,
and  put  her  in  a  condition  for  the  fea.  This  day,  Mr.  Banks
crofled  to  the  other  fide  of  the  harbour,  where,  as  he  walked
along  a  fandy  beach,  he  found  innumerable  fruits,  and
many  of  them  fuch  as  no  plants  which  he  had  difcovered  in
this  country  produced:  among  others  were  fome  cocoa
nuts,  which  Tupia  faid  had  been  opened  by  a  kind  of  crab,
which  from  his  defcription  we  judged  to  be  the  fame
that  the  Dutch  call  Beurs  Krabbe,  and  which  we  had  not
feen  in  thefe  feas.  All  the  vegetable  fubftances  which  he
found  in  this  place,  were  encrufted  with  marine  productions,
and  covered  with  barnacles  ;  a  fure  fign  that  they  muft  have
come  far  by  fea,  and,  as  the  trade-wind  blows  right  upon  the
ihore,  probably  from  Terra  del  Efpirito  Santo,  which  has
been  mentioned  already.

The  next  morning,  Mr.  Banks,  with  Lieutenant  Gore,  and
three  men,  fet  out  in  a  fmall  boat  up  the  river,  with  a  view
to  fpend  two  or  three  days  in  an  excurfion,  to  examine  the
country,  and  kill  fome  of  the  animals  which  had  been  fo
often  feen  at  a  diftance.

On  the  7th,  I  fent  the  Mafter  again  out  to  found  about  the
fhoals,  the  account  which  he  had  brought  me  of"  a  channel
being  by  no  means  fatisfaclory  j  and  we  fpent  the  remainder
of  this  day,  and  the  morning  of  the  next,  in  fifTiing,  and
other  neceiTary  occupations.

About  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  Mr.  Banks  and  his
party  returned,  and  gave  us  an  account  of  their  expedition.
Having  proceeded  about  three  leagues  among  fwamps  and
mangroves,  they  went  up  into  the  country,  which  they
found  to  differ  but  little  from  what  they  had  feen  before  :
they  purfued  their  courfe  therefore  up  the  river,  which  at
length  was  contracted  into  a  narrow  channel,  and  was
bounded,    not  by  fwamps  and   mangroves,    but  by  fteep

banks3


ROUND    THE    WOULD.  s69

banks,  that  were  covered  with  trees  of  a  mod  beautiful  ver-
dure, among  which  was  that  which  in  the  Weft  Indies  is
called  Mohocy  or  the  bark  tree,  the  hibifau  tiliaccus ;  the  land
within  was  in  general  low,  and  had  a  thick  covering  of  long
grafs:  the  foil  feemed  to  be  fuch  as  promifed  great  fertility,
to  any  who  fhould  plant  and  improve  it.  In  the  courfe  of
the  day,  Tupia  faw  an  animal,  which,  by  his  defcription,
Mr.  Banks  judged  to  be  a  wolf:  they  alfo  faw  three  other
animals,  but  could  neither  catch  nor  kill  one  of  them,  and
a  kind  of  bat,  as  large  as  a  partridge,  but  this  alfo  eluded  all
their  diligence  and  fkill.  At  night,  they  took  up  their  lodg-
ing clofe  to  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  made  a  lire,  but  the
mufquitos  fwarmed  about  them  in  fuch  numbers,  that  their
quarters  were  almoft  untenable ;  they  followed  them  into
the  fmoke,  and  almoft  into  the  fire,  which,  hot  as  the  cli-
mate was,  they  could  better  endure  than  the  ftings  of  thefe
infects,  which  were  an  intolerable  torment.  The  fire,  the
flies,  and  the  want  of  a  better  bed  than  the  ground,  ren-
dered the  night  extremely  uncomfortable,  fo  that  they  palled
it  not  in  fleep,  but  in  reftlefs  wifhes  for  the  return  of  day.
With  the  firft  dawn  they  fet  out  in  fearch  of  game,  and  in  a
walk  of  many  miles,  they  faw  four  animals  of  the  fame
kind,  two  of  which  Mr.  Banks's  greyhound  fairly  chaced,
but  they  threw  him  out  at  a  great  diftance,  by  leaping  over
the  long  thick  grafs,  which  prevented  his  running:  this
animal  was  obferved  not  to  run  upon  four  legs,  but  to  bound
or  hop  forward  upon  two,  like  the  Jcrbua,  or  Mus  Jaculus.
About  noon,  they  returned  to  the  boat,  and  again  proceeded
up  the  river,  which  was  foon  contracted  into  a  frefh  water
brook,  where,  however,  the  tide  rofe  to  a  confiderable
height :  as  evening  approached,  it  became  low  water,  and
it  was  then  fo  fhallow  that  they  were  obliged  to  get  out  of
the  boat  and  drag  her  along,  till  they  could  find  a  place  in
Vol.  II.  4  D  which


57°  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

17?°'      which  they  might,  with  fome  hope  of  reft,  pafs  the  night.

« „ 1  Such  a  place  at  length  offered,  and  while  they  were  getting  the

things  out  of  the  boat,  they  obferved  a  fmoke  at  the  diilance
of  about  a  furlong:  as  they  did  not  doubt  but  that  fome  of
the  natives,  with  whom  they  had  fo  long  and  earaeftly  de-
fired  to  become  perfonally  acquainted,  were  about  the  fire,
three  of  the  party  went  immediately  towards  it,  hoping  that
fo  fmall  a  number  would  not  put  them  to  flight :  when  they
came  up  to  the  place,  however,  they  found  it  deferted,  and
therefore  they  conjectured  that  before  they  had  difcovered
the  Indians,  the  Indians  had  difcovered  them.  They  found
the  fire  ftill  burning,  in  the  hollow  of  an  old  tree  that  was
become  touch-wood,  and  feveral  branches  of  trees  newly
broken  down,  with  which  children  appeared  to  have  been
playing:  they  obferved  alfo  many  foot-fteps  upon  the  fand,
below  high  water  mark,  which  were  certain  indications  that
the  Indians  had  been  recently  upon  the  fpot.  Several  houfes
were  found  at  a  little  diflance,  and  fome  ovens  dug  in  the
ground,  in  the  fame  manner  as  thofe  of  Otaheite,  in  which
victuals  appeared  to  have  been  dreffed  fince  the  morning,
and,  fcattered  about  them,  lay  fome  fliells  of  a  kind  of
clamm,  and  fome  fragments  of  roots,  the  refufe  of  the
meal.  After  regretting  their  difappointment,  they  repaired
to  their  quarters,  which  was  a  broad  fand  bank,  under  the
flicker  of  a  buffi.  Their  beds  were  plantain  leaves,  which
they  fpread  upon  the  fand,  and  which  were  as  foft  as  a  mat-
crefs;  their  cloaks  ferved  them  for  bed-clothes,  and  fome
bunches  of  grafs  for  pillows :  with  thefe  accommodations
they  hoped  to  pafs  a  better  night  than  the  laft,  efpecially  as,,
to  their  great  comfort,  not  a  mufquito  was  to  be  feen.  Here
then  they  lay  down,  and,  fuch  is  the  force  of  habit,  they
refigned  themfelves  to  deep,  without  once  reflecting  upon
the  probability  and  danger  of  being  found  by  the  Indians  in

thai:


D/


Sunday  8-


ROUND    THE    WORLD.

that  fltuation.  If  this  appears  flrange,  let  us  for  a  moment  »"
reflect,  that  every  danger,  and  every  calamity,  after  a  time
becomes  familiar,  and  lofes  its  effect  upon  the  mind.  If  it
were  poflible  that  a  man  fhould  firfl  be  made  acquainted  with
his  mortality,  or  even  with  the  inevitable  debility  and  infir-
mities of  old  age,  when  his  understanding  had  arrived  at  its
full  flrength,  and  life  was  endeared  by  the  enjoyments  of
youth,  and  vigour,  and  health,  with  what  an  agony  of  ter-
ror and  diflrefs  would  the  intelligence  be  received !  yet,
being  gradually  acquainted  with  thefe  mournful  truths,  by
infenfible  degrees,  we  fcarce  know  when,  they  lofe  all  their
force,  and  we  think  no  more  of  the  approach  of  old  age  and
death,  than  thefe  wanderers  of  an  unknown  defart  did  of  a
lefs  obvious  and  certain  evil,  the  approach  of  the  native  fa-
vages,  at  a  time  when  they  mud  have  fallen  an  eafy  prey  to
their  malice  or  their  fears.  And  it  is  remarkable,  that  the
greater  part  of  thofe  who  have  been  condemned  to  fuffer  a
violent  death,  have  flept  the  night  immediately  preceding
their  execution,  though  there  is  perhaps  no  inftance  of  a
perfon  accufed  of  a  capital  crime  having  flept  the  firfl  night
of  his  confinement.  Thus  is  the  evil  of  life  in  fome  degree
a  remedy  for  itfelf,  and  though  every  man  at  twenty  depre-
cates fourfcore,  almofl  every  man  is  as  tenacious  of  life  at
fourfcore  as  at  twenty  ;  and  if  he  does  not  fuffer  under  any
painful  diforder,  lofes  as  little  of  the  comforts  that  remain
by  reflecting  that  he  is  upon  the  brink  of  the  grave,  where
the  earth  already  crumbles  under  his  feet,  as  he  did  of  the
pleafurcs  of  his  better  days,  when  his  diflblution,  though
certain,  w7as  fuppofed  to  be  at  a  diilance.

Our  travellers  having  flept,  without  once  awaking,  till
the  morning,  examined  the  river,  and  finding  the  tide  fa-
voured  their  return,    and   the   country   promiied  nothing

4  D  a  worthy


57^


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


July

i — , —

Sunday  3


1770.      worthy  of  a  farther  fearch,  they  reimbarked  in  their  boat,'
and  made  the  bell  of  their  way  to  the  fhip.

Soon  after  the  arrival  of  this  party,  the  Matter  alfo  re-
turned, having  been  feven  leagues  out  to  fea,  and  he  was
now  of  opinion,  that  there  was  no  getting  out  where  before
he  thought  there  had  been  a  pafTage ;  his  expedition  how-
ever was  by  no  means  without  its  advantage,  for  having
been  a  fecond  time  upon  the  rock  where  he  had  feen  the
large  cockles,  he  met  with  a  great  number  of  turtle,  three
of  which  he  caught,  that  together  weighed  {even  hundred
and  ninety-one  pounds,  though  he  had  no  better  inftrument
than  a  boat  hook.
Monday  9.         The  next  morning  therefore,  I  fent  him  out  again,  with
proper  inflruments  for  taking  them,   and  Mr.  Banks  went
with  him,  but  the  fuccefs  did  not  at  all  anfwer  our  expecta-
tions, for,  by  the  unaccountable  conduct  of  the  officer,  not
a  fingle  turtle  was  taken,  nor  could  he  be  perfuaded  to  re-
turn :  Mr.  Banks,  however,  went  aihore  upon  the  reef,  where
he  faw  fevcral  of  the  large  cockles,  and  having  collected
many  lhells,  and  marine  productions,  he  returned  at  eleven
o'clock  at  night,  in  his  own  fmall  boat,  the  Mailer  ftill  con-
tinuing with  the  large  one  upon  the  rock.     In  the  after-
noon,   feven  or  eight  of  the  natives  had  appeared  on  the
fouth  fide  of  the  river,  and  two  of  them  came  down  to  the
fandy  point,  oppofite  to  the  fhip;  but  upon  feeing  me  put
oil*  in  a  boat  to  f peak  with  them,  they  all  ran  away  with  the
greateft  precipitation.

As  the  Mailer  continued  abfent  with  the  boat  all  night,  I
was  forced  to  fend  the  Second  Lieutenant  for  him,  early  the
TuefJa   10.    next  mormng  m  the  yawl ;  and  foon  after  four  of  the  natives
appeared  upon  the  fandy  point,  on  the  north  fide  of  the
river,  having  with  them  a  fmall  wooden  canoe,  with  out-
riggers :


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  J73


riggers :  they  feemed  for  fome  time  to  be  bufily  employed
in  flriking  fifh :  fome  of  our  people  were  for  going  over  to
them  in  a  boat,  but  this  I  would  by  no  means  permit,  re-
peated experience  having  convinced  me  that  it  was  more
likely  to  prevent,  than  procure  an  interview.  I  was  deter-
mined to  try  what  could  be  done  by  a  contrary  method,  and
accordingly  let  them  alone,  without  appearing  to  take  the
lead  notice  of  them:  this  fucceeded  fo  well,  that  at  length
two  of  them  came  in  the  canoe  within  a  muikct  mot  of  the
Ihip,  and  there  talked  a  great  deal  in  a  very  loud  tone :  we
underflood  nothing  that  they  faid,  and  therefore  could
anfwer  their  harangue  only  by  (homing,  and  making  all
the  figns  of  invitation  and  kindnefs  that  we  could  devife.
During  this  conference,  they  came,  infenfibly,  nearer  and
nearer,  holding  up  their  lances,  not  in  a  threatening  man-
ner, but  as  if  to  intimate  that  if  we  offered  them  any  injury,
they  had  weapons  to  revenge  it.  When  they  were  almofl
along-fide  of  us,  we  threw  them  fome  cloth,  nails,  beads,
paper,  and  other  trifles,  which  they  received  without  the
leafl  appearance  of  fatisfadtion:  at  laft,  one  of  the  people
happened  to  throw  them  a  fmall  fifh ;  at  this  they  exprefled
the  greater!  joy  imaginable,  and  intimating,  by  figns,  that
they  would  fetch  their  companions,  immediately  paddled
away  towards  the  more.  In  the  mean  time  fome  of  our
people,  and  among  them  Tupia,  landed  on  the  oppofite  fide
of  the  river:  the  canoe,  with  all  the  four  Indians,  very  foon
returned  to  the  fhip,  and  came  quite  along-fide,  without  ex-
preffing  any  fear  (K  diftruft.  We  diftributed  fome  more
prefents  among  them,  and  foon  after  they  left  us,  and
landed  on  the  fame  fide  of  the  river  where  our  people  had
gone  afhore  :  every  man  carried  in  his  hand  two  lances,  and
a  flick,  which  is  ufed  in  throwing  them,  and  advanced  to
8  the


1770.

July.
Tuefday  10.


574  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

177©-       the  place  where  Tupia  and  the  reft  of  our  people  were  fitting;

< 111 i   Tupia  foon  prevailed  upon  them  to  lay  down  their  arms,  and

Tuefday  1.0.  come  forwarci  without  them :  he  then  made  figns  that  they
lliould  fit  down  by  him,  with  which  they  complied,  and
feemed  to  be  under  no  apprehenfion  or  conftraint :  feveral
more  of  us  then  going  afhore,  they  expreffed  fome  jealoufy
left  we  mould  get  between  them  and  their  arms ;  we  took
care  however  to  fhew  them  that  we  had  no  fuch  intention,
and  having  joined  them,  we  made  them  fome  more  pre-
fents,  as  a  farther  teftimony  of  our  good-will,  and  our  defire
to  obtain  theirs.  We  continued  together,  with  the  utmoft
cordiality,  till  dinner  time,  and  then  giving  them  to  under-
ftand  that  we  were  going  to  eat,  we  invited  them,  by  figns,
to  go  with  us :  this  however  they  declined,  and  as  foon  as
we  left  them,  they  went  away  in  their  canoe.  One  of  thefe
men  was  fcmewhat  above  the  middle  age,  the  other  three
were  young ;  they  were  in  general  of  the  common  ftature,
but  iheir  limbs  were  remarkably  fmall  •,  their  fkin  was  of
the  colour  of  wood  foot,  or  what  would  be  called  a  dark  cho-
colate colour ;  their  hair  was  black,  but  not  woolly ;  it  was
ihort  cropped,  in  fome  lank,  and  in  others  curled.  Dampier
fays,  that  the  people  whom  he  faw  on  the  weftern  coaft  of
this  country,  wanted  two  of  their  fore-teeth,  but  thefe  had
no  fuch  defect:  fome  part  of  their  bodies  had  been  painted
red,  and  the  upper  lip  and  breaft  of  one  of  them  was  painted
.with  ftreaks  of  white,  which  he  called  Carbanda-,  their  fea-
tures were  far  from  difagreeable,  their  eyes  were  lively,  and
their  teeth  even  and  white,  their  voices  were  foft  and  tune-
able, and  they  repeated  many  words  after  us  with  great  fa-
cility. In  the  night,  Mr.  Gore  and  the  Mailer  returned  with
the  long-boat,  and  brought  one  turtle  and  a  few  mell-iifh.
The  yawl  had  been  left  upon  the  ihoal  with  fix  men,  to

make  a  farther  trial  for  turtle.

The
i


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  $7$

The  next  morning,  we  had  another  vifit  from  four  of  the  1770.
natives;  three  of  them  had  been  with  us  before,  but  the  1  -.-' _>
fourth  was  a  flranger,  whofe  name,  as  we  learnt  from  his  Wednef* lfc
companions  who  introduced  him,  was  Yaparico.  This
gentleman  was  diflinguifhed  by  an  ornament  of  a  very  link-
ing appearance:  it  was  the  bone  of  a  bird,  nearly  as  thick
as  a  man's  finger,  and  five  or  fix  inches  long,  which  he  had
thrufl  into  a  hole,  made  in  the  griftle  that  divides  the
noftrils ;  of  this  we  had  feen  one  inflance,  and  only  one,  in
New  Zealand  ;  but  upon  examination,  we  found  that  among
all  thefe  people  this  part  of  the  nofe  was  perforated,  to  re-
ceive an  ornament  of  the  fame  kind:  they  had  alfo  holes  in
their  ears,  though  nothing  was  then  hanging  to  them,  and
had  bracelets  upon  the  upper  part  of  their  arms,  made  of
plaited  hair,  fo  that,  like  the  inhabitants  of  Terra  del  Fuego,
they  feem  to  be  fond  of  ornament,  though  they  are  abfo-
lutely  without  apparel;  and  one  of  them,  to  whom  I  had
given  part  of  an  old  fhirt,  inilead  of  throwing  it  over  any
part  of  his  body,  tied  it  as  a  fillet  round  his  head.  They
brought  with  them  a  fifh,  which  they  gave  us,  as  we  fup-
pofed,  in  return  for  the  fifh  that  we  had  given  them  the  day
before.  They  feemed  fo  be  much  pleafed,  and  in  no  hafle
to  leave  us,  but  feeing  fome  of  our  gentlemen  examine  their
canoe  with  great  curiofity  and  attention,  they  were  alarmed,
and  jumping  immediately  into  it,  paddled  away  without
fpeaking  a  word.

About  two  the  next  morning,  the  yawl,  which  had  been  Thurfdaj?i^
left  upon  the  fhoal,  returned,  with  three  turtles  and  a  large
fkeat.  As  it  feemed  now  probable  that  this  fifhery  might  be
profecuted  with  advantage,  I  fent  her  out  again,  after  break-
faft,  for  a  further  fupply.  Soon  after,  three  Indians  ven-
tured down  to  Tupia's  tent,  and  were  fo  well  pleafed  with
their  reception,  thax  one  of  them,  went  with  the  cance  to*

fetch.


5TS  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1773-      fetch  two  others  whom  wc  had  never  feen:  when  he  re-
^_  -"/'    •   turned,  he  introduced  the  flrangers  by  name,  a  ceremony
■ihurida)  12.  ^jjjpjj^  upon  fuch  occafions,  was  never  omitted.     As  they
had  received  the  fifh  that  was  thrown  into  their  canoe,  when
they  firft  approached  the  fhip,  with  fo  much  pleafure,  fome
fi.fli  was  offered  to  them  now,  and  we  were  greatly  furprized
to  fee  that  it  was  received  with  the  greateft  indifference:
they  made  figns,  however,  to  fome  of  the  people,  that  they
mould  drefs  it  for  them,  which  was  immediately  done,  but
after  eating  a  little  of  it,  they  threw  the  reft  to  Mr.  Banks's
dog.    They  ftaid  with  us  all  the  forenoon,  but  would  never
venture  above  twenty  yards  from  their  canoe.     We  now  per-
ceived that  the  colour  of  their  fkin  was  not  fo  dark  as  it  ap-
peared, what  we  had  taken  for  their  complexion,  being  the
effects  of  dirt  and  fmoke,  in  which,  we  imagined,  they  con-
trived to  fleep,  notwithftanding  the  heat  of  the  climate,  as
the  only  means  in  their  power  to  keep  off  the  mufquitos.
Among  other  things  that  we  had  given  them  when  we  firft
faw  them,  were  fome  medals,  which  we  had  hung  round
their  necks  by  a  riband  ;  and  thefe  ribands  were  (b  changed
by  fmoke,  that  we  could  not  eafily  diftinguifh  of  what  colour
they  had  been:  this  incident  led  us 'more  narrowly  to  ex-
amine the  colour  of  their  fkin.    While  thefe  people  were
with  us,  we  faw  two  others  on  the  point  of  land  that  lay  on
the  oppoiite  fide  of  the  river,  at  the  diftance  of  about  two
hundred  yards,  and  by  our  glaffes  difcovered  them  to  be  a
woman  and  a  boy ;  the  woman,   like  the  reft,  being  ftark
naked.     We  obferved,   that  all  of  them  were  remarkably
clean-limbed,  and  exceedingly  active  and  nimble.     One  of
thefe  flrangers  had  a  necklace  of  fhells,  very  prettily  made*
and  a  bracelet  upon  his  arm*  formed  of  feveral  firings,  fo  as
to  reiemble  what  in  England  is  called  gymp:  both  of  them
hid  a  piece  of  bark  tied  over  the  forehead,  and  were  dif-
t  figured


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  j77

figured  by  the  bone  in  the  nofe.    We  thought  their  Ian-      1770.
guage  more  harfh  than  that  of  the  Illanders  in  the  South  "


Sea,  and  they  were  continually  repeating  the  word  chercauy  Thurfdayl2<

which  we  imagined  to  be  a  term  exprefling  admiration,  by

the  manner  in  which  it  was  uttered:  they  alfo  cried  out,

when  they  faw  any  thing  new,  cher,  tut,  tut,  tut,  tut!  which

probably  had  a  fimilar  fignification.    Their  canoe  was  not

above  ten  feet  long,  and  very  narrow,  but  it  was  fitted  with

an  outrigger,  much  like  thofe  of  the  iflands,  though  in  every

refpectvery  much  inferior :  when  it  was  in  mallow  water,  they

fet  it  on  with  poles,  and  when  in  deep,  they  worked  it  with

paddles  about  four  feet  long :  it  contained  juft  four  people,

fo  that  the  people  who  vifited  us  to-day  went  away  at  two

turns.    Their  lances  were  like  thofe  that  we  had  feen  in

Botany  Bay,  except  that  they  had  but  a  fingle  point,  which

in  fome  of  them  was  the  fling  of  the  ray,  and  barbed  with

two  or  three  fharp  bones  of  the  fame  fifli :  it  was  indeed  a

moft  terrible  weapon,  and  the  inflrument  which  they  ufed

in  throwing  it,  feemed  to  be  formed  with  more  art  than  any

we  had  feen  before.     About  twelve  o'clock  next  day,  the  Fridax  »3«

yawl  returned,  with  another  turtle,  and  a  large  fling-ray,

and  in  the  evening,  was  fent  out  again.

The  next  morning,  two  of  the  Indians  came  on  board,  Saturday  14.
but  after  a  fhort  flay,  went  along  the  fhore,  and  applied
themfelves  with  great  diligence  to  the  flriking  of  fifli.  Mr.
Gore,  who  went  out  this  day  with  his  gun,  had  the  good
fortune  to  kill  one  of  the  animals  which  had  been  fo  much
the  fubject.  of  our  fpeculation:  an  idea  of  it  will  befl  be  con-
ceived by  the  cut,  plate  XX,  without  which,  the  moft  accu-
rate verbal  description  would  anfwer  very  little  purpofe,  as
it  has  not  fimilitude  enough  to  any  animal  already  known,
to  admit  of  illuflration  by  reference.    In  form,  it  is  moft

Vol.  II.  4  E  like


5;8  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770-      like  the  gerbua,  which  it  alfo  refembles  in  its  motion,  as

July.

i 1   has  been  observed  already,  but  it  greatly  differs  in  fize,  the

.  °  ay  '*'  gerbua  not  being  larger  than  a  common  rat,  and  this  animal,
when  full  grown,  being  as  big  as  a  fheep :  this  individual  was
a  young  one,  much  under  its  full  growth,  weighing  only
thirty-eight  pounds.  The  head,  neck,  and  moulders,  are  very
fmall  in  proportion  to  the  other  parts  of  the  body;  the  tail  is
nearly  as  long  as  the  body,  thick  near  the  rump,  and  taper-
ing towards  the  end:  the  fore-legs  of  this  individual  were
only  eight  inches  long,  and  the  hind-legs  two  and  twenty :
its  progrefs  is  by  fucceflive  leaps  or  hops,  of  a  great  length,
in  an  erect  pofture ;  the  fore-legs  are  kept  bent  clofe  to  the
breafl,  and  feemed  to  be  of  ufe  only  for  digging:  the  fkin  is
covered  with  a  fhort  fur,  of  a  dark  moufe  or  grey  colour
excepting  the  head  and  ears,  which  bear  a  flight  refemblance
to  thofe  of  a  hare.  This  animal  is  called  by  the  natives
Kanguroo.
Sunday  15.  The  next  day,  our  Kanguroo  was  drefled  for  dinner,  and
proved  molt  excellent  meat ;  we  might  now  indeed  be  faid
to  fare  fumptuoufly  every  day,  for  we  had  turtle  in  great
plenty,  and  we  all  agreed  that  they  were  much  better  than
any  we  had  tailed  in  England,  which  we  imputed  to  their
being  eaten  frefh  from  the  fea,  before  their  natural  fat  had
been  wailed,  or  their  juices  changed  by  a  diet  and  fituation
fo  different  from  what  the  fea  affords  them,  as  garbage  and
a  tub.  Moil  of  thofe  that  we  caught  here,  were  of  the  kind
called  green  turtle,  and  weighed  from  two  to  three  hundred
weight,  and  when  thefe  were  killed,  they  were  always  found
to  be  full  of  turtle  grafs,  which  our  naturalifls  took  to  be  a
kind  of  conferva :  two  of  them  were  loggerheads,  the  flefli  of
which  was  much  lefs  delicious,  and  in  their  flomachs  nothing

was  to  be  found  but  fhells.

In


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  579

In  the  morning  of  the  16th,  while  the  people  were  em-      1770.
ployed  as  ufual  in  getting  the  fhip  ready  for  the  fea,  I   1   ,  .lul>J
climbed  one  of  the  hills  on  the  north  fide  of  the  river,  from  Monday  l6-
which  I  had  an  extenfive  view  of  the  inland  country,  and
found  it  agreeably  diverfified   by  hills,  vallies,   and  large
plains,   which  in   many  places  were  richly  covered  with
wood.    This  evening,  we  obferved  an  emerfion  of  Jupiter's
firft  fatellite,  which  gave  2140  53'  45"  of  longitude.     The
obfervation  which  was  made  on  the  29th  of  June  gave  2 14°
42'  30";  the  mean  is  2 14°  48'  7  4",  the  longitude  of  this  place
weft  of  Greenwich.

On  the  17th,  I  fent  the  Matter  and  one  of  the  Mates  in  the  Tuefday  17.
pinnace  to  look  for  a  channel  to  the  northward ;  and  I  went
myfelf  with  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  into  the  woods  on
the  other  fide  of  the  water.  Tupia,  who  had  been  thither  by
himfelf,  reported,  that  he  had  feen  three  Indians  who  had
given  him  fome  roots  about  as  thick  as  a  man's  finger,  in
fhape  not  much  unlike  a  rhadifh,  and  of  a  very  agreeable
tafte.  This  induced  us  to  go  over,  hoping  that  we  mould  be
able  to  improve  our  acquaintance  with  the  natives  :  in  a  very
little  time  we  difcovered  four  of  them  in  a  canoe,  who  as  foon
as  they  faw  us  came  afhore,  and,  though  they  were  all  Gran-
gers, walked  up  to  us,  without  any  figns  of  fufpicion  or  fear.
Two  of  thefe  had  necklaces  of  fhells,  which  we  could  not
perfuade  them  to  part  with  for  any  thing  we  could  give
them:  we  prefented  them  however  with  fome  beads,  and
after  a  fhort  ftay  they  departed.  We  attempted  to  follow
them,  hoping  that  they  would  conduct  us  to  fome  place
where  we  fhould  find  more  of  them,  and  have  an  oppor-
tunity of  feeing  their  women ;  but  they  made  us  understand,
by  figns,  that  they  did  not  defire  our  company.

4E  2  At


58o  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  At  eight  o'clock  the  next  morning,  we  were  vifited  by  fe-

s_  "__  _f   veral  of  the  natives,  who  were  now  become  quite  familiar.
Wednef.  is.    Qn£  Q£  tjiemj  at  our  defire>   threw  his  lance,  which  was

about  eight  feet  long :  it  flew  with  a  fwiftnefs  and  fteadinefs
that  furprifed  us,  and  though  it  was  never  more  than  four
feet  from  the  ground,  it  entered  deeply  into  a  tree  at  fifty
paces  diftance.  After  this  they  ventured  on  board,  where  I
left  them,  to  all  appearance  much  entertained,  and  went
again  with  Mr.  Banks  to  take  a  view  of  the  country ;  but
chiefly  to  indulge  an  anxious  curiofity,  by  looking  round  us
upon  the  fea,  of  which  our  wifhes  almoft  perfuaded  us  we
had  formed  an  idea  more  difadvantageous  than  the  truth.
After  having  walked  about  feven  or  eight  miles  along  the
fhore  to  the  northward,  we  afcended  a  very  high  hill,  and
were  foon  convinced  that  the  danger  of  our  fituation  was  at
leaft  equal  to  our  apprehenfions ;  for  in  whatever  direction
we  turned  our  eyes,  we  faw  rocks  and  fhoals  without  num-
ber, and  no  paffage  out  to  fea,  but  through  the  winding
channels  between  them,  which  could  not  be  navigated  with-
out the  laft  degree  of  difficulty  and  danger.  We  returned
therefore  to  the  fhip,  not  in  better  fpirits  than  when  we  left
it ;  we  found  feveral  natives  ftill  on  board,  and  we  were  told
that  the  turtles,  of  which  we  had  then  no  lefs  than  twelve
upon  the  deck,  had  fixed  their  attention  more  than  any
thing  elfe  in  the  fhip.

ThwHayip,  On  the  19th  in  the  morning,  we  were  vifited  by  ten  of  the
natives,  the  greater  part  from  the  other  fide  of  the  river,  where
we  faw  fix  or  feven  more,  molt  of  them  women,  and  like
all  the  reft  of  the  people  we  had  feen  in  this  country,  they
were  ftark  naked.  Our  guefts  brought  with  them  a  greater
number  of  lances  than  they  had  ever  done  before,  and  hav-
ing laid  them  up  in  a  tree,  they  fet  a  man  and  a  boy  to

watch


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  58i

watch  them  :  the  reft  then  came  on  board,  and  we  foon  per-      *77°-

ceived  that  they  had  determined  to  get  one  of  our  turtle,   v. — ._>

which  was  probably  as  great  a  dainty  to  them  as  to  us.  Ul  ay  *9'
They  firft  afked  us,  by  figns,  to  give  them  one  ;  and  being
refufed,  they  exprefTed,  both  by  looks  and  geftures,  great
difappointment  and  anger.  At  this  time  we  happened  to
have  no  victuals  drefTed,  but  I  offered  one  of  them  fome  bif-
cuit,  which  he  fnatched  and  threw  overboard  with  great  dif-
dain.  One  of  them  renewed  his  requeft  to  Mr.  Banks,  and
upon  a  refufal  (lamped  with  his  foot,  and  pufhed  him  from
him  in  a  tranfport  of  refentment  and  indignation :  having
applied  by  turns  to  almofl  every  perfon  who  appeared  to
have  any  command  in  the  fhip,  without  fuccefs,  they  fud-
denly  feized  two  of  the  turtles,  and  dragged  them  towards
the  fide  of  the  fhip  where  their  canoe  lay  :  our  people  foon
forced  them  out  of  their  hands,  and  replaced  them  with  the
reft.  They  would  not  however  relinquifh  their  enterprife,
but  made  feveral  other  attempts  of  the  fame  kind,  in  all
which  being  equally  cufappointed,  they  fuddenly  leaped  into
their  canoe  in  a  rage,  and  began  to  paddle  towards  the  fhore.
At  the  fame  time,.  I  went  into  the  boat  with  Mr.  Banks,
and  five  or  fix  of  the  fhip's  crew,  and  we  got  aihore  before
them,  where  many  more  of  our  people  were  already  en-
gaged in  various  employments;  as  foon  as  they  landed,  they
feized  their  arms,  and,  before  we  were  aware  of  their  de-
fign,  they  fnatched  a  brand  from  under  a  pitch  kettle  which
was  boiling,  and  making  a  circuit  to  the  windward  of  the
few  things  we  had  on  fhore,  they  fet  fire  to  the  grafs  in  their
way,  with  furprifmg  quicknefs  and  dexterity:  the  grafs,
which  was  five  or  fix  feet  high,  and  as  dry  as  flubble,  burnt
with  amazing  fury ;  and  the  fire  made  a  rapid  progrefs  to-
wards a  tent  of  Mr.  Banks's,  which  had  been  fet  up  for
Tupia  when  he  was  fick,  taking  in  its  courfe  a  fow  and  pigs,
4  ous


58?  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°«  one  of  which  it  fcorched  to  death.  Mr.  Banks  leaped  into  a
<l  ■-.-,_/  boat,  and  fetched  fome  people  from  on  board,  juft  time
ur  yi9'  enough  to  fave  his  tent,  by  hauling  it  down  upon  the  beach;
but  the  fmith's  forge,  at  lead  fuch  part  of  it  as  would  burn,
was  confumed.  While  this  was  doing,  the  Indians  went  to  a
place  at  fome  diftance,  where  feveral  of  our  people  were
wafhing,  and  where  our  nets,  among  which  was  the  feine,
and  a  great  quantity  of  linen,  were  laid  out  to  dry ;  here
they  again  fet  fire  to  the  grafs,  entirely  difregarding  both
threats  and  entreaties.  We  were  therefore  obliged  to  dis-
charge a  mufquet,  loaded  with  fmall  mot,  at  one  of  them,
which  drew  blood  at  the  diftance  of  about  forty  yards,  and
this  putting  them  to  flight,  we  extinguifhed  the  fire  at  this
place  before  it  had  made  much  progrefs;  but  where  the
grafs  had  been  firft  kindled,  it  fpread  into  the  woods  to  a
great  diftance.  As  the  Indians  were  ftill  in  fight,  I  fired  a
mufquet,  charged  with  ball,  abreaft  of  them  among  the
mangroves,  to  convince  them  that  they  were  not  yet  out  of
our  reach :  upon  hearing  the  ball  they  quickened  their  pace,
and  we  foon  loft  fight  of  them.  We  thought  they  would
now  give  us  no  more  trouble ;  but  foon  after  we  heard  their
voices  in  the  woods,  and  perceived  that  they  came  nearer
and  nearer.  I  fet  out,  therefore,  with  Mr.  Banks  and  three
or  four  more,  to  meet  them  :  when  our  parties  came  in  fight
of  each  other,  they  halted  j  except  one  old  man,  who  came
forward  to  meet  us :  at  length  he  flopped,  and  having  ut-
tered fome  words,  which  we  were  very  forry  we  could  not
underftand,  he  went  back  to  his  companions,  and  the  whole
body  flowly  retreated.  We  found  means  however  to  feize
fome  of  their  darts,  and  continued  to  follow  them  about  a
mile :  we  then  fat  down  upon  fome  rocks,  from  which  we
could  obferve  their  motions,  and  they  alfo  fat  down  at
about  an  hundred  yards  diftance.  After  a  fliort  time,  the  old
s  man


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  5%

man  again  advanced  towards  us,  carrying  in  his  hand  a  mo.
lance  without  a  point:  he  flopped  feveral  times,  at  different  v  -.- ^r
diftanccs,  and  fpoke  ;  we  anfwered  by  beckoning  and  mak-  ur  ay'9'
ing  fuch  figns  of  amity  as  we  could  devife ;  upon  which  the
meflenger  of  peace,  as  we  fuppofed  him  to  be,  turned  and
fpoke  aloud  to  his  companions,  who  then  fet  up  their  lances
againfl  a  tree,  and  advanced  towards  us  in  a  friendly  man-
ner: when  they  came  up,  we  returned  the  darts  or  lances
that  we  had  taken  from  them,  and  we  perceived  with  great
fatisfaction  that  this  rendered  the  reconciliation  complete.
We  found  in  this  party  four  perfons  whom  we  had  never
feen  before,  who  as  ufual  were  introduced  to  us  by  name ;
but  the  man  who  had  been  wounded  in  the  attempt  to  burn
our  nets  and  linen,  was  not  among  them ;  we  knew  how-
ever that  he  could  not  be  dangeroufly  hurt,  by  the  diftance
at  which  the  fhot  reached  him.  We  made  all  of  them  pre-
sents of  fuch  trinkets  as  we  had  about  us,  and  they  walked
back  with  us  towards  the  (hip :  as  we  went  along,  they  told
us,  by  figns,  that  they  would  not  fet  fire  to  the  grafs  any
more  ;  and  we  diflributed  among  them  fome  mufquet  balls,
and  endeavoured  to  make  them  underftand  their  ufe  and  ef-
fect. When  they  came  abreaft  of  the  fliip,  they  fat  down^
but  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  come  on  board  ;  we
therefore  left  them,  and  in  about  two  hours  they  went
away,  foon  after  which  we  perceived  the  woods  on  fire  at
about  two  miles  diftance.  If  this  accident  had  happened  a
very  little  while  fooner,  the  confequence  might  have  been
dreadful  j  for  our  powder  had  been  aboard  but  a  few  days,
and  the  ftore  tent,  with  many  valuable  things  which  it  con-
tained, had  not  been  removed  many  hours.  We  had  no  idea
of  the  fury  with  which  grafs  would  burn  in  this  hot  climate,
nor  confequently  of  the  difficulty  of  extinguifhing  it ;  but
we  determined,  that  if  it  mould  ever  again  be  neceflary  for

us


1770.

July.
Thurfday  19.


Saturday  21.


Sunday  22.


s84  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

us  to  pitch  our  tents  in  fuch  a  fituation,  our  firft  meafure
mould  be  to  clear  the  ground  round  us.

In  the  afternoon  we  got  every  thing  on  board  the  fhip,
new  birthed  her,  and  let  her  fwing  with  the  tide ;  and  at
night  the  Matter  returned,  with  the  difcouraging  account
that  there  was  no  paflage  for  the  fhip  to  the  northward.

Fw&y  20.  The  next  morning,  at  low  water,  I  went  and  founded  and
buoyed  the  bar,  the  fhip  being  now  ready  for  the  fea.  We
faw  no  Indians  this  day,  but  all  the  hills  round  us  for  many
miles  were  on  fire,  which  at  night  made  a  moft  ftriking  and
beautiful  appearance.

The  2 1  ft  palled  without  our  getting  fight  of  any  of  the  in-
habitants, and  indeed  without  a  fingle  incident  worth  no-
tice. On  the  22d,  we  killed  a  turtle  for  the  day's  provifion,
upon  opening  which  we  found  a  wooden  harpoon  or  turtle-
peg,  about  as  thick  as  a  man's  finger,  near  fifteen  inches
long,  and  bearded  at  the  end,  fuch  as  we  had  feen  among
the  natives,  flicking  through  both  fhoulders :  it  appeared  to
have  been  ftruck  a  confiderable  lime,  for  the  wound  had
perfectly  healed  up  over  the  weapon.

Monday  23.  Early  in  the  morning  of  the  23d,  I  fent  fome  people  into
the  country  to  gather  a  fupply  of  the  greens  which  have
been  before  mentioned  by  the  name  of  Indian  Kale ;  and  one
of  them  having  ftraggled  from  the  reft,  fuddenly  fell  in  with
four  Indians,  three  men  and  a  boy,  whom  he  did  not  fee
till,  by  turning  fhort  in  the  wood,  he  found  himfelf  among
them.  They  had  kindled  a  fire,  and  were  broiling  a  bird  of
fome  kind,  and  part  of  a  Kanguroo,  the  remainder  of  which,
and  a  cockatoo,  hung  at  a  little  diftance  upon  a  tree :  the
man,  being  unarmed,  was  at  firft  greatly  terrified ;  but  he
had  the  prefence  of  mind  not  to  run  away,  judging  very

rightly,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  s%S


rightly,  that  he  was  moft  likely  to  incur  danger  by  appear-      »77°-

ing  to  apprehend  it ;  on  the  contrary,  he  went  and  fat  down   * ^ — '

by  them,  and,  with  an  air  of  chearfulnefs  and  good  humour,
offered  them  his  knife,  the  only  thing  he  had  about  him
which  he  thought  would  be  acceptable  to  them ;  they  re-
ceived it,  and  having  handed  it  from  one  to  the  other,  they
gave  it  him  again :  he  then  made  an  offer  to  leave  them  •,
but  this  they  feemed  not  difpofed  to  permit:  Hill  however  he
diffembled  his  fears,  and  fat  down  again ;  they  confidered
him  with  great  attention  and  curiofity,  particularly  his
clothes,  and  then  felt  his  hands  and  face,  and  fatisfied  them-
felves  that  his  body  was  of  the  fame  texture  with  their  own.
They  treated  him  with  the  greateft  civility,  and  having  kept
him  about  half  an  hour,  they  made  figns  that  he  might  de-
part :  he  did  not  wait  for  a  fecond  difmiflion,  but  when  lie
left  them,  not  taking  the  direct  way  to  the  fhip,  they  came
from  their  fire  and  directed  him ;  fo  that  they  well  knew
whence  he  came.

In  the  mean  time,  Mr.  Banks,  having  made  an  excurfion
on  the  other  fide  of  the  river  to  gather  plants,  found  the
greateft  part  of  the  cloth  that  had  been  given  to  the  Indians
lying  in  a  heap  together,  probably  as  ufelefs  lumber,  not
worth  carrying  away ;  and  perhaps,  if  he  had  fought  fur-
ther, he  might  have  found  the  other  trinkets  ;  for  they
feemed  to  fet  very  little  value  upon  any  thing  we  had,  except
our  turtle,  which  was  a  commodity  that  we  were  leaft  able
to  fpare.

The  blowing  weather,  which  prevented  our  attempt  to  Tuefdayz4.
get  out  to  fea,  flill  continuing,  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander
went  again  out  on  tiie  24th  to  fee  whether  any  new  plant
could  be  picked  up:  they  traverfed  the  woods  all  day  with-
out fuccefs ;  but  as  they  were  returning  through  a  deep  val-

Vol.  II.  4  F  ley,


5%6  LIEUTENANT    COOR's    VOYAGE

i77°-  ley,  the  fides  of  which,  though  almoft  as  perpendicular  ass
» — -v — j  a  wall,  were  covered  with  trees  and  bufhes  ;  they  found
lying  upon  the  ground  feveral  marking  nuts,  the  Anacardium
orient  ale  \  thefe  put  them  upon  a  new  fcent,  and  they  made  a'
moft  diligent  fearch  after  the  tree  that  bore  them,  which
perhaps  no  European  botanift  ever  faw ;  but  to  their  great
mortification  they  could  not  find  it :  fo  that,  after  fpending.
much  time,  and  cutting  down  four  or  five  trees,  they  re-
turned quite  exhausted  with  fatigue  to  the  fhip.

Wednef.  25.  On  the  25th,  having  made  an  excurfion  up  the  river,  I
found  a  canoe  belonging  to  our  friends  the  Indians,  whom
we  had  hot  feen  fince  the  affair  of  the  turtle ;  they  had  left
it  tied  to  fome  mangroves,  about  a  mile  diftant  from  the.
fhip,  and  I  could  fee  by  their  fires  that  they  were  retired  at
leaft  fix  miles  directly  inland.

As  Mr.  Banks  was  again  gleaning  the  country  for  his  Na*
''  tural  Hiftory  on  the  q6th,  he  had  the  good  fortune  to  take-
an  animal  of  the  Opojfum  tribe  :  it  was  a  female,  and  with  it
he  took  two  young  ones  :  it  was  found  much  to  refemble  the
remarkable  animal  of  the  kind,  which  Monf.  de  Buffon  has
defcribed  in  his  Natural  Hiftory  by  the  name  of  Phalangerr
but  it  was  not  the  fame.  Monf.  Buffon  fuppofes  this  tribe  to
be  peculiar  to  America,  but  in  this  he  is  certainly  miftaken,^
and  probably,  as  Pallas  has  obferved  in  his  Zoology,  the
Phalanger  itfelf  is  a  native  of  the  Eaft  Indies,  as  the  animal,
which  was  caught  by  Mr.  Banks  refembled  it  in  the  extra-
ordinary conformation  of  the  feet,  in  which  it  differs  from,
animals  of  every  other  tribe.
Friday  27.  On  the  27th,  Mr.  Gore  fhot  a  Kanguroo,  which,  with  the

fkin,  entrails,  and  head,  weighed  eighty-four  pounds.    Upon
examination,  however,  we  found  that  this  animal  was  not  at
its  full  growth,  the  innermoft  grinders  not  being  yet  formed:
5  We


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  587

We  dreffed  it  for  dinner  the  next  day;  but  to  our  great  dif-       ^re-
appointment, we  found  it  had  a  much  worfe  flavour  than   ».  -,y'  __?
that  we  had  eaten  before.  Saturday  z«.

The  wind  continued  in  the  fame  quarter,  and  with  the
fame  violence,  till  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  29th,  Sunday  23,
when  it  fell  calm  ;  foon  after  a  light  breeze  fprung  up  from
the  land,  and  it  being  about  two  hours  ebb,  I  fent  a  boat  to
fee  what  water  was  upon  the  bar ;  in  the  mean  time  we  got
the  anchor  up,  and  made  all  ready  to  put  to  fea.  But  when
the  boat  came  back,  the  officer  reported  that  there  was  only
thirteen  feet  water  upon  the  bar,  which  was  fix  inches  lefs
than  the  fhip  drew.  We  were  therefore  obliged  to  come  to,
and  the  fea  breeze  fetting  in  again  about  eight  o'clock,  we
gave  up  all  hope  of  failing  that  day.

We  had  frefh  gales  at  S.  E.  with  hazy  weather  and  rain,  Monday  30.
till -two  in  the  morning  of  the  31ft,  when  the  weather  being  Tuefday  31.
fomething  more  moderate,  I  had  thoughts  of  trying  to  warp
the  fhip  out  of  the  harbour  ;  but  upon  going  out  myfelf
£rft  in  the  boat,  I  found  it  ftill  blow  too  frelh  for  the  at-
tempt. During  all  this  time  the  pinnace  and  yawl  continued
to  ply  the  net  and  hook  with  tolerable  fuccefs ;  fometimes
taking  a  turtle,  and  frequently  bringing  in  from  two  to  three
hundred  weight  of  fifli.

On  the  1  ft  of  Auguft,  the  carpenter  examined  the  pumps,  Auguft.
and,  to  our  great  mortification,  found  them  all  in  a  ftate  of
decay,  owing,  as  he  faid,  to  the  fap's  having  been  left  in  the
wood  j  one  of  them  was  fo  rotten  as,  when  hoifted  up,  to
drop  to  pieces,  and  the  reft  were  little  better ;  fo  that  our
chief  truft  was  now  in  the  foundnefs  of  our  veflfel,  which
happily  did  not  admit  more  than  one  inch  of  water  in  an
hour.

4F  2  At


$8S  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

177°-  At  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  Friday  the  3d,  we  made

t.  "f"^  another  unfuccefsful  attempt  to  warp  the  fhip  out  of  the
Sday 4.  harbour;  but  at  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  4th,
our  efforts  had  a  better  effecT:,  and  about  feven,  we  got  once
more  under  fail,  with  a  light  air  from  the  land,  which  foon
died  away,  and-  was  followed  by  the  fea-breezes  from  S.  E.
by  S.  with  which  we  flood  off  to  fea  E.  by  N.  having  the
pinnace  ahead,  which  was  ordered  to  keep  founding  conti-
nually. The  yawl  had  been  fent  to  the  turtle  bank,  to  take
up  the  net  which  had  been  left  there  ;  but  as  the  wind  frefh-
ened,  we  got  out  before  her.  A  little  before  noon  we  an-
chored in  fifteen  fathom  water,  with  a  fandy  bottom ;  for  I
did  not  think  it  fafe  to  run  in  among  the  fhoals,  till  I  had
well  viewed  them,  at  low-water,  from  the  mafl-head,  which
might  determine  me  which  way  to  fleer :  for  as  yet  I  was
in  doubt  whether  I  fhould  beat  back  to  the  fouthward,  round
all  the  fhoals,  or  feek  a  paffage  to  the  eaflward  or  the  north-
ward, all  which  at  prefent  appeared  to  be  equally  difficult
and  dangerous.  When  we  were  at  anchor  the  harbour  from
which  we  failed  bore  S.  70  W.  diflant  about  five  leagues ;  the
northermofl  point  of  the  main  in  fight,  which  I  named  Cape
Bedford,  and  which  lies  in  latitude  150  16' S.,  longitude
2 1 40  45'  \V.  bore  N.  ao  W.  diflant  three  leagues  and  a  half;
but  to  the  N.  E.  of  this  Cape  we  could  fee  land  which  had
the  appearance  of  two  high  iflands :  the  turtle  banks  bore
eafl,  diflant  one  mile :  our  latitude  by  obfervation  was
150  32' S.  and  our  depth  of  water  in  flanding  off  from  the
land  was  from  three  and  an  half  to  fifteen  faihom.


CHAP,


21.' >.  *,'                  *  *        "  ..;i-  -.

On  thu  Lctldv^' t/u- yht[>       **  "■•.*■•'

laid  x3Hours.  and,  n-              *  *  "  *    ♦  *
cdvednuick  Jama,),- .

Ji    —    «w    "'■■"  "^    ^'"i    ""»«    '"'"r

.jo  I.',

1,


io


1^'*— «**


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  589


CHAP.     VII.

Departure  from  Endeavour  River ;  a  particular  Defcrip-
tion  of  the  Harbour  there,  in  which  the  Ship  was  refitted,
the  adjacent  Country,  and  fever  al  Ifla?ids  near  the  Coafii  .•
the  Ran<re  from  Endeavour  River  to  the  Northern  Ex-
tremity  of  the  Country,  and  the  Dangers  of  that  Navi-
gation.

TO  the  harbour  which  we  had  now  left,  I  gave  the  name  1770;
of  Endeavour  River.  It  is  only  a  fmall  bar  harbour,  L _  _^—  *
or  creek,  which  runs  in  a  winding  channel  three  or  four  Saturdjy  4
leagues  inland,  and  at  the  head  of  which  there  is-  a  fmall
brook  of  frefh  water:  there  is  not  depth  of  water  for  (hip-
ping above  a  mile  within  the  bar,  and  at  this  diflance  only
on  the  north  fide,  where  the  bank  is  fo  fleep  for  near  a
quarter  of  a  mile,  that  a  fhip  may  lie  afloat  at  low  water,  fo
near  the  lhore  as  to  reach  it  with  a  ftage,  and  the  fituation  is
extremely  convenient  for  heaving  down ;  but  at  low  water,
the  depth  upon  the  bar  is  not  more  than  nine  or  ten  feet,  nor
more  than  feventeen  or  eighteen  at  the  height  of  the  tide ;
the  difference  between  high  and  low  water,  at  fpring  tides,
being  about  nine  feet,  At  the  new  and  full  of  the  moon  it
is  high  water  between  nine  and  ten  o'clock:  it  muft  alfo  be
remembered,  that  this  part  of  the  coaft  is  fo  barricaded  with
fhoals,  as  to  make  the  harbour  ftill  more  difficult  of  accefs ;
the  fafeft  approach  is  from  the  fouthward,  keeping  the  main
land  clofe  upon  the  board  all  the  way.  Its  fituation  may
always  be  found  by  the  latitude,  which  has  been  very  accu-
4  rately


'         i6             ."4.     J"-     -U,     --

5       «       '*"        v        'I4       V        3i°... ..■'£.  „  i- i£™^2 y    ,    *

2       ¥       J°  „^™iJ        v'       s,°        ^        10^1

44-

„      stS       -«

Chart  of  Part  of  the  Coast

S            8                             |

3°-

30

i.-,-

or

NEW  SOUTH    WAEES,

flL  ^  ''K^wr$^-

.!:■)

■I.i  -

FROM

Cape  Tribulation  to  Endeavour  Straits  .

B^^s   ^      &  :«    ,

By  Lieut.  J.Cook,

30.

1770

„,„   "TRSfea^;-.,?.  ,

-30

SIR

■2  18

""•-.,

iP^A.:               »    <°*

■

-*jAjj

W^J0  it  &?;   I    Is1

8°-

^

V

Bolt  Head  J  VJ?       .      1     O      '"    "       "<&'

SPr'^4 "ir,  f      ,

-3°

217

1

EJCPliAJVATIOJV,
<$■  Recks,. nvnc  of  which  arc  dry  at  Low- water
and  others  alum:,    covered.
_r^-  Supposed  direction  of  such  part  of  the  Coast

Cape  Mrevn».ulh"/wxi^        I-'f  ,'^  L       ■'# 'foci-hum  J sic,                                                                                           f

s  217

=

and  Shoals  as  were  not  seen.

21          f,,-;«^^.

/                                                    3

«-

CI

?  Place.,    where   the  Ship  anchored

The  injures  denote  the  depth,  of  Water  in  Fathoms.

4P       4%^:  1     •>'

*

/                                                                                              T3

/                             •        s

l.«

1

,/                       \C     •*/

'    /                                                '&■

30.

(3-

$       .               ik:^'

y/                                                                                                                                                                 2

-.!<•

/                      '      •/'"-<:.!  '•:•- j?ST.*i\

/                                                                                                                                                                                *

'J-

/'"'    ^  ,/  /     f

■/                                              ■          '                                             "

/■

216

■'/             !                     <

'/**—.

2.I6

/"

'^f^4*^

45-

\

-«

.,

\       ■

-30

1     1.6-

§                  &                ')       i>

\v

:«

ft        k>                tJ/i  £         S\         ■-'                                            *

■       \.

21,5

^    dCr    ^~~~y$-', ^*i^~y~7~~\  't^f'f    <<

/'■tv

\  .

«i

r>

L

z7   •

•      \

-8o

Onthiil.cdiZ'IUu.Ship      <-,                  '■.                 «.*'

^v

.lautiaHours.aiuln-              *****»..«*'                                                                                                  /

\^

1  ''<

/                             scale  of  Leagues.

i/

1,

1

6                                    1

5                                        1

'(S                Jo                '(j

4                          1

3    -                      1

2                                                     11                                                     10\

,

ROUND    THE    WORLD.  589


CHAP.     VII.

Departure  from  Endeavour  River ;  a  particular  Defcrip-
tion  of  the  Harbour  there,  in  which  the  Ship  was  reftted,
the  adjacent  Country,  and  fever  al  I/lands  near  the  Coafi  .*
the  Range  from  Endeavour  River  to  the  Northern  Ex-
tremity of  the  Country,  and  the  Dangers  of  that  Navi-
gation.

TO  the  harbour  which  we  had  now  left,  I  gave  the  name  1770.
of  Endeavour  River.  It  is  only  a  fmall  bar  harbour,  ■  "s"  *
or  creek,  which  runs  in  a  winding  channel  three  or  four  Saturday  4
leagues  inland,  and  at  the  head  of  which  there  is-  a  fmall
brook  of  frefh  water :  there  is  not  depth  of  water  for  (hip-
ping above  a  mile  within  the  bar,  and  at  this  diftance  only
on  the  north  fide,  where  the  bank  is  fo  fteep  for  near  a
quarter  of  a  mile,  that  a  fhip  may  lie  afloat  at  low  water,  fo
near  the  fhore  as  to  reach  it  with  a  ftage,  and  the  fituation  is
extremely  convenient  for  heaving  down  j  but  at  low  water,
the  depth  upon  the  bar  is  not  more  than  nine  or  ten  feet,  nor
more  than  feventeen  or  eighteen  at  the  height  of  the  tide ;
the  difference  between  high  and  low  water,  at  fpring  tides,
being  about  nine  feet.  At  the  new  and  full  of  the  moon  ic
is  high  water  between  nine  and  ten  o'clock:  it  muft  alfo  be
remembered,  that  this  part  of  the  coaft  is  fo  barricaded  with
fhoals,  as  to  make  the  harbour  ftill  more  difficult  of  accefs ;
the  fafeft  approach  is  from  the  fouthward,  keeping  the  main
land  clofe  upon  the  board  all  the  way.  Its  fituation  may
always  be  found  by  the  latitude,  which  has  been  very  accu-
4  rately


590  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      rately  laid  down.     Over  the  fouth  point  is  fome  high  land,

< „ — — *   but  the  north  point  is  formed  by  a  low  fandy  beach,  which

r  ay4"     extends  about  three  miles  to  the  northward,  where  the  land
begins  again  to  be  high.

The  chief  refreshment  that  we  procured  here,  was  turtle,
but  as  they  were  not  to  be  had  without  going  five  leagues
out  to  Tea,  and  the  weather  was  frequently  tempeftuous,  we
did  not  abound  with  this  dainty :  what  we  caught,  as  well  as
the  fifh,  was  always  equally  divided  among  us  all  by
weight,  the  meaneft  perfon  on  board  having  the  fame  fhare
as  myfelf ;  and  I  think  every  commander,  in  fuch  a  voyage
as  this,  will  find  it  his  intereft  to  follow  the  fame  rule.  In
feveral  parts  of  the  fandy  beaches,  and  fand  hills  near  the
fea,  we  found  purflain,  and  a  kind  of  bean  that  grows  upon
a  ftalk,  which  creeps  along  the  ground:  the  purflain  we
found  very  good  when  it  was  boiled,  and  the  beans  are  not
to  be  defpifed,  for  we  found  them  of  great  fervice  to  our
fick :  the  beft  greens,  however,  that  could  be  procured  here,
were  the  tops  of  the  coccos,  which  have  been  mentioned  al-
ready, as  known  in  the  Weft  Indies  by  the  name  of  Indian
ink:  thefe  were,  m  our  opinion,  not  much  inferior  to
fpinnage,  which  in  tafle  they  fomewhat  refemble;  the  roots
indeed  are  not  good,  but  they  might  probably  be  meliorated
by  proper  cultivation.  They  are  found  here  chiefly  in  boggy
ground.  The  few  cabbage  palms  that  we  met  with,  were
in  general  fmall,  and  yielded  fo  little  cabbage  that  they
were  not  worth  feeking.

Befides  the  kanguroo,  and  the  opofTum  that  have  been  al-
ready mentioned,  and  a  kind  of  polecat,  there  are  wolves
upon  this  part  of  the  coaft,  if  we  were  not  deceived  by  the
tracks  upon  the  ground,  and  feveral  fpecies  of  ferpents  ;
fome  of  the  ferpents  are  venomous,    and  fome  harmlefs;

there


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  59ir

there  are  no  tame  animals  here  except  dogs,  and  of  thefe  we       1770.
faw  but  two  or  three,   which  frequently  came  about  the    k    "f-  j
tents,  to  pick  up  the  fcraps  and  bones  that  happened  to  lie    atur  ay4*
fcattered  near  them.     There  does  not  indeed  feem  to  be
many  of  any  animal,  except  the  kanguroo;  we  fcarcely  faw
any  other  above  once,  but  this  we  met  with  almoft  every
time  we  went  into  the  woods.     Of  land  fowls  we  faw  crowsj
kites,   hawks,   cockatoos  of  two  forts,  one  white  and  the
other  black,  a  very  beautiful  kind  of  loriquets,  fome  parrotsr
pigeons 'of  two  or  three  forts,  and  feveral  fm all  birds  not
known  in  Europe.     The  water  fowls  are  herns,  whittling'
ducks,  which  perch,  and,  I  believe,  rooll  upon  trees,  wild
geefe,  curlieus,  and  a  few  others,  but  thefe  do  not  abound.
The  face  of  the  country,  which  has  been  occafionally  men=
tioned  before,  is  agreeably  diverfified  by  hill  and  valley,  lawn
and  wood.     The  foil  of  the  hills  is  hard,   dry,   and  ftony,
yet  it  produces  coarfe  grafs  befides  wood :   the  foil  of  the
plains  and  vallies  is  in  fome  places  fand,  and  in  fome  clay;
in  fome  alfo  it  is  rocky  and  ftony,  like  the  hills;  in  general,
however,  it  is  well  clothed,  and  has  at  lead  the  appearance
of  fertility.     The  whole  country,  both  hill  and  valley,  wood
and  plain,  abounds  with  ant  hills*  fome  of  which  are  fix  or
eight  feet  high,  and  twice  as  much  in  circumference.    The
trees  here  are  not  of  many  forts;  the  gum  tree,  which  we
found  on  the  fouthern  part  of  the  coaft,  is  the  mod  common,
but  here  it  is  not  fo  large :  on  each  fide  of  the  river,  through;-
its  whole  courfe,   there  are  mangroves  in  great  numbers,
which  in  fome  places  extend  a  mile  within  the  coaft.     The:
country  is  in  all  parts  well  watered,  there  being  feveral  fine
rivulets  at  a  fmall  diftance  from  each  other,  but  none  in  the
place  where  we  lay,  at  leaft  not- during  the  time  we  were;
there,   which  was  the  dry  feafon ;  we  were  however  welL
fupplied  with  water  by  fprings,  which  were  not  far  off.

In


5?q  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

»77°-  In  the  afternoon  of  the  4th,  we  h;  d  a  gentle  breeze  at  S.E.

<_^_JLj  and  clear  weather,  but  as  I  did  it  intend  to  fail  till  the
aturday*.  morning,  I  fent  all  the  boats  to  the  reef,  to  get  what  turtle
and  fhell  fifh.  they  could.  At  low  water,  1  went  up  to  the
mall-head,  and  took  a  view  of  the  flioals,  which  made  a
very  threatening  appearance  :  I  could  fee  feveral  at  a  remote
diflance,  and  part  of  many  of  them  was  above  water.  The
fea  appeared  mod  open  to  the  north  eaft  of  the  turtle  reef,
and  I  came  to  a  refolution  to  ftretch  out  that  way  clofe  upon
a  wind,  becaufe  if  we  mould  find  no  pafTage,  we  could  al-
ways return  the  way  we  went.  In  the  evening,  the  boats
brought  in  a  turtle,  a  fling-ray,  and  as  many  large  cockles
as  came  to  about  a  pound  and  a  half  a  man,  for  in  each  of
them  there  was  not  lefs  than  two  pounds  of  meat :  in  the
night  alfo  we  caught  feveral  fharks,  which,  though  not  a
dainty,  were  an  acceptable  increale  of  our  frefh  provifion.
Sunday  5.  jn  the  morning,  I  waited  till  half  ebb  before  I  weighed,

becaufe  at  that  time  the  flioals  begin  to  appear,  but  the
wind  then  blew  fo  hard  that  I  was  obliged  to  remain  at  an-
chor: in  the  afternoon,  however,  the  gale  becoming  more
moderate,  we  got  under  fail,  and  flood  out  upon  a  wind
N.  E.  by  E.  leaving  the  turtle  reef  to  windward,  and  having  the
pinnace  founding  ahead :  we  had  not  kept  this  courfe  long,
before  we  difcovered  flioals  before  us,  and  upon  both  the
bows  ;  and  at  half  an  hour  after  four,  having  run  about
eight  miles,  the  pinnace  made  the  fignal  for  fhoal  water,
where  we  little  expected  it :  upon  this  we  tacked,  and  flood
on  and  off,  while  the  pinnace  ftretched  farther  to  the  eaft-
ward,  and  night  approaching,  I  came  to  an  anchor  in  twenty
fathom  water,  with  a  muddy  bottom.  Endeavour  River
then  bore  S.  52  W.  Cape  Bedford  \V.  by  N.  -IN.  diflant  five
leagues,  the  northermofl  land  in  fight,  which  had  the  ap-
pearance of  an  ifland,  N. ;  and  a  jSboal,  a  fmall  fandy  part

of


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  59c

of  which  appeared  above  water,  bore  N.  E:  diflant  between      *77°-

Auguft.

two  and  three  miles  s  in  (landing  off  from  turtle  reef  to  this   < „ 1

place,  we  had  from  fourteen  to  twenty  fathom  water,  but
when  the  pinnace  was  about  a  mile  farther  to  the  E.  N.  E.
there  was  no  more  than  four  or  five  feet  water,  with  rocky
ground ;  and  yet  this  did  not  appear  to  us  in  the  (hip.  In
the  morning  of  the  6th,  we  had  a  (Irong  gale,  fo  that  inftead  Monday  6.
of  weighing,  we  were  obliged  to  veer  away  more  cable,  and
(Irike  our  top-gallant  yards.  At  low  water,  myfelf,  with
feveral  of  the  officers,  kept  a  look-out  at  the  mad-head,  to
fee  if  any  paffage  could  be  discovered  between  the  (hoals,
but  nothing  was  in  view  except  breakers,  extending  from
the  S.  round  by  the  E.  as  far  as  N.  W.  and  out  to  fea  beyond
the  reach  of  our  fight ;  thefe  breakers,  however,  did  not  ap-
pear to  be  caufed  by  one  continued  (hoal,  but  by  feveral,
which  lay  detached  from  each  other:  on  that  which  lay
fartheft  to  the  eaftward,  the  fea  broke  very  high,  which
made  me  think  it  was  the  outermoft,  for  upon  many  of  thefe
within,  the  breakers  were  inconfiderable,  and  from  about
half  ebb  to  half  flood,  they  were  not  to  be  feen  at  all,  which
makes  failing  among  them  (till  more  dangerous,  efpecially
as  the  (hoals  here  confift  principally  of  coral  rocks,  which
are  as  deep  as  a  wall ;  upon  fome  of  them  however,  and  ge-
nerally at  the  north  end,  there  are  patches  of  fand,  which
are  covered  only  at  high  water,  and  which  are  to  be  difcerned
at  fome  diilance.  Being  now  convinced  that  there  was  no
paffage  to  fea,  but  through  the  labyrinth  formed  by  thefe
Ihoals,  I  was  altogether  at  a  lofs  which  way  to  (leer,  when
the  weather  (hould  permit  us  to  get  under  fail.  It  was  the
Matter's  opinion,  that  we  (hould  beat  back  the  way  we
came,  but  this  would  have  been  an  endlefs  labour,  as  the
wind  blew  (Irongly  from  that  quarter,  almoft  without  inter-
miflion  ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  no  paflage  could  be  found  to
Vol.  II.  4  G  the


594  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

tf7o.      the  northward,  we  fhould  be  compelled  to  take  that  meafure
■  ^"f"ft"  ,  at  laft.     Thefe  anxious  deliberations  engaged  us  till  eleven
o'clock  at  night,  when  the  fhip  drove,  and  obliged  us  to
veer  away  to  a  cable  and  one  third,  which  brought  her  up ;
Tuefday^.     fcut  in  the  morning,  the  gale  increafing,  fhe  drove  again,
and  we  therefore  let  go  the  fmall  bower,  and  veered  away
to  a  whole  cable  upon  it,  and  two  cables  on  the  other  an-
chors, yet  fhe  ftill  drove,  though  not  fo  fall ;  we  then  got
down  top-gallant  mads,  and  (truck  the  yards  and  top-malts
clofe  down,  and  at  laft  had  the  fatisfaction  to  find  that  fhe
rode.     Cape  Bedford  now  bore  \V.  S.  W.  diftant  three  leagues
and  an  half,  and  in  this  fituation  we  had  fhoals  to  the  eafl-
ward,    extending  from   the  S.  Ev  by  S.  to  the  N.  N.  W.  the
Wednef.  8.     neareft  of  which  was  about  two  miles  diftant.    As  the  gale
FHd^io9'    continued,  with  little  remiflion,  we  rode  till  feven  o'clock  in
the  morning  of  the  ioth,  when,  it  being  more  moderate,  we
weighed,  and  flood  in  for  the  land,  having  at  length  deter-
mined to  feek  a  paflage  along  the  fhore  to  the  northward,
ftill  keeping  the  boat  ahead :  during  our  run  in  we  had  from
nineteen  to  twelve  fathom :  after  flanding  in  about  an  hour,
we  edged  away  for  three  fmall  iflands  that  lay  N.  N.  E.  7  E.
three  leagues  from  Cape  Bedford,  which  the  Maflcr  had
vifited  while  we  were  in  port.    At  nine  o'clock,  we  were
abreafl  of  them,  and  between  them  and  the  main:  between
us  and  the  main  there  was  another  low  ifland,  which  lies
N.  N.  W.  four  miles   from   the  three  iflands  ■>   and  in  this
channel  we  had  fourteen  fathom  water.    The  northermoft
point  of  land  in  fight  now  bore  N.  N.  W.  7  \V.  diftant  about
two  leagues.     Four  or  five  leagues  to  the  north  of  this  head
land,  we  faw  three  iflands,  near  which  lay  fome  that  were
ftill  fmallcr,  and  we  could  fee  the  fhoals  and  reefs  without
us,  extending  to  the  northward,  as  far  as  thefe  iflands :  be-
tween thefe  reefs  and  the  head  land,  we  directed  our  courfe*

leaving


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  S95

leaving  to  the  eaflward  a  fmall  ifland,  which  lies  N.  by  E.       »77°-

°  }  Auguft.

diftant  four  miles  from  the  three  iflands.     At  noon,   we   ^- — 1

were  got  between  the  head  land  and  the  three  iflands:  from
the  head  land  we  were  diftant  two  leagues,  and  from  the
iflands  four;  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  140  51'.  We
now  thought  we  faw  a  clear  opening  before  us,  and  hoped
that  we  were  once  more  out  of  danger;  in  this  hope,  how-
ever, we  foon  found  ourfelves  difappointed,  and  for  that
reafon  I  called  the  head  land  Cape  Flattery.  It  lies  in  lati-
tude i4°56'S.  longitude  2i4°43/W.  and  is  a  lofty  promontory,
making  next  the  fea  in  two  hills,  which  have  a  third  behind
them,  with  low  fandy  ground  on  each  fide  :  it  may  however
be  Hill  better  known  by  the  three  iflands  out  at  fea:  the
northermoll  and  largeft  lies  about  five  leagues  from  the
Cape,  in  the  direction  of  N.N.  E.  From  Cape  Flattery  the
land  trends  away  N.  W.  and  N.  W.  by  W.  We  fleered  along
the  fhore  N.  W.  by  W.  till  one  o'clock,  for  what  we  thought
the  open  channel,  when  the  petty  officer  at  the  mafl-head
cried  out  that  he  faw  land  ahead,  extending  quite  round  to
the  iflands  that  lay  without  us,  and  a  large  reef  between
us  and  them :  upon  this  I  ran  up  to  the  mafl-head  myfelf,
from  whence  I  very  plainly  faw  the  reef,  which  was  now  fo
far  to  windward,  that  we  could  not  weather  it,  but  the  land
ahead,  which  he  had  fuppofed  to  be  the  main,  appeared  to
me  to  be  only  a  clufler  of  fmall  iflands.  As  foon  as  I  got
down  from  the  mafl-head,  the  Maflcr,  and  fome  others  went
up,  who  all  infifled  that  the  land  ahead  was  not  iflands,  but
the  main,  and  to  make  their  report  flill  more  alarming,  they
faid  that  they  faw  breakers  all  round  us.  In  this  dilemma,
we  hauled  upon  a  wind  in  for  the  land,  and  made  the  fignai
for  the  boat  that  was  founding  ahead  to  come  on  board,  but
as  me  was  far  to  leeward,  we  were  obliged  to  edge  away  to
take  her  up,  and  foon  after  we  came  to  an  anchor,  under  a

4  G  2  point


S96  LIEUTENANT    CO0K>s    VOYAGE

*77°-       point  of  the  main,  in  fomewhat  lefs  than  five  fathom,  and

' r— '—>   at  about  the  diflance  of  a  mile  from  the  more.     Cape  Flattery

now  bore  S.  E„  diftant  three  leagues  and  an  half.  As  foon  as
the  fhip  was  at  anchor,  I  went  afhore  upon  the  point,  which
is  high,  and  afforded  me  a  good  view  of  the  fea  coaft,  trend-
ing away  N.  \V.  by  \V.  eight  or  ten  leagues,  which,  the  wea-
ther not  being  very  clear,  was  as  far  as  I  could  fee.  Nine  or
ten  fmall  low  iflands,  and  fome  fhoals,  appeared  off  the
coaft ;  I  faw  alfo  fome  large  fhoals  between  the  main  and  the
three  high  iflands,  without  which,  I  was  clearly  of  opinion
there  were  more  iflands,  and  not  any  part  of  the  main.  Ex-
cept the  point  I  was  now  upon,  which  Icalled  Point  Look-
out, and  Cape  Flattery,  the  main  land,  to  the  northward  of
Cape  Bedford,  is  low,  and  chequered  with  white  fand  and
green  buflies,  for  ten  or  twelve  miles  inland,  beyond  which
it  rifes  to  a  conliderable  height.  To  the  northward  of  Point
Look-out,  the  coaft  appeared  to  be  fhoal  and  flat,  for  a  con-
fiderable  diftance,  which  did  not  encourage  the  hope  that
the  channel  we  had  hitherto  found  in  with  the  land  would
continue.  Upon  this  point,  which  was  narrow,  and  con-
fifted  of  the  fineft  white  fand  we  had  ever  feen,  we  discovered
the  footfteps  of  people,  and  we  faw  alfo  fmoke  and  lire  at  a.
diflance  up  the  country.

In  the  evening,  I  returned  to  the  fhip,  and  refolved  the
next  morning  to  vifit  one  of  the  high  iflands  in  the  offing,,
from  the  top  of  which,  as  they  lay  five  leagues  out  to  fea,  I
hoped  to  difcover  more  diftinetly  the  fituation  of  the  fhoals,
and  the  channel  between  them.

Saturday  ii.  In  the  morning  therefore,  of  the  nth,  I  fet  out  in  the  pin-
nace, accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks,  whofe  fortitude  and  curi-
ofity  made  him  a  party  in  every  expedition,  for  the  norther-
moft  and  largeft  of  the  three  iflands,  and  at  the  fame  time  I

fent


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


597


fent  the  Matter  in  the  yawl  to  leeward,  to  found  between  the       '77o«
low  iflands  and  the  main.     In  my  way,  I  parted  over  a  reef         g-  ilJ
of  coral  rock  and  fand,  which  lies  about  two  leagues  from    atur  ayir*
the  ifland,  and  I  left  another  to  leeward,  which  lies  about
three  miles  from  it :  on  the  north  part  of  the  reef,  to  the  lee-
ward, there  is  a  low  fandy  ifland,  with  trees  upon  it ;  and
upon  the  reef  which  we  parted  over,  we  faw  feveral  turtle  :
we  chafed  one  or  two,  but  having  little  time  to  fpare,  and
the  v/md  blowing  frefh,  we  did  not  take  any.

About  one  o'clock,  we  reached  the  ifland,  and  immediately
afcended  the  higheft  hill,  with  a  mixture  of  hope  and  fear,
proportioned  to  the  importance  of  our  bufinefs,  and  the  un-
certainty of  the  event :  when  I  looked  round,  I  difcovercd  a
reef  of  rocks,  lying  between  two  and  three  leagues  without
the  iflands,  and  extending  in  a  line  N.  W.  and  S.  E.  farther
than  I  could  fee,  upon  which  the  fea  broke  in  a  dreadful
furf ;  this  however  made  me  think  that  there  were  nofhoals
beyond  them,    and  I  conceived  hopes  of  getting  without
thefe,  as  I  perceived  feveral  breaks  or  openings  in  the  reef,
and  deep  water  between  that  and  the  iflands.     I  continued
upon  this  hill  till  funfet,  but  the  weather  was  fo  hazy  during
the  whole  time  that  I  came  down  much  difappointed.   After
reflecting  upon  what  I  had  feen,  and  comparing  the  intelli-
gence I  had  gained  with  what  I  expected,  I  determined  to
ftay  upon  the  ifland   all  night,   hoping  that  the  morning
might  be  clearer,  and  afford  me  a  more  diflinct  and  compre-
henfive  view.    We  therefore  took  up  our  lodging  under  the
fhelter  of  a  buffi  which  grew  upon  the  beach,  and  at  three
in  the  morning,  having  fent  the  pinnace  with  one  of  the  Sunday  n.%
Mates  whom  1  had  brought  out  with  me,  to  found  between
the  ifland  and  the  reefs,  and  examine  wThat  appeared  to  be  a
channel  through  them,  I  climbed  the  hill  a  fecond  time ;  but
to  my  great  difappointment  found  the  weather  much  more
4.  hazy


598  LIEUTENANT    COOR's    VOYAGE

1 770.       hazy  than  it  had  been  the  day  before.     About  noon  the  pin-
L  /vJ°u11,  _,  nace  returned,  having  been  as  far  as  the  reef,  and  found
Sunday  1  z.     between  fifteen  and  twenty-eight  fathom  of  water;  but  it
blew  fo  hard  that  the  Mate  did  not  dare  to  venture  into  one
of  the  channels,  which  he  faid  appeared  to  him  to  be  very
narrow:  this  however  did  not  difcourage  me,  for  I  judged
from  his  defcription  of  the  place  he  had  been  at,  that  he  had
feen  it  to  difadvantage.    While  I  was  bufy  in  my  furvey,  Mr.
Banks  was  attentive  to  his  favourite  purfuit,  and  picked  up
feveral  plants  which  he  had  not  before  feen.    We  found  the
ifland,  which  is  vifible  at  twelve  leagues  diftance,  to  be  about
eight  leagues  in  circumference,  and  in  general  very  rocky
and  barren.     On  the  north  weft  fide,  however,   there  are
fome  fandy  bays,  and  fome  low  land,  which  is  covered  with
long  thin  grafs,  and  trees  of  the  fame  kind  with  thofe  upon
the  main :  this  part  alfo  abounded  with  lizards  of  a  very
large  fize,  fome  of  which  we  took.     We  found  alio  frefh
water  in  two  places ;  one  was  a  running  ftream,  but  that
was  a  little  brackifh  where  I  tailed  it,  which  was  clofe  to  the
fea  ;  the  other  was  a  {landing  pool,  clofe  behind  the  fandy
beach,  and  this  was  perfectly  fwcet  and  good.      Notwith-
ftanding  the  diftance  of  this  ifland  from  the  main,  we  faw,
to  our  great  furprize,  that  it  was  fometimes  vifited  by  the
natives  ;  for  we  found  feven  or  eight  frames  of  their  huts,
and  vaft  heaps  of  fhells,  the  fifh  of  which  we  fuppofed  had
been  their  food.     We  obferved  that  all  thefe  huts  were  built
upon  eminences,  and  entirely  expofed  to  the  S.  E.  contrary
to  thofe  which  we  had  feen  upon  the  main;  for  they  were
all  built  either  upon  the  fide  of  a  hill,  or  under  fome  bumes
which  afforded  them  inciter  from  the  wind.     From  thefe
huts,  and  their  ntuation,  we  concluded  that  at  fome  feafons
of  the  year  the  weather  here  is  invariably  calm  and  fine;  for
ihe  inhabitants  have  no  boat  which  can  navigate  the  fea  to

fo


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


599


fo  great  a  diflance,  in  fuch  weather  as  we  had  from  the  time  of      J77°-

our  firft  coming  upon  the  coaft.   As  we  faw  no  animals  upon    < „ — Li

this  place  but  lizards,  I  called  it  Lizard  Island;  the  other
two  high  iflands,  which  lie  at  the  diflance  of  four  or  five  miles
from  it,  are  comparatively  fmall ;  and  near  them  lie  three
others  fmaller  flill,  and  low,  with  feveral  fhoals  or  reefs,
efpecially  to  the  S.  E.  :  there  is  however  a  clear  pafTage  from
Cape  Flattery  to  thefe  iilands,  and  even  quite  to  the  outward
reefs,  leaving  Lizard  Ifland  to  the  north  weft,  and  the  others
to  the  fouth  eaft.

At  two  in  the  afternoon,  there  being  no  hope  of  clear
weather,  we  fet  out  from  Lizard  Illand  to  return  to  the  fhip,
and  in  our  way  landed  upon  the  low  fandy  ifland  with  trees
upon  it,  which  we  had  remarked  in  our  going  out.  Upon
this  ifland  we  faw  an  incredible  number  of  birds,  chiefly
fca-fowl :  we  found  alfo  the  nefl  of  an  eagle  with  young
ones,  which  we  killed  ;  and  the  nefl:  of  fonte  other  bird,  we
knew  not  what,  of  a  moft  enormous  fize  ;  it  was  built  with
flicks  upon  the  ground,  and  was  no  lefs  than  fix  and  twenty
feet  in  circumference,  and  two  feet  eight  inches  high.  We
found  alfo  that  this  place  had  been  vifited  by  the  Indians,
probably  to  eat  turtle,  many  of  which  we  faw  upon  the
ifland,  and  a  great  number  of  their  fhells,  piled  one  upon
another  in  different  places.

To  this  fpot  we  gave  the  name  of  Eagle  Island,  and
after  leaving  it,  we  fleered  S.  W.  dire&ly  for  the  fhip,  found-
ing all  the  way,  and  we  had  never  lefs  than  eight  fathom,
nor  more  than  fourteen  ;  the  fame  depth  of  water  that  I  had
found  between  this  and  Lizard  Ifland.

When  I  got  on  board,  the  Mafter  informed  me  that  he  had
been  down  to  the  low  iflands,  between  which  and  the  main
I  had  directed  him  to  found ;  that  he  judged  them  to  lie

about


6oo  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°n-  about  three  leagues  from  the  main  ;  that  without  them  he
i_J^__l_j  found  from  ten  to  fourteen  fathom,  and  between  them  and
„un  >•  L2.  tjae  majn  fCven:  but  that  a  flat,  which  ran  two  leagues  out
from  the  main,  made  this  channel  narrow.  Upon  one  of
theie  low  iilands  he  flept,  and  was  afiiore  upon  others  ;  and
he  reported,  that  he  faw  every  where  piles  of  turtle-fhells,
and  fins  hanging  upon  the  trees  in  many  places,  with  the
fietli  upon  them,  fo  recent,  that  the  boat's  crew  eat  of  them:
he  faw  alfo  two  fpots,  clear  of  grafs,  which  appeared  to  have
been  lately  dug  up,  and  from  the  fliape  and  fize  of  them  he
conjectured  they  were  graves.

After  confidering  what  I  had  feen  myfelf,  and  the  report
of  the  Matter,  I  was  of  opinion  that  the  paffage  to  leeward
would  be  dangerous,  and  that,  by  keeping  in  with  the  main,
we  fhould  run  the  rifk  of  being  locked  in  by  the  great  reef,
and  at  laft  be  compelled  to  return  back  in  fearch  of  another
paffage,  by  which,  or  any  other  accident  that  mould  caufe
the  fame  delay,  we  fhould  infallibly  lofe  our  pafTage  to  the
Eaft  Indies,  and  endanger  the  ruin  of  the  voyage,  as  we  had
now  but  little  more  than  three  months  provifions  on  board
at'fhort  allowance.

Having  ftated  this  opinion,  and  the  facts  and  appearances
upon  which  it  was  founded,  to  the  officers,  it  was  unani-
moufly  agreed,  that  the  beft  thing  we  could  do  would  be  to
quit  the  coaft  altogether,  till  we  could  approach  it  with  lefs
clanger.

Monday  13.  m  tne  morning  therefore,  at  break  of  day,  we  got  under
fail,  and  ftood  out  N.  E.  for  the  north  weft  end  of  Lizard
Illand,  leaving  Eagle  Ifland  to  windward,  and  fome  other
iflands  and  fhoals  to  the  leeward,  and  having  the  pinnace
ahead  to  afcertain  the  depth  of  water  in  every  part  of  our
courfe.  In  this  channel  we  had  from  nine  to  fourteen  fa-
thom.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6oi

thorn.     At  noon,  the  north  weft  end  of  Lizard  Ifiand  bore       1770.

E.  S.  E.  diftant  one  mile ;  our  latitude  by  observation  was    » „ — L-/

14.  °  38',  and  our  depth  of  water  fourteen  fathom.  We  had
a  fteady  gale  at  S.  E.  and  by  two  o'clock  we  juil  fetched  to
windward  of  one  of  the  channels  or  openings  in  the  outer
reef,  which  I  had  feen  from  the  ifiand.  We  now  tacked,  and
made  a  fhort  trip  to  the  S.  W.  while  the  Mailer  in  the  pin-
nace examined  the  channel :  he  foon  made  the  fignal  for  the
fhip  to  follow,  and  in  a  fhort  time  fhe  got  fafe  out.  As  foon
as  we  had  got  without  the  breakers,  we  had  no  ground  with
one  hundred  and  fifty  fathom,  and  found  a  large  fea  rolling
in  from  the  S.  E.  a  certain  fign  that  neither  land  nor  fhoals
were  near  us  in  that  direction.

Our  change  of  fituation  was  now  vifible  in  every  counte-
nance, for  it  was  mofl  fenfibly  felt  in  every  breafl :  we  had
been  little  lefs  than  three  months  entangled  among  fhoals
and  rocks,  that  every  moment  threatened  us  with  deftruc-
tion ;  frequently  pafling  our  nights  at  anchor  within  hear-
ing of  the  furge  that  broke  over  them  ;  fometimes  driving
towards  them  even  while  our  anchors  were  out,  and  knowing
that  if  by  any  accident,  to  which  an  alrnoft  continual  tempeft
expofed  us,  they  fliould  not  hold,  we  muft  in  a  few  minutes
inevitably  perifh.  But  now,  after  having  failed  no  lefs  than
three  hundred  and  fixty  leagues,  without  once  having  a
man  out  of  the  chains  heaving  the  lead,  even  for  a  minute,
which  perhaps  never  happened  to  any  other  veflel,  we  found
ourfelves  in  an  open  fea,  with  deep  water ;  and  enjoyed  a
flow  of  fpirits  which  was  equally  owing  to  our  late  dangers
and  our  prefent  fecurity :  yet  the  very  waves,  which  by  their
fwell  convinced  us  that  we  had  no  rocks  or  fhoals  to  fear,
convinced  us  alfo  that  we  could  not  fafely  put  the  fame  con-
fidence in  our  veflel  as  before  fhe  had  flruck  ;  for  the  blows

Vol.  II.  4  H  flu


&>2  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.       flie  received  from  them  fo  widened  her  leaks,  that  fhe  ad-
'■%_  ,^_ '_,   mitted  no  lefs  than  nine  inches  water  in  an  hour,  which,
Monday  13.    confK}ering  the  ftate  of  our  pumps,  and  the  navigation  that
was  Hill  before  us,  would  have  been  a  fubjecl:  of  more  feri-
ous  confideration,  to  people  whofe  danger  had  not  fo  lately-
been  fo  much  more  imminent.

The  paffage  or  channel,  through  which  we  palled  into  the
open  fea  beyond  the  reef,  lies  in  latitude  140  32' S.  and  may
always  be  known  by  the  three  high  iflands  within  it,  which
I  have  called  the  Islands  of  Direction,  becaufe  by  thefe  a
ftranger  may  find  a  fafe  paffage  through  the  reef  quite  to  the
main.  The  channel  lies  from  Lizard  Ifland  N.  E.  A  N.  diftant
three  leagues,  and  is  about  one  third  of  a  mile  broad,  and
not  more  in  length.  Lizard  Ifland  which  is,  as  I  have  before
obferved,  the  largeft  and  the  northermofl  of  the  three,  af-
fords fafe  anchorage  under  the  north  weft  fide,  frefh  water,
and  wood  for  fuel.  The  low  iflands  and  fhoals  alfo  which
lie  between  it  and  the  main  abound  with  turtle  and  fifh,
which  may  probably  be  caught  in  all  feafons  of  the  year,
except  when  the  weather  is  very  tempeftuous ;  fo  that,  al*
things  confidered,  there  is  not  perhaps  a  better  place  for
ihips  to  refrefh  at  upon  the  whole  coafl  than  this  ifland.
And  before  I  difmifs  h>  I  mufl  obferve,  that  we  found  upon
it,  as  well  as  upon  the  beach  in  and  about  Endeavour  River,
bamboos,  cocoa  nuts,  pumice  flone,  and  the  feeds  of  plants
which  are  not  the  produce  of  this  country,  and  which  it  is
reafonable  to  fuppofe  are  brought  from  the  eaftward  by  the
trade  winds.  The  iflands  which  were  difcovered  by  Quirosr
and  called  Auflralia  del  Efpiritu  Santa,  lie  in  this  parallel ;
but  how  far  to  the  eaftward  cannot  now  be  afcertained :  in
mofl  charts  they  are  placed  in  the  fame  longitude  with  this-
country,  which,  as  appears  by  the  account  of  his  voyage

that


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6oj

that  has  been  publifhed,  he  never  faw ;  for  that  places  his
difcoveries  no  lefs  than  two  and  twenty  degrees  to  the  eafl-

d~ C  :•.  Monday  i  *.

or  It.  '    j

As  foon  as  we  were  without  the  reef,  we  brought  to,  and
having  hoifled  in  the  boats,  we  flood  off  and  on  upon  a  wind
all  night ;  for  I  was  not  willing  to  run  to  leeward  till  I  had  a
whole  day  before  me.  In  the  morning,  at  day-break,  Lizard  Tuefday  14.
Ifland  bore  S.  15  E.  diftant  ten  leagues ;  and  we  then  made
fail  and  flood  away  N.N.W.  i.  W.  till  nine  o'clock,  when  we
flood  N.  W.  4  N.  having  the  advantage  of  a  frefh  gale  at  S.E.
At  noon,  our  latitude  by  obfervation  was  13°  46'  S.  and  at  this
time  we  had  no  land  in  fight.  At  fix  in  the  evening  we
fhortened  fail  and  brought  the  fliip  to,  with  her  head  to  the
N.E. ;  and  at  fix  in  the  morning  made  fail  and  fleered  weft,  Wednef.  15,
in  order  to  get  within  fight  of  the  land,  that  I  might  be  fure
not  to  overfhoot  the  paffage,  if  a  pafTage  there  was,  between
this  land  and  New  Guinea.  At  noon,  our  latitude  by  obfer-
vation was  1 30  2'  S.,  longitude  21 6°  W.;  which  was  i2  23'  W.
of  Lizard  Ifland  :  at  this  time  we  had  no  land  in  fight ;  but  a
little  before  one  o'clock,  we  faw  high  land  from  the  mafl-head,
bearing  W.S.W.  At  two,  wc  faw  more  land  to  the  N.  W.
of  that  we  had  feen  before :  it  appeared  in  hills,  like  iflands;
but  we  judged  it  to  be  a  continuation  of  the  main  land.
About  three,  we  difcoverecl  breakers  between  the  land  and
the  fliip,  extending  to  the  fouthward  farther  than  we  could
fee;  but  to  the  north  we  thought  we  faw  them  terminate
abreafl  of  us.  What  we  took  for  the  end  of  them  in  this
direction,  however,  foon  appeared  to  be'only  an  opening  in
the  reef;  for  we  prefently  faw  them  again,  extending  north-
ward beyond  the  reach  of  our  fight.  Upon  this  we  hauled
clofe  upon  a  wind,  which  was  now  at  E.  S.  E.  and  wc  had
fcarcely  trimmed  our  fails  before  it  came  to  E.  by  N.  which
was  right  upon  the  reef,  and  consequently  made  our  clear-

4  EI  a  ing


6o4  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

*7»*       ing  it  doubtful.    At  funfet  the  northermoft  part  of  it  that

Augult.^     ^^    .^    ^^^  bor£    from  ug  N>  by.  £>    and   was    twQ   Qr    tllree.

Wednef.  iS.  ieagUes  diilant ;  this  however  being  the  beft  tack  to  clear  it,
we  kept  Handing  to  the  northward  with  all  the  fail  we  could
fet  till  midnight ;  when,  being  afraid  of  Handing  too  far  in
this  direction,  we  tacked  and  flood,  to  the  fouthward,  our  run
from  funfet  to  this  time  being  fix  leagues  N.  and  N.  by  E.
When  we  had  flood  about  two  miles  S.  S.  E.  it  fell  calm  ;  we
had  founded  feveral  times  during  the  night,  but  had  no  bot-
tom with  one  hundred  and  forty  fathom,  neither  had  wet
any  ground  now  with  the  fame  length  of  line  ;  yet,  about

Thurfdayi6.  four  in  the  morning,  we  plainly  heard  the  roaring  of  the
furf,  and  at  break  of  day  faw  it  foaming  to  a  vaft  height,  at
not  more  than  a  mile's  diftance.  Our  diftrefs  now  returned
upon  us  with  double  force;  the  waves  which  rolled  in  upon
the  reef,  carried  us  towards  it  very  faft  y  we  could  reach  no
ground  with  an  anchor,  and  had  not  a  breath  of  wind  for
the  fail.  In  this-  dreadful  fituation,  no  refource  was  left  us
but  the  boats ;  and  to  aggravate  our  misfortune  the  pinnace
was  under  repair :  the  longboat  and  yawl  however  were  put
into  the  water,  and  fent  ahead  to  tow,  which,  by  the  help  of
our  fweeps  abafr,  got  the  mip's  head  round  to  the  north-
ward ;  which,  if  it  could  not  prevent  our  deftruction,  might
at  leaft  delay  it.  But  it  was  fix  o'clock  before  this  was  ef-
fected, and  we  were  not  then  a  hundred  yards  from  the
rock  upon  which  the  fame  billow  which  warned  the
fide  of  the  fhip,  broke  to  a  tremendous  height  the  very
next  time  it  rofe  ;  fo  that  between  us  and  deftruction  there
was  only  a  dreary  valley,  no  wider  than  the  bafe  of  one
wave,  and  even  now  the  fea  under  us  was  unfathomable,  at
leaft  no  bottom  was  to  be  found  with  a  hundred  and  twenty
fathom.  During  this  fcene  of  diftrefs  the  carpenter  had
found  means  to  patch  up  the  pinnace  ;  fo  that  fhe  was
3  hoifted


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


C05


lioifled  out,  and  fent  ahead,  in  aid  of  the  other  boats,  to  tow;  1770.
but  all  our  efforts  would  have  been  ineffectual,  if,  juft  at  t  Ausuft-^
this  crifis  of  our  fate,  a  light  air  of  wind  had  not  fprung  up,  Thurfda>' ,6-
fo  light,  that  at  any  other  time  we  mould  not  have  obferved
it,  but  which  was  enough  to  turn  the  fcale  in  our  favour,
and,  in  conjunction  with  the  affiftance  which  was  afforded
us  by  the  boats,  to  give  the  fhip  a  perceptible  motion  ob-
liquely from  the  reef.  Our  hopes  now  revived  j  but  in  lefs
than  ten  minutes  it  was  again  a  dead  calm,  and  the  fhip
was  again  driven  towards  the  breakers,  which  were  not
now  two  hundred  yards  diftant.  The  fame  light  breeze
however  returned  before  we  had  loft  all  the  ground  it  had
enabled  us  to  gain,  and  lafted  about  ten  minutes  more.
During  this  time  we  difcovered  a  fmall  opening  in  the  reef,
at  about  the  diflance  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile  :  I  immediately
fent  one  of  the  Mates  to  examine  it,  who  reported  .that  its
breadth  was  not  more  than  the  length  of  the  fhip,  but  that
within  it  there  was  fmooth  water :  this  difcovery  feemed  to
render  our  efcape  poffible,  and  that  was  all,  by  pufhing  the
fhip  through  the  opening,  which  was  immediately  at-
tempted. It  was  uncertain  indeed  whether  we  could  reach
it ;  but  if  we  fhould  fucceed  thus  far,  we  made  no  doubt  of
being  able  to  get  through :  in  this  however  we  were  difap-
pointed,  for  having  reached  it  by  the  joint  affiftance  of  our
boats  and  the  breeze,  we  found  that  in  the  mean  time  it  had
become  high  water,  and  to  our  great  furprizc  we  met  the
tide  of  ebb  rufhing  out  of  it  like  a  mill-ftream.  We  gained
however  fome  advantage,  though  in  a  manner  directly  con-
trary to  our  expectations  ;  we  found  it  impoffible  to  go
through  the  opening,  but  the  ftream  that  prevented  us,  car-
ried us  out  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile:  it  was  too  narrow  for
us  to  keep  in  it  longer;  yet  this  tide  of  ebb  fo  much  affifted
the  boats  that  by  noon  we  had  got  an  offing  of  near  two

miles.


6o6  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S   VOYAGE

1770-  miles.  We  had,  however,  reafon  to  defpair  of  deliver-
■  ".- '_.  ance,  even  if  the  breeze,  which  had  now  died  away,
Thurfday  16.  ^^j^  revrve}  f or  we  were  flill  embayed  in  the  reef ;  and  the
tide  of  ebb  being  fpent,  the  tide  of  flood,  notwithftand-
ing  our  utmofl  efforts,  again  drove  the  fhip  into  the  bight.
About  this  time,  however,  we  faw  another  opening,  near  a
mile  to  the  weflward,  which  I  immediately  fent  the  Firfl
Lieutenant,  Mr.  Hicks,  in  the  fmall  boat  to  examine  :  in  the
mean  time  we  flruggled  hard  with  the  flood,  fometimes
gaining  a  little,  and  fometimes  lofing  ;  but  every  man  flill
did  his  duty,  with  as  much  calmnefs  and  regularity  as  if  no
danger  had  been  near.  About  two  o'clock,  Mr.  Hicks  re-
turned with  an  account  that  the  opening  was  narrow  and
dangerous,  but  that  it  might  be  palled :  the  poffibility  of
pafling  it  was  fufficient  encouragement  to  make  the  attempt,
for  all  danger  was  leis  imminent  than  that  of  our  prefent
fituation.  A  light  breeze  now  fprung  up  at  E.  N.  E.  with
which,  by  the  help  of  our  boats,  and  the  very  tide  of  flood
that  without  an  opening  would  have  been  our  definition,
we  entered  it,  and  were  hurried  through  with  amazing  ra-
pidity, by  a  torrent  that  kept  us  from  driving  againil  either
fide  of  the  channel,  which  was  not  more  than  a  quarter  of  a
mile  in  breadth.  While  we  were  mooting  this  gulph,  our
foundings  were  from  thirty  to  feven  fathom,  very  irregular,,
and  the  ground  at  bottom  very  foul.

As  foon  as  we  had  got  within  the  reef  we  anchored  in
nineteen  fathom,  over  a  bottom  of  coral  and  fliells.  And
now,  fuch  is  the  viciflitude  of  life,  we  thought  ourfelves
happy  in  having  regained  a  fituation,  which  but  two  days
before  it  was  the  utmofl  object  of  our  hope  to  quit.  Rocks
and  fhoals  are  always  dangerous  to  the  mariner,  even  where
their  fituation  has  been  afcertained ;  they  are  more  dange-
rous in  feas  which  have  never  before  been  navigated,  and  in

this


ROUND    THE    WOULD.


6oj


this  part  of  the  globe  they  are  more  dangerous  than  in  any       17-0.

other ;  for  here  they  are  reefs  of  coral  rock,  riling  like  a    1 _gLl#

wall  almoft  perpendicularly  out  of  the  unfathomable  deep,  Thurfda>' l6>
always  overflowed  at  high-water,  and  at  low-water  dry  in
many  places  ;  and  here  the  enormous  waves  of  the  vaft
Southern  Ocean,  meeting  with  fo  abrupt  a  refinance,  break,
with  inconceivable  violence,  in  a  furf  which  no  rocks  or
ftorms  in  the  northern  hemifphere  can  produce.  The  dan-
ger of  navigating  unknown  parts  of  this  ocean  was  now
greatly  increafed  by  our  having  a  crazy  fhip,  and  being  fhort
of  provifions  and  every  other  neceiTary ;  yet  the  diftinction
of  a  firft  difcoverer  made  us  chearfully  encounter  every  dan-
ger, and  fubmit  to  every  inconvenience  ;  and  we  chofe  ra-
ther to  incur  the  cenfure  of  imprudence  and  temerity,  which
the  idle  and  voluptuous  fo  liberally  beftow  upon  unfuccefs-
ful  fortitude  and  perfeverance,  than  leave  a  country  which
we  had  difcovered  unexplored,  and  give  colour  to  a  charge
of  timidity  and  irrefolution.

Having  now  congratulated  ourfelves  upon  getting  within
the  reef,  notwithftanding  we  had  fo  lately  congratulated
ourfelves  upon  getting  without  it,  I  refolved  to  keep  the
main  land  on  board  in  my  future  route  to  the  northward,
whatever  the  confequence  might  be  ;  for  if  we  had  now
gone  without  the  reef  again,  it  might  have  carried  us  fo  far
from  the  coaft,  as  to  prevent  my  being  able  to  determine,
whether  this  country  did,  or  did  not,  join  to  New  Guinea;  a
queftion  which  I  was  determined  to  refolve  from  my  firft
coming  within  fight  of  land.  However,  as  I  had  experienced
the  difadvantage  of  having  a  boat  under  repair,  at  a  time
when  it  was  poflible  I  might  want  to  ufe  her,  1  determined
to  remain  fall  at  anchor,  till  the  pinnace  was  perfectly  re-
fitted. As  I  had  no  employment  for  the  other  boats,  I  fent
them  out  in  the  morning  to  the  reef,  to  fee  what  refreih-  Friday  ,r>
4  ments


6d3  LIEUTENANT   COOR's    VOYAGE

1773-  ments  could  be  procured,  and  Mr.  Banks,  in  his  little  boat,
■  "f- r_f  accompanied  by  Dr.  Solander,  went  with  them.  In  this  fitu-
■ftiday  17-  ation  I  found  the  variation  by  amplitude  and  azimuth  to  be
4°  9  E. ;  and  at  noon,  our  latitude  by  obfervation  was  120
38'S.  and  our  longitude  2i6°45'W.  The  main  land  extended
from  N.  66  W.  to  S.  W.  by  S.  and  the  nearefl  part  of  it  was
diflant  about  nine  leagues.  The  opening  through  which  we
had  pafled,  I  called  Providential  Channel  ;  and  this  bore
E.  N.  E.  diftant  ten  or  twelve  miles  s  on  the  main  land  with-
in us  was  a  lofty  promontory  which  I  called  Cape  Wey-
mouth ;  on  the  north  fide  of  which  is  a  bay,  which  I  called
Weymouth  Bay:  they  lie  in  latitude  i2°42'S.,  longitude
1270  15'W.  At  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  boats  re-
turned with  two  hundred  and  forty  pound  of  the  meat  of
fhell-fifh,  chiefly  of  cockles,  fome  of  which  were  as  much  as
two  men  could  move,  and  contained  twenty  pounds  of  good
meat.  Mr.  Banks  alfo  brought  back  many  curious  fhells,
and  Mollafca ;  befides  many  fpecies  of  coral,  among  which
was  that  called  the  Tubipora  mufica.

At  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  got  under  fail  and  flood
away  to  the  N.W.  having  two  boats  ahead  to  direct  us  ;  our
foundings  were  very  irregular,  varying  five  or  fix  fathom
every  cafl,  between  ten  and  twenty-feven.  A  little  before
noon,  we  pafied  a  low  fandy  ifland,  which  we  left  on  our
itarboard  fide,  at  the  diflance  of  two  miles.  At  noon,  our
latitude  was  12°  28',  and  our  diflance  from  the  main  about
four  leagues:  it  extended  from  S.  by  W.  to  N.  71  W.  and
fome  fmall  iflands  from  N.  40  W.  to  54  W.  Between  us  and
the  main  were  feveral  fhoals,  and  fome  without  us,  befides
the  main  or  outermofl  reef,  which  we  could  fee  from  the
mafl-head,  flretching  away  to  the  N.  E.  At  two  in  the  af-
ternoon, as  we  were  fleering  N.W.  by  N.  we  faw  a  large
fhoal  right  ahead,  extending  three  or  four  points  upon  each

.  bow  5


Saturday  i£


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6o9

bow ;  upon  this  we  hauled  up  N.  N.  E.  and  N.  E.  by  N.  to  get       '  770-

round  the  north  point  of  it,  which  we  reached  by  four,  and    «    -f-  '..-

then  edged  away  to  the  weftward,  and  ran  between  the  north    aturday  lS*

end  of  this  fhoal  and  another,  which  lies  two  miles  to  the

northward  of  it,  having  a  boat  all  the  way  ahead  founding;

our  depth  of  water  was  flill  very  irregular,  from  twenty-two

to  eight  fathom.     At  half  an  hour  after  fix,  we  anchored  in

thirteen  fathom :  the  northermofl  of  the  fmall  iflands  feen  at

noon  bore  W.  £  S.  diflant  three  miles :  thefe  iflands  are  dif-

tinguifhed  in  the  chart  by  the  name  of  Forbes's  Islands,

and  lie  about  five  leagues  from  the  main,  which  here  forms

a  high -point  that  we  called  Bolt  Head,  from  which  the

land  trends  more  weflerly,  and  is  in  that  direction  all  low

and  fandy ;  to  the  fouthward  it  is  high  and  hilly  even  near

the  fea.

At  fix  in  the  morning  we  got  again  under  fail,  and  fleered  Sunday  i?.-
for  an  ifland  which  lay  at  a  fmall  diflance  from  the  main,
and  at  this  time  bore  from  us  N.  40  \V.  diflant  about  five
leagues:  our  courfe  was  foon  interrupted  by  fhoals;  how-
ever, by  the  help  of  the  boats,  and  a  good  look-out  from  the
top  of  the  mail,  we  got  into  a  fair  channel  that  led  us  down
to  the  ifland,  between  a  very  large  fhoal  on  our  (larboard
fide  and  feveral  fmall  ones  towards  the  main:  in  this  chan-
nel we  had  from  twenty  to  thirty  fathom  water.  Between
eleven  and  twelve  o'clock  we  hauled  round  the  north  en  ft
fide  of  the  ifland,  leaving  it  between  us  and  the  main,  from
which  it  is  diflant  about  feven  or  eight  miles.  This  ifland  is
about  a  league  in  circuit,  and  we  faw  upon  it  five  of  the  na-
tives, two  of  whom  had  lances  in  their  hands ;  they  came
down  upon  a  point,  and  having  looked  a  little  while  at  the
fhip,  retired.  To  the  N.W.  of  it  are  feveral  low  iflands  and
quays,  which  lie  not  far  from  the  main ;  and  to  the  north-

Vol.  II.  4  I  ward


610  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  ward  and  eaftward  are  feveral  other  iflands  and  fhoals  ;  fo
._  u^"'  '  f  that  we  were  now  encompaffed  on  every  fide :  but  having
Sunday  19.  ]ate]y  been  expofed  to  much  greater  danger,  and  rocks  and
fhoals  being  grown  familiar,  we  looked  at  them  compara-
tively with  little  concern.  The  main  land  appeared  to  be
low  and  barren,  interfperfed  with  large  patches  of  the  veiy
fine  white  fand,  which  we  had  found  upon  Lizard  Iiland  and
different  parts  of  the  main.  The  boats  had  feen  many  turtle
upon  the  fhoals  which  they  pafled,  but  it  blew  too  hard  for
them  to  take  any.  At  noon,  our  latitude  by  obfervation  was
is0,  and  our  longitude  2170  25':  our  depth  of  water  was
fourteen  fathom ;  and  our  courfe  and  diftance,  reduced  to  a
ftrait  line,  was,  between  this  time  and  the  preceding  noon
N.  29  W.  thirty  two  miles.

The  main  land  within  the  iflands  that  have  been  juft  men-
tioned forms  a  point,  which  I  called  Cape  Grenville  :  it
lies  in  latitude  u°  58',  longitude  217*  38';  and  between  it
and  Bolt  Head  is  a  bay,  which  I  called  Temple  Bay.  At  the
diftance  of  nine  leagues  from  Cape  Grenville,  in  the  direc-
tion of  E.  4-N.  lie  fome  high  iflands,  which  I  called  Sir
Charles  Hardy's  Isles  -,  and  thofe  which  lie  off  the  Cape  I
called  Cockburn's  Isles.  Having  lain  by  for  the  boats,
which  had  got  out  of  their  flation,  till  about  one  o'clock,  we
then  took  the  yawl  in  towj  and  the  pinnace  having  got
ahead,  we  filled,  and  flood  N.  by  W.  for  fome  fmall  iflands
which  lay  in  that  direction ;  fuchatleafl  they  were  in  appear-
ance, but  upon  approaching  them  we  perceived  that  they
were  joined  together  by  a  large  reef:  upon  this  we  edged
away  N.  \V.  and  left  them  on  our  flarboard  hand  ;  we  fleered
between  them  and  the  iflands  that  lay  off  the  main,  having
a  clear  paffage,  and  from  fifteen  to  twenty-three  fathom
water.     At  four  o'clock,  we  difcovered  fome  low  iflands  and

rocks,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  611

rocks,  bearing  W.  N.  W.  and  flood  directly  for  them  :  at  half       1770.

an  hour  after  fix,  we  anchored  on  the  north  eaft  fide  of  the   < ,~L>

northermofl  of  them,  at  one  mile  diftance,  and  in  fixteen
fathom.  Thefe  iflands  lie  N.  W.  four  leagues  from  Cape
Grenville,  and  from  the  number  of  birds  that  I  faw  upon
them,  I  called  them  Bird  Isles.  A  little  before  fun-fet,  we
were  in  fight  of  the  main  land,  which  appeared  all  very  low
and  fandy,  extending  as  far  to  the  northward  as  N.  W.  by  N.
fome  fhoals,  quays,  and  low  fandy  ifles  flretching  away  to
the  N.  E.

At  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  got  again  under  fail,  Monday  raj
with  a  frefh  breeze  at  E.  and  flood  away  N.  N.  W.  for  fome
low  iflands  in  that  direction,  but  were  foon  obliged  to  haul
clofe  upon  a  wind  to  weather  a  fhoal  which  we  difcovered
upon  our  larboard  bow,  having  at  the  fame  time  others  to  the
eaftward :  by  the  time  we  had  weathered  this  fhoal  to  lee-
ward, we  had  brought  the  iflands  well  upon  our  lee  bow,
but  feeing  fome  fhoals  run  off  from  them,  and  fome  rocks
on  our  flarboard  bow,  which  we  did  not  difcover  till  we
were  very  near  them,  I  was  afraid  to  go  to  windward  of  the
iilands,  and  therefore  brought  to,  and  having  made  the  fig-
nal  for  the  pinnace,  which  was  ahead,  to  come  on  board,  I
fent  her  to  leeward  of  the  iflands,  with  orders  to  keep  along
the  edge  of  the  fhoal,  which  ran  off  from  the  fouth  fide  of
the  fouthermofl  ifland,  fending  the  yawl  at  the  fame  time,  to
run  over  the  fhoal  in  fearch  of  turtle.  As  foon  as  the  pin-
nace had  got  to  a  proper  diftance,  we  wore,  and  flood  after
her :  as  we  ran  to  leeward  of  this  ifland,  we  took  the  yawl  in
tow,  ihe  having  feen  only  one  fmall  turtle,  and  therefore
made  but  little  ilay  upon  the  fhoal.  The  ifland  we  found  to
be  a  fmall  fpot  of  fand,  with  fome  trees  upon  it,  and  we
could  difcern  many  huts,  or  habitations  of  the  natives,
whom  we  fuppofed  occafionally  to  vifit  thefe  iflands  from

4  I  z  the


612  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°-       the  main,    they  being  only  five  leagues  diftant,   to  catch

Auguft.  y

t — -~ — i  turtle,  when  they  come  afhore  to  lay  their  eggs.  We  con-
tinued to  fland  after  the  pinnace  N.  N.  E.  and  N.  by  E.  for
two  other  low  iflands,  having  two  ihoals  without  us,  and
one  between  us  and  the  main.  At  noon,  we  were  about
four  leagues  from  the  main,  which  we  law  extending  to  the
northward,  as  far  as  N.  W.  by  N.  all  flat  and  fandy.  Our  la-
titude,, by  obfervation,  was  n°  23'  S.  and  our  longitude  2170
46'  VV.  our  foundings  were  from  fourteen  to  twenty-three  fa-
thom ;  but  thefc,  as  well  as  the  fhoals  and  iflands,  which
are  too  numerous  to  be  particularly  mentioned,  will  be  belt
feen  upon  the  chart.  By  one  o'clock,  we  had  run  nearly  the
length  of  the  fouthermoft  of  the  two  iflands  in  fight,  and
finding  that  the  going  to  windward  of  them  would  carry  us
too  far  from  the  main,  we  bore  up  and  ran  to  leeward,
where  finding  a  fair  open  paffage,  we  fleered  N.  by  W.  in  a.
direction  parallel  to  the  main,  leaving  a  fmall  ifland  which,
lay  between  it  and  the  fhip,  and  fome  low  fandy  ifles  and
ihoals  without  us,  of  all  which  we  lofl  fight  by  four  o'clock,
and  faw  no  more  before  the  fun  went  down :  at  this  time
the  fartheft  part  of  the  land  in  fight  bore  N.  N.  W.  7  W.  and
foon  after  we  anchored  in  thirteen  fathom,  upon  foft  ground,
at  the  diftance  of  about  five  leagues  from  the  land,  where
we  lay  till  day-light.

Tuediayzi.  Early  in  the  morning,  we  made  fail  again,  and  fleered
N..N.  W.  by  compafs,  for  the  northermoft  land  in  fight ;  and
at  this  time,  we  obferved  the  variation  of  the  needle  to  be
30  6'  E.  At  eight  o'clock,  we  difcovered  Ihoals  ahead,  and
on  our  larboard  bow,  and  faw  that  the  northermoft  land,
which  we  had  taken  for  the  main,  was  detached  from  itr
and  that  we  might  pais  between  them,  by  running  to  leer
ward  of  the  fhoals  on  our  larboard  bow,  which  were  now
near  us :  we  therefore  wore  and  brought,  to,  fending  away

the


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  613

rhe  pinnace  and  yawl  to  direct  us,  and  then  fleered  N.  W.       1770.

along  the  S.  W.  or  infide  of  the  flioals,  keeping  a  good  look-   \ Z~Lj

out  from  the  maft-head,  and  having  another  fhoal  on  our
larboard  fide :  we  found  however  a  good  channel  of  a  mile
broad  between  them,  in  which  we  had  from  ten  to  fourteen
fathom.  At  eleven  o'clock,  we  were  nearly  the  length  of
the  land  detached  from  the  main,  and  there  appeared  to  be
no  obftruCtion  in  the  paflage  between  them,  yet  having  the
long-boat  aftern,  and  rigged,  we  fent  her  away  to  keep  in
more  upon  our  larboard  bow,  and  at  the  fame  time  dif-
patched  the  pinnace  a-ftarboard  ;  precautions  which  I  thought
necefTary,  as  we  had  a  flrong  flood  that  carried  us  an  end
very  fall,  and  it  was  near  high  water :  as  foon  as  the  boats  were
ahead,  we  flood  after  them,  and  by  noon,  got  through  the
pafTage.  Our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  then  io°  36',  and
the  nearefl  part  of  the  main,  which  we  foon  after  found  to
be  the  norfhermofl,  bore  W.  2  S.  diflant  between  three  or
four  miles :  we  found  the  land  which  was  detached  from
the  main,  to  be  a  fingle  ifland,  extending  from  N.  to  N.  75  E-
diflant  between  two  and  three  miles ;  at  the  fame  time  we
faw  other  iflands  at  a  confiderable  diflance,  extending  from
N.  by  W.  to  W.  N.  W.  and  behind  them  another  chain  of
high  land,  which  we  judged  alfo  to  be  iflands:  there  were
flill  other  iflands,  extending  as  far  as  N.  71  W.-which  at  this,
time  we  took  for  the  main.

The  point  of  the  main  which  forms  the  fide  of  the  chan-
nel through  which  we  had  pafTed,  oppofite  to  the  ifland,  is
the  northern  promontory  of  the  country,  and  I  called  it  York
Cape.  Its  longitude  is  2180  24'  W.  the  latitude  of  the  north
point  is  io°  37,  ancl  of  the  eafl  point  io°  42'  S.  ■  The  land  over
the  eafl  point,  and  to  the  fouthward  of  it,  is  rather  low,  and
as-  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  very  flat,  and  of  a  barren  ap-

7  pearance.


<5i4  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1 770-  pearance.  To  the  fouthward  of  the  Cape  the  fliore  forms  a
■  "f1"  »  large  open  bay,  which  I  called  Newcastle  Bay,  and  in
Tuefday  21.  wj1jcj1  are  fome  fmall  low  iilands  and  fhoals ;  the  land  adja-
cent is  alfo  very  low,  flat,  and  fandy.  The  land  of  the
northern  part  of  the  Cape  is  more  hilly,  the  vallies  feem  to
be  well  clothed  with  wood,  and  the  more  forms  fome  fmall
bays,  in  which  there  appeared  to  be  good  anchorage.  Clofe
to  the  eaftern  point  of  the  Cape  are  three  fmall  iflands,  from
one  of  which  a  fmall  ledge  of  rocks  runs  out  into  the  fea :
there  is  alfo  an  ifland  clofe  to  the  northern  point.  The  illand
that  forms  the  ftreight  or  channel  through  which  we  had
patted,  lies  about  four  miles  without  thefe,  which,  except
two,  are  very  fmall:  the  fouthermoft  is  the  largeft,  and
much  higher  than  any  part  of  the  main  land.  On  the  north
weft  fide  of  this  illand  there  appeared  to  be  good  anchorage,
and  on  fhore,  vallies  that  promifed  both  wood  and  water.
Thefe  iflands  are  diftinguifhed  in  the  chart  by  the  name  of
York  Isles.  To  the  fouthward,  and  fouth  eaft,  and  even  to
the  eaftward  and  northward  of  them,  there  are  feveral  other
low  iflands,  rocks,  and  fhoals  :  our  depth  of  water  in  failing
between  them  and  the  main,  was  twelve,  thirteen,  and  four-
teen fathom.

We  flood  along  the  fhore  to  the  weflward,  with  a  gentle
breeze  at  S.  E.  by  S.  and  when  we  had  advanced  between
three  and  four  miles,  we  difcovered  the  land  ahead,  which,
when  we  firft  faw  it,  we  took  for  the  main,  to  be  iflands  de-
tached from  it  by  feveral  channels :  upon  this  we  fent  away
the  boats,  with  proper  inftrucftions,  to  lead  us  through  that
channel  which  was  next  the  main  ;  but  foon  after  difcovering
rocks  and  fhoals  in  this  channel,  I  made  a  fignal  for  the  boats
to  go  through  the  next  channel  to  the  northward,  which  lay
between  thefe  iflands,  leaving  fome  of  them  between  us  and

the


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  615

the  main :  the  fhip  followed,  and  had  never  lefs  than  five  fa-       '77°.
thorn  water  in  the  narrowed  part  of  the  channel,  where  the    e— y-^j
diftance  from  ifland  to  iflind  was  about  one  mile  and  an     ue  ay  zu
half.

At  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  anchored,  being
about  a  mile  and  a  half,  or  two  miles,  within  the  entrance,
in  fix  fathom  and  a  half,  with  clear  ground:  the  channel
here  had  begun  to  widen,  and  the  iflands  on  each  fide  of  us
were  diftant  about  a  mile :  the  main  land  ftretched  away  to
the  S.  \V.  the  farther!  point  in  view  bore  S.  48  W.  and  the
fouthermoft  point  of  the  iflands,  on  the  north  weft  fide  of
the  paflage,  bore  S.  76  W.  Between  thefe  two  points  we
could  fee  no  land,  fo  that  we  conceived  hopes  of  having,  at
laft,  found  a  paffage  into  the  Indian  fea;  however,  that  I
might  be  able  to  determine  with  more  certainty,  I  refolved
to  land  upon  the  ifland  which  lies  at  the  fouth  eaft  point  of
the  paflage.  Upon  this  ifland  we  had  feen  many  of  the  in-
habitants when  we  firft  came  to  an  anchor,  and  when  I
went  into  the  boat,  with  a  party  of  men,  accompanied  by
Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  in  order  to  go  afhore,  we  faw
ten  of  them  upon  a  hill:  nine  of  them  were  armed  with
fuch  lances  as  we  had  been  uied  to  fee,  and  the  tenth  had  a
bow,  and  a  bundle  of  arrows,  which  we  had  never  feen  in
the  poffeffion  of  the  natives  of  this  country  before :  we  alfo
obferved,  that  two  of  them  had  large  ornaments  of  mother
of  pearl  hanging  round  their  necks.  Three  of  thefe,  one  of
whom  was  the  bowman,  placed  themfelves  upon  the  beach
abreaft  of  us,  and  we  expected  that  they  would  have  oppofed
our  landing,  but  when  we  came  within  about  a  mufket's
fhot  of  the  beach,  they  walked  leifurely  away.  We  imme-
diately climbed  the  higheft  hill,  which  was  not  more  than
three  times  as  high  as  the  maft-head,  and  the  moft  barren  of
2  any


me  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

177°-       any  we  had  feen.    From  this  hill,  no  land  could  be  feen  be-
i__^LL»    tween  the  S.  W.  and  W.  S.  W.  fo  that  I  had  no  doubt  of  find-
Tuefdayzi.    j^  a  channel  through.     The  land  to  the  north  weft  of  it
confifted  of  a  great  number  of  iflands  of  various  extent,  and
different  heights,  ranged  one  behind  another,  as  far  to  the
northward  and  well  ward  as  I  could  fee,  which  could  not  be
lefs  than  thirteen  leagues.     As  I  was  now  about  to  quit  the
eaftern  coaft  of  New  Holland,  which  I  had  coafted  from  lati-
tude 38  to  this  place,  and  which  I  am  confident  no  European
had  ever  feen  before,  I  once  more  hoifted  Englifh  colours,
and  though  I  had  already  taken  poffemon  of  feveral  parti-
cular parts,  I  now  took  poffemon  of  the  whole  eaftern  coaft,
from  latitude  38"'  to  this  place,  latitude  ioi  S.  in  right  of  his
Majefty  King  George  the  Third,  by  the  name  of  New  South
Wales,    with  all  the  bays,    harbours,    rivers,    and  iflands
fituated  upon  it:  we  then  fired  three  vollies  of  fmall  arms,
which  were  anfwercd  by  the  fame  number  from  the  fhip.
Having  performed  this  ceremony  upon  the  ifland,  which  we
called  Possession  Island,  we  reimbarked  in  our  boat,  but  a
rapid  ebb  tide  fetcing  N.  E.  made  our  return  to  the  veffel  very
difficult  and  tedious.     From  the  time  of  our  laft  coming
among  the  fiioals,  we  conftantly  found  a  moderate  tide,  the
flood  fetting  to  the  N.  W.  and  the  ebb  to  the  S.  E.     At  this
place,  it  is  high  water  at  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon,
about  one  or  two  o'clock,  and  the  water  rifes  and  falls  per-
pendicularly about  twelve  feet.     We  faw  fmoke  riling  in
many  places  from  the  adjacent  lands  and  iflands,  as  we  had
clone  upon  every  part  of  the  coaft,  after  our  laft  return  to  it
through  the  reef.

We  continued  at  anchor  all  night,  and  between  feven  and

v,tJnef.  zz,    eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  faw  three  or  four  of  the

natives  upon  the  beach  gathering  mell-fifJr  j  we  discovered,

by


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6ij

by  the  help  of  our  glaffcs,  that  they  were  women,  and,  like       *77°'

Augull.

all  the  other  inhabitants  of  this  country,  flark  naked.     At   ■ » >

low  water,  which  happened  about  ten  o'clock,  we  got  under
fail,  and  flood  to  the  S.W.  with  a  light  breeze  at  E.  which
afterwards  veered  to  N.  by  E. ;  our  depth  of  water  was  from
fix  to  ten  fathom,  except  in  one  place,  where  we  had  but
five.     At  noon,  Pofleffion  Iiland  bore  N.  53  E.  diflant  four
leagues,  the  weflern  extremity  of  the  main  land  in  fight  bore
S.  43  W.  diflant  between  four  and  five  leagues,  and  appeared
to  be  extremely  low,    the  fouth  welt  point  of  the  largcfl
ifland  on  the  north  well  fide  of  the  pailage  bore  N.  71  W.
dillant  eight  miles,  and  this  point  I  called  Cape  Cornwall.
It  lies  in  latitude  io°  43'  S.,  longitude  2 19°  W.  ;  and  fome  low
lands  that  lie  about  the  middle  of  the  paflage,    which   [
called  Wallis's  Isles,  bore  W.  by  S.  7  S.  diflant  about  two
leagues:    our  latitude,    by  obfervation,   was  lo^G'S.     We
continued  to  advance  with  the  tide  of  flood  W.  N.  W.  having
little  wind,  and  from  eight  to  five  fathom  water.    At  half
an  hour  after  one,  the  pinnace,  which  was  ahead,  made  the
fignal  for  fhoal  water,   upon  which  we  tacked,   and  lent
away  the  yawl  to  found  alfo:  we  then  tacked  again,  and
flood  after  them:  in  about  two  hours,  they  both  made  the
fignal  for  fhoal  water,  and  the  tide  being  nearly  at  its  greatefl
height,  I  was  afraid  to  fland  on,  as  running  aground  at  that
time  might  be  fatal ;  I  therefore  came  to  an  anchor  in  fomc-
what  lefs  than  feven  fathom,  fandy  ground.   Wallis's  iflands
bore  S.  by  W.  7  W.  diflant  five  or  fix  miles,  the  iflands  to  the
northward  extended  from  S.  73  E.  to  N.  10  E.  and  a  fmall
iiland,  which  was  jufl  in  fight,  bore  N.  W.  7  W.     Here  we
found  the  flood  tide  fet  to  the  wcflward,  and  the  ebb  to  the
eailward.

After  we  had  come  to  an  anchor,  I  fent  away  the  Matter

in  the  long-boat  to  found,    who,    upon  his  return  in  the

Vol.  II.  4  K  evening,


4i8  LIEUTENANT    COOK's   VOYAGE

1770.       evening,  reported,  that  there  was  a  bank  flretching  north
«,_  -f-  _>    and  fouth,  upon  which  there  were  but  three  fathom,  and
Thurfdayzj.  t]lat  beyond  it  there  were  feven.     About  this  time  it  fell
calm,  and  continued  fo  till  nine  the  next  morning,  when
we  weighed,  with  a  light  breeze  at  S.  S.  E.  and  fleered  N.  W.
by  W.  for  the  fmall  illand  which  was  juft  in  fight,  having
firft  fent  the  boats  ahead  to  found :  the  depth  of  water  was
eight,  feven,  fix,  five,  and  four  fathom,  and  three  fathom
upon  the  bank,  it  being  now  the  laft  quarter  ebb.     At  this
time,  the  northermoft  ifland  in  fight  bore  N.  9  E.  Cape  Corn-
wall E.  diflant  three  leagues,  and  Wallis's  Ifies  S.  3  E.  diftant
three  leagues.     This  bank,  at   leaf!  fo  much  as  we  have
founded,  extends  nearly  N.  andS.  but  to  what  diltanccldonot
know:  its  breadth  is  not  more  than  half  a  mile  at  the  utmoft.
When  we  had  got  over  the  bank,  we  deepened  our  water  to
fix  fathom  three  quarters,  and  had  the  fame  depth  all  the
way  to  the  fmall  illand  ahead,  which  we  reached  by  noon,
when  it  bore  S.  diftant  about  half  a  mile.     Our  depth  of
water  was  now  five  fathom,  and  the  northermoft  land  in
fight,  which  is  part  of  the  fame  chain  of  iflands  that  we  had
feen  to  the  northward  from  the  time  of  our  firft  entering  the
ftreight,  bore  N.  71  E.     Our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  10°
-33'S.  and  our  longitude  2 1 90  asrW.:  in  this  fituation,nopartrof
the  main  was  in  fight.     As  we  were  now  near  the  ifland,  and
had  but  little  wind,  Mr.  Banks  and  I  landed  upon  ir,  and
found  it,  except  a  few  patches  of  wood,  to  be  a  barren  rock,
the  haunt  of  birds,  which  had  frequented  it  in  fuch  num-
bers, as  to  make  the  furface  almoft  uniformly  white  with
their  dung :  of  thefe  birds,    the  greater  part  feemed  to  be
boobies,    and   I   therefore  called  the  place  Booby  Island.
After  a  fhort  flay,  we  returned  to  the  fliip,  and  in  the  mean
time  the  wind  had  got  to  the  S.  W. ;    it  was  but  a  gentle
breeze,  yet  it  was  accompanied  by  a  fwell  from  the  fame

5  quarter,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  619

quarter, .  which,   with  other  circumftances,    confirmed  my       *770-
opinion  that  we  were  got  to  the  weftward  of  Carpentaria,  or    t_  __!  '_,
the  northern  extremity  of  New  Holland,  and  had  now  an       ur  ayz3'
open  fea  to  the  weftward,  which  gave  me  great  fat  is  faction,
not  only  becaufe  the  dangers  and  fatigues  of  the  voyage  were
drawing  to  an  end,  but  becaufe  it  would  no  longer  be  a
doubt  whether  New  Holland  and  New  Guinea  were  two  fe-
parate  iflands,  or  different  parts  of  the  fame.

The  north  call  entrance  of  this  paffage,  or  ftreighr,  lies  in
the  latitude  of  iou  39  S.  and  in  the  longitude  of  21 8°  36'  W«
It  is  formed  by  the  main,  or  the  northern  extremity  of  New
Holland,  on  the  S.  E.  and  by  a  congeries  of  iflands,  which  I
called  the  Prince  of  Wales's  Islands,  to  the  N.  W.  and  it  is
probable  that  thefe  iflands  extend  quite  to  New  Guinea.
They  differ  very  much  both  in  height  and  circuit,  and  many
of  them  feemed  to  be  well  clothed  with  herbage  and  wood  :
upon  moft,  if  not  all  of  them,  we.  faw  fmoke,  and  therefore
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  their  being  inhabited:  it  is  alfo
probable,  that  among  them  there  are  at  leaft  as  good  paf-
fages  as  that  we  came  through,  perhaps  better,  though
better  would  not  need  to  be  defned,  if  the  accefs  to  it,  from
the  eaftward,  were  lefs  dangerous :  that  a  lefs  dangerous
accefs  may  be  difcovered,  I  think  there  is  little  reafon  to
doubt,  and  to  find  it  little  more  feerns  to  be  neceffary,  than
to  determine  how  far  the  principal,  or  outer  reef,  which
bounds  the  fhoals  to  the  eaftward,  extends  towards  the  north,
which  I  would  not  have  left  to  future  navigators  if  I  had
been  lefs  haraffed  by  danger  and  fatigue,  and  had  had  a  fhip
in  better  condition  for  the  purpofe.

To  this  channel,  or  pafTagc,  I  have  given  the  name  of  the
fhip,  and  called  it  Endeavour  Streights.  Its  length  from
N.  E.  to  S.  W.  is  ten  leagues,  and  it  is  about  five  leagues

4K2  broad;


6zo  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

J77°-  broad,  except  at  the  north  eaft  entrance,  where  it  is  fome-
.  °su' '_.  what  lefs  than  two  miles,  being  contracted  by  the  illands
Tiu1rfday23.  ^.^  u?  ^e?e.  That  which  I  called  PoiTeffion  Ifland  is  of
a  moderate  height  and  circuit,  and  this  we  left  between  us
and  the  main,  palling  between  it  and  two  fmall  round
illands,  which  lie  about  two  miles  to  the  N.  W.  of  it.  The
two  fmall  illands,  which  I  called  Wallis's  Illands,  lie  in  the
middle  of  the  fouth  well  entrance,  and  thefe  we  left  to  the
fouthward.  Our  depth  of  water  in  the  ilreight,  was  from
four  to  nine  fathom,  with  every  where  good  anchorage,  ex-
cept upon  the  bank,  which  lies  two  leagues  to  the  north-
ward of  Wallis's  Illands,  where,  at  low  water,  there  are  but
three  fathom :  for  a  more  particular  knowlege  of  this
ftreight,  and  of  the  fituations  of  the  feveral  illands  and
fhoals  on  the  eaftern  coaft  of  New  Wales,  I  refer  to  the
chart,  where  they  are  delineated  with  all  the  accuracy  that
circumftances  would  admit ;  yet,  with  refpect  to  the  fhoals,
I  cannot  pretend  that  one  half  of  them  are  laid  down,  nor
can  it  be  fuppofed  poffible  that  one  half  of  them  mould  be
difcovered  in  the  courfe  of  a  fmgle  navigation  :  many  illands
alfo  mull  have  efcaped  my  pencil,  efpecially  between  lati-
tude 2o°  and  22°,  where  we  faw  illands  out  at  fea  as  far  as
an  ifland  could  be  diilinguifhed  ;  it  muft  not  therefore  be
fuppofed,  by  future  navigators,  that  where  no  fhoal  or  ifland
is  laid  down  in  my  chart,  no  fhoal  or  ifland  will  be  found  in
thefe  feas  :  it  is  enough  that  the  fituation  of  thofe  that  appear
in  the  chart  is  faithfully  afcertained,  and,  in  general,  I  have
the  greateft  reafon  to  hope  that  it  will  be  found  as  free  from
error  as  any  that  has  not  been  corrected  by  fubfequent  and
fucceflive  obfervations.  The  latitudes  and  longitudes  of  all,
or  moll  of  the  principal  head  lands  and  bays,  may  be  con-
fided in,  for  we  fcldom  failed  of  getting  an  obfervation  once
at  leaft  every  day,  by  which  to  correct:  the  latitude  of  our

reckonings


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  621

reckoning,  and  obfervations  for  fettling  the  longitude  were  1770.
equally  numerous,  no  opportunity  that  was  offered  by  the  ■  cgu  '  ■
fun  and  moon  being  fullered  to  efcape.  It  would  be  inju-  Thulfday  z3-
rious  to  the  memory  of  Mr.  Green,  not  to  take  this  oppor-
tunity of  attefling  that  he  was  indefatigable  both  in  making
obfervations  and  calculating  upon  them ;  and  that,  by  his
instructions  and  afliftance,  many  of  the  petty  officers  were
enabled  both  to  obferve  and  calculate  with  great  exactnefs.
This  method  of  finding  the  longitude  at  fea,  may  be  put
into  univerfal  practice,  and  may  always  be  depended  upon
within  half  a  degree,  which  is  furflcient  for  all  nautical  pur-
pofes.  If,  therefore,  obferving  and  calculating  were  con-
fidered  as  necefTary  qualifications  for  every  fea  officer,  the
labours  of  the  fpeculative  theorift  to  folve  this  problem
might  be  remitted,  without  much  injury  to  mankind:
neither  will  it  be  fo  difficult  to  acquire  this  qualification,  or
put  it  in  practice,  as  may  at  firfl  appear  ;  for,  with  the  affift-
ance  of  the  nautical  almanack,  and  aftronomical  ephemeris,
the  calculations  for  finding  the  longitude  will  take  up  little
more  time  than  the  calculation  of  an  azimuth  for  finding  the
variation  of  the  compafs.


CHAP,


0*3  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


CHAP.     VIII.

Departure  from  New  South  Wales  ;  a  particular  Defcrip-
tion  of  the  Country ,  its  ProduEls^  and  People  :  A  Speci-
men of  the  Language^  a?id  fo?ne  Obfervations  upon  the
Currents  and  "Tides.


1770.


o


F  this  country,  its  products,  and  its  people,  many  par-
Aigufi.  ^  \_J  ticulars  have  already  been  related  in  the  courfe  of  the
narrative,  being  fo  interwoven  with  the  events,  as  not  to  ad-
mit of  a  reparation.  I  fhall  now  give  a  more  full  and  cir-
cumftantial  defcription  of  each,  in  which,  if  fome  things
mould  happen  to  be  repeated,  the  greater  part  will  be  found
new.

New  Holland,  or,  as  I  have  now  called  the  eaftern  coafl,
New  South  Wales,  is  of  a  larger  extent  than  any  other  coun-
try in  the  known  world  that  does  not  bear  the  name  of  a
continent :  the  length  of  coafl:  along  which  we  failed,  re-
duced to  a  ftrait  line,  is  no  lefs  than  twenty-feven  degrees
of  latitude,  amounting  to  near  2000  miles,  fo  that  its  fquare
furface  mull  be  much  more  than  equal  to  all  Europe.     To
the  fouthward  of  33  or  34,  the  land  in  general  is  low  and
level ;  farther  northward  it  is  hilly,  but  in  no  part  can  be
called  mountainous,  and  the  hills  and  mountains,  taken  to-
gether,  make  but  a  fmall  part  of  the  furface,  in  comparifon
with  the  vallies  and  plains.    It  is  upon  the  whole  rather  bar-
ren than  fertile,  yet  the  rifing  ground  is  chequered  by  woods
and  lawns,  and  the  plains  and  vallies  are  in  many  places
covered  with  herbage :  the  foil  however  is  frequently  fandy,

and


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  6a,

and  many  of  the  lawns,  or  favannahs,  are  rocky  and  barren,  1770.
efpecially  to  the  northward,  where,  in  the  bed  fpots,  vege-  .  Au£uft,_,
tation  was  lefs  vigorous  than  in  the  fouthern  part  of  the
country ;  the  trees  were  not  fo  tall,  nor  was  the  herbage  fo
rich.  The  grafs  in  general  is  high,  but  thin,  and  the  trees,
where  they  are  largeft,  are  feldom  lefs  than  forty  feet  afun-
der;  nor  is  the  country  inland,  as  far  as  we  could  examine
ir,  better  clothed  than  the  fea  coaft.  The  banks  of  the  bays
are  covered  with  mangroves,  to  the  diftance  of  a  mile  within
the  beach,  under  which  the  foil  is  a  rank  mud,  that  is  al-
ways overflowed  by  a  fpring  tide  ;  farther  in  the  country  we
fometimes  met  with  a  bog,  upon  which  the  grafs  was  very
thick  and  luxuriant,  and  fometimes  with  a  valley,  that  was
clothed  with  underwood :  the  foil  in  fome  parts  feemed  to  be
capable  of  improvement,  but  the  far  greater  part  is  fuch  as
can  admit  of  no  cultivation.  The  coaft,  at  leaft  that  part  of
it  which  lies  to  the  northward  of  25°  S.  abounds  with  fine
bays  and  harbours,  where  vefTels  may  lie  in  perfect  fecurity
from  all  winds.

If  we  may  judge  by  the  appearance  of  the  country  while
we  were  there,  which  was  in  the  very  height  of  the  dry  fea-
fon,  it  is  well  watered  :  we  found  innumerable  fmall  brooks
and  fprings,  but  no  great  rivers  ;  thefe  brooks,  however,
probably  become  large  in  the  rainy  feafon.  Thinly  Sound
was  the  only  place  where  frefh  water  was  not  to  be  pro-
cured for  the  fhip,  and  even  there  one  or  two  fmall  pools
were  found  in  the  woods,  though  the  face  of  the  country-
was  everywhere  interfered  by  falt-creeks,  and  mangrove
land.

Of  trees  there  is  no  great  variety.     Of  thofe  that  could  be
called  timber,  there  are  but  two  forts  ;  the  largeft  is  the  gum
tree,  which  grows  all  over  the  country,  and  has  been  men-
tioned'


624  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

:  ri77Q.  tioned  already:  it  has  narrow  leaves,  not  much  unlike  a
t_  !^u  '_,  willow  ;  and  the  gum,  or  rather  refin,  which  it  yields,  is  of
a  deep  red,  and  refembles  the  fangnis  draconis;  pollibly  it  may
be  the  fame,  for  this  fubftance  is  known  to  be  the  produce
of  more  than  one  plant.  It  is  mentioned  by  Dampier,  and
is  perhaps  the  fame  that  Tafman  found  upon  Diemen's
Land,  where  he  fays  he  faw  "  Gum  of  the  trees,  and  gum
«'  lac  of  the  ground;"  The  other  timber  tree  is  that  which
grows  fomewhat  like  our  pines,  and  has  been  particularly
mentioned  in  the  account  of  Botany  Bay.  The  wood  of  both
thefe  trees,  as  I  have  before  remarked,  is  extremely  hard
and  heavy.  Befides  thefe,  here  are  trees  covered  with  a  foft
bark  that  is  eafily  peeled  off,  and  is  the  fame  that  in  the
Eaft  Indies  is  ufed  for  the  caulking  of  mips.

We  found  here  the  palm  of  three  different  forts.  The
firft,  which  grows  in  great  plenty  to  the  fouthward,  has
leaves  that  are  plaited  like  a  fan :  the  cabbage  of  thefe  is
fmall,  but  exquifitely  fweet ;  and  the  nuts,  which  it  bears  in
great  abundance,  are  very  good  food  for  hogs.  The  fecond
fort  bore  a  much  greater  refemblance  to  the  true  cabbage
tree  of  the  Weft  Indies ;  its  leaves  were  large  and  pinnated,
like  thofe  of  the  cocoa-nut ;  and  thefe  alfo  produced  a  cab-
bage, which  though  not  fo  fweet  as  the  other,  was  much
larger.  The  third  fort,  which,  like  the  fecond,  was  found
only  in  the  northern  parts,  was  feldom  more  than  ten  feet
high,  with  fmall  pinnated  leaves,  refembling  thofe  of  fome
kind  of  fern :  it  bore  no  cabbage,  but  a  plentiful  crop  of
nuts,  about  the  fize  of  a  large  chefnut,  but  rounder :  as  we
found  the  hulls  of  thefe  fcattered  round  the  places  where
the  Indians  had  made  their  fires,  we  took  for  granted  that
they  were  fit  to  eat  ;  thofe  however  who  made  the  ex-
periment paid  dear  for  their  knowlcge  of  the  contrary,  for

they


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  625

they  operated  both  as  an  emetic  and  cathartic  with  great       1770


violence.  Still,  however,  we  made  no  doubt  but  that  they
were  eaten  by  the  Indians ;  and  judging  that  the  constitution
of  the  hogs  might  be  as  ftrong  as  theirs,  though  our  own
had  proved  to  be  fo  much  inferior,  we  carried  them  to  the
ftye ;  the  hogs  eat  them,  indeed,  and  for  fome  time  we
thought  without  fuffering  any  inconvenience ;  but  in  about
a  week  they  were  fo  much  difordered  that  two  of  them  died,
and  the  reft  were  recovered  with  great  difficulty.  It  is  probable,
however,  that  the  poifonous  quality  of  thefe  nuts  may  lie  in
the  juice,  like  that  of  the  caffada  of  the  Weft  Indies  ;  and
that  the  pulp,  when  dried,  may  be  not  only  wholefome,  but
nutricious.  Befides  thefe  fpecies  of  the  palm,  and  man-
groves, there  were  feveral  fmall  trees  and  fhrubs  altogether
unknown  in  Europe ;  particularly  one  which  produced  a
very  poor  kind  of  fig ;  another  that  bore  what  we  called  a
plum,  which  it  refembled  in  colour,  but  not  in  fhape,  being
flat  on  the  fides  like  a  little  cheefe  ;  and  a  third  that  bore  a
kind  of  purple  apple ;  which,  after  it  had  been  kept  a  few
days,  became  eatable,  and  tafted  fomewhat  like  a  damafcene.

Here  is  a  great  variety  of  plants  to  enrich  the  collection  of
a  botanilt,  but  very  few  of  them  are  of  the  sefculent  kind.
A  fmall  plant,  with  long,  narrow,  graffy  leaves,  refembling
that  kind  of  bulrufh  which  in  England  is  called  the  Cat's-
tail,  yields  a  refm  of  a  bright  yellow  colour,  exactly  refem-
bling gambouge,  except  that  it  does  not  ftain  ;  it  has  a  fwect
fmell,  but  its  properties  we  had  no  opportunity  to  difcover,
any  more  than  thofe  of  many  others  with  which  the  natives
appear  to  be  acquainted,  as  they  have  diftinguifhed  them  by
names.

I  have  already  mentioned  the  root  and  leaves  of  a  plant

refembling  the  coccos  of  the  Weft  Indies,  and  a  kind  of

Vol.  II.  4  L  bean  ;


Auguft.


bzt>  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770.  bean  ;  to  which  may  be  added,  a  fort  of  parfley  and  purfe-
w^l— t  lain,  and  two  kinds  of  yams  ;  one  fhaped  like  a  rhadifli,  and
the  other  round,  and  covered  with  ftringy  fibres  :  both  forts
arc  very  fmall,  but  fweet ;  and  we  never  could  find  the
plants  that  produced  them,  though  we  often  faw  the  places
where  they  had  been  newly  dug  up;  it  is  probable  that  the
drought  had  deflroyed  the  leaves,  and  we  could  not,  like  the
Indians,  difcover  them  by  the  ftalks.

Mod  of  the  fruits  of  this  country,  fuch  as  they  are,  have
been  mentioned  already.  We  found  one  in  the  fouthern
part  cf  the  country  refembling  a  cherry,  except  that  the  flone
was  foft ;  and  another  not  unlike  a  pine-apple  in  appear-
ance, but  of  a  very  difagreeable  tafte,  which  is  well  known
in  the  Eaft  Indies,  and  is  called  by  the  Dutch  Pyn  Appcl
Boomtiu

Of  the  quadrupeds,  I  have  already  mentioned  the  dog,
and  particularly  defcribed  the  kanguroo,  and  the  animal  of
the  opofTum  kind,  refembling  the  phalanger  of  BufFon  ;  to
which  I  can  add  only  one  more,  refembling  a  polecat,  which
the  natives  call  %<?//;  the  back  is  brown,  fpotted  with  white,
and  the  belly  white  unmixed.  Several  of  our  people  faid
they  had  feen  wolves ;  but  perhaps,  if  we  had  not  feen  tradts
that  favoured  the  account,  we  might  have  thought  them
little  more  worthy  of  credit  than  he  who  reported  that  he  had
feen  the  devil.

Of  batts,  which  hold  a  middle  place  between,  the  beafts
and  the  birds,  we  faw  many  kinds,  particularly  one  which,
as  I  have  obferved  already,  was  larger  than  a  partridge  ;  we
were  not  fortunate  enough  to  take  one  either  alive  or  dead,
but  it  was  fuppofed  to  be  the  fame  as  Buffon  has  defcribed:
by  the  name  of  Rovjft  or  Rouget,

The


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  G:j

The  fea  and  other  water-fowl  of  this  country,  are. gulls,  1770.
fhaggs,  foland  gec^e,  or  gannets,  of  two  forts  ;  boobies,  nod-  t_.-^f_,
dies,  curlieus,  ducks,  pelicans  of  an  enormous  fize,  and
many  others.  The  land-birds,  are  crows,  parrots,  paroquets,
cockatoos,  and  other  birds  of  the  fame  kind,  of  exquifue
beauty ;  pigeons,  doves,  quails,  buftards,  herons,  cranes,
hawks,  and  eagles.  The  pigeons  Hew  in  numerous  flocks,
fo  that,  notwithstanding  their  extreme  fhynefs,  our  people
frequently  killed  ten  or  twelve  of  them  in  a  day :  thefe  birds
are  very  beautiful,  and  crefted  very  differently  from  any  we
had  feen  before.

Among  other  reptiles,  here  are  ferpents  of  various  kinds,
fome  noxious,  and  fome  harmlefs ;  fcorpions,  centipieds,  and
lizards.  The  infects  are  but  few.  The  principal  are  the
mufquito,  and  the  ant.  Of  the  ant  there  are  feveral  forts ;
fome  are  as  green  as  a  leaf,  and  live  upon  trees,  where  they
build  their  nefls  of  various  fizes,  between  that  of  a  man's
head  and  his  fift.  Thefe  nefts  are  of  a  very  curious  ltruc-
ture :  they  are  formed  by  bending  down  feveral  of  the  leaves,
each  of  which  is  as  broad  as  a  man's  hand,  and  gluing  the
points  of  them  together,  fo  as  to  form  a  purfe  ;  the  vifcus
ufed  for  this  purpofe,  is  an  animal  juice,  wdiich  Nature
has  enabled  them  to  elaborate.  Their  method  of  firft  bend-
ing down  the  leaves,  we  had  not  an  opportunity  to  obferve  ;
but  we  faw  thoufands  uniting  all  their  ftrength  to  hold  them
in  this  pofition,  while  other  bufy  multitudes  were  employed
within,  in  applying  the  gluten  that  was  to  prevent  their  re-
turning back.  To  fatisfy  ourfelves  that  the  leaves  were  bent,
and  held  down  by  the  effort  of  thefe  diminutive  artificers,
we  difcurbed  them  in  their  work,  and  as  loon  as  they  were
driven  from  their  ftation,  the  leaves  on  which  they  were
employed  fprung  up  with  a  force  much  greater  than  we

4  I-  -  could


628  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770.  could  have  thought  them  able  to  conquer  by  any  combine
.  tUf!  'j,  tion  of  their  flrength.  But  though  we  gratified  our  curio-
fity  at  their  expence,  the  injury  did  not  go  unrevenged;  for
thoufands  immediately  threw  themfelves  upon  us,  and  gave
us  intolerable  pain  with  their  flings,  efpecially  thofe  which
took  pofTeffion  of  our  necks  and  our  hair,  from  whence  they
were  not  eafily  driven :  the  fling  was  fcarcely  lefs  painful
than  that  of  a  bee ;  but,  except  it  was  repeated,  the  pain  did:
not  laft  more  than  a  minute.

Another  fort  are  quite  black,  and  their  operations  and!
manner  of  life  are  not  lefs  extraordinary.  Their  habitations
are  the  infide  of  the  branches  of  a  tree,  which  they  contrive
to  excavate  by  working  out  the  pith  almofl  to  the  extremity
of  the  flendereft  twig;  the  tree  at  the  fame  time flourifhing,
as  if  it  had  no  fuch  inmate.  When  we  firfl  found  the  tree,
we  gathered  fome  of  the  branches,  and  were  fcarcely  lefs
aftonifhed  than  we  mould  have  been  to  find  that  we  had
prophaned  a  confecrated  grove,  where  every  tree,  upon  being
wounded,  gave  figns  of  life  ;  for  we  were  inftantly  covered
with  legions  of  thefe  animals,  fwarming  from  every  broken
bough,  and  inflicting  their  flings  with  incefTant  violence..
They  are  mentioned  by  Rumphius  in  his  Herbarium  ^mboi-
nenfe,  vol.  ii.  p.  257. ;  but  the  tree  in  which  he  faw  their
dwelling,  is  very  different  from  that  in  which  we  found:
them.

A  third  kind  we  found  nefled  in  the  root  of  a  plant,  which
grows  on  the  bark  of  trees  in  the  manner  of  mifletoe,  and
which  they  had  perforated  for  that  ufe.  This  root  is  com-
monly as  big  as  a  large  turnip,  and  fometimes  much  big-
ger: when  we  cut  it,  we  found  it  interfered  by  innume-
rable winding  pafTages,  all  filled  with  thefe  animals,  by
which  however  the  vegetation  of  the  plant  did  not  appear  to
6  have


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6i9

Have  fuffcred  any  injury.  We  never  cut  one  of  thefe  roots  1770.
that  was  not  inhabited,  though  fome  were  not  bigger  than  i.  ^_'_j
a  hazle-nut.  The  animals  themfelves  are  very  fmall,  not
more  than  half  as  big  as  the  common  red  ant  in  England.
They  had  ftings,  but  fcarcely  force  enough  to  make  them
felt ;  they  had  however  a  power  of  tormenting  us  in  an
equal,  if  not  a  greater  degree ;  for  the  moment  we  handled
the  root,  they  fwarmed  from  innumerable  holes,  and  running
about  thofe  parts  of  the  body  that  were  uncovered,  produced
a  titillation  more  intolerable  than  pain,  except  it  is  increafed
to  great  violence.  Rumphius  has  alfo  given  an  account
of  this  bulb  and  its  inhabitants,  vol.  vi.  p.  120.  where  he
mentions  another  fort  that  are  black.

We  found  a  fourth  kind,  which  are  perfectly  harmlefs,
and  almoft  exactly  referable  the  white-ants  of  the  Eaft  In-
dies j  the  architecture  of  thefe  is  ftill  more  curious  than  that
of  the  others.     They  have  houfes  of  two  forts,  one  is  fuf-
pended  on  the  branches  of  trees,  and  the  other  erected  upon
the  ground :  thofe  upon  the  trees  are  about  three  or  four
times  as  big  as  a  man's  head,  and  are  built  of  a  brittle  fub-
ftance,  which  feems  to  confifl:  of  fmall  parts  of  vegetables
kneaded  together  with  a  glutinous  matter,  which  their  bo-
dies probably  fupply ;  upon  breaking  this  crult,  innumerable
cells,  fwarming-  with  inhabitants,  appear  in  a  great  variety
of  winding  directions,  all  communicating  with  each  other,
and  with  feveral  apertures  that  lead  to  other  nefts  upon  the
fame  tree  :  they  have  alfo  one  large  avenue,  or  covered  way,
leading  to  the  ground,  and  carried  on  under  it  to  the  other
neft  or  houfe  that  is  conftructed  there.     This  houfe  is  gene-
rally at  the  root  of  a  tree,  but  not  of  that  upon  which  their
other  dwellings  are  conftructed :  it  is  formed  like  an  irre-
gularly fided   cone,  and  fometimes  is  more  than  fix  feet

high,


6$o  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


Auguft.


1770.  high,  and  nearly  as  much  in  diameter.  Some  are  fmaller,
and  thefe  are  generally  flat  fided,  and  very  much  refemble
in  figure  the  Hones  which  are  feen  in  many  parts  of  Eng-
land, and  fuppofed  to  be  the  remains  of  druidical  antiquity.
The  outfide  of  thefe  is  of  well  tempered  clay,  about  two
inches  thick  ;  and  within  are  the  cells,  which  have  no  open-
ing outwards,  but  communicate  only  with  the  fubterranean
way  to  the  houfes  on  the  tree,  and  to  the  tree  near  which
they  are  conftrucled,  where  they  afcend  up  the  root,  and  fo
up  the  trunk  and  branches,  under  covered  ways  of  the  fame
kind  as  thofe  by  which  they  defcended  from  their  other
dwellings.  To  thefe  ftructures  on  the  ground  they  probably
retire  in  the  winter,  or  rainy  feafons,  as  they  are  proof
againft  any  wet  that  can  fall ;  which  thofe  in  the  tree,
though  generally  conftrueted  under  fome  overhanging
branch,  from  the  nature  and  thinnefs  of  their  cruft  or  wall,
cannot  be.

The  fea  in  this  country  is  much  more  liberal  of  food  to  the
inhabitants  than  the  land;  and  though  Mi  is  not  quite  fo
plenty  here  as  they  generally  are  in  higher  latitudes,  yet  we
fcldom  hauled  the  feine  without  taking  from  fifty  to  two
hundred  weight.  They  are  of  various  forts ;  but,  except  the
mullet,  and  fome  of  the  fheH-fifh,  none  of  them  are  known
in  Europe :  moil  of  them  are  palatable,  and  fome  are  very
delicious.  Upon  the  fhoals  and  reef  there  are  incredible
numbers  of  the  fineft  green  turtle  in  the  world,  and  oyilers
of  various  kinds,  particularly  the  rock-oyfler  and  the  pearl-
oyfter.  The  gigantic  cockles  have  been  mentioned  already;
befides  which  there  are  fea-crayfifh,  or  Iobfters,  and  crabs  ;  of
thefe  however  we  faw  only  the  fliells.  In  the  rivers  and  fait
creeks  there  are  aligators.

The


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6

The  only  perfoh  who  has  hitherto  given  any  account  of      '770-

this  country  or  its  inhabitants  is  Dampief,  and  though  he  is,   v , — .

in  general,  a  writer  of  credit,  yet  in  many  particulars  he  is
miftaken.  The  people  whom  he  faw  were  indeed  inhabi-
tants of  a  part  of  the  coafl  very  diftant  from  that  which  we
vifitcd;  but  we  aifo  faw  inhabitants  upon  parts  of  the  coafl
very  diftant  from  each  other,  and  there  being  a  perfect  uni-
formity in  perfon  and  cufloms  among  them  all,  it  is  reason-
able to  conclude,  that  diltance  in  another  direction  has  not
considerably  broken  it.

The  number  of  inhabitants  in  this  country  appears  to  be-
very  fmall  in  proportion  to  its  extent.  We  never  faw  fo  many
as  thirty  of  them  together  but  once,  and  that  was  at  Botany
Bay,  when  men,  women,  and  children,  aflembled  upon  a
rock  to  fee  the  fhip  pafs  by :  when  they  manifestly  formed
a  refolution  to  engage  us,  they  never  could  mufter  above
fourteen  or  fifteen  fighting  men  ;  and  we  never  faw  a  num-
ber of  their  meds  or  houfes  together  that  could  accommo-
date a  larger  party.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  we  faw  only  the
fea-coafl  on  the  eaftern  fide;  and  that,  between  this  and  the
weftern  fhore,  there  is  an  immenfe  tract  of  country  wholly
unexplored  :  but  there  is  great  reafon  to  believe  that  this
immenfe  tract  is  either  wholly  defolate,  or  at  lead  ftill  more
thinly  inhabited  than  the  parts  we  vifited.  It  is  impoffible
that  the  inland  country  mould  fubfift  inhabitants  at  all  fea-
fons  without  cultivation  ;  it  is  extremely  improbable  that  the
inhabitants  of  the  coaft  mould  be  totally  ignorant  of  arts  of
cultivation,  which  were  practifed  inland.;  and  it  is  equally
improbable  that,  if  they  knew  fuch  arts,  there  mould  be  no  .
traces  of  them  among  them..  It  is  certain  that  we  did  not
fee  one  foot  of  ground  in  a  ftate  of  cultivation  in  the  whole
country;  and  therefore  it  may  well  be.  concluded- that  where-

die


O'


632  XIEUTENANT    COOK's   VOYAGE

1770.      the  fea  does  not  contribute  to  feed  the  inhabitants,  the  coun«=
t     "fu.  '  •  try  is  not  inhabited.

The  only  tribe  with  which  we  had  any  intercourfe,  we
found  where  the  Ihip  was  careened  ;  it  confided  of  one  and
twenty  perfons ;  twelve  men,  feven  women,  one  boy,  and
one  girl :  the  women  we  never  faw  but  at  a  diftance  ;  for
when  the  men  came  over  the  river  they  were  always  left  be-
hind. The  men  here,  and  in  other  places,  were  of  a  middle
fize,  and  in  general  well  made,  clean  limbed,  and  remark-
ably vigorous,  active,  and  nimble  :  their  countenances  were
not  altogether  without  expreffion,  and  their  voices  were  re-
markably foft  and  effeminate.

Their  fkins  were  fo  uniformly  covered  with  dirt,  that  it
was  very  difficult  to  afcertain  their  true  colour :  we  made
fevcral  attempts,  by  wetting  our  fingers  and  rubbing  it,  to
remove  the  incruftations,  but  with  very  little  effect.  With
the  dirt  they  appear  nearly  as  black  as  a  Ncgroe  ;  and  ac-
cording to  our  bell  difcoveries,  the  fkin  itfelf  is  of  the  colour
of  wood  foot,  or  what  is  commonly  called  a  chocolate  colour.
Their  features  are  far  from  being  difagreeable,  their  nofes
are  not  flat,  nor  are  their  lips  thick ;  their  teeth  are  white
and  even,  and  their  hair  naturally  long  and  black,  it  is  how-
ever univerfally  cropped  fhort;  in  general  it  is  ftrait,  but
fometimes  it  has  a  flight  curl  4  we  faw  none  that  was  not
matted  and  filthy,  though  without  oil  or  greafe,  and  to  our
great  aftoniihment  free  from  lice.  Their  beards  were  of  the
fame  colour  with  their  hair,  and  bufhy  and  thick :  they  are
not  however  fuffered  to  grow  long.  A  man  whom  we  had
feen  one  day  with  his  beard  fomewhat  longer  than  his  com-
panions, we  faw  the  next,  with  it  fomewhat  fhorter,  and
upon  examination  found  the  ends  of  the  hairs  burnt :  from
this  incident,  and  our  having  never  ieen  any  fharp  inftru-

ment


ROUND    THE    WORLD.

ment  among  them,  we  concluded  that  both  the  hair  and  the
beard  were  kept  fliort  by  fingeing  them.

Both  fexes,  as  I  have  already  obferved,  go  (lark  naked,
and  feem  to  have  no  more  fenfe  of  indecency  in  difcoverin  g
the  whole  body,  than  we  have  in  difcovering  our  hands  and
face.     Their  principal  ornament  is  the  bone  which  they
thruft  through  the  cartilage  that  divides  the  noftrils  from
each  other :  what  perverfion  of  tafte  could  make  them  think
this  a  decoration,  or  what  could  prompt  them,  before  they
had  worn  it  or  feen  it  worn,  to  fuffer  the  pain  and  incon-
venience that  muft  of  neceflity  attend  it,  is  perhaps  beyond
the  power  of  human  fagacity  to  determine :  as  this  bone  is
as  thick  as  a  man's  finger,  and  between  five  and  fix  inches
long,  it  reaches  quite  acrofs  the  face,  and  fo  effectually  flops
tip  both  the  noftrils  that  they  are  forced   to  keep  their
mouths  wide  open  for  breath,  and  muffle  fo  when  they  at-
tempt to  fpeak,  that  they  are  fcarcely  intelligible  even  to
•each  other.     Our  feamen,  with  fome  humour,  called  it  their
fpritfail-yard ;  and  indeed  it  had  fo  ludicrous  an  appearance,
that  till  we  were  ufed  to  it,  we  found  it  difficult  to  refrain
from  laughter.    Befide  this  nofe-jewel,  they  had  necklaces
made  of  fhells,  very  neatly  cut  and  ftrung  together ;  brace-
lets of  fmall  cord,  wound  two  or  three  times  about  the  up-
per part  of  their  arm,  and  a  firing  of  plaited  human  hair
about  as  thick  as  a  thread  of  yarn,  tied  round  the  waift.  Befides
thefe,  fome  of  them  had  gorgets  of  fhells  hanging  round  the
neck,  fo  as  to  reach  crofs  the  breaft.  But  though  thefe  people
wear  no  clothes,  their  bodies  have  a  covering  befides  the
dirt,  for  they  paint  them  both  white  and  red:  the  retl  is
commonly  laid  on  in  broad  patches  upon  the  moulders  and
breaft  ;   and  the  white  in  ftripes,  fome  narrow,  and  fome
broad:  the  narrow  were  drawn  over  the  limbs,  and  the  broad
over  the  body,  not  without  fome  degree  of  tafte.    The  white
Vol.  II.  4  M  was


>3fl


J24  LIEUTENANT   COOK's   VOYAGE

1770.  was  alfo  laid  on  in  fmall  patches  upon  the  face,  and  drawn
'X  "f  ij  in  a  circle  round  each  eye.  The  red  feemed  to  be  ochre,  buc
what  the  white  was  we  could  not  difcover  ;  it  was  clofe
grained,  faponaceous  to  the  touch,  and  almofl  as  heavy  as-
white  lead,  poflibly  it  might  be  a  kind  of  Steatites,  but  to
our  great  regret  we  could  not  procure  a  bit  of  it  to  examine.
They  have  holes  in  their  ears,  but  we  never  faw  any  thing
worn  in  them.  Upon  fuch  ornaments  as  they  had,  they  fet
fo  great  a  value,  that  they  would  never  part  with  the  leafl
article  for  any  thing  we  could  offer ;  which  was  the  more  ex-
traordinary as  our  beads  and  ribbons  were  ornaments  of  the
fame  kind,  but  of  a  more  regular  form  and  more  fliowy  ma-
terials. They  had  indeed  no  idea  of  traffic,  nor  could  we
communicate  any  to  them :  they  received  the  things  that  we
gave  them ;  but  never  appeared  to  underfland  our  figns
when  we  required  a  return.  The  fame  indifference  which
prevented  them  from  buying  what  we  had,  prevented  them
alfo  from  attempting  to  Ileal :  if  they  had  coveted  more,  they
would  have  been  lefs  honefl ;  for  when  we  refufed  to  give
them  a  turtle,  they  were  enraged,  and  attempted  to  take  it
by  force,  and  we  had  nothing  elfe  upon  which  they  feemed
to  fet  the  leafl  value ;  for,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  many  of
the  things  that  we  had  given  them,  we  found  left  negli-
gently about  in  the  woods,  like  the  playthings  of  children,
which  pleafe  only  while  they  are  new.  Upon  their  bodies
we  faw  no  marks  of  difeafe  or  fores,  but  large  fears  in  irre-
gular lines,  which  appeared  to  be  the  remains  of  wounds
which  they  had  inflicted  upon  themfelves  with  fome  blunt
inflrument,  and  which  we  underflood  by  figns  to  have  been
memorials  of  grief  for  the  dead.

They  appeared  to  have  no  fixed  habitations,  for  we  faw
nothing  like  a  town  or  village  in  the  whole  country.  Their
houfes,  if  houfes  they  may  be  called,  feem  to  be  formed

with


ROUND    THE    WORLD,  635

\vith  lefs  art  and  induftry  than  any  we  had  feen,  except  the  »77°-
■wretched  hovels  at  Terra  del  Fuego,  and  in  fome  refpects  uJ^— . t
they  are  inferior  even  to  them.  At  Botany  Bay,  where  they
were  beft,  they  were  juft  high  enough  for  a  man  to  fit  up-
right in;  but  not  large  enough  for  him  to  extend  himfelf  in
his  whole  length  in  any  direction  :  they  are  built  with  pli-
able rods  about  as  thick  as  a  man's  finger,  in  the  form  of  an
oveo,  by  flicking  the  two  ends  into  the  ground,  and  then
covering  them  with  palm  leaves,  and  broad  pieces  of  bark :
the  door  is  nothing  but  a  large  hole  at  one  end,  oppofite  to
which  the  fire  is  made,  as  we  perceived  by  the  afhes.  Under
thefe  houfes,  or  fheds,  they  fleep,  coiled  up  with  their  heels
to  their  head ;  and  in  this  pofition  one  of  them  will  hold
three  or  four  perfons.  As  we  advanced  northward,  and  the
climate  became  warmer,  we  found  thefe  fheds  flill  more
flight :  they  were  built,  like  the  others,  of  twigs,  and  covered
with  bark ;  but  none  of  them  were  more  than  four  feet  deep,
and  one  fide  was  intirely  open:  the  clofe  fide  was  always  op-
pofed  to  the  courfe  of  the  prevailing  wind,  and  oppofite  to
the  open  fide  was  the  fire,  probably  more  as  a  defence  from
the  mufquitos  than  the  cold.  Under  thefe  hovels  it  is  pro-
bable, that  they  thruft  only  their  heads  and  the  upper  part
of  their  bodies,  extending  their  feet  towards  the  fire.  They
were  fet  up  occafionally  by  a  wandering  hord,  in  any  place
that  would  furnifh  them  for  a  time  With  fubfiftence,  and
left  behind  them  when,  after  it  was  exhaufted,  they  went
away:  but  in  places  where  they  remained  only  for  a  night
or  two,  they  flept  without  any  fhelter,  except  the  bufhes  or
grafs,  which  is  here  near  two  feet  high.  We  obferved,  how-
ever, that  though  the  fleeping  huts  which  we  found  upon
the  main,  were  always  turned  from  the  prevailing  wind,
thofe  upon  the  iflands  were  turned  towards  it;  which  feems
to  be  a  proof  that  they  have  a  mild  feafon  here,  during  which

4  M  2  the


€$6  LIEUTENANT   COOR's   VOYAGE

1770-  the  fea  is  calm,  and  that  the  fame  weather  which  enables
them  to  vifit  the  iflands,  makes  the  air  welcome  even  while
they  fleep.

The  only  furniture  belonging  to  thefe  houfes  that  fell  un-
der our  observation,  is  a  kind  of  oblong  vefTel  made  of  bark,
by  the  limple  contrivance  of  tying  up  the  two  ends  with  a
withy,  which  not  being  cut  off  ferves  for  a  handle ;  thefe
we  imagined  were  ufed  as  buckets  to  fetch  water  from  the
fpring,  which  may  be  fuppofed  fometimes  to  be  at  a  confide*
rable  diflance.  They  have  however  a  fmall  bag,  about  the  fize
of  a  moderate  cabbage-net,  which  is  made  by  laying  threads
loop  within  loop,  fomewhat  in  the  manner  of  knitting  ufed
by  our  ladies  to  make  purfes.  This  bag  the  man  carries  loofe
upon  his  back  by  a  fmall  firing  which  pafles  over  his  head ;
it  generally  contains  a  lump  or  two  of  paint  and  refin,  fome
fiih-hooks  and  lines,  a  fhell  or  two,  out  of  which  their  hooks
are  made,  a  few  points  of  darts,  and  their  ufual  ornaments,
which  includes  the  whole  worldly  treafure  of  the  richeft
man  among  them.

Their  fiih-hooks  are  very  neatly  made,  and  fome  of  them
are  exceedingly  fmall.  For  linking  turtle  they  have  a  peg
of  wood  which  is  about  a  foot  long,  and  very  well  bearded  ;
ibis  fits  into  a  focket  at  the  end  of  a  flafF  of  light  wood,  about
as  thick  as  a  man's  wrirt,  and  about  feven  or  eight  feet  long:
to  the  flafF  is  tied  one  end  of  a  loofe  line  about  three  or  four
fathom  long,  the  other  end  of  which  is  faftened  to  the  peg.
To  flrike  the  turtle,  the  peg  is  fixed  into  the  focket,  and  when
it  has  entered  his  body,  and  is  retained  there  by  the  barb,
the  flafF  flies  off  and  ferves  for  a  float  to  trace  their  vielim  in
the  water ;  it  affifls  alfo  to  tire  him,  till  they  can  overtake
him  with  their  canoes,  and  haul  him  afhore.  One  of  thefe
pegs,  as  I  have  mentioned  already,  we  found  buried  in  the
3  body


ROUND^THE   WORLD.  6$?

"body  of  a  turtle,  which  had  healed  up  over  it.    Their  lines       »77o.
are  from  the  thicknefs  of  a  half  inch  rope  to  the  finenefs  of  * — ,— Lr,
a  hair,  and  are  made  of  fome  vegetable  fubflance,  but  what
in  particular  we  had  no  opportunity  to  learn.

Their  food  is  chiefly  fifh,  though  they  fometimes  contrive
to  kill  the  kanguroo,  and  even  birds  of  various  kinds ;  not-
withftanding  they  are  fo  fhy  that  we  found  it  difficult  to  get
within  reach  of  them  with  a  fowling-piece.  The  only  vege-
table that  can  be  confidered  as  an  article  of  food  is  the  yam ;
yet  doubtlefs  they  eat  the  feveral  fruits  which  have  been
mentioned  among  other  productions  of  the  country ;  and  in-
deed we  faw  the  fhells  and  hulls  of  feveral  of  them  lying
about  the  places  where  they  had  kindled  their  fire.

They  do  not  appear  to  eat  any  animal  food  raw  ;  but  hav-
ing no  vefTel  in  which  water  can  be  boiled,  they  cither  broif"
it  upon  the  coals,  or  bake  it  in  a  hole  by  the  help  of  hot'
ftones,  in  the  fame  manner  as  is  practifed  by  the  inhabitants
of  the  iflands  in  the  South  Seas.

Whether  they  are  acquainted  with  any  plant  that  has  an
intoxicating  quality,  we  do  not  know;  but  we  obferved
that  feveral  of  them  held  leaves  of  fome  fort  conftantly  in
their  mouths,  as  an  European  does  tobacco,  and  an  Eaft  In-
dian betele :  we  never  faw  the  plant,  but  when  they  took  it
from  their  mouths  at  our  requefl ;  poflibly  it  might  be  a
fpecies  of  the  betele,  but  whatever  it  was,  it  had  no  effect x
upon  the  teeth  or  the  lips.

As  they  have  no  nets,  they  catch  fifh  only  by  finking,  or
with  a  hook  and  line,  except  fuch  as  they  find  in  the  hol-
lows of  the  rocks  and  fhoals,  which  are  dry  at  half  ebb.

Their  manner  of  hunting  we  had  no  opportunity  to  fee  ;
but  we  conjectured  by  the  notches  which  they  had  every

where


'6$  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770.      where  cut  in  large  trees  in  order  to  climb  them,  that  the?

AugufL  °  J

.V— r—^  took  their  flation  near  the  tops  of  them,  and  there  watched
for  fuch  animals  as  might  happen  to  pafs  near  enough  to  be
reached  by  their  lances :  it  is  poflible  alfo,  that  in  this  fitua-
tion  they  might  take  birds  when  they  came  to  roofl.

I  have  obferved  that  when  they  went  from  our  tents  upon
the  banks  of  Endeavour  river,  we  could  trace  them  by  the .
fires  which  they  kindled  in  their  way ;  and  we  imagined
that  thefe  fires  were  intended  fome  way  for  the  taking  the
kanguroo,  which  we  obferved  to  be  fo  much  afraid  of  fire,
that  our  dogs  could  fcarcely  force  it  over  places  which  had
been  newly  burnt,  though  the  fire  was  extinguished.

They  produce  fire  with  great  facility,  and  fpread  it  in  a
wonderful  manner.  To  produce  it  they  take  two  pieces  of
dry  foft  wood,  one  is  a  Hick  about  eight  or  nine  inches  long,
the  other  piece  is  flat :  the  flick  they  fhape  into  an  obtufe  point
at  one  end,  and  preffing  it  upon  the  other,  turn  it  nimbly  by
holding  it  between  both  their  hands  as  we  do  a  chocolate
mill,  often  fhifting  their  hands  up,  and  then  moving  them
down  upon  it,  to  increafe  the  prefiure  as  much  as  poflible.
By  this  method  they  get  fire  in  lefs  than  two  minutes,  and
from  the  fmallefl  fpark  they  increafe  it  with  great  fpeed  and
dexterity.  We  have  often  feen  one  of  them  run  along  the
fhore,  to  all  appearance  with  nothing  in  his  hand,  who
ftooping  down  for  a  moment,  at  the  diflance  of  every  fifty
or  a  hundred  yards,  left  fire  behind  him,  as  we  could  fee
firfl  by  the  fmoke,  and  then  by  the  flame  among  the  drift
wood,  and  other  litter  which  was  fcattered  along  the  place.
We  had  the  curiofity  to  examine  one  of  thefe  planters  of
fire,  when  he  fet  off,  and  we  faw  him  wrap  up  a  fmall
fpark  in  dry  grafs,  which,  when  he  had  run  a  little  way,
having  been  fanned  by  the  air  that  his  motion  produced,

began


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  t.39

began  to  blaze ;  he  then  laid  it  down  in  a  place  convenient      1770.
for  his  purpofe,  inclofing  a  fpark  of  it  in  another  quantity   »_.    °-  _j
of  grafs,  and  fo  continued  his  courfe.

There  are  perhaps  few  things  in  the  hiftory  of  mankind
more  extraordinary  than  the  difcovery  and  application  of
fire:  it  will  fcarcely  be  difputed  that  the  manner  of  pro-
ducing it,  whether  by  collifion  or  attrition,  was  difcovered
by  chance :  but  its  firft  effects  would  naturally  ftrike  thofe  to
whom  it  was  a  new  object,  with  confirmation  and  terror:  it
would  appear  to  be  an  enemy  to  life  and  nature,  and  to  tor-
ment and  deflxoy  whatever  was  capable  of  being  defcoyed
or  tormented ;  and  therefore  it  feems  not  eafy  to  conceive
what  mould  incline  thofe  who  firft  faw  it  receive  a  tran-
fient  exiftence  from  chance,  to  reproduce  it  by  defign.  It  is
by  no  means  probable  that  thofe  who  iirfl  faw  fire,  ap-
proached it  with  the  fame  caution,  as  thofe  who  are  familiar,
with  its  effects,  fo  as  to  be  warmed  only  and  not  burnt ;  and
it  is  reafonable  to  think  that  the  intolerable  pain  which,  at
its  firft  appearance,  it  muft  produce  upon  ignorant  curiofity,
would  fow  perpetual  enmity  between  this  element  and  man-
kind; and  that  the  fame  principle  which  incites  them  tocrufh
a  ferpent,  would  incite  them  to  deftroy  fire,  and  avoid  all
means  by  which  it  would  be  produced,  as  foon  as  they  were
known.  Thcfe  circumftances  confidered,  how  men  became
fufficiently  familiar  with  it  to  render  it  ufeful,  feems  to  be  a
problem  very  difficult  to  folve:  nor  is  it  eafy  to  account  for
the  firft  application  of  it  to  culinary  purpofes,  as  the  eating
both  animal  and  vegetable  food  raw,  muft  have  become  a
habit,  before  there  was  fire  to  drefs  it,  and  thofe  who  have
confidered  the  force  of  habit  will  readily  believe,  that  to  men
who  had  always  eaten  the  flefh  of  animals  raw,  it  would  be
as  difagreeable  dreffed,  as  to  thofe  who  have  always  eaten  is
drefled,  it  would  be  raw.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  inhabi-
ts tanta


64cf  LIEUTENANT    COOR's    VOYAGE

-1770.  tants  of  Terra  del  Fuego  produce  fire  from  a  fpark  by  col-
jJ^!!L»  lifion,  and  that  the  happier  natives  of  this  country,  New
Zealand,  and  Otaheite,  produce  it  by  the  attrition  of  one
combuftible  fubftance  againft  another:  is  there  not  then
fome  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  thefe  difTerent  operations  cor-
refpond  with  the  manner  in  which  chance  produced  fire  in
the  neighbourhood  of  the  torrid  and  frigid  zones  ?  Among
the  rude  inhabitants  of  a  cold  country,  neither  any  operation
of  art,  or  occurrence  of  accident,  could  be  fuppofed  fo  eafily
to  produce  fire  by  attrition,  as  in  a  climate  where  every
thing  is  hot,  dry,  and  aduft,  teeming  with  a  latent  fire  which
a  flight  degree  of  motion  was  fufficient  to  call  forth  5  in  a
-cold  country  therefore,  it  is  natural  to  fuppofe  that  fire  was
produced  by  the  accidental  collifion  of  two  metallic  fub-
ftances,  and  in  a  cold  country,  for  that  reafon,  the  fame  ex-
pedient was  ufed  to  produce  it  by  defign:  but  in  hot
•countries,  where  two  combuftible  fubflances  eafily  kindle
by  attrition,  it  is  probable  that  the  attrition  of  fuch  fub-
flances firfl  produced  fire,  and  here  it  was  therefore  natural
for  art  to  adopt  the  fame  operation,  with  a  view  to  produce
the  fame  effect.  It  may  indeed  be  true  that  fire  is  now  pro-
duced in  many  cold  countries  by  attrition,  and  in  many  hot
by  a  flroke ;  but  perhaps  upon  enquiry  there  may  appear
reafon  to  conclude  that  this  has  arifen  from  the  communi-
cation of  one  country  with  another,  and  that  with  refpect  to
the  original  production  of  fire  in  hot  and  cold  countries,  the
diftinction  is  well  founded.

There  may  perhaps  be  fome  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  men
became  gradually  acquainted  with  the  nature  and  effects  of
-fire,  by  its  permanent  exiftence  in  a  volcano,  there  being  re-
mains of  volcanoes,  or  vefliges  of  their  effects,  in  almofl
every  part  of  the  world:  by  a  volcano,  however,  no  method
of  producing  fire,  otherwife^than  by  contact,  could  be  learnt  5

the


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  64i

the  production  and  application  of  fire  therefore,  Hill  fcem  to      *77°


afford  abundant  fubject  of  fpeculation  to  the  curious.

The  weapons  of  thefe  people  are  fpears  or  lances,  and
thefe  are  of  different  kinds:  fome  that  we  faw  upon  the
fouthern  part  of  the  coaft  had  four  prongs,  pointed  with
bone,  and  barbed ;  the  points  were  alfo  fmeared  with  a  hard
refin,  which  gave  them  a  polifh,  and  made  them  enter
deeper  into  what  they  ftruck.  To  the  northward,  the  lance
has  but  one  point :  the  fhaft  is  made  of  cane,  or  the  ftalk  of
a  plant  fomewhat  refembling  a  btilrufli,  very  flrait  and
light,  and  from  eight  to  fourteen  feet  long,  confifling  of
feveral  joints,  where  the  pieces  are  let  into  each  other,  and
bound  together ;  to  this  are  fitted  points  of  different  kinds;
fome  are  of  hard  heavy  wood,  and  fome  are  the  bones  of
fifh :  we  faw  feveral  that  were  pointed  with  the  flings  of  the
fling-ray,  the  largeft  that  they  could  procure,  and  barbed
with  feveral  that  were  fmaller,  fattened  on  in  a  contrary  di-
rection ;  the  points  of  wood  were  alfo  fometimes  armed  with
fharp  pieces  of  broken  fhells,  which  were  fluck  in,  and  at
the  junctures  covered  with  refin:  the  lances  that  are  thus
barbed,  are  indeed  dreadful  weapons,  for  when  once  they
have  taken  place,  they  can  never  be  drawn  back  without
tearing  away  the  flefli,  or  leaving  the  fharp  ragged  fplinters
of  the  bone  or  fhell  which  forms  the  beard,  behind  them  in
the  wound.  Thefe  weapons  are  thrown  with  great  force
and  dexterity ;  if  intended  to  wound  at  a  fhort  diftance,  be-
tween ten  and  twenty  yards,  fimply  with  the  hand,  but  if  at
the  diftance  of  forty  or  fifty,  with  an  inftrument  which  we
called  a  throwing  flick.  This  is  a  plain  fmooth  piece  of  a  hard
reddifh  wood,  very  highly  polifhed,  about  two  inches  broad,
half  an  inch  thick,  and  three  feet  long,  with  a  fmall  knob,
or  hook  at  one  end,  and  a  crofs  piece  about  three  or  four
nehes  long  at  the  other:  the  knob  at  one  end  is  received  in
Vol.  II.  4  N  a  fmall


Auguft.


642  LIEUTENANT    COOK's   VOYAGE

1770-      a  fmall  dent  or  hollow,  which  is  made  for  that  purpofe  in
iAuf"  '  .  the  fhaft  of  the  lance  near  the  point,  but  from  which  it
eafily  flips,  upon  being  impelled,  forward :  when  the  lance
is  laid  along  upon  this  machine,  and  fecured  in  a  proper  po-
sition by  the  knob,  the  perfon  that  is  to  throw  it  holds  it
over  his  moulder,  and  after  making  it,  delivers  both  the
throwing  Hick  and  lance  with  all.  his  force,  but  the  flick
being  flopped  by  the  crofs  piece  which  comes  againfl  the
fhoulder,  with  a  fudden  jerk,,  the  lance  flies  forward  with
incredible  fwiftnefs,  and  with  fo  good  an  aim,  that  at  the
diftance  of  fifty  yards  thefe  Indians  were  more  fure  of  their
mark  than  we  could  be  with  a  fingle  bullet.    Befides  thefe
lances,  we  faw  no  ofFenfive  weapon  upon  this  coaft,  except
when  we  took  our  laft  view  of  it  with  our  glafTes,  and  then
we  thought  we  faw  a  man  with  a  bow  and  arrows,  in  which
it  is  pofllble  we  might  be  miflaken.    We  faw,  however,  at
Botany  Bay,  a  fhield  or  target,  of  an  oblong  fhape,  about
three  feet  long,  and  eighteen  inches  broad,  which  was  made
of  the  bark  of  a  tree :  this  was  fetched  out  of  a  hut  by  one
of  the  men  that  oppofed  our  landing,  who,  when  he  ran
away,  left  it  behind  him,  and  upon  taking  it  up,  we  found
that  it  had  been  pierced  through  with  a  fingle  pointed  lance
near  the  center.    Thefe  fhields  are  certainly  in  frequent  ufe
among  the  people  here,  for  though  this  was  the  only  one
that  we  faw  in  their  pofleflion,  we  frequently  found  trees
from  which  they  appeared  manifeftly  to  have  been  cut,  the
marks  being  eafily  diftinguifhed  from  thofe  that  were  made
by  cutting  buckets :  fometimes  alfo  we  found  the  fhields  cut
out,  but  not  yet  taken  off  from  the  tree,  the  edges  of  the
bark  only  being  a  little  raifed  by  wedges,  fo  that  thefe  people,
appear  to  have  difcovered  that  the  bark  of  a  tree  becomes
thicker  and  ftronger  by  being  fuffered  to  remain  upon  the
trunk  after  it  has  been  cut  round.

The


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  643

The  canoes  of  New  Holland  are  as  mean  and  rude  as  the  »
houfes.  Thofe  on  the  fouthern  part  of  the  coaft  are  nothing  >  '-"--'_;
more  than  a  piece  of  bark,  about  twelve  feet  long,  tied  to-
gether at  the  ends,  and  kept  open  in  the  middle  by  fmall
bows  of  wood :  yet  in  a  vefTel  of  this  cqnftruction  we  once
faw  three  people.  In  mallow  water  they  are  fet  forward  by
a  pole,  and  in  deeper  by  paddles,  about  eighteen  inches
long,  one  of  which  the  boatman  holds  in  each  hand  ;  mean
as  they  are,  they  have  many  conveniences,  they  draw  but
little  water,  and  they  are  very  light,  fo  that  they  go  upon
mud  banks  to  pick  up  fhell  fiih,  the  moil  important  ufe  to
which  they  can  be  applied,  better  perhaps  than  veffels  of
any  other  conftruction.  We  obferved,  that  in  the  middle  of
thefe  canoes  there  was  a  heap  of  fea-weed,  and  upon  that  a
fmall  fire ;  probably  that  the  fiih  may  be  broiled  and  eaten
the  moment  it  is  caught.

The  canoes  that  we  faw  when  we  advanced  farther  to  the
northward,  are  not  made  of  bark,  but  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree
hollowed,  perhaps  by  fire.  They  are  about  fourteen  feet
long,  and,  being  very  narrow,  are  fitted  with  an  outrigger
to  prevent  their  overfetting.  Thefe  are  worked  with  pad-
dles, that  are  fo  large  as  to  require  both  hands  to  manage
one  of  them:  the  outfide  is  wholly  unmarked  by  any  tool,
but  at  each  end  the  wood  is  left  longer  at  the  top  than  at  the
bottom,  fo  that  there  is  a  projection  beyond  the  hollow  part
refcmbling  the  end  of  a  plank  ;  the  fides  are  tolerably  thin,
but  how  the  tree  is  felled  and  fafhioned,  we  had  no  opportu-
nity to  learn.  The  only  tools  that  we  faw  among  them  are
an  adze,  wretchedly  made  of  flonc,  fome  fmall  pieces  of  the
fame  iubftance  in  form  of  a  wedge,  a  wooden  mallet,  and
fome  fhells  and  fragments  of  coral.  For  poliihing  their
throwing  flicks,  ana  the  points  of  their  lances,  they  ufe  the
leaves  of  a  kind  of  wild  fig-tree,  which  bites  upon  wood  al-

4  N  2  rnofl


644  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770*       moil  as  keenly  as  the  fhave-grafs  of  Europe,  which  is  ufed


Aueult


by  our  joiners:  with  fuch  tools,  the  making  even  fuch  a  ca-
noe as  I  have  defcribed,  mull  be  a  moll  difficult  and  tedious
labour :  to  thole  who  have  been  accullomed  to  the  ufe  of
metal,  it  appears  altogether  impracticable ;  but  there  are  few
difficulties  that  will  not  yield  to  patient  perfeverance,  and
he  who  does  all  he  can,  will  certainly  produce  effects  that
greatly  exceed  his  apparent  power.

The  utmoll  freight  of  thefe  canoes  is  four  people,  and  if
more  at  any  time  wanted  to  come  over  the  river,  one  of
thofe  who  came  firll  was  obliged  to  go  back  for  the  rell:
from  this  circumllance,  we  conjectured  that  the  boat  we
iaw,  when  we  were  lying  in  Endeavour  River,  was  the  only
one  in  the  neighbourhood :  we  have  however  fome  reafon  to
believe  that  the  bark  canoes  are  alfo  ufed  where  the  wooden
ones  are  conftructed,  for  upon  one  of  the  fmall  illands  where
the  natives  had  been  fiihing  for  turtle,  we  found  one  of  the
little  paddles  which  had  belonged  to  fuch  a  boat,  and  would
have  been  ufelefs  on  board  any  other.

By  what  means  the  inhabitants  of  this  country  are  reduced
to  fuch  a  number  as  it  can  fubfift,  is  not  perhaps  very  eafy
to  guefs ;  whether,  like  the  inhabitants  of  New  Zealand,
they  are  dellroyed  by  the  hands  of  each  other  in  contells  for
food;  whether  they  are  fwept  off  by  accidental  famine,  or
whether  there  is  any  caufe  which  prevents  the  increafe  of
the  fpecies,  mull  be  left  for  future  adventurers  to  determine.
That  they  have  wars,  appears  by  their  weapons ;  for  fup-
pofmg  the  lances  to  ferve  merely  for  the  linking  of  fifli,  the
fliield  could  be  intended  for  nothing  but  a  defence  againft  men ;
the  only  mark  of  hostility,  however,  which  we  faw  among
them,  was  the  perforation  of  the  ihield  by  a  fpear  which
has  been  jufl  mentioned,  for  none  of  them  appeared  to  have
been  wounded  by  an  enemy.  Neither  can  we  determine
2  whether


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  645

whether  they  are  pufilanimous  or  brave  ;  the  refolution  with      l7l°-

'  r  Auguft.

which  two  of  them  attempted  to  prevent  our  landing,  when  u~^j
we  had  two  boats  full  of  men,  in  Botany  Bay,  even  after  one
of  them  was  wounded  with  fmall  mot,  gave  us  reafon  to
conclude  that  they  were  not  only  naturally  courageous,  but
that  they  had  acquired  a  familiarity  with  the  dangers  of
hoftility,  and  were,  by  habit  as  well  as  nature,  a  daring  and
warlike  people  ;  but  their  precipitate  flight  from  every  other
place  that  we  approached,  without  even  a  menace,  while
they  were  out  of  our  reach,  was  an  indication  of  uncommon
tamenefs  and  timidity,  fuch  as  thofe  who  had  only  been
occafionally  warriors  mufl  be  fuppofed  to  have  fhaken  off,
whatever  might  have  been  their  natural  difpofition.  I  have
faithfully  related  fa  els,  the  reader  mufl  judge  of  the  people
for  himfelf.

From  the  account  that  has  been  given  of  our  commerce
with  them,  it  cannot  be  fuppofed  that  we  fliould  know  much
of  their  language  ;  yet  as  this  is  an  object  of  great  curiofity,
efpecially  to  the  learned,  and  of  great  importance  in  their
refearches  into  the  origin  of  the  various  nations  that  have
been  difcovered,  we  took  fome  pains  to  bring  away  fuch  a
fpecimen  of  it  as  might,  in  a  certain  degree,  anfwer  the  pur-
pofe,  and  I  fhall  now  give  an  account  how  it  was  procured,,
If  we  wanted  to  know  the  name  of  a  ftone,  we  took  a  flone
up  into  our  hands,  and  as  well  as  we  could,  intimated  by
figns  that  we  wifhed  they  fhould  name  it:  the  word  that
they  pronounced  upon  the  occafion,  we  immediately  wrote
down.  This  method,  though  it  was  the  beft  we  could  con-
trive, might  certainly  lead  us  into  many  miflakes  ;  for  if  an
Indian  was  to  take  up  a  ftone,  and  afk  us  the  name  of  it,  we
might  anfwer  a  pebble  or  a  Hint ;  fo  when  we  took  up  a
flone,  and  afked  an  Indian  the  name  of  it,  he  might  pro-
nounce a  word  that  diflinguifhed  the  fpecies  and  not  the

genus,


646


LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE


1770.

Auguft.


genus,  or  tliar,  inftead  of  fignifying  ftone  Cmply,  might  fig-
nifv  a  rough  ftone,  or  a  fmooth  ftone ;  however,  as  much  as
poffible  to  avoid  miftakes  of  this  kind,  feveral  of  us  contrived,
a<-  different  times,  to  get  from  them  as  many  words  as  we
could,  and  having  noted  them  down,  compared  our  lifts :
thofe  which  were  the  fame  in  all,  and  which,  according  to
every  one's  account,  fignified  the  fame  thing,  we  ventured  to
record,  with  a  very  few  others,  which,  from  the  fimplicity
of  the  fubjecT:,  and  the  eafe  of  expreffing  our  queition  with
plainnefs  and  precifion  by  a  fign,  have  acquired  equal  au-
thority.


Englifh.

New  Holland.

Englifh.

New  Holland.

The  head,

Wageegee.

Nails,

Kulke.

Hair,

Morye.

Sun,

Gallan.

Eyes,

Meul.

Fire,

Meanang.

Ears,

Melea;

Aflone,

Walba.

Lips,

Yembe.

Sand,

Yowall.

Nofe,

Bonjoo.

A  rope,

Gurka.

Tongue,

Unjar.

A  man,

Bama.

Beard,

Waliar.

A  male  turtle,  Poinga.

Neck,

Doomboo.

A.female,

Mameingo.

Nipples,

Cayo.

A  canoe,

Marigan.

Hands,

Marigal.

To  paddle,

Pelenyo.

Thighs,

Coman.

Sit  down,

Takai.

Navel,

Toolpoor.

Smooth,

Mier  Carrar.

Knees,

Pongo.

A  dog,

Cotta,  or  Kota.

Feet,

Edamal.

A  lor iq  net,

Perpere,  Grpier-pier,

Heel.

Kniorror.

Blood,

Garmbe.

Cockatoo,

Wanda.

Wood,

Yocou.

The  foal  of

[chumal.

The  bone  it.

'JTapool.

the  foot,

3

the  nofe,

Ankle,

Chongurn.

A  bag,

Charngala.

Arms,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


647


Englifh.        New  Holland.
Arms,  Aco,  or  Acol.

'Thumb,         Eboorbalga.  |
The    fore,    1

middle,  ««^>Egalbaiga.

ringjingers,  J
The    little    7Nakil,   or  Eboor-

fnger,        j      nakil.
Thejky,        Kere,  or  Kearre*
A father,      Dunjo.
A  fon,  Jumurre.


Englifh.        New  Holland.
A  great  cockle,  Moingo.
Cocos,  jams,  Maracotu.


T770.

Aueuft.


Cherr,
Cherco,
Yarcaw,
Tut,    tut,
tut,  tut,


tExpreffions,  as  <we
fuppofed,  of  ad~
miration,  tuhich
\  they  continually
I  ufed  ivhen  they
I  iu ere  in  company
L  with  us,


I  fliall  now  quit  this  country,  with  a  few  obfervations  re-
lative to  the  currents  and  tides  upon  the  coaft.  From  lati-
tude 3 20,  and  fomewhat  higher,  down  to  Sandy  Cape,  in
latitude  240  46',  we  conftantly  found  a  current  fetting  to  the
fouthward,  at  the  rate  of  about  ten  or  fifteen  miles  a  day,
being  more  or  lefs,  according  to  our  diflance  from  the  land,
for  it  always  ran  with  more  force  in  fhore  than  in  the  offing ;
but  I  could  never  fatisfy  myfelf  whether  the  flood-tide  came
from  the  fouthward,  the  eaftward,  or  the  northward :  I  in-
clined to  the  opinion  that  it  came  from  the  fouth-eaft,  but
the  firfl  time  we  anchored  off  the  coaft,  which  was  in  latitude
24030',  about  ten  leagues  to  the  fouth  eafl  of  Buftard  Bay,  I
found  it  come  from  the  north  weft ;  on  the  contrary,  thirty
leagues  farther  to  the  north  weft,  on  the  fouth  fide  of  Keppel
Bay,  I  found  that  it  came  from  the  eafl,  and  at  the  northern
part  of  that  Bay  it  came  from  the  northward,  but  with  a
much  flower  motion  than  it  had  come  from  the  eafl:  on  the
eafl  fide  of  the  Bay  of  Inlets,  it  fet  flrongly  to  the  weftward,
as  far  as  the  opening  of  Broad  Sound ;  but  on  the  north  fide
of  that  Sound,  it  came  with  a  very  flow  motion  from  the'
north  weft  j  and  when  we  lay  at  anchor  before  Repulfe  Bay*,
1


648  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

*770-       it  came  from  the  northward:  to  account  for  its  courfe  in  all

Augufl.

U  —<<,■•  mt  this  variety  of  directions,  we  need  only  admit  that  the  flood-
tide  comes  from  the  eaft  or  fouth  eaft.  It  is  well  known,
that  where  there  are  deep  inlets,  and  large  creeks  into  low
lands,  running  up  from  the  fea,  and  not  occafioned  by  rivers
of  frefh  water,  there  will  always  be  a  great  indraught  of  the
flood-tide,  the  direction  of  which  will  be  determined  by  the
pofition  or  direction  of  the  coaft  which  forms  the  entrance  of
fuch  inlet,  whatever  be  its  courfe  at  fea ;  and  where  the
tides  are  weak,  which  upon  this  coaft  is  generally  the  cafe?
a  large  inlet  will,  if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expreflion,  attract:
the  flood-tide  for  many  leagues.

A  view  of  the  chart  will  at  once  illuftrate  this  pofition.  To
the  northward  of  Whitfunday's  Paflage  there  is  no  large  in-
let, confequently  the  flood  fets  to  the  northward,  or  north
weflward,  according  to  the  direction  of  the  coafl,  and  the
ebb  to  the  fouth,  or  fouth  eaftward,  at  leafl  fuch  is  their
courfe  at  a  little  diflance  from  the  land,  for  very  near  it  they
will  be  influenced  by  fmall  inlets.  I  alfo  obferved,  that  we
had  only  one  high  tide  in  twenty-four  hours,  which  hap-
pened in  the  night.  The  difference  between  the  perpen-
dicular rife  of  the  water  in  the  day  and  the  night,  when
there  is  a  fpring-tide,  is  no  lefs  than  three  feet,  which,
where  the  tides  are  fo  inconfiderable  as  they  are  here,  is  a
great  proportion  of  the  whole  difference  between  high  and
low  water.  This  irregularity  of  the  tides,  which  is  worthy
of  notice,  we  did  not  difcover  till  we  were  run  afhore,  and
perhaps  farther  to  the  northward  it  is  itill  greater:  after  we
got  within  the  reef  the  fecond  time,  we  found  the  tides  more
confiderable  than  we  had  ever  done  before,  except  in  the  Bay
of  Inlets,  and  poffibly  this  may  be  owing  to  the  water  being
more  confined  between  the  fhoals  ;  here  alfo  the  flood  fets  to

the


ROUND    THE   WORLD,  649

the  north  weft,  and  continues  in  the  fame  direction  to  the       1770.

extremity  of  New  Wales,  from  whence  its  direction  is  weft  1 <~-j

and  fouth  weft  into  the  Indian  fea,


CHAP.     IX.

77je  Pajfage  from  New  South  Wales  to  New  Guinea^  with
an  Account  of  what  happened  upon  landing  there,

IN  the  afternoon  of  Thurfday  Auguft  the  23d,  after  leaving  Thurfday^;
Booby  Ifland,  we  fleered  W.  N.  W.  with  light  airs  from
the  S.  S.  W.  till  five  o'clock,  when  it  fell  calm,  and  the  tide
of  ebb  foon  after  fetting  to  the  N.  E.  we  came  to  an  anchor  in
eight  fathom  water,  with  a  foft  fandy  bottom.  Booby
Ifland  bore  S.  50  E.  diftant  five  miles,  and  the  Prince  of
Wales's  Ifles  extended  from  N.  E.  by  N.  to  S.  55  E.;  between
thefe  there  appeared  to  be  a  clear  open  pafTage,  extending
from  N.  46  E.  to  E.  by  N.

At  half  an  hour  after  five,  in  the  morning  of  the  24th,  as  Friday  24,
we  were  purchafing  the  anchor,  the  cable  parted  at  about
eight  or  ten  fathom  from  the  ring :  the  fhip  then  began  to
drive,  but  I  immediately  dropped  another  anchor,  which
brought  her  up  before  fhe  got  more  than  a  cable's  length
from  the  buoy ;  the  boats  were  then  fent  to  fweep  for  the
anchor,  but  could  not  fucceed.  At  noon,  our  latitude,  by
obfervation,  was  io^o'S.  As  I  was  refolved  not  to  leave
the  anchor  behind,  while  there  remained  a  poiTibility  of
recovering  it,  I  fent  the  boats  again  after  dinner,  with  a
fmall  line,  to  difcover  where  it  lay ;  this  being  happily  ef-
fected, we  fwept  for  it  with  a  hawfer,  and  by  the  fame
hawfer  hove  the  fhip  up  to  it :  we  proceeded  to  weigh  it,  but

Vol.  II.  4  O  juft


65o  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

juft  as  we  were  about  to  fhip  it,  the  hawfer  flipped,  and  we
had  all  our  labour  to  repeat:  by  this  time  it  was  dark,  and,
we  were  obliged  to  fufpend  our  operations  till  the  morning.
As  foon  as  it  was  light,  we  fweeped  it  again,  and  heaved
it  to  the  bows:  by  eight  o'clock,  we  weighed  the  other  an-
chor, got  under  fail,  and,  with  a  fine  breeze  at  E.  N.  E.  flood
to  the  north  weft.    At  noon,   our  latitude,   by  obfervation,
was  io°  i8'S.  longitude  219°  39/ W.    At  this  time,  we  had
no  land  in  fight,  but  about  two  miles  to  the  fouthward  of  us
lay  a  large  fhoal,  upon  which  the  fea  broke  with  great  vio-
lence, and  part  of  which,  I  believe,  is  dry  at  low  water.     It
extends  N.  W.  and  S.  E.  and  is  about  five  leagues  in  circuit.
Our  depth  of  water,  from  the  time  we  weighed  till  now,  was
nine  fathom,  but  it  foon  fhallowed  to  feven  fathom ;  and  at
hal£  an  hour  after  one,  having  run  eleven  miles  between
noon  and  that  time,  the  boat  which  was  a-head  made  the
fignal  for  fhoal  water ;  we  immediately  let  go  an  anchor,
and  brought  the  fliip  up  with  all  the  fails  ftanding,  for  the
boat  having  jufl  been  relieved,  was  at  but  a  little  diftance:
upon  looking  out  from  the  fliip,  we  faw  fhoal  water  almofl
all  round  us,  both  wind  and  tide  at  the  fame  time  fetting
upon  it.     The  fhip  was  in  fix  fathom,   but  upon  founding
round  her,    at  the   diftance  of  half  a  cable's  length,    we
found  fcarcely  two.     This  fhoal  reached  from  the  eaft,  round
by  the  north  and  weft,  as  far  as  the  fouth  weft,  fo  that  there
was  no  way  for  us  to  get  clear  but  that  which  we  came.
This  was  another  hair's-breadth  efcape,  for  it  was  near  high
water,  and  there  run  a  fhort  cockling  fea,  which  mufl  very
foon  have  bulged  the  fhip  if  fhe  had  ftruck ;  and  if  her  direc-
tion had  been  half  a  cable's  length  more  either  to  the  right
or  left,  fhe  mufl  have  ftruck  before  the  fignal  for  the  fhoal
was  made.     The  fhoals  which,  like  thefe,  lie  a  fathom  or
two  under  water,  are  the  moft  dangerous  of  any,  for  they  do

not


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  6Si

not  difcover  themfelves  till  the  veffel  is  juft  upon  them,  and       1770.
then  indeed  the  water  looks  brown,  as  if  it  reflected  a  dark    i__,-"g-  '_/
cloud.    Between  three  and  four  o'clock  the  tide  of  ebb  be-      u  ayzs*
gan  to  make,  and  I  fent  the  Mailer  to  found  to  the  fouth-
ward  and  fouth  weftward,  and  in  the  mean  time,  as  the  fhip
tended,  I  weighed  anchor,  and  with  a  little  fail  flood  firfl
to  the  fouthward,  and  afterwards  edging  away  to  the  weft-
ward,  got  once  more  out  of  danger.    At  funfet,  we  anchored
in  ten  fathom,  with  a  fandy  bottom,  having  a  frefh  gale  at
E.  S.  E.

At  fix  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  again  and  flood  weft,  Sunday  26.
having,  as  ufual,  firft  fent  a  boat  ahead  to  found.  I  had  in-
tended to  fteer  N.  W.  till  I  had  made  the  fouth  coaft  of  New
Guinea,  defigning,  if  poffible,  to  touch  upon  it ;  but  upon
meeting  with  thefe  flioals,  I  altered  my  courfe,  in  hopes  of
finding  a  clearer  channel,  and  deeper  water.  In  this  I  fuc-
ceeded,  for  by  noon  our  depth  of  water  was  gradually  in-
creafed  to  feventeen  fathom.  Our  latitude  was  now  by  ob-
fervation  io°  10'  S. ;  and  our  longitude  22 o°  12'  W.  No  land
was  in  fight.  We  continued  to  fteer  weft  till  funfet,  our
depth  of  water  being  from  twenty-feven  to  twenty-three  fa-
thom :  we  then  fhortened  fail,  and  kept  upon  a  wind  all
night;  four  hours  on  one  tack,  and  four  on  another.  At
day-light,  we  made  all  the  fail  we  could,  and  fleered  W.N.  W.  Monday  27.
till  eight  o'clock,  and  then  N.  W.  At  noon,  our  latitude  by
obfervation  was  90  56'  S. ;  longitude  22 1°  W.  ;  variation
20  30'  E.  We  continued  our  N.  W.  courfe  till  funfet,  when
we  again  fhortened  fail,  and  hauled  clofe  upon  a  wind  to
the  northward:  our  depth  of  water  was  twenty-one  fathom.
At  eight,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  fouthward  till  twelve  ;
then  flood  to  the  northward  with  little  fail  till  day-light:  our  Tuefdayzs.
foundings  were  from  twenty-five  to  feventeen  fathom,  the
water  growing  gradually  fhallow  as  we  flood  to  the  north-

4  O  2  ward'.


65z  LIEUTENANT   COOK/s    VOYAGE

1770.  ward.  At  this  time  we  made  fail  and  flood  to  the  north,  in
.  Augulh  ,  or{jer  to  make  the  land  of  New  Guinea :  from  the  time  of
Tuefday  zg.  Qur  ma^^ng  fa^|  t[\\  n0on,  the  depth  of  water  gradually  de-
creased from  feventeen  to  twelve  fathom,  with  a  ftoney  and
Ihelly  bottom.  Our  latitude  by  observation  was  now  8°  52' S»
which  is  in  the  fame  parallel  as  that  in  which  the  fouthern
part3  of  New  Guinea  are  laid  down  in  the  charts ;  but  there
are  only  two  points  fo  far  to  the  fouth,  and  I  reckoned  that
we  were  a  degree  to  the  weftward  of  them  both,  and  there-
fore did  not  fee  the  land,  which  trends  more  to  the  north-
ward. We  found  the  fea  here  to  be  in  many  parts  covered
with  a  brown  fcum,  fuch  as  failors  generally  call  fpawn.
When  1  firft  faw  it,  I  was  alarmed,  fearing  that  we  were
among  fhoals  ■,  but  upon  founding,  we  found  the  fame
depth  of  water  as  in  other  places.  This  fcum  was  examined
both  by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  but  they  could  not  de-
termine what  it  was :  it  was  formed  of  innumerable  fmall
particles,  not  more  than  half  a  line  in  length,  each  of  which
in  the  microfcope  appeared  to  confift  of  thirty  or  forty  tubes ;
and  each  tube  was  divided  through  its  whole  length  by
fmall  partitions  into  many  cells,  like  the  tubes  of  the  con-
ferva :  they  were  fuppofed  to  belong  to  the  vegetable  king-
dom, becaufe  upon  burning  them  they  produced  no  fmell
like  that  of  an  animal  fubftance.  The  fame  appearance  had
been  obferved  upon  the  coavt  of  Brazil  and  New  Holland,
but  never  at  any  considerable  difiance  from  the  fhore.  In
the  evening  a  fmall  bird  hovered  about  the  fhip,  and  at
night,  fettling  among  the  rigging,  was  taken.  It  proved  to
be  exa&ly  the  fame  bird  which  Dampier  has  defcribed,  and
of  which  he  has  given  a  rude  figure,  by  the  name  of  a  Noddy
from  New  Holland.  [See  his  Voyages,  vol.  iii.  p.  98.  Tab.  of
Birds,  Fig.  5.]

We


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  fa

We  continued  {landing  to  the  northward  with  a  frefii  gale      1.770.
at  E.  by  E.  and  S.  E.  till  fix  in  the  evening,  having  very  ir-   \    -g-'  ._<■
regular  foundings,  the  depth  changing  at  once  from  twenty-  Tuefda>' 28,
four  fathom  to  feven.    At  four,  we  had  feen  the  land  from
the  maft-head,  bearing  N.  W.  by  N. ;  it  appeared  to  be  very
low,  and  to  flretch  from  W. N.W.  to  N.N.  E.  diflant  four  or
five  leagues.    We  now  hauled  clofe  upon  a  wind  till  feven,
then  tacked  and  flood  to  the  fouthward  till  twelve,  at  which
time  we  wore  and  flood  to  the  northward  till  four  in  the
morning,  then  laid  the  head  of  the  vefiel  off  till  day-light,  WedneG  29.
when  we  again  faw  the  land,  and  flood  in  N,  N.  W.  directly
for  it,  with  a  frefh  gale  at  E.  by  S.     Our  foundings  during
the  night  were  very  irregular  from  feven  to  five  fathom,
fuddenly  changing  from  deep  to  fhallow,  and  from  mallow
to  deep,  without  in  the  leaft  eorrefponding  with  our  diflance
from  the  land.     At  half  an  hour  after  fix  in  the  morning  a
fmall  low  ifland,  which  lay  at  the  diflance  of  about  a  league
from  the  main,  bore  N.  by  W.  diflant  five  miles:  this  ifland
lies  in  latitude  8°  13' S.,  longitude  221°  25'W. ;  and  I  find  it
laid  down  in  the  charts  by  the  names  of  Bartholomew  and
Whermoyfen.    We  now  fleered  N.  W.  by  W.  W.  N.W.  W.  by
N.  W.  byS.  and  S.W.  by  W.  as  we  found  the  land  lie,  with
from  five  to  nine  fathom;  and  though  we  reckoned  we  were
not  more  than  four  leagues  from  it,  yet  it  was  fo  low  and
level  that  we  could  but  jufl  fee  it  from  the  deck.   It  appeared
however  to  be  well  covered  with  wood,  and  among  other
trees,  we  thought  we  could  diftinguifli  the  cocoa-nut.    We
faw  fmoke  in  feveral  places,  and  therefore  knew  there  were
inhabitants.     At  noon  we  were  about  three  leagues  from
the  land;  the  weflermofl  part  of  which  that  was  in  fight
bore  S.  790  W.    Our  latitude  by  obfervation  was  8°  19' S.  and
longitude  2210  44  W.    The  ifland  of  St.  Bartholomew  bore
N.  74  E.  diflant  20  miles.

After


^54


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


1770.

Auguft.
Wednef.  2  c


Thurfday  30.


After  fleering  S.  W.  by  W.  fix  miles,  we  had  fhoal  water  on
our  ftarboard  bow,  which  I  fent  the  yawl,  to  found,  and  at
the  fame  time  hauled  off  upon  a  wind  till  four  o'clock,  and
though  during  that  time  we  had  run  fix  miles,  we  had  not
deepened  our  water  an  inch.  I  then  edged  away  S.  W.  four
miles  more  ;  but  finding  it  flill  fhoal  water,  I  brought  to  and
called  the  boats  aboard.  At  this  time,  being  between  three
and  four  leagues  from  the  fhore,  and  the  yawl  having
found  only  three  fathom  water  in  the  place  to  which  I  had
fent  her  to  found,  I  hauled  off  clofe  upon  a  wind,  and  wea-
thered the  fhoal  about  half  a  mile.

Between  one  and  two  o'clock,  we  paffed  a  bay  or  inlet  be-
fore which  lies  a  fmall  ifland  that  feems  to  fhelter  it  from
the  foutherly  winds  ;  but  I  very  much  doubt  whether  there
is  fufficient  depth  of  water  behind  it  for  fhipping.  I  could
not  attempt  to  determine  the  queflion,  becaufe  the  S.  E.  trade
wind  blows  right  into  the  bay,  and  we  had  not  as  yet  had
any  breeze  from  the  land.

We  fbretched  off  to  fea  till  twelve  o'clock,  when  we  were
about  eleven  leagues  from  the  land,  and  had  deepened  our
water  to  twenty-nine  fathom.  We  now  tacked  and  flood  in
till  five  in  the  morning ;  when,  being  in  fix  fathom  and  an
half,  we  tacked  and  laid  the  head  of  the  veffel  off  till  day-
light, when  we  faw  the  land,  bearing  N.  W.  by  W.  at  about
the  diflance  of  four  leagues.  We  now  made  fail,  and  fleered
firfl  W.  S.  W.  then  W.  by  S. ;  but  coming  into  five  fathom  and
*n  half,  we  hauled  off  S.W.  till  we  deepened  our  water  to
eight  fathom,  and  then  kept  away  W.  by  S.  and  W.  having
nine  fathom,  and  the  land  juft  in  fight  from  the  deck  ;  we
judged  it  to  be  about  four  leagues  diflant,  and  it  was  flill
very  low  and  woody.  Great  quantities  of  the  brown  fcum
continued  to  appear  upon  the  water,  and  the  failors,  having

given


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  655

given  up  the  notion  of  its  being  fpawn,  found  a  new  name       >770-
for  it,  and  called  it  Sea-faw-duft.     At  noon,  our  latitude  by    »  '  "£u  '_.
obiervation  was   8°so'S. ;  our  longitude   222'  34/  \V.;    and  ThurfJa>'30-
Saint  Bartholomew's  ifle  bore  N.  69  E.  diflant  feventy-four
miles.

As  all  this  coaft  appears  to  have  been  very  minutely  ex-
amined by  the  Dutch,  and  as  our  track  with  the  foundings
will  appear  by  the  chart,  it  is  fufficient  to  fay,  that  we  con-
tinued our  courfe  to  the  northward  with  very  mallow  water,
upon  a  bank  of  mud,  at  fuch  a  diftance  from  the  more  as
that  it  could  fcarcely  be  feen  from  the  fhip,  till  the  3d  of  Sep-
tember. During  this  time  we  made  many  attempts  to  get
near  enough  to  go  on  more,  but  without  fuccefs  ;  and  hav-
ing now  loit  fix  days  of  fair  wind,  at  a  time  when  we  knew
the  fouth  eaft  monfoon  to  be  nearly  at  an  end,  we  began  to
be  impatient  of  farther  delay,  and  determined  to  run  the
fhip  in  as  near  to  the  more  as  poffible,  and  then  land  with
the  pinnace,  while  fhe  kept  plying  off  and  on,  to  examine
the  produce  of  the  country,  and  the  difpofition  of  the  inha-
bitants. For  the  two  laft  days  we  had  early  in  the  morning
a  light  breeze  from  the  more,  which  was  flrongly  impreg-
nated with  the  fragrance  of  the  trees,  fhrubs,  and  herbage
that  covered  it,  the  fmell  being  fomething  like  that  of  Gum
Benjamin.  On  the  3d  of  September,  at  day-break,  we  faw  September,
the  land  extending  from  N.  by  E.  to  S.  E.  at  about  four  °nda>  3
leagues  diftance,  and  we  then  kept  {landing  in  for  it  with  a
frelh  gale  at  E.S.  E.  and  E.  by  S.  till  nine  o'clock,  when
being  within  about  three  or  four  miles  of  it,  and  in  three
fathom  water,  we  brought  to.  The  pinnace  being  hoifted
out,  I  fet  off  from  the  fhip  with  the  boat's  crew,  accom-
panied by  Mr.  Banks,  who  alfo  took  his  fervants,  and  Dr.
Solander,  being  in  all  twelve  perfons  well  armed ;  we  rowed

directly


6$6  LIEUTENANT   COOK's   VOYAGE

1770-  directly  towards  the  fliore,  but  the  water  was  fo  fhallow
v— — v~J/  that  we  could  not  reach  it  by  about  two  hundred  yards  :  we
°"  ay  3"  waded  however  the  reft  of  the  way,  having  left  two  of  the
feamen  to  take  care  of  the  boat.  Hitherto  we  had  feen  no
figns  of  inhabitants  at  this  place ;  but  as  foon  as  we  got
afhore  we  difcovered  the  prints  of  human  feet,  which  could
not  long  have  been  imprefled  upon  the  fand,  as  they  were
below  high-water  mark:  we  therefore  concluded  that  the
people  were  at  no  great  diftance,  and,  as  a  thick  wood  came
down  within  a  hundred  yards  of  the  water,  we  thought  it
neceflary  to  proceed  with  caution,  left  we  mould  fall  into  an
ambulcade  and  our  retreat  to  the  boat  be  cut  off.  We  walked
along  the  fkirts  of  the  wood,  and  at  the  diftance  of  about
two  hundred  yards  from  the  place  where  we  landed,  we
came  to  a  grove  of  cocoa-nut  trees,  which  flood  upon  the
banks  of  a  little  brook  of  brackifh  water.  The  trees  were  of
a  fmall  growth,  but  well  hung  with  fruit ;  and  near  them
was  allied  or  hut,  which  had  been  covered  with  their  leaves,
though  moil  of  them  were  now  fallen  off:  about  the  hut  lay
a  great  number  of  the  fhells  of  the  fruit,  fome  of  which  ap-
peared to  be  juft  frefh  from  the  tree.  We  looked  at  the  fruit
very  wifhfully,  but  not  thinking  it  fafe  to  climb,  we  were
obliged  to  leave  it  without  tailing  a  fingle  nut.  At  a  little
diftance  from  this  place  we  found  plantains,  and  a  bread-
fruit tree,  but  it  had  nothing  upon  it ;  and  having  now  ad-
vanced about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  boat,  three  In-
dians ruihed  out  of  the  wood  with  a  hideous  fhout,  at  about
the  diftance  of  a  hundred  yards ;  and  as  they  ran  towards  us,
the  foremoft  threw  fomething  out  of  his  hand,  which  flew
an  one  fide  of  him,  and  burnt  exactly  like  gunpowder,  but
made  no  report :  the  other  two  inftantly  threw  their  lances
at  usj  and,  as  no  time  was  now  to  be  loft,  we  difcharged  our
3  pieces,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6#

pieces,  which  were  loaded  with  fmall  fliot.  It  is  probable  >77o.
that  they  did  not  feel  the  fhot,  for  though  they  halted  a  mo-  i_P-em-  "^
ment,  they  did  not  retreat ;  and  a  third  dart  was  thrown  at
us.  As  we  thought  their  farther  approach  might  be  pre-
vented with  lefs  rifle  of  life,  than  it  would  cofh  to  defend
ourfelves  againft  their  attack  if  they  fliould  come  nearer,  we
loaded  our  pieces  with  ball,  and  fired  a  fecond  time :  by  this
difcharge  it  is  probable  that  fome  of  them  were  wounded ;
yet  we  had  the  fatisfaction  to  fee  that  they  all  ran  away  with
great  agility.  As  I  was  not  difpofed  forcibly  to  invade  this
country,  either  to  gratify  our  appetites  or  our  curiofity,  and
perceived  that  nothing  was  to  be  done  upon  friendly  terms,
we  improved  this  interval,  in  which  the  deflruclion  of  the
natives  was  no  longer  necefTary  to  our  own  defence,  and
with  all  expedition  returned  towards  our  boat.  As  we  were
advancing  along  the  fhore,  we  perceived  that  the  two  men
on  board  made  fignals  that  more  Indians  were  coming  down ;
and  before  we  got  into  the  water  we  faw  feveral  of  them
coming  round  a  point  at  the  diftance  of  about  five  hundred
yards :  it  is  probable  that  they  had  met  with  the  three  who
firft  attacked  us ;  for  as  foon  as  they  faw  us  they  halted,
and  feemed  to  wait  till  their  main  body  fhould  come  up.
We  entered  the  water,  and  waded  towards  the  boat ;  and  they
remained  at  their  ftation,  without  giving  us  any  interrup-
tion. As  foon  as  we  were  aboard  we  rowed  abreaft  of  them,
and  their  number  then  appeared  to  be  between  fixty  and  a
hundred.  We  now  took  a  view  of  them  at  our  leifure  ;  they
made  much  the  fame  appearance  as  the  New  Hollanders,
being  nearly  of  the  fame  ftature,  and  having  their  hair  fhort
cropped:  like  them  alfo  they  were  all  ftaxk  naked,  but  we
thought  the  colour  of  their  ikin  was  not  quite  fo  dark  :  this
however  might  perhaps  be  merely  the  effect  of  their  not
being  quite  fo  dirty.  All  this  while  they  were  fhouting  de-
Vol.II.  4P  fiance*


658  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  fiance,  and  letting  off  their  fires  by  four  or  five  at  a  time.
^  eptem  er.  ^^t  thefe  fires  were,  or  for  what  purpofe  intended,  we
Monday  3.  cou[^  not  imagine  :  thofe  who  difcharged  them  had  in  then-
hands  a  fhort  piece  of  Hick,  poilibly  a  hollow  cane,  which
they  fwung  fideways  from  them,  and  we  immediately  faw
fire  and  fmoke,  exactly  refembling  thofe  of  a  mufquet,  and
of  no  longer  duration.  This  wonderful  phenomenon  was
obferved  from  the  fhip,  and  the  deception  was  fo  great  that
the  people  on  board  thought  they  had  fire-arms  ;  and  in  the
boat,  if  we  had  not  been  fo  near  as  that  we  muft  have  heard
the  report,  we  mould  have  thought  they  had  been  firing
volleys.  After  we  had  looked  at  them  attentively  fome  time,
without  taking  any  notice  of  their  flafhing  and  vociferation,
we  fired  fome  mnfquets  over  their  heads  :  upon  hearing  the
balls  rattle  among  the  trees,  they  walked  leifurely  away,
and  we  returned  to  the  fhip.  Upon  examining  the  weapons
they  had  thrown  at  us,  we  found  them  to  be  light  darts,
about  four  feet  long,  very  ill  made,  of  a  reed  or  bamboo  cane,
and  pointed  with  hard  wood,  in  which  there  were  many
barbs.  They  were  difcharged  with  great  force  ;  for  though
we  were  at  fixty  yards  diftance,  they  went  beyond  us,  but  in
what  manner  we  could  not  exactly  fee :  poffibly  they  might
be  mot  with  a  bow;  but  we  faw  no  bows  among  them
when  we  furveyed  them  from  the  boat,  and  we  were  in  ge-
neral of  opinion  that  they  were  thrown  with  a  flick,  in  the
manner  praclifed  by  the  New  Hollanders.

This  place  lies  in  the  latitude  of  6°  15'  S.  and  about  fixty-
five  leagues  to  the  N.  E.  of  Port  Saint  Augufline,  or  Walche
Caep,  and  is  near  what  is  called  in  the  charts  C.  de  la  Colta  de
St.  Bonaventura.  The  land  here,  like  that  in  every  other  part
of  the  coaft  is  very  low,  but  covered  with  a  luxuriance  of
wood  and  herbage  that  can  fcarcely  be  conceived.  We  faw
8  the


i/70-


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  G59

the  cocoa-nut,  the  bread-fruit,  and  the  plantain  tree,  all
flouriihing  in  a  ftate  of  the  higheil  perfection,  though  the
cocoa-nuts  were  green,  and  the  bread-fruit  not  in  feafon ;
befides  mod  of  the  trees,  ihrubs,  and'  plants  that  are  com-
mon to  the  South  Sea  iilands,  New  Zealand,  and  New  Hol-
land.

Soon  after  our  return  to  the  fhip,  we  hoiiled  in  the  boat
and  made  fail  to  the  weftward,  being  refolved  to  fpend  no
more  time  upon  this  coaft,  to  the  great  fatisfaetion  of  a  very
confiderable  majority  of  the  fhip's  company.  But  I  am  forry
to  fay  that  I  was  ftrongly  urged  by  fome  of  .the  officers  to
fend  a  party  of  men  afhore,  and  cut  down  the  cocoa-nut
trees  for  the  fake  of  the  fruit.  This  I  peremptorily  refufed,
as  equally  unjuft  and  cruel.  The  natives  had  attacked  us
merely  for  landing  upon  their  coaft,  when  we  attempted  to
take  nothing  away,  and  it  was  therefore  morally  certain
that  they  would  have  made  a  vigorous  effort  to  defend  their
property  if  it  had  been  invaded,  in  which  cafe  many  of  them
mull  have  fallen  a  facrifice  to  our  attempt,  and  perhaps  alfo
fome  of  our  own  people.  I  mould  have  regretted  the  necef-
fity  of  fuch  a  meafure,  if  I  had  been  in  want  of  the  neceffa-
ries  of  life ;  and  certainly  it  would  have  been  highly  crimi-
nal when  nothing  was  to  be  obtained  but  two  or  three
hundred  of  green  cocoa-nuts,  which  would  at  mod  have
procured  us  a  mere  tranfient  gratification.  I  might  indeed
have  proceeded  farther  along  the  coaft  to  the  northward  and
weftward,  in  fearch  of  a  place  where  the  fliip  might  have
lain  fo  near  the  fhore  as  to  cover  the  people  with  her  guns
when  they  landed  ;  but  this  would  have  obviated  only  part
of  the  mifchief,  and  though  it  might  have  fecured  us,  it
would  probably  in  the  very  act  have  been  fatal  to  the  na-
tives.   Befides,  we  had  reafon  to  think  that  before  fuch  a

4  P  2.  place


<$6o  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770.  place  would  have  been  found,  we  fhould  have  been  carried
September  fo  ^  tQ  ^  weftwar(}  as  to  have  been  obliged  to  go  to  Bata-
Monday  3.  yja>  on  tJie  north  fit|e  of  Java  ;  which  I  did  not  think  fo  fafe
a  paffage  as  to  the  fouth  of  Java,  through  the  Streights  of
Sunday  :  the  fhip  alfo  was  fo  leaky  that  I  doubted  whether
it  would  not  be  neceflary  to  heave  her  down  at  Batavia,
which  was  another  reafon  for  making  the  beft  of  our  way
to  that  place ;  efpecially  as  no  difcovery  could  be  expected  in
feas  which  had  already  been  navigated,  and  where  every
coaft  had  been  laid  down  by  the  Dutch  geographers.  The
Spaniards  indeed,  as  well  as  the  Dutch,  feem  to  have  circum-
navigated all  the  iflands  in  New  Guinea,  as  almofl  every
place  that  is  diftinguifhed  in  the  chart  has  a  name  in  both
languages.  The  charts  with  which  I  compared  fuch  part  of
this  coaft  as  I  vifited,  are  bound  up  with  a  French  work,  in-
titled,  "HiftoiredesNavigationes  auxTerres  Auftrales,"  which
was  publifhed  in  1756,  and  I  found  them  tolerably  exact  -%
yet  I  know  not  by  whom,  nor  when  they  were  taken :  and
though  New  Holland  and  New  Guinea  are  in  them  repre-
fented  as.  two  diftinct  countries,  the  very  hiftory  in  which,
they  are  bound  up,  leaves  it  in  doubt.  I  pretend  however"  ta
■no  more  merit  in  this  part  of  the  voyage,  than  to  haveefta.-
"blifhed  the  fact  beyond  all  controverfy.

As  the  two  countries  lie  very  near  each  other,  and  the  in-
termediate fpace  is  full  of  iilands,  it  is  reafonable  to  fuppofe
that  they  were  both  peopled  from  one  common  flock  ■  yet  no*
:mtercourfe  appears  to  have  been  kept  up  between  them  ;  for
if  there  had,  the  cocoa-nuts,  bread-fruit,  plantains,  and  other
fruits  of  New  Guinea,  which  are  equally  neceflary  for  the
fupport  of  life,  would  certainly  have  been  tranfplanted  to-
New  Holland,  where  no  traces  of  them  are  to  be  found.  The
tohoxof  the  "HiftoiredesNavigationes  auxTerres  Auftrales  ~


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  661

m  his  account  of  La  Maire's  voyage,  has  given  a  vocabulary  *77°-
of  the  language  that  is  fpoken  in  an  ifland  near  New  Britain,  v. — Z—J
and  we  find,  by  comparing  that  vocabulary  with  the  words
which  we  learnt  in  New  Holland,  that  the  languages  are
not  the  fame.  If  therefore  it  fhould  appear,  that  the  lan-
guages of  New  Britain  and  New  Guinea  are  the  fame,  there
will  be  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  New  Britain  and  New  Guinea
were  peopled  from  a  common  flock;  but  that  the  inhabi-
tants of  New  Holland  had  a  different  origin,  notwithftanding:
the  proximity  of  the  countries.


€  H  A  P>


e62  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


CHAP.     X.

The  Pa(fa<re  from  Neiv  Gumea  to  the  Ijland  of  Savu,  and
the  cTra?tfaSiiom  there.

1770-      \\  7E  made  fail,  from  noon  on  Monday  the  3d  to  noon  on
£!!^!2,     VV    Tuefday  the  4th,  Handing  to  the  weflward,  and  all
Tuefday  4.     ^  time  kept  -m  foun<jings,  having  from  fourteen  to  thirty
fathom  ;  not  regular,  but  fometimes  more,  fometimes  lefs.
At  noon  on  the  4th,  we  were  in  fourteen  fathom,  and  lati-
tude 6°  44'  S.,  longitude  223  °  51'  W.  5  our  courfe  and  diftance
fince  the  3d  at  noon,  were  S.  76  \V.  one  hundred  and  twenty
Wednef.  5.     miles  to  the  weflward.    At  noon  on  the  5th  of  September,
we  were  in  latitude  70  25  S.,  longitude  2250  41'W.;  having
been  in  foundings  the  whole  time  from  ten  to  twenty  fa-
thom.
Thurfday  6.        At  half  an  hour  after  one  in  the  morning  of  the  next  day,
we  paffed  a  fmall  ifland  which  bore  from  us  N.  N.W.  diftant
between  three  and  four  miles  ;  and  at  day-light  we  difco-
vered  another  low  ifland,  extending  from  N.N.W.  to  N.N.E.
diftant  about  two  or  three  leagues.    Upon  this  ifland,  which
did  not  appear  to  be  very  fmall,   I  believe  I  fhould  have
landed  to  examine  its  produce,  if  the  wind  had  not  blown
too  frefh  to  admit  of  it.     When  we  pafTed  this  ifland  we  had
only  ten  fathom  water,  with  a  rocky  bottom ;  and  therefore
I  was  afraid  of  running  down  to  leeward,  left  I  fhould  meet
with  fhoal  water  and  foul  ground.     Thefe  iflands  have  no
place  in  the  charts  except  they  are  the  Arrou  iflands ;  and  if

thefe,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  (65

thefe,  they  are  laid  down  much  too  far  from  New  Guinea.       >77°-
I  found  the  fouth  part  of  them  to  lie  in  latitude  7"  6'S.,  Ion-   »    -.-.  ^j
gitude  225"  W.

We  continued  to  fleer  W.  S.  W.  at  the  rate  of  four  miles
and  an  half  an  hour,  till  ten  o'clock  at  night,  when  we  had
forty-two  fathom,  at  eleven  we  had  thirty-feven,  at  twelve
forty-five,  at  one  in  the  morning  forty-nine,  and  at  three
120,  after  which  we  had  no  ground.  At  day-light,  we  made
all  the  fail  we  could,  and  at  ten  o'clock,  faw  land,  extending
from  N.  N.  W.  to  W.  by  N.  diflant  between  five  and  fix  leagues:
at  noon,  it  bore  from  N.  to  W.  and  at  about  the  fame  diflance  :
it  appeared  to  be  level,  and  of  a  moderate  height:  by  our
diflance  from  New  Guinea,  it  ought  to  have  been  part  of  the
Arrou  Iflands,  but  it  lies  a  degree  farther  to  the  fouth  than
any  of  thefe  iflands  are  laid  down  in  the  charts;  and  by  the
latitude  mould  be  Timor  Laoet:  we  founded,  but  had  no
ground  with  fifty  fathom.

As  I  was  not  able  to  fatisfy  myfelf  from  any  chart,  what
land  it  was  that  I  faw  to  leeward,  and  fearing  that  it  might
trend  away  more  foutherly,  the  weather  alfo  being  fo  hazy
that  we  could  not  fee  far,  I  fleered  S.  W.  and  by  four  had  loft
fight  of  the  ifland.  I  was  now  fure  that  no  part  of  it  lay  to
the  fouthward  of  8°  15' S.  and  continued  ftanding  to  the
S.  W.  with  an  eafy  fail,  and  a  frefh.  breeze  at  S.  E.  by  E.  and
E.  S.  E. :  we  founded  every  hour,  but  had  no  bottom  with
120  fathom.

At  day-break  in  the  morning,  we  fleered  W.  S.  W.  and  Friday  7.
afterwards  W.  by  S.  which  by  noon  brought  us  into  the  lati-
tude of  90  30'  S.  longitude  229°34'W.  and  by  our  run  from
New  Guinea,  we  ought  to  have  been  within  fight  of  Weafel
Ifles,  which  in  the  charts  are  laid  down  at  the  diflance  of
twenty  or  twenty-five  leagues  from  the  coafl  of  New  Hol-
land:


664


LIEUTENANT    COOKss    VOYAGE


.1770.

Septembe
Friday  j.


Saturday  S
jSunday  9.


Monday  10.


"Tuefday  it.


land;  we  however  faw  nothing,  and  therefore  they  muft
have  been  placed  erroneously ;  nor  can  this  be  thought
flrange,  when  it  is  confidered  that  not  only  thefe  iflands,
but  the  coaft  which  bounds  this  fea,  have  been  difcovered
and  explored  by  different  people,  and  at  different  times,  and
the  charts  upon  which  they  are  delineated,  put  together  by
others,  perhaps  at  the  diftance  of  more  than  a  century  after
the  difcoveries  had  been  made ;  not  to  mention  that  the  difco-
verers  themfelves  had  not  all  the  requifites  for  keeping  an  ac-
curate journal,  of  which  thofe  of  the  prefent  age  are  poffeffed.

We  continued  our  courfe,  fleering  W.  till  the  evening  of
the  8th,  when  the  variation  of  the  compafs,  by  feveral  azi-
muths, was  12'W.  and  by  the  amplitude  j'W.  At  noon,  on
the  9th,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  90  46'  S.,  longitude
23  20  7'W.  For  the  lafl  two  days  we  had  fleered  due  W.  yet,
by  obfervation,  we  made  fixteen  miles  fouthing,  fix  miles
from  noon  on  the  6th  to  noon  on  the  7th,  and  ten  miles  from
noon  on  the  7th  to  noon  on  the  8th,  by  which  it  appeared
that  there  was  a  current  fetting  to  the  fouthward.  At  fun-
fet,  we  found  the  variation  to  be  2  W.  and  at  the  fame  time,
faw  an  appearance  of  very  high  land  bearing  N,  W,

In  the  morning  of  the  1.0th,  we  faw  clearly  that  what  had
appeared  to  be  land  the  night  before,  was  Timor.  At  noon,
our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  io°  i'S-  which  was  fifteen
miles  to  the  fouthward  of  that  given  by  the  log  ;  our  longi-
tude, by  obfervation,  was  233  °  2  7'W.  We  fleered  N.  W.  in
order  to  obtain  a  more  diflinct  view  of  the  land  in  fight,  till
four  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  nth,  when  the  wind
came  to  the  N.  W.  and  W.  with  which  we  flood  to  the  fouth-
ward till  nine,  when  we  tacked  and  flood  N.  W.  having  the
wind  now  at  W.  S.  W.  At  fun-rife,  the  land  had  appeared  to
extend  from  W.  N.  W.to  N.  E,  and  at  noon,  we  could  fee  it

extend


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  665


September.
1  uefday  1 1.


extend  to  the  weftward  as  far  as  W.  by  S.  ;  S.  but  no  farther
to  the  eaflward  than  N.  byE.  We  were  now  well  aifured,
that  as  the  firft  land  we  had  feen  was  Timor,  the  lall  ifland
we  had  palled  was  Timor  Laoet,  or  Laut.  Laoet,  is  a  word
in  the  language  of  Malaca,  fignifying  Sea,  and  this  ifland
was  named  by  the  inhabitants  of  that  country.  The  fouth
part  of  it  lies  in  latitude  8°  15' S.  longitude  azS0  io'W.  but
in  the  charts  the  fouth  point  is  laid  down  in  various  lati-
tudes, from  8°  30' to  90  30':  it  is  indeed  poflible  that  the
land  we  faw  might  be  fome  other  ifland;  but  the  prefumption
to  the  contrary  is  very  ftrong,  for  if  Timor  Laut  had  lain
where  it  is  placed  in  the  charts,  we  muft  have  feen  it  there.
We  were  now  in  latitude  90  37'  S. ;  longitude,  by  an  obferva-
tion  of  the  fun  and  moon,  2330  54'  W.  we  were  the  clay  before
in  2330  27';  the  difference  is  27',  exactly  the  fame  that  was
given  by  the  log:  this,  however,  is  a  degree  of  accuracy  in
obfervation  that  is  feldom  to  be  expected.  In  the  afternoon,
we  flood  in  fhore  till  eight  in  the  evening,  when  we  tacked
and  flood  off,  being  at  the  diflance  of  about  three  leagues
from  the  land,  which  at  fun-fet  extended  from  S.  W.  "  W.  to
N.  E. :  at  this  time  we  founded,  and  had  no  ground  with  140
fathom.  At  midnight,  having;  but  little  wind,  we  tacked  WedneCis,
and  flood  in,  and  at  noon  the  next  day,  our  latitude,  by  ob-
fervation, was  90  36'  S.  This  day,  we  faw  fmoke  on  fhore
in  feveral  places,  and  had  feen  many  fires  during  the  night.
The  land  appeared  to  be  very  high,  rifing  in  gradual  Hopes
one  above  another:  the  hills  were  in  general  covered  with
thick  woods,  but  among  them  we  could  diftinguifh  naked
fpots  of  a  confiderable  extent,  which  had  the  appearance  of
having  been  cleared  by  art.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,
we  were  within  a  mile  and  a  half  of  the  fhore,  in  fixtcen  fa-
thom water,  and  abreafl  of  a  fmall  inlet  into  the  low  land,
which  lies  in  latitude  90  34' S.  and  probably  is  the  fame  that
Vol.  II.  4  Q^  Dampier


666  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770-  Darnpier  entered  with  his  boat,  for  it  did  not  feem  to  have
■  eptem  "'■  fufficient  depth  of  water  for  a  fhip.  The  land  here  anfwered
WcdneC  12.  wejj  tQ  tj1£  defcription  that  he  has  given  of  it:  clofe  to  the
beach  it  was  covered  with  high  fpiry  trees,  which  he  men-
tions as  having  the  appearance  of  pines  j  behind  thefe  there
feemed  to  be  fait  water  creeks,  and  many  mangroves,  inter-
fperfed  however  with  cocoa-nut  trees :  the  flat  land  at  the
beach  appeared  in  fome  places  to  extend  inward  two  or  three
miles  before  the  rife  of  the  firft  hill ;  in  this  part,  however,
we  faw  no  appearance  of  plantations  or  houfes,  but  great
fertility,  and  from  the  number  of  fires*  we  judged  that  the
place  mull  be  well  peopled.

When  we  had  approached  within  a  mile  and  an  half  of
the  more,  we  tacked  and  ftood  off,  and  the  extreams  of  the
coaft  then  extended  from  N.  E.  by  E.  to  W.  by  S.  ±  S.  The
fouth  weflerly  extremity  was  a  low  point,  diflant  from  us
about  three  leagues.  While  we  were  {landing  in  for  the
more,  we  founded  feveral  times,  but  had  no  ground  till  we
came  within  about  two  miles  and  a  half,  and  then  we  had
live  and  twenty  fathom,  with  a  foft  bottom.  After  we  had
tacked,  we  flood  off  till  midnight,  with  the  wind  at  S. ;  we
then  tacked  and  flood  two  hours  to  the  weflward,  when  the
wind  veered  to  S.  W.  and  W.  S.  W.  and  we  then  flood  to  the
ThuWdiy  i3.  fouthward  again.  In  the  morning,  we  found  the  variation,
to  be  i°  10' W.  by  the  amplitude,  and  by  the  azimuth  i°  27'-
At  noon,  our  latitude  was,  byobfervation,  90  45'  S.  our  lon-
gitude 2340  12'  W. ;  we  were  then  about  feven  leagues
diflant  from  the  land,  which  extended  from  N.  31  E.  to»
W.  S.  W.  i-  W.

With  light  land  breezes  from  W.  by  N.  for  a  few  hours  in:
a  morning,  and  fea  breezes  from  S.  S.  W.  and  S.  we  advanced;
1  „  ]4,      to  the  weflward  but  flowly.    At  noon  on  the  14th,  we  were
between  fix  and  feven  leagues  from  the  land,  which  ex-
tended


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  66?

tended   from   N.  by  E.  to  S.  78  W. ;    we  ftill  faw   fmoke  in      1770.
many  places  by  day,  and  fire  by  night,  both  upon  the  low  ,Septembe!\
land  and  the  mountains  beyond  it.     We  continued  fleering  Friday  I+'
along  the  more,  till  the  morning  of  the  ijth,  the  land  ftill  Saturday ij.
appearing  hilly,  but  not  fo  high  as  it  had  been :  the  hills  in
general  came  quite  down  to  the  fea,  and  where  they  did  not,
we  faw  inftead  of  flats  and  mangrove  land,  immenfe  groves
of  cocoa-nut  trees,  reaching  about  a  mile  up  from  the  beach :
there  the  plantations  and  houfes  commenced,  and  appeared
to  be  innumerable.    The  houfes  were  fhaded  by  groves  of
the  fan  palm,  or  borajjus,  and  the  plantations,  which  were
inclofed  by  a  fence,  reached  almofl  to  the  tops  of  the  hio-hefl
hills.     We  faw  however  neither  people  nor  cattle,  though
our  glaffes  were  continually  employed,  at  which  we  were
not  a  little  furprifed.

We  continued  our  courfe,  with  little  variation,  till  nine
o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  16th,  when  we  faw  the  fmall  Sunday  16.
ifland  called  Rotte  ;  and  at  noon,  the  ifland  Semau,  lying
off  the  fouth  end  of  Timor,  bore  N.  W.

Dampier,  who  has  given  a  large  defcription  of  the  ifland
of  Timor,  fays,  that  it  is  feventy  leagues  long,  and  fixteen
broad,  and  that  it  lies  nearly  N.  E.  and  S.W.  I  found  the
eaft  fide  of  it  to  lie  neareft  N.  E.  by  E.  and  S.  W.  by  W.  and  the
fouth  end  to  lie  in  latitude  io°  23'  S.  longitude  236"  5'W.
We  ran  about  forty-five  leagues  along  the  eaft  fide,  and  found
the  navigation  altogether  free  from  danger.  The  land
which  is  bounded  by  the  fc-a,  except  near  the  fouth  end,  is
low  for  two  or  three  miles  within  the  beach,  and  in  general
interfered  by  fait  creeks:  behind  the  lowland  are  moun-
tains, which  rife  one  above  another  to  a  confiderable  height.
We  fleered  W.  N.  W.  till  two  in  the  afternoon,  when,  being
within  a  fmall  diilance  of  the  north  end  of  Rotte,  we  hauled

4  Q^2  UP


668  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  up  N.  N.  \V.  in  order  to  go  between  it  and  Semau :  after  fteer-
■lep".  "',  ing  three  leagues  upon  this  courfe,  we  edged  away  N.  W.
Sur.aay  16,  an(j  ^  an^  ^y  f1Xj  we  Were  clear  of  all  the  iflands.  At  this
time,  the  fouth  part  of  Semau,  which  lies  in  latitude  io°
15'  S.  bore  N.  E.  diflant  four  leagues,  and  the  iiland  of  Rotte
extended  as  far  to  the  foufhward  as  S.  36  W.  The  north  end
of  this  iiland,  and  the  fouth  end  of  Timor,  lie  N.  --  E.  and
S.  4.  W.  and  are  about  three  or  four  leagues  diflant  from  each
other.  At  the  weft  end  of  the  pafTage  between  Rotte  and
Semau,  are  two  fmall  iilands,  one  of  which  lies  near  the
Rotte  fhore,  and  the  other  off  the  fouth  weft  point  of  Semau:
there  is  a  good  channel  between  them,  about  fix  miles
broad,  through  which  we  paffed.  The  ifle  of  Rotte  has  not
fo  lofty  and  mountainous  an  appearance  as  Timor,  though
it  is  agreeably  diversified  by  hill  and  valley:  on  the  north
fide,  there  are  many  fandy  beaches,  near  which  grew  fome
trees  of  the  fan  palmv  but  the  far  greater  part  was  covered
with  a  kind  of  brufhy  wood,  that  was  without  leaves.  The
appearance  of  Semau  was  nearly  the  fame  with  that  of
Timor,  but  not  quite  fo  high.  About  ten  o'clock  at  night,
we  obferved  a  phenomenon  in  the  heavens,  which  in  many
particulars  refembled  the  aurora  borealis,  and  in  others,  was
very  different :  it  confuted  of  a  dull  reddifli  light,  and
reached  about  twenty  degrees  above  the  horizon :  its  extent
was  very  different  at  different  times,  but  it  was  never  lefs
than  eight  or  ten  points  of  the  compafs  :  through,  and  out  of
this,  paired  rays  of  light  of  a  brighter  colour,  which  va-
nifhed,  and  were  renewed  nearly  in  the  fame  time  as  thofe
of  the  aurora  borealis,  but  had  no  degree  of  the  tremulous
or  vibratory  motion  which  is  obferved  in  that  phenomenon:
the  body  of  it  bore  S.S.  E.  from  the  fhip,  and  it  continued,
•without  any  diminution  of  its  brightnefs,  till  twelve  o'clock,

when


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  (>69

when  we  retired  to  fleep,  but  how  long  afterwards,  I  cannot      J77°-

,.  -  September.

tell.  '       .     _f

Being  clear  of  all  the  iflands,  which  are  laid  down  in  the  Monday  n*
maps  we  had  on  board,  between  Timor  and  Java,  we  fleered
a  weft  courfe  till  fix  o'clock  the  next  morning,  when  we  un-
expectedly faw  an   iiland   bearing  W.  S.  W.   and   at  firft  I
thought  we  had  made  a  new  difcovery.     We  fleered  directly
for  it,  and  by  ten  o'clock  were  clofe  in  with  the  north  fide  of
it,  where  we  faw  houfes,  cocoa-nut  trees,  and,  to  our  very
agreeable  furprife,  numerous  flocks  of  flieep.     This  was  a
temptation  not  to  be  refilled  by  people  in  our  fituation,  efpe-
cially  as  many  of  us  were  in  a  bad  ftate  of  health,  and  many
ftill  repining  at  my  not  having  touched  at  Timor :  it  was
therefore   foon  determined   to    attempt   a  commerce  with
people  who  appeared  to  be  fo  well  able  to  fupply  our  many
neceflities,  and  remove  at  once  the  ficknefs  and  difcontent
that  had  got  footing  among  us.    The  pinnace  was  hoifted
out,   and  Mr.  Gore,   the  Second  Lieutenant,   fent  to  fee  if
there  was  any  convenient  place  to  land,  taking  with  him
fome  trifles,  as  prefents  to  the  natives,  if  any  of  them  mould
appear.    While  he  was  gone,  we  faw  from  the  fhip  two  men
on  horfeback,  who  feemed  to  be  riding  upon  the  hills  fcr
their  amufement,  and  often  flopped  to  look  at  the  fhip.    By
this  we  knew  that  the  place  had  been  fettled  by  Europeans,
and  hoped,  that  the  many  difagreeable  cireumftances  which
always  attend  the  firft  cttablifhment  of  commerce  with  fa-
vages,    would  be  avoided.      In  the  mean  time,    Mr.  Gore
landed  in  a  fmall  fandy  cove  near  fome  houfe3,  and  was
met  by  eight  or  ten  of  the  natives,  who,  as  well  in  their
drefs  as  their  perfons,    very  much  refembled  the  Malays :
they  were  without  arms,  except  the  knives  which  it  is  their
cuftom  to  wear  in  their  girdles,  and  one  of  them  had  a  jack
afs  with  him:  they  courteoufly  invited  him  afhore,  and  con-
S  verfed


67o  LIEUTENANT    COOK^s   VOYAGE

1770.  verfed  with  him  by  figns,  but  very  little  of  the  meaning  of
/-eptem  er'/  either  party  could  be  underflood  by  the  other.  In  a  fhort
JMonday  17.  t-me  ji£  returneci  with  this  report,  and,  to  our  great  mortifi-
cation, added,  that  there  was  no  anchorage  for  the  fliip.  I
fent  him  however  a  fecond  time,  with  both  money  and
goods,  that  he  might,  if  pomble,  purchafe  fome  refrefh-
ments,  at  leafl  for  the  lick ;  and  Dr.  Solander  went  in  the
boat  with  him.  In  the  mean  time  I  kept  {landing  on  and  off
with  the  fhip,  whieh  at  this  time  was  within  about  a  mile
of  the  fhorc.  Before  the  boat  could  land,  we  faw  two  other
horfemen,  one  of  whom  was  in  a  complete  European  drefs,
confiding  of  a  blue  coat,  a  white  waiftcoat,  and  a  laced  hat :
thefe  people,  when  the  boat  came  to  the  more,  took  little
notice  of  her,  but  fauntered  about,  and  feemed  to  look  with
great  curiofity  at  the  fliip.  We  faw  however  other  horfe-
men, and  a  great  number  of  perfons  on  foot,  gather  round
our  people,  and,  to  our  great  fatisfaction,  perceived  feveral
cocoa-nuts  carried  into  the  boat,  from  which  we  concluded
that  peace  and  commerce  were  eftabliflied  between  us.

After  the  boat  had  been  afhore  about  an  hour  and  a  half,
ihe  made  the  fignal  for  having  intelligence  that  there  was  a
bay  to  leeward,  where  we  might  anchor:  we  Hood  away
directly  for  it,  and  the  boat  following,  foon  came  on  board.
The  Lieutenant  told  us,  that  he  had  feen  fome  of  the  prin-
cipal people,  who  were  d  re  fled  in  fme  linen,  and  had  chains
of  gold  round  their  necks :  he  faid,  that  he  had  not  been
able  to  trade,  becaufe  the  owner  of  the  cocoa-nuts  was  ab-
feht,  but  that  about  two  dozen  had  been  fent  to  the  boat  as
a  prefent,  and  that  fome  linen  had  been  accepted  in  return.
The  people,  to  give  him  the  information  that  he  wanted,
drew  a  map  upon  the  fand,  in  which  they  made  a  rude  re-
prefentation  of  a  harbour  to  leeward,  and  a  town  near  it  :
they  alfb  gave  him  to  underftand,  that  mcep,  hogs,  fowls,

and


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  671

and  fruit  might  there  be  procured  in  great  plenty.    Some  of      *77°-

r  i    r   •  September.

them  frequently  pronounced  the  word  Portuguefe,  and  laid    « u »

fomething  of  Larntuca,  upon  the  ifland  of  Ende :  from  this
circumftance,  we  conjectured  that  there  were  Portuguefe
fomewhere  upon  the  ifland,  and  a  Portuguefe,  who  was  in
our  boat,  attempted  to  converfe  with  the  Indians  in  that  lan-
guage, but  foon  found  that  they  knew  only  a  word  or  two
of  it  by  rote :  one  of  them  however,  when  they  were  giving
our  people  to  underftand  that  there  was  a  town  near  the
harbour  to  which  they  had  directed  us,  intimated,  that  as  a
token  of  going  right,  we  mould  fee  fomewhat,  which  he
exprefTed  by  crofling  his  fingers,  and  the  Portuguefe  inftantly
conceived  that  he  meant  to  exprefs  a  crofs.  Jufl  as  our
people  were  putting  off,  the  horfeman  in  the  European  drefs
came  up,  but  the  officer  not  having  his  commiffion  about
him,  thought  it  beft  to  decline  a  conference.

At  feven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in
the  bay  to  which  we  had  been  directed,  at  about  the  diftance
of  a  mile  from  the  fhorc,  in  thirty-eight  fathom  water,  with
a  clear  fandy  bottom.  The  north  point  of  the  bay  bore  N.
30  E.  diftant  two  miles  and  an  half,  and  the  fouth  point,  or
weft  end  of  the  iiland,  bore  S.  63  W.  Juft  as  we  got  round
the  north  point,  and  entered  the  bay,  we  difcovered  a  large-
Indian  town  or  village,  upon  which  we  flood  on,  hoifting  a
jack  on  the  fore  top-maft  head:  foon  after,  to  our  great  fur-
prize,  Dutch  colours  were  hoifted  in  the  town,  and  three
guns  fired ;  we  flood  on,  however,  till  we  had  foundings,
and  then  anchored.

As  foon  as  it  was  light  in  the  morning,  we  faw  the  fame  TuefU&y  is;.

colours  hoifted  upon  the  beach,  abreafl  of  the  fhip ;   flip-

pofing  therefore  that  the  Dutch  had  a  fettlement  here,  I  fen!:

Lieutenant  Gore  afhore,  to  wait  upon  the  Governor,  or  the

jb  chief


(5;s  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

177°-  chief  perfon  refiding  upon  the  fpor,  and  acquaint  him  who
<.ep  e"'°e '/  we  were,  and  for  what  purpofe  we  had  touched  upon  the
lueidayis.  CQ^  ^s  fcOIi  as  }ie  came  alliore,  he  was  received  by  a
guard  of  between  twenty  and  thirty  Indians,  armed  with
rnulkets,  who  conducted  him  to  the  town,  where  the  colours
had  been  hoifted  the  night  before,  carrying  with  them  thofe
that  had  been  hoifted  upon  the  beach,  and  marching  with-
out any  military  regularity.  As  foon  as  he  arrived,  he  was
introduced  to  the  Raja,  or  King  of  the  iiland,  and  by  a  Por-
tuguefe  interpreter,  told  him,  that  the  fhip  was  a  man  of
war  belonging  to  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  and  that  fhe  had
many  fick  on  board,  for  whom  he  wanted  to  purchafe  fuch
refrefhments  as  the  iiland  afforded.  His  Majefty  replied,
that  he  was  willing  to  fupply  us  with  whatever  we  wanted,
but,  that  being  in  alliance  with  the  Dutch  Eaft  India  Com-
pany, he  was  not  at  liberty  to  trade  with  any  other  people,
without  having  firft  procured  their  content,  for  which,  how-
ever, he  faid  he  would  immediately  apply  to  a  Dutchman
who  belonged  to  the  company,  and  who  was  the  only  white
man  upon  the  ifland.  To  this  man,  who  refided  at  fome
diftance,  a  letter  was  immediately  difpatched,  acquainting
him  with  our  arrival  and  requeft:  in  the  mean  time,  Mr.
Gore  difpatched  a  meffenger  to  me,  with  an  account  of  his
fituation,  and  die  ftate  of  the  treaty.  In  about  three  hours,
the  Dutch  refident  anfwercd  the  letter  that  had  been  fent
him,  in  perfon:  he  proved  to  be  a  native  of  Saxony,  and  his
name  is  Johan  Chriftopher  Lange,  and  the  fame  perfon  whom
we  had  feen  on  horfeback  in  a  European  drefs :  he  behaved
with  great  civility  to  Mr.  Gore,  and  allured  him,  that  we
were  at  liberty  to  purchafe  of  the  natives  whatever  we
pleafed.  After  a  fhort  time,  he  expreffed  a  defirc  of  coming
on  board,  fo  did  the  king  alfo,  and  feveral  of  his  attendants :
Mr.  Gore  intimated  that  he  was  ready  to  attend  them,  but

they


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  673


September.
Tucfday  i3.


they  defired  that  two  of  our  people  might  be  left  afhore  as    n  »77°
hoflages,  and  in  this  alfo  they  were  indulged.

About  two  o'clock,  they  all  came  aboard  the  fhip,  and  our
dinner  being  ready,  they  accepted  our  invitation  to  partake
of  it:  I  expected  them  immediately  to  fit  down,  but  the  King
feemed  to  hefitate,  and  at  laft,  with  fome  confufion,  faid  he
did  not  imagine  that  we,  who  were  white  men,  would  fuffer
him,  who  was  of  a  different  colour,  to  fit  down  in  our  com-
pany ;  a  compliment  foon  removed  his  fcruples,  and  we  all
fat  down  together  with  great  cheerfulnefs  and  cordiality :
happily  we  were  at  nolofs  for  interpreters,  both  Dr.  Solandcr
and  Mr.  Sporing  underflanding  Dutch  enough  to  keep  up  a
converfation  with  Mr.  Lange,  and  feveral  of  the  feamen
were  able  to  converfe  with  fuch  of  the  natives  as  fpoke  Por-
tuguefe.  Our  dinner  happened  to  be  mutton,  and  the  King
exprefTed  a  defirc  of  having  an  Englifh  fheep;  we  had  but
one  left,  however  that  was  prefented  to  him :  the  facility
with  which  this  was  procured,  encouraged  him  to  afk  for
an  Englifh  dog,  and  Mr.  Banks  politely  gave  up  his  grey-
hound: Mr.  Lange  then  intimated  that  a  fpying-glafs  would
be  acceptable,  and  one  was  immediately  put  into  his  hand.
Our  guefls  then  told  us  that  the  ifland  abounded  with  buf-
faloes, fheep,  hogs,  and  fowls,  plenty  of  which  mould  be
driven  down  to  the  beach  the  next  day,  that  we  might  pur-
chafe  as  many  of  them  as  we  mould  think  fit:  this  put  us
all  into  high  fpirits,  and  the  liquor  circulated  rather  falter
than  either  the  Indians  or  the  Saxon  could  bear  ;  they  inti-
mated their  defire  to  go  away,  however,  before  they  were
quite  drunk,  and  were  received  upon  deck,  as  they  had
been  when  they  came  aboard,  by  the  marines  under  arms.
The  King  expreffed  a  curiofity  to  fee  them  exercife,  in  which
he  was  gratified,  and  they  fired  three  rounds :  he  looked  at
them  with  great  attention,  and  was  much  furprifed  at  their

Vol.  IT.  4  R  regularity


tf74  LIEUTENANT   COOK'S   VOYAGE

1770.       regularity  and  expedition,  efpecially  in  cocking  their  pieces  j

September*

« „ 1   the  firft  time  they  did  it,  he  flruck  the  fide  of  the  fhip  with  a

Hick  that  he  had  in  his  hand,  and  cried  out  with  great
vehemence,  that  all  the  locks  made  but  one  click.  They
were  difmhTed  with  many  prefents,  and  when  they  went
away  faluted  with  nine  guns :  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander
went  afhore  with  them ;  and  as  foon  as  they  put  off  they
gave  us  three  cheers.

Our  Gentlemen,  when  they  came  afhore,  walked  up  with
them  to  the  town,  which  confifts  of  many  houfes,  and  fome
of  them  are  large  ;  they  are  however  nothing  more  than  a
thatched  roof,  fupported  over  a  boarded  floor,  by  pillars
about  four  feet  high.  They  produced  fome  of  their  palm-
wine,  which  was  the  frefh  unfermented  juice  of  the  tree  ;
it  had  a  fweet,  but  not  a  difagreeable  tafte  ;  and  hopes  were
conceived  that  it  might  contribute  to  recover  our  fick  from
the  fcurvy.  Soon  after  it  was  dark,  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solan-
der returned  on  board.

Wednef.  19.  In  the  morning  of  the  1 9th,  I  went  afhore  with  Mr.  Banks,
and  feveral  of  the  officers  and  Gentlemen,  to  return  the
King's  vifit ;  but  my  chief  bufinefs  was  to  procure  fome  of
the  buffaloes,  fheep  and  fowls,  which  we  had  been  told
mould  be  driven  down  to  the  beach.  We  were  greatly  mor-
tified to  find  that  no  fteps  had  been  taken  to  fulfil  this  pro-
mife  ;  however,  we  proceeded  to  the  houfe  of  afTembly,
which  with  two  or  three  more  had  been  erected  by  the
Dutch  Eaft  India  company,  and  are  diflinguifhed  from  the
reft  by  two  pieces  of  wood  refembling  a  pair  of  cow's  horns,
one  of  which  is  fct  up  at  each  end  of  the  ridge  that  termi-
nates the  roof;  and  thefe  were  certainly  what  the  Indian  in-
tended to  reprefent  by  crofling  his  fingers,  though  our  Por-
tuguefe,  who  was  a  good  Catholic,  conftrucd  the  fign  into  a
4  crofs,


September.
Wednef.  i<j.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  67

crofs,  which  had  perfuaded  us  that  the  fettlement  belonged  '779
to  his  countrymen.  In  this  place  we  met  Mr.  Lange,  and
the  King,  whofe  name  was  A  Madocho  Lomi  Djara,  attended
by  many  of  the  principal  people.  We  told  them  that  we  had
in  the  boat  goods  of  various  kinds,  which  we  propofed  to
barter  for  fuch  refremments  as  they  would  give  us  in  ex-
change, and  defired  leave  to  bring  them  on  more  ;  which
being  granted,  they  were  brought  afliore  accordingly.  We
then  attempted  to  fettle  the  price  of  the  buffaloes,  fliecp,
hogs,  and  other  commodities  which  we  propofed  to  pur-
chafe,  and  for  which  we  were  to  pay  in  money  ;  but  as  foon
as  this  was  mentioned  Mr.  Lange  left  us,  telling  us  that
thefe  preliminaries  muft  be  fettled  with  the  natives :  he  faid,
however,  that  he  had  received  a  letter  from  the  Governor  of
Concordia  in  Timor,  the  purport  of  which  he  would  com-
municate to  us  when  he  returned.

As  the  morning  was  now  far  advanced,  and  we  were  very
unwilling  to  return  on  board  and  eat  fait  provifions,  when
fo  many  delicacies  furrounded  us  afhore,  we  petitioned  his
Majefty  for  liberty  to  purchafe  a  fmall  hog  and  fome  rice,
and  to  employ  his  fubjeets  to  drefs  them  for  us.  He  an-
fwered  very  gracioufly,  that  if  we  could  eat  victuals  drefled
by  his  fubjecls,  which  he  could  fcarcely  fuppofe,  he  would
<lo  himfelf  the  honour  of  entertaining  us.  We  cxpreffed  our
gratitude,  and  immediately  fent  on  board  for  liquors.

About  five  o'clock,  dinner  was  ready  j  it  was  ferved  in  fix
and  thirty  dimes,  or  rather  bafkets,  containing  alternately
rice  and  pork  ;  and  three  bowls  of  earthen  ware,  filled  with
the  liquor  in  which  the  pork  had  been  boiled :  thefe  were
ranged  upon  the  floor,  and  mats  laid  round  them  for  us  to
fit  upon.  We  were  then  conducted  by  turns  to  a  hole  in  the
floor,  near  which  flood  a  man  with  water  in  a  veflel,  made

4R  2  of


676  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.,  of  the  leaves  of  the  fan-palm,  who  affifted  us  in  wafliing
».ep-.-  _'f  our  hands.  When  this  was  done,  we  placed  ourfelves  round
Wednef.  19.  ^e  v^uaiS)  anj  waited  for  the  king.  As  he  did  not  come,
we  enquired  for  him,  and  were  told  that  the  cuftom  of  the
country  did  not  permit  the  perfon  who  gave  the  entertain-
ment to  fit  down  with  his  guefts ;  but  that,  if  we  fufpected
the  victuals  to  be  poifoned,  he  would  come  and  tafte  it.  We
immediately  declared  that  we  had  no  fuch  fufpicion,  and
defired  that  none  of  the  rituals  of  hofpitality  might  be  vio-
lated on  our  account.  The  prime  minifter  and  Mr.  Lange
were  of  our  party,  and  we  made  a  mod  luxurious  meal :  we
thought  the  pork  and  rice  excellent,  and  the  broth  not  to  be
defpifed;  but  the  fpoons,  which  were  made  of  leaves,  were  fo
fmall  that  few  of  us  had  patience  to  ufe  them.  After  dinner,
our  wine  palled  brifkly  about,  and  we  again  enquired  for
our  royal  hoft,  thinking  that  though  the  cuftom  of  his  coun-
try would  not  allow  him  to  eat  with  us,  he  might  at  leafl
fhare  in  the  jollity  of  our  bottle  ;  but  he  again  excufed  him-
felf,  faying,  that  the  mailer  of  a  feaft  Ihould  never  be  drunk,
which  there  was  no  certain  way  to  avoid  but  by  not  tailing
the  liquor.  We  did  not  however  drink  our  wine  where  we
had  eaten  our  victuals ;  but  as  foon  as  we  had  dined  made
room  for  the  feamen  and  fervants,  who  immediately  took
our  places  :  they  could  not  difpatch  all  that  we  had  left,  but
the  women  who  came  to  clear  away  the  bowls  and  bafkets,.
obliged  them  to  carry  away  with  them  what  they  had  not  eaten.
As  wine  generally  warms  and  opens  the  heart,  we  took  an
opportunity,  when  we  thought  its  influence  began  to  be  felt,
to  revive  the  fubject  of  the  buffaloes  and  fheep,  of  which
we  had  not  in  all  this  time  heard  a  fyllable,  though  they
were  to  have  been  brought  down  early  in  the  morning.  But
our  Sax"on  Dutchman,  with  great  phlegm,  began  to  commu-
nicate to  us  the  contents  of  the  letter  which  he  pretended  to

have


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  677

have  received  from  the  Governor  of  Concordia.     He  faid,      1770.
that  after  acquainting  him  that  a  vefTel  had  fleered  from  >  epte™ ier*/
thence  towards  the  ifland  where  we  were  now  afhore,  it  re-  Wcdnef- 19"
quired  him,  if  fuch  fhip  mould  apply  for  provifions  in  dif-
trefs,  to  relieve  her;  but  not  to  fuffer  her  to  flay  longer  than
was  abfolutely  necefTary,  nor  to  make  any  large  prcfents  to
the  inferior  people,  or  to  leave  any  with  thofe  of  fuperior
rank  to  be  afterwards  diflributed  among  them:  but  he  was
gracioufly  pleafed  to  add,  that  we  were  at  liberty  to  give  beads
and  other  trifles  in  exchange  for  petty  civilities,  and  palm-
wine.

It  was  the  general  opinion  that  this  letter  was  a  fiction  ;
that  the  prohibitory  orders  were  feigned  with  a  view  to  get
money  from  us  for  breaking  them  ;  and  tha.t  by  precluding
our  liberality  to  the  natives,  this  man  hoped  more  eafily  to
turn  it  into  another  channel.

In  the  evening,  we  received  intelligence  from  our  trading-
place  that  no  buffaloes  or  hogs  had  been  brought  down,  and
only  a  few  fheep,  which  had  been  taken  away  before  our
people,  who  had  fent  for  money,  could  procure  it.  Some
fowls  however  had  been  bought,  and  a  large  quantity  of  a
kind  of  fyrup  made  of  the  juice  of  the  palm  tree,  which,
though  infinitely  fuperior  to  molafies  or  treacle,  fold  at  a
very  low  price.  We  complained  of  our  difappointment  to
Mr.  Lange,  who  had  now  another  fubterfuge ;  he  faid,  that
if  we  had  gone  down  to  the  beach  ourfelves,  we  might  have
purchafed  what  we  pleafed ;  but  that  the  natives  were  afraid
to  take  money  of  our  people,  left  it  mould  be  counterfeit
We  could  not  but  feel  fome  indignation  againfl  a  man  who
had  concealed  this,  being  true  ;  or  alleged  it,  being  falfe,
I  ftarted  up,  however,  and  went  immediately  to  the  beach,
but  no  cattle  or  fheep  were  to  be  feen,  nor  were  any  at  hand
7  to


673  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

„  l77°;       to  be  produced.    While  I  was  gone,  Lange,  who  knew  well

September.  *  °  °

« — -v— _*  enough  that  1  fhould  fucceed  no  better  than  my  people,  told
'  '9*  Mr.  Banks  that  the  natives  were  difpleafed  at  our  not  having
offered  them  gold  for  their  flock ;  and  that  if  gold  was  not
offered,  nothing  would  be  bought.  Mr.  Banks  did  not  think
it  worth  his  while  to  reply,  but  foon  after  rofe  up,  and  we
all  returned  on  board,  very  much  diffatisfied  with  the  ifTue
of  our  negociations.  During  the  courfe  of  the  day,  the
King  had  prom i fed  that  fome  cattle  and  fheep  mould  be
brought  down  in  the  morning,  and  had  given  a  reafon  for
our  difappointment  fomewhat  more  plaufible  ;  he  faid  that
the  buffaloes  were  far  up  the  country,  and  that  there  had
not  been  time  to  bring  them  down  to  the  beach.

Thurfday  20.  The  next  morning  we  went  afhore  again :  Dr.  Solander  went
up  to  the  town  to  fpeak  to  Lange,  and  I  remained  upon  the
beach,  to  fee  what  could  be  done  in  the  purchafe  of  provi-
fions.  I  found  here  an  old  Indian,  who,  as  he  appeared  to
have  fome  authority,  we  had  among  ourfelves  called  the
Prime  Minifler ;  to  engage  this  man  in  our  intereft  I  pre-
fented  him  with  a  fpying-glafs,  but  I  faw  nothing  at  mar-
ket except  one  fmall  buffalo.  I  enquired  the  price  of  it,  and
was  told  five  guineas :  this  was  twice  as  much  as  it  was
worth ;  however,  I  offered  three,  which  I  could  perceive  the
man  who  treated  with  me  thought  a  good  price ;  but  he  faid
that  he  muft  acquaint  the  King  with  what  I  had  offered  be-
fore he  could  take  k.  A  meflenger  was  immediately  dif-
patched  to  his  Majefty,  who  foon  returned,  and  faid,  that  the
buffalo  would  not  be  fold  for  any  thing  lefs  than  five  guineas.
This  price  I  abfolutely  refufed  to  give  ;  and  another  meflen-
ger was  fent  away  with  an  account  of  my  refufal :  this  mef-
fenger  was  longer  abfent  than  the  other,  and  while  I  was
waiting  for  his  return  I  faw,  to  my  great  aftonifhment,  Dr.

Solander


ROUND    THE    WORLD,  679

Solan der  coming  from  the  town,  followed  by  above  a  hun-      1770.
dred  men,  fome  armed  with  mufquets  and  fome  with  Ian-   *^-.-  _j
ces.    When  I  enquired  the  meaning  of  this  hoftile  appear-      ur  da>r  2°*
ance,  the  Doctor  told  me,  that  Mr.  Lange  had  interpreted  to
him  a  meflage  from  the  King,  purporting  that  the  people
would  not  trade  with  us,  becaufe  we  had  refufed  to  give
them  more  than  half  the  value  of  what  they  had  to  fell;  and
that  we  fTiould  not  be  permitted  to  trade  upon  any  terms
longer  than  this  day.     Befides  the  officers  who  commanded
the  party,  there  came  with  it  a  man  who  was  born  at  Timor,
of  Portuguefe  parents,  and  who,  as  we  afterwards  difco-
vered,  was  a  kind  of  colleague  to  the  Dutch  factor;  by  this
man  what  they  pretended  to  be  the  King's  order  was  deli-
vered to  me,  of  the  fame  purport  with  that  which  Dr.  So-
lander  had  received  from  Lange.     We  were  all  clearly  of
opinion  that  this  was  a  mere  artifice  of  the  factors  to  extort
money  from  us,  for  which  we  had  been  prepared  by  the
account  of  a  letter  from  Concordia ;  and  while  we  were  he-
fitating  what  flep  to  take,  the  Portuguefe,  that  he  might  the
fooner  accomplifh  his  purpofe,   began  to   drive  away  the
people  who  had  brought  down  poultry  and  fyrup,  and  others
that  were  now  coming  in  with  buffaloes  and  fheep.     At  this
time.  I  glanced  my  eye  upon  the  old  man  whom  I  had  com-
plimented  in  the.    morning  with    the  fpying-glafs,    and  I
thought,  by  his  looks,  that  he  did  not  heartily  approve  of
what  was  doing;  I  therefore  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  pre-
fented  him  with  an  old  broad  fword.     This  inftantly  turned
the  fcale  in  our  favour ;  he  received  the  fword  with  a  tran-
fport  of  joy,  and  flourifhing  it  over  the  bufy  Portuguefe,
who  crouched  like  a  fox  to  a  lion,  he  made  him,  and  the
officer  who  commanded  the  party,  fit  down  upon  the  ground
behind  him  :    the  people,  who,  whatever  were   the  crafty
pretences  of  thefe  iniquitous  factors  for  a  Dutch  company,

were


•6So  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

'77°-  were  eager  to  fupply  us  with  whatever  we  wanted,  and
u!!^L!!j  feemed  alfo  to  be  more  defirous  of  goods  than  money,  in-
:'  ay30'  ilantly  improved  the  advantage  that  had  been  procured
them,  and  the  market  was  flocked  almofl  in  an  inftarit.  To
eflablifh  a  trade  for  buffaloes,  however,  which  I  mofl  wanted,
I  found  it  necefTary  to  give  ten  guineas  for  two,  one  of
which  weighed  no  more  than  a  hundred  and  fixty  pounds  ;
but  I  bought  feven  more  much  cheaper,  and  might  after-
wards have  purchafed  as  many  as  I  pleafed  almofl  upon  my
•own  terms,  for  they  were  now  driven  down  to  the  water-
fide  in  herds.  In  the  firfl  two  that  I  bought  fo  dear,  Lange
had  certainly  a  fhare,  and  it  was  in  hopes  to  obtain  part  of
the  price  of  others,  that  he  had  pretended  we  mufl  pay  for
them  in  gold.  The  natives  however  fold  what  they  after-
wards brought  down  much  to  their  fatisfaction,  without  pay-
ing part  of  the  price  to  him  as  a  reward  for  exacting  money
from  us,  Mofl  of  the  buffaloes  that  we  bought,  after  our
friend,  the  Prime  Minifter,  had  procured  us  a  fair  market,
were  fold  for  a  mufquet  apiece,  and  at  this  price  we  might
have  bought  as  many  as  would  have  freighted  our  fhip.

The  refrcfhments  which  we  procured  here,  confifled  of
nine  buffaloes,  fix  fhcep,  three  hogs,  thirty  dozen  of  fowls,
a  few  limes,  and  fome  cocoa-nuts ;  many  dozen  of  eggs,
half  of  which  however  proved  to  be  rotten;  a  little  garlic,
and  feveral  hundred  gallons  of  palm-fyrup.


CHAP.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  <$8i


CHAP.     XL

A  particular  Description  of  the  IJland  of  Savu,  its  Product
and  Inhabitants,  with  a  Specimen  of  their  La?iguage.

THIS  ifland  is  called  by  the  natives  Savu;  the  middle  of  1770;
it  lies  in  about  the  latitude  io°  35'  S.,  longitude  2370  ,vep_e^^,
30'  W.  j  and  has  in  general  been  fo  little  known  that  I  never
faw  a  map  or  chart  in  which  it  is  clearly  or  accurately  laid
down.  I  have  feen  a  very  old  one,  in  which  it  is  called  Sou,
and  confounded  with  Sandel  Bofch.  Rumphius  mentions
an  ifland  by  the  name  of  Saow ;  and  he  alfo  fays  that  it  is  the
fame  which  the  Dutch  call  Sandel  Bofch :  but  neither  is  this
ifland,  nor  Timor,  nor  Rotte,  nor  indeed  any  one  of  the  iflands
that  we  have  feen  in  thefe  feas,  placed  within  a  reafonable
diftance  of  its  true  fituation.  It  is  about  eight  leagues  long
from  eaft  to'weft ;  but  what  is  its  breadth,  I  do  not  know,  as
I  faw  only  the  north  fide.  The  harbour  in  which  we  lay  is
called  Seba,  from  the  diflridl  in  which  it  lies :  it  is  on  the
north  weft  fide  of  the  ifland,  and  well  fheltered  from  the
fouth  weft  trade  wind,  but  it  lies  open  to  the  north  weft.  We
were  told,  that  there  were  two  other  bays  where  mips  might
anchor ;  that  the  beft,  called  Timo,  was  on  the  fouth  weft
fide  of  the  fouth  eaft  point :  of  the  third  we  learnt  neither
the  name  nor  fituation.  The  fea-coaft,  in  general,  is  low ;
but  in  the  middle  of  the  ifland  there  are  hills  of  a  confide-
rable  height.  We  were  upon  the  coaft  at  the  latter  end  of
the  dry  feafon,  when  there  had  been  no  rain  for  feven
months ;  and  we  were  told  that  when  the  dry  feafon  conti-
Vol.  II.  4  S  nues


453*  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1770-  nues  fo  long,  there  is  no  running  flream  of  frefh.  water
L^'i  upon  the  whole  ifland,  but  only  fraall  fprings,  which  are
at  a  confiderable  diflance  from  the  fea-fide :  yet  nothing
can  be  imagined  fo  beautiful  as  the  profpect  of  the  coun-
try from  the  ihip.  The  level  ground  next  to  the  fea-
fide  was  covered"  with  cocoa-nut  trees,  and  a  kind  of  palm
called  Arecas  ,  and  beyond  them  the  hills,  which  rofe  in  a
gentle  and  regular  afcent,  were  richly  clothed,  quite  to  the
fummit,  with  plantations  of  the  fan  palm,  forming  an  al-
tnoft  impenetrable  grove.  How  much  even  this  profpecl
mull  be  improved,  when  every  foot  of  ground  between  the
trees  is  covered  with  verdure,  by  maize,  and  millet  and  in-
dico,  can  fcarcely  be  conceived  but  by  a  powerful  imagina-
tion, not  unacquainted  with  the  ftatelinefs  and  beauty  of  the
trees  that  adorn  this  part  of  the  earth.  The  dry  feafon  com-
mences in  March  or  April,  and  ends  in  October  or  November.

The  principal  trees  of  this  iiland,  are  the  fan-palm,  the
cocoa-nut,   tamarind,   limes,   oranges,   and  mangoes  ;    the
other  vegetable  productions  are  maize,  Guinea  corn,  rice,
millet,  callevances,   and  water-melons.     We  faw  alfo  one
fugar-cane,  and  a  few  kinds  of  European  garden-fluff;  par-
ticularly cellery,  marjoram,  fennel,  and  garlic.   For  the  fup-
ply  of  luxury,  it  has  betele,  areca,  tobacco,  cotton,  indico,
and   a  fmall  quantity  of   cinnamon,   which    feems   to  be
planted  here  only  for  cufiofity  ;   and  indeed  we  doubted
whether  it  was  the  genuine  plant,  knowing  that  the  Dutch
are  very  careful  not  to  trufl  the  fpices  out  of  their  proper
iflands.     There  are  however  feveral  kinds  of  fruit,  befides
thofe  which  have  been  already  mentioned  ;  particularly  the
fweet  fop,  which  is  well  known  to  the  Weft  Indians,  and  a
fmall  oval  fruit,  called  the  Blimbi,  both  of  which  grow  upon
trees.    The  blimbi  is  about  three  or  four  inches  long,  and

in


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  683

in  the  middle  about  as  thick  as  a  man's  finger,  tapering  to-  '770.
■wards  each  end  :  it  is  covered  with  a  very  thin  fkin  of  a  light  ,' ep  e™  er',
green  colour,  and  in  the  infide  are  a  few  feeds  difpofed  in
the  form  of  a  liar :  its  flavour  is  a  light,  clean,  pleafant  acid,
but  it  cannot  be  eaten  raw ;  it  is  faid  to  be  excellent  as  a
pickle ;  and  ftewed,  it  made  a  moft  agreeable  four  fauce  to
our  boiled  difhes.

The  tame  animals  are  buffaloes,  fheep,  goats,  hogs,  fowls,
pigeons,  horfes,  afles,  dogs  and  cats ;  and  of  all  thefe  there
is  great  plenty.  The  buffaloes  differ  very  confiderably  from
the  horned  cattle  of  Europe  in  feveral  particulars  ;  their  ears
are  much  larger,  their  fkins  are  almoft  without  hair,  their
horns  are  curved  towards  each  other,  but  together  bend  di-
rectly backwards,  and  they  have  no  dewlaps.  We  faw  fe-
veral that  were  as  \>\g  as  a  well  grown  European  ox,  and
there  rauft  be  fome  much  larger ;  for  Mr.  Banks  faw  a  pair
of  horns  which  meafured  from  tip  to  tip  three  feet  nine
inches  and  an  half,  acrofs  their  widefl  diameter  four  feet
one  inch  and  an  half,  and  in  the  whole  fweep  of  their  femi-
circle  in  front  feven  feet  fix  inches  and  a  half.  It  mufl
however  be  obferved,  that  a  buffalo  here  of  any  given  fizc,
does  not  weigh  above  half  as  much  as  an  ox  of  the  fame
fize  in  England :  thofe  that  we  gueffed  to  weigh  four  hun-
dred weight  did  not  weigh  more  than  two  hundred  and
fifty ;  the  reafon  is,  that  fo  late  in  the  dry  feafon  the  bones
are  very  thinly  covered  with  flefh:  there  is  not  an  ounce  of
fat  in  a  whole  carcafs,  and  the  flanks  are  literally  nothing
but  fkin  and  bone :  the  flefh  however  is  well  tailed  and
juicy,  and  I  fuppofe  better  than  the  flefli  of  an  Englifli
ox  would  be  if  he  was  to  flarve  in  this  fun-burnt  country.

The  horfes  are  from  eleven  to  twelve  hands  high,  but
though  they  are  fmall,  they  are  fpirited  and  nimble,  efpe-

4  S  2  cially


684:  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°-  cially  in  pacing,  which  is  their  common  ftep:  the  inhabi-
^ptem^en  tantg  generally  ride  them  without  a  faddle,  and  with  no
better  bridle  than  a  halter.  The  fheep  are  of  the  kind
which  in  England  are  called  Bengal  fheep,  and  differ  from
ours  in  many  particulars.  They  are  covered  with  hair  in-
flead  of  wool,  their  ears  are  very  large,  and  hang  down
under  their  horns,  and  their  nofes  are  arched ;  they  are
thought  to  have  a  general  refemblance  to  a  goat,  and  for
that  reafon  are  frequently  called  cabritos:  their  flefh  we
thought  the  woifl  mutton  we  had  ever  eaten,  being  as  lean
as  that  of  the  buffalo's,  and  without  flavour.  The  hogs,
however,  were  fome  of  the  fattefl  we  had  ever  feen,  though,
as  we  were  told,  their  principal  food  is  the  outfide  hufks  of
rice,  and  the  palm  fyrup  diffolved  in  water.  The  fowls  are
chiefly  of  the  game  breed,  and  large,  but  the  eggs  are  re-
markably fmall.

Of  the  fifh  which  the  fea  produces  here,  we  know  but
little :  turtles  are  fometimes  found  upon  the  coaft,  and  are
by  thefe  people,  as  well  as  all  others,  confidered  as  a  dainty.

The  people  are  rather  under,  than  over  the  middling  fize  ;
the  women  efpccially  are  remarkably  fhort  and  fquat  built :
their  complexion  is  a  dark  brown,  and  their  hair  univerfally
black  and  lank.  We  faw  no  difference  in  the  colour  of  rich
and  poor,  though  in  the  South  Sea  iflands  thofe  that  were
expoled  to  the  weather  were  almoft  as  brown  as  the  New
Hollanders,  and  the  better  fort  nearly  as  fair  as  the  natives
of  Europe.  The  men  are  in  general  well-made,  vigorous,
and  active,  and  have  a  greater  variety  in  the  make  and  dif-
pofition  of  their  features  than  ufual ;  the  countenances  of  the
women,  on  the  contrary,  are  all  alike.

The  men  faften  their  hair  up  to  the  top  of  their  heads
with  a  comb,  the  women  tie  it  behind  in  a  club,  which  is

very


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  68^

very  far  from  becoming.    Both  fexes  eradicate  the  hair  from       1770.
under  the  arm,  and  the  men  do  the  fame  by  their  beards,    t"epte"ue^,
for  which  purpofe,  the  better  fort  always  carry  a  pair  of
filver  pincers  hanging  by  a  firing  round  their  necks ;  fome
however  fuffer  a  very  little  hair  to  remain  upon  their  upper,
lips,  but  this  is  always  keptfhort.

The  drefs  of  both  fexes  confifts  of  cotton  cloth,  which
being  died  blue  in  the  yarn,  and  not  uniformly  of  the  fame
fhade,  is  in  clouds  or  waves  of  that  colour,  and  even  in  our
eye  had  not  an  inelegant  appearance.  This  cloth  they  ma-
nufacture themfelves,  and  two  pieces,  each  about  two  yards
long,  and  a  yard  and  a  half  wide,  make  a  drefs:  one  of
them  is  worn  round  the  middle,  and  the  other  covers  the
upper  part  of  the  body :  the  lower  edge  of  the  piece  that
goes  round  the  middle,  the  men  draw  pretty  tight  juft  below
the  fork,  the  upper  edge  of  it  is  left  loofe,  fo  as  to  form  a
kind  of  hollow  belt,  which  ferves  them  as  a  pocket  to  carry
their  knives,  and  other  little  implements  which  it  is  conve-
nient to  have  about  them.  The  other  piece  of  cloth  is  palTed
through  this  girdle  behind,  and  one  end  of  it  being  brought
over  the  left  fhoulder,  and  the  other  over  the  right,  they
fall  down  over  the  bread,  and  are  tucked  into  the  girdle
before,  fo  that  by  opening  or  clofing  the  plaits,  they  can
cover  more  or  lefs  of  their  bodies  as  they  pleafe  ;  the  arms,
legs,  and  feet  are  always  naked.  The  difference  between
the  drefs  of  the  two  fexes  confifts  principally  in  the  manner
of  wearing  the  waift-piece,  for  the  women,  inilead  of  draw-
ing the  lower  edge  tight,  and  leaving  the  upper  edge  loofe
for  a  pocket,  draw  the  upper  edge  tight,  and  let  the  lower
edge  fall  as  low  as  the  knees,  fo  as  to  form  a  petticoat;  the
body-piece,  inflead  of  being  palled  through  the  girdle,  is
fattened  under  the  arms,  and  crofs  the  bread,  with  the  utmoft
decency,    I  have  already  obferved,  that  the  men  fallen  the

hair


686  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°-  hair  upon  the  top  of  the  head,  and  the  women  tie  it  in  a
■_pe.-  .'•  club  behind,  but  there  is  another  difference  in  the  head-
drefs,  by  which  the  fexes  are  diftinguilhed :  the  women
wear  nothing  as  a  iuccedaneum  for  a  cap,  but  the  men  con-
ftantly  wrap  fornething  round  their  heads  in  the  manner  of"
a  fillet ;  it  is  fmall,  but  generally  of  the  fined  materials  that
can  be  procured :  we  faw  fome  who  applied  filk  handker-
chiefs to  this  purpofe,  and  others  that  wore  fine  cotton,  or
muflin,  in  the  manner  of  a  fmall  turban.

Thefe  people  bore  their  tefcimony  that  the  love  of  finery  is
a  univerfal  paflion,  for  their  ornaments  were  very  nume-
rous. Some  of  the  better  fort  wore  chains  of  gold  round
their  necks,  but  they  were  made  of  plaited  wire,  and  con-
fequently  were  light  and  of  little  value  ;  others  had  rings,
which  were  fo  much  worn  that  they  feemed  to  have  defcend-
ed  through  many  generations ;  and  one  perfon  had  a  filver-
headed  cane,  marked  with  a  kind  of  cypher,  confiding  of
the  Roman  letters  V,  O,  C,  and  therefore  probably  a  prefent
from  the  Dutch  Eafl:  India  Company,  whofe  mark  it  is :  they
have  alfo  ornaments  made  of  beads,  which  fome  wear  round
their  necks  as  a  foiitaire,  and  others,  as  bracelets,  upon
their  wrifls :  thefe  are  common  to  both  fexes,  but  the  women
have  befidcs,  firings  or  girdles  of  beads,  which  they  wear
round  their  waifls,  and  which  ferve  to  keep  up  their  petti-
coat. Both  fexes  had  their  ears  bored,  nor  was  there  a  fingle
exception  that  fell  under  our  notice,  yet  we  never  faw  an  or-
nament in  any  of  them  ;  we  never  indeed  faw  either  man  or
woman  in  any  thing  but  what  appeared  to  be  their  ordinary
drefs,  except  the  King  and  his  minifter,  who  in  general
wore  a  kind  of  night-gown  of  coarfe  chintz,  and  one  of
whom  once  received  us  in  a  black  robe,  which  appeared  to
be  made  of  what  is  called  prince's  fluff.  We  faw  fome  boys,
about  twelve  or  fourteen  years  old,  who  had  fpiral  circles

of


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  63j

of  thick  brafs  wire  pafTed  three  or  four  times  round  their       r77o.
arms,    above   the    elbow,    and   fome  men  wore   rings  of   •w-Y_^J
ivory,  two  inches  in  breadth,   and  above  an  inch  in  thick-
nefs,  upon  the  fame  part  of  the  arm :  thefe,  we  were  told,
were  the  fons  of  the  Rajas,  or  Chiefs,  who  wore  thefe  cum-
brous ornaments  as  badges  of  their  high  birth,

Almofl  all  the  men  had  their  names  traced  upon  their
arms,  in  indelible  characters  of  a  black  colour,  and  the
women  had  a  fquare  ornament  of  flourifhed  lines,  impreffed
in  the  fame  manner,  jufl  under  the  bend  of  the  elbow.  We
were  ftruck  with  the  fimilitude  between  thefe  marks,  and
thofe  made  by  tattowing  in  the  South  Sea  iflands,  and  upon
enquiring  into  its  origin,  we  learnt  that  it  had  been  praclifed
by  the  natives  long  before. any  Europeans  came  among
them ;  and  that  in  the  neighbouring  iflands  the  inhabitants
were  marked  with  circles  upon  their  necks  and  breads.  The
univerfality  of  this  praftice,  which  prevails  among  favages
in  all  parts  of  the  world,  from  the  remotefl  limits  of  North
America,  to  the  iflands  in  the  South  Seas,  and  which  pro-
bably differs  but  little  from  the  method  of  ftaining  the  body
that  was  in  ufe  among  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Britain,  is
a  curious  fubject  of  fpeculation  f.

The  houfes  of  Savu  are  all  built  upon  the  fame  plan,  and
differ  only  in  fize,  being  large  in  proportion  to  the  rank  and

f  In  the  account  which  Mr.  Boflu  has  given  of  fome  Indians  who  inhabit  the  bankg
of  theAkanza,  a  river  of  North  America,  which  rifes  in  New  Mexico,  and  falls  into
the  Mifliflippi,  he  relates  the  following  incident:  "The  Akanzas,  fays  he,  have
adopted  me,  and  as  a  mark  of  my  privilege,  have  imprinted  the  figure  of  a  roe-buck
upon  my  thigh,  which  was  done  in  this  manner  :  an  Indian  having  burnt  fome  firaw,
diluted  the  allies  with  water,  and  with  this  mixture,  drew  the  figure  upon  my  ik'-ri  ;  he
then  retraced  it,  by  pricking  the  lines  with  needles,  fo  as  at  every  puncture  jufl  to  draw
the  blood,  and  the  blood  mixing  with  the  alhes  of  the  flraw,  forms  a  figure  which  cart-
never  be  effaced."     See  Travels  through  Louifiana,   vol.  i.  p.  107.

3  riches


688  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  riches  of  the  proprietor.  Some  are  four  hundred  feet  long,
^sptem  er.^  ^^  fome  are  not  more  than  twenty :  they  are  all  raifed  upon
polls,  or  piles,  about  four  feet  high,  one  end  of  which  is
driven  into  the  ground,  and  upon  the  other  end  is  laid  a
fubftantial  floor  of  wood,  fo  that  there  is  a  vacant  fpace  of
four  feet  between  the  floor  of  the  houfe  and  the  ground.
Upon  this  floor  are  placed  other  pods  or  pillars,  that  fupport
a  roof  of  Hoping  fides,  which  meet  in  a  ridge  at  the  top
like  thofe  of  our  barns:  the  eaves  of  this  roof,  which  is
thatched  with  palm  leaves,  reach  within  two  feet  of  the
floor,  and  over-hang  it  as  much:  the  fpace  within  is  gene-
rally divided  lengthwife  into  three  equal  parts ;  the  middle
part,  or  center,  is  inclofed  by  a  partition  of  four  fides,  reach-
ing about  fix  feet  above  the  floor,  and  one  or  two  fmall
rooms  are  alfo  fometimes  taken  off  from  the  fides,  the  reft
of  the  fpace  under  the  roof  is  open,  fo  as  freely  to  admit  the
air  and  the  light :  the  particular  ufes  of  thefe  different  apart-
ments, our  fhort  flay  would  not  permit  us  to  learn,  except
that  the  clofe  room  in  the  center  was  appropriated  to  the
women.

The  food  of  thefe  people  confifts  of  every  tame  animal  in,
the  country,  of  which  the  hog  holds  the  firft  place  in  their
eflimation,  and  the  horfe  the  fecond  ;  next  to  the  horfe  is  the
buffalo,  next  to  the  buffalo  their  poultry,  and  they  prefer
dogs  and  cats  to  fheep  and  goats.  They  are  not  fond  of  fifli,
and,  I  believe,  it  is  never  eaten  but  by  the  poor  people,  nor
by  them,  except  when  their  duty  or  bufinefs  requires  them
to  be  upon  the  beach,  and  then  every  man  is  furnilhed  with
a  light  calling  net,  which  is  girt  round  him,  and  makes
part  of  his  drefs ;  and  with  this  he  takes  any  fmall  filh  which
happen  to  come  in  his  way.

The  aefculent  vegetables  and  fruits  have  been  mentioned

already,  but  the  fan-palm  requires  more  particular  notice,

9  f°r


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  689

for  at  certain  times  it  is  a  fuccedaneum  for  all  other  food  I77°-
both  to  man  and  beaft.  A  kind  of  wine,  called  toddy,  is  ,
procured  from  this  tree,  by  cutting  the  buds  which  are  to
produce  flowers,  foon  after  their  appearance,  and  tying
under  them  fmall  bafkets,  made  of  the  leaves,  which  are  fo
clofe  as  to  hold  liquids  without  leaking.  The  juice  which
trickles  into  thefe  veffels,  is  collected  by  perfons  who  climb
the  trees  for  that  purpofe,  morning  and  evening,  and  is  the
common  drink  of  every  individual  upon  the  ifland ;  yet  a
much  greater  quantity  is  drawn  off  than  is  confumed  in  this
ufe,  and  of  the  furplus  they  make  both  a  fyrup  and  coarfe
fugar.  The  liquor  is  called  dua,  or  dime,  and  both  the  fyrup
and  fugar,  gula.  The  fyrup  is  prepared  by  boiling  the  liquor
down  in  pots  of  earthen  ware,  till  it  is  fufficiently  infpiffated;
it  is  not  unlike  treacle  in  appearance,  but  is  fomewhat
thicker,  and  has  a  much  more  agreeable  tafte:  the  fugar  is
of  a  reddifh  brown,  perhaps  the  fame  with  the  Jugata  fugar
upon  the  continent  of  India,  and  it  was  more  agreeable  to
our  palates  than  any  cane  fugar,  unrefined,  that  we  had
ever  tafted.  We  were  at  firft  afraid  that  the  fyrup,  of  which
fome  of  our  people  eat  very  great  quantities,  would  have
brought  on  fluxes,  but  its  aperient  quality  was  fo  very  flight
that  what  effect  it  produced  was  rather  falutary  than  hurt-
ful. I  have  already  obferved,  that  it  is  given  with  the  hufks
of  rice  to  the  hogs,  and  that  they  grow  enormouily  fat  with-
out taking  any  other  food :  we  were  told  alfo,  that  this  fyrup
is  ufed  to  fatten  their  dogs  and  their  fowls,  and  that  the  in-
habitants themfelves  have  fubfifted  upon  this  alone  for
feveral  months,  when  other  crops  have  failed,  and  animal
food  has  been  fcarce.  The  leaves  of  this  tree  are  alfo  put  to
various  ufes,  they  thatch  houfes,  and  make  bafkets,  cups,
umbrellas,  and  tobacco-pi  pes.  The  fruit  is  leaft  efteemed,
and  as  the  bloffoms  are  wounded  for  the  tuac  or  toddy,  there
Vol.  II.  4  T  is


69o  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770-  is  not  much  of  it:  it  is  about  as  big  as  a  large  turnip,  and
^ep^em  er^  covere(jj  y^e  tiie  cocoa-nut,  with  a  fibrous  coat,  under
which  are  three  kernels,  that  mull  be  eaten  before  they  are
ripe,  for  afterwards  they  become  fo  hard  that  they  cannot  be
chewed ;  in  their  eatable  ftate  they  tafte  not  unlike  a  green
cocoa-nut,  and,  like  them,  probably  they  yield  a  nutriment
that  is  watry  and  unfubftantial.

The  common  method  of  dremng  food  here  is  by  boiling,
and  as  fire-wood  is  very  fcarce,  and  the  inhabitants  have  no
other  fuel,  they  make  ufe  of  a  contrivance  to  fave  it,  that  is
not  wholly  unknown  in  Europe,  but  is  feldom  practifed  ex-
cept in  camps.  They  dig  a  hollow  under  ground,  in  a  hori-
zontal direction,  like  a  rabbit  burrow,  about  two  yards  long,
and  opening  into  a  hole  at  each  end,  one  of  which  is  large
and  the  other  fmall:  by  the  large  hole  the  fire  is  put  in,  and
the  fmall  one  ferves  for  a  draught.  The  earth  over  this
burrow  is  perforated  by  circular  holes,  which  communicate
with  the  cavity  below ;  and  in  thefe  holes  are  fet  earthen
pots,  generally  about  three  to  each  fire,  which  are  large  in
the  middle,  and  taper  towards  the  bottom,  fo  that  the  lire
acts  upon  a  large  part  of  their  furface.  Each  of  thefe  pots
generally  contains  about  eight  or  ten  gallons,  and  it  is  fur-
prifing  to  fee  with  how  fmall  a  quantity  of  fire  they  may  be
kept  boiling ;  a  palm  leaf,  or  a  dry  ftalk,  thruft  in  now  and
then*  is  fufficient:  in  this  manner  they  boil  all  their  victuals,
and  make  all  their  fyrup  and  fugar.  It  appears  by  Frazier's
account  of  his  voyage  to  the  South  Sea,  that  the  Peruvian
Indians  have  a  contrivance  of  the  fame  kind,  and  perhaps  it
might  be  adopted  with  advantage  by  the  poor  people  even  of
this  country,  where  fuel  is  very  dear.

Both  fexes  are  enflaved  by  the  hateful  and  pernicious  habit
of  chewing  beetle  and  areca,  which  they  contract  even  while

they


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


691


they  are  children,  and  practife  incelTantly  from  morning  till       1770.
night.     With  thefe  they  always  mix  a  kind  of  white  lime,   ,  cPtembe^
made  of  coral  ftone  and  fhells,  and  frequently  a  fmall  quan-
tity of  tobacco,  fo  that  their  mouths  are  difguftful  in  the
higheft  degree  both  to  the  fmell  and  the  fight:  the  tobacco
taints  their  breath,  and  the  beetle  and  lime  make  the  teeth
not  only  as  black  as  charcoal,  but  as  rotten  too.     I  have  feen
men  between  twenty  and  thirty,  whofe  fore  teeth  have  been
confumed  almoft  down  to  the  gums,  though  no  two  of  them
were  exactly  of  the  fame  length  or  thicknefs,  but  irregularly
corroded  like  iron  by  ruft.     This  lofs  of  teeth  is,  I  think,  by
all  who  have  written  upon  the  fubject,  imputed  to  the  tough
and  ftringy  coat  of  the  areca  nut ;  but  I  impute  it  wholly  t<&
the  lime :  they  are  not  loofened,  or  broken,  or  forced  out,  as
might  be  expected  if  they  were  injured  by  the  continual
chewing  of  hard  and  rough  fubftances,  but  they  are  gra-
dually wafted  like  metals  that  are  expofed  to  the  action  of
powerful  acids ;  the  flumps  always  adhering  firmly  to  the
focket  in  the  jaw,  when  there  is  no  part  of  the  tooth  above
the  gums :  and  poffibly  thofe  who  fuppofe  that  fugar  has  a
bad  effect  upon  the  teeth  of  Europeans,  may  not  be  miftaken,
for  it  is  well  known  that  refined  loaf  fugar  contains  a  con-
fiderable  quantity  of  lime ;  and  he  that  doubts  whether  lime
will  deftroy  bone  of  any  kind,  may  eafily  afcertain  the  fact
by  experiment.

If  the  people  here  are  at  any  time  without  this  odious
mouthful,  they  are  fmoking.  This  operation  they  perform
by  rolling  up  a  fmall  quantity  of  tobacco,  and  putting  it  into
one  end  of  a  tube  about  fix  inches  long,  and  as  thick  as  a
goofe  quill,  which  they  make  of  a  palm  leaf.  As  the  quan-
tity of  tobacco  in  thefe  pipes  is  very  fmall,  the  effect  of  it  is
increafltd,.  efpecially  among  the  women,  by  fwallowing  the
•fmoke.

4  T  2  When


695  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

I77°«    ,      When  the  natives  of  this  ifland  were  firft  formed  into  a
^  eptem  er^    ^.^  {qq^j^    jg  nGt  certainly  known,   but  at  prefent  it  is
divided    into    five    principalities    or  nigrees:    Laai,    Seba,
Regeeua,  Timo,  and  Massara,   each  of  which  is  governed
by  its  refpective  Raja  or  King.     The  Raja  of  Seba,  the  prin-
cipality in  which  we  were  afhore,  feemed  to  have  great  au-
thority, without  much  external  parade  or  fhow,   or  much
appearance  of  perfonal  refpect.    He  was  about  five  and  thirty
years  of  age,  and  the  fatteft  man  we  faw  upon  the  whole
ifland :  he  appeared  to  be  of  a  dull  phlegmatic  difpofition,
and  to  be  directed  almoft  implicitly,  by  the  old  man  who,,
upon  my  prefenting  him  with  a  fword,  had  procured  us  a
fair  market,  in  fpight  of  the  craft  and  avarice  of  the  Dutch
factors.     The  name  of  this  perfon  was  Mannu  Djarme,  and
it  may  reafonably  be  fuppofed  that  he  was  a  man  of  uncom-
mon integrity  and  abilities,  as,  notwithflanding  his  pofTef-
iion  of  power  in  the  character  of  a  favourite,  he  was  beloved
by  the  whole  principality.     If  any  difference  arifes  among
the  people,  it  is  fettled  by  the  Raja  and  his  counfellors,  with-
out delay  or  appeal,  and,   as  we  were  told,  with  the  mofi
folemn  deliberation  and  impartial  juflice.

We  were  informed  by  Mr.  Lange,  that  the  chiefs  who  had
fucceflively  prefided  over  the  five  principalities  of  this  ifland,
had  lived  for  time  immemorial  in  the  ftrictefl  alliance  and
mofl  cordial  friendfhip  with  each  other;  yet  he  faid  the
people  were  of  a  warlike  difpofition,  and  had  always  cou-
rageoufly  defended  themfelves  againft  foreign  invaders.  We
were  told  alfo,  that  the  ifland  was  able  to  raife,  upon  very
fhort  notice,  7300  fighting  men,  armed  with  mufkets,
fpears,  lances,  and  targets.  Of  this  force,  Laai  was  faid  to
furnifh.  2600,  Seba  qooo,  Regeeua  1500,  Timo  800,  and
Maffara  400.  Befides  the  arms  that  have. been  already  men-
tioned, each  man  is  furnifhed  with  a  large  pole-ax,  refem-

bling


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  693

bling  a  wood-bill,  except  that  it  has  a  ftrait  edge,  and  is  T77°'
much  heavier:  this,  in  the  hands  of  people  who  have  cou-  »_  ■-.-  _j
rage  to  come  to  clofe  quarters  with  an  enemy,  muft  be  a
dreadful  weapon ;  and  we  were  told  that  they  were  fo  dex-
terous with  their  lances,  that  ar  the  diftance  of  fixty  feet  they
would  throw  them  with  fuch  exadtnefs  as  to  pierce  a  man's-
heart,  and  fuch  force  as  to  go  quite  through  his  body.

How  far  this  account  of  the  martial  prowefs  of  the  inha-
bitants of  Savu  may  be  true,  we  cannot  take  upon  us  to
determine,  but  during  our  uay,  we  faw  no  appearance  of
ir.  We  faw  indeed  in  the  town-houfe,  or  houfe  of  aflcmbly,.
about  one  hundred  fpears  and  targets,  which  ferved'to  arm
the  people  who  were  fent  down  to  intimidate  us  at  the
trading  place;  but  they  feemed  to  be  the  refufe  of  old  ar-
mories, no  two  being  of  the  fame  make  or  length,  for  fome
were  fix,  and  fome  fixteen  feet  long :  we  faw  no  lance  among
them,  and  as  to  the  mufkets,  though  they  were  clean  on  the
outfide,  they  were  eaten  into  holes  by  the  rulV within;  and'
the  people  themfelves  appeared  to  be  fo  little  acquainted
with  military  difcipline,  that  they  marched  like  a  diforderly
rabble,  every  one  having,  inflead  of  his  target,  a  cock,  fome
tobacco,  or  other  merchandife  of  the  like  kind,  which  he
took  that  opportunity  to  bring  down  to  fell,  and  few  or  none
of  their  cartridge  boxes  were  furnifhed  with  either  powder
or  ball,  though  a  piece  of  paper  was  thruft  into  the  hole  to
fave  appearances.  We  faw  a  few  fwivel  guns,  and  pateraros
at  the  town-houfe,  and  a  great  gun  before  it ;  but  the  fwivels
and  pateraros  lay  out  of  their  carriages,  and  the  great  gun
lay  upon  a  heap  of  {tones,  almofl  confumed  with  ruft,  with
the  touch-hole  downwards,  poffibly  to  conceal  its  fize,
which  might  perhaps  be  little  lefs  than  that  of  the  bore.

We


September.


694  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  We  could  not  difcover  that  among  thefe  people  there  was

any  rank  of  diftinction  between  the  Raja  and  the  land-
owners: the  land-owners  were  refpectable  in  proportion  to
their  pofTeflions ;  the  inferior  ranks  confift  of  manufacturers,
labouring  poor,  and  flaves.  The  flaves,  like  the  peafants  in
fome  parts  of  Europe,  are  connected  with  the  eftate,  and
both  defcend  together:  but  though  the  land-owner  can  fell
his  flave,  he  has  no  other  power  over  his  perfon,  not  even  to
correct  him,  without  the  privity  and  approbation  of  the  Raja.
Some  have  five  hundred  of  tftefe  flaves,  and  fome  not  half  a
dozen  :  the  common  price  of  them  is  a  fat  hog.  When  a
great  man  goes  out,  he  is  conftantly  attended  by  two  or  more
of  them:  one  of  them  carries  a  fwordor  hanger,  the  hilt  of
which  is  commonly  of  fdver,  and  adorned  with  large  tafiels
of  horfe  hair ;  and  another  carries  a  bag  which  contains  betel,
areca,  lime,  and  tobacco.  In  thefe  attendants  coniifts  all
their  magnificence,  for  the  Raja  himfelf  has  no  other  mark
of  diftinction.

The  chief  object  of  pride  among  thefe  people,  like  that  of
a  Welchman,  is  a  long  pedigree  of  refpectable  anceftors,  and
indeed  a  veneration  for  antiquity  feems  to  be  carried  farther
here  than  in  any  other  country :  even  a  houfe  that  has  been
well  inhabited  for  many  generations,  becomes  almoft  facred,
and  few  articles  either  of  ufe  or  luxury  bear  fo  high  a  price
as  ftones,  which  having  been  long  fat  upon,  are  become  even
and  fmooth:  thofe  who  can  purchafe  fuch  ftones,  or  are
pofTefied  of  them  by  inheritance,  place  them  round  their
houfes,  where  they  ferve  as  feats  for  their  dependants.

Every  Raja  fets  up  in  the  principal  town  of  his  province,
or  nigree,  a  large  ftone,  which  ferves  as  a  memorial  of  his
reign.  In  the  principal  town  of  Seba,  where  we  lay,  there
are  thirteen  fuch  Hones,  befides  many  fragments  of  others,

which


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  69S

which  had  been  fet  up  in  earlier  times,  and, are  now  mould-       1770.
ering  away:   thefe  monuments  feem  to  prove  that  fome    tlep-.-e^
kind  of  civil  eftablifhment  here  is  of  confidcrable  antiquity.
The  laft  thirteen  reigns  in  England  make  fomething  more
than  276  years.

Many  of  thefe  ftones  are  fo  large,  that  it  is  difficult  to  con-
ceive by  what  means  they  were  brought  to  their  prefent
ftation,  efpecially  as  it  is  the  fummit  of  a  hill ;  but  the  world
is  full  of  memorials  of  human  ftrength,  in  which  the  me-
chanical powers  that  have  been  fince  added  by  mathematical
fcience,  feem  to  be  furpafTed;  and  of  fuch  monuments
there  are  not  a  few  among  the  remains  of  barbarous  anti-
quity in  our  own  country,  befides  thofe  upon  Salifbuiy
plain.

Thefe  ftones  not  only  record  the  reigns  of  fucceffive
princes,  but  ferve  for  a  purpofc  much  more  extraordinary,
and  probably  altogether  peculiar  to  this  country.  When  a
Raja  dies,  a  general  feaft  is  proclaimed  throughout  his  do-
minions, and  all  his  fubjects  afiemble  round  thefe  ftones  5
almoft  every  living  creature  that  can  be  caught  is  then
killed,  and  the  feaft  lafts  for  a  lefs  or  greater  number  of
weeks  or  months,  as  the  kingdom  happens  to  be  more  or
lefs  furnifhed  with  live  ftock  at  the  time  ;  the  ftones  ferve  for
tables.  When  this  madnefs  is  over,  a  faft  muft  necefTarily
enfue,  and  the  whole  kingdom  is  obliged  to  fubfift  upon,
fyrup  and  water,  if  it  happens  in  the  dry  feafon,  when  no
vegetables  can  be  procured,  till  a  new  ftock  of  animals  can
be  raifed  from  the  few  that  have  efcaped  by  chance,  or  been
preferved  by  policy  from  the  general  mafTacre,  or  can  be
procured  from  the  neighbouring  kingdoms.  Such,  how-
ever, is  the  account  that  we  received- from  Mr.  Lange.


656  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  We  bad  no  opportunity  to  examine  any  of  their  manufao

September.  r     ■%  11  1   •    i

v. — *-—j    tures,  except  that  or  their  cloth,  which  they  fpin,  weave,
and  dye  ;  we  did  not  indeed  fee  them  employed,  but  many
of  the  inftruments  which  they  ufe  fell  in  our  way.    We  faw
their  machine  for  clearing  cotton  of  its  feeds,  which  is  made
upon  the  fame  principles  as  thofe  in  Europe,  but  is  fo  fmall
that  it  might  be  taken  for  a  model,  or  a  toy :  it  confifts  of
two  cylinders,  like  our  round  rulers,  fomewhat  lefs  than  an
inch  in  diameter,  one  of  which,  being  turned  round  by  a
plain  winch,  turns  the  other  by  means  of  an  endlefs  worm ;
and  the  whole  machine  is  not  more  than  fourteen  inches
long,  and  feven  high:  that  which  we  faw  had  been  much
ufed,  and  many  pieces  of  cotton  were  hanging  about  it,  fo
that  there  is  no  reafon  to  doubt  its  being  a  fair  fpecimen  of
the  reft.     We  alfo  once  faw  their  apparatus  for  fpinning  ;  it
confifted  of  a  bobbin,  on  which  was  wound  a  fmall  quantity
of  thread,  and  a  kind  of  diftaff  filled  with  cotton  ;  we  con-
jectured therefore  that  they  fpin  by  hand,  as  the  women  of
Europe  did  before  the  introduction  of  wheels ;  and  I  am  told
that  they  have  not  yet  found  their  way  into  fome  parts  of  it.
Their  loom  feemed  to  be  in  one  refpect  preferable  to  ours,
for  the  web  was  not  ftretched  upon  a  frame,  but  extended
by  a  piece  of  wood  at  each  end,  round  one  of  which  the
cloth  was  rolled,  and  round  the  other  the  threads:  the  web
was  about  half  a  yard  broad,  and  the  length  of  the  fhuttle
was  equal  to  the  breadth  of  the  web,  fo  that  probably  their
work  goes  on  but  flowly.     That  they  dyed  this  cloth  we  firil
guefled  from  its  colour,  and  from  die  indigo  which  we  faw
in  their  plantations j  and  our  conjecture  was  afterwards  con-
firmed by  Mr.  Lange's  account.     I  have  already  obferved,
that  it  is  dyed  in  the  yarn,  and  we  once  faw  them  dying
what  was  laid  to  be  girdles  for  the  women,  of  a  dirty  red,  but
with  what  drug  we  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  enquire.

The


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  697

The  religion  of  thefe  people,  according  to  Mr.  Lange's  in-  1770.
formation,  is  an  abfurd  kind  of  paganifm,  every  man  chu-  ._ep-™-C'".
fing  his  own  god,  and  determining  for  himfelf  how  he
fhould  be  worfhipped ;  fo  that  there  are  almoft  as  many
gods  and  modes  of  worfhip  as  people.  In  their  morals,
however,  they  are  faid  to  be  irreproacliabie,  even  upon  the
principles  of  Chriftianity :  no  man  is  allowed  more  than  one
wife  ;  yet  an  illicit  commerce  between  the  fexes  is  in  a  man-
ner unknown  among  them:  inftances  of  theft  are  very  rare;
and  they  are  fo  far  from  revenging  a  fuppofed  injury  by
murder,  that  if  any  difference  arifes  between  them,  they
will  not  fo  much  as  make  it  the  fubjecT:  of  debate,  left  they
fhould  be  provoked  to  refentment  and  ill-will,  but  immedi-
ately and  implicity  refer  it  to  the  determination  of  their
King.

They  appeared  to  be  a  healthy  and  long-lived  people;  yet
fome  of  them  were  marked  with  the  fmall-pox,  which  Mr.
Lange  told  us  had  feveral  times  made  its  appearance  among
them,  and  was  treated  with  the  fame  precautions  as  the
plague.  As  foon  as  a  perfon  was  feized  with  the  diflemper,
he  was  removed  to  fome  folitary  place,  very  remote  from
any  habitation,  where  the  difeafe  was  left  to  take  its  courfe,
and  the  patient  fupplied  with  daily  food  by  reaching  it  to
him  at  the  end  of  a  long  pole.

Of  their  domeftic  ceconomy  we  could  learn  but  little:  in
one  inftance  however  their  delicacy  and  cleanlinefs  are  very
remarkable.  Many  of  us  were  afhore  here  three  fucccflive
days,  from  a  very  early  hour  in  the  morning  till  it  was  dark  •■,
yet  we  never  faw  the  leaft  trace  of  an  offering  to  Cloacina,
nor  could  we  fo  much  as  guefs  where  they  were  made.  In
a  country  fo  populous  this  is  very  difficult  to  be  accounted

Vol.  II.  a  U  for,


698  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1770.      for,  and  perhaps  there  is  no  other  country  in  the  world
£l^!ll>  where  the  fecret  is  fo  effectually  kept.

•  The  boats  in  ufe  here  are  a  kind  of  proa.

This  ifland  was  fettled  by  the  Portuguefe  almofl  as  foon  as
they  firft  found  their  way  into  this  part  of  the  ocean;  but  they
were  in  a  fhort  time  fupplanted  by  the  Dutch.  The  Dutch
however  did  not  take  poffeffion  of  it,  but  only  fent  floops  to-
trade  with  the  natives,  probably  for  provifions  to  fupport  the-
inhabitants  of  their  fpice  iflands,  who  applying  themfelves
wholly  to  the  cultivation  of  that  important  article  of  trade,
and  laying  out  all  their  ground  in  plantations,  can  breed
few  animals :  poflibly  their  fupplies  by  this  occafional  traf-
fic were  precarious ;  poflibly  they  were  jealous  of  being  fup-
planted in  their  turn ;  but  however  that  be,  their  Eaft  India
Company,  about  ten  years  ago,  entered  into  a  treaty  with
the  Rajas,  by  which  the  Company  ftipulated  to  furnim.  each
of  them  with  a  certain  quantity  of  filk,  fine  linen,  cutlery
ware,  arrack  and  other  articles,  every  year ;  and  the  Rajas
engaged  that  neither  they  nor  their  fubjedts  mould  trade
with  any  pcrfon  except  the  company,  without  having  firft
obtained  their  confent,  and  that  they  would  admit  a  refident
on  behalf  of  the  Company,  to  refide  upon  the  ifland,  and
fee  that  their  part  of  the  treaty  was  fulfilled :  they  alfo  en-
gaged to  fupply  annually  a  certain  quantity  of  rice,  maize,
and  calevances.  The  maize  and  calevances  are  fent  to  Ti-
mor in  floops,  which  are  kept  there  for  that  purpofe,  each  of
which  is  navigated  by  ten  Indians;  and  the  rice  is  fetched
away  annually  by  a  fliip  which  brings  the  Company's  re-
turns, and  anchors  alternately  in  each  of  the  three  bays.
Thefe  returns  are  delivered  to  the  Rajas  in  the  form  of  a
prefent,    and  the  calk  of  arrack  they  and  their  principal

people


ROUND    THE    WORLD,


699


people  never  ceafe  to  drink,  as  long  as  a  drop  of  it  re-      1770.

September.

mains.  *_  -.-  -j

In  confequence  of  this  treaty,  the  Dutch  placed  three  per-
fons  upon  the  ifland:  Mr.  Langc,  his  colleague,  the  native  of
Timor,  the  fon  of  an  Indian  woman  by  a  Portuguefe,  and
one  Frederick  Craig,  the  fon  of  an  Indian  woman  by  a
Dutchman.  Lange  vifits  each  of  the  Rajas  once  in  two
months,  when  he  makes  the  tour  of  the  ifland,  attended  by
fifty  flaves  on  horfeback.  He  exhorts  thefe  Chiefs  to  plant,
if  it  appears  that  they  have  been  remifs,  and  obferves  where
the  crops  are  got  in,  that  he  may  order  Hoops  to  fetch  it ;  fo
that  it  paiTes  immediately  from  the  ground  to  the  Dutch
ftorehoufes  at  Timor.  In  thefe  excurfions  he  always  carries
with  him  fome  bottles  of  arrack,  which  he  finds  of  great  ufe
in  opening  the  hearts  of  the  Rajas  with  whom  he  is  to  deal.

During  the  ten  years  that  he  had  refided  upon  this  ifland
he  had  never  feen  a  European  befides  ourfelves,  except  at  the
arrival  of  the  Dutch  fhip,  which  had  failed  about  two
months  before  we  arrived;  and  he  is  now  to  be  diftinguifhed
from  the  natives  only  by  his  colour  and  his  drefs,  for  he  fits
upon  the  ground,  chews  his  betele,  and  in  every  refpedl  has
adopted  their  character  and  manners :  he  has  married  an
Indian  woman  of  the  ifland  of  Timor,  who  keeps  his  houfe
after  the  falhion  of  her  country;  and  he  gave  that  as  a  rea-
fon  for  not  inviting  us  to  vifit  him,  faying,  that  he  could
entertain  us  in  no  other  manner  than  the  Indians  had
done,  and  he  fpoke  no  language  readily  but  that  of  the
country.

The  office  of  Mr.  Frederic  Craig  is  to  inftruct  the  youth  of
the  country  in  reading  and  writing,  and  the  principles  of
the  Chriftian  religion ;  the  Dutch  having  printed  verfions
of  the  New  Teftament,  a  catechifm,  and  feveral  other  tracts,

4  U  2  in


yoo  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

^770.  in  the  language  of  this  and  the  neighbouring  iflands.  Dr.
September^  Soiander)  wh0  was  at  his  houfe,  faw  the  books,  and  the  copy-
books alfo,  of  his  fcholars,  many  of  whom  wrote  a  very  fair
hand.  He  boafted  that  there  were  no  lefs  than  fix  hundred
Chriftians  in  the  townfhip  of  Seba  ;  but  what  the  Dutch
Chriftianity  of  thefe  Indians  may  be,  it  is  not  perhaps  very
eafy  to  guefs,  for  there  is  not  a  church,  nor  even  a  prieft,  in
the  whole  ifland.

While  we  were  at  this  place,  we  made  feveral  enquiries
concerning  the  neighbouring  iflands,  and  the  intelligence
which  we  received,  is  to  the  following  effect :

A  fmall  ifland  to  the  weflward  of  Savu,  the  name  of  which
we  did  not  learn,  produces  nothing  of  any  confequence  but
areca-nuts,  of  which  the  Dutch  receive  annually  the  freight
of  two  floops,  in  return  for  prefents  that  they  make  to  the
iflanders.

Timor  is  the  chief,  and  the  Dutch  refidents  on  the  other
iflands  go  thither  once  a  year  to  pafs  their  accounts.  The
place  is  nearly  in  the  fame  ftate  as  in  Dampier's  time,  the
Dutch  having  there  a  fort  and  ftorehoufes  ;  and  by  Lange's
account  we  might  there  have  been  fupplied  with  every  ne-
ceflary  that  we  expe&ed  to  procure  at  Batavia,  fait  provifions
and  arrack  not  excepted.  But  the  Portuguefe  are  ftill  in
pofTemon  of  feveral  towns  on  the  north  fide  of  the  ifland,
particularly  Laphao  and  Sefial.

About  two  years  before  our  arrival,  a  French  fhip  was
wrecked  upon  the  eaft  coaft  of  Timor ;  and  after  me  had
lain  fome  days  upon  the  fhoal,  a  fudden  gale  broke  her  up
at  once,  and  drowned  the  Captain,  with  the  greateft  part  of
the  crew :  thofe  who  got  alhore,  among  whom  was  one  of
the  Lieutenants,  made  the  bed  of  their  way  to  Concordia ;
they  were  four  days  upon  the  road,  where  they  were  ob-
liged

2


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ;oi

liged  to  leave  part  of  their  company  through  fatigue,  and       1770


the  reft,  to  the  number  of  about  eighty,  arrived  at  the  town.
They  were  fupplied  with  every  neceffary,  and  fent  back  to
the  wreck,  with  proper  affiftance,  for  recovering  what  could
be  fifhed  up :  they  fortunately  got  up  all  their  bullion,  which
was  in  chefts,  and  feveral  of  their  guns,  which  were  very
large.  They  then  returned  to  the  town,  but  their  compa-
nions who  had  been  left  upon  the  road  were  miffing,  hav-
ing, as  it  was  fuppofed,  been  kept  among  the  Indians,  either
by  perfuafion  or  force ;  for  they  are  very  defirous  of  having
Europeans  among  them,  to  inftruct  them  in  the  art  of  war.
After  a  flay  of  more  than  two  months  at  Concordia,  their
number  was  diminifhed  nearly  one  half  by  ficknefs,  in  con-
fequence  of  the  fatigue  and  hardfhip  which  they  had  fuf-
fered  by  the  fhipwreck,  and  the  furvivors  were  fent  in  aj
fmall  veflel  to  Europe.

Rotte  is  in  much  the  fame  fituation  as  Savu ;  a  Dutch  fac-
tor refides  upon  it  to  manage  the  natives,  and  look  after  its
produce,  which  confifts,  among  other  articles,  of  fugar.
Formerly  it  was  made  only  by  bruifing  the  canes,  and  boil-
ing the  juice  to  a  fyrup,  in  the  fame  manner  as  Toddy;  but
great  improvements  have  lately  been  made  in  preparing
this  valuable  commodity.  The  three  little  iflands  called  the
Solars  are  alfo  under  the  influence  of  the  Dutch  fettlement
at  Concordia :  they  are  flat  and  low,  but  abound  with  provi-
fions  of  every  kind,  and  the  middlemoft  is  faid  to  have  a,
good  harbour  for  (hipping.  Ende,  another  little  ifland  to
the  weftward  of  the  Solars,  is  ftill.in  the  hands  of  the  Por-
tuguefe,  who  have  a  good  town  and  harbour  on  the  north
eait  corner  of  it  called  Larntuca  t  they  had  formerly  an  har-
bour on  the  fouth  fide  of  it,  but  that,  being  much  inferior
to  Larntuca,  has  for  fome  time  been  altogether  neglected.

The


September.


<c"


1770.

September.


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

The  inhabitants  of  each  of  thefe  little  iflands  fpeak  a  lan=
guage  peculiar  to  themfelves,  and  it  is  an  object  of  Dutch
policy  to  prevent,  as  much  as  poflible,  their  learning  the
language  of  each  other.  If  they  fpoke  a  common  language,
they  would  learn,  by  a  mutual  intercourfe  with  each  other,
to  plant  fuch  things  as  would  be  of  more  value  to  them-
felves than  their  prefent  produce,  though  of  lefs  advantage
to  the  Dutch  ;  but  their  languages  being  different,  they  can
communicate  no  fuch  knowlege  to  each  other,  and  the  Dutch
fecure  to  themfelves  the  benefit  of  fupplying  their  feveral
neceflities  upon  their  own  terms,  which  it  is  reafonable  to
fuppofe  are  not  very  moderate.  It  is  probably  with  a  view
to  this  advantage  that  the  Dutch  never  teach  their  own  lan-
guage to  the  natives  of  thefe  iflands,  and  have  been  at  the
expence  of  translating  the  Teftament  and  catechifms  into  the
different  languages  of  each ;  for  in  proportion  as  Dutch  had
become  the  language  of  their  religion,  it  would  have  be-
come the  common  language  of  them  all.

To  this  account  of  Savu,  I  fliall  only  add  a  fmall  fpecimen
of  its  language,  by  which  it  will  appear  to  have  fome  affi-
nity with  that  of  the  South  Sea  iflands,  many  of  the  words
being  exactly  the  fame,  and  the  numbers  manifeftly  derived
from  the  fame  fource.


A  mail)

Momonne.

The  ears,

Wodeeloo,

A  woman,

Mobunnee.

The  tongue,

Vaio.

The  head.

Catoo.

The  neck,

Lacoco.

7 'he  hah-,

Row  catoo.

The  breajls,

Soofoo.

The  eyes,

Matta.

The  nipples,

Caboo  foofoo,

The  eye-laJJjes,

Rowna  matta.

The  belly,

Dulloo.

The  nofe,

Swanga.

The  navel,

AfToo.

The  cheeks,

Cavaranga.

The  thighs,
6

Tooga.

r

The


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


7°3


The  knees ,

Rootoo.

The  fun,

Lodo.                        1770-

The  legs,

Baibo.

The  moon,

Septembe:

Wurroo.                »    -,-

The  feet)

Dunceala.

Thefea,

AidalTee.

The  toes,

Kiilbvei  yilla.

Water,

Ailea.

The  arms,

Camacoo.

Fire,

Aee.

The  hand,

Wulaba.

To  die,

Maate.

A  buffalo,

Cabaou.

To  Jleep,

Tabudge.

A  horfe,

Djara.

To  rife,

Tateetoo,

A  hog,

Vavee.

One,

UiTe.

Afloeep,

Doomba.

Tivo,

Lhua.

A  goat,

Kefavoo.

Three,

Tullu.

A  dog,

Guaca.

Four,

Uppah.

A  cat,

Maio.

Five,

Lumme.

A  j oiv  I,

Mannu.

Six,

Unna.

The  tail,

Carow.

Seven,   .

Pedu.

The  beak,

Pangoutoo.

Eight,

Ami.

Afijh,

Ica.

Nine,

Saou.

A  turtle,

Unjoo.

Ten,

Singooroo.

A  cocoa-nut,

Nieu.

Eleven,

Singurung  ufle,

Fan- palm,

Boaceree.

20,

Lhuangooroo,

Areca,

Calella.

100,

Sing  afTu.

Bciele,

Canana.

1000,

Setuppah.

Lime,

Aou.

10,000,

Selacufla,

Afifh-hook,

Maanadoo.

IOC,COO,  •

Scrata.

Tattoiv,  the  marks  1

'     .           £Tata,

1,000,000

Sereboo,

on  the/kin,


In  this  account  of  the  ifiand  of  Savu  it  muft  be  remem-
bered, that  except  the  facts  in  which  we  were  parties,  and  the
account  of  the  objects  which  we  had  an  opportunity  to  exa-
mine, the  whole  is  founded  merely  upon  the  report  of  Mr.
Lange,  upon  whofe  authority  alone  therefore  it  mull  reft.

CHAP,


;04  LIEUTENANT   COOK'S    VOYAGE


CHAP.      XII.

The  Run  from  the  IJland  of  Savu  to  Batavia,  and  an

Account  of  the  TranfaSiions  there  while  the  Ship

was  refitting.

177°-  TN  the  morning  of  Friday  the  21ft  of  September,  1770,  we
i  ep-em-  "it  A  got  under  fail,  and  flood  away  to  the  weftward,  along
"  ay  zu  the  north  fide  of  the  ifland  of  Savu,  and  of  the  fmaller  that
lies  to  the  weftward  of  it,  which  at  noon  bore  from  us  S.S.E.
diftant  two  leagues.  At  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we
difcovered  a  fmall  low  illand,  bearing  S.  S.  W.  diftant  three
leagues,  which  has  no  place  in  any  chart  now  extant,  at
kaft  in  none  that  I  have  been  able  to  procure:  it  lies  in  lati-
tude io°47'S.,  longitude  238°  a8'W.

Satuuiay22."  At  noon  on  the  22d,  we  were  in  latitude  ii°  io'S.,  longi-
.Sunday  zy  tude  2400  38'  \V.  In  the  evening  of  the  23d,  we  found  the
variation  of  the  needle  to  be  20  44'  W. ;  as  foon  as  we  got
clear  of  the  iflands  we  had  conftantly  a  fwell  from  the  fouth-
ward,  which  I  imagined  was  not  caufcd  by  a  wind  blowing
from  that  quarter,  but  by  the  fea  being  fo  determined  by  the
pofition  of  the  coaft  of  New  Holland.

Monday  24.        At  noon  on  the  26th,  being  in  latitude  io°  47'  S.,  longi-

WedneH  z6.  tude  2490  52'  W.  we  found  the  variation  to  be  3  °  ro'W.  and
our  fituation  to  be  twenty-five  miles  to  the  r  jrthward  of  the
log ;  for  which  I  know  not  how  to  accour  c.     At  noon  on  the

Thurfday27.  27th,  our  latitude  by  obfervation  was  ,o°  51'S.  which  was
agreeable  to  the  log;  and  our  lor^itude  was  2520  ii'W.

Friday  28.      Wc  fleered  N.  W.  all  day  on  the  28th,  in  order  to  make  the

land


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ?D5

land  of  Java ;  and  at  noon  on  the  29th,  our  latitude  by  obfer-       1770.
vation  was  90  31'  S.,  longitude  25.).°  10' W.;  and  in  the  morn-    . epteni  "^
ing  of  the  30th,  I  took  into  my  polleffion  the  log-book  and  slSjyj'
journals,  at  lead  all  I  could  find,  of  the  officers,  petty  offi-
cers, and  feamen,  and  enjoined  them  fecrecy  with  refpcct  to
where  they  had  been.

At  feven  in  the  evening,  being  in  the  latitude  of  Java
Head,  and  not  feeing  any  land,  I  concluded  that  we  were  too
far  to  the  weftward:  I  therefore  hauled  up  E.  N.  E.  having
before  fleered  N.  by  E.  In  the  night,  we  had  thunder  and
lightning;  and  about  twelve  o'clock,  by  the  light  of  the
flafhes,  we  faw  the  land  bearing  eaft.  I  then  tacked  and
flood  to  the  S.  W.  till  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  ifl  oaober
of  October  ;  and  at  fix,  Java  Head,  or  the  weft  end  of  Java,  Monday  u
bore  S.  E.  by  E.  diflant  five  leagues  :  foon  after  wc  faw
Prince's  Ifland,  bearing  E.  l  S. ;  and  at  ten,  the  ifland  of  Cra-
catoa,  bearing  N.E.  Cracatoa  is  a  remarkably  high-peaked
ifland,  and  at  noon  it  bore  N.  40  E.  diflant  feven  leagues.

I  mufl  now  obferve  that,  during  our  run  from  Savu,  I  al-
lowed twenty  minutes  a-day  for  the  weflerly  current,  which
I  concluded  mufl  run  flrong  at  this  time,  efpecially  ofF  the
coafl  of  Java,  and  I  found  that  this  allowance  was  jufl  equi-
valent to  the  effect  of  the  current  upon  the  fhip.

At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  2d,  we  fetched  clofe  Tuefd
in  with  the  coafl  of  Java,  in  fifteen  fathom ;  we  then  flood
along  the  coafl,  and  early  in  the  forenoon,  I  fent  the  boat
afhore  to  try  if  fhe  could  procure  fome  fruit  for  Tupia^  who
was  very  ill,  and  fome  grafs  for  the  buffaloes  that  were  flili
alive.  In  an  hour  or  two  fhe  returned  with  four  cocoa-nuts,
and  a  fmall  bunch  of  plantains,  which  had  been  purchafed  for
a  fhilling,  and  fome  herbage  for  the  cattle,  which  the  In-
dians not  only  gave  us,  but  aflifled  our  people  to  cut.     The

Vol.  IL  4  X  country


ay  2.


3  uefday  2


LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

country  looked  like  one  continued  wood,  and  had  a  very
pleafant  appearance.

About  eleven  o'clock,  we  faw  two  Dutch  fhips  lying  off
Anger  point,  and  I  fent  Mr.  Hicks  on  board  of  one  of  them,
to  enquire  news  of  our  country,  from  which  we  had  been
abfent  fo  long.  In  the  mean  time  it  fell  calm,  and  about
noon  I  anchored  in  eighteen  fathom  with  a  muddy  bottom.
When  Mr.  Hicks  returned,  he  reported  that  the  mips  were
Dutch  Eaft  Indiamen  from  Batavia,  one  of  which  was  bound
to  Ceylon,  and  the  other  to  the  coaft  of  Malabar ;  and  that
there  was  alfo  a  flyboat  or  packet,  which  was  faid  to  be  fla~
tioned  here  to  carry  letters  from  the  Dutch  fhips  that  came
hither  to  Batavia,  but  which  I  rather  think  was  appointed  to
examine  all  fhips  that  pafs  the  flreight :  from  thefe  mips  we
heard,  with  great  pleafure,  that  the  Swallow  had  been  at
Batavia  about  two  years  before.

At  feven  o'clock  a  breeze  fprung  up  at  S.  S.W.  with  which
'having  weighed,  we  flood  to  the  N.E.  between  Thwart-the-
way-Ifland  and  the  Cap,  founding  from  eighteen  to  twenty-
eight  fathom:  we  had  but  little  wind  all  night,  and  having
a  itrong  current  againft  us,  we  got  no  further  by  eight  in
vednef,  3.  the  morning  than  Bantam  Point.  At  this  time  the  wind
came  to  the  N.  E.  and  obliged  us  to  anchor  in  two  and  twenty
fathom,  at  about  the  diftance  of  two  miles  from  the  fhore  j
the  point  bore  N.  E.  by  E.  diflant  one  league,  and  here  we
found  a  ftrong  current  fetting  to  the  N.  W.  In  the  morning
we  had  feen  the  Dutch  packet  flanding  after  us,  but  when
the  wind  lhifted  to  the  N.  E.  flie  bore  away.

At  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  wind  having  obliged  us
to  continue  at  anchor,  one  of  the  country  boats  came  along
fide  of  us,  on  board  of  which  was  the  Mafter  of  the  packet.
He  feemed  to  have  two  motives  for  his  vilit,  one  to  take  an

1  account


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ?oy

account  of  the  fhip,  and  the  other  to  fell  us  refrefhments ;       1770.
for  in  the  boat  were  turtle,  fowls,  ducks,  parrots,  paroquets,    t  oa°be^
rice-birds,  monkies,  and  other  articles,  which  they  held  at  a  Wednef-  **
very  high  price,  and  brought  to  a  bad  market,  for  our  Savu
Hock  was  not  yet  expended :  however,  I  gave  a  Spanifh  dol-
lar for  a  fmall  turtle,  which  weighed  about  fix  and  thirty
pounds ;  I  gave  alfo  a  dollar  for  ten  large  fowls,  and  after-
wards bought  fifteen  more  at  the  fame  price  j  for  a  dollar
we  might  alfo  have  bought  two  monkies,  or  a  whole  cage
of  rice-birds.     The  Matter  of  the  Hoop  brought  with  him
two  books,  in  one  of  which  he  defired  that  any  of  our  offi-
cers would  write  down  the  name  of  the  (hip  and  its  Com-
mander, with  that  of  the  place  from  which  fhe  failed,  and
of  the  port  to  which  fhe  was  bound,  with  fuch  other  parti-
culars relating  to  themfelves,  as  they  might  think  proper,  for
the  information  of  any  of  our  friends  that  mould  come  after
us :  and  in  the  other  he  entered  the  names  of  the  fhip  and
the  Commander,  himfelf,  in  order  to  tranfmit  them  to  the
Governor  and  Council  of  the  Indies.     We  perceived  that  in
the  firfl  book  many  fhips,  particularly  Portuguefe,  had  made
entries  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  for  which  it  was  pre-
fented  to  us.     Mr.  Hicks,  however,  having  written  the  name
of  the  fhip,  only  added  "  from  Europe."    He  took  notice  of
this,   but  faid,    that  he  was   fatisfied  with   any   thing  wc
thought  fit  to  write,  it  being  intended  merely  for  the  infor-
mation of  thofe  who  mould  enquire  after  us  from  motives
of  friendfhip.

Having  made  feveral  attempts  to  fail  with  a  wind  that
would  not  item  the  current,  and  as  often  come  to  an  an-
chor, a  proa  came  alongfide  of  us  in  the  morning  of  the  5th,  Friday  c,
in  which  was  a  Dutch  officer,  who  fent  me  down  a  printed
paper  in  Englifh,  duplicates  of  which  he  had  in  other  lan~

4X2  guages,


7o3  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      guages,   particularly  In  French  and  Dutch,    all  regularly
y0-0-'l,  figned,  in  the  name  of  the  Governor  and  Council  of  the  In*
¥nday  5*    dies,  by  their  fecretary  :  it  contained  nine  queftions,  very  ill
exprefled,  in  the  following  terms:

"■  1.  To  what  nation  the  fhip  belongs,  and  its  name?

**  2.  If  it  comes  from  Europe,  or  any  other  place?

"  3.  From  what  place  it  laflly  departed  from  l

"  4.  Whereunto  defigned  to  go  I

"-  5,  What  and  how  many  fhips  of  the  Dutch  Company
M  by  departure  from  the  laft  more  there  layed,  and  their
"  names-?

"  6.  If  one  or  more  of  thefe  mips  in  company  with  this,.
«  is  departed  for  this,  or  any  other  place  ?.

««  7.  If  during  the  voyage  any  particularities  is  happened.
"  or  feen  .?

"  8.  If  not  any  fhips  in  fea,  or  the  Streights  of  Sunda,  have
"  feen  or  hailed  in,  and  which  ?:

"  9.  If  any  other  news  worth  of  attention,  at  the  place-
"  from  whence  the  fhip  laflly  departed,  or  during  the  voy—
w  age,  is  happened.

"  Batavia,  in  the  Caflle.

"  By  order  of  the  Governor  General,  and  the
"  Counfellors  of  India,.

"  J.  Brander  Bungl,  Sec/5'

Of  thefe  queftions  I  anfwered  only  the  firft  and  the  fourth;
which  when  the  officer  faw,  he  faid  anfwers  to  the  reft  were-
of  no  confequcncc:  yet  he  immediately  added,  that  he  mufl
fend  that  very  paper  away  to  Batavia,  and  that  it  would  be
there  the  next  day  at  noon,    I  have  particularly  related  this,

incident*,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  709

incident,  becaufe  I  have  been  credibly  informed  that  it  is  bur      *77°-
of  late  years  that  the  Dutch  have  taken  upon  them  to  exa-    c_ — „-.!>
mine  mips  that  pafs  through  this  Streighr.

At  ten  o'clock  the  fame  morning,  we  weighed,  with  a  light
breeze  at  S.  W. ;  but  did  little  more  than  Hem  the  current,
and  about  two  o'clock  anchored  again  under  Bantam  Point,
where  we  lay  till  nine  ;  a  light  breeze  then  fpringing  up  at
S.E.  we  weighed  and  flood  to  the  eafhvard  till  ten  o'clock  the
next  morning,  when  the  current  obliged  us  again  to  anchor  Saturdays.
in  twenty-two  fathom,  Pulababi  bearing  E.  by  S.  4  S.  diflant
between  three  and  four  miles.  Having  alternately  weighed
and  anchored  fevcral  times,  till  four  in  the  afternoon  of  the
7th,  we  then  flood  to  the  eafhvard,  with  a  very  faint  breeze  Stmday7»-
at  N.  E.  and  paffed  Wapping  Ifland,  and  the  firfl  ifland  to  the
eafhvard  of  it ;  when  the  wind  dying  away,  we  were  carried
by  the  current  between  the  firfl  and  fecond  of  the  iflands
that  lie  to  the  eaflward  of  Wapping  Ifland,  were  we  were
obliged  to  anchor  in  thirty  fathom,  being  very  near  a  ledge
of  rocks  that  run  out  from  one  of  the  iflands.  At  two  the
next  morning  we  weighed  with  the  land  wind  at  fouth,  and'  Mend-
flood  out  clear  of  the  fhoal;  but  before  noon  were  obliged
to  come  to  again  in  twenty-eight  fathom,  near  a  fmall
ifland  among  thofe  that  are  called  the  Thoufand  Iflands,.
which  we  did  not  find  laid  down  in  any  chart.  Pulo  Pare  a:
this  time  bore  E.N.E.  diflance  between  fix- and  feven  miles.

Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  went  afhore  upon  the  ifland,
which  they  found  not  to  be  more  than  five  hundred  yard;
long,  and  one  hundred  broad  j  yet  there  was  a  houfe  upon
it*  and  a  fmall  plantation,  where  among  other  things  was
the  Pahna  Chrifii,  from  which  the  caflor  oil  is  made  in  the
Wefl  Indies  :  they  made  a  fmall  addition  to  their  collection
cf  plants,  and  fhot  a  bat,  whofe  wings  when  extended  mea—
4  fured


7K5  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      furcd  three  feet  from  point  to  point :  they  mot  alfo  four  plo


Oaober


vers,  which  exactly  refembled  the  golden  plover  of  England.
Monday  8.  Soon  after  ^y  returned,  a  fmall  Indian  boat  came  alongfide
with  two  Malays  on  board,  who  brought  three  turtles,  fome
dried  fifli,  and  a  few  pumpkins :  we  bought  the  turtle,
which  altogether  weighed  a  hundred  and  forty-fix  pounds,
for  a  dollar,  and  coniidering  that  we  had  lately  paid  the
Dutchman  a  dollar  for  one  that  weighed  only  fix  and  thirty
pounds,  we  thought  we  had  a  good  bargain.  The  feller  ap-
peared equally  fatisfied,  and  we  then  treated  with  him  for
his  pumpkins,  for  which  he  was  very  unwilling  to  take  any
money  but  a  dollar ;  we  faid  that  a  whole  dollar  was  greatly
too  much ;  to  which  he  readily  affented,  but  defired  that  we
would  cut  one  and  give  him  a  part :  at  laft,  however,  a  fine
fhining  Portuguefe  petacka  tempted  him,  and  for  that  he  fold
us  his  whole  ftock  of  pumpkins,  being  in  number  twenty-
fix.  At  parting,  he  made  figns  that  we  mould  not  tell  at
Batavia  that  any  boat  had  been  aboard  us.

We  were  not  able  to  weather  Pulo  Pare  this  day,  but  get-
ting the  land  wind  at  fouth  about  ten  o'clock  at  night,  we
weighed  and  flood  to  the  E.  S.  E.  all  night.  At  ten  in  the
Tuefd  o.  morning,  wc  anchored  again,  to  wait  for  the  fea  breeze ;
and  at  noon  it  fprung  up  at  N.N. E.  with  which  we  flood  in
for  Batavia  road,  where  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  we
came  to  an  anchor.

We  found  here  the  Karcourt  Indiaman  from  England,  two
Englifh  private  traders  of  that  country,  thirteen  fail  of  large
Dutch  fliips,  and  a  confiderable  number  of  fmall  veffels.  A
boat  came  immediately  on  board,  from  a  fhip  which  had  a
broad  pendant  flying,  and  the  officer  who  commanded  hav-
ing enquired  who  we  were,  and  whence  we  came,  immedi-
ately returned  with  fuch  anfwers  as  we  thought  fit  to  give

him :


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ;iI

iiim :  both  he  and  his  people  were  as  pale  as  fpeclres,  a  fad      1770.
prefage  of  our  fufferings  in  fo  unhealthy  a  country  j   but   ■  Cci_0^"^
our  people,  who,  except  Tupia,  were  all  rofy  and  plump,  Tuefda^9'
feemed  to  think  themfelves  fo  feafoned  by  various  climates
that  nothing  could  hurt  them:    In  the  mean  time,  I  fent  a
Lieutenant  ailiore  to  acquaint  the  Governor  of  our  arrival,
and  to  make  an  excufe  for  our  not  faluting  ;  for  as  I  could
falute  with  only  three  guns,  except  the  fwivels,  which  I  was
of  opinion  would  not  be  heard,  I  thought  it  was  better  to  let
it  alone.    As  foon  as  the  boat  was  difpatched  the  carpenter
delivered  me  an  account  of  the  defects  of  the  fhip,  of  which
the  following  is  a  copy  :

"  The  defects  of  his  Majefly's  bark  Endeavour,  Lieutenant
"  James  Cook  Commander.

"  The  fhip  very  leaky,  as  flic  makes  from  twelve  to  fix
"  inches  water  an  hour,  occafioned  by  her  main  keel  being
"  wounded  in  many  places,  and  the  fcarfs  of  her  ftern  being
M  very  open :  the  falfe  keel  gone  beyond  the  midfhips  from
"  forward,  and  perhaps  farther,  as  1  had  no  opportunity  of
u  feeing  for  the  water  when  hauled  afliore  for  repairing ;
s<  wounded  on  the  larboard  fide  under  the  main  channel,
"  where  I  imagine  the  greater!  leak  is,  but  could  not  come
"  at  it  for  the  water:  one  pump  on  the  larboard  fide  ufelefsj
<c  the  others  decayed  within  an  inch  and  an  half  of  the  bore.
si  Otherwife  mails,  yards,  boats,  and  hull,  in  pretty  good
"  condition/'

As  it  was  the  univerfal  opinion  that  the  fhip  could  not
fafely  proceed  to  Europe  without  an  examination  of  her  bot-
tom, I  determined  to  apply  for  leave  to  heave  her  down  at
this  place  ;  and  as  I  underflood  that  it  would  be  neceflary  to
make  this  application  in  writing,  I  drew  up  a  requeft,  and

the


7is  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

*77o.      the  next  morning,  having  got  it  tranflated  into  Dutch,  we

O&ober.

v. —  - — >   all  went  afliore.

W«dnef.  I/O.

We  repaired  immediately  to  the  houfe  of  Mr.  Leith,  the
only  JEnglifhman  of  any  credit  who  is  refident  at  this  place;
he  received  us  with  great  politenefs,  and  engaged  us  to
dinner:  to  this  gentleman  we  applied  for  mftruetions  how  to
provide  ourfelves  with  lodgings  and  neceflaries  while  we
fhould  flay  afliore,  and  he  told  us,  that  there  was  a  hotel,  or
kind  of  inn,  kept  by  the  order  of  government,  where  all
merchants  and  ftrangers  were  obliged  to  refide,  paying  half
per  cent  upon  the  value  of  their  goods  for  warehoufe  room,
which  the  matter  of  the  houfe  was  obliged  to  provide ;  but
$hat  as  we  came  in  a  King's  fhip,  we  mould  be  at  liberty  to
live  where  we  pleafed,  upon  afking  the  Governor's  perinif-
fion,  which  would  be  granted  of  courfe.  He  faid,  that  it
would  be  cheaper  for  us  to  take  a  houfe  in  the  town,  and
bring  our  own  fervants  afliore,  if  we  had  any  body  upon
whom  we  could  depend  to  buy  in  our  provifions;  but  as
this  was  not  the  cafe,  having  no  perfon  among  us  who  could
fpeak  the  Malay  language,  our  gentlemen  determined  to  go
to  the  hotel.  At  the  hotel,  therefore,  beds  were  immediately
hired,  and  word  was  fent  that  we  fhould  fleep  there  at
night.

At  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  1  was  introduced  to  the
Governor-General,  who  received  me  very  courteoufly ;  he
told  me,  that  I  fhould  have  every  thing  I  wanted,  and  that
in  the  morning  my  requeft  fhould  be  laid  before  the  coun-
cil, which  I  was  defired  to  attend.

About  nine  o'clock,  we  had  a  dreadful  ftorm  of  thunder,
h'ghtning,  and  rain,  during  which  the  main-maft  of  one  of
the  Dutch  Eait  Indiamen  was  fplit,  and  carried  away  by  the
<3eck  ;  the  main-top-mafl  and  top-gallant-maft  were  fhivered

all


ROUND    THE    WORLD.

all  to  pieces ;  fhe  had  an  iron  fpindle  at  the  main-top-gallant-
maft-head,  which  probably  directed  the  ftroke.  This  (hip
lay  not  more  than  the  diftance  of  two  cables'  length  from
ours,  and  in  all  probability  we  mould  have  fhared  the  fame
fate.,  but  for  the  electrical  chain  which  we  had  but  juft  got
up,  and  which  conducted  the  lightning  over  the  fide  of  the
fhip;  but  though  we  efcaped  the  lightning,  the  explofion
fhook  us  like  an  earthquake,  the  chain  at  the  fame  time  ap-
pearing like  a  line  of  fire:  a  centinel  was  in  the  action  of
charging  his  piece,  and  the  fhock  forced  the  mufket  out  of
his  hand,  and  broke  the  rammer  rod.  Upon  this  occafion,  I
cannot  but  earneftly  recommend  chains  of  the  fame  kind  to
every  fhip,  whatever  be  her  deflination,  and  I  hope  that  the
fate  of  the  Dutchman  will  be  a  warning  to  all  who  fhall  read
this  narrative,  againft  having  an  iron  fpindle  at  the  mad-
head.

The  next  morning,  I  attended  at  the  council-chamber,  and  TWday  u,
was  told  that  I  fhould  have  every  thing  I  wanted.  In  the
mean  time,  the  gentlemen  afhore  agreed  with  the  keeper  of
the  hotel  for  their  lodging  and  board,  at  the  rate  of  two  rix-
dollars,  or  nine  fhillings  fterling  a  day  for  each;  and  as  there
were  five  of  them,  and  they  would  probably  have  many
vifitors  from  the  fhip,  he  agreed  to  keep  them  a  feparatc
table,  upon  condition  that  they  fhould  pay  one  rix-dollar  for
the  dinner  of  every  ftranger,  and  another  for  his  fupper  and
bed,  if  he  mould  flccp  afhore.  Under  this  flipulation  they
were  to  be  f  urnifhed  with  tea,  coffee,  punch,  pipes  and  to-
bacco, for  themfelves  and  their  friends,  as  much  as  they
could  confume  ;  they  were  alfo  to  pay  half  a  rupee,  or  one
milling  and  three  pence  a  day  for  each  of  their  fervants.

They  foon  learnt  that  thefe  rates  were  more  than  double

the  common  charges  of  board  and  lodging  in  the  town,  and

Vol.  II.  4  Y  their


714  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

*77°-       their  table,  though  it  had  the  appearance  of  magnificence.,

' * — -*   was  wretchedly  ferved.     Their  dinner  confifted  of  one  courfe

luraayu.  ^  fifteen  dimes,  and  their  fupper  of  one  courfe  of  thirteen,
but  nine  or  ten  of  them  confided  of  bad  poultry,  varioufly
dreffed,  and  often  ferved  up  the  fecond,  third,  and  even  the
fourth  time  :  the  fame  cluck  having  appeared  more  than  once
roafccd,  found  his  way  again  to  the  table  as  a  fricafee,  and
a  fourth  time  in  the  form  of  forced  meat.  It  was  not  long,
however,  before  they  learnt  that  this  treatment  was  only  by
way  of  eflay,  and  that  it  was  the  invariable  cuftom  of  the
houfe,  to  fupply  all  ftrangers,  at  their  fiift  coming,  with
fuch  fare  as  could  be  procured  for  the  leafc  money,  and  con-
fequently  would  produce  the  moft  gain:  that  if  either
through  indolence  or  good-nature  they  were  content,  it  was
continued  for  the  benefit  of  the  hoft,  but  that  if  they  com-
plained, it  was  gradually  amended  till  they  were  fatisfied,
which  fometimes  happened  before  they  had  the  worth  of
their  money.  After  this  difcovery,  they  remonftrated,  and
their  fare  became  better;  however,  after  a  few  days,  Mr.
Banks  hired  a  little  houfe,  the  next  door  on  the  left  hand  to
the  hotel,  for  himfelf  and  his  party,  for  which  he  paid  after
the  rate  of  ten  rix-dollars,  or  two  pounds  five  millings  fler-
ling  a  month  ;  but  here  they  were  very  far  from  having  either
the  convenience  or  the  privacy  which  they  expected ;  no  per-
fon  was  permitted  to  ileep  in  this  private  houfe  occafionally,
as  a  gueft  to  the  perfon  who  hired  it,  under  a  penalty,  but
amoft  every  Dutchman  that  went  by  ran  in  without  any
ceremony,  to  aflc  what  they  fold,  there  having  been  very
feldom  any  private  perfons  at  Batavia  who  had  not  fome-
thing  to  fell.  Every  body  here  hires  a  carriage,  and  Mr.
Banks  hired  two.  They  are  open  chaifes,  made  to  hold  two
people,  and  driven  by  a  man  fitting  on  a  coach-box ;  for
each  of  thefe  he  paid  two  rix-dollars  a  day.

5  As


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  -f.

As  foon  as  he  was  fettled  in  his  new  habitation,  he  fent  for  *77c-
Tupia,  who  till  now  had  continued  on  board  upon  account  J^^IIl*
of  his  illnefs,  which  was  of;  the  bilious  kind,  and  for  which  Thurfday"'
he  had  obftinately  refufed  to  take  any  medicine.  He  foon
came  afhore,  with  his  boy  Tayeto,  and  though  while  he  was
on  board,  and  after  he  came  into  the  boat,  he  was  exceed-
ingly liftlefs  and  dejected,  he  no  fooner  entered  the  town
than  he  feemed  to  be  animated  with  a  new  foul.  The  houfes,
carriages,  ftreets,  people,  and  it  multiplicity  of  other  ob-
jects, all  new,  which  rumed  upon  him  at  once,  produced
an  effect  like  the  fudden  and  fecret  power  that  is  imagined
offafcination.  Tayeto  expreffed  his  wonder  and  delight
with  ftill  lefs  reftraint,  and  danced  along  the  ftreet  in  a  kind
of  extafy,  examining  every  object:  with  a  reftlefs  and  eager
cuiiofity,  which  was  every  moment  excited  and  gratified.
One  of  the  firfl  things  that  Tupia  remarked,  was  the  various
dreffes  of  the  paffing  multitude,  concerning  which  he  made
many  enquiries ;  and  when  he  was  told  that  in  this  place,
where  people  of  many  different  nations  were  affembled,
every  one  wore  the  habit  of  his  country,  he  defired  that  he
might  conform  to  the  cuflom,  and  appear  in  that  of  Otaheite.
South  Sea  cloth  was  therefore  fent  for  from  the  fhip,  and  he
equipped  himfelf  with  great  expedition  and  dexterity.  The
people  who  had  feen  Otourou,  the  Indian  who  had  been
brought  hither  by  M.  Bougainville,  enquired  whether  Tupia
was  not  the  fame  perfon;  from  thefe  enquiries,  we  learnt
who  it  was  that  we  had  fuppofed  to  be  Spaniards,  from  the
accounts  that  had  been  given  of  two  mips  by  the  Iflanders.

In  the  mean  time,  I  procured  an  order  to  the  fuperinten-
dant  of  the  ifland  of  Ouruft,  where  the  fhip  was  to  be  re-
paired, to  receive  her  there ;  and  fent  by  one  of  the  mips  that
failed  for  Holland,  an  account  of  our  arrival  here,  to  Mr.
Stephens,  the  Secretary  to  the  Admiralty.

4  Y  2  The


7i6  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i-77**  The  expences  that  would  be  incurred  by  repairing  and  re-

• — -v-lL/  fitting  the  fhip,  rendered  it  neceffary  for  me  to  take  up
rhurfdayu.  money  in  ^jg  piace)  which  I  imagined  might  be  done  with-
out difficulty,  but  I  found  myfelf  miftaken;  for  after  the
moil  diligent  enquiry,  I  could  not  find  any  private  perfon  that
had  ability  and  inclination  to  advance  the  fum  that  I  wanted.
In  this  difficulty  I  applied  to  the  Governor  himfelf,  by  a
written  requeft,  in  confequence  of  which,  the  Shebander  had
orders  to  fupply  me  with  what  money  I  mould  require  out  of
the  Company's  Treafury.

ThurfdayiS.  On  the  18th,  as  foon  as  it  was  light,  having  by  feveral
accidents  and  miftakes  fuffered  a  delay  of  many  days,  I  took
up  the  anchor,  and  ran  down  to  Ouruft :  a  few  days  after-
wards, we  went  along-fide  of  the  wharf,  on  Cooper's  Iflandj
which  lies  clofe  to  Ouruft,  in  order  to  take  out  our  ftores.

By  this  time,  having  been  here  only  nine  days,  we  began
to  feel  the  fatal  effects  of  the  climate  and  fituation.  Tupia,
after  the  flow  of  fpirits  which  the  novelties  of  the  place  pro-
duced upon  his  firft  landing,  funk  on  a  fudden,  and  grew
every  day  worfe  and  worfe.  Tayeto  was  feized  with  an  in-
flammation upon  his  lungs,  Mr.  Banks's  two  fervants  became
very  ill,  and  himfelf  and  Dr.  Solander  were  attacked  by
fevers:  in  a  few  days,  almofl  every  perfon  both  onboard
and  afliore  was  fick ;  affected,  no  doubt,  by  the  low  fwampy
fituation  of  the  place,  and  the  numberlefs  dirty  canals  which,
interfect  the  town  in  all  dire&ions.  On  the  26th,  I  fet  up
the  tent  for  the  reception  of  the  fhip's  company,  of  whom
there  was  but  a  fmall  number  able  to  do  duty.  Poor  Tupia,
of  whofc  life  we  now  began  to  defpair,  and  who  till  this
time  had  continued  afliore  with  Mr.  Banks,  defired  to  be  re-
moved to  the  fhip,  where,  he  faid,  he  fiiould  breathe  a  freer
air  than  among  the  numerous  houfes  which  obftructed  ic
h  afliore.?:


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  7i7

afliore:  on  board  the  fhip,  however,  he  could  not  go,  forfhe       1770.

x  October.

was  unrigged,  and  preparing  to  be  laid  down  at  the  careen-  < „ r

ing  place  ;  but  on  the  28th,  Mr.  Banks  went  with  him  to  Sunday  28,.
Cooper's  hland,  or,  as  it  is  called  here,  Kuypor,  where  fhe
lay,  and  as  he  feemed  pleafed  with  the  fpot,  a  tent  was
there  pitched  for  him:  at  this  place,  both  the  fea  breeze  and
the  land  breeze  blew  directly  over  him,  and  he  expreffed
great  fatisfaction  in  his  fituation.  Mr.  Banks,  whofe  huma-
nity kept  him  two  days  with  this  poor  Indian,  returned  to
the  town  on  the  30th,  and  the  fits  of  his  intermittent,  which  Tuefday  301
was  now  become  a  regular  tertian,  were  fo  violent  as  to  de-
prive him  of  his  fenfes  while  they  lafted,  and  leave  him  fo
weak  that  he  was  fcarcely  able  to  crawl  down  flairs  :  at  this
time,  Dr.  Solander's  diforder  alfo  increafed,  and  Mr.  Monk-
houfe,  the  Surgeon,  was  confined  to  his  bed.

On  the  fifth  of  November,  after  many  delays  in  confe-  November;.
quence  of  the  Dutch  mips  coming  along-fide  the  wharfs  to
load  pepper,  the  fhip  was  laid  down,  and  the  fame  day,  Mr.
Monkhoufe,  our  Surgeon,  a  fenfible,  fkilful  man,  fell  the
firft  facrifice  to  this  fatal  country,  a  lofs  which  was  greatly
aggravated  by  our  fituation.  Dr.  Solander  was  juft  able  to
attend  his  funeral,  but  Mr.  Banks  was  confined  to  his  bed.
Our  diftrefs  was  now  very  great,  and  the  profpect  before  us
difcouraging  in  the  highefl  degree:  our  danger  was  not  fucii
as  we  could  furmount  by  any  efforts  of  our  own ;  courage,
fkill,  and  diligence  were  all  equally  ineffectual,  and  death
was  every  day  making  advances  upon  us,  where  we  could
neither  refift  nor  fly.  Malay  fervants  were  hired  to  attend
the  fick,  but  they  had  fo  little  fenfe  either  of.  duty  or  huma-
nity, that  they  could  not  be  kept  within  call,  and  the  patient
was  frequently  obliged  to  get  out. of  bed  to  feek  them,.  On
die  9th,  we  loft  our  poor  Indian  boy  Tayetor  and  Tupia  was  FxHajr.^.

fa


7i-8  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°«       fo  much  affected,  that  it  was  doubted  whether  he  would

November.      _  .,,     .  ■>

< .   furvive  till  the  next  day.

Friday  9.  '  '  .

In  the  mean  time,  the  bottom  of  the  imp  being  examined,
was  found  to  be  in  a  worfe  condition  than  we  apprehended  :
the  falfe  keel  was  all  gone  to  within  twenty  feet  of  the  ftern
poll;  the  main  keel  was  confiderably  injured  in  many
places  ;  a  great  quantity  of  the  fheathing  was  torn  off,  and
feveral  planks  were  much  damaged;  two  of  them,  and  the
half  of  a  third,  under  the  main  channel  near  the  keel,  were,
for  the  length  of  fix  feet,  fo  worn,  that  they  were  not  above
an  eighth  part  of  an  inch  thick,  and  here  the  worms  had
made  their  way  quite  into  the  timbers ;  yet  in  this  condition
fhe  had  failed  many  hundred  leagues,  where  navigation  is
as  dangerous  as  in  any  part  of  the  world  :  how  much  mifery
did  we  efcape,  by  being  ignorant  rhat  fo  confiderable  a  part
of  the  bottom  of  the  veffel  was  thinner  than  the  fole  of  a
fhoe,  and  that  every  life  on  board  depended  upon  fo  flight
and  fragile  a  barrier  between  us  and  the  unfathomable
ocean  !  It  feemed,  however,  that  we  had  been  preferved  only
to  perifh  here ;  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  were  fo  bad  that
the  phyfician  declared  they  had  no  chance  for  recovery  but
by  removing  into  the  country  ;  a  houfe  was  therefore  hired
for  them,  at  the  diftance  of  about  two  miles  from  the  town,
which  belonged  to  the  mafler  of  the  hotel,  who  engaged  to
furniih  them  with  provifions,  and  the  ufe  of  flaves.  As  they
had  already  experienced  their  want  of  influence  over  flaves
that  had  other  matters,  and  the  unfeeling  inattention  of  thefe
fellows  to  the  fick,  they  bought  each  of  them  a  Mallay
woman,  which  removed  both  the  caufes  of  their  being  fo  ill
ferved ;  the  women  were  their  own  property,  and  the  ten-
.dernefs  of  the  fex,  even  here,  made  them  good  nurfes.
While  thefe  preparations  were  making,   they  received  an

account


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  7rg

arccount  of  the  death  of  Tupia,  who  funk  at  once  after  the
lofs  of  the  boy,  whom  he  loved  with  the  tendernefs  of  a
parent.

By  the  14th,  the  bottom  of  the  fhip  was  thoroughly  re-  Wednef.  i>
paired,  and  very  much  to  my  fatisfaclion  :  k  would,  indeed,
be  injuftice  to  the  officers  and  workmen  of  this  yard,  not  to
declare  that,  in  my  opinion,  there  is  not  a  marine  yard  in
the  world,  where  a  fhip  can  be  laid  down  with  more  conve-
nience, fafety,  and  difpatch,  nor  repaired  with  more  dili-
gence and  fkill.  At  this  place  they  heave  down  by  two
mafts,  a  method  which  we  do  not  now  practife ;  it  is,  however,
unqueftionably  more  fafe  and  expeditious  to  heave  down
with  two  mails  than  one,  and  he  muft  have  a  good  fhare  of
bigotry  to  old  cuftoms,  and  an  equal  want  of  common  fenfe,
who  will  not  allow  this,  after  feeing  with  what  facility  the
Dutch  heave  down  their  largeft  mips  at  this  place.

Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  recovered  flowly  at  their  coun-
try-houfe,  which  was  not  only  open  to  the  fea  breeze,  but
fituated  upon  a  running  ftream,  which  greatly  contributed
to  the  circulation  of  the  air:  but  I  was  now  taken  ill  myfelf ;
Mr.  Sporing,  and  a  feaman  who  had  attended  Mr.  Banks^
were  alfo  feized  with  intermittents ;  and  indeed  there  was
not  more  than  ten  of  the  whole  fhip's  company  that  were
able  to  do  duty.

We  proceeded  however  in  rigging  the  fhip,  and  getting
water  and  flores  aboard  :  the  water  we  were  obliged  to  pro-
cure from  Batavia,  at  the  rate  of  fix  fliillings  and  eight  pence
a  leager,  or  one  hundred  and  fifty  gallons.

About  the  26th,  the  weflerly  monfoon  fet  in,  which  gene-  Monday  26.
rally  blows  here  in  the  night  from  the  S.  W.  and  in  the  day
from  the  N.  W.  or  N.     For  fome  nights  before  this,  we  had  .
very  heavy  rain,  with  much  thunder ;  and  in  the  night  be-
tween.


720


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


Monday  26.


tween  the  25th  and  26th,  fuch  rain  as  we  had  feldom  feen,
for  near  four  hours  without  intermiflion.  Mr.  Banks's  houfe
admitted  the  water  in  every  part  like  a  fieve,  and  it  ran
through  the  lower  rooms  in  a  dream  that  would  have  turned
a  mill:  he  was  by  this  time  fufliciently  recovered  to  go  out,
and  upon  his  entering  Batavia  the  next  morning,  he  was
much  furprifed  to  fee  the  bedding  every  where  hung  out  to
dry.

The  wet  feafon  was  now  fet  in,  though  we  had  fome  in-
tervals of  fair  weather.  The  frogs  in  the  ditches,  which
croak  ten  times  louder  than  any  frogs  in  Europe,  gave  notice
of  rain  by  an  inceffant  noife  that  was  almofl  intolerable,  and
the  gnats  and  mufquitos,  which  had  been  very  troublefome
even  during  the  dry  weather,  were  now  become  innu-
merable, fwarming  from  every  plafh  of  water  like  bees
from  a  hive ;  they  did  not,  however,  much  incommode  us
in  the  day,  and  the  flings,  however  troublefome  at  firft,
never  continued  to  itch  above  half  an  hour,  fo  that  none  of
us  felt  in  the  day,  the  effects  of  the  wounds  they  had  received
in  the  night.

On  the  Sth  of  December,  the  fhip  being  perfectly  refitted,
and  having  taken  in  moil  of  her  water  and  ftores,  and  re-
ceived her  fick  on  board,  we  ran  up  to  Batavia  Road,  and
anchored  in  four  fathom  and  an  half  of  water.
Monday  24.  From  this  time,  to  the  24th,  we  were  employed  in  getting
on  board  the  remainder  of  our  water  and  provifions,  with
fome  new  pumps,  and  in  feveral  other  operations  that  were
neceffary  to  fit  the  fhip  for  the  fea,  all  which  would  have
been  effected  much  fooner,  if  ficknefs  and  death  had  not  dis-
abled or  carried  off  a  great  number  of  our  men.

While  we  lay  here,  the  Earl  of  Elgin,  Captain  Cook,  a  fhip
belonging  to  the  Engliffi  Earl  India  Company,  came  to  an

anchor


December.
Saturday  8


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  ?2I

anchor  in  the  Road.    She  was  bound  from  Madrafs  to  China,  1770.

but  having  loft  her  paflage,  put  in  here  to  wait  for  the  next  ■ vec""'  er'-

feafon.     The  Phoenix,    Captain  Black,  an  Engliffi  country  Monday  24*
fhip,  from  Bencoolen,  alfo  came  to  an  anchor  at  this  place.

In  the  afternoon  of  Chriftmas  eve,  the  24th,  I  took  leave
of  the  Governor,  and  feveral  of  the  principal  gentlemen  of
the  place,  with  whom  I  had  formed  connections,  and
from  whom  I  received  every  pollible  civility  and  affiftance  ;
but  in  the  mean  time  an  accident  happened,  which  might
have  produced  difagreeable  confcquences.  A  feaman  had
run  away  from  one  of  the  Dutch  mips  in  the  Road,  and
entered  on  board  of  mine :  the  Captain  had  applied  to  the
Governor,  to  reclaim  him  as  a  fubject  of  Holland,  and  an
order  for  thatpurpole  was  procured  :  this  order  was  brought
to  me  foon  after  I  returned  from  my  laft  viflt,  and  I  (aid,
that  if  the  man  appeared  to  be  a  Dutchman,  he  mould  cer-
tainly be  delivered  up.  Mr.  Hicks  commanded  on  board,
and  I  gave  the  Dutch  officer  an  order  to  him,  to  deliver  the
man  up  under  that  condition.  I  flept  myfelf  this  night  on
fhore,  and  in  the  morning,  the  Captain  of  the  Dutch  Com-  Tuefday-25.
modore  came  and  told  me  that  he  had  carried  my  order  on
board,  but  that  the  officer  had  refufed  to  deliver  up  the  man,
alleging,  not  only  that  he  was  not  a  Dutchman,  but  that
he  was  a  fubject  of  Great  Britain,  born  in  Ireland ;  I  re-
plied, that  the  officer  had  perfectly  executed  my  orders,  and
that  if  the  man  was  an  Englifh  fubjecl,  it  could  not  be  ex-
pected that  I  fhould  deliver  him  up.  The  Captain  then  faid,
that  he  was  juft  come  from  the  Governor,  to  demand  the
man  of  me  in  his  name,  as  a  fubject  of  Denmark,  alleging,
that  he  flood  in  the  fhip's  books  as  born  at  Elfineur.  The
claim  of  this  man  as  a  fubject  of  Holland,  being  now  given
up,  I  obferved  to  the  Captain,  that  there  appeared  to  be  fome

Vol.  II.  4  Z  miftake


*22  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

miftake  in  the  General's  mefTage,  for  that  he  would  certainly
never  demand  a  Danifh  feaman  from  me,  who  had  com-
Tuefday  26.  mitte(j  no  other  crime  than  preferring  the  fervice  of  the
Englifh  to  that  of  the  Dutch.  I  added,  however,  to  con-
vince him  of  my  fincere  defire  to  avoid  difputes,  that  if  the
man  was  a  Dane  he  mould  be  delivered  up  as  a  courtefy,
though  he  could  not  be  demanded  as  a  right ;  but  that  if  I
found  he  was  an  Englifh  fubject,  I  would  keep  him  at  all
events.  Upon  thefe  terms  we  parted,  and  foon  after  I  re-
ceived a  letter  from  Mr.  Hicks,  containing  indubitable  proof
that  the  feaman  in  queflion  was  a  fubject  of  his  Britannic  Ma-
jelly.  This  letter  I  immediately  carried  to  the  Shebander,
with  a  requeft  that  it  might  be  fhewn  to  the  Governor,  and
that  his  Excellency  might  at  the  fame  time  be  told,  I  would
not  upon  any  terms  part  with  the  man.  This  had  the  defired
effect,  and  I  heard  no  more  of  the  affair.

In  the  evening,  I  went  on  board,  accompanied  by  Mr.
Banks,  and  the  reft  of  the  gentlemen  who  had  conflantly
refided  on  more,  and  who,  though  better,  were  not  yet
perfectly  recovered.

^'ednef.  z6.  At  fix  in  the  morning,  of  the  q6th,  we  weighed  and  fet
fail,  with  a  light  breeze  at  S.  W.  The  Elgin  Indiaman  fa-
luted  us  with  three  cheers  and  thirteen  guns,  and  the  garri-
foh  with  fourteen,  both  which,  with  the  help  of  our  fwivels,
we  returned,  and  foon  after  the  fea  breeze  fet  in  at  N.  by  W.
which  obliged  us  to  anchor  juft  without  the  mips  in  the
Road.

At  this  time,  the  number  of  fick  on  board  amounted  to
forty,  and  the  reft  of  the  fhip's  company  were  in  a  very  feeble
condition.  Every  individual  had  been  fick  except  the  fail-
maker,  an  old  man  between  feventy  and  eighty  years  of

age.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  723

age,  and  it  is  very  remarkable  that  this  old  man,  during      177°-
our  ftay  at  this  place,  was  conftantly  drunk  every  day:  we   L_  v-    '
had  buried  feven,  the  Surgeon,  three  feamen,  Mr.  Green's  Wednef' z  '
fervant,  Tupia,  and  Tayeto  his  boy.    All  but  Tupia  fell  a
facriflce  to  the  unwholefome,    ftagnant,    putrid  air  of  the
country,  and  he  who  from  his  birth  had  been  ufed  to  fubfifl
chiefly  upon  vegetable  food,  particularly  ripe  fruit,   foon
contracted  all  the  diforders  that  are  incident  to  a  fea  life,
and  would  probably  have  funk  under  them  before  we  could
have  completed  our  voyage,  if  we  had  not  been  obliged  to
go  to  Batavia  to  refit.


4  Z  a  CHAP.


#4  LIEUTENANT   €OOK's    VOYAGE


CHAP.     XIII.

Some  Account  of  Batavia,  and  the  adjacent  Country  ,  with
their  Fruits,  Flowers,  and  other  Produ&ions.

J77°»  "|3  ATA  V I  A,  the  capital  of  the  Dutch  dominions  in  India,
1  -™  2t  *- J  and  generally  fuppofed  to  have  no  equal  among  all  the
pofTeflions  of  the  Europeans  in  Afia,  is  Situated  on  the  north
fide  of  the  ifland  of  Java,  in  a  low  fenny  plain,  where  feveral
fmall  rivers,  which  take  their  rife  in  the  mountains  called
BlaeuwenBerg,  about  forty  miles  up  the  country,  empty  them-
felves  into  the  fea,  and  where  the  coaft  forms  a  large  bay,  called
the  Bay  of  Batavia,  at  the  distance  of  about  eight  leagues
from  the  ftreight  of  Sunda.  It  lies  in  latitude  6°  io'S.  and
longitude  106^50' E.  from  the  meridian  of  Greenwich,  as
appears  from  aftronomical  obfervations  made  upon  the  Spot,
by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Mohr,  who  has  built  an  elegant  ob-
fervatory,  which  is  as  well  furnifhed  with  instruments  as
molt  in  Europe.

The  Dutch  feem  to  have  pitched  upon  this  fpot  for  the
convenience  of  water-carriage,  and  in  that  it  is  indeed  a
fecond  Holland,  and  fuperior  to  every  other  place  in  the
world.  There  are  very  few  Streets  that  have  not  a  canal  of
considerable  breadth  running  through  them,  or  rather  Stag-
nating in  them,  and  continued  for  Several,  miles  in  almoft
every  direction  beyond  the  town,  which  is  alfo  interfected
by  five  or  fix  rivers,  fome  of  which  are  navigable  thirty  or
forty  miles  up  the  country.  As  the  houfes  are  large,  and
the  Streets  wide,  it  takes  up  a  much  greater  extent,  in  pro-

7  portion


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  725

portion  to  the  number  of  houfes  it  contains,  than  any  city
in  Europe.  Valentyn,  who  wrote  an  account  of  it  about  the
year  1726,  fays,  that  in  his  time  there  were,  within  the
walls,  1242  Dutch  houfes,  and  1200  Chinefe;  and  without
the  walls  1066  Dutch,  and  1240  Chinefe,  befides  12  arrack
houfes,  making  in  all  4760 :  but  this  account  appeared  to  us
to  be  greatly  exaggerated,  efpecially  with  refpect  to  the
number  of  houfes  within  the  walls.

The  ftreets  are  fpacious  and  handfome,  and  the  banks  of
the  canals  are  planted  with  rows  of  trees,  that  make  a' very
plealing  appearance  ;  but  the  trees  concur  with  the  canals
to  make  the  fituation  unwholefome.  The  ftagnant  canals
in  the  dry  feafon  exhale  an  intolerable  flench,  and  the  trees
impede  the  courfe  of  the  air,  by  which  in  fome  degree  the
putrid  effluvia  would  be  diffipated.  In  the  wet  feafon  the
inconvenience  is  equal,  for  then  thefe  refervoirs  of  corrupted
water  overflow  their  banks  in  the  lower  part  of  the  town,
efpecially  in  the  neighbourhood  of.  the  hotel,  and  fill
the  lower  ilories  of  the  houfes,  where  they  leave  behind
them  an  inconceivable  quantity  of  flime  and  filth  :  yet  thefe
eanals  are  fometimes  cleaned ;  but  the  cleaning  them  is  fo
managed  as  to  become  as  great  a  nuifance  as  the  foulnefs  of
the  water;  for  the  black  mud  that  is  taken  from  the  bottom  is
fufFered  to  lie  upon  the  banks,  that  is,  in  the  middle  of  the
Itreet,  till  it  has  acquired  a  fufficient  degree  of  hardnefs  to
be  made  the  lading  of  a  boat,  and  carried  away.  As  this
mud  confifts  chiefly  of  human  ordure,  which  is  regularly
thrown  into  the  canals  every  morning,  there  not  being  a
neceflary-houfe  in  the  whole  town,  it  poifons  the  air  while
it  is  drying  to  a  confiderable  extent.  Even  the  running
ftreams  become  nuifances  in  their  turn,  by  the  naflinefs  or
negligence  of  the  people ;  for  every  now  and  then  a  dead

hog.


7Z6  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  hog,  or  a  dead  horfe,  is  flranded  upon  the  mallow  parts,  and
December^  ^  i,Qmg  the  bufinefs  of  no  particular  peribn  to  remove  the
nuifance,  it  is  negligently  left  to  time  and  accident.  While
we  were  here,  a  dead  buffalo  lay  upon  the  fhoal  of  a  river
that  ran  through  one  of  the  principal  ftreets  above  a  week,
and  at  laft  was  carried  away  by  a  flood.

The  houfes  are  in  general  well  adapted  to  the  climate;
they  confift  of  one  very  large  room  or  hall  on  the  ground
floor,  with  a  door  at  each  end,  both  which  generally  ftand
open :  at  one  end  a  room  is  taken  off  by  a  partition,  where
the  mafter  of  the  houfe  tranfadls  his  bufinefs ;  and  in  the
middle  between  each  end  there  is  a  court,  which  gives  light
to  the  hall,  and  at  the  fame  time  increafes  the  draught  of
air.  From  one  corner  of  the  hall  the  flairs  go  up  to  the  floor
above,  where  alfo  the  rooms  are  fpacious  and  airy.  In  the
alcove,  which  is  formed  by  the  court,  the  family  dine ;  and
at  other  times  it  is  occupied  by  the  female  flaves,  who  are
not  allowed  to  lit  down  any  where  elfe.

The  public  buildings  are,  mofl  of  them,  old,  heavy,  and
ungraceful ;  but  the  new  church  is  not  inelegant;  it  is  built
with  a  dome,  that  is  feen  from  a  great  diftance  at  fea,  and
though  the  outfide  has  rather  a  heavy  appearance,  the  infide
forms  a  very  fine  room  :  it  is  furnifhed  with  an  organ  of  a
proper  fize,  being  very  large,  and  is  mofl  magnificently  il-
luminated by  chandeliers.

The  town  is  inclofed  by  a  ftone  wall,  of  a  moderate  height;
but  the  whole  of  it  is  old,  and  many  parts  are  much  out  of
repair.  This  wall  itfelf  is  furrounded  by  a  river,  which  in
fome  places  is  fifty,  and  in  fome  a  hundred  yards  wide :  the
ftream  is  rapid,,  but  the  water  is  fhallow.  The  wall  is  alfo
lined  within  by  a  canal,  which  in  different  parts  is  of  diffe-
rent breadths ;  fo  that,  in  palling  either  out  or  in  through  the

gates,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  727

gates,  it  is  nccefTary  to  crofs  two  draw-bridges ;  and  there       J77o.
is  no  accefs  for  idle  people  or  ftrangers  to  walk  upon  the    (      ]"  Jj
ramparts,  which  feem  to  be  but  ill  provided  with  guns.

In  the  north  eafl  corner  of  the  town  flands  the  caflle  or
citadel,  the  walls  of  which  are  both  higher  and  thicker  than
thofe  of  the  town,  efpecially  near  the  landing-place,  where
there  is  depth  of  water  only  for  boats,  which  it  completely
commands,  with  feveral  large  guns  that  make  a  very  good
appearance.

Within  this  cattle  are  apartments  for  the  Governor  Gene-
ral, and  all  the  Council  of  India,  to  which  they  are  enjoined
to  repair  in  cafe  of  a  fiege.  Here  are  alfo  large  ftorehoufes,
where  great  quantities  of  the  Company's  goods  are  kept,
efpecially  thofe  that  are  brought  from  Europe,  and  where
almoll  all  their  writers  tranfacl  their  bulinefs.  In  this  place
alio  are  laid  up  a  great  number  of  cannon,  whether  to  mount
upon  the  walls  or  furnifh  flapping,  we  could  not  learn ;  and
the  Company  is  faid  to  be  well  fupplied  with  powder,  which
is  difperfed  in  various  magazines,  that  if  fome  mould  be  de-
flroyed  by  lightning,  which  in  this  place  is  very  frequent^
the  reft  may  efcape.

Befides  the  fortifications  of  the  town,  numerous  forts  are
difperfed  about  the  country  to  the  diftance  of  twenty  or  thirty
miles ;  thefe  feem  to  have  been  intended  merely  to  keep  the
natives  in  awe,  and  indeed  they  are  fit  for  nothing  elfe.  For
the  fame  purpofe  a  kind  of  houfes,  each  o^  which  mounts
about  eight  guns,  are  placed  in  fuch  fituations  as  command
the  navigation  of  three  or  four  canals,  and  ■ ...  .nfequently  the
roads  upon  their  banks:  fome  of  thefe  are  in  the  town  itfelf,
and  it  was  from  one  of  thefe  that  all  the  belt  houfes  belong-
ing to  the  Chinefe  were  levelled  with  the  ground  in  the  Chi-
nefe  rebellion  of  1 740.  Thefe  defences  are  fcattered  over  all
8  parts


728  LIEUTENANT    COOR's   VOYAGE

i77°-       parts  of  Java,  and  the  other  iflands  of  which  the  Dutch  have

i_  -.-  Jj   got  pofTeffion  in  thefe  feas.   Of  one  of  thefe  fingular  forts,  or

fortified  houfes,  we  fhould  have  procured  a  drawing,  if  our

Gentlemen  had  not  been  confined  by  ficknefs  almoft  all  the

time  they  were  upon  the  ifland.

If  the  Dutch  fortifications  here  are  not  formidable  in
themfelves,  they  become  fo  by  their  fituation  ;  for  they  are
among  morafTes  where  the  roads,  which  are  nothing  more
than  a  bank  thrown  up  between  a  canal  and  a  ditch,  may
eafily  be  deftroyed,  and  confequently  the  approach  of  heavy
artillery  either  totally  prevented  or  greatly  retarded :  for  it
■would  be  exceedingly  difficult,  if  not  impoflible,  to  tranfport
them  in  boats,  as  they  all  mutter  every  night  under  the
guns  of  the  cattle,  a  fituation  from  which  it  would  be  im-
poflible for  an  enemy  to  take  them.  Befides,  in  this  country,
delay  is  death  ;  fo  that  whatever  retards  an  enemy,  will  de-
ftroy  him.  In  lefs  than  a  week,  we  were  fenfible  of  the  un-
healthinefs  of  the  climate  -,  and  in  lefs  than  a  month  half
the  fhip's  company  were  unable  to  do  their  duty.  AVe
were  told,  that  of  a  hundred  foldiers  who  arrive  here  from
Europe,  it  was  a  rare  thing  for  fifty  to  furvive  the  firft  year;
that  of  thofe  fifty,  half  would  then  be  in  the  hofpital,  and
not  ten  of  the  reft  in  perfect  health :  poffibly  this  account
may  be  exaggerated ;  but  the  pale  and  feeble  wretches
whom  we  faw  crawling  about  with  a  mufquet,  which  they
were  fcarcely  able  to  carry,  inclined  us  to  believe  that  it  was
true.  Every  white  inhabitant  of  the  town  indeed  is  a  foldier ;
the  younger  are  conftantly  muttered,  and  thofe  who  have
ferved  five  years  are  liable  to  be  called  out  when  their  affift-
ance  is  thought  to  be  necefiary  ;  but  as  neither  of  them  are
ever  exercifed,  or  do  any  kind  of  duty,  much  cannot  be  ex-
pected from  them.    The  Portuguefe,  indeed,  are  in  general

good


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  729


good  mark  (men,  becaufc  they  employ  themfelves  much  in
mooting  wild  hogs  and  deer:  neither  the  Mardykers  nor  the
Chinefe  know  the  ufe  of  fire-arms ;  but  as  they  are  faid  to
be  brave,  they  might  do  much  execution  with  their  own
weapons,  fwords,  lances,  and  daggers.  The  Mardykers  are
Indians  of  all  nations,  who  are  defcended  from  free  ances-
tors, or  have  themfelves  been  made  free.

But  if  it  is  difficult  to  attack  Batavia  by  land,  it  is  utterly
impoffible  to  attack  it  by  fea :  for  the  water  is  fo  mallow,
that  it  will  fcarcely  admit  a  longboat  to  come  within  cannon
fhot  of  the  walls,  except  in  a  narrow  channel,  called  the
river,  that  is  walled  on  both  fides  by  ftrong  piers,  and  runs
about  half  a  mile  into  the  harbour.  At  the  other  end,  it  ter-
minates under  the  fire  of  the  flrongeft  part  of  the  caftle;  and
here  its  communication  with  the  canals  that  interfect  the
town  is  cut  off  by  a  large  wooden  boom,  which  is  fhut
every  night  at  fix  o'clock,  and  upon  no  pretence  opened  till
the  next  morning.  The  harbour  of  Batavia  is  accounted  the
finefi:  in  India,  and  to  all  appearance  with  good  reafon  ;  it  is
large  enough  to  contain  any  number  of  fhips,  and  the
ground  is  fo  good  that  one  anchor  will  hold  till  the  cable
decays :  it  never  admits  any  fea  that  is  troublefomc,  and  its
only  inconvenience  is  the  fhoal  water  between  the  road  and
the  river.  When  the  fea  breeze  blows  frefh,  it  makes  a  cock-
ling fea  that  is  dangerous  to  boats:  our  longboat  once  ftruck
two  or  three  times  as  flie  was  attempting  to  come  out,  and
regained  the  river's  mouth  with  fome  difficulty.  A  Dutch
boat,  laden  with  fails  and  rigging  for  one  of  the  Indiamen,
was  entirely  loft.

Round  the  harbour,  on  the  outiide,  lie  many  ifiands,  which
the  Dutch  have  taken  poffeilion  of,  a  ad  apply  to  different
ufes.     To  one  of  them,  called  Edam,  they  tranfport  all  Eu-

Vol.  II.  5  A  ropeans


1770.

December


730  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

»77°«      ropeans  who  have  been  guilty  of  crimes  that  are  not  worthy

December.  ■     '       "        '  ■  J

\. — „ — i  of  death:  fome  are  fentenced  to  remain  there  ninety-nine
years,  fome  forty,  fome  twenty,  fbme  lefs,  down  to  five,  in
proportion  to  their  offence ;  and  during  their  banimment,
they  are  employed  as  Haves  in  making  ropes,  and  other
drudgery.  In  another  ifland,  called  Purmerent,  they  have  an
hofpital,  where  people  are  faid  to  recover  much  falter  than
at  Batavia.  In  a  third,  called  Kuyper,  they  have  warehoufes
belonging  to  the  Company,  chiefly  for  rice,  and  other  mer-
chandize of  fmall  value ;  and  here  the  foreign  mips,  that
are  to  be  laid  down  at  Ouruft,  another  of  thefe  iflands,  which
with  Kuyper  has  been  mentioned  before,  difcharge  their
cargoes  at  wharfs  which  are  very  convenient  for  the  pur-
pofe.  Here  the  guns,  fails,  and  other  flores  of  the  Falmouth,
a  man  of  war,  which  was  condemned  at  this  place  when  fhe
was  returning  from  Manilla,  were  depofited,  and  the  fhip
herfelf  remained  in  the  harbour  with  only  the  warrant  offi-
cers on  board  for  many  years.  Remittances  were  regularly
made  them  from  home ;  but  no  notice  was  ever  taken  of  the
many  memorials  they  fent,  defiring  to  be  recalled.  Happily
for  them,  the  Dutch  thought  lit,  about  fix  months  before  our
arrival,  to  fell  the  veilel  and  all  her  flores,  by  public  auction,
and  fend  the  officers  home  in  their  own  mips.  At  Ouruft,
they  repair  all  their  own  {hipping,  and  keep  a  large  quan-
tity of  naval  ftores.

The  country  round  Batavia  is  for  fome  miles  a  continued
range  of  country  houfes  and  gardens.  Many  of  the  gardens
are  very  large,  and,  by  fome  ftrange  fatality,  all  are  planted
with  trees  almoil  as  thick  as  they  can  Hand ;  fo  that  the
country  derives  no  advantage  from  its  being  cleared  of  the
wood  that  originally  covered  it,  except  the  fruit  of  that
which  has  been  planted  in  its  room.    Thefe  impenetrable

forefts


ROUND    THE    WORLD.

forefts  fland  in  a  dead  flat,  which  extends  fome  miles  beyond
them,  and  is  interfered  in  many  directions  by  rivers,  and
more  flill  by  canals,  which  are  navigable  for  fmall  vefTels.
Nor  is  this  the  worfl,  for  the  fence  of  every  field  and  garden
is  a  ditch ;  and  interfperfed  among  the  cultivated  ground
there  are  many  filthy  fens,  bogs,  and  morafles,  as  well  frefh
as  fait.

It  is  not  ftrange  that  the  inhabitants  of  fuch  a  country
mould  be  familiar  with  difeafe  and  death:  preventive  medi-
cines are  taken  almoft  as  regularly  as  food  ;  and  every  body
expects  the  returns  of  ficknefs,  as  we  do  the  feafons  of  the
year.  We  did  not  fee  a  fingle  face  in  Batavia  that  indicated
perfect  health,  for  there  is  not  the  lead  tint  of  colour  in  the
cheeks  either  of  man  or  woman :  the  women  indeed  are
mod  delicately  fair;  but  with  the  appearance  of  difeafe
there  never  can  be  perfect  beauty.  People  talk  of  death
with  as  much  indifference  as  they  do  in  a  camp  ;  and  when
an  acquaintance  is  faid  to  be  dead,  the  common  reply  is,
"  Well,  he  owed  me  nothing ;"  or,  "  I  muft  get  my  money
"  of  his  executors."

To  this  description  of  the  environs  of  Batavia  there  are  but
two  exceptions.  The  Governor's  country  houfe  is  fituated
upon  a  rifing  ground;  but  its  afcent  is  fo  inconfiderable,  that
it  is  known  to  be  above  the  common  level  only  by  the  ca-
nals being  left  behind,  and  the  appearance  of  a  few  bad
hedges :  his  Excellency,  however,  who  is  a  native  of  this
place,  has,  with  fome  trouble  and  expence,  contrived  to  in-
dole his  own  garden  with  a  ditch  ;  fuch  is  the  influence  of
habit  both  upon  the  tafte  and  the  undcrftanding.  A  famous
market  alio,  called  Paflar  Tanabank,  is  held  upon  an  emi-
nence that  rifes  perpendicularly  about  thirty  feet  above  the
plain  ;  and  except  thefe  fituations,  the  ground,  for  an  extent

<;  A  2  of


732  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77°-  of  between  thirty  and  forty  miles  round  Batavia,  is  exactly
\_  -T-l!l<  parallel  to  the  horizon.  At  the  diftance  of  about  forty  miles
inland  there  are  hills  of  a  confiderable  height,  where,  as  we
were  informed,  the  air  is  healthy,  and  comparatively  cool.
Here  the  vegetables  of  Europe  flourifh  in  great  perfection,
particularly  ftrawberries,  which  can  but  ill  bear  heat ;  and
the  inhabitants  are  vigorous  and  ruddy.  Upon  thefe  hills
fome  of  the  principal  people  have  country  houfes,  which
they  vifit  once  a-year;  and  one  was  begun  for  the  Governor,
upon  the  plan  of  Blenheim,  the  famous  feat  of  the  Duke  of
Marlborough  in  Oxfordfhire,  but  it  has  never  been  finifhed.
To  thefe  hills  alfo  people  are  fent  by  the  phyiicians,  for  the
recovery  of  their  health,  and  the  effects  of  the  air  are  faid  to
be  almofl  miraculous :  the  patient  grows  well  in  a  fhort  time,
but  conitantly  relapfes  foon  after  his  return  to  Batavia.

But  the  fame  fituation  and  circumftances  which  render
Batavia  and  the  country  round  it  unwholefome,  render  it  the
befl  gardener's  ground  in  the  world.  The  foil  is  fruitful  be-
yond imagination,  and  the  conveniences  and  luxuries  of
life  that  it  produces  are  almoft  without  number.

Rice,  which  is  well  known  to  be  the  corn  of  thefe  coun-
tries, and  to  ferve  the  inhabitants  inftead  of  bread,  grows  in
great  plenty:  and  I  mull  here  obferve,  that  in  the  hilly  parts
of  Java,  and  in  many  of  the  eaftern  iflands,  a  fpecies  of  this
grain  is  planted,  which  in  the  weftern  parts  of  India  is  intirely
unknown.  It  is  called  by  the  natives  Paddy  Gunung,  or  Moun-
tain rice  ;  this,  contrary  to  the  other  fort  which  muft  be  un-
der water  three  parts  in.  four  of  the  time  of  its  growth,  is
planted  upon  the  fides  of  hills  where  no  water  but  rain  can.
come  :  it  is  however  planted  at  the  beginning  of  the  rainy  fea-
fon,  and  reaped  in  the  beginning  of  the  dry.  How  far  this  kind
of  rice  might  be  ufeful  in  our  Well  Indian  iflands,  where  no
a.  bread.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  753

bread  corn  is  grown,  it  may  perhaps  be  worth  while  to  en-
quire.

Indian  corn,  or  maize,  is  alfo  produced  here;  which  the
inhabitants  gather  when  young,  and  toaft  in  the  ear.  Here
is  alfo  a  great  variety  of  kidney  beans,  and  lentiles,  which
they  call  Cadjang,  and  which  make  a  confiderable  part  of  the
food  of  the  common  people  ;  befides  millet,  yams  both  wet
and  dry,  fwect  potatoes,  and  European  potatoes,  which  are
very  good,  but  not  cultivated  in  great  plenty.  In  the  gar-
dens, there  are  cabbages,  lettuces,  cucumbers,  rhadifhes,
the  white  rhadiihes  of  China,  which  boil  almofl  as  well  as  a
turnep ;  carrots,  parfley,  celery,  pigeon  peas,  the  egg  plant,
which  broiled,  and  eaten  with  pepper  and  fait,  is  very  deli-
cious ;  a  kind  of  greens  refembling  fpinage  ;  onions,  very
fhiall,  but  excellent  •,  and  afparagus :  befides  fome  European
plants  of  a  ftrong  fmell,  particularly  fage,  hyfop,  and  rue.
Sugar  is  alfo  produced  here  in  immenfe  quantities  :  very
great  crops  of  the  fineffc  and  larger!  canes  that  can  be  ima-
gined are  produced  with  very  little  care,  and  yield  a  much
larger  proportion  of  fugar  than  the  canes  of  the  Weft  Indies,
White  fugar  is  fold  here  at  two  pence  half-penny  a  pound ;
and  the  molaffes  makes  the  arrack,  of  which,  as  of  rum,  it
is  the  chief  ingredient ;  a  fmall  quantity  of  rice,  and  fomc
cocoa-nut  wine,  being  added,  chiefly,  I  fuppofe,  to  give  it
flavour.  A  fmall  quantity  of  indigo  is  alfo  produced  here,
not  as  an  article  of  trade,  but  merely  for  home  confumption.

But  the  mod  abundant  article  of  vegetable  luxury  here,  is
the  fruit ;  of  which  there  is  no  lefs  than  fix  and  thirty  dif-
ferent kinds,  and  Lfhall  give  a  very  brief  account  of  each.

i.  The  pine  apple  ;    Bromelia  Aiianas,     This  fruit,  which  is
here  called  Nanas,  grows  very  large,  and  in  fuch  plenty  that
they  may  fometimes  be  bought  at  the  firft  hand  for  a  fay-
thing


734  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

thing  a  piece  ;  and  at  the  common  fruit  fhops  we  got  three
of  them  for  two  pence  half-penny.  They  are  very  juicy  and
well  flavoured  ;  but  we  all  agreed  that  we  had  eaten  as  good
from  a  hot-houfe  in  England :  they  are  however  fo  luxuriant
in  their  growth  that  rnoft  of  them  have  two  or  three  crowns,
and  a  great  number  of  fuckers  from  the  bottom  of  the  fruit;
of  thefe  Mr.  Banks  once  counted  nine,  and  they  are  fo  for-
ward that  very  often  while  they  ftill  adhered  to  the  parent
plant  they  (hot  out  their  fruit,  which,  by  the  time  the  large
one  became  ripe,  were  of  no  inconfiderable  fize.  We  feveral
times  faw  three  upon  one  apple,  and  were  told  that  a  plant
once  produced  a  clufter  of  nine,  befides  the  principal :  this
indeed  was  confidered  as  fo  great  a  curiofity,  that  it  was  pre-
ferred in  fugar,  and  fent  to  the  Prince  of  Orange.

2.  Sweet  oranges.  Thefe  are  very  good,  but  while  we
were  here,  fold  for  fix  pence  a  piece.

3.  Pumplemoefes,  which  in  the  Weft  Indies  are  called
Shaddocks.  Thefe  were  well  flavoured,  but  not  juicy;  their
want  of  juice  however  was  an  accidental  effect  of  the  feafon.

4.  Lemons.  Thefe  were  very  fcarce ;  but  the  want  of  them
was  amply  compenfatcd  by  the  plenty  of  limes.

5.  Limes.  Thefe  were  excellent,  and  to  be  bought  at  about
twelve  pence  a  hundred.  We  faw  only  two  or  three  Seville
oranges,  which  were  almofl  all  rind ;  and  there  are  many
forts,  both  of  oranges  and  lemons,  which  I  mall  not  particu-
larly mention,  bccaufe  they  are  neither  efteemed  by  Euro-
peans nor  the  natives  themfelves.

6.  Mangos.  This  fruit  during  our  ftay  was  fo  infefled
with  maggots,  which  bred  in  the  infide  of  them,  that  fcarcely
one  in  three  was  eatable ;  and  the  bed  of  them  were  much
inferior  to  thofe  of  Brazil :  they  are  generally  compared  by

Europeans


ROUND    THE    WORLD.

Europeans  to  a  melting  peach,  which,  indeed,  they  referable
in  foftnefs  and  fweetnefs,  but  certainly  fall  much  fhort  in
flavour.  The  climate  here,  we  were  told,  is  too  hot  and
damp  for  them ;  but  there  are  as  many  forts  of  them  as
there  are  of  apples  in  England,  and  fome  are  much  fuperior
to  others.  One  fort,  which  is  called  Mangha  Coivani,  has  fo
ftrong  a  fmell  that  a  European  can  fcarcely  bear  one  in  the
room  -,  thefe,  however,  the  natives  are  fond  of.  The  three
forts  which  are  generally  preferred,  are  the  Mangha  Doodool,
the  Mangha  Santock,  and  the  Mangha  Cure,

7.  Bananes.  Of  thefe  alfo  there  are  innumerable  forts,
but  three  only  are  good  ;  the  Pijfang  Mas,  the  Pijfang  Radjar
and  the  Pijfang  Ambou:  all  thefe  have  a  pleafant  vinous  tafte,
and  the  reft  are  ufeful  in  different  ways ;  fome  are  fried  in
batter,  and  others  are  boiled  and  eaten  as  bread.  There  is
one  which  deferves  the  particular  notice  of  the  botanift,  be-
eaufe,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  its  tribe,  it  is  full  of  feeds,
and  is  therefore  called  Pijfang  Batu,  or  Pijfang  Bidjie  ;  it  has
however  no  excellence  to  recommend  it  to  the  tafte,  but  the
Malays  ufe  it  as  a  remedy  for  the  flux.

8.  Grapes.  Thefe  are  not  in  great  perfection,  but  they  are
very  dear ;  for  we  could  not  buy  a  moderate  bunch  for  lefs
than  a  milling  or  eighteen  pence.

9.  Tamarinds.  Thefe  are  in  great  plenty,  and  very  cheap:
the  people  however  do  not  put  them  up  in  the  manner  prac-
tifed  by  the  Weft  Indians,  but  cure  them  with  fait,  by  which-
means  they  become  a  black  mafs,  fo  difagreeable  to  the
fight  and  tafte,  that  few  Europeans  chufe  to  meddle  with
them.

10.  Water  melons.  Thefe  are  in  great  plenty,  and  very
good.

3  11.  Pumpkins.


73S


73<S  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  ir.  Pumpkins.    Thefe  are  beyond  comparifon  the  mod

December  ^fefai  fafa  that  can  be  carried  to  fea ;  for  they  will  keep
without  any  care  feveral  months,  and  with  fugar  and  lemon-
juice,  make  a  pye  that  can  fcarcely  be  diftinguifhed  from
one  made  of  the  beft  apples  ;  and  with  pepper  and  fait,  they
are  a  fubftitute  for  lurneps,  not  to  be  defpifed

12.  Papaws.  This  fruit  when  it  is  ripe  is  full  of  feeds,  and
almoft  without  flavour ;  but  if  when  it  is  green  it  is  pared,
and  the  core  taken  out,  it  is  better  than  the  beft  turnep.

13.  Guava.  This  fruit  is  much  commended  by  the  inha-
bitants of  our  iflands  in  the  Weft  Indies,  who  probably  have
a  better  fort  than  we  met  with  here,  where  the  fmell  of  them
was  fo  difagreeably  ftrong  that  it  made  fome  of  us  fick ;
thofe  who  tafted  them,  faid,  that  the  flavour  was  equally
rank.

id..  Sweet  fop.  The  Amwna  fquammofa  of  Linnams.  This
is  alfo  a  Weft  Indian  fruit;  it  confifts  only  of  a  mafs  of
large  kernels,  from  which  a  fmall  proportion  of  pulp  may
be  fucked,  which  is  very  fweet,  but  has  little  flavour.

15.  Cuftard  apple.  The  Annona  reticulata  of  Linnasus.  The
quality  of  this  fruit  is  well  expreffed  by  its  Englifh  name,
which  it  acquired  in  the  Weft  Indies  ;  for  it  is  as  like  a  cuf-
tard, and  a  good  one  too,  as  can  be  imagined.

16.  The  cafliew  apple.  This  is  feldom  eaten  on  account  of
its  aftringency.  The  nut  that  grows  upon  the  top  of  it  is
well  known  in  Europe.

17.  The  cocoa-nut.  This  is  alfo  well  known  in  Europe;
there  are  feveral  forts,  but  the  beft  of  thofe  we  found  here  is
called  Calappi  Edjon,  and  is  eafily  known  by  the  rednefs  of
the  nefh  between  the  fkin  and  the  fhell.

18,  Mangoftan.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


737


18.  Mangoftan.    The  Garcinia  Mangoflana  of  Linnaeus.    This       1770.


fruit,  which  is  peculiar  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  is  about  the  fizc  of
the  crab  apple,  and  of  a  deep  red-wine  colour :  on  the  top  of
it  is  the  figure  of  five  or  fix  fmall  triangles  joined  in  a  circle,
and  at  the  bottom  feveral  hollow  green  leaves,  which  are  re-
mains of  the  bloflbra.  When  they  are  to  be  eaten,  the  fkin,
or  rather  flefh,  mufl  be  taken  off,  under  which  are  found  fix
or  leven  white  kernels,  placed  in  a  circular  order,  and  the
pulp  with  which  thefe  are  inveloped,  is  the  fruit,  than  which
nothing  can  be  more  delicious :  it  is  a  happy  mixture  of  the
tart  and  the  fweet,  which  is  no  lefs  wholefome  than  plea-
fant ;  and  with  the  fweet  orange,  this  fruit  is  allowed  in  any
•quantity  to  thofe  who  are  affii&ed  with  fevers,  either  of  the
putrid  or  inflammatory  kind.

19.  The  jamboo.  The  Eugenia  Mallaccenfis  of  Linnaeus.  This
fruit  is  of  a  deep  red  colour,  and  an  oval  fhape  ;  the  largeft,
which  are  always  the  beft,  are  not  bigger  than  a  fmall  apple ;
they  are  pleafant  and  cooling,  though  they  have  not  much
flavour.

so.  The  jambu-eyer.  A  fpecies  of  the  Eugenia  of  Linnaeus.
Of  this  fruit  there  are  two  forts  of  a  fimilar  fhape,  refem-
bling  a  bell,  but  differing  in  colour ;  one  being  red,  the
other  white.  They  fomewhat  exceed  a  large  cherry  in  fize,
and  in  tafte  have  neither  flavour  nor  even  fweetnefs,  con-
taining nothing  but  a  watry  juice,  flightly  acidulated ;  yet
their  coolnefs  recommends  them  in  this  hot  country,

21.  Jambu-eyer  mauwar.  The  Eugenia  jambos  of  Linnaeus.
This  is  more  grateful  to  the  fmell  than  the  tafte  ;  in  tafte  it
refembles  the  conferve  of  rofes,  and  in  fmell  the  frefh  fcent
of  thofe  flowers.

22.  The  pomgranate.  This  is  the  fame  fruit  that  is  known
by  the  fame  name  all  over  Europe.

Vol.IL  5B  23.  Durion,


December.


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

23.  Durion.  A  fruit  that  in  fhape  rcfembles  a  fmall  melon,
but  the  fkin  is  covered  with  fharp  conical  fpines,  whence
its  name ;  for  dure,  in  the  Malay  language,  fignifies  prickle.
When  it  is  ripe,  it  divides  longitudinally  into  feven  or  eight
compartments,  each  of  which  contains  fix  or  feven  nuts,  not
quite  fo  large  as  chefnuts,  which  are  covered  with  a  fub-
ftance  that  in  colour  and  confiftcnce  very  much  refembles
thick  cream :  this  is  the  part  that  is  eaten,  and  the  natives
are  fond  of  it  to  excefs.  To  Europeans  it  is  generally  difa-
greeable  at  firfl  j  for  in  tafte,  it  fomewhat  refembles  a  mix-
ture of  cream,  fugar,  and  onions  5  and  in  the  fmell,  the
onions  predominate.

24.  Nanca.  This  fruit,  which  in  fome  parts  of  India  is  called
Jack,  has,  like  the  Durion,  a  fmell  very  difagreeable  to  Aran-
gers,  and  fomewhat  refembling  that  of  mellow  apples  mixed
with  garlic  :  the  flavour  is  not  more  adapted  to  the  general
tafte.  In  fome  countries  that  are  favourable  to  it,  it  is  faid
to  grow  to  an  immenfe  fize.  Rumphius  relates,  that  it  is
fometimes  fo  large  that  a  man  cannot  eafily  lift  it  j  and  we
were  told  by  a  Malay,  that  at  Madura  it  is  fometimes  fo
large  as  not  to  be  carried  but  by  the  united  efforts  of  two
men.  At  Batavia,  however,  they  never  exceed  the  fize  of  a
large  melon,  which  in  fhape  they  very  much  refemble:  they
are  covered  with  angular  prickles,  like  the  ihootings  of  fome
chryflals,  which  however  are  not  hard  enough  to  wound
thofe  who  handle  them.

25.  Champada.  This  differs  from  the  Nanca  in  little  ex-
cept fize,  it  not  being  fo  big.

26.  Rambutan.  This  is  a  fruit  little  known  to  Europeans;
in  appearance  it  very  much  refembles  a  chefnut  with  the
hufk  on,  and  like  that,  is  covered  with  fmall  points,  which
are  foft  and  of  a  deep  red  colour:   under  this  fkin  is  the

8  fruit,


ROUND     THE    WORLD.

fruit,  and  within  the  fruit  a  ftorie  ;  the  eatable  part  there-
fore is  fmall  in  quantity,  but  its  acid  is  perhaps  more  agree-
able than  any  other  in  the  whole  vegetable  kingdom.

27.  Jambokm.  This  in  fize  and  appearance  is  not  unlike
a  daraafcene ;  but  in  tafle  is  flill  more  aftringent,  and  there-
tore  lefs  agreeable.

28.  The  Boa  Bidarra  ;  or  Rhammis  Jujuba  of  Linnaeus.  This
is  a  round  yellow  fruit,  about  the  fize  of  a  goofeberry;  its
ilavour  is  like  that  of  an  apple,  but  it  has  the  aftringency  of
a  crab.

29.  Nam  nam.  The  Cynometra  Cauliflora  of  Linnams.  This
fruit  in  fhape  fomewhat  refembles  a  kidney  ;  it  is  about
three  inches  long,  and  the  outfide  is  very  rough  :  it  is  fel-
dom  eaten  raw,  but  fried  with  batter  it  makes  a  good  fritter,

30,31.  TheCatappa,  or Tertamalia  Catappa ;  and  theCanare,
the  Canarium  commune  of  Linnaeus  ;  are  both  nuts,  with  kernels
fomewhat  refembling  an  almond ;  but  the  difficulty  of
breaking  the  fhell  is  fo  great,  that  they  are  no  where  pub-
licly fold.  Thofe  which  we  tailed  were  gathered  for  curio-
fity  by  Mr.  Banks,  from  the  tree  upon  which  they  grew.

32.  The  Madja;  or  Limonia  of  Linnceus  ;  contains,  under  a
hard  brittle  fhell,  a  lightly  acid  pulp,  which  cannot  be  eaten
without  fugar;  and  with  it,  is  not  generally  thought  plea-
fant.

$$.  Suntul.  The  Trichilia  of  Linnaeus.  This  is  the  word  of
all  the  fruits  that  I  mall  particularly  mention :  in  fize  and
fhape  it  refembles  the  Madja  ;  and  within  a  thick  fkin  con-
tains kernels  like  thofe  of  the  Mangoftan,  the  tafle  of  which
is  both  acid  and  aftringent,  and  fo  difagreeable  that  we  were
furprifed  to  fee  it  expofed  upon  the  fruit-flails.

S  B  2  34,


739
1770.

December.


74o  LIEUTENANT    COOR's    VOYAGE

1770.  34,  35,  36.  The  Blimbing,  or  Averrhoa  Belbnbi ;  the  Blira-

eJ^l^  bing  BelTe,  or  Averrhoa  Carambola;  and  the  Cherrema,  or
Averrhoa  aclda  of  Linnseus,  are  three  fpecies  of  one  genus ;
and  though  they  differ  in  fhape,  are  nearly  of  the  fame
tafte.  The  Blimbing  Beffe  is  the  fweeteft :  the  other  two  are
fo  aufcerely  acid,  that  they  cannot  be  ufed  without  drefling  j
they  make  however  excellent  pickles  and  four  fauce.

37.  The  Salack ;  or  Calamus  Rotang  Zalacca  of  Linnxus.  This
is  the  fruit  of  a  prickly  bufli ;  it  is  about  as  big  as  a  walnut,
and  covered  with  fcales,  like  thofe  of  a  lizard :  below  the
fcales  are  two  or  three  yellow  kernels,  in  flavour  fomewhac
refembling  a  ftrawberry.

Befides  thefe,  the  ifland  of  Java,  and  particularly  the  coun-
•  try  round  Batavia,  produces  many  kinds  of  fruit  which  were
not  in  feafon  during  our  flay  ;  we  were  alfo  told  that  apples,
ftrawberries,  and  many  other  fruits  from  Europe,  had  been
planted  up  in  the  mountains,  and  flourifhed  there  in  great
luxuriance.  We  faw  feveral  fruits  preferved  in  fugar,  that
we  did  not  fee  recent  from  the  tree,  one  of  which  is  called
Kimkit,  and  another  Boa  Atap :  and  here  are  feveral  others
which  are  eaten  only  by  the  natives,  particularly  the  Kellor^
the  Guilindina,  the  Moringa,  and  the  Soccum.  The  Soccum  is  of
the  fame  kind  with  the  bread-fruit  in  the  South  Sea  iflands,
but  fo  much  inferior,  that  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  fimili-
tude  in  the  outward  appearance  both  of  the  fruit  and  the
tree,  we  mould  not  have  referred  it  to  that  clafs.  Thefe  and
fome  others  do  not  merit  to  be  particularly  mentioned.

The  quantity  of  fruit  that  is  confumed  at  Batavia  is  incre-
dible ;  but  that  which  is  publicly  expofed  to  fale  is  generally
over-ripe.   A  ftranger  however  may  get  good  fruit  in  a  flreet
called  Paflar  Piflang,  which  lies  north  from  the  great  church,
r  and


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  74I

and  very  near  it.  This  flreet  is  inhabited  by  none  but  Chinefe      »77o-
fruit-fellers,  who  are  fupplied  from  the  gardens  of  Gentle-   ,Dcce™bg2.
men  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  town,  with  fuch  as  is
frcfli,  and  excellent  in  its  kind,   for  which  however  they
muft  be  paid  more  than  four  times  the  market  price.

The  town  in  general  is  fupplied  from  a  considerable  dis-
tance, where  great  quantities  of  land  are  cultivated  merely
for  the  production  of  fruit.     The  country  people,  to  whom
thefe  lands  belong,  meet  the  people  of  the  town  at  two
great  markets ;  one  on  Monday,  called  Paffar  Sineen ;  and
the  other  on  Saturday,  called  Paffar  Tanabank.     Thefe  fairs
are  held  at  places  confiderably  diftant  from  each  other,  for
the  convenience  of  different  diftriets ;  neither  of  them  how-
ever are  more  than  five  miles  diftant  from  Batavia.   Ac  thefe
fairs,  the  befl  fruit  may  be  bought  at  the  cheapeft  rate  ;  and
the  fight  of  them  to  a  European  is  very  entertaining,     The
quantity  of  fruit  is  aftonifhing ;  forty  or  fifty  cart  loads  of
the  finefl  pine   apples,  packed  as  carelefsly  as  turneps  in
England,  are  common,  and  other  fruit  in  the  fame  profu-
fion.     The  days  however  on  which  thefe  markets  are  held
are  ill  contrived  ;  the  time  between  Saturday  and  Monday
is  too  fhort,   and  that  between  Monday  and  Saturday  too
long :  great  part  of  what  is  bought  on  Monday  is  always
much  the  worfe  for  keeping  before  a  new  ftock  can  be
bought,  either  by  the  retailer  or  confumer ;  fo  that  for  feve-
ral  days  in  every  week  there  is  no  good  fruit  in  the  hands
of  any  people  but  the  Chinefe  in  Paffar  Piffang.

The  inhabitants  of  this  part  of  India  practife  a  luxury
which  feems  to  be  but  little  attended  to  in  other  countries  ;
they  are  continually  burning  aromatic  woods  and  refms,
and  fcatter  odours  round  them  in  a  profufion  of  flowers,
pollibly  as  an  antidote  to  the  noifome  effluvia  of  their  ditches

and


7-P  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

and  canals.  Of  fweet  fmelling  flowers  they  have  a  great  va-
riety, altogether  unknown  in  Europe,  the  chief  of  which  1
fhall  briefly  defcribe.

i.  The  Champacka,  or  Michelia  Champacca.  This  grows  upon
a  tree  as  large  as  an  apple  tree,  and  conflfts  of  fifteen  long
narrow  petala,  which  give  it  the  appearance  of  being  double,
though  in  reality  it  is  not  fo:  its  colour  is  yellow,  and  much
deeper  than  that  of  a  jonquil,  to  which  it  has  fome  refem-
blance  in  fmell.

2.  The  Cananga,  or  Uvaria  Cananga,  is  a  green  flower,  not
at  all  refembling  the  bloflbm  of  any  tree  or  plant  in  Europe :
it  has  indeed  more  the  appearance  of  a  bunch  of  leaves  than
a  flower;  its  fcent  is  agreeable,  but  altogether  peculiar  to
itfelf.

3.  The  Mulaiti,  or  Njflanlhes  Sa?nbac.  This  is  well  known  in
Englifh  hot-houfes  by  the  name  of  Arabian  jeffamine:  it
grows  here  in  the  greater!  profufion,  and  its  fragrance,  like
that  of  all  other  Indian  flowers,  though  exquifitely  pleafing,
has  not  that  over-powering  ftrength  which  diftinguifhes  fome
of  the  fame  forts  in  Europe.

4.  5.  The  Combang  CaracnaJ/i,  and  Combang  Tonquin,  Pcrcularla
Glabra.  Thefe  are  fmall  flowers,  of  the  dog's-bane  kind,
very  much  refembling  each  other  in  fhape  and  fmell,  highly
fragrant,  but  very  different  from  every  product  of  an  Englifh
garden.

6.  The  Bonga  Tanjong,  or  Mimufops  Elengi  of  Linnseus.  This
flower  is  fhaped  like  a  ftar  of  feven  or  eight  rays,  and  is
about  half  an  inch  in  diameter;  it  is  of  a  yellowifh  colour,
and  has  an  agreeable  fmell.

Befides  thefe,  there  is  the  Sunclil  Malum,  or  Pollanthes  Tube-
rofa.    This  flower,  being  the  fame  with  our  own  tuberofe,  can

have


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  743

have  no  place  among  thofe  that  are  unknown  in  Europe,
but  I  mention  it  for  its  Malay  name,  which  fignifies  "  In-
triguer of  the  Night,"  and  is  not  inelegantly  conceived.
The  heat  of  this  climate  is  fo  great,  that  few  flowers  exhale
their  fweets  in  the  day ;  and  this  in  particular,  from  its  total
want  of  fcent  at  that  time,  and  the  modefty  of  its  colour,
which  is  white,  feems  negligent  of  attracting  admirers,  but
as  foon  as  night  comes  on,  it  diffufes  its  fragrance,  and  at
once  compels  the  attention,  and  excites  the  complacency  of
all  who  approach  it.

Thefe  are  all  fold  about  the  flreets  every  evening  at  fun-
fet,  either  ftrung  upon  a  thread,  in  wreaths  of  about  two
feet  long,  or  made  up  into  nofegays  of  different  forms,
either  of  which  may  be  purchafed  for  about  a  halfpenny.
Befides  thefe,  there  are,  in  private  gardens,  many  other
fweet  flowers,  which  are  not  produced  in  a  fufficient  quantity
to  be  brought  to  market.  With  a  mixture  of  thefe  flowers,
and  the  leaves  of  a  plant  called  pandang,  cut  into  fmall
pieces,  perfons  of  both  fexes  fill  their  hair  and  their  clothes,
and  with  the  fame  mixture  indulge  a  much  higher  luxury  by
lire  wing  it  on  their  beds,  fo  that  the  chamber  in  which  they
fleep,  breathes  the  richell  and  purefl  of  all  odours,  unallayed
by  the  fumes  which  cannot  but  arife  where  the  fleeper  lies
under  two  or  three  blankets  and  a  quilt,  for  the  bed  covering
here  is  nothing  more  than  a  Angle  piece  of  fine  chintz.

Before  I  clofe  my  account  of  the  vegetable  productions  of
this  part  of  India,  I  mufl  take  fome  notice  of  the  fpices,
Java  originally  produced  none  but  pepper.  This  is  now
fent  from  hence  into  Europe  to  a  great  value,  but  the  quan-
tity confumed  here  is  very  fmall:  the  inhabitants  ufe  Cap-
ficum,  or,  as  it  is  called  in  Europe,  Cayan  pepper,  almoft
univerfally  in  its  (lead.     Cloves  and  nutmegs,  having  been

monopolized


744  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

monopolized  by  the  Dutch,  are  become  too  dear  to  be  plen-
tifully ufed  by  the  other  inhabitants  of  this  country,  who
are  very  fond  of  them.  Cloves,  although  they  are  faid  ori-
ginally to  have  been  the  produce  of  Machian,  or  Bachian,  a
fmall  illand  far  to  the  eaflward,  and  only  fifteen  miles  to  the
northward  of  the  line,  and  to  have  been  from  thence  dif-
feminated  by  the  Dutch,  at  their  firft  coming  into  thefe  parts,
over  all  the  eaftern  iflands,  are  now  confined  to  Amboina,
and  the  fmall  ifles  that  lie  in  its  neighbourhood  ■  the  Dutch
having,  by  different  treaties  of  peace  between  them  and  the
conquered  kings  of  all  the  other  illands,  ftipulated,  that  they
mould  have  only  a  certain  number  of  trees  in  their  domini-
ons, and  in  future  quarrels,  as  a  punifhment  for  difobedi-
ence  and  rebellion,  leffened  the  quantity,  till  at  laft  they  left
them  no  claim  to  any.  Nutmegs  have  in  a  manner  been
extirpated  in  all  the  illands  except  their  firft  native  foil,
Band  a,  which  eafily  fupplies  every  nation  upon  earth,  and
would  as  eafily  fupply  every  nation  in  another  globe  of  the
fame  dimenfions,  if  there  was  any  fuch  to  which  the  in-
duflrious  Hollander  could  tranfport  the  commodity ;  it  is,
However,  certain,  that  there  are  a  few  trees  of  this  fpice
upon  the  coaft  of  New  Guinea.  There  may  perhaps  be  both
cloves  and  nutmegs  upon  other  iflands  to  the  eaflward  ;  for
.thofe,  neither  the  Dutch,  nor  any  other  European,  feem  to
think  it  worth  while  to  examine.

The  principal  tame  quadrupeds  of  this  country  are  horfes.,
cattle,  buffalos,  fheep,  goats,  and  hogs.  The  horfes  are
fmall,  never  exceeding  in  fize  what  we  call  a  flout  galloway,
but  they  are  nimble  and  fpirited,  and  are  reported  to  have
been  found  here  when  the  Europeans  firft  came  round  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  The  horned  cattle  are  faid  to  be  the
fame  fpecies  as  thofe  in  Europe,  but  they  differ  fo  much  in
appearance,  that  we  were  inclined  to  doubt  it:  they  have  in-
deed


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  745

deed  the  pakaria  or  dewlap,  which  naturalifts  make  the  dif-  '77<>.
tinguifhing  characteriftic  of  the  European  fpecies,  but  they  ■_  -.-  *■
certainly  are  found  wild,  not  only  in  Java  but  feveral  of  the
eaftern  iflands.  The  flefh  of  thofe  that  we  eat  at  Batavia,
had  a  finer  grain  than  European  beef,  but  it  was  lefs  juicy,
and  miferably  lean.  Buffalos  are  plenty,  but  the  Dutch
never  eat  them,  nor  will  they  drink  their  milk,  being  pre-
pofTened  with  a  notion  that  both  are  unwholefome,  and
tend  to  produce  fevers  ;  though  the  natives  and  Chinefe  eat
both,  without  any  injury  to  their  health.  The  fheep  are  of
the  kind  which  have  long  ears  that  hang  down,  and  hair  in-
Head  of  wool :  the  flefh.  of  thefe  is  hard  and  tough,  and  in
every  refpect  the  worfl  mutton  we  ever  faw:  we  found  here,
however,  a  few  Cape  fheep,  which  are  excellent,  but  fo
dear  that  we  gave  five  and  forty  millings  a-piece  for  four  of
them,  the  heavieft  of  which  weighed  only  five  and  forty
pounds.  The  goats  are  not  better  than  the  fheep,  but  the
hogs,  efpecially  the  Chinefe  breed,  are  incomparable,  and
fo  fat,  that  the  purchafer  agrees  for  the  lean  feparately.
The  butcher,  who  is  always  a  Chinefe,  without  the  leafl
fcruple  cuts  off  as  much  of  the  fat  as  he  is  deiired,  and  after-
wards fells  it  to  his  countrymen,  who  melt  it  down,  and  eat
it  inftead  of  butter  with  their  rice:  but  notwithftanding  the
excellence  of  this  pork,  the  Dutch  are  fo  ftrongly  prejudiced
in  favour  of  every  thing  that  comes  from  their  native  coun-
try, that  they  eat  only  of  the  Dutch  breed,  which  are  here
fold  as  much  dearer  than  the  Chinefe,  as  the  Chinefe  are  fold
dearer  than  the  Dutch  in  Europe.

Befides  thefe  animals,  which  are  tame,  they  have  dogs
and  cats,  and  there  are  among  the  diftant  mountains  fome
wild  horfes  and  cattle:  buffalos  are  not  found  wild  in  any
part  of  Java,  though  they  abound  in  MacaiTar,  and  feveral
other  eaftern  iflands.    The  neighbourhood  of  Batavia,  how-

Vol.  II.  5  C  ever,


74*5  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

ever,  is  plentifully  fupplied  with  two  kinds  of  deer,  and
wild  hogs,  which  are  fold  at  a  reafonable  price  by  the  Por-
tuguese, who  flioot  them,  and  are  very  good  food.

Among  the  mountains,  and  in  the  defart  parts  of  the
ifland,  there  are  tygers,  it  is  faid,  in  great  abundance,  and
fome  rhinoceroies ;  in  thefe  parts  alfo  there  are  monkies,
and  there  are  a  few  of  them  even  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Eatavia.

Of  fifli,  here  is  an  amazing  plenty ;  many  forts  are  excel-
lent, and  all  are  very  cheap,  except  the  few  that  are  fcarce.
It  happens  here,  as  in  other  places,  that  vanity  gets  the
better  even  of  appetite:  the  cheap  fifh,  moll  of  which  is  of
the  bed:  kind,  is  the  food  only  of  flaves,  and  that  which  is
dear,  only  becaufe  it  is  fcarce,  and  very  much  inferior  in
every  refpett,  is  placed  upon  the  tables  of  the  rich.  A  fen-
fible  houfekeeper  once  fpoke  to  us  freely  upon  the  Subject.
I  know,  faid  he,  as  well  as  you,  that  I  could  purchafe  a
better  dim  of  fifli  for  a  milling,  than  what  now  cofts  me  ten  %
but  if  I  mould  make  fo  good  a  ufe  of  my  money,  I  mould
here  be  as  much  defpifed,  as  you  would  be  in  Europe,  if  you
were  to  cover  your  table  with  offals,  fit  only  for  beggars  or
dogs.

Turtle  is  alfo  found  here,  but  it  is  neither  fo  fweet  nor  fo
fat  as  the  Weft  Indian  turtle,  even  in  London  ;  fuch  as  it  is,
however,  we  fliould  confider  it  as  a  dainty  ;  but  the  Dutch,
amongother  angularities,  do  not  eat  it.  We  faw  fome  li-
zards, or  Iguanas,  here  of  a  very  large  fize ;  we  were  told
that  fome  were  as  thick  as  a  man's  thigh,  and  Mr.  Banks  fhot
one  that  was  five  feet  long:  the  flefh,  of  this  animal  proved
to  be  very  good  food.

Poultry  is  very  good  here,  and  in  great  plenty :  fowls  of

a  very  large  fize,  ducks,  and  geefe  are  very  cheap ;  pigeons

4  are


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


747


are  dear,  and  the  price  of  turkies  extravagant.    We  fome-       »77°«
times  found  the  flefh.  of  thefe  animals  lean  and  dry,  but  this  '•

was  merely  the  effect  of  their  being  ill  fed,  for  thofe  that  we
fed  ourfelves  were  as  good  as  any  of  the  fame  kind  that  we
had  tafted  in  Europe,  and  we  fometimes  thought  them  even
better.

Wild  fowl  in  general  is  fcarce.  We  once  faw  a  wild  duck
in  the  fields,  but  never  any  that  were  to  be  fold.  We  fre-
quently faw  fnipes  of  two  kinds,  one  of  them  exactly  the
fame  as  that  in  Europe,  and  a  kind  of  thrufli  was  always  to
be  had  in  great  plenty  of  the  Portuguefe,  who,  for  I  know
not  what  reafon,  feem  to  have  monopolized  the  wild  fowl
and  game.  Of  fnipes,  it  is  remarkable  that  they  are  found
in  more  parts  of  the  world  than  any  other  bird,  being  com-
mon almoft  all  over  Europe,  Afia,  Africa,  and  America.

With  refpect  to  drink,  Nature  has  not  been  quite  fo  liberal
to  the  inhabitants  of  Java  as  to  fome  whom  £he  has  placed  in
the  lefs  fruitful  regions  of  the  north.  The  native  Javanefe,
and  moft  of  the  other  Indians  who  inhabit  this  ifland,  are
indeed  Mahometans,  and  therefore  have  no  reafon  to  regret
the  want  of  wine ;  but,  as  if  the  prohibition  of  their  law
refpected  only  the  manner  of  becoming  drunk,  and  not
drunkennefs  itfelf,  they  chew  opium,  to  the  total  fubverfion
not  only  of  their  underftanding  but  their  health.

The  arrack  that  is  made  here,  is  too  well  known  to  need  a
defcription :  befides  which,  the  palm  yields  a  wine  of  the
fame  kind  with  that  which  has  already  been  defcribed  in  the
account  of  the  ifland  of  Savu ;  it  is  procured  from  the  fame
tree,  in  the  fame  manner,  and  is  fold  in  three  ftatcs.  The
firft,  in  which  it  is  called  Tuac  mamfe,  differs  little  from  that
in  which  it  comes  from  the  tree ;  yet  even  this  has  received

5  C  2  fome


748  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770*  fome  preparation  altogether  unknown  to  us,  in  confequence
■l  ecem- "'_.  of  which  it  will  keep  eight  and  forty  hours,  though  other-
wife  it  would  fpoil  in  twelve :  in  this  ftate  it  has  an  agreeable
fweetnefs,  and  will  not  intoxicate.  In  the  other  two  Hates  it
has  undergone  a  fermentation,  and  received  aninfufion  of  cer-
tain herbs  and  roots,  by  which  it  lofes  its  fweetnefs,  and  ac-
quires a  tafte  very  auftere  and  difagreeable.  In  one  of  thefe
Hates  it  is  called  Tuac  eras,  and  in  the  other  Time  cuning,  but
the  fpecific  difference  I  do  not  know ;  in  both,  however,  it
intoxicates  very  powerfully.  A  liquor  called  Tuac  is  alfo
made  from  the  cocoa-nut  tree,  but  this  is  ufed  chiefly  to  put
into  the  arrack,  for  in  that  which  is  good  it  is  an  efTential  in-
gredient.


GH  A  P.


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  749


CHAP.      XIV.

Some  Account  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Batavia,  and  the  ad-
jacent Country,  their  Manners,  Cufioms,  and  Manner
of  Life.


December.


THE  town  of  Batavia,  although,  as  I  have  already  ob-  ^177°
ferved,  it  is  the  capital  of  the  Dutch  dominions  in  India,
is  fo  far  from  being  peopled  with  Dutchmen,  that  not  one
fifth  part,  even  of  the  European  inhabitants  of  the  town,  and
its  environs,  are  natives  of  Holland,  or  of  Dutch  extraction:
the  greater  part  are  Portuguefe,  and  befides  Europeans,  there
are  Indians  of  various  nations,  and  Chinefe,  befides  a  great
number  of  negro  Haves.  In  the  troops,  there  are  natives  of
almoft  every  country  in  Europe,  but  the  Germans  are  more
than  all  the  reft  put  together ;  there  are  fome  Englifh  and
French,  but  the  Dutch,  though  other  Europeans  are  per-
mitted to  get  money  here,  keep  all  the  power  in  their  own
hands,  and  confequently  poiTefs  all  public  employments.  No
man,  of  whatever  nation,  can  come  hither  to  fettle,  in  any
other  character  than  that  of  a  foldier  in  the  Company's  fer-
vice,  in  which,  before  they  are  accepted,  they  muft  covenant
to  remain  five  years.  As  foon  however  as  this  form  has
been  complied  with,  they  are  allowed,  upon  application  to
the  council,  to  abfent  themfelves  from  their  corps,  and  enter
immediately  into  any  branch  of  trade,  which  their  money
or  credit  will  enable  them  to  carry  on  ;  and  by  this  means  it
is  that  all  the  white  inhabitants  of  the  place  are  foldiers.

Women,  however,  of  all  nations,  are  permitted  to  fettle
here,  without  coming  under  any  reftrictions ;  yet  we  were

told


75o  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

told  that  there  were  not,  when  we  were  at  Batavia,  twenty
women  in  the  place  that  were  born  in  Europe,  but  that  the
white  women,  who  were  by  no  means  fcarce,  were  defcen-
dants  from  European  parents  of  the  third  or  fourth  genera-
tion, the  gleanings  of  many  families  who  had  fucceffively
come  hither,  and  in  the  male  line  become  extinct ;  for  it  is
certain  that,  whatever  be  the  caufe,  this  climate  is  not  fo
fatal  to  the  ladies  as  to  the  other  fex.

Thefe  women  imitate  the  Indians  in  every  particular ;  their
drefs  is  made  of  the  fame  materials,  their  hair  is  worn  in  the
fame  manner,  and  they  are  equally  enflaved  by  the  habit  of
chewing  betel.

The  merchants  carry  on  their  bufinefs  here  with  lefs
trouble  perhaps  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  world :  every
manufacture  is  managed  by  the  Chinefe,  who  fell  the  pro-
duce of  their  labour  to  the  merchant,  refident  here,  for  they
are  permitted  to  fell  it  to  no  one  elfe ;  fo  that  when  a  fliip  comes
in,  and  befpeaks  perhaps  a  hundred  leagers  of  arrack,  or
any  quantity  of  other  commodities,  the  merchant  has  no-
thing to  do  but  to  fend  orders  to  his  Chinefe  to  fee  them  de-
livered on  board :  he  obeys  the  command,  brings  a  receipt
ligned  by  the  mailer  of  the  fliip  for  the  goods  to  his  employer,
who  receives  the  money,  and  having  deducted  his  profit,
pays  the  Chinefe  his  demand.  With  goods  that  are  im-
ported, however,  the  merchant  has  a  little  more  trouble,  for
thefe  he  muft  examine,  receive,  and  lay  up  in  his  warehoufe,
according  to  the  practice  of  other  countries.

The  Portuguefe  are  called  by  the  natives  Oranferahe,  or
Nazareen  men,  (Oran,  being  Man  in  the  language  of  the
country,)  todiftinguiih  them  from  other  Europeans;  yet  they
are  included  in  the  general  appellation  of  Caper,  or  Cafir.,  an
opprobrious  term,  applied  by  Mahometans  to  all  who  do  not

profefs


ROUND    THE    WORLD.

profefs  their  faith.  Thefe  people,  however,  are  Portuguefe
only  in  name;  they  have  renounced  the  religion  of  Rome,
and  become  Lutherans :  neither  have  they  the  leaft  commu-
nication with  the  country  of  their  forefathers,  or  even  know-
lege  of  it:  they  fpeak  indeed  a  corrupt  dialect  of  the  Portu-
guefe language,  but  much  more  frequently  ufe  the  Malay:
they  are  never  fuffered  to  employ  themfelves  in  any  bue
mean  occupations :  many  of  them  live  by  hunting,  many
by  waffling  linen,  and  fome  are  handicraftfmen  and  arti-
ficers. They  have  adopted  all  the  cuftoms  of  the  Indians,
from  whom  they  are  diftinguifhed  chiefly  by  their  features
and  complexion,  their  fkin  being  confiderably  darker,  and
their  nofes  more  fharp ;  their  drefs  is  exactly  the  fame,  ex-
cept in  the  manner  of  wearing  their  hair.

The  Indians,  who  are  mixed  with  the  Dutch  and  Portu-
guefe in  the  town  of  Batavia,  and  the  country  adjacent,  are
not,  as  might  be  fuppofed,  Javanefe,  the  original  natives  of
the  iiland,  but  natives  of  the  various  iflands  from  which  the
Dutch  import  ilaves,  and  are  either  fuch  as  have  themfelves
been  manumized,  or  the  defcendants  of  thofe  who  formerly
received  manumiffion ;  and  they  are  all  comprehended
under  the  general  name  of  Oranjlam,  or  Ifalam,  fignifying  Be-
lievers of  the  true  Faith.  The  natives  of  every  country,
however,  in  other  refpeets  keep  themfelves  diftinct  from  the
reft,  and  are  not  lefs  ftrongly  marked  than  the  ilaves  by  the
vices  or  virtues  of  their  refpeclive  nations.  Many  of  thefe
employ  themfelves  in  the  cultivation  of  gardens,  and  in
felling  fruit  and  flowers.  The  betel  and  areca,  which  are
here  called  Siri  and  Pinaag,  and  chewed  by  both  fcxes  and
every  rank  in  amazing  quantities,  are  all  grown  by  thefe
Indians :  lime  is  alfo  mixed  with  thefe  roots  here  as  it  is  in>
Savu,  but  it  is  lefs  pernicious  to  the  teeth,  becaufe  it  is  firft
flaked,    and,    befides  the  lime,    a  fubftance  called  gambir

which


751


75*  LIEUTENANT    COOK's   VOYAGE

i77o«  which  is  brought  from  the  continent  of  India ;  the  better  fort
«_,  -  -  J.  of  women  alfo  add  cardamum,  and  many  other  aromatics,
to  give  the  breath  an  agreeable  fmell.  Some  of  the  Indians,
however,  are  employed  in  fifliing,  and  as  lightermen,  to
carry  goods  from  place  to  place  by  water;  and  fome  arc
rich,  and  live  with  much  of  the  fplendour  of  their  country,
which  chiefly  confifts  in  the  number  of  their  flaves.

In  the  article  of  food  thefe  Ifalams  are  remarkably  tem-
perate :  it  confifts  chiefly  of  boiled  rice,  with  a  fmall  propor-
tion of  bufFalo,  fifh,  or  fowl,  and  fometimes  of  dried  fifh,
and  dried  mrimps,  which  are  brought  hither  from  China ;
every  difh,  however,  is  highly  feafoned  with  Cayan  pepper,
and  they  have  many  kinds  of  paftry  made  of  rice  flower,
and  other  things  to  which  I  am  a  ftranger ;  they  eat  alfo  a
great  deal  of  fruit,  particularly  plantanes.

But  notwithftanding  their  general  temperance,  their  feafts
are  plentiful,  and,  according  to  their  manner,  magnificent.
As  they  are  Mahometans,  wine  and  flrong  liquors  profefTedly
make  no  part  of  their  entertainment,  neither  do  they  often
indulge  with  them  privately,  contenting  themfelves  with
their  betel  and  opium.

The  principal  folemnity  among  them  is  a  wedding,  upon
which  occafion  both  the  families  borrow  as  many  ornaments
of  gold  and  filver  as  they  can,  to  adorn  the  bride  and  bride-
groom, fo  that  their  drefles  are  very  fhowy  and  magnificent.
-The  feafts  that  are  given  upon  thefe  occafions  among  the  rich,
laft  fometimes  a  fortnight,  and  fometimes  longer;  and
during  this  time,  the  man,  although  married  on  the  firfl
day,  is,  by  the  women,  kept  from  his  wife.

The  language  that  is  fpoken  among  all  thefe  people,  from

what  place  foever  they  originally  came,  is  the  Malay;   at

leaft  it  is  a  language  fo  called,  and  probably  it  is  a  very

9  corrupt


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  7i<3

corrupt  dialect  of  that  fpoken  at  Malacca.  Every  little  ifland
indeed  has  a  language  of  its  own,  and  Java  has  two  or  three,
but  this  lingua  franca  is  the  only  language  that  is  now  fpoken
here,  and,  as  I  am  told,  it  prevails  over  a  great  part  of  the
Eaft  Indies.  A  dictionary  of  Malay  and  Englifh  was  pub-
limed  in  London  by  Thomas  Bowrey,  in  the  year  1701.

Their  women  wear  as  much  hair  as  can  grow  upon  the
head,  and  to  increafe  the  quantity,  they  ufe  oils,  and  other
preparations  of  various  kinds.  Of  this  ornament  Nature  has
been  very  liberal ;  it  is  univerfally  black,  and  is  formed  into
a  kind  of  circular  wreath  upon  the  top  of  the  head,  where  it
is  fattened  with  a  bodkin,  in  a  tafte  which  we  thought  inex-
preffibly  elegant:  the  wreath  of  hair  is  furrounded  by  an-
other of  flowers,  in  which  the  Arabian  jefTamine  is  beautifully
intermixed  with  the  golden  ftars  of  the  Bonger  Tanjong.

Both  fexes  conftantly  bathe  themfelves  in  the  river  at  lead
once  a  day,  a  practice  which,  in  this  hot  country,  is  equally
necefTary  both  to  perfonal  delicacy  and  health.  The  teeth  of
thefe  people  alfo,  whatever  they  may  fuffer  in  their  co-
lour by  chewing  beetle,  are  an  object  of  great  attention :
the  ends  of  them,  both  in  the  upper  and  under  jaw,  are
rubbed  with  a  kind  of  whetflone,  by  a  very  troublefome  and
painful  operation,  till  they  are  perfectly  even  and  flat,  fo
that  they  cannot  loie  lefs  than  half  a  line  in  their  length.
A  deep  grove  is  then  made  crofs  the  teeth  of  the  upper  jaw,
parallel  with  the  gums,  and  in  the  middle  between  them  and
the  extremity  of  the  teeth;  the  depth  of  this  groove  is  at
leaft  equal  to  one-fourth  of  the  thicknefs  of  the  teeth,  {o
that  it  penetrates  far  beyond  what  is  called  the  enamel,  the
leaft  injury  to  which,  according  to  the  dentifts  of  Europe,  is
fatal;  yet  among  thefe  people,  where  the  practice  of  thus
wounding  the  enamel  is  univerfal,  we  never  faw  a  rotten

Vol.  II.  5  D  tooth;


75±  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  tooth;  nor  is  the  blacknefs  a  ftain,  but  a  covering,  which
may  be  wafhed  off  at  pleafure,  and  the  teeth  then  appear  as
white  as  ivory,  which  however  is  not  an  excellence  in  the
eftimation  of  the  belles  and  beaus  6f  thefe  nations.

Thefe  are  the  people  among  whom  the  practice  that  is
called  a  mock,  or  running  a  muck,  has  prevailed  for  time  im-
memorial. It  is  well  known,  that  to  run  a  muck  in  the
original  fenfe  of  the  word,  is  to  get  intoxicated  with  opium,
and  then  rufh  into  the  ftreet  with  a  drawn  weapon,  and  kill
whoever  comes  in  the  way,  till  the  party  is  himfelf  either
killed  or  taken  prifoner ;  of  this  feveral  inftances  happened
while  we  were  at  Batavia,  and  one  of  the  officers,  whofe  bu-
finefs  it  is,  among  other  things,  to  apprehend  fuch  people,
told  us,  that  there  was  fcarcely  a  week  in  which  he,  or  fome
of  his  brethren,  were  not  called  upon  to  take  one  of  them
into  cuftody.  In  one  of  the  initances  that  came  to  our  know-
lege,  the  party  had  been  feverely  injured  by  the  perfidy  of
women,  and  was  mad  withjealoufy  before  he  made  himfelf
drunk  with  opium;  and  we  were  told,  that  the  Indian  who
runs  a  muck  is  always  firft  driven  to  defperation  by  fome  out-
rage, and  always  firft  revenges  himfelf  upon  thofe  who  have
done  him  wrong:  we  were  alfo  told,  that  though  thefe  un-
happy wretches  afterwards  run  into  the  ftreet  with  a  weapon
in  their  hand,  frantic  and  foaming  at  the  mouth,  yet  they
never  kill  any  but  thofe  who  attempt  to  apprehend  them,  or
thofe  whom  they  fufpect  of  fuch  an  intention,  and  that  who-
ever gives  them  way  is  fafe.  They  are  generally  flaves,  who
indeed  are  mod  fubjecT:  to  infults,  and  leaft  able  to  obtain
legal  redrefs:  freemen,  however,  are  fometimes  provoked
into  this  extravagance,  and  one  of  the  perfons  who  run  a
muck  while  we  were  at  Batavia,  was  free  and  in  eafy  circum-
ftances.  He  was  jealous  of  his  own  brother,  whom  he  firft
killed,  and  afterwards  two  others,  who  attempted  to  oppofe
2  him.:


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  755

hirii:  he  did  not,  however,  come  out  of  his  houfe,  but  en-
deavoured to  defend  himfelf  in  it,  though  the  opium  had  fo
far  deprived  him  of  his  fenfes,  that  of  three  mufkets,  which
he  attempted  to  ufe  againft  the  officers  of  juflice,  not  one
was  either  loaded  or  primed.  If  the  officer  takes  one  of
thefe  amocks,  or  mohawks,  as  they  have  been  called  by  an
eafy  corruption,  alive,  his  reward  is  very  confiderable,  but
if  he  kills  them,  nothing  is  added  to  his  ufual  pay ;  yet
fuch  is  the  fury  of  their  defperation,  that  three  out  of  four
are  of  neceffity  deflroyed  in  the  attempt  to  fecure  them,
though  the  officers  are  provided  with  inflruments  like  large
tongs,  or  pincers,  to  lay  hold  of  them  without  coming  with-
in the  reach  of  their  weapon.  Thofe  who  happen  to  be
taken  alive  are  generally  wounded,  but  they  are  always
broken  alive  upon  the  wheel,  and  if  the  phyfician  who  is  ap-
pointed to  examine  their  wounds,  thinks  them  likely  to  be
mortal,  the  punifhment  is  inflicted  immediately,  and  the
place  of  execution  is  generally  the  fpot  where  the  firil  mur-
der was  committed.

Among  thefe  people,  there  are  many  abfurd  practices  and
opinions  which  they  derive  from  their  Pagan  anceftors:  they
believe  that  the  devil,  whom  they  call  Satan,  is  the  caufe  of
all  ficknefs  and  adverfity,  and  for  this  reafon,  when  they
are  lick,  or  in  diftrefs,  they  confecrate  meat,  money,  and
other  things  to  him  as  a  propitiation.  If  any  one  among
them  is  rcdlefs,  and  dreams  for  two  or  three  nights  fuccef-
fively,  he  concludes  that  Satan  has  taken  that  method  of
laying  his  commands  upon  him,  which  if  he  neglects  to
fulfil,  he  will  certainly  fufler  ficknefs  or  death,  though  they
are  not  revealed  with  fufficient  perfpicuity  to  afcertain  their
meaning :  to  interpret  his  dream,  therefore,  he  taxes  his
wits  to  the  uttermoft,  and  if,  by  taking  it  literally  or  figu-
ratively, directly  or  by  contraries,  he  can  put  no  explanation

5  D  z  upon


756  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

upon  it  that  perfectly  fatisfies  him,  he  has  recourfe  to  the
cawin  or  prieft,  who  affifts  him  with  a  comment  and  ilmf-
trations,  and  perfectly  reveals  the  myfterious  fuggeftions  of
the  night.  It  generally  appears  that  the  devil  wants  victuals
or  money,  which  are  always  allotted  him,  and  being  placed
on  a  little  plate  of  cocoa-nut  leaves,  are  hung  upon  the
branch  of  a  tree  near  the  river,  fo  that  it  feems  not  to  be  the
opinion  of  thefe  people,  that  in  prowling  the  earth  the  devil
u  walketh  through  dry  places."  Mr.  Banks  once  afked,
whether  they  thought  Satan  fpent  the  money,  or  eat  the  vic-
tuals ;  he  was  anfwered,  that  as  to  the  money  it  was  con-
iidered  rather  as  a  mulct  upon  an  offender,  than  a  gift  to  him
who  had  enjoined  it,  and  that  therefore  if  it  was  devoted  by
the  dreamer,  it  mattered  not  into  whofe  hands  it  came,  and
they  fuppofed  that  it  was  generally  the  prize  of  fome  ftranger
who  wandered  that  way;  but  as  to  the  meat  they  were
clearly  of  opinion  that,  although  the  devil  did  not  eat  the
grofs  parts,  yet,  by  bringing  his  mouth  near  it,  he  fucked
out  all  its  favour  without  changing  its  pofition,  fo  that  after-
wards it  was  as  taftelefs  as  water.

But  they  have  another  fuperflitious  opinion  that  is  fiill
more  unaccountable.  They  believe  that  women,  when  they
are  delivered  of  children,  are  frequently  at  the  fame  time
delivered  of  a  young  crocodile,  as  a  twin  to  the  infant :  they
believe  that  thefe  creatures  are  received  moll  carefully  by
the  midwife,  and  immediately  carried  down  to  the  river,
and  put  into  the  water.  The  family  in  which  fuch  a  birth  is
fuppofed  to  have  happened,  conftantly  put  victuals  into  the
river  for  their  amphibious  relation,  and  efpecially  the  twin,
who,  as  long  as  he  lives,  goes  down  to  the  river  at  itated
3'eafons,  to  fulfil  this  fraternal  duty,  for  the  neglect  of
which  it  is  the  univerfal  opinion  that  he  will  be  vilited  with
ficknefs  or  death,    What  could  at  firft  produce  a  notion  fo

extravagant


hound  the  world.  757

extravagant  and  abfurd,  it  is  not  eafy  to  guefs,  efpecially  as
it  feems  to  be  totally  unconnected  with  any  religious  myfteryr
and  how  a  fact  which  never  happened,  mould  be  pretended
to  happen  every  day,  by  thofe  who  cannot  be  deceived  into
a  belief  of  it  by  appearances,  nor  have  any  apparent  intereft
in  the  fraud,  is  a  problem  ftill  more  difficult  to  folve.  No-
thing however  can  be  more  certain  than  the  firm  belief  of
this  ftrange  abfurdity  among  them,  for  we  had  the  concur-
rent teftimony  of  every  Indian  who  was  queftioned  about  it,
in  its  favour.  It  feems  to  have  taken  its  rife  in  the  iflands  of
Celebes  and  Boutou,  where  many  of  the  inhabitants  keep
crocodiles  in  their  families  j  but  however  that  be,  the  opinion
has  fpread  over  all  the  eaftern  iflands,  even  to  Timor  and
Ceram,  and  weftward  as  far  as  Java  and  Sumatra,  where,
however,  young  crocodiles  are,  I  believe,  never  kept.

Thefe  crocodile  twins  are  called  Sudaras,  and  I  mail  relate
one  of  the  innumerable  ftories  that  were  told  us,  in  proof  of
their  exiftence,  from  ocular  demonftration.

A  young  female  Have,  who  was  born  and  bred  up  among
the  Englifh  at  Bencoolen,  and  had  learnt  a  little  of  the  lan-
guage, told  Mr.  Banks  that  her  father,  when  he  was  dying,
acquainted  her  that  he  had  a  crocodile  for  his  Jkdara,  and
folemnly  charged  her  to  give  him  meat  when  he  mould
be  dead,  telling  her  in  what  part  of  the  river  he  was
to  be  found,  and  by  what  name  he  was  to  be  called  up.
That  in  purfuance  of  her  father's  inftructions  and  command,
fhe  went  to  the  river,  and  ftanding  upon  the  bank,  called
out  Radja  Ponti,  white  king,  upon  which  a  crocodile  came
to  her  out  of  the  water,  and  eat  from  her  hand  the  pro  virions-
that  fire  had  brought  him.  When  fhe  was  defired  to  defcribe
this  paternal  uncle,  who  in  fo  ftrange  a  fhape  had  taken  up
Iris  dwelling  in  the  water,  fhe  faid,  that  he  was  not  like
8  other


758  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

other  crocodiles,  but  much  handfomer ;  that  his  body  was
fpotted  and  his  nofe  red  ;  that  he  had  bracelets  of  gold  upon
his  feet,  and  earrings  of  the  fame  metal  in  his  ears.  Mn.
Banks  heard  this  tale  of  ridiculous  falfehood  patiently  to  the
end,  and  then  difmifTed  the  girl,  without  reminding  her,  that
a  crocodile  with  ears  was  as  flrange  a  monfter  as  a  dog  with
a  cloven  foot.  Some  time  after  this  a  fervant  whom  Mr.
Banks  had  hired  at  Batavia,  and  who  was  the  fon  of  a  Dutch-
man by  a  Javanefe  woman,  thought  fit  to  acquaint  his  maf-
ter  that  he  had  feen  a  crocodile  of  the  fame  kind,  which
had  alfo  been  feen  by  many  others,  both  Dutchmen  and
Malays :  that  being  very  young,  it  was  but  two  feet  long,
and  had  bracelets  of  gold  upon  its  feet.  There  is  no  giving
credit  to  thefe  ftories,  faid  Mr.  Banks,  for  I  was  told  the  other
day  that  a  crocodile  had  earrings  ;  and  you  know  that  could
not  be  true,  becaufe  crocodiles  have  no  ears.  Ah  Sir,  faid
the  man,  thefe  Sudara  Oran  are  not  like  other  crocodiles ;
they  have  five  toes  upon  each  foot,  a  large  tongue  that  fills
their  mouth,  and  ears  alfo,  although  they  are  indeed  very
fmall.

How  much  of  what  thefe  people  related  they  believed,
cannot  be  known ;  for  there  are  no  bounds  to  the  credulity
of  ignorance  and  folly.  In  the  girl's  relation,  however,  there
are  fome  things  in  which  fhe  could  not  be  deceived  ;  and
therefore  rauft  have  been  guilty  of  wilful  falfehood.  Her
father  might  perhaps  give  her  a  charge  to  feed  a  crocodile,
in  confequence  of  his  believing  that  it  was  his  Sudara  ;  but
its  coming  to  her  out  of  the  river,  when  flie  called  it  by  the
name  of  White  King,  aad  taking  the  food  lhe  had  brought
it,  mud  have  been  a  fable  of  her  own  invention ;  for  this
being  falfe,  it  was  impofuble  thatihe  mould  believe  it  to  be
true.  The  girl's  ftory,  however,  as  well  as  that  of  the  man,
is  a  flrong  proof  that  they  both  firmly  believed  the  exig-
ence


December,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  7S9

ence  of  crocodiles  that  are  Sudaras  to  men  ;  and  the  girl's  1770
fiction  will  be  eafily  accounted  for,  if  we  recollect,  that  the
earned  defire  which  every  one  feels  to  make  others  believe
what  he  believes  himfelf,  is  a  ftrong  temptation  to  fupport
it  by  unjuftifiable  evidence.  And  the  averring  what  is
known  to  be  falfe,  in  order  to  produce  in  others  the  belief  of
what  is  thought  to  be  true,  mull,  upon  the  moft  charitable
principles,  be  imputed  to  many,  otherwife  venerable  charac-
ters, through  whofe  hands  the  doctrines  of  Chriftianity  palled
for  many  ages  in  their  way  to  us,  as  the  fource  of  all  the
filly  fables  related  of  the  Romifli  faints,  many  of  them  not
lefs  extravagant  and  abfurd  than  this  ftory  of  the  White
King,  and  all  of  them  the  invention  of  the  firft  relater.

The  Bougis,  MacafTars,  and  Boetons,  are  fo  firmly  per-
fuaded  that  they  have  relations  of  the  crocodile  fpecies  in
the  rivers  of  their  own  country,  that  they  perform  a  periodi-
cal ceremony  in  remembrance  of  them.  Large  parties  of
them  go  out  in  a  boat,  furniilied  with  great  plenty  of  provi-
fions,  and  all  kinds  of  rnufic,  and  row  backwards  and  for-
wards, in  places  where  crocodiles  and  allegators  are  moil
common,  finging  and  weeping  by  turns,  each  invoking  his
kindred,  till  a  crocodile  appears,  when  the  mufic  inflantly
flops,  and  provifions,  betele,  and  tobacco  are  thrown  into  the
water.  By  this  civility  to  the  fpecies,  they  hope  to  recom-
mend themfelves  to  their  relations  at  home;  and  that  it  will
be  accepted  inilead  of  offerings  immediately  to  themfelves,
which  it  is  not  in  their  power  to  pay.

In  the  next  rank  to  the  Indians  fland  the  Chinefe,  who  in
this  place  are  numerous,  but  poflefs  very  little  property ;
many  of  them  live  within  the  walls,  and  keep  mops.  The
fruit-fellers  of  PafTar  PifTang  have  been  mentioned  already;
but  others  have  a  rich  fhow  of  European  and  Chinefe  goods :

the


75o  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

the  far  greater  part  however  live  in  a  quarter  by  themf elves,
without  the  walls,  called  Campang  China.  Many  of  them  are
carpenters,  joiners,  fmiths,  taylors,  flipper  makers,  dyers  of
cotton,  and  embroiderers  ;  maintaining  the  character  of  in-
■duftry  that  is  univerfally  given  of  them :  and  fome  are  fcat-
tered  about  the  country,  where  they  cultivate  gardens,  fow
rice  and  fugar,  or  keep  cattle  and  buffaloes,  whofe  milk  they
bring  daily  to  town.

There  is  nothing  clean  or  dirty,  honefl  or  difhoneft,  pro-
vided there  is  not  too  much  danger  of  a  halter,  that  the  Chi-
nefe  will  not  readily  do  for  money.  But  though  they  work
with  great  diligence,  and  patiently  undergo  any  degree  of
labour ;  yet  no  fooner  have  they  laid  down  their  tools  than
they  begin  to  game,  either  at  cards  or  dice,  or  fome  other  play
among  the  multitude  that  they  have  invented,  which  are  al-
together unknown  in  Europe :  to  this  they  apply  with  fuch
eagernefs,  as  fcarcely  to  allow  time  for  the  neceflary  refrefh-
ments  of  food  and  fleep ;  fo  that  it  as  rare  to  fee  a  Chinefe
idle,  as  it  is  to  fee  a  Dutchman  or  an  Indian  employed.

In  manners  they  are  always  civil,  or  rather  obfequious ;
and  in  drefs  they  are  remarkably  neat  and  clean,  to  what-
ever rank  of  life  they  belong.  I  fhall  not  attempt  a  defcrip-
tion  either  of  their  perfons  or  habits,  for  the  better  kind  of
China  paper,  which  is  now  common  in  England,  exhibits  a
perfect  reprefentation  of  both,  though  perhaps  with  fome
flight  exaggerations  approaching  towards  the  caricatura.

In  eating  they  are  eafily  fatisfied,  though  the  few  that  are
rich  have  many  favory  diflies.  Rice,  with  a  fmall  propor-
tion of  flefh  or  fifti,  is  the  food  of  the  poor;  and  they  have
^reatly  the  advantage  of  the  Mahometan  Indians,  whofe  re-
ligion forbids  them  to  eat  of  many  things  which  they  could
moil  eafily  procure.    The  Chinefe,  on  the  contrary,  being

under


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  761

under  no  reftraint,  eat,  befides  pork,  dogs,  cats,  frogs,  lizards,
ferpents  of  many  kinds,  and  a  great  variety  of  fea  animals,
which  the  other  inhabitants  of  this  country  do  not  confider
as  food  :  they  eat  alfo  many  vegetables,  which  an  European,
except  he  was  perifhing  with  hunger,  would  never  touch.

The  Chinefe  have  a  fingular  fuperftition  with  regard  to
the  burial  of  their  dead  ;  for  they  will  upon  no  occafion  open
the  ground  a  fecond  time,  where  a  body  has  been  interred.
Their  burying  grounds,  therefore,  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Batavia,  cover  many  hundred  acres,  and  the  Dutch,  grudging
the  wafte  of  fo  much  land,  will  not  fell  any  for  this  purpofe
but  at  the  moft  exorbitant  price.  The  Chinefe,  however,
contrive  to  raife  the  purchafe  money,  and  afford  another  in-
ftance  of  the  folly  and  weaknefs  of  human  nature,  in  tranf-
ferring  a  regard  for  the  living  to  the  dead,  and  making  that
the  object  of  folicitude  and  expence,  which  cannot  receive
the  leaft  benefit  from  either.  Under  the  influence  of  this
univerfal  prejudice,  they  take  an  uncommon  method  to  pre-
ferve  the  body  intire,  and  prevent  the  remains  of  it  from
being  mixed  with  the  earth  that  furrounds  it.  They  inclofe
it  in  a  large  thick  coffin  of  wood,  not  made  of  planks  joined
together,  but  hollowed  out  of  the  folid  timber  like  a  canoe  ;
this  being  covered,  and  let  down  into  the  grave,  is  furrounded.
with  a  coat  of  their  mortar,  called  Chinam,  about  eight  or
ten  inches  thick,  which  in  a  fhort  time  becomes  as  hard  as-
a  ftone.  The  relations  of  the  deceafed  attend  the  funeral
ceremony,  with  a  confiderable  number  of  women  that  are
hired  to  weep :  it  might  reafonably  be  fuppofed  that  the
hired  appearance  of  forrow  could  no  more  flatter  the  living:
than  benefit  the  dead  ;  yet  the  appearance  of  forrow  is
known  to  be  hired  among  people  much  more  reflective
and  enlightened  than  the  Chinefe.     In  Batavia,  the  law  re-

Vol.  II,  5  E  quires


;&?  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

quires  that  every  man  fliould  be  buried  according  to  his
rank,  which  is  in  no  cafe  difpenfed  with;  fo  that  if  the  de-
ceafed  has  not  left  fufficient  to  pay  his  debts,  an  officer  takes
an  inventory  of  what  was  in  his  poffeflion  when  he  died,  and
out  of  the  produce  buries  him  in  the  manner  prefcribed,
leaving  only  the  overplus  to  his  creditors.  Thus  in  many
inftances  are  the  living  facrificed  to  the  dead,  and  money
that  fliould  difcharge  a  debt,  or  feed  an  orphan,  laviflied  in
idle  proceflions,  or  depofited  in  the  earth  to  rot.

Another  numerous  clafs  among  the  inhabitants  of  this
country  is  the  Haves ;  for  by  Haves  the  Dutch,  Portuguefe,
and  Indians,  however  different  in  their  rank  or  fituation,
are  conftantly  attended ;  they  are  purchafed  from  Sumatra,
Malacca,  and  almoft  all  the  eaftern  iflands.  The  natives  of
Java,  very  few  of  whom,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  live  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Batavia,  have  an  exemption  from  fla-
very  under  the  fan&ion  of  very  fevere  penal  laws,  which  I
believe  are  feldom  violated.  The  price  of  thefe  flaves  is  from
ten  to  twenty  pounds  fterling ;  but  girls,  if  they  have  beauty,
fometimes  fetch  a  hundred.  They  are  a  very  lazy  fet  of
people ;  but  as  they  will  do  but  little  work,  they  are  content
with  a  little  victuals,  fubfifling  altogether  upon  boiled  rice,
and  a  fmall  quantity  of  the  cheapeft  fifli.  As  they  are  na-
tives of  different  countries,  they  differ  from  each  other  ex-
tremely, both  in  perfon  and  difpofition.  The  African  negroes,
called  here  Papua,  are  the  worfl,  and  consequently  may  be
purchafed  for  the  leafl  money :  they  are  all  thieves,  and  all
incorrigible.  Next  to  thefe  are  the  Bougis  and  Macaflars,
both  from  the  ifland  of  Celebes  ;  thefe  are  lazy  in  the  high-
eft  degree,  and  though  not  fo  much  addicted  to  theft  as  the
negroes,  have  a  cruel  and  vindictive  fpirit,  which  renders
diem  extremely  dangerous ;  efpe  daily  as,  to  gratify  their
i  refentment,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  763

refentment,  they  will  make  no  fcruple  of  facrificing  life.  1770-
The  befl  flaves,  and  confequently  the  deareft,  are  procured  »_eC-™  c^,
from  the  ifland  of  Bali :  the  moft  beautiful  women  from
Nias,  a  fmall  ifland  on  the  coaft  of  Sumatra  ;  but  they  are
of  a  tender  and  delicate  conftitution,  and  foon  fall  a  facrifice
to  the  unwholefome  air  of  Batavia.  Befides  thefe,  there  are
Malays,  and  Haves  of  feveral  other  denominations,  whofe
particular  characteriflics  I  do  not  remember.

Thefe  Haves  are  wholly  in  the  power  of  their  mafters  with
refpecl:  to  any  punifliment  that  does  not  take  away  life  ;  but
if  a  flave  dies  in  confequence  of  punifliment,  though  his
death  mould  not  appear  to  have  been  intended,  the  mafler
is  called  to  a  fevere  account,  and  he  is  generally  condemned
to  fufFer  capitally.  For  this  reafon  the  matter  feldom  inflicts
punifliment  upon  the  flave  himfelf,  but  applies  to  an  officer
called  a  Marineu,  one  of  whom  is  Rationed  in  every  di£lri6t.
The  duty  of  the  Marineu  is  to  quell  riots,  and  take  offenders
into  cuitody  •,  but  more  particularly  to  apprehend  runaway
flaves,  and  punifli  them  for  fuch  crimes  as  the  mailer,  fup-
ported  by  proper  evidence,  lays  to  their  charge :  the  punifli-
ment however  is  not  inflicted  by  the  Marineu  in  perfon,  but
by  flaves  who  are  bred  up  to  the  bufinefs.  Men  are  puniihed
publicly,  before  the  door  of  their  mailer's  houfe;  but  women
within  it.  The  punifliment  is  by  ilripes,  the  number  being
proportioned  to  the  offence  ;  and  they  are  given  with  rods
made  of  rattans,  which  are  fplit  into  flender  twigs  for  the
purpofe,  and  fetch  blood  at  every  flroke.  A  common  pu-
nifliment coils  the  mafler  a  rixdollar,  and  a  fevere  one  a  du-
catoon,  about  fix  {hillings  and  eight  pence.  The  mailer  is
alfo  obliged  to  allow  the  flave  three  dubbelcheys,  equal  to
about  ieven  pence  half-penny  a  week,  as  an  encouragement,
and  to  prevent  his  being  under  temptations  to  ileal  too  flrong
to  be  refilled.

5  E  z.  Concerning


764  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.  Concerning  the  government  of  this  place  I  can  fay  but

fcJU^L^j  little.  We  obferved  however  a  remarkable  fubordination
among  the  people.  Every  man  who  is  able  to  keep  houfe
has  a  certain  fpecific  rank  acquired  by  the  length  of  his  fer-
vices  to  the  company ;  the  different  ranks  which  are  thus
acquired  are  diftinguifhed  by  the  ornaments  of  the  coaches
and  the  drefles  of  the  coachmen  :  fome  are  obliged  to  ride  in
plain  coaches,  fome  are  allowed  to  paint  them  in  different
manners  and  degrees,  and  fome  to  gild  them.  The  coach-
man alfo  appears  in  clothes  that  are  quite  plain,  or  more  or
lefs  adorned  with  lace.

The  officer  who  prefides  here  has  the  title  of  Governor
General  of  the  Indies,  and  the  Dutch  Governors  of  all  the
other  fettlements  are  fubordinate  to  him,  and  obliged  to  re-
pair to  Batavia  that  he  may  pafs  their  accounts.  If  they  ap-
pear to  have  been  criminal,  or  even  negligent,  he  punifhes
them  by  delay,  and  detains  them  during  pleafure,  fome-
times  one  year,  fomenimes  two  years,  and  fometimes  three ;
for  they  cannot  quit  the  place  till  he  gives  them  a  difmiffion.
Next  to  the  Governor  are  the  members  of  the  council,  called
.here  Edele  Heeren,  and  by  the  corruption  of  the  Englifh,  Ido-
leers.  Thefe  Idolecrs  take  upon  them  fo  much  Itate  that
whoever  meets  them  in  a  carriage,  is  expected  to  rife  up  and
bow,  then  to  drive  on  one  fide  of  the  road,  and  there  flop  till
they  are  part :  the  fame  homage  is  required  alfo  to  their
wives  and  even  their  children ;  and  it  is  commonly  paid  them
by  the  inhabitants.  But  fome  of  our  Captains  have  thought
fo  flavifh  a  mark  of  refpect  beneath  the  dignity  which  they
derived  from  the  fervice  of  his  Britannic  Majefty,  and  have
refufed  to  pay  it ;  yet,  if  they  were  in  a  hired  carriage,  no-
thing could  deter  the  coachman  from  honouring  the  Dutch
Grandee  at  their  expence,  but  the  moft  peremptory  menace

of  immediate  death,

Juftice


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  y6S

Juftice  is  adminiftered  here  by  a  body  of  lawyers,  who  mo-
have  ranks  of  diftindtion  among  themfelves.  Concerning  t  ec!™,e^
their  proceedings  in  queflions  of  property,  I  know  nothing ;
but  their  decifions  in  criminal  cafes  feem  to  be  fevere  with
refpect  to  the  natives,  and  lenient  with  refpecl  to  their  own
people,  in  a  criminal  degree.  A  Chriftian  always  is  in-
dulged with  an  opportunity  of  efcaping  before  he  is  brought
to  a  trial,  whatever  may  have  been  his  offence ;  and  if  he  is
brought  to  a  trial  and  convicted,  he  is  feldom  punifhed  with
death :  while  the  poor  Indians  on  the  contrary  are  hanged,
and  broken  upon  the  wheel,  and  even  impaled  alive  with-
out mercy.

The  Malays  and  Chinefe  have  judicial  officers  of  their
own,  under  the  denominations  of  Captains  and  Lieutenants,
who  determine  in  civil  cafes,  fubject  to  an  appeal  to  the
Dutch  court.

The  taxes  paid  by  thefe  people  to  the  Company  are  very
confiderable ;  and  that  which  is  exacted  of  them  for  liberty
to  wear  their  hair,  is  by  no  means  the  leafl.  They  are  paid
monthly,  and  to  fave  the  trouble  and  charge  of  collecting
them,  a  flag  is  hoifted  upon  the  top  of  a  houfe  in  the  middle
of  the  town  when  a  payment  is  due,  and  the  Chinefe  have
experienced  that  it  is  their  intcreft  to  repair  thither  with
their  money  without  delay.

The  money  current  here  confifts  of  ducats,  worth  a  hun-
dred and  thirty-two  ftivers ;  ducatoons,  eighty  flivers  ;  im-
perial rixdollars,  fixty;  rupees  of  Batavia,  thirty;  fchellings,
fix;  double  cheys,  two  flivers  and  a  half;  and  doits,  one
fourth  of  a  fliver.  Spanifh  dollars,  when  we  were  here,  were
at  five  millings  and  five  pence ;  and  we  were  told,  that  they
were  never  lower  than  five  millings  and  four  pence,  even  at
2  the


166  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1770.      the  Company's  warehoufe.    For  Englifh  guineas  we  could

December.  ,  •  n  .„■

i_  --,_>  never  get  more  than  nineteen  millings  upon  an  average ;
for  though  the  Chinefe  would  give  twenty  millings  for  fome
of  the  brighteft,  they  would  give  no  more  than  feventeen
ihillings  for  thofe  that  were  much  worn.

It  may  perhaps  be  of  fome  advantage  to  ftrangers  to  be
told  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  coin  here,  of  the  fame  de-
nomination, milled  and  unmilled,  and  that  the  milled  is  of
moft  value.  A  milled  ducatoon  is  worth  eighty  ftivers  j  but
an  unmilled  ducatoon  is  worth  no  more  than  feventy-two.
All  accounts  are  kept  in  rixdollars  and  ftivers,  which,  here  at
leaft,  are  mere  nominal  coins,  like  our  pound  fterling.  The
rixdollar  is  equal  to  forty-eight  ftivers,  about  four  Ihillings
and  fix  pence  Englifh  currency.


CHAP.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  767


CHAP.     XV.

The  Pajfage  from  Batavia  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope :
Some  Account  of  Prince  s  Ijland  and  its  Inhabitants  ^  and
a  comparative  View  of  their  Language  with  the  Malay
and  Javanefe,


o


N  Thurfday  the  27th  of  December,  at  fix  o'clock  in  the       1770-

December.

morning,  we  weighed  again  and  flood  out  to  lea.   At-   1 „-__/

ter  much  delay  by  contrary  winds,  we  weathered  Pulo  Pare      un  ay  2;*
on  the  29th,  and  flood  in  for  the  main ;  foon  after  we  fetched  Saturday  29.
a  fmall  ifland  under  the  main,  in  the  midway  between  Ba-
tavia and  Bantam,  called  Maneater's  Ifland.    The  next  day,  Sunday  30.
we  weathered  firft  Wapping  Ifland,  and  then  Pulo  Babi.    On
the  31ft,  we  flood  over  to  the  Sumatra  fliore;  and  on  the  Monday  31;
morning  of  New  Year's  day,  177 1,  we  flood  over  for  the  Java      1771.

n  January.

more.  Tuefday  1.

We  continued  our  courfe  as  the  wind  permitted  us  till
three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  5  th,  when  we  anchored  Saturdays.
under  the  fouth  eaft  fide  of  Prince's  Ifland  in  eighteen  fa-
thom, in  order  to  recruit  our  wood  and  water,  and  procure
refrefhments  for  the  fick,  many  of  whom  were  now  become
much  worfe  than  they  were  when  we  left  Batavia.  As  foon
as  the  fhip  was  fecured,  I  went  afliore,  accompanied  by  Mr.
Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  and  we  were  met  upon  the  beach  by
fome  Indians  who  carried  us  immediately  to  a  man,  who,
they  faid,  was  their  King.  After  we  had  exchanged  a  few
compliments  with  his  Majefly,  we  proceeded  to  bufinefs;  but

in


763  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

i77r«  in  fettling  the  price  of  turtle  we  could  not  agree:  this  how-
.  Jan_"^_y,_,  ever  did  not  difcourage  us,  as  we  made  no  doubt  but  that
Saturday  5.  ^e  ^ou]d  buy  them  at  our  own  price  in  the  morning.  As
foon  as  we  parted,  the  Indians  difperfed,  and  we  proceeded
along  the  more  in  fearch  of  a  watering-place.  In  this  we
were  more  fuccefsful;  we  found  water  very  conveniently
fituated,  and,  if  a  little  care  was  taken  in  filling  it,  we  had
reafon  to  believe  that  it  would  prove  good.  Jufl  as  we
were  going  off,  fome  Indians,  who  remained  with  a  canoe
upon  the  beach,  fold  us  three  turtle ;  but  exa&ed  a  promife
of  us  that  we  mould  not  tell  the  King.

Sunday  6.  The  next  morning,  while  a  party  was  employed  in  filling

water,  we  renewed  our  traffic  for  turtle:  ar  firft,  the  In-
dians dropped  their  demands  flowly,  but  about  noon,  they
agreed  to  take  the  price  that  we  offered,  fo  that  before  night
we  had  turtle  in  plenty :  the  three  that  we  had  purchafed
the  evening  before,  were  in  the  mean  time  ferved  to  the
Ihip's  company,  who,  till  the  day  before,  had  not  once  been
ferved  with  fait  provifions  from  the  time  of  our  arrival  at
Savu,  which  was  now  near  four  months.  In  the  evening,
Mr.  Banks  went  to  pay  his  refpecfts  to  the  King,  at  his  palace,
in  the  middle  of  a  rice  field,  and  though  his  Majefly  was
bufily  employed  in  dre fling  his  own  fupper,  he  received  the.
ftranger  very  gracioufly.

The  next  day,  the  natives  came  down  to  the  trading-place,
with  fowls,  fiih,  monkies,  fmall  deer,  and  fome  vegetables,
but  no  turtle,  for  they  faid  that  we  had  bought  them  all  the
day  before.  The  next  day,  however,  more  turtle  appeared
at  market,  and  fome  were  brought  down  every  day  after-
wards, during  our  flay,  though  the  whole,  together,  was
not  equal  to  the  quantity  that  we  bought  the  day  after  our
arrival.

On


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  yGg

On  the  nth,  Mr.  Banks  having  learnt  from  the  fervant      1771.
whom  he  had  hired  at  Batavia,  that  the  Indians  of  this  ifland   ,  ^fej
had  a  town  upon  the  fhore,  at  fome  diftance  to  the  weftward,  Ftld*y  ll'
he  determined  to  fee  it:  with  this  view  he  fet  out  in  the
morning,  accompanied  by  the  Second  Lieutenant,  and  as  he
had  fome  reafon  to  think  that  his  vifit  would  not  be  agree-
able to  the  inhabitants,  he  told  the  people  whom  he  met,  as
he  was  advancing  along  the  fhore,  that  he  was  in  fearch  of
plants,  which  indeed  was  alfo  true.     In  about  two  hours
they  arrived  at  a  place  where  there  were  four  or  five  houfes,
and  meeting  with  an  old  man,  they  ventured  to  make  fome
enquiries  concerning  the  town.     He  faid  that  it  was  far
diftant ;  but  they  were  not  to  be  difcouraged  in  their  entcr-
prife,  and  he,  feeing  them  proceed  in  their  journey,  joined
company  and  went  on  with  them.     He  attempted  feveral
times  to  lead  them  out  of  the  way,  but  without  fuccefs ;  and
at  length  they  came  within  fight  of  the  houfes.     The  old  man
then  entered  cordially  into  their  party,  and  conducted  them
into  the  town.     The  name  of  it  is  Samadang,  it  confifls  of
about  four  hundred  houfes,   and  is  divided  by  a  river  of
brackifh  water  into  two  parts,  one  of  which  is  called  the  old
town  and  the  other  the  new.     As  foon  as  they  entered  the
old  town,  they  met  feveral  Indians  whom  they  had  feen  at
the  trading-place,  and  one  of  them  undertook  to  carry  them
over  to  the  new  town,  at  the  rate  of  two  pence  a  head.  When
the  bargain  was  made,  two  very  fmall  canoes  were  pro-
duced, in  which  they  embarked  ;  the  canoes  being  placed
alongfideof  each  other,  and  held  together,  a  precaution  which
was  abfolutcly  necefTary  to  prevent  their  overfetting,    the
navigation  was  at  length  fafely  performed,  though  not  with-
out fome  difficulty;  and  when  they  landed  in  the  new  town,
the  people  received  them  with  great  friendfhip,  and  mowed
them  the  houfes  of  their  Kings  and  principal  people,  which
Vol.  II.  <;  F  are


77o  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1771.  are  in  this  diftrift:  few  of  them  however  were  open,  for
._  "arylf  at  this  time  the  people  had  taken  up  their  refidence  in  the
Fnday  1 1.  riCe -grounds,  to  defend  the  crop  againft  the  birds  and  mon-
kies,  by  which  it  would  otherwife  have  been  deftroyed.
When  their  curiofity  was  fatisfied,  they  hired  a  large  failing
boat. for  two  roupees,  four  millings,  which  brought  them
back  to  the  fhip  time  enough  to  dine  upon  one  of  the  fmall
deer,  weighing  only  forty  pounds,  which  had  been  bought
the  day  before,  and  proved  to  be  very  good  and  favory  meat.

We  went  on  fhore  in  the  evening,  to  fee  how  the  people  who
were  employed  in  wooding  and  watering  went  on,  and  were
informed  that  an  ax  had  been  ftolen.  As  the  pairing  over
this  fault  might  encourage  the  commiflion  of  others  of  the
fame  kind,  application  was  immediately  made  to  the  King,
who  after  fome  altercation  promifed  that  the  ax  mould  be
Saturday  1 2.  reflored  in  the  morning;  and  kept  his  word,  for  it  was
brought  to  us  by  a  man  who  pretended  that  the  thief,  being
afraid  of  a  difcovery,  had  privately  brought  it  and  left  it  at
his  houfe  in  the  night.

We  continued  to  purchafe  between  two  and  three  hundred
weight  of  turtle  in  a  day,  befides  fowls  and  other  neceffaries ;
§uaday  13.  and  in  the  evening  of  the  13th,  having  nearly  completed
our  wood  and  water,  Mr.  Banks  went  afliore  to  take  leave
of  his  Majefty,  to  whom  he  had  made  feveral  trifling  pre-
fents,  and  at  parting  gave  him  two  quires  of  paper,  which
he  graciouily  received.  They  had  much  converfation,  in  the
courfe  of  which  his  Majefty  enquired,  why  the  Englifh  did
not  touch  there  as  they  had  been  ufed  to  do.  Mr.  Banks
replied,  that  he  fuppofed  it  was  becaufe  they  found  a  defi-
ciency of  turtle,  of  which  there  not  being  enough  to  fupply
one  fhip,  many  could  not  be  expected.  To  fupply  this  de-
fect, he  advifed  his  Majefty  to  breed  cattle,  buffaloes,  and

fheep,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  7Jl

fhecp,  a  meafurc  which  he  did  not  feem  much  inclined  to      I77'»

i  January.

adopt.  i         '_f

On  the  14th  we  made  ready  to  fail,  having  on  board  a  Monday  14.
good  flock  of  refrefhments,  which  we  purchafcd  of  the  na-
tives, confifting  of  turtle,  fowl,  fifh,  two  fpecies  of  deer,
one  as  big  as  a  fheep,  the  other  not  larger  than  a  rabbit  j
with  cocoa-nuts,  plantains,  limes,  and  other  vegetables.  The
deer  however  ferved  only  for  prefent  ufe,  for  we  could  fel-
dom  keep  one  of  them  alive  more  than  four  and  twenty
hours  after  it  was  on  board.  On  our  part,  the  trade  was
carried  on  chiefly  with  Spanifh  dollars,  the  natives  feeming1
to  let  little  value  upon  any  thing  elfe ;  fo  that  our  people,
who  had  a  general  permiffion  to  trade,  parted  with  old
fTiirts  and  other  articles,  which  they  were  obliged  to  fubfti-
tute  for  money  to  great  difadvantage.  In  the  morning  of
the  15th,  we  weighed,  with  a  light  breeze  at  N.E.  and  flood  Tuefday  iS,
out  to  fea.  Java  Head,  from  which  I  took  my  departure
lies  in  latitude  6°  49'  S.,  longitude  255 °  12'  \V.

Prince's  Ifland,  where  we  lay  about  ten  days,  is,  in  the
Malay  language,  called  Puh  Selan  ;  and  in  the  language  of.
the  inhabitants,  Pulo  Paneitan.  It  is  a  fmall  ifland,  fituated  in
the  weflern  mouth  of  the  Streight  of  Sunda.  It  is  woody,
and  a  very  fmall  part  of  it  only  has  been  cleared:  there  is
no  remarkable  hill  upon  it,  yet  the  Englifh  call  the  fmall
eminence  which  is  juft  over  the  landing-place  the  Pike.  It
was  formerly  much  frequented  by  the  India  mips  of  many
nations,'  but  efpecially  thofe  of  England,  which  of  late  have
fofffakcn  it,  as  it  is  faid,  becaufe  the  water  is  bad ;  and  touch
either  at  North  Ifland,  a  fmall  iiland  that  lies  on  the  coafl  of
Sumatra,  without  the  eaft  entrance  of  the  Streight,  or  at
New  Bay,  which  lies  only  a  few  leagues  from  Prince's
Ifland,  at  neither  of  which  places  any  confiderable  quantity

5  F  2  of


772


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


1771.       of  other  refrefliments  can  be  procured.    Prince's  Ifland  is,
anuary^   Up0n  the  whole,  certainly  more  eligible  than  either  of  them ;
Tuefday  15.    an(j  though  the  water  is  brackifh,  if  it  is  filled  at  the  lower
part  of  the  brook,  yet  higher  up  it  will  be  found  excellent.

The  firfl  and  fecond,  and  perhaps  the  third  fhip  that  comes
in  the  feafon  may  be  tolerably  fupplied  with  turtle ;  but  thofe
that  come  afterwards  muft  be  content  with  fmall  ones.  Thofe
that  we  bought  were  of  the  green  kind,  and  at  an  average  coil
us  about  a  half-penny  or  three  farthings  a  pound.  We  were
much  difappointed  to  find  them  neither  fat  nor  well  fla-
voured ;  and  we  imputed  it  to  their  having  been  long  kept
in  crawls  or  pens  of  brackifh.  water,  without  food.  The
fowls  are  large,  and  we  bought  a  dozen  of  them  for  a  Spa-
nifh  dollar,  which  is  about  five  pence  a  piece :  the  fmall
deer  cofl  us  two  pence  a  piece,  and  the  larger,  of  which  two
only  were  brought  down,  a  rupee.  Many  kinds  of  fifh  are
to  be  had  here,  which  the  natives  fell  by  hand,  and  we  found
them  tolerably  cheap.  Cocoa-nuts  we  bought  at  the  rate  of
a  hundred  for  a  dollar,  if  they  were  picked  ;  and  if  they
were  taken  promifcuoufly,  one  hundred  and  thirty.  Plan-
tains we  found  in  great  plenty;  we  procured  alfo  fome  pine
apples,  water  melons,  jaccas,  and  pumpkins ;  befides  rice,
the  greater  part  of  which  was  of  the  mountain  kind,  that
grows  in  dry  land  ;  yams,  and  feveral  other  vegetables,  at  a
very  reafonable  rate.

The  inhabitants  are  Javanefe,  whofe  Raja  is  fubject  to  the
Sultan  of  Bantam.  Their  cuftoms  are  very  fimilar  to  thofe
of  the  Indians  about  Batavia ;  but  they  feem  to  be  more
jealous  of  their  women,  for  we  never  faw  any  of  them  during
all  the  time  that  we  were  there,  except  one  by  chance  in  the
woods,  as  fhe  was  running  away  to  hide  herfelf.  They  pro-
fefs  the  Mahometan  religion,  but  I  believe  there  is  not  a
2  mofque


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  m

mofque  in  the  whole  ifland:    we  were  among  them  during      177'


the  faft,  which  the  Turks  call  Ramadan,  which  they  feemed
to  keep  with  great  rigour,  for  not  one  of  them  would  touch
a  morfel  of  victuals,  or  even  chew  their  betel  till  fun-fet.

Their  food  is  nearly  the  fame  as  that  of  the  Batavian  In-
dians, except  the  addition  of  the  nuts  of  the  palm,  called
Cycas  circbialis,  with  which,  upon  the  coaft  of  New  Holland,.
ibme  of  our  people  were  made  fick,  and  fome  of  our  hogs
poifoned.

Upon  obferving  thefe  nuts  to  be  part  of  their  food,  we  en-
quired by  what  means  they  deprived  them  of  their  deleterious
quality;  and  they  told  us,  that  they  firft  cut  them  into  thin
flices,  and  dried  them  in  the  fun,  then  fteeped  them  in  frefh
water  for  three  months,  and  afterwards,  preffing  out  the
water,  dried  them  in  the  fun  a  fecond  time ;  but  we  learnt
that,  after  all,  they  are  eaten  only  in  times  of  fcarcity,  when,
they  mix  them  with  their  rice  to  make  it  go  farther.

The  houfes  of  their  town  are  built  upon  piles,  or  pillars,
four  or  five  feet  above  the  ground :  upon  thefe  is  laid  a  floor
of  bamboo  canes,  which  are  placed  at  fome  diftance  from
each  other,  fo  as  to  leave  a  free  pafTage  for  the  air  from  be-
low :  the  walls  alfo  are  of  bamboo,  which  are  interwoven5
hurdlewife,    with  fmall  flicks,    that  are  fattened  perpen-
dicularly to  the  beams  which  form  the  frame  of  the  build-
ing: it  has  a  floping  roof,  which  is  fo  well  thatched  with:
palm  leaves,  that  neither  the  fun  nor  the  rain  can  find  en-
trance.    The  ground  over  which  this  building  is  erected,  is
an  oblong  fquare.     In  the  middle  of  one  fide  is  the  door,
and  in  the  middle  between  that  and  the  end  of  the  houfe,
towards  the  left  hand,  is  a  window :   a  partition  runs  out
from  each  end  towards  the  middle,   which,  if  continued,,
would  divide  the  whole  floor  into  two  equal  parts,  longitu-
dinally,


January.


T,74  LIEUTENANT    COOK's   VOYAGE

i?7l-  dinally,  but  they  do  not  meet  in  the  middle,  fo  that  anopen-
■  a"""  '  '  ing  is  left  over-againft  the  door;  each  end  of  the  houfe
therefore,  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  door,  is  divided  into
two  rooms,  like  Halls  in  a  liable,  all  open  towards  the  paf-
fage  from  the  door  to  the  wall  on  the  oppofite  iide :  in  that
next  the  door,  to  the  left  hand,  the  children  ileep ;  that  op-
pofite to  it,  on  the  right  hand,  is  allotted  to  ftrangers;  the
mailer  and  his  wife  fleep  in  the  inner  room  on  the  left  hand,
and  that  oppofite  to  it  is  the  kitchen.  There  is  no  difference
between  the  houfes  of  the  poor  and  the  rich,  but  in  the  fize  ;
except  that  the  royal  palace,  and  the  houfe  of  a  man,  whole
name  is  Gundang,  the  next  in  riches  and  influence  to  the
King,  is  walled  with  boards  inftead  of  being  wattled  with
flicks  and  bamboo.

As  the  people  are  obliged  to  abandon  the  town,  and  live
in  the  rice-fields  at  certain  feafons,  to  fecure  their  crops  from
the  birds  and  the  monkies,  they  have  occafional  houfes  there
for  their  accommodation.  They  are  exactly  the  fame  as  the
houfes  in  the  town,  except  that  they  are  fmaller,  and  are
elevated  eight  or  ten  feet  above  the  ground  inftead  of  four.

The  difpofition  of  the  people,  as  far  as  we  could  dis-
cover it,  is  good.  They  dealt  with  us  very  honeflly,  except,
like  all  other  Indians,  and  the  itinerant  retailers  of  fifh  in
London,  they  afked  fometimes  twice,  and  fometimes  thrice
as  much  for  their  commodities  as  they  would  take.  As  what
they  brought  to  market,  belonged,  in  different  proportions,
to  a  confiderable  number  of  the  natives,  and  it  would  have
been  difficult  to  purchafe  it  in  feparate  lots,  they  found  out
a  very  eafy  expedient  with  which  every  one  was  fatisfied :
they  put  all  that  was  bought  of  one  kind,  as  plantains,  or
cocoa-nuts,  together,  and  when  we  had  agreed  for  the  heap,
they  divided  the  money  that  was  paid  for  it,  among  thofe

of


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


77S


of  whofe  fcparate  property  it  confifted,  in  a  proportion  cor-
refponding  with  their  contributions.  Sometimes,  indeed,
they  changed  our  money,  giving  us  240  doits,  amounting  to
five  (hillings,  for  a  Spanifh  dollar,  and  ninety-fix,  amount-
ing to  two  (hillings,  for  a  Bengal  roupee.

They  all  fpeak  the  Malay  language,  though  they  have  a
language  of  their  own,  different  both  from  the  Malay  and
the  Javanefe.  Their  own  language  they  call  Catta  Gunung,
the  language  of  the  mountains  ;  and  they  fay  that  it  is
fpoken  upon  the  mountains  of  Java,  whence  their  tribe  ori-
ginally migrated,  firfl  to  New  Bay,  and  then  to  their  prefent
flation,  being  driven  from  their  firfl  fettlement  by  tygers,
which  they  found  too  numerous  to  fubdue.  I  have  already
obferved,  that  feveral  languages  are  fpoken  by  the  native  Ja-
vanefe, in  different  parts  of  their  ifland  ;  but  when  I  fay  that
the  language  of  thefe  people  is  different  from  the  Javanefe,  I
mean  that  it  is  different  from  the  language  which  is  fpoken
at  Samarang,  a  place  that  is  diftant  only  one  day's  journey
from  the  refidence  of  the  emperor  of  Java.  The  following  is
a  lift  of  correfponding  words  in  the  languages  of  Prince's
Ifland,  Java,  and  Malacca.

Javanefe,  Malay.

Oong  Lanang,  Oran  Lacki  Lacki.
OongWadong,  Parampuan.


1771.

January.


Englifh

A  man,
A  ivoman,
A  child,
The  head,
The  nofe,
The  eyes,
The  ears,
The  teeth,
The  belly,


Prince's  Ifland.

Jalma,

Becang,

Oroculatacke,

Holo,

Erung,

Mata,

Chole,

Cutock,

Beatung,


The  Backfide,  Sent,


Lari,

Undafs,

Erung,

Moto,

Cuping,

Untu,

Wuttong,

Celit,


Anack.

Capalla.

Edung.

Mata.

Cuping.

Ghigi.

Prot.

Pantat.


Tfa.


776


Vf.fi.

January.


LIEUTENANT

COOK's

VOYAGE

Englifh.

Prince's  Ifland.

Javanefe.

Malay.

The  thigh,

Pimping,

Poopoo,

Paha.

'The  knee,

Hullootoor,

Duncul,

Lontour.

"The  leg,

Metis,

Sickil,

Kauki.

A  nail,

Cucu,

Cucu,

Cucu.

A  hand,

Langan,

Tangan,

Tangan.

Afnger,

Ramo  Langan,

Jari,

Jaring.

In  this  fpecimen  of  the  languages  of  places  fo  near  to  each
other,  the  names  of  different  parts  of  the  body  are  chofen,
becaufe  they  are  eafily  obtained  from  people  whofe  language
is  utterly  unknown,  and  becaufe  they  are  more  likely  to  be
part  of  the  original  ftamen  of  the  language,  than  any  other,
as  types  of  the  firft  objects  to  which  they  would  give  names.
It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  Malay,  the  Javanefe,  and  the
Prince's  Iiland  language,  have  words,  which,  if  not  exactly
fimilar  to  the  correfponding  words  in  the  language  of  the
iflands  in  the  South  Seas,  are  manifeflly  derived  from  the
fame  fource,  as  will  appear  from  the  following  table :

Englifh.      South  Sea.    Malay.         Javanefe.    Prince's  Ifland.


An  eye,

Matta,

Mata,

Moto,

Mata.

To  eat,

Maa,

Macan,

Mangan.

To  drink,

Einu,

Menum,

Gnumbe.

To  kill,

Matte,

Matte,

Matte.

A  lonfe,

Outou,

Coutou.

Rain,

Euwa,

Udian,

Udan.

Bamboo  cane

,  Owhc,

Awe.

A  breajl,

Eu,

Soufou,

Soufou.

A  bird,

Mannu,

Mannu,

Mannuck.

Ajijh,

Eyca,

lean,

Iwa.

The  foot,

Tapao,

Tapaan.

A  lobjler,

Tooura,

Udang,

Urang.

Yams,

Eufwhe,

Ubi,

Urve.

To


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


777


Englifh.


South  Sea.      Malay.         Javanefe.

To  bury,         Etannou,      Tannam,         Tandour.
A  mofchito,      Enammou,  Gnammuck.
To  f cratch,     Hearu,         Garni,  Garu.

Coccos  roots,   Taro,  Tallas,  Talas.

In-land,  Uta,  Utan.

This  fimilitude  is  particularly  remarkable  in  the  words
expreffing  number,  which  at  firit  fight  feems  to  be  no  in-
confiderable  proof  that  the  fcience  at  leaft  of  thefe  different
people  has  a  common  root.  But  the  names  of  numbers  in
the  iiland  of  Madagafcar,  are,  in  fome  inflances,  fimilar  to
all  thefe,  which  is  a  problem  Hill  more  difficult  to  folve.
That  the  names  of  numbers,  in  particular,  are  in  a  manner
common  to  all  thefe  countries,  will  appear  from  the  follow-
ing comparative  table,  which  Mr.  Banks  drew  up,  with  the
afMance  of  a  negro  flave,  born  at  Madagafcar,  who  was  on
board  an  Engliih  fhip  at  Batavia,  and  fent  to  him  to  gratify
his  curiofity  on  this  fubject.


Englifli.  S.  Sea  Ifland3.

One,      Tahie,
Tnvo,     Rua,
Three,  Torou,
Four,     Haa,
Five,     Reina,
Six,       Wheney,
Seven,  Hetu,
Eight,  Warn,
Nine,    Iva,
Ten,      Ahouroa,


Malay.

Satou,

Dua,

Tiga,

Ampat,

Lima,

Annam,

Tudju,

Delapau,

Sembilan,

Sapoulon,


Javanefe.

Sigi,
Lorou,
Tullu,
Pappat,

Li  mo,


Prince's  Ifland.

Hegie,

Dua,

Tollu,

Opat,

Limah,


Nunnam,  Gunnap,
Pern,        Tudju,
Wolo,       Delapan,
Songo,      Salapan,


Madagafcar.

IfTe.
Rua.

Tellou.

EfFats.

Limi.

Ene.

Titou.

Walon.

Sivi.


Sapoulou,  Sapoulou,  Tourou.


In  the  language  of  Madagafcar,  there  are  other  words
fimilar  to  words  of  the  fame  import  in  the  Malay.  The  nofe
in  Malay  is  called  Erung,   at  Madagafcar  Ourou;  Lida,  the

Vol.  II.  5  G  tongue.


778  LIEUTENANT    COOR's    VOYAGE

1771-       tongue,  is  Lala;  Tangan,  the  hand,  is  Tang;  and  Tanna,  the

January.  .

i_.  -,—  _»    ground,  is  laan.

From  the  fimilitude  between  the  language  of  the  Eaftern
Indies,  and  the  iflands  of  the  South  Sea,  conjectures  may  be
formed  with  refpect  to  the  peopling  thofe  countries,  which
cannot  eafily  be  referred  to  Madagafcar.     The  inhabitants  of
Java  and  Madagafcar  appear  to  be  a  different  race  j  the  Java-
nefe  is  of  an  olive  complexion,  and  has  long  hair ;  the  native
of  Madagafcar  is  black,  and  his  head  is  not  covered  with
hair,   but  wool;    and  yet  perhaps   this  will   not   conclude
againfl  their  having  common  anceftors  fo  ftrongly  as  at  firft
appears.    It  does  not  feem  lefs  difficult  to  account  for  the
perfonal  difference  between  a  native  of  England  and  France,
as  an  effect  of  mere  local  fituation,  than  for  the  difference
between  the  natives  of  Java  and  Madagafcar ;  yet  it  has  never
been  fuppofed,  that  England  and  France  were  not  peopled
from  common  anceftors.     If  two  natives" of  England  marry
in  their  own  country,  and  afterwards  remove  to  our  fettle-
ments  in  the  Weft  Indies,  the  children  that  are  conceived  and
born  there  will  have  the  complexion  and  caft  of  countenance
that  diftinguifh  the  Creole  ;  if  they  return,  the  children  con-
ceived and  born  afterwards,  will  have  no  fuch  characteriftics..
If  it  be  faid  that  the  mother's  mind  being  impreffed  with  dif-
ferent external  objects,  impreffes  correfponding  features  and
complexion  upon  the  child  during  her  pregnancy,  it  will  be
as  difficult  to  refer  the  effect  into  this  caufc,    upon  mere
phyfical  principles,  as  into  the  other  ;  for  it  can  no  more  be
fliewn  how  a  mere  idea,  conceived  in  the  mother's  imagina-
tion, can  change  the  corporeal  form  of  her  infant,  than  how
its  form  can  be  changed  by  mere  local  fituation.     We  know
that  people  within  the  fmall  circle  of  Great  Britain  and  Ire-
land, who  are  born  at  the  diftance  of  two  or  three  hundred
miles  from  each  other,  will  be  diftinguilhed  by  the  Scotch

face,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  779

face,  the  Wclfh  face,  and  the  Irifh  face ;  may  we  not  then       1771


reafonably  fuppofe,  that  there  are  in  nature  qualities  which
act  powerfully  as  efficient  caufes,  and  yet  are  not  cognizable
by  any  of  the  five  modes  of  perception  which  we  call  fenfes?
A  deaf  man,  who  fees  the  firing  of  a  harpfichord  vibrate,
when  a  correfponding  tone  is  produced  by  blowing  into  a
flute  at  a  diftance,  will  fee  an  effect  of  which  he  can  no  more
conceive  the  caufe  to  exifl  in  the  blowing  air  into  the  flute,
than  we  can  conceive  the  caufe  of  the  perfonal  difference  of
the  various  inhabitants  of  the  globe  to  exifl  in  mere  local
fituation  ;  nor  can  he  any  more  form  an  idea  of  the  caufe  it-
felf,  in  one  cafe,  than  we  can  in  the  other:  what  happens  to
him  then,  in  confequence  of  having  but  four  fenfes  inftead
of  five,  may,  with  refpect  to  many  phenomena  of  nature,
happen  to  us,  in  confequence  of  having  but  five  fenfes  in-
Head  of  fix,  or  any  greater  number.

Poffibly,  however,  the  learning  of  ancient  ^gypt  might
run  in  two  courfes,  one  through  Africa,  and  the  other
through  Afia,  diffeminating  the  fame  words  in  each,  efpe-
cially  terms  of  number,  which  might  thus  become  part  of
the  language  of  people  who  never  had  any  communication
with  each  other.

We  now  made  the  befl  of  our  way  for  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  but  the  feeds  of  difeafe  which  we  had  received  at  Ba-
tavia  began  to  appear  with  the  mofl  threatening  fymptoms  in
dy ferneries  and  flow  fevers.  Left  the  water  which  we  h^d
taken  in  at  Prince's  Ifland  fliould  have  had  any  mare  in  our
ficknefs,  we  purified  it  with  lime,  and  we  warned  all  parts
of  the  fhip  between  decks  with  vinegar,  as  a  remedy  againfl
infection.  Mr.  Banks  was  among  the  fick,  and  for  fome
time  there  was  no  hope  of  his  life.  We  were  very  foon  in
a  mofl  deplorable  fituation  5  the  fhip  was  nothing  better  than

5  G  2  aa


January.


780  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

1771.  an  hofpital,  in  which  thofe  that  were  able  to  go  about,  were
■  too  few  to  attend  the  fick,  who  were  confined  to  their  ham-
mocks; and  we  had  almoft  every  night  a  dead  body  to  com-
mit to  the  fea.  In  the  courfe  of  about  fix  weeks,  we  buried
Mr.  Sporing,  a  gentleman  who  was  in  Mr.  Banks's  retinue,
Mr.  Parkinfon,  his  natural  hiftory  painter,  Mr.  Green  the
aflronomer,  the  boatfwain,  the  carpenter  and  his  mate,  Mr.
Monkhoufe  the  midlhipman,  who  had  fothered  the  fhip
after  Ihe  had  been  ftranded  on  the  coaft  of  New  Holland,  our
old  jolly  fail-maker  and  his  affiftant,  the  lhip's  cook,  the
corporal  of  the  marines,  two  of  the  carpenter's  crew,  a  mid-
shipman, and  ninefeamen;  in  all  three  and  twenty  perfons,
befides  the  feven  that  we  buried  at  Batavia.


CHAP.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  78r


CHAP.     XVI.

Our  Arrival  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;  fome  Remarks  on
the  Run  from  Java  Head  to  that  Place  ;  a  Defcription
of  the  Cape,  and  of  Saint  Helena  ;  With  fome  Account  of
the  Hottentot sy  and  the  Return  of  the  Ship  to  England.

ON  Friday  the  15th  of  March,  about  ten  o'clock  in  the       i77i.
morning,  we  anchored  off  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in   ^  March'
feven  fathom  with  an  ouzey  bottom.    The  weft  point  of  the  Friday  '*
bay,  called  the  Lion's  Tail,    bore  W.  N.  W.  and  the  caftle
3.  W.  diftant  about  a  mile  and  a  half.     I  immediately  waited
upon  the  Governor,  who  told  me  that  I  fhould  have  every
thing  the  country  afforded.    My  firft  care  was  to  provide  a
proper  place  afhore  for  the  lick,  which  were  not  a  few ;  and
a  houfe  was  foon  found,  where  it  was  agreed  they  mould  be
lodged  and  boarded  at  the  rate  of  two  millings  a  head  per
day.

Our  run  from  Java  head,  to  this  place,  afforded  very  few
fubjects  of  remark  that  can  be  of  ufe  to  future  navigators ;
fuch  as  occurred,  however,  I  mail  fet  down.  We  had  left
Java  Head  eleven  days  before  we  got  the  general  fouth  eaft
trade-wind,  during  which  time,  we  did  not  advance  above.
50  to  the  fouthward,  and  30  to  the  weft,  having  variable
light  airs,  interrupted  by  calms,  with  fultry  weather,  and
an  unwholefome  air,  occafioned  probably  by  the  load  of  va-
pours which  the  eaftern  trade-wind,  and  wefterly  monfoons,-
Bring  into  thefe  latitudes,  both  which  blow  in  thefe  feas  at
the  time  of  year  when  we  happened  to  be  there.  The  eaft-
*•  erly


782  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1771-  erly  wind  prevails  as  far  as  10  or  120  S.  and  the  wefterly  as
■  far  as  6  or  8° ;  in  the  intermediate  fpace  the  winds  are  vari-
m  y  lS'  able,  and  the  air,  I  believe,  always  unwholefome;  it  cer-
tainly aggravated  the  difeafes  which  we  brought  with  us
from  Batavia,  and  particularly  the  flux,  which  was  not  in
the  lead  degree  checked  by  any  medicine,  fo  that  whoever
was  feized  with  it,  confidered  himfelf  as  a  dead  man;  but
we  had  no  fooner  got  into  the  trade-wind,  than  we  began  to
feel  its  falutary  effects:  we  buried  indeed  feveral  of  our
people  afterwards,  but  they  were  fuch  as  had  been  taken
on  board  in  a  ftate  fo  low  and  feeble  that  there  was  fcarcely
a  poffibility  of  their  recovery.  At  firft  we  fufpected  that  this
dreadful  diforder  might  have  been  brought  upon  us  by  the
water  that  we  took  on  board  at  Prince's  Ifland,  or  even  by
the  turtle  that  we  bought  there ;  but  there  is  not  the  leaft
reafon  to  believe  that  this  fufpicion  was  well  grounded,  for
all  the  mips  that  came  from  Batavia  at  the  fame  feafon,  fuf-
fered  in  the  fame  degree,  and  fome  of  them  even  more
feverely,  though  none  of  them  touched  at  Prince's  Ifland  in
their  way.

A  few  days  after  we  left  Java,  we  faw  boobies  about  the
fhip  for  feveral  nights  fucceffively,  and  as  thefe  birds  are
known  to  rooft  every  night  on  more,  we  thought  them  an
indication  that  fome  ifland  was  not  far  diftant ;  perhaps  it
might  be  the  ifland  of  Selam,  which,  in  different  charts,  is
very  differently  laid  down  both  in  name  and  fituation.

The  variation  of  the  compafs  off  the  weft  coaft  of  Java  is
about  30  W.  and  fo  it  continued  without  any  fenfible  varia-
tion, in  the  common  track  of  fhips  to  the  longitude  of  2 88°
W.  latitude  22  S.  after  which  it  increafed  apace,  fo  that  in
longitude  2950,  latitude  230,  the  variation  was  io°  20'W. :  in
feven  degrees  more  of  longitude,  and  one  of  latitude,  it  in-
creafed


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  78c

creafed  two  degrees  ;  in  the  fame  fpace,  farther  to  the  weft,  177 *•
It  increafed  five  degrees:  in  latitude  280,  longitude  31 40,  it  < — ^ — L/
was  24°  20',  in  latitude  290  longitude  3170,  it  was  260  10',
and  was  then  ftationary  for  the  fpace  of  about  ten  degrees
farther  to  the  weft;  but  in  latitude  340,  longitude  3330,  we
obferved  it  twice  to  be  28°-L  W.  and  this  was  its  greateft  varia-
tion, for  in  latitude  3jr°f>  longitude  3370,  it  was  240,  and
continued  gradually  to  decreafe;  fo  that  off  Cape  Anguillas
it  was  220  30',  and  in  Table  Bay  200  30'W.

As  to  currents  it  did  not  appear  that  they  were  at  all  con-
fiderable,  till  we  came  within  a  little  diftance  of  the  meridian
of  Madagafcar ;  for  after  we  had  made  520  of  longitude  from
Java  Head,  we  found,  by  obfervation,  that  our  error  in  lon-
gitude was  only  two  degrees,  and  it  was  the  fame  when  we
had  made  only  nineteen.  This  error  might  be  owing  partly
to  a  current  fetting  to  the  weftward,  partly  to  our  not  making
proper  allowances  for  the  fetting  of  the  fea  before  which  we
run,  and  perhaps  to  an  error  in  the  aflumed  longitude  of
Java  Head.  If  that  longitude  is  erroneous,  the  error  muft  be
imputed  to  the  imperfection  of  the  charts  of  which  I  made
ufe  in  reducing  the  longitude  from  Batavia,  to  that  place
for  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  longitude  of  Batavia
is  well  determined.  After  we  had  patted  the  longitude  of
3070,  the  effects  of  the  wefterly  currents  began  to  be  con-
fiderablej  for  in  three  days,  our  error  in  longitude  was
1"  5' :  the  velocity  of  the  current  kept  increafing,  as  we  pro-
ceeded to  the  weftward,  in  fo  much  that  for  five  days  fuc-
ceffively  after  we  made  the  land,  we  were  driven  to  the  S.  W.
or  S.  W.  by  W.  not  lefs  than  twenty  leagues  a  day;  and  this
continued  till  we  were  within  fixty  or  feventy  leagues  of  the
Cape,  where  the  current  fet  fometimes  one  way,  and  fome--
times  the  other,  though  inclining  rather  to  the  weftward.

*  After.


784  LIEUTENANT    COOR's    VOYAGE

177T-  After  the  boobies  had  left  us,  we  faw  no  more  birds  till  we

«___!^L_j  got  nearly  abreafl  of  Madagafcar,  where,  in  latitude  270 1  S.
Friday  15.  we  faw  an  aibatrofs,  and  after  that  time  we  faw  them  every-
day in  great  numbers,  with  birds  of  feveral  other  forts,  par-
ticularly one  about  as  big  as  a  duck,  of  a  very  dark  brown
colour,  with  a  yellowifh.  bill.  Thefe  birds  became  more  nu-
merous as  we  approached  the  fhore,  and  as  foon  as  we  got
into  foundings  we  faw  gannets,  which  we  continued  to  fee
as  long  as  we  were  upon  the  bank  which  itretches  off  An-
guillas  to  the  diflance  of  forty  leagues,  and  extends  along
the  fhore  to  the  eaftward,  from  Cape  Falfe,  according  to
fome  charts,  one  hundred  and  fixty  leagues.  The  real  ex-
tent of  this  bank  is  not  exactly  known ;  it  is  however  ufeful
as  a  direction  to  fhipping  when  to  haul  in,  in  order  to  make
the  land.

While  we  lay  here,  the  Houghton  Indiaman  failed  for
England,  who,  during  her  Hay  in  India,  loft  by  ficknefs  be-
tween thirty  and  forty  men;  and  when  fhe  left  the  Cape  had
many  in  a  helplefs  condition  with  the  fcurvy.  Other  fhips
fullered  in  the  fame  proportion,  who  had  been  little  more
than  twelve  months  abfent  from  England;  our  fufferings
therefore  were  comparatively  light,  confidering  that  we  had
been  abfent  near  three  times  as  long.

Having  lain  here  to  recover  the  fick,  procure  flores,  and

perform  feveral  necefTary  operations  upon  the  fhip  and  rig-

rU        ging,  till  the  13th  of  April,  I  then  got  all  the  fick  on  board,

Saturday  13.  fcveral  Gf  whom  were  ftill  in  a  dangerous  ftate,  and  having

Sunday  14.     taken  leave  of  the  Governor,  I  unmoored  the  next  morning

and  got  ready  to  fail.

The  Cape  of  Good  Hope  has  been  fo  often  defcribed,  and  is
fo  well  known  in  Europe,  that  I  mail  mention  only  a  few

particulars,


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  7?5

particulars,  which  in  other  relations  are  omitted  or  mifrc-      ifirr.
prefented.  •">——>, — -j

Notwithftanding  all  that  has  been  faid  to  the  contrary,  no
country  that  we  faw  during  the  voyage  makes  a  more  for-
lorn appearance,  or  is  in  reality  a  more  flerile  defart.  The
land  over  the  Cape,  which  conftitutes  the  peninfula  formed
by  Table  Bay  on  the  north,  and  Falfe  Bay  on  the  fouth,  con-
fifts  of  high  mountains,  altogether  naked  and  defolate  :  the
land  behind  thefe  to  the  eaft,  which  may  be  confidered  as
the  ifthmus,  is  a  plain  of  vaft  extent,  confining  almoft  wholly
of  a  light  kind  of  fea  fand,  which  produces  nothing  but
heath,  and  is  utterly  incapable  of  cultivation.  All  the
fpots  that  will  admit  of  improvement,  which  together  bear
about  the  fame  proportion  to  the  whole  as  one  to  one  thou-
fand,  are  laid  out  in  vineyards,  orchards.,  and  kitchen  grounds ;
and  moil  of  thefe  little  fpots  lie  at  a  confiderable  diftance
from  each  other.  There  is  alfo  the  greateft  reafon  to  believe,
that  in  the  interior  parts  of  this  country,  that  which  is  ca-
pable of  cultivation  does  not  bear  a  greater  proportion  to
that  which  is  incorrigibly  barren  ;  for  the  Dutch  told  us,
that  they  had  fettlements  eight  and  twenty  days  journey  up
the  country,  a  diftance  equal  to  at  leaft  nine  hundred  miles,
from  which  they  bring  provifions  to  the  Cape  by  land ;  fo
that  it  feems  reafonable  to  conclude  that  provifions  are  not
to  be  had  within  a  lefs  compafs.  While  we  were  at  the  Cape,
a  farmer  came  thither  from  the  country,  at  the  diftance  of
fifteen  days  journey,  and  brought  his  young  children  with
him.  We  were  furprifed  at  this,  and  afked  him,  if  it  would
not  have  been  better  to  have  left  them  with  his  next  neigh-
bour :  Neighbour !  faid  the  man,  I  have  no  neighbour  within
lefs  than  five  days  journey  of  me.  Surely  the  country  mud
be  deplorably  barren  in  which  thofe  who  fettle  only  to  raife
.Vol. II.  5  H  provifions


7S6  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1771.  provifions  for  a  market,  are  difperfed  at  fuch  distances  from
._  Ap" '  •  each  other.  That  the  country  is  every  where  destitute  of
wood  appears  to  demonftration  ;  for  timber  and  planks  are
imported  from  Batavia,  and  fuel  is  almoft  as  dear  as  food.
We  faw  no  tree,  except  in  plantations  near  the  town,  that
was  fix  feet  high ;  and  the  ftems,  that  were  not  thicker  than
a  man's  thumb,  had  roots  as  thick  as  an  arm  or  a  leg,  fuch
is  the  influence  of  the  winds  here  to  the  disadvantage  of  ve-
getation, fetting  the  fterility  of  the  foil  out  of  the  queftion.

The  only  town  which  the  Dutch  have  built  here  is,  from
its  fituation,  called  Cape  Town,  and  confifts  of  about  a  thou-
fand  houfes,  neatly  built  of  brick,  and  in  general  whited  on
the  outfide  ;  they  are  however  covered  only  with  thatch,  for
the  violence  of  the  fouth  eaft  winds  would  render  any  other
roof  inconvenient  and  dangerous.  The  ftreets  are  broad  and
commodious,  all  croffing  each  other  at  right  angles.  In  the
principal  ftreet  there  is  a  canal,  on  each  fide  of  which  is
planted  a  row  of  oaks,  that  have  flourished  tolerably  well,
and  yield  an  agreeable  made:  there  is  a  canal  alfo  in  one
other  part  of  the  town,  but  the  flope  of  the  ground  in  the
courfe  of  both  is  fo  great,  that  they  are  furnifhed  with  flood-
gates, or  locks,  at  intervals  of  little  more  than  fifty  yards.

A  much  greater  proportion  of  the  inhabitants  are  Dutch,
in  this  place  than  in  Batavia  ;  and  as  the  town  is  Supported
principally  by  entertaining  Strangers,  and  Supplying  them
with  neceSSaries,  every  man,  to  a  certain  degree,  imitates  the
manners  and  cuftoms  of  the  nation  with  which  he  is  chiefly
concerned.  The  ladies  however  are  fo  faithful  to  the  mode
of  their  country,  that  not  one  of  them  will  Stir  without  a
chaudpied  or  chauffet,  which  is  carried  by  a  Servant  that  it
may  be  ready  to  place  under  her  feet  whenever  She  Shall  fit
down.  This  practice  is  the  more  remarkable,  as  very  Sew  of
4  theSe


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ?$7

thefe  chauffets  have  fire  in  them,  which  indeed  the  climate       »7J«.
renders  unneceffary.  < Pt.l'-/

The  women  in  general  are  very  handfome;  they  have  fine
clear  fkins,  and  a  bloom  of  colour  that  indicates  a  purity  of
conftitution,  and  high  health.  They  make  the  bed  wives  in
the  world,  both  as  miftreffes  of  a  family  and  mothers  ;  and
there  is  fcarcely  a  houfe  that  does  not  fwarm  with  children.

The  air  is  falutary  in  a  high  degree ;  fo  that  thofe  who
bring  difeafes  hither  from  Europe,  generally  recover  perfect
health  in  a  fhort  time  ;  but  the  difeafes  that  are  brought
from  India  are  not  fo  certainly  cured.

Notwithftanding  the  natural  fterility  of  the  climate,  induf-
try  has  fupplied  this  place  with  all  the  neceffaries,  and  even
the  luxuries  of  life  in  the  greateft  profufion.  The  beef  and
mutton  are  excellent,  though  the  cattle  and  fheep  are  natives
of  the  country;  the  cattle  are  lighter  than  ours,  more  neatly
made,  and  have  horns  that  fpread  to  a  much  wider  extent.
The  flieep  are  clothed  with  a  fubftance  between  wool  and
hair,  and  have  tails  of  an  enormous  fize  ;  we  faw  fome  that
weighed  twelve  pounds,  and  were  told  that  there  were  many
much  larger.  Good  butter  is  made  of  the  milk  of  the  cows,
but  the  cheefe  is  very  much  inferior  to  our  own.  Here  are
goats,  but  they  are  never  eaten,  hogs,  and  a  variety  of  poul-
try. Hares  are  alfo  found  here,  exactly  like  thofe  of  Europe;
antelopes  of  many  kinds,  quails  of  two  forts,  and  buftards,
which  are  well  flavoured,  but  not  juicy.  The  fields  produce
European  wheat  and  barley,  and  the  gardens  European  ve-
getables, and  fruit  of  all  kinds,  befides  plantains,  guavas,
jambu,  and  fome  other  Indian  fruits,  but  thefe  are  not  in  per-
fection ;  the  plantains  in  particular,  are  very  bad,  and  the  gua-
vas no  larger  than  goofeberries.  The  vineyards  alfo  produce
wine  of  various  forts,  but  not  equal  to  thofe  of  Europe,  ex-

5  H  2  cept


788  LIEUTENANT    COOK'S    VOYAGE

1771'      cept  the  Conftantia,  which  is  made  genuine  only  at  one
* — v"  ',/  vineyard,  about  ten  miles  diftant  from  the  town.    There  is
another  vineyard  near  it,  where  wine  is  made  that  is  called
by  the  fame  name,  but  it  is  greatly  inferior.

The  common  method  in  which  ftrangers  live  here,  is  to
lodge  and  board  with  fome  of  the  inhabitants,  many  of
whofe  houfes  are  always  open  for  their  reception :  the  rates
are  from  five  fhillings  to  two  millings  a  day,  for  which  all
neceflaries  are  found.  Coaches  may  be  hired  at  four  and
twenty  millings  a  day,  and  horfes  at  fix  millings ;  but  the
country  affords  very  little  temptation  to  ufe  them.  There
are  no  public  entertainments ;  and  thofe  that  are  private,  to-
which  ftrangers  of  the  rank  of  Gentlemen  are  always  ad-
mitted, were  fufpended  while  we  were  there  by  the  break-
ing out  of  the  meafles.

At  the  farther  end  of  the  High  flreet,  the  Company  have
a  garden,  which  is  about  two  thirds  of  an  Englifh  mile  long;,
the  whole  is  divided  by  walks  that  interfect  each  other  at
right  angles,  and  are  planted  with  oaks  that  are  dipt  into
wall  hedges,  except  in  the  center  walk,  where  they  are  fuf-
fered  to  grow  to  their  full  fize,  and  afford  an  agreeable
made,  which  is  the  more  welcome,  as,  except  the  planta-
tions by  the  fides  of  the  two  canals,  there  is  not  a  fingle  tree:
that  would  ferve  even  for  a  fliepherd's  buiH,  within  many
miles  of  the  town.  The  greater  part  of  this  garden  is  kit-
chen ground  ;  but  two  fmall  fquares  are  allotted  to  botani-
cal plants,,  which  did  not  appear  to  be  fo  numerous  by  one-
half  as  they  were  when  Oldenland  wrote  his  catalogue.  At
the  farther  end  of  the  garden  is  a  menagerie,  in  which  there
are  many  birds  and  beafts  that  are  never  feen  in  Europe. j
particularly  a  beaft  called  by  the  Hottentots  Coe  Don,  which
is  as  large  as  a  horfe,  and  has  the  fine  fpiral  horns  which

are-


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  78^

are  fometimes  feen  in  private  and  public  collections  of  curi-      r77T-

r   .  April.

ofities.  ■ « «

Of  the  natives  of  this  country,  we  could  learn  but  little
except  from  report ;  for  there  were  none  of  their  habitations,
where  alone  they  retain  their  original  cufloms,  within  lefs
than  four  days  journey  from  the  town  ;  thofe  that  we  faw
at  the  Cape  were  all  fervants  to  Dutch  farmers,  whofe  cattle
they  take  care  of,  and  are  employed  in  other  drudgery  of
the  meaneft  kind.  Thefe  are  in  general  of  a  Aim  make,  and
rather  lean  than  plump,  but  remarkably  ftrong,  nimble,  and
active.  Their  fize  is  nearly  the  fame  with  that  of  Europeans,
and  we  faw  fome  that  were  fix  feet  high:  their  eyes  are  dull
and  without  expreffion :  their  fkins  are  of  the  colour  of  foot,
but  that  is  in  a  great  meafure  caufed  by  the  dirt,  which  is  fo
wrought  into  the  grain  that  it  cannot  be  diftinguiihed  from
complexion  ;  for  I  believe  they  never  wafli  any  part  of  their
bodies.  Their  hair  curls  ftrongly,  not  like  a  negroe's,  but
falls  in  ringlets  about  feven  or  eight  inches  long.  Their
clothing  coniifts  of  a  fkin,  generally  that  of  a  fheep,  thrown
over  their  fhoulders  ;  befides  which,  the  men  wear  a  fmall
pouch  in  the  middle  of  the  waiit,  and  the  women,  a  broad
leather  flap,  both  which  hang  from  a  girdle  or  belt  that  is
adorned  with  beads  and  fmall  pieces  of  copper.  Both  men
and  women  wear  necklaces,  and  fometimes  bracelets,  of
beads ;  and  the  women  wear  rings  of  hard  leather  round,
their  ancles,  to  defend  them  from  the  thorns,  with  which
their  country  every  where  abounds :  fome  of  them  have  a
fandal,  made  of  wood  or  bark;  but  the  greater  part  of  them
are  unihod;

To  a  European,  their  language  appears  to  be  fcarcely  arti-
culate ;  befides  which  it  is  diftinguiihed  by  a  very  remark-
able Angularity.    At  very  frequent  intervals,,  while  they  are

fpeakingF


79°


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


1771.      fpeaking,  they  cluck  with  the  tongue  againfl  the  roof  of  the

2ji^J>  mouth :  thefe  clucks  do  not  appear  to  have  any  meaning,

but  rather  to  divide  what  they  fay  into  fentences.    Moil  of

thefe  Hottentots  fpeak  Dutch,  without  any  peculiarity  of

pronunciation.

They  are  all  modeil,  even  to  fheepiihnefs ;  for  it  was  not
without  the  greateft  difficulty  that  we  could  perfuade  any  of
them  to  dance,  or  even  to  fpeak  in  their  own  language  to
each  other,  in  our  prefence.  We  did  however  both  fee  them
dance,  and  hear  them  fing ;  their  dances  are  by  turns  active
and  fluggifli  to  excefs;  fometimes  confiding  of  quick  and
violent  motions,  with  itrange  diitortions  of  the  body,  and
unnatural  leaps  backwards  and  forwards,  with  the  legs  crof-
fing  each  other ;  and  being  fometimes  fo  fpiritlefs  that  the
dancer  only  flrikes  the  ground  firft  with  one  foot  and  then
with  the  other,  neither  changing  place  nor  moving  any
other  part  of  his  body:  the  fongs  alfo  are  alternately  to  quick
and  flow  movements,  in  the  fame  extremes  as  the  dance.

We  made  many  enquiries  concerning  thefe  people  of  the
Dutch,  and  the  following  particulars  are  related  upon  the
credit  of  their  report :

Within  the  boundaries  of  the  Dutch  fettlements  there  are
feveral  nations  of  thefe  people,  who  very  much  differ  from
each  other  in  their  cuftoms  and  manner  of  life :  all  how-
ever are  friendly  and  peaceable,  except  one  clan  that  is  fet-
tled to  the  eaflward,  which  the  Dutch  call  Bofch  ?nen,  and  thefe
live  entirely  by  plunder,  or  rather  by  theft ;  for  they  never
attack  their  neighbours  openly,  but  ileal  the  cattle  privately
in  the  night.  They  are  armed  however  to  defend  them-
felves,  if  they  happen  to  be  detected,  with  lances  or  afTagays,
and  arrows,  which  they  know  how  to  poifon  by  various
ways,  fome  with  the  juice  of  herbs,  and  fome  with  the  ve-
nom


ROUND    THE    WORLD.


29*


nom  of  the  ferpent  called  Cobra  diCapeloy  in  the  hands  of  1771.
thefe  people  a  ftone  alfo  is  a  very  formidable  weapon,  for  ._.  /_'
they  can  throw  it  with  fuch  force  and  exactnefs  as  repeatedly
to  hit  a  dollar  at  the  diftance  of  a  hundred  paces.  As  a  defence
againft  thefe  freebooters,  the  other  Indians  train  up  bulls,
which  they  place  round  their  towns  in  the  night,  and  which,
upon  the  approach  of  either  man  or  beaft,  will  afTemble
and  oppofe  them,  till  they  hear  the  voice  of  their  mailers
encouraging  them  to  fight,  or  calling  them  off,  which  they
obey  with  the  fame  docility  as  a  dog.

Some  nations  have  the  art  of  melting  and  preparing  cop-
per, which  is  found  among  them,  probably  native  ;  and  of
this  they  make  broad  plates,  which  they  wear  as  ornaments
upon  their  foreheads.  Some  of  them  alfo  know  how  to
harden  bits  of  iron,  which  they  procure  from  the  Dutch,
and  form  into  knives,  fo  as  to  give  them  a  temper  fuperior  to
that  of  any  they  can  buy.

The  Chiefs,  many  of  whom  are  pofTeflbrs  of  very  nume-
rous herds  of  cattle,  are  generally  clad  in  the  fkins  of  lions,
tygers,  or  zebras,  to  which  they  add  fringes,  and  other  orna-
ments in  a  very  good  tafte.  Both  fexes  frequently  anoint  the
body  with  greafe,  but  never  ufe  any  that  is  rancid  or  foetid?
if  frefli  can  be  had.  Mutton  fuet  and  butter  are  generally
ufed  for  this  purpofe  ;  butter  is  perferred,  which  they  make:
by  making  the  milk  in  a  bag  made  of  the  ft  in  of  fome
beaft.

We  were  told  that  the  pried  certainly  gives  the  nuptial
benedi&ion  by  fprinkling  the  bride  and  bridegroom  with  his
urine.  But  the  Dutch  universally  declared  that  the  women'
never  wrapped  the  entrails  of  fheep  round  their  legs,  as  they
have  been  faid  to  do,,  and  afterwards  make  them  part  of
their  food.    Semicaftration  was  alfo  abfolutely  denied  to  be

general}


7^2  LIEUTENANT   COOK's    VOYAGE

177?-      general ;  but  it  was  acknowledged  that  fome  among  the  par-
i_ — V-—J  ticular  nation  which  knew  how  to  melt  copper  had  fuffered
that  operation,  who  were  faid  to  be  the  beft  warriors,  and
particularly  to  excel  in  the  art  of  throwing  (tones.

"We  were  very  defirous  to  determine  the  great  queftion
among  natural  hiflorians,  whether  the  women  of  this  coun-
try have  or  have  not  that  flefhy  flap  or  apron  which  has  been
called  the  Sinus  pudoris,  and  what  we  learnt  I  fhall  relate.
Many  of  the  Dutch  and  Malays,  who  faid  they  had  received
favours  from  Hottentots  women,  pofitively  denied  its  exift-
ence  ;  but  a  phyfician  of  the  place  declared  that  he  had
cured  many  hundreds  of  venereal  complaints,  and  never  faw
one  without  two  flefhy,  or  rather  fkinny  appendages,  pro-
ceeding from  the  upper  part  of  the  Labia,  in  appearance
fomewhat  refembling  the  teats  of  a  cow,  but  flat ;  they  hung
down,  he  faid,  before  the  Piukndum,  and  were  in  different
fubjects  of  different  lengths,  in  fome  not  more  than  half  an
inch,  in  others  three  or  four  inches:  thefe  he  imagined  to  be
what  fome  writers  have  exaggerated  into  a  flap,  or  apron,
hanging  down  from  the  bottom  of  the  abdomen,  of  fuffkient
extent  to  render  an  artificial  covering  of  the  neighbouring
parts  unneceflfary.

Thus  much  for  the  country,  its  productions,  and  inhabitants.
The  bay  is  large,  fafe,  and  commodious ;  it  lies  open  indeed
to  the  north  weft  winds,  but  they  feldom  blow  hard ;  yet  as
they  fometimes  fend  in  a  great  fea,  the  flaps  moor  N.  E.  and
S.  W.  fo  as  to  have  an  open  hawfer  with  north  weft  winds  :
the  fouth  eafl  winds  blow  frequently  with  great  violence,
but  as  this  direction  is  right  out  of  the  bay,  they  are  not
dangerous.  Near  the  town  a  wharf  of  wood  is  run  out  to  a
proper  diflance  for  the  convenience  of  landing  and  fhipping
goods.  To  this  wharf  water  is  conveyed  in  pipes,  from  which

feveral


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  7p:

feveral  boats  may  fill  water  at  the  fame  time;  and  feveral  *77*-
.  large  boats  or  hoys  are  kept  by  the  Company  to  carry  {lores  i  .Ap.nJ*  _r
and  provifions  to  and  from  the  fhipping  in  the  harbour.
The  bay  is  defended  by  a  fquare  fort,  fituated  clofe  to  the
beach  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the  town,  and  by  feveral  outworks
and  batteries  extending  along  the  fhore,  as  well  on  this  fide
of  the  town  as  the  other ;  but  they  are  fo  fituated  as  to  be
cannonaded  by  fhipping,  and  are  in  a  manner  defencelefs
againft  an  enemy  of  any  force  by  land.  The  garrifon  confifts
of  eight  hundred  regular  troops,  befides  militia  of  the  coun-
try, in  which  is  comprehended  every  man  able  to  bear  arms.
They  have  contrivances  to  alarm  the  whole  country  by  fig-
nals  in  a  very  fliort  time,  and  the  militia  is  then  to  repair
immediately  to  the  town.

The  French  at  Mauritius  are  fupplied  from  this  place  with
faked  beef,  bifcuit,  flour,  and  wine  :  the  provifions  for
which  the  French  contracted  this  year  were  500,000  lb.
weight  of  fait  beef,  400,000  lb.  of  flour,  400,000  lb.  of  bif-
cuit, and  i,qoo  leagers  of  wine.

In  the  morning  of  the  14th,  we  weighed  and  flood  out  of  Sunday  H.
the  bay ;  and  at  five  in  the  evening  anchored  under  Penquin,
or  Robin  Ifland  :  we  lay  here  all  night,  and  as  I  could  not
fail  in  the  morning  for  want  of  wind,  I  fent  a  boat  to  the
ifland  for  a  few  trifling  articles  which  we  had  forgot  to  take
in  at  the  Cape.  But  as  foon  as  the  boat  came  near  the  fhore,
the  Dutch  hailed  her,  and  warned  the  people  not  to  land  at
their  peril,  bringing  down  at  the  fame  time  fix  men  armed
with  mufquets,  who  paraded  upon  the  beach.  The  officer
who  commanded  the  boat  not  thinking  it  worth  while  to
rifle  the  lives  of  the  people  on  board  for  the  fake  of  a  few
cabbages,  which  wTere  all  we  wanted,  returned  to  the  fliiD.
At  firfl  we  were  at  a  lofs  to  account  for  our  repulfe,  but  we

Vol.  II.  5 1  afterwards


794


LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE


177.1-  afterwards  recollected,  that  to  this  ifland  the  Dutch  at  the
«_,  --p".'_i  Cape  banifh  fach  criminals  as  are  not  thought  worthy  of
Sunday  i4.  ^eat]lj  for  a  certain  number  of  years,  proportioned  to  the
offence ;  and  employ  them  as  flaves  in  digging  lime-ftone,
which  though  fcarce  upon  the  continent  is  plenty  here :  and
that  a  Danifh  fhip,  which  by  ficknefs  had  loft  great  part  of
her  crew,  and  had  been  refufed  afliftance  at  the  Cape,  came
down  to  this  ifland,  and  fending  her  boat  aihore,  fecured  the
guard,  and  took  on  board  as  many  of  the  criminals  as  me
thought  proper  to  navigate  her  home :  we  concluded  there-
fore that  the  Dutch,  to  prevent  the  refcue  of  their  criminals
in  time  to  come,  had  given  order  to  their  people  here  to
fuffer  no  boat  of  any  foreign  nation  to  come  aihore.

Thurfday  25.  On  the  25th,  at  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  weighed,
with  a  light  breeze  at  S.  E.  and  put  to  fea.  About  an  hour
afterwards,  we  loft  our  Mafter,  Mr.  Robert  Mollineux,  a
young  man  of  good  parts,  but  unhappily  given  up  to  intem-
perance, which  brought  on  diforders  that  put  an  end  to  his
life.

We  proceeded  in  our  voyage  homeward  without  any  re-
Monday  wg.    markable  incident;    and  in  the  morning  of  the  39th,    we
crofted  our  firft  meridian,  having  circumnavigated  the  globe
in  the  direction  from  eaft  to  weft,  and  consequently  loft  a
day,  for  which  we  made  an  allowance  at  Batavia.

May.  At  day-break,  on  the  ift  of  May,  we  faw  the  ifland  of  St.

Wednef.  i.     Heiena.  ancj  at  noonj  we  anchored  in  the  road  before  James's

fort.

We  ftaid  here  till  the  4th,  to  refrefh,  and  Mr.  Banks  im-
proved the  time  in  making  the  complete  circuit  of  the
ifland,  and  vifiting  the  molt  remarkable  places  upon  it.

2  It


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  7?5

It  is  fituatcd  as  it  were  in  the  middle  of  the  vaft  Atlantic       1771.

ocean,  being  four  hundred  leagues  diftant  from  the  coaft  of   < "_'_,

Africa,  and  fix  hundred  from  that  of  America.     It  is  the  WedlK'f-  '•
fummit   of  an  immenfe  mountain   rifing  out  of  the  fea,
which,  at  a  little  diflance  all  round  it,  is  of  an  unfathomable
depth,   and  is  no  more  than  twelve  leagues  long,   and  fix
broad.

The  feat  of  volcanoes  has,  without  exception,  been  found
to  be  the  highefl  part  of  the  countries  in  which  they  are
found.  JEtna  and  Vefuvius  have  no  land  higher  than  them-
felves,  in  their  neighbourhood  ;  Hecla  is  the  highefl:  hill  in
Iceland;  volcanoes  are  frequent  in  the  highefl  part  of  the
Andes  in  South  America  ;  and  the  pike  of  TenerifTe  is  known
to  be  the  covering  of  fubterraneous  fire :  thefe  are  flill  burn-
ing, but  there  are  innumerable  other  mountains  which  bear
evident  marks  of  fire  that  is  now  extinct,  and  has  been  fo
from  the  time  of  our  earlieft  traditions :  among  thefe  is  Saint
Helena,  where  the  inequalities  of  the  ground,  in  its  exter-
nal furface,  are  manifeftly  the  effect,  of  the  finking  of  the
earth,  for  the  oppofite  ridges,  though  feparated  always  by
deep,  and  fometimes  by  broad  vallies,  are  exactly  fimilar
both  in  appearance  and  direction ;  and  that  the  finking  of
the  earth  in  thefe  parts,  was  caufed  by  fubterraneous  fire,  is
equally  manifeft  from  the  flones,  for  fome  of  them,  efpe-
cially  thofe  in  the  bottom  of  the  vallies,  are  burnt  almoft  to
a  cinder:  in  fome  there  are  fmall  bubbles,  like  thofe  that  are
feen  in  glais  which  has  been  urged  almofl  to  fufion,  and
fome,  though  at  firft  fight  they  do  not  appear  to  have  been
expofed  to  the  action  of  great  heat,  will  be  found,  upon  a
clofer  infpection,  to  contain  fmall  pieces  of  extraneous  bo-
dies, particularly  mundick,  which  have  yielded  to  the  power
of  fire,  though  it  was  not  fufficient  to  alter  the  appearance
of  the  fione  which  contained  them.

5  I  2  It


796  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

1771.  It  appeared,  as  we  approached  it  on  tlie  windward  Mef

<_JS^->  like  a  rude  heap  of  rocks,  bounded  by  precipices  of  amazing
Wedaef.  1.  height,  and  confiding  of  a  kind  of  half  friable  ftone,  which
fliows  not  the  leaft  fign  of  vegetation ;  nor  is  it  more  pro-
mifmg  upon  a  nearer  view :  in  failing  along  the  more,  we
came  fo  near  the  huge  cliffs,  that  they  feemed  to  over-hang
the  fhip,  and  the  tremendous  effect  of  their  giving  way,
made  us  almoft  fear  the  event :  at  length  we  opened  a  valley,.
called  Chappel  Valley,  which  fefembles  a  large  trench ;  and
in  this  valley  we  difcovered  the  town.  The  bottom  of  it  is
flightly  covered  with  herbage,  but  the  fides  are  as  naked  as
the  cliffs  thar  are  next  the  fea.  Such  is  the  firft  appearance
of  the  ifland  in  its  prefent  cultivated  ftate,  and  the  firft  hills
muft  be  paffed  before  the  vallies  look  green,  or  the  country
difplays  any  other  marks  of  fertility.

The  town  ftands  juft  by  the  fea  fide,  and  the  far  greater
part  of  the  houfes  are  ill  built;  the  church,  which  originally
was  a  mean  ftructure,  is  in  ruins,  and  the  market-  houfe  is
nearly  in  the  fame  condition.

The  white  inhabitants  are  all  Englifh,  who,  as  they  are
not  permitted  by  the  Eaft  India  Company,  to  whom  the
iiland  belongs,  to  carry  on  any  trade  or  commerce  on  then-
own  account,  fubfift  wholly  by  fupplying  fuch  mips  as  touch
at  the  place  with  refrefhments,  which,  however,  they  do
not  provide  in  proportion  to  the  fertility  of  the  foil,  and  the
temperament  of  the  climate,  which  would  enable  them,  by
cultivation,  to  produce  all  the  fruits  and  vegetables  both  of
Europe  and  India.  This  ifland  indeed,  fmall  as  it  is,  enjoys
the  different  advantages  of  different  climates,  for  the  cab-
bage trees  which  grow  upon  the  higheft  ridges,  can  by  no
art  be  cultivated  upon  the  ridges'  next  below,  where  the  red-
wood and  gum-wood  both  nourifh,  which  will  not  grow
3  upon


May.
Wednef.


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  797

upon  the  ridges  above,  and  neither  of  the  three  are  to  be       *77'«
found  in  the  vallies,  which,  in  general,  are  covered  with
European  plants,  and  the  more  common  ones  of  India.

Here  are  a  few  horfes,  but  they  are  kept  only  for  the
Saddle,  fo  that  all  labour  is  performed  by  Haves  5  nor  are
they  furnifhed  with  any  of  the  various  machines  which  art
has  invented  to  facilicate  their  talk.  The  ground  is  not
every  where  too  fteep  for  a  cart,  and  where  it  is,  the  wheel-
barrow might  be  ufed  with  great  advantage,  yet  there  is  no
wheelbarrow  in  the  whole  ifland;  every  thing  ia  conveyed
from  place  to  place  by  the  flaves,  and  they  are  not  furnifhed
even  with  the  fimple  convenience  of  a  porter's  knot,  but  carry
their  burden  upon  their  heads.  They  are  indeed  very  nume-
rous, and  are  brought  from  almoft'  every  part  of  the  world,
but  they  appeared  to  be  a  miferable  race,  worn  out  partly
by  exceflive  labour,  and  partly  by  ill  ufage,  of  which  they
frequently  complained  ;  and  I  am  forry  to  fay,  that  inftances
of  wanton  cruelty  are  much  more  frequent  among  my  coun-
trymen here,,  than  among  the  Dutch,  who  are,  and  perhaps
not  without  reafon,  generally  reproached  with  want  of  hu-
manity at  Batavia  and  the  Cape.

Among  the  native  products  of  this  ifland,  which  are  not
numerous,  muft  be  reckoned  ebony,  though  the  trees  arc
now  nearly  extinct,  and  are  not  remembered  to  have  been
plenty:  pieces  of  the  wood  are  frequently  found  in  the  val-
lies, of  a  fine  black  colour,  and  a  hardnefs  almoft  equal  to
iron:  thefe  pieces,  however,  are  always  fo  fhort  and  crooked,
that  no  ufe  can  be  made  of  them.  Whether  the  tree  is  the
fame  with  that  which  produces  ebony  upon  the  ifle  of  Bour-
bon, or  the  iflands  adjacent,  is  not  known,  as  the  French
have  not  yet  pubiifhed  any  account  of  it.

There


May.
Wednef.  i


793  LIEUTENANT    COOK's    VOYAGE

I771-  There  are  but  few  infects  in  this  place,  but  there  is  a  fpe-

cies  of  fnail  found  upon  the  tops  of  the  higheft  ridges,  which
probably  has  been  there  fince  the  original  creation  of  their
kind,  at  the  beginning  of  the  world.  It  is  indeed  very  dif-
ficult to  conceive  how  any  thing  which  was  not  depofited
here  at  its  creation,  or  brought  hither  by  the  diligence  of
man,  could  find  its  way  to  a  place  fo  fevered  from  the  reft  of
the  world,  by  feas  of  immenfe  extent,  except  the  hypothecs
that  has  been  mentioned  on  another  occafion  be  adopted,
and  this  rock  be  fuppofed  to  have  been  left  behind,  when  a
large  tract:  of  country,  of  which  it  was  part,  fubfided  by
fome  convulfion  of  nature,  and  was  fwallowed  up  in  the
ocean.

Saturday*  At  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  of  the  4th  of  May,  we
weighed  and  flood  out  of  the  Road,  in  company  with  the
Portland  man  of  war,  and  twelve  fail  of  Indiamen.

We  continued  to  fail  in  company  with  the  fleet,  till  the
Friday  10.  loth  in  the  morning,  when,  perceiving  that  we  failed  much
heavier  than  any  other  fhip,  and  thinking  it  for  that  reafon
probable  that  the  Portland  would  get  home  before  us,  I  made
the  fignal  to  fpeak  with  her,  upon  which  Captain  Elliot  him-
felf  came  on  board,  and  I  delivered  to  him  a  letter  for  the
Admiralty,  with  a  box,  containing  the  common  log  books  of
the  ihip,  and  the  journals  of  fome  of  the  officers.  We  con-
Thurfday23.  tinucd  in  company,  however,  till  the  23d  in  the  morning'
and  then  there  was  not  one  of  the  (hips  in  fight.  About  one
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  died  our  Firft  Lieutenant  Mr.  Hicks,
and  in  the  evening  we  committed  his  body  to  the  fea,  with
the  ufual  ceremonies.  The  difeafe  of  which  he  died,  was  a
confumption,  and  as  he  was  net  free  from  it  when  we  failed
from  England,  it  may  truly  be  faid  that  he  was  dying  during

the


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  799

the  whole  voyage,  though  his  decline  was  very  gradual  till       i77x«

May.

we  came  to  Batavia  :  the  next  day,  I  gave  Mr.  Charles  Clerk   ■     -.-  _j
an  order  to  act  as  Lieutenant  in  his  room,  a  young  man  who    n  ay  z*'
was  extremely  well  qualified  for  that  ftation.

Our  rigging  and  fails  were  now  become  fo  bad,  that  fome-
thing  was  giving  way  every  day.     We  continued  our  courfe,
however,  in  fafety  till  the  ioth  of  June,  when  land,  which       June.
proved  to  be  the  Lizard,  was  discovered  by  Nicholas  Young,     °n  ay  I0*
the  fame  boy  that  firfl  faw  New  Zealand ;  on  the  i  ith  we  run  Tuefday  m
up  the  channel,  at  fix  in  the  morning  of  the  12th  we  pafTed  Wednef.  jz.
Beachy  Head,  at  noon  we  were  abreaft  of  Dover,  and  about
three  came  to  an  anchor'in  the  Downs,  and  went  afhore  at
Deal.


I      N      I      S.


€TH(ERINGTON  7(>09  Business  Park  Drive

CONSGRVRTION  Greensboro,  NC  27409

C6NT6R,  INC.  "«*«'"


swo#   1 3(  "SSi

Title    Hc^v^Viejc-oor  4v^    No<_jo.n

Item  #       1  7

J   J
TREATMENT  PERFORMED

TEXJBtOCK:

0Dry  cleaned  surface
□  Removed  tape  w.

Deacidified:  □  aqueous/  O  non-aqueous  w

□  Encapsulated  in  polyester  film

Qiviended  leaves/pages:    He^-^eA    ■\-i*>.'>U^

□  Lined  with      '

Binding:

□  Guarded  sections

0  Resewn:

Housing

□  Phase  box

□  Phase  box  Deluxe

□^Rebound:

HRebacked:^-  i n  t~  V  "icv^^e1)*

□  Repaired  joints:

□  Clamshell
\ \JD  Portfolio

0  Pamphlet  Binder

[^Restored  original  binding

0  Consolidated  leather  w  W^    Qi

0  Polyester  film  jacket

Comments:

#

Date .AP'-I,   ?ooq

Conservator    ^^cIcsa.    VV^Aqi  cVl


Reused  18  Jan  03


M


,1*1;.


